^ 


.^^  ^%,; 


PRINCETON,  N.  J. 


** 


% 


iC 


*v^j'r 


Presented    by         c_) V^  <£/   CA\_A-VV\ 


OX~^ 


V.  \ 


re 


Si  ^-3 


)Az<^*^''i^  '^hi'iL-n 


CSc 


^~)t. 


'v5^c^^ 


':rt^ 


'<A> 


'^'^^^^'^V 


4 

=     APR  111910 


THE 


%/ 


£6/CAL  StU'^ 


GOSPEL  OF  MATTHEW 


AN    EXPOSITION 


A.  C.  GAEBELEIN 

Editor  of  "  Our  Hope  '' 


VOLUME  I. 


OUR    HOPE    PUBLICATION    OFFICE 

80  Second  Street 

New     York     City 


PICKERING  &  INGLIS 
Glasgow,  Scotland 


L.  S.  HAYNE.S 
502  Yonge  St.,  Toronto,  Can. 


Copyright  igio  by  A.  C.  Gaebelein 


I  NDEX. 


PAGIC 

Introduction 3 

Chapter        1 17 

II 38 

HI 53 

IV 79 

V 105 

VI 131 

VII 150 

"       VIII 165 

IX 184 

X 203 

XI 218 

XII 234 

XIII 259 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  Gospel  of  Matthew  stands  first  among  the  Gospels 
and  in  the  New  Testament,  because  it  was  first  written  and 
may  be  rightly  termed  the  Genesis  of  the  New  Testament. 
Genesis,  the  first  book  of  the  Bible,  contains  in  itself  the 
entire  Bible,  and  so  it  is  with  the  first  Gospel ;  it  is  the  book 
of  the  beginnings  of  a  new  dispensation.  It  is  like  a  mighty 
tree.  The  roots  are  deeply  sunk  in  massive  rocks  while  its 
uncountable  branches  and  twigs  extend  upward  higher  and 
higher  in  perfect  symmetry  and  beauty.  The  foundation  is 
the  Old  Testament  with  its  Messianic  and  Kingdom  prom- 
ises. Out  of  this  all  is  developed  in  perfect  harmony,  reach- 
ing higher  and  higher  into  the  new  dispensation  and  to  the 
beginning  of  the  millennial  age. 

The  instrument  chosen  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  write  this 
Gospel  was  Matthew.  He  was  a  Jew.  However,  he  did  not 
belong  to  the  religious,  educated  class,  to  the  scribes ;  but  he 
belonged  to  the  class  which  was  most  bitterly  hated.  He 
was  a  publican,  that  is  a  tax  gatherer.  The  Roman  govern- 
ment had  appointed  officials  whose  duty  it  was  to  have  the 
legal  tax  gathered,  and  these  officials,  mostly,  if  not  all  Gen- 
tiles, appointed  the  actual  collectors,  who  were  generally 
Jews.  Only  the  most  unscrupulous  among  the  Jews  would 
hire  themselves  out  for  the  sake  of  gain  to  the  avowed 


enemy  of  Jerusalem.  Wherever  there  was  still  a  ray  of 
hope  for  Messiah's  coming,"the  Jew  would  naturally  shrink 
from  being  associated  with  the  Gentiles,  who  were  to  be 
swept  away  from  the  land  with  the  coming  of  the  King. 
For  this  reason  the  tax  gatherers,  being  Roman  employees, 
were  hated  by  the  Jews  even  more  bitterly  than  the  Gentiles 
themselves.  Such  a  hated  tax  gatherer  was  the  writer  of 
the  first  Gospel.  How  the  grace  of  God  is  revealed  in  his 
call  we  shall  see  later.  That  he  was  chosen  to  write  this 
first  Gospel  is  in  itself  significant,  for  it  speaks  of  a  new 
order  of  things  about  to  be  introduced,  namely,  the  call  of 
the  despised  Gentiles. 

Internal  evidences  seem  to  show  that  most  likely  original- 
ly Matthew  wrote  the  Gospel  in  Aramaeic,  the  Semitic  dia- 
lect then  spoken  in  Palestine.  The  Gospel  was  later  trans- 
lated into  Greek.  This,  however,  is  certain,  that  the  Gospel 
of  Matthew  is  pre-eminently  the  Jezvish  Gospel.  There  are 
many  passages  in  it,  which  in  their  fundamental  meaning 
can  only  be  correctly  understood  by  one  who  is  quite  familiar 
with  Jewish  customs  and  the  traditional  teachings  of  the 
elders.  Because  it  is  the  Jewish  Gospel,  it  is  dispcnsational 
throughout.  It  is  safe  to  say  that  a  person,  no  matter  how 
learned  or  devoted,  who  does  not  hold  the  clearly  revealed 
dispensational  truths  concerning  the  Jews,  the  Gentiles  and 
the  church  of  God  will  fail  to  understand  Matthew.  This 
is,  alas,  too  much  the  case,  and  well  it  would  be  if  it  were 
not  more  than  individual  failure  to  understand;  but  it  is 
more  than  that.  Confusion,  error,  false  doctrine  is  the  final 
outcome,  when  the  right  key  to  any  part  of  God's  Word 


is  lacking.  If  the  dispensational  character  of  Matthew  were 
understood,  no  ethical  teaching  from  the  so-called  Sermon 
on  the  Mount  at  the  expense  of  the  Atonement  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  would  be  ix)ssible,  nor  would  there  be  room 
for  the  subtle,  modern  delusion,  so  universal  now,  of  a  "so- 
cial Christianity"  which  aims  at  lifting  up  the  masses  and 
the  reformation  of  the  world.  How  different  matters  would 
be  in  Christendom  if  its  leading  teachers  and  preachers, 
commentators  and  professors,  had  understood  and  would 
understand  the  meaning  of  the  seven  parables  in  Alat- 
thew  xiii,  with  its  deep  and  solemn  lessons.  When  we  think 
how  many  of  the  leaders  of  religious  thought  reject 
and  even  oppose  all  dispensational  teachings,  and  never 
learned  how  to  divide  the  Word  of  truth  rightly,  it  is  not 
strange  that  so  many  of  these  men  dare  to  stand  up  and  say 
that  the  Gospel  of  Matthew  as  well  as  the  other  Gospels  and 
the  different  parts  of  the  New  Testament  contain  numerous 
contradictions  and  errors.  Out  of  this  failure  to  discern 
dispensational  truths  has  likewise  arisen  the  attempt,  by  a 
very  well  meaning  class,  to  harmonize  the  Gospel  records 
and  to  arrange  all  the  events  in  the  life  of  our  Lord  in  a 
chronological  order,  and  thus  produce  a  life  of  Jesus  Christ, 
our  Lord,  as  we  have  a  descriptive  life  of  Napoleon  or  other 
great  men.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  never  undertaken  to  pro- 
duce a  life  of  Christ.  That  is  very  evident  by  the  fact  that 
the  greater  part  of  the  life  of  our  Lord  is  passed  over  in 
silence.  Nor  was  it  in  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  to  report  all  the 
words  and  miracles  and  the  movements  of  our  Lord,  or  to 
record  all  the  events  which  took  place  during  His  public 


ministry,  and  to  arrange  them  in  a  chronological  order. 
What  presumption,  then,  in  man  to  attempt  to  do  that  which 
the  Holy  Spirit  never  attempted !  If  the  Holy  Spirit  never 
intended  that  the  records  of  our  Saviour  should  be  strictly 
chronological,  how  vain  and  foolish  then,  if  not  more,  the 
attempt  to  bring  out  a  harmony  of  the  different  Gospels! 
One  has  correctly  said,  "The  Holy  Spirit  is  not  a  reporter, 
but  an  editor."  This  is  well  said.  A  reporter's  business  is 
to  report  events  as  they  happen.  The  editor  arranges  the 
material  in  a  way  to  suit  himself,  and  leaves  out  or  makes 
comment  just  as  he  thinks  best.  This  the  Holy  Spirit  has 
done  in  giving  four  Gospels,  which  are  not  a  mechanical 
.reporting  of  the  doings  of  a  person  called  Jesus  of  Naz- 
areth, but  the  spiritual  unfoldings  of  the  blessed  person  and 
work  of  our  Saviour  and  Lord,  as  King  of  the  Jews,  ser- 
vant in  obedience.  Son  of  Man  and  the  only  begotten  of  the 
Father.  We  cannot  enter  more  deeply  into  this  now,  but  in 
the  exposition  of  our  Gospel  we  shall  illustrate  this  fact. 

In  the  Gospel  of  Matthew,  as  the  Jewish  Gospel,  speak- 
ing of  the  King  and  the  kingdom,  dispensational  throughout, 
treating  of  the  Jews,  the  Gentiles  and  even  the  church  of 
God  in  anticipation,  as  no  other  Gospel  does,  everything  must 
be  looked  upon  from  the  dispensational  point  of  view.  All 
the  miracles  recorded,  the  words  spoken,  the  events  which 
are  given  in  their  peculiar  setting,  every  parable,  every 
chapter  from  beginning  to  end,  are  first  of  all  to  be  looked 
upon  as  foreshadowing  and  teaching  dispensational  truths. 
This  is  the  right  key  to  the  Gospel  of  Matthew.  It  is  like- 
wise a  significant  fact  that  in  the  condition  of  the  people 


Israel,  with  their  proud  religious  leaders  rejecting  the  Lord, 
their  King  and  the  threatened  judgment  in  consequence  of 
it,  is  a  true  photograph  of  the  end  of  the  present  dispensa- 
tion, and  in  it  we  shall  see  the  coming  doom  of  Christendom. 
The  characteristics  of  the  times,  when  our  Lord  appeared 
among  His  people,  who  were  so  religious,  self-righteous, 
being  divided  into  different  sects,  Ritualists  (Pharisees)  and 
Rationalists  (Sadducees — Higher  Critics),  following  the 
teachings  of  men,  occupied  with  man-made  creeds  and  doc- 
trines, etc.,  and  all  nothing  but  apostasy,  are  exactly  repro- 
duced in  Christendom,  with  its  man-made  ordinances,  rituals 
and  rationalistic  teachings.  We  hope  to  follow  out  this 
thought  in  our  exposition. 

There  are  seven  great  dispensational  parts  which  arc 
prominent  in  this  Gospel  and  around  which  everything  is 
grouped.    We  will  briefly  review  them. 

I.— The  King.  The  Old  Testament  is  full  of  promises 
which  speak  of  the  coming,  not  alone  of  a  deliverer,  a  sin- 
bearer,  but  of  the  coming  of  a  King,  King  Messiah  as  He 
is  still  called  by  orthodox  Jews.  This  King  was  eagerly 
expected,  hoped  for  and  prayed  for  by  the  pious  in  Israel. 
It  is  still  so  with  many  Jews  in  our  days.  The  Gospel  of 
Alatthew  proves  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  truly  the 
promised  King  Messiah.  In  it  we  see  Him  as  King  of  the 
Jews,  everything  shows  that  He  is  in  truth  the  royal  person, 
of  whom  Seers  and  Prophets,  as  well  as  inspired  Psalmists, 
wrote  and  sang.  First  it  would  be  necessary  to  prove  that 
He  is  legally  the  King.     This  is  seen  in  the  first  chapter, 


8 


where  a  genealogy  is  given  which  proves  His  royal  descent. 
The  beginning  is,  "Book  of  the  generation  of  Jesus  Christ, 
Son  of  David,  Son  of  Abraham."*  It  goes  l^ack  to  Abraham 
and  there  it  stops,  while  in  Luke  the  genealogy  reaches  up 
to  Adam.  In  the  Gospel  of  IMatthew  He  is  seen  as  Son  of 
David,  His  royal  descent ;  Son  of  Abraham,  according  to 
the  flesh  from  the  seed  of  Abraham. 

The  coming  of  the  Magi  is  only  recorded  in  Matthew. 
They  come  to  worship  the  new  born  King  of  the  Jews.  His 
royal  birthplace,  David's  city,  is  given.  The  infant  is  wor- 
shipped by  the  representatives  of  the  Gentiles  and  they  do 
homage  indeed  before  a  true  King,  though  the  marks  of 
poverty  were  around  Him.  The  gold  they  gave- speaks  of 
His  royalty.  Every  true  King  has  a  herald,  so  the  King 
Messiah.  The  forerunner  appears  and  in  Matthew  his  mes- 
sage to  the  nation  is  that  "The  Kingdom  of  heaven  has  drawn 
nigh" ;  the  royal  person  so  long  foretold  is  about  to  appear 
and  to  offer  that  Kingdom.  When  the  King  who 
was  rejected  comes  again  to  set  up  the  Kingdom,  He  will 
be  preceded  once  more  by  a  herald  who  will  declare  His 
coming  among  His  people  Israel,  even  Elijah  the  prophet. 
In  the  fourth  chapter  we  see  the  King  tested  and  proven 
that  He  is  the  King.  He  is  tested  thrice,  once  as  Son  of 
Alan,  as  Son  of  God  and  as  the  King  Messiah.  After  the 
testing,  out  of  which  He  comes  forth  a  complete  victor, 


*We  use  a  translation  of  the  New  Testament  which  was  made 
years  ago  by  J.  N.  Darby,  and  which  for  correctness  is  the  very 
best  we  have  ever  seen.  We  can  heartily  recommend  it  to  our 
readers.  It  is  published  in  New  York  City.  Price  60  cents  a  copy. 
Order  from  80  Second  Street,  N.  Y. 


He  begins  His  ministry.  The  Sermon  on  the  Mount  (we 
shall  use  the  phrase  though  it  is  not  scriptural)  is  given 
in  Matthew  in  full.  Mark  and  Luke  report  it  only  in  frag- 
ments and  John  has  not  a  word  of  it.  This  should  at  once 
determine  the  status  of  the  three  chapters  which  contain 
this  discourse.  It  is  teaching  concerning  the  Kingdom,  the 
magna  charta  of  the  Kingdom  and  all  its  principles.  Such 
a  kingdom  in  the  earth,  with  subjects  who  have  all  the 
characteristics  of  the  royal  requirements  laid  down  in  this 
disccurse  will  yet  be.  If  Israel  had  accepted  the  King  it 
would  then  have  come,  but  the  kingdom  has  been  postponed. 
The  Kingdom  will  at  last  come  with  a  righteous  nation  as 
a  center,  but  Christendom  is  not  that  kingdom.  In  this 
wonderful  discourse  the  Lord  speaks  as  the  King  and  as  the 
Lawgiver,  who  expounds  the  law  which  is  to  rule  Tlis  King- 
dom. From  the  eighth  to  the  twelfth  chapters,  we  see  the 
ro\al  manifestations  of  Ilim  who  is  Jehovah  manifested  in 
the  flesh.  This  part  especially  is  interesting  and  very  in- 
structive, because  it  gives  in  a  series  of  miracles,  the  dis- 
pensational  outline  of  the  Jew,  the  Gentile,  and  what  comes 
after  the  present  age  is  past. 

As  King  ?Ie  sends  out  His  servants  and  endues  them 
with  kingdom  power,  preaching  likewise  the  nearness  of 
the  kingdom.  After  the  tenth  chapter  the  rejection  begins 
followed  by  His  teachings  in  jxirables,  the  revealing  of 
secrets.  He  is  presented  to  Jerusalem  as  King,  and  the 
Messianic  welcome  is  heard,  "Blessed  is  He  who  comcth 
in  the  name  of  Jehovah."  After  that  His  suffering  and  His 
death.     In  all  His  Kingly  character  is  brought  out,  and  the 


lO 


Gospel  closes  abruptly,  and  has  nothing  to  say  of  His  ascen- 
sion to  heaven ;  but  the  Lord  is,  so  to  speak,  left  on  the 
earth  with  power,  all  power  in  heaven  and  on  earth.  In 
this  closing  it  is  seen  that  He  is  the  King.  He  rules  in 
heaven  now  and  on  the  earth  when  He  comes  again. 

II. — The  Kingdom.  The  phrase  Kingdom  of  the  Heav- 
ens occurs  only  in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew.  We  find  it 
thirty-two  times.  What  does  it  mean?  Here  is  the  failure 
of  the  interpretation  of  the  Word,  and  all  error  and  the 
confusion  around  us  springs  from  the  false  conception  of 
the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens.  It  is  generally  taught  and 
understood  that  the  term  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  means 
the  church,  and  thus  the  church  is  thought  to  be  the  true 
Kingdom  of  the  Heavens,  established  in  the  earth,  and 
conquering  the  nations  and  the  world.  The  Kingdom  of 
the  Heavens  is  not  the  church,  and  the  church  is  not  the 
Kingdom  of  the  Heavens.  This  is  a  very  vital  truth.  May 
the  exposition  of  this  Gospel  be  used  in  making  this  dis- 
tinction very  clear  in  the  minds  of  our  readers.  When  our 
Lord  speaks  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  up  to  the 
twelfth  chapter  He  does  not  mean  the  church,  but  the  King- 
dom of  the  Heavens  in  its  Old  Testament  sense,  as  it  is 
promised  to  Israel,  to  be  established  in  the  land,  with  Jeru- 
salem for  a  center,  and  from  there  to  spread  over  all  the 
nations  and  the  entire  earth.  What  did  the  pious,  believ- 
^^S  Jew  expect  according  to  the  Scriptures?  He  ex- 
pected (and  still  expects)  the  coming  of  the  King  Messiah, 
who  is  to  occupy  the  throne  of  His  father  David.    He  was 


II 

expected  to  bring  judgment  for  the  enemies  of  Jerusalem, 
and  bring  together  the  outcasts  of  Israel.  The  land  would 
flourish  as  never  before;  universal  peace  would  be  estab- 
lished; righteousness  and  peace  in  the  knowledge  of  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  to  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the 
deep.  All  this  in  the  earth  with  the  land,  which  is  Jehovah's 
land,  as  fountain  head,  from  which  all  the  blessings,  the 
streams  of  living  waters,  flow.  A  temple,  a  house  of  wor- 
ship, for  all  nations  was  expected  to  stand  in  Jerusalem,  to 
which  the  nations  would  come  to  worship  the  Lord.  This 
is  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  as  promised  to  Israel  and  as 
expected  by  them.  It  is  all  earthly.  The  church,  how- 
ever, is  something  entirely  different.  The  hope  of  the 
church,  the  place  of  the  church,  the  calling  of  the  church, 
the  destiny  of  the  church,  the  reigning  and  ruling  of  the 
church  is  not  earthly,  but  it  is  heavenly.  Now  the  King 
long  expected  had  appeared,  and  He  preached  the  Kingdom 
of  the  Heavens  having  drawn  nigh,  that  is,  this  promised 
earthly  kingdom  for  Israel,  When  John  the  Baptist 
preached,  "Repent  ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  the  Heavens  has 
drawn  nigh,"  he  meant  the  same.  It  is  all  wrong  to  preach 
the  Gospel  from  such  a  text  and  state  that  the  sinner  is  to 
repent  and  then  the  Kingdom  will  come  to  him.  A  very 
well  known  English  teacher  of  spiritual  truths  gave  not 
long  ago  in  this  country  a  discourse  on  the  mistranslated 
text,  "Tlie  Kingdom  of  God  is  within  you,"  and  dwelt 
largely  on  the  fact  that  the  Kingdom  is  within  the  believer. 
The  context  shows  that  this  is  erroneous,  and  the  true 
translation  is  "The  Kingdom  is  among  you;^'  that  is,  in  the 
person  of  the  King. 


12 


Now  if  Israel  had  accepted  the  testimony  of  John,  and 
had  repented,  and  if  they  had  accepted  the  King,  the  King- 
dom would  have  come,  but  now  it  has  been  postponed  till 
Jewish  disciples  will  pray  again  in  preaching  the  coming 
of  the  Kingdom,  "Thy  Kingdom  come,  Thy  will  be  done 
in  earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven."  That  will  be  after  the 
church  has  been  removed  to  the  heavenly  places.  The  his- 
tory of  the  Kingdom  is  given  in  the  second  chapter.  The 
Gentiles  first,  and  Jerusalem  does  not  know  her  King  and 
is  in  trouble  on  account  of  Him. 

III. — The  King  and  the  Kingdom  is  rejected.  This  is 
likewise  foretold  in  the  Old  Testament,  Isaiah  liii,  Daniel 
ix:25,  Psalm  xxii.,  etc.  It  is  also  seen  in  types,  Joseph, 
David  and  others.  The  herald  of  the  King  is  first  rejected 
and  ends  in  the  prison,  being  murdered.  This  speaks  of 
the  rejection  of  the  King  Himself.  In  no  other  Gospel  is 
the  story  of  the  rejection  so  completely  told  as  here.  It 
begins  in  Galilee,  in  His  own  city,  and  ends  in  Jerusalem. 
The  rejection  is  not  human  but  it  is  Satanic.  All  the  wick- 
edness and  depravity  of  the  heart  is  uncovered  and  Satan 
revealed  throughout.  All  classes  are  concerned  in  the  re- 
jection. The  crowds  who  had  followed  Him  and  were  fed 
by  Him,  the  Pharisees,  the  Sadducees,  the  Herodians,  the 
priests,  the  chief  priests,  the  high  priest,  the  elders.  At 
last  it  becomes  evident  that  they  knew  Him  who  He  was, 
their  Lord  and  their  King,  and  wilfully  they  delivered  Him 
into  the  hands  of  the  Gentiles.  The  story  of  the  cross  in 
Matthew,  too,  brings  out  the  darkest  side  of  the  rejection. 
Thus  prophecy  is  seen  fulfilled  in  the  rejection  of  the  King. 


13 

I\'. — The  rejection  of  His  Earthly  People  and  their 
Judgment.  This  is  another  theme  of  the  Old  Testament 
which  is  very  prominent  in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew,  They 
rejected  Him  and  He  leaves  them,  and  judgement  falls  upon 
them.  In  the  eleventh  chapter  He  reproaches  the  cities  in 
which  most  of  His  works  of  power  had  taken  place,  be- 
cause they  had  not  repented.  At  the  end  of  the  twelfth  chap- 
ter He  denies  His  relations  and  refuses  to  see  His  own,  while 
in  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  He  leaves  the  house  and 
goes  down  to  the  sea,  the  latter  term  typifies  the  nations. 
After  His  royal  presentation  to  Jerusalem  the  next  day  early 
in  the  morning  He  curses  the  fig  tree,  which  foreshadows 
Israel's  national  death,  and  after  He  uttered  His  two  para- 
bles to  the  chief  priests  and  elders,  He  declares  that  the 
Kingdom  of  God  is  to  be  taken  away  from  them  and  is  to 
be  given  to  a  nation  which  is  to  bring  the  fruit  thereof.  The 
whole  twenty-third  chapter  contains  the  woes  upon  the  Phar- 
isees, and  at  the  end  He  speaks  to  Jerusalem  and  declares 
that  their  house  is  to  be  left  desolate  till  they  shall  say, 
Blessed  is  He  who  comes  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

V. — The  mysteries  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens.  The 
kingdom  has  been  rejected  by  the  people  of  the  kingdom 
and  the  King  Himself  has  left  the  earth.  During  His  ab- 
sence the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  is  in  the  hands  of  men. 
There  is  then  the  kingdom  in  the  earth  in  an  entirely  differ- 
ent form  than  it  was  revealed  in  the  Old  Testament,  the 
mysteries  of  the  kingdom  hidden  from  the  world's  founda- 
tion are  now  made  known.      This  we  learn  in  Matthew 


14 

xiii,  and  here,  too,  we  have  at  least  a  glimpse  of  the  church. 
Again  it  is  to  be  understood  that  both  are  not  identical. 
But  what  is  the  kingdom  in  its  mystery  form?  The  sev- 
en parables  will  teach  this  to  us.  It  is  seen  there  in  an 
evil  mixed  condition.  The  church,  the  one  body,  is  not  evil, 
for  the  church  is  composed  of  those  who  are  beloved  of  God, 
called  saints,  but  Christendom,  including  all  professors,  is 
properly  that  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  in  the  thirteenth 
chapter.  The  parables  bring  out  what  may  be  termed  the 
history  of  Christend9m.  It  is  a  history  of  failure,  becoming 
that  which  the  Kin^  never  meant  it  to  be,  the  leaven  of  evil, 
indeed,  leavening  the  whole  lump,  and  thus  it  continues  till 
the  King  comes  back,  when  all  the  ofifences  will  be  gathered 
out  of  the  kingdom.  The  parable  of  the  pearl  alone  speaks 
of  the  church. 

VI. — The  Church.  In  no  other  Gospel  is  anything  said 
of  the  church  except  in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew.  In  the 
sixteenth  chapter  Peter  gives  his  testimony  concerning  the 
Lord,  revealed  to  him  from  the  Father,  who  is  in  the  heav- 
ens. The  Lord  tells  him  that  on  this  rock  I  will  build  My 
assembly — church — and  hades'  gates  shall  not  prevail 
against  it.  It  is  not  I  have  built,  but  I  zinll  build  My 
church.  Right  after  this  promise  He  speaks  of  His  suffer- 
ing and  death.  The  transfiguration  which  follows  the  first 
declaration  of  His  coming  death,  speaks  of  the  glory  which 
will  follow,  and  is  a  type  of  the  power  and  coming  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  (2  Peter  i:i6).  Much  that  follows  after 
the  declaration  of  the  Lord  concerning  the  building  of  the 
church  is  to  be  applied  to  the  church. 


15 

\"II. — The  Mount  of  Olivet  Discourse.  Prophetic 
Teachings  Concerning  the  End  of  the  Age.  This  discourse 
was  given  to  the  disciples  alter  the  Lord  had  spoken  His 
last  word  to  Jerusalem.  It  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
sections  of  the  entire  Gospel.  We  find  it  in  the  24th 
and  25th  chapters.  In  it  the  Lord  teaches  concern- 
ing the  Jews,  the  Gentiles  and  the  Church  of  God ;  Chris- 
tendom is  in  it  likewise.  The  order  is  different.  The  Gen- 
tiles stand  last.  The  reason  for  that  is  because  the  church 
will  be  removed  first  from  the  earth  and  the  professors  of 
Christendom  will  l:e  left,  and  are  notliing  but  Gentiles  and 
concerned  in  the  judgment  of  nations  as  made  known  by  the 
Lord.  The  first  part  of  Alatthew  xxiv  is  Jewish  throughout. 
From  the  fourth  to  the  forty-fifth  verse  we  have  a  most 
important  prophecy,  which  gives  the  events  which  follow 
after  the  church  is  taken  from  the  earth.  The  Lord  takes 
here  many  of  the  Old  Testament  prophecies  and  blends 
them  in  one  great  prophecy.  The  history  of  the  last  week 
in  Daniel  is  here.  The  middle  of  the  week  after  the  first 
three  years  and  a  half  is  verse  15.  Revelation,  chapters 
vi-xix  is  all  contained  in  these  words  of  our  Lord.  He  gave, 
then,  the  same  truths,  only  more  enlarged  and  in  detail, 
from  heaven  as  a  last  word  and  warning.  Three  parables 
follow  in  which  the  saved  and  the  unsaved  are  seen.  Wait- 
ing and  serving  is  the  leading  thought.  Reward  and  castini;- 
out  into  outward  darkness  the  twofold  outcome.  This,  then, 
finds  an  application  in  Christendom  and  the  church.  Th.e 
ending  of  Matthew  xxv  is  the  judgment  of  nations.  This 
*s  not  the  universal  judgment,  a  popular  term  in  Christen- 


i6 


dom,  but  unscriptural,  but  it  is  the  judgmeiit  of  the  nations 
at  the  time  when  our  Lord  as  Son  of  Man  sits  upon  the 
throne  of  His  glory. 

Many  of  the  most  interesting  facts  in  the  Gospel,  the  pecu- 
liar quotations  from  the  Old  Testament,  the  perfect 
structure,  etc.,  etc.,  we  cannot  give  in  this  introduction 
and  outline,  but  we  hope  to  bring  them  before  us  in  our 
exposition.  May,  then,  the  Spirit  of  Truth  guide  us  into  all 
the  truth. 


i; 


CHAPTER  I. 

The  first  chapter  of  the  Gospel  of  Matthew  is  divided  into 
two  parts.  In  the  first  to  the  seventeenth  verse  we  find  the 
genealogy  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  the  last  part  of  the  chap- 
ter the  account  of  the  birth  of  the  promised  One.  In  the 
second  half  we  see  Him  as  Son  of  God  and  Saviour,  while 
in  the  first,  in  thfe  genealogy.  His  royal  descent  is  proven. 
He  is  the  rightful  heir  to  David's  throne,  and  thus  His  King- 
ship is  legally  established. 

The  two  Greek  words  with  which  this  Gospel  begins  are 
"Biblos  gencscos,"  the  book  of  the  generation,  which  corre- 
sponds to  a  similar  Old  Testament  expression  frequently 
found  in  the  Scriptures  (Genesis  vitQ,  etc.)  The  very  be- 
ginning of  this  Gospel  shows  clearly  that  this  is  the  Jewish 
Gospel,  The  question  of  genealogy  is  an  all  important  one 
for  the  Jew.  The  genealogy  which  appears  in  the  Gospel  of 
Luke  does  not  stand  there  in  the  beginning,  but  it  comes  in 
with  the  third  chapter,  after  the  account  of  the  Saviour's 
birth,  and  the  ministry  of  the  forerunner,  and  when  He  be- 
gins His  public  ministry.  In  the  Gospel  of  Luke  He  is  the 
Son  of  man,  and  not  as  in  Matthew,  the  King.  In  Luke  it 
is  a  going  backward  clear  to  Adam,  while  in  the  genealogy 
in  Matthew  it  is  the  opposite ;  not  like  in  Luke,  beginning 
with  His  earthly  name,  Jesus,  but  beginning  with  Abraham, 
it  goes  forward  till  the  end  is  reached  in  Joseph,  the  husband 


i8 

of  Mary.  The  first  verse  in  Alatthevv  may  be  termed  a  super- 
scription for  the  genealogy  which  follows,  Book  of  generation 
of  Jesus  Christ,  "Son  of  David,  Son  of  Abraham."  How 
truly  He  is  all  that,  is  now  to  be  established,  Son  of  David, 
because  a  King  is  promised  to  rule  in  righteousness  upon 
the  throne  of  His  father  David ;  but  in  a  larger  sense.  Seed 
of  Abraham,  through  whom  all  the  families  of  the  earth  are 
to  be  blessed,  and  the  nations  to  receive  spiritual  blessings. 
How  incorrect  it  would  have  been  if  it  had  said,  Book  of 
generation  of  Jesus  Christ,  Son  of  Abraham,  Son  of  Da- 
vid. That  would  have  been  the  rendering  by  man,  but  the 
Holy  Spirit  puts  David  here  before  Abraham,  though  in  the 
genealogy  itself  Abraham  is  the  head,  the  first  one.  Jesus 
Christ  is  first  the  Son  of  David,  and  as  such  He  is  to  be  pre- 
sented to  the  nation  Israel,  as  King,  and  to  be  rejected  by 
them.  He  is  after  that  in  the  wider  sense  the  One  through 
whom  the  promises  of  blessing  in  Abraham  to  the  nations 
are  to  be  fulfilled.  How  clearly  this  proves  the  verbal  in- 
spiration !  Indeed,  if  there  is  no  verbal  inspiration  there  is 
no  inspiration  at  all. 

It  is  not  rarely  the  case  that  readers  of  the  New  Testament 
have  asked  themselves  why  all  these  names  appear  in  the 
first  chapter.  We  have  answered  many  questions  and 
have  written  numerous  letters  during  the  last  eight  years 
in  answer  to  inquiries  from  the  Jews  on  account  of  the  gene- 
alogy, as  it  appears  here,  and  the  apparent  contradictions 
and  discrepancies  between  Matthew  and  Luke.  Many  a  Jew 
has  come  an-d  asked,  Why  must  a  man  have  two  genealogies, 
cind  which  is  the  right  one?    When  the  Jew  takes  the  New 


19 

Testament  and  opens  it  with  Matthew,  he  finds  himself  upon 
familiar  gromid.  It  is  the  first  question  with  him,  if  Jesus 
of  Nazareth  is  the  .Messiah,  Son  of  David,  it  must  be 
proven  by  a  genealogy.  Does  the  New  Testament,  in  the 
genealogies  in  Matthew  and  in  Luke,  prove  this?  is  the  im- 
portant question  the  Jew  asks.  We  have  often  asked  the 
Jewi>h  intjuircr,  Supposing  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  not  the 
Messiah,  not  the  Son  of  David,  then  you  would  expect  the 
coming  of  a  ISIessiah  who  is  a  Son  of  David,  born  in  Ileth- 
lehem ;  how  could  that  coming  Messiah  prove  that  he  is  real- 
ly the  Son  of  David,  when  your  genealogical  registers  have 
been  lost  centuries  ago?  Others,  too,  have  had  difficulty  on 
account  of  these  two  genealogies.  We  will  state  the  case 
and  what  they  teach  in  a  few  words. 

In  the  genealogy  of  Matthew  Jesus  Christ  is  shown  to 
be  the  King  legally;  in  the  Gospel  of  Luke  we  have  Ilis 
genealogy  as  the  Son  of  Man,  and  as  such  linked  with  the 
whole  race.  The  genealogy  in  Matthew^  proves  that  Joseph 
is  a  descendant  of  David  through  the  house  of  Solomon. 
The  one  in  the  Gospel  of  Luke  proves  that  Mary,  the  virgin, 
is  likewise  a  descendant  of  David,  but  not  through  the 
house  of  Solomon;  she  is  connected  with  David  through  the 
house  of  N^athan.  The  Messiah  was  to  be  born  of  a  virgin, 
one  who  must  be  a  descendant  of  David.  But  a  woman  has 
no  right  to  the  throne.  As  the  son  of  the  virgin  alone  He 
could  not  have  a  legal  right  to  the  throne.  For  this  reason 
to  make  the  One  begotten  in  her  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the 
rightful  heir  to  the  throne  of  David  in  the  eyes  of  the  nation, 
the  virgin  had  to  be  the  wife  of  a  man  who  had  a  perfect, 


20 


unchallenged  right  to  the  throne.  Now  the  genealogy  in 
Matthew  shows  that  Joseph  is  a  son  of  David,  and  thus  en- 
titled to  the  throne,  therefore  Jesus  is  legally  in  this  way 
heir  to  the  throne.  He  is  the  legal  descendant  and  heir  of 
David  through  Joseph,  but  never  Joseph's  Son.  He  was 
supposed  by  the  people  to  be  the  Son  of  Joseph.  "And 
Jesus  Himself,  when  He  began  to  teach,  was  about  thirty 
years  of  age;  being,  as  was  supposed,  the  Son  of  Joseph" 
(Luke  iii:23).  "And  they  said.  Is  not  this  the  Son  of  Jos- 
eph?" (Luke  iv:22).  His  claim  as  being  truly  the  Son  of 
David  was  therefore  never  disputed.  Now  if  He  had  been 
the  Son  of  Joseph  according  to  the  flesh,  He  would  never 
be  and  could  never  be  our  Saviour.  The  51st  Psalm  would 
then  have  found  an  application.  "I  was  shapen  in  iniquity 
and  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me."  On  the  other  hand, 
if  He  had  been  the  Son  of  Mary,  without  she  being  legally 
the  wife  of  a  Son  of  David,  the  Jews  would  have  rejected 
His  claim  from  the  very  outset.  We  see  then  that  legally 
He  was  the  Son  of  Joseph;  in  His  humanity.  He  is  the  Son 
of  Mary,  and  then  one  step  higher,  as  we  read  in  the  closing 
verses.  He  is  the  Son  of  God.  The  two  genealogies  show 
Him  as  King — Son  of  man  and  Son  of  God — as  the  One 
born  of  Mary,  but  begotten  in  her  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

The  genealogy  in  Matthew  speaks  of  decadence.  Corrup- 
tion, ruin  and  hopelessness  is  clearly  brought  out  in  it.  It 
begins  with  Abraham.  And  as  generation  after  generation 
is  mentioned,  it  puts  before  us  the  shameful  history  of 
Israel,  with  their  unbelief,  apostasy  and  judgments.  At  last 
it  becomes  all  dark  and  all  hopeless  as  far  as  Israel  is  con- 


21 


cerned.  Like  Sarah's  womb,  as  she  indeed  stands  in  type 
for  the  nation,  the  whole  nation  was  dead,  no  hope,  all  ruin 
and  corruption.  But  God  can  bring  life  from  the  dead. 
"But  when  the  fullness  of  time  was  come,  God  sent  forth 
His  Son,  come  of  woman,  come  under  the  law,  that  He 
might  redeem  those  under  the  law,  that  we  might  receive 
sonship"  (Gal.  iv  -.4).  It  is  so  with  this  present  dispensation, 
for  after  awhile  when  the  Lord  has  taken  to  Himself  His 
Church,  darkness,  ruin  and  evil  will  prevail,  and  in  the 
darkest  hour  of  Israel's  believing  remnant  and  in  the  history 
of  the  world,  the  Firstborn  will  come  again  into  the  habit- 
able world  surrounded  by  worshipping  angels  (Heb.  i:6). 

The  division  of  the  genealogy  is  threefold.  From  Abra- 
ham to  David,  from  David  to  the  carrying  away  into  the 
Babylonian  captivity,  and  from  the  carrying  away  into  Baby- 
lon to  Christ  (verse  17).  In  each  division  are  fourteen 
generations,  twice  seven  in  each  division.  This  brings  in 
perfect  harmony  and  order,  as  He  who  has  given  it  all  is  the 
Spirit  of  order  and  not  disorder  (i  Cor.  xiv:33).  Seven 
is  a  highly  symbolical  number,  peculiar  to  Israel.  Much  of 
the  history  of  Israel  is  divided  into  seven ;  the  seventy  years 
of  Captivity,  the  seventy  prophetic  weeks  in  Daniel,  the  last 
week  still  future  composed  of  seven  years,  etc.,  are  well- 
knowfi  facts  to  every  reader  of  the  Word.  Here  it  is  three 
times  twice  seven,  which  means  fulfillment  and  completeness. 

A  closer  investigation  shows  at  once  that  a  number  of 
generations  have  been  left  out.  Attempts  have  been  made  to 
explain  this  in  different  ways.  Many  poor,  shortsighted  men 
have  put  it  down  as  an  error,  and  higher  critics  and  unbe- 


22 


lievers  have  pointed  it  out  as  an  argument  against  the  in- 
spiration of  the  Word,  and  as  an  example  of  the  contra- 
dictions, which,  according  to  them,  exist  in  the  Scriptures. 
Others  have  charged  Matthew  with  ignorance,  and  that  by 
not  knowing  any  better,  he  left  these  generations  out.  As 
a  Jew,  he  was,  without  question,  well  acquainted  with  the  Old 
Testament  writings.  He  had  full  access  to  all  the  collections 
of  books  which  we  term  Old  Testament.  Out  of  the  histori- 
cal books  it  would  have  been  a  very  easy  matter  to  get  to- 
gether a  complete  register  of  names,  such  as  would  have  been 
in  full  accord  with  the  object  in  view  to  satisfy  the  Jew.  Man 
indeed  would  have  done  that  if  he  had  to  write  the  genealogy, 
but  Matthew  did  not  write  according  to  his  own  taste  or 
wish ;  the  Holy  Spirit  wrote  every  word,  and  He  has  found 
it  good  to  make  a  number  of  omissions.  For  this  reason, 
that  which  is  so  often  claimed  to  prove  that  there  are  con- 
tradictions in  the  Bible,  and  that  the  Bible  is  not  infallible, 
is  really  a  witness  for  the  divinity  of  the  Scriptures.  In  all 
this  arrangement,  leaving  out  and  changing,  the  Holy  Spirit 
has  a  wise  purpose,  and  it  does  not  follow,  if  we  in  our  short- 
sightedness do  not  understand  it  all,  that  there  must  be  an 
error  involved  somewhere.  He  has  the  right  to  do  it.  and  it 
has  been' His  pleasure  to  leave  out  generations.  This  is  also 
so  in  the  case  of  another  Old  Testament  genealogy  (see" 
Ezra  vii). 

The  most  prominent  omission  is  in  verse  eight.  Three 
kings  are  left  out.  These  are  Ahaziah,  Joash  and  Amaziah. 
Who  were  they?  They  are  the  descendants  of  the  daughter 
of  wicked  Ahab,  Athaliah.     Athaliah  desired  to  annihilate 


23 

the  king^ly  seed  of  the  lioiisc  of  Judah.  This  was  a  satanic 
attempt  to  frustrate  the  purposes  of  God.  It  was,  Hke  Ha- 
inan's attempt,  inspired  by  him  who  is  a  murderer  from  the 
beginning".  It  may  be  called  Anti-}.Iessianity.  This  is  un- 
doubtedly the  reason  why  the  Holy  Spirit  left  out  these  three 
kings. 

Another  apparent  difficulty  is  the  one  concerning  Jcch- 
oniah  (verse  ii),  Zorobabel  and  Salathiel.  The  last  two  are 
in  the  genealogy  in  Luke,  and  Zorobabel  being  called  a  son 
of  Salathiel  when  i  Chr.  iii:i9  speaks  of  him  as  a  son  of 
Pedaiah. 

We  give  a  few  hints,  which  will  be  hel]')ful  in  the  correct 
understanding.  Jehoiakim  is  often  called  1)v  the  name  of 
his  son  Jechoniah.  P>oth  have  the  same  meaning  translated 
from  the  Hebrew,  Jehovah  will  estal)lish.  Jehoiakim  was 
carried  away  into  Babylnn  (2  run.;s  xxiv:i5).  He  has  had 
brethren,  which  Jechoniah  1:::(1  nut  (i  Chr.  iii:i5).  Thus  it 
becomes  clear  that  Jechoniah  is  Jehoiakim.  In  the  twelfth 
verse  we  have  Jechoniah.  the  son  of  Jehoiakim,  because  Sa- 
lathiel is  the  son  of  Jechoniah  (i  Chr.  iii:i7).  Read  also 
Jeremiah  xxii  130. 

Upon  the  line  of  Solomon  there  was  then  a  curse,  and  Jos- 
eph is  in  connection  with  tlirit  line.  Upon  the  line  of  Nathan 
there  was  no  curse,  and  thus  in  His  birth  from  Mary  He  is 
in  truth  the  Son  of  David,  still  in  the  eyes  of  the  nation  He 
was  it  legally  in  Joseph. 

If  Zorobabel  and  .Salathiel  appear  in  Luke  we  may  take 
them  as  different  per.sons.    The  difficulty  of  Zorobabel  being 


24 

the  son  of  Salathiel  here  and  the  son  of  Pedaiah  in  Chronicles 
may  be  solved  by  the  levirate  law. 

Other  striking  facts  come  to  our  knowledge  when  we  go 
through  the  list  of  the  generations,  each  one  is  highly  sig- 
nificant. We  mention  a  few  only.  Judah  is  mentioned,  be- 
cause the  prophecy  of  Jacob  makes  it  clear  that  from  him 
the  Shiloh  would  come  (Gen.  xlix:io).  We  are  reminded 
of  something  else  in  the  phrase,  Judah  and  his  brethren, 
namely,  of  Judah's  sin  and  his  brethren's  in  selling  their  own' 
brother,  and  all  that  is  connected  with  it. 

David  alone  has  the  title,  the  king  (verse  6).  Solomon's 
name  is  there,  but  there  is  no  kingship  attached  to  it.  The 
unbelieving  Jew,  as  he  tries  to  reject  prophecies  concerning 
the  Messiah,  has  always  made  a  strong  point  of  this,  that  the 
promises  given  to  David  concerning  a  son  were  all  fulfilled 
In  Solomon.  Solomon  according  to  them  is  the  king,  and 
higher  than  David  in  his  rule  and  dominion.  How  striking 
then  that  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  the  name  simply  Solomon 
without  adding,  the  king,  to  it.  David  is  the  king  and  no 
other  can  have  the  title,  till  his  son  come :  even  He  who  came 
and  whom  David  called  Lord  (Ps.  cx:i).  Thus  the  angel 
announced  Him,  the  Lord  God  shall  give  unto  Him  the 
throne  of  His  father  David :  and  He  shall  reign  over  the 
house  of  Jacob  forever ;  and  of  His  kingdom  there  shall  be 
no  end. 

In  the  last  fourteen  generations  beginning  with  Zorobabel, 
we  find  no  more  prominent  names.  Only  two  of  them  are 
recorded  in  the  Old  Testament.  Zorobabel  means,  Pprn  in 
Babel,  and  his  son  Abiud,  which  means,  Perishing.  However, 


25 

the  most  interesting  fact  is  the  four  women  who  are  men- 
tioned in  the  genealogy.  Three  of  them  are  found  in  the  first 
division  and  the  fourth  in  the  second  one.  Women  in  a  gene- 
alogy is  something  which  is  very  rarely  the  case.  There  were 
many  noble,  devoted  and  believing  women  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. Sarah,  Rebekah,  Deborah,  and  women  received  their 
dead  raised  to  life  again,  and  others  were  tortured  not  ac- 
cepting deliverance  (Heb.  xi:35).  One  would  naturally 
expect  that  in  the  genealogy  of  Him  who  is  the  seed  of  the 
woman  to  bruise  the  serpent's  head,  some  of  these  women 
who  believed  the  promise  would  be  mentioned.  However, 
we  look  in  vain  for  them.  Instead  of  them  we  discover  four, 
who  are  only  known,  at  least  three,  by  their  shame,  and  the 
other  belonged  to  a  race  which  was  according  to  the  law 
cursed.  Let  us  look  into  the  names  and  history  of  these 
four  women. 

Tamar  is  the  first.  Her  shameful  history  of  fornication 
is  recorded  in  Genesis  xxxviii.  What  a  dark  story  it  is,  full 
of  the  evil  deeds  of  the  flesh.  Sin  in  its  blackness  is  seen 
there.  But  how  did  she  get  into  the  genealogy?  The 
answer  is,  by  her  sin.  It  was  her  shameful  sin  that  puts  her 
here  in  the  genealogy  of  Ilim  who  has  come  to  save  that 
which  is  lost,  the  Saviour  of  men.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  put 
her  name  in  and  shows  by  it  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
the  Saviour  of  sinners.  He  has  come  to  save  the  vilest  and 
the  lowest.  And  the  second  one  is  Raliab.  Who  was  she? 
A  Canaanitess.  Unclean  and  outcast,  a  harlot  full  of  abom- 
ination. Yet  here  is  her  name  too  linked  with  Salmon 
(meaning  clothed)   and  Boaz,  her  son,  which  means.  "In 


26 


strength."  She  had  believed  the  messengers  as  they  had 
come,  and  the  scarlet  thread,  the  sign  of  her  deliverance 
from  the  doomed  city,  was  in  her  window.  "By  faith  the 
harlot  Rahab  perished  not  with  them  that  believed  not,  when 
she  had  received  the  spies  with  peace"  (Heb.  xi  :3i).  It  was 
faith  by  which  she  came  into  line.  Every  Jew  knew  her 
history  and  knew  too  that  she  had  come  in  to  share  Israel's 
blessings.  Still  the  proud  Pharisees  murmured  when  Jesus 
sat  down  and  ate  and  drank  with  the  publicans  and  the  sin- 
ners and  the  outcasts  gathered  around  Him,  murmuring 
because  He  sought  the  lowest. 

Ruth,  the  third  woman  mentioned,  is  an  exception,  for 
there  is  no  stain  upon  her  character.  She  was  a  Moabitess. 
The  law  was  against  her  and  cursed  her.  It  is  written,  "An 
Ammonite  or  Moabite  shall  not  enter  into  the  congregation 
of  the  Lord ;  even  to  their  tenth  generation  shall  they  not 
enter  into  the  congregation  of  the  Lord  forever"  (Deut. 
xxiii  :  3).  But  in  faith  too  she  enters  into  the  congregation 
with  her  children,  and  the  third  after  her,  her  grandson,  is 
King  David  himself.  The  law  which  had  pronounced  the 
curse  is  completely  set  aside  in  her  case. 

The  fourth  woman  is  not  mentioned  by  name — Her  of 
Uriah,  that  is  all  it  says.  We  know  it  is  Bath-Sheba,  the 
one  with  whom  King  David  committed  adultery.  Here  it  is 
sin  in  connection  with  a  believer.  Did  that  sin  com- 
mitted by  King  David  then  undo  him  as  a  believer  ?  No,  he 
had  believed  and  grace  had  full  sway  over  him. 

What  a  wonderful  demonstration  of  the  whole  and  full 
Gospel  of  Grace  as  it  is  in  Him,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ!    We 


27 


see  sin — Faith  as  it  lays  hoUl  and  salvation  by  faith — deliv- 
erance from  the  law — and  then  the  case  of  the  believer,  the 
assurance  of  salvation.  Grace — nothing  but  grace  shines  out 
as  nowhere  else  in  the  genealogy,  in  the  four  women, 
all  four  Gentiles.  Hannah  broke  out  in  her  proi)hctic 
song  and  said,  "He  lifteth  up  the  needy  from  the  dunghill, 
to  make  them  sit  with  princes  and  inherit  the  throne  of 
glory"  (i  Sam.  ii:8).  How  truly  this  is  seen  with  Tamar, 
Rahab,  Ruth  and  Bath-Sheba.  What  comfort  in  this  fact 
for  us  all ! 

He  is  Son  of  Abraham.  Through  Ilim  the  blessing  is  to 
go  out  to  the  greatest  sinner,  to  the  deepest  in  misery  and  in 
want,  blessing  to  the  Gentiles  in  the  new  dispensation  of 
grace. 

We  come  now  to  the  account  of  His  birth.  Here  He  is 
presented  as  human  and  divine,  born  of  a  virgin  and  at  the 
same  time  Jehovah-Saviour,  Emmanuel,  God  with  us.  H 
Matthew  \:i-iy  were  all  that  could  be  said  of  His  birth.  He 
might  then  have  had  a  legal  right  to  the  throne,  but  He 
could  never  have  been  He  who  was  to  redeem  and  save  from 
rin.  lUit  the  second  half  before  us  shows  Him  to  be  truly 
the  long  promised  f^ne.  the  One  of  whom  Moses  and  the 
prophets  spake,  to  whom  all  the  past  manifestations  of  God 
in  the  earth  and  the  types,  pointed.  To  accomplish  the  work 
of  salvation,  to  suffer  the  penalty  of  sin  and  to  put  away  sin 
He  had  to  be  divine  and  human. 

"Xow  the  birth  of  Jesus  Christ  was  thus:  His  mother, 
Mary,  that  is  having  been  betrothed  to  Joseph,  before  they 
came  together,  she  was  found  to  be  with  child  of  the  Holy 


28 


Ghost.  But  Joseph,  her  husband,  being  righteous,  and  un- 
willing to  expose  her  publicly,  purposed  to  have  her  put 
away  secretly ;  but  while  he  pondered  on  these  things,  behold, 
an  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  to  him  in  a  dream,  saying, 
Joseph,  son  of  David,  fear  not  to  take  to  thee  thy  wife,  for 
that  which  is  begotten  in  her  is  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  she 
shall  bring  forth  a  Son,  and  thou  shalt  call  His  name  Jesus, 
for  He  shall  save  His  people  from  their  sins. 

"Now  all  this  came  to  pass  that  that  might  be  fulfilled 
which  was  spoken  by  the  Lord  through  the  prophet,  saying, 
Behold  the  virgin  shall  be  with  child,  and  shall  bring  forth 
a  Son,  and  they  shall  call  His  name  Emmanuel,  which  is, 
being  interpreted,  God  with  us.  But  Joseph  having  awoke 
from  his  sleep  did  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord  enjoined  him, 
and  took  to  him  his  wife,  and  knew  her  not  until  she  had 
brought  forth  her  firstborn  Son;  and  he  called  His  name 
Jesus  (verses  18-25)." 

How  simple  all  this  sounds ;  yet  here  are  depths  which 
no  human  mind  can  or  ever  will  fathom.  All  attempts  to 
explain  will  utterly  fail.  Faith  worships  here  and  looks 
with  profound  adoration  upon  the  mystery  made  known, 
God  manifested  in  the  flesh.  The  Lord  stood  before  Abra- 
ham, clothed  in  the  form  of  a  human  being,  eating  and 
drinking  (Genesis  xviii).  What  humiliation  that  was  for 
Him  even  then,  but  how  much  deeper  and  far-reaching  it  is 
here?  It  is  now  His  mother,  Mary,  which  is  prominent  in 
the  record.  Born  of  a  woman  Paul  says  in  Galatians  iv. 
This  directs  our  attention  to  the  very  first  promise  made  in 
Genesis  iii :  "I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the  woman, 


29 


and  between  thy  seed  and  her  seed:  He  shall  bruise  thy 
head  and  thou  shalt  bruise  His  heel."  This  is  the  first 
promise  of  a  Deliverer. 

We  often  read  in  the  prophetic  Word,  I  am  He.  The 
Hebrews  have  the  word  "Hu"  (He)  as  a  divine  name. 
In  the  ancient  book  of  Zohar  the  word  "He"  is  applied  to  the 
eternal  God  bruising  the  serpent's  head.  He  is  to  be  the 
seed  of  the  woman,  not  of  Adam,  the  man.  Interesting 
is  the  following  quotation  from  an  ancient  exposition  of 
the  Jews.  "The  voice  which  our  first  parents  heard  walk- 
ing in  the  garden  was  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  or  the  Messiah. 
Before  they  sinned  they  saw  the  glory  of  the  blessed  God 
speaking  with  them,  but  after  their  sin  they  heard  only  the 
voice  walking.  The  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the 
head  of  the  serpent,  and  they  shall  obtain  healing  in  the 
days  of  the  Messiah." 

Mary  was  that  elect  woman,  a  virgin,  from  whom  the 
One  seed  came.  She  was  betrothed  to  Joseph,  the  Son  of 
David,  and  so  that  there  should  not  even  be  the  shadow  of 
a  doubt,  it  is  added,  before  they  came  together  she  was 
found  to  be  with  child  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Righteous 
Joseph  pondering  on  these  things  and  as  a  righteous  man 
undoubtedly  praying  to  God  about  it,  is  visited  by  an  angel 
of  the  Lord.  Even  the  little  word  "an"  is  here  of  import- 
ance. We  hear  much  in  the  Old  Testament  of  the  angel  of 
the  Lord.  He  appears  often  as  the  mediator  between  God 
and  man.  He  has  divine  names  and  attributes.  He  ap- 
peared in  the  form  of  man  to  Hagar.  Abraham,  Jacob,  the 
children  of  Israel,  Joshua,  Gideon,  Manoah,  and  to  Man- 


30 


oah's  wife.  Jacob  calls  him  the  angel,  the  Redeemer.  In 
Tsaiah  Ixiii  :g  he  is  called  the  angel  of  His  face.  Indeed  all 
through  the  Old  Testament  Jehovah  and  His  glory  is  in 
him  revealed,  so  that  in  these  manifestations  we  see  the  in- 
carnation foretold.  The  very  name  of  God  was  in  him 
(Exodus  xxiii:2o).  The  old  Jewish  synagogue  believed 
correctly  that  this  angel  of  the  Lord  is  the  word  of  God, 
the  Messiah.  The  One  who  appeared  as  the  angel,  is 
now  to  be  born  of  the  virgin.  He  emptied  Himself,  taking 
a  servant's  form,  taking  His  place  in  the  likeness  of  men 
(Phil.  ii:7).  If  the  writing  of  the  Gospel  of  Matthew  had 
been  the  work  of  an  impostor,  he  would  surely  have  written, 
that  the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  to  Joseph,  instead  of  an 
angel.  So  even  the  little  word,  an,  brings  out  the  verbal  in- 
spiration. 

In  the  Gospel  of  Luke  we  read  that  the  angel  Gabriel  (the 
same  who  announced  to  Daniel  the  coming  of  the  Messiah 
and  the  time  of  the  end),  was  sent  of  God  to  Mary,  and 
came  in  to  her  and  said,  "Hail,  favored  one !  the  Lord  is  with 
thee.  But  she,  seeing  the  angel,  was  troubled  at  his  word, 
and  reasoned  in  her  mind  what  this  salutation  might  be. 
And  the  angel  said  to  her,  Fear  not,  Mary,  for  thou  hast 
found  favor  with  God.  And,  behold,  thou  shalt  conceive  in 
the  womb  to  bear  a  Son,  and  thou  shalt  call  His  name  Jesus. 
He  shall  be  great  and  shall  be  called  Son  of  the  Highest; 
and  the  Lord  God  shall  give  Him  the  throne  of  His  father 
David;  and  He  shall  reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  for  the 
ages,  and  of  His  kingdom  there  shall  not  be  an  end.  But 
Mary  said  to  the  angel.  How  shall  this  be,  since  I  know  not 


31 

a  man?  And  the  angel  answering  said  to  her,  The  Holy 
Spirit  shall  come  upon  thee,  and  power  of  the  Highest  over- 
shadow thee,  wherefore  the  holy  thing  also  which  shall  be 
born  shall  be  called  Son  of  God"  (Luke  i  :28-35).  In  read- 
ing this  one  almost  hears  the  voice  which  spoke  to  Moses, 
Take  off  thy  shoes  from  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou 
standest  is  holy  ground.  Both  Gospels  bring  it  out  clearly 
that  it  is  the  Son  of  God,  the  eternal  Word,  who  becomes  a 
man,  truly  the  child  of  His  virgin  mother,  flesh  and  blood, 
a  real  human  body  like  ours,  but  a  holy  thing,  that  is  abso- 
lutely without  sin.  His  human  nature  proceeded 
directly  from  the  Spirit  of  God.  No  other  being  could  have 
saved  us. 

The  Old  Testament  speaks  often  of  this  great  event,  the 
birth  of  the  Saviour,  and  that  He  is  to  be  divine  and  human 
in  His  person.  He  is  called  the  Branch  (Zemach).  In 
Isaiah  He  is  called,  The  branch  of  Jehovah,  and  in  other 
prophets,  The  branch  of  David.  "For  unto  us  a  child  is 
born,  unto  us  a  Son  is  given ;  and  the  government  shall  be 
upon  His  shoulder ;  and  His  name  shall  be  called  Wonder- 
ful, Counsellor,  Mighty  God,  Everlasting  Father,  Prince  of 
Peace"  (Isaiah  ixij).  There  is  a  very  important  and  re- 
markable passage  in  Jeremiah,  "The  Lord  hath  created  a 
new  thing  in  the  earth,  A  woman  shall  encompass  a  man" 
(Jer.  xxxi:22).  This  belongs  to  a  Messianic  prophecy  as 
shown  by  the  context.  It  is  a  new  thing  which  is  to  take 
place,  and  a  creation.  This  could  never  be  said  of  the  birth 
of  a  child  in  the  natural  way.  Even  one  of  the  ancient 
rabbis  acknowledges  that  Jpr,  xxxi:?2  speaks  of  IMessiah, 


32 


and  that  by  the  woman  a  virgin  is  meant.  In  the  Jew- 
ish writings,  some  of  them  of  great  antiquity,  much  is 
said  on  the  origin  and  birth  of  the  Christ.  We  quote  but 
a  few  of  the  most  important  words  of  the  rabbis.  "Several 
state  that  Messiah  is  to  have  no  earthly  father."  "The  birth 
of  the  Messiah  alone  shall  be  without  any  defects."  "His 
birth  shall  not  be  like  that  of  other  men."  "The  birth  of  the 
Messiah  shall  be  like  the  dew  of  the  Lord,  as  drops  upon  the 
grass  without  the  action  of  man." 

That  this  exposition  of  the  Scriptures  concerning  the  mi- 
raculous birth  of  the  Messiah  was  generally  believed  at  the 
time  of  our  Lord  is  seen  from  the  Gospel  of  John.  "Is  not 
this  He  whom  they  seek  to  kill  ?  and  behold  He  speaks  open- 
ly and  they  say  nothing  to  Him.  Have  the  rulers  then  in- 
deed recognized  that  this  is  the  Christ?  But  as  to  this  man 
we  know  whence  He  is.  Now,  as  to  the  Christ,  when  He 
comes  no  one  knozvs  zvhencc  He  is  (John  vii  127) .  With 
this  they  acknowledged  that  they  believed  that  with  the  birth 
of  the  Christ  a  mystery  is  connected.  They  thought  then 
they  knew  who  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is ;  "And  they  said,  is 
not  this  Jesus,  the  son  of  Joseph,  whose  father  and  mother 
we  have  known?  How  then  does  he  say  I  am  come  down 
from  heaven?"  (John  vi:24).  Many  centuries  later  wick- 
ed Jews  wrote  a  vulgar  and  blasphemous  account  of  the 
birth  of  our  Lord,  but  the  early  Jews,  it  seems  never  at- 
tempted to  contradict  the  first  chapter  in  Matthew. 

The  angel  bade  Joseph  not  to  fear,  and  make  known  to 
him  not  only  that  that  which  is  begotten  in  Mary  is  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  but  he  said  also,  "She  shall  bring  forth  a  son, 


33 

and  thou  shalt  call  His  name  Jesus,  for  He  shall  save  His 
people  from  their  sins." 

The  word  Jesus  is  taken  from  the  Hebrew  Jehoshua, 
wiiich  means,  Jehovah  is  the  Saviour.  It  is  the  precious 
name  in  which  the  whole  story  of  salvation  is  contained. 
The  people  of  Jehovah  are  His  people,  because  He  is  Jeho- 
vah, and  left  His  eternal  glory.  His  riches,  and  became 
poor,  to  save  them  from  their  sins.  When  Moses  stood  in 
the  presence  of  this  descended  Lord,  who  proclaimed  before 
him  the  name  of  the  Lord,  Moses  said,  'Tf  now  I  have  found 
grace  in  Thy  sight,  O  Lord,"  saying  this  looking  to  heaven, 
'"let  m}-  Lord,"  the  One  who  had  come  down  and  stood  be- 
fore him,  "I  pray  thee  go  among  us;  for  it  is  a  stiff-necked 
I)Cople.  and  pardon  our  iniquities  and  our  sin,  and  take  us 
for  Thine  inheritance."  (Exodus  xxxiv:9).And  He  has 
come,  Jesus,  who  is  able  to  save  His  people  from  their  sins, 
because  He  is  God,  and  gracious,  as  revealed  to  Moses  in 
the  mountain.  They  rejected  Him  and  His  salvation.  They 
are  scattered  among  the  nations,  blinded  and  hardened,  but 
He  is  neverthless  Jesus  who  shall  save  His  people.  He  has 
bought  the  field  and  the  treasure  in  it.  He  will  come  again 
and  turn  away  ungodliness  from  Jacob  and  remember  their 
•iins  no  more.  Yes,  He  will  come  again  and  the  Lord  God 
will  give  Him  the  throne  of  ITis  father  Daviil.  and  He  shall 
reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  for  ever.  Saul  of  Tarsus 
heard  the  voice  from  heaven,  which  said.  "T  am  Jesus !" 
Tt  is  very  significant  that  He  spoke  thus  to  the  one  who 
became  the  apostle  to  the  Gentiles,  and  who  in  many  respects 
is  a  type  of  the  whole  nation  in  unbelief  and  in  their  com- 


34 

ing  conversion.  He  saved  Saul  of  Tarsus.  He  will  save 
all  Israel  yet.  For  believers,  His  name  is  not  simply  Jesus, 
but  for  us,  the  church.  He  is  both  Saviour  and  Lord,  and  the 
right  way  to  address  Him  is  by  His  full  name,  as  it  is 
by  the  resurrection  from  among  the  dead,  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ. 

With  the  declaration  that  He  shall  save  His  people  from 
their  sins  the  message  of  the  angel  was  completed.  It  is 
now  Matthew,  and  through  Matthew  of  course  the  Holy 
Spirit,  who  continues.  The  most  vital  passage  of  the  Old 
Testament  is  brought  to  the  front.  This  is  the  familiar 
prophecy  in  Isaiah  vii:i4,  which  reads,  "Behold  a  virgin 
shall  be  with  child  and  shall  bring  forth  a  son,  and  they 
shall  call  His  name  Emmanuel."  Like  most  all  the  other 
Messianic  prophecies,  this  one  has  also  been  the  target  of 
"Higher  Criticism."  These  learned  (?)  critics  have  made 
some  very  ridiculous  utterances  on  this  sublime  prophecy, 
and  said  that  it  is  anything  but  Messianic.  They  stand  not 
alone,  but  are  in  company  with  rationalistic  Jews  and  other 
infidels,  who  serve  the  power  of  darkness — the  one  who  is 
the  falsifier  of  God's  Word  from  the  beginning.  Some  of 
this  infidel  trash  of  Wellshausen,  etc.,  is  continually  being 
rehashed  by  some  of  the  so-called  professors  in  theological 
"evangelical"  seminaries  in  this  country.  Alas !  how  true 
still,  professing  themselves  wise,  they  became  fools.  Higher 
criticism  is  nothing  else  but  infidelity  and  foolishness. 

It  is  with  these  critics,  who  are  the  educators  of  the  com- 
ing preachers  in  the  different  denominations,  a  question  what 
Isaiah  wrote  and  what  he  did  not  write,  what  is  genuine 


35 

and  what  is  added  to  by  another  hand.  So  it  is  beini?  tauc^ht 
that  Isaiah  spoke  of  his  own  wife  when  he  uttered  the  words 
wliich  are  before  us.  Now  beware  how  you  treat  this 
prophecy!  Matthew  1:22  says  that  not  the  prophet  said 
these  words,  "Behold,  a  virgin  shall  be  with  child,"  but  the 
Lord  Himself  spoke  these  words  through  the  prophet.  A 
denial  of  Isaiah  vii  114  that  it  is  not  a  Messianic  prophecy  is 
a  denial  of  the  integrity  of  the  New  Testament,  a  denial  of 
the  Lord.  How  does  any  one  dare  to  say  the  prophet  did  not 
utter  a  prophecy  at  all,  that  it  is  not  to  be  understood  as 
meaning  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
the  very  first  chapter  in  the  New  Testament  declares  that 
it  is  a  Messianic  prophecy,  and  that  it  has  found  its  fulfill- 
ment in  the  person  of  our  Lord?  If  there  were  no  other 
evidence  whatever  in  the  Old  Testament,  nay,  if  there  were 
many  difiiculties  connected  with  it  Matthew  i  :22  would 
settle  it  all  and  would  be  sufficient  proof  in  itself  for  what 
the  Lord  meant  when  He  spoke  these  words  through  Isaiah 
the  prophet. 

But  there  is  nothing  whatever  in  Isaiah  vii.  which  would 
in  any  way  show  that  the  prophecy  is  not  Messianic.  The 
Lord  spoke  the  promise  at  a  time  when  the  house  of  David 
was  discouraged  and  disheartened,  and  King  Ahaz,  instead 
of  trusting  the  Lord,  continued  in  unbelief.  The  prophet  asks 
him  to  demand  a  sign  from  the  Lord,  but  he  rejects  the  offer 
under  the  jilca  that  he  would  not  tempt  God.  Upon  this  the 
prophet  said  that  the  Lord  Himself  shall  give  you  a  sign, 
and  the  prophecy  then  spoken  is  the  sign  for  the  discour- 
aged king  and  the  house  of  David.  In  other  words,  Messiah 


36 

is  to  be  born,  He  is  to  come  from  Judab,  and  from  the  house 
of  David.  How  could  he,  the  king,  fear  destruction  and  ex- 
termination ?  This  was  the  comfort  of  the  sign.  The  birth 
of  Him  is  a  sign — something  extraordinary,  a  miracle,  and 
therefore  the  promise  of  comfort  begins  with  the  prophetic 
word,  "Behold."  We  will  not  enter  into  fuller  discussion 
of  the  seventh  chapter  of  Isaiah,  nor  answer  the  arguments 
which  are  brought  against  the  Hebrew  word  used  here  for 
virgin;  all  this  would  be  of  little  value  and  profit  to  most 
of  our  readers.*  Some  have  seen  a  difficulty  that  the  child 
was  to  be  named  Emm.anuel,  and  instead  of  this  name.  He  is 
named  Jesus.  The  Jew  often  comes  with  this  question.  We 
point  out  to  him  that  this  apparent  contradiction  is  really  a 
proof  of  the  inspiration.  How  easy  it  would  have  been  for 
Matthew  to  have  all  fit  in  so  that  every  word  would  be  in 


*"That  the  word  almoh,  in  Isaiah  denotes  an  untouched  virgin, 
sufficiently  appears  from  the  sense  of  the  passage  Isa.  vii:i4.  King 
Ahaz  was  afraid  lest  the  enemies  that  were  now  upon  him  might 
destroy  Jerusalem  and  utterly  consume  the  house  of  David.  The 
Lord  meets  this  fear  by  a  sign  and  most  remarkable  promise, 
namely,  'that  sooner  should  a  pure  virgin  bring  forth  a  child  than 
the  family  of  David  perish.'  And  the  promise  yields  a  double 
comfort :  namely,  of  Christ  hereafter  to  be  born  of  a  virgin ;  and  of 
their  security  from  the  imminent  danger  of  the  city  and  house  of 
David.  So  that,  although  that  prophecy,  of  a  virgin's  bringing 
forth  a  son,  should  not  be  fulfilled  till  many  hundreds  of  years 
after,  yet,  at  that  present  time,  when  the  prophecy  was  made,  Ahaz 
had  a  certain  and  notable  sign,  that  the  house  of  David  should  be 
safe  and  secure  from  the  danger  that  hung  over  it.  As  much  as 
if  the  prophet  had  said:  'Be  not  so  troubled  O  Ahaz,  does  it  not 
seem  an  impossible  thing  to  thee,  that  never  will  happen,  that  a 
pure  virgin  become  a  mother?  But  I  tell  thee  such  a  virgin  shall 
bring  forth  a  son,  before  the  house  of  David  perish.' " — Horae 
Hebraicac  et  Talmudicae  by  Lightfoot. 


37 

harmony  with  the  Old  Testament.  The  Holy  Spirit  guided 
his  hand  in  writing.  The  propliecy  in  the  Old  Testament 
says.  "And  call  His  name  Immanuel."  Here  it  says,  "They 
shall  call  his  name."  In  the  first  chapter  of  Matthew  we 
read  that  Joseph  called  the  child's  name  Jesus,  but  in  Luke 
we  read  that  Mary  calls  His  name  Jesus.  The  name  Emman- 
uel, God  with  us,  is  only  given  in  Matthew.  He  is  Emman- 
uel, and  as  such  Jehovah  the  Saviour,  so  that  in  reality  both 
names  have  the  same  meaning.  "And  the  Word  became 
flesh  and  dwelt  among  us  (and  we  have  contemplated  His 
glory,  a  glory  as  of  an  only  begotten  with  his  Father)  full 
of  grace  and  truth"  (John  i  :i4).  Tie  is  the  exalted  One  over 
all. 

Joseph  was  obedient  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  as  it  had 
come  to  him  through  the  angel.  That  Mary  had  other  chil- 
dren is  clearlv  seen  from  the  sixty-ninth  Psalm,  verses  7  and 
8,  where  it  speaks  of  His  suffering:  "Because  for  thy  sake 
I  have  borne  reproach  ;  shame  has  covered  my  face.  I  am 
become  a  stranger  to  my  brethren,  even  an  alien  to  the  chil- 
dren of  my  mother." 


38 


CHAPTER  II. 

The  second  chapter  in  Matthew  relates  events  which  are 
nowhere  else  recorded  in  the  Gospels.  For  this  reason,  and 
this  is  the  only  reason,  the  authenticity  of  the  chapter  has 
been  doubted  more  than  once.  All  that  which  the  second 
chapter  contains  belongs  properly  into  the  Jewish,  dispen- 
sational  Gospel,  and  would  indeed  be  entirely  out  of  place 
in  the  other  three  Gospels,  therefore  the  Holy  Spirit  has 
seen  fit  to  put  it  only  in  the  first  Gospel.  The  chapter  con- 
tains the  story  of  the  coming  of  the  Magi  or  wise  men  to 
Jerusalem  in  search  of  the  King  of  the  Jews,  to  worship 
Him,  and  to  bring  Him  the  gifts  they  had  brought  from 
afar;  the  wrath  of  Herod  the  king,  and  the  flight  of  the  child 
into  Egypt,  the  slaughter  of  the  children  in  Bethlehem,  the 
return  from  Egypt,  and  the  dwelling  of  the  Lord  in  Nazareth 
as  the  rejected  One.  All  these  events  are  foretold  in  the 
Old  Testament,  to  which  we  are  referred  and  where  we 
learn  the  meaning  of  them.  The  chapter  is  an  in- 
tensely interesting  one,  full  of  important  teachings.  It 
gives  us  in  a  nutshell  the  story  of  the  entire  Gospel.  The 
true  King  is  not  known  in  Jerusalem,  the  City  of  a  great 
King;  in  His  own  royal  residence,  His  people  do  not 
know  He  has  come.  Strangers  from  distant  lands  seek  Him 
and  are  desirous  to  know  and  to  worship  Him.  Still  worse, 
the  ecclesiastical  authorities,  the  chief  priests  and  the  scribes, 


39 

are  indifferent,  and  the  civil  ruler  is  filled  with  hatred  against 
Him  and  seeks  His  life,  and  later  both  combined  to  kill  Him. 
Thus  in  one  of  the  shortest  chapters  and  narratives  the 
trend  of  the  whole  Gospel  is  given.  But  it  is  reaching  still 
farther.  The  whole  history  of  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens 
in  its  hidden  form  is  here  outlined,  and  the  character  of  the 
entire  new  dispensation  is  manifested. 

"Now  Jesus  having  been  born  in  Bethlehem  of  Judea  in 
the  days  of  Herod  the  king,  behold  Magi  from  the  East  ar- 
rived in  Jerusalem,  saying,  Where  is  He  that  hath  been 
born.  King  of  the  Jews,  for  we  have  seen  His  star  in  the 
East  and  have  come  to  worship  Him?"  (verses  i.  2.) 

The  first  question  would  be  to  ascertain  the  tim.e  when 
these  wise  men  came  to  Jerusalem.  It  is  generally  believed 
that  it  was  immediately  after  the  birth  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  The  old  masters  have  taken  most  of  the  subjects 
for  their  paintings  from  biblical  history,  but  many  of  these 
productions,  if  not  all,  are  unscriptural  and  misleading.  Thus 
the  birth  of  the  Saviour  has  been  put  on  canvas,  so  familiar 
to  our  readers,  a  stable,  a  manger,  Mary  and  Joseph,  do- 
mestic animals,  a  star  shining  over  the  building,  shepherds 
with  their  staflfs  on  the  one  hand  and  on  the  other  three 
gaudily  attired  persons  on  their  knees,  glittering  crowns  on 
their  heads,  and  in  the  extended  hands  the  gift  upon  which 
the  eyes  of  the  babe  rest.  Such  a  picture  of  course  is  incor- 
rect. The  authorized  version,  too,  has  helped  such  a  wrong 
conception  along  by  having  it  translated,  "But  when  Jesus 
was  born."  The  correct  reading  is.  But  Jesus  having  been 
born,  that  is   some  time  after  and   nnt  immediate^'  after. 


40 

Other  evidences  in  the  chapter  show  that  the  child  must 
■  have  been  about  a  year  old  when  the  visit  of  the  wise  men 
occurred.  They  had  seen  His  star,  announcing  to  them  in 
their  far  away  homes  that  the  expected  king  had  been  born. 
They  had  to  travel  over  a  large  territory,  and  the  journey 
must  have  taken  many  months,  and  then  there  is  nothing  to 
show  that  they  started  at  once.  In  the  eleventh  verse  we 
read,  "And  when  they  had  come  into  the  house,  they  saw 
the  young  child  with  Mary  His  mother,  and  they  fell  down 
and  worshipped  Him."  In  Luke  it  says,  "And  she  brought 
forth  her  first  born  Son,  and  wrapped  Him  in  swaddling 
clothes  and  laid  Him  in  a  manger,  because  there  was  no 
room  for  them  in  the  inn."  In  Matthew  it  is  a  house  where 
the  child  is  found,  in  Luke  there  was  no  room  in  the  inn. 
Perhaps  the  most  important  evidence  is  in  the  sixteenth 
verse.  Herod  had  privately  called  the  wise  men  and  in- 
quired of  them  exactly  the  time  that  the  star  appeared. 
Their  answer  is  not  given,  but  from  the  sixteenth  verse  we 
may  conclude  that  Herod  had  received  a  very  definite  answer 
by  which  he  knew  that  the  child  could  not  be  over  two  years 
old. 

The  second  question  would  be  about  these  strange  visi- 
tors, who  came  to  do  homage  before  the  King.  Who  were 
they?  How  many  of  them  came?  They  are  called  in  the 
Greek,  Magi  from  the  East.  Magi  is  the  name  by  which  in 
olden  times  a  large  class  of  people,  who  were  occupied  with 
occult  things,  were  known.  These  were  the  astrologers,  in- 
terpreters of  dreams  and  omens,  medical  men,  necromancers, 
etc.   Among  the  Persians  and  Medes  they  formed  a  special 


41 

class  of  priests,  and  were  chiefly  occupied  with  foretelling 
events  from  the  stars,  and  preparations  of  medicines  for  bod- 
ily ills.  From  Magi  has  come  the  more  modern  word  magic ; 
in  an  evil  sense,  sorcerer.  Daniel  was  chief  over  such  a 
class  of  wise  men.  "And  the  king  made  Daniel  to  be  chief 
governor  over  all  the  wise  men  of  Babylon"  (Daniel  ii:48). 
These  wise  men  of  the  East  were  not  all  impostors.  Many 
of  them  were  earnest  seekers  after  the  truth,  and  students  of 
natural  forces.  They  did  not  have  the  true  light.  What  a 
significant  fact  it  is  that  now  in  the  beginning  of  the  twen- 
tieth century,  in  the  midst  of  so-called  Christian  nations, 
soothsayers,  readers  of  "human  destiny"  through  the  stars, 
those  who  claim  to  ask  the  dead,  others  having  familiar 
spirits,  are  practicing  their  deceptions,  wickedness  and 
abominations,  and  are  advertising  their  evil  things  openly, 
and  find  among  these  so-called  "Christians"  thousands  and 
thousands  to  consult  them.  It  cannot  be  otherwise.  The 
true  Light  rejected,  the  truth  not  believed,  strong  delusions 
and  utter  darkness  follow  (2  Thess.  ii).  The  Magi  here 
were  unquestionably  earnest  seekers  after  truth.  There  is 
nothing  to  show  how  many  came  thus  to  Jerusalem.  That 
three  came  and  that  these  three  were  kings  is  incorrect.  We 
would  rather  think  that  a  larger  number  made  their  appear- 
ance in  the  city,  followed  perhaps  by  a  large  train  of  atten- 
dants. Their  appearance  in  number  was  striking  enough 
to  startle  Jerusalem,  and  to  bring  trouble  into  the  heart  of 
its  wicked  king. 

They  had  seen  "His  star,"  the  star  of  the  born  King  of 
the  Jews.   There  has  been  much  speculating  about  the  star, 


44 

likewise.  Many  think  that  the  star  was  a  constellation  of 
Jupiter  and  Saturn,  The  great  astronomer,  Kepler,  issued 
in  1606  a  book  in  which  he  attempted  to  show  the  year  of 
the  birth  of  our  Lord  by  such  a  constellation.  In  1463  the 
great  Jewish  teacher,  Abarbanel,  concluded  from  a  similar 
constellation  which  happened  then  that  the  coming  of  the 
Messiah  must  be  near.  But  it  does  not  say  stars,  but  it  is 
star,  and  that  His  star.  It  is  also  incorrect  to  think  that 
the  star  guided  the  Magi  from  the  East  across  an  immense 
stretch  of  country  and  brought  them  at  last  to  Jerusalem. 
The  star  they  had  seen  in  the  East  went  before  them  only 
after  they  had  departed  from  Jerusalem.  It  says  then, 
"When  they  saw  the  star  they  rejoiced  with  exceeding  great 
joy."  This  shows  that  for  a  time  they  did  not  see  the  star. 
Perhaps  in  their  ancient  traditions  there  was  something  left 
of  Balaam's  prophecy  (Numbers  xxiii  and  xxiv).  Might 
they  not  have  had  fragments  of  Daniel's  prophecies?  It  is 
a  well  known  fact  that  throughout  the  East  there  was  at 
that  time  a  universal  expectancy  of  the  coming  of  a  King, 
and  Jerusalem  was  connected  with  this  King.  A  similar 
expectancy  is  even  now  noticeable  among  Oriental  nations. 
A  marvelous  light  was  seen  by  these  men.  It  burst  forth  in 
a  brilliant  brightness,  as  once  more  in  the  near  future  the 
heavens  will  be  lit  up  by  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  man,  return- 
ing in  power  and  glory.  With  that  strange  light  in  the 
heavens,  a  brilliant  star,  the  intelligence  was  conveyed  to 
them  that  the  King,  the  One  who  is  the  desire  of  all  nations 
(Hag.  ii  :3)  was  born.  And  that  light  was  sufficient  for  these 
seekers  to  make  them  set  out  with  their  £rifts.  to  undertake 


43 


the  long  and  dangerous  journey  to  find  the  King  and  bow 
before  His  royal  person. 

What  a  day  it  was  when  they  arrived  at  last  in  Jerusalem, 
not  guided  there  by  the  star,  but  by  the  knowledge  that  in 
Jerusalem  the  King  was  to  reign,  aiid  where  they  expected 
to  find  Him !  But  what  did  they  find  ?  Jerusalem  under  the 
regime  of  an  Edomite.  Herod  upon  the  throne  and  his 
heart  filled  with  Edomite  hatred.  No  question  that  these 
evil  rulers,  including  this  one,  are  types  of  the  final  usurper, 
the  Antichrist,  whom  the  Lord  will  find  in  possession  of  the 
city  when  He  comes  the  second  time,  and  whom  He  will 
destroy  with  the  breath  of  His  mouth  and  the  brightness  of 
His  coming.  "Where  is  He  that  hath  been  born  King  of 
the  Jews?"  Where  is  He?  In  vain  they  go  after  their  long 
journey  through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  asking  the  ques- 
tion ;  there  is  no  answer.  The  great  city  with  its  magnifi- 
cent religious  institutions,  its  wonderful  Herodian  temple, 
then  still  in  process  of  erection,  its  aristocratic  priesthood 
an;l  benevolent  institutions,  had  no  knowledge  of  that  King; 
nay,  they  did  not  desire  that  King  to  come,  they  were  self- 
satisfied.  This  foreshadows  the  whclc  story  of  the  rejection 
of  the  King,  the  Lord  from  heaven,  that  there  was  not  alone 
no  room  for  Him  in  the  inn,  but  there  was  likewise  no  room 
for  Him  among  His  own;  they  received  Him  not.  Herod, 
the  king,  was  troubled  and  all  Jerusalem  with  him.  1  Ic 
feared  for  his  throne,  which  was  not  his.  Jerusalem  knew 
what  Herod's  fear  meant — rebellion,  bloodshed,  and  suffer- 
ing. 

How  true  this  is  still,  and  how  truly  it  describes  the  en- 


44 


tire  dispensation  in  which  we  Hve !  Jerusalem  knows  not 
the  King,  has  rejected  Him  who  is  their  Messiah,  and  ever 
since,  Jerusalem  and  Israel's  sad  history  of  blood  and  tears 
has  begun  and  will  surely  not  end  till  the  false  king  is  de- 
throned and  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  King  of  the  Jews,  is 
crowned  as  Lord  of  all. 

And  these  men  from  the  East  were  not  Jews,  they  were 
not  Israelites,  but  Gentiles.  For  months,  while  Jerusalem 
is  not  acquainted  with  the  fact  of  the  birth  of  the  long  prom- 
ised One,  they  had  knowledge  that  He  had  come.  Gentiles 
were  first  to  acknowledge  and  to  worship  Him.  The  first  be- 
came last  and  the  last  became  first.  By  their  fall  salvation  has 
come  to  the  Gentiles  to  provoke  them  to  jealousy.  He,  the 
Saviour,  is  first,  a  light  for  the  "unveiling  of  the  Gentiles, 
but  in  the  end,  too,  the  glory  of  Thy  people  Israel"  (Luke 
ii:32).  Still  it  is  to  be  seen  here  likewise  that  not  all  the 
Gentiles  came  to  worship  Him,  only  a  small  number,  and 
so  throughout  this  dispensation  the  promise  is  not  that  the 
nations  will  walk  in  His  light  and  worship  Him,  but  only  a 
people  is  called  out  from  the  nations  for  His  name.  We 
will  see  later  in  the  exposition  of  this  chapter  that  these 
Gentiles  who  came  to  Jerusalem  are  typical  of  all  the  nations 
going  up  to  Jerusalem  to  worship  the  King,  the  Lord  of 
Hosts. 

But  in  Jerusalem  there  was  not  only  a  king  who  was  the 
enemy  of  the  right  heir  to  David's  throne,  but  there  were 
the  religious  leaders  of  the  people,  the  Pharisees,  the  scribes, 
the  priests  and  the  chief  priests.  The  learned  doctors  of  the 
law,  the  students  of  prophecy,  the  orthodox ;  had  they  no 


45 

knowledge  of  Him  of  whom  Moses  and  the  Prophets  spoke? 
Surely  if  they  hear  He  has  come  they  will  run  to  meet  Him 
and  welcome  Him!  Far  from  it;  they  were  ignorant,  like- 
wise, and  all  indifferent  to  the  startling  news  which  had 
come  to  Jerusalem  from  such  an  extraordinary  source. 

"And  when  Herod  the  king  heard  it  he  was  troubled, 
and  all  Jerusalem  with  him ;  and  having  gathered  together 
all  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  of  the  people,  he  inquired  of 
them  where  the  Christ  was  to  be  born.  And  they  said  unto 
him,  In  Bethlehem  of  Judea ;  for  it  is  written  through  the 
prophet.  And  thou  Bethlehem  in  the  land  of  Juda,  art  in  no 
wise  least  among  the  governors  of  Juda ;  for  out  of  thee 
shall  come  forth  a  leader  who  shall  be  a  shepherd  to  my 
people  Israel." 

By  order  of  the  king  they  were  called  together,  not  in  a 
special  session  of  the  Sanhedrim,  but  in  a  larger  gathering,  all 
the  chief  priests  and  scribes  are  commanded  to  show  them- 
selves and  to  produce  the  scrolls  of  the  law,  the  prophets 
and  the  writings.  And  now  Herod  puts  his  question.  Where 
is  Messiah  to  be  born  ?  The  answer  comes  at  once  from  the 
prophecies  of  Micah  in  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  chapter, 
"Bethlehem  in  Juda."  There  was  no  dissenting  voice.  They 
were  all  orthodox  and  had  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  scrip- 
tures, but  it  was  head  knowledge,  and  their  consciences 
were  not  touched  by  it.  The  quotation  itself  differs  from 
the  original  Hebrew  and  from  the  Septuagint.  They  used 
undoubtedly  the  text  from  a  Chaldee  paraphrase.  The  meet- 
ing is  dismissed  and  all  goes  on  in  its  usual  way.  Nothing 
is  said  that  these  priests  and  scribes  were  awakened  and 


46 


joined  the  seeking  strangers  to  find  Him,  who  is  their  Mes- 
siah. Sad  was  their  state.  Knowledge  sufficient,  but 
no  interest  in  Him,  no  love  for  Him,  the  living  Word.  Their 
hearts  were  not  filled  with  joy,  and  perhaps  in  their  indif- 
ference the  incident  was  soon  forgotten,  till  one  day  the 
slaughter  of  the  children  in  Bethlehem  reminded  them  once 
more  of  what  had  happened.  It  is  the  first  time  we  meet 
these  chief  priests  and  scribes  in  the  Gospel;  they  will  soon 
stand  before  us  in  all  their  religiousness  in  another  charac- 
ter. Indifferent  they  were  once,  and  soon  we  shall  see 
them  in  their  hatred,  wickedness,  and  at  last,  with  a  perfect 
knowledge  of  the  person  who  is  in  their  midst,  they  delfver 
Him  into  the  hands  of  the  Gentiles. 

And  is  this  not  true  in  Christendom  at  this  present  time? 
How  much  there  is  of  religiousness,  rituals,  ceremonies  and 
creeds  of  men,  but  with  all  this  it  is  nothing  but  profession 
outwardly,  the  heart  cares  not  for  Him  and  has  no  interest 
in  Him.  The  indifference  of  our  times  in  the  midst  of  Chris- 
tendom is  appalling.  There  is  no  interest  in  the  coming 
again  of  our  Lord  as  there  was  no  interest  in  the  religious 
leaders  of  the  people  at  His  first  coming.  Indifference  ends 
with  this  age  also  in  opposition  and  apostasy,  followed  by 
judgment.  Perhaps  for  the  first  time  had  these  wise  men 
from  the  East  heard  the  Word  of  God.  The  flash  of  light, 
the  brilliant  star,  that  supernatural  sign,  was  sufficient  to 
start  them  on  their  way.  The  light  they  had  they  followed, 
and  soon  there  is  added  to  it.  The  Word  of  God  they  heard 
perhaps  not  at  all  from  any  of  the  scribes  and  chief  priests. 
These. strangers  were  despised  by  them  and  considered  as 


47 


clogs,  in  spite  of  the  prophetic  scriptures  which  speak  of  the 
salvation  of  the  Gentiles.  The  presence  of  them  in  Jerusalem 
should  have  taught  them  the  fulfillment  of  prophecy.  No, 
not  the  scribes  and  chief  priests  acquaint  the  wise  men  with 
the  Word,  but  wicked  King  Herod,  with  his  wicked  thoughts 
and  intentions,  transmits  it  to  them.  "Then  Herod,  having 
privately  called  the  Magi,  inquired  of  them  exactly  the  time 
that  the  star  appeared ;  and  sending  them  to  Bethlehem  he 
said,  Go  and  search  out  exactly  about,  the  child  and  when 
ye  have  found  Him  bring  me  back  word,  that  I  may  come 
and  worship  Him  also."  They  are  obedient  to  the  word 
spoken ;  though  it  came  from  Herod's  lips,  it  was  neverthe- 
less the  truth.  Jerusalem  is  left  behind,  and  their  faces  are 
set  towards  Bethlehem.  "When  they  had  heard  the  king 
they  departed ;  and  lo,  the  star  they  had  seen  in  the  East 
went  before  them  until  it  came  and  stood  over  where  the 
young  child  was.  And  when  they  saw  the  star  they  rejoiced 
with  exceeding  great  joy." 

The  question  has  been  raised.  Where  did  they  find  the 
child?  In  Luke  we  read,  "And  when  they  had  performed 
all  these  things  according  to  the  law  of  the  Lord,  they  re- 
turned unto  Galilee,  their  own  city  Nazareth"  (Luke 
ii:39).  Now  if  the  wise  men  came  about  a  year  later,  did 
they  find  the  child  in  P>ethlehem  or  were  they  guided  all  the 
way  up  to  Narareth  ?  We  think  they  were  guided  by  the 
star  to  Bethlehem  in  fulfillment  of  the  word  they  had  heard. 
Bethlehem  is  in  a  southern  direction  from  Jerusalem  and 
Nazareth  directly  north.  They  were  put  without  question 
on  the  right  road  by  Herod,  when  the  star  appeared  again. 


48 


But  if  the  parents  were  in  Bethlehem  a  year  later  with  the 
child,  why  did  they  go  there  ?  The  Gospel  of  Luke  gives  the 
answer.  "Now  His  parents  went  to  Jerusalem  every  year 
at  the  feast  of  the  Passover.  And  when  He  was  twelve  years 
old  they  went  up  to  Jerusalem  after  the  custom  of  the  feast" 
(Luke  ii:4i,  42).  This  brings  out  that  they  were  a  year 
after  again  in  Jerusalem  for  the  feast,  and  were  therefore 
not  in  Nazareth.  Bethlehem  was  truly  their  city,  and  the 
very  short  journey  was  made  there  from  Jerusalem,  where 
the  wise  men  now  found  the  young  child  with  Mary  His 
mother. 

"And  having  come  into  the  house  they  saw  the  little  child 
with  Mary,  his  mother,  and  falling  down  did  Him  homage. 
And  having  opened  their  treasures,  they  ofifered  him  gifts, 
gold,  frankincense  and  myrrh."  With  exceeding  great  joy 
they  had  welcomed  the  reappearing  of  the  star ;  it  came  and 
stood  over  the  place  where  the  child  was.  They  enter  into 
the  house  and  find  the  little  child  and  Mary,  his  mother. 
Even  the  order  of  words  teaches  us  something.  It  is  not 
Mary,  his  mother,  and  the  little  child,  but  the  one  who  is 
God  manifested  in  the  flesh  stands  first,  and  Joseph  is  not  at 
all  mentioned.  What  a  rebuke  to  the  corrupt  systems  in 
Christendom  where  Mary  and  Joseph  occupy  a  prominent 
place  and  are  worshipped.  The  wise  men  worshipped  Him, 
there  was  no  adoration  for  Mary,  while  Joseph  was  com- 
pletely ignored.  All  the  worship  and  bowing  of  knee  is  for 
Him  of  whom  it  is  written  that  at  His  name  every  knee 
should  bow,  of  heavenly  and  earthly  and  infernal  beings, 
and  every  tongue  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  God 


49 

the  Father's  glory  (Phil.  ii:io).  The  outcome  of  their  long 
and  tedious  Journey,  of  their  searching  and  seeking  llitn 
who  is  the  King,  was  worship.  A  Httle  light  was,  followed, 
and  soon  the  increase  came.  The  Word  of  God  showed  theni 
the  way,  and  there  was  a  second  outburst  of  light  from  the 
star  which  brought  them  to  the  right  place.  What  else  could 
they  do  then  but  do  homage  to  Him  and  to  adore  Him  ? 
Their  first  business  was  worship.  It  should  be  so  with  every 
true  believer.  We  often  hear  it  said,  "saved  to  serve." 
This  is  not  strictly  true.  We  are  saved  by  grace  to  worsnip 
and  adore  our  God  and  Father  and  His  Son,  our  Saviour 
and  Lord.  Service  comes  in,  too,  but  only  after  worship. 
Where  grace  is  rightly  understood  there  will  be  a  great  deal 
of  worship  and  praise,  followed  by  true  service,  but  where 
there  is  a  dim  conception  of  what  God  has  done  for  us,  what 
He  has  made  us  in  His  Son,  and  where  that  blessed  and 
comforting  doctrine,  the  assurance  of  salvation,  is  not  known. 
there  will  be  much  service  or  attempted  service,  with  much 
unrest,  but  little  worship,  or  none  at  all.  May  our  readers 
understand  that  worship  stands  first  and  is  the  first  thing. 
The  Father  seeks  worshippers  (John  iv:23).  We  are  saved 
by  grace  to  be  worshippers  of  Him.  All  our  joy  and  peace 
as  believers,  as  well  as  fruitbearing,  comes  from  being  at 
His  feet  and  doing  h.omagc  to  Ilim. 

How  long  the  worship  of  the  wise  men  lasted  we  do  not 
know,  nor  how  long  they  tarried.  After  their  worship  they 
opened  their  treasures  and  offered  to  Him  gifts,  gold,  fran- 
kincense and  myrrh.  This  was  their  service,  the  ofTering  of 
gifts. 


50 


Prophetically,  this  homage  of  the  wise  men,  and  the  gifts 
they  brought,  is  of  much  importance.  It  was,  of  course,  and 
still  is  a  custom  of  the  Orient  to  appear  before  a  person  of 
royal  descent  with  many  presents,  but  here  we  have  more 
than  a  simple  custom.  Without  knowing  it,  nor  knowing 
the  significance  of  what  they  did,  their  hands,  in  selecting 
the  gifts,  were  divinely  guided.  As  King  they  had  sought 
Him,  as  such  they  worshipped  Him,  and  now  the  presents 
are  in  full  harmony  with  the  character  of  the  King.  The 
gold  speaks  of  His  divine  and  kingly  glory,  the  frankin- 
cense of  the  fragrance  of  His  life,  as  Son  of  God  in  power, 
according  to  the  spirit  of  holiness,  and  myrrh,  the  balsamic 
juice  of  Arabian  myrtle,  which  is  used  for  burial,  speaks  of 
His  death,  that  this  King  is  to  lay  down  His  life.  What 
lessons  there  come  even  from  the  gifts  the  wise  men  spread 
before  our  Lord. 

Quite  often  we  are  told  that  this  is  in  fulfillment  of 
Isaiah  lx:6.  However,  in  looking  at  this  passage,  we  dis- 
cover that  the  wise  men  could  not  be  spoken  of  there,  nor 
that  they  fulfilled  that  prophecy.  We  read  in  Isaiah: 
"They  shall  bring  gold  and  frankincense,  and  shall  pro- 
claim the  praises  of  the  Lord."  We  notice  at  once  that 
Isaiah  does  not  say  anything  at  all  about  myrrh.  Why, 
then,  is  there  no  myrrh  in  Isaiah,  and  why  is  there  a  men- 
tion made  of  myrrh  by  Matthew?  The  passage  in  Isaiah 
refers  to  the  coming  of  the  Gentiles  at  the  time  when  the 
rejected  King  has  come  again  in  power  and  in  glory,  and  is 
King  of  kings ;  hence  there  is  no  need  of  myrrh.  The  whole 
scope  of  Isaiah  Ix  brings  this  out.     "For  behold,  darkness 


51 


shall  cover  the  earth,  and  gross  darkness  the  nations  (yet  to 
come  during  the  tribulation),  but  the  Lord  shall  arise  upon 
thee  (Israel)  and  His  glory  shall  be  seen  upon  thee.  An  I 
nations  shall  come  to  thy  light,  and  kings  to  the  brightness 
of  thy  rising."  If  we  read  through  this  chapter  we  find 
multitudes  coming,  and  they  seek  not  a  small  humble  house 
like  the  wise  men  did.  but  they  seek  the  house  of  glory,  and 
there  they  meet  the  King  of  Glory  in  His  beauty,  and  spread 
before  Him  gold  and  frankincense,  shouting  aloud  His 
praises  and  the  glory  of  His  name.  What  a  glorious  chapter 
this  is,  and,  oh,  the  joy  which  fills  us  as  believers  in  the  an- 
ticipation when  all  this  shall  be  so.  May  it  soon  be  when 
violence  shall  no  more  be  heard  in  the  land,  desolation  nor 
destruction  within  thy  borders ;  but  thy  w^alls  shall  be  called 
salvation  and  thy  gates  praise.  We  would  say,  then,  that  it 
is  incorrect  to  state  that  the  wise  men  came  in  fulfillment 
of  Isaiah  Ix  :6 ;  they  were  but  faint  types  of  what  shall  take 
place  after  the  Glory,  wdien  no  more  bloodthirsty  Herod  will 
be  upon  the  throne,  and  Jerusalem  and  not  Bethlehem  will 
be  the  city  to  which  the  Gentiles  journey,  the  city  of  a  great 
King. 

"And  being  divinely  instructed  in  a  dream  not  to  return 
to  Herod,  they  departed  into  their  own  country  another 
way."  This  is  all  the  Word  has  to  say  about  the  departure 
of  these  strangers.  After  their  worshi])  and  offering  of 
gifts,  divine  guidance  instructs  them.  It  is  guidance,  like- 
wise, we  have  as  believers,  but  it  is  a  guidance  through 
the  Spirit  in  the  Word. 

"Xow  they  having  departed,  behold  an  angel  of  the  Lord 


52 


appeared  in  a  dream  to  Joseph,  saying,  Arise,  take  to  thee  the 
little  child  and  His  mother,  and  flee  into  Egypt,  and  be  there 
until  I  shall  tell  thee ;  for  Herod  will  seek  the  little  child  to 
destroy  it.  And  having  arisen,  he  took  to  him  the  little  child 
and  His  mother  by  night,  and  departed  into  Egypt,  and  he 
was  there  until  the  death  of  Herod,  that  it  might  be  ful- 
filled which  was  spoken  by  the  Lord,  through  the  prophet, 
saying,  Out  of  Egypt  have  I  called  my  Son"  (verses  13-15). 
Thus  the  narrative  continues.  The  child  is  the  only  prom- 
inent figure  in  it.  There  is  a  spurious  gospel,  called  the 
Gospel  of  the  Infancy  of  our  Lord,*  in  which  the  flight  to 
Egypt  is  adorned  with  many  miracles.  We  mention  some 
of  them.  Idols  broke  to  pieces  wherever  the  child  came ; 
the  three-year-old  child  of  an  Egyptian  priest  who  was  pos- 
sessed by  demons  put  a  swaddling  cloth  of  the  child  upon  his 
head,  and  the  demon  fled ;  a  woman  possessed  by  a  demon 
was  healed  by  looking  upon  Mary ;  robbers  fled  in  terror 
before  the  child ;  all  manner  of  diseases  were  healed,  in- 
cluding leprosy,  etc.  The  whole  book  shows  that  it  is  a 
counterfeit,  gotten  up  by  some  one  who  favored  the  worship 
of  Mary  and  the  child.  How  simple  the  story  is  here  in 
Matthew.  The  child  is  dependent  upon  Joseph,  who  is  now 
mentioned,  and  in  poverty,  under  great  danger,  at  night, 
they  had  to  flee.  God  could  have  transported  His  Son  by  a 
miracle,  but  the  Son  of  God  had  become  man,  and  now  it 
was  for  Him  to  enter  into  all.  He  has  to  go  the  long  and 
wearv  road.   The  cause  of  the  flight  was  Herod,  who  under 


*Evangelium  Infantiae. 


53 


the  power  of  Satan  sought  the  Hfe  of  the  child.  He  shows 
himself  here  as  the  murderer  from  the  beginning.  Satan  is 
that  still  the  great  red  dragon  with  seven  heads  and  ten 
horns,  ready  to  devour  the  man-child  (Rev.  xii).  The  place 
of  refuge  is  Egypt.  There  He  is  to  go,  to  be  called  back 
after  a  while  in  fulfillment  of  the  prophetic  Word,  "Out  of 
Egypt  have  I  called  my  Son." 

This  prophecy  is  found  in  Hosea  xi  :i.  "When  Israel  was 
a  child  then  I  loved  Him,  and  called  My  Son  out  of  Egypt." 
This  was  spoken  about  700  years  before  and  is  about  Israel, 
but  here  we  learn  through  the  Holy  Spirit  its  true  and  full 
meaning.  Jews,  infidels  and  higher  critics  have  stumbled 
at  this,  but  how  simple  even  this  is,  no  difficulty,  as  commen- 
taries sometimes  say.  Israel  is,  according  to  Exodus  iv  :22, 
God's  first  born  Son,  and  in  Jeremiah  xxxi:9  we  read,  "I 
am  a  father  to  Israel  and  Ephraim  is  my  first  born."  Christ 
and  Israel  are  closely  identified  in  the  prophetic  Word.  Thus 
the  Messiah,  our  Lord,  is  called  in  Isaiah  the  servant  of  the 
Lord,  and  Israel  is  spoken  of  there,  too,  as  the  servant  of 
the  Lord,  that  is  Israel's  Messiah  is  the  servant  of  the  Lord 
through  whose  obedient  suffering  and  death  Israel  becomes 
at  last  in  the  earth  the  righteous  servant  of  Jehovah.  Israel 
is  God's  first  born,  but  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  not  alone 
the  only  begotten  of  the  Father,  but  also  the  first  born  from 
the  dead.  In  resurrection  He  will  be  the  first  born  among 
many  brethren,  which  is  the  Church,  His  body.  But  through 
Him  and  in  Him  alone,  Israel,  God's  earthly  people.  His 
first  born  will  become  that  for  which  God  has  called  them  ac- 
cording to  His  merciful  purposes.    Israel's  history  beginning 


54 

with  Egypt,  has  been  a  history  of  sin,  disobedience,  apostasy 
and  shame.  Therefore  the  true  One  had  to  come,  the  true 
servant  of  the  Lord  in  obedience — obedience  unto  death. 
He  had  to  go  through  the  history  of  His  people.  This  is  the 
reason  why  He  had  to  go  down  to  Egypt,  the  house  of  bon- 
dage. Of  course,  there  was  no  bondage  for  Him.  And 
when  He  is  called  out  of  Egypt,  He  comes  to  pass  through 
the  wilderness  to  be  tested  and  tried,  going  the  long  journey 
through  all  in  the  spirit  of  holiness  without  sin,  far  differ- 
ent from  that  which  Israel  was.  How  blessedly  He  became 
identified  with  all. 

In  the  following  three  verses  we  read  of  the  satanic  rage 
of  Herod  when  he  finds  that  the  wise  men  did  not  return 
and  all  the  boys  in  Bethlehem  and  in  all  its  borders  from  two 
years  and  under  were  slain.  "Then  it  was  fulfilled  that 
which  was  spoken  through  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  saying:  A 
voice  has  been  heard  in  Rama,  weeping  and  great  lamenta- 
tion; Rachel  weeping  for  her  children,  and  would  not  be 
comforted,  because  they  are  not."  The  wicked  deed  is  but 
a  beginning  of  the  sorrows  of  Israel  on  account  of  the  re- 
jection of  the  King.  His  blood  indeed  has  been  upon  them 
and  their  children,  the  worst  is  still  to  come  in  the  time  of 
Jacob's  trouble  when  the  false  Messiah  will  be  like  Her- 
od, shedding  their  blood.  The  quotation  is  from  Jeremiah 
xxxi:i5.  It  is  an  application  here  of  that  prophecy.  Ra- 
chel was  buried  near  Bethlehem.  Dying  there  she  called 
the  son  who  was  born  to  her  Ben-oni,  which  means  the  son 
of  my  sorrow,  but  his  father  Jacob  soon  changed  his  name, 
anrd  the  son  of  sorrow  becomes  Benjamin,  which  means,  the 


55 

son  of  the  right  hand.  Rachel  is  seen  here  as  weeping  and 
lamenting  over  the  slaughtered  children,  the  children  of 
Bethlehem.  They  were  no  more,  and  would  not  be  com- 
forted. What  greater  crying  and  lamentation  there  shall  be 
in  the  future  in  the  land!  In  Jeremiah,  in  the  context,  we 
read :  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  refrain  thy  voice  from  weeping 
and  thine  eyes  from  tears — they  shall  come  again  from  the 
land  of  the  enemy."  The  child  had  escaped  the  murderous 
onslaught  of  Satan  through  Herod,  but  He  comes  back  to 
lay  down  His  life,  that  through  death  He  might  annul  him 
who  has  the  might  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil ;  and  might  set 
free  all  those  who  through  fear  of  death  through  the  whole 
of  their  life  were  subject  to  bondage  (Hebrews  ii.).  The 
return  of  the  child,  how  long  they  stayed  in  Egypt  is  not 
said,  is  next  described  in  our  chapter  and  needs  no  further 
comment.  The  child  is  kept  as  He  now  keeps  the  feet  of 
His  saints,  His  church,  and  hades'  gates  shall  not  prevail 
against  it. 

There  is  one  more  prophecy  which  is  to  be  mentioned. 
"And  having  been  divinely  instructed  in  a  dream,  he  went 
away  in  the  parts  of  Galilee,  and  came  and  dwelt  in  a  town 
called  Xazareth ;  so  that  it  should  be  fulfilled  which  was 
spoken  through  the  prophets.  He  shall  be  called  a  Naza- 
rene"  (verses  22,  23).  It  is  next  to  the  questions  from  the 
first  chapter  in  Matthew,  the  most  important  the  inquiring 
Jew  brings  in  reading  the  New  Testament :  "Where  is  it 
written,  or  in  what  prophet  is  it  written,  that  Messiah  should 
be  called  a  Xazarene?"  It  does  not  say  here  that  it  is  writ- 
ten by  one  prophet,  but  by  the  prophets.    Therefore  all  the 


56 


prophets  have  spoken  of  Him  as  being  a  Nazarene.  A  Naz- 
arene  is  an  inhabitant  of  Nazareth.  That  city  is  in  Gahlee, 
which  is  called  the  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles,  because  so  many 
Gentiles  lived  there.  The  Pharisees  and  scribes  in  Jeru- 
salem hated  and  despised  Galilee,  and  especially  was  Naza- 
reth despised.  The  inhabitants  were  called  Ain-horatzim, 
that  is  ignorant  men.  Even  the  Galileans  looked  down  upon 
the  town  and  despised  everybody  who  lived  there.  The  ruin 
and  corruption  was  there  the  greatest.  Therefore  we  read 
in  another  Gospel :  "Can  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Naza- 
reth?" To  that  mean,  despised  place  the  Son  of  God  is  to 
go,  there  He,  who  was  rich  in  all  eternity,  found  His  abode. 
Now,  this  is  spoken  by  all  the  prophets,  that  the  Messiah, 
the  Saviour,  was  to  be  rejected  by  men.  The  rejection  be- 
gan with  the  very  start,  and  there  in  the  little  town  He  is 
to  spend  thirty  years  of  His  life,  and  when  He  comes  forth 
and  begins  His  ministry  in  Galilee,  it  is  only  to  be  rejected 
again,  ending  at  last  in  Jerusalem  outside  of  the  camp. 
How  true,  He  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men.  And  our 
place  is  with  Him  now  in  rejection,  outside  of  the  camp, 
to  bear  His  reproach.  May  this  be  our  place,  and  like  Him, 
the  leader  and  completer  of  the  faith,  may  we,  for  the  joy 
set  before  us,  endure  the  cross  and  despise  the  shame. 


57 


CHAPTER   III. 

The  third  chapter  relates  the  ministry  of  the  herald  of  the 
King,  who  announces  that  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  has 
drawn  nigh,  and  the  presence  of  the  King  Himself,  who  is 
to  come  after  him  ;  the  baptism  of  the  King,  who  comes  from 
Galilee  to  the  Jordan  to  John,  and  the  events  connected 
with  it,  are  given  in  the  second  half  of  the  chapter. 

"Now  in  those  days  comes  John  the  Baptist,  preaching  in 
the  wilderness  of  Judea,  and  saying,  Repent,  for  the  king- 
dom of  the  heavens  has  drawn  nigh.  For  this  is  He,  who 
has  been  spoken  of  through  Esaias  the  prophet  saying,  A 
voice  of  Him  that  crieth  in  the  wilderness :  Prepare  ye  the 
way  of  the  Lord,  make  straight  His  paths.  And  John  him- 
self had  his  garments  of  camel's  hair,  and  a  leathern  girdle 
about  his  loins,  and  his  nourishment  was  locusts  and  wild 
honey"  (verses  1-4). 

The  forerunner  is  John  the  Baptist,  a  typical  Old  Testa- 
ment person,  of  whom  the  Lord  says  later  in  the  Gospel, 
"Yea,  I  say  to  you,  and  more  than  a  prophet,  this  is  he  of 
whom  it  is  written,  Behold  I  send  My  messenger  before  Thy 
face,  who  shall  prepare  Thy  way  before  Thee.  Verily  I 
say  to  you,  that  there  is  not  arisen  among  the  born  of  women 
a  greater  than  John  the  Baptist,  but  he  who  is  a  little  one 
in  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  greater  than  he"  (chapter 
xi:9-l2).     In  the  same  discourse  the  Lord  says,  in  vindi- 


58 


cation  of  John,  who  was  then  in  prison  :  ''And  if  ye  will  re- 
ceive it,  this  is  Elias  who  is  to  come."  In  the  first  chapter 
of  Luke  the  angel  announces  his  birth  and  says:  "For  he 
shall  be  great  before  the  Lord,  and  he  shall  drink  no  wine  or 
strong  drink ;  and  he  shall  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  even 
from  his  mother's  womb.  And  many  of  the  sons  of  Israel 
shall  he  turn  to  the  Lord  their  God.  And  he  shall  go  be- 
fore Him  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elias,  to  turn  hearts  of 
fathers  to  children,  and  disobedient  ones  to  the  thoughts  of 
just  men,  to  make  ready  for  the  Lord  a  prepared  people" 
(Luke  1:15-17).  In  these  words,  given  through  the  Holy 
Spirit,  the  Lord  Himself  and  an  angel  of  the  Lord,  we  have 
the  three  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament  concerning  the 
forerunner  quoted.  These  are :  Isaiah  xl  :3-5  ;  Malachi  iii  :i ; 
iy:5,-6.  That  he  was  sent  in  fulfillment  of  these  prophecies 
is  therefore  unquestionable.  To  this  comes  the  manner  of 
his  dress  and  the  nourishment.  It  reminds  us  of  the  great 
prophet  Elias,  the  Tishbite.  "He  was  an  hairy  man,  and 
girt  with  a  girdle  of  leather  about  his  loins"  (2  Kings  i:8). 
John  knew  His  personality  and  His  mission,  for  he  said : 
"I  am  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness,  Make 
straight  the  way  of  the  Lord,  as  said  the  prophet  Esaias" 
(John  1:23).  But  when  asked,  Art  thou  Elias?  he  an- 
swered, I  am  not.  The  Jews  expected  Elijah,  as  the  ortho- 
dox Jews  expect  him  still,  as  the  forerunner  of  King  Mes- 
siah. At  every  passover  ceremony  a  cup  is  reserved  for  the 
prophet  Elijah,  and  at  the  circumcision  of  the  child  a  chair 
is  placed  for  that  person,  and  many  are  the  prayers  which 
are  said,  that  God  may  send  soon  the  prophet  Elijah,  for  hi!> 


59 


presence  would  indicate  to  them  the  nearness  of  the  King. 
The  character  and  preaching  of  EHjah  were  clearly  repro- 
duced in  John.  He  was  the  Elias  for  his  day.  If  they  had 
received  it,  he  would  have  been  Elias.  In  this  sense,  Mat- 
thew xvii  :i2,  is  to  be  understood :  "Elias  cometh  and  restor- 
eth  all  things;  But  I  say  unto  you,  that  Elias  is  come  al- 
ready, and  they  did  not  recognize  him,  but  did  unto  him 
whatever  they  would."  He  was  rejected,  and  his  rejection 
foretold  how  things  would  go,  that  the  King  Himself  would 
be  rejected.  We  would  only  mention  that  before  the  King 
comes  again  there  will  be  once  more  a  forerunner.  Once 
more  the  message  will  be  heard,  The  kingdom  of  the  heavens 
draweth  nigh.  It  will  be  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  preached 
by  the  remnant  during  the  great  tribulation  All 
we  have  in  Malachi  iv:5,  "Behold,  I  will  send  you  Elijah 
the  prophet,  before  the  coming  of  the  great  and  dreadful 
day  of  the  Lord,"  will  then  be  fulfilled.  In  Revelation  xiii 
one  of  the  two  witnesses  is,  without  question,  one  like  Eli- 
jah. It  is  necessary  to  state,  that  no  great  and  miracle-work- 
ing preacher  of  repentance,  in  the  spirit  of  Elijah,  is  prom- 
ised to  Christendom.  We  make  this  remark,  because  in  our 
days  persons  stand  up  and  declare  that  they  are  forerunners, 
or  one  of  the  witnesses  or  messengers  of  the  covenant. 
These  poor  people  err  and  know  not  the  Scripture,  and  by 
their  conceited  claims  work  untold  harm. 

John  the  Baptist  appears  in  the  wilderness.  He  is  not  in 
the  temple  in  the  midst  of  the  learned  and  the  great.  There 
was  no  room  for  him  there.  He  is  outside  of  the  camp,  and 
the  people  too  have  to  leave  Jerusalem  and  go  out  to  him. 


6o 


This  is  once  more  significant.   It  shows  what  the  end  will  be. 

His  preaching  is,  "Repent,  for  the  kingdom  of  the  heav- 
ens has  drawn  nigh." 

The  phrase,  kingdom  of  the  heavens,  is  mentioned  thirty- 
two  times  in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew.  Here  it  is  for  the  first 
time.  The  strangest  meaning  has  been  put  upon  this  term. 
Christendom  at  large  is  all  at  sea  about  the  meaning  of  it. 
Heaven  or  the  church  are  the  general  interpretations  which 
are  given.  Both  are  wrong,  and  because  the  meaning  of 
this  term  is  so  grossly  misunderstood,  there  is  no  conception 
whatever  of  the  thoughts  and  purposes  of  God.  The  king- 
dom of  the  heavens  is  an  Old  Testament  term.  It  is  to  be 
in  the  earth  and  not  in  heaven.  It  is  a  kingdom  in  which 
the  heavens  rule  (Daniel  iv:26).  The  setting  up  of  that 
kingdom  is  spoken  of  in  Daniel  ii:44,  and  in  the  seventh 
chapter,  verse  14.  It  is  in  the  hands  of  One  who  is  the  Son 
of  Man,  Messiah,  the  Son  of  David,  who  is  to  rule  in 
righteousness.  In  that  kingdom  there  will  be  universal 
peace,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall 
cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  deep.  His  own  peo- 
ple, the  house  of  Judah  and  the  house  of  Israel,  will  all  be 
regathered  into  the  land,  Jerusalem  built  again  and  become 
the  great  centre  of  blessing  for  the  nations  of  the  earth.  In 
one  word,  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  the  literal  fulfilment 
of  all  the  prophecies  and  promises  contained  in  the  Old 
Testament,  which  the  Lord  gave  to  the  seed  of  Abraham, 
and  the  blessings  of  the  nations  of  the  earth  to  come  after 
this  kingdom  is  set  up.  The  Church  is  not  known  in  the 
Old  Testament,  nor  is  it  seen  in  the  opening  chapters  of 


6i 


Matthew.  This  kingdom,  the  forerunner  declares,  now  has 
drawn  nigh,  it  is  at  hand.  The  King  is  in  the  earth,  Eman- 
uel, He  whose  name  is  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  the  Mighty 
God,  the  Everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  and  con- 
cerning whom  it  is  said,  "that  of  the  increase  of  his  govern- 
ment and  peace  there  shall  be  no  end  upon  the  throne  of 
David,  and  upon  His  kingdom,  to  order  it  and  to  establish 
it  with  judgment  and  with  justice  from  henceforth  even  for- 
ever." Xot  alone  did  John  preach  this  kingdom  to  its  Jewish, 
earthly  form,  but  the  Lord  Himself  declared  that  it  had 
drawn  nigh,  and  when  the  King  sent  out  His  disciples  He 
told  them  to  preach,  "The  kingdom  of  the  heavens  has  drawn 
nigh,"  the  special  Messianic  kingdom  power  was  put  upon 
them  to  heal  the  sick,  to  raise  the  dead,  cleanse  the  lepers, 
and  cast  out  demons  (Matthew  x). 

But  as  the  forerunner  and  his  testimony  is  rejected,  and 
the  King  Himself,  the  coming  of  that  kingdom  of  the 
heavens  is  postponed.  It  is  not  set  aside  completely,  but 
only  postponed,  and  all  the  glories  of  that  earthly  Messianic 
Kingdom,  which  will  reach  from  sea  to  sea,  so  minutely 
pictured  in  Old  Testament  prophecy,  will  yet  be  established 
in  the  earth  with  Jerusalem  as  the  center,  for  the  gifts  and 
callings  of  God  are  without  repentance.  The  kingdom  of 
the  heavens  is  not  the  church,  and  the  church  is  not  the 
kingdom.  How  great  the  confusion  is  on  this  point  in  all 
Christian  denominations  who  read  the  "history  of  the  church" 
in  the  establishment  and  glory  of  the  kingdom  predicted  by 
the  prophets. 

The  proper  word  for  John  to  utter  when  appearing  in  th« 


62 


wilderness  was,  repent.  That  kingdom  which  had  now 
drawn  nigh  was  to  bring  judgment  of  all  that  is  evil.  Judg- 
ments upon  all  unrighteousness  are  associated  with  the  com- 
ing of  that  kingdom.  Every  Jew  was  acquainted  with  that 
fact.  It  is  true  the  earthly  glories  of  the-  kingdom  of  the 
heavens  had  been  announced  by  every  prophet,  but  equally 
true  is  it  that  the  coming  judgments  were  announced,  and 
at  all  times  in  past  generations  of  the  earthly  people  of  God, 
the  cry,  "Return!  Repent!"  was  heard.  Now  the  greatest 
one  of  all  the  prophets  has  come,  and  the  cry  of  the  Law 
and  the  Prophets,  Repent,  sounds  forth  once  more,  so  strong 
and  clear  as  never  before. 

Before  we  take  up  the  meaning  of  repentance  here  and  the 
baptism  unto  repentance  wherewith  he  baptized,  and  com- 
pare them  with  repentance  and  baptism  which  are  connected 
with  the  Gospel  of  Grace,  we  must  call  attention  to  the  quo- 
tation from  Isaiah  which  follows.  The  words  are  taken  from 
that  sublime  chapter  which  begins  with,  Comfort  ye,  comfort 
ye,  my  people,  the  fortieth  chapter.  In  comparing  Matthew 
with  Luke  we  find  that  the  quotation  in  Luke  is  complete, 
in  Matthew  it  is  only  in  part.  Luke,  or  rather  the  Holy 
Spirit  through  him,  adds,  "Every  gorge  shall  be  filled  up, 
and  every  mountain  and  hill  shall  be  brought  low,  and  the 
crooked  shall  become  straight,  and  the  rough  places  smooth 
ways,  and  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God  (Luke  iii: 
5-7)."  One  would  look  to  the  Gospel  of  Matthew  as  the 
Jewish  Gospel,  to  find  such  a  complete  quotation  from  the 
Old  Testament.  Why  then,  is  it  not  all  quoted  in  Matthew, 
and  why  does  it  stand  in  Luke  ?    The  reason  is  easily  found. 


63 

Luke's  Gospel  is  for  the  Gentiles,  to  show  that  salvation  is 
to  be  indeed  offered  to  all  tlesh.  For  this  reason  the  full 
quotation  is  perfectly  in  order  in  that  Gospel,  while  in  Mat- 
thew, here  in  the  beginning  in  its  narrower  scope,  it  would 
be  out  of  order.  It  is  likewise  to  be  remarked  that  the  tes- 
timony of  John  was  not  only  the  cry  in  the  wilderness,  the 
loud  and  continued  "Repent!"  Such  is  heard  here,  and 
when  the  kingdom  hopes  are  not  realized,  we  shall  see  him 
later  sending  from  the  prison  to  the  Lord  with  his  cjuestion. 
But  John  had  a  more  perfect  knowledge,  which  he  im- 
parted to  his  disciples.  The  proper  place  for  that  testimony 
is  neither  Matthew,  Mark  nor  Luke,  but  the  Gospel  where 
the  Holy  Spirit  shows  us  our  Saviour  and  Lord  as  the  only 
begotten  of  the  Father,  the  Gospel  of  John.  There  John 
points  to  Him  and  says,  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  who  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world.  "I  have  seen  and  borne  Him 
witness  that  He  is  the  Son  of  God  (John  i:29-34)."  But 
clearer  still  is  that  wonderful  address  he  delivers  to  his  dis- 
ciples when  they  came  to  him.  "And  John  answered  and 
said.  A  man  can  receive  nothing  unless  it  be  given  him  out 
of  heaven.  Ye,  ourselves,  bear  me  witness  that  I  said.  I 
am  not  the  Christ,  but  that  I  am  sent  before  Him.  He  that 
hath  the  bride  is  the  bridegroom ;  but  the  friend  of  the  bride- 
groom, who  stands  and  hears  him,  rejoices  in  heart  because 
of  the  voice  of  the  bridegroom ;  this  my  joy  then  is  fulfilled. 
He  must  increase,  but  I  must  decrease.  He  who  comes 
from  above  "is  above  all.  He  who  has  his  origin  in  the 
earth  is  of  the  earth,  and  speaks  as  of  the  earth.  He  who 
comes  out  of  heaven  is  above  all,  arid  what  He  has  seen 


64 


and  what  He  has  heard  this  He  testifies ;  and  no  one 
receives  His  testimony.  He  that  has  received  His  testimony 
has  set  to  his  seal  that  God  is  true ;  for  He  whom  God  has 
sent  speaks  the  words  of  God,  for  God  gives  not  the  Spirit  by 
measure.  The  Father  loves  the  Son  and  has  given  all  things 
in  His  hand.  He  that  believes  on  the  Son  has  life  eternal,  and 
he  that  is  not  subject  to  the  Son  shall  not  see  life,  but  the 
wrath  of  God  abideth  upon  him  (John  iii:27-36)." 

Such  a  testimony  then  was  given  by  John,  he  knew  of  life 
through  Christ  and  that  the  bridegroom  is  the  Son  of  God. 

Repentance  is  his  foremost  message  to  the  nation.  Let  us 
consider  briefly  what  it  means.  Repentance  as  it  is  found  in 
the  Old  Testament,  is  God's  request  to  His  earthly  people  to 
return  unto  Him.  This  is  the  call  of  John  the  Baptist  in  this 
third  chapter.  It  is  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  which  he 
preaches.  The  Gospel  of  Grace  is  something  different.  It 
was  not  known  then,  it  could  not  be  fully  made  known  and 
preached  till  after  the  death, the  resurrection,  ascension  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  To  preach 
the  Gospel  of  Grace  from  the  words  of  John  the  Baptist, "Re- 
pent, for  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  has  drawn  nigh, "would 
be  misleading.  Still  it  is  being  done  throughout 
Christendom.  Not  knowing  what  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens 
is,  what  the  church  is,  and  the  differences  between  the  Gos- 
pel of  the  Kingdom  and  the  Gospel  of  Grace,  there  is  a  con- 
stant misapplication  of  the  scriptures  and  preaching  of  a  re- 
pentance which  is  Jewish.  Theological  systems,  especially 
Arminianism,  have  produced  a  way  of  salvation,  which  is 
surely  nothing  less,  than  the  new  wine  in  old  wineskins.  There 


6s 

is  the  demand  of  a  repentance,  a  certain  form  of  penitence, 
a  deep  feeling  of  being  lost,  grief  and  despair,  turning  away 
from  the  world  and  worldly  pleasures,  seeking  the  Lord,  per- 
haps for  many  weary  months,  then  at  last,  after  such  a  weird 
experience,  believing  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  After  this 
the  receiving  of  what  is  termed,  the  witness  of  the  Spirit,  a: 
good  feeling,  by  which  it  is  claimed  one  alone  can  know  that 
he  is  saved,  a  feeling  which  can  be  lost,  after  which  the  per- 
son is  once  more  unsaved.  That  all  this  is  not  according  to 
the  Gospel  of  Grace,  the  teachings  of  Romans,  as  well  as  the 
other  epistles  is  evident.  One  who  has  written  on  the  sub- 
ject of  repentance  has  done  it  in  such  a  scriptural  and  simple 
way  that  we  desire  to  quote  from  his  book  :* 

"What  then  about  repentance?  Are  faith  and  the  Spirit's 
work  enough?  Or  is  not  repentance  no  less  a  necessity  if 
men  are  to  be  saved  ?  I  meet  this  question  boldly  and  at  once 
by  denouncing  it  as  based,  not  so  much  on  ignorance  as  on 
deep  seated  and  systematic  error.  The  repentance  which  thus 
obtrudes  itself  and  claims  notice  in  every  sermon  is  not  the 
friend  of  the  Gospel  but  an  enemy.  It  is  like  the  ofificious 
guide,  who  forces  himself  upon  the  traveler  only  to  mislead 
him.  Faith  and  repentance  are  not  successive  stages  on  the 
road  to  life;  they  are  not  independent  guides  to  direct  the 
pilgrim's  path ;  they  are  not  separate  acts  to  be  successively 
accomplished  by  the  sinner  as  a  condition  of  his  salvation. 
But,  in  different  phases  of  it,  they  represent  the  same  God- 
ward  attitude  of  the  soul,  which  the  truth  of  God  believed 
produces. 


*  "The  Gospel  and  its  Ministry."     Iiy  Robert  Anderson. 


'66 


"Salvation  there  cannot  be  without  repentance  any  more 
than  without  faith,  but  the  soundest  and  fullest  Gospel 
preaching  need  not  include  any  mention  of  the  ivord.  Neither 
as  verb  or  noun  does  it  occur  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans — 
God's  great  doctrinal  treatise  on  redemption  and  righteous- 
ness— save  in  the  warnings  of  the  second  chapter.  And  the 
Gospel  of  John,  pre-eminently  the  Gospel-book  of  the  Bible 
— will  be  searched  in  vain  for  a  single  mention  of  it.  The 
beloved  disciple  wrote  his  Gospel  that  men  might  believe  and 
live,  and  his  Epistle  followed  to  confirm  believers  in  the 
simplicity  and  certainty  of  their  faith;  but  yet  from  end  to 
end  of  them  the  word  'repent'  or  'repentance'  never  once 
occurs.  It  is  to  these  writings  before  all  others  men  have 
turned  in  every  age  to  find  words  of  peace  and  life,  and  yet 
some  who  profess  to  hold  them  inspired  will  cavil  at  a  Gospel 
sermon  because  repentance  is  not  mentioned  in  it — a  fault,  if 
fault  it  be,  that  marks  the  testimony  of  the  Apostle  John  and 
the  preaching  of  our  Lord  Himself,  as  recorded  by  the  fourth 
evangelist.  The  repentance  of  the  Gospel  is  to  be  found  in 
the  Nicodemus  discourse  and  in  the  gracious  testimony  to  the 
woman  at  the  well ;  and,  I  may  add,  any  repentance  that 
limits  or  jars  upon  those  sacred  words  is  wholly  against  the 
truth." 

In  Acts  iii:i9  we  hear  Peter  preaching,  "Repent."  It  is 
here  still  to  the  nation  connected  with  a  national  hope :  The 
restoring  of  all  things  of  which  God  has  spoken  by  the  mouth 
of  His  holy  prophets.  After  the  calling  out  of  people  for 
His  name  is  accomplished,  and  the  fullness  of  the  Gentiles 
has  come  in,  there  will  be  once  more  the  call  heard,  "Repent !' 


^7 


Dut  the  call  to  repentance  is  associated  with  baptism — the 
baptism  unto  repentance.  "Then  went  out  to  Him  Jerusalem 
and  all  Judea.  and  all  the  country  round  the  Jordan,  and  were 
baptized  by  Him  in  the  Jordan,  confessing  their  sins  (verse 
5)."  Concerning  his  baptism  He  said,  "I  indeed  baptize  you 
with  water  unto  repentance."  There  was  then  a  great  stir, 
and  large  were  the  multitudes  from  the  city  who  came  out  to 
hear  and  to  follow  the  call  to  repent.  Among  them  were 
many  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  to  whom  He  said,  "Offspring 
of  vipers,  who  has  forewarned  you  to  flee  from  the  coming 
wrath?  Produce,  therefore,  fruit  worthy  of  repentance. 
And  do  not  think  to  say  within  yourselves.  We  have  Abraham 
for  our  Father ;  for  I  say  unto  you  that  God  is  able  of  these 
stones  to  raise  up  children  to  Abraham.  And  already  the 
axe  is  applied  to  the  root  of  the  trees ;  every  tree  therefore 
not  producing  good  fruit  is  cut  down  and  cast  into  the  fire." 
"And  all  the  people  when  they  heard  it,  and  the  publicans, 
justified  God,  having  been  baptized  with  John's  baptism ; 
but  the  Pharisees  and  the  lawyers  rejected  God's  counsel 
with  regard  to  themselves,  not  being  baptized  by  Him"  (Luke 
vii  :29,  30). 

The  baptism  of  John  shows  clearly  what  repentance  means. 
Jordan  is  always  in  the  Word  the  type  of  death.  Thus  John 
l,ai)tized  in  the  river  of  death,  which  would  mean  unto  death.* 
Tho  people  came,  confessed  their  sins,  seeing  then  their  true 
position,  what  they  were  and  what  they  deserved ;  they  went 


*Baptism    in    water    was    known    and    practiced   amnnp   the   Jews 

centuries  before  John.    Proselytes  were  not  only  circumcised  but 
also  dipped  in  water. 


/ 


6S 


down  into  Jordan  to  be  buried  in  water,  tbus  typifying  death. 
They  heard,  they  beheved,  they  confessed  and  witnessed  to  it 
outwardly.  In  this  way  they  justified  God,  as  recorded  in  the 
above  passage  from  Luke.  Christian  baptism  is,  of  course, 
something  essentially  different.  It  is  not  a  baptism  unto 
repentance  of  deserved  death,  but  it  is  unto  Christ's  death, 
who  has  taken  our  place  and  died  for  us.  "Are  you  ignorant 
that  we,  as  many  as  have  been  baptized  unto  Christ,  have 
been  baptized  unto  His  death?  We  have  been  therefore 
buried  with  Him  by  baptism  unto  death,  in  order  that  even 
as  Christ  has  been  raised  up  from  among  the  dead  by  the 
glory  of  the  Father,  so  we  also  should  walk  in  newness  of 
life"  (Rom.  vi:3-5).  Christian  baptism  is  not  taught  in  the 
third  chapter  of  Matthew.  How  much  confusion  has  re- 
sulted from  giving  it  such  a  meaning,  placing  believers  into 
a  sad  legalism. 

Many  then  were  baptized  unto  repentance  by  the  fore- 
runner. But  now  for  the  first  time  we  meet  with  the  two 
great  religious  classes  and  leaders  among  the  Jews,  the 
Pharisees  and  the  Sadducees,  who  came  out  to  John.  These 
two  classes  play  an  important  role  in  the  Gospel.  The 
Pharisees*  were  the  strictly  religious,  orthodox-ritualistic 
class.  They  were  well  versed  in  the  traditions  of  the  elders, 
and  occupied  themselves  with  creating  new  commandments 
and  strange  interpretations  of  the  law.  They  are  the  fathers 
of  the  talmudical  Jews  of  the  present  day  and  typical  of 


*The   name   Pharisee   means   a   Separatist.     One   who   says :    "I 
am  holier  than  thou." 


69 


ritualistic  Christendom,  having  the  form  of  godliness  and 
not  the  power.  The  Sadducees  were  the  rationalists,  the 
unbelieving  class.  They  were  much  given  to  reform.  Their 
offspring  to-day  are  the  reformed  Jews,  who  reject  the 
greater  part  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  in  Christendom  they 
are  remarkably  reproduced  in  the  unevangelical  "Isms," 
though  they  call  themselves  "Christian"  (as  the  Sadducees 
called  themselves  Jews),  who  reject  portions  of  the  Word, 
who  do  not  believe  in  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible. 

"Offspring  of  vipers !"  thus  the  Holy  Spirit  declared 
through  the  forerunner  their  true  character.  What  a  strong 
and  cutting  word  it  is,  which  applies  not  alone  to  the  Phari- 
ses  and  Sadducees,  but  to  all  ritualistic-religiousness  and  un- 
believing criticism.  They  are  the  offspring  not  of  God  but 
of  vipers.  But  still  they  were  the  proud  boasters  of  being 
the  seed  of  Abraham  and  as  such  entitled  to  the  promised 
blessing.  They  believed  that  they  were  to  be  saved  from  the 
wrath  of  God  connected  with  the  establishment  of  the  king- 
dom, and  the  wrath  would  fall  entirely  upon  the  Gentile 
nations.  One  only  needs  to  peruse  some  of  the  tracts  of  the 
Talmud  to  find  the  reflection  of  their  proud,  self-righteous 
belief.  When  they  came,  they  were  far  from  taking  that  true 
position  in  repentance,  in  death.  And  so  John  demands  of 
them  that  they  are  to  bring  forth  fruit  worthy  of  repentance. 
He  uncovers  their  false  pretensions,  and  shows  that  no 
natural  birth,  no  religious  attainment  would  deliver  them  in 
the  day  of  wrath.  This  is  followed  by  the  announcement  of 
the  nearness  of  the  judgment,  the  axe  laid  at  the  root  of  the 
trees,  readv  to  fell  the  mightv  trees  void  of  fruit.    All  this 


70 


finds  an  application  in  the  day  in  which  we  hve,  when  the 
axe  is  once  more  laid  at  the  roots  to  cut  off  and  cast  into  the 
fire  that  which  has  not  brought  fruit.* 

From  the  words  of  condemnation  upon  the  proud,  self- 
righteous  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  the  herald  of  the  King 
now  turns  to  speak,  as  it  became  him  in  humility,  of  the 
glorious  Person  of  the  King  Himself.  And  what  a  far- 
reaching  testimony  it  is  we  have  in  the  eleventh  and  twelfth 
verses!  "I  indeed  baptize  you  with  water  unto  repentance, 
but  He  that  comes  after  me  is  mightier  than  I,  whose  sandals 
I  am  not  fit  to  bear;  He  shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  fire;  whose  winnowing  fan  is  in  His  hand,  and 
He  shall  thoroughly  purge  His  threshing  floor,  and  shall 
gather  His  wheat  into  the  garner,  but  the  chaff  He  will  burn 
with  fire  unquenchable." 

Here  we  have  another  passage  which  is  of  vital  import- 
ance. Let  us  understand  in  the  first  place  that  the  words 
spoken  refer  to  the  first  and  second  coming  of  our  Lord. 
Let  this  be  clearly  fixed  in  our  minds,  and  all  will  be  plain. 
The  promise  connected  with  the  first  coming  is,  He  shall 
baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  second  coming  of  the 
Lord  will  bring  the  baptism  with  Fire,  as  it  is  seen  at  once 
in  the  words  which  follow,  which  speak  clearly  of  judgment 
and  fire  unquenchable.  It  may  appear  strange  at  the  first 
glance  that  John  says  in  one  breath :  "He  shall  baptize  you 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  fire" — that  the  Holy  Spirit  should 


*The  conditions  in  nominal  Christendom  now,  immediately  before 
the  Second  Coming  of  Christ,  are  the  same  as  the  conditions  in 
professing  Judaism  at  the  time  of  His  first  coming. 


71 


refer  to  His  first  coming  and  the  fire  to  His  second  appear- 
ing, but  let  us  take  into  consideration  that  John  still  belongs 
to  the  Old  Testament,  and  he  expresses  himself  in  a  way  as 
many  of  the  prophets  did,  who  frequently  spoke  in  one 
clause  of  the  Lord's  first  and  second  coming.  However, 
the  fifth  verse  in  the  first  chapter  of  Acts  puts  into  our 
hands  the  key.  The  Lord  said  then  to  His  disciples,  "John, 
indeed,  baptized  with  water,  but  ye  shall  be  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  not  many  days  hence."  That  our  Lord 
speaks  of  what  John  said  in  our  passage  here  is  evident,  yet 
He  does  not  mention  baptism  with  fire,  li  He  had  added, 
and  with  fire,  it  would  clearly  prove  that  the  baptism  con- 
nected with  His  first  coming  is  a  baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  fire.  But  He  leaves  out  the  fire  because  it  stands 
in  connection  with  His  second  coming.  Thus  it  is  seen  in 
the  entire  prophetic  Word,  which  speaks  of  the  day  of  wrath 
and  vengeance  as  being  a  day  of  burning  and  fire.  How 
could  we  even  undertake  to  mention  but  half  of  the  errone- 
ous doctrines  which  are  more  or  less  emanating  from  this 
passage  wrongly  applied?  The  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  etc.,  has  of  late  years  been  made 
very  prominent.  Conventions  for  baptisms,  fillings  with 
the  Holy  Spirit,  the  enduement  of  the  Spirit  for  power  in 
service,  and  many  other  topics  in  relation  to  the  doctrine  of 
the  Spirit  and  for  a  so-called  "second  blessing"  (a  term 
which  is  nowhere  found  in  the  Word)  are  being  held.  But 
how  sad  it  is  to  see  the  contortions  of  the  Scriptures  as  well 
as  the  unscriptural,  abnormal  applications  which  have  been 
made.    A  good  deal  comes  from  teaching  that  the  believer 


72 

is  to  be  baptized  not  alone  with  the  Spirit  but  also  with  fire. 
It  is  not  enough  to  have  believed,  so  they  teach,  and  be 
saved  by  Grace,  but  there  is  to  be  a  baptism  with  fire,  a 
second  experience  which  outshines  all  others.  Hence  we 
find  the  most  extravagant  terms  which  are  used  in  connec- 
tion with  the  Holy  Spirit,  such  as  Holy  Ghost  preachers  and 
Holy  Ghost  fire. 

The  baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  promised  by  the  Lord 
took  place  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  By  this  one  Spirit  are 
we  all  baptized  into  the  one  body,  which  is  the  Church  (i 
Cor.  xii:i3).  We  are  not  born  again  by  the  baptism  of  the 
Spirit,  but  those  who  are  born  again  become  by  it  the  mem- 
bers of  that  one  body.  Every  believer  who  has  believed  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  the  blessed 
Paraclete,  is  abiding  in  him.  It  is  wrong  for  a  believer 
to  plead  or  pray  for  the  Holy  Spirit  to  come  unto  him,  and 
equally  unscriptural  is  it  to  pray  for  a  baptism  with  fire,  for 
there  is  no  such  baptism  nozv,  and  no  believer  could  pray 
for  the  flaming  fire  to  fall  upon  him,  for  he  is  delivered 
from  that  wrath. 

The  Lord  comes  again,  and  then  it  will  be  with  a  bap- 
tism of  fire.  The  wheat  will  be  gathered  into  the  garner, 
and  then  the  chafif  upon  the  threshing  floor  swept  together, 
corresponding  with  the  tares  in  the  parables  put  together 
in  bundles,  will  be  given  over  to  the  fire  unquenchable. 

John  unquestionably  waited  anxiously  for  the  appearing 
of  Him  whose  advent  he  had  announced.  God,  who  had  sent 
him  to  baptize  with  water,  had  told  him  that  upon  whom 
thou  shalt  see  the  Spirit  descending  and  abiding  on  him. 


73 


he  it  is  who  baptizes  with  the  Spirit  (John  i  :32-34).  At 
last  the  moment  came.  What  a  moment  it  was!  It  termin- 
ated the  ministry  of  the  forerunner.  It  was  the  beginninjj^ 
of  the  public  mmistry  of  the  King  Himself.  He  now  steps 
to  the  front  to  go  that  path  of  obedience  marked  out  for 
Him,  to  be  presented  as  King  to  the  nation,  to  be  rejected, 
and  to  do  that  work  which  no  Prophet,  no  John,  no  Angel 
or  Archangel  could  do,  but  He  alone. 

"Then  comes  Jesus  from  Galilee  to  the  Jordan  to  John,  to 
be  baptized  of  him."  The  Lord,  He  who  baptizes  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  and  with  fire.  He  who  is  greater  than  John,  to 
whom  the  Baptist  bowed  in  humility  and  worship.  He  who 
is  the  creator  of  all  things,  comes  to  the  preacher  of  re- 
pentance and  presents  Himself  to  be  baptized.  What  a 
scene!  John  stood  amazed.  "He  forbade  Him,  saying,  I 
have  need  to  be  baptized  of  Thee,  and  comest  Thou  to  me?" 
In  other  words,  I  am  the  sinner,  I  need  repentance,  I  de- 
serve to  go  into  that  river  of  death,  but  Thou  art  holy — no 
evil  in  Thee,  nothing  worthy  of  death. 

Thus  in  the  very  beginning  of  His  public  ministry  we 
have  the  testimony  of  His  holiness.  He  is  the  one  who 
alone  is  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  sinners ; 
He  knew  no  sin,  who  could  not  sin,  neither  was  guile  found 
in  His  mouth.  When  at  last  the  prince  of  this  world  came 
he  had  nothing  in  Him.  But  why  then  should  He,  the  holy 
one,  this  spotless,  pure  being,  present  Himself  to  the  preacher 
of  repentance?  Why  should  He  go  into  the  river  of  death 
and  take  His  place  in  death?  Where  there  is  no  sin  there 
need  be  no  confession.    Where  there  is  no  sin  there  can 


74 

be  no  death.  How  could  He,  the  King,  that  holy, thing  born 
of  the  virgin,  God  manifc^te  1  in  th:  flesh,  ever  confers  sin 
when  there  was  no  sin  ?  Yet  He  not  only  came  to  be  baptize4; 
but  He  was  baptized.  The  question  has  had  many  answers. 
We  said  above  that  His  baptism  marks  the  beginning  of  His 
pubhc  ministry,  He  enters  upon  His  work,  and  there  can  be 
only  one  meaning  to  His  baptism,  which  is  in  fullest  harmony 
with  that  work  He  came  to  do.  Baptism  means  death  and  res- 
urrection. He  had  no  sin,  but  came  to  be  the  substitute  for 
sinners,  and  so  He  takes  in  the  very  beginning  their  place^  the 
sinner's  place  in  death.  He  knew  His  work  before.  It  is  not 
to  be  understood  as  if  now  He  had  learned  for  the  first  time 
who  He  is  and  what  His  work  is.  But  publicly  He  declares  in 
presence  of  men,  angels,  demons,  and  in  the  presence  of 
Glod  that  He  is  here  to  fulfill  all  righteousess.  "Suffer  it 
now,  for  it  thus  becometh  us  to  fulfill  all  righteousness'* 
(verse  13).  No  confessing  or  repenting  on  His  part,  He 
was  fulfilling  all  righteousness.  As  one  has  said,  "He  saw 
His  sheep  struggling  in  the  dark  waters  of  the  river  of 
judgment,  the  meaning  of  the  Jordan,  and  He  must  go  in 
for  their  rescue.  He  must  become  identified  with  them, 
taking  their  place  in  judgment  that  they  might  be  made  the 
righteousness  of  God  in  Him,  bringing  in  'the  righteousness 
of  God  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  towards  all  and  upon  all 
those  who  believe"  (Rom.  iii:22).  He  knew  no  sin,  was 
made  sin  for  us,  and  His  baptism  declares  this.  The  de- 
tails of  His  baptism  are  not  given.  Then  he  suffers  Him. 
He  placed  Himself  into  the  hands  of  John  and  went  into 
the  waters  of  Jordan.    Later  He  said,  I  have  a  baptism  to 


75 


be  Lapiized  with,  and  how  I  am  strengthened  until  it  sh.all 
have  been  accomplished !  The  man  of  sorrows  and  ac- 
quainted with  grief  soon  reached  that  place,  when  He  went 
into  the  deep  waters  of  suffering  and  death,  when  all  the  bil- 
lows broke  over  His  head.  His  baptism  was  but  a  type  of 
this. 

"And  Jesus,  having  been  baptized,  went  straightway  from 
the  water,  and  lo,  the  heavens  were  opened  to  Him,  and  He 
saw  the  Spirit  of  God  descending  as  a  dove  and  coming 
upon  Him;  and  behold  a  voice  out  of  the  heavens  saying. 
This  is  my  beloved  Son  in  whom  I  have  found  My  delight 
(verses  i6  and  17)." 

Here  we  have  something  which  leads  us  still  deeper.  It 
is  a  glorious  manifestation  of  the  Father,  the  Son  and  the 
Holy  Spirit.  The  Son  who  has  gone  down  comes  out  to  be 
anointed  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  proclaimed  as  the  beloved 
Son  by  the  Father's  voice.  He  is  anointed  for  the  work  He 
had  to  do.  He  was  begotten  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  filled  with 
the  Spirit,  and  through  the  eternal  Spirit  He  offered  Him- 
self without  spot  to  God.  John  learned  now  that  He  was 
the  true  One.  The  Holy  Spirit  came  upon  Jesus  in  the 
form  of  a  dove.  The  dove  is  the  type  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
We  are  reminded  of  the  dove  which  flew  across  the  dark 
waters  of  judgment,  come  from  the  ark,  lifted  above  all 
judgment,  finding  no  resting  place  and  returned  to  the  ark. 
And  when  sent  out  the  second  time  the  dove  returns  with 
an  olive  branch  and  the  third  time  there  was  no  return  to 
the  ark.  This  speaks  of  the  sending  forth  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  the  different  dispensations.    But  here  is  the  One 


76 


upon  whom  the  Holy  Spirit  came  to  abide.  We  are  re- 
minded of  the  prophet  whose  book  and  experience  is  a  type 
of  Christ,  Jonah  the  son  of  Amittai,  translated,  the  Dove, 
the  Son  of  Truth.  The  dove  is,  as  one  of  the  sacrificial 
birds,  a  type  of  Christ.  And  through  Him  and  in  Him  we 
have  the  Holy  Spirit  as  the  abiding  one,  the  Paraclete.  He 
was  poured  out  after  His  death  and  resurrection. 

The  heavens  were  opened  unto  Him.  This  is  a  significant 
word  which  is  often  overlooked.  For  Him  alone  the  heavens 
are  open.  No  one  has  gone  up  into  heaven  save  He  who 
came  down  out  of  heaven,  the  Son  of  Man,  who  is  in 
heaven  (John  iii:i3).  He  came  out  of  heaven.  The  heav- 
ens were  opened  unto  Him  and  He  has  passed  through  the 
heavens.  In  Him  the  heavens  are  opened  for  us,  and  He 
has  taken  us  all,  who  believe,  into  heaven,  bringing  many 
sons  to  glory.  And  now  a  voice  is  heard.  It  is  not  the 
voice  of  an  Angel,  but  the  voice  of  the  Father.  Wonderful 
fact,  that  now  after  He,  who  is  eternally  the  Son  of  God, 
subsisting  in  the  form  of  God,  and  who  became  Son  of  God 
incarnate,  after  He  has  thus  taken  the  place  in  death  for 
sinners,  that  the  Father  speaks  to  approve  of  Him.  He  had 
seen  Him,  His  beloved  Son,  go  down  to  fulfill  all  righteous- 
ness, and  now  He  vindicates  Him  by  declaring.  This  is  My 
beloved  Son  in  whom  I  have  found  My  delight.  This  cor- 
responds to  the  word  in  the  second  Psalm,  Thou  art  My 
Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
is  eternally  the  Son  of  God,  but  here  in  both  passages  wc 
see  Him  as  the  Son  of  God  incarnate.  Never  could  it  be 
said  of  Him  as  the  Only  begotten  of  the  Father,  This  day 


17 

have  I  begotten  Thee.  Equally  true  is  it  that  eternally  the 
Father's  delight  has  been  in  the  Son.  But  Romans  i  :3 
speaks  of  Him  as  His  Son,  come  of  David's  seed  according 
to  flesh,  marked  out  as  Son  of  God  in  power,  according  to 
the  spirit  of  holiness  by  resurrection  of  the  dead  Jesus  Christ 
GUI  Lord.  He  is  the  first  begotten,  and  in  Acts  xiii  we 
have  the  true  application  of  that  word.  Thou  art  My  Son — 
"iiaving  raised  up  Jesus ;"  as  it  is  also  written  in  the  second 
Psalm,  "Thou  art  My  Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten  Thee" 
— it  is  then  in  resurrection,  by  the  resurrection  from  the 
dead  that  He  is  marked  out  Son  of  God, 

.^nd  thus  we  see  it  here.  In  going  down  into  Jordan  He 
typifies  His  own  death,  but  His  coming  up  straightway  is 
the  type  of  resurrection,  and  in  this  coming  up  the  Father's 
voice  is  heard  declaring  Him  the  well  beloved.  "Therefore 
doth  My  Father  love  Me — because  I  lay  down  My  life  that 
I  might  take  it  again".  Well  pleasing  to  the  Father  He 
vv^as,  and  how  else  could  it  be  with  the  Sinless  One,  who 
was  made  like  unto  His  brethren.  It  is  then  seen  from  the 
baptism  of  our  Lord  that  He  is  the  Lamb  of  God  for  the 
sacrifice,  even  as  John  recognized  it  in  pointing  to  Him, 
Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  who  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
world.  He  is  perfectly  pleasing  to  the  Father,  and  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  who  came  upon  Him  He  is  consecrated  to  the 
work  before  Him.  It  is  also  clear  from  these  meditations 
that  the  baptism  of  the  Lord  is  typical  of  His  death  and 
resurrection. 

And  now.  after  all  this  took  place  and  He  entered  thus 
upon  His  official  work — then  Jesus  was  carried  up  into  the 


78 

wilderness  by  the  Spirit  to  be  tempted  of  the  devil  (chap. 

iv:i). 

Many  other  teachings  could  be  given  in  connection  with 
the  third  chapter  in  which  we  tarried  longer  than  we  ex- 
pected. How  rich,  how  unfathomable  is  God's  Word!  Di- 
vine from  beginning  to  end,  a  living  Word,  energetic,  and 
sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword.  May  we  praise  our 
God  for  His  written  Word,  and  for  Him  who  is  the  living 
Word,  who  took  our  place  in  death,  delivered  for  our 
offences,  but  raised  from  the  dead  on  account  of  our  justi- 
fication. All  honor  and  praise  and  glory  to  Him  who 
loveth  us  and  has  washed  us,  to  Him  the  Son  who  has  made 
us  sons,  and  in  whom  we  hear  the  Father's  loving  voice. 
"And  because  ye  are  sons,  God  has  sent  the  Spirit  of  His 
Son  into  our  hearts,  crying,  Abba  Father"  (Gal.  iv:6). 


79 


CHAPTER  IV. 

The  first  part  of  this  chapter  gives  us  the  history  of  the 
temptation  of  the  King.  This  is  a  most  important  topic, 
many-sided  in  its  appHcations ;  large  vohimes  have  been 
written  on  it  without  exhausting  it.  We  will  therefore  have 
to  confine  ourselves  to  the  bringing  out  of  some  of  the  most 
important  teachings,  without  attempting  to  go  into  many  of 
the  precious  details  and  applications  to  the  believer. 

The  baptism  marked,  as  we  saw  in  the  last  chapter,  our 
Lord's  entrance  upon  His  official  work.  He  is  declared  as 
the  Son  of  God  by  His  Father,  and  anointed  with  the  Holy 
Spirit ;  and  the  third  act  is  that  He,  who  is  declared  the  Son 
of  God,  anointed  with  the  Spirit,  come  to  do  the  eternal  will 
of  God,  to  suffer  and  to  die,  is  to  be  tempted  by  the  devil. 
"Then  was  Jesus  carried  up  into  the  wilderness  by  the  Spirit'' 
(verse  i).  It  came  immediately  after  he  had  come  out  of 
the  waters.  There  was  no  interval  between.  This  is  seen 
from  the  Gospel  of  Mark.  "And  immediately  the  Spirit 
drives  Him  out  into  the  wilderness"  (Mark  i:i2).  It  was 
the  first  thing  to  be  done  in  fulfilling  the  Scriptures.  He 
was  carried  into  the  wilderness,  and  in  Mark  it  is  stronger 
still:  driven  there.  Some  have  said,  as  if  our  Lord  was 
anxious  to  meet  the  enemy,  desirous  of  coming  face  to  face 
with  that  old  serpent,  the  devil,  who  has  the  power  of  death, 
and  whom  to  annul  He  had  come.    But  that  cannot  be.    If 


8o 


it  had  been  our  Lord  Himself  who  hastens  impatiently  to 
meet  the  adversary,  He  would  have  been  the  tempter  of  the 
Evil  one.  Not  His  Spirit  drove  Him,  but  the  Spirit  carried 
Him  into  the  wilderness.  It  was  the  Holy  Spirit  who  took 
Him  to  meet  the  enemy.  The  Spirit,  who  had  come  upon 
Him  and  rested  on  Him — He  impels  Him.  The  Christ,  the 
second  man  and  last  Adam,  meets  the  devil  in  another  place, 
far  different  from  the  garden  where  Adam  and  Eve  had 
their  abode.  What  a  contrast!  Even  the  earth,  though 
good  and  perfect  it  was,  did  not  seem  to  be  a  good  enough 
place  for  Adam  and  Eve.  So  the  Lord  planted  a  garden 
eastward  in  Eden,  and  there  He  put  the  man  He  had 
formed.  And  out  of  the  ground  made  the  Lord  God  to 
grow  every  tree  that  is  pleasant  to  the  sight  and  good  for 
food  (Gen.  ii:8,'9).  What  a  beautiful  spot  that  garden 
must  have  been !  Surrounded  by  all  this,  with  all  wants 
supplied,  the  enemy  came  to  tempt,  and  with  it  came  the 
failure.  But  here  is  the  second  Man,  and  He  is  not  brought 
into  a  garden,  but  He  is  driven  into  the  wilderness — "the 
great  and  terrible  wilderness  wherein  were  fiery  serpents 
and  scorpions,  and  thirsty  ground  where  was  no  water" 
(Deut.  viii  115 ).  He  was  there  in  the  wilderness  with  the 
wild  beasts  (Mark  i:i3).  In  that  terrible  wilderness,  sur- 
rounded by  serpents,  scorpions,  adders  and  the  wild  beasts, 
the  Messiah,  the  King,  stands  to  meet  the  foe.  And  having 
fasted  forty  days  and  forty  nights,  afterwards  He  hungered; 
His  blessed  body,  a  body  of  flesh  and  blood,  felt  hunger  and 
thirst.  How  reduced  in  His  outward  appearing  He  must 
have  been,  the  Man  of  Sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief ! 


We  would  call  attention  to  the  fact,  that  the  tempter  did 
not  come  to  Him  for  forty  days,  as  it  is  often  said  in  mis- 
quoting- scripture,  but  aftcriiwd,  when,  having  fasted,  he 
came  to  Him. 

And  the  tempter  came  to  Him.  It  is  the  adversary,  the 
accuser  of  the  brethren,  that  old  serpent,  the  devil.  He  is 
as  truly  a  person  as  God  and  our  Lord  is  a  person.  How 
terrible  it  is  that  in  the  very  midst  of  Christendom  the  per- 
sonality of  the  devil  is  denied.  If  there  is  no  personal  devil 
there  is  no  need  of  a  personal  Saviour.  The  "new"  theol- 
ogy, whose  father  the  devil  is  himself,  has  no  use  for  a_ 
belief  in  the  personal  devil.  That  person  is  simply  put  down 
as  an  invention  of  the  dark  middle  ages,  and  spoken  of  as 
an  old  relic,  which  still  survives  in  the  minds  of  some  old 
fogies.  It  is  no  longer  a  person  with  most  of  these  modern 
theologians,  but  an  evil  principle.  The  Lord's  temptations, 
according  to  this  new  interpretation,  were  only  imaginations, 
they  were  the  workings  of  the  mind,  a  kind  of  weakness 
which  was  produced  by  the  prolonged  fastings.  If  we  ask 
these  men  who  got  rid  of  the  personal  devil,  how  they  can 
explain  the  belief  of  the  Jews  in  a  personal  devil  and  in  the 
demons,  as  well  as  the  demoniacal  possessions  in  the  days 
of  our  Lord?  they  answer  us  and  say,  The  Jews  brought 
this  sujierstition  from  the  Babylonian  captivity.  But  if  we 
ask  these  "critics"  Why,  then  did  the  Lord  and  His  apostles 
not  correct  so  grave  an  error?  they  give  us  an  answer  which 
dishonors  our  Lord.  The  denial  of  the  existence  of  a  per- 
sonal devil,  as  it  is  becoming  almost  universal  in  Christen- 
dom, is  surely  the  masterpiece  of  all  the  dreadful  work 


82 


Satan  has  done,  and  we  can  well  imagine  what  fiendish  joy 
he  must  have  in  seeing  his  existence  denied,  and  by  and  by 
he  will  have  the  world  in  security  ensnared  by  his  delusions. 
Then,  when  he  himself  and  with  him  his  demons  are  cast 
out  of  heaven  into  the  earth,  the  earth  will  know  that  there 
is  a  personal  devil,  for  he  comes  on  the  earth  and  brings 
with  it  that  which  is  his  work,  the  great  tribulation.  His 
wrath  will  be  great  for  a  short  time  (Rev.  xii).  What  a 
terrible  awakening  that  will  be  for  all  those  who  denied  the 
existence  of  that  Evil  one!  The  dreadful  chain  in  denying 
the  personality  of  the  devil  is:  No  dci'il,  no  sin,  no  judg- 
ment, no  zvrath,  no  atonement,  no  Saviour,  and  at  last  no 
God.    ■ 

We  do  not  know  in  what  form  of  a  person  the  devil  ap- 
peared to  our  Lord.  There  is  a  scripture  which  tells 
us  of  a  form  he  took  that  is  in  Genesis  the  third  chapter. 
The  serpent  must  have  been  perhaps  the  most  attractive  of 
all  the  creatures  and  not  as  the  serpent  is  now,  creeping  upon 
its  belly,  having  become  this  by  the  curse.  In  the  New 
Testament  we  read  that  he  goes  about  as  a  roaring  lion 
and  that  Satan  transforms  himself  into  an  angel  of  light. 
Perhaps  in  that  subtle  form  he  came  to  meet  Him,  whom  he 
knew  to  be  the  eternal  Word  made  flesh. 

There  is  but  one  more  word  to  be  considered  before  we 
turn  to  the  temptations  themselves  and  take  them  up  in  their 
order.  It  is  the  word  tempt.  It  is  here  where  much  misun- 
derstanding comes  in.  The  word  tempt  has  different  mean- 
ings. One  of  them  is  inciting  or  enticing  to  evil,  to  seduce. 
This  always  presupposes   evil  present  in  some   form,  the 


83 

possibility  that  the  person  can  be  enticed  and  incited  to  evil, 
that  in  the  person  there  is  something  which  responds  or  may 
respond  to  the  evil  placed  before  the  soul.  This  could  nci'cr 
be  the  case  with  our  Lord.    There  was  no  sin,  no  evil  in 
Him.    He  is  absolutely  holy.    Therefore  the  word  tempt  in 
this  form  can  iic^.cr  apply  to  Him.    But  the  word  tempt 
means  also,  put  to  test.   To  test  means  to  bring  to  trial  and 
examination ;  compare  with  a  standard ;  in  this  sense  only 
it  can  refer  to  our  Lord.    He  was  tempted  means.  He  was 
tested  as  to  His  ability  to  do  that  for  which  He  had  come. 
The  test  or  tempting  is  to  bring  out  that  He  is  the  pure 
gold,  the  Holy  One,  the  spotless  One,  the  One  who  alone 
can  do  the  work  for  which  He  appeared,  to  put  away  sin  by 
sacrificing  Himself.    Therefore  the  Spirit  led  Him  up  into 
the  wilderness.    The  word  tempting  or  testing  has  also  a 
special  significance  in  connection  with  Israel.     The  Lord, 
as  Messiah  and  King,  is  closely  identified  with  His  people. 
He  goes  through  their  history,  so  to  speak,  and  fulfills  all. 
and  at  last  He  died  for  that  nation.    Israel  was  tested  or 
proved,  and   failed.    "There  He  made   for  them  a  statute 
and  an    ordinance,    and    there    He    proved    them."    The 
Septuagint     translates     the     Hebrew     "Nissohu"     with     a 
Greek    word    which    is    used    in    the    fourth   chapter   of 
Matthew.    The  LTebrew  means  testing,  to  find  out  if  it  is 
really  so  by  a  test.   The  same  word  is  used  in  Deuteroaomy 
the  eighth    chapter.    "And    thou    shalt    remember  all  the 
way   which   the   Lord   thy   God   has   led    thee   these   forty 
years  in  the  wilderness  that  He  might  humble  thee,  to  prove 
(test)  thee,  to  know  what  was  in  thine  heart,  whether  thou 


84 


wouklest  keep  His  commandments  or  no"  (Deut.  viii  :2). 
The  Lord,  the  true  Israel  then  is  tested  and  He  does  not  fail. 
And  now  we  come  to  the  temptations  themselves.  The 
devil  begins  to  address  Him,'  who  has  come  to  crush  his 
head.  It  would  be  very  interesting  to  make  a  careful 
study  of  the  words  of  Satan  we  have  in  the  Word  of  God. 
They  are  contained  in  Genesis  the  third  chapter,  the  first 
chapter  of  Job,  and  here  in  the  Gospel.  The  words  he 
speaks  in  these  passages  establish  him  in  his  true  character, 
the  liar  and  murderer  from  beginning,  the  accuser.  He 
places  before  our  Lord  three  temptations,  the  test  is  three- 
fold. 

I.  "And  the  tempter  coming  up  to  Him  said,  //  thou  be 
•iSon  of  God,  speak  that  these  stones  may  become  bread." 

The  answer  from  the  Lord :  "But  He  answering  said.  It 
is  written  man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every 
word  which  goes  out  through  Gods  mouth"  (Deut.  viii  13). 

II.  Then  the  devil  takes  Him  to  the  holy  city  and  sets 
Him  upon  the  edge  of  the  temple,  and  says  to  Him,  //  Thou 
be  Son  of  God  cast  Thyself  down  ;  for  it  is  written.  He  shall 
give  charge  to  His  angels  concerning  Thee,  and  on  their 
hands  shall  they  bear  Thee,  lest  in  any  wise  Thou  strike 
Thy  foot  against  a  stone"  (Psalms  xci). 

The  answer:  "Jesus  said  to  him.  It  is  again  written,  thou 
shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God"  (Deut.  vi  :i6). 

III.  "Again  the  devil  takes  Him  to  a  very  high  mountain, 
and  shows  Him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  and  their 
glory,  and  says  to  Him,  All  these  things  will  I  give  Thee,  if, 
falling  down,  thou  wilt  do  me  homage.  Then  Jesus  says  to 


85 


him,  Get  tliee  away,  Satan,  for  it  is  written,  Thou  slialt  do 
homage  to  the  Lord  thy  (iod,  and  Him  alone  shalt  thou 
serve"  (Dent,  vi  :i3). 

First,  a  few  general  remarks.  Twice  Satan  takes  the  name 
Son  of  God  in  his  mouth.  He  knew  that  the  Person  before 
him  is  the  Son  of  God,  but  he  hates  Ilim  as  such.  Later 
this  hatred  is  fully  seen  in  those  of  whom  the  Lord  said, 
"Ye  are  of  the  devil,  a?  your  father,  and  ye  desire  to  do  the 
lusts  of  your  father"  (John  viii:44).  The  Pharisees  and 
elders  of  the  people,  who  are  seen  in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew, 
knew  Him  as  Son  and  Heir,  and  with  this  knowledge  they 
rejected  Him  and  delivered  Him  into  the  hands  of  the  Gen- 
tiles. This  was  surely  Satanic.  Each  of  these  temptations 
leads  higher.  In  the  first  it  seems  but  a  small  matter  to 
turn  a  stone  into  bread.  He  knew  this  Lord  had  spoken  in 
creation,  and  the  heavens  were  blazing  with  millions  of 
worlds,  now  but  speak  and  change  a  stone  into  bread.  The 
second  demands  more,  but  the  third  is  the  climax,  when  he 
asks  Him,  who  is  the  Heir  of  all  things,  and  in  whose  name 
every  knee  must  bow,  to  fall  down  and  do  him  homage.  All 
the  forces  at  Satan's  command  were  uncjuestionablv  l)rought 
to  bear  in  this  last  temptation.  Whh  one  stroke  of  His  hand 
He  could  produce  before  Plim,  who  is  the  King  of  kings, 
all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world. 

Only  once  the  tempter  says.  It  is  written.  He  knows 
v.hat  is  written  and  he  knows  more  of  the  written  \\'ord, 
Vvhich  is  forever  settled  in  the  heavens,  than  all  the  higher 
critical  professors  in  the  world.  Higher  criticism  of  the 
W':'rd  is  but  his  child,  his  profkictioji.    P.ut  whenever  he 


86 


quotes  scripture  it  is  always  in  the  wrong  way.  It  was  so 
in  the  Garden  of  Eden  and  it  is  so  here.  He  quotes  from  the 
ninety-first  Psahn,  but  leaves  out  the  words,  "In  all  thy 
ways."  Another  interesting  fact  is  that  the  tempter  knew 
that  this  psalm  was  spoken  prophetically  of  the  second  man, 
the  Lord  from  heaven.  What  sneering  remarks  have  been 
made  on  the  Book  of  Psalms  by  the  critics.  What  they 
deny  is  a  denial  of  the  truth,  which  the  devil  knows,  believes 
and  trembles.  Our  Lord  speaks  three  times.  It  is  written. 
What  a  testimony  to  the  Word  of  God !  He  knows  no  other 
weapon  than  the  written  Word.  In  quoting  the  scriptures 
to  the  enemy  He  does  it  from  but  one  book,  that  is  the  book 
of  Deuteronomy.  More  than  any  other  book  in  the  Old  Tes- 
tament this  one  has  been  denied  an  ancient  date.  Higher 
criticism  has  declared  and  declares  to-day,  that  Moses  never 
wrote  that  book,  but  that  it  is  the  work  of  some  pricbt  liv- 
ing centuries  later.  The  late  J.  H.  Brookes  wrote  very 
pointedly  on  this,  saying,  "Our  Lord  took  refuge,  so  to 
speak,  behind  the  written  Word  of  God,  quoting  each  time 
from  the  book  of  Deuteronomy,  as  if  foreseeing  the  con- 
tempt with  which  this  precious  book  is  treated  by  modern 
higher  criticism,  and  defending  it  against  the  attacks  of  the 
enemy.  It  is  perilously  near  blasphemy  to  assert  that  He 
quoted  from  a  book  which  this  insolent  criticism  declares  to 
be  a  forgery.  For  if  He  did  not  know  the  date  of  its  com- 
position He  is  not  divine.  And  if  He  did  not  know  but 
chose  to  humor  a  popular  error,  He  connived  a  falsehood. 
Genesis  tells  us  of  election ;  Exodus  of  redemption ;  Leviti- 
cus of  worship;  Numbers  of  warfare  in  the  wilderness; 


87 

Deuteronomy  of  obedience;  and  hence  the  appropriateness 
of  quoting  from  this  book,  which  the  Lord  knew  as  divinely 
inspired.  It  is  written,  was  ciiou^^h  for  Him  in  the  conflict 
with  the  devil,  and  It  is  written  enough  for  us  amid  all  the 
temptations  we  may  encounter  on  our  way  to  meet  Him  in 
the  air." 

\\'e  will  leave  it,  then,  as  we  suggest  above,  to  the  reader 
to  make  a  careful  comparison  between  the  opening  verses  of 
the  third  chapter  in  Genesis  and  the  temptations  of  our 
Lord.  The  Satan  there  is  the  same,  that  old  serpent,  the 
devil.  He  came  to  Eve  with  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust 
of  the  eyes  and  the  pride  of  life,  and  the  same  he  brings  to 
bear  upon  the  Lord.  He  said  to  Eve,  "Is  it  so  that  God 
said  ?"  and  to  Christ  he  said,  "If  thou  art  the  Son  of  God." 
It  is  doubt,  unbelief  with  which  he  always  advances.  He 
misquoted  the  Word  of  God  to  Eve.  God  had  said.  "Thou 
shalt  surely  die,"  and  he  said,  "Lest  yc  die."  He  docs  the 
same  in  the  temptations  of  Christ.  These  hints  will  be 
sufficient  to  help  in  the  comparison. 

The  first  temptation  is  of  course  the  principal  one.  De- 
feated in  this  one  he  is  defeated  in  all.  He  is  detected  at 
once  as  the  enemy  and  with  the  first  victory  the  whole  vic- 
tory is  won.  It  is  the  most  subtle  of  all ;  it  appears  extreme- 
ly plausible  and  one  might  think  it  hardly  a  temptation  at 
all,  while  in  the  third  it  is  the  most  blunt  attempt;  we  might 
almost  say  a  desperate,  despairing  attack.  But  what  was 
the  first  temptation  and  what  does  it  teach  us?  "If  thou  be 
Son  of  God.  speak  that  these  stones  may  become  bread." 
That  the  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God  as  He  stands  before  the 


tempter  was  well  known  to  the  evil  one.  He  knew  it  before 
and  attempted  to  take  the  life  of  the  child  through  Herod, 
and  the  demons  cried  out  before  Him  in  terror,  "What  have 
we  to  do  with  the  Son  of  God — hast  Thou  come  here  before 
the  time  to  torment  us  ?"  But  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  the 
temptation  is  to  make  Jesus  doubt  that  He  is  the  Son  of 
God,  because  He  is  suffering  hunger.  The  first  temptation 
is  one  in  which  He  is  assailed  as  the  Son  of  man.  He  was 
truly  man,  and  this  is  seen  here  in  the  wilderness.  He  fasted 
and  He  hungered.  Is  there  anything  wrong  in  being 
hungry  ?  Certainly  not.  It  is  in  this  that  the  subtlety  of  the 
tempter  shows  itself.  The  enemy  comes  with  a  natural 
want  and  appeals  to  our  Lord's  pDwer  to  relieve  Himself 
from  that  want.  He  is  still  the  same  evil,  cunning  deceiver, 
who  begins  with  the  most  subtle  temptations.  Here  one 
might  ask,  What  wrong  is  there  in  satisfying  hunger?  The 
Lord  could  easily  have  done  this,  turning  stones  into  bread. 
He,  who  spoke  in  the  hour  of  creation,  "Let  there  be 
light,"  "let  the  earth  bring  forth,"  He  by  whom  and  for 
whom  are  all  things  could  have  at  once  changed  all  the 
stones  into  bread.  Later  He  fed  thousands  in  a  miraculous 
manner.  He  could  have  done  so  now  for  Himself,  but  if 
He  had  done  it  He  would  have  been  proven  at  once  unfit  to 
be  our  Saviour,  who  could  die  for  us.  He  came  to  do. the 
will  of  God.  Thus  it  is  written,  "Sacrifice  and  offering 
Thou  willedst  not.  Thou  hast  prepared  me  a  body.  *  *  *  * 
Lo  I  come,  O  God,  to  do  Thy  will"  (Hebrews  x:5-8).  He 
had  not  esteemed  it  robbery  to  be  on  an  equality  with 
God;  but  had  emptied  Himself,  taking  the  form  of  a  ser- 


89 


vant,  taking  His  place  in  the  likeness  of  men.  Now  the 
path  for  Him  has  begun.  He  is  here  as  true  Man,  God  man- 
ifested in  the  flesh,  but  the  jiath  is  to  do  the  will  of  Go.l, 
that  eternal  will  of  salvation.  The  path  leads  downward  in 
humiliation,  suffering,  it  is  to  end  in  the  cross,  suffering 
death  and  tasting  death  for  everything.  Hunger  is  a  part 
of  His  humanity.  Was  there  or  is  there  in  the  Word  of 
God  one  word  which  could  have  told  Him  to  change  stones 
into  bread?  On  the  cross  in  deep  agony  He  remembered 
but  a  little  Scripture  concerning  Himself,  which  had  to  be 
fulfilled,  and  so  it  was  by  His  own  request  so  that  even  not 
one  of  the  smallest  prophecies  about  His  sufferings  might 
be  unfulfilled  (John  xix:28).  P)Ut  had  God  given  anywhere 
one  word  to  Him,  who  had  come  to  do  His  will  that  He  was 
to  end  His  suffering  as  man,  His  hunger  by  a  miracle? 
Nowhere  is' to  be  found  such  a  direction.  Tf  He  had  entered 
upon  the  suggestion  of  .Satan  He  would  have  acted  accord- 
ing to  His  own  will  and  t!-.at  would  have  been  the  will  of 
the  enemy.  He  would  have  taken  His  case  in  His  own 
hands.  All  the  elements  of  disobedience  and  disfntst  to 
God  are  in  it  involved.  Now  having  failed  in  this  one 
thing,  having  satisfied  His  hunger  and  saved  Himself  by 
using  powers  which  were  not  according  to  the  will  of  Go:l, 
He  would  have  been  unfit  to  endure  the  cross  and  to  despis? 
the  shame.  When  it  came  to  Gethsemane  He  might  have 
shrunk  from  drinking  the  cup.  He  might  havf  crdled  upon 
legions  of  angels  at  His  command  to  deliver  Him,  and  when 
the  billows  of  wrath  and  judgment  were  coming  He  could 
not  have  stood  them.     Thus  the  changing  of  stones  into 


90 


bread  would  have  shown  that  He  who  did  it  was  not  fit  to 
die  for  us,  for  He  had  chosen  His  own  will  by  the  suggestion 
of  Satan  and  not  done  the  Father's  will,  which  is  that  He 
should  suffer. 

This  is  clearly  seen  from  His  answer.  He  detects  the  old 
serpent  at  once.  There  is  no  parleying  from  His  side  as  it 
was  with  Eve.  He  resists  the  devil  at  once.  The  perfect, 
sinless  and  spotless  One  has  His  "It  is  written"  to  hand 
and  this  Word,  bringing  out  the  Father's  will  which  He  is 
here  to  do,  ends  this  first  temptation.  "It  is  written  man 
shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  which 
goes  out  through  God's  mouth"  (Deut.  viii:3).  The  mean- 
ing of  the  word  He  uses  here  is  that  man  lives  truly  not  by 
bread  alone,  but  by  the  Word  of  God,  that  is,  in  obedience 
to  this  Word.  And  there  is  an  application  for  us  as  be- 
lievers. One  has  said  on  this,*  "We  realize  the  wondrous 
privilege  that  is  ours,  the  solemn  responsibility  that  lies 
upon  us.  For  we  are  sanctified  into  the  obedience  of  Christ. 
and  He  has  left  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  in 
His  steps"  (i  Peter  i:2,  ii:2i).  This  principle  of  His  life 
must  then  be  the  principle  of  our  lives.  If  with  Him  the 
governing  motive  was  to  do  the  will  of  God,  how  simple 
is  it  that  for  us  also  the  will  of  God  must  be  our  motive  for 
action.  By  every  word  that  goes  out  of  the  mouth  of  God 
doth  man  live.  What  a  sustenance  of  the  true  life  within 
us  to  be  thus,  day  by  day,  receiving  the  messages  of  His 
will  guided  by  that  wondrous  voice,  learning  more  contin- 


*Numerical  Bible,  New  Testament,  page  62. 


91. 


ually  the  tenderness  of  His  love  for  us :  "He  wakeneth 
morning  by  morning,  He  wakeneth  mine  ear  as  the  learner" 
(Isaiah  1:4).  This  is  the  utterance  of  the  Lord  Himself. 
How  blessed  to  be  able  to  make  it  our  own,  and  to  have  the 
fulfillment  of  those  words:  "I  will  instruct  thee  and  teach 
thee  in  the  way  in  which  thou  shalt  go;  I  will  guide  thee 
with  mine  eyes." 

For  the  next  test  the  tempter  took  the  Lord  to  the  Holy  City 
and  sets  Him  upon  the  edge  (the  pinnacle)  of  the  temple,  and 
said  to  Him,  "If  Thou  be  Son  of  God  cast  Thyself  down; 
for  it  is  written,  He  shall  give  charge  to  His  angels  con- 
cerning Thee,  and  on  their  hands  they  shall  bear  Thee,  lest 
in  any  wise  Thou  strike  Thy  foot  against  a  stone." 

The  Psalm  which  Satan  quotes  (Psalm  xci.)  is  a  Mes- 
sianic Psalm.  He  takes  Him  to  the  Holy  City.  Jerusalem, 
and  upon  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  because  the  second 
temptation  is  the  temptation  of  Him  as  the  Messiah.  Standing 
upon  that  high  place  the  people  below  must  have  seen  Him 
and  recognized  Him ;  Satan  was  hid  from  their  view.  What 
a  test  and  proof  of  His  Messiahship  if  slowly  He  had  de- 
scended, the  laws  of  gravitation  completely  set  aside,  land- 
ing unharmed  on  His  feet  before  the  astonished  multitude. 
Would  they  not  at  once  accept  Him?  Why  should  He  be 
rejected  if  by  doing  this  He  might  become  in  the  shortest 
order  their  leader,  their  King  and  redeemer  from  the  yoke 
of  the  Roman  oppressor?  Now  Satan  defeated  had  heard 
the  Word  upon  which  the  Lord  stood.  He  was  defeated  by 
the  Word.  He  comes  now  with  the  Word  himself,  quoting 
scripture  and  that  from  a  Psalm  which  speaks  of  the  Mes- 


92 


siah,  the  second  man.  However,  he  misquotes  the  Word 
and  leaves  out  the  seven  words,  "and  keep  Thee  in  all  Thy 
ways."  It  is  as  subtle  as  the  first  temptation.  Here  he 
presents  the  Word  and  tries  to  make  our  Lord  act  in  obedi- 
ence to  the  Word  by  testing  God's  Word  and  by  doing  so 
to  prove  that  He  is  the  ]\Iessiah  and  the  Son  of  God  at  the 
same  time.  But  why  did  he  leave  out  those  seven  words? 
Because  the  ways  in  which  He,  the  Messiah,  will  be  kept  are 
the  ways  of  God.  "Thy  ways"  are  indeed  His  ways.  It  was 
not  the  way  of  faith  in  impatience  to  test  the  truth  of  the 
Word  and  casting  Himself  down  and  to  prove  thereby  that 
He  is  Messiah  and  Son  of  God.  It  was  impossible  that  He 
could  have  even  given  this  temptation  a  moment's  thought. 
The  answer  is  at  once  ready  as  soon  as  the  tempter  has 
uttered  his  lie.  Jesus  said,  "It  is  again  written.  Thou  shalt 
not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God."  It  would  have  been  testing, 
proving  God  and  as  such  again  distrust  and  disobedience. 
We  see  how  closely  the  two  temptations  are  connected.  It 
is  tempting  Him  to  choose  His  own  will  and  not  the  Will 
of  God,  to  act  in  His  own  behalf  and  to  escape  the  suffering 
before  Him. 

It  is  very  suggestive  that  Satan  should  demand  of  Him  to 
cast  Himself  down  from  the  edge  of  the  temple,  and  to 
prove  by  this  act  His  Messianity  and  Divinity  as  well.  Our 
Lord  is  gone  into  the  presence  of  the  Father  with  a  glorified 
body  of  flesh  and  bones.  In  a  future  day  He  who  ascended 
upon  high,  will  descend.  The  heavens  will  be  covered  with 
His  glory,  and  He  who  is  the  leader  and  completer  of  faith, 
the  great  Exemplar  of  faith,  in  whom  patience  had  its  com- 


93 


plete,  perfect  work,  will  ciMiie  aq;ain  in  glory  and  majesty, 
seen  by  all  eyes,  the  Messiah- King  of  Israel,  the  Son  and 
Heir.  Then  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  will  bow,  and 
every  tongue  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  God  the 
Father's  glory.  The  adorable  One  knew  the  Father's  will ; 
He  knew  the  suffering  and  the  patience,  the  only  road  that 
leads  to  glory.  He  begun  to  go  the  path,  and  His  face  is 
set  like  a  flint.  He  could  not  fail  in  what  He  had  come  to 
do.    Again  the  old  serpent  is  conquered. 

Let  us,  like  our  Lord,  be  patient  and  go  the  way  which  is 
for  us  now  in  humilitation,  never  murmuring  or  tempting 
God.  "Count  it  all  joy,  my  brethren,  wh.en  ye  fall  into  vari- 
ous temptations  (trials),  knowing  that  the  proving  of  your 
faith  works  patience.  But  let  patience  have  its  perfect  work, 
that  ye  may  be  perfect  and  complete,  lacking  in  nothing" 
(James  i  12-4 ). 

And  now  they  stand  upon  a  high  mountain.  What  a  pic- 
ture is  presented  to  our  view  !  The  liar  and  murderer  from 
the  beginning,  and  alongside  of  him  stands  He  who  is 
Jehovah,  the  eternal  A\'ord  made  flesh.  What  must  have 
been  His  outward  appearance  w^ith  the  fasting  of  forty  days, 
with  perhaps  the  tattered  robes  which  hung  upon  His 
body  rent  by  the  thorns  of  the  wilderness.  The 
tempter's  eyes  must  have  beholden  such  a  weak  and  frail 
Person — a  man  of  sorrows.  One  who  knew  not  where  to 
lay  His  head.  But  the  scene  changes.  The  serpent  hisses, 
and  by  his  immense  power  still  at  his  command  the  darkness 
of  the  night  and  the  gloominess  of  the  mountain  top  are 
dispersed.      Marvelous   visions   of  beauty!     Right  here   is 


94 

Egypt  with  its  pyramids  and  wonderful  buildings,  treasures 
of  art  and  precious  things.  It  disappears,  and  in  its  place 
ancient  Greece,  Athens  and  Corinth  come  up  in  all  their 
splendor.  Once  more  the  scene  shifts,  and  now  Rome,  the 
mistress  of  the  world,  that  great  city,  is  revealed.  Satan 
shows  Him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  their  glory. 
Yes,  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  they  are  in  the 
tempter's  grasp  still,  are  passing  by,  one  startling  vision 
after  the  other.  And  when  the  glory  has  passed,  or  perhaps 
while  still  in  view,  driven  to  the  very  last,  Satan  speaks, 
but  now  no  longer  mentioning  the  Lord  as  Son  of  God,  but 
treating  Him  as  mere  man.  He  says  to  Him,  "All  these 
things  will  I  give  Thee  if  falling  down  Thou  wilt  do  me 
homage,"  The  very  words  speak  of  despair.  All  things  are 
His — all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  and  their  glory  shall 
yet  be  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  prince 
of  this  world,  whose  eternal  abode  with  all  his  demons  is 
the  lake  of  fire,  could  dare  and  stand  by  Him  who  is  the 
King,  the  second  Man,  and  offer  all  the  world  to  Him.  Per- 
haps the  very  appearance  of  our  Lord  may  have 
brought  the  tempter  to  this  despondent  act.  But  when  all 
the  kingdoms  of  the  world  and  their  glory  pass  along  and 
the  eyes  of  Jesus  rest  upon  them,  what  thoughts  must  have 
been  His?  What  did  He  behold  in  all  the  grand  and  glorious 
scenes?  Surely  we  can  venture  to  say  that  He  must  have 
thought  of  this  poor,  benighted  world  under  sin,  death  and 
judgment,  in  the  grasp  of  this  dark  and  dreadful  being 
standing  there  at  His  side.  And  He  had  come  to  be  the 
Lamb  of  God  and  to  take  away  the  sin  of  the  World.    He 


95 


had  come  to  annul  liini.  who  has  the  inii^ht  of  death,  that  is, 
the  devil  (Hebrews  ii:i4).  That  He  is  the  future  heir  of 
all  things  Satan  must  have  felt,  and  now  he  offers  Him  all 
at  once  to  turn  over  all  the  kinf^doms  of  the  world  and  their 
glory  to  Him  if  He  will  but  do  him  homage — again  if  He 
but  turn  aside  from  the  will  of  God.  It  is  now  clear  that 
Satan  feared  Him  going  that  path  of  faith  as  the  second 
man — going  it  to  the  very  end  where  He  would  crush  the 
serpent's  head.  Through  death,  through  His  death  on  the 
cross,  the  might  of  death  in  the  devil's  hand,  and  eventually 
the  control  over  this  world,  were  to  be  wrested  from  Satan's 
hands.  All  three  temptations  bring  this  out,  "The  tempter 
would  keep  Him  back  from  doing  the  will  of  God."  But  our 
Lord  has  gone  that  way.  He  was  obedient  unto  death,  even 
inito  the  death  of  the  cross.  God  has  exalted  Him,  the  eter- 
nal victor,  by  whom  we  are  forever  separated  from  sin  and 
death.  He  has  put  all  things  in  subjection  under  His  feet; 
He  has  left  nothing  unsubject  to  Him.  He  has  been  wel- 
comed in  heaven  by  the  Father  and  taken  His  place  at  His 
right  hand,  waiting  till  the  time  comes  when  heaven  and 
earth  shall  be  shaken,  when  He,  the  First-born,  is  brought 
into  the  habitable  world,  and  with  Him  in  glory  the  many 
sons,  and  when  at  last  the  glorious  shout  shall  ascend,  "The 
kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our 
Lord  and  of  His  Christ,  and  He  shall  reign  forever  and 
forever." 

With  threatening,  defying  words  the  Lorrl  might  have 
burled  the  tempter  down  the  mountainside.  ])Ut  it  is  a  ma- 
jestic "Get  thee  away,  Satan"  (He  calls  him  now  by  name). 


96 


"for  it  is  written,  Thou  shalt  do  homage  to  the  Lord  thy 
God,  and  Him  alone  shalt  thou  serve."  The  devil  leaves 
Him,  and  behold,  angels  came  and  ministered  to  Him, 
What  a  ministry  that  must  have  been ! 

Satan  could  not  conquer  Him.  He  has  met  Him  whom 
he  could  not  harm,  and  the  temptations  were  the  tests  and 
show  that  our  Lord  is  He,  the  only  One  who  is  able  to  do 
the  work  He  came  to  do.  But  the  tempter  has  gone  on 
with  the  same  temptations,  and  how  astonishingly  he  has 
succeeded  in  that  monstrosity  which  calls  itself  Christen- 
dom !  He  has  brought  about  a  perfect  blindness.  Christen- 
dom attempts  to  rule,  to  control  the  world,  to  be  on  the 
throne;  world-conquest,  influence  and  power  are  its  watch- 
words. Christendom  has  bowed  the  knee  before  Satan.  It 
would  not  go  the  way  the  Lord  went,  doing  the  will  of 
God,  in  obedience,  patience  and  suffering,  and  then  the 
glory.  Hence  Christendom  has  become  the  enemy  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

The  remainder  of  the  fourth  chapter  describes  the  en- 
trance of  our  Lord  upon  His  public  ministry.  The  ministry 
which  the  Holy  Spirit  describes  in  Matthew  is  the  Galilean. 
The  events  which  show  Him  and  make  Him  known  as  the 
true  Messiah,  the  Jehovah-Jesus,  in  fulfillment  of  Old  Testa- 
ment prophecy,  are  vividly  described.  As  Jehovah  in  the 
earth.  He  does  miracles,  announces  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
to  be  at  hand,  but  soon  is  in  want,  despised  and  rejected 
by  the  leaders  of  the  nation  and  by  the  nation  itself.  The 
events  of  His  Judean  ministry  in  Jerusalem  are  passed  over 
in  Matthew.     The  fourth  Gospel  describes  these  events  in 


97 


detail,  in  which  He  is  manifested  as  the  only-begotten  of 
the   Father.     There  has  been  and  is  still  a  c^reat  deal  of 
wrestling,  so  to  speak,  with  these  events  as  they  are  re- 
corded in  the  different  Gospels,  to  arrange  them  in  a  perfect 
chronological  order,  or,  as  it  is  said,  to  harmonize  the  Gospel 
records.     The  infidels  of  all  ages  have  made  the  most  of  it 
to  prove  contradictions,  and  the  rationalistic  preachers  and 
professors    in    the   camp    of    Christendom    have    generally 
founded  their  accusations  of  numerous  contradictions  in  the 
New  Testament  upon  these  apparent  discrepancies,  which 
they  thirk  exist  in  the  different  statements  concerning  the 
public  ministry  of  our  Lord.      The  Holy  Spirit  could  have 
written  a  perfect  account  of  the  earthly  life  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  and  arrange  a  biography  of  Him  accounting 
for  every  detail,  but  He  has  not  done  this.     To  charge  the 
writers  of  the  Gospel  with  ignorance  of  certain   facts  is 
charging  the  Holy  Spirit  with  it.     In  each  Gospel  the  Holy 
Spirit  makes  prominent  the  events  which  are  calculated  to 
impress  the  specific  teachings  of  the  respective  Gospels,  and 
He  has  always  arranged  the  events  in  such  an  order  to  suit 
Himself.     Every  Gospel  is  therefore  to  be  studied  and  read 
separately  from  the  others.    They  are  in  their  contents  not 
the  mechanical  reporting  of  the  life  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
but  the  spiritual  unfolding  of  the  blessed  person  and  work 
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  as  King  of  the  Jews,  servant  in 
obedience,  Son  of  man  and  the  Only-Begotten  of  the  Father. 
In  Matthew  we  have  before  us  the  King  and  His  rejec- 
tion ;  therefore  in  the  matter  of  His  public  ministry  all  is 
brought  together  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  show  Him  as  King 


98 

and  to  bring  out  as  in  no  other  Gospel  that  He  is  rejected, 
of  men. 

We  divide  the  account  of  the  beginning  of  His  pubhc 
ministry,  as  given  in  the  fourth  chapter,  into  three  parts. 
The  first  from  the  12th  to  the  17th  verse.  Our  Lord  was  in 
Jerusalem.  The  report  reaches  Him  there  that  the  forerun- 
ner, John,  was  delivered  up,  cast  into  prison  and  his  minis- 
try is  ended.  This  foretold  His  rejection,  and  on  account 
of  the  imprisonment  of  John,  He  departed  into  Galilee.  Here 
we  see  Him  first  in  His  own  city,  in  Nazareth.  But  we 
have  here  only  the  bare  mention  that  He  was  in  Nazareth 
and  that  He  left  Nazareth  to  dwell  in  Capernaum  (verse 
12).  What  happened  in  Nazareth  we  have  recorded  in  the 
Gospel  of  Luke.  In  the  fourth  chapter  of  that  Gospel  we 
read  that  our  Lord,  after  the  temptations,  returned  in  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  into  Galilee.  The  whole  surrounding 
country  was  stirred  up  on  account  of  Him,  and  He  entered 
their  synagogues,  being  glorified  of  all.  In  the  synagogue 
of  Nazareth  the  scroll  of  Isaiah  was  handed  to  Him^  from 
which  He  read  the  opening  verse  of  the  Ixi  chapter,  stop- 
ping in  the  middle  of  a  sentence,  and  began  to  say  to  them, 
"To-day  this  scripture  is  fulfilled  in  your  ears."  And  there 
in  the  city  where  He  was  brought  up  they  said,  "Is  not  this 
the  son  of  Joseph?"*  But  the  starting  point  of  the  Gali- 
lean ministry  and  its  career  is  not  Nazareth,  but  the  place 
called  Capernaum,  that  is,  "village  of  comfort,"  and  there 


*rn  a  little  pamphlet.  "The  Messiah  and  His  People,"  we  have 
described  the  event  in  Nazareth  in  connection  with  the  chapter  from 
Isaiah. 


99 

He  did  some  of  His  mighty  works.  But  leavinc:  Nazareth 
and  dwelling-  in  Capernaum  was  done  by  Him  in  the  literal 
fulfillment  of  a  prophecy,  standing  in  a  very  significant 
part  of  Isaiah.  We  find  the  words  here  quoted  in  the  ninth 
chapter  of  Isaiah.  It  is  in  the  midst  of  prophecies  which 
are  all  ^lessianic  that  we  read  in  the  beginning  of  the  (jth 
chapter  that  the  great  light  (the  IMessiah)  was  to  be  seen 
in  the  Galilee  of  the  nations.  The  most  oppressed,  the  dark- 
est and  the  most  corrupt  province  was  to  receive  the  light 
first.  Here  we  see  this  word  fulfilled.  We  notice  a  two- 
fold description  of  Galilee,  namely,  as  the  land  of  Zebulon 
and  Nephtali  and  as  the  Galilee  of  the  nations.  Read  Gene- 
sis xlix:i3,  "Zebulon  shall  dwell  at  the  haven  of  the  sea.  and 
he  shall  be  for  an  haven  of  ships  and  his  border  shall  be 
upon  Zidon."  Jacob's  prophecy  outlines  the  history  of  the 
sons  of  Jacob,  that  is,  the  whole  nation,  and  Zebulon  signi- 
fies the  time  of  their  rejection,  when  they  become  merchant- 
men. Here  in  Matthew  we  see  Zebulon  dwelling  by  the  sea. 
So  that  we  have  the  fulfillment  of  two  prophecies  before  us 
— the  prophecy  in  the  forty-ninth  chapter  in  Genesis  and 
the  one  in  Isaiah.  The  same  is  true  of  Nephtali.  This 
means  struggler.  "Nephtali  is  a  hind  let  loose"  (Gen.  xlix : 
2t).  In  Jacob's  prophecy  Nephtali  stands  for  the  coming 
struggling  and  victorious  Jewish  remnant.  Here,  then,  in 
the  land  of  Zebulon  and  Nephtali  the  great  light  shines 
first.  Grace  comes  down  to  the  most  miserable,  the  strug- 
gling ones.  But  here  we  see  likewise  something  which  has 
a  connection  with  His  second  coming.  The  great  light  will 
shine  once  more.     The  glory  of  the  Lord  will  cover  the 


lOO 


heavens,  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  will  rise  with  healing 
in  His  wings,  and  when  this  great  event  comes,  the  light 
will  shine  indeed  upon  a  remnant  of  Israel  sitting  in  dark- 
ness and  the  shadow  of  death.  The  term  Galilee  of  the 
nations  has  another  significance.  The  province  was  called 
by  this  name,  because  the  most  ignorant  class  of  Jews  lived 
there  and  they  had  become  mixed  up  with  the  Gentiles,  who 
were  very  numerous  in  that  borderland.  The  aristocratic 
classes  of  Judea,  the  learned  in  the  law,  the  refined  and 
ecclesiastical  leaders,  yes,  all  the  different  sects  in  Jerusalem, 
despised  Galilee.  An  inhabitant  of  Galilee  was  looked  upon 
as  an  Am-H caret:;  (an  ignorant  countryman).  What  good 
thing  can  come  from  Nazareth? — But  here,  where  the  peo- 
ple had  sunk  the  lowest,  the  Lord  appears  first.  That  this 
is  again  an  indication  that  the  Gentiles,  the  outcasts  and 
despised,  were  to  come  first,  as  we  saw  in  the  second  chapter, 
need  hardly  be  mentioned. 

From  the  lips  of  the  King  Himself  comes  now  the  procla- 
mation, "Repent,  for  the  Kingdom  of  the  heavens  has  drawn 
nigh"  (verse  17).  He  announces  that  the  Kingdom  has 
drawn  nigh  in  that  He,  the  King,  is  standing  in  their  midst 
to  establish  that  Kingdom.  He  never  said  nor  taught  of  a 
Kingdom  within  them.  All  spiritualizing  on  these  lines 
of  a  Kingdom  within,  which  our  Lord  is  made  to  teach  here 
in  Matthew,  is  wrong.  It  is  the  Kingdom  John  had  an- 
nounced which  He  now  preaches.  He  prolongs  the  message 
of  the  forerunner  for  a  short  time  and  soon  His  lips  were 
closed,  too.  We  preach  not  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom. 
but  the  Glad  Tidings  of  Grace.     A  day  is  coming  when 


lOI 


heralds  will  announce  once  more  the  Kingdom  to  be  at  hand, 
and  when  it  will  come  in  the  person  of  the  Son  of  ]).Tan  com- 
ing from  heaven  with  angels  of  His  power  in  flaming  fire 
(2  Thess.  i). 

The  second  part  of  the  portion  here  before  us  extends 
from  verses  18-22.  It  describes  the  call  of  four  disciples, 
Peter  and  Andrew  and  the  two  sons  of  Zebedee,  James  and 
John.  They  were  not  from  the  class  of  wise  men,  learned 
in  the  written  and  oral  law,  but  they  were  fishers.  He  calls 
them  away  from  their  nets  to  be  fishers  of  men.  This  illus- 
trates what  the  Holy  Spirit  later  declared  through  the 
Apostle  of  the  Gentiles :  "For  consider  your  calling,  breth- 
ren, that  there  are  not  many  wise  according  to  flesh,  not 
many  powerful,  not  many  high-born.  But  God  has  chosen 
the  foolish  things  of  the  world,  that  He  may  put  to  shame 
the  strong  things,  so  that  no  flesh  should  boast  before  God" 
(i  Cor.  1:26).  To  be  a  fisher  of  men,  to  preach  the  Gospel, 
does  not  demand  a  classical  education,  nor  the  ordination 
parchments  of  man.  It  is  the  Lord  who  calls  to  service. 
It  is  not  the  first  acquaintance  these  four  men  had  with  the 
Lord.  They  knew  Him  before.  Here  it  is  the  definite  call 
which  comes  to  them  to  be  fishers  of  men.  If  we  want  to 
learn  how  these  men  came  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  we 
must  read  the  first  chapter  in  the  Gospel  of  John.  The 
events  there  transpired  before  the  Lord  departed  into  Galilee. 
We  see  in  the  first  of  John  that  the  forerunner  was  still 
witnessing;  he  was  not  yet  in  prison.  The  "Follow  Me" 
here  does  not  mean,  as  often  erroneously  put,  the  call  of  the 
Gospel.     Gospel  preaching  never  asks  to  follow  the  Lord, 


102 


but  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  the  "Follow 
Me"  for  service.  And  how  simple  and  refreshing  the  whole 
scene  is !  Their  obedience  is  prompt.  There  is  no  excuse 
and  no  delay,  for  the  King's  business  requires  haste.  They 
had  come  to  Him,  to  Whom  John  had  pointed  as  the  Lamb 
of  God,  who  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world,  and  trusted 
Him  for  salvation,  eternal  life,  and  now  they  put  themselves, 
their  time,  their  all  completely  into  His  hands.  The  first  call 
in  John  came  to  them,  as  the  call  from  Him  as  Saviour, 
and  here  it  is  the  call  of  Him  as  Lord,  and  they  were  to  be 
His  servants.  "And  they,  having  left  their  trawl  nets,  vn- 
mediatcly  followed  Him"  (verse  20).  How  many  questions 
might  have  been  asked  by  them?  "What  about  our 
nets?"  "What  about  our  support?"  "What  about  food 
and  raiment?"  "And  here  is  our  old  father.  Does  not  our 
law  say,  Honor  thy  father  and  thy  mother?  Is  it  right  to 
leave  our  father  to  toil  alone  by  the  sea?" — They  left  it  all 
immediately  and  trusted  Him  for  all.  And  so  the  true  ser- 
vant of  the  Lord  is  obedient  to  His  call  and  looks  to  Him, 
who  has  called  him  to  service  and  who  has  promised  ffom 
the  glory  through  His  Spirit  to  supply  all  need.  How  sad 
we  are  made  when  we  look  away  from  this  refreshing  pic- 
ture to  the  modern  evils  of  Christendom.  Surely  a  salaried 
Gospel  ministry  is  unscriptural.  And  then  to  think  of  all  the 
evil,  dishonor  to  the  Lord  and  reproach  upon  His  Name 
which  is  sometimes  associated  with  it. 

In  the  third  section  we  see  our  Lord  making  the  whole 
round  of  Galilee,  teaching  in  their  synagogues,  preaching 
the  glad  tidings  of  the  Kingdom  and  healing  every  disease 


I03 


and  every  bodily  weakness  among  the  people.  The  work 
done  was  threefold — teaching,  which  was  exclusively  done 
in  their  synagogues,  and  that  was  exjx^unding  the  scriptures, 
the  law  and  the  prophets.  The  meeting  in  the  synagogue 
in  Xazareth  referred  to  above  was  repeated  in  many  otlier 
synagogues.  Preaching  the  glad  tidings  of  the  KingdcMu, 
which  may  have  been  done  mostly  to  the  large  crowds  of 
people  who  flocked  around  Him  in  public  places,  in  the 
streets  and  at  the  side  of  the  mountains.  Closely  connected 
with  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Kin;:;(lom  was  the 
healing  of  every  disease  not  spiritual,  but  every  bodily  dis- 
ease and  weakness.  The  healing  of  disease  is  always  con- 
nected with  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom. 
"Che  healings  were  signs  that  the  King  is  the  Jehovah  and  that 
the  Kingdom  had  drawn  nigh.  These  signs  of  healing 
every  disease  are  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come.  Later  in 
our  exegesis  of  the  eighth  chapter  we  hope  to  consider  the 
question  of  healing  more  fully  in  all  its  far-reaching  im- 
portance. Here  we  point  out  simply  the  fact,  that  it  is  not 
the  Gospel  of  Grace  which  is  preached,  but  that  of  the 
Kingdom.  The  Gospel  of  Grace  needs  no  sign  outwardly 
by  healing  of  disease  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  God-given. 
Nowhere  in  the  Epistles  have  we  the  promise  that  Gosjiel 
preaching  is  to  be  connected  with  healing  of  every 
bodily  weakness  and  disease.  However,  it  is  very  significant 
that  the  question  of  healing  of  every  disease  by  supernatural 
power  is  made  so  prominent  in  our  days.  It  is  but  an  indi- 
cation of  the  nearness  of  the  coming  dispensation,  when 
the  earth  sliall  be  delivered  with  its  omnnin-jf  creation. 


I04 


His  fame  then  went  forth  into  the  whole  of  Syria.  And 
now  they  flock  to  Him.  What  a  multitude  it  must  have 
been !  Satan  had  his  mighty  power  resting  upon  that  land. 
He  knew  that  Christ  had  come  to  make  an  end  of  his  power, 
hence  he  troubled  his  poor  slaves  with  terrible  diseases  and 
by  his  demons  took  possession  of  his  victims.  There  were 
various  pains  and  diseases,  those  possessed  by  demons,  and 
lunatics,  and  paralytics;  and  He  healed  them.  Once  more 
the  prince  of  this  world  will  attempt  to  have  the  world  in 
his  control.  An  evil  day  is  coming  for  this  world.  Even 
now  there  is  an  increase  of  crimes  and  forms  of  insanity 
which  indicate  demoniacal  possession.  China  and  other 
countries  are  full  of  it.  In  our  own  land  there  are  unques- 
tionably those  who  have  familiar  spirits,  known  under  the 
name  of  spiritualistic  mediums.  But  He  will  come  again. 
He  comes  when  Satan  with  his  demons  are  in  the  earth, 
and  in  his  great  but  short  wrath,  torments  the  inhabiters  of 
the  earth  during  the  tribulation.  Christ's  coming  means 
an  end  of  that  awful  enemy.  Then  the  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness will  bring  healing,  and  what  we  see  at  the  end  of  the 
fourth  of  Matthew  is  but  a  faint  outline  of  what  will  be 
when  the  Kingdom  will  have  come  in  the  person  of  the 
returning  King,   May  that  day  be  hastened ! 


105 


CHAPTER  V. 

In  the  closing  of  the  last  chapter  we  saw  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  surrounded  by  a  great  niuhitude  of  people,  which  fol- 
lowed Him  and  who  were  attracted  by  the  King's  presence, 
before  whom  the  various  diseases  had  to  flee.  H  Ave  turn 
to  the  eighth  chapter  we  find  the  continuation  of  these  scenes 
we  had  in  the  last  half  of  the  fourth  chai)ter.  Between  these 
two  chapters  are  three  very  important  ones,  which  are 
as  such  found  only  in  this  Gospel.  The  contents  of  the 
fifth,  sixth  and  seventh  chapters  are  in  the  form  of  a  con- 
tinued discourse  of  our  Lord,  commonly  called  "the  ser- 
mon on  the  mount,"  an  expression  which  the  reader  knows 
is  nowhere  found  in  the  Gospels.  If  we  look  through 
Mark,  Luke  and  John  we  do  not  find  any  such  report  there 
of  a  lengthy  discourse ;  indeed,  except  a  number  of  frag- 
ments in  the  Gospel  of  Luke,  we  find  nothing  whatever  in 
them  about  these  sayings.  When  we  turn  to  the  Gospel  of 
Luke,  we  find  that  the  portions  of  this  discourse  reported 
there  are  in  an  entirely  different  setting.  Wc  point  to  that 
which  is  generally  called  "the  Lord's  prayer."  In  Luke  we 
read  (chapter  xi)  that  as  He  was  praying  in  a  certain  place, 
when  He  ceased,  one  of  His  disciples  said  unto  Him,  Lord, 
teach  us  to  pray,  even  as  John  also  taught  his  disciples. 
And  he  said  unto  them,  When  ye  pray,  say.  Our  Father, 
etc.    Now  in  Matthew  there  is  no  such  incident,  but  the  dis- 


io6 


ciples  hear  it  in  a  continual  flow  of  speech.  We  also  call 
attention  to  the  fact  that  the  call  of  Matthew  is  reported  in 
the  ninth  chapter,  the  call  of  the  twelve  disciples  in  the  tenth, 
here  his  discourse  is  placed  before  these  historical  events. 
The  Holy  Spirit,  to  carry  through  the  wonderful  scope  of 
the  first  Gospel,  has  put  the  words  of  our  Lord  together 
into  one  continued  address  to  His  disciples,  in  the  very 
midst  of  the  most  positive  evidences  that  the  King  has 
come  and  Jehovah  is  in  the  midst  of  His  people.  When  the 
King  is  manifest  He  utters  His  proclamation.  Such  is 
the  discourse  before  us  here  in  Matthew,  the  proclamation 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  King.  And  if  the  King  pro- 
claims, makes  known  His  proclamation,  it  must  be  concern- 
ing the  Kingdom  which  He  came  to  bring,  preached  and 
offered  to  the  people.  Let  this,  then,  be  the  starting-point 
of  our  analysis  of  this  discourse.  The  so-called  sermon  on 
the  mount  is  a  proclamation  concerning  the  Kingdom,  the 
magna  charta  of  the  Kingdom  of  heavens. 

In  the  next  place  let  us  consider  three  false  applications 
which  are  being  made  of  the  discourse  of  our  Lord  before 
us. 

I.  The  application  to  the  unsaved,  unbelieving  mass  of 
Christendom  and  others,  as  if  in  the  sermon  on  the  mount 
the  way  to  righteousness  is  revealed  and  human  nature's  de- 
velopment (as  they  say)  were  here  shown,  for  which  every 
man  should  strive.  This,  of  course,  is  the  grossest  error 
possible.  The  discourse  speaks  of  the  characteristics  of  per- 
sons who  arc  saved,  who  Iiaz'c  redemption.  There  is  no- 
where found  in  it  the  word  redemption,  nor  is  salvation  men- 


107 


tioned  and  pointed  out ;  in  other  words,  the  way  a  sinner  is 
saved  is  not  revealed  here,  but,  as  the  greater  part  of  the 
discourse  was  addressed  exclusively  to  disciples,  the  Lord 
is  speaking  about  such  who  are  saved  and  not  sinners.  Yet 
how  little  this  is  understood. 

In  our  days  more  than  ever  before  we  notice  an  astonish- 
ing misuse  of  the  sermon  on  the  mount.  The  saddest  of 
all  is  that  many  preachers  of  various  evangelical  denomina- 
tions fall  back  upon  it  as  the  most  important  document  of 
Christendom ;  for  them  it  seems  to  become  more  and  more 
the  Gospel,  and  the  consequences  are  that  we  hear  in  our 
times  more  ethical  preaching,  more  about  becoming  better, 
doing  good,  improving  your  better  self,  etc.,  than  ever  be- 
fore. It  would  require  much  time  and  a  great  deal  of  space 
to  show  up  all  the  errors  which  are  springing  from  this  ap- 
plication. It  is  the  Gospel  of  works  and  of  evolution.  And 
as  this  is  done  there  is  less  preaching  of  the  utter  corruption 
of  man,  his  lost  condition  and  utter  helplessness  to  be  right- 
eous (that  which  the  discourse  makes  very  clear),  and 
the  salvation  of  God  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  ab- 
solute necessity  of  being  born  again,  the  reception  of  eternal 
life,  the  new  nature.  As  the  teachings  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Romans  have  been  and  are  being  abandoned  in  Christen- 
dom, the  false  application  of  the  discourse  here  in 
Matthew  has  been  taken  up.  There  is  therefore  a  con- 
tinual increase  of  teaching  about  lifting  man  out  of 
his  lost  place  into  a  better  sphere  by  means  of  ethical 
teachings  taken  from  the  sermon  on  the  mount.  This 
is    done    also    under    the    garb    of   a    social    Christianity, 


io8 


union  of  worshippers  (?),  the  Fatherhood  of  God  and 
the  brotherhood  of  man.  Not  long  ago  we  were  told 
of  a  reformed  rabbi  who  read  in  his  synagogue  on  Saturday 
portions  of  the  sermon  on  the  mount  and  preached  on  it  to 
his  hearers.  This  was  hailed  as  a  favorable  sign  of  the 
progress  made  toward  the  lifting  up  of  humanity.  Surely,  if 
evangelical  preachers  (in  creed  at  least)  continue  to  progress 
in  this  awful  direction  by  substituting  ethical  teachings  for 
salvation  by  the  precious  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  declare,  as  not  a  few  have  done,  "the  sermon  on 
the  mount  is  a  large  enough  Bible  for  us,"  a  general  apostasy 
from  the  faith  will  soon  be  reached.  There  is  a  lifting  up  of 
the  sinner  from  his  miserable  place  into  sonship  and  making 
him  the  heir  of  God,  but  that  is  never  by  the  sermon  on  the 
mount,  by  striving  to  obtain  the  heavenly  righteousness  re- 
vealed here. 

2.  There  are  others  who  give  the  discourse  in  Matthew 
v-vii  an  exclusively  Christian  application. 

This  is  the  second  false  application.  We  cannot  put  into 
the  discourse  exclusively  church  teachings  and  say  that  all 
found  here  is  to  be  applied  to  the  church,  and  that  it  is  the 
guide  for  the  church,  as  some  have  said.  If  the  Lord  had 
had  the  church  in  her  heavenly  calling  and  character 
in  mind,  the  place  given  to  the  discourse  would  be  all 
wrong.  The  Lord  mentions  the  church  the  first  time  in  the 
sixteenth  chapter,  and  if  following  the  sixteenth  chapter  He 
had  spoken  these  words  we  might  say  that  we  should  find  in 
it  the  church.  He  said  something  to  His  disciples  after  He 
had  declared  that  He  would  build  His  church,  which  applies 


109 


to  the  church.  A  good  deal  in  the  sermon  on  the  mount 
appears  mostly  in  connection  with  the  earth.  The  meek  are 
to  inherit  the  earth.  The  church,  however,  is  heavenly. 
Not  here,  but  in  the  Epistles,  written  after  the  death,  resur- 
rection and  ascension  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  after  the 
Holy  Spirit  had  come  down  from  heaven,  do  we  find  all 
about  the  church.  The  magna  charta  of  the  church  is  in  the 
Epistles  of  Paul,  to  whom  the  full  revelation  of  the  church 
was  given.  Out  of  this  misconception  has  sprung  a  good 
(leal  of  error.  People  attempt  to  make  the  sermon  on  the 
mount  the  standard  of  their  lives;  they  apply  it  to  them- 
selves in  the  least  details  and  get  into  legal  bondage.  The 
flesh  given  so  much  to  legality  likes  this  only  too  well. 
Here  the  greatest  mischief  comes  in,  that  believers  do  not 
see  clearly  what  grace  has  done,  and  that  their  heavenly 
walk  does  not  spring  from  a  contemplation  of  a  series  of 
descriptions  of  the  character  and  actions  of  regenerated  per- 
sons, but  by  the  fact  that  we  look  upon  ourselves  as  lifted  in- 
to the  highest  heaven  once  and  for  all  in  the  person  of  our 
perfect  High  Priest.  A  heavenly  walk  is  the  outcome  of  a 
heavenly  contemplation.  But  this  not  being  seen,  professing 
Christendom,  amongst  it  many  true  believers,  stumble  around 
in  the  sermon  on  the  mount.  In  this  way  it  has  come  about 
that  the  "Our  Pathcr"  (the  name  next  to  "Lord's  prayer" 
given  to  the  prayer,  our  Lord  taught  His  disciples)  has  be- 
come the  ritualisic  prayer  of  Christendom,  repeated  at  numer- 
ous occasions. 

3.  The  last  false  interpretation  is  that  one,  which  makes 
the  sermon  on  the  mount  exclusively  Jewish. 


no 

There  are  not  a  few  who  refuse  to  consider  the  three  chap- 
ters in  Matthew  as  having  any  reference  to  Christian  be- 
lievers at  all  and  as  if  there  is  no  application  to  be  made  in 
this  direction  and  the  believer  could  afford  to  pass  them  by 
entirely  and  not  be  concerned  about  it.  This  is  the  other  ex- 
treme and  equally  wrong. 

In  our  exegesis  of  the  three  chapters,  (which  of  necessity 
we  have  to  condense  considerably)  we  shall  always  in  every 
part  look  upon  the  sermon  on  the  mount  as  the  proclamation 
of  the  King  concerning  the  Kingdom.  That  Kingdom  is 
not  the  church,  nor  is  the  state  of  the  earth  in  righteous- 
ness, governed  and  possessed  by  the  meek,  brought  about 
by  the  agency  of  the  church.  It  is  the  millennial  earth  and 
the  Kingdom  to  come,  in  which  Jerusalem  will  be  the  city 
of  a  great  King.  We  read  in  the  Old  Testament  that 
when  the  Kingdom  comes,  for  which  these  Jewish  dis- 
ciples of  our  Lord  were  taught  to  pray,  the  law 
will  go  forth  out  of  Zion  and  the  Word  of  the  Lord 
from  Jerusalem.  While  we  have  in  the  Old  Testament  the 
outward  manifestations  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  heavens  as 
it  will  be  set  up  in  the  earth  in  a  future  day,  we  have  here 
the  inner  manifestation,  the  principles  of  it.  Yet  this  never 
excludes  application  to  us  who  are  His  heavenly  people, 
members  of  His  body,  who  will  share  the  heavenly  throne 
in  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  with  Him.  Israel's  calling  is 
earthly;  theirs  is  an  earthly  kingdom,  ours  is  altogether 
heavenly.  "In  the  sermon  on  the  mount  we  have,  then,  the 
principles  of  the  Kingdom  of  heaven,  with  very  plain  refer- 
ences to  the  millennial  earth  *  *  *  Yet  let  it  not  be  thought 


Ill 


that  this  takes  from  us  the  application  to  ourselves  which 
Christians  seek  in  it.  The  fuller  revelation  only  completes 
the  partial  one ;  the  higher  blessing  but  transcends  the  lower. 
Through  all  dispensations  God  is  the  same  God,  and  we  are 
'blessed  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  in 
Christ  Jesus.'  Of  many  things  we  can  only  argue,  indeed  a 
more  perfect  (or  at  least  a  fuller  application)  to  ourselves 
than  to  them.  To  take  from  Israel  what  is  hers  is  only  to 
diminish  her  and  not  enrich  ourselves.  Nay,  what  has  been 
called  in  this  way  the  spiritualizing  of  the  promises  has  led 
most  surely  and  emphatically  to  the  carnalizing  of  the 
church."* 

The  Kingdom  has,  then,  a  heavenly  and  an  earthly  side. 
Both  are  seen  in  the  discourse,  but  the  earthly  is  predomi- 
nant. In  itself  the  discourse  is  most  perfect.  The  seven- 
fold division  is  well  known.  We  mention  them  here,  and 
will  take  up  each  for  a  very  brief  consideration. 

1.  The  characteristics  of  the  Heirs  of  the  Kingdom  (chap- 
ter V.  1-16). 

2.  The  Law  goes  forth  from  Zion.  It  is  confirmed  and 
expounded  by  the  King  (verses  17-48). 

3.  The  better  righteousness  (chapter  vi:i-i8). 

4.  Kept  in  the  world.  Single-eyed,  trusting  in  God 
(verses  19-34). 

5.  The  judgment  of  righteousness  (chapter  vii:i-i4). 

6.  Warning  against  false  prophets  (verses  15-20). 

7.  Warning  against  false  professors  (21-29). 


*F.  W.  Grant  on  Matthew,  page  70. 


112 


Most  of  these  sections  may  again  be  divided  into  seven 
parts.  The  number  seven  is  the  perfect  number,  and  as  He 
is  the  divine  King,  the  perfect  King,  all  that  proceeds  out 
of  His  mouth  is  perfection.  We  have  seven  expansions  of 
the  law,  seven  parts  of  the  better  righteousness,  and  seven 
petitions  in  the  prayer  our  Lord  taught  His  disciples. 

The  first  section  in  the  fifth  chapter  from  the  first  verse 
to  the  sixteenth  is  before  us.  Seeing  the  crowds  He  went  up 
into  the  mountain,  and  having  sat  down,  His  disciples  came 
to  Him ;  having  opened  His  mouth  He  taught  them.  Moses 
the  mediator  of  the  old  covenant  went  up  into  the  mountain 
where  he  received  the  law ;  but  here  is  a  greater  one  than 
Moses,  the  Mediator  of  a  better  covenant  and  the  King  at 
the  same  time.  He  begins  with  blessings,  the  blessings  of 
grace. 

The  blessings  in  themselves  are  most  wonderful  in  their 
scope  and  inexhaustible  in  their  meaning.  We  can  but  call 
the  attention  to  a  few  thoughts  in  connection  with  them. 

We  notice  seven  beatitudes  which  show  forth  the  char- 
acter of  those  who  are  the  heirs  of  the  kingdom.  These  are : 

Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of 
the  heavens. 

Blessed  they  that  mourn,  for  they  shall  be  comforted. 

Blessed  the  meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth. 

Blessed  they  who  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness, 
for  they  shall  be  filled. 

Blessed  the  merciful,  for  they  shall  find  mercy. 

Blessed  the  pure  in  heart  for  they  shall  see  God. 


"3 

Blessed  the  peacemakers,  for  they  shall  be  called  the  sons 
of  God.' 

These  seven  blessings  must  be  divided  into  two  parts.     The 
division  is  into  four  and  three.    Four  is  the  earthly  number 
and  three  the  heavenly.    In  the  first  four  we  see  the  char- 
acteristics of  the  heirs  of  the  kingdom  in  their  position  in 
the  earth,  waiting  for  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  and  the 
inheritance  of  the  earth,  and  in  the  last  three  the  inner  char- 
acteristics as  the  heirs  of  the  kingdom  have  them  by  having 
become  the  partakers  of  the  divine  nature.     Let  us  remind 
ourselves  once  more  that  the  Lord  does  not  speak  to  wn- 
saz'cd  persons,  but  to  His  disciples.    The  blessings  do  not 
?;peak  of  what  a  person  should  be,  or  striz'e  to  be,  but  what 
//.'t\v  ore.    All  here  is  contrary  to  the  natural  man,  everything 
is  strange  to  his  disposition.   It  is  only  the  Grace  of  God  in 
Christ  Jesus  which  can  produce  this.     The  gift  of  God  is 
eternal  life  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     He  Himself  is  the 
true  God  and  the  eternal  life,  which  has  been  manifested 
and  which  is  communicated  to  every  one  who  believes  and 
thus  hath  the  Son.     Believing  in  Him  we  receive  life  and 
are  partakers  of  the  divine  nature.    Here  we  have  the  des- 
cription of  one  who  is  in  possession  of  this  new  nature  and 
as  it  manifests  itself.     (The  first  Epistle  of  John   shows 
the  same  characteristics ) .     ( )nc  has   said  very  pointedly : 
"At  the  beginning  of  His  career,  Christ  draws  the  picture 
of  the  person  who  is  to  be  the  result  of  His  work.    This  is 
the  ideal  man  whom  the  Saviour  is  to  make  actual  by  sav- 
ing him  from  sin."*   How  great  then  the  blindness  of  those 


*Wcston  on  Matthew. 


114 


teachers  in  Christendom  who  make  the  sermon  on  the  mount, 
the  beatitudes,  the  Gospel,  and  who  attempt  to  reform  the 
world  by  it. 

In  the  first  place  let  us  consider  that  in  the  seven  blessings 
we  have  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself.  He  is  the  fullest 
expression  of  all.  He  is  the  highest  illustration  of  these 
characteristics.  It  is  a  most  blessed  study  to  see  how  the 
Word  speaks  of  Him  as  the  one  who  was  poor  and  needy, 
who  became  poor  for  our  sake.  He  took  that  place  for  us. 
He  could  say,  "I  am  poor  and  sorrowful"  (Ps.  lxix:29). 
and,  "Bow  down  thine  ear,  O  Jehovah,  for  I  am  poor  and 
needy"  (Ps.  lxxxvi:i),  and  again,  "For  I  am  poor  and 
needy,  and  my  heart  is  wounded  within  me"  (Ps.  cix:22). 
And  He  who  humbled  Himself  receives  the  kingdom.  He 
was  while  on  earth  the  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with 
griefs.  He  Himself  took  our  infirmities  and  bare  our  dis- 
eases. Jesus  wept  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus  and  over  Jerusa- 
lem, and  in  that  night  of  deepest  gloom  He  ofTered  both  sup- 
plications and  entreaties  to  Him  who  was  able  to  save  Him 
out  of  death  with  strong  crying  and  tears  (Heb.  v:/).  He 
was  the  great  mourner  and  He  was  comforted ;  heard  be- 
cause of  His  piety  and  raised  from  the  dead.  We  know 
Him  as  the  One  who  was  meek  and  lowly  in  heart.  He  did 
not  cry,  nor  lift  up,  nor  cause  His  voice  to  be  heard  in  the 
street  (Isaiah  xli  :2).  And  now  the  earth  is  surely  the  Lord's 
and  the  fulness  thereof ;  the  world  and  they  that  dwell  there- 
in (Ps.  xxiv).  Thou  madest  Him  to  have  dominion  over  the 
works  of  thy  hands ;  thou  hast  put  all  things  under  His  feet 
(Ps.  viii.).     As  the  hungering  and  thirsting  One,  He  was 


115 

here,  too,  hating  iniquity  and  loving  righteousness,  His  meat 
and  drink  to  do  the  will  of  Him  who  sent  Him.  And  sure- 
ly He  sees  and  shall  see  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  shall  be 
satisfied.  Mercy  and  Purity  and  Peace  were  embodied  in 
Him. 

Every  one  then  who  is  born  of  God  has  by  grace  these 
characteristics.  Poor  in  spirit  is  the  very  first  characteristic. 
The  unsaved  sinner  knows  nothing  of  it.  It  is  altogether 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  means  to  take  the  right 
place  before  God,  which  is  in  the  dust  in  absolute  helpless- 
ness. It  is  the  continued  attitude  of  a  saved  person  in  the 
earth,  poverty  in  spirit  and  entire  dependence  upon  the 
Lord.  The  mourning  which  comes  next  should  not  be  made 
to  mean  grieving  on  account  of  personal  sin.  It  is  rather 
over  the  results  of  sin,  the  present  conditions  of  tbings  in 
the  earth.  Thus  our  Lord  grieved  and  mourned.  The  com- 
fort is  that  coming  re^'emption  from  the  presence  of  sin  and 
entrance  into  tV.at  heavenly  inheritance  which  belongs  to  us 
in  Christ  Jesus.  P.ut  having  taken  the  true  place  before  God, 
and  knowing  tlic  evil  and  mourning  on  account  of  it.  what 
is  to  be  our  path  on  the  earth  ?  Blessed  are  the  meek  !  Blessed 
are  they  that  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness!  Tbis 
is  the  way  of  the  heirs  of  the  kingdom,  waiting  for  the  mani- 
festation of  it. 

When  we  come  to  the  next  three  blessings,  we  find  the 
divine  origin  of  the  cbildren  of  God  brougbt  out.  It  would 
be  very  b.elpful  to  compare  these  last  three  beatitudes  with 
the  first  Epistle  of  John.  God  is  righteous,  God  is  light  and 
God  is  love.   Everyone  who  is  born  of  God  is  righteous,  he 


ii6 


is  in  the  light  and  he  loves.  The  love  of  God  which  comes 
down  from  heaven  is  perfected  in  Him.  Merciful  would 
stand  for  Righteousness,  purity  in  heart  for  Light  and  peace- 
maker for  Love.  These  are  then  called  the  sons  of  God  and 
shall  see  God. 

But  while  all  this  is  a  true  application  or  rather  a  faint 
outline  of  that  which  is  so  richly  told  out  here,  we  must  not 
forget  that  there  is  also  a  direct  application  to  the  believing 
remnant  of  Israel.  This  remnant  of  Israel  will  pass  through 
the  great  tribulation  through  which  the  Church  (which  of 
course  can  never  be  put  into  the  first  part  of  Matthew)  will 
never  pass.  They  will  then  be  waiting  in  the  midst  of  great 
tribulations,  persecutions  and  sufferings  for  the  kingdom  to 
come.  When  the  kingdom  at  last  comes,  in  the  return  of  the 
king,  the  Son  of  man,  they  will  enter  in.  Let  us  look  at  the 
first  four  beatitudes  from  this  standpoint.  This  people  will 
be  poor  in  spirit.  The  remnant  is  described  in  Zephaniah  iii., 
12,  "I  will  leave  in  the  midst  of  thee  an  afflicted  and  poor 
people,  and  they  shall  trust  in  the  name  of  Jehovah.  The 
remnant  of  Israel  shall  not  do  iniquity,  nor  speak  lies,  neither 
shall  a  deceitful  tongue  be  found  in  their  mouth,  for  they 
shall  feed  and  lie  down  and  none  shall  make  them  afraid." 
In  Isaiah  Ixvi  :2 :  "To  this  man  will  I  look,  even  to  him  that 
is  poor  and  of  a  contrite  spirit  and  that  trembleth  at  my 
Word."  This  elect  remnant  will  mourn  in  the  earth  in  the 
evil  day.  Here  is  a  prophetic  description  of  the  mourning 
of  this  remnant :  "Woe  is  me !  for  I  am  as  when  they  have 
gathered  the  summer  fruits,  as  the  grape  gleanings  of  the 
vintage ;  there  is  no  cluster  to  eat ;  my  soul  desireth  the  first 


U7 

ripe  fig.  The  godly  man  is  perished  out  of  the  earth  and 
there  is  none  upright  among  men ;  they  all  lie  in  wait  for 
blood,  they  hunt  every  man  his  brother  with  a  net.  Their 
hands  are  upon  that  which  is  evil  to  do  it  diligently.  *  *  * 
The  son  dish.onorcth  the  father,  the  daughter  riseth  up 
against  her  mother,  the  daughter-in-law  against  her  mother- 
in-law,  a  man's  enemies  are  the  men  of  his  own  house.  (Com- 
pare with  Matthew  xxiv:io  and  x:2i-23).  But  as  for  me, 
I  will  look  unto  the  Lord ;  I  will  wait  for  the  God  of  my 
salvation;  my  God  will  hear  me"  (Micah  vii:!-/).  They 
shall  then  be  comforted.  Their  comfort,  however,  will  not 
be  in  the  heavenlies,  but  they  shall  be  comforted  in  Jeru- 
salem, for  He  shall  come  and  deliver  them  from  all  their  en- 
emies and  restore  the  kingdom  to  Israel.  They  will  be  as 
the  meek  of  the  earth  and  inherit  the  earth  when  the  king 
comes.  Inheriting  the  earth  is  Israel's  promise ;  ours  is  to 
rule  and  reign  with  Him  in  the  heavenlies  over  the  earth. 
The  thirty-seventh  Psalm  forms  a  perfect  commentary  to 
this  beatitude  "Blessed  are  the  meek."  There  we  find  what 
meekness  includes,  both  in  ourselves  as  believers  and  the  fu- 
ture believing  remnant.  "Fret  not  thyself" — "Neither  be 
thou  envious" — "Trust  in  the  Lord" — "Delight  thyself  in 
the  Lord" — "Commit  thy  way  unto  the  Lord" — "Rest  in  the 
Lord."  The  meek  waiting  for  the  Lord  are  thus  de- 
scribed. But  it  is  of  the  believing  remnant  we  read 
in  that  Psalm.  Some  dav  it  shall  be  as  it  is  written  there: 
"Evildoers  shall  be  cut  off.  But  those  that  wait  upon  the 
Lord  they  shall  inherit  the  land.  For  yet  a  little  while  and  the 
wicked  shall  not  be,  but  the  meek  shall  inherit  the  land,  and 


ii8 


shall  delight  themselves  in  the  abundance  of  peace"  (Psalm 
xxxvii:9-ii).  They  will  also  be  hungering  and  thirsting 
for  righteousness  and  shall  be  filled  in  the  day  of  His  mani- 
festation. 

The  seven  beatitudes  are  followed  by  two  others  which 
describe  the  heirs  of  the  kingdom  as  sufferers  and  perse- 
cuted in  the  earth.  Therefore,  because  we  are  children  of 
God,  the  world  knoweth  us  not,  for  it  knew  Him  not.  Do 
not  wonder,  brethren,  if  the  world  hate  you.  Our  Lord  here, 
too,  is  the  great  exemplar.  "For  to  this  have  ye  been  called, 
for  Christ  also  has  suffered  for  you,  leaving  you  a  model 
that  you  should  follow  His  steps :  who  did  no  sin,  neither 
was  guile  found  in  His  mouth ;  who,  when  reviled,  reviled 
not  again;  when  suffering  threatened  not"  (i  Pet.  ii:2i). 
The  first  blessing  is  for  the  persecuted  for  righteousness' 
sake,  but  in  the  second  we  read,  "Blessed  are  ye  when  they 
reproach  and  persecute  you,  and  say  every  wicked  thing 
against  you,  lying,  for  my  sake.  Rejoice  and  exult,  for  your 
reward  is  great  in  the  heavens,  for  thus  have  they  persecuted 
the  prophets  who  were  before  you."  This  second  beatitude 
stands  in  connection  with  the  last  three  blessings.  In  the 
first  the  Lord  says  "They"  and  that  "theirs  is  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,"  but  in  the  second  He  says,  "Ye."  In  the  first  it 
is  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  in  the  second  it  is  the  great  re- 
ward in  heaven.  The  latter  is  more  than  the  earthly  glory  of 
that  coming  kingdom.  This  finds  unquestionably  its  fulfill- 
ment during  that  time  of  Jacob's  trouble.  There  will  be 
the  suffering  for  righteousness'  sake  during  the  tribu- 
lation as  never  before  and  many  will  be  slain  of  these 


119 

faithful  Jewish  witnesses  for  His  sake.  The  latter  will  re- 
ceive great  reward  (read  Revel.  xx:4).  It  will  be  the  com- 
fort for  His  earthly  people  in  the  coming  day  of  trouble.  The 
suffering  of  the  church,  outside  of  the  camp  bearing  His 
reproach  is  revealed  in  the  Epistles, 

From  the  I3th-i6th  verse  we  hear  what  the  heirs  of  the 
kingdom  are  in  the  eartli.  "Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth  ;  but 
if  the  salt  has  become  insipid,  wherewith  shall  it  be  salted? 
Tt  is  no  longer  fit  for  anything  but  to  be  cast  out  and  to  be 
trodden  under  foot  by  men." 

This  is  in  reference  to  the  first  beatitudes.  Salt  preserves 
from  corruption.  Thus  is  the  heir  of  the  kingdom  to  be  in 
the  midst  of  all  that  which  is  corruptiou.  r)Ut  what  when 
the  salt  becomes  insipid?  Tt  becomes  absolutely  worthless 
and  is  trodden  under  foot.  It  was  so  with  Jerusalem,  it  has 
become  worthless ;  it  has  been  trodden  down  by  the  Gentiles 
and  Christendom  will  be  thit.  nav  is,  in  the  age  of  Laodicca. 
Ye  are  the  Light  of  the  world.  This  is  in  reference  to  the 
last  three  beatitudes.  This  is  followed  by  the  exhortation : 
"Let  your  light  thus  shine  before  men  so  that  they  may  see 
your  upright  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  who  is  in  the 
heavens."  But  what  light  is  it  which  is  to  shine?  Surely  thii^ 
can  mean  only  ihe  reflection  of  Him  wdio  is  the  Light.  "He 
does  not  say  let  your  good  works  shine,  but  let  your  /?V/)f 
shine;  that  is,  let  Christ  shine  in  your  life;  not  that  yc  may 
see  your  good  works,  but  that  men  see  them;  not  to  your 
glory,  but  to  the  glor\'  of  your  Father." 

Because  it  is  the  God  who  spoke  that  out  of  darknes.s 
light  should  shine  who  has  shone  in  our  hearts,  for  the  shin-. 


t^d 


ing  forth  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face 
of  Jesus  Chj-ist  (2  Cor.  iv:6).  Salt  and  Light,  to  pre- 
serve and  to  shine — this  is  then  our  responsibility  and  our 
testimony  we  have.  But  the  salt,  the  preserving,  hindering 
power  will  at  last  be  taken  away  from  the  earth,  and  the 
light'  will  shine  no  longer.  What  will  be  left,  but  unspeak- 
able corruption  and  the  gross  darkness  which  will  cover  the 
earth  ? 

The  second  section  of  the  great  proclamation  of  the  King 
contains  the  confirmation  of  the  law  and  its  expansion.  We 
can  but  give  a  very  brief  outline  and  exposition  and  will  be 
obliged  to  guard  against  digressions,  which  might  be  made 
at  almost  every  verse. 

We  now  see  our  Lord  speaking  as  the  one  who  is  greater 
than  Moses  (Hebrews  iii:i2).  Sitting  upon  the  mount, 
He  speaks  with  greater  authority  than  Moses  or  any  one  be- 
fore Him,  because  He  has  greater  authority.  He  who  speaks 
concerning  the  law  and  the  prophets,  confirming  and  ex- 
panding, is  the  one  who  gave  it  to  Moses,  whose  fingers 
wrote  upon  the  tables  of  stone,  whose  Spirit  revealed  the 
visions  to  the  prophets  and  testified  in  them  and  through 
them  beforehand,  concerning  the  sufifering  and  the  glory 
that  should  follow.  The  question  which  comes  to  the  Jew- 
ish mind  after  reading  the  opening  of  the  discourse,  the  de- 
scription of  the  characteristics  of  the  heirs  of  the  kingdom 
is  the  question  concerning  the  law  and  the  prophets ;  that 
is,  the  whole  Old  Testament.  Did  He  then  come  to  set 
them  aside?  Did  He  come  to  make  the  law  and  the  proph- 
ets void  ?  He  states  at  once  that  He  came  not  to  make  void 


tit 


the  law  and  the  prophets,  but  to  fulfill,  and  adds,  "For  verily 
I  say  unto  you  until  the  heaven  and  earth  pass  away,  one 
iota  or  one  tittle  shall  in  nowise  pass  from  the  law  until  all 
come  to  pass." 

A  good  deal  of  wTong  teaching  has  been  taken  from  these 
words ;  the  most  erroneous  is  the  one  which  puts  a  Christian 
believer  still  under  the  law  and  teaches  from  this  passage 
that  inasmuch  as  Christ  came  not  to  make  void  the  law  so, 
every  believer  is  obliged  to  fulfill  the  law.  This  is  a  favored 
argimient  with  Seventh  Day  people  and  others.  It  springs 
from  forgetting  the  fact  that  here  we  have  no  teaching  con- 
cerning the  Church  or  the  individual  believer  as  it  was  made 
known  subsequently  in  the  Epistles.  The  Epistles  make 
very  clear  the  relation  to  the  law  which  the  true  believer  sus- 
tains, who  has  eternal  life  and  is  in  Christ.  ''So  that,  my 
brethem,  we  also  have  been  made  dead  to  the  law  by  the 
body  of  Christ,  to  be  another  who  has  been  raised  up  from 
among  the  dead  in  order  that  we  might  bear  fruit  to  God" 
(Romans  vii:4).  We  are  dead  to  the  law,  yet  the  law  in 
itself  is  not  dead;  it  is  as  much  alive  as  ever,  and  holy, 
just  and  good.  However,  the  new  nature  which  we  have  Is 
the  perfect  law  of  liberty;  it  is  something  altogether  new; 
yet  the  old  law  still  exists  and  has  its  power,  but  never  for 
him  who  is  a  new  creation  in  Christ  Jesus.  "The  law  has 
been  our  tutor  up  to  Christ,  that  we  might  be  justified  on 
the  principle  of  faith,  but  faith  having  come  we  are  no  long- 
er under  a  tutor,  for  ye  are  all  God's  sons  by  faith  in  Christ 
Jesus"  (Gal.  iii  :24,  25).  The  law  could  make  nothing  per- 
fect, but  Christ  came,  and  perfection  is  in  Him  and  through 


122 


Him.  What  is  the  meaning  of  "to  fulfill"?  It  means  to 
give  the  fullness,  to  make  full,  to  fill  out  the  law  and  the 
prophets.  The  wrong  interpretation  comes  generally  from 
having  only  the  ten  Commandments  in  view,  hut  there  is 
more  than  that  and  more  than  the  Lord's  full  obedience  to 
the  law  and  fulfilling  Himself  all  that  which  the  law  and  the 
prophets  had  spoken  concerning  Him.  In  the  true  seuFC 
of  the  word  the  meaning  is,  that  He  can:e  to  make  good 
the  whole  scope  of  the  law  and  prophets.  He  is  come  to 
reveal  the  completeness  of  that  which  the  law  and  the 
prophets  had  but  pointed  out.  All  that  which  the  law  an  1 
the  prophets  teach  and  predict,  the  fullness,  is  of  Him  and 
will  be  fulfilled  in  Him  who  came  and  who  will  come 
again.  The  eighteenth  verse  makes  this  clear.  Even  the 
smallest  letter,  the  Hebrew  "jod,"  shall  come  to  pass ;  not 
even  the  least  letter  can  be  set  aside,  but  all  will  be  accom- 
plished. Here  we  have  one  of  the  strongest  words  for  th2 
verbal  inspiration  and  infallibility  of  the  Bible.  Even  the 
"jod"  is  of  Him,  and  "until  the  heavens  and  the  earth  pars 
away  one  iota  or  one  tittle  shall  in  nowise  pass  from  the 
law  till  all  come  to  pass."  All  then  is  divine,  infallible  and 
will  come  to  pass.  What  a  solemn  declaration  of  the  great 
King  this  is !  This  is  in  full  harmony  with  the  entire  testi- 
mony of  the  Word.  "Forever,  O  Lord,  Thy  Word  is  set- 
tled in  the  heavens"  (Psalm  cixrSg).  "Thou  hast  magni- 
fied Thy  Word  above  all  Thy  name"  (Psalm  cxxx:2).  "The 
law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  converting  the  soul ;  the  testi- 
mony of  the  Lord  is  sure,  making  wise  the  simple ;  the 
statutes  of  the  Lord  are  right,  rejoicing  the  heart;  the  com- 


123 

niandmcnt  of  the  Lord  is  pure,  enliglitcninj;  the  eyes;  the 
fear  of  the  Lord  is  clean,  enckiriiii^  forever;  the  judi^nients 
of  the  Lord  are  true  and  righteous  altogether.  More  to  be 
desired  are  they  than  gold,  yea,  than  much  fine  gold,  sweeter 
also  than  honey  and  the  honeycomb.  Morever,  by  them  is 
thy  servant  warned,  and  in  keeping  of  them  is  great  reward" 
(Psalm  xix).  In  the  cxix  Psalm  the  perfection  and  excel- 
lency of  the  Word  is  told  out  in  each  of  the  176  verses,' with 
the  exception  of  two,  and  the  declaration  is  made,  "Thy 
Word  is  true  from  the  beginning."  What  an  awful  sin, 
what  a  heinous  thing,  the  rejection  of  'the  inspiration 
of  the  Word  of  God  is ! 

In  the  nineteenth  and  twentieth  verses  the  King  speaks 
of  the  doing  and  teaching  of  the  commandments.  Here  we 
are,  of  course,  altogether  on  Jewish  ground.  Then  there  is 
to  be  a  surpassing  righteousness,  or  better  righteousness  for 
the  one  who  is  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens. 
Their  righteousness  was  their  own  and  insuf^cient  for  the 
entering  into  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens.  P)Ut  does  our 
Lord  here  teach  that  a  person  is  by  a  better  righteousness 
of  his  own  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  and 
that  he  is  by  his  own  efforts  to  produce  this  righteousness? 
Certainly  not.  Still  the  false  application,  the  ethical  teach- 
ings in  Christendom  substituting  now  so  universally  the 
preaching  of  the  glad  tidings  of  our  salvation,  teaches  that 
man  is  to  lift  himself  up  into  heaven  by  his  own  righteous- 
ness. Our  Lord  speaks  not  to  sinners  here,  but  to  such  who 
are  saved,  and  the  saved  sinner  has  a  better  righteousness 
than  the  scribes  and  the  Pharisees,  who  were  onlv  natural 


124 


men.  In  possession  of  his  righteousness  we  do  rejoice. 
"But  now  without  the  law  the  righteousness  of  God  is  mani- 
fested, borne  witness  to  by  the  law  and  the  prophets ;  right- 
eousness of  God  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  towards  all,  and 
upon  all  those  who  believe,  for  there  is  no  difference,  for  all 
have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God;  being  jus- 
tified freely  by  His  grace  through  the  redemption  which  is 
in  Christ  Jesus,  whom  God  hath  set  forth  a  mercy  seat 
through  faith  in  His  blood  for  the  showing  forth  of  His 
righteousness ;  in  respect  of  the  passing  by  the  sins  that  had 
taken  place  before,  through  the  forbearance  of  God ;  for  the 
showing  forth  of  His  righteousness  in  the  present  time,  so 
that  He  should  be  just  and  justify  him  that  is  of  the  faith  of 
Jesus"  (Romans  iii:2i-26).  "For  what  the  law  could  not 
do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh,  God,  having  sent 
His  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  flesh  of  sin,  and  for  sin,  has 
condemned  sin  in  the  flesh,  in  order  that  the  righteous  re- 
quirement of  the  law  should  be  fulfilled  in  us,  who  do  not 
walk  according  to  the  flesh,  but  according  to  the  Spirit" 
(Romans  viii:3,  4).  And  the  outflow  of  the  righteousness 
of  God  we  are  in  Him,  is  His  righteousness.  But  these 
words  stand  also  in  relation  to  Israel,  converted  at  last  and 
entering  into  the  kingdom  (Ezek.  xxxvi  125,  etc). 

And  now  after  He  had  confirmed  the  law  and  made 
known  its  immutability,  He  begins  to  teach  that  surpassing 
righteousness  which  He  demands.  He  teaches  the  law  in 
its  fullest  and  deepest  spiritual  meaning.  Here  we  see  all 
the  majesty  of  the  King  and  the  lawgiver.  Six  times  He 
says  "I  say  unto  you."     It  is  divine  "I"  of  Jehovah,  who 


125 

speaks.  And  as  He  speaks  here  and  sends  forth  the  expan- 
sions of  the  law,  so  will  He  speak  ag^ain.  Out  of  Zion  shall 
go  forth  the  law  and  the  Word  of  the  law  from  Jerusalem 
(Isaiah  ii:3).  And  when  that  time  comes,  then  surely 
righteousness  and  peace  will  kiss  each  other,  and  Israel, 
new-horn,  having  the  laws  in  their  inmost  parts  and  written 
in  their  hearts  and  the  Spirit  upon  them,  will  walk  in  His 
statutes,  and  nations  will  be  converted. 

Not  alone  does  He  show  in  these  expansions  of  the  law, 
in  declaring  the  true  righteousness,  His  divine  authority, 
but  He  uncovers  the  human  heart  and  shows  its  deep  cor- 
ruption and  the  hopelessness  that  the  natural  man  could 
ever  attain  to  such  a  righteousness.  It  condemns  every 
human  being.  As  mentioned  before,  thousands  of  unsaved 
l)erson,  Jews  and  Gentiles  have  made  this  first  discourse 
of  our  Lord  in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew  the  standard  for  what 
they  call  "their  religion."  It  is  a  sad  statement  which  is 
now  heard  from  all  sides :  "The  sermon  on  the  mount  is  my 
creed,"  or  "Our  preacher  preaches  only  from  the  Gospels 
and  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  and  never  touches  the  Old 
Testament  or  the  Epistles"  (this  was  told  us),  etc.  Arc 
these  people  really  honest,  and  do  they  know  the  cutting 
words  of  our  Lord,  words  like  a  two-edged  sword,  pene- 
trating to  the  division  of  soul  and  spirit,  a  discerner  of  the 
thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart?  If  they  read  and  are  sin- 
cere they  find  themselves  all  uncovered  and  naked  before 
Him  whose  eyes  are  like  flames  of  fire,  before  Whom  indeed 
all  things  are  naked  and  laid  bare.     The  words  show  the 


126 


sinner  his  ruin  and  his  corruption.  Condemnation  comes 
from  every  word  to  the  natural  man. 

Let  us  look  but  briefly  to  the  different  teachings  our  Lord 
giveth,  both  to  show  the  true  righteousness  He  demands 
and  to  uncover  the  corruption  of  the  heart. 

He  takes  some  of  the  commandments  which  He  wrote 
on  the  second  table  of  stone  and  begins  with  the  command- 
ment: "Thou  shalt  not  kill."  Murder  was  the  first  awful 
fruit  after  the  fall,  sprung  as  it  was  from  envy  in  the  heart. 
The  penalty  of  murder  is  the  judgment.  This,  then,  is  the 
letter  of  the  law.  It  dealt  with  the  outward  deed,  but  the 
heart  itself  it  did  not  touch.  Now  He  speaks.  "/  say  unto 
you,  that  every  one  that  is  lightly^  angry  with  his  brother 
shall  be  subject  to  the  judgment."  It  shall  be  as  if  he  had 
committed  the  deed  "thou  shalt  not  kill."  Every  one  that 
hates  his  brother  is  a  murderer  (i  John  iii:i5).  "Whoso- 
ever shall  say  to  his  brother,  Raca  (a  word  embodying  hatred 
and  contempt)  shall  be  called  before  the  Sanhedrim;  but 
whosoever  shall  say.  Fool,  shall  be  subject  to  the  penalty  of 
the  hell  fire."  It  will  be  so,  nO'  doubt,  when  the  kingdom 
will  be  come  into  the  earth ;  swift  judgment  will  overtake 
the  offender.  But  the  words  lay  bare  the  heart  and  show 
the  impossibility  of  man  to  stand  before  God,  who  judges 
the  heart,  in  their  own  righteousness.  The  believer  being 
the  partaker  of  the  divine  nature,  is  righteous  and  loves  his 
brother.    Only  the  reception  of  eternal  life,  which  is  Christ 


*The  word  "lightly"  belongs  in  here.  It  was  dropped  in  some 
manuscripts,  but  stands  in  the  oldest.  It  is  not  angry  alone  out- 
wardly, but  even  the  remotest  feeling  of  displeasure  is  meant. 


127 


Himself,  can  produce  righteousness  and  love.  "Whosoever 
has  been  begotten  of  God  does  not  practice  sin,  because  His 
seed  abides  in  him  and  he  cannot  sin,  because  he  has  been 
begotten  of  God.  In  this  are  manifest  the  children  of  God 
and  the  children  of  the  devil.  Whoever  docs  not  practice 
righteousness  is  not  of  God,  and  he  who  does  not  love  his 
brother"  (i  John  iiirQ-ii).  The  believer  walking  in  the 
Spirit  wi'.l  in  no  way  fulfill  flesh's  lust. 

The  23d  and  24th  verses  refer  primarily  to  Israel ;  in  prin- 
ciple they  arc  applicable  during  this  Christian  age. 

The  words  which  follow  are:  "Make  friends  with  thine 
adverse  party  quickly,  while  thou  art  in  the  way  with  him ; 
lest  some  time  the  adverse  party  deliver  thee  to  the  judge 
and  the  judge  deliver  thee  to  the  officer  and  thou  be  cast 
into  prison.  \'^crily  I  say  to  thee,  Thou  shalt  in  nowise  come 
out  thence  till  thou  hast  paid  the  last  farthing."  The  words 
contain  an  allegorical  exhortation  to  Israel.  It  is  a  short 
outline  of  their  history  the  Lord  here  introduces.  Fol- 
lowing the  expansion  of  the  law  concerning  murder  and 
hatred,  that  which  they  were  about  to  do  with  their  own 
Brother,  it  is  significant.  Israel  were  the  adversaries  of 
Him  who  had  come,  and  treated  the  royal  Person  in  their 
midst  as  an  adversary.  They  did  not  agree  with  Him  and 
have  been  put  into  the  prison  (nationally)  under  punishment 
till  the  last  farthing  is  paid.  The  lord  will  perform  His 
whole  work  (punitive)  upon  ATount  Zion  and  on  Jerusa- 
lem C Isaiah  x:i2),  and  then  it  will  be  "that  her  warfare  is 
ended"  or,  as  the  marginal  reading  gives  it  (Isaiah  xl:2), 
"her  punishment   is   accepted,"  and    "her   iniquity   is   par- 


128 

doned  and  she  hath  received  of  the  Lord's  hand  double  (in 
blessing)  for  all  her  sins."  Thus,  explained  these  words  fit 
in  the  whole. 

The  next  two  expansions  of  the  law  are  concerning  purity 
and  divorce.  Not  alone  the  deed  itself,  which  was  punish- 
able by  a  severe  penalty,  is  sin,  but  every  one  who  looks  upon 
a  woman  to  lust  after  her  has  already  committed  adultery 
with  her  in  his  heart.  Out  of  the  heart  the  transgression 
comes,  and  the  heart  is  evil.  And  this  is  what  so  many 
persons  in  Christendom  say  is  their  creed  and  standard  for 
"religion" !    It  is  the  word  which  condemns  them  altogether. 

The  plucking  out  of  the  right  eye  and  the  sacrificing  of 
the  right  hand  is,  of  course,  never  to  be  understood  in  the 
literal  sense,  but  stands  for  the  inner  exercise  of  the  be- 
liever, who  in  self-judgment  puts  that  away  which  is  a  snare 
or  a  stumbling  block.  But  what  sinner  can  do  it  or  will  do 
it?  Let  him  try  it.  And  while  there  is  in  our  day  an  in- 
creased boasting  in  a  better  morality,  a  higher  standard, 
and  a  "social  Christianity"  is  attempted  and  built  upon 
certain  words  of  our  Lord  in  this  discourse,  it  becomes 
more  and  more  evident  that  the  lust  of  the  eye  and  the  lust 
of  the  flesh  are  honeycombing  all  classes  of  the  professing 
church  and  are  practiced  as  never  before.  So  it  is  with 
divorce.  What  dreadful  things  might  be  mentioned  here! 
Among  the  Jews  the  greatest  laxity  prevailed  in  this  direc- 
tion. Even  now  through  talmudical  laws  the  marriage  re- 
lations may  be  dissolved  on  a  mere  pretext.  Our  Lord  says 
with  the  voice  of  authority,  binding  ever :  "Whosoever  shall 
put  away  his  wife  except  for  cause  of  fornication  makes  her 


129 

commit  adultery,  and  whosoever  marries  one  that  Is  put 
away  commits  adultery." 

Ill  the  fourth  place  He  speaks  against  swearing,  not 
against  oaths  such  as  are  demanded  by  law.  but  in  a  profane 
way.  Heaven,  earth  and  Jerusalem  are  mentioned  because 
these  were  mostly  used  in  profane  swearing.  Significant 
here  is  the  description  of  Jerusalem  as  the  city  of  the  great 
King.  This  will  be  during  the  millennial  reign.  When  the 
kingdom  has  come  praise  will  be  heard  in  the  heavens,  in  th^ 
earth  and  in  Jerusa'cm.  Now  the  earth  is  full  of  swearing 
and  wicked  words,  but  in  that  coming  day  the  offences  will 
be  gathered  out  of  the  kingdom. 

The  law  of  retaliation  comes  next  (verse  38).  He  teaches 
not  to  resist  evil.  This  is  again  a  great  principle  for  His 
disciples.  The  author  of  the  Numerical  Bible  says:  "There 
is  no  supposition  of  the  abrogation  of  law  or  of  its  penal 
ties.  The  government  of  the  world  is  not  in  question,  but 
the  path  of  the  disciple  in  it.  Where  they  are  bound  by  the 
law,  they  are  bound  and  have  no  privileges.  They  are  bound, 
too,  to  sustain  it  in  its  general  working,  as  ordained  of  God 
as  good.  Within  these  limits  there  is  still  abundant  room 
for  such  practice  as  is  here  enjoined.  We  may  still  turn 
the  left  cheek  to  him  that  smites  the  right,  or  let  the  man 
that  sues  us  have  the  cloak  as  well  as  the  coat  which  he  has 
fraudulently  gained,  for  that  is  clearly  within  our  rights.  If 
the  cause  were  that  of  another,  we  should  have  no  right  of 
this  kind,  nor  to  aid  men  generally  in  escape  from  ju.stice 
or  slighting  it.  The  Lord  coidd  never  lay  down  a  genera! 
rule  that  His  people   should   a'li)w  lawlessness  or  identif/ 


130 

themselves  with  indifference  to  the  rights  of  others.  He 
speaks  only  of  what  is  personal  to  one's  self — ^smite  thee, 
compel  thee  and  sue  thee." 

The  last  expansion  brings  forth  love.  "Ye  have  heard 
that  it  has  been  said,  Thou  shalt  love  they  neighbor  and  hate 
thine  enemy.  But  I  say  unto  you,  Love  your  enemies,  bless 
those  who  curse  you,  do  good  to  those  that  hate  you  and 
pray  for  those  who  insult  you  and  persecute  you,"  etc. 
(verses  43-48),  ending  with  "Be  ye  therefore  perfect,  as 
your  heavenly  Father  is  perfect."  It  is  the  same  exhorta- 
tion as  in  Eph.  v  :i :  "Be  imitators  of  God  as  dear  children." 
The  standard  for  the  heirs  of  the  kingdom  is  then  His  own 
moral  perfection. 

The  day  will  come  when  such  righteousness  and  love  and 
perfection  as  the  King  here  describes  will  dwell  amidst  His 
earthly  people  and  will  be  manifested  in  the  earth.  It  will 
be  in  the  day  when  the  kingdom  has  come  and  His  will  be 
done  in  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven.  But  every  child  of  God  born 
anew  has  put  before  him  the  highest  standard,  which  in- 
cludes all  that  which  the  King  here  expounds  and  that  is  in 
possession  of  Himself,  who  is  the  true  God  and  the  eternal 
life,  "to  walk  even  as  He  walked."  "Be  ye  therefore  per- 
fect as  your  heavenly  Father  is  perfect." 


131 


CHAPTER  \L 

Our  Lord  said:  "For  I  say  unto  you,  that  unless  your 
rii^^hteousness  surpass  that  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye 
shall  in  nowise  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens" 
(chap.  v:2o).  This  righteousness  He  had  taught  in  His 
confirmation  and  expansion  of  the  law,  but  now  He  speaks 
of  something  higher  still.  He  makes  known  the  motive  of 
this  true  righteousness,  which  the  heir  of  the  kingdom  is  not 
alone  to  possess  but  also  to  practice.  The  motive  is  in  all 
to  act  in  the  presence  of  the  Father.  The  first  eighteen 
verses  of  the  sixth  chapter  shows  this  in  a  threefold  relation. 
First,  in  relation  to  man  (verse  1-4),  then  in  relation  to  God 
(verse  5-15)  and  lastly  in  relation  to  self  (verse  16-18). 
The  word  Father  is  found  ten  times  in  these  first  eighteen 
verses  of  the  sixth  chapter.  The  Father  sees,  the  Father 
knows ;  therefore  all  is  to  be  done  before  Him,  the  Seeing 
and  Knowing  One.  Here,  then,  relationship  is  acknowl- 
edged and  made  prominent,  such  a  relationship  which  was 
unknown  in  the  Old  Testament.  How  we  are  brought  into 
this  relationship  to  God  as  Father,  and  to  know  Him  as  our 
Father,  so  as  to  act  continually  as  in  His  presence,  is  not 
taught  in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew.  The  Gospel  of  John 
makes  this  fully  known.  There  we  read  all  about  eternal  life, 
the  reception  of  this  life,  being  born  anew,  born  into  the 
family  of  God,  etc.  "As  many  received  PTim  (Christ,  the 
true  God  and  eternal  life),  to  them  gave  He  the  right  to  be 


1^2 

children  of  God,  to  these  that  beHeve  on  His  name ;  who 
have  been  born,  not  of  blood  nor  of  flesh's  will  nor  of  man's 
will,  but  of  God"  (John  i:i2,  13).  This  is  all  anticipated 
in  Matthew,  and  the  Father  here  is  not  that  "All-Father," 
as  the  modern  twentieth-century  teachers  of  a  Fatherhood 
of  God  and  brotherhood  of  men  teach,  but  He  is  the  God 
and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who,  according  to  His 
great  mercy,  has  begotten  us  again  to  a  living  hope  through 
the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  among  the  dead  ( i 
Peter  1:3-5).  Only  such  as  are  begotten  again,  born  into 
the  family  of  God  are  children  and  though  they  are  little 
children,  yet  do  they  know  God  as  their  Father.  "I  write 
to  you,  little  children,  because  ye  have  known  the  Father" 
(i  John  ii:i3).  Only  such  who  are  children  and  partakers 
of  the  divine  nature  can  act  as  in  the  presence  of  the  Father ; 
with  all  others  this  is  an  impossibility ;  for  how  can  they  act 
and  walk  before  One  and  do  all  out  of  love  for  One  and  to 
please  that  One,  whom  they  do  not  know?  This  is  another 
proof  how  impossible  it  is  for  the  unregenerated,  who  have 
taken  the  sermon  on  the  mount  as  a  so-called  rule  for  con- 
duct, to  do  that  which  is  taught. 

Our  Lord  begins  with  alms.  In  the  first  verse  the  word 
alms  is  best  translated  (as  several  old  manuscripts  read)  by 
"righteousness."  "Take  heed  not  to  do  your  righteousness 
before  men  to  be  seen  of  them,  otherwise  ye  have  no  reward 
V,  ith  your  Father  who  is  in  the  heavens." 

Alms  are  good  deeds  towards  others,  charitable  actions, 
bestowing  upon  the  poor,  needy  and  afflicted.  Such  deeds 
of  mercy  and  kindness  are  generally  designated  by  Jews  as 


133 

righteousness.  In  their  prayers  on  New  Year's  clay  they 
profess  that  repentance,  prayer  and  Zodoko — righteousness 
will  intlucnce  God  and  change  the  evil  to  come  upon  them 
for  their  sins,  into  good.  Under  righteousness  every  ortho- 
dox Jew  understands  alms.  It  must  have  been  so  during 
the  days  of  our  Lord  in  the  midst  of  His  earthly  people.  How 
was  it  done  ?  We  believe  that  the  description  our  Lord  gives 
here  was  a  literal  performance  by  the  self-righteous  re- 
ligionists. Alms  were  given  so  as  to  be  seen  by  men,  a 
trumpet  was  sounded  before  them  and  the  sums  they  gave 
to  the  poor  were  heralded  through  the  streets.  And  is  it  not 
so  now  even  in  the  midst  of  Christendom?  How  much 
almsgiving  and  charities  would  there  be  if  it  were  not  for  a 
big  display  ?  Such  almsgiving,  such  deeds  of  mercy  are  not 
pleasing  to  God.  Such  a  righteousness,  and  done  by  such  a 
motive,  are  but  filthy  rags  which  give  no  covering  and  de- 
file. But  so  it  is  among  Jews  and  professing  Christians, 
almsgiving,  charities  without  end,  good  works  to  appear  be- 
fore men  as  religious,  and  no  knowledge  of  the  Father, 
"Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  they  have  their  reward.  But 
when  thou  doest  alms,  let  not  thy  left  hand  know  what  thy 
right  hand  does ;  so  that  thine  alms  may  be  in  secret  and  thy 
Father  who  sees  in  secret  will  render  it  to  thee"  (verse  4). 
The  lesson  here  for  every  true  believer  is  that  all  our  good 
works  are  to  be  done  as  to  our  Father  and  as  before  Him 
alone ;  when  we  have  done  all  things  that  are  commanded, 
we  are  to  say,  we  are  unprofitable  servants  (Luke  xvii:io). 
Prayer  is  the  next  which  follows.  Prayer  is  that  which 
relates  to  God.      How  much  might  be  said  on  that  most 


134 

precious  duty  and  privilege — prayer !  But  we  cannot  digress 
here.  "And  when  thou  prayest,  thou  shalt  not  be  as  the 
hyprocrites ;  for  they  love  to  pray  standing  in  the  synagogues 
and  in  the  corners  of  the  street,  so  that  they  should  appear 
to  men."  What  glaring  contradiction  to  pray  in  words 
which  are  addressed  to  God,  and  in  motive  they  are  but  ut- 
tered so  as  to  be  heard  by  men !  What  our  Lord  describes 
any  one  can  witness  still,  on  any  Saturday  morning  on  the 
lower  East  Side  of  New  York  City.  In  synagogues  and  pri- 
vate dwellings  many  a  Jew  can  be  seen  marching  up  and 
down,  or  standing  still,  or  swaying  his  head  and  reading 
his  prayers.  He  is  attired  with  the  philacteries  (prayer- 
straps),  a  purely  rabbinical  invention,  and  his  shoulders  are 
enshrouded  by  a  prayer-mantle.  His  whole  behavior  as  he 
takes  a  prominent  stand  in  the  synagogue  or  before  an  open 
window,  shows  but  too  well  that  it  is  done  so  as  to  appear 
before  men.  "Hypocrites"  is  the  word  with  which  our 
Lord  designates  such  men.  Yet,  is  it  any  better  in  Christen- 
dom ?  The  modern  "church  prayer  meeting"  shows  only  too 
often  the  same  spirit.  We  have  known  men  and  seen  them 
standing  in  public  places  to  lead  in  prayer,  and  before  them 
a  very  carefully  worded  prayer  written  beforehand,  which 
vvas  read  with  much  pathos.  Some  observer  of  religious 
movements  spoke  of  a  leading  New  York  preacher  a 
short  time  ago  as  making  "beautiful  and  very  flowery 
public  prayers."  Alas !  without  sitting  in  judgment  upon 
any  one,  the  flowery  prayers,  human  eloquence  in  prayer, 
are  only  too  often  a  form  of  address  to  God  but  only  uttered 
to  be  seen  of  men.    None  is  excepted  of  this  danger  which 


135 

comes  with  public  prayer.     It  should  be  with  nuich  godly 
fear  and  earnest  looking  to  the  Lord  when  a  brother,  r^ses  to 
lead  in  prayer.    It  is  to  be  done  as  before  God  and  not  before  ^ 
men. 

Next  our  Lord  tells  us  that  prayer,  like  alms,  is  to  be 
done  in  secret,  as  unto  the  Father  and  not  unto  men.    "Bat 
thou,  when  thou  prayest,  enter  into  thy  chamber,  and  having 
shut   thy  door,  pray  to  the  Father  who  is   in   sc:rct,.,and 
thy  Father  who  sees  in  secret  will  render  it  to  thee."     No' 
one  would  conclude  from  these  words  that  our  Lord  forbids; 
public  or  united  prayer.     It  is  seen  only  that  He  speaks 
against  the  mode  and  manner  of  public  prayer.     A  believer, 
praying  in  public  should  be  as  before  the  Father  in  secret, 
Later  our  Lord  says,  anticipating  the  church,  "Again  I  say' 
to  you,  that  if  two  of  you  shall  agree  on  the  earth  concerning, 
any  matter,  whatsoever  it  may  be  that  they  shall  ask,  it  shall 
come  to  them  from  my  Father  in  heaven"  (chapter  xviii : 
19).    United  prayer  of  the  assembly  and  that  not  in  secret 
alone  but  in  public,  yet  as  l>efore  the  Father,  is  a  great 
privilege   and   attended   by   untold   blessings.      "They,  gave, 
themselves  all  with  one  accord  to  continual  prayer"  (Acts  i:- 
14).     "And  they  persevered  in  the  teaching  and  fellowship 
of  the  apostles,  in  breaking  of  bread  and  prayers"  (Acts  ii : 
42).     "But  we  will  give  ourselves  up  to  prayer  and  minis- 
try of  the  Word"  (vi:4).    Unceasing  prayer  was  made  by 
the  assembly  to  God  concerning  him  (.\cts  xii  15) .  Such  was 
the  j)ractice  in  the  apostolic  age,  and  the  exhortations  given 
to  believers  in  the  New  Testament  are  in  harmony  with  it. 
"As  regard  prayer,  persevering"   (Rom.  xii:i2).     "Perse- 


136 

vere  in  prayer,  watching  in  it  with  thanksgiving,  praying  at 
the  same  time  for  us  also,  that  God  may  open  to  us  a  door 
of  the  Word  to  speak  the  mystery  of  Christ"   (Col.  iv:4). 
"In  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication,  with  thanksgiv- 
ing, let  your  requests  be  made  known  to  God"  (Phil.  iv:6). 
Secret  prayer  is  here  mentioned  by  our  Lord,  and  surely  the 
true  believer  is  doing  this  as  he  looks  to  the  Father  only. 
What  joy,  comfort  and  strength  it  does  afford  to  be  alone 
before  God.    Here  it  cannot  be  done  as  unto  men.    The 
hyprocite  does  not  know  nor  practice  secret  prayer,  and  the 
professing  Christian  often  makes  an  attempt  at  it  in  a  legal 
way  so  as  to  satisfy  his  conscience.    "The  Father  who  seeth 
in  secret  shall  recompense  thee."     Some  manuscripts  have 
"openly."    The  day  will  be  when  all  the  secret  prayers,  that 
precious  ministry  of  prayer  given  to  the  saints  who  are  holy 
priests,  will  be  made  known.    What  revelations  there  will 
be  and  what  reward  to  the  saints  for  such  faithful  and  per- 
severing ministry  in  secret  !*     "But  when  ye  pray,  use  not 
vain  repetitions,  as  those  who  are  of  the  nations :  for  they 
think  they  shall  be  heard  through  their  much  speaking.    Be 


*No  sooner  had  Saul  of  Tarsus  passed  from  death  unto  life,  than 
the  Lord  says  of  him  "Behold  lie  prayeth!"  Doubtless  he  had  as 
a  "Pharisee  of  the  Pharisees"  said  many  long  prayers,  but  not  until 
he  "saw  that  Just  One  and  heard  the  voice  of  His  mouth"  could  it 
he  said  of  him,  Behold  he  prayeth  (Acts  xxii:i4).  Saying  prayers 
and  praying  are  two  totally  different  things.  A  self-righteous 
Pharisee  may  excel  in  the  former ;  none  but  a  converted  soul  can 
enjoy  the  latter.  The  spirit  of  prayer  is  the  spirit  of  the  new  man; 
the  language  of  prayer  is  the  distinct  utterance  of  the  new  life.  The 
moment  a  spiritual  babe  is  born  into  the  new  creation  it  sends  up  a 
cry  of  helpless  dependence  toward  the  source  of  its  birth. — C.  H.  M. 


137 

not  ye  therefore  like  them,  for  your  Father  knows  of  what 
things  ye  have  need  before  ye  beg  anything  of  Him." 
Martin  Luther  says  on  this:  "Here  He  censures  the  abuse 
of  prayer,  when  they  that  are  praying  make  use  of  many 
words  and  babbhngs ;  He  calls  this  a  heathenish  practice,  a 
loose,  idle  and  useless  talk,  of  such  who  think  they  would 
otherwise  not  be  heard.  The  spirit  of  the  worshiper  prays, 
and  because  he  knows  that  (]od  will  hear  him,  he  dares  not 
use  such  endless,  idle  talk — the  fewer  the  words,  the  better 
the  prayer."!  The  Pharisees  had  their  long  prayers  with 
many  vain  repetitions.  One  only  needs  to  take  up  an  ortho- 
dox Jewish  "prayer  book"  to  sec  the  numerous  vain  repeti- 
tions, repeating  phrases  over  and  over  again.  That  our 
Lord  had  this  first  of  all  before  Him  seems  clear.  Yet  what 
else  is  Christendom  but.  as  one  has  said,  "an  unauthor- 
ized revival  of  a  departed  shade"?*  It  is  an  aping  after 
that  which  no  longer  exists.  The  rituals  of  Christendom 
with  their  liberal  use  of  the  Psalms  in  responsive  readings, 
set  forms  of  prayer  for  all  occasions,  their  chant  and  rapid 
delivery,  are  but  the  daughters  of  the  old  mother — Pharisee- 
ism.  Here  we  mention  especially  rituals  which  are  used  at 
the  Lord's  supper,  generally  called  by  that  unscriptural  word 
"sacrament."  There  are  used  repeatedly  phrases  like  "Lamb 
of  God,  have  mercy  on  us."  "Almighty  God.  have  mercy  on 
us,"  "O  Lord,  save  us."  These  indeed  are  vain  repetitions, 
and  at  the  Lord's  table  when  they  are  used  by  a  believer 
(who  only  has  a  right  to  the  Lord's  table)  they  are  worse 


fLuther's  notes  on  the  Gospels. 
♦Adolph  Saphir  on  Hebrews. 


138 

than  vain.  Vain  repetitions,  however,  may  also  be  used  by 
such  who  use  no  formal  prayers,  ritual  and  prayer  book. 
This  is  often  done  when  the  name  of  God  and  the  Lord  is 
falsely  used  in  public  prayer  as  well  as  other  oft-repeated 
phrases.  Others  have  gone  into  an  extreme  and  have  de- 
clared that  the  Lord  teaches  here  that  a  petition  should  be 
made  only  once,  and  that  if  we  have  asked  in  faith  for  some- 
thing once,  to  ask  again  is  only  proof  of  our  unbelief.  The 
Lord  teaches  no  such  thing.  Our  Lord  Himself  in  Gethse- 
mane  made  the  same  petition  three  times,  and  Paul  with  his 
thorn  in  the  flesh  had  besought  the  Lord  thrice  that  it  might 
depart  from  him  (2  Cor.  xn-.y). 

This  is  followed  by  a  model  for  prayer  which  the  King 
now  gives.  This  prayer  is  generally  called  throughout  Chris- 
tendom "the  Lord's  prayer."  Where  is  the  authority  in 
Scripture  to  call  it  by  this  name?  If  any  prayer  can  be  called 
the  Lord's  prayer  it  certainly  is  the  one  contained  in  John 
xvii.  It  is  not  the  Lord's  prayer,  but  the  disciples'  prayer 
This  model  for  prayer  has  become  the  formal  prayer,  the 
ritualistic  prayer  of  every  sect  in  Christendom.  That  which 
our  Lord  forbids,  vain  repetitions,  is  practiced  with  this 
divine  model  by  those  who  call  themselves  Christians.  In 
the  Roman  and  Greek  Churches,  so-called,  it  becomes  a 
good  work  to  repeat  so  many  "Our  Fathers."  and  the  poor 
deceived  souls  expect  blessing  in  this  world  and  in  eternitv 
from  the  mechanical  repetition  of  so  many  prayers.  This 
of  course  is  very  little  different  from  the  prayer  machines  of 
Thibet,  upon  which  a  certain  number  of  prayers  written  on 
paper  are  placed  and  unwound  before  some  god  or  goddess. 


139 

In  "evangelical"  denominations  it  is  not  much  better.  We 
remember  well  in  childhood,  being  strictly  brought  up  in 
the  Lutheran  denomination,  how  constantly  this  prayer  was 
used.  In  sickness,  in  pain,  in  danger,  at  mealtime,  in  the 
morning  and  at  night,  in  severe  storms,  etc.,  it  was  ever  re- 
peated as  if  a  miraculous  power  indwelt  these  words  suffi- 
cient to  dispel  sickness,  de'iver  from  danger  and  bring  bless- 
ing which  otherwise  would  not  come.  It  is  one  of  the  rags 
which  Luther  brought  away  from  the  old  Roman  sepulchre. 
Yet  it  is  the  same  in  other  denominations.  In  one  of 
the  strongest  it  is  used  at  the  burial  of  the  dead,  sprinkling 
of  infants,  Lord's  supper,  "ordination"  of  deacons  and  elders, 
"consecration"  of  bishops,  and  it  is  repeated  in  public  by  the 
congregation.  All  this  practice,  the  use  of  this  model  for 
prayer,  as  the  Lord's  prayer  given  to  the  Church,  to  be  used 
by  the  Church,  is  wrong,  decidedly  unchristian,  nor  can  it  be 
proven  from  the  New  Testament  that  it  is  intended  for 
the  Church.  In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  we  read  of  the 
breaking  of  bread,  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  the  assembly  of 
believers,  the  baptism  of  believers,  but  do  wc  read  anywhere 
in  the  divinely  inspired  record  of  the  beginning  of  the 
Church  that  the  so-called  Lord's  prayer  was  used  by  tlie 
apostles  or  by  the  primitive  church  ?  Is  there  a  hint  any- 
where in  the  Xew  Testament  that  the  prayer  is  to  be  re- 
peated in  public  and  used  by  believers?  Not  even  the 
faintest  hint  that  this  should  be  so.  but  many  strong  proofs 
and  arguments  that  it  should  not  be  so.  Centuries  passed 
before  it  became  a  settled  custom  to  make  the  i)raycr  the 
King  gave  to  His  Jewish  disciples  the  prayer  for  Christians 


140 

and  to  use  it  in  the  form  and  in  the  way  it  is  used  now.  An 
unknown  hand  then  added  something  to  the  last  petition, 
"Deliver  us  from  the  evil  one."  The  words,  "for  thine  is 
the  kingdom  and  the  power  and  the  glory  forever  and  ever 
— Amen,"  are  an  interpolation.  They  do  not  belong  into 
your  Bibles,  for  the  Lord  never  uttered  them.  The  revised 
version  (though  so  imperfect  in  many  of  its  revisions)  has 
done  well  in  omitting  them  altogether.  When  it  was  decided 
to  use  this  model  for  prayer  as  a  prayer,  this  ending  was 
written  by  some  one  and  added  to  it  and  thus  making  it  a 
prayer  with  the  "Amen"  attached  to  it.  No  such  "amen" 
belongs  there. 

This  perfect  model  of  prayer  was  given  by  our  Lord  to 
His  disciples  to  be  used  by  them  individually  and  previously 
to  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  was  then  all  on  Jewish 
ground ;  they  were  Jewish  believers  and  as  such  they 
received  this  model  prayer  and  used  it  in  the  transition  state. 
There  came  a  day  when  our  Lord  said  another  word  to  these 
very  disciples  who  had  come  to  Him  with  the  request,  "Lord, 
teach  us  to  pray,  even  as  John  also  taught  his  disciples." 
It  was  in  the  upper  room  where  He  spoke  all  the  precious 
words  concerning  the  Comforter,  all  that  which  was  so 
new,  altogether  new,  that  which  would  take  them  upon  a 
new  ground.  He  said,  Hitherto  ye  have  asked  nothing  in 
My  name ;  ask  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  he 
full.  *  *  *  In  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  My  name"  (John 
xvii:24-27).  This  message  alone  ought  to  give  perfect 
light  and  understanding  to  any  of  our  readers  who  are  in 
doubt  about  this  matter.     "Hitherto  ye  have  asked  nothing 


HI 

in  My  name."  This  shows  two  things:  (i)  They  asked  of 
God,  and  (2)  They  asked  not  in  His  name.  They  had  then 
used  the  prayer  He  had  taught  them,  and  it  was  a  prayer 
not  in  His  name.  Now  He  tells  them  that  they  were  to  ask 
in  His  name.  This,  then,  is  Christian  prayer  to  ask  God, 
the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  our  Father  in  the 
name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  When  He  says  "in  that 
day"  He  means  the  day  which  began  when  the  Holy  Spirit 
came  down  from  heaven,  and  this  day  is  still  present.*  The 
Christian  believer,  knowing  his  perfect  standing  in  Christ 
Jesus,  prays  in  His  name,  and  that  is  prayer  in  the  Holy 
Spirit,  who  now  joins  His  help  to  our  weakness;  for  we  do 
not  know  what  we  should  pray  for  as  is  fitting,  but  the 
Spirit  Himself  makes  intercession  with  groanings  which  can- 


*\Vhen  the  Holy  Spirit  was  given,  and  the  child  was  able  to  draw 
near  to  the  Father  in  the  name  of  Christ,  you  have  something  dif- 
ferent. The  Lord's  prayer  so-called  does  not  clothe  the  believer  with 
the  name  of  Christ.  What  is  meant  by  asking  the  Father  in  that 
name?  Can  it  be  merely  saying  "in  His  name"  at  tlie  end  of  a 
prayer?  When  Christ  died  and  rose  again,  He  gave  the  believer 
His  oian  standing  before  God,  and  then  to  ask  the  Father  in  the 
name  of  Christ  is  to  ask  in  the  consciousness  that  my  Father  loves 
me  as  He  loves  Christ;  that  my  Father  has  given  me  the  acceptance 
of  Christ  Himself  before  Him,  having  completely  blotted  out  all 
my  evil,  so  as  to  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him.  To 
pray  in  the  value  of  this  is  asking  in  His  name.  Is  there  a  soul  using 
the  Lord's  prayer  as  a  form  that  has  a  real  understanding  of  what 
it  is  to  ask  the  Father  in  the  name  of  Christ?  I  believe  they  have 
never  entered  into  that  great  truth. — Notes  on  Matthew  by  IV.  Kelly. 

The  latter  is,  alas!  too  true;  "they  have  never  entered  into  that 
great  truth."  How  sad  to  see  the  great  mass  of  professing  Christians 
without  a  knowledge  of  what  grace  has  done,  without  assurance  of 
salvation,  constantly  "unchristianizing"  themselves,  cumbered  with 
much  service,  running  to  and  fro. — A.  C.  G. 


142  .        ' 

not  be  uttered  (Rom.  viii:26).     We  glance  but  briefly  at  a 

few  of  the  petitions  to  show  how  a  Christian  behever  could 

not  use  this  model  of  prayer  as  a  form.     However,  we 

desire  to  state  once    more    the    perfection    of  the  prayer. 

.  Every  word  here  is  as  divine  as  He  who  spoke  it.     There 

could  be  no  imperfection  about  anything  He  uttered.     Many 

volumes  have  been  written  on  it  and  many  more  might  be 

written  to  show  the  perfection  of  every  petition. 

:■  -As  believers  we  know  that  our  Lord  gave  the  promise 

-  and  has  fulfilled  it  by  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  "That  if 

any  love  Me,  he  will  keep  My  word  and  My  Father  will  lovs 

-him,  and  we  will  come  to  him  and  make  our  abode  with 

"him."   We  are  brought  nigh  by  His  blood,  and  in  the  per- 

--son:o£  an  adorable  Lord  we  arc  in  heaven  seated  with  Him 

in  the  heavenlies.     The  "Our  Father  who  art  in  heaven" 

^  does  not  give  expression  to  this  nor  could  it  be  before  the 

•  death,  resurrection  and  ascension  of  our  Lord.    "Hallowed 

'  be  thy  name"  is  Jewish.    Indeed,  the  Jewish  ritual  uses  the 

..  phrase  very  often.  The  believer  exalts  "the  God  and  Father 

^  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  whom  God  has  exalte:! 

'  and  inade  head  over  all  things." 

"Thy  kingdom   come."     This   petition   is   for   the   com- 
'  ing  of  the  kingdom,  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens,  the  Mes- 
'  sianic  Kingdom,  which  is  followed  by  the  doing  of  the  will 
of  God  on  earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven.   Here  Christendom 
is  the  most  confused,  expecting  a  kingdom  now;  a  spiritual 
L kingdom  without  a  king.   What  our  Lord  taught  His  Jew- 
ish disciples  to  pray  for  is  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  to 
come,  that  which  John  the  Baptist  preached,  and  also  the 


143 

Lord  up  to  the  time  of  His  rejection.  As  believers  we  do 
not  wait  for  the  coming  of  the  King  and  the  estabhshment 
of  the  kingdom  in  the  earth,  but  we  wait  for  the  coming  of 
the  Lord  to  take  us  out  of  the  earth.  The  prayer  of  the 
Church  is,  "Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus."  And  the  Spirit 
and  the  Bride  say,  "Come."  Without  enlarging  on  the 
other  petitions  or  attempting  a  full  exposition  of  them  in 
their  full  and  perfect  meaning  we  wish  only  to  say  that  this 
prayer  will  be  heard  once  more  in  the  earth  and  will  then 
be  used  as  it  was  once  used  by  the  Jewish  disciples  when 
they  were  sent  forth  by  our  Lord.  When  the  Church  is 
taken  from  the  earth  a  believing  Jewish  remnant  will  give 
the  witness  and  preach  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  once 
more.  They  will  undoubtedly  use  this  prayer  during  the 
great  tribulation  through  which  they  will  pass,  the  tribula- 
tion in  which  the  evil  one  is  in  the  earth  and  famine  and 
many  temptations  will  abound.  Then  can  they  truthfully 
ask,  "Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread — lead  us  not  into 
temptations — deliver  us  from  the  evil  one,"  which  is  the  per- 
sonal Antichrist.  "Thy  kingdom  come."  This  prayer  will 
be  answered,  deliverance  will  come  for  them  from  heaven 
in  the  coming  of  the  King.* 

Then  our  Lord  speaks  in  connection  with  prayer  of  the 
spirit  of  for.  ivcness  which  every  one  who  is  in  relationship 
with  God  as  Father  should  exercise.  If  such  a  spirit  of  love 
and  patience  towards  those  who  have  done  evil  against  r»s 

*We  pass  over  the  petition,  "And  forgive  nso  our  debts  a-^  WP  ''^♦'•■ 
pive    our    debtors."      This    is    a    legal,    an    Old    Testament   petit'O^. 
Our   forgiveness  docs  unt  depend  npon  our  relation  to  each  Qther, 


144 

is  not  practiced,  it  means  that  we  cannot  enjoy  full  com- 
munion with  Him.  Therefore,  "let  all  bitterness,  and  heat 
of  passion,  and  wrath,  and  clamor  and  injurious  language 
be  removed  from  you,  with  all  malice ;  and  be  to  one  another 
kind,  compassionate,  forgiving-  one  another,  so  as  God 
also  in  Christ  has  forgiven  you"  (Eph.  iv:32).  That  which 
relates  to  ourself  follows  next :  "And  when  ye  fast  be  not 
as  the  hypocrites,  downcast  in  countenance,  for  they  dis- 
figure their  faces  so  that  they  may  appear  fasting  to  men; 
verily  I  say  to  you,  they  have  their  reward.  But  thou  when 
fasting  anoint  thy  head  and  wash  thy  face,  so  that  thou 
mayest  not  appear  fasting  unto  men,  but  to  thy  Father,  who 
sees  in  secret;  and  thy  Father  who  sees  in  secret  shall  ren- 
der it  to  thee."  Here  once  more  we  have  the  wrong  motive 
and  the  true.  It  was  done  by  the  hypocrites  in  just  the  way 
spoken  of  here.  It  was  an  attitude  of  humiliation  of  the 
body,  denying  self,  but  only  as  to  be  seen  of  men.  What 
else  has  been  and  is  all  the  fasting  and  asceticism  as  it  has 
been  fostered  in  Christendom?  If  one  does  fast,  let  the  fast- 
ing be  done  in  secret  as  unto  the  Father  and  not  to  appear 
before  men. 

In  the  second  half  of  the  sixth  chapter  we  are  taken  upon 
another  ground.  The  heirs  of  the  kingdom  are  seen  in  this 
section  as  in  the  world,  subject  to  the  cares  and  temptations 
of  the  wilderness.  We  must  not  lose  sight  here  of  its  Jewish 
application.  When  our  Lord  sent  forth  His  disciples  in  the 
tenth  chapter  to  preach  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  He  gave 
them  instructions  how  they  should  go  about,  depending  in 
all  things  upon  their  Father  in  heaven.    The  disciples  thus 


145 

sent  forth  with  the  preaching-  of  the  King-dom  Gospel  are  the 
types  of  another  Jewish  remnant  which  is  to  preach  once 
more  in  a  future  day  the  same  Gospel,  "The  Kingdom  of 
the  heavens  has  drawn  nigh,"  To  this  remnant  going 
til  rough  the  tribulation  the  exhortations  have  a  special  ap- 
plication. However,  we  pass  this  by  and  apply  it  to  our- 
selves as  believers,  for  all  which  our  Lord  speaks  in  this 
section  is  for  every  member  of  the  body  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  as  such,  who  are  in  the  earth,  pilgrims  and  strangers, 
waiting  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  We  are  in  the  world 
though  not  of  the  world,  hated  by  the  world  as  the  world 
hated  Him,  but  in  this  world  we  are  exposed  to  all  the  temp- 
tations and  the  cares  and  sorrows  connected  with  an  earthly 
life  which  are  ever  coming  upon  the  believer.  Our  Lord  tells 
us  now  how  to  behave  in  the  midst  of  these  scenes,  passing 
through  the  wilderness,  what  our  privileges  and  comforts 
are. — "Lay  not  up  for  yourself  treasures  upon  the  earth, 
where  moth  and  rust  spoils,  and  where  thieves  dig  through 
and  steal ;  but  lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures  in  heaven, 
where  neither  moth  nor  rust  spoils,  and  where  thieves  do 
not  dig  through  and  steal ;  for  where  thy  treasure  is,  there 
will  be  also  thy  heart." — The  natural  man  lives  for  the 
earthly  things  and  strives  for  the  things  which  are  seen. 
His  delight  is  in  treasures  which  are  here  below,  and  con- 
nected with  this  life  is  care,  worry,  anxiety  and  at  last  the 
loss  of  that  which  was  cherished  and  loved.  As  believers 
born  again  we  have  a  new  nature  and  belong  no  longer  to 
the  earth,  but  we  belong  to  heaven.  "If  therefore  ye  have 
been  raised  with  the  Christ,  seek  the  things  which  are  above, 


146 

where  the  Christ  is  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God :  have 
your  mind  on  the  things  which  are  above,  not  on  the  things 
that  are  on  the  earth"  (Cor.  iii:2,  3).  "We  look  not  at  the 
things  that  are  seen,  but  at  the  things  that  are  not  seen ;  for 
the  things  which  are  seen  are  for  a  time,  but  those  that  are 
not  seen  are  eternal"  (2  Cor.  iv:i8).  While,  then,  this  is 
our  calling  it  is  neverthless  true  that  the  heirs  of  the  king- 
dom are  constantly  in  danger  in  this  present  evil  age  to  for- 
get that  they  are  but  pilgrims  and  strangers  here.  Alas ! 
only  too  many  are  like  Lot,  pitching  first  the  tent  towards 
Sodom  and  getting  there  altogether  after  a  while.  In  these 
days  especially  the  danger  is  exceedingly  great  and  the 
heavenly  calling,  the  laying  up  of  treasures  in  heaven  is  often 
put  into  a  secondary  place.  The  exhortations  in  the  Epistles 
are  but  a  continuation  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  this  word  of 
our  Lord.  "Those  who  desire  to  be  rich  fall  into  temptation 
and  a  snare,  and  many  unwise  and  hurtful  lusts,  which 
plunge  men  into  destruction  and  ruin.  For  the  love  of 
money  is  the  root  of  every  evil ;  which  some  having  aspired 
after,  have  wandered  from  the  faith  and  pierced  themselves 
with  many  sorrows"  (i  Tim.  viiQ-ii).  "Enjoin  on  those 
rich  in  the  present  age  not  to  be  high-minded,  nor  to  trust 
in  the  uncertainty  of  riches ;  but  in  God  who  affords  us  all 
things  richly  for  our  enjoyment ;  to  do  good,  to  be  rich  in 
good  works,  to  be  liberal  in  distributing,  disposed  to  com- 
municate of  their  substance"  (i  Tim.  vi:i7,  18).  "Let  your 
conversation  be  without  the  love  of  money,  satisfied  with 
your  present  circumstances"  (Heb.  xxiii:5).  How  great 
the  danger  of  looking  back  to  Egypt !  But  as  we  follow  the 


147 

exhortation  aiul  lay  up  for  ourselves  treasures  in  heaven 
and  that  in  view  of  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ,  where  we 
shall  receive  the  rewards,  our  heart  will  surely  be  there. 
Thus  having  our  treasures  there  and  laying  them  up  there 
they  are  not  alone  secure,  but  our  heart  will  constantly  be 
drawn  there  and  in  this  way  kept  from  the  eartldy  things. 
And  where  do  our  thoughts  mostly  rest — on  earthly  or 
heavenly  things?  If  our  thoughts  are  here  surely  our  treas- 
ure cannot  be  in  heaven. 

Our  Lord  continues:  "The  lamp  of  the  body  is  the  eye; 
if  therefore  thine  eye  be  single,  thy  whole  body  will  be  light; 
but  if  thine  eye  be  wicked,  thy  whole  body  will  be  dark: 
If  therefore  the  light  that  is  in  thee  be  darkness,  how  great 
the  darkness." 

These  are  most  solemn  words.  The  believer  has  a  spiritual 
nature,  a  heart  in  which  he  sees,  "bc'ng  enb'gh toned  in  the 
eyes  of  your  heart"  (Ephes.  i:i8).  The  Word  of  God  is 
the  light  and  the  entrance  of  His  Word  bringeth  light.  The 
eye,  the  heart  single — that  is  looking  only  above  to  the 
heavenlies,  the  whole  body  will  be  light,  there  will  be  not 
only  a  realization  of  a  heavenly  calling  but  also  a  walk 
worthy  of  this  high  calling,  a  heavenly  walk.  But  light 
rejected  becomes  darkness,  and  how  great  the  darkness ! 
Truth  given,  light  flashed  forth  from  the  Word  and  not 
used  and  acted  upon,  leads  into  the  grossest  darkness.* 

Therefore  a  double  service  is  impossible,  ^^^e  cannot 
serve  two  masters.    Tt  is  impossible  that  the  eye  could  look 


*This  is  the  deplorable  s^atc  of  thousands  of  believers. 


148 

at  the  same  time  to  the  earth  and  to  heaven.  Friendship 
with  the  world  is  enmity  with  God  (James  iv:4).  Is  it 
then  a  hard  path  which  we  liave  in  the  wilderness  with  no 
comfort?  No,  for  the  very  next  words  of  our  Lord  bring 
to  our  hearts  that  sweet  and  precious  comfort  which  only 
he  can  enjoy  who  with  the  single  eye  looks  to  things  above 
and  walks  in  separation  from  the  workl. 

These  words  (25-34  verses)  tell  us  that  we  have  a 
Father  who  careth,  a  Father  who  knows  and  who  loves. 
He  who  feedeth  the  birds  of  heaven  provides  surely  more 
abundantly  for  those  who  are  much  better  than  they,  and  all 
He  asks  is  trust  in  Him.  "Be  not  careful" — oh,  how  blessed- 
ly it  sounds — oh,  how  full  and  rich  it  comes  to  the  believer's 
jieart.  And  again  it  is  written  "Be  careful  about  nothing; 
but  in  everything,  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanks- 
giving, let  your  requests  be  made  known  to  God"  (Phi!. 
iv:6).  Be  not  careful  for  your  life,  what  ye  shall  eat. 
*  *  *  Be  careful  for  nothing.  *  *  *  Yet  how  slow 
we  are  to  learn  it.  Anxiety  and  care,  hurry  and  worry,  these 
God-dishonoring  w^orks  of  the  flesh  are  ever  coming  up 
again.    How  true  George  Mueller  used  to  say: 

"Where   anxiety   begins    faith    ends, 
Where    faith   begins   anxiety   ends." 

The  lesson  can  only  be  learned  in  constant  dependence 
upon  Him  in  seeking  the  things  which  are  above. 

And  what  does  anxiety  and  care  accomplish  after  all? 
"But  which  of  you  by  being  careful  can  add  to  his  growth 


149 


)ne  cubit?  And  why  are  you  careful  about  clothing?"  etc. 
(X'erses  2J-^t,).  We  are  then  utterly  helpless  in  ourselves. 
Alas !  how  often  we  look  in  our  anxiety,  in  sickness  and  in 
health  to  something  in  ourselves  and  to  men  and  man's 
help  and  not  to  Him  in  whose  hands  we  are  so  securely 
and  leave  it  all  with  Him,  committing  our  way  unto  the 
Lord.  And  all  this  is  applicable  to  even  the  smallest  matters 
of  the  daily  life.  Seeking  then  first  of  all  the  kingdom  of 
God  and  His  righteousness — that  is,  the  things  which  are 
above — the  promise  is  given,  all  things  shall  be  added  unto 
you. 

And  there  is  another  characteristic  about  anxiety.  It 
looks  unbelievingly  ahead.  Unbelief  draws  dark  pictures  of 
despair  and  occupies  the  mind  with  a  day  which  may  never 
come.  How  different  it  ought  to  be  and  will  be  if  we  but 
follow  His  word,  "Be  not  careful  then  as  to  the  morrow, 
for  the  morrow  will  be  careful  for  itself :  sufficient  for  the 
day  is  its  own  evil." 


I50 


CHAPTER  VII. 

The  chapter  which  follows  contains  the  last  words  of  the 
great  discourse  of  our  Lord.  The  contents  of  this  chapter 
are  very  instructive  and  form  a  most  fitting  end  of  the 
declaration  of  the  King.  The  first  few  verses  contain  a 
warning  against  judging.  We  have  in  the  beginning  of  the 
chapter  something  which  is  altogether  different  from  the 
last  section  of  the  sixth  chapter.  There  we  saw  the  heir 
of  the  Kingdom  in  the  midst  of  the  world,  how  he  is  to  trust 
in  and  dependent  on  the  Father  and  seek  first  the  kingdom 
of  God  and  his  righteousness,  his  walk  undivided  and  de- 
pending. When  our  Lord  begins  with  "Judge  not,  that  ye 
be  not  judged"  He  directs  the  attention  to  the  conduct  of  the 
disciple  towards  his  fellow  disciple.  The  conduct  towards 
those  who  are  enemies,  who  despitefully  use  and  persecute 
the  heirs  of  the  Kingdom  was  mentioned  by  our  Lord  before. 
It  is  the  relation  they  were  to  show  one  towards  the  other 
He  touches  upon  now.  The  principle  of  this  relation  is  love. 
In  Matthew  of  course  it  could  not  be  mentioned  in  full.  In 
the  Gospel  of  John  our  Lord  leads  His  disciples  into  the 
fullness  of  it,  which  here  is  but  indicated,  and  in  the  First 
Epistle  of  John  these  precious  things  are  still  more  unfolded. 
After  He  had,  as  the  Lord  and  Teacher,  washed  the  disciples' 
feet,  He  told  them  that  they  ought  to  wash  one  another's 
feet.    This  is  the  opposite  from  that  against  which  He  warns 


1-5 1 


here,  sittiriQ^  upon  judji^ment  aj^ainst  the  other  and  cxposiui:^ 
one  another's  fauhs. 

But  we  ask,  what  does  our  Lord  mean,  when  He  says : 
"Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judged;  for  with  what  judgment 
ye  judge,  \e  shall  be  judged;  and  with  what  measure  ye 
mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you"?  Does  He  in  these  words 
forbid  the  judging  of  outward  actions  or  the  present  evil? 
Some  have  taken  it  in  this  sense  and  gone  into  that  looseness 
against  which  the  Lord  warns  later  (verse  6).  The  L(M-d 
does  not  forbid  here  the  judging  of  actions  and  evil.  H  He 
did,  His  words  would  clash  with  numerous  statements  in  the 
Epistles.  For  instance,  we  read  in  Corinthians:  "For  what 
have  I  to  do  with  judging  those  outside  also?  Yea,  do  not 
ye  judge  them  that  are  within  ?  l^)Ut  those  without  God 
judges.  Remove  the  wicked  persons  from  among  your- 
selves" (i  Cor.  v:i2,  13).  It  is  evident  from  these  words, 
as  well  as  from  the  order  our  Lord  has  laid  down,  to  proceed 
with  a  brother  who  has  sinned  (Matthew  xviii  :i5-i8),  that 
the  individual  believer  as  v/cll  as  the  assembly  has  a  right 
to  judge  evil  actions.  Furtlicrmore,  in  this  very  chapter 
our  Lord  declares,  "By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them ;", 
how,  then,  could  we  know  them  if  it  were  not  by  ourselves, 
judging  the  persons  on  account  of  their  evil  actions ?  Cerr 
tainly  judging  of  things  which  surround  us.  as  well  as, per- 
sons, when  it  is  our  plain  duty  to  do  so,  is  nowhere  forbidden. 
Contending  earnestly  for  the  faith  once  and  for  all  delivered 
to  the  ^aints.  to  which  we  are  exhorted  in  these  days  of  fall- 
ing away,  carries  with  it  the  necessity  of  judging  that  which, 
in  man-made  systems  as  well  as  in  persons,  is  offensive  to 


152 

God  and  dishonoring  to  our  Lord.  The  words  which  de- 
mand the  separation  from  that  which  is  evil  presupposes 
judging  Hkewise.  This  solemn  duty  we  have  as  believers, 
in  the  midst  of  a  perverse  generation,  standing  as  we  do, 
at  the  close  of  this  dispensation.  It  is  to  be  exercised  as 
in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  and  with  the  single  eye  to  His 
glory  and  the  honor  of  His  name.  Easily  and  quickly  made 
is  the  step  from  the  judging,  which  is  duty,  to  that  censori- 
ousness,  fault-finding  and  all  that  follows,  against  which  our 
Lord  warns  and  which  is  sinful. 

But  what  is  the  meaning  of  the  words  "Judge  not"  ?  Our 
Lord  forbids  the  judging  of  motives,  the  spring  from  which 
actions  result.  I  have  no  right  to  judge  that  which  is  not 
manifested  to  mine  eyes.  Motives  are  concealed  and  known 
to  God  alone.  He  who  in  censoriousness  continually  judges 
his  brother's  motives  and  in  a  fault-finding  spirit  sits  in 
judgment  upon  him,  assumes  the  place  of  the  judge,  which 
does  not  belong  to  him,  but  to  the  Lord  only.  Two  passages, 
perhaps,  from  Romans  and  Corinthians  explain  the  judging 
which  our  Lord  condemns:  "One  man  is  assured  that  he 
may  eat  all  things ;  but  the  weak  eats  herbs.  Let  not  him 
that  eats  make  little  of  him  that  eats  not;  and  let  not  him 
that  eats  not  judge  him  that  eats:  for  God  has  received  him. 
Who  art  thou  that  judgest  the  servant  of  another?  to  his 
own  master  he  stands  and  falls.  *  *  *  But  thou,  why 
judgest  thou  thy  brother?  or  again,  thou,  why  does  thoU 
make  little  of  thy  brother?  for  we  shall  all  be  placed  before 
the  judgment  seat  of  God.  *  *  *  Let  us  no  longer 
therefore  judge  one  another;  but  judge  ye  this  rather,  not 


153 

to  put  a  stumbling-block  or  a  fall-trap  before  bis  brotber" 
(Romans  xiv:3-i3).  "So  tbat  do  not  judge  anytbing  be- 
fore the  time,  until  the  Lord  shall  come,  who  shall  also  both 
bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness,  and  shall  make 
manifest  the  counsels  of  hearts;  and  then  shall  each  have 
his  praise  from  God"  (i  Corin.  iv:5). 

And  how  true  it  is  what  our  Lord  says :  "For  with  what 
judgment  ye  judge,  ye  shall  be  judged ;  and  with  what  meas- 
ure ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you."  This  is  a  law, 
from  which  the  believer  cannot  escape.  A  law  like  that  other 
one  in  Galatians,  "Be  not  deceived :  God  is  not  mocked ;  for 
whatever  a  man  shall  sow,  that  shall  he  reap."  Many  a  one 
has  found  out  the  swift  working  of  this  law,  "With  what 
measure  you  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you."  Many  will 
have  yet  to  learn  by  sad  experiences  and  much  heartache 
that  the  execution  of  this  law  is  never  slow.  The  word  was 
quickly  spoken  which  censured  a  brother's  motives,  which 
belittled  him  (to  lift  up  the  self  of  the  accuser),  but  it  will 
not  take  very  long,  and  some  one  will  step  up  with  the  same 
measure  and  the  same  judgment  and  do  the  same  to  us. 
Xothing  is  so  detrimental  to  spirituality  than  a  habitual  cen- 
soriousness. 

And  why,  then,  do  men  see  the  little  mote  in  their  brother's 
eye?   Because  thev  do  not  see  the  great  beam  in  their  own. 

Tf  the  saint  but  judges  himself  he  will  surely  not  be  for- 
ever occupied  with  seeing  the  mote  in  the  brother's  eye. 
He  will  be  patient,  loving  and  not  surmise  always  evil. 
"Love  does  not  impute  evil     *     *     *     beareth  all  things, 


154 

believeth  all  things,  hopeth  all  things,  endiireth  all  things" 
(i  Cor.  xiii). 

In  the  sixth  verse  our  Lord  warns  against  the  other  ex- 
treme, which  is  looseness,  the  abuse  of  His  grace :  ''Give 
not  that  which  is  holy  to  the  dogs,  nor  cast  your  pearls  be- 
fore swine,  lest  they  trample  them  with  their  feet  and  turn 
round  and  rend  you."*  A  person  misunderstanding  the 
"judge  not"  may  allow  evil  to  go  unjudged,  and  therefore 
that  which  is  holy  and  the  pearls  become  defiled  and  are 
trampled  under  feet  by  dogs  and  swine — unconverted  per- 
sons, though  perhaps  outward  professors  (see  2  Peter  ii:22). 
To  apply  the  passage  to  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  to  the 
unsaved  and  to  those  sunk  the  deepest  in  vice  would  be  inccr- 
rect.  It  has  no  reference  to  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel. 
We  should,  however,  always  guard  against  any  irreverent 
use  of  the  word  of  God  and  the  blessed  things  made  known 
in  it. 

In  verses  7-1 1  we  have  the  familiar  words  of  our  Lord 
telling  us  to  ask  of  Him,  with  the  assurance  that  every  one 
that  asketh  receiveth.  The  connection  is  obvious.  In  look- 
ing at  the  injunctions  our  Lord  gives  not  to  judge  and  not 
to  abuse,  what  He  has  given,  one  feels  the  need  of  wisdom. 
Intercourse  with  God  in  prayer  supplies  this  need,  'Tf  any 
of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  God  that  giveth  to  all 
liberally,  and  upbraideth  not;  and  it  shall  be  given  him'' 
(James  i  :5). 


*That  incorrect  paraphrase  called  "the  Twentieth  Century  New- 
Testament"  has  seen  fit  to  put  part  of  this  verse  in  a  more  refined 
(?  !)  language.  They  translate,  "Do  not  give  what  is  sacred  to 
dogs;  nor  yet  throw  your  pearls  before  (>igs."    How  ridiculous! 


155 

And  what  an  invitation  is  here  put  before  us!  How  siiu- 
])le  and  definite  the  language!  How  plain  it  all  is  with  no 
"if"  or  "but"  added  to  it.  Happy  he  who  takes  all  these 
words  in  their  simple  meaning  and  ever  uses  the  royal  oflfer 
in  faith.  Of  course  we  would  not  look  in  Matthew  for  the 
fullest  teaching  on  prayer  in  His  name  nor  could  the  words 
here.  "Ask  and  it  shall  be  given  you;  seek  and  ye  shall  find; 
knock  and  it  shall  be  opened  to  you,"  be  applied  to  anyone 
else  but  believers.  This  is  clear  from  the  w^ords :  "If  ye 
then,  who  are  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your 
children,  how  much  more  shall  your  Father  who  is  in  heaven 
give  good  things  to  those  that  ask  Him."  In  Luke  xi  we 
read  the  same  word,  but  there  it  says,  "give  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  them  that  ask  Him."  The  prayer  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  however,  is  no  longer  in  order,  for  the  Comforter 
has  come,  and  no  believer  has  a  right  now  to  ask  upon  this 
promise  for  the  Spirit. 

The  I2th  verse  in  this  chapter  is  one  of  the  most  misap- 
plied in  the  whole  discourse  of  our  Lord.  "All  things,  there- 
fore, whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  unto  you, 
thus  do  ye  also  to  them :  for  this  is  the  law  and  the  prophets." 
This,  many  professing  Christians  and  others,  who  make  no 
profession  at  all,  call  the  golden  rule.  How  many,  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  have  told  us  that  this  is  the  religion  they  believe  in. 
It  is  even  claimed  that  in  the  "sacred''  books  of  the  East, 
the  religious  products  of  Buddhism  and  nrahmanism,  same- 
thing  similar  is  found.* 


*Jews  claim  the  same  for  the  Talmud  because  FTillel  taught 
"What  thnu  wouldst  not  wish  for  thyself,  do  not  unto  thy  neighbor. 
This  is  the  wholg  \a.w."— Talmud,  Sahb.  31. 


156 


Yet  with  all  this  boast  in  a  rule  which  they  do  not  under- 
stand, no  one  keeps  it  nor  would  think  of  keeping  it.  The 
Lord  gives  this  practical  word  to  the  true  disciple.  He 
who  is  born  again  is  born  of  God.  He  has  the  nature  of 
God  and  that  is  love.  "He  that  loveth  another  hath  fulfilled 
the  law.  *  *  *  Love  worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbor; 
therefore  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law"  (Rom.  xiii  :8  and 
lo).  "For  this  is  the  message  that  ye  heard  from  the  begin- 
ning, that  we  should  love  one  another"  (i  John  iii:ii). 
"We  love,  because  He  first  loved  us"  (i  John  iviig).  We 
see  then  that  the  terse  saying  our  Lord  puts  in  the  chapter  is 
not  out  of  keeping  with  the  whole.  The  outcome  of  inter- 
course with  God  spoken  of  in  verses  7-1 1  will  be,  acting  in 
love. 

This  is  followed  by  an  exhortation  such  as  He  who  is 
from  above  alone  could  give  and  with  it  the  first  half  of  the 
seventh  chapter  closes.  "Enter  ye  in  through  the  narrow 
gate:  for  wide  is  the  gate  and  broad  is  the  way  that  leadeth 
unto  destruction,  and  many  there  are  that  enter  through  it; 
because  narrow  is  the  gate  and  straitened  is  the  way  that 
leadeth  unto  life,  and  few  there  are  that  find  it."  It  is  the 
well-known  Gospel  text,  though  not  always  correctly  applied. 
The  gate  (door)  and  the  way  is  Christ  Himself.  "I  am  the 
door  of  the  sheep ;  by  me  if  any  man  enter  in,  he  shall  be 
saved"  (John  x).  "I  am  the  way  *  *  *  j^q  j^^n  cometh 
unto  the  Father  but  by  me"  (John  xiv).  And  why  then  is 
the  gate  narrow?  Not  because  certain  conditions  and  hard 
terms  are  to  be  fulfilled,  but  because  man  does  not  want  to 
give  up  his  own  righteousness  and  clinging  still  to  his  mis- 


157 

enable,  filthy  rags,  he  refuses  God's  way  and  God's  door  of 
salvation,  which  is  Christ  and  Christ  alone.  Ah,  the  devices 
of  Satan  ever  multiplying  to  keep  men  away  from  entering 
in  through  the  narrow  gate !  The  broad  way  that  leads  to 
destruction  was  never  so  thronged  in  the  history  of  Christen- 
dom with  such  masses  of  professing,  self-righteous,  moral, 
educated,  but  Christ  and  the  blood  rejecting  "Christians"  as 
in  these  days,  and  still  the  word  is  true  of  the  narrow  gate 
and  the  straitened  way  that  "few  there  are  that  find  it." 

In  His  closing  words  our  Lord  gives  a  most  solemn  warn- 
ing against  false  prophets,  and  makes  a  contrast  between  the 
false  prcvfessor  and  the  true  possessor.  "Beware  of  false 
prophets,  such  as  come  to  you  in  sheep's  clothing,  but 
within  are  ravening  wolves!"  (verse  15).  Let  us  notice 
first  of  all  that  this  warning  has  a  special  significance  for 
the  closing  of  the  age,  that  is,  the  ending  of  this  dispensa- 
tion, the  seven  years  of  tribulation  and  sorrow  in  the  earth. 
We  only  need  to  turn  to  the  Olivet  discourse  (Matt,  xxiv) 
in  which  our  Lord  answers  the  question  of  His  disciples 
concerning  the  consummation  of  the  age.  When  they 
asked  aboiit  this  ending  of  the  age  they  surely  meant  noth- 
ing else  but  the  Jewish  age,  for  of  a  Christian  age  they 
knew  nothing.  In  answer  our  Lord  gives,  describing 
the  events  which  fall  into  the  seventieth  week  of  Daniel, 
He  says:  "And  many  false  prophets  shall  arise."  These 
false  prophets  will  make  their  appearance  during  the  great 
tribulation,  no  doubt  under  the  leadership  of  the  false 
prophet,  the  Heast,  so  prominent  in  the  book  of  Revelation. 
That   there  have  been  throughout  this  dispensation   false 


1 58 

prophets  in  sheep's  clothing  and  that  they  are  more  numerous 
now  than  they  have  ever  been  before  we  need  hardly 
jnention,  yet  strictly  speaking,  the  warning  against  false 
prophets  concerns  the  Jewish  remnant  in  the  earth  during 
the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble.  Nowhere  are  we  as  believers 
warned  against  false  prophets ;  we  are  warned  against  false 
spirits  and  false  teachers,  which  of  course,  like  the  false 
prophets  come  in  sheep's  clothing.  False  prophets  then, 
after  the  church  is  taken,  to  lead  many  astray ;  false  teachers 
and  false  spirits  now  while  the  Church  is  still  on  the  earth. 
The  false  prophets,  who  will  undoubtedly  work  many  mir- 
acles and  be  leaders  of  the  strong  delusions,  are  the  visible 
-manifestation  of  the  false  spirits  which  are  now  at  work. 
When  Paul  said  farewell  to  the  Elders  of  Ephesus  he  said : 
"For  I  know  this,  that  after  my  departing  shall  grievous 
wolves  enter  in  among  you,  not  sparing  the  flock.  Also  of 
your  own  selves  shall  men  arise,  speaking  perverse  things,  to 
draw  away  disciples  after  them"  (Acts  xx:29,  30).  How 
soon  this  prophecy  was  fulfilled !  Let  us  remind  ourselves  of 
some  of  the  solemn  warnings  which  are  for  the  Church.  "Be- 
ware lest  any  man  spoil  you  through  philosophy  and  vain 
deceit,  after  the  tradition  of  men,  after  the  rudiments  of  the 
world  and  not  after  Christ"  (Col.  ii:8).  "O  Timothy,  keep 
that  which  is  committed  to  thy  trust,  avoiding  profane  and 
vain  babblings  and  oppositions  of  science,  falsely  so-called, 
which  some  professing  have  erred  concerning  the  faith"  (i 
Tim.  vi  :2o).  The  very  errors  and  false  teachings  so  prevalent 
in  these  days  are  marked  out  here.  "Now  the  Spirit  speak- 
^th  expresslv  that  in  the  latter  times  some  shall  depart  from 


159 

the  faith,  giving  heed  to  seducing  spirits,  and  doctrines  of 
demons"  (i  Tim.  iv:i).  And  how  great  the  increase  of 
these  seducing  spirits  in  our  day!  "But  there  were  false 
prophets  also  among  the  people,  even  as  there  shall  be 
false  teachers  among  you,  who  privily  shall  bring  in  damna- 
ble heresies,  even  denying  the  Lord  who  bought  them,  and 
bring  upon  themselves  swift  destruction"  (2  Pet.  ii:i). 
The  so-called  "Higher  Critics,"  who  sit  in  wicked  judg- 
ment upon  the  infallible  Word  of  God  and  dishonor  Christ, 
the  living  Word,  are  meant  here.  And  where  are  these 
men  not  found  throughout  Christendom?  See  also  the 
warnings  against  false  spirits  in  the  first  Epistle  of  John, 
(i  John  iv:i-3;  2  Cor.  ii:i7;  2  Cor.  xi:i3-l5;  Titus  i:io, 
II,  and  other  passages). 

But  whether  they  are  false  prophets  coming  in  the  future 
or  the  false  spirits  and  teachers  at  the  present  time,  they 
come  in  sheep's  clothing.  Anti-Christ  himself  will  first 
speak  like  a  lamb  and  have  a  flattering  tongue,  and  all  the 
prophets  under  his  control  will  follow  him,  backing  their 
assertions  by  signs  and  lying  miracles.  The  story  of  Moses 
and  Aaron  sent  by  Jehovah,  and  Jannes  and  Jambres  sent  by 
Satan  and  endued  by  him  with  power,  will  then  be  acted 
out  again  (Exodus  vii:ii).  In  this  way  many  will  be  led 
astray.  In  our  age  Satan  transforms  himself  into  an  angel 
of  ■light,  and  the  false  spirits  and  teachers  appear  like  meek 
sheep  of  the  Great  Shepherd.  In  the  subtle  infidelity  which 
denies  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible,  Satan  has  surely  trans- 
formed himself  thus.  There  is  much  talk  from  their  side 
of  "Bible  research."  and  that  their  work  will  help  in  bring- 


i6o 


ing  out  the  truth,  and  many  declarations  that  they  are  sin- 
cere and  earnest  Christian  workers  in  spite  of  their  infidelity 
in  the  divinity  of  the  Scriptures,  but  all  this  is  but  the  sheep's 
dress  in  which  they  make  their  appearance.  We  think  of 
other  false  teachers  who  deny  the  eternal  Deity  of  our 
Lord,  the  physical  resurrection  of  Him  and  the  revealed 
facts  concerning  the  dead  in  Christ  and  those  who  died 
unsaved.*  All  these  soul  destroying  false  teachings  come 
in  the  garb  of  truth  and  light. 

Our  Lord  continues :  "By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know 
them:  do  men  gather  grapes  from  thorns  or  figs  from 
thistles?  So  every  good  tree  bringeth  forth  good  fruit, 
but  the  corrupt  tree  bringeth  forth  bad  fruit.  A  good  tree 
cannot  bear  bad  fruit,  nor  can  a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth 
good  fruit.  Every  tree  that  bringeth  forth  not  good  fruit 
is  cut  down  and  cast  into  the  fire.  By  their  fruits  then  shall 
ye  know  them"  (verses  16-20). 

What  does  our  Lord  mean  by  fruit?  Does  He  mean 
downright  wickedness?  There  is  no  question  that  immor- 
ality and  evil  deeds  are  included  under  the  term  fruit. 
Many  a  false  teacher  began  in  teaching  error  in  such  a  way 
that  the  error  could  hardly  be  distinguished  from  the  truth, 
but  continuing  in  error  he  ended  with  many  of  his  follow- 
ers in  the  flesh.  Often  behind  the  most  subtle  errors  the 
flesh  is  nourished  and  an  outbreak  in  gross  immorality  may 


*We  have  reference  to  the  "Millennial  Dawn  Series."  Thou- 
sands have  been  led  astray  by  these  books  which  appear  in-deed 
in  sheep's  clothing,  but  within  is  the  ravening  wolf  who  wishes 
to  harm  the  flock  of  Christ.  .-iJ't:     :     ."  '    '; 


i6i 


follow.  Yet,  if  our  Lord  meant  nothing  but  evil  deeds  and 
wickedness,  it  would  be  hard  indeed  to  detect  these  false 
ones.  Satan  is  not  so  blind  as  to  peddle  his  lies  around  by 
wicked  people  whose  lives  bear  the  stamp  of  immorality 
and  open  wickedness.  He  does  it  in  quite  another  way. 
We  were  often  told  of  people  who  hold  the  most  abominable 
doctrines  and  deny  the  Deity  of  our  Lord  as  well  as  the 
atonement,  "But  look  at  the  beautiful  lives  they  live!  How 
meek  and  lovely  they  are !  How  much  good  they  do ! 
Do  not  their  lives  prove  that  their  doctrine  is  right  and  the 
fruit  show  that  the  tree  is  not  bad  ?"  This  outward  moral 
appearance  and  a  "sweet"'  temper  belongs  only  too  often 
to  the  sheep's  clothing  and  is  one  of  the  devices  of  Satan 
with  which  he  tries  to  lead  many  away  from  the  truth 
and  into  error — the  fruit  by  which  we  shall  know  them 
may  be  wickedness  in  the  grossest  form,  but  it  means 
more  than  that.  The  word  "Do  men  gather  grapes  from 
thorns  and  figs  from  thistles?"  is  the  key.  Grapes  and  figs 
speak  of  true  fruit.  Thorns  bear  fruit  which  may  resemble 
grapes,  but  never  can  they  be  grapes  from  which  comes  the 
wine  which  makes  glad  the  heart  of  God  and  man.  The 
soul  looking  deeper  (and  we  remember  the  warning  is  for 
believers)  than  outward  appearances  finds  soon  that  the 
false  teacher  or  spirit  is  not  in  the  truth.  He  tc;  ts  it  by 
the  Word,  and  finds  the  fruit,  the  glory  of  Christ  and  glory- 
ing in  Him,  lacking.  It  is  a  most  subtle  substitute  for  the 
true  fruit — a  counterfeit — and  leaves  the  soul  empty.  A 
believer,  not  much  taught  in  the  Scriptures,  sent  us  a  few 
>veeks  ago  a  question  about  a  certain  publication  which  was 


1 62 


sent  to  him  with  the  promise  of  leading  him  into  a  better 
knowledge  of  the  Bible  inasmuch  as  it  was  devoted  to  Bible 
study.  We  wrote  him  at  once  exposing  the  true  character  of 
the  paper.  He  answered,  that  while  he  had  but  little  knowl- 
edge yet  of  the  Word,  and  while  much  seemed  to  be  in 
favor  of  the  paper  which  had  been  placed  into  his  hands, 
yet  while  reading  he  experienced  a  feeling  of  emptiness, 
there  was  no  response  from  his  heart  and  a  lack  of  joy  and 
peace.  This,  perhaps,  will  be  helpful  to  see  how  a  true 
believer  will  know  them  by  their  fruit. 

But  in  the  words  of  our  Lord  we  have  also  the  most 
definite  teaching  of  that  doctrine,  which  may  be  termed 
the  A  B  C  of  the  Gospel,  the  total  depravity  of  man,  the 
utter  ruin  of  man,  and,  therefore,  the  necessity  of  the  im- 
partation  of  a  new  nature.  Both,  as  we  well  know,  are 
denied  by  some  of  the  leading  preachers  and  teachers  of  all 
the  great  evangelical  denominations.  To  deny  these  truths 
is  equal  to  the  denial  that  Christ  is  our  Saviour.  Man  is, 
according  to  the  new  theology,  his  own  Saviour.  The  tree 
is  corrupt,  the  fruit  is  bad.  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh 
is  flesh.  The  tree  is  good  and  the  fruit  is  good.  That 
which  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  Spirit. 

In  the  three  verses  our  Lord  mentions  His  own  coming 
day,  when  He  will  appear  as  the  One  into  whose  hands  the 
Father  has  given  all  things.  The  whole  ending  of  the 
discourse  brings  us  into  that  time.  This  in  itself  makes  it 
that  great  dispensational  discourse  concerning  the  king- 
dom, as  we  have  pointed  out  in  our  exposition. 


1 63 

"Not  every  one  who  saith  unto  Me.  Lord,  Lord,  shall 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  he  that  doeth  the 
will  of  My  Father,  who  is  in  heaven.  Many  will  say  to 
Me  in  that  day,  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied  in  Thy 
name,  and  in  Thy  name  have  cast  out  demons,  and  in  Thy 
name  have  done  many  wonderful  works?  And  then  I  will 
profess  unto  them,  I  never  knew  you ;  depart  from  Me,  ye 
who  work  lawlessness !" 

That  this  has  no  reference  to  the  Church  is  evident. 
The  Church  meets  the  Lord  in  the  air,  and  every  believer 
has  in  Christ's  day  to  appear  before  the  judgment  seat  of 
Christ.  But  at  tliat  judgment  seat  no  mere  professors  of 
Christ's  name  will  appear,  and  no  "Depart  from  Me,"  wnW 
be  heard  from  the  lips  of  the  Lord,  the  Head  of  the  Body. 
>,^or  does  this  word  here  in  Matthew  refer  us  to  the  great 
^vhite  throne.  When  our  Lord  says  "in  that  day,"  He 
means  the  day  when  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  come  by 
His  return  to  the  earth.  Then  many  will  be  found  but 
empty  professors,  who  in  spite  of  their  works  and  using 
His  name  'were  none  of  His.  From  this  dispensational 
aspect,  we  may  well  look  to  our  times.  The  name  of 
Christ  is  upon  many  lips,  and  there  are  many  who  speak  in 
His  name,  and  do  works  of  power  in  His  name,  yet  they 
are  not  saved  and  know  Him  not.  Christian  Science,  falsely 
so-called,  may  be  mentioned  here  as  w^ell  as  others.  Not 
outward  profession  brings  into  the  kingdom  and  makes  one 
an  heir  of  it,  but  doing  the  will  of  the  Father.  This  is 
continued  in  the  last  paragraph.  "Therefore,  whosoever 
hcarcth  these  words  of  mine  and  docth  them,  is  likened  unto 


i64 


a  prudent  man,  who  built  his  house  upon  tlie  rock,  and  the 
rain  and  the  floods  came,  and  the  winds  blew  and  beat  upon 
that  house,  and  it  fell  not,  for  it  was  founded  upon  the 
rock.  And  every  one  that  heareth  these  words  of  Mine, 
and  doeth  them  not,  shall  be  likened  unto  a  foolish  man 
who  built  his  house  upon  the  sand.  And  the  rain  and  the 
floods  came,  and  the  winds  blew  and  beat  upon  that  house, 
and  it  fell,  and  great  was  the  fall  of  it"  (verses  24-27). 

How  sublime  and  yet  simple  is  this  illustration  of  our 
Lord !  Hearing  first  and  doing  is  the  way.  The  rock 
upon  which  he  who  heareth  (believeth),  builds,  is  Christ. 
Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay.  Being  in  Him  we  are 
safe  and  secure  in  time  and  in  eternity.  The  storm  will 
come,  and  is  even  now  advancing,  yet  we  have  a  refuge  and 
a  shelter  in  Him,  and  as  He  abides,  the  Rock,  so  shall  we 
abide.    How  true,  oh  !  how  true  it  is : 

On  Christ,  the  solid  rock,  I  stand, 
All  other  ground  is  sinking  sand. 

All  which  is  not  Christ  is  sinking  sand.  Reader !  where 
do  you  stand,  upon  Christ  and  Christ  alone,  or  upon  some- 
thing else — no  matter  what — the  sinking  sand? 

Such  teaching,  such  unfoldings  of  the  purposes  of  God 
were  never  heard  before.  The  Pharisees  and  scribes  dis- 
puted together,  and  expressed  their  human  opinions,  but 
here  One  spake  with  authority,  so  that  the  multitudes  were 
astonished. 


i65 


CHAPTER   VIII. 

With  the  eighth  chapter  we  enter  into  a  new  section  of 
the  Gospel.  This  section  extends  to  the  end  of  the  twelfth 
chapter.  The  King  had  declared  the  principles  and  rule  of 
the  kingdom,  and  now  He  comes  down  from  the  mountain 
followed  by  great  multitudes.  First  of  all  He  is  to  manifest 
Himself  as  the  divine  King,  the  Jehovah  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment Scriptures,  who  is  truly  come  to  His  own.  To  them 
He  offers  and  through  His  disciples  likewise,  the  kingdom. 
But  soon  it  becomes  evident  that  His  own  receive  Him 
not.  They  reject  Him  and  recognize  Him  not  as  their 
King,  and  accuse  Him,  before  whom  the  demons  cried  in 
terror,  that  His  miracles  were  done  by  Beelzebub,  the  prince 
of  demons.  He  then  breaks  off  the  relationship  with  His 
own,  which  wc  find  at  the  end  of  the  xii  chapter.  These 
five  chapters,  from  the  eighth  to  the  twelfth,  contain  there- 
fore the  full  manifestation  of  Jehovah-Jesus  among  His 
people  and  the  rejection  of  the  King. 

And  how  completelv  He  manifested  Himself  as  the  King 
with  divine  power!  Here  we  have  a  number  of  miracles, 
one  following  the  other,  as  we  hope  to  show,  put  in  perfect 
order  by  the  One  who  is  perfect  in  knowledge,  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Yet  with  these  wonderful  manifestations,  the  leper 
cleansed,  the  demons  driven  out,  the  blind  made  to  see,  the 
dead  raised,  the  people  deliberately  reject  Him,  and  fall 


i66 


not  at  His  feet  to  worship  Him.  This  shows  the  utter  ruin 
and  full  character  of  the  flesh,  enmity  against  God.  It 
is  so  still  and  never  can  be  anything  else.  Even  if  now 
(as  it  is  sometimes  said  it  should  be)  signs  and  miracles 
would  be  done,  the  flesh  would  not  be  changed  by  them, 
but  zvould  still  reject  Him  and  turn  azvay  from  the  Lord. 
The  antichrist,  the  false  king,  Satan's  masterpiece  and 
counterfeit,  will  make  his  appearance  in  the  closing  days 
with  all  power  and  signs  and  lying  wonders.  He  will  mimic 
all  the  signs  and  miracles  done  by  our  Lord.  The  flesh 
will  surely  accept  that  false  one  with  his  strong  delusions. 
But  let  us  briefly  point  out  the  signs  our  Lord  does  in  these 
chapters : 

1.  The  cleansing  of  the  leper,  viii:i-4.  He  touches  the 
leper. 

2.  The  healing  of  the  Centurion's  servant,  viii:5-i3.  He 
heals  by  His  word.     Faith  touches  Him. 

3.  Peter's  wife's  mother  healed  of  fever,  14,  15.  Healing 
by  His  touch. 

4.  The  healing  of  All,  16,  17.  His  presence  among  the 
suffering. 

5.  He  rebukes  the  winds  and  the  sea,  23,  27.  His  divine 
power  over  nature. 

6.  The  two  possessed  by  demons  delivered,  28-34.  De- 
mons confess  Him  Son  of  God. 

7.  A  man  sick  of  palsy  completely  restored,  ix  :i-8.  Full 
restoration  of  soul  and  body.  "The  lame  man  shall  leap  as 
an  hart"  (Is.  xxxv:6). 


167 


8.  A  woman   with  an  issue  of  blood  healed,  ix  :20-22. 
She  touches  Him. 

9.  The  daughter  of  the  ruler  raised  up,  23-26.  Resur- 
rection. 

10.  Two  blind  men  receive  their  sight,  27-31.  "He 
openeth  the  eyes  of  the  blind"  (Is.  xxxv:5). 

11.  A  dumb  man  with  a  demon  healed,  ^2,  ^^.  "The 
tongue  of  the  dumb  shall  sing"  (Is.  xxxv:6). 

1:2.     Preaching  the  Gospel  of  the  kingdom  and  healing 
every  sickness  and  cirry  disease,  35  (Is.  lxi:i). 

13.  The  man  with  the  withered  hand  healed  (xii  :io-i3). 

14.  One  possessed  by  a  demon,  blind  and  dumb,  restored, 
22.     His  last  sign  of  this  section  (Is.  xxxv  15,  6). 

In  these  miracles  we  have  before  us  the  manifestation  of 
the  King.  Jehovah  alone  could  manifest  Himself  thus  in 
mercy,  healing  and  restoring.  Satan  may  have  great  power 
to  work  signs,  yet  never  could  such  a  manifestation  come 
from  him.  "If  Satan  cast  out  Satan,  he  is  divided  against 
himself;  how  shall  then  his  kingdom  stand?"  (xii:26).  With 
these  words  our  Lord  silenced  the  Satanic  accusations  of  the 
Pharisees.  What  He  did,  furthermore,  is  seen  in  the  Old 
Testament  in  connection  with  the  kingdom.  The  signs 
manifest  the  King  as  well  as  the  Kingdom..  In  Isaiah  xxxv 
we  have  a  description  of  the  kingdom  as  the  King  is  to  set 
it  up.  He  came,  and  that  He  is  the  King  and  His  Kingdom 
at  hand,  is  proven  by  Ilim  in  doing  the  signs  cnumorntpd  in 
the  thirty-fifth  chapter  of  Isaiah.  The  King  and  Kingdom 
is  rejected,   the   Kingdom   postponed,   and   Israel   and   the 


i68 


nations  wait  with  a  groaning  creation  for  the  glorious  ful- 
filment of  this  chapter  in  Isaiah.  The  fulfilment  will  come, 
when  the  King  comes  back  to  the  earth,  then  "the  ransomed 
of  Jehovah  shall  return  and  come  to  Zion  with  songs  and 
everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads;  they  shall  obtain  joy  and 
gladness,  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away." 

And  how  full  is  the  manifestation  of  His  divine  power ! 
Leprosy,  the  awful  disease  and  defilement,  altogether  gone. 
Winds  and  sea  calmed.  Demons  banished  and  sent  to  the 
place  where  they  belong.  Forgiveness  of  sins  followed  by 
the  healing  of  the  body.  The  blind  see,  the  dumb  speak,  the 
dead  rise !  Every  sickness  and  every  disease  healed.  These 
miracles  our  Lord  did  here  to  show  Himself  as  the  King  are 
certainly  also  typical  of  the  spiritual  cleansing,  the  opening 
of  the  eyes  of  the  blind,  the  sinner,  the  speaking  in  praise 
and  worship  of  those  who  never  spoke  to  God  or  of  God,  the 
raising  of  the  dead,  the  power  and  dominion  of  Satan  broken. 
The  application  on  these  lines  is  evident.  We  see  in  them 
also  a  foreshadowing  of  the  redemption  of  the  body  of  the 
believer  in  resurrection,  as  well  as  the  blessings  for  Israel 
and  the  nations,  in  the  coming  age.  All  these  features,  we 
hope  to  point  out  as  we  look  to  the  different  signs,  separately. 

Before  taking  up  the  first  part  of  the  eighth  chapter  we 
must  call  the  attention  of  our  readers  to  another  fact.  If 
one  looks  for  these  miracles  in  the  Gospels  of  Mark  and 
Luke,  and  traces  our  Lord's  movements  in  them,  he  will  be 
astonished  to  find  that  they  are  put  in  these  Gospels  in  an 
entirely  different  setting.  We  will  not  go  into  details  here. 
In  Matthew  all  has  its  peculiar  arrangement,   and   every- 


169 

thing  is  taken  out  of  its  chronological  order.  This  is  no- 
where so  evident,  as  in  the  section  before  us.  The  reason  is 
obvious.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  manifested  in  it  His  divine 
wisdom.  Infidels  have  ever  sneered  (and  do  even  more  so 
every  day)  at  a  verbal  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures.  The 
utterances  of  some  well-known  "evangelical"  teachers, 
that  the  New  Testament  contains  numerous  discrepancies,  is 
generally  backed  up  by  arguments  about  the  miracles  re- 
corded in  Matthew,  as  happening  after  the  sermon  on  the 
mount,  when  in  another  Gospel  they  are  given  as  having  oc- 
curred before  the  discourse  of  our  Lord.  Now  that  which 
moves  the  infidel  and  the  preacher  tainted  with  higher  criti- 
cism to  ridicule  the  divinity  and  infallibility  of  the  written 
Word,  moves  the  believer  and  diligent  searcher  of  the  Scrip- 
tures to  praise,  for  the  very  argument  which  the  denier  of  a 
verbal  inspiration  uses  to  build  his  infidel  fabric  on,  is  to  the 
believer  the  most  positive  evidence  of  the  divinity  of  the  Bible 
and  its  verbal  inspiration.  It  is  not  alone  so  here  but  all 
through  the  Word.  The  Holy  Spirit  as  the  writer  of  the  first 
Gospel  has  taken  certain  events  in  the  life  of  our  Lord  and 
grouped  them  together  in  such  a  way  that  they  not  only 
show  us  how  the  King  proved  Himself  King  and  how  He 
was  rejected,  but  to  show  in  the  grouping  of  these  miracles 
the  purposes  of  God,  and  bring  out  some  very  rich  yet  sim- 
ple dispensational  teachings.  The  Gospel  of  Matthew  as  the 
Jewish  Gospel  is  the  proper  place  for  it. 

We  look  now  at  the  first  seventeen  verses  of  the  eighth 
chapter.    Here  we  have  four  different  signs. 

The  first  is  the  cleansing  of  the  leper,  followed  at  once 


170 


by  the  healing  of  the  centurion's  servant,  after  which  our 
Lord  enters  Peter's  house,  and  his  mother-in-law  being 
sick,  He  touches  her  hand  and  the  fever  leaves  her.  The  last 
is  the  healing  of  all.  Now  in  these  four  miracles,  following 
one  the  other  as  they  do  here,  we  have  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  dispensational  teachings  concerning  the  Jews  and  the 
Gentiles.  The  first,  the  cleansing  of  the  leper,  stands  for 
Jehovah  among  His  people  Israel.  The  second,  where  He 
is  absent,  and  heals  not  by  His  touch  but  by  His  Word ; 
this  represents  the  Gentile  dispensation  which  is  still  run- 
ning. After  this  dispensation  is  passed  He  will  enter  the 
house  again,  restoring  His  relations  with  Israel,  and  healing 
the  sick  daughter  of  Zion,  represented  by  the  healing  touch 
and  raising  of  Peter's  mother-in-law.  After  this  is  accom- 
plished the  millennial  blessings  come  to  all  in  the  earth  when 
the  curse  of  sin  will  be  removed.  We  look  at  each  but 
briefly. 

I.  The  cleansing  of  the  leper.  Israel  represented  by  the 
leper.  Jehovah-rophe  (Ex.  .rz'.)  among  His  people.  Lep- 
rosy is  the  most  loathsome  disease  known.  There  was  no 
remedy  for  it  in  the  Old  Testament,  nor  is  there  a  remedy 
for  it  in  our  times,  and  we  may  say  there  will  never  be  any 
found.  The  Spirit  of  God  has  made  leprosy  a  type  of  sin, 
and  inasmuch  as  there  is  no  remedy  from  the  human  side 
for  sin,  so  there  is  none  and  will  be  none  from  man's  side 
for  leprosy.  Jehovah  alone  could  heal  the  awful  disease 
(Numbers  xii:i3;  2  Kings  v.i-15,  etc.).  This  man  meet- 
ins:  our  Lord  as  He  comes  from  the  mountain  was  according: 


171 


to  Luke  (and  he  was  a  physician),  "A  man  full  of  leprosy'' 
(Luke  v:i2).  The  application  of  leprosy  as  to  every  sin- 
ner is  so  well  known  that  we  pass  it  over.  The  leper  here 
does  not  alone  represent  the  sinner,  but  he  represents  Is- 
rael. Long  before  the  Spirit  of  God  had  made  known  the 
leprous  conilition  of  the  people  in  the  following  words : 
"The  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  is  faint,  l-'rom 
the  sole  of  the  foot  even  unto  the  head,  there  is  no  sound- 
ness in  it ;  but  wounds  and  bruises  and  putrifying  sores. 
They  have  not  been  closed,  neither  bound  up,  neither  molli- 
fied with  ointment"  (Is.  i  :5,  6).  This  is  a  most  perfect  de- 
scription of  the  leper  with  his  wounds,  bruises  and  sores  as 
he  wanders  an  outcast  toward  still  greater  sufferings.  Here 
then  Israel's  Messiah,  Jehovah-Jesus,  the  same  who  spoke  in 
Exodus,  "I  am  Jehovah,  thy  Healer,"  meets  His  poor,  un- 
clean people,  represented  by  the  leper.  The  attitude  of  t^e 
leper  as  he  fell  before  Him,  doing  Him  homage,  should  have 
been  Israel's  attitude,  his  prayer,  "Lord,  if  Thou  wilt,  Thou 
art  able  to  cleanse  me,"  Israel's  prayer.  Jehovah-Jesus 
stretches  out  His  hand  and  touches  him.  He  speaks  as 
Jehovah  in  all  His  omnipotent  power  and  mercy,  "I  will — be 
cleansed."  And  {iiiiiicdiatciy  his  leprosy  zvas  cleansed.  Thus 
Jehovah  could  and  would  cleanse  Israel.  He  had  then  mani- 
fested Himself  as  the  "Jehovah,  thy  Healer,"  among  His 
people.  The  Lord  sends  the  cleansed  leper  to  the  priest  and 
asks  him  to  offer  the  gift  wliich  Moses  ordained.  This  was 
all  proper  before  the  death  and  resurrection  of  our  Lord. 
Some  have  taken  this  as  an  evidence  that  the  law  should  still 
be  kept,  but  they  forget  that  by  the  death  and  resurrection 


172 

of  our  Lord  we  are  delivered  from  the  law.  However,  the 
issue  here  is  not  the  continuation  of  the  Mosaic  institutions 
The  Lord  sends  the  cleansed  leptr  to  the  priest  for  a  different 
purpose.  The  priest  was  the  proper  person  to  pronounce 
the  cleansed  one  clean.  How  then  had  he  become  clean  ? 
Had  he  used  any  remedy?  No.  Had  he  seen  some  cele- 
brated physician?  No.  Jesus  had  spoken,  "I  will!"  He, 
who  in  prophecy,  in  the  law  (Deuteronomy),  in  Ezekiel  and 
Isaiah,  saith  again  and  again,  "I  will,"  had  touched  him. 
Who  was  this  Jesus?  There  could  be  only  one  answer,  He 
is  Jehovah  manifested  in  the  flesh.  The  priest  should  have 
iM'okcn  forth  in  song  and  praise:  "Blessed  be  the  Lord,  the 
God  of  Israel,  because  He  hath  visited  and  wrought  re- 
demption for  His  people !"  He  should  have  run  from  the 
sanctuary  in  search  of  Him,  and  having  found  Him  adores 
Him  as  Jehovah.  But  the  event  closes  abruptly.  The  priest 
alone  heard  the  story,  for  the  man  was  told  not  to  tell  it  to 
others.  The  priest  is  silent ;  we  hear  nothing  of  him.  He 
failed  to  recognize  Jehovah  in  the  midst  of  His  people,  and 
does  not  respond  by  coming  forth  to  meet  the  divine  King. 
The  priest  is  the  type  of  unbelieving  Israel.  The  day,  kow- 
ever,  will  come  when  the  King  will  come  again,  and  when 
in  mercy,  He  will  speak  again  to  the  remnant  of  His  people, 
'T  will."  The  Sun  of  righteousness  will  rise  with  healing 
beneath  His  wings. 

II.  The  Centurion's  servant  healed  by  His  Ward.  Grace 
shozvn  to  the  Gentile.  Not  even  in  Israel  have  I  found  so 
great  faith.     Israel  having  failed  to  accept  the  King,  and 


1/3 

not  recognizing  Jehovah  in  their  midst,  the  Gentile  is  in- 
troduced. Grace  was  to  come  to  the  Gentile.  The  Centu- 
rion's servant  was  a  paralytic— the  type  of  the  helpless  and 
hopeless  condition  of  the  Gentiles.  The  Centurion  steps  up 
with  a  simple,  childlike  faith.  How  different  from  the 
ritualistic  priest  who  had  no  answer  to  Jehovah-Jesus.  Jesus 
declared  Himself  willing  to  come  and  heal  him.  He,  the 
One  who  knows  the  heart  of  man,  well  knew  that 
this  would  bring  out  the  faith  of  the  Gentile.  And  the 
Centurion  answered  and  said,  "Lord,  I  am  not  fit  that 
Thou  shouldest  enter  under  my  roof :  but  only  speak  a  zvord 
and  my  servant  shall  be  healed."  In  this  simple  faith 
there  is  the  fullest  confession  that  Jesus  is  God  and  able  to 
heal  by  His  Word,  though  absent  from  the  sufferer.  What 
a  grand  foreshadowing  of  the  dispensation  in  which  we 
live  and  of  the  mercy  shown  to  the  Gentiles!  It  is  the 
character  of  the  dispensation.  Jesus  is  absent,  yet  in 
childlike  faith  we  know  Him,  and  by  His  Word  He  mani- 
fests His  power.  It  is  not  healing  by  touch,  but  by  His 
Word.  Upon  the  manifestation  of  "so  great  faith,"  our 
Lord  reveals  the  coming  in  of  the  Gentiles  and  the  setting 
aside  of  Israel,  "the  sons  of  the  kingdom."  "But  I  say 
unto  you  that  many  shall  come  from  the  rising  and  setting 
sun,  and  shall  lie  down  at  table  with  Abraham.  Isaac  and 
Jacob  in  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens;  but  the  sons  of  the 
kingdom  shall  be  cast  out  into  the  outer  darkness:  there 
shall  be  the  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth."  There  is 
another  feature  here  we  must  not  forget.  In  the  eighteenth 
chapter  of  Genesis  we  read  how  Abraham  refreshed  the 


174 


Lord.  Here  after  the  failure  of  Abraham's  seed  the  Gen- 
tile refreshes  the  heart  of  the  Lord.  What  joy  and  com- 
fort the  blessed  One  had  in  looking  upon  this  Gentile  and 
"so  great  faith,"  and  then  look  towards  the  cross  and  be- 
yond it ;  the  travail  of  His  soul  must  have  come  before 
Him,  the  blessed  fruit  of  His  death  and  resurrection  in  the 
coming  of  them  afar  off.  And  are  you  refreshing  and  com- 
forting His  heart,  Him  who  is  unseen  now?  And  surely 
it  is  by  simple  faith  in  Himself  and  in  His  power  we  refresh 
Him. 

HL  Coming  to  the  house.  The  suffering  zvoman  healed 
of  fever,  raised  up  and  serving  Him.  Typical  of  Israel's 
healing  and  raising  up.  In  the  healing  of  Peter's  mother- 
in-law,  we  see  a  type  of  what  will  take  place  after  the  full- 
ness of  the  Gentiles  has  come  in.  The  sick  woman  is  typical 
of  Israel.  In  some  of  the  Prophets  we  have  the  comparison 
of  Israel  to  a  woman,  a  widow,  one  forsaken,  but  the  prom- 
ises speak  of  her  healing  arid  that  she  is  to  become  the  min- 
ister of  the  Lord  as  Peter's  mother-in-law  served  the  Lord. 
We  also  see  that  He  heals  her  by  touch.  So  will  He  come 
again  in  relationship  with  His  people  and  heal  them. 

IV.  The  demons  east  out.  All  healed  ivho  zvere  sick.  The 
fulfilment  of  Isaiah  liii:^.  Millennial  blessings.  "And 
when  the  evening  was  come,  they  brought  to  Him  many 
possessed  by  demons,  and  He  cast  out  the  spirits  with  a 
word  and  healed  all  that  were  ill ;  so  that  that  should  be 
fulfilled  which   was   spoken   through   Esaias   the   prophet. 


175 

saying,  Himself  took  our  infirmities  and  bore  our  diseases." 
Later  the  demons  cried  out,  saying,  What  have  we  to  do 
with  Thee,  Son  of  God?  Hast  Thou  come  here  before  the 
time  to  torment  us?"  (Verse  29.)  The  day  is  coming,  the 
set  time,  when  Satan  will  be  cast  out  and  bound.  This  will 
be  in  connection  with  our  Lord's  return  and  Israel's  restor- 
ation. Then  all  demons  will  be  cast  out.  Now  not  all  are 
healed,  but  then  the  sad  results  of  sin  will  be  removed. 
"And  the  inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I  am  sick"  (Is.  xxxiii: 
24). 

We  come  now  to  the  second  half  of  the  chapter.  It  will 
not  be  necessary  to  call  again  attention  to  the  arrangement 
of  the  incidents  recorded,  differing  from  the  Gospel  of 
Luke,  where  the  scene  is  laid  after  the  transfiguration.  We 
have  learned  before  that  the  Holy  Spirit  does  not  report 
these  events  chronologically,  but  puts  all  together  in  His 
own  perfect,  divine  way.  First,  we  meet  with  a  scribe 
who  desires  to  follow  Jesus,  and  then  a  disciple  is  seen, 
who  wishes  to  go  first  to  bury  his  father  before  following 
Him.  After  this  He  and  the  disciples  are  on  the  stormy 
sea  and  He  rebukes  the  winds  and  the  sea.  On  the  other 
side  the  two  possessed  of  demons  are  delivered.  We  can 
touch  upon  but  a  little  of  the  manifold  application  which  can 
be  made  of  these  events. 

"And  a  scribe  came  up  and  said  to  Him,  Teacher,  I  will 
follow  thee  whithersoever  thou  mayest  go."  And  Jesus  says 
to  him,  "The  foxes  have  holes,  and  the  birds  of  the  heavens 
roosting  places,  but  the  Son  of  Man  has  not  where  to  lay 
His  head"  (verse  19,  20). 


176 

This  man  was  a  self-seeking  scribe,  one  whose  mind  was 
filled  with  idle  dreams  of  a  Kingdom  to  be  established  and, 
having  seen  the  manifestation  of  the  divine  power,  he  de- 
sires selfishly  to  follow  Jesus.  No  doubt  his  expectations 
were  earthly  gain,  riches  and  glory.  In  this  respect  he 
may  well  be  taken  as  a  type  of  the  nation  itself.  The  Lord 
then  gives  the  answer,  which  showed  the  scribe  how  per- 
fectly He  understood  his  heart  and  read  his  thoughts. 
Nothing  is  heard  of  the  scribe  afterward.  It  was  sufficient 
to  discourage  him  completely.  The  Messiah  had  nothing 
to  offer  him,  and  if  he  would  follow  Him,  it  meant  that 
which  the  flesh  can  never  do.  But  all  brings  out  the  fact 
of  the  coming  rejection  of  the  King.  None  of  the  multi- 
tude come  to  fall  down  before  Jesus  and  worship  Him  as 
Jehovah,  only  this  man  comes.  Our  Lord  was  on  His  way 
to  the  other  side,  when  the  scribe  approaches  Him  with  his 
carnal  request.  The  answer  which  Jesus  gives  is  also  sig- 
nificant. It  is  the  first  indication  coming  from  His  own 
lips  of  His  rejection,  and  for  the  first  time  in  this  Gospel 
He  speaks  of  Himself  as  "Son  of  Man."  This  title  belongs 
to  Him  both  in  His  rejection  and  in  His  exaltation.  Of 
course,  here  it  refers  to  His  rejection.  The  words,  "The 
foxes  have  holes  and  the  birds  of  the  heaven  roosting  places, 
but  the  Son  of  Man  has  not  where  He  may  lay  His  head," 
are  generally  taken  to  refer  to  His  extreme  earthly  poverty. 
This  is  certainly  correct.  He  who  was  rich  became  poor, 
that  we  might  by  His  poverty  become  rich.  He  who  is  the 
creator  of  all  things  came  into  the  earth  and  made  a  little 
lower  than  the  angels,  which  He  had  created,  took  the  place 


1/7 

of  dependence  in  lowliness.  The  Book  of  Psalms,  which 
so  fully  reveals  Him,  the  Son  of  Man,  in  His  rejection  as 
well  as  in  His  glory,  records  His  voice  as  He  would  speak 
and  as  He  did  speak  in  the  earth.  There  we  read  that  He 
says :  I  am  weak,  I  am  weary  from  groaning,  I  am  poor 
and  needy,  I  am  a  worm  and  no  man,  I  am  poured  out  like 
water,  I  am  poor  and  sorrowful,  I  am  like  a  pelican  of  the 
wilderness,  I  am  a  sparrow  alone,  etc.  But  this  word  of 
our  Lord  speaks  also  of  His  death,  though  it  is  in  the  xvi. 
chapter,  after  Peter's  confession.  He  reveals  to  His  disci- 
ples fully  the  fact  of  His  rejection,  suffering,  death,  resur- 
rection and  coming  again  as  Son  of  Man.  The  foxes 
have  places  where  they  find  shelter  when  the  hunters 
seek  their  lives,  so  have  the  birds  roosting  places  where 
they  are  safe,  but  for  the  Son  of  Man  there  was  to  be  no 
refuge ;  He  came  to  die  the  death  on  the  cross. 

Many  there  are  still  who  speak  of  "following  Jesus." 
What  has  not  the  flesh  attempted  in  this  direction !  Some 
went  into  poverty  to  be  as  poor  as  He  was  and  others  tried 
to  follow  Him  in  His  life  and  walk  as  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
ever  speaking  of  His  earthly  life  as  an  example  and  of 
"character  building"  (a  phrase  so  prominent  in  modern 
preaching),  as  if  the  flesh  could  ever  be  anything  but  flesh. 
The  true  "follow  me"  and  the  connection  of  him  who  has 
believed  with  the  Lord  in  death  and  resurrection,  is  but 
little  known  and  understood. 

Then  comes  one  who  is  a  disciple.  In  Luke  we  read  that 
the  Lord  spoke  to  him  first.    He  called  him  as  His  disciple. 


178 


Here  we  read,  "But  another  of  His  disciples  said  to  Him, 
Lord,  suffer  me  first  to  go  away  and  bury  my  father.  But 
Jesus  said  to  him,  Follow  me,  and  leave  the  dead  to  bury 
their  own  dead."  The  Lord  who  calls  asks  absolute  obedi- 
ence. He  is  the  first  and  all  earthly  connections  are  to  cease. 
How  reluctant  to  follow  the  call ;  how  often  the  disciple, 
the  believer,  who  is  the  Lord's  when  there  is  the  call  to 
service  from  the  Lord,  says,  "Suffer  me  first."  Some  earthly 
thing,  a  certain  occupation,  an  earthly  relationship  intrudes 
itself  between  the  calling  Lord  and  His  disciple.  Oh,  for 
more  and  greater  devotedness  to  Him,  whose  we  are  and 
who  is  our  Saviour  and  Lord.  May  we  be  loosed  from 
all  earthly  bondage  and  "let  the  dead  bury  their  dead." 

"And  He  went  on  board  ship  and  His  disciples  followed 
Him ;  and  behold,  the  water  became  very  agitated  on  the  sea. 
so  that  the  ship  was  covered  by  the  waves ;  but  He  slept. 
And  the  disciples  came  and  awoke  Him,  saying.  Lord,  save : 
we  perish.  And  He  says  to  them.  Why  are  ye  fearful,  O  ye 
of  little  faith  ?  Then  having  arisen.  He  rebuked  the  winds 
and  the  sea,  and  there  was  a  great  calm.  But  the  men  were 
astonished  saying.  What  sort  of  man  is  this,  that  even  the 
winds  and  the  sea  obey  Him"   (verse  23-28). 

"He  maketh  the  storm  a  calm,  so  that  the  waves  there- 
of are  still"  (Ps.  cvii:28).  The  "He,"  who  created  the  sea 
was  in  that  ship  upon  the  stormy  sea  and  rose  in  His  power 
and  rebuked  (what  a  word!)  the  winds  and  the  sea.  How 
suggestive  it  all  is.  He  had  asked  devotedness  and  obedience 
of  His  disciples  and  now  He  shows  them  that  He  is  with 


179 

them  and  in  the  midst  of  storm  and  waves  they  are  secure 
and  are  kept  and  saved  by  His  power.  He  slept.  What  cahii 
and  rest  was  His  in  the  midst  of  the  turbulent  element 
when  the  disciples  were  threatened  with  disaster  and 
death.  And  such  rest  is  the  rest  of  faith.  How  slow  we 
are  to  learn  it,  the  simple  lesson  "He  anxious  for  nothint;.'' 
It  is  impossible  lor  the  flesh.  Though  the  Lord  may  have 
sent  deliverance  a  thousand  times,  whenever  a  new  trial  of 
faith  comes,  whenever  a  new  storm  arises  and  tribulation  is 
before  us,  the  flesh  will  always  fear  and  tremble  in  unlielief. 
But  how  blessed  the  assurance  that  in  the  midst  of  all  the 
waves  and  roaring,  in  all  the  attacks  of  Satan  and  the 
world,  in  all  trials  and  adversities,  we  are  secure,  eternally  se- 
cure. We  can  never  perish.  "All  things  work  together  for 
good  to  those  who  love  God,  who  are  called  according  to  pur- 
pose ;"  and  therefore  "we  glory  in  tribulations."  And  the 
disciples  with  their  unbelieving  appeals  and  cries,  how  often 
we  have  been  like  them !  Instead  of  looking  to  Him,  who  is 
Lord  and  our  Lord,  we  looked  to  circumstances  and  cried 
for  help  where  faith  should  have  looked  in  rest  and  silence  to 
Him,  who  doeth  all  things  well.  But  wdiere  could  we  stop 
with  the  lessons  and  different  applications  of  this  scene ! 
The  world  and  the  age,  this  present  evil  age,  is  represented 
by  the  sea  and  His  own  are  upon  it,  so  fearful  and  of  little 
faith.  As  He  arose  then,  so  will  He  rise  again  and  will 
rebuke  in  His  majesty  as  Son  of  Man  the  winds  and  the  sea. 
We  speak  not  only  of  the  blessed  fact  that  in  our  own  lives 
and  experiences  He  does  no7u  often  rebuke  the  winds  and 


i8o 


the  sea,  but  of  His  coming  again.    Then  and  only  then  will 
be  "a  great  cahn." 

Coming  to  the  other  side  He  is  met  in  the  country  of  the 
Gergesenes  by  two  possessed  by  demons,  coming  out  of  the 
tombs,  the  place  of  death,  exceedingly  dangerous,  so  that  no 
one  was  able  to  pass  by  that  way.  They  could  not  be  bound, 
not  even  with  chains  and  they  cut  themselves  with  stones 
(Mark  v:i-7).  Not  one  demon,  but  many  demons  had 
entered  into  them ;  their  name  in  one  of  them  was  Legion 
(Luke  viii:3o).  What  awful  witnesses,  these  naked,  bleed- 
ing, raving  and  tearing  demoniacs  were  of  the  body  and 
soul  destroying  power  of  the  enemy.  When  our  Lord  ap- 
peared in  the  land  the  evil  one  had  by  the  demons  taken 
possession  of  large  numbers  of  people  and  was  driving  them 
on  to  perdition.  It  will  even  be  worse  before  His  return. 
Satan  and  his  angels  zvill  be  cast  out  into  the  earth  and  his 
angels  with  him.  This  will  be  during  the  great  tribulation. 
And  even  now  those  possessed  by  demons  are  continually 
increasing.  The  ever  changing,  as  well  as  new  forms,  of 
insanity,  many  of  them  at  least,  if  not  all,  must  be  connected 
with  the  influence  of  these  evil  spirits.  The  so-called 
"mediums"  of  Spiritism  and  adepts  in  occult  "sciences"  are 
undoubtedly  demon-possessed.  Surely  our  days,  the  days 
'ong  ago  predicted,  are  the  latter  times  in  which  some 
apostatize  from  the  faith,  giving  their  mind  (it  is  the  mind 
where  these  evil  workings  begin)  to  deceiving  spirits  and 
teachings  of  demons  (i  Tim.  iv:i).  And  opening  the  soul 
to  the  deceiving  spirits  and  teachings  of  demons  means  their 


I8l 


dreadful  entering  in  and  taking  full  possession.  We  cannot 
follow  here  this  dark  theme,  much  as  it  is  needed  in  our 
days.  And,  He,  the  Son  of  God  has  come  to  destroy  the 
works  of  the  Devil,  and  through  death  annul  him,  who  has 
the  might  of  death,  that  is,  the  Devil.  And  here  the  demons 
confess  Him,  that  He  is  Son  of  God.  "And  behold  they 
cried  out,  saying.  What  have  we  to  do  with  thee,  Son  of 
God?  Hast  thou  come  here  before  the  time  to  torment  us?'' 
It  is  the  first  confession  of  Him  as  Son  of  God  we  have  in 
the  Gospel.  They  give  Him  His  right  title.  The  demons 
believe  and  tremble  (James  ii:i9).  They  see  and  know 
Him  as  their  future  Judge,  but  they  argue  that  the  right 
moment  for  the  punishment  is  not  yet.  The  knowledge  of 
the  demons  according  to  this  is  threefold :  They  know  Him 
as  Son  of  God,  as  their  Judge  and  that  the  judgment  will 
take  place  at  a  certain  time.  But  Satan  with  his  lies  drives 
his  countless  victims  on  in  unbelief  to  deny  every  one  of 
these  facts  that  Christ  is  Son  of  God  and  the  Judge,  and  the 
most  striking  thing  is  that  the  father  of  lies  succeeds 
to  put  himself  down  as  a  myth. 

He  shows  Himself  next  as  the  one  who  has  power  over 
these  demons  and  that  they  may  well  fear  Him.  They  cried 
out  and  then  asked,  "If  thou  cast  us  out  send  us  away 
into  the  herd  of  swine."  He  said :  "Go !"  What  power  over 
these  legions  is  His !  Can  they  ever  touch  Him  or  harm 
Him  ?  No.  never !  And  Son  of  God,  declared  by  resurrec- 
tion from  the  dead  as  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth 
and  the  day  will  be  when  all  things  shall  be  subjected  under 


rS2 


His  feet.  Then  "at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  will  bow,  of 
heavenly  and  earthly  and  infernal  beings."  And  we  are  linked 
with  Him,  His  victory  is  ours,  we  too  can  triumph  over 
these  evil  beings.  Thanks  be  to  God  who  gives  us  the  vic- 
tory through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "For  the  rest  brethren, 
be  strong  in  the  Lord,  in  the  might  of  His  strength.  Put  on 
the  panoply  of  God,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  stand  against  the 
artifices  of  the  Devil ;  because  our  struggle  is  not  against 
blood  and  flesh,  but  against  principalities,  against  authori- 
ties, against  the  universal  lords  of  this  darkness,  against 
spiritual  power  of  wickedness  in  the  heavenlies"  (Eph.  vi: 

10-13). 

"And  they,  going  out,  departed  into  the  herd  of  swine ; 
and  lo,  the  whole  herd  of  swine  rushed  down  the  steep 
slope  into  the  sea,  and  died  in  the  waters."  This  has 
puzzled  not  a  few  readers  of  the  Word.  We  may  explain 
it  from  the  dispensational  side.  The  deliverance  of  the  two 
possessed  typifies  the  deliverance  of  the  Jewish  remnant,  the 
apostate  part  of  the  Jewish  nations  is  foreshadowed  in  the 
swine  and  they  will  rush  on  into  the  waters,  representing 
judgment. 

The  account  in  Mark  and  Luke  goes  into  details,  showing 
each  one  of  the  delivered  victims  in  their  right  mind.  In 
the  end  of  the  chapter  we  hear  that  the  whole  city  went  out 
to  meet  Jesus,  and  when  they  met  Him,  they  begged  Him 
to  go  away  out  of  their  coasts.  They  feared  perhaps  the 
loss  of  other  possessions,  and  rather  have  the  earthly  things 
and  the  swine,  than  the  Lord.    What  Satanic  blindness !    He 


i83 

the  evil  one,  is  seen  here  in  the  manifestation  of  His  power 
in  another  form.  Strange  that  they  should  be  afraid  of 
Him  who  is  the  deliverer !  But  Satan  had  completely  blinded 
them.  And  as  we  look  back  over  what  we  were,  we  can 
praise  our  God  for  such  deliverance  from  such  an  enemy, 
for  we  were  dead  in  oflfences  and  sins  in  which  we  once 
walked  according-  to  the  age  of  this  world,  according  to  the 
ruler  of  the  authority  of  the  air,  the  spirit  who  works  now 
in  the  sons  of  obedience  (Eph.  ii). 


184 


CHAPTER  IX. 

After  our  Lord  was  requested  by  the  Gergesenes  to  go 
away  out  of  their  coasts,  He  passed  over  the  lake  and  came 
to  His  own  city,  that  is,  Capernaum.  Here  the  Lord  did 
His  greatest  miracles,  yet  they  rejected  Him  there,  so  that 
later  He  said :  "And  thou,  Capernaum,  who  has  been  raised 
up  to  heaven,  shall  be  brought  down  even  to  Hades.  For  if 
the  works  of  power  which  have  taken  place  in  thee  had 
taken  place  in  Sodom,  it  had  remained  until  this  day.  But 
I  say  to  you,  that  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  the  land  of 
Sodom  in  judgment  day  than  for  thee"  (Matt.  xi:23-24). 

One  of  the  mighty  miracles  He  did  in  Capernaum  is  re- 
lated by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  beginning  of  the  chapter 
which  we  have  reached.  He  is  manifested  in  this  miracle 
like  in  the  others,  as  Jehovah.  A  paralytic  is  brought  to 
Him  by  loving  hands,  and  when  He  saw  their  faith  He 
said  to  the  helpless  one,  "Be  of  good  courage,  child ;  thy 
sins  are  forgiven."  And  now  for  the  first  time  in  the  Gos- 
pel do  we  read  that  the  scribes  said,  "This  man  blasphemes." 
They  did  not  speak  it  out,  but  He  saw  their  thoughts,  for 
He  is  the  One  of  whom  David  says :  "Thou  knowest  my 
downsitting  and  mine  uprising;  thou  understandeth  my 
thoughts  from  afar  off"  (Ps.  cxxxix:2). 

He  then  asks  them :  "Which  is  easier :  to  say.  Thy  sins 
are  forgiven ;  or  to  say.  Rise  up  and  walk  ?    But  that  ye 


may  know  that  the  Son  of  God  has  power  on  earth  to  for- 
give sins  (then  He  says  to  the  paralytic),  Rise  up,  take  thy 
bed  and  go  to  thy  house.  And  he  rose  up  and  went  to  his 
house"  (verses  2-8). 

Divine  power  is  here  fully  manifested.  In  Luke  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  say,  "Who  is  able  to  forgive  sins  but 
God  alone?''  (Luke  v:2i).  Indeed,  if  He  who  spoke  the 
word  of  comfort  and  gave  the  paralytic  the  assurance  of 
forgiveness  is  not  Jehovah,  anything  less  than  He,  the 
accusations  of  the  scribes  would  have  been  well  founded. 
He  then  shows  that  He  has  the  power  to  forgive  sins  by 
healing  the  body  of  the  paralytic,  who  rises  up  and  carries 
away  the  bed  upon  which  he  w^as  brought.  The  paralytic 
is  a  type  of  the  sinner  in  his  helpless  condition.  In  the  Old 
Testament  we  have  a  beautiful  type  of  this  in  Mephibo- 
sheth,  who  w^as  lame  on  both  of  his  feet  and  who  had  to  be 
brought  to  King  David.  So  this  one  is  brought.  But  why 
did  they  bring  him?  Xo  question,  healing  of  the  body 
was  all  which  they  desired  for  their  helpless  friend  and 
what  he  himself  expected.  But  our  Lord  goes  deeper  to 
that  which  is  the  fountain  of  all  disease  and  pain — sin.  He 
knew  the  guilt  of  sins  resting  upon  the  paralytic,  and  before 
he  could  rise  and  walk,  before  he  could  be  delivered  out  of 
his  helpless  condition,  the  sins  had  first  to  be  forgiven.  The 
conscience,  burdened  more  than  the  crippled,  paralyzed  body 
was  by  disease,  had  first  to  be  relieved.  The  lessons  here 
are  clear.  It  forcshadotcs  that  which  He,  who  gave  Him- 
self for  us  and  who  was  raised  on  account  of  our  justifica- 
tion, gives  to  every  one  who  believes  in  Him.    He  has  re- 


i86 


moved  completely  the  guilt  of  sin  and  we  have  the  assurance 
of  the  forgiveness  of  sins :  the  blessedness  of  the  man 
"whose  transgression  is  forgiven,  whose  sin  is  covered"  is 
ours  through  and  in  Christ.  He  also  has  given  us  a  new 
life.  He  has  delivered  us  from  the  power  of  sin  and  spoken 
the  word  "Rise  up  and  walk."  All  this  is  so  familiar  that  we 
will  not  enlarge  upon  it.  We  should  not  forget  that  the 
spiritual  application  of  "Rise  up"  is  not  the  first  meaning. 
The  paralytic  received  healing  for  his  body  and  the  miser- 
able body  was  delivered  from  the  paralysis  which  held  it 
down.  So  the  body  of  the  believer  has  been  redeemed  and 
there  will  be  a  "rising  up"  from  the  grave  and  from  the 
earth,  changed  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  We  have  also 
to  say  that  the  teaching  of  remission  of  sins  and  what  is 
connected  with  it  is  not  to  be  taken  from  the  ninth  chapter 
in  Matthew.  To  teach  from  this  chapter  the  doctrine  of 
forgiveness,  as  it  has  been  done -so  much,  would  be  an  error. 
He  shows  His  authority  as  Son  of  Man  to  forgive  sins  on 
earth,  and  because  He  has  this  power  and  proves  it,  He 
manifests  Himself  by  it  as  God.  He  is  now  no  longer  Son 
of  Man  on  earth,  but  He  will  come  again  as  Sofi  of  Man, 
and  then  once  more  will  show  His  authority  to  forgive  sins 
on  earth  and  speak  the  Word  of  Life  to  those  who  are  help- 
less.    To  this  the  miracle  refers  us  in  type. 

The  paralytic  is  the  type  of  Lsrael.  We  have  a  number 
of  such  types  in  the  Word.  In  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  Gos- 
pel of  John  we  read  of  an  infirm  man  who  was  lying  help- 
less in  the  five  porches  (typifying  the  law)  and  Jesus  came 
and  healed  him,  telling  him,  "rise,  take  up  thy  couch  and 


i87 

walk."  He  is  the  type  of  Israel.  In  the  third  chapter  of 
Acts  another  helpless  one,  lame  from  his  mother's  womb, 
was  lying-  at  the  beautiful  gate  of  the  Temple,  He  is  raised 
up  and  leaps  and  praises  God.  The  name  of  Jesus  Christ 
the  Nazarene  had  raised  him  up.  He  also  is  a  type  of  Israel. 
Aeneas  in  Acts  ix  :32-35,  who  had  been  lying  for  eight  years 
upon  a  couch,  paralyzed,  and  to  whom  Peter  said,  "Jesus 
the  Christ  heals  thee,"  is  not  different  in  the  typical  applica- 
tion from  the  others. 

It  is  Israel  we  have  to  see  here  represented  in  type.  What 
He,  the  Son  of  Man,  when  He  comes  in  glory,  will  do  for 
His  earthly  people  is  seen  in  the  healing  of  the  paralytic. 
First,  He  will  come  and  turn  away  ungodliness-  from  Jacob. 
He  will  forgive  their  sins  and  remember  them  no  more. 
And  His  people,  the  remnant  of  Israel,  will  break  forth 
and  sing,  "Who  is  a  God  like  unto  Thee,  that  pardoneth 
iniquity  and  passeth  by  the  transgression  of  the  remnant  of 
His  heritage?  He  retaineth  not  His  anger  forever,  because 
He  delightcth  in  mercy"  (IMicah  vii:i8).  He  will  then  say 
to  His  people,  "I,  even  I,  am  He  that  blotteth  out  thy  trans- 
gressions for  mine  own  sake,  and  will  not  remember  thy 
sins"  (Is.  xliii  125 ). 

After  this  He  will  heal  them.  His  own,  poor,  blinded, 
paralyzed  and  miserable  people  Israel  will  be  the  first  of 
the  nations  of  the  earth  to  receive  complete  healing  for  soul 
and  body.  They  will  leap  and  shout  for  joy  like  the  lame 
man  in  the  third  chapter  of  Acts.  Therefore  it  says  in 
Malachi  iv,  where  it  speaks  of  the  Son  of  Righteousness  with 
h'ealing  beneath  His  wings,  "Ye  shall  go  forth  and  leap  for 


joy  (correct  translation)  as  calves  of  the  stall."  "And  the 
inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I  am  sick:  the  people  that  dwell 
therein  shall  be  forgiven  their  iniquity"  (Is.  xxxiii:24).  The 
ciii  Psalm  illustrates  most  beautifully  Israel's  coming  praise. 
It  is  not  only  "who  forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities,"  but  also 
"who  healeth  all  thy  diseases,"  The  diseases  in  this  psalm 
are  generally  spiritualized,  but  that  is  incorrect.  They  are 
bodily  diseases.  The  healing  of  the  paralytic  has  been  put 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  a  special  place  to  be  in  harmony  with 
the  whole  scope  of  the  Gospel  of  Matthew.  What  the  Son 
of  Man  did  in  humiliation  to  one  paralytic,  the  Son  of  Man 
in  exaltation,  coming  again,  will  do  to  the  whole  nation  and 
others  in  the  earth  in  that  coming  age  of  millennial  glory. 

The  healed  one  went  to  his  house.  "But  the  crowds  see- 
ing it  were  in  fear,  and  glorified  God,  who  gave  such  power 
to  men"  (verse  8).  This  was  all  they  saw  and  did.  They 
did  not  acknowledge  Him  as  Jehovah,  but  simply  in  their 
formal  way  glorified  God,  which  was  but  the  service  of  the 
lips. 

Besides  the  record  of  the  healing  of  the  paralytic  we 
have  nine  other  events  put  together  once  more  in  a  peculiar 
order,  far  from  being  chronological,  but  in  fullest  harmony 
with  the  scope  of  this  first  book.  These  are :  The  call  of 
Matthew,  Jesus  entering  the  house  and  sitting  down  with 
the  publicans  and  sinners,  the  question  of  John's  disciples, 
the  ruler  whose  daughter  had  died  and  the  Lord  going  to 
raise  her  up,  the  woman  with  an  issue  of  blood  who  touches 
Him  and  is  healed,  the  raising  from  the  dead  of  the  ruler's 
daughter,  the  healing  of  the  two  blind  men,  the  healing  of 


i89 


the  tlumb  man  as  well  as  others  and  the  Lord's  compassion 
for  the  multitudes. 

The  call  of  Matthew,  the  same  who  was  chosen  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  as  the  instrument  for  the  writing  of  this  Gospel, 
is  related  in  a  few  words  only :  "And  Jesus  passing  on 
thence  saw  a  man  sitting  at  the  tax  office  called  Matthew, 
and  says  to  him.  Follow  Me.  And  he  rose  up  and  followed 
Him"  (verse  9).  Had  Matthew  written  this  book  by  him- 
self and  not  by  inspiration  he  would  have  followed  the 
custom  of  other  writers  in  making  himself  more  promi- 
nent. He  might  have  begun  the  book  with  an  elaborate  ac- 
count of  himself,  his  earthly  circumstances  and  spoken, 
perhaps,  at  length  of  the  scene  which  is  but  rapidly  sketched 
in  one  verse.  The  Holy  Spirit,  however,  guided  his  pen, 
and  in  the  right  place  in  the  right  words  he  records  the  story 
of  his  own  call.  The  place  given  to  it  is  significant.  After 
the  Lord  had  shown  Himself  in  His  power  to  be  Jehovah 
He  now  manifests  Himself  in  His  grace  to  the  lost  and  out- 
cast sinner.  What  a  scene  it  is  which  the  one  little  verse 
puts  before  us !  There  he  sits  gathering  in  the  tax,  no 
thought  of  Him,  no  knowledge  of  Him.  As  a  tax-gatherer 
he  was,  with  his  colleagues,  despised  by  the  leaders  of  the 
Jews,  the  I'harisees,  the  Sadducees  and  the  Scribes,  as  well 
as  by  the.  mass  of  the  people.  Tax-gatherers  (Publicans) 
were  known  as  thieves,  who  enriched  themselves  by  extor- 
tions. Another  one  said  later,  after  the  Lord  had  entered 
into  his  house:  "If  I  have  taken  anything  from  any  man 
by  false  accusation,  T  return  him  fourfold."  However,  this 
was  not  the  cause  why  the  people  hated  him.    They  looked 


IQO 


upon  them  as  miseraiile  hirelings  of  the  Roman  govern- 
ment, who  had  put  themselves  under  the  control  of  the 
Gentile  rule  and  helped  in  the  subduing  of  the  land  and  the 
people,  their  own  land  and  their  own  brethren.    The  tax- 
gatherers  were,  therefore,  considered  apostates.     And  such 
a  one  is  called  not  alone  to  follow  Jesus,  but  called  and 
chosen  as  an  instrument  to  write  the  kingly  Gospel.    Mar- 
velous Grace !    "Ye  have  not  chosen  me,  but  I  have  chosen 
you"   (John  xv  :i6).    This  is  perfectly  illustrated  in  Mat- 
thew's case  as  well  as  in  everyone  who  is  saved  by  Grace. 
Well  may  we  adoringly  cry  out :  "Oh,  the  Grace  that  sought 
me !"  With  no  thought  of  Him  or  for  Him,  busied  in  earthly 
things  for  the  meat  that  perisheth,  Matthew  was  called  to  fol- 
low Him.    Matthew  follows.    He  leaves  the  table,  there  is 
no  bargaining  on  his  side,  no  request  to  think  it  over,  no 
desire  to  go  first  to  do  something  else,  but  the  first  thing 
done  was  obedience  to  the  voice  which  had  spoken.    Yet 
there  is  no  claim  of  merit  from  his  side  in  doing  this.    May 
we  who  are  His  own  ever  be  ready  in  obedience  to  His  call. 
And  Matthew  invites  Him  to  his  house  and  makes  Him 
a  feast.   It  does  not  say  in  this  Gospel  that  it  was  Matthew's 
house ;  in  another  Gospel  the  Holy  Spirit  has  made  a  record 
of  it   (Mark  ii  :I4-I7.)    Here  a  company  of  tax-gatherers 
and  sinners  are  come  together,  and  He,  the  Holy  One,  the 
One  who  had  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  is  lost, 
recHnes  with  them  at  table  and  eats  with  them.   Again  we 
say,  what  a  scene  of  grace !    He  who  created  the  heavens 
and  the  earth  in  the  creature's  place  in  living  touch  with 
those  who  rebelled  against  Him !     And  there  they  stand, 


191 

the  poor,  miserable,  self-righteous  Pharisees.    They  would 
in  their  religiousness,  with  their  broad  phylacteries,  keeping 
the  outside  clean,  not  even  touch  a  tax-gatherer,  much  less 
speak  to  him.   To  sit  down  and  eat  with  them  would  have 
been   in   their  eyes   an   almost   unpardonable   crime.    And 
here  they  find  Him  whose  words  of  divine  authority  they 
had  heard,  whose  deeds  of  omnipotent  power  they  had  seen, 
who  had  manifested  Himself  as  Jehovah,  and  He  eats  with 
tax-gatherers  and  sinners.    Not  the  poor,  wicked,  self-con- 
fessed thieves,  the  tax-gatherers  and  harlots  appear  in  this 
scene  and  throughout  the  Gospel  as   Satan's  masterpiece, 
but    the    proud,    religious,    self-righteous   Pharisee.    John 
the  Baptist  with  his  divine  message  came,  and  the  Phari- 
sees were  rightly  called  by  him  the  generation  of  vipers, 
but   never   the   tax-gatherers   and   the   harlots,    who   gladly 
came  and  confessed  their  sins  and  owned  their  lost  condi- 
tion.   "John  came  to  you  in  the  way  of  righteousness,  and 
ye  believed  him  not ;  but  the  tax-gatherers  and  harlots  be- 
h'eved  him  ;  but  )e.  when  ye  saw  it,  repented  not  yourselves 
afterwards  to  believe  him"    (Matt,  xxi  :32).    So  here  we 
see  them,   without  any   faith   in   Jesus   and   no   knowledge 
of  the  God  of  mercy,  wrapped  up  in  the  filthy  rags,  their 
own  righteousness.   What  else  then  could  they  do  but  speak 
against  the  Lord's  gracious  way?    "Why  eateth  your  Mas- 
ter with  tax-gatherers  and  sinners?"   And  the  self-righteous 
Pharisees  of  ritualistic  Christendom  are  not  different  from 
these,  their  forefathers,  the  Pharisees.    No  heart  for  Christ, 
no  understanding  of  grace  and  no  knowledge  of  God.    In 
the  answer  our  Lord  gives  He  shows  tliaf  what   He  docs 


192 

Is  in  fullest  harmony  with  His  having  come  down  into 
the  earth.  God  would  have  mercy  and  He  had  come  to 
show  it.  "They  that  are  strong  have  not  need  of  a  physi- 
cian, but  those  that  are  ill.  But  go  and  learn  what  that  is — 
I  will  hive  mercy  and  not  sacrifice ;  for  I  have  not  come 
to  call  righteous  men,  b'.it  sinners." 

Then  the  disciples  of  John  came  to  Him  with  a  question. 
"Why  do  we  and  the  Pharisees  often  fast,  but  Thy  disciples 
fast  not?"  John's  disciples  were  having  a  difficulty.  Their 
master  had  made  much  of  fasting  and  had  enjoined  it  upon 
themselves,  but  the  disciples  of  Jesus  were  not  fasting. 
Were  they  not  with  Him  in  the  tax-gatherer's  house,  eating 
and  drinking?  It  is  a  straightforward  question  they  bring. 
They  come  not  as  faultfinders  or  murmurers,  like  the  Phar- 
isees, but  as  intelligent  inquirers,  who  were  seeking  light. 
So  the  Lord  meets  them  and  solves  their  difficulty  by  a  gra- 
cious answer.  He  is  still  the  same,  ever  ready  to  teach  and 
instruct  the  saint  who  sits  at  His  feet.  The  only  difficulty 
is  we  are  often  so  unlike  these  disciples  of  John,  though 
our  knowledge  and  our  position  is  higher  than  theirs.  In- 
stead of  taking  the  straight  course  in  coming  to  Him  first 
of  all,  we  seek  first  the  solution  of  our  difficulties  somewhere 
else.  Perhaps  the  disciples  of  John  who  came  here  are  the 
same  who  came  and  told  Jesus,  after  they  buried  the  headless 
body  of  their  master. 

"Can  the  sons  of  the  bridechamber  mourn  so  long  as  the 
bridegroom  is  with  them?  But  days  will  come  when  the 
bridegroom  will  have  been  taken  away  from  them,  and  then 
they  will  fast."   He  Himself  is  the  bridegroom  and  He  had 


193 

come  and  while  He  was  with  them,  mourning  could  have  no 
place ;  His  rejection  was  to  come  and  then  they  would  fa^t. 
But  our  Lord  not  merely  answers  the  (luestion  and  shows 
Himself  greater  than  John,  who  was  but  the  friend  of  the 
bridegroom  (John  iii  129),  while  Jesus  is  the  bridegroom. 
He  adds  something  which  is  of  great  importance.  He 
speaks  of  a  complete  change  of  the  order  of  things.  "But 
no  one  puts  a  patch  of  new  cloth  on  an  old  garment,  or  its 
filling  up  takes  from  the  garment  and  a  worse  rent  takes 
place.  Nor  do  men  put  new  wine  into  old  skins,  otherwise 
the  skins  burst  and  the  wine  is  poured  out,  and  the  skins 
will  be  destroyed ;  but  they  put  new  wine  into  new  skins 
and  both  are  preserved  together."  The  old  garment  is 
Judaism  with  its  legal  righteousness.  It  is  no  good  and  had 
proven  itself  as  such.  No  value  in  it  at  all,  only  to  be  cast 
aside,  utterly  put  aside,  A  new  garment,  a  better  righteous- 
ness was  about  to  be  given.  He  whose  name  is  "Jehovah 
our  righteousness"  had  come  and  a  change  of  dispensations 
was  to  take  place.  And  now  as  it  has  come  the  old  is  gone, 
it  is  no  longer  in  existence.  Yet  that  which  the  Lord  here 
but  faintly  indicates,  the  impossibility  of  patching  up  that 
which  is  hopeless  and  worthless,  has  been  done  in  Christen- 
dom, nay,  is  the  almost  universal  state  of  Christendom.  Tt 
is  mi.xing  law  and  grace  together.  The  rent  has  become 
worse.  A  Judaistic  Christianity  which,  with  a  profession 
of  Grace  and  the  Gospel,  attempts  to  keep  the  law  and  fos-. 
tors  legal  righteousness,  is  a  greater  abomination  in  the 
eyes  of  God,  than  professing  Israel  in  the  past,  worshipping 
idols. 


194 


The  new  wine  is  the  Gospel  of  Grace.  The  old  skins*  are 
the  law,  the  Levitical  institutions  and  all  connected  with  it, 
New  wine  belongs  into  new  skins.  If  the  new  wine  is  put 
into  old  skins,  the  skins  will  burst  and  then  there  is  no 
wine  left  and  the  skins  are  also  made  useless.  The  two 
belong  no  longer  together.  So  Gospel  and  Judaism,  Law 
and  Grace  do  not  belong  together.  The  Gospel  of  Grace 
enclosed  in  ceremonial  Judaism  will  result  in  the  loss  of  the 
new  wine,  and  ceremonial  Judaism,  the  old  skins,  will  be 
gone  as  well.  And  such  is  ritualistic  Christendom;  it  is 
neither  Christian  nor  Jewish.  It  has  not  Judaism  and  has 
lost  the  new  wine.  "They  say,  they  are  Jews  and  are  not" 
(Revl.  iiip).  If  men  hold  only  the  form  of  godliness  and 
deny  the  power  thereof,  it  will  always  mean  outward  re- 
ligiousness, legality,  self-righteousness  and  turning  away 
from  Grace  and  the  Lord  Himself. 

The  ruler  whose  daughter  had  died  appears  next  on  the 
scene.  He  is  unlike  the  Centurion  in  the  eighth  chapter 
V  ho  had  the  greater  faith  and  wanted  the  Lord  to  speak 
L..t  a  word.  The  ruler  of  the  Jews  wants  the  Lord  to  come 
in  person  to  his  house  and  touch  the  one,  without  life.  His 
personal  presence  is  demanded  to  raise  the  daughter  from 
death  to  life.  That  we  have  here  once  more  dispensational 
truths  before  us  is  seen  at  the  first  glance.  Israel  is  often 
spoken  of  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  as  a  daughter, 
the  daughter  of  Zion.    In  the  short  book  of  Lamentations 

■  *Bottles  in  the  authorized  version.  Skins  were  used  and  are  be- 
ing used  in  the  Orient  for  the  preservation  of  wine.  Hence  skins 
is  the  correct  translation. 


195 

alone  wc  find  the  word,  dauf^^htcr.  as  meanings  Israel,  ei^h- 
tcon  times.  The  dauij;hter  who  has  died  is  then  likewise  a 
type  of  the  people.  To  briny;  life  to  Israel  can  be  only- 
through  the  presence  of  Him,  who  is  the  life.  When  He 
came  the  first  time,  they  would  not  come  to  Him  that  they 
mij^hl  have  life.  lUit  He  is  coming  again  to  raise  up  His 
:vM)ple,  to  touch  t'lC  daugblcr  ot  Zion. 

And  while  our  Lord  goes  forward  to  fulfill  the  request 
of  the  ruler,  another  incident  comes  in  by  the  way.  An 
unclean  woman  touclics  Him  and  is  healed.  "And  behold 
a  woman  who  had  an  issue  of  blood  for  twelve  years  came 
behind  and  touched  the  hem  of  His  garment;  for  she  said 
within  herself,  if  I  should  only  touch  His  garment  I  shall 
be  healed.  But  Jesus,  turning  and  seeing  her,  said,  'Be  of 
good  courage,  daughter,  thy  faith  hath  healed  thee.'  And 
tl.e  woman  was  healed  from  that  hour"  (verses  20-23). 
She  represents  the  Gentiles  and  the  grace  which  comes  to 
them  by  faith,  wdiile  the  resurrection  of  Israel  is  still  un- 
accomplished, but  drawing  nigh.  Faith  touches  Him  now 
and  receives  of  Him  salvation  with  its  precious  assistance. 
But  the  touching  of  Him  is  parenthetical,  just  as  the  present 
age  with  salvation  come  to  the  Gentiles  is  a  parenthesis. 
Jesus  comes  to  the  house  of  the  ruler.  It  has  the  meaning 
of  relationship.  So  will  He  come  to  raise  up  the  dauglilcr 
of  Israel.  "And  when  Jesus  was  come  to  the  house  of  the 
ruler,  and  saw  the  flute  players  and  the  crowd  making  a 
tumult,  He  said,  Withdraw,  for  the  damsel  is  not  dead,  but 
sleeps.  And  they  derided  Him.  But  when  the  crowd  had 
been  put  out,  He  went  in  and  took  her  hand ;  and  the  damsel 


196 

rose  lip.  And  the  fame  of  it  went  out  into  all  that  land." 
May  not  the  crowd  of  unbelievers  and  mockers  represent 
nominal  Christendom?  Surely  the  same  is  in  Christendom 
which  we  see  here.  The  Lord  has  declared  in  His  Word, 
eternally  settled  in  the  heavens,  His  loving  purposes  con- 
cerning Israel.  It  can  well  be  said  of  His  earthly  people, 
as  He  said  of  the  ruler's  daughter,  "The  damsel  is  not  dead, 
but  sleeps."  The  Scriptures  are  full  of  promises  to  Israel 
and  the  day  of  their  resurrection  and  restoration,  yet  Chris- 
tendom treats  all  this  with  unbelief  and  ridicule.  There  is 
no  understanding  of  God's  purposes,  the  plan  of  the  ages, 
and  hence  no  heart  and  no  love  for  the  people,  who  are  still 
beloved  for  the  Father's  sake  and  whose  arc  the  promises. 
Our  Lord  said  to  that  crowd,  "Withdraw,"  and  they  were 
put  out  of  the  scene,  when  He  came  and  touched  the  damsel 
to  raise  her  up.  And  may  we  not  see  in  this  also  the  end 
of  the  motley  throng  in  Christendom,  which  will  be  put  off 
the  scene  when  He  comes  to  do  the  miracle  of  His  mercy 
and  His  power  on  Israel  ? 

And  when  He  does  this  to  His  people  then  surely  the 
blind  will  see  and  the  dumb  speak. 

In  the  healing  of  the  two  blind  men,  which  comes  imme- 
diately after  the  raising  of  the  maid,  we  see  again  a  dis- 
pensational  foreshadowing  of  Israel's  present  condition  and 
future  healing.  It  is  true  the  miracle  of  the  two  blind  men 
who  cry  to  Him  is  often  spiritualized,  and  we  do  not  at  all 
deny  that  he  has  an  application  in  that  direction.  First  of 
all,  however,  we  must  not  overlook  the  original  meaning  it 
has  in  this  Jewish  Gospel,  and  as  we  do  this  we  shall  yet 


197 

more  and  more  grasp  the  divine  scope  of  the  Gospel  of 
Matthew.  "Two  bHnd  men  followed  Him  crying  and  say- 
ing. Have  mercy  on  us,  Son  of  David."  The  two  blind 
men  picture  Israel's  condition  as  the  leper  did  in  the  be- 
ginning of  the  eighth  chapter.  They  were  blind,  when  He 
came  and  dwelt  among  them.  His  own  knew  Him  not  and 
received  Him  not.  lUit  how  much  greater  has  their  blind- 
ness become  since  they  not  only  have  cast  Him  out,  but  re- 
jected the  offer  of  His  mercy  after  His  resurrection  and 
ascension?  Now  it  is.  Let  their  eyes  be  darkened.  Blind- 
ness in  part  has  happened  to  Israel.  When  the  Apostle 
to  the  Gentiles,  Paul,  had  come  to  Rome,  and  in  his  burning 
love  for  his  brethren,  his  kinsmen,  had  sent  for  them 
and  in  disagreement  they  began  to  leave,  he  addressed 
to  them  the  Word,  so  true  throughout  this  age :  "Well 
spake  the  Holy  Spirit  through  Isaiah  the  prophet  to 
our  fathers,  saying.  Go  to  this  people,  and  say.  Hearing 
ye  shall  hear  and  not  understand,  and  seeing  ye  shall  see 
and  not  perceive.  For  the  heart  of  this  people  has  become 
fat,  and  they  hear  heavily  with  their  cars,  and  they  have 
closed  their  eves  ;  lest  they  should  see  with  their  eyes,  and 
hear  with  their  ears,  and  understand  with  their  heart,  and 
be  converted  and  I  should  heal  them"  (Acts  xxviii  :25-28). 
But  this  is  not  Israel's  final  condition.  Like  these  two 
blind  men,  so  Israel  will  cry  out  of  the  deepest  darkness, 
out  of  the  terrible  night  of  Jacob's  trouble.  "Have  mercy 
on  us.  Son  of  David."  Son  of  David  is  His  title  as  He 
stands  in  relation  to  His  earthly  people,  and  in  this  passage 
we  have  Him  called  by  this  name  for  the  first  time  in  the 


198 

Gospel.  The  cry  these  two  men  utter  is  specifically  Jewish, 
and  surely  no  Gentile  will  cry  to  Him  as  Son  of  David. 
Later  in  the  Gospel  a  Gentile  woman  cried  after  Him, 
"Have  mercy  on  me,  Lord,  Son  of  David;  my  daughter 
is  miserably  possessed  by  a  demon.  But  He  did  not  answer 
her  a  word"  (Matt.  yi\:2^).  When  she  called  again,  she 
said,  "Lord,  help  me,"  and  after  she  had  taken  her  place 
with  the  dogs  the  Lord  acknowledged  her  faith.  And  when 
thus  Israel  cries  for  mercy  and  waits  for  the  coming  of  the 
Son  of  Man  and  the  Son  of  David,  He  will  arise  and  have 
mercy  upon  Zion  and  "in  wrath  He  will  remember  mercy." 
"He  will  return  again.  He  will  have  compassion  upon  us; 
He  will  subdue  our  iniquities ;  and  thou  wilt  cast  all  their 
sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea"  (Micah  vii:i9). 

He  did  not  pass  by  the  two  blind  men.  "When  He  was 
come  to  the  house  (which  always  stands  for  relationship), 
the  blind  men  came  to  Him,  and  Jesus  says  to  them.  Do 
ye  believe  that  I  am  able  to  do  this?  They  say  to  Him, 
Yea,  Lord.  Then  He  touched  their  eyes,  saying,  According 
to  your  faith,  be  it  unto  you.  And  their  eyes  were  opened." 
So  He  healed  them  by  coming  in  touch  with  them  not  ab- 
sent and  unseen,  but  present  and  touching  them.  He  is 
absent  from  the  earth  now  unseen  to  the  eyes  of  men,  yet 
we  believe  in  Him  and  through  Him  on  God;  we  believe, 
too,  that  He  is  able,  that  all  power  is  given  to  Him  in 
heaven  and  on  earth  and  it  is  also  now  "according  to  your 
faith."  But  He  who  is  absent  will  come  back  to  earth 
again,  back  into  definite  relationship  with  His  earthly  peo- 
ple, and  then  and  not  before  will  Israel's  blindness  be  ended. 


199 

And  what  these  two  healed  men  did,  spreading  His  name 
abroad  in  all  that  land,  believing  and  seeing  Israel  will  do 
in  that  day. 

Next  comes  a  dumb  man  possessed  by  a  demon,  and  the 
demon  having  been  cast  out,  the  dumb  spake.  This,  too. 
refers  to  Israel  still  under  the  control  of  Satan's  power. 
Instead  of  praising  their  King,  Israel  was  dumb  and  is 
dumb  now;  but  the  demon  will  be  cast  out,  and  then  Israel 
will  speak  His  praises  and  sing  the  new  song  unto  the 
Lord.  What  a  day  it  will  be,  when  dumb  Israel  is  at  last 
the  people  "formed  to  show  forth  His  praise !"  "And  the 
crowds  were  astonished,  saying.  It  has  never  been  seen  thus 
in  Israel."  And  in  that  day  wdien  Israel  is  healed  it  will  be 
said,  "What  God  has  wrought,"  and  all  the  nations  icill 
know  that  He  is  Jehovah.  We  learn  therefore  in  the  three 
miracles — the  raising  of  the  maid  from  the  dead,  the  open- 
ing of  the  eyes  of  the  blind  and  the  casting  out  of  the  de- 
mon from  the  dumb  man — the  blessed  story  of  Israel's  com- 
ing redemption.  Israel  raised  from  the  dead  will  sec  and 
behold  the  King,  the  Son  of  David,  and  speak  and  praise 
His  name.  It  is  not  less  the  way  of  divine  grace  with  each 
siimer  wdio  believes  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We  are  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins.  He  said :  "Verily,  verily,  I  say 
unto  you,  that  an  hour  is  coming  and  now  is  (and  the  hour 
is  not  yet  passed),  wdien  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of 
the  Son  of  God  and  they  that  have  heard  shall  live"  (John 
v:24),  and  those  He  raises  from  the  dead  to  them  He  gives 
eternal  life,  which  is  He  Himself,  and  gives  them  the  light 
of  life.  His  Spirit,  to  enlighten  them  and  guide  them.     Out 


20O 


of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  will  speak  to  His 
praise  who  loveth  us  and  has  redeemed  us  by  His  blood 
and  delivered  us  from  the  power  of  darkness.  Oh,  how 
blessedly  rich  and  full  in  His  Word ! 

But  now  the  dark  side.  While  the  crowds  were  aston- 
ished, the  Pharisees  said.  He  casts  out  the  demons  through 
the  prince  of  demons.  Here  for  the  first  time  in  the  Gospel 
do  we  find  the  awful  blasphemy  of  the  religious  leaders  of 
the  people.  The  power  of  Jehovah  had  been  manifested 
before  their  very  eyes.  The  leper  had  been  cleansed  and 
gone  to  the  priest,  who  knew  Jehovah's  power  had  done  it; 
the  tempest  had  been  stilled,  the  demons  cast  out,  the  para- 
lytic healed,  the  dead  maid  raised  up,  the  blind  saw  and 
the  dumb  spake ;  but  instead  of  bowing  in  the  august  pres- 
ence of  the  King  and  acknowledging  the  power,  which 
manifested  itself  in  such  a  manner,  as  divine,  they  attributed 
it  to  Satan,  the  prince  of  demons.  They  accused  the  Lord 
from  heaven  of  being  the  instrument  of  Satan !  Awful 
blasphemy !  It  is  here  but  the  first  muttering  of  the  coming 
storm.  The  storm  breaks  fully  in  the  twelfth  chapter. 
There  they  stand  in  all  their  Satanic  boldness  and  charge 
Him  with  casting  out  demons  by  Beelzebub.  They  com- 
mitted there  and  then  the  sin  against  the  Spirit.  We  must 
reserve  the  closer  investigation  of  this  matter  till  we  read 
the  chapter  in  which  our  Lord  speaks  of  that  sin.  Here  we 
notice  especially  that  the  rejection  of  our  Lord  began  with 
the  blind  leaders  of  the  people,  the  religious,  self-righteous 
Pharisees.  It  is  not  different  in  Christendom  with  the  fall- 
ing away  from  the  faith. 


201 


Our  Lord  continued  in  His  ministry  in  Galilee.  "And 
Jesus  went  round  all  the  cities  and  the  villages,  teaching  in 
their  synagogues,  and  preaching  the  glad  tidings  of  the 
kingdom  and  healing  every  disease  and  every  bodily  weak- 
ness" (verse  35).  What  an  activity  this  must  have  been! 
He  walked  up  and  down  through  Galilee,  and  certainly  not 
one  of  the  numerous  villages  was  forgotten  by  Him.  Let 
us  notice  again  that  it  is  the  Gospel  of  the  kingdom  He 
preached,  therefore  Kingdom  signs  were  present.  When  He, 
the  King,  comes  again,  and  the  Kingdom  of  the  heavens  is 
established  and  the  heavens  rule,  then  disease  and  all  that 
offends  will  be  put  away. 

But  what  scenes  met  His  eye  as  He  passed  thus  minister- 
ing among  the  crowds  of  people  ?  He  beheld  them  as  worn 
out,  harassed  and  cast  away  as  sheep  not  having  a  shepherd. 
His  loving  heart  was  moved  with  compassion  for  them.  In 
this  loving  sympathy  He  reveals  Himself  as  the  Shepherd 
of  Israel.  Long  before  His  Spirit  in  the  prophets  had 
spoken  of  the  scene  we  behold  here.  "Son  of  Man,  prophesy 
against  the  shepherds  of  Israel ;  prophesy,  and  say  unto 
them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  unto  the  shepherds:  Woe 
be  to  the  shepherds  of  Israel  that  do  not  feed  themselves ! 
Should  not  the  shepherds  feed  the  flock?  *  *  *  And 
they  were  scattered,  because  there  is  no  shepherd;  and  they 
became  meat  to  all  the  beasts  of  the  field,  where  they  were 
scattered.  My  sheep  wandered  through  all  the  mountains, 
and  upon  every  high  hill ;  yea,  My  flock  was  scattered  upon 
all  the  face  of  the  earth  and  none  did  search  and  seek  after 
tlicm"   ( P'.zek.  xxxiv).    In  the  same  chapter  we  read  what 


202 


Jehovah  the  Shepherd  of  Israel  says :  "I  will  both  search 
My  sheep  and  find  tliem  out.  *  *  *  /  will  seek  out  My 
sheep.  *  *  *  1  will  bring  them  out  from  the  people  and 
gather  them  from  the  countries.  *  .  *  *  /  will  feed  them 
in  a  good  pasture.  *  *  *  /  ^jn  feed  My  flock  and  /  will 
cause  them  to  lie  down.  *  *  *  /  -^iH  seek  that  which  was 
lost.  *  *  *  /  ^jji  niake  with  them  a  covenant  of  peace," 
*  *  *  etc.  He  came  thus  to  His  own  as  the  Shepherd, 
but  they  did  not  want  Him.  As  the  good  Shepherd  He  laid 
down  His  life  for  the  sheep,  becoming  the  great  Shepherd 
in  resurrection  and  the  chief  Shepherd  in  glory.  But  He  is 
also  the  Shepherd  of  Israel,  and  thinks  still  of  His  earthly 
people  and  loves  them.  That  thirty-fourth  chapter  of  Eze- 
kiel  will  yet  be  literally  fulfilled  through  the  returning  Son 
of  Man,  and  then  His  poor  flock  will  know  Him  and  sing 
in  the  earth  what  the  believer's  heart  sings  now :  "The 
Lord  is  my  Shepherd,  I  shall  not  want."  'Then  saith  He 
to  His  disciples.  The  harvest  is  great  and  the  workmen  few ; 
supplicate  therefore  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  that  He  send 
forth  workmen  unto  His  harvest."  He  Himself  is  the  Lord 
of  the  harvest.  He  sends  forth  the  workmen  and  He  equips 
them  for  the  service.  But  there  is  a  great  difiference  between 
the  sending  forth  of  the  workmen  to  preach  the  gospel  of  the 
kingdom,  and  to  heal  the  sick,  and  the  gifts,  the  Lord  in 
glory,  as  the  Head  of  His  body,  has  given  to  the  church. 
The  sending  forth  of  the  laborers  into  the  harvest  will  be 
before  us  in  the  next  chapter. 


203 


CHAPTER  X. 

We  learn  now  how  our  Lord,  who  is  truly  the  Lord  of 
the  Harvest,  sends  forth  the  laborers.  He  does  it  as  the 
Kini]^,  who  came  to  offer  the  Kingdom  to  Lsrael.  He  sends 
fortii  the  laborers  into  the  harvest  as  messengers  of  Himself 
to  announce  the  same  message,  which  He  announced,  "The 
Kingdom  of  the  heavens  has  drawn  nigh,"  and  confers  to 
them  the  authority  and  the  power  to  heal  the  infir.r,  raise 
the  dead,  and  cast  out  demons.  This  sending  forth,  as  we 
shall  see,  was  altogether  in  connection  with  the  Kingdom ; 
it  was  therefore  only  temporary  and  ended  with  the  complete 
rejection  of  the  Kingdom  by  Israel.  However,  there  is  a 
time  coming  when  a  Jewish  remnant  will  again  go  forth  to 
preach  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom.  This  will  be  during  the 
great  tribulation. 

It  is  strange  that  Christian  believers  should  go  to  the 
tenth  chapter  of  Matthew  and  look  upon  what  is  written 
here  as  meaning  the  sending  forth  of  the  laborers,  mission- 
aries, preachers  and  teachers  to  proclaim  the  Gospel  of 
(Trace,  when  there  was  first  of  all  no  Gospel  of  Grace  and 
when  the  words  of  our  Lord  so  clearly  sh<nv  that  it  could 
not  refer  to  anything  outside  of  Israel  and  Israel's  land. 
Yet  this  wrong  application  is  constantly  made.  It  is  claimed 
by  some  on  the  authority  of  this  chapter  that  missionary 
efforts  should  consist  in  not  preaching  alone,  but  healing  of 


204 


the  sick.  They  send  out,  therefore,  missionaries  who  are 
physicians,  and  supply  them  with  drugs  and  surgical  instru- 
ments, as  if  our  Lord  did  anything  of  the  kind.  Others 
again  claim  that  the  healing  of  the  sick,  besides  the  preach- 
ing of  what  they  term,  the  Kingdom  of  the  heavens,  is  still 
in  order,  and  they  act  according  to  this  belief ;  however, 
the  raising  of  the  dead  they  do  not  include  in  their  powers. 
The  Mormons  with  their  abominable  and  blasphemous  teach- 
ings likewise  go  to  this  chapter,  going  forth  two  by  two 
and  trying  to  follow  the  other  commands  given.  All 
this  confusion  is  at  once  ended,  when  we  look  upon  the  send- 
ing forth  of  the  laborers  here,  as  the  sending  forth  of  mes- 
sengers to  announce  the  Kingdom ;  after  the  Kingdom  had 
been  postponed  this  special  mission  of  the  twelve  ended. 

The  first  verse  in  the  chapter  tells  us  that  He  called  His 
twelve  disciples  and  that  He  gave  them  power  over  unclean 
spirits,  so  that  they  should  cast  them  out,  and  heal  every 
disease  and  every  bodily  weakness.  The  twelve  messen- 
gers, whose  names  are  given  in  the  second,  third  and  fourth 
verses,  stand  as  such  always  in  relation  to  Israel.  He 
tells  them  later,  "Ye  shall  also  sit  on  twelve  thrones,  judging 
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel''  (chapter  xix:28).  Even  in  the 
New  Jerusalem  there  will  be  this  distinction.  "Her  shining 
was  like  a  most  precious  stone,  as  a  crystal  like  jasper  stone ; 
having  a  great,  high  wall ;  having  twelve  gates,  and  at  the 
gates  twelve  angels,  and  names  inscribed,  which  are  those 
of  the  tzvclve  tribes  of  the  sons  of  Israel.  *  *  *  And 
the  wall  of  the  city  had  tivelvc  foundations,  and  on  them 
tzvclve  names  of  the  tivclvc  apostles  of  the  Lamb"   (Rev. 


205 


xxi  :  12-14).  The  twelve  apostles  thus  stand  in  prominent 
and  definite  relation  to  Israel.  Here  among  the  twelve,  who 
are  sent  forth,  is  also  the  name  of  Judas  the  Iscariot,  who 
delivered  Him  up.  After  his  awful  end  another  was  right!) 
and  divinely  chosen  in  his  place,  that  is  Matthias.  It  ii 
astonishing  to  hear  able  teachers  of  the  Word  talk  and  write 
of  the  mistake  which  the  eleven  made  in  the  first  chapter 
in  the  book  of  Acts  in  casting  the  lot  and  choosing  Matthias. 
We  have  heard  all  kinds  of  criticism  upon  their  action. 
They  were,  however,  guided  aright,  and  did  not  make  a  mis- 
take, for  they  acted  upon  the  Word  of  God  in  the  Psalms, 
and  in  the  casting  of  the  lot  they  were  fully  authorized  by 
the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  and  besides  this,  they  did  it 
in  dependence  on  the  Lord.  It  is  also  said  by  these  breth- 
ren who  see  in  the  choosing  of  Matthias  an  error,  that  the 
Lord  wanted  Paitl  to  be  the  one  who  belongs  to  the  twelve. 
This  is  the  ivorst  blunder  of  all.  The  Holy  Spirit  fully 
endorses  the  action  of  the  eleven  before  Pentecost  through 
I'aul  himself.  In  i  Corinthians  xv  15  we  read  that  the  risen 
Lord  was  seen  by  the  tivclrc.  In  the  eighth  verse  Paul  says : 
"And  last  of  all,  as  to  an  alxjrtion,  He  appeared  to  me  also.'' 
It  is  clear  from  this  passage  that  Paul  does  not  belong  to 
the  twelve.  Paul,  as  apostle  to  the  Gentiles,  is  an  apostle 
not  from  men  nor  through  man  (Gal.  i  :i)  ;  he  received  his 
apostleship  from  the  risen  and  glorified  Lord.  It  is  through 
Paul  as  the  one  who  has  no  earthly  connections,  but  has  it 
all  from  above,  that  the  Gospel  of  Grace  as  well  as  the  mys- 
tery hid  in  former  ages  is  made  known. 
..  In  the  Epistles  given  through  Paul  we  read,  therefore. 


2o6 


all  concerning  the  Gospel  of  Grace,  the  church  and  the  min- 
istry, which  is  for  this  age,  an  age  in  which  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  not  King,  but  Lord  in  Glory.  It  is  from  the  Glory 
as  Head  of  the  Body  He  gives  gifts.  "He  that  descended 
is  the  same  who  also  ascended  up  above  all  the  heavens,  that 
He  might  fill  all  things ;  and  He  has  given  some  apostles, 
and  some  prophets,  and  some  evangelists,  and  some  shep- 
herds and  teachers,  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints"  (Ephes. 
iv  :  10-12).  He  ministers  then  through  the  instruments  He 
chooses  from  above,  and  nowhere  in  the  Epistles  do  we 
read  anything  like  that  which  is  contained  in  the  tenth  chap- 
ter of  Matthew.  Let  us  divide  the  Word  of  truth  rightly 
and  not  put  the  church  and  the  ministry  of  the  church  in  the 
chapter  before  us.  All  this  will  become  clearer  to  us  as  we 
turn  to  the  different  verses. 

J^^or  instance,  in  the  sixth  verse  we  read :  "Go  not  of^ 
into  the  way  of  the  Gentiles,  and  into  a  city  of  Samaritans 
enter  ye  not;  but  go  rather  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house 
of  Israel."  This  is  a  limited  sphere.  They  had  nothing  to 
do  and  could  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  Gentiles  nor  with 
Samaritans.  After  the  death  and  resurrection  of  our  Lord 
the  Gospel  was  to  be  preached,  beginning  in  Jerusalem,  in 
Samaria,  to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth.  The  lost  sheep 
of  the  house  of  Israel,  that  much  "spiritualized"  phrase, 
were  not  Gentiles,  nor  were  they  the  church,  for  a  church 
was  not  and  could  not  be  then.  Their  preaching  was  only 
this  text :  "The  Kingdom  of  the  heavens  has  drawn  nigh." 
What  does  it  mean?  It  meant  that  the  promised  Kingdom 
for  Israel,  and  through  Israel  to  the  nations,  the  Kingdom 


207 


with  all  its  earthly  blessings,  was  about  to  come.  It  was 
heralding  the  fact  of  the  presence  of  the  King  to  set  up  the 
Kingdom,  if  His  own  would  have  it.  Such  a  preaching  of 
the  Kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  not  given  now.  After  the 
church  age  closes  by  the  removal  of  the  church  from  the 
earth  into  heaven,  as  foreshadowed  bv  the  vessel  which 
Peter  saw  comina;  out  of  heaven  and  again  received  into 
heaven,  then  the  kingdom  will  again  draw  nigh  in  the  per- 
son of  the  returning  King  and  Lord  with  His  saints. 

He  tells  them:  "Vc  have  received  gratuitously,  give 
gratuitously.*  Do  not  provide  yourselves  with  gold,  or  sil- 
ver, or  brass,  for  your  belts,  nor  scrip  for  the  way,  nor  two 
body  coats,  nor  sandals,  nor  a  staff,  for  the  workman  is  wor- 
thy of  his  nourishment."  Some  well-meaning  persons  have 
tried  to  follow  out  these  commandments  to  the  very  letter, 
but  it  was  never  meant  for  the  servants  of  Christ  to  be  fol- 
lowed literally  during  this  age.  However,  two  principles 
are  in  these  words  before  us,  which  find  their  application  in 
this  age.  They  had  received  the  message  and  power  gra- 
tuitously and  thus  they  were  to  give  it.  The  Gospel  is  to 
be  free,  without  price  and  without  money.  This  principle 
holds  good  at  this  time.  How  great  the  failure  in  Christen- 
dom, with  its  salaried  ministry,  pew  rents,  fairs  and  enter- 
tainments to  make  money  for  the  building  of  churches  and 
other  things ! 

They  were  to  go  forth  with  no  provision  made.    This 


♦Christian  Science  also  claims  to  follow  this  chapter  by 
healincr  the  sick.  But  "freely  Kive"  is  not  practiced  by  this 
wicked  cult.     It  costs  to  be  healed. 


208 


made  them  altogether  dependent  upon  the  Lord  who  had 
sent  them.  Trust  in  the  Lord,  who  sends  out  the  laborer, 
is  another  principle,  which  belongs  to  this  age  as  well.  All 
disappointment  and  discouragement  for  the  servant  of  Christ 
comes  in  when  he  looks  not  to  the  Lord  but  to  man.  The 
Lord  never  disappoints.  "And  He  said  to  them,  When  I 
sent  you  without  purse  and  scrip  and  sandals,  did  ye  lack 
anything?  And  they  said,  Nothing"  (Luke  xxii:35).  The 
Lord  who  calls  His  servants  and  sends  them  forth  always 
keeps  them  when  they  walk  in  simple  dependence  upon  Him- 
self. 

•  From  verses  ii  to  15  we  read  other  instructions  for  this 
special  mission.  In  city  and  village  they  were  to  inquire  for 
them  who  are  zvorthy.  The  worthiness  consisted  undoubt- 
edly in  a  desire  to  know  Messiah,  "waiting  for  the  conso- 
lation of  Israel."  The  Gospel  of  Grace,  which  is  preached 
now,  is  preached  without  any  such  distinction.  Its  message 
is:  "Whosoever,"  even  the  most  unworthy.  At  the  end  of 
this  paragraph  (verse  15)  there  is  the' threatening  of  judg- 
ment when  their  message  is  not  accepted. 

In  the  next  four  verses  (16-20)  we  read  of  how  their 
ministry  would  be  accepted.  "Behold  I  send  you  as  sheep 
in  the  midst  of  wolves ;  be  therefore  prudent  as  the  serpents 
and  guileless  as  doves.  But  beware  of  men ;  for  they  will 
deliver  you  up  to  sanhedrims  and  scourge  you  in  their  syn- 
agogues." And  so  they  did  reject  the  Lord  and  the  ser- 
vants He  sent.  But  it  was  not  alone  confined  to  the  Jews — 
sanhedrim  and  synagogue — but  the  Gentiles  would  treat 
them  in  the  same  way.    "And  ye  shall  be  brought  before 


209 


rulers  and  kings  for  my  sake,  for  a  testimony  to  them  an.l 
to  the  nations."  Part  of  the  fulfinment  of  all  this  is  found 
in  the  book  of  Acts.  We  see  here  also  a  deeper  meaning 
and  refer  to  these  words  again  when  we  come  to  another 
verse. 

"But  when  they  deliver  you  up.  be  not  careful  how  or 
what  ye  shall  speak ;  for  it  shall  be  given  to  you  in  that  hour 
what  ye  shall  speak.  For  ye  are  not  the  speakers,  but  the 
Spirit  of  your  Father  which  speaks  in  you."  We  can  point 
to  Stephen  in  Acts  vii  as  an  illustration  how  fully  this 
promise  has  been  fulfilled. 

The  most  bitter  persecution  is  now  promised  them,  by  our 
Lord :  "But  brother  shall  deliver  up  brother  to  death,  and 
father  child  ;  and  children  shall  rise  up  against  parents  and 
shall  put  them  to  death  ;  and  ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  on  ac- 
count of  my  name.  But  he  that  has  endured  to  the  end  shall 
be  saved.  But  when  they  persecute  you  in  this  city,  flee  to 
the  other,  for  verily  I  say  to  you.  Ye  shall  not  have  com- 
pleted the  cities  of  Israel  until  the  Son  of  Man  be  come." 
These  words  are  perhaps  the  most  important  in  the  whole 
chapter.   The\-  are  a  kind  of  key  to  the  entire  cliapter. 

The  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  which  is  mentioned  is  His 
second  coming.  The  giving  of  the  testimony  by  Jewish  dis- 
ciples concerning  the  Kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  according 
to  the  words  of  our  Lord  to  continue  till  He  comes  again. 
How  are  we  to  understand  this?  The  testimony  which  was 
begun  by  the  apostles  up  to  the  time  when  Israel  rejected 
once  more  the  offers  of  mercy  from  the  risen  Lord,  when 
He  was  still  waiting  for  their  repentance  as  a  nation,  is  an 


210 


unfinished  testimony.    After  that  offer  was  again  rejected 
the  great  parenthesis,  the  church  age,  began,  and   during 
this  age    (which   is  not  reckoned   in  the   Old   Testament) 
there  is  no  more  Jewish  testimony  of  the  kingdom  of  the 
heavens.    Israel  nationally  is  set  aside,  blindness  in  part  is 
theirs  till  the   fulness  of  the  Gentiles  is  come   in.    When 
the  church  is  complete    and    the    rapture    of    the    saints 
has  taken  place,  then  the  Lord  begins  to  deal  with  His  peo- 
ple Israel  again.   There  is  the  seventieth  week  of  Daniel  ix 
yet  to  come,  and  this  week  of  seven  years  forms  the  end  of 
this  dispensation.    In  this  coming  last  week  of  seven  years  . 
the  church  testimony  is  finished  and  Jewish  believers  will 
take  up  the  unfinished  testimony  to  the  nation  and  proclaim 
once  more  "The  Kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  at  hand."   The 
xxiv  chapter  in  this  Gospel  is  a  continuation  of  the  x  chap- 
ter, inasmuch  as  Matthew  xxiv  shows  us  the  unfinished  tes- 
timony of  the  X  chapter,  finished  and  completed.  (Read  Matt. 
xxiv:5-32.)    In  Matt,  xxiv  we  read  of  the  great  tribulation, 
so  likewise  here   in  the   tenth   chapter.     In   Micah   vii   we 
read  of  a  dark  picture  and  there  the  Spirit  of  Christ  reveals 
a  tribulation,  which  His  lips  on  the  earth  proclaim  to  His 
disciples.    Then  during  the  tribulation  {never  noiv)  it  will 
mean  enduring  to  the  end  and  salvation  will  come  then  by 
the  visible  return  of  the  Son  of  Man  from  heaven.   What  our 
Lord  said  in  verses  17  and  18  about  persecutions  from  Jews 
and  Gentiles  for  these  witnesses  will  find  its  final  great  fulfil- 
ment in  that  great  tribulation,  when  not  alone  the  unbeliev- 
ing nation  will  persecute  the  believing  and  witnessing  Jew- 
ish remnant,  but  nations  as  well. 


211 


Fr(Mii  the  twenty-fourth  verse  to  the  end  of  the  chapter 
our  Lord  continues  to  speak  to  the  twelve,  who  were  about 
to  go  forth.  His  words  are  now  words  of  encouragement, 
not  to  fear ;  they  were  safe  in  the  hands  of  His  Father. 
While  all  these  words  had  a  special  significance  for  the 
Jewish  disciples  our  Lord  sent  forth,  they  also  contain  pre- 
cious comfort  and  instruction  for  every  true  believer  living 
in  this  day.  It  would  be  extremely  one  sided  to  pass  over 
these  words  of  our  Lord  and  treat  them  as  not  containing 
truth  for  us.  Every  word  which  our  God  and  Father  has 
been  pleased  to  give  us  has  a  meaning  for  us. 

First  of  all  our  Lord  speaks  of  the  position  of  the  dis- 
ciple. "The  disciple  is  not  above  his  teacher,  nor  the  bond- 
man above  his  Lord.  It  is  sufficient  for  the  disciple  that 
be  should  become  as  his  teacher,  and  the  bondman  as  his 
lord.  If  they  have  called  the  master  of  the  house  Beelze- 
bub,* how  much  more  those  of  his  household?''  (verses  24- 
26).  The  position  of  the  disciple  is  then  according  to  these 
words  identification  of  the  closest  kind  with  His  Lord. 
However,  to  learn  fully  of  this  identification  with  Him,  who 
is  our  Saviour  and  Lord,  we  do  not  go  to  this  first  Gospel. 
The  Gospel  of  Matthew  was  not  written  with  this  purpose. 
In  the  Gospel  of  John,  the  Gosepl  of  Life  and  Resurrection, 
and  the  First  Epistle  of  John  as  well  as  the  Epistles  given 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  through  Paul,  we  learn  of  the  blessed 
identification  which  exists  by  Grace  between  the  Lord  and 
His  own.    How  preciously  it  is  revealed  by  Himself  in  that 


*Bcelccbub  means  "Lord  of  the  house,"  that  is,   Satan  as   the 
possessor  of  the  house. 


212 


Holy  of  Holies  in  the  Gospel  of  John,  the  seventeenth  chap- 
ter. And  this  chapter  itself  is  but  the  germ  out  of  which 
the  Holy  Spirit  develops  in  the  Pauline  Epistles,  the  Gospel 
of  Grace  and  the  truth  concerning  the  Church  as  the  Body 
of  Christ.  In  that  marvelous  chapter  our  Lord  intercedes 
before  His  Father  for  the  very  disciples  (as  well  as  our- 
selves) whom  He  sent  forth  in  the  beginning  of  His 
earthly  ministry.  Altogether  one  with  Him,  is  the  golden 
thread  which  goes  through  His  prayer.  And  He  said: 
"The  world  has  hated  them,  because  they  are  not  of  the 
world,  as  I  am  not  of  the  world.  I  do  not  demand  that 
thou  shouldest  take  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  thou 
shouldest  keep  them  out  of  evil."  In  the  First  Epistle  of 
John  the  Holy  Spirit  says :  "Do  not  wonder,  brethren,  if 
the  world  hate  you,"  and  in  the  upper  room  He  said  to 
His  own :  "If  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know  that  it  hated  Me 
before  you"  (John  xv:i8).  It  is  therefore  an  identification 
of  the  closest  nature  in  which  we  stand  with  our  Lord.  And 
do  we  ever  stop  and  think  on  these  things?  How  little  we 
do,  how  little  all  this  is  real  to  us  ?  It  is  true  little  of  the 
reproach  of  Christ  is  seen  in  these  days ;  but  little  hatred 
from  the  side  of  the  world,  nor  any  names  of  rejection. 
We  ask  why?  The  answer  is  soon  given.  The  professing 
church  has  turned  her  back  upon  her  heavenly  calling  and 
with  that  upon  the  Lord.  She  has  committed  adultery  in 
loving  the  world  and  has  returned  to  the  beggarly 
elements  of  this  world.  But  let  the  true  believer  leave 
this  camp  and  go  outside  of  that  which  professes  His 
name  and  soon  enough  the  reproach  will  have  to  be  borne, 


Christendom  and  the  world  has  httle  use  for  one  who  walks 
in  true  separation.  Still  how  precious  is  that  place.  If  it  is 
reproach  it  is  His  reproach  ;  hatred,  it  is  the  same  with  which 
He  was  hated.  Reproach,  hatred  and  persecution  is  the  seal 
of  identification  and  fellowship  with  Him. 

But  with  this  our  Lord  does  not  leave  it.  He  comforts 
those  He  sent  forth.  And  now  He  speaks  the  word  which 
is  to  calm  their  fears :  ''Fear  not."  What  meaning  it  has 
coming  from  such  lips !  Angels  spoke  the  word  "Fear 
not"  in  olden  times.  They  are  but  creatures  sent  with 
a  message  from  the  Throne.  But  He  who  speaks  here  is 
the  Creator  Himself  made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels  He 
had  created ;  the  Omnipotent  One,  our  Lord  speaks,  "Fear 
not !"'  "Fear  them  not  therefore ;  for  there  is  nothing  cov- 
ered which  shall  not  be  revealed,  and  secret  which  shall  not 
be  known.  What  I  say  to  you  in  darkness  speak  in  the  light, 
and  what  ye  hear  in  the  ear  preach  upon  the  houses."  In 
other  words.  He  tells  them  of  the  day  when  all  is  to  be 
uncovered,  and  the  secret  things  to  be  made  known.  This 
fact  is  ever  to  be  before  them.  It  is  to  be  daily  before  us. 
Oh,  brethren,  let  us  learn  to  look  at  all  things  in  the  light  of 
the  Judgment  seat !  "Do  not  judge  anything  before  the 
time,  until  the  Lord  shall  come,  who  shall  also  bring  to  light 
the  hidden  things  of  darkness,  and  shall  make  manifest  the 
counsels  of  hearts ;  and  then  shall  each  have  his  praise  from 
God"  (i  Corinth.  iv:5).  In  view  of  this  revelation  of  the 
secret  things  our  Lord  tells  us  to  be  bold  and  to  declare  the 
whole  counsel  of  Cod. 

Then  what  harm  can  men  do  to  him  anyway,  who  is 


214 


Christ's  (and  Christ  is  God's).  We  belong  to  God,  we  are 
His  own.  No  man  can  do  us  any  harm  with  his  persecu- 
tion or  hatred.  Therefore  He  says  now :  "And  be  not  afrai  I 
of  those  who  kill  the  body  but  cannot  kill  the  soul."  What 
if  they  should  even  go  so  far  as  to  kill  the  body,  as  they 
often  did  and  will  yet  do,  especially  to  the  Jewish  Saints 
in  the  great  tribulation.*  If  they  kill  the  body  they  cannot 
kill  the  soul  and  the  killing  of  the  body  and  faithful  tes- 
timony given  through  martyrdom  will  enrich  the  Lord  as 
well  as  the  disciple.  We  may  not  be  called  upon  to  sur- 
render thus  our  bodies,  yet  the  principle  of  it  is  ours ;  fear 
nothing  outward,  nothing  temporal,  whatever  it  may  be. 
"But  fear  rather  Him  who  is  able  to  destroy  both  soul  and 
body  in  hell."t  And  He  who  is  able  to  do  that  and  will  do 
it  at  the  great  white  Throne  to  the  unsaved,  is  God.  He 
then  is  to  be  feared  alone.  Of  course  all  this  is  not  to  be 
read  as  referring  to  the  believer.  He  who  has  believed  is 
passed  from  death  unto  life,  he  does  not  come  into  judg- 
ment. Once  saved  means  always  saved.  We  must,  however, 
not  overlook  the  fact  that  among  the  twelve  there  was  one 
who  was  not  saved.  It  was  the  first  warning  coming  to 
Judas.    He  looked  to  outward  things  and  was  a  thief. 

Words  of  comfort  come  next.     "Are  not  two  sparrows 
sold  for  a  farthinsf?  and  one  of  them  shall  not  fall  to  the 


*We  mention  again  that  all  these  words  have  a  future  meaning 
and  fulfillment  during  that  time  of  Jacob's  trouble,  after  the  remov- 
al of  the  church.  The  Jewish  believers  will  know  the  comfort  of 
these  words,  as  Saints  durine  this  a^e  know  them. 

tHere  Gehenna  and  not  Hades.  Gehenna  is  correctly  translated 
hell. 


215 

ground  without  your  Father;  but  of  you  even  the  hairs  of 
the  head  are  all  numbered,  h^ear  not  therefore  ;  ye  are  better 
than  many  sparrows."  And  where  is  the  child  of  God  who 
does  not  rejoice  in  such  a  statement?  He  knows  the  spar- 
rows upon  the  housetops  as  He  knew  the  fish  in  the  sea 
and  the  piece  of  money,  which  laid  on  the  bottom  of  the 
sea.  He  knows  every  hair  of  His  own.  He  speaks  of  a 
special  providence  which  watches  over  every  child  of  God. 
Happy  are  we  if  we  walk  in  the  simplicity  of  a  child  before 
our  Father  and  our  Lord  and  ever  know  by  day  and  by 
night  "He  careth  for  you."   We  are  all  in  His  hands. 

The  words  of  responsibility  follow:  "Everyone  therefore 
who  shall  confess  me  before  men,  I  also  will  confess  before 
my  Father  who  is  in  the  Heavens.  But  whosoever  shall 
deny  Me  before  men,  him  will  I  also  deny  before  my  Father 
who  is  in  the  Heavens." 

He  who  believes  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  saved ; 
confession  with  the  mouth  follows  (Rom.  x:8-i2). 

Every  one  who  believes  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and 
confesses  with  the  mouth  that  Jesus  is  Lord,  such  confesses 
Him  before  men.  This  confession  of  Him  is  ever  to 
increase  not  only  with  the  lips  but  in  the  conduct  and 
the  life.  Thus  every  true  believer  is  a  confessor  of  Jesus 
ias  Lord  and  the  Lord  in  His  day  will  confess  him  before  His 
Father.  Individual  faithfulness  will  of  course  bring  a  cor-  ^  ^ 
responding  reward.  The  unsaved  denies  Him  before  men. 
He  may  have  the  name  of  Jesus  upon  his  lips  but  he  trusts 
not  in  Him  and  this  is  the  denial  and  he  who  has  not  be- 


2l6 


lieved  will  not  be  confessed  before  the  Father,  because  the 
unsaved  is  none  of  His. 

In  the  few  verses  which  follow  (34-36  verses)  our  Lord 
describes  the  characteristics  of  this  age,  the  age  in  which 
we  live  and  which  is  so  rapidly  ending  up.  "Do  not  think 
that  I  have  come  to  send  peace  upon  the  earth.  I  have  not 
come  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword."  Many  puzzled  Jews 
have  come  to  us  with  this  word  and  asked  what  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  meant.  How  could  He  be  our  Messiah  when 
instead  "of  peace  He  sends  the  sword?"  "Is  not  Messiah 
the  Prince  of  Peace  to  speak  peace  to  the  nations?"  How- 
ever we  learn  that  the  words  He  speaks  here,  foretelling 
the  history  of  this  age,  are  blessed  evidences  of  His  divinity. 
This  age  is  not  the  age  of  world  wide  peace.  "Peace  on 
Earth"  is  not  yet  reached  in  the  divine  program  for  the 
earth.  The  King  and  His  kingdom  rejected,  He  Himself 
absent,  strife,  confusion  and  wars,  the  sword  reigns.  But 
the  King  is  coming  back.  Before  His  return  as  King  out 
of  the  opened  heavens  the  sword  will  be  unsheathed  and 
peace  be  taken  from  the  earth.  The  nations  may  boast  of 
peace  among  themselves  at  this  time,  but  it  will  not  last 
very  long  and  soon  the  rider  upon  the  red  horse  will  gal- 
lop over  the  earth  (Revel,  vi).  Peace  like  a  river  will  surely 
flow  after  the  King  has  come  and  all  swords  have  become 
plowshares.     The  Lord  hasten  the  day. 

And  what  place  and  position  has  the  true  disciple  with 
Hirist  in  this  age?  Christ  is  rejected  and  scorned.  He 
TTimcplf  is  to  be  owned  and  full  devotedness  shown  to  Hi''", 
and  that  means — suffering. 


217 

"He  who  loves  father  or  mother  above  me  is  not  worthy 
of  me;  and  he  who  loves  son  or  daughter  above  me  is  not 
worthy  of  me.  And  he  who  does  not  take  up  his  cross  and 
follow  me  is  not  worthy  of  me.  He  that  finds  his  life  shall 
lose  it;  he  who  has  lost  his  life  for  my  sake  shall  find  it." 

But  there  is  another  side.  Not  alone  the  suffering  but 
the  glory  which  is  to  follow.  The  recompense  is  as  sure 
as  the  suffering  and  the  recompense  will  be  greater  than  the 
sufferings. 

"He  that  receives  you,  receives  me,  and  he  that  receives 
me,  receives  Him  who  has  sent  me.  He  that  receives  a 
prophet  in  a  prophet's  name  shall  receive  a  prophet's  re- 
ward ;  he  that  receives  a  righteous  man  in  a  righteous  man's 
name  shall  receive  a  righteous  man's  reward.  And  whoso- 
ever shall  give  to  drink  to  one  of  these  little  ones  a  cup  of 
cold  water  only,  in  the  name  of  a  disciple,  verily  he  shall 
in  no  wise  lose  his  reward."  The  one  who  receives  a  prophet 
shall  have  the  blessing  of  a  prophet — he  who  receives  the 
Son  of  God  becomes  the  Son  of  God,  Heir  of  God  and  joint 
heir  with  Jesus  Christ,  and  anything  done,  which  has  love 
for  its  motive,  will  not  be  forgotten. 


2l8 


CHAPTER  XL 

The  first  verse  of  this  chapter  belongs  to  the  sending  forth 
of  the  twelve,  and  should  be  put  to  the  previous  chapter. 
"And  it  came  to  pass  when  Jesus  had  finished  commanding 
His  twelve  disciples,  He  departed  thence  to  teach  and 
preach  in  their  cities."  He  took  the  work  upon  Himself 
once  more,  and  with  the  disciples  He  had  sent  forth  He 
preached  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  to  be  at  hand.  The 
Lord  of  the  harvest,  who  had  sent  forth  the  laborers,  enters 
the  harvestfield  Himself.  His  rejection  is  now  to  be  made 
more  and  more  manifest.  He  came  to  His  own  and  His 
own  received  Him  not.  Gradually  in  this  Gospel  we  have 
seen  how  Israel  had  no  heart,  no  desire  for  Him ;  they  were 
indeed  blinded.  The  rejection  of  Him  who  had  so  fully 
shown  Himself  to  be  Jehovah  manifested  in  the  flesh,  is 
now  rapidly  approaching.  Soon  He  will  leave  the  house 
and  take  His  place  at  the  seashore  (chapter  xiii::)  to  teach 
the  mysteries  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens,  that  which 
is  to  pass,  while  He,  the  King,  and  with  Him  the  Kingdom 
is  rejected.  The  eleventh  chapter  is  the  beginning  of  the 
crisis,  and  the  twelfth  chapter  is  the  great  turning  point. 

First  of  all  we  have  the  record  of  John  the  Baptist  in 
prison  sending  to  our  Lord,  and  the  message  our  Lord 
sends  to  him.  "But  John,  having  heard  in  the  prison  the 
works  of  the  Christ,  sent  by  His  disciples  and  said  to  Him, 


219 

Art  Thou  the  Coming  One?  or  are  we  to  wait  for  another? 
And  Jesus  answering  said  to  them,  Go,  report  to  John  what 
vou  hear  and  see.  Bhnd  men  see  and  lame  walk;  lepers 
are  cleansed  and  deaf  hear;  and  dead  are  raised  and  poor 
have  glad  tidings  preached  to  them ;  and  blessed  is  whoso- 
ever shall  not  be  offended  in  Me." 

The  incident  has  been  differently  interpreted.  From  the 
fourth  chapter  we  learned  that  when  Jesus  heard  that  John 
was  cast  into  prison  He  departed  into  Galilee  (iv:i2).  The 
fourteenth  chapter  in  this  Gospel  gives  the  story  of  John's 
imprisonment  and  his  death.  In  this  arrangement  the  divine 
hand  which  guided  Matthew's  hand  is  seen  again. 

John  the  l^aptist  spent  therefore  some  time  in  prison  be- 
fore he  sent  his  disciples  to  our  Lord.  It  is  generally  as- 
sumed that  John,  the  preacher  of  repentance  and  the  com- 
ing Kingdom,  had  finally  expected  that  Jesus  would  soon 
establish  the  Kingdom,  and  that  he,  as  the  voice  in  the 
wilderness,  the  forerunner,  would  have  a  share  in  its  glories. 
Instead  of  this  expected  glory  he  is  cast  into  a  dungeon.  He 
had  faithfully  discharged  his  duties.  Not  like  a  miserable 
iiireling  had  he  acted,  but  fearlessly  he  had  denounced  evil, 
and  for  all  his  faithfulness  nothing  but  suffering,  rejection 
and  death  staring  him  in  the  face.  It  is,  therefore,  said  Iw 
many  (hat  he  doubted  that  Jesus  was  truly  the  promised 
Messiah,  and  asked  for  evidences  of  His  Messiahship.  How- 
ever, this  interpretation  can  hardly  be  right.  If  we  turn  to 
the  Gospel  of  John  and  read  his  utterances  there,  we  find 
that  he  had  a  complete  insight  into  the  work  which  Christ 
as  the  Lamb  of  God  was  to  do,  and  he  kiiczu  Jesus  was  the 


220 


Christ.  It  is  also  reasonable  to  assume  that  his  own  disciples 
who  had  come  to  our  Lord  with  the  question,  "Why  do  we 
and  the  Pharisees  fast  but  Thy  disciples  fast  not?"  had 
come  to  him  and  given  him  the  answer,  that  the  bridegroom, 
the  Messiah,  was  to  be  taken  away  from  them,  and  then 
there  would  be  fasting. 

Others  have  looked  upon  this  incident  in  another  light. 
They  attempt  to  shield  John  the  Baptist  altogether,  and  de- 
fend his  absolute  faith  and  confidence  in  Jesus  as  the  Christ. 
According  to  many  John  was  perfect  so  that  no  doubt  could 
assail  his  mind.  But  why  should  he  send  from  his  prison 
and  ask  of  the  Lord  such  information?  The  difficulty  is, 
according  to  these,  solved,  in  that  John  desired  the  answer 
not  for  any  confirmation  of  his  faith,  but  that  he  sent  his 
disciples  because  they  were  staggered  in  their  belief.  Martin 
Luther  says  on  this  passage :  "It  is  certain  that  John  sent  to 
inquire  on  account  of  his  disciples;  for  they  did  not  yet 
regard  Christ  as  the  One  for  Whom  He  was  to  be  regarded. 
They  waited  for  one  who  would  move  along  pompously, 
highly  learned,  as  a  mighty  King.  John  treats  them  tender- 
ly, endures  their  weak  faith  till  they  become  strong;  does 
not  reject  them  because  they  do  not  yet  believe  in  Him  so 
firmly."  This  solution  of  the  difficulty,  however,  lacks 
scriptural  support.  It  is  a  fanciful  theory  that  John  should 
have  sent  to  Christ  for  the  sake  of  his  disciples.  We  need 
not  claim  perfection  and  infallibility  for  John  the  Baptist, 
for  he  had  neither.  Only  one  on  the  earth  was  perfect  and 
infallible,  sinless  and  spotless,  who  was  never  assailed  by 
doubt,  and  that  one  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.      John,  like 


221 


Elijah,  was  "a  man  of  like  passions  as  we  are."  Elijah's 
ministry  was  marked  with  individual  failure.  His  life  was 
threatened  by  Jezebel :  "And  when  he  saw  that,  he  arose  and 
went  for  his  life,  and  came  to  Beer-sheba,  which  belongeth 
to  Judah,  and  left  his  servant  there.  But  he  himself  went  a 
day's  joiirney  into  the  wilderness,  and  came  and  sat  down 
under  a  juniper  tree :  and  he  requested  for  himself  that  he 
might  die ;  and  said,  It  is  enough ;  now,  O  Lord,  take  away 
my  life;  for  I  am  not  better  than  my  fathers"  (i  Kings  xix; 
3,  4).  What  a  failure  this  was!  Surely  there  is  nothing 
good  in  man,  and  even  in  the  most  privileged  servants  of 
the  Lord  there  is  the  flesh  and  the  failure  of  the  flesh.  John 
in  prison  passes  through  the  experience  of  Elijah  in  whose 
spirit  and  power  he  had  come.  It  would  be  incorrect  to  say 
that  John  doubted  the  Alessiahship  of  Jesus.  He  knew  Him 
as  the  Christ.  Yet  in  prison  his  patience  is  severely  tested, 
and  doubt  troubles  him.  In  this  test  he  looks  to  Him,  whom 
he  always  honored  as  his  Lord,  for  succor.  He  sent  directly 
to  the  Lord,  and  certainly  He  knew  the  weak  and  doubting 
one,  as  well  as  his  faith,  which  looked  to  Him  for  strength 
and  a  word  of  cheer. 

And  is  this  not  an  incident  with  lessons  for  us  ?  It  teach- 
cth  us  to  confess  our  weakness  before  Him,  and  look  to  the 
Lord  for  the  strength  and  comfort  He  alone  can  give. 

\\'e  may  also  meditate  in  connection  with  John  in  prison 
and  his  doubt  with  another  servant  of  the  Lord  in  prison. 
There  in  Rome  he  sat  and  wrote,  "I,  Paul,  prisoner  of  the 
Lord."  And  out  of  that  prison  came  forth  the  strains  of 
praise  and  joy.     How  many  "ifs'  and  '"hows"  and  "whys'' 


222 

he  might  have  asked  ?  How  many  murmurings  and  bitter 
complaints  might  have  flown  from  His  Hps?  He  sends  out 
a  letter  from  the  dungeon  which  has  not  the  slightest  hint 
of  failure  in  it,  where  sin  and  flesh  is  not  seen  and  not  men- 
tioned. But  what  is  the  secret  of  the  rejoicing  prisoner  of 
the  Lord?  What  is  the  secret  which  underlies  the  triumph- 
ant language  of  joy  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians?  It  is 
one  word,  "Christ."  The  life  of  Christ  in  him,  and  Christ 
the  center,  Christ  the  pattern  and  object  before  the  apostle, 
and  Christ  his  strength,  enabled  by  Him  to  do  all  things,  is 
the  secret  of  all ;  and  that  John  the  Baptist,  the  greatest  of 
the  Old  Testament  did  not  know,  nor  could  he  be  in  pos- 
session of  it.  It  is  our  full  inheritance  as  believers  on  the 
other  side  of  the  cross.  Oh,  may  we  live  in  enjoyment  of  it, 
■up  to  the  mark  of  our  position  and  possession  in  Christ. 

But  we  return  to  our  chapter.  The  Lord  gives  the  mes- 
sage for  John.  If  his  disciples  had  any  doubt,  the  words  of 
the  Lord  must  have  dispersed  these.  And  when  John  heard 
the  answer  it  must  have  brought  him  strength  and  cheer. 
The  Lord  speaks  of  the  signs  of  the  Kingdom  which  He  did 
in  fulfillment  of  Old  Testament  predictions.  We  have  shown 
before  how  in  the  miracles  our  Lord  performed  Is.  xxxv:5 
and  6  was  fulfilled.  The  dead  also  were  raised  and  the  glad 
tidings  preached.  The  spiritual  significance  of  the  latter 
two  is  of  course  fully  seen  in  the  Gospel  of  John.  The 
words.  "And  blessed  is  whosoever  shall  not  be  ofifended  in 
ATe."  are  words  of  exhortation  to  John  the  Baptist.  How 
like  the  Lord  to  put  them  at  the  end  of  the  message.  The 
Holy  Spirit  has  repeated  this  in  the  Epistles  where  the  ad- 


223 


monitions  arc  always  comine;  in  at  the  end  or  after  words  of 
love  and  commendation  were  c^iven  first.  The  admonition 
was  certainly  understood  by  John,  and  how  deeply  it  must 
have  exercised  him.  It  led  to  humiliation,  hcartsearching-, 
and  in  the  end  it  was  a  beatitude,  a  "blessed."  May  it  ever 
be  so  with  us. 

And  all  this  was  not  unknown  to  the  crowds.  They  stood 
there  and  heard  what  passed  between  the  Lord  and  John's 
disciples.  They  heard  the  question  they  asked  and  the 
answer  our  Lord  sent  to  John.  John  the  Baptist  was  known 
by  these  crowds  and  they  believed  in  him  as  a  great  prophet. 
His  testimony  and  his  personality  might  then  be  discredited 
by  them.  The  Lord  addresses  himself  to  the  crowds  in  what 
may  be  termed  a  defense  of  John.  He  shields  him  now  be- 
fore any  criticism,  and  maintains  his  testimony  and  divinely 
given  mission. 

"But  as  they  went  away  Jesus  began  to  say  to  the  crowds 
concerning  John,  What  went  ye  out  in  the  wilderness  to 
see  ?  A  reed  moved  about  by  the  wind  ?  But  what  went  ye 
out  to  see?  A  man  clothed  in  delicate  raiment?  Behold 
those  who  wear  delicate  things  are  in  the  houses  of  kings. 
But  what  went  ye  out  to  see?  A  prophet?  Yea,  I  say  to 
you,  and  more  than  a  prophet ;  this  is  he  of  whom  it  is 
written.  Behold,  I  send  My  messenger  before  Thy  face,  who 
shall  prepare  Thy  way  before  Thee.  X'erily  I  say  to  you, 
that  there  is  not  risen  among  the  born  of  women  a  greater 
than  John  the  Baptist.  But  he  who  is  a  little  one  in  the 
Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  is  greater  than  he." 

W'e  confine  our  remarks  to  the  end  sentence.     What  is 


224 


the  meaning  of  it?  Its  common  application  is  generally 
the  thought  that  our  Lord  speaks  here  of  the  church  age, 
and  that  the  least  in  this  present  dispensation  is  greater 
than  John  in  the  old  dispensation,  to  which  he  fully  be- 
longed. That  such  is  the  case  no  one  doubts.  We  as  Chris- 
tian believers  are  higher  in  our  standing  than  the  Old  Tes- 
tament saints.  However,  the  primary  meaning  of  the  pas- 
sage is  a  different  one.  The  question  would  be  first  of  all, 
"What  does  our  Lord  mean  here  by  Kingdom  of  the  Hea- 
vens?" Up  to  the  thirteenth  chapter  in  the  Gospel  of 
Matthew  the  phrase,  "Kingdom  of  the  Heavens,"  has  only 
one  meaning,  viz.,  the  Kingdom  to  be  established  in  the 
earth,  as  predicted  by  the  Old  Testament  prophets.  In 
the  thirteenth  chapter  it  is  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  in 
the  hands  of  man  in  its  development  during  the  absence  of 
the  King.  We  cannot  think,  therefore,  that  in  the  eleventh 
chapter,  where  it  is  still  the  offer  of  the  Kingdom  of  the 
Heavens,  our  Lord  would  introduce  the  present  age.  This 
would  be  all  out  of  keeping  with  the  scope  of  Matthew. 
Now  as  our  Lord  means  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens 
actually  set  up  in  the  earth,  the  meaning  of  His  words  be- 
comes clear.  The  little  one  who  is  in  that  Kingdom  of  the 
Heavens,  when  it  has  come  at  last,  will  be  greater  than  John, 
w^ho  but  announced  the  Kingdom  to  come.  It  foreshadows 
the  glories  of  the  coming  Kingdom  age,  when  the  little  one 
will  be  greater  than  John  ever  could  be  in  the  earth. 

But  our  Lord  adds :  "From  the  days  of  John  the  Baptist 
until  now,  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  is  taken  by  violence, 
and  the  violent  seize  on  it.    For  all  the  prophets  and  the  law 


225 

have  prophesied  unto  John.  And  if  ye  will  receive  it  (him), 
this  is  Elias,  who  is  to  come.  He  that  has  ears  to  hear  let 
him  hear." 

These  words  are  attain  very  simple  and  to  our  mind  pre- 
sent no  difficulty  at  all,  if  they  are  taken  in  their  literal  mean- 
ing.. It  is  stranii^e  that  the  words  of  our  Lord  should  he 
made  to  mean  the  Gospel,  eternal  life,  conversion  and  the 
sinner's  own  efforts  to  take  possession  of  it.  Yet  such  is  the 
case.  Many  preachers  and  evangelists  have  no  other  light 
on  this  passage  and  preach  and  exhort  from  it  what  is  in 
direct  opposition  to  the  hlessed  Gospel.  According  to  these 
preachers,  the  violent,  wdio  take  the  Kingdom  by  force  or 
press  into  it  (Luke  xvi  :i6),  are  unsaved  sinners.  The  devil, 
the  flesh  and  the  world  stand  in  the  sinner's  way  of  salvation, 
so  they  teach,  and  he  must  use  force,  great  violence,  to  enter 
into  the  Kingdom.  After  due  exercise,  strenuous  effort 
and  violence  he  will  be  able  to  take  it  by  force.  This  is  the 
general  interpretation  of  the  passage.  It  is  as  erroneous 
as  the  interpretation  of  the  parable  of  the  treasure  hid  in 
the  field  ami  the  ])earl  of  great  i)rice,  which  makes  the  sinner 
give  his  all  (though  he  has  nothing  to  give)  to  buy  salvation. 

Ko,  the  violent  who  take  the  Kingdom  by  violence  are 
not  unsaved  sinners,  who  seek  salvation  and  that  salvation 
must  be  taken  by  force.  Salvation  is  by  grace,  it  is  (iod's 
free  gift,  and  the  sinner  is  not  saved  through  and  in  his 
violent  efTorts,  but  in  believing  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

The  Pharisees  and  scribes  who  stand  here  before  our  Lord 
arc  the  violent  who  take  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens 
(never  the  Gospel)  by  force  and  seize  on  it.    CJur  Lord  says: 


226 


"From  the  days  of  John  until  noiv."  The  forerunner,  John, 
was  violently  rejected  by  the  Pharisee,.  This  foreshadowed 
the  rejection  of  the  King,  the  rejection  of  the  preaching  of 
the  Kingdom  and  the  Kingdom  itself.  In  this  seizing  upon 
the  Kingdom,  rejecting  it,  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens 
suffered  violence.  It  was  rejected  by  force  and  now  is  post- 
poned till  He  comes  again.  If  they  had  received  John  the 
Baptist  he  would  have  been  Elias.  But  he  was  rejected, 
they  would  not  have  it  so.  They  did  violence  to  what  the 
King  had  come  to  bring.  Another  Elias  will  come  once 
more,  and  then  no  violence  can  keep  back  the  coming  of  the 
Kingdom  of  the  Heavens. 

Let  us  notice  that  John's  ministry  was  exclusively  to  his 
own  people.  Elijah's  ministry  is  still  future  and  falls  in  the 
period  of  the  great  tribulation.  His  ministry  and  testimony 
will  be  confined  to  the  land  of  Israel  and  to  the  remnant  of 
Israel.  Any  one  who  claims  to  be  Elijah  incarnate  at  this 
time  is  either  a  downright  fraud,  unbalanced  in  his  mind,  or 
so  grossly  ignorant  of  the  Word  of  God  and  His  revealed 
purposes,  that  the  proud  imaginations  of  his  heart  lead  him 
astray  into  such  a  ridiculous  claim. 

The  words  which  follow  are  a  true  description  of  the 
generation  which  was  privileged  to  see  the  King,  Jehovah, 
manifested  in  the  earth.  "But  to  whom  shall  I  liken  this 
generation  ?  It  is  like  children  calling  to  their  companions, 
saying.  We  have  piped  to  you,  and  ye  have  not  danced ;  we 
have  mourned  to  you,  and  ye  have  not  wailed.  For  John 
has  come,  neither  eating  nor  drinking,  and  they  say,  He  has 
a  demon.     The  son  of  man  has  come  eating  and  drinking, 


Z2J 


apd  they  say,  Behold  a  man  that  is  eating  and  wine  drinkinq:, 
a  friend  of  tax-gatherers,  and  of  sinners; — and  wisdom  has 
been  justified  by  her  children''  (verses  15-19).  In  other 
words,  the  generation  was  a  foolish  lot  of  people  who 
tould  not  be  suited  by  anything.  They  were  like  chil- 
■Jren.  It  is  a  wonderful  declaration  of  our  Lord  of  the  con- 
dition of  the  people,  His  own  to  whom  He  came,  and  who 
received  Him  not.  The  illustration  is  taken  from  children 
playing  with  the  real  things  of  life,  with  joy  and  sorrow, 
and  idling  their  time  away.  John  appeared  among  them 
and  they  were  dissatisfied  with  him.  He  was  too  strict,  too 
severe ;  they  cared  not  for  him,  and  because  he  would  not  sit 
down  and  eat  and  drink  with  them  they  said,  he  has  a  demon. 
Then  the  Lord  came.  Truth  and  mercy  were  revealed 
through  Him.  He  sat  down  with  the  tax-gatherers  and  sin- 
ners and  mingled  with  them,  eating  and  drinking.  Divine 
mercy  towards  the  fallen  and  outcast  was  most  blessedly 
shown — the  spotless  One  in  touch  with  the  defiled  and  lost, 
calling  sinners  to  repentance.  But  they  had  no  understand- 
ing for  this,  no  heart  for  that  wonderful  grace.  He  was  in 
their  eyes  but  a  man,  for  they  said:  "Behold  a  man — eating 
and  drinking."  They  put  Him  on  the  same  level  with  the 
wine  drinking  company.  Neither  mourning  nor  rejoicing 
suited  thcni.  Behind  it  stands  the  evil  heart,  the  natural 
man,  never  pleased  with  God's  way,  always  finding  fault. 
"The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God ;  for  it  is  not  sub- 
ject to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be"  (Rom.  viii  7). 
The  words  "wisdom  has  been  justified  by  her  children"  has 
found  many  different  interpretations.     Its  meaning  is  very 


228 


simple.  While  the  large  mass  of  people  were  thus  rejecting 
John  and  Christ,  and  had  no  understanding  for  God's  love 
and  mercy  made  known,  there  were  others,  a  few  indeed, 
and  these  accepted  the  teaching  of  John  and  believed  in  the 
Lord.  "Wisdom"  is  an  Old  Testament  name  of  our  Lord. 
The  whole  book  of  Proverbs  abounds  with  the  word  Wisdom 
and  the  speech  Wisdom  utters.  The  eighth  chapter  tells  us 
that  Wisdom  is  a  person  and  that  person  is  our  Lord.  Those 
who  believed  in  Him  are  the  children  of  Wisdom  and  they 
had  no  fault  to  find,  neither  with  John's  burning  call  to 
repentance,  nor  with  the  mercy  of  Christ  in  eating  and  drink- 
ing with  the  tax-gatherers  and  sinners.  In  this  way  Wisdom 
was  justified  by  her  children. 

And  is  the  present  generation  of  nominal  Christian  bet- 
ter than  the  generation  of  professing  Israelites  in  the  day 
of  Christ?  We  think  not.  They  are  to-day  the  same  as 
the  Christ  rejecting  Jews  were  then.  The  Christ  of  God, 
God's  way  of  Righteousness  and  Grace  does  not  suit  the 
natural  heart  at  any  time. 

Solemn  are  the  words  which  follow  now.  The  Judge 
speaks.  He  who  speaks  here  will  take  His  place  upon  the 
throne  and  preside  in  that  judgment  day  of  which  He  speaks, 
"Then  began  He  to  reproach  the  cities  in  which  most 
of  His  works  of  power  had  taken  place,  because  they  had  not 
repented.  Woe  to  thee,  Chorazin  !  Woe  to  thee,  Bethsaida  ! 
for  if  the  works  of  power  which  have  taken  place  in  you,  had 
taken  place  in  Tyre  and  Sidon,  they  had  long  ago  repented 
in  sackcloth  and  ashes.  But  I  say  to  you,  that  it  shall  be 
more  tolerable  for  Tyre  and  Sidon  in  judgment  day  than  for 


229 


you.  And  thou,  Capernaum,  who  hast  been  raised  up  to 
heaven,  shall  be  brought  down  even  to  Hades.  For  if  the 
works  of  power  which  have  taken  place  in  thee,  had  taken 
l)lace  in  Sodom,  it  had  remained  until  this  day.  But  I  say 
to  you,  that  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  the  land  of  Sodom 
in  judgment  day  than  for  thee'."  His  divine  patience  is  now 
seen  as  almost  exhausted  and  for  the  first  time  in  this  Gospel 
He  speaks  the  "Woe,"  which  He  repeats  later  a  number 
of  times.  And  oh !  the  word  "woe"  coming  from  such 
lips !  Chorazin  and  Bethsaida  had  been  greatly  privileged. 
Works  of  power,  works  which  manifested  Jehovah's  pres- 
ence had  been  shown  in  their  midst,  yet  they  repented  not. 
Tyre  and  Sidon  never  witnessed  such  manifestations.  The 
responsibility  of  Chorazin  and  Bethsaida  is  therefore  greater 
than  the  responsibility  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.  There  will  be  in 
that  day  different  degrees  of  punishment.  Capernaum,  His 
own  city,  had  come  nearest  to  heaven  and  still  there  was  no 
response.  Sodom  with  all  their  awful  fruits  of  the  flesh 
will  fare  better  in  judgment  day  than  Capernaum.  The 
measure  of  relationship  is  always  the  measure  of  responsi- 
bility. Tyre,  Sidon  and  Sodom  had  no  such  privileges  and 
stood  in  no  such  relationship  to  the  Lord  as  the  cities  which 
our  Lord  mentions  here.  It  is  so  with  Christendom  to-day. 
It  shall  be  more  tolerable  in  that  day  to  the  nations  of  dark- 
est Africa  than  to  the  so-called  "Christian  nations,"  with 
light  and  privileges  offered  and  wilfully  rejected. 

And  what  a  scene  follows !  "At  that  time,"  when  in  the 
midst  of  the  outburst  of  His  righteous  words  of  condemna- 
tion, He  speaks  the  words  so  precious  still.     What  words 


230 

could  picture  Him  as  He  stood  there  and  that  face,  soon  to 
he  marred  and  spit  upon,  turned  upward  to  heaven?  And 
now  He  said,  "I  praise  thee,  Father,  Lord  of  the  heaven  and 
the  earth,  that  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and 
prudent  and  hast  revealed  them  to  babes.  Yea,  Father,  for 
thus  has  it  been  well  pleasing  in  Thy  sight.  All  things  have 
been  delivered  to  me  by  my  Father,  and  no  one  knows  the 
Son  but  the  Father,  nor  does  anyone  know  the  Father  but 
the  Son,  and  he  to  whom  the  Son  may  be  pleased  to  reveal 
Him." 

The  Lord  stands  on  the  earth  and  looks  to  the  Father  in 
heaven.  Both  are  Lord.  It  was  so  at  the  destruction  of 
Sodom.  "Then  the  Lord  rained  upon  Sodom  and  upon  Go- 
morrah brimstone  and  fire  from  the  Lord  out  of  heaven." 
(Genes.  xix:24).  The  Lord  who  had  then  been  in  the  earth 
and  communed  with  Abraham  His  friend,  stood  once  more 
on  the  earth.  He  came  in  the  form  of  a  servant,  having 
emptied  Himself  of  His  outward  glory,  and  here  as  the 
obedient  One  praises  Him,  to  whom  He  had  said  coming  into 
the  world,  "Lo,  I  come  to  do  Thy  will"  (Heb.  x:4-7).  The 
Lord  of  the  heaven  and  of  the  earth  is  His  Father,  but  He 
who  looks  now  to  Him  is  not  less  the  Lord  of  the  heaven 
and  of  the  earth.  "Father,"  He  said.  He  was  then  the  only 
One  who  could  thus  look  to  heaven.  It  is,  blessed  be  His 
name !  diflferent  now.  The  Spirit  of  Sonship  has  been  given 
whereby  we  cry,  "Abba,  Father." 

From  the  wise  and  the  prudent,  the  self-sufficient  religion- 
ists, the  Pharisees  and  speculating  Sadducees  these  things 
were  hid,  but  revealed  imto  babes.     Thev  had  refused  Him, 


231 

the  wisdom  of  God;  being:  wise  in  their  own  conceits 
and  bhndness  was  the  dreadful  result.  Babes  instead  received 
the  revelation  of  Himself.  We  often  wonder  why  the  wi^e 
and  prudent  of  our  day  do  not  see  certain  truths,  the  blessed 
Gospel  of  the  Glory  of  God,  the  truth  concernin;^  the  church, 
the  coming  of  our  Lord,  while  others,  poor  and  weak 
though  they  are,  are  in  full  possession  of  these  revelations 
and  ever  receive  more  out  of  his  fullness.  The  reason  is 
soon  found.  Only  He  who  owns  his  nothingness,  who  takes 
his  place  in  weakness  at  His  feet,  and  is  like  a  l)abe.  can 
receive  these  things.  Never  does  the  Lord  entrust  His  se- 
crets and  his  councils  to  the  wise  and  prudent.  Would  we 
know  more  of  Him,  of  His  Word,  His  purposes  and  His 
thoughts?  There  is  only  one  way — be  a  babe,  own  yourself 
as  such  and  as  a  babe  walk  and  live  before  the  Lord  of 
heaven  and  earth. 

"All  things,"  our  Lord  said,  "have  been  delivered  unto 
me  by  my  Father."  The  people  were  soon  ready  to  reject 
Him  as  their  ^Messiah  and  King,  but  He  knew  His  inheri- 
tance, an  inheritance  in  which  the  babe  in  Him  has  a  glori- 
ous share. 

Furthermore,  "the  Father  knoweth  the  Son."  How  softly 
we  should  tread  whenever  we  speak  of  the  person  of  our 
Lord,  for  the  full  knowledge  is  only  with  the  Father.  "Xo 
one  knoweth  the  Father  but  the  Son  and  he  to  whomsoever 
the  Son  may  be  pleased  to  reveal  Him."  No  one  cometh  to 
the  Father  but  by  me.  Whoever  denies  the  Son  has  not 
the  Father  either.  Revealing  the  Father  is  what  our  Lord 
did  and  still  is  doing.     In  resurrection  He  is  Son  of  God 


232 


with  power,  and  all  who  receive  Him  are  brought  to  God 
and  become  children  of  God,  to  know  the  Father. 

Upon  this  divine  statement  of  His  own  person,  His  one- 
ness with  the  Father,  He  utters  that  word  which  is  so  well 
known  and  which  has  been  a  word  of  blessing  to  uncount- 
able souls, 

"Come  to  Me  all  ye  who  labor  and  are  burdened  and  I 
will  give  you  rest."  This  is  the  first  part  of  the  gracious 
invitation.  Significantly  it  comes  in  right  after  the  rejec- 
tion by  His  own  becomes  manifest  and  after  He  spoke  of 
the  rejection  of  the  favored  Galilean  cities.  It  is  typical  of 
that  full,  free  and  blessed  Gospel  of  Grace,  which  was  made 
known  after  His  death  and  resurrection,  and  which  is  still 
being  preached. 

It  is  an  invitation  to  all,  Jew  and  Gentile.  The  invitation 
is  to  those  who  labor  and  are  burdened  ;  it  is  to  come  to 
Him  and  He  promises  rest.  How  full  it  is !  How  inex- 
haustible in  its  meaning!  The  second  part  of  His  invitation 
brings  us  further.  "Take  My  yoke  upon  you  and  learn 
from  Me ;  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart ;  and  ye  shall 
find  rest  for  your  souls ;  for  My  yoke  is  easy  and  My  burden 
light" 

The  one  who  has  come  to  Him  and  found  rest  is  to  take 
now  His  yoke  upon  him  and  to  learn  of  Him.  It  means  to 
follow  Him,  to  be  under  Him  as  Lord.  The  yoke  is  not  the 
law,  but  His  own  yoke.  His  loving  restraint ;  and  two  belong 
into  the  yoke ;  we  are  yoked  together  with  Him.  And  hav- 
ing Him,  the  One  meek  and  lowly  in  heart,  ever  before  the 


233 


soul,  rest  for  the  soul  is  the  blessed  fruit.  It  is  the  whole 
Epistle  to  the  Philippians  in  a  nutshell.  "Let  this  mind  be 
in  you  which  was  in  Christ  Jesus."  Coming  to  Him  we  have 
rest — living  in  Him  we  find  rest  for  our  souls.  May  the 
reader  meditate  upon  these  words  of  our  Lord  till  they  be- 
come sweeter  than  honey  and  honeycomb. 


234 


CHAPTER  XII. 

The  twelfth  chapter  brings  before  us  the  full  manifestation 
of  the  enmity  of  Israel  against  our  Lord  and  His  rejection 
by  His  own. 

It  is  the  great  turning  point  in  this  Gospel  and  with  it  the 
offer  of  our  Lord  to  Israel  as  their  King,  as  well  as  the  offer 
of  the  Kingdom  ceases.  We  have  followed  the  story  of  our 
Lord  manifesting  Himself  as  Jehovah  the  King.  Every- 
thing in  the  first  part  of  this  royal  Gospel  proves  Him  to 
be  the  promised  One.  Speaking  not  like  the  Pharisees  and 
the  Scribes,  but  with  authority,  He  had  declared  the  princi- 
ples of  the  Kingdom  He  came  to  bring. 

Going  through  the  cities  of  Galilee,  He  and  His  disciples 
had  preached  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  to  be  at  hand. 
Multitudes  had  heard  the  glad  and  solemn  announcement. 

These  glad  tidings  were  backed  up  by  the  most  startling- 
signs.  The  blind  saw,  the  lepers  were  cleansed,  demons 
were  driven  out  and  the  dead  were  raised.  There  could  be 
only  one  explanation  for  these  miracles. 

Every  one  of  them  proved  conclusively  that  Jehovah  had 
visited  His  people;  He  whose  name  is  "Immanuel"  had  ap- 
peared in  their  midst.  Old  Testament  predictions  of  the 
coming  of  the  Messiah,  the  manner  of  His  coming  and  His 
works  were  being  fulfilled  before  the  eyes  of  that  generation 
yet  they  did  not  and  would  not  recognize  Him. 


235 

They  remained  cold  and  indifferent.    They  had  no  heart 
for    Jehovah-Jesus.     This    in    itself    was    a    fultillment    of 
prophecy.  And  so  we  learn  in  the  eighth  chapter  that  a  Gen- 
tile showed  greater  faith  than  the  Lord  had  found  in  Israel 
and  our  Lord  indicates  the  immediate  future  of  the  children 
of  the  Kingdom.   They  were  to  be  cast  out  and  others  from 
the  East  and  the  West  were  to  come  and  sit  down  in  the 
Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  with  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob. 
The  murmuring  of  the  Pharisees,  first  heard  when  he  healed 
the  paralytic  and  forgave  him  his  sins,  was  the  first  outbrca'c 
against  Him.   And  now  the  storm  we  saw  in  its  threatening 
is  to  break.    The  awful  blasphemy  is  uttered  and  the  King 
declares  in  His  sovereign  power  the  relationship  between 
Him  the  King  and  the  Kingdom  people  broken.    It  is  now 
clear  that  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens,  so  fully  revealed 
in  the  Old  Testament,  is  to  be  postponed  till  the  Son  of  Man 
comes  again.   After  this  rejection  of  the  King  and  His  turn- 
ing away  from  His  own.  He  revealed  the  Kingdom  of  the 
Heavens  in  mysteries.    He  shows,  as  the  Revealer  of  Se- 
crets,  the  history  of   what   He  brings   and   makes   known, 
the   Kingdom   in   the   hands   of   men   and   the   development 
of  it  during  His  absence  from  the  earth.    And  so  we  read 
immediately  following  the  xii  chapter,  '"An  1  that  saiiw  day 
Jesus  went  out  from  the  house  and  sat  down  by  the  sea.'' 
He  left  the  house;  breaking  off  His  relationship  and  takin  •• 
His  place  by  the  sea — (a  type  of  the  Gentiles). 

And  now  we  are  ready  to  look  a  little  closer  at  the  sad 
events  before  us  in  the  important  twelfth  chapter. 

The  first  paragraph,  contained  in  e:;;ht  verses,  shows  us 


236 


our  Lord  manifesting  Himself  as  Lord  of  the  Sabbath  and 
answering  the  charge  of  the  Pharisees,  who  accused  them 
of  Sabbath  breaking.  "At  that  time  Jesus  went  on  the  Sab- 
bath through  the  cornfields ;  and  his  disciples  were  hungry 
and  began  to  pluck  the  ears  and  to  eat.  But  the  Pharisees, 
seeing  it,  said  to  Him,  Behold,  Thy  disciples  are  doing  what 
is  not  lawful  to  do  on  the  Sabbath."  It  was  "at  that  time," 
at  the  time  of  that  loving  call  to  come  unto  Him,  which 
stands  at  the  close  of  the  eleventh  chapter.  When  divine 
love  was  full  of  solicitude  for  the  burdened  and  the  poor, 
the  evil  hearts  of  the  enemies  were  ready  to  attack  Him. 

The  Sabbath,  the  seventh  day,  is  something  essentially 
Jewish,  the  peculiar  day  for  the  peculiar  people.  Its  keep- 
ing is  embodied  in  the  ten  commandments.  The  seventh  day 
was,  and  is  to  the  present  day,  a  matter  of  great  importance 
with  the  Jew.  He  prides  himself  with  it  and  boasts  in  the 
strict  keeping  of  it.  Not  satisfied  with  the  plain  fourth 
commandment  in  the  decalogue,  the  Jewish  elders  added 
their  injunctions  forbidding  even  the  smallest  matters  and 
entering  into  details  which  are  ridiculous.  These  human 
traditions  were  in  the  days  of  our  Lord  strictly  followed. 
The  religious  Pharisee  saw  to  its  enforcement  and  they  put 
these  burdens  upon  the  people  and  tried  to  establish  their 
own  righteousness.  To  take  ears  of  corn  and  eat  them  on 
the  Sabbath  is  nowhere  forbidden  in  the  law  given  through 
Moses.  Among  many  other  injunctions  the  leaders  of  tra- 
ditions had  added  this  to  the  Word  of  God  and  made  it  a 
sin  should  anyone  pluck  an  ear  of  corn  on  the  seventh  day. 

Before  we  continue  with  the  story  of  this  chapter  we 


237 

desire  to  add  here  a  few  words,  which  may  prove  helpful 
to  some  of  our  readers.  Not  a  few  Christian  believers  have 
been  annoyed,  as  well  as  disturbed,  by  a  class  of  professing 
Christians  who  have  added  to  their  denominational  names, 
as  a  special  distinction,  the  term  "Seventh  day."  Thus  we 
find  about  us  "Seventh  Day  Baptists"  and  "Seventh  Day 
Adventists,"  as  well  as  others  whose  chief  endeavor  seems 
to  be  to  preach  the  keeping  of  the  Jewish  Sabbath.  These 
sects,  who  defend  the  seventh  day  as  a  Christian  institution, 
are  nearly  all  infested  with  other  serious  evil  doctrines,  such 
as  soul  sleep,  second  probation,  universalism  and  others. 
The  root  of  this  error  of  Sabbath  keeping  is  the  ignorance 
of  these  people  of  the  fact  that  the  believer  in  Christ  has  not 
the  law,  the  ten  commandments,  for  his  rule,  but  the  believer 
in  Christ  is  dead  to  the  law,  and  as  a  new  creation  is  complete- 
ly severed  from  that  which  is  old,  as  well  as  from  all  earthly 
connections.  The  believer  in  Christ  is  above  the  law.  He  is 
complete  and  perfect  in  Christ.  The  rule  for  his  walk  is 
Christ  Himself,  by  whom  he  is  indwelt.  The  Sabbath,  the 
seventh  day,  is  connected  with  the  earth  and  wnth  Israel, 
but  the  believer  is  not  Israel,  nor  does  he  belong  to  the  earth, 
but  Grace  has  lifted  him  into  heaven.  It  is  cjuite  true  there 
is  a  Sabbath  day  and  this  day  is  the  seventh  day  of  the  week. 
But  there  is  no  Sabbath  keeping  now  as  regards  Israel  and 
the  earth.    The  orcat  and  true  Sabbath  is  still  coming. 

The  question  might  then  be  asked,  "Has  the  Christian  be- 
liever no  Sabbath  day  to  keep?"  The  answer  is.  No.  If  we 
speak  of  a  Sabliath  day  then  surely  it  must  mean  the  seventh 
day,  and  if  we  desire  to  keep  the  Sabbath  day  holy  wc  must 


238 


keep  not  the  first  day  of  the  week  but  the  seventh  day.  But 
some  will  say,  "the  Sabbath  has  been  changed  from  the 
last  day  of  the  week  to  the  first  day."  This  is  often  said; 
but  there's  no  scriptural  authority  for  it.  Neither  Christ 
nor  His  apostles  declared  such  a  change.  It  is,  therefore, 
wrong  to  call  the  first  day  of  the  week,  known  by  the  name 
"Sunday,"  the  Sabbath  or  "Christian  Sabbath."  The  first 
day  of  the  week  is  the  Lord's  day,  the  day  of  resurrection, 
the  day  of  the  new  creation.  This  day  was  kept  in  the  very 
beginning  of  the  Christian  age  as  a  precious  memorial  of 
Him  who  was  dead  and  was  raised  from  the  dead,  who  is 
seated  in  the  Highest  Heaven  and  who  is  coming  again. 
It  was  with  the  early  Christians,  and  should  be  so  still,  a 
day  of  worship,  when  they  came  together  to  break  bread 
and  partake  of  the  blessed  cup,  to  show  the  Lord's  death, 
till  He  come  again.  Some  one  has  expressed  it  in  the  fol- 
lowing short  sentences :  "Israel  was  commanded  to  observe 
the  Sabbath  day ;  the  church  is  privileged  to  enjoy  the  first 
day  of  the  week.  The  former  was  the  test  of  Israel's  moral 
condition ;  the  latter  is  the  significant  proof  of  the  Church's 
eternal  acceptance.  The  Sabbath  day  manifested  what  Israel 
co]dd  do  for  God;  the  Lord's  day  perfectly  declares  what 
God  has  done  for  us." 

There  is  no  law  about  this  blessed  first  day  of  the  week. 
The  Christian  believer  is  in  perfect  liberty,  with  no  yoke 
and  bondage  upon  him.  "For  ye  have  been  called  to  liberty, 
brethren ;  only  do  not  turn  liberty  into  an  opportunity  to 
the  flesh,  but  by  love  serve  one  another"  (Gal.  v:i5).  The 
child  of  God  will  know  how  to  use  this  liberty  in  the  right 


239 


way  and  will  certainly  have  the  first  day  of  the  week  as  a 
(lay  of  rejoicing  in  the  Lord  and  fellowship  with  Him. 

A  strange  sight  indeed  it  is  to  see  the  nominal  church  at- 
tempting by  political  influences,  legislation,  police  activities, 
to  force  the  zvorld  to  keep  the  Sabbath  day  on  the  first  day 
of  the  week.  As  if  it  were  the  calling  of  the  church  to  en- 
force lazi'S  and  as  if  the  world  could  be  made  to  keep  the  Sab- 
bath. What  a  deplorable  mixture !  What  an  awful  confu- 
sion ! 

And  now  after  this  disgression  we  come  back  to  our  chap- 
ter. The  human  way  of  answering  the  objections  of  the 
Pharisees  would  have  been  to  tell  them  that  there  was  no 
law  forbidding  the  deed  done  by  the  disciples.  In  a  few  words 
He  might  have  informed  them  not  alone  of  the  invalidity  of 
their  traditions,  but  also  of  the  sin  they  had  committed  by 
adding  to  the  Word  of  God.  However,  this  is  not  the  way 
divine  wisdom  chooses  to  silence  their  accusations.  Perhaps 
they  expected  in  their  Satanic  device  some  such  answer, 
which  they  would  have  used  against  Him.  The  answer  they 
hear  from  His  lips,  the  lips  of  the  Lawgiver  Himself,  is  a 
different  one  they  expected.  It  reveals  His  divinity,  Hint 
the  perfect  one  in  knowledge,  as  does  every  other  answer 
He  gave  to  His  enemies  in  this  Gospel,  silencing  their 
temptings  at  every  instance.  When  He  met  Satan,  as  we 
learned  from  the  fourth  chapter.  He  used  as  weapon  the 
Word  of  God,  His  own  Word.  Now  He  meets  the  offspring 
of  vipers,  the  children  of  the  enemy,  and  the  weapon  Pie  uses 
is  the  same.  He  wields  once  more  the  Sword  of  the  Spirit 
and  answers  lluir  unscriplural  objections  by  His  scriptural 


240 


assertions.  May  we  learn  from  it,  and  at  all  times,  whether 
it  is  the  Devil  or  his  offspring  which  tempt  us,  use  the  Word 
in  our  defense.  And  thus  He  spake:  "Have  ye  not  read 
what  David  did  when  he  was  hungry,  and  they  that  were 
hungry?  How  he  entered  into  the  house  of  God,  and 
ate  the  shewbread,  which  it  was  not  lawful  for  him  to  eat, 
nor  for  those  with  him,  but  for  the  priests  only?  Or  have 
ye  not  read  in  the  law  that  on  the  Sabbath  the  priests  in  the 
temple  profane  the  Sabbath  and  are  blameless?  But  I  say 
unto  you,  that  there  is  here  what  is  greater  than  the  temple. 
But  if  ye  had  known  what  is :  I  will  have  mercy  and  not 
sacrifice,  ye  would  not  have  condemned  the  guiltless.  For 
the  Son  of  Man  is  Lord  of  the  Sabbath." 

The  incident  quoted  by  our  Lord  from  David's  life  we 
find  recorded  in  i  Sam.  xxi :  How  then  is  this  incident  to 
be  applied?  David  was  forced,  as  the  rejected  one,  though 
God's  anointed  king,  to  enter  the  house  of  God  and  do  what 
was  not  lawful  for  him  to  do.  David's  hunger  and  the  hun- 
ger of  those  who  were  with  him  is  but  a  type  of  the  greater 
One  than  David  and  His  disciples  passing  through  the  corn- 
field hungry  and  obliged  to  pluck  ears  of  corn  to  eat.  The 
sad  scene  on  that  Sabbath  day  was  evidence  enough  that  the 
people  did  not  care  for  the  little  group  headed  by  the  King. 
When  David  was  rejected  and  a  fugitive,  the  holy  things 
connected  with  the  ceremonials  given  to  Israel  by  God  ceased 
to  be  holy.  The  sin  was  David's  rejection,  and  this  made 
the  consecrated  shewbread  common,  as  David  said  to  the 
High  Priest,  "the  bread  is,  as  it  were  common,  yea,  thougli 
it  were  sanctified  this  day  in  the  vessel"   (i  Sam.  xxi:5). 


241 

The  rejection  of  God's  anointed  had  profaned  all.  This  is 
the  thought  our  Lord  expressed  to  the  Pharisees.  They  had 
rejected  Him.  They  had  no  love  for  Him  nor  cared  for  Him. 
How  ridiculous  for  these  hyprocrites  to  speak  of  Sabbath- 
keeping  when  they  were  rejecting  the  Lord  of  the  Sabbath ! 
They  were  straining  at  a  gnat  and  swallowing  a  camel. 
How  much  of  this  pharisaical,  hypocritical  spirit  we  have 
about  us  in  Christendom.  The  divinity  of  the  Bible,  as  well 
as  the  Lord  and  His  redemption  work,  is  denied  by  many 
professing  Christians,  who  hold  still  outward  forms,  rituals, 
keeping  of  holidays  and  ceremonials.  But  even  the  priests 
profaned  the  Sabbath  and  were  blameless.  What  did  our 
Lord  mean  by  this  ?  The  priests  had  to  bring  sacrifices  on 
the  Sabbath  day.  "And  on  the  Sabbath  day  two  lambs  of 
t'-.e  first  year  without  spot,  and  two-tenth  deals  of  flour  for 
a  meat  ofifering,  mingled  with  oil,  and  the  drink  offering 
thereof" — thus  the  law  commanded  (Num.  xxviii:9). 
This  demanded  work,  and  according  to  the  law  and  their  in- 
terpretation of  it,  it  was  forbidden  on  the  Sabbath,  yet  the 
priests,  though  they  profaned  the  Sabbath,  were  held  blame- 
less. Grace  was  fully  typified  in  these  sacrifices  and  Grace 
working  is  above  the  law  and  does  away  with  the  legal  cov- 
enant. Our  Lord  surely  indicates  here  the  time  when  laws 
and  ceremonials  were  to  find  their  end  in  Him  who  is 
"greater  than  the  temple."  He  had  come  as  the  true  [wriest 
and  the  true  sacrifice  to  do  that  which  the  blood  of  Imlls  and 
goats  could  never  do;  that  is,  to  take  away  sin  and  bring  the 
Sabbath,  the  rest.    He  is  the  Lord  of  the  Sabbath  and  that 


242 

as  Son  of  Man,  in  His  humiliation  and  in  His  exaltation. 
But  alas !  they  would  not  understand  Him  nor  know  what 
it  meant,  "I  will  have  mercy  and  not  sacrifice."  There  was 
no  answer  from  the  Pharisees.  The  declaration  of  Himself 
as  the  Lord  of  the  Sabbath,  the  One  who  is  above  the  Sab- 
bath, must  have  inflamed  the  hatred  in  their  hearts  still  more. 
And  so  we  see  Him  going  away  from  thence.  However,  He 
did  not  turn  His  back  upon  them.  It  is  a  lingering,  patient 
love  we  learn  of  Him  here.  He  turns  His  blessed  feet 
towards  their  synagogue.  How  reluctant  to  leave  them  in 
their  dreadful  condition  of  enmity  against  Him  ! 

A  man  is  present  with  a  withered  hand.  They  desire  now 
to  find  some  new  ground  of  accus-ation  again  Him.  Their 
first  attempt  had  failed.  He  had  read  their  evil  thoughts,  and 
by  His  answer  He  had  shown  that  He  anticipated  the  question 
they  now  put  to  Him,  'Ts  it  lawful  to  heal  on  the  Sabbath?" 
Awful  motive,  which  stands  alongside  of  the  question,  show- 
ing the  depths  of  Satan  "that  they  might  accuse  Him."  The 
question  also  discloses  the  fact  that  they  believed  in  His 
healing  power.  We  may  well  imagine  the  scene  in  that 
synagogue.  The  Lord  in  His  divine  calmness,  the  unfortu- 
nate man  with  the  withered  hand,  the  malicious,  accusing 
Pharisees  with  their  Satanic  desire.  And  now  the  stillness 
broken  by  His  voice,  "What  man  shall  there  be  of  you  who 
has  one  sheep,  and  if  this  fall  into  a  pit  on  the  Sabbath,  will 
not  lay  hold  of  it  and  raise  it  up?"  There  was  no  answer; 
of  course  none  could  stand  up  and  declare  he  would  not  de- 
liver his  one  sheep  out  of  the  pit.  "How  much  better  then 
is  a  man  than  a  sheep !    So  that  it  is  lawful  to  do  well  on  the 


243 


Sabbath."     What  a  divine  logic!     How  unanswerable  this 
statement ! 

But  it  is  not  His  Word  alone.  He  has  divine  power  to 
heal  him  who  has  heard  His  words.  His  glory  as  Jehovah, 
the  King  Immanuel,  is  to  shine  forth  once  more.  He  says  to 
the  man.  "Stretch  out  thy  hand!"  I-'aith  answers  to  His 
Word,  and  he  stretcheth  it  out,  antl  it  was  restored  sound  as 
the  other.  It  was  faith  to  stretch  out  a  withered  hand  in 
answer  to  His  W'ord  and  precious  are  the  lessons  we  may 
learn  from  it  for  the  life  by  faith  to  which  we  are  called, 
ever  living  and  acting  in  obedience  to  His  Word.  Yet  we 
pass  over  that  which  is  so  plainly  seen  on  the  surface  and 
add  but  a  few  words  of  what  this  miracle  stands  for  in  this 
dispensational  Gospel.  The  man  with  the  withered  hand  is 
a  type  of  poor,  withered  Israel,  withered  spiritually  and  na- 
tionally. He  had  come  to  restore,  but,  unlike  the  man.  Israel 
had  no  faith.  Yet  the  day  is  coming  when  Israel  will  an- 
swer in  faith  and  healing  will  follow. 

The  Pharisees  beaten  by  His  words  and  deed  go  out  of 
the  synagogue.  In  their  dark  ccnmcils  for  the  first  time 
they  came  together  to  find  a  way  how  to  destroy  Him. 

How  great  the  blindness  which  began  to  settle  upon  them  ! 
How  could  they  destroy  Him,  who  had  raised  the  dea  1  ? 
How  could  the\  take  His  life,  who  is  the  true  God  and  the 
eternal  life?  And  even  if  there  and  then,  in  their  dark  coun 
sels,  they  had  found  a  way,  according  to  their  conception, 
to  destroy  Him,  they  could  never  have  touched  His  life,  for 
our  Lord's  body  was  not  subject  to  mortality,  His  body  in 
His  humiliation  was  immortal,  for  He  knew  no  sin.    And 


244 


while  they  kept  their  bhnd  endeavors  to  themselves,  He  was 
not  ignorant  of  it.  "But  Jesus,  knowing  it,  withdrew  thence, 
and  great  crowds  followed  Him  and  He  healed  them  all  and 
charged  them  strictly  that  they  should  not  make  Him  pub- 
licly known"  (verses  15,  16).  The. withdrawal  of  Himself 
from  the  scene  and  the  presence  of  the  Pharisees  indicated 
His  withdrawal  from  the  nation  itself,  the  result  of  His 
rejection. 

This  is -made  clear  by  the  quotation  from  the  Scriptures 
which  follows :  "That  that  might  be  fulfilled  which  was 
spoken  through  Esaias  the  prophet,  saying:  "Behold  my 
servant,  whom  I  have  chosen,  my  beloved,  in  whom  my  soul 
has  found  its  delight.  I  will  put  my  Spirit  upon  Him,  and 
He  shall  show  forth  judgment  to  the  nations.  He  shall  not 
strive  or  cry  out,  nor  shall  anyone  hear  His  voice  in  the 
streets ;  a  bruised  reed  shall  He  not  break,  and  smoking  flax 
shall  He  not  quench,  until  He  bringeth  forth  judgment  unto 
victory;  and  in  His  name  shall  the  nations  hope"  (verses 
17-21).  These  verses  are  found  in  Isaiah  xlii:i-4.  He  who 
knew  the  Scriptures  and  who  had  com.e  to  fulfill  the  prophe- 
cies relating  to  His  sufferings,  whose  constant  desire  was  to 
do  the  will  of  Him  who  sent  Him,  that  the  Scripture  might 
be  fulfilled — what  comfort  and  encouragement  must  have 
come  to  Him  through  these  words,  which  His  own  Spirit 
had  revealed  to  Isaiah.  The  rejection  of  Him  by  His  own 
was  imminent.  They  were  turning  away  from  Him  and 
accusing  Him,  but  He  knew  Himself  as  the  chosen  One,  the 
Beloved,  His  Father's  love  and  delight  upon  Him.  Thus 
in  the  midst  of  the  enemies  with  their  wicked  accusations 


245 

and  persecutions  He  could  be  calm,  His  perfect  trust  in  Him, 
whose  Beloved  He  was.  well  pleasing  to  Hiui. 

Our  way,  as  His  own,  should  not  be  different  from  this. 
In  the  midst  of  tribulations  and  adversities,  surrounded  by 
the  enemy,  we  can  be  calm,  and  more  than  that,  rejoice. 

He,  as  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  did  not  strive.  Why 
should  He  strive  as  the  One  who  put  His  trust  in  Jehovah? 
And  thus  it  is  written  of  the  servant.  His  follower,  "the 
servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive,  but  be  gentle  to  all." 
(2  Tim.  ii:24.)  Gentleness  as  foretold  was  to  be  found  in 
Him.  How  gentle  and  loving  He  must  have  been?.  Can  we 
ever  think  too  much  of  His  patience  and  gentleness?  The 
bruised  reed  He  did  not  break.  The  w^eakest  thing  He  took 
tenderly  in  His  hands.  The  smoking  flax  was  not  quenched 
by  Him.  In  the  Epistle  of  our  practical  walk  in  Christ 
we  are  exhorted,  "let  your  gentleness  be  known  of  all  men." 
(Phil.  iv:5).  He  in  us  will  reproduce  the  very  same  charac- 
teristic in  our  lives  here  on  the  earth. 

But  the  force  of  the  quotation  lies  in  the  fact  that  the 
Gentiles,  the  nations  are  mentioned.  The  fulfillment  in  its 
completeness  will  take  place,  no  doubt,  at  the  time  of  His 
second  Coming,  but  here  the  Holy  Spirit  uses  it  in  still 
another  way.  Israel  had  begun  to  reject  Him  and  now  the 
Gentiles  shall  hear  of  God's  gift  and  grace.  The  passage  is 
introduced  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  a  way  as  He  only  could 
do  it. 

Another  one  possessed  by  a  demon  is  brought  before  Him. 
Most  likely  He  had  returned  from  the  withdrawal  recorded 
above,  and  once  more  the  Pharisees  are  present.    The  pos- 


246 

sessed  one  is  blind  and  dumb.  Was  he  not  a  perfect  picture 
of  the  nation  Israel?  Blind  and  dumb  was  their  condition. 
Again  He  manifests  Himself  as  Lord  and  He  healed  the 
demon  possessed  man,  so  that  the  dumb  spoke  and  saw. 
No  wonder  that  all  the  crowds  were  amazed  and  said,  "Is 
this  the  Son  of  David?"  They  must  have  meant  by  this 
cry  the  Messiah,  for  they  expected  Him  under  the  title  of 
the  Son  of  David.     Still  the  question  also  implies  doubt. 

And  here  they  stand  again,  these  dark  and  cunning  Phari- 
sees. They  have  heard  it.  Perhaps  the  cry,  "Is  this  the  Son 
of  David?"  reached  their  ear.  Moved  with  jealousy,  anger, 
malice  and  Satanic  hatred  against  Him  whose  omnipotent 
power  was  once  more  manifested,  the;'  said:  "This  man  does 
not  cast  out  demons  but  by  Beelzebub,  prince  of  demons." 

The  accusation  had  been  made  before  by  them  (ix:34) 
when  it  was  passed  over  by  the  Lord,  but  now,  after  the  re- 
peated m.anifestations  of  His  power,  after  their  hatred  cul- 
minated in  seeking  His  life,  the  awful  blasphemy  is  to  be  re- 
buked by  Him.  Cowards  they  were,  as  it  is  seen  that  they 
did  not  dare  to  bring  the  accusation  to  His  face.  How  could 
they  dare  to  stand  before  Him  ?  So  He  reads  again  their  very 
thoughts,  a  miracle  in  itself,  which  should  have  startled 
them.  His  answer  to  their  Satanic  thoughts  consists  in  two 
verv  logical  arguments.  "Every  kingdom  divided  against 
itself  is  brought  to  desolation,  and  every  city  or  house  divi- 
ded against  itself  will  not  subsist.  And  if  Satan  casts  out 
Satan,  he  is  divided  against  him.self,  how  then  shall  his  king- 
doru  subsist?"  (verses  25-26).  This  is  very  clear,  Satan 
castmg  out  Satan  would  mean  a  division  in  his  awful  domain, 


247 

which  would  mean  its  complete  ruin  and  overthrow.  It  is, 
therefore,  inconceivable  that  the  Devil  could  furnish  the  pow- 
er to  destroy  his  own  kingdom  which  he  controls.  The  pas- 
sage is  full  of  meaning  aside  from  the  argument  it  contains. 
He  who  knoweth  all  things  in  perfect  knowledge  tells  us 
that  Satan  is  a  person  and  a  king,  for  he  has  a  kingdom  over 
which  he  rules.  The  demons*  are  in  his  kingdom,  one  with 
the  head  in  thought  and  purpose.  How  little  we  know  of 
his  awful  power,  of  his  kingdom  and  the  agencies  at  liis 
command  to  destroy  body  and  soul.  We  need  not  know  it  all, 
it  is  sufficient  to  know  that  he  is  an  enemy  overcome,  his 
kingdom  is  spoiled  by  the  victor,  by  Him  who  has  annulled 
him,  who  has  the  power  of  death,  that  is  the  Devil.  Higher 
Criticism  claims  that  our  Lord  acquiesced  in  the  legendary 
belief  of  the  Jews,  a  belief  they  had  picked  up  in  Babylon, 
that  there  existed  a  personal  Devil  and  demons  under  him. 
This  foolish,  infidel  theory,  which  is  nowadays  held  by  so 
many  preachers  and  theological  professors,  is  almost  as  blas- 
phemous as  the  accusation  of  the  Pharisees.  H  our  Lord 
knew  better  than  what  the  Jews  held,  and  He  did  not  correct 
their  views,  and  if  He  did  not  know  that  their  belief  was  in- 
correct, then  in  neither  case  could  He  be  divine.  This 
is  Higher  Criticism,  the  denial  of  the  infallibility  and 
divinity  of  the  living  and  the  written  Word.  The  second  ar- 
gument against  their  evil  thoughts  is  the  following: 

"And  if  I  cast  out  demons,  by  Beelzebub,  your  sons  b" 


*The  translation  "devils"  is  not  correct.     There  is  one  devil,  but 
the  fallen  angels  are  demons. 


248 


whom  do  they  cast  them  out?  For  this  reason  they  shall  be. 
your  judges"  (verse  27). 

Among  the  Jews  there  were  and  are  still  such  who  pro- 
fess to  be  exorcists,  men  who  claim  to  have  power  to  cast 
out  demons.  We  cannot  follow  certain  traditional  teach- 
ings of  the  Jews  concerning  exorcism  at  this  time.  Some  of 
them  were  wandering  exorcists,  going  from  place  to  place 
professing  to  cast  out  demons.  Such  are  they  who  are  men- 
tioned in  Acts  xix:i3:  "And  certain  of  the  Jewish  exorcists 
also,  who  went  about,  took  in  hand  to  call  upon  those  who 
had  wicked  spirits  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  saying,  I 
adjure  you  by  Jesus,  whom  Paul  preaches."  Perhaps  those 
who  are  mentioned  elsewhere,  who  drove  out  demons  using 
the  name  of  the  Lord  and  did  not  follow  Him,  were  exorcists. 
Certain  it  is  the  Lord  did  not  mean  His  own  disciples  upon 
whom  He  had  conferred  the  power  to  cast  out  demons  in 
His  name ;  He  meant  the  school  of  Pharisees,  who  practiced, 
or  claimed  to  practice,  exorcism.  The  question  put  to  them 
by  our  Lord  demanded  an  answer  which  they  cared  not  to 
give,  for  it  would  have  been  to  their  own  condemnation. 

And  so  He  continues  with  His  perfect  argumentation, 
driving  it  home  to  their  hearts,  as  only  He  could  do  it.  "But 
if  I  by  the  Spirit  of  God  cast  out  demons,  then  indeed  the 
Kingdom  of  God  is  come  upon  you."  It  is  impossible  that 
Satan  could  cast  out  Satan.  There  remains,  then,  only  one 
other  alternative ;  the  Spirit  of  God  casts  out  the  demons. 
Then,  indeed,  the  Kingdom  is  come  upon  vou  in  the  person 
of  the  King  who  manifests  this  power.  Alas!  thev  knew  it, 
but  they  would  not  have  Him  and  the  Kingdom  He  preached. 


249 


And  still  Hi?  voice  is  heard :  "Or  else,  can  anyone  enter 
into  the  house  of  the  strong  man  and  plunder  his  goods,  un- 
less he  first  bind  ihe  strong  man  ?  And  then  he  will  plunder 
his  house." 

The  strong  man  is  Satan,  but  the  Lord,  stronger  than 
Satan,  had  bound  him  and  has  the  power  to  enter  his  domairi 
and  take  away  his  prey.  Who  then  is  He  who  bound  the  en- 
emy ?  Perhaps  His  voice  rested  here.  Perhaps  He  waited 
for  an  answer.  "Thou  art  Christ  the  Son  of  the  living  God" 
would  have  been  in  order  here. 

And  stronger  still  He  speaks.  "He  that  is  not  with  me  is 
against  me,  and  he  that  gathers  not  with  me  scatters."  He 
demands  decision.  Half-heartedness  does  not  satisfy  Him 
and  in  face  of  such  open-faced  accusations  and  blasphemies 
would  be  impossible.  It  was  an  appeal  to  decide.  In  our 
day  in  which  we  live,  out  and  out  decision  is  not  less  demand- 
ed. Phariseeism  and  Sadduceeism,  the  leaven  is  working 
about  us  and  to  be  undecided  is  paramount  with  dishonoring 
His  own  glorious  person. 

"For  this  reason  I  say  unto  you,  every  sin  and  injurious 
speaking  shall  be  forgiven  to  men  but  speaking  injuriously 
of  the  Spirit  shall  not  be  forgiven  to  men.  And  whosoever 
shall  have  spoken  a  word  against  the  Son  of  man,  it  shall 
be  forgiven  him,  but  whosoever  shall  speak  against  the  Holy 
Spirit,  it  shall  not  be  forgiven  him,  neither  in  this  age  nor 
in  the  coming  one." 

Much  has  been  said  and  written  on  this  passage  and  on 
the  (|uestion  of  the  unpardonable  sin.  Many  who  had  lived 
in  open  sin  and  worldly  lusts,  having  been  arrested  by  the 


250 


grace  of  God,  almost  despaired  for  they  feared  they  had  com- 
mitted that  sin  and  now  in  spite  of  their  repentance  forgive- 
ness was  an  impossibiHty  for  them.  This  wrong  conclusion 
is  often  preached  in  so  called  "revival  meetings"  to  bring 
sinners  to  accept  Christ.  Believers  who  fell  in  sin  likewise 
have  thought  that  after  sinning  with  open  eyes,  wilfully, 
they  had  been  guilty  of  the  unpardonable  sin.  How  many 
poor,  ignorant  souls  have  grieved  for  weeks  and  months 
thinking  the  Holy  Spirit  had  now  left  them  for  good.  But 
the  Holy  Spirit  once  given  to  the  believer  in  believing  on 
Christ  has  come  as  the  abiding  Comforter.  He  has  come  to 
stay  and  never,  no  never,  to  leave  that  which  He  has  sealed. 
The  Spirit  may  be  grieved.  He  may  be  quenched,  but  never 
can  He  be  driven  away  so  that  the  true  believer  would  fall 
back  and  be  lost. 

This  widespread  doctrine  of  falling  from  grace  in  the 
sense  of  the  believer's  possibility  to  be  lost  dishonors  Christ 
and  His  work  for  us.  But  some  one  says:  "Did  not  David 
pray:  And  take  not  the  Holy  Spirit  from  me?"  Certainly  he 
did,  and  it  was  in  order  for  him  to  pray  thus  for  the  Holy 
Spirit  might  have  left  him,  for  He  was  not  then  in  the  earth 
with  believers  as  the  abiding  comforter.  The  believer  in  the 
New  Testament  is  never  exhorted  to  pray  to  the  Spirit  to 
remain  with  him.  He  is  to  be  filled  with  the  Spirit 
and  continually  guard  against  grieving  the  Spirit  or  not  to 
quench  Him,  but  never  to  doubt  His  presence.  All  these 
wrong  conceptions  spring  from  a  deplorable  ignorance  of 
the  fundamentals  of  the  blessed  Gospel  of  the  Grace  of  God. 

And  now  what  is  this  sin  of  which  our  Lord  speaks  here? 


In  His  coming  to  His  own  people,  the  Father,  the  Son  and  the 
Holy  Spirit  were  manifested.  The  Holy  Spirit  in..His  pqwer 
was  manifested  through  the  Son,  our  Lord,  upon  whom  He 
was  in  His  fullness.  The  signs  He  did  were  not  alone  done 
in  His  own  omnipotent  power  as  Jehovah,  they  were  the 
manifestation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  likewise.  And  these  Phari- 
sees had  sinned  against  this  Holy  Spirit  by  accusing  Christ, 
that  He  drove  out  the  demons  by  Satanic  power.  They  had 
blasphemed  the  Spirit,  spoken  injuriously  about  Him,  in 
saying  that  Beelzebub,  the  prince  of  demons,  was  present 
with  Christ  and  not  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  they  did  mali- 
ciously. And  this  and  nothing  else  is  the  sin  of  which  our 
Lord  here  speaks.  The  sin  is  to  charge  the  Lord  with 
doing  His  miracles  through  Satanic  power  and  not  through 
the  Holy  Spirit.  We  do  believe,  therefore,  that  this  sin 
could  only  be  committed  as  long  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
was  in  the  earth  and  that  it  was  committed  by  the  Pharisees 
with  their  blasphemies.  This  is  the  sin  which  would  not  be 
forgiven  neither  in  this  age  nor  in  the  coming  one.  In  i 
John  V :  16-17,  we  read,  "H  any  one  see  his  brother  sinning,  a 
sin  not  unto  death,  he  shall  ask,  and  he  shall  give  him  life, 
for  those  that  do  not  sin  unto  death.  There  is  a  sin  to 
death.  I  do  not  say  of  that  that  he  should  make  a  request." 
This  is  to  be  explained  in  the  following  way.  The  brother 
is  a  believer.  On  account  of  sinning  he  is  chastised.  God 
permits  sickness  to  come  upon  him  and  the  sinning  not  hav- 
ing been  unto  death  (physical  death  only)  he  is  raised  up. 
However,  a  believer  may  go  on  zvilfiillx  siiuiing  and  remain 
there  dishonoring  Christ.  He  is  to  be  taken  away  out  of  the 


252 

land  of  the  living,  cut  off  by  death.  No  request  could  he 
made  for  such  a  one.  The  question  of  death  is  not  eternal 
condemnation  but  only  physical  death. 

From  the  fact  of  the  sin  these  Pharisees  were  doing,  the 
blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Lord  now  turns  to 
the  cause  of  this,  the  spring  from  which  the  evil  comes. 
"Either  make  the  tree  good,  and  its  fruit  good ;  or  make 
the  tree  corrupt,  and  its  fruit  corrupt.  For  from  the  fruit 
the  tree  is  known.  Offspring  of  vipers !  how  can  ye  speak 
good  things,  being  wicked?"  (verse  33-34).  The  Searcher 
of  hearts,  He  who  understandeth  the  thoughts  afar  off,  un- 
covers the  real  condition  of  these  men  and  the  condition  of 
man  in  general.  The  tree  is  bad,  the  fruit  must  be  bad. 
The  tree  must  be  made  good,  and  that  denotes  a  change, 
and  the  fruit  will  be  good.  "The  heart  is  deceitful  above 
all,  and  desperately  wicked;  who  can  know  it?  I,  the 
Lord,  search  the  heart"  (Jerm.  xvii  :9,  10).  He  does  it 
here  and  speaks  of  them  as  John,  the  forerunner  did,  as 
"offspring  of  vipers,"  with  wicked  hearts  and  impossible  to 
bring  forth  anything  good.  And,  later,  once  more  He 
spoke  of  the  condition  of  the  heart  of  man,  "For  out  of 
the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts,  murders,  adulteries,  forni- 
cations, thefts,  false  witness,  blasphemies"  (Matth.  xv.ig). 
How  little  those  Pharisees,  and  Sadducees  as  well,  believed 
in  this  and  how  unwilling  they  were  to  accept  the  sentence 
and  verdict  of  Him,  who  knoweth  all  things.  They  were 
j';iven  to  their  ceremonial,  ritualistic  observances,  very  scru- 
pulous about  their  phylacteries  and  fringes  of  their  garments, 
making  long  prayers,  keeping  the  outside  of  the  cup  and 


253 

the  platter  clean,  but  never  acknowledging  the  condition  of 
the  heart  before  the  Searcher  of  Hearts.  Self-righteous, 
moral,  religious  and,  with  it  all,  "offspring  of  vipers."  All 
their  religious  observances  and  outward  morality  did  not  and 
could  not  effect  a  change.  And  so  they  stood  before  Him 
whose  finger  had  written  the  law,  boasting  in  the  keeping 
of  the  law  and  rejecting  the  Lord,  blaspheming  against  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

The  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  is  still  at  work.  This  leaven 
has  leavened,  indeed,  the  whole  lump.  Ritualistic,  religious, 
moral  Christendom,  professing,  and  not  possessing,  is  the 
direct  descendant  of  the  Pharisee  of  old  and  as  such  the 
offspring  of  vipers  as  much  as  they  were.  How  little  the 
radical,  complete  corruption  of  man  is  believed  in  Christen- 
dom, how  little  it  is  taught.  Man  with  the  good  spark  in 
him  (as  they  claim),  developing  it  by  religiousness  and  the 
use  of  his  own  will,  becomes  and  is  his  own  Saviour.  The 
Lord  is  looked  upon  not  as  Lord,  but  as  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
whose  life  is  an  example,  while  the  atonement,  the  blood,  is 
set  aside  and  rejected.  The  wicked  heart  cannot  bring  forth 
good  things.  Fine  and  polished,  sweet  and  harmonious, 
may  be  the  language  of  the  cultured,  religious,  unsaved 
man,  but  proceeding  from  an  evil  heart  it  can  never  please 
God.  "For  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth 
speaks.  The  good  man  out  of  the  good  treasure  brings 
forth  good  things  and  the  wicked  man  out  of  the  wicked 
treasure  brings  forth  wicked  things.  But  I  say  unto  you 
that  cverv  idle  word  which  men  shall  say,  they  shall  render 
an  account  of  it  in  judgment  day;  for  by  thy  words  thou 


254 


shalt  be  justified,  and  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  condemned'' 
(verse  35-37). 

These  words  have  been  misunderstood  and  much  mis- 
applied and  all  this  by  wresting  these  words  out  of  their 
connection.  They  are  mostly  applied  in  connection  with 
that  unscriptural  phrase  and  doctrine,  "universal  judgment." 
According  to  this,  even  the  words  will  be  weighed  and 
judged,  and  only  then  in  that  hour  of  judgment,  will  it  be 
known,  according  to  this  teaching,  who  will  be  saved  and 
who  is  lost.  Our  Lord  did  not  teach  this  here  nor  is 
it  taught  anywhere  else.  These  Pharisees  were  proud  of 
their  works  and  were  self-righteous.  If  they  relied  on  their 
works  as  a  means  of  their  justification  and  salvation  they 
have  to  expect  a  judgment  accordingly;  every  idle  word  is 
to  be  judged,  which  means  utter,  absolute  condemnation. 
Their  words  could  not  be  good  because  they  were  wicked. 
Alay  the  self-righteous,  religious  man  remember  this.  Ab- 
solute condemnation  awaits  him.  Salvation  is  by  grace,  and 
by  that  salvation  man  receives  a  good  treasure  and  brings 
forth  good  things.  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the 
mouth  then  speaks.  Futhermore,  the  word  "idle"  means 
useless,  barren.  All  that  which  man  speaks  out  of  himself 
is  barren  and  useless.  The  believer,  however,  living  after 
the  Spirit,  will  not  utter  useless  words,  but  that  which  is  in 
honor  of  the  Son  of  God.  As  believers,  we  should  bear 
constantly  in  mind  that  we  must  all  appear  before  the 
judgment  seat  of  Christ,  not  for  a  decision  of  eternal  sal- 
vation, this  was  settled  when  the  believer  trusted  in  Christ, 


255 

but  for  rewards.     Surely  then  our  deeds,  our  works  and 
our  words  will  be  cither  approved  or  disapproved. 

"By  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  justified  and  by  thy  words 
thou  shalt  be  condemned."  This  has  also  a  reference  to  the 
familiar  passage  in  Romans  x:  "If  thou  shalt  confess  with 
thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  in  thine  heart 
that  God  Iiath  raised  Him  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt  be 
saved."  And  wherever  there  is  not  this  confession  springing 
from  the  belief  of  the  heart  there  is  condemnation. 

The  scene  is  now  drawing  to  its  close.  The  hard-heart- 
edness  of  the  Pharisees  is  seen  by  some  of  them  coming 
after  such  words,  saying,  Teacher,  we  desire  to  see  a  sign 
from  Thee.  Whatever  evil  design  they  had  in  asking  him 
thus  we  do  not  know.  He  had  done  sign  upon  sign  and  they 
had  ample  proofs  of  His  divinity.  Upon  such  an  evil,  un- 
believing request  He  can  only  utter  His  righteous  indigna- 
tion. So  He  calls  them  a  wicked  and  adulterous  generation. 
"A  wicked  and  adulterous  generation  seeks  after  a  sign,  and 
a  sign  shall  not  be  given  to  it  save  the  sign  of  Jonas  the 
prophet.  For,  even  as  Jonas  was  in  the  great  fish  three  days 
and  three  nights,  thus  shall  the  Son  of  Man  be  in  the  heart 
of  the  earth  three  days  and  three  nights.  Ninevites  shall 
stand  up  in  the  judgment  with  this  generation,  and  shall 
condemn  it :  for  they  repented  at  the  preaching  of  Jonas ; 
and  behold  more  than  Jonas  is  here"  (verse  38-4T).  This 
is  a  most  significant  passage.  How  far  the  Pharisees  be- 
lieved the  story  of  Jonas  we  do  not  know.  The  Sadducees  no 
doubt  rejected  the  book  of  Jonah,  for  they  were  the  ration- 
alists and  critics  of  their  tlay.  It  is  significant  for  us  in  our 


256 


day  when  the  judgment  to  fall  upon  apostate  Christendom 
is  so  near,  nothing  is  more  ridiculed  than  the  book  of  Jonah 
and  its  sublime  teachings.  The  Sadducees  of  the  present 
day,  the  higher  critics,  assume  to  know  more  than  the  Lord, 
and  by  rejecting  the  book  of  Jonah  as  uninspired  they  reject 
the  infallible  Lord  Himself.  But  why  does  our  Lord  men- 
tion Jonah  here?  Because  Jonah  is  a  type  of  the  death  and 
resurrection  of  our  Lord.  Jonah  is  the  only  prophet  who 
was  sent  away  from  Israel's  land  far  unto  the  Gentiles,  to 
the  great  and  ungodly  city  of  Nineveh.  However,  before 
he  went  there,  he  passed  through  a  death  experience  and  out 
of  that  grave  in  which  he  was  brought  he  was  taken  again, 
a  type  of  resurrection.  Through  it  God  brought  salvation  to 
the  Gentiles,  for  Jonah,  after  his  death  and  resurrection 
experience  proclaimed  the  message  of  God.  So  the  Lord 
was  going  away  from  Israel.  He  was  soon  to  leave  them, 
and  the  grace  of  God  was  to  go  out  towards  the  Gentile 
world.  Yet  before  that  could  be  He  had  to  go  into  the  jaws 
of  death,  and,  like  Jonah,  was  three  days  and  three  nights 
in  the  belly  of  the  great  fish,  so  was  He  to  be  the  same 
length  of  time  in  the  grave,  but  also  to  come  forth  in  resur- 
rection. He  was  preached,  after  His  resurrection,  to  the 
Jew  first ;  but  while  Nineveh  repented  after  the  message  of 
Jonah,  that  wicked  and  adulterous  generation  did  not  re- 
pent of  their  course,  after  the  preaching  through  Him,  who 
is  greater  than  Jonah.  Therefore  the  Ninevites  will  rise  up 
and  condemn  that  generation.  Jonah  is  likewise  a  type  of 
the  whole  nation,  which,  however,  is  not  before  us  in  this 


257 


chapter.*  The  Queen  of  Sheba  also  will  condemn  that  gen- 
eration, she  came  to  hear  the  wisdom  of  Solomon  and  here 
stands  He  who  is  the  iyisdo)n  and  they  reject  Him,  who 
imparted  to  the  wise  King  the  wisdom  he  had. 

And  this  is  followed  by  a  prediction  by  our  Lord  which 
concerns  the  future  of  that  generation.  "But  when  the 
unclean  spirit  has  gone  out  of  the  man,  he  goes  through 
dry  places,  seeking  rest,  and  does  not  find  it.  Then  he 
says,  I  will  return  to  my  house  whence  I  came  out ;  and 
having  come  he  finds  it  unoccupied,  swept  and  adorned. 
Then  he  goes  and  takes  with  himself  seven  other  spirits 
worse  than  himself,  and  entering  in,  they  dwell  there ;  and 
tht  last  condition  of  that  man  becomes  worse  than  the  first. 
Thus  it  shall  be  to  this  wicked  generation  also"  (verse 
43-45).  All  kinds  of  interpretations  and  applications  have 
been  made  of  this  prediction.  It  is,  however,  clear  that 
there  is  but  one  application,  and  that  is  in  respect  to  t'e 
unbelieving  generation.  "Thus  shall  it  be  to  this  wicked 
generation  also" — settles  the  point  of  application.  Gener- 
ation is  certainly  to  be  understood  in  the  sense  of  race. 
The  unclean  spirit  is  idolatry.  It  had  left  the  nation,  and 
even  now  the  nation  is  swept  froni  that  evil  spirit  and  unoc- 
cupied, and  boasts  of  reform.  It  will  not  be  so  forever. 
The  unclean  spirit  will  return  and  bring  seven  others  with 
him  and  take  possession  of  that  house  again,  and  the  last 
condition,  the  end,  becomes  worse  than  the  beginning.   The 


♦See  our  tract  on  "Jonali   and   tlie   Whale,"   whore  the  dlspcnsa- 
tional  side  is  expounded. 


258 

return  of  the  unclean  spirit  with  its  seven  companions  will 
take  place  during  the  great  tribulation. 

The  end  of  the  rejection  of  our  Lord  by  His  own  has 
come.  He  has  outlined  their  dreadful  end,  and  to  which 
Israel's  unbelief  is  rapidly  leading  on,  and  now  follows  a 
pathetic  ending  of  this  great  crisis.  "But  while  He  was 
yet  speaking  to  the  crowds,  behold  His  mother  and  His 
brethren  stood  without,  seeking  to  speak  to  Him.  Then 
one  said  to  Him,  Behold  Thy  mother  and  Thy  brethren 
are  standing  without,  seeking  to  speak  to  Thee.  But  He 
answered  and  said  to  him  who  had  spoken  to  Him,  Who 
is  My  mother  and  who  are  My  brethren?  And  stretching 
out  His  hand  to  His  disciples,  He  said.  Behold  My  mother 
and  My  brethren;  for  whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  My 
Father  who  is  in  the  heavens,  he  is  My  brother  and  sister 
and  mother."  From  Mark's  Gospel  we  learn  the  possible 
reason  of  His  relatives  coming  to  Him.  "And  His  relatives 
having  heard  of  it  went  out  to  lay  hold  of  Him,  for  they 
said,  He  is  out  of  His  mind"  (Mark  iii:2i). 

He  refuses  to  see  them.  Behind  this  refusal  stands  the 
fact  of  a  broken  relationship.  He  no  longer  recognizes 
His  own,  and  speaks  of  a  new  relationship,  founded  upon 
obedience  to  the  will  of  His  Father  in  the  heavens. 


259 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

We  have  now  reached  one  of  the  most  important  chapters 
in  this  Gospel.  It  demands,  therefore,  our  closest  at- 
tention, and  this  more  so  because  the  revelation  which  our 
Lord  gives  here,  the  unfolding  of  the  mysteries  of  the  king- 
dom of  the  heavens,  has  been  and  still  is  grossly  misunder- 
stood and  falsely  interpreted.  Precisely  that  which  our 
Lord  did  not  mean  has  been  read  into  this  chapter.  The 
whole  chapter  has  been,  so  to  speak,  turned  upside  down 
by  most  of  the  learned  commentators  of  Christendom.  For 
any  believer  to  turn  to  these  for  light  and  instruction  will 
only  result  in  getting  thoroughly  confused.  We  have  often 
said  if  this  one  chapter  would  be  rightly  understood  by 
the  professing  church,  the  consequences  would  be  the  most 
far-reaching.  But  one  almost  despairs  of  seeing  the  true 
meaning  of  the  mystery  of  the  kingdom  in  Matthew  xiii 
believed  in  Christendom.  The  professing  mass  continues, 
and  will  continue,  with  the  majority  of  those  w^ho  are  not 
merely  outward  professors,  to  build  upon  the  misinterpre- 
tation of  our  Lord's  parables  the  optimistic  dreams  of  the 
enlargement  of  the  church,  the  foreshadowing  of  the 
universal  extension  of  the  church  and  the  continued 
good  work  of  the  leaven  in  the  three  measures  of  meal,  etc. 
We  have  foimd  in  our  experience,  that  it  is  hard  to  get  the 
individual  believer,  brought  up  in  these  wrong  conceptions, 


26o 


to  see  the  true  meaning;  and  often  the  testimony  given  is 
rejected.  Let  us  then  carefully  and  prayerfully  look  into 
the  chapter  before  us,  and  may  our  Lord  give  His  blessing ; 
and  while  the  many  may  reject  what  we  teach  from  these 
parables  it  may  be  a  few  receive  light  through  the  entrance 
of  His  Word,  and  may  all  believers  in  these  truths  be 
strengthened. 

Let  us  notice,  first  of  all,  two  verses  in  this  chapter ; 
"Because  to  you  it  is  given  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the 
kingdom  of  the  heavens,  but  to  them  it  is  not  given"  (verse 
1 1 )  ;  "All  these  things  Jesus  spoke  to  the  crowds  in  par- 
ables, and  without  a  parable  He  did  not  speak  to  them,  so 
that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  through  the 
prophets  saying,  I  will  open  my  mouth  in  parables ;  I  will 
utter  things  hidden  from  the  world's  foundation"  (verses 
34-35).  These  verses  then  tell  us  what  our  Lord  makes 
known  in  this  chapter,  namely  "the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom 
of  the  heavens" — "Things  uttered,  zvhich  ivere  hidden  from 
the  world's  foundation/' 

In  Genesis  we  read  of  one  who  is  called  "Zaphnath- 
paaneah"  which,  according  to  rabbinical  interpretation, 
means  "Revealer  of  secrets."  He  is  Joseph,  the  Hebrew 
lad  reiected  by  his  brethren,  that  most  perfect  type  of  our 
Lord.  After  his  rejection  by  his  brethren,  Joseph  becomes 
the  revealer  of  the  secrets,  and  that  through  the  wisdom  of 
God. 

Here  in  this  chapter  Christ  appears  as  the  rejected  one, 
and  now  after  the  oflfer  of  the  kingdom  is  rejected  by  the 
people  of  the  kingdom,  and  He  as  king,  is  likewise  rejected, 


26 1 


He  becomes  the  revealer  of  the  secrets,  to  show  what  will 
take  place  after  the  Kingdom  has  been  rejected  by  Israel, 
and  postponed. 

That  He  is  the  rejected  one  and  the  far-reaching  witness 
He  gives  now  is  evident  in  the  very  opening  verses.  "And 
that  same  day  Jesus  went  out  from  the  house  and  sat  down 
by  the  sea."  Leaving  the  house  means  He  severed  His 
relation  with  His  people  as  we  saw  at  the  close  of  the-twelfth 
chapter.  Taking  His  place  by  the  sea,  the  sea  typify- 
ing nations,  shows  that  His  testimony  to  be  given  now, 
tiie  mysteries  to  be  revealed  have  a  wider  sphere ;  they 
are  relative  to  the  nations.  "And  great  crowds  were 
gathered  together  to  Him,  so  that  going  on  board  ship 
He  sat  down,  and  the  whole  crowd  stood  on  the 
shore."  He  separated  Himself  from  the  multitude,  while 
in  the  first  part  of  this  Gospel  He  moves  in  the  midst  of 
the  multitudes,  here  He  takes  His  place  alone.  What  a 
scene  it  must  have  been !  There  on  the  seashore  the  multi- 
tude, and  He  alone  some  ways  from  the  shore — He  cannot 
be  reached  by  touch  now.  All  is  significant.  Then  when 
all  eyes  hang  upon  His  lips.  He  began  to  speak. 

What  He  says  is  in  parables,  and  without  paraMes  He 
did  not  speak  to  them.  He  utters  seven  parables.  In  no 
other  Gospel  do  we  find  them  grouped  together  as 
here.  Why  is  this?  This  is  the  great  dispensa- 
tional  Gospel.  Here  God's  plan  of  the  ages  is  re- 
vealed as  in  no  other  Gospel.  We  have  seen  before  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  in  giving  us  this  Gospel,  the  Genesis  of  the 
New  Testament,  is  not  tied  down  to  chronological  order, 


262 


but  He  arranges  everything  to  suit  His  sublime  purpose. 
After  the  kingdom  was  offered  and  rejected,  the  Lord 
makes  known  what  is  to  be  after  this  rejection,  and  during 
the  time  of  His  absence.  Therefore  these  parables,  seven 
in  number,  denoting  completeness,  are  put  right  in  here. 

Now  the  important  question  is  when  the  Lord  says  six 
times  in  these  parables,  "The  kingdom  of  the  heavens  is 
like"  what  does  He  mean  by  the  term  "Kingdom  of  the 
heavens  ?"  That  it  can  no  longer  mean  the  kingdom  as  it  is 
revealed  in  the  Old  Testament,  as  it  is  promised  to  Israel, 
and  as  He  offered  it  to  the  people,  is  evident.  For  in  the 
first  place,  the  offer  was  made  and  rejected.  The  preaching 
of  Him  and  the  messengers  He  sent  out  was,  "The  kingdom 
of  the  heavens  it  at  hand,  repent."  Not  a  word  do  we  hear 
of  this  in  the  thirteenth  chapter,  nor  after  this  chapter. 
And  in  the  second  place,  if  our  Lord  had  had  the  Old  Testa- 
ment kingdom  promised  to  Israel  in  view,  when  He  says 
here  "The  Kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  like,"  He  could  not 
have  said  that  He  uttered  things  hidden  from  the  world's 
foundation,  for  the  kingdom,  in  the  Old  Testament  is  not 
a  mystery,  but  clearly  revealed. 

Some  say,  and  indeed  the  popular  and  almost  universally 
accepted  interpretation  is — it  is  the  church.  The  Lord 
begins  now  to- teach  about  the  church.  So  that  if  He  says: 
"The  kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  like  leaven,  which  a  woman 
took  and  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal,"  etc.,  it  is  de- 
clared the  church  is  meant,  and  the  Gospel.  The 
church  is  nowhere  called  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens. 
Oh,  the  great  confusion  which  exists  on  this  topic.     The 


263 


Lord  mentions  the  word  cliurch  only  once  in  t'.c 
Gospel,  and  that  is  in  Matthew  xvi.,  where  He  says 
that  He  zvill  build  His  church.  The  church  did 
not  exist  in  the  Old  Testament,  it  was  not  known  there 
at  all ;  it  was  not  in  existence  while  the  Lord  walked  in 
the  earth,  and  uoivhcrc  does  He  refer  to  the  church  as  the 
kingdom  of  the  heavens,  neither  does  the  Holy  Spirit  speak 
of  the  church  as  the  kingdom.  1  le  speaks  of  the  church 
as  the  habitation  of  God,  a  house,  a  temple,  the  body  of 
Christ  and  the  Piride  of  Christ,  but  we  repeat  it,  never  as 
the  kingdom  of  the  heavens.  All  this  modern  application 
of  kingdom  of  the  heavens  to  the  church  is  foreign  to  the 
Word  of  God.    It  is  the  unscriptural  theory  of  man. 

But  what  does  our  Lord  mean  when  He  says  "the  king- 
dom of  the  heavens?"  The  answer  is  a  very  simple  one. 
The  kingdom  on  the  one  hand  was  rejected  by  Israel,  but 
on  the  other  hand.  God  gives  His  Word  to  the  Gentiles,  a 
fact  indicated  in  the  Old  Testament  prophetic  Word. 

The  mercy  and  grace  offered  to  Israel  is  to  go  forth  to 
the  Gentiles,  the  nations,  while  the  King  Himself  is  absent. 
This  is  indicated  in  the  first  parable  where  the 
sower  ivcut  out,  which  stands  for  the  fact  of  His  going 
forth  into  the  field,  which  is  the  world.  So  that  which  is 
extended  to  the  Gentiles  and  that  in  which  the  name  of 
Christ  is  confessed  is  now  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens,  and 
of  this  development  of  what  He  the  Lord  from  heaven 
brought  and  left  in  the  earth,  our  Lord  speaks  in  these 
parables.  In  one  word  "the  kingdom  of  the  heavens"  in 
Matthew  is  equivalent   wiUi   "Christendom."       It  includes 


264 

the  whole  sphere  of  Christian  profession  saved  and  un- 
saved, so-called  Romanists  and  Protestants,  all  who  are 
naming  the  name  of  Christ.  Therefore  the  church  is  not 
the  kingdom  of  the  heavens,  though  the  church  is  in  the 
kingdom  of  the  heavens. 

The  Lord  teaches  in  the  seven  parables  how  matters  will 
go  in  the  earth  while  He  is  not  here,  and  what  men  will  do 
with  that  which  He  brought  from  heaven  and  left  in  the 
hands  of  men. 

Before  we  take  up  the  parables  separately  we  must  con- 
sider their  general  character.  The  seven  parables  are  first 
divided  into  four  and  three.  The  first  four  He  speaks 
before  the  multitudes.  Then  after  He  dismissed  the  crowds, 
He  went  into  the  house  and  in  the  presence  of  the  disciples 
He  utters  the  three  last  parables.  These  three  last  ones, 
the  treasure  hid  in  the  field,  the  pearl  of  great  price  and  the 
dragnet,  have  a  deeper  spiritual  meaning  than  the  first.  The 
first  two  parables  our  Lord  explains  Himself  to  His  dis- 
ciples ;  the  other  five  He  leaves  unexplained. 

They  may  also  be  divided  in  the  following  way  by  twos : 

1.  The  sower  who  went  out  to  sow. 

2.  The  enemy  sowing  tares,  the  spurious  seed. 

These  refer  in  part  to  the  beginning  of  the  king^dom  of 
the  heavens  in  the  hands  of  men,  however  the  conditions 
pictured  here  last  to  the  end,  the  time  of  the  harvest. 

3.  The  parable  of  the  mustard  seed. 

4.  The  parable  of  the  leaven. 

These  fortell  the  external  and  internal  development  of 


265 

the  kingdom  of  the  heavens,  the  progress  is  described  and 
it  is  an  unnatural  and  evil  progress. 

5.  The  parable  of  the  treasure  hid  in  the  field. 

6.  The  parable  of  the  one  pearl. 

These  stand  for  the  two  mysteries  of  the  kingdom,  God's 
earthly  people  hid  in  ihe  field,  the  church  the  one  pearl  for 
which  He  has  given  all.  First  the  pearl  is  taken,  then  the 
treasure  is  lifted  in  the  field. 

7.  The  parable  of  the  dragnet. 

It  stands  isolated,  and  refers  to  the  end  of  the  kingdom 
of  the  heavens  in  its  mystery  form. 

Still  another  way  of  looking  at  them  would  be  to  com- 
pare them  with  the  seven  church  messages  in  Rev.  ii  and  iii. 
Here  the  Lord  speaks  again,  and  this  speaking  is  from  the 
glory.  In  the  seven  messages  we  learn  the  beginning,  the 
progress  and  the  end  of  this  present  Christian  age.  It  is 
the  history  of  Christendom,  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens. 

1.  The  parable  of  the  sower — Ephcsus.  The  apostolic 
age.     The  beginning  with   failure — leaving  the  first  love. 

2.  The  parable  of  the  evil  seed — Sinyrna,  meaning  bit- 
terness.    The  enemy  revealed. 

3.  The  parable  of  the  mustard  seed — Pc)\s.amos — meaning 
high  tower  and  twice  married.  The  professing  church  be- 
comes big,  a  state  institutiou  under  Constantine  the  Great. 
The  big  tree  and  the  unclean  birds  (nations)  find  shelter 
there. 

4.  The  parable  of  the  leaven — TJiyafira — the  one  who 
sacrifices.  Rome  and  her  abomination.     The  woman  Jeze- 


266 


bel,  the  harlot,  corresponds  to  the  woman  in  the  parable  of 
the  leaven. 

5.  The  parable  of  the  treasure  hid — Sardis — the  refor- 
mation age — having  a  name  to  live,  but  being  dead  and  a 
remnant  there.  Israel,  dead  but  belonging  to  Him  who  has 
purchased  the  field. 

6.  The  parable  of  the  Pearl — Philadelphia.  The  church, 
the  one  pearl.  The  one  body  of  Christ  and  the  removal  of 
the  church  to  be  with  Him. 

7.  The  parable  of  the  dragnet — Laodicea — Judgment. 
I  will  spue  thee  out  of  my  mouth. 

We  do  not  claim  to  teach  all  this  exhaustively.  That 
would  take  many  months,  but  we  give  these  that  each  reader 
may  have  hints  in  what  way  to  search. 

We  add  but  one  more  fact  to  these  introductory  remarks 
to  the  study  of  the  different  parables.  The  key  for  their 
right  interpretation  is  in  themselves  as  well  as  in  the  scrip- 
tures. The  sower  in  the  first  parable  and  in  the  second  is 
the  Son  of  Man.  What  He  sows  is  the  wheat,  that  which 
stands  throughout  the  scriptures  for  purity,  for  Christ  him- 
self. The  Word  He  is  Himself  and  the  corn  of  wheat; 
the  good  seed  are  the  sons  of  the  kingdom.  The  field  is 
the  world.  The  enemy  is  the  Devil.  The  man  in  the  sixth 
parable  who  buys  the  field  (the  world)  is  the  same  Son  of 
Man  and  the  merchantman  who  sells  all  He  has  to  pur- 
chase the  one  pearl  He  desires  is  the  same  person  as  the 
Sower.  It  is  nonsense  to  make  out  of  the  merchantman 
and  out  of  the  man  who  buvs  the  field  the  sinner.       That 


267 

would  mean  that  the  sinner  has  something  to  give.  He  has 
not.  And  the  fieUl,  meaning  the  world,  it  would  mean  the 
sinner  is  to  buy  the  world. 

The  three  measures  of  meal  of  course  come  from  the 
wheat,  they  always  stand  for  that  which  is  good.  Leaven, 
however,  nczrr  means  anything  good,  but  it  always  stands 
for  evil.  The  closer  study  of  these  parables,  which  we  now 
take  up  will  bring  out  all  this  more  fully: 

After  having  studied  this  important  chapter  in  a  general 
way,  we  shall  now  look  at  the  seven  parables  separately  and 
to  learn  from  them  the  development  of  the  Kingdom  of  the 
Heavens  in  its  mystery  form.  Throughout  our  study  the 
dispensational  aspect  of  the  parables  is  to  be  kept  strongly 
in  the  foreground,  for  it  is  dispensational  truth  which  is 
tausdit  here. 

/he  first  parable  is  the  well-known  one  of  the  sower. 
"And  he  spoke  to  them  many  things  in  parables,  saying, 
Behold  the  sower  went  out  to  sow."  Two  thing  attract 
our  attention  in  this  opening  sentence  of  the  parable.  We 
notice  first  that  our  Lord  speaks  of  the  sower,  not  of  a 
sower,  and  when  He  expounds  the  parable  later  to  His  dis- 
ciples He  does  not  tell  them  who  this  sower  is,  but  He  only 
speaks  of  what  happened  to  the  seed  He  sowed.  The  second 
thing  we  mention  is  that  the  sower  went  out. 

The  personality  of  the  sower  is  not  difficult  to  clear  up, 
for  in  explaining  the  second  parable  our  Lord  says :  "He 
that  soweth  the  good  seed  is  the  Son  of  Man."  Our  Lord 
Himself  is  the  Sower.  He  came  with  the  precious  seed,  the 
fine  wheat,  and  of  course  He  himself  is  the  corn  of  wheat. 


268 


The  seed  He  sows  can  only  bring  forth  as  it  falls  upon 
good  ground,  and  in  the  ground  it  dies,  and  out  of  death 
comes  the  fruit.  All  this  is  indicated  here.  We  would, 
however,  take  this  parable  in  the  first  sense  to  apply  to  the 
days  of  our  Lord  in  the  earth.  In  a  wider  sense  it  must  be 
taken  as  typical  of  the  entire  age,  in  which  He  is  absent 
from  the  earth  and  the  Kingdom  is  in  the  hands  of  men. 
The  sowing  He  began  continues  still,  and  the  result  of  sow- 
ing is  likewise  the  same. 

And  what  is  the  significance  that  it  is  written  that  the 
sower  went  out  to  sow?  It  shows  the  beginning  of  some- 
thing new ;  a  new  work  which  the  Lord  now  takes  up. 
Israel  had  failed  to  yield  fruit.  Israel  was  the  vineyard  of 
Isaiah  v.  "He  fenced  it  in,  and  gathered  out  the  stones 
thereof,  and  planted  it  with  the  choicest  vines,  and  built  a 
tower  in  the  midst  of  it,  and  also  made  a  wine  press  therein ; 
and  He  looked  that  it  should  bring  forth  grapes,  and  it 
brought  forth  wild  grapes  .  ,  .  and  now  go  to ;  I  will 
tell  you  what  I  will  do  to  my  vineyard :  I  will  take  away  the 
hedge  thereof,  and  it  shall  be  eaten  up ;  and  break  down  the 
wall  thereof,  and  it  shall  be  trodden  down."  (Is.  Y:2-y.) 
Israel  is  the  fig  tree  of  the  parable;  the  Lord  came  and 
found  no  fruit.  The  vineyard  is  laid  waste  and  the  fig  tree 
stands  barren.  It  is  true,  it  will  not  be  always  so.  The  vine 
and  the  fig  tree  will  bring  fruit  at  last,  but  in  the  meantime, 
Avhile  Israel  is  unfruitful,  the  sower  has  gone  out  to  sow. 
Where  has  he  gone?  Where  does  the  sower  generally  de- 
posit the  seed?  In  the  field.  What  is  the  field?  The  di- 
vine interpreter   gives  us  the  answer.     "The  field   is  the 


269 


world."  So  we  have  here  the  fact  established  that  after 
Israel  failed  the  Word  is  to  go  forth  into  the  wide  world, 
"beginning  in  Jerusalem  unto  Samaria  and  the  uttermost 
parts  of  the  earth." 

The  question  comes  at  once,  what  will  be  the  result? 
Will  all  the  world  receive  it  and  every  part  of  the  entire 
field  be  cultivated  ?  Will  the  whole  field  be  reached  by  the 
seed  and  the  seed  spring  up  and  bear  an  abundant  harvest? 
W' ill  not  a  single  grain  be  lost  ?  The  parable  has  this  very 
thought  as  its  centre.  What  becomes  of  the  seed? 

What  we  learn  from  the  parable  is  far  from  teaching  us 
the  optimistic  dream  of  Christendom  of  world  conversion, 
so  often  founded  upon  a  wrong  application  of  these  par- 
ables. The  parable  proves  that  it  will  not  be  a  universal 
acceptance  of  the  W'ord  which  we  can  look  for  in  this  age ; 
only  the  fourth  part  of  the  seed  sown  brings  forth  fruit, 
and  there  is  again  a  marked  diflference  in  the  quantity  of 
fruit  in  that  fourth  part.  Our  Lord  then  impresses  here  in 
this  simple  parable  the  fact,  whicli  later  the  Holy  Spirit  re- 
peats, the  age  in  which  He  is  absent  and  in  which  His 
Word  is  preached  and  His  grace  is  offered,  that  Word  will 
be  in  greater  part  rejected,  and  only  a  fourth  part  yields 
the  fruit ;  the  rest  is  failure. 

It  is  very  significant  that  we  meet  this  important  dispen- 
sational  fact  at  the  very  threshold  of  Matthew  xiii.  Alas ! 
it  has  not  been  believed  by  the  great  mass  of  professing 
Christians.  To  speak  of  failure  in  this  age  and  deny  a 
soon  coming  world  conversion  is  frowned  u]ion  as  a  miser- 
able,  unbelieving  pessimism.      One   is   sometimes  even   ac- 


270 


cused  of  disbelieving  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  con- 
vert the  whole  world,  as  if  the  Holy  Spirit  had  been  sent 
down   from  heaven   for  world  conversion. 

But  we  shall  now  read  what  came  from  the  lips  of  our 
Lord  in  this  parable. 

"Behold  the  sower  went  out  to  sow ;  and  as  he  sowed, 
some  grains  fell  along  the  way,  and  the  birds  came  and  de- 
voured them ;  and  others  fell  upon  the  rocky  places  where 
they  had  not  much  earth,  and  immediately  they  sprang  up 
out  of  the  ground,  because  of  not  having  any  depths  of  earth, 
but  when  the  sun  rose  they  were  burned  up,  and  because  of 
not  having  any  root  were  dried  up ;  and  others  fell  upon  the 
thorns,  and  the  thorns  grew  up  and  choked  them ;  and  others 
fell  upon  the  good  ground,  and  produced  fruit,  one  a  hun- 
dred, one  sixty,  and  one  thirty.  He  that  has  ears  let  him 
hear"  (verses  5-9).  We  need  not  to  guess  the  meaning  of 
this  parable  for  the  Lord  Himself  tells  His  disciples  what 
He  meant  by  the  birds  and  the  rocky  place  and  the  thorns. 
And  so  we  ::hall  take  His  own  explanation  with  such  com- 
ments which  may  be  helpful  for  a  fuller  understanding. 

"The  disciples  came  up  to  Him  and  said,  Why  speakest 
thou  to  them  in  parables?"  This  question  came  at  once 
after  He  had  finished  this  first  parable.  They  had  never 
heard  a  parable  from  His  lips.  What  He  had  spoken  be- 
fore to  the  people  and  their  leaders  had  been  in  simple 
words,  easily  to  be  understood  by  every  one,  and  now  for 
the  first  time  He  spoke  something  which  they  could  not 
comprehend.    It  was  veiled.    The  answer  which  our  Lord 


271 


gives  is  of  great  solemnity,  as  it  announces  the  judgment 
upon  Israel. 

"And  He  answering  said  to  them,  Because  to  you  it  is 
given  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heav- 
ens, but  to  them  it  is  not  given."  The  disciples,  repre- 
senting believers,  were  to  understand  the  mysteries  coming 
in  now  while  die  nation  who  had  refused  the  light  would 
be  in  darkness.  "For  whosoever  has,  to  him  shall  be  given, 
and  he  shall  be  caused  to  be  in  abundance.  But  he  who  has 
not,  even  what  he  has  shall  be  taken  away  from  him."  The 
disciples  had  received  the  Lord  and  He  gave  them  more, 
while  Israel  had  not,  they  rejected  Christ  and  so  what  they 
had  still  as  His  earthly  people  was  to  be  taken  away  from 
them.  But  this  two-edged  sword  cuts  in  another  way.  The 
principle  our  Lord  here  utters  is  still  active.  The  true  be- 
lievers composing  the  church  have,  and  by  and  by  we  shall 
be  caused  to  be  in  abundance,  while  an  apostate  Christen- 
dom which  has  not  shall  lose  even  what  it  boasts  to  have. 

"For  this  cause,"  our  Lord  continues,  "I  speak  to  them 
in  parables,  because  seeing  they  do  not  see,  and  hearing 
they  do  not  hear  nor  understand ;  and  in  them  is  filled  up 
the  prophecy  of  Esaias,  which  says.  Hearing  ye  shall  hear 
and  shall  not  understand,  and  beholding  ye  shall  behold 
and  not  see ;  for  the  heart  of  this  people  has  grown  fat.  and 
they  have  heard  heavily  with  their  ears,  and  they  have 
closed  their  eyes  as  asleep,  lest  they  should  sec  with  the 
eyes,  and  hear  with  the  ears,  and  understand  with  tlic  heart, 
and  should  be  converted,  and  I  should  heal  tliem."  This 
passage  is  a  quotation  from  Isaiah  vi  :9-io.    Isaiah  saw  in  a 


2^2 


vision  Jehovah  sitting  upon  a  throne,  and  He  spoke  these 
words  to  the  prophet.  If  we  turn  to  the  xii.  chapter  in  the 
Gospel  of  John  we  find  these  words  quoted  again,  and  there 
is  the  significant  addition,  "These  things  said  Esaias,  when 
he  saw  His  glory,  and  spoke  of  Him"  (John  xii  140).  The 
Jehovah  Isaiah  saw  upon  His  throne  was  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Once  more  do  we  read  the  same  words  brought  to 
remembrance  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  the  last  chapter  of 
Acts,  when  Israel's  apostasy  and  unbelief  is  fully  estab- 
lished, Paul  speaks  them  to  the  assembled  Jews  and  adds, 
"Be  it  known  therefore  unto  you  that  the  salvation  of  God 
is  sent  unto  the  Gentiles  and  they  will  hear." 

And  now  after  our  Lord  declares  them  blessed  on  account 
of  what  they  see  and  hear,  He  explains  the  parable  Himself. 

"Ye,  therefore,  hear  the  parable  of  the  sower.  From 
every  one  who  hears  the  word  of  the  Kingdom  and  does  not 
understand  it,  the  wicked  one  comes  and  catches  away 
what  was  sown  in  his  heart ;  this  is  he  that  is  sown  at  the 
wayside"  (v,  18-19). 

How  easy  is  it  then  understood.  The  wayside  is  hard 
and  trodden  down  by  feet,  there  the  seed  fell  and  birds 
were  ready  to  snatch  it  up  and  devour  it. 

A  hearer  or  a  class  of  hearers  is  given  here  who  do  not 
understand  the  Word.  But  is  it  the  question  of  mental  ca- 
pacity of  an  intellectual  understanding?  Certainly  not.  The 
Lord  says  the  word  was  "sown  in  the  heart;"  it  had  di- 
rected itself  to  the  conscience  and  could  either  be  accepted 
or  rejected.  But  the  heart  would  not  have  it  and  turned 
against    it;    "and    does    not    understand    it,"    means    "he 


would  not  understand  or  receive  it."  No  sooner  is  this  the 
case  and  the  seed  has  fallen  upon  such  a  ground,  a  hard 
heart  like  the  wayside,  then  the  birds  come  and  devour  the 
seed.  The  birds  represent  the  wicked  one.  He  is  present 
with  his  agencies  and  busy  to  take  up  whatever  was 
given  and  rejected.  Once  more  do  we  read  in  this  chapter 
of  birds ;  it  is  in  the  third  parable,  that  of  the  mustard 
seed.  The  birds  there  mean  nothing  good  but  that  which 
is  evil,  like  in  the  first  parable. 

"But  he  that  is  sown  on  the  rocky  places — this  is  he 
that  hears  the  Word  and  immediately  receives  it  with  joy, 
but  has  no  root  in  liimself,  but  is  for  a  time  only;  and 
when  tribulation  happens  on  account  of  the  Word,  he  is 
immediately  oflFended"   (vv.  20-21). 

The  rocky  ground  is  lightly  covered  with  earth.  There 
is  a  sudden  springing  up,  an  enthusiastic  reception  one 
might  say,  which  pushes  itself  along.  But  the  sun  rises 
higher,  the  heat  is  felt,  and  there  is  no  resistance,  no 
life  to  combat  these  conditions;  the  delicate  thing  drops 
over  and  is  burned  up.  It  had  no  roots.  This  little  earth 
on  top  of  the  rock  may  well  represent  the  natural  heart  of 
man  as  the  way  trodden  by  men  represents  it.  Only  here 
is  the  brightest  side  of  the  flesh,  if  one  can  speak  of  it  in 
such  a  way.  But  behind  that  little  earth  is  the  solid  rock, 
which  no  plow  has  broken  and  where  no  life  is  present. 
How  large  is  this  class?  It  is  the  great  class  of  professing 
Christians.  They  arc  covering  over  this  old,  desperately 
wicked  heart  with  a  little  earth.  They  put  on  the  form  of 
Godliness,  while  they  know  nothing  of  its  power.     There 


274 

is  also  a  great  deal  of  enthusiasm,  a  springing  up  of  the  seed ; 
it  looks  almost  as  if  there  is  to  be  a  great  result — but  alas ! 
there  is  only  the  name  to  live,  but  death  is  behind  it. 

"When  the  sun  rose  they  were  burned  up."  May  we 
not  apply  this  word  also  dispensationally  ?  The  rocky  ground 
sowers  will  flourish,  and  they  flourish  and  increase  now 
with  their  empty  profession  and  their  enthusiastic  show  at 
religiousness  and  world  improvement.  But  the  sun  will 
rise,  tribulation  will  come.  The  great  tribulation  and  the 
judgments,  which  precede  the  rising  of  the  Sun  of  Right- 
eousness will  burn  them  up  and  sweep  them  away. 

"And  he  that  is  sown  among  the  thorns,  this  is  he  who 
hears  the  Word,  and  the  anxious  care  of  this  life  and  the 
deceit  of  riches  choke  the  Word  and  he  becomes  unfruit- 
ful" (verse  22). 

This  is  so  plain  that  it  needs  hardly  any  comment  at  all. 
"The  deceit  of  riches"  hinder  the  growth  of  the  Word.  It 
becomes  choked  and  there  is  no  fruit.  How  true  this  is  of 
the  present  day  we  all  know.  The  world,  the  pleasures  of 
the  earth,  cares  and  anxiety  in  getting  as  much  as  possible 
of  these  phantom  things  seems  to  control  more  and 
more  the  outwardly  professing  masses.  All  that  is  of  God 
becomes  choked. 

Thus  we  see  in  these  three  classes,  in  which  the  seed 
perishes  and  brings  no  fruit,  the  Devil,  the  Flesh  and  the 
World  represented.  The  Devil  snatches  up  and  devours, 
the  Flesh  attempts  and  fails,  the  World  surrounds  and 
chokes.  And  yet  how  much  else  might  be  said  in  connec- 
tion with  these  three  classes !    No  human  being  could  have 


275 

spoken  such  a  simple  parable  with  such  a  deep  and  far- 
reaching  meaning.  The  Revealer  of  Secrets  speaks,  who 
knows  the  hidden  things. 

"But  he  that  is  sown  upon  the  good  ground,  this  is  he 
who  hears  and  understands  the  Word,  who  bears  fruit  also 
and  produces  one  a  hundred,  one  sixty,  and  one  thirty'' 
(verse  23).  Hearing,  understanding,  which  is  in  faith 
and  through  faith,  fruitbearing  and  producing,  this  is  the 
process  of  the  seed  in  the  good  ground,  a  receptive  heart 
prepared  by  the  Grace  of  God. 

We  come  now  to  the  second  parable,  in  which  we  find 
the  Kingdom  of  the  heavens  mentioned.  It  was  not  men- 
tioned in  connection  with  the  first  parable  of  the  sower. 
"Another  parable  set  He  before  them,  saying.  The  King- 
dom of  the  heavens  has  become  like  a  man  sowing  good 
seed  in  his  field  ;  but  while  men  slept  his  enemy  came  and 
sowed  darnel  amongst  the  wheat  and  went  away.  But 
when  the  blade  shot  up  and  produced  fruit  then  appeared 
the  darnel  also.  And  the  bondmen  -of  the  householder 
came  up  and  said  to  him.  Sir,  hast  thou  not  sown  good  seed 
in  thy  field  ?  Whence  then  has  it  darnel  ?  And  he  said  to 
them,  A  man  that  is  an  enemy  has  done  this.  And  the 
bondmen  said  to  him.  Wilt  thou  then  that  we  go  and 
gather  it  up?  But  he  said.  No;  lest  in  the  gathering  the 
darnel  ye  should  root  up  the  wheat  with  it.  SufTer  both  to 
grow  together  unto  the  harvest,  and  in  time  of  the  harvest 
I  will  say  to  the  harvestmen,  Gather  first  the  darnel,  and 
bind  it  into  bundles  to  burn  it ;  but  the  wheat  bring  to- 
gether into  my  granary"   (verses  24-30).     Again  we  are 


276 


not  left  to  seek  for  an  interpretation.  After  he  had  spoken 
two  other  parables  we  read  that  our  Lord  in  answer  to  His 
disciples'  question  tells  them  what  He  meant  by  the  parable. 
To  this  perfect  interpretation  by  the  divine  speaker  we 
have  to  turn  to  find  the  correct  and  far  reaching  meaning 
of  this  second  parable.  "Then,  having  dismissed  the 
crowds,  He  went  into  the  house ;  and  His  disciples  came  to 
Him,  saying,  Expound  to  us  the  parable  of  the  darnel  of 
the  field.  But  He  answering  said,  He  that  sows  the  good 
seed  is  the  Son  of  Man,  and  the  field  is  the  world  and  the 
good  seed  are  the  Sons  of  the  Kingdom,  but  the  darnel  are 
the  sons  of  the  evil  one ;  and  the  enemy  who  has  sowed  it 
is  the  devil,  and  the  harvest  is  the  completion  of  the  age, 
and  the  harvestmen  are  angels"  (verses  36-39). 

The  connection  with  the  first  parable  is  clear.  The  same 
sower  is  in  the  beginning  of  the  parable  before  us,  and  the 
seed  is  deposited  in  the  field,  which  is  the  world.  But  our 
Lord  says,  "the  good  seed,  these  are  the  Sons  of  the  King- 
dom." This  can  mean  only  one  thing,  namely,  that  the 
good  seed  sown  and  fallen  into  a  good  ground,  as  we  saw 
in  the  first  parable,  brings  forth  fruit,  and  the  Word  of  the 
Kingdom  produces  the  Sons  of  the  Kingdom.  Like  begets 
like ;  the  fruit  is  according  to  the  seed.  However,  the 
leading  thought  in  this  parable  is  the  enemy  and  his  evil 
work.  It  is  a  work  of  spite,  as  it  is  yet  quite  often  practiced 
in  oriental  countries.  The  enemy  watches  till  his  hated 
neighbor  has  deposited  his  seed  into  the  field,  then  he  goes 
to  work  and  during  the  night,  while  men  sleep,  and  begins  to 
sow  the  bad  seed  of  some  weed.    Not  till  the  seed  springs 


^77 

up  and  grows  docs  the  unsuspecting  victim  see  the  work  of 
the  enemy.  The  enemy,  our  Lord  says,  is  the  devil.  As 
from  the  Word  of  the  Kingdom  the  Sons  of  the  Kingdom 
spring  forth,  so  from  the  evil  seed  sown  by  the  devil  come 
the  sons  of  the  evil  one. 

It  is  important  to  notice  the  time  when  the  enemy  did 
this  and  the  manner  in  which  he  attempts  to  counteract  the 
work  of  the  Sower,  the  Son  of  Man. 

In  regard  to  the  time,  we  have  two  facts  to  consider. 
The  first  is:  It  was  immediately  after  the  Sower  had  de- 
posited the  good  seed ;  and  the  second  fact :  It  was  "while 
men  slept."  No  sooner  had  our  Lord  brought  the  truth, 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  had  been  given,  than  the  enemy  began 
its  work.  In  the  days  of  the  Apostle  Paul  the  work  which 
the  enemy  had  done  became  manifest,  and  the  evil  seed, 
which  at  the  end  of  this  age  is  full  grown,  is  easily  seen 
springing  up  in  the  beginning  of  the  age.  The  mystery  of 
iniquity  began  its  work  then,  and  continues  throughout  the 
age  till  the  end  is  reached,  when  it  is  fully  developed. 

It  was  while  men  slept  that  tlie  enemy  did  it.  Not  the 
Sower  slept,  He  neither  sleeps  nor  slumbers,  but  the  men 
slept.  Such  an  un watchful  condition  soon  developed  in 
the  beginning  of  the  age.  The  first  love  was  soon  g^ven 
up,  and  then  the  enemy  did  his  work. 

The  manner  was  by  putting  a  counterfeit  seed  in  the 
field.  The  darnel  looks  in  its  seed  like  the  wheat.  When 
it  springs  up  it  cannot  be  distinguished  from  the  wheat,  yet 
it  is  a  poisonous  weed.  The  darnel  represents  the  lie 
as  it  is  put  into  the  field  by  the  devil.     It  is  evil  doctrine. 


278 

a  counterfeit  of  the  faith  once  and  for  all  delivered  linto  the 
saints.  The  denial  of  the  Deity  of  our  Lord,  the  denial  of 
the  resurrection  and  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible  belong  to 
this  darnel  seed,  which  makes  itself  felt  in  the  very  begin- 
ning of  this  Christian  age. 

-  In  a  certain  sense  this  process  still  continues.  Whenever 
^the  truth  is  proclaimed  and  the  Word  taught,  it  does  not 
take  long  before  the  enemy  comes  and  brings  the  counter- 
feit when  "men  sleep."  Another  strong  lesson  we  learn 
from  this  parable  is  the  character  of  this  entire  age.  It  is 
evil.  Satan  is,  the  god  of  this  age  till  the  end  of  the  age 
comes.  The  mixed  condition  of  good  seed  and  darnel 
seed,  Sons  of  the  Kingdom  and  sons  of  the  evil  one,  prevails 
to  the  very  end.  The  servants  of  the  bondmen  were  will- 
ing to  root  out  the  darnel  but  were  not  permitted  to  do  so. 
It  is  an  idle  dream,  which  many  hope  to  realize,  to  reform 
,the  virorld,  to  gather  out  obnoxious  evils,  to  banish  drunk- 
enness and  immorality,  to  purify  the  state  and  politics. 
Such  efforts  are  nowhere  taught  in  the  Word  of  God. 
Men,  under  Christian  profession,  take  such  work  upon 
themselves,  and  they  little  know  how  they  sin  and  dishonor 
Christ  with  it.  No,  error  and  its  fruits  will  continue  to 
grow  alongside  the  good  seed  and  its  precious  fruit  till  the 
time  of  the  harvest.  Before  we  follow  the  thought  of  the 
harvest  we  turn  our  attention  to  still  another  matter  in 
connection  with  the  first  part  of  this  parable. 

A  vital  error  has  been  committed  in  regard  to  the  place 
where  the  wheat  and  the  darnel  grow  together.  It  has 
been    said    to  us  "we    cannot   have    a    pure    church,    or 


279 

assembly,  for  the  Lord  Himself  has  said  that  the  evil  will 
always  be  with  us  and  that  we  are  not  to  put  them  out  who 
are  the  sons  of  the  evil  one."  This  was  said  and  is  said 
on  the  supposition  that  our  Lord  speaks  of  the  Church. 
However,  this  is  not  the  case.  The  church,  the  assembly, 
is  not  before  Him  at  all.  As  we  have  said  before  the  King- 
dom of  the  heavens  is  not  the  Church.  When  it  comes  to 
the  revelation  concerning  the  Church  we  hear  our  Lord 
say  that  evil  is  not  to  be  tolerated  in  the  assembly.  "If 
thy  brother  sin  against  thee  go,  reprove  him  between  thee 
and  him  alone.  If  he  hear  thee,  thou  hast  gained  thy 
brother.  But  if  he  do  not  hear,  take  with  thee  one  or  two 
besides  that  every  matter  may  stand  upon  the  word  of  two 
witnesses  or  of  three.  But  if  he  will  not  listen  to  them, 
tell  it  to  the  assembly  and  if  also  he  will  not  listen  to  the 
assembly,  let  him  be  to  thee  as  one  of  the  nations  and  a 
tax-gatherer"  (Chap.  xviii:i5-i7).  This  is  the  way  evil 
is  to  be  treated  in  the  assembly,  or,  as  we  generally  say, 
Church.  In  the  epistles  we  find  numerous  exhortations 
that  evil  doctrine  and  an  evil  walk  contrary  to  the  Gospel 
is  not  to  be  tolerated  in  an  assembly.  The  assembly  is  to 
judge  evil.  It  is  not  said  of  the  Church  "let  them  grow 
together." 

The  field  is  not  the  Church,  but  the  world,  and  it  is  in 
the  world  that  this  takes  place;  in  that  part  of  the  field 
where  the  good  seed  has  been  sown,  in  the  entire  sphere  of 
professing  Christendom. 

The  harvest  is  the  completion  of  the  age.  Our  author- 
ized   version    has    it    "world."       This    has    misled    many 


28o 


readers  of  the  Word.  The  end  of  this  world  is  a  good  ways 
off  yet.  The  end  of  the  age  in  which  we  live  is  drawing 
rapidly  to  a  close.  What  will  take  place  then?  Our  Lord 
says,  "As  then  the  darnel  is  gathered  and  is  burned  in  the 
fire,  thus  it  shall  be  in  the  completion  of  the  age.  The 
Son  of  Man  shall  send  His  angels  and  they  shall  gather  out 
of  His  Kingdom  all  offences,  and  those  that  practice  law- 
lessness, and  they  shall  cast  them  into  the  furnace  of  fire; 
there  shall  be  the  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  Then 
the  righteous  shall  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  Kingdom 
of  their  father.  He  that  hath  ears  let  him  hear"  (verses  40- 
43).  Before  in  the  parable  our  Lord  said:  "I  will  say  to 
the  harvestmen,  Gather  first  the  darnel,  and  bind  it  into 
bundles  to  burn  it;  but  the  wheat  bring  together  into  my 
granary." 

The  completion  of  the  age  is  the  same  as  in  Matthew 
xxiv,  when  the  disciples  asked  for  the  signs  of  His  coming 
and  the  completion  of  the  age.  The  ending  of  the  age  will 
be  Jewish ;  Jewish  history  resumed  in  the  events  which  fall 
into  the  last  week  of  Daniel,  the  seventieth  week.  Of 
this  ending  the  Lord  speaks.  The  angels  will  then  be  the 
harvestmen.  It  corresponds  to  what  we  read  in  Rev.  xiv: 
14-20.  "And  I  looked  and  behold  a  white  cloud,  and 
upon  the  cloud  one  sat  like  unto  the  Son  of  Man,  having 
upon  His  head  a  golden  crown,  a»d  in  His  hand  a  sharp 
sickle.  And  another  angel  came  out  of  the  temple,  crying 
with  a  loud  voice  to  him  that  sat  on  the  cloud,  Thrust  in 
thy  sickle  and  reap ;  for  the  time  is  come  for  thee  to  reap 
for  the  harvest  of  the  earth  is  ripe." 


28l 


Some  who  teach  the  unscriptural  theory,  that  the  church 
will  remain  in  the  earth  to  the  very  end  of  the  age  and 
pass  through  the  great  tribulation,  have  used  this  parable 
to  support  their  views.     We  repeat  the  parable  has  nothing 
to   do   with   the   Church.      When   our   Lord   speaks  of  the 
bundling  up  of  the  darnel  and  the  gathering  of  the  wheat 
into  the  granary,  He  did  not  teach  that  the  wheat  is  the 
Church  or  represents  the  Church,  and  that  the  gathering  in 
of  the  Church  is  to  be  His  last  act  in  this  age.    The  wheat, 
of  course,  is  the  good  seed,  the  good  seed  are  the  Sons  of 
the  Kingdom.     That  all  true  believers  are  the  good  seed 
and  as  such  Sons  of  the  Kingdom  none  would  doubt.    Yet, 
after  the  Church  is  removed   from  the  earth,  before  the 
completion   of   the   age.   as    foretold   in    prophecy,   begins, 
there  will  still  be  wheat  in  the  earth.     There  will  still  be 
sowing.     Indeed  it  wi'.l  then  be  "the  Word  of  the  King- 
dom" which  is  preached.       The  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom 
will  be  proclaimed  during  that  end  and  the  seed  will  spring 
up.     A  great  multitude  will  come  out  of  that  great  tribula- 
tion having  washed  their  robes  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb. 
This   multitude   will   be   gathered   in    the   time   when   the 
darnel     are    bundled     up,     preparatory    to    the    burning. 
The  wheat,  these  Sons  of  the  Kingdom,  will  be  gathered  into 
His  granary,  kept  and  preserved   for  the  Kingdom  to  be 
established  in  the  earth.     "Then  the  righteous  shall  shine 
forth  as  the  sun  in  the  Kingdom  of  their  Father."     This 
reminds  us  very  strongly  of  the  language  of  Matthew  xxv : 
34.     "Come  ye  blessed  of  My  Father,  inherit  the  Kingdom 
prepared   for   you   from   the    foundation   of   the   World." 


282 


These  words  are  not  addressed  to  the  church,  but  to  that 
rnultitude  come  out  of  all  nations  (Rev.  vii)  and  the  King- 
dom is  not  the  heavenly  glory  but  the  earthly  Kingdom. 
The  Church,  her  heavenly  calling  and  destination,  we 
repeat  again,  is  not  in  view  at  all  in  this  second  parable. 

Let  us  hold  fast  the  three  great  facts  the  parable  teaches. 
These  are,  as  we  have  seen,  the  following : 

1.  The  enemy,  the  devil,  began  his  work  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  age. 

2.  The  age  is  mixed,  good  and  evil  grow  together. 
This  condition  cannot  be  changed  throughout  the  age. 

3.  The  mixed  condition  will  cease  with  the  completion  of 
the  age.  The  Sons  of  the  Kingdom  will  inherit  the  King- 
dom.    The  darnel  after  being  bundled  up  are  burned  with 

'fire. 

The  next  two  parables  our  Lord  spake  to  reveal  still  more 
of  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  are  the 
parables  of  the  mustard  seed  and  of  the  leaven..  They  belong 
together.  We  shall  learn  in  the  exposition  of  these  two 
parables,  how  the  popular  interpretation  of  them  through 
the  leading  commentators  of  Christendom  has  turned 
everything  upside  down.  The  fact  is,  precisely  the  oppo- 
site our  Lord  meant  is  being  taught  by  teachers  in  evan- 
gelical Christendom.  The  fault  of  this  erroneous  interpre- 
tation springs  from  the  great  fundamental  error  that  the 
Lord  has  the  church  in  view  when  He  speaks  of  the  king- 
dom of  the  heavens,  and  that  the  church  is  that  kingdom. 
Therefore  it  is  taken  for  granted  by  this  exposition 
that  when  the  Lord  now  speaks  of  a  grain  of  mustard  seed, 


2S3 


which  becomes  a  great  tree  and  which  gives  shelter  to  the 
birds,  that  this  is  a  prophecy  relating  to  the  expansion  of 
the  church.  The  leaven  is  therefore  made  to  mean  the  gos- 
pel with  its  leavening  power.  All  this  is  radically  wrong. 
We  turn  to  the  parable  of  the  grain  of  mustard  seed  first. 

"Another  parable  set  He  before  them,  saying,  The  king- 
dom of  the  heavens  is  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed  which 
a  man  took  and  sowed  in  his  field,  which  is  less  indeed 
than  all  seeds,  but  when  it  is  grown  is  greater  than  herbs, 
and  becomes  a  tree,  so  that  the  birds  of  heaven  come  and 
roost  in  its  branches"  (verses  31-32). 

Here  we  have  the  outward  development  of  the  kingdom 
of  the  heavens  as  it  grows  and  expands,  in  an  unnatural 
way,  and  becomes  the  roosting  place  of  the  birds  of  hcai'cn. 
As  indicated  above,  the  almost  universal  comment  on  this 
mustard  seed  and  its  miraculous  growth,  as  it  is  termed, 
is  that  it  fully  declares  the  expansion  of  the  church,  and 
the  birds  of  heaven  are  interpreted  as  meaning  peoples  and 
nations,  who  find  shelter  in  the  church.  Growing  and  still 
growing,  the  mustard  tree  reaches  over  the  entire  earth, 
its  branches  spread  out  wider  and  wider,  and  soon  (so  they 
tell  us)  the  tree  will  have  covered  the  earth  as  the  waters 
cover  the  deep.  It  is  also  a  common  occurrence  that  some 
denominational  leader — a  bishop  or  an  elder — claims  the 
parable  for  his  denomination  and  illustrates  with  it  the 
phenomenal  growth  of  the  sect  to  which  he  belongs,  or 
claims  a  great  future  of  success.  Again,  the  history  of 
the  "church"  is  resorted  to  for  the  sake  of  showing  the 
fulfillment  of  this  parable  and  the  statistics  of  Christen- 


284 


dom,  so  many  millions  of  Protestants  (including  all  the  in- 
fidels, unsaved  masses  of  Germany,  England,  and  every 
other  "evangelical"  country)  so  many  more  now  than 
fifty  years  ago.  etc. 

If  the  Lord  had  meant  His  church  by  this  mustard 
seed,  w^hich  becomes  a  tree  and  the  roosting  place  of  birds, 
if  it  is  really  the  church,  which  is  His  body,  then  this 
parable  would  be  in  flagrant  contradiction  with  what  He 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  teach  elsewhere  concerning  the  church 
in  the  earth,  the  mission  and  the  future  of  the  church. 
The  greatest  clash  of  teaching  would  be  the  result. 

For  instance,  in  His  prayer  our  Lord  says  concerning 
His  own,  those  who  are  one  as  the  Father  and  Son  are  one : 
"They  are  not  of  the  world,  as  I  am  not  of  the  world" 
(John  xvii:i4).  The  church  then,  composed  of  all  true 
believers,  is  not  of  the  world  as  He  is  not  of  the 
world.  The  church  is  from  above,  as  every  believer  has  a 
life  which  is  from  above;  but  for  a  little  while  the  church 
is  in  the  world,  and  in  a  little  while  the  church  will  be 
above,  where  He  is  the  glorified  Head  of  His  body.  The 
mustard  seed  springing  up  in  the  field  (do  not  forget  the 
field  is  the  zvorld),  rooting  deeper  and  deeper  in  the  earth 
and  expanding  in  this  unnatural  way  affording  room  for 
birds,  is  the  picture  of  something  entirely  different.  It 
shows  us  a  system  which  is  rooted  in  the  earth  and  which 
aims  a  greatness  in  the  world,  expansion  over  the  earth. 
The  Lord  never  meant  His  church  to  be  rooted  and 
grounded  in  the  field,  the  world.  He  never  called  the 
church  to  assume  such  proportions  and  become  an  abnor- 


285 

mal  growth  in  the  earth.  Whatever  is  spoken  of  Christ  is 
spoken  of  the  church.  Suffering  and  glory,  after  lowH- 
ness,  followed  by  exaltation,  is  the  way  Christ  went;  it  is 
the  way  ordained  for  the  church.  She  is  to  be  lowly,  now 
suffering  with  Him,  rejected  and  disowned  by  the  world  as 
He  was,  never  to  reign  and  rule  now,  but  patiently  waiting 
with  Him  for  the  moment  when  He  is  manifested  and  then 
to  share  His  Throne  and  His  Glory.  The  calling  and  des- 
tiny of  the  church  is  heavenly.  Her  mission  is  to  shine 
out  Himself  and  testify  of  His  grace,  but  never  to  control 
and  overspread  the  world.  The  epistles  addressed  to  the 
church  make  this  sufficiently  clear. 

But  if  the.  mustard  seed  and  its  growth  does  not  mean 
the  church,  what  does  it  mean?  It  means  the  Kingdom  of 
the  heavens,  and  this  is,  as  we  have  seen  before,  professing 
Christendom.  At  once  the  parable  becomes  illuminated 
with  light.  Looked  upon  in  this  light,  in  full  harmony 
with  all  the  Lord  teaches  in  this  chapter,  all  is  easily  un- 
derstood. The  little  mustard  seed,  which  was  not  destined 
to  be  a  tree  but  only  a  shrub,  easily  taken  out  of  the  garden 
where  it  had  been  planted,  develops  against  its  nature  into 
a  tree.  That  which  came  from  Him,  the  Son  of  Man,  the 
Sower,  develops,  committed  into  the  hands  of  men,  into  an 
unnatural  thing — one  might  say,  a  monstrosity — for  such 
I!  mustard  tree  is.  This  unnatural  thing,  this  monstrosity, 
is  professing  Christendom  as  a  system  of  the  world,  profes- 
sing Christ,  without  possessing  Him  and  His  Spirit. 

Here  we  have  to  call  attention  to  the  third  message  to  the 
churches  in  Revelation,  the  second  chapter.  That  is  the  mes- 


286 


sage  to  Pergamos,  typifying  the  age  of  the  history  of  Chris- 
tendom, beginning  with  Constantine  the  Great  in  the  fourth 
century.  The  suffering  church  was  made  a  state  church. 
The  mustard  seed  suddenly  became  the  tree,  and  ever  since 
the  professing  church  has  dehghted  in  looking  upon  herself 
as  a  big  expanding  tree.  But  notice  the  perfect  agreement — • 
the  third  parable  and  the  third  church  message. 

The  birds  which  roost  in  that  tree  would  mean, 
if  the  parable  applies  to  the  church,  converted  sinners.  Do 
birds  ever  represent  clean  persons?  We  need  not  go  out- 
side of  the  chapter  to  answer  this.  The  birds  which  fell 
upon  the  seed  which  had  fallen  by  the  wayside  were  instru- 
ments of  Satan.  Birds  of  heaven,  or  fowls,  never  mean 
anything  good  in  Scripture.  Abraham  stood  in  the  midst 
of  the  pieces  of  the  sacrifices  and  drove  away  the  fowls 
which  were  ready  to  fall  upon  the  pieces  (Gen.  xv.).  The 
animals  divided  there  represent  Christ  and  the  fowls  noth- 
ing good.  Birds  in  this  parable  mean  unsaved,  uncon- 
verted people  and  nations  who  flock  for  selfish  motives  to 
the  tree,  the  outward  form  of  Christendom,  and  find  shelter 
there.     But  they  defile  the  tree. 

At  last  the  tree  will  be  full  grown.  Of  the  full  grown 
tree  it  is  said,  "Great  Babylon  has  become  the  habitation 
(roosting  place)  of  demons,  and  a  hold  of  every  unclean 
spirit,  and  a  hold  of  every  unclean  and  hated  bird"  (Rev. 
xviii  :2). 

But  let  us  not  forget  there  is  a  tree  which  is  to  grow  up 
and  spread  its  branches,  taking  sap  out  of  the  root,  over 


28; 

the  whole  earth.  This  tree  is  Israel— the  good  olive  tree 
with  its  indestructible  root.  Some  of  the  branches  are  now 
broken  off  and  lie  upon  the  ground.  Romans  xi,  how- 
ever, assures  us  that  God  is  able  to  graft  them  in  again. 
Yet,  before  this  olive  tree  with  its  holy  root,  this 
olive  tree  with  its  long  promised  future,  the  cov- 
enant made  with  an  oath,  stands  highminded.  boast- 
ing Christendom,  boasting  itself  against  the  branches 
and  claiming  to  be  the  tree  to  overspread  the  earth  and 
thus  attending  to  Israel's  earthly  calling.  Alas !  the 
warning  is  cast  into  the  winds,  "if  God  spared  not  the 
natural  branches  take  heed  lest  He  spare  not  thee." 
What  a  fall  it  will  be  when  at  last  that  tree,  the  monstrous 
tree,  falls  and  is  destroyed  forever  root  and  all! 

Hut  we  must  now  turn  our  attention  to  the  next  parable, 
the  parable  of  the  leaven.  "He  spoke  another  parable  to 
them  :  The  kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  like  leaven,  which  a 
woman  took  and  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal  until  it  had 
been  all  leavened"  (verse  33).  It  is,  perhaps,  unneces- 
sary to  state  the  universal  explanation  of  the  parable  of 
the  leaven.  All  the  leading  commentators  of  the  Bible 
have  accepted  it,  and  it  is  taught  throughout  Christendom. 
1  lowever,  we  must  refer  to  it  briefly.  The  leaven  is  taken 
to  mean  the  Gospel  and  its  power.  The  woman  represents 
the  church.  The  woman  takes  the  leaven  and  puts  it  into 
three  measures  of  meal,  which,  according  to  this  general 
exegesis  represents  humanity,  the  entire  human  family. 
Here  the  leaven  does,  in  a  hidden  manner,  its  work  in  an 


288 


assimilating    process    in    penetrating    the    whole    mass    of 
humanity.* 

That  the  parable  could  mean  anything  but  that,  which 
we  have  briefly  outlined,  seems  to  the  great  majority  of 
teachers  and  preachers  of  Christendom  next  to  an  impos- 
sible thing.  It  is  such  a  general  accepted  view  that  but 
few  can  tear  themselves  loose  from  it,  and  see  the  true 
teaching  our  Lord  gives  in  this  fourth  parable.  One  hears 
so  continually  statements  about  the  Gospel  leaven  and 
prayer  that  the  "good"  leaven  may  do  its  work,  etc.,  that 
another  explanation  of  this  parable  puts  one  at  odds  with 
the  bulk  of  Christian  believers.  Indeed,  this  little  parable 
contained  in  a  little  verse  is  apt  to  revolutionize  the  con- 
ception of  many  truths  revealed  in  the  Word  of  God.  If 
we  then  approach  this  parable  with  a  candid  mind,  laying 
aside  any  prejudice  and  preconceived  ideas  and  are  willing 
to  know  and  follow  the  truth  at  any  cost,  we  shall  certainly 
find  the  truth  and  with  it  great  joy  and  peace.  If  it  re- 
volutionizes our  views  it  will  only  put  us  right,  for  whoso- 
ever follows  the  accepted  teachings  of  men  is  generally  not 
right. 

If  then  the  leaven  means  the  Gospel,  and  the  woman  the 


*Thus  writes  P.  Lange,  often  called  "the  Prince  among  Com- 
mentators." "The  woman  is  an  apt  figure  of  the  church.  Leaven,  a 
substance  kindred,  yet  quite  opposed  to  meal,  having  the  power  of 
transforming  and  preserving  it,  and  converting  it  into  bread,  thus 
representing  the  divine  in  its  relation  to,  and  influence  upon,  our 
natural  life.  One  of  the  main  points  of  the  parable  is  the  hiding  or 
the  mixing  of  the  leaven  in  the  three  measures  of  meal.  This  refers 
to  the  great  visible  church,  in  which  the  living  Gospel  seems,  as  it 
were,  hidden  and  lost." 


289 

church,  and  the  three  measures  of  meal  humanity,  the 
Lord  would  teach  that  the  Gospel,  through  the  instru- 
mentality of  the  church,  is  to  permeate  humanity,  and 
that  the  world  is  to  be  converted  by  the  assimilating  power 
of  the  Gospel  in  penetrating  the  whole  mass  of  humanity. 
Such,  of  course,  is  the  belief,  the  unscriptural  belief,  of 
Ghristendom.  But  if  the  Lord  teaches  any  such  doctrine 
in  this  parable  He  manifestly  contradicts  Himself,  a  thing 
impossible  with  Him,  who  is  infallible.  We  have  seen  in 
the  second  parable  that  the  wheat  and  the  tares  grow  to- 
gether until  the  time  of  the  harvest.  This  excludes  the 
thought  of  world  conversion  in  this  age.  This  age,  as  we 
have  seen,  is  a  mixed  one,  and  these  conditions  prevail  to 
the  end  of  it.  If  our  Lord  meant  the  leaven  to  permeate 
the  whole  lump  of  humanity  then  He  teaches  something 
entirely  different  from  what  Hei  taught  in  the  second 
parable. 

But  let  us  turn  our  attention  to  the  word  "leaven." 
We  should  not  forget  that  our  Lord  as  the  teacher,  as 
Nicodemus  called  Him,  come  from  God,  was  according  to 
the  flesh  the  Son  of  David  and  the  Son  of  Abraham. 
These  to  whom  He  speaks  were  Jews.  Now  the  hearers 
of  the  parable  certainly  understood  what  was  meant  by 
leaven.  No  Jew  would  ever  dream  that  leaven  used  in 
illustrating  some  power  of  process,  could  stand  for  some- 
thing good.  Leaven  with  the  Jews  means  always  evil.  It 
was  excluded  from  every  offering  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire. 
Conscientiously  the  orthodox  Jew  searches  his  dwelling  be- 
fore keeping  the  feast  of  the  unleavened  bread,  if  perhaps 


290 

somewhere  a  morsel  of  bread  with  some  leaven  may  be  hid. 
He  purges  out  the  leaven. 

The  word  leaven,  however,  is  not  used  here  exclusively. 
We  find  it  a  number  of  times  in  the  New  Testament;  the 
question  is  for  what  does  it  stand  in  the  other  passages? 

Three  times  our  Lord  uses  the  word  leaven,  besides  here 
in  the  parable.  He  speaks  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees, 
the  leaven  of  the  Sadducees  and  the  leaven  of  Herod. 
(Matt.  xvi:i2;  Mark  viii:i5.)  Does  He  mean  some  good 
quality  of  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  when  He  mentions 
leaven  in  connection  with  them  ?  Certainly  not,  He  cautions 
His  disciples  to  beware  of  that  leaven.  He  terms  the  hypo- 
crisy of  the  ritualistic  Pharisee,  leaven,  and  the  rationalism 
of  the  Sadducees  and  worldliness  of  Herod  is  leaven.  The 
Holy  Spirit  furthermore  uses  the  word  leaven  only  in  an 
evil  sense  (i  Cor.  v:6;  Gal.  v.g).  It  is  then  evident  in 
Scripture  language  leaven  never  means  anything  good, 
always  stands  for  evil  and  corruption.  It  is  impossible 
that  it  should  mean  only  once  something  good,  and  that  the 
Lord  without  any  further  comment,  should  use  it  here  as  a 
t)'pe  of  the  gospel. 

But  let  us  turn  to  the  question  of  the  three  measures  of 
meal.  What  do  they  represent  ?  The  faulty  but  accepted 
teaching  is,  that  the  Lord  means  corrupted  humanity  by  it.. 
However,  this  is  as  impossible  as  it  is  for  leaven  to  be  some- 
thing good.  Where  does  the  meal  come  from  ?  Surely  any 
child  can  answer  this,  the  meal  comes  from  the  wheat. 
Tares,  the  type  of  evil,  corruption,  never  yield  fine, 
wholesome  meal.     Meal  is  the  product  of  the  good  seed 


291 

only.  Good,  nutritious  and  pure  as  it  is,  it  can  never  repre- 
sent the  unregencrated  mass  of  humanity.  But  we  have 
still  greater  evidence.  Three  measures  of  meal 
stivid  in  type  for  Christ,  the  corn  of  wheat  and  the  bread 
of  life.  When  Abraham  comforted  the  Lord  (Genesis  xviii) 
it  was  by  three  measures  of  meal  and  a  calf.  Both  are  typi- 
cal of  Christ,  His  Person  and  His  Work.  He  is  good, 
pure,  holy,  undefiled,  as  well  as  that  which  He  has  given, 
His  Word.  It  is  therefore  all  folly  to  twist  Scripture  lan- 
guage around,  and  make  the  three  measures  of  meal  mean 
corruption,  when  it  always  denotes  purity. 

Again,  if  the  Gospel  is  leaven,  and  this  leaven  is  to 
permeate  the  whole  mass  of  humanity,  we  have  an  additional 
contradiction.  Does  the  Gospel  really  work  like  leaven? 
How  does  leaven  work?  It  is  put  into  meal  and  then  it 
works  by  itself.  That  is  all.  Simply  put  it  there,  leave  it 
alone,  it  is  bound  to  leaven  the  whole  lump.  But  this  is  not 
the  way  the  Gospel  works  the  power  of  God  unto  Salvation. 

Conceding  it  is  true,  the  Gospel  is  leaven  and  is  to  per- 
meate the  whole  lump,  then  we  can  readily  say  the  "Gos- 
pel leaven"  is  the  biggest  failure  which  has  ever  been  put 
out.  There  is  no  nation,  nor  even  a  town  or  hamlet  which 
has  ever  been  successfully  "leavened"  by  the  Gospel. 

The  process  is  then  a  failure,  the  Gospel  does  not  accom- 
plish the  leavening  of  the  lump,  it  has  not  done  it  in  1900 
years.  The  inference  which  comes  next  is,  that  in  giving 
such  a  prophecy  the  speaker,  our  Lord,  was  mistaken. 

We  have  now  torn  down  the  false  explanation  of  the 


parable,  and  laid  the  foundation  upon  which  we  can  easily 
build  and  grasp  the  true  meaning  of  the  parable. 

Leaven  is  error,  evil,  corruption.  The  good  pure  meal 
stands  for  truth,  for  Christ  and  His  Word.  The  leaven 
corrupts  the  meal,  it  changes  that  which  is  good,  and  at- 
tacks in  a  hidden  way  its  purity,  till  it  has  pervaded  the 
whole  mass.  The  Lord  teaches  in  the  parable  how  evil 
doctrine  will  corrupt  the  fine  meal,  the  doctrine  of  Christ. 
It  follows  the  parable  of  the  mustard  seed.  First  the  pro- 
fessing church  was  lifted  up  into  prominence,  and  the  next 
step  was  the  woman  who  put  leaven  into  the  three  measures 
of  meal.  Pergamos,  the  period  of  church  history,  in 
which  the  professing  church  is  married  (the  meaning  of 
Pergamos)  to  the  state  and  the  world,  is  followed  by  the 
fourth  period,  that  of  Thyatira.  This  fourth  message  cor- 
responds to  the  parable  of  the  woman  and  the  leaven.  A 
woman,  the  woman  Jezebel,  is  mentioned  in  Revelation  ii. 
No  doubt  she  stands  for  Rome,  The  woman  in  the  par- 
able represents  the  same,  the  apostate  church,  the  mother 
of  harlots  and  abominations  of  the  earth.  She  has  with 
her  evil  doctrine,  the  leaven,  corrupted  the  fine  meal,  the 
doctrine  of  Christ.  And  now  this  leaven  works  in  pro- 
fessing Christendom.  It  cannot  yet  fully  pervade 
all,  the  whole  is  not  yet  leavened.  The  true  be- 
lievers, the  church,  still  in  the  earth,  is  a  hind- 
rance to  the  full  leavening  process  of  evil.  But 
the  church  will  be  removed  from  the  earth,  then  the 
whole  lump  will  be  leavened.  The  fire  alone  can  arrest  the 
leaven  in  its  work.    The  fire    will   make    an    end    of    the 


293 

leaven.  This  explanation  is  the  only  correct  one,  for  it 
agrees  perfectly,  not  only  with  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  in 
the  previous  parables,  but  with  Scripture  as  a  whole.  The 
evil  conditions  in  which  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  gets 
in  the  hands  of  men,  during  the  absence  of  the  Lord,  is 
here  fully  declared.  Christendom,  Rome,  the  mother  of 
harlots,  and  the  daughters,  is  evidence  enough  and  proof 
how  the  Revealer  of  Secrets  revealed  things  to  come. 

All  these  parables  show  the  growth  of  cml,  and  are  proph- 
ecies extending  over  the  entire  age  in  which  we  live.  May 
we  bow  before  the  Word  and  follow^  the  Word  and  its  clear 
teachings,  the  oracles  of  God,  rather  than  the  "voice  of 
the  church"  or  "the  doctrines  of  men." 

After  our  Lord  dismissed  the  crowds,  He  went  into  the 
house  and  here,  in  answer  to  the  request  of  the  disciples, 
He  expounded  the  second  parable.  It  was  given  to  them, 
as  it  is  given  to  us,  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom. 
We  have  looked  at  this  divine  interpretation  before,  and 
so  we  can  at  once  proceed  with  the  three  parables  which 
follow  and  which  our  Lord  speaks  to  His  disciples  in  the 
house.  Two  of  these,  the  parable  of  the  treasure  hid  in 
the  field  and  the  parable  of  the  one  pearl  of  great  price, 
belong  together.  After  these  the  Lord  concludes  His 
teaching  of  the  mysteries  with  the  parable  of  the  dragnet. 

"The  kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  like  a  treasure  hid  in 
the  field,  which  a  man  having  found  has  hid,  and  for  the 
joy  of  it  goes  and  sells  all  whatever  he  has,  and  buys  that 
field.  Again  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  like  a  mer- 
chantman seeking  beautiful  pearls ;  and  having  found  one 


294 

pearl  of  great  value,  he  went  and  sold  all  whatever  he  had 
and  bought  it"  (verses  44-46).  That  these  two  parables 
are  closely  connected  is  seen  by  their  similarity.  In  both  a 
man  is  mentioned,  and  he  sells  in  each  all  he  has  to 
obtain  what  he  esteems  precious.  In  the  first,  he  finds  a 
treasure  in  the  field  and  hides  it  there,  while  he  buys  the 
field  to  possess  the  treasure.  In  the  second,  he  sells  all  to 
obtain  one  pearl  of  great  value.  There  is,  of  course,  a  dif- 
ference likewise.  The  treasure  is  in  the  field;  it  is  depos- 
ited there.  The  field  is  bought,  and  with  it  the  treasure. 
The  one  pearl  comes  out  of  the  sea;  its  value  is  greater 
than  the  treasure  in  the  field,  of  which  it  is  not  said  that  it 
has  a  great  value.  Again,  a  treasure  may  be  increased  or 
decreased,  there  may  be  taken  away  from  it  or  added  to  it ; 
the  one  pearl,  however,  is  complete,  its  value  and  beauty 
are  fixed. 

As  we  turn  to  the  interpretation  of  these  parables,  we 
are  obliged  to  follow  the  same  course  which  we  followed 
with  the  preceding  parables.  We  have  to  set  aside  the  com- 
monly accepted  view.  We  have  to  show  once  more  that  the 
almost  universal  exposition  and  application  of  the  parables 
by  evangelical  Christendom  is  wrong,  unscriptural  and  con- 
flicting with  other  parts  of  God's  Word.  We  shall  have  to 
use  the  sharp  knife  again,  to  lay  bare  the  errors  of  the 
teachings  taken  from  the  treasure  in  the  field  and  the  one 
pearl.  Only  in  this  way  can  we  get  at  the  root  of  the  mat- 
ter, and  see  the  true  meaning  and  understand  the  mysteries 
of  the  kingdom. 

Perhaps  the  best  way  to  mention  the  erroneous  interpre- 


295 

tation  is  to  quote  the  father  of  Trotestantism,  Martin 
I.uther.  His  comment  on  these  two  parables  is  about  the 
best  expression  of  the  accepted  theories,  what  our  Lord 
meant  with  the  treasure  and  the  pearl.     Luther  said : 

The  parable  of  the  treasure  means,  that  we  vainly  seek  the  king- 
dom of  God  by  our  works  and  exertion,  or  the  works  of  the  law. 
For  we  are  not  born  of  the  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of 
the  will  of  man.  The  Jews  had  the  field,  but  did  not  see  the 
treasure  in  it.     But  the  Gentiles  bought  the  field  with  the  treasure; 

that  is  the  hrn.'  icith  Christ The  hidden  treasure  is  the 

Gospel,  which  gives  us  grace  and  righteousness  without  our  merit. 
Therefore  when  one  finds  it,  it  causes  joy;  that  is  a  good,  cheerful 
conscience,  which  cannot  be  secured  by  any  good  works. 

The  parable  of  the  pearl  is  almost  of  the  same  import  as  the  pre- 
ceding one,  except  that  the  former  speaks  of  the  finding  and  this  o£ 
the  seeking.  Therefore  he  speaks  here  of  a  growing  faith,  and 
signifies  therewith  that  the  pearl  was  not  unknown,  but  that  it  had 
been  heard  of,  as  being  of  great  price.  Here  the  merchantman  is 
intent  only,  that  he  may  possess  the  one  pearl.  For  this  is  also  the 
nature  of  the  Christian  life,  that  he  who  has  begun  it  imagines  he 
has  nothing,  but  he  reaches  out  for  it,  and  constantly  presses  onward, 
that  he  may  obtain  it.* 

This  mode  of  interpretation  has  been  strictly  followed  by 
commentators.  H.  A.  W.  Meyer,  a  leadinc^  expositor  of. 
the  New  Testament,  declares  "the  kingdom,  the  most 
val'iable  possession,  must  be  taken  hold  of  by  a  joyful 
sacrifice  of  all  earthly  things."  Another  one  says :  "The 
treasure  and  the  pearl  ?re  pictures  of  the  great  value  of 
the  kingdom  of  the  heavens.  To  possess  them  one  has  to 
sacrifice  all  his  other  goods"  (Prof.  Holtzmann).  P.  Lange, 
so  well  known,  declares:  "True  Christianity  is  like  an 
unexpected  discovery,   even   in   the   ancient   church.    It  is 


♦Luther's  Explanatory  Notes  on  the  Gospels.    Page  82. 


296 

the  best  possession  we  can  find,  a  gift  of  free  grace.  Every 
sinner  must  find  and  discover  Christianity  for  himself.  In 
order  to  secure  possession,  even  of  what  we  found  with  no 
merit  of  our  own,  we  must  be  wilHng  to  sacrifice  all;  for 
salvation,  though  entirely  of  free  grace,  requires  the  fullest 
self-surrender."  But  enough  of  this.  It  is  the  general 
way  of  interpreting  these  two  parables  by  making  the  man 
who  sells  all  to  obtain  the  treasure  and  the  merchant- 
man, the  unsaved  sinner.  The  Gospel,  salvation,  the 
grace  of  God,  or  as  some  term  it  "religion,"  is,  according 
to  this,  represented  in  the  treasure  and  the  one  pearl  of 
great  value.  That  such  a  theory  is  unreconcilably  clashing 
with  the  very  heart  of  the  gospel  is  but  little  considered. 

Gospel  sermons,  so-called,  are  preached,  in  which  the 
sinner  is  exhorted  to  give  up,  to  sell  all,  in  order  to  become 
a  Christian,  to  surrender  the  world  and  himself  and  then  to 
find  the  pearl  of  great  value.  But  is  this  the  Gospel?  We 
answer.  No !  The  sinner  has  no  sacrifice  to  bring.  All 
his  trying  to  surrender  himself  or  giving  up  the  v/orld  can 
never  secure  for  him  eternal  life  or  the  grace  of  God. 
"What  must  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life?"  was  spoken  by 
a  self-righteous  Pharisee,  the  young  ruler,  and  the  Lord 
answers  him,  who  came  to  him  with  the  law  and  as  under 
the  law,  accordingly,  and  tells  him  to  sell  all  he  has  ard 
give  it  to  the  poor  and  follow  him.  But  this  is  not  the 
gospel,  but  the  law,  which  says,  "Do  and  live."  To 
preach  the  Gospel  to  sinners  and  tell  them  to  do,  to  give  up 
and  to  receive,  is  fundamentally  wrong.  The  Gospel  of 
grace  does  not  ask  of  the  sinner  to  sell  all  he  has  to  receive 


297 

the  grace  of  God  and  eternal  life,  but  the  Gospel  of  grace 
offers  to  every  sinner  eternal  life  as  God's  gift,  a 
free  gift,  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  Word  of  God,  it  is  true, 
speaks  of  buying;  but  what  kind  of  buying  is  it?  "Ho, 
every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters ;  and  he 
that  hath  no  money,  come  ye,  buy,  and  eat;  yea,  come 
buy  wine  ami  milk  witJwut  money  and  without  price'' 
(Is,  Iv.  :  1,2).  It  is  buying  without  money  and  without  price. 

The  giving  up,  the  surrender,  follows  when  a  person  is 
saved  and  has  received  the  grace  of  God,  but  never  before. 
We  see  that  to  teach,  the  man  who  finds  the  treasure 
is  the  sinner,  and  the  sinner  is  to  sell  all  to  obtain  the 
possession  of  Christ,  or  the  merchantman  is  the  sinner  who 
obtains  a  pearl,  eternal  life,  by  giving  up  all,  is  wrong 
teaching,*  The  Lord  )icz'cr  meant  in  these  parables  to 
describe  the  seeking  and  the  finding  of  the  sinner. 

The  difficulty  which  is  so  apparent  in  the  first  of  these 
two  parables  is  but  little  dealt  with  by  preachers  who  make 
the  Gospel  out  of  it.  According  to  this  wrong  application 
the  sinner  would  have  to  buy  the  field  to  obtain  the  treas- 
ure, the  Gospel.  What  is  the  field  ?  One  of  the  above 
mentioned  commentators  makes  of  it  "the  external,  worldly 
ecclesiasticism."  This  is  simply  a  human  opinion.  We 
know  what  the  field  is.  We  need  not  to  ask  Dr.  Luther, 
Lange,  or  any  other  man,  what  means  the  field.  The  Lord 
has  given  us  the  key.  "The  field  is  the  world."  This  is 
the  meaning  of  the   word   field   in   the  first   two  parables. 


*How  strange  that  even  the  simple  Gospel  is  so  little  known,  and 
there  is  more  and  more  the  preaching  of  a  Gospel,  which  is  another. 
A  nauseating  mi.xturc  of  law  and  grace. 


298 

Who  would  say  that  the  \Tord  "field"  means  anything 
different  in  the  fifth  parable?  The  field  is  the  world.  If 
the  sinner  is  meant  by  the  man  who  buys  the  field,  it 
would  mean  that  the  sinner  has  to  buy  the  zvorld.  There 
is  no  sense  whatever  in  giving  these  two  parables  suck  an 
application. 

Again,  in  the  two  first  parables  a  person  is  spoken  of — 
the  sower,  the  man  who  sowed  the  good  seed.  This  Man 
in  the  first  two  parables  is  the  Lord  Himself.  In  the  two 
parables  before  us  the  man  and  the  merchantman  stand  for 
the  same  person,  and  this  person  is  identical  with  the  man 
in  the  first  and  second  parables ;  in  other  words,  the  man 
who  bought  the  field  and  the  treasure  in  it,  and  the  mer- 
chantman, who  sold  all  to  obtain  one  pearl  of  great  value, 
is  the  Lord  Himself.  It  is  not  the  unsaved  seeking  and 
finding  salvation,  but  it  is  the  Saviour  seeking  the  sinner, 
purchasing  the  field,  buying  the  treasure  in  it,  giving  up 
all  to  possess  one  pearl  of  great  value. 

As  we  look  upon  it  in  this  light  we  have  indeed  the 
blessed  Gospel.  He,  who  was  rich,  became  poor  for  our 
sakes,  that  by  His  poverty  we  might  become  rich.  He,  who 
subsisted  in  the  form  of  God,  emptied  Himself.  He  came 
down,  He  gave  up,  He  gave  all  and  was  obedient  unto 
death,  unto  the  death  of  the  cross.  Both  parables  teach 
the  same  great  truth,  Christ,  the  Saviour,  who  came  to  seek 
that  which  is  lost  and  who  has  purchased  the  field  and 
found  in  it  a  treasure,  which  is  His,  and  obtained  one  pearl 
of  great  value. 

But  the  question   arises,   if   this  is  the  case,   why   two 


299 

parables?  If  the  fiiuling  man  and  the  seeking  merchant- 
man is  our  Lord,  why  should  His  work  in  giving  up  and 
selHng  all  be  mentioned  twice?  Why  is  a  treasure  men- 
tioned first  and  then  a  pearl?  and  why  is  the  purchased 
treasure  hid,  while  the  one  pearl  of  great  value  comes  evi- 
dently first  into  the  possession  of  the  merchantman? 

The  Lord  certainly  speaks  here  of  a  twofold  mystery  of 
the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  and  of  two  different  objects, 
which  He  obtained  by  His  work  of  redemption.  When  He 
mentions  the  treasure  hid  in  the  field,  which  is  His  by  pur- 
chase, He  means  His  earthly  people,  Israel.  The  one  pearl 
of  great  value,  taken  out  of  the  sea ;  the  one  pearl,  beauti- 
ful and  complete,  means  the  church,  the  one  body.  We 
have  in  these  two  parables  the  mystery  of  Israel  and  the 
mystery  of  the  church ;  of  both  mysteries  the  Holy  Spirit 
witnesses  in  the  epistles  by  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  to 
whom  these  mysteries  were  made  known. 

Israel  is  the  treasure  in  the  field.  "Ye  shall  be  a 
peculiar  treasure  unto  me  above  all  people ;  for  all  the 
earth  is  mine"  (Exod.  xix  :  5).  "For  the  Lord  hath  chosen 
Jacob  for  Himself  at  d  Israel  for  His  peculiar  treasure" 
(Psa.  cxxxv  14).  When  He  came  from  heaven  He  found 
His  people  in  the  field.  He  bought  the  whole  world  and 
with  it.  inclusive,  the  people  who  are  His  earthly  treasure 
"He  died  for  that  nation"  is  spoken  of  His  blessed  work 
CJohn  xi  :  51).  However,  we  do  not  read  that  He  got  pos- 
session of  the  treasure ;  it  is  rather  the  thought  which  we 
get  from  it.  that  the  treasure  found  is  hid  still  in  the  field 
which  He  bought  by  so  great  a  price,  for  the  sake  of  own- 


300 

ing  that  treasure.  And  in  this  we  have  the  key,  why  this 
is  introduced  in  these  parables  of  the  mysteries  of  the  king- 
dom of  the  heavens. 

Israel  is  the  Lord's  peculiar  treasure.  He  has  purchased 
His  earthly  people.  They  shall  be  yet  his  peculiar  treas- 
ure, displaying  in  the  earth,  in  the  coming  age,  all  the 
excellencies  of  Himself.  They  will  be  justified,  a  separ- 
ated and  Spirit-filled  people.  In  Balaam's  prophecies  the 
Spirit  of  God  speaks  of  what  Israel  is  in  God's  eyes 
through  the  redemption  work  of  Jehovah.  The  Lord  died 
for  that  nation,  and  still  the  results  of  His  death  are  not 
yet  manifested.  Israel  is  hid  in  the  field,  in  the  world. 
The  Lord  will  come  again  and  return  to  the  field,  the 
world,  once  more.  He  comes  to  claim  His  inheritance. 
Then  He  will  lift  the  treasure,  then  He  claims  His  people 
Israel  and  they  will  rejoice  in  His  salvation.  During  this 
age,  the  age  of  an  absent  Lord,  Israel  is  kept  hid  in  the 
field.  This  is  one  of  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  the 
heavens.  It  corresponds  to  Rom.  xi  :  25  :  "For  I  do  not 
wish  you  to  be  ignorant,  brethren,  of  this  mystery,  that  ye 
be  not  wise  in  your  own  conceits,  that  blindness  in  part  is 
happened  to  Israel,  until  the  fullness  of  the  nations  be  come 
in ;  and  so  all  Israel  shall  be  saved.  According  as  it  is 
written :  The  Deliverer  shall  come  out  of  Zion ;  He  shall 
turn  away  ungodliness  from  Jacob."  Alas !  Christendom 
is  wise  in  their  own  conceits  and  has  ignored,  yes  com- 
pletely ignored  this  mystery.  It  declares  that  "God  hath 
cast  away  His  people  and  there  is  no  hope  for  Israel."' 
Christendom  forgets  that  Israel  is  the  treasure  in  the  field, 


301 


purchased  by  tlie  blood,  tbe  precious  blood  of  the  Son  of 
God.  and  that  He,  who  is  Hke  a  man  who  has  gone  to  a  far 
country,  will  come  again  to  claim  the  earth  and  lift  His 
peculiar  treasure  Israel.  Much  more  might  be  said  on  all 
this,  but  we  are  obliged  to  turn  to  the  meaning  of  the  one 
pearl  of  great  value. 

This  one  pearl  is  the  Church.  "He  loved  the  Church 
and  gave  Himself  for  it,"  thus  it  is  written,  and  here  in  the 
parable  He  declares  this  precious  truth  Himself.  The 
pearl  is  taken  out  of  the  sea.  Way  down  on  the  dark  bot- 
tom of  the  ocean  is  the  shell,  the  house  of  an  animal,  and 
in  this  animal,  by  its  work,  the  beautiful  pearl  is  produced. 
A  small  grain  of  sand,  we  are  told,  imbeds  itself  between 
the  animal  and  the  shell  and  creates  by  its  presence  a 
wound  in  the  side  of  the  animal.  Upon  this  miserable 
grain  of  sand  the  animal  deposits  a  thin  crust  of  a  brilliant 
material.  How  often  this  is  repeated  no  one  can  tell,  one 
deposit  after  the  other  is  made,  till  at  last  in  the  side  of 
the  animal  there  is  found  a  most  beautiful  pearl,  a  pearl  of 
great  price,  a  pearl  in  which  the  colors  of  the  rainbow  of 
the  heavens  are  wonderfully  blended  together.  It  is  taken 
up  and  becomes  the  well  nigh  priceless  jewel  in  the  crown 
of  some  mighty  monarch. 

We  see  at  once  why  our  Lord  used  the  pearl  as  the  type 
of  the  church,  which  He  loved  and  gave  Himself  for  it. 
Like  Eve  who  was  taken  out  of  the  side  of  Adam,  so  His 
blessed  side  was  opened  and  out  of  that  side  is  building 
His  church.  Like  the  pearl,  the  church  is  one,  though  com- 
posed of  many  countless  members  known  to  Him  alone. 


302 


This  one  pearl  is  still  forming  out  of  His  side.  The  one 
pearl  is  still  in  the  dark  waters  of  the  sea.  How  many 
more  members  will  be  added  to  this  one  pearl  we  do  not 
know.  How  long  it  will  be  yet,  before  the  Lord  takes 
her  unto  Himself  into  the  air,  to  adorn  Himself  with  that 
precious  pearl,  none  can  tell.  The  church  belongs  to 
Him,  and  will  be  with  Him  in  the  heavenlies.  Of  what 
great  value  must  this  one  pearl  be  to  Him,  that  He 
gave  all  for  it?  What  glories  will  He  receive  from  the 
possession  of  that  pearl  and  what  a  beautiful  object  will 
be  the  pearl  in  the  possession  of  the  heavenly  and  eternal 
merchantman  ? 

When  He  comes  to  take  possession  of  Israel,  the  treas- 
ure, and  of  the  world,  His  church  will  be  with  Him.  And 
what  else  might  be  said  of  this  precious  parable !  May  we 
meditate  on  it,  and  rejoice  in  that  love  which  gave  up  all  to 
take  us  out  of  our  ruin  and  loss  untold,  and  make  us  the 
objects  of  His  marvelous  grace. 

One  more  parable  remains,  the  seventh.  "Again  the 
kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  like  a  dragnet  cast  into  the  sea, 
and  which  gathers  together  of  every  kind,  which  when  it 
has  been  filled,  they  having  drawn  up  on  the  shore  and  sat 
down,  gathered  the  good  into  vessels  and  cast  the 
worthless  out.  Thus  shall  it  be  in  the  completion  of  the 
age ;  the  angels  shall  go  forth  and  sever  the  wicked  from 
among  the  just,  and  shall  cast  them  into  the  furnace  of 
fire ;  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth"  (verses 

47-50). 

This  is  not  the  Gospel  net,  as  it  is  often  called.    After 


303 

the  one  pearl  is  taken  up  the  end  of  the  age  begins.  This 
parable  falls  into  the  completion  of  the  age.  The  dragnet 
is  let  into  the  sea,  which,  as  we  have  seen  before,  repre- 
sents the  natic)n>.  The  parable  refers  to  the  preaching  of 
the  everlasting  Gospel  as  it  will  take  place  during  the  great 
tribulation  (Rev.  xiv  :6.  7).  The  separating  of  the  good 
and  the  bad  is  done  by  angels.  All  this  cannot  refer  to 
the  present  time  nor  to  the  church,  but  to  the  time  when 
the  kingdom  is  about  to  be  set  up.  Then  angels  will  be 
used,  as  it  is  so  clearly  seen  in  the  book  of  Revelation. 
The  wicked  will  be  cast  into  the  furnace  of  fire  and  the 
righteous  will  remain  in  the  earth  for  the  millennial  king- 
dom. To  follow  all  this  in  detail  would  take  us  into  the 
history  of  the  seventieth  week  of  Daniel.  It  is  the  san:e 
"end  of  the  age"  which  is  described  in  Matthew  xxiv. 

We  have  learned  from  these  seven  parables  the  myster- 
ies of  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens,  beginning  with  the 
apostolic  age  and  showing  us  the  conditions  which  prevail 
up  to  its  end.  It  is  significant  that  the  last  three  parables — 
containing,  as  we  have  seen,  the  mystery  of  Israel,  the 
mystery  of  the  church,  an  1  the  mystery  of  the  ending  of 
the  age — were  spoken  in  the  house  to  the  disciples.  The 
great  multitude  did  not  hear  them,  as  they  contain 
truths  for  His  own,  to  whom  alone  it  is  given  through  the 
Spirit  of  God  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom. 
And  so  we  read :  "Jesus  says  unto  them,  Have  ye  under- 
stood all  these  things?  They  say  to  Him,  Yea,  Lord.  And 
He  sai<l  to  them.  For  this  reason  every  scribe  disciplcd  to 
the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  like  a  man  that  is  a  house- 
holder who  brings  out  of  his  treasure  things  new  and  old" 


304 


(verses  51,  52),  The  things  old  are  the  things  revealed  in 
the  Old  Testament  and  the  new  things  those  of  the  new  dis- 
pensation, which  are  given  in  these  parables  in  a  nut-shell. 

Upon  this  declaration  there  follows  a  symbolical  action 
of  our  Lord.  "And  it  came  to  pass  when  Jesus  had 
finished  these  parables,  He  withdrew  thence."  The  re- 
vealer  of  the  secrets  has  riven  His  revelation  and  now  He 
disappears  from  the  scene.  It  stands  in  type  for  His  bodily 
absence  from  the  earth  during  this  age. 

The  end  of  the  chapter  is  in  full  accord  with  the  beginning 
and  the  teaching  of  the  entire  '  chapter.  "And  having 
come  into  His  own  country,  He  taught  them  in  their  syn- 
agogues, so  that  they  were  astonished,  and  said.  Whence 
has  this  man  this  wisdom  and  these  works  of  power?  Is 
not  this  the  son  of  a  carpenter?  Is  not  His  mother  called 
Mary,  and  His  brethren  James  and  Joseph,  and  Simeon 
and  Juda?  And  His  sisters,  are  they  not  all  with  us? 
Whence  then  has  this  man  all  these  things?  And  they 
were  offended  in  Him.  And  Jesus  said  to  them,  A  prophet 
is  not  without  honor,  unless  in  His  country  and  in  his  house. 
And  he  did  not  there  many  works  of  power,  because  of 
their  unbelief"  (verses  54-58). 

What  else  is  all  this  but  evidence  of  His  full  rejection. 
His  own  knew  Him  not.  They  speak  of  His  earthly  rela- 
tions. For  them  He  is  "this  man."  His  Father  they 
knew  not.  They  call  Him  "the  son  of  the  carpenter." 
And  thus  He  is  rejected  still  by  His  earthly  people :  and 
alas !  many  of  those  who  call  themselves  by  His  name  dur- 
ing this  age  treat  Him  no  better.  With  the  next  chapter 
we  sh^U  follow  the  story  of  His  rejection. 


''OUR  HOPE" 


A  MONTHLY  MAGAZINE 
FOR  BIBLE  STUDY 


ESPECIALLY  THE  PROPHETIC  WORD 
Edited  by  A.   C   GAEBELEIN 


CONTINUED  EXPOSITIONS  of  different  Bible  Books. 

NOTES  ON  PROPHECY  AND  THE  JEWS  give 
monthly  information,  reliable  and  interesting,  on 
Zionism,  Signs  of  the  Times,  the  Apostasy,  etc. 

DAILY  SCRIPTURE  CALENDAR.  A  text  for  each 
day  of  the  month,  with  a  short  comment. 

QUESTION  DRAWER,  SUNDAY  SCHOOL  LESSONS, 
CURRENT  EVENTS,  etc. 

Price;  $1   a  year 

SAMPLE  COPIES  FREE. 
Address : 

-OW?  HOPE/' 
80  SECOND  STREET,  N.  Y.  CITY. 


The  Harmony  of  the 

Prophetic  Word 

By  A.   C.   GAEBELEIN 

Mr.  C.  I.  SCOFIELD  says  in  his  Preface  to  the  book: 

"Another  reason  for  the  neglect  of  prophecy  is  found  in 
the  undeniable  difficulties  which  encounter  the  beginner  in 
that  study.  A  bewildering  number  of  new  phrases  and 
formulas  are  encountered,  and  it  is  not  all  at  once,  nor 
indeed  without  long  application,  that  this  seeming  con- 
fusion falls  into  its  truly  majestic  order.  It  is  precisely  at 
this  point  that  '  The  Harmony  of  the  Prophetic  Word  ' 
seems  to  me  supremely  helpful.  What  the  beginner  could 
not  do  at  all,  nor  even  the  most  persevering  student  for 
many  months,  is  here  done  for  him  by  an  expert  student 
of  the  prophetic  writings." 

Nicely  Bound  in  Cloth,  $1.00  Post-paid. 


Address : 
''OUR    HOPE^^  PUBLICATION    OFFICE 
80  SECOND  STREET,  NEW  YORK  CITY 


Studies  in  Zecbariab. 


By  A.  C  GAEBELEIN,    .    .    80  Second  St.,  N.  Y.  City. 

Price  75  CtS.  Postpaid.     Paper  50  CtS. 

This  is  a  complete  commentary  of  the  visious  and 
prophecies  of  Zechariah.  While  there  are  numerous  ex- 
positions of  Daniel  and  Revelation,  very  few  have  attempted 
to  produce  an  exegesis  of  Zechariah.  The  book  has,  there- 
fore, been  welcomed  by  the  leading  teachers  of  the  Word  as 
supplying  a  long-felt  want. 


Dr.   C.  I.  SCOFIELD,  Editor  of  the  Scofield  Reference 
Bible,  writes: 

"I  have  read  with  delight  and  profit  your  niobt  biblical  and 
spiritual  exposition  of  Zechariah.  A  really  good  and  adequate  work 
on  Zechariah  has  long  been  a  desideratum,  and  this,  I  am  thankful 
to  find,  you  have,  under  God,  supplied.  Can  you  not  now  give  us  a 
book  on  Joel  ?  " 

Dr.  JAMES  M.  GRAY,  of  Boston,  writes: 

"I  have  carefully  read  the  'Studies  in  Zechariah'  up  until 
the  8th  chapter,  as  they  appeared  monthly  in  Our  Hope,  and  have 
been  so  well  pleased  with  them  as  to  recommend  theci  heartily  to 
the  students  under  my  instruction.  Their  publication  in  book -form 
will  be  a  real  boon  to  earnest  Bible  students  to  whom  the  prophet 
Zechariah  is  particularly  difficult,  and  who  have  neither  the  time  nor 
facility  to  search  many  and  larger  volumes." 


EPISCOPAL  RECORDER: 

"  We  can  most  heartily  conmiend  it  as  a  very  valuable  contribution 
to  the  intelligent  understanding  of  the  great  and  preciour  prophecies 
of  which  it  treats.  It  is  scholarly,  practical  and  evangelical,  and  we 
shall  be  glad  if  it  has  the  wide  circulation  and  close  attention  to 
which  it  is  entitled." 


IMPORTANT  WORKS  ON  BIBLE  STUDY 


"Hath  God  Cast  Away  His  People?"    The  Great  Jewish  Question.    By  A.  C. 

Gaebelein.     Post-paid $1.00 

Gospel   of   Matthew.    Vol.   I,   Chaps    i  xiii ;   Vol.  II,  Chaps,  xiv-xxviii.     By 

A.  C.  Gaebelein,     6io  pp.,  well  bound  in  cloth.     Post-paid $2.00 

The  Harmony  of  the  Prophetic  Word.  New  edition.  By  A.  C.  Gaebelein  ...  $1.00 
Studies  in  Zechariah.     By  A.  C.  Gaebelein.     A  complete  coramentary  of  the 

Prophet  ot  Glory.     Very  highly  recommended  by  different  teachers  of 

the  Word      Price,  post-paid 50c. 

fhings  to  Come.    Address  on  Prophecy.     By  A.  C.  G      Paper,  20c.;  cloth 40c. 

I  etters  on  Bible  Study.     By  Dr.  Howard  A.  Kelly.     Per  dozen 1 2c. 

Better  Not  to  Have  Been  Born.    Gospel  Message.    By  Bishop  Nicholson 5c. 

Studies  in  Galatians.    By  C.  I.  Scofield.    A  helpful  exposition |5c. 

Genealogy  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    Matthew  i.     By  A.  C.  G 5c. 

The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.     By  A.  Saphir.     The  best  exposition  of  this 

Epistle  we  know      2  vols $2.00 

Joseph  and  His  Brethren.    Christ's  First  and  Second  Coming.    By  A.  C.  G |5c. 

Morning  by  Morning.    By  Mrs.  George  C.  Needham 75c. 

Jonah  and  the  Whale.    By  A.  C.  G 2c. 

The  Messiah  and  Israel.    By  A  C.  G       1 5c. 

The  Seven  Churches.    A  Divine  Church  History.    An  e.Kcellent  exposition  of 

the  Seven  Messages  in  Revelations  ii  and  iii.    By  F.  C  Jennings.    Cloth, 

fi.oo.    Paper 75c. 

The  First  Three  Chapters  of  the  Bible.    By  A.  C.  G 5c. 

Taith's  Resources  in  Sickness.    By  S.  Ridout.    A  pamphlet  for  our  times.. .    .  5c. 

The  Olivet    Discourse.      An    exposition    of    Matthew    xxiv-xxv.      By   A.   C. 

Gaebelein.     Bound  artistically  in  cloth 50c. 

Characteristics  of  the  Age.    By  Phil.  Mauro 8c. 

The  Day  of  Pentecost.     By  C.  A.  Gaebelein 20c. 

Miracles.    By  W.  W.  Fereday I5c. 

The  Heavenly  Guest  6c. 

Roger's  Reasons.     No.  II.     By  Dr.  J.  Urquhart 6c. 

Zionism:    The  Great  Jewish  Revival  of  Nationalism.    By  A.  C.  Gaebelein ,  lOc. 

The  Kingdom  Parabies.     Matt,  xiii      By  A.  C  Gaebelein 1 5c. 

Judges  and  Ruth.    An  exposition.    By  F.  C.  Jennings.    300  pp $1.00 

Papers  on  the  Lord's  Coming.    By  C.  H.  M 1 5c. 

His  Riches  -  Our  Riches.     A  Gospel  Message.     By  A.  C.  G.     Boards,  35c.;  paper  25c. 

Meat  in  Due  Season.    Three  Addre'^st  s  on  Prophecy.    By  A.  C.  G , |0c. 

The  Prophet  Joe).    An  exposition  of  the  Book  of  Joel.    By  A  C.  Gaebelein. 

Nicely  bound 75c. 

The  Approaching  Crisis  of  the  World.    By  Dr.  C.  I.  Scofield.     A  lecture  on  the 

coming  end  of  the  age lOc. 

Satan  and  the  Saints.  A  fine  book  against  Milleuial  Dawn  Delusion,  Chris- 
tian Science,  etc.     By  Dr.  James  M.  Gray 25c. 

The  Kingdom  in  the  Old  Testament.    A  lecture  by  A.  C.  Gaebelein lOc. 


PUBLICATION    OFFICE 

"OUR     HOP  E," 

so  SECOND  ST.,  NEW  YORK  CITY. 


