





3)


The Library


School of Theology
at Claremont


1325 North College Avenue
Claremont, CA 91711











THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE >


BOOK OF ECCLESIASTES


‘THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


OLD TESTAMENT


ON AN ORIGINAL PLAN


WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES,
INDEXES, ETC., ETC.


By VARIOUS AUTHORS


In T weniy-One Volumes





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


Se at 8


Pos A HOMILETIC
™ COMMENTARY


ECCLESIASTES


WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES


BY THE
REV. THOMAS H. LEALE





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


Printed in the United States





TABLE OF CONTENTS.





PacE
Introduction and Preface Be, ae ie Bee eas A pee as |
CHAPTER I.
Critical Notes .. Nees En ny 4
Verse 1 The Necessary Qualities of the True Preacher ey na - 4
4 1 Suggestive Comments on 5
” 911 The Lowest Possible Estimate of Human Life a Result of the Denial of
the Soul’s Supreme Hope pee Bee aie ot Lf
” 2-11 Suggestive Comments on ie 10
” 12-18 Speculative Wisdom Applied to ‘the Facts of Existence isi G6
"12-18 Suggestive Comments on ; i ee “ee a 18
CHAPTER IL,
Critical Notes aw oe aoe Pee:
7” 4-2 A Wise Man’s Trial of Sensual Enjoyments mn i Pt 23
” 1-2 Suggestive Commentson ... ae re woe «24
” 3.11 The Worth of this World’s Pleasures # Fairly Tested aus ono 25
” 3-11 Suggestive Commentson ... aoa aes ere ae HS
712-16 Practical Wisdom Ane ees A006 ore eco aes 31
12-16 Suggestive Comments on ... “Oe eae uae een soe.
” 17-23 The Confessions of a Pleasure-Seeker eee ose sce eee 35
” 47-23 Suggestive Comments on ... eee eee eee ee «35
” 94.96 The Wisest Use of the Present World .., Fab aay Ae, 37
"24.26 Suggestive Comments on ... ee ae Bi san 38
CHAPTER Tt.
Critical Notes .. 56 oer nee sc 40
”» 1-8 The Supremacy ‘of the Divine Control eae ore ose we. 40
The Clock of Destiny ... ae ae Ae Ae on 43
” 1-8 Suggestive Comments on ... ce ARE Ae Bh woe 44
” 9-11 Solace for the Troubled Mind .., aes nae Ae ae 50
” 9.11 Suggestive Comments on ... ca 8 ade ae ww. Ol
” 12-15 The way to Front our Destiny ... See aes ae 5 53
”12-17 Suggestive Comments on ... owe se oh aoe oe 54
The Impotence of Time a na on ot 55
” 16-18 Corruption in the Seat of Justice ... acs ese ae -. 56
” 16-19 Suggestive Comments on aoe ae ane oe ase 57
” 19-22 The doubt of Immortality coe eee coe eoe eco coo 58
” 19-22 Suggestive Comments on ok ies aes aes ae 59
CHAPTER ne
Critical Notes ase eee ae eo. 60
» 1-3 The Tyranny of Fores against Right ans nae ate ose 61
» 1-3 Suggestive Comments on .., nee aie ane mat ew. 61
» 4.9 The Penalties of Success ses ee ree Aa ee 62
» 4.6 Suggestive Comments on ... ans ose en 100 o. 63
»” 7-12 Portrait of a Mammon Worshipper ase ace ose eee 64
” 7.12 Suggestive Comments on .. eos eee ate ee 65
713-16 The Instability of the Highest Dignities ae eae Ae Por 67
”13-16 Suggestive Comments on ... oe x ass ee 68
CHAPTER v.
Critical Notes . soo mas ose eee eee 70
» 1.3 The Ethics of Divine Worship eee oa acs den ee. 70
» 1-3 Suggestive Comments on aA or Sen ove ons 71
» 4-7 Religious Triflers ... eae res ae ee ae a. 3
» 4-7 Suggestive Comments on eee eee 74
» 3-9 The Oppressors of Mankind Waiting for the Judgment “0 See the
» 8-9 Suggestive Comments on soe ore to eee ove 77
”10-11 The Impotence of Wealth ... cit ee A ae Bee ths)
”10.12 Suggestive Comments on aes 79
” 13-17 The Miseries of Him who Survives the Wreck of his Fortunes. x oe) OU
”13-17 Suggestive Comments on : ea 82
” 18-20 The Gifts of Providence—A Source of Spiritual Gulture eee w. 83
” 18-20 Suggestive Comments on fe ane oon ies ane 85


iy TABLE OF CONTENTS.





CHAPTER VI.
aa Pacz
Critical Notes eco eoe ece eee eet oce eee 86
Verses 1-6 The Life of Life Se Sr ase eas wae wee 87
» 1.6 Suggestive Comments on ... as ate oe a5 . 88
» 7.10 True Satisfaction for the Soul ... wa ae on Pea 90
* 7.10 Suggestive Comments on .., ere ah Sos ane soo Ok
” 11-12 Three Oprressions of Humanity es ace ee ose 93
” 11-12 Suggestive Comments on ... Sos ene eee eve we OF
CHAPTER VII.
Critical Notes... ae eee A sae 95
» 1.7 The Transforming Power of Goodness oF eee ace rep EE
» 1-7 Suggestive Comments on as ste ove 97
» 8.14 The Counsels of a Religious Philosopher. ie aA Ses -»- 100
”» 8.14 Suggestive Comments on ase “5 oe ees
” 15-22 The Cautions of a Religious Philosopher oe ate ace mee LUS
” 15-22 Suggestive Comments on ne on ane 110
” 9329 'The Confessions of a Religious Philosopher ou at ose eee 113
” 2329 Suggestive Comments on ee waa oe eas 115
CHAPTER VII,
Critical Notes eee ee ece 200 ooo 118
” 1.5 The Life of the Righteous Man in the State... ose ane 119
” 1-5 Suggestive Comments on ... 5 Ses nob e.. 120
” 68 The Stern Dominion of the Supreme King ees se ace 122
” 6-8 Suggestive Comments on .., ae eae ane eee o. 123
” 9-18 The Delay of Divine Justice ... e: ate ee aes 125
” 9-74 Suggestive Comments on ..,. ose ee ae
” 14.17 Our Duty under the Moral Discrepancies of the Present Life... 128
” 14-17 Suggestive Comments on .., ez ae ic ase eee 129
CHAPTER IX.
Critical Notes... ese aa 131
” 1-6 The Seeming Imperfection of God’s Moral Government eee «. 132
” 16 Suggestive Comments on 134
” 49-10 7 Unsatisfactory Conditions of the Present Life in their Bearing’ upon sa
uty . ® ace eee eee eco eee eee
”» 710 Suggestive ‘Comments on ace ous ae Hb 137
- 11-12 The Higher Will i in Human Thinge. eee eco eco eco coo 139
” 1112 Suggestive Comments on ate Ar ove one aoe 141
*” 13-18 The World’s Benefactors ... ase ase nee ove oo. 142
” 13-18 Suggestive Comments on Ach ae nee Sea oe §«=—sts-sd*‘ AL
CHAPTER X.
Critical Notes eee eee ooo eco coe ne 147
* 14 The Excellencies of Wisdom .., eee on ote eae 147
” 1-4 Suggestive Comments on eee ee ooo ote ooo evo 149
» §-10 The Promotion of Fools Seo aes oo eae nae 150
” 5-10 Suggestive Comments on ,,. eae Ses See ate eo. 152
"11-15 The Vanity of Speech coe ooo coe eco ooo eee 154
ee 11-15 Suggestive Comments OD eo eco eee ooo ooo ooe 156
” 1620 The True Life of the State “fs ove coe ovo ove 158
” 16-20 Suggestive Comments on ... ase ooo ees e. 159
CHAPTER XL
Critical Notes... eee evo ooo eve ooo ooo 161
” 1-6 The Precepts of Benevolence eee aes eee oes oo. 162
” 1-5 Suggestive Comments on ove ove 164
” 710 The Counsels of Wisdom to the Children of Pleasure “£0 eo. 167
» 7-10 Suggestive Comments on ee oe see ae6 eee 170
CHAPTER XIL
Critical Notes... ae ase ese (Os cop gt
» 1-7 Incitements to Early Piety see Ads OF ae aes 173
” 1-7 Suggestive Comments on ... an eer oe 176
” 8-11 The Vindication of a True Religious ‘Character an ove vee 179
” §8-11 Suggestive Comments on ... bie vee ace <<0 o 181
” 12-14 Parting Counsels a Ses eae sis Bee ae 183
Ld 12-14 Suggestive Comments on eee ete eco ect Ld ae 186


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


ON


ECCLESIASTES,





Outroduction and Preface,


Ecoxzsiasres is the Greek name given to this Book by the Szvenry, as the
interpretation of the title Koheleth, which it bears in the Hebrew Canon. ‘I'he
meaning of this designation is, on the whole, well represented by the equivalent
term, “ The Preacher,” which our Translators have supplied. The Authorship
is generally ascribed toSolomon. But the adventurous spirit of modern criticism
has sought for reasons of dissent from this view. These are founded chiefly
upon some peculiarities in the Author’s language—such as the employment of
so many Aramaic words—and upon its representation of Jewish national life,
which, it is alleged, is not a fitting description of the joyous times of Israel’s
most prosperous and magnificent king. It is, therefore, suggested that the
Book was written by some Jew of a later age, who, in order to invest it with
Importance, assumed the name and style of Solomon. But such literary expe-
dients, though employed by other nations, were not the usual practice of the
Jews, and whenever resorted to, were discouraged. To us, the excess of evidence
weighs in favour of the view that Solomon was the writer. The Jews have
always regarded this Book as his production, as such it was received by the
early Christians, nor did any one dispute this opinion before Grotius, In the
Superscription “The Preacher” proclaims who he is, and the illustrations,
evidently drawn from scenes of life in which he was the chief actor, correspond
with all that we know of the manner of his life, His restless activity in building
and planting, his severe strictures upon women, his unwearied pursuit of know-
ledge and wisdom, and his endeavours to instruct the Church by means of short
and pointed sayings, clearly identify the writer with Solomon. This Book bears
internal evidence that it was written after his repentance. Such a nature as his
would fall an easy prey to the seductive influence of the talents and riches of
other nations, Solomon imitated their splendour, adopted their social customs,
and even their idolatrous rites; or—as wa think more strictly—became indif-
ferent, regarding all religion as equally true. We have here the history of the
struggles of his soul through perplexity, doubt, and trial, till he found true peace


INTRODUCTION AND PREFACE





at last in the ways of duty, quiet submission to the Divine will, and in waiting
for the Judgment, wherein Eternal Justice will be asserted. The record of the
closing years of Sulomon’s life is not assuring, But when 600 years had passed
away, and history could calmly survey his life without the prejudice and com-
plication of near avents, Nehemiah speaks of him as of one whv was safe in the
infinite charity of his God. Chiding his people for seeking ailiances with heathen
nations, he asks, “ Did not Solomon, King of Israel, sin by these things? yet
among many nations was there no king like him, who was beloved of his God”
(Neh. xiii. 26). The prophecy uttered by Nathan before his birth gives strength
to this pleasing hope—“TI will be his father, and he shall be my son. If he com-
mit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the
ehildren of men, But my mercy shall not depart away from him, as I took it
tvcra Saul” (2 Sam. vii. 14, 15). All carelessness in the voyage of life does not
end *n complete wreck.


“ For I have seen a ship in haven fall,
After the storm had broke both mast and shroud.”


The great lessons of this book are obvious—The insufficiency of earthly things te
confer solid happiness, Riches, talent, and genius, cannot put us in possession of the
Rupreme good. We are to enjoy the bounties of Providence with thankfulness 3
and though it be difficult to preserve a calm mind in the present disjointed con-
dition of the world, we must patiently submit to the fixed order of things, and
wait for the end. We are to serve God from our youth, and be guided in our
opinions and conduct by ‘‘the words of the wise ”—+t.e., by the inspired writers.
The chief difficulty is to reconcile some statements in this Book with the teaching
of Scripture, and indeed with itself. Thus, the immortality of the spirit of man
is both asserted aod denied. The righteous and the wicked are represented as
sharing an equal fate, and yet as having different portions in the Judgment
Some of these conflicting statements can be brought into harmony by supposing
that the Author changes his point of observation, As seen by man, wisdom,
goodness, and all our glory end with the grave. But, observed from the stand-
point of the Divine idea and purpose, man has a nobler destiny. Some expositors
say, that here we are taught the vanity of all things apart from Godliness, and, on
this principle, regard each separate statement as true. Others represent it as a
discussion between Solomon and several opponents. But, in our judgment, the
plan and structure of this Book are most clearly seen if we consider it as a
dramatic biography, where Solomon depicts in fervid words the scenes of his own
life; and is, for the time, what he describes. He is sceptic, voluptuary, and
philosopher by turns. He indulges his capricious temper in the most diverse ways,
as if he quitted every entertainment upon the first sensations of disgust. All these
were but different experiences of the same mind—human life as observed in the
changing moods of a soul of intense feeling and power. A book constructed on
this principle must contain some statements not true im themselves, and at


INTRODUCTION AND PREFACE,





variance with its main conclusion. In the relation of his experience and long
observation, the writer shows a power for deep reflection upon the saddest truths
of life, and the solemn mysteries by which we are bounded on every side. It is
eminently a book for practical men; teaching how to use life wisely and well,
In a sacred writer, whose chief theme is the miseries of human life, and the evil
and folly of sin, we naturally look for some reference to Christ, the fount of
consolation; and to the glory of that world where the sufferings of the righteous
will be swallowed up in a sea of infinite pleasure. But we have to keep in mind
that the Scriptures are not a collection of detached parts, having no relations of
dependence ; but an organic whole, consisting of different members. We cannot
therefore expect to find the same things everywhere ; for the higher the organism,
the less we have of the repetition of parts; as we see by a comparison of vegetable
and animal structures. The Bible does not increase by deposit—one layer
mechanically placed upon another—but it is unfolded as a principle of life by an
inner law of organic growth. Resignation is the chief remedy here proposed to
relieve the distress of contemplation, or the present disorder. And do not the
writers of an advanced revelation exhort us to walk by faith, and not by what
is seen? The Gospel itself does not completely dispel the darkness which
surrounds us here, and we must await the solution of all painful mystery in
the disclosures of eternity. In the meantime, only the mind in harmony with the
Divine mind can have true peace, and enjoy the Supreme good.

In accordance with these views of the inspired writer’s plan and purpose, we
have given our interpretation in a style adapted to homiletics. We have aimed
to be brief and suggestive, to trace the principal lines of thought, leaving to cthers
_ the last strokes and finishing touches. We have consulted the best expositors,
and by illustrations and extracts from many able writers, have endeavoured to
make this work answerable to its design.





CHAP. 1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES





CHAPTER L


Criricat Notes.—l. The Preacher.] The word properly signifies “‘The Assembler.”
Solomon collected the people together for the purpose of addressing them asa public speaker.
A difficulty has been felt in applying this term to him, because in Hebrew this word has a
feminine form; but we may regard Solomon as an impersonation of Wisdom, the word for which
in Hebrew is also feminine, 2. Vanity.} The Hebrew word is Hebel (Abel) the name given
to one of the sons of Adam. The subjection of the whole creation to vanity was soon observed
and felt, §. And hasteth.] The verb signifies to hanker after, to be eager for. There is a
ssess eagerness appearing in the daily course of the sun. The expression corresponds to

sa, xix. 5: “He rejoiceth as a strong man (a hero) to run a race.” 13. To seek and search
out.] In the sense of to try, or thoroughly to test. The Preacher sought that knowledge
which is attained by investigation, as distinguished from that which is arrived at by precon-
ceived opinion, or taken upon trust. By Wisdom.] In the Book of Proverbs, this word is
equivalent to piety ; but in Ecclesiastes it signifies science or sagacity. 15. Made straight.] The
exact force of the Hebrew verb is to come into position, The meaning is, there is a seeming
imperfection in the world; man cannot bend the stubborn system of things to whathe regards as
his own idea of the best. 17. To know madness and folly.} His aim was to discover the worth of
wisdom by its deviation from folly, For this purpose it was necessary to have a knowledge of
both. Hieronymus says, contrartis contraria intelliguntur, opposite things are understood by
opposite,

Ee


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verse 1.
Tue Necessary QUALITIES OF THE TRUE PREACHER.


I. He has the True Public Spirit, Solomon gave his invitation to all, as in
Prov. : ‘Unto you, O men, I call.” The words of the Sacred writer of Israel
have a popular character, as distinguished from the writings of heathen nations,
which were addressed only to minds capable of lofty speculation. ‘Ihe wisdom
of the world despises and spurns away the ignorant. It is addressed to classes—
the heritage of the favoured few. But, the true preacher is a public benefactor
in the widest sense. He who seeks the highest and most lasting good for man
is the genvine lover of the race. His benevolent designs are not circumscribed
by sect, country, social position, or mental culture—they are wide as the wants
of the soul, which are seen beneath all appearances and disguises. 1. This pubsic
spirit is opposed to all selfish ends. ‘The true preacher does not seek wealth—his
own glory—has no desire of display. His aim is to proclaim the only remedy
for the world’s disease. He is lost in the supreme glory of his theme. 2. J¢ zs
opposed to all lesser forms of benevolence. Solomon had acquired skill to increase
the nation’s wealth, to adorn and beautify cities, palaces, etc. Yet he does not
exhort men to attain this power, but rather to seek the Chief Good. The work of
the true preacher promotes man’s temporal welfare, sharpens the spur of
progress, spreads civilization, purifies and elevates literature. The collateral
effects of Christianity are not to be despised. But the great end of the preacher
is to convey lasting spiritual good. The good, of which he is the channel, has the
stamp of immortality. IL He has the impulse to utter the Great Verities
of Religion. Solomon could not keep his knowledge of Divine truth and fervour
of piety in the seclusion of his own mind and heart. He must let it forth for the
good of all, The true preacher has an irresistible impulse to utter the message
God has given him. Why? 1. Because he has true views of man—his position
before God, and his destiny. He has his eye on the four last things. This gives
him earnestness, and singleness of purpose, 2. Because he has @ Divine call,
No mere culture or training can fit a man to be a successful messenger of Divine
truth. The true preacher is the creation of the grace of God, The Divine fire,
hot within him, will be resplendent without. Every true preacher will be both
@ buroing and a shining light. 3. Because the nature of his message must fill

4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. L





him with compassion, and this has the property of loving to spend itself. The
messenger of mercy must catch the inspiration of true charity. III. He has a
Soul-History. Solomon had an eventful history of spiritual conflict with sin,
sorrow, doubt, and disappointment. He had attained to peace through a terrible
struggle. Woe to that man who has nothing but an outward history—no stirrings
of an inner life. It may not be necessary for the true preacher to fight over
again all the soul-battles of Solomon, but he must know what moral conflict is—
the crisis of victory must have taken place in his life. Without such a history.
1. The symbols of Divine truth will be mere words, having no life or spirit. 2.
His utterance of truth will be only professtonal. 3. He, at best, can only promote
the religion of habit, taste, or culture, instead of true spiritual feeling. IV. He
has True Regal Power. Solomon was a Royal Preacher, and every preacher can
be royal in his influence over souls. As mental power is superior to physical, sc
is spiritual to either. The men of literature are monarchs of the empire of mind.
But the men who place spiritual principles deep in the heart of humanity have
attained the greatest sovereignty beneath the Supreme Majesty. To gain a soul
is to enhance the glory of our royal diadem. He who bears witness to the truth
isa king. To possess Divine wisdom, and the power to utter it, invests a man
with true kinghood. The Apostles still rule the Church by their words.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSE.


Verse 1. The methods God employs
in the conveyance of His truth to man
are not peculiar to religion, Men seek
by spoken and written words to impress
their thoughts on other minds. All
who would affect public assemblies by
speech must use the expedient of
preaching. The great masters of know-
ledge, in every age, were, in their
several ways, preachers.

Solomon was the inspired teacher of
the people, His words of wisdom were
not only uttered by the voice, but they
were also made permanent in sacred
literature, and so their influence is per-
petual. But though the Christian
preacher may not commit his words to
the immortal custody of the press, they
are engraven on human minds and
hearts. That which is written on the soul
lasts longer than inscriptions on brass
or marble, than the still more enduring
works of genius, or even than the Bible
itself. The writing which God’s truth
traces upon the spirit of man will ouslast
all the imperfect appliances of human
learning. If a preacher is inspired by
the Spirit, he can write books which
will furnish the library of heaven.

Words become ennobled when they
are used to convey spiritual ideas. The
cross was once suggestive of disgrace
and contempt; it now brings to our


mind the dear remembrance of the deed
of infinite love.

The common expressions of our daily
life have deep spiritual significations.
Hunger, thirst, truth, freedom, life,
death—these words, as the preacher
uses them, have meanings of sublime
importance. The Holy Ghost can
turn the common elements of human
language into a celestial dialect.
There is a better and a more enduring
substance in language than the litera-
ture of the world can express.

The words of the true preacher. 1.
Instruct. 2. Persuade.3. Gain the affec-
tions. 4. Unite true souls here. 5. Pre-
pare souls for the great assembly om
high.
Solomon taught the people knowledge.
Paul was “ preaching the kingdom of
God, and teaching those things which
concern the Lord Jesus Christ” (Acts
xxviii. 81). The preaching that does not
teach is worthless.

Talent, logic, learning, words,
manner, voice, action, all are required
for the perfection of the preacher ; but
“one thing is necessary,”—an intense
perception and appreciation of the end
for which he preaches, and that is, to
be the minister of some definite
spiritual good to those who hear him
[J. H. Newman]. :


CHAP, I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





Words are the garments with which
thoughts clothe themselves.
mind cannot rest in whatis vague or
diffused : it can only apprehend ideas
which havea definite expression. This
law of our mental constitution makes
the superior revelation of the Gospel a
necessity. God has given us an ex-
pression of Himself. 1. By the In-
carnate Word. Thought itself is in-
visible. We cannot follow the silent
excursions of another’s mind. But
speech is thought enbodied. The In-
visible God has been manifested forth
in His Son—the Divine Word. Logos
signifies in Greek, both the word which
expresses the thought outwardly, and
also the inward thought, or the reason
itself. The Eternal Word reveals the
Eternal Reason. Christ is the power
of God, and the Wisdom of God. 2.
By His works. These are the thoughts
of God as manifested by material
things. Physical science is but the in-
telligent reading of those ideas of God
which have taken form and shape in
the universe of matter. Here are the
Divine thoughts on beauty, force,
mechanism, and contrivance to compass
special ends for the welfare of His
great family. Nature is a volume whose
meaning is ever unfolding, and en-
hancing our conceptions of the Infinite
Mind. “The invisible things of Him
from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made.” 3. By the
Scriptures. These are the thoughts of
God concerning us men and our salva-
tion. They reveal (1.) His thoughts on
our natural condition. (2.) His thoughts
on the means of our recovery. (3.) His
thoughts on the conditions of our welfare
in the great future.

The Church can only be maintained
by keeping spiritual thought alive by
means of fitting words. The disciples
were commanded to “ teach all nations.”

A king does not lower his dignity
by undertaking the office of a preacher.
That sacred calling is honourable, be-
cause it is occupied with what is of
infinite value and importance—the soul
ef man. The words of secular speakers
are an concerned with the fleeting


The.


things of time, but the words of the
preacher are concerned with man’s
interest beyond the grave,

The statesman deals with the con
cerns of empires; but empires, though
they flourish through a life of centuries,
yet ultimately share in the mortality of
their founders. The advocate vindi-
cates the claims of individuals whose
earthly existence is still more transient;
but to the preacher alone is appropriated
the assertion of a subject whose extent
is infinite, whose duration is eternal,
To him alone it is given to consider
man in the one aspect in which he is
unchangeably ‘sublime. With every
other view of his nature the low and
the ludicrous may mingle ; for in every
other view he is a compound of the
wondrous and the worthless; but in
the contemplation of a being whose
birth is the first hour of »n unending
existence, no artifice can weaken the
impression of awful admiration which
is the great element of sublimity
[Archer Butler].

The Church, by the voice of her
teachers, possesses a power to gather
men together, and to unite them by the
surest bonds, The society thus held
together by the ties of a common heri-
tage of truth, experience, and hope,
has no elements of decay. Outside
the Church, we find disunion and
desolation. ‘‘ We have turned every
one to his own way.” Men can never
be truly united into one family until
they bear the same gracious and loving
relations to our Heavenly Father.
Success in preaching serves to expand
the Parental Empire of God.

Christ is the true Solomon—the true
collector of assemblies. He said to
Jerusalem, “ How often would I have
gathered thee!” He will, in the end,
collect all His people into one great
assembly, and unfold to them the riches
of His mind. He has yet many things
to say unto us, but we cannot bear them
now.

Human language cannot fully reveal
the riches of infinite truth. The sub-
stance of Divine truth in the Bible is
superior to the forms of language by
which it is conveyed. The preacher's


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


CHAP. I.


——————————————


best words fall short of the sublime
verities of which they are the vehicle.

The garment of man’s speech must
be narrower than the body of God’s
tru’, which by one means or another
has %o be clothed with it [ Zrench].


The preacher should be careful in
_ the choice of words, for their right use
and ordering is not merely an accom-
plishment, but is bound up with the
interests of truth itself.

The mixture of those things by
speech, which by nature are divided, is
the mother of all error [ Hooker].


The preacher must avoid the danger
of accepting the words of religion
instead of the things which they repre-
sent. There is behind the words a


life-giving Spirit, without which they
are vain. The advice of Bacon is to
the point: tpsis consuescere rebus—to
accustom ourselves to the things them-
selves,

The preacher’s words are a debt due
to the Church.

The sun does not monopolize its
beams, and engross its light; but
scatters them abroad, gilds the whole
world with them. It shines more for
others than itself; it is a public lighs
Look on a fountain; it does not bind
its streams, seal up itself, and enclose
its waters, but spends itself with « con-
tinual bubbling forth. It streams forth
in a fluent, liberal, and communicative
manner; it is a public spring [ Culver-
weil].


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 2—11,


Toe Lowes? PossisLe Estimate or Human Lire « RESULT OF THE DENIAL
OF THE SovuL’s Supreme Hops.


Apart from God and immortality, human life, in all its departments and issues,
must be regarded as a failure. ‘All is vanity.” We have: I. The failure of
all Human Labours. ‘ What profit hath a man of all hislabour?” It cannot
be denied that work and industry have their uses and rewards—they are
necessary to the very existence of society. But they yield no lasting profit for
man—they do not put him in possession of the chief good. Why do they fail to
secure this result P—1. Because they do not employ the whole capacity of man. In
many departments of industry, work is but a dull and weary round. The same
course of things goes on from day to day, without variation. After the first
difficulty of learning his task is over, a man works mechanically. Even in
those labours requiring great intellectual skill and culture, some of the higher
powers of the soul are left unemployed and unsatisfied. The Reason which
apprehends eternal truth, and the Conscience which is sensitive to eternal law,
may be dormant in the midst of great mental activity. A man may be engaged
in the highest earthly work, and yet the sublimest powers of his nature may lie
unused. 2. They are only accepted as a sad necessity of his position. — Man does not
labour because he delights in it; but because he is forced to join in the struggle
for subsistence. Human labour is weariness and toil. Even the nobler exer-
tions of the intellect exhaust the powers. The necessity for labour is a bitter
draught for man. 3. They yield no lasting good. Some kinds of labour are for
the supply of necessities, and some for ornaments to beautify and adorn life.
The necessities recur again, and a fresh demand is made. The glories of this life
soon clog the sense—they cease to please—there is no felt satisfaction. The fairest
scenes soon fade and languish in our eye, All earthly pleasures lack the quality of
permanence, The darkness of the shadow of death takes the fairest colours out
of life. II. The failure of the Individual Life. “One generation passeth away,”
&e. If we deny man’s supreme hope of being with his God for ever, the highest
account we can give of life is—that the race is immortal, but the individual perishes,
Humanity survives, but the separate souls which have composed it, which have
lived und worked here, are gone for ever. They have come from forgetfulness,
and sink thither again. The only ee ne ee ee


CHAP, L HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


er








activity are the earth and man—the type preserved, the individual lost. This
rapid extinction of the individual life, as compared with the permanence of the
scene on which it is manifested, appears:—1l. From the uses of History. For
what purpose is history, but to give us an account of past generations? It is
necessary because they are gone. Their voices are hushed, and their thoughts
and deeds can only reach us through literature, which embalms the past.
History is written that the deeds of men may not altogether fail of renown.
2. From our own observation of Human Life, We see the world around us in fixed
and constant outline, and the busy multitudes upon it. But the separate
individuals composing these drop away, one by one, out of our sight.
“ He changes their countenance, and sends them away.” Compared with the
ever-during world, the life of man here is but a sudden flash in the darkness of
eternal night. This is a melancholy view of life. (1.) Z¢ makes the jinal
cause of man’s existence an inscrutable mystery. If this life be all, we ask—
why was such a creature made with capacities which the world itself cannot
satisfy ? Why should man be endowed with marvellous powers which have no
room for expansion here? If there be no immortality, surely man was made
in vain, (2.) Abates the value of every fact in the universe. Our own existence
is the fact of the greatest importance tous, What is it tous that even God
Himself exists, and that His works will ever furnish a sublime theme for con-
templation, if we ourselves sink into eternal oblivion? (3.) That dead matter
has a longer range of existence than human life, is a crushing humiliation for the
soul, III, The failure of Man’s Hope of Progress. If God and the prospect of a
future life be shut out, all hope for any real progress for the race is but a delusion.
1. Nature does not indicate such progress. ‘There is everywhere movement,
activity and change; but no tendency ofthings to a higher state. All move in
one regular, unvarying round. There is noonward march to the distant goal of
perfection, Thus, water appears as vapour in the clouds, as liquid in the river ;
then it runs into the sea, and is raised to vapour again. It is driven in this
endless round from age to age. The winds are lashed around their fixed circles.
Even every separate particle of air performs its little journey, to and fro,
by an invariable law. Even where there is apparent progress, there is no
real advance. Life itself only passes from growth to decay. 2. Our ex-
perience of Human Life does not indicate it. ‘The same classes of events constantly
recur. History repeats itself. Given the facts of sin—evil propensities, and the
forces of temptation, and it is not difficult to predict human conduct. As the
underlying facts of depravity are pretty constant, it follows that one age is but
the repetition of another. There is nothing absolutely new, even in mental
effort. The grandest utterances of gerius are but theexpression of the inarticulate
aspirations, or dumb agonies felt by myriads of minds and hearts long before.
3. There is no real progress, notwithstanding the activity of human invention and
discovery. The mind of man will exert itself to ight with his hard conditions,
But all his power does not avail to rend the iron bonds of his destiny. Thus,
progress in medical science may restore health for atime, but cannot finally turn
aside the common fate of death, The dominion of man over nature may be en-
larged by his inventions, and his enjoyments multiplied; but the sad and severe
facts of our existence still remain, Man by his genius hasdone much to conquer
the wild forces of nature, yet by these he is often vanquished, He has assayed to
conquer the winds and the ocean, but tempests and shipwrecks remind him that
his sovereignty over nature is not complete. No human power or talent can
banish the curse, and restore Paradise. IV. The Failure of Man’s Hope for
Fame, “There is no remembrance of former things,” &c. It is natural to cherish
a desire to be remembered. We cannot resign onrselves to the thought that our
names and deeds shall quickly be lost in forgetfulness, Hence the restless pur-
suit Ry fame, But even this poor consolation is denied us. If we have no hope


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. ¥


eee


of living with God hereafter, there is no eart}ly immortality of any kind for us.
1. The dest men are soon forgotten. The wis”, tho good, and the great of past
eges pleased and blessed their generation, and lived for awhile in the memory of
posterity ; but in the course of revolving “years, they have entirely faded out of
remembrance, Noskill or goodness can preserve the majority of mankind from
obliviox. 2. The worlds greatest benefactors are unknown. This is true of
the inventors of the most useful arts—of those who have devised principles of
action which have changed the currents of a nation’s history—their names are
unknown. Those are not the greatest names that survive in history. The men
whose thoughts were the deep foundations forchanges and events are hidden in
forgetfulness. Even the names of the authors of several of the sacred books are
unknown. 3. The roll of fame cannot be practically enlarged. The human
memory is not infinite. As new namesare added to the roll of fame, other names
must vanish from it. We can have no consolation from any hope of fame. Let


us seek to be desr to the remembrance of God.


Grrosite IpEas or Lire: Tas Marertatis-
TIO AND THE Spiriroac. LKecl. i, 2—11,
contrasted with 1 John ii. 17, John i, 51,
James i, 25, Heb, xi. 4.


There sre two very opposite ideas of human
life—Materialism propounds th» one, Spiritual
Christianity the other. Let us contrast these
two ideas. I. The one idea represents life as
@ transient appearance, the other as a per:
manent reality. Solomon eays, speaking out
the philosophy of Materialism, “ One gene-
ration passeth away,” wc. “ Allis Vanity”
—a mere pageant, an empty show. A whole
generation is but @ troop of pilgrims pursuing
their journey from dust to dust, They soon
reach their destination and disappear: but the
earth, the old rond over which they trod their
way, ‘‘abideth for ever.” To-day I walk
through the bustling thoroughfare of a com-
mercial city. Merchants, artizans, the rich,
‘the poor, &., rash by me, Thirty years hence,
& greater throng, it may be, will rush through
these streets ; but they are not the same men,
women, boys and girls, In the view of the
Materialist—

% Life’s but a walking shadow—a poor player
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,
And then is keard no more,”

In sublime contrast with this is the teaching
of the New Testament: “He that doeth the
will of God, abideth for ever.” “He that
believeth on Me shall never die.” It is true
that the earth 1sathoroughfare for generations;
but it is not the whole journey of man.

who have ever trod this earth are living,
thinking, conscious still. II. The one idea
represents life as an Endless Routine, the
other as Constant Progress. ‘‘The sun also
ariseth,” &c. Solomon saw the sun, the wind,
the rivers moving in an invariable circle,
returning ever to the point whence they set
out, He compares this to human life—a mere


endless routine, It is true that nature moves
in a circle—that themotion of all organic
life is from dust to dust. This is, says the
Materialist, but a figure of man’s moral his-
tory; there is no progress, it is an eternal
round. Place against this the idea of Spiritual
Christianity: ‘‘ Hereafter ye shall see heaven
open,” &c. Souls do not revolve in such fixed
cycles, Their destiny is not to roll, but te
rise, The true path of the soul is like Jacob’s
ladder, ‘‘from glory to glory.” III. The one
idea represents life as Unsatisfying Labour-
iousness, the other as Blessed Activity. “All
things are full of labour.” In every part of
nature, hard work is going on. It is especially
so in human life, There is labour of the
brain as well as of the muscle. Materialists
say that this labour is necessarily unsatisfying,
This is true to him. . Labour, if not inspired
by the right spirit, fails to yield true satisfac-
tion, On the other hand, Christianity
teaches that labour need not be unsatisfying.
A good man is “ blessed in his deed.” Labour
inspired with the spirit of love 10 God will be
eversatisfying. IV. The oneidea represents life
as Doomed to Oblivion, the other as Imperish-
ably Remarkable. “There isno remembrance
of former things” &c. Men and their doings
are speedily lost in forgetfulness, Time wipes
out the names of famous men from the most
durable marble—moulders the metal, stone,
parchment and paper on which they were in-
scribed. Such is the gloomy idea of Material-
ism, and it is partly true. Posterity soon for-
gets the greatest of its ancestors, Yet they
are remembered by their friends, and their
God. Nosoul can be forgotten. The good
man “being dead, yet speaketh.”

Christianity teaches that man will ever live
in the memory of those who love him. The
genuine disciple of Christ has his name
written in an imperishable book—“the Lamb’s
Book of Life ” [Homilist],


CHAP. f.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


Stn nEnEnEnteee ete Ee


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 2. The duty of teiching, in
the imperishable pages of Revelation,
the emptiness of earthly glory was not
laid upon one who had never tasted it,
and who would naturally feel a sense
of disgust at what he could not reach.
It was Israel’s most magnificent king,
whose name was the equivalent for
earthly grandeur and state, who was
commissioned to preach this lesson to
the Church.

This description cannot be applied to
God, for He is self-existent, and of
infinite glory ; nor can it be applied to
the whole existence of those who are
partakers of the Divine nature, All
that is not God—not with Him—not
tke Him—is vanity.

hav the word vanity should most
properly describe the state of the world
is no reflection on the Creator. Sin
nas invested the whole scene of man
with this terrible property. “The
creature was made subject to vanity.”

We have two opposite conditions
described in the Buble, “God saw
everything that He had made, and,
oechold, it was very good.” “All is
vanity.” But the tail of man has
intervened. The fall om tne highest
involved a corresponding reduction all
along the scale of nature.

The present state of things is not
eternal—it is only oneof transition. It
was not the beginning, and wilt not be
the end of God’s ways. The (rospel
has for its object the “ regeneration”
of Society. The second head of
humanity will make all things new.
Death, the master-stroke and crowning
power of vanity, will be destroyea; the
children of God will be delivered from
the burden and vanity of earthly
existence. This is the hope in which
we are saved, (Rom. viii. 24.)

We must feel our emptiness before
we can partake of the Divine fulness.
To dwell in our true home—which is
God—is the s9ul’s refuge from the
vanity of life.

The soul’s true good springs from
another order of things than the preseat.

10


It can only be secured to us by the
kingdom of heaven.

A true sense of the vanity of life
shows us our need of God and immor-
tality. 1. It saves us from the false
pursuit of happiness. 2. It reconciles
us to the loss of the world. 3. It teaches
us to prepare for a higher destiny.
There is a “better and an enduring
substance.” Men are taught by the
vanity of life their need of heaven.

There are different ways of meeting
this painful fact of human life:—1.
The Stoicalh We may harden our
hearts, and look down upon the ills of
life with the lofty bearing of a severe
philosophy. 2. The Epicurean. We
may strive to drown all painful feeling
in a reckless devotion to pleasure,
“Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow
we die.” 8. The Christian. He pro-
jects the Divine glory within him upon
the outward world, and regards this
life as but one step in the path of
eternal progress,

The thinkers of all ages, whether
within or without the area of revealed
truth, have felt the present disordered
condition of the world. This feeling
has sometimes led to atheism, and some-
times to some desperate or vague hope.
Lucretius could see no hand of Eternal
Wisdom in the plan of creation—
nothing but a disordered and confused
mixture. Man has always felt that
Paradise is not here.

Christ will restore Paradise, and
usher in a new creation in which will
be nothing vain, He will be mind-
ful of that world where He was enter-
tained so long, and which was the nurse
of His humanity.

What the Spirit of God meaneth by
vanity, the Spirit of God can best tell
us; who doth Himself explain it, when
the Prophet Jeremiah acknowledgeth,
“ Surely our fathers have inherited lies,
vanity, and things wherein there is no
profit” (Jer. xvi. 19), The vanity, then,
whereof the preacher speaketh, is the
lying promises of contentment which
worldly things make, and the no-profit


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


CHAP. I.


ST 1S


which is made of them. ‘ Vanity of
vanities,”’ that is, the vanity of them is
even more than vanity : and as if he
would say more, but could not, he saith
the same again : and lest he should not
have said all, yet he addeth, ‘ All is
vanity” [Jermin].

This verse, if they who are great in
this world were wise, they would write
on all their walls and garments, in their
common meeting places, in their private
houses, on their doors, in their entries,
end above all in their consciences, so
that they might always see it before
their eyes, always consider it in their
minds [S¢. Chrysostom].


Verse 8. Human labour has some
present profit and advantage, it trains the
physical, and intellectual powers, gives
sustenance, comfort and adornment of
life. It prevents man from being van-
quished by the powers ofnature. But
without a divine principle in the soul, and
a high aim, the profit it brings vanishes
with the departing breath. It wants the
stamps of immortality. Life’s labour
will not be ia vain for those who live
for ever in God’s sight.

The curse inflicted upon us signifies
something more than the necessity for
work. It is labour—all that is painful
and distressing in work. In the future
world, there will be work in the sense
of the highest activity; but, ‘They
rest from their labours.”

If a man has no hope of heaven,
where is the profit of all his earthly
labour? 1. In any true satisfaction
with it. In looking back upon all his
labour, a man must discover that it is
far from being perfect. He has to
lament mistakes, and movements foolish
and unprofitable. 2. In true enjoy-
ment. Man, even in the most favour-
able conditions, has but few days of
rapture—painful thought and anxiety
damp his pleasures, 3. In the issues
of it. When allis done, and he looks
into the future, nothing remains but a
dreary blank.

He alone has lasting gain who works
for a world higher than this.

He who does not find God loses all
the labour of his life.


This fruitlessness of man’s labour he
doth restrict only to things under the
sun, that is, of an earthly and tem-
porary concernment, on which man
spends his time and pains which should
be employed about things above the
sun, or of a heavenly and eternal con-
cernment, which are of a higher rise
and nature, and so are expressed by
“things above.” . Nothing
can be esteemed the true profit of a
man’s labour of body and spirit, but
that only which will abide, and continue
with him; and therefore, his profit
cannot in reason be thought to consist
in earthly pleasures which are momen-
tary (Job xx. 5), nor in “ riches which
take wings” (Prov. xxiii. 5), nor in
worldly glory which ‘descends not
after him ” (Psa. xlix. 17), but is only
to be found in fellowship with Christ,
which may be in some measure con-
tinued with him along the course of his
pilgrimage here, and shall never be
interrupted hereafter [Nisbet].

The sun is the master-workman of
the world, labouring continually, and
labouring under his great Master, God,
to minister unto the inferior creatures
of the world, as the Hebrew name
of it (Shamesh, te. to minister or
serve), doth notify unto us. Under
this master-workman are all other
labourers; he calls them up to their
labour; he oversees their labour; he
appoints unto them their time of ceasing
from labour. But although we labour
under him, yet unless the end of our
labour be for something above him, it
will not profit us; unless as he calls
us to labour, so we call upon God for
a blessing on our labour, we shall have
no comfort in it [Jermin].

This speech of Solomon’s is the
speech of every soul, when being spoiled
of those things which are here, she
goeth to that life which is hoped for
[Gregory Nyssenus].


Verse 4. Every object in the material
world, by its persistence, preaches to
us the brevity of our life. We stand
upon our own monuments ; the earth is
the great tomb of man.

Generations entering life ae with

1


UHAP. L


we eee


BOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





them powers and capabilities; going
hence they ‘ake away with them
character.

How little possession we have of the
present world ! Wecannot carry hence
its wealth or glory. But we can bear
away the * pearl of great price.”

God does not give to man an earthly
immortality. The individual man
passes away, and the wastes of death
are repaired by fresh life. This arrange-
ment serves :—1. To abate human pride.
No man can glory, or boast him-
self against God, when he remembers
that he has no power over his own life,
2.To curtail human experience and
knowledge. ‘There is not time to learn
all the lessons of the ages, and tosearch
out all what could be known here. 3,
To cast the soul upon God. He remains
when generations pass away.

The wholecompany of men and women
upon the face of the earth are ina
continual motion towards death and
eternity: whatever they be doing, their
course that way is never interrupted.
And therefore as every man in particu-
lar should look upon himself as being
shortly to bid farewell to all his earthly
contentments, never to y-eet with them
again, that thereby hi. heart may be
weaned from delighting in them as his
portion, that he may be moved to seek
after that which will abide with him
when he is gone out of the world. He
may thus have true comfort, consider-
ing that neither his sufferings in the
world can be long, nor his combat with
his spiritual enemies, nor shall he be
long holden from the possession of his
blessedness [/Visbet].

The earth the Time-Residence of
Man. 1. It is ready furnished. God
has prepared it by His power and
wisdom. The generations of the past
have prepared it by their genius and
skill. We enter into the heritage of
those who have gone before, are rich
with the spoils of time. 2. It is a
place of moral education. Weare here
to be trained for a superior life, 3. It
may be made the first stage in eternal

rogress. God always begins with the

ower, and imperfect stages—darkness

es light,—chaos before order,—
1


“First that which is natural, and
afterwards that which is spiritual.”

The passing away of generations
does not interfere with their relations
to God. He is God of nature, but
much more of man. He will not suffer
His own image to be effaced by death.
The generations who pass away still
live before Him. ‘Thus the dominion
of God over intelligent creatures is ever
enlarging.

The earth remains :—1. As the scene
of moral trial for successive genera-
tions. 2. As the scene of depravity, and
of redemptive power. 3. As the scene
of restored Paradise.

The melancholy sadness which touches
the heart, when reflecting upon the
rapid flight of the generations of men,
appears in the earlier poetry. Thus
Homer :—


The race of man is like the race of leaves :

Of leaves, one generation by the wind

Is scattered on the earth; another soon,

In spring’s luxuriant verdure, bursts to light,

So with our race; these flourish, those decay.
{Lorp Degsy’s TRANSLATION.]


Verse 5. The sun cannot break away
from the line of his course in the
heavens, nor can man by all his boasted
skill get rid of his sad inheritance of
sin, want, weakness, and death. All
human beings are driven through this
sad and weary round.

The course of the sun an emblem of
human life. 1, The rising sun is an
emblem of the fre~hness and eagerness
of youth. The youth is longing to
enter into the serious business of life—
“Eager to run the race his fathers
ran.” 2. The sun’s course in the
heavens is an emblem of the untried
day for man. Whether the day will be
clear or dark is uncertain. What will
he become? is a question we may ask
tremblingly of every child. 8. The
setting sun is an emblem of the manner
of our departure from the world. We
may sink down in the terrible gloom of
sin, or our evening sky may be pure.

This frailty of man is illustrated
the sun, who keeps a constant, orderly,
and swift motion toward the place of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





his rising and setting ; and he is said to
“haste toward” (or “ pant after,” as the
word signifies) the Orient, or place of
his rising, because, however, his motion
be no less swift toward the Occident,
or place of his setting ; yet his rising
is most desired and remarked by men.
But as for man, when he has once gone
down to death, he shall rise no more to
the enjoyment of his earthly content-
ments, and therefore’ these are not to
be sought after as his chief happiness
[MVisbet].

The reign of law is a theme for grate-
ful and admiring contemplation; yet, it
must be confessed, that this endless
uniformity of nature has a depressing
influence on the human heart. Nature
preaches no doctrine of a sublime pro-
gress—she seems to forbid the soul to
rise into a freer element.


Verse 6. The wind appears to be a
wild and irregular power, yet it is under
the control of law. The most furious
storms run their cycles in obedience to
the eternal conditions laid upon them by
the Creator. So human history may
seem to be but a succession of events
without order or plan, but there is a
Supreme Governor over all.

Our eye cannot trace or follow the
wandering courses of the wind,—nor
can we trace the ways of God through
human history.

We have here the vanity of man
compared to the wind; and though that
may be conceived to be of all things
most vain, most light; yet here man’s
vanity is shown to be greater. And
whereas Job saith, “ O, remember that
my life is wind”; the Preacher saith,
that it is more vain than wind. For
though the wind pass on speedily, and
pass away quickly, though most incon-
stantly it pass from place to place, and
every way turneth itself, which our
translation hath “ whirleth about contin-
ually,” yet it returneth still, and going
from the world, it cometh back to the
earth again. But it is notso with man;
and that which Job speaketh of him-
self, is true of every man, “when a
few years are come, I shall go the way
whence I shall not return.”—The pass-





CHAP.


on)


ing breath of man’s life hath no return,
But though man being gone from his
natural life cannot return, yet being
gone from his spiritual life, he may and
should return. And like the wind,
having wandered here and there, and
whirled about continually in the giddy
mazes of iniquity, it were good that
he would return according to his cir-
cuits, and go back to God by the con-
trary courses of amendment. We are
to return :—1. From a foolish mirth.
2. From an unprofitable sadness,
8. From a vain ostentation. 4. From
a hidden pride. For these being the .
vanities of the world, from these we
must return in order that we might goto
God, and come to happiness [Jermin].


Verse 7. The river, as it runs into
the sea, is an illustration of human life,
It rises in obscurity, and after a longer
or shorter course, falls into the great
ocean. Some rivers are insignificant,
others run through many countries, and
give names to towns along their banks,
But all have one common destiny,
Such is the life of man—obscure in its
beginning, of greater or less renown in
its progress, and in its close disappeare
ing in the great ocean of eternity.

When a river is kept within its banks,
it carries life and fertility far and wide:
but when it overflows its banks, spreads
destruction. So human life, when it
leaves the channels of truth and right,
only spreads evil and sorrow.

God preserves the balance of the
powers of nature, appointing all things
by weight and measure. Shall He not
be as careful and exact in His moral
government of man?

The rivers run toward the sea, and
yet the sea is never full, because the
waters are drawn up thence into
vapours and clouds to distil down upon
the earth, to water it, and fill the rivers
again. But as for frail man, he is
carried away as with a flood, and never
returns again to the enjoyment of his
earthly pleasures [ Nisbet].

Saint Gregory in a moral sense
applieth this verse unto preachers,
who having studied and meditated of
heavenly things, do then send them

13


OAP. I.


forth for the watering of the Lord’s
fields ; and when they have done so, do
then return to study and meditation
again. Because unless they do this,
“an inward ignorance will dry up the
outward words of their preaching”
[Jermin].

Let us comprehend that we can only
then be happy and make others happy,
when, as nature unconsciously obeys
natural laws, we obey with clear con-
sciousness the commands of virtue and
the laws of nature for the spirit-world
[ Wohlfarth].


Verse 8. There is no paues in the
battle of life. Man must wage a con-
tinual warfare against want and death,
or else be vanquished.

There is a sense of languor and
weariness in all human effort. Nothing
goes on with lively vigour, but every-
where thespurand the whip are required,
The earth will not yield her fruit to
man with ease and profusion—it must
be wrested by hard labour.

Labour is not an unmixed evil. The
good Providence of God has mitigated
the curse, and made it full of blessing.
Labour has stimulated invention, and
developed the powers of man. Nature
offers opposition to him; hence the
plough and the ship. He is born
ignorant; hence the school, where he
labours to conquer that condition.
Labour has served to modify the
virulence of depravity. How much
worse would human nature be, were
the necessity for labour done away
with? The bonds of toil have done
much to restrain the fierce passions of
men.

To the pious soul, labour only tends
to sweeten the prospect of heaven.
Rest will be delightful after toil.

Language breaks down under the task
of representing the greatness and ex-
tent of the labours of men. No one
mind can understand every department
of human industry. Words fail fully to
represent the present world—how much
more the activity and glory of the in-
visible kingdom |!

The abundance of phenomena which
presses on eye, ear, and the remaining

14


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





senses, is endless; there are always


objects which the eye must see, does


see, and brings to him who would
gladly close his labours [Hitzig].

The issues of men’s labours are
unsatisfactory. When the utmost is
done, the eye and ear desire more.
The void, produced in the soul by the
fall, cannot be filled up by wealth,
worldly glory, or even by the superior
treasures of the intellect. No mere
idea, or vague sense of some mysterious
power, but the Living God alone is
the satisfying portion. A nature capa-
ble of being filled with all the fulness
of God must be discontented with any
other portion.

The soul’s powers of inner vision
and hearing are satisfied when God
appears.

Such is the curse which the Lord
hath put upon all earthly things sought
after as man’s best portion, that his
unsatisfaction after attainment of
them is no less than it was in the
pursuit; but rather still growing, as
thirst doth in some distempered persons,
by drinking. Till lost man close with
God, reconciling Himself to him in
Christ, and hear the joyful sound of
His Spirit speaking pardon and peace
through the promises, had he never so
great plenty of sensible delights (in
themselves never so ravishing), this may
still be truly said of him, ‘‘the eye is
not satisfied,” &c, [Nisbet].

It is a great mercy, always to
receive for the supplying of our want,
and never to want the need of receiv-
ing [Jermin].

The immortal essence of the soul
can by no means repose in the empty
creature ; it seeks ever farther, and will
ever have more; it is a fire that burns
without ceasing, and would gladly
seize all things [Berleb. Bible],


Verse 9. If we understand these
words of the things themselves, and of
the works of God, they would not be true,
For God is every day doing what is
new ; but we do nothing new, because
the old Adam isin all. Our ancestors
abused things just as we abuse them,
Alexander and Cesar had the same dis


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. 1





position ; so had all Kaisars and Kings ;
so have we. As they could never be
satisfied, so never can we; they were
wicked ; so are we [Luther].

The study of history affords no hope
that man, by any power of his own, can
rise above the vanity of his condition.
Human life of to-day contains no
element which past generations did not
possess—there is nothing fresh. As
the old was bad, it is an evil that there
is nothing new. j

With advanced civilization there is
& multiplying of the enjoyments of life,
and a refinement of pleasure. But
this does not bring us nearer to com-
plete satisfaction—to the chief good.
New appliances for comfort only
generate new wants, and what was at
first a luxury, becomes a necessity.
We may add new links to the golden
chain of pleasure, but only to increase
the power of it to bind us faster.

We cannot be altered from below,
but only from above. “ Behold I make
all things new,” is the regenerating
word for man. The new creation
begins where vanity begun—with man.
When he is created anew in Christ, all
things will be new.

The delights of novelty are only
prepared for man in Christ. He alone
can give us material for new songs.
Our life here is a weary round—a
depressing sameness; but heaven is
eternal progression in light and love,

Our longing for something new is a
proof that religion is necessary to
bring true rest to our soul. Man
expresses the voice of nature, which
seems to be restless and uneasy in its
present bonds, and to yearn for per-
fection.

Even in the things of the material
world which surrounds us, there is an
element of life, a yearning of what is
bound, which, like that of the Memnon
statue, unconsciously sends forth
symphony, when the ray touches it
from above [Schubert].

1. There is no new earthly delight to
be found out by men, besides one of
these three idols, pleasure, profit, and
honour. which the men of this world
nave alwaya, since the beginning, been


worshipping. 2. Nor is any new
course to be found out for attaining
these, the like whereof for substance,
and no less effectual for the end, hath
not been essayed before. 3. Nor any
new success of these courses to be
expected, but the same disappointment
and vexation their fathers had found to
deter their children from idolatrous
courses (Jer. xvi. 19) [ Nisbet].

In order to the solid satisfaction of
man’s soul, there must be a newness,
either of the kind of the delights which
he enjoys, or of the relish and sweet-
ness he finds in them; which is only to
be had in things spiritual and heavenly,
in fellowship with God, and tasting how
gracious He is; which is no less fresh,
sweet, and new, even after many tastes
of it, than it was at first. Yea, the
oftener any taste spiritual comforts, the
sweeter and newer they are; but the
most desirable of earthly delights, the
more they are enjoyed, the more they
are loathed. So that they become old
in a moment, and sooner than they can
be called new [Nisbet].


Verse 10. Men suddenly rejoice in
some boasted discovery for healing the
hurt of humanity. See, this is new!
But the old wounds still remain. The
true Healer of man is Divine, and
comes from above,

Panting after this illusion of novelty
is a sign of secret dissatisfaction. It
robs us of that quietness which is the
only solace of our life,

Politicians trace the evils of society
to bad laws, and by reforming legisla.
tion endeavour to increase socia! happi-
ness. But no alteration of outward
circumstances can restore the soul to
true happiness and peace. When the
light of life shines within, all things
become transfigured by that light.

To be acquainted with the history of
past events, especially that which is
recorded in Scripture, is of singular
use to the people of God to guard them
against offence, fretting, or being dis-
couraged at the apprehended newness
of their trials, or temptations; and to
draw their hearts from following those
sinful courses, which others have im

15


CHAP. L


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





their experience proved to end in so much
vexation, And while we are taken up
with any earthly delight as new, we
prove ourselves to be unacquainted with
things that have been before, and like
children brought from the country to
some great city, and there ravished with
every trifle as new, which experienced
persons are not affected with [ Nisbet. ]


Verse 11. The vast mass of human
deeds are buried in oblivion. History
gives but a scanty outline of what has
been. “One Cesar lives, a thousand
are forgot.”

Even literature fails to preserve some
from forgetfulness and neglect. Libra-
ries are often the cemeteries of departed
reputation. The books which are never
disturbed in their dusty beds speak
eloquently of the failure of many to
secure a lasting fame, though they were
above the average of humanity.

The world soon forgets even those
who have blest it with good words and


deeds, Nothing can save us from the
fate of oblivion but a place in the
infinite memory of God. The good, in
whatever world, are in God’s sight—
ever in His remembrance, ‘‘ Nevere
theless, I am continually with thee.”
It is some kind of preservation of
things that are not, that they are not
forgotten; and because this might seem
to mitigate the vanity of worldly things
the Preacher showeth that there is ‘no
remembrance” of things, neither of
“ former things,” nor of things present
when they shall be gone, neither of
things which shall be. So that as
Hugo de Sancto Victore speaketh ;
“ Not only their presence by perishing
is taken away, but their memory also
by oblivion is blotted out. Wherefore
let this check the great minds of some,
who think to do some great thing by
which they will be remembered, and let
it make them to seek after righteous-
ness; for it is the memory of the
righteous that is blessed” [Jermin].


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH. Verses 12—18,


SPECULATIVE WISDOM APPLIED TO THE Facts oF EXISTENCE.


L The exercise of it is Divinely appointed for all. ‘God hath given this
sore travail to the sons of men.” We are not left to choose whether or not we
will think upon the mysteries of nature, of human life, and destiny. We are
bound to exercise thought and investigation. 1. By the nature of the powers of
the human mind. We cannot be content with a passive, indifferent gaze upon the
world around us, and the scene of man. We are constituted by our Creator
speculative beings. In the pauses of the world’s labour, a sense of the harmony of
nature is forced upon us, we feel ourselves in the presence of some mysterious
Power. Man is conscious of wants and cravings which belong not to the body.
He has pains and pleasures in which the physical part of his nature does not
share. The mind is ever groping for some solvent idea that will adjust the discre-
pancies that appear iu this life. Man cannot rest in merely seeking the satisfaction
of his bodily wants, and in studying the system of nature only as it affects these.
He must speculate upon nature, himself, society. 2. By the necessities of our
present position. Man must maintain his sovereignty over nature, must bear
undisputed sway over the wildest animals, and win spoils and tribute from the
mine, the forest, the ocean, and the air. Without thought and the power of con-
trivance, he must soon cease to be lord of this lower world; for in all other
respects, the brute creation would be his superiors, Man holds his position by the
power of reason. He is forced to reflect upon the facts of his mysterious exist-
ence, as it touches, at one extremity, all that is vile and base; and on the other,
all that is noble and divine. Hence the religious instinct in man, which no
culture, or refinement, or boasted supremacy of reason, can ever destroy. 3. No
superiority of outward condition can discharge us from the necessity of this exercise.
“Twas king.” High social position, and profusion of earthly splendour cannot

16





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHPA, 1,
a
shut out thought and reflection on the system of nature, and the painful mystery
of life. Pleasure, and a lofty feeling of importance cannot wholly occupy the
mind. Pale and anxious thought can break through the charmed circle of kingly
dignity. II. The Issues of it are Unsatisfactory, Mere human knowledge and
speculation upon the mysteries of life, yield no results of permanent value.
1. They do not satisfy the intellect. However wide the empire of science may
expand, the mind will pant after the undiscovered regions beyond. The vain
pursuit, without the help of revelation, of the ultimate truth concerning nature,
man, and God, must ever keep the mind unsatisfied. 2. Zhey do not satisfy the
heart. The heart has infinite longings beyond the power of expression, and a
faculty of vague prophecy of some glory beyond the experience of this life. It
cannot be satisfied by human speculation or science; it must meet the loving
heart above. It longs to know of a love which is powerful, and a power which is
kind, The investigation of matter, force, of the vast machinery of nature, were
we conscious of no loving heart above, would be painful. Knowledge and specu-
lation, which must end with death, have poor comfort and hopeless issue. We
can have no true consolation unless we feel that there is life above and on before.
8. They are powerless to improve the condition of which we complain. The vanity
to which creation is subject cannot be removed by our wisdom, ingenuity of
contrivance, or of speculation. (1.) Man cannot alter the system of things in
accordance with his own ideal of the best. ‘* That which is crooked cannot be made
straight,” #.e., brought into position, In the arrangements of the world there are,
apparently, imperfections. We can imagine a kinder, less destructive, and more
eaceful system of things. While pain, suffering, death, and decay remain, this

ife cannot be the ideal best. But we have no power to alter the frame and dis-

position of nature, nor the hard conditions of our life. There are mysteries,
anomalies, and crooked things in human life; but we cannot bring them to an
ideal perfection. (2.) Man cannot supply fatal defects. ‘That which is wanting,”
&c. Mere human wisdom sighs in vaic for that which would restore the lost
harmonies of creation, but it will not be supplied. The lost and forgotten spell
of power is only supplied to the new man in Christ, who lives in a new creation.
III. The Divine Purpose in it has a moral significance for Man. ‘*‘To be exercised
therewith.” The intention of God hereby is to afflict man’s mind, and to humble
him. 1. His pride of power is humbled, so that he might feel his need of redemption.
When a man feels that his own strength is of no avail, then he has a motive for
depending on the strength of God. He wants a strong deliverer. The boast of
power is but empty and vain when a man feels that there is no one to save him
from death. 2. His vain presumption of wisdom is humbled. God allows man to
try the strength and capacity of his mind in the application of his speculative
wisdom to life; gives him difficult problems, as a severe discipline, so that his
reason might be humbled, This exercise is a pain and a perplexity. Pain and
suffering have a tendency to throw the mind back upon itself, and to force us to
seek relief in another. IV. The Difficulty is only increased by Superior Powers
of Investigation. “In much wisdom is much grief,” &c. An increase of human
knowledge and power of speculation does not banish the painful impression the
scene of life makes upon the mind. 1. Some subjects of investigation are painful
in themselves. History is chiefly a record of oppression—wrong—cruelty—war.
The history of the conflict of opinion reveals base passions—pride of intellect—
great mental labour, ending at last in some pitiful and controverted conclusion.
We feel that, after all, human wisdom has done littie to settle the great questions
—the mystery of life, and the ultimate destiny of man. Even Ecclesiastical
History is a fearful record of ambition, strife, and corruption of the truth. The
more knowledge of this kind, the more mae ey ey saa pirsnoun
2. The results of our investigations fail to satisfy the whole of our nature. Science
only gives us ie and face not a personal God, The study of pres

0


Owar. i HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


=





intensifies our pity—our suspicion; or awakens envy—aspirations in us that will
never be satisfied. Our studies of nature and of man, as far as they are guided
by human wisdom alone, only tend to make us sad. They leave the deepest
yearnings of the soul unsatisfied—we still cry out for the “ Living God.” 3. There
is an oppressive sense of imperfection when we have done our best. The increase of
knowledge only convinces us of our hopeless ignorance; the infinite unknowns
rises up before us to humble our pride. The more deep and extensive our study,
the more it is seen how one subject is closely related to another, till we are forced
to despair of surveying the whole scene of truth, even from the loftiest elevativn
of the mind. If there be not an Infinite Intelligence, the whole universe cannot
be comprehended by any one mind. The little knowledge, which is all the wisest


cau attain to, is humbling—a sorrowful portion.
far as the individual is concerned, ts of brief duration.


short.”


4. Mere human knowledge, as
“ Art is long; life is


If this life be all, our own wisdom must soon perish. Why trouble our-


selves, if life is so soon to end for ever, to gather stores of knowledge, only to
increase the tenderness of our nature to all painful impression ?


“Who would put forth one billow from the shore,
If the great sea boe—Death ?”


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 12. The Royal Preacher had
full opportunity for a practical ac-
quaintance with the theme of his dis-
-course. He tried the world at its best;
and if it had any solid joys, be could
have discovered them.

High social position, and the activi-
ties of public life, are favourable to
large and correct views of human
things. A practical man is able to
form juster views than a recluse.
Theories of human nature, shaped by
lonely meditation, away from the busy
activities and strifes of men, are often
dispersed by the stern facts of life.
The true instructor of the Church
mingles with men.

“In Jerusalem” — the home of
Divine Revelation. Solomon had the
advantage of studying the inspired
records. He possessed a national his-
tory in which the hand of God could
be plainly traced. He was the repre-
sentative of God in a political system
where Divine laws ruled national life
—the first outline of that Kingdom of
God which a greater than Solomon came
to establish.

The true preacher arises from the
midst of the Church. He has Divine
facts. He enters into the possession of
the rich heritage of the past.

He had not yet put off his royal
robes, he had not yet laid aside his
crown; and yet, considering the vain

1


uncertainty, and speedy passing away
of worldly greatness, he rather affirmeth
himself to have been than to be. “TI
was King ” [Jermin].

The eminency of a man’s place and
employment, whether ecclesiastical or
civil, as also the dignity and privileges
of the people over whom he hath
charge, should be so far from making
him slack and negligent in pains for
bettering his gifts—as if his measure of
these were sufficient already, seeing he
is so employed—that on the contrary,
the consideration thereof should stir him
up to the’ greater pains and diligence,
that he may grow in abilities for the
more faithful and successful discharge
of his employment; for the considera-
tion of Solomon’s office in the Church
and State of Israel may be looked upon,
as here mentioned by him, as a speciah
motive to that exceeding great diligence
afterwards described [/Visbet].


Verse 13. In all real study, the
heart must be engaged as well asthe head
—there must be desire as well as power.

Love is always ready to explore its
object.

We must not be content simply with
a knowledge of the facts of human his-
tory. We should study the principles
underlying them, and their tendencies—
their bearing upon the purposes of God
here, and hereafter.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


CHAP. I.


a \


The most precious things of truth lie
not on the surface, before the careless
eye. They are hidden in the depths,
and greatly embedded, and can only be
gained by laborious toil. The best
teachers can but tell us where to dig for
the precious ore: the labour which puts
us in possession of it must be our own,

God is educating the human race by
forcing upon everyone the painful
problems of life—by the discipline of
sorrow and humility—also, by means of
punishment.

Even the inspired teachers of the
Church had necessity for laborious
study and thought. The Church should
value the products of long and careful
meditation,

“To search out. . . concerning all
things that are done under heaven.”
This involves—1. The study of moral
helplessness. The facts of evil, in
human conduct, must be admitted.
Unaided by a Divine power, man can-
not lift his own burden—he must lie
crushed by the load. 2. The study
of a severe moral conflict. The grace
of God is in the world opposing sin,
and modifying the facts of depravity.
As a resultant of these forces, this
world is neither a Paradise nora Hell.
3. The study of great possibilities for
the future. The consequences of human
conduct are projected beyond the world.
The great harvests of thought and action
only ripen in eternity. Man, in his
degradation, still has powers capable of
God, and of all the improvements of
eternity.

He who came to us from above the
sun can alone redeem us from all the
evils under it.

There is nothing which God hath
made, or doth, neither anything which
He ordereth, or permitteth to be done,
but it deserveth man’s serious thoughts,
as that from whence he may learn some-
thing for his profit. ‘The study of the
creatures will proclaim to him the
glorious properties of his Maker. The
study of human affairs may teach him
what is for the advantage of his worldly
estate, yea, even the greatest — miscar-
riages in the world may afford him either
matter of caution to beware of the like,


or of praise that men are restrained
from miscarrying further, or of eomfort
that God is bringing good out of it. The
children of God may lay out their wit
sometimes in considering what happiness
the creatures and human endeavours
about them can yield, still putting the
same in the balance with what is to be
had in communion with the Lord, so
that comparing Christ, the true Apple-
tree, with the trees of the wood, “ His
fruit may be the sweeter to their taste ; ”
and comparing the excellent knowledge
of Him with what may be known and
enjoyed of other things, these other
things may become dross and dung in
their esteem [Nisbet].

Behold here the royal student, and
see the matter, the method, the manner,
the diligence of his studying. 1. The
matter is “‘ all things that are done under
heaven,” as the ethics of the manners
of men, the civil histories of the deeds
of men, the natural history of the
works of God. 2. The method of his
study we have, in that it is said, “by
wisdom,” for that is the only right
method of well seeking anything.
Method is the wise part of study, but
an unwise method is a methodical folly.
3. The manner of his studying we have
in that ** he sought and searched.” He
sought things unknown, and searched
deep things. 4. The diligence of his
studying we have in that he gave his
heart unto it. He went about it not
only with a willingness, but with a love
which locked him up, and held him
hard unto it [Jermin].


Verse 14. If men had only disap-
pointment of their hopes to look for,
while they neglect the new and living
way to felicity, and seek happiness in
vain and sinful courses, their misery
were the less. But besides this, they
shall find the issue of their course to
be an eating up and gnawing away of
their spirit, and that they have been
feeding upon the wind, while delight-
ing in things earthly as their best
portion. Such is the signification of the
original words “All is Vanity and Vexa-
tion” or gnawing away of the spirit, or
feeding upon the wind Lae


CHAP. %


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





The most diligent study of human
life only reaches the miserable con-
clusion, that ‘“‘All is Vanity.” Yet,
an exercise yielding no satisfactory
results in the looked-for direction,
may be salutary. God often educates
the human race by failure. Amidst
the wreck of our earthly hopes, we are
ready to grasp the hand stretched out to
save, and to draw us to the shores of life,

Worldly things do not feed our souls,
but rather the hunger of our souls
[St. Bernard].

The “ Vanity,” etc., may be referred
unto his seeing and knowing, the
knowledge of man being such as is full
of vanity and unquietness,—unquiet in
the getting; unquiet being gotten, lest
forgetfulness should lose it again; and
vain where it is greatest, because it is
far from the perfect discovery of any-
thing. For this world, and the things
in it, are a book of that largeness and
greatness, that none is able to read it
over [Jermin].


Verse 15. Mere earthly wisdom
and skill fail to bend the perverse
direction of human things into the
true position. Sin has produced this
deformity. In the world above, there
is nothing crooked; all is exact—regu-
lar—beautiful.

Men have tried several expedients to
lessen the evils of life, and to perfect
society,—the dominion of arms—wise
government — education — the supre-
macy of the church—the assertion of
the social principle. But none of these
can bring about a state of things in
which all will go on smoothly. In the
best ordered conditions of society, there
must be imperfections which man can
never remedy. Our only hope for the
world is the answer to the prayer,
“ Thy Kingdom come.”

Even when our souls are renewed by
grace, the evils of life remain. Grace
does not straighten the natural crooked-
ness of things. ‘The body is dead,
because of sin.” All the world’s
glory leads to the grave, and death is
the sum of all vanity.

Whatever is wanting to make the
world and man perfect, we cannot sup-


ply from hence, The true remedy for
our fatal defects is not a philosophy,
but a revelation.

When the perfect world is displayed
to the inner vision, we are reconciled to
the irregularites of the present.

With man in this life, the quid est
is far below the quid opostet.

The present state is a discipline in
Christian toleration, We must acknow-
ledge imperfection, and be content to
endure, and to wait for the glory of the
perfect world.

1. Before men get grace to choose
Christ for their portion, and so to be
made new creatures, there is nothing
but crookedness, and contrariety in
their nature and actions to what is truly
good and right in thesight of God.
(1.) Their understanding is crooked, so
that it cannot discern things spiritual ;
and hath upon it strong impressions
contrary to the truth. (2.) Their will
is crooked in regard of its averseness
both from passive and active obedience
to their Maker. (8.) Their affections
are crooked in so far as they loathe and
weary of what God approves and com-
mands. They love and delight in what
He abhors; whence it is that every
step of their walk is a turning aside to
their crooked ways. 2. There are not
a few things wanting to fallen man
considered in his natural estate. He
is spiritually destitute. He wants life
—health—food—raiment—a sight and
feeling of his wants, and the desire to
have them supplied. Yea, he wants .
the art of numbering out his wants to
Him that can supply them. 3. The
rectifying of this crookedness of
man’s nature and actions, and the sup-
plying of his spiritual wants, is a work
that surpasseth the power of the
creatures, and requireth a creating,
infinite power for the doing of it
Only the infinite virtue of Christ’s
death can crucify the old man, and
make the sinner anew creature; which
is to make straight that which is
crooked. Only he whose understand-
ing is infinite, who numbers the stars,
and hath in Himself all fulness, knows
the number of our wants, and can
supply them all [JWVisbet].


a a


HOMILETIC @OMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


CHAP. L





Verse 16. It is salutary, at times,
to enter the secret chambers of our
own heart, to speak freely there, and
thus be our own audience. We should
know what lies within ourselves—what
is the extent of our power. If we
would avoid the ruin of our spiritual
fortunes, we must learn to take reckon-
ing with ourselves.

The more we commune with our own
hearts, the more cause have we for
humility; for the best discover im-
perfections. Yet, as we discover in
ourselves powers and capabilities which
make religion possible, this duty should
serve to inspire hope. The Divine
hand has something to lay hold of in
man.

The very names of the early kings,
who had been before Solomon in Jeru-
salem (such as Melchizedek), show that
they had higher purposes and aims than
the other kings of the earth,

Each one should enlarge his original
capacity. The gifts of God must be
improved by our own industry, or their
energy and value will grow less.

A great estate without wisdom does
not add to the true dignity of the
owner. Wisdom and knowledge are
necessary even to extend the uses of
riches, and to increase the enjoyments
of life. Riches without culture and
study only increase the temptation to
coarse pleasures.

The experience of wisdom and know-
ledge is better than wisdom itself, for
the habits and principles acquired by
long and careful meditation are of
greater value than the mere facts of
knowledge.

The treasures of the mind become
the more endeared by long possession.

The Lord’s people should not satisfy
themselves with the simple notional
knowledge of the truth, unless they
have also the experimental knowledge
thereof, which consists in our discern-
ing evidently the things we Know in
the causes thereof, and by their effects
upon ourselves orothers. s «+ - The
more outward advantages and accom-
modations men have for acquiring
knowledge, and the greater inward
qualifications, the more should their


heart be set upon enriching them-
selves therewith; otherwise the Lord
will challenge them sadly for abusing
His gifts contrary to the end for which
He gave them [/Visbet].


Verse 17. To attain a true knowledge
of man, it is necessary to study all the
facts of his nature and condition, and
not to make a selection of the most
pleasant and favourable. Goodness
and truth are not only to be investigated
in themselves, but also in their counter-
parts, evil—error—and confusion.

Man does not originate the objects
which his science investigates. The
specimens are selected by nature. We
must accept the facts of human life,
atk painful the study of them may

e. ;
The knowledge of the world’s mad-
ness and folly teaches a man to value
true wisdom. The knowledge of disease
is necessary to discover the means for
the preservation of health.

A close examination of human effort
will discover that many actions reputed
wise must be charged with folly.

We must study the madness and folly
of the world only in order that we
might hate and avoid them. Men sur-
vey, and lay down in the map, the
features of barren and inhospitable
countries where they never intend to
dwell. They construct charts, which,
though they mark the positions of safe
anchorage and secure havens, yet, for
the most part, indicate the dangers which
are to be avoided by the mariner. The
rocks and shoals, and sandbanks of life
must be studied.

And that he might the better know
wisdom, he laboured not only to know
it in itself, but to know it also by con-
paring it with madness and folly, that
the foulness of the one might set out
the beauty and clearness of the other.
And first he sought to know wisdom,
that knowing madness and folly, he
might as well hate, as know them
[Jermin].

Astronomers determine the distance
of a heavenly body by observing the
different directions it bears when
viewed from two positions widely apart,

21


CHAP. I.





So the observation of man from the
extremes of moral conduct (wisdom and
folly) is necessary to our complete
understanding of his real position in the
moral universe.


Verse 18. This is true. 1. Of the
knowledge of nature, As we increase
our knowledge of the facts and laws of
the universe, our ignorance becomes
more and more apparent. ‘There is an
ever-deepening sense that the mystery
of the ultimate facts of nature retires
into closer seclusion, and becomes
altogether unsearchable by us. As
the sphere of light enlarges, so does the
circumscribing sphere of darkness. 2.
Of our knowledge of mankind. One
result of an extensive study of human
nature is; that we have less faith in it
as we grow older, Our _ suspicion
increases. The sins and follies of men
fill the righteous soul with grief. 3,
Of the knowledge of ourselves. The
study of our own heart and life gives us
reasons for humility and grief. The
stronger the light by which we observe
ourselves, the more will evils and
deformities be revealed. 4, Of our
knowledge of the Heavenly World.
The more we learn of the nature of
that world, the more we have reason to
blame ourselves that it has so little
effect upon us.

The increase of human knowledge
renders the soul more sensitive to
influences—increases the power of feel-
ing pain and distress — complicates
grief. : 3
Wisdom reveals defects, dispels illu-
sions, and destroys the contentment


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





and fancied security of ignorance,
The laughter of fools is loud, for
wisdom would chastise the fervour of
their joy. The failure of our highest
faculties to give us true happiness casts
us at the feet of God, “in knowledge
of whom standeth our eternal life.”

Every increase of the Godly sorrow
of the righteous has comfort in the
bosom of it, and always joy at the back
of it [Visbet].

All human wisdom labours, and has
care and sorrow for its reward; the
further wisdom looks, the greater is the
labyrinth in which it loses itself. It is
with reason as to the eyes with a mag-
nifying glass, when the most delicate
skin becomes disgusting, the most
luscious dish a mess of worms, and
the finest work of art a mere botch.
We see the impossibility of removing
all inequalities of human society, and
we see in it an overwhelming number
of faults and failings; yea, the weak-
ness of our senses and judgment leads
us to find faults in beauties, because
we examine all things only fragmen-
tarily [Harman].

In respect of the contemplation of
truth, knowledge causeth delight ; but
in respect of the things known, it
causeth sorrow. Now if they be good
things which are known, then the sorrow
is from the great labour which a man
must take to attain the knowledge of
them ; and from the little perfection of
knowledge to which his great pains
hath brought him. If they be evil
things which are known, then his sorrow
is that he is subject to them [Jermin}.








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. cmar. ©





=e


CHAPTER IL


Crrricat Norres.—l. I said in mine heart.] The pronoun is emphatic and denotes the
_ tmportance of the person who is speaking. There are instances of such addresses to the soul
in the Psalms, Enjoy pleasure, literally “behold good”—linger with it so as to enjoy it. Here is
the germ of the parable of the Rich Fool—Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years. 3.
{sought in mine heart.] The word has the meaning not of thinking or reflecting, but to prove
or assay—to make a moral experiment. §. The peculiar treasure of Kings.] The treasure
forced from vanquished heathen rulers, and the voluntary gifts of friendly rulers such as the
- Queen of Sheba. Lhe delights of the Sons of Men. An obvious reference to Solomon’s excessive
_ animal indulgence. 12. What can the man do that cometh after the King?) What will my

successor do? He will probably, like the rest of the world, follow the well-worn path of sin
and folly—even that which hath been already done—fulfilled in Rehoboam, 16. And how dieth
the wise man? As the fcol!] This is an inexpressible burst of feeling—a deep regret that it
should be so. It is a question painfully asked of the Supreme Wisdom, not in anger but in
grief. 24. There is nothing better for a man than that he should eat and drink.] Not in the
Epicurean sense, worshipping the triad of sensual life—eat, drink, and be merry; but in the
sense of a rational and righteous enjoyment. In his labour, Thus it was not the luxurious
enjoyment of the idle.


aes


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1, 2
A Wise Man’s Tria or SEnsuAL ENJOYMENTS.


We may look upon the troubles and painful mystery of life and be sad; or
we may strive to laugh them away. There is a serious, and also a merry mood
of treating the dark enigma of our present state. Here we have a wise man
making a trial of worldly pleasure, if haply he might find therein relief and satis-
faction for his jaded mind. ‘ Therefore enjoy pleasure,” look upon and feed
thy desire with every sensual enjoyment. Such a course is not true wisdom.

I, It is a dangerous Moral Experiment. Solomon’s trial of the resources of
human wisdom ended in the grief of failure. Now he plunges into pleasure to
_ determine if that will fill his soul, and drown the anxiety of painful thought. But
such an experiment is dangerous. 1. Because there ts a secret misgiving as to the
success of the result. “Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth.” A word of
entreaty is used, as if he said to his heart, “‘O let me try thee again!” All his
real convictions were against the hope of success in this trial. He had to rouse
himself up to this endeavour—to press his heart to it, as if it had been too slow in
the pursuit. Worldly men feel in their heart of hearts that sensual pleasures do not
satisfy—that they leave a sting behind, and fret and wear the mind with long
regrets. It is dangerous to submit ourselves to what we must confess, in moments
of calm reflection, is a delusion. 2. The pursut of pleasure as an end is a forget-
fulness of the great work appointed us here. All pleasure and amusement are not
forbidden. But if we make these the end of life, and abandon ourselves to their
treacherous illusions, we forget the claims of duty. Whatever lies in the path
of the Commandments is ours to enjoy, but we must not stray from that path in
search of tempting pleasures. Duty and service claim our first regard. We were
not sent into this world by our Maker, like the Leviathan into the sea, merely
that we might “ play therein.” It is dangerous to run the risk of forgetting the
claims of duty, and the high destiny of the spiritual part of our nature. 3. The
undue pursuit of pleasure injures every faculty of the soul, The health of the soul is
impaired, and the symmetry of it destroyed, by draining off it vital force in one
direction, just as the body is deformed and its strength consumed by malignant
tumours. (1.) The understanding is xmpaired. He who is devoted to pleasure has
need only of those mental efforts necessary to devise new modes of enjoyment.
The higher powers of the mind remain unemployed. He who oes ees


CHAP. 1 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES,





intellectual eminence must learn to “scorn delights, and live laborious days.”
(2.) The affections are blunted, The indulgence in worldly pleasures, both coarse
and refined, tends to make the life artificial, Beneath apparent gentleness
and goodwill, the heart is often hard and cold. The children of soft indulgence
can weep over the elegant distress of fiction, but are often unmoved by the real
sorrows of life, (3.) The will is enfeebled. The seductions of pleasure bring it
into captivity. The elastic power of it is injured, as steel springs by long com-
pression, The syrens of pleasure paralyze the will. (4.) The senstbility of the
conscience 4s injured. When we are given up to pleasure and forsake duty, the
delicacy and tenderness of our conscience are impaired.

II. It is Moral Insanity. ‘I said of laughter, it is mad.” In the wild
excitement of pleasure, a man loses his claim to rationality—it is but the infatua-
tion of madness, To forsake duty, and allow the senses to run riot, is to dethrone
reason. The symptoms of the mental and moral diseases are similar. 1. Zhere ia
delusion. The insane mind lives in a false and unreal world. The true propor-
tion of things are disturbed. The man of pleasure is not governed by truth
and reality: he lives in adelusion. 2. The supremacy of wild passions. The insane
man is the subject of uncontrollable impulses. Reason being no longer his guide,
he is driven about by the storms of passion; and, like a ship without a rudder,
has no power of self-direction. He who lives for this world’s pleasure alone,
give up the high command of himself, and becomes the sport of untamed and
destructive passions. The world’s loud laughter—which has no reality of deep and
abiding joy in it—is but the wild merriment of the maniac. 3. There is an entire
perversion of the faculties, ‘The will, instinct, and emotions are all perverted in
mental disease. The man who forsakes God, and lives for pleasure, uses none of
his powers aright. Such a condition is:—(1.) Pitiable. We have sympathy with
the sick and suffering, but the madman deserves our pity. The votaries of
pleasure awake the pity of every righteous soul. (2.) Beneath the true dignity of
man. When reason deserts her throne, the man falls below his true dignity. His
sovereign power is gone, the sceptre is wrested from hishand. The image of God
becomes fearfully disguised. So the man of worldly pleasure is a slave in the
‘“‘ far country ” of evil, when he might be a ruler at home with his God. (3.)
Remediable. By judicious treatment, mental disease may be cured. The sobriety
of reason may come again to the distracted man. The disorder of the faculties
may give place to perfect soundness of mind. So the prodigal, who has rioted in
ungodly pleasures, may “‘ come to himself” by coming to his father. The spirit
of a “sound mind ” is the gift of God. IIL. It ends with Disgust of its own
Device. “Of mirth, what doeth it?” The pleasures of the world promise
much, but they deceive at last. He who seeks in this way to drown the sense of
the sad facts of life becomes at last disgusted with his own device. He first sus-
pects, and then discovers himself befooled. 1. Heis deceived as to their depth and
intensity. They promise to entrance the soul, and to shut out all painful thought
and anxiety. But they cannot accomplish this,— Even in laughter, the heart
is sad.” 2. He is deceived as to their constancy. They promise to entertain the
soul all life’s journey through. But they soon clog the senses, and wear out the
energy. Even the power of enjoying the world often passes away before the
world itself. Pleasure casts her votaries off when they have toyed with her for
a season, and the brief delight is turned into loathing and disgust. The soul
sorrowfully asks the question which needs and expects no answer.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1, The joy of the world is so that the faithful findin God is spiritual,
constituted that it entails repentance, constant, satisfying, and inexpressible
mortification, and grief; but the pleasure [Starke].

24


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES,  cuar. &


nS A


It isin vain that reason and con-
Beience point out to us one path when
the affections urge us in another. If
the heart inclines to worldly pleasures,
the mind soon becomes a willing
captive,

A man’s moral position is determined
by what he says in his heart.

The heart must have some object to
fasten on; the pleasures of the world,
or the joy which God gives.

Language bears witness to the vanity
of earthly pleasures. We call them
diversions, for they divert the attention
from our real miseries, They only
serve to make us forget that we are
unhappy.

It is dangerous to entice our hearts
to such courses as are forbidden by
reason and duty. The Children of
Israel were warned by the voice of God
not to ‘seek after their own heart and
eyes,” that is, they must not make any
moral experiments.

If we trust to the pleasures of the
world, they will serve us like Absa-
lom’s mule, and slip from under us
when we need them most [Morning
Exercises).

The Lord hath given this pre-emi-
nence to man above all other creatures
in the world, that he can reilect upon his
past temper and actions, and commune
with his own heart for the future. He
should make use of this for restraining
himself from sin; for reclaiming him-
self therefrom when he is fallen into
it; for encouraging his heart in duty,
especially to trusting in God, and to
praise Him, In which, ard the like
places, are the holy soliloquies of a
Christian with himself. When the
Lord is provoked to withdraw His
gracious presence, man can do nothing
but abuse this privilege, to the blowing
up of his own corruptions, and en-
couraging his heart to courses de-
structive of his own peace and comfort,


and which will prove a bitterness to him
in the latter end [Nisbet].


Verse 2. The laughter of the votaries
of pleasure, like that of distracted men,
arises from the want of knowing and
feeling their true situation—from the
want of thought. Calm reflection upon
the dark foundations upon which this
mysterious life of ours reposes, and the
awful truths lying around it, would
fill the soul with emotion, and turn the
loud rejoicing into the silence of a
great sorrow.

In the midst of sinful pleasures, it is
well if men have sufficient moral
strength remaining to question them,
and to suspect their delusive charms,

Worldly mirth ends in vexation,
remorse, and disgust; but spiritual joy
yields a profit of infinite satisfaction.

In the world, feasting comes first and
fasting afterwards; men first glut
themselves, and then loathe their
excesses; they take their fill of good,
and then suffer; they are rich that they
may be poor; they laugh that they may
weep; they rise that they may fall.
But in the Church of God it is re-
versed; the poor shall be rich, the lowly
shall be exalted, those that sow in
tears shall reap in joy, those that mourn
shall be comforted, those that suffer
with Christ shall reign with Him [J.
H. Newman].

Even as Christ went not up to joy,
but first He suffered pain. He entered
not into His glory before He was
crucified. So truly our way to eternal
joy is to suffer here with Christ [ Liturgy,
Visitation of the sick].

Mirth effeminateth the virtue of
nature, it enfeebleth the strength of
the mind, it weakeneth the forces of
the soul, it bringeth destruction to
reason, it casteth the mist of darkness
upon the purity of serene thoughts
[Vermin].


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 8—11.


Tar Worth OF THIS WoRLD’s PreasuRes Farriy TrEstxp,


The experiment to ascertain whether the pleasures of this life have any abiding
value for man, was conducted, in this instance, with perfect ifairness, L It was


25


CHAP. I, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.








tried on a sufficient number and variety of cases, Solomon had ample oppor.
tunity of tasting every pleasure the age could afford. He did not, like one from
some obscure retreat, despise those glories he could not share. He tried them all.
1. He tried coarse pleasures. ‘I sought in my heart to give myself unto wine.”
The excessive indulgence of the lower appetites—such as the intoxication of the
senses with wine—promises us a brief happiness. We forget the miseries and
painful aspects of life, and enjoy a temporary elevation of soul. The feelings
become intense, the mind seems half inspired, life appears as if lighted up with


a sudden glare. The graces of intellect and feeling, and even of religious rapture, |


are imitated in the condition produced by wine. ‘Be not drunk with wine, but
filled with the Spirit,” implies as much. The indulgence of animal instincts was also
tried. “The delights of the children of men.” Solomon was a melancholy
example of a great soul debased by a wild indulgence of animal passion, 2. He
tried those pleasures which feed the desire of display. There is a feeling of pride
in human nature which has a natural outlet in parade and show. We court
admiration, and the distinction of being an object of envy. Solomon had great
riches, tribute from foreign kings, numerous servants, houses, and gardens—all
that could support splendour and magnificence. The homage paid to great
estate and grandeur increases the outward happiness of this life. Men make
wealth and display the standard of honour. 3. He tried those pleasures which
minister to a sense of refinement. There are pleasures more exalted than the
indulgence of our lower instincts—more worthy of the dignity of our nature.
The royal sage employed himself in works of constructive skill—noble architec-
ture, vineyards, gardens, pools of water, groves. He enjoyed the delights of
music. Such pleasures engage some of the noblest powers of the mind, they lend
a grace and elegance to life, they assuage the troubles of the heart, and they fill
up the pauses of sensual pleasures which so soon tire the power of enjoyment.
They are more congenial to our better nature. They take us beyond the mere
things themselves, and are not unworthy to represent spiritual delights. ‘They
furnish a parable of Divine joys. Worldly refinement is a close imitation of
religion. Zhey yield but a temporary joy. “For my heart rejoiced in all my
labour.” Misery can exist beneath them all, and as they vanish with life they
cannot be our chief good. God permits some men to run through the entire scale
of human happiness to show others that the best of this world cannot fill the
soul. II. It was tried under the Restraints and Control of Wisdom, “ Yet
acquainting mine heart with wisdom.” ‘ Wisdom remained with me.” He did
not rush headlong into seusual enjoyments, but tested them with calm reflection
and composure. He did not allow himself to be blindly led by passion, but was
under the guidance of a mind regulated by prudence. 1. Such a course is dis-
tinguished from that of the mere voluptuary. Such plunge into pleasure and do not
allow the control of the higher faculties. Wisdom is left behind. The man isa
slave to passion. Unless the mind retains its supremacy and dignity, our trial of
wordly pleasure cannot even merit the poor name of an experiment. 2. Sucha
course may be expected to yield a hopeful result. (1.) It saves the soul from utter
dcbasement, When the voice of reason is hushed, and a man is abandoned entirely
to sensuality, there is but little prospect that he will escape the snare. (2.) Con-
science ts on the side of reason and right; and is effectual when reason is released
from the control of passion. (3.) A man ts not condemned to hopeless slavery
while his mind is free. He preserves an instrument which can help him to recover
his liberty. III. It was tried with an Honest Endeavour to discover what
was the Chief Good of Man. “Till I might see what was good for the sons of
men,” &c. It was not the love of pleasure for its own sake that prompted him.
The experiment was made in all honesty to find out what, on the whole, was best
for the sons of men. We must expect that like experiments will be made in such


@ world as this. 1. It isnot always evident, at firsi, what is best. A life devoted
aw





:
.


Spat


a Die peso


ee er


—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.
aS eS a a a a


CHAP, It..


to wisdom has superior advantages over one of pleasure, yet, for aught we know,
the enjoyment of the world’s pleasure may be better for us than a cold and severe
wisdom, which only serves to increase our pains and anxieties. The mystery and
uncertainty of human things is some justification for making a trial of this kind
2. Practical wisdom can only be gained by experience. This requires repeated
trials. We can only be said really to know that of human life which we have
ascertained by trial, It is well when life’s solemn lessons are quickly learned, and
we become truly wise before worldly pleasure completely injures our moral force,


and claims us for her own.


°


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 8, He who indulges in the
coarse mirth excited by wine, with the
hope that a superior wisdom will pre
serve him from moral danger, runs the
risk of being shorn of his strength in
the lap of luxury.

He who gives the reins to pleasure
may never recover his command.

Human life is so short and uncertain
that we should come to an early
decision concerning our Chief Good.

How much use of wit and reason
soever men may have in the pursuance
of earthly delights, yet while they are
seeking in their hearts to. give them-
selves away to these things, they are
but taking hold of folly. And though
the foolish sinner does not look upon
his way while he is pursuing his idols,
yet when God awakes him, whether in
wrath or mercy, he will see and be
forced to say that he hath been doing
nothing but taking hold on folly
[Wisbet].

The original goes thus, ‘in the num-
ber of the days of their life,” as show-
ing the fewness of man’s days, so that
they may be numbered, For as the
Poet speaketh, Pauperis est numerare
pecus. It isasign of a poor man to
number his cattle; so it is a proof of
the scantiness of man’s days that num-
ber doth so easily measure them [Jer-
min}.


Verse 4. In producing works of
utility and adornment, man enjoys a
pleasure beyond the value of the things
themselves.

Some kind of activity is necessary
for the happiness of those whose lot
does not require them to toil for sub-


sistence. No one can be happy in a
life of soft enjoyment—passively re-
ceiving the gifts of pleasure. There
must be some means of employing the
active powers of the mind.

The power of. constructing great
works is part of the likeness of the
Divine Nature. The beginning of all
these things is laid in the thought of
man’s mind. All the devices of human
industry and skill have been developed
from ideas. And whatis creation, but
the Divine thought taking form and
expression in eternal things? It is
God-like to possess the power to devise
and produce great works.

For how much the magnificence is
greater in the structure of houses,
either in respect of their multitude or
cost, by so much the shame is greater,
that the soul is not adorned. Let that
be built up carefully ; let humility be
the pavement of it, let hope be the roof
of it, let faith be the pillars of it; on
this side let justice be towards nien, on
that side devotion towards God. And
let love, an excellent artificer, neatly
join all these together, and then there
will be a house for wisdom to dwell in
[Jermin].

We may use our means of living to
administer to our necessity, and the
culture of our mind and taste; or to
feed the desire of display and vain show.

A Greek Father says, that Solomon’s
confession of the planting of vineyards
contains a catalogue of his vain affec-
tions, that “ Wine immoderately taken
is the nourishment of intemperancy,
the bane of youth, the reproach of old
age, the shame of women, the prison of
madness.”

27


@@apP. IL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





Verse 5. Man still finds his delight
in what is but the degenerate imitation
of Paradise. Buildings and palaces
would soon cease to please, He must
have the pleasures of the open air, the
sweet refreshments of gardens.

Let those to whom God hath afforded
these delights have in their gardens, as
Joseph had, a sepulchre—that is, let
them in their pleasures remember their
death. And as Joesph’s sepulchre in
his garden was made the sepulchre of
Christ, so it were good also that such
in their gardens—that is, in their
delights—would think of the misery
which He suffered for them [Jermin].

The church is the true garden of
God, enclosed from the wilderness of
the world, and tended with special care,
All possible varieties are compelled to
grow in the garden, so the church in-
cludes every variety of mind, temper,
and disposition; affording special en-
couragements and means of spiritual
growth for each. Yet God has some
garden plants in the wilderness; the
fruits of the Spirit may be brought
forth outside the domain of Christen-
dom.


Verse 6. Large pools were necessary
for watering the gardens and orchards.
The Church of God needs her fountains
hear.

Nature, though free with her bounti-
ful blessings, leaves much for man to
do. Water is provided, but human
contrivance is necessary to conduct it
to every place where it is required. We
have our part to do in preparing our
souls to be proper receptacles of the
plentiful grace of God.

But that from these pools of water,
we may draw something that shall be
wholesome for us; let us make our eyes
pools of water, that so a sorrow for our
sins may wash them away with the
watering of it, and cleanse us from
them by the current of amendment in
the course of our life. Or else let us
make pools of charity, therewith to
water the decayed trees of misery;
therewith to moisten the dry ground of
want and necessity. Charity is Reho-
both, oe well of breadth, a name givea


by Isaac to a well which his servants —
digged; for charity doth spread abroad —
her waters wheresoever is need of —
them [Jermin].

Let us make us pools by digging into
the depths of heavenly knowledge. —
There is nothing better than this Divine _
fountain, by which the dryness and
barrenness of our souls is made wet
and moistened, by which virtues do
spring up in us, so that even a grove
of good desires and works doth sprout
forth in our lives [Gregory Nyssenus].


Verse 7. The vanity of man is fed
by that display of grandeur which
raises the admiration of others,

Servants born in the house would be
endowed with natural fidelity. Men
make use of natural laws to serve their
own ambition.

It is not the lot of all to be attended
by oumerous traius of servants, but if
we are the sons of the heavenly king,
the angels wait upon us. The heirs of
salvation have, even under the disad-
vantages of the present state, some
signs of royal dignity.

In the heavenly household, the
greatest, waits upon the least. Man is
greatest, not when exacting, but when
performing service.


Verse 8. The love of gold and
silver tends to burden the heart more
than the love of large possessions in
cattle, &c. A man is more likely to
worship the image of wealth than
wealth itself,

The homage paid to wealth is a
strong temptation to indulge the illu-
sion of superiority.

Gifts persuade even the gods, and
gold is more potent with men than a
thousand arguments [ Plato].

Wealth honours wealth ; income pays
respect to income; but it is wont to
cherish in its secret heart an un-
measured contempt for poverty. It is
the possession of wealth, and of the
social power which is conferred by
wealth, which constitutes the title to
bonour. To believe that a man with
£60 a year is just as much deserving
ef respect aa @ man with £6000, you


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES,


CHAP If,


a a


must be seriously a Christian, A
philosophical estimate of men and
things is not really proof against the
Inroads of the sentiment which makes
the possession of mere income the
standard of honour [Ziddon].

The most obvious danger which
worldly possessions present to our
spiritual welfare is, that they become
practically a substitute in our hearts
for that One Object to which our
supreme devotion is due. They are
present; God is unseen, They are
means at hand of effecting what we
want: whether God will hear our
petitions for those wants is uncertain;
or rather, I may say, certain in the
negative. Thus they promise and are
able to be gods to us, and such gods
too as require no service, but, like dumb
idols, exalt the worshipper, impressing
him with a notion of his own power
and security. Religions men are able
to repress, nay extirpate, sinful desires ;
but as to wealth, they cannot easily
rid themselves of a secret feeling that
it gives them a footing to stand upon—
an importance, a superiority; and in
consequence they get attached to the
world, lose sight of the duty of bearing
the Cross, become dull and dim-sighted,
and lose their delicacy and precision of
touch, are numbed (so to say) in their
fingers’ ends, as regards religious in-
terests and prospects [J. H. Newman].

Music is a kind of language, and has
&@ voice independent of the forms of
speech, It has an universal eloquence,
& power to withdraw even the dull and
the sensual for awhile from their
grosser existence. It is a luxury to
feel strongly, and to allow the soul to
be dissolved in harmony. But what-
ever exalts the feelings without leading
to right practice inflicts moral injury.

We may understand “the delights
of the sons of men” of music generally,
great being the power which the delight
of music hath upon men, Of which
King Theodorio writing to Boetius in
Cassiodore saith—‘“ When she cometh
from the secret of nature, as it were
the Queen of the senses, adorned with
her musical figures; other thoughts
skip away, and she causeth all things


to be cast out, that there may be a
delight only of hearing her. She
sweeteneth grief, mollifieth rage, miti-
gateth cruelty, quickeneth laziness,
giveth rest to the watchful, maketh her
chaste who hath been defiled with
unclean love, and that which is a most
blessed kind of curing, by most sweet
pleasures driveth away the passions of
the mind, and by the subjection of
things that are insensible obtaineth
command over the senses.” But though
this be “the delight of the sons of
men,” let the delight of the sors of
God be the music and harmony of
their lives unto God’s commandments
[Jermin].


Verse 9. Solomon compares his
greatness as a worldly-wise man, not
with private characters, but with
official, He was great, yet it was only
‘more than they that were before him
in Jerusalem,” not more than they that
were in virtue and holiness before him.
Worldly greatness is not to be compared
with spiritual.

Men imagine that the greatness of
their works and possessions is trans-
ferred to themselves, that their mag-
nificence can be determined by measures
of surface. The Rich Fool thought
that the enlarging of his barns would
make the foundations of his life surer
and more lasting.

The most exalted human wisdom
cannot save us from becoming a prey to
vanity. We may by means of it con-
quer sensuality, and yet end in the
worship of ourselves.

While the outward man revels in
pleasure, the inward man may be yearn-
ing for a higher life.

There is some hope for a man who
has made even a foolish experiment
upon principles of reason. He who
leaves wisdom behind him, when he
plunges into worldly pleasures, destroys
the bridge by which alone he can
return.

Solomon could not have come to the
conclusion that “ all was vanity,” unlesa
he discovered that there was something
in himself which was not vanity—thus,
“ wisdom remained with him.” : ies


GHAP. IL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





of S. Victor says, ‘‘He was able to
speak that against vanity not vainly.”
So prone are men enjoying plenty of
outward delights to lose even the exer-
cise of common prudence and reason,
and to give themselves up as beasts to
the leading. of their sensual appetites,
that it is a mercy much to be marked
and acknowledged for a man to have
any measure of the exercise thereof
continued in that case. For Solomon
speaks of this as a remarkable thing,
which hardly would be expected by
many, that he having “ all the delights
of the sons of men,” being so great and
increased more than all that had been
before him, might yet truly say this,
“ Also my wisdom remaineth with me”


[Nisbet].


Verse 10. The heart is often led by
the eye, the seat of moral power be-
comes subject to the senses.

The eye, the guardian of our safety,
may be allured by a false light that
“leads to bewilder, and dazzles to
blind,”—by false philosophies, pleasures,
religions.

Man received the first wounds of
sin through the eye. The very sentinel
placed aloft by heaven to guard us
must be defended by God’s especial
grace.

Let us remember how unhappily
their eyes were opened unto them that
were in Paradise, which were en-
lightened so long as they had them
shut unto sin. Where we read “the
eye is the light of the body,” the Greek
is, the lamp, the candle of the body:
for as a lamp burneth very well, and
giveth good light so long as it is shut
up and kept close within some room ;
but if it be set in the open air, is soon
blown out by the wind; so the eye, if
it be kept shut from vanity by a
watchful carefulness, then it giveth
the best light to the body. But if it
be wantonly and negligently opened,
then the good light of it is soon put out
[Jermin].

There is some earthly recompense
for human labours ; but, at best, man is
never truly rewarded here for all his
aes A transitory joy is but a poor


compensation to set over against the
infinite sadness of life, and the terrible
forebodings of the heart.

The eye, the most far-reaching of all
our powers, cannot give us lasting joy.
It may range freely over every delight,
but the spirit of man will remain in
bondage till it is delivered by the
coming of the Holy Ghost.

Labour there was in the seeking of
it, labour in the possession of it, and
yet this is the All which man seeketh
of all his labour. This is the portion
which the Preacher saith he had;
there being no sickness, no enemy, no
other cross either in mind or body, at
home or abroad, to deprive him of it.
So that we have here under the law,
the Prodigal under the Gospel, asking
his portion of his father, which is
divided to him, and spent by him in
the far country of this world upon
worldly delights [Jermin].


Verse 11. “ All the works.” 1, In
collecting riches. 2. In increasing the
magnificence of the State. 3. In mul-
tiplying the means of social enjoyment,

It is well that we should look upon
the works we have wrought in the
world, till we discover that, apart from
God, they are labour, weariness, and
pain upon every remembrance of them.
To think upon our ways, to survey our
position, is the first step towards obtain-
ing our true good.

The pangs of spiritual famine—the
want of God, may be felt by one whose
lot it is to live in the midst of a pro-
fusion of this world’s plenty and
pleasure.

Our works in the world often outlast
our joy. The Royal Moralist did not
look upon his joy, but upon his
labours.

Vanity has two ingredients—hollow.
ness and aimlessness. Without God,
all things are unsubstantial ; they have
no solid and lasting worth. Human
labour, when not inspired by the Divine
idea, reaches no worthy goal. God had
His witnesses for this truth in the old
heathen world. Thus, in the poem of
Lucretius, we read—‘ Therefore the
race of men labours always fruitlessly,





Fh eo Sar Og what


——


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


CHAP, I.


SS,


and in vain; and life is consumed in
empty cares.”

The wisdom which is concerned with
what is under the sun can only give us
negative conclusions; can only say of
true happiness—It is not here. Religion
has a positive truth to set over against
this— Every good gift and every per-
fect gift is from above,”

That is vain which is empty, when
there is a name, but not anything at


thing; a name of glory, but without
the thing; a name of power, but the
name only is to be found. Who is there-
fore so senseless as to seek after names
which have not the things, and to
follow after empty things which should
be shunned [S¢. Chrysostom].

The Fortunate Islands, which anyone
may talk of, are but mere dreams, not
lying anywhere under the sun's light


[Jermin].
all. A name of riches, but not the


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 12—16,
PRAcTICAL Wispom,


The Royal Preacher had exercised his wisdom on speculative subjects: he now
applies it to the practical matters of human life. Of such wisdom, or philo-
sophical prudence, we learn—I. That it possesses high Absolute Value. Of all
earthly treasures, wisdom has the greatest worth. This is a truth at once evident
to every reflecting mind. The perception of it is quick as vision. ‘Then I saw
that wisdom excelleth folly,” &. Such wisdom may be compared to the light.
1, Like light, wisdom ts a revealing power. Without light, our knowledge of
nature would be scanty. We could only have knowledge of near objects. The
distant glories of the universe are completely veiled to the blind. But light
reveals them—makes all things manifest. So wisdom reveals to man the true
state of things around him—his position in the world—the conditions of earthly
happiness. He is thus able to form the most sagacious plans, and to use expedients
for the maintenance of his life, for avoiding dangers, and varying his pleasures,
In physical endowments, man is inferior to the lower animals, but he obtains
supremacy over them by that wisdom which reveals to him more of that world
in which he lives. 2. Like light, wisdom is a guiding power. ‘The wise man’s
eyes are in his head.” ‘The eyes of the wise man are where they ought to be—the
lofty windows of the palace of the soul, through which she takes'a large survey of
the outward world, and the scene of man. ‘he eyes of the mind, like those of
the body, serve both to inform and direct. Every truth of nature or of man, that
we discover, becomes for us a rule of action or duty. The facts revealed to the
understanding guide us in our way through the world. He who walks in dark-
ness runs the risk of stumbling. All nature is against the fool. 38. Like light
wisdom is a vitalising power. Light is absolutely necessary to the growth and
preservation of all kinds of life. The light of the day not only warms, but fer-
tilises. 'The sun is a source of energy, performing all the work of this lower
world. So practical wisdom is the real strength of man’s life here. Folly is
darkness—a dull negation—unproductive of vitality or beauty—generates fear.
The ignorant are the victims of unnecessary fears, as we see from the history of
superstition. Wisdom is a light to quicken all things necessary for man as an
inhabitant of this world. It supplies that vital energy by which we do our work.
By the life-giving power of wisdom, man conquers nature, by directing her forces
to serve his own uses. The dull existence of the fool is not worthy of the name
of life. We learn of this practical wisdom—IL That it is complicated with
certain facts giving rise to painful doubts and questionings. The superiority
of wisdom to folly is beyond dispute. It is at once apparent. Like the light,
this truth is its own evidence. But there are attendant facts which lead to pain-
ful doubts and questionings as to whether wisdom, on the whole, has a a


CHAP. IL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





superior advantage; or whether, in the upshot of things, the wise man is better off
than the fool. 1. We are not sure that posterity will preserve the frutts of our
work and wisdom. Men labour that they may increase their earthly joys, amass
wealth, and accomplish some wise designs ; but how often are the fruits of their
anxious toil spoiled and wasted by those who come after! As the custom of the
world is folly, the Royal Preacher could only expect that his successor would
be a foolish man—according to the general type. Every worker upon merely
human principles, no matter how accomplished, must say at last, ‘‘ I have laboured
in vain, and spent my strength for nought.” The fact, that what we have gathered
with such labour and pains may thus be wasted and dissipated by others, is enough
to make the wisest serious and sad. The speech acquires a painful hue of
reflectiveness, and the contemplation of life becomes a distress. 2. All our dilt-
gence and wisdom cannot avail to save us from oblivion. *‘ There isno remembrance
of the wise more than of the fool for ever.” It is not intended to deny all
posthumous fame. Some names will live through the whole range of time, names
like Moses—the earliest in literature, and sounding through the endless songs of
heaven. But the great bulk of mankind are not remembered by posterity—the
wise and the fool alike are soon forgotten: “‘One Cesar lives, a thousand are
forgot.” ven if we live in fame ever so long, and are at last forgotten; when
compared with eternity, this is equivalent to oblivion. 3. All our wisdom cannot
save us from the common doom of the race. “ One event happeneth to all.’”’ Our
wisdom and skill cannot save us from accidents, pains, and from that sum of all
fears and distresses—death. The terrible necessity of death awaits alike the foolish
and the wise. We take pains to gather knowledge, and the maxims of wisdom ;
death comes, and our fancied superiority over others vanishes, If there be no
future, the most sagacious of men may mournfully ask at the close of life, ““ Why
was I then more wise ?”” The wise and foolish appear to go out of life in the same
manner. AH differences are lost in the darkness of the tomb. Let us learn—that
heavenly wisdom ts complicated with no painful facts to fill us with doubts and
misgivings. Nothing can arise to dull the pure splendour of this Divine gift. The
glory of it only increases as all that is precious in life is fading away. We can
only be saved from the fate of oblivion when we seek the “ honour that cometh
from God only,” when we are “ confessed before the angels,” and our names in-
scribed in the Book of Life. All who are truly wise shall be fixed in the regions
of immortality—shall “shine as the stars for ever and ever.”


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 12. Whatever we desire to are others who have some intellectual


understand, it is necessary that we
should not only look upon it, but be-
hold it—there must be a prolonged
look. The object must not only be
seen, but seen through. All men are
bound to see what lies in their way,
but few see with the eye of intelligent
observation. The wealth of the mind
comes not as a sudden gift of fortune :
it is gathered slowly.

He who contemplates human nature
must be prepared to find it a mixed
scene of wisdom, madness, and folly.
There are wise men who govern their
eonduct by reason, and maxims gained
te nce and observation, ‘There


power, but it is rashly applied. There
is no sufficient guiding principle—their
conduct is madness—power wasted in
an irregular manner, without order or
plan. ‘here are simple men who are
easily led, and become the willing dupes
of cunning craft.

The evils of the world are incurable
by human means. We can only expect
that the future will be as the past.
The dream of human perfection is not
realised. The paths of sin and folly are
old and well worn. Generations to
come will be content to travel in them.

Posterity may forget our wisdom,
and destroy the fruits ef our labours,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTRS.


ee


But he who works with eternity in
view will find the grave a place of
restitution.

How vain are those possessions which
the most foolish of mankind can dis-
perse as chaff before the wind |

It is well noted by Hugo, that first
he looked upon wisdom as thereby
coming to behold madness and folly.
For as he speaketh—*‘ No one goeth to
darkness that he may see darkness; but
he cometh to the light, that by the light
he may see, not only light, but light
and darkness also, First therefore the
Preacher saith he beheld wisdom, s0
that he might behold in wisdom itself
what itself is, and by itself madness and
folly, which wisdom itself is not”
[Jermin].

The utmost comfort that creatures
can yield, when happiness is sought in
them, may soon be attained. It is no
such depth but that it may be sounded
by those who will put it to the trial.
One man may in a short time find out
80 much thereof as that he may defy
others after him to find more. Whence
appears a manifest difference between
heavenly and earthly consolations, the
heavenly being still upon the growing
hand, and incomprehensible by any of
the saints till in heaven they be filled

with all the fulness of God. For here
Solomon professeth himself to have been
at the bottom of earthly delights, so as
none after him could go deeper. ‘“ What
can the man do who cometh after the
king ?” [Visbet].


Verse 18. There are endowments of
human nature, and improvements in
character, which, though not distinctly
spiritual, have high absolute value.
Moral virtue and practical wisdom may
beautify and adorn the character so as
to win Divine commendation. The
young man in the Gospel fell short of
the highest excellence, yet “ Jesus be-
holding him, loved him.”

There is great variety in the courses
which natural men take in the pursuit
of happiness. Some employ the highest
prudence and caution, others are
abandoned to the most reckless folly.
There is all the difference between


darkness and light in human conduct,
even when it comes short of the highest
requirements,

Let us not despise the natural
beauties and graces of character. All
light should be welcomed. The Gospel
has an attraction for all that is pure
and lovely in human nature.

It is the property of good things that
they do not need an external praiser,
but themselves when they are seen do
testify their grace. It is a greater ex-
cellency which is approved by sight,
than that which is commended by
speech [St. Ambrose].

It is of human wisdom whereof I
conceive him to speak, which therefore,
though he could not be free from
vanity, yet doth he prefer before folly,
as much as light before darkness. Now
light hath God himself for the praiser
of it, and it is the first thing that God
praised, “ Let there be light,” is the
first word that God ever spoke; and
that ‘‘ God saw the light to be good,”
is the first praise that God ever gave.
As soon as God made the light, He
divided the darkness from it, as if he
would not have the excellency thereof
to be dishonoured by the company of
it. Let it therefore be our care also to
divide wisdom from folly. The society
of the one doth much shame the other,
and indeed most unworthy is folly, so
much as to be joined in comparison
with wisdom [Jermin].


Verse 14, Sensual pleasures dim the
light of reason, and weaken man’s
power to direct his way.

When the animal in man surmounts
the rational, the eyes which should be
the light of the body, are degraded to
the dust, and blinded.

The superior light, which the wise
man of this world holds aloft to illumi-
nate his path in life, does not prevent
him from taking his last step into the
darkness of the grave. The light that
comes from beyond the sun can alone
pierce that darkness.

A fool hath not his eyes in his head,
but in his heels, For when the com-
templative power of the soul is busied
in worldly things, the a ee the


OHAP. IL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; ECCLESIASTES.





eyes passeth to the heels, which the


serpent pursueth and biteth with his
teeth [Jermin].


Verse 15. Thoughts on the dread
humility of dying will betimes oppress
the most favoured and exalted of men.

The terrible realities of our troubled
life must sooner or later come home to,
the individual,—*“ So it happeneth even
to me.” :

In the voyage of life, our fellow
passengers are marked by a great
variety. There are rich and poor,
obscure and noble, wise and fovlish,
good and evil. But one fate awaits us
all—total shipwreck. We must all
sink into the gulf of death. Our only
consolation lies in the hope that we
shall be supplied with Divine strength
to climb up the other bank of
life.

To the wise man of the world, there
is humiliation in the thought of the
disgraceful necessity of death. But
Jesus has passed through the tomb and
sanctified it, so that for the Christian,
death becomes the gate of life. No one
who has learned the knowledge of the
holy will have mournfully to ssk when
his last hour draws near—“ Why was
I then more wise?” For such a man,
the tree of knowledge becomes the tree
of life.

A man is placed in a high situation,
receives an expensive education at
school or college, and a still more ex-
pensive one of time and experience.
And then, just when we think all this
ripe wisdom, garnered up from so many
fields, shall find its fullest use, we hear
that all is over, he has passed from
among us, and the question, hideous in
its suggestiveness, arises—“ Why was
he then more wise?” Asked from
this world’s stand-point—if there is no
life beyond the grave, then the mighty
work of God is all to end in nothing-
ness. But if this is only a state of
infancy, only the education for eternity,
then to ask why such a mind is taken
from us is just as absurd as to question
why the tree of the forest has its first
training in the nursery garden. This
is ro the nursery ground, from whence

4


we are to be transplanted into the great
forest of God’s eternal universe. There
is an absence of all distinction between
the death of one man and another. The
wise man dies as the fool with respect
to circumstances [ Robertson].

The Preacher objecteth, that although
the wise man seeth so far into the nature
and condition of things, yet that one
event happeneth to them all. And, as
to this objection. 1. He granteth it,
‘Then said I in my heart,” I said that
it was so, and in my heart confessed it
to be true. 2. He applieth it, “ As it
happeneth to the fool, so it happeneth
even tome.” I cannot deny it in my-
self, of whom it cannot be denied that
my wisdom is the greatest of any. 3.
He repineth at it in these words, “ And
why was I then more wise?” Why
did I so carefully search into the nature
and condition of things, forecast the
events of things? 4. Hedelivereth his
sentence, “ Then I said in my heart that
this also is vanity.” Then I concluded
of it, and said so in my heart when I
had considered of it [Jermin].


Verse 16. It is always a startling
thing to see the rapidity with which
the wisest and the best are forgotten.
We plough our lives in water, leaving
no furrow ; two little waves break upon
the shore, but no further vestige of our
existence is left [ Robertson].

The footprints we leave on the sands
of time are soon washed away by the
advancing tide,

The words, “And how dieth the
wise man ?” in the original are an ex-
clamation—“But O, how is it that the
wise man dieth as the fool!” This is
not the conclusion of a cold and severe
logic, but the expression of deep emo-
tion. Beneath all the glory of this life,
there is an unutterable sorrow. There
are truths too deep for words. They
are only to be uttered with a gasp and a
sigh.

Faith alone can cure the terrible
melancholy with which this view of
life afflicts the soul. The intellect, the
throne of human wisdom, is part of the
Divine image, and God will not suifer
it to die in imperfect rudiments. Man


HOMIILE1IC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





has in him some resemblances of the
Eternal God, who will not leave His


CHAP. It.


image in the grave, nor suffer this
spark of Him to see corruption.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 17—238.
Tur CONFESSIONS OF A PLEASURE-SEEKER,


I. That his life’s promise has failed. The pleasure-seeker begins life with
high hopes. The intoxication of mirth exalts his imagination, and he lives, for a
brief space, in the transports of joy. He looks forward to many years of merri-
ment, free from every invasion of sorrow. But as time passes, and he learns the
lessons of experience, and awakens to a sense of the solemn realities around him,
life’s fair promise is discovered to be a delusion. He has lived for pleasure, and
trusted in the hopes it inspired; but these have failed. 1. Jt promised that life
would be bliss, but now he deplores the very fact of existence. (Verse 17.) The
pleasures of the world, by their agreeable variety and adaptation to our lower
nature, promise to fill up every moment of life, and drive away all care and
repining ; but they soon clog the senses, the power of enjoyment is blunted, and
life itself regarded with disgust. 2. Jt promised that life would still be unfolding
new scenes of pleasure, but now tt has led him to blank despair. (Verse 2U.) He
had hoped much from his high capacity for pleasure, from his wealth, from his
skill in those great public works which would promote his magnificence, and draw
attention to his genius. But now his ingenuity is exhausted, his spirits spent,
and all is flat and weary—the world has no more to offer. The night of despair
has come, and the bright and gaudy colours of life have faded away into con-
fusion. II. That he is tormented by some ever-recurring thought. (Verses
18,21.) The Royal Preacher had dwelt upon the idea before, that his wealth
and all the products of his labour and skill must be left to some unworthy suc-
cessor. This is with him a standing grief. Here the same thought rises again.
What he had gathered with care, and produced by great labour of contrivance,
would be laid waste by some foolish man. Amidst all the pleasures of his life,
this terrible thought would come to the surface. Men of pleasure find that pain-
ful and anxious thoughts are ever arising to disturb their enjoyment, The
reflection is forced upon them that time is fast passing away, that their glory
will soon descend into the grave, that all their earthly joy will fade in the last
sickness and before the tomb, and that in the distant future even their very
children will forget them in their own merry laugh and joy. Some deep thought
is ever coming uppermost before which pleasure grows pale. III. That he
enjoys no true repose. (Verse 23.) He has no rest during the progress of his
work, nor even when his task is done. The night, which invites repose, is in-
vaded by care and trouble. His wealth can procure luxury; but the heart is
unquiet, and sleep is not to be had at any price. This shows us—1l. That there
is a majesty in our nature which disdains to be satisfied with mere worldly pleasure.
2. That a sense of the solemn facts of our nature and destiny cannot be banished
from the mind by mirth, 8. That the God of our soul can alone satisfy tt,


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 17. If God has disappeared
from the efforts of men, a disgust of
life appears sooner or later [pore

There is a contempt of the world
which is not genuine religion. Pleasure
may heartlessly spurn away those with
whom she has played ; they may become


weary of the world, and yet be without
the consolations of God. The disgust
of life may lead to remorse instead of
true repentance, and a stoical resigna-
tion to inflexible fate may closely
imitate the calm anticipation of the
joys of heaven,
85


CHAP. YL.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





The disorder of the mind darkens the
whole scene of life. The brightest
glory of the world may be clouded by
the gloom of our own hearts.

To hate life is to destroy the founda-
tions of all happiness, for without
existence no happiness could be possible.
The gift of salvation can turn existence
into a blessing. Our creation is a
pledge of guardianship. It is to us a
sure sign and token that *‘ God will not
forsake the work of His own hands,”

The original expresseth itself more
fully, “I hated lives,” not only this
kind of life, or that kind of life; nor
only this time of life, or that time of
life; not only the life of this man, or
of that man; but the lives of all men,
of all kinds, of all times. I hated
mine own life, “because the work that
is done under the sun is grievous unto
me ;” the life of others, because “ All is
vanity and vexation of spirit” [Jermin].

The things of this life have true
bitterness, false contentment, certain
grief, uncertain pleasure, hard labour,
fearful rest, matter full of misery, hope
empty of happiness [Augustine].


Verse 18. It is only the resultof our
labours that we pass on to posterity.
The toil is ours, and theirs the fruit.
The effects of our labour and skill
remain after we are gone. They
endure for others, but not for us.

We are only the conveyers of the
things of this life to others, not the

sessors of them.

As a thief comes in one night, and
bears away the fruits of many toilsome
days, s0 a man may leave his possessions
to some one unworthy and unprofitable.

Man is but a tenant under the great
Lord of all. He has no lease of life;
but is liable to be turned out at a
moment’s notice. He occupies his little
holding for s brief space, and then
departs, leaving all he has gathered and
wrought to those who come after.

We cannot be truly said to possess
that which can be severed from us,
leaving us poor indeed. God is the
only portion of the soul for ever.


Verse 19. He who has gathered
86


spiritual treasure is rich in the wealth
of immortality, and will be for ever
master of all his possessions, In the
future kingdom only the wise shall rule,

The works of faithful souls shall follow
them beyond the world. They shall
not be left behind to run the chance of
being wasted or spoiled by others.

Man has but a brief sovereignty over
his earthly labours. A fool, from
motives of mischief, or from some vain
notion of improvement, may spoil the
work of the wisest man.

It is one of the vanities of wealth
that a man knows not to what use it
will be put by his successor.


Verse 20. Here we have set down
the two causes of despair—vanity and
vexation. Vanity is a great cause of
despair, for when men have laboured
hard, and find no success, that makes
them despair of any success [Jermin].

Even the utmost depths of despair
cannot overwhelm the cry of the soul.

The darkest hour of the night is
before the dawn. ‘The darkest hour of
the soul may be the prelude to a cheerful
and prosperous day.

Some will not seek the highest re-
source until all that is earthly has
failed. They must be driven to feed
upon the husks of despair before they
will think upon the bread which is ia
their Father’s house,


Verse 21. An excess of carefulness
for posterity may prove a hindrance in
the duty that lies before us.

We enter into the labours of others,
build upon their foundation, and come
into the easy possession of what they
have won by careful thought and labour.
If we are true spiritual workers, we
have a wealthy heritage. Let us strive
to use it well.

Even the best men must be content
to accept the failure of much of the
results of their works and wisdom. In
every mental and moral effort for the
good of others, there is some waste of
power. The real effective force of our
life is small—both in regard to the
present generation, and in regard to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


CHAP. If,


Se mle


The Lord in His wise Providence
sees it fit that great things of the
world should fall for a portion to men
who have neither wit nor experience for
purchasing or improving them, that all
may be convinced that these things are
not infallible signs of His love; and
that men who get them may be allured
to their duty by them, or the more
severely punished when he reckons
with them [Visbet].


Verse 22. The pleasures of the world
depart one by one, and leave men the
sad heritage of weariness and vexa-
tion.

There is nothing here that is an
adequate recompense for our anxiety of
thought, and wasting labour. If this
life be all, even our supremacy in the
empire of mind is but a poor consolation,
seeing our stay is so short and death
strikes the sceptre from our hand.

It is well to pause in the midst of our
Jabours, and ask ourselves to what
profit do they tend? This is the atti-
tude in which the soul hears the voice
of God, bidding her return to enduring
pleasures and works of lasting profit.

For when it is asked what hath a
man of all his labour, perhaps some
one may answer—Behold I fill up my
sacks, my walls do hardly hold that
which I get, my gains do flow out every
way, and money runs like a stream into
my purse. Yet this is no answer; for


that thy sack may be filled, thy soul
fevereth with cares; that thy gold may
increase, thine honesty is diminished ;
that thou mayest be richly clothed
without, thou art spoiled and left naked
within [Augustine],


Verse 23. The joys of the children
of this world are but the illusions of a
dream, There is a deep sorrow running
through life which men strive in vain
to hide.

Much of the work of the world is
pursued beyond what is simply necessary
for the sustenance and ornament of life,
Men try to avoid being left alone with
themselves. They contrive to draw off
the attention from their own misery.
Yet the grief of life remains, and, like a
fatal distemper, cleaves to the soul.

Sleep is the gift of God, who secures
it to the contented mind and clear con-
science.

God has access to our spirit at all
times, and when at night we rest from
labours and strive to shut out care, He
can trouble us with unknown terrors.

There is only one pillow on which
the heart can rest—the bosom of the
Infinite Father.

The magnetic needle has one position
of rest—when it trembles to the pole. In
all other positions it is under constraint,
and tends to swing itself torest. So the
soul can have no true repose until the
affections rest in God.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 24—26,
Tus Wisrst Usk or THE PRESENT WORLD.


I. A proper enjoyment of the blessings of life. The good things of this
world can never bring us true and lasting happiness if we live for them alone.
But we must not despair of finding external happiness even in these, if we use
them aright. There must be some lawful means of enjoying the world’s good,
The Creator, in His works, has provided both for ornament and delight. We must
not be as sulky children, refusing to enjoy ourselves when He invites us. To
condemn all that the world offers to cheer the spirit of man, without showing how
it may be properly enjoyed, or substituting some other pleasures, would either
drive the soul to despair, or plunge it more deeply into unlawful pleasures. The
state of our souls determines what is good or bad in pleasure, We project our
nature upon the external world. ‘To the pure, all things are pure.” How are
we to enjoy the blessings of this life? 1. They should be subordinated to our
higher wants. As long as we remember that they only minister to our lower
wants, we preserve the true dignity of our soul He who has the ee


cHar, 1. | HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





can rightly and well enjoy the lowest. When pleasure is made the end of life,
the soul becomes debased, and unfit for the vision of God. The pure light of
heaven in the soul can transfigure aJl things in life. Christ used the world, but
He had superior meat, drink, and joy than He could find here. To Him, the
world was a place of duty and trial; but He tasted the world’s pleasures as a
“Brook by the way.” 2. They should be used with moderation of desire.
‘* Enjoy good in his labour.” There is a happiness naturally arising out of the
things of life. What we force out of them beyond their natural yield will only
prove a bitter portion. The path of the wise is ever traced between dangerous
extremes, 3. Superior power and factlity of enjoyment must not tempt us to abuse
them, (Verse 25.) Solomon had riches and position—means to procure enjoy-
ments. He had the skill to devise exquisite pleasures, and to secure an agreeable
variety. But he found that all must be under the control of some exalted purpose.
The best gifts of heaven may be abused ; but while reason and conscience govern,
we are safe. II. A recognition of the Divine source of the blessings of life,
(Verse 24.) 1. The blessings of this life are the gift of God. They are His pro-
visions for the creature whom He has made. A remembrance of the great
source of all our good makes life sacred. To abuse this present world is to take
an unfair advantage of infivite kindness. To worship God’s gifts instead of Him-
self is idolatry. We must use God’s creatures for the same end for which He made
them—His glory. 2. The power to enjoy them comes from God. If we can enjoy
His gifts with contentment and cheerfulness, this power comes from Him. How
soon God may destroy our happiness, by either removing His gifts, or depriving
us of the power of enjoying them! 38. Zheir true value and use can only be known
by Divine teaching. If we can taste with grateful cheerfulness what is provided
for us here on our way to our superior home, the idea is divinely imparted to us.
When we realize the true idea ot life, we can best enjoy the world. The repose
of mind, and peace of consvience thence arising, are favourable to the truest enjoy-
ment. ILI, A conviction that there are Divine provisions for the good.
There is an apparent indifference on the part of God to moral distinctions in the
human character, Yet there are, even in this life, indications of retributive
justice. God will make abundant provision for the man who is “good in His
sight.” 1. He will be supplied with the true guiding principle of life. ‘ Wisdom
and knowledge.” For lack of these, many leave the best pleasures of life untasted.
They are the dupes of imagination and fancy. When our earthly enjoyments are
not held in check by a superior guiding power, they turn to vexation and misery. A
careful observance of the facts of life, and the wisdom to employthem for the highest
ends, will secure for us the purest enjoyments, 2. He will have the rational comforts
of life. To him “ joy” shall be given; and this depends upon the state of the heart.
“A man’s life” (not the sustenance of his life, but the life by which he lives)
“consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth.” Existenca
is the gift of God’s goodness to all men, but the life of life, the joy and real soul
of it, isa mark of His favour. IV. A conviction that the impious use of the
Creator’s gifts is ruinous. (Verse 26.) The sinner, as he riots in pleasure,
May appear to have the best of the world, but he is only laying up a store of
misery. The justice of heaven is not a wild passion of revenge, but is calm and
dignified; and though the sword of God is not in haste to smite, yet, if not
averted by repentance, it will descend with fearful destruction upon the sinner.
A wrong use of this world must end in utter ruin.


SUGGESTIVE COMMEN1S ON THE VERSES.
Verse 24, True piety is opposed to destroy the plain truths and duties of


asceticism. Revealed Religiondoesnot nature.
88


——


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. IL





Loepmeectd
Piety obliges no man to be dull
[South].


The common actions of life may be

sanctified by a general purpose of con-
_ secration to God.

The Creator not only sends us gifts
which minister to onr use and delight,
but even the power to enjoy is also His

ift.

; Christianity has ennobled many words
which once served the uses of supersti-
tion by making them the representatives
of nobler thoughts. In like manner, the
worldly man’s triad—to eat, drink, and
be merry—may be ennobled by an
abiding intention of pleasing God in
all that we do.

Christians may have earthly joy.
Let there be no half-remorseful sensa-
tions as thougb they were stolen joys.
Christ had no sympathy with that tone
of mind which scowls on human happi-
ness. His first manifestation of power
was at a marriage feast. Who would
check the swallows’ flight, or silence
the gush of happy melody which the
thrush pours forth in spring? [Robert-
son. |


Verse 25. He can best lay down
the law of life who is qualified by ex-
perience.

I take the original word here used to
signify to call or cry aloud, and so
should render the verse according to
this sense: “ Who can call for more
freely, who can enjoy more speedily,
the good of this life than I can?”
And, therefore, who should also be be-
lieved rather than I, who deny the en-
joying of the good of this life to be the

of man? From hence we may
take this lesson, that no one do promise
to himself, or take upon himself, those
things which those who have been far


more able than himself have not been
able to perform. And for an in<
stance: let not those promise to them-
selves heaven who live carelessly in
religion, when it is hard for them who
are very careful to attain thither
[Jermin].


Verse 26. True goodness is that
which can endure in the sight of God.

Here we have: 1. A satisfaction for
the intellect—‘* Wisdom and know-
ledge.” 2. A satisfaction for the affec-
tions—“‘ Joy.” 3. A satisfaction for
the conscience— Good in His sight.”

Man, in the present world, is under
the moral government of God, even in
his pleasures, No part of his conduct
is indifferent, for it has some relation to
the formation of character, and there-
fore to our future destiny.

All the vanity, all the toilings of men
after wisdom, happiness and rest, which
in so many ways lead men to the grave,
where ceases all the distinction which
they strive to obtain on earth, are not
allotted to the pious man by God; they
are a curse which sin has laid upon
man, but which God will make a bless-
ing to His chosen ones. For these
busy, restless creatures gather and heap
up for those who are good in God’s eyes,
And these latter shall  gratui-
tously receive by the sinner’s labour
what he seeks and finds not, what he
labours for and cannot enjoy: wisdom,
knowledge, joy. What is the Divine
word, and whence are taken this wis-
dom, knowledge, and joy that in it
exist? Are they not honey made by
bees in the slain beasts? What ara
the stories that they tell us but exam-
ples of sinner’s toil, of the vanity and
folly into which men have fallen?
[ Hamann, ]





39


GAP. IL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BCCLESIASTES.


EE EI EEE TT PEL IE POI IE REL IO CI LOE AE EN IG OPES


CHAPTER IL


.  Carricat Norzs.—l1. Season-time.] Season signifies a certain period or term ; time denotes
@ division ef time in general, 2. A time to plant, &c.] Used in O, T. as a metaphor to
describe the founding and destruction of cities. 7. A time to rend and a time sew.] The
rending of garments on hearing sad tidings, and sewing them when the season of grief is past,
1L In His time.] This is the emphatic part of the sentence. The fitting time is one of the
chief elements in the ways of Providence, which raises in us the thought of an Infinite Wisdom.
Also He hath set the world in their heart, The world here should be rendered eternity—i.e., the
universe considered as duration—as that which is extended in time. It is because man has
eternity in his heart that he is able, from the observation of Oreation, to form an idea of “ His
eternal power and Godhead.” So that no mancan find out the work that God maketh. Mon
have an idea of God and His immense dominion; but the details of the method and eircumstances
of His Severeign rule are but imperfectly known. 14. It shall be ores) God’s order is fixed
—His law is eternal. 15. God requireth that which is past.) Literally, God seeketh that
which was crowded out. Thus God seeks out again what the revolutions of history have
pushed back into the past, as if it were entirely done with. The meaning is—that the past
ages of wrong and unjust suffering shall be called up again. God will investigate the case of
those who have been persecuted. 198. That God might manifest them.] The disorders of the
resent are permitted to the end that God might test, or prove, men. t they themselves are
sts. Not in regard to moral character, but to the common fate of dissolution, awaiting
alike both men and beasts, They themselves—é.¢., apart from Him who alone hath immortality,
and in whose sole right is the gift of it—men, like the beasts, are all included in one sad fate.
This thought is expanded in the next verse. 12. For who knoweth the Spirit of man that goeth
upward.] Man has no distinct and certain knowledge of his own future destiny, or of that of
other forms of life. The sudject is altogether beyond the range of human experience. Like
God Himself, the future state is unseen and unknown by us. We can indeed apprehend both
these truths by faith; yet, from the mere human standpoint, we may reason with equal
plausibility, so far as outward appearances are concerned, for or against immortality. 22. For
who shall bring him to see what shall be after him?] Man cannot tell what God will do in
the future with all his earthly circumstances—how far, in the great future, they will be
modified or destroyed. Hence riches, &c., must have many elements of uncertainty.
Therefore enjoy the present,


can Cepecee


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH. Verses 1—8.
Toe SUPREMACY OF THE DIVINE CONTROL.


Man forms designs for his own happiness, gives free scope to his powers, and
traces out the course of his life. Yet there is over him a higher system of
things, a stern and terrible Power by which he is overmastered and subdued.
He is made, after all, to fulfil the designs of heaven. The Divine control over
every domain of creation is supreme over all other sovereignties. This is evident
from the following facts: I. The Divine Control is exerted throughout all
time. Human history is inserted between the two eternities. In the infinite
solitudes of the past, before the birth of time, the mind has not whereon to rest,
nor can the eye pierce beyond the present order of things into the immense
future. Between these there isa range of time, forming the platform upon
which human history is erected. Here the mind can rest, and survey the rule of
the Supreme, 1. God made time for us by giving a peculiar direction to His power.
Before time was, or ever any creature was made, He dwelt in that eternity which
knows no periods. No voice could be heard in that vast solitude but His own.
Yet He was not content to remain thus solitary, but surrounded Himself with
those intelligencies upon whom He might pour the illustrations of His wisdom
and benevolence. Thus the Divine power directed by goodness has created time
for us wherein all the circumstances and issues of all creatures are displayed.
2. God rules over the whole course of time which He has made, Origination gives
a natural title to possession, has exerted His power and wisdom both im

40


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. Ul.








time and space, and therefore has an undisputed claim to reign supreme over each
realm. 3. God’s Supreme Control is to be observed chiefly in the events of time.
Events take place at certain seasons, and a season is a portion cut off from time.
They are ita joints, or articulations—critical periods of time. What has been
ripening slowly through long years comes to the birth at a moment in the grand
decisive events of history. Thus the Deluge, the giving of the Law, the establish-
ment of Judaism, the founding of Christianity, the invention of Printing, the
Reformation, are some of the great births of time. They are seasons when it is
most of all observed that there is a wise and Infinite Power above, directing the
great issues of time. These are the joints that connect and strengthen the whole
frame of human history. The smooth course of affairs often fails to excite
attention, but great events startle men into surprise, and invite contemplation.
The thoughtless world is thus roused to behold the mighty hand of the great
Ruler of all, II. The Divine control is marked by an unchangeable order.
The times and seasons in which every purpose comes to full ripeness are pre-
determined by God. With Him there is no disordered mixture of things—no
wild confusion. Infinite wisdom cannot be taken by surprise, or plunged of a
sudden into perplexity. All the events of time arise from a fixed order of
things. They are determined by a plan, dimly seen by us, but traced
in stern and clear lines by a steady hand, and with the precision and
confidence of infinite skill, We call this regular order of things law, for so it is
as seen from our point of view; but on God’s side it is the exercise of will; not
indeed of an uncertain and capricious nature, but following method—the will of
the Father of Lights—a clear and illumined will. This is unchangeable by us, or
dy any other power. i. Infinite wisdom and power lead to such a result. God
hag no need to make experiments to try some doubtful issue. He has no mis-
takes to repair, nor can any reason arise to oblige Him to retouch and modify His
plan. In His vast design no element, however small, is omitted or overlooked,
He has power to carry all His purposes into effect; hence such a Being has no
cause or reason to oblige Him to depart from a fixed order. 2. Zhe study of
nature teaches us that there must be such an order in human events. There is such
a fixed order in the physical world, in the great orbs that roll above us, The
laws of nature are regular, severe, exact. We can depend upon them in their
inflexible constancy. All things in the universe are ordered by number, weight,
and measure. Are we to suppose that the regular plan of the Divine government
is only concerned with lifeless matter, and does not also extend with equal
accuracy and completeness to souls? Is man alone to be made the sport of blind
chance, when all movements and changes of created things are governed by a
rigid law? Man, with all the events of time that concern him, reveals an infinite
eomplication, yet surely the boundless wisdom of God is equal to the task of
governing him according to a regular plan? The most slippery elements of
human affairs are held by the Divine hand. 8. Zhe Bible is full of this doctrine,
What reason teaches us to expect, the Bible reveals as a fact. The added light
of Revelation enlarges our prospect, and strengthens our sight of the wide realms
over which God rules. What is the Gospel itself but the kingdom of God, imply-
ing authority, law, and order? ‘The more we look into God’s latest Revelation,
the more are we persuaded that there is nothing that concerns human nature
which isleft out by the Divine plan. The teaching of the Bible is that man, as
an inhabitant of this world, and as a candidate for immortality, is completely
under the control of the Supreme. III. The Divine control is illustrated by the
whole course of human affairs. The hand of God in history can be clearly per-
ceived by every one whose attention is at all awake. The proudest is brought,
sooner or later, to confess that God has “ beset him, behind and before.” The
kings of the earth who have “taken counsel together against the Lord and His
Anointed ” have either been tamed to submission, or in mad rebellion od aa


CHAP. IL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.








themselves azainst the bars of destiny. History is but a revelation of the fixed
principles of Providence. A survey of this scene of man will give abundant
illustration of the completeness of the Divine control throughout the whole extent
of human history. 1. Jt ts tllustrated in the individual life. (1.) The boundaries
of that life are determined. Birth and death are the extreme limits between
which each single life receives a manifestation. Life is purely a gift. We sought
it not: it was thrust upon us. Though tlowing to us through human channels,
it rises from the Fountain of Life. We were summoned into His presence, The
time of our public appearance here was appointed by Providence, and we must
accept it for good or evil. We are here, called from the abyss of nothing by the
Almighty power. The time of our departure hence is also determined. Though
that time is to us unknown, yet where our journey of life shall end is known fully
to the Great Disposer of all things, He has already drawn the circle which we
must fill, nor can we by all our skill and care enlarge it, nor enclose a greater area
from the territory of life allotted to us. (2.) The discipline of that life is determined.
We pass through various changes of fortune, and these are employed by Divine
Providence as a means of spiritual education, We are planted, and again
plucked up—we enter upon new modes of life, and old scenes pass away from us,
never to return. Structures which we had raised in confidence and hope are broken
down, and with a sadder heart and dearly-bought experience we build again as
best we may. We are stunned by disease, as if killed by the terrible blow; and
then healed again to receive what awaits us in life. In the merchandise of life,
we experience the excitement of loss and gain; and what we have secured by
energy and kept with care we may be obliged, in the emergencies of fortune, to
cast away. (3.) The emotions of our life are determined. We havenocommand
over our joys or our sorrows. They arise from the constitution of our nature,
acted upon by the various changes in the world around us. There are times when
sorrow lifts the sluices of our tears, and we cannot intercept their flow; again the
season of joy comes and shakes our countenance into ripples of laughter. There
are times too of excessive emotion, when to mourn or to dance seems to be the
only fit expression of the great force with which both grief and pleasure possess
our frame, (4.) The seasons of special duty are also determined. War and
peace, silence and speech, are here selected as the type of many. Ina world of
conflicting interests and passions, there are times when even the most peaceful
disposition is dragged into a contest, and then the season comes when the con-
ditions of peace ought to be cheerfully accepted. There are times when silence
is the highest duty, lest we should pluck the unripe fruit of wisdom, or speak
words out of season to some beavy heart. Then the moment comes when we
should hold no longer from speaking, but give utterance to the thought within us
to instruct, to comfort, and to bless. The seasons both of silence and speech are
forced upon us, when the most sullen is compelled to utterance, and the most
noisy tongue is silenced. 2. Jt is illustrated in the life of nations. The history
of nations is analogous to that of individuals, but it is drawn to a larger scale. It
is developed through greater measures of time. Nations, like individuals, have
peculiarities of character, and special elements of strength and weakness.
As the moral determinations of a man’s early life change the whole
course of his subsequent history, so it is with nations. By great moral
crises they rise to superior influence and grandeur, or date from them the first
symptoms of decline. History shows that the Divine control over the
life of nations is complete. (1.) They have their allotted span of life. For them,
too, there is a “time to be born and a time to die.” They rise,
flourish, and decay, and run through a strange and eventful course between the
cradle and the grave. One nation after another has passed away. We have but
the poor remains of their glory embalmed in history. Rome and Carthage, and
mighty Babylon—where are they? The mighty past is full of the graves of
42


HOMILETIC CUMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES,  cHaP. U1.
NN eens


empires. Divine Providence calls a people to be a nation, and when their course
is run they go down into the dust of time. They were “planted” and then
“plucked up,” they were gathered and then dispersed by weakness, and com-
pletely undone. (2.) Zhey have times of severe Providential visitations. They are
wounded as by the thrusts and stabs of some terrible fortune; they are healed
again, recover strength, and live tocomplete their history. (3.) They pass through
the varied changes of public feeling. In times of great public calamity they are
constrained to weep and mourn; and in some great national excitement of joy
they assume the proper circumstances of mirth andrapture. (4.) They have the
alternations both of prosperity and adversity. They have their times “to get,” and
“to lose,” “to gather,” and to “castaway.” (5.) They have times of special duty.
Now, by the pressure of circumstances, or by a sense of propriety, they are forced
to silence; and again, the time comes for self assertion. Hence, love and hatred,
peace and war. 3. It ésillustrated in the life of Churches. The life of the Church
itself, as the Kingdom of God, survives the destruction of States and all the
changes of the world; the seed of the Kingdom is imperishable. But separate
Churches have histories as strange and eventful as those of the individual.
(1.) They have a fixed period of existence, They are founded, endowed with
spiritual life; and after flourishing, it may be through centuries, they die out.
They are ‘planted ” and “ plucked up; ” gathered as stones for a building, and,
like the Temple at Jerusalem, they are scattered. Where are the Seven
Churches of Asia now? Where those flourishing African Churches of the early
centuries? Infidelity and superstition grow rank over the ruins of once famous
Churches. Ecclesiastical systems change; they have no natural immortality.
Each system will have its day. There is no miracle wrought to preserve the
garments of religious thought and Church order from waxing old, and decaying
through the wilderness of history. (2.) They have seasons of manifest Divine
Visitation. There are times when God, in His dealings with His Church,
compels attention. There are manifest visitations of God to His people both of
anger and love. By the corruption of doctrine, and the influence of the world,
by neglecting her true mission, and by prosperity, the Church is corrupted, and
Divine judgments threaten, and at length fall upon her. Then is the season to weep
and mourn and torend the garments. Providence often resorts to terrible means,
as if the Lord would slay His people. Then there are times of blessed visitation,
when the Church is increased and prosperous; the sharp wound is healed, the
season of joy and exultation has come. (3.) They have seasons of special
duty. There are times when Churches can afford to be silent and regard the
cavils and opposition of others with a lofty indifference. It is often best to
maintain peace, and to allow the fury without to spend its own violence and
utterly exhaust itself. But the fit time for self-assertion arrives, and the Church
must carry the war into the enemies’ camp. The Christian Religion itself has
been the occasion of terrible conflicts, and men have kindled the flame of fierce
passions upon the altar of God. The temper of the world towards the Churches
of different periods varies. It is fickle and inconstant like human affection.
There is for the Church, in regard to her relations with the world, a “ time to
love, and a time to hate.” For the Church of every age there are “times and
seasons which the Father hath put into His own power.” They are all a portion
of the eternal plan.
THE OLOOK OF DESTINY.


Mortattry isa huge time-piece wound up
by the Almighty Maker; and after he has set
it a-going nothing can stop it till the Angel
swears that time shall be no longer. But
here it ever vibrates and ever advances—tick-
ing one child of Adam into existence, and
ticking another out, Now it gives the whirr


of warning, and the world may look out for
some great event; and presently it fulfils its
warning, and rings in a noisy revolution, But
there! as its index travels on so resolute and
tranquil, what tears and raptures attend its
progress! It was only another wag of the
sleepless pendulum ; but it was fraught with
43


cuaP. ub HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





destiny, and a fortune was made—s heart was

ken—an empire fell, We cannot read the
writing on the mystic cogsas they are coming
slowly up; but each of them is coming on
God’s errand, and carries in its graven brass
® Divine decree, Now, however—now, that
the moment is past, we know; and in the ful-
filment we can read the fiat, This instant


Sains


was to say to Solomon, “ Be born!” this other
was to say to Solomon in all his glory, “Die!”
That instant was to “plant” Israel in Pales-
tine; that other was to “pluck him up.”
And thus inevitable, inexorable, the great
clock of human destiny moves on, till a mighty
hand shall grasp its heart and hush for ever
its pulse of iron [Dr. J, Hamilton].


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1. In all the afflictions of the
good, it is an element of consolation
that the severe season will have an end,
and in the great future a brighter one
will arise. It is the highest prudence
to await in patience God's time.

The fact that there is a Divine plan
to be observed amidst all the seeming
disorder of human things, is the charter
of our liberty, the very foundation of
our hope. Under the dominion of a
wild and reckless chance, we could not
walk sure-footedly in this life, nor
cherish a deathless hope of better things
awaiting us in the life to come.

There are atmospheres that support,
and others that extinguish flame. There
are beliefs that have a like effect upon
the soul. Without the recognition of
@ superior power controlling all things,
the torch of hope cannot burn,

The plan of God must be distin-
guished from fate and destiny, Some
ancient philosophers taught that God
Himself was subjected to an iron
necessity, that the resistless walls of
fate constrained even the Highest. We
know that God is above His plan;
that it is framed by Infinite Wisdom,
Maintained by Infinite Power, and
pervaded by the Spirit of Infinite Love.

The plan of God results not from
mere will, supported by a terrible and
uncertain power. His will is not wilful-
ness, or caprice. We know what we are
to expect from one who is wise and good,

The view of the machinery of the
Divine Government, constructed with
such infinite skill, and moved on by a
terrible power, would of itself oppress
and overwhelm our soul, Human
nature must languish even under the
contemplation of the highest regularity
and order. But there is an infinite
tenderness above all, and within the

44


awful circles of wisdom and power
there is a Divine bosom on which weary
souls can repose, and where they are
safe from fear.

Even Christ Himself became subject
to the plan of God. He waited for
His “ baptism ” and His “hour.” His
greatest enemies could not prevail
against Him till the appointed season
had come.

* Time” —* Season.” 1, Consola-
tion for the righteous in the day of
trouble. They know that there will be
a period to their sorrow, and that com-
fort and rest await them. 2. Assurance
of the triumph of truth and right. He
who has formed the plan of nature’s vast
year is the Holy One, and in the upshot
of all things He will vindicate His own
character. He will make the cause of
the right and the true to triumph. 3
The condemnation of the false and
wrong. The most rebellious will be
forced at last to submission; and he
who has enjoyed his fancied liberty,
because judgment appeared to linger,
will find that he is overtaken at last.

There is no wandering out of the
reach of God’s perfect knowledge, no
slipping through the hands of Omnipo-
tence. God’s hand is as steady as His
eye; and certainly thus to reduce con-
tingencies to method, instability and
chance itself to an unfailing rule and
order, argues such @ mind as is fit to
govern the world [South].

Nothing can come from the most
carefully constructed of human schemes
till the pre-determined hour has struck,
even if all men on earth were to put
forth the most violent efforts. God
will not suffer the hands of His great
clock to be pointed by the kings and
princes and lords of the earth [Luther].

The things “under heaven” have


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. II





—<





but a time—a brief season. There is
awaiting the good and the true the calm
and untroubled flow of the ages of
eternity.


Verse 2. There is “a time to be
born,” and however much a man may
dislike the era on which his existence is
cast, he cannot help himself: that time
is his, and he must make the most of
it. Milton need not complain that his
lot is fallen on evil days; for these are
his days, and he can have no other.
Roger Bacon and Galileo need not
grudge their precocious being, that they
have been prematurely launched into
the age of inquisitors and knowledge-
quenching monks—for this age was
made to make them. And so with the
time to die. Voltaire need not offer
half his fortune to buy six weeks’ re-
prieve; for if the appointed moment
has arrived it cannot pass into eternity
without taking the sceptic with it.
And even good Hezekiah—his tears and
prayers would not have turned the
shadow backward, had that moment
of threatened death been the moment
of God’s intention [Dr. J. Hamilton].

How immense is the difference be-
tween the circumstances of one human
being and another!—and yet this is
made by, what seems to us, the mere
accident of birth. “This babe to be
hail’d and woo’d as a Lord, and that to
be shunn’d like a leper!” Thus the
Supreme Power determines the “ bounds
of our habitation” by appointing the
time and place where we shall make
our entrance upon life.

Each human soul born into the world
is an entirely new product. It never
existed before. Matter continues the
same through all changes and evolu-
tions, but souls are strictly new. The
observation of this common fact pre-
pares the mind to accept the great
mystery of creation.

To be born is—1. To enter upon
scenes of life already prepared for us.
The world was made ready for our
habitation, and the circumstances of
society were prepared for us long before
we came, 2. To incur the obligation
of duty. The fact that we are created





by a higher Power implies a certain
relation to that Power, and therefore
corresponding duties, 3. To take our
part in the system of Providence. We
become, at birth, a part of the estab-
lished order of things; we must take
our place and accept our condition, 4.
To enter upon a state of probation.
There is another great event awaiting
us, determined by the Divine decree—
death. Life is the season in which the
character is to be fitted for the next
scene of things to which God shall call
us.
The gift of Life.—1l. It is a Divine
gift. God alone can impart it. The
breathing marble is but a figure of
speech. The Spirit of God, the primal
force of the universe, is *‘ sent forth, and
they are created.” 2. It is a blessed
gift. Our creation is the foundation of
all the blessings that we can enjoy in
any world, All the riches and ad-
vancement belonging to thought and
feeling from hence take their rise. 3.
It is an awful gift. Existence is a
terrible responsibility, for we may make
it an evil and a curse,

Believers and Christians know that
no tyrant’s sword can kill or destroy
them, and that before their hour comes
no creature whatever can harm them.
Hence they do not trouble and worry
themselves much about death, but when
it comes they die unto the will of God
as He pleases, like lambs and young
children [Luther].

The busiest of mortals must find a
time to die. Death has been described
as “the land without any order,” and,
as it seems to us, without any order
the King of Terrors carries off his
victims. But Providence observes a
fixed order. There is for every mortal
course a fixed hour to close.

The time and manner of our death
are to us unknown. ‘This uncertainty
is beneficial—1, On social grounds.
Man, by this provision, does not end
his labours till the last moment in which
he can be useful to society. 2. On
religious grounds. The motives for
seeking God are strengthened by the
uncertainty of life.

But above all, believe it, the sweetest

45


GHAP. IL.





Canticle is Nunc dimittis, where a man
hath obtained worthy ends and expecta-
fions. Death hath this also, that it
openeth the gate to good fame, and
extinguisheth envy [Bacon].

The time of death is one—l. Of
parting from all the associations of life.
Those scenes of nature and of man
which had become endeared to us are
rudely torn from our heart. There is
a complete loss of the world. 2. Of
an oppressive sense of loneliness. There
is no human breast on which the parting
soul can rely. The dread journey
must be attempted alone, as far as
human supports are concerned. 3. Of
the dread of the unknown and untried.
The unknown is ever the terrible,

And so there is “a time to plant.”
The impulse comes upon a man of
fortune, and he lays out his spacious
lawn, and studs it with massive trees;
and he plants his garden, and in the
soil imbeds the richest and rarest flowers,
And that impulse fades away, and in
the fickleness of sated opulence the
whole is rooted up, and converted into
a wilderness again. Or by his own or
4 successor’s fall, the region is doomed
tw destruction; and when strangling
nettles have choked the geraniums and
the lilies, and, crowded into atrophy,
the lean plantations grow tall and
branchless, the axe of an enterprising
purchaser clears away the dark thickets,
and his plough-share turns up the weedy
parterre [Dr. J. Hamilton].

God has often plucked up the
heathen and planted His own people.
The Church is a cleared enclosure in
the midst of the wilderness of the
world,

The Heavenly Husbandman will
pluck up every piant that is unfit for
His garden.

The growths of sin and error can
only flourish foratime. No advantage
of situation can give them a title to
continuance. The season for plucking
up will come, for God must remove
them out of His sight.


Verse 3. God often resorts to terrible

means in order to purify His Church,

Affliction is sometimes sharp, and
46


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES





seems to be the prelude to death; but
it is not in itself an end. God only
ordains death as a passage to life. He
is the Heavenly Physician who wounds
but to heal.

The hurt comes before the healing,
and affliction before the fruition of
blessedness,

The miracles of healing performed
by Our Lord contain a prophecy of
what He will do as the Restorer of
Paradise. He will heal all the wounds
of His people, and give them life to
enjoy in its best condition.

Times of healing, whether of bleeding
and sick nations, of rent and distempered
Churches, or wounded spirits, are in
God’s hand; and, till His time come, all
essays of other physicians for healing
are in vain; and therefore He is to be
humbly employed and depended upon
for that end, considering that however
times of healing be fixed with Him,
yet the importunity of penitents is
ordinarily a comfortable forerunner of
their being healed [ Nisbet].

The most famous and enduring of
works have been destroyed, and the
glories of each succeeding age are often
built upon the ruins of the past.

No worldly fortune so great but God
can break it down, as He will for every
man at death, All the works of man
are doomed. Those structures alone
shall abide that are raised upon the
everlasting foundations,

When this life is past, there will be,
for the good, an end of the succession
of breaking down and building up.
For them there is prepared the city
which shall never be spoiled by the
invader.

God builds again the walls of the
Church when He grants great spiritual
prosperity and increase.

In the Church’s lowest condition the
faithful few need not despair; the
“time to build up” will come.

The progress of all human things is
towards final and complete ruin. But
upon these ruins God will raise ever-
lasting habitations.

In the midst of failure and destruc-
tion, the wise may bope and take
courage, Their ruined structures shall


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.
A ences


be built again. We must fail here; but
if we are one with God, we shall find
all re-constructed for us on a larger
plan, and with more refined elegance.


Verse 4. We cannot fix the seasons
of sorrow or of joy; they are forced
upon us by the decrees of Providence,

With the good, joy always comes
last. Their history is a transcript of
the history of Christ. He suffered
first, and then entered into His glory.

The weeping of the world is but
tears shed over the grave of hope; it
is the anguish of despair. But the
righteous weep with a sadness which
takes comfort. Their darkest prospect
is rounded by the glory of unfading
hope.

There are seasons when the Church
must hang her harp upon the willows
and weep the tears of memory and long
regrets; but the night of weeping shall
be folluwed by the morning of joy.

It is best to yield to the feeling of
the time, for this is the design of Provi-
dence. The children of this world try
to force themselves to laughter when
they ought to weep—there is a deep
misery underlying their loudest joy.

Tears are, as it were, the blood of


_ the wounds of the soul, which manifest


the greatness of them; and so the light
skipping of the body in dancing is but
the chadow of the light and lofty flying
of the mind in joy [Jermin].

The Lord hath His own times fixed
wherein He will fill the mouths of His
people with laughter, and turn their
mourning into dancing by making them
see the performance of those promises
which they could hardly believe, heal-
ing their spiritual distempers, guarding
their hearts against the vexation of
affliction, giving them such sweet fore-
tastes of their future happiness that
they cannot but skip for joy, even in
the midst of the worst that men can do
to them. And when His time for
making His people laugh snd dance
cometh, the world cannot hinder it
[WVisbet] .

No one can fix a date and say, I shall
spend that day merrily, or I must spend
it mournfully, The day fixed for the


CHAP, Hi,





wedding may prove the day for the
funeral; and the ship which was to
bring back the absent brother, may
only bring his coffin. On the other
hand, the day we had destined for
mourning, God may turn to dancing,
and may gird it with irresistible glad-
ness [Dr. J. Hamilton].

There are extremes of joy and sorrow
which must receive a corresponding ex-
pression. From their very nature, they
must be of brief duration. There is
an average healthy pulse for the spiri-
tual as well as for the natural man,
The soul must not be disselved in rap-
ture so as to give no heed to the claims
of duty.

The extreme forms of human emo-
tion show that this world is not our
place of rest. Ours is not that calm and
untroubled joy which the righteous look
for beyond life. The Fountain of Life
above is no intermittent spring.


Verse 5. Destruction and re-building
—These words describe all history.—
1. The history of material and social
progress, This is mainly a breaking-up
of institutions which have been proved
a failure—no longer able to accompany
the soul into higher latitudes; or it is
the substitution of new methods be-
cause they are better and more potent
than the old—as in skilful inveutions
and contrivances. 2, The history of
thought. Old fashions of thinking
have passed away, and new systems
have been built up. And so it will be
to the end, as long as the constitution
of the mind is unchanged.

Human monuments cannot endure
for ever. They are broken down, to be
replaced by other works of taste and
skill, The material progress of man
requires such renewal. A like neces-
sity exists in intellectual progress,
Each age requires a new embodiment
of the truth. Hence the necessity of
current literature.

Christ said to the Jews, “ Behold
your house is left unto you desolate.”
It was God’s house no longer. When
the Church has reached this stage of
corruption, the time for scattering her
stones is not far off. But God cherishes

47


cuarP, mm. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





the purpose of building in the midst of
this work of undoing. The glorious
Christian Temple was raised upon the
ruins of Judaism.

“ There is a time to embrace, and a
time to refrain from embracing.” There
is a time when the fondness of friend-
ship bestows its caresses, and receives
them in return with reciprocal sincerity
and delight: and # time when the
erdour cools; when professions fail ;
when the friend of our bosom’s love
proves false and hollow-hearted, and
the sight of him produces only the sigh
and tear of bitter recollection. We re-
frain from embracing because our em-
brace is not returned [ Wardlaw].

The love of God to His Church is un-
ehangeable, but the special expressions
of His love—i.e., His favour, varies.
The souls of the righteous are some-
times cast down as if God did not
permit them always to enjoy His
closest and most retired affection.

Providence has ordained it that not
even in religion itself shall we have a
constant rapture of delight. In the most
entrancing music of the soul, there
must be pauses of silence.


Verse 6. There is a time when every
enterprise succeeds; when, asif he were
a Midas, whatsoever the prosperous mer-
chant touches is instantly gold. Then
comes a time when all is adverse—when
flotillas sink, when ports are closed,
and each fine opening only proves
another and a tantalising failure, And
so there is “a time to keep and a time
to cast away.” There isa time when
in the cutting blast the traveller is
fain to wrap his cloak more closely
around him; a time when in the torrid
beam he is thankful to be rid of it.
There is a time when we cannot keep too
carefully the scrip or satchel which con-
tains the provision for our journey ; a
time when, to outrun the pursuing
assassin, or to bribe the red-armed
robber, we fling it down without a
scruple. It was a time to keep when
the sea was smooth, and Rome’s ready
market was waiting for the corn of
Egypt; but it was atime to cast the
seh into the sea when the angry


ocean clamoured for the lives of thrice a
hundred passengers [Dr. J. Hamilton],

We have here—1. A recognition of
the duty of industry. There is “a time
to get.” Providence calls men to
active diligence in the sober pursuit of
this world’s good. 2. The vicissitudes
of fortune. No human power can con-
trive that our fortunes shall be constant
and unbroken. They may be under-
mined by the merest accident; or we
may be deprived of the power to enjoy
them. 38. The prudence proper in ex-
tremity. It isright carefully to preserve
the results of our labour, but there are
emergencies when, to serve some higher
purpose, we must part with our most
cherished earthly good.

That which is subject tosuch violent
changes, and which we must be pre-
pared to lose, cannot be our chief good.
It is no part of our real selves, no last-
ing inheritance of the soul.

Even our life, the dearest treasure
we possess, must be rendered up at the
high demands of duty.

The treasures of the mind and soul
are alone exempt from this inexorable
law. Capricious fortune cannot force
us to resign immortal wealth.

We must not attach our hearts to
that which we may lose so soon.


Verse 7. There is a time when
calamity threatens or grief has come,
and we feel constrained to rend our
apparel and betoken our inward woe ; a
time when the peril has withdrawn, or
the fast is succeeded by a festival, when
it is equally congruous to remove the
symbols of sorrow. There is “a time
to keep silence ”—a time when we see
that our neighbour’s grief is great, and
we will not sing songs to a heavy heart;
a time when, in the abatement of
anguish, a word of sympathy may prove
a word in season; a time when te
remonstrate with the transgressor would
be to reprove a madman, or, like the
pouring of vinegar on nitre, would be
to excite a fiery explosion; but a time
will come when, in the dawn of repent-
ance, or the sobering down of passion,
he will feel that faithful are the wounds
of a friend [Dr. J. Hamilton].


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. cmap. m2.





Providence has ordained that grest
and violent griefs shall not be perpetual.
The rents of sorrow are healed by time;
wherefore time has been called “the
comforter.”

There are seasons when man must
pay his tribute to nature, and assume
the proper circumstances of woe, Again
the season arrives when it is seemly to
remove the ensigns of sorrow.

Silence should go before speech, for
only in the silence of meditation can
speech be wisely framed.

Silence is the proper attitude of the
soul.—1. Before a great sorrow. The
small griefs of men are noisy and
demonstrative, but the greatest griefs
are silent. They choke the utterance,
2. Before a great mystery. When
words fail to give to the vast and in-
finite shape and outline, we can only
stand and wonder and adore. In the
inner shrine of religious thought we
must cover our faces.

O the strong buckler of a circum-
spect defence, silence! O the most
faithful foundation of stability! For
many being well settled with a stable
heart, yet unawares have fallen by the
errorof a wandering tongue[St. Ambrose].

There are some seasons wherein the
Lord’s people are to refrain from speak-
ing even that which is in itself good,
and might prove so to others. As 1.
When we are called to learn from others
(Job xxxii. 7); 2. When men turn
brutish, and declare themselves in-
capable of profiting, and the more they
are spoken to are the more enraged in
their wickedness (Matt. vii. 6), and so
incorrigible that others can neither have
access to deal with them, nor with God
for them (Amos v. 13); and, 3. When
the truth hath been often before suffi-
ciently asserted and cleared even to their
onviction (Matt. xxvii. 14) [/Visbet].

God broke the long silence which
reigned before the world was made by
saying, “Let there be light.” We
should only break silence to speak
words of quiet power, rich in the

urity of truth and goodness, and tend-
es to diffuse peace and joy.

The resulting force of one body act-
img upon another depends upon the





angle at which it is struck. Words
spoken in proper season strike the mind
directly with full effective force, while
those which are ill-timed can only strike
with diminished power,

Seasons for speaking. 1. To give
testimony for the truth. 2. To rebuke
sin, 3. Tocomfort the afflicted. 4. To
vindicate the innocent. 5. To instruct.

Providence has supreme control over
those actions which seem to lie most
within our own power. The most re-
fractory under Heaven’s government
must accept the seasons of silence and
speech with the same helpless resigna-
tion as they must accept the natural
seasons of the year,


Verse 8. We have no complete
command over our love and hatred, for
they depend upon causes beyond ours
selves. ‘They are the opposite poles of
human emotion, and, like the magnetic
needle, they obey the forces of attraction
and repulsion.

There is a period when, from identity
of pursuit, or from the spell of some
peculiar attraction, a friend is our all
in all, and our idolatrous spirits live
and move and have their being in him ;
but with riper years or changing charac-
ter, the spell dissolves, and we marvel
at ourselves that we could ever find zest
in insipidity, or fascination in vulgarity.
And just as individuals cannot control
their hatred and their love, so nations
cannot regulate their pacifications and
their conflicts. But just at the moment
when they are pledging a perpetual
alliance, an apple of discord is thrown
in, and to avenge an insulted flag, or
settle a disputed boundary, or maintain
the tottering balance of power, wager
of battle is forthwith joined [Dr. J.
Hamilton).

God has both the mild and the stormy
passions of human nature entirely under
His command.

The changes of our hearts’ emotion
are determined by Providence working
slowly through time.

The system of Divine Providence is
made up of antagonistic elements, of
whish each one in turn will have ite
brief season, If we accept the — of


CHAP. IIL





human nature as they are, we cannot
expect otherwise than that wars and
commotions will arise, History is but
the development of the possibilities
latent in man,

In the recital of the chief examples of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES,


the Divine Control, the series is oot
cluded by the mention of peace, for this
is the goal and Sabbath of all God’s
ways with man. The end of all the
strife and agitation of this troubled year
of existence is to secure eternal peace.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 9—11.
SoLAcE FOR THE TROUBLED Minp,


The mind is perplexed by the difficulties of Providence—the seeming disorder
€ the world, Hence the heart is troubled with care—that tenacious, wasting
disease of human nature. We can only seek solace in well-assured, immoveable
truths. I, That all human care must be unavailing. (Verse 9.) Where are
she results of all the cares, labours, and anxieties of men? When the final
reckoning is made, where is the profit? The widest observation of the scene of
man reveals the uselessness of care, and of the trouble of the mind at the con-
templation of the antagonistic elements composing the scheme of Providence.
(Verse 10.) Why is it that our care and anxiety are of no avail? 1. Because
we cannot lift the burden of vanity from man’s life here. There is a fatal disorder
in the system of things in which we play so important a part. All our care cannot
remove it. 2. Because we cannot force the seasons of Providence. We are as
powerless to change these as we are to change the natural seasons of the year.
We cannot be joyful when the hour for mourning arrives. All the gradual and
violent changes in human things will take place despite all our care, We should,
therefore, seek the solace of the inevitable, and the shelter of a love which, what-
ever happens, shall never fail the righteous, Weakness, ignorance. and imper-
fection must fall helpless into the arms of the Infinite. II, The exquisite skill of
adaptation to be observed in the Divine Plan. (Versell.) The intinite wisdom
of Providence is most to be observed in bringing forth His purpose at the fitting
season, All the movements of the Supreme Governor are timed with accuracy,
1, There ts a fixed method. There is an established order for everything which
God has made, and all His purposes are exquisitely fitted to the times in which
they are produced. God needs no system as we understand it, for this is only
the refuge of imperfect minds. We need system to classify our ideas, and to
make them portable for the memory. Infinite wisdom is above the necessity of
this device, and can only use method. 2. Zhere is a fixed aim. There ig
nothing purposeless in Providence, no movements at random. All is sure,
steady, and accurate. Every purpose moves with sure aim to its proper end.
Evil itself is made to further the good purposes of God. The well-timed
order of the system of Divine Providence should be to us a comforting portion,
sufficient to allay our anxiety and to assuage our sorrow. Confusion and disorder
would only generate despair, for they could not conserve the good that might by
chance arise; but we have everything to hope for from wise method, and fixed-
ness of purpose and aim. If we are true and good, our deepest aspirations wil]
have their proper season, and be brought forth in a light which will lend them a
beauty and a glory. III. The inability of the human mind to compass the
whole designs of Providence. (Verse 11.) No man can trace the work of God
all through its mazy course, little portion of it is before us, but the extremes
of it are lost in the immensity of the past and future, 1. We are ignorant of the
whole plan of Providence. We may indeed know a part of it, ‘This much
St. Paul teaches us is within our grasp; and from what we know, we may form
a dim prophecy of what we may expect. Yet to adventure to explore the plan
of God, as a whole, wauld take us beyond the depth of our understanding. We

50


cen US


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. 1%





only see the work of God in the course of its progress, but we cannot see the
plan of it, nor the glory of the finished purpose. 2. We are ignorant of the
several ends contemplated by Providence. We know in general that the true, the
right, and the good, will be brought forth into the light and vindicated ; but what
other ends group themselves around these, and are intimately interwoven with
the whole scheme, we know nut. There must lie outside tue region of our know-
ledge quite an infinity of possibilities of which we cannot form even the first
draft, or rude outline of an idea. 3. We are ignorant of the reasons of God's
dealings. The long dominion of evil, tho afflictions of the good, the disordeied
mixture in the life of humanity, must be accepted as an impenetrable mystery,
notwithstanding all our efforts to find a sufficient reason. God does not always
answer the question of His people. ‘Show me wherefore Thou contendest with
me?” 4, We are tgnorant of the future. We cannot tell where any purpose or
work shall have its end. We cannot enter the secret chambers of heaven, and
steal from thence the unpublished volumes of the Book of Providence. Men of
science cannot tell the destination of the material universe in space; and where
this present system of things shall end, and how it shall be disposed of in the final
crash of doom, we are alike ignorant, Yet our little knowledge ought to be
consolatory, and it will be so if we are only careful to assure ourselves that it is
but a little. God reserves for Himself enough to keep our souls for ever in the
attitude of adoration. We can only have peace and hope in the worship of the
Highest. IV. The hopefulness inspired by a sense of the true grandeur of man,
(Verse 11.) ‘God hath set eternity in their heart.” He has place within the
soul of man a power capable of infinite expansion. These God-like properties
constitute the true grandeur of man. Such a distinction conferred upon us should
inspire hope, and allay anxiety. This gift comprises: 1. The power to contem-
plate the Divine nature. We cannot comprehend fully the nature of God and
His dealings, They still wear the robe of mystery. Yet, becuse we have this
great gift of eternity within us, as a disguised or pent-up force, we are able to
know something of God. We could not entertain the idea of God unless He had
first made us God-like by such an immense gift as this. It is our privilege to be
‘‘ partakers of the Divine nature,” and to partake of that nature is to know it to
that degree. 2. The pledge of immortality. Man’s destiny in the future is thus
bound up with the eternity of God, The destination of spirit is to run parallel
with the existence of the Supreme. The desire to live eternally is a portion of
the Divine image. Only for this infinity within us, religion would be impossible,
for it deals with eternal life. 3. The capacity for unlimited improvement. The
investment of the heart with eternity is a kind of force given in elastic measure,
It has reserves of power which will be developed throughout eternity, It is the
property of a creature with this endowment to make progression towards a limit
placed at an infiniteremove. God will keep that limit still ahead of us, The soul’s
eye will never be permitted to approach too near to the intolerable light. We should
console ourselves with reflections upon our true grandeur. However mean and
obscure our present condition, we may hope for distinction and honour when we
are advanced to the light of God. The heritage of the noble and the good, how-
ever obscured here by poverty and neglect, is divine in glory and duration. He
who can realise that he is the heir of immortality carries with him through life’s
saddest journey the balm of sorrow and the ease of care,


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 9. Nothing is to be reckoned can do. Only the graces of God’s
the true profit or advantage of a man’s Spirit abide in the exercise of them
work but that which is permanent, and with the saints in death, and their
will abide with him as nothing earthly good works abide with them through


51


CHAP. Hil.





all eternity in the gracious reward of
them [ Nisbet].

All labour that does not increase the
riches of the soul must prove profitless
in the end,


Verse 10. God hath appointed the
changes of time that man may be
exercised in them, either wisely and
willingly to His praise, or else unwil-
lingly and foolishly to his torment and
vexation [Jermin].

Before the hour comes, thought and
labour are lost. But we are neverthe-
less to labour, each in his sphere and
with diligence. God commands this ;
if we hit the hour, things prosper; if
we do not, nothing comes of it, and
thus no human thought avails. They,
therefore, who would anticipate God’s
hour, struggle, and have nothing but
care and sorrow Eened

It is often expedient for the teacher
to allow his pupil himself to grapple
with the difficulties of knowledge, for
thus his mental devices are stimulated,
and the true foundations of science are
laid. So God gives severe exercises
to man, that he may know his true
position, and learn the ways of wis-
dom.

God does not teach us by imparting
knowledge which we have but passively
to receive. He sets humanity some
hard exercises, which they have pain-
fally to work out by the experience of
this rough world.

No worldly position, however exalted
or outwardly happy, can exempt a man
from exercising his mind upon the
painfal problems of existence.

The path of spiritual knowledge is
traced with difficulty through uncleared
and tangled regions. God has laid
down no “ royal road.”

The long processes of Divine teaching,
through so many seasons of time, have
their special purposes in the education
of humanity.


Verse 11. Not only has God made
everything, but there is a beauty in
this arrangement where ali is fortuitous
to us, but all is fixed by Him. That
er must be beautiful which to

&


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES,


ee


infinite love and wisdom seems the
best [Dr. J. Hamilton].

Not only the works of Creation have
a lustre and beauty in them, but even
those works of Providence which seem
blackest unto men have a great deal of
ravishing beauty. Joseph’s being sold,
Job spoiled and plagued, Daniel in the
lion’s den, Christ betrayed and nailed
upon tke Cross—these and the like,
although, being looked upon as in the
hands of instruments, they seem to
have nothing but deformity in them ;
yet, being looked upon as God’s works,
and according to His intent, and the
result of them, they have a ravishing
beauty in them, and many of His
fair attributes written upon them
[ZVisbet].

The works of Providence have the
prime elements of beauty—fitness and
adaptation.

To know a life, we must partake of
it in some degree, Unless our Creator
had set ‘‘eternity in our heart,” we
could entertain no idea of ** His eternal
power and Godhead.”

We have the power to discern the
eternal behind this transitory scene.

Man here exists but in a mean condi-
tion. He has powers which eternity alone
can unfold. The human soul is like a


-seed wherein unborn forests sleep.


Man findeth not out to what end all
those things are done, until himself
come to hisend. Then he shall under-
stand it, for either the mercy or the
justice of God will show it unto him
[Jermin},

We only see the system of Provi-
dence in the making, and not as a
completed whole. Therefore we can
only discern the mere rudiments of
what shall be; no complete or extensive
knowledge being possibletous. ‘ The
house that is a-building looks not as
the house that is built,” says the
proverb.

We can only see, at a time, but an
inconsiderable part of the ocean, so
that we can never take a view of it as
one great whole. In like manner the
ways of God can only be seen in small
portions. Their vastness overtasks our
powers,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; ECCLESIASTES. CHAP, Hi,
$$$ et,


Bternity casts upon the whole course The creature of a day cannot be ex-
of time the shadow of mystery. We pected to grasp those vast designs
have enough light to work by, but not stretching from creation to the final
enough for complete revelation, destiny of all things,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 19—15.
Tas Way To Front our Drstiny.


I.—By a cheerful acceptance of our Providential lot. We should wisely
use the gifts of God, and rejoice in them. (Verses 12, 13.) This will give to
life the smoothness of contentment, and the comfort of resignation. Such is the
greatest good that we can extract from life. Whatever our lot may be, let us
accept it with cheerfulness, and receive whatever good it offers. This is the
wisest course for man. 1. To fret and worry ourselves ie useless. We cannot
contend with the inevitable, nor rectify the apparent perversity of things. It will
be best to allow God to arrange all for us. 2. A rebellious temper hinders the
course of true happiness. If we murmur against the appointments of God, we are
only adding an unnecessary burden to life, and sending the iron of affliction
deeper into the soul. Unless we have sympathy with the Supreme Ruler, all must
be unpleasant to us. A sour, complaining disposition would make true happiness
impossible. 3. Zhe power to enjoy the good of this life is the gift of God. There
may be even a refined enjoyment of life, which is not godly. But the sober and
joyful use of the provisions of Providence, while keeping in mind the higher aims
of existence, is a special gift of heaven. II.—By a practical recognition of the
high claims of duty. ‘‘ To do good in his life.’ (Verse 12.) This will make
the appointments of Providence grateful and delightful to us. We can make
even our trials and vexations the occasions of cheerful and devoted service—the
school wherein our graces are refined and perfected. Thus we can maintain an
heroic bearing against the hardest fate. 1. Doing good brings a man into sympathy
with the Supreme Disposer of all things. We are thus imitating God Himself,
_ and, in any case, this must put us into the best position. To do good is to enjoy
some of the pleasures of the Highest. 2. Whatever else may be mysterious, our
present duty is always clear. The reasons of God’s dealings are obscure, and the
ways of Providence seem altogether a tangled maze; but our duty is written in
clear outline, quite obvious and familiar. To follow therefore what is clearly
known is the surest means to lead us to further knowledge, and solution of mystery.
If we are faithful to the light we have, a superior light will be granted us, in
which all things will be transfigured. 3. The faithful discharge of duty is the only
lasting foundatson for solid joy. There is a joy of the world which glitters, but it is
not lasting. It is like the sparkle of shallow streams as the water flows over the
pebbles, or like the dispersion of it in foam. But the joy that God gives is
powerful and deep. The reason is, that the only lasting joy is that which arises
from a good conscience. Righteousness gives peace, and peace 1s the true home
of joy. III.—By an acknowledgment of the inflexible rule of the Divine
Government. (Verse 14.) God’s ways in the government of the world are not
by the method of trial and failure, by added light from experience. They are all
fixed from the beginning. 1. God’s counsels are for ever. They are sure from
eternity, and cannot be set aside, This seems an iron rule only to the rebellious.
The good have nothing to fear from the wise ordering of Him who is perfect in
knowledge, and infinite in mercy. Such are ready with joy to front their destiny.
2. God’s counsels are so certain that they are not complicated with our human dss
tinctions of time. (Verse 15.) We speak of time—past, present, and future,
Our weak faculties need such a device as this. But to the Infinite Intelligence
% an eternal now does ever fast.” All things are eternally present to ie and


CHAP, Ill, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





with one quick glance He sees from the beginning to the end. The past lives
now—the future is already here. IV.—By recognising the righteous ends
contemplated by the Divine Government, (Verses 14, 15, latter part.) There
are certain ends which the Supreme Ruler proposes to Himself in His adminis-
tration, These are of a practical nature; they relate to human conduct, and as
such are revealed. The metiods of the Divine Government are designed—1. To
tame and subdue the heart of man. Men are “ to fear before Him.” This want of
mastery over the future tends to bring man to submission. He is convicted of
ignorance, and the pride of knowledge is abated. He can never presume to be
the God of God when his rebellion is proved to be a vain and hopeless attempt,
and the future is kept in terrible reserve. The only sane result of the contem-
plation of the ways of Providence is resignation, humility, and the fear of God.
It is madness for a man to dash his head against the iron walls of destiny. The
course of Providence in the world is the great tamer of the human breast. 2. Zo
vindicate the wrongs of His people. That which has fled away, and seemed to
have escaped altogether, God will summon to His presence again. He will cause
the great gulf of time to deliver up all that is in it. The past ages of wrong shall
be called up again—reviewed and judged. Men think when they have persecuted
the righteous that all is done with, They have silenced the testimony of truth.
They have triumphed over the meek. But the end will come, and a day of
reckoning, when the wrongs and oppressions of the past shall utter their voice,
emphatic, decisive, and terrible. The Christian knows that his ‘* Vindicator” liveth
—that the time must come when all wrongs shall be adjusted, and all precedency
set right,


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 12. There is no lasting good Verse 13. The purest earthly joys


in the things of this life; yet a joyful
heart lends a beauty and grace to those
fading and vanishing delights.

Doing good should always go hand
in hand with joy; because good deeds
spring from love, and joy is but the
recreation of love.

Duty is the watchword of humanity,
the herald of progress, the pledge of
final emancipation. In the confusion
and general uproar of things that amaze
our ears, the voice of duty is clearly
heard, and calls us to the skies,

When good actions become pleasant
to us, then joy is the very sinews of
duty.

Active goodness and joy are God-
like properties, for He is the unwearied
worker of good, and the Blessed One.

They whose hearts are cheered by
the proofs of the Lord’s bounty in His
dealing with them, and do express that
cheerfulness by their activity in duties
that may honour Him; they have
found that true good which is attain-
able in this life [Wisbet}.

54


are those which are won by toil. What
we passively receive stirs up only a
languid feeling. The idle and luxurious
blunt the edge of joy.

It requires peculiar skill to use
creature comforts wisely and well.
This power is the gift of God.

The means of our common suste-
nance are turned into manna by a
joyful spirit, and the remembrance of
the giver.

When the gifts of God are not cheer-
fully acknowledged and enjoyed, our
table becomes a snare.


Verse 14. As the omnipotency of
God is without defect, so the counsel of
God is without change. For how can
there be any change in Him to whom
nothing is past, or to come, but all
things are present ? [Jermin.]

Men form opinions which change in
the different situations of the mind
through the course of time. It has
been said that opinion is but knowledge


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.  ona.d. iL





in the making. It is but provisional
where absolute certainty cannot be

attained. But the thoughts of God
- stand “ to all generations.”

The whole scheme of an Oriental
court, and eminently that of the Great
King, was laid out on the idea that it
was the visible representation of the
court of heaven, and the king himself
a visible incarnation of the highest
God. The sense of this speaks out in
every arrangement, in the least, as in
the greatest, and is the key to them all.
Thus, the laws of that kingdom, when
once uttered, could not be reversed or
changed (Dan. vi. 8), because the king
who gave them was the incarnation of
God, and God cannot repent, or alter
the thing which has gone out from His
lips [Trench].

The thought of the perfection of
God’s plan raises our admiration, but,
at the same time, inspires a wholesome
fear. There is behind all a mysterious
and terrible power which we may well
fear to offend.

Fear should be the instrument of
caution, and the sentinel of loving
obedience.

The works of God are so perfect
that no improvement can be made, and,
left to themselves, they will be per-
petual. How true is this regarding
God’s greatest work — redemption !
What more could He have done to
make it a great salvation than what
He has already done? Or what
feature of the glorious plan could we
afford to want? And now that He
has Himself pronounced it a “ finished ”
work, what is there that man can put
to it? What is there that he dare take
from it? And in doing it He has
done it “ for ever” [Dr. J. Hamilton).


Verse 15. In all the seeming irregu-
larities of Divine Providence, there are
fixed principles which are never de-
parted from. And thus it is that a
science of history is possible. So cer-
tain is God’s method of procedure, that
though we know not the special events
of the future, we can predict the results
of great principles. ‘

The future will be but a repetition of


the past. Thus the course of humanity
through time may be likened to the
movements of the solar system. The
planets run their fixed cycles, and go
over the same paths again. Yet there
is with all these movements another
by which the whole system is itself
travelling in space. So human history,
though revealing a perfect sameness
from age to age, may yet be travelling
towards some certain goal.

The deeds of oppression, cruelty, and
wrong have not passed away for ever.
God will seek them out again, and
measure their deserts. The persecutors
of the righteous cannot hide themselves
even in the abyss of time.


Tue IMPOTENCE OF TIME.


Time has not done much, notwithstanding
all; “for that which hath been is now.” This
language will apply—I. To all the elements
of material existence. The forms of the
material world are ccustantly changing, but
the elements, of which the first types of all
were formed, are the same. The raw materials,
out of which the principle of life constructs
its organs, and weaves its garments from age
to age, are always here. Time, through all
its mighty revolutions, cannot destroy an
atom, II. To all the spirits of mankind. All
human souls that ever have been are now,
Not one of the mighty millions who spent his
short and misty day of life under these
heavens is loss, All are thinking, feeling,
aeting, still, Their bodies are dust, but their
bodies were theirs, not they; their instru-
ments, not themselves,


“ Distinct as is the swimmer from the flood,
The lyrist from his lyre.”


III. To all the general types of human
character. All the varieties of human charac-
ter may be traced to five or six different regal
sympathies. There is the inordinate love of
pleasure, the undue love of gain, the vain love
of show, the mere love of inquiry, the inordinate
love of power, the false love of religion, the
holy love of God. All these great types of
character have been here almost from tne
earliest dawn of history. Herods and Hamans,
Athenians and Pharisees, seem to be living
again in every age. IV. Toall the principles
of the Divine Government. All the principles
by: which both the physical and moral pro-
vinces have beencontrolled from the beginning
are the same now as ever. Harmony with
God’s laws is the creature’s highest de stiny,
Rebellion against them is his inevitable ruin,
They neither pause nor change, either for
angels or men, V. To the grand design of all
things. This must ever be the holy develop-
ment of creature-mindsin gratitude, reverence,
love, and assimilation to Himself. VI. To the
55


GHAP. Il. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


——s





recollections of the human memory. Memory manisrecorded, notin books, butin souls, VIZ,
ers up every fragment of all “that hath To all the conditions of man’s well-being.
”” gothat none may be lost. The history of Physical, intellectual, spiritual [ Homilist]}.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 16—18.
CorRupTicN IN THE SEaT oF JUSTICE.
I. It is a manifest and daring iniquity. History gives a sad recital of deeds


of oppression and wrong done in the sacred name of justice. Power and place
have been abused to serve the basest passions of human nature. This is a mani-
fest and daring form of impiety. 1. Rulers and judges are in the place of God.
Human law has for its chief object the preservation of order, the securing of the
best conditions of national prosperity, and the guardianship of public morality,
Those who administer the law stand in the place of God, who is the fountain of
all law and authority. When these abuse their position, a Divine idea is per-
verted and dishonoured, A lofty principle of the Divine Government is subjected
to a degrading parody. Such a sin is a daring insult to the majesty of Heaven,
2. When they are corrupt, the worst evils follow. The streams of social life are
poisoned, the innocent are without defence, and the restraints of wickedness are
slackened or broken. But one great evil that follows is the oppression of the
righteous. The Church has often come into conflict with the civil power, and
the good have been persecuted in the name of lawand justice. II. Itisa source
of disciplinu for the righteous. Like other evils, this is overruled by Providence,
and made to serve the purposes of discipline. 1. Jt serves to develop spiritual
character. (Verse 18.) It manifests what isin men. It marks off the brutish part
of mankind from those who are moved by high principle and noble aspirations. The
good, under every oppression and injury, have the support of conscience—they are
strong in integrity. Afiliction does but fetch out the hidden lustre of their graces.
2. It serves to cure radical evils in the Churchof God. Times of outward ease and
prosperity for the Church have some special dangers, the chief of which is pride
—a vice easily forced into bloom by the warmth of prosperity ; but soon nipped
by the keen blasts of adversity. 3. Jt serves to show to what baseness human nature
may come, apart from Divine influence. (Verse 18.) “They themselves.” Having
quenched the Divine light within them, and all better hopes and feelings, some
men have become monsters of injustice, and degraded themselves to the level of
beasts. In times of persecution, when deeds of cruelty and slaughter have their
sanction from the seat of justice, it is difficult to believe that men capable of such
fierce brutality have immortal souls, It seems easier to believe that men are but
beasts, after all, to be tamed for pleasure, or destroyed for sport. IIL It tends
to ripen the world for Divine Retribution. God cannot allow the misuse of
the most sacred gifts to go on for ever. Judgment may be delayed, but it will
come at last. 1. Our spiritual instincts call for such an interference. There is some-
thing within every righteous soul which is prophetic of the time when all the present
moral confusion and disorder shall have an end. Christ is the hope of all the oppressed
ones—Himeelf their chief in affliction. The world once looked upon the picture
of Herod in purple on the throne, and the purest and loveliest of humanity cruci-
fied between two thieves ; but the day is coming when the universe shall look upon
another picture, wherein shall be a sad reversal. 2. Zhe character of God teaches
us to expect it. He is wise, just, and holy, and (though the process to us seems
slow) He will maintain the honour of His name. He must make a separation
between the righteous and the wicked—thus He will judge both. (Verse17.) 8.
The appeal of the oppressed from earth to heaven will be heard. (Verse 17.) “A
time there.” The Royal Preacher, as it were, points from the seat of unrighteous-
ness with his lifted finger to heaven—the home of justice. ‘ There ”—such is
the answer of the persecuted, and the only answer which many souls in their
Sei) SeuNy eould give.
6


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. IIL





SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THA VERSES.


Verse 16. The advancement of men
bo places of power and trust in the
world, who abuse the same to the
oppression of piety and equity, and
the promoting of ungodliness and in-
justice, is a dispensation that, of any
other, the Lord’s people had most need
to be guarded against stumbling at,
and taught how to judge aright of;
seeing Satan takes occasion from thence
to tempt to corruption of the best to
Atheism, or denial of a Providence
(Isa. xl. 27), and to join with such men
in their sinful ways (Psa. Ixxiii., 10,
13) [Nisbet].

Wickedness is too obvious and mani-
fest—too weak by itself to succeed. It
has to assume the forms of goodness,
Hence under the pretence of justice
the vilest wrongs have been inflicted.

Corruption in the seat of justice tends
—1. To confuse all moral distinctions.
2. To put to sore trial minds of waver-
ing principle and unstable virtue. 3.
To disorganise the frame of society.
4. To retard social progress.

The wisest and best of mankind have
gaffered fearful evils under the mockery
of a trial. Even Christ Himself went
from a human judgment-seat to His
Cross.

Place and authority do not ensure
the integrity of those who possess them.
Some of the worst names in history
have held the most exalted positions.

The throne which Solomon made was
overluid with the most pure gold; and
what did this signify but the esteem
and price in which God would have
justice to be held, as also how pure the
judgments should be that from thence
are given? But too often where the
seat is gold, he that sits on it is brass ;
where the place is the place of judg-
ment and righteousness, wickedness and
iniquity are found [Jermin].


Verse 17. The world has a terrible
account of injustice and wrong to
answer for. God will yet have a
reckoning with the children of men.

God is just, though by the impene-


trable clouds of Providence that justice
may for awhile be hidden. He will
clear the scene in the end, and spurn
from His presence every form of evil.

The true and good who have been
wronged here shall take their case before
a higher court.

With two worlds in which to out-
work the retribution, and with a
whole eternity to overtake the arrears
of time, oh! how tyrants should fear
for God’s judgments !—and that match
which themselves have kindled, and
which is slowly creeping round to ex-
plode their own subjacent mine, in what
floods of repentance, if wise, would they
drench it! [Dr. J. Hamilton.]

The vindication of the righteous is
as much a proper work of judgment as
the condemnation of the sinner. The
Avenger is afoot, and will yet overtake
all oppressors.

The judgment of God will yet repair
all the wrongs of time.

At the sight of the worst oppressions
and wrongs, our soul instinctively fastens
upon the idea of the judgment, and
points to the lofty throne of eternal
justice.

As there is a time for every purpose
and work, so there will be a time when
all things shall be ripe for Divine judg-
ment,


Verse 18. For a moment the Royal
Preacher felt relief in recalling the
future judgment. But what care they
for the judgment? So brutish are
they that they neither look forward nor
look up, but are content with their daily
ravin. Yes, beasts, I half believe you.
Your grossness almost converts me to
your own materialism. I wish that
God would manifest you to yourselves,
and show you how brutish you are
living, and how brute-like you will die
[Dr. J. Hamilton].

Times of misrule and injustice mani-
fest character by affording scope for
human malignity, or by giving oppor-
tunity for tne integrity of high principle
to assert itself, pe


caaP. m1 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





In human nature, how often the
animal has surmounted the rational !
Men have made themselves beasts by
indulgence in animal pleasures, by their
cruelty and rage, and by extinguishing
the sense of immortality.

The evil of some is disguised and
restrained by circumstances. It wants
only a fit opportunity for their vices to
ettain a maturity of corruption.

Wicked men may see that the dis-


pensations of God, even the most
grievous, may contribute much for their
good, if they make a right use thereof ;
for while He is manifesting them to the
world, they ought to think that it is
done “that they may see themselves to
be beasts,” and so may loaihe them-
selves, and thank Him that they are
not destroyed, but preserved that they
may seek mercy, and a change of their
nature [ Visbet}.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 19—232.


Tue Dovust or ImMorTALITY,


There are times when the most assured truths are questioned. The Royal
Preacher assumes the sceptic, and allows the appearances of things to cast on him
the dismal shadow of doubt. I. This doubt may arise from the identity of the
outward conditions both of man and the lower animals. In the features oi
their physical existence, they are so much alike that one may be tempted to
predict for them a common fate—total extinction at death. 1. They appear to be
both alike under the dominion of chance. (Verse 19.) “ Befalleth”—-7 e., they are
mere chance, in the sense of being subject to it. They have not the free deter-
mination of their own lot. We apply the term chance to describe those occur-
rences whose causes are obscure. Those things upon which life mostly depends
are wholly out of the power alike of men and beasts. They both appear to be
the sport of innumerable chances. 2. Both are informed by the same principle of
life. (Verse19.) ‘One breath.” In the essential qualities of physical life, our
nature can boast no pre-eminence, The beasts, like ourselves, are supported by
the products of the earth, and draw the vital air. ‘They follow the same analogy
of physical construction. They are liable to disease, danger, and accident. 4.
They have both the same origin and destiny. As far as outward appearance is con-
cerned, no difference can be detected in the two extremes of their existence,
They all come from the dust, and return to the dust again. IL. This doubt is
strengthened by our complete ignorance of a future life. (Verse 21.) We
may, indeed, speak of the spirit of man going “upward,” and the spirit of the
beast going *“‘ downward,” yet the difference is too subtle to be easily discerned.
“ Who knoweth?” In the absence of any certain information, who can make a
positive assertion? 1. We have no experience of a superior life for man, Know-
ledge does increase through ages, but humanity has gathered no experience of any
lite beyond this world. No one has returned from the other shores of life to
tell the mysterious secret. The eternal silence of the grave strengthens doubt.
2. Human reason is powerless to give us any assurance of such a life. Reason may
give us probable grounds for believing that there may be such a destiny for man,
but it cannot give us a certainty. We may reason ourselves, almost with equal
facility, into a belief for or against immortality. And in the sirailarity of the
fates both of men and beasts, it is hard to discover the difference. There are
times when the sense of immortality is not strong. 38. Some have accepted
materialism as a doctrine. The blank ignorance of man upon the subject, together
with appearances, have led them to adopt the dismal creed of hopeless extinction
in the grave. Consider the wail of despair which marks some of the ancient
poetry. St. Paul tells us the heathen had ‘no hope.” The very existence af
doubt implies that there is some evidence on the other side of the question. LLL


This doubt ought not to interfere with the enjoyment of the present. In
5


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. If,


ee


the darkest seasons of doubt, there are some manifest duties. Whatever be our
fate when life is ended, some clear path lies before us now. Man can enjoy his
portion. 1. The present life affords scope for such enjoyment. No one thought,
however tremendous or awful it may be, can ever be present to the mind. The
short tenure of existence here, the dread certainty of death, does not prevent
mankind from enjoying the present world. 2. No other arrangement will be made
for man in this life. (Verse 22.) “That is his pcrtion ;” when he has once
departed from life, he cannot enjoy it again, Each life is a measured portion
once for all. 3. We are unable either to command or to look into the future.
A man cannot tell what shall be after him, even in his own immediate circle. He
cannot shape the future according to his own views or wishes. It is vain for a
man to trouble himself much regarding that over which he can have no command,
and which is hopelessly concealed from him.





at


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 19, . If one questioned the
eyes and judgment without listening to
the Word of God, human life would
appear to be governed by mere chance
to such an extent that men would seem
to be, as it were, like a great ant-hill,
and like ants to be crushed. But the
revelation of the Divine Word must be
placed in contrast with this appear-
ance [Melanchthon|.

In building up the science of material
things we learn to correct appearances
—the reports of sense—by the convic-
tions of reason. So the dark and
melancholy appearances of life around
us must be corrected by the light of
faith.

On this, the human side of life, all
is seeming confusion, as if chance and
accident held dominion. He who looks
no further has sufficient occasion for
doubt and denial. We cannot see life
clearly unless we see it in God’s light.

The anatomist can only examine the
structure of the organs of physical life.
The immortal creature cannot be in-
vestigated by the scalpel.

The sense discovers, both in man
and beast, the same wave of life beat-
ing to and fro, He who only regards
the physical part of out nature may
believe, without difficulty, that the same
dark fate is reserved for both.


Verse 20. The lowly origin and
destiny of the material part of our
nature should be—a motive for
humility—a rebuke to arrogance—@
reason for seeking the imperishable,


It is but one place, there be no upper
and lower places in death; but how
different soever the places of men may
be while they lived, when they die,
they are all in the same place; yea,
beasts are in the same place with the
wisest, the richest, and the greatest
men. And there indeed is their
journey’s end [Jermin].

All that live are borne onwards by
an irresistible decree, from dust to dust,

The degradation to which our
physical nature must come when life
is ended is a sore trial to faith. It
seems as if we lose existence then.
Faith, in seeking to grasp eternal life,
has, after all, to leap a precipice.


Verse 21. Man’s superior destiny
in the great future, is a truth not
unattainable, yet still difficult to be
known. It has been hid from many,
and by others has been obscured by
sensuality, and devotion to this present
world.

The common eye cannot trace human
existence beyond the last scene of all.
The image of God’s immortality
stamped upon man cannot be discerned
on this side of life, yet faith gew a
glimpse thereof as reflected in the mirror
of God’s word.

The philosophers were much tur-
moiled and very busy in seeking after
the nature of the soul. Tertullian
describes them as in a wood, whereip
if they saw any light of truth, it is only
glimpses of it through the thick. trees
of ignorance and errors; and whereip

&9


CHAP. IV.





if any shall seek for the truth, he shall
seek it in a wood. Surely there is no
better manifester of the soul than He
who is the Maker of it, and that is God
Himself [Jermin].

Can anything be more marvellous
or startling, unless we were used to it,
than that we should have a race of
beings about us whom we do but see,
and as little know their state, or can
describe their interests or their destiny,
as we can tell the inhabitants of the
sun and moon? We have more real
knowledge about the angels than about
the brutes. They have apparently
passions, habits, and a certain account-
ableness, but all ie mystery about them.
We do not know whether they can sin
or not, whether they are under punish-
ment, whether they are to live after
this life... Is it not plain to our
senses that there is a world inferior to
us in the scale of beings, with which
we are connected without understand-
ing what it is? [J. H. Newman.]


Verse 22. Only the moment that we
live in life is our possession. Every
hour lived sinks irrevocably into the sea
of the past; the future is uncertain.
Therefore is he a fool who lets the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





present slip by unused, wastes it in vain
amusement, or grieves with useless
lamentations [ Wohlfarth].

It is our duty to do the best with
that which lies to hand, and not con-
sume ourselves with vain longings after
an ideal state. We must accep: the
conditions of our earthly existence as a
fact, and we ought to lighten their
burden by the spirit of joy.

With a firm conviction of the duty
which the present demands, the tasks
of life, though in themselves grievous,
may be set to the music of the soul,

No second lease of life wi!l be granted
us. We should therefore act well in
the present, so that we might await
with confidence the mysterious crown
of eternity.

The future is all uncertain. We
cannot forecast history; or, to come
closer home, that smaller portion of it
interwoven with our own life and
labours. Yet we may be assured that
if we are good and true, the future
hides nothing in it that can vanquish
or distress us.

Within the vague and solemn mys-
tery which rounds our little life here,
there is yet some room for cheerfule
ness, contentment, and hope,





CHAPTER IV.


Criricat Norzs.—l. 80 I returned.
new subject of contemplation, They
intended to make the thought emphatic.
excellence and skill.
the envy of others.


both together, but if one or the other falls,


4. Every right work.]
But the writer has chiefly in view that successful work which excites
5. Eateth his own flesh.] Accomplishes his own ruin by indolence,
exhausts his fortune, preys upon himself like one mad with hunger.
12. A threefuld cord.]}
suggest plurality, but three give the idea of strength.


Passing from the reflections of the last chapter to a
ad no comforter.


The repetition of this phrase is
Every work marked by


10. If they fall.] Not
Two cords would only
13. Better is a poor and a wise child.]


Not in the moral point of view, but happier—better off. 14. For out of prison he cometh to
reign.] Reference is made to the youth mentioned in the previous verse, The writer may
have had the history of Joseph in his mind. Born in his kingdom becometh poor. Oame to the
possession of his kingly dignity by birth. His dethronement is the condition of the sudden
elevation of this youth, 15. All the living which walk under the sun, with the second child.]
The oy number of the adherents of tus upstart who has seized the throne,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. cuar, IV.


Cy


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—8.
Tue Tyranny oF Force acarnst RiGuat,


I, Such tyranny is an immense evil. 1. Jt is an old evil, From the days
of Cain, who did the first murder, there have been tyrants who have used their
power to oppress the innocent. Brute force, without the government of the reason
and conscience, employed to crush the defenceless, is one of the earliest forms of
human iniquity. 2. J/é és an inveterate evil. Since Abel’s murder, the oppressors
and the oppressed have been the chief actors in history. In every age, might has
prevailed over right. No nation can show a clear page, purged from this blot.
Humanity has become so indoctrinated with the claims of mere power that armies
are still called “‘ forces.” Even now, society is not advanced enough to render
supreme homage to reason and moral right. Still the ultimate appeal of nations
is to force. II. Such tyranny gives rise to extreme suffering. The innocent
may be strong in the sense of right, and in the defence of conscience ; still human
nature mustfeel. 1. These sufferings open the fountains of sorrow. When courage,
goodness, and skill are of no avail against a vicious power; when the innocent
are trampled under by the iron heel of tyranny, no wonder that the eye fills, and
the heart is overwhelmed with emotion. 2. These sufferings are sometimes aggra-
vated by the circumstance that they haveno earthly comforter. The good have often
been alone in the sorrows inflicted by the oppressor, and have looked around in
vain for a sympathetic heart. With no eye to pity, and no heart to cheer, the
load of misery comes with crushing weight. III, Such tyranny causes existence
to seem but a questionable benefit. The long record of human agony produced
by the tyranny of the powerful; the cruel persecutions of some of the brightest
ornaments of human nature—these things are a sore trial to our faith in the
goodness of the Supreme Power. It seems as if God were indifferent to the most
grievous wrongs of men. The existence of such evils in the world tempts a man
to indulge in the most extravagant and desperate language. 1. He affirms that the
dead are better off than the living. (Verse 2.) The thought of the wrongs which
man inflicts on man so sickens the heart that we are plunged into that gloomy
mood in which we are ready to hail the condition of the dead, and welcome the
long sleep and the safe shelter of the grave. There are deeds so horrible that the
contemplation of them is enough to make us Joathe life. 2. That the gift of
existence is itself an evil. (Verse 3.) There are seasons when the contemplation
of the darker side of history so occupies the mind that we are tempted to regard
the gift of life itself as a doubtful blessing. We almost wish as if our eye had
never opened to the light of day, and that we had never been called from that
dark negation which we once were. A state of non-existence appears to us
preferable to a state of ill-existence. 3. There are times when this melancholy
thought presses itself with peculiar force upon the mind. Times in the individual
life—times in the life of nations. The state of mind, however, here described,
does not and cannot last. Though the soul may have to pass through this shadow,
she emerges into the light of a better hope. Elsewhere the Royal Preacher
praises life as a Divine gift. Our fecling regarding the wrongs of time is thus
modified by the higher truths, and the belief in eternal justice.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1. Grace, while fortifying A tear is often the only tribute that
the soul against the violence of trouble, the oppressed can give to misery.


does not seal up the fountains of The tears of the oppressed are—1, A
nature. dumb protest against the cruel might


61


GHAP. IV.





of wrong. 2, An appeal to the justice
of Heaven. 3. A revelation of an
eternal future.

The pious, in the fiercest trial, though
all men may forsake them, have yet a
Comforter at their side,

Society has not yet reached that
stage of progress wherein the convic-
tions of reason and conscience bear
supreme rule, Notwithstanding the
advance of knowledge, and the presence
of the Christian Religion for so many
ages, humanity is still far from this
ideal perfection.

A mechanical force is of no service
to man unless he can guide and direct
it to certain ends. There are some
forces of nature of great potentiality,
but they are like wild beasts that cannot
be tamed. Power needs the direction
af goodness to make it venerable, and
worthy of praise.

The world has not yet got beyond
the illusion of military glory—a proof
that the worship of force has not yet
disappeared from amongst us.

The Lord has a bottle, and into that
bottle he puts His people’s tears, and
the tears of all who are oppressed.
When Joseph wept at Dothan, and the
Jews at Babylon, it was not the sand of
the desert, nor the stream of Euphrates,
which intercepted the tear, but God’s
bottle. . . . And whether it be the
scalding tear of the Southern Slave, or
that which freezes in the Siberian exile’s
eye, God’s bottle has received them
all; and when the measure is full, the
tears of the oppressed burst in vials of
vengeance on the head of the oppressor
[Dr. J. Hamilton].


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES,


i





The power of the oppressor is, after
all, a mere shadow—a vanishing thing.
The power most to be dreaded is that
which is on the side of the oppressed,
He who has taken refuge in the citadel
of God is the most terrible foe.


Verse 2. When one attentively
regards the innumerable sorrows of the
heart, miseries, great evils, and troubles
on earth, and the awful wickedness
there is in the world, which is the devil’s
kingdom, one must surely be of the
mind that it were better to be dead
than to see so much wretchedness
[ Luther].

There are such sights of misery on
earth, that in the confusion of his feel-
ing, the spectator finds a momentary
relief in thinking upon the dread repose
and secure refuge of the dark house.

The dead are clean escaped from the
hands of the tyrant. The door of the
sepulchre for ever bars the entrance of
revenge.


Verse 3. In certain frames of the
feeling, it is natural to wish for the
condition of non-existence, Extreme
sorrow has plunged some of the best
men into this trial—Job—Jeremiah.

When life seems so poor a heritage,
the true and Absolute Being becomes
all to us.

The tribulation through which we
must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven
may consist of temptations to indulge
the most extravagant and vain wishes.

There are times when we seem to
snatch a consolation from the dreariest
of all philosophies.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH. Verses 4—6.


Tue PENALTIES OF SUCCESS.


We have here the case of a man who has escaped many ills and disasters of
life. His work has led to a successful issue. Such a man may be regarded as
comparatively happy, yet society fixes certain penalties upon his condition,
I. The successful man is often a mark for the envy of others. (Verse 4.)
The world idolizes success, and gives credit to the man who has achieved it for
deep contrivance and many virtues. Yet success has some drawbacks and dis-
advantages, It often draws upon itself the envy of others. But 1—This envy ig
unjust. Society should bow cheerfully to the condition by which a man enjoys

62


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP, IV.





the fruit of his labour. The succese of another should not be a huge object
casting a dark shadow upon our own portion. Yet the language of Haman is
that of most men (Esther v. 13). 2. This envy brings many evils in tts train. The
envious man may be tempted to ruin the successful, to attack his reputation, or
te depreciate his work. Hence arise various forms of low cunning and deceit.
The first murder had its bitter root in envy. 38. This envy is worthless. ‘‘ This
also is vanity,” ending in no good result for those who indulge it—a consuming
fire in the breast. 4. This envy is unwise. In the proper ordering of human
society, the wise and the good should rule, and come to place and power. Even
in the present disorder, it often happens that talent and virtue are rewarded with
success. But envy has prevented many a man from occupying his proper place,
and thus the progress of society is retarded. II. The successful man has no
unmixed enjoyment. He is above the reach of many evils, and has much to
make him happy. Yet his lot is not pure and unmixed joy. He has much to
chafe his affections—to worry and distract his mind. ‘ Vexation of spirit” is
also his portion. This may arise from the fact—l. That the skill he has shown
meets with such an ungrateful return. He has been remarkable for industry and
wisdom, and, it may be, has exerted himself for the public good; yet, for all his
pains, he is only made the mark of envy. Ingratitude has often been the sad
and vexatious heritage of some of the bravest and best workers. 2. That tha
evil affections of mankind are so far beyond the reach of remedy. All the efforts
and reforms of the wisest can never eliminate the feeling of envy from mankind.
Men are ever prone to envy that successful work in which they have taken no
part. III. The work of the successful man is often depreciated by the indolent.
The slothful man is described as working his own ruin, (Verse 5.) He cannot
endure to witness the success of men of greater talents and energy than himself,
Hence he assumes the features of wisdom, and counsels moderation. (Verse 6.)
Why all this labour for so little result? It is better to manage life with sobriety
than to gain success at the expense of proper repose. 1. Zhis counsel is given by
men who are the least ready to do any good work themselves, The idle man folds
his hands, and calls that work useless which he cannot imitate, either from natural
or moral unfitness. He waits for miracles, and expects the end without tne
means. 2. Zhis counsel possesses an element of wisdom. It is not altogether
foolish and vain advice, but has in it some features of truth. It is better to
secure a little, and to enjoy it, than to aim at too much; and thus to purchase
success by the loss of happiness and quiet. To cultivate contentment, and to cool
the fever of ambition, should be the aim of every wise man. 3. Zhis counsel ts
wrong in its extreme form. Men must have large aims if they would perform
great and lasting works, A low and mean ideal cripples the energies of the soul,
Every true man must have a purpose wider than himself.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 4, Envy is opposed to that enemy than under envy; nay, of his


expansive charity which rejoices in the
success of another. Like love, it is not
an intermittent, but a constant passion ;
thus it frets and consumes the possessor
The trail of the serpent Envy is
traced across every earthly paradise.
‘“‘Envied of his neighbour,” nay of
his father-in-law for did not this make
Saul to envy David, so that David fiy-
fag to Achish had rather be under an


brother, when there was but one brother
in the world [Jermin].

No man so secure in the peaceful
results of his honest labour and skill
as to be beyond the reach of «he archers
of envy.

Even he who gains the applause of
men obtains a tribute often impaired
by envy.

When a statue had been erected by

63


GaP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





his fellow-citizens of Thasos to Thea-
genes, a celebrated victor in the public
games of Greece, we are told that it
excited so strongly the envious hatred
of one of his rivals, that he went to it
every night, and endeavoured to throw
it down by repeated blows, till at last,
unfortunately successful, he was able
to move it from its pedestal, and was
crushed to death beneath it on its fall.
This, if we consider the self-consuming
misery of envy, is truly what happens
to every envious man. He may perhaps
throw down his rival’s glory; but he is
crushed in his whole soul beneath the
glory which he overturns [Dr. TZ.
Brown}.


Verse 5. Idleness makes a desert
of the mind; multiplies the snares of
temptation ; and ends in self-destruc-
tion.

He who does not keep his powers in
@ state of healthy activity will find that
they waste away. This is true of the
physical, moral, and spiritual.

The difficulty of accomplishing suc-
cessful work, and the envy it raises in
others, should not cause us to fold our
hands in indolence.

The purest pleasures are those which
are won by exertion—the sweet rewards





of toil, He who folds his hands tastea
not the honey of life, but consumes
himself with long regrets and imaginary
fears.


Verse 6. We may conceive that, as
in the verse before, Solomon showeth
his misery in his wasted estate; so
here he showeth his misery in a plenti-
ful estate. He who laboureth and
getteth but a little, yet by labour hath
a quiet mind free from a burdensome
tediousness, is to be preferred before
him (Jermin].

There is in human life a certain
golden mean in which the greatest
happiness can be enjoyed.


A competence with quietness is to be
preferred to abundance with all its
necessary train of anxieties and cares,


This speech can be put into the
mouth either of a fool or of a wise man,
for it has elements which suit both
characters. As uttered by a fool, it
springs from envy. It is the affectation
of wisdom, used to despise the work of
another. But as spoken by a wise
man, it is a sober counsel to hit the
happy medium between absolute indo-
lence and that restless activity which
pushes enjoyment out of life.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 7—12.
Portrait or 4 Mammon WoORSHIPPER,


Instead of using the gifts of fortune wisely, and gaining favour with mankind,
gome only increase their misery by depriving life of its proper happiness. Here
is the picture of a man who is possessed by the spirit of avarice—a worshipper of
Mammon. Of such an one, we may say:—I. That his conduct is unreasonable
(Verse 8.) He has no “child,” nor ‘brother; ” no relation to care for, and yet
he toils after money with restless anxiety, as if life itself depended uponit. This
eonduct is unreasonable. 1, Jt surpasses the proper bounds of prudence. Prudence
ought to govern all conduct. A man should be diligent in work, striving to
build for himself a defence against the storms of adversity. But when this
passes to the extreme of greediness and grasping, so that a man forgets his own
happiness to serve a base passion, his conduct is unreasonable. 2. Zhe folly of it
is sometimes apparent to himse/f. There are times when the voice of awakened
reason within the avaricious man proclaims his folly. A better spirit possesses
him for awhile, and he asks, “ For whom do I labour?” &c. He feels, during
this momentary fit of wisdom, that his conduct is utterly without useful purpose,
He cannot spend all upon himself. He has no relations, and has made no friends.
He wilfully deprives himself of happiness, 8. It is conduct which does violence to

64 z


a tS


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EUULESIASTES. cmap. wv.
et Se ah SR EL ge SES a ae
eal conviction, and to the tenderest feelings of nature. It is the nature of avarice
to increase in fearful proportion, growing by what it feeds on, The more a man
has, the more he covets. Avarice leads a man to trample rudely upon the charities of
life; his whole heart withers, all his affections are resolved into one base passion. To
love wealth for the sake of the power it gives, is capable of some defence from reason ;
but to love it for its own sake is the height of folly. II. That he is condemned
to suffer the distress of a cold and cheerless isolation. He has no relatives,
but he might have made friends. He has not a “Second,” but is left all alone
His supreme selfishness has repelled all hearts. 1. This comes from the retribution
of society. He who does not love cannot be beloved. Society, in the matter of
the affections of love or hatred, gives measure for measure, 2. It és self-inflicted,
There is no necessity that it should be thus. A man can make himself friends
by means of his wealth. Good deeds secure the gratitude of others—they bind
heart to heart. The avaricious man may command men by his wealth, but he is
obeyed without love. To live to self, is to die to all that is dear and precious in
life. It is moral suicide. III, That he is deprived of the true enjoyment of
life. Social life has pleasures which are sought for in vain in selfish solitude.
1, The participation of others in our joy serves to increaseit. (Verse11.) Superior
joys are not impoverished by giving. The communication of knowledge to
another does not decrease our own store; and in pleasing others, we lose nothing
ourselves. He who will not share his joy with other breasts, must be content to
see his own joy dwindle away. 2. JVeglect of the social principle can only produce
unhappiness. We wore made for society, and there only can our happiness reach
to any tolerable development. Beasts may herd together, but only men can live
together. Selfishness is a breach of the natural laws of society, and the penalty
is a blank and gloomy solitude. IV. That he is deprived of proper protection.
He who by his selfishness brings himself into a condition of barbarous solitude,
suffers many disadvantages, If he has made a friend, he has the joy and satis-
faction of a mutual reward of labour. (Verse 9.) But in a state of isolation,
he loses this, with all other advantages that are derived from companionship.
1. He is deprived of the protection of wise counsel. There are events in life which
greatly perplex the judgment, and the mind of the exercised man is so confused
by the circumstances in which it is placed, that it fails tobe asafe guide. Hence
the importance of wise counsel. Another mind coming fresh to the subject is
able to suggest some wise directing ideas, and to place the difficulty in a more
hopeful light. 2. He ts deprived of timely aid in danger. He who has a com-
panion when he falls, has one to help him. A man may fall, tripped by some
snare of temptation, or overwhelmed by sudden calamity ; and his state is desolate
indeed if he has made no friend who can give him timely aid, and lift him up
a, in. 3, He is deprived of the protection of sympathy in joy and sorrow, When
msn can feel together both on the joyful and mournful occasions of life, the
gla ‘ness is intensified, and the force of the sorrow abated. There is’ a genial
war: ith in sympathy which secures a large comfort, and preserves a man from
pc tithing in the severe season of trial. (Verse 11.) 4. He is deprived of the
defence of a large and compact friendship, (Verse 12.) If he has two, or more
to help him in the hour of need, so much the better. With a large fellowship,
his defence is made stronger, and the enemy overawed and contounded, To
despise the social compact is unnatural ; it is unwise, and ends in unmitigated
misery. The heart’s affections of the mammon worshipper are so completely
given to the idol he adores, that he has nothing left in him responsive to the kind
Charities of life.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 7. As the vain and sinful in this earth are so many and various
courses which men take for happiness _ that, let a diligent observer turn as:
a


OHAP. Iv e


never so often to what hand he will, he
shall always see moreand more of them—
sv those who would promote the work of
mortification in their own hearts ought to
search them all out, and study the variety
of them one after another [WVisbet].


Verse 8. This is the first thing which
a covetous man desireth, to have nobody
near him, nobody that may either bor-
row, or beg, or get anything from him.
Wherefore, St, Chrysostom calleth a
covetous man the common enemy of all
men [Jermin].

The ties of kindred are forced upon
us by nature, but those of friendship
are within our own power, A loving
and kindly disposition will gain friends,
It is a man’s own fault if he has no
part in the kindred of souls,

The most selfish man has some con-
nection with society, for he too is bound
by the system of mutual dependence,
Yet it is only a mechanical, and not a
vital connection. Selfishness cuts the
roots of social life.

Every virtue lies near some dangerous
extreme. Activity in our worldly call-
ing is commendable up to a certain
point; but beyond this, wanting suffi-
cient reason, it deserves the imputation
of folly.

There is a diseased appetite for gain
which only grows the more it is indulged.

The seltish soul can enjoy no true
happiness, and is therefore driven to the
unhealthy stimulus of onesordid thought.

The Mammon Man.—In his very
nature he becomes as little human as
that which he adores. Where his gold
is buried, his affections too are buried.
The figure which Salvian uses in speak-
ing of him is scarcely too bold,—that
his soul assimilates itself to his treasure,
and is transmuted, as it were, into a
mere earthly mass [Dr. T. Brown].

Even diligence must be restrained by
rules. It should not degenerate into an
unreasonable passion.


Verse 9, He who deprives himself
of the advantages of society by a mis-
taken devotion, or his own selfishness,
has but an impaired heritage of life.

Man has no such resources in himself

66


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





a)


so that he can find a sufficient defence
in loneliness) He must lean upon
another. The strength of a man’s
belief is more than doubled when he
finds that his doctrine is received by
another mind. Society is necessary for
the very life of faith and action.

Society makes the Church possible,
It is “‘ where two or three are gathered
together” that the Church is to be found,

Society lightens the tasks of labour,
and exalts the enjoyment of its rewards,

God alone is self-sufficient—Man can
only come to his true heritage of strength
and enjoyment in society,

A single drop of water is insignificant,
but united with the rest, in the ocean,
it becomes an immense power. Society
makes man sublime.

The improving of Christian Society
for our furtherance in duty hath a
special reward, not only after time, but
even in this life. Hereby His people
may expect to be sharpened, and have
an edge put upon them in their duty—
to have encouragements from others
against difficulties—and fresh supplies
of the Spirit drawn from heaven to
each other by their mutual prayers;
and so both their work is furthered, and
their future reward ensured [Wisbet].


Verse 10. The fellowship of love
will always render help in danger,

The true man never deserts his friend
when he falls. The first impulse of love
is to give succour. Love does not wait
to investigate. Danger, sorrow, and
necessity are sufficient arguments,

In the best state of society, there
must of necessity be many falls into sin,
danger, and sorrow.

That is the only religion for man
which can show him a true helper.

The Christian, even though deserted
by all, yet, like his Master, is never really
alone.

A sense of loneliness and desertion
plunges the soul into the most oppressive
gloom of sorrow. Society, friendship,
and love assuage our sharpest grief, and
pierce the thickest gloom with a kindly
ray.

To be a helper to the fallen is one of
the: noblest uses of society—it is the





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.
CE EEE SEE EEE SSR treet ood OPT Le


joyful sound which fallen humanity
hears in the Gospel.

In Christian society, mutual help has
the highest motive, and the most
splendid reward,


Verse 11. If two lie together in the
cold night of sorrow and sadness, they
have the heat of comfort, which
mutually they yield one to the other,
even by striking together the hard flints
of their misery, by easing their hearts
while their tongues talk of their distress,
by supporting each other under their
burdens who cannot bear his own, by
doubling the light of counsel which
may the better show them the way of
getting out. If two lie together in the
prison of affliction, society gives heat to
their cold irons, softens the hardness of
them, and though it cannot break them
off, yet makes them to be borne with the
more contentment [Jermin].

The fervent glow of zeal for the
truth, the fire of devotion and love, can
only be maintained by the close com-
munion of mind with mind, and heart
with heart.

True sympathy cannot be generated
by proxy; the close contact of hearts is
necessary to melt them into the tender-
ness of love.

The live coals of a furnace soon
expire when isolated from the rest.

A heartless solitude chills the affec-
tions. Love delights in presence—
seeks the companionship of one who is
ever near.


CHAP. IV.





The soul may sooner leave off to
subsist, than to love; and like the vine,
it withers and dies if it has nothing to
embrace [South].


Verse 12. Love, by seeking com-
panionship, provides a defence against
the enemy.

It is the duty of the good to use
their strength for the defence of one
another.

As the union of the children of the
Lord should be so strict, as their adver-
saries may lose hopes of breaking one
of them, except they break all; so when
the Lord doth unite them, it will be no
easy matter for their most powerful
enemies to prevail against them [ Nisbet].

If we make friends by means of
whatever wealth of mind, goodness, or
estate we may have, we provide ourselves
with a strong defence here, and with a
welcome for us on the other shores of
life.

The good man feels that though his
native strength is small, yet, because he
has communion with the Highest, and
with all who are noble and true, his
feeble power is multiplied by an infinite
factor.

Mere doctrines, institutions, and laws
can never give the Church power to
vanquish her enemies, The Church
can only be strong as anation of brothers,

Unity in the Church gives strength
to faith, increases charity, strikes awe
into the enemy, and is the pledge of
final victory.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 183—16.
Tue InstaBiuity oF THE HIGHEST DIGNITIES.


I. They are subject to the saddest reverses. The most favoured pets of fortune
are not spared the common burden of human sorrow. Placed ona lofty eminence,
there is below them a depth into which they might, at any time, fall. The pen
of history has often described how the mighty have been pushed down from their
seats. Here we have the picture of a dethroned king. (Verse 14.) We cannot
expect otherwise than that such reverses will occur in the course of human affairs.
1. Great principles must be vindicated against the mere assertion of rank and
authority, When the king is foolish, and will no more be admonished (Verse 13),
he cannot wonder that his subjects will endure him no longer. The patience of
nations is not infinite. Long oppression exhausts it. The time arrives when
great principles must be upheld as of superior importance to rank and authority.


2. It is often necessary to secure the public good even at any cost to vee


OHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





The great and the powerful have often been robbed of their dignity in order te
save the state. The public good must be secured against the selfishness and
tyranny of Kings. 8. The season comes when it is expedient to render worth and
wisdom a well-deserved honour. (Verse 14.) There are men, now living in
obscurity, who by their talents and wisdom are fitted to govern empires. The
hour comes when these royal minds must have a true place and honour. Hence
many born to the kingdom have been thrust down from their thrones to give
place to those to whom nature has given greater fitness for empire and command.
4. Kings may be the victims of popular fury. They may come upon an evil time,
and, through no fault of their own, be the victims of conspiracy and rebellion,
Il. The most fortunate have often but a brief triumph. The able and deserving
man, when the world acknowledges his merit, and the time is ripe, sometimes
rises from a humble sphere to sit upon a throne. Such extraordinary changes of
condition are not unknown to history. He who attains to this splendid gift of
fortune, awakens the enthusiasm of the multitude, who are ever prone to idolize
success. Such acase is described. (Verse 16.) 1. He has a crowd of adherents.
Such men are endowed with great power to influence and command others.
Multitudes give a momentum to feeling—followers increase. Mankind are
easily led in droves. His dominion is very wide. (Verse 15.) 2. He is exposed
to the most disastrous changes of popular feeling and opinion. The time comes
when the favourite is rejected. The people nolonger rejoice in him. (Verse 16.)
Popular feeling is not to be trusted. The hero of to-day may be the victim of
to-morrow. He who has risen to the throne by real merit, may become corrupted
by success, and give way to deeds of folly and misrule. The injured feeling of
the nation at length recoils upon him with terrible retribution, III, Earthly
Dignities, in their changes, furnish a picture of human life. Kings in their brief
reign, and uncertain tenure of state and grandeur, are but a picture of the life
of humanity through the ages. 1. Each generation witnesses great changes. The
outward conditions of life are changed—new inventions multiply comforts, and
give man a more complete dominion over nature, Nations frame new laws, and
repeal old ones. The mechanism of Government is remodelled till the old order
passes away. 2. Each generation has a marked character. Each is informed by
the reigning spirit of society. The one idea which occupies the mind of the
individual man, and fires his passion, is but a picture of the prevailing spirit of
the age, Generations have a distinct character. In one the spirit of belief
preveils; in another, doubt and scepticism. Now, there is almost an idolatrous
reverence for authority ; and, again, we fall upon an age of self-will and law-
lessness. Every age has its own fashion of thought and feeling. 8. Each
generation appears upon the scene of life but for a short time. Thrones have many
succeeding occupants, and in “ the hollow crown, that rounds the mortal temples
of a King, death holds his court.” So generations, who have wielded a power
through their little day, are soon gone, Nothing continues at one stay—* there
is no end of all the people.”


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 13. Neither length of days
nor exalted station can, of necessity,
confer wisdom. A man may continue
a fool with all the appliances of know-
ledge about him, and all the lessons of
time spread before him,

The occupants of thrones do not
always possess regal minds. Illustrious

68


station only serves to make great faults
the more conspicuous.

The greatness of life depends upon
what we put into it, and not upon age,
or outward conditions. A poor youth
with the spirit of wisdom may have
more real nobility than an old king.


Wisdom can irradiate poverty, and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. IV.





reveal the emptiness of mere earthly
glory.

Rejecting admonition is often the
forerunner to certain ruin.

To refuse admonition is in none 8
greater folly than in a king, because in
none it is more pernicious, to none more
dangerous; but to be grown old in
wilful stubbornness, and self-conceited
perverseness, as well asin years, and not
only not to follow admonition, but not
to hear it; as it is the extremity of
folly, so it is the shame of honour, and
maketh a poor vise child better worthy
of it [Jermin].


Verse 14. Providence sometimes
asserts the right of the wise alone to
bear the rule.

We may well take Joseph to be this
poor wise child; for that he was a wise
child his father’s love shewed, who
therein may seem not so much as a
father to have preferred his son before
his other brethren, as a prophet rather
to have preferred a mystery, in respect
of that to which he foresaw the wisdom
of his son would bring himself. But
that he was also a poor child, the malice
of his brethren who sold him for a
captive made to betrue. The rest God
performed for him, and out of prison
brought him to be the next in greatness
in the kingdom. Yea, while he was in
prison, what was he but even then a
king? [Jermin].

There is no height of worldly
grandeur so great but that Providence
can fetch a man down from thence.

Through oppression, regal minds
have sometimes languished in a prison,
Some few have stepped from thence to
a throne. Providence thus shows, that
in the future kingdom, the wise shall
bear the rule. d

Even the glory of birth and station
fails to lend a lustre to folly, or to save
the foolish from a degrading fall.





™ ‘Verse 15. While men in power and
authority have the people flocking about
them, honouring and acknowledging
them, they should be taken up with the
thought of a change, and consider the
people as walking with the man that
shall come up in their stead, courting
him; and themselves as shortly to fall
one way or other [/Visbet].

The power of the future overshadows
the present.

As the powerful, the aged, and the
wise pass away, Providence raises up
others to take their place.

How soon the splendour of the mighty
grows pale. New candidates for popu-
lar applause arise, and the once-
renowned hero finds to his sorrow that
he survives his fame.

The future has an element of oppres-
sion as well as the past. These two
gulfs overwhelm themind. Wecanonly
find peace by commending our soul to
that Infinite love which reigns over all.


Verse 16. The most ardent worldly
ambition must, sooner or later, receive
a check from the hard facts of life.

The temper of future generations is
but a reflection of that of the past.
The facts of human nature remaining,
the future can only repeat the old story
of life, with all its changes, uncertain-
ties, and reverses. Thus mankind is
driven from age to age in the horse-mil}
round of vanity.

He who assumes the constancy of
popular favour may have long leisure

‘to repent his folly.

Every man advanced to eminency,
power, or esteem among men, should
look upon himself as standing upon a
very slippery foundation, and particu-
larly upon worldly applause, as a flower
that will soon wither and become
unsavoury. They should resolve to
see their own applause die before them-
selves [Visbet].


CHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





CHAPTER V.


Catrtoat Nores.—l. Thy foot] The outward movement, as showing the tendency of the
heart. ‘fhe sacrifice of fools] Some unworthy satisfaction of tho religious idea—an offering
whose purpose is merely to please God, and to serve as a salve for the conscience. They con
sider not that they do evil] Theirs is the error of simple ignorance rather than of any intention
to deceive, 2. Rash with thy mouth] Refers to the repetition of unmeaning words—mere
babbling. §. The multitude of business] Lit. of annoyance—the worries of life disturbing the
mind, and giving rise to restlessness and dreams. 6. Before the angel] The representative of
God in the Temple, t.e., the priest. Or it may be taken literally, as expressing the early
beliof of mankind that angels are invisible witnesses to our conduct, especially in God’s house,
(1 Cor. xi. 10). 8. In a province] Such being far distant from the seat of government, it was
more likely that there oppression would be practised by subordinate rulers, Higher than the
highest, and there be higher than they. The king is over the oppressive ruler, and over him there
is the Supreme and Infinite Power, the King of Kings. They. Principalities and Powers all
slong the scale, at the summit of which is God. 18. To their hurt] Inasmuch as they, at
length, lose those possessions (verse 14), The owner is more unhappy than if he had never
possessed at all. 17. Eateth in darkness] A spirit of melancholy darkening the whole life,
20. He shall not much remember the days of his life] An even joy is diffused through them—
they pass smoothly and pleasantly along. Answereth him in the joy of his heart, Answers him
by satisfying his desire, and thus prolonging his joy.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—8.
Tue Eruies oF Dirvinz WorsHIP.


The Royal Preacher enters upon a new object of thought. Happiness is only
to be found in religion, and the most exalted act of religion is worship. The solemn
services of the house of God demand duty from the worshipper. I. We must
avoid an unintelligent worship. God must be acknowledged in His relations to
us as communities. Hence to attend His house for the purpose of worship is @
solemn duty. Some cautions must be observed, if the service of the sanctuary is
to be acceptable. The worship should tke intelligent; marked by all the
cautiousness, deliberation, and sobriety of thought. There are three principal
classes of offenders against this requirement. 1. Zhose who worship simply from
éustom. They are not governed by the deep reasons of this sacred duty, but
without due reflection follow what is considered to be a common obligation.
Hence they go with careless feet, walking in the ruts of custom. They are
imitators of others, Their devotion is sowlless—mechanical. 2. Those who worship
with a pre-occupied mind, The mind being filled with vther objects, thought
wanders, and the worship is but languidly performed. 3. Taose who in the act of
worship are not completely possessed witha solemn purpose. One ales purpose
must carry away the soul of the worshipper. The service of worship demands
the concentration of thought and feeling. The soul, like the feet, must not
wander in uncertainty, but go straight to her sclemn purpose, II. We must
avoid a Barren Worship. The worship is not to end in itself, as if external
homage were all that was requiredof us. It must have issue in quickened spiritual
power, and practical duty. No barren or unproductive worship is acceptable. 1.
The end of worship is to stimulate to obedience. (Verse 1.) “To hear” in the language
of the O. T. signifies to obey, #.e., tohear with the inner ear. Thought is awakened
that it might lead to action. The sense of the Divine presence summons to duty,
Obedience is the proper vesture of the thoughts and feelings roused in the
sanctuary. 2. Worship without obedience has no rational ground. The adoration

70


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. V.
rr


of the Divine Nature implies a respect for those laws of duty which are but an
expression of that nature. A sacrifice, therefore, without obedience is but the
sacrifice of a fool. It has no solid reason to go upon. Such worship is but a
careless effort; without any wise design or sure aim. 38. Worship without obedi-
ence 1s sometimes the result of ignorance. It doesnot always arise from a pure and
unmixed attempt to deceive, or to act the hypocrite. Some deceive themselves.
They, being ignorant of the true way of religion, imagine that outward service
will atone for many follies and sins—that the whole reckoning with heaven can
thus be closed. This is the folly of many religions—they are but a salve for
the conscience. III. We must avoid an Irreverent Worship. Reverence is
essential to all true worship. It is the proper attitude of man before the
Supreme. In order to secure the spirit of reverence, we must attend
to certain rules of duty in worship. 1. Be careful tn the employment
of words. (Verse 2.) Rash and hasty words are here forbidden. This
is not meant to check devotion, or to cool the ardour of the soul by some
formal and severe requirement. It is opposed (1) To empty words. These are
uttered without solemn reflection—empty phrases, possessing but little meaning
for the worshipper. They are mere words, spoken without due consideration—
“rash.” It is opposed (2) Zo superficial words. They do not proceed from the
inner depths of the soul. They are quickly uttered, and in any required number,
as involving no expense of thought or feeling. Words that are not winged by
the soul’s desire cannot rise to heaven. It is opposed (3) To all useless repetitions,
It is not a fatal defect in prayer that it is marked by some repetition, for the
soul may love to linger upon a thought to make her desire more emphatic, or to
express intense emotion. The habit censured is the : :,arding mere words as
possessing merit—that their multitude can atone for sin, and make compromise
for the high demands of duty. To avoidirreverence, we must 2. Have a proper sense
of the majesty of the object of worship. We have to remember that God dwells in
unapproachable glory, far beyond the reaches of our mind ; and that we are upon
the earth—the scene of ignorance, error, sin, and want. With such a conviction,
the language we utter before high heaven will be marked by brevity of expression.
A sense of reverence will impose on us a solemn reserve. The employment of
few and careful words most befits the sacred act of worship. (1) Because this
ts the method of true passion. The most powerful feelings discharge themselves
in few, simple, and direct expressions. ‘True passion disdains the long array of
words, (2) Because it suits the nature of the duty. The silent awe and admira-
tion proper to worship must not lose their effect through the intrusion of the
multitude of words. When in the presence of a Superior Being, reserve and
caution are the most commendable qualities of speech. (3) Because it #8 agree-
able to the best examples. The prayers recorded in the Bible are brief, and ex-
pressed in words of simple majesty, The Lord’s Prayer is marked by fulness in
little compass 3. Have a proper sense of the evil of careless speech in devotion. It
has a bad effect upon the soul. The language degenerates into weakness and
twaddle. Devotion becomes a mere babble of words involving no serious effort
of intellect or heart. As dreams often arise from the perplexing cares and busi-
ness of the day—these, in a confused manner, presenting themselves in sleep—so
the multitude of words, though uttered not without some carefulness at first, at
length degenerates into confusion and unreality. (Verse 3.)


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1. The feet translate the dis- tion of the soul before engaging in
positions of the mind—they are the worship. On the way to the house of
outward indicators of purpose. God, the worshipper should be acquiring


There is a proper frame and disposi- @ readiness for its solemn wai


emp. V.





The royalty of the Supreme King
demands a careful, reverent, and sub-
dued manner in those who approach his
Majesty.

Obedience is the most splendid issue
of the adoration of the fount of law.
Duty is our clearest revelation, and
the path to our true honour,

The worship of God is a reasonable
service, demanding the best fruit of the
intellect and heart. He who does not
make it a thoughftul and _ heartfelt
exercise presents the sacrifice of a


{t is the simplicity of the heart, and
not of the head, that is the best indictor
of our petitions. That which proceeds
from the latter is undoubtedly the
sacrifice of foels; and God is never
more weary of sacrifice than when a
fool is the priest and folly the oblation
[South].

The vanity, hollowness, and insin-
eerity of the outward world intrudes
even into the temples of religion.

In the spirit of that significant Ori-
ental usage which drops its sandals at
the palace door, the devout worshipper
will put off his travel-tarnisted shoes—
will try to divest himself of secular
anxieties and worldly projects—when
the place where he stands is converted
into holy ground by the words, “ Let
us worship God” [Dr. J. Harrilton.]


Verse 2. The tongue of the wor-
shipper should not outstrip the fervours
of his heart. Unless the words of
devotion glow with the inner heat,
they are but empty sounds.

It is an affront to the Majesty of
Heaven to offer the unripe fruit of our
mind and heart.

The multitude of words in prayer
does not imply deep thought and fer-
vour of devotion, ‘They are but the
tawdry garment that covers the poverty
of the soul.

Before Job saw God with the inner
eye, he was loquacious, but after sight
of the Divine vision, his words “ were
ended,” and afterwards he only opened
his mouth to declare how he “ abhorred
himself.”

He whe regards the pure splendour

72


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES





in which God dwells, and the humble
platform on which he himself stands,
will render his devotion in few and
careful words,

A heap of unmeaning words only
smothers the fires of devotion.

Remember at whose throne you are
kneeling ; and be not verbose, but let
your words be few and emphatic, as of
one who is favoured with an audience
from Heaven’s King. . . . When
the emergencies of life—some perplexity
or sorrow, some deliverance or mercy,
—at an unwonted season sends us to
the Lord, without any lengthened pre-
amble we should give to this originat-
ing occasion the fulness of our feelings
and the foremost place in our petitions
[Dr. J. Hamilton].

The Lord’s Prayer begins by remind-
ing the petitioner of the lofty dwelling-
place of that Being whom he addresses,
yet this august Majesty of heavenly
state is tempered by the endearing name
of Father.

What a wide application may be
made of these words both to teaching
and preaching, to prayer and to our
ordinary life! How many sermons,
hours long, would be expunged by this
censorship, though never so skilfully
arranged and put together according to
the preaching art. And if all sermons
and other discourses concerning Divine
things were purged from all useless,
unedifying, fruitless, offensive, and
wrong words, how few would the cen-
sorship leave standing! [Zhe Berleburger
Bible},


Verse 8. Tertullian, expressing the
nature of dreams, saith, “Behold a
fencer without weapons, a coach-driver
without his running chariot, acting and
practicing all the postures and feats of
his skill, There is fighting, there is
stirring, but it is an empty moving and
gesturing. Those things are done in
the acting of them, but not in the effect-
ing anything by them. Soit is in many
words; there is often much fencing,
but no weapons wherewith the enemy
is wounded; there is much running,
but no chariot winneth the race; much
seemeth to be said, but it is to as mueh


—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. V.


—_————————————————————————


purpose as if nothing were said; all stantial as a dream, the multitude of
is an empty moving of the tongue words only making the disordered
[Jermin}. mixture more bewildering,

All speech that does not commence The fool’s prayer is composed of
upon the solidities of truth is unsub- —trifles—meaningless and unreal,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 4—T,


RELigious TRIFLERs,


There are some who do not distinctly oppose religion. They regard it, in some
sense, necessary to them, and therefore observe its outward forms. But they are
lacking in depth and serious purpose. They are but religious triflers. We have
here the chief features of their character. I, They are Forward ix Offers of
Service. (Verse 4.) Reference is here made to vows, which easily enhance a
man’s reputation for piety; and which fools, without due consideration, are ever
ready to make. Want of seriousness leads to this irreverent trifling. Of these
thoughtless religionists, we are taught, 1. That they are ever ready to make pro-
mises of stricter and more enlarged service. They would not lag behind the most
ardent piety, and therefore declare their willingness to increase the bonds of
obligation. In the time of peril, or when they desire some special good, they are
ready to make the most solemn vows. But, 2. They fail when the demand of duty
ts made. In the powerful feelings of the time the largest promises are made,
but they fail to fulfil their pious resolutions. They do not pay their vows. Thie
arises (1) From tndolence and lack of spiritual vigour. They have not sufficient
moral strength to carry on their purpose to the right issue. They have no abid-
ing principle—hence euergy fails, It sometimes arises (2) From avarice. They
soon discover that in an unguarded moment they promised too much, and imagine
that God can be put off with less. The strong feeling has cooled, and the sober
fact of duty affrights them. 3. They are in a worse moral postition than tf the
offer of service had never been made. (Verse 5.) To have omitted to vow at all
was no sin. God is satisfied with a steady service, an even, constant devotion.
But to over-estimate our moral strength only lands us upon new difficulties, IL
They are the Victims of Unreality. 1. They are deceived by words. (Verse 7.)
They mistake words for things, the symbol of thought for the substance of it,
Words are easily uttered, but when they are unreal, they lead the soul into a snare,
How many are the victims of mere phrases! 2. They are morally corrupted by words.
(Verse 6.) The mouth brings sin upon the flesh. The tongue has corrupted
the whole man, Language reacts upon thought and feeling, and the habit of
uttering hollow words only deepens the vain shadow in which such are walking,
8. They are altogether the slaves of imagination. (Verse 7.) Their words are
but the flimsy and vanishing elements of a dream. Men of dreamy minds are
unfit for the sober, and often prosaical, duties of life. III. They are Cunning
to Invent Excuses. When the hour arrives for performing the vow, they are
ready with plausible excuses. 1. The plea of twfirmtty. They urge that the vow
was, after all, a mistake. It was simply “an error.” (Verse 6.) The service
was never really intended, but thoughtlessly promised in some sudden rush of
feeling. ‘Thus they excuse their forwardness and disown the obligation. 2. Zhey
are bold enough to urge their plea before the representatives of God. They say it
before “ the angel.” (Verse 6.) They enter the place of _the holy, and before
God’s appointed witnesses dare to present the plea of infirmity. They try to pass
off a culpable rashness for a mereerror, IV. They are Exposed to the Divine
Judgment, 1 They provoke the anger of God. He is the God of truth, and can
have no pleasure in those whose words are unreal, and whose whole life is a
delusion, The religious trifler misuses the gift of speech, employing it in Peay


CHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES





and evasion. Hence he provokes eternal justice. God is angry at his voice.
(Verse 6.) 2. Their conduct brings its own punishment. Such conduct must
issue inthe complete loss of their work. God will destroy it. (Verse 6.)
Offended justice will reject their izapertinent offers of service, and punishment
fall upon those deceivers who profane holy things to serve the base uses of
hypocrisy. 38. Their punishment can only be averted by the fear of God. (Verse
7.) This isthe very soul of reverence. The fools—the solemn triflers in the sanc-
tuary of God—must learn this fear, which is “‘ the beginning of wisdom.” They
must return to seriousness, truth, and reality. They must learn to respect the
morality of words—the sacred proprieties of speech. All falsehood and unreality
must be destroyed before life can be placed upon a permanent and sate
foundation.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 4, If Christians make volun-
tary vows at all, it should be with clear
warrant from the Word, for purposes
obviously attainable, and for limited
periods of time. The man who vows
to offer a certain prayer at a given
hour for all his remaining life, may
find it perfectly convenient for the
next six months, but not for the next
six years, The man who vows to pious
uses half the income of the year may
be safe, whereas the Jephthah who
rashly devotes contingencies over which
he has no control may pierce himself
through with many sorrows. And
whilst every believer feels it his reason-
able service to present himself to God
a living sacrifice, those who wish to
walk in the liberty of sonship, will seek
to make their dedication, as a child is
devoted to his parents, not so much in
the +‘ ingent precision of a legal docu-
ment as in the daily forthgoings of a
filial mind [Dr. J. Hamilton].

Promises to God should be prudently
made, s.acerely intended, and speedily
fulfilled.

It is safest to allew the standing
motives for duty their full operation.
The seeking after a new stimulus may
exp se our piety to peril.

i'he contemplation of human folly, by
the wise, raises the most loathsome
images in the mind; how much more
with him who is Infinite Wisdom !

Seek to maintain thy baptismal vows,
wherein thou hast vows enough
[Lange].

Frames of feeling and good words are

74


but, at best, rudimentary virtue, until
they are consummated in accomplished
duty.


Verse 5. It is better to be slow in
vowing than to be slow in paying. It
is better to deliberate, and to hold long
in suspense our doubtful resolution,
than to be free and easy in our words,
but hard and difficult in our works
[Jermin].

By insincerity, or by some rash
attempt to attain superior virtue, a
man but injures his moral strength,
and lowers himself to a position of less
advantage.

Better to be satisfied with the ordinary
lines of duty, than to run the risk of
failure by attempting a more ambitious
virtue.

The want of prudence is dangerous
to every degree of goodness. Sobriety
of mind and sincerity are the only
solid foundations for a true life.

Some men cannot be restrained from
placing themselves in positions where
their folly is rendered conspicuous.

The Lord Jesus has often some severe
tests for hasty disciples. How many
does the profession of His religion
place in a most serious spiritual posi-
tion; showing them the rising path,
yet exposing them to the risk of falling
into the greatest depths! Better to
remain in darkness, than to neglect to
perform our day’s-work while we have
the light.


Verse 6. The mouth causeth the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


CHAP. V.





flesh to sin when it promises what the
flesh neither can nor will perform
[Hansen].

A rash and ungovernable tongue
can bring the whole body into bon-
dage.

If we are not careful, our own words
may become to us a delusion and a
snare.

The tongue so far controls the whole
man that, when it is tamed, he may be
considered to have well nigh attained
perfection.

Some are bold encugh to utter the
most hollow excuses before the mes-
sengers of God, as if they could thus
compound for sin.

We must be careful what we reckon
as sins of ignorance, lest our sin should
remain and we be exposed to judgment.

Nothing in the religious character
but what is based upon sincerity and


away by the Divine judgments, as the
mountain torrent destroys the founda-


_ tions of sand. \


Verse 7. The fear of God is the best
remedy against rashness. It instructs
us in the lessons of prudence, and keeps
alive in us a sense of the danger of in-
sincerity,

The abuse of language has diversified
sadly the vanities of life, ‘ Dreams
and many words” have led to serious
evils. The interests of religious truth
have suffered much from the vain
imaginations of men—dreamy specula-
tions, and from mere wordy disputes.

The fear of God imparts true sobriety
to the religious life, delivering it from
vain and fruitless distractions, and
empty efforts. The Great Teacher was
frequent in censuring those who took
up religion too lightly, and who made
promises which they were likely to
break.


truth can abide, All else shall be swept


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH, —Verses 8, 9.
THE OPprRESSORS OF MANKIND WAITING FOR THE JUDGMENT.


Ir man would enjoy true happiness, he must study his duty to society; and
abstain from deeds of violence and oppression. Though the dark pages of
history, stained with tyranny and injustice, must fill him with sorrow, yet he may
be comforted by the conviction that God will, in the end, interfere and redresg
all wron.s. I, The Existence of Euaan Wrongs calls for such an Interference,
There have ever been, and stili are, social wrongs in the world of appalling
magnitude. There is, 1. The tyranny of claza eczr cluss, The natural tempta-
tions of pomp and power are haughty indiffeence to the evils of those beneath
them, and the spirit of cruelty and oppression. Men take advantage of the
accidents of position to inflict misery upon others. The power of wealth has
been often used to crush the poor. And not alone to the great in high places is
this vice to be imputed. Smaller communities, and almost every parish, has its
little tyrant. There is, 2. The perversion of Justice. (Verse 8.) Under the pretence
of administering justice many wrongs have been inflicted. Hven laws themselves
have often been partial to the more favoured classes, but cruel in their general
tendency and effect. The sacred name of justice has been prostituted to serve the
basest ends, Tyrants have proceeded to their cruel work with the hypocrisy of loud
professions of virtue. There is, 3. The indulgence of the wild passions of human
nature. Extreme depravity may, for a time, be heid in check by circumstances ;
but when the occasion arises, the envious flood bursts the bonds which held it,
and spreads desolation far and wide. How many fair lands have been despoiled,
and unutterable cruelties inflicted, when the loose rein has been given to the
depraved passions of human nature! II. That these Sad Facts of Human
History need not excite Surprise. ‘Marvel not at the matter.” (Verse 8.)
And why? 1. Because the facts of human nature lead us to expect such a condition
of things. The evil taint clings to our nature still, however disguised by the
outward proprieties of life, or held in check by righteous power. The violence


CHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





—


of temptation, conflicting interests—the impulse of ambition and of savage cruelty,
still exist, in spite of civilization and the restraints of religion. The facts of human
nature remaining, the wise man cannot expect otherwise than that some wrongs
shall always exist: history having a tendency to repeat itself in the same sad
and weary round. 2. Because the best ordering of human society cannot put
an end to every social wrong. Laws may be improved, and the most laudable
endeavours made to reduce, and even banish, all the evils that afflict
society ; still there will be room for much social injustice and oppression. Society
can never be made good from the outside, While our natural corruption remains,
and the prevalent evil of selfishness, there must be tyranny, oppression, and
wrong. ‘The most ardent dreamer of a social millennium must make up his mind
to accept the facts of human nature; and the true prophet, gifted with sight
into futurity, can, at best, have but a melancholy burden. III. That during the
course of History, God uses Human Authority to mitigate this Condition. There
are gradations in human authority—one rank above another. There are high,
higher, and highest. (Verse 8.) The case is here supposed of an oppressor in a
“ province,” remote from the central and chief authority. This subordinate
governor takes advantage of his position to oppress his subjects. But above him
there are superior authorities, and the “king” over all. (Verse 9.) Hence those
who are wronged may obtain redress, and tardy justice at length come to their
aid. 1. Constituted authority stands in the place of God. He reserves the com-
plete and final adjustment of human affairs for Himself; but for the present He
makes use of human authority in the government of mankind. Every repre-
sentative of that authority is ‘‘the minister of God.” (Rom. xiii, 4.) The special
form of government is a human ordinance, but government itself is of divine
appointment. 2. The gradations of rank in human authority tend to secure the proper
carriage of justice. ‘The lesser ruler is responsible to the greater, so that the dread
of censure often serves to check those who are inclined to be tyrannical, Divine
Providence thus uses the complications of human government to lessen the sum
total of social wrongs. 38. The protection of earthly kings is of immense benefit.
By the administration of wise laws, they protect the people and maintain peace ;
they secure for us the fruits of the earth by preserving our fields from invasion.
The produce of the land is the source of the real wealth of the nation. It is
for the advantage of the authorities themselves to promote the general wealth, for
“the king himself is served by the field.” (Verse 9.) Mankind are bound together
by the ties of a common interest, and attain to the best social condition under
the protection of wise laws. Hence though there is a heavenly King, the benefits
derived from earthly governors are not to be despised. IV. That when Human
History closes, God Himself will Interfere. There will be a personal manifestation
of the King who is over all. If earthly authorities will not come to the aid of the
oppressed and redress their wrongs, there is One above who will do it. 1. There is
a Supreme Authority. Of the highest earthly rulers, it may be said that ‘ there be
higher than they.” (Verse 8.) There is One who has absolute dominion and
power, whose throne of justice is raised on eternal foundations, the highest
resource of troubled souls, and the ultimate appeal of the oppressed. An earthly
king, after all, is but a symbol. His power really resides with his subjects. He
is merely clothed with power and authority. But the Heavenly King has power
in Himself. Hence his dominion is the only reality of government—the only
“everlasting kingdom.” 2. Though God promotes the welfare of society by means of
earthly governors, yet He has reserved the final adjustment of human affairs for
Himself, The best human governments cannot prevent the essential evils of our
present state. They can only reach the outward conduct as far as it affects the
happiness of society. Human laws cannot touch the question of sin. They
cannot enforce the kinder and milder graces of life—those which have the
ai potency to aid human necessity and assuage sorrow. Human justice,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES CHAP. V.





in its best estate, is cold and severe; which, though it may command admiration,
has no power to melt the heart, or touch the springs of human tenderness. This
imperfection cannot goon for ever—the Divine governor must interfere to usher
in His perfect kingdom. There are duties of piety and religion with which the
Supreme Judge alone can deal. There are moral discrepancies requiring such an
adjustment. Here, vice is often prosperous, enjoying the magnificence and splendour
of life, while virtue is condemned to the grief of apparent failure. The happi-
ness and misery of this world are not distributed according to the laws ot
eternal reason and high justice ; the wise, the true, and the good, do not in the
present state stand in their proper lot. There must be for these a better and a
higher place, the lofty vindication of Eternal Justice, a perpetual reward. The
oppressors of mankind will have to come to reckoning with the Righteous Judge,
and for all the down-trodden and persecuted the Avenger will arise. Lessons,—
1. Be patient under the evils of the present. 2. Have confidence in the justice of the
Eternal King. 38. Beware lest thou oppress any: if thou hast done so, seck recon-
ciliations lest they take their cause to the Supreme Court. (Matt. v. 25.)


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 8. In this small province of
God’s dominions, the good have been
persecuted, and justice, at best, but
imperfectly rendered, The complaints
of the oppressed have passed on from
one human governor to another—many
still standing to their account. But
He who is “higher than they” will
interfere, and redress the wrongs of
His people, “redeeming their souls
from deceit and violence.”

Deep knowledge of human nature
and history blunts the sense of wonder.
He who has the widest experience of
mankind comes at length to marvel at
Rothing.

The nature of evil men is to hate
and to oppress. Their deeds need not
excite astonishment, The righteous
must not think it strange that they
have to pass through fiery trials.

Why dost thou marvel that good
men are shaken that they may be
settled? A tree is not firm in the
ground unless the wind do often beat
upon it; the very shaking of it doth
fasten the root more surely. They are
weak that do grow in the warm valley
[Seneca].

The righteous soul, who sees the
oppression of the poor, and the pervert-
ing of justice, opens another eye, fixing
it upon one bright spot in the future
where the majesty of Eternal Justice
will be asserted.


The Heavenly King waits long
through the slow rolling of the ages:
meantime the world’s burden of oppres-
sion and wrong grows larger! But the
avenger is afoot, and will at length
overtake all tyrants.

The Highest is the strong refuge of
the persecuted.

Let every man, according to bis rank
and God’s command, do his work with
the best industry ; other things let him
commend to God. Let him be patient
and wait for Him who is able to fad
out and judge the ungodly and urjust;
He who cannot lift a great stone, let
him leave it lying and lift what he can.
Wherefore, when thou seest thai kins,
princes, and lords misuse their porwr,
that judges and advocates take bri’es
and allow causes to sink or swim as
they can, being wise and sensible, thou
wilt think within thyself, God will
sometime bring about a better state
[Luther].

Verse 9. In all grades of society,
human subsistence is very much the
same. “The profit of the earth is for
all; the king himself is served by the
field.” “ What hath the wise man more
than the fool?” Even princes are not
fed with ambrosia, nor do poets subsist
on asphodel, Bread and water, the
produce of the flocks and herds, and a
few homely vegetables, form the staple
of his food who can lay the globe under

77


CHAP. V.





tribute ; and these essentials of health-
ful existence are within the attainment
of ordinary industry [Dr. J. Hamil-
ton].

The great Roman poet has said that,
“The Father of mankind Himself
hath willed it that the way of cultivate
ing the ground should not be easy.”
Hence the ingenuity of man has been
stimulated to invent the means of sub-





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES,





therefore, encourage agriculture and
the arts and sciences.

The first of all human occupations
is still the foundation of wealth, and the
chief promoter of the industrial arts.

Mutual dependence is the law of
society. The tiller of the soil spreads
the benefits of his labour to all ranks,
to the very highest. They, in turn,
secure for him the protection of Gov-


duing the soil. A wise king will, ernment.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 10—12.
Tue IMPOTENCE OF WEALTH.


Wealth, though it confers great social influence and power, has yet some
elements of weakness, and fails when the severest tests are applied. I, Wealth
cannot Satisfy the Desireit Raises. Wealth stimulates desire, and when attained
feeds that desire; but not to satisfaction. (Verse10.) The appetite only increases
by what it feedson. The fever of gain only rages the more with the increase of
possessions. ‘This insatiable desire of wealth is, 1. Irrational. Reason would
teach us that as our wants are satisfied, desire ought to abate. When we have
abundance, there should be the repose of contentment. Yet those who have
gained great wealth desire more, not because it is wanted, but only to satisfy a
restless craving. The undue pursuit of wealth is an infatuation—an untamed
passion which has broken away from the control of reason. 2. Jt shows that the
soul is on some wrong track of happiness. That which is a real good to man gives
him a pure and a permanent joy. But when the pursuit of an object ends in an
ansatisfying result and the rage of tortured desire, the soul has missed the path
of true happiness. Riches do not satisfy, and cannot therefore be our chief good.
8. It shows that man is greater than wealth. He may yield himself to the
absorbing passion, and worship the assumed majesty of wealth; yet in the lucid
intervals of his better reason, he feels that the greatness of his nature refuses thus
to be satisfied. And whether he understands the eternal truths of the soul or not,
they have nevertheless their operation. He cannot go against the great facts of
man’s essential life. II. Wealth has Certain Evils Inseparable from it,
(Verse 11.) 1. As tt increases, fresh channels are opened for its dispersion
The rich man surrounds himself with a numerous train of attendants; who,
though they minister to his comfort and ease, multiply his cares and eat up hig
stores. There are always plenty to spend the most carefully hoarded treasures,
2. Increasing wealth creates artificial wants. Luxury attaches new burdens to a
man. He comes more and more under the tyranny of habit. The increased comforts
and luxuries that riches procure become at last a necessity of nature. He who lords
it over many thus becomes himself a slave, The artificial wants that are created
have the force and impetuosity of nature. 3. Wealth, however great, cannot be
incorporated with the human soul, A man cannot make his treasures the garniture
of his soul. They are altogether outside of him. The owner of great riches,
and of all that riches procure, can enjoy no superior advantage than the beholding
of them with his eyes. (Verse11.) A man really has only what is within him;
all else is uncertain and transitory. III, Wealthis often gained at the
Expense of Real Comfort. The rich man frequently but purchases his state
and grandeur by the loss of solid comforts. The many cares of his great riches
deprive him of the full benefit of some of nature’s most important gifts. 1. He
ie often deprived of the blessing of sound slumber. (Verse 12.) The multitude of

78


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. ¥.
$a SS


cares, with which increased riches fill him, make his mind uneasy and banish sleep.
All his riches cannot purchase this blessed gift. 2. He has reason to envy his
poorer neighbour. Though he has power to multiply comforts, yet there are
simple but important gifts of nature which are beyond his reach. These are
often bestowed in abundance upon his humbler brethren. Relieved from com-
plicated cares and anxieties, and prepared by the fatigue of labour, the poor man
eajoys sweet sleep. His diet may be precarious; now a liberal, and again a
scanty fare, yet his severe duty in the battle of life brings him repose. He may
well be envied by pampered wealth seeking refreshing slumber in vain. The
blest enjoyment of life is greater than any earthly treasure, and he who depends
upon wealth for true happiness must miserably fail.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 10. When a man begins to
amass money, he begins to feed an
appetite which nothing can appease,
and which his proper food will only
render fiercer. To greed there may be
“increase,” but no increase can ever be
“abundance.” . . . . Could you
transmute the solid earth into a single
lump of gold, and drop it into the
gaping mouth of Mammon, it would
only be a crumb of transient comfort,
a restorative enabling him to cry a little
louder, Give, give [Dr. J. Hamilton].

The love that burns in holy souls
delights to rest in its object in calm
and contented repose. But the base
love of gain is a torturing passion, for
ever uneasy and unsatisfied.

The feverish thirst for gain only
rages the more its demand is answered ;
but all healthful desires are easily
satisfied, and give repose and enjoy-
ment to life. 3

The toils of covetousness know no
Sabbath—no healthful relaxation of
the strain of life. ‘hey hurry their
victim onward to some illusive goal
which recedes, as they approach it, into
a lane of vain shadows.

‘Lhe soul has a capacity altogether
infinite, and refuses to be satisfied with
the vanishing good of this life,

What is a miser but a poor, tortured,
uneasy soul and heart that is always
looking after that which it does not
possess; it is therefore vanity and
wretchedness. If now God gives thee
riches, use thy share as thou usest thy
share of water, and let the rest flow by


thee; if thou dost not do so, thy
gathering will be all in vain [Luther].


Verse 11. The strongest chain, if it
has sufficient length, will snap under the
pressure of its own weight. Great
riches may become so unwieldy as to
ruin the happiness of their possessor,

The menial service and attendance
which are at the command of wealth,
introduce many complexities into life,
and increase the burden of care and
vexation.

It is wisely ordered that rank and
wealth cannot be entirely selfish. They
give employment and the means of
subsistence to others.

The river that flows through the
estate of the wealthy man cannot be
pent up there, but must flow on to
enrich other districts.

Great riches and multiplied sources
of pleasure do not necessarily give in-
creased capacity for enjoyment. If
their owner lacks exquisite taste, and
an answering mind, their effective power
to raise his happiness is but small.

The spectator of the outward signs
of grandeur often derives more real
enjoyment than the possessor,

Let a man consider how little he is
bettered by prosperity as to those per-
fections which are chiefly valuable. All
the wealth of both the Indies cannot
add one cubit to the stature, either of
his body or his mind. It can neither
better his health, advauce his intel-
lectuals, or refine his morals. We see
those 1anguish and die, who command

79


CHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





the physic and physicians of a whole
kingdom. And some are dunces in the
midst of libraries, dull and sottish in
the very bosom of Athens; and far
from wisdom, though they lord it over
the wise [South].

A rich man buys a picture or a
statue, and he is proud to think that
his mansion is adorned with such a
famous masterpiece. But a poor man
Comes and looks at it, and, because he
has the esthetic insight, in a few
minutes he is conscious of more as-
tonishment and pleasure than the dull
proprietor has experienced in half a
century. Or, a rich man lays out a
park or a garden, and, except the
diversion of planning and remodelling,
he has derived from it little enjoyment,
but some bright morning a holiday
student or a town-pent tourist comes,
and when he leaves, he carries with
him a freight of life-long recollec-
tions . ... . Such sight-seers, though
they leave the canvas on the walls,
and the marble in the gallery—though
they leave the flowers in the vases, and
the trees in the forest ; they have carried
off the glory and the gladness; their
bibulous eyes have drunk a delectation,
and all their senses have absorbed a joy
for which the owner vainly pays his
heavy annual ransom [Dr. J. Hamil-
ton}.


Verse 12. The refreshing repose
which labour brings is often denied to
the children of soft indulgence. Hence
learn, 1. The limited power of wealth.
It cannot purchase what is of the
highest value. 2. The humbler con-


ditions of life have some counter
balancing advantages. To the poor
man is given that healthy refreshment
and repose which his rich neighbour
often seeks in vain. 3. How little
does our true happiness depend upon
the outward !

The walls of gold that keep out famine
cannot bar the passage of the torment-
ing spirits of restlessness and anxious
care.

The unequal distribution of human
happiness is more apparent than real.
The humblest plodder in the obscurest
condition of life has his special advan-
tages and consolations. Providence
has wonderful compensations,

If the poor could get a taste of opu-
lence, it would reveal to them strange
luxuries in lowliness. Fevered with
late hours and false excitement, or
scared by visions, the righteous recom-
pense of gluttonous excess, or with
breath suppressed and palpitating heart
listing the fancied footsteps of the rob-
ber, grandeur often pays a nightly
penance for the triumph of the day
[Dr. J. Hamilton].

The most precious things of life are
beyond the power of wealth to purchase.
Like wisdom, sleep is the gift of
God.

The worshippers of Mammon must
submit to a most heartless tyranny—
worn down by severe and restless ser-
vice, and no solid reward to crown the
end.

He who takes a thoughtful and sober
view of human life will strengthen his
sense of contentment, and abate the
fires of envy.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 18—17.


Tux Misrerres oF Him wHO SURVIVES THE WRECK OF HIS FORTUNES.


“Thero is & sore evil which I have seen under the sun, namely, riches kept for the owners
thereof to their hurt. But those riches perish by evil travail, and he begetteth a son, and
there is nothing in his hand. As he came forth of his mother’s womb, naked shall he return
to go as he came, and shall take nothing of his labour, which he may carry away in his hand,
And this also is a sore evil, that in all points as he came, so shall he go: and what profit hath
he that hath laboured for the wind? All his days also he eateth in darkness, and he hath
much sorrow and wrath with his sickness,” —Lcclesiastes v. 13—17,


In these reflections upon the vanity of riches, the Royal Preacher is supposing
the case of one who has no internal consolations, When riches are flown, how ia


80


BOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. V.


SS CC LL A en


ft with such aman? I. He is placed in a Worse Position than if He had never
been Prosperous. (Verses 13, 14.) 1. There is the painful sense of failure. He
rejoiced in his treasures, made them his stronghold and boast; but now they have
perished, and he is left without defence. The results of his labour and anxieties
are lost. What he had lived for is now vanished from him. He is oppressed
with the distress of failure. 2. There are the sorrows of memory. The remem-
brance of the past deepens the gloom of the present aad turns it into pain. It ig
an unspeakable sorrow for a man to be forced to look at his greatness and pros«
perity only through the aid of memory and long reflections, Riches, when they have
departed, are not absolutely hidden in the buried past. The memory of them arises
to hurt and afflict the mind. How can a man in the land of poverty, where he is
a stranger and an exile, sing the song of prosperity? He must hang his harp upon
the willows, and weep the tears of memory. 38. There is the oppressive feeling of
impotency to satisfy his ambitious desires. When he possessed wealth, he formed
bright designs for the future whick that wealth could accomplish. Reckoning
upon the stability of his riches, he thought to build up his house; and, through
the flourishing generations of his family, transmit his splendour aud magnificence
to posterity. But now the time has come when his favourite child is there, but
no splendid mansion is for him. The heir is present, but the heritage has gone,
(Verse 14.) There is a sense of departed power which is altogether overwhelming,
and which is unknown to those who never possessed it. To be unable to perform
what was once easily within our power is vexation and sorrow. 11. He is brought
Face to Face with the most Solemn Aspects of Life. If we direct our attention to
the two extremes of human life, we are made to front facts of dread solemnity.
Our utter nakedness, both upon our arrival here and our departure hence, is one
of the saddest facts of existence. (Verse 15.) Death strips us of all our time-
garments, and we go naked into eternity. Thus the grandeur of the world is but
a vain show—the passing shadow of acloud! This solemn truth is forgotten
in the excitement of pleasure, quite inaudible amidst the tumult of the
passions. But when a man is stripped of his fortune, the solemn facts of life
assert themselves and he is forced to listen to their voice. 1. How near are the
fountains of sorrow! In the midst of worldly enjoyments, if men only reflected
deeply upon the solemn aspects of existence, how soon would the heart heave
with emotion! ‘The fairest pleasures of the world are but hastily snatched from
the borders of misery and pain. 2. What a teacher is adversity—imparting a due
solemnity to the mind! Affliction gains audience for truths which failed to secure
a hearing in the time of prosperity. Death is indeed the great teacher, opening
the eyes of man upon the higher mysteries; yet death is only the completion of
that entire stripping of all earthly possessions which process adversity had begun,
3. How great the folly of trusting in wealth! It may depart long before us, thus
afflicting us with the memory of joys now no longer ours. Or, if it staye, yet w

must be rudely torn from it, and go into eternity with nothing in our hand
(Verse 15.) Jt is unwise to put our entire trust in that which must fail us in
the last necessity. III. He becomes a Prey to Melancholy. (Verse 17.) All
what he trusted and delighted in is gone, and having no inward sources of com-
fort, a thick gloom settles upon his soul. It may be said of this inward condition,
1. That it darkens for him the scenes of life. There is light on every side, yet the
darkness within him spreads itself over the whole scene of his life. The outward
world takes the mood of our soul, be it merry or sad. In the gloomy seasons of
our temper, it is in vain that nature strives to please, The darkness of the soul
ean overwhelm the light and glory of the world. 2. That it is moral disease. It
is a sorrowful portion—the sickness of the soul. In health, all the bodily organs
work together in harmony, and we are not directly conscious of the process. The


man is said to be whole. But in disease, one or more organs, by becoming a


seat of pain, assert their separate existence. Thus disease is disorder—a et of


OHAP, VY.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLES/ASTES. |





wholeness. This fact holds strict analogy with moral unsoundness. When soms
painful truths are forced upon the soul without any countervailing good, it indicates


moral disease,


In this soul-sickness, there is ‘sorrow and wrath.”


There can


be no health in the soul when there is no peace, 3. It forebodes the last gloomy days


of one who is entirely devoted to the present life.
of religion, this darkness is but the shadow of death.


be the light of joy, truth, and love.


For the soul without the comforts
Without God, there cannot


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 18. Wealth is often the ruin
of its possessor. Like that king of
Cyprus who made himself so rich that
he became a tempting spoil, and who,
rather than lose his treasures, embarked
them in perforated ships ; but, wanting
courage to draw the plugs, ventured
back to land and lost both his money
and his life. So a fortune is a great
perplexity to its owner, and is no de-
fence in times of danger. And very
often, by enabling him to procure all
that heart can wish, it pierces him
through with many sorrows [Dr. J.
Hamilton].

The base love of gain, when long
indulged by success, multiplies the
snares that will entrap and even fatally
injure the soul.

The worshipper of Mammon will in
the end be crushed beneath the fall of
his idol.

Continued prosperity exposes a man
to the vices of luxurious indulgence,
neglect of religion, and a foolish
confidence in his own greatness,

He whose heart has been bound up
with his wealth can ill bear the loss of
it. Having no inward resources, his
condition is poor indeed. He is cast
into the roaring tide of adversity; and
he has no courage, strength, or skill, to
stem the danger and gain a place of
safety.

It is the highest wisdom to seek the
true riches, which place a man above
the accidents of life.


Verse 14. The Lord hath many
ways to blast covetous men’s idols.
He can make use of the injustice and
avarice of spoilers and oppressors, the
deceitfulness of friends, and the prodi-

82 ;


gality of children to make their riches
perish [Nisbet].

The memory of vanished joys is a
bitter draught to those who have no
spring of heavenly life and consolation
within,

All earthly supports of the heart
may soon fail us, and they must fail in ~
the last extremity,

Virtue and knowledge are the best
heritage we can leave to our children.
In all things else, they may be but the
heirs of misery and disappointment.

Riches give a man power to com-
mand the service of many, and to
summon the ministers of comfort. But
how soon may the sceptre be snatched
from his hand His necessities and
ambitious desires continue, but the
power is gone,


Verse 15. At both ends of human
life, all social distinctions are levelled,

The hand of death rends away our
time-garments. We must leave here,
on these shores of life, all the outward
circumstances of wealth, and the soul
be stripped for her last voyage.

He who by the stroke of adversity ie
denuded of his fortune, is hereby re-
minded of that utter desolation to which
he shall be brought by the rifling hands
of death.

Mental wealth, spiritual character—
all that is truly within us, we can take
away when we part for ever from the
world. But our environment of wealth
and grandeur must be left behind,

Alexander the Great is said to have
ordered that, as he was carried forth t¢
burial, his hands should ‘‘be exposed,
that all mankind might see how empty
they were,”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES, CHAP. V.





Adversity clears a man’s view of the
most solemn and saddest facts of our
nature. It is well if we lay them to
heart, so that we may be rich in the
wealth of immortality when death robs
us of the passing treasures of this life.

Seeing that we go away naked, and
can carry nothing hence with us, we
should look upon nothing as our own;
we should be careful to go away clothed
with Christ’s righteousness, and adorned
with His grace, which is the durable
riches, which whosoever hath shall not
- be found naked in death nor after it
[Nisbet].

Here, we walk beneath appearances ;
but in eternity, we must stand forth in
our true reality.


Verse 16. The thought of the pre-
ceding verse is here repeated, but with
greater emphasis. The spiritual teachers
of mankind find it necessary to repeat
great truths.

The covetous man when life is ended
is reduced to his first condition; he
possesses absolutely nothing.

The riches of selfish and covetous
men, 1. Give them anxiety and vexa-
tion in life; 2. Forsake them in death;
8. Accuse them before the bar of God,

The labours of man without God
have no solid worth—no lasting profit.
When at the close of life he looks upon
them, he finds that they vanish into
thin air. They were but appearances
under the hollow image of a form.

If covetous worldlings would com-
mune often with their own hearts, they
could not but see their way to be no
less unreasonable and unprofitable for
attaining to happiness, than if a man
would make it the business of his life
to gather wind, which cannot be held


though it be among his hands, nor can
satisfy him though he could hold it
{ Wisbet].


Verse 17. When the power to enjoy
is gone, and increasing infirmities
produce fretfulness and inward misery,
how vain are all the circumstances of
wealth and grandeur |

Through the medium of our melan-
choly feelings, the faigest scenes of life
appear to be overspread with gloom,
True joy is within, The sun only
shines for the happy.

As years roll on, the present world
does not grow brighter and more joyous
to him who lives entirely for it. Days

of darkness await him.

You pass a staiely mansion, and as
the powdered menials are closing the
shutters of the brilliant room, and you
see the sumptuous table spread and the
fire-light flashing on vessels of gold and
silver, perhaps no pang of envy pricks
your bosom, but a glow of gratulation
for a moment fills it. Happy people
who tread carpets so soft, and who
swim through halls so splendid! But,
some future day, when the candles are
lighted and the curtains drawn in that
self-same apartment, it is your lot to
be within ; and as the imvalid owner is
wheeled to his place at the table, and
as dainties are handed round of which
he dares not taste, and as the guests
interchange cold courtesy, and all is
stiff magnificence and conventional
inanity—your fancy cannot help flying ©
off to some humbler spot with which
you are more familiar, and “ where
quiet with contentment makes her
home” [Dr. J. Hamilton].

Fretfulness and vexation wait on
avarice.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 18—20.


Tar Girrs or Provipence—A Source or Spirirva CuLrure..


The plentiful gifts of Providence only serve to develop the depravity of some,
They ae loose bas to the passions, lead to forgetfulness of God, to fretfulness


and despair.


But, to the wise, they are a source of spiritual culture. They


learn, L, To Use Them with Cheerfuluess. (Verse 18.) They do not insult the


83


CHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





Creator and Preserver of men by spurning His gifts, or by the voluntary humility
of self-inflicted austerities. Their cheerfulness is not the transient rapture of the
children of worldly pleasure, put a habitof the soul. It is, 1. The cheerfulness of
pious gratitude. The wise and good accept the bounties of this life as from the
hands of God. Admiration for the source of all good awakens gratitude, and
gratitude becomes a luxury. The joy of pious breasts is thankful, it is a deep
and perpetual spring. It is, 2, The cheerfulness of conscious integrity. The wise
and good follow the path of duty. They work diligently at the tasks of life, not
turned from their calm and steady purpose by a restless ambition, or by grasping
avarice. Their joy is mot the intemperate sallies of worldly mirth; it is controlled
by wisdom, it is generated by the consciousness of duty performed. Con-
scious rectitude alone gives true and abiding cheerfulness. The world’s joy is
@ vanishing and unsubstantial thing. It is but gilding over a surface of
misery which time will soon wear off. It is, 8. Zhe cheerfulness
arising from the possession of @ high purpose. No man can have
any deep and essential joy who is not conscious ef possessing some high purpose
in life, To him who can live above and beyond the world, who has higher aims
than men around him, life becomes a sacred thing. The joy of his soul is
invigorated by the imperial air of a better country. Feeling that his purpose is
true and sublime, he has a sense of kinship with the most exalted ranks of God’s
servants. They learn, II, To Enjoy Them with Contentment. (Verse 19.)
Whether their lot in life be poor and humble, or wealthy and distinguished, they
take it as their portion, and rejoice in it as the gift of God. (Verse 19.) They
are content with the appointments of Providence. 1. Because they are marked by
Supreme wisdom. It is impotent and vain to rebel against our appointed portion in
life, and to challenge the wisdom of Divine Providence. We are not proper
judges of what is best for us, and our highest wisdom is to do our duty in that
state to which we are called. The belief that the plan of our life is a Divine
idea is the soul of contentment, 2. Because there are evils attendant on every
condition of life. Both poverty and riches have their own peculiar evils and
temptations. It is difficult to say what, on the balance, is the social condition
most to be desired, Without Divine help, any condition of life must lead to
fretfulness, vexation, and misery. But if God is acknowledged, and His gifts
received with thankfulness, poverty is sweetened, and riches ara enjoyed with
moderation and prevented from becoming a vain confidence for the soul. When
God is served witha willing mind, the evils of every condition are mitigated.
3. Because the present arrangements of Providence are not final. The outward
conditions of men are not in accordance with their mental or spiritual characters.
Great souls here are not always surrounded by the trappings of wealth, nor
invested with the importance of station. But though the good man may feel that
his present state is out of frame with Eternal Justice, he accepts the allotment of
Providence with resignation, does his duty, and waits for the end. He who
can look beyond the present life, and see the ultimate triumph of goodness and
truth, easily learns the lesson of contentment with his portion in this world.
The heir of immortality can wait in patience and hope for his full irvestiture
and recognition, They learn, III. That Piety is the Secret of True Happi-
ness, (Verse 20.) Human life has many miseries for the poor, the rich
have many cares; all have to bear some portion of the load of trouble. But
there are Divine consolations, There is a way of happiness whose secret must
be caught from Heaven. 1, Help granted in answer to prayer. The godly man
feels that he has no native ability to do the work of life well, to overcome its
temptations, and to bear its trials. Weak and helpless, he goes to prayer, and
rises strong and full of hope. He draws a joy from above which abides with
him through all the changes of life. 2. A life of inward peace is the gift of God
to the good. They only have peace who have righteousness. He who is cons
84


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. V.


Sapien me EEE ee eee oe


scious that he has well discharged his duty by Divine help, and with a sublime
motive, inherits the blessing of a deep and settled peace. He does “not much
remember the days of his life,” it flows so smoothly on. A constant joy in the
breast alleviates the sorrows of memory, and the impressions of the sharpest trials
are worn down by a sense of the infinite goodness of God, and of the precious
bopes inspired by religion, 8. God alone can satisfy man’s deepest want, That
deepest want is not happiness merely, but peace. We want a refuge from the
upbraidings of the past, and the evil forebodings of the future. We want all
thoughts and feelings resolved in one direction, and made to minister to one
great aim and purpose of life. Then the soul rests truly in God. Peace gives
the hand to true contentment, dwelling in the same breast. Then there is no
discord between our desires and our outward lot; no discord between our affec-
tions and our mind; no painful doubts of the rectitude of God’s dealings. The
scenes of life, however diversified by joy or sorrow, are turned for the pious into
the school of religion where the spirit of man is fitted to be advanced to
immortality.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 18, The good things of this
life should be the means of rational
enjoyment, not the object of a grasping
avarice.

There are some who rest in the pre-
sent world, making it their chief end,
and the highest object of the mind and
heart. But the wise have made a
better choice, passing through the
world with higher aims and aspirations,
yet tasting with gratitude the pleasures
provided by the way.

The practical recognition of God im-
parts a beauty to the most common ac-
tions of human life.

The covetous man pursues wealth
with such insane devotion that he shuts
out all true happiness. It is folly to
allow our labour to degenerate into a
heartless slavery so as toleave no room
for the wise enieyment of the fruits of
it.

Thankfuiy to sse and enjoy the por-
tion appointed by Providence is the
easiest recompense we can render to
heaven.

It was asultry day, and an avaricious
old man who had hoarded up a large
amount, was toiling away and wasting
his little remaining strength, when a
heavenly apparition stood before him.
*¢T am Sclomon,” it said, with a friendly
voire ; “what are youdoing?” “If
you are Solomon,” answered the old
man, “how can you ask? When I


was young you sent me to the ant, and
told me to consider her ways; and from
her I learned to be industrious and
gather stores.” ‘* You have only half
learned your lesson,” replied the spirit ;
“goonce more to the ant, and learn to
rest the winter of your years and enjoy
your collected treasures” [Lessing’s
Fables}.


Verse 19. Religion does not pro-
hibit the acquirement of wealth, but
teaches how it may best be enjoyed and
bestowed,

He who has wisdom with his riches
guides himself between the twoextremes
of avarice and prodigality.

The acknowledgment of God in the
plentiful gifts of His Providence pre-
vents them from becoming a snare.

The adoration of the Highest—the
spiritual vision of the Supremely Good
One, preserves the soul from all degrad-
ing worship. He who acknowledges
the Giver will not make His gifts the
occasion of idolatry.

As men’s wealth and riches are God’s
gifts, so the power to use these for
strengthening them in His service is a
second gift; and wisdom to take their
own due portion, neither depriving
themselves of their own allowance, nor
others to whom they are bound to give
a part of theirs, is a third gift. And
the grace to comfort themselves in so

85


CHAP. V1.





doing is a fourth. And so the Lord
should be acknowledged and depended
upon for our daily bread, for our
appetite after 1, for the heart to take
and use it, for wisdom and grace to
take neither more nor less than our
allowance of it, and to take that cheer-
fully [Nisbet].

A wise man enjoys wealth by a
thankful use of i himself—by making
it a channel of good to others—by
turning it into a means of self-culture
and improvement. It is a great favour
of Providence when God gives both
wealth and large-heartedness.


Verse 20. The way to sweeten man’s
short and sorrowful life, to banish the
sad thoughts of by-past crosses, and the
fearful forecasting of future, is muchcor-


respondence with God, frequent prayer -


for refreshment from Heaven, and
taking every comfortable passage of
Scripture or Providence, which cheers


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.








the heart in God’s service, for a jeyful
answer from God [Nisbet].

Prayer heals the sorrows of memory,

lays the ruggedness of life even, and
draws down from heaven a perpetual
oy.
, The attention of the wise man is not
directed too much towards himself.
He looks to God and to duty, not fret-
ting nor worrying himself concerning
the rest. No man can be healthy who
is always thinking about his own
health.

The sorrows of the past are perpetu-
ated by handing them over to the care
of memory. All our philosophy cannot
banish them. But when a superior
joy takes possession of our breast, they
cease to torment. The old feeling is
overwhelmed by the new.

The joy of God in the heart is a
light which transfigures the whole
scene of life, and makes it a more
blessed and diviner thing.





CHAPTER VL


Carrrcat Nores.—1. Common among men] In the strict meaning of the word, the refer
ence is to the magnitude of the evil, and not to the frequency of it. That which appears to be
good is discovered, after all, tobe a greatevil. 3. And also that he have no burial] Through
the lack of filial devotion on the part of his posterity, he is denied an honourable burial—one
in accordance with his social position. 4. For he cometh in with vanity] Zit., Though it—
4,6., the abortion (ver, 3)—falls into nothingness, fails of reaching the dignity of recognised
life. And his name shall be covered with darkness] Such receive no name; they are not
reckoned with mankind, and sink into mere oblivion, 6. Not seen the sun] The sun looks
down upon so many scenes of vanity and misery that, in our melancholy mood, we consider
that not to have seen it may he accounted a blessing, More rest than the other] Absolute
rest from the sufferings and trials of life—they are better off. 6. Da not all go to one place ?]
All go to Scheol—“ the house of assembly of all living” (Job. xxx, 23). There all arrive equally
poor; nor is the chance afforded them to regain what they have failed to enjoy on earth. J,
The appetite is not filled] The deep wants of the inner man are not satisfied, though the sensual
_ part of him may lack nothing of indulgence. §. Knoweth to walk before the living] Knows
how to walk accurately by the proper rule of life. Thus St. Paul—“See that ye walk circum-
spectly, t.e., accurately, Eph. v. 15. 9. Better is the sight of the eyes] The enjoyment of what
is before us—our eyes resting contentedly on ou lot. 10. That which hath been is
named already] Whatever happens has happened before, and long ago received its name ; 7.e,,
the nature of it was accurately described and known in the plan of God. And it is known that
it is man] Lit, Adam, There is a play upon the name. Man is known to be what he really
is, Adam, 2.e.,man from earth. Mightier than he} He cannot contend with the All Powerful
One, 11. Increase vanity] All that tends to strengthen the impression of vanity. 12. What
is good for man in this life] What kind of lot is the best; seeing that all is uncertain, and the
future is concealed. After him] The meaning is—not after his death, but after his present
condition. The force of the question is—who can tell what is the next thing that will happer
to him, or through what changes of fortune he may be called to mass ?

86


—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. VI.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—6.
THe Lire oF Lire.


Man has two lives: the outward life which he lives, the manner and means of
_ life—all his surroundings in the world. He has also that life by which he lives
—the power to taste life—the strong feeling of a deathless existence. No out-
ward conditions of life, however well-favoured, can of themselves secure the true
happiness of existence, which is the very life of it. This is illustrated by sup-
posing two cases in which men fail to attain the life of life. I. They fail to
attain it who have abundant sources of Jomfort, but without Enjoyment.
(Verse 2.) We have here the case of a man endowed with wealth, and there-
fore possessing the means of satisfying every desire. He has also what all noble
minds earnestly covet—the honour yielded to him ty his fellow-men. Yet with
these advantages, he fails of the true happiness of life. He lacks the power to
enjoy. This may arise—1l. From ph. cal causes. An evil habit of body—some
inveterate disease may make life for him a distressing burden, so that he has no
power to taste with proper relish the comforts which his rickes could provide.
This may arise—2. From mental causes. He may have some unfortunate dispo-
sition of mind, a fierce and uncertain temper, or a spirit afflicted with perpetual
gloom and melancholy. Thus some defect of mind or temper may mar the enjoy-
ment of the most plentiful provisions. It may arise also—3. From moral causes.
An uneasy conscience, the evil shadow of some great sin, or dark foreboding of
the future, may rob the fairest earthly prospect of allits glory. It is not neces-
sary to be pious in order to perceive the vanity of life, and to heave with emotion
before the solemn facts of destiny. Of the life of life, we may also affirm—IL
They fail to attain it who have Age and Posterity, but without Respect.
(Verse 3.) The case is here supposed of a man who lives for many years, and
has a numerous offspring, that much-desired blessing of the Old Covenant. Yet
he has attained to an old age devoid of honour—his own posterity fail to do him
reverence. He generated no kindly feelings in the breasts of others, he shed no
light of love upon society, and now he feels the terrible retribution. He has the
misfortune to live to be neglected and despised. He dies unregretted and un-
loved, the last offices performed for him scarcely deserving the name of burial—
at best but a heartless service. His condition is sad in the extreme. This loss
of the affection and good-will of others, giving birth to tender human tokens of
reverence, is—1. An evil which deprives life of some of its sweetest pleasures. To
live in the affections and grateful memory of others is pure delight ; and a long
life, gathering and strengthening human affections around it, has a special loveli-
ness. But he who by his selfishness has deprived himself of friends, and forteited
bis title to honour, should he arrive at old age, has but a prolonged misery. It
is—2. An evil indicating poverty of soul. It argues a soul wanting in the higher
attributes of moral and spiritual life—a soul not “ filled with good.” (Verse 3.)
This destitution in man’s inmost spirit is the saddest of human evils. It is a
poverty which has no compensations. The selfisn spirit of avarice is a non-
conductor interrupting the flow of all kindly influences, It is—3. An extreme and
desperate evil. That complete withering of the soul, that insulation from human
love, which are the natural results of a life of selfishness, are evils of immense
magnitude—of awful significance. To describe a man who has arrived at this
m serable condition, language is used which appears to border upon extravagance.
(1) His condition is described as worse than that of one who has never seen the light.
“ An untimely birth.” (Verse 3.) Such have not attained to the distinction and
dignity of a name—are not reckoned with the inhabitants of the world—quickly
fall away again into the oblivion of darkness. (Verse 4.) Yet these de


ouaP. vi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





rest (Verse 5)—absolute freedom from toil and vexation—than the comfortless
and unlovely miser whose whole life is a lamentation, whose closing days on
earth are desolate, and who is denied honourable burial, 2, His condition
would not be improved on the supposition that he were granted more favourable cir-
cumstances. (Verse 6.) Suppose him to live to the years of men before the
Flood, yea, that he doubles in age those venerable sons of elder time, yet even then
would his condition remain unimproved. His misery would only take a deeper
tinge of darkness, if that were possible. A longer life!—this would only bring
about the same evils in endless and weary succession. We do not find that men
get less attached to the world and self as they grow older—that true wisdom is
the necessary and inseparable companion of length of days. (Job. xxxii. 9.)
“ Even to the verge of the churchyard mould” they hug the idol of their heart,
and turn away their faces from the charities of life and the consolations of
immortal hope. 3. What he has failed to attain tn life cannot be recovered beyond
the grave. In the land of souls to which he is hastening, all arrive equally poor.
No man can there recover his earthly losses. What he has done here is written
on the iron page, and laid up for eternity. Acts of unkindness, cruelty, wrong,
all the evil he had inflicted upon himself and others by his unloveliness—these
remain. He cannot come back to the world again and re-cast the scene of his
life anew. ‘TI shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world,” is
the solemn regret of the dying; and he who has failed to attain the life of life
aie await beyond the grave, sad and unprofitable, the solemn judgments of


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1, There is asad lack of an
essential and practical knowledge of
some of the greatest and most widely-
diffused evils which afflict humanity.
It needs a sage to direct attention to
them.

It is one end for which God hath
filled man’s life with evils, that we
seeing them might not mistake our
journey for our home. For travellers
falling in their way upon some pleasant
places, it is not seldom that the pleasure
of their journey hindereth their going
on, while that it doth delight them.
And therefore while we are journeying
to heaven, it is needful to see and
observe the evils of earth [Jermin].


Verse 2. Riches, wealth, and honour
—the Triad of sensual life.

How soon God may destroy the
earthly happiness of the most prospe-
rous man by taking away his power of
enjoyment, though leaving his riches
with him!

Providence teaches some men the
truth, that the happiness of a man’s
life “‘ consisteth not in the abundance
of the things which he possesseth.”

88


When the power of enjoyment is
gone, the fairest prospects of life are
darkened, and the glad profusion of
riches becomes but the smile of scorn.

He who has devoted himself entirely
to this world will, sooner or later, find
life a weary portion, a tasteless thing.


He who ceased to enjoy his own
riches may have the misery of seeing
some reckless heir taste them with keen
relish, thus giving prophetic significance
of their rapid dissipatica when he him-
self is parted from them.


The power to enjoy the world often
passes away before the world itself. He
who has no divine comforts will find
that the path of life becomes more
comfortless, and at length opens out
into a dreary desert, where his fears in-
crease, and sad forebodings.


Verse 8. A numerous offspring is
often made the excuse of a grasping
avarice.

A man may make himself so unlovely
by his selfishness as to die in the affec-
tions of those who should love him
most, This social death is the sad


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. Vi.





penalty that covetousness pays to the
offended laws of human nature.

Onr value in the scale of true great-
ness does not depend upon the length
of our life, but upon the good thoughts
and deeds with which we fill our
measure of life. If the soul is not
filled with good, the longest life is vain.

He has no honourable burial who
dies unregretted, and is followed to the
grave only by the pomp of mercenary
woe.

Better never to have opened the eyes
upon the light of the world than to
ruin a fair heritage of life by selfishness
and sin.

A long life without rest and peace in
God, is nothing but a long martyrdom
[ Geter].

What the untimely birth loses of
natural life without any fault of its
own, that the miser wantonly robs him-
self of in spiritual life. Because his
soul has no firm foundation in com-
munion with the good God, it goes to
ruin [Zange].


Verse 4, Into this darkness there-
fore it is that the soul of a covetous
wretch goeth, when the life into which
he came is vanished away. And when
his soul thus lieth in the carkness of
horror, when his body lieth in the dark-
ness of the grave, then is his name
also covered, either with the darkness
of silence, abhorring to mention it ; or if
it be mentioned, with the darkness of ree
proaches that are cast upon it [Jermin].

The natural vanity of life is most
manifest in the sordid children of avarice,
They have utterly failed to attain any
true and noble life, The darkness
which hides the glory of the world, and
but reveals awful forms, at once de-
scribes their unlovely existence, and
the rapid oblivion into which they fall.

When the soul is not filled with that
good which God alone can bestow, a
man’s life is but a dark spot upon the
map of time. }

It is just with God to deprive men
of a name after they are gone, who
minded never the glory of His Name
[Nisbet],


Unrighteousness is the death of the
soul, and darkness is the shroud with
which Divine Justice wraps it.

The light of God’s favour alone can
give to names an immortal fame.
Where that light shines not, no earthly
power, or care of human remembrance,
can lift the gloom from the soul.


Verse 6. Human life, though short, ig
long enough for the purposes of proba-
tion. Those who have failed to learn the
lessons of experience, and the knowledge
of the holy, in the few years appointed
to man, would remain in their sin and
folly were life prolonged even to the
years of men before the Flood, twice
told,

In this present world, there is no
substantial and abiding good which a
man may hope at length to discover
through the long years of time.

Length of days for the righteous
affords time for ripening their graces,
and fitting them for the vision of God ;
but for the sinner, they only serve to
increase the sense of false security.

However long life may be, it leads
to the dark house where man must
await God.

Death will open the faithless eyes of
men to look upon those awful realities
which they failed to see here through
their selfishness and sin.


Verse 5. They who have (as it were)
thrust from them the gift of life, have
indeed failed of the light and comfort
it bestows, and remain but a dull nega-
tion. Yet these have more rest than those
miserable men who would gladly invite
the rush of darkness upon their souls,
if haply they might find relief from the
intolerable burden of themselves.

The soul that has no internal satis-
faction must be ever restless and un-
easy.
All the favours that wicked men en-
joy are aggravations of their guilt, and
so do increase their misery. ven this,
that they have seen the sun, or have
known anything at all, makes their case
more sad than theirs who have nov
[Nisbet].

The consideration that in a shoe time

&


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





we shall all meet in one place, namely,
the grave, or the state of the dead,
should keep men from magnifying
themselves for those temporary things
wherein they excel cthers; and when


men account others for the want of
those things miserable in comparison of
themselves, they forget the meeting
place, death, which will equal all
| Nisbet}.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.


True SATISFACTION FOR THE SOUL.


Verses 7—10.


Man strives to remove the vanity from life—to gain some solid satisfaction
here, or what appears to him to be such. But there are false and true ways of
seeking this desired good. I. It cannot be gained by the Indulgence of the
Senses. Human life is full of care and trouble, Some try to escape the burden
of it by indulging the sensual appetites, or by a merry behaviour seek to hide
the thought of it in forgetfulness. Yet the deep and essential appetites of the
soul cannot hereby be satisfied. (Verse 7.) 1. Because the appetites become blunted
by indulgence. As the several appetites are fed by their natural objects, they
become less discriminating, and their power to taste grows less exquisite. Custom
steals away the charms of novelty, and the more the sensual appetites are
indulged, the earlier does the season of weariness and disgust of life set in.
2. Because man has wants which the indulgence of the senses cannot satisfy. Wants
of the intellect—conscience—affections.—These will make their voices heard amidst
the mest exciting pleasures of the senses, Strange pangs of hunger can afilict the
soul when the body is ministered unto by all that profusion of pleasures which riches
can secure. 3. Because the saddest truths of life will, at some time, force themselves
upon the attention. The most devoted children of pleasure, by the changes of
human things, are brought face to face with the tremendous realities of existence.
By their own afflictions and those of others; by the tortures of pain, and the
anxieties of the last sickness, they are made to face the dread solemnities, There
are great truths that command. silence, and enforce a hearing frcm the most thought-
less. A man feels that he requires a higher good than this world can afford, and a
more imperishable defence than wealth and pleasure. II. It cannot be gained by
Ordinary Thoughtfulness and Prudence in Behaviour. There are those who are
not spiritual men, and yet they are convinced that a life devoted to sensual in-
dulgence is folly—that there are nobler aims and satisfactions for man, They
have enough light and moral strength to discard the common forms of human
folly, and to guide their conduct in life by moderation and prudence. These go
very far towards true wisdom, and even closely imitate the graces of religion.
There is a wisdom and prudence of great use in guiding a man’s way through life,
yet divorced from piety in the strict sense. Of such a character, we may affirm;
1. He has modest views of himself. He has no high notions of himself, but is
content tc be poor and lowly in his own eyes. (Verse 8.) He has too much
wisdom—sees too far and clearly around and above him to indulge in the swellings
of pride. 2. His outward life is upright in the sight of men. He knows “how to
walk before the living.” He observes his duty to others, is correct in his behaviour,
and does not waste himself in the ways of vice and folly. 3. He makes the best
maxims of prudence the rule of his life. He sees the folly of avarice, and is content
to enjoy the present with moderation. He prefers indulging in what is before
him to the passionate, uncertain, and unhealthy pursuits of ambition. (Verse 9.
Yet all this does not remove vanity from life. ‘The prudence of the children of
this world may go very far towards beautifying and adorning human life, yet it
does not bring a man solid satisfaction. Without some higher principle of life,
and a larger view than the present affords, we may ask, what advantage has the
wise man after all?, (Verse 8.) ILI. 7{can only be gained by a Pious Submission

90


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


ee


CHAP. Vi.





—


te the Supreme. He who is truly wise knows that God is great, that he himself
ig weak and helpless, and that to submit to the guidance of the Infinite One is
the highest prudence for man. (Verse 10.) This includes: 1. A practical recog-
nition of the Divine Plan, Whatever has been, and is, was named and appointed
long ago.. In the ways of Providence there is no rude chance, nothing irregular,
nothing uncertain, on God’s side of it; with Him, all is fixed and determined
The future is already known and named, Submission to the plan of God is true
wisdom, because for the truly wise and good He will mark out a safe and pros-
perous way through all the apparent confusion and disorder—yea, even through
the rigidity of destiny itself. It must be well, in the end, with all those who are
“partakers of the Divine Nature.” 2. A sense of the frailty of our nature, and
the need for Divine help. ‘It is known that it is man.” (Verse 10.) His very

‘me, Adam, expresses the idea of frailty, Hence his absolute «pendence upom
- divine help. It is only when we are conscious of the aid of tue Supreme and
__.inite Power that we can have solid satisfaction, He who has the strength of
God on bis side is secured against all defeat, fears no foe, and has within him a
perpetual joy. 3. A sense of the folly of persistent opposition to God. (Verse 10.)
It is in vain for a man to contend with his Maker—a madness to imagine that he
can bend Omnipotence to his purpose. Our wisdom is to submit to the will of the
Highest. In doing and suffering the Divine will, we have the charter of our
freedom, the true conditions of our peace, and the best education for the land of
the happy where that will is perfectly obeyed,


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 7. The necessity for food is the
spur of all human industry. Hunger
is the taskmaster of humanity.

By his powers of sensation, man stands
connected with the present toiling, suffer-
ing world ; but by his spiritual nature,
he forms part of a larger fellowship,
and ciaims a loftier home.

However plentiful the satisfaction of
the fleshly appetites, and the desire for
granaeur and display, there is a longing
for something which is not here. Men
seek it vaguely and blindly, or with
clear vision and hope. There is a hun-
ger of the soul which allows no man to
rest till it be satisfied.

Some souls are conscious of a deep
spiritual want, as an irfant is conscious
of the pain of hunger. It feels, but
kiows not how the sensation may be
gatu.fied, In other souls, where reason
and conscience are active, there is at
the same time with the perception of
the distress, the apprehension of the
remedy and the purpose of attaining it.

They are strangely deluded who think
that if they had more of things worldly
their desires would then be satisfied.


Till the soul of man close with, and
rest upon, that infinite soul-satisfying
good, God reconciled to them in Christ,
give it never so much of other things,
the appetite will still cry, give, give;
the consideration whereof should cons
vince men that they are miserable who
seek satisfaction in those things wherein
it is impossible to find it [/Visbet].


Verse 8. The highest human pru-
dence, when divorced from deep religion,
is only for this life. The difference
between it and folly is indeed great
when seen from the stand-point of
time ; but when looked upon from the
heights of immortality, the difference
vanishes.

Of what avail is that wisdom which
does not make the immortal nature
supremely happy !

He who has climbed to the top of
the mountain kas reached a_ higher
elevation than the man who remains at
its base. But for the purpose of reach-
ing the stars, both situations are equally
ineffectu Vl. Human prudence and folly
are alike impotent to secure that supreme

91


ouaP. Vi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





good which can only be attained through
our spiritual nature illumined by the
distant light of eternity.

Man stands in certain relations to
God, as well as to society ; therefore,
to honesty and integrity towards men,
there must be added piety towards God.
The Gospel religion includes morality,
but also much more. It raises a man
to a nobler citizenship than any earthly
nationality can bestow, and therefore
imposes a superior code of duty, and
requires a corresponding elevation and
nobility of character.

The Christian religion furnishes the
best forms of what is good in this world.
It refines upon the best ideas of the
unaided mind of man—giving us graces
for virtues. By the culture afforded
by wisdom and prudence, 8 man may
go very far towards attaining the beauty
of the Christian character.

What doth it profit to go after Christ
unless we come unto Him? Do thou,
O Christian, there set down an end to
thy course, where Christ did set down
an end to His [S¢. Bernard].


Verse 9. To cool the fever of our
desires, and remain contented with our
lot, is better than restless ambition—
the unhealthy stimulus of wild adven-
ture, seeking to explore some unknown
fancied happiness. Yet if there be for
man no higher destiny than this life,
we mournfully ask, for what end is all
this wisdom ?

The wisdom and prudence of the
children of this world cannot abide the
fiercest storms. There they are shat-
tered, and nothing is left but the poor
remains—“ vanity and vexation of
spirit.”

Solomon means that we make use of
the present, thank God for it, and not
think of anything else—like the dog in
Ausop, which snapped at the shadow
and let the tlesh fall. . . He forbids
the soul running to and fro, as it is said
in the Hebrew, that is, we are not to
be always weaving our thoughts
together into plans [Luther].


Verse 10, In theroll of ages, no new
98


element in the problem of human
destiny arises. The old questions and
difficulties return. All was named and
determined long ago.

In the confessed impotence of suc-
cessive philosophies, the awful lessons
of history, and the vanity of all human
effort, the helplessness of man is
revealed.

By the name of the first man we are
reminded of our earthliness, depen-
dance upon our Maker, and our frailty.

As God’s cause is always just, it is
vain to contend with Him; seeing that
He has power to maintain His honour,
and vanquish His foes.

1. Fate is fixed. All the past
was the result of a previous destiny,
and so shall be all the future. . . It
depends upon our point of view whether
the fixed succession of events shall
appear as a sublime arrangement or a
dire necessity. It depends on whether
we recognise ourselves as foundlings in
the universe, or the children of God by
faith in Jesus Christ—it depends on
this, whether in the mighty maze we
discern the decrees of fate, or the
presiding wisdom of our Heavenly
Father. It depends on whether we
are still skulking in the obscure corner,
aliens, intruders, outlaws ; or walking
in liberty, with filial spirit and filial
security—whether our emotion towards
the Divine foreknowledge and
sovereignty be, “O fate, I fear thee,”
or *O Father, I thank thee.” 2. Man
is feeble. And Christless humanity
is a very feeble thing. His bodily
frame is feeble. A punctured nerve or
a particle of sand will sometimes
occasion it exquisite anguish; a grape
seed or an insects’ sting hasbeen known
to consign it to dissolution, And
man’s intellect is feeble, or rather it is
a strange mixture of strength and
weakness. ; . Insane when contending
with one that is mightier, man is
irresistible when in faith and coinci-
dence of holy affection he fights the
battles of the Most High, and when by
prayer and uplooking affiance, he im-

rts into his own imbecility the might
of Jehovah [Dr. J. Hamilton].


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. nap. VL
SS A ees


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 11—13,


Taree Oppressions or HumANItY.


I The Oppression of fruitless Toil after Happiness. (Verse 11.) Some fancied
good ever lies before us, but we are doomed—if we have no resource but earthly
wisdom or contrivance—to toil after it in vain, 1. Every advance we make only
tucreases the sources of annoyance. As we pass from the possession of one seeming
good to another, in this life, our brief happiness receives successive impulses ;
and we indulge the hope of enjoying in peace the rewards of endurance and
conflict. Put when we have gained what we sought after, and the gifts of life
are multirlied, and the objects of our ambition secured, we find that at the same
time there is generated for us an increase of vanity and vexation—a more
complicated misery. Riches bring cares; honour and fame set a man up as a
mark for envy, and make him feel more keenly the pain of wounded pride,
2. In the best conditions of earthly happiness, there is a craving for some unpos=
sessed good. Men never attain to the end of their desires—never reach a state of
satisfaction and repose—the goal ever lies beyond them. There is no anchor to
stay the soul on the troubled sea of life but immortal hope, and those who have
it not drift in danger and in fear. They have no safe harbour where they can be
sheltered till the indignation be overpast. This fruitless toil after happiness is
one of the oppressions of man. It is that burden of vanity under which the
creation groans, and which only God himself can lift from the soul, IL The
Oppression of Ignorance. (Verse 12.) The empire of human knowledge expands
from age to age, but the great problems of existence still remain unsolved. All
our investigation, all our labour of speculative thought only pushes the mystery
further back into the darkness, The unknown is ever the terrible; and darkness is
not only the deprivation of light, but also the region of fear and terror. The
imagination paints horrid forms where the eye can no longer see. This ignorance
is considered here under two forms. 1. Ignorance of the best conditions of happiness.
If we have only the wisdom of this world to direct us, it is hard to tell what
state of life, on the whole, is the best. Every condition has some
disadvantage, and it is difficult to strike the balance. Humanity without the
light and comfort of religion must remain in ignorance of that most concerning
question, how can the soul be happy in all the scenes and changes through which
it is called to pass? Even spiritual men must feel that there are aspects of
human life, the contemplation of which, for the present, is not without pain.
They also must wait for the clearing up of mystery. This burden of ignorance
presses upon all; some are sustained under it by faith and hope, to the rest it ig
an intolerable load—a weariness and vexation. 2. Ignorance of the future. A
man “ cannot tell what shall be after him.” He knows not what shall occur in
his own immediate circle, or in the broader field of history. The intellect is equal
to the task of framing principles which future history will be certain to illustrate.
The spiritual man knows that certain great moral truths will be vindicated
through all the events of the future. But what those events shall be in their
number, variety, and special issues, no human sagacity can foresee. That part
of the roli of history which is still to be unfolded by time, is hidden from us, and
our keenest vision cannot read the writing there. In front of the darkness and
uncertainty lying before us, we can only utter the cry, “Who can tell?” II.
The Oppression of Weakness. Man’s life is “vain,” and he spends it “as a
shadow.” ‘There is no enduring substance in it—no power of defence against the
terrible forces which threaten, and will in the end overwhelm it. 1, This weakness
ie felt in our utter helplessness before the great troubles and disasters of life. In the
time of prosperity, when the love of life is strong, and the enjoyment of =


CHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECULESIASTES.





we may glory in the conscious possession of power. But our triamph is short;
and when a great trouble arises, we jeel how weak we are. All our science and
skill can raise no permanent defence against disease, nor hold us back from going
down one of the many paths to death. Wealth and grandeur are no defence in
the day of trouble, The grim realities of existence mock at our poor refuges,
and sweep themruthlessly away. 2. This weakness is a cause of sadness and misery
to humanity. To feel ourselves strong is a happiness—a grateful assurance for
the mind. While we have plentiful reserves of strength, there is a consciousness
of security which is pure enjoyment. But to be weak is to be miserable—to
feel ourselves the sport of every unfriendly power. The weakness of man
revealed to him by misfortune, suffering, and death is one of the saddest burdens
of the race. The Gospel makes a gracious provision for humanity oppressed by
these three burdens. 1. Christ offers rest to those who weary themselves for very
vanity. 2. Christ promises to dispel the darkness of this present state. He makes
duty the condition of the higher revelation; through goodness, man reaches that
splendour where all is clear. 38. Christ arms the soul with His own strength.
That soul whom He strengthens can fear no foe. He who is joined to the
highest is as secure as the throne of God.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 11. What the better is man of hands. We can only be healed by a


that reputation which only makes him
more envied? What the better is he
of that wealth which only makes him
obnoxious to plots and dangers? What
the better of that philosophy which,
like a taper on the face of a midnight
cliff, only shows how beetling is the
brow above him, and how profound the
gulf below, whilst he himself is crawl-
ing a wingless reptile on the ever-nar-
rowing ledge? What the better is ac-
quirement, when, after all, man’s in-
tellect, man’s conscience, man’s affec-
tions, must remain a vast and unap-
peasable vacuity ? [Dr. J. Hamilton. ]

In our anxiety to get rid of the bur-
den of vanity by new diversions, pur-
suits, and acquirements, we only make
that burden the heavier, and condern
ourselves to the grief of failure.

The boasted improvements of reason,
while they enlarge our view and refine
our taste, at the same time serve to
render the sense of misery more acute.

No imagined change in the external
conditions of a man’s life can make
any radical improvement of his real
self.

The diseases of the human spirit are
inveterate. Not only are we not healed
by the physicians who undertake our
case, but we grow worse under their


miracle of grace.


Verse 12. What we often looked
forward to as a source of great good
has turned out to be a great evil.
The sages have failed so often in the
experiment of determining the best con-
ditions of happiness, that there can be
no certain knowledge except by Revela-
tion. Faith alone can heal the sorrows
of the mind.

The voice of complaint and distress
is heard from every position in the sucial
scale. In the face of this fact, who
can tell, on merely human principles,
what is best for man?

It is a ‘vain life,” and all its days
a “shadow.” A shadow isthe nearest
thing to a nullity. It is seldom
noticed, Even a “vapour” in the
firmament—a cloud, may catch the eye,
and in watching its changing hues or
figure, you may find the amusement
cf a moment; and if that cloud condense
into a shower, a few fields may thank
it for its timely refreshment. But a
shadow—the shadow of a vapour! who
notes it? Whorecordsit? .... But
Jesus Christ hath brought immortality
to light. This fleeting life He has
rendered important az “ a shadow from
the rock eternity,” In His own teach-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. C22. Vit





a ae


ing, and in the teaching of His
Apostles, the present existence acquires
a fearful consequence as the germ, or
rather as the outset of one which is
never ending. Totheir view, this exis-
tence ix both everything and nothing.
As the commencement of eternity,
and as giving complexion to all the
changeless future, it is everything ; as
the competitor of that eternity, or the








counterpoise to its joys and sorre-7, it
is nothing [Dr. J. Hamilton].

The mysterious depths of the future
are hidden from human eye, but nothing
shall be found there which can hurt or
alarm the rightecus. In the upshot of
things, there will be seen the triumph
of great moral principles, and the
vindication of goodness wherever it L
found.





CHAPTER VIL


Criricat Nores.—2. For that is the end of all men] Not the house of mourring itself, but
tne fact that every house must, in turn, become such. §. Sorrow] Not that passionate and
unavailing sorrow of the children of this world, but that salutary grief for our own sinfulness—
the godly sorrow of 2 Cor. vii. 10. Laughter] The boisterous merriment of the children of
light enjoyment, as distinguished from that recreation of reason—that spiritus] joy in which
it is proper for the righteous to indulge. 7. Surely oppression maketh a wise man mad] The
meaning is, not that the wise man by oppression is driven to the verge of madness, but that
the oppressor himself (who but for his own fault, might have been a wise man) suffers ; intel-
lectual and moral injury by repeated acts of unkindness and wrong. His higher intelligonce
becomes deadened, and he falls into the wretched condition of those in whom the lamp of
reason is extinguished. A gift destroyeth the heart] A bribe accepted by men in power
corrupts the moral nature, This kind of corruption was common amongst Oriental nations,
All could be procured for presents. 11. Wisdom is good with aninheritance] Wisdom, though
good in itself, yet when joined with ample means imparts a power of doing good to others,
12. Wisdom is a defence, and money is a defence] Lit., in the shadow of wisdom, ete. : In
countries where the heat was oppressive, a shadow would be the natural symbol of protection,
She excellency of knowledge is, that wisdom giveth life to them that have it] Both wisdom and
money give » man superior advantage in the battle of life. But wisdom is life itself—the principle
of the soul’s animation and vigour, 14. In the day of adversity consider] The last word belongs to
the next statement, as if the Preacher said—Consider the adaptation of one part to another in
the system of Divine Providence. God also hath set the one over against the other] Even
things eyil in themselves are employed to bring about the purposes of God. The consideration
of this is a source of comfort in adversity. To the end that a man should find nothing after him]
God so acts in His government of the world that man cannot fathom the future. 16. Be not
righteous over much; neither make thyself overwise] This is not intended to inculcate cares
lessness in moral conduct, nor as a beatitude upon ignorance, The meaning is, that we are
not to scrutinise too narrowly the ways of Ged. We are to avoid that boldness which dares to
say what would be just or unjust for Him to do, as though we could manage the world better,
We are also to avoid rash speculation, full as it is of danger, tending to the destruction of true
spiritual life. 17. Be not over much wicked] Though all men are sinful by nature, yet some
sin maliciously, and of set purpose. Even the righteous sin through weakness, but they set a
watch over the ways of moral conduct, Therefore, beware of crossing the border-line, lest you
sin with consciousness of evil. 18. That thou shouldest take hold of this; yea also from this
withdraw not thine hand] Avoid the two extremes, of a false righteousness on the one hand,
and a life of carelessness and sin on the other. 19. Ten mighty men which are in the city]
Ten heroes, or commanders, at the head of their forces, to whom the deience of the city is
entrusted, 2'7. Counting one by one, to tnd out the account] Colieciing the results of many
observations—thus forming an opinion carefully and slowly. 29. Many inventions] Refors
not so much to the devices of wickedness, but rather to evil arts, perverse thinkings, fooliah


and adventurous speculations, 95


omar, Vi HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—17,


THE TRANSFORMING PowER oF GOODNESS.


{ It makes Life Real and Earnest. Goodaess in the soul expresses itself
outwardly in actions of moral beauty—deeds of kindness and love. These win
the admiration of society, Hence arises a good reputation. Goodness in
character po-sesses an immense power, transforming human life into a solemn
reality, and filling it with earnest endeavour. It does this, 1. By supplying the
noblest impulse of life. (Verse 1.) A man of high spiritual character cherishes
an increasing passion for goodness. He desires one excellence above all others—
that he may be right and true himself, and secure a good reputation amongst
men. This is the noble ambition of the pure and holy. They aim to be good—
to be like God; and so have a definite and lofty purpose in life, With such, life
is an earnest and real thing. The constant striving after goodness imparts
increased faculty to the powers of thesoul. 2. By redeeming life from all that is
frivolous and vain. Goodness in man must have in it an element of admiration
for a goodness higher than his own, When the soul is enamoured of God’s holi-
ness, life becomes a serious thing. It is seen with sober eyes, and felt to be the
place for the discharge of loving duty, not for vain, trifling, and thoughtless
Iriyolity. Good men have the aspirations, feelings, and refinements of true
greatness, representing amongst their fellows the style and circumstances of a
nobjer citizenship, They have higher pleasures than feasting, a more exquisite
joy than the thoughtless mirth of the children of this world, and more solid
entertainment than the songs of fools. (Verses 3, 4, 5.) IL It Preserves
the Soul from Great Dangers. There are forms of sin which have the
most disastrous consequences, even in this life. They deprave every faculty
of the soul. Two of these forms are introduced here as having elements of
special danger—acts of tyranny and oppression, and corruption cf the heart
by receiving bribes. (Verse 7.) Here we have two great dangers, from which
the love of goodness and the desire of a fair reputation save us. 1. The injury
of the rational faculty. He who indulges in repeated acts of tyranny and oppression
becomes at length a monster, and hateful in the eyes of men. All his higher powers
suffer injury. He loses his rational understanding ; and when this is gone, destruction
is near athand. Sinners of this class madly pull down ruin upon themselves. 2.
The injury of the moral faculty. When those in power and station take bribes, their
moral faculties become weakened. They lose the sense of fine and delicate
perception in things relating to conduct. In the strong language of Scripture,
their whole moral nature becomes “ corrupt,” #.¢., broken together—unfitted for
performing its proper functions. It is only by obedience and love that the
delicacy of the moral sense can be preserved. III. It Changes the Complexion
of Earthly Sorrows. The sorrows of human life wear a forbidding aspect.
The children of this world strive to forget them in the dissipation of pleasure, or
they are driven by them into sullen despair. But goodness in the soul, appearing
in the moral beauties of character, transforms sorrow—yea, transfigures it into
the bright and heavenly. Sorrow, instead of being an unmixed evil, consuming
and fretting the spirit of man, becomes the channel of precious benefits.
1. Death becomes a great teacher. (Verse 2.) When men die, their houses are
filled with friends who mourn their loss, It is but nature to weep then, in the
presence of the greatest sorrow that can fall upon any home. But good men
though they feel the common distresses of humanity, and shrink instinctively
from the terrors of death, yet learn to make them the occasion of spiritual benefit.

a6


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. omar. Vib


a Rt ED


Death becomes a great teacher, giving them solemn lessons which they lay ta
heart. From what appears to be the terminus of life’s journey, good men can
discern the lights of another and better country. Death himself holds the torch
which shows them the path of life. 2. Human sorrow becomes a moral renovator,
(Verse 3.) The same afflictions which sink some men into despair, or drive them
into the mazes of unreal and unwholesome pleasures, only refine the nature of the
good man. They purify his affections from every mean and baseelement. “The
heart is made better” by the pure and heavenly objects which it loves—by the
increased fervour of its devotion. It is often in the seclusion of sorrow that the
noblest purposes are framed, and strength is gathered for the greatest moral
victories. 3. The pain of righteous reproof becomes more grateful than the loudest
joys of the world, (Verse 5.) “The rebuke of the wise” may be painful toa
good man who has committed a fault, or has been betrayed into folly; but he
accepts it with thankfulness, and learns the lessons it imparts. If the righteous
thus smite him, he shall deem it a kindness; for they but imitate the action of
the Merciful God who wounds only to heal. When the smart of reproof is over,
they feel a greater joy than in listening to the thoughtless and empty merriment
of fools, IV. It makes Death itself to be Gain. (Verse 1.) To our merely
human apprehension, all the circumstances of death are clothed with terror.
Levity turns pale at the contemplation of the last enemy, and the hardiest frame
shudders as with a mortal chill. But the death of a good man is for him but a step
in the path of progress; and for others a precious example, and a support of faith
and hope. Let us consider the death of the good (1) As a gain to society. There
are certain elements of loss to society when the good pass away for ever. Yet
death serves to set the virtues and graces of their character in a fairer and more
enduring light. Whilst in this work-day world, they are not fully known; but
death sets them on high, where they “shine as the stars for ever and ever.”
Death opens the way to fame, and when their presence is no longer with us, they
bless us with the scented fragrance of their ended life. How have the Apostles
of our Lord gained by death, in the estimation of mankind, and in an ever-
expanding influence! St. Paul and St. John are more fully known and revered
at this day than they were in their own times. 2. As @ gain to the individual.
The day of a good man’s death is better to him than the day of his birth, It is
an introduction to a sublimer state of existence—the day of his better nativity.
It is in death that his soul seizes the infinite, and enters upon the wealth of all
her mysterious nature. Death loosens the righteous from care, temptation, and
sorrow. It is to him the greatest of liberties,


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1, At this point, the Royal
Preacher enters upon a new stage of
enquiry. He had laid open the sins,
sorrows, and perplexities of humanity ;
now he seeks a remedy. If men would
be happy and secure amidst all the
storms of evil fortune, they must be
good. They must learn to interpret
the lessons ci affliction, to control
passion, to exercise wisdom and know-
ledge in conduct, and must seek to re-
gain that uprightness which was the
property of human nature as it came
fresh from the hands of its Creator.


Whatever perplexities may arise in
the contemplation of our existence and
condition here, there are certain things
that must be right. It must be right
to cultivate goodness, to have confi-
dence (notwithstanding appearances) in
the rectitude of God, and to put our-
selves in harmony with those Divine
laws which are the charter and the
pledge of liberty.

A good reputation springs from
inherent goodness in the soul. The
spiritual life within must work itself
outwards, The savour of a good

7





mame cannot be confined; but like a
precious ointment, it fills the whole
sphere of our influence,

The richest perfumes, like every
luxury of sensation, exhaust themselves,
but the aroma of a good name is for
ever fresh, and unhurt by the wrongs
of time.

The awe and veneration which a
good name inspires is the homage
which society pays to virtue.

Just as a box of spikenard is not
only valuable to its possessor, but pre-
eminently precious in its diffusion ; so,
when a name is really good, it is of un-
speakable service to all who are capabie
of feeling its exquisite inspiration ;
and should the Spirit of God so re-
plenish with His gifts and graces, so as
to render his name thus wholesome,
better than the day of his birth wil! be
the day of his death; for at death the
box is broken, and the sweet savour
spreads abroad. There is au end of
the envy, and sectarianism, and jealousy,
the detraction and the calumny, which
often environ goodness when living;
and now that the stopper of prejudice
is removed, the world fills with the
odour of the ointment, and thousands
grow stronger and more lifesome for
the good name of one (Dr. J. Hamil-
ton].

Birth introduces the good upon the
stage of a severe probation, fuli of risk
and danger; but death fixes their
goodness, placing it beyond the reach
of injury. The monster, created by
natural fears, is for the righteous but a
friend who removes the load of earthly
endurance, thus giving liberty to the
soul to recover her strength, and to
try her unencumbered powers.

In life, the righteous are but out-
door servants of the Kiag cf kings.
In death, they are admitted to His
palace, where they serve with increased
dignity and comfort.


Verse 2. A good man possesses the
heavenly secret of distilling sweetness
from sorrow.

The contemplation of suffering and
death, with the practical recognition of
the teaching they impart, best prepare

98


caar. vi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





us for that land where sorrow is un
known, and where life endures to
immortality.

He who is spiritually wise discovers
that the afflictions of our mortal state
have their bitter root in sin. He pene-
trates beneath the surface, and von-
templates that moral evil from which
all natural evil grows. He therefore
boldly faces the solemn fact which will
restore for him the lost harmonies of
creation, for it makes a “ new earth ”
as well as “new heavens.”

The coarse mirth of the world ends
in disgust and weariness, having no
element of permanent consolation and
hope. But the discipline of sorrow
refines the character, imparts a serious
aud thoughtful attitude to the soul, and
gladdens it by a hope beyond the


_ grave,


In tke place where they mourn for
the dead, a man is reminded that to
this also he must come. When a few
years, at most, are gone, his own house
will be turned inte a bcuse of mourn-
ing.
It is better to lay to heart the most
painful facts of life, and to learn their
solemn lessons, than to indulge in the
forced merriment of foolish men.

The winds and the waves are terrible
powers, but man, by the exercise of
‘hig reason and invention, forces them
to vender him obedient service, and to
carry him whither he would be. So
heavenly wisdom and goodness in the
soul turn the sorrows of life into the
means of spiritual improvement. The
forces that destroy the foolish are ele-
ments in the triumph of the wise.

God saith unto the Prophet Jere-
miah, “Arise and go down to the potter’s
house, and there I will cause thee to
hear My words” (Jer. xviii, 2). The
** potter's house” is the house of mourn-
ing wherein is the earthen vessel
broken, the earthen vessel of man’s
body, broken by death. And if we
shall go down thither, that will make
us willing to hear the words of God,
whereby to keep our souls from the
infection of sin, The very temper of
sadness is a friend to virtue [Jermin].


4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES, CRAP. Vil.


eS Rae a Le ee


Verse 3. Godly sorrow, leading on,
as it does, to endurance and experience,
thus becomes one of the ancestry of
hope. The laughter of the world is
changed to sorrow which at length de-
generates into remorse.

Worldly joy gleams on the surface,
but leaves the heart within unchanged,
still evil and unprofitable. The sorrows
of the righteous may leave a sadness
on the countenance, but peace and joy
reign within,

The design of Providence, by the
discipline of sorrow, is improvement.

By afiliction the heart is made tender,
and thus prepared for the impressions
which the love of God can make upon
it.

The affections of the soul are often
trained in the school of adversity. The
first lessons may be a wearisome
hitterness and pain; but they impart
superior moral culture, lead to the sweets
of victory, and to bliss without alloy,

Strangers to godly sorrow must
needs be strangers to their own blessed-
ness [Nisbet].


Verse 4. A wise man will choose
to go where he can learn most of the
nature of those great realities with
which he is concerned. In the house
of mourning, he learns to see—1. The
rebuke of pride and vanity. 2, The
evil of sin, It surrounds our removal
to another state with such awful cir-
cumstances. 3. The importance of
goodness as a defence against the un-
known and untried. Whatever the
great future may reveal, if we have
attained to the Divine image, we can-
not fail.

It is with no sorrowful acceptance,
but with glad heart that the righteous
take up the cross. They follow that
Divine Leader, who, though He may
conduct them through barren and un-
promising regions, will at length bring
them to the heights of immortality.

Tue fool has no far-reaching sight,
no power of penetration into the dread
realities around him. Herce he is
pleased with what glitters before his
eyes, and only seeks the satisfaction of
the present.


Let the heart of the wise go to the
house of such an one as may reprove
him when he offends, that he may bring
him to tears, and make kim to lament
his own sins; and let him not go to
the hcuse of mirth where the teacher
flatters and deceives; where he seeks,
not the conversion of his hearers, but
his own applause and praise [St. Je-
rome].

The moral nature of the inner man
is determined by the objects of tho
heart’s satisfaction.


Verse 5. The rebuke of the wise is
but the sharp incision of a cunning
hand that wounds only to heal. It is
the rod of gentle and loving reproof,
not the fist of wickedness.


The rebuke of the wise, though it
may occasion a smart, leads to moral
improvement; but the songs of fools,
though they may afford some passing
entertainment, are without any worthy
aim.

There is in rebuke a jarring and
harsh music, because it opposeth the
fault that is committed, it disagreeth
with the mind of him that hath com-
mitted it: but yet it is better music
than the melodious songs of flattering
parasites, who, leading on in wickedness,
do bring on to destruction [Jermin].

The rough-hewn marble gives but
the promise of a statue. Many a stroke
and finishing touch must be given be-
fore it attains perfection. So the
spiritual character requires those fre-
quent touches of wise reproof which
gradually shape it into symmetry and
beauty.

It is better to follow the course of
duty, though it may seem common-
place and the conditions of it severe,
than to be lured to destruction by the
siren songs of sinful pleasure,


Verse 6. The joy of fools seems as
if it would last for ever, and does
indeed blaze up, but it is nothing.
They have their consolation for a
moment, then comes misfortune, that
casts them down; then all their joy


lies in the ashes... . . Ue
9


cuar. vi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES





and vain consolation of the flesh, do
not last long, and all such pleasures
turn into sorrow, and have an evil end
[Luther].

In the mirth of the children of this
world there lies no deep moral worth.
It is but a sudden blaze of the fancy,
or the passing joy of a tickled appetite.

This world’s mirth may be loud and
imposing, but the sound of it quickly
dies away, and the heated passion
which inspired it subsides into melan-
choly and regret. Nothing remains but
the ashes of disappointment.

The mouth of the righteous shall
then be filled with laughter, when, the
tears of their pilgrimage being dried up,
their hearts shall be satisfied with ex-
ultation of joy. When the servants of
God, being filled with joy of a manifest
beholding of Him, shall, as it were,
break forth into a cheerfulness of laugh-
ing, in the mouth of their understand-
ing. Then their laughter shall not be
as the crackling of thorns under a pot,
but as the singing together of the
morning stars, and as the shouting for
joy of all the sons of God [Jermin].

The mirth of sinners is noisy and
short-lived, but the joy of the righteous
is like the everlasting lights that shine
in the calm depths of heaven,


Verse 7. The health of the mind,
which is wisdom, can no more be trifled
with than the health of the body.
Acts of cruelty and oppression harden


the heart, dull the moral sensibilities,
and gradually steal away every attain-
ment of virtue. When the sound mind
is lost, a man becomes a prey to every
delusion and foolish temptation.

That a wise man may be changed into
a monster of cruelty is an illustration of
the terrible power of sin. It can
destroy the tender charities of nature,
and impart to the conduct that wild
recklessness which amounts to fury, and
which calls for the restraints of Divine
judgment.

Acts of cruelty and oppression tend,
more than any other forms of human
sin, to efface the image of God in the
soul. They cause a man to approach
to the likeness of the Evil One, who
is both the Destroyer and the Adver-
sary.

To ruin the promise of wisdom by
entering upon the most dangerous
courses of folly, is moral madness.
Covetousness destroys the heart of them


that are under the power of it; blinds


their understanding that they cannot
see the evil of anything that makes for
their gain; sways their heart to receive
bribes, which being received, they
think themselves obliged to gratify the
giver by perverting justice in his favour
[ Nisbet].

It is dangerous to weaken our moral
sensibility by yielding to the lust of
gain. When the heart is destroyed,
there is taken away from a man the
very capacity for religion.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verss 8—14


Tue CounsELs OF A RELIGIOUS PHILOSOPHER.


Human life, duty, and destiny are here contemplated from their philosophic
side. We have moral and prudential maxims from one whose philosophy does
not lose itself in vain speculations, but mixes with men, and exerts itself in the
humbler but more useful task of contributing towards right practice. Counsels
such as these tend to mitigate the evils of our condition, and to inspire us with a
better hope. I Be Patient under Trial. (Verse 8.) The patient man is he
who meekly endures, who bears present evils and troubles with resignation, and
who is free from that unreasoning and passionate haste which is the bane of
impetuous natures. He is here contrasted with the “proud in spirit,” because
that blindness to reality, that wilfulness, that fierce vindication of self-love, all of
which are pressed into the service of pride, are alien to that patience which sees
clearly our true position, accepts the will of the Highest, and refuses the aid of


100


Fax J


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES, CHAP. VII.


<<





passion to support a fictitious glory. Pride and patience are mutually exclusive.
The patient man is superior to the proud, because, 1. He recognises the uses of
discipline, and a purpose wider than himself. However dark and perplexing his
present trial, he knows that God has some worthy end in view, that His will is
being accomplished in the improvement and perfection of all who piously and
meekly endure. He is satisfied that the righteous are safe, though they pass
through much tribulation into the kingdom of God. He whose character is stamped
with such convictions, bears the imprint of such lofty thoughts and purposes,
has a wider horizon and a sublimer idea of life than the wretch who is concen-
tred all in self, Breadth of view, that nobility of mind which despises the
mean, and small, and selfish, is the mark and quality of true greatness. 2. He
ts more easily moulded for goodness. Wilfulness lies at the root of pride. He
whose aim is to glorify himself scorns the yoke of obedience, There isa kind of
rigidity in such which refuses to be shaped into the form and excellence of good-
ness, They refuse the dictation and control of the will of the Highest, setting
themselves against it in stubbornness and rebellion. But the will of the patient
man is tamed and subdued; he learns easily the lessons of duty—of faith and
hope. He resigns himself into the hands of that Divine Artifieer who can mould
him into His own image. Our steps cannot be directed in the paths of peace
and goodness unless we “ acknowledge Him in all our ways.” But this involves
the forsaking of our own will, and of that pride which refuses to submit. 38. He
is content to wait for the end. Patience signifies something more than meek
endurance. It is often opposed to that disposition which cannot wait. The
proud man is in haste to secure the short-lived triumphs of the hour. He rushes
on to his purpose, not heeding, not caring, what human and Divine rights he
may trample upon. He is completely under the tyranny of the present. This
contracts his view, and seals up his affections within himself, so that he wildly
reaches out to the glittering things that lie near, unmindful of the holy and the
high, But the patient ma. feels that, though the present trial may be grievoug
and the way dark, the “end” will be “better than the beginning,” and so Kk
waits in hope. ‘To be able thus to take in a large view imparts nobility to the
character. II. Subdue the Violence of Passion, ; (Verse 9.) A wise man
learns to control passion, to keep it from bursting out into the intemperate
heats of anger. It is the triumph of religion thus to subdue the wildness of
nature, and so to tame the passions that they easily submit to the yoke, and
thus become the servants of virtue. Anger rests only “in the bosom of fools,”
i.e., with the irreligious. Of such passions it may be affirmed—1l. That they
indicate a nature uninfluenced by great moral convictions. The practice of good-
ness in the quiet paths of duty, and constant meditation on those great truths
which concern our relations to God and eternity, tend to keep down the violence
and fury of the passions. Righteousness (which is the result of great moral
convictions) brings peace, and peace finds a congenial home with contemplative
souls. Anger is the vice of the thoughtless, but it is far from minds accustomed
to regard the solemn aspects of life, duty, and destiny. 2. They indicate a mis-
chievous employment of useful powers. tis not the purpose of religion to destroy
the passions of human nature, but rather to give them a right direction. No
original endowment of our nature is either mischievous or useless. Nothing is
made in vain, either in the material or moral world. The organs of the body,
though they may become the seat of disease, yet in their healthy state serve bene-
ficial ends. There is a pious use of anger. When it is directed against sin,
oppression, and wrong, it strengthens the just in their righteous cause. Those
noble champions who have sought to redeem their fellow-men from the tyranny
of ages, have found their weakness turned into strength and impenetrable defence
by the stimulus of a holy indignation. When anger is kindled upon the altar of
.God, ityis just and good ;, but as an unreasoning passion, raised suddenly upon
es ne a , . 101


CHAP. VIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





the slightest provocation, in our daily intercourse with men, it is but the offering
of a “strange fire.” That anger which is quite disproportioned to the offence,
and fails to weigh the circumstances of it with accuracy, is a weakness and base-
ness of nature—an abuse of powers capable of nobler employment. 8. Zhey
are hurtful to others. Anger has been a fruitful source of oppression and wrong.
The history of religious persecution bears ample testimony to the sad fact that
the innocent and the meek have suffered from the fury and rage of this base
passion, Even in the narrower circle of domestic life, how much evil arises from
hence—what deep and lasting wounds! Anger may proceed no further than
words ; yet even these become sharp instruments of torture, and memory renews
the pain. When passion slips from the control of reason and righteousness, it
can only spread disaster and misery. Anger is native to the bosom of fools,
who are naturally careless, and serve their own selfish ends at any cost to the
feelings and rights of others, Iii. Do not Magnify the Past at the Expense of the
#resent. (Verse 10.) It is a common fault with men of peevish and fretful disposi-
tions to praise past ages, and to mourn over the degeneracy of the times in which
they have the misfortune to live. This is often the vice of age; for the old man
is proverbially a praiser of the times when he was a boy, and @ severe censor of
youth—of all that is new and fresh. This disposition to magnify the past can
also be observed in some of those arguments brought from antiquity, wherein the
authority that is hoary with time is made to overrule the most convincing evi-
dence, In the history of human thought, there have been times of intellectual
tyranny when it was treason to teach contrary to the doctrines of Aristotle. This
tendency to the undue glorification of past times can only be corrected by study
and reflection, by the cultivation of a contented mind, and by that sobriety of
judgment which frees a man from the slavery of the unreal. This disposition
arises—J. From dissatisfaction with the present, Men despise all what is near
and about them as things common and familiar. That which is hidden from
their observation is invested with peculiar sanctity. The past possesses a vague
sublimity which often serves to charm away the fancied evils of the hour, 2.
From the illusion of distance. As disance in space tempts the imagination to
indulge in gay fancies which lend ez:clhantment to the view, so distance in time
entertains the mind with a pleasing iilusion, Antiquity, instead of being rated
by the sober judgment of historical facts, becomes a mere sentiment. Poetry is
made to take the place of logic. To act thus is not to ‘enquire wisely ” con-
cerning these things. It is not the part of the religious philosopher to forsake
the sure ground of facts in order to follow fancies, There must be something
faulty in our moral nature as well, when we fail gratefully to acknowledge the
good that marks our own times, and seek an ineffectual relief in the fictitious
glory of the past. This fault is the indication of a nature dissatisfied with itself,
and spreading the gloom of its own discontent uponallaround. It is a revelation
of moral character. IV. Consider wherein Man’s Real Strength lies. (Verse
12.) Wisdom—that intellectual and moral sagacity which imparts sobriety to
the judgment, and steadiness to the walk in the paths of duty, has also this
excellence, that it is the defence—yea, the highest defence of man. A feeble
image of its power to protect, and to give assurance, may be seen in the social
estimate of the potency of riches. They, too, in their way, are a defence; they
give a sense of security, ward off many evils, and endow men with power and
ipfluence. These properties raise the consciousness of strength. They are
regarded as a material defence against calamity, and in unspiritual minds the
protection they afford is sufficiently magnified. So far, the analogy between
wisdom and money, as a source of defence, holds good. But beyond this
point they part company, diverging into widely different issues. Wisdom
has this superiority, that it “‘giveth life to them that have it.” Consider how
wisdom contributes to this result, and affords the only reliable protection against
102


ais


HOMILETIC COMMEPTARY: ECCLESTASTES. CHAP. VII.








ae


real evils. 1. There are some evils from which neither wisdom nor money can save
us. Our sagacity and prudence sometimes fail to ensure what is called success
in life. The highest qualities of goodness do not suffice to ward off disaster,
They grant no title of exemption from taking our sorrowful portion in the com-
munity of suffering and woe. In this regard, wisdom stands on a level with
riches, as a defence. Riches cannot prevent the invasion of sickness, calamity,
and death, And wisdom is equally powerless to deliver us trom these evils,
2. Wisdom has superior consolations. In the great troubles of life, the comfort
gained by wealth is but limited and insufficient, When man is fairly within
the grasp of the last enemy, his wealth can give him no assurance or joy. But
to the good man, journeying through the dreariest desert of life, wisdom is a
spring to refresh him, a tree to give him shade, And when time is setting with
him, and the last struggle apprcaches, conscience gives him strength and
assurance. In the kindly light of faith and hope, he humbly awaits what God
has ‘laid up for him. 3. Wisdom is the only essential and permanent defence. All
other defences are temporary, quite unavailing in the severest trials, and the
greatness of man can afford to dispense with them. Wisdom gives life, and
from hence springs the consciousness of strength, that robust courage, which is
confident of victory. Life is the sphere wherein man’s highest ope rests and
expatiates. To him who is assured of life, what is death itself b»t the Jark and
painful struggle into his second birth? ‘Life. in its deep spiritual significance, is
perpetual existence under the smile of God. This is the greztest power—the
strongest defence of man. All else are shadows; this the only enduring sub-
stance. V. Be Resigned to the Established Order of Providence. (Verse 13.)
Resignation—that habit of humble submission to the Divine will—is man’s true
wisdom, the garment and proper adornments of piety. Hereby is patience kept
alive, and grows strong for her perfect work. There are two considerations
which should prevent men from murmuring at the established order 0 Provi-
dence. 1. Such conduct is useless in itself. We cannot withstand God, or alter
His determination, We are able to collect the facts and discern the laws of
Providence, as we do those of the solar system, but we are powerless to effect
any change in either of these spheres of the Divine operation. God has not
taken us into His counsel. His wisdom is not so weak and fallible that it should
call to us for aid. Inthe laws of Nature and Providence, there is no help nor
happiness for us but by submission. It is vain to contend with infinite wisdom
and power. For man, in his ignorance and bold defiance, to lay his puny hand
upon the revolving wheel of nature is destruction. 2. Such conduct is impious
towards God. Most men in the time of adversity fail rightly to ‘* consider the
work of God.” If we see no presiding will behind the present system of things,
we become fretful, disobedient, full of despair; and in the vain atterapt to help
ourseives, find only bitter disappointment. But if we see God in all these things,
we learn self-control, and submit with pious resignation. “I was dumb, I
opened not my mouth ; because Thou didst it,” says the Psalmist (Psa. xxxix. 9);
Ours should not be the submission of despair, or of sad reconcilement to the
inevitable, but rather that joyful submission which has all to hope for from a
Father’s hand. As God is wise, and good, and loving, He can do nothing
arbitrary. If we are good and true, we can afford to wait, even through present
- obscurity and discomfort, till God shall mauiifest Himself, and bring with Him
full reward and consolation. VI, Do not Force the Spirit into Unnatural
Moods. (Verse 14.) A wise mar is marked by that sinsplicity of character
which avoids all affectation and in-incerity. In the various moods of feeling
through which he is called to pass, ne is (in the best sense of the word) natural,
We should use no devices to disguise or falsity our feelings, but let them have
full expression and fitting exercise, according to their nature. 1. Give proper
expression to joyful feclings. Prosperity comes from God, and should oop aoe


cuar. vi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





for devout thankfulness and joy. Love to Him who sends the blessing should
dispose us to this; for what is joy, but the recreation of love? It is love
taking exercise, casting off for a while the weight of care and sorrow, and sport-
ing itself in the sunshine of prosperity. ‘Is any merry? let him sing psalms,”
(James v.13). We should allow our feelings to flow in their proper channels
and not repress them by an unnatural asceticism. We have this element in the
Book of Psalms, wherein the most lofty expressions of joy are used, and nature
herself is made responsive to the gladness of the soul. 1. Give proper expression
to the feelings of sadness and gloom. While adversity should not drive us to
despair, to doubt the goodness of God, or to insane endeavours to extricate our-
selves; yet, at the same time, it should not tempt us to assume a stoical
indifference. Not to feel the rod of the cross, the chastisement of God, is a
great evil. The Prophet complains, “‘ Thou hast stricken them, but they have
not grieved.” (Jer. v. 3.) Job refused this wretched consolation of hardness of
feeling, and scorn of afiliction’s rod. ‘Is my strength the strength of stones?
or is my flesh of brass?” (Job vi. 12.) 38. Learn the lessons both of prosperity
and adversity. In prosperity we should learn gratitude, a sense of our unworthi-
ness, and discern herein a prophecy of a better and more enduring world. In
adversity, we are told to “ consider” the moral aspects of the affliction. These
duties are not rigidly exclusive. We are not taught that prosperity should be
thoughtless, and adversity joyless. But the consideration of the solemn facts of
our moral probation is specially appropriate to the season of adversity. (1) Con-
sider that the same God appoints both conditions. In our human view, they are
very diverse; but in the Divine idea and purpose of them, they are but alterna-
tions of treatment necessary to our soul’s health. They both come from His
hand whose will is that the end should be blessed, though we proceed through
part of our journey in pain. (2) Consider that human helplessness and ignorance
are a necessary discipline. The purpose of these diverse ways of Providence is,
that “‘man should find nothing after him.” He is thus rendered incapable of
piercing into the future, and, therefore, of managing it to serve his own purposes.
Convinced thus of his own helplessness and ignorance, he is cast upon God that
he may learn the lessons of humble dependence and of faith.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


first.” But there are some things to which


Verse 8. This isa strange statement, and
thoroughly false when applied to some things,
1. It is false when applied to sin, Sin to man,
in its first stage, is a comparatively pleasant
thing. The fruit to Eve was delicious; the
thirty pieces of silver in the hands of Judas,
at first, were prized ; but the end—how sad !
Sin begins in pleasure, but ends in pain ; be-
gins in music, but ends in groans. 2. It ts
false when applied to unwise enterprises. The
first stages of a mercantile or a national enter-
prise, to the projector, are pleasant, But if
the methods of action are unwise, the enter-
prise will soon prove to be a house built upon
the sand. 3, Jt will not apply to partial
reformations, When reformation has not been
effected on right principles, there comes an
apostacy. Certain devils, in the form of
habits, have been expelled, but the mind is
left empty. The evil spirit at length returns,
bringing with him seven more devils; “and


the last state of that man is worse than the


104


these words will apply. 1. They will apply to
an honest and persevering search after truth.
At the outset of all. investigations, the mind
is often harassed with doubt, and perplexed
with difficulties ; but as it proceeds, things
appear more reasonable, obstacles are re-
moved, and the mist gradually rolls off the
scene. 2. They will apply to the history of
Christianity. It came from despised Nazareth,
its founder was the son of a carpenter, who
died a malefactor. Systems, institutions, kings,
and peoples were against it. But its end will
be better. It is fast moving on to universal
dominion. 3. They will apply to true friend-
ships. Most true friendships at their outset
have trials. But as it proceeds, mutual know-
ledge, mutual excellence, mutual love increase,
and the twain becomeone, 4. They will apply
to the life of a@ yood man. This may be illus-
trated by three remarks :—I. At the End of his
Life he is Introduced into a Botter State,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


CHAP. VII.





1. He begins his life amidst impurity. Tainted
with sin, at the beginning; but at the end, he
is introduced to purity —saints—angels—Christ
—God! 2. He begins his life on trial. It is
amoral battle; shall he conquer? It is a
voyage; shall he reach the haven? The end
determines all. 3. He begins his life amidst
suffering. “In this tabernacle we groan,
earnestly,” &c. II. At the End of his Life he
is Introduced into Better Occupations. Our
occupations here are threefold—physical, intel-
lectual, moral. All these are of a painful
kind, Toiling for bread—grappling in the
dark with the mere rudiments of knowledge—
mortifying the flesh, But death introduces us
to those which will be congenizl to the tastes,
and honouring to God, III. 4t the End of
his Life he is Introduced into Better Society,
Society here is frequently insincere, non-
intelligent, unaffectionate, But how delightful
the society into which death will introduce
us! We shall mingle with enlightened,
genuine, warm-hearted souls, rising grade
above grade up to the Eternal God Himself
[Homilist].


However severe the afflictions of the
righteous may be, the end is always in
their favour. The end is their proper
inheritance, of which no calamity can
deprive them.

The end, for the righteous, will be
the verification of those great truths
which are here but dimly seen by faith.

If we are faithful, the darkest events
of Providence will approve themselves
to us in the end, which will be a reve-
lation of the righteous ways of God.

It is only at the end that we can
sum up fairly, and weigh the value of
all things.

A patient spirit comes in aid of th>
decisions which wisdom is disposed to
pronounce. It takes time to reflect,
instead of giving way to the first head-
long impulse. Pride lends fuel to feed
the flame of passion and violence.
Patience keeps down the fire and
quells the tumult, and thus secures for
wisdom the leisure and the calmness
which, in such circumstances, it so
especially needs, in order to judge
righteous judgment [Buchanan].

Pride has a short-lived triumph,
patience an eternal reward.

The gate is low through which we
pass into the distinctions and honours
of the kingdom of God.


Verse 9. Righteous anger, which


alone is lawful for us, is slowly raised ;
is conformable to the measures of
reason and truth, and endures no longer
than justice requires. It expires with
the reformation of the offender. It is
rounded by pity and love, which, like a
circle of fire, increases towards the
central space until the anger itself is
consumed.

Frail man, who has so many faults
of his own, and stands in need, on
every side, of favourable interpretation,
should be very cautious how he in-
dulges himself in the dangerous pas-
sion of anger. A wise man herein
will observe @ legal calmness and
sobriety.

Cases are not only supposable, but
of no unfrequent occurrence, in which
the emotions of anger may be fairly
justified. Yet it is one of those pas-
sions for which a person feels afraid
to plead, because it requires, instead of
encouragement and fostering, constant
and careful restraint; and the pro-
pensity in every bosom to its indulgence
is ever ready to avail itself of an argu-
ment for its abstract lawfulness, to
justify what all but the subject of it
will condemn, as its careless exercise,
or its criminal excess .... To retain
and foster it is a mark of a weak mind,
as well as of an unsanctified heart
[ Wardlaw}.

It is one of the gracious and en-
couraging testimonies which Scripture
has given us concerning God, that ‘‘ He
is slow to anger” (Neh. ix. 17), and
that ‘‘ Neither will He keep His anger
for ever (Psa. ciii. 9), And yet what
infinitely greater cause God has for
being angry, and for retaining His
anger against us, than we can ever
have in the case even of our most
offending fellow-men! Did His wrath
burn and break forth against the sin-
ner as suddenly and vehemently as
does the sinner’s wrath against his
offending brother, there is not a day
nor an hour in which the sinner might
not be consumed [ Buchanan].

With the wise man, anger is a
strange and suspicious guest, ready


’ to be cast out upon the first confir-


mation of his evil intent, But with
105


carp. vi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





the fool anger has a congenial home.

Where anger is indulged it will lead
all the other passions to mutiny, and
render any wise self-government im-
possible,


Verse 10. The dreamy admiration
of antiquity is the refuge of weak
minds, the futile justification of their
discontent, They despise actual life
around them and the ways of duty as
too prosaic, thus injuring their moral
force by the excesses of the imagina-
tion.

If we follow the fancied superiority
of past ages with a sober and impartial
eye, we shall find that it retires into
the region of mist and fable.

Some Christians mourn over the
lack of spirituality and earnest pur-
pose in the Church of the present.
They sigh for the ideal perfection which
marked primitive times. But a closer
examination would soon dispel this
illusion. Even in the times of the
Apostles, the passions of human nature,
and the infirmities of the human mind,
both disfigured the life of the Church,
and corrupted the truth.

The golden age for our ace lies in
front of us, and not behind. Humanity
is ever toiling up the heights of pro-
gress—from evil to greater good.

Those who unduly praise past ages,
fix their eitention upon a few illustrious
names, and challenge the present times
for the preduction of their like. They
forget that those famous men do not re-
present the average of their contem-
poraries, but stood at their head and top.
Those moral heroes are but brilliant
points of light scattered sparingly
through the long jark vista of the past.

‘Thou dost not inquire wisely con-
cerning this.” 1. Thou art inquiring
for the cause of what thou shouldst first
ascertain with certainty to ke a jac’;
of what possibly has no existence but
in thine own cistempered imagination,
or partially unformed judgment. There
has been no golden age in this world
but the short period of paradisaical
innocence and bliss enjoyed by the
first progenitors of our since accursed


race. 2. Consider that thou knowest
6





the evils of former times only by report,
whereas of present ills thou thyself
feelest the pressure, By this feeling
thy judgment is liable to be perverted.
The sight of the eye is more impressive
than the hearing of the ear. 3. In
uttering thy complaints, thou art un-
wise: for thou arraignest in so doing
the All-wise Providence of the Most
High, who assigns to every successive
age its portion of evil and of good.
The complaints of a petted spirit are
ungodly ; and the inquiries of such a
spirit are equally unwise in their princi-
ple, and delusive in their results [ Ward-
law].


Verse 11. Wisdom can stand upon
its own merits, and derives no addi-
tional glory from wealth. Yet by
means of wealth, wisdom is com-
mended to the minds of many.

Wisdom can do without wealth
better than wealth can do without
wisdom.

Ample possessions do but minister to
the lusts of their foolish owner, and
feed his self-importance.

Wisdom, as far as it can make use
of wealth, is a “profit to them that see
the sun,” t.e., to those who are free,
and have the power to enjoy. But
when the darkness of adversity comes,
wisdom has reserves of strength, and
riches of consolation hidden till then.

In the vocabulary of a very large
class of men, wealth and wisdom mean
pretty nearly the same thing. ‘I'he
wise man who knows everything but
the art of making money they regard
asa fool; while the millionaire who,
with a lamentable deficiency of higher
gifts, has continued to amass a fortune,
receives all the deference due to the
man who is pre-eminently wise. It
can need no argument to prove that
Svulomon could never mean to lend any
countuaancs to so gross a method
of estimating the worth of things
[Buchanan].


Verse 12. Wisdom is so conscious
of her superior dignity and worth that
she can afford to estimate, at their full
value, all beneath her,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESTASTES. CHAP. VII.





Wealth affords but a mechanical de.
fence against adversity, giving way
under the pressure of the greatest
calamities. But wisdom changes the
nature of the afflictions themselves, and
wltogether neutralises them.

Wisdom is a wall of derence, and
money is a hecge. The thorns in the
Gospel, which sprang up and choked
the good seed, ure by our Saviour ex-
pounded of the deceitfulness of riches;
but that is when the thorns do grow
among the corn, when the love of
riches hath placed them in the heart,
where the seed of spiritual grace ought
to grow. Let them be kept out of the
heart, be esteemed of as they are, out-
ward thing: ; then they are, as it were,
a fence, a hedge unto a man whereby
he is preserved from hurt. So they
were to Job, by God’s Providence
over them (Job i. 10) [Jermin].

True spiritual wisdom not only
ministers to the comfort wd dignity
of life; it is life itself. That which is
true in a lower sense of human know-
ledge has its highest illustration in
that knowledge which is eternal life
(1 John v. 11, 12).

Of what avail are the splendours of
wealth when the soul passes, bereft of
all, into eternity? The riches a man
leaves behind him raise the admiration
of others; but the deep, solemn, essen-
tial question is, did they give him
life? If not, they cannot be placed in
comparison with the unfailing virtues
of heavenly wisdom.

Money may defend its owner from
a certain class of physical evils, but it
can do nothing to shield him from
those far more formidable moral evils,
which bring ruin upon the immortal
soul, It cannot protect him from the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye,
and the pride of life . . . . But
heavenly wisdom arms him against all
these foes, and teaches him, as its first
great lesson, what he must do to be
raved; and it disposes him to choose
that good part which shall not be taken
away; and in so doing it enables him,
humbly and calmly, to bid defiance to
the devil, the flesh, and the world. In
acquainting him with God, it gives





him a peace which the world’s greatest
prosperity cannot confer, and of which
its direst adversity cannot deprive him
[ Buchanan]. .


Verse 13. The conviction that the
work is God’s is enough for the pious
soul,

The spiritual instincts of the righteous
discern behind the dread forces of
nature not only a personal will, but
also a heart. He feels this, and is
satisfied.

Our wisdom is baffled by the system
of Providence, as well as our power.
As we cannot resist the decrees of it,
80 we can find no principle to har-
-monise its apparent discrepancies, Our
safety lies not in rebellion, but in
patience, faith, and hope.

So terrible are the restrictions of
humen destiny, that man can have no
perfect liberty here. The seeming
disorders of life sorely chafe him.
We must be born into another life
before we can have complete eman-
cipation and “ glorious liberty ” (Rom.
viii. 21).

Solomon does not mean, in so saying,
to teach or countenance the revolting
doctrine of fatalism ; he does not mean
that we are to regard ourselves as being
in the iron grasp of a remorseless
power, in regard to which we have no
resources but passively to leave ourselves
in its hands... . It is His will—the
will of the only Wise, Just, and Holy
Jehovah, and not that of His ignorant,
erring, and fallen creature, that is to
decide what shall be. Let man, there-
fore, humbly and reverently acquiesce
in what the Lord is pleased to ordain
as to his earthly estate. ‘Shall not
the Judge of all the earth do right?”
[Buchanan].

When we are at home with God, in
the *‘ secret place of the Most High,”
our painful perplexity subsides in the
presence of His love and comfort. The
darkness of our sojourn here is but the
shadow of His wings.


Verse 14. Our joy in prosperity
should not be the selfish glorying in
success, or the transports of gratified

107


cuaP, vin. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


a 2


ambition. It should be an act of
worship, a glad recompense paid to
heaven,

It is wisest, as well as most natural,
to allow our feelings full play while
they last. We cannot take in the
idea of life as a whole; else the burden
of duty and suffering would appal
us.

“Consider” 1. The Author of your
trials. Whatever be their nature, and
whatever the instrument of their inflic-
tion, they are the appointment of
Providence ; they come from the hand
of a wise and merciful God—who, in
all His ways, is entitled to your thought-
ful regard. “Consider” 2. The cause
of all suffering. Sin is the bitter foun-
tain of every bitter stream that flows
in this wilderness. “Consider” 3.
The great general design of adversity ;


to excite to self-examination, repent.
ance of sin, and renewed vigilance, to
promote the increase of faith, love, and
hope, and spirituality of mind, and
general holiness of heart and life
[ Wardlaw].

The alternation of joys and sorrows
in human life is necessary to our soul’s
health. Our nature is too weak to
bear an unvarying experience without
being hardened or corrupted. We
need to be startled into sudden sur-
prises in order to keep our attention
awake.

God so tempers His dealings with us
as to make our probation a stern and
serious thing. He thus keeps men in
His own hands, so that they can find
nothing where He has not willed it,
or wnere His light does not show the
way.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH. Verses 15—22.


Tue Cavtions or A ReEtigrous PHILosoPHeER.


IL Against Judging the Moral Worth of Men by their Outward Conditions,
(Verse 15.) There are perplexing appearances in the moral government of God— _
@ seeming confusion of right and wrong, as if the Supreme Ruler was indifferent
to human conduct, and had no complacency in goodness. 1. Moral excellence is
sometimes associated with misfortune. The just man perishes, notwithstanding his
righteousness. He therefore is made to suffer all lesser evils beneath this
extreme calamity. How often have the good been betrayed and persecuted, or
condemned to obscurity and neglect! Some of the noblest souls on this planet
are overwhelmed by adversity, and altogether unknown to the world. 2. That
wickedness is sometimes associated with prosperity. The basest of men have occu-
pied the highest places, and have been preserved to old age surrounded by all the
appliances of luxury and pride. 3. These moral discrepancies must be viewed in
the light of religion. The righteous man will perceive that, even through all
these apparent irregularities, the great purpose of God is being accomplished.
He will reflect that, after all, these disorders are of little significance to him,
Even they are but ‘‘ vanity ;” they will soon be past, as far as he is concerned.
Like his own life here, they are but a “ vapour,” and that even an appearance for
@ little time. These evils must be endured; but what does it matter, since life
is so short? They are but a momentary speck upon the clear glory of eternity.
The humble and enlightened soul will consider the bitter root of all these evils.
1. He will look to the past. In the history of human nature, there is an evil
somewhere—some primal transgression corrupting the origin of the human race.
The burden of vanity is laid upon us on account of sin; and even the righteous,
in many sorrows and in the painful necessity of dying, must pay the penalty. 2.
He will look to the future. There is a higher revelation awaiting maa. ‘ That
which is perfect ” will come, and there will be a clear justification of all the ways


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. VIL





of God. No evil will offend those pure and holy souls who live in His sight.
Il. Against a Rash Estimate of the Divine Dealimzs with Man, (Verse 16.)
This is not a caution against aiming at the highest excellence in goodness or
wisdom, for these are the proper objects of a righteous ambition. It is rather a
caution against the conduct of those who presume to find fault with the methods
of God’s dealings with men, as if they could devise and conduct a more satis-
factory scheme, This is the most daring form of human arrogance. 1. It is
the result of a proud righteousness. There is a dangerous refinement of rectitude
and wisdom which is bold enough to venture a criticism on the moral government
of God. Vain man has assumed an over-nice delicacy of moral principle, leading
him to indulge the suspicion that he could surpass his Maker in righteous and
wise administration. We have here the germ of that Pharisaism which appeared
in the days of our Lord. The same error underlies both the earlier and the
latter stages of this religious vice—the want of humility. We are warned
against the temptation (1) Jo re-judge the Divine justice. We may imagine that
things would be better in our hands, that there would be a more equitable dis-
tribution of good and evil. But our weakness and ignorance sufficiently stamp
this as impiety. (2) Zo question the Divine wisdom. We may, in our foolish
fancy, build imaginary systems in which no imperfection appears, nor any risk
or chance of failure. Such pride needs the rebuke, “ Shall mortal man be more
just than God?” (Job iv. 17.) Our knowledge is too limited for such a bold
exercise as this. We have no basis of facts sufficiently broad, nor any experi-
ence of them sufficiently long and intimate, to warrant us in such an adventure,
We are “ but of yesterday,” and, as a consequence, “‘ we know nothing.” Besides,
there is our moral disqualification. Such impiety as this tends to ruin; “ why
shouldest thou destroy thyself?” Men who meddle with matters too high for
them will receive some humiliating check, or suffer moral degradation and injary.
But, 2. The dread of this fault must not drive us into the opposite extreme. (Verse
17.) I+ is not hereby intended to teach moderation in sinful actions. We have
rather a precept which takes into account the sad fact of our sinfulness; and,
regarding absolute perfection as unattainable (verse 20), counsels us not to cross
the border-line which separates the good man—still subject to weakness and
infirmity—from the open sinner. (1) Such conduct would be destructive. Vice,
in considerable measure, brings its own punishment, by shortening human life
and making it miserable. (2) To avoid such extremes is the highest attainable excel-
lence. (Verse 18.) This is the ‘‘ good” we should reach after, the only one
possible to us. It is well if we can hit that happy medium which avoids the
affectation of righteousness, on the one hand, and carelessness as to our moral
conduct, on the other. (8) Such excellence ts only attainable by true piety. “ He
that feareth God shall come forth of them all.” He alone shall be saved from
false righteousness and reckless immorality. A Divine hand alone can lead us
in the safe way between these dangerous extremes. III. Against Building upon
an Impossible Ideal of Humanity. (Verse 20.) Man might have some ground
for boasting, and presuming upon his own wisdom, were he pure, and open to no
impeachment of his goodness, or imputation of folly. But even the best are im-
perfect. Therefore, 1. We need some defence against the Divine Justice. Man has
offended the justice of God, and must either receive the full force of the penalty, or
provide a sufficient defence against it. We must accept the facts of our condition,
painful though they be, and receive protection from the evils we deserve, as a
gift of Divinemercy. 2. Heavenly wisdom supplies the needful defence. (Verse 19.)
By “ wisdom” is signified the pious fear and love of God. This is the only sure
defence. Wecannot avert or mislead Divine justice. ‘ However we contrive,
we must come face to face with it at last. Man can build fortified cities, and
brave heroes may defend them with valour and skill, and maintain a successful
resistance against the enemy. But no ingenuity of device, or ed of


CHAP, VIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





resistance, can defend us from the inflictions of Divine Justice, if we are found
without that wisdom which is godly and pure. IV. Against an Over-sensitive-
ness in regard to the Judgments of Others. (Verse 21.) Contrive how we
zaay, men will think about us, and form some estimate of our character. 1. We
must pay some attention to suck judgments. The text refers both to praise and
blame. We cannot be purely indifferent to either. Praise is the crown that
society places upon the head of the good, the reward of brave and consistent
virtue. Blame is often the index, pointing to some fault or defect inus; and a
wise man will not neglect such indications, But, 2. Such judgments must not
excite in us any undue anxiety. (1) As to blame. If we are right and pure in
motive, aim, and purpose, we can afford to despise adverse judgments. We con-
sider that such are compounded of ignorance, malice, and rage. (2) As to praise,
It is often insincere; at best, fickle and inconstant, A wise man will receive it
with moderation of desire and estimate. If we are too anxious to catch every
breath of praise, we expose ourselves to the grief of bitter disappointment. A
man may hear his own servant “cursing” him, while he is listening for the
much-coveted praise. 3. We should remember our own failings. (Verse 22.)
We ourselves are not faultless. We may have the painful consciousness of some
defects of disposition, or of wrong inflicted upon others, which may provoke just
censure, or retaliation. We may possibly have come slowly and late to the
possession of heavenly wisdom, and in our days of folly, may have inflicted
injuries whese effects still remain. We are candidates for a mercy to come, and
must, therefore, be merciful to others. The censure we overheard, when we
expected a word of praise, may have been uttered in a moment of passion; and
though the sharp agony of the sting remains with us, the hasty word may have
been soon forgotten by him who uttered it. We must make allowance for the
imperfections of our fellow men, and cherish the spirit of moderation and for-
givezess. Unless protected by the shadow of a mercy which must cover many
faults (even in the best), we have much to fear from the judgment of God.
The vision of that awful trial which awaits humanity, and from which there is
no escape, should make us more reserved in our censures, and more merciful in
our estimation of human conduct. Our sin is at the bottom of all the evils we
suffer here, the moral disorders of the world, and of all the trials and vexations
which accompany us throughout our probation. Given faultless men, and
there would be a faultless world; the very face of nature and of life would be
changed. Rightsousness would work itself outwardly in a “new heaven and a
new earth.”


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 15. If we estimate the moral How often has it happened that the


worth of men by their surroundings,
we should greatly mistake. Dives and
Lazarus, in their environment here,
presented the contrasted pictures of
happiness and ease with want and
misery. If with perverted eye, we see
in the outcast of earth the outcast of
heaven ; or in the favourite of fortune
the favourite of heaven; how soon is
the illusion dispelled when aeath strips
both of all their time-vestments to the
bare essence of their souls, and to the
simple attributes of character!
110


just man, who has laboured to promote
some social regeneration, or to give the
world a purer faith, has perished, the
victim of intolerance! The thankless
world has often rewarded its best
teachers with the prison, the cross, and
the stake.

He who is unscrupulous may rise to
prosperity and undisturbed enjoyment,
while the righteous perishes because he
will not forego high principle. It is
only in the ‘‘ days of our vanity ” that
we can see the apparent failure of the


~~ oe


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. cua?. VIL


es


righteous, and the prosperity of the
wicked. A far different sight will be
presented to us in the stern realities of
eternity |

Men who adopt a higher standard of
duty than the rest of the world may
have to suffer for it. The noble army
of martyrs bears witness to this. He
who adopts common views and princi-
ples may find life easy enough.


Verse 16. Those rulers are over-
just who search everything too closely;
and the theologians are over-wise who
in matters of faith wish to direct
everything according to their own
reason [Cramer].

The boldest forms of impiety have
assumed the garb of righteousness, in
which men have dared to “snatch from
His hand the balance and the rod.”

Unless goodness is sufficiently guar-
ded by humility, we are exposed to
the danger of ‘ntelleccual and moral
pride.

There must be some fatal fault in
aay refinement of justice or wisdom
which leads a man to entertain a sus-
picion of God.

The attempt to oppose the justice
and wisdom of God by our vain imagi-
nation leads to destruction, ‘The
words of Job are ended,” says the in-
spired historian. All words spoken
against God must sooner or later come
toan end. LEither grace forgives the
folly of the speech—as in the case of
Job—or God closes the impious mouth
with violence.

The impiety here condemned has
also an illustration in the government
of human affairs, where it is often seen
that, Summum jus summa injuria, Luther
says, “He who would most rigidly
regulate and rectify everything, whether
in the State or in the household, will
have much labour, little or no fruit.”


Verse 17. As you would not be
over-righteous, see to it that you be
not over-wicked,—that is, that you do
not contemn and neglect all govern-
ment committed to you, thus letting
everything fall into evil. It may be





well to overlook some things, but not
to neglect everything Hoots

As there is a moral and intellectual
activity which degenerates into impious
speculation, so there is an inertness of
conscience and of mind which issues in
wickedness and folly.

As there are hazards attending high
pretentions to wisdom, so there are
risks peculiar to folly. The absolute
fool becomes the object of contempt.
His life is hardly thought worth an
effort, far less a sacrifice, for its preser-
vation. The fool is easily made the
tool and the dupe of a party; exposing
himself to be the prey of virulent ene-
mies, or of selfish pretended friends.
Folly leads a man into innumerable
scrapes. It may induce him heedlessly
to mix with wicked associates, and may
thus occasion his suffering for crimes,
in the perpetration of which he had no
active hand, and which, fool as he is
he would shrink from committing
And in numberless ways he may come
by his folly, to “‘ die before his time ”
[ Wardlaw].


Verse 18. By the fear of God we
escape, on the one hand, the danger of
Pharisaism, because, firstly, it awakens
in the heart a dread of all attempts to
deceive God by the trappings of a
heartless show of piety, and because
further, an energetic knowledge of sin
is inseparably bound up with a true
fear of God (Isa. vi. 5). We escape,
also, on the other hand, the danger of
a life of sin, because we cannot really
fear God without also having a keen
dread of offending Him by our sins,
and a lively wish to walk in the ways
of His commands [Hengstenberg ].

The safe way of duty lies between
dangerous extremes. Nothing but the
fear of God can keep us from wander-
ing to the utmost edge of hazard.

The fear of God springs from faith,
and leads to that hope which expects
all good from Him. If we believe in
the character of God, as revealed in
Scripture, we have everything to hope
for. Fear is but the attitude of that
caution which dreads to lose God, and
by so doing, to lose all. ;

11


GHAP. Vil.





Onur true safety lies not in dwelling
exclusively upon the moral dangers to
which we are exposed, but rather in
“ Setting the Lord always before us.”
Herein is the only condition of stability
for our righteousness,


Verse 19. It is due to this inherent
and immense superiority of intelli-
gence and forethought, over mere
numbers of animal energy, that the
few in all ages have controlled the
many—that a handful of cultivated
and civilised men have triumphed over
whole nations of barbarians. It is
wisdom, in the sense of knowledge and
intellectual skill, that has subdued the
material world, and made it tributary
to the convenience and comfort of man-
kind. . . . . It is not human
science, however great its achieve-
ments may be, that he intends to cele-
brate. . . . . But more than
these “mighty men,” with all their
skill and energies combined, could do
for such a city, can wisdom do to
Strengthen its possessor against the
devil, the flesh, and the world [Bu-
chanan].

Our goodness is besieged on all
sides. We can only hold out against
the enemy by the might of a wisdom
and courage which is stronger than
that of the world.

The true heroes of our race are
spiritual men, who havo felt and dared
to utter great truths. Other heroes
have conquered enemies, yet have
themselves been vanquished by deadlier
foes! Spiritual men alone have con-
quered all, “The good fight of faith,”
is the only one that leads to any satis-
factory and permanent result,


Verse 20. There is not even a just
man—a justified man—upon earth, that
doeth good and sinneth not; that doeth
good so exclusively and so perfectly as
to be without sin. The law of sin
which is in his members still wars
against the higher law of his regene-
rated mind, and more or less at times
prevails. But there is this grand and
fundamental distinction between him
and the impenitent and unbelieving,

112


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; ECCLESIASTES.





that the germ of a new and Divine
life has been implanted in his soul
[Buchanan].

The highest attainments in good
ness come far short of absolute per-
fection. The best can only say with
the Apostle, “Not as though I had
already attained, either were already
perfect” (Phil. iii. 12).

The boast of sinlessness can only
arise from deplorable self-ignorance or
spiritual pride.

The purest souls feel that they need
some defence against the justice of
God. Nature and Providence teach
no doctrine of forgiveness; they often
chastise without warning, and pay no
heed to the excuse of ignorance. But
spiritual wisdom is gifted with that in-
sight into the character of God which
beholds in Him infinite mercy and
compassion. This is our only hope.


Verse 21. The wisest and best run
the risk of being misrepresented and
misunderstood. They often suffer ex-
quisite pain through the malice and
envy of others, and the proneness of
mankind to indulge in careless talk,
But he who follows conscience has no
need to lay this seriously to heart, All
the “ wood, hay, and stubble” of human
speech will be burnt up.

Consistent goodness will, in the end,
triumph over suspicion and unfavour-
able judgments. The clouds that
accompany the sun on his journey,
hiding his bright head, often form at
his setting a cushion of vermillion and
gold on which he sinks down to rest.
Enough for us if our evening sky be
pure and lovely; we can afford to
despise the passing shadows of our
course.

Even wise and good men are often
unduly fretted and disquieted by the
harsh and uncharitable things that
may be said of them in this censorious
and envious world. They err in giving
way to such angry or disappointed
feelings. They forget that even the
best of men have still many failings—
that there is no perfection among our
fallen race; and while this fact should
remind them that they themselves are


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





not infallible, and that they may really
have given some cause for the accusa-
tions of which they complain, it should
also teach them not to form unreason-
able expectations as to the conduct of
others . . There is much point
as well as truth in the familiar saying
that eavesdroppers seldom hear good of
themselves, They do not deserve to
hear it. It is well that their craving
curiosity and morbid vanity should be
thus rebuked and humbled [ Buchanan].

Extreme sensitiveness is one of the
evils of ill-health. A robust strength
and integrity of character will preserve
us from many annoyances,


CHAP. Vm





Verse 22. As we can boast of no
absolute purity, we cannot take too
high ground with humanity,

Those who crowd around the gates
of mercy, as suppliants, have little
need to recriminate one another.

Your own consciousness will prevent
you from thinking it impossible that
you should hear any evil of yourself ;
and it will, at the same time, teach you
to make allowance for the passions and
hasty speeches of other men [ Ward-
law.

Expect injuries, for men are weak,
and thou thyself doest such too often
[Richter].


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 23—29.
Tue CoNnrESSIONS OF A. RELIGIOUS PHILOSOPHER.


The Royal Preacher, approaching religion from its speculative or philosophic
side, has some gad confessions to make. I, That the Search for Wisdom is
Difficult. (Verses 23,24.) His search is represented as most complete, marked
by earnestness, the Royal thinker urging himself to it by a strong effort of the
will, ‘I said I will be wise.” The plan of procedure was most complete and
exhaustive. It was no surface inspection—no mercenary work, He “applied”
his *‘ heart to know, and to search, and to seek out wisdom.” He tried to dis-
cover what lay behind all appearances, “ the reason of things ””—that deep insight
which would reveal to him perfect order and harmony. In his speculations, he
used variety of method, approaching the subject from different sides. Virtues
were contemplated in their opposites, Witha painful revulsion of feeling, know-
ledge was obiained from the morbid anatomy of sin, ‘‘ Wickedness” and “ folly,”
‘foolishness ” and “* madness,” are not inviting subjects, but they are facts of
human life, and must be investigated by all who would speculate upon the state
of man. Here is a search after wisdom most energetic and complete. Whence
does the difficulty arise? In general, it arises from the vast dimensions of the
subject of investigation. But these dimensions are here contemplated in two
directions. 1. Jn thetr surface. The knowledge of man—his duty and destiny,
and of the mysteries of religion—forms a subject extending far beyond our
mental sight. We see and explore our narrow circle all around, but it is bounded
by darkness, clouds, and shadows. If we adventure far, and the scene opens out
before us, yet it closes behind us! We cannot chase the darkness away. The
suriace which we are permitted to explore is painfully limited. Like the end of
the rainbow, where fancy has placed a golden cup, the prize of absolute wisdom
is unattainable by man. The most successful explorer must make the confession,
‘¢It was far from me.” 2. In their depth. Exceeding deep, who can find it
out?”? Even that which is before our eyes, when we attempt to fathom it,
proves too deep to be sounded by our plummet. Great secrets lie there hidden
from mortal sight. Even the commonest objects are mysterious, and lie on dark
roundations, quite inaccessible by us; and therefore how remote from our reach
must be the ultimate mystery of God and man! IL. That the Results of the
Search are Humiliating. They are but poor, scanty, and unsatisfactory, And

8 113


cHaP. vi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





this, 1. In a speculative view. The gains of our search after wisdom, regarded
as an intellectual effort, are but small. We mect with some success, and obtain
considerable insight into man’s life and destiny. But the goal of absolute wisdom
is as far off as ever. We can only express the little that we know in broken
accents. Cur difforent movements of thought come into frequent collision.
Partial wisdom—mere fragments of knowledge—are all that we have—crumbs
from the table. 2. In a practical view. In this direction, our search after
wisdom is more plentiful in results. We gather more facts and principles, But
how sad and humiliating are these! We have been investigating evil, disorder,
the force and terrible complicatioas of temptation—all the melancholy facts of
human nature under the influence of violent passions and unworthy motives.
We have here a recital of some of these sad facts. (1) That there are some special
dangers to virtue. (Verse 26.) There are temptations in life which have
elements of special danger. They deceive by treacherous arts, and the unsus-
pecting sinner, at first pleased with the siren song, delays, yields to the enchant-
ment, and is lured to his destruction. That book of practical and prudential
wisdom, the Proverbs of Solomon, is full of warnings against the seductive arts
of women. Their lascivious looks and foul embrace are here described as
* snares,” “ nets,” and “bands,” An easy virtue is soon entrapped and over-
whelmed. The Serpent first approached man through his weak side, and she
who was first deceived more easily deceives others (1 Tim, ii. 14), This portion
of humanity, when loosened from the restraints of social morality and religion, pre-
sents the most pitiable forms of degradation, and one of the chief dangers to virtue,
Special help from God is needed to escape these dangers. ‘“ Whoso pleaseth God
shall escape from her.” (2) That the highest moral excellence is rare. (Verse 28.)
The Royal Preacher professes an extensive knowledge of human nature. He is
satisfied with no hasty glance, obeys not the impulseof tirst impressions, but acquires
his knowledge by slow and painful steps. He searches out his facts “one by
one,” summing them up with a cool and severe judgment. (Verse 27.) As a
standard of comparison, he takes man as he came pure from the hands of his
Maker, before his glory had fallen—God’s idea of humanity, He confesses that
no one reaches this absolute standard of sinless purity and perfection. Among
men, he had found “ one of a thousand,” in some sense, worthy of the name—
one who approached the Divine idea within some computable distance. But
among women, he had not found one worthy of the name, in the primeval ideal.
‘That he never found such a one, consequently that he considered the whole
female sex as vicious, and highly corrupt, cannot possibly be his opinion, as
appears from Verse 29, as also in Chap. ix. 9. But that moral excellence, taken
as a whole, is much more rarely found than among men, that sin reigns more
uncontrolled among the former than the latter, and in the forms of moral
weakness and proneness to temptation, as well as in the inclination to seduce, to
deceive, and ensnare—such is clearly the sense of this passage” [Lange].
3. That man must sigh in vain for a lost Paradise. (Verse 29.) That pertect
uprightness, that moral integrity of man in his primeval state, is but a splendid
fact of the past, a sad remembrance of what once was, but is now no longer.
There will, indeed, be a restored Paradise for man, but it will not be the same as
that which was lost. Fallen man may attain a better estate than that which he
torfeited, yet his final honours and distinctions will be those of one whose
fortunes have been repaired, and not of one who has preserved his inheritance
as he received it from the beginning. The dispensation of mercy itself cannot
obliterate the sad facts of sin. Surrounded and penetrated by evils, our spirit
can only sigh for the past, “ God hath made man upright.” 4. That man makes
the evils which trouble him. ‘They have sought out many inventions.” The
sad, moral calamity of our race has not destroyed human activity. The powers
of our nature still exert themselves with restless effort, but they have taken a


iemehantanatinn Nase mee


a ea Pad





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; ECCLESIASTES.  cua?. vu.


$$ ey


wrong direction, They are fruitful in those ‘inventions ” which, though marked
by fertiliny of device and ckill, are yet hurtful, and are but great powers
altogether misused, ‘Ihe Religious Philosopher does not dwell here upon external
actions, but goes rather to their spring in the perverse thinkings of the mind,
The devices of natural reason—useiess or impious speculations—have often
corrupted and confused the truth. Instead of receiving Divine wisdom with the
simple instinct and faith of childhood, man follows bis own dazzling speculations,
and the tigher knowledge is hidden from him. (Matt. xi. 25.) - These perverse
thinkings are the seed from which the evil of the world springs, for sin works
from within outwardly, from thought to act. The assumed superiority in moral
strength and excellence, which man may have over the woman, is but a short-
A and unseemly boast in the presence of that sinfulness which belongs to all

ie Trace, }


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 23. The true teacher must
be a constant learner, He can only
impart what he has gained by trial
and exercise.

Though the effort is beset with tre-
mendous difficulties, yet the resolve to
be wise, at all hazards, is noble and
praiseworthy,

Our study of the mysteries of God,
man, and nature, is not «altogether
barren of results. We are able to
“know in part.” We gather a few
facts, and by a kind of prophetic in-
sight, frame those portable and con-
venient statements of them called
hypotheses and laws. But even the
wisest must confess that the ultimate
mystery is as far off as ever.

There are some fixed stars whose dis-
tance is so great, that when observed
from the extremes of the diameter of the
earth’s orbit, they show no change of
direction; thus affording no data for
the calculation of their distances. If
we could get nearer to them, then we
should discover how far off they are.
He who has approached the nearest to
the great secrets of God and this uni-
verse, is most of all conscious how
distant he is from absolute wisdom.

The goal of intellectual wisdom lies
so far off that the hope of attaining it
can impart no solid satisfaction. But
there isa Divine word which is ever
nigh unto man; yea, in his heart, and
ready to break forth from his mouth.
We need not seek for it in the height
of heaven or in the abyss (Rom. x.
6—S).


12


He had said, indeed, “I will be
wise.” He had set his heart on under-
standing all mysteries and all know-
ledge. In that vain confidence to
which at one time he had given way,
he had imagined himself to be equal
to the task of unlocking every secret,
whether of nature or of Providence,
and of leaving no difficulty unexplained.
Time and the trial had undeceived him,
and had taught him to form a humbler
and juster estimate of the powers that
are given to man, .. . The
dark problems which he had thought
to solve remained, many of them as far
from solution as ever. Such was the
experience of Solomon, and such will,
and must, be the experience of every
finite mind [Buchanan].


Verse 24. Neither the wide range
of subjects with which the intellect can
grapple, nor its power of penetrating
their depths, can put us into the pos-
session of those secret things which
God has reserved for Himself.

The infinite superiority of God renders
it necessary that many things be con-
cealed from man. Such mystery and
reserve are the life of adoration.

Though Revelation is clear on all
matters of practical duty, yet it pre-
seuts truths whose mysterious depths it
does not illumine. Such are the eter-
nity and immensity of God — the
mystery of creation—the existence of
evil under a holy and righteous govern-
ment—the dealings of God with men
in Providence and in grace.

115


CHAP. VIL.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES,


SS sl


We can have no true happiness if
we wait for perfect satisfaction of the
intellect. We can only comprehend
God through love. Neither height nor
depth can vanquish or distress him who
has the love of God in his heart (Rom.
viii. 39),

Wisdom is so far off that it is not
known from whence it cometh, nor
where the place of it is (Job xxviii. 20).
It is so deep that the depth saith it is
not in me, and the sea saith it is not
with me. It is so far, that the weak-
ness of man’s understanding is over-
wearied before it can come unto it;
so exceeding deep that the eyes of
man’s understanding is dazzled to look
into it, and man’s wit is endangered
by venturing into it. It is deep and
deep, as the original expresses it—deep
to men, deep to angels [Jermin].


Verse 25. Wisdom does not yield
her treasures to the indolent, but only
to minds accustomed to earnest and
patient toil.

Truth is so often mixed with error,
so completely confused and disguised
by that which has gathered around it,
that it is only traced out with diffi-
culty and cleared from the entangle-
ment.

We must not be satisfied with the
simple observation of facts; we should
try to discover their causes, or the
principles they illustrate. It is the
glory of the human intellect that it can
contemplate laws, and does not depend
upon the limited information gained
. from passive impressions,

However painful the task may be,
the great teachers of mankind must
investigate the causes of the chief
dangers to virtue.

There are some forms of human evil
so bold, full of wild passion, and
irrational, that they stand out like
mountains on the scene of the world’s
guilt,

That which is truly good is more
clearly seen when we consider the evil
that is contrary to it. The beauty of
holiness, and excellency of saving
Bhs is illustrated, and best seen,

41


when the deformity of sin, the madness
and unreasonableness of those courses
which natural men take to come at
their imaginary happiness, are com-
pared therewith [/Visbet].


Verse 26. To know the wickedness
of folly, the wickedness and foolishness
of madness, seems equivalent to know-
ing the worst species of it. . . . .
In his own wild career he had come
in contact with folly, and he had him-
self wrought folly of many sorts. And
now, comparing all these one with
another, so as to ascertain to which of
them the pre-eminence of evil should
be assigned, this was the conclusion at
which he had arrived. These terribly
significant words point plainly to the
same seducer of whose base and
destructive arts so startling a picture
is given in Chap. vii. of the Book of
Proverbs [Buchanan].

How strong the expression—“ whose
heart is snares and nets!” signifying
the multitude of her devices of tempta-
tion, and the consummate skill, the
secrecy, the address, the guile, with
which she uses them for the accom-
plishment of her purposes, Her very
“heart is snares and nets,” in whose
intricate and entangling meshes the
fascinated and deluded soul is taken
captive to its destruction. “ And her
hands as bands.” Her powers of
detention are equal to her powers of
allurement. Her heart is a net, to
entangle the unwary; her hands as
bands, to hold him fast when her wiles
have proved successful. So irresistible
is the power, operating like the spell of
enchantment, by which she retains
under her influence the hapless victim
of her charms [ Wardlaw].

The most pleasant fountains of sin
turn, in the end, into the bitterness of
long regret.

Education and culture—therestraints
of human prudence, may do much to
preserve the maintenance of the highest
virtue, in the face of the most insidious
allurements. But religion furnishes
the highest motives, the most powerful
restraints, The noble ambition to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.  cmaP. VIL
en ES ea


stand well in the sight of God is the
only trustworthy sentinel of virtue.

By “‘the sinner” is meant one who
is thoroughly vicious—with whom the
practice of evil is habitual. With
such the power to resist temptation
grows less, and they become an easy
prey to every pleasurable sin.


Verse 27. Sin cannot be treated by
vague generalities, the forms of it are
30 many and diversified. We must
descend to particulars in order to make
a deep impression.

Even the most patent facts should
not be treated as known upon a mere
surface inspection. The real knowledge
of them can only be gained by minute
investigation,

Knowledge comes not to man by
sudden irradiations, but by slow de-
grees—by adding, arranging, and re-
flecting.


Verse 28. Much is gained by the
diligent seeker after wisdom—many
facts, principles, lessons, and warnings ;
but the full possession of wisdom is not
permitted to man.

Men of the highest qualities of mind
and soul, powerful in word and influ-
ence, are but rarely found, ‘There are
but few stars of the first magnitude.

The strong expression of a truth
brought home to the soul by sore ex-
perience, may easily wear the appear-
ance of harshness and exaggeration.

The Preacher may refer to woman
in regard to her attainments in Divine
wisdom. ‘The superior delicacy of her
natural sensibilities often give her the
advantage of an immediate and vivid
perception of truth, to which man
atiains chiefly by the slow and laboured
processes of the mind. Yet this power,
when directed into wrong channels,
shows a faculty just as strong in em-
bracing error and superstition. It
must be confessed that the natural
weakness of woman has contributed, in
no small measure, to the spread of
these evils. They have too often been
the natural home of frivolities both in
lite and religion, Though the Bible
records the praise of many noble women,


yet the fact remains that an inspired
Apostle thought it necessary to warn
the Church against dangers arising
from this source (1 Tim. ii. 12. 1 Cor.
xiv. 84). They are the easy dupes of
false teachers (2 Tim. iii. 6).

Never, perhaps, has there been any
period in the history of the visible
Church of God, and certainly never
in these more modern times, con-
cerning which we are best informed,
in which the majority of those who
lived in the fear and love of God
were not women. Solomon is here
evidently speaking, and that as a
humbled penitent, of his own particular’
case. He had loved “many strange
women,” outdoing, in this respect, the
laxity and the luxury of the heathen
monarchs around him. . . . Is it
any wonder that in such a household,
even among the thousand he had
gathered into it, one solitary example
of real goodness could not be found?
Among his male attendants and cour-
tiers, gay and dissolute as the society
of the palace had become, one might
now and then be met with who had not
forgotten the piety and integrity of
other and better days [Buchanan].


Verse 29. The present evils of
man are not to be charged upon his
Maker.

However rude and vague the com-
mencement the Creator may have
given to inanimate matter, as the God
of souls He must needs produce His
Own image in fit perfection.

“Upright,” 1. As to his mind. It
was a plain mirror wherein the images
of truth were reflected without dis
tortion. The knowledge he possessed
was, in its kind, perfect and pure, un
mixed with baser matter. 2. As to
his affections. They were fixed on
God. He was pleased and attractec
only by what was noble and good
3. As to his conscience. As anindi-
cator, it was in a condition of perfect
adjustment and delicacy. Asan instru-
ment of moral control, it had both the
right and the powertorule, 4, As to
his will. It had no perversity, no ele-
ment of rebellion; but arr et


SHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; ECCLESIASTES.





determined to that which was right
and good.

The hurtful inventions—the evil arts
and devices of the human intellect, are
marked by endless complexity, variety,
and skill. This is power ill-directed
and misapplied; but still a power,
great in its perversion and ruin.

The first Paradise will never return ;
for the past never returns to us, bring-
ing the same features as those long
since vanished. But by that Divine
mercy which triumphs over all diffi-
culties, and through them educes a
greater good, there will be for man a
better Paradise than the first.

We read that in the future Para-
Gise there will be a “tree of life,” but
no “tree of knowledge.” ‘ The glory
of the Lord did lighten it, and the


will then allow God’s light to shine
upon it instead of working out its own
devices,

The actual existence of moral evil
is too notorious to admit of a moment’s
question. The Bible account of ita
origin did not cause it; it existed in-
dependently of the revelation which
informs us how it began; and the
rejection of that revelation neither
removes nor mitigates it, nor disen-
cumbers it, in the slightest degree, of
its embarrassing difficulties, On the
contrary, revelation alone, whilst it
assumes and proceeds upon the mourn-
ful fact, provides a remedy; all other
systems, finding human nature in ruins,
leave it as they find it. Revelation
rears out of the ruins a magnificent
and holy Temple to the God of purity


Lamb is the light thereof.” The mind and love [ Wardlaw].





CHAPTER VIL


Ornrrrcat Notrs.—]. The boldness of his face shall be changed.] Folly, inthe form ef selfishe
yess, imparts a fierce aspect to the features; but wisdom graces them with a superior refinement,
2. The King’s Commandment.) The Preacher falls back upon his authority as a king, striving
to realise what is the Divine idea of the ruler of men. And that in regard of the cath of God.]
An appeal to God as witness to that promise of okedience which every subject virtually ma kes
to the king—the obligation of obedience strengthened by the sanctions of religion. 3. Be not
hasty to go out of His sight) A becoming demeanour must be observed in the presence of the
King. If he is not favourable to our petition, we must not show our vexation and disappointe
ment by retiring from his presence with indecent haste. Stand not in an evil thing.) Do not excite
His anger by the appearance of stubbornness, as if he could be forced into compliance by our
stern attitude and bold persistency. 5. The Commandment.) ‘“ The word of a king.” (Verse 4.)
The expressed will of an earthly authority as representing the Divine, Shall feel no evil thing.
Shall have the protection of the laws. A wise man’s heart discerneth both time and judgment.
The wise man will modify the common obligation to obedience. by reason and conscience, It
may be his duty to resist. 6. Therefore.] Best rendered by Although. The meaning is, that
notwithstanding the present misery of man, in the ways of Providence towards him, there are
appointed times. Deep and wise purposes lie oenind all this apparent confusion and disorder,
Is great upon him.] The form of the werd implying something laid upon him as a heavy
burden. 7. When it shall be.] The marginal rendering is to be preferred—how tt shall be
8. Neither shall wickedness deliver those that are given to it.] Lit., its possessors, Opposition.
though it may appear for a time to be victorious, will at length prove to be of noavail. This
is the principal thought of the verse, and the fit conclusion of the entire section. 9. There is
a time when one man ruleth over another to his own hurt.] This was the definite direction of
the Preacher’s observations. He tried to discover what were the prevailing disorders of the
time, and he beheld a whole epoch filled with examples of tyranny. 10. The place of the
holy.] Some understaud the place of judgment. Others, the place of honourable burial, where
men came and went in funeral procession, But it is more in accordance with the sense of the
Posner e understand it of the sanctuary, or the comm nity of the righteous, These wicked


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.  cuar. vin.
| J A


men concealed their true character beneath the outward forms and proprieties of religion,
12. And his days be prolonged]—i.e., in sinning. 13, Neither shall he prolong his days.] Vice

__ being unfavourable to long life ; though, as in Verse 12, the time spent in sin, undisturbed by
any seeming interference of Providence, may be considerable. 14. There is a vanity which
is done upon the earth.) These seeming anomalies in the moral government of God are part of
that vanity to which man has been made subject on account of sin. 16. And to see the
business that is done upon the earth.) Travail, or torment; not business. Compare with

Chap. ii, 26., and iii. 10, The painful labour of seriously considering human life and destiny.

_ Neither day nor night seeth sleep with his eyes.] The “ travail” is so earnestly carried onas to
interfere with proper rest. 17. All the work of God.] His universal dominion—the whole
sphere of the Divine operation as observed by man. He shall not find it.] He shall not be
able to comprehend, or fathom it. Compare with Chap. iii, 11, and vii, 24,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—6


Tae Lire or THE RicHtecovus Man IN THE STATE.


L He Recognises Duties towards Constituted Authority. The wise man is
he who has true spiritual knowledge, and who makes that knowledge the guide
of his life. Such will endeavour to discharge all the duties arising’ from the
several relations in which they stand to God and man. All are members of civil
society, and therefore subjects under some form of human government. Certain.
duties are owing to those whom Providence has set over us in the State. 1. Zhe
duty of loyal obedience. (Verse 2.) If it is the will of God that men should
exist in civil society, it must also be His will that there should be rulers, for these
are necessary to the continuance and perfection of civil society. The actual

_ rulers of mankind are in their places by that Providence which works in history.
Properly constituted government affords that protection, and gives that oppor-
tunity, by which all the members of the State are able to fulfil their several

- duties. Our Lord and His Apostles taught that obedience must be rendered to
rulers, Their memorable words on this subject must have acted as a powerful
check, in the case of the first believers, to any tendency to exaggerate their
Christian liberty ; to which the temptation would be strong, on account of the
corruption of existing governments. We should cultivate, 2. A proper sense of
the sacred obligation of obedience. (Verse 2.) ‘ And that in regard of the oath
of God.” Human authorities are called of God, appointed by Him, and fill their
places, not on account of their own intrinsic excellencies or merit, but by His
permission—by that act of Providence which has placed them where they are.
We are under as sacred an obligation to obey them as if we had solemnly ratified
the promise of obedience by a formal appeal to heaven, We should cultivate—3. A
delicate refinement of behaviour where duty has special difficulties. (Verse 3.) In
the king’s presence it is proper to maintain a reserved and careful behaviour. If
the king grants not our request, it is unseemly to show our vexation by departing
from his presence in haste. On the other hand, we should not carry our firmness
so far as to appear obstinate. We may have to sacrifice our own private feeling
to that veneration which is due to office. The indulgence of improper tempers
towards lawfu! authority might sow the seeds of rebellion far and wide. It is
wisdom to study that behaviour which is proper to the occasion, and to avoid all
that tends to imperil the safety and good ordering of society. We should cultivate
—4. A proper reverence and awe of authority. (Verse 4.) Rulers, for certain


ends of civil society, stand to us in the place of God. We owe them oe


cHaP. VL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





for the sake of their office, and should maintain a wholesome dread of the power
committed to their hands. II. Wisdom imparts Special Fitness for the
Discharge of such Duties. ‘‘ He who is truly wise, who fears God, and reverences
what is God-like in man, does not delude himself by impossible theories of human
society. He powesses that practical wisdom which teaches him how to pass
through life smoothly, to abstain from infringing the rights of others, and to
labour for the promotion of the general good. The wise man is the best servant
of the state. 1. He has a better insight into the reasons and the nature of duty.
(Verse 1.) ‘ He knoweth the interpretation of a thing.” Lit., “of the word.”
To him the grounds of duty are clear; he is alive to the importance of social
order, and brings to the consideration of law a correct moral judgment and the
habit of obedience. The great principles of his life are adequate to all the
requirements of right conduct between man and man, though they extend
beyond it even to the realm of higher duties. 2. He is the subject of a civilising
and refining influence. (Verse 1.) Wisdom is not only a power in the mind and
heart, an inward and sacred adornment, but is also a power working outwardly,
revealing itself in the style and bearing of a man, and lighting up his coun-
tenance with noble expression. It softens all that is repulsive, so that the
countenance does not wear that fierce aspect which results from coarse ideas and
a selfish heart. This refinement of beauty is an image of that social order and
harmony which wisdom tends to produce. It is the pledge of the world’s peace.
3. His obedience to authority is discriminating. (Verse 5.) He renders not a
passive, a blind obedience, as if every command proceeding from merely human
authority must be obeyed without questioning. It may be allowed that, in
geveral, it is safe to obey. ‘ Whoso keepeth the commandment shall feel no
evil thing.” He who renders unquestioning obedience may save himself from
many troubles. But if he makes this rule absolute, he may have to compromise
conscience, Therefore wisdom must be employed to discriminate when human
authority is in conflict with those higher duties which we owe to God. A wise
man may have to resist the king’s command, as Daniel did. An unreasoning,
“ind obedience is not taught in Scripture. Principle is dearer to the righteous
Jan than safety and comfort. Where human and Divine authority are in conflict,
bis choice is made, He owes his highest allegiance to the ‘* King of Kings,”


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1. None is comparable to
the wise man. He alone possesses
that real and abiding treasure which
cannot be gotten for gold.

The power to investigate the deep
reasons of things imparts a majesty
and stability to the religious life. The
wise man is so fixed upon the solidities
of truth that he is not carried about “* by
every wind of doctrine.” Piety without
intelligence is exposed to the dangers of
fanaticism.

Wisdom, though an inward power,
hangs out her ensign upon the human
countenance.

The power of wisdom to elevate and
refine its possessor is a kind of re-

120


newal of his physical nature, an earnest
of the redemption of the body.

The beauty of the “human face
divine” lies in its expression. The
light of wisdom within beams in the
countenance, imparting to it the attrac-
tive aspect of intelligence and sensi-
bility. Itis a mild and lovely light.
It does not dazzle and overpower by the
studied brilliance of self-display, but
with soft and gentle radiance inspires
delight, and wins affection; for of
genuine wisdom, self-diffident humility
is the invariable associate. Such
wisdom gives to the countenance the
expression both of dignity and grace
[ Wardlaw].


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES,


CHAP, Vill,


LL


“ Boldness” may, with greater strict-
ness and accuracy, be rendered by
*effrontery,” or “arrogance.” What
Solomon seems to say is, that wisdom
communicates to the face of its owner
an aspect of meekness and gentleness
very different from that air of im-
perious and boastful confidence which
it once wore. None is so arrogant as
the ignorant or half-instructed; none
so unpretending as the man of largest
knowledge and deepest thought [Bu-
chanan].


Verse 2. Wisdom throws light upon
every relation in which man is placed,
and makes every duty to appear in clear
definition. That book which reveals
the highest truths does not disdain to
give authoritative commands regarding
the every-day work of man in the
world.

“The powers that be are ordained
of God,” says St. Paul (Rom. xiii. 1).
They are ordered and appointed by
Him just as much as those who occupy
the most sacred offices of the Church.
Kings may be imperfect, but so were
the Scribes and Pharisees who “ sat in
Moses’ seat; ” yet this does not destroy
the obligation to hear and obey their
lawful words.

The wise man’s sense of duty to
kings rests upon a higher motive than
fear, or the love of security. It is
with him a sacred obligation.

Since men must life in civil society,
they have a right to consider how they
shall thus live. The observance of the
laws is necessary to secure the common
good, and the king is but the living
law.

Civil obedience is not a question
between man and man merely ; but, as
we are here emphatically reminded, it is
also a question between man and God.
: . The same “oath of God”
expressed or understood, by which the
subject is bound to keep the king’s
commandment, limits and regulates the
very obligation which it imposes. So
long as obedience to the king’s com-
mand does not involve disobedience to
any commandment of God Himself,
obedience is imperative. The oath of


God exalts loyalty into a religious duty
[Buchanan].


Verse 3. Our own vexation and dis-
appointment should not destroy our
proper reverence for those who repre-
sent the law.

A wise man will avoid everything
in thought, temper, and action tending
to sow the seeds of sedition,

Whilst your first and most sacred
regard should be to the “oath of
God,” yet your own interest is also
involved. You are in the king’s power.
He may degrade you from your station,
deprive you of your emoluments, and
inflict upon you such punishment as
shall not be alleviated by the con-
sciousness of its being undeserved.
The headstrong passion that persists in
evil because it cannot brovk submission,
is itself inexcusable, it may cost you
too dear [ Wardlaw].

Beware of rashly casting off allegiance
to your lawful sovereign under any
temporary influence of wounded pride
or passion; or of being led away into
sedition or rebellion by the specious
plea of reforming the existing order of
things. Ahithophel did this in the
days of David, and he came, in con-
sequence, to a miserable end. . . .
Or, again, if any man have bea
seduced by evil counsel, or hurried by
resentment or ambition into some un
lawful attitude or act, let him not
“stand” in the “evil thing.” To per-
sist is only to aggravate the offence,
and to make its punishment more in-
evitable and severe [ Buchanan].

Passion, whether in the form of
haughty disdain or of stubbornness, is
untriendly to the proper discharge of
duty.


Verse 4, Without power to enforce
it, the law would be but mere advice.

The power of law and government is
very great. The law never sleeps. It
has a retentive memory, and it has long
arms. Joab, proud and imperious, and
contiding in the impunity which his
position at the head of David’s army
appeared to give him, trampled on the
king’s commandment, but nevertheless

121


CHAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; ECCLESIASTES.





he found to his cost, in the end, that
where the word of a king is there is
power [ Buchanan].

There is no appeal from the king’s
decree, as he acknowledges no earthly
superior. Be it wise or foolish, good
or evil, that decree must take effect.
The victims of tyranny, suffering for a
righteous cause, may indeed appeal to
the Heavenly King; but that appeal
cannot be heard till the final Judg-
ment.

Authority could never command
respect, or be invested with its fitting
character of sacredness, if it were com-
pelled to bear upon its very front a
proclamation of the conditions upon
which it might be set at naught.
Hence the unqualified language in
which Solomon speaks in this passage
[Buchanan].


Verse 5. The true liberty for the
subject is the liberty of law. Obedi-
ence is the condition of safety and pro-
tection,

There are times in which obedience
to human laws has peculiar difficulty
and perplexity for the wise man. But
his wisdom disposes him patiently to
wait, to watch the time and opportunity,
and to judge soberly what conduct is
right for him.

Our cause may be righteous and
good, but if we lack discretion, our
best designs must fall to naught,





Mistaken zeal is ever ready to pre-
cipitate events. But ‘he that believeth
shall not make baste.” He can afford
calmly to wait.


There are three enquiries which the
man of true wisdom is ever proposing
to himself :— What should Ido? When
should I do it? How should it be
done? He pays regard not only to
the matter or quatit; of his actions, but
to the time and the manner of them.
He attends to circumstances in every
department of his conduct; in impart-
ing counsel, in administering reproof,
in seeking the redress of grievances, in
promoting needful improvements and
reform ;—never forgetting that success
very often depends as much on the
choice of a right season, and the
adoption of a proper way of performing
an action, as upon the action itself
{ Wardlaw].


What is fitting must be studied as
well as what is right and good. A wise
man observes the proprieties proper to
the time, place, and occasion. St.
Paul, while adhering firmly to principle,
followed no unyielding methods of
action; but by “becoming all things
to all men,” thus won many to Christ.


Even innocence is but a poor and in-
sufficient protection in a world like
this. The wisdom of the serpent is
needed as the trusty sentinel of the
harmlessness of the dove,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 6—&


Tue Stern Dominion OF THE SUPREME KING,


We now turn from earthly kings and their narrow dominions to consider the
Great Ruler over all. There are aspects of His government terrible to man.
I. He Uses an Inflexible Method. (Verse 6.) In the government of God over
Bature and man, we observe a stern regularity which is calculated to inspire us
with awe of some mysterious and inflexible power, All seems to us as one vast
machine which moves on in invariable method, not knowing, not caring, what
injuries it may inflict. In some moments of painful thought, it might seem to
us that we are abandoned to the terror of some heartless and unsympathetic
power. Some of these harsh aspects of God’s government are here indicated.
1. His purposes are already formed. He does not enter upon His work with
rudimentary and imperfect ideas, waiting for a wider experience and more
certain knowledge. He uses no methods of trial and error; learns not, as we

122


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP, VILL


a


are obliged to do, from failure and success, His purposes are formed once for
all. 2. There is an appointed season for their development. The time is deter
mined beforehand when the purposes of God shall be effected. They ripen slowly
and await their proper season, nor can any human power force their growth.
3. They appear to be carried on regardless of human woes. Although “the misery
of man is great upon him,” this inexorable dominion continues. The wheel
within wheel in the system of nature and Providence may raise our admiration,
but their terrible regularity of movement and certainty of effect seem to spurn
away imploring misery, and threaten to crush hope. Yet the wise man will
discern a “reason” behind all these harsh appearances. Therefore he submits
and waits. There is a “set time” also to favour him. II. He Hides from Man
Future Destinies. (Verse 7.) No feeling does more to tame the human breast
than our complete ignorance of the future. It is altogether hidden from us.
1, As to what it contains. “ He knoweth not that which shall be.” He cannot
tell what events shall take place, what new scenes and changes shall be unfolded
_ in the course of time, 2. As to the manner of it. “Who can tell him how it
shall be?” He who has studied the past history of mankind with intelligence
and calm reflection, can predict the general principles which future events shall
illustrate. But in what time and manner those events shall take place, no
human sagacity can foresee. This ignorance of future destinies strengthens, in
‘the good man, the feeling of dependence upon God. It makes faith in the love
of God a necessity of the religious life. The way may be dark before us, but if
we fear the Lord, He will guide us tenderly with more than a father’s care. The
oppression of the future becomes light when we are strengthened by a sense of
that “loving kindness which is better than life.” III. He Appoints for Man
the Inevitable Hour. (Verse 8.) However varied the fortunes of men, there is
One event awaiting all. 1. When the high summons arrives no power or skill can
resist tt. Our breath of life is in the hands of God. He decrees the time when
we shall breathe the last gasp, and when the heart’s emotion shall be stilled.
When He permits the last enemy to grasp us, there is no escape. Death knows
no awe of rank, nor yields to bribes. That ruthless power cannot be softened by
the voice of distressed affection, or forced to spare his victims by any arguments
derived from the usefulness or beauty of their lives, No man has power to
retain the spirit beyond its appointed time. Nothing can stay its flight when
once it starts on the journey to God. 2. Zhere are no grounds upon which we can
procure exemption. On the eve of the battle, or when actually engaged in it, the
soldier cannot obtain his discharge. No plea can avail him, no sacred demands
of home or kindred. Weare all under this inexorable law of war. When the
stern command is issued, we must enter into the conflict ; we can obtain no sub-
stitute, purchase no discharge. When summoned to enter the field in mortal
conflict with the last enemy, there is no retreat. 3. Rebellious opposition will not
avail us, ‘Neither shall wickedness deliver those that are given toit.” Wicked
men put forth wonderful energy in their evil deeds, but when God’s time of
judgment arrives, it is in vain that they resist.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 6. If, without the light of a God’s works and ways would be of little
better hope, we survey this scene of comfort to us, if we were not assured
man, it would appear as if the Monarch that behind all there is a loving
of the world was indifferent to human heart.
miseries. God works out His purposes slowly,

The skill and regularity displayed in and (as it appears to us) aagiers of

rt


cHaP. Vil. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES,





the private griefs of men—yea, even of
their highest necessities, The world
had to wait long ages for the crowning
revelation of God’s mercy. Yet all
this time men suffered the evils of
ignorance, sorrow, and sin.

The degree of mischief, and dis-
appointment, and wretchedness, arising
amongst mankind from the want of
wise consideration of seasons and
circumstances, is beyond calculation.
Were men in general more carefully
atientive to these, a large proportion of
the miseries of which they complain
might readily be avoided. But some
by their weakness, others by their heed-
lessness; some by their headstrong
obstinacy, others by their excess of
pliancy ; some by impatient precipita-
tion, others by procrastinating dilatori-
ness, and thousands in an endless variety
of ways. are led to overlook * time and
judgment,” aud. to bring distress upon
theiuselves, or others, or both [ Ward-
law].


Verse 7. Our ignorance of the
future should teach us—1. To be
superior to the fear of man, If we
have God on our side, how little, after
all, can weak and ignorant man do to
harm us! 2. That we should not envy
the temporary prusperity of others.
How soon their fortunes may be
wrecked, and the evil time come when
riches cannot deliver! 38. That we
should seek Divine guidance. God
will show us, even through all the
miseries of the present, what is the
path of life.

It is true that no man can tell “ what
shall be,” and that neither can any one
tell him *‘when it shall be;’’ but this
is no reason why either the “ when” or
the ‘‘ what” that may thus lie hidden
in the inscrutable future should be
to us a matter of no concern. It is not
by being utterly careless and indifferent
upon the subject that we can escape
the evil that may be impending over
us. Itis true that we may aggravate
that evil, or even create it when st has


124


no actual existence, by tormenting our-
selves with excessive or groundless
anxieties and fears. As regards those
futurities against which no foresight
cap provide, the part of true wisdom is
to follow the counsel of our blessed
Lord (Matt. vi. 34) [ Buchanan}.


Verse 8. The Royal Preacher had
spoken of the power of kings (verse
4). Yet how limited is that power?
They cannot resist the decree of the
King of Terrors.

Death overwhelms the strength of
man. It is the great terror of nature,
The very thought of it must fill us with
horror, uuless we are conscious that
the inward man is growing stronger
day by day.

Man is sown in weakness here—a
weakness most sad and manifest in his
closing hours; but he is raised in
power, which, if blessed by the vision
of God, will be “the power of an end-
less life.”

This is a field in which every man
must advance; and every man must
advance alone to singie combat; and
every man in succession must fall.
The enemy to be encountered is him-
self invulnerab] ; and whether the
struggle be short or long, and however
successful for a time our efforts may
be to parry or to cover ourselves from
his deadly thrust, ke will, sooner or
later, find his way with certain aim
and irresistible force to every heart
[ Wardlaw}.

Death can only destroy the body of
our humiliation, Our permanent and
immortal essence remains unhurt,

Death meets us everywhere, and is
procured by every instrument, and in
all chances, and enters in at many
doors. . . » . And all this is the
law and constitution of nature, it is a
puni-hment to our sins, the unalterable
event of Providence, and the decree of
heaven. The chains that conline us
to this condition are strong as destiny,
and immutable as the eternal laws of
God [Jeremy Taylor},


ROMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESTASTES, CHAP, VIII.
er


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 9—18.
Tue Detay oF Divine Jovstice.


The Royal Preacher often insists upon the truth that God rules over man

th an inflexible justice. Yet that justice does not act swiftly, but seems, for

time, to be suspend«d. We have here three facts regarding this delay of the
Divine Justice. I, That it Continues, though the Worst Forms of Iniquity
Prevail. In every age there are prevailing sins whose enormity is so great
that they may be said to provoke the Divine Justice. They ery to heaven for
vengeance and retribution, yet that cry seems to be unheeded. Some of these
sins are mentioned here. 1. Tyranny and oppression. (Verse 9.) Man is enslaved
to man. Those who have the power rule with a rod of iron, oppressing the poor
and the defenceless, Cruelty, in some form, exists under every condition of
society. The wrongs that men inflict upon one another are amongst the most
terrible forms of human suffering. The permission of such evils in the moral
government of God is a source of perplexity. It would seem as it heaven heeded
not the groanings of the innocent, yet unavenged. 2. Hypocrisy. (Verse 10.)
These tyrants disguised their wickedness under the cloak of religion. They went
continually to the “ place of the holy ”—the Sanctuary of God—the assembly of
the righteous. They dared to insult God in His own house. And yet this
hypocrisy was suffered to continue, justice not interfering to cast forth these
audacious men from the place which they had profaned. And not only during
life, but even in death itself, did men attempt to hide these hollow pretences
beneath the outward signs of reverence due to real worth. These wicked men
were “buried” with all the pomp and circumstance of woe. Yet, with all the
advantage of these external appearances, carried on even to the grave, they failed
to deceive either God or man. ‘“ They were forgotten in the city where they had
so done.” Men soon recovered from any infatuation which their outward splen-
dour might have produced. No deeds of love and kindness made them dear to
memory, and the world soon consented to let their names die. The wickedness
of those men was so manifest that they were hypocrites without deceiving.
Posterity covered them with shame and disgrace. II. That it Continues, though
Some thereby are Emboldened to Sin. (Verse 11.) In the moral government
of God, as it is carried on in the present world, punishment does not fall upon the
sinner speedily, Even that penalty with which some sins are visited in this life
is often long delayed. It would seem as if sin was nt interfered with —that there
are in the world no sufficient tokeos that the Divine Justice is likely to be exact
and rigorous. This long-suffering of God, the design of which is to lead men to
penitence, is perverted by some into a privilege to sin. The reason of this perversion
is not hard to find. 1. Zhere is a feeling that God is indifferent to human conduct.
While justice delays, and the course of life seems to run smoothly, the sinner
begins io imagine that the moral government of God is, after all, but an empty
phrase. The weakness of our moral nature will take advantage of the most
slender excuses to continue in a course of sin.. Even good men are staggered by
the delay of Divine ju-tice to inflict penalty for the crying sins of mankind. In
this painful perplexity, they can only find relief in faith, and present comfort in
the patience of hope. The long-suffering of God is their salvation (2 Pet. iii. 15) ;
but with the sinner, it only serves to wear down all moral distinctions, and to
blunt the feeling of retribution. 2. There 18 the excitement of success. The
schemes of those *‘ wicked ” men had prospered. They gained the object of their
ambition. There is a powerful excitement in success. The world worships it
and few men have strength enough to withstand the infatuation. or the


cHaP. vi HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES,


intoxication of success, the distinct colours of good and evil fade. Men become
the slaves of the unreal. They heed not the solemn and sober facts of human
destiny. III. That it will have an End in Just Retribution. (Verses 12, 13.)
The penalty which God’s law attaches to sin is not an empty threat, a vain terror
held over the human race. A just retribution will come to all at last.


“ The mill of God grinds slowly,
But it grinds exceedingly small.”


There will be just retribution. 1. For the sinner. The most successful course of
sin will have an end, when reckoning will have to be made with Divine justice.
“Tt shall not be well with the wicked.” He cannot have any final success. Sin
must lead to unhappiness. God will banish it from His sight, and all what is
banished from Him is bereft of peace and joy. 2. For the righteous. ‘It
shall be well with them that fear God, which fear before Him.” To “ fear
God ” is the O.T. expression for the state and character of piety. He who is
righteous before God does not pervert His kindness, in delaying to inflict the
penalties of sin, into license for iniquity. Divine justice may be long delayed;
in the meantime, the foulest sins grow rank; and even the good have painful
moments of darkness, when faith is difficult; still, in the end, it must be well
with the righteous, for God will honour and reward all who have meekly toiled
that they might be partakers of the Divine nature.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.





Verse 9. He who studies the moral
condition of man in the world will
find many stumbling blocks to his
faith.

Power is a dangerous possession
unless it is regulated by goodness,

Of this fact the system of slavery is
still a conspicuous and terrible proof.
That system involves, indeed, many
and most formidable evils to its un-
happy victims ; and yet, enormous and
intolerable as these evils are, they are
exceeded by those which the system
entails upon the men by whom it is
administered and maintained, They,
most emphatically, rule over others to
their own hurt, Their moral sense is
blunted, and all the better feelings of
their nature depraved by the sights
which the system compels them to wit-
ness, and by the deeds which it requires,
or at least tempts them to do [Bu-
ehanan|.

As the Lord doth for wise ends per-
mit wicked men to come to authority
over others in the world, so hath He
the time when they shall come to it
fixed, and how long they shall have it.
For it is clear by the consequence of

126


this ruling, to the person who hath it,
that he speaks of wicked men, and the
word time signifies a set and fixed
season, wherein ‘‘one man rules over
another ” [ Nisbet].


Verse 10. Death often solves the
perplexities of the distressed. The
oppressors of mankind are made to
yield to the resistless stroke of fate,
and so they “‘ cease from troubling.”

There is a form of hypocrisy which
springs from ignorance. Men deceive
themselves. But there is an hypocrisy
which hides great depravity of soul
beneath the appearance of goodness.

“IT saw the wicked who had come
and gone from the place of the holy ”—
who had attended the sanctuary, joined
in the worship of God, and cloaked
their unrighteousness and oppression
under the garb of external piety—who
had “ come and gone,” continuing their
hypocritical career in safety, no marks
of Diviue vengeance visiting them for
their awful profanation and odious dis-
sembling. I saw them buried,—the
victims of mortality equally with others,
having no power more than thev in the


—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; ECCLESIASTES.


CHAP. VIII.


SSS ee” SS sss


day of death. I saw them buried,
carried in affectiug humiliation and
impotence, to “the house appointed for
all living.” . They had
sought after, and expected perpetual
fame; but men had no pleasure in
remembering them ; when out of sight,
they were out of mind; their name
and memory rotted with their carcases
in the dust [ Wardlaw].

It has often happened that when
the grave has closed upon great oppres-
sors, that men have hasted to abolish
their laws, and to sweep away all traces
of their ambition and pride. In the
better state of things which has suc-
ceeded, men have been glad to forget
the tyrant’s name,

‘“* This also is vanity ;” this, to make
the inward substance of virtue a shadow
of outward beauty. This, to have an
opinion of holiness, and to be praised
for it, but not to deserve it. ‘his, to
be flattered or feared being alive, to be
hated being dad. This, being present
to be remembered, being absent to be
forgotten. This, to be Church Chris-
tians, the guests of hell in life and con-
versation. This, for a while to rule
in pride and oppression, and for ever
to be slaves to misery and torments
[Jermin].


Verse 11. Whatever lies remote
from us, in time, fails to affect the
mind, or at best affects it but languidly.
The delay of the inflictions of Divine
justice thus becomes an occasion of
indulging in a false security.

That which men wish to be true,
they are naturally prone to believe.
They are fond of thinking that sin will
not expose them to such irremediable
vengeance as the Bible threatens.
They are willing to be persuaded of
this; and they flatter themselves into
the persuasion by the wiles of a thou-
sand sophistries. At first, it may be,
they commit sin with a timid heart
and a trembling hand. They hesitate
long. But at length, though with
irresolute tremor, it is done. No harm
comes te them. No indications of the
anger of heaven follow the deed. They
feel themselves safe. And having


tasted of the sin, it is sweet; and they
desire it again [ Wardlaw].

It is the proper mark of an un-
regenerate man, void of saving know
ledge and grace, to have his heart fully
set in him, without reluctancy or re-
morse, to do evil. The regenerate have
another principle within them, opposing
their sinful motions (Gal. v. 17), check-
ing and wounding them, and bringing
them to remorse for sin (Rom. vii. 24)
[ Nisbet].


Verse 12. Sin becomes easier the
more it is indulged. Fixed and in-
tensified by the power of habit, it comes
at length to be almost as strong as fate,

The sinner, in the long security
which is permitted to him, may even
seem to have Providence on his side.

The frequent success of the ungodly,
and their apparent’ immunity from
evil, may be a sore perplexity to the
weak who suffer. Yet, if these look
to the end, they will see that the good
alone triumph.

There are great fundamental truths
—moral axioms, which cannot be set
aside by any difficulties of speculation,
In the midst of mystery and apparent
confusion they shine out clearly.

It is not a bare conjecture, or mere
probability, that the godly have of their
future happiness, but it is a certainty,
and a firm persuasion wrought in their
hearts by the Spirit of God, making
them to rest confidently upon His
faithful word, and helping them te
believe by giving them the first-fruits
thereof in hand [ Nisbet].


Verse 13. “But it shall not be well
with the wicked.” Not while he lives,
for even when he prospers it is ill
with him: the curse of heaven is upon
his tabernacle, and it secretly mingles
itself with all his enjoyments. Not
when he dies, for he has then nothing
before him but ‘‘a fearful looking for
of judgment.” Not when he appears
before the Judgment Seat, for ‘‘the
ungodly shall not stand in the judg-
ment, nor sinners in the congregation
of the righteous ” [ Wardlaw].

God’s judgments come suddenly.

127


CHAP, VIIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; ECCLESIASTES,





Men who have not faith see no signs of
their approach. The prosperity and
security of the wicked are but that
strange and uanatural calm before a
storm,

The triumphing of the wicked, at
best, is but short. Their prosperity has
in it no element of solid worth—nothing


that will abide through the untried
scenes and changes which await them.
Their glory passes away as a shadow,
completely dispersed by the light of
eternity.

When God enters into judgment with
the sinner, the vain show of his worldly
life disappears.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 14—17,


Ove Duty UNpEeR THE Morat DISCREPANCIES OF THE PRESENT LIFE.


The origin of evil is a profound mystery, but not less so is the permission of
evil. These exercise the wisest with painful speculation ; they remain a difficulty
and a sore trial, even for the best. Still there is a course of duty which is clear,
and a light of faith which is sufficient. There are moral discrepancies in the
present life (Verse 14), but they do not set aside great moral duties, and wise
efforts to reach after a more satisfactory state of things, which God, in his own
good time, shall bring in. Our duty is indicated here. I. We Should Feel
their Temporary Character. “I said that this also is vanity.” We see the
wicked prosper as if they were rewarded for their works, and the good afflicted,
and abandoned to cruel wrongs and oppressions, as if they were punished for
their righteousness. We must survey this seeming confusion of right and wrong
not with wild amazement, but calmly. It is our duty to explore our situation
in the world, and to discover what course is best for us. The just man beaten
down by calamity, while he beholds the wicked apparently enjoying the rewards
of virtue, may feel a strange perplexity. But he has to consider that even this is
“vanity.” There is little in it to cause him any permanent anxiety or pain. He
may reflect—1. That these discrepancies exist under the rule of a Moral Governor
who is both wise and good. Physical and moral evil exist in the world. God
is both wise and good. We toust admit these two facts as beyond debate.
However difficult their reconcilement may be, we are bound to believe that no
disorders of this present time can obscure those bright attributes of the Divine
Nature. The good man has faith in the character of God, and waits till He
shall make all clear. 2. Such a condition of things cannot be final. To a narrow
view, it might appear as if Providence was entirely regardless of moral qualities
in human character; yea, as if the stamp of approval was affixed to wickedness.
Yet God’s meek and patient children know that these disorders cannot be endured
for ever. They are but passing shadows, and the full glory of God will yet
shine forth, The stern realities of things will appear in the light of eternity,
Slowly the ages pass on for us; but to the eye of God they are but as “ yester-
day when it is past, and as a watch in the night.” 8. These moral discrepancies
have no practical significance for us. If we are the true and faithful servants of
God, these things to us are mere vanity. They amount tonothing. If we have
a lively sense of the eternal verities, we can afford to despise them. What do
they signify for us, since life is so shcrt, and the scenes of retribution so soon to
be unfulded? With such a thought, St. Paul consoles Christians even in
slavery ; “‘ Art thou called being a servant (i.e., a bond-servant—a slave)? care
not for it” (1 Cor. vii. 21). Nothing is of practical significance to the good man
bet those things that abide. II. We should Enjoy with Contentment the
Blessings that Remain. (Verse 15.) The disordered condition of things may
be puzzling ; yea, in some of the: aspects, disheartening ; but there are present
blessings. There are great facts and duties appearing in clear light, There is

128


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. VIEL
rr


enough left which we may contentedly and soberly enjoy. 1. This enjoyment ts
reasonable. ‘Then 1 cummended mirth because a man hath no better thing
under the sun.” ‘This is the best and most reasonable course for us, to cultivate
a cheerful spirit which gladly enjoys whatever lies within its reach. In the
worst state of things, there are some blessings remaining; and if God is the
portion of our inheritance, we cannot be entirely destitute. Anxious care only
brings torment, and leads to no good. It is the highest prudence to make the
best of what lies before us. Besides, the godly are sustained by the consciousness
of the good that is reserved for them. 2. Jt 2s the safe course. ‘For that shall
abide with him.” Changes occur in the outward conditions of life, but the habit
of cheerful gratitude abides with a man. It is to him an accession of spiritual
treasure which the most disastrous reverses of fortune cannot alienate. 3. It is
god/y, The mirth here commended is not the coarse, thoughtless mirth of the
children of this world, but that joy which flows from piety. It is the cheerful
acceptance, on the part of the righteous man, of those blessings “which God
giveth him under the sun.” Such a man hath faith in God, and is distinguished
by that elevation of character which comes of taking a large and comprehensive
view. III. We should Abstain from Fruitless Speculations, (Verses 16, 17.)
To enquire into “ the business that is dove upon the earth” is to investigate the
“travail’”’ that is connected with human life, action, and fate. Buta wise man
will not allow such speculations unduly to distress his mind, or to attract him
from the paths of humble duty. We may say of such enquiries, when pushed
beyond the bounds of soberness, 1. They are a wearisome effort, They may be
Carried so far as to interfere with present enjoyment, and even to rob us of the
needful rest of sleep. (Verse 16.) 2. They are a profitless effort. (Verse 17.)
The bottom of the mystery cannot be reached by the greatest labours of the
wisest. To know “all the work of God” completely is far beyond our depth,
God’s great secrets lie hidden. 3. They lead to no good practical result, That
restless curiosity and impatience of mystery, which is the temptation of some
minds, does but weaken the capacity for duty and humble trust in God. In the
mazes of speculation a man may lose the clear sight of what lies before him. It
-is best to do what is close at hand, and to await in faith and hope the disclosures
of futurity. 4. They interfere with our spiritual life. Itis the plan of God to
begin with what is comparatively imperfect, and to proceed to greater perfection.
Thus chaos was before order, and daikness before light. This life is but the
commencement of our existence, and it is marked by imperfection. Yet this
imperfection is necessary to the life of faith. The full vision, which the future
shall alone disclose, would interfere with that life. If we can see but one step
before us, it is enough. Light, in the fulness of it, is a reward ** sown for the
rignteous.” It is an “ inheritance ” reserved and guarded for us while we are in
our mivority, but into whose full possession we shall come when we have attained
to the full manhood of our existence, Col, i. 12.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 14. Look at Joseph in the
dungeon. He has been a disciple
of heavenly wisdom. He has re-
sisted a strong temptation to sia, and
it has happened to him according to
the work of the wicked. He is loaded
with reproach and shame—he is left to
languish in prison, either forgotten or


despised, Look at Paul bruised and


bleeding, when he has been all but
stoned to death at the gates of Lystra,
or writhing under the cruel and igno-
minious scourge at Philippi, or dragged
through the streets and beaten by the
infuriated populace at Jerusalem. Or,
once more, take a far more illustrious
example than either of these—look at
Him who was the very impersonation
129


SHAP. VIIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





and living embodiment of wisdom.
Was He not all His life long a man of
sorrows and acquainted with grief?
Was He not despised and rejected of
men? And did He not terminate His
earthly career upon a malefactor’s cross?
{Buchanan.]}

God rewards His people with better
things than the perishing good of this
life.

The righteous are often taught by
the course of Providence that godli-
ness cannot be turned to outward
gain.

It is not certain that even the best
men will have prosperity in this life, or
any external reward of goodness. How
vain then to set our hearts upon that
which is not, and to lose sight of a
certain and enduring reward!

The seeming confusion of good and
evil in the world is part of the vanity
of our present state. Faith sees this
old order passing away and giving
place to the new. The seus of God
shall yet be delivered from this vanity.


Verse 15. The measure of a man’s
earthly prosperity, and of the success
of his labour, is a matter of complete
uncertainty, but a cheerful and con-
tented spirit, disposed to enjoy what-
ever portion is sent, is a sure and con-
stant blessing. The secret of happiness,
as far as it depends on the things of
time, is to enjoy pr sperity cheerfully,
and without the irksome and depres-
sing apprehensions cf an anxious mind,
as long as it continues; and if it is
lessened or withdrawn, still to receive
our diminished and stinted supplies
with the same cheerful and buoyant
gratitude; thus making the best of
that which, both in its degree and its
eontinuance, is so proverbially uncer-
tain. Amidst all changes, this happy
frame of spirit may be preserved
[ Wardlaw].

Our labour is often in vain, our
works perish; but the habit of cheerful-
ness, arising from the conviction that
our portion of life is from God, abides
with us. The possessions of the mind
and soul survive all outward changes. :

Of our labour, the most valuable

130


remaining product—saved, as it were,
from the wreck of it—is the spiritual
dispositions which it has served to gene
rate in us,

He who manifests the spirit of a
pious and sober joy is imitating one ef
the qualities of the Divine nature. The
reward of heaven consists in the enter-
ing into God’s own joy.

The Preacher having spoken of the
oppressions of the wicked, and of the
troubles of the righteous, here he
showeth a good remedy against them,
and an excellent carriage in them,
‘Then I commended mirth;” when
he had considered the troubles of man’s
life, then he commended cheerfulness
as a thing worthy of praise in itself;
he commended it unto men as a thing
bringing much good unto them. And
this it is which the prophet David com-
mended, “Serve the Lord with glad-
ness, come before His presence with
singing” [Jermin].


Verse 16. That wisdom which is
possible to man can only be attained
by the earnest application of all our
powers,

He who engages in the study of the
condition and character of man has
laid upon himself a difficult and pain-
ful task. He has accepted the burden
of humanity, thus attracting upon him-
self the penalty of restless anxiety and
the sorrows of a disappointing search
after that which must for ever lie beyond
his reach,

The unreflecting multitude, whose
minds are never exercised on such
questions at all, have no conception of
the amount both of time and effort
which it costs to master them. They
do not know, though it is a fact, that
there are men who, in handling such
profound problems as the mysteries of
Divine Providence, in connection with
the state and prospects of the human
race, present, “neither day nor night
see sleep will their eyes [ Buchanan].


Verse 17. There are works of God
quite beyond the range of our observa-
tion, and which, therefore, we cannot
fathom. But even those works of God





|


ens


ga ee


bn? Le eS


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


GHAP. IX





which concern human affairs, though
they lie near and about us, are beyond
our capacity fully to explore.

A wise man may be tempted to im-
patience of mystery, and thus weary
himself with fruitless endeavours to rest
on the much-desired ground of ultimate
truths. But it is the highest wisdom
contentedly to accept the fact of our
ignorance,

Mere human reason could do nothing
to explain the origin or the existence,
under the government of an all-wise,
almighty, and infinitely righteous God,
of a state of things in which it should
ever happen to just men to be treated
according to the deserts of the wicked,
or to wicked men to be treated accord-
ing to the deserts of the righteous,


There is no human philosophy that


could ever have thrown one ray of true
and satisfying light on an anomaly so
great. Even divine revelation itself,
though it tells us how it came to pass,
does not tell us why this was permitted,
That it was permitted for God’s glory,
we do indeed confidently infer and un-
hesitatingly believe, because that is and
must be the grand final cause of all
things. But still, as regards the prin-
ciple that is to harmonize the existence
of sin and misery in God’s universe
with the infinite perfections of His
own being, it is altogether hidden
from us—it is far above and beyond
the grasp, at least in its present feeble
condition, of any human mind [Bu-
chanan}.








CHAPTER IX,


Crrricat Norzs.—2. One event.] An equal chance or happening—the wisest and best
having no special destiny (chap, ii. 14, 15, and iii. 19). Chance, in this use of the word, is not
opposed to Providence, but is a term employed to signify the impotence of all human effort to
secure any certain result. He that sweareth, as he that feareth an oath.| The profane and
frivolous swearer as well as he who respects the sacredness of an oath. 6. Also their love, and
their hatred, and their envy is now perished.] The author keeps before him, for his present
purpose, those gioomv views of the state of the dead belonging to the earlier revelation. The
souls that are detained in the prison-house of death are regarded as having but a quasi exist-
ence, in which all thought and feeling have become so inert as to be scarcely perceptible. A
loftier conception of the destiny of the human spirit after death is given in chap xii. 7. 8. Let
thy garments be always white; and let thy head lack no ointment.) No literal observance
of these circumstances of external appearance is intended ; but rather an exhortation to indulge
those calm and pure emotions of joy, of which white garments and a face which oil causes to
shine are the well-known symbols. 10. For there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom, in the grave whither thou goesi.] This may be compared with the saying of our
Lord in John ix. 4. The grave.] The unseen state to which thou art hastening. 12. Knoweth
not his time.] Hknows not the hour of his destruction, when he shall be suddenly snared
and taken by death. This solemn crisis in man’s destiny is called in Scripture the “day ” (Job
xviii, 20), the “hour” (Mark xiv. 41), As the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as
the birds that are caught in the snare. The net, trap, and snare are symbols of those divine
judgments which suddenly overtake men (Hz, xii, 13, xxxii. 3; Prov, vii. 23; Luke xxi, 35),
13. This wisdom.] The special instance of the power of wisdom related in the next verse,
14. Few men within it.] Not acity with a scanty population, but one possessing only a few
fitting men capable of defending it. 18. One sinner destroyeth much good.] One who is
gifted with great physical energy, but destitute of wisdom. The coarsest qualities—the fierce
attributes of the wild beast—are sufficient for nae work of destruction. 131

EK :


cuar. & jj§ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


®





MAIN HOM/LETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—6,
THe Szeminc IMPERFECTION OF Gop’s Mora, GOVERNMENT,


By imperfection, as applied to God’s Moral Government, we may understand
either that it has some fault or fatal defect ; or else that it lacks completeness,
and is still but rudimentary. It is only in this latter sense that the system of
God’s dealings with men can be charged with imperfection. This view, however,
is not insisted upon here. The writer sets aside, for the moment, the future
world. Viewed merely from this life, the action of Providence over human
affairs seems to be defective. How does such an idea arise? I. It is suggested
by the fact that the Righteous and the Wicked are Subjected to an Equal Fate.
(Verses 2, 3.) 1. In regard to the events and experiences of life. Sume appear to
be the favourites of fortune. But in this distribution of the world’s gouds we
fail to discern, in every case, the rewards of virtue, The richest gifts the world
can afford often fall to the lot of the most unworthy. Lhe righteous are some-
times prosperous, but so are the wicked. The pure and holy share the same earthly lot
with the defiled. ‘The despisers of religion have quite as good a portivn in this life
as those who revere God’s holy law. The profane are not frowned upon by
Providence : those who reverence God are not outwardly distinguished by any
special regard. ‘Take the whole variety of human experience—joys and sorrows,
prosperity and adversity, success, disappointment, and failure, health and sick-
ness—they come alike to all. The righteous are not distinguished by any special
fate. It would seem as if the fortunes of men were assigued to them by a blind
chance, or by some reckless Power. 2. In regard to the expectation from life.
No man can have any ground to expect that his portion in the time that remains
to him will compensate for the evils of the past. ‘Time brings no power to
adjust the unequal distribution of good and evil. ‘‘ No maa Knoweth either love
or hatred by all that is befure them.” No man car assure himself of a
prosperous future on the ground of his moral excellenve. He does not know in
advance whether God will grant him love or hatred; whether his life will be
cheered by the one, or vexed and tormented by the other. 3. Jn regard to the
necessity of death. Righteousness does not deliver from death. The quickening
of the soul by the infusion of spiritual life does not preserve the body from
decay, or purchase exemption from the dishonour of the grave. ‘“ The body is
dead because of sin” is a stern decree which even the clusest union with Christ
cannot set aside. There are times when the shadow of this terrible necessity
darkens and troubles lives in which immortal hope is strong. The wisest aud
purest must pay the debt of nature alike with the ungodly and the fool. Death
to our human eye, uninformed by a better light, seems to level all moral dis-
tinctioas and to destroy the hope of righteous reward. II, This has a Morally
Injurious Effect upon Some. (Verse 3.) The apparent disregard of Providence
to moral distinctions of character causes some to rush upon courses of evil.
This may icise, 1. From the loss of faith in God’s rectitude. Those who
stumble against appearances in the moral world easily resign themselves
to tbe oelief, either that God is altogether absent from this scene of man,
or quite indifferent to the conduct of His creatures. A man may
4,ood over the moral difficulties of our present state until God vanishes
from his view. Even where the truth of God’s existence cannot be wholly
erased from the mind, the consciousness of his rectitude is so faiutly marked that
ven indulge in sin without restraint. Goodness ein stand any test su long as it
retains the conviction that “the Judge of all the eartb will do right.” When
this conviction is gone, what is there left to make virtue worth a sacrifice? 2,
From the weakening of the motives of moral conduct. There are some who admit

133


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. IX,
eee


a Providence, and that there is a tendency discoverable in the present state of
things towards perfection. This belief, however, is so feeble -that it has scarcely
any perceptible influence upon the conduct. Practically, they are without faith
in God, ‘They hold no belief that is effective as a restraint in the ways of
wickedness, The strange folly of their lives is so manifest that it may be
charged with madness, The end of this scene is as melancholy as its course was
sad and unprofitable. ‘‘ After that, they go to the dead.” III. In spite of this
Imperfection, Men prefer the Present Life to the seeming Extinction of Exist-
ence in the Grave. (Verses 4, 5,6.) The dead appear to be at rest. In poetic
moods, men may long for the quiet of the grave, Butin the calm deliberation of
thought they shrink from the idea of oblivion rushing upon their souls. They
prefer life with all its disadvantages to that vague uncertainty which belongs to
the state of the dead. 1. Life always affords room for hope. (Verse 4.) While
life remains, men may always look for a better state of things. hey derive
some satisfaction from resigning the rectification of their fortunes into the hands
of time. The sick man hopes for recovery, though hard against the warrant of
appearances, and stays himself upon that hope until the end. Mankind have felt
that the light of life, even when but glimmering in the socket, lends a ray to
hope. This has passed into a proverb. The meanest thing that lives is better
than the noblest when dead. ‘The poorest and most forlorn living man has no
cause to envy the most wealthy and renowned when he is laid in the grave. 2.
The present life has the advantage of certainty. That which is remote from us in
space or future time makes but a languid impression. We may contemplate the
darkness that rests upon the state of man beyond the grave until the mind is
overshadowed with gloom and belief dies, Even the Royal Preacher, for the
moment, resigns himself to the dreariest view of the destiny of man. Life has
many advantages, (1.) There is the fact of consciousness. ‘+ The living know
that they shall die.” This is but a melancholy knowledge, yet the consciousness
of possessing it yields some satisfaction. Man shrinks from the very idea of his
thought and feeling being quenched in eternal midnight. To all outward ap-
pearance, the dead are for ever still—stripped of all that distinguishes and adorns
life. They know nothing. The consciousness of knowing the facts of life,
though some of them ere painful, we cherish as a pure enjoyment; and the
thought of letting it go disturbs us. While we are alive, it is possible to feel and
kvow that we are dealt with by some Superior Power; but the dead appear to
have vompletely dune with a retributive Providence. (2.) There is the fact of
possessing a recognised place amony the living. While we are numbered with the
inhabitants of this world we have our circle of influence, be it great or small.
Tue most insignificant must occupy some place in the thoughts and feelings of
Others, and act, and be acted upon, in turns, But the presence of the dead is re-
moved from us, they soon cease to affect us, and at length slip entirely from the
remembrauce of the living. (3.) There is the conscious play of the passions
and emotions. (Verse 6.) Love, hatred, and envy, with the mixture of joy and
pain they involve, afford evidence of conscious life. Whether for good or baneful
intiuence, they minister to the luxury of feeling. But, to all appearance, no
emotion heaves the bosom of the dead, They seem powerless to awaken any
re-ponse to love, they are couscious of no affront to stir the rage of hatred, or of
rivalry to kindle the fires of envy. They are deaf alike to the voice of censure


and of tame.


“Q©an honour’s voice provoke the silent dust,
Or flattery soothe the dull cold ear of death !”


LV. This Imperfection should not be an Insurmountable Obstacle to Faith
(Verse 1.) 1t may be admitied that, in the scheme of Providence, there 3s much


t: try our faib, There are times in the lives of most believers when the eae
13


CHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


doubts take possession of the soul. Witness John the Baptist in prison, who after
the clearest evidence of the Messiah’s claims, was yet disturbed by doubt, and
sent two of his disciples for fresh and surer evidence. (Matt. xi. 2—6.) Still,
though the darkness that lies over the future, and the oppression of life’s mystery,
try faith severely, yet God granted to men, even in times of imperfect revela-
tion, firm supports for faith to lean upon. “ The righteous, and the wise, and
their works, are in the hands of God.” Therefore they can afford calmly to wait.
He will not disappoint their hope, nor quench in the long silence of the grave
their yearnings for eternal life. The strong faith that we are in the hands of
God can clear the barriers of the tomb, and find beyond them a sure place


whereon to rest for ever.


We have our truest refuge ia the character of God.


If we cherish the belief in His goodness; no difficulties, no evils, nor even the


shadow of death, can affright us.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1. The hand of God is not the
symbol of mere power, but of power
subdued and controlled by infinite
wisdom and goodness. It is a hand
that will gather the righteous to the
bosom of their Father. When God
holds us by His right hand, we may well
cherish the blessed confidence that he
will “ afterwards receive us to glory.”
(Ps. lxxiii., 24.)

Not only the works of the righteous,
but themselves, are in the hands of
God. Much of their work may perish,
as being valueless and not able to en-
dure the final test, but they themselves
shall abide for ever.

The solemn committal of the spirit
into the hands of (rod is the last pious
duty alive.

The fact that we are in the hands of
God, as controlled by the Supreme
Power, is one thing, but the felt con-
viction of it is another. When we
awake to the consciousness that we
have a living Director, we can pass
through the most troubled darkness
without fear.

Though His Providence does present
a mystery to our limited faculties, yet
He is not forgetful of those who fear
Him. They and their works are neither
unknown, nor unregarded ;: and He will
one day make it fully manifest that
His whole procedure has perfectly ac-
corded with His character [ Wardlaw].

They are kept safe in the hand of
God ; and that hand which now keepeth

134


them, will at last reach forth a glorious


reward unto them [Jermin].

The highest moral excellence cannot
assure its possessor of human regard
and love. Even the flower of humanity
was constrained to say, “They hated
me without a cause.”


Verse 2. The true moral worth of
men must not be estimated by the light
of their outward fate.

Righteousness can deliver no one
from the necessity of enduring the sad
variety of human experience.

This life is not the last act in the
great drama of human history. It is
not here and now that men are receiving
the due reward of their deeds. After that
curtain shall have fallen that is destined
to cover up and close the latest of the
shifting scenes of time, it will rise once
more to bring into view a vaster,
grander, and more awful stage than
time ever displayed [Buchanan].


Verse 8. Those stern outward con-
ditions in which all men are bound,
irrespective of character, furnish a proof
of some present disorder, and raise in
pious souls the expectation of Divine
interference to restore to goodness true
place and reward.

A wise man does not hesitate to
recognise obvious evils. He feels the
oppression of life’s strange mystery, as
the same has been felt by such saints
as Job and Asaph. He is not driven


q


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


CHAP.


—_—_-_---e


to melancholy and despair, for he is
sustained by a better hope. He is not
driven to mad rebellion, for he fears
God.

The moral mystery of our present life
is a trial which God has appointed for
man. If we endure it wiscly and well,
He rewards our faith with plentiful
consolation, giving us peace in the
depths of our soul. If we fail herein,
we are either driven to despair or to the
wildest courses of sin,

The heart distributes the power of
sin within us, by which it corrupts the
life and fills the world with evils.

The moral madness of sinners shows
itself in foolish and impossible thoughts
of God and His ways, and in foolish
contrivances for their own deliverance.

Every act of sin, being an act of
rebellion against the infinite God, is an
act of madness; of infatuated, and
impotent, and self-destroying frenzy.
All worldliness of spirit, being a pre-
ference in affection and pursuit of
temporal to eternal things, is madness ;
far beyond the derangement of the
maniac who throws away gold for
stones, and prefers straw to pearls and
jewels [ Wardlaw].

Repining against God and his Pro-
vidence, because they cannot longer
enjoy their sinful pleasures, they carry
their sins with them to the very gates
of death [WVisbet].


Verse 4. While life remains, for the
sinner there is the hope of amendment
and restoration—for the exiles of for-
tunes, the hope of returning. To
living man there is no gloom so oppres-
sive but that some ray of hope may
struggle through.

Life suggests the idea of liberty, of
some large space to move and work in,


While it is continued, the range of
possibilities for us is wide.


We think
of death as putting an arrest upon our
liberty—in some sense a prison for
man.

The meanest living man possesses &
superiority over the mightiest dead, in
having life itself, and power, and con-
sciousness, and feeling, and enjoyment;
which with regard to the dead, viewed


in their relation to this world, are all
at an end; and equally at an end,
whatever their power and eminence
while they lived [ Wardlaw].

The superior value and importance
of life may be regarded either as the
justification of a course of self-indul-
gence and pleasurable sin, or as a
motive for diligence in that work which
can only be done in this world, There
is a mean and also a noble view of
man’s existence; and as we take one
or the other, so the significance of this
proverb may be determined.


Verse 5. The consciousness of exist-
ence is a necessary truth—the surest


and most intimate knowledge we
possess. This one fact gives import-


ance and value to all others.

Existence, though it implies the
knowledge of the saddest facts, is yet a
positive good when compared with the
total loss of conscious being.

To the eye of sense the dead seem
bereft of all thought, feeling, and
motion. There are appearances enough
—for those who are under the tyranny
of them—to justify the darkest scepti-
cism and boldest defiance of future
retribution.

As far as the opportunities, duties,
and experiences of this life are con-
cerned, the dead are completely severed
from us. Even the poetical existence
which memory gives them at length
fades away.

Limited as is the view here given of
the change death makes in the con-
dition of those who have lived and died
without God—for it is of them, as the
context plainly implies, that Solomon
is speaking—it is sufficiently humbling
and awful. From the moment they
die, their connection with this world is
at an end. This world was their all,
and they have lost it. They know
nothing of it now. Its rewards cannot
reach them in the grave. Their very
name and memory soon pass away out
of the world altogether [Buchanan].


Verse 6. They are utterly impotent s
they have no power whatever remain-
ing, either to profit or to burt, and are

i35


CHAP. rx.





neither courted for the one, nor feared
for the other. Their power to benefit
and to injure is alike gone. The
objects of their love can derive from
it no advantage, nor can the victims of
their hatred and envy sustain from
them any damage: While they lived,
their favour might be courted, and its
effects desired; their displeasure depre-
cated, their hatred and envy dreaded,
and the consequences of them anxiously
shunned. But their mere names have
no charm, either of blessing or of curse.
The ashes of the grave can do neither
evil nor good. . . . Their portion
of enjoyment is gone for ever. Death
is not a temporary absence, but an
eternal adieu [ Wardlaw].

How little have we to fear from the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


rage of human passions which, so far
as they can affect us, are totally extin-
guished in the grave,

Man is destined to a continuity of
existence, but in his progress through
it, as one door is opened before him,
another closes behind. Whatever
awaits man in the future world, the
severance from this world is most com-
plete.

These gloomy views of the state of
the dead are modified by the later ©
Revelation—their sadness relieved by
Christian hope; yet death, in some
sense, does reign over all until the
resurrection. When “ this mortal puts
on immortality,” only then is the vic-
tory of man over the grave com-
plete.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 7—10.


Tue UNSATISFACTORY CONDITIONS OF THE PRESENT LIFE IN THEIR BEARING
upon Doty.


The Preacher had shown that the ways of God to man are full of dark mystery,
This has been a terrible oppression to many—to some even a fatal one, We
must admit that man’s present condition is unsatisfactory ; for it is rudimentary.
It is on the way to perfection. The dark enigma of life, however, should not be
a fatal obstacle to duty. Of the unsatisfactory conditions of the present life, we
affirm—I. They do not Forbid a Joyful Acceptance and Use of the Blessings
of Providence. (Verses 7, 8, 9.) The habit of dwelling exclusively upon the
dark side of things is hurtful to the soul. We are either driven to melancholy
and despair, or else to the mad pursuit of pleasure by which we seek to drown
all anxiety and care. There is a safe middle way between these two extremes,
by which we avoid gloom and despair, on the one hand, and a reckless pursuit
of pleasure, on the other hand, We should thankfully accept the blessings of
Providence, and use them with sobriety. The consciousness that God “ ac-
cepteth” our ‘‘ works” should be at once the impulse and the director of our
joy (Verse 7). The constant reference to God, and the intention of pleasing Him,
will sanctify all life. Thereare three sources of enjoyment referred to here,
which we may soberly and thankfully use. 1. The satisfaction of the appetites,
(Verse 7.) Our physical wants are a fact of our nature which we must accept.
They crave for satisfaction. These natural endowments, as they arise from the
appointment of the Creator, are not sinful in themselves. They only become
the occasion of sin by unlawful indulgence. The bounty of the Great Giver
has furnished means for the satisfaction of our common wants, even ministering
to the most delicate perceptions of taste and gladdening the heart of man. 2,
The taste for outward beauty. (Verse 8.) There are outward forms, the contem-
plation of which gives an exquisite and refined pleasure. Thus the ornaments
of dress minister to the instinct of beauty and harmony. The Creator, in His
works, has not only studied utility, but has even prepared those graces and
ornaments which wait upon our perception of elegance, He has placed this
instinct in the human breast, We may indulge it if we only do so with mo-
deration, remembering that outward beauty has no infinite capacity to please,
It is a joy which is bounded, and God alone is the soul’s pure rot permanent

136


HOMILETIC CUMMENTARY: ECULESIASTES. CHAP. IX.


a





delight. 8. Domestic joys. (Verse 9.) The various relations of life, whether we
are born to their possession, or enter them by choice, minister to our social en-
joyments. They tend to abate the natural selfishness of the human heart and to
multiply and exalt our pleasures. These are the gifts of God—they are our
“portion” here, They serve for awhile to lift our minds above the over-
whelming sense of the vanity of life. We can use such joys if we remember
that tuey too are fleeting, and that the only sure and abiding portion for the
soul is God. “The fashion”—the outward form, scheme, or arrangement—
“of this world passeth away.” (1 Cor. vii. 31.) IL, They do not Forbid pro-
per Zeal and Diligence in the Work of Life. (Verse 10.) We may dwell upon
the dark things of life until we are driven to despair, and despair paralyses
effort, Weak hands and feeble knees accompany melancholy. Whatever be
the tendencies and issues of things—the ultimate solution of this mystery—we
have great practical duties to perform. 1. We should accept the task and duty
lying nearest to us. It is in vain to sit still and wait for some congenial task to
fall in our way. There are duties enongh lying to our hand. No man has
need to be idle for lack of a task. 2. We should be earnest in our work. The
most exalted natures are distinguished by the highest activity—God, who works
in and through all—the angels, who are quick and strong to do His will.
Throughout the whole course of nature we observe unwearied activity. Creation
preaches to us, saying, be earnest. The illustrious names of history who have
won a distinction that will never die exhort us to industry. Such isthe price we
have to pay for all possessions that are of true and abiding worth. 38. We have a
strong motive for such earnestness, Whatever may lie before us in the future, there
are certain kinds of work which can only be done in this world. While the work
is before us and our faculty is fresh, all is fluent to our hands; but when our
life’s day is ended, all becomes rigid—fixed in the solemn stillness of eternity !
There are forms of work and of knowledge which are only possible here. If we
disregard them, there will be no chance afforded ustorepair the omission. Even
Christ himself, during his earthly sojourn, came under this law. There was a
work which even He could do only in this world. (John ix. 4.) He felt
that in His mortal day His allotted task must be accomplished. The grave
is the dark terminus of our earthly work. III. They do not Destroy our
Hope of Reward. From the appearances of this life we may draw the hasty
conclusion that there is no reward for goodness hereafter, no vindication of
suffering innocence, It seems as if this troubled drama of human history must
repeat itself endlessly throughout the ages. But we have to reflect, 1. Zhat
we stand in a present relation to God. If we are good in His sight, He accepts
our works now. He receives them as the homage of our gratitude, and pieces
out our imperfections with His goodness, We may well hope that that goodness
has provided for us the larger gift of immortality. God will not permit us to know
Him and work for Him through the brief space of life, and then blot us out of exist-
ence forever. 2. We have reason to hope that we shall stand in a future relation to
Him. If we can say with the Psalmist, “O God, Thou art my God” (Psa. lxiii. 1),
we may well hope that He shall be our portion for ever, that He shall redeem us
from the power of the grave. The majesty of God requires that He shall make
His servants rich, not only by the bestowal of gifts by which they serve Him,
but also in the heritage of eternal life, so that they may serve Him for ever,
Therefore, though the way be dark, we can have light enough for duty ; and
unfading hope to assure us that there is for us e higher service in other worlds.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.
Verse 7. The mystery of God’s of His goodness, the proofs of which
moral Government should not render are full and manifest.


our sight insensible to the impressions = The Almighty Maker of sees


CHAP. IX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





intended that the beauty of His works
should make an appeal to mind and
heart. In like manner, He intends
that the gifts of His hand should
awaken in us the emotions of gratitude
and joy.

When God accepts our works, the
commonest actions of our life become
sanctified.

Though faith be sorely tried by
appearances, yet God is on the side of
the righteous, giving them tokens of
acceptance and reserving greater things
for them.

We must learn to live before we can
live rightly and well. With us, “that
which is natural” forces itself upon us
as our first care. Afterwards that
which is spiritual. Wherefore those
ordinary gifts of Providence by which
we are constantly delivered from death
deserve the instant tribute of our praise
and joy.

Moses putting his hand into his
bosom took it out leprous, putting it
again into his bosom, he took it out
clean.
working, and the works of man are
sometimes leprous and unsound, some-
times healthy and good. If they pro-
ceed from a sincere and honest heart,
which God approveth, then they are
sound and healthy ; but if they come
from a corrupt heart, and be done for
the pleasing of men, then they are
leprous and unsound, Now it is a
healthy and sound body that is fittest
for mirth and freest in mirth, it is a
healthy and sound body that eateth and
drinketh most cheerfully. Wherefore
seeing where God accepteth thy works,
there is health and soundness, let there
also be freeness of joy and mirth
[Jermin].


Verse 8. Cheerfulness should be the
soul’s habit, and joy the prevailing ex-
pression of the soul’s countenance,

God gives His people the oil of joy to
assuage their grief, and fits them for
the feast of His pleasures by the
garments of praise.

The notion of pleasure seems in-
variably associated with the practice;
and it was aptly indicated by the rich-

188


The hand is the instrument of


ness and freshness, and, in many cases,
by the aromatic fragrance, of the
balsamic unguents. “Let thy head
lack no ointment” is equivalent to—
Rejoice in the bounty and loving
kindness of the Lord; “let not thy
heart be troubled, neither let it be
afraid.” And the expression “let thy
garments be always white” is of the
same account with the Apostolic ex-
hortation, ‘‘ Rejoice evermore!” Take
the enjoyment of whatever the hand of
a kind Providence bestows, with a
grateful and cheerful spirit; not with
selfishness or extravagance, or thought-
less mirth; but with benevolence and
sobriety, and with that true joy which
is independent of the possessions of
time, which, coming from above, in-
fuses into the things of earth a relish
of heaven, and would continue to be
the inmate of the pious soul, though
they were all removed [ Wardlaw].

Christ was anointed with the oil of
joy, although he lived under the shadow
of a great calamity. All noble souls
have a deep and intimate joy which no
disasters can dislodge.


Verse 9. The disciples of wisdom
affect no refinement beyond the ordi-
nances of God.

We should joyfully use those solaces
which God’s Providence has provided
for us as a peaceful retreat from the
tumultuous scenes of life,

“Here love his golden shafts employs, here -
lights

His constant lamp, and waves his purple
wings—

Here reigns and revels” [Paradise Lost).

The moral character of nations is
determined by the purity and integrity
of domestic life. The home is the
support, the forerunner, the very material
of the Stateand Church. The righteous
man, by beautifying and sanctifying
home, is the real safety and hope of his
courtry.

We should look upon the joys of
domestic life as the earthly reward of
our labour, our measured portion of
happiness here, and the gift of God.

The sense of time fast speeding on to
eternity hangs over the most endearing


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





scenes of life, and at times touches
thoughtful minds with overwhelming
emotion,

By the repetition of the last words
we are expressly taught that, in the
midst of the vanity and travail with
which human existence is burdened,
we are pressingly summoned not to seal
up the sources of enjoyment which still
remain open to us [ Hengstenberg].

The consideration of the vanity and
shortness of their life, and of the mise-
ries incident to it, though it should
not provoke them to excess of sensual
delights, yet it should incite them to a
more cheerful use of these comforts,
that, seeing their time is short, they
may have the more strength and en-
couragement to serve the Lord cheer-
fully. For while Solomon is pressing
upon men a cheerful and free use of
outward comforts, he minds them twice
of the vanity of their life, which, in
the midst of these things, they are
ready to forget, and makes the same a
reason pressing the cheerful use of their
allowance [Nisbet].


Verse 10, The melancholy and gloom
which deep thought awakens is dissi-
pated by the active exertion of our
powers in dnty.

Whatever is dark and mysterious in
man’s present state, his work, and the
obligation to perform it, are quite clear
and evident, It is better to spend his
energy upon what is certain than to tor-


ment himself with the pain of speculation. -


That the opportunity is short is a
motive for diligent exertion in our work,
_ but not the strongest motive; which the
potion of our state hereafter, depending
upon our work here, alone supplies,
Therefore this exhortation requires,
though it does not formally state, the
doctrine of a future life.


CHAP. LX.





Death is truly an unclothing of man,
who, though his being is continuous,
must put aside what he cannot resume
again, There are duties to be per-
formed, talents and powers to be used,
which are peculiar to the present state;
they must altogether be put off with
our mortal life.

Though sustained by immortal] hope,
it is salutary to reflect upon the physical
side of death, and learn from thence
diligence in the duty of the moment, or
even console ourselves by the melan-
choly prospect of its long repose. What-
ever the state of the dead may be, it is
certain that it is night to us, as far as
some kinds of work and modes of know-
ledge are concerned,

Nothing that has been neglected here
can be attended to there. If we fail to
perform a duty in this life, there will
be no opportunity of performing it in
the place of the dead. If we have
errors to confess, or wrongs to repair—
if we have any bad influence to undo,
or any good influence to employ—if we
have any evil habits to unlearn, or any
gracious tendencies to cultivate, now is
the time [Buchanan].

Man’s characteristic is restlessness;
restiessness foretells his immortality;
and a sluggard by his apathy seems to
destroy the mark, and silence the pro-
phecy. But if confined to other things,
indolence may not be absolutely fatal;
the indolent man may have wealth which
secures him against want; and by the
occasional exercise of rare talentshe may,
in spite of habitual sluggishness, even
attain to some measure of distinction.
But an indolent Christian—it is a sort
of contradiction—Christianity is indus-
try spiritualised [Melviil].

Diligence in our earthly and heavenly
callings is the surest way through mys-
tery and darkness up to God.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 11—12.
Tue HicHEeR WILL In Human THINGS.


L That Will is Supreme over Human Actions. (Verse 11.) The will of man
is the force that apparently directs and controls his earthly history. . It seems to
make him an independent being. He boasts of his freedom, exerts himself to


139


onaP, IX HOMILE1IC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





ee ee ne —_


satisfy his ambition, or to minister to his pleasures. Yet manis impotent. There
is a Higher Will which through all the changes of human history is being accom-
plished. 1. There is a Divine disposition of human things altogether beyond our
control. ‘‘Time and chance happeneth to them all.” There are times and seasons
in our lives. We have no power to control their order or duration. Each man
too has his “chance” which “ happeneth” to him. Chance is not used here as
opposed to Providence, as if man were the sport of some uncertain and irresponsible
dominion, but it is opposed to human effort, whose results are shaped by a Higher
Power than the will and energy of man. We spend our little strength and faculty
in devising for ourselves; but the ultimate result of our actions, their permanent
shape, is devised and finished by the Divine power. Thus God is over all, even
in regard to the production and result of those actions in which we consider
ourselves most free. 2. Human efforts often fail though ever 8o fittingly contrived,
(Verse 11.) ‘I returned, and saw uniler the sun, that the race is not to the
swift, &c.” Fortune sometimes gives denial to our expectation founded upon
the likelihood or natural tendency of things. It must be admitted that superior
powers of running are of prime importance to a racer, and tend to ensure his
success; that numbers and strength give a superior advantage in battle; that
the gifts of wisdom, understanding, and skill, raise a man to superior eminence,
enlarge his authority and influence, and furnish him with the means of securing
distinction and competence. But these several gifts and faculties are so com-
plicated with disturbing elements, over which men have no control, that they
often fail of success, The most agile racer, and surest of the victor’s crown,
may stumble, or be seized by bodily faintness, and thus fail of his prize. An
army superior in discipline and numbers may be defeated. Some difficulty of
climate or of position, or the caprices of some strange accidents, may turn the
fortunes of war. How often it has happened that disease has proved more
destructive than the sword, and that victories which national vanity has ascribed
to courage and skill, were chiefly owing to the accidental advantage of health.
The wise man ought to attain to that distinction to which his talents entitle him,
but that many such have altogether failed, the sad examples of history show.
The wise man may have some unfortunate disposition of mind or of temper that
may ruin his prospect of succes:. Great skill and understanding may be so
combined with follies and absurdities that their possessor may fail to secure the
proper rewards of them. Adverse circumstances may hinder him from taking
his true place, or enjoying his proper reward, He may be hindered from rising
by social surroundings, and thus consigned to neglect. Thus events do not
always happen according to the natural tendencies of human effort and skill.
Let a man have ever so great advantage, yet as to the future he is literally sure
of nothing. There are qualities likely to secure success, but whether they will do
so in any given case, we cannot know. The issues of all human thoughts and
labours are with God, who accomplishes His will, not only in the obedient and
fluent elements of the physical universe, but also in the troubled and refractory
elements of the moral world. II. That Will is Supreme over Human Life,
We have seen that the dominion of God is supreme over all that life contains,
The same also is true of the bounds of life itself. 1. The time of each man’s death
is hidden from him. (Verse 12.) No man knows at what time death will over-
take him. The probability that out of a given number of men, now alive, a
certain number will die within a fixed period of years, may be calculated. But
no refinement of analysis can show whether any given individual will be dead at
a stated time, Men may have some vague and melancholy fancy that they will
die at a certain time of life, but the fact very rarely justifies the presentiment, The
mariner can calculate his distance from the desired haven, as he nears it from
day to day, but no man can compute his distance from the shores of eternity.
As spe as the fishes are of the net, or as the birds are of the snare, se
40


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: #&CCLESIASTES. CHAP. IX,
lS


are men of the time of their capture and destruction by the great enemy,
2. The manner of each man’s death is hidden from him. There are many ways
to death, but each man is ignorant by which of these he shall go down to
the silent house of darkness. It may be suddenly, by some unforeseen acci-
dent, or delayed through the slow and painful stages of a wasting sickness,
He may die at home, or among strangers in a strange land. He may die upon
the great highway of the waters, and sink into the vast sepulchre of the sea,
The proverb says, “ Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird”
(Prov. i. 17). The bird is ignorant of the design of such a contrivance ; so man,
though he may see the snares of death preparing, knows not that they are laid
with fatal intent for him. Thus, while there is room left for our actions and
our skill to work out their issues, our sovereiguty over them is limited. The

take themselves at length out of our dominion, and become fashioned to the
dictates of a higher will





SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


/


Verse 11. The best and most skil-
fully directed efforts may fail to secure
the result aimed at, because they may
come into collision with events quite
beyond our control,

The fortune of war may be deter.
mined by a slight circumstance, alto-
gether unknown and unsuspected, and
so the stream of events for a nation
may suddenly take a new course.
Human history is but a resultant of
many forces, of which the power and
skill of man is but a part. Hence
through the complex system of human
life, Providence works out those de-
signs which are above and beyond man,

“Time and chance” are necessary
in order to ensure success, even for the
most skilful and wise. There must be
a suitable season, and a favourable con-
currence of circumstances, or else the
time will be out of joint and nothing
will work,

Superior skill and understanding are
naturally fitted to secure the best results
of success and prosperity. But who can
ensure his health, and yet how much
depends upon this?

Chance is a term denoting ignorance,
not on God’s part, but on ours. It has
been happily defined, although by a
poet, yet without a poet’s fiction,—
“ direction which we cannot see.” The
blind Goddess of Fortune is but the
creation of a foolish and ungodly fancy.
Without our Heavenly Father, “a


sparrow falleth not to the ground”
[ Wardlaw].

The wise man by some unfortunate
combination of circumstances may be
reduced to want. The man of under-
standing—the man, for example, most
conversant with both the materials and
the principles of commerce—may never
come to wealth. Unforeseen events
may derange his plans, and disappoint
his calculations. Unpropitious seasons
may blight the produce of his fields,
Storms may sink his ships in the deep.
His confidence may be betrayed and
his property wasted by those in whose
hands he has placed it. And while
this man of large and cultured intellect
may come tu old age in comparative
poverty, some ignorant and illiterate
bore, who started in life alongside of
him, may have swelled into a million-
aire [Buchanan].

The world worships success, which
is, afier all, an insufficient and uncer-
tain measure of real worth. Wisdom,
and things that accompany it are still
an invaluable possession, though they
seem to fail.

That there is some kind of Power
which bafiles the most aptly contrived
designs of man must be admitted. It
may be regarded as blind and unin-
telligent, as arbitrary Will, or as Infi-
nite Wisdom working towards righteous
ends, though in strange and mysterious
ways; each of which view: nay com

141


JHAP.





mend itself according to our religious
insight. To the Christian, the highest
Power in human affairs is the Divine
Mercy (Rom. ix. 16).


Verse 12. We know not the time of
those disasters which overturn our
schemes and disappoint our hopes; nor
do we know the time of that great
disaster which shall deprive us of all!

How vain the boast of wealth, or
pomp of power—of all that lies outside
of us—seeing they are held on the un-
certain tenure of life!

The preparations for accomplishing
his capture and destruction lie before a
man, and he knows it not. Our igno-
rance of the caprices of disaster and
doom bring us into companionship with
the lowliest forms of life.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


—a


Man’s ignorance of the time of his
death serves, 1. To place him helplessly
in the hands of Providence. Rebel-
lion is vain, and nothing remains for
him but loving submission or desperate
resignation. 2. To promote the good
of society. The knowledge of the hour
when life’s day closes would paralyse
effort. 3. To strengthen the motives
for godliness. The time is uncertain,
and therefore instant provision should
be made for the soul. More exalted
and enduring things should engage our
affections. :

He that by a constant holiness
secures the present, and makes it useful
to his noblest purposes, turns his con-
dition into his best advantage by making
his unavoidable fate become his neces-
sary religion [Jeremy Taylor].


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 18—18,
Tur WorLp’s BENEFACTORS.


Tle Royal Preacher turns to consider a strange anomaly that too often
happens in a thoughtless and ungrateful generation. Men who have been the
true workers and deliverers of their time have often been despised and forgotten.
The world is ignorant, or guilty of neglect, of its true benefactors, How they
work, and with what success, is considered here. I. Their Instrument,
Wisdom is the instrument by which they worked. It was a * wise man” who
“ delivered the city.” (Verse 15.) ‘Their words heard in quiet among the con-
templative few have proved stronger than the edicts of the most potent rulers,

ea even stronger than the power of warlike arms. (Verses 17, 18.) ‘They
lave conferred real and permanent benefits upon their fellow men. For such a
purpose, we observe, 1. That wisdom ts the most fitting instrument. Man, with
many natural disadvantages when compared with the lower forms of life beneath
him, still holds his place in nature as the crown and head of all things by his
superior knowledge. By means of wisdom, that knowledge is made to act in the
direction of the greatest advantage. We may say that this instrument has a
natural fitness for performing the truest and most lasting work. The highest
natures use it, for “The Lord by wisdom hath founded the earth, by under-
standing hath He established the heavens.” (Prov. tii. 19.) All work produced
by other means, however loud and long the triumph, must end in confusion and
overthrow. However big and imposing the work of fools, they shall at length
be buried in the heaps they raise. Wisdom as an instrument may also be said
to have a moral fitness. It tends to injure no one; its pure and just conquests are
aot stained by crime, and ravage, and slaughter. The tears of the widow and the
orphan do not trouble its quiet enjoyment of victory. All true wisdom—
whether strictly in the sphere of religion or outside of it—is from above; and
coming down to earth pure from its native heaven, bears on the front of it the
gifts of peace, 2. That it is the most potent instrument. “ Wisdom is better
than strength—better than weapons of war.” (Verses 16, 18.) All work that
is truly great and abiding commences in wise thought, The scheme of it is laid

142


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. IX.
a ce Ee de ee


in silence in the utmost recesses of the mind until it assumes shape and sub-
stance in the palpable and accomplished fact. The material creation which ig
the standing illustration of the Divine power is but the Divine thought mani-
fested. Brute force has narrow limits, moving with a constrained motion; but
the power of wisdom is large, plentiful in resources, and free. Wisdom is the
true director of all forces, without which they are wild, irregular, and destruc-
tive. It is the force which has urged humanity on in the upward path of high
Civilization, refinement, and goodness. II. The Manner of their Working. In
her method and manner of working, there is a style and habit appropriate to
wisdom. She wields a quiet power, shunning all noise and loud display. ‘The
words of wise men are heard in quiet.” This quality for quietness and sobriety
is one of the chief characteristics of the deliverances and of the works of
wisdom, All who would learn from her and receive her gifts must possess this
quality. 1. Quietness promotes those conditions of mind most favourable to the
reception of wisdom. All who enter her school must leave behind them the noise
and tumult of petty ambition, boisterous self-assertion, and pride. Fools must
either put away these things, or quit her courts. The still small voice of
wisdom is only heard amidst the quietness of contemplation. We must enter
this kingdom as a little child, with the qualities of teachableness and humility,
putting away all positiveness and pride, which are ever noisy and demonstrative,
2. All the conquests of wisdom have been quietly won. Other victories have been
prompted by ambition and attained by violence. The victories of wisdom, on
the other hand, have been accomplished in those clear and lofty heights of
contemplation far above the tumult and strife of human passion. Wisdom, with
truth for her possession and substance, has been content to wait till the tem-
porary advantages of error have passed away, and then she has quietly
gathered in her spoils. 3. Quietness is the attribute of the greatest natures.
The great thinkers of the world who have opened up for us new regions of
truth, how quietly and silently they worked! We feel their power still
across the ages of time. They seem to “rule our spirits from their urns.” The
victories of religion over superstition and unbelief have been won by the steady
witnessing to the truth, and the patience of suffering. He who came to conquer
all hearts, and to lay the foundations of an everlasting kingdom, was distin-
guished by his quiet manner of working and freedom from desire of display.
He did not “strive nor cry,” nor was ** His voice heard in the streets.” This
quiet demeanour of wisdom is, in Verse 17, shown in contrast with the boisterous
manner in which folly is wont to display itself. ‘The ruler among fools ” soon
becomes the victim of the virulent contagion of folly, and utters injudicious
commands with fierce and noisy circumstance. III. Their Fate. (Verses 15,
J£.) There are some exceptions, but the example here related is a description of
te fate of many wise and good men. 1. They are sometimes noticed and obeyed
under the pressure of circumstances. In some dangerous crisis or great calamity,
the wise man may rise to importance and regard. There are junctures of events
in which the most careless and unreflecting men must turn to such for deliverance.
When the enemy is at the gates, and the valour of mighty heroes is unavailing,
he who can devise some wise project which saves the city, gains that approbation
and fame so readily yielded to evident success. There are times when the wise
man’s wisdom must be valued, even by the most thoughtless, as a precious com-
modity, 2. They ure sometimes the victims of contumely and neglect. When the
calamity is overpast, society soon learns to forget those who have served it in
the crisis of danger. This fault of ingratitude appears in almost every little
social circle, and has a constant illustration in the history of every nation and
age. The world too willingly lets the names die of those who have blest it most.
"Those are not always the best and truest workers whose names stand in the
teont of history. it will be found that the world’s most real bg are


CHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





those who took the most subordinate and retired part. Their work is undying in
its effects, but their names have perished from all remembrance but that of God,
Many a truly wise and great man has lived to be forgotten and despised. This
is a base ingratitude, for it deprives such of their earthly reward. The barriers
of wealth and social standing have often served to keep wise men from rising into
just regard and fame. This wise man delivered the city; but he was poor, and
that was quite sufficient to ensure his being despised. 3. Their work is often
ruined. The essential good of their work cannot be destroyed, for it is an im-
perishable seed, which once having taken hold upon the world, leaves it not.
But some of the immediate results of their work—fruits of patient toil and
endurance—may be destroyed, which exploit only needs the natural endowments
of the most thoughtless and wicked fool. (Verse 18.) Physical strength—the
power of social station—the boisterous impudence of ignorant and foolish men—
may prevail over the wise and ruin his work. It requires but little talent to destroy,
for it is within the province of any lusty fool to lay in ruins the labour and skill
of years, or to obstruct the progress of some good and great work. From this
subject, we learn both the power and the vanity of wisdom. The power, in that it
is superior to strength, to numbers, to the voice of mere authority, or to the
influence of social rank. It is the prime element in the world’s progress—the
_ means of its regeneration. The vantéy, in that it often fails, or at best has but a
partial victory, through the stubborn and ignorant opposition of men,


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 138. It had made a strong
impression on his mind. The testimony
which it bore to the value and efficacy
of wisdom appeared to him to be most
remarkable. On one side there was a
king, backed by a powerful army, and
“aving at hiscommand, for the capture
and destruction of the feebly-garrisoned
city he had come to assail, all the arts
and appliances of war. On the other
side was a solitary individual, of no
note or name, without wealth or station,
or social influence, having no other
strength than that which was derived
from his own personal worth, and no
other resources than those of a God-
fearing, sagacious, and thoughtful spirit
[Buchanan].

Wisdom without the advantages of
wealth or station, yet securing regard
and attention to itself, is so rare a
spectacle, that the wise themselves, at
the sight of it, may well stand amazed.
In a perfect state of society, such a
triumph would be too common to be
wonderful,


Verse 14. There is a baseness in
oppression which allows no rights to
the defenceless and the weak.

144


The oppressed have often on their
side an unknown and _ unsuspected
power which avails for deliverance, and
by which the most confident ambition
is defeated.

The “ little city ” of the Church of
God has often been besieged, and the
enemy has prepared to celebrate the
victory over an extinguished Faith,
But the tower of God has ever had
brave defenders, strong in wisdom and
in the might of goodness,


Verse 15. A sudden calamity may
serve to redeem the wise from neglect.

When the strong fail to deliver, and
rank and authority are of no avail, wise
men must be sought for. Such alone
are the true defence of states.

That is a foolish and ignoble pride
which refuses to acknowledge worth
because it is not encrusted by wealth,
Yet such is the way of the world,—
“Slow rises worth by poverty de-
pressed.”

What was it that rescued the
nations of the ancient world from the
universal heathenism in which they
were sunk ; from the gross superstitions
and multiplied abominations of an all.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.
oS a ce ae Rl AI es


prevailing idolatry? Not the poetry
and literature, not the arts and pbilo-
sophy, of Greece and Rome, but the
Gospel of Jesus Christ. Those humble
peasants and fishermen, who issned
from the upper chamber of some
obscure street of Jerusalem, were the
poor wise men who delivered the cities
of the ancient world [ Buchanan].

The pressure of necessity, or the
claims of selfishness, may force admira-
tion for the poor man’s wisdom, but
such admiration expires before it has
time to ripen into gratitude, or attain
to the sturdy strength of a principle.

How hard is the condition of poverty,
when social prejudice can overwhelm a
man whose wisdom it has been com-
pelled to own!


Verse 16. The triumphs of wisdom
over brute force and the terrible
powers of aature, all of which it sub-
dues under the sovereignty of man, are
among its first fruits. It has also a
surpassing excelience in that it imparts
the power to discover and appreciate
the order and fitness of things in the
universe,

Wisdom is the living and intelligent
director of all other forces, without
which they can serve no useful end.
In our investigation of the powers of
lature, we cannot rest in the contem-
plation of forces and effects. We are
hound to go on to mind—the greatest
of all. Mind is the producer of all
other powers, and therefore superior to
them. That which is true, in this
regard, of the Highest, is true also of
man, under the necessary limitations
of his position as a creature.

The more that wisdom spreads, the
more human strength is saved, and the
more is comfort enhanced. The bird
who is about to build her nest next
month, will toil as long and work as
hard as the sparrows and swallows who
frequented the temple in the time of
Solomon, and the building will be no
‘improvement on the nest of three thou-
sand vears ago. But if Solomon’s own
palace were to be builded anew, modern
skill could rear it much faster than
Hiram’s masonry, and there are few


CHAP. DX,


ee es es Sy








houses in Londoa which do not con-
tain luxurics and accommodations
which were lacking in the ‘ house of
the forest of Lebanon.” Already a
pound of coals and a pint of water will
do the work of asturdy man; and with
a week’s wages, @ mechanic may now
procure a library more comprehensive
and more edifying than that which
adorned the Tusculan villa,—nay, such
a store of books as the wealth of
Solomon could not command [Dr. J.
Hamilton).

It requires but little intellectual
sagacity to admire that wisdom which
leads to some evident practical result,
When self-interest is at stuke, the
meanest soul3 can assume a virtue,
The steady recognition of wisdom, for
her own sake, is only found in answer-
ing minds,

The poverty of Jesus, the incarnate
Wisdom of God, was sufficient to bring
upon Him one of the sharpest trials of
His humiliation, which was that of
being despised and overlooked,


Verse 17. Quiet men—men of calm
and dispassionate minds—give heed to
the words of wisdom, though noisy fools
may disregard them, Also, in quiet
times, in the hours of retirement and
reflection, when the distractions of the
world are shut out, the words of wis-
dom come back into the mind and sink
into the heart. How unlike in this
respect to the cry of him that ruleth
among fools! Even at the moment it
is uttered, his cry may fall powerless
upon the thoughtless, ignorant, or im-
patient crowd to whom it is addressed ;
and this it may do for no other and
better reason, than because it does not
suit the fancy or the frenzy of the
hour. At any rate, and in any case,
its influence is but transitory, its power
short-lived [Buchanan].

Folly requires the aid of boisterous
acciamation to give it the semblance of
greatness. Wisdom is content with
quiet and retired ways, there to meet
her disciples and untold her treasures.
Disdaining the Pharisees device, she
sounds no trumpet, but calm as the
depths of heaven, speaks to ae re


CHAP. Ix.


tion the everlasting language of truth,

How soon the fame of those who
have made the greatest noise and dis-
play passes away! It is easily blown
up to the bubble reputation, but soon
to burst most unprofitably. Time clears
away all illusions and lays bare the
solidities of truth.

The wise man may speak to an
audience fit, though few; but his
audience will increase through the
ages, and his words receive obedience
and recognition.

The mariner who guides his ship
upon the trackless ocean with safety
and expedition accomplisbes this by
the aid of principles which were dis-
covered by Grecian geometers ages ago.
The words of these quiet thinkers were
heard and understood by few, but
without them the greatest development
of commerce and civilisation would be
impossible,

The true rulers of the world, of
lasting sovereignty, are those who
guide the intellects and souls of men.
They have been faithful over a few
things, and have thus been made rulers
over many cities.


Verse 18. War wounds, but wisdom
heals. War overturns, but it is wisdom
that builds up and restores. War is
the hurricane that sinks the ship ; wis-
dom is the favouring breeze that wafts
it to the desired haven. War is the
torrent that furrows the earth, and
sweeps its soil into the sea; wisdom
droppeth softly, like the rain or the
gentle dew from heaven, to refresh the


1es


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





thirsty ground and to bless the springs
ing thereof. Ina word, war and all its
weapons belong to the bloody brood of
him who was a murderer from the
beginning ; wisdom is the attribute
and gift of Him who came to bring
peace on earth, goodwill to men, and
glory to God in the highest [Bu-
chanan].

The continued existence of war in
the midst of material and intellectual
progress is a proof that the world is yet
far from wisdom. The reign of force
can never knit humanity into a true
brotherhood. The Christian religior,
which is the highest style of wisdom,
is the only strong power, against which
all else contends in vain.

The ambition of one man may plunge
nations into deadly warfare. The
heresies of one man may divide the
Church, weaken her influence, and
provoke the rage of an irritating con-
troversy. One slanderous tongue can
slay many reputations, and work mis-
chiefs which are but ill-repaired by
time.

The ways in which one sinner may
destroy much good are as numerous as
the forms of evil itself. But there is a
bad and even a worse eminence in sin.
The greater the power abused, the more
terrible and far-reaching the conse-
quences. Hence he who writes a book
that unsettles the foundations of faith
in the soul of man, or robs him of his
immortal hope, propagates a mischief
far beyond his own working-day in life,
and verily keeps his sad acconnt and
reckoning with eternity still open.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. x


rn a PSS


CHAPTER X,


seh yee


Crrricat Notes.—l. Dead flies.) Zit., “Flies of death;” because, as such, the corrups
the ointment, The apothecary.] A dealer in spices. Thus it is not the common kind, but
® costly, fragrant unguent that is here intended, A little folly.] Little in proportion to the
entire mass of wisdom whose properties and influence it injures. 2. A wise man’s heart is at
his right hand.] By the heart we are to understand the inclinations, for these influence the
understanding and the judgment. The wise man’s heart is in its right place. His feelings are
on the side of wisdom and truth; and therefore his whole nature. But a fool’s heart at his left.}
His inclinations are averse from wisdom and truth, He has sinister aims and purposes. 4, The
Spirit of the ruler rise up against thee.] A ruler capable of committing great offences
against thee, when his spirit is stirred up in anger. §. As an error which proceedeth from
the ruler.| Not a mere error, as such, but one which is manifest by its consequences—
eaprices of despotism like those described in verses 6,7. 6. Folly.] To be understood, in the
concrete form, of mean and ignoble persons, having no title to dignity and advancement. The
rich.] Men of noble birth and bearing, inheriting an honourable name and patrimony, and
qualified to fill exalted positions in the state. This unnatural inversion of the orders of
society was not infrequent under the despotism of Eastern monarchs. 7. Servants.| Not
merely in condition, but servile in character, destitute of all noble aims and purposes,
Princes.] Both in regard of outward rank, and having a corresponding elevation of character
and bearing. They are princely minded. 8. He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it.] It was
the custom, where lions and other wild animals abounded, to dig pits overlaid with branches
of trees, in order to entrap them. Hence a man might unwittingly fall into a pit which he
had himself digged (Psa. vii. 15, lvii. 6; Prov. xxvi. 27), And whoso breaketh an hedge, a
serpent shall bite him.] Serpents and other reptiles were often found hiding in old walla
Hence he who broke through them ran the risk of being bitten (Amosv. 19). 9. Removeth
stones ... cleaveth wood, shall be endangered thereby.] As such employments required
violent exertion, they were the more dangerous. 1). A babbler is no better.] Lit., “The
master of the tongue.” One who is of ready utterance, capable of producing great effects by
the power of speech, yet lacking energy and promptnessin action. 12. Gracious.] His words
have the power of winning favour. They have a calm and grateful influence. All his
actions are suitable and well-timed, not like those of the unwary serpent-charmer. 14. A fool
also is full of words.] Not only given to endless talk, but even boldly announcing his plans
and purposes, as if he could certainly reckon upon the future. The latter part of the verse con-
demns the folly of such presumption. 15. Wearieth every one of them.] Though full of words,
they are indolent, and soon grow weary in any useful toil, He knoweth not how to go to the
city.] He cannot make sure thut he shall carry out even so ordinary a purpose and action,
Probably St. James (chap. iv. 18) refers to this passage when censuring’ the boldness which pre-
gumes upon a future which no man can certainly know or command. 16. When thy king is a
child.] Not in age, but in understanding—wanting in all the qualities of a vigorous manhood,
And thy princes eat in the morning.] They employ in self-indulgence the time which ought
to be devoted to serious business. 18. By much slothfulness the building decayeth.] The
“ building” is the edifice of the state, which is brought to ruin by the indclence of the rulers,
20. The rich.] Those of high rank and station, such as the nobles and princes—the coun-
sellors of the king. A bird of the air shall carry thy voice.] In some unknown manner *@
secret will come out, as if suddenly picked up and borne off by a bird,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 1-4,
Tue EXceLLENCIES OF WIsD0M.


I. As seen in the Contrasted Qualities of the Wise Man and the Fool. The
intrinsic excellencies of wisdom are clearly manifest to all who have true
spiritual insight, and that sympathy oe is the best interpreter of its object.

L 147


cHar.X& . HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; ECCLESIASTES





But there are some broad general features of wisdom which strike conviction
of their excellence into the mind of every beholder. They are seen to great
advantage when we contrast the action of wisdom and folly in regard to the
roots or fruits of moral conduct. 1, As to motive and aim. The fool’s motive
or aim is always sinister, He has no straightforward designs and purposes, but
deals in what is sly and left-handed. (Verse 2.) The very centre of motion is
—as it were—shifted from its true place, and the result is nothing but the
utmost moral confusion and disorder: But the motives and aims of the wise
man, on the other hand, are pure and right. His heart—the principal fount
and spring of action—is in the right place. Hence his character is marked by
simplicity, and free from guile. 2. As to self-knowledge. The fool is under a
complete delusion in regard to himself. He grows exalted in the imagination
shat he is wise. No revelation of his true self has been vouchsafed to his
mind, and in the conceit of ignorance he is both happy and bold. When a fool
at length knows that he is such, he has attained to the beginning of wisdom.
He has already entered into the outer courts of her temple, and may yet know
her mysteries and see her glory. But while this self-knowledge is hidden from
him, the worst consequences of ignorance must follow. On the slightest
occasions of life, in the common ways of duty and intercourse, his want of
wisdom is manifest. He may be even said to proclaim himself a fool. (Verse
8.) He has not even the sense to leave his true character to be discovered by
slow inference, or to be concealed by silence and caution ; he must needs preci-
pitate the conclusion, Contrast this with the character of the wise man who
learns to know himself, and does not bring discredit upon his wisdom by failing
to show it when the occasion demands. Such a man will use that discretion,
which, if it does not altogether hide his faults, will preserve them from being
prominent, 38. As to self-government. Men are often placed in circumstances of
great provocation where it is difficult to calm the anger that rises in the breast.
The case is here supposed where a wise man is confronted with the insolence
and tyranny of authority. (Verse 4.) A conflict arises within him between the
high sense of justice and the proper reverence due to that authority, as such,
But prudence guides the wise man; he has learned to govern his passions, and
by a calm demeanour tames the fury which threatened him. But the fool lacks
discretion in such trying situations. He is stubborn and unyielding; and for
want of self-government, his passion breaks forth to his own injury. He has
not the wisdom to wait and be calm, nor the faith to believe in the triumph of
the meek. II. As seen in the Exquisite Delicacy of the Wise Man’s Character.
(Verse 1.) The character of the wise man is here compared to ointment; not
of the common sort, but of the perfumer—one which is prepared with rare and
costly ingredients, Such a compound may be spoiled and rendered valueless by
so small a thing as the decaying remains of flies. Such is the delicacy and rare
preciousness of the wise man’s character that the beauty and value of it may be
impaired by a few faults, Coarse and common things are not easily injured.
The chiefest dangers threaten that which is most skilfully and delicately
contrived. The risks of such moral disasters arise from the very excellence of
the wise man’s character. 1. In such, small blemishes are more conspicuous,
Small blemishes in the character of the fool, standing as they do in the thick
multitude of graver faults, easily escape notice, But in the character of the
wise man, these are soon detected, as a black spot upon white ground. Men
have a keen eye for the occasional weaknesses and indiscretions of human
virtue. 2. In such, small blemishes are more ruinous. The wise man has an
influence for good, and that influence is sensibly abated by even the appear-
ance of shurtcomings and moral deformities, He that is in reputation for
wisdom and honour may, by retaining but a few faults, greatly fail to benef
mankind to that extent which is warranted by his strong virtues. The fragrance
148





ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES,.


CHAP. X,


SN —————


of a good man’s life may be injured, yea, almost changed into a baneful influence,
by the admixture of but a few faults and follies,


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1. Those vibrations and dis-
turbances which would not interfere
with the proper action of some rude
machinery would, in the instruments of
the astronomer, be a source of disad-
_ Vantage and error. The spirit of the
wise man is trained to the finest issues,
and may be injuriously affected by an
apparently small cause.

The imperfection of human nature is
such that even the wisdom of the wisest
is seldom found unmixed with baser
matter.

The wise are a standing rebuke to
others, therefore men are prone to ex-
aggerate their faults.

A certain grace and attractiveness
of behaviour is necessary to give full
effect and influence to the finest assem-
blage of virtues. In addition to the
greatest excellencies, we must have
‘“* whatsoever things are lovely.”

A man’s character is the expression
of his true self; in fact, the express
image of the invisible things in him.
His reputation depends upon the man-
ner in which he is imaged and repre-
sented to the eye of society. Hence
while the real character of the wise
man may not be seriously affected,
his reputation may suffer loss,

The principle is especially applicable
to a Christian profession; and the best
use we can make of it is to exemplify
it in some of those flaws and failings
which destroy the attraction and im-
pressiveness of men truly devout and
God-fearing, Our instances must be
taken almost at random ; for, like their
Egyptian prototypes, these flies are too
many to be counted. 1. Rudeness, 2,
Irritability, 3. Selfishness. The subject
is uninviting, and time would fail did
we speak of the parsimony, the indo-
lence, the egotism, the want of intelli-
gence, the want of taste, by which
mnany excellent characters are marred,


and by which the glory of the Gospel


is often compromised [Dr. J. Hamilton],


Verse 2. Right desires and incli-
nations are as necessary to the charac-
ter of the wise man as nobility and
strength of mind. They place him in
the position of the best advantage for
all good and true work.

Fools have no dexterity in duty.
They can, at best, but awkwardly
imitate the virtues of the wise.

1. A wise man minds his own proper
business; whereas the fool neglects
what belongs to himself, and is ex-
ceedingly officious, intermeddling, and
full of sagacious counsel, in every
one’s concerns but his own. Any
wisdom he has is “at his left hand,”
it is applied in the wrong place. 2.
The understanding of the wise man is
at all times ready for his immediate
direction— at his right hand.” So
that, being steadily applied to its pro-
per business, it is prepared to meet
times of emergency. The fool, on the
contrary, is ever uncertain, ever at a
loss, all hesitation and perplexity, His
wisdom is always to seek. 3. That
which the wise man does, his wisdom
enables him to do well—with skill and
dexterity. The fool, when he does any-
thing at all, does it with his left hand;
not only applying any little fragments
of wisdom he may possess in a wrong
direction, but bungling, blundering, and
failing, even in that which he attempts
[ Wardlaw].


Verse 3. A fool is mischievous
without art, as he is a hypocrite with-
out deceiving. A man must have some
understanding to conceal the want of it.

The fool does not need, as the
Pharisees did, to sound a trumpet be-
fore him. He is his own herald.

That quality of fools by which they
quickly reveal themselves, even in the
most ordinary intercourse of life, may be
reckoned as one of the wise compensa-

149


GHAP. xX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


tions of Providence; for thus wicked


men are often prevented from doing
the utmost mischief.

Not that he intends to convey this
impression, but that, in point of fact,
he does convey it. So long, indeed, as
he “ holdeth his peace,” even “a fool
may be counted wise” (Prov. xvii.
28). But he has only to open his lips
in order to let out the secret, and to
show what he really is. His ignorance,
his petulance, his indiscretion, his self-
complacency and presumption, let all
who meet him know that he is a fool.
He talks loudly and confidently on
subjects regarding which wiser men
herdly venture to give an opinion.
The wise are like deep rivers, which
flow quietly. The fool is like the
shallow stream, which brawls and
makes a noise [Buchanan].

The fool, having no true self-know-
ledge, is puffed up with conceit and
vanity; therefore he fails rightly to
interpret the effects of his own folly
upon others. He is the last to detect
the derision and contempt which he
himself has excited.


Verse 4. The wise man when
oppressed by the powerful does not
allow himself to be driven by passion
into acts of rebellion. He stands firmly
at the post of duty, and is content to
wait till the indignation be overpast,
and audience be given to the still small
voice of reason and truth.


Where the obligation of duty is
clear, we should not be moved from
our steady purpose of obedience by
the sudden outburst of unrighteous
anger.

There are times when a wise man
may abstain from insisting upon his
own proper rights. In the conflict with
human authority, swayed by fierce
passions, he learns meekly to endure,
knowing that what is right and true is
more likely to have due recognition
when those passions have subsided.

If we meet anger with anger, we
wage a conflict in which nothing can
be gained, and everything may be
lost.

There is a wonderful power in the
arts of conciliation. A soft answer
turneth away wrath; and what is
better still, when a man’s ways please
God, He maketh even his enemies to
be at peace with him. Esther and
Mordecai succeeded in getting the per-
secuting edict of Ahasuerus recalled,
by committing their way unto the Lord,
and by waiting for the fitting moment
to speak. And well it were, for the
interests of peace and love, if, in less
conspicuous spheres of life, the same
prudent course were always followed.
How often are lasting enmities and
divisions caused simply for want of a
little of that yielding, whose power to
pacify even great offences Solomon so
jastly celebrates [Buchanan].


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 5—10.


Tur Promotion oF Foous.


The excellencies of wisdom, and the practical uses of it, are evident to all who
can feel the force of moral reasoning. Yet the wise often fail of attaining their
true place in the world, or having attained it, they are thrust out, and fools set
up in their stead. He who is conscicus of superior gifts, and rectitude of purpose,
is condemned to witness the promotion of men, contemptibly poor in mind and
morals, to places of authority and power. How does this perverse disposition of
things arise, and wherewith shall good men console themselves in this disappoint-
ment? I. It arises from the Interference of Human Caprice with the Proper
Tendencies of Social Forces. The setting up of folly in great dignity, and
casting down the wise and noble from their seats, is here ascribed “to an error
which proceedeth from the ruler.” (Verse 5.) Such an unnatural inversion can
oniy proceed trom the caprice o1 some arbitrary authority. It is only possible

150





b:
%
z
f
\
os
3
5
:
i


ee ee


~~


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES, CHAP. X.
a Ee


through those accidents of history when folly and wickedness gain a temporary
advantage. That wisdom which is made up of justice, goodness, and practical
sagacity in human affairs, is a social force which has a known direction. But it
may be turned aside from this direction by some disturbing causes. The fitness
of things, their true tendencies and results, must be acknowledged, though they
may be interrupted for a while by some disorder, 1. Jt is fitting that the wisest
and best should rule. Such ought to have the highest social influence and power
—the chiefest authority in the state. Nations can only maintain their place in
the world’s history by means of their noblest and wisest men. Their natural
decay sets in when these are displaced, and the sovereignty given to fools. There
are conditions of national stability that must not be violated, and it is impossible
to preserve the social pyramid poised upon its apex. 2. The most sacred rights of
man may be held in abeyance. Wisdom and goodness ought to secure their proper
results, and enjoy with dignity their quiet triumphs, But the existence of moral
evil introduces a source of complication. It is a disquieting factor in our
reckoning of human things. Hence, in this world, what is right does not always
prevail, It is the property of evil to hold continual warfare against all order—
to rebel against all just dignities—to undo the work of goodness in the world.
Thus the progress of humanity towards perfection is retarded, II. It is an
Unstable Condition of Things. The wise man may be consoled when he reflects
that such social disorder cannot last long, There are certain fundamental prin-
ciples of national prosperity, and these cannot be long violated with impunity.
Retribution comes at length, and the true order returns. There are certain
chemical preparations which are said to be unstable, because they are held
together by a slender bond, and the slightest force is sufficient to decompose
them. In like manner, there are conditions of society brought ubout by the
irrational caprice of wilful men; but such conditions are unstable. They are
always upon the point of rupture. Providence, which permits so much, has yet
reserves of force by which these evils find correction, In the disorders of human
government, fools may be suddenly raised to rank and authority; but they must
at length fall to their true level. They can but, as it were, snatch at greatness:
they cannot retain it in their grasp. No power can give their unnatural assump-
tion any fixity or permanence. 1. The devices which procure their promotion may
be turned against themselves. (Verses 8, 9.) They were raised to their dignities by
flattery, intrigue—by a ruthless trampling upon the rights of others. They
employed dangerous weapons which may, at any moment, be snatched from their
hands and used against themselves. He who breaks through the boundaries of
truth and right runs the risk of arousing indignant justice. The breakers of old
walls—moral, social—shall be avenged by the startled serpent’s sting. 2. Human
eaprice is not to be trusted. When men are not governed by great principles, but
by passion and folly, they are ever unsteady. You cannot reckon upon them, for
nothing can be trusted that does not rest upon the sure foundations of truth and
right. The fools which the wilful monarch promotes to power may soon excite
his disgust, and give place to other fools who are likely to meet with the same
capricious fate. 3. They lack that fitness which alone can give dignity and efficiency
to office. Wisdom imparts an intellectual and a moral fituess for every duty and
trust; and without it, no man can fulfil the highest offices in the community.
(1.) He cannot maintain the dignity proper to them. Men hold in admiration
those who possess wisdom and knowledge. Even the most ignorant learn to
regard, with a feeling akin to adoration, those who are more knowing and wiser
than they. Men may pay court to the outward splendour of the fool; they may
adore the greatness which is thrust upon him, but they despise himself. The
pomp and glory of outward cirvumstance cannot impart true dignity where the
solid endowments of moral worth and wisdom are not found, (2.) He cannot
maintain the efficiency of it. (Verse 10.) Physical strength, or the oh of


OHAP. X.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


SE


authority, may accomplish much, but wisdom is necessary for the finest and most
ingenious work—for the framing of all purposes that are far-reaching, and the


richest in their consequences to man.


Human destiny cannot be shaped to the


noblest issues by rough tools, though they be wielded with savage strength,


There must be the cunning hand—the skilful device—the sharp edge.


These are


the gifts of wisdom to man, without which he cannot accomplish any work of
enduring worth. The power of office and authority is impotent and vain where


the highest faculties are blunt.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 5. St. Cyril observeth that in
the law whereas if others did sin, God
appointed a sacrifice and remedy for
them, whether they sinned through
ignorance or else with knowledge. In
the sin of the High Priest there is not
appointed any sacrifice for him if that
he sinned by ignorance, “as if by no
means there were to be admitted in
them that do rule ignorance, or defect
of that wisdom required for their posi-
tion.” Besides there had need to be a
great care in the ruler that shall choose
others to rule and command, because
it is a hard thing to discharge it.
Nazianzene saith, “It isa hard thing
for a man to rule, a most hard thing to
instruct and teach men. It seemeth
to me to be ap art of arts, a science of
sciences, to rule man, who is of all
creatures most various and changeable ”
[Jermin].

It is hard for ordinary men to con-
ceive of the full nature and strength of
those temptations which beset one who
is invested with absolute rule. There
are positions in which it is hard for
ordinary virtue to stand upright. It
is no wonder, therefore, that such
monarchs have erred.

The most exalted station and com-
plete investiture of authority cannot
confer infallibility.

We must not allow errors to pass
unheeded because they are connected
with great names.

The errors of the mightiest are the
most destructive. There is an “ energy
of position” in things moral and social,
as well as in the region of matter.
When power is wrongly directed, the
disaster is proportioned to its magni-
tude,

152


Verse 6. There is no function be-
longing to rulers which they are bound
to exercise with greater impartiality,
prudence, and caution, than that of
selecting men who are to fill the great
offices of the state. These men have
oftentimes the destinies of a nation in
their hands, . . . To place, out
of mere favouritism or caprice, or even
from a want of sufficient care and
enquiry, an unrighteous or incompetent
judge in the seat of justice; an igno-
rant or dishonest administration in
charge of the revenues of a country ;
a cruel or rapacious governor at the
head of the province of the kingdom;
an unskilful or inexperienced leader in
the command of an army ;—for rulers
to do such things is to trifle with
interests of the greatest magnitude, and
to betray a trust of the most solemn
and responsible kind [ Buchanan},

The highest honours and dignities
must sit ungainly upon those who are
not prepared for them by sufficient
training and capacity. In the obscurest
station, folly is a disadvantage, a
noticeable evil; but in the most exalted
station, it becomes conspicuous and
most fully exposed to the eye of ridi-
cule.

When a fool is set in dignity, it is
as when a handful of hay is set up to
give light, which with smoke and smell
offendeth all that are near it. When
the worthy sit in a low place, it is as
when a goodly candle, that on a table
would give a comfortable and comely
ma is put under a bushel [Jer-
min].

When men of true nobility of mind
and character are pushed from their
seats, they still adorn the lowliest place





ee ce


ee


—


ee a


Parsi


Ae tale Oana


ay


St ee


ee a ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


CHAP. X,


a


where they are constrained to sit. They
suffer most who cast them down.


Verse 7 No change of outward
condition can alter what is essential
in the character. The servile mind
is not destroyed by the elevation from
poverty to grandeur, nor do royal
minds cease to be such when they are
stripped of all outward marks of great-
ness.

It was far from being a very un-
common case, under the despotic
government of the East; slaves of the
palace being not unfrequently, from
caprice, partiality, or secret selfishness,
advanced to the highest ranks, to look
down in haughty superciliousness on
their natural and deserving superiors
[W wdlaw].


Verse 8. He who seeks prosperity
and distinction by treacherous ways, or
by breaking through the bounds of
moral restraint, tempts the vengeance
of Heaven.

He who frames designs for the de-
struction of others is working on the
utmost edge of danger.

There are proper boundaries to know-
ledge as well as to the courses of con-
duct. He who by needless curiosity
adventures to break through them,
only prepares misery for himself—the
anguish of a restless and unsatisfied
mind, ;

When ambitious heads break through
hedges to get to high places, there is a
serpent lurking secretly, which bites
them by the heel and either stops them
from going on, or else bringeth by it
some great mischief upon them. Or
else the serpent that biteth these ambi-
tious subtle workers is some other
more subtle than they, by whom they
are undermined in their plots. Indeed,
when ambition is set upon it, no hedgs,
no wall is able to hold it, but it breaks
through, and leaps over all. ‘What
hedges did Athaliah break, killiag all
the royal progeny that herself might
reign? What hedges did Abimelech
break, killing seventy of his bretaren
that himself might rule? What hedges
did Absalom break that he might be


king in Israel? But did not the ser-
pent bite them all? [Jermin.]


Verse 9; The man who sets himself
to pull down or to alter the fabric of
the constitution of a country, under-
takes a work of no light or trifling diffi-
culty, and a work always of hazard to
himself, and very often of fearfully
doubtful benefit to others. It is a vast
deal easier to find fault than to mend;
to complain of what is wrong, than to
substitute what is right [ Wardlaw].

Most men have penetration enough
to discover the faults in things that are
established, but the knowledge of the
deep principles upon which they rest,
and by which they are held together, is
the possession of only afew. He who
attempts the work of a reformer, with-
out sufficient knowledge and prudence,
is likely to meet with ill-success and to
bring trouble upon himself.

There are times when the corrup-
tions of existing things have grown so
great as to demand violent measures
for their reformation. But the zeal
thus aroused is a dangerous weapon in
the hands of frail man,


Verse 10, A little skill expended in
sharpening the edge, will save a great
deal of strength in wielding the
hatchet. But, just as the unskilful
labourer who cannot handle the whet-
stone must belabour the tree with a
blunt instrument, and after inflaming
his palms and racking his sinews,
achieves less result than his neighbour
whose knowledge and whose knack
avail instead of brute force, so the ser
vant who does not know the right way
to do his work, after all his fatigue
and fluster will give less satisfaction
than one who has learned the best and
easiest methods ; and the householder
who knows nothing of the mechanic
arts, or who knows not what to do when
sickness or emergencies occur, must
compensate by the depth of his purse,
or by the strength of his arm, for the
defects of his skill. A blunt axe im-
plies heavy blows and an aching arm 3
coarse work with a blistered hand.
But “ wisdom is profitable oe


' GHAP, x,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


—


Intelligence is as good as strength, and
a little skill will save both time and
materials, money and temper [Dr. J.
Hamilton].

Even in the most righteous cause,
great strength and determination of
character will lead a man into many
evils unless he has skill and prudence
to guide him,

Mere force is blind, and must be
directed to proper ends and uses by those
who have the power to see.

The triumphs of man over the


fierceness and strength of the brute
creation, and over all the difficulties
which nature places in his way, are the
triumphs of mind.

Wisdom gives that fine edge to effort
by which many difficulties, that other-
wise offer a complete resistance, are
easily cleft through.

Wisdom is the director of all forces
which can be brought under the con-
trol of man. Without intelligent
guidance, they cannot become effective
for the best ends,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 11—15.
THe VANITY OF SPEECH.


Human wisdom has been shown to be, in some cases, unavailing, through the
sudden advantage that may be gained by folly. So many are the instances
of apparent failure that a reflecting mind, tn certain sad moods of thought, may
be tempted to imagine that this landed possession is but another of the many
vanities of human life. In particular, speech itself, which professes to manifest
the inmost glory of wisdom, may be regarded as, after all, but a splendid vanity.
I. The Essential Value of Speech must be Admitted. There are many
instances in which the wisest speech seems to fail. This faculty, however,
must be regarded as, in itself, a good gift. 1. Speech rightly employed wins
favour. (Verse 12.) By the graciousness of speech, a wise man wins his way
to favour, and conquers the minds and hearts of others. The gift of graceful
speech is a splendid talent, though it may be degraded to serve the worst
purposes. Hence the tongue is called “an ornament of iniquity.” (James
iii. 6.) It is capable of presenting error with seductive charms, and making the
worst appear the better reason. Still, the gift of speech may be employed to
enhance the attractions of wisdom, and graciously subdue men’s hearts to the
love of her. 2. Speech rightly employed is powerful. (Verse 11.) The
enchanter has the power of controlling the serpent so that it forgets to sting.
While the strange spell lasts, the venomous reptile is rendered harmless. The
tongue, in like manner, can perform the office of a magician, and so persuade
and charm men as to calm their most boisterous passions and render them
harmless and obedient to the charmer’s will. In some critical juncture, the
speech of a wise man may bring relief to a nation’s perplexity, and save it from
ruin. The uttered word of man has proved mightier than the sword. It is the
most powerful and lasting of all influences. Good and wise words are seeds,
most tenacious of vitality, reproducing themselves from age to age in noble and
heroic deeds. Speech, inasmuch as it is the vehicle of mind, must have the
chief place among the instruments which man uses for carrying on his work in
the world. But in some of those sad moods of reflection, into which the mind
will sometimes fall, there is much to tempt a man to account even this brilliant
gift a vanity. II, Even in the Hands of the Wise, this Gift requires the
Greatest Dexterity. On the supposition that wise men were always wise, we
might well suppose that their speech would, at all times, be seasonable and full of
grace, But the actual state, even of the best, falls below this ideal. The wisest
and the meekest man on earth is in danger of speaking unadvisedly with his
lips. The most devoted saint must take heed that he sin not with his tongue.
Hence he who can so control his speech as not to offend at all has well nigh


154


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. x,











reached perfection. In order to manage the gift of speech rightly, it is necessary
that we have something more than an ample store of wisdom’s gatherings and
the faculty of graceful utterance. 1. There must be vigilance. The wisest man
may fail through want of vigilance in certain crises of danger, and thus bring
himself under the charge and the penalties of folly. The charmer possesses the
art of rendering the serpent harmless, but if he styimbles upon it unawares, he
shall be bitten like an ordinary man. So if the wise man is unwatchful, or does
not speak at the right time; if he misses his opportunity or is wanting in dis-
cretion, notwithstanding his ability to represent the wealth of thought and feeling
in words of power, he too must smart, as the veriest fool, under the grief and
penalties of failure. There are certain junctures in human affairs which may
nonplus unwatchful wisdom. 2, There must be prompt action. The richest gifts
of wisdom must be accompanied by practical ability ; or they may fail of success,
A wise man may lack the power of grappling with emergencies, and may become so
stunned by some sudden perplexity as to be totally unfit for the proper action of the
time. There are so many sudden and unexpected changes in the course of human
affairs, that unless the wise man, though gifted with the most persuasive speech,
has the ability promptly to adapt himself to the occasion, he may be vanquished
as though he were not wise. III. This Gift is often the Instrument and
Revealer of Folly. (Verses 13—15.) The mind and heart—the nature of the
man within—may be regarded as the fountain of speech. As that fountain is
sweet or bitter, troubled or clear, live-giving or pestilential, so are the streams
which flow from it. Speech is the instrument by which the mind conveys and
distributes its wisdom or folly. Hence the fool soon reveals himself; for when
he ventures to speak, his folly is sure of instant recognition. Some of the
characteristics of the speech of such are noted here. 1. Jt shows no tendency
towards improvement. (Verse 13.) The speech of the fool does not follow the
method of creation, where confusion and disorder improved into harmony and
beauty, It shows no tendency to assume a higher state, no power to work itself
clear, The disorder which marked his first utterance becomes more observable
as he proceeds, so that by the time he has made an end of speaking he has
cutraged reason itself. He grows loquacious, There is scarcely any pause in
his insipid and tiresome twaddle. (Verse 14.) He does but win fresh titles of
folly every time he speaks, and his last utterance is the most extravagant of all
2. The effects of tt are destructive. Foolish speech, though incapable of deceiving
those who have discernment, is likely to affect others injuriously, and to grow
into a source of mischief. (Verse 13.) It is a stream which, gathering foulness
as it proceeds, poisons the air. There is a kind of moral contagion in the words
of a fool; and considering how many minds are predisposed to it, the mischief is
immense. But the fool’s speech is more especially destructive to himself. .Verse
12.) He may be said to commit mora] suicide—himself the gulf which swallows
up his reputation. 3. Jt ts concerned with subjects in which a discreet silence should
be observed. (Verses14,15.) The fool. is apt to talk contidently about the future,
as if he could command it and make it sure. He rushes boldly into matters con-
cerning which he knows least. This haa a most injurious effect upon himself.
It consumes his energies in useless toil. (Verse 15.) Such a confident way of
dealing with future things shows an unwarrantable presumption. No man can
know those things which are hidden in the aark recesses of futurity, where they
lie open to the eye of Cod alone. ‘Lo speak of the future as if we could command
it, and know what lies hid in it, is manifest presumption. Even the most common
facts and events of the future are so concealed from man that he cannot, in the
conduct of his affuirs, reckon upon them He may purpose such an ordinary act
as that of going to the city at such and such a time, but he cannot be sure that
he shall accomplish this. (Verse 15.) In the front of this awful fact of human
ignorance, all daring presumption in speech and conduct must be a tg and


CHAP. X





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LCCLESIASTES.





—- ~~


vain. It is an abuse of the divine gift of language when it is thus made the
instrument of arrogance and folly, and the multitude of such abuses in the world
may cause even a wise man, in some gloomy season of the soul, to reckon this
boasted faculty with the sum total of human vanity,


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 11. In the East, there have
always been persons who, by means of
music and legerdemain, exert great in-
fluence over some species of serpents,
so that whilst under their spell the
deadly cobra may be handled, as if he
were utterly harmless. But if the
charmer tread on the snake unawares,
or be bitten when off his guard, he will
be poisoned like another man. And
to certain minds there has been given
an ascendancy over other minds, like
the influence of the serpent-charmer.
Sagacious and eloquent, they are able
to soothe the fury of fierce tempers,
and mould rancorous natures to their
will Like David’s transforming harp,
as the strain advances, it looks as if a
new possession had entered the ex-
orcised frame, and a seraph smiled out
at those windows where a demon was
frowning before. But alas for the
harper, if Saul should snatch the
javelin before David has time to touch
the strings! Alas for the wise charmer,
and also for the good cause, if the
tyrant’s passion towers up, or the decree
of the despot goes forth before a friendly
counsellor has time to interfere [Dr. J.
Hamilton).

“The master of the tongue”—the
man of ready and wise speech—may
fail in matters of ordinary life through
want of the power of quickly adapting
himself to the occasion. To ensure
success in a world like this, where so
many hidden dangers lie ready to spring
upon us, we must have tact as well as
talent.

While under the power of the elo-
quent tongue, fierce natures may be
wielded at will; but when the charm
is dissolved their virulence returns,

He who gives to his tongue an un-
restrained license, and is guided in the
use of it neither by principle nor by

56


prudence, isa man that requires to be
managed with peculiar caution. Con-
tradiction and violence may only irritate,
and make the venom of his tongue the
more virulent and deadly. He must
be charmed [ Wardlaw].


Verse 12. “The words of a wise
man’s mouth are gracious.” 1, They
win the favour of the hearers. Ii is
pleasant to listen to them—to be near
the fountains of wisdom, 2. They
minister good to the hearers, They
convey those treasures of the mind and
heart which are the impulse of all
goodness in life, and the most enduring
possession of man,

The words of wise men have a gentle,
yet all-prevailing force. In morals,
this is a pleasing constraint, a drawing
of the affections, It corresponds te
attraction in the physical universe.

The gracious words of Christ, who was
incarnate wisdom, are still powerful in
drawing the nations to Himself,

The fool is the sepulchre of his own
reputation ; for as long as he was silent,
you were willing to give him credit for
the usual share of intelligence, but no
sooner does he blurt out some astound-
ing blunder—no sooner does he begin
to prattle forth his egotism and vanity,
than your respect is exchanged for con-
ate or compassion [Dr. J. Hamil-
ton}.

As the Psalmist says when speaking
of such men as he, “ They make their
own tongue to fall upon themselves”
(xiv. 8). It was the folly of Herod
that made him utter the rash promise,
which stained his soul with the crime
of murder, It was the folly of another
Herod that prompted the profane and
self-glorying oration, which drew down
upon him the vengeance of the Al-
mighty [Buchanasz].


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


CHAP. X.


gsm


Verse 18. The speech of the fool
shows no tendency towards improve-
ment as he proceeds. It is sure to
degenerate into unmeaning rant, and to
arouse passions which are hurtful to
himself and to others.

There is a ridiculous disproportion
between the passionate language of a
fool and the insignificant causes which
excite it.

There is as much difference between
the chastised fervour of the wise man’s
words, and the impudent rage of
fools, as there is between the warmth
and glow of health and the burning
of a fever.

We have here the serpent, the
babbler spoken of in Verse 11, wreathed
into a circle, his two ends, head and
tail, meeting together. And as at the
one end he is a serpent having his
sting in his head, so at the other end
he is a scorpion having his sting in his
tail [Jermin].


Verse 14, A fool vainly imagines
that mere words are knowledge and
wisdom. Hence he easily lends i:im-
self to a flattering delusion to conceal
the poverty of his mind.

Wisdom is content with few words,
The most important truths have been
condensed into the smallest compass,
The precious things of the mind are
thus rendered portable.

He is like the empty drum that sounds
at the lightest touch. His self-conceit
persuades him that he is competent to
decide, off-hand, matters on which
deeper, more tboughtful, more con-
scientious minds are slow to say any-
thing at all. ‘ A man cannot tell what
shall be; and what shall be after him,
who can tell him?” These are diffi-
culties which wiser men feel and
acknowledge . . . - - The wise
man waits for more light. The case is
not ripe for judgment—he can as yet
neither approve nor disapprove ; he can
neither acquit nor condemn; and ac-


cordingly he refrains his lips, Not so
the fool, He is the first, the longest,
and the loudest in every discussion
[ Buchanan].

Fools are always most confident
concerning the unknown and inscru-
table,

That balanced condition of the mind,
in which it is content to remain released
from belief, is so uncommon that we
have no word in our language to re-
present it. Every ignorant and foolish
man has a stiff opinion upon those
subjects in which his knowledge is
least.


Verse 15. Folly makes a man both
@ weariness to himself and to his neigh-
bours. They grow impatient of his
blunders and busy zeal of fruitless
labour.

The fool is most confident in that
wherein he ought to show the greatest
modesty and reserve. He speaks of
the accomplishment of his plans for
the future with the same assurance as
if he had read them distinctly in the
Book of Fate.

The fool he has in view is a culpable
fool—is one whose folly has much more
of the moral than of the intellectual,
in the defect which it indicates and
implies. He is one whose heart is
much further wrong than his head.
The tongue of a mere imbecile cannot
bite like a serpent. . . . . Inthe
highest and truest sense of the word,
all wicked men are fools, There isa
city—a mighty city—a glorious city—
to which not one of them knows how to
go; and that is the New Jerusalem, the
city of the living God [Buchanan].

Fools (in the moral signification of
the term), when they stand before some
great conviction, waken up to the dis-
covery that what they thought was
knowledge was only words, resting
upon no realities. They learn, like
Job, the language of penitence and
submission (Job xlii, 5, 6).


187


CHAP. xX. HOMILETIC COMMEN' TARY: ECCLESIAS1ES.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.~—Verses 16—20. 7
Tae True Lire oF THE STATE


As in individuals, so in states, there is a certain standard of health. There
are conditions of vigour and decay. They cannot long hold any life or prosperity
which is not founded upon moral goodness. The true life of the state may be
considered, I, As to the Sources by which it is Nourished: All life must draw
support, and materials for repair and development, from something beyond itself.
No creature can live upon its own blood, Nations can only maintain their true
life and prosperity by due supplies of the proper nourishment of that life. It is
especially necessary that those who govern should possess the highest excellencies
—moral—intellectual—social, 1. Zhey should have superior endowments of mind
and heart. (Verse 17.) They should be ‘sons of nobles,” not only by deriva-
tion and rank, but nobles in reality ; men who are distinguished by that elevation
of mind, those qualities of heart and temper, and that dignified bearing by
which they are fitted for the difficult and responsible work of government. 2,
They should be diligent in duty. Rulers have certain duties arising from the rela-
tions in which they stand to those over whom they are placed. Hence they need
not only ability, but also zeal and diligence in their calling. They should be dis-
tinguished by industry, two main channels of which are indicated here. (1)
They should maintain the efficiency of what is good. The edifice of state, like a
house, is exposed to constant wear, and the slow decays of time. The beauty
and use of it must be preserved by repair and renovation. The inherent good-
ness of institutions will not save them from destruction. They must be main-
tained in efficiency by constant diligence and care. (Verse 18.) (2) Mecessury
wmprovements and reforms should be made. Time reveals what is weak, or no
longer potent. Hence wise legislators will study the peculiar necessities of the
age; and upon a wider basis of facts and experience, will endeavour to carry the
science of government to greater perfection. All human institutions need reform.
They have no natural immortality, and only maintain their potency by renewal
of life. (8) They should exercise moral control. (Verses 16,17.) It is necessary
in those who presume to lead mankind that the faculty of reason should be strong
and clear, the judgment ready to decide with firmness whatever that reason ap-
proves. But this excellence of mind cannot be attained except by the mastery
of the appetites and passions. When princes begin the day in rioting and excess,
the animal surmounts the rational, justice and judgment fail, and the land fares
il. When moral control is exercised by those who rule, when they eat “for
strength, and not for drunkenness,” their powers and energies of mind and heart
are most effective for their high duties. Such men renew the life of the state.
They are fitted to receive and exercise that wisdom which is profitable to direct,
alike in the most retired as well as in the most public ways of life. II, The
Causes of its Decline. There are several forms of folly which, in the course of
time, must wear out the life of states and bring them to the condition of dead
empires. 1, Intellectual and moral imbecility in their rulers. (Verse 16.) When
the king is a “child” in mind and in character, inexperienced and thoughtless,
having no manly vigour, no stable virtue, the nation he rules over is exposed to
the worst fate. ‘The more absolute the authority, the greater the ills which
follow when those who wield it have not reached maturity of wisdom and skill,
There are child-like qualities, beautiful in their own order and circum-
stance, but beyond these, intolerable and disastrous. A child must not
hold the helm of the state. 2. Habits of luxury and dissipation. (Verses
17, 19.) When kings give way to gluttony and imtemperance, their

168


“ae











HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. .


rr


CHAP. X.








moral influence must decline, they are rendered insensible to the real evils around
them, and powerless to contend against those dangers by which the State is
threatened. The contagion of their example is likely to spread rapidly through
their subjects, and, as history has often witnessed, the nation unconquerable by
the foe has become weakened by luxury, and rendered an easy prey to the
invader, But such habits in rulers are marked by a deeper shade of guilt when
they are defended by a shameless boldness and bravado, Evil men, on the seat
of authority, are not ashamed to avow a vicious code of duty, to utter some
miserable dictum with the vain conceit of appearing smart, Such an attempt to
justify excess and riot is described in Verse 19. (1) They plead the abundant
provisions of nature for self-indulgence. There is the feast-—why should they not
carouse, and enjoy to the full? There is the wine—why should they not be
merry? Were not these things made for the use of man, and do they not
confer with appetite to urge him to the highest enjoyment? Thus far can folly
render men.insensible to the delicacies and moralities of speech. (2) They
assert the omnipotence of gold. ‘Money answereth all things.” They are
insensible to the noblest influences and powers, and imagine that money can
achieve every purpose, and satisfy every desire ; that gold is an apology for every
crime, and answers all charges. Thus folly attains to the bad eminence of the
utmost heights of impertinence. III. The Cautions which even Wise Men
must Observe who Desire its Welfare. The moral and intellectual faculties of
such men are not impaired by vicious indulgence, but enhanced by careful
culture and soberness of life. By their talents and virtue they contribute to the
strength and preservation of the State. They are an influence for good, a stand-
ing rebuke to evil, the promoters of wise reforms. Such men might be tempted
to impatience under the evils depicted here, and in the greatness of their zeal for
the cause of justice, commit themselves to violent measures for reformation.
Therefore prudence is necessary. 1. They must avoid too hasty an expression of
feeling. (Verse 20.) The king, and the councillors who are associated with
him in the government, may be corrupt in their administration. This is a sore
trial for men of delicate moral sense and high convictions of justice. Yet the
wise man must restrain his feelings, and forbear to curse such rulers, even in
his thought. The sense of indignation, though justly roused, might lead such to
hasty action, and cause a righteous struggle to end in defeat. 2. They have to
consider that the injudicious promotion of a good cause may lead to serious evils. It
is not expedient to speak out every conviction of the mind. ‘The wise will learn
to maintain a judicious reserve. Mere fragments of speech may be taken up by
tale-bearers, and so combined and distributed as greatly to distort and misrepresent
what was spoken. Hence, in a world like this, prudence in every course of
conduct is necessary ; for without it, virtue itself is but a weak and insufficient
defence.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 16. Read in the light of this


In such hands everything must speedily
contrast, child must obviously mean a


fall into inevitable disorder. The cour-


child in capacity—a silly Absalom, or
a self-willed Rehoboam—a man desti-
tute of the gravity, and intelligence,
and experience, and still more destitute
of the high sense of responsibility and
duty, which true wisdom inspires; &
man more taken up about his own
amusements and pleasures than with
the affairs and interests of his kingdom.


tiers would be sure, with their custom-
ary servility, to copy the idleness and
loose living of the king. It is this, no
doubt, that is pointed at by the “ princes
eating "—that is, feasting—“in the
moruing.” The morning in all coun-
tries, und especially in the East, was
devoted by princes to public affairs.
Then it was that, as judges, they sat in
159


GHAP. x.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





the gate, to hear and determine the
causes and questions which the people
might have to bring before them; or
that they assembled in the council
chambers to deliberate on the great
matters of the state [Bucnranan].

Ill fares the land when the king is
intellectually weak, luxurious, and de-
praved. His administration 13 likely
to be defective, and even vicious; his
exalted position renders his example
the more dangerous,

Goed and wise institutions cannot
preserve a nation from destruction,
unless they are administered by good
and wise men.

Illustrious names should be supported
by illustrious virtues and capacities.


Verse 17. A king, the son of nobles,
is one possessing true nobility of mind.
To be merely of high lineage would, of
itself, be no security for the possession
of those qualities of which Solomon
here evidently intends to speak. Neither
virtue nor wisdom is the necessary
accompaniment of high birth. In all
periods of the world’s history, from
Solomon’s time until now, it has been
a thing only too common to find far-
descended princes who had nothing else
but their pedigree of which to boast—
whose personal qualities were as low
and base as their ancestry was illus-
trious and exalted. Wisdom is not
hereditary —it does not run in the
blood—as Solomon’s ownson sufficiently
proved [Buchanan].

The senses and appetites, when they
are under the control of wisdom, may
be made the servants of virtue.

When the indulgence of appetites,
lawful in themselves, is carried to ex-
cess, or pursued for its own sake, it is
@ proof that the animal man sinks both
the rational and the spiritual, Nations
must “seek those things which are
above,” if they would prosper.


Verse 18. A house requires not only
to be built, but to be kept up. Ifa
man, from laziness, after having got
his habitation reared, will not be at the
trouble of necessary repairs, a damage
that is is first trifling will imperceptibly

1


increase, and will be followed by others
till the bui,ding comes to be in danger:
Dzy after day, as the time for purposed
or half-purposed exertion comes round,
the sluggard yawns out to himself the
same convenient assurance, that a few
hours can make no difference, till by
daily procrastination the repair becomes
impracticable, and the decayed and
shattered tenement “falls through ”
[ Wardlaw}.

There are three great fellowships of
men, the Family, the State, the Church,
which are so many buildings of God.
In each of these, slothfulness is an evil
fraught with the utmost danger.

No institution can live merely upon
the history of the past. The skill and
activity of the living present must con-
stantly repair the wrongs of time. It
does not suffice even for Christianity
itself that it has a firm historical basis.
It needs also a living and ever-active
Director.

Slothfulness, whether in the things
of man or God, is the forerunner of a
gradual, yet sure decay.


Verse 19. Men’s lusts are very ex-
persive, they will not get their sloth-
fulness and excess maintained without
much money; the consideration
whereof should make them more sober
and diligent. For their words import
that sensual rulers must have money,
and may be looked upon as including
an argument to dissuade them from
laziness and excess taken from the
effect thereof, which is the poverty of
the people, who must give to them
that ‘“‘money which answereth all
things” [Nisbet].

As men yield to the allurements of
evil, the power and delicacy of the
mind and conscience become impaired.
Such are satisfied and lulled by the
meanest excuses.

When we consider the power and
influence which are secured by gold,
we do not wonder that it has turned
the heads of some. They have accepted
the worship of it as a religion—a sure
refuge from every evil—a means of
justification,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES, CHAP, XI.
rrr Ss ss St SSS SSD


Verse 20. A righteous man may be
so provoked by existing evils, that he
cannot prevent the sense of indigna-
tion from rising in his breast. Yet the
duty of restraining his feelings by a
sober and calculating prudence is laid
upon him by the constitution of
society, and it is part of his trial here.

There is a respect due to office and
authority, as such, independently of
their moral character. Every ordi-
nance of God may become corrupt by
human vices, yet the fact of their
Divine appointment remains.

When once thought is uttered in
speech, it is often like a stone flung
from the hand; we have no further
power over it, and know not where it
will light or with what results,

This is a strong proverbial form of


The course they have followed leaves
no traces by which it can be searched
out. It is as if ‘a bird of the air had
carried the voice.” You are as much
at a loss as the Syrian monarch was,
when Elisha the prophet “told the
king of Israel the words that he spoke
in his bed-chamber” [ Wardlaw}.

The earth is not a place of secrecy,
It is scarcely in the power of earthly
frailty to keep anything secret and
concealed. Wherefore St. Paul was
taken up to the third heaven, when he
heard things that might not be uttered:
according as St. Ambrose noteth upon
it, who saith, ‘* Paul heard some secrets
of wisdom which he was forbidden to
make known to others, and therefore
he was taken upinto Paradise ” [Jermin].

There is a Heavenly King who has


immediate note of the most secret
suggestions of the mind, and to whose
ears are borne even the whispers of
rebellion,


speech, expressive of the strange and
unaccountable way in which such
matters are frequently detected. They
come to light—nobody knows how.





CHAPTER XI,


Orrricat Norzs.—l. Cast thy bread upon the waters.] “Bread,” rendered in Isafah xxviii,
28, ‘bread corn.” It has been supposed that there is an allusion to the manner of sowing the
seed-corn of the rice plant during the time of the flooding of the fields. But it is doubtful
whether this kind of grain was cultivated in Judea in the times of Solomon. _The peculiarity
of Egyptian agriculture may have suggested this image, where the seed is sown literally
“upon the waters” before the inundation of the Nile has subsided, Perhaps the writer had
no peculiar usage of agriculture in his mind, but by a bold figure represents a free-handed
benevolence which does not too nicely calculate cost and results. 2. Give a portion to seven, and
also to eight.] ‘Seven and eight” and similar combinations are often used in the sense of unde-
fined plurality. (Mich. v. 5, Prov. xxx. 15, Amosi. 8.) The meaning here is clear: seven must
not be the limit, but rather “‘ seven and more.” 3. And if the tree fall toward the south, or
toward the north, in the place where the tree falleth, there it shall be.] This figure is suitable
to represent the idea of irrevocable Divine judgments overtaking man; but it may be doubted
whether it requires that idea. The more probable signification, and more suitable to the
theme of these verses, is given by Lange: “The utility of the tree remains the same, whether
it falls upon the ground of a possessor bordering it to the north or to the south ; if it does not
profit the one, it does the other. And it is just so with the gifts of love; their fruit is not lost,
although they do not always come to light in the manner intended.” 6. he way of the spirit.)
Lit. The way of the wind. ‘The same word signifies both wind and spirit. The double meaning
may be taken as most in harmony with the latter part of the verse. We cannot track and
discover all the mysteries of nature. (John iii. 8.) Nor how the bones do grow in the womb
of her that is with child.] The formation of man’s physical nature in the womb has always
been regarded as peculiarly mysterious. (Psa. cxxxix. 13-16.) 6. And in the evening withe
hold not thine hand.] Lit. “towards evening.” Be diligent both early and late. Either
this or that.] Either the laboar of the morning or of the evening. 7. Truly the light is sweet.}
Light as the symbol of life. (Psa. xxxvi. 9, Job iii,20.) 8. Yet let him remember the days
of darkness; for they shall be many.] Days of misfortune and gloom in this world, and a yet
longer season in the dark sojourn of the dead, In the imperfect revelation of the time, the
state of the departed was considered as dark and cheerless, All that cometh is vanity.]
Everything that happens in the course of the world’s history and in daily life, more a Sepa

uM


CHAP, XB HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; ECCLESIASTES. .





every man, since men are the prime movers and chief figures in all these things. 9. Rejoice, 0
young man, in thy ycuth.] These words need not be understood as ironical. There is a
sober and healthy joy which is consistent with tue remembrance of the judgment. And walk
in the ways of thine heart, aud in the sizht of thine eyss.] Thera are lawful ploasures both
for the heart and eyes; yet in all these things the solemn reckoning of the future must be
kept in view. 10. Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart.] The word signifies “sorrow,
dissatisfaction,” not as in the LXX. and Vulgate, “anger.” The command to “rejoice,” in
verse 9, is here followed by a warning against the opposite state of feeling. Put away evil
from thy flesh.] Evil in the sense of misfortune—some evil condition of life.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—6.
Tue PrRecEPTs OF BENEVOLENCE.


Benevolence is goodness considered, not as an internal state, but as an active
habit. As such, it needs the direction of principles and rules, otherwise this
genial impulse may degenerate into softness, and fail in various ways of pro-
ducing the highest possible good. Precepts and rules are but the true method of
performing any work or duty when that method is interpreted in language.
Benevolence has its precepts. I. Learn to Venture Much. (Verse 1.) We are
not certain that our kindest works shall have their proper effect, either in win-
ning the gratitude or securing the permanent benefit of others. In the moral, as
well as in the natural, world, there is an appearance of waste and failure, Yet
the impulse of benevolence must not from hence be discouraged, nor wait for
the time of action till it has the fullest assurance of success. We must learn to
venture much, for we have often to cast our seeds of kindness “‘ upon the waters?’
not knowing whither they will be carried, often, too, with as little prospect of
reaping any ultimate good as if we scattered them upon the barren foam of the
sea. The prospect of immediate success must not be our motive, We have to
act upon a higher and a nobler principle. 1, We must learn to do good for its
own sake. It destroys the nobility of goodness if we are anxious to ascertaia
what profit we shall have. Moral action that depends entirely upon the spur «1
reward only belongs to the lowest degrees of spiritual life. The angels dv all tur
love and nothing for reward. The highest virtue is bold to act, indulges in the
hiberties of a free spirit, and is contented with the luxury of doing good. 2. We
must have faith in the imperishableness of good deeds. It is true that the promise
of immortality is only to the doer himself, ‘He that doeth the will of Gnd
abideth for ever.” (1 John ii. 17.) Much of his work must perish, tainted as it
is with human infirmity, and imperfect. Yet all that is of sterling value in it
shall abide. Good deeds springing from the fount of purity and unselfishness
can never die. They are preserved for ever in the favourable remembrance of
God. Even in the present life we are permitted to see some of the fruits and
rewards of them. The long delay of their due recognition and recompense may
discourage us, but if we are faithful and unwearied in duty we shall see fruit
“after many days.” 38. We must consider that the issues and rewards of our


life are with God. In allowing our goodness freely to spend itself, we are


imitating the property of our Heavenly Father, and we may safely leave with
Him our keeping and our reward. He knows all the issues of the good man’s
life, and all the riches of his sure recompense in eternity. These are greatly
hidden from us here; therefore, in the meantime, we must learn the uses of that
faith which ventures all. Venture is the very soul of the religious life—the
attitude of the righteous towards the great things of God yet to be revealed; and
the spirit of it penetrates all the forms of duty. IL Do not adopt a Quantita-
tive Standard of Duty. (Verse 2.) We must not order our benevolence by a
162


ee


wiltipsscactt


eae
4 \


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP, XI.
—_—_—_—_—____— —<\®}}}—_—_————— Fe
cold, arithmetical law. If the purpose to bless seven candidates for our good
offices be the limit we have set to our charity, that limit should not be so final
and irreversible as to prevent us from extending our kindness yet to another, if
he also stands in need of our favour, 1. True goodness is above the tyranny of
minute maxims and rules, That portion of moral conduct which consists in
doing good to others has its own laws; but these are wide. Like the laws of
nature, they are general and all-pervading. They cannot be represented by a
severe and formal code, which does not rise above the letter, and knows nothing
of that generous and free spirit of goodness which giveth life. The loving heart
disdains the suggestions of that austere and cynical spirit of economy which
says, ‘‘ Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, an given to the
poor?” (John xii, 5.) The highest goodness acknowledges no law but the law
of love, 2. True goodness often secures a grateful return of favours. “Thou
knowest not what evil shall be upon the earth.” It is, therefore, wise and
prudent to create an interest beforehand, so that we may have succour in the day
of calamity. We know not what disaster may cast us upon the kindness of
others, Let us, therefore, by the deeds of love, make them our friends now.
There is a reward which comes to the good man from society, In the time of
prosperity he needs it for his encouragement ; but in the time of adversity, it may
be his very health and life. 3. True goodness has always some beneficial results,
(Verse 3.) Through the ingratitude of mankind, and the moral perversity that
is in the world, our good deeds may often seem to fail. Yet they will have some
grateful issue—some precious results which cannot altogether die. These may
fall out in quite a different direction from the course of our expectation. In any
way, there will be benefit and blessing. The utility of the tree is not destroyed
whether it falls to the north or to the south. In any case it will be a profit
to some one. III. Do not Act by Constraint. (Verse 3.) 1. The constraint
of law can never produce the highest goodness. It is possible for a man
to do the deeds of kindness, not so much from love as from a sense of
right. In the same proportion as he acts herein from any external constraint does
he fail to rise to the true nobility of goodness. ‘The quality of mercy is not
strained.” 2. The only constraint should be that of love. If the clouds be “full
of rain” they must burst in showers of blessing upon the earth. They are the
natural image of a heart that can hold out no more, that blesses by a sweet con.
straint, and in doing good to others relieves itself. The highest natures are not
ashamed to own the gracious necessity under which they are laid by love. IV. Be
not Over-Cautious. (Verse 4.) He who is always watching with nervous anxiety
the wind and rain, and must have the most perfect conditions before he begins his
work, can only meet with but poor success. ‘There is a certain boldness about
true feeling that does not wait till all is clear and perfectly ascertained. In the
uncertainties of the present life, there is a moral obligation to act upon imperfect
evidence, upon assurances whose solidity is not quite beyond a doubt. The
impulse of affection and love will often carry a man beyond the warrant of the
logical understanding. He who is timid and hesitating cannot accomplish much
good; It is best to follow the promptings of the generous heart, whithersoever
they will lead, without waiting for that assurance of certainty which is never
perfectly given to man in this life. In moral action, over-refinements are
dangerous—they are impracticable. Therefore, he who waits for action till the
most complete conditions favour him may have long to wait, and must suffer
many disadvantages. 1. He must lose many opportunities of doing good. If a
man does not attempt the duty lying immediately before him, the opportunity
may slip away for ever. He must be poor in good works who makes too careful
a selection of what he shall do. 2. Such delay tends to paralyse effort. Caution
is a valuable principle when used to secure accuracy in moral conduct, and to
enable a man to walk surefootedly in this present life, But over-caution amouuts
M2


CHAP. XL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





to a disease, relaxes the sinews of effort, and impairs the moral force. He who
puts off the doing of good actions, from time to time, loses the healthfulness which a
vigorous activity would give him, and in the end scarcely accomplishes anything.
V. Be Earnest and Untiring. (Verse 6.) Earnestness and perseverance are the
sure conditions of ultimate success. The holy examples of all the wise and good,
and the solemn verities amidst which we now live, alike enforce these upon us.
This earnestness and untiring devotion to every good work implies—1. A wide
and varied action. It extends throughout every part of our working time—from
“morning ” till “ evening.” It is distributed over an ample field, and embraces
opportunities on every side, It implies—2. A surer and more plentiful reward.
If we sow with a liberal and diligent hand, some seeds will be sure to spring up.
We may be discouraged by the appearance of a waste of power. God may
destroy some of the seeds we sow, but He will preserve others. The work of the
morning, or the work of the evening, may perish, yet we may fondly hope that
one of them, at least, will succeed. In any case, the diligent worker shall see some
profit of his labour, Then, too, the success may happen to be very great.
“Thou knowest not . . whether they both shall be alike good.” The law
still holds in every case, ‘He that soweth plentifully shall reap plentifully.”
VI. Consider that God often Hides from Us the Success of Our Work. (Verse 5.)
It is not possible for us to know the full extent of the impressions we make upon
the minds and hearts of others, The good seed we sow may be borne very far,
and quite beyond our observation and knowledge ripen into precious fruit. God,
in this thing also, does hide Himself. Our works, as well as the deepest things
of our soul, are laid up with Him, awaiting that Judgment which shall make all
things manifest. The labours of love cannot be fully reckoned up in this world,
This ignorance of the whole cause of our success is—1. A necessity of our present
condition. Man is still the greatest mystery to himself. The delicacy of the
human spirit is such that it is impossible to say how far it is affected by the
words and acts of another. In our present imperfect stage we cannot have full
light either upon the reasons of God’s dealings, or upon the issues of our conduct,
This ignorance, in both cases, may be a necessary discipline. It is suitable to a
life of faith, and for perfecting the grace of humility. 2. I¢ is analogous to our
ignorance of nature's mysteries. We can observe the effects and direction of the
wind, but cannot tell “‘whence it cometh, and whither it goeth.” (John iii. 8.)
We have no faculty to observe where the wind arises, and where it breathes out
its last gasp. In like manner we are ignorant of the mystery of organic life
—most notably of human life. Science can do much in classifying facts and
reducing them to general laws, but cannot arrive at the ultimate mystery. How
our physical nature is developed in the darkness of the silent womb, and pre-
pared for the light and work of life, is still inexplicable to us. If we are ignorant
of what is so intimately connected with ourselves, how can we presume to know
all the work that God is doing inthe world? Let us stand in awe and reverence
before the depths of Divine knowledge, which conceal so much from our most
piercing sight. Enough for man to know, that there is duty to be done, there
are safe principles to act upon, and all faithful workers are sure of reward.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1. Suppose that you are in
the South Sea Isles, where the bread-
fruit grows, and that by chance, or on
purpose, you scatter some of its pre-
cious bunches on the sea. At the
moment you may feel that they are

164


lost; but, should the winds and waters
waft them to one of those reef islands
with which such seas are thickly stud-
ded, the wandering seeds may get
washed ashore, and beneath those


brilliant suns may quickly grow to a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES, GHAP. XL
——— ee eeeeeeeeeeeEeeeeEeEeeESSFSFSFFFFSFSSSSSSSSFFsses


bread-fruit forest. And should some
disaster long years after wreck you on
that reef, when these trees are grown
and their clusters ripe, you may owe
your sustenance to the bread which
you cast on the waters longago. Such
is God’s husbandry. Do the right deed.
Do it in faith, and in prayer commend
it to the care of God, And though
the waves of circumstance may soon
waft it beyond your ken, they only
earry it to the place prepared by Him.
And whether on an earthly or heavenly
shore, the result will be found, and the
reaper will rejoice that he once was
@ sower [Dr. J. Hamilton).

In the eyes of mere economists and
calculators, many deeds of love may
seem but a reckless waste, and the hope
of any real advantage or fruit of them
@ vain presumption. But the same
God who gives to the good man the
impulse of duty also gives him his
faith. Thus he learns to work beyond
the warrant of appearances, and to
leave his reward with God.

The seeds of goodness, scattered by
a loving hand in the most unpropitious
circumstances, may yet become the
life of many.

In the course of history, the corrup-
tions of the Church have grown so
great that the times required bold men
who would venture to cast their seeds
of truth upon the waters that, to com-
mon eyes, only seemed to give them
sepulchre, An ocean of prejudices,
prescriptive authority, venerable fic-
tions, and worldly interests, was ready
to swallow up their truth, But the
seeds they sowed found nourishment
and the favour of heaven; they have
ripened into successive harvests, and
have become the life and rejoicing of
many.

The ingratitude of men may seem
unprofitably to engulf the labours of
love, yet those labours cannot entirely
fail of reward. The least possible
result is, that they return with blessing
into the bosom of the doer,


Verse 2, Miss no opportunity of
performing kind actions. Though you
Should have bestowed your bounty on


seven—on & number which you might
deem sufficient—should an eighth present
himself, d< something for him also,
for you know not what evil shall be
upon earth. You know not in this
world of mutation how soon you may
be the pensioner instead of the almoner.
You know not how soon you may be
glad of a crust from those who are at
present thankful for your crumbs
Beneficence is the best insurance [ Dr.
J. Hamilton).

We are not in danger of erring on
the side of large bounty. Our natural
selfishness inclines us rather to keep
within the mark than to go beyond it.

The best use we can make of the
talents committed to us is by their
means to secure friends.

In the time of our prosperity we may
not perceive what stores of love our
kindness has caused to be laid up for
us. It needs the occasion of our cala-
mity to unlock them,

We can store up mechanical energy,
so that it remains quiescent till such
time as we have need of it for effec-
tive work. In like manner we can
store up for ourselves the energy of
love in the hearts of men, and in the
day of our distress it will become a
power to bless and save.

In what opposite ways may the same
consideration be applied? The very
circumstance which Solomon here
urges as @ reason for present and
generous liberality, the covetous
worldly-minded man pleads as an
apology for hoarding. 1 know not, he
says, ‘‘ what evil may come upon the
earth.” I must, therefore, take good
care of what I have got, Who can
tell but I may otherwise come to de-
pendence, and die poor myself? A
prudent precaution to prevent our
becoming a burden upon others in the
time of age and infirmity, is by no
means to be condemned. But it is an
awful perversion, when the apprehen-
sion of future possibilities is made an
excuse for griping avarice, How much
more noble the use that is made, by
the spirit of God, of our ignorance of
the future! Instead of withholding
from others on this ground, be Solo=


CHAP. XL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





mon, rather give while you have to
give, and give liberally: lose not the
precious opportunity; ‘it is more
blessed to give than to receive.” En-
joy, then, the pleasure of present
beneficence [ Wardlaw].


Verse 3. As the clouds are formed,
not as an end, in themselves, but that
they may water the earth, so God be-
stows His bounties upon men that they
may bless others.

The good heart owns no necessity
but that of its own loving nature.

A cloud full of rain, and yet leaving
the earth beneath it parched and de-


solate, would be an anomaly in the.


natural world; and is not a griping,
narrow-souled, selfish rich man an
anomaly of the same kind? God has
given him the means of making “ his
very paths drop fatness.” . . . In
what manifest opposition, then, to the
ways and to the will of God does such
a man live, when no drop of this plen-
teous rain is emptied upon the thirsty
earth! when he lives only to hoard
and heap up his accumulating treasures;
or to Jay them out only for the grati-
fication of his own vanity and ambi-
tion, or of his sensual ease and pleasure?
Such a man is a kind of monstrosity in
the moral world—tit to be the object
of no other feelings than those of con-
tempt and pity on the part of his fel-
lows; and certain to inherit the dis-
pleasure and wrath of Him, whose
tender mercies are over all His works
[Buchanan].

Our bounty can never be entirely
lost. If we do good in all directions,
we shall find the reward of it in some
direction, though not, perhaps, where
we had most looked for it.

Though there be discretion required
in charity to know the worth of the
persons on whom it is _ bestowed
(Psa, exii. 5), yet where the intention
of the giver is honest, and endeavours
{o discern what manner of persons they
are to whom he gives, though he may
be mistaken, and let his charity fall
upon the worst, his reward shall be no
less than if it fell upon the better sort ;
for thus also may this similitude be

166


turned into an argument for charity, aa
holding forth the certainty of the re-
ward thereof, whether the objects of it
be good or bad [Nisbet].


Verse 4. It is easy to find excuses
for the neglect of our duty.

Timidity is a source of moral weak-
ness, Trembling caution can accom:
plish very little, There is a dauntless-
ness about faith which does not wait
till all is most favourable.

If we are never to do an act of kind-
ness till we are perfectly sure that it
will not be abused, and that it will
really and fully accomplish the purpose
we intend by it, we shall never perform
any such act at all. If I am never to
give an alms until I know the whole
history, past and future, of the indi-
vidual who is to receive; if I am never
to befriend one who is in difficulty and
distress till I can be positively assured
that he will prove himself worthy of it;
if Iam never to bestow my money on
any undertaking for promoting the
temporal or spiritual welfare of my
fellow-men till I have infallible proof
that there shall be no mistake com-
mitted in the management of it, and
that it shall effect all the good which
its authors are looking for and aiming
at, I may as well resolve at once to do
nothing in the way of spending my
worldly substance for the interests of
religion or humanity at all [Buchanan].

Certainty is not attainable in the
business of common life, therefore
men are content to act upon proba-
bilities. Why should they require more
in moral duties ?

The great preachers of the Gospel
have had the courage to sow the seed
of the Word when the temper of the
time seemed altogether unfavourable.
They did not wait till all were willing
hearers.


Verse 5. The way of the human
spirit from the Creator’s power to the
consciousness of life, thought, and
feeling, and the manner of its strange
union with this material frame, are
mysteries of which human knowledge
can give no perfect account. We can


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





no more determine the ultimate facts
of it than we can distinctly mark the
place of the rising and expiring of
the viewless wind.

The old mystery of life, which has
puzzled the thoughtful in all ages, still
returns. God retains the secret as a
standing challenge to man.

Throughout all the seeming nature
there remains this mysterious, gene-
rative, life-giving process in the vege-
table, the animal, and especially in the
human birth, as a constant symbol of
the supernatural presence, or of the
old unspent creative force, still having
its witness in continually recurring
acts, ever testifying to the great
Divine secret that baffles science, and
to the explanation of which she can-
not even make an approach [Dr. 7.
Lewis, in Lange].

Let us apply ourselves to the duty
lying near us, and for the assurance
of reward and success be content to
know that there is an invisible power,
accomplishing in secret and in dark-
ness the will of heaven.

Our spirits might well faint amidst
all the discouragements of duty, were
we not assured that somewhere there is
perfect knowledge and never-failing
power. This is the stable centre of the
soul,


Verse 6. We cannot calculate be-


CHAP. Xh





forehand the success, in special in-
stances, of our labours to do good,
The result will, doubtless, show that
there has been some waste of power.
But this should not discourage us.

We may be tempted to try nothing
by the morbid apprehension of failure,
The better course is to calculate on
some of our attempts failing; and on
this account, that we may have the
greater probability of succeeding in
some, to make them the more nume-
rous; whilst, at the same time, we
bring to bear upon every one of them
the entire amount of prudence and
forethought we possess, that, as far as
lieth in us, we may ensure a favourable
issue to them all [ Wardlaw].

For sowing—for doing well, every
time serveth ; and who knoweth which
shall do best in the acceptance of God,
and in the advancing of our. blessed
ness? Be, therefore, diligent and sow
continually. It is not in sowing as it
is in buying and selling; in those,
things are done by weight and by
measure; but in sowing, there is a
scattering abroad in a free and full
manner. Wherefore, when it is said
of the righteous man, * He hath dis-
pensed, he hath given to the poor,”
Theodoret noteth upon it, “ He imita-
teth those that sow their seed abun-
dantly, scattering it about in hope of
filling their hands again” [Jermin}.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 7—10.


Tur CounsELS oF WIsDOM TO THE CHILDREN OF PLEASURE,


Wisdom commends the rational and sober useof pleasure. But when pleasure
is pursued for its own sake, leads to forgetfulness of God, or weakens the power
of moral control, it becomes an evil. But even those who are most careful
herein have need constantly to keep before them certain solemn truths. I. To
Remember how Empty the Most Favoured Life is of any Solid Good. The
wise man is ready to admit all the good that life contains, He does not, in the
spirit of a gloomy philosophy, condemn all enjoyment, 1. Zhe consciousness of
existence ia itself a pleasure. (Verse 7.) Light speaks to us of all that is glad,
joyous, and free; and light is the symbol of life, Existence is an inheritance,
and we fondly cling to it, even when bereft of allelse. To enjoy the light of the
sun and the comfort of the elements is, in itself, pure delight. 2. Some lives may
have a large capacity for pleasure. This may be favoured by the length of life.
A man may live “many years, and rejoice in them ail.” Time is, at least, one
dimension of the capacity of life; and if it be extended in other miei ig by


GHAP. XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





the ability to enjoy and improve it, life may be filled with much good. Or, take
life in the season of its greatest power of enjoyment. (Verse 9.) Youth is the
time of the greatest vigour, when the sense of enjoyment is keenest. Care has
not yet begun to corrode the mind, nor faith in man to lessen, nor hope to lose
her charms, The young man may well “rejoice” in his “youth.” 3. A life
devoted entirely to pleasure, however favoured, has no solid worth. He who lives
to satisfy his appetites, unmindful of the claims of duty and of his solemn reckon-
ing with God, will find at the close of life that he has been grasping a shadow.
The pleasing forms die in his embrace, like those of a dream when one awaketh.
If a man has anything to dread from the judgment, life, however blessed by out-
ward favours, must be but a sad portion after all. But, taking man at his best
estate here, and comparing it with the sublimer destinies awaiting him in future
worlds, it will be found that the successive stages of life are vanity. The rosy
dawn and the bright morning of life may be beautiful, but they hold their per-
fection only for alittle moment. Theday, meanwhile, hastens on to its close, and
a night of uncertain duration shuts up the scene. The contemplation of life must
produce a despairing sadness, unless a man has the hope of immortality. This
hope shifts the centre of the soul from the region where all is unsubstantial and
vain, and places it where all is real and abiding. This idea raises and transforms
life. Without it, life will be found to be empty of any enduring worth. II. To
Consider the Dread Abode to which They are Hastening. (Verse 8.) The Old
Testament speaks in very gloomy language of that dark house where souls are
detained after death. The darkness that rested upon life and immortality could
not be cleared away until His coming who was the life and light of men. Yet
even the advanced light of the Gospel does not completely relieve the gloom with
which this dread subject afflicts and oppresses the human mind. Departed saints
have still, in some form, to submit to the long reigu of death. Still, “ waiting
for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of the body,” they groan for perfection
and full investiture, With all the superior light and hope of the Gospel, the
subject is yet sufficiently solemn. There are views of the state of the dead upon
which it is salutary that we should dwell, even while we cherish the brightest
hope of reward. This tends to preserve that humility which is proper to our
present condition, and to set the pleasures of the world in their true light. The
following thoughts arise whenever we contemplate the state of the dead: 1. There
is the sense of obscurity and neglect. A man is removed from the eyes of the
living, and though his memory is preserved awhile, he is, at length, forgotten. *
There is an idea of utter neglect, It seems as if the invisible thread of love and
memory, which connects the two worlds, becomes at last severed. With all the
dear human hopes and feelings that now fill us, we cannot contemplate such a fate
without due solemnity. 2. There ts the sense of uncertainty. Whenever we think
of what is beyond our knowledge, and especially of that in which we ourselves
must play an important part, vague fears arise in the mind. With our present
experience, we are not able to conceive of the manner in which they live who have
put off this vesture of mortality. And this very uncertainty becomes an oppres-
sion, This is, indeed, relieved by faith; yet despite of all, it will now and then
suggest itself to contemplation, 8. There is the sense of privation. There must
be such, as far as this life is concerned. When we have passed the bounds of
time and space, the pleasures of this world exist for us no more. We seem half
afraid that even there we shall lack many enjoyments. Thus, in certain moods
of mind, must we think of that long night which succeeds our mortal day.
Though such thoughts should not be the governing ideas of our spiritual life, yet
they are valuable for several purposes of discipline. They impart that soberness
to the mind, by which we learn to taste the pleasures of life as those who have
shortly to enter upon a scene of unknown and untried things. To every one, the
wise a says, *‘ let him remember the days of darkness: for they shall be many.”


HOMILETIC COMKEN' TARY. : ECCLESIASTES CHAP, Xt,


—_—_—— nn — — — mw snk a


Til. To be Mindful of the Solemn Judgment Awaiting Mankind. (Verse 9.)
This does not refer to any penalties of sin in the present life, though these are
Divine Judgments, but rather to that solemn reckoning which God will
make with all mankind. The fact of human responsibility makes a future
Judgment necessary. Mankind will not be judged in masses, but each one by
himself. “ God will bring thee into judgment.” 1. The moral worth or worthless
ness of each human life will be estimated. The true character of each man will be
revealed. The Judgment is spoken of as that which shall make manifest what
we really are. (2 Cor. v. 10.) 2. The judgment will be against all lives in
which there has been a non-recognition of God. The youth is reminded that for
the joy which is so natural to his season of life, for walking in the ways of his
heart and in the sight of his eyes, God will bring him into judgment. This does
not necessarily mean condemnation. He who in life’s work or pleasures recog-
nises God, and is governed by spiritual ideas, though he may feel solemn as he
thinks of the test to which he shall be brought, has yet nothing to fear. It will
be a test discovering what he is, not one which destroys. Like gold which is
proved in the fire, the Judgment will, indeed, be a trial for all the righteous,
but it will not be destruction. But he who in his pleasures and works has for-
gotten God, has lived without a due sense of responsibility, and of the awful
future, has all to fear from the Holy One, who is determined to put all sin out
of His sight. Nothing that is evil can live in the light of His countenance, and
all is sad and unprofitable upon which that light does not shine. Human life in
all its duties, joys, and sorrows, is sanctified and raised by the continual desire
to please God. Without this the whole of life comes under condemnation.
IV. To Allow these Facts Practically to Influence the Conduct. (Verse 10.)
In this section the wise man dwells upon the chief facts of probation and de-tiny.
No stage of life is permanent, but all is fleeting. All are hastening to that long
dark night in which no man canwork. All alike await the Judgment, even
the best and holiest needing to find mercy of the Lord in that day. What course
of conduct is the wisest in the face of these solemn truths? How, especially, is
the youth, to whom the world offers the strongest temptations, so to order his life,
lest he should zome into the condemnation of the Judgment? 1. He should
remove the causes of inward trouble. ‘Remove sorrow from thy heart.” Sin,
in its many forms, is the cause of all trouble and sorrow. All disorders in the
universe arise from this one bitter root. If sin is put away, though a man may
have outward trouble, yet the depths of him will be lightened up with the
presence of God; and in a rich hope, and an approving conscience, he will have
the comfort of an unearthly joy. The youth who follows his desires, without any
moral restraint, must sooner or later know sad grief heavy at his heart. Con-
science will one day awake and afflict his soul. 2. He should avoid the physical
penalties of sin. There are spiritual sins for which the flesh is not chastised.
There are carnal sins whose penalties man is made to bear in his body. Some
vices injure health, exhaust physical vigour, and bring acute misery. ‘ Put
away evil from thy flesh” is the counsel of wisdom to those who are tempted to
try dangerous pleasures, A man may well reflect whether he does not pay too
high a price for the sinful indulgence of the flesh. These natural chastisements
foredate the Last Judgment, and full retribution for all sin. Their lessons
should be early learned, lest youth should transmit to age the inheritance of suf-
feringand shame. To put awayevil from the heart, and sorrow from the flesh, is to
garnish and prepare the soul, that heavenly influences there may take up their
abode. The joy of opening life is a hollow vanity, unless a man has learned to
cherish those joys which time can never fade,


169


CHAP. XL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 7. All light is pleasant; ’tis
the very smile of nature, the gloss of
the world, the varnish of the creation,
a bright paraphrase upon bodies.
Whether it discover itself in the
modesty of a morning blush, and open
its fair and virgin eyeli’s in the dawn-
ing of the day ; or whether it dart out
more vigorous and sprightful beams,
shining out in its noonday glory;
whether it sport and twinkle in a star ;
or blaze and glare out in a comet; or
frisk and dance in a jewel; or dis-
semble and play the hypocrite in a
glow-worm; or epitomize and abbre-
‘viate itself in a spark, and show its
zeal in the ruddiness of its complexion
in the yolk of the fire; or grow more
pale, pining, or consuming away in a
candle. However it is pleased to
manifest itself, it carries a command-
ing lustre in its face . . . Is it
not a pleasant thing to behold a sun?
nay, to behold but a candle, a deputed
light, a vicarious light—the ape of a
sunbeam? [Culverwell.}

Light is the emblem of all that is
joyous in life. Sorrow and melancholy
seek the shade and the darkness,

It is only the brightest passages, the
best moments of life, that can be aptly
and truly represented by the light. Sin
has disturbed the harmony between
the natural and the spiritual worlds.


Verse 8. If a man’s life is not ap-
proved of God, prosperity, however
long continued, will end in the darken-
ing of all that is hopeful and bright in
life. This is but the prelude of a
sadder privation beyond life.

The most favourable instances of the
worldly prosperity of godless men do
not affect the truth, that all that cometh
of such a life is vanity.

In the years of thy life, therefore,
remember these days. In thy days of
delight, remember these days of trouble,
and let the remembrance of them make
thee to provide against them by well
ordering thy life [Jermin].

170


_ As long as life is coming, or to come,
its vanity does not appear. On the
contrary, there is- nothing thought of
then but content and satisfaction;
nothing but Elysian prospects, dreams
of happiness, and landscapes of Para-
dise. For there is a strange fallacy
in Hereafter ; and distance, which
lessens objects to the eye, magcrifies
them to the mind, We are big


with the hopes of. that part of life


which is coming on, and live day after
day upon the fancy of what to-morrow
will produce, like the spectators of @
play still in expectation of the next
scene; but yet, when to-morrow comes,
we find it just like yesterday, vain and
without content ; and so will every to-
morrow be when it comes to be to-day
[Norris].

There are days of darkness which
will come to the just, in this world -
but it is not a@ darkness which hides
God, Rather is it like that of night,
which uncovers the celestial globe,
and reveals bright glories in the beavens
which were never seen by day.


Verse 9. When the heart is in a
right state no joy will harm, provided
only it be true joy, and not merely a
corrupting mirth. Enjoy it, then, if
there is anything pleasant for the sight
or hearing. provided you sin not against
God [Luther].

To walk in the ways of the heart and
in the sight of the eyes may be taken
in a bad sense, as representing that
wilfulness in conduct which does not
acknowledge God. But there is a
proper use both of the heart and of the
eye. God denies no lawful pleasures
to that faculty which loves, or to that
which appreciates the forms of beauty
in the world, The principle by which
life is governed is the chief thing. To
the pure, all these things are pure.

The stronger the temptations to un-
lawful pleasures, the stronger should be
felt the restraints of religion.

In the enjoyments of pleasure, a man


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.
2 ——————


should have the thought ever present
with him that he is living under the
shadow of the Day of Judgment—a
shadow which is deepening fast. This
will prevent him from abusing that
which was intended for his training and
improvement,

To be brought face to face, at last,
with God will of itself be terrible dis-
tress to all who have not learned in
life to find their chief delight in Him.


Verse 10. There are inward and
outward troubles—sources of pain to
the body and to the mind. From some
of these our goodness cannot deliver
us; but from the worst forms of them
we can be saved by obedience to the
will of God,

That heart which God’s Spirit has
renewed and occupies, however op-
pressed with the troubles of life, can
have no essential and crushing sorrow.

He who is saved from sin is saved
from the cause of the deepest troubles,


CHAP. XIL





ee


He possesses the true life, and therefore
enjoys the gladness which it brings,
He becomes a partaker of the Divine
nature, and is blessed,

Godliness, while it raises and puri
fies the spirit of man, does also redeem
the flesh from many evils. Herein is
@ prophecy of a more complete redemp-
tion for the body. The tree of life in
Paradise heals all the ills of man.

Let, therefore, the youthful worldling
pause. Let him not suffer his fond
hopes, and dazzling visions of the
future, to deceive him, “for childhood
and youth are vanity.” The promises
they make to the thoughtless, carna]
mind, arefalse. The halo which they
throw around the world is a deceitful
glare. The joyous anticipations in
which they indulge are continually
liable to disappointment; and every
day, every hour, events may arrive
that will sweep them utterly away,
or bury them in darkness and death
[Buchanan].





CHAPTER XIL


Crrrtcan Notrs.—l. Thy Creator.] The Hebrew word Is in the plural form, denoting the
fulness and wealth of the Divine nature. While the evil days come not.] The time of joyless
old age as contrasted with the glad season of youth. 2. While the sun, or the light, or the
stars be not darkened.} The separate meution of the sun and light is not to be considered
as tautology. Aben Ezra explains that by the light is signified the morning light, which,
though identical with that proceeding from the sun, is yet poetically different. The darken-
ing of these natural lights signifies the diminishing of joy and the coming of the season of
adversity, (Isa. xiii. 10, Amos viii. 9, Ezek. xxxii. 7.) Nor the clouds return after the rain.]
A description of what often happens, in those countries, during the rainy season of winter.
After a great discharge of rain, the clouds gather again, the signal for another storm, One
trouble follows closely upon another, 3. The keepers of the house shall tremble.] The
human body, being the habitation of the soul, is often compared to a house or tent. (Job. iv. 19,
Wisdom ix. 15, Isa, xxxvili. 12, 2 Cor. v. 1, 2 Pet. i. 13.) The description given here is that
of a rich mansion or castle, not that of an ordinary house, It is a house having the necessary
things of war and luxury; soldiers to defend it and keep watch on the turrets; servants for
attendance, and to prepare food for a large household. The furniture and surroundings are
those of a magnificent and lordly dwelling—the hanging lamps, the golden bowl, the splendid
fountain. (Verse 6.) By “the keepers of the house” are signified the arms, one of whose
chief uses is defence. In oldage they become weak and tremulous, And the strong men shall
bow themselves.] These are the legs which, from failing strength, bend under the weight of
years. And the grinders cease becanse they are few.] The “millers” or “ grinders” are the
teeth, which in old age become few, They cease, in the sense of failing in ability to perform
their proper function. In Hebrew, the form of the word is feminine, in allusion to the custom
by which the grinding for the household was performed by female slaves. And those that
look out of the windows be darkened.] Not ordinary windows, but some opening in a lofty
part, such asa turret. The castle, which would have its “strong men,” would also have its
watchers on the heights, These answer to the eyes, which are placed aloft as on a watch-tower.
Dimness of sight is tho common infirmity of old age, 4. And the doors shall be na be the


CHAP, xIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; ECCLESIASTES.








streets,] Some expositors say that by “‘ the doors” the mouth isintended. But this is scarcely
likely, as the mouth had been sufficiently described before, The description answers better to
the ears, for a double organ is plainly signified, and one by which we hold intercourse with the
outer world. When the sound of the grinding is low.] This refers not to the failure of the
powers of mastication, but to the failure of hearing. The old man but feebly hears the most
familiar household sounds, such as those of the maids grinding corn. And he shall rise up
at the voice of the bird.] In allusion, probably, to the sleeplossness of old mon, §. Afraid of
that which is high.] ferring to the difficulty which an old man feels in ascending a hill.
Fears shall be in the way.] ‘The smallest dangers are magnified by his weakness till they
become formidable. The almond tree shall flourish.) The almond tree flourishes in the
midst of winter, and bears its blossoms on a leafless stem. These blossoms. notwithstanding
their red colour, have, as they fall, the appearance of white snow-flakes, Dry, bleak, barren
old age, with its silvery hair, is thus represented, The grasshopper shall be a burden.] Some
explain this of their singing and chirping, which may easily annoy the old man. Others—
taking the word in the strictly literal sense of Jocust—say that the reference is to these as an
article of food which is too strong for the impaired digestion of the aged. Others, again, say
that they represent that which devours, hereby signifying those forces which are hostile to
life. Various other interpretations are given, more or less fanciful, but all are foreign to the
simplicity of the figure. Here, it will be found that the meaning that would occur to the
simplest reader is the best, The old man cannot bear the least weight. Desire shall fail.]
Every kind of desire, whether it be the appetite for food, or that of the sensual passions, Be-
cause man goeth to hislong home.| Lit. “to his eternal house.” This is inserted parenthoti-
cally—all these things are signs that life is shortly about to cease. The expression is found
in Tobit iii, 6, and was familiar to Roman literature. As the word rendered “eternal” also
signifies the world, it may be that the idea of time is not prominent here, and that we have but
@ form of the phrase “the other world.” 6. Or ever the silver cord be loosed.] Man’s living
organism is here described by a new figure. It is now a golden lamp, hanging by a silver
cord, Hereby is signified the thread of life, and that life is a noble and precious thing. Or
the golden bowl be broken.] The vessel containing the oil which supports the fame. This
answers to the brain, the organ of the noblest functions of man, and also the source of that
stimulus by which all the processes of the body are carried on. Or the pitcher be broken at
the fountain.] This gives a different idea from the golden bowl, and _ evidently refers to that
organ which draws nourishment from something outside the body. Like the broken pitcher,
the lungs are no longer able to draw in the vital air. Or the wheel broken at the cistern.]
The same figure as the last, but represerting a different part of the arrangement for drawing
water—the cistern wheel for raising and lowering the bucket. Life is represented under the
image of a wheel in constant motion. This, probably, suggested James iii, 6, “The wheel of
nature.” §. Vanity of vanities.] This repetition of chapter i, 2 shows that these words are
intended to be placed at the head of the conclusion of the book. They introduce the epilogue.
10. Acceptable words. Pleasant, agreeable words. We are reminded of the “gracious
words” of Our Lord. (Luke iv. 22,) And that which was written was upright.] In accord-
ance with the standard. They corresponded with eternal realities, and were, therefore, true,
ll. The words of the wise are as goads.] The author thus classes himself with the writers
of proverbial wisdom, The Sapiential Books of the O. T, would come under this description,
Such words are “‘as goads;” they have the power of penetrating deeply into the heart. And
nails.] Used synonymously with “ goads.” Fastened by the masters of assemblies.] Tho
maxims of wisdom, as united into one assembly or collection. Which are given from one shep-
herd.] In the sense of a leader of a congregation, or chief of a school. The wisdom of many
is pervaded by a spirit of unity. Hengstenberg considers that there is a reference to God
as the author of the Sacred Books. 12. My Son.| An expression appropriate to the master of
wisdom when addressing his pupils; equivalent to “my scholar,” or “dear reader,” (Prov. i.8,)
Of making many books there is noend.] The plural form sometimes denotes the parts of one
treatise, and conveys the general idea of “much writing.” The word may be, therefore,
rendered collectively, “in making a great book there is no end.” Great labour for little
result. These words may also be understood of the heathen literature, which on many subjects
was misleading, and really settled no question. 13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole
matter.] There is an implied reference to verse 12, Here the wise man concludes, since it is
useless to make a long book. Fear God.) Lit. “‘God fear.” The object of fear is put first
for the sake of emphasis. For this is the whole duty of man.] ‘The whole of man,” Hie
destiny depends on this, “ For that belongs to all men.” Luther.


172


es


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. XI,
Se Ee a oO
MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—7,


Incrrements To Earty Prrry,


The Royal Preacher now leaves speculation, as leading to no substantial result,
and turns, with better hopes, to practical matters. He had observed much of
this scene of man, and thought deeply upon the mysteries of life and destiny;
but he has no brilliant discovery of ultimate wisdom to announce which could
settle these questions, He is more inclined to give those few and simple counsels
which are far more profitable for himself and for all who hear him, A man
always returns gratefully to these when he has grown tired of the conflict of
thought and controversy. Thus the Epistles of “ Paul the Aged” deal more with
the ‘‘faithful sayings” than with the deep things of doctrine. Experience
teaches a man to rely only upon what is sure. Asa master in the school of
heavenly wisdom, Solomon calls his young friends around him, exhorting and
entreating them to early piety. He lays before them those motives and reasons
which commend the fear of God to youth, I. It is a Rational Duty. (Verse 1.)
The whole of what we understand by piety is made to consist of the remembrance
of our Creator. Nor is this too narrow a basis: it really includes all duty. The
fact that God is our Creator is the foundation fact upon which lies all what we
know and feel, or are capable of. Practically, to recognise our relationship to
God herein is the sum of all duty. If God is our Creator, He will make pro-
vision for our sustenance, for our preservation, for our spiritual education and
improvement. After the reflection, ‘“‘Thy hands have made me and fashioned
me,” how natural is the prayer, “ give me understanding that I may learn thy
commandments.” (Psa. cxix. 73.) To remember God is to keep Him always
before us, to be mindful of what He is, to obey His will, and to pay Him thanks,
It is like the son’s remembrance of his father’s home, bringing back tender
associations fresh to his mind, acting as a restraint from evil ways, and
strengthening the motives of filial duty. God as our Creator has certain rights
which we must acknowledge. The only rational service for man is to do what is
right in accordance with the relations in which he is placed. This makes early
piety the only consistent and reasonable course. All late coming to the know-
ledge of a God is a culpable forgetfulness. Though the mercy of God be not
hereby overtasked, there is in this tardy recognition of duty something ungra-
cious. 1. God has a right to our entire and life-long service. The obligation to the
loving service of our Creator never ceases for a moment, but always remains with
us. Why should we either heedlessly thrust that obligation aside, or keep it in
abeyance until we are sated with the world’s pleasures, and fondly hope to return
to it as a last resource when all else has failed? The service of God should
fill the whole area of duty, and the whole course of our time. The true and
complete model of the religious life—God’s ideal of humanity—is that which
was manifested in Christ, whose whole life was devoted to His ‘‘ Father’s busi-
ness.” In that life there were no violent changes, no painful struggles to recover
lost ground; but from the earliest dawn of thought and feeling, duty was accepted,
and the communication with Heaven kept open. The perfection of this model
should not appal us, for it is our duty to make as near an approach to it as pos-
sible. “The measure of Christ” is the limit to which we ought to tend,
though that limit stretches so far beyond us. 2. God has aright to our constant love
and gratitude. His character is such as to demand and win our love. He does not
use the instruments of terror to lash us into a tender regard for Himself, but
seeks to attract us by His loving kindness. Therefore, our love to Him should
be deep, simple, and free, as nature. In O.T. times, the love of such an
awful Being would be that of a distant, reverential love, represented by got aa


CHAP, XIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





(which is there the prevailing element) ‘the fear of God ”—that wholesome dread
of offendiag Him. But in the latter revelation, mediation comes to our help;
and in Christ, God is brought closer to our human heart and sympathy. We
are drawn “ with the cords of a man, with the bands of love.” (Hos. xi. 4.)
Hence our heart is under the stronger obligation to answer back to God. As we
were made in His image, we are capable of these high favours and solemn
duties, Gratitude is but one of the forms of love. It is love contemplating
favours, and grasping the hand that blesses, The energy of the living God still
goes forth, working in nature, Providence, and grace. Hence the demand upon
our gratitude is constant, and ever will be so while our relations with our Creator
last. It is irrational to deprive Him of this service during any part of our lives,
3. God has a right to be glorified in us. ‘*The heavens declare the glory of
God,” because they are obliged to obey those eternal conditions which he has
laid upon them. They have no power to resist His will, or to conspire against
universal order. But man glorifies God, not as conquered by force, but as sub-
missive to His will, Our nature should act as a mirror to the Divine nature,
reflecting His truth, His love, His righteousness. When we shine with that
heavenly light, thus falling upon our soul, God is glorified. We return, though
somewhat dim and impaired, the graces of His image. God has a right to find
in every man an answering mind and heart. To refuse the homage of these is
to expose ourselves to the penalty of Divine judgments, by which it is like-
wise possible for God to be glorified in us, Early piety avoids so disastrous a
risk, 4. It 1s not @ reasonable thing that we should give the mere dregs of our
life to God. It is not grateful conduct towards the Author of our being to
drive a close bargain with Him, practically asking the question, How little service
can we render consistent with our final safety? This is base ingratitude, sins
against every law of love, and lacks that nobility of spirit which is essential to
our true dignity. If we put off the service of God till it is late in our day of
life, and troubles thicken, and we are cut off from consolations elsewhere, we are
but offering to Him a miserable remnant—a wasted heritage—what is blind,
halt, and lame. Besides, we cannot be sure that even this shall be possible to us,
The most ardent and vigorous youth cannot reckon with certainty upon long life.
Hence, if delay shows a will most incorrect to heaven, it is also dangerous. The
uncertainty of life, as well as the reason of the thing, preaches early piety.
II. It Assuages the Sorrows of Age. (Verses 2—6.) In youth, the power
to taste pleasure is strong. The more complicated evils of life—sorrowful
regrets, the sense of loss and failure, dissatisfaction with the world—as yet lie
far in the future. But they will come, those “ evil days” that yield no pleasure,
The joyous light within will grow dim, darkening and rendering cheerless the
world without. The summer of life was not quite free from troubles, but these
were slight and passing as a summer shower. The clouds quickly opened
again, and there was the “clear shining after rain.” But it is far otherwise in
winter. The storm is gloomier and more sweeping now, and the brief pauses -
of it are but the preparation for a more merciless deluge of rain, for a louder
and more melancholy wailing of the winds. In old age, troubles come apace,
Even before this time there are evil days and the light begins to fail. (Verses
1, 2.) The description of old age given here is general, being in certain respects
true of all, but the picture is too dark and melancholy to represent the old age of
the righteous. The character which the writer had in view is evidently that of
a man of the world, who had lived for pleasure, who is now no longer able to
enjoy, and who has no consolations within to assuage his sorrows. Such, at
least, is the original of the picture ; yet it may be considered as aptly describing
the main features of old age, as they appear to an ordinary spectator. These
infirmities and calamities lead to the outer chambers of death, where man awaits
his conflict with the last enemy. 1. Death approaches the aged with many terrors.
174


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES, CHAP. Xi,
pana SL ES SS INS he Lg mL


To the young man whose strength is overwhelmed by violence, death is indeed
terrible. But to old age, death seems to come with all the refinements of slow
torture. (1.) There is the failure of those powers which carry out the purposes of
human activity, The arms, those “ keepers of the house,” so valuable for defence,
now begin to tremble, and are powerless against the foe. They were once able
to shape the stubborn material around to the mind’s purpose and design, but now
they have lost their cunning. The legs, which once ministered swiftly to the
will, stood firm against assault, imparted the sense of freedom, and gave a man
sovereign command over the whole area of his work, now bow themselves for
very feebleness, (2.) The failure of the nobler senses. The eyes—those windows
by which the soul looks upon the outer world—are darkened, for the old man
brings to them no lounger the power of seeing. The ears—one of the entrances for
intelligence, and ways of communication with the world outside—are closed, so that
they obstruct the paths of sound. The most familiar sounds are scarcely dis-
tinguished, the sweet music of speech at length dies away, and the old man
becomes completely shut up within himself. (3.) The failure of the powers of
enjoyment. ‘The power to taste all pleasures, coarse or refined, now fails.
Savoury meats and luscious entertainments now pall upon the sense. Singing
men and singing women cease to charm. (4.) The increased power of litile things
to annoy. The grasshopper is now a burden, the slightest obstacle is magnified
into an object of dread, and every little hill becomes a mountain of difficulty,
Short breath, dim eyes, failing limbs, give man a painful sense that he is
vanquished by nature. 2. The event of death to the aged suggests the most melan-
choly images to the mind. It is the destruction of the palace of the soul, with all
its appliances for defence and luxury. It is the breaking of the golden lamp of
life, It is the fatal arrest of that revolving wheel by which we draw what is to
us the water of life. The permanent cessation of motion in physical nature
means death. The exact meaning of this is, that the body as an organism
ceases to exist, There are other movements set up, even when the body lies still
in death. ‘The dust returns to the earth as it was.” Of the earthly side of
man’s nature, we have here an end, The grave is the goal of all that is mortal.
The body goes a progress from dust to dust, from a lowly origin to cold dis-
honour. 3. Without spiritual consolations the condition of old age is most lament-
able. The perpetual joy that reigns in the breast of the godly man can mitigate
the sorrows of old age. The worst evils become disarmed when we can afford
to set them at naught by the consciousness of strong consolation within. When
the eye grows dim, and the ear ceases to be charmed by sweet sounds, celestial
light shines inward with richer effulgence, and the soul listens to diviner har-
monies, With the spiritual man, the power to enjoy God increases as his human
strength decays, Godliness even modifies some of the physical conditions of age
by saving a man from the penalties of sensuality and vice. He who has learned
to preserve the honour of his body by temperance and sobriety of behaviour,
when he comes to grey hairs will not be such a deplorable ruin as the sinner who
has grown old in sin. Thus early piety assuages the sorrows of age, and raises
a joy within the breast which no calamities can dislodge. III. It Deprives of
Terror the Soul’s Inevitable Appearance before God. (Verse 7.) 1. To appear
before God is the destination of every human soul. The flesh ends in dust. Man
sinks down to that from which he arose, But man is made in the imageof God,
and therefore in the image of His immortality. There is a part of him that can
never die, While the flesh goes down to dust, there is another movement of the
spirit upward to God. Hach human soul must take that solemn journey to God.
However much it may dread the meeting, it cannot pass one side of Him, or in
any way avoid Him, but must go straight into His presence. In their “ long
home”—that other house of life—all men, for good or ill, must await God.


2. That appearance must bring the ungodly into conflict with the ees aad





CHAP. XI, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





ments. Sin leaves a mark upon the soul that death itself is not able to efface,
God “changes man’s countenance and sends him away,” but the spiritual
character of the soul cleaves to it still, Man in that other world must for ever
live with himself; and what he is, so shall be his condition. None but the pure
and holy can remain in God’s sight, and enjoy the comfort of His presence. If
a@ man has not answered the purpose intended by his Creator, he cannot be
approved, but must suffer the Divine displeasure. 3. The godly will come to
his Creator in peace. To be summoned into the presence of God is sufficiently
solemn, even for the purest and holiest of mankind. But such will come, not to
an offended, but to a reconciled God. The solemn meeting will be peace, and
prosperity, and endless refreshment. In the dread passage out of life into eter

nity, the good man learns tosay, “ Thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me.” And
when his spirit takes its everlasting flight unto Him who gave it, he shall find that
the light which was sown for him springs up into a harvest of blessedness, He
who has remembered his Creator in the days of his youth shall be able, in his
time of age and decay, to utter with confidence the prayer, “ Lord, remember
me.” Early piety is the only perfectly graceful conduct towards the Author of
our being, the most acceptable sacrifice, the best provision against the sorrows of
life, and the terrors of the last trial. The soul needs the strongest ground for
courage and hope when this present world vanishes, and there is nothing to
intercept its vision of the throne of God.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1. Practically considered, the
root of all moral evil is forgetfulness
of God.

Remembrance imparts to great facts
and impressions the beauty and influ-
ence of presence. Thus the truth of
God’s nature and our duty comes upon
us with fresh power.

The mention of the Creator, here,
shows the right which He has in us,
and our obligation.

Your own happiness is concerned in

our compliance with this counsel,
That happiness is unworthy of the
name which is disturbed by the remem-
brance of God. The contemplation,
and enjoyment, and service of the
Divine Being, must be the honour and
the blessedness of every rational nature.
There is a propriety, a beauty, and a
glory in early piety [ Wardlaw].

Of his last years this old man says,
“T have no pleasure in them.” Once
on a time existence was a gladness, and
the exuberant spirits overflowed in
shouts and songs of hilarious ditties.
So abundant was the joy of life, that,
like the sunbeams in a tropic clime, it
was needful to shade it, and with a
_ lattice of imagined sorsows

YY


and tragic tales, the young man ase
suaged the over-fervid beams of his
own felicity. Now there is no need
of such artificial abatements. It is
not easy for the old man to get a nook
so warm that it will thaw the winter
of his veins. Tosay nothing of a song,
it is not easy for him to muster up a
smile; and as he listens with languid
interest to the news of the day, and, in
subtile sympathy with his own failing
faculties, as he disparages this modern
time and its dwindled men, it is plain
that, as for the world, its avocations
and amusements, its interests and its
inhabitants, he has little pleasure in
them [Dr. J. Hamilton].


Verse 2, The conditions of external
nature, in their aspect towards ourselves,
are determined by our own state.
Nature is gay, or sad, or languishing,
according to the several moods of our
soul. When we lose the power of en-
joying it, the world itself may be said
to pass away.

As the light declines, the gayest
colours of life fade, and, at length, all
is reduced to a dreary blank. So it
shall be with the youth who vainly


hime ge AR ALI gt rls ita sei


neath Stones


_w


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; ECCLESIASTES.


LSD





depends upon the continuance of the
world’s happiness,

He only is preserved from bitter dis-
appointments and long regrets, who
seeks that light of heavenly joy which
increases while all other lights grow
dim.

We should use our mercies and pri-
vileges which are common to us with
other men, to wit, our bodily sight, our
reason, and all other comforts, which
may be signified by the lights here men-
tioned, so as we may be still mindful of
the decay and failing of them at death;
and often think with ourselves what a
comfort it will be to see by faith Him
that is invisible favourable to us, to be-
hold Christ the Sun of Righteousness
shining in mercy upon us, and to have
the Day-Star, His Spirit, arising in
our hearts never to set again, even
when all other lights and outward com-
forts will be darkened [Nisbet].

In youth, troubles come like rain,
which, though inconvenient while it
lasts, leaves no devastation behind.
But in age, troubles are like rain fall-
ing upon a flood already threatening
and which, at length, carries away man’?
into eternity (Psa. xc. 5),

Old age is a Tierra del Fuego—a
region where the weather never clears,
Once, when a trivial ailment came, the
hardy youth could outbrave it, and still
go on with his daily duties. But now,
every ailment is important, and they
are never like to end. The cough is
cured only to be succeeded by an
asthma, and when the tender eyes have
ceased to trickle, the ears begin to
tingle. Once upon a time a few drops
might fall into the brightest day, like a
settling shower in June; and there
were apt to be hurricanes, equinoctial
gales, great calamities, drenching and
devastating sorrows, But now, the
day is all one drizzle, and life itself the
chief calamity, and there is little space
for hope where the weather is all either
clouds or rain [Dr. J. Hamilton].


Verse 3. As each power and sense
fails, man descends by so many steps
into the grave,

By the failure of sight—the noblest


CHAP. XI,


of the senses—a man has already en-
tered “the valley of the shadow of
death.”

In old age, a man is compelled, in a
terribly real sense, to retire from the
world. Shut in from outward joys, he
must live with himself. How cheer-
less if he has no Divine Comforter !

When old age, with its ever-increas-
ing feebleness, draws on, “ the keepers
of the house ”—the once-powerful arms
that shielded the body from every hos-
tile assault, that triumphantly defended
it even in the shock of battle—“ shall
tremble.” Their force is gone; they
can no longer grasp a weapon, or strike
ablow. The “‘ strong men” too, that were
like the pillars of the building—the
firm and well-jointed limbs that bore
the body up, unconscious of its weight
—‘‘shall bow themselves,” and sink
down helpless beneath the load. ‘ And
the grinders shall cease because they
are few”—the toothless jaws shall at
length refuse their office—the very
mechanism by which the waste of na-
ture’s energies was wont to be repaired,
losing its power to act, and thereby ac-
celerating the progress of decay. “ And
those that look out of the windows ”—
the sentinels that kept watch in the
lofty towers, and whose function it-was
to descry and announce the approach
of danger—those bright and beaming
eyes that, erewhile, looked forth far and
wide on surrounding things, shall “ be
darkened” ; their range of vision will
become contracted, and° blind Isaac
shall not know his younger from his
elder son [Buchanan].

In the consciousness of failing
strength, the good man feels that he
belongs the more to God.


Verse 4. When hearing fails, a man
is shut in from more than half the world.
Even affection and love can only
minister to such by some other and
more difficult entrance.

But not only is the door of audience
closed, the door of utterance is also
shut. ‘The grinders have ceased,”
and with lips collapsed and organs all
impaired, it is an effort to talk; and
bending silently in on his own ati


CHAP. Xi.





the veteran dozes in his elbow-chair
the long summer hours when younger
folks are busy. But, if he dozes in the
day, he does not sleep at night, At the
voice of the bird, at the crowing of the
cock, although he does not hear it, he
ean keep his couch no longer. He
rises, but not because he has any work
to do, or any pleasure to enjoy [Dr. J.
Hamilton].

Aristotle hath observed it well, that
by hearing, the things of others are
made known to ourselves, as by our
voice and tongue we are able to make
known our own things to another. But
when old age cometh, the glory of this
most excellent work is humbled and
“brought low,” the anvil is worn, the
hammer is weak, the drum is unbraced,
the pure air is grown thick, the music
is marred, the doleful toll of the passing
bell being ready to sound, and to ring
out [Jermin].

He can afford to part with the de-
lights of music who has learned to
make melody in his heart,


Verse 5. He has neither enterprise
nor courage. Once it was a treat to
press up the mountain side and enjoy
the majestic prospect. Now there is
no high place which is not formidable ;
and even to the temple, it is a sad
drawback that it stands on Zion, and
that it is needful to “go up.” ‘ The
almond tree flourishes, and the grass-
hopper is burdensome.” Teaze him not
with your idle affairs. In that load of
infirmities he has enough to carry, and
though it be not the weight of a feather,
do not augment his burden who totters
under the load of many years. For
“desire has failed.” You can grapple
with heavy tasks; you can submit to
severe toil and protracted self-denial,
for you have a purpose to serve—you
have an end in view. But with him
there is no inducement, for there is no
ulterior [Dr. J. Hamilton].

The hoary head of old age—the
flourishing of the almond tree—
forebodes the dreary winter that shuts
the scene of mortal life.

In this present state—this earthly
house—man is but as a guest that

178


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


—-——- at


tarrieth for a night ; but in that “ house
of eternity”—that other world—to
which he is hastening, man has his
final and permanent habitation.

It should be our aim to make pre-
paration for our comfort, peace, and
joy, in that world where we shall dwell
the longest,


Verse 6. Though death involves the
destruction of the entire mortal frame,
yet it may begin in any one of the
great centres of life—the brain, the
heart, or the lungs. The “ silver cord”
of nervous matter may be “loosed,”
and the delicate mechanism by which
the body is supplied with blood and
air may be rendered useless.

Science has thrown much light upon
those wonderful processes by which
physical life is maintained. But its
greatest discoveries are chiefly the
clearing, and settling into more definite
form, of that knowledge which was
held in solution by mankind for ages.
Poetry has often anticipated science,
and the prophet comes before the
investigator.

The fountain of natural life remains
for the race, but the individual is only


permitted to draw from it for a short ©


time.

The bucket and the wheel are
broken; the water can no longer be
drawn; and instead of the busy and
lively scene that was wont to surround
the well’s mouth, all is solitude and
silence, the ground untrodden, the water
stagnant [ Wardlaw].


Verse 7. However fairly it may be
garnished, man lives but in a house of
clay whose end is dust.

The humble destination of the
mortal part of us should be a rebuke
to pride.

Some rationalistic expositors main-
tain that these words teach that the
soul loses its individuality, and is ab-
sorbed into God. But we are plainly
taught that man, as a spirit, returns
to God, not to perish by dispersion in
His infinity, but tobe judged. (Verse 14.)
Hence moral responsibility will re-
main, and this is not possible unless


ee et ee ee ee ee ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES


CHLP. XH,


a,


the conscious selfhood in each man
remains,

Natural likeness to God—for we are
spirit as well as flesh—makes us
capable of appearing before Him in a
spiritual world. But moral likeness
to Him can alone turn that solemn
necessity into blessedness.

We know not what mysterious things
await the spirit when it returns to
God ; but we know that the law of love


holds good, as the condition of happi-
ness, in all worlds,

Our spirits are God’s free gift, and
therefore all the powers and faculties
thereof ought to be employed to the
honour of the Giver. (Rom. xi. 36.)
He is to be depended on, and acknow-
ledged for the preservation of them
(Job. x. 12); and all crosses upon
body and spirit to be submitted unto.
(Heb. xii. 9.) [WVisbet.]


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses $—11,
THe VinvicaTion oF a Tru Reitcious TEACHER.


The Church, though guided and informed by the Spirit of God, must have
human teachers. Human words, written or spoken, are necessary to convey the
suggestions of inspiration. Physical nature can be known by observation and
research ; but we can only know a person when he pleases to reveal himself by
speech. God has spoken in past ages to minds fitted to receive and convey His
truth. He who affirms that he possesses true spiritual wisdom, and speaks on
behalf of God, puts forward a high claim. Upon what grounds can such a claim
be vindicated ? Solomon here answers this question for himself, and the claims
of all true religious teachers admit of the like justification. These claims may
be examined as they have reference to the teacher himself, or to his work. He
may be vindicated, therefore: I. By the Worth of His personal Qualifications.
God has always chosen the purest and the noblest natures to convey His truth to
mankind, The men who instruct us in the pages of the Written Word were fit
instruments for so high an office; and all who presume to teach the Church the
will of God must be sufficienily endowed in mind, and heart, and strength of


purpose. Every true spiritual teacher should partake of the qualities which the
author of this book claims for himself. 1. He has the gift of spiritual wisdom
(ver. 9). He is in the possession of truths which lie not idly in bis mind, but


are quick and powerful, influencing the heart and life. To have wisdom is the
one thing needful for the conveyance of it. God must first speak to the soul of a
teacher before he can instruct the Church in words of living power. He can
teach the people knowledge as long as he continues to utter, not only the old
truths, but also the latest things which he has heard from God. This imparts
the freshness of the morning] to what may be, in reality, as old as time itself.
2. He has the power and impulse to teach wisdom. He is not content to be wise
for himself ; he must teach the people. This requires special talents, and a dis-
position towards the work. (1) The power of conveying knowledge in a portable
form. ‘‘ He gave gooa heed, and sought out, and set in order many proverbs.”
These are compact and terse expressions of truth—fulness and wealth in little
compass. It is sometimes an advantage to be able to exchange the scattered and
cumbrous possessions of the mind for their golden equivalents of thought. We
owe much to those who have expressed the wisdom of many in brief and pointed
sayings. (2.) The power of conveying knowledge in an agreeable form. “ Accept-
able words,” not of necessity to all, but to the true children of wisdom. There
are those who are “of the truth,” and who therefore recognise the features of
truth as by an unerring instinct. To such the words of wisdom are pleasant, and
find welcome entrance and commendation. (3.) The power of high moral eee
u2


sHaP. x1,  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.








noe


The Royal Preacher had a high moral purpose to urge him to his task. He cob |


lected the maxims and chief things of wisdom, not for intellectual display or
recreation, but in order that he might awaken in the souls of men the love of
truth and the sense of duty. Such a purpose made him thoroughly in earnest.
He announced no curious speculations, remote from the true interests of mans
but, in words of solemn earnestness, set forth the simple facts of experience and
of duty. The religious teacher has the strongest reason for earnestness, because


he is concerned with eternal verities which will have untold significance when the |


world has passed away. All genuine teachers of the Church of God know and
feel great spiritual truths, and tell them forth from the abundance of their heart,
But further; the true religious teacher is vindicated. II. By the Verification of
His Work. He who is endowed with the necessary qualities of mind, and heart,


and earnest purpose, must be a successful leader of the thought and effort of |


God’s people. Given such a teacher, and we can predict the results of his work.
But we can reverse the process, and from the nature of the work, judge the
worth and fitness of the teacher. Thus we are capable of verifying what is sub-
mitted to us as truth. We have a stronger foundation than mere authority for
the essential facts of our spiritual nature. Even Christ Himself was not above
appealing to that standard of truth which is preserved in every pure mind and
heart. To all such, His sayings were true. We have, in this section, certain
marks by which we can assure ourselves of the truth of what is delivered to us.
1, The teaching should be conformed to the standard of eternal truth. ‘* That which
was written was upright; even words of truth.” In the physical world, there
are fixed directions—such as the level and the vertical. In like manner, in the
spiritual world, there is a normal and standard of right. Whatever is conformed
to this shall live through the ages; and whatever is not so conformed, men will,
in the course of time, allow most willingly to die. Conscience, enlightened by the
Spirit of God, has a correct eye to discover what is right and true in morals and
religion, And whatever offends, that eye cannot be allowed long to endure,
2. The teaching should have the power of penetrating the heart. (ver. 11.) Like
* soads’’ and ‘ nails,” spiritual truth has the power of penetrating the heart of
the children of God, and there fixing itself. Divine Revelation, above all, has
this wonderful property. Whatever in the literature of the world is deepest, and
touches most our inmost part, is derived from that Blessed Book. All the rest,
however beautiful or worthy in itself, does but gild and play upon the surface of
our souls. If our hearts are sincere, and open to spiritual impressions, they can
thus judge of the claims of any teacher to be the messenger of God’s truth. 3,
The teaching should commend itself to the children of wisdom. It should find a
welcome in all sincere and upright souls. Wisdom is sure «oc be “ justified of her
children.” She speaks those things which they know to be true to their own
nature, instincts, and longings. 4. The teaching should be in harmony with all
previous truth, ‘ Which are given from one shepherd.” However diversified the
utterances of truth by different minds, that truth is at one with itself. The light
may be coloured by the medium through which it passes, or broken up into re-
fractions, yet these can be traced to the same pure and single light of heaven,
The Bible is an instance of such unity, because, though the work of many
authors, it is pervaded by one purpose, and bears the impress of one presiding
mind. In the successive stages of revelation, the truth is advanced further, but
it is in perfect continuity with all that has preceded. Thus, by these several
marks, the work of the true teachers of the Church may be verified, and proved
to be really the work of God. Their claim to be heard may be supported upon
the surest evidence. Even the Bible itself cannot be regarded as so securely
resting upon authority as to set aside the necessity of enquiring into the nature
and morality of its doctrines and precepts. Our spiritual nature answers to
these, that they are right, pure, and true. Strong as the Scripture is in the
180






)


an


Sng pl eS


HOMILETIC COMMEN TARY: ECCLESIASTES.
a


CHAP, XYi.


support of external evidence, it is subsimely strong in the witness which it bears


to itself. These “ words of the wise ”
standard of rizht, by their power to to
adaptation to all the necessities


can be verified by their conformity to the
uch the heart and conscience, and by their
of the soul.


The authors are many, but they


have contributed to form one book, which conveys a perfect unity of impression


to every spiritual mind.
is, that it has


It has the characteristic of every true book, and that
one central idea—one principal theme.


That idea is one of


surpassing greatness, for it concerns the most important and lasting interests of


mankind,


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.


Verse 8. These words are repeated
in order to show that all human en-
deavour and greatness are vain, if the
silent dust is all that remains of man.

The hand of death will lift from
before the eyes of the dying the veil of
delusive fascination that covered the
emptiness of earthly joys; and this
solemn truth, inscribed upon them all,
will appear in its dread reality, and
be felt in all its bitterness by the
disappointed and foreboding heart
[ Wardlaw].

He who sees the vanity of life, is
best prepared to learn the fear of God,
and the ways of duty (ver 13).

This is but a half-truth, Human
existence cannot be considered as wholly
vain when it is regarded in the light
of the hereafter,


Verse 9, ~All who possess true wis-
dom have necessity laid upon them to
teach it. The wisest cannot commu-
micate his wisdom by some sudden
influence. He must take upon himself
the humble duty of teaching.

The knowledge of Divine things is
the only stable foundation for piety.
If the feelings are not fed from hence,
they do but waste and consume the
energy of the soul.

Instead of hiding in his own breast
those treasures of wisdom and know-
ledge he had acquired—instead of treat-
ing them as a mere intellectual luxury,
or of selfishly hoarding them up for his
own behoof—he was at pains to turn
them to account, in the way of pro-
moting the great interests of morality
and religion, . . . This was nota


subject on which to speak at random.
It demanded something better than
hasty and superficial thoughts. He
laid himself out, accordingly, to dis-
cover, by profound meditation, by prac-
tical aud persevering study, the best
and most appropriate things that could
be said; and to condense and adjust
them into those terse and pointed
sentences which are usually desig-
nated by the name of proverbs
[ Buchanan].

The reason of things lies in little
compass, if the mind could at any time
be so happy as to light upon it. All
philosophy is reduced to a few prin-
ciples, and those principles comprised
in a few propositions. And as the
whole structure of speculation rests
upon three or four axioms, or maxims,
so that of practice also bears upon
a@ very small number of rules. And
surely there was never yet any rule
or maxim that filled a volume, or
took up a week’s time to be got by
heart. The truth is, there could be no
such thing as art or science, could not
the mind of man gather the general
natures of things out of the numberless
heaps of particulars, and then bind them
up into such short aphorisms or pro-
positions, so that they may be made
portable to the memory, and therefore
become ready and at hand for the
judgment to apply, and make use of, as
there ehall be occasion [South].


Verse 10. The truth may often be
unpalatable, but it should not be so
expressed as to give offence to those
who hear it. The most ea eat


CHAP. XIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES





can always be so combined with others
as to produce a grateful impression.
In the doctrines of grace, and mercy,
and hope for man, the true teacher of
the Church has abundant material for
imparting sweetness to his message.

Every faithful instructor of God’s
people maintains a strict regard for
truth, while he seeks, on the other hand,
to make it lovely in the eyes of man-
kind.

The guidance of inspiration did not
render unnecessary the activity of
genius in the writers of the Sacred
Books. They were able to clothe the
truth in forms of beauty, and with all
the agreeable diversity of their several
gifts.

There were two objects at which he
especially aimed—the one, to set down
only that which was upright, even
words of truth; the other, to find ac-
ceptable words in which to convey his
thoughts. He knew how often the
most weighty and precious lessons were
rendered utterly distasteful, and even
offensive, by the unsuitable language
in which they were expressed. . . .
He understood human nature. He
knew that many will be led who will
not be driven; that it is often very
possible to conciliate where it would be
hopeless to attempt to coerce; that
rudeness seldom fails to aggravate and
embtter the enmity and opposition which
gentleness would soothe and sweeten—
nay, that so apparently a small matter
as mere style—the propriety, the ele-
gance, the felicity of the form of speech
in which a truth is delivered—will,
with many minds, gain for it a place
and power which, in their case at least,
it would never otherwise have acquired
[ Buchanan].

Writing gives a permanence to truth,
and preserves it trom the wrongs of
time. It makes the progress of
humanity possible by securing the
results of all past victories over
ignorance,

We owe much to the gifted men who
have made great truths permanent for
us in forms of beauty. They prepare
and spread the repasts of the mind and
soul.

182


Speaking is but like a burning coal,
which giveth heat and some light near
at hand; but writing is like a shining
lamp, which giveth light afar off
[Jermin].


Verse 11. All true words of lasting
significance to man have power to enter
the depths of the soul and to fasten
themselves there,

As the Bible dwells upon the subject
of all human anxieties, and speaks in
the language of human experience and
sympathy, its words have a pre-emirent
power in piercing the heart.

The power of a book depends, not
entirely upon its own worth, but also
upon the condition of the reader.
There are states of mind and heart
in which the words of the Bible
come home to us with overwhelming
power.

St. Cyprian, therefore, saith: take
not those things which are eloquent,
and serve to delight the ears, but those
that are strong aad powerful to work
upon the heart, to wound and gall the
conscience, to rouse a carnal -ecurity.
Such goaas were the words of St. Peter,
when they that heard them were pricked
in their hearts, and cried out to Peter
and the rest of the apostles, “* Men and
brethren, what shall we do?” Of
these goads, that is true, which from
heaven was spoken to Saul, “ It is hard
for thee to kick against the pricks”
[Jermin].

How often has it thus happened that
some single sentence of Scripture—
heard, perhaps, in some sermon, or
read in some book, of which nothing
else whatever is remembered—has been
so fixed, in a moment, in the sinner’s
mind that he could not get rid of it ?
He tried to forget it; he wandered, it
may be, all over the world, in the hope
and with the desire of being able to
free himself from the disquietude it
created ; but the nail could not be drawn
out | Buchanan].

The words of the wise, who have
spoken true things concerning the
deepest interests of man, though they
are many and diversified, are per-
vaded by a spirit of unity. They


an ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.


a


are but separate beams of one central
light.

The “shepherds” who have taught
the Church by their words contained
in the Scripture, though they lived in
different ages, and belonged to widely
diverse classes of society, have pro-
duced a volume which, in the highest
sense, is one Book. It is one, not by an
outward, but by an organic, unity. One
living power fills and infurms every part.

But this unity of Scripture, where
is it? From what point sball we be-
hold and recognize it? Surely from
that in which those verses (Eph. i. 9,
10) will place us, when we regard it as


CHAP. XII





the story of the knitting anew the
broken relations between the Lord
God and the race of man ; of the bring-
ing the First-begotten into the world,
for the gathering together all the scat-
tered and the sundered in Him; when
we regard it as the true Paradise Re-
gained—the true De Civitate Dei—
even by a better title than those noble
books which bear these names—the
record of that mystery of God’s will
which was working from the first to the
end “that in the dispensation of the
fulness of times He might gather to-
gether in one all things in Christ
[Trench].


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 12—14.
PaRTING COUNSELS,


We have here the parting counsels of one whose native ability, careful culture,
long and varied experience, and spiritual wisdom, gave him the right to claim a
hearing for his weighty words. He does not speak as a young and untried man, who,
lacking experience, is yet able to reason from principles, and therefore gives
advice with little hesitation. His counsels are not a brilliant intellectual effort,
forcing attention upon itself; they arise rather from a heart which had endured
the pain of conflict with temptation, doubt, and failure, The language is that
of affectionate entreaty, and is concerned with those few and simple truths which
age bequeaths to youth as the only heritage of any enduring value. The wisest
man, when he draws near to the end of life, haa little else to say than to commend
old and familiar truths. Therefore, the Royal Preacher dwells upon the folly of
useless struggles after the unattainable—the claims of duty—and the solemnities
of the Judgment. I. Leave Fruitless Speculation. (Verse 12.) The state-
ments of this Book touch many mysteries, in whose mazes the mind might easily
be lost; but their chief use is to admonish the reader against the actual
evils of life, and to stir him up to duty. Those speculations which only minister
to curiosity are regarded as possessing two fatal disadvantages. 1. They do not
reach a final settlement of any question. ‘** Of making many books there is no end.”
Literature is a necessity of every civilized nation. It preserves the best thoughts
and sentiments of their wisest men, and is the very soul of that society in which
it was produced; As long as there is mental activity among a people, their litera-
ture must be ever growing, Each age, also, claims and requires a different
representation of truth, for the simple reason that it is different, in several
respects, from every former age. Thus the making of many books cannot come
to an end, for the mental activity of mankind must continue. But, in another
sense, books do not come to an end. Many of them deal in curious speculations
regarding the nature, state, and destiny of man. However confident their authors
may have been in thecertainty of their conclusions, or however numerous the readers
who have yielded their assent, the eternal questioning comes up again and again,
and nothing is settled, The old mysteries are inquired into by successive ages of
thinkers. They are viewed from every side, and set in various lights of argument
and illustration ; yet still mankind are as far as ever from their perfect solution.
It is true that the Bible admits these mysteries; yet the Bible shows ier the


CHAP. XIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.





=,
|


mind of man may rest in safety and peace, and what is the proper attitude of the
soul until such time as Gd shall be pleased to give more light. The literature
of the world upon speculative subjects reaches no certain conclusion; yet it will
continue to make the unavailing attempt as long as human society lasts. It is
not wise to allow the mind to be unduly occupied with what is so unsatisfactory,
especially if hereby we are drawn aside from our plain duty and constancy of our
faith in the immutable things. 2. They are a wearisome exercise. “ Much study
is a weariness of the flesh.” This is true of the pursuit of ordinary knowledge.
Nothing can be gained but by severe and constant exercises of the mind. Natural
indolence must be overcome, the fear of difficulties overmastered, and all the
anxieties of inquiry endured. The thinker has to pay the penalty of a weary
brain and exhausted energies. When the knowledge gained is certain, and pro-
fitable for use or for delight, there is a grateful recompense. But how sad the
fate of him who endures all the labour and anxiety for some pitiful and contro-
verted conclusion! He wearies himself upon a profitless and endless task,
II. Make Practical Use of what is Certainly Known. Solomon could have
written at greater length upon the subjects on which he treated. He draws not to
an end from lack of wealth in thought or language, But why go on? Life is
too short for prolonged exercises of this kind. Duty is at hand, and there are
stern realities to face. The reader is exhorted to give his attention to the ** words
of the wise,” for they deal with those eternal truths which most concern man to
know. They are truths not framed to satisfy the curious and unprofitable
appetites of the mind, but to touch the heart, to rouse up the conscience, and to
teach man his duty, What is thus certainly known is sufficient for every practical
purpose. 1. Jt ts sufficient to guard us against real evils. The Preacher has
yet this to say, ‘“ By these, my son, be admonished.” These words of the wise
give warning against the greatest evils to which man is exposed. ‘There are many
calamities which afflict man in his fortune or his flesh, but these are iight and
passing when compared with the crushing and lasting evils that may fall upon
the soul. These are the only real calamities. To lie under the displeasure of
God is the awful disaster, The Psalmist, speaking of the testiuonies of God,
says, “ Moreover by them is thy servant warned.” No long and laborious study
is required to learn what those evils are which we ought to dread most and to
avoid. Unlike the speculations of the natural mind, the whole case of our spiritual
danger may be put before us in few words. 2. /¢t is sufficient to teach us what
ts our highest good. The “conclusion of the whole matter” is given in few and
earnest words. They speak of duty to the Highest, and this is all that concerns
man to know. When the whole of man’s existence is taken into account, this
alone has any real importance for him. How loved, how honoured once, avails
him not if, after life is ended, he dves not rest in the smile of God. Therefore,
our only concern is to learn our duty, that we might not be ashamed when we
come to appear before Him. Such knowledge is not too wonderful tor us, but is
obvious and familiar, easy and intelligible. It may be considered as consisting of
two elements, (1.) Right feelings towards God. ‘Fear God.” The Scripiure
lays great stress upon the condition of the heart, because from it proceed the
“issues of life.” The streams cannot be pure and sweet if the fountain is defiled.
The heart determines what a man really is, for it is the origin and spring of moral


action. The whole state of the feelings towards God is here spoken of under the |


name of fear, which (in the O.T. especially) is a word of wide signification. It
is that feeling which both fears and loves—that filial awe which trembles lest it
should offend, and yet knows no servile dread while it dwells under the shaduw
of a Father's love. It is not the fear of ignorance which trembles at the thought
of unknown terrors, but that tntel/iyent year which arises from a due recognition
of the relations in which we staud to God. It springs from the earnest realities
of our moral situation. and is that cisposition of the soul by which aluae we can
184


ata eae








i
|
,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP, XIl,
CI gee an en eee eee ee ey


walk humbly with God. 2. Practical Obedience. ‘Keep His commandments.”
Right feelings towards God must issue in obedience. Regard for another—for
his person, for his rights, for the claims of his affection towards us, disposes us to
a ready and loving service. Unless feeling does spend and employ itself in duty,
it uses the power of the soul to no purpose, and only deceives us with the semb-
lance of goodness. Uprightness in the life isthe only infallible proof of upright-
ness in the heart. The commandments of God are the authoritative statements
of our duty to all that is above, around, and beneath us. They have regard to
ail what we ought both to know, to feel, and to do, They are the statutes of
God’s kingdom, which all His subjects are bound to obey. According to the
state of our heart, we feel them either a painful restraint, or the very charter of
our liberty. Love to God turns them into a delight. When He enlarges our
heart, we can run the ways of His commandments. The two great command-
ments of the Law speak of nothing else but right feelings, because, if these are
present, right practice is sure to follow. There is a true ‘invariable sequence”
in moral things. ITI. Recognise the Fact of Human Accountability. (Verse 14.)
* For God shall bring every work into judgment.” ‘The fucure is thus brought
into view in order to strengihen the motives for obedience. The Judgment to
come is rendered necessary by the fact of human accountability, As certain as
there is moral disorder in the world, and there is a God over all of infinite justice
and purity, so certain is it that He will interfere with the course of human affairs,
summon men before His bar, and assign to each his proper portion and place,
If men are responsible to God, it is necessary that at some time their account
shovic be rendered. However remote from Him we may feel ourselves to be, we
shal} have to come to Him for reckoning. The doctrine of the future Judgment
is intended to influence our moral feeling and practice. This fact of human
accountability, pointing as it does to the Judgment, should be practically recog-
nised. 1. Because tt raises and ennobles the idea of life. We may regard the fact,
that we shall have to appear before God for Judgment, as a disadvantage—a
source of dread and alarm. And so it must be, if we have resisted His will, and
thus come under condemnation. But the fact of our accountability renders it
possible for us, through the mercy of God, to obtain the reward of the righteous.
Thus a prospect is opeved, so sublime that the thought of it gives a supreme value
to our life. The idea of Judgment implies that man shall live in a future state
—that his individuality shall remain. This thought transfigures our poor human
life, redeems it from the imputation of vanity, and our condition from meanness,
Our inheritance is not briet life, but eternity. 2. Jt acts as a wholesome moral
restraint, {tis true that love in its highest moods does not think of restraint,
but delights in its own freedom. Yet restraint is salutary, for it aids and guards
weak virtue; and the highest virtue may be prevented thereby from the dangers
of a fall) The thought that evil shall surely be punished is the first motive that
urges us to righteousness—the higher and nobler motive comes afterwards, Also,
the thought that even good actions shall come under the scrutiny of the Judge
of all, tends to make us careful. Since the whole of our conduct shall be tested,
we should look well to the purity of our motives, 3. Jt casts the soul entirely
upon God. Krom His justice we can have no confident hope that we should see
salvation, but rather we have much to fear, The chastisements of nature, and in
the course of Providence, seem inflexible in their awful regularity. We have
really no sure refuge but in the infinite charity of God. To please Him by our
loving obedience should be the great endeavour of our life; for if we have this
testimony, we may cherish a humble confidence that He will receive usin peace.
Before the dread tribunal we all alike stand in need of mercy. If we can cast
our souls upon God, even * these things to come ”—though so terrible in them-
selyes—ca"not separate us from His love, which for us in Gospel times “ is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.” 186








GHAP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES.
SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES.
Verse 12. The Preacher doth


wisely exhort us that we prefer saving
studies, which are easily perceived,
everlasting in their benefit, before those
the search whereof is infinite, and the
end whereof at last is only weariness
and misery [Jermin].

“My son.”—The voice of warning
should have the style and tone of
affection, and have regard to the
ultimate good of him to whom it is
addressed,

He who listens to admonition is one
of the children of wisdom.

In the study of the Scripture, men
should not aim at their comfort only,
but mainly that they may receive clear
information and warning of their sin
and hazard, the true remedy thereof,
and the way to attain to it; for this is
one use to be made of this Book, and
consequently of the rest of Scripture
[Nisbet].

There is a deceitful literature of the
world which attempts to deal with the
highest questions that concern hu-
manity. It refuses the teaching of Scrip-
ture regarding the nature, the chief
good, and the destiny of man. It re-
jects the supernatural aid of faith,
which imparts a new faculty to man, by
which alone he can have consciousness
of truths beyond the dull and prosaic
scenes of this mortal life. There is no
reason why such unwarranted specula-
tions should not go on for ever. They
never reach to any certainty on which
the soul of man can rest. Hence men
become dissatisfied with them, and in
their efforts to obtain something better,
only substitute one folly for another.
This false wisdom, admired as _philo-
sophy in one age, becomes the derision
and scorn of the next.

Whatever is built upon God’s truth
shall stand. All other foundations
shall be removed when the storm arises;
and though men may presume to build
upcn thsm again, yet their work is
Gestined likewise to perish.

Thetruthsof religion which bear upon

184


practical duty are few and simple; but
the speculaticas of the human mind,
unaided by JJivine light, are endless
and confused Hence he who engages
in their stvdy wearies himself in a
fruitless tas},

The study of the Word of God en-
gages the ettention, but it gives rest to
the soul. All who love His law have
great peace,


Verse 13. This conclusion is not the
summing ap of the reflections in this
Book, but rather the practical end
which * The Preacher” had in view.
He is now coming to the chief point
which concerns all.

* The conclusion of the whole mat-
ter is one of those “ nails ” and “ goads”
by which “The Preacher” endeavours
to affect the heart and conscience.

The fear of God delivers the soul
from every other fear—from the anxie-
ties of restless inquiry—from distrust
and suspicion of God—from murmur-
ing and discontent.

To fear God is in our hearts to
serve and honour Him; to keep His
commandments is the outward de-
monstration of this inward devotion, in
the conversation and actions of our
lives to show ourselves [Jermin].

The keeping of the commandments is
inseparably connected with the fear of
God, because all true feeling is bound
by a pleasing necessity to engage itself in
the service of its object.

freconciliation to God is like enter-
ing the gate cf a beautiful avenue
which conducts to a splendid mansion.
But that avenue is long, and in some
places it skirts the edge of dangerous
cliffs ; and, therefore, to save the
traveller from falling over where he
would be dashed to pieces, it is fenced
all the way by a quickset hedge. That
hedge is the commandments. They
are planted there that we may do our-
selves no harm, But, like the fence of
the fragrant brier, they regale the pil-
grim who keeps the path, and they only


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ECCLESIASTES. CHAP. Xi





kurt him when he tries to break
through [Dr. J. Hamilton).

In the fear of God, and obedience to
His will lies all that has any permanent
value for man. Everything else will
pass away, but this has an enduring
substance.

It is not only the whole duty, but
the whole honour, and interest, and
happiness of man { Wardlaw] :


Verse 14 ‘God shall bring:”
loath is guilty man to come into judg-
ment, and therefore he crieth to the
hills to cover him, to the mountains to
fall upon him ; but mountains and hills
and all shall forsake him, and God
shall bring him to it. The best way,
therefore, is of ourselves beforehand to
go unto His judgment, and in our own
hearts to arraign ourselves before God,
for that is which will make His 4udg-
ment to be comfortable to us [Jermin].

The fact that God often comes into
judgment with man, in the course of
human history, is included in these
words, But the future Judgment is
chiefly intended. because the spirit


returns to God that its true character
may be revealed, and its true place
assigned.

The future judgment will diseover
the realities of human conduct, for #
will proceed upon perfect knowledge.

There will be such a development of
character as shall justify the Supreme
Judge, and the judgments He pro-
nounces and executes, in the consciences
of the condemned, and certify His un-
impeachable righteousness to angels and
men [ Wardlaw].

The Judgment will bring to light
both the hidden things of good und
of evil—the secret deeds of shame, and
tne kind offices of retiring and modest
worth,

In the light of the solemn account
which we must all render to God, the
life of man becomes as a seed from
which a mighty forest is to spring,

The Christian lays the comfort to
his heart that judgment is committed
to the Son of Man. He knows that
he has a Judge who can be “touched
with the feeling” of his ‘ infirmities.”
The purest soul needs this assuranes.





HOMILETICAL


COMMENTARY


ON THE


SONG OF SOLOMON


BY


THOMAS ROBINSON, D.D.,


Author of “Suggestive and Homiletic Commentary on the Epistle to the
Romans,” “Homiletical Commentary on the Book of Job,’ “Wanderings
in Scripture Lands,” “The Evangelists and the Mishna,” &c.


Printed in the United States


FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK anp LONDON





PREFACE,





THE following work, like its predecessor on Job, was originally intended

for the Van Doren Series. According to the design of the under-
taking of which it now formsa part, its object is neither critical nor exegetical,
but homiletical; the projector’s aim being rather to supplement existing
Commentaries, and to afford a practical aid to preachers who are supposed,
more or less, to possess them. The work has, therefore, been thrown into
such a shape as was thought most likely to meet the requirements of those
who, with comparatively little opportunity for study, are called to dispense
the Word of Life. .


While this, however, was the main object, the Author has at the same
time endeavoured to make his book as readable and profitable as possible to
the private Christian. He has, therefore, introduced comparatively little in
the way of critical elucidation of the text; and, as in the case of his work
on Job, has given to such matter a place by itself at the end of the com-
mentary.


The author, as far as he was able, has availed himself of the labours of
those who have preceded him in the same field. Their views, however, in
regard to the meaning or application of the text, will in general only be
found among the appended notes. His own views, which are given rather in
the commentary than in the notes, he has endeavoured to form, after giving
the text the most careful consideration he was able, independently of what
he has found in the numerous commentators consulted. His aim and
desire has been, first to ‘receive of the Lord,’ and then to ‘ deliver’ to His
Church.

Of a book like the Song of Solomon, there will naturally be found a great
diversity of interpretation. The exact meaning and application of a passage
intended by the royal penman, or by the Holy Spirit who inspired him, it
must necessarily be difficult in many cases to determine. This will no doubt
be generally obtained in proportion as we may be under the teaching of the


av PREFACE.





same Spirit. ‘ For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit
of a man which is in him? Even so the th: ngs of God knoweth no man, but
the Spirit of God which is in him’ (1 Cor.11. 11). To obtain such teaching,
however, we require to occupy a very humble place: ‘ Thou hast hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes’
(Matt. xi. 25). It is, however, not only in reference to single passages that
a great variety of opinions is often found to exist. The same variety is found
im reference to the nature and object of the book itself; some, though few,
strangely regarding it as merely treating of earthly matters, with only a
moral object in regard to the conjugal relation (the profano-erotic or ethical
view), while the great bo ly of expositors, both ancient and modern, Jewish
and Christian, have regarded it as a Divine allegory, exhibiting spiritual
things under the veil of natural ones. Here, however, we again find diver-
sity. First, as to the ground or basis of the allegory; whether it is based
upon an actual occurrence —a historical basis ; and if so, what? Or whether
it is formed upon an ideal transaction conceived by the poet himself under the
Spirit’s inspiration. Secondly, as to the spiritual meaning of the allegory;
whether eaperimental in relation to the individual believing sou! (the
mystico-spiritual sense) ; or doctrinal, in relation to the Church as a whole
(the mystico-doctrina/) ; or prophetical, whether in relation to the Church
(the mystico-prophctical) ; or to Christ Himself (the ¢ypico-Messixnic); or
hist-rica/, iu relation to the Church or nation of Israel (the mystico-political).
To most of these applications of the allegory, few of which, perhaps, are
entirely exclusive of the rest, reference will be found in the notes appended
to the commentary.


The author’s own view as to the basis of the allegory will be seen, both
from the commentary and the introduction, to be rather that of Detrrzscu,
ZocKLeR, and others; according to which Solomon is regarded as having,
during an excursion into the country, in which he was attended by his
nobles, met unexpectedly with Shulamite while engaged in rural pursuits, and
struck with her charms, having asked and obtained her hand, brought her to
the palace as his bride. The incident, however, he considers to have been
probably rather a conception of the inspired poet than an actual fact, or at
least possessing but a very slight substratum of reality; a conception brar-
ing a strong resemblance to that of one of our own English poets, who, in
one of nis Oriental Eclogues, written doubtless without the slightest reference
to the Song of Solomon, makes Abbas, a Georgian king, to have done
exactly the same with Abra, a shepherdess, what Solomon is supposed,
according to this view, to have done with Shulamite. This view the author


PREFACE. v





conceives to be more probable than either the older and more common
one, which makes the basis of the poein to be the marriage of Solomon
with Pharaoh’s daughter; or the more modern one of Ewarp and others,
adopted also by Professor Gopet, of Neufchatel, which makes Solomon to
have carried off by force the object of his passion, and to hare taken her to
his palace, where he endeavoured in vain to detach her affection from the
youthful shepherd to whom she was already betrothed.


That the form is a sacred allegory setting forth, under an external veil, the
love, union, and communion existing between Jehovah or Messiah on the one
hand, and the Church or people of God on the other, with allusion to points
in the history both of the Church and its Head, is the view that, unde:
various modifications, has been generally adopted both by Jews and Chris. -
tians.


That such a view is the correct one, is rendered the more certain by the
fact that similar allegorical or parabolic representations are not uncommon
in the Scriptures; and that everywhere, both in the Old and New
Testaments, the relation between God, or more properly the Messiah, and
His Church or covenant people, is exhibited under the figure of a marriage:
the former being frequently styled the Husband or Bridegroom, and the
latter the Bride. In the sixteenth chapter of kizekiel, for example, the
Jewish church or nation is represented as having been found by Jehovah as
an outcast infant in the open field, rescued and reared, adorned and beau-
tified by Him, and ultimately taken into union with Himself as His Bride.
‘And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I
said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live; yea, I said unto thee
when thou wast in thy blood, Live. I have caused thee to multiply as the
bud of the field, and thou hast increased and waxen great, and thou art come
to excellent oraaments: thy breasts are fashioned, and thine hair is grown,
whereas thou wast naked and bare. Now, when I passed by thee, and looked
upon thee, behold, thy time was the time of love; and I spread my skirt
over thee, and covered thy nakedness: yea, I sware unto thee, and entered
into a covenant with thee, saith the Lord God, and thou becamest mine ’


(Ezek. xvi. 6—8).


Lang, in his valuable work on Modern Egypt, observes that, from the
character of the Moslem songs sung at the Zckrs, or special religious services
composed for the purpose, and intended only to havea spiritual sense, though
not understood in that sense by the generality of the people, he cannot have
any doubt as to the design of Solomon’s Song. And although Sir William


wi PREFAGE.





Jones speaks doubtfully in reference to the existence of sacred allegory in
ordinary Oriental poetry, Dr. Krrto remarks that the practice of setting forth
spiritual subjects under the emblem of love is not confined to Arabian
countries, but is found in Persia, India, and among the Rabbinical Hebrews ;
and gives it as his opinion that the allegorical or spiritual interpretation of
the Song of Solomon is not only the right one, but the only possible one;
and that, if the poem have any historical basis, the circumstances are so
modified as to suit the spiritual purpose of the allegory, but would have
been most unsuitable in a real history.


The reader will observe, that like some other expositors, I have divided
the Song into parts, and these again into separate scenes. There can be no
reasonable doubt that, while the remotest idea of performance is of course
entirely out of the question, the poem is scenic or dramatic in its structure ;
exhibiting, as it does, without formally announcing it, a variety of characters
in dialogue, in various situations, and under various circumstances; white,
in the general presence of the ‘ daughters of Jerusalem,’ a resemblance may
even be seen to the chorus of the ancient Greeks. The separating of the
parts of the poem, however, and the assigning to the speakers their proper
place in the dialogues, while highly important to the right understanding of
the passages, is often one of the most difficult tasks of the expositor. The
speaker is indeed often, though not always, indicated either by the title
given to the party addressed, or by the grammatical form of some of the.
words, apparent in the original, but not in an English translation.


None who is familiar with the Psalms of David and the writings of the
prophets, will wonder at the language of ardent love and longing mutually
expressed in the Song by the Bride and Bridegroom, viewed as representing
the Lord Jesus Christ and His redeemed people. It may well be asked, why
should earthly love be less ardent than that which is Divine and heavenly P
and why should perfect excellence, and boundless, unmerited, self-sacriticing
love be regarded with less ardour and affection, and be spoken of in colder
terms, than that which is unspeakably inferior? Is it too much to say that
the ardent language of many a Jacobite song, in reference to a prince who at
best afforded but a specimen of fallen and imperfect humanity, might put to
the blush many who profess attachment to the Prince of Life P


The Author is aware that, in some quarters, the Divine Book on which
he has been engaged lies under a prejudice, as if unsuited for homiletical
use. He trusts, however, that the attempt, now very imperfectly made, te
provide a help in that direction, may not be in vain. If either the preacher


pa ea Tl eee i eal


PREFACE. vii





——ee


of the Gospel should derive benefit in tis arduous but blessed and important
employment from the commentary now prepared, as the writer is thankful to
learn has been the case with that on Job or if the Christian reader should find
himself assisted by it in his meditation on that portion of the inspired Word
which the author has found so precious to himself, he will feel abundantly
rewarded for the labour it has cost him. He prayerfully commends it, with
all its imperfections, to the blessing of Him whose aid has been invoked in
its preparation, and who has graciously promised in regard to His own
Word: ‘IT sHaLL NOt RETURN UNTO ME VOID.’





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY


THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


Gntroduction.


I. Authorship, The poem generally regarded as the work of King Solomon. Perhaps,
thongh not certainly, indicated by the title. See on chap, i. ver. 1 Reasons in favour
of this view:—1. General consent both of Jewish and Christian writers, ancieat and
modern. 2, The prevailing circle of images and references to facts and things; indicating
the author to have lived in the time of Solomon, and to have been well acquainted with
natural history, as Solomon is known to have been (Xie/). 8. The author well acquainted
with all parts of the land of Israel, and greatly susceptible of impressions from the beautiful
(Delitzsch), 4. Solomon known to have been largely employed in poetical composition
(1 Kings iv. 32), 5. A relationship with the Book of Proverbs, known to be Solomon’s,
indicated by the language (Hengstenderg).


II. Canonicity and Inspiration. All but universally admitted. Formed partof the Jewish
canon in the time of the Saviour, and always received as inspired Scripture by the Christian
Church, Independent arguments for its inspiration; —The majesty of the style; the sublimity
of the matter; its harmony with the rest of Scripture, especially in the leading idea of the
bridal relation of the Church to Jehovah or the Messiah; its power, felt in all ages, in
moving tne affections towards the Divine Saviour.


III. Unity of the Book. The poem generally regarded asa anited whole rather than
a collection of independent odes. Arguments in favour of its unity:—l. The title—a
“Song,” not Songs. 2, The same persons introduced throughout, and in the same character
as—the King, called also Solomon, appearing as the friend and beloved of the virgin; the
Virgin herself, called more definitely Shulamite, who appears throughout as the Fair One, the
love, sister, and bride of the king; the Daughters of Jerusalem. 3. The same commence-
ments and conclusions of long passages or divisions of the book ; as at iii. 6; vi. 10; viii. 5;
ii. 6, 7; iii. 5; viii. 3, 4. 4. The recurrence of the same ideas, and even of whole sentences,
as in ii. 10--13 compared with vi. 11, vii. 12—14; ii, 1—4 with v. 2—8; iv. 1—3 with
vi. 5-7; iv. 5 with vii. 4; i. 15 withiv. 1. 5. The san.e language throughout, even to
the smallest peculiarities (Hahn). 6. Unity of scene. 7. The plan and tendency of the
whole (Hwald). 1


INTRODUCTION.








IV. Internal Character of the Composition. An allegory, with a probable founda-
tion in some historical fact or event in Solomon’s life, as the occasion of it; the brida]
relation between the Church and Christ being exhibited under the figure of a similar
relation between King Solomon and Shulamite, a beautiful and pure-minded rustic maiden.
Arguments in favour of the allegorical nature of the poem :—l1. The general belief of both
the Jewish and the Christian Church, both in ancient and modern times. 2. The unity
and harmony of the Book, on this supposition, with the rest of Scripture. 3. The apparent
reference to it in this sense by the writers and speakers of the New Testament, as Matt.
ix. 15; John iii. 29; Rom. vii. 4; 2 Cor. xi. 2; Eph. v. 23—82; Rev. xix. 7; xxi. 9;
xxii. 17 compared with Song iii. 11; iv. 8,9, 10,11; v.1; and vii. 10; Matt. ii. 1 with
iii. 2, and v. 6; Matt. ii. 1] with iii. 6; Matt. xviii. 12, 13, and Luke xv. 4—7 with ii. 2, 8,
and vi. 8,9. 4. The undeniable resemblance of the Song to the 45th Psalm, about whose
allegorical meaning all are agreed. 5. Apparent indications in the poem itself; for example:
* Shulamite ” apparently used as a symbolical name (viii. 10), and as the name rather of a
plurality in unity than of a single person (i. 3, 4; ii. 9,15; v. 1; vii. 13; viii, 8, 12).
* Baalhamon” not the name of any known real place, but apparently expressive of the world
and its peoples as in a state of unrest and dispeace (Ps. xlvi 4, 7; Isaiah lvii. 20). 6. The
acknowledged difficulty of giving a satisfactory explanation on the merely natural or historie
theory, as mdicated by the great want of unity among those who have adopted it.

Y. The External Character or Form of the Composition. A dramatic poem, or a
poem in the nature of a drama, embracing a variety of scenes and characters ; these
characters sometimes speaking in dialogue, and sometimes alone; with a subordinate party
generally present and often taking part in the dialogue, in some respects corresponding to
the Chorus of the ancient drama. The form of the poem thus in some degree resembling
that of Job; the difference being that in Job each speaker is formally announced by the
poet, which is not the case in the Song, the change and personality of the speakers being
left to be inferred by the reader from the speeches themselves—a circumstance often
rendering the interpretation more difficult, but greatly contributing to the energy and
liveliness of the composition.


VI. The Object of the Book. Various objects probably contemplated by the Divine
Author, whatever may have been the design of the human one. The leading object justly
regarded as being to exhibit the intimate relation subsisting between the Church, whether
viewed as a whole or in each of its true members individually, and its Divine covenant—
Head and King, the Messiah, or Son of God in human nature ; the relation being that of a
Bride and Bridegroom—a relation constantly recognized in the Prophets in especial reference
to the Church of the Old Testament (Isaiah liv. 5, 6; Jer. ii. 2; iii. 14; xxxi. 32; Hos. ii.
19, 20; ili. 3; Ezek. xvi. 32—38); and in the Evangelists and Apostles in reference to the
Church of the New (Matt. ix. 15; John iii. 29; Rom. vii. 4; 2 Cor. um. 2; Eph.
v. 23, 82; Rev. xix. 7—9; xxi.9; xxii.17). Asa part of this object, the Book designed
to shew the amazing love of God in Christ as implied in that bridal relation; the trans-
cendent excellence of the Divine Bridegroom; the privileges, duties, and responsibilities
eonnected with this relation on the part of the Church as His Bride; the injury sustained
by her from a conduct unbecoming it, and, on the other hand, the blessedness and honour
eonnected with a faithful observance of its duties and improvement of its privileges. Prac-
tically, re edification of the Church the object of this as of the other parts of Scripture


ce


INTRODUCTION.
9S


(Rom. xv. 4; 2 Tim. iii, 15,16); the aim of her Divine Head in giving this precious por-
tion of Holy Writ being thereby to elevate, purify, sanctify, comfort, warn, direct, preserve,
and stimulate the members of his mystical Body in every age; the Book exhibiting, with this
view, a picture of the experience of believers while on earth—their hopes and longings, joys
and sorrows, temptations and conflicts, falls and recoveries, love and service.





A coincident object of the book probably to afford a prophetical shadowing forth of the
incarnation, death, resurrection, and ascension of the Bridegroom, and of the general history
of the Church after these events; as well as a dim allegorical picture of its development up
to the time of their occurrence,


Possibly also a subordinate object contemplated in the Book in relation to marriage,
viewed as an earthly though Divine institution; its duties being here, as in Eph. v. 23, &.,
mirrored forth, on the one hand, in the affection and demeanour of the heavenly Bridegroom
to His Church; and, on the other, in the duties belonging to the Church in relation to her
Divine Husband.


VII. Divisions and Contents of the Book. The divisions variously made, but
very generally considered as five or six, with several subdivisions. The first division may
be viewed as extending from chap. i. 2 to ii. 7; the second, from chap. ii, 8 to iii. 5; the
third, from chap. iii. 6 to v. 1; the fourth from chap. v. 2 to vi. 9; the fifth, from chap. vi. 10
tothe end of the Book. The last possibly divided at chap. viii. 4. The subjects under these
divisions, as regards the allegory, may for convenience be distinguished thus :—Part First :
The Meeting of the Betrothed. Part Second: The Nuptials. Part Third: The Marriage
Feast. Part Fourth: The Coolness and its Consequences. Part Fifth: Married Life and
its Incidents. The Book might be said to have three great divisions :—Before the Mar
riage; The Marriage Itself; and, After the Marriage. The divisions might be further
reduced to two: The Period before and the Period after Marriage. Chap. ii. 2 appa-
rently the centre of the poem.





THE


SONG OF SOLOMON.





Citle of the Book.


CHapten tl. VERSE l.


“The Song of Songs, which is Solomon's.”


(t is well, with Dr. Chalmers, to begin
the study of this sacred book with the
prayer: “* My God, spiritualize my affec-
tions ; give me intense love to Christ.”
Two parts in the ‘litle of the book as here
ven:—1l, Its name and character—“ the
Song of Songs.” _¥. Its ascription—‘ which
is Solomon’s.” The First part of the Title,


“* The Song of Songs,”

Indicates—

I. The Naturz of the Book. A Song.
Hence—

1. Pleasant and joyous. Song the lan-
guage of joy. Indicates joy in those who
ing, and aims at awakening joy in those
who hear. This one of the ‘songs in the
night’ given by our Maker and Saviour
(Job xxxv. 10). The Holy Spirit the author
of joy, and therefore the author of songs.
This all the more attractive from its
being a song. Both old and young love
songs, and are attracted by them. The sub-
ject of this book of a pleasing nature, and
fit to be treated in a song. Marriage a joyful
event, celebrated with festivity and music.
The subject of this song a Divine and
heavenly union. The song a spiritual
Epithalamium, or Nuptial Ode. <A song of
the bride-chamber (Matt. ix. 15). A Gospel
song, and one for Gospel times; the whole
subject being the love of Jesus Christ to
sinners and the salvation He brings to them,
Gospel grace puts a new song in the mouth
(Ps. xl. 3; xcviii. 1). The Gospel began
with songs and ends with them. This book
nne of the ‘spiritual songs,’ in which be-
aevers are to ‘speak one to another’ (Eph.
v. 19; Col. iii. 16). A large part of the
Bible taken up with songs. The Word of
God intended to be attractive. The Lord’s
ransomed ones to ‘return and come to Zion
with songs’ (Isa. xxxv. 10).

2. Profitable. A song, like poetry in
general, fitted to stir and move the affections.


Songs found to have the most powerful m.-
fluence on the minds and morals of a pecple.
“Give me the making of the songs and
ballads of a nation, and I will leave the laws
to others.” By the Jews the poetical parte
of Scripture were especially esteemed, and
often learned by heart.


II. Zés Excettence. A ‘Song of songs
A Hebrew expression denoting exceilence
as king of kings, heaven of heavens, &c.
This not only excels all human, but
Divine songs, The Jews called other
Scripture songs ‘holy,’ but this the ‘holy of
holies.” The book worthy of this title on
account of—

1. Its Character as a Composi'ion. The
most “beautiful example of Hebrew poetry
in its highest style of metaphor and arrange-
oes ore especially, however, on account
oiI—

2. Its Subject. The bridal relation between
the Son of God and His saved people.
Christ’s excellence and beauty, and His ove
to the Church as His bride. The Church’s
excellence and beauty as a reflection of His,
and her happiness and honour in consequence
of her bridal relation to Him, This song
has the Holy Ghost for its author; the union
and communion between Christ and believers
for its matter; and the glory of God and the
comfort of His people for its end. Here are
prophecy, history, and the spiritual life,
divinely woven into one symbolical robe of
matchless beauty. The song a many-sided
mirror reflecting the Lord’s dealings with
His Church, viewed both collectively and in-
dividually, as well in the Old Testament as
in the New. Reveals mysteries of Divine
love into which the angels desire to look.
This book, next to the Gospels, the fullest of
Christ, and therefore the sweetest to the
Christian who is enlightened enough to un-
derstand it. A fountain at which prophets
and apostles and the Lord Jesus nee elf


CHAP, I,





refreshed their spirits. Next to David’s
Psalms, the favourite book of tle Bible with
the Fathers of the Church. Its foundation
laid in the Psalms; especially in that gem
of Psalms, the forty-fifth. David sung the
Bridegroom’s future appearing, His conflicts,
bis sorrows, and his triumphs: Solomon
sung His alliance and fellowship with His
blood-bought bride. The song a labyrinth
of exquisite flowers transplanted from heaven
to earth. Wafts a perfumed breath of
celestial spring from paradise to this world.
The song “a maze of sweets, and a
lovely obscurity.” A heaven-given riddle in
connection with the marriage of the Lamb,
the true Samson; and only to be ploughed
with His own heifer. Requires ‘ fhe mind
that hath,’ not earthly but, heavenly
‘wisdom.’ A mine of precious diamonds,
demanding egy and pare labour and


the Spirit’s light to explore it and discover
them.
The Second part of the Title—


** Which is Solomon’s,”
Ambiguous, Probably indicates—


I, The Autuor of the Book. The literal
Solomon, King of Israel, and wisest of men.
Best proof of wisdom, to celebrate the love of
God tx Christ, and to stir up ourselves and
others to love Him in return. Gradation in
Solomon’s writings: the Proverbs, Ecclesi-
astes, Canticles, or the Song. In Proverbs,
Solomon sings of moral virtues and their
benefits ; in Ecclesiastes, of the vanity of
earthly things; in Canticles, of Divine love
and fellowship. Canticles a striking contrast
to Ecclesiastes. Ecclesiastes, a mournful
complaint of the disappointment found in
the creature; Canticles a Pe ae song of the
infinite satisfaction found in the Grantor
Ecclesiastes points to earthly plea, and
says: ‘Whosoever drinketh of this water
shall thirst again’; Canticles points to
God as revealed in Jesus Christ, and says:
‘Whosoever drinketh of this water shall
never thirst.—Solomon, with his hands full
of state affairs, yet found time for spiritual
meditation and the celebration of Divine
love. Worldly business, and diligence in it,
no hindrance to love to Christ, and due
eoncern for the spiritual interests of ourselves
end others.


II. The Sussect of the Book. The spiritual
Solomon, the true Prince of Peace and King
of Israel,—Solomon’s great antitype. The
true Solomon and his love to the Church the
great subject of the Song. Solomon exhibited
in the Bible as one of the types of the
Messiah. Is so—

1. In his Names : ‘Jedidiah,’ Beloved of
the Lord: ‘Solomon,’ the Peaceful,

6


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


2. In his Wisdom.

3. In his Riches and Magnificence.

4, In the wide extent of his Dominions.

5. In the peaceful character of his Reign

6. In the prosperous and happy conditios
of his Kingdom,

7. In the erection of the Temple of Goa
at Jerusalem.

Christ prefigured by Aaron as a priest,
by Moses as a prophet ; by David and Solo-
mon as a King,—by the one in his conquests
and by the other in his peaceful enjoyment
of them. Solomon not called here, as in
Proverbs and Kcclesiastes, the King of
Israel. His personality here lost sight of
in his typical character. The type over-
shadowed by the antitype. Christ, in one
aspect or another, the central figure in all the
Books of Scripture. “Search the Scriptures ;
for they testify of Me.” This said even of
Old Testament Scripture. “The testimony
of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.” “ He
expounded to them in all the Scriptures the
things concerning Himself” (John v. 39;
Rev. xix. 10; Luke xxiv. 27). ‘The Scrip-
tures all testify of Jesus. The Song testifies
of Him as the King and Bridegroom of His
Church, stooping to win and wed poor fallen
humanity for His Bride. By the Jews, the
Song understood of their Divine King to be
manifested in the Messiah, and the Israelitish
nation as the Bride whom He was pleased
to espouse to Himself.


Ill. Zhe Dusten of the Book. For the
true Solomon.

1. For his Glory. The glory of Christ, and
of God in Him, the end of all Scripture as of
all creation (Col. i. 16). Especially true of
this portion of it, so full of Himself, of His
excellencies, His joys, and His love.

2. For his Use. All Old Testament in-
tended for his use as the perfect man (Ps. i.
1—8; 2 Tim. iii. 15, 16). Probably this
portion of it especially, which speaks most
about him. Reason to believe that the
Psalms of David and the Song of Solo-
mon formed the Soa devotional books


of our Lord (Davidson). As a child,
Jesus grew in wisdom and in stature,
In boths respects, doubtless, through


ordinary means. The sincere milk of the
Word his daily food. What was designed
for the Head, designed also for the members.
What was used by the man Christ Jesus as
His spiritual aliment and refreshment, to be
used also by ourselves for ours. The Rab-
binical rule that this Book was only to be
read by those who had reached their thirtieth
year, a mere human invention,—like others,
rejected by Christ and to be rejected by us.
2 Tim. ii. 15—16, and Rom. xv. 4 clean
against any such limitation, This Book, like


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


CHAP, I,


Sy


the rest of Scripture, to be read with serious-
ness and expounded with discretion ; but
no argument against reading and preaching
from it in the fact that evil men may abuse
it. Ignorant men wrest also other Scrip-
tures to their own destruction. “To the
pureall thingsare pure.” The holiest and
most spiritually-minded have naturally de-
lighted most in this Book, in which they
find most of their Beloved and their Friend,
Witness Bernard of Clairvoix, Samuel Ruth-
erford, and Robert McCheyne. In Scotland’s
best times, the song of Solomon the chosen
field of meditation at Sacramental seasons,

Two things needful for the profitable
reading of this remarkable book :—(1) A
Uhristian experience, The song a mirror of


the believer’s heart. Only taught by a
Divine anointing, and only learned by a
spiritual experience’’ (Bernard). Only to
be properly understood by our becoming
part of the Bride whose experience it por-
trays. (2) A loving heart. Like the forty-
fifth Psalm, which it greatly resembles, the
Song of Solomon a ‘ Song of loves’ (Ps. xlv.
title). The mystery of the song a mystery
of love. Wordsiot earthly,love employed to
elevate the soul toa heavenly one. A ‘song
of loves’ requires a loving heart to under-
stand, realize, and appreciate it. ‘‘ Love’s
language a foreign tongue to one who does
not love.” Hence the song of Solomon
pre-eminently a test for the state of the
heart,


PART FIRST.


Che Meeting of the Petrothed,


Carter I, 2, To Cuaprer II, 7.


Scene First,


Place: The Palace of Jerusalem. Speakers: Shulamite, or the Bride;


and the Daughters of Jerusalem, or the Ladies of Solomon’s Court.—Cuap. i, 2—8.


SHULAMITE,


Addressing the King in his Absence,
Bride’s Longing after the Beloved.
Verses 2—4,


Let him kiss me with the hisses of his
mouth !

For thy love is better than wine,

Because of the savour of thy good oint-
ments,

(Thy name is as ointment poured forth),

Therefore do the virgins love thee,


Draw me:
We will run after thee.


The King hath brought me into his cham-
bers :

We will be glad and rejoice in thee ;

We will remember thy love more than


wine:
The upright love thee,


Spiritually, the believer’s longing for the
sensible presence of Christ and the mani-
festation of His love. Probably the cry of
the Ancient Church for the coming of the


Lord’s Anointed, According to the Jews,


~ for (Ps. Ixxiii. 25),


Israel’s longing for the Divine reconcilia-
tion after the sin of the Golden Calf.


Bride’s First Desire.


“* Let him kiss me with the kisses (or, with
kisses) of his mouth” (ver. 2). Shulamite
speaksin soliloquy. Speaks of her Beloved
as absent. Observe—

. The Person intended. ‘‘ Let him;”
namely, the Beloved. No name mentioned,
The language abrupt but natural, as spoken
under strong emotion. Expressive of rev-
erence, So the disciples of Pythagoras
Spoke of their master, —‘‘ He said.” More
especially, of impassioned affection. The
Bride’s thoughts full of her Beloved, as
though there were but one object she cared
Christ to the believer
the One Pearl of great price (Matt. xiii. 46),
The language of a soul wearying of all
but Christ. Bride speaks of her Beloved as
if all must know whom she meant. So
Mary to the supposed gardener: “ If thou
have borne Him hence” (John xx. 15).

Christ continually promised to the fa-
thers through the prophets (Acts xxvi. 6; 1
Peter i. 11), The hope and expectation of
Old Testament saints (Gen. xlix. 18 ; Isa,
xxvi. 8; Matt. xiii. 17; John viii. 56;
Acts xxvi, 7). Exemplified in Simeon,
Anna, and others (Luke ii, 25, 26, 36—38 ;


7


OHAP, I,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: TEE SONG OF SOLOMON.





iii. 15), Christ promised and expected as
the Bridegroom of the Church (Hos, ii. 19 ;
iii, 3; Isa, liv. 5 ; lxii, 5 ; John iii. 29),


II. The Turtna desired. Let him “ kiss
me with the kisses of his mouth.” Personal
and sensible manifestation of Christ and
His love to the soul, The love itself not
doubted : the expression, proof, and enjoy-
ment of it desired. Christ’s kiss is Christ
Himself sensibly giving Himself in tender-
est affection to the soul, and assuring it of
His cordial love. The subject of the Song
not the coming to the Saviour, but commun-
ton with Him : not the coming of the soul! to
Christ, but the coming of Christ to the soul.
The language of the soul in the Song not
that of the Publican : ‘ God be merciful to
me 2 sinner’; but that of the Psalmist:
* My soul cleavetn to the dust : quicken thou
me according to Thy word’ (Ps. cxix. 25).
The language of the text expressive of—

1. Strong desire and eager longing. ‘ Let
him ’ (or, O that he would)‘ kiss me,’ Such
longings a natural part of a healthy Chris-
tian experience, Feeble health little accus-
tomed to fervent longings. A Christ loved
will be a Christ longed for. Absence ill-
brooked by ardent affection. Love yearns
for the fellowship and enjoyed love of its
object.

2. Intimate acquaintance. Familiar ac-
quaintance with Christ begets not con-
tempt, but reverence and love,

3. Consciousness of union with and interest
in the Beloved. Kisses not for strangers,
still less for enemies. Expected only by a
friend, and most of all by a Bride or


wife,

4, Mutual affection. Kisses desired only
from one who loves us and whom we our-
selves love, An aggravation of Judas’s sin
that he betrayed his Master witha kiss, A
true kiss the ‘ kiss of charity’ or love (1
‘Pet. v. 14).

5. Absence and delay. Sensible tokens
of Divine love not always vouchsafed to
believers, Christ’s kisses not things of every
day. At times wisely withheld. ‘ A time
for embracing, and a time to refrain from
embracing.’ Patience required in respect
to spiritual joys. The time coming when
delay and withdrawal will be no more.

6. Desire for manifested reconciliation. So
Israel longed after the Lord after the sin of
the golden calf (Ex. xxxiii, 1—4, 7—11);
and in the time of Samuel (1 Sam. vii. 2).
A kiss the token of reconciliation given by
David to his son Absalom, and by the for-
giving father to the prodigal and penitent
son (2 Sam. xiv. 33: Luke xv. 20).

The desire expressed by each believing
soul for itself: ‘Let him kiss me.’ The
living soul desires personal enjoyment of
Christ’s love and the personal application of


8


it, Christ’s kisses for His Church universal,
and for each true member of it in particular.
Each believing soul the Church in minia-
ture. The features, experience, and glory
of the Church those of each individual
member,

The thing desired—(1) ‘ Kisses.’ Implies
coldness of faith and affection. To receive
even a kind word from Christ an unspeak-
able favour and happiness. Christ able and
willing to do exceeding abundantly above
all we ask or think (Eph. iii. 20). Grants not.
only the adoption of a son, but the espousala
of a bride (Theodoret), The Bride appears
to desire not only one kiss but many. Even
one not to be purchased with a thousand
worlds. Howrich the believer in receiving
many! Even one a thing never to be for-
gotten. One of Christ’s kisses carries
heaven in its bosom. Kisses of different
kinds and for different occasions : the kiss
of favour, of friendship, of affection, of
reconciliation, of relationship, of nuptial
contract, and of marriage. The marriage-
covenant between Christ and His people
permits and grants the renewal of its seals
and pledges. (2) ‘ Kisses of his mouth,’
These reserved more especially for his per-
sonalappearing. ‘ Let him kiss me, not by
the mouth of the prophets, but with his own
mouth ’(Rabbins). The desire a prophetical
intimation of His coming in the flesh.
Realized when men wondered at “‘ the graci-
ous words which proceeded out of his
mouth” (Luke iv, 18—22). ‘‘Be of good
comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee ;” ‘‘ Thy
faith hath saved thee : go in peace’”—some
of these kisses. Such also every Gospel
promise and gracious consolation uttered
and applied by Jesus to the penitent be-
lieving soul, ‘ The lip of promise meeting
the lip of prayer.’ Christ’s office to
‘‘Preach glad tidings to the meek; to
bind up the broken hearted ; to comfort
them that mourn; to proclaim the ac-
ceptable year of the Lord” (Isa, lxi, 1—3;
Luke iv. 18, 19). His mouth most sweet
(chap. v. 16), ‘ His mouth,’ as marking
the tenderest affection, Amazing conde-
scension that the King of glory can stoop
from His throne to kiss a beggar taken from
the dunghill. Ample compensation for the
loss of idols in the kisses of the King’s
mouth, Thesoul that givesupallfor Him,
sooner or later filled and overpowered with
His love, The ‘kisses of his mouth’ not
only the communications of His love but of
His spirit. According to the Jews, a man’s
loving kiss is accompanied with an infusion
of hisspirit. So Jesus, aftersaying : Peace
be unto you,—breathed on His disciples,
and said : Receive ye the Holy Ghost (John
xx. 21, 22), Christ’s kisses given in the
reading and hearing of His word ; in secret
and social prayer; and in the ordinance


A(iMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


of the Supper. The consolations of His
Word personally applied by Himself to the
heart through His Spirit. The kisses to be
given by His own mouth. All Gospel duty
summed up in our kissing the Son; all
Gospel comfort summed up in the Son kissing
us. Christ’s kisses in the Gospel intended to
heal the wounds of the Law. The kisses of
His mouth in the highest sense still kept in
reserve. Jerusalem above the place where
the Lord mainly comforts His people (Isa.
Ixvi. 13). There they see His face. His
hand wipes away their tears. He Himself
feeds them and leads them to living foun-
tains of waters. Hence His second appearing
the desire of believers in the New Testament,
as His first appearing was that of those in
the Old (Tit. ii, 13; 1 Cor. i. 7; Phil. iii.
20; 2 Pet. iii. 12). The last promise of
Christ in the Bible: Surely I come quickly.
The last prayer of His Church: Even so,
come, Lord Jesus (Rev. xxii. 20).


Reason of Bride’s First Desire.
“ For thy love (Heb. loves) és better than


wine.” —Verse 1.

With the next breath Shulamite turns to
her Beloved and addresses himself, though
still absent and invisible. A believer's
communion with Christ on earth rather that
with an invisible friend. Want of bodily
sight no hindrance to spiritual fellowship.
Christ, though invisible to the eye of ficeh,
yet visible to the eye of faith. Common,
under strong feeling, to address a friend
though distant and unseen. The living and
loving soul not satisfied with speaking of
Christ, but must speak ¢o Him. ‘ He’ to be
exchanged for ‘Thou.’ The reason for the
soul desiring the kisses of Christ’s mouth is
the excellence and sweetness of His love and
the manifestations of it. An object desired
in proportion to the sense of its worth.
Observe in regard to the—


Excellence of Christ’s Love.


I. The Love téself.
margin, ‘thy loves’—not only the love
itself, but the manifestations of it. Christ’s
love always one and the same; the expres-
sions and manifestations of it many and
various. His love well represented in the
plural form, from its riches, abundance, and
extent. Paul’s prayer that believers might
be Be hotkened with might by the Holy
Spirit, so as to comprehend with all saints
what is its length, and breadth, and depth,
and height, and to know it though really
assing all knowledge (Eph. iii. 16—19.
bserve— ,

1. The character of Christ’s love. Like


‘Thy love,’ or as





, in word and


CHAP. I,


the love of the Father it is—(1) Ever.
lasting (Jer. xxxi. 3). (2) Unchanging
(John xiil. 1). (3) Spontaneous and Te
(Ezek. xvi. 5, 6, 8; 1 Joln iv. 10, 19).
(4) Sovereign and distinguishing (John
vi. 70; xiii. 18; xv. 16). (5) Costly and
self-sacrificing (Eph. v. 25; Rev.i.5). (6)
Enriching in its effects (Eph. v. 26, 27;
Rev. i. 5, 6).

2. The manifestations of it. These both
eed. Made in—(1) His en-
gaging for us in the everlasting covenant
(Ps. xl. 7; Eph. v. 25). (2) The reve
lation of His love in the first promise in
Eden (Gen. iii, 15). (3) The successive
communications of it through the prophets.
(4) His gracious dealings with His people
in the Old Testament. (5) The personal
manifestations of Himself to the patriarchs
and Old Testament saints. (6) His Incan-
NaTION. (7). His acts, words, and teach-
ings when on earth. (8). His sufferings
and death. (9). The bestowment of His
Spirit on and after Pentecost. (10) His
promises to His Church made before and
after His ascension into heaven. (11) The
ordinances which He instituted, especially
that of the Supper. (12) The ingathering of
His Redeemed by the preaching of the Word.
(13) The personal communications of His
love to the souls of His people. (14) His
gracious providential dealings with His
Church, both as a whole and in its individual
members.


IL The Excetrence of the love. ‘Thy
love is better than wine.’ Wine put for
what is most grateful to the taste, refreshing
to the vody, and exhilarating to the spirits,
Wine among the chief luxuries of life. The
‘banquet of wine’ (Esther v. 6) put for the
most joyous of feasts. Yet Christ’s love
‘better than wine.’ (1) From ¢he nature of
love itself. Love and the expression of it
among the sweetest of human enjoyments,
Hence the ‘comfort of love’ (Phil. ii. J).
(2) From the person whose love it ts. A
sinful and imperfect creature’s love often the
sweetest of earthly enjoyments. What the
love of Him who is the ‘Chief among ten
thousand,’ ‘ fairer than the children of men,’
‘altogether lovely,’ the sum, source, and
centre of ali loveliness and excellence!
Christ’s love better than wine, as—

1. More sweet, gladdening, and refreshing
(Ps. iv. 7, 8). ‘Sweet is the King’s wine, but
sweeter is his love’ (Delitzsch). The sense of
Christ’s love the true cordial of the soul.

2. More satisfying. The old wine, after
which none desires new. Takes from creature
enjoyments much of their attraction. The
world crucified to us by the cross of Christ ,—
the highest ex™ression of this lcve. 5


CHAY. Y.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





8. More beneficial. Exhilarates the soul;
and through that, influential on the whole
man. Purifies while it gladdens. No danger
of excess or-of hurtful consequences. Wine
amocker. At last bites like a serpent and
stings like an adder (Prov. xx. 1; xxiii. 32).
Christ’s love leaves no sting behind it.
Betrays none into sin. Exhilarates with-
Out inebriating.

4, More lasting in its effects. Wineperish-
able, and soon ceases even to exhilarate and
refresh. Christ’s love eternal and unchang-
ing in its effects as well as in itself. That
only strictly true of Christ’s love which is
said of wine: ‘ Let him drink and forget his
poverty, and remember his misery no more’
(Prov. xxxi. 6).

The excellence of Christ’s love not to be
described (Ps. xxxvi. 7—10). To be
tasted in order to be known (Ps. xxxiv. 8;
1 Pet. ii. 3). Able to fill the soul with jo
in the absence of all earthly comforts, an
the loss of all earthly possessions (Hab.
iii, 17, 18). The Holy Spirit’s office to
reveal it and shed it abroad in the heart
(Rom. v. 5). Hence the exhortation: ‘ Be
not drunk with wine, wherein is excess;
but be ye filled with the Spirit’ (Eph. v.
18). Joy in the experience of Christ’s
love the characteristic of the New Testa-
ment dispensation. Symbolized in His first
miracle. The water of the Old Testament
economy turned into the wine of the New.
The consecration of wine as the symbol of
His shed blood, and so of His dying love,
among the last acts of the Saviour’s love.
Hence the Lord’s Supper made the sweetest
and most reviving of all Divine ordinances.
Christ’s love the joy of the Redeemed in
heaven. The new wine of the kingdom.
The song of the Beloved Disciple’s old age,
seventy years after tasting of it as he lay
on Jesus’s breast. The ever new song of
the saints around the throne (Rev. i. 5;
v. 9—12).


The Bride Justifies her Desire.


* Because of the savowr of thy otnt-
ments (thy name is as ointment poured forth),
therefore do the virgins love thee’ —Verse 3.

Her desire justified on two grounds: (1)
The excellence and sweetness in the Be-
loved himself; (2) The fact that on that
account virgins loved him.

First Grounp : ‘ Because of the savour of
thy good ointments,—thy name ts as ointment
poured forth ;’ or, ‘ointment poured forth ts
thy name.’ The first clause the formal reason
for the virgins’ love to the King; the second,
a parenthetical amplification and explanation
of the former, his name being itself those
ar ointments (Eccles. vii. 1). ‘The


~savour of thy good ointments’ or perfumes,


suggests—
The Excellence and Sweetness of Christ


I. Christ has ‘ointments’ or perfumes,
The ings ointments sweetly scented oils
sprinkled on thegarments, poured on the head,
orcarried about the person. Christ’s ointments
the graces of the soul and life, shed on Him
and produced in Him by the Holy Spirit.
The existence of such ointments indicated in
His official name, ‘Christ,’ or ‘the Christ.’
This the Greek rendering of the Hebrew
term Messiah; both meaning ‘the Anointed
One.’ Christ, as God’s appointed Saviour,
anointed with the Holy Ghost, and that
without measure (John iii. 34: Acts iv. 8;
Luke iv. 18). This anointing that which
fitted Him for His office (Isa. lxi. 1—3).
Anointed with the oil of gladness above
His fellows (Heb. i. 9). All His mediatorial
garments thus made to ‘smell of myrrh,
aloes, and cassia,’ oy which He was made
glad (Ps. xlv. 8). His human nature thus
made full of all excellence and sweetness.
Christ fully endowed with all the virtues
that can either adorn the character, or that
ean render a man lovely and attractive in
himself, and a benefactor and blessing to hia
fellow men (Isa. xi. 2—5). All the excel.
lences and charms that can either beautify
or exalt humanity found in Him in then
combination and perfection. Graces and
virtues apparently contradictory and exclu.
sive of each other, found beautifully har
monized in His character. Symbolized by
the ‘holy anointing oil,’ composed ol
various ingredients (Hx. xxx. 233—25, 34
$5). Loftiest wisdom combined in Jesus
with child-like simplicity; awe-inspiring
dignity with meekest humility; inflexible
justice with tenderest compassion; spotleas

oliness with sweetest affability ; abhorrence
of sin with pity and love to the sinner. The
Gospels an exhibition of the ‘good oint-
ments’ of Christ. His life, as written by
the four Evangelists, the best commentary on
this verse.


II. Cirist’s ointments are ‘good. They
are s0—

1. In themselves. The graces and virtues
of His character, of the purest and choicest
kind, and existing in Him in the highest
degree. All Divine, as the product of the
Holy Ghost which filled Him. God well
pleased for His righteousness’ sake (Isa. xlii.
21). The testimony twice repeated from
heaven: ‘This is My beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased’ (Matt. iii. 17; Luke. ix.
85). The goodness or excellence of Christ’s
* ointments sooner In His spirié
and disposition. ‘ Meek and lowly in heart,’


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


—


Gentle and compassionate, not breaking the
bruised reed nor quenching the smoki
flax. ‘Holy, harmless, undefiled, an
separate from sinners.’ (2) In His words.
Gracious words proceeded out of His mouth.
‘Never man spake like this man.’ The
Gospels a repertory of such golden sayings
as never before had fallen from human lips.
(3) In His actions. ‘He went about doing
Ache Even in His outward actions, acknow-
edged to have been the greatest benefactor
the earth had ever seen before or has ever
beheld since. His earthly ministry one con-
tinued display of self-denying beneficence to
the poor, the suffering, and the distressed.
(4) In His sufferings and death, In these,
ey distressing as they were, a picture
isplayed of the most perfect patience and
submission. His dying breath a prayer
on behalf of His persecutors and murderers,
while His only complaint was that poured
forth to His Father in the words of the
Psalmist : My God, My God, why hast Thou
forsaken Me? (Ps. xxi. 1; Matt. xxvii. 46).

2. In their effects. Ointments or perfumes
valued for their refreshing fragrance. Hence
poured on the head of guests at table. The
graces and virtues of Christ’s character all
such as rendered Him a Benefactor and
Saviour to mankind. Fitted by the Holy
Spirit’s anointing to preach glad tidings to
the poor, bind up the broken hearted, &.
(Isa. lxi. 1, 2.) The poorest, lowest, and
guiltiest attracted to Him by His gracious
and loving spirit, as well as by His heavenly
and healing words (Luke xv. . Even little
children drawn to Him by the savour of His
‘good ointments.’ Inthe graces and virtues
of His character, as well as the sacrificial
surrender of His life, Christ a sweet-smelling
savour to God. His words quickening, re-
viving, comforting and gladdening as well
to sinners as to saints.

In the view of Shulamite, the King’s same,
including in it the report of his graces and
excellencies (1 Kings x. 1, 6—9), constituted
in itself a rich perfume. ‘Thy name is as
ointment poured forth;’ or, ‘ointment

oured forth is Thy name’ (Eccles. vii. 1).
weetly true in regard to Solomon’s Anti-
type. Observe, in reference to the


Name of Christ—


I. The Name itse/f. The name of a
person often put simply for the person him-
self. All that is in Jesus, and that is known
of Him, renders Him ‘as ointment poured
forth’ The chief among ten thousand.
Precious to them that believe. In Him is
all that sinners need and that is suited to
their case and condition. J{is character and
worth that which renders Him to believers





CHAP. I.





the object of their warmest affection and
their most entire confidence. The name or
names by which He is known indicative of
what He is in Himself, and what He is and
becomes to us. His names all significant
and suggestive of His character and work.
Their meaning such as to commend Him to
sinners, and to endear Him to saints. Each
name an exhibition of Him in some special
aspect of loveliness and preciousness. Ex-
amples :—
1. Emmanvgt. His name in prophecy
Oe vii. 14). Its meaning, ‘God with us’
Matt. i. 23). Full of sweetness. God for
our salvation become one of us—a partaker
of flesh and blood—in order to be our Re-
deemer. God manifest in the flesh. The
Eternal Word made flesh and dwelling
among us. The name a reviving revelation
of boundless love, pity, and condescension
on the part of our Maker. The Beloved of
the Church one who is both God and Man.
‘The man that is My fellow, saith the Lord
of Hosts’ (Zech. xiii. 7). One with the
Father, and yet one with us. The bright
reflection of the Divine glory, and yet bone
of our bone and flesh of our flesh. Possessed
of all the attributes of the God-head, and all
the sympathies of humanity. Sustains the
lory of Deity, and is touched with the
belay of all our infirmities. The Creator
and Upholder of the universe, and yet
tempted in all points like as we are (Heb,
i. 2, 3; iv. 15). Hence (1) His tnjintte
power as a Saviour, Able to save to the
uttermost. Mighty to save. Able to raise
both the dead soul and the dead body to life.
(2) The infinite efficacy belonging to His
sacrificial undertaking. His suffering and
death that of ‘God manifest in the flesh.’
God purchased the Church with His own
blood—a sufficient price for the ransom of
countless worlds (Acts xx. 28). The blood
of Jesus Christ, because the blood of God’s
Son, able to cleanse from all sin (1 John


i, 7).

9. Jesus. Given, at the direction of ax
angel, as the equivalent ef ‘ Emmanuel’
(Matt. i, 21—23). A name full of exquisite
sweetness. Denotes—‘ Jehovah the Saviour ; *
or, ‘the Lord will save.’ God Himself be-
comes our Salvation. ‘Jesus,’ a Divine
Saviour; hence equivalent to ‘Hmmanuel.’
A Saviour needed by man, and a great one
Such found in Jesus. Hence His name.
Saves, as was necessary, both from sin and
sin’s consequences; not only from its guilt
and punishment, but from its power, pollu-
tion, and presence; saves from a blinded
understanding, a depraved will, and a
corrupt heart. Saves from sin and Satan,
from death and hell, and from the power
aud influence of a present evil ye:


CHAP. L





Saves at once, and saves for ever.
Saves now by the invisible operstion of
His Spirit; saves hereafter by His visible
and glorious appearing (Heb. ix 14, 28).
Able to save even the chief of sinners (1 ‘lim.
i. 15). To save the lost the object of Mis
coming into the world (Luke xix. 10; 1
Tim. i. 15).

3. Curist, or Toe Curist. His officias
name. Both a name and atitle. Like the
Hebrew term ‘Messiah,’ denotes ‘the
Anointed.’ A name also full of sweetness.
Marks Him out as anointed by the Holy
Ghost as the Prophet, Priest, and King of
His Church. Anointed with the oil of
gladness above his fellows (Ps. xlv. 7).
Anointed by the Spirit to preach glad
tidings to the meek, &c (Isa. Ixi. 1). Jesus
the Christ, as filled with the Holy Spirit, and
80 fitted for man’s salvation.

His ‘name’ may include (1) His 7iéles:
as; Son of God,Son of Man, King of Kings,
Prince of Peace, Lamb of God, Prince of
Life, Lord of Glory, Plant of Renown, the
Word, the Word of God, our Hope, our
Peace, our Life. (2) His Offices: as; Prophet,
Priest, King, Mediator, Kedeemer, Captain,
Physician, ‘Teacher, Witness-bearer, Saviour.
(3) His Relations: as; Husband, Brother,
Father, Friend, Shepherd, Surety, Master.
(4) His Atwibutes: as; Merciful, Faithful,
True, Almighty, Everlasting, Unchanging,
the Alpha and Omega, the First and the
Last. (5) His Character: as; meck, lowly,
loving, holy, just, wise, and good.

No name mentioned in the text. The
name deep in the heart. No name like His
in a believer’s ear. Remembered when every
other name is forgotten. The name which
is above every name. Known truly to none
but Himself and those to whom He reveals
it. Wherever known, accompanied with
love and trust (Ps. xci. J.4; ix. 10).


II. The Comparison.
poured forth.’ ;

1. As ‘ointment’ or perfume. Indicates
its sweet and reviving nature. To a believer
the very mention of Jesus accompanied with
joy and comfort. Every name of Jesus fra-

ant to the spiritual senses. The name of a
oved one sweet because calling up the
person himself. The name of Jesus makes
the sad heart it enters leap with joy. Is
honey to the mouth, music to the ear, and
comfort tothe soul. Everything insipid to a


‘As. ointment


believer that carries not the savour of that -


name in it, “All spiritual food dry, if not
pervaded with this oil; and tasteless, if not
seasoned with this salt.” What is written
has no relish to a believer, if he reads not
therethe name of Jesus. Conversation has no
pleasure if the name of Jesus is excluded.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF . 1LOMON,





“Nature with all its loveliness only pleases


when assoc.ated with the name of Jesus.
His name soggestive of all that is most
beautifui, lovely, and excellent. ‘ Contains
in it all the excellence scattered throughout
creation.” The best, sweetest, purest,
noblest things associated with it. Embraces
whatever is noblest in truth, honour, faith,
love, meekness, humility, self-denial, gene-
rosity. All tenderness, sweetness, benevo-
lence, centred in the name Jesus. Gentle-
ness, moral courage, disinterested love,
identified with it. In His uame, more
sweetness, beauty, love, than ever human
heart conceived. ‘To a renewed and spiritual
mind, the most joyous and exhilarating name
on earth. “Touches all the chords of
gratitude, enthusiasm, and devotion.” Under
the Holy Spirit’s revelation, fills every
avenue of the soul with joy, wonder, and


adoration. A day coming, when it will fill
heaven and earth with its sweetness and
fragrance.


2. As ‘ointment poured forth.’ Indicates—
(1) Abundance, as well of the ointment itse'f
as of its fragrance. The perfume abundantly
diffused. An infinite fulness in Jesus, and
an infinite sweetness in His name. ‘It hath
pleased the Father that in Him shouid all
fulness dwell.’ ‘God giveth not the Spirit
by measure unto Him.’ His glory that of
the only begotten of the Father, ‘full of
tinge and truth ’ (John i. 14: iii. 34; Col. i.

9). Christ a full Saviour for empty sinners.
A fountain ever full and ever flowing His
riches without a bottom. A mine Never
exhausted.


Enough for each, enough for all,
Enougb for evermore.


(2) Impartation. A perfume poured ferth


ields up all its fragrance. for enjoyment.
nclosed and sealed up in the vessel, it


affords little sweetness. Mary broke her
alabaster box, or its seal, and the whole
house was filled with the odour of the oint-
ment. Christ’s name not only ointment but
ointment ‘poured forth,’ for the benefit and
enjoyment of others. Christ to be mani-
fested—

Externally. Christ and His name was a
erfume in heaven while shut up ‘in the
bosses of the Father’ A perfume to God
and angels before man was created. Shut
up as to men till the day of the fall. The
first promise of a Saviour made in Eden
broke the seal (Gen. iii. 15). The seal more
and more removed, and the fragrance made
more and more to flow forth, as time
rolled on. The promised Saviour more
and more plainly and fully revealed through
the prophets, till He Himself appeared
The ointment then poured forth—(1) By


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





Christ Himself: (a) in His life; (3) in
His preaching; (c) in His miracles; (d)
in His death. The seal of tle casket
containing the perfume tha, was to fill
heaven and earth with its fragrance fully
broken on Calvary when Jesus said: ‘It is
finished,’ bowed His head, and died; (e) in
His effusion of the Holy Spirit on the day
of Pentecost. (2) By the Apostles and the
Church after Pentecost. ill then the ‘name’
shut up among the Jews: after that, to be
carried by the Apostles to all nations. The
ointment streaming forth more or less overt
the world during the last eighteen centuries
The calling and commission of the Church
at large, as well as of Apostles, ministers, and
missionaries, to make manifest the savour of
his knowledge in every place (2 Cor. ii. 14).
‘ Ye are My witnesses.’ Every believer, by
his lips and his life, to be a bearer of the
fragrance of Christ’s name in the neighbour-
hood where he dwells.

Internally. ‘Yhis ointment to be poured
forth iz the soul in order to the perception
of its sweetness. Mere pa diffusion
pot sufficient. A spiritual fragrance to be
spiritually perceived. A spiritual power of
perception needed; or, what is equivalent,
an inward spiritual revelation of Christ by
the Holy Ghost. ‘It pleased God to reveal
His Son in me.’ ‘Flesh and blood hath not
revealed this unto thee, but my Father who
is in heaven.’ ‘Thou hast hid these things
from the wise and prudent and hast revealed
them unto babes.’ God ‘ hath shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ’
(2 Cor. iv. 6; Gal. i. 16; Matt. xvi. 17; xi.
25). Without the inward diffusion of the
fragrance by the Holy Ghost (John xvi. 14,
15), Christ ‘a root out of ary ground, with-
out form or comeliness’ (Isa. liii. 2). A
man’s greatest blessedness in having this
precious ointment poured forth in his heart
(Rom. v. 5). The perfume of Christ’s name
to be poured forth externally by the Church,
through the lips and lives of its members, to
the world at large; tzternally by the Holy
Ghost to the individual soul. The Word and
Sacraments the instituted means through
which the Spirit pours forth the ointment,
both externally and internally. Sinners
saved and believers refreshed, revived, and
sanctified only as Christ's name is thus
revealed and the ointment poured forth.
The Scriptures, a preached Gospel, the
Bread and Wine in the Supper, —these the
casket containing the perfume; the Holy
Ghost the agent who breaks the seal and
pours forth the fragrance.

Important questions for each: Have I
known this precious name? Is the name of


CHAP. L





Jesus to me ‘as ointment poured forth?’ If
80, what am I doing to diffuse its fragrance
for the benefit of others? If not, why so?
Have I given proper attention to that name?
Have I seriously thought of Christ? ‘The
whole have no need of a physician, but
they that are sick:’ have I realized my
spiritual sickness P Have I seriously
considered and really known what it is to be
a sinner, and so realized my need of a
Saviour? If not, how can I expect the
name of Jesus to be sweet and precious te
me? Lord, let me not rest till I have done
so. Give me now, by Thy Holy Spirit, to
realize my need of Christ, and to see His
preciousness.


The Effect of Solomon’s Excellencies.
“ Therefore do the virgins love thee.”


The report of the king’s excellencies and
attractions had reached Shulamite, as it had
done the Queen of Sheba (1 Kings x. 1).
The effect of these excellencies was that the
virgins loved him; among the rest Shulamite
herself. So the excellencies of Christ render
Him, as they may well do, the object of love
to all sincere and rightly disposed persons
who came to hear of them. In reference
to—


Love to Christ,
the text suggests—=


I. The Persons who love Him.
‘ virgins’ representatives of—

1. Believers, or renewed persons in general.
Virgin-souls—those whose hearts are given
entirely to God and Jesus Christ. Those
who follow the Lamb whithersoever He
goeth (Rev. xiv. 4). Believers to be pre-
sented to Christ as a chaste virgin (2 Cor,
xi. 3). The true members of the Jewish
Church so called (Jer. xxxi. 4,21). Believers
‘virgins ’—(1) rom their pure and undivided
affection to Christ ; (2) From their chaste and
Juithful adherence to Him and His cause ;
(3) From their ¢rue and Scriptural views of
Him and His religion; (4) From the purity
of their worship and general conversation;

5) From their meekness, modesty, and tender-
ness of conscience; (6) From their moral
beauty and comeliness of spirit. Observe—
(1) Christ only loved by virgin-souls, whose
hearts are detached from the world. Men
cannot serve God and mammon, or love
Christ and the world If any man love the
world, the love of the Father and of Christ
is not in him. A divided heart cannot love
Christ. Those only His true lovers who are
willing to leave all and follow Him. sre


The


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


/
[





—(2) Only renewed and regenerate persons
love Christ. The arial: mind enmity
against God, and so against Christ. The
heart renewed and circumcised in order to
love God and His Son (Deut. xxx. 6). The
stony heart taken away and a heart of flesh
given instead (Ezek. xxxvi. 26). (3) Au
renewed souls love Christ. Christ the magnet
that attracts renewed hearts. A natural
affinity between Christ and renewed souls.
Such able both to see and appreciate His
excellence, both in Himself and in relation
to sinners. The language of renewed and
enlightened souls : ‘The love of Christ con-
straineth us’ (2 Cor. v. 14). (4) The glory
and honour of Jesus, that He is loved only by
pure and sincere souls, and by all such.

2. Young converts, more particularly. First
love of believers often warmest. The kind-
ness of Israel’s youth tenderly remembered
by the Lord hee ii, 2). The believer’s
young love often damped by the power of
corruption within, and the influence of the
world without. The main charge which the
Lord Jesus brought against the Church of
Ephesus, that it had left its ‘first love’
(Rev. ii. 4).

3. Men in general,—especially, men of
single and sincere hearts. Christ the suit-
able object of human love, both as a perfect
man and as a loving Saviour. Men of honest
and sincere hearts the most likely to love
Christ. Hence the attachment of a
Nathanael and a Cornelius, of a Nicodemus
and a Joseph of Arimathea. Men who are
‘Israelites indeed, in whom there is no
guile,’ readily drawn to Christ. Christ the
* Desire of all nations,’ fitted to be such, and
actually to become such. Men only pre-
vented from loving Christ by the blindness
of their minds and the depravity of their
hearts. Love to Christ the test of a man’s
character. Men worthy to be ‘accursed’
who do not love the Lord Jesus Christ (1
Cor. xvi. 23).

4. Angels, who have sever sinned. Christ
the object of angelic love. His sufferi
on earth and His glory in heaven lovingly
contemplated by angels (1 Pet. i 11, 12).
Angels rejoiced to minister to Him, and sti
minister to His members for His sake.
The first to announce His birth, and the
companions of the redeemed in celebrating

is praise.


II. The Love itself. Christ the object
first of a sinner’s faith, then of his love. True
faith in Christ, a ‘faith which worketh by
love.’ Men’s love desired by Christ: ‘ My
son, give Me thine heart.’ The love of the
woman of Sychar refreshes Him more than
meat and drink. Nothing without men’s
love satisfied Christ, ‘If a man would ~ive

14


all the substance of his house for love, it
would be utterly contemned’ (chap. viii. 7).
Christ infinitely worthy of men’s love—(1) For
what He is in Himself; (2) For what He
has done for them. Observe—

1. The character of a believer’s love to
Christ. It is—(1) Natural and reasonable.
(2) Ardent and sincere. (3) Paramount
and supreme. (4) Undivided and admitting
no rival. (5) Active and practical. (6)
Self-denying. (7) Pure and holy. (8)
Permanent and abiding. (9) Unconquerable
and unquenchable. (10) Divine in its
origin. (11) Self-evidencing.

2. The evidence of this love. Shews it-
self—(1) In obedience to His will. (2) In
devotednesy to His service. (3) In love to
His fellowship. (4) In imitation of His
spirit and conduct. (5) In affection to His
people, His cause, and all that belongs te


Bride’s Second Desire.
§ Draw me, we will rus after thee’ — Verse 4.


Shulamite’s fret desire for the bride-
oom’s kisses; her second desire for the
fedeceoutn himself. Spiritual desire grows
and enlarges itself. Christ better than even
His kisses. The text contains—I. A Request :
II. A Resolution.


1. The Ruquust. ‘Draw me. Christ
the magnet of renewed souls. The desire of
all such to be drawn to Him. The request
the result—(1) Of acquaintance with Him ;
(2) Of love to Him; (3) Of desire to enjoy
and follow Him. Implies—(1) Perception
of Him, as the One Pearl of great price;
the Treasure hid in the Field; the chief
among ten thousand; the Altogether Lovely.
(2) Desire after Him. Renewed and saved
souls not content to be at a distance from
Christ, or to sit still in such a condition.
Their desire to be near Him, lean on His
bosom, rest in His arms, sit at His feet, hear
His voice, look on His pierced hands and
side. (3) Conscious inability, The soul
unable of itself to come to Christ, run after
Him, or follow Him. The renewed soul
conscious of that inability. Hence the
prayer : ‘Quicken us, and we will call upon

hy name.’ ‘My soulcleaveth to the dust ;
quicken me according to Thy word.’ ‘Turn
me and [ shall be turned.’ The soul con-
scious of Divine help in following hard after
God (Ps. lxiii. 8; cxix. 32). Grace, teaches
us both Christ’s worth and our own weakness.
Christ the Author as well as the Object of
our faith. The soul kept from Christ, and
from following after Him, by a three-fold
hindranoe—(1) The flesh; (2) The world;


—— = -


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


CHAP. I.





(3) The Devil. Christ first draws souls
to Him, and then after Him. Observe in
regard to—


The Saviour’s Drawing.


1. The Meantne anv Import of ##. A
threefold drawing of the soul by Christ—
(1) In conversion to Him; (2) In follow-
ing after Him; (3) In communion with
Him. The last here especially intended.
The desire in verse 2, followed by that in
verse 4 as a means towards it. To enjoy
Christ’s kisses we have to be drawn to
Christ Himself. Christ draws—(1) Our
attention, keeping it fixed on Himself; (2)
Our desire and longing, aa in the case of the
woman of Sidon (Matt. xv. 31—28); (3)
Our affection ; (4) Our resolution; (5) Our
self-surrender ; (6) Our conjidence and faith.
Implies not only faith, but perseverance in
it al Pet. i. 5).

2. The Means by which He draws. Christ
draws by showing—(1) His own love, love-
liness, and preciousness; (2) Our entire
and absolute need of Him. The Holy
Ghost the effectual agent employed, The
instrumental means, the Word, however
communicated, which reveals Him in what
He is in Himself, and what He is to us and
has done for us (John xii. 32). Christ
draws—(1) By the Doctrines He teaches;
{2) By the Promises He makes; (3) By the
Providences He employs (Hos, li. 14; xi.
4; Rom. ii. 4).

3. The MorivE axp Grounn of the draw-
ing. His own free love. He draws with
loving-kindness because He has loved with
an everlasting love (Jer. xxxi. 3), The
bands with which He draws, “‘the bands of
love” (Hos, xi. 4). His love to and choice
of us before ours to Him (John xv. 16; 1
John iv. 19).

The porsonality of the request to be
noticed. ‘Draw me.’ Salvation and true
religion,—the. possession and se ebeecae of
Christ,—a personal thing. The believer's first
desire is to be drawn himself. ‘Remember
me, O Lord, with the favour that Thou
bearest to Thy people; visit me with Thy
salvation’ (Ps. cvi.4). We can only be the
means of drawing others to Christ when we
have been drawn ourselves.


IL Tke Rusorvtiow. ‘ We will run after
‘thee’ The words may indicate—(1) The
object of the request; (3) The argument
used to enforce it: not sweeter to
Christ, than a soul ardently following Him ;
(3) A purpose formed; (4) A hope enter-
tained, Viewed as referring to the speaker,
@ purpose or resolution; as referrmg to
thera, a hope and expectation. Notice—


1. The Action. ‘Run after thee.” Im-
plies eagerness, earnestness, and haste; ra-
pidity, perseverance, and strength (Isa. xl.
31; Dan. viii. 6). Opposed to former
deadness and sluggishness, whether abso-
lute or comparative. Believers, when it is
well with them, not content with mere
walking after Christ. Good to walk, better
torun. The Psalmist’s resolution (Ps. cxix.
32). The promise of the Father to Christ
in regard to the nations (Isa. lv. 5). Not
only walking but running promised as the
result of waiting upon the Lord (Isa. xl.
31). Running, rather than mere walking,
leasing to Christ. Luke-warmness his great

islike (Rev. iii. 15). Christ worthy not
only of being followed, but rux after
—followed and sought with the energy of
the whole soul. A blind world run after
the ereature; enlightened believers run
after Christ. Christ first run Zo, then run
after. Run toas a Saviour; run after asa
Friend and Beloved. We run ¢o Him as
sinners; after Him as saints. The believer’s
duty and privilege not to run defore, but after
Christ ; not to make a way for himself but
to tread in His steps (John x. 4, 5, 27).
The running ours ; the power to run, Christ’s.
Effectual grace consistent with personal
diligence, and a strong encouragement to it
(Phil. ii, 12, 13; Ps.cx.3). The request to
be drawn not made from indolence but from
helplessness. Believers to be not slothful
in business—least of all in the business of
religion—but fervent in spirit, serving the
Lord (Rom. xii. 11). Progress always to
be made towards Christ and in the Divine
life. The Christian life a ruaning (1 Cor.
ix. 24,25; Gal. ii.2; iv. 7; Heb. xii. 1, 2;
Philip, iii, 13, 14). The believer’s feet
made like hind’s feet. The Word of God
made plain, that those that read may run
Hab. ii. 2). Christ to be run after—

) As our Chief Joy and Highest Good,

hrist the Desire of all nations, and worthy
to be the Desire of all hearts. All in Him
that is lovely and desirable; and all lovely
and desirable that is in Him. Christ the
Fountain of living waters. All else broken
cisterns. The language of the soul runni
after Christ, ‘ Whom have [in heaven but Thee?
and there is none on the earth that I desire
besides Thee.’? ‘There be many that say:
who will shew us any good: Lord, lift Thou
up the light of Thy countenance upon us’
(Ps. lxxiii. 25 ; iv. 6). ‘

“Thou, O Christ, art all I want ;
More than all in Thee I find.”
(9) As our Pattern and Example. He hath
left us an example that we should follow
His steps. ‘I have given you an example
that ye should do as I have waa t ah


CHAP. L,





(John xiii, 14, 15; 1 Pet. ii. 21). The
same mind to be in us that was in Him.
The believer to be as He was in the world
(Phil. ii. 5; 1 John iv. 17; ii. 6; iii. 3).
To run his race, looking unto Jesus (Heb. xii.
3). (8). Our Leader and Commander. Christ
given for this purpose (Isa. lv. 4). ‘The
Captain of our salvation. Believers to be
good soldiers of Jesus Christ. The picture
of Christ and His saints on the day of His
appearing to have its special verification
now,—Christ as King and General on His
white horse, followed by the armies of His
people also on white horses (Rev. xix.
12—14). Fulfilled in the calling of the
Apostles (Matt. iv. 18—22; Luke v. 27,
28; John i. 43). And of every believer
(Matt. xvi 24). ‘The sacramental host of
God’s elect.’

2. The persons. ‘ We will run after Thee.’
The singular changed for the plural. Draw
me: we willrun. We,—TI and others with
me. Me, the individual believer; we, he
and others influenced by him. Or; me, the
single believer; we, the Church of which he
forms a part. Both ‘individuality and plu-
rality in the Bride. The Bride both an
individual and a community. The Church
one and many. The drawing of one member
followed by the running of others; so the
Primitive Church at and after Pentecost.
The drawing of the womanof Sychar followed
by the running of many of the inhabitants
(John iv.). The language of a lively believer
that of Moses to his father-in-law: ‘We
are journeying to the place of which the
Lord hath said, I will give it you; come
thou with us and we will do thee good’
(Num. x. 29). The believer not content. to
enjoy or follow Christ alone. Andrew finds
his brother Simon and brings him to Jesus.
Philip, after finding the Saviour himself, does
the same with Nathaniel (John i. 40—45).
None drawn to follow Christ alone. One
drawn by means of another. The believer’s
duty and privilege to be instrumental in
drawing others to Christ ; and his great joy
to see others running after Him along with
himself. The lively Christian a missionary
everywhere. The love and life of one be-
liever the means of quickening and stirrin
up others. On the other hand, one dea
Christian often the means of deadening
others. One lively member of a Church a
blessing to the whole.


Bride’s Recorded Experience.
‘ The King hath brought me into His chambers,
Shulamite recalls and records her experi-
ence of the King’s kindness and her own


happiness. Good to remember and thank-
fully to record the manifestations of Christ’s
16


HOMIZETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





favour. The Lord’s will concerning His
people. He hath made His works to be
remembered. The believer’s daty,—Bless
the Lord, O my soul and forget not all His
benefits. A gain to ourselves as well as to
others, to remember and ‘ mention the loving
kindness of the Lord’ (Is. lxiii. le The
favour in the text recorded apparently as an
answer to the prayer: ‘Draw me.’ Answers
to prayer to be especially remembered and
mentioned for the Lord’s honour, and for the
encouragement of others as well as our-
selves. Earnest longings and entreaties for
spiritual blessings never disregarded. ‘The
vision is for an appointed time; though it
tarry, wait for it; it will surely come, and
will not tarry’ (Hab. ii. 3).—Observe, in re-
arte to the favour in the text,—introduction
in


The King’s Chambers,


I. Tus Campers themselves. The
King’s chambers his more private apart-
ments. Admission only for favoured persons,
those nearest and dearest to the King. The
especial privilege of the King’s Betrothed.
Shulamite rejoices in being admitted to
this high honour. Christ not only makes
believers His Bride, but admits them to the

rivileges of such a relation. Admission
into Christ’s chambers implies—more than
ordinary manifestations of Himself ; personal
nearness; intimate fellowship; sensible en-
joyment; confideutial communication. The
fulfilment of the promise: ‘I will manifest
myself to him’ (John xiv. 21). The secret
of the Lord is with them that fear Him, and
He will show them His covenant (Ps. xxv.
14). The privilege of believers to enter into
the holiest of all by the blood of Jesus (Heb.
x. 19), and to sit with Christ in the heavenly
places (Eph. ii. 6). Special nearness to
Christ and sense of His love at times realized
by the believer. Such realisations not con-
fined to time or place; but more usually
enjoyed in secret prayer and public ordi-
nances, more especially in the Lord’s Supper.
Such experiences the believer’s high festival
days, and foretastes of heaven. Ordiuarily
for but a short time together. At present,
the believer’s place in general only the ante-
chamber. Permanent abiding in the King’s
chambers reserved for a higher and better
state. Meantime, the happy privilege of be-
lievers to be at times admitted into the
King’s chambers. No place on earth so
honourable and so blessed. No place so
humble and unattractive to the eye of sense
but e can convert it into the King’s
ohatibera: Jacob’s experience on the ston
plain at Bethel not contined to local habi-
tation: ‘Surely the Lord is in this place, and
I knew it not: This is none other but the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





house of God, and this is the gate of
heaven’ (Gen. xxviii. 16,17). Such Divine
manifestations enjoyed in the humblest
dwelling, and even in the chamber of sick-
ness. The field, the wood, the highway, the
Open sea, capable of being made the King’s
chambers. John’s blessed experience in the
lonely rocky isle of Patmos. Samuel Ruther-
ford in exile dated his letters from ‘the King’s

alace at Aberdeen.’ John Bunyan wrote

is “ Pilgrim’s Progress” in Bedford Jail.
The moors and mosses, caves and mountain
sides, often made to His persecuted fol-
lowers the King’s chambers. Admission
into these chambers the special privilege of
New Testament times. Moses spoke to the
Church at the door of the tabernacle; the
Apostles speak from the Holy of Holies.
Those now waiting at Wisdom’s gates ad-
mitted into Wisdom’s chambers. The three
eae blessings enjoyed in those chambers,—

omfort, Enlightenment, and Security (Ps.
xxv. 13, 14; xxvii.4—6; Isa. xxvi.20, 21).
The King’s chambers on earth so blessed,
what the chambers in heaven!


II. Apmission into the chambers. ‘The
King hath brought me’ (Heé., ‘made me
come’), Admission into them both the
King’s favour and the King’s doing. An
enhancement of the happiness. Believers
conscious of their own unworthiness and
inability to enter the chambers of Divine
communion, and of the Saviour’s grace in
introducing them. The King brings them—
(1) By procuring access through His own
merits (Rom. v. 2; Eph. ii. 13, 18; Heb.
x. 19). (2) By giving the desire to enter
them—‘ Why was I made to hear thy voice,’
&c. (Eph. iv. 18). (3) By encouraging them
with His gracious invitations and promises.
(4) By imparting faith and inward light (Ps.
xliii. 3). (5) By subduing and keeping down
corruption,—like Abraham fraying away the
fowls from the sacrifice (Gen. xv. 11). Ob-
stacles and hindrances to be overcome in
order to our entrance into the King’s cham-
bers. Some outside of us: Divine justice
that forbids it to transgressors ; Satan who
resists it; the world with its influences
against it. Others within us: conscious

uilt ; spiritual blindness; carnality; un-

elief; sloth; natural disinclination. These
to be overcome and removed by the
Saviour’s grace.—‘The Kizg hath brought
me.’ Marks the forth-putting of especial
grace and power. Christ brings #nners into
the enjoyment of Divine favour and fellow-
ship as a Eing. ‘he title indicative of His
power and right. To introduce sinners into
the enjoyment of the blessings He has pur-
faced. one of His kingly acts. As King,
He has the keys of His owa chambers as

|


CHaP.


well as those of death and hell. The im-
ven of Christ’s Aingliness left on the
eart of the believer admitted into His fel-
lowship. A few hours’ converse with Jesus
in a humble dwelling left John and Andrew
with the conviction they had been with
Messiah the King (John i. 41). Communion
with Christ gives lofty thoughts of Him.
Only ‘ He’ before ; now, ‘the Rane Christ
all the more kingly in a believer’s eyes the
nearer he gets to Him. So Isaiah: ‘ Mine
eyes have seen the King’ (Isa. vi. 5).
Divine familiarity the opposite of breeding
contempt. Reverence, humility, and obedi-
ence, the result of admission into the King’s
chambers. The experience in those cham-
bers: ‘I am a man of unclean lips ’ (Isa.
vi. 5). Believers go forth from them more
devoted to the service of the King: ‘ Here
am I, send me’ (Isa. vi. 8). Divine power
and sovereignty manifest in everything con.
nected with salvation. Christ a King, both
in His own right as God, and by Divine
appointment as Mediator (Ps. ii. 6). Saves
not only as a Priest and a Prophet, but also
asa King. Believers, when it is best with
them, love most to acknowledge Christ’s
supremacy and right over all they are and
have anddo. Christ not only a King, but ¢he
King,—chief of all who ever bore the title;
the only one with absolute right to it;
‘the blessed and only Potentate, King of
Kings and Lord of Lords’ (1 Tim. vi. 15).
—Observe the personality of the experi-
ence: ‘Hath brought me.’ Hach believer
to be able to say this for himself. The
language—(1) Of joy and thankfulness.
What was matter of prayer, now made matter
of praise. (2) Of wonder and surprise.
Shulamite dwells on the King’s condescen-
sion. Like Mephibosheth when admitted to
the King’s table, —‘ such a dead dog as I,’
‘Hath brought me,’—me so black and un-
worthy of such an honour and happiness !
Amazing condescension and love on the part
of the King to admit worms and rebels mto
His chambers. Every believer a begga:
raised by the King from the dunghill, to be
made His Bride and the partner of His
throne. ‘The believer never to lose sight of
what he was, and still is, in himself. (8)
Of consciousness and certainty. Snulamite
certain the King has bestowed on her this
privilege. Enjoyment of Christ’s presence
and fellowship a matter about which there
should be no mistake or doubt. Christ’s
object to make it certain; Satan’s, to tempt
the believer to question its reality and think
it a delusion.


Bride’s Joy in the King.
* We will be glad and rejoice in Thee.
Language expressive of Skulamite’s happy


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





experience of the King’s chambers, and her
high esteem of the King himself. Implies
both anticipation and resolution, Observe
on the words thus viewed, in regard to the


Believer’s Joy in Christ,


I. The soy itself. Intense joy. The lan-
guage emphatic: ‘We will be glad and
rejoice.’ Two words employed for empha-
sis. Not mere joy, but exultation. Not
a mere rejoicing, but a shouting for joy. An
inward joy outwardly expressed. A believer’s
joy in Christ a joy unspeakable and full of
plory (1 Pet. i 8). Believers at times in

eaviness through manifold temptations;
but their experience anything but a gloomy
one. The ransomed of the Lord enabled to
return to Zion with songs and everlasting
icy upon their heads (Isa. xxxv. 10).

ave joy here, and the hope of more kere-
after. ‘They shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and sighing shall flee away.’ Cheer-
fulness and joy disposing to praise, both the
privilege and duty of believers. Sadness in
the presence of an Oriental monarch an
offence to the sovereign and a peril to the
subject (Neh. ii. 1, 2). God graciously meets
those that rejoice while they remember Him
in His ways (Isa. lxvi. 5).


IL The osssct of the joy. Christ him-
self. We will be glad and rejoice in Thee.
Not in the creature and its attractions; not
in the world and its pleasures; not in
self and its doings or feelings. Christ and
God in him the object of truest and highest
joy. The duty and privilege of believers,
both in the Old and Nes estament, to re-
joice in the Lord (Ps. xxxiii. 1; Phil. iii.

). Enough in God to fill a universe of in-
telligent creatures, and enough in Christ to
fill a world of believing sinners, with joy
unspeakable. Christ opens up sources of
joy outside of Himself; but the deep and
iving fountain is in Himself. The Psalmist’s
words especially true of Christ: ‘All my
springs are in Thee’ (Ps. lxxxvi. 7).
In Him are both ‘the upper and the nether
springs,’—the joy of the Church triumphant
in heaven, and of the Church militant
on earth. All the attractions and charms in
the creature concentrated and summed up in
Him, the Creator and Saviour. In Him all
love and loveliness, all sweetness and ex-
cellence, in their perfection and without
alloy. Believers able to rejoice in Christ
not only as their Redeemer and Saviour, but
as their Beloved and Bridegroom (Matt. ix.
15). To a renewed soul, everything in Jesus
such as to afford matter of joy,—His person,
aames, titles, offices, relations, work; His
oirth, life, sufferings, death, resurrection, as-

18


cension, second coming; His miracles, dis
courses, doctrines, promises, precepts, warn-
ings; His word, worship, day, table, people,
cause; His salvation, grace, kingdom, fel-
lowship, love; His blood that washes them,
His righteousness that clothes them, His
ape that anoints and sanctifies them, and

is ordinances that comfort and strengthen
them. In His present salvation they rejoice;
still more in that which is to be revealed at
His coming. In His salvation they rejoice ;
still more in Himself. Good to have and
enjoy the King’s gifts; still better to have
and enjoy the King himself. Thy gifts pre-
cious; but ‘ We will be glad and rejoice in
Thee.’ Joy in an unseen Christ unspeakable;
what then in a seez one P

The text the language of resolution. ‘We
will be glad.’ The duty of believers to re-
joice in Christ, and to resolve by Divine
grace to do so. Especially on any fresh
enjoyment of His presence and love. Holy
resolution the fruit of Divine grace, and to
be freely made in dependance on it. Need
of resolution. Much to oppose such rejoic-
ing: remembered sin; inward corruption;
buffetings of Satan; outward trials. These
not to hinder rejoicing in the Lord, ‘ Al-
though the fig-tree shall not blossom, &c.,
yet will I rejoice in the Lord,’ &c. (Hab. iii.

7, 18). Joy in Christ often greatest when
joy from the creature is least (Hos. ii 14;’
2 Cor. i. 5).

The language of faith and hope. The same
ground of rejoicing in the future as in the

ast. Christ a well that never runs dry.
he same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.
‘Who delivered us from so great a death,
and doth deliver; in whom we trust that
He will yet deliver us’ (2 Cor.i.10). ‘Be-
cause thou hast been my help, therefore in
the shadow of Thy wings will I rejoice’
(Pa. lxiii. 7).

Observe the reeled who shall rejoice. ‘ We
will be glad and rejoice in Thee.’ Another
change from the singular to the plural. ‘The
King hath brought me, &e.; we will be glad,
&c. The Bride herself, and others aion
with her. The believer speaks for himse
and his fellow-believers. The joy of one to
become the joy of many. The part of be-
lievers to Sa with them that rejoice.
The body of Christ one with many members.
© If one member be honoured, all the members
rejoice with it’ (1 Cor. xii. 26). One be-
liever rejoicing in the presence and love of
Jesus, the means of influencing others to
seek and obtain the same happiness. Man a
social being. Inclined to act in numbers,
One constantly influenced by another. Sym-

athy a powerful principle in man’s nature.
Tits operation im revivals of religion. Em-


ployed by the Spirit in the greas


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


CHAP. L





of Christ’s Kingdom (Zech. viii. 20—23 ;
Isa. ii. 3; Mic. iv. 1, 2).


Bride’s Gratitude to the King.
* We will remember Thy love more than wine,


Shulamite resolves not only to rejoice in
the King himself, but to cherish a grateful
remembrance of his love. ‘‘ We will remem-
ber (or record) thy love (or loves—loving
words and actions) more than wine.” Pro-
bably a double resolution—to remember in-
wardly for herself, and to record outwardly
for others; both to the praise of her loving
Bridegroom. One of the duties and delights
of believers, the


Remembrance of Christ’s Love.


Observe in regard to it—


L The Love remembered. Heb. ‘ Loves,’
—for the greatness of it, or the variety of
its kinds, and the multiplicity of its manifes-
tations. Christ’s love to His people that of
a Saviour to the lost, a Redeemer to the cap-
tive, a Shepherd to his sheep, a Husband to
his wife, a Brother to his brethren, a Father
to his children, a Friend to his intimate ac-
quaintances. Its various manifestations—

1. Offering Himself for our redemption in
the everlasting covenant (Ps. xl. 7).

2. Revealing himself to the Old Testament
Church in types and symbols, prophecies and
promises.

_ 3, Assuming our nature in the fulness of


e.

4, His teachings and labours of love during
His life on earth.

5. His sufferings and death as the atone-
ment for our sins.

6. His return to heaven to carry forward
the work of our salvation.

7. His subsequent bestowment of the Holy
Spirit with all needful grace and blessing.

8. His gathering in lost sinners to Himself
through His Word and Spirit.

9. His speaking peace and comfort to the
awakened and troubled conscience.

10. His restoring the believer from his
falls and backslidings.

11. His gladdening the soul with His
manifested presence and love.

12. His gracious promises to come again
and receive His people to Himself for ever.

Christ’s love infinitely worthy to be re-
membered and celebrated through time and
eternity; on account of —

1. Its greatness. ‘Greater love hath no
man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends’ (John xv.13). Christ’s love

reater than this; as—(1) He did more than

y down His life forus; (2) He did it not for

2—2


friends, but enemies.. Jonathan’s love to
David, ‘wonderful, passing the love of
women’ (2 Sam. i. 26). Jonathan’s love
only a faint picture of Christ’s.

2. Its costliness. ‘Christ loved the Church,
and gave Himself for it’ (Eph. v. 25). The
love of Ahasuerus to Esther his queen ex-
tended to the gift of half his kingdom
(Est. v. 3). Christ’s love to His people ex-
tended not only to the gift of His whole
kingdom, but of Himself (Matt. xx. 28).

8. Its fruits. Deliverance from sin, death,
and hell, with perfection in holiness and the
enjoyment of Himself in glory everlasting.
‘That He might sanctify and cleanse it by
the washing of water, by the word; that He
might present it unto Himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing, but that it should be holy and
without blemish’ (Eph. v. 26).


II. The RemMEeMBRANCE Of i¢. The ree
membrance of Christ’s love on the part of
believers: (1) A Duty; (2) A Delight;
(3) A Necessity. Proceeds—(1) From a
sense of duty; (2) From the impression of its
sweetness. Christ’s love remembered when
all else is forgotten. Its remembrance brings
—(1) Glory to Christ; (2) Benefit to our
neighbour; (3) Comfort and quickening to
ourselves. Its remembrance our sweetest
cordial in the time of trouble (Psalm xlii. 6),
Assures us afresh of our interest in Christ,
and casts out slavish fear. Revives our love
to Him, and stimulates to do and suffer for
His sake. His love not remembered and re-
corded as a thing past and gone for ever;
but one of unchanging continuance and ever
fresh manifestation. An everlasting love.
Helps to remembering it are—

1. Daily reading of the Word, with medi-
tation and prayer; especially such portions
of it as bear expressly upon Christ and His
love. For example: the Gospels and Can-
ticles ; Isaiah liii.; Psalm xxii. &c.

2. Careful observance of the Sabbath, with
suitable meditation on His death and resur-
rection, which it was designed to commemo-
rate.

3. Frequent celebration of the Lord’s Sup-

er, designed for the sad urpose of
eeping Himself and His dying love in re-
membrance.

4. Fellowship with living and loving be-
lievers. ‘As iron sharpeneth iron, so doth
a man the face of his friend.’ ‘Then they
that feared the Lord spake often one to
another.’ ‘Provoke one another to love
and good works.’


III. The Ducrus of Remembrance. ‘More
than wine.” The love better than wine
(verse 2), and therefore more remembered,

19


CHaP. L


Wine mentioned as a natural means of
gladness ard refreshing (Jud. ix. 13; Ps.
civ. 15). Associated with festivity—‘ ban-
guet of wine.” Here put for all earth’s
choicest pleasures and sensuous enjoyments.
To Shulamite, her bridegroom’s love more
worthy to be remembered than everything
besides. ‘Sweet is the King’s wine, but
sweeter his love.’ All Christ's gifts sweet,
and all His benefits to be remembered ; but
sweeter and more to be remembered than all is
His love. Its sweetness sufficient to obliterate
the remembrance of all other joy. Christ’s
love the absorbing subject as the believer ap-
roaches the confines of eternity. Harth’s
awful enjoyinents perhaps not forgotten in
heaven; but the love of Christ the chosen
and overshadowing subject of ever-new songs
(Rev. i. 5; v. 9, 12, 13; xiv. 3).


The text the language of resolution. ‘We
will remember,’ &c. Such resolution needed.
The flesh adverse to such remembrance.
Satan’s object to efface or weaken it. The
tendency of earthly things to prevent or
deaden it. David’s language in reference to
Jerusalem applicable to Christ’s love: “If I
forget thee, let my right hand forget her
cunning: if IT do not remember thee, let my
tongue cleave. to the roof of my mouth;
if 1 prefer not thee above my chiefest joy
(Ps. exxxyii. 5, 6).


Bride Commends her Beloved and
Justifies her Love.


* The upright love thee?


May be either read—‘ Upright people love
thee;’ or, ‘Rightly do people love thee.
Mentioned by Shulamite as an enhancement
of her Beloved’s excellence, and a justification
of her own love. Similartoverse 3. Indi-
eon the character both of Christ himself
an
Christ’s Lovers.


{. Taz CHARACTER OF THOSE WHO Love
Curist. ‘The upright;’—sincere, true,
just, pure in heart and life. Such as Simeon
of Jerusalem; Joseph the carpenter ; Joseph
of Arimathzea; Nathaniel, ‘an Israelite in-
deed, in whom was no guile.” Christ Him-
self, ‘that Just One;’ God’s ‘righteous
servant;’ ‘Jesus Christ the Rigtiteous,’
who loves righteousness and hates iniquity;
* holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from
sinners,’ Naturally loved by persons of a
similar character, and only by such. A holy
Christ capable of being loved only by holy
persons, or such at least as, couscious of their
sins, desire to be holy. Like naturally loves
and draws to like. ence Christ only loved
by converted and renewed persons. Love to


20


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: UHM SUNG UF SULUMUN.


———


God's Christ a holy and spiritual thing. A
plant not spontaneously growing among the
noxious weeds of Nature’s garden, but proe
duced by the Holy Ghost in a renewed heart.
Found only in those who have passed from
death to life; who were afar off, but have
been made nigh by the blood of Christ; whe
were lost, but are found; who as believing
and pardoned sinners ‘have tasted that the
Lord is gracious’ (1 Pet. ii. 3; 1 John iv.
19). The forgiven woman that had been a
sinner, loved Jesus, who had forgiven her
sins, which were many, and for which she
now lovingly weeps at His feet. The proud,
self-righteous, merely outwardly religious
Pharisee, incapable of such love. ‘He to
whom little is forgiven, the same loveth
little’ (Luke vii. 47). A sinner may love
Christ, but not a Pharisee (Luke xv. 1, 2).
Upright persons love Christ, because by His
blood shed for them, and His spirit given to
them, He has made them upright. When He
forgives a sinner He makes him upright. The
heart purified by faith. All upright who love
Christ in sincerity. Others only pretenders.
True love to Christ sufficient to prove a man
upright. ‘By their fruits ye shall know
them.’ On the other hand, a man’s love to
Christ proved by his uprightness. ‘If ye
love me keep my commandments. Ifa man
love Me, he will keep My words’ (John xiv.
15, 23). Hence those worthy to be ‘ac-
cursed’ who do not love Christ. They are
not upright, and they refuse Him who would
make them so.


IJ. Taz Cuaracter or Curist Himserr,
The text a commendation of the Beloved.
He must be excellent and upright who is
loved by upright persons. A man’s charac-
ter indicated by the character of his friends.
A high commendation of the character of
Christ—(1) That He is loved by all the honest
and best in creation —by all holy angels and
holy men; (2) That He is loved only by the
holy aud upright


ILI. Tue Caaractsr or Love to Crrist,
It is—(1) A oly thing; only upright persons
aire it; (2) A right and reasoxable thing,

pright persons only love uprightly—on just
grounds and considerations. Just grounds
for loving Christ—(1) In what He is; (2) In
what He has done. Christ infinitely worthy
of angelic, still more of human, love. Is in-
finitely excellent in Himself; has been infi-
nitely kind to us. As God, possessed of all
the mfinite amiableness of the Divine perfec-
tions; and, as our Creator, Preserver, and
Benefactor, has an infinite right to our
love. That right enhanced by the fact that,
as God-man for our sakes, He has become
also our Kedeemer. Robbery committed


“ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON. omar. t.'





when Christ is not loved; idolatry, when
others are loved in His place, ‘If any man
love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema Maran-atha,’—accursed [when]
the Lord cometh (1 Cor. xvi. 22),

The text a test of character. Do I love
Thrist P_ If not, then I am not upright. I
do not love uprightness; for Christ is up-
rightness itself. Trot Him of what He has
the most perfect right to, and of what He
sets the highest value on—my love. Hence
my need both of mercy and grace; of merc
to pardon, and of grace to renew me. taal
grant both,


SHULAMITE,


TO THE DAUGHTERS OF JERUSALEM, GR LADIES
OF SOLOMON’S COURT,


Gives an Account of herself in justification
of her presence in the King’s Chambere,


VeRsEs 5, 6,
I am black,


But comely,

O ye daughters of Jerusalem 3
As the tents of Kedar,

As the curtains of Solomon,


Look not upon me,

Because I am black,

Because the sun hath looked upon me.
My mother’s children were angry with me;
They made me keeper of the vineyards ;
But mine own vineyard have I not kept.


Shulamite, in the Allegory, originally a rus-
tic damsel, employed by her brothers in watch-
ing the vineyards. Though thus tanned and
discoloured by the sun, yet not uncomely in
herself, and therefore not to be despised by
the ladies of the court. The words indicate
the believer’s twofold character, and the
reason of it.


The Christian Paradox.


* T am black, but comely.”


Shulamite, black or tawny in complexion
from the reason given; but comely in fea-
ture and proportion. Swarthy, as the coarse
tents of Kedar or Arabia, made of dark
coloured goats’ or camels’ hair, and farther
blackened by exposure to the sun and rain
(Isa. xxi. 13, 17: xlii, 11; Ez. xxvii. 2];
Ps. cxx. 5, 6). Comely, as the beautiful
embroidered hangings of Solomon’s palace
(Eccles. ii. 4—8; Esth. i 5, 6).


Hence observe—





I. Dark side of the Paradoz—T am
black.’ The believer black—

1. With sin. In common with others, the
believer blackened—(1) With original sin;
(2) With actual transgression, The charac-
ter of sin to make men black. Sin black in
itself, and blackens those who carry it in
their nature and commit it in their life.
Black, as contrary to the nature and will of
God, who is Light. The least sin in a be-
liever like a dark spot on the sun’s disk.
Sin pervading our whole nature renders us
sonal Ethiopians. Man, originally created
‘upright,’ made black by the Fall (Kccles. vii.
29; Rom. v. 12—19). Black with sin, both
original and actual, now the character of the
human race (Gen. vi. 5; viii. 21; 2 Chron. vi.
36; Prov. xx.9; Ps. xiv. 1—3; Rom. iii.
9—19, 23; Jamesii. 10; iti. 2; 1 John i. 8),
The experience and confession of David
(Ps. li. 5). The teaching of Christ
(John iii. 5—7). Observe—(1) The believer
black through inbred corruption and daily
transgressions, even while in Christ and enjoy-
ing His love. A law in his members warring
against the law of his mind (Rom. vii. 23).
Peter’s fall immediately after the feast. The
believer carries his blackness into the King’s
chambers. Good to remember and confess it
in the midst of his spiritual enjoyments.
‘Look unto the rock wheuce ye are hewn, and
to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged ’
(Isa. li., 1). (2) The believer not only black,
but conscious of tt. The great distinction
between him and others. Others as black as
he; but he alone sees and feels his blackness.
(3) The believer not afraid to acknowledge
that he is black. His safety and comfort not
in his not being black, or less black than
others ; but in his being comely in Christ, and
washed in His blood. His sense of blackness,
therefore, no hindrance to his chee in
Christ, but rather a help to it. Confession
of blackness part of our rejoicing in Christ’s
comeliness. ‘Ie blacker we are in our own
eyes, the more precious is Christ (2 Cor. xii.
8—10). (4) The confession, ‘I am black,’ often
the turning point in a soul’s history. Paul’s
experience at Damascus (Acts ix. 1—18;
Rom. vii. 9). That of Isaiah in the temple
(Isa. vi. 5—8). Never comely till we rea-
lize we are ‘black.’ (5) Our whole nature
black, I,—not a part of me; the whole na-
tural man; the ‘me’ and ‘1’ of the Apostle.
‘In me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good
thing. I am carnal, and sold under sin’
(Rom. vii. 14, 17). (6) Believers always
black with sin while in this world. Times
when the believer may be without suffering 5
no time when he is without sin.


9. With suffering. Suffering and grief
lacks cs na: well sa aim (Ser, vii. 215 Aue


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





iv. 8; Ps. cxix. 83). Like others, the believer,
while in this world, black with suffering as
well as with sin. Sin draws suffering with
it as its dark shadow. Believers no exception
to this law. That believers have suffering,
no more to be concealed than that they have
sin. The difference between them and other
men, not that they have less suffering, but
that they have more comfort and better hope.
The testimony of Scripture and the expe-
tience of believers, that ‘many are the
afflictions of the righteous,’ and that ‘ through
much tribulation we must enter the king-
dom.’ Believers, though having the first-
fruits of the Spirit, yet groan within them-
selves (Rom. viii. 23). Groan, being burdened
(2Cor.v. 2). Believers not only not exempt
from grief and suffering in this life, but have
naturally alarge share of it. Their sufferings
partly such as are common to men; partly,
peculiar to themselves as believers. Various
causes Of their suffering. (1) The love of
their Father, who chastens them for their

rofit, to make them partakers of His own
chines (Heb. xii. 6—11). (2) The hatred
of the world, which persecutes the members
as it did the Head ots xv. 18—21; xvii,
14; 2 Tim. iii. 12). (3) The temptations of
Satan, acting both directly on the mind
himself, and indirectly through the agency
of others (2 Cor. xii. 7; 1 Pet. v.9; Rev.
ii. 10). (4) Indwelling sin, or the body of
sin and death which we carry with us,
occasioning a constant warfare within, and
often extorting the cry, ‘O wretched man
that Iam! who shall deliver me from the
body of this deathP’ (Rom. vii. 23, 24;
Gal. v. 17; James iv. 1; I Pet.ii. 11). (5)
The sins and sufferings of others, as well of
their own brethren as of the unconverted;
these often awakening the cry of the prophet:
*O that my head were waters,’ &c. (Jer. ix.
1; viii. 21; 1 Cor. xii. 26; 2 Cor. xi. 29;
Rom. xii.15). (6) Faithful and self-denying
effurts for the spiritual and eternal benefit of
others; thus filling up in their flesh that
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ
for His body’s sake, the Church (Col. i. 24;
2 Cor. xi. 283—28). Believers, having the
Spirit of Christ, suffer in seeking to save
others, and grieve to see so many remain
ensaved,


II. Bruieut side of the Parador. ‘But
comely.’ The Bride, notwithstanding exter-
nal blackness, ‘all glorious within’ (Ps. xlv.
14). Shulamite’s comeliness rather that of
the soul, which lighted up and gave a
charming expression to her swarthy features.
Believers’ comeliness that ‘in the hidden
nan of the heart,’ and diffusing a spiritual
beauty over the life. Believers comely—

1. Thivugh imputed righteousness. Comely

22


through the comeliness of their Head and
Saviour put upon them (Ezek. xvi. 14).
Believers made the Righteousness of God in
Christ (2 Cor. v.21). Made accepted in the
Beloved (Eph. i. 6). Christ made righteous-
ness to those who are in Him (1 Cor. i. 30).
The language of faith: ‘In the Lord have }
righteousness’ (Is. xlv. 24). The name by
which the promised Saviour was to be called :
The Lord our Righteousness (Jer. xxiii. 6).
The guests at the King’s marriage-supper
accepted not in their own garments, but in
those provided for and given to them’by the
King Himself (Matt. xxii. 11, 12). Paul’s
desire to be found not in his own righteous-
ness which was by the law, but that which
was ‘through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith’
(Phil. iii. 9). Believers, like Jacob, blessed
in the garments of their Elder Brother (Gen.
xxvii. 15, 27). Men made sinners by one
man’s disobedience; made righteous by the
obedience of another (Rom. v. 19).

2. Through imparted holiness. Believers
saved and made comely as well by ¢mpartation
as by imputation; made personally holy by the
one, as they are made legally righteous by the
other. Made righteous in our Representa-
tive, we are made holy in our own persons.
Christ made to us ‘ sanctification,’ as well as
‘righteousness’ (1 Cor. i. 30). Faith says:
‘In the Lord I have righteousness and
strength,’—the latter for personal holiness,
vs the former for acceptance with God (Is.
xlv. 24). Believers clothed with ‘the beauty
of holiness,’ as well as with the ‘robe of
righteousuess.’ Made to put on Christ in
His spirit and character, as well as in His
Surety righteousness. Renewed in the image
of God, and conformed to the likeness of His
Son. Made one with Christ, they possess
His Spirit, and live because He lives in them
(Gal. ii. 20). Sanctified as well as justified
in Him (1 Cor. i. 2). Christ our Life, as
well as our Peace and Hope, ‘If any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
His’ (Rom. viii. 9). Believers chosen and
blessed by the Father in Christ, in order to
be holy and without blame before Him in
love (Eph. i. 4), Predestinated by Him to
be conformed to the image of His Son (Rom,
viii. 29). Redeemed by Christ to be sancti-
fied and cleansed, and so presented to
Himself a glorious Church, holy and without
blemish (Eph. v. 25—27). Believers accepted
in Christ without any holiness; but accepted
in order to their being made holy.


III. Zhe Comprination of the two. The
believer, like Shulamite, at once black and
comely. The paradox: Black and yet
eomely. Comely while yet black. The
explanation: Believers black in themselves,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





comely in Christ; black by nature, comely
by grace; black in the flesh or old man in
them ; comely in the spirit or new man.
Believers carry in them two natures at once,
—the flesh and the spirit, the old man and
the new. Like Rebekah, with two nations
in her womb. The elder, or old carnal
nature, to serve the younger, or the new
and spiritual one. In the believer, with
his twofold nature of flesh and spirit lusting
and warring against each other, 1s seen ‘ the
company of two armies.’ Hence both in-
ward conflict and outward incongruities.
The believer both a saint and a sinner.

in him the roots of all sin, and the principles
of all holiness. Hence the believer’s frequent
doubts and disquietude about his spiritual
condition, The question natural to the
inexperienced Christian: If I am a child of
God, why am I thus? A part of spiritual
wisdom to know that we can be, and that, if
believers, we actually are, both black and
comely at the same time. Not less black in
ourselves because comely in Christ; and not
less comely in Christ because black in our-
selves. Believers often black outwardly in
respect to condition and circumstances, when
comely inwardly in respect to character and
affections. Black like their Master, in the
eyes of the world; comely in the eyes of
God. Black in suffering; comely in the
patience and meekness with which they
endure it.—Observe—

1, Believers to be as conscious of their
comeliness in Christ, as of their blackness in
themselves. Our duty to know ourselves,
that Christ is in us; and that while black in
ourselves, we are comely in Him. Hence
both the believer’s humility and joy.

2. Our duty and privilege to confess both
our blackness and our comeliness. Grace not
to be denied while blackness is acknowledged.
To see and confess ourselves at once black
and eomely—black in ourselves and comely
in Christ—the mark of a believer. Pride
forbids both.

3. Our comeliness to attract and convince
the world, more than our blackness might
offend and deter them. The excellenee of
Christ and His Gospel seen in the comeliness
of believers, nobwithataniiine their blackness.
Believers to seek that others may think
highly of Christ on their account, and rejoice
in Him along with them. The world and
weak professors apt to stumble at the
blackness in believers, as seen in their suffer-
ings, and especially in their sins. More
power in their comeliness to attract, than in
their blackness to repel. Believers more to
be envied for their comeliness than despised
for their blackness. gy

4. Much in the believer and the spiritual
life mysterious and incomprehensible to the


CHAP. L


world. Apparent contradictions: black, yet
comely; ‘sorrowful, yet always rejoicing;
poor, yet making many rich.’ Strange in
the eyes of natural reason that the children
of God should be black at all; still more,
that they should be comely at the same time.
Yet natural—(1) That the Bride of the Man
of Sorrows should be also for a short time a
sufferer, and that the Wife of the Persecuted
One should herself be persecuted ; (2) That
the blackness of her own fallen nature should
not be all at once removed, but allowed for
wise and important purposes in part te
remain till the Bridegroom comes and takes
her to Himself. The blackness daily passing
away; the comeliness ever increasing. The
blackness carried only till death; the come-
liness perfected in the New Jerusalem.

5. The glory of the work of Christ and of
the grace of God, that those who are ‘ black’
are thereby rendered ‘comely. Our blackness
in respect to suffering assumed by the Surety,
that we might have His comeliness put upon
us. That comeliness imparted in regeneration
and conversion. ‘Hiven when we were dead
in sins, hath He quickened us together with
Christ (by grace are ye saved); and hath
raised us up together, and made us sit to-
gether in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.’
© Neither fornicators, nor idolators, nor adul-
terers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of them-
selves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covet-
ous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extor-
tioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God:
and such were some of you; but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus,
and by the Spirit of our God’ (Eph. i.
5,6; 1 Cor. vi. 9—11; read also Titus iii,


Notice the Pantry ADDRESSED.
*O ye daughters of Jerusalem.’


These, in the Allegory probably the ladies
of Solomon’s court, now present with Shula-
mite in the King’s chambers. Now ad-
dressed by the rustic Stranger who has
just been introduced among them. ‘The
robable representatives—(1) Of the pro-
Be Church; (2) Of persons only par-
tially or carnally acquainted with Christ.
Charged not to disturb the Beloved One’s
rest (chap. ii. 7). Connected in some way
with the marriage of the King and Shula-
mite (chap. iii. 10). Supposed to have some
knowledge of the Bridegroom, though not
ossessing Him as their own (chap. v. 8).

ade desirous to learn more about Him,
and to seek Him with the Bride (chap. vi.
1). Becomes interested in the Bride, and
admires her beauty (chap. vi.13). The women
of Jerusalem who followed Jesus to ea


CHAP, I.





called by this name; with a probable refer-
ence to the term in the text, and indicatin
the connection of the Song with the Gospe
history, and the identity of the Bridegroom
with Christ. Observe, in reference to—


The Visible Church.


1. Possible to be near Christ and yet not
to belong to Him; to have a knowledge of
the Saviour, but not a saving one; to have
a place in Christ’s House, and yet not to be
Christ’s Bride.

2. The duty of believers to have regard
to the spiritual welfare of the unconverted
in the visible Church, and to seek their
salvation.

3. Believers to be careful to remove all
stumbling-blocks out of the way of the
Church’s unsaved members, especially such
as are in themselves.

4. Young believers to regard the members
of the visible Church with charity, and to
treat them with deference and respect.

5. Believers to be able and willing, humbly
and for edification, to declare, especially to
the members of the Church, their spiritual

¢anding and condition in Christ.


APPEAL AND EXPLANATION,


“ Took not upon me because I am black,
because the sun hath looked (or glanced) upon
me (to scorch me) ; sy mother’s children were
angry with me; they made me keeper of the
vineyards: but mine own vineyard have I not
kept’ (Verse 6).


Shulamite begs the ladies of the court not
to gaze upon her with such prying eyes. nor
yet to regard her with disdain, or be offended
on account of her swarthy complexion; a
dusky hue being a mark of inferior con-
dition among Kastern females. She inti-
mates the cause of her blackness—exposure
to the sun whilst fulfilling a rural task im-
posed on her by husune relatives under whose
control she had been,—unmarried females in
the Hast being under the guardiansbip of
older male relations ; and whilst watching the
vineyards during the summer while the fruit
was ripening,—a work which could easily be
done by a young female, though both menial
in itself and injurious to her complexion.
This last circumstance perhaps figurately
alluded to in the coalndiat clause of the
verse: ‘Mine own vineyard’—my own
interest, or what concerned my own person,
namely, my complexion—‘ I have not kept,’
er attended to. Or perhaps emphasizing the
circumstance that it was in attending to the
vineyards of others,—and not to her own,
—and therefore unwillingly and by con-

an


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


=—








straint, —that her otherwise fair countenanes
had become thus discoloured. Observe—

1. The condition of believers on earth,
whether as one of sin or suffering, no just
cause of offence to others; their sin being
the result of a corrupt nature inherited from
their first parents, and their suffering being
partly the necessary consequence of that sin,
and partly from the hostility of their un-
renewed brethren (Rom. v. 12, 19; vii. 15,
19; John xv. 18, 20; xvi. 2; 1 Pet. i. 6).

2. Men of the world and unrenewed
Church members apt to look more on be-
lievers’ blemishes than on their beauty.

3. Believers, like Christ Himself, often,
through men’s sin, a stumbling-stone and
rock of offence to others; partly from their
unavoidable imperfections, and partly from
their constrained sufferings. Chosen out of
the world, and therefore made an offence to
it. Sharers of Christ’s cross, and, there-
fore, of its offence (Gal. iv. 11; Heb. xiii,
12, 13).

4. The duty and desire of believers to
remove as far as possible all occasions of
stumbling from the way of others; and to
guard them against stumbling at what must
necessarily exist. Paul’s exhortation to be-
lievers: ‘Give none offence, neither to the
Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor to the Church
of God’ (1 Cor. x. 32; viii. 9; Rom. xiv.
13). His own resolution: ‘If meat make
my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh
while the world standeth, lest I make my
brother to offend’ (1 Cor. viii. 13). His
anxiety in respect to his sufferings: ‘I de-
sire that ye faint not at my tribulation for
you.” ‘That no man should be moved by
these afflictions, for yourselves know that we
are appointed thereunto (Eph. iii, 13; 1
Thess. iii. 3).

5. Connection with Christ, the Sun of
Righteousness, sure to blacken us; ah,
Discovering to us our own corruption ; (2
Exposing us to persecution and tribulation
from the world (John xvi. 2, 33).

6. Our “mother’s children,’ whether
naturally or ecclesiastically, not always the
children of our heavenly Father, or the
Bride of His Son (Rom. ix, 6—8; Gal. iv.
22—31; John vii. 5).

7. No uncommon as for believers to
experience the anger and persecution ob
their ‘mother’s children’ (Is. lxvi. 5; Matt.
x. 21, 35, 36).

8. A sinning and suffering condition in
this world, a necessity laid upon believers in
common with others in consequence of the
Fall. All men, believers included, children
of wrath by nature, as well as children of
disobedience (Eph. ii. 2. 3). ‘The creature
made subject to vaniiy noi willingly (Rom
viii, 20).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


see





9. The duty of each to be careful in look-
ing to the interests of his own soul. Each
man’s soul his own vineyard given him by
his Creator to keep (Prov. iv. 23). Loss of
spiritual beauty the result of negligence and
unwatchfulness (Prov. xxiv.30—34). Minis-
ters, while keeping the vineyard of others,
to be especially careful to keep their own
(1 Cor. ix. 27).

10. The part of a believer to look to
the interests of others as well as, and to a
certain extent, beyond his own. ‘I seek not
mine profit, but the profit of many, that they
may be saved.’ ‘Let no man seek his own,
but every man another’s wealth’ (or wel-
fare). ‘Look not every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of
others: let this mind be in you which was
also in Christ, (1 Cor. x. 2 , 33; Phil. ii.
4,5). True ministers the servants of others
for Jesus’ sake (2 Cor. iv. 5). Self-forgetting
ee one mark of the the Bride of Jesus

ist.


Bride’s Third Request of her Beloved.


Shulamite again addresses herself to the
King, though stilt out of sight.


VERSE 7.


Tell me,

O thou whom my soul loveth,

Where thou feedest,

Where thou makest thy flock to rest at
noon,

For why should I be as one that
turneth aside

By the flocks of thy companions.


The ¢hird petition which Shulamite has
already addressed to her absent Bridegroom.
A believer’s life a life of prayer. A living
soul must pray. He has wants, and feels
them. Has longings, and one to tell them
to. An earnest, loving Christian has many
petitions, and has boldness in presenting
them. The King’s golden sceptre held out
with—‘ What is thy petition, and what is
thy request ? and it shall be done unto thee’
(Esther v. 2, 3).

Shulamite still longs for the Beloved’s
presence and fellowship. The chambers of
the King not sufficient without the King
himself. The Bride anxious to know where
her Bridegroom is, in order to be with him.
Addresses him as if he were present. Ardent
love communes with its object. though absent
and unseen. ‘The interview between a long-
ing soul and a loving Saviour maintained
through a thin veil. Bodily bsence no
hindrance to cominunion with Christ. The
loving soul must unbosom its feelings to the


CHAP. I





Beloved, whether present or absent. Good
to turn from even professing Christians to
Christ Himself. The daughters of Jerusalem
unable to take the place of Jerusalem’s
King. Ordinances good, and Christian fel-
lowship good ; but neither of them anything
without Christ himself.

_ The ground of Shulamite’s longing given
in the title with which she addresses her
absent Beloveds:


*O thou whom my soul loveth.?


Love unable to rest without the presence of
its object. The language expressive both of
the stncerity and the ardour of her affection.
The believer’s love to Christ a love of the
*soul,—deep down in the heart, and en-
gaging all its affections. Christ to be loved
with all and above all (Matt. x. 37; Luke
xiv. 20). Jesus locked in the believer’s
heart as its most precious treasure. Infi-
nitely worthy of such affection—(1) From
His own loveliness ; (2) From His love. In
regard to believers, Christ’s love that of a
Bridegroom, who has—(1) Loved them; (2)
Given His own life for them; (8) Wooed
and won them; (4) Lavished the expres-
sions of His love upon them (Eph. v. 24—
30). The believer’s love to Christ therefore
that of a Bride. Christ in His loveliness
and love, more than sufficient to attract and
engage all our affection, if we possessed a
thousand hearts instead of one. The be-


liever’s
Love to Christ


is—(1) Divine in its origin; produced by
the Holy Spirit in a renewed heart. (2) Un-
quenchable in tts character: survives all
trials, sufferings, and discouragements. (3)
Discoverable in its effects: leading to—(i.)
Obedience; (ii.) Self-dedication; (ii1.) Desire
of fellowship; (iv.) Love and esteem for all
that is His. True and hearty love to Jesus
the distinguishing mark of a genuine Chris-
tian. The contrast of thisin 1 Cor. xvi. 22.
Believers conscious, or ought to be, that
they love Christ. Shulamite’s language that
of unquestioning certainty. So Peter, even
after his fall; ‘Yea, Lord; Thou knowest
all things; Thou knowest that I love Thee’
(John xxi.). The Church’s language in the
lips of the prophet: ‘Tne desire of our soul
is to Thy name and to the remembrance of
Thee’ (Isa. xxvi. 8). True of all believers ;
‘Whom, having not seen, yelove’ (1 Pet. i.
8). Observe—

1. Our comfort in darkness and aesertion,
to know that we love Jesus.

2. Consciousness and confession of blackness,
in perfeet harmony with love to Christ. Peter’s
thrice repeated declaration of love to his
Master consistent with his thrice repeated,


OHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





but afterwards deeply repented of, denial of 2


Him.
iven.
3. Love to Christ a plea i the enjoyment
vf His presenco. Acknowledged by Christ
imself : ‘He that loveth Me shall be loved
of My Father, and I will love him, and will
manifest myself to him’ (John xiv. 21),


Love greatest where most is for-


In regard to the request in the text, ob-
serve—

I. The Purition sése/f. ‘Tell me where
thou feedest,’ &. A desire for information.
Implies ignorance. Believers while in this
world, ignorant of many things pertaining to
Christ’s ways and their own comfort. ‘ Now
we know in part.’ Our happiness to be able
to go to Christ for light and instruction.
Christ made ‘wisdom’ to us, as well as
righteousness and sanctification. Believers
not only weak, and needing to be drawn, but
erring, and needing to be directed. Wells of
refreshment in the Word not seen till Jesus
reveals them. Christ found in the Word and
ordinances only as He is pleased to discover
Himself. Himself our best Guide and
Teacher.

Shulamite desires to know where her Be-
loved ‘feeds and rests his flocks at noon.’
Scripture often represents


Christ as a Shepherd.


He is: (1) Jehovah’s Shepherd; chosen by
the Father to feed and save his people. ‘ My
shepherd’ (Zech. xiii. 7). ‘I will set u
one shepherd over them’ (Ezek. xxxiv. 23),
(2) The Good Shepherd: good epee in
* giving his life for the sheep’ (John x. ih).
(3) The Great Shepherd: being the Almighty,
‘and able to save to the uttermost all who
come to God by Him’ (Heb. xiii. 20). (4)
The Chief Shepherd: in distinction from all
other shepherds, who, as teachers and rulers
of the Church, are employed under Him in
promoting the welfare of the sheep (1 Peter v.
4). (5) The One Shepherd: the sheep being
only His, and no under-shepherd being to
be compared with him (Ezek, xxxiv. 23;
Eoeles. xii. 11).

As a Shepherd Christ has—


His Flock.


These are—(1) Given Him by the Father
John x. 29; xvii. 2,6); (2) Redeemed by
is own blood; (3) Sought and found by
Himself while straying in the wilderness;
4) Called by His grace; (5) Quickened by
is Spirit; (6) Kept and preserved by His
wer; (7) Cared for and tended by His
ove. Hitherto, as compared with the world,
a ‘little flock’? (Luke xii. 32). Always a
26


‘beautiful flock’ (Jer. xiii. 20). Frequeatly
a ‘flock of slaughter’ (Zech. xi. 4, 7 Ps.
xliv. 22; Rom. viii. 36). Known from their
—(1) Hearing His voice and obeying His
call ; (2) Following Him through bad and
good report even to the end; (3) Avoiding
and refusing to follow a stranger. Enjoy the
privilege of being—(1) Led by Christ as
their Shepherd; (2) Guarded by Him from
all real evil and from every hurtful foe; (3)
Helped, supported, and even carried by Him;
(Is. xl. 11; xlvi. 4; Ixiii. 9; Luke xv. 5;
(4) Fed, sustained, and comforted by Him
till they reach their home in heaven (Ps.
xxiii. 1—6).

Two actions here ascribed to Christ as the
Shepherd :—

1. He feeds His flock. Believers require
spiritual food. Living souls must be fed.
Such feel their need of nourishment. Hungei
and thirst for it. Desire what may inwardly
satisfy them and enable them to grow in
knowledge, faith, love, and every grace,
Must be fed by Christ Himself. Willing to -
go anywhere where He feeds His flock, how-
ever plain the place, and poor the people, and

ainful the effort to reach them. Christ
eeds them—(1) With His Word, which is
made ‘the joy and rejoicing of their heart ;?
(2) With Hts ordinances, in which he makes
them to lie down as ‘in green pastures;’
(3) With Himself, the Hidden Manna and
Bread of Life, whose ‘flesh is meat indeed,
and His blood drink indeed.’

2. He makes them to rest at noon. Noon the
time of oppressive heat,—‘the burden and
heat of the day.’ Expressive of the time of
—(1) Temptation (2) Trouble; (3) Perse-
cution (Matt. xiii. 5, 6, 20,21; 1 Pet, iv. 12).
Believers often in such circumstances (1 Pet
i. 6; 2 Tim. iii. 12; John xvi. 33). There-
fore require rest and comfort, as well as food.
Christ therefore rests His flock as well as
feeds it. Able to make them ‘rejoice in tri-
bulation.? Speaks comfortably (or ‘to their
heart’) in the wilderness (Hos. ii. 14). Gives
them rest and comfort—(1) By the promises
of His Word; (2) By the doctrines of His
grace; (3) By the ordinances of His house ;
(4) By the dealings of His Providence; (5)
By the consolations of His Spirit; (6) By
the fellowship of His peo) (7) By the
manifestation of Himself. Christ the Rest
of His people as well as their Food. ‘The
shadow of a great rock in a weary land’
(Is. xxxii. 2). Exemplified in the case of
Churches in Acts ix.31. Typified in the rest

iven at times to Israel (Jud. v.31; 1 Kings
lv. 24, 25). The Bride’s desire to be rested
as well as fed by Christ along with his flock.
Believers desire to be rested—(1) By Christ
Himself. The world seek rest and comfort
in the ereature. Believers choose rather to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOL¢WO#


suffer with Christ than to reign with the
world. (2) Among His people. ‘Where
Thou makest Thy flock to rest.’ Christ
found where His flock is, and where He
i feeding and resting them (Mat. xviii,


).
Shulamite, while desiring to be rested by
the shepherd along with His flock, probably
speaks in the character of a shepherdess,
wishing to feed her kids where her Beloved
is feeding his sheep. Even the under-shep-
herds need to be fed and rested by Christ
Himself. The labourer for Christ to keep
near to Christ even in his labour. Best to
feed our kids where Christ is feeding His
flock. Whether toiling or resting, the be-
liever’s place is to be near the Master.

Il. The Reason for the Petition. ‘For,
why should I be as one that turneth aside
(or, is veiled, either as a mourner or an
immodest woman) by the flocks of thy
companions.’ Observe—

1. Unlike the Bride of Christ to be living
without His presence and socieiy. Natural to
believers to ee the presence of Christ and
to be happy in it. Not to Christ’s honour
that His bride should go mourning without
Say or turning aside to others for com-

rt


2. The Bride of Christ in danger of turning
aside, if without Christ’s presence. Believers
justly afraid of turning aside from Christ to
the flocks of His under shepherds, or even
of wandering from those flocks themselves.
Most happy in being by those flocks, but
not to substitute them for Christ Himself.
Not to be satisfied with being by Christ’s
flocks, or being fed by His companions
instead of Christ Himself. Safer to find no
rest than to find it by ts pee

8. The fear of turning aside, or of bringin
reproach Z he name, a powerful plea iA
pleading with Christ for His presence. Right
to plead as well as pray.

4. Believers liable to be mistaken for
hypocrites and mere professors. Christ Him-
self thus mistaken. ‘We esteemed Him
stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted’
(Is. liii. 4).

5. Believers often unable to understand the
reason of the Lord’s dealings with them.
Rebekah’s question not uncommon with
believers: ‘Why am I thus?’ (Gen. xxv.
22). Three Why's: Why have I darkness
and trouble while others have light and
comfort? Why am I without quickening
means of grace while others enjoy them?
Why have I not the enjoyment of the Lord’s
presence which others have P


Answer to Shulamite’s Request.
The request, though addressed to the absent





GHAP. I.





Bridegroom, apparently answercd by the
Daughters of Jerusalem or Ladies of the Court
who were present (VERS: 8).


If thou know not,

O thou fairest among women,
Go thy way forth

By the footsteps of the flock,
And feed thy kids

Beside the shepherds’ tents,


Shulamite receives a speedy answer to her
request, though perhaps not a very direct
one; nor yet from the Beloved himself, to
whom it was addressed, but from his friends
and the inmates of his house. Observe—
(1) The earnest enquirer afce. Christ not
long in receiving direction: ‘Yu shall seek
Me and find Me, whep ye shall seareh for
Me with all your heart’ (Jer. xxix.13). (2)
Various ways by which. Christ may direct
the enquiring soul. he Head of the Church
at no loss for instrements. (3) Enquirers
often directed by the ministers of the Word,
or by those already acquainted more or less
with the Saviour. (4) Those having any
knowledge of Christ to do their best in
guiding others to Him. (5) The great end
of the Christian ministry and of the Christian
Church, to direct men to Christ. All
Christians to be able to give such direction.
From the language of the auswer in the
text, observe—


I. The Appress. ‘O thou fairest among
women,’ A superior beauty belonging to
believers. That beauty a moral and spiritual
one, the beauty of holiness. ‘The King’s
daughter all glorious within’ (Ps. xlv. 11,
13; cx. 3). Observe—

1. Believers to commend themselves to others
by their spiritual beauty. Something in a
spiritually-minded, loving, and consistent
believer that attracts the notice and admira-
tion of others.

2. Believers are, as they ouaut to be, more
excellent and lovely than their neighbours
(Prov. xii. 26). Possessed of a Divine
nature. Bornof God. Made new creatures
in Christ. Created in Him unto good works.
The Spirit of Christ, and so the fruits of the
Spirit, in them (Rom. viii. 9; Gal. v. 22),
Not to be satisfied to be like others (Matt.
v. 46—48),

3. Believers not merely to be, but to be
seen to be, more lovely and excellent than other
men (Matt. v. 16; 1 Pet. ii. 12). Ought to
appear’in the eyes of men as the Bride of
Christ. Their calling to reflect His beauty,
and be His witnesses and representatives in
tne world. Men to see in believers what
Christ was and is. Christ Himself ie.


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





lovely, His Spouse, possessing His Spirit,
expected to be lovely also. His comeliness
put upon them (Ezek. xvi. 10, 14).

4. Individuals never more lovely than when
earnestly seeking Christ.

5. Others often stirred up by the earnestness
Of one soul seeking the Saviour.

IL. The Surrosttion. ‘If thou know
not.’ Observe—


1. Believers expected to know where Christ
ts to be found. Ought to know. Not
according to their character to be ignorant.

2. Knowledge sometimes possessed when not
exercised. Apparently the case here.

3. Young believers often deficient in spiri-
tual knowledge (John xiv. 8, 9).

4. Patience to be exercised in dealing with
inquirers and young believers. Christ
Himself a High Priest who has compassion
a the ignorant. Believers to resemble

im.


If. Taz Dmection. Twofold—


1. ‘ Go thy way forth by the footsteps of the
flock.” Three ideas in this part of the direc-
tion. (1) ‘Go thy way. To find Christ,
We must use means, and use them earnestly.
The direction opposed to indolence and sit-
ting still, (2) ‘Go thy way forth’ To
find Christ, we must not only go our way,
but go forth. ‘Let us go forth unto Him
without the camp, bearing His reproach’
(Heb. xiii. 13). Forth from—(i.) Ourselves :
no longer trusting in anything we are or do;
(ii.) The world: its pleasures and practices,
its favour and fellowship. (iii.) Siz: so as
no longer to love it or willingly to commit
it. (3) ‘By the footsteps of the flock
Observe in regard to the—


Footsteps of the Flock.


(i.) Chris?’s flock has footsteps in common.
One spirit in them; one faith and one bap-
tism. The ‘common faith,’ the ‘faith of
God’s elect;’ ‘like precious faith with us’
(Eph. iv. 4, 5; Tit. i 4; 2 Pet. i. 1).
(ii.) The footsteps and daily life of believers
to be such as conduct to Christ. (iii.) To
find Christ, we need to be in the footsteps of
the flock, not in the wanderings of the world.
These footsteps are—(a) Obedience: ‘why
call ye Me Lord, and do not the things
which I say.’ (4) Fuith: ‘whose faith
follow;’ ‘the steps of the faith of our
father Abraham’ (Heb. xiii. 7; Rom. iv.
12). (¢) Self-denial ; ‘If any man will be
My disciple, let him deny himself’ (d)
Meekness and humility : ‘Learn of me, for
I aa meek and holy in heart’ (Matt. xi.


28). (ec) Love: ‘walk in love;’ ye are
My disciples, if ye have love one to another
(Eph. v. 2; John xiii. 35). The footsteps
of the flock exhibited in the Word of God
for our guidance. The cloud of witnesses.
The faith and obedience of Abel, Abraham,
&c., recorded as footprints to guide those
who should come after. Hence, also, the
value of faithful Christian biography. (iv)
Inquirers to be the careful followers of Christ's
Satthful people. ‘Be ye followers of them
who through faith and patience inherit
the promises.’ ‘Be followers together of
me, and mark them that walk so as ye have
us for an example.) ‘ Followers of me even
as I also follow Christ’? (Heb. vi. 11,
12; xiii. 7; Phil. iii. 17). Believers to
‘enquire for the old paths, and walk
therein’ (Jer. vi. 16). To go back to the
inspired words of prophets and apostles.
* To the law and to the testimony ;’ not to
the decrees of Councils, or the dicta of
Doctors, or the lives of so-called Saints.
The Church early corrupted with heresy in
doctrine, and error in practice. Even early
Christian writers often heated with contro:
versy. Not only contradicted one another,
but often contradicted themselves. In many
cases, impossible to obtain a clear and
definite opinion from them. Their writings
often mutilated and interpolated. Their
views often manifestly and avowedly in-
correct. The example even of the holiest
of men to be only followed in so far as it
aecords with the written Word. (v.) Jn-
quirers to be content with old and ordinary
directions as to finding Christ. No new or
extraordinary direction given to the Bride
in her difficulty. (vi.) Directions not the less
useful because not immediately bringing us to
the object of our search, ‘ Lord what wilt
Thou have me to do?’ ‘Go to Damascus,
and it shall be told thee what thou must
do’ (Acts ix. 6).

2. ‘Feed thy kids beside the shepherds’


tents’ Shulamite addressed as a_ shep-
herdess. Believers made partakers of the
calling and work of their Master. Christ


the chief Shepherd; they, in their various
spheres, and according to their various gifts,
under-sbepherds. ‘eed my lambs; feed
my sheep,’—the evidence of their love to
the Great Shepherd (Rom. xxi. 15, 16).
Shulamite, as a female, had her kids to feed.
If unable to feed the sheep, we may be able
to attend to the lambs. ‘The gifts of some
ualify them to minister to the adult and
the mature Christian; those of others to the
young and the weak. Two particulars in
this part of the directions. (1) ‘ Feed thy
kids.” Observe—(i) Believers and inquirers
have their kids to feed: (a) Their spiritual
desires and longings to be satisfied; (6)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : THE SONG OF SULOMON. omar. t





Their new man, or young spiritual renewed
nature, to be nourished and strengthened ;
(c) The souls of others, in one way or other
committed to their charge, to be cared for
and looked after. A Christian parent has
his children’s souls as well as their bodies
to feed and care for. A Sabbath-school
teacher has his class; a minister has his
flock, including both old and young. A
District Visitor has the families of his or her
district. Elders, deacons, and other Church
office-bearers, have their respective charges.
Hach believer has the souls in his immediate
neighbourhood, in the circle of his relations,
within the sphere of his influence, or under
his employment. The language only of a
Cain,—‘ Am I my brother’s keeper?’ The
injunction laid on believers in general,—
‘On some have compassion, making a dif-
ference ; others save with fear, pulling them
out of the fire’ (Jude 22, 23). The reso-
lution of David to be that of every saved
soul; ‘Then (when thou hast restored to
me the joy of thy salvation) will I teach
transgressors Thy ways, and sinners shall be
converted unto Thee’ (Ps. li. 12, 18).
Every believer, in his measure, charged with
the care of his fellow-believers. Their
duty to comfort, edify, and exhort one
another (1 Thess. iv. 18; v.11; Heb. iii.
13). (ii) Believers and inquirers to be
diligent in feeding their kids. Christ most
likely to be found by us when diligently
attending to the charge committed to us.
To be found in active duty as well as in
private devotion. (2) ‘Beside the shep-
herds’ tents.’


The Shepherds’ Tents,


representative of Christian assemblies
gathered together in Christ’s name, or
rather of the places where they are so ga-
thered. A body of people, and the place
of their ordinary meeting, naturally asso-
siated in thought. Hence the term
‘Church’ originally applied only to the
former, also used to designate the latter.
Churches and congregations of believers
placed by Christ, the chief Shepherd, under
the charge and care of under-shepherds.
These ordinarily in the New Testament
designated Elders or Presbyters, Bishops or
Overseers, and Pastors or Shepherds. These
titles acknowledged to have been originally
applied promiscuously to the same persons
(Acts xiv. 23; xx. 17, 28; Eph. iv. J1;
Phil il; 1 Tim. iii 1—5; iv. 14; Titus


i. 5—7; 1 Pet. v, 1—4). Shepherds or
Pastors Christ’s gifts to His Church after
His ascension into heaven (Eph. iv. 10—12;
Jer. iii. 15). The Shepherds’ tents the
places where the Shepherds are found minis-
tering to the flock (1 Pet, v. 1, 2). Ob-
serve—(i) Christ found beside the shepherds’
tents? (Matt. xviii. 19, 20). Himself al-
ways engaged in tending His sheep. Not
far off when we are beside the ‘ Shepherds’
tents.’ Inquiring and believing souls
directed to the place where Christ is feed-
ing His flock through His under-shepherds.
(il.) Zrue Pastors and Gospel ordinances to
be highly valued and diligently made use of
(Heb. xiii, 17; 1 Thess. v. 12). None
allowed to be above ordinances in the
Church militant. (iii.) Believers to feed
their charge and attend to their own souls,
where Christ, His people, and His under-
shepherds are. ‘They who separate them-
selves,’ given as a mark of those who have
not the Spirit (Jude 19). ‘Forsaking the
assembling of themselves together’ not the
manner of Christ’s flock (Heb. x. 25). Iso-
lation from Christ’s ordinances not the way
to find Christ. (iv.) The kids also to be fed
beside the shepherds’ tents. Safest and best
to accustom children to attend the ordi-
nances of Christ’s house. ‘Train up a
child in the way he should go.’ Christ’s
will coneerning children: ‘Suffer the chil-
dren to come unto Me;’ but Christ is where
two or three are gathered together in His
name. ‘The shepherds in their ministra-
tions to have a portion for the young as
well as the old. The children an important
portion of the flock, and to be carefully
attended to. ‘How is it that your shee
look better than other people’s P’ was aske
of a farmer. ‘I look well to the lambs,’
was the reply. (v.) Lhe importance, necessity,
and permanence of the pastoral office tndi-
cated. Pastors and teachers, &c., given
‘for the edifying of the body of Christ, till
we all come in the unity of the faith, and of
the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man—unto the measure of the
statue of the fulness of Christ’ (Eph. iv.
11—13). The charge difficult, and some-
times painful and hazardous; but honour-
able, often pleasant, and when faithfully
executed, blessedly rewarded (1 Pet. v.
1—4), People without a faithful pastor
like sheep without a shepherd. As such,
the object of Christ’s special compassion,
and should be that of His people (Matt. ux
36—38).


eS SS


$9


OMAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





The Hopal Pridegroom’s Greeting,


Sxconp Scenz. Place: The open grounds adjacent to the Palace. Speakers: The King
and Shulamite ; the daughters of Jerusalem or ladies of the Court, at « distance.


VursEs 9—1],


I have compared thee, O my love,

To a company of horses in Pharaoh’s
chariots.

Thy cheeks are comely with rows of
fowelu:

Thy neck with chains of gold.

We will make thee borders of gold

With studs of silver.


Shulamite, having gone forth according to
the direction of the ladies of the court, the
King meets her with his loving greeting.
Observe :—(1) The earnest seeker of Christ
and His fellowship, certain sooner or later to
jind Him. Historically exemplified in the
case of the Wise Men of the East, who came
to Jerusalem seeking the infant King; and
of those devout and praying men and women
who were found at the birth of Jesus wait-
ing for the consolation of Israel. Possibly,
according to the view of the Jews, a retro-
spective reference to the Lord’s gracious ap-
pearance and promise to Moses and Israel
when mourning after the sin of the Golden
Calf (Exod. xxxiii. 10—14; xxxiv. 4—10).
(2) Christ’s own time for the manifestation of
Himself to the seeking soul the best. That
time, as apparently here, often sooner than
expected. (3) The joy in finding, such as
abundantly to compensate for all the grief in
seeking. Such indicated by the character of
the bridegroom’s greeting. Observe in re-
gard to it :—

I. The Aprrttation. ‘O my love.’
Hebrew, ‘My companion.’ Given here for
the comfort and joy of the seeker. Ob-
serve: (1) Earnest pursuit after Christ re-
warded by sweet assurance of His love to us
and our interest in him. (2) Christ’s spouse
manifested by her earnestness in following
after and resolution not to rest without Him.
(3) Sweet assurance of Christ’s love often
follows deep sense of our own unworthiness.
‘I am black ’—soon followed by—‘O my
Love.’ (4) When blackest in our own eyes,
often fairest in Christ’s, The Appellation
exhibits believers as—


The Bride of Christ.


1. The high distinction of believers that
they are Christ’s Bride. Five, in relation to


Adam, a type of the great body of believers,
and of each believer A partienla, in relation
&e


to Christ the second Adam. This relation
between the Saviour and the Saved, the
Church and her Head, recognised and taught
throughout the Word. Christ, or God in
Christ, everywhere in the Bible the Bride-

‘oom and Husband of believing souls. (See

troduction.) This relation the foundation
of the Song. Typified in that of ancient
Israel as God’s covenant people.

2. This relation acknowledged and rejoiced
in by Christ Himself. Believers acknowledged
and delighted in by Christ as His Father’s
gift, as Eve by Adam when God brought her
to him and gave her to him to be his wife
(Gen. ii, 22; iii. 12; John xvii. 6). Re-
peas and believing sinners acknowledged

y Jesus when on earth as his Bride cas ve
29—35). That relation the ground of His re-
demption work (Eph. v. 25—27).

8. The great happiness of believers that they
are Chris?’s Bride. A blessedness beyond
conception involved in so intimate, tender,
and enduring a relation to the King of
Kings and Lord of Glory, in whom is
summed up all created and uncreated love-
liness and excellence, and who is Love itself,
The joy attending the realization of such a
rapa | justly described as ‘unspeak-
able and full of glory’ (1 Peteri. 8). No
light thing in David’s eye to be son-in-law
to a poor earthly king like Saul. Arch-
angels fail to tell the Thiesoeanas of bein
Bride to the King of Glory, the Prince
the kings of the earth.

4, An enhancement of this blessedness to re-
ceive the testimony of the relationship from
Christ Himself. This testimony often spi-
ritually and sweetly conveyed to earnestly
seeking believers even on earth. A personal
testimony from His own lips, given face to
face, awaiting every child of God hereafter,
The blessed hope of believers.

5. Believers reminded of the duty and re-
sponsibility connected with such a relation-
ship. Ceesar’s wife to be above suspicion,
What, then, the Bride of Christ ? The proper
character of such a Bride to be without
spot. Christ’s honour in her keeping. His
joy in her purity and undivided love. Na-
tural for believers to tremble at the first
rising of sin, as a dove at the sight of a
hawk’s feather. Sin in a believer a double
crucifixion of Christ. The most painful
wounds those which a man receives in the


house of his friends. Believers, as Christ’s





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON,


————-


Bride, justly expected—(1) Carefully to
avoid every sin; (2) Jealously to watch
against every rival in their affection; (3) Con-
stantly to beware of any coolness or distance
between them and Christ; (4) Faithfully to
seek to obey His commends, promote His in-
terests, and advance His glory.





Il. The Comparison. ‘I have compared
thee,’ &. Notice—


_1. The party making it, The Bridegroom
himself. Observe:—(1) The main thing to
have the good opinion of Christ. Of compara-
tively small importance what men think of
us. Christ best acquainted with us. Best
knows what is real worth and true beauty.
Can be surety for His own assertion. (2) Christ
observant of his people’s graces and the exercise
of them. The comparison in the text the re-
sult of His close observation of the Bride’s
spirit and conduct. (3) Nothing more pleas-
ing im Christ’s eyes than a soul earnestly and
lovingly seeking Him and His fellowship as its
chief joy. 'Vhis the case even when He gives
no intimation of it, or appears to take no
notice. His own time for giving such inti-
mation the best. (4) What excellence Christ
ascribes to His people is what He Himself has
given. Not only makes the comparison, but
provides it. His comparison not merely one
of word, but of previous act. He makes His
bride what He loves, then compares and
commends her.

2. The comparison ttsel/f. ‘To a company
of horses (or, to my mare) in Pharaoh’s
chariots.’ The best and most beautiful
horses those from Egypt; and naturally the
best of all those auiploved in drawing the
royal chariot. Such horses obtained by
Solomon from Egypt (1 Kings iv.26; x. 26,
28, 29). The comparison in the text either
to a single mare, to a team drawing together,
or to ii whole stud in the royal stables,
The comparison of a beautiful woman to a
Thessalian mare found in an ancient Greek

+. Horses celebrated in Oriental poetry
or their beauty. Arabs passionately attached
vo their mares. The points of comparison:
(1) Beauty. So—‘his goodly horse’ (Zech.
x. 8). (2) Liveliness and ardour. See the
description of the horse in Job xxxix. 19—
25. (3) Courage and endurance. Hence es
pecially employed in ancient warfare. ‘His
goodly horse in the battle’ (Zech. x.3). See
again the description in Job. @ Obedience
ond subjection. Horses naturally wild and
wilful. Brought into subjection and broken
in by man’s effort and skill, ‘Tamer of
steeds,’ a Homeric epithet fora hero. The
horse, when broken in and trained, obedient
to the slightest intimation of the rider or
devestawll (5) In the case of a team—


CHAP. L





harmony and united action.. Draw with one
mind, will, step. (6) Discipline and order.
Horses employed in drawing chariots, not
only broken in, but well trained, so as to run
in the traces with the greatest regularity and
order. (7) As horses in Pharaoli’s chariots,
—excellence in their kind, the best training,
the most costly and beautiful ornaments, and
employment tn the King’s service. The


Proper Character of Believers,


especially when it is well with them. (1)
Beautiful in holiness, and comely with the
Divine comeliness put upon them (Ps. cx 3;
Ezek, xvi. 14), (2) Lively and ardent, in-
stead of being slothful and lukewarm. (3
Strong and courageous in fighting thegoo
faith, and enduring tothe end. (4) Obedi-
ent to their Divine Master, and subject in
all things to His will (5) A unity in plu-
rality ; one and yet many ; many in num-
ber, yet with one spirit ; many individual
believers, yet but one Bride and one Body.
(6) United in action ; striving together tor
the faith of the Gospel ; engaging with one
heart in the service of Christ and the ad-
vancement of His kingdom (1 Cor. i. 10;
Eph. iv. 4; Phil. i. 27; ii. 2). (7) Subdued
and well-disciplined under the Holy Ghost ;
no longer, as at first, like a bullock unaccus-
tomed to the yoke ; made willing in the day
of Christ’s power ; walking orderly, and
subject to one another according to the rule
of the Gospel (Ps. cx. 3; Col. ii 5; ) Cor,
xiv. 40). (8) The most excellent of their
species, not naturally or by their own mer-
it, but by God’s grace; the excellent of
the earth ; God’s workmanship created in
Christ Jesus unto good works (Ps, xvi. 3 ;
Eph. ii. 10), (9) Arrayed in the garments
of salvation, clothed with humility, and
adorned with a meek and quiet spirit. (10)
Employed by the King of Zion in His ser-
vice as His fellow-workers ; drawing in the
chariot of the Gospel, and commissioned
to carry it to the ends of the earth, —Christ
Himself going forth in it, conquering and
to conquer. Hence in regard to believers
—(i.) Their honour and blessedness ; (ii.)
Their duty and responsibility ; (iii.) Their in-
debtedness to Divine grace. Formerly Satan’s
willing slaves, and his depraved instru-
ments in furthering his cruel and abomina-
ble purposes. Now the willing and happy
subjects of Jesus, employed in his honour-
able holy, and blessed service in promoting
the salvation and happiness of a world.


III. The Commenpation, ‘ Thy cheeks are
comely with rows of jewels,’ &, Cheeks
mentioned as now uncovered, Perhaps in
allusion to the comparison already made in


CHAP, i.





verse 10. Ornaments of gold, silver, and
jewellery about the face and neck, greatly
esteemed in Oriental countries, So Arabs
adorned both their horses and camels, as
well as their own persons (Jud. viii. 26).
Such ornaments thought to set off and add
to female beauty. Observe—


1. Believers highly beautiful and com-
mendable in the eyes of Christ. Often like
Himself, without form or comeliness in the
eyes of the world, but beautiful and comely


in His.

2. Wonderful change in a believer's cha-
racter. Cheeks comely with grace and love,
instead of a whore’s forehead and a brow of
brass. Their neck no longer stiff with an
iron sinew, and burdened with the yoke of
Satan; but adorned with the golden chains
of heavenly wisdom (Prov. i. 9; xxv. 12;
Matt. xi. 29, 30; Gal. v. 1).

3. The spiritual beauty of believers aot
watural to them, or properly their own, but
imparted to them and put upon them by
Divine grace. The ‘rows of jewels’ and
‘chains of gold’ something put upon the
Bride. Believers made comely with the
‘ comeliness put upon them’ (Ezek. xvi. 14).
Their ornament Christ Himself, whom they
put on as well for wisdom and sanctification
as for justification or righteousness (Rom.
xiii. 14; 1 Cor. i. 30). ‘Llive; yet not I,
but Christ liveth in me.’ ‘Not I, but the
grace of God which was with me’ (Gal.
hi. 20; 1 Cor. xv. 10). All the graces of a
believer the fruits of the Spirit who has
been given to him (Gal. v. 22). ‘Who
maketh them to differ P and what hast thou
that thou hast not received? (1 Cor. iv. 7).

4. The duty of believers to aim at being
as they are here represented. The graces of
the Spirit given them in Christ, to be put
on and worn by them as their own. Their
duty to be putting on Christ from day to
day, ‘as a bride adorneth herself with her
jewels.’ As the elect of God, holy and

loved, believers to put on bowels of
mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind,
meekness, long-suffering, &c. (Col. iii. 12).

5. Believers’ spiritual beauty the Bride-
groom’s joy. The language of the text that
of admiration, satisfaction, and delight.
* The Lord taketh eae in them that fear
Him.’ His joy fulfilled in His faithful,
obedient, and loving people. The name He

ives to His Church—Hephzibah, or, ‘My
elight is in Her.’ His believing people a
crown of flory and a diadem of beauty in
His hand. ‘Hearken, O daughter and
consider, &c.; so shall the king greatly
desire thy beauty’ (Psalm xlv. 10, 11

6. The graces of Christ’s people to be
we conspicuous to the werid. The Bride's


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


_





cheeks and neck here commended. Men to
be able to see the believer’s good works, that
they may glorify God who makes him what
he is. ‘To take knowledge of him that he
has been with Jesus, The Church to be
able to magnify the grace of God m us. The
world to know and believe from what they
see in believers that God h as sent His Son.
Believers to be living epistles of Christ, known
and read of all men (2 Cor. iii. 2).


IV. Tie Promisz. ‘ We will make thee
borders (circlets or diadems), of gold,’ &.
The speaker changed from the singular to
the plural. Still, however, the king. Speaks
in the plural either in the style of majesty,
or as having others associated with him im
the fulfilment of the promise. Christ, in
His purpose of adorning His Church with
the beauties of holiness and the insignia of
royalty, has associated with Him the Holy
Spirit given Him by the Father for that
object. The Spirit the great agent both in
the believer’s sanctification and glorification.
A similar style to that in the text used im
connection with the creation of man (Gen.
i. 26). ‘The same Divine Trinity engaged
both in the first and second creation—in
creating man at first, and in renewing him
when fallen (Isaiah vi. 8; Matt. xxviii. 19;
2 Cor. xiii 14). Observe, in relation to the
promise—


1. The purpose of Christ to pe believers
both in holiness and glory. The will of God
their sanctification and perfection. The
object for which Christ gave Himself for
the Church, that it should be holy and with-
out blemish (Eph. v. 24—26). Believers
chosen in Christ by the Father before the
foundation of the world, to be holy and
without blame before Him in love. Blessed
by Him for this object with all spiritual
blessings, as the result of that election
eh 1, 3, 4). Predestinated to be con-
ormed to the image of Christ (Rom.
viii, 29). Believers to be adorned in a way
wens re ects of i ore ee:
ed from glory unto glory. eir pat.
like that of bbe ahaa light, shining ee
and more unto the perfect day (Prov. iv. 18 ;
2 Cor. iii. 18).

9. Adequate agency employed for the ae-
complishment of such a purpose. ‘We will
make thee,’ &c. The Triune Jehovah the
Almighty Agent. Believers God’s work-
manship. The branch of His planting, and
the work of His hands, that He may be
glorified (Isa. lx. 21; Eph. ii. 10), Their
sanctification and salvation the work of their
Divine Creator. That Agent able to make
them perfect in every good word and work.
Able to do exceeding abundantly above all


_HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON, cusr. 1.


rr SS


=


we ask or think. To sanctify wholly,
throughout body, and soul, and spirit.
Nothing too hard for the Lord. Able to
subdue all things to Himself. Believers
saved and glorified according to the working
of His mighty power put forth in raising
the Lord Jesus from the dead. More not
to be desired ; less unable to suffice.

3. The destiny of the Church and of
each individual believer unspeakably glorious.
‘Borders (headbands or diadems) of gold,
with studs (points or spanglets) of silver?
Believers to be made a crown of glory and a
diadem of beauty in the hand of the Lord
(Isa. lxii. 3). To be made as glorious as the
Bride of the King of glory ought to be;—
as glorious as a Loving and Almighty Hus-
band can make them. To be made entirely
like Christ, and to share His glory. To sit
with Him on His throne; and as kings and
Aa to reign with Him for ever and ever.

heir glorious destiny yet to be revealed.
It doth not yet appear what we shall be
(1 John iii. 2). Certain, however, in its ac-
complishment, as being—(1) The object of
a Divine purpose; (2) The subject of a Di-
vine promise; (3) The work of a Divine
Agent.

4. The Church’s experience and character a
progressive one. ‘True in relation both to
the Church asa whole and to each individual
member. The glory of the former Legal
Dispensation eclipsed by the superior glory
of the new Dispensation of the Gospel. The
latter, the Dispensation of the Spirit; the
former, that of the letter. The former cha-
racterized by a spirit of bondage and fear;
the latter by a spirit of liberty and adoption,
—of ‘love, power, and a sound mind.’ Under
the Gospel all classes to receive largely of
the Spirit, and as the result of it to pro-
aid (Acts ii. 17, 18; Joel ii. 28, 29).

me better thing reserved for the Church
in the Dispensation of the Gospel. The
light of the moon to be as the light of the
sun. The millennial age that shall follow
still more glorious. The light of the sun as
the light of seven days (Isa. xxx. 26). Be-
liever’s glory an ever-advancing one. Fair
as the moon; clear as the sun; terrible as
an army with banners (Song vi. 10).

5. The promise of growth in grace and of
future glory given for the consolation of ear-
nesé believers.

6. Grace exercised and improved, followed
and rewarded with grace increased (Matt. xiii.
12; Luke xix. 26).


Bruvze’s Repty To THz Krve’s GReetine.
Shulamite expresses her Delight in her Beloved.


Vrnszs 12—14,
|


While the King sitteth at his table,

My spikenard sendeth forth the smell
thereof,

A bundle of myrrh is my well-beloved
unto me;

He shall lie all night (or, which remains)
betwixt my breasts.

My Beloved is uato me as a cluster of
camphor

In the vineyards of Engedi.


The King’s commendation and assurance
of leve reciprocated by the Bride. The lan-
guage of the 12th verse—‘while the King
sitleth,’ &c., either the declaration of a fact,
expressive of her delight in the King, and
the joy his presence afforded her; or a reso-
lution as to what she would do for his
honour. Regarded as the latter, it corre-
sponds with the King’s last words. Solo-
mon promises ornaments of gold and silver.
Shulamite can only bring her spikenard;
which, however, shall not be wanting in
order to do him honour and express her
love. Historically and literally realized in
the life of Jesus, when the woman that was
a sinner brought her alabaster box of oint-
ment to anoint His feet in the Pharisce’s
house; and when Mary, the sister of Lazarus,
performed a similar service with her costly
spikenard in the house of Simon the leper
a vil. 37, 38; John xii. 3; Matt. xxvi.
6, 7).

In regard to the Resoxution, notice—


I. The Occasion to which tt refers. ‘While
the King sitteth at his table’ (or, ‘in his
circle [of guests]’). Observe, in refer-
ence to—


The King at His Table.


1. The person referred to. ‘The King.’
So Shulamite speaks of her Beloved, and me
believer of his Lord. Christ a King. Im-
ports his dignity as God and his office as
Redeemer. Christ a King both by Divine
right and Divine appointment. A King in
virtue of his Divine nature as Son of God;
and in virtue of His mediatorial undertaking
as Son of Man. In His twofold nature as
God-man, and in His mediatorial character
as Kedeemer, Christ is God’s King; King
of Zion; King of Saints; Head over all
things to His Church. Sits at the Father’s
right hand upon His Father’s throne, ‘ angels
and authorities aud powers being made sub-
ject to Him.’ ‘The King and Lord of glory.
Rules and reigns over both the Church ana
the world as King of Kings and Lord of
Lords,—‘ Prince of the Kings of the earth.’
Te a lower, literal, aud subordinate, though


33


CHAP, I.





important sense, the ‘ King of the Jews,’
heir to the throne of his father David. The
language of the text emphatic. Christ not
only a King, but ‘the King.’ The Church’s
own and only King. ‘The great and only
Potentate.’ In Christ, ‘ love brings the ma-
jesty of the Creator down to the misery of
the creature.’ Observe—The Church recog-
nizes and acknowledges Christ as King, and
asthe King. Even in the closest and most en-
dearing fellowship, His dignity and the rev-
erence due to him as King not forgotten.
True enjoyment of His fellowship accom-
panied with an impression on the heart as to
His royal character and dignity. Such fel-
lowship thus distinguished from what is
spurious, imaginary, fanatical. Nearness to
Christ fitted to exalt our views of Him and
increase our reverence towards Him. The
seraphim in His presence veil their faces
and their feet with their wings. The Pro-
phet, beholding His glory in the temple, ex-
claims : Woe is me ; forI am undone, &c.;
for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord
of Hosts (Isa. vi. 1--5 ; John xii. 45), John,
the beloved disciple, in like circumstances
‘fell at His feet as dead’ (Rev.i.17). Na-
thanael’s adoring testimony at the beginning
of the Gospel history—‘ Rabbi, thou art the
Son of God; thou art the King of Israel’
Thomas’s, at its close,—‘ My Lord and M
God.’ The sentiment of the Church we
expressed in Ambrose’s celebrated hymn,—
* Thou art the King of glory, O Christ.’ The
title in the text indicative of—(1) The con-
descension of Cnrist in admitting sinful men
to his fellowship. Subjects seldom admitted
to the table of their sovereign. Mephibo-
sheth amazed at David’s condescension in
giving ‘a dead dog’ like him a place at his
table. Christ not only admits to His inti-
mate fellowship His own creatures, but
creatures who have debased and polluted
themselves with sin, and have been in active
and open rebellion against Him. (2) The
honour and blessedness of believers. Each be-
liever not only admitted into the King’s pre-
sence, but admitted there as the King’s
Bride and Beloved. Compared with this,
the highest earthly honour and position as
worthless as the fallen leaf of autumn. This
privilege the believer’s guarantee of all he
needs for time and eternity. (3) The believer’s
duty and responsibility. If Christ be our
King, we are to confess, follow, obey, serve,
honour, and trust in Him as such. The be-
liever to aim at shewing himself at all times
and in all places, both by word and deed,
the faithful subject of Christ his King.

2. The King’s place. ‘Sitteth at his
table.’ Observe—(1) Christ has a table.
Has a table tx heaven. Acelestial banquet
a a by Him for all the saved. Abra-

4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


-_—us


" ham seen afar off by the rich man in hell,


sitting at that table with Lazarus reclining
on His bosom. Hereafter follows the Mar-
riage Supper of the Lamb, when His ‘ Bride
hath made herself ready’ (Rev. xix. 9).
Has alsoa tableonearth. This thatreferred
to in the text. The earthly rather than the
heavenly experience of believers described
in the Song. Sothe New Testament speaks
of the Lord’s, i.e,, Christ’s table, and ‘ the
Lord's Supper’ (1 Cor. x. 21; xi. 20).
One of the many connecting links between
the Song of Solomon and the New Testa-
ment, The King’s ‘Table’ on earth the
ordinances of the Gospel, and especially their
central part—


The Lord’s Supper.


This ordinance expressed in the Scrip-
ture asa Table, not an altar, The Lord’s
Supper a Feast, after and upon a sacrifice
offered up more than eighteen centuries ago,
not the sacrifice itself, The Table in the
Lord's Supper the King’s Table. The King
(i.) appointed it ; (ii.) provides it ; (iii.) pre-
sides at it. The Table not man’s but the
Lord’s; hence for all who love and belong
to the Lord, and only such. Hence, also,
His Table to be only what He Himself
directs and prescribes. Man’s grievous
sin in converting His Table into what Christ
could no longer recognize as such. The
Table appointed by the King for the refresh-
ment, comfort, and strengthening of His
Church in the wilderness. The provisions
the King’s own; while the outward, visible,
and symbolical materials are, according to
His appointment, provided by the Church.
The provisions nothing less than Himself.
Christ as crucified for us, fed upon by faith in
the Supper, as exhibited under the symbols
of bread and wine. His flesh, or Himself
as the incarnate and crucified Redeemer, the
true meat; and His blood as shed for the
remission of our sins, the true drink of the
soul. Christ the bread of life, to be cons
stantly, as well as in the Supper, fed upon
by faith, He that eateth Me, even he
shall live by Me. Except ye eat the flesh of
the Son of Man, and drink His blood, ye
have no life in you (John vi. 35—58 ; 1 Cor.
x. 16; xi. 23—29\. Christ spiritually fed
on by believers, as the Lamb Slain, as the
typical lamb was carnally eaten by Israel iw
the Feast of the Passover. The King’s
Table thus richly furnished. Man eats more
than angels’ food. The Table on earth
preparatory to the Table in heave

the marriage supper of the Lamb. (9,
Christ sits at His Table. The King’s
Table not only appointed and provided, but
presided at by the King. hen the dis


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON. cmap. i,
Fe = SS ERS


ciples prepared the last Passover and first
Lord’s Supper, Jesus ‘sat down with the
twelve.’ Jesus sits at His own Table
(Matt. xviii. 20). Is there for His own
sake, fe in the fellowship of His
loving and believing people. ‘I will come
in to him and sup with him” More
especially, however, for their sake. Affords
them quiet fellowship and intimate com-
munion with Himself. Hence, the precious-
ness of the Lord’s Table to believers. He
is there Himself, not as changed into, or
necessarily connected with, the bread and
wine; but as revealing Himself graciously
and spiritually to the souls of His people.
Is there, not only as the provisions, but as
the presiding Head ; not merely as their
crucified Redeemer, but as their living and
loving Bridegroom. The King’s ‘Table
precious, but more precious the presence of
the King Himself. Feeding on Him, as
exhibited in the bread and wine, believers
have life; realizing his living and loving
resence, they have life more abundantly
elievers at the Lord’s Table not only feed
on Christ, but have fellowship with Christ. He
speaks peace and comfort to their heart.
They speak their petitions and desires into
His ear. The King sits at His Table—(i.)
To see that the guests want nothing ; (ii.)
To give them a loving welcome; (uli.) To
ladden them with His presence and smile ;
Gr.) To receive their petitions ; (v.) To bless
the provision to their souls.

8. The ¢ime the King is at His Table.
‘While the King sitteth,’ &. The King
not always sitting at His Table. Only now
and then, and that for but a limited period,
That period often short. Christ at His
Table in the upper room at Jerusalem at
most for two or three hours. Seasons of
special communion in general neither very
frequent nor long continued. When the
risen Saviour manifested Himself as such
to the two disciples at Emmaus, he imme-
diately ‘vanished out of their sight.? Such
the conditions under which the Lord’s Table
is spread on earth. Too often the causes of
abridged communion in ourselves. Hence
(1) earnest prayer to be made, that while the
Table is spread the King Himself may be
present at it, and present all the time that
itis so. (2) Special care to be taken that
there be nothing in us or by us to cause the
time of His presence to be abridged. (3)
Diligent improvement to be made of His
presence while it continues. The King’s
golden sceptre being held out, believers to be
ready with their petitions (Esther v. 2, 3).


II. The Resouvution itself. ‘My spike-
nard sendeth (or hath sent) forth the smell
thereof.’ Spikenard, a fragrant liquid pro-

8—2


duced from a lowly shrub of that name.
Wont to be poured on the head of guests at
table (Luke vii. 46 ; Mark xiv. 3), This,
and other perfumes, often carried about by
Oriental ladies on their person. Shulamite
had her’s in order to shew her devotion to
her beloved—to do him honour, and to minis-
ter to his pleasure and refreshment. Her
spikenard to give forth its fragrance only
while the King reclined at his table or jn
the circle of his friends, when she sbonld
lovingly pour it on his head or even on his
feet. Perbaps her language figuratively
expressive of the effect the King’s presence
had on her affections, in calling them into
lively and ardent exercise. Her own love the
sweetest spikenard to the King. Observe in
regard to ~


The Believer’s Spikenard.


1. The believer Aas spikenard. A spiritual
as well as a material spikenard. ‘The soul or
spirit capable of being pleased and regaled
as well as the senses. Spiritual spikenard,
that in an individual or in the Church at
large, which is most pleasing and delighful
to God, to Christ, and to holy souls. Book
the fruits and graces of the Spirit—love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, &. (Gal. v. 22). HG
and spiritual affections exhibited in corre-
sponding actions God’s delight (Ps. xxxvii.
23). The Philippians’ gifts to Paul, ‘an
odour of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable
and well-pleasing to God’ (Phil. iv. 18).
Believers’ prayers as incense (Ps. cxli. 2).
These graces and virtues present more or
less in every regenerate soul. The spike-
nard for the Lord’s table more especially—
(1) Faith in Jesus, as the Lamb slain ; (2)
Love to Jesus, kindled by the display of His
dying love tous; (3) Joy in Him as our God
and Saviour, our husband and friend; (4)
Repentance and godly sorrow for the sins that
caused Him to suffer; (5) Sedf-dedication—
*O Lord,I am Thy servant; Iam ‘I'hy servant
and the son of Thine handmaid; Thou hast
loosed my bonds’ (Ps. cxvi. 16). (6) '
Holy resolution, to live by His grace a life of
obedience and devotedness to His service.
These graces and their lively exercise agree-
able to Christ as most fragrant perfume.
Costly and precious as the work of the Spirit
and the result of the Saviour’s own suffering
and death. Symbolized in the frankincense
and myrrh presented by the wise men to the
new-born King, as well as in the spikenard
poured on His head and feet by the hands of
those whom He had saved.

2. The believer's desire that his spikenard
give forth its ree Not sufficient that
the spikenard is present. Of little use while
still only kept close in the vessel. He


cua. 1, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.
i iN a ee =


Mary broke the box, the house was filled
with the odour of the ointment. The graces
of the Spirit to be not only in our souls, but
in lively exercise. Hence the need of the
prayer: ‘Awake, O north wind; and come,
thou south; and blow upon my garden (the
garden of Christ in my soul), that the spices
thereof may flow out’ (chap. iv. 16).

(3) His desire in order that Christ may
receive both honour and delight. The object
of the women who poured their spikenard on
His head and feet, The desire of the loving
believer that all he is and has, feels and does,
be for the honour and gratification of his
Saviour. The very spikenard all the King’s
own, and ours only by his kind and kingly
favour ; therefore to Ge for the King’s own
enjoyment. We have given Him the vinegar
and gall to drink for our sakes; meet, there-
fore, we should give Him the fragrant spike-
nard of Hisown grace. Not only the spike-
nard itself His; but the emission of its
fragrance due to His own presence. His mani-
fested gracious pres.uce like the gentle
breeze that passes over the beds of spices,
and causes them to exhale their sweets.
Raises a cloud of sweet incense from the
believer’s renewed heart. Sitting with Christ,
we obtain something of Christ in our spirit
and walk. The bride breathes no fragrance
but what she imbibes from her beloved. The
clay vessel scented by the perfume that fills
it. Christ the sun that dissolves the spike-
nard and extracts its odour. His presence
at the table, that which brought forth the
fragrance of the women’s ointment. The
believer’s graces at the King’s table do not
so much impart sweetness to the King, as
His presence there imparts sweetness to those
graces. Hence, in relation to the Lord’s
Table, the duty of believers—(1) To have
lofty views of Christ as ‘the King’; (2)
To think much of the King’s condescension
and love, and of their high pririlege in bein

rmitted to occupy a place at iis table; @)

© pray earnestly that He may be please

to be graciously present and to manifest
Himself there to their souls; (4) To see
that there is nothing in themselves to hinder
this; (5) To be concerned that there be the
Spirit’s graces to please and entertain Him;
(6) To seek that those graces be in full and
lively exercise.

Verses 11 and 12, the Bride’s commen-
dation of her beloved, and her declaration of
her love, ‘A bundle (or bag) of myrrh is
my well beloved unto me; he shall lie all
night’ (or, ‘which remaineth’) &c. Ob-
serve how the Bride speaks of the King, ‘ my
well-beloved.’ So believers of Christ Jesus,
the beloved of every believing soul. ‘ Whom
having not seen ye love.’ Christ’s gifts pre-
cious to the believers; but more precious

86


Himself. Love the first and the last thing
required by Christ of His people. The
object of His greatest desire, and that for
which He gave Himself. When well with the
believer, no question with himself as to his
love to Christ. ‘Lord, thou knowest all
things; thou knowest that I love thee.’
Ardent love its own certificate.—Christ com-
mended in the text under a two-fold com-
parison :—


I, 4‘ Bundle of Myrrh? Myrth a fra
ek gum exuding from a tree growing in

astern countries, employed for es
fragrance to the person, and often for that
papers carried by Eastern females in the

osom (chap. iii. 6; Est. ii. 12; Ps. xlv.
8). One of the chief spices in the East, and
used in the composition of the Holy Anoint-
ing Oil (Ex. xxx. 23, 34). Christ a


Bundle of Myrrh.


1. In Himself. Includes in Himself all
sweetness and fragrance. In Him a combi-
nation of all charms and excellencies. The
totality of all graces and virtues resident in
His person. Himself the eoncentration of all
loveliness and sweetness. In Him a fragrance
that fills heaven with delight. His person,
names, titles, attributes, words and works,
such as ought to diffuse joy in every sinner’s
heart, and actually do so wherever they are
known. Not half the sweetness that is in
Jesus enjoyed even by those best acquainted
with Him on earth. Yet in that which is
enjoyed, a joy unspeakable and full of glory.

2. To the Believer. ‘Unto me.’ The
language—(1) Of knowledge and apprehen-
ston. The believer’s happiness to if made
to apprehend the excellence and sweetness
that is in Jesus. Christ revealed to him
and in him by the Father. His eyes opened
and anointed by the Spirit to ‘see that Just
One.’ Made by faith to behold the King in
His beauty. Enabled to testify from ex-
perience— Thou art fairer than the children
of men; grace is poured into Thy ce ‘We
beheld His glory.’ Whatever He is to
others, to them He is a bundle of myrrh. To
them that believe, He is precious. (2) Of
choice and appropriation. Christ chosen and
appropriated by the believer as his ‘bundle
of myrrh’—Ais joyand treasure. Others choose
the finite and fading creature for their
‘bundle of myrrh,’ which perishes in the
using. Believere, with Miwy, choose Christ,
First chosex py Him, they next choose Him.
Their choice and appropriation of Him vin-
dicated in the words of the Bride—‘ He shall
lie all night (or simply— ‘which remains)
betwixt my breasts.’ The reference rather


vo the bundle of myrrh than to the beloved


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON. CHAP, I.
eeeeeeeeSeSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSsaesesesesesssssSsSsSsSSsSs


himself, though indicating the bride’s feelings
and purpose regarding him. Like the bag of
myrrh that remained constantly in the bosom,
he should have the most intimate place in the
affections of her heart. The believer’s earnest
desire and resolution to have Christ ever near
him and ever with him—to enjoy His un-
interrupted communion, to satisfy the longings
of his soul with His presence and love, and
never to part with Him. His desire expressed
in the hymn;


** Abide with me from morn till eve;
For without Thee I cannot live.”


Christ appropriated not as a dress to be put
on and off again, but as a perfume to be
carried in the bosom day and night. The
present world a night to believers (Rom. xiii.
12). His personal coming brings the day.
Himself the Bright and Morning Star. His
spiritual manifested presence gives songs in
the night. His presence and smile our bundle
of myrrh. In the world ye shall have tribula-
tion, but in me ye shall have peace (John xvi.
33). Christians to be Christ-bearers. Not
merely to wear His name but Himself. Not
to carry a crucifix, or picture of Him on our
person, but His living presence in our heart.
That presence the secret of the believer’s
fragrance. The bag of myrrh in the bosom
perfumed the whole person. The Spirit and
life sweet and savoury, only as far as we have
Christ in us and with us.


II. A ‘cluster of camphor.’ Camphor, or
more properly cypress, or henna, an Oriental
plant whose fragrant flowers grow in clusters.
The spikes or springs of it carried about by
Eastern females for the fragrance. Engedi,
with its vineyards, near the western shores of
the Dead Sea, and famous for its aromatic
herbs, the place where the best cypresses grew.
Christ not only to believers as fragrant
cypress, but a cluster of it; not merely a
cluster of cypress, but of the best and most
fragrant cypress to be found,—cypress in the
vineyards of Engedi. In Christ a concen-
tration of all graces and virtues, all sweetness
and _ excellence. Abraham’s faith, Moses’
meekness, Job’s patience, David’s devotion,
Solomon’s wisdom, Paul’s zeal, and John’s
love, all united in Jesus in fullest perfection
and concentrated strength. Christ in the
world and in the Church like a cluster of
cypress in the vineyard of Engedi. Whatever
of excellence or sweetness found there, in-
finitely short of what is in Him. Nature
lovely; Christ infinitely lovelier. Some men
and women, especially believing ones, charm-
ing and attractive both in their spirit and
their person. Christ incomparably fairer
and more attractive than the children of
men. Divine ordinances sweet and_ re-
freshing; Christ infinitely more so; and or-


dinances only sweet as Christ Himself is in
them.


Bride and Bridegroom’s Mutual
Commendations.


I. THE KING’s COMMENDATION OF
SHULAMITE.


(Verses 15—17.)


Behold, thou art fair, my love;
Behold, thou art fair;
Thou hast dove’s eyes (ver. 15).


The language earnest and emphatic. ‘ Be-
hold:’ expressive of admiration. Repeated
with the declaration—‘ thou art fair,—as in-
dicative of strong emotion and deep convic-
tion, as well as of the desire to assure the
bride of its truth, and the difficulty of doing
so. The assurance all the more necessary
from Shulamite’s own sense of her blackness,
and the depreciation of her by the ladies
of the Court on that account. Observe—
(1) Believers’ eyes more readily fixed on their
own corruption than on Christ’s grace in
them. (2) Love delights in expressing high
esteem for and admiration of its object. (3)
Believers never fairer in Christ’s eyes than
when blackest in their own, and meekly endur-
ing the contempt of others. (4) Believers
not only beautiful in the eyes of others
(verse 8), but very specially in the eyes of
Christ Himself. Christ looks not at the
blemishes, but the beauties of His people.
The beauties His, the blemishes their own.
“He seeth no iniquity in Jacob.’ Christ
the best judge of beauty. To be beautiful
in His eyes is to be beautiful indeed, and
blessed as well as beautiful. Beautiful in
His eyes, it matters little what we are in the
eyes of others. ‘ Let them curse, but bless
thou.’ Christ looks not only at what be-
lievers are now, but at what they shall be
hereafter. Views past, present, and future
at-one glance. Christ takes delight in His
people’s beauty (Ps. xlv. 10, 11). Rejoices
over them as the Bridegroom over the Bride
(Isa. Ixii. 5). The double assertion: ‘ Thou
art fair,’ probably intended to express the
greatness as well as the reality of Shulamite’s
beauty. A two-fold beauty in believers:
beauty of the inward spirit and of the
outward life; beauty in doing and in suf-
fering; beauty in imputed righteousness and
imparted grace. The repeated assertion of
Shulamite’s beauty, accompanied with the
King’s assurance of His love to her, and
her relation to Him: ‘ My love.’ Sweet and
comforting, as well as strengthening and
sanctifying to believers, to be assured of
Christ’s love, and of their relation to Him as
His bride.
37


cuar, 1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON,





A special feature in Shulamite’s beauty
noted ; ‘ Thou hast doves’ eyes,’ or ‘ Thine
eyes are doves,’ The eyes of Syrian doves
distinguished for their softness, tender-
ness, and lustrous beauty. The eye espe-
cially the seat of beauty. The eyes of Syrian
females particularly beautiful, The eye the
expression of thesou]. More especially the
expression of inward affection. Hence the
power of the eye in captivating the heart
(chap. iv. 9 ; vi. 5). Obscrve — (1) Christ no-
tices not only the beauty of believers in gen-
eral, but their single graces in particular ;
more especially He notices their love which
has Himself for its object. (2) The eyes of
believers those of doves, or doves them-
selves. The dove distinguished for(i.) gen-
tleness and meekness ; (ii.) affection and
fidelity to its mate ; (iii.) purity and cleanli-
ness ; (iv.) timidity and retiring disposition.
Its character indicated in its eyes. The eyes
of believers not those of the tiger, or the fox,
or the hawk ; butofthe dove. The contrast
of the believer’s eyes indicated in Matt, xx.
15 ; 2 Pet. ii. 14; Ps, cxxxi,1. Believers
learn of Jesus to be meek and lowly in heart.
The ‘ gentleness of Christ’ to be a distin-
guishing feature in their character. ‘Gen-
tleness’ is love holding intercourse with
those around us, Implies tenderness of
feeling ; readiness of sympathy ; consider-
ateness of others. ‘ Gentleness’ is‘ lovein
its depth and in its delicacy.’ Believers
chosen in Christ to be holy and without
blame before God in Jove (Eph, i. 4), Notto
be drawn away from Christ by any suffering
or persecution. Pass the time of their so-
journing herein fear. Work out their sal-
vation with fear and trembling (1 Pet. 1.17 ;
Phil, ii. 12),


2. SuHuLamire to THE Kina,
(Verse 16).


Behold thou art fair, my beloved ;
Yea, pleasant.


The Bride returns her Beloved’s commenda-
tion. Every good word from Christ to be
turned to His own praise, What the be-
liever is made, he is made ‘ to the praise of
the glory of His grace.’ The title also re-
ciprocated : ‘My Beloved.’ The believer
made conscious both of His love to Christ
and hisrelationto Him. Bride’s commen-
dation also commences with a note of excla-
mation : ‘ Behold.’ Implies the reality and
greatness of the King’s beauty. His beauty
a thing to be contemplated and dwelt upon.
The ascription of beauty to the Bride re-
turned as belonging rather to Himself. The
believer’s beauty only a reflection of Christ’s,
Shulamite commends her beloved as—


88 2


I. Farr. Observe—


1. Jesus supremely beautiful in the eyes of
believers, Their eyes anointed with Divine
eye-salve to see His beauty. Able to testify
with John we beheld His glory. Their
blessedness, to behold even now, by the eye
of faith, ‘the King in His beauty.’ Christ
formerly to them as to others, a root out of
a dry ground, without form or comeliness :
now the chief among ten thousand, and
altogether lovely.

2. Jesus in Himself transcendenily beauti-
ful. Observe, in reference to the


Beauty of Christ—


1, Its greatness. His beauty such as no
angel’s hand could pourtray, or tongue de-
scribe. The exclamation of the prophet :
‘ How great is His beauty!’ (Zech. ix. 17.)
Of the Psalmist : ‘Thou art fairer than the
children of men ; grace is poured into thy
lips’ (Ps. xlv.). (2) His beauty a glory such
as becomes the Son of God: ‘ We beheld
His glory ; the glory as of the only begotten
of the Father’ (John i, 14). All beauty
summed up and centered in Jesus, What-
ever is beautiful in the creature, found ip
Him in an infinitely greater degree, All
creature-beauty only a ray or emanation
from His own. Christ the fountain and
ocean of beauty ; all beauty in the creature,
whether angel, man, or nature, only astream
from that fountain, or a drop from that
ocean. His an essential beauty ; theirs a
derivedone, All beautiful things in nature
only made to reflect something of His
beauty, and to lead up to it.

2.Its character, His beauty mainly a
moraland spiritual one : ‘ Full of grace and
truth.’ His countenance, doubtless, indi-
cative of that spiritual beauty. Not the less
beautiful because, for our sakes, marred
more than any man’s, and soiled with blood
and tears. His beauty in His soul, but
manifesting itself in His words, looks, and
actions. Seen both in what He is in Him-
self, and in what He is to others, especially
to poor sinners of mankind. His soul free
from all sin, and full of all grace. Allits
powers and faculties in complete order and
perfect harmony. His beauty seen not only
in the separate graces of His character, but
in their combination, proportion, and sym-
metry. Displayed in His love and loving-
ness— His self-forgetting, and self-denying
benevolence, sympathy, and compassion ; in
His gentleness and tenderness,His meekness
and humility ; in His kindness and conde-
scension to the poor, the ignorant, and the
despised ; in His wisdom and intelligence,
combined with forbearance and child-like


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: 1sH# SUNG UF SOLOMON.


CHAP. L





simplicity; in His patience in suffering and
submission to His Father’s will; in his fear-
lessness in regard to Himself with the ten-
derest care and consideration for others; in
His manliness combined with meekness ;
in His firmness of principle with flexibilit
of manners; in His purity combined wit
pity; in His hatred of sin with love to the
sinner; in His ardent affection for His
friends with the most generous forgiveness
of his enemies; in His supreme love to God
combined with untiring self-sacrificing love
to man.


II. Preasawt, Shulamite adds—‘ Yea,
leasant’ or comely. ‘ Yea,’ indicating the
ifficulty she finds in expressing her appre-

ciation of the King’s excellence, and the
delight she found in Him. Not only ‘ fair,’
but ‘pleasant’ besides. The most beautiful
not always the most pleasant. Christ not
only beautiful but pleasant. Observe in
regard to the


Pleasartness of Christ:


In Him the greatest moral excellence com-
bined with thegreatest pleasantness. Pleasant-
ness a special quality, and superadded to
excellence. Indicates what a person is in
relation to others. That which renders a
man amiable, agreeable, and enjoyable to
those around him, The quality in an indi-
vidual that affords pleasure and delight in
his presence and society. Has special re-
ference to one’s spirit and temper, manners
and deportment,—a person’s Jooks, and the
tone of his voice, as well as his words and
actions. Impliesa combination of graces as
well as virtues; of charms, as well as ex-
cellencies; of agreeable as well as solid
qualities, fitting their possessor for impart-
ing pleasure as well as profit to those in
contact with him. Such pleasantness in
Jesus. Jesus fair in Himself; pleasant to
others. Such that not only angels but men—
not only the godly but sinners—may find
pleasure in Him. ‘he evidence of His plea-
santness seen in His disciples who so fondly
adhered to Him and so closely followed
Him; in John the fisherman, who was wont
to pillow his head on His bosom; in the
multitudes that everywhere thronged about
Him; in the publicans and sinners that drew
near to hear Him; in the children that fol-
lowed Him with their parents, and sang His
praise in the temple-courts ; in the infants
that He took up in His arms, putting His
hnnds on their head and blessing them.
David's testimony in regard to Jonathan
that of every believer in regard to Jesus:
‘Very pleasant hast thou been unto ie.’
Jesus ‘very pleasant’ to believers now waile


conversed with through a veil, What when
they see Him face to face P


8. SHULAMITE REJOICES IN THE Krna’s
FELLOWSHIP AND THE PLACE OF ITS
ENJOYMENT.


Verses 16, 17.


Also our bed is green;
The beams of our house are cedar,
And our rafters of fir.


The scene now the grounds of the palace.
Shulamite has found the King at the shep-
herd’s tents. Intensely happy in each
other’s society and love, they sit down and
repose on a green and flowery bank — the
resting-place at noon (verse 7). The cedars
spread their shady branches over them like
the beams of a palace, while the fragant fir
trees form a gallery for their walk. Shula-
mite notices these things, and in her de-
lighted enjoyment of the King’s fellowship,
and her fine appreciation of the objects of
nature, expresses her gratification in these
agreeable surroundings. Brought up in the
country, she is everywhere exhibited in the
Song as an enthusiastic admirer of natural
beauty. In this way as well as others, a
meet companion for him who ‘spake of
trees, from the cedar tree that is in Lebanon,
even unto the hyssop that springeth out of
the wall’ (1 Kings iv. 33). Enjoyment of
a dear one’s fellowship gives of itself a
charm to the place which is the scene of it.
The place where a believer has enjoyed sweet
and hallowed communion with his Saviour,
especially in the season of his first love,
rendered beautiful in his eyes, and endeared
to his heart. All the more so when this has
been in the midst of natural scenery. With
the joy of a soul’s deliverance from bondage —
and possession of a newly found Saviour, all
surrounding nature seems to be in harmony.
By a law of our mental constitution, the
joy transfuses itself over all surrounding
objects. The mountains and hills break
forth into singing, and all the trees of the
field clap their hands (Is. lv. 12). Christ’s
graciously manifested person sheds a beauty
and sweetness over every thing around us.
Himself fair and pleasant, the very place
becomes such where He is found and en-
joyed. Where He treads, lilies and_ roses

loom. Hence the sweetness of Divine
ordinances. Christ’s fellowship usually most
enjoyed in connection with the ordinances of
His own institution. Gospel ordinances the
shepherds’ tents where the Chief Shepherd
is found, and where He makes His flock to
rest at noon, ‘The promise,—‘] will com


39


CHAP. I,


mune with them from off the mercy seat.
Hence, the ver7 place of these ordinances,
beautiful and delightful to a loving believer.
‘Howamiable are Thy tabernacles;’ ‘Strength
and beauty are in His sanctuary.’ ‘A day in
Thy courts is better than a thousand.’ Hence
his longing desire after them. ‘My soul
longeth, yea even fainteth, for the courts of
the Lord.;’ ‘One thing have I desired of the
Lord, and that will I seek after; that [may
Awell in the house of the Lord all the days
of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord
and inquire in His temple’ (Ps. lxxxiv.;
xevi.; lxiii; xxvii.). This sweetness and
charm connected with the sanctuary some-
thing very different from mere outward
attraction; though it may be desirable that
even that should not be altogether wanting.
Nothing lost when that which meets the
bodily eye is somewhat in harmony with the
BEETEN beauty of the sanctuary, which only
the eye of the living soul can perceive and
the renewed heart delight in.

Shulamite commends both the beauty of
the grassy couch on which they reposed, and
the agreeableness of the shade afforded by
the trees which spread their branches over
their heads like the beams of sylvan cham-
bers. ‘Our bed (or couch) is green (or
flourishing) ; the beams of our house (Heb.
“houses ”) are of cedar (or cedars are the
beams of our chambers) ; and our rafters (or
galleries) are of fir’ (or fir trees are our
rafters or galleries). Suggesting, in regard
to


Divine Ordinances,


1. Community of interest and participation
onthe part of Christ and His people. ‘ Our
bed;? ‘our house ;’ as pertaining both to
the bride and bridegroom. So Divine ordi-
nances the joint property of Christ and His
people. The temple at Jerusalem spoken of
as both God’s house and that of the people:
* Our beautiful house ;’ ‘ Your house is left
untoyoudesolate.’ The sacrifices participated
in both by God and the offerer. Called ‘the
bread of their God,’ ‘ the food of the offering
made by fire unto the Lord’ (Lev. iii. 11;
xxi. 6, 8, &c.). Christian ordinances in-
tended both for the enjoyment of Christ and
His people. ‘If any man hear my voice and
open the door, I will come in unto him,
and will sup with him and he with me’
(Rev. iii. 21).

2. Repose as well as comfort to the soul.
Christ found in the ordinances of his house
as ‘the rest and the refreshing’ wherewith
‘the weary’ are to be made to rest, and ‘as
the shadow of a great rock in a weary land’
(Is. xxvili. 12; xxxii. 2). ‘One thing have
J desired of the Lord, that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of my lite ;

40


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: Hu »wONG OF SOLOMON,


For in the time of trouble he shall hide me
in his pavilion: in the secret of his taber-
nacle shall he hide me.’ ‘There is a river,
the streams whereof shall make glad the
city of God, the holy place of the tabernacleg
of the most high’ (Ps. xlvi. 4; xxvii.
4, 5).

3. Freshness and life. ‘Our bed is green’
or flourishing. The ordinances of the Ciris-
tian Church, wherever two or three are
gathered together in the Master’s name, as
fresh and lively, as full of blessing and
as precious to Lelorets now as when after
Pentecost the disciples ‘continned steadfast
in the Apostles’ fellowship and doctrine,
and in breaking of bread, and in prayers’
(Acts ii. 42). These ordinances as sweet
and refreshing to the believer at the close of
his earthly pilgrimage as at the beginnin
of it. The promised presence of Christ a
the operation of His Spirit, that which keeps


the couch green and flourishing. ‘There is
ariver, &.’
4. Strength and permanence. ‘The beams


of our house are cedars.’ Strength as well
as beauty in God’s sanctuary (Ps. xcvi.
6). Christ’s promised presence gives pers
manance, as well as life and freshness, to
ordinances. The Lord's Supper, the central:
ordinance of Christian worship, to continue
till He come again. These ordinances have
continued throughout eighteen centuries in
almost all parts of the known world, and
are, to a great extent, the same even in
form at this day as when originally insti-
tuted and observed by the earliest converts,
One precious fruit of the Reformation, the
restoration of these ordinances to their pri-
mitive simplicity, after having been overlaid
and disfigured both in the Eastern and
Western Churches with rites and ceremonies
of mere human invention. What is Divine
in ordinances permanent as the cedars; what
is merely human, perishable, and to be put
away.

5. Fragrance and beauty. ‘Our rafters
(or galleries) of fir’ (or, are firs or cypresses).
The fir or cypress distinguished for its
beauty as well as its fragrance. ‘ Instead of
the thorn shall come up the fir tree.’ Pro-
mised in connection with the sanctuary in
Gospel times. ‘The glory of Lebanon shall
come unto thee, the fir tree and the pine
tree and the box together, to beautify the
place of my sanctuary’ (Is. Ix. 13; lv. 13).
Beauty, as well as strength, in Gods sanc-
tuary (Ps. xevi. 6). ‘The fragrance and
beauty of Divine ordinances not in the
fumes of incense, or in external decoration,
whether of place or persons; but in the
truths of the Gospel exhibited, the presence
of Christ enjoyed, and the power of the
Spirit experienced in them,


AUMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





Further Intercourse bettoeen the
Petrother,
Chapter II. Verses 1—3.
Ssvnamite’s Ser-DepREciation,
(Verse 1).


T am the rose of Sharon,
And the lily of the valleys.


The King and Shulamite still seated on
their grassy couch. She, happy in his fellow-
ship and love, and remembering her humble
origin, appears to feel herself all unworthy
of such a position, and with her eye on
the wild flowers around her, to sigh out:
‘IT am but a wild flower of the plain, a
humble lily in the valleys.’ This view of
the words probably more correct than that to
which we have long with pleasure been
accustomed, and which is rather the one
suggested by our English version, viz.,
that which ascribes these words to the King
instead of the Bride. Scarcely likely that
here, and here alone, the speaker commends
himself. Self-commendation, however just
and becoming in the true Bridegroom, not
the language of love, nor in consonance with
the context and the rest of the poem. The
rose probably not the flower here intended ;
but one of the bulbous kind; perhaps the
meadow-saffron, crocus, or narcissus. The
flower both common and abundant, and with
little or nothing striking in it. Natural, in
the circumstances of the case, for Shulamite
thus to depreciate herself in the presence of
the King, of whose love she sees herself so
anworthy. Commentators and versions
divided on the pussage; the older ones
applying these words rather to the King,
the moderns more generally to the Bride.
The spiritual instruction precious in either
case.

1. The believer's feelings, in the enjoyment of
the Saviour’s manifested presence and love,
naturally those of deep humiliation and
self-depreciation, Such the feelings of
Menhibosheth at the King’s table, and of
Peter on the revealed divinity of his Master
in the fishing-boat. On the perception of
Christ's glory, and the sense of His love to
oursel'res, our thoughts naturaily thrown on
our ovn unworthiness. ‘I am not worthy
of the least of (Hed., 1 am less than) all the
mercies and of all the truth which Thou hast
showed unto Thy servant ; for with my staff
I passed over this Jordan; and now I am
become two bands’ (Gen. xxxii. 10). So
Dsvid: ‘What am I, O Lord God® and
what is my house, that Thou hast brought
me hitherto?’ (2 Sam. vii. 18) and Hliza-


CHAP. I,


beth : ‘Whence is this unto me, that the
mother of my Lord should come unto me?’
(Luke i. 42) Lowly views of one’s self, and
lofty views of Christ, the legitimate fruit of
Divine communion. The lasting wonder of
heaven and earth, that the King of Kings,
possessed of infinite dignity and matchless
excellence, should ally Himself in bridal
union with a poor vile sinner.


“How should it be, Thou heavenly King,
That Thou shouldst us to glory bring ?
Make slaves the partners of Thy throne,
Deck’d with a never fading crown.


** Hence our hearts melt; our eyes o’erflow;
Our words are lost; nor will we know,
Nor will we think of aught beside—

My Lord, my love, is crucified.’’


2. The description in the text true of the
believer.—(1) Nothing more in him than in
the millions of his race. A fallen child of
Adam, shapen in iniquity, and a child of
wrath even as others (Eph. ii. 2,3). (2)
Exposed to danger and destruction; like the
flower of the field, ready to be trodden on,
and crushed by every foot. Often accounted
as sheep for the slaughter. Like his Master
in the eyes of the world—‘a root out of a
dry ground; despised and rejected of men.’
(3) Often chosen from among the poor and
illiterate. ‘Ye see your calling, brethren;
how that not many wise men after the flesh,
not many mighty, not many noble are called.’
‘Hath not God chosen the poor of this world,
rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom P’
‘ He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and
lifteth the needy out of the dunghill; that
He may set him with princes, even with the
princes of His people’ (Ps. cxiii. 7, 8; 1 Cor.
1, 26; James il. 8).


Tue Kine’s CommenpaTion oF SHv-
LAMITE,


(Verse 2).


As the lily among thorns,
So is my love among the daughters.


To Shulamite’s self-depreciating remark—
‘I am but a lily in the valleys,’—the King
immediately replies: ‘But as a lily among
thorns, so is my love among and in compari-
son with all other women.’ The more a
believer sees and acknowledges his own
unworthiness, the more lovely he appears in
the eyes of the Saviour, and the more does
the Saviour assure him of His esteem and
love. The language of the text true as
addressed by Christ to His people. His
eyes, which are ‘as a flame of fire,’ view
both believers and unbelievers in their real
character. His testimony that of ‘ the vias


cHar. 1 §HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





fol and True Wituess.? Mis Church colleo-
tively and His people individually, while in
this world and in comparison with others, a


Lily among Thorns.
In this Divine assertion, notice


I. The Lity. Uncertain what species of
lily is meant. According to some, the Scar-
let Martagon, which grows in profusion in
the Levant. Possibly the White Amaryllis
intended. A species mentioned by Salt, in
his Voyage to Abyssinia, whose white petals
are marked with a single streak of bright
purple down the middle. Believers com-
pared to lilies, from—

1. Their beauty. Jesus speaks of the
lilies of the field as adorned with a beauty
to which that of Solomon, in all his glory,
could not be compared. The Scarlet Mare
tagon an exceedingly gorgeous flower. The
wild flowers of Palestine in general very
beautiful. Believers possessed of a moral
and spiritual beauty—the beauty of holiness,
Made partakers of tke Divine nature, which
islove. Renewed after the image of God and
conformed to the likeness of Christ, who is
‘fairer than the children of men,’ and the
embodiment of all beauty. Believers, as
members of Christ, adorned with the graces
of His Spirit—‘ love, joy, peace, long-suffer-
ing, &c.? Enabled by grace to cultivate, and
increasingly to exhibit, ‘whatsoever things
are pure, just, lovely, and of good report’
(Phil. iv. 3 ; Gal. v. 22).

2. Their purity. The White Amaryllis,
or our common white lily, an emblem of
purity. Believers made, by Divine grace,

ure Toth in heart and life. Enabled 6 the

ope of seeing Christ as He is, to purify them-
selves even as He is pure. Have purified
their hearts through obeying the truth. Are
sanctified through the truth. Sanctified in
Christ Jesus. Made clean through the Word
He has spoken to them. As ‘pure in heart,’
etic te at death to the beatific vision of
God.

8. Their humility, The White Amaryllis
rises only two or three inches from the

round. The common white lily, with its
diocnine head, an emblem of humility and
modesty. Believers called to be ‘clothed
with humility,’ and to learn of Him who
was ‘meek and lowly in heart.’ Made by
Divine grace to be ‘meek’ and ‘poor ip
spirit.’ Represented by the Publican in the
temple. Enabled to grow in humility as in
other graces. Hxemplified in Paul. His first
acknowledgment : ‘not worthy’ to be called
an apostle;’ later on: ‘less than the least
of all saints ;’ last of all: ‘the chief of sin-
ners.’ The heavier the ear of corn, the more

42


it bends. A proud Christian a paradox,
Faith essentially humble, as being simply
sa aie receiving out of another's fulness,
and weakness leaning em a Saviour’s
te Para?

4. Their fragrance. Accordi alt,
the flower es the White Amaryllis is sweet
scented, its smell ‘resembling that of the
Lily of the Valley, but much more powerful.
Behavers: according as they walk with
Christ and possess His spirit, enabled to
exercise a beneficial influence on others, and
to diffuse a moral fragrance which makes
their very presence a blessing. God’s pro-
mise even to penitent backsliders: ‘I will
be as the dew unto Israel;’ and as the con-
sequence of it—‘he shall grow as the lily,
and cast forth his roots as Lebanon: his
branches shall spread, and his beauty shall
be as the olive tree, and his smell as Le-
banon’ (Hos. xiv. 5, 6). The believer's

rivilege so to carry Christ with him as to
e a perfume a benefaction wherever
he goes.


II. The Toorxs. The wagedly so called
(2 Sam. xxiii. 6). Compared to a thorn hedge
(Mic. vii. 4). Thorns as being—

1. Unsightly. Little beauty in a thorn.
As little in the unregenerate in the sight of
God and angels. Men in their fallen state
and still unrenewed by Divine grace, ‘cor-
rupt, filthy, and abominable;’ ‘ hateful and
hating one another;’ under the power of a
carnal mind, which is ‘enmity against God,
and is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be.’ No truly good thing in
them, or in the fallen nature which governs
them. No longer bearing the moral image
of God, but of His great adversary.
‘ Alienated from the life of God’ who is
love, and ‘dead in trespasses and in sins.’
Every imagination of the thoughts of their
heart only evil continually (Gen. vi. 5;
vii. 21; Ps. xiv. 1—3; Rom. iii. 10, &.;
viii. 7, 8; Tit. iii. 3; Eph. iv. 18; ii. 1):

2. Hurtful. Thorns pierce the hand that
takes hold of them, and tear those that
come in contact with them. So the ungodl
(2 Sam. xxiii. 6). The unregenerate hurtful
to their neighbours. Their influence, both
conscious and unconscious, for evil rather
than good. Their example injurious, as
turning others away from God rather than
turning them #o Him. The Divine testi-
mony: ‘One sinner destroyeth much good.’
Pau, in his unconverted state, ‘ a persecutor,
and injurious.’ The poison of asps under
the lips of the ungodly. Their feet swift
to shed blood. The impenitent and unbe-
lieving often grieving thorns in the sides of
believers, and‘even of their nearest relatives


and best friends. Their words often such as


HOMILE?IO COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON. cmap, u.





to leave a stain on the mind and a wound in
the heart of others.

8. Unproftable. Thorns and thistles part
of the curse of barrenness inflicted on the
earth for man’s sin, ‘ Do men gather grapes
of thorns?’ Thorns only useful in making
a hedge for the protection of what may do
good to others. The Divine testimony
regarding men in their natural state: ‘They
are altogether become unprofitable; there is
none that doeth good; no, not one’ (Rom.
iii. 12). The unregenerate unable to benefit
men as immortal souls. Aim neither at
bringing glory to God nor salvation to men.
Are only employed by God for subordinate

urposes, and as His unintentional instru-
ments for the protection of His people and
the interests of His kingdom. The final
sentence pronounced on the ungodly: ‘Take
ye the unprofitable servant,’ &c.

4. Destined to destruction. Thorns,
especially in the East, cut a to be burned,
or set on fire as they grow (2 Sam. xxiii. 6;
Is. ix. 18; x. 17; xxvii. 4; Heb. vi. 8).
The end of the ungodly (Matt, xxv. 41).


III. Zhe Situation or tHE Lityr.
‘Among thorns.’ Beautiful wild flowers in
Palestine often seen growing in the midst of
a thorn bush or a thorn hedge. Believers,
while in this world, necessarily among unbe-
lievers. Jx an ungodly world, though not
of it. Saints in Cesar’s household. The
tares still suffered to grow among the wheat.
The chaff and the wheat together till death
separate them. Heaven or the new earth
the only place where the thorns are not.
The situation of believers among the ungodly
over-ruled for their own improvement, for
the benefit of others, and for the giory
of Him whose grace makes them to differ,
and whose power preserves them safe to His
heavenly kingdom. ‘The calling of believers,
while in this world, to magnify the grace of
God towards them, and to shew the excel-
lency of His grace in them. Their aim to
be among the unregenerate as the pure,
modest, and harmless lily among thorns,
Their loveliness, like that of the lily, to be
all the more manifest and striking from their
situation. Believers not to be surprised if
called to suffer tribulation and persecution
from the world, ‘A lily among thorns’
likely enough to be torn by them. ‘Their
comfort that it is only Aere, and for a short
time, that their situation is that of a ‘lily
among thorns.’


IV. The SupERIORITY OF THE LILY TO THB
Torn. The language expressive of com-
ison as wellas situation. The lily superior
ngre thorns among which it grows. So
believers in relation to the world (1 John


.


v. ¥9). ‘The righteous more excellent
than his neighbour.’ Believers superior to
others—

1. In Character, Believers renewed in the
spirit of their mind after the image of God.
Have Christ dwelling in them as their inward
life, so that they become like Him who was
‘holy, harmless, and undefiled.’ Created
anew in Christ unto good works; and engrafted
into Him, so as to bring forth the fruits of
the Spirit—love, joy, peace, long-suffering, &c.
2. Usefulness to others. Believers, from
the uew Divine nature implanted in them,
able to benefit others for eternity as well as
for time. Enabled by the Spirit of Christ in
them to act upon the words of Christ: ‘It
is more blessed to give than to receive.’
‘ Freely ye have received, freely give.’ Are
qualified for being made, like Christ, a bless-
ing to the world, by their example, their
prayers, and their personal efforts. The salt
of the earth, and the lights of the world.
Unbelievers rather a hindrance than a fur-
therance to the real interests of others.

3. In their Final Destiny. Believers at
death are transplanted in their spirits, and
at the Lord's appearing also in their bodies,
to a happier clime, to bloom as immortal
lilies in the Paradise of God. Destruction
and eternal death the end of the impenitent
and unbelieving (Rom. vi. 21, 23; Phil. iii,
19). As thorns, destined to everlasting
burnings (Is. xxxiii. 12, 14; Rev. xxi. 8).

Application. The world divided into
two parts, lilies and thorns—regenerate and
unregenerate, believers and unbelievers. ‘l'o
which do [ belong? Am I lily or a thorn?
Allare thorns by nature. Lilies ouly made
such by regenerating grace. Have I under-
gone this changeP Out of a thorn has al-
mighty grace made me alilyP If not, am I
willing that it should be so now? Thorns
spared for this purpose. ‘The grace that has
transformed others able to transform you also.
That grace offered. Jesus, working in the
Gospel by His Spirit, still transforms lilies
into thorns, and is ready even now to trans-
form you. He says: ‘Look unto me, and be
ye saved;’ ‘Come unto me, all ye that labour
and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest;’ ‘He that believeth on me though hy
were dead, yet shall he live.’ ‘ Wilt chow bs.
made whole P’





SHULAMITE’s COMMENDATION OF HER
BELOVED.


Verse 3.


As the apple-tree
Among the trees of the woods
So is my beloved
Among the sons,
4d


cuar. 1 HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.
re


I sat down under His shadow
With great delight,

And His fruit

Was sweet to my taste.


Shulamite compares her beloved to an
apple or citron tree growing among, or com-
i with, the common trees of the wood.

he comparison natural. The lovers sur-
rounded with trees as well as flowers. Ob-
serve—The more Christ shews His love
to His people, the more they are drawn to
eommend Him as their Beloved. If Christ
can commend the imperfect, and in Himself
worthless, believer ; howe much more should
the believer commend Him who is perfection
and loveliness itself! Christ compared to


The Apple-Tree.


The word alee to any tree of the
class to which the apple-tree belongs. The
Hebrew term expressive of the fragrance
of the fruit. Probably the citron intended.
The orange still common in Palestine, es-
pecially on the sea-coast. Perhaps more so
than formerly. The citron-tree distinguished
for its fruit, its foliage, and its shade. Hence
its superiority to the common trees of the
wood. Other trees might perhaps equal it
in shade, but without the fruit or its peau-
tiful appearance. All excellence and beauty
comprehended in Christ. Compared with
Him, mankind in general, and even be-
lievers themselves, only as the common trees
of the wood, compared with the beautiful and
shady citron or orange-tree with its golden,
fragrant, and delicious fruit. The world
itself little worth to him who knows Christ.
‘What things were gain to me these I
counted loss for Christ; yea doubtless, and
I count all things but loss for the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord’
(Phil. iii. 7, 8). Observe—

I. The Comparison made, ‘As the apple-
tree,’ &c. The comparison of the Beloved
to the apple or citron-tree made—

1. From its appearance. The citron-tree,
larger, nobler, and more beautiful in appear-
ance than the trees of the wood; for ex-
ample, the dwarf oak, so common in Pales-
tine. The citron or orange-tree, with its
dark green glossy foliage, its white blossoms,
and its golden fruit, a picture of beauty. So
Christ; ‘the chief among ten thousand,’ ‘fairer
than the children of men,’ Has in all things
the pre-eminence over both angels and men.
The first-born among many brethren. They

riests; He the High Priest. They kings;
3 the King ofkings. They pearls; He the
One pearl of great price. The highest,
reatest, and best among men but as the
ie stunted shrub, or common wild-tree.
4 ,


in presence of the noble and beautiful cit:
ron.

2. From its shade. The foliage of the
citron or orange-tree not only beautiful, but
thick, and affording an agreeable shade. So
Christ affords shelter and shade — (1) Zo
awakened sinners, from the scorching sen-
tence of God’s righteous and broken law.
The sinner, while out of Christ, pursued by
the fiery law with its terrible curse: ‘The
soul that sinneth it shall die;? ‘Cursed is
every one that continueth not in all things
written in the book of the law to do them.’
{In Christ alone, as enduring the curse for
him, can he find shelter. But there he can
and does. ‘Christ hath redeemed us from
the curse of the law, having been made a
curse for us.’ ‘In Him we have redemption
through His blood, even the forgiveness of
sins’ (Ephi.7; Gal. iii. 10). ‘There is
now no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus (Rom. viii. 1). (2) To tried
and tempted believers. Tribulation the ap-
pointed lot of believers in this world. Per.
secution unavoidable to those ‘ who will live
godly in Christ Jesus.” For a season, at
times in heaviness through manifold tempta-
tions. Sometimes ao with fiery trials.
Christ then their shade and shelter. ‘In me
ye shall have peace.’ ‘When thou walkest in
the fire, I will be with thee. Fear not, for
I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am
thy God.’ His presence with them as the
shadow of a great rock in a weary land. His
grace promised to be sufficient for their
both doing and suffering all His will. Hence
enabled to rejoice even in tribulationand made
more than conquerors through Him that
loved them. Christ crucified, the shadow
between sinners and the heat of God’s wrath ;
Christ crowned, the shadow between believers
and the wrath of men and devils. The
shadow of Christ, the true apple-tree, gives
life as well as peace and comfort to those who
sit underit. Every other shadow only that of
the deadly upas. A religion of the flesh to
be avoided, which is only a sitting under the
shadow of the ‘letter which killeth.’ Divine
wisdom, to sit only under the shadow of
Him who is the Truth and the Life.

3. From its Fruit. The fruit of the apple,
citron, or orange tree, fragrant, delicious,
and refreshing. Such the fruit of Christ.
That fruit—(1) The redemption accomplished
on the cross, with all the varied blessings of
the everlasting covenant for time and eter-
nity, flowing out of it. (2) The doctrines y
grace in which that redemption is unfold
and which are revealed in the Scriptures.
(3) The promises of the Word, ‘ exceeding
great and precious, adapted to every case
and condition, and all ‘ Yeaand Amen to them
that believe.’ (4) The ordinances of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





Gospel; as prayer, the preaching of the
Word, and pre-eminently the Lord’s Supper.
The fruit Christ’s, as—(1) Procured through
Him in His obedience unto death. (2)
Found i# Him. (3) Communicated dy Him.
On this apple-tree hangs fruit for immortal
souls and dying sinners, and that in richest
abundance. Fruit sweeter than that of
Eden, with neither sin nor danger in the
eating of it. Instead of a prohibition and
threatened death, here is a free invitation
and promised life. Instead of a flaming
sword turning every way to guard its access,
a silver trumpet sounds, proclaiming liberty
of approach to all comers: Come, buy and
eat, without money and without price; eat
ye that which is good, and let your soul
delight itself in fatness. The fruit offered
by the god of this world, however fair and
inviting in appearance, found at last to be
only wormwood: ‘the grapes of Sodom and
the clusters of Gomorrha,’


Tl. The Experience related, ‘TI sat,’ &.
The very remembrance of an enjoyed Saviour
sweet.

‘What peaceful hours I then enjoy’d!

How sweet their memory still |’


The text expressive of repose and enjoy-
ment. A beautiful illustration of faith in
exercise. Hxhibits—(1) Sense of exposure
and weariness. (2) Discovery in Christ of
what meets our case. (3) Trust in and
appreciation of Him for the wants of our


soul. (4) Feeling of security, peace, and
satisfaction. (5) Continuance in such a
state. Observe—(1) Whatever Christ ts, He


is to be to us personally and experimentally.
In whatever aspect He is exhibited in the
world, in that He is to be appropriated,
embraced, and made use of. Entire confi-
dence to be placed, and full complacency
taken, in Him and in His finished work. As
the apple tree, we are to sit down under His
cooling shade, and partake of His refreshing
fruit. Not enough to be near the shade, or
to gaze upon the fruit. Without appropriatior.
and personal use, men die even in sight of
the Apple-tree. The awakened sinner to
believe the testimony concerning Christ as
a Saviour, and cordially to appropriate it for
his own present and eternal benefit. (2)
The preciousness of Divine grace that has not
only made such provision for our souls’ neces-
sities, but inclines and enables us to make use
of it. ‘By grace ye are saved, through
faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the
gift of God’ (Eph. ii. 8).

‘Why was I made to hear Thy voiee,

And enter while there’s room ?
While thousands make a wretched choice,
And rather starve than come.





CHAY. I


‘*T' was the same love which spread the feast,
That sweetly drew me in;
Else I had still refused to taste,
And perished in my sin.’


(3) Coming under the shadow of Christ for
defence from the law’s curse, we are inviled to
to sit down and partake of His fruit. The
fruit of the apple-tree for those who come
under its shadow. Joy and comfort in Christ
the immediate result 6f faith in His blood.
So the awakened jailor rejoiced, believing
in the Saviour preached to him by Paul and
Silas. The believing Eunuch ‘went on his
way rejoicing’ (Acts viii. 39; xvi. 34).
(4) Christ's fruit sweet to the taste of those
who come under His shadow. ‘To you that
believe He is precious.’ A spiritual taste
and acarnal one. As a man is, so is his
taste. Truth in the proverb—each man to
his taste. The taste of the carnal and
unrenewed only carnal, and for the things
that are seen and temporal—the pleasures of
sin, which are but for aseason. ‘Lhe taste of
aman different from that of the swine at
the swine-trough. A refined and cultivated
taste the result of civilization, training, and
education. The taste of a believer the result
of regeneration and the impartation of a new
spiritual and divine nature. Hence his
taste for what is spiritual, divine, and
heavenly, instead of what is only carnal and
earthly. Unspeakable mercy to be blessed
with a beneded nature and a spiritual taste.
A man’s misery to be left under the dominion
of an earthly, carnal, and depraved taste.
To such a taste Christ and heayen itself
entirely without attraction. The place of
torment the only future abode for a carnal
taste. The object of the Holy Spirit’s work
to change a man’s taste. Hence the first
step in his conversion—conviction of his sin
and misery, and the worthlessness of the
world to a dying sinner and an immortal soul
(John iv. 12, 14; Luke xv. 14—19). To
a renewed soul and a spiritual taste, Christ
and His salvation infinitely sweeter than
the choicest pleasures of a perishing world.


Application. Has this been my experience P
Is it sonow? Have I seen my exposure, as
a sinner, to Divine wrath, and fled to Christ
for shelter? Have I appropriated Him as
just the shelter I need; and am I now using
and enjoying Him as suchP Have I found
delight in Him and in His salvation? Has
His work of redemption and the word of His
grace been sweet to my tasteP Is it so
now? All have their different tastes: what
is mine? Is it spiritual or carnal? Christ
or the world? Lord, give me a spiritual
taste. Make Christ precious to me as a
sinner, as He is toall that believe. Give me,
as a believing sinner, to sit down under His


CHAP. Hi.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





shadow with great delight, and to find His
fruit sweet to my taste. :


SHuLamite’s Harry EXeRrcisn.
(Verses 4—6).


‘ He brought me to the banqueting-house,
And his banner over me was love,


‘Stay me with flagons ;
Comfort me with apples;
For I am sick of love.


‘ His left hand is under my head,
And his right hand doth embrace me.’


Shulamite describes her happy enjoyment of
her Beloved’s fellowship and love. Repre-
sents it under the figure of a banquet of
wine. ‘He brought (or hath brought) me
into the banquet-house’ (or house of wine).
Such a banquet among the highest of
earthly enjoyments. Hence queen Esther’s
invitation to the king (Esther v. 4—6),
The king’s love already declared by Shula-
mite to be ‘better than wine.’ She now
realizes this to the full. Her longing de-
sires after the enjoyment of his fellowshi
and love now fully Uae She has foun
him whom her soul loved, and experienced
intense delight in his presence. Obserye—
(1) The soul that earnestly seeks Jesus, and the
enjoyment of His fellowship and love, will not
seck in vain. ‘Said I to the house of Jacob,
seek ye me in vain?’ ‘Then shall ye seek me
and shall find me, when ye search for me with
all your heart.’ (2) Zhe happiness in the enjoy-
ment of Christ’s presence and love, such as
infinitely to compensate for all the labour and
pains in seeking Him. What it cost Shula-
mite to find her Beloved, forgotten in her
happiness now that se is found. ‘In
Christ, though now ye see Him not, yet
believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable
and full of glory’ (1 Pet. i. 8). Notice, in
regard to the


Banqueting House—


I, The Experience tésel/f. The nature of
the ‘banqueting house’ or ‘house of wine,’
indidated in the words that follow: ‘ His
banner over me was love.’ Perhaps in
allusion to some practice of suspending ban-
nerets with suitable mottoes or devices over
the heads of honoured guests at entertain-
ments; or to the burning cressets carried at
the head of a marriage procession, to light
the party to the banquet-house. The happy
experience of the banqueting-house is the
enjoyment of the King’s presence, and of
that love which is ‘better than wine.’ The

46


test i happiness experienced in the
ellowship and love of one whom we ourselves

eatly love. The poetry of every country
ull of this sentiment. Love, the poetry of
life; the wine and cream of existence. Jacob’s
hard service of seven years for Kachael
seemed to him but a few days, ‘ for the love
he bare unto her.’ The banner that floats
over the head of believers’ in the fellowship
of Jesus, a banner of ‘love.’ Its emblem ‘a
Lamb as it had been slain;’ and its mottoes :
‘ He loved the Church, and gave Himself for
it ;’ ‘He loved me, and gave Himself for
me.’ This love-banner manifestly suspended
over the disciples at the Last Supper. The
same banner waving over every Communion
Table. Love, the ground of all the Lord’s
dealings with His people. His love—(1)
An electing love; (2) A redeeming love; (3)
A covenanting or bridal love. The manifes-
tation of Christ’s love, the believer’s feast.
His loving presence a banquet of wine. The
assurance of His love the believer’s strength
and joy in the battle of life.


‘With Thee conversing, I forget
All time, and toil, and care;
Labour is rest, and oe is sweet,

If Thou, my Lord, art there.’


Heaven but the full bloom of this enjoy-
ment. Christ’s enjoyed presence and love
the great attraction of Christian ordinances,
especially of the Lord’s Supper. The key-
note athe Song of Solomon. The Song, like
Psalm xlv., a ‘Song of Loves.’ The bappi-
ness in the enjoyment of Christ’s love, and
the language of the Song in describing it,

extectly natural, The naturalness of such

nguage in the case of mere earthly love
unquestioned. Why in the case of a Divine
Pe spiritual one? Infinitely more in the
God-man to fill the soul with delight in the
enjoyment of His fellowship and love than in
the loveliest, most loving, and most beloved
creature. Mere creature love and creature
loveliness, beside Christ’s, a taper beside the
sun. The love of the Man that is Jehovah’s
fellow, revealed in His thorn-rent brow, His
nail-pierced hands, and His spear-wounded
side. The language of each scar in His
sacred body, love—love unspeakable, incon-
ceivable; love of the most worthy to the
most worthless; love of the Prince of the
kings of the earth to a beggar on the dung-
hill; love of the all-glorious Creator to the
degraded creature; love of God to a con-
temptible worm, though a worm originally
made after His own image, and capable of
loving Him with the ardour of the loftiest
seraph. This love and loveliness able to be
apprehended, realized, and felt by the haman
soul, made at the same time deeply conscious
of its utter unworthiness of it. The soul


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





capable both of, enjoying *hat amazing love
and of reciprocating it : and of experiencing,
while so doing, a joy superior to that con-
nected with any mere earthly love—a joy
characterized by one who knew it as ‘un-
speakable and full of glory.’ Such joy in

ivine fellowship and love, man’s normal
experience as a rational creature in an un-
fallen state. The object of Redemption to
restore man to its enjoyment; with the
superadded element, that the Creator has,
for man’s sake, assumed his nature, and in
that nature endured for his deliverance the
awful curse incurred by his sin. Delight in
the love and fellowship of a Divine Redeemer
the experience even of Old Testement saints
before that Redeemer became incarnate.
Hence the impassioned language and longing
of the ‘sweet Psalmist of Israel’: ‘In His
favour is life.’ ‘My soul thirsteth for Thee,
my flesh longeth for Thee, in a dry and
thirsty land, where no water is; Thy lovin
kindness is better than life; my ‘soul shal.
be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and
my mouth shall praise Thee with joyful lips,
when I remember Thee upon my bed, and
meditate upon Thee in the night watches,
* As the hart panteth after the water brooks,
so panteth my soulafter Thee,OGod.’ ‘My
soul longeth,yea,even fainteth,for the courts
of the Lord ; my heart and my flesh crieth
out for the living God’ (Ps, xxx. 5 ; Ixiii,
1,3,5,6; xlii. 1; lxxxiv. 2), Isaiahsings :
‘I will greatly rejoice in the Lord ; my soal
shall ba joyful in my God’ (Is. Ixi. 10).
Zephaniah exhibits the joy on both sides :
‘Sing, O daughter of Zion ; shout, OIsrael ;
be glad and rejoice with all the heart, O
daughter of Jerusalem. The Lord in the
midst of thee is mighty : He will save ; He
will rejoice over thee with joy; He will rest
in His love; He will joy over Thee with
singing’ (Zeph. iii. 14, 17). This joy in the
Divine Redeemer and His love the experience
of the early Christians. Raised them above the
smiles ai the frowns of the world, above
the fear of torture and of death, of the lions
and thestake. The experience of the Church
in its times of greatest and spiritual pros-
perity, and of believers in their first-love
and highest attainments in grace. Oiten
specially realized by the Church and believers
in times of suffering and persecution. The
experience which gives such life, sweetness,
and power to the hymns of Charles Wesley,
the Moravian Brethren, and others. The
*banqueting-house’ not confined to time
or place; but especially found in the ordi-
nances of God’s house, and most of all in
that of the Lord’s Supper.


Il. The Aurion of the experience. ‘He
brought (or, hath brought) me,’ &c. The


CHAP. I.





king recognized by Shulamite as uot orly
pepnnng the banquet of love, but also
ringing her to it. Her language that of
amazement, admiration, gratitude, and joy.
Our experience of the love and fellowship of
Christ as our Bridegroom-Kedeemer due
entirely to Himself. Himself not only the
Author of the bridal relation between Him
and His people, but of ‘their knowledge,
acceptance, and enjoyment of it. The cle.
tion itself, with all the blessings connected
with it, freely offered to men in the Gospel;
but, apart from the grace of Christ, neither
apenas nor cared for. ‘Who hath
believed our report?’ Wisdom hath mingled
her wine, and furnished her table, and sent
out her maidens with the invitation to the
feast; but men reject the counsel of God
against themselves, and begin to make ex-
cuse (Prov. ix. 1—3; Matt xxii. 2—6; Luke
vii 30). Blindness, caruality, pride and unbe-
lief, only overcome by the same royal grace
that spreads the feast. ‘Why was I made to
hear Thy voice?’ &c. Christ brings to the
banqueting-house—

1. By His electing love. ‘Ye have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you.’ His
love an everlasting love, which in time lays
hold of its object (Jer. xxxi. 3).

2. By His renewing grace. The carnal
mind enmity against God, and so without
any inclination to the banquet of His love.
Its taste the swine-trough. Its enjoyment
the creature, not the Creator.

3. By His gift of faith. Such amazing
love to the worthless and undeserving not
readily believed. Unbelief as to the freeness
of the Gospel offer and the reality of Christ’s
love, to be removed by divine grace. This
done by Christ Himself through His Spirit.
Christ the Author as well as Finisher of our
faith. His to give as well as ‘increase’ it.
Exalted to give repentance, which includes it.

4. By His conquest of the heart. His
people willing in the day of His power
(Ps. ex. 3). Loved with an everlasting love,
and, therefore, drawn with lovingkindness
(Jer. xxxi. 3). Drawn with cords of a man,
and with bands of love (Hos. xi. 4). His
free, forgiving love, apprehended by faith,
breaks and conquers the heart. The case
of the woman in Simon’s house. Her many
sins freely forgiven. Hence she loved much.
But to whom little is forgiven, the same
loveth little (Luke vii. 47, &c.)

5. By helping the soul over every dis-
couragement in the way of its full enjoyment of
Christ’s fellowship and love, and preparing
it, both by His providence and grace, for
such enjoyment. So the woman ‘that was a
sinner’ enabled to enjoy the banquet of love at
Christ’s feet even in the Pharisee’s house.

6. By pouring His love into the Bait as





cHar. u. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; THE SONG OF SOLOMON
Soniye the rich realization of it through a high degree, next door to the felicity of
His Holy Spirit (Rom. v. 5). Christ able heaven. (4) Tie soul filled with, and faint-


tospeak comfortably (margin, ‘to the heart’)
even in the wilderness. ‘I will love them
freely? (Hos. xiv. 4; ii. 14). So with the
woman in Simon’s house: ‘Thy sins are
forgiven thee.’ Christ able to ¢e// the soul,
‘I have loved thee with an everlasting love ;’
‘I have redeemed thee; thou aré mine’
(Jer. xxxi. 3; Is. xliii.1),


TIL. The Errect of the experience. ‘Stay
(or support) me with flagons (or cordials—
perhaps raisin-cakes); comfort me (or sur-
round me—strew my couch) with apples
(or citrons—fruits of reviving fragrance) :
for I am sick of (or faint with) love. His
left hand is (or, let His left hand be) under
my head, and His right hand embrace me.’
Shulamite, overpowered by a sense of the
king’s love, and the happiness she enjoyed
in his fellowship, calls as if for aid in ee
fainting state, to the ‘daughters of Jerusa-
lem,’ or ladies of the Court, perhaps waiting
at some distance; though probably intending
only the king himself, as indicated in her
concluding words: ‘Let his left hand be
under my head,’ &c. The effect of her pre-
sent rapturous enjoyment a sense of fainting,
vhich requires the application of reviving
Jrdials and odours, and the support of the
king’s own loving arms. ‘I am sick of (or
faint with) love,’ implying—(1) Overpower-
ing sense of present enjoyment in the king’s
love; (2) Inability to sustain more of it
in present circumstances; (3) Need of sup-
port under it. ‘The sense of Christ’s love
sometimes attended with similar effects on
the physical system. The human frame often
unable to endure unusually powerful emotions
without sensible weakness and derangement
as the result. The language of one under
the sense of Christ’s love: ‘Stay Thy hand
or the vessel will burst.’ Mr. Flavel, under
a similar enjoyment while riding on horse-
back, felt himself at length so weak as
scarcely to be able to retain his seat, and
discovered that the blood had been oozing
from his limbs, and flowing into his boots.
Two of the writer’s own friends the subjects
of a similar experience. Observe—(1) That
love must be precious, and the experience of tt
desirable, which can cause the soul to faint
under the sense of tt. (2) Such Divine love-
sickness only relieved by more of that which
ts its cause. The fruit of the Apple-tree
alone able to cure the sickness it makes.
The Bridegroom’s own arms must support
the soul fainting under a sense of His love,
Such sickness followed by a blessed healing,
both here and in a better world. (3) Sense
of Chrtst’s love the highest enjoyment to be
sapervenced on earth. Such seuse, enjoyed in


48


ing under, Christ’s love, languishes for the
Suller enjoyment of His presence in heaven.
Full satisfaction only found where Christ is
seen face to face. Love-sickness only on
earth. Sense of Christ’s love the most
effectual means of weaning the affections
from the world. The ‘ expulsive power of a
new affection.’ The love-sick soul only jones
the more for the Marriage Supper of the
Lamb,
*O Christ, He is the fountain,
That deep, sweet well of love;
On earth the streams I’ve tasted:
More deep I'll drink above.’


(5) Affecting contrast between sickness from
Christ’s love and surfeit from the pleasures 0
the world. The former followed with a still
richer manifestation of that love, but with
an enlarged capacity for its enjoyment. The
latter succeeded by an eterna! thirst, with
nothing to allay it (Luke xvi. 19—25).


Tue Kine’s Cuancs.
Verse 7.


I charge you,

O ye daughters of Jerusalem,

By the roes and by the hinds of the field,
That ye stir not up,

Nor awaken my love,

Till he (or till she) please,


Uncertain from the original whether the
‘love’ be Shulamite or the king, or simply
the love itself as now experienced and
enjoyed. Translators and commentators
divided in opinion as to the speaker. The
words probably spoken by the king in regard
to his Beloved, now so happy in his love,
or perhaps sunk into sleep by his side. The
charge addressed to the daughters of Jerusa-
lem, or ladies of the Court, in the language
of oriental poetry. ‘ Roes and hinds’ familiar
objects in the country. Beautiful, but timid
animals, ready to start up at the slightest
noise. From their affectionate disposition
suitably introduced in connection with a
matter of love. A man’s wife to be to him
“as the loving hind and pleasant roe (Prov.
v. 19). Shulamite, Solomon’s Beloved, not
to be disturbed in the enjoyment of his
love, or in the sleep which was occasioned by
it. Observe, in regard to the


Enjoyment of Christ’s Love,
1. The temporary and uncertain duration


of that enjoyment tn the present world. A
limit to it so long as the Church is militay


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; THE SONG OF SOLOMON. cmar. w


A


On earth. The banneret of love to be soon
exchanged for the banner of war. The feast
to give place to the fight. The banquet-
house to be followed by the battle-field.
Believers soldiers of Christ as well as His
Bride. The bridal chaplet to be laid aside
for the warrior’s helmet. The high enjoy-
ment of the Bridegroom’s love on earth
may be temporary, but not the love itself.
That enjoyment easily disturbed, like the
repose of the timid gazelle. Intimate fel-
lowship with Christ a tender, delicate, and
Sensitive thing. Numerous causes of dis-
turbance both within and without us. Even
necessary duty in the batile of life and the
service of the Master may disturb it. Sin,
self, and the seductions of the world, how-
ever, its main disturbers. Satan as great a
foe to such enjoyment as to that of our first
parents in the bowers of Eden. Heaven the
place of undisturbed enjoyment.

2. Great care necessary in order to preserve
the enjoyment of Christ’s love. That enjoy-
ment precious, as—(1) Endearing the
Saviour ; (2) Engaging us to His service;
(3) Deadening us to the world; (4) Tending
to crucily sin and increase holiness in the
soul. Tie love of Christ constrameth us.
The sense of it, therefore, to be carefully
ere Hence the caution at the Supper
‘able : ‘Watch and pray, lest ye enter into
temptation: Continue ye in my love.’ Im-
ortant charge: ‘Keep yourselves in the
ove of God,’ that is, in the enjoyment of it
(Jude 21), The sense and enjoyment of
Christ’s love only preserved by (1) Watch-
fulness against sin; (2) Obedience to His
will; (8) Faithfulness in His service; (4)
Patient endurance of the cross. ‘If ye keep
My commandments ye shall abide in My love,
even as I have kept My Father’s command-
ments, and abide in His love’ (John xv. 10).
David und Peter lost for a time the joy of
God's salvation through sin, but not the sal-
vation itself, Care to be taken to preserve
a tender and an unsviled couscience. Especial


care necessary in our intercourse with the
world, and even with the professing Church.
Danger even of the ‘ daughters of Jerusalem ’
disturbing our love. Believers to be most
careful over themselves when they have been
nearest to Christ.

3. The desire of Jesus that His people may
enjoy the continuance of His fellowship and
love. Exemplified at the Supper Table in
the Upper Room. ‘Continue ye in my love:
These things have I spoken unto you that
My joy mght remain in you, and that your
joy might be full’ (John xv. 9—11). His
desire to come in aud sup with believers, and
they with Him (Rev. iii. 20). From no
unkindness or unwillingness on His part if
the enjoyment of His fellowship and love is
nut of longer continuance. Only necessity
and duty compel the language: ‘ Arise, let
us go hence’ (John xiv. 31).

4. A time when sensible enjoyment of
Christ?’s love and fellowship may be safely
and properly suspended. ‘Until he (or she)
please.’ A suspension necessitated after the
enjoyment in the Upper Room, both on the
part of Christ and His disciples. Christ
obliged to leave the ‘ banqueting-house’ to
go and redeem His lost sheep; believers to
be ready to leave it to go and reclaim them.
Others, still without, to be invited and
brought to the Marriage-feast with our-
selves. The loving self denial of the Master
the best way to preserve the assurance of
His love, and to secure the frequent repeti-
tion of the sexse of it. The temporary sus-

ension of our own enjoyment well repaid
by the Saviour’s joy over another lost snee
found. Our love to Himself to be evince
by our care for His lambs (John xxi. 15).
His promise to His faithful and self-denying
servants: ‘I will see you again, and your
heart shall rejoice’ (John xvi. 22). Christ
most likely to be found again by us, when join-
ing Him in His own loved employment —seek-
ing and saving that which is lost. ‘Feed thy
kids beside the shepherds’ tents.’


CHAP, UH.








HOMILETIC COUMENIAKY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





PART SECOND.
The Auptials.


Cuartzs IL. 8, to Cuarrze II. 11


Sczenz Finst. Place: Shulamite’s home in the country. Speaker: Shulamite alone
with the Daughiers of Jerusalem, or Ladies of the Court.


NABRATIVE OF THE BRIDEGROOM’S VISIT.
Verses 8—13.


The voice of my Beloved !

Behold, he cometh,

Leaping upon the mountains,

Skipping upon the hills.

My Beloved is like a roe or a young hart:

Behold, he standeth behind our wall;

He looketh forth at the windows,

Shewing himself (glancing, like a rose

bud) through the lattice.

My beloved spake and said unto me

Rise up, my love, my fair one,

And come away.

For lo! the winter is past;

The rain is over and gone;

The flowers appear on the earth:

The time of singing is come;

And the voice of the turtle is heard in
our land.

The fig tree putteth forth her green figs;

And the vines, with the tender grape, (or,
now in blossom), give a good smell.

Arise, my love, my fair one, and come
away.


Shulamite relates the visit of her Beloved
when he came to take her to the nuptials.
The visit probably made in spring. The
bridegroom’s invitation, from its pleasant
nature, poetically, represented as a call to
come forth and enjoy the beauties of that
delightful season. The language implies a
eens absence of the bridegroom. The
elievers most comiortable state on earth not
abiding. Its interruption, however, subser-
vient to higher advancement.—The parts of
which the Song is composed appear to shift
and melt into each other like the dissolving
views of a diorama.

The text a poetical and allegorical represen-
tation of what takes place in the history of the
Church as a whole, and in the experience of
believers individually. Historically, the

60


Church’s experience—(1) At the return of
the Jews from the captivity in Babylon ; (2)
At the time of the Saviour’s incarnation and
earthly ministry; (3) At any time of great
revival in the Church—pre-eminently, at the
commencement of the Gospel Dispensation on
the Day of Pentecost, and at the Reforma-
tion in the sixteenth century. A time of the
Church’s


Revival,


a time of Spring. The voice of the heavenly
Turtle-dove, like the harbinger of an oriental
Spring, then heard in the land. The Gospel,
tlie voice and dispensation of the Spirit—
then clearly and earnestly preached, and
accompanied with the Spirit’s own power.
Sleepers awakened and the dead made alive.
The anxious inquiry heard: What must I
do to be saved? Sanctuaries thronged with
thirsting hearers, Converts multiplied. Be-
lievers quickened—made holy, happy, and
useful; bold in testifying for Christ and their
testimony blessed. The spirit of prayer—
the voice of the Turtle-dove in the believer's
heart—eminently poured out, Gatherings for

rayer, numerous, lively, and largely attended.

he fruits of the Spirit conspicuous. Love,
peace, and goodwill prevailing in the Church
and in the neighbourhood. Satan may rage,
and some may persecute; but the believers are
unmoved, rejoicing to walk ‘in the footsteps
of the flock,’ and to be counted worthy te
suffer shame for their Master’s sake. Ob-
serve—A necessity laid on believers to pray
for such a Spring-time to the Church and
the world (Zech. x. 1).—The Church’s ex-
perience farther indicated in the text—(4)
At the time of the Saviour’s second coming.
The new heavens and the new earth then
created. The whole creation, now groan-
ing and travailing in pain together, then
‘delivered from the bondage of corruption
into the glorious liberty of the children
of God.’ No more death, neither sorrow,
nor crying, nor any more pain; ‘for the
former things are passed away’ ( Peter iii.
13; Rom. viii. 21; Rev. xxi. 4).

The experience of individual believers ex-


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





hibi ) At the time of their first enjoy-
ment of Christ’s manifested love; (2) At
subsequent repetitions of the same; (3) In
revived spiritual life and joy after a season
of deadness and discomfort; (4) At their
departure to the ‘ better country.’


There everlasting spring abides,
And never withering flowers.


The passage includes a lively and beautiful
description of


Spri ng.


Spring the emb/em of all that is sweet and
lovely, joyous and refreshing. he spring in
nature only a picture of the spring in grace,
and still more of the spring in glory. Its
lessons manifold :—

1. That God ts love. This proclained in
the months of spring from every wood and
hedge-row, every field and garden. Sung by
he lark as it soars in the air; hummed by

the insect as it flits from flower to flower;

whispered by the daisy that shows its smiling

face again after the snows and storms of

winter. Spring a continually recurring testi-

mony that God delights in the happiness of
is creatures.

2. That He rules by His providence. By
His care, the creatures he has made are again

rovided with the means of support and com-

ort which seemed for a time to fe suspended,
Life bursts forth out of death, and plenty out
of want. His hand looses the bands of
winter by preserving the earth in its motion,
and the sun in its power. He brings back
the sweet influences of the Pleiades, and
_ looses the bands of Orion e ob. xxxviii. 31).

8, That God ts faithful to his promises,
The time of the singing of birds comes, how-
ever long it seemed to be deferred. The
voice of the turtle or cuckoo is again heard
in the land, proclaiming that God is mindful

_ of His promise that, while the world remains,
seed-time and harvest, summer and winter,
shall not cease (Gen. viii. 22). Weeping
may endure for a night; joy, according to
His promise, comes in the morning. ‘ They
that sow in tears shall reap in joy.’ (Ps.
xxx. 5; cxxvi.5). The fulness of the time
arrives, and the Saviour appears.

4. That God is the author of beauty.
Himself the perfection of beauty, He delights
in imparting it to His creatures. Beauty the
robe of Spring. Conspicuous everywhere,—
im “the blue sky, green earth, and gleaming

sea.” The world not a mere granary. The
hand that fills the ear with the full corn for
man’s food, clothes the grass of the field
with beautiful flowers for man’s enjoyment.
The voice of spring: “ How great is His

dness, and how great is His beauty!”
bh. ix. 17
4


CHAP, I.


one





An interesting feature of Spring is the
return of the migratory inhebitants of the
woods. More especially that of the herald of
Spring—with us the cuckoo,—in Pal tine,


The Turtle Dove.
® The voice of the turtle ts heard in our land.


The turtle-dove in the natural, an emblem
of the Holy Ghost in the spiritual, world
His chosen form, in descendiug on the
Saviour at His baptism. Probnble allusion
to the figure in the account of the Creator
(Gen. i. 2): ‘The Spirit cf God moved on
the face of the waters.’ Literally, ‘ brooded,’
as a bird over its young. ‘ Dove-like, sat’st
brooding’ (Milton). The dove an emblem
of the Holy Spirit, as—{1) Distinguished for
tts faithful love. In love, the Spirit visits
loathsome hearts, which He renews for His
abode, and then never entirely leaves. (2)
The cleanest and most Lelicate of birds. The
least sin hateful and grieving to the Holy
Spirit. Creates, in the soul He dwells in,
the same holy hatied. (8) 4 very timid
creature. A hawk’s feather said to be suf-
ficient to make it tcemble. The Holy Spirit
easily grieved, and creates in us a holy fear
in regard to sin and spiritual danger. (4)
A gentle bird. The gentleness of the Spirit
seen in the gentleness of Christ, in whom
He dwelt in His fulness. ‘I am meek and
lowly in heart.’ ‘He shall not strive nor
cry. A bruised reed He shall not break, and
smoking flax shall He not quench’ (Matt. xi.
29; xi. 20). Among the fruits of the Spirit
are—long-suffering, gentleness, and meek-
ness (Gal. v. 22, 23). (5) The turtle takes
up its abode in the land renewed under the
ental breath of Spring. The Holy Spirit
pies to dwell in the heart He renews by His
own gracious influence. The heliever’s body
as well as His soul the temple of the Holy
Ghost (1 Cor. iii. 16; vi. 19). Care to be
taken by the believer to cherish so blessed
a guest.

The ‘voice’ of the Holy Spirit ‘heard in
the land’—(1) When the Gospel is preached
in its purity. The Gospel the Dispensation
of the Spirit. ‘The Spirit and the Bride
say: Come.’ ‘As the Holy Ghost saith, To-
day, if ye will hear His voice.” ‘He that
hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit
saith unto the Churches’ (Rev. ii. 11; xxi.
17; Heb. iii. 7). (2) When the Gospel is
preached with power. The Gospel to be
preached ‘with the Holy Ghost sent down
from heaven.’ ‘ Ye shall receive power after
that the Holy Ghost is come upon you; and

e shall be witnesses unto me’ (1 Peter i.
13; Acts i. 8). (3) When the fruits of the
Gospel appear in the lives of those who 7 it


CHAP. IL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





These fruits—love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, tem-
perance (or self control). Exemplified in
the first hearers of the Gospel at Jerusalem,
at Samaria, Philippi, Corinth, &c. (Acts ii.
44 —47; viii. 8; xvi. 15, 33, 34; Phil. i
3—7; 1 Cor. vi. 11). The voice of the
turtle-dove never entirely silent in the earth
since the first promise of a Saviour. Heard
in the preaching of Enoch and Noah, in the
Psalms of David, in the Proverbs and Song
of Solomon, and in the strains of all the
rophets. Carries in the Gospel the olive
eaf of peace to a perishing but pitied
world.

From the language of Shulamite in re-
ference to her Beloved, observe—

1. The warm affection of a believer's heart
towards the Saviour. ‘The voice of my Be-
loved!’ The first faint sound of His voice
eagerly caught as it falls on theear. Shula-
mite speaks as if her heart leaped within her
at the sound. ‘As soon as the voice of Thy
salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe
leaped in my womb for joy’ (Luke i. 44).
(2) The waiting and expectant state of the
believer in regard to Christ. For His jirst
Advent in the case of the Old Testament
Church ; His second Advent in that of the
New; and His spiritual visits and ap-
pearances in the case of believers in general.
Shulamite on the eager look out for her Be-
loved. ‘The proper posture of believers in
regard to Christ. His second and glorious
Appearing the Church’s ‘blessed hope’
(Titus i, 13; Luke xii. 36). (3) The love
of Christ to His Church. Shulamite’s Be-
oved represented as coming to her, in the
eagerness of his desire, like a swift and
sprightly gazelle or young antelope, bound-
ing over mourtain and hill. No obstacle too
great for Christ to overcome in redeeming
and blessing His Church. ‘He loved the
Church and gave Himself for it.’ Jacob’s
love to Rachael shewn by a hard service of
fourteen years in keeping Labau’s flocks. A
human life of thirty-three years to fulfil
the precepts of the law; and a painful, igno-
minious, and accursed death, with the added
misery of the hiding of His Father’s face,
to satisfy its penalty—not too much for the
love of Christ to His Church. ‘ Sacrifice and
offering Thou wouldst not: then said I, lo, I
eome to do Thy will, O God; a body hast
Thou prepared for me’ (Ps. xl. 6, &c.;
Heb. x. 5—9).

3. The Saviour’s desire for the detiever’s
love and fellowship. Shulamite’s Beloved
having reached her dwelling, waits outside
till he obtains her consent to follow him.
*He standeth behind our wall,’ &c. He
addresses her by the most endearing titles,
and employs arguments taken from the

52


removal of every obstacle—‘the winter is
ast,’ &c.—and from the most attractive
eatures of the country in the lovely season
of an oriental Spring, as expressive of the
sweetness enjoyed in the fellowship of love,
Souls invited to receive and follow Christ by
the blessedness imparted by His presence
and love. ‘Behold, I stand at the door and
knock ; if any man hear my voice and open
the door, I will come in unto him, and will
sup with him, and he with me’ (Rev. iii. 20).
4. The natural backwardness of the heart
to the blessedness to which Christ invites Hes
ati Shulamite’s backwardness indicated


y the arguments employed OY her waiting —


Beloved to overcome it. e believer’s
Tale willing, while the flesh is weak.

eights hanging on the soul which have to
be laid aside. ‘The natural tendency, through
the remains of the carnal mind, to settle
down in a state of sloth and indolence, satis-
fied with little of spiritual life and commu-
nion with the Saviour. ‘My soul cleaveth
to the dust; quicken Thou me according to
Thy word’ (Ps. cxix. 25).

6. The necessity of leaving everything for
Christ. Shulamite twice entreated ‘to rise
up and come away.’ Like the exhortation
addressed to the same Bride in the forty-


fifth Psalm: ‘ Harken, O daughter, and con- —


sider: forget also thine own people and thy
father’s house’ (Ps. xlv. 10, 11). The
Saviour’s call: ‘Follow Me’—to be an-
swered by a rising up, leaving all, and follow-
ing Him (Matt. iv. 1999; Luke v. 27, 28).
‘ Whosoever he be that forsaketh not all that
he hath, he cannot be My disciple’ (Luke
xiv. 33).
7. The whole passage descriptive of


The Saviour’s Call.


I. What st cost to make it. Shulamite’s
Beloved required to come from a distance,
overcoming every obstacle, ‘like a roe or a
young hind’ bounding over one mountain
peak after another. The Son of God re-
quired to leave His Father’s house, assume
our nature, empty Himself of His glory, take


the form of a servant, be born of a humble —
woman, be brought forth in a stable, work as


a carpenter, become a man of sorrows and


acquainted with grief, be fora time with no- —


where to lay his head, endurethe contradiction, ©


reproach, and opposition of sinners, and at —


last the hiding of His Father’s face amid the
agony and shame of an accursed death. One


mountain of suffering and one valley of —


humiliation after another, to be passed before —


He could call sinners to the enjoyment of
salvation,— His chosen bride to the celebra-
tion of the marriage. Many also the pro-
vocations to be come over in His saving call








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON. mar. i





to sinners, and His sanctifying call to be-
lievers, before He obtains their fuli consent
to ‘rise up and come away.’ Jesus more
eager to save and biess, than the sinner or
the saint to experience His salvation and
blessing (Ps. Ixxxi. 10—16).


II. The Means through which He addresses
the call. ‘lhe voice of my Beloved. He
standeth behind our wall, he looketh forth
at the windows, showing himself (margin,
‘flourishing’ — glancing like an opening
flower) through the lattice.” Through these
openings in the wall he addressed his invi-
tation: ‘My beloved spake and said unto
me.’ Through the ordinances instituted by
Himself in His Church, Christ wooes sinners
to become His Bride, and invites His Bride
to the full enjoyment of union and com-
munion with iim. ‘We are ambassadors
for Christ, as though God did beseech you
by us: we pray you, in Christ’s stead, be ye
reconciled unto God.’ ‘I have espoused
you to one husband, that I may present you
asa chaste virzin unto Christ’ (2 Cor. v. 20;
xi. 2). ‘Lhe voice of Christ Himself in the
word and ordinances the only effectual means
of awakening and drawing the soul to Him-
self. ‘My sheep hear my voice and follow
me.’ The quickened soul able to distinguish
that voice as the voice of the beloved. “They
know uot the voice of strangers.”’ ‘The voice
known to be that.ot the Saviour from its inward
power and sweetness, and {rom its conformity
to the written Word. Known by believers
as having heard and experienced it before.
Observe—(1) 4 wall found standing between
Christ and the soul whom He seeks. Our
fleshly nature, both in respect to body and
mind, such awall. The ‘law of command-
ments’ which we have broken, anotner.
Visible nature at present a separating wall.
Ordinances themselves a wall, but a wall
with openings in it; or ordinances these
openings themselves. Through these openings
Christ shows Himself to the soul He seeks.
(2) To obtain glimpses of Christ and hear
His voice, it is necessury to be at the lattice of
ordinaxce», Divine ordinances the meeting-
place vetween Christ and His people (Ex.
xxv. 22; xxix. 42, 43; xxx, 6, 36). ‘Blessed
is the man that heareth me, watching daily at
my gates, waiting at the ports of my doors,’
* One thing have I desired, and that will Iseek
after; that 1 may dwell in the house of the
Lora all the days of my life, to behold the
beauty of the Lord and inquire in His
temple? ‘Wherever two or three are
gathered together n My name there am | in
the midst of them.’ ‘Wherever I record my
name, I will come and bless you’ (Prov.
mii, 34; Ps, xxvii. 4; Matt. xviii. 20;
Ex, xx. 24),





III. Tke ARGUMENTS employed in the call.
Three arguments employed by Shulamite’s
Beloved. (1) His own love—expressed in
the titles given her; (2) The removal of
hindrances: ‘The winter is past, the rain
is over and gone;’ (3) The joyful prospect
before her—‘ The flowers appear on the
earth,’ &c. Jesus invites sinners to become
His Bride, and His Bride to come forth to
the full enjuyment of His fellowship on the
ground of—

1. Ais love to them. His great argument
with Israel His argument with believers and
with sinners stili: ‘I have loved ‘hee
with an everlasting love; therefore, with
loving-kindness have I drawn thee.’ ‘I have
redeemed thee; thou art mine.’ ‘Turn, O
backsliding children, for 1 am married unto
you’ (Jer. xxxi. 3; iii. 14; Is. xliii. 1).
‘God so loved the world that He gave His
only begotten Son, that whosoever be-
lieveth on Him might not perish.’ ‘The
Son of Man is come to seek and to save that
which was lost.’ ‘Came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister, and to give His hfe
a ransom for many’ (Johniii. 16; Luke xix.
10; Matt. xx. 28). Thus Jesus gained the
woman at Jacob’s well, and tlie sinner that
washed His feet with her tears. ‘Ihe sin-
ner’s heart only thawed by a Saviour’s love.
The cords that draw the soul to Christ ‘the
cords of a man and the bands of love’ (Hos.
xi, 4). Ouly the revelation of redeemi
love able to break down the Bacar
undo the bolts of a sinner’s heart A lovi
voice heard outside before the door is pened
within (Kev. iij. 20). None so fair in the
eyes of Jesus as the penitent and believing
soul (Luke xv. 5—7).

2. The removal of hindrances. The win-
ter of a Legal Dispensation now past. The
covenant of works superseded by a covenant
of grace. ‘ Do this and live’ exchanged for
‘Believe and live.’ Fulfilment of moral
precepts and observance of ceremonial ordi-
nances no longer a term of union with the
Beloved. The invitation: ‘Come unto me,
all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest.’ ‘ Ho, every one that
thirsteth ; come ye to the waters; and he
that hath no money; Come, buy and eat;
without money and without price.’ ‘ Who-
soever will, let him take the water of life
freely’ (Matt. xi. 28; Is. lv.1; Rev. xxii. 17),
Divine justice that demanded the sinner’s
damnation now satisfied with the Surety’s
blood. The sword that should have smitten
the guiliy sheep bathed in the blood of the
eremen! and so put back into its scabbard,
The way prepared on the cross for a righteous
reconciliation with God, aud the full forgive-
ness of the sinner. God now able to be
just while justifying the ungodly. fee


CHAP, II.





God now a Saviour. All things now ready
for the salvation of the sinner, and his mar-
riage with God’s own Son (Zech. xiii. 7;
Eph. ii. 13—16; Rom. iii. 21—26; Matt.
xxii. 2, 4). Nothing wanting but the sin-
ner’s consent. ‘Wilt thou go with this
man?’ ‘To as many as received Him, to
them gave He power to become the sons of
God’ (John i. 12).

8. The joy and blessedness attending com-
pliance. ‘The flowers appear on the earth,
&.’ Tne soul invited by Christ to the joy
and blessedness of an eternal spring, in the
enjoyment of His society and love—in the
new heavens of the new earth ‘wherein
dwelleth righteousness.’ A rest remaining
for the people of God, of which Canaan,
clad in a the beauties of a lovely spring,
was _ atype. A time in prospect for the
sinner that accepts the Saviour, when all the
chill and gloom, the clouds and storms, the
darkness and discomfort of the present state,
shall give place to the sweetness and sun-
shine, the brightness and beauty, the light
and gladness, of a land where the sun shall
no more go down ; where flowers that never
fade bloom under cloudless skies ; where the
harps of angels and the songs of the Re-
deemed fill the air with celestial music, and
where the tree of life bears its perennial
fruit on both banks of the river that waters
the Paradise of God. A ‘better country’
in prospect to every believing soul, where
purity and peace, and joy and love—the
voice of the heavenly turtle—is everywhere
heard, and where the true Vine diffuses its
fragrance, and with its precious clusters fills
the happy inhabitants with ‘a joy unspeakable
and full of glory.’


III, The Catz itself. ‘Rise up and come
away.’ The call addressed by the Saviour
to His first disciples: ‘Follow me,’ In
obedience to it, they ‘rose up, left all, and
followed him ’ (Matt. iv. 18—22 ; Luke v.
27, 28). The general law : ‘ Whosoever he
be that forsaketh not all that he hath, he
cannot be my disciple’ ‘If any man will
come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his cross and follow me.’ ‘ Let us
go forth unto Him, without the camp, bear-
ing His reproach’ ‘ Hearken, O daughter,
and consider ; forget all thine own people,
and thy father’s house : so shall the King
greatly desire thy beauty ’ (Luke xiv. 33 ;
Matt, xvi. 24; Heb. xiii, 13; Ps. xlv 10,
11), The world to be given up in order to
‘come away’ with Christ. No man able
to serve two masters of different interests
and demands, ‘ Ye cannot serve God and
mammon,.’ ‘If the Lord be God, serve
Him ; if Baal be God, serve him,’ A reso-
lution and effort to be made to leave our


$4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





present state in order to follow Christ.
Rise up.” So the Prodigal Son: ‘I will
arise and go to my father,’ &c. And he
arose and went. The strength to arise is
Christ’s : the act and effort our own. So
with the Paralytic: ‘Take up thy bed, and
go into thine house; and he arose and de-
parted to his house’ (Luke xv. 18, 20; Matt.
1x. 6). Christ’s call is—(1) To come ¢o him;
(2) To come after Him. We are to come éo
Him as sinners; to come after Him as
disciples, The former verified by the latter.
The blessing of coming ¢o Christ realized in
coming after Him. ‘Come unto me, all ye
that labour and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest,’ followed by—‘take my yoke
upon you, and learn of me; and ye shall find
rest to your souls’ (Matt. xi. 28, 29). Un-
speakable gainers in giving up all for Christ.
Christ the One Pearl of great price that
makes a man up for time and eternity.
Everything, therefore, wisely given up to
obtain possession of it. The case of Paul
that of all believers: ‘What things were
gain to me, those I counted loss for
Christ ; yea, doubtless, and I count all things
but loss for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have
suffered the loss of all things,’ &c. (Phil
iii. 7, &).


Baumecroom’s Seconp Call.


Verse 14.
O my dove,
That art in the clefts of the rock,
In the secret places of the stairs 5
Let me see thy countenance,
Let me hear thy voice;
For sweet is thy voice,
And thy countenance is comely,


Love unwilling to take a refusal. Hence a
repetition of the bridegroom’s call. Strange
backwardness on the part of a sinner to
comply with the call of a Saviour. Back-
wardness on the part of a believer to follow
Jesus to the enjoyment of a higher life of
holiness and blessedness. In tue Bride.
groom’s Second Call, observe—


I. The Trt1e of the Called one. ‘My
dove.’ A term of endearment. Love sees
in its object only what is beautiful and
agreeable. The called one a sinner, with
much that is not dove-like. Yet love says;
‘My dove.’ Yet in regard to a believer, the
title tiae. The believer is—(1) A ‘ dove,’ be-
cause renewed with a dove-like nature akin
to that of Him who renews him and dwells
in him—the Holy Spirit, whose emblem is
the dove ; the dovelien becoming the pre~


























HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


CHAP. I,


—_———————————


dominant one in him, and going on increas-
ing until it reaches perfection and is the
only one, and that for ever. Believers
viewed and addressed by Christ in His love,
according to their zew, rather than their old
nature. (2) Christ’s dove, as—(i.) Given Him
by the Father; (ii.) Purchased by His own
blood ; (iii.) Wooed and won by Him as His
Bride, and made a member of His body.
The little word ‘my’ as precious to Christ
in reference to believers as it is to believers
in reference to Christ.


The Dove,


an emblem of believers, as it is—

1. Helpless. Unable to defend itself against
birds of prey (Compare Ps. xviii.17; Jer.
xxxi. 11).

2. Simple. With as little wisdom as
streugth to defend itself. ‘Ephraim is like
a silly dove’ (Hos. vii. 11). ‘O foolish
Galatians, who hath bewitched you that ye
should not obey the truth’ (Gal. iii. 1).
Hence Paul’s fear for the Cormthians
(2 Cor. xi. 2).

3. Timid. Trembles at the sight of a
hawk’s feather. ‘They shall tremble as a
dove out of the land of Assyria’ (Hos. xi. 11).
Believers tremble at God’s word. Afraid to
sin, though not afraid to suffer (Heb. xi. 25).

4. Sen itive. ‘They shall mourn love
like doves in the valley.’ The dove’s note a
mournful ure. Believers sensitive to evils
within and without them, about which others
do not care. Concerned and troubled both
for Christ’s cause and their neignbour’s
souls. Sigh and cry for the abominations
done in the land. Weep in secret places for
the pride and destruction of others. Groan
within themselves for the sins of their own
nature and life. Their character and blessed-
ness that they ‘mourn,’ and‘ sorrow after a
godly sort’ (Matt. v. 4; 2 Cor. vii. 11).

5. Beautiful. Was ‘wings covered with
silver, and her feathers with yellow gold’
(Ps. lxviii. 13). Believers to be made like
them. Adorned with the beauties of holiness.
Comely with Christ’s comeliness put upon
them.

6. Cleanly. Cleanly in its food, its feathers,
and its nest. Believers called to be holy
and without blame. Clean through the
Word of Christ spoken to them. Purify
themselves, as God is pure. Cleanse them-
selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit. Cleansed by the blood, and sanctified
by the Spirit of Christ (1 John i. 7; 1 Cor.
vi. 11


7. Harmless. The dove’s harmlessness
proverbial. Believers made like Him who
was ‘holy, harmless,’ &c. Their calling to
be ‘blameless and harmless, as the sons of


God ;’ harmless in spirit, speech, and actions
(Phil. ii. 15).

8. Affectionate and faithful. Pairs only
with one mate. Mourns over its loss. Be-
lievers’ love to Christ stronger than death.
‘Follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth.’

9. The Bearer of Tidings. Doves em-
ployed for this purpose. A speciss of pigeon
distinguished by this name. Noah’s dove.
So believers the bearers of the glad tidings
of the Gospel (Is. xl. 9; lii. 7; Ps. lxviii.
11; Mark xvi. 15).

10. Often resorting to, and making their
nest in the rocks. A species named fyom this
circumstance. Hence what follows—


Il. Their Puace and Conpition. ‘ That
art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret .
places of the stairs’ (or precipices), Pos-
sible allusion to the retired seclusion in
which Shulamite was kept in her mother’s
house; or to the sequestered situation of
that house among the mcuntains. The de-
scription suggested by the title given: ‘ My
dove.’ Doves often found in the recesses of
rocks. Indicates—

1. Timidity. The dove in tke clefts of
the rock from fear of her pursuers. Be-
lievers to pass the time of their sojourning
here in fear. Work out their salvation with
fear and trembling. ‘'lhe wise man leareth
and departeth from evil,’ while ‘the fool rageth
and is confident’ (Ps. xiv. 16). Sutlicient
cause for ‘fearing always,’ in a corrupt
nature within us, a roaring lion and subtle
serpent without us, and a world lying in
wickedness around us.

2. Security. Tie dove safe in the clefts
of the rock. Believers safe in the Kock of
Ages. Their place of defence the munitions
of rocks. Jehovah Himself their refuge.
Shelteredin Jesus, the enemy may harrass,
but not hurt them. Sin may rage, but not
reign in them. Men and devi’s may perse-
cute and persuade, but not prevail against
them. Kept by the power of God through
faith unto salvation (1 Peter i. 5).

3. Isolation and loneliness. Believers ix
the world, though not of it. Strangers and
pilgrims. ‘The world knoweth us not, even as
it knew Him not.’ Believers at present in
this world as the Bride when the Bridegroow
is taken away from her. Special times ia
their experience when they are ‘as a sparrow
alone upon the house-top’ (Ps. cil. 7;
xxxviii. 11). Henze the promise: ‘ I will not
leave you comfortless (margin, ‘ orphans’); I
will come to you’ (John xiv. 18).


Til. The Cau ttself, ‘Let me see thy
countenance, let me hear thy voice.’ Christ’s
desire in regard to His Church in the world —


(1) ‘fo enjoy their fellowship (Kev. ry ;


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





(3) To see them trustful, cheerful, and
happy in Himself (Phil. iii. 1); (3) To wit-
ness In them the exercise of faith and love
(Heb. xii. 2); (4) To enjoy their beauty—
the reflection of His own—His own comliness
which He has put upon them (Ps. xlv. 11).
The believer’s countenance, lighted up with
faith and love, the fairest sight in heaven and
earth to Christ, next to His Father. The
weakest believer invited to a free and familiar
intercourse with the Saviour. The believer’s
happiness, as well as the Saviour’s joy, to
turn his countenance fully and constantly
towards Him. Nothing, not even sin, to be
allowed to turn it away from Him when He
lovingly invites him to turn it to Him. (5)
To hear their voice (i.) In speaking ¢o
Him as well as of Him; (ii.) In cheerful
song; songs given the believer even in the
night—in painful and perilous, as well as
leasant and peaceful, times (Job. xxxv. 10;
s. xi. 8); (iii.) In thanksgiving and praise.
To give thanks in everything, and to praise
at all tines, the will of God concerning us;
(iv.) In confessing sin, and Jesus as a
ious and all-sufficient Saviour from it;
v.) In prayer and el aeep eet 3
always and not fainting; in everything
making their requests known unto God;
coming boldly to the throne of grace through
Him who is their elder brother and High
Priest ; casting their care upon Him who
careth for them, and pouring out their hearts
before Hiia. No situation or circumstances
in which the soul should yield to the tempta-
tion of restraining prayer.


IV. The Reason of the Call. ‘For sweet
is thy voice, aud thy countenance is comely.’
The voice of a believer, though heard in

oans and lamentations, sweeter to Jesus
than the hallelujahs of angels. The voice of
the child for whom He gave His life, and of
the Bride whom He redeemed with His own
blood. Sweeter still when heard in songs
of faith and love, or in happy communion
. with Himself. The believer’s countenance
comely to Christ, though soiled with tears
and deiesten with sorrow, The Saviour’s
refreshment in Simon’s house, not the viands
on the table, but the woman at His feet
with her countenance wet with the tears of
penitence and love. The believing prayers
and loving praises of a pardoned sinner
sweeter to Christ than the songs of seraphim,
The first cry of an awakened soul turns away
his ear from the symphonies of heaven. His
joy fulfilled, not in the angels that never fell,

ut in fallen and restored men. The joyous
thanksgivings of redeemed sinners make the
Son of God a double heaven. His joy of joys
in the dead made alive again, in the lost one
found. ‘He will rejoice over thee with joy;








He will rest in His love; He will joy over
thee with singing,’—like the mother who
sings for joy over her infant that lies smiling
in her lap (Zenh. iii. 17). ‘ Hephzibah,’ the
name He gives to His saved people: ‘ My
delight is in her’ (Is lxii, 4).


SauLamitr’s Rerty to HER BELOVED.
(Verses 15—17.)


Take us the foxes,

The little foxes,

That spoil the vines ;

For our vines have tender grapes,


My beloved is mine,
And I am his;
He feedcth among the lilies,


Until the day break

And the shadows flee away ;
Turn my Beloved,

And be thou like a roe,

Or a young hart,

Upon the mountains of Bether,


Shulamite readily responds to her Beloved.
Complies with His request to let Him hear her
voice. Her song, a ‘song of loves’ (Ps,
xlv. title). Expresses her desire and joy.
Believers, encouraged and invited by Jesus,
lift up their voice in prayer and song to the
praise and pleasure of their Beloved. The
privilege of ‘the ransomed of the Lord’ to
return to Zion with songs. ‘The inhabitant
of the rock ’ sings; though lonely, yet secure
and happy. Believers enabled, through faith
and love, to sing the Lord’s song even in a
strange land (Ps. exxxvii. 4). Shulamite’s
song a mirror of the believer’s experience.
Expresses—


I. Concern. ‘Take us the foxes (or jack-
als), the little foxes, that spoil the vines;
for our vines have tender grapes’ (or, ‘ are
in bloom’). Expresses her concern that
nothing may exist to cool their love, or mar
the happiness of the anticipated union,
Speaks of herself as, in her bridal character,
a vineyard, the property as much of her
Beloved as her uwn. The vines of that
vineyard, the haypy intercourse of the con-
nubial state. These, as in Spring, only then
in bloom; the marriage not yet cousummated,
and the intercourse being only that of parties


betrothed. The married state, however, an--


ticipated, when for a time the vines wow! still
only ‘have tender grapes,’ or be in flower
Natural concern in the Bride that nothing
may disturb or mar the felicities of their


married life, Wishes every hurtful and dis

















HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


eur. 1,


-— see


turbing element to be detected and removed
at the very beginning. Even ‘the little
foxes’ to be taken and destroyed. Greater
danger from infirmities of temper, little
jealousies, coolnesses, or estrangements, at
the earlier period of their wedded inter-
course than even afterwards. The thought
of the possible existence of such things
painful to the loving Shulamite. ‘To remove
the causes and guard against the occasions
of such disturbance, the joint care of both
arties, while especially lying upon the hus-
and. ‘ ‘lake us the foxes.’ Observe—

1. Care to be taken to preserve unhurt the
union and communion between believers and
Christ. ‘The peace as well as fruitfulness of
believers easily marred and injured. Grace
in the soul, and Christ’s presence in the
Church, a tender and delicate thing. ‘I'he
Spirit easily grieved. Many foxes about the
‘vineyard, both great and small. Injury to
the Church as a whole, and to believers indi-
vidually, from various causes. ‘These ap-

arent in the earliest period of the Church.
Pshibited in the acts of the Apostles, the
Epistles, and the Revelation. Appeared
both in the form of false doctrines and foul
practices. Believers, and the Church in
eneral, warned against them. Care, vigi-
ance, and decision necessary to guard against
their entrance and effects.

2. Errors in doctrine and sins in life to be
especially guarded aguinst in the Spring-
time of grace, and tn the revivals of the
Church. Spiritual pride, uncharitableness,
vain-glory, strife, error, exclusiveness, to be
then especially watched against. To be
crushed in their first appearances and small
beginnings. ‘Take us the /itt/e foxes.’ More
dangerous and more damaging ¢hen, as
being more likely to be overlooked, and
more easily admitted. Young foxes more
injurious to the vines in Spring than the
older ones. What might be regarded as
small sins, and scarcely observable to others,
often the most hurtful to the divine life, and
the spiritual health of a Church. ‘1 have
somewhat against thee, because thou hast
left thy first love. Remember, therefore,
from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and
do the first works; or else I will come unto
thee quickly,’ &c. (Rev. ii. 4, 5).

3. Sins and errors in the Church an injury
to Christ as well as to the Church itself, and
to individuul believers, ‘Take us the foxes;
our vines have tender grapes.’ The purity,
happiness, and fruitfulness of the Church,
both collectively and individually, the com-
mon interest of Christ and His people. The
Church Christ’s body. His chosen rest and


abode. His walk among the seven golden
candiesticks. Injury to them an injury wo
Him.


4 Christ and His Spirit's neces.
bo the preservation of the Church's pore 4
and the believer's peace. ‘ Take us (or ‘ for
us’) the foxes.’ The Bride unable to do
this herself. Believers ‘kept by the power
of God through faith unto salvation’ (1 Pet.
i. 5). Christ alone able to keep His people
from falling, and to preserve them blameless.
‘A vineyard of red wine: I the Lord do keep
it: I will water it every moment: lest any
hurt it, I will nerp it night and day’ (Is,
xxvii. 2,3). Without me ye can do nothing.
My grace is sufficient for thee. The Church’s
efforts made effectual by the Spirit’s agency.
‘Not by might nor by power, but by my
Spirit, saith the Lord of hosts’ (Zech. iv. 6).
Little speed in soul-matters without Christ’s
hand in the work.

5. The believer's duty and interest prayer-
Sully to put the preservation of his own soul,
and of the Church at large, into Christ's
hands. ‘Take us the foxes’—the Bride’s
earnest prayer to the Bridegroom. Paul’s
conduct in regard to the thorn in the flesh ;
‘For this I besought the Lord thrice, that
it might depart from me’ (2 Cor. xii. 8).
Arise, plead thine own cause. What Christ
can do, and has promised to do, He will do
at His people’s earnest prayer (Ezek. xxxvi.
37; Is. xlv. 11; Matt.1x. 38.) Prayer the
mightiest weapon put by her Lord into the
Church’s ne for the preservation of her
urity and the conquest of her foes, Be-
evers’ duty both to work and pray. ‘We
will give ourselves to prayer and the ministry
of the Word’ (Acts vi. 4). The Church’s
greatest triumphs won upon her knees.


II. Joy. ‘My beloved is mine and I am
His.’ Shulamite expresses her joy in the
possession of her Beloved, and in the entire
surrender of herself to him as his own.
This joy enhanced by the consideration of
what he is and does—the excellence of his
character, the happiness he imparts to his
own, and the pisos he takes in their
society. ‘He feedeth among the lilies,’
The Beloved compared to a noble and beauti-
ful gazelle that pastures only in the flowery
meads. Only purest joys the Saviour’s
choice. Only the pure His companions and
friends. Purest enjoyments attend His pre-
sence, Lilies spring and bloom at His steps.
Hence the believer’s joy and thankfulness.
Justly congratulates himself on his untold
treasure. ‘To you that believe He is pre-
cious.’ ‘The lines are fallen unto me in
pleasant places: I have a goodly heritage:
the Lord is the portion of my inheritance
and my cup.’ * My soulshall make her boast
in the Lord.’ ‘1 wiil greatly rejoice in the
Lord; my soul shall be very joyful m my
God.”


&7


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





‘The opening heavens around me shine,
With beams of sacred bliss,
When Jesus tells me He is mine,
And whispers I am His.’


Observe—

1. A real, complete, and lasting propriety in
each other on the part of Christ and believers.
Hach, with all that he is and has, the pro-
perty of the other. The humblest and
poorest believer equally with the strongest
and richest, the sharer of Christ and all that
is His—His life, merits, death, resurrection,
glory, power, kingdom, throne (Rom. viii.
17; Rev. iii. 21). The believer entirely
Christ’s—his affections, talents, powers,

ossessions, influence. The name of King
i esus stamped on all he has and is. ‘ Holi-
ness to the Lord’? engraven on the furniture
of his house and the tools of his workshop.

2. The believer's happiness that Christ is
his and he ts Chris?s. Christ such as to
guarantee this happiness. ‘He feedeth
among the lilies.” His presence makes a
Paradise to angels, still more to His re-
deemed. ‘ Where thou art is heaven.’ In-
finitely blessed Himself, He is able to make
all blessed who are the object of His love.
The special blesseaness of the glorified, that
the Lamb who is in the midst of the throne
shall feed them, that the Lamb stands on
Mount Zion in the midst of the redeemed,
and that He appears even in heaven as a
Lamb that ‘had been slain’ (Rev. v. 6;
vii. 17 ; xiv. 1).

3. The proper character of believers to be
lily-ike. ‘He feedeth among the lilies.’
Lilies the emblems of sweetness and purity.
Descriptive of those among which the Holy
and Fair One delights to dwell. The spot-
less and lovely One can only feed among
lilies. He who is sweetness and beauty
itself must have lilies for His companions and
joy. © This fact the guardian of the believer’s
ife and the security of his peace. To
enjoy Christ and His fellowship we must be
lies. Christ only able to live in a pure
heart (Matt. v. 8; Tit. ii. 14; 1 John iii. 3).

4. Christ to be found umong His people.
‘He feedeth among the lilies.’ Is to be found
among such (ch. vi. 2). ‘ Wherever two or
three are gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them.’ ‘ He that
walketh in the midst of the seven golden
candlesticks’ (Matt. xviii. 20; Rev. ii. 1),
Christ still to be sonyht and found in the
temple—His own body, the Church. Found
sitting, not in the midst of proud Pharisees
and captious Scribes, but among His humble
disciples, aud the ‘publicans and sinners’
that draw near to hear Him (Luke xv. 1;
Is. lxvi. 1, 2; lvii. 15; Acts vii. 48).


IL Desirg, ‘Till the day-dawn jor
58


breathe), and the shadows flee away, turn,
my beloved,’ &c. Shulamite’s desire, pro-
bably, for the day of the anticipated nuptials,
and her Bridegroom’s frequent visits in the
meantime. ‘lhe day longed for that shall
make her legally and publicly his own, and
shall put her in possession of the happiness
and privilege of his married wife. The day
of the Lord’s second appearing that of the
public nuptials of His Church. The espousals
or betrothing, here; the marriage, hereafter
(2 Cor. ii. 2; Rev. xix. 7). The Bride not
complete till the Bridegroom comes to be
glorified in His saints and to make them all
like Himself (2 Thess. i. 10; Phil. iii. 20,
21). That day the object of the believer’s
longing. The blessed hope (Tit. ii. 13). The
day looked for and hasted to (2 Peter ili. 12).
The speedy arrival of that day the last pro-
mise of the Bridegroom to His Church, and
the last. prayer of the Bride to her Beloved
(Rev. xxii. 20). That day the termination of
the Church’s night. With the Bridegroom’s
advent the day dawns and the day star ap-
pears. Christ Himself the bright and morn-
ing star (Rev. xxii. 16; 2 Pet.i. 19; Rom.
xii. 12; viii. 18 —23). His first advent the
termination of the night of the legal dispen-
sation; His second that of the present one
(Luke i. 78). Meantime He visits and
revives His people. ‘I will not leave you
comfortless (orphans); I will come unto you.’
Such visits their comfort and joy in the night
of their pilgrimage (Ps. xvii.3; xhi. 8; Job.
xxxv. 10). Christ, in His love, like a roe, or
a young hart bounding over the mountains of
Bether (or of cliffs intersected with dee
fissures and ravines), when coming in humi-
liation and weakness ; no less so when coming
in glory and power. Intervening events an |
epochs to transpire previous to His second
as well as to His first advent Perhaps the
last of these mountains of Bether already
reached, or soonto be so. The Lord hasten
it in His time!


Che Missing One Found.
Chapter III. Verses 1—5.


Propasty a Dream RELATED BY SHULA-
MITE TO THE DAUGHTERS OF JERUSALEM.


By night on my bed
I sought him whom my soul loveth;
I sought him, but I found him not,


I will rise now, and go about the city;

In the streets, and in the broadways
thereof,

Will I scek him whom my soul loveth.

{ sought him, but J found bim not.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


The watchmen that go about the city
found me; to whom I said:
Saw ye him whom my soul loveth?


It was but alittle that I passed from them,
But | found him whom my sou! loveth.


I held him, and would not let him go,

Until Lhadbrought him into my mother’s
house,

And into the chamber of her that con-
ceived me.


I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusa-
lem,

By the roes and by the hinds of the field,

That ye stir not up nor awake my love,

Till he please.


This section probably the narration of a
dream, given in a song by Shulamite in pre-
sence of the Daughters of Jerusalem or
Ladies of the Court. ‘By night (Hebrew,
‘nights’) on my bed,’ &e. (So Dan. iv. 10,
13). ‘A dream cometh by the multitude of
business ;’ and Shulamite’s, from the occupa-
tion of her thoughts with the prospect of
the approaching nuptials, and the prepa-
rations for them. Indicates how her waking
thoughts were possessed by her Beloved,
here ayain characterized by her as ‘he whom
my soul loveth,’ as already in Chap. i. 73
and reveals her great desire to enjoy his
society, and her fear lest anything should
occur to prevent it. From the passage,
viewed in its spiritual aspect, observe—

1. Natural that believers, especially in the
ardour of their first love, should have their
thoughts much occupied with Christ, and
that as a consequence He should be present
to them even in their dreams. Their ex-
perience expressed by the prophet ; ‘ With
my soul have I desired Thee in the night:

ea, with my spirit withm me will I seek

hee early’ (Is. xxvi. 9).

2. The believer’s great desire, when it is
well with his soul, forthe presence and fellow-
ship of the Saviour whom he loves; and his
great concern not to lose it, or do anything
that. may occasion its loss.

_ 8. Times when the believing soul is war-
ranted and constrained to open up to others
the treasures of her spiritual experience,
and to narrate both her conflicts and
her victories, her sorrows and her joys
(Ps. Ixvi. 16).

4. The fellowship of Christ not always
and uninterruptedly enjoved by the believer
in this world. Many causes of its interrup-
tion— a corrupt nature, a tempting devil, and
av, orld lymg in wickedness,


CHAP. Il.


—


5. Dark seasons and dull frames no proof
of a Christless state. Christ always present
with a believer, but not always sensibly so.
Our union with Christ not affected by our
want of communion with Him. Our interest
in His love not dependent on our feelings,
but on His faithfulness,

6. A precious mercy to be aroused to seek
an absent Christ.

7. The mark of a living and loving soul,
not to be satisfied with an absent Saviour.

8. Seeking Christ to be diligent and
earnest, in order to be successful. he soul
to stir itself up to take hold of God when
He appears to be absent (1s. Ixv.7). Christ
not always readily found when missed. Not
readily found in order to increase our earnest-
ness in seeking, and our carefulness in
retaining Him. A missing Christ makes
prized ordinances.

9. Suitable means to be employed and
inquiry made, in order to find a missing
Christ. The part of a true pastor to direct
inquiring souls. That direction to be sought
and found both in private conference and in
attendance on the public ordinances of God’s
house (John xti. 21; Ps. xxvii. 4). The
likeliest place to find the missing Jesus was in
His Father’s house (Luke ii. 46). ‘Christ
to be found in the streets and broad ways of
the city, not in the blind by-ways outside of
it.’—( Henry).

10. Ministers to know Christ themselves
in order to direct others to Him. A Christ-
less minister a poor guide to a Christ-seeking
soul. Ministers expected by their people to
be familiar with Christ, and withthe exercises
of those who are earnestly seeking Him.

ll. Ministers to be accessible to their
people, and to be diligent in their duty
‘The watchmen that go about the city
found me.’

12. Earnest and diligent search after
Christ not long unsuccessful. ‘It was but
a little that I passed from them, but I found
Him,’ &c. Christ not far from a faithful
ministry and an earnestly seeking soul.

13. Means to be employed, but not rested
in. ‘I passed from them” The seekin
soul to go deyond the minister. Means an
ministers, like finger-posts, pointing to some-
thing beyond them. Ordinances only means.
Angels unable to satisfy Mary at the empty
sepulchre. The Bride hastens past the ser-
vant to the master.

14. Inexpressible joy in finding a missing
and sought-for Saviour. ‘I found Him ’—
the language of exultation. Like Aroki-
medes in the bath—‘I have found it, I
have found it.’ So Andrew and Philip in
regard to the Messiah (John i, 41, 45).
So the wise men rejoiced in the Star


(Matt. ii. 10).
69


CHAP. IL.





15. Care to be taken by those who have


found Christ in order to retain Him. ‘1 held
him,’ &c. The language—(1) Of love
and affection to the Saviour (Ruth i. 16).
(2) Fear and jealousy of losing Him. (3)
Karnest resolution to hold Him. Implies
on Christ's part—(1) An apparent inclination
to depart (Gen. xxxii. 26; Luke xxiv. 28;
Mark vi. 48). (2) Gracious condescension
—the Almighty allowing Himself to be held
by a creature.

16. Believers who find Christ, and enjoy
His fellowship, to endeavour that otlers also
may profit by it. ‘I brought him to my
mother’s house.’ Both natural and spiri! ual
kindred to be made partakers of the benefit.
A proof that Jesus is dear to ourselves
when we seek to make Him known to others.
A family or congregation to be the better by
any member of it that rejoices in a found
Saviour. Only a present and enjoyed Christ
the life of a Phurel or congregation.

17. Watchlulness, resolution, and care
necessary, on the part of the believer, to avoid
whatever may disturb his enjoyment of
Christ’s presence and fellowship; and on the
part of the Church, to avoid whatever ma
grieve him away from its ordinances ‘
charge you,’ &c. Danger of disturbing a
found and present Christ especially to be
apprehended from the ‘daughters of Jeru-
salem.’ The flesh Christ’s greatest enemy,
whether in the believer’s own heart or in the
Church or congregation.

18. Easy to provoke Christ to withdraw
from the soul or the Church while [le is
visiting it. ‘By the roes and by the hinds of
the field,’—the most timid creatures, and
most easily disturbed and frightened away.

Observe from the whole passage in regard


A Missing Saviour.


I. The PERson who misses him. One who
loves him. ‘Isought him whom my soul
loveth.’? The character of a believer and a
regenerated soul that he loves Christ. He
loves Him— (1) Sincerely, with his ‘soul ;’ not
in mere sentiment or profession. (2) dr-
dently, with warmest affection; his ‘soul’
loves Him. Christ loved with the ‘soul’
the proof uf asoul that loves Christ. Christ
only loved by a new nature. The carnal
mind enmity to God, and soto Christ. Love
to Christ generated by the Hcly Spirit’s
revelation of him to the soul in his p:ecious-
ness aS a Saviour. The soul that loves
Christ most ready to miss Him, and most
pained at losing Him. ‘That only missed
which has been prized and possessed. The
condemnation and curse of men who have
heard the Gospel that they do not love
Christ (Jehn iti. 19; 1 Cor. xvi. 22).

60


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





-


Il. The Means employed to find him. (1)
Diligent attendance on public ordinances.
These ordinances the ‘streets and broad-
ways’ of the city of the great King. Christ
to be found in these. ‘ Wherever two ot
three are gathered together,’ &c. (Matt.
Xvili. 20). ‘ Blessed is the man that heareth
me, watching daily at my gates, &c. For
whoso findeth me, findeth lite,’ &c. (Prov.
viii. 34, 35). (2) Private inquiry of spiritual

uides. Pastors and teachers appointed by

ion’s King to direct anxious souls to Him-
self. ‘Remember them which have the rule
(margin, are the guides) over you, who have
spoken unto you the word of God,’ &.
(Heb. xiii. 7, 8,17). (3) Searching the Scrip-
tures. The written Word the standing
direction of inspired guides. The voice of
the watchmen of Zion heard in the Bible.
The Scriptures testify of Christ. None long
in finding Christ who search for Him in the
‘testimony of the Gospel.’ (4) Harnest
prayer for divine light and guidance (Pas.
xliii. 3). Shulamite turns from the watch-
meu to the King himself (verse 4).


TUL. The Resutr of the search. Christ
found. ‘I found him whom my soul loveth.’
Sucu success is (1) certain. Promised by Him
that cannot lie. ‘‘I'hen shall ye seek me and
find me, when ye search for me with all your
heart’ (Jer. xxix. 13), ‘If thou criest after
knowledge, &c. ‘Then shalt thou find the
knowledge of God’ (Prov. ii, 3—5. (2)
Speedy. ‘It was but a little,’ &c. ‘ Before
they call, I will answer, and while they are

et speaking, I will hear’ (Is. lxv. 24). ‘&
ie surely heard Ephraim bemoaning him-
self, &c. My bowels are troubled for him.’
(Jer. xxxi. 18—20).


IV. The Improvement of the success.
Threefold. (1) 4 holding him fast, so as not
again 10 lose Him. ‘I held Him,&c. That
likely to be most carefully treasured and
kept which has been once lost and found
again. <A believer not more known by find-
ing Chritt than by his care to keep Him
when [ie ‘s found. Care to be taken to re-
tain a merey as well as to obtain it. Cure to
retum Christ as precious in his sight as
anxiety tu ohtain Him. And equally neces-
sary. Enough mthe worid, the flesh, the devil,
and the carnality of the ‘aaughters of Jeru-
salem,’ to vender such care necessary. (2)
An endeacver ty make olhers purtukers of the
blessing. Our mother’s house to share the
benefit of a found Christ. A living believer
rejoicing in a found Christ, a blessing to a
whole congregation. The found treasure
not to be id. ‘Many shall see it, and fear
and trust m the Lord.’ ‘Come ana hear,


All 32 <uat fear God; and I will declare


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


CHAP. I,


a


what he hath done for my soul’ (Ps. xl 3;
Ixvi. 16). Our kindred not to be forgotten,
*Go home to thy friends and tell them how
great things the Lord hath done for thee’
(Mark v. 19). (3). Watchfulness and resolu-
bion to guard against anything that might


shorten Christ's ee and presence
"4 charge you,’ &c. Spiritual blessings to
be held with a vigilant eye and a resolute
hand. A cooling of first love sufficient to
grieve a loving Saviour, and to endanger the
continuance of te ‘candlestick’ (Rev. ii. 4,5).





Che Marriage Procession.


Scenz Sxconp. Places: A street in Jerusalem, with a royal Litter, guarded by @ company


Of soldiers, seen in the distance.


Speakers: Citizens of Jerusalem.


Cuartern IIL 6—11. Verses 6—8,


FIRST CITIZEN.


Who is this that cometh out of the wil-
derness,

Like pillars of smoke,

Perfumed with myrrh and frankincense,

With ali powders of the merchant ?


SECOND CITIZEN.


Behold his bed, which is Solomon’s;
Threescore valiant men are about it,
Of the valiant of Israel.

They all hold swords,

Being expert in war ;

Every man hath his sword on his thigh,
Because of fear in the night,


THIRD CITIZEN,


K‘rg Solomon made himself a chariot
Of the wood of Lebanon;

He made the pillars thereof of silver,
The bottom thereof of gold,

The covering of it of purple,

The midst thereof being paved with love
For the daughters of Jerusalem.


The question probably asked by one citizen
or company of citizens, aud answered by
another in reference to the Bridal Palanquin
and Procession seen advancing towards
Jerusalem from the country. Marriage pro-
eessions in the East accompany the Bride
on her way from her own dwelling to the
house of the Bridegroom or his father; the
Bride herself being concealed by a curtained
canopy, called the Huppad, borne by four
men Golding it by a pole at each corner.
The procession, accompanied by parties of
musicians, generally occupies three or four
hours or more, moving slowly, and taking a


circuitous route for the sake of display,
while aromatics are frequently burnt in
honour of the occasion. When the proces-
sion is at night, it is to accompany the Bride-
groom—usually to and from some house of
prayer—and is then illuminated by torches
or burning cressets, and other lights fixed at
the top of poles, and carried by men on
their shoulders, the inhabitants of the place
usually pressing out into the streets to
enjoy the sight. The name of Solomon con-
nected in the context with the “’tle of King,
a sufficient indication that it iv che marriage
of Solomon, the king of Israts, that forms
the picture or emblem in the allegory. His
anticipated espousals with Shulamite now
about to take place. ‘The proeession attracts
the notice of the citizens of Jerusalem, who
are able to discern it at a distance, and
make their remarks to one another. ‘ Who
(or what) is this,’ &c.? The scene recalls
the inquiry of the same citizens wnen Jesus,
a few days before His crucifixion, made His
triumphant entry into Jerusalem, amid the
acclamations of the multitude: ‘ Blessed be
the king that cometh in the name of the
Lord’ (Luke xix. 38). ‘All the city was
moved, saying, Who is this? (Matt. xxi.
10). The inquiry in the text, and the de-
scription in reply to it, applicable rather to
the Bridal Couch, Litter, or Palanquin, in-
cluding at the same time the party conveyed
in it. Exhibits, under various aspects, the
Church or believer, as the


Bride of Christ.


1. Coming up from the wilderness. Be-
lievers chosen out of the world. J» it, but
no longer of it. Tike Israel, the typical
and Old Testament Bride, coming up out
of Exypt and the wilderness to Canaan. A
wilderness between the Bride of re _


CHAP. It,





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





her heavenly home. While others take up
their abode in it, the Bride makes her way
out of it. The mark of Christ’s Bride that
she seeks ‘a better country,’ has her ‘con-
versation (or citizenship) in heaven,’ and
sets her ‘affections on things above, where
Christ sitteth at the right hand of God’
(Heb. xi. 16; Phil. iii, 20; Col. iii. 1).

2. Perfumed. Believers possessed of a
two-fold perfume: (1) The merits of the
Bridegroom. Made accepted in the Beloved.
Christ made to those who are in Him wisdom,
and righteousness, and sanctification, as well
as redemption (1 Cor. i. 30). Christ Him-
self the divine merchant, from whom the
heavenly aromatics are to be obtained. ‘I
counsel thee to buy of Me.’ ‘ Buy without
raoney and without price.’ The Lord well
pleased ‘for His righteousness sake.’ The
‘much incense’ added to the prayers of
believers by the Angel of the Covenant, who
presents them to the Father (Rev. viii. 3).
Believers wrapped in the perfumed garments
of their Elder Brother, and so obtain the
blessing (Gen. xxvii. 15,27). (2) The graces
of the Spirit. "Those who are Christ’s pos-
sess His Spirit. Have put on Christ.
Receive out of His fulness grace for grace.
Believers made fragrant both to God and
man by the fruits of the Spirit produced in
them—love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentle-
ness, &c. (Gal. v. 22, &e.). The works of
faith and services of love performed by be-
lievers through the Holy Spirit in them, a
sweet, smelling savour to the Lord (Phil. iv.
18). The spiritual perfume that anointed
the King shed also upon His Bride (Ps.
CXXxili. 2),

3. On their way to the marriage Supper of
the Lamb, and the home prepared for them by
the Beloved. Like Shulamite, on their way
to-the nuptials to be celebrated in the New
Jerusalem, when the Bridegroom comes ‘to
be glorified in His saints, and admired in all
them that believe’ (2 Thes. i. 10). The
heavenly Bridegroom gone to prepare a
place for His Bride in His Father’s house,
and in due time to come again, and receive
her to himself (John xiv. 2). Believers at
Tlis coming caught up to ‘meet the Lord in
the air,’ and so are ‘for ever with the Lord ’”
(1 Thes. iv. 17). The public reception and

resentation of them to the Father, as His
Beas to be followed by the Marriage Sup-
per of the Lamb (Rev. xix. 7—9).

4. A spectacle and object of interest to
angels and men. (nto these things the angels
desire to look. ‘To principalities and powers
in the heavenly places is made known by
the Church the manifold wisdom of God
(1 Pet. i. 12; Eph. iti. 10). Believers,
tiving as such, the object of attention, if not
of attraction, to the world around them.

62


‘Ther took knowledge of them that they had
been with Jesus.’ ‘The remark of the heathen
in reference to the early believers : See how
these Christians love one another! The
people ‘ magnified’ the Pentecostal Chureh at
Jerusalem, while unbelievers were afraid to
‘join themselves unto them’ (Acts iv. 13).
Believers made conspicuous by their heavenly
deportment, as far as they possess the spirit
of their Master, and live in His fellowship.
Spiritually-minded Christians a marvel and
a mystery to their fellow men. ‘Men won-
dered at.’ Christian and Faithful passing
through Vanity Fair, gazed and wondered at
‘as outlandish men.’ Believers, us such,
unlike the world in their principles, practice,
spirit, views, experiences, hopes. The dif-
ference, that between the flesh and the spirit.
Believers, as such, both wxknown and mis-
known by the world (1 Cor. iii 15; 1 John
ili. 1). The Church of believers going up
from the wilderness, compared to


‘Pillars of Smoke.?


1. Pillars or columns of smoke have an
upward motion and tendency. Their direction
towards heaven, whither they are constantly
ascending. So believers, risen with Christ,
seek the things that are above. The part
of a believer to have his affections, desires,
aims, hopes, &., on things above. ‘Our
conversation is inheaven. ‘Their heart where
their treasure is.


2. Such columns seen at a considerable. dis-~


tance. Believers acitysetonahill. Lights
in the world. Men to be able to see their
ood works, so as thereby to glorify their
Father in heaven. The world to be able
to take knowledge of them that they have
been with Jesus. ‘ Epistles of Christ known
and read of all men.’ The heavenward


aims and heavenly life of believers, that |


which makes them most. observed by a world
which only ‘ minds earthly things.’

3. Yet the foundation of these pillars in-
visible, The smoke ascends from a fire
which is unseen. Inthe Allegory, the smoke
probably that ascending from the incense
burned as the procession advanced. The
source of a believer’s spiritual and heavenly
life hidden from the eyes of the world. ‘That
source Christ Himself, and the fire of His
Spirit in the heart. ‘I live; yet not I, but
Christ liveth in me.” ‘Not I, but the grace
of God which was with me.’ ‘Your life is
hid with Christ in God.’ A hidden fire,
kindled by the Holy Ghost, burns in the be-
liever’s heart. The smoke seen, bus not its
source.

4. Such pillars constant and continuous in
their ascent. Tlie believer's spiritual life and
heavenward aim habitual and abiding. Not


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOUON.


CHAP.





existing for a day or a month, but through
life. The path of the just as the shining
light, which shineth more and more unto the
perfect day (Prov. iv.18). he believer no
mere Sabbath-day saint. The mark of a
false heart to serve God on Sundays, and the
world during the rest of the week. Be-
lievers not heavenly in the Church, and
earthly in the ball-room. A man known not
by what he is sometimes, and by fits and
starts, but what he is habitually. A Chris-
tian discovered, not by temporary feelings
or spasmodic acts, but by the even tenour of
his way (John viii. 31).

5. Yet their ascent not always uniform and
unuisturbed. The column of smoke always
ascending, yet subject to agitation and dis-
turbance from the wind. ‘The spiritual life
of a believer not always alike, either in ap-
pearance or experience. Subject to disturb-
ing influences, both from within and without.
Such influence, natural corruption; the daily
trials and temptations of life; the unwearied
efforts of an invisible enemy. The work of
a believer’s life to guard his spirit against
these influences, and to preserve the heaven-
ward tendency of his thoughts and affections,
and the heavenly character of his temper and
conduct.


Solomon’s Bed or Bridal Palanquin.


* Behold his bed, which is Solomon’s, Sc.


The ‘bed,’ litter, sedan or palanquin,
probably the same as the ‘ chariot’ deseribed
in the subsequent verses. Prepared by
Solomon for himself; that is, for the con-
veyance of his Bride from her father or
mother’s house to his own, where the nup-
tials were to be celebrated; and perhaps for
the conveyance of hims If on the same occa-
sion. Guarded, as became a royal marriage,
by an escort of the king’s select troops, to
prevent either danger or disturbance by the
way ; especially as the journey required to

made, in part at least, during the night.
May be viewed as emblematic of


The Covenant of Grace,


as administered both in the Old and New
Testament dispensations; in the former,
through a system of typical ordinances, in-
cluding a typical priesthood and a typical
tabernacle and temple, (these last perhaps
specially referred to by the ‘bed ’ and¢ chariot,’
—thesame, and yet in Some respects ditferent,)
accompanied with a succession of inspired
prophets; in the latter, by means of spiritual
ordinances and various gilts of the Spirit,
with the ministration of divinely instituted
office-bearers, some extraordinary and tem-


porary, as apostles and prophets; others
ordinary and permanent, as evangelists, pas-
tors and teachers. The Covenant itself, in
substance, that made with Abraham: ‘I
will be a God to thee, and to thy seed after
thee.’ Circumcision appointed to him and
his natural wale offspring, as the sign
or token of the covenant; ‘a seal of the
righteousness which he had by faith; ’ after-
wards, in the New Testament Church, re-
placed by the simpler rite of Baptism. The
Covenant made with David : ‘He hath made
with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in
all things; and sure’ (2 Sam. xxiii. 5),
offered to all in the Gospel: ‘Incline your
ear and come unto me; hear, and your soul
Shall live: and I will make an everlasting
covenant with you, even the sure mercies of
David’ (Is. ly. 3). Proclaimed by Peter on
and after Pentecost : ‘The promise is unto
you and to your children, and to all that are
afar off, even to as many as the Lord our
God shall call.” ‘Ye (Jews) are the chil-
dren of the prophets, and of the covenant
which God fade with our fathers, saying
unto Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the
kindreds of the earth be blessed’ (Acts ii.
39; iii, 25). Called a New Covenant, as
under a new administration, and especially
as distinguished from that made with Israel
as a people at Mount Sinai. Promised as a
New Covenent by the prophet Jeremiah
(Jer. xxxi. 31, &c.). The promise applied
by Paul to the time subsequent to the death
and ascension of Christ (Heb. viii, 4—13).
The covenant sealed by the blood or death of
Jesus. The cup in the Lord’s Supper, sym-
bolical of that blood, called by Himself the
‘cup of the New Testament (or Covenant) in
my blood” Its special blessings,—divine
teaching, pardon, adoption, and sanctification
(Heb. viii. 10—12). Hence, called a better
covenant, and established upon better pro-
mises than that made with Israel at Mount
Sinai (Heb. vili. 6). Christ the Mediator
and Surety of the Covenant (Heb. vii. 225
vill, 6; 1x. 15; xii. 24). The covenant
made with all who are saved, on their believ-
ing in Jesus and accepting the Gospel offer.
Believers hence called ‘Abraham’s seed, and
heirs according to the promise’ (Gal. iii.
99). Observe, in relation to the ‘bed’ or
“chariot ’—

1. It was made by Solomon himself. ‘Solo-
mon made himself a chariot.’ Christ the
Mediator of the Covenant of Grace. The
Covenant ratified and its blessings procured
by His atoning death. ‘The Covenant offered
by Him in the Gospel, and made by Him
with all who believe and accept of it (Is. lv. 3).
The whole of its admiuistvation in the New
Testament dispensation, with iis ordinauces,


offices, and gifts, directly from I/im as the
63


cuar. . HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON,





Church’s Head (Eph. iv. 7—)1; Matt. xxviii.
18—2*; 1 Cor. 11, 23).

2. Made by Solomon for himself. ‘Made
himself a chariot.’ The special object of it
the comfortable conveyance of his Bride to
her future home. The covenant of grace
devised by a Triune God, the Son as well as
the Father and the Spirit, for the salvation of
the Church, given to the Son as His Bride.
The ordinances, gifts, and offices, for the
gathering in, building up, and perfecting of
the redeemed (Eph. iv. 12; v. 25—28).
Christ’s glory connected with the salvation
of His Church (Jok» xvii. 1, 2).

3. Well guarded. The chariot, with the
Bride in it, during its passage through the
wilderness, accompanied by a chosen guard
of military, well armed, and of dauntless
courage, ‘ because of fear in the night.’ ‘The
period of the Church's passage through this
world to her heavenly home a time of ‘night’
—of darkness, danger, and discomfort.
Hence placed by her divine Lord under the
escort of an angelic guard, ‘The angel of
the Lord encampeth round about them that
fear him, and delivereth them.’ Angels that
excelinstrength,—‘ ascending and descending
uponthe Son of man,’—-sent forth ‘to minister
for them who shall be heirs of salvation’
(Heb. i. 14; John i. 51). Hence the death
of a persecuting Herod (Acts xii. 1—23).
The Church placed also under the care of
those to whom it is given to watch for their
souls ‘as those that must give account’
(Heb. xiii. 17). Such set for the defence of
the Gospel, that its truth may continue
with the Church in its purity and integrity,
and by the skilful use of the ‘sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God,’ to con-
tend earnestly ‘for the faith once de-
livered unto the saints’ (Phil. i.17; Gal
ii. 5; Jude 3).

4. Worthy of its author and object. ‘Made
of the wood of Lebanon’—cedar, both
durable and fragrant. Its ‘pillars of silver,’
supporting the canepy at its four corners,
Its ‘bottom,’—seat for reclining on, or back
for leaning against,—of eo Its ‘ corey ,
or hangings, of purple or scarlet. Its
‘midst,’ or bottom, paved with love, for (or
by) the daughters of Jerusalem,’—covered
with a carpet, probably adorned with
embroidered love-emblems and mottoes, the
work of the hands of the Ladies of the
Court.—The Covenant of Grace an ‘ever-
lasting covenant.’ The ordinances by which
it is administered, for perpetual observance
till the Lord’s second appearing. His pre-
sence with His Church and servants in the
administration of it, ‘even unto the end of
the world.” The Lord’s Supper to be ob-
served until He Himself shall come. The
ordinances of the Old Testament dispensa-

4


tion having a temporary design, superseded
by those of the New, site that Fis n had
been accomplished. The tabernacle and
temple with their furniture, distinguished,
like the ‘chariot,’ for their durable materials
(including cedar), and the gold and silver of
which they were composed ; the veil of ‘blue,
purple, scarlet, and fine-twined linen’ (that
of the temple also adorned with embroidered
cherubims), and the covering of the taber-
nacle of ‘rams’ skins dyed red,’ overlaid
with badgers’ skins,—all figures of ‘ good
things to come,’ of which deine ‘love’ is
the beginning, middle, and end (John iii. 16;
Eph. v. 25, &.).

No journeying to heaven for sinful men
but in this chariot of love. Every portion
of the blood-bought Bride of Christ brought
into it through the knowledge and belief of
the truth which it is designed to proclaim.
A place in it offered by Christ to every sin-
ner through the voice of the Bride whom it
conveys (Rev. xxii.17). The chariot passes
by wherever the Gospel is preached, with
an invitation even to ihe chief of sinners to
accept of Jesus as their Saviour, Bridegroom,
and King, and to enter it as a portion of His
Bride. Unspeakable blessing to have a

lace in this Bridal chariot of the King of
ings. Terrible consequences of slighting
the invitation (Heb. ii. 3).


Tue Roran Marrrcs.
Verse 11.
Crrizens, calling to the Women of Jerusalem.


Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion,

And behold King Solomon ;

With the crown wherewith his mother
crowned him;

In the day of his espousals,

And in the day of the gladness of his
heart.


The bridal procession now supposed to have
entered the city, and to be either passing
along the street, or to have aah at the
palace. The language sufficiently indicative
that the royal marriage is now taking place
in the poem, or about to do so. That
marriage the point to which the previous
events in the Song were preparatory steps.
This verse, therefore, to be regarde as the
central part of the poem. ‘The king ex-
hibited as already wearing the nuptial crown
or chaplet, such a crown being worn in the
East by the bridegroom as well as the bride,
and usually placed on his head by his mother,
if still surviving. ‘The royal marriage
naturally an object of special interest and
attraction to the citizens, more particularly
the king himself, its central figure-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE SONG OF SOLOMON. omar. m1.


———————————————  — ——————eeeFeeFeFesesesesesSFSseseF


The espousals of Israel’s king with Shula-
mite a picture of the marriage of the Lord
Jesus Christ with His Church at His second
coming, when His Bride shall have ‘made her-
self ready’ (Rev. xix. 7), On that infinitely
solemn and glorious day of the King’s es-
pousals, those who ‘have fallen asleep,’ but
whosealready perfected spirits shall come with
Him to be reunited to their raised and glori-
fied bodies, as well as those who shall be
‘alive and remain to His coming,’ being ‘in
@ moment’ changed and glorified without
tasting of death, shall be ‘caught up to
meet the Lord in the air,’ and to go with
Him into the new Jerusalem to be presented
to His Father and their Father, and to sit
down together at the ‘ Marriage Supper of
the Lamb,’ and so to be ‘ for ever with the
Lord’ (1 Thess, iv. 14—17; 1 Cor. xv. 51,
52; Rev. xix. 7—9). The most prominent
figure in the whole transcendently glorious
scene, and the object attracting the eyes of
men and angels, will naturally be Christ
Himself as


The Royal Bridegroom 3


here exhibited under the name and title of
one of his most distinguished Old Testa-
ment types, King Solomon. Observe—

1. Christ will appear at His second coming
in the characler of Kine. His title exhibited
‘on His vesture, and on fis thigh:’ Kine
or Kines, and Lorp or Lorps. Never till
then fully manifested in this character.
The dignity claimed for Himself at Pilate’s
bar, but denied Him by His own subjects, or
those who ought to have been such. His
title virtually and practically denied by the
world, and, to a great extent, by the pro-
fessing Church, who say by their spirit and
their lives: ‘ We will not have this man to
reign over us.’ The scene indicated in the
text faintly foreshadowed by the Saviour’s
triumphant entry into Jerusalem. (Matt.
xxi. 9; Luke xix. 38).

9. Christ will especially appear as Kine
Sotomon. ‘Solomon’ derived from a
word denoting ‘peace.’ His reign a reign
of peace. The sword, always drawn in the
reign of David his father, slept in its scab-
bard during that of Solomon. Jesus the
Prince of Peace. Himself our peace. The
‘Min’ who should be ‘the peace.” Has
made peace by His blood. His birth cele-
heated by angels as inaugurating ‘peace on
earth. That peace, however, never fully
enjoyed on and by the earth, till He ascends
the Throne ‘at. His appearing and His King-
dom.’ Till then His Kingly character repre-
sented by David the ‘man of war,’ rather
than by Solomon the Peaceful. His followers
now called to fight as ‘ good soldiers of Jesus


5


ne tae es called to sit down and
east as his Bride at the ‘ Marriage Su
of the Lamb.’ eae
_ 3. Christ will appear at His second coming
in the character of a Roya. BRIDEGROOM
Solomon’s crown ‘wherewith his mother
crowned him,’ neither a political, nor a mar-
tial, but a nuptial crown. This crown put
on his head not by priest or potentate, but by
‘his mother” Worn by him not ona state
occasion, or on a day of triumvh, but on
the day of his espousals, The period indi-
cated, that of the public espousals of Christ
with His saved Church on the day of His
glorious appearing. That period, however,
preceded by two secret and mystical es-
pousals which may be blended with those
peau ones; namely, His crucifixion, when

is human mother, in the person of the
soldiers, placed on His head the crown of
thorns; and the sinrer’s conversion to Christ
and open avowal of Him as his Lord and
King. His believing people presented unto
Him at His coming as a chaste virgin, having
been previously espoused to Him as their
husband (2 Cor. xi.2). The time to which
Paul looked forward as the goal of his hopes
in connection with his labours in the Gospel
(1 Thess. ii. 19). Every saved soul a flower
in Christ’s bridal chaplet; or rather a part
of the Bride herself. Saved souls the crown
of those who had been the instruments in
their salvation; much more to Christ Him-
self, who redeemed and saved them. The
crown, therefore, placed on His head by
His spiritual mother, the Church in which
He Himself was born; in joyful compensation
for the crown of thorns with which His
natural mother, or humanity, crowned Him
in the day of His deep humiliation and sor-
row. Every act of faith and love by be-
lieving souls, a step towards Christ’s coro-
nation. Before conversion, we put the crown
on our own heads; after conversion, we put
it on Christ’s.

4. Christ's second appearing the ‘ day of the

ladness of His neart. ‘The day of the
pec reatest joy that on which He
receives His Bride (Is. Ixii. 5). That day
looked forward to by Christ in the midst of
His sufferings as ‘ the joy that was set before
Him,’ for which He srilligly ‘endured the
cross, despising the shame’ (Heb. xii. 3).
That day the climax of His joy. His loving
heart rejoiced even in the day of His hum.-
liation, when He found the lost sheep and
laid it on His shoulders. Much more in the
day of His exaltation, when He has all the
sheep safely and for ever with Himself at
home (Luke xv. 56). The day when He
presents to His Father all that had been
given to Him to save, saying, ‘Here am I,
and the children whom thou hast ala :


cap. 11. BOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





(Heb. ii. 13). That day the joyous harvest


after the seed-time of sorrow and anguish He
endured on earth. The compensating fruit
of the pain He suffered, the tears He shed,
and the blood He gave for the redemption of
His Bride. To the joy of that day every
single conversion now contributes; and
accordingly, every faithful and loving effort
put forth by His people for such conversion.
‘Tbe seed sown now in tears, then reaped in


joy.

5. The day of Christ’s appearing and es-
pousils a day of intense interest to the Church
and to the world. The daughters of Zion
ealled to ‘go forth and behold King Solo-
mon,’ with his nuptial crown’ in the day ‘ of
his espousals,’ When Christ comes in the
clouds as the Royal Bridegroom of His
Church, ‘every eye shall see Him’ (Rev.
i. 7). The joy of all joys to behold Him on
that day as our own Bridegroom (Is. xxv. 9),


The sorrow of all sorrows to see Him as the
Bridegroom whom we continued to despise
aud reject (Rev. vi. 14—17). :

The day of Christ?s public espousals and
of ‘ the gladness of His heart’ fast hastening
on. LHighteen centuries ago the Bridegroom
left the promise with His expectant Bride:
‘Surely I come quickly’ (Rev. xxii. 20).
His parting word not yet fulfilled. The
Bride not yet ready. The number of His
elect not yet accomplished. The Gospel of
the kingdom not yet preached for a witness
to all nations. Yet the time may be near.
The Gospel never so widely preached as now.
In a short time all nations will have heard
it. The last vessel of mercy probably ere
long gathered in, when the Bride shall have
inate ‘herself ready.’ A very short time and
the cry may be heard, arousing asleeping world
and a slumbering Church: ‘Behold the
Bridegroom cometh ; go ye out to meet Him.’





PART THIRD.


Che Marriage Fexst.


Cuapter IV. 1—16, ro V. 1.


Scene First.


Tue Kine,


Expressing his Admiration of and Delight in
his Bride.


Cuapr, Iv. 1—7.


Behold, thou art fair, my love;
Behold, thou art fair.

Thou hast doves’ eyes within thy locks.
Thy hair is as a flock of goats,

That appear from Mount Gilead,


Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that
are even shorn ;

Which come up from the washing ;

Whereof every one beareth twins ;,

And none is barren among them.


Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet ;
And thy speech is comely.
66


Place: Bridal Apartment in Solomon’s Palace.
and Shulamite.


Speakers: The King


Thy temples are like a piece of pome-


: granate,
Within thy locks (or, ‘ behind thy veil’),


Thy neck is like the tower of David,
Builded for an armoury ;

Whereon there hang athousand bucklers,
All shields of mighty men.


Thy two breasts are like two young roes
That are twins,
Which feed among the lilies.


Until the day break,

And the shadows flee away,

I will get me to the mountain of myrrh,
And to the hill of frankincense,


Thou art all fair, my love;
There is no spot in thee,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE SONG OF SOLOMON. CHAP, TV.


eee


Shulamite not now merely a betrothed, but
a married wife. Hence in this chapter, for
the first time, called by Solomon, ‘My
spouse.” Her veil removed in the bridal
apartment, Solomon surveys her beauty, and
contempiates her person with intense delight.
Spiritually, the Church, or individual be-
liever, still regarded as on earth, but in an
advanced stage of experience as compared
with that of the preceding chapters. Histo-
rically, the New Testament Church, or the
Church after Pentecost, indicated; the cru-
cifixion and death of Jesus, followed by His
resurrection and ascension, being regarded as
the nuptials. Im reference to individual
believers, the present part of the Allegory
may be viewed as descriptive of the time
when they have made the public and solemn
profession of their acceptance of and
self-dedication to Jesus, by sitting down at
His table, and receiving that seal of the
Covenant and pledge of His love.

The text, Solomon's previous commen-
dation of the Bride now repeated with con-
siderable enlargement and particularity. For-
merly, only her dove-like eyes commended
and admired. Now all her features, as well
as the upper parts of her person—her hair,
neck, and breasts. Observe—

1. A growth of grace in believers. The

ath of the just as the shining light.
Believers changed from glory to glory.
Becutiful in Christ’s eyes here; much more
so hereafter. Heaven the place of just men
made perfect.

2. Periods of special advancement in the
history of the Church and of individual be-
lievers. A great advance in holiness and
grace in the Church of the New Testament
after the day of Pentecost, as compared
with that of the Old Testament. A simi-
lar advance to be experienced in the Mil-
lenial Church as compared. with the Church
in its present state. The light of the moon
made to be as the light of the sun; and the
light of the sun as the light of seven days
(Is. xxx. 26). A great increase of grace
often visible in the case of a believer after
a solemn and public dedication of himself to
the Lord, and a sealing of the Covenant at
the Lord’s Table. Believers frequently
sensible of a considerable advance in grace,
and of an elevation of their spiritual life to
a higher level. Such elevations often pre-
ceded by painful trials, deep soul-exercises,
and renewed conviction of sin. Much
higher attainments in grace to be gained
than are ordinarily arrived at. Such attain-
ments to be earnestly desired and sought
after. Provision made for them. ‘Open
thy mouth wide, and I will fill it’ ‘Be ye
filled with the Spirit’ (Ps. lxxxi 10;
Eph. v. 18).


3. The highest delight of Jesus in the
spiritual beauty and perfection of His Church
and people. *‘ Forget thine own people ard
thy father’s house; so shall the king greatly
desire thy beauty’ (Ps. xlv. 10). ‘ihe Lord
in the midst of thee is mighty; He will save ;
He will rejoice over thee with joy; He will
rest in His love; He will joy over thee with
singing’ (Zeph. iii. 17). Christ’s joy ful-
filled in the spiritual prosperity and perfec-
tion of His people. The deseription of the
Bride’s beauty in the text a climax, indica-
tive of the joy of the Bridegroon—his
affection kindling as he contemplates the
object of his love. Commences with :
‘Thou art fair;’ and ends with: ‘Thou art
all fair ; there is no spot in thee.’

4. The believer’s love, as expressed in the
‘eyes,’ her main attraction in the view of
Christ. The Bride’s dove-like eyes the first
feature described, and the only one previously
mentioned, ‘The eyes the expression of the
soul, and especially of the tender emotions.
Doves distinguished for their affection,
especially to their mates. Hence, ‘doves’
eyes’ particularly expressive of the affec-
tion of a loving Bride. ‘The believer’s eyes
such; as being meekly and lovingly directed
to Christ as His Bridegroom.

5. The beauty and excellence of the believer in
Christ’s eyes made up of.a variety of particulars.
Seven here mentioned, as perhaps indicative
of the believer’s perfection. Not necessary
exactly to fix the spiritual reference of each,
though desirable to find the corresponding
grace in the believer’s character. The various

articulars that constitute the spiritual

eauty and excellence of the believer scat-
tered up and down in the Scriptures. Some-
times brought together in a cluster, as in the
text. So in Gal. v. 22; 2 Pet. 1.5; Phil.
iv. 8; Col. ili. 12. These particulars all
seen combined in their perfection in the
person of Christ Himself. The believer’s
duty and interest to see that none of these
features in the spiritual character are wanting
or defective in him. Symmetry, proportion,
and completeness necessary to the perfection
of the Christian character.

6. The comparisons in the description not
all equally obvious, though equally suitable,
Their aptness more obvious and natural to
an Oriental than a European reader. That
aptness seen more in the geueral impression
than in the particular resemblance. Beauti-
ful and striking things in the person of a
beloved one compared in the Kast by an
ardent admirer, or by a writer of poetry, to
other beautiful and striking things, where
only a general or distinct reseinblance might
exist. The Bride’s breasts thus compared
to ‘two twin fawns’ feeding among ‘lilies ’
or in a flowery mead; the prominent idea


CHAP. IV.





being probably that of love and conjugal
enjoyment (Prov. v. 19). Her fair neck,
with its jewelled and golden ornaments, sug-
gestive, in the eyes of Solomon, of the loft

marble ‘tower’ erected by his father David,
with the glittering ‘shields’ of warriors
suspended on its walls as indicative of the
nation’s strength; thus conveying the idea
of moral firmness, dignity, and purity in the
Bride. Her black tresses—a prominent
feature in Oriental female beauty—sugges-
tive, to those accustomed to the pastoral
scenes of Judea, of ‘a flock of goats,’ with
their long, dark, glossy hair, seen at a dis-
tance browsing on the mountain side; sug-
gesting to ws, however, the true ornament,
not only of the female but of the Christian
character in general—that ‘of a meek and
quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God
of great price’ (1 Pet. iii. 3). The Bride’s
‘lips’ compared to a ‘thread of scarlet,’
as, while beautiful in themselves, suggesting
a still greater charm,—the sweetness and
comeliness of her ‘speech,’ as expressive of
a pure, affectionate, and intelligent soul, and
rendering her a meet companion for an
enlightened husband; a prominent feature
in aspiritual believer being that his ‘ speech’
is ‘with grace, seasoned with salt ;’ able to
‘minister grace to the hearers ;’ and that ‘no
corrupt communication ’ is allowed to proceed
out of his mouth, but ‘that which 1s good
to the use of edifying’ (Col. iv. 6; Eph. iv.
29) The whole presence of the Bride sug-
gests to the admiring husband a ‘ mountain
of myrrh’? and a ‘hill of frankincense,’
where all is fragrant, sweet, and delightful :
what the pure-minded and loving wite is to
her husband, and what the Church and the
Seliever’s soul is, or ought to be, to Christ.

7. Christ's great enjoyment in the grace and
fellowship of His believing people. The Bride-
groom, after surveying and admiring Shula-
mite’s unveiled charms, with the delightful
consciousness that she is now all his own,
resolves, for her comfort as well as his own,
duly to enjoy her society and love. ‘Till
the dawn and the shadows flee away, I will
get me to the mountain of myrrh,’ &. The
‘mcuntain of myrrh’ to Jesus is not so
much the ‘ quiring Seraphim’ and the angels
of light, as ‘his people, whom he has re-
deemed with his most precious blood,’
whetber these be triumphant in heaven or
still militant on earth. ‘This is my rest
for ever; here will I dwell; for I have desired
it’ (Ps. exxxii. 13, 14). His place of enjoy-
ment is among the ‘golden candlesticks,’ or
Churches of the saints (Rev. ii. 1).

4. Christ's presence in and with His Church
promised during the whole of her stay in this
world. That period, one of night—of dark-
ness, danger, and discomfort (itom. xiii, 12).

68


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





His second coming to His Church, the
dawning of a bright and never-ending day.
Till then His presence promised both to
believers individually and to their assemblies
couvened in His name. (John xiv. 23;
Matt xviii. 20). His promise to His servants
and people in connection with the great
commission: ‘Lo, I am with you alway,
even to the end of the world’ (Matt. xxviii.
2U). The words of the text those of Jesus
at the Supper ‘lable in the upper room at
Jerusalem; ‘I will not leave you comfort-
less; I will come to you’ (Joln xiv. 18),
Specimens of the fulfiment of the promise
given immediately alter His resurrection
(John xx. 16—28; Luke xxiv. 15—32;
Acts i. 4).

9. The Church, both in tts individual mem-
bers and in tts assemblies and ardinances,
made a ‘mountain of myrrh and hill of frank-
incense’ by the person of Jesus Himself. No
fragrance or sweetness apart from Himself.
‘Thy name is as ointment poured forth.’ All
His garmenis smell of myrrh, and aloes, and
cassia. Ordinances themselves insipid with-
out Christ. Believers ‘stale and unpro-
fitable,’ but as they have Christ dwelling in
them by His Spirit. Christ the ‘bundle of
myrrh’ that sweetens both the believer's
spirit and the Church’s ordinances. ‘Ihe
care and concern of Churches and believers
to be constantly, by the presence of Jesus
and His Spirit, a mountain of myrrhand hill
of frankincense.

10. If the Church om earth is made by
the presence of Jesus a ‘mountain of myrrh
and a hill of frankincense, what shall heaven
be ??


Tus Bripecroom’s INVITATION.
(Verse 8.)


Come with me from Lebanon,

My spouse, with me from Lebanon;
Look from the top of Amana,

From the top of Shenir and Hermon,
From the lions’ dens,

From the mountains of leopards.


The King intimates to his beloved that he
has a better place of residence prepared fo
her than that which had hitherto been her
home; that it was his desire that she
snould soon accompany him to it; and that
in the meantime she should withdraw her
affections from her former abode. Her pre-
vious home is represented as being in Mount
Lebanon with its snow-capped heights,
either really, or in a locality thus poetically
named. Lebanon, in its higher regions,
With its adjacent peaks of Amana, Shenir or


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


rp


Sirion, and Hermon, mentioned as a place
both of danger and discomfort, notwith-
standing the pleasant spots found in_ its
valleys and lower slopes. The text the lan-
guage of tenderest affection. For the
first time Shulamite called by the King
‘my spouse.’ The marriage viewed as now
having taken place. The Bridegroom’s
earnest desire to have his Bride always with
him. — His care that she should be with him
in a place of comfort and security. Wishes
her to leave those cold bleak mountains, the
haunts of the lion and the panther; but to
do so with the aid and protection of his arm
and the solace of his company.
The text may be are as corresponding
with the words of Jesus at the Last Supper :
‘In my Father’s house are many mansions:
if it were not so, I would have told you; I
go to prepare a place for you; and if I go to
prepare a place for you, I will come again,
and receive you unto myself; that where I
am, there ye may be also” (John xiv. 2, 3).
Observe, in reference to the Bridegroom’s


Call from Lebanon,


I. The Catt ttself. ‘Come with me,’ &.
To be viewed as a Call—

1. To leave the world in heart and affection.
The world, in its present state of apostasy
and rebellion, here represented by Lebanon
and its snowy peaks. This the believer's
native home. The place where he is born
and brought up. Christ’s Bride originally
of the world as wellas iz it. ‘Among whom
also we all had our conversation in times
past’ (Eph. ii. 3; Tit. iti. 3). This world,
in its present state, however, not to be the
home of Christ’s Bride. A place prepared
for her in His Father’s house. The world
is to believers—(1) A place of discomfort.
Like Lebanon with its bleak and barren
rocks, and its cold snowy heights. ‘In the
world ye shall have tribulation.’ (2) A place
of danger. Lebanon a place of lions’ dens.
‘Your adversary, the devil, goeth about like
a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour.’
* My soul is among lions—the sons of men,
whose teeth are spears and arrows’ (1 Pet.
v. 8; Ps. lvii. 4). (8) Yet a place not with-
out attractions, Lebanon adorned with some
of the loveliest spots in nature. The world,
even in its fallen state, possessed of many
attractions which might entangle the affec-
tions of Christ’s Bride—‘the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of
life’ (1 John ii. 16). The call in the text,
not to leave the world as to bodily presence,
but in heart and affection. This, perhaps,
indicated in the parallel clause: ‘ Look from
the top of Amana, &c. Withdraw your
thoughts and affections from those rugged


THE SONG OF SOLOMON. CHAP. IV.





heichts to your better home. ‘Arise ye
and depart, for this is not your rest.’ ‘ Seek
those things that are above, where Christ
sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your
affection on things that are above, not on
things that are on earth.’ ‘Love not the
world, neither the things that are in the
world’ (Mic. ii. 10; Col. iii. 1,2; 1 John
ii. 15). The Bride to forget her own people
and her father’s house (Ps. xlv. 11). Be.
lievers to look not at the things which are
seen and temporal; but at those which are
unseen and eternal (2 Cor. iv. 18). This
world not be viewed as our home, but as an
inn where we tarry for a night. Believers,
while here, only strangers and pilgrims,
journeying to their own country. Their
ome in the better land, the heavenly
Canaan, the new Jerusalem, the city that
hath foundations. Their language to be
that of the pilgrim in reference to the cities
which he passed on his way to Jerusalem—
“very beautiful; but this is not Jerusalem.”

2. To leave it in life and practice. Be-
lievers not to be ‘conformed to this world,
but transformed,’ by the renewing of their
mind. Though éz the world, not to be of it.
‘ Be ye not, therefore, like unto them.’ Be-
lievers to be as strangers in this world in
life and practice, as well as in heart and affec-
tion. Christian and Faithful represented as
passing through Vanity Fair without buying
any of its wares, or even so much as pricing
them. Gazed at in the Fair as ‘outlandish
men.’ Their only answer: ‘We buy the
truth.’ Paul’s testimony, in the name of
believers—‘ Our conversation (life or citizen-
ship) is in heaven.’ Believers to act and
comport themselves in this world as citizens
of the heavenly Jerusalem, to which they
belong (Phil. ii. 20).

3. To leave it as to its friendship and
sociely. Too great a difference between
believers and the men of the world to
admit of cordial friendship and society. ‘We
are of God, and the whole world lieth in
wickedness’ (or ‘in the Wicked One’)
(1 John v. 19). ‘How can two walk to-
gether except they be agreed?’ ‘Be not
unequally yoked with unbelievers; for what
fellowship hath light with darkness ? Where-
fore, come out from among them, and be ye
separate’ (2 Cor. vi. 14—17). ‘The friend-
ship of this world is enmity with God: who-
soever will be a friend of the world is the
enemy of God’ (James iv. 4), The believer’s
proper language: ‘I am a companion of all
them that fear thee.’ ‘My goodness ex-
tendeth not unto thee; but unto the saints
that are in the earth, and to the excellent,
in whom is all my delight.’ ‘I have not sat
with vain persons: I have hated the congre-
gation of evil doers, and wil. not sit uit Ng


CHAP. Iv,








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





wicked.’ ‘Depart from me, ye evil-doers,
for I will keep the commandments of my
God’ (Ps. xvi. 2; xxvi. 4, 5; exix. 115).
Men known by the company they keep. Peter
and John, ‘being let go, went unto their own
company.” ‘Then they that feared the
Lard spake ofien one to another’ (Mal. iii.
16; acts iv. 23).

The believer’s life a daily coming ‘from
Lebanon.’ ‘If any man will be .My dis-
ciple, let him deny himseif, and take up his
eross daily, and follow me.’ Believers,
being redeemed from this present evil world,
to take heed lest they be ‘aguin entangled
in the yoke of bondage.’ Need the daily
prayer: ‘‘Turn away mine eyes from behold-
ing vanity.’ Their standing caution: ‘ Re-
member Lot’s wife.’

4. To leave the world at death. The
comfort of believers that they have to leave
this world, not merely in heart and affection,
in life and practice, and in respect to its
friendship and society, but also, in due time,
in seta bodily presence. A better home
provided for them. Their happiness in being
where their Husband is. ‘Ihe death-call
to them only their Bridegroom’s voice:
‘ Arise, my Love, my Fair One, and come
away.’ ‘To the believer, the passage to the
tomb no Dolorous Way. Sense sings a
dirge at the grave; faith, a Hallelujah. A
believer enters his sepulchre through pearly
gates. Not deadly nightshade, but roses and
lilies line the path to it. Lt is the last step
in the journey home, or rather the actual
arrival at it. The funeral bell may toll its
slow and solemn strokes on earth, but clieer-
ful peals are rung in heaven, The pardoned
soul’s desire now granted: ‘I have a desire
to depart and to be with Christ, which is far
better. To me to die is gam’ ‘I have
waited for Thy salvation, O Lord’ ‘Now,
Lord, lettest thou Thy servant depart in
peace; for mine eyes have seen ‘hy sal-
vation.”

5. To leave the world at the Lord’s Se-
eond Coming. ‘Vill then, a part of the Bride
always still in Lebanon, ‘The bodies also of
those whose spirits are with Christ in Para-
dise still in the earth.
eome from Lebanon given at last. ‘ Awake
and sing, ye that dwell in dust,’ uttered by
the voice of the archanvel, and the trump of
God. The Lord Himself descends from
heaven with a shout that echoes throuzh the
mansions 3f the dead. They that sleep in
éesus, joining the living and now glorified
saints, ascend to meet Him in the air. The
Church's blessed hope at last accomplished.
The Bride’s last recowded prayer on earth
now answered. ‘I'he Bridegroom’s last
iovine promise now fullilled—* Surely I come
quickly.’

“7


The firfal call to.


Il. The character of the Journzy. ‘Come
with me from Lebanon.’ ‘lhe journey from
Lebanon and its snow-capped heights neither
easy nor safe. Its rugged pxths, steep pre-
cipices, aud ferocious animals, sufficient to
render the descent both painful and perilous
to the bride. A picture of the believer’s
passage from this world, the place of his
nativity, to the home prepared for him in
the Father’s house. Manifold temptations
often mingling heaviness with our joy. Much
tribulation the way to the kingdom. Perse-
cution promised to all who will live godly in
Christ Jesus. The world’s hatred in propor-
tion to their faithfulness to their Master
and to their character as the Bride of Clirist.
Their adversary, the devil, like a roaring lion,
going about and seeking whom he may de-
vour. Principalities and powers, the rulers
of the darkness of this world, leagued to
obstruct or annoy their passage. A carnal
mind and evil heart of unbelief still linger-
ing within themselves. ‘The flesh lusting
against the spirit, and its lusts warring 10
their members. ‘Che flesh weak to whit is
good, even when the spirit is willing, Need
for constant watchfulness and prayer. The
foot easily slipping, and the consequence a
bruising fall. Broken bones not unfrequent
in the descent from Lebanon. Noah, David,
aud Peter, humbling examples. No easy
matter t@ walk safely down the rugged
steeps. Diffi-uit so to keep ourselves that
that Wicked One touch us not. Not easy
to break with a world lying in wickedness,
anil to pass through it unscathed. Faithful
made a victim in Vanity Fair, and Christian
well nigh the same. Not easy to pass
through pollution without being soiled;
to travel through an enemy’s country with-
out getting into trouble; or to walk among
gins and pits without making a fall. Con-
stant need for the prayer: ‘Hold thou me
up, that my footsteps slip not. Preserve
me, O God, for in ‘Thee do I put my trust.’
Death, too, in the journey from Lebanon.
A passage from which poor hyman nature
instinetively recoils. ‘fo us an unknown and
naturally a formidable road.  Beset also
with spiritual adversaries. Not unfrequently
accompanied with acute and prolonged suf-
fering. The taking down of the tabernacle
not always a smooth or easy process. The
presence of earthly friends often of little
avail. The roughest and dreariest. part of
the passage, pertiaps, to be travelled alone,
Sometimes the pathway tracked with blood.
Lies at times through torture, the scaifold,
and the stake. The path at first too rugge
even for a Cranmer. The prayer in the
Burial Service not entirely needless ; ‘Suffer
us not, in ovr last hour, for any pains of


death to fall from thee,’





HOM]LETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON. . cuarP. Iv.


i


TIL. The Comronrt and Arn in the journey.
Indicated in the two little words: ‘ With
me.’ These precious words repeated, to call
special attention to what they imply, to con-
firm their truth, and to indicate their impor-
tance. An argument to induce compliance
with the Call. The Bridegroom’s societ
preferable to the Bride beyond that of all
Others. Who would remain among lions and
panthers when they can have the fellowship
of the king? No great loss to leave the
cold bleak heights of Lebanon to be with
the heavenly Bridegroom. A twofold bless-
ing implied in the words—(1) The everlast-
ing presence of Christ after the journey is
over ; (2) His company and support all the
way through. The descent from Lebanon
made safe and comfortable to the Bride by
the Bridegroom’s presence. Precious to
believers to know that they are not called to
leave the world, whether in heart and affec-
tion, or in life and practice, or in bodily pre-
sence, alone and unaided, The presence and
aid of the Friend ‘that sticketh closer than
a brother,’ promised in every trying, difficult,
and dangerous passage of life, as well as in
the last dark valley. ‘Fear not, for I am
with thee.’ ‘Iwill never leave thee, nor
forsake thee.’ ‘When thou passest through
the waters, I will be with thee, and through
the floods, they shall not overflow thee ;
when thou walkest in the fire, thou shalt not
be burned, neither shall the flame kindle
upon thee.’ Hence the triumphant language
of faith: ‘The Lord is my light and my
salvation ; whom shall I fear? the Lord is
the strength of my life; of whom shall I be
afraid? Though an host should encamp
against me, my heart shall not fear; though
war should rise up against me, in this will I
be confident.’ ‘ Yea, though I walk through
the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear no evil; for Thou art with me; Thy
rod and Thy staff comfort me’ (Ps. xxiii. 4;
xxvii. 1, 2).


“The soul that on Jesus hath lean’d for repose,
He will not, he cannot desert to its foes.
That soul, though all hell should endeavour

to shake,
He'll never, no never, no nEvER, forsake.”


The presence of Jesus with the believer in
his descent ‘from Lebanon’ on the way to
his future home—(1) For comfort. The
company of a friend a solace in a difficult
and dangerous journey. (2) For aid and
protection. The Bridegroom’s arm employed
to support and defend, as well as His voice
to solace and cheer. ‘Who is this that
cometh up from the wilderness, leaning on
her Beloved?’ The grace of Jesus sufficient
for the most difficult duties, the strongest


6


temptations, and the most painful trials. His
strength made perfect in our weakness.
Hence faith’s language: ‘I can do all things
through Christ which strengtheneth me.’ (3)
For example. The Bridegroom haa descended
from Lebanon before us. Points us to His
steps as He came down its difficult and
rugged steeps. ‘He hath left us an exam-
ple that we should walk in His steps.’
* Looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher
of our faith, who, for the joy that was set
before Him, endured the cross, despising the
shame.’ (1 Pet. ii. 21; Heb. xii. 2).

The promise indicated in the words ‘ with
me,’ applicable to the believer’s death, as
well as his life. His presence with them also
in that final, solemn, and untried journey.
Joseph sent his servants and waggons to
convey his father to Kgypt. Jesus not only
sends His angelic servants to fetch His Bride
and escort her through the darksome valley,
but comes Himself. Not only makes a
passage for them through the dark swelling
waters of death, but, like the Ark in Jordan,
is with them Himself in the passage. Seen
by Stephen on the eve of martyrdom, not
sitting as usual, but standing at the right hand
of God, as if risen up to be with His faith-
ful servant in the last great conflict, and to
give him a loving welcome when it was over.
The footsteps of Jesus seen also in that last
dark passage. The Bridegroom Himself trod
the pathway to the tomb. Encountered
death in its most formidable aspect. Passed
through the valley in excruciating pain, amid
jeers of men and assaults from Satan, and in
a bath of blood. Travelled the last hours of
His life in loneliness, darkness, and desertion
of soul. Has lain in the tomb a lifeless corpse
before us. The grave made by His presence
therea perfumed bed to all His followers.

Important questions: Have I Jesus with
me for my comfort and aid in going through
this world? Shall I have His presence in
death? Have I heard and obeyed His call
to come with Him nowP Am I taking up
my cross daily, and following Him? Have
I given up the world, or am | still making it
my home? We come éo Christ as sinners,
before we come with Him as saints. Have
I done this? Reader, if not, lose no time ;
but do it #ov.


Tus Krye Harry mw His Barve.
Verses 9—15.


Thou hast ravished my heart,

My sister, my spouse:

Thou hast ravisnea my ueart,

With one of thine eyes,

With one chain of thy neck. ;
1


CHAP. Iv.





How fair is thy love,

My sister, my spouse !

How much better is thy love than
wine;

And the smell of thine ointments than
all spices!


Thy lips, O my spouse,

Drop as the honeycomb ;

Honey and milk are under thy tongue ;
And the smell of thy garments

Is like the smell of Lebanon.


A garden enclosed

Is my sister, my spouse;
A spring shut up

A fountain sealed.


Thy plants are an orchard of pomegra-
nates,

With pleasant fruits ;

Camphire with spikenard,

Spikenard and saffron,

Calamus and cinnamon,

W'th all trees of frankincense 3

Myrrh and aloes,

With all the chief spices,


A fountain of gardens,
A well of living waters,
And streams of Lebanon.


The climax of the King’s admiration of,
and delight in, his Bride. Realization of the
words of the forty-fifth Psalm, the Song of
Loves : ‘So shall the King greatly desire thy
beauty.” The happy Bridegroom had already
described the charms of his Bride; he now
declares, in the language of impassioned
affection, the effect which these produced
upon him: ‘Thou hast ravished my heart.’
Literally ‘Thou hast hearted me.” A new
word coined to show the intensity of Christ’s
love to and delight in His believing people.
Christ’s heart in the possession of the loving
believer. His love to His people that of the
most ardent lover; yet calm, deep, and holy
His Church His peculiar treasure. (Ex. xiv.
5). The King, in addressing his Bride, com-
bines terms expressive of the nearest and
tenderest relations, each supplementary to
the other. ‘ My sister, my spouse ;’ or, ‘my
sister spouse,’ Names of nearest kindred
employed in the East as terms of affection.
These combined terms immediately after-
wards repeated by the King in order to indi-
cate the reality of the darn b the in-
tensity of his affection, and his delight in
employing the title. The believer not to
forget that he belongs to Christ, both as
his Brother and his Bridegroom. Is at once
both the sister and the spouse of Jesus.


red


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





His sister, as having the same Father and the
same nature; Christ assuming the believer’s
human nature and imparting to him His
Divine one. His spouse, as now united in a
marriage-bond with Himself, having been
betrothed by Him in an everlasting covenant
(Hos. ii. 19; 2 Cor. xi. 2; Rom. vii. 4). In
the believer the ardour of a spouses love
combined with the purity of a sister’s, Typi-
fied in Eve, at once the sister and the spouse
of Adam. The ardour of Christ’s love to
His people grounded—(1) On the relation
in which they stand to Him as the Bride
given Him by the Father. (2) On the fact
that, as His Bride, He has brought them
from the bondage of sin, Satan, and the curse
of a broken law, by the price of His own
agony and blood. (3) On the holy beauty
which, as His blood-bought Bride, He im-

arts to them by the renewing and transform-
ing grace of His Holy Spirit, more especially
the beauty of their faith and love. What
costs most, usually most beloved. The
Shepherd rejoices most over the sheep whick
He had lost, but with much toil and trouble
had found. A saved soul an addition to the
happiness of heaven. The Saviour’s joy
bound up in the sinner whom He saves. The

rounds of the King’s admiration of and de-
fight in his Bride, rapturously indicated by
himself :—

1. Her beauty. More especially that of
her ‘eyes’ and ‘neck,’ the one directed to
himself in a tender affection, the other
bowed in humility and self-surrender: ‘Thou
hast ravished my heart with one of thine
eyes, with one chain of thy neck.’ One, as
indicating the perfection of beauty and re-
dundancy of charms beheld in the Bride.
One believing penitent look of the sinner
sufficient to secure the Saviour’s love. (Zech.
xii. 12). Christ overcome by the look of the
Syro-Pheenician woman and of the dying
thief. The Bride’s eyes and neck contrasted
with the wanton and adulterous eyes, and the
stiff and stubborn neck of an impenitent
world.

2. Her love. ‘ How fair is thy love,’ &.
Literally ‘loves,’ as in chap. i., verse 4. Pro-
bably expressions and manifestations of love.
The term and the comparison following for-
merly applied by the Bride to the ines
love; now returned to her with tender
emphasis. The love of the loved one the
sweetest enjoyment of the lover. The love
of the saved soul the joy and reward of the
Saviour, The faith and love of the forgiven
woman in the Pharisee’s house, infinitely
sweeter and more refreshing to Him than the
wine on Simon’s table, and even the precious
ointment with which she anointed His feet,
His wine-cup on the cross the love of a
pardoned sinner.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


——





8. Her savoury spirit. ‘The smell of
thine ointments is better than all spices.’
The fragrance of her spirit properly her own
ointments. This sweeter to the king than
all the ‘powders of the merchant? with
which she might perfume her person. ‘The
smell of thy garments is like the smell of
Lebanon,’ celebrated for its odoriferous
trees (Hos. xiv. 5, 7). Her garments pro-
perly her spirit and deportment. ‘Be ye
clothed with humility.’ ‘ Put on, as the elect
of God, bowels of mercies.’ ‘ Put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ.? Garments, in the East,
often richly perfumed, especially on mar-
riage and other festive occasions. So
those of the King Himself (Ps. xlv. 8).
The ‘ointments’ both of the King and of
the Bride the graces of the Spirit, imparted
first to Christ, without measure, then to His
members, ‘according to the measure of the
gift of Christ.” The precious ointment
poured on the head of Aaron runs down
upon the beard, ‘even to the skirts of his
garments’ (Ps. cxxxiii. 2). The ‘smell’ of
the Bride’s garments, the sweetness of the
actings and exercises of those graces. The
part of believers, as having Christ and His
Spirit in them, to carry about with them a
spiritual fragrance, sweet to Christ and pro-
fitable to men.

4, Her speech and conversation. ‘Thy
lips, O my spouse drop as the honeycomb,’
&c. An enlarged repetition of the commenda-
tion already given, —‘Sweet is thy voice,’ ‘ thy
speech is comely.’ Shulamite’s speech the
index of her soul. ‘Out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaketh.’ A wile’s
sweet, savoury, enlightened conversation the
delight of an intelligent husband. Especial
attention paid by Christ to the speech of His
people. ‘Then they that feared the Lord
spake often one to another, and the Lord
hearkened and heard’ (Mal. iii. 17).
Believers to be of circumcised lips as well as
heart. Their lips touched with the live coal
from off the altar (Isa. vi. 4). The poison of
asps is changed for the honey and milk of
the Holy Spirit. Honey and milk under the
tongue, when the milk of God’s Word is in
the heart. Christ’s Word dwelling richly in
us shows itself in sweet and wholesome
conversation. The sweetest honey gathered
from the flowers of Holy Scripture. To have
honey dropping from our lips, we must have
the honeycomb in our heart. The honey
first under the tongue, then on it. Medita-
tion on the Word the best means for speech
that shall minister pleasure to Crist and
‘grace to the hearers.’

5. On her general excellence and benefi-
cial influence. This represented under four
comparisons—(1.) 4x Enclosed Garden, ‘A
garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse.’ A
garden aplace forpleasure. An Oriental garden
# scene of special beauty. A garden enclosed
indicative of—(i.) Its preciousness * fii.) The


: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


cuAP. IV,


care taken of it; (iii.) Its preservation for


the owner’s exclusive enjoyment, The
Church and each individual lever Christ’s


enclosed pleasure-garden. ‘I will walk in
them ;? not merely with them. His Church
the object of His special care. ‘I, the Lord,
will keep it; I will water it every moment:
lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and
day’ (Isa. xxvii. 3). Believers set apart
for His own enjoyment. ‘The Lord hath set
apart him that 1s godly for Himself’ (Ps.
iv. 3). The Church, as a garden, dis-
tinguished from the world. The world, apart
from Christ’s Church, a moral desert. That
Church enclosed for its safety and defence.
Safe, though surrounded by wild beasts and
raging enemies. God Himself a wall of fire
round about her (Zech. ii. 5). Believers
‘kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation.’ (2.) 4 locked-up Spring and a
sealed Fountain. ‘ A spring shut up,a fountain
sealed.’ Such locked and sealed fountains
frequently found in the East. The lock and
seal indicate value, care, and exclusive use.
The fountains thus kept from being dried up
by the heat, defiled by animals, or employed
by strangers. Springs and fountains
especially valuable in the East. The special
delight of Orientals during the heat of
summer. Gardens and courts usually pro-
vided with them. ‘The Church of living and
loving souls a spring of delight to Christ, as
He is to His people. ‘1 will sup with him
and he with me.’ The believer’s heart shut
up to all but Christ. The Bride exclusively
for her husband (Prov. v. 15—18). Believers
‘holiness to the Lord.’ Their life hid with
Christ in God. Sealed by the Holy Ghost to
the day of redemption. The motto of the
seal: ‘The Lord knoweth them that are His.’
Under the Old dispensation the fountain sealed
in one nation; under the New, spread over all
the world. (3.) 4 Orchard of fruit trees and
spices. ‘Thy plants are an orchard,’ &c.,* with
pleasant fruits,’ or ‘fruit of excellence,’ or
‘precious things’ (Deut. xxxiii, 13—16).
‘Camphor,’ cypress, or henna (chap. i. 14).
*Calamus,’ or sweet cane (Jer. vi. 20; Exod.
xxx. 23). ‘Frankincense,’ employed in the
composition of the holy anointing oil (Exod.
xxx. 34). ‘Myrrh,’ distilling from an
Arabian shrub, and hardening into a gum.
‘ Aloes,’ a costly and sweet-smelling wood ;
connected with myrrh also in Psalm xlv. 9;
Proverbs vii. 17; John xix. 39. Solomon,
familiar with orchards, fruit trees, and
spices (Eccles. ii. 5), saw in these ouly a

icture of the excellencies found in his

eloved Shulamite. Such Christ’s estimate
of His Churen. His Church to Him the
antitype of Eden (Gen. ii. 8, 9). Believers
‘trees of righteousness, the planting of the
Lord, that He may be glorified’ Repre-
sented as olives and vines, palms aud cedars,
firs and myrtles. The Church collectively an


archard containing 2 variety of trees, and
73


CHP. Iv.





each believer one containing a rich variety
of Christian graces (Gal. v. 22). All the
fruits of the Spirit found in believers in a
a! or less degree of development.
heir duty to cultivate each, and to seek its
maturity. To ‘abound in every good word
and work’ (Col. i. 9). To be ‘filled with the
fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus
Christ, to the praise and glory of God.’ To
abound in ever ee (2 Cor. viii. 7). The
object for which Christ gave himself for His
Church (Eph. v. 27; Tit. ii. 14. The Church
and each believer to produce not only
‘fruits, but ‘spices.’ A  believer’s life,
spirit and conversation, to be not only pure,
holy, aud upright, but sweet and savoury.
Ralievére to exhibit not merely what is
sterling and excellent, but also what is
lovely and attractive. (4.) 4 Fountain
sending forth refreshing and fertilizing
streams. ‘A fountain of gardens’ — by
which gardens are watered, hence afford-
ing an abundant supply (Jer. xxxi. 12;
Isa. lviii. 11). ‘A wellof fede waters’ —always
full and always flowing. ‘Streams from
Lebanon ’—such as those in the Zebdani
Valley, or the ‘ Abana and Pharpar, rivers of
Damascus,’ fed by the snows of Lebanon
(Jer. xviii. 14). The Bride in one sense a
‘sealed fountam;’ in another a fountain
sending forth its streams for the general
benefit (Prov. v. 15, 16). The virtuous
woman not only the confidence and joy of
her husband, but kind to all, and, the bene-
factor of the poor (Prov. xxxi. 11, 12, 20, 26).
The Church, while the delight of Christ, a
blessing to others. Christ, the fountain of
living waters, makes the believer a well of
living water by being in him. The Holy
Spirit in believers as a well of living water
cht iv. 14). Renders them a means of
life, strength, and comfort to others. Be-
lievers not only recipients of the living water,
but channels for the communication of it to
their fellow men and fellow Christians (John
vii. 38). Made receivers in order to be
givers. Receive the manifestation of the
Spirit for the benefit of others (1 Cor. xi. 7).
Believers to be refreshed by one another
(Philemon 7, 20). To comfort and _edify
one another. One believer like Harlan
Page, the means of life and blessing to a
whole neighbourhood. The Church the
means of spiritual verdure and fruitfulness
to the world at large. Through Christian
missions, the desert made to rejoice and blos-
som as the rose. Believers watered them-
selves while watering others, and in order
that they may do so (Prov. ix. 25). ‘ Living
water’ indicative of (i.) the perpetuity ; (ii.)
the excellence; (iii.) the wholesomeness;
(iv.) the exhaustless mature, of Christ’s
grace. The voice or breath of prayer the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





first bubbling up of the ‘ well of living water®


(Acts ix. 11). Grace in a believer makes


him as
Streams from Lebanon.


The streams visible; their source hidden
from human view. What is good, holy, and
Habeas beneficial, communicated by Christ
through His Spirit to the believer, and from
the believer to the world. Grace in the
Church exhibited as ‘streams.’ Indicative
of—(i.) the fulness; (ii.) the /reeness ; (iii.)
the Jdiveliness ; (iv.) the beauty; (v.) the
abundance ; (vi.) the refreshing nature—of
Christ’s grace. The ‘streams from Lebanon’
in the Zebdani Valley, among the most
beautiful things in nature, and making all
beautiful in their neighbourhood. The most
beautiful as well as the most beneficial things
in Creation employed by Christ to set forth
the excellence of His Church, and the grace
which produces it.

Important ee suggested by the pas-
sage: Does Christ take delight in me and in
what He sees in me? Is it my aim to
afford joy to Him as my Saviour and Bride-
groom? Are my feelings towards Him
those of a bride towards her husband?
Am I seeking to cultivate ali the various
fruits of the Spirit? And not only the
fruits, but the ‘spices?’ Am I endeavour-
ing, through the Spirit of Christ in me, to
Uetalss not only what is pure, and just, and

onest, but also what is lovely, and of good
Sgt Am I careful not only as to what
I do, but the manner and spirit in doing it P
Is my life useful to others, as ‘ streams from
Lebanon,’ beautifying and refreshing those
I come in contact with? ‘Strike out of my
heart, O God, a well of living water !’—
Dr. Chalmers.


Baiwecroow’s PRaYER FOR His GARDEN.
Verse 16.


Awake, O north wind,

And come, thou south!

Blow upon my garden,

That the spices thereof may flow out.


The Bride still viewed by the Bridegroom
as his garden. That garden one of spices
as well as fruits. Her spirit and conversa-
tion sweet and refreshing to her husband.
His desire that that sweetness may be full
exhibited in all their intercourse with eac
other. The fragrance of aromatic plants
not always evolved alike. Some circum-
stances more favourable for its evolution
than others. Its evolution chiefly dependent


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


CHAP. IV.





on the state of the atmosphere, and the kind
and degree of wind flowing. Hence the
Bridegroom’s wish poetically expressed ;
‘ Awake, O north wind,’ &c. The north wind,


perhaps, thus called to depart and give place


to the south wind, as more favourable for the
emission of the fragrance. Possibly, how-
ever, the call equally to both, as both alike
needful to that emission.

Not enough that gracious dispositions, or
the fruits of the Spirit be implanted in a
believer’s soul. These not to be latent and
dormant, but to be drawn forth in lively
exercise, so that Christ may be glorified and
find pleasure. That exercise dependent, in
seme degree, on external circumstances, on
the situation in which the believer may be
ee and even on his physical health.

ore especially, however, on the degree of
divine influence which he may at any time
enjoy. The breath of the spiritual wind as
necessary for the lively exercise of the
pecs affections, as that of the natural one
or the exhalation of the fragrance of a bed
ofspices. The spiritual wind the Holy Spirit.
The Spirit frequently in Scripture compared
to a wind Gob iii, 8; Acts ii. 2; Ezekiel
xxxvii. 9). That Spirit the ‘spirit of love,
power, and a sound mind.’ Hence essen-
tial to a believer’s spiritual prosperity, and
to the gracious and beneficial influence he
may exercise on the world. Equally impor-
tant to personal happiness, domestic peace,
and conjugal comfort. Especially necessa
to Christ’s enjoyment of His Church, bot
collectively and individually. Hence, the
text a call on the part of Christ for the

acious influence of the Spirit upon the
hurch and the believer’s soul. These
again viewed as


The Garden of Christ.
The text presents to our notice—


I. The Gaxven itself. The Church and
the believing soul is—

1. A Garden. It is so, as being—(1)
Reclaimed from the world. Originally the
children of wrath, even as others. Separated
by distinguishing grace. Chosen out of the
world. Called out of darkness into marvel-
lous livht. ‘We are of God, but the whole
world lieth in wickedness’ (1 John v. 19).
(2) Safely enclosed. Hedged round by divine
protection. ‘Kept by the power of God
through faith unto salvation.’ ‘A vineyard
of red wine; I the Lord do keep it.’ ‘The
Lord is thy keeper.’ ‘I will be a wall of
fire round about her.’ ‘Salvation will God
appoint for walls and bulwarks.’ ‘The gates
of hell shall not prevail against it.’ (3) Care-
fully cultivated. \ ‘vie God—the Father,


the Son, and the Holy Ghost—eng..ged in
its cultivation. ‘My Father is the husband-
man. Every branch in me that beareth fruit
he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more
fruit.’ ‘I will water it every moment.’ For
its cultivation also, a number of human
labourers, for various departments of
work, employed in the garden. ‘ He
gave some apostles, some prophets, some
evangelists, some pastors and teachers.’
(4.) Planted with choice plants very
believer a tree of righteousness. The fruits
of the Spirit produced in the garden: ‘ Love,
joy, peace, long-suffering,’ &c. The loveliest
specimens of humanity found in Christ’s
garden. Naturally, because sanctified and re-
newed humanity. ‘The righteous shall
flourish like a palm tree; they shall grow as
the cedar in Lebanon. They that be planted
in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the
courts of our God. They shall still bring
forth fruit in old age. They shall be fat and
flourishing’ (Ps. xcii. 12, &c). (5.) Designed
Jor the pleasure and enjoyment of the Master
and his friends. The garden in the text, with
its beds of spices and flowers a pleasure-
garden. So the Church and a believer’s soul.
*T will walk in them!’ ‘The Lord taketh
pleasure in His people.’ The name given by
Himself to the Church, ‘ Hephzi-bah’—* my
delight is in her.’ ‘This is my rest for ever;
here will I dwell, for I have desired it.’ The
Lord in the midst of thee is mighty; He
will save; He will rejoice over thee
with joy; He will rest in His love; He
will joy over thee with singing (Zeph.
iii, 7 (6.) Kept clean and orderly.
Weeds not suffered to grow or continue
in it. ‘Lay aside all malice, and all guile,
and hypocrisy, and envies (or grudges),
and all evil speakings.’ ‘Purge out the old
leaven.’ ‘Put off the old man, with his
deeds, whicharecorrupt.’ ‘Putting away lying,
speak every man truth with his neighbour.’
‘Ye also put off all these — anger, wrath,
malice, blasphemy, mat communication,
out of your mouth.’ ‘Looking diligently
lest any root of bitterness springing up
trouble you.’ ‘Keep yourselves in the love
of God, hating the garment spotted by the
flesh. Believers’ to ee themselves un-
spotted from the world. In the Church all
things to be done ‘decently and in order’
(1 Cor. xiv. 40). :

9. Christ's Garden. As being — (1)
Chosen and given to Him by the Father (Eph.
i.3; John x. 30). (2) Chosen by Himself
Sor His own. ‘Ye have not chosen me, but
[have chosen you.’ (3) Purchased by His
blood. ‘He loved the Church, and gave
himself for it.” ‘The Church of God which
he hath purchased with his own blood.’ The
Church, like the rest of the world, baer y

3)


CHAP, rv.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





under sentence of death through sin. That
sentence removed by the substitution of
Christ in their stead. (4) Reclaimed by the
Spirit. The Church not only redeemed by
price, but separated by power. The Spirit
given to Christ for that purpose. The in-
strumentality employed, the truth of the
Gospel in the lips and lives of believers. (5)
Employed for His own use and pleasure, ‘This
people have I formed for myself’ Believers
the planting of the Lord, that He may be
glorified.


IL. The Catt. Observe—
1. The Called. The Call addressed to


The Holy Spirit as a Wind.


So John iii. 8; Acts ii. 2; Ezek. xxxvii. 9.
The Spirit so represented—(1) From His
invisibtlity (John iii, 8). (2) From His
power. ‘A mighty rushing wind’ (Acts ii.
2). Nothing able to resist the wind in
Nature, or the Spirit ingrace. (3) From the
universality of His operations. The wind
blows everywhere, over the whole earth. The
Holy Spirit’s operations confined to no land
place, class, age, condition, or circumstances.
(4) From the mysterious character of His
movements and operations. ‘The general nature
of the wind as air in motion, and the general
principle of its movements, tolerably under-
stood. But its local changes and varieties
among the most difficult things in Nature to
account for. Blown in every possible variety
of direction. Sometimes changes from one
direction to another entirely opposite. Some-
times from opposite directions at once.
Sometimes in one form and degree, some-
times in another. Two winds here men-
tioned : the North and the South. The North
wind cold to those in the Northern hemis-

here, as from the region of ice about the
Pole. In the East, a healthful and refreshing
wind (Prov. xxv. iii; Job xxvii. 21, 22).
The South wind warm, as from the regions
about the Equator, always greatly heated by
the direct rays of the sun (Job xxxvii. 17),
The effects of these opposite winds conse-
quests of an opposite character. ‘Ihe ten-

ency of the one to bind up and restrain;
that of the other to loosen and disengage, the
odours of aromatic plants. So the operations
of the Holy Spirit various in their character
and effects. Sometimes as a piercing North
wind, convincing, reproving, awakening, dis-
turbing, shaking. Sometimes as a soft and
balmy South wind, melting, softening, sooth-
ing, comforting. Under His convincing ope-
ration, the multitude at Pentecost cried:
Men and brethren, what sliall we do? Under
His comforting agency. they gladly received
the word of reconciliation, and experienced
peace (Acts i. 37, 44; ‘Lhe dispensation of
the Law, and its application to the individual
conscience ene operation of the Holy Spit:

16


the dispensation of the Gospel, and its
application to the heart, another. Both
North and South wind necessary in the
economy of Nature; and both the convincing
and comforting operations of the Spirit
needful for the Church and the individual
soul, The first rather preparatory to the
second. The warm and quieting South wind
more suited for the evolution of the spices of
the garden. So the fruits of the Spirit
brought forth in the Church and in the
believer rather under the Gospel than under
the Law; under the still small voice of
evangelical consolations, than under the
whirlwind of legal terrors. Yet the latter
often necessary to the former.

2. The Caller. Christ Himself. His con-
stant concern and care about His Church’s
spiritual prosperity. None so interested in
its fruitfulness and beauty. Never forgetful
of His Church’s interests. While on earth
His constant prayer to His Father on its
behalf. Still walks in the midst of the
ae candlesticks, as the High Priest of

is Church, attending to their proper condi-
tion. Intercedes for His people at God’s right
hand. Prays also on earth in the person of
His members. The Holy Spirit given in
auswer to such prayer. The disciples waited
in Jerusalem for the promise of the Father;
but waited in prayer and supplication, for
ten days. Their prayer the Call of Christ in
them: ‘ Awake, O North wind,’ &c. The
Spirit only g'ven in His fulness after Jesus
had completed His work of atonement
(Luke xii. 49,50; John vii. 39; xvi. 7).
The Spirit committed into His hands after
His ascension into heaven. His added title
then — He that hath the Seven Spirits of
God (Rev. iii. 1). Asif to point tothe words
of the Song and to intimate their meaning,
the Spirit’s descent on the Day of Pente-
cost like that of ‘a mighty rushing wind’
(Actsii. 2). Still continues the part of Christ
to call for the Spirit to blow upon His gar-
den, the Church, in answer to the
fervent, believing prayers of his people.
‘Ask of the Lord rain in the time of the
latter rain: so shall the Lord make bright
clouds (or lightnings), and give them showers
of rain” ‘If men who are evil know how to
give good gifts unto their children, how
much more shall your Heavenly Father give
the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him?
(Zech. x. 1; Luke xi. 13). ‘The Church’s
duty not only to pray for the Spirit, but to
seek the removal of every hindrance to His
effusion. ‘Bring ye all the tithes into the
storehouse, and prove me herewith; if I will
not open the windows of heaven, and pour
you out a blessing that there shall not be
room enough to receive it’ (Mal iii. 10).

3. The Call itself. * Awake—come—
bow.’ ‘The Holy Spunt, though given, not
always and alike in actual operation. Never
entirely absent from the Chure. _ Believers


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : THE SONG OF SOLOMON.
ee


His permanent abode. May be present, how-
ever, in different degrees and in different
ways. In ths Old Testament dispensation,
as a spirit of bondage; in the New, as a
spirit of liberty. Through defective faith
and careless walking, may still be a spirit of
bondage. Hence different states of the
Church and of individual believers. The
Spirit given in the greatest measure yet
known on and after Pentecost. Often greatly
withheld from the Church’s unfaithfulness,
unwatchfulness, and unprayerfulness. The
candlestick in danger of being removed from
its place. Churches and individual believers
aroused at times to a sense of their need of
the Spirit, and to earnest prayer for His
gracious and powerful operation. This
usually the first indication of the Spirit’s
visitation. Earnest and persevering prayer
for the Spirit’s effusion the token that that
effusion will be bestowed. Such prayer
either the call of the Bridegroom in the text
or its happy precursor. Fervent prayer for
spiritual blessing the voice of His Spirit
in the believer’s heart (Rom. viii. 26, 27).


III. The Ossect of the Cali. ‘That the
apices thereof may flow out.’ Not enough
that the spice-plants are there. The odours
may be shut up in their cells and no fra-
grance be emitted. The pores to be opened
and the odorous particles to be exhaled.
Grace given to believers to be exercised and
made sensible. Not enough that a Church
exists, and that grace is in it. The Church
to be in a spiritually lively state, and the
grace of believers to be in lively exercise.
Only thus may Christ enjoy the fellowship
and works of the Churches. See his epistles
to the seven churches of Asia (Rev. i. and ii.).
The Church at Laodicea in a condition only
to be spued out of His mouth. Neither a
church nor a believer to be satisfied with
a lifeless and lukewarm state. Lukewarm-
ness—a state betweex hot and cold—Christ’s
greatest abhorrence. Yet too often the
state of Churches and professors when
enjoying rest and outward prosperity. The
state most agreeable to the carnal mind.
The duty and privilege of believers not only
to have life, but to have it‘ more abundantly.’
A divine injunction: ‘Be ye filled with the
Spirit.’ Churches and believers in a spiritual
and lively condition such as Christ delights
to dwell in, and such as He can employ for
the conversion of others. The Spirit pro-
mised to the disciples, that they might be
His witnesses to the end of the earth.
David’s prayer and resolution: ‘ Kestore
unto me the joy of Thy salvation, and up-
hold me with Thy free Spirit; then will I
teach transgressors Thy ways, and sinners
shal] be converted unto Thee ’ (Ps. li. 12, 13).


CHAP. v





A lively and spiritually prosperous state or
the Church and of believers the result of the
Spirit’s gracious operation, in obedience to
the Call in the text. As the Holy Spirit
blows, the Church’s odour flows. Hence
His gracious and abundant effusion to be
earnestly and perseveringly sought. ‘For
this will I be inquired te the house of
Israel to do it for them’ (Ezek. xxxvi. 37).
Believers to stir themselves up ‘to take hold
of God and His gracious power. Their’s to
awaken the arm of the Lord, to put on
strength as in the days of old’ (Is. li. 9).
His will that they should not keep silence,
and should give Him no rest till He make
Jerusalem a praise in the earth. ‘Concern-
ing the work of my hands, command ye me.’
‘Ye have not, because ye ask not’ (Is. xlv.
11; Ixii. 6, 7; James iv. 2).


Tus Brivr’s Destez.


Verse 16.


Let my Beloved come into his gardex
And eat his pleasant fruits.


The Bride reciprocates the Bridegroom’s
love. ‘My love,’ answered with ‘My Be


loved.’ Christ’s love to us the ground and
occasion of ours to Him. The Bride’s de-
sire one with her Husband’s. He admires


and commends her as his garden. She in-
vites him to the enjoyment of it. His de-
sire that its spices should flow forth; hers
that he should come and eat its pleasant
fruits. Believers made such for Christ’s
enjoyment: their desire that He should have
it. The Bride calls herself: ‘His garden.’
Believers no longer their own, but Christ’s.
‘Ye are bought with a price.’ Christ claims
the Church as His garden: believers gladly
respond to the claim. ‘One shall say: I am
the Lord’s.’?’ ‘O Lord, I am Thy servant;
thou hast loosed my bonds’ (Is. xliv. 5;
Ps. exvi. 16). Christ’s presence in and with
His Church the believer’s greatest desire.
‘Let my beloved come into his garden.’ His
presence in His Church and with believers,
not always alike. Times in the Lord’s
earthly ministry when He hid Himself
Such times still. ‘Thou art a God that
hidest Thyself.’ ‘He hideth His face from
the house of Jacob.’ Times when the Bride
has to cry to her Husband: ‘ Why hidest
thou Thyself.’ Israel exhorted to keep their
camp holy, lest the Lord who walked in the
midst of it should see any unclean thing and
turn away from them (Deut. xxiii. 14).
Christ’s visit to and continuance with
believers connected with their love aad
obedience. ‘He that hath My command-
wents and keepeth them,’ &c. (John a h


CHAP. Vv.





The Bride’s desire that nothing may hinder
his presence and stay with her. The Church
and the believer who desires Christ’s pre-
sence, to be careful to put away whatever
is offensive to Him. His words to the luke-
warm, self-satisfied, and self-righteous, yet
oor, wre! ched, miserable, and blind, and naked

hurch at Laodicea: ‘ Beloved, I stand at
the door and knock; if any man hear My
voice and open the door, I will come in to
him, and will sup with him, and he with Me’
(Rev. iii. 20). Christ’s condescension and
love to His Church, that He finds His
sweetest entertainment in it. Finds and
eats ‘ his pleasant fruits.’ ‘ With desire have
{ desired to eat this passover with you be-
fore I suffer.’ Fellowship with loving and
lively believers His greatest joy. The de-
sire of such believers that He may find in
them that joy. The believer, notwithstand-
ing his own corruption, conscious that through
grace there are with him pleasant fruits for
Christ to eat. No part of faith to deny the
Spirit’s work. ‘ Know ye not that Christ is
in you, except ye be reprobatesP’ ‘The
care of believers that Christ may have plea-
sant fruits in them, both in abundance and
in good condition, for His own enjoyment.
No pleasant fruits in the Church or a believer,
but what are His, and the production of His
own Spirit. ‘ His pleasant fruits.’ The fruits
in the garden Christ’s ; the weeds and briars
our own. The productions of grace in the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


——,


soul, ‘ pleasant fruits ;’ those of unsanctified
nature, sour crabs. Christ’s ‘ pleasant fruits ’
found only in His Church. Elsewhere, only
‘wild grapes.’ Pleasant fruit found only on
the branches of the True Vine. ‘The smallest
service of believers rendered in faith and
love, reckoned and enjoyed by Christ as ‘ His
pleasant fruits.’ Their believing prayers
sweet incense to Him. Their thanksgivings
and praises a well-pleasing sacrifice. They
gracious words recorded in His Book of re-
membrance. Their tears of godly sorrow
put into His bottle. Observe—

1. Believers to be more concerned about
Christ’s enjoyment than their own. Their
desire to be rather that Christ may eat His
eres fruits than that they themselves
should.


2. Believers to consider that all that is


theirs is His, and that what He accepts at
their hands is best bestowed. Their honour
and happiness that He can accept of any-
thing they have, and can employ it for His
own glory and pleasure.

3. Fruitfulness and love on the part of the
Church most likely to secure Christ’s pre-
sence in it. To gain the Bridegroom’s pre-
sence the Bride must have her ‘ pleasant
fruits.’

4. The believer’s best time when Christ
comes in to him, and eats with him his

leasant fruits. ‘I will sup with him and
e with Me.’


Che Hridegroom’s Response.


CHapter V. Veznse L.


Scenz Szconn. Place: Banquet Hall in the Palaces. Speaker: The King.


TO THE BRIDE.
[ am come into my garden,
My sister, my spouse ;
{ have gathered my myrrh with my


spice ;
I have eaten my honeycomb with my
honey ;


T have drunk my wine with my milk.


TO THE GUESTS.


Eat, O Friends ;
Drink, yea drink abundantly, O be-
loved.


L The Bridegroom’s address to the Bride.
‘Iam come,’ &c. The King, like Ahasue-
rus, accepts the Queen’s invitation to the
war 4 of wine. Expresses his readincas

q


and delight to do so. The believer’s desire
for Christ’s presence no sooner expressed
than fulfilled. ‘Before they call I will
answer; and while they are yet speaking, I
will hear’ (Isa. lxv. 24). Christ’s visits not
long delayed when His people are earnest
and ready to receive them. ‘When the
hour was come, He sat down with the
twelve.’ The Bride herself the banquet;
yet a material feast the accompaniment and
outward expression of it. ‘The marriage
celebrated with a marriage feast. The feast
now prepared, and the guests assembled.
The bridegroom conducts his bride to the
table. Piciure of the Marriage Supper of the
Lamb, after the reception and presentation of
the Bride. Also, historically, of the Last Sup-
per, soon after the triumphant entry into Jeru-
salem, and immediately iar the cruci-


fixion. That Supper to


continued in the ©








—"


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


!


CHAP. V


et


Church till Christ the Bridegroom come

in. Believers, especially while seated at
the Lord’s Table, and, according to His dying
command, showing forth His death by eating
and drinking the symbols of His body and
blood in remembrance of Him—His garden
and His banquet. The Bride, as well as the
table and all its provisions, His own. These
provisions only mentioned by the Bride, but
enlarged and dwelt on by the rejoicing
Bridegroom. A higher value set by Christ
on the fruits of His Spirit and His own
mediatorial work, than by the believer him-
self. Those fruits of great variety. Each of
them a special delight to the Saviour. The
myrrh of a believer’s repentance as accept-
able to Christ as the spice of His love. The
humblest gifts of love as acceptable as the
most costly. The honeycomb as well as the
more valuable honey within it. The com-
mon milk as well as the richer and more
costly wine. The widow’s two mites more
precious in His eyes than the larger offerings
. of the rich. Enough for Him when He can
say: ‘She hath done what she could.” The
turtle dove or young pigeons of the poor as
scceptable as the lamb or bullock of the
rich, when laid in love upon the altar. ‘It
is accepted according to what a man hath,
-and not what he hath not.’ The cheerful-
ness of the giver makes the acceptableness of
the gift. ‘ Where Christ gets a welcome, He
never complains of the fare.’ — Durham.
When Christ was risen from the dead, ‘ His
disciples gave Him a broiled fish and a piece
of a honeycomb, and He ate before them.”
(Luke xxiv. 42, 43). Probably ncaa
the Holy Spirit as another connecting li
between the Song and the Gospels.


Il. The Bridegroom’s address to the guests.
‘Eat, O Friends,’ &c. The king invites his
friends to partake of his Joy. Recals the
Saviour’s language to His disciples at the
Supper table: ‘Take, eat: Drink ye all of
it.” ‘Ihave not called you servants, but
friends: Ye are my friends, if ye do whatso-
ever I have commanded you.’ The Marriage
Supper of the Lamb partaken of by His
friends, who are also the Bride herself. Ob-
serve—

1, A high honour and privilege to be
called Christ’s friends; though a higher still
to be called His Bride.

2. Where Christ is, He wishes her friends
to be with Him. ‘Those who invited Christ
must also invite His friends. At Cana, both
Jesus and His disciples were invited to the
marriage (John ii. 1). :

8. Christ’s desire that all who are His
should share His joy. His reward to His


faithful servants; ‘ Enter thou into the joy
of thy Lord.’

4. When Christ comes into His Church
and people, He brings His provisions with
Him; and while He sups with them, He
gives them to sup with Him (Rev. iii. 20).

5. The provisions of Christ’s house and
table, of great variety, richness, and plenty
(Ps. xxxvi.8; lIxv. 4). ‘I am come that
my sheep might have life, and have it more
abundantly.’ ‘I will satiate the soul of the
priests with fatness, and my pe shall be
satisfied with my goodness; [ onle satiated
the weary soul, and I have replenished evey
sorrowful soul’ (Jer. xxxi. 14, 25). Christ?s

rovisions both nourishing and refreshing—

oth milk and wine. Correspond with the
blessings of salvation offered in the Gospei
(Isa. lv. 1). At His rich banquet, no danger
either of surfeit or excess.

6. Christ gives not only wholesome and
heaped cheer, but a hearty welcome.—
‘Drink, yea drink abundantly.’ ‘Open thy
mouth wide, and I will fill it." ‘Be ye
ree ee the Spirit’ ‘Rs. Ixxxi. 10; Eph.
v. 18).

7. All the provisions of Christ’s table the
urchase of His own suffering and death.
erhaps indicated in the first article men-

tioned by the king: ‘I have gathered my
myrrh.’ Myrrh bitter to the taste. ‘This
gathered by the King Himself. Vinegar
and gall, the symbol of His own bitter
sufferings, handed to Him on the cross,
before the wine and milk, emblems of the
blessings of salvation, could be handed to
us. The bread given at the Supper Table
the symbol of His broken Body; the wine
that of His shed Blood. ‘The bread that J
shall give is my flesh, which I will give for
the life of the world (John vi. 51).

8. A threefold Feast provided by Christ
for His friends, as the Bridegroom of the
Church — (1) In their personal and private
experience as they journey through the wil-
derness. The ‘ feast of fat things’ made by
Christ in His holy mountain, the Church,
for the benefit of Zion’s travellers. The ‘ bread
eaten in secret’ (Rev. iii. 20). (2) In the
ordinance of the Lord’s Supper, as first
instituted in the upper room at Jerusalem,
and celebrated in the Church from time to
time until He come again. The happiest
experience of the believer often connected
with that sacred Feast. (3) The Marriage
Supper of the Lamb afier He has come to
take the Bride to Himself, and she has made
herself ready; the number of the elect being
then accomplished, and the kingdom pea
come. The I.ord’s Supper an image an
foretaste of that heavenly banquet.


19





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


nel


CHAP. Ve
PART FOURTH.
Che Coolness and its Consequences,
Cuarter V. Verse 2.—CHarter VI. VERSE 9
Scene Finst. Place: Zhe Palace at Jerusalem.


Speakers: Shiulamite and the Ladies


of the Court, or the Daughters of Jerusalem.


Saunamitz Rexatine a Nicut’s
EXPERIENCE.


Verse 9.


I sleep (or, was sleeping),
But my heart waketh (or, was awake).


The second great division of the Song now
reached: the period after the marriage. The
exposition more difficult. In the present
section the Bride relates to the ladies of the
Court her experience during the night.
Probably a dream. The narrative, however,
possibly given by the Bride in a song sung
at the marriage, with the view of exhibiting
both the Bridegroom’s excellences, her entire
Jove to him, and, at the same time, her own
unworthiness of him. She has retired to
rest, perhaps at the close of one of the seven
days during which the nuptial feast con-
tinued (Judges xiv. 15—17). Her ardent
love to her husband, and the delight she
enjoyed in his fellowship, give mse appa-
rently to a dream, exhibiting, as often
happens, the opposite of the reality. After
she has retired to rest, her Beloved knocks
at her door, desiring admittance. She
strangely and unkindly hesitates, and makes
silly and selfish excuses for not admitting
him. After pleading in vain for admittance.
he withdraws, but not until he has inserted
his hand into the hole of the door as if,
according to oriental custom, for the purpose
of opening it. Seeing his hand, she relents,
and rises to open; but too late. He has
withdrawn and is gone. Full of distress, she
searches for him in the city, but in vain.
At last, as if recalling to mind his ordinary
haunt, in the eagerness of her desire to find
him, she hastens to the spot.

The narrative, whether given as that of a
dream or otherwise, designed, like the rest
of the Song, to exhibit the experience of
believers individually, as well as that. of the
Church as a whole. What was, perhaps, a
dream to Shulamite, too often the reality in


80


the case of the believer and the Church,
The experience, in either case, as in hers,
the effect of sleep. The narrative illus-
trative of—


Spiritual Sleep and its Effects.


phere In the state of the Jewish
Church at the time of the Saviour’s advent.
‘ He came to His own, but His own received
Him not.’ Jerusalem knew not the day of
her visitation. (2) In the case of the dis.
ciples, after the Last Supper, in the garden of
Gethsemane. Heavy with sleep and unable
to watch but one hour with their Master
agonizing under the dews of the night; and
afterwards abandoning, denying, or betray-
ing Him. (8) In the experience and his-
tory of the Christian Church after the
Apostolic age. That state of the Church in

eneral represented by the Church at Lao-
dices So described as readily to recall this
ie of the Song (Rev. iii. 19, 20). (4)
n the occasional experience of a child of
God. A believer’s enjoyment of the Saviour’s
fellowship not unfrequently followed by a
state of carnal security and sleep. The
danger here indicated for our warning. ‘ Let
him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest
he fall.” * Watch and pray, lest ye enter into
temptation.’ The warning never more needed
than at a time of special spiritual enjoyment.
Like the Master Himself, believers often
taken from the Jordan of enjoyment to the
Wilderness of temptation.

The Bride asleep, though her heart was
awake. In a believer’s worst state, spiritual
life and love still in existence. His sleep
that of carnal security, not that of spiritual
death. His slumber that of the couck, not
that of the grave ; one from which an awaken-
ing is not difficult, and must sooner or later
come. The flesh in a believer only asleep,
while the spirit in him is still awake. Be-
lievers to distinguish between the two,
and to unders their own spiritual ex-
perience. ;





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


CHAP, V,


rr cee erences eee


Tus Bripecroom’s APrrAl
Verse 3.


The voice of my beloved that knocketh,

Saying, open to me, my sister, my love,

My dove, my undefiled ;

For my head is filled with dew,

And my locks with the drops of the
night.


Natural for a husband to repair to his
home after the fatigues of the day ; and as
natural for him to expect a ond welcome,
Ghrist’s love indicated in the fact that He, too,
comes from time to time, and knocks for
admission into the heart (Rev. iii. 20). His
desire to receive entertainment from His
people, and to enjoy fellowship with them.
‘If any man hear my voice and open the
door, I will come in to him, and will sup with
nim, and he with me.’ The love and fellow-
ship of His people the reward of His toil and
travail for their salvation. The Son of God
left His Father’s bosom to find a home in
the sinner’s heart. His head, for our sakes,
‘filled with dew, and His locks with the drops
of the night” His nights often spent under
the open sky in prayer on our behalf, while
others rested in their bed. His last night
on earth a sleepless one in some part of the
high priest’s palace, with His hands still
bound with cords as a criminal. In the text
we have—


Christ’s Call to His Sleeping Church.


I. The party Cattep. The Bride. Indi-
cated in her own : ‘The voice of
my beloved.’ Also in that of the Bride-
groom: ‘ My sister, my love,’ &c. Strange
that Christ’s Bride should ever be slow to
admit Him. As true asit is strange. An effec-
tual call addressed to those who constitute
the Church whom He loved, and for whom
He gave Himself. These found by Him ori-
ginally in the sleep of death. Too apt to fall
again into carnal slumber, though not into
spiritual death. Only living souls able to
Astin uish Christ’s voice as the voice of
their Beloved. Only a believer able to say :
*I sleep, but my heart waketh.’


TI. The Stare implied. One of spiritual
sleep. Our natural state. One into which
the believer may relapse, though never so
deeply as before. Svc


Spiritual Sleep


a state—(1) Of security and ease. (2) Of
indifference and unconcern, (8) Of indo-


lence and sloth. (4) Of carnal indulgence.
(5) Of spiritual inactivity. (6) Of insensi-
bility to one’s best interests. (7) Of self-
os lk eata da usually accompanied with
gen & Such a state the result of—(1)
The body of sin and death still adhering to
us. (2) The world’s temptations—its cares,
pleasures, pursuits, society. (3) Satan’s
endeavours—his old trade (Gen. iii. 14;
2 Tim. ii. 26, margin). (4) Sense of safety
experienced after believing. (5) Neglect of
watching unto prayer, and other appointed
means. (6) A state of comfort and enjoy-
ment. (7) An avoidance of the cross.


IIL The Knocxixe. ‘The voice of my
beloved that knocketh’ (or ‘ knocking’),
Christ’s Bride not allowed to remain in a
state of spiritual sleep. Christ has to knock
both before conversion and after it. Knocks
both in outward warnings and inward calls.
Knocks—(1) By His Word. Every appeal
in the Bible a knock at the sleeper’s heart.
The language of Christ in the Scripture as
well as of all His faithful servants: ‘Awake
thou that sleepest, and Christ shall give thee
light” (2) By His Providence. A thorn
in the flesh sent both to awaken and to keep
awake. Christ’s knocks often heard on a
bed of sickness, and in the chamber of death.
His language often in trouble: ‘As many as
I love I rebuke and chasten: be ye zealous,
therefore, and repent (Rev. iii. 19). (3)
By His Spirit. The Spirit Christ’s Agent
in dealing with men’s souls. Knocks from
without éefore conversion; from within,
after it.


IV. The Cau to oper. The voice added
to the knock. Christ in earnest to be ad-
mitted. ‘Open unto me.’ Will not force
an entrance, but produce a welcome one.
His people willing in the day of His power
(Ps. cx. 3). To ‘open’ implies—(1) To
invite His entrance. Like Laban to Eliezer, ,
* Come in thou blessed of the Lord.’ (2) To
give Him a hearty welcome as the inmate of
our heart; glad to entertain Him and enjoy
His fellowship. (3) To remove the hindrances
to His entrance—any sinful habit, indulg-
ence, or disposition. ‘The dearest idol I
have known,’ &. (4) To receive Him as an
entire Saviour, and to surrender ourselves to
Him as our Prophet, Priest, and King.


V. The Puta for admission. A three-
fold plea employed by the Bridegroon—

1. His relation to the sleeper. ‘ My sister.’

en to me. The last words emphatie Ta
* Me,’ thy husband and Saviour. Te Me,
whom thou hast sworn to love, honour, and
obey. The person who knocks, the stroagest
of al arguments for admission. Tb, Be


CHAP. ¥.


of all shames to keep such a friend and~
Saviour at the door. When Christ knocks
for admission into the heart, it is either as
already a husband, or seeking to become
one.

2 His love to the sleeper. Indicated in
the terms He employs: ‘My love, my dove,
my undefiled.’ Christ’s love to sinners in
general, and to His Church in particular, as
seen especially in giving Himself for them,
a powerful reason for admitting Him to their
heart.. That love further seen in passing
over their defilement and unworthiness, and
in regarding only the work of His Spirit in
their hearts. The multiplication of the ten-
derest terms in addressing the sleeper, indi-
cative—(1) Of the Bridegroom’s great and
unchanging love, (2) Of His earnest desire
for admission. (3) Of the ditticulty of
awakening the sleeper.

3. What He has endured on the sleeper’s
behalf. ‘My head is filled with dew,’ &c.
In visiting the Bride, and in seeking admis-
sion as the Bridegroom of His Church,
during His earthly ministry, this often lite-
rally true. ‘The Son of Man hath not where
to lay His head.’ Often spent the whole
night in prayer for His people under the
open sky. ‘Every man went unto his own
house; but Jeses went into the Mount of
Olives’ (John vii. 53; viii. 1.) In redeem-
ing His Church and saving a lost world, ‘His
visage was marred more than any man, and
His form more than the sons of men” His
last night on earth one of accumulated suffer-
ings. His mental agony in the Garden to-
wards midnight indicated by ‘great sweat-
‘ike drops of blood falling down to the
ground.’ His betrayal and arrest at mid-
aight, followed by long weary hours in the
vigh priest’s palace, while He stood bound
as a criminal before the tribunal, first of
Annas and then of Caiaphas, and remained
the rest of the night in the hands of ruf-
fian menials in the guard-room—spit on,
buffeted, struck with rods, and made the
subject of their fiendish sport—till led away
at daybreak to the general council-room to
undergo a third examination. His sacred
head filled with the wrath-drops of that
awful night, and of a still more awful day
that followed it. Such a night and day of
anguish, suffering, and blood it cost the Son
of God to obtain admission to the sinner’s
heart, in order to fill Him with the joys of
salvation. What more powerful plea can be
used for admission ?


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





Tur UNKIND RESPOMSE.
Verse 8
SHULAMITE.


I have put off my coat;
How shall I put it onP

I have washed my feet ;
How shall I defile them ?


Sad answer from the beloved spouse of a
king. More like theanswer ic a dream than 10
reality. ‘lhe language only of one oppresse@
with physical or moral sleep. The excuse for
not opening at once as silly as it was selfish.
No great difficulty in resuming a garment just
laid aside. No great sacrifice in soiling the
feet by walking across the floor. The effects
of spiritual sleep—(1) To see difficulties in
the way of duty where none exist, and

reatly to eXaggerate those that do. The
Rneenre only of the sluggard, ‘There is a
lion in the street’ (Prov. xx. 4; xxvi. 3.
Haggai i. 2--4). (2) To be unwilling to
deny ourselves, or make sacrifices for Christ ;
and to think those we are called to make
much greater than they really are. (3) To
be more careful about personal comfort
and carnal case, than about the pleasures
of Christ and the interests of His kingdom.
(4) To be oblivious of our own best in-
terests. (5) To forget our character and
condition as believers, and to act in a way en-
tirely inconsistent with it. Toocommon forbe:
lievers to act in a way unlike themselves. In
a low state of religion this usually the case.
The wise virgins too often slumbering with
the foolish ones. An early Apostolic rebuke
to a Christian Church: ‘ Are ye not carnal,
and walk as men?’ Possible even for be-
lievers to act at times more according to the
flesh than the Spirit. (6) To act rather as
in a dream than as oneawake. The life and
conduct of men in general. Possessed of
deathless souls, yet caring only, or most, for
a short-lived body. Born for eternity, yet
concerned only, or most, for the things of
time. Possessing interests inconceivably
high, glorious, and important, and yet ex-

ending their time and energy on trifles.
Sentenced as sinners to eternal damnation,
but with the gracious offer of a free pardon ;
and yet under no concern to secure it. Under
the power of a loathsome disease that must,
unless removed, exclude them from heaven,
and shut them up in hell; and yet slighting the
freely proffered services of the only Physician
who is able to cure them. The endless
glories and felicities of heaven, with peace
and comfort in the way to it, procured at an
smazing cost by the Son ef God, and freely


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


CHAP. V.


ee


offered, along with Himself, for the imme-
diate acceptance even of the chief of sinners ;
and yet slighted and refused for the paltry
enjoyments of time and ‘the pleasures of sin,
which are but for a season.’ The testimony
of Scripture true: ‘Madness is in their
hearts while they live, and afterwards
ariel aes to aan dead’ (Kccles ix. 3).

e uage the Spouse an ex-
ample of the ig sad


Excuses,


made for not giving immediate attention to
the Saviour’s call, and the concerns of the
soul. Such excuses usually either — (1)
Want of time and leisure ; (2) The difficulty
end sacrifice involved—as, loss of worldly
favour, friendship, or enjoyment; the scoif
und ridicule of neighbours and assuciates ;
the effort required to keep up a religious
profession and attendance upon religious
ordinances, &c.; or, (3) The intention to
give more heed to the things of eternity at a
future and more favourable opportunity.
Such excuses foolish and unreasonable ; as—

1. Nothing of an earthly nature can for
a moment be compared, in pvint of import-
ance, with the concerns of eternity. ‘ What
shall a man be profited if he should gain the
whole world and lose his own soul?’ Well-
being for eternity obviously, with an im-
mortal soul, the one thing needful.

2. No difficulty involved in accepting
Christ and His salvation which His grace
will not enable us to overcome; and no
sacrifice which will not be infinitely more
than compensated. His own testimony true:
‘My yoke is easy, and my burden is light.’
‘ When I sent you without purse or scrip,
lacked ye anything? And they said:
Nothing, Lord.’

8. The present moment only ours. A
more favourable opportunity may never
come. Felix never found his ‘more conve-
nient season.’ With our salvation it may be
now or never. Delay only hardens the
heart, and makes salvation more difficult.

4. Persons of all classes, and in all cir-
cumstances and conditions, are continually
by their example shewing the practicability
and blessedness of receiving Christ and ex-
periencing His salvation.

Main truths suggested by the passage in
reference to believers :—

1. The carnal mind remaining in a believer
always the same, and as much disinclined to
spiritual communion as it was in his uncon-
verted state.

2. That in a believer, through the remains
of a carnal nature, which continually subjects
him to condemnation, with the increased

6—3


guilt arising from greater knowledge and
past experience of the divine mercy.

3. Only the unchangeableness of Christ’s
love, and of the Covenant of grace which has
been made with him in Christ, along with
the existence of a new and spiritual nature
imparted to him at conversion, preserves
the believer from final apostacy, and from
sinking back into his former state of car-.
nality and unbelief.


Love’s Conquest.
Verse 4


My beloved put in his hand by the
hole of the door,
And my bowels were moved for him.


Shulamite continues her narrative. The
Bridegroom, unwilling to take a refusal,
employs further means for obtaining ad-
mission. Inserts his hand, through the hole
made for opening the door in the inside.
The sight of his hand gains the desired
compliance.

Observe—

1. Christ unwilling to take a refusal on
the part of redeemed sinners, and especially
of His believing though backslidden people.
His patience unwearied, because His love is
unchangeable (Hos. xi 7—9).

2. A work of Omnipotence needed as well
for restoring saints as for converting sinners,
The hand to be employed as well as the
voice; the power of the Spirit as well as
the call of His Word. Preachers successful
because the Lord works with them, givin
testimony to the Word of His grace, an
confirming that Word with signs following.
©The hand of the Lord was with them, and
a great number believed and turned unto the
Lord’ (Acts xi. 21; xiv. 3). The Lord’s
hand also often put forth in Providence, when
His voice is not hearkened to in His Word.
The secret springs of the soul in the Saviour’s
hand. ‘He that openeth, and no man
shutteth : and shutteth and no man openeth.

8. Christ turns the heart, but employs
suitable means and rational motives in doing
so. The Bridegroom shewed his hand ; but
left the Bride to draw back the bolt herself
‘Christ puts no force upon our xzafure, but
upon our #// nature.’—Henry. His people
willing in the day of His power. God, ina
work of grace, does His part, and leaves us
to do ours. Believers to work out their sal-
vation, because God works in them ‘both to
will and to do.’ Theapostles ‘so spake that
many believed.” The Lord opened Lydia’s
heart, that she attended tothe things spoken
by Paul. The believing connected ab


a. v. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


speaking as its result. The Lord opens the
heart, but Lydia attends to what is spoken
{Acts xiv. 24; xvi. 14). Christ’s voice
raised Lazarus from the dead, but the people
were to remove the stone from the grave,
and then to ‘loose him from his grave-clothes
and let him go’ (John xi. 39—44).

4. Faithful preachers not to despond. If
one means or message fails, another may be
made successful. ‘In the morning sow thy
'seeé, and in the evening withhold not thine
hand; for thou knowest not which shall
ee “If the axe be blunt, he putteth

orth more strength.’ Sometimes a provi-
dence successful where the preacher has
failed.

5. Christ acquainted with the best means
of reaching the heart. Sometimes the least
likely means the most successful. The Lord’s
mere look bre Peter’s heart. ‘The mere
sight of the Bridegroom’s hand did more to
melt the heart of the Bride than either
his repeated knock or his imploring call. A
\preacher’s loving earnestness often the means
of moving the ¢arelese more than the words
he utters.

6. Inward motions necessary to outward
action, ‘My'bowels were moved for him’
(or, ‘in me’). The Spirit, in conversion or
restoration, acts upon the conscience and
feelings. The three thousand at Pente-
cost pricked in their hearts, and then cried;
Men and brethren, what shall wedoP’ The
moving of Peter’s bowels the turning point
of his second conversion.

7. The exhibition of Christ and His love
the most effectual way cf leading to true
repentance. ‘My bowels were moved for, or
on account of him.’ ‘They shall look on
Him whom they have pierced, and shall
mourn because of Him’ (Zech. xii. 10).
Preaching Christ, and Him crucified, the
readiest as well.as most Scriptural way of
moving mens’ hearts,

8. Great and palpable effects on the soul
under the Holy Spirit’s operation. ‘The
wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou
hearest the sound thereof.’

9. Believers able to mark and record the
operations of the Spirit on their heart, and
their inward experience in relation to Christ.


Tus Bripr’s REPENTANCE.
Verse 5.


Trose to open to my beloved ;
And-my hands dropped with myrrh,
And my fingers with sweet-smelling


myrrh,
On the handles of the lock.


Shulamite not only felt, but acted ‘I


: Al
rose to open to my beloved.” In matters of
religion, feeling valuable as it leads to action.
Such actions to be prompt. ‘ Whatsoever
thine hand findeth to do, do it with thy’
might.’ ‘I made haste and delayed not.’,
‘Repentance, when real, puts the most care- |
less on their feet.—Durham, So the Pro-
digal Son: ‘I will arise and go to my father.
And he arose and went.’ So the penitent,
Corinthians (2.Cor. vii. 10, 11).

A circumstance connected with Shula-
mite’s action related. ‘My hands dropped
with myrrh, &c., upon the handles of the
lock.’ Did she bring it with her? or did she
find it there? Probably the pnguage only
a poetic way of expressing the feelings of
sweet and joyful ardour with which she
hastened to admit her beloved, and anticipated
his embrace. Thoughts of him were now to
her in the place of the best sweet-smelling
myrrh. Observe from the passage—

1. No time to be lost in opening to Christ.
The Bride delayed and suffered forit. Now
shakes off her sloth and rises at once.
Christ’s call to Zaccheus.that to each soul:
‘Make haste and come down, for to-day I
must abide at thy house.’ The conduct of
Zaccheus to be ours: ‘He made haste, and
came down, and received him joyfully ’ (Luke
xix. 5, 6).

2. A special sweetness accompanying true
peniienee and a hearty reception of Christ.

hulamite’s hands dropped with sweetest
myrrh while attempting to open to her be
loved. Every act of faith and self-denying
obedience for Christ accompanied with a
sweetness and satisfaction unable to be found:
in the pleasures of the world or in the in-|
dulgence of the flesh. True penitence a
sweet sorrow. Myrrh bitter to the taste,
but sweet to the smell. Christ brings sweet-
His name: ‘ Ointment





ness with Him.
poured forth.’

Grace acts in order to move the soul ts
action. When the Bridegroom puts forth
his hand at the hole of the door, the Bride
must put forth her hand to open to him.
Believers to ‘work out their salvation, be-
cause God works in them both ‘to will and
to do of His own gcod pleasure,’

4. Nothing sweeter to Christ than a soul

enitently and earnestly rising to open to

im. Fingers perfumed that open to
Christ.

6. Grace supplied as the soul rises to
perform its duty and obey Chrigt’s call.
Only when Shulamite rose to open, her hands
dropped with sweet-smelling myrrh. Duty
earnestly and obediently attempted at the
Saviour’s call found both easy and pleasant.
The handles of the lock found perfumed
with myrrh. Delay accumulates rust, and
renders duty more difficult, .


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON. cuate. v.


LL


Tae DisaPromntwErt,
Verse 6,


I opened to my beloved ;

But my beloved had withdrawn himself,
And was gone.

My soul failed when he spake.


I sought him ;

But I could not find him.
I called him ;

But he gave me no answer,


, Shulamite’s delay has disappointment for
its fruit. Christ’s call not to be trifled with.
Duty may be attempted too late to be im-
mediately successful. God forgives His
sinning people, though He may see fit to
chasten them. Indulgence of the flesh, even
for a short time, may bear bitter fruit.
David’s short sin produced long sorrow.
Falls, though not fatal, may bring broken
bones. Samson, awaking from his sleep in
Delilah’s lap, ‘wist not that his strength
was departed from him’ Observe, in regard to


Divine Withdrawings,


1, These withdrawings real. A fact
stated. ‘My beloved had withdrawn him-
self.’ Such athing as God hiding His face.

2. These withdrawings such as to be
observed and known. © The Bride bears
testimony to the fact. She knew it. Be-
lievers to know their case.

3. Well for believers and others to know
when the Lord withdraws Himself The
saddest case for a man when God withdraws
from him, and he either does not know it or
pays no attention to it. Israel’s misery that
‘grey hairs were here and there upon him,
yet he knoweth it not * (Hos. vii. 9). An
ul sign for men when God’s anger ‘sets
them on fire round about, and they know it
not ; when it burns them, and they lay it not
to heart’ (Isa. xlii. 25).

4. The withdrawings of Christ, in the case
of a believer, the result of /ove. The greatest
sign of wrath when men are allowed to
sleep and sin on. ‘As many as I love, I
rebuke and chasten.’

5. These withdrawings in wisdom, as well
as in love. Wise as well as gracious
reasons for them. (1) To teach the sin of
neglecting divine calls and invitations. Sucn
sin to be seen and lamented (Jer. ii. 19;
Hos. v. 15). (2) To make His presence
more prized. The value of a blessing eel


known when it has been withdrawn.





misery of Christ’s absence to be sometimes
learned by experience. Lamented absence
better than slighted presence. (3) To prove
the believer’s 1ove. Love unable to endure
absence. (4) To render more watchful and
careful in the future.

6. Divine withdrawings the believer's
greatest distress. My soul failed (or fainted,
as Genesis xlii. 28) when He spake (or, al. His
speaking — at the remembrance of what He
had said). So with Peter (Matt. xxvi. 75).
The Bride’s felt calamity indicated by a
double expression: ‘ Had withdrawn himself,
and was ic The sweeter the past enjoy-
ment of Christ, the greater the pain of Ws
present withdrawal.

7. Inthe case of a believer, the joy of
Christ’s presence withdrawn, but not His
love. David mourned the loss of the joy of
God’s salvation, but not of the salvation
1 ES li. LP .

ther lessons from the pass:

1. The remembrance Pot baa nateits
slighted calls, one day the bitterest ingre-
dient in the sinner’s cup. ‘My soul failef
when hespake.’ Well when the remembrance
is here, and not hereafter. An awful word
to the rich man in hell: ‘Son, remember’
(Luke xvi. 25). One element of a true
repentance, in the case of hearers of the
Gospel, is the remembrance of a slighted
Christ. The remembrance of past guilt an
aggravation of present trouble.

2. Christ still loved by the believer in the
midst of His withdrawing. ‘My beloved,’
&c. True love made more ardent by the
withdrawing of its object. One of the
lessons of the Song. Realized in the
disciples after the Saviour’s resurrection.
The proof of a believer that he loves even an
absent Christ.

3. Better to follow Christ in sorrow, than
to live at ease in sin.

4. The more the soul has tasted of Christ’s
love, the more deeply it repents its coldness,

5. Means to be alent employed to
recover a missing Christ. ‘I called,’ &c.

6. The prayer of a penitent believer not
always immediately answered. ‘He gave me
no answer.’

7. A withdrawn Christ not immediately
found. ‘I sought Him, but I found Him
not.’ The Saviour’s threatening to the Jews:
© Ye shall seek me but. ve shall not find me.’

8. Sin often visited with a correspondi
chastisement. The Bridegroom h Balled:
and the Bride had not answered. Now she
calls to him, but receives no answer. Observe
in regard to


Answers to Prayer.


1, Answers to prayer, and the contrary, to
be carefully noted and recorded.


OHAP. V.


%. Prayers not immediately answered not
therefore rejected. Efforts not immediately
successful not therefore in vain. The pro-
mise of finding made not to search begun,
but persevered in. Believers’ prayers often
only apparently rejected. Never Da un-
answered without a greater benefit being
bestowed. Moses not permitted to enter
Canaan, but taken direct to a better land.
Paul’s thorn in the flesh not removed, but
more of Christ's grace imparted to him.
Direct answers to prayer often withheld for
the best and wisest reasons (Job xxx. 20;
Ps. xxii. 2; Lam. iii. 8, 44). Prayer often
answered by terrible things in righteousness
(Ps. Ixv. 5).

3. Strength and grace given a believer
still to pray even when no answer is received.
Such grace often an equivalent for a direct
answer. The greatest praise bestowed by
Christ in the Gospels on one who still prayed
earnestly after repeated repulses (Matt. xv.
21—28).


Tue Searcy axp ITs Resutrs.
Verse 7.


The watchmen that went about the city

“ound me; they smote me; they
wounded me: ;

The keepers of the walls

Took away my veil from me.


A painful experience awaited the Bride
on returning to herself and her duty. Those
who ahcald lave been for her protection and
her help, now add to her distress. Her
character suspected, and her veil taken from
her as an immodest woman (Ezek. xxiii. 25,
26). Her experience in seeking the Bride-
groom and the conduct of the watchmen
towards her, much more painful than in a
former search. The reason, ¢hat was before
marriage, this after it. The greater our pri-
vileges, and the higher the dares attained
in the Divine life, the greater the sin in
backsliding from and unfaithfulness to it.
Hence the greater the difficulty and the more

ainful the experience in returning to it.
he ways of transgressors hard, even in the


ease of
Backsliders.


Often the most painful of all experiences
vonnected with a missing Saviour, and a
backslidden state. ‘I'he very means of grace
and messages of the Word often an aggrava-
tion of the grief. Promises apparently
silent, and threatenings only uttering their
voice. The two-edged sword of the Werd
felt only to cut and wound, Ministers sem

86


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON,





only commissioned to smite. The backslider
apt to lose the character of the spouse of
Christ, and to be taken for a hypocrite. No
help now, for a time at least, received from
the ministers of the Word, as at a former

riod. No word now of Shulamite finding
fice beloved after only passing a little from
them as before. Different effects from the

reaching of the Word according to the con-

ition of the hearer. Ministers and their
messages only what the Master is pleased to
make them. Whena man’s ways please the
Lord, He makes his enemies to be at peace
with him. When the opposite is the case,
even his friends may be made to appear
against him. Nevertheless, the conduct of
the watchman unjustifiably rigorous, harsh,
and unfeeling. On the part of


Ministers,


the greatest tenderness due to backsliders
who are seeking Jesus sorrowing. ‘The
example of Jesus towards Peter. The bruised
reed not to be ruthlessly broken. An un-
tender minister a great affliction to an ex-
ercised soul. The ‘tongue of the learned’ re-
quired to ‘speak a ed in season to him that
is weary’ (Isa. 1. 4). Sad when ministers
talk to the grief of those whom God has
wounded (Ps. lxix. 26). The part of hireling
shepherds to thrust with the side and
shoulder, and push at the diseased instead of
healing them (Ezek. xxxiv.21). A sore cala-
mity to the Church when its pastors become
brutish (Jer. x. 21). False shepherds hunt
the souls of God’s people, making the
righteous sad, instead of binding up their
wounds (Ezek. xiii. 20). The reproofs of
ministers to be an excellent oil which shall
not break the head (Ps. cxli. 5). The truth
to be spoken, but to be spoken in love.
Ministers to be both plain and faithful, but
neither harsh nor severe. The conduct. of
the watchmen in the text realised in that of
the Jewish priests and elders in their treat-
ment of the spouse of Jesus after His de-
er to heaven (Acts iv. 1—3; v.17, 18,

3, 40). Thesame spouse not unfrequently
smitten by ecclesiastical rulers, as heretics
and schismaties. Church rulers to be them-
selves a part of the spouse, and so acquainted
with her exercises and temptations. Jesus
Christ the model of Ministers. Had com-
passion on the ignorant, and on them that
gre out of the way. Istouched with the feel-
ing of our infirmities. Having Himself
suffered in being tempted, He is able to suc-
cour them that are tempted (Heb. ii. 15; iv.
15; v. 2). Ministers to be not only lawfully
called, but spiritually qualified,


> ra a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; TUE SONG OF SULOMON,





CHAP. ¥,





Tos CHancs.


Verse 8.


T charge you,

O ye daughters of Jerusalem;

If ye find my beloved,

That ye tell him that I am sick of love.


Shulamite probably still relates her dream.
Receiving stripes instead of sympathy from
the watchmen, she addressed herself to the
women of the city. Such incongruities
natural inadream. The language that of—

1. Intense concern : ‘I charge you,’ &. A
kind of adjuration, as in chap. li. 7; iii. 5;
viii. 4; indicative of the unity of the poem.
Observe—(1) The soul seeking a missing
Saviour, glad to find sympatny and obtain
help wherever it can. Necessity neglects no
means. (2) Sad to find private Chvistions
more sympathizing and helpful to exercised
souls than the ministers of the Word. (3)
Backsliding makes a believer an inquirer
when he ought to have been a teacher. Guilt
seals a believer’s lips, which only a renewed
sense of pardon can open (Ps. li. 12—15).
(4) In darkness and desertion, others sup-
posed to know better how and where to find
Christ, and to have more access to Him, than
the soul who is seeking Him. (5) Young
believers sometimes found to have nearer
access to Christ, and more sensible com-
. munion with Him, than those of greater ex-
perience. The strongest believers some-
times in a condition to be assisted by the
weakest (Rom. i. 12). Times when the be-
liever feels unable directly to address him-
self as usual to the Saviour. Power to pray
not always present with the desire to pray.
(6) The duty and privilege of earnest
seekers of Jesus to request the prayers and
assistance of others. ‘Pride often the hin-
drance to the anxious soul obtaining peace.
(7) Communion with Christians often the
best way of finding a missing Christ. Be-
lievers to be able and ready to help others
to find the Saviour.

2. Shulamite’s language indicative of
confusion and distraction. ‘If ye find my
beloved, that ye tell him,’ &. ; literally:
‘What shall ye tell him? that I am sick of
love” Hardly knows what she wants, and
what message to send, or how to express her
feelings, A state of great perturbation and

erplexity natural to a soul seeking a loved
ed offended and inissing Saviour. Shula-
mite’s present case realized in Mary weeping
beside the empty tomb, and addressing Jesus
Himself as if He were the gardener: ‘Sir,
if thou have borne Him hence, tell me where


thou hast laid Him, and I will take Him


away’ (John xx. 14, 15). Neithe: knowing
to whom she spoke, nor what she said. Her
soul absorbed with one thought, and not
even naming the object of her search.

3. Her language that of ardent affection.
‘Tell him that I am sick of love.’ Formerly
said in the enjoyment of Christ’s presence ;
now in distress for His absence (cliap. ii. 5).
Love to Christ not dependent on present
enjoyment, or confined to happy frames.
Pursues Him when absent, as well as rejoices
in Him when present. Observe, in re-
ference to


Love-sickness for Christ,


That it is—

1. Natural and reasonable. This true,
whether the sickness arise from the over-
powering enjoyment of Christ’s presence, as
in chap. 11. 5; or, as here, from the painful
sense of His absence. No reason in nature
why love-sickness should exist in reference
to an imperfect creature, and not to the all-

erfect Creator, who has, at the same time
in His love to me, become my Brother.
Natural that the more excellent, lovely, and
loving the object of our love, the more
intense and ardent that love should be.
Love due from an intelligent creature
to the infinitely excellent Creator. That
love not to be a cold and languid, !uke-
warm and formal love; but one ardent and
intense —with all the heart, and soul, and
strength, and mind—with all the affection
which He has Himself implanted in our
nature, and of which He is infinitely worthy
(Rev. iii. 15, 16). The claims of a Creator
upon our most ardent love unspeakably en-
hanced by those of a Redeemer. An evi-
dence how far sin has blinded the mind,
depraved the heart, and deadened the soul,
that love-sickness for Christ is not as exten-
sively experienced as the Bible is read and
the Gospel preached. If the Creator, who
is love and excellence itself, humbling Him-
self, in love, for the deliverance and happi-
ness of His creatures, so as to assume those
creatures’ nature, and in that nature to ba
bound and spit upon, scourged and crucified
—is not ardently loved by these who profess
to helieve they have been the objects of suck
love, the only reason must be that what the
Bible declares about man’s heart is true, that
it is ‘deceitful above all things, and despe<
rately wicked.’ The day will declare what
every truly awakened and enlightened soul
even now sees to be true, that it is man’s
sin and shame that a creature should be
loved with greater warmth, and longed for
with greater intensity, than the Creator who
died for them; and that the sentence pro-
nounced by ihe inspired Apostle, an iy

i 8


be


CUAP. %


corded in the Bible, is just: ‘If any man.


uve not the Lord Jesus Christ, let ‘him be
accursed’ (1 Cor. xvi. 22).

2. Blessed and desirable. A love-sickness
according to truth and righteousness, and
sure to obtain its end. A pain which those
who feel it would not exchange, even for a
moment, for all the pleasures of the world
and sin during a lifetime. Ask Mary weep-
ing at the empty grave, and the woman of
the city washing the Saviour’s feet with her
tears. Love-sickness for Christ one of the
evidences of spiritual health. Good to carry
such sickness with us tothegrave. Death onl
welcome and agreeable to those who love an
long for Christ. Paul’s experience: ‘IT havea
desire to depart and be with Christ, which is
far better. To me to live is Christ, and to
die is gain.” Death necessarily gain to
the lovers of Christ, as it brings them to the
sight and presence of Him ‘ whom having
not seen they loved’ (] Peteri. 8; 1 John
iii. 2). One of the strongest proofs of
Christ’s love to a soul is to make that soul sick
of love for Himself. The prayer of Dr.
Chalmers that of true enlightenment: ‘O
God, spiritualize my affections: Give me an
ardent love to Christ.’


First Enquiry BY THB
DavcuHrers OF JERUSALEM.
Verse 9.


What is thy beloved more than another
beloved,

O thou fairest among women ?

What is thy beloved more than another
beloved,

That thou dost so charge us?


Greater tenderness and consideration
from the daughters of Jerusalem than from
the watchmen of the city. The people of
Jerusalem ‘magnified’ the early converts,
while the priests and rulers sought to put
them to death. The Spouse, in the eyes of
the daughters of Jerusalem, the ‘ fairest
among women;’ in those of the watchmen of
the city, a mere street-walker. That, in
Christ and His Church, revealed to babes,
which is hidden from the wise and prudent.
Hopeful and others in Vanity Fair attracted
to Christain and Faithful, while the rest
mocked and persecuted them. A hopeful
indication to discern the beauty and excel-
lence of holiness, especially in times of per-
secution and spiritual desertion. Observe
from the appellation given to the Bride—

1. Something especially lovely and beau-
tiful in a believing soul earnestly seeking
after a missing Christ. Grace in exercise
wakes the most plain-looking lovely.

2. Believers to appear in the errs


38


a9 om,


HOMILETIC COMMEN1ARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





world what they really are—possessed of a
spiritual beauty which exalts them above
others. ‘Therighteous is more excellent than
his neighbour.’ The Spouse of Christ the
‘fairest among women.’ The world to be com-
elled by a believer’s life and spirit to acknow-
edge the reality and beauty of true
religion. Christ’s preciousness and excellence
to be seen in the character and disposition
of His people.

From the inquiry of the daughters of
Jerusalem: ‘What is thy beloved,’ &e.,
observe—

1. Earnest search after a missing Saviour
often blessed to the awakening of a spiritual
concern in others. The ‘daughters’ especially
struck with the earnest manner and language
of the Bride: ‘that thou dost so charge us.’
Nothing more likely to impress others than
earnestness in seeking Christ. One living,
loving, earnest Christian may shake a whole
Church and neighbourhood out. of its
slumbers.

2. The world to learn from the earnestness
of believers that there is a preciousness in
Christ not to be found in anything else.

3. The world and mere nominal professors
of religion, ignorant of Christ’s loveliness
and excellence. This ignorance the reason
bis others are put in competition with Him,
and preferred before Him.

4. Serious inquiry about Christ often the
beginning of a new life. A hopeful inquiry
of the Greeks : ‘Sir, we would see Jesus.’

5. All have something as a ‘beloved’—
either Christ or something else. The world
full of Christ’s rivals and candidates for
men’s hearts,

6. Believers expected to give a reason for
their attachment to Christ, and to show His
superior excellence and claim to men’s
affection.

7. Christ infinitely above all other ‘be-
loveds,’? and supremely worthy of men’s
hearts ; as (1) More excellent and lovely in
Himself—the sum and source of all love-
liness and excellence. (2) More satisfying
as a portion, being more suited to man’s
nature and requirements. (3) More durable,
never changing either in Himself or His love,
and unable to be taken from us either in life
or in death. (4) More loving and kind;
having given the greatest proof of His love
in what He has done and suffered for us—
humbling Himself, laying down His life for
us, seeking us in our wandering, and beari
with our weakness and waywardness. (5
The longer and better known, the more
loved and admired. (6) Able, as bei
divine as well as human, to be loved wit
the whole heart, without danger either of
idolatry or excess.


——"


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


CHAP. V.


en


Sautamire’s Descuirrion of HEB
BELoveEp.


Verse 10—16,
SHULAMITS.


My beloved is white and rnddy,
The chief among ten thousand.


His head is as the most fine gold;
His locks are bushy,
And black as a raven.


His eyes are as the eyes of doves,
a the rivers of waters,

ashed with milk,
And fitly set.


His cheeks are as a bed of spices,
As sweet flowers;

His lips are like lilies,

Dropping sweet-smelling myzrh,


His hands are as gold rings,
Set with the beryl,


or cara Ao a is as bright ivory,
Overlaid with sapphires.


His legs are as pillars of marble,
Set upon sockets of fine gold.


His countenance is as Lebanon,
Excellent as the cedars.


His mouth is most sweet;
Yea, he is altogether lovely.


This is my beloved,
And this is my friend,
O ye daughters of Jerusalem,


In reply to the daughters of Jerusalem,
Shulamies ives a full-length portrait of her
beloved. The description one of enraj
tured admiration and affection. ‘ Super
tively glorious, and given in brief and com-

ehensible language.’ Rich specimen of
Driental poetry. Observe from it—

1. Believers able to give a true, if not a fall
description of Jesus. ve Christians well
acquainted with Christ, and able to give a
reason of their love as well as their hope.

%. Believers to be ready to make others

uainted with Christ. This their calling
and privilege. ‘Ye shall be my witnesses.’

3. The joy of a uring believer to testify
for Jesus, and to guide inquirers to Him.
*] will teach tzausgressors thy ways, and


sinners shall be converted untothee.’ Love
mus? speak of its object.

4. Better to be employed in setting forth
Christ’s excellence, than in dwelling on our
own defects or troubles,

,5. Testimony concerning Jesus to be borne
with heartiness and love. The truth to
appear not only in the matter but the man-
ser of our testimony.

6. Thoughts of Jesus, and the expression
of them, the best anodyne for a troubled
spirit. McCheyne’s recipe: ‘For one look
at self take ten at Christ.’ Confession of
Christ often the shortest way to comfort ix
Christ. Speaking of Him for others, a pre-
¢ious help to our realizing Him for ourselves.

7. Testimony to Christ’s loveliness and
excellence for others, to be accompanied with
a te appropriation of Him for ourselves.
‘This is my beloved,’ &c. Preachers to
@ommend Christ and speak of Him as their
own Beloved and Friend.

8. Christ’s excellence and preciousness the
best subject for the fellowship of believers
with each other. Believers thus to stir up
their own love to Christ and that of others.

9. A pre-eminence and perfection of
beauty in Jesus. The concentration of all
creature loveliness. The union of all the
elements of loveliness found in Him. The
sum of all conceivable and all possible beauty
and sweetness. ‘Thou art deicer than the
children of men.’ The chief (conspicuous,
or a standard-bearer) among ten thousand.
The one Pearl of great price. Natural that
the source of all beauty should Himself be
the perfection of beauty.

10, The happiness of believers to be made
to perceive, appreciate, and enjoy that beauty.
Eyes anointe i the Spirit’s eye-salve, and
hearts renewed by His grace, required for
that perception and appreciation.

11. The beauty and excellence of Christ
made up of a variety of particulars. The
holy perfume composed of various ingredients
(Exod. xxx. 34, $5). His offices, relations,
attributes, words and works, make up the
one Christ.

12. Everything in Christ excellent and
glorious in itself, as well as attractive and
precious in the eyes of a believer. ‘Alto-

ther lovely;’ or, ‘all desirable things.’
Christ an unalloyed congeries of excellencies
and delights. Every divine and human per-
fection found in Him, and nothing but what
is absolutely perfect.

13. That in Jesus which exceeds all de-
scription and all knowledge. The Bride
breaks off as unable to describe the beauty
argo ee
and le eight in Jesus
and Hic love, never to be fully comprehended.
The duty and happiness of believers to an


‘


CHAP. V.


HUMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





in the knowledge of Christ. All compari-
sons fall short of fully exhibiting Him. The
most beautiful and excellent things in nature
and art employed, but fail.

The description of the bridegroom in-
clusive of his dress and ornaments, as well
as his person. That of a youthful prince
eminent for dignity and beauty. Probably
such as Solomon himself appeared to the
eyes of beholders in the only period of his
reign. Corresponds to his father’s appear-
ance at a ive age (1 Sam. xvi. 12). Not
necessary to find in Jesus an exact counter-
part m every particular. Yet every part
suggestive of something to be found in Him.
‘The application to be made as the Holy
Spirit gives understanding. We have in


The Bridegroom’s Portrait,


1, His Complexion. ‘ White and ruddy.’
Fair and blooming. The perfection of a
beautiful and healthy complexion. Suggests
the Saviour’s general loveliness, as well as
His purity and spiritual health. ‘ Holy,
harmless, undefiled.’ ‘ Fairer than the chil-
dren of men.’ Recalls His spotless life and
atoning death, as well as the union of the
divine and human nature constituting the
one God-man Redeemer. His meek and
heavenly ‘visage’ not less lovely because, for
our sakes, ‘marred more than the sons of
men.’ His form not less beautiful because
bruised and lacerated with the scourge and
the nails, and ‘ruddy with His own precious
blood.’

2. His Head. ‘As the most fine gold.’
For excellence, a mass of pure and precious
gold. Perhaps including an allusion to the
golden crown which at times adorned it.
Suggests the kingliness and nobility of Jesus,
as well as His ‘excellent wisdom.’ ‘ Head
over all things to His Church.’ ‘ Head over
all principality and power.’ ‘In Him are hid

the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.’

3. His Hair. ‘His locks are bushy (or
curled and pendulous), and black as a raven.’
Expressive of youthful and manly vigour.
Jesus only known on earth as one in the
prime and bloom of life. His death at the
age of thirty-three. Jesus ever young. The
same yesterday, to-day, and for ever. Ap-
pears in heaven ‘as a Lamb that had been
slain.’ In another description of bis appear-
ance: ‘his hair white as snow’ (Rev. i. 14),
as expressive of His eternity —the Ancient
of Days. His raven locks perhaps symbolical
of His human, and His snow-white hair of
His divine, nature.

3. His yes. ‘As the eyes of doves (or,
as doves), by the rivers of waters, washed
with milk, and fitly set’ (or, ‘sitting in ful-

90


ness ’—in full streams). Suggestive of the
love, tenderness, and gentleness of Him who
was meek and lowly in heart ; who, ‘ when
He beheld the city, wept over it,’ and when
He saw the sisters of Lazarus weeping at
his grave, and the Jews also weeping, wept
along with them.

4. His Cheeks. ‘As beds of spices’ (or,
balsams), as sweet flowers,’ (or, ‘towers of
perfume’). The loving aspect of Jesus the
index of His loving heart. His countenance
ordinarily lighted up with gracious smiles
that cheered the penitent, invited even pub-
licans and sinners to draw near to Him, and
made Him attractive even to little children.
His benignant aspect made His presence like
a bed of spices to such as, like Mary, ‘sat
down at His feet, hearing His words.

5 His Zips. Like lilies, dropping sweet-
smelling myrrh.’ Expressive either of the
gracious words that proceeded from His
mouth, and which, as recorded in the-Scrip-
tures, have been the comfort of millions ever
since, or the sweetness felt in the communi-
cation of His love to the soul—‘ the kisses of
His mouth’ (chap. i. 2).

6. His Hands, ‘As gold rings (or cylin-
ders), set with the beryl’ (chrysolite or
topaz). The image probably from the rings
that usually adorned the hands of Oriental
princes. His hands themselves were as the
costliest jewels. Suggestive of those works
of benevolence and love—‘ wonderful and
glorious ’"—wrought by Jesus when on earth,
as well as those which, though invisible, He
is working still, as the Head and High
Priest of His Church.

7. His Body. ‘His belly (or body) is as
bright ivory, overlaid with sapphires.’
The tender compassion of Jesus, combined
with heavenliest purity. He who said: ‘I
have compassion on the multitudes,’ said
also : ‘ Which of you convinceth me of sin?”
*Yeare from beneath; Iam from above: Ye
are of this world; Iam not of this world ’
(John viii. 23, 46).

8. His Legs. ‘As pillars of marble set
upon sockets of fine gold.’ The marble
whiteness of His pillar-like legs suggestive
of the spotless purity and integrity of His
life, as well as His faithfulness and ability
to support all who trust in Him, ‘ His feet
like sockets of fine gold,’ descriptive of Him
who went about doing good. ‘ Beautiful on
the mountains,’ as the feet of Him who
brought glad tidings to a perishing world.

9. His Figure or General Aspect. ‘ Like
Lebanon, excellent as the cedars.’ The
majesty and stateliness of His figure, re-
sembling in its general character and aspect
the ‘goodly mountain’ with its noble cedars,
expressive of the amiable dignity of Him whe





j
4
(
M
|
}
F
j
}
!
}
;
}
f


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


a


THE SONG OF SOLOMON.  cuar. w





is both Son of God and Son of Man, the man
that is Jehovah’s fellow, the brightness of
the divine glory, while not ashamed to call
us brethren.

_ 10. His Mouth. ‘Most sweet.’ Recall-
ing the sweetness of the discourse of Him
who ‘spake as never man spake.’ Suggestive
also of the divine sweetness of that love
which is ‘ better than wine.’

The enraptured and magnificent descrip-
tion closes ‘with a holy admiration and
amazement which ends insilence.’ ‘Yea, He
is altogether lovely’ (or, ‘all of Him is lovely
and desirable things.’) Winds up with an
emphatic


Appropriation of the Beloved.


* This is my beloved, and this is my friend,
O ye daughters of Jerusalem.’

Commendation of Christ to others to be
accompanied with conscious choice and per-
sonal appropriation of Him by ourselves.
That choice and appropriation of Christ by
ourselves to be openly avowed while we com-
mend Him to others. Conscious interest in
Christ by ourselves, that which gives heart
and life to our commendation of Him to
tere The Bride’s language expressive
0! —

1. The believer’s personal apprehension
of Christ’s loveliness and excellence. ‘ This’
—the person I have described to you—‘is
my Beloved.’

9. Choice of Him in preference to all
other objects of attraction.

8. Appropriation and personal possession
of Christ-as our own.

4. Consciousness of such choice and appro-

riation. ‘My Lord and my God.’ ‘I
Gas whom I inte believed.’ ‘I know that
my Redeemer liveth.’ j

5. Unchanged and unchanging attach-
ment. ‘My Beloved,’ notwithstanding pre-
sent appearances. ‘Though He slay me, yet
will I trust in Him,’ and love Him. ‘I will
wait on him who hideth himself.’

6. Full satisfaction with and glorying in
Him as our choice and portion, our beloved
and friend. ‘My soul shall make her boast
in the Lord.’

7. A bold and fearless confession of Him
as the object of our choice, and the Saviour
in whom we trust. Christ not only to be
believed in with the heart, but confessed with
the mouth (Rom. x. 9, 10).

8. Christ at once the believer’s beloved
and friend— beloved and lover. The love a
mutual one. Christ, as


The Christian’s Beloved,
Is loved—(1) For what He is in Himself—


the ‘chief among ten thousand,’ and ‘alto:
gether lovely.? (2) For what He is to us,
Saviour, Redeemer, husband, brother, and
friend. (3) For what He has done for us
—given Himself to humiliation and anguish,
a bloody and shameful death, to satisfy, as
our sacrifice and substitute, the demands of
Divine justice upon us; sought us when we
were wanderers; won our hearts, and espoused
us to Himself as Hisown. That Christ is our
beloved implies—(1) Wonderful condescension
and love on the part of Christ, that sinners
should be able to call Him their beloved. (2)
Precious grace, that so changes the heart and
renews the nature that we can thus truly and
sincerely speak of Christ. (3) Blessed con-
dition of believers, that they are able to claim
Jesus as their beloved. Christ, as


The Christian’s Friend,


Is—(1) Loving, generous, and sympathizing.
(2) Faithful and true,—‘ sticketh closer than
a brother.’ (3) Unchanging—loving ‘ to the
end.’ (4) Rich and powerful. His hand
able to answer the dictates of His heart. (5)
Tried and proved—proved both by suffering
Jor us, and suffering from us. Performs ail
the offices of a loving and faithful Friend—

1. Pays our debts.

2. Redeems our person.

3. Supplies our wants.

4. Comforts us in trouble.

5. Counsels us in difficulty.

6. Warns us of danger.

7. Reproves and corrects our faults.

8. Confides to us His secrets.

9. Delights in our society.
. Entrusts us with His interests.

11. Defends our name and reputation.
12. Takes our part against all adversaries.

Christ a friend in need and a friend indeed.
Rich and blessed the pauper who has Christ
for his friend; poor and wretched the prince
who has not. A man’s highest wisdom to
make Christ his friend while he may. Happy
and only happy the man that can say of Him,
‘this is my lloved. and this is my friend.’
Reader, let this happiness be yours.


Szconp InqQuIRY BY THE
DavcGuTers oF JERUSALEM.
Chapter vi. Verse 1.


Whither is thy beloved gone,
O thou fairest among women?
Whither is thy beloved turned aside ?
That we may seek him with thee


Result of Shulamite’s description A a


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





beloved on the women of the city. Their


sympathy excited, and a desire awakened
partly to aid her in her search, and partly to
see 80 beautiful and excellent a person for
themselves. Shulamite supposed to know
something of her beloved’s haunts. Ob-
serve—

1. The faithful and loving tetimony for
Christ not always unsuccessful. Often made
the means of awakening in others the desire
to seek Him and become acquainted with
Him. ‘Encouragement to be ready to com-
mend a precious Christ.’ Good for preachers
and ministers to dwell on the beauty, excel
lence, and preciousness of the Saviour.

2. Earnest and loving seekers of a known
Christ likely instruments in awakening the
interest of others in regard to Him. A holy
zeal for Christ the natural means of pro-
voking many (2 Cor. ix. 2). Preachers, to
be of use in winning others to Christ, must
be in earnest about Him themselves, and be
able to commend Him both as the Friend of
sinners and their own.

3. One end of Christ’s dealings with His
people, that they may be the means of lead-
ing others to the knowledge and possession
of Him. The troubles and afflictions of
believers, spiritual as well as physical, often
designed for the good of others as well as
their own.

4. Every exhibition of Christ’s precions-
ness and excellence to excite the desire to
become personally acquainted with Him, and
possess Him for ourselves. Description not
to satisfy. ‘Come and see.’ Testimony to
issue in parcns! knowledge. ‘Now we
believe, not because of thy saying 5 for we
have heard Him ourselves, and know that
this is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the
world’ (John iv. 42).

5. Earnest seekers of Christ, bearin
faithful testimony of Him to others, n
likely to be alone in seeking Him. ‘With
Thee.’ Thorough earnestness sympathetic,
Hence Zech. vill. 20, 21. Apparent in ex-
tensive revivals of religion. The nature of
enthusiasm, like fire, to extend itself. One
heart kindled by the warmth of another.

6. Christ most likely to be found when
sought in connection with the Bride—His
living people. Good to seek Him alone;
still better to seek Him with others who are
able to help us.

7. ‘With Thee,’ an indication of the mys-
tical and spiritual nature of the Song ; other-
wise an unacceptable compliment to the
Bride.—Henry. Christ’s true lovers and
possessors, desire to see their number
multiplied as much as possible. Joy
in the possession of Christ by one, not
diminished but increased, by the possession
¥ Him by another. The Spouse of Christ

98


one body, consisting of a multitude of
individuals.

8. Earnestness required in seeking Christ.
ae pracy of the ‘ dau, pres arate

eir repeated inguiry: ‘ Whit is thy
beloved aaa ‘ ke nd

9. Knowledge of Christ and His ways to
be sought with a view to seeking and pro-
fessing Him. The inquiry of the women
made with a practical object: ‘That we may
seek Him with thee.’ An unpractical and
uninfluential knowledge of Christ of little
value. A knowledge of Christ merely ‘after
the flesh’ to be renounced (2 Cor. v. 16).

10. Believers expected to know where
Christ is to be found, and to be better
acquainted with His ways than other people,
so as to be able to guide them in their seareh

er Him.

ll. In regard to believers, Christ’s
absence only a temporary ‘turning aside,’
not a final departure. ‘In a little wrath I
hid my face from thee for a moment’ (Isa.
liv. 7, 8). The covenant made with be-
lievers an everlasting covenant. ‘{ will be-
troth thee unto me for ever’ (Hos, ii. 19),
‘The Lord will not cast off His people’
(Ps. xciv. 14; 1 Sam. xii. 22).

12. A soul never fairer than when
earnestly scores Christ. The earnestly
seeking spouse addressed four times as the
‘fairest among women.’

The inquiring ‘daughters of Jerusalem’
represented historically by the Greeks at the
Feast, Nicodemus, Joseph of Arimathea,
the women that followed Christ to the cross
and observed the place of His interment,
and by the inquirers on and after Pentecost—
* devout men dwelling at Jerusalem, out of
every nation under heaven’ (Acts ii. 5, 14).


Tus Inquiny AnswERED.
Verse 2.


SuutamitE, to the Daughiers.
My Beloved is gone down into his


garden,
To the beds of spices ;
To feed in the gardens,
And to gather lilies.


Shulamite continues her Narrative and
Song. Relates her answer to the inquiring
women. Suddenly recollects herself, and at
once and unhesitatingly declares whither her
Beloved is gone. ‘He is gone down to his
garden.’ Literally, Solomon’s garden in a
valley below Jerusalem, on the South Kast.
The allusion, however, probably to the Bride
herself, already called ‘ his garden,’ which he


-


~~


CHAP. V3,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


See SO = SS nee


had been invited by her to enter and ‘eat his
leasant fruits’ (chap. iv. 16). A delicate
int that the Bridegroom was expected to
be with his Bride, and to find his chief en-
Piney in her society. So Prov. v.
5—20. Christ the Bridegroom of His
Church to be found in the assemblies of His
ee le (Matt. xviii. 20; Ps. exxxii. 13, 14).

alks among the golden candlesticks (Rev.
ii. 1). Never absent from His Church in
Seen though apparently and for a time
rom individual believers. Observe—(1) By
commending Christ to others we often find
Him ourselves. (2) The spiritual darkness
of a believer often broken in upon by a ray
of light which at once removes his difficulty
and sorrow. Hagar’s eyes had but to be
opened to see the fountam by her side.
‘Mary!’ suddenly and in a moment turned
her sorrow into joy. (3) Historically,
Christ’s body, after His crucifixion, found
in Joseph’s garden, and His Spirit in the
paradise of God. The Bride’s answer sug-
gestive of what constitutes


The Saviour’s Joy.


l. The fellowship of His believing people om
earth. The Church His ‘garden.’ Separate con-
regations and individual believers His ‘gar-
ee Christ goes down ‘into His garden,’ ‘to
feed in the gardens.” Indicated in His call to
She Church at Laodicea : ‘I stand at the door
and knock; if any man hear My voice, I will
tome in unto him, and will sup with him, and
ae with Me’ (Rev. iii. 20). ‘ The Lord’s por-
tion is His people.’ ‘He will rest in His
love; He will joy over thee with singing’
(Zeph iii. 17). Thename given by Him to
His Church: ‘ Hephzibah,’ or ‘my delight is
in her.’ ‘The Lord taketh pleasure in His
people.’ ‘He walketh in the midst of thy
camp.’ ‘I will walk in you.’ Christ delightsin
His Church and people as a man in his garden
of fruits, flowers, and spices. Hence the re-
sponsibility resting on them to be such that
Christ may find in them the enjoyment which
He seeks. No unclean thing to be in Israel’s
eamp. The garden to be kept clean and
orderly forthe proprietor’s pleasure. Believers
to keep their hearts and lives for Christ’s
sake as well as their own. The Church to
purge out the old leaven of malice and
wickedness. To put away from among them
the wicked person. To keep the ordinances
as delivered to them. To see that all things
are done decently and in order (1 Cor. v. 7, 13;
xi. 2; xiv. 40). Believers to see that they are
bearing not only fruit, but much fruit. All the
fruits of the Spirit to be produced in them—
love, joy, peace, &c. (Gal. v. 22). ‘I looked
that it should bring forth grapes.’ ‘ My soul
desired the first ripe fruit.’ His complaint


that Israel was an empty (or yieding) vine
bringing forth fruit only : hiveclf hen v.
4; Mic. vii. 1; Hos. x. 1). Christ leaves
His heritaze, and ‘ gives the dearly beloved
of His soul into the hand of her enemies,
when it becomes to Him as a ‘speckled
bird’ (Jer. xii. 7—11). A lukewarm Church
or Christian He can only spue out of His
mouth (Rev. iii. 16). Believers to see
that no root of bitterness springing up
trouble them, and defile the garden of Christ.
Spices, as well as fruits, to be growing in
Christ’s garden. His people ani Churches
to be ‘beds of spices ’—fragrant and attrac-
tive, as well as useful.

2. The presence of His people in heaven.
‘He goes down into His garden to gather
lilies. Heaven a place of


Gathered Lilies.


Lilies, his believing people (chap. ii. 2).
Gathered out of His garden on earth for His
presence in heaven. Christ first trausforms
thorns into lilies, then transfers the lilies to
Paradise. A world lying in wickedness not
a place for His lilies to remain longer than
is necessary. Every departed saint a
gathered lily. The lilies enjoyed by Christ
while growing in His garden below; still
more when blooming in the Paradise above.
The lilies gathered in fulfilment of His own

romise (John xiv. 2). Preserved safe with
imself till His return, when He brings


‘them with Him (1 Thess. iv. 14; iii. 13; 2


Thess i. 10). Heaven delightful and attrac-
tive as the place of gathered lilies. ‘The
spirits of just men made perfect.’ Those
who have washed their robes and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb. Believers
depart to be with Christ. ‘To-day shalt thou
be with Me in Paradise.” Absent from the
body, present with the Lord. Lazarus
carried by the angels into Abraham’s bosom.
Christ’s lilies in heaven without a spot i

them. ‘Without fault before the throne of
God.’ Presented as a chaste virgin to
Christ. Faultless before the presence of His
glory. A glorious Church, not having spot, or
wrinkle, or any such thing. Holy and with-
out blame before Him in love. All like
Himself, seeing Him as He is. The former
things passed away. The blessedness of
heaven is, that it is free from all moral defile-
ment, The happiness of the glorified, not so
much that there is no more sorrow, as that
there is no more sin. Chirist’s people lily-
like here; much more hereafter. No re-
mains of the thorn in heaven. The flesh
carried to the grave, but no farther. The
lilies gathered for Christ’s own enjoyment as
well as that of His people. Each departed
believer an accessiun to the joy of heaven

93


CHAP, VI.





and of heaven’s King. Christ’s heaven to have


the hundred and ery and four thousand of


His redeemed around Him on Mount Zion,
praising the Father in the midst of the
General Assembly and Church of the First-
born the (Heb. 1.12; xii. 23), Hence—(1)
A reason why believers should gladly leave
this world. (2) A ground of sweet consola-
tion in regard to friends who fall asleep in
Jesus. (3) Believers not to grudge Christ
the lilies which He gathers.


Renewep Setr-DepIcaTion.
Verse 3.


SHULAMITE,


I am my beloved’s
And my beloved is mine:
He feedeth among the lilies.


Shulamite repeats in presence of the
Daughters the declaration of her devotedness
to and interest in her beloved which she had
formerly made to himself (chap. ii. 16). The
declaration possibly now also made in his
presence, at the conclusion of her narrative.
Perhaps the whole sung in his presence at
the Feast, or he himself comes now in view.
The language of exultation and joy, as well
as of devotedness and love. Observe—

(1) Faith and love ina believer never dead,
though sometimes in a swoon. ‘True faith
like wood rather than iron—if it sink, it will
rise again. A believer’s falls not final, ‘1
have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not’
(Luke xxii. 32).

2. Withdrawals on the part of Christ no

roof of abated love (John xiii. 1; Isa. liv. 8).
he covenant of grace too firmly established
to be broken by the infirmities of the flesh.
That covenant steadfast, because of grace and
not of works. Christ betroths believers to
Himself in faithfulness for ever, because in
righteousness and judgment, in loving kind-
ness and in mercies (Hos. ii, 19, 20). The
the way transgressors always hard; but
transgression unable to cast out of the cove-
nant of grace as it did out of the covenant
of works. God’s faithfulness not affected by
His people’s falls. The gifts and calling of
God without repentance or change of mind
on His part. He pardons His people’s sins
though He takes vengeance on their inven-
tions. Rebukes not only consistent with
covenant love, but a necessary part of it.
The Bridegroom bears with the Bride’s ill
manners is the wilderness, though He wisely


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





expresses His displeasure. Withdraws the
joy of salvation for a time, though not the
salvation itself.

3. The chastened and penitent believer
restored to the full consciousness of his
interest in Christ, and with that to joy and
comfort. Joy unspeakable in a conscious
interest in Christ and full surrender to Him.

4. Good for a believer frequently to recal
his covenant relationship to Christ, his self-
surrrender to Him, and his interest in Him.
Paul’s comfort in prison—‘I know whom I
have believed; and I am persuaded that He
is able to keep that which I have committed
unto Him against that day’ (2 Tim. i. 12).

5. Surrender of ourselves to Christ, and
acceptance of Him, the two sides of a chi
faith, ‘I am His,’ indissolubly connecte
with ‘He is mine.’ The two confirmatory
ofeach other. Interest ix Christ necessarily
follows surrender ¢o Christ. The conscious-
ness of the one bound up with the conscious-
ness of the other. Those fleeing to Christ
and closing with Him may safely conclude
that Christ is theirs.

6. The order of the two first clauses of the
text changed from what it was before. The
bride’s declaration of selt-surrender now first,
as having been placed in suspicion by her
recent coolness. So Peter, after his threefold
denial, must make a threefold declaration of
hislove. Renewed and open declaration of
our faith and love necessary to full restora-
tion to former enjoyment.

7. Christ’s presence, both on earth and in
heaven, among His lily-like people. ‘He
feedeth among the lilies.” His presence pro-
mised to His Church till the end of the
world, when faith is changed to sight. Christ
both feeds others and has joy Himself in His
Church and its ordinances. To enjoy His
presence and His care we must be among
the lilies. ‘Not forsaking the assembling
of yourselves together, as the manner of
some is.’ No mark of Christ’s sheep to
‘separate’ ourselves from the flock. The
happiness of believers to find themselves
among Christ’s people and in the enjoyment
a His ordinances. ‘All my springs are in
thee.

8. The text historically verified in the
disciples after Christ’s resurrection. ‘Then
were the disciples glad when they saw the
Lord.’ The language of Shulamite that of
Mary at Jesus’s feet — ‘ Raboon.,’ — ‘ My
Master!’ That of Thomas with his finger
on the nail-prints,—‘ My Lord and my God!’
That of penton Peter,—‘ Thou knowest all
things: Thou knowest that I love ‘Thee.’


Spe a oh eo ~





"
q
2
Ft
4





cur. vi HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.








Che King’s Admiration of Bis Bride,
Scemm Suconp, Places Tike Royal Garden, Speakers The King to Shulamite,
Verszs 4—10,


THE KING.


Thou art beautiful, O, my love, as
Tirzah,
Comely as Jerusalem,
Terrible as an army with banners,
Turn away thine eyes from me,
For they have overcome me.
Thy hair is as a flock of goats,
That appear from Mount Gilead.
My teeth are as a flock of sheep,
Which go up from the washing,
Whereof every one beareth twins,
And there is not one barren among
them.
As a piece of pomegranate
‘Are thy temples within thy locks.


There are threescore queens,

And fourscore concubines,

And virgins without number:

My dove, my undefiled, is but one;

She is the only one of her mother ;

She is the choice one of her that bare
her.


The daughters saw her,

And blessed her ;

Yea, the queens and the concubines,

And they praised her:—

‘Who is she that looketh forth as the
morning,

Fair as the moon,

Clear as the sun,

Terrible as an army with banners ?”


The king himself now appears, and
expresses\ his joy in and admiration of his
bride, notwithstanding her temporary cold-
ness. Perhaps found by her im the royal
gardens, where she had gone to seek him.
Possibly only her exclamation on the conclu-
sion of her song at the Marriage Feast. The
place and circumstances of the dialogue now
more difficult to determine. The application
or spiritual meaning of the allegory, however,
under the Spirit’s teaching, not difficult to find.
Among the truths suggested by the passage,
we notice—


1. Christ’s love not forfeited by His
eople’s falls. Shulamite is still ‘my love.’
Christ revealed Himself after His resur
rection to His disciples, who had forsake
Him and fled; and to Peter, who bad thrice
denied Him.

2. Earnest seeking after Christ sure to be
followed by a happy finding of Him. Fervent
longings for His presence succeeded by sweet
enjoyment of it. Faith in and love to
an unseen Christ sure of His blessing
(John xx. 29).

3. The penitent believer, seeking Christ
sorrowing, the object of His admiration and
delight.

4. Christ’s withdrawal from and silence
towards His erring people not of long con-
tinuance. ‘Ina little wrath, I hid my face
from thee for a moment,’ &c. (Isa. liv. 9).

5. Christ returns to His people in love
when they return to Him in penitence. No
upbraiding for past sin. Lays the lost sheep
on His shoulder, and returns with it re-
joicing (Luke xv. 4).

6. ‘The fruit of chastening after a fall cnly
greater endearment.

7. Christ’s views of His people, like His
love towards them, unchanzed by their falis.
Their beauty, on repentance, the same in
His eyes as before. Tie diamond a diamond
still, notwithstanding temporary sullying.
The beauty of nature fading; that of grace,
fast colours.

8. Beauty a character essentially belong-
ing to the Church and believers. ‘Thou
art beautiful.’ Observe, in regard to the


Church’s Beauty.


1. A moral and spiritual beauty to be
recognized, as well as a corporeal or sensuous
one. The former as far superior to the latter
as the soul and spirit is more excellent than
the body, and the divine nature is superior to
the human. Spiritual beauty, or the beauty
of holiness, a portion of the beauty that is
in God Himself; or rather is that beauty
itself. Holiness the divine nature and image.
Its essence love. That moral and spiritual
beauty the beauty of believers. _ Believers
renewed in the image of God. Made par-
takers of the divine nature. Conformed to

95


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


—


tne image of Christ, the perfection of
beauty. Love the essential feature in
their character, and that which distinguishes
the children of God. ‘Though I speak
with the tongues of men and angels, and
have not charity (love), I am as sounding
brass and a tinkling cymbal,’ &c. (1 Cor. xiii.
1). That love, embracing both God and
man, the sum of moral beauty, or the beauty
of holiness. Believers chosen in Christ
by God the Father, and blessed with all
spiritual blessings, that they should be holy
and without blame before Him in love (Eph.
i. 4). Beautified with salvation — salvation
from sin into holiness. The Church’s holy
beauty the delight of her divine Lord (Ps.
xlv. 10,11). The Bride’s beauty compared
to that of Tirzah, the royal city of one of the
ancient kings of Canaan, and afterwards the
metropolis of the kings of Israel. In Solo-
mon’s time the northern, as Jerusalem was
the southern, capital of Palestine. Its name,
denoting the ‘ pleasant’ or ‘agreeable,’ pro-
bably given from its situation or appearance.

9. A comeliness as well as a beauty
belonging to the Church and to believers.
*Comely as Jerusalem.’ Comeliness closely
allied to beauty. Conveys the additional
idea of pleasantness. The sweetness and the
pleasantness of beauty. Shulamite comely
~—pleasant to look upon and converse with,
as well as beautiful. In this respect also the
Bride’s beauty a counterpart and reflection
of the Bridegroom: ‘Thou art fair, my be-
loved; yea, pleasant’ (chap. i 16). A
comeliness, as well as a beauty, in holiness.
The one to be cultivated and exhibited by
believers as well as the other. Believers to
be, like Christ, not only loving but lovely.
Their character to embrace vot only whatso-
ever things are true, just, and pure, and
honest, but ‘whatsoever things are lovely’
(Phil. iv. 8). Christ not only the holiest,
but the most attractive of men, even to pub-
licans, and sinners, and little children. Be-
lievers to resemble Him by imbibing His
Spirit. ‘Learn of Me, for | am meek and
lowly in heart.’ ‘Love one another as I have
loved you.’ Shulamite’s comeliness com-
pared to that of ‘Jerusalem.’ Jerusalem
the city of the great King. Beautiful for
situation. The joy of the whole earth. At
first a stronghold of the Jebusites; after-
wards the metropolis of Palestine and resi-
dence of the kings of Judah. Its name—
the ‘City or Foundation of Peace.’ Mostly
surrounded by mountains. Compactly built.
Fortified by lofty walls. Adorned with palaces,
Beautified and ennobled especial: es the
temple, the peculiar abode of Jehovah, in
the midst of it. An emblem of the Church
in its unity and brotherhood, its security


and peace, and especially im its being the
96


THE SONG OF SOLOMON.  cua?, VI,





chosen habitation of God through His Spirit’
(Eph. ii. 20, 21). The Church’s beauty not
so much her own as that of Him who dwells
in her.

10. A terribleness as well as comeliness
in the Church’s beauty. ‘Terrible as an
army with banners.’ Something in extraor-
dinary beauty that awes beholders and for-
bids approach. ‘Terror in love and beauty,
not approached by stronger hate.’—Milion.
A deribleners in holiness or spiritual basa
* He perceived how awful goodness is, while
in its form most lovely.’ Terribleness and
beauty combined in the Church when enjoy-
ing much of the Divine presence and bless-
ing. ‘Kings of armies did flee apace,’
while Israel was ‘as the wings of a dove
covered with silver, and her feathers with
yellow gold’ (Ps. Ixviii. 12, 13. So Ps.
xlviii, 1—6). The people magnified the
Pentecostal Church at Jerusalem, while
awed by its holiness and afraid to join them-
selves ¢ its (Acts ii. 43; v. 13). Paul
terrible both to Felix and Agrippa. Be-
lievers walking in their true character as
kings and priests to God, not only amiable
but awful. Observe, in regard to


The Church’s Terribleness,
L The Grounns of tt.


1. Her holy and spiritual character. The
Church terrible through the heavenly walk
and spirit of her members. One believer, by
this Christ-like spirit, able to overawe a
multitude.

2. The presence of Christ, promised to His
Church and to Hts people individually. ‘God
is in the midst of her.’ ‘I'am with you al-
way.’ ‘Wherever two or three are gathered
together in My name, there am I in the
midst of them.’

8. The power committed to her. ‘Ye shall
receive power after that the Holy Ghost is
come you.’ ‘Tarry ye in Jerusalem until ye
be endued with power from on high.’ That
power exhibited—(1) In the Church’s prayers
and the answers to them. ‘By terrible
things in righteousness wilt Thou answer
us.’ The earthquake at Philippi connected
with the prayers of Paul and Silas in the
prison. The power of eae prayers to be
repeated in the Church of Christ (James v.
16—18; Rev. xi. 6). The smoke of the
incense, with the prayers of the saints as-
eending up before God, followed by ‘voices
and thunderings, and lightnings, and an
earthquake’ (Rev. viii. 4, 5). (2) In the
Chureh’s ordinances, and especially its faith-
ful preaching. ‘Strength’ as well as ‘ beauty’
in God’s sanctuary. Power with the Word,
both to convinee and to convert. The hearers


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


=


is ‘convinced of all and judged of all, and
the secrets of his heart made manifest; so
that falling down on his face he worships
God and reports that God is among you for
truth’ (l or. xiv. 24, 25). So Felix trem-
bled before Paul. ‘‘The weapons of our
warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God to the pulling down of strongholds’
(2 Cor. x. 4). (3) Inits discipline. A dis-
Hiatt power committed to the Church by
its Head,—to bind and to loose, to remit or to
retain sins (Matt.xvi.19 ; xviii. 18; Joln xx.
23). The Kingdom of God not in word but
in power. ‘I have judged already, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are
gathered together and my spirit, with the
power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver
such an one unto Satan for the destruction
_ Of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in
the day of the Lord Jesus’ (1 Cor. iv. 20; v.
8—5). Effects of the spiritual and faithful
exercise of discipline by the Church realized
from the age of the Apostles to our own.


II. The Oxssects of tt. The Church ter-
tible to her adversaries (2 Cor. x. 4). So
Israel in the wilderness (Deut. xxxiii. 29;
ii. 25; Exod. xv. 14—16; Num. xxiv. 5;
Ps. xlvili. 5, 6; Ixviii. 12). ‘ Satan trembles
when he sees,’ &c. A holy Church and a
spiritual believer the terror of the devil.
‘Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who
are ye?’ The Church terrible intheeyes of her
adversaries only as she is beautiful in those of
Christ. More formidable to her enemies when
arrayed in the beauties of holiness, than
when armed with Acts of Parliament, and the
sword of the civil magistrate. The Church,
when faithful, ever terrible to her adversaries
and to the world in general. ‘l'yrants made
to tremble by the constancy and firmness of
believers (Acts xxiv. 25). Mary, Queen of
Scotland, more afraid of Knox’s prayers than
of an army of solaiers. Attila overawed by
Leo and his attending presbyters. Sin and
ungodliness often put to shame by the zeal
and consistency of asingle believer (Heb. xi.
33—35). Christ’s weak Bride, both collec-
tively and individually, mightier by her faith,
holiness, and prayers, than the combined
hosts of earth and hell. Samson in his locks
of consecration and Nazariteship, a terror to
the Philistines.


TI. The Natur of her terribleness. ‘ As
an army with banners.’ The Church terrible
in her militant character as arrayed against
the powers of evil. An army with banners
terrible from its arms and armour flashing in
the sun, its numbers, its order and array,
its un‘ty ana compactness, its courageous
spirit, determined mien, undaunted aspect,
avd firm step; resolved to conquer or to die


q





CHAP. VI.





in the conflict. The Church of Christ terri-
ble as an


Army with Banners,


1. With Christ, the King of kings and Lord
of lords, as its commander-in-chief, the Cap-
tain of the Lord’s host, the Captain of our
salvation. The Church led on by Him who
has already ‘overcome the world,’ and
‘spoiled principalities and powers, triumph-
ing over them in His cross’ (Col. ii. 15;
John xvi. 33).

2. Marshalled under subordinate leaders.
‘He gave gifts; some apostles, some pro-
phets, some evangelists, and some pastors
and teachers’ (Kph. iv. 8—11). Every
pastor and Church ruler an officer under
Christ.

3. Arrayed with goodly order, and go-
verned by wholesome discipline. The Apostle’s
joy in beholding the ‘order’ of the Church
at. Colosse (Col. ii. 5). His direction: ‘Let
all things be done decently and in order’ (1
Cor. xiv. 40.) A Church with Scripture
order and discipline something terrible to the
world. -

4. Divided into various sections, Israel
marched through the wilderness in four
divisions, exclusive of the Levites (Num.
x. 14—28). One Church and yet many
Churches. An army composed of many
regiments, each with its own uniform and
banner, yet serving one King and obey-
ing one Commander-in-chief. Christian
Societies and Missions in the Church as
the battalions and squadrons of an army,

5. Animated with one spirit. Unity with-
out uniformity the order of Christ’s army.
One body and one spirit; one faith and one
baptism (Eph. iv. 4, 5). The Church’s ter-
ribleness seen and felt when its members
stand ‘steadfast in one spfrit, with one mind
striving together for the faith of the Gospel’
(Phil. 1. 27).

6. Furnished with suitable armour and
weapons. The armour of Christ’s Church
—the helmet of the hope of salvation; the
breast-plate of righteousness, faith, and
love ; the girdle of truth ; the shoes of the
Gospel of peace; the shield of faith. As
John Bunyan remarks—no armour for the
back. Christ's soldiers expected not to flee
but to fight. Their weapons the arrows of
truth, the sword of the Spirit which is the
Word of God, and earnest, believing, and
persevering prayer. Believers’ armour a
panoply provided by God Himself—‘ the
whole armour of God’ (Eph. vi. 13—18;
1 Thes. v. 8). The armour of righteousness
on the right hand and on the left (2 Cor.
vi. 7). ‘Their weapons not carnal, bul
mighty through God (2 Cor. x. 4). yy


‘e


cuar.vi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON





7. Distinguished by appropriate banners.
Israel’s host in the wilderness said to have
marched under four standards (Num. x.
14—28). A banner given by Christ to be
displayed because of the truth. His banner
that waves over His people, Love. Christ
himself set up for an ensign. Some of the
emblems on the Church’s banners—a Lamb
as it had been slain; a Cross; a Shepherd,
carrying a lamb in His bosom. Some of
their mottoes: ‘Behold the Lamb of God,
that taketh away the sins of the world.’
‘He loved us, and washed us from our sins
in His own blood.’ ‘The good shepherd
giveth his life for the sheep.’

The army of the Church composed of all
who as sinners accept of Christ asa Saviour,
and surrender themselves to Him as their
King. Every true conversion to Christ an
enlistment. Every genuine Christian a
soldier of Jesus Christ. Baptism and
Church membership a nominal enrolment.
The baptized and professors found in the
ranks of the world and the devil, deserters
from Christ. Professing Christians, with the
heart still in the world, traitors in the camp.
The Church, as an army, not only prepared
for battle, but always in it. Its enemies the
world, the flesh, and the devil. Their worst
enemy within—fleshly lusts that war against
the soul—the law in the members warring
against the law of the mind (1 Pet. in. 11;
Rom. vii. 23), The devil to be daily re-
sisted (1 Pet. v. 8, 9). The world to be
overcome by the disciple as by the Master
and in the Master’s strength (1 John v. 4, 5).
The world to be won for Cirist. Hardness
to be endured as by good soldiers. Perse-
verance in the conflict to be maintained to
the end. Victory certain. Every believer
already a conqueror, fully in Christ and
ee in his own person. The conflict

astens toa close. The crowning at hand.

The true and spiritual Church of Christ,
‘His body and the fulness of Him that
filleth all m all,’ the living embodiment of
Christianity. ‘That Christianity ‘no failure ;
not feeble, but strong; not vanquished, but
valorous and victorious; a spiritual power
in the midst of a godless world; working in
the early centuries, and during the middle
ages, and ever since; working in spite of
resistance and corruption, im spite of
violence and sophistry, in spite of errors and
pervers:ons ; often apparently imperilled, but
never really overcome; assailed, but im-
vincible ; warred against, but triumphant.’ —
Stoughton’s Ages of Christendom.

Christ’s joy in His Church not only from
her beauty and comeliness, but her ¢errib/e-
wess. Believers never fairer in His eyes than
when going forth in His strength to the
spiritual conflict, and fighting the good

98 ;


fight of faith. The Bridegroom delights m
coutemplating his Bride as an army with
banners led on by Himself as Her Captain.


The Church often fairest in Christ’s eyes


when foulest in the eyes of the world. Most
like her Lord when incurring the world’s
hatred, because testifying against its sin.
‘Me it hateth, because I testify of it that
the works thereof are evil.” ‘If the world
hate you, ye know that it hated me before it
hated you’ (John vii. 7; xv. 18).

The description in the text realized in the
Pentecostal Church to the present day. To
be go still more hereafter (Rev. xix. 8, 14).


The Bridegroom acknowledges the power
of the Bride’s beauty over himself, ‘Turn
away thine eyes from me, for they have over-
come me.’ Eyes mentioned as the principal
seat of beauty, and the expression of the
soul. The language of the eye often more

owerful than that of the tongue. A look
Pein Christ broke Peter’s heart ; a look from
Peter overcomes His own. The part of the
believer to have power with God as well as
with men; with God first, then with men.
The believer’s power with Christ in the look
of penitence, dependence, and prayer. ‘He
wept and made supplication unto him. He
had power with the angel and prevailed’
(Hos. xii. 3, 4). Christ unable to hold out
against the beseeching eye of the woman of
Sidon. ‘he pleading eye of the penitent
thief drew forth from the dying Saviour His
longest utterance on the cross. The eyes of
the Spouse like those of doves. The more
dove-like the believer, the more power he has
with Christ. Doves’ eyes overcome the Lion
of the Tribe of Judah. The proper character
of the believer’s eyes that they ‘are ever
toward the Lord’ (Ps. xxv.15). Not lofty,
but waiting on the Lord until he have mercy
(Ps. exxiii. 1, 2; exxxi. 1). Hence the be-
liever strongest when he is weakest. Paul’s
paradox: ‘When I am weak, then am I
strong.’ ‘The lame take the prey.’ ‘Christ
constrained by the earnest love of His depen-
dent. people (Luke xxiv. 29, 30).

The particular description now given of
the Bride’s beauty mostly a repetition of a
former one (chap. iv. 1, &c.). Lips, neck,
and breasts, only now omitted.

Observe—

1. The Church’s beauty a permanent one.
May, however, be more fully exhibited at
one time than another. The same parts
and features not aiways equally developed.
In the Seven Churches, some things com-
mended, and the want and weakness of
others reproved. The Church at Ephesus
ee for its patience and its works, but

lamed for having left its first love. Israel’s
love warmest at the earliest period of their





AOMILETIC COMMENTAR?Y: THL SONG OF SULUMON.





history. ‘I remember thee, the kindness of
thy youth, the love of thine espousals.’
Peter’s fall brought his love into question,
and perhaps for a time cooled its ardour.
‘ Because iniquity shall abound, the love of
many shall wax cold” Young converts to
preserve the ardour of their first love, and
so to guard against the chilling influence of
the world around them. Probably the
earliest and the latest periods of the Church’s
history those of its greatest spiritual beauty.
Believers to seek to cultivate a// the graces
of the Spirit. To be perfect and entire,
wanting nothing. ‘To pursue, possess, and
exhibit whatsoever things are true, just,
pure, honest, lovely, and of good report:
‘if there be any virtue and if there be any
praise.’

2. Christ’s love to His Church unchanged
and uncbanging. Speaks comfort according
to the requirements of her case. Assurance
of continued love and esteem needed after
reproof for undutiful conduct. So with
Peter after his fall. The charge to feed
Christ’s lambs and sheep renewed as often
ag he had before denied His Master.

3. Truth requires repetition. Believers
need to be reminded of what they have
heard, and to have their minds stirred up by
way of remembrance (Phil. iii. 1; 2 Pet. in.
1, 2). More earnest heed to be given to the
things we have heard, lest at any time we
should let them slip. Line to be given upon
line, and precept upon precept. ‘Truth not
easily imprinied on the mind so as to be
retained, recollected, and always realized.
The Spirit specially given to bring to our
remembrance whatsoever Christ has said to
us in His Word. Words spoken by Christ
to His disciples after tis resurrection those
He had spoken before, but which they had
either not understood or had forgotten (Luke
xxiv. 44). Words spoken by Christ must
be spoken again by Himself, in order to have
their relish and effect. Believers to be fre-
quently reminded of their proper character
aud holy calling as Christ's Bride, in order
to be the more careful to exemplify that
character, and to walk according to that
calling.

The Bride commended by the Bridegroom
as superior to all others. ‘There are three-
score queens,’ &c. Possible allusion to the
Ladies of an Oriental Harem. Something
similar in Solomon’s own Court at a later
period of his life (1 King xi. 1—3)._ Per-
haps only a comparison intended between
Shulamite and all other women, even the
queens, concubines, or secondary wives, and
virgins, or candidates for that poxition,
belonging toall Oriental Courts. Solomon’s
Bride attended by ladies of high rank.
King’s daughters among hus ‘honourable

j—3


CHAP. VI.





women,’ while the queen stood at his right
hand, accompanied by her virgins (Ps lv.
9,14). The comparison viewea wm relation


to the
Church of Christ,


Suggestive of—

1. The excellence of Christ's Church or trus
believers. None of all the queens, concu-
bines, or virgins to be compared with Shula-
mite. Christ’s ‘ little flock’ more beautiful
and precious in His eyes than all other mem-
bers of the human family, whatever thea
ee talents, or acquirements. -This,

owever, not from anything in themselves,
either original or acquired by their own
efforts. ‘By the grace of God I am what I
am. ‘Ye see your calling, brethren, how
that not many wise men after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble are called;
but God hath chosen the weak things of the
world to confound the mighty,’ &e. ‘God
hath chosen the poor of this world rich in
faith and heirs of the kingdom which He
hath promised to them that love Him.’
Christ’s chosen, redeemed, and regenerated
people His ‘ beautiful flock.” Made comely
with His comeliness put upon them. The
best and most gifted of unrenewed men,
in comparison to the subjects of His grace,
but as ‘chaff to the wheat.’ The saints in
Cesar’s household the true royalty—kings
and priests unto God. The true ‘Sons of
Zion,’ as partakers of Christ and His Spirit,
‘comparable to fine gold.’ Out of Christ,
men at the best but flesh, and carnall
minded. ‘That which is born of the flesh
is flesh. But the mind of the flesh is
enmity against God. To be carnally-minded
is death. ‘he carnal mind not subject to the
law of God, nor can be. ‘In me, that is, in
my flesh, there dwelleth no good thing,’
Apart from renewing grace, men have not
the love of God in them. ‘The character
of the unregenerate, that they love the praise
of men more than the praise of God; are
alienated from the life of God; are without
God in the world; and do not seek after
God, but mind earthly things. ‘The compa-
vison in tne text true also of the Church of
Christ collectively, as a visible and organized
community, im relation to all other bodies of
men, whether civil or religious. ‘True, not-
withstanding all the defects to be found in
the Church visible; but true in the degree
in which it approaches the Serijiural model,
‘the pattern showed in the Mount.’ ‘Tne
reason is, that the Holy Spirit is ever more
or less at. work in it, renewing men in the
image of God. ‘The abode of the Spirit in
the Church, from Pentecost, is a fact. A


succession of ages is presented, on all of


iiven in those
99


which the Spirit sets a seal.’


CHAP. VI.


ages, ‘overshadowed by ignorance and~


spiritual despotism, the light of the Spirit’s
presence may be traced amidst the gloom;
not only amongst those who stood apart
from the corruptions of Christendom, but
even in the heart of the Roman Church.
Faith, love, and purity may be found in the
lives of many in that communion ; connected,
it is true, with error and superstition, with
much that was foolish, and worse than
foolish; but yet faith, love, and purity
were there—all the more manifestly, in-
deed, for the evils and hindrance that
surrounded them.’ — Stoughion’s Ages of
Christendom.

2. The Unity of the Church. ‘ My love, my
undefiled is one, the only one of her mother.’
This unity farther expressive of the Church’s
excellence. Shulamite more precious and
excellent in her mother’s eyes than all her
other children, and in her Bridegroom’s eyes
than all the Queens, concubines, and virgins
united. Her excellence enabled her to stand
alone—one against ten thousand. Perfection
needs no help or addition, and admits of
none. The one diamond in the ring more

recious than all the stones set round about
it. The Church of Christ one in herself.
‘ Jerusalem is a city that is compact together’
—united or made one in herselé ‘One body
and one spirit, even as ye are called in one
hope of your calling ; one Lord, one faith, one
baptism.’ Apostles and other gifts bestowed
by the Church’s Head, «for the edifying of the
body of Christ, till we all come in (or into)
the unity of the faith and of the knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fulness of
Christ’ (Eph. iv. 4, 5, 12, 13). The Church
many individuals, and many separate congre-
gations and organizations, but one Church.
Its true members the one Bride of Christ,
united to Him by a living faith, and inha-
bited by His Spirit. United also to each other
by a substantially common faith; bya common
inward life, which is Christ Himself living
in them by His Spirit; by a common birth
and common nature, that of the Spirit, in vir-
tue of which they are all made God’s children ;
and by a common love, as, notwithstanding
all their diversities, brethren of each other.
Christ’s prayer that that unity might be in-
creasingly and perfectly developed and dis-
played to the world. ‘That unity much more
precious than uniformity in rites, ceremonies,
and Church government, and independent of
it. Exhibited in the Lord’s Supper: ‘We,
being many, are one bread.’


8. The greatness of Christ’s love to His
Church. Solomon’s love concentrated on
Shulamite. So Christ’s love in regard to


His redeemed. Israel loved by Jehovah with
a peculiar love (Deut. vi. 7, 8; Pa. cxlvii.
100


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


—





_—


19, 20; exlviii. 14). The Lord ‘loveth the
stranger to give him food and raiment ;’ but
loved Israel with the love of a Bridegroom.
‘You only have I known of all the nations of
the earth.’ The love of the Father and of
Christ to the Church, also a peculiar love. A
general divine love towards all mankind.
*God so loved the world that He gave His
only begotten Son,’ &c. A special love to
His Church. Christ ‘loved the Church, and
gave Himself for it.’

4. The undividedness of the Church's love

to Christ. ‘My dove, my undefiled.” Shu-
lamite’s love to the Bridegroom that of the
dove, distinguished for its undivided attach-
ment to its mate. Herself ‘undefiled,’ as
loving him with an undivided love. The
mark of Christ’s true Spouse to be able to
say: ‘Whom have I in heaven but Thee ?
and there is none on earth that I desire
besides Thee.’ ‘What have I to do any
more with idols ?? ‘ What things were gain
to me, these I counted loss for Christ:
ea, doubtless, and I count all things but
oss for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have
suffered the loss of all things, and do count
them but dung that I may win Christ.’
‘God forbid that I should glory, save in
the cross of the Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom the world is crucified to me, and
I unto the world.’ The whole heart sought
ph ee and yielded through His grace.
‘My son, give me thy heart.’ His com-
plaint against the nominal Israel: ‘ Their
heart is divided.’ The prayer of the rege-
nerate ; ‘ Unite my heart that I may fear
Thy name.’ ‘The part of grace to make the
double heart single.

5. Lhe smallness of the Church as compared
with the world. Shulamite one; the queens,
concubines and virgins many. So with the
true spiritual Church of Christ at any period
of her history. In comparison with the
world, and even with religious professors,
Christ’s believing people but a ‘little flock.’
‘We are of God, and the whole world lieth
in wickedness.’ Among the Gentiles, as in
Israel, the saved only a ‘remnant according
to the election of grace.’ The gate of life
straight, and ‘few there be that find it.’ The
prophet’s complaint regarding Israel ageneral
one: ‘Who hath believed our report ?? So
the Saviour’s own, as addressed to the mul-
titude: ‘Ye will not come unto me, that ye
might have life.’ The Gospel preached
among the nations to ‘take out a people for
His name.’ God hath ‘chosen the weak
things of the world to confound the things
that are mighty.’ Christ’s Church His
‘hidden ones,’ whom ‘the world knoweth
not, even as it knew Him not.’ Yet collee-
tively, a ‘multitude that no man can num


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


GHAP. Vi.





ber, of all nations, and kindreds, and 1
and tongues’ (Rev. vii. 9). avers
Shulamite represented in the text as an
shee of admiration and praise to spectators.
* The daughters saw her, and blessed her (pro-
nounced her happy)’ &c. The Bride’s beauty
and excellence thus strongly commended by
her royal Bridegroom, who extols her as the
object of admiration to those who might have
been her rivals. The New Testament Church
and converted Israel similarly spoken of by
the prophet. ‘Their seed shall be known
among the Gentiles, and their offspring among
the people: all that see them shall acknow-
ledge them that they are the seed which the
Lord hath blessed’ (Isa. Ixi. 9). Jerusalem
to be made a praise in the earth and a joy of
many generations (Is. lx. 15; lxii. 7). Israel
was to be an object of admiration and won-
der to other lands, on account of the wisdom
and understanding through the Divine law
which had been committed to them, and to
be made ‘high in praise, and in name, and
in honour above all the nations’ (Deut. iv.
6; xxvi. 19; Jer.xxxiii.9). A thing which
actually hee (Ezek. xvi. 14; 1 Kings
x. 8). So after the effusion of the Spirit on
the day of Pentecost, the people collected
from every nation under heaven, wondered
when they heard the illiterate Galileans de-
elaring in all their respective languages, ‘ the
wonderful works of God.’ Subsequently,
the infant Church at Jerusalem had favour
with all the people’ who ‘ magnified them’
(Acts ii. 6—11, 47; v. 13). The rulers,
‘seeing the boldness of Peter and John,
ac yalled: and took knowledge of them that
they had been with Jesus.’ The council
‘looking steadfastly on Stephen’ as he
stood before them, ‘saw his face as it had
been the face of an angel’ (Acts iv. 13; vi.
15). King Agrippa, hearing and seeing
Paul, ‘almost persuaded’ to become a
Christian. The testimony of the heathen in
regard to the early Christians: ‘See how
these Christians love one another!’ ‘They
are astonished who behold thy order.’—
Theodoret. Believers the living epistles of
Christ, known and read of all men. So to
live that others seeing their good works may
glorify their Father who is heaven. ‘They
magnified the grace of God in me’ (Gal. 1.
24). Men to see that faith in Jesus makes
believers not only holy but happy. Others
to be attracted to Christ by what they see
in His people (Zech. viii. 23). ‘Now I
saw in my dreams that Christian went not
forth alone; for there was one whose name
was Hopeful (being so made by beholding
of Christian and Faithful in their words and
behaviour, in their sufferings at the Fair),
who joined himself unto him. Thus one
died to bear testimony to the truth, and


another rises out of his ashes to be a com-
ae with Christian in his pilgrimage.’

he language of the admiring daughters
apparently given: ‘Who is she that looketh
forth,’ &c. Perhaps the exclamation of the
king’s female attendants, as they saw Shula-
mite enter the garden while they had accom-
pe him. The language, not of ignorance,

ut of admiration. That in the Church
of Christ fitted to awaken the wonder and
admiration of the world. The Church a
wonder in heaven (Rev. xii. 1). The
Apostles a ‘ spectacle to the world, to angels
and to men’ (1 Cor. iv. 9). In reference to


New Testament Believers,


The language suggestive of—


L Their Posture. ‘That looketh forth
as the morning.’ Indicates—


1. Deliverance and change for the better.
The morning looks forth out of the darkness
of the night. The shadow of death turned
into the morning. The case—(1) Of the
Church at and after Pentecost. ‘Ye shall have
sorrow; but I will see you again, and your
hearts shall rejoice.’ Darkness made light
before them. ‘The day-spring from on high
hath visited us, to give light to them that sit
in darkness.? ‘The darkness is past, and
the true light now shineth.’ At Pentecost
the light of the moon made as the light of
the sun. (2) Of believers at conversion.
‘ His going forth is prepared as the morning.’
The converted and believing soul goes forth
out of darkness into light, out of bondage
into liberty, out of death into life. ‘ Ye shall

‘0 out with joy, and be led forth with peace.”

elievers are children of the light and of the
day. Not ofthe night nor of the darkness.
Possess of the day-star in their hearts. (3)
Of the Church at the Resurrection. All
comparatively night with the Church till
Jesus comes. Her chief beauty and blessed-
ness connected with His glorious appearing,
when she looks forth from the night of tri-
bulation and the darkness of the grave. ‘In
the beauty of holiness, from the womb of the
morning, thou hast the dew of thy youth.’
‘He shall come to be glorified in His saints,
and admired in all them that believe’ (2
Thess. i. 10).

2. Cheerfulness and confidence. The face
not now hidden or cast down from sorrow,
shame, or fear. From Mount Olivet the
disciples returned to Jerusalem with great
joy. After Pentecost they ‘did eat their
meat with gladness and singleness of heart,

raising God.’ The council inarvelled at the

ee of Peter and John, and saw the

face of Stephen as the face of an angel.
Jeb


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





Believers having peace with God through
Jesus Christ, rejoice in the hope of the glory
of God, glory in tribulation, and have joy
in God Himself (Rom. v. 1, &c.). Conscious
enjoyment of God’s favour the health of a
man’s countenance. In Christ we receive
at conversion, ‘not the spirit of bondage
again to fear, but the spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba Father!’ Confidence
towards God a fruit of faith in His Son.
He hath given us, ‘not the spirit of fear,
but of love, power, and of a sound mind.’
The promise connected with the Lord’s ap-
earing: ‘ For their shame they shall have
Honble, and for their confusion they shall
rejoice in their portion’ (Isa. lxi. 7).

3. Interest in others. The law of Christ’s
kingdom: ‘ Look not every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of
others.’ Believers after Pentecost looked
forth with pity and concern on a world lying
in wickedness. Their calling: ‘Ye shall
be my witnesses to the ends of the earth.’
Preach ‘repentance and the forgiveness of
sins in My name toall nations.” ‘Freely ye
have received ; freely give.’ ‘The Gospel
committed to the Church for the world’s
salvation, Believers to hold forth to others
the Word of life. To look forth on the
multitudes with the bowels of Christ. To
go, in the spirit and steps of their Master,
to ‘seek and save that which is lost.’ ‘Lhe
world to be won for Christ.


Il. Their AprEaRance. A threefold com-
parison—

1. ‘ Fair as the moon.? The moon, with
her borrowed light, an object of beauty for
the whole earth she looks upon. Beautiful
when rolling on with unclouded grandeur.

‘So Homer—


—The moon, refulgent lamp of night,

she ae ache clear azure spreads her sacred
ight.

When not a breath disturbs the deep serene,

And not a cloud o’ercasts the solemn scene.

——The conscious swains, rejoicing in the


sight,
Eye the blue vaults and bless the useful
light.


Still more beautiful when her path is
through dark masses or patches of clouds—


The moon,
Rising in clouded majesty, at length,
Apparent queen! unveil’d her peerless light,
And o’er the dark her silver mantle threw.


Still more so, perhaps, in her virgin cres-
cent. So the Ghare of Christ, faithfully
reflecting to a world still in darkness the
light she receives from the Sun of lighteous-


ness, an object of beauty to men and angels.
All the more beautiful when her path is
through dark clouds of trial and adversity—
her usual course in this world. The proper
character of believers to be ‘fair’ in their
doings, dealings, and general demeanour.
To cultivate and exhibit ‘whatsoever things
are pure, lovely, and of good report.’ The
Church’s fair face to be soiled with tears,
but not with sin. Her character after Pen-
tecost (Acts il. 42—47; Heb. x. 32—34).

2. ‘Clear as the sun.’ The Church’s path
progressive. A refulgence belonging to the
sun above that of the moon. The New
Testament Church clothed with the sun,
while the moon is under her feet (Rev. xii.
1). The Lord Himself, the Sun of Righ-
teousness, her everlasting light. Believers
partakers of His glory. Even now the
prayer of Deborah in part fulfilied: ‘Let
them that love Him be as the sun when he

oeth forth in his might’ (Jud. v. 31).
Fully hereafter. ‘The righteoun shall
shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of
their father’ (Matt. xiii. 43). We shall be
like Him; for we shall see Him as He is,
When Christ, who is our life, shall appear,
then shall ye also appear with Him in glory
(1 John iii, 2; Col. i. 4). Believers to be
clear in their character, their conscience, and
their creed. Christ’s Church to be like
Cesar’s wife—above suspicion.

3. ‘ Terrible as an army with banners.” The
comparison to a bannered host already
made. The allusion here not unlikely to the
celestial host, the stars, as they appear mar-
shalled in the midnight sky, when ‘ He
bringeth out their host by number.’ The
third comparison probably taken from the
same class of objects as the first and second.
The stars, as seen in Syria, especially re-
splendent. Something overpowering and
awe-inspiring in the countless starry worlds,
varying in magnitude, brilliancy, and colour,
as they throng the deep blue vault of heaven.
The Church not only fair and clear but ter-
rible; and terrible as she is fair and clear.
Attractive yet terrible. Burning yet uncon-
sumed. The Church’s faithful ministers
especially, as stars in the Saviour’s right
hand. They that turn many to righteous-
ness to shine as the stars for ever and ever
(Dan. xii. 3). The whole regenerate Church
to be seen one day by an astonished world
as a countless starry host, of which ‘one
star differeth from another star in glory.’
The description of the Church in this verse,
and the kindred one in verse fourth, among
the most magnificent passages in the Song.
The distinction between the tw, that the
former takes its comparisons from terrestrial,
the latter from celestial objects. Perhaps
pointing to the “ ° ° between the


ee


1


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


CHAP. Vs





Church while militant on earth, and the
same Church when triumphant in heaven;
the former description concluding with the
simile of an army marshalled for battle
under its banner, the latter with that of
glittering stars peacefully shining in the


midnighty sky. Conflict first, then rest,
First the fight, then the feast,


“There they who with their Leadeg,
Have conquer’d in the fight,

For ever and for ever,
Shall shive as stars of light.”


PART FIFTH.


Married Life and its Jneidents.


Cuartex VL 6, 10—8, 14.


Scena Finsr.


Tue Krne’s Happiness IN HIS BRIDB.
Verses 11, 13.
SoLomon.


IT went down to the garden of nuts,

To see the fruits of the valley ;

To see whether the vine flourished

And the pomegranate budded.

Or ever [ was aware,

My soul made me like the chariots of
Amminadib.


The concluding part of the Song appears
to exhibit the mutual happiness enjoyed by
the married pair. In the words before us the
King apparently presented as expressing the
joy he experienced in the possession and
society of his Bride Exhibits, spiritually,
the delight which the Lord Jesus findsin His
Church as the Bride whom He has betrothed
and united to Himself. Husbands taught
to love their wives from the example of
Christ in His love to His blood-bought
Church (Eph. v. 25).

The present section given in the form of
narrative. As the Bride in the preceding

art of the Song related her experience, so


in this the Bridegroom appears to relate his.”


*I went down,’ &c. Not clear what parti-
cular incident is referred to, whether con-
nected with the King’s first acquaintance
with Shulamite, or his withdrawal, as related
by the Bride, or a visit to the Bride in her
own apartment at a time subsequent to the
marriage. The last the most probable. The
narrative possibly given, like the Bride's,
in a song at the Marriage Feast. In seeking
spiritual prey from the passage, may we
receive ‘the mind that hath wisdom!’ The
privilege of believers, in searching the
Scriptures, to plough with the Spirit’s heifer.
(Jud. xiv. 18). Observe in regard to—


- intended.


Place: The Royal Palace. Speakers: Solomon and Shulamite.


The King’s Visit.


IL. The Puace of the visit. ‘I went down
to the gardea of nuts.’ The walnut probably
Fruit with a bitter husk, hard
shell, and sweet kerne!. Formerly common
and luxuriant around the lake of Genesaret.
Probably the ‘ garden’ to be here viewed, as
in chap. vi. 16 and vi. 2, as a figurative ex-
pression for the Bride. Now a‘ garden’ of
nuts, as indicating a state of maturity, or the
Bride as a married wife. Perhaps exhibits
‘the Bride’s graces ripened by her earnest
search after Jesus.” The privilege of
believers to a{tain to a maturity im grace.
‘Be no more children.’ ‘Strong meat be-
longeth to them that are of full age.’ (Heb.
v. 12—14; Eph. iv. 13,14) The Chureh
of the New ‘Testament thus distinguished, as
a whole, from that of the Old Legal Dispen-
sation. So the Millennial Church in relation
to the present. ‘The light of the moon shall
be as the light of the sun, and the light of
the sun shall be seven-fold, as the light of
seven days” ‘The Church and individual
believers a


Garden of Nats,


as—(1) The fruit $s preserved safe ina hard
shell, Tie Church in the world, but pre-
served from its pollution and itsinjury. ‘I,
the lord, do keep it; lest any hurt it, I do
keep it night and day.’ ‘Tf will be a wall of
fire round about her.’ ‘Thou shalt not be
afraid for the terror by night, nor for the
arrow that flieth by day, nor for the pesti-
lence that walketh in darkness, nor for the
destruction that wasteth at noonday,’ ‘ His
truth shall be thy shield and buckler’ (Ps.
exi. 4—6; Jsa xxvii. 2). ‘I pray not that
Thou shouldst take them out of the world,
but that Thou shouldst keep them from the
evil? (Jolin xvii. 15). (2) Lhe kernel hidden
within the shell. Believers God’s ‘hidden


163


CHAP. VI.


ones.” Their ‘life hid with Christ in God.’
‘The world knoweth us not, even as it knew
Him not.’ ‘The Lord knoweth them that
that are His.’ (3) The fruit only reached
when the shell is broken. Trouble and afflic-
tion often the means of discovering grace,
Persecution often the occasion of bringing
forth God’s hidden ones. (4). 4 rough
exterior and a bitter husk, but a sweet kernel.
‘God hath chosen the poor of this world
rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom.’ Be-
lievers, while in this world, often like their
Master. (Isa. liii..2, 3). ‘Judge not ac-
cording to the appearance.’ ‘The Lord
looketh not on the outward appearance,
but upon the heart.” ‘If we suffer with
Him, we shall also be glorified together.’ (5)
Nuts composed of shell and kernel: the former
however to perish; the latter to be used
as food, or to propagate as seed. Believers
while in this world possessed of a twofold
nature —the flesh and the spirit ; the former,
however hard to overcome, to perish at
death, or the Lord’s appearing ; the latter
reserved for Christ’s enjoyment and service
in the new heavens and the new earth. (6).
Nuts require much time for ripening. Be-
lievers ordinarily kept many years in the
world for their maturity and perfection in
grace. The maturity of the Church as a
whole has, in the wisdom of God, required
many centuries, and is not yet attained. (7)
Nuts ordinarily the last fruit in the garden.
The Church of Christ to outlive the world,
and grace to survive nature, ‘The righteous
is an everlasting foundation.’ The earth and
the things therein to be burned up. To be
followed by a new earth, ‘wherein dwelleth
righteousness’ (2 Peter iii 10—13). ‘The
upright shall dwell in the land, and the
pertect shall remain in it; but the wicked
shall be cut off from the earth, and the
transgressors shall be rooted out of it’
(Prov. ii. 21, 22).

Observe further in regard to the king’s
visit to the garden—

1. Christ seeks pleasure in His Church as a
man tn his garden. ‘This is my rest for
ever, for I have desired it.’ The Church
named by Himself—Hephzibah,—‘ My de-
light is in her” If any man hear my voice
and open the door, I will come in and sup
with him and he with Me’ (Rev. iii. 20).

2. Unspeakable condescension in Christ's
visits to His Church. ‘I went down.’ His
visits a coming down from the heights of
glory to asinful world The Lord of glory
visiting a worm. He humbles Himself even
to ‘behold the things that are in heaven;’
yet comes down to earth to raise up the poor
out of the dust, and to lift the needy out of
the dung-hill (Ps. cxiii. 6, 7).

oo believers Christ's especial plea-

4





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.








sure. ‘I went down to the garden of nuts.’
The promise—‘I will dwell in them and
walk in them,’ connected with al he
—‘Come out from among them, be ye
separate, and touch not the unclean thing’
(2 Cor. vi. 16, 17). ‘The Lord taketh
pleasure in them that fear Him, in those
that hope in His mercy. He will beautify
the meek with salvation’ (Pa. exlvii. 11;
exlix. 4; xxxvii. 23).


Il. The Oszzcr of the visit. ‘To see the
fruits of the valley,’ &c. A valley low in
situation and generally fertilized by a stream
of water; hence suitable for a garden.
Christ’s Church lowly in her condition in
respect to this world. ‘Not many mighty,’
&c. Lowliness of spirit the proper character
of His people. ‘Learn of me, for [ am
meek ie lowly in heart.’ Christ’s Church
well watered. ‘I will water it every mo-
ment.’ Sheltered as well as watered. ‘The
city shall be low in alow place.’ Observe—
(1) Christ's delight to see the spiritual fruits
of His Church. ‘Herein is my Father glo-
rified that ye bear much fruit: so shall ye
be my disciples.’ ‘My soul desired the first
ripe fruits.’ (2) Christ careful im observing
the spiritual condition and progress of His
Church, ‘To see whether the vine flourished
and the pax hewn budded.’ Fruit ex-


pected. ‘I looked that it should bring forth
grapes.’ ‘These three yearsI come seeki
fruit.’ The first declaration in each o:


Christ’s letters to the Seven Churches: ‘I
know Thy works.’ This followed by a de-
scription of their condition, The spiritual
condition of congregations and individual
believers carefully noted. Growth and pro-
ess looked for. The Church and the
eliever’s soul to be like Aaron’s rod that
‘budded, and blossomed, and bare almonds.’
(3) Grace found in different stages—the bud,
the blossom, and the fruit. ‘ First the blade,
then the ear, and then the full corn in the
ear.’ The ‘bud’ precious in Christ’s eyes
as well as the fruit. ‘Feed my lambs,’
first charge to Peter. The day of small
things not despised. (4) Different kinds of
Sruit in Christ's garden. Nuts, grapes, and
pomegranates, Love, joy, peace, long-
suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meek-
ness, temperance. Passive as well as active
virtues. The child’s docility, the maiden’s
purity, the confessor’s boldness, and the
martyr’s patience. (6) Different charae-
teristics and types among believers. Nut-trese,
vines, and pomegranates, ‘Sons of consola-
tion ’and ‘sons of thunder.’ Varieties found
in the Church which are due not to the de
ee of grace, but to the nataral character,
Gonsutate differences of individual cha-


racter, not extinguished er suppressed by


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


grace, but hallowed and employed for different
purposes in the Kingdom of God. Marthas
as well as Marys, Jameses as well as Johns
required in the Church of Christ.


Ill. The Resvrt of the visit. ‘Or ever I
was aware, &c. Apparently expressive of
speedy, sudden, and unexpected delight.

he king’s expectation quickly, suddenly,
and more than gratified. Christ’s desire for
fruit and enjoyment in His blood-bought
Vhureh fully and speedily realized on and
after the Day of Pentecost (Acts ii. 1, 2,
41—47; iv. 31—37; v. 12, 14, 41, 42).
The glorious change wrought on the New
Testament Church the immediate result of
the outpoured Spirit who, ten days after
Christ’s ascension, came suddenly as a
‘mighty rushing wind’ that ‘filled all the
house where they were sitting.’ The ‘cha-
riots of Amminadib’ probably distinguished
for the speed at which they were driven.
‘Amminadib’ possibly the name of a well-
known charioteer. The meaning of the
name—My willing, liberal, noble, or princely
people. May point to the love and devoted-
ness of the Pentecostal Church, when none
of them said ‘that ought of the things
which he professed was his own ;’ and when,
in the ardour of their love to one another,
and their consecration to the Saviour’s
cause, they ‘sold their possessions and goods
and parted them to all men, as every man ha
need’ (Acts ii. 45; iv. 32). A fulfilment
of the text also possibly in the boldness and
zeal of the Apostles and primitive Church, in
testifying for Christ and preaching His
Gospel in the world according to His last
and great commission: ‘Go ye unto all
the world,’ &c. From the text we may
ebserve—

1. Christ's affections moved by the eontem-
elation of His people’s graces. More especially
—(1) Their earnestness in seeking Him
when absent, as Shulamite had previous
sought her absent Bridegroom. (2) Their
penitence for past indifference and unfaithful-
ness. (3) Their love in commending Him to
others. (4) Their zeal in carrying out His
wishes in regard to the world. carte ek
for a time at least fulfilled in the New
Testament Church, in their love to one
another, their obedience to His word, and
their devotedness to His service. Christ
glorified in His saints. Moved with an in-
tensity of feeling towards His people. ‘ As
the Bridegroom rejoiceth over the Bride, so
will the Lord thy God rejoice over thee’
(Isa. lxii. 5). His joy over them in propor-
tion as they show themselves His ‘willing
people.” This their proper character (Ps.
ex. 3; 2 Cor. viii. 5).

2. Christ’s people to be Hts chariot in con-


CHAP. VI.





veying the Gospel, and in winning others to
His side. The Gospel the chariot in which
Christ goes forth with His bow in His hand,
‘conquering and to conquer’ (Rev. vi. 2).
His people in general, and preachers in par-
ticular, the bearers of that Gospel, both at
home and abroad. Hence His ‘ battle-axe
and weapons of war’ for breaking in pieces
the nations (Jer. li. 20—25).

3. The cause of Christ's joy tn His people
JSrom and within Himself. ‘My soul made
me like (or simply ‘made me’) the cha-
riots,’ &. His own ‘soul’ rather than any-
thing really in them. ‘The believer has a
notable friend in Christ’s own bosom.—Dur-
ham. ‘Of Me isthy fruit found.’ ‘Ye have
not chosen Me, but I have chosen you, and
ordained you that ye should go and bring
forth fruit? (John xv. 16).

4. The privilege and happiness of Christ's
Saithful and willing people that they are mada
His Joy. ‘These things have I spoken unto
you, that my joy might remain in you, and
that your joy might be full’ (John xv, 11).


Tue Catt ro SxvuLamrs.
Verse 18.


Return, return, O, Shulamite;
Return, return ;
That we may look upon thee.


Probably the language of the King, speak-
ing in the plural as in chap. i. 11, perhaps
as being attended by companions. pres-
sive of admiration of Shulamite’s beauty, and
ardent desire for her presence and society.
Shulamite, though entreated to return, sup-
posed to be near enough to answer the ait


‘What will ye see in the ShulamiteP’? Her
attempted flight from the King, from what-
ever cause, supposed in the Probably


from conscious unworthiness, as indicated in
her answer, ‘What will ye see?? &c. The
reference in the words, and their connection
with the preceding, obscure. Clearer on the
supposition of the king relating his first
meeting with his future Bride. Perhaps the
allusion to the Bride’s own narrative. The
spiritual Sve of the words little
affected by the obscurity of the reference.
The allegorical meaning, the principal matter,
sufficiently obvious. Similar language too
frequently addressed through the prophets
by the heavenly Bridegroom to His ancient
Church, The text in harmony with such

assages as Jer. ili. 1, ]12—14, 20—22; iv.
i v. 23; xxxi. 22. Hos. xii. 6; xiv. 1
Joel ii. 138; Zech. i. 3. May be viewed there-
fore as a prophetic intimation—(1) of Israel’s
departure from the Lord in the time of
the kings, as well as in that of the ete

10


cuar. Vi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





and of the earnestness with which the Lord,
first by His prophets, then by Himself
personally in the flesh, and subsequently by
His Apostles and servants, sought to bring
back His backslidden people. ‘The Gospel
to be first preached in Jerusalem and to the
Jewish nation, Christ’s personal call and
that of His forerunner: ‘Repent.? ‘O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem! how often would I
have gatiiered thy children together as a hen
gathereth her chickens under her wings !?
The Apostles’ call to the same people:
‘Repent and be converted.’ (2) Of the same
tendency in the New Testament Church.
A similiar call on the part of the Bride-


groom heard in most of the Epistles to the -


Seven Churches. Because iniquity should
abound, the love of many should wax cold.
The caution as necessary for the New Testa-
ment Church as for the Old: ‘Take heed lest
there be in any of you an evil heart of unbe-
lief in departing from the living God.’ The
Epistle to the Hebrews written especially to
guard the Hebrew Christians from backslid-
ing and apostacy. Paul’s Epistle to the
Churches of Galatia indicative of a similar
danger: ‘O foolish Galatians, who hath be-
witched you, that ye should not obey the
truth ? ‘ Be not again entangled in the yoke
of bondage.’ ‘1 marvel that ye are so soon
removed from Him that called you into the
grace of Christ unto another Gospel.’ ‘Ye
did run well: who did hinder you that ye
should not obey the truth.’ Practical as well
as doctrinal departures even then to be
mourned over. ‘Demas hath forsaken me,
having loved this present world.’ Observe in
regard to the


Call to Return.


I. The Party called. ‘O Shulamite.’
Different significations assigned to the name.
(1) Bride of Solomon; the name viewed as
the feminine form of Solomon. The Bride
thus named from her husband. ‘So Christ’s
new name to be written upon His faithful
people (Rev. iii. 12), ‘Disciples called
‘Christians’ or ‘Christ’s people.’ ‘The same
name given to both the heavenly Bridegroom
and the Bride: ‘The Lord our righteous-
ness’ (Jer. xxill. 6; xxxili. 16). (2) One
who has been reconciled, or has obtained peace.
As Solomon is ‘The Peaceful,’ or ‘The
Peace-giver ;? so Shulamite, ‘The Pacified,’
or ‘The Peace - receiver.’ ‘Justified by
faith we have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ.’ ‘He is our peace,’
‘having made peace through the blood of
His cross; and you hath He reconciled
in the body of His flesh through death?
Rom. v. 1; Eph. ii. 14; Col. i. 20, 22). (3)
The perfect One. So chap. iv. 7; vi, 9.

106


Tsrael’s beauty said to have been ‘perfect *


through Jehovah’s comeliness put upon her
(Ezek. xvi. 14). Believers complete in
Christ. Called to be perfect as God is per-
fect; to be ‘perfect and entire, wanting
nothing ;’ to ‘stand perfect and complete in
all the will of God’ (4) An inhabitant of
Salem or Jerusalem (Ps. |xxvi. 2). The Bride
made such by her union with Solomon. Be-
lievers, through union with Christ, made
citizens of the new and heavenly Jerusalem—
the Jerusalem which is above. ‘Their citi-
zenship in heaven, from whence they look for
the Saviour (Phil iii, 19: Heb. xii. 22; Rev.
iii. 12; Gal. iv. 23). Jerusalem also literally
the birthplace of the New Testament Church,
which had its first meetings in that city, and
began from thence to publish the glad tidings
of salvation and peace to the world (Luke
xxiv. 47; Isa. xl. 9). (5) Hyuivalent to
Shulamite, or an inhabitant of Shunem, early
known as Sulem, and corresponding with the
present So/am, a village about three miles
north of Jezreel. ‘The Bride thus apparently
identified with Abishag (1 Kings 1. 3), and
reminded of her native home and humble
origin. Believers not to forget the ‘hole of
the pit’ from whence they were taken, and
the dust and dungutill from which rich and
sovereign grace stooped to lift them, in order
to ‘set them among princes and make them
inherit the throne of glory’ (1 Sam. ii. 8;
Ps. exiii..7, 8; Isa. li. 1). The text, viewed
as Christ’s call to His timid, down-cast and
backslidden people, thus given in the greatest
tenderness and ee as to those whom He
has already espoused to Himself. Reminds
them of their abiding union with and interest
in Him. Like that to Israel: ‘ Turn O back-
sliding children, saith the Lord; for | am
married to you’ (Jer. iii. 14). The bond
that unites Christ’s people to Himself indis-
soluble. ‘I have loved thee with an ever-
lasting love ; therefore, with loving kindness
have I drawn thee.’ ‘I will betroth thee


unto Me for ever’ (Jer. xxxi. 3; Hos, ii. .


19).


Il. The Catt itself. ‘Return. The call,
as addressed to Shulamite, not merely appli-
cable to Solomon’s first meeting with her.
Her own narrative indicative of its subse-

uent appropriateness. Man’s return to
God the aim of all Divine revelation and the
economy of redemption. Sin and the fall a
departure from God. ‘The first act of our
fallen parents symbolical of the moral state
into which the fall brought mankind —a
fleeing from our Maker. ‘The tendency in
man’s fallen nature continually to do the
same. Man now by nature actually in a state
of departure and apostasy from God. The
Bible a continuous cali to men to return to





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SULUMON.


CHAP. VI.


rrr pe


Him from whom they have revolted. Christ’s
redeemed Church naturally in this state of
> is from God in common with others.

he object of Christ to bring her back from
her wandering. ‘1 came not call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance.’ Hence the para-
bles of the Lost Sheep, the Lost Piece of
ney and the Prodigal Son. Every con-
verted soul an example of obedience to the
eall in the text. The Gospel call: ‘Turn ye,
turn ye; for why will ye die?’ ‘Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous
man his thoughts; and let him return unto
the Lord, for He will have mercy upon him.’
‘Come unto Me all ye that labour and are
heavy laden; and I will give you rest.’ Same
proneness to depart from God in the carnal
nature still remaining in the believer. Con-
stant tendency to backslide. The tendency
too often selded to. Believers not unfre-
tpn in a backslidden state. The first of
the Seven Epistles of the ascended Saviour
a reproof for having left ‘first love,’ and a
call to ‘repent and do the first works.’ The
last of them a similar call to ‘be zealous
and repent.’ Cowper’s lament too frequently
to be made by Christ’s Bride: ‘ Where is
the blessedness I knew, when first I saw the
Lord?’ Believers, like Peter, often requiring
a second conversion. As addressed to be-
lievers, the call in the text to—(1) The
ardour of first love. So the call to the
Church at Ephesus (Rev. ii. 4, 5). (2)
Renewed zeal in His service. ‘Do the first
works’ (Rev. ii. 5). (8) To a holy and
Christlike life. (4) To closeness of walk
with God and with Jesus Christ. The
nature of sin to cause coolness and distance
between the soul and God. (5) To the
peace and comfort formerly enjoyed. David’s
sin cost him broken bones and sleepless
nights. The joy of God’s salvation lost
through fobsludsne: though the salvation
itself is not (Ps. li. 8, 12).


__ IIL. The Manner of the Call. Indicated
in the fourfold repetition of the same word :
‘Return.’ Intimates—


1. Its earnestness. Like the Call in Eze-
kiel: ‘Turn ye, turn ye; for why will ye
die? Yet even that double call here
repeated. Shows the earnestness of Christ
both for the return of a sinner, and of
a backslidden believer. ‘Oh, Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, how often would I have ga-
thered thy children together!’ Corre-
sponds with all that He has done and suffered
for the salvation of men. So He stands at
the door and knocks, as if unwilling to
depart. ;

9. Its continuousness. Not once or twice,
but four times. ‘All day long have I


stretched out my hand toa disobedient and
gainsaying people.’ ‘ How shall I give thee
up, Ephraim ? The patience of God with
His backslidden people, and the continuous-
ness of His call to sinners to repent, some-
thing wonderful.

3. Its kindness. Hach successive ‘ Return’ |
a declaration of His loving heart. One such
call to a sinner or backslider a token of love.
What when it is repeated four times over ?

4. The difficulty of compliance. Great the
unwillingness to return, or the difficulty of
doing so, that requires a four times repeated
call to overcome it. Much easier to stray
and backslide than to return. Departure
from God a downward motion. Thereturn an
ascent. Impossible to renew a certain once fa-
voured class torepentance. Yet nothing impos-
sible with God. Christ's fourfold call, entering
the ear and heart, the means of overcoming
the natural reluctance and fear, as well of a
sinner as a backsliding saint. The longer the
Prodigal’s absence,the more difficult his return.

5. The seriousness of the case. No slight
cause the occasion of a fourfold call. Awful
condition of the soul away from Christ.
Mournful, as well as hazardous, state of a
backslider. Such a thing as a ‘drawing
back unto perdition.”? Sad loss both to him-
self and others when a believer keeps at a
distance from God.

6. The duty and necessity of immediate
compliance. When Christ calls earnestly to
return, hazardous as well as sinful to sit
still. Such a Call to be at once followed by
the Prodigal’s resolution: ‘1 will arise and
go to my Father.’


IV. The Oxsect of the Call. ‘That wa
may look upon Thee ’—admire and enjoy
Thy beauty. The language of the king,
either for himself alone, or for others wit
him. Christ speaks to His people both in
His own name and the Father’s. ‘My
Father will love him, and we will come unto
him, and make our abode with tim’ (John
xiv. 23). The object of the Call to sinners
and backsliders, to return that Christ the
Father may rejoice in their spiritual beauty
as ee ined: renewed, and saved souls. The
pleasure and glory of God necessarily the
object of all His dealings with His creatures.
*He hath made all things for Himself,’
‘ For Thy pleasure they are and were created,
So with believers : ‘This people have I formed
for Myself, that they may show forth My
praise’ (Isa. ii. 2 ). Believers chosen by
God ‘in Christ to be ‘holy and without
blame before Him in love’ (Hph. i. 4). God’s
greatest glory and joy in looking on lost
sinners restored, renewed, and saved by the
obedience of His Son, and the grace of His
Spirit. Saved souls the Saviour’s reward,


107


SHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENT «a... THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





and the subject of His joy (Isa. hii. 10, 11;
Luke xv. 5). His love to sinners indicated
in the joy He feels in their salvation. His
love to His people shown in the pleasure
He has in their jak renht beauty, and
prosperity. , His joy especially in beholdin
them returning from their wanderings, an
giving up all for His sake. His delight in
their beauty an argument for their entire con-
secration. ‘Forget also thine own people,
and thy father’s house. So shall the King
greatly desire thy beauty’ (Ps. xlv. 10, 11).
The sinner exhorted to return for his own
fake; the saint for his Saviour’s. Yet a
powerful argument with the sinner that God
has pleasure in his salvation, not in his
destruction. ‘Turn ye, turn ye; for why
will ye die? I have no pleasure in the death
of the wicked, but rather that he should turn
unto Me and live’ (Ezek. xviii. 18, 23 ; xxxiii.
11). An irresistible motive in the hands of
the Spirit both with the sinner and the saint,
that a Three-One God is glorified and
rejoices in his return.


Savtamrre’s Drrviaxce,
Verse 13.
What will ye see in the Shulamite P


The question the reply to the Call. Shu-
lamite little conscious of any such beaut
and attractiveness. Acknowledges herself
Solomon’s wife ; or perhaps confesses to her
humble origin. ‘What am I, and what is
my father’s house ?? So Gideon when called
to be Israel’s deliverer: ‘My family is

oor in Manasseh, and I am the least in my
father’s house’ (Jud. vi. 14, 15). One effort
of grace to make us conscious of our unwor-
thiness. Moses, on coming down from the
Mount, wist not that his face shone. Isaiah
in the Temple: ‘I ama man of unclean lips.’
Peter in the presence of a divine Saviour:
*Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O
Trond Job: ‘Now mine eye seeth Thee;
wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust
and ashes.’ The more light, the more de-
fects seen. Company with Christ discovers our
shortcomings. Formerly, before the mar-
riage, Shulamite defended her beauty before
the daughters of Jerusalem. After being
for a little with her Beloved, she hangs her
head: ‘I am but a common wildflower of the

lain—a lily of the valley.’ Now, as the
King’s married wife : “What will ye see in
the Shulamite?’ So Paul, righteous in his
own eyes before he had seen the Lord;
then, ‘less than the least of all saints ;’ last
of all, ‘ the chief of sinners.’ Sight of Christ
shows us our own deformity. John Wesley’s
Bite testimony; ‘I the chief of sinners

1


am; But Jesus died for me.” That of
William Wilberforce : ‘ By the grace of God
Iam whatIam.’ Humility, in God’s esti-
mation the greatest beauty. ‘To that man
will I look who is bumble.’ The great Ex-
emplar meek and lowly in heart. Humility
the first lesson He teaches. The ‘poor in
spirit’ the heirs of the kingdom. Humility
to be the believer’s clothing. A believer puts
on humility as he puts on Christ. The be-
liever’s twofold testimony: ‘I am nothing;
Christ is all.” The glow-worm hides itself
in the light which clothes it. The question
of the Shulamite that of Peter and John
after Pentecost: ‘Why look ye so earnestly
upon us, as though by our own power or
holiness we had made this man to walk ??
(Acts iii. 12).

Yet, notwithstanding unworthiness, be-
lievers still Christ’s spouse. That relation
to Christ to be maintained in the face of all
shortcomings. Believers not to deny the
gee of God in them and towards them.

ense of sin and unworthiness quite compa-
tible with consciousness of acceptance im the
Beloved and the joy of faith.


Tus Kine’s AnswER.
Verse 18.
As it were the company of two armies.


The King’s answer intended to dispel the
diffidence of the Bride. Expressive of her
grace and attractiveness in his sight. The
‘company’ properly a ‘dance,’ or a ‘com-
pany of dancers.’ Dances anciently a part
of religious worship. Especially practised ix
connection with religious festivals, the cele-
bration of victories, and other solemn and
festive occasions, Performed by several
companies at once, and by ranks moving
in opposite directions. Always an ex-
pression of joy, whether in God or other-
wise (Exod. xv. 20, 21; xxxii. 19;
Judges xxi. 19, 1 Sam. xviii. 6, 7; Jer.
xxxi. 4,13; Ps. exlix. 3, doubtful; Luke
xv. 25; Matt. xi.1J,17). Religious dances
still common in the East. Their introduction
into the West an idea of Savanarola. The
‘armies, or camps’ either literally armies of
men who, in celebration @f a victory, engaged
in such dances ; ortheangelichosts ; the word
here used being the name given by Jacob to
the place where the angels of God met him:
Mahanaim, or, as in margin, ‘Two hosts or
camps’ (Gen xxxii. 12). The dual form of
the word, though not necessarily implying
two, perhaps indicating two divisions or semi-
choruses, as of the women of Israel (1 Sam,
xviii. 7), or, of the Levites at the dedication
of the walls of Jerusalem (Neh. xii, 12, 31,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





38, 40), the companies of Levites being also
called ‘eamps’ (1 Chron. is 18,19). The
comparison expressive of—

1. Grace and beauty. The Bride from her
beauty already compared to an army with ban-
ners, whether as marshalled for battle, on the
march, or under review. The beauty, perhaps,
still greater of military companies engaged
in a martial or festive dance, or in perform-
ing their orderly evolutions. Even this much
short of the beauty of a company, or, rather
of two responsive bands of angels engaged in
holy dance, as expressive of their joy and

raise. Such the beauty and grace of the

ride in the eyes of her Beloved. Such the
beauty of the Church in the eyes of Christ
amid all her blemishes and defects. The
mind of Christ Himself expressed by the
Apostle when he wrote to the Church at
Colosse : ‘Joying and beholding your order.’
What the beauty of the Church when she
shall be presented to her Bridegroom, ‘a
glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle,
or any such thing P Beautiful and glorious
indeed when the Lord of glory Himself shall,
on the day of His glorious appearing, ‘be
glorified in His saints, and admired in all
them that believe’ (2 Thess. i. 10). ‘We shall
be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is,’
Our vile bodies changed and ‘fashioned like
His own glorious body.’

2. Grandeur and terribleness. The Bride
already said to be ‘terrible as an army
with banners.’ Something in great personal
beauty that awes while it charms you.
‘Terror in beauty.’ So with spiritual beaaty.
‘He pereeived how awful goodness is.’ So
with the Church after Pentecost. ‘Of the
rest durst no man join himself to them; but
the people magnified them’ (Acts ii, 13).
All that sat in the Council looking steadfastly
at Stephen, ‘saw his face as it had been the
face of an angel.’ A beauty in Christian
meekness and patience that awes even perse-
cutors.

3. Joy and adoration. The comparison,
whether referring to things celestial or ter-
restrial, suggestive of joy and praise. The
dance, like music in general, expressive of
festive joy, and, like sacred song, employed,
as already noticed, in connection with divine
worship (Jud. xi. 34; xxi. 21), God to be
worshipped with holy gladness. Joy espe-
cially becoming in the service and worship of
Him who is love itself and the fountain of
every blessing. ‘O come let us sing unto
the Lord; let us make a joyful noise to the
rock of our salvation.” ‘Make a loud noise,
and rejoice, and sing praise.’ ‘Sing unto
the Lord with the harp; with the harp and
the voice of a Psalm; with trumpets and
sound of cornet make a joyful noise before


the Lord the King.’ ‘Serve the Lord with


CHAP. VI.





gladness; come before His presence with
singing.’ ‘ Praise Him with the timbrel and
dance; praise Him with stringed instruments
and organs’ (Ps. xev.1; xevili. 4—6; ¢. 2,;
cl. 4). To rejoice in the Lord a repeatedly
enjoined duty. That joy, however, far re-
moved from levity cad carnal mirth. Min-
gled with reverence and godly fear. A holy
awe in the true worship of God, which
Ss oe instead of damping the joy. Joy, as
well as love and peace, a fruit of the Spirit,
(Gal. v. 22). Joy in divine worship probably
only hindered by the corruption of the heart
and its coldness in respect to God, from ex-
pressing itself, at certain times, in dance as
well as song. The beauty and attractiveness
of grace heightened by the deep and holy
joy which it produces.

4. Boldness and courage. Acharacteristic
of ‘ armies,’ whether human or angelic. Holy
courage a grace of the Spirit. ‘Add te your
faith virtue,’ or courage. Believers called to
quit themselves like men, and be strong.
The fearful classed with the unbelieving.
Courage the child of faith. By faith men
‘out of weakness were made strong, waxed
valiant in fight, put to flight the armies of
the aliens.” Verified inthe Primitive Church,
and in times of persecution. The noble army
of martyrs. ‘They loved not their lives unto
the death.’ True courage, to fear God and
have no other fear. Such courage a part of
the Christian character. ‘lhe Church while
on earth necessarily militant. The believer’s
adversaries the world, the flesh, and the
devil. Carries in himself two contending
armies, the flesh and the spirit (Kom. vil.
23; Gal.v.17; 1 Pet.ii. 7). The life of a
believer a warfare, but a blessed one (1 Tim.
i. 18; vi. 12; 2 Tim. iv. 7). The Church
enlisted under Christ as ‘the sacramental
host of God’s elect,’ to do battle against its
spiritual foes. Not less beautiful in the
Bridegroom’s eyes because returning, like
himself, with scars and wounds. A penitent
and believing soul courageously fighting, in
the Saviour’s strength, against sin, Satan,
and an evil world, more beautiful in Christ’s
oe than armies of Seraphim (Luke xv. 6,7,

0).

The whole redeemed Church of Christ
known as two armies — the Church militant ,
on earth, and the Church triumphant in
heaven. With the latter the battle is fought,
and the victory won; with the former, the
fight still continues, but the victory certain.
In the eye of the glorious Leader, both but
‘one army of the living God.’ The day at
hand when they shall be visibly one, as ‘the
armies which are in heaven,’ following their
victorious Commander, who, as the Rider on
the White Horse, ‘ with righteousness doth
jedge and make war’ (Rev. xix. Ge

09


cHar. Vil. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





SHuLAMITE’s Beauty ConTEMPLATED
AND ADMIRED.


Chap. vii. Verse 1—7.

How beautiful are thy feet with shoes,

O Prince’s daughter |

The joints of thy thighs are like jewels,

The work of the hands of a cunning
workman.

Thy navel is like a round goblet,

That wanteth not liquor.

Thy belly is like a heap of wheat,

Set about with lilies.

Thy two breasts are like two young roes
that are twins.

Thy neck is as a tower of ivory.

Thine eyes like the fishpools in
Heshbon,

By the gate of Bathrabbim.

Thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon,

That looketh towards Damascus.

Thy head upon thee is like Carmel,

And the hair of thy head like purple;

The King is held in the galleries.

How fair and how pleasant art thou, O
love, for delights !

This thy stature is like to a palm tree,

And thy breasts to clusters of grapes.


Shulamite, encouraged by his gracious
call, now appears in the presence of the King.
The King, probably accompanied by his
female attendants, contemplates and admires
with them her sweetness and beauty. ‘The
eye surveys her whole figure, including ber
ornaments and attire, which, as in the case
of the shoes, can alone meet the view. These
latter, however, admired and mentioned as
tending to set off her beauty.

The title bere given to Shulamite observ-
able—‘Prince’s daughter.’ Probably not
so originally, but—(1) Through union with
Solomon. (2) As worthy to be such—her
beauty, dignity and grace, such as to become
a prince’s daughter, while her spirit and
disposition were such as to suggest a royal
extraction. The Church of Christ, and be-
levers individually, fitly so called, as—(1)
Born of God, the King eternal (John i. 12;
2 Cor. vi. 18; 1 John iii. 1). (2). United
to Christ, the ‘Prince of the Kings of the
earth,’ as His Bride (Rev. xix. 7; xxi. 9).
(3) Princely in their rank and possessions—
kings and priests unto God, heirs of God
and joint-heirs with Christ, to inherit ali
things (Rev. i. 6; xxi. 7; Rom. viii. LW):
(4). Endowed with a princely spirit, disposi-
bas bearing (1s. xxxii, 5—8; Ps,





xxxvii. 21; 2 Sam. xxiv. 22,23; 2Cor. viii
1—4). Believers raised by sovereign grace


as beggars from the dung-hill to sit with —


princes, and to inherit the throne of glory
(1 Sam. ii. 8; Ps. exiii. 7).

In the contemplation of Shulamite by the
the king and his attendants, and in the
description of her loveliness and grace, he:
‘ feet,’ or rather s¢eps, and the ‘shoes’ she
wore, the first object noticed. Perhaps the
attention first struck by her graceful and
becoming gait as she ‘returned’ and ap-
poche the king. The shoes of Oriental
emales of rank always beautifully and richly
ornamented. The feet thus adorned indica-
tive of a princely condition. The ‘feet,’ or
steps, suggestive of the believer’s walk and
daily life. Practical holiness and devotion
to the Lord’s service a great part of spiritual
beauty. ‘This especially noticed by the Lord
Jesus. ‘Ye are my friends, if ye do whatso-
ever I command you.’ Indolence and sloth
no part of a believer’s character. The ‘shoes’
of the believer the ‘preparation’ given him
by ‘the Gospel of peace,’ for holy active
service or patient enduring of the Master’s
will. The feet to be ‘beautiful with shoes,’
in imitating the Bridegroom who ‘went
about doing good,’ and, according to ability,
ee the glad tidings of peace (Is.
ii. 7; Rom. x. 15), Carrying the tidings
of salvation to a perishing world, the work
peculiarly committed to the Bride of .Christ,
and that in which great part of her beauty is
seen. The distinction cf tue Pentecostal
Church—they ‘ went every where preaching
the Lord Jesus’ (Acts vin 4; xi. 19, 20;
2 John vii.). The New Testament Church
to be not merely eveugelical, but evangelistic.
Called not merely tz hold, but to hold forth
the Word of Life (hil. ii. 16). Her beauty
not merely in holy walking, but in lowly
working. The Chnrch essentially a mission-
ary institution, established by her Lord before
He went up to heaven, and fitted for her
work by the promised gift of the Holy
eke (Matt. xxviii, 20; Luke xxiv. 46—
4


The order in the former descriptions of the
Bride’s beauty here reversed. Commencing
with the ‘feet,’ advances upwards. Perhaps
the Church here especially exhibited as seen
by men. The world can see the believer’s
walk and judge of that. Men mark how ‘the
Christian dives. His inward life ‘hid with
Christ in God.’ The outward walk sngsested
also by the next object men.uoned in the
description, ‘The joints (or .oundings) of
thy thighs are like jewels,’ &c, The gait as
well as appearance of the Bride’s figure
still probatl in view. The comparison to
‘jewels’ perhaps suggested by the eye falling
on the Bride’s jewelled girdle, The descrip-


. ee ee
ee or ee Ts eo. .


ne ee


Palen eae! sen.


ne Rea aati porn


Pi catieciRA ASng
a aS LOVE





Se


Fae FATS toy dave ate there ake ees)


Thal tem tne a taal a Ne


Aldine


ny yi ar, Wben” §


|
]


\


\ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


CHAP. VII,


2 a


tion, as expressive of the life of the New
Testament Church, verified in Acts ii. 42—
47; iv. 82—-387; Heb. x. 32—36. That life
_ the production of a Divine workman (Eph.
ii. 10; Gal. v. 22). ‘I'he Divine life of be-
lievers the result of the renewing of the Holy
Ghost (‘Tit. iii, 5).

In the description of this and the parts
next named, as in the case of the feed, the
dress that. clothed them only visible, and the
subjects only of the comparisons, namely:
‘the navel’ or girdle-clasp which covered it,
and the belly or body with the breasts,
described by the light coloured dress of
golden tissue embroidered wth white flow-
ers—the ‘garments of wrought gold’ and
the ‘raiment of needlework’ worn by the
Bride (Ps. xlv. 13, 14). The comparisons,
like the mention of the parts themselves,
more according to the style o1 Oriental than
of modern European poetry. The parts now
mentioned more especially connected with
maternity, always highly esteemed in the
East; and the comparisons chosen ac-
cordingly. The navel, or girdle - clasp,
compared to a round goblet, replenished
with wine; the breasts to two young beauti-
ful gazelles — the emblems of love and
beauty (Prov. v. 19); and the body, or the
robe which clothed it, toa heap of wheat sur-
rounded, as is said to have been the custom
at a harvest festivity, with lilies or other
flowers. The Church, like Shulamite, to be
‘not only a beautiful Bride, but a fruitful
mother.’ The New Testament or Gentile
Church, the ‘barren woman made to keep
house, and to be a joyful mother of
children’ (Ps. cxiii. 9). ‘To the free Jeru-
salem, which is above, and which is the
mother of all believers, the Prophet, followed
by the Apostle, cries: ‘Rejoice, O barren,
thou that didst not bear; for more are the
children of the desolate than of her which
hath an husband’ (Isa. liv. 1: Gal. iv. 26,
27). That Church represented bysuch as Paul
himself, when he says : ‘ My little children, of
whom I travail in birth again, until Christ be
formed in you.’ ‘ We were gentle among
you, even as a nurse cherisheth her children’
(Gal. iv. 19; 1 Thess. ii. 7). The bodily
parts, and the comparisons in the text, sug-
gestive of a mother, not only bearing, but
nourishing, herchildren. The goblet of wine,
the lily-girdled heap of wheat, and the two
fawn-like breasts, not unsuitable emblems of
the nourishment which the Church, as a
spiritual mother, extends to her children in
the word and sacraments: the cup of blessing
which she blesses, the bread which she
breaks, and the pure milk of the Word, whicn
she administers. A ‘heap of wheat set about
with lilies,’ a suggestive emblem of what


should be the character of


Ministerial Discourses.


1. A ‘heap of wheat.’ Solid spiritual food,
consisting of pure Scripture truth, the food
God feeds His people with. ‘I should have
fed thee with the finest of the wheat’ (Ps.
Ixxxi. 16). The spiritual ‘corn,’ which,
under the New Testament, should ‘make
the young men cheerful’ (Zech. ix.
17). The ‘truth as it is in Jesus’ the
‘bread that strengtheneth man’s heart,’ and
makes it glad. ‘Thy words were found unto
me, and | did eat them; and Thy word was
the joy and rejoicing of my heart.” The Word
of God that by which the ‘young men’ are
made strong, and are enabled to ‘overcome
the wicked One’ (1 John ii. 14). That
‘wheat’ Christ Himself in His person,
offices, and work Christ the ‘grain of
wheat’ which, falling into the ground and
dying, brings forth much fruit (Jolin xii. 24).
The bread of lite which came down from
heaven, ‘ of which if a man eat he shall live
for ever.’ A discourse to feed the souls of
the hearers, to be, not merely ¢ru¢h, but
‘the truth as it is in Jesus.’ To be a hea
of wheat. ‘Therefore to be well winnowed.
The chaff of mere human fancies, speculations,
or traditions, to be carefully excluded,
‘What is the chaff to the wheat? saith the
Lord. Is not my word like as a fire P saith
the Lord; and like a hammer that breaketh
the rock in pieces’ (Jer. xxiii. 28, 29). The
most useful discourses those that have
most of Bible truth in Bible language. No
words, for power and efficacy, ‘like the words
which the Holy Ghost teacheth’ (1 Cor. 2,
13). Discourses not only to have the truth,
but to have it in abundance. Not ahandful,
but a fevp of wheat. Ministers to preach a
full Christ—a Christ who is both Prophet,
Priest, and King. Discourses to contain
both doctrine, promise, and precept; the
things to be believed, and the things to be
done; the things done on God’s side, and the
things to be done on ours. A fulness in
Christ and the truth concerning Him that is
inexhaustible. Discourses also to exhibit the
truth in a connected, orderly, and methodical
manner. A heap of wheat—compact and
orderly, not mere loose and scattered grains,
Divine evangelical truth a compact whole,
with order, connection, and mutual depen-
dence in its parts, Both law and Gospel,
doctrineand duty, to have their proper place
and proportion, Christ taught the people
as they were able to hear it, The founda-
tion to be lai in first principles, and so ‘to
go on to perfection’ or higher truths (Heb.
v. 11—14; vi. 1), A natural and orderly
arrangemem in a discourse necessary a3
well to its retention as its apprehension,

2. ‘ Set about with lilies.’ The heap of

111


CHAP, Vil.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





wheat surrounded with lilies in the way of
ornament. The heap thus made more
attractive. ‘Apples of gold’ to be served
up in baskets of silver (Prov. xxv. 11.) ‘The
wise preacher to ‘ find out acceptable words,’
while ‘ words of truth.’ Faithful discourses
not necessarily devoid of ornamer‘t Solidity
in the matter to be connected with sweetness
in the manner of delivering it. The ‘heap
of wheat’ beautificd and commended by
the ‘lilies’ that surrounded it, Style as
well as staple to be attended to. The lilies
not to be eaten with the wheat, yet not there-
fore without their purpose. The wheat of
solid and saving truth advantageously set
forth with the lilies of metaphor and simile.
Such lilies culled from the fields of God’s
works as well as God’s Word. Gathered
also from the words and works of men.
Truth both commended and conveyed by apt
illustration, Comparisons and illustrations
often the window that admits the light. Lllus-
trations drawn from all quarters —history,
science, biography, external nature, common
life. The discourses of the great ‘l'eacher full
of them. ‘The better able the preacher is to
introduce them, the more likely he is to be
useful. Yet the ‘lilies’ only to surround
the wheat. To be ‘set about’ the heap,
not mixed up with it. Truth, not metaphor
or simile to be the staple. The garnishing
not to be confoonded with the food with
which it is served. ‘Very fine, sir, very
fine ; but people cannot live upon flowers.’—
Robert Hall. The truth to be the prominent
and commanding object. [Illustration and
ornament to be only so far employed as may
render the truth more attractive and effective.
* Lilies’ not to take the place of the ‘ wheat.’


The neck, eyes, and nose of the Bride next
commended. ‘The neck for its whiteness and
erectness compared to a ‘tower of ivory.’
The eyes for their largeness and lustre, soft-
ness and serenity, compared to the two
ponds in Heshbon, the Amorite capital,
situated on each side of the gate of Bathrab-
bim. The nose, for its prominence and
majesty, compared to ‘ the tower of Lebanon
tbat looketh towards Damascus,’ the active
enemy of Israel, that had been taken by
David, but recovered its liberty under Solo-
mon (2 Sam. viii. 6; 1 Kings xi. 23—25).
Without straining the allegory and the com-
parisons, we may view this part of the descrip-
tion as suggestive in relation to the New
Testament Church of —

1. The believer's purity of life and liberty
of spirit, as indicated by Shulamite’s fair and
erect ‘neck’ rising like a ‘tower of ivory.’
White unspotted ivory, a fit emblem of the
life of one whom the grace of God teaches
ale Himself to all ungodliness and


worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world’ (Tit. ii. 11,
12). A neck like an ivory tower sufficiently
suggestive of that ‘liberty wherewith Clirist
makes His people free ’—a liberty from the
yoke of bondage both in regard to sin and
self-righteousness—a liberty not abused as a
cloak of maliciousness, but proving itself by
a sel{-denying leve.

2. The believer’s calmness, intelligence, and
heavenly -mindeduess, in the presence of a noisy,
anxious, and bustling world; as symbolized
by Shulamite’s dole sight eyes, suggesting
the placid pool, with its smooth, deep,
transparent waters, reflecting the heavens
and heavenly bodies on their unruffled
bosom, on each side of the principal gate of
Heshbon, with its hum of court and market,
and its constant tramp of passengers. Be-
lievers taught of God not to be ‘conformed
to this world, but transformed by the renew-
ing of their mind’; to ‘look not at the things
which are seen and temporal, but at those
which are unseen and eternal’; to be ‘ with-
out carefulness,’ and to have their ‘conversa-
tion in heaven’; to learn of Him who was
‘meek and lowly in heart,’ and to be, at
once, ‘wise as serpents and harmless as
doves.’

3. The believer's boldness, vigilance, and de
cision, in the presence of a world that either
persecutes or ensnares, and of the great ad-
versary that goes about ‘like a roaring lion
secking whom he may devour.’ Symbolized by
a ‘nose’ that suggested the tower of Lebanon,
boldiy confronting and peodtes a vigilant
watch upon the hase city of Damascus.
So the Council at Jerusalem marvelled at
the boldness of Peter and John in their pre-
sence. Believers taught to watch and be
steadfast in the faith; to be strong and to
quit themselves like men; to be sober and
vigilant, and not ignorant of Satan’s devices ;
to obey God rather than men, and to ‘ esteem
the reproach of Christ greater riches than
the treasures of Egypt.’

The description ends with the head, as it
began with the feet. ‘Thine head upon thee
is like Carmel,’ &c. Shulamite had com-
mended her Beloved’s head as ‘ being like the
most fine gold.’ Hers, perhaps still wearing
the marriage chaplet, now commended in
turn, as resembling the majestic Carmel,
towering up from the sea and the plain, and
erowned with foliage and flowers. Her hair
admired as resembling the richest purple,
as well from its lustre as its deep, dark
colour. Her Carmel-like head suggestive of
the dignity of Christ’s Church, and the
authority with whieh He invested her when
He said : ‘ Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth
shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever


ye shall loose on earth shall be logsed in


omar. vi HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SCLOMON.





heaven. Whosesoever sins ye remit, they
are remitted, and whosesoever sins ye
retain they are retained.’ The power of
Christ exercised in His Church when act-
ing in His name; and an authority given
unto her by Him for edification, but
not for destruciion (1 Cor. v. 3—5;
2 Cor. x. 8; xiii. 10). The ‘hair,’ given
to the woman for a covering, and serv-
ing as her ornament and glory ( Cor.
si. 15), suggestive of the precicus fruits of
the Spirit proceeding from Christ, and form-
ing the true adornmentof His Church—love,
joy, peace, long-suffering, &c., the ‘fruits of
righteousness which are by Jesus Christ to
the praise of God’ (Gal. v. 22; Phil. i. 11).
The believer’s adorning not ‘the plaiting of
the hair, or the wearing of gold, or the
putting on of apparel; but that of the hidden
man of the heart, which ia not corruptible,
the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit’ (1
Peter iii. 4).

The last clause in verse fifth apparently a
parenthesis, expressing the admiration of the
observer and the attractive power of Shu-
lamite’s beauty. ‘The (or a) king is held

ound or captive] in the galleries’ (or ‘by
the tresses’). No higher commendation of
her charms than that a King—and such a
King as Solomon! — was held captive by
them. Suggestive of the spiritual beauty
put upon the believer, in contemplating
which the King of kings finds His delight.
‘ Forget thine own people and thy father’s
house, so shall the King desire thy beauty’
(Ps. xlv. 10,11). ‘ He shall rejoice over
thee with joy; He shall rest in His love.’
That beauty as great as a Three-One God
can put upon a creature in order to fit that
creature for a Bride to the incarnate Son,
* who loved the Church and gave Himself for
it, that He might sanctify and cleanse it b
the washing of water through the Word,
that He might present it to Himself a glo-
rious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or
any such thing’ (ph. v. 28). The clause
equally expressive of the love of Christ, as of
the Church's beauty which He imparts to
her. Infinite condescension and love on the
part of Him who ‘humbleth Himself tc

ehold the things that are done in heaven,’
that He is held bound, not by the beauty and
dazzling glory of the Seraphim that never
sinned, but by the imparted beauty of those
whom He raised from the dunghill of degra-
dation and sin, ‘to set them among princes,
even the princes of His por (Ps. exili.
5). Wonderful power of the believing sinner
over the loving Saviour. ‘ Drawn ‘by His
Church’s prayers, He is held by the Church’s
praises.’ ;

The contemplation of Shulamite’s beauty
followed by an exclamation of admiration

8








and delight. ‘How fair and how pleasant
art thou, O love, for (or in) delights!’ The
character of ‘fair and pleasant’ already
ascribed by Shulamite to her Beloved (chap.
1.16). ‘This twofuld character now applied
by the King to herself. A mutual admira-
tion and delight between Christ and His
people. What He is in their eyes they are
im His. Christ not only ‘fair’ in Himself,
but ‘pleasant’ to His people. Believers not
only made ‘fair’ in themselves, but ‘plea-
sant’ to Christ, Exhibited still further in
the expression ‘for (or in) delights.’ An
amazing fact, and expressive of inconceivable
grace on the part of Christ,—that the Son of
God and Lord of glory can and does find
delight in His blood-bought Church, consist-
ing of sinners raised from the dust and dung-
hill of spiritual filthiness and corruption,
Yet such the case: ‘The King shall greatly
desire thy beauty.” ‘He shall rejoice over
thee with joy: He shall rest in His leve ; He
shall joy over thee with singing.’ ‘Thou
shalt be called Hephzibah, for the Lord
delighteth in thee. As a bridegroom re-
joiceth over the bride, so shall thy Lord
rejoice over thee’ (Isa. lxii. 4, 5; Zeph. iii.
17; Ps. xlv. 11). That delight in His saved
atl as—(1) Made whai. they are by the Holy

pirit’s grace, - conformed to Christ’s own
image; (2) His own Bride, the gift of His
Father, and espoused by Himself; (3) His
redeemed Bride, for whom He has paid the

rice of His own humiliation, agony, shame,
Hood. and death. His delight in them xow,
in the midst of all their imperfections ; what
when they shall be presented to Himself
hereafter, ‘a glorious Church, without spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing? Hence the
duty of believers: (1) To aim at perfect
holiness. The holier a believer is, the
gest is Christ’s delight in him. (2) To

e much in fellowship with Jesus. That
fellowship the Saviour’s joy. (3) To seck
the conversion of others. Every converted
soul an addition to the Bridegroom’s delight.
The Bride composed of such souls. (4) To
endeavour to promote the sanctification of
believers, Christ’s joy enhanced as their
sanctification advances. An increase in their
holiness is an increase in His joy.

As if unable sufficiently to admire the grace
and beauty of his Bride, the king resumes
his description with the comparison of her
whole figure to a noble and beautiful palm
tree, with its rich clusters of dates and its
evergreen and elegant branches. This thy
stature is like a palm tree, and thy breasts
like clusters of grapes’ (or rather ‘ dates’).
Tne palm one of the most beautiful of trees.
From its erectness and the general beauty
of its aspect, its Hebrew name (Thamar,
often given to women (Gen. xxxviii. 6;

118


onaPp. vi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





2 Sam. xiii. 1; xiv. 27). The figure of-a
palm tree frequent in the decoration of Solo-
mon’s temple. At one time abundant in
Palestine, and chosen as the emblem of the
country. Now rarely to be met with. Judah
sits desolate under her solitary palm tree.
The palm tree, both from its beauty, its
fruitfulness, and its character as an ever-
green, an emblem of the righteous (Ps.
xcii. 12). The comparison of Shulamite’s
stature to a palm tree natural ; the Bride
being regarded—(1) As a tall and elegant
female. (2) As the Church of Christ-con-
sisting of those who are both justified and
sanctified in Christ Himself. Points sug-
gested in the comparison of the Church and
the individual believer to a


Palm Tree,


1. Its erectness. The palm straight and
upright. Believers upright in their principles
and conduct. Straightforward, as opposed
to the wicked, whose ways are ‘crooked’
(Ps. exxv. 5; Prov. ii. 15). Free and joyous,
as distinguished from the spirit of bondage
and fear tha causes the back to be ‘ bowed
down alway’ (Ps. lxix. 23; Rom. xi. 10).

2. Its regularity. The palm regular in its
growth and figure, both in respect to stem
and 6 anches. ‘The Apostle’s joy in behold-
ing the Church’s order. ‘The helibves’s be-
haviour orderly. His spiritual growth re-
gular. His piety to be symmetrical. Atten-
tion to be given to a// the will of God, and
to all the pattern shown in Christ himself.

3. Its fruitfuluess. The fruit of the palm
tree both abundant and nutritious, growing
in very large clusters nearthe stem. Believers,
united to Christ as the Life, bear in greater or
less abundance the fruits of the Spirit, love,
joy, peace, &c. To be filled with the fruits
of righteousness. To abound in every good
word and work. Their fruit glorifying to God
and profitable to men. Continues to be borne
at all times and in all circumstances, even
unto old age (Ps. xcii. 13, 14).

4. Its perpetual greenness. The palm an
evergreen. Always crowned with beautiful
green feathery branches. ‘l'rue grace an ever-
green. Inward spiritual life, which is Christ
Himself, abiding. Discovers its beauty and
freshness alike in prosperity and adversity ;
in health and sickness; in youth and old


e.

5. Its elasticity and invincibleness. The
fibre of the palm so elastic that no imposed
weights can hinder its upward growth. Hence
probably its brances used as tokens of victory
and triumph. Nothing able to separate the
believer from Christ, who is his life, or to

revent his spiritual growth and final perfec-
ion. In all things made more than a con-

114





queror through Him who has loved him. Al
things made to work together for his spiritual
and eternal good. The Church, like its type
in Egypt,—‘ the more they afflicted them, the
more they multiplied and grew’ (Ex. i. 12).
The blood of the martyrs the seed of the
Church.

6. Its general beauty. The palm tree one
of the most beautiful objects in the vegetable
world. The highest beauty seen in true
religion and those exhibiting it. Witnessed
in its perfection in the Lord Jesus Christ.
Seen, more or less, in all His members who
are to be conformed to His image. A loving
and consistent Christian the admiration of
men.

The breasts of the Bride compared to
clusters of dates, the fruit of the palm tree.
The comparison natural from the dates grow-
ing in large clusters near the stem of the
tree. ‘Lhe fruits of the Spirit found in
believers sweet and refreshing to Christ.
Of these fruits, love, symbolized by the
breasts, the first in the inspired list (Gal.
v. 22), and the most precious to the Saviour.
The love of Mary, as shown by her anointing
His feet with costly perfume, the subject of
the highest encomium ever passed bg the
Saviour on any individual act: ‘ Why trouble
ye the woman ? for she hath wrought a good
work upon me. Verily, I say unto you,
Wheresover this Gospel. shall be preached
in the whole world, there shall ae this,
that this woman hath done, be told for a
memorial of her’ (Matt. xxvi. 10—13).
A similar act, done from similar feelings by
another woman, as the expression of her
love to Him who had so graciously forgiven
her, rewarded with similar praise (Luke vii.
37—46). No perfume so sweet, and no
fruit so precious to the Saviour, as the ar-
dent love of a forgiven sinner.


Tue Kine’s REesoLtuTiow AXD
ANTICIPATION,


Verses 8, 9.


I said, I will go up to the palm tree;

I will take-hold of the boughs thereof ;

Now also thy breasts shall be as clusters
of the vine,

And the smell of thy nose like apples ;

And the roof of thy mouth like the best
wine,

(For my beloved),

That goeth down sweetly,

Causing the lips of them that are asleep
to speak.


‘I said,’ indicative of the king’s purpose,





|


|
|


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON  cmar. vu.





whether secret or expressed, in regard to
Shulamite. The purpose—first, to make her
his Bride and then to enjoy her fellowship as
such (Prov. v.18, 19). Christ’s doings in
regard to His Church the result of a Divine
pusncse. His delights, prospectively, with
che children of men, before the foundation of
the world (Prov. viii. 31). His purpose to
ve Himself for sinners, to unite them to
imself as His Bride, and then throughout
eternity to rejoice in their fellowship and
love. ‘Father, I will that they also whom
Thou hast given Me be with me where
I am, that they may behold My glory which
Thou hast given Me’ (John xvii. ae ‘He
loved the Church and gave Himself for it
that He might sanctily and cleanse it by the
washing of water by the Word; that He
might present it to Himself a glorious
Church.” ‘He gave Himself for us that
redeem us from all iniquity, aud purify unto
Himself a peculiar people.’ ‘‘Lhis people
have I formed for Myself’ (Eph. v. 26; ‘Tit.
ii. 14; Isa. xliii. 21). Having loved and
given Himself for His Church, He will ‘rest’
and have delight ‘in His love’ (Zeph. iii. 17).
Christ said, I will go up to the palm tree—
(2) In the everlasting covenant when He
engaged to be the Redeemer of the world.
(2) When in the fulness of time He gave Him-
self for His Church, and ‘for the joy that
was set before Him, endured the cross de-
spising the shame.’ (3) When He, according
to His loving purpose, arrests the wanderer
in his sins, and, as the good shepherd, lays
the Jost one ‘on his shoulders, and returns
with it rejoicing.’ (4) When from time to
time He lovingly manifests Himself to His
saved one, comes in and sups with him and
he with Him (Rev. tii. 20). (5) When at
death He receives the believer to Himself,
that where He is he may be also (John xiv.
2). Christ’s resolution that of enjoying the
fruit of the travail of His soul, and of
utting His people also in possession of it.
n His love He provided the feast, and with
His people He sits down to it. Planted the
tree when He ascended the cross, and eats
the fruit of it now that He has ascended the
throne. The happiness of the believing soul
to yield its2lf to Christ as the palm tree, for
His enjoyment of the fruits of it.
Anticipation connected with resolution.
* Now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of
the vine,’ &c. The loving fellowship of his
beloved bride should be sweet and refresh-
ing to him as the clusters of the vine, the
fragrance of citrons, and the richest wine.
A similar anticipation and desire already ex-
pressed on the part of the Bride in relerence
to her Beloved (chap. ii. 5). A mutual
‘comfort of love’ between Christ and lis
people. ‘My soul desired the first ripe
8—2


fruit? ‘I remember thee, the kindness of
thy youth, the love of thine espousals.’ ‘I
found Israel like grapes in the wilderness’
(Hos. ix. 10; Jer. ili. 2; Mic. vii. 1). This
joy experienced by Christ in the first love of
the New Testament, as well as that of the
Old ‘Testament, Church. His delight found
in His people in proportion as He finds in
them the graces of His Spirit (Ps. cxlix.
4; Jer. ix. 24). In the finished work of
the first creation, God ‘rested and was
refreshed ;” much more in that of the
second. The redeemed Church to be to Him
‘for a name, for an everlasting sign that
shall not be cut off.’—The spiritual breath of
the regenerate soul sweet and fragrant to
Christ. ‘The smell (or fragrance) of thy
nose (or breath) like apples (or citrons;’.
Such breath the love ane Neiging: the aspi-
rations and expressions, the penitence and
gratitude, the confessions and thanksgivings,
the sighs and groans, the prayers and praises,
of the new and spirit-born nature. ‘ To this
man will I look, even to him who is poor
and of a contrite spirit, and that trembleth
at My word.’ ‘1 dwell in the high and
holy place ; with him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the
humble, and to revive the heart of the con-
trite ones’ (Isa. lvii, 15; lxvi. 2). Marked
contrast between the wholesome breath of
a living soul and the noxious effluvium of a
dead one. The fragrance of a humble and
holy love breathed by a believer in propor-
tion as he walks with Christ and posseses
His spirit. ‘The love and spiritual-minded-
ness of a pardoned soul the Saviour’s
sweetest refreshment. Powerful motive to
ee cultivation of a holy, loving, and spiritual
ife.

The loving self-surrender of the Bride
apparently indicated in the words, ‘for my
beloved’ (verse 9). Probably the words of
the Bride interjected while the Bridegroom
was speaking and comparing her love, and
the expression of it, to the best wine. The
Bride hastens to assure him that that wine
should be entirely for himself. He who was
so worthy of her love, and who possessed
such claims to it, should alone possess it.
As his happy and favoured Bride she would
love him with an undividedlove. The warm
ana devoted affection of our heart the best
gilt we can offer; and, through grace, freely
given to Him who is most worthy of it, and
has the best right to it. That affection
desired and prized by {im whom angels
delight to honour. Our highest happiness to
be permitted and enabled to render it. ‘O,
what am I, to love such a Que, or to be
loved by that high and Jofty one! I think
the angels may blush to look upon Him.
Hell (as 1 now think), and all the aor in

1


cHar. vo. HMUMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


it, laid on me alone, would not put me from
loving. Woe, woe is me; 1 have a lover,
Christ, and yet I want love for Him I have
a lovely and desirable Lord, who is love-
worthy, and who beggeth my love and heart,
and | have nothing to give Him.” —S Ru/her-
ford. ‘For my Beloved,’ the appropriate
motto of a loving believer’s life. ‘To be
inscribed on all we are and have.

Perhaps an intimation, in the conclusion
of the verse, of the effects of the believer’s
love to Christ on others as well as himself.
The wine to which the Bride’s love, and the
expression of it (‘the roof of thy mouth’)
is compared, said, according to our English
version, to cause the lips of them that are
asleep (Margin, ‘the ancient’ ) to speak. The
language obscure, though indicating some
property or effect of the wine spoken of,
and so of that which is compared to it.
Perhaps the reference to its stimulating as
well as refreshing virtue. ‘The influence
which Christ condescends to allow His
people’s love to have upon Himself already
stated (chap. iv. 9; vi. 5). Its influence on
the world, asleep in the snare of Satan and
under the power of sin, to be found, indi-
rectly, in the success attending the efforts,
prompted by love to Christ and love to
souls for His sake, to reclaim the wanderer
and rescue the perishing, by conveying to
them the glad tidings of His love. Love to
Christ the highest and strongest motive im-
pelling believers to self-denying endeavours
on behalf ofa perishing world. ‘ Lord, thou
knowest that I love Thee,’ naturally followed
by—‘ Feed my lambs; feed my sheep.’
‘Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these, my brethren, ye have done it
unto Me.’ Silent lips constantly being
opened, from devotedness to Jesus, in the
praise of redeeming love.


SHULAMITE’s JoyruL SELF-SURRENDER.
Verse 10.


Tam my beloved’s,
And his desire is towards me,


With her love, Shulamite’s whole self is
iven to her Beloved. The heart given, all
Is given. The Believer’s language to Jesus:
‘Tam thine; save me.’ ‘They gave them-
selves first to the Lord, and then to us.’ ‘ The
Bride’s language—(1) That of joy. The
believer’s surrender of himself to Jesus a
joyful one. ‘O Lord, I am Thy servant, I
am Thy servant; Thou hast loosed my bonds.’
‘ Bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the
horns of the altar.’ The Apostles departed
from the Council ‘rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame’ for the
116


name of Jesus. (2) Certainty. No mere
hope or supposition. The matter placed be-
ond a doubt. Satan’s object, to lead the
balieter to question the reality of his sure
render of himseif to Jesus. Such self-surren-
der to be madecertain by frequent. repetition.
This the third time Shulamite has made the
declaration (Chron ti. 16; vi. 3). So Peter
declared a third time his love to Jesus. A
matter of such importance not to be left in
doubt. Desirable to be constantly renewi
our self-dedication to the Lord. Much of
our comfort and growth in grace connected
with the assurance that we have truly sur-
rendered ourselves to Jesus, and are His,
Observe in regard to such—


Self-Surrender.


I. Ite Oxssect. (1) For his sole possession.
One shall say: ‘I am the Lord’s.’ ‘Ye are
not your own.’ (2) For His pleasure and
enjoyment. ‘For Thy pleasure all things
are’ Much more the Church whom He has
redeemed to Himself. Christ?s unspeakable
condescension that He finds His enjoyment
in His Church. (3) For His service. ‘I
am Thy servant.’ Abigail, when consenting
to be David’s wife, gave herself to be his
handmaid to wash the feet of his servants.
Mary’s language that of the believer: ‘ Be-
hold the handmaid of the Lord.’ Eve given
to Adam to be an ‘help meet for him.’
Christ’s Church at once His Bride and His
servants. Our honour to be made ‘fellow
workers with Him’ in the salvation of others,
(4) For His free disposal. ‘ Be it unto me
according to Thy Word.’ ‘Let Him do with
me as seemeth good in His sight.’ ‘ Not m
will, but Thine be done.’ Such self-
surrender the soul of true religion. ‘ Re-
ligion ’ a binding ourselves over to the Lord.

© man can serve two masters. Every
man and woman either for Christ or for His
adversary.


II. Z#s Cuaracter. Such surrender—
(1) A willing and cheerful one. ‘The Lord
loveth a cheerful giver.’ ‘ Not by constraint,
but willingly.’ Christ’s people willing in the
‘day of His power.’ (2) A whole and entireone.
No part kept back. Body, soul, and spirit
given up. All we are and all we have.
‘Holiness to the Lord’ written on the bells
of the horse-bridle. Every ‘pot’ holiness
unto the Lord. ‘ Not a hoof left behind’ for
tke enemy. (3) A present and eternal one.
Made zow. Not put off till to-morrow No
deferring till a more convenient season. The
surrender required now. Not to make it
now is a refusal. Made now, it is made for


ever. No taking back the gift, The sacri-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





fice bound with the cords of a divine and un-
dying love to the horns of the altar.


Il. The Grounn of i#. ‘His desire is
towards me.’ The desire that of a husband
to the wife of his choice. Similar language
used of Eve in regard to her husband (Gen,
ii, 16). A man’s wife the desire of his
eyes (Hzek. xxiv. 16, 18). ‘The desire of

hrist towards a sinner that of a Saviour and
a Husband. His desire towards us the

round of ours towards Him. We love Him

ecause He first loved us. ‘Iam Thy ser-
vant; thou hast loosed my bonds.’ His de-
sire towards the Church composed of
perishing sinners, a desire—(1) To save and
bless it. ‘He loved the Church and gave
Himself for it.’ His desire towards sinners
brought Him from heaven, and then nailed
Him to the Cross for their sake. His desire
towards His redeemed such that He can
withhold no good thing for them. His care
and concern for His Church that of a hus-
band for his wife. Bears with her infirmities,
sympathizes with her sorrows, protects her
from danger, comforts her in trouble, pro-
vides for her wants, prepares for her a home.
(2) To possess it as His own. ‘He gave
Himself for us, that He might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify unto Himself s pecu-
liar people.’ His desire, that they may both
be ‘brought to Him, and kept in Him’
(John x. 16; xvii. 11). (3) To have it with
Himself for ever. 1s gone to heaven to pre-
pare a place for them, that where He is,
there they may be also. Hence His inter-
cessory prayer: ‘Father, I will that they
also whom Thou hast given Me be with Me
where I am’ (John xiv. 3; xvii. 24). Rises
from His Throne of glory to meet and wel-
come the liberated spirit of His faithful
servant (Acts vii. 55). :

Observe the individuality of the desire.
© His desire is towards se.’ Faith’s triumph,
and the soul’s comfort in that little word
me. Every sinner that accepts of Jesus as a
Saviour warranted to employ the language.
True even of the sinner before he accepts
the Saviour. His desire also towards the
unsaved one; for, did He not come ‘to seek
and to save that which was lost ?


Tue Bumwr’s Prorosal
Verse 11—13.


Come, my beloved,
_ Let us go forth into the field ;
Let us lodge in the villazes.
Let us get up early to the vineyards
Let us see if the vine flourish,
If the tender grapes appear,


And the pomegranates bud forth;
There will I give thee my loves,
The mandrakes give a smell,

And at our gates

Are all manner of pleasant fruits,
New and old,

Which [ have laid up

For thee, O my beloved.


Shulamite speaks, in reply to the King, as
having her heart on her native fields and
vineyards—the rural scenes and employments
in which she had been brought up. These
more attractive to her pure and simple mind,
with its genuine love of nature, than the
spleens and ceremony of a court. Probably
the wish also present, that her native locality
might enjcy the benefit of her exaltation.
But for all this, or whatever might be the
object of her proposal, her Beloved must go
along with ber. Painful now any thought
of separation from him. His presence and
society her only earthly happiness and joy.

The Church of Christ and believers indi-
vidually, happy as the Bride of the Son of
God, look out in pity and in the bowels of their
Lord, on the lands of the heathen, and a
world lying in wickedness, to which they had
themselves belonged. Thus the Church of
Pentecost soon ‘ went everywhere preaching
the Word.’ This according to the will and
commission of her Lord. ‘Go ye into all the
world,’ &c. ‘Ye shall be witnesses unto Me
in Judea and Samaria, even unto the utter-
most ends of the earth.’ The apostles and
disciples were to degin at Jerusalem, but not
to stopthere. Strictly, the resolution of the
Church at Antioch, under the direction of the
Holy Ghost, the first full verification of the
text (Acts xiii. 1, &c). Subsequently, a
second made by the apostles, to visit the
places among the heathen where they had
preached the Gospel, and ‘to see how they
did ‘ (Acts xv. 36). Shulamite’s ‘come’ an
echo of her Beloved’s (Chron. ii. 10—13).
The Church, in time, responds to Christ’s
Call, and pleads the fulfilment of His
promise. The text suggestive of


The Church’s Calling.


That calling a Missionary one. The
Charch called to out the Mission of
Christ into all the world. To be no longer
the spring shut up, but streams flowing forth.
Made the bearer of the glad tidings of a
Saviour intended for all people. Christ
to be set upas an ensign in dat land. That
ensign to be carried and displayed by the
Church (Isa. xi. 18; Ps. lx. 4). The ‘ day
of good tidings’? to be shared in by a
perishing world, The King’s ee to


cnar. vi.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





his servants, to go out into the hedges and
highways, the streets and lanes of the city,
to invite in the poor and needy, and even to
compel them to come to the marriage feast.
The Gospel to be preached in the ‘ villages,’
as well as the large centres of population.
But observe—

1. The Lord’s presence with the Church ne-
sessary for success in her efforts for the
evangelization of the world. Shulamite’s
language to the King that of the evangelistic
Church pleading with Christ for His pre-
sence. ‘Come, my beloved, let us go forth,’
&e. Moses’ pleading with God to be that of
the minister and missionary before going
forth to deliver his message: ‘If Thy pre-

‘ sence go not with us, carry us not up hence.’
Preparation important ; but Christ’s pre-
sence aud power essential. Christ’s word to
the faithful and thoughtful preacher that to
Gideon as the Lord looked on him: ‘Go in
this thy might; have not I sent thee?’
Christ’s promise to His sent servants: ‘Lo
J am with you alway.’ ‘The promise, how-
ever, to be pleaded in prayer, and laid hold
of by faith. The resolve of the Apostles;
‘We will give ourselves to prayer and the
winistry of the Word.’

2. Christ’s presence necessary also for
His servants’ strength and refreshment in the
midst of their labours. Christ wont at times
to take His disciples apart (Mark vi. 31;
John xviii. 2). Himself whole nights in
prayer. The Gospel-fishermen’s nets to be
mended in private, as well as managed in
public. To teach others successfully, we
need to be taught successively ourselves. The
wheels of the Gospel chariot the better for
{frequent oiling. To be ‘endued with fresh
power from on high,’ the preacher needs to
‘terry’ awhile with the Master. The lamp
shines more brightly in the pulpit after
being trimmed in the closet. Giret's pre-
sence lightens the preacher’s labour, and
carries lim over every difficulty. In labour
or rest, the Master’s presence the faithful
servant’s Paradise. Nature only lovely and
oept, when the Lord of Nature is with

im.

3. Love to Christ to characterize every
preacher of the Gospel. Shulamite’s language
to the King : ‘Come, my Beloved’ Love to
Christ the source of ministerial devotedness,
and the secret of ministerial success. The
motto of the prince of preachers. ‘The Jove
of Christ constraineth us’ The charge:
‘Feed my lambs; feed my sheep,’ only given
to Peter after the thrice-repeated declaration
of his love to the Master. The preacher to
lavour as a portion of the Bride of Him
whom he preaches, and as therefore having
a personal interest in the work. ‘The Spirit
and the Bride say, Come.’

118


4. Prompiness and diligence necessary 1
the Church’s discharge of her calling. * Let
us get ae the vineyards.’ ‘The text
of John Wesley’s last sermon, preached after
a laborious ministry of above half a century,—
‘ The King’s business requireth haste.’ His
own practice was to rise at four o’clock. The
New ‘l'estament Church early and zealous in
its labours for the evangelization of the
world. The Apostle, some time before his
death, speaks of the Gospel as having been
preached ‘in all the world,’ and ‘to every
creature under heaven’ fi Col. i. 6, 20).
Need for promptness. Men dying at the rate
of one every second. Thousands dying daily
without Christ, and without even the know-
ledge of Him. Vast ‘ fields’ open, and ‘white
to the harvest.’

5. The Church to inquire carefully into the
success of the Gospel and the spiritual state of
the world, both at home and abroad. Minis-
ters and missionaries not merely to preach
and labour, but to look for results. The
work the servant’s, and the success the
Master’s. True, but success promised, and
to be expected. God’s promise that His
Word shall not return to him ‘void.
Generally the faithful and prayerfal labourer
who expects most, the most successful.
Fulfilment of divine promises in regard to
the Church and the woild to be believingly
and earnestly looked for. All flesh to see the
salvation of God. The knowledge of the
Lord to cover the earth. Men to be blesseé


in Christ, and all nations to call Him blessed.


Christ to inherit all nations. The people te
be gathered to Shiloh, The idols to be ut-
terly abolished.

6. The Leliever’s love to Christ to be dis-
played in his diligently carrying out the
Saviour’s wish in regard to the evangeliza-


tion of the world, and the conversion of sin-


ners to himself. ‘There will 1 give thee
my loves.” The Church and_believer’s
warmest love to Christ found in con-
nection with their most self-denying la-
bours in making Him known to others.
The believer ¢hen most acceptable to
Christ, when caring most for the souls
whom He bought with His blood. His
‘loves’ given best to his Lord when going
in His bowels and in His steps alter the
sheep that was lost. ‘There,’-—not on the
couch of selfish care and indulgence, hut in
the place of labour and sacrifice, in the
spirit and work of His Master, does He give
Him his ‘loves.’ .

7. The. Church's aim to bring forth
spiritual children to Christ ‘Tle mandrakes
give aswell.” The mandrake 1 very strong-
smelling piant’ growing in Palestine. The
fruit, gathered in wheat harves: or the month
of May, and perhaps other paris of the plant,


apa mae Tk ae PD ea Dry


are


ee


a ee


as


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON. cuar. vib_


A


thought by the Orientals to favour conce
tion (Gen. xxx. 14—16). The Church to ie
‘a joyful mother of children.? ‘Married’ to
_ Christ that ‘she may bring forth fruit unto
God’ (Rom. vii. 4). The part of faithful minis-
ters and others to ‘travail in birth until Christ
be formed’ in the souls of others. When Zion,
in her ministers and members, travails, she
brings forth her children (Isa. Ixvi. 98).
The preaching of the Gospel, accomparied by
faith, love, and prayer, on the part both of
reacher and people, the true means of the
hurch’s spiritual conception.

8. The result of the Church's labours an
abundance of spiritual fruit. ‘At (or over)
our gates (or door, according to the practice
in Kastern houses) are all manner of plea-
sant fruits.’ Such fruits the sample and
foretaste of what was to come. The
Church’s fruits an acceptable gift to Christ.
‘My soul desired the first ripe fruit.’ ‘I
have chosen you and ordained you, that ye
should go and bring forth fruit. Herein ‘is
My Father glorified, that ye bring forth
much fruit.’ The minister’s true ambition
to have many souls to present to Jesus at
His coming. ‘Here am I and the children
whom thou hast given me.’ The most ‘ plea-
sant fruits’ to Christ, the souls whom He
has redeemed with His blood, sought out
and brought to Him by His loving peo le
These fruits both‘ new and old. The
Church’s converts from both Jews and Gen-
tiles, those of the Old Covenant as well as
the New, those that were ‘nigh,’ as well as
those who had been ‘afar off.’ In the New
Testament Church the graces of the age of
the Law increased by those of that of the
Gospel. ‘Instead of the fathers shall be the
children.’ Believers not to be satisfied with
first principles, but to go on unto perfection
(Heb. vi. 1).

9. All the Church's works to be begun and
carried on for Christ. ‘Which I have laid up
for thee, O my beloved.’ Believers to do what
they do ‘heartily, as to the Lord, and not
unto men.’ Love to Christ to be the main-
spring of the believer’s labours. The salva-
tion of a soul to be dear, but the glory of
Christ still dearer. The salvation of souls
to be dearest because Christ’s glory is bound
up with it. The strongest motive with a
faithful and loving labourer, that Christ shall
‘see of the travail of his soul and be satis-
fied.” Love considers that best bestowed
which is bestowed on its object. Mary’s

recious ointment best employed in anoint-
ing her Saviour’s feet. All services now
lovingly done for Christ to be one day called
for, acknowledged, and rewarded. ‘Inas-
much as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these, my brethren, ye have done it
unto me.’





SHULAMITE’s WIsH. -


Chap. viii. 1—4,


O that thou wert as my brother,

That sucked the breasts of my mother |
When I should find thee without,

I would kiss thee,

Yea, I should not be despised.

I would lead thee,

And would bring thee unto my mother’s


house,

Who would (or thou wouldst) instruct
me.

I would cause thee to drink of spiced
wine,


Of the juice of my pomegranate.

His left hand should be under my head,
And his right hand should embrace me.
I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem,
That ye stir not up,

Nor awaken my love,

Until he please.


Shulamite still addresses her Beloved,
perhaps now already on the way to the fields,
towards her mother’s house. Expresses the
wish that she could be as familiar with him
even outside, as if he were her brother. She
had desired his kisses; and now wishes she
could becomingly repay them with her own.
She could wish to have him with her in her
mother’s house, and be her instructor there ;
where on her side she would present him
with the best of the beverages she possessed,
as the fruit of her own labour in the vine-
yard. In language already employed in rela-
tion to the enjoyment of his fellowship and
love (chap. ii. 6, 7), she pictures to herself
the joy she should thus experience, and the
care she would take that nothing should dis-
turh it. The whole the language of a loving
wife, expressed according to Oriental man-
ners, and in the style of Oriental poetry.
Observe—

1. The renewed soul, brought to the realiza-
tion of Christ's preciousness and love, and to
the experience of the blessedness of being
united to Him as His Bride, cannot be satis-
fied without the closest intimacy and unre-
strained enjoyment of His fellowship. An
intense longing after more of His sok
and love, a mark of the heaven-born soul,
and of the Bride of Christ. Unable to
enjoy in this world as much of that com-
munion with Christ as he desires, he looks
forward with wistfulness to a better. ‘I
have a desire to depart, and to be with
Christ, which is far better” In heaven,
believers see Him as He is; are eg


omar. vil, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





Him as His sheep, and led by Him to
‘fountains of living waters.’ ‘Follow Him
whithersoever He goeth.’ Their happiness
there not merely to enjoy Christ fully, lai to
express, without restraint of fear or shame,
the ardour of their love and affection. ‘I
would kiss thee.’ Believers hindered in the
present world, by causes both internal and
external, from letting out their love on Christ
as they would. The holy delight and satis-
faction in doing so reserved for a better
state. In reality, however, the language of
the Bride realized in relation to Christ. The
Bridegroom of the Church no longer as in
the time of Old Testament saints, the mere
infinite and absolute God—‘ the King eternal,
immortal, and invincible, dwelling in that
light which no man can approach unto,
whom no man hath seen orcan see.’ ‘The
longing of the Old Testament Church ful-
filled in the New. The Divine Bridegroom
now our very ‘Brother’—seen with our
eyes, looked upon and handled with our
hands (1 John 1. 1). John leaned on His
bosom. Mary held Him by His feet. ‘The
woman that had been a sinner kissed His
feet while she washed them with ber tears.
Probably the disciples were in the habit of
kissing His cheek according to the custom
of the time; though the only such kiss
recorded, alas! is that of the man that be-
trayed Him. His message after His resur-
rection—‘ Go and tell My brethren.’ ‘ For-
asmuch as the children were partakers of
flesh and blood, He Himself likewise took
part of the same’ (Heb. ii. 11—14).

2. Christ still to be found ‘without? Be-
lievers have still to go forth unto Him
‘without the camp.’ Christ still to the
world at large ‘a root out of a dry ground.’
The world no nearer knowing Him now than
when He sojourned on earth. The ‘reproach
of Christ’ to be experieuced till He shall come

in. Danger of being ‘ashamed’ of Him
‘in this sinful and adulterous generation.’
Christ also found ‘without’ in His cause,
and in the persons of those who are to be

thered to Him out of the world, both at

ome and abroad. ‘Inasmuch as ye did it

unto one of the least of these, my brethren,
sae it unto me.’ Christ, in the person of

is redeemed, found by the Bride after Pen-
tecost in Judea, Samaria, and the lands of
the heathen, and brought by her unto her
mother’s house, the Church.

3. The desire of believers to have Christ
brought into their mother's house. (1) Into
the Church at large, and especially that por-
tion of it with which they are more imme-
diately connected. ‘Christ to be taken by
the believer from the closet into the sanc-
tuary.’? Well when believers not only find
eran. the Church, but take him there.

1





Jerusalem which is above, the mother of us

: yet to every believer, in a narrower
sense, some section of the visible Church,
and some particular congregation or mission,
his ‘mother’s house,’ in which he found
Christ and was born again. ‘Of Zicn it shall
be said, This man and that man was born
there.’ (2) The circle of their own Aindred
and relations. So Andrew found his brother
Simon, and brought him to Jesus. Christ’s
direction to the restored Demoniac: ‘ Go
home to thy friends, and show them what
great things God hath done for thee.’ Sal-
vation and blessing promised not only to
believers themselves, but, conditionally, to
their family (Ps. cxv. 14; Acts. ii. 39).
Hence households baptized with their be-
lieving head. Tete conversion to be
followed by the conversion of the household.
‘The religion of the closet and of the sane-
tuary tried and confirmed by that of the
family.? Parents saved for the sake of their
chiidren as well as for themselves. On the
other hand, the salvation of the children
often followed by that of the parents. Noah
was not only to enter the ark, but his family
with him. Rahab was not only to be saved
in the destruction of Jericho, but her father
and mother, brother and sisters, along with
her. ‘The happiest family that in which
Christ is made an inmate. ‘ No resting place
to the Son of man sweeter than the bosom
of a pious family.’ Such the family at
Bethany (Luke x. 38—42; John xi. 1, 2).

4. The privilege of believers to be under the
continued leaching of Christ and His Church,
‘Who would (or thou wouldst) instruct me.’
All needful instruction in the possession of
Christ. Christ the prophet, as well as the
Priest and King of His Church. The Great
Teacher. Hid in Him are ‘all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge.’ Natural that
He should be the teacher of His Bride,
Divine teaching promised to all the children
of the true Jerusalem. ‘All thy children
shall be taught of the Lord.’ Christ, ‘ the
wisdom of God,’ made ‘wisdom’ to those
who are in Him. Believers to grow in the
knowledge of their Lord and Saviour. Much
always to be learned. Here we know but in
part. Our privilege to have the anointing of
the Holy Spirit, that we may know all
things. Eye-salve given by Christ, that we
may anoint our eyes and see. Spiritual
instruction to be found in the Church, our
‘mother’s house.” The Church furnished by
her Head with the means for such instruction,
Gifts of the Spirit bestowed for that pur-
pose (Eph. iv.7; Rom. xii. 7). True pastors
and teachers Christ’s gift. Believers to
teach and admonish one another. Our pri-
vilege always, with Mary, to sit at Jesus’


feet and hear his words, The Scriptures


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


OHAP. VIII,





given for our learning, that the man of God
may be perfect. The great commission, not
only to preach the Gospel, but to ‘ teach’
the Church's members (Matt. xxviii. 20).
The Bridegroom’s voice to His Bride:
* Learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in
heart’ (Matt. xii. 29). The most advanced
believers the most earnest and humble
learners. Believers never to be above ordi-
nances, yet always to look above them to
Christ. To be taught not by special revela-
tion, but in connection with instituted means
in their ‘mother’s house.’ Must find the truth
in ordinances, or cease to attend them (Prov.
xix. 27). Will not hear the voice of strangers,
but ‘flee from them.’ Believers after Pente-
cost ‘continued steadfastly in the doctrine
of the Apostles,’ who ‘daily in the temple
and in every house, ceased not to teach and
to preach Jesus Christ’ (Acts ii. 42; x. 42.
6. The believer's duty and delight, to make a
return for Christ’s love with whatever he has or
és. ‘I would cause thee to drink,’ &c. The
inquiry natural: ‘What shall I render
unto the Lord for all His benefits?’ Be-
lievers constrained by the mercies of God in
Christ to present their bodies to Him as a
living sacrifice (Rom. xii. 1). The love of
Christ constraineth us, to live not to ourselves
but ‘to Him who died for us’ (2 Cor. v. 10).
Our love desired in return for His, ‘ My
son, give me thine heart.’ Our love, mani-
fested by obedience and self-denying service,
His greatest refreshment and delight. ‘I
have meat to eat which ye know not of,’
Christ refreshed and fed m His members,
‘Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of
the least of these my brethren,’ &c. ‘He
that is taught in the word, to communicate
unto Him that teacheth in all good things.’
What is given to His servants who teach in
His name, regarded as given to Himself. ‘ He


that receiveth you, receiveth Me’ (Matt. x.
40—42). Believers after Pentecost ‘sold
their possessions, and brought the price and
laid it down at the Apostle’s feet; and dis-
tribution was made unto every man according
as he had need’ (Acts ii. 45; iv. 34—37).

6. Believers walking faithfully with Christ,
warranted to expect the repetition of former
enjoyment in His fellowship and love. ‘His
left hand should be aes my head,’ &.
This happiness already, on a former occasion,
enjoyed and recorded (chap. ii. 6). The
delight once experienced in special commu-
nion with Christ, and the enjoyment of His
manifested love, to be desired and expected
by the believer in the course of his pilgrim-
age. That experience usually found in propor-
tion to the desire after it, and in connection
with faithfulness in following Christ, confess-
ing Him before men, and seeking after the
lost. Special communication of His love
often Christ’s loving reward for faithful, self-
denying service. Yet an open door, and a
hearty welcome will bring Him in to sup
with us (Rev. iii. 20).

7. Care always needed by the believer to
guard against disturbing influences while in
the enjoyment of Christ’s presence and love.
‘I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem,’
&c. The charge already given on two former
occasions (chap. xxvii. 3, 5). Always needful
so long as the believer is in this world.
Seasons of spiritual rest and enjoyment to be
cherished and improved to the utmost (Acts
ix. 31). Care to be taken not to grieve or
quench the Spirit (Eph. iv. 20; 1 Thess. v.
19). Disturbing intluences both within and
without. Believers to keep the heart tender
and watchful in entertaining a found Christ,
No absolute freedom from interruption in the
enjoyment of Christ till we see Him as He
is.


Sczwz Szcomp. Place: The Country in the ncighbourhood of Shulamite’s native home.
Speakers: The King, Shulamite, and Country People.


Cuartzer VIIL Verses 5—7.


SHuLaMITE ADMIRED BY THE CoUNTRY
PEOPLE.


Verse 5.
Country Prope.


Who is this
_That cometh up out of the wilderness,
Leaning upon her beloved?


Shulamite’s proposal to go forth into the


country lovingly accepted by the King. The:


journey commenced, and now nearly com-


pleted. The happy pair now arrived »* the


neighbourhood of Shulamite’s native home.
Seen approaching, as she leans on her hus-
band’s arm. The Bride an object of admira-
tion to the rustic inhabitants, who exclaim;
‘Who is this?’ &c. Beautiful and instruc-
tive picture of the believer while in this
world. True always; especially true in the
Pentecostal or primitive age of the Church.
Notice in regard to


The Believer’s Posture.
L fhe Postuns Avif. Two pet ig


CHAY. VIII





eam


\ ase
1. cum ng up out of the wilderness? (1)
‘Coming. he life of believers a journey,
Like Moses to Hobab: ‘ We are journeying
to the place,’ &c. Sinners not pardoned to
sit still. Brought up out of the horrible pit,
and our feet set upon the rock, our ‘goings’
are established. The healed and pardoned
aralytic takes up his couch and goes to his
ouse. Believers have a home, and they go
to it. (2) Coming ‘wp. The journey of
believers an zpward one, Their home on
high. The ‘heavenly Jerusalem ;’ the house
with ‘many mansions;’ the ‘ better country,
that is, an heavenly.’ Their affections set on
things above. Their journey an ascent.
Their motto, Excelsior. Higher and higher.
Progress heavenward characteristic of the
believer. On the ladder, and ascending by
it. Ascent often difficult and laborious.
Descent easy, and requiring little effort. Sal-
vation to be wrought out with fear and
trembling. All diligence required to add to
our faith, virtue, &c. (3) Coming up ‘ oud of
‘the wilderness. The world in which the
believer finds himself, a wilderness. So Israel’s
journey to Canaan lay through a desert. A
wilderness is—(i.) A place of hunger and
‘thirst. (ii.) A place of thorns and briars.
(iii.) A place of danger both for man and
beast. The world anatle to satisfy the wants
and cravings of the soul. Full of trials
and temptations, The place of the roaring
lion, who seeks whom he may devour.
enemy’s country. Believers, like others,
once abiding in the wilderness. Willing to
remain in it, though finding neither rest nor
satisfaction, Aroused by a gracious voice:
‘Arise and depart ye; this is not your rest.’
Made to see it to be a wilderness, Like the
prodigal son, they see their misery, and think
of ahome Taking Jesus as their Saviour,
they set out for it. ‘Their back now to the
wilderness, and their face to heaven. Jn
the world, but no longer of it.
2. ‘Leaning on her Beloved.’ Implies—(1)
The company of her Beloved. Christ’s pre-
sence pron.ised to His people in their journey
through the wilderness. ‘ Fear not, for lam
with thee.’ ‘I will never leave thee nor for-
sake thee.’ ‘Iam with you alway, even unto
the end of the world.’ Hence their fearless-
ness. ‘Yea, though I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evi] ; for Thou art with me’ (Ps. ii. 3, 4).
(2) The support of her Beloved. Christ the
‘strength,’ as well as ‘ righteousness,’ of His
poo His promise: ‘ My grace is sufficient
or thee; My strength is made perfect in
weakness.’ Believers taught the ‘happy
art’ of depending on Christ for all thi
*Tcan do all things through Christ which
strengtheneth me.’ Believers ‘lean’ on
Christ—(i.) for acceptance with God, through
123


IMMENTARY ; THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





His perfect obedience. (ii.) For holiness and
victory over sin, through the grace of His
Spirit ; (iii) For protection and preservation,
by His Almighty power. (iv.) For strength
and grace for the performance of every duty,
and the endurance of every trial. Constant
supplies of grace needed and received out of
Christ’s fulness for the wilderness journey.
Great part of heavenly wisdom to lean on
Christ at every step, and at every turn of the
road. The life of believers a life of faith and
dependence on Christ. The part of faith to
lay the whole weight of our salvation, and the


burden of every duty and difficulty on the Be-


loved. Believers only go upward as they lean
on Christ. Kesting on Christ essential to pro-
ress in holiness. Spiritual growth marked
y conscious weakness leaning on perfect
strength. Hence Milton’s caney a ‘The
omnipotence of human weakness.’ Christ
honoured and pleased by such dependence.
To further it, He often removes from us every
a support. Hence Paul’s ‘thorn in the
esh.’


The believer’s life therefore—(1) A Jabo-
rious one. An upward journey through a
wilderness. (2) A pleasawt one. The com-
pany of the Beloved. Pleasant company
makes pleasant travel. (3) A sa/e one. An
Almighty arm to lean upon.


IL The Enquiry. ‘Whois this?? The
sight—(1) A rare one. Far from common
to ee an individual going up from the wil-
dernes., with his back to the world and his
face to he-ven, and especially as leaning on
Jesus as his Seloved. The opposite of the
character of the world. The sight every-
where met with is, worldliness, pride, and
self-dependence. (2) A beautiful and engag-
sng one. Beautiful in itself, and beautiful in
the eyes of God, angels, and all right-minded
persons, to see an individual giving up sin
and the world, and with Jesus as his Beloved
and only trust, earnestly proceeding on his
way to heaven. Believers most amiable when
seen going up out of the wilderness leaning
on their Beloved. Worldliness and pride
the blight and bane of the Church. A proud
and worldly-minded professor a stumbli
block to the world. A humble and heavenly
walk attractive even in the eyes of ungodly
men. (3) An open and conspicuous one.
Believers. going up from the wilderness lean-
ing on Jesus, not able to be hid. A city set
on a hill. The Master’s will that they should
be seen. ‘let your light so shine before
men,’ &. The object not that they should
be admired, but that God their Father should
be glorified. Believers to be ‘living Epistles
of Christ, known and read of all men.’ ‘He
that doeth truth cometh to the light, that
his deeds may be made manifest, they


q


4
*


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.
Fen ee eh


_——-—


are wrought in God.’ Believers to be God’s
witnesses in a sinful world. Their holy and
heavenly life to be His constant testimony,
Men to take knowledge of them that they
have been with Jesus. Made a ‘spectacle to
the world’ for God’s glory and the world’s
good. The heathen’s testimony to the early
Church: ‘See how these Christians love one
another.’ Men to be drawn to Christ not
merely by the preacher’s lips, but by the be-
liever’s life.


THe REMINISCENCB,
Verse 5.
Tue Kine,


To Shulamite, who enters with him, leaning
on his arm.


I raised thee up under the apple tree:

There thy mother brought thee forth,

There she brought thee forth that bare
thee.


One of the obscurest passages in the

em. Apart from Jewish pointing, nothing
in the form of the words to indicate who is
the speaker. That pointing, comparatively
modern, makes the words to be addressed to
the King, and thus to be spoken by Shula-
mite. ore reason, however, with all the
Greek Fathers, and many of the Latin ones,
to regard the King himself as the speaker,
and Shulamite the party addressed. Moved,
perhaps, by the sight of a familiar object as
they approach her mother’s dwelling, he re-
minds his beloved of what took place there
at an early period of their connection; points
her to the apple or citron-tree growing near
the house, which had witnessed his endeavours,
under its pleasant shade, to gain her affec-
tions, and his subsequent happiness when he
there received her as his betrothed at her
mother’s hand. ‘I raised thee up (or ‘ex-
cited thee’ to love) under the apple tree:
there thy mother brought thee forth (rather
‘pledged thee’ to me), there she brought
thee forth (pledged thee) that ‘bare thee.’
Observe—


1. First love and espousals between Christ
and the believer never to be forgotten. Never
forgotten on Christ’s side. ‘I remember
thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of
thine espousals’ (Jer. ii. 2). Believer’s first
love greatly prized and fondly looked back
upon by the Saviour. ‘I have somewhat
against thee, because thou hast left thy first
love ’ (Rev. ii. 4). Believers, on their part,
to cherish the remembrance of Christ’s ear
gracious dealings wth their soul, and of their


cHAP, Tt


early affection and surrender of themselver
to Him.

2. Christ the first mover in the saving con-
nection between a soul and Himself. ‘1 raised
thee up’—excited thee to love. ‘Ye have
not chosen Me, but I have chosen you.’ The
first spark of love to Christ in the soul kindled
by Christ Himself. ‘We love Him because

e first loved us.’ ‘I have loved thee with
an everlasting love; therefore with ioving-
kindness have I drawn thee.’ ‘I will betroth
thee unto Me in lovingkindness and in mer-
cies’ (Hos. ii. 19; Jer. xxxi. 3). The soul
espoused by Christ first ‘raised up? by Him
from x ese death. ‘Raised up’ from a
state of degradation and misery. Raised as
a ‘beggar from the dunghill, to inherit the
throne of glory’ (1 Sam. ii. 8). ‘Raised
up’ from the deep spiritual sleep into which
sin has cast mankind’ (Eph. v. 14). ‘ Raised
up,’ finally, from the dejection and despon-
dency common upon conviction of sin’ (Acts
ii. 37, 38; xvi. 30, 31).

3. Those places precious and memorable to
the believer that are associated with his early
love and espousals to Christ. The place of
the altar where the Lord first appeared to
Abraham in Canaan fondly remembered by
him. Jacob reminded by the Lord Himself
of the place where He first appeared to him
as his covenant God. Those places of early
love and communion afterwards gratefully
visited. Their frequent remembrance pro-
fitable to the reviving and stimulating of love
and devotedness to the Saviour.

4, Spiritual ordinances, in which Christ
meets and espouses souls to Himself, ji¢/y
compared to ax


Apple Tree.


(1) Because full of Christ, the True Apple .
Tree (chap. ii. 3). (2) From the sweet re-
Jreshment afforded in them to quickened souls.
The apple or citron tree distinguished for its
rofalhig fragrance. (3) From the rich
and reviving fruit enjoyed in connection
with them. ‘Thy words were found unto
me, and I did eat them; and Thy words
were the joy and rejoicing of my ‘heart.’
‘My flesh is meat indeed, and My blood is
drink indeed.’ (4) From the comfort aad
strength afforded in them in times of tempta-
tion and trial. The citron-tree remarkable
for its shade. The Psalmist’s experience:
* One thing have I desired of the Lord, and
that will f seek after, that I may dwell in
the house.of the Lord all the days of m
life; to behold the beauty of the Lord
to inquire in His temple: for in the time of
fonts He shall hide me in His pavilion.
Mine head shall be lifted up above mine
enemies round about me’ (Ps. xxvii. a


CHAP. VIII,





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


eee


5. The part of the Church of Christ not~ with henna dye, or other material (Rev. vii.


only to ‘bring forth, but to ‘pledge’ souls to
Him as His Bride. The Church to be a
mother of children, who, with herself and
through her instrumentality, shall be es-
poused to Christ. Paul, as a minister of
Christ, a representative of the Church when
he says: ‘My little children, of whom I
travail in birth, until Christ be formed in
yu, ‘I have espoused you to one hus-
and.’ The Church never to forget her high
calling, and never to be satisfied unless
‘pledging ’ souls to Christ as His Bride.

6. The divinely instituted ordinances of the
Church, the means by which souls are ordi-
sarily ‘ brought forth’ to a spiritual life and
pledged to Christ as His Bride. ‘There thy
mother brought thee forth’ (pledged thee).
The ordinances of the Church instituted by
Christ Himself for this purpose (Eph. iv.
8—12). ‘In Christ Jesus have I begotten
you by the Gospel.’ Paul and Barnabas at Ico-
nium ‘so spake that a great multitude both of
the Jews and also of the Greeks believed’
(Acts xiv. 1).


Tue Brive’s REQUEST.
Verses 6, 7.
SHuLaMItE, ¢o the King.


Set me as a seal upon thy heart,

As a seal upon thine arm:

For love is strong as death,

Jealousy is cruel as the grave:

The coals thereof are coals of fire,

Which hath a most vehement flame.

Many waters cannot quench love;

Neither can the floods drown it.

If a man would give all the substance
of his house for love,

It would utterly be contemned.


Shulamite, still leaning on her Beloved,
and taking occasion from the tender recol-
lection he had just uttered, expresses on her
_ side a desire indicative of the ardour and
steadfastness of her affection. ‘Set measa
seal upon thine heart,’ &c. As a plea for her
request, she urges the nature of true love.
‘For love is strong as death, &c. Ob-
serve—


I. The Request. ‘Set me as a seal,’
&c. Seals well-known to have been used, as
they still are, ior ratifying and confirming
covenants (Neh. ix. 38; Jer. xxxil. 10, 44;
Rom. iv. 11). Used also for security (Deut.
xxxii. 34; Job xiv. 17; Matt. xxv. 66;
Rom. xv. 28). May here allude to the prac-
tice of impressing marks upon the person

134


8; xiv. 1; xx. 3). Shulamite’s desire to
have ber name or likeness stamped upon her
Beloved’s heart and arm; on his heart or
breast as the seat. of affection, and on his arm,
where it might be constantly in view. The
desire of every loving heart to be kept in
affectionate remembrance by one who is the
object of its love. Love must have love in
return, A fear, however, that love nught be
diminished by distance, especially where
it may have rivals. Love trembles at the
thought of the proverb proving true: ‘Out
of sight, out of mind’? ‘The believer's
strongest desire to be loved and affectionately
remembered by his Saviour. ‘Lord, remem-
ber me,’ a prayer both in the Old and New
Testament (Ps. evi. 8; Luke xxiii. 42).
The believer conscious how unworthy he is
of Christ’s love, yet cannot live without an
assurance of it. That assurance granted
in the words of the inspired prophet:
‘Can a woman forget her sucking child, that
she should not have compassion on the som
of her womb® Yea, she may forget; yet will
I not forget thee. Behold I have graven thee
upon the palms of my hunds ; thy walls are
“continually before me’ (Isa. xlix. 14—16).
Typical of this fact, the names of the twelve
tribes were engraved on the High Priest’s |
breast-plate and shoulder-pieces, and carried
with him into the Holy of Holies before the
Lord (Exod. xxviii. 6—30). The import of
the request—(1) Preciousness and dearness
in the sight of the Beloved (Jer. xxii. 24;
Haggai 11. 28). (2) Nearness to, or rather
oneness with, Him. (3) An unchanging an
permanent place in His affection. (4) A
constant remembrance by Him. Observe—

1. Present communion to be improved by
importunate pleading.

2. Love evinces its reality and ardour by
seeking greater nearness and unchanging
steadlastness.

3. The believer’s earnest desire and distin-

ished privilege to be cherished by Christ’s

eart, aud supported by Christ’s arm.


II. The Pura. ‘For love is strong as
death, &c. The ardour and strength of
Shulamite’s affection, the reason of the desire
to have an abiding place in that of her
Beloved. Ardent love can only live on love.
Conscious of the ardour and steadfastness of
her own affection, she desires it to be reci-
procal. Love which is not ardent and stead-
fast unworthy of the name. Hence Shula
mite’s descant on the


Nature of True Love.


L. Its strength and irresistiblen
subject of it, ‘Strong as death,’


o*


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON


—











more to be resisted in its approaches than
death. Shulamite under the power of it in
regard to her Beloved. Unable to resist it,
ehe must love and be loved in return, or die.
Like death, love must have its object. So
Christ gave up His own life in order to have
the Church whom He loved (John xv. 13;
ae v. 25). Believers must have Christ, or
ie.

2. Its tenacity. ‘Jealousy is cruel as the
grave.’ Jealousy an intense, vehement love,
that cannot brook a rival (Prov. vi. 34).
Same word rendered ‘ zeal.’ Is ‘cruel ’—
severe, unyielding, and tenacious, ‘as the
grave.” Like the grave, love will not quit its
hold but at the command of Omnipotence,
_ Jealousy implies—(1) Ardent affection; (2)
Fervent desire of enjoyment; (3) Impa-
tience of anything coming between love and
its object; (4) Grief for any apparent want
of return. Such the case with Christ’s love
and the believer’s, Jealousy of Christ’s
love a proof of the strength of our own.
Love to Christ makes us jealous of all that
would come betwixt Him and us. Christ’s
love to His people can endure no rival in
theirs to Him, ‘I would thou wert either
cold or hot.’ Believers too apt unjustly to
suspect Christ’s love to them, while Christ
has too much cause to be jealous of their love
to Him.

3. Its ardour and intensity. The coals
(or rather ‘flames’) thereof are coals
(flames) of fire, which hath a most vehement
flame’ (or, ‘a flame of Jah,’ or Jehovah,—
expressive either of its greatness, or its
origin). The comparison common to all
countries. The Song itself an exemplifi-
cation of the text. True love not only in-
tense, but painful and consuming, unless
able to obtain its object. Believers not to
be satisfied with a lukewarm love to Christ.
Everything in Him to beget a fervent,
burning love. Such a love sought by Him
(John xxi, 15—17; Rev. iii. 15). Christ
infinitely lovely and infinitely loving. Con-
jugal love to be ardent, intense, and self-
sacrificing: love to Christ to be still more
so. Christ’s own love of that nature, ‘The
zeal of thine house hath eaten me up’ ‘He
loved the Church, and gave Himself for it.’
True, holy love, a ‘flame of Jehovah,’ from
its origin as well as its ardour. Especially
true of love to Christ. No true love to Christ
which has not been kindled by the Holy
Ghost. A divine flame of love to Christ
kindled in the breast of every believer.

‘There let it to Thy glory burn,
With inextinguishable blaze;

And, trembling to its source return,
In ardent love and fervent praise.’


The text the only passage in the Song appa-


rently containing the divine name: ‘a ilame of


CHAP, VIIL,





Jah.’ This, if the correct translation, perhaps
intended to afford the key to the ial book.
The Song of Solomon not only a ‘Song of
Loves,’ but a Song of divine loves—of the love
of Jehovah-Jesus to His Church, and the
Church’s love to Him, as kindled by the
Holy Ghost.

4. Its wnguenchableness. ‘Many waters
cannot quench love,’ &c. True love survives
all discouragements, and even coolness on
the part of its object. Superior to all suffer-
ing endured on account of it. The love of
Shulamite and the King had stood both tests,
To exhibit, under an allegory, the unquench-
ableness of the love between Christ and His
Church, probably one great object of the
poem. leading feature in love or charity,
as described by Paul, that it ‘suffereth long,
beareth all things, endureth all things, and
never faileth’ (1 Cor. xiii. 4, 7,8). ‘The
unquenchableness of the believer’s love to
Christ exhibited by ‘the noble army of
martyrs’ (Rom. viii. 35—37; Rev xii. 11).
By Paul himself (Acts xx. 24; xxi. 13).
By many among the Jews, in the persecutions
by Antiochus Epiphanes (Dan. xi 32, 33).
Love’s unqueuchableness exhibited in its
perfection by the Lord Jesus Christ (Eph. v.
25; John xiii. 1). His love not drowned by
the floods of suffering that men, or devils, or
God Himself, as the righteous Judge dealing
with the sinner’s Surety, could pour upon
it (Ps. lxix. 1, 2).

5. Its unpurchaseableness and preciousness.
‘Tf a man would give all the substance of
his house for love, it would utterly be con-
temned.’ ‘hree ideas—(1) Love cannot be pur-
chased by mony or external gifts. ‘Too pre-
cious to be bought. Love will beget love,
but money cannot buy it. ‘Money answer-
eth all things;’ but cannot fue love.
The poorest peasant possessed of a treasure
shiek the wealth of a millionaire cannot
buy. A man’s body and labour may be
purchased, but not his love. Kind words
and acts may generate it. Self-denying de-
votedness may give a claim to it, and may
win it. But no money can be accepted as
its price. Riches may gain the hand, but
not the heart. Shulamite’s love, though
that of a humble peasant, not won by Solo-
mon’s crown and kingdom, but by his excel-
lence andlove. Believer’s love Christ not for
what He has, but for what Heis. God is loved
not because He is the greatest, but because
He is the dest of beings. Christ’s goodness
rather than His gifts, wins the sinner’s heart.
His cross the ‘apple-tree’ under which He
gaius the believer’s love. Sinners drawn by
the cords of a man and the bands of love
(Hos. xi. 4). ‘We love Him, because He
first loved us.’ Christ gave for the sinner’s
love, not the ‘substance of His house,’ but

125


\


ruaP. wil. HOUMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


a eee


the blood of His heart (Rev. i. 5; v. 9). (2)
Nothing can be given or accepted as a substi-
tute for love. Solomon’s whole kingdom
despised by Shulamite if offered in the
place of his love. The riches of the uni-
verse contemptible to a quickened soul as a
substitute for Christ’s love. Heaven itself,
with all its glory, were it possible, without
the love of heaven’s King, but a poor gift
to the soul that loves Him. Hell made
heaven with the enjoyed love of Christ, and
heaven no heaven without it. ‘In His
favour is life’ ‘Thy loving kindness is
better than life On the part of man, all
his gifts, without love, contemptible. (1
Cor. xiii. 3). Love the pearl in the oyster-
shell. The shell without the pearl con-


temptible. (3) Love not to be detached by the
gifis of another, True love superior to
flattering promises as well as threatened

enalties. Satan’s bait only successful where


ove to Christ is nominal.
to withdraw Demas from his profession, but
not Jolin from his love. The believer not to
be separated from the love of Christ by the


The world able


height of prosperity, any more than by the
depth of adversity. ‘The believer’s love,
like Christ’s own, superior to all enticements,
His language, even at the stake, with a par.
don offered for apostasy: ‘If you love my
soul, away with it.’ ‘ None but Christ, none
but Christ!’ Love rejects with disdain the
most flattering temptations to withdraw
the soul from Christ. Esteems the reproach
of Christ greater riches that the treasures of
Egypt. Prefers a dungeon with Christ to a
palace without Him.

This brief didactic discourse on the nature
of true love, remarkable as here introduced
into the Song. Apparently intended to give
the key to the whole book. Remarkable
also for its resemblance to Paul’s discourse on
the same subject in 1 Corinthians xiii. The
passage probably a prophetic intimation of
that exhibition of Divine love to be made
in the fulness of time, in the incarnation,
suffering, and death of the Son of God, as
the Bridegroom of His Church, and the
Saviour of the world.


Che Mride’s Yntercession for Ber Wittle Sister,
Cuarrer VIII. 8—14.


Screwz Turnp. Place: Skulamite’s Mother's House in the Country. Speakers: The King
and Shulamite.


Verse 8,
SHULAMITR,


We have a little sister,

And she hath no breasts.

What shall we do for our sister,

In the day when she shall be spoken
for ?


Now reposing with her beloved in her
mother’s house, Shulamite seeks lovingly to
turn the visit to the advantage of a younger
sister. The family being poor, she asks of
her royal husband what they should do for
her in the event of her being sought in
marriage. ‘ What shall we do for our sister P”
&e. Observe—

1, Union and communion with the Saviour
to be improved by the believer to the advantage
of others, especially of his relations und
friends. So Esther with Ahasuerus at the
banquet of wine (Esther vii. 3.) Commu-
nion seasons, especially, to be improved as
times of intercession.

2. The duty of believers to interest them-

126


selves in the welfare of others, and especially
Of those with whom they are more immediately
connected. Believers not to be satisfied to
enjoy Christ and heaven alone. One indivi-
dual saved for the benefit of others as well
as himself. The privilege and duty of be-
lievers to save others (James v. 19, 203
Jude 23). Souls saved and blessing bestowed
on others, in answer to believer’s prayers.
*O that Ishmael may live before thee!
* I have given thee all them that sail with
thee.’ The nature of grace to desire that
others may share our happiness. The effect
of sin torender men selfish and indifferent
to the welfare of their neighbour. Godlike
and Christlike not only to de good but to
‘do good and to communicate.’ Believers
possessed of the Divine nature; and therefore,
‘look not on their own things, but on the
things of others.’ All men our brethren.
A brother or a sister seen in every child of
Adam, however poor and degraded. The
‘little sister’ ever at our doors. Also found
in China and Japan, in central Africa and
New South Wales. More especially within
the circle of our nearer kindred. Grace not
to cancel, but to consecrate earthly relation


~


ee —


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


f


CHAP. VIII.


ee


ships. Men ‘set in families’ that one may take
more special interest in the welfare of another.
The happiness of one member to be made
the happiness of the rest. Andrew ‘findeth
his own brother Simon,’ and ‘ brought him to
Jesus.’ Noah was to enter the ark and bring
his family with him. Lot was to take his
kindred with him out of Sodom. Rahab’s
relatives to be saved with herself in the
destruction of Jericho. A promise given to
the believer concerning his house as well as
himself. Hence whole households baptized
at once. The language of Moses to his
father-in-law to be that of believers to
their kindred and fellow-men: ‘Come thou
with us and we will dothee good’ (Num. x.
29). The new Testament Church to be
Christ’s witnesses and the bearers of His
salvation to ‘Judsa and Samaria, and the
‘uttermost ends of the earth’ The picture
in the text verified in the Church’s inter-
cessions for a perishing world, begun in the
upper room at Jerusalem and continued to
this day.

3. In caring and interceding for others, we
do it for Christ’s brethren as well as our own.
‘We have a little sister.’ Marriage makes
community of kindred. United to Christ,
what is ours becomes His, as what is His
becomes ours. Our brethren His brethren
also, by virtue of His incarnation and a com-
mon nature. The poorest and most degraded,
a ‘little sister’ of Christ as well as of His
people.

4. The young to have a special place in the
care and intercession of the Church. The
‘little sister’ not to be overlooked because
little. None too little to be saved, or to
need salvation. Children cared for by Christ,
and to be cared for by His people. ‘Suffer
the little children to come unto Me, and
forbid them not.’ The lambs gathered with
His arm, and carried in His bosom. His
first charge to the penitent Apostle: ‘Feed
My lambs ;’ His second: ‘Feed My sheep.’
The most healthy, prosperous, and usetul
Church, that where the shepherd looks well
to the lambs. The Church’s wisdom, as well
as duty, to remember the ‘little sister’ in
her prayers and ministrations.

5. Times when, in the providence of God,
nations and individuals are favoured with the
gracious offers of a Saviour. ‘The day when
she shall be spoken for,’ or sued in marriage.
Such a time contemplated by Shulamite as
likely to occur, sooner or later, to her still
‘little’ sister. The faithfully preached
Gospel an offer of Christ as the sinner’s
Saviour and Husband. A demand made in
it for the sinner’s heart on the part of the
heavenly Suitor. Every Gospei liearer
wooed te the King of Glory to become
His Bride. Every faithful minister, like


John the Baptist, the friend of the Bride-
groom, seeking to bring about a match
between Christ and His hearers, The Gos-
pel offer is the question put to Rebekah:
Wilt thou go with this man? Paul’s lan-
guage to his converts: ‘I have espoused
you to one hushand’ (2 Cor. xi. 2). This
offer made to all who hear the Gospel. The
Gospel itself intended to be preached to all.
Yet, in the providence of God, only reaches
some. Time required for its promulgation.
The harvest great; the labourers few.
Labourers to be sent forth. Dass to be
opened by Him who rules amongmen. The
Church’s duty to enter those doors as the
are opened. That duty too slowly performed.
The preacher directed in his mission by the
Holy Ghost (Acts viii. 26—29; xii. 2;
xvi. 6, 7). The Gospel preached with power
is an ‘accepted time,’ and ‘ day of salvation’
(2 Cor. vi. 2). Blessed when men know the
day of their merciful! visitation.

6. The Church not only to intercede with
God on behalf of their fellow-men, but also to
act as his fellow-workers for their salvation.
* What shall we do for our sister in the day,’
&c.? Shulamite’s duty in relation to her
‘little sister’ not completed when she had
intereeded for her; something to be done for
her. Praying for others to be followed by
doing for them. ‘The Gospel not only to be
taken or sent to them, but something to be
done while it is so. The Gospel, when
ee a to be accompanied with earnest,

elieving prayer for its success. The
hearers of it, as opportunity is afforded, to
be counselled to accept of its gracious offer.
Believers to be on the watch for souls when
the Gospel is pressed home on men’s hearts.
The value of the Inquiry Room. Believers
to help the preacher by endeavouring lovingly
to bring the hearer to decision. Impressions
to be fostered. Young converts to be care-
fully and tenderly watched over by the
Church. All, however, to be done only along
with Jesus. ‘What shall we do?’ &c.
Poor work when even the believer goes to
it alone.


Tue Royat Response.
Verse 9.
Tus Kine.


If she be a wall,

We will build upon her a palace of
silver ;

If she be a door,

We will enclose her with boards of


cedar.
137


CHAF. VIII.


HUMILETIG COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





The King graciously receives Shulamite’s
suit, and promises that, with her co-cpera-
tion, he will take proper care of, and amply
provide for her little sister, according as her
circumstances and conduct may appear to
require. ‘If she be a wall,’ steadfastly re-
sisting temptation, ‘we will build upon her
a palace (or tower) of silver’—endow her
with a rich and ample dowry. ‘If,’ on the
contrary, ‘she be a door’—open to all
comers—‘ we will enclose her with boards
of cedar’—impose upon her due restraints,
or bestow on her adowry of much less value.
Observe—

l. The Saviour never regardless of His
people’s intercessions on alg of others,
especially of their own kindred, ‘Asx Me
of things to come concerning My sons ; and
concerning the work of My hands, com-
mand ye Me.’ As for Ishmael, I have heard
thee ; behold, I have blessed him (Gen. xvii.
20; Isa. xlv. 11).

2. Christ associates His people with Him-
self in blessing and saving those for whom they
intercede. ‘We will build upon her,’ &c.
Believers to be ready to employ means, as
well as to offer prayers, Abraham com-
mended for ‘commanding his children and
his household after him,’ that the Lord
might bring upon him that which He had
‘spoken of him ’—the blessing He had pro-
mised (Gen. xviii. 19),

3. Prayer for others not answered in all
cases alike. ‘The answer given according to
the circumstances of the case. Regard had
to the requirements and behaviour of the
party prayed for. Our comfort to know
that prayer will be answered according to
the judgment of infinite wisdom and good-
ness. Ishmael blessed in answer to Abra-
ham’s prayer, but not with the blessing of
Isaac.

4. A principle in the Divine procedure,
‘to him that hath shall more be given, and he
shall have abundance.’ Gitts increased or
withdrawn according to their improvement.
‘If she be a wall,’ &c. A firm and steadfast
¢ wall,’ to be adorned with a ‘tower of silver’:
an open and yielding ‘ door,’ to be nailed up
with ‘ boards of cedar.’

5. Christ a liberal giver. ‘We will build
upon her’—not any ordinary dwelling, but
—a ‘palace;’ not a palace of stone, but one
of ‘silver.’ ‘Able to do exceeding abun-
dantly above all that we ask or think.’ ‘Able
to make all grace abound toward us.’ And as
willing as He is able. Giveth to all liberally,
and upbraideth not. ‘Is the Spirit of the
Lord straitenedP’ ‘Ye are not straitened
inus: but ye are straitened in your own
bowels’ (2 Cor. vi. 12; Mic. ii. 7). No
limit to the grace of Christ. Our privilege
to receive ‘ out of His fuluess, and grace for

128


grace,’ and to be ‘filled with all the fulness
of God.’

6. Prayer sometimes answered by affiction
and chastening. ‘We will enclose her,’ or
nail her up. To be nailed up, though with
‘boards of cedar,’ rather like a blow than
a blessing. Yet, in the circumstances, the
grea'est boon. ‘By terrible things in righ.
teousness wilt thou answerus.’ Restraints
of divine Providence often our greatest
blessing. Often a special mercy when the
Lord ‘hedges up our way,’ so that we ‘may
not find our paths’ (Hos. ii. 6).

7. Lhe work of grace in the hears, a ‘ build-

 *We will build upon her.’ ‘Ye are
God’s building.’ The foundation of that
building Christ Himself, accepted and trusted
in as the only and all-sufficient Saviour,
Christ also, by His Holy Spirit, the Great
Master-builder. ‘On this rock I will build
My church.’ Faithful ministers, and be-
lievers in general, according to their several

ifts, subordinate builders and labourers.

he building the joint work of Christ and
His people: ‘ We will build.’ The building
a glorious one—a palace of silver! rich,

ure, and resplendent in glory. The resi-
face of the ing of Kings. ‘An habitation
of God through the Spirit? (Eph. ii. 19—22;
1 Pet. ii. 5; Col. ii. 7; Jude 20.).

8. The duly of each, both before and after
conversion, to seek grace to keep the heart and
to resist temptation. Our interest in being
a ‘wall’ to resist, rather than a ‘door’ to
admit, the tempter. ‘Your adversary, the
devil, goeth about like a roaring lion, seeking
whom he may devour; whom resist, steadfast
in the faith.’ Joseph a ‘wall,’ and becomes
governor of Egypt, to ‘save much people
alive.’ Dinah a ‘door,’ and after filling a
town with bloodshed and misery, goes down
into forgetfulness, leaving behind her only
a dishonoured name (Gen. xxxiv. 1),
Steadfast adherence to Christ’s truth in the
face of persecution, kindly noticed and gra-
ne rewarded by the Master (Rev. iii.

9. The text realized in the Pentecostal
Church. That Church a wall—{1) Against the
attacks and threatening of their adversuries
(Acts iv. 13—20; v. 27—33, 41, 42; vi.
9—15; vii. 54—60). ‘Overcame by the
word of their testimony, not loving their
lives unto the death.’ Enriched, in con-
sequence, with all grace and spiritual gifts
(Acts ii. 41—47; iv. 33—37; Rom. xv. 14;
1 Cor. i. 4—7; 2 Cor. viii. 1, 2; Heb. x.
32—34). (2) Against the attempts of Juda-
izers to bring the Church under the boudage of
the Mosatc law (Acts xv. 1—29). Paul a
‘wall’ throughout; Peter, at one time, in
danger of becoming a ‘door’ (Gal. ii. 4, 5,
11—14). A world of evil, introduced when


Po ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





CHAP. VIIb





afterwards the Church became a ‘ door,’ ad-
mitting corruptions from Judaism, Gentile
Philosophy, and Pagan superstition. At-
tempts, however, made by faithful men from
time to time to enclose and nail up the door.
Notably in the Reformation of the sixteenth
Seals by Luther, Calvin, Knox, and
others.


SuuLamite’s THANKFULNESS,
Verse 10.
SHULAMITE,


T am a wall,

And my breasts like towers
Then was I in his eyes

As one that found favour,


fhe Bride reminded by the King’s words
of her own happiness in the preservation of
her purity and the enjoyment of his love.
Arrived at a chaste womanhood, she had
been honoured, notwithstanding her poverty
and obscurity, to become the spouse of the
King. Observe—

1. An unspeakable mercy to be preserved,
especially in the time of youth, from the allure-
ments and lemptations of an evil world. That
mercy to be thankfully acknowledged.

2. The believer’s duty to recognize the Lord’s
mercy in his preservation and spiritual yrowth.
A mercy to be in a state of grace; an addi-
tional mercy to know that we are. A divine
injunction to know ourselves. ‘Know ye
not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ
is in you, except ye be reprobate?’ ‘The
grace of assurance, however, commonly the
result of faithful adherence to Christ, resist-
ance to temptation, and growth in grace.
‘Tribulation worketh patience; and patience,
eeu (or proof); and experience,

ope.’

3. Grace, a thing of progress and increase.
‘My breast like towers.’ Not always so.
Shulamite once like her ‘little sister,’ with
‘no breasts.’ ‘he breasts also considerabl
grown since she began to have them.
world of difference between a man who is a
true Christian and one who is not. But a
great difference also between one true Chris-
tian and another. Some Christians only
‘babes in Christ ;? others ‘full grown men.’
Believers not to be satisfied with a low state
of grace, but to go on to perfection. ‘ Be
no longer children, but men.’ ‘Grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ.’

4. The part of believers to be helpful to
others. Breasts given not for the use of the
mother, but her infant, The Church to be a

q


joyfal mother of children. Each believer to
é helpful in nourishing these children,
‘Able to admonish one another.’ ‘ Edify
one another, even also ye do.’ ‘Exhort one
another daily while it is called to-day.’
‘Teaching and admonishing one another in
psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs.’ ‘Feed
my lambs,’ an injunction not confined to
Peter or to ministers. The body strength-
ened by ‘that which every joint supplieth?
‘Let every one please his neighbour for his

to edification’ (Rom. xv. 2, 14; Col. iii.

6; Heb. iii. 13).

5. Christ’s pleasure in His faithful people.
The soul most pleasing in Christ’s eyes that
has, in His strength, resisted and overcome
temptation. ‘Then,’ when I appeared as a
wall, ‘1 was in his eyes as one that found
favour.’ ‘ Because thou hast kept the word
of My patience, I also will keep thee,’ &c.
(Rev. ini. 10).

6. 4 man’s greatest happiness to find favow
in Christ’s eyes. Recorded by Shulamite in re-
lation to Solomonas her great happiness: ‘I
was in his eyes as one that found favour ’ (or
peace). If the favour of an earthly monarch
may count for so much, what of the favour
of the King of Kings? ‘In His favour is
life.’ Thy ‘loving-kindness is better than
life.’ ‘Many will entreat the favour of the
prince’ (Prov. xix. 6). Alas! that so few
should entreat the favour of Him who is the
* Prince of the kings of the earth.’ The day
approachixz when all men will see how little
it matters in whose eyes we may find favour,
if we have not the favour of Him who shall
sit upon the ‘great white throne. Happy
for us that the poorest, humblest, and vilest
may find favour in His eyes, not through
any merits of our own, but by believing His
Word, and heartily accepting the offer He
makes of Himself in the Gospel. ‘Justified
by faith, we have peace with God through
Our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom we have
access into this grace, wherein we stand’
(Rom. v. 1). ‘True ‘ peace’ found in finding
and accepting Christ, who is ‘our peace.’
‘Whoso findeth Me findeth life, and shall
obtain favour of the Lord’ (Prov. viii. 35).


SauLamite’s Se.F-DEpIcaTION.
Verses 11, 12.
SHULAMITE,


Solomon had a vineyard at Baalhamon:
He let out the vineyard unto keepers:
Every one for the fruit thereof
Was to bringa thousand pieces of silver.
My vineyard, which is mine,
Is before me;

129


cHaP. vill. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON. |





ny


Thou, O Solomon, must havea thousand,
And those that keep the fruit thereof
two hundred.


Shulamite, intensely happy in the pos-
session of her Beloved, gladly consecrates to
him and to his service herself and her little
all. She should be to him as his choice
vineyard at Baalhamon,—perhaps a fictitious
or peetical name, suited for the allegory, and
denoting the ‘lord of noise,’ or ‘ possessor
ofa multitude.’ As Solomon for his vineyard
received a thousand pieces of silver as its
rental, he should receive no less for what
she brought him, while the keepers of the
fruit should also receive suitable remunera-
tion, She speaks of what she devoted to
him as her own vineyard: ‘My vineyard
which is mine.’ The language peculiar and
emphatic. Probably intended to indicate no
mere piece of landed property which she

ossessed, and which she now made over to

er husband ; but rather that which, both in
itself and to Solomon, was worth more than
the widest domains that could have been
eae to him,—HeRseLr. ‘The same

gure already apparently employed by her in
the beginning of the Song, when she con-
fessed to the ladies of the Court: ‘They
made me keeper of the vineyards, but mine
own vineyard have I not kept* (Ch. i. 6).
This vineyard of her own person, she seems
to say, she will no longer, as before, neglect ;
but would, for her husband’s sake, cultivate
it with all due attention, that she might be
to him all that she could be, and, if possible,
all that he could desire. ‘My vineyard,
which is mine, is before me; (present to my
thoughts, and the object of my attention
and care); thou, O Solomon, must have a
thousand’ (or rather, ‘the thousand ’—the
full and ample revenue, as of the vineyard at
Baalhamon). Those who should aid her in
this self-cultivation should also receive a
liberal remuneration: ‘The keepers thereof
two hundred ’—a fifth of the revenue.

In Solomon’s ‘vineyard at Baalhamon’
we may have a picture of the ‘ Kingdom of
God,’ with its privileges and blessings, as
committed originally to the favoured de-
scendants of Abraham. The parallel to the
passage may probably be found in the parable
of the Vineyard (Matt. xxi. 33—43; Isa.
v. 1, &c.). The vineyard, in the Prophet, is
ascribed to the ‘ Belived > (‘My Beloved,’
namely, the Messiah), as here to Solomon,
nis type. Christ the Head of the Theo-
cratic Kingdom in the Old Testament, as
truly as He is head of the Church in the
New. In His incarnation, ‘He came unto
His own,’ literally, ‘His own things,’ His
own kingdom or vineyard; ‘and His own
(his own people, the form of the word being

130








altered), received Him not’ (Jobn i. 11).
The ‘vineyard’ or kingdom, Christ’s; as—
(1) It has been given Him by the Father.
(2) He has been constituted its Head and


King. (3) He has purchased its blessings


with His blood. This vineyard at ‘ Baalha-
mon;’ the ‘Kingdom of God’ being set
busy up in the midst of the world with
its multitudes, its noise and unrest. The
kingdom at first set up among the descen-
dants of Abraham thus separated from
the nations for a special purpose, after-
wards extended to all the nations of the
earth (Matt. xxviii. 19). The extension in-
dicated in the change of Abraham’s name,
the added syllable being a modified form
of the second part of the name in the text
Baal-hamon. The transference of the ki
dom or the ‘vineyard’ from the Jews to
the nations of the world probably indicated
in this part of the allegory, in which Shula-
mite becomes the vineyard of Solomon
instead of that at Baalhamon. From the
whole, observe—

1. The part of a believer to consecrate
himself and his all to Christ and His service.
Such dedication on the part of the bride to
her husband, understood in the case of earthly
espousals. No less real in the case of the
heavenly ones. :

2. The believer himself individually, as
well as the Church collectively, a ‘vineyard ;?
as reclaimed from the wilderness of the
world, hedged in, cared for, cultivated by
the Divine husbandman, and bringing forth

recious fruit for its owner (John xv. 1—8;

a. v. 1, &.).

3. Believers to make their own souls and
those of their brethren the object of their
special care and attention. ‘My vineyar
which is mine, is before me.’ ach has
naturally his own soul to care for and attend
to. But only a Cain asks: ‘Am I my bro-
ther’s keeper?’ Our own vineyard to be
carefully looked after: ‘Keep thy heart
with all diligence.’ ‘Keep yourselves in the
love of God.’ ‘He that is of God keepeth
himself, and that wicked one toucheth him
not.’ Great part of ‘pure and undefiled
religion,’ to keep ourselves ‘unspotted from
the world.’ Believers to work out their own
salvation ‘with fear and trembling.’ Each
to interest himself in the welfare of his
brethren and of the Church at large (1
Cor. xii. 26). ‘Look not every man on
his own things, but also on the things of
others.” ‘Seek not every man his own
wealth,’ or welfare. ‘Looking diligently
lest any man fail of the grace of God.’ ‘ Ex-
hort one another daily, lest any of you be
hardened by the deceitfulness of sin.’ ‘Teach-
ing and admonishing one another in all
wisdom,’ ‘Let every one of us please his


inns ged nal


ot le arti ata


ee ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


CHAP. VIII.


a


neighbour for his good unto edification’
(Rom. xv. 2). The care required for our own
and our neighbour’s soul indicated in the
expression—‘Is before me.’ Denotes—(1)
Thoughtfulness, (2) Attention. (3) Watch-
fulness. (4) Diligence.

4. The aim of the believer’s eare over His
own soul and that of others to be that
Christ may be glorified, and God in Him,
in an abundance of fruit. ‘Thou, O
Solomon, must have a thousand.  ‘ Here-
in is My Father glorified,’ that ye bear much
fruit ; so shall ye be my disciples.’ ‘I have
chosen you and ordained you, that ye should
go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit
should remain’ (John xv. 8, 16). The fruit
brought forth by believers the reward of
Christ’s suffering for tieir salvation (Isa. liii.
11). The ‘joy that was set before Him’ in
enduring ‘the cross.’ That fruit the ‘fruits
of the Spirit, being produced through His in-
ward and spiritual agency. These fruits:
Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, or
self-control (Gal. v. 22). The spiritual
benefit received through us by others, put
down as ‘ fruit’ to our account (Rom i. 13).

5. Special keepers of the fruit of the vineyard
appointed and to be recognized. * The keepers
of the fruit thereof.’ 'The care of these some-
thing over and above that which Shulamite
herself should exercise over her vineyard.
These appointed by her in conjunction with
her husband, as her servants and helpers.
The charge belonging to each believer in
reference to his own soul and the souls of his
brethren, neither to supersede nor be super-
seded by the special charge of others ap-
pointed for that specific purpose. These
special ‘keepers’ given and appointed by

hrist Himself for the benefit of His Church.
‘He ascended up on high, and gave gifts:
some, apostles ; some prophets ; some evan-
gelists; and some pastors and teachers, for the
perfecting of thesaints’ (Eph. iv.5). Thegeneral
title of these in the New Testament, elders or
Presbyters ; called also, from the nature of
their charge, bishops or overseers, and
deacons with a temporal charge (Acts xiv.
23; xx. 17, 28; 1 Peter v. 14; Phil. i. 1).
These given by Christ, but chosen by the
believing people, guided by their knowledge
of the gifts hestowed and formally appointed
by those already in office (Acts vi. 2, 6; xiv.
23 (Greek); 1 Tim. iv. 4, 14). All these
the Church’s servants for Jesus’s sake (2
Cor. 4,5; 1 Cor. iii. 21, 22). The spiritual
charge of these ‘keepers’ indicated in such
admonitions as these; ‘Take heed unto
yourselves and unto the flock over the which
the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to
feed the Church of God, which He hath pur-
chased with His own blood.’ ‘Feed the


“xii. 3).


flock of God, which is among you, taking the
oversight thereof not by constraint, but wil-
lingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready
mind; neither as being lords over God’s
heritage, but being ensamples to the flock.’
‘Remember them which have the rule (Mar-
gin, are the guides) over you, who have
sua unto you the word of God.’ ‘Obey
them that have the rule over (Margin, guide)
you, and submit yourselves: for they watch
for your souls, as they that must give account’
ie xx. 28; 1 Pet. v. 2,3; Heb. xiii. 7,


6. Those occupied in the special charge of
Christ’s Church, or Vineyard, to receive suit-
able remuneration ‘The keepers thereof,
two hundred” A portion of that remunera-
tion here, in—(1) The esteem and love of
those to whom they minister (1 Thess. v. 12,
13; 1 Tim. v.17). (2) A sufficient mam-
tenance (1 Cor. ix. 7—14; 1 ‘lim. xvii. 18).
Their principal remuneration, if faithful,
hereafter (1 Pet. v. 4; 2 ‘Tim. iv. 8; Dan.
Christ a liberal paymaste- To
work faithfully for Him is to do the best
thing for ourselves, though not done with
that object. When Christ receives Azs due
among a people, His servants wiil not come
short of theirs. Where the Master gets his
‘thousand,’ the ‘keepers’ will receive their
‘two hundred.’


Tue Brivecroom’s Request.
Verse 13.
THE Kine,


Thou that dwellest in the gardens,
The companions hearken to thy voice.
Cause me to hear it.


Business arrangements over, the Bride-
groom appears to desire his Bride to gratify
the expectant friends as well as himself, with
one of her songs. A similar request had on
another occasion been made and complied
with (chap. ii. 14—17). Then only the
Betrothed of Solomon; now, his married
wife. Then, dwelling alone in tne clefts of
the rocks; now, a happy resident ‘of tne
gardens.’ Observe—

l. The characteristic of New Testament
believers, that they ‘dwell in the gardens.’
‘Gardens’ indicative of separate congrega-
tions. The Church, as a whole, one large
garden—the Church Catholic, as found
scattered over the habitable globe. ‘One
body, one faith, one baptism.’ But this
one garden of the Church universal divided
into numerous lesser ‘gardens.’ These
also called Churches or congregations—a

13]


oHar. vil. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON,


larger or smailer number of believers living
in the same locality, and united together as
the professed followers of Jesus for Divine
worship, personal edification, and the fur-
therance of His kingdom. Believers dwell
together in unity. Jerusalem a city compact
together. Such assemblies, gardens; as—
(1) Separated from the wilderness of a world
lying in wickedness. (2) Under spiritual
and Divine cultivation. (3). Productive of
the fruits of righteousness. (4) Pleasant
to God, angels, and renewed men. ‘The
part of believers to have their place in these
assembiies, not as mere visitors, but as re-
gular members. Believers introduced out-
wardly into these ‘gardens’ by baptism;
spiritually by regeneration and faith in
Jesus. The visible bond and expression of
their fellowship, the Lord’s Supper, or ‘break-
ing of bread’ in commemoration of His
death. The delight as well as outward place
of believers is in these ‘gardens.’ ‘Lord,
I have loved the habitation of Thy house,
and the place where thine honour dwelleth.’
‘How amiable are Thy tabernacles!’ ‘All
my springs are in thee’ (Ps. xxvi. 8; lxxxiv.
1; lxxxvii. 7). These ‘gardens’ especially
the place where the voice of the Bride is
here in praise, prayer, and public testimony.
‘Blessed are they who dwell in Thy house ;
they will be still praising Thee’ (Ps. Ixxxiv.
4; lxv. 1, 2). The Pentecostal Church
exhibited as ‘dwelling in the gardens.’
‘They continued steadfastly in the Apostle’s
doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking
bread, and in prayers.
tinuing daily with one accord in the temple,
and breaking bread from house to house, did
eat their meat with gladness and singleness
of heart, praising God’ (Acts ii. 42, 46,
47). Hence, the happiness of a believer's
life. To ‘dwellin the gardens’ a picture of
enjoyment. Believers not always dwelling
alone ‘in the clefts of the rock.’ A new
song put into their mouth, praise unto their
God (Ps. xl. 3). These gardens, ‘ Paradise
Regained,’ and a picture of the ‘ Paradise
of God.’ Wisdom’s ways pleasantness even
in this life. Her children not dwellers in the
desert, but ‘in the gardens.’ ‘ Instead of the
thorn, shall come up the fir tree ; and instead
of the briar, the myrtle tree.’? Believers
blessea with a double heaven, one in the
hand, and another in the hope. ‘ The re
bellious dwell in a dry land’ (Ps. Ixviii. 6).

2. The part of believers to ‘hearken’ to
the voice of the Bride. The companions
hearken to Thy ‘voice.’ The voice of the
Church heard both in its members and its
ministers. To be ‘hearkened to,’ as uttered
—(1) In testimony and teaching. (2) In
counsel and admonition. (3) In warning and
reproof (Matt. xviii. 15, 17). To be

132


And they, con-:





hearkened to with—(1) With attention. @)
With deference. (3) With submission (

Pet. v. 5). Yet not with blindness and
bondage. The voice of the Church to be
distinguished from that of her Head. The
Bride may err, but not the Bridegroom,
Infallibility in the Bible but aot elsewhere,
‘To the law and to the testimony.’ The
Bereans commended for ‘ searching the Scrip-
tures daily whether’ the things spoken by
the Apostles ‘were so’ (Acts xvii. 11).
Even councils may err and have erred
(Article XXI). Believers to try the spirits.
To ‘prove all things.’ Believers them-
selves, as part of the Bride, possessed of
the anointing whereby to know all things.
‘Judge ye what I say. ‘He that is
spiritual Judgeth all things’ (1 Cor. ii. 15;
x. 15; 1 Thess. v. 21; 1 John ii. 20; iv.
1). Even Peter at one time to be blamed
in his acting, and withstood by Paul to the
face. ‘Subjection’ not to be given to false
teachers and corrupters of the truth, ‘no
not for an hour.’ ‘God accepteth no man’s
person’ (Gal. ii. 6, 11).

3. Believers to praise and pray in fellowship
with each other. ‘The companions hearken to
Thy voice.’ Believers the ‘companions’
both of Christ and one another. David's
testimony: ‘My goodness extendeth not
unto thee, but unto the saints that are in
the earth, and to the excellent, in whom ig
all my delight.” ‘I am a companion of all
them that fear Thee’ (Ps. xvi 2; cxix 63).
‘They that feared the Lord spake often one
to another’ (Mal. iii. 16). Praise comely
every where ; especially in ‘ the congregation
of saints’ (Ps. cxlix. 1). A special promise
made to united prayer (Matt. xviii. 19, 20).
Believers not to forsake the assembling of
themselves together for these purposes. An
ill sigu with a man when he ‘ separates him-
self’ from the brethren (Jude 19; Heb. x.
25).

4. The will of Christ that His people, amid
all their occupations, should frequently address
themselves to Him and to the Father in the
language of pra*se and prayer. His repeated
wish at the Last Supper, that His disciples
should, after His departure, continually ad
dress Him or the Father in His name, in


Prayer.


His will revealed through the apostles;
‘Pray without ceasing: in everything give
thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ
Jesus concerning you’ (1 Thess. v. 17, 18).
The first business in which the disciples en-
gaged after Christ’s ascension accompanied
with prayer, apparently addressed to Christ
Himself (Acts 24, 25). Prayer seen to occupy
a large place in the life of the Pentecostal





|
}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





Church, and of the Apostles themselves (Acts
ii. 42; vi. 4). The last utterance of the
Bible, a prayer on the part of the Bride
addressed to Jesus Himself (Rev. xxii. 20).
Blessed to speak of Christ; more blessed
still to speak to Him. The voice of the
Bride, however, to be heard not only in


prayer, but in
Praise.


The Sacrifice of praise to be offered to God
through Christ continually, ‘the fruit of our
lips, giving thanks to His name’ (Heb. xiii.
15). Praise and thanksgiving to form a large
portion of a believer’s life. ‘In everything
give thanks.’ If so in the Old Testament,

roperly still more so in the New. David’s
ife : ‘Seven times a day do I praise thee.’
‘At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto
thee’ (Ps. exix. 62, 164). The New Son
‘of the Kedeemed in heaven learned aa
begun on earth. Believers have ‘harps’ for
their praises as well as ‘vials’ for their
prayers (Rev. v. 8). The ‘praises of Israel’
God’s chosen dwelling place (Ps.. xxii. 3).
Believer’s fellowship ok each other to con-
sist largely in songs of praise (Eph. v. 19).
© One word of Christ before we part.’—Areh-
bishop Usher. Praise to be connected with
our warfare and service in the Lord’s cause.
Jehoshaphat’s army sang praise before the
battle, as certain of victory (2 Chron. xx. 21,
23). Paul and Silas not only ‘ prayed,’ but
‘sang praises’ in the prisonat Fhilippi. The
ransomed of the Lord to return to Zion with
songs (Is. xxxv. 10). Christ our example in
praise and thanksgiving (Luke x. 21). Sang
a hymn with the disciples before going to
Gethsemane. Sings praises in the midst of
the Church (Heb. 11. 12).


SHuLamite’s Sone,
Verse 14,
SHULAMITE.


Make haste, my beloved!

And be thou like to a roe,

Or to a young hart

Upon the mountains of spices !


At the request of her Beloved, Shula-
mite lifts up her voice in song. Her song
resembling a former one (chapter li. 17).
Expressive of her delight in her beloved, and
her desire for his constant society. ‘ Make
haste (or flee), my beloved, and be thou like
to p roe or to a young hart (in swiftness as
in loveliness and love), upon the mountains
of spices.’ The sweetness of his presence
and the joy of his coming transferred to the


mountains over which he was to pass. The
very mountains which his feet should touch
made ‘mountains of spices.” His abode,
wherever it might be, made fragrant by his
presence. Observe—

1. The believer’s song to have Christ for its
subject as well as its object. Isaiah’s prelude
to his song: ‘Now will I sing into my
well beloved a song of my beloved’ (Isa.
v. 1). David’s: ‘My heart is inditing a good
matter : I speak of the things which I have
made touching the King’ (Ps. xlv. 1). The
Psalms full of Christ. ‘Let the Word of
Christ dwell in you richly, teaching and ad-
monishing one another in psalms, and hymns,
and spiritual songs’ (Col. iii. 16). The tes-
timony of a heathen that the early Christians
met together in the morning of the first day
of the week and ‘sang a hymn to Christ as to
God.’ The Church’s hymns naturally full of
the Bridegroom.

2. The part of the believer to long for the
presence of Christ. ‘ Make haste, my beloved.’
His spiritual and unseen presence desired
here. Ordinances themselves barren and
insipid if Christ be notin them. No pleasure
to the loving believer if his ‘Beloved’ be
not there. ‘'I'hy presence makes my paradise.’
His visible presence desired hereafter. Paul’s
desire to ‘depart and be with Christ.’ Absent
from the body, present with the Lord.
Hence ‘to die is gain.’ More especially
His presence at His second appearing. That
event the Church’s ‘blessed hope.’ The
Bride expects not merely to go ¢o heaven
to Jesus, ei for Jesus to come from heaven
to her. ‘Our conversation is in heaven
from whence we look for the Saviour’ (Phil.
iii. 20). His bodily return promised by the
angels as He ascended into heaven. ‘This
same Jesus shall so come in like manner as
ye have seen Him go up into heaven’ (Acts
1. 10,11). Preached by Peter after Pente-
cost : ‘God shall send again Jesus’ (Acts
iii. 20). Promised by Jesus Himself after
His ascension: ‘ Behold I come quickly’
(Rev. xxii. 20). The subject of the Church’s
last recorded and inspired prayer: Even sc
come Lord Jesus.’ This prayer of the be-
loved Disciple in the name of the Church
apparently an echo of that of the Bride in
the text. The same prayer concludes the
Song of Solomon, and the Book of Revela-
tion. Believers characterized as those who
‘look for’ Christ, and who ‘love His ap-

earing.” Old Testament saints looked and
onged for His first Advent; those of the
New for His second. Natural to long for
the presence and return of those whom we
love. To love Christ is to ‘love His appear-
ing.” Christ’s highest glory and the desiver-
ance of creation bound up with it (? Thess.
i.10; 2 Tim. iv: 1; Rom. viii. 3/--};. His


cHap. vit. HOWILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


appearing the full redemption of His saints
(Luke xxi 28; Eph. i. 14),

3. Christ’s presence sweetens all. ‘Upon
the mouutain of spices.’ His presence makes
heaven, whether above or below the skies.
Even rugged mountains converted by it iuto
‘moun ains of spices.’ Samuel Rutherford,
in his banishment, dated his letters from
*Christ’s palace in Aberdeen,’ The ‘ Mount
Zion’ ‘n heaven, all that it is to the re-
detmed, because Christ, the Lamb slain, is
apon it (lev. xiv. 1). His presence here, the
first fruits ; youder, the full harvest. His








presence hereafter to be followed by no
ee His coming, therefore, the sweet-
est and most joyous event to His waiting
Church, who shall then, as a whole, ‘ be for
ever with the Lord.’

Blessed to conclude all our works and
services, and to end each day of our lives and
lite itself, as Solomon concludes his Song,
and John his Revelation, with the earnest
and loving prayer, ‘ Make haste, my beloved,
and be like to a roe or a young hart upon the
mountains of spices,’ ‘Even so come, Lord
Jesus! Amen,’


AUMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


NOTES.





/


Hotes,





CHAPTER L


Vensu il: fhe Sony of Songs which is
Solomon’s. ‘The Song of Songs,’ DO VWit WW
(shir hashshirim). WW (shir), a song
or poem, as opposed to prose: but dis-
tinguished from “VOD (mizmor), a song


with musical accompaniment, a psalm. Ew-
4LD, ZocKLER iz Lane, According to
some, a series. Kizux. AUGUSTI. fJ7U
in its original acceptation, a string or chain ;
Arab poets speaking of stringing their verses
as pearls. Goop. ‘Song of Songs,’ a He-
brew reduplication denoting excellency. An
instance of the Hebrew superlative, like
Ezek. xvi. 7; Dan. ix. 24; the finest or
most beautiful of songs, the comparison
however probably not with other poetry of
Solomon. Noyes. Not, as Grsentus, asong
cousisting of many songs. Nor, as KIMCHI
and others,a song out of many Songs of
Solomon. The High Song (das Hohelied).
LutHer. The excellent song. GENEVA
Brsiz. Indicates emphatically the most ex-
cellent of its kind. Kwatp. The noblest
and sweetest song. Sanctius. The most
excellent song, and made up many songs ; or,
comprehending all the songs, not only of
Solomon but of the Prophets: the sum,
kernel, and marrow of all sacred songs.
Cocczrus, Mercer. The most beautiful
song. Dz Wertz. A song consisting of
many songs, or excelling other songs ; indi-
cating also the unity of its contents. Dsz-
uitzscH. So called either from the excel-
lence of the composition or the subject.
LowtH. Most excellent song of all in the
sacred books; in elegance of structure, ful-
ness of mystery, and sublimity of meaning.
Carezov. Most important, excellent and
precious of songs ; reference to the sudyect of
it; to prophets and apostles, a reservoir of
the treasures of Divine love existing between
the Creator and His saved and sanctified
creatures; the title claimed not by Solomon,
but by the Holy Spirit. Wess. Other
songs celebrate the King’s victory and the
deliverance wrought for His Church; this
His marriage with her and His love to the
Bride. THzoporEet. Ten songs have been
sung; but this excels them all. Targum.
The song which is above all songs. RasHI.


All the oars are holy; the Song of
songs, the Holy of holies. Axrpa. All the
songs of Scripture are the Holy place; the
Song of songs, the most holy. R. Josaua.
‘Which is Solomon's’ (TA7W? TWN
asher li-Shelomoh). The relative probably
not, as GesENIUs thinks, added here on
account of the article in OWT as if—
‘the songs which are Solomon’s. The ante-
cedent either WW or OVW; most likely
Vu, DVWIT being added as a Hebrew form
of the superlative. Ewap, Hirzic, BurEx. So
the SepruaGint, 3 éon, ‘whichis.’ rip oui? to
or of Solomon.’ rious (Shelomo) from Dow


(shalom) peace, with the termination FF or j,
identical with }), and forming the concrete
from the abstract. Meaning alluded to in 1
Chronicles xxii. 2. Gusznius. Davipson
fancifully suggests 7} as the representative of
Ni ‘he’; as if, ‘He is the peace’ like
Micah v. 5 and Ephesians ii. 14. The AEx.
Serruacint has—to, for, or of Solomon
(-¢ %.). The Vuxreate: Solomon’s. As re-
ferring to Solomon or ascribed to him. Vata-
BLUs. Both by and concerning Solomon,
é.e., Christ. Coccetus. Solomon as a type
of Christ, both the author and the subject.
AtnswortH. Words so contrived as to
mean either. Patrick. Concerning Solo-
mon, that is, the Messiah, Muprasux.


not used here merely to indicate the author-
ship : =‘ devoted or delivered to;’ as Psalm
vii. 2; Jeremiah xv. 2; 1 Chronicles xxix. 2.
Weiss. Of Solomon as the author. MERCER,
&c. As the author inspired by the Holy
Ghost. CaRpzov. Hentai to Solomon,
and so placed among the sacred books, ABEN
Ezra. Solomon as the author; Amplifies


‘ what David his father had begun in the 45th


and 68th Psalms: the Bridegroom in the
song called Solomon, either from the dignity
of the name (Peaceful), or as suiting the cir-
cumstances, or because Solomon was a type
of Christ, which was probably known to
Solomon himself. Sanctius. According to
Ewa, the title ascribes the poem to Solo-
mon, but was given at a later ae Be
8


NOTES.





bably after the exile. Detitzscn: Indicates
unity of authorship. ZéckLeR: Which is
hy Solomon His title of ‘ King,’ assumed
o Proverbs and Ecclesiastes, here laid aside
‘n contemplating the celestial person of
«hom he speaks. Patricx. Also, lest So-
omon should be thought the King here in-
ended, the book being s ‘Song of Loves.’
Giut. Concerning Solomon: hence not a
book of King Solomon’s, but of some other
mspired author. Harmer. Concerning
Solomon—the true Solomon, the Lord Jesus
Christ; no reference being made to King
Solomon in any part of the book. Hawker.
Solomon the inspired author, yet not speak-
ing in his own person. Fry,

Verse 6. Look not upon me because Tam
black, because the sun hath looked upon me:
my mother’s children were anyry with me; they
wade me keener of the vineyards ; but my own
cineyard have I not kept, ‘ Look not upon


ne’ we ON al tiruni, Look not at me.


ZocKLER. Gaze not on me. WILLIAMS.
With surprise and doubt, as if wondering at
her presumption. Noyes. In admiration of
her beauty. Hitzic. With scorn or disdain.
Wirnineton, Ginspore. With too much
scrutiny. TayLor. With indignation. Dur-
HAM. With delight at my affliction, as
Obadiah 12. AryswortH. With an evil eye.
Mercer. Do not survey me in my vile
dress, but consider how I have it. Den Rio.
Allegorically; Taxcum: Spoken by the Con-
aes of Israel to the nations: Do not
espise me because 1 am more sorrowful
than you, having done according to your
deeds in worshipping your false gods, and
having brought upon myself the Divine dis-
pleasure. Fourot: Do not look so much at
my sufferings, as at the reason why I endure
them, and the fruit which I shall receive
from them. Weiss: Addressed b
to the nations wondering at their boldness
after the sin of the golden calf, or astonished
that they could commit so great a sin.
‘Because the sun hath looked upon me.’


INDY sheshzaphathni; from Ww shazaph;
to burn or scorch; to blacken ; hence also to
look upon, as Job. xx. 9; xxviii 1. From Tw


by the change of J into}. Vuiceate: Hath
discoloured me. Aguita: Hath blackened
me. Wickiirr: Has scorched me. Cover-
pDaLt: Has shined on me. Luter: Has
so burned me. Dropati: Has touched me
with his rays. Martin: Has looked on
me. VataBius: Has fixed his rays on me.
Tisurine Version: Striking me with his
beams. Parkuurst: Has looked down on
me, or has shined on me. Wittiams: Has
beamed upon me. Fry; Properly, looked
ry ne rigour, Weiss: Has
1


Israel ,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





glanced or gazed on me. Burrovenus and
GinsrurG; Has browned me. THRUPP:
Fiercely scanned me. Z6cKLER: Scorched
me. Mercer: The blackness not natural
but. accidental. Rasnr: Not natural, and
therefore may be removed. A. CLARKE ob-
serves that the brown complexion of the
Egyptians is attributed to the influence of
the sun or climate. But probabiy no
Egyptian in the text. <Allegorically ; Tar-
Gum: Israel made black by the worship of
the sun. Favsset: Scorched with God’s
anger, executed on her through the world-
owers, because of her unfaithfulness before
Tessiah’s coming. Grucory, &c.: The sun of
righteousness blackens the soul by the suffer-
ings endured on his account, or by showing
it its own blackness in his presence. PHILO
Carpatuius: Do not despise me for my
sins; since Christ the sun of righteousness
has shone upon me. AINsworTH, GILL, &.:
The Church blackened by the sun of perse-
cution. RosENMULLER: By miseries and
calamities

‘My mother’s children were angry with
me.’ aN (nikharu bhi) ; from VY


to burn, or Piel of “113 Ewatp. Supr-


TUAGINT, VULGATE, &c.: Fought against me,
CoverDaLte: Had evil will. Luter, Dio-
Dati, Martin: Were angry with me. So
Ewa.p, Detitzscu, and GEsentus. Acted
severely against me. A. CrarKke. Were
severe with me. Percy, Goop, BootH-
RoyD. Despised me; literally snorted at
me: expresses the ill-treatment she re-
ceived from her relations in exposing her to
servile employments, which caused her dark
complexion. Hence the Bride of low ex-
traction compared with her royal Bridegroom.
Fry. ‘My mother’s children’ synonymous
with brothers: her father probably no longer
living at the time of this transaction. Zocx-
LER. The children those of her mother by a
former husband. Hovusicant, Umsrerz,
Ewarp, &c. Her countrymen. Harmer.
Allegorically; Tarcum: False prophets
and teachers, the cause of God’s anger
against Israel. Rasu1: The children of
Egypt, among whom I was brought up, and
who came up from Egypt with me; and the
the offspring of my mother in the wilderness.
Kerr: Israel experienced, in cousequence of
their sin, the anger of the nations, and lost
their beauty and glory. Wertss: The
Egyptians were incensed against Israel on
account of Noah’s curse on Ham, and his
blessing on Shem, and so treated them cruelly.
Coccetus, &c.: Persecuting Jews. Muns-
TER, &c.: False prophets and kings. Sanc-
Tius: The Gentiles. Mercer: Nominal
members of the Church. DutcH Annota-
Tors: Faise brethren. Piscaton: Affee-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY :


ee ee





tions of carnal corrupt nature. Menocutvs:
All enemies, external or internal
‘They made me Keeper of the vineyards,’


DYDD hak-keramim, plural of OVD kerem,
a vineyard; from the unused root DD
= “4, to be of a noble disposition; hence


noble, fruitful , D2 land planted


with noble plants (Jud. xv. 5; Job. xxiv. 18).
GesEnrus. A vineyard, possession, estate.


Ewatp. The noblest, most valued posses-
sion. Zécxier. Ground cultivated like a
es used generally of vineyards, gar-

ens, and plantations. Simon. ‘Made me
keeper,’ &c.; made her a drudge in their ser-
vice, to her own personal injury; keeping
vineyards, a servile work. Percy, Consin.
Bossvuzt, on the supposition of the bride
being an Egyptian princess, observes: ‘The
princess, by one of those family intrigues
common at Eastern Courts, had perhaps been
banished to some southern part of Egypt,
where she had been employed on senlge
labour, till by a counter intrigue and revolu-
tion equally common, she was recalled from
her banishment.” <A/legorically; Tarcum:
Taught me to worship their idols and to walk
in their statutes. Mercer: Forced me to
observe rites not prescribed by God. Dv
Veit: Made me a zealous observer of their
human traditioug Sanctius: Forced me
to follow sinful pleasures and _ practices.
Coccetus: Excommunicating me from their
synagocues. AinsworTH : To fall inwith their
corrupt worship and vain traditions. Scotr:
Drawn by original sin to evil things against
my will, ‘'H7Z0D0RET, however, takes another
view of the words, applying them to the
Apostles: They gave me (the Gentile Church)
the divine ordinances to keep. OnIGEN views
them as spoken by the Apostles and others,
who anxious about the salvation of men, suf-
fered outwardly themselves. Lyra applies
them to the drudgery of Israel in Egypt.
Det Rio thinks the vineyards were in the
first instance the synagogue, then the Churches
of the Gentiles. So Coccerus also views
the vineyards as including the congre-
gations of the faithful. Fromonp1 sees the
pastoral office indicated: Dispersed me among
the Gentiles, and caused me to be made pas-
tors and keepers of the Gentile Churches.
Davipson: he Christian Church charged
with the care both of Jew and Gentile vine-
yards, in consequence of the Jews’ rejection
of God and His laws; or made the depository
of the oracles of God with which they are to
be fed. Haun: The brothers, or Hamitic
Heathendom, having withdrawn from the ser-
vice of God and given themselves to the ser-
vice of Satan, and so made their vineyard or


THE SONG OF SOLOMON. NOTES.


“the vineyard of God to become a vineyard of


Satan, alienated the weaker sister from
the service of God, and drew her into that of
Satan, causing her to keep the vineyard, like
themselves, in his service.


‘ But mine own vineyard have I not kept.’
1) YD carmi shelli, ‘ my vineyard which
belongs to me? Mercer: which was com-
mittedto me. Z6cKLER: ‘2W (shelli), not


only gives special emphasis to the suffix
‘my,’ but distinguishes her vineyard as quite
distinct and of another kind from what she
had heen forced to keep, viz., herself, with
all she has and is. Gesentus, Ewa.p, &.,
apply it in like manner to her beauty. Sanc-
Tius: That with which she was bought as
her dowry, according to usual practice (Hos.
ili. 2); the same mentioned in chap. viit. 14.
Allegorically; Tarcum: The Lord who is
my God I have not served. The vineyard,
according to THeoporet, the traditions
received before accepting Christianity; or,
her own soul. Sanctivs: The more noble
part of our nature. Bernarp, &c.: The
Jewish people (Is. v. 1); or, the primitive
Church composed of Jews, to whom Christ
and the Apostles were first sent. Meno-
culus: The charge of all the world’s vine-
yards, and especially that of the synagogue,
was committed to me. Dex Rio: I forsook
the vineyard, at first committed to me on
account of the conduct of the Jewish hus-
bandmen in killing the heir (Matt. xxii.)
Junius: I departed from my duty. Piscator:
Did not adhere steadily to the worship of
God. ArnswortH: The charge not cnt
either from her own infirmity and negligence,
or from the tyranny of others, or from both:
persecutions and afflictions often the effet
of chastening for sin. Patrick: I was like
one set to keep the vineyard of others, and
could not look after his own: picture of the
Gentiles seduced by false teachers into idol
worship. Gitu: Her own vineyard, either
the Church or her own soul: not kept, either
from fear or infirmity, or both. Scorr: The
treatment she received proved a temptation
to neglect her duty and the care of her own
soul, and so conduced to mar her loveliness.
Hawkers: Neglected her own soul while
engaged in the service of others. Rosen-
MULLER: Her own country’s religion and
institutions forsaken, Dg Werte: The
Jewish vineyard neglected by the Jewish
shepherds (Ezek. xxxiv. 7—9; Zech. xi. 8).
Turupe: The religious culture of all Israel.
Haun. The vineyard committed to her in
the service of Satan she has not kept;
having awoke to the painful feeling of her
anrest, and learned to long after the better
home with Israel’s King. in


NOTES.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





Verse 9: Ihave compared thee, O my love,
to a company of horses in Pharaoh’s chariots.
‘To a company of horses’ CDR? le-
susatht) MDD (susah), fem., from DID


(sus), a horse, may be either ‘a mare,’ or, as


a collective noun, ‘a stud or company of
horses.’ In the latter case, the final yod
paragogic, as in Samuel i. 1; Isaiah. i. 21.
GESENIUs inclines to the former view, think-
ing the comparison of a single loved one
to a body of horse not so congruous.
The latter favoured by RosENMULLER, Dz
Werte, Noyes, and others. The versions
divided, Sepruacint: My mare. VULGATE:
My cavalry. LuTHER: My spirited team.

ICKLIFF: My riding. Dropati (Italian)
and DutcH: The mares. Geneva: The
troops of horses. Martin (French): The


most beautiful pair of horses that I have.
Montanvs : mare. Coccerus: My
cavalry. Yod redundant. Mercer, VETA-


BLus. Not superfluous; ‘ My,’ because,
chosen for his own. Deut Rio: ‘My mare,’
t.e., my most beautiful mare. Bossuet: My
well trained steed. Percy: One of the
steeds ; Yod paragogic. Goon, BooTHRoyD.
‘My horse ;’ a favourite mare of the King;
a particularly fine and splendidly caparisoned
specimen of those good mares which Solo-
mon had for his chariots 0 Kings x. 26).
ZéckLeR. On therther hand, RoseENMULLER
thinks there is no case of a beautiful woman

raised by comparison to a mare. ‘ My
ee a collective noun for all his cavalry
(1 Kings x. 26) Weiss. My stud. Gins-
sBurG. My horses. Hopeson. The team
of horses. Hann. Puti0 has: ‘Asa swift
horse that wins the prize. An Arab’s mare
his most valuable possession, and dearer to
him than his fortune. GREENFIELD. Theo-
critus compares the comeliness of Helen to a
Thessalian mare in a chariot ; mares used in
preference to horses both for riding and in
chariots in the East, as being swifter and
more able to endure hardship, and go longer
without food. A. CLARKE.

*In Pharaoh’s chariots.’ Pharaoh a name
common to the Egyptian Kings; denoting in
Coptic, and according to Josephus, ‘the
King.’ GzxseEntvs inclined rather to derive
the title, in its Hebrew form at least, from
VID (phara’), ‘to lead in battle;? hence,


V15 (phera), ‘prince,’ with the forma-


tive 7} (oh). “ ‘Inthe Pharaonic, or Ezyp-
tian chariots of Pharaoh ;’ more exactly, such
a stud as was used on state occasions in
Solomon’s Pharaonic chariots; those costly


188


teams which Solomon had imported from
Egypt (1 Kings x. 28, 29.) ‘ In Pharaoh’s
magnificent team.’ DetirzscH, Ewa.p.
Horses of Egypt remarkable for their beauty
and stateliness, and eagerly sought for the
Ringe of Syria. Harmer. Egyptian horses
as the very best; and Egyptian horses m
Pharaoh’s chariots as the very best of all.
Cuay. Pharaoh, Solomon’s father-in-law,
supplied him with most of his chariots,
Fromonpt. A reference needlessly supposed
by many to the chariots of Pharaoh at the
Red Sea. So the Tancum and the Rassins,
as well as the Roman Catholic and other
Christian interpreters. BERNaRD and Fouiot;
‘The Lord’s cavalry or angelic host who
overthrew Pharaoh’s chariots in the Red
Sea.’ Sanctius: ‘Such as are described in
the Psalm concerning the triumph over
Pharaoh.’ Det Rio: ‘ With the chariots of
Pharaoh, ¢.¢., when they were drowned.’
Haiterin: ‘In [crushing] the chariots of
Ph’. Henry: ‘My company of horses that
triumphed over Pharaoh’s chariots’ (Hab. iii.
15). M. Sruarr and Favsser: ‘In the
chariots of Pharaoh’ at the Red Sea; such
being to Israel incomparable for swiftness
and splendour.

The points of comparison: Swiftness and
spirit: flies to her bridegroom like a horse
which is spurred in the course. THEODORET.
Drawing equally and elegantly together.
Sanctius. Power to overcome enemies,
Det Rio, Fromonpr. Grace and beauty.
Du Ve. Beauty and speed. Mencer,
Piscator. Stateliness, strength, and cour-
age. Duruam. Comeliness. AssEMBLY’s
Annotations. Stateliness and beauty. PooLz,
Affection. Pxrcy. Beauty, courage, state-
liness, ahd other excellencies. Davipson.
Extends to the sumptuous trappings and,
ornaments. Goop. Splendid decoration:
these horses led forth on days of State, per-
haps in some late procession of a royal mar-
riage. Fry. Glittering ornaments of the
head and neck. Weiss. The proud bearing
of the horse (Job xxxix. 19). Feiss: Their
harmony and usefulness, Tact Socierty’s
Comm. Her youthful freshness and un-
affected behaviour. Dxuitzscu. Ardour
and beauty. Fausset. The formidable
character of Pharaoh’s horses at the Red
Sea. Tururp, Woxpswortu. Their swift-
ness and splendour. M. Stuart. The
resemblance founded as much on the Bride’s
dress and ornaments as on her beauty. Norzs.
Orientals spare no expense in ornamenting
their horses with the most costly trappings,
while the ladies decorate themselves in a
similar manner. WILLIAMS,


AUMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


NOTES.


CHAPTER II.


Verss 1: Iam the rose of Sharon, and the
lily of the valleys. ‘1 am,’ &c. Opinions
divided as to who is the speaker. The
Bridegroom. Origen, THEODORET, and the
great majority of Latin and Greek Fathers.’
The Bride. Tarcum, Puito, Pseuivs,
Grecory or Nyssa, and the great body of
modern commentators. Either the Church,
expressing the excellence of her grace and
beauty received from Christ; or rather,
Christ Himself, setting forth his own excel-
lence. Grint. The Bridegroom, acknow-
ledging the praises given to him by the
Bride. Patrick. More probably the
Church, showing her graces received from
Christ. Ainsworta. Spoken by either;
but rather by Christ, commending Himself
to the notice, love, and acceptance of His

eople, like Isaiah Ixv. 1. Hawker. By the
ES ieeecon the comparison made out of
condescension. Duruam, M. Stuart. By
Bride ; no instance in the Song of either
Bride or Bridegroom praising themselves,
Weiss. Spoken by Bride with a becoming
modesty. Percy. In self-depreciation. Busu.
Representing her beauty as nothing extraor-
dinary. Noyes. Speaks of herself as an
Object mean and contemptible amidst the
beauties of the surrounding scene. Fry.
Asserting she had no elaim to such beauty as
was ascribed to her. BootHrorp. Con-
sidering herself almost too mean for the
Bridegroom. Bartu (Bible Manual). Speak-
ing as well with self-respect as humility.
Deuitzscu. As lowly, yet lovely. Fausset.


‘The rose of Sharon’ (WWiT NSaN
Khabhattseleth hasksharon), I\Q¥30 here


rendered ‘rose,’ according to ancient inter-

reters, either the /ily, as the Sepruacint,

uLeaTe, and Tarcum of Isaiah xxxv. 1;
or the warcissus, as the Tarcum here; or the
rose, as the VENETIAN GREEK, Kimcul, and
Asen Ezra. According to most modern
Hebraists, the rose to be rejected, as the flower


must be one with a bulbous root, from pe}


(detsel), a bulb. According to BocHart,
Haan, and De Werte, the zarcissus. EWALD
and GEsENIuS: the Meadow Saffron (Colché-
cum Autumnale), a meadow and autumnal
flower like the crocus, with a bulbous root.
So Micnaruis, Noyes, Worpswortu, &c.
Ewa.p derives the name from ON2 and


Yor ‘sour.’ Means, radically, a plant with


a pungent bulb,—inapplicable to the rose.
Favussez. Hirzic, however, connects th-


word with Yt} ‘red’ Parxnorst, fol-


lowed by Wixtiams, derives the word from


TIDM, to hide, and 5y, a shadow; as
if a rosebud, or rose shaded with the calyx.
The Sepruagint, VuLteatTE, and ‘THEoDO-
TION have here simply, ‘a flower.’ AQuiua:
a‘flower-cup.’ ‘lhe Syriac: ‘a lily,’ as in
second clause. WiIcKLIFF and Dovai VER-
SION: a ‘ flower.’ Geneva BIBLE: a‘ rose.’
Bisuor’s BIBLE: a ‘lily. So Munster,
Mercer, Coccrius, Rasui. A flower,—
left indefinite. Castatio. Flower or rose.
J. H. Micwazuis. ‘Ihe flower, par excellence,
—the flower of the whole earth. Wiutxuine-
Ton. ‘The flower; only, however, in a generic
sense. GREEN. A wild-flower. Ginspuxe.
Wirnineton. The tulip. Maenus, Var-


HINGER. The daisy. Tururv. mwa ‘pro-
perly, the Plain; from “WW, to be straight.
Gesenius. Or from WZ, to look forth


or around. Bocuart, Ewaup. The word
used as a proper name, and applied to the
plain between Cesarea and Joppa, fertile
and abounding in lilies, roses, and narcissuses.
Ges., Sancrius. ‘That between Mount ‘l'abor
and the Lake of Galilee. Ewan. Bride
refers to her native place. Goop. Sharon,
the name of a district, then of a city in it
(1 Chron. v. 16; Acts ix. 35). Munxczr,


PiscaToR. nw, a plain; any considerable


portion of level ground, whether fertile or
otherwise: more than one in the land of
Israel: the great Sharon, that beyond Jor-
dan, in the land of Gilead and Bashan (1 Chron.
v. 16): here, that between Tabor and the
lake of Tiberias, rich in pastures, but not
therefore suitable for roses and lilies. Wiss.
Septuagint: a flower of the plain. Vuneats
and Wick.trF: a flower of the field. BisHor’s
Biste: the lily of the field. Diopat1
and Martin: The rose of Sharon. Sanc-
tius: A flower of the field; fenced around
with no hedges; set forth to the eyes and
for the use of all. Fromonpi: | am a
flower of the open field, where you will
rather find me than on the green bed. Har-
MER, Percy, &c.: A mere rose of the field,
where thousands and thousands grow of
equal value: the thought suggested by the
assemblage of beauty collecied at the royal
nuptials. Warti1ams. The spouse compares
herself with the more humble natives of the
fields and valleys. Witineron. Is disposed
to humility by reflecting on her present good
fortune as the King’s Bride. Z6ckier. A


139


NOTES.


flower of the field; alluding to Christ’s
hundliation and incarnation, THEODORET.
A humble scarlet flower; Christ lowly and
red in His own bloed. Honortus. Christ
the flower of the heavenly plain, who far
excels all cherubim and seraphim, and gives
them all their beauty and excellence. Fottor.
The flower of this whole world, of which
Christ was the glory, inviting all to enjoy
His sweetness. Ortcen, AmMBRosE, Bebe,
Det Rio. The Church of Israel with the
Shekinah in her midst. Tareum. ‘The Church
lowly, and delightful for odour and beauty
(Hos. xiv. 7). Ainsworta. Gratefully ac-
knowledges the beauty given her by her
Lord. Davipson. The humility and faith
expressed in Isaiah xlv. 24; Psalm xxxiv. 2.
Weiss. Self-humiliation, the effect of a real
manifestation of God to the soul. Fry. —
‘The lily of the valleys.’ (DYPOYA AIwwiw
shoshannath ha-’amagim), MawWw shoshanrah


(from Yrw shush, an unused root, ‘to be
white or splendid’), a noun of unity, from
ww shoshan, @ lily; a flower growing


wild in the fields of Palestine and adjacent
countries; of various colours, but especially
white and light blue; also apparently red
(chap. v. 13). Gzsznius. Pliny speaks of
zed and purple lilies. Modern Jews, foliowed
bv Lutuer, Munster, and Castauio, make
TW a rose, instead of a lily. Kimcut,


a violet. Signifies a lily in Hebrew, Aramaic,
Arabic. and Persic; a six-petalled flower,
from WW (shesh), six: hence, not the rose,


which has only five petals: only it is the red
lily, familiarin the Kast. De.irzscu. Not our
Lily of the Valley (déliam convallium); but the
noblest flower that aderns our gardens, and
which in Palestine erows wild in the fields.
Wiuuams. One of the plants in which the
number sir predominates in the distribution
of their parts, as the Crocus, Asphodel, Daf-
fodil, Lily, &c. Kitro. Takes iis name
from its six leaves or petals, and from its
vivid silver whiteness: a perfect specimen has
seven flowers on the spike —one at the head
and six on the sides of the stem. Seen
Mystery. Mercer and AinswortH think
it may be the woodhine, which grows and
flourishes in hedges, and is sometimes called
the ‘lily among thorns.’ A common flower
that throws itself out on every spot of ground.
Harmer. ‘The Huleh lily is very large,
and the three inner petals meet above and
form a gorgeous canopy, such as art. has never
approached: this incomparable flower de-
lights most in the valleys, but is found also
on the mountains. THomson’s Land and the
Book, OD'PIyit from Ply Cemeg), a val-


ley. The name not applied to ravines, but
140


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





to the long broad sweeps sometimes found
between parallel ranges of hills, Sraney.
Low places also fruitful places (1 Chron.
xxvii, 29). ArnswortH. Lily of the ‘val-
leys’ more beautiful than those of the moun-
tains, because always watered and less ex-
posed to the heat. Rasur. Indicates a
district not far from Sharon, as mentioned
with it (1 Chron. xxvii. 29). M. Stuart.
The expression denotes an isolated and wild
lily in the valleys. Wetss. The point of
comparison in both cases is both the diminu-
tive size of these plants, compared with
cedars, cypresses, &c., and also their beauty
and elegance; the Bride, though referring
to her lowliness and rural aeesarae 9 yet
saying nothing derogatory to herself. Zécx-
LER.


Verse 4: His banner over me was love.
‘His banner,’ 27 (diglo), from 207


(degel), a military standard. The SrpruacInt
and VuLGATE read the word as a verb; the
former in the imperative: ‘Marshal (régare),


love against me;’ the latter in the indicative;
‘He marshalled (ordinavit) love against me.’
WickuirF: He ordained me in charity,
Luter: Love is his banner over me. Dro-
paTI: ‘the banner which he lifts up to me.
Martin: Which I carry. THEopDORET,
expounding from the Septuagint: Teach me
the manner of love. Rasur: My band
who guide me to him is love. Munster,
Monranvs, and Pacninus: His banner over
me or about me. The expression, according
to Menocutus, equivalent to—* He drew me
with the cords of love.’ Mercer: He held
love before me as a banner to attract me to
himself. Grotius: ‘He carries his love as
an ensign before me,’—I serve under his
banner, which is love. Similarly Gesentius:
‘I follow the banner of love which my Be-
loved presents to me, as soldiers follow a
military standard and never desert it.’ Trrt-
nus: ‘Love,’ that is, his love to ne, by
which he might subdue me to himself; and
mine to him, that he might take me and all
I have for his own. Piscator, Junius, and
Mexcer: ‘ Having love towards me for a
standard,—by which to call or draw me to
himself.’ Sancrivs, expounding from the
Vulgate: ‘By his numerous kindnesses and
sweetest blandishments he drew up all the
array of his love against me.’ So Du Vem:
He subdued me entirely to himself under
the banner of love: he caused that I should
cleave to him alone in love, as soldiers follow
their standard. Patrick: I am enlisted
under his banner whose motto is love: he
has overcome my heart so as to submit en-
tirely to his wonderful love. MuicHaxEtis:
He attacked me under the banner of love.
RosENMULLER: His banner for me ia


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


—-——


love,—his love to me is conspicuous as a
banner in an army. Ewan: Love was as
a protecting banner over my head. Z6cKLER:
Love waves as a protecting and com/orting
banner over my head when J am near him.
So Dépxr, Worpswortu, and BuRROUGHS.
Percy, and BoorRoyD, reading the word


as a verb in the imperative: ‘Spread the |


banner of love over me.” Fry, following
one of Dr Kennicot’s manuscripts; ‘They
have set up their banner over me.’ Fausset:
The banner inscribed with the name of the
Captain who rescued us, Love. Some view
the word as denoting the luminous standard
carried before marriage processions. So ParK-
Hurst; also Harmer: A cresset, or portable
fiery standard. Others, perhaps still more
correctly, as a ‘flag or pendant, probably
displayed on festive occasions.” So Wi1-
tiams. A banner usually displayed on the
festive tent or banqueting house; perhaps
having on nuptial occasions the word ‘ Love’
inscribed on it. PERcy. A canopy, suchas
is carried over a Bride in the East. Hue.

Verse 12: The time of the singing of birds
és come.


‘The time of the singing,’ "7277 Ny
(eth ha-zamir). Two meanings given to Wot


(zamir), GEsentvs and others derive it from
“Wot (zamar), ‘to prune,’ as in Leviticus


xxv. 3; and so understand the expression as
the ‘time of pruning the vines,’ or spring.
So the Septuagint, Vulgate, and the ancients
generally. Rasut, Kimcut, ABEN Ezra,
and most of the modern interpreters, under-
stand the word rather as denoting ‘ singing,’
from “Df, ‘to sing.’ So Kwaxip, who ob-


serves that vineyards are not mentioned till
verse 13, and that the Greek yaarcw (psal-
kein), equivalent to “Vt, is used of the


singing of birds. ZécKLER understands the
word of sizging, but rather the ‘ merry songs
as of shepherds and country people.’ Some
understand it of the ‘plucking and gathering
of flowers” So Grecory or Nyusa, Dv
Vein, Trrinus, and Poort. Harwer and
Kirto think allusion is made to the nightin-
gale, which is heard in Palestine during the

reater part of the garden season, singing
Gelightfully in the day time among the pome-
granate groves, and from trees of loftier
growth in the night season, The time of
singing, a8 more agreeing with that of the
turtle’s cooing. Fausset. Sancrivs cb-
serves that vines are not pruned in spring,
and prefers —‘ the time of cutting the cyprus
in order to obtain its balsam in the gardens
of Egedi’ Lurner simply transiates: The
time of spring. Variously allegorized. Tar-
eum: Time of cutting off the first born in


THE SONG OF SOLOMON. NOTES





Egypt. Rasptns: Time of Israel’s redemp-
tion, cutting off of the first born, and rooting
a of idolatry. Weiss: Cutting off of the
idolatrous nations of Canaan. OricEn :
Pruning at the end of the world, when the
axe of judgment is laid to the root of the
trees. GkEGory: Removing the reprobate
from the Church, that the end of the world
may come. Deu Rio: A spiritual pruning
in baptism and repentance for the remission
of sins. Foxtrot: In sacred confession. WIL-
LERAMUS; By the preaching of the Word.
Cassioporus: The pruning of the saints in
and by Christ. Puiuo: A daily pruning
from all sin necessary to those who wish to
be Christ’s spouse. Honorius: Pruniig
the Church of its rebellious members, Fro-
MONDI: Putting off of the old man and
cutting away of the old shoots of vices.
Wick.trr: By the preaching of the Gospel.
TuHRreEFOLD Mystery: Pruning of the Gen-
tiles after Christ’s coming. ABEN Ezra.
‘Time of singing the song by the Red Sea.
Broventon: ‘Time of the Jew’s return from
the Babylonian captivity. Fausset: Time
of rejoicing at the advent of Jesus.

Verse 15: Take us the foxes, the little


foxes, that spoil the vines. DY2VW (shu-


alim) foxes. So the old translators. Some-
times also used for jackals, as Judges
xv. 4; Psalm Ixiii. 11. Grsentus, Proba-
bly both these dangerous animals; the word
being a general name for animals of the
fox aud: jackal species. Ewaup. A term
including jackals. Fausset. Jackals pro-
bably meant wherever the word occurs in
the Old Testament. Dr. Smita. Z6cKLER,
however, inclines to foes, as jackals are
always called ON, or YF. But, as
Ewald observes, these rather poetically
so called. Bocuart: jackals. Harmer:
Jackals gregarious, but not foxes; distin-
guished from the latter as ‘little foxes.’
Hassetquist calls the jackal the ‘little
Eastern fox.? Jackals roam in troops about
the villages at night. ‘Very destructive in
Judea. Bootnroyp. Coxsin: ‘ Eastern
foxes very unlike ours: small deticate crea-
tures ; and while seemingly gentle and harm-
less, creep quietly into any chink left in the
fence of a vineyard, and nibble at the young
shoots which are thus injured or destroyed.’
‘Little foxes’ Z6cxuerR: Young ones.
Mercer; Little; as more hurtful to the
vineyard, and more bold in doing damage.
Sanctios: As more easily taken than when
full grown. Det Ric: Still few and feeble
m spring, the time of germinating; the double
expression used for a single one; ‘the foxes,
1 say, while still little.’ Ewaxp: In the
early part of the year a prudent farmer will
expel the foxes, especially the young vie
1


Aas


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





‘Take us,’ &c.; catch us foxes, &. A
little vintage song, or a fragment of oue,
sung 7 the Bride. Herprer, ZockKLeR.
Sung while she hastens to her Beloved; the
song bearing a delicate allusion to their love-
relations, Des.itzscu. An intimation that
she was not disinclined to his taking part
with her in the care of her vineyard. ZécxK-
Ler. Spoken by the Bride. Goon, Bur-
rouaus, Noyes, Turupr. Words borrowed
from a popular song, but receiving a new
meaning here from their connection. GREEN.
The beloved is conceived by the Bride as
commanding the servants and bystanders.
Ewatp. ‘Let thy servants catch,’ &c. Cos-
Bin. Addressed by Solomon to his com-
panions. Mercer, Borurorp. Sending


them on their assigned employ. Fry. Spoken
by the virgins to the friends of the Bride-
groom, Wituams. By the Bridegroom to
Shulamite, directing her to look well to her
vineyard, Worpsworta. A summons to —
the chase. Taytor, WiTHINGTON. Bride-
groom’s words to his servants reported by
the Bride as heard in her sleep. Det Rio.
Spoken to Shulamite by her brothers. Grns-
Bure. Uncertain whether spoken by Christ,
or the Church, or both: more probably by
Christ, and chiefly addressed to the ministers
of the Church, directing them to discover
and refute the errors of false teachers and
heretics; and to judge, censure, and cast
them out of the Church, or to avoid them a
not of it. AINswoRTH, DurHaM, GILL.


CHAPTER IIL.


Vausn ¥, Bolold Ms bed which  Solo-
mon’s, ‘His bed,’ inp (mittatho) from 110)


(natak), to stretch or recline. Not the same
word as in verse first, which properly ex-
presses a place for lying down upon, The
word here generally understood to denote a
palanquin or litter. A bed of repose, es-
pecially used by the rich (Amos vi. 4). Same
as the ‘ chariot’ in verse ninth, where it is
described as; now before the eyes of
spectators. Ewatp. A royal bridal chariot
or palanquin, afterwards called a ‘ chariot.’
Stuart. A travellinglitter. FausseT. A
portable bed. Dexitzscu. For the convey-
ance of the bride. Harmer. A palanquin
of State large enough to convey both the
Bride and Bridegroom. Wittiams. A
common vehicle in which the great are
carried throughout the East. Coppin. The
bed in which Solomon rests and is conveyed.
Haun. Only such a bed as the Bride used
to be carried in from her father’s house to
that of her Bridegroom. Wittiams. A
throne which, in the Kast, was in the form
of a bed or couch. Parricx. A palanquin,
sedan, or portable vehicle,in which Kings in
the East used to be carried when on a pe
journey; also a sort of pleasure couch, or
sofa, on which they reposed by day when
fatigued with business, or after a repast
(Esther vii. 8; Gen. xlvii. 31). Sometimes
also used instead of ADWO (mishcad), the
bed used at night for sleeping on (2 Sam. iv.
5; Ps. cxxxii. 3). Weiss. ‘ His bed;’ as
used by him alone. Broventon, As made
by him. Sancrius. ‘ Which is Solomon’s’


Pr>wow shelli-shelomoh.) The relative
W, with a suifix, gives an intensive
143


signification. ZécKLER. His bed, namely,
that of him who is Solomon—the bed of
Solomon himself. Mercer. Solomon’s
own palanquin. Wittiams. A form of
expression not elsewhere found in the O. T.;
but proper here, as used by the common
people. KEwatp. Of the King whose name
is Peace. Rassins. The name of Solomon
in the Song to be taken historically of King
Solomon. GENEBRARD. The Bridegroom’s
palanquin and attendance compared to that
of Solomon. Sanctius. Describes the pomp
of an earthly King, and probably Sulomon’s
own royal state. Brink or Curist.
Though Solomon be named, a greater thar
Solomon is here. Dz. Coaumers. Solomon
as the type of Messiah. Muiprasa. In the
seventy-second Psalm, Solomon viewed as


the Messiah. Tarcum, ABEN Hzra,
Kimcnt, Rast. Solomon’s bed the
Temple built by Solomon. Tareum. The


Tabernacle cf the congregation and the Ark,
whicn were carried in the wilderness.
Rasui. The Ark of the Covenant brought
by David to Jerusalem. Weiss. The
Scriptures. TuxopoxEt. Christ Himself
in which the soul rests. AmBrosE. The


Church in which Christ rests. PuHito,
Grecory, Bepse. The Temple of His
body. Corron, Broveuton. His hu-


manity or His Cross. Arontus. The loving,
devoted soul. Gregory. The hearts of the
elect. Coccerus, AinswortH. Historically,
refers to Jesus returning from the wilderness,
full of the Holy Ghost. M. Sruanr His
grave; His, as new. DAvIDSON.


Verse 9. King Solomon made himsey @
chariot of the wood of Lebanon. ‘A chariot’
TDN aphreyon, & palanquin, or portable





oO Rae?


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


NOTES.


A


bed; probably from TID ‘to be borne


quickly. GesEnius. According to the
Talmudists, a bed, or nuptial couch, from
ms ‘to be fruitful” EKwanp and


DeirzscH derive the word from M75
(Arabic ¢ to cleave, labour, elaborate:


the chariot elaborately made as a state
coach; moreso than the bed, or travelling
litter, in verse 7. So Fausset. Coccerivus
supposes that the Greek word here used
(popéor) might have come from the Hebrew
through the Pheenician. The Syriac renders
tke word a throne; Wictirr, a chair;
Coverpate and Mattuews’ Bible, a bed-
stead; CRANMER and Bisuops’, a palace:
Genzva, a chariot; Dovai, a chariot or
bed. Piscaton: A couch. Monrtanus.
A bridal bed. Pacninus: An edifice.
Monster: A palace. The Ficurinzs: A
canopy. VarTasius: A tent. Mercer: A
portable couch, in which the Bride was
carried for display. BricutMan ;: A chariot,
showing his Majesty before the multi-
tude. Junrusand TREMELLIUS: A throne.
Patrick: An open chariot, with a bed or
cushion. Gini: Used in the Mishna for a
nuptial bed, or open chariot, in which the
Bride was conveyed from her father’s house
to that of her husband. Wuitiams: A
palanquin of state, probably large enough to
carry both the Bride and Bridegroom. Goon:
A bridal couch. M. Stuart: A royal bridal


chair, or palanquin, borne on men’s
shoulders, Det Rio. The Latin name
(ferculum), ® conveyance used by the


Romans for carrying the spoils or tokens
of victory before the conqueror in a
triumph; here something carried for show.


Hirae: A conveyance distinct from the
"3, or bed, in verse 7; Solomon riding
in that, while the Bride rode in this.
ZockueR: A portable couch, or litter;
identical with the ‘TD or bed, according
to Rabbinical traditions and ancient
Versions, spacious enough to afford room
for Solomon and Shulamite; though the
former probably rode in a less showy


vehicle by her side. Variously alle-
gorized. Tarcum: The Temple. ABEN
iizra; The Holy of Holies. AtsHEcH:


The Tabernacle of witness, Weiss: ‘The
Throne-chamber, or Holy of Holies, with the
Ark and the Cherubim, called - the clariot’
(1 Chron, xviii, 1—18). M. Sruarr:
Account agrees with the Tabernacle, more
especially with the Holy of Holies and Ark
of the Covenant, borne on the shoulders of
the Levites, like an eastern palanquin.
Fausset: The 'lemple as compared with
the Tabernacle, typical of Christ’s body.
Tuxoporet: The Apostles who carried
Christ’s name to the Gentiles. Rupert
and Mercer: The Word of God. Grz-
Gory, AmBrRosE, &c.; The human nature of
Christ. WerstminsteR AsseMBLY and M,
Stuart: The person of Christ. Grecory,
Det Rio, Davinson: Christ’s Church and
eople; the renewed believing soul in which
ne dwells. Sanctius, Coccerus, Dunnam:
The work of the Covenant of Kedemption.
Gitt, Scotr: The Covenant of Grace.
Tarupe: The Cross of Christ. WiIL.iaMs:
The Gospel in its onward progress. Hrnes-
TENBERG: ‘lhe means by which Christ
brings the nations into His kingdom
Cuatmers: May relate to the glories of
heaven, and of His own person.


CHAPTER IV.


Verse 6: Until the day dawn, and the
shadows flew away, Iwill get me to the moun-
tain of myrrh and to the hill of frankincense.
‘Until the day dawn’ (OV Mwy,


adh shey-yaphuakh hay-yom), DW, com-
posed of w, for WR, that, and mp
from [7)5, ‘to blow or breathe; literally,


till the day breathe. According to some,
before the cool of the day ; a cooling breeze
usually blowing at that time in the Kast.
So Ewan, Gusentus, RosenMULLER, and
most of the moderns. Reference to the
easterly gale which frequently accompanies
the approach of the sun to the horzon


Parxuurst, Percy, A. Crank Purr
observed that a wind blows fresh botu at the
rising and setting of the sun. GILL. Accord-
ing to the earlier interpreters, the reference
to the morning gale or dawn of day. A
local beauty: in those hot countries the
dawn of day is attended with a fine refresh-
ing breeze much more grateful than the
return of light itself. VataBLus. Reference
to the morning still preferred by some
moderns, The refreshing breeze of dawn in
the East, or air of life, which distinguishes
morning from the death-like stillness of
night. M. Sruart, Faussyr. ‘ Breathe
a figurative expression for the reviving of
the day after its apparent death. Goon.
143


NOTES.


Till the day breathe forth, te. light; may
also refer to the blowing of the wind at the
break of day. AinswortH. Piscaror has: ‘l'il)
the day respire or refresh himself, #.e., the sua,
after the labours of the day. Ancient ver-
sions and Fathers connect with the preceding
‘until evening,’ when having fed, they (i.e.,
the roes) return home. Junius and Dur-
HaM refer it to the day in which the marriage
was to be consummated. According to Dr-
LitscH and Z6cKLER, the words spoken hy
Shulamite, as well as in chap. ii., 17. Ac-
cording to the former, the Bride modestly
wishes to leave the ball for a more solitary
place in the precincts of the palace, till eve-
ning shall bring her again into the King’s
presence. So Barrn (Bible Manual): the
Bride unable to bear herself so highly com-
mended, and desiring to prepare herself for
the Bridegroom. Others, probably more
correctly, ascribe the words to the Bride-
room. So Ewaup: Till the day declines
te soon) would I enjoy thy beauty. Gru.
views the words as spoken by him in reply
to the request of the Bride in chap. ii. 17.
According to the author of the Zhree/old
Mystery, he intimates the coming change—
his withdrawal for a season—with, however, a
word of hope. Allegorically: Till the eve-
ning of the world, when | will take thee to
myself. Piscator. Fromonp : I will go
during the night of this present life. Dur-
HAM: Till the day when the Bride shall be
taken into immediate communion with the
shook ante Fry: Till the day of Christ’s
second appearing. Fausset: Till the ever-
lasting day: typically, God’s taking up his
abode in the Temple till the dayiicek of
Messiah’s first appearing. Mercer and
others: Day of the Gospel Dispensation,
when the shadows of the law should pass
away. Gizi: The day of grace, and then
the day of glory to elect souls.

‘I will get me to the mountains of myrrh,’
&c. According to some, the reference to
certain localities. ZéckLER: Localities about
the royal palace: solitary shady spots, per-
haps beds of balsam (verse 13). UmBREIT:
The region of Shulamite’s home. Hirzie:
Zion, as the seat of the Court. Wiutiiams:
The Lebanon: the allusion to the fragrant
groves of spices to be found in that country.
A. Cuarxe: Probably the mountains of
Bether. Coszin: The object to obtain per-
fumes for the Fair One, Others regard the
language as figurative and denoting the
Bride herself. Gnrottus: The breasts of
the Bride, with allusion to the fragrant sub-
stances upon them. Prrcy: The Bride
compared to an entire heap of perfumes.
Ewatp : Shulamite’s beauty so compared, as
inviting from its sweet perfume. Allegori-
cally: The temple on Mount Moriah, Tan-

144


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


a








Gum, Rasni, ABew Ezra. Mount Moriah,
where the oil was made out of pure myrrh:
Mount Zion as a figure of the Church. Hene-
STENBERG. Where Isaac was offered. Old
Commentators. Where frankincense was
offered on the altar of incense; the Lord
promising to dwell in the ‘l'emple now dedi-
cated to Him (2 Chron. vii. 12—15). Weiss,
Fausset. Reference to the Temple and its
pavers and services, where Jesus often
rought the devotion of holy prayer. Det
Rio. Heaven. Piscator. Tie heavenly
Jerusalem. Junius. As the place of special
holiness. Sanctius. The abode of mar-
tyrs and confessors. Honortus. The abode
of angels, spoken of in the Hast as having
bodies of perfume. Harmer. The media-
torial kingdom of Christ, where He presents
to the Father the incense of His finished
atonement, Hawker, and theautuorof ZAree-
fold Mystery. Refers to the crucifixion and
death of tous Grecory. Christ went
willingly to death: the mountain of myrrh
His death, the hill of frankincense His resur-
rection and ascension. THnoporet. Christ’s
mountain full of rich gifts, but only avail-
able for us by the bitterness of His death.
Det Rio. Historical reference to Calvary,
and the embalming of the Lord’s body with
the myrrh and aloes till His resurrection,
M. Stuart. The Bride or Church of Christ,
even now lovely and precious in His eyes as
the mountain of myrrh. Patrick. The
Church, where the graces of His people flow,
and where their prayers are as incense,
Douruam. Where Ghrist takes up His abode
till His second coming. Gitt. The Church
assembled under the Gospel ministry, where
the name of Jesus, like frankincense, fills the
hearts of His people with the savour of His
presence, HawKER (Nofes). On the sweetly
smelling sacrificial fragrance of the mountain
of myrrh (his Bride) he will delight himself
from morning till evening. Hany. Souls
whose fleshly lusts are mortified by the myrrh
of repentance. Fromonpi. Reference to a
life of prayer and contemplation. Trrinus.
As spoken by the Bride. The Church will
flee for safety from her persecutors to the
place prepared for her in the wilderness
(Rev. xii. 14). Coccrtus. Will wait for
the day, retiring for prayer and meditation.
Hawker. To the mountain of sacrifice and
the hill of praise. Davipson. The soul in
great distress fleeing to Christ for refuge in
prayer and meditation, AINSWORTH.
Verse 8. Come with me from Lebanon, my
spouse, with me from Lebanon ; look from the
top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and
Hermon, from the lions’? dens, from the
mountains of the leopards


‘Come with me? (CAN NIA tabhoi


a
:
S

“


me


Any
&


a)





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; THE SONG OF SOLOM ON,
Se


-—- —. ey





itty), ‘AN sometimes read as the impera-
tive of IN ‘to come” So the Szp-


TuaGinT and Vuteate, followed by Cover-
DALE and Lutner. Viewed by most as
from DS ‘with’ and 9 ‘me.’ So the Tar-


Gum, Diopati and Martin. By others as
denoting ‘to me.’ Solomon invites the
Bride to his arms as a place of safety.
Percy, Wi.ttamMs, BootHroyp. EwaLp
strangely supposes the words put by
Shulamite into her abseat lover’s mouth.
Bridegroom invites the spouse to come into
more pleasant and secure places. Patrick.
To make an excursion with him to admire
together the grand and beautiful scenery.
DopErtzin. To see the mountains men-
tioned, and to be crowned with their flowers.
Deu Rio. Bride, after last meeting, had
returned home, and, being a shepherdess,
had been feeding her flocks as far as Lebanon,
&c. “ Bride of Christ.” Solomon meets his
betrothed on the summits of Lebanon, and
invites her to leave it along with him. M.
Stuart, Deitzscn. Announces to her
that her home should henceforth be with
him in the royal palace. ZéckLER. ‘ Le-


banon’ (229 from 2? laban, ‘to be


white,’ the ‘white mountain, the Mont Blane
of Palestine’), the magnificent range of
mountains, so-called, situated between
Phenicia and Syria, with a double line,
called the Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon. Re-
markable for the grandeur of its appearance,
its silvery aspect, its fertility and beauty.
The abode of wild beasts (2 Kings xiv. 9),
A forest or wilderness in comparison with
other places (Isa. xxix. 17). Place of the
Bride’s nativity and upbringing. Sancrius.
Bride exhorted to leave her paternal abode
with the Bridegroom. TuHEovoRET. Solo-
mon recalls her descent from a simple
shepherd’s family in the mountain region of
Northern Palestine. Zockuer. The Bride’s
seven-fold beauty the ground on which she
comes down with the King from Lebanon
and its mountain peaks, and from the haunts
of lions and panthers, where she had dwelt
on the other side of Lebanon. Haun.
Allegorically: The congregation of Israel
invited to come to the ‘lemple, and dwell
with the Lord there. Tarcum. The
divine presence promised to Israel when
they should be carried captive from Lebanon
and should return thither. Rasur. From
the Temple, or the city and land where it is
situated. RoseNMULLER. Israel to leave
the temporary sanctuary and follow the
Bridegroom in the spiritual way of perfec-
tion, being assured of His presence with her
in the path of suffering. Wetss, Lebanon
10


NOTES,


the Temple from which Christ calls His
peuple to remove (Zech. ii. 1; compare
att. xxi. 13). M. Srvarr,
Called to forsake idols, and to leave all and
follow Christ, her Bridegroom; like Psalm
xlv. 10. ‘T'HeoporET, Davipson. Called
from the splendour of worldly glory. Ho-
Nokius. From some situation of danger.
Busy. From false Churches and societies
of wicked people, to walk with him in new
ness of life. AtnswortH. The Church in-
vited to heaven. Piscartor.


‘My spouse.’ AEP) (callah) a bride;
according to Grsentus, from 55> calal, to
crown, ‘the crowned one;’ but according to
others, from 223 to perfect; a term of


affection and esteem, used to express the
relation of a son’s wife to his father and
mother—a ‘perfect one.’ ParKHurst, WIL-
LIAMS, Simon, Neverused with my. The Bride
so called in direct relation to her husband’s
parents rather than to the husband himself ;
equivalent to ‘daughter-in-law,’ the title
being retained as long as her husband’s
parents were living (Gen. xxxviii. 11, 16,
24; Ruth i. 6—S). Fry. More directly
applied in reference to the Bridegroom or
husband (1 Sam. iii. 10): the idea of the
word being completion, totality ; a family being’
only complete upon a son’s marriage, and
the prospect of issue in the male line; the
Bride, or daughter-in-law, being the person
through whom the name, honours, and inhe-
ritance were to be continued. ‘ Zhree-fold
mystery.’ Shbulamite here, for the first time
called the Bride: hitherto only ‘love’ on
‘friend ;’ this section immediately following
the consummation of the marriage. PERCY.
So-called on account of the day being
appointed for the marriage. Junius.
‘Look from the top of Amana, &c.


WA (¢ashuri) susceptible of two meanings


—to ‘look’ and to set out onajourney. The
latter preferred by ZécKLER and others as


parallel with NilD. Thus understood


by the SEPTUAGINT (s:edevon.) So Luruer.
The Vuteate: Thou shalt be crowned;
either from WW to rule (Sancrius), or


from TWN to be happy (Det Rio). So


Caumet : The Bridegroom promises to deck
her with a crown, and make her his Bride.
‘Tarcum: Thou shalt see persons coming,
.e., with presents. So Rosemv.ier.
Grotius: I will conduct thee through the
most pleasant parts of my kingdom. Coc-
cEIUs: Come and euter into possession :
look forth on the inheritance. Percy:
She may now look dowr ‘a security amidst
145


The Church -


NOTES,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





any dangers of which she was apprehensive.
Fry: The Bride, in passing from her home
to her husband’s abode, would obtain from
the heights of these mountains a gratifying
prospect of the land of promise. Detrrzscu :
Solomon would conduct her from one
summit of Lebanon to another, and give her
to see and enjoy the prospect of his wide


dominions. ‘ Amana’ (TJD), the name of


a mountain in the north of Palestine.
Rasut. At present not precisely known:
probably belonging to the same range of
mountains in Antilibanus as Shenir and
Hermon. Weiss. Not likely, as A.
CuaRKkE, the mountains dividing Cilicia and
Assyria. WIttiams: A mountain in Syria ;
the valley and the river called by the same
name, Amanaand Abana (2 Kings v.12; Keré


TIDN Amana). GEsentus: The name of


a river rising in Antilibanus and watering
Damascus, and giving its name to that part
of the Lebanon. According to later Jews,
only the name of ariver. Hwatp: Amana,
some part of Lebanon not far from
Damascus, whence a small river of
similar name had its rise, called Abana.
Micuagtis: Abana probably the river
now called Fiji. ZockLerR: Amana, the
peak lying farthest to the east and north-
east of the Anlitibanus range. ‘Shenir’
(WI, better read “VJW Senir), the name


of Mount Hermon with the Amonites
(Deut. iii. 9); as Sirion (WY) was with


the Sidonians. In a stricter sense, a part
of Hermon or Antilibanus lying to the north,
and now called by the Arabs, Jebel Senir ;
Hermon being distinguished from Shenir
both here and in 1 Chronicles v. 23. GEsz-
nius. Shenir the more northern, Hermon
the more southern, of the principal peaks in
the Hermon or Antilibanus range. ZOCKLER.
Sirion identical with Shenir, meaning a
breastplate ; referring probably to its glitter-
ing breastplate of ice. Stanney. ‘ Hermon’


()D7). A high mountain of Antilibanus


covered with snow, now called Jebel Sheikh.
Sometimes as here, and in] Chronicles v. 23,
distinguished from Shenir, the common
usage apparently fluctuating. Hermon con-
sisted of more mountains than one (Ps. xlii.
7), these mountains being called also Zion
(Deut. iii, 9; iv. 48). Gusentus. ‘The
poet here only varies the names, because one
meant the same as another to him. Hirzie,
ZocKLER. Amana, Shenir, and Hermon, all
different mountains of the Lebanon chain.
Cozssin. The SepruaGint, strangely trans-
lating the first name, Amana, has: ‘ From
the beginning of the faith.’ In the second
146


clause, however: ‘From the top,’ &c.; as
the VuteaTe in both clauses. The passage
thus allegorized, Turoporet: Shenir and
Hermon the law or legal life. Weiss:
Wild mountains of Israel’s captivity. Davip-
son: The whole land of Gentile Ksau—the
Gentile and estranged wilderness. Parrick ;
From the horrid mountains, where thou wast
exposed to the rage and cruelty of furious
and troublesome men, look down and behold
the goodly heritage 1 have purchased for
thee. Piscator: Heaven to be beheld by
faithh Duruam: Elevate the aeart to
heaven; Jook, at least. Fry; The believer,
like Moses on Pisgah, obtains a prospect of
the promised rest. Gitu: The Church
called to look down and see how the Gospel
was received by the nations: or, Christ’s
call to His Church to leave the society of
the wicked men of the world, and go along
with Him (2 Cor. vi. 17; Rev. xvili. 4).
* Lion’s dens and mountains of leopards.’ A
poetical exaggeration of the mountains
around Shunem, as if to be compared with
Lebanon ; alluding, in a general way, to the
wild beasts and inhospitable character of
the region of Shulamite’s home (Zech. i. 3;
Jer. xii. 5; Deut. xxxiii. 22). Z6cKLER.
Allegorically, the inhabitants of strong
towns, who are strong as lions. TaRrcum.
Furious Jews and crafty Gentile philoso-—
hers. TuEoporet. Malicious, cruel, and
ypocritical men. Jexomz, Grecory. Here-
tics. Pano, Ansetm. False brethren.
Honoris. Persecuting tyrants. PiscaTor,
Durnam. Regions of idolatry, of which
Egypt whence the Bride came (?) was one
of the most remarkable Harmer. Baby-
lonian lions and Chaldean panthers. Weiss.
Savage, beastly, and idolatrous poor
Ainswortu. These mountains, thus beauti-
ful but dangerous, put in contrast with the
mountain of myrrh and hill of frankincense.
Burroveus.

Verse 9. Thou hast ravished my heart, my
sister, my spouse: thou hast ravished my
heart with one of thine eyes, with one cham
of thy neck. ‘Thou hast ravished my heart’
(322) libbabhtini, a verb formed from


aad libbebh, from the noun 335 lebhabh,


a heart); ‘thou hast wounded or taken away
my heart.’ Gxsrnrus. ‘Hast enchanted
me, made me wholly thine own.’ Z6cKLER,
DeiirzscH. According to this view the
Piel form of the verb has a privative signi-


fication like 220 (sikkel), to clear away
stones; or WY (sheresh), to uproot. Ac-
cording to others» 33), like the same in


Syriac, denotes to give heart or encourage.
So the niphal form of the verb in Job. xi. 12,





i a


te


ve es


eo. oY


i


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


NOTES.





323, to get a heart or wisdom. So Gre-


gory. Coccrtus, Ewatp, and others : Thou
hast heartened, or emboldened me. Worps-
WworTH and some Rabbins: Behearted me—
coupled my heart to thine. Sepruacint :
Thou hast hearted us. Symmacuus: Hast


emboldened me. Vutuate, followed by
Coverpa.Le, Matruews, GENEVA and Doval
versions: Hast wounded my heart. Cran-
MER and BisHor’s Bible: Hast bewitched
my heart. Lutaer, Montanvs, Piscator,
Mercer: Hast taken away my heart. D1o-
patr and Dutcu Version: Hast robbed
me of my heart. Martin: Hast ravished
my heart. So Junius and TREemELuivus,
PaRkuurst, Percy, Goop, Booturoyp.
Monster: Hast fascinated my heart. Trr1-
nus and TicuRINE version: Hast taken
ossession of my heart. So Patrick. ABEN

zRA: Hast taken away my heart. Kri-
cui: Hast wounded it with the arrow of
thine eyes. Rasui: Hast drawn my heart
to thee. Tarcum: Written on the tablet of
my heart is thy love. AinswortH : Thou
hast taken, pierced, wounded my heart,
ravishing it with love and aeighe Dz
Werte: Hast robbed me of my heart.
Noyzs: Hast taken my heart captive. Um-
BREIT: Hast robbed me of courage.
Haun: Hast unhearted me. Weiss: Hast
cherished, known, esteemed, and loved me.
Cray: The word not found elsewhere in the
Bible in this form and sense: Christ’s love
so unspeakable, new words to be coined to
express it.—‘ With one of thine eyes’:
(FIV KTRD be-akhadh me-enaik)


‘With one of the glances proceeding from
thine eyes.’ ZécKLER, HenesteNBERG. So
Junius, Le Cuerc, Percy, Goon, &c.; sup-
osing that something, as 9X7, has either
Pion dropped out of the text, or is to be
understood after “J182, Masorites pro-


posed reading [MN instead of TNA,
Ty being feminine. So the Keri and
many MSS. Ewaup: With a single one
of thy glances. Detitzscu: With one of
thy looks. AinswortH: Even a side or
rofile view of her face charms him. So
ee Parxuurst: The least glance I
have of thee and of thy beauty. Kennicort:
At once with thine eyes. So BooruroyD,
Cozsin, Hopesor, Rasui: 1 would have
loved thee with only one of thy charms.
Sanctius: Perhaps one eye hidden by
the veil or crown. Eastern women un-
unveiled only one eye in conversation.


TeRtuLLiaN, Nrzesunr, Nores.— With one
chain of thy neck’ (TWD PAY TON.
be-akhadh’anag mits-tsavronaik). Ply (anag)
acollar, from PY, ‘to adorn or clothe the


neck’ (Ps. Ixxiii. 6). Gesentus. With one
chain of thy necklace; Shulamite’s neck
looking so charmingly in it. Zécktrr. Th

word however only to be taken figuratively.
Percy. With one stone of thy necklace.
Ewatp. In Eastern descriptions, the dress
and ornaments quite as much praised as the
person: so in our own old ballads. “ Bride
of Christ.’ PatRick understands a ‘ wreath
of hair.” So Hirzie: A ringlet or lock of
the first hair hanging down on the neck.
4.. Ciarxe thinks the reference to the play
of the muscles of the neck. So Goop and
Percy: With one turn of thy neck. Booru-
Royp: At once with the turning of thy


neck. ny (tsavron), a diminutive of en-


dearment, from NAS (¢savvar) 3 ‘thy tiny


neck.’ Gesentus, Ewauv. The dual or plural
used to indicate the hair hanging on both sides
of the neck. AiInsworTH. Szptuacint: With
one ornament of thy neck. Symmacuvs :
With one necklace. Aquina: One lock.
Vuteate: One hair or ringlet. Lurusr:
One of thy neckchains. Diopati and Mar-
TIN: One of the necklaces of thy neck. So
Mercer, Paeninus, &. Munster: With
one fillet.

“My sister, my spouse. A bride also
called ‘sister’ among the later Arabians:
so soror applied to a mistress in Tibullus.
Grsenius. The designation of 4 certain
relationship: the spouse now Solomon’:
lawful wife, and next to him as a sister toa
brother. ZécxiER. ‘My sister,’ a word of
tenderness and endearment, used by hus-
bands to their wives: so Tobit, vii. 16; viii.
4, 7. Patrick. Relations and kinspeople
called by the Jews brethren and sisters.
Gut. The Church Christ’s sister by His
assumption of our nature; His spouse, by
love and marriage-covenant. Brpz. The
Church so called out of love, and in respect
to regeneration and adoption (Heb. ii. 11).
Arnswortu. The Lord’s heart drawn by
even one right thought directed towards Him.
Sanctivs. Christ easily and willingly over-
come by His own. Dunnam. The Bride’s
poverty of spirit looking forth behind the
veil of her doyecliie eyes, one of the two
great features of her beauty that won the
heart of the King; her humility of spirit the
other. Haun.


NOTES.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





CHAPTER V.


Verse 2: I sleep, but my heart waketh.
‘Sleep,’ IW; yeshenah, a participle or


adjective, from we, to sleep. GEesENIUs.


The connection with what follows gives to
Mu? and): the sense of imperfects: ‘I


was sleeping,’ &c. ZécxiEr, Hirzie. So
Goop, Percy, Booturoyp, &c. Diopati,
Martin, and Dutcu: I slept or was asleep.
Was sleeping as if inebriated with tee
Micnanuis, A. Charke. Had laid her head
down on her couch, waiting for her beloved,
and had fallen asleep, aud now relates her
dream to her companions, GrecGorY. Ro-
counts an adventure, or perhaps a dream,
Percy. Most likely the latter. A. CLARKE.
A dream, indicating perplexity and uncon-
nectedness, and containing reminiscences of
the former one. Ewatp. Another part of
the poem begins here: in Solomon’s ab-
sence, tle Bride relates a dream to her
attenda:.'s or the daughters of Jerusalem.
Deuitzscu. A dream, indicative of her
state of mind some days after the marriage
festivities, her longing having been awakened
for her native home. ZéckLER. The scene
transferred to the Bride’s lowly cottage in
the city, where she refused her husband ad-
mittance at night; a scene in accordance
with her original position, but most incon-
sistent with her present rank, and explicable
only onthe ground of allegory. M. Stuart.
Second half of the Book begins here, shew-
ing the Bride’s original condition, and how
her longing for the King was brought about.
Hann. ‘My heart waketh.’ Rather, was
waking or awake, So Ewatp, Z6cKLER,
&c. 25. (libbi) ‘my heart;’ used in the


O.T. sense, of the centre and organ of the
entire life of the soul. Zécxter. My soul.
Ewaxp. My mind. Davipson. The intellec-
tual faculties or region of thought. Hrrzic.
Her sleep nearer waking than sleeping.
Sancrius. Like Balaam, fallen asleep, but
with the eyes open (Num. xxiv. 4). Patrick.
Spoken of one asleep, or partly so, being
excited by an unexpected call. Fry. Her
mind awake and filled with the object of her
affection. Noyes. Thus allegorized; Tar-
eum: Israel, when carried to Babylon, like
a man asleep and unable to awake. Ransins:
Asleep as to the commandments, but my
heart awake to the duties of piety: asleep as
to my redemption, but the Blessed One
awake to redeem me. Welss: Ancient
Church relates her experience after the dedi-
cation of the Temple (2 Chron. xii. 1; Isa. i.
21; v 7; Jer. ii. 21; Sam. iv. 1); a moral
sleep intended; a state of spiritual drowsi-
148


ness and inactivity. AinswortH: The spouse
having eaten and drunk largely of the bless-
ings of Christ, begins to remit her zeal, and
neglect the works of faith and love: the
heart, however, or inner man, the spirit, or
the man as he is regenerate, still awake. Deu
Rio: Awake in the inward soul, while the
external senses were lulled. Hann: Am
unnatural sleep; the original condition of
the Bride or the Gentile nations living without
God; a life without liveliness, as a sleep.
ZéckLERand HenesteNBERG: A dark scene:
Apostasy of unbelieving mankind from God;
epee the rejection of the Saviour. Grz-
GorRY and early interpreters: Saved from the
billows, the Church falls asleep on the shore.
Broventon and Corton: State of the
Church in Constantine’s time. Davipson :
The disciples before Christ's resurrection.
Verse 4: My beloved put in his hand by
the hole of the door. ‘ By the hole of the


door? (ANT Yo, min ha-khor; literally


‘from the hole’). Through the latticed win-
dow. ZécxueR. Theopening which served for
a window. Ewatp. At the window or case-
ment. Patrick. Probably rather a hole in
the door. The hole in cr near the door.
Rasui. Above the lock. Hany. In the
wall. Hirzic. The attempt made to open
the lock inside. Oriental oases still made
with a hole in the door, or rather door-post,
by which the master and domestics open the
locks by putting in their hand, while strangers
neither dare nor know how to do so, the
locks being variously made: at night, addi-
tional bolts and bars so fasten the door that
it cannot be opened from without. Weiss.
When the bolt was too strong for the finger
to move, or the hole too small, a key was
used: otherwise, the finger inserted into the
hole could move the bolt and open the door:
at night, a pin was passed before the fore
part of the bolt, to prevent its being opened
on the outside: the Bridegroom had put in
his finger to see if this had been omitted.
Det Rio. A key in the Kast usually a piece
of wood with pegs or pins in it correspondin
to small holes in a wooden bolt within, sea
is inserted through a hole in the door to push
back the bolt. Fausset. The locks are
placed on the inside of the doors of gardens
and outer courts, and even on those of inner
rooms of some places. ‘I'o enable the owner
to open them, a hole is cut in the door,
through which he thrusts his arm and inserts
the key. THomson, Land and Book. Sup-
TUAGINT: Withdrew his hand from, &e. So
Burroucus and GinsBuRG. VuULGATE,
followed by Mantin: Put hi


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG CF S( LOMON.





NOTES,





Lutuer, Diopatt, WicxurrF: Through the
hole. Geneva: Through the hole of the
door, Piscator and Montanvs: From the
hole. Junius and Tremetuvus: Had put
down his hand from, &c. Tuxroporet: To
awaken the Bride. Piscator: To effect an
opening. Sancrivs: To remove the bolt.
Patrick: As if attempting to draw her out
of her bed, or threatening to punish her.
Hirzie: As if intending to climb in by the
window. HENGSTENBERG and WoRDSswoRTH:
Forcibly to break a hole through the wall,
like Ezekiel viii. 7, 8. Allegorically: His
hand, the Divine energy. THeoporet. A
secret inspiration on the heart. Frostonpt1.
Something tending to awaken the Church.
Bricutman. To arouse the lingering and
fearful. Cocczius. His vengeance in the
days of Ahaz. Rasat. LEfficacious grace.
Gitt. Historically, the reference to the in-
carnation. Honortus. To the scene in the
judgment-hall of Caiaphas. M. Stuart,

AussET. To the resurrection of Christ.
Puito. To the inward working of His
Spirit, as at Antioch (Acts. ii. 19, 21. Arns-
WORTH, FaussEt.


Verse 5: My hands dropped with myrrh,
and my fingers with sweet smelling onthe handles


of thelock. ‘Dropped with myrrh.’ WO")


natephu mor, literally ‘dropped myrrh.’ So
Sepruacint, Vuteate, LuTuer, &c. Mar
TIN: The myrrh dropping from my hand.
The myrrh from Solomon’s having taken
hold of the lock on the outside with pro-
fusely anointed hands. ZécKLer, WILLIAMS.
From the unguent flowing in from the outer
lock through the keyhole. Hitzie. Some
drops inserted by her lover through the hole
or above the door, and trickling down on the
inner lock, showing how richly anointed he
had come to her. Detitzscu. Left on pur-

ose by himself. Ewatp, Txrupp, Rowe.
PE eosediuy from the moisture of his hand
when he introduced his finger to remove the
bolt. Det Rio, Noyes, Hann. She ima-
gines how her beloved, while calling her, had
smeared the lock with perfume for its smell
to meet her. Ewaup. Lucretius speaks of
lovers perfuming the doors of their mistresses.
Some, on the other hand, view the perfume as
having been brought by the Bride herself.
So WorpswortH. Sanctivs: Not having
time to perfume her garments, she pours the
myrrh on her hand, wishing thus to receive
and gratify her Bridegroom, Fausset:
Anointed herself profusely, as the best proof
she could give him of a hearty welcome.
Weiss: Just having gone to anoint herself
as a delicate lady among the Homans.
Patrick and Percy: Having taken it to
anoint her husband’s head with it, she in her
paste spil§ it on her hands A. CLsBKE:


Those who brought the Bride to the Bride-
groom’s house often anointed the doorposts
with fragrant oils, and sometimes the Bride
herself anointed them: hence wor, fot
unxor. Allegorized by the Fathers generally
as indicating penitence, chastity, and morti-
fication of the flesh. Dunuam : Lively exer-
cise of faith and other graces. AINSWORTH:
Godly sorrow, faith, and love; or the sweet
alluring odour left by Christ. Patrick:
Most ardent love with which the believer
seeks to entertain his Saviour. BRigHTMAN :
Her endeavours as most acceptable to God.
Det Rio: The Bridegroom moving his
Church to undertake the work of preaching
the Gospel with the desire to endure hard-
ship and even death for His sake. Coccerus:
The Church’s begun labour that she and the
brethren might be partakers of Christ.
Davipson: ‘The application to the Church,
of all the efficacy ot Christ’s atonement and
resurrection. symbolized by the myrrh with
which His body was embalmed, and which
flows from Him as the Head to His mem-
bers. Threefold Mystery: Vhe setting forth
anew of the precious doctrines of the atone-
ment and mediation of Christ. M. Sruarr:
Historically, the reference to the disciples
with myrrh seeking Jesus in the tomb.
Fausset: Also, to bitter repentance as the
fruit of the Spirit’s anointing (2 Cor. i. 21.
22).

ERSE 6, ‘ My soul failed when He spake.’

“My soul failed.’ TINS’ (WH)
naphshi yatseah, literally, ‘went forth.
Failed, or fainted; breath forsook me; my
soul almost went out of me. Z6cKLER,
Ewa.p, Deuiztscu. Sunk. Burroucus.
I swooned away, and was like a dead body
(Gen. xxxv. 18). Fry. I was not in my
senses. De Wetts, Noyes, Sanctivs.
My sow melted with anguish. Rows.
With sweet effusion of love. Fromonp1.
Left me and flew away to my Bridegrceom.
Deu Rio. Was in great terror. Cocczsus,
Was in suspense. ‘THEopoRET. ‘There
remained no more spirit in her. Davipson.
Vuucate: My soul was melted. Lutagr:
Went out. Martin: Fainted. Duiopati:
I was out of myself. CoverpaLe and
Mattuews: My heart could not refrain.
TicguRINE: My mind was disturbed,
‘When he spake.’ yaa bedhabbero,
at his speaking;’ from ‘? dibder, to
speak. So Gesenius. When he spoke.
Kwatp, Devitzsca. While he yet spoke.
Weiss, Mercer, Le Cuerc, &e. When
he was speaking, i.e. through the window.
Zockuer. Had failed as he spoke; a
supplementary remark. Dopss, Ssprua-


Gint: At his word. Vuteate: When he
149


NOTES,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





spoke. Symmacuus: While he spoke.
Wicxulrr: As he spake. CovErpALE and
Marruews : Now like as aforetime when he
spake. Luruer: Afterhisword. DutcH:
On account of his word. Martin: From
having heard him speak. Rasu1: When he
spoke this word. Junius: On account of
the word with which he addressed me.
Assembly's Annotations: My neglect of his
speech troubled me when he was gone.
BRIGHTMAN, AINSWORTH. BooTHRoyD:
On remembering his words. Borroucus:
In consequence of what he had said. Scorr:


Hither remembering his tender and affec-
tionate apeal, or hearing a reproving word
as he withdrew. Noyzs and Dz Wertz:
I was not in my senses while he spoke—
acted insanely in not admitting my beloved
at his request. Ewatp proposes to read


372 ‘at his going away. Hrrzie views
the word as equivalent to VON ‘after
him.’ Umsrgit: ‘In order to follow him;
from “DF to follow. Some propose


1273 ‘on his account,’


CHAPTER VIL


Versz 12. Or ever I was aware, my soul
made me like the chariots of Amminadid.


The speaker in this and the preceding
verse iiderendly understood by expositors.
According to many, the Bridegroom is the
Speaker. Among the moderns, Haun ob-
serves: The King had gone down to enjoy
the beauty of spring in his native plains,
after the virgin’s refusal. Kirto: Had gone
down to his garden toadmire its beauty. J.
H. Micnaz.is: Bridegroom relates his joy-
fal doing and saying. A large portion of in-
terpreters view the Bride as thespeaker, THE-
oporET: Bride gives the reason for her not
obeying the Bridegroom’s call. De.itzscH:
Bride relates where she had been. Ewa.p:
Begins to relate how she had been surprised
by the royal cor¢éye while in her garden, and
what happened to her on her first being
brought to the King’s Court. ZockizER:
Describes how she had been occupied before
being brought to the royal Court, and how
that had taken place. Percy, Goop, and
Bootsroyp: Spoken by the Bride, who
had gone to meet her spouse. M. Stuart:
The Bride always the narrator in the Song.
Some expositors, however, view the Bride-
groom as the Speaker in the preceding verse,
and the Bride in this.

‘Or ever I was aware, YT. Nd
fo yadha’ ti; literally, I knew not. Gzsz-
ius: I observed or expected not; YI


used also of observing. ZOCKLER: ‘I knew
not ;’ viz., that her lover was the King.
DeuitzscH: That my soul exalted me,’ &c.
Ewatp: ‘That my pleasure brought me,’
&c., §.¢., it happened without my knowing it.
‘My soul made me like the chariots of Am-
minadib’ (aT Oy Mad "VW
samathni markebhoth ammi-nadhibh). A
construction like Psalm exxxiv, 2,and Ezekiel
xvii. 5. Perhaps marae for M3373,


150


as 1 Samuel viii. 11. Most of the MSS.
read 2°73) YOY as two words (ammi nadib
é.e, my willing people); though upwards of
twenty read as one, like the Septuagint and
Vulgate. According to Gusenius, OY is


the construct state of OY with Yod


annexed, but not as the pronominal
suffix, my. Hwaxp, however, reads with


the suffix, —my people, t.e., the people
to which I belong. Guxsznius understands
the noun as denoting friends or com-


pany (from OD to collect); and 27)
as another noun, ‘the prince;’ from
372 ‘to impel;’ hithpael, ‘to offer one:
self willingly ;? hence 2°7J ready, prompt,


liberal, princely; and as a noun, a prince:
the expression in the text denoting ‘the
Prince’s people or company.? Noyzs: The
prince’s train. M. Stuart: the attendants
of the prince. Zocxter: Expresses the
full display of the pomp and power of the
kingdom. According to others, the two
words are united in the proper name of
a person celebrated for his swift chariots.
So Mercer, Grotivus, Patrick and others :
some noted captain, who easily pursued his
victories with the swiltest chariots Har-
MER: a furious driver of the age; the ex-
pression indicating the greatest precipitation.
According to some Latin writers, Ammina-


dib, the father of Naasson. For nw
Déderlein reads ‘JDY ‘made me
amazed ;’ apparently the reading of the
Vulgate, which has: My soul disturbed me
on account of the four-horsed chariots of
Amminadib. Similarly, Symmacuus: I was
in perplexity for, &c. ‘The SEPruacint
has: My soul knew not (reading JY")


he (or it) made me, &. WickurF and


a a
“


{ee ee


Ds ee So al


Ey


i


the Dovar Version follow the Vulgate:
My soul disturbed or troubled me for, &e.
Cranmer and the BisHor’s Biste: I knew
not that my soul had made me the chariots
of the people that be under tribute. Gzneva
Version: I knew nothing; my soul set me
as the chariots of my noble people. CoveR-


DALE and MattuEews: Then the chariots of .


the proud of my people made me suddenly
afraid. LurHer: My soul knew it not, that
he had set or made me the chariots of
Amminadib. Diopatr: I was not aware
that my desire rendered me like the chariots
of A. Martin: [ did not perceive myself,
that my affection rendered me like the
chariots of A. Dutcu: Before I knew it,
my soul set me on the chariots of my willing
people. Castatio: My soul rendered me
unawares like, &. Mercer: I knew not,
my soul made or placed me the chariots, &c.
Paeninus and Brigutman: As the chariots,
&c. Munster: To be the chariots, &c.
Piscator, Junrvs, and TREMELLIUs: When
I perceived not this, viz.: that the vines
were Dagens, &c. ArnswortH: My soul
set me, t.e., | put myself, &c.; the language
of earnest desire and affection, as Ecclesiastes
vii. 28; Canticles i. 7. DurHam: I was made
like, or, I was set on the chariots, &. Editor
of Catmet: My affections transported me
hke, &c. J. H. Micuarnis: I knew not
how, my soul placed me on, &c. PERCY,
Goop, Booturoyp: I knew not the irreso-
lution of my mind, which made me withdraw
swift as the chariots, &c. Den Rio: I
perceived not [thy love to me, because] my
mind disturbed me on account of, &c. Ro-
SENMULLER: Made melike, é.e., swift as the
chariots, &. HoipEN: Before I was aware,
my soul hurried me away with anxious
thoughts of my beloved. Fry: My heart
made me hke, &c. Sanctius: So coura-
geous in following after the missing Bride-
groom. UmBrrit: Made me into a chariot
of, &c., i.e. a princess. Gzsenivs, Hitzie,
Ewap: Transported me; made me happy
among the chariots, &c. Hopeson: My fancy
conceived myself on the chariots, &c. MERCER
explains: Unawares an incredible desire im-
pelted meto goto the garden where my beloved
was ; andl went with such speed that I did not
perceive I was like, &c. Junius and Pis-
cator: Not seeing the Bride ready for the
marriage, I took speedy counsel what I should
do for her until that time. Vatasius: I
used the quickest. carriages, those used by

rince; so quickly did I return to my
icon Sanctius: I knew not that
the Bridegroom had gone down to the gar-
den ;\ my sou! disturbed me for the chariots,
&c., lest I should meet them; or lest I
should not be permitted to ascend them.
Parzicx: I did not know it, or think so,—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


NOTES.





was not conscious of such perfections: thy
praises put such motions in my soul as to
make me to aim at the highest perfection,
and use all haste to its attainment. Dur-
HAM: I knew not till I was transported
with an irresistible power of love to my
Bridegroom. A. Cxarke: Implies strong
agitation of mind, -palpitation of heart.
Fry: Describes the fluttering of fear, being
taken by surprise and driven to flight.
Percy: Expresses a heart palpitating be-
tween love, bashfulness, fear, and other ten-
der passions; the meeting probably by ap-
pointment. Fry: I was not aware,—her
retirement being suddenly interrupted.
Gzszntus: Suddenly, while walking in the
garden, I unexpectedly saw myself sur-
rounded with the chariots of the king’s com-
panions, Witiams: The affection of the
prince carried him to meet his Bride with the
rapidity of a chariot of A. Kirto: Solomon
unexpectedly sees Shulamite. Cray: His
soul bounds towards her in swift afféction as
she now makes her appearance in the gar-
den. Detitzscu: I knew not that my soul
exalted me, &c.; it was not by self-exalta-
tion, but by the impulse of her own love,—
not forgetful of her humble origin. M.
Stuart: Expresses her ignorance as to
where he was, and her diligence in seeking
him; her great haste from the strength of
her affection, or her courage and resolution
in surmounting all difficulties for his sake.
ZocxieR: Indicates sudden elevation to
ae dignity, and her desire to be wholly


The passage variously allegorized. TaR-
eum: The Lord consults with Himself for
the good of Israel. Rasnt: Israel com-
plains of the consequence of her sin in
falling under the power of Rome. Tuzo-
porET: The Church complains of the hea-
then whom she sought to evangelize, but
who attacked her and became as Satan’s
chariot. AmBrosE: The soul’s subjection
to the four passions till Christ mounts the
chariot. Dex Rio: The Jews converted
in the latter days excuse their long con-
tinuance in blindness and _obstinancy.
BricutMan : The conversion of the Jews as
a thing beyond all expectation, and the
ready aid given by the Gentiles in their
restoration (Isa. Ixvi. 20). Grecory and
many of the Latins view the chariot as
that of Christ, drawn by the four evan-
gelists. Coccrrus sees in the passage a
prophetic reference to the warlike expedi-
tions of the Hussités under Ziska ; Christ’s
pity for His oppressed people, and his ready
assistance to their endeavours. AINSWORTH
observes, that Christ uses His servants as
chariots, for {"is ‘ willing people’ to be
brought as an oblation to the Lord. (Isa,

= 151


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





lavi. 20). Grzx sees in the passage the swift-
ness as well as the majesty and glory with
with which Christ visits His Church: not
finding the plants as He expected, He
speedily employs methods for making them
so: or, He returns with a transport of love
to His Church. Bride of Christ: Christ in
viewing the plants planted by His Father, is
filled with the joy of one who finds himself
suddenly surrounded with His willing people.
Hawker: The Bride conscious of the effect
of Christ’s visit to her, her soul being sud-
denly and blessedly on fire. M. Stuart:
The Bride suddenly transported with desire
to return to her Lord and vate J. H.
MicHae.is: Christ speaks after the manner
of men, as if not expecting such an event, or
not knowing what to do. So Catovius and
Coccrtus. Davinson: Christ takes His
willing people, as it were, in the chariots of
His commands, and brings them to Mount
Zion, the Christian Church. THRrupr: The
Church unexpectedly made the source and
channel of victorious might to all the willing
people of God. Hann: The Gospel in its
fourfold history carried rapidly through the
world; and, without thinking a moment
longer, constrained by the long restrained
love of His heart, Christ mounts, as Captain
of the Host, the chariots of His people, to
bring the penitent to Himself, and to fulfil His
vocation, as Israel’s King, in bringing back
ona Heathendom into the tents of
em.


Versz 18. Return, returs, O Shulamite ;
return, return. ‘Return” DW shudihi,


return, come back. So most; though some,
as De Werte, Haun, and Sanpers render it
‘turn round,’ for which a different word
would probably be used. Spoken by Solomon
and his female attendants. Ewatp. By
bride’s companions, who desire her to return
back to the garden with them. De.irzscg.
By the bridegroom’s servants. THEODORET.
By his friends. Hovsicant, Percy. By
chorus of women. Menocutvus. The Bride,
finding her beloved, takes leave of the women,
who her to return. Mercer. GILL:
Observing her bashfulness, they call her to
turn her face, that they may behold it. Han-
MER : Spoken by Solomon or his attendants
to the Jewish Queen, who had fied as not
able to bear an interview with the King.
Sanctius: Spoken by the ‘daughters of
Jerusalem,’ desiring to see her beauty for
themselves. M. Stuart: By the ‘daughters,’
desiring in the King’s absence to see the
Bride. Weiss: By first division of the
‘daughters.’ Fry: by the company who
had broken in upon her retirement, while she
turned away to conceal herself. Noyss: Se
the court ladies. ZécxuzR: The ladies
162


ing to her when appearing to leave the court.
Haun: The call of the King and his host
out of the chariots to the virgin in her home
which they have speedily reached. Wu-
Liams: Seeing her at a distance, the king
instantly turns back and flies to meet her.
Thus allegorized. Tarcum: The Lord calls
Jerusalem to receive His prophets. RasHI:
To return to Himself. Tuzoporet: Christ’s
servants call to the Charch, not to fear the
attacks of persecutors. Puimo, TRes
Patres: Call to the imperfect to repent.
Amsrose: To return to the way of virtue and
of heaven. Bexnazp: Bridegroom calls to
the Church to return from lukewarmness,
torpor and pride—from foolish joy and useless

ief. Dex Rio: The call of the Christian

hurch addressed to the latter day Jews in
the four quarters of the world. Haun: The
call of the Gospel of peace to the heathen
world. WorpswortH: The summons re-
iterated, as addressed to Jew and Gentile to
return to God. Tururp: Call to the Church
to return in peace from victorious conflict.
Hawker: The call of the Triune Jehovah.
*Shulamite” JVOPWT ha-Shulammith.


Different meanings and derivations of the
name given. Probably named from Solomon.
miaoe Shelomo; ‘she who is Solomon’s


Bride ;’ or, ‘she who has been visited with
peace.’ Gzsenius. The Bepeaced. THRUPP.
A dialectic variation of Shunemite, from
Shunem, also called Solam, the place of her
abode. ZécxiER., Shunem called Solam as
early as the time of Eusebius, who refers to
1 Kings i.3; ii. 17, as a possible explanation
ofthe term. Gesenivus. Inhabitant of Sulem
or Jerusalem. ABEN Ezra, Kimcui,Coccetvs,
Partaick, &c. From ow perfect, or OW to


restore; the perfect or restored one. WEIss.
Perfect in thy faithfulness. Rasni. Sep-
tuaGint: Sunamite; though the Complu-
tensian and Royal Editions have Sulamite.
Vuueate, Syriac, and ARABIC: Sulamite.
Aquita: She who is at peace. WICKLIFFE :
Sunamytis. The name here used to remind
her of her condition as Solomon’s bride, and
so to remove her bashfulness. PERcy.

Ibid. As it were the company of two
armies. The answer given by the Bride-

oom. So Txzoporetand the Fathers. By
is friends, Canvin. By the ‘daughters.’
Z6cKLER and many moderns. A continua-
tion of the Virgin’s question. Dz Wertts
and others, ‘As it were the company,’ &c.
aie) noma (kimkholath mahanaim).
Pini) (mekholah) a choir or dance, to cele-
brate a victory; from Da; to turn or go


round, to dance. Gzsznrus. 2VTID (makhul>
=e


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





always a religious dance, or danceat areligious
festival (Exod. xv.20; Jud. xxi. 19; Jer, xxxi.


4,13). Ewaxp. aT, a circular dance, well
known and common to the Orientals in feasts


and solemn occasions, performed by several


companies at once and by ranks, moving in
opposite directions; performed  anciently


round heathen idols. Weiss. mma, like
ria) a chorus or dance; processions or


bands constantly employed on occasions of
public rejoicing. Fry. O° (mahanaim);


eae
dual or plural of (T2M2; a camp or army ;
from ‘127; to pitch tent: here, according


to some, the heavenly hosts or angels. So
Gzsenivs and De.itzscu. Two hosts or
choral bands. Percy, Goop. Two bands;
alluding probably to the two choruses or
semi-chorusses that accompanied the Bride
and Bridegroom. Wittiams, Two camps.
A. Crarxe. Simply, Mahanaim: ‘'The dance
of Mahanaim.’ Zécxter. What resembles
the dance of M.: they would see her
dance. Ewaup, who observes: Mahanaim
was an old city on the other side of Jordan
celebrated in Jacob’s time (Gen. xxxii. 3):
must have become in the poet’s time cele-
brated for its female dancers at the solemn
religious festivals, having been a holy city
from antiquity through Jacob’s abode in it:
hence such dances, as at Shiloh (Jud.xxi. 19), in
the Kingdom of Israel, at first only at Dan and
Beersheba (1 King xii. 28, 29), afterwards in
in many other cities (Amos iv. 4; v. 5). These
remarks, however, made on the supposition
that the Song was composed by a later poet
than Solomon. The Szptuacint has: As
choruses or dances of the camps. VULGATE:
Unless the choruses of camps. WICKLIFF :
But quires of tents. Dovat: The dance of
the angelic choirs. Luter: As the ranks
at Mahanaim, Dutcu: A row of two





NOTES.





armies. Dropatr and Marri: As a dance
of two companies. VataBLus, PaGninus,
Mercer, &c.: As the chorus of a camp or
camps. JUNIUS and TREMELLIUS: The quire
of Mahauaim. Brightman: What but as
tue company of an army. Sanctivs: Indi-
cates sweetest pleasure, whether it be a
chorus of dancers or instrumental music.
Refers to the songs or praises of warriors.
Rupert. Singing a triumph as conquerors.
THeoporet. As it were the meeting or
conflict of two hosts. Percy. Rather the
amiable junction of two friendly companies
as in a dance. Harmer. The rushing to-
moe after the manner of dancers. Goon.

he squadrons of two hosts dazzling by their
armour, and performing their evolutions with
the greatest order and beauty. Boornroyp,
CosBin. Indicates the stateliness and ma-
jesty of two armies in batile array. GruL.
Allegorically; In the Church is both warfare
and festivity, choirs and camps; fighting
first and singing afterwards. THroporet.
Indicates the glorious presence of God in
the Christian Church, resembling what Jacob
saw at Mahanaim, or in the hosts of heaven.
Patrick. The deliverance of Shulamite
from her miseries, and the joy of men and
angels for her victory. AinswortH. The
union of Jews and Gentile; or rather, the
conflict between the flesh and the spirit in a
believer. Grxt. Indicates only a certain ter
rible and wonderful majesty. Mercer. The
Church’s excellence. DurHam. A band of
two camps united under one leader: seen in
the desire of Luther and others in regard to
the Bohemians in 1522. Coccztus. Points
to the time when the Beloved shall be as an
ensign to the nations, and the two armies of
Jews and Gentiles shall be united. Weiss.
Something as magnificent and transporting
as the dance of the angel bands at Mahanaim ¢
the sight of Shulamite one of angelic beauty
and heavenly sublimity. ZéckLER,


CHAPTER VII,


Verse 5: The Kings held in the galleries.
In the galleries.’ D'QIMD (ba-rehatim),
plural of O;7), a gutter, rafter, gallery, a hair
or ringlet ; from OFT), an unused root, like


the Aramaic om) to run or flow. Here,


according to most moderns, aringlet or lock.
A king is fettered in the locks Ewatp,
Dez Werte, Deuirzscu. Her locks or curls
viewed as nets or snares. ZOCKLER. The
king is held captive in the flowing ringlets.
Goop. Captivated by the locks. Novzs.
According to other interpreters, the word


is used in the sense of ‘galleries’ or ‘eor-
ridors,’ that run along the sides of a house,
or pass from one chamber to another.
Places to walk in. Junius, Piscator.
So the SzepTuaeint: A king is bound in
the galleries (wapasoponas), DUTCH VERSION :
The king is as bound on the galleries.
Munster: Bound to the galleries to con-
template thee. Junrus: Any king would
thus be held in the galleries. According to
others, the word here denotes beams or
rafters. Mercer: Is bound as it were to
the beams of the house to look at thee.
VataBLus: Bowad to the beams of his own


153


NOTES.


house for excessive love. Some connect the
word 2!) (melek), a king, with the last


word in the preceding verse, ‘ the purple
of a king,’ or royal purple, and thus under-


stand OOM) of the ‘gutters,’ or canals


used by dyers for dying the purple. So the
Vuucats. The purple of a king bound in
the canals. Wicxuirr and Dovart Vzr-
sion. Joined or tied to water-pipes.
So Apen Ezra, Leo Jupa, Goevet, &c.
Others, following the same construction,
translate ‘ plaits or folds.? CoveRDALE and
Matruews. The purple of a king folden up
in plaits. Luraer. Bound in folds. Dio-
DaTI, giving the meaning of ‘ rafters,’
Attached to scaffolds. Housigant. Royal
urple hanging in a knot from the ceiling.
RY. Bound on the rafters: allusion to
some rich canopy of state suspended from
the roof of the palace. Turupr. Like
royal purple fixed among the wainscottings,
Sanctius gives a different meaning to


DO A—gold or silver headbands. So


Micuae.is. As the king encircled with a
straight turban. Thus allegorized: Rasut.
The King—God himself—is bound by the
love and obedience of His people. ABEN
Ezra and AtsHecuH. The King—Messiah—
born, according to ancient Rabbies, on the
day Jerusalem was destroyed. RuPERT;
The Saviour’s passion, the more glorious the


longer it was preceded by typical sacrifices.’


Atnswortn and Gitu. Christ the King ab-
tuptly breaks off in His description of the
Church’s beauty, to discover to her His love
and affection. Davipson and WorpswortH.
The Chnrch’s King dispenses His grace
through the appointed channels,—the ordi-
nances of the Gospel, and the Scriptures of
truth. Hann. The love of the King and
his people gained by the beauty of Shula-
mite’s humility and poverty of spirit.

VersE 9. And the roof of thy mouth like
the best wine for my beloved, that goeth down
sweetly, causing the lips of those that are


asleep to speak. ‘¥or my beloved,’ 7?


le-dhodhi. Understood by Aspen Ezra,
Sanctius, and many moderns, as a sud-
den interruption by the Bride. So
RosENMULLER, DetitzscH, Noyes, &c.
Spoken by the Bride, who takes up the
king’s words to continue the description,
shewing that she fully responded to his love,
Z6cKLER. Viewed by many as spoken, like
the preceding, by the virgin-attendants, one
speaking in the name of the rest, or the
whole choir considered as one person. M.
Stuart. The virgins viewed, like the Bride,
xs both one and many, and claiming the
Bride’s beloved for their own, So Munogn,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


ArnswortH, and others. Dunnam. ‘For
my special friends;’ or as personating
the Bride in an abrupt expression of her
love to the Bridegroom. Some, like the
SrPTUAGINT, connect the expression with


3217 (dolech) ‘that goeth, and either’


translate ‘that goeth pleasantly,’ as Pisca-
TOK, JUNIUS and TREMELLIUS, PERcy, and
BootuRoyD; or, ‘that goeth towards my
beloved,’ or, ‘that goeth down for my
beloved,’ as De Wetter, Hany, and others ;
or, ‘for my friends;’ or, ‘sent to those
whom I love;’ as Patrick and WILLIAMS.
Ewatp would put the word in brackets,
as probably an error of the transcribers,
but long before the Masorites, as only want-
ing in one of Kennicot’s MSS. (715), and
that, perhaps, by oversight. HouBIGant
conjectures ‘IIT) ‘to my palate,’ as the
original word, Guassius supposes it to be
used euphonically for O'T)12 as chap.
vii. 2; 2 Kings, xi. 19. SepruaGint,
That goeth to my beloved. VuLcarts.
Worthy of my beloved to drink. So Wicx-
LiFFE and the Dovar Version. LuTHER.
That enters my beloved. Martin. In =
favour of my beloved Diopati. Whica
goes to my friend. Dutcn Version. To
my beloved ones.


‘That goeth down sweetly,’ 725
(H77) OMWHD Aolech (le-dhodhi) le.
mesharim. Literally : ‘ That goeth to or for my


beloved, to or in straightness, or straightly.’
Dw the plural of WD (meshar)


straight; with the prefix 2 to or for,—


straightly or directly. So Gzsznrus and
Ewatp. Smoothly, or ‘according to even-
ness.” ZOCKLER and De Wertz. Smoothly,
that is, pleasantly. Wetss. That goeth to
him directly and ultroneously, as entirely
belonging to him. Sancrius. Some con-


nect O'W22, not with 757, but with


79 ‘those whom I love for their upright-


ness. So Wixtiams. Or, ‘whom I love
uprightly,’ #.¢., from the heart. So Rasat.
SepTuaGintT: Going to my _ beloved
straightly (cis es@vryra). VULGATE, perhaps


reading D'Nw9: Worthy for my beloved


to drink. LurHer. Which enters my be-
loved smoothly. Dropatrt. Which goes
directly to my friend. CRaNMER and
Geneva Biste. Which goeth straight to
my well-beloved. Dutcu. Which goeth
right to my beloved ones. Montanus and

ERCER. Carrying itself rightly. Mun-
ermg. Going by straight ways. Paagninus


f


A 5


i


eee


Diagn, ee ee Ty a














HOMILETIG COMMENTARY:





Going directly. Juntus and TREMELLIUS.
Most rightly. Coccetus. Flowing to my
beloved most smoothly. AtnswortH. So
delicious that it goes down glibly. Fry.
Moving to my beloved as it ougat; indicatin
the Bride’s desire that her conversation shoul
be agreeable toher husband. Weiss. Like
the choice wine poured on the altar of burnt
offering, which mounts directly to heaven.
Davinson supplies a copula, and translates :
For my beloved, and for the upright ones.
Tuxoporst, using the Septuagint: For di-
rection to the souls that love thee.
‘Causing the lips of those that are asleep


to speak.” I2)T dodhebh, from 127, to


which the Tulmudists give the meaning of
speaking; ‘making the lips of those who
sleep to speak,’ #.¢., in dreams. So
Mercer, HenstensBerc, Denirzscn, &c.
Witiiams. Causing to murmur. WEIss.
To lisp. Sanctius. Inducing intoxication,
and making the stammerers eloquent.
Patrick. Making men speak with the lips
of the ancient, ¢.e. to utter exceilent savings.
A. Ciarks. As wine causes the most back-
ward to speak, so thy charms make the most
taciturn eloquent in thy praise. Fry:
Hffervescing against the lips, &c. Others,
however, give to 327 the meaning of


‘to creep or flow over.’ So Ewa.p, Gesz-
nius, De Werte, &c. ‘Gliding over the
lips of sleepers.’ that is, he who drinks is
insensibly overtaken with sleep; the adjec-
tive being taken, as frequently, from the
effect. ZOcKuER, Ewaup, Noyes. Flowing
down. Percy. ‘Those that are asleep’
OU yeshenim, may be either ‘ persons
sleeping,’ or ‘old men;’ the former prefera-
ble, as from JW? to sleep, So Gzsenius and


most, Hann. Persons already sinking into
slumber, as if, overcome by the sweetness of
the wine, they were unable to remove the
cup again from their lips. Some understand
it figuratively of the dead. Patrick. ‘Old
men;’ those asleep or dead, or at the point
of death. SepruacGint, reading O°3w) and
Mw: Reaching my lips and teeth. VuL-
Gate, Suitable for the lips and teeth to
ruminate. So WickuirF, BisHop’s, and
Dovar Version. CoverpaLe and Mar-
THEws. ‘The lips and teeth shall have their
pleasure. Cranmer. Which bursteth forth
from the lips of the ancient Elders. Dutcu,
Diopati, and Martin. Making the lips of
the sleepers to speak. Lutuer. And
speaks of wnat is afar off. Mércer. Awa-
kening the slumbering senses, and refreshing
the mind. Varasius. Who (viz. the
friend who drinks it) speaks with the lips of
them that sleep. Castatio: To my friena


THE SONG OF SOLOMON. NOTES


who (in consequence) babbles with sleepin
lips. TarcuM, atlegorizing. As Elisha an
Elijah raised the dead, and as Hzekiel pro-
phesied, and awoke the dead in the valley
of Dura  Rasut. Even my fathers in the
grave shall rejoice and give praise for their
portion. Rassins. Causing, by the Spirit,
given in answer to the Church’s interces-
sion, the lips of the nations who were asleep
before to be opened, and to show forth the
praises of the Lord. Weiss. Perhaps an
allusion to the Israelites expecting silently
the prayer made by the priests in the
Temple, or by the leader in the synagogue,
when the lips only moved: the daughters of
Jerusalem thus intimating that, while the
Church was requested to offer fervent prayer
in their behalf, they would silently repeat it
after her. AinswortH. Sinners awakened
and quickened by the word preached (Eph.
v. 14) ; also others who from negiigence tei]
asleep, and are enabled by this spiritual
wine to speak (Isa. lvii. 13, 19).

Verse 13. The mandrakes give a smell,


‘Mandrakes” OPTI ha-dudhain ;
plural of ‘717 a love-apple, from TF to


love. So Gesenrus and others. ‘A man-
dragora (Atropa mandragora, Linneus); a
plant with large leaves, like the beet; its
root like that of a turnip, divided in the lower
part, and somewhat resembling the human
form ; employed in preparing eke philtres,
as having a soporific power, and thought to
possess a virtue in matters of love, which is
still ascribed to it in the East.’ A wild plant
common in Palestine, especially in Galilee ;
of the same genus as the Belladonna. with
small whitish blossoms, which, in May or
June. become small yellow apples, with a
strong and disagreeable odour; very early re-
arded as an artificial provocative of sensual
ove, not only in the Hast, but also by thie
Gr eks and Romans, and still called by the
Arabs (uffah esh-shaitan, or Satan’s apples.
ZocKLER, Ewanp. According to others, a
particular kind of melon called in the east,
from its shape, chamama, or Womar’s
breast, corresponding to the Hebrew name in
the text. So Catmet and Fry. Taytor.
Some lovely fruit or flower. De Wurtz.
Some beautiful sweet - smelling plant.
Copsin. A kind of highly-flavoured melon.
Some read O'N INT dudhaim, ‘baskets’ (as


Jer xxiv. 1). SoHaun: Baskets full of all
kinds of precious fruits. According to
to the Talmudists: Violets or lilies, Rast.
The Jasmine. Tarcum. The Balsam.
Septuagint and VuneatR Mandragora.
Lutuge. fuilies. According to others, as
Ludolf and Simon, the Indian Fig. Patrick
and others needlessly object to the man
\ 1


NOTES,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLUMON.





drake, as having an offensive smell. ‘Give
a smell, —give forth their odour; therefore
referring to the fruit, not the blossoms, nor
the plant; and so looking forward toa more


advanced season than in verse 13, the fruit
not being ripe till the wheat harvest’ (Gen.
xxx. 14, ZOcKLER.


CHAPTER VIIL


Verse 5, I raised thee up under the apple
bree: there thy mother brought thee forth ;
there she brought thee forth that bare thee.


‘Traised thee up,’ JSD ’orarticha,
Pilel of VY, to be awake; literally, lawaked


thee out of sleep; according to many
moderns, here applied to awakening the
previously slumbering affections. So Zéck-
LER. [I incited thee [to love]; discovering
mine to thee, I obtained thine. GxsENIUs.
I inspired thee with love; properly, aroused
thee. Dz Wertz, Booturoyp. Excited
thee to love. Wu it1ams. Wooed thee.
Percy, Goop. Fry: Raised thee Up; per-
haps, resuscitated thee,—the Bride originally
found by her husband an exposed infant
(Ezek. xvi. 3—6). ‘The Masoretic pointing
in our Hebrew Bibles probably in this case
iaulty, as determining the speaker to be the
Bride instead of the Bridegroom, to whom
the words appear much more naturally to
belong, and to whom they are ascribed by all
the Greek Fathers, and many of the Latins,
‘Under the apple-tree.’ Under this apple-
tree,—pointing to it; one immediately ad-
joining her mother’s house, and probably
shading one of the windows. Z6cKLER.
This apple-tree one among many other
laces recalling their first love-intercourse.
Dearaen Reminding her of their first
interview. Booturoyp. Referring to the
place of her birth. Sanpers. In the woods,
as rustic and poor. Sanctivs. Reminding
her of her humble origin. Fry. Refers to
the scene in chap. ii. 3. Wutitams. Szp-
TUAGINT, and VuLteate: Under an apple-
tree I awoke thee up (éfnyepa). COVERDALE
and MarrHews: I am the same that
awakened thee up among the apple-trees.
Ewatp prefers adhering to the Masoretic
pointing, and understands by the apple-tree
the place where the Bride sometimes awoke
the Bridegroom when resting at mid-day, and
which had seen him born.—‘There she


brough+ thee forth that bare thee.’ aN


Hhibbelathecia ; Piel of [2M to bend,


twist; hence Piel, to bring forth with pain.

So GesEnrIus and most. There, where that

apple-tree stands, or the dwelling shaded by

it, she travailed with thee. ZOCKLER.

Others, however, understand the verb as
156


from 9217 to plight, as Exodus xxii. 26;


Deuteronomy xxiv. 6, 17 ; ‘ pledged or con-
tracted thee to me.’ So Hovsicant, MicHazE-
is, A. Cuarke, Goov, Booturoyp, &c.
Deuitzscu. Under the same tree, Shulamite
received from ker mother her life, from Solo-
mon his love. Wittiams. Reference to
the scene in chap. ii. 3, where we may sup-
pose the Bride’s mother to have been pre-
sent, and some ceremony here alluded to
to have taken place. Pzrcy. Bridegroom
makes a solemn recapitulation of the contract
they had entered into. Szpruacint. There
thy mother travailed with thee (asimcé ce),
Vuteatz, using a different reading:
Was corrupted. Followed by the Dovar


version. CovERDALE. Bare thee. So
LutHer, Diopart, Martin, and the
DutcuH version. Pacninus. Conceived


thee. Piscator, Junius, and TREMELLIUS:
Was in labour with thee. Allegorically :—
Wicxulrre. ‘The voice of Christ to the
synagogue; of the holy cross. Dova1. Christ
redeemed the Gentiles at the foot of the cross.
Martuews. Voice of the Spouse before the
spounciess, Det Rio. Bridegroomrelates that
the beginning and increase of his love to his
beloved had manifested itself under the
apple-tree ; reminding her of her original
misery and poverty, in order to keep her from
pride and elation. Fromonpr. I raised
thee up when dead under the forbidden tree,
by sprinkling thee with the blood of my
cross ; that as death reigned by one tree, he
might be conquered by another. Sancttus.
I raised thee up when abandoned by thy
mother to perish (Ezekiel xvi. 3—6).
Davipson. Raised thee up after the fall;
or, by the preaching of the Gospel. Weiss.
I, the risen Saviour, aroused thee under the
apes or citron tree; the cross, where the
sleeping Church was aroused; for example,
John, Joseph, Nicodemus, the thief, &c.
Giutt, The apple-tree Christ Himself, or
the ordinances of the Gospel. Rasut, fol-
lowing the Rabbinical pointing. The Bride
seeks to stir up the love of her Beloved.
Coccetvs. The Bride arouses Christ by her
prayers in time of trouble and persecution,
as the disciples did in the storm. J. H.
MicHazE.is. Arouses Him by earnest prayer
to shew Himself more than formerly. Arns-
wostH. Taking hold of the covenant of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





NOTES,


grace and the promises of life in Christ, the


ayple-tree of life and grace (chap. ii. 8), she
stirred Him up by prayer for her help and
comfort. GiLL: Not finding Him in ordi-
nances, she raised Him up by earnest prayer.
Fausszt ; I excited thy comparsion to
come and save me from mv sin and misery
under the apple-tree in Eden ;—spoken by


converted Israel as the type of the whole


redeemed humanity. M. Sruart: She
reminds the king of his own outcast condi-
tion. Haun: Pledges herself solemnly
to the king for ever, and the king himself
to her, in the cool shade of the apple-tree of
the garden (chap. vi. 11); in his home-land
in Canaan, her misery out in the open field
moved his loving heart to sympathy. Ac-
cording to AMBROSE and others: The syna-
gogue the Church’s mother, who brought
forth the Church, by shedding the blood of
Christ through which she is born again.
TuxEoporET: The grace of the Holy Spirit
in connection with baptism. Honortus:
The flesh of Eve or human nature. Dur-
HAM: Believers the mother of Christ, as
bringing forth His image in the souls of men,
and so giving Him a being in their heart.
AinswortH : By the preaching of the Gos-
pel, attended with labour, sorrow, and diffi-
culty. J. H. Micuazrtis: By doing the
Father’s will, and conceiving in themselves
the image of Christ by a true faith. Mzr-
cER: When fleeing to Him for refuge. M.
Stuart: Refers to the time of sorrow or
birth - pangs that preceded Christ?s resur-
rection from the dead. Haun: With pain
His people brought Him forth to themselves
as their King.

Verse 6. The coals thereof are coals of
fire which hath a most vehement flame. ‘The


coals thereof’ ‘DW reshapheha, plural
of Aw resheph, a flame; from the un-
ased root aaa to inflame or kindle. Gz-


sunius, ZockLER,. A blaze or flash of
lightning. (Deut. xxxii, 24; Job v. 7;
Hab. ii. 5) Wetss. Ewaxp derives rather
from *\W to creep, creep forth ; applied to


the plague, and so the feat of the plague:
hence, heat or flame in general. SepruaGint:
Its wings. Vuueate and Aquiza: Its
lamps and torches. Symmacuus: its at-
tacks. Syriac: Its sparks. Lutuer: Its
flame or heat. Dioparr and Martin: Its
burning coals. So the Rabbins, who make it


like ia retseph, a coal, and who are fol-


lowed by Paeninus, Montanus, Mercer,
Piscator, &c. Munster has ‘torches.’


AinswortH : Burning coals or darts of love-


that pierce and enflame the heart. So Pa-
rrick: Darts or arrows. Pxrxgcr preters


‘sparks.’ Sancrrus applies it to ‘jealousy’,
which tortures like rAieg Which hath a


most vehement flame.’ MNT shalhe-
bhethyak, from III? lehabhah, a ‘flame’


with W ‘which? Another reading, the
Recension of Ben Naphtali, divides it into
two words, FY NAW, shalhebheth Yah,


‘the flame of Yah, or Jehovah. Ewarp
thinks that probably both words were origi-
nally read, (‘its lames are the flames of
Jehovah,’) and that one of them dropped


out; and remarks that #1” for 7T\) was


seldom used before Solomon’s time, its use
having risen when the name of Jehovah
began to be added as a surname; and that it
occurs only once in the Pentateuch (Exodus
xv. 2). Z6cKieER, who translates, a ‘blaze
of Jehovah,’ observes that this name of God
is mentioned only in this passage of the
Song, ‘the radiant apex in the developement
of its doctrinal and ethical contents.’ Ac-
cording to Z6cKLER, the flame not natural,
but kindled and sustained by God Himself;
love, and jealousy, its intense synonym, ap-
pearing here like a brightly blazing fire, send-
ing forth a multitude of sparks or flames
into men’s hearts. So Deuitzscu: A flame
of Jehovah, as kindled by Him; hence un-
quenchable. Patrick: ‘Fire of the flame
of the Lord,’ t.e., mighty and exceedingly
scorching. S1mon derives the word from
the Chaldee or Syriac aMb>yy to burn;
the w servile marking the Shaphal species
(GreEN). ParKuurst derives it from 3
to loose, and 3j}2 a flame, —a dissolving fire
Weiss, in like manner reading as one word,°
explains as ‘a stream, volume or torrent of
flame, as Ezekiel xx. 47; a conflagration of
flames (Job xv. 30). Prrcy: ‘A flame of
Jab,’—which Jehovah kindles in the clouds,
—a most vehement flame (Jobi. 16). Wu-
LiaMs refers the expression to the sacrificial
flame, which, according to Jewish tradition,
no rain could extinguish. The Sepruaqint
has simply : ‘Its flames.’ Vuieate: ‘And
of flames,’ connecting with ‘fire. Tarcum:
Like the coals of the fire of hell, which the
Lord shall kindle at the last day. CoverDALE
and Marruews: A very flame of the Lord.
Grenrva;: A vehement flame. DutcH: As
a flame of the Lord. Diopati: A very
great flame. Martin: A very vehement
flame. TireurinE: Which have been
kindled by the flame of God. Murcer and
Montanvs: A flame of the Lord. Junius
aud TRemetuius: A Divine flame. Coccz-
tus: A flame of God,—bright and inextin-
guishable. Paeninus: A most vehement
flame. Grotius: As a flame of God, i.e.,
a whole burnt-offering, Vatasius: As the


157


NOTES,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





flame of Jah or God, t.e, most vehement.
Piscaton: Which Jehovah kindies; the
genitive of Authorship, Junius: The
greatest flame, as being the Spirit’s most
powerful light, to endure for ever. AINS-
wortH: The vehement consuming flame of
the Lord; piercing and devouring lightning ;
the fire of His Spirit. Parrick: Burning
with a violent and inextinguishable heat;
mightily moved by the Lord.

Verse 9. If she be a wall, we will build
upon her a palace of silver: and if she be a
door, we will enclose her with boards of


cedar, ‘If she be a wall.’ min khomah,


from the unused root MOTT tiamah, to


surround, defend, protect ; a wall. Spoken
of a chaste damsel, difficult of access. Gr-
sENIUs and Ewaup. Inaccessible, unwilling
to receive suitors, or to be married. Noyes.
Invincible ; if she offers firm and successful
opposition to all immoral enticements. De-
LitzscH. Firm in her love against all wiles.
Menocuivus. Conveys the idea of the firm
resistance that cheeks the first advance of
foes. Hirzet. Spoken by the King; If she
be able as a strong wall to resist all attacks
of others; the sister’s fortune will depend
entirely on herself. Hann. Heats by
Shulamite’s brothers, careful for the honour
and purity of their little sister; or by the
Bridegroom: If she be fortified against all
stratagems. Sanctius. Patrick. According
to others: A wall adapted to rear and sup-
port a family. Wuituiams. Implies that
nothing was materially defective. Fry. Alle-
gorically; Taxcum: If she (Israel) be es-
tablished as a wall among the nations.
Rasut: If she is strong in her faith and
religion, so as to be before the nations as a
wall of brass. Grecory: Able to resist
adversaries, Dex Rio: If firm and stead-
fast in my love and worship agamst the
wiles of suitors and attacks of the wanton,—
in allusiez te the last times. Muxcer and
Cavin: If she remain firm in the faith, in
the truth and in the worship of God. Coc-
cEIus: If she stand firm on the true founda-
tion. Duxuam: If she be joined to Christ.
Gitt: Built on a sure foundation; well
walled. ArtnswortH: Strong and well
grounded in the truth. Patrick: Faithful
and constant. Weiss: Converted and
built up as the first wall inthe temple of God;
or those of her who shall prove a wall.

‘We will build upon her a palace of silver.’
FVVO tirath, a tower, citadel, or palace;
from the unused root "974 (¢ur), to surround
So Grsenius. According to others, from
10, properly “4x, to fasten, enclose. Va-
taBLus. ‘TV (¢irah) a small but strong


, castle, tower, or bulwark. Zicxiaz, A
158


pinnacle or battlement crowning a wall. Hrr-
zig, Herticstapt. A palace. Kmgcut.
Fair and goodly turrets. Patrick. A fair
and goodly building wont to be set on the
walls of strong cities. AinsworTH. A habi«
tation, Hen@sTenBeRG. Splendid tokens of
victory, marking the wall of proud fortresses,
Ewaup. Septuagint and Vuueats : Breast-
works and bulwarks. Luter: Bulwarks,
Durcn Bisie: Pinnacles. Diopati and
Maetin: A palace. Figuratively: We will
find for her an illustrious husband. Gro-
TIus, CauMet, A. CLarKz. Will provide for
her a marriage. Wittiams. Will aska high
dowry for her. RosenmULLER, De Werte.
Bestow a handsome dowry on her future
marriage. Percy. Give her an ample for-
tune. BootHroyp. Improve her appearance,
and ornament her person. Fry. ‘Treat her
in the most dignified manner. HanMER,
Build her up and that in full glory. Taxupe.
Will accord to her the freedom and honour
due to her virgin purity and steadfastness.
Deuitzscu. She shal be enriched and
honoured. Cossin. Allegorically ; Tan.
cum; We will surround her (Israel) as with
borders of silver, so that the nations shall
not be able to rule over her. RasHt: We
will be to her a strong city and a crown of
beauty; and we will build for her the holy
city and the chosen house. THEODORET;
Silver towers or bulwarks—words resplendent
with reason (Ps. xi. 7), whence we may assail
the enemy. Bene: Eloquent men con-
verted to Christ and then employed as
preachers of the Gospel. Merrcer: We
will add strength, and adorn her with gifts
and graces. Fromonpi: Will strengthen
her to resist adversaries, Piscator, AINS-
worTH, DurnamM: We, é.e., the Trinity ;
or Christ and His people,—the former by His
grace, the latter ministerially by the Word.
Coccerus: We will endeavour that the
Churches be adorned with a knowledge ot
the truth in its completeness and connection,
and with a holiness corresponding to it.
Gitt. Will fortify her by ministers and
ordinances; or, make her an habitation for
God by His hide CuaLmers: Let ever
good work in her be perfected : let us graft
on her capabilities what may advance into a
full-grown Christianity. Weiss: With her
aid, we shall call in and build up the Gentiles
on this first wall, this first Church built up
in Jerusalem,


‘If she be a door. ny (deleth), a door,
from ms (dalah), to hang: figuratively,


a damsel easy of access. So Gesznius. A
door whose sanctity any one may violate,
Ewaup. A door open to all. Tirinus,
Kasily tempted and overcome,—a gate pass-
able to all Sanorsus. If she gives way.


Pe ee ee A ee ee i.
5 ~ :


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.


oe


\
\
—_——.








Bricutman. Giving a ready reception to
every suitor, NoyEs. According to others:
A door to keep safe what may be preserved
in the house. Tugoporrr. If it be too
weak or mean. Patrick. In a low con-
‘dition ; only a door instead of a wall. Giut.
Allegorically; Rasui: If she (Israel) be
open to seducers. ABEN Ezra: Liable to
turn aside to other lovers. Dex Rio: Open
to the Lord alone, and to His grace. Fro-
moypDi1: The Church a door into eternal life.
Mercer: A wall the stronger and more
confirmed believers; a door, the weaker and
those not yet confirmed in the faith. Wiss:
Those undecided and doubting,—moving to
and fro on the hinges of unbelief. Ains-
worta: If she go forward in the faith and
ae of the Gospel, built up, according to

ehemiah (chap. lii.), with doors for the
safeguard of the inhabitants. Coccxrus, on
the contrary: A door admitting uncertain
opinions, by which the ungodly may creep
into her communion. DuraamM: A door
giving entrance to Christ by faith.


© We will enclose her with boards of cedar.’
a>) natsur, from YN, to press, enclose,


restrain, GESENIUS. EwaLp addg: With
the additional idea of making unhappy. Will
block or stopup. Dzuitzscu. With boards
or planks put on the inside to prevent it from
turning and opening. ZécxueR. A door
Open to every one must be fastened with
boards nailed to it. Ewaup. Figuratively :
We will keep her in strict confinement, so
that access to her shall be difficult. Novzs.
Will keep her in. Bricutmay. Will take
means to restrain and prevent her (Hos. ii.
7). ABeN Ezra. Sanctius. Her false free-
dom to be in that case limited. Hann. We
will so watch over that she shall be approach-
able to no seducer, and no courtier approach-
able to her. Will safely enclose her, so as
not to be a mere thoroughfare. M. Stuart.
Fausset. According to others: We will
render her firmer. Mzrcer. Fence her
about. AinsworTH. Further strengthen
and adorn her. Duruam. Provide tor her
in a manner suitable to her rank and
circumstances. Wuittams. She shall be
the graceful entrance to my favour and
friendship. Goop. Allegorically ; THzopo-
ret: We will give her rulers and pastors of
the Church not liable to be corrupted. Coc-
crus: We will endeavour to fix and con-
firm her in doctrine and discipline. MER-
ceR: Impart fresh grace to strengthen and
adorn her. Tr1rinus: The weak to be care-
fully strengthened, and occasion of falling
removed. BsicnutMan: We will, by means
of the civil magistrate, fortify and defend
her against all foes, and make her to flourish.


Gait: Will adorn her with grace bere and


NOTES.








glory hereafter. Weiss: Will plunge he
into awful calamities (Isa. xxix. i, 4). |
Versg ll. Solomon had a vineyard at


Baalhamon. poanya, from bya baal,
a lord, or according to some, a place; and
Wait (amen), a multitude, from '7, to


make a noise; ‘the lord or place of a multi-
tude.’ Gesentus, from Judith viii. 3, thinks
the place was in the Holy Land, and especially
to be sought in Samaria. Kwatp rather
thinks it may be Hammon (Josh. xix. 28),
in the tbe of Asher, in the most fruit-
fel part of Palestine. Zockter prefers
the Belamon mentioned in Judith viii. 3, in
the tribe of Issachar, a locality not very far
from Suunem ; and thinks it mentioned here
by Shulamite as an instance, very near her
home, of a royal property let out at a
high rent, in order to illustrate by it her
relation to the king, as well as to her
brothers ; ‘A vineyard became Solomon’s,’
s.e., he has it now,—not, he had it once.
He thinks the name may have been derived
from the ‘l'yro-Egyptian god Ammon, who
may have been worshippedthere, MicHazLIs,
after Ikenius, thinks it another name for
Baalbec. Ginn: Perhaps Baalgad (Josh.
xi. 17), in the valley of Lebanon. Weiss
understands Jerusalem, a ‘place of tumult or
couiusion ’ at the time referred to. Sanctius
understands tle name as denoting ‘a place
of many people,” t.e., desired by such to Lave
a possession in it—a rich and fertile district,
tie place where the vineyard which was Shu-
lamite’s dowry lay—the same as Engedi.
Assen Ezra and Grovius think it a place
not far trom Jerusalem. ‘The VuLeate
reads: The Peaceable had a vineyard in her
that has peoples. ‘The Agasic, WICKLIFF,
and the Douval Version: In Jerusalem. Dif-
ferent views as to the reason of the introduc-
tion of the vineyard here. According to Sanc-
Tius, Shulamite means that she did not love
her Briuegroom for the dowry he gave. The
vineyard simply adduced by way of example.
De.itzscu, ZOcKLER. Introduced for con-
trast with her own vineyard, namely, her
beauty or person, for which she did not wish
any pecumiary income. Noygs. Mentioned
as an example of Solomon’s riches, of which
she may have heard; spoken only in the
way of narrative, to be alterwards applied to
herself. Kwaup. A vineyard or estate of
Sclomon’s, with which she compares one given
to her by him for her residence. Fry. Lhe
vineyard which Shulamite had possessed in
Baalhamon, but which now appertained to
Solomon as the dowry she had brought him,
and which she now wishes to be given to her
younger sister. Goop. ‘he adult sister, asa
newlysnazsied bride, declares her my ie
Sy





the diligence with which she would cultivate it
for the benefit of her Bridegroom, comparin:

it with Solomon’s in the same neighbourhood.
Det Rio, Mercer, &c. Aillegorically;
Wickutrr and MattHews: The synagogue
speaks of the Church. Coccrius: Solomon
the type of Christ; Baalhamon the world,
among which Christ has His Church.
Piscator, &c.: The vineyard, the Church
or congregation of the righteous. THEO-
port : Men who apply themselves to religion
and to Christ According to MarmMonIDEs
and the Rassins: The literal Solomon is
here meant, and a comparison made between
some literal vineyard and the Chareh ef


attends to His
i, 1)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE SONG OF SOLOMON.





God. Drx Rio: The vineyard the Jewish
Church, with which is compared the Gentile
Church, composed both of Jews and Gentiles.
Gitt, Davipson, &c.: Baalhamon the Gen-
tile world. M. Sroart: Jerusalem, or the
land of Israel; spoken by the joint Church of
Jew mad Gentile, or by the little sister.
Hann: The heathen world a vineyard
belonging to the king of Israel, in the land
of unrest and dispeace. Bricutman: Christ
compares Himself and His vineyard to
Solomon and his: Solomon unable to look
to his own Lag at while Christ personally

arch (Matt. xviii. 20; Rev


‘


an


{


A
Answers to Prayer .. nee nes


Apple-tree, Christ compared lales an
(see Christ)... 45
Spiritual Ordinances compared toe
(see Ordinances) ..,
Appropriation of Christ— This is my
Beloved,’ &c.; implies—
Personal apprehension of His loveli-
ness and excellence.
2. Choice of Him in preference to all
others.
8. Appropriation and personal possession,
4. Consciousness of such choice and appro-
priation.
&. Unchanged and unchanging attach
ment,
6. Full satisfaction and glorying in Him
as our choice and portion,
q. Bold cae fearless confession of Him as
Buc. soe ooo





Army with Banners, the Chareh com-


pared to an—
1. Christ its Commander-in-Chief,

2. Marshalled uoder subordinate leaders
8. Arranged in goodly order, and go-
verned by wholesome discipline,

4. Divided into various sections,

&. Animated with one spirit,

6. Furnished with suitable armour and
weapons.


¥. Distinguished by appropriate banners


B
Backsliders ARC eos ooe ose eee


Banqueting-house, Christ’s





‘ pelf—
1. By his electing love.
2. By his renewing yrace,
8. By his gift of faith.
4. By his conquest of the heart.
5. By his helping the soul over every dis-
couragement,


6. By his pouring his love into the heart 46





. 123


Believers brought into it by Christ Him-





(4) Its confession a turning-point im
the soul’s history.

(5) Their whole nature black.

(6) Black with sin so long as in this
world.

2. With suffering: causes of believers’
sufferiug:—

(1) Their heavenly Father’s love,

(2) The world’s hatred.

(3) Satan’s malice.

(4) Their own sin.

5) The sins and sufferings of others,

6) Their faithful and self-denying


4%


efforts for the good of others.
II. Comey:
1, pease Christ’s imputed righteons-


2. Through the Spirit’s impar'ed holiness,
II]. Combination OF THE Two:

1. Believers to be as conscious of their
comeliness in Christ as of their black.
ness in themselves.

&. Our duty and privilege to confess both
our blackness and our comeliness.


91


4. Much in the believer that is mysterious

and incomprehensible to others,
5. The glory of Christ’s work that the
black are rendered comely .. ooo
Believers, remarks in reference to . 24,

Compared to ‘ horses in Pharaoh’s
chariots’ ove sae

Their spiritual beauty tee 32,
Compared to ‘lilies,’ in respect


97





of—
1. Their beauty.
2. Their purity.
8. Their humility.
4, Their fragrance 200 eco ees


‘Who is this


86


Believers, Posture of;
that cometh ?’ &c,
I, The PostuRkE itself,
1. ‘Coming up out of,’ &e,
(1) Coming—a journey.
2) Coming up—an ascent.
fy Coming out of the wilderness—e


Beauty, of believers oe ooo 82, 87 sepiration.
of Christ:— 9. ‘Leaning on her Beloved ;’ implica—=
1. Its greatness. (1) The Company of Christ,
2. Its character ... eee <e6 co 88


Believers, ‘ black but comely ;’—
L Brack;
1, With szz: believers are—
(1) Black with inbred corruption.
(2) Conscious of the blackness.
(8) Not afraid to acknowledge ft,


(2) His support.
Believers lean on Christ—
(i) For acceptance with God.
(ii) For holiness and victory over sin.
(iii.) For protection and preservation.


;
8. Our comeliness to attract the world.


—Gnbee of Subjects more or less Homiletically treated in the Book.


21
27


8)
33


41


(iv.) For strength and grace we eee 12)


(see also 101)


a HOMILETICAL INDEX.





Beloved, Christ the believer's :
1. For what He is in Himself.
3. For what He is to us.
8. For what He has done for us. Ime
plies—
(1) Wonderful condescension and love
on His part.
(2) Precionsness of grace that enables
us to make Him our Beloved,
(8) Blessed condition of believers ... 91
Blackness of believers eco eco coe 21
(See Believers). :


Bride, the; her first Desire—‘ Let him
kiss me,’ &c.
J. The Person desired.
II. The Thing ve wae A
—Her Second Desire—‘ Draw me,’ &e.
I. The Request: Implies—
1. Acquaintance with him and apprehen-
siou of his preciousness.
2. Love to him.
8. Desire after him and the enjoyment of
his fellowship.

4. Conscious weakness and inability .. 14
—— Heer joy in the King ... ceo oe 17
— Her gratitude to the King...
—— Her remembrance of his love.., wos
— Her Third Desire—‘ Tell me,’ &c. ;—

I. he Petition itself,
II. ‘The Reason of it cee aoe 25, 26


Bride of Christ, remarks in connection
with the eee wi ae 0,

— Her Duty and Responsibility ... 31

Compared to ‘ Pillars of Smoke;’


oo 7,8





as—
1. Having an upward motion and tem
dency.
2. Visible at a considerable distance.
8. Their foundation out of sight.
4. Constant and continuons in their ascent.
6. That ascent however not always uni-
form and undisturbed aie eee
— Compared to a ‘ Palm Tree;’ from—
1. Its Erectness,
2. Its Regularity.
8. Its Fruitfulness.
4. Its perpetual Greenness.
6. Its Elasticity and Invincibleness,
6. Its general Beauty... ove


Bridegroom, Portrait of the ...


eee 114
89, 91


Cc
Call, the Saviour’s First—to sinners;
Arise,” &c.

I. What it cost to make it.
JI. The Means throngh which it is addressed.
IIL. The Arguments employed :—

1. His love to the Called;

2. The removal of hindrances 5

8. The joy and blessedness of compliance ;
IV. The Call itself.

1. To Come #o Christ.

3. To Come after Him coe eos eve 53
e=—The Saviour’s Second—to Believers ;

*O my dove,’ &e.
L The Title of the Called ones.


II. Their Place and Condition.
ILI. ‘The Call itself ; implying the desire of
Christ— \
1. To enjoy their fellowship.
2. hs see them trustful, cheerful, and
appy. .
8. To witness their faith and love.
4. To enjoy their beauty.
5. To hear their voice,—
(1) 7 speaking ¢o him as well as of
im


(2) In cheerfal songs.
(8) In thanksgiving and praise.
(4) In confessing him.
(5) In prayer and supplication.
IV. ‘The Reason of the Call Fe 55, 54


Call, another to Believers,—‘ Come with me .
from Lebanon,’ &c,
I. The Call itself—
1. To leave the world in heart and affes-
tion.
2. To leave it in life and practice.
8. To leave its friendship and society.
4 To leave it at death.
5. To leave it at Christ’s second coming.
Il. The Character of the Journey.
III. The Comfort and Aid held forth in it—
1, The Everlasting presence of Christ at
the end of it. :
_ 8. His Company and Support all the way
ough = see ove vs 0


Call of Christ to the Sleeping Church—
‘Open unto me,’ &e.
I. The party called.
II. The state implied.
III. The knocking.
IV. The call to open ;—
1. To invite his entrance.
&. To give him hearty welcome.
8. To remove hindrances to his entranes.
4. To receive Him as an entire Saviour.
V. The Plea for Admission :
1. His relation to the sleeper.
2. His love.
8. What He has endured on the Sleeper


behalf ats ea ee ae


Call, of Christ to the Holy Spirit :
I. The Caller.

II. The Called,

ITI. The Call itself.

IV. The Object of the Call oon


Calling, the Church’s +.  — sve


Chambers, the King’s :
I. The Chambers themselves.
II. Admission into them from the King
himself :—

1. By procuring access through his own
merits.

%. By giving the desire to enter.

8. By encouraging approach through his
invitations and promises.

4. By imparting faith and inward light.

6. By subduing and restraining inward
corruption,


ve 76
coe 117


ee a ee


ee Se eee


er a


are


Peas S Se ee a


HOMILETICAL INDEX. ii


eee


IIT. Personality of the Admission—‘ Hath
brought me ;’ the language of —
1. Joy and thankfulness,
%. Wonder and surprise.





8. Consciousness and certainty ... es (17
Chariot, Solomon’s 4 sn ove :63
Thrist, His love cece se ry 9

His excellence and ewectness 1
[. He has ‘ Ointments.’
IL. Tuese Ointments ‘ good:’
1. Ge od in themselves ; as seen—
(I) In His spirit and disposition,
(2) In His words,
iy In His actions,
4) In His suffering and death.

2. Good in their effects ... Woe 10, 11
=== His Name (See Name) .. 12, 18
Christ as a Shepherd (See Shepherd) .. 26
—aKing . 36, 65
— the Bridegroom of His ‘Church 65, 57


— His Beauty ... ax nae oo. 38
— His Pleasantness ... vee « 39
Compared to an © Apple (or Citron)
Tree’ from—
1. Its Appearance.
2. Its Shade,
8. Its Fruit. Christ’s Fruit—
: The Redemption ou the Cross,
2) The Doctrines of Grace.
(8) The Ordinances of the Gospel,
—— His Calls (See Cail).
— His Sufferings for His Church and for
Sivners a, 82
— His Superiority as a ‘Beloved’ and
* Friend ;? as—
1. More excellent and lovely in Himself.
2. More satisfying as a portion.
8. More durable and unchanging.
4. More loving and kind.
5. The longer and better known, the more
loved and admired .., ee coe ©6888





— His spiritual Portrait iss woe ©6290
—— Appropriation of Him ae rae oe
—— The Church’s Teacher ‘ae cee 121


Church, the, Christ’s Bride... 6), 72
Christ’s Sister ... Ax so (HL








Her beauty commended... ae UE

The Pentecostal, or New Testa-
ment ... nea west Od.

The Millennial Kee Sch 67


Compared to an enclosed garden %3
toa sealed spring, #0. ; toan orchard, 26.
to the morning, 101 ; ; to the moon,
102; to the sun, 2d. ; to an army, 97,














102; to the starry host eS we 102
ae ee Christ’s Gardena eco ee 75
———_— Her Beauty coe eee 95, 98, a

Her Comeliness Ze Ras

Her Terriblenees as nae 2

Her Excellence oes oo 96

Her Unity eco ooo 100
—E—— Her Numbers eee . 100


Her Posture and Appearance 101, 102
—— Her Calling eee 117





Churches, or Christian Assemblies,
compared to Gardens, as—
1. Separated from the world.
2. Under Spiritual Culture.
3 Produce spiritual Fruits,
4, Pleasant to God, angels, and renewed


mena one vee eee 131
Comeliness of Christ ie fee ve «39
—— of the Church one a oO
Concern for others to accompany and result
from communion with Christ eee 126
Covenant of Grace ae eee aa UR
D =
Day of Christ’s second appearing coe 65
Dedication, self ... cee nas oe «94


Delight, the Saviour’s in His people, as—~
1. Made what they are by His grace.
2. His Bride given Him by His Father,
and espoused to Himself.
8. Redeemed by Him at the price of His,
humiliation and death . 118


Desire, the Saviour’s towards His ee eae
1. To save and bless them.
2. To possess them as His own.
8. To bave them with Him for ever 42,


Discourses, Ministerial, to resemble—
1, A ‘heap of wheat.’
2, Such a heap ‘ set about with lilies’


Dove, Distinguished for—
J. Gentleness and meekness.,
2. Affection and fidelity to its mate.
8. Purity and cleanliness.
4. Timidity and retiring disposition ws 88
An Emblem of the Holy Spirit, is—
1. Distinguished for its fuithful love,
2. The cleanest aud most delicate of birds.
8. A timid creature.
4. A gentle bird,
6. The turtle dove takes up its abode in
the land renewed under the genial
breath of spring... ss eo 61
An emblem of Believers ; aa—
Helpless.
Simple.
. Timid.
. Sensitive,
Keautifal,
Cleauly.
. Harmless.
Affectionate and faithful,
. The bearer of tidings.
10. Resorting to, and making its abode in,
the rocks woe «(55
—— Believers Christ’s Dove; as—
1. Given him by the Father.
2. Purchased by His own blood.
3. Wooed and won by Him as His Bride 65


Drawing, the Saviour’s—“ Draw me”
I. Its MEANING and JmPort,
1, A Threefold Drawing :—
(1) In conversion ¢o Him.
a In following after Him,
(8) Ip communion wits Bix


117


11]








$2 OI OR 90 TO


iv hOMILETICAL INDEX.





2. Christ draws—=
(1) Our attention to Him.
(2) Ovr desire and longing after Him.
(8) Our affection.
(4) Our resolution.
(5) Our self-surrender.
(6) Our confidence and faith.
TI. The Means by which He draws,
1. By revealing His own love, loveliness,
and preciousness,
2. By discovering to us our entire and
absolute need of Him.
The Avent employed, His Holy Spirits
the Instrument, His own Word.
More especially He draws—
(1) By the doctrines He teaches.
ey By the promises He makes.


(3) By the Providences He employs.
Ill. The Motive and Grounp of the
drawing,
TV. Its Personatiry, “ Draw me” vee 28


See also under “ Banqueting-house.”


RK,
Enquiry after Christ he ea 88, 92
pega not accepting the Saviour’s


1. Want of time and leisure.

2. The difficulty and sacrifice involved.

8. The intention to give more heed to it
at a future time.

Answered —

1. Nothing of an earthly nature to be
compared to the interests of the soul.

2. No difficulty involved in accepting
Christ and His salvation which grace
will not enable us to overcome,

8. The present moment only our own.

4. Persons of all classes and in all circum-
stances and conditions, continually
receiving Christ and His salvation ... 83


KF,


Feast, a threefold one, prepared by
Christ for His Church—


1, In their personal and private experience
while in this world.

2. In the ordinances of His House, more
especially in the Lord’s Supper,

8. In the marriage-supper of the Lamb
above ew. 79


Flock, of Christ—
I. His Flock, as—


1. Given Him by the Father,

2. Redeemed by His own blood,

8. Sought and found by Himself,

4. Called by His grace.

5. Quickened by His Spirit.

6. Kept and preserved by His Power,

7. Cared for and tended by His love,
Il. Its Cuaracterierica—
1. A ‘little flock.’

‘beautiful flock,’


RA





8. A ‘flock of slaughter.’
4. Known by their life—
(1) Hearing His voice and obeying His
call.
(2) Following Him to the end.
(3) Avoiding and refusing to follow a
stranger,
ITI. Their PrivitzcEs:—
1, Led by Christ.
2. Guarded and protected by Him.
8. Helped, supported, and carried by Him.
4. Fed, sustained, and comforted by Him 26
Flock, Footsteps of the tee eee soo 28


Footsteps of the Flock—
1. Obedience,
2. Faith
8. Self-denial.
4. Meekness and humility.
5. Love coe coe 000 coe 28


Fountain, Christ and the Church com-
pared to a sae, Mpeeea hecceeae
Friend, Christ the believer’s—


I. His CHARACTER as such—
1. Loving, generous, and sympathizing,
2. Faithful and true.
8. Unchanging.
4, Rich and powerful.
5. Tried and proved.
II. His Acts and OFFices as such—
. Pays our debts.
Redeems our persons,
Supplies our wants.
Comforts us in trouble,
. Counsels us in difficulty,
. Warus us of danger.
. Reproves and corrects our faults.
. Confides to us His secrets,
. Delights in our society.
. Entrusts us with His im‘erests,
. Defends our name avd character.
. Takes our part cok, oA ooo OL
Fruit, Christ’s—
1. The Redemption on the Cross,
2. The doctrines of Gruce.
3. The Promises of the Word.
4. The Ordinances of tae Gospel.
This fruit Christ’s; as—
1. Procured through Him,
2. Found in Him.
8. Communicated by Him ose coo 44
Fruits of the Church Scat Pees vee 73


—_
SO WAIHD TP We


ie
oe


6


Garden, the Church comparea to 7.3 as—

1. Reclaimed from the world,

2. Safely enclosed,

8. Carefully cultivated.

4. Planted with choice plarte.

5. Designed for pleasure acd enjoyr.ent.

6. Kept clean and orderly _,.., oe]
The Church Christ’s Gardin, as—

1. Given to Him by the futher,

2. Chosen by Himself at His owa.


HOMILETICAL INDEX. ’
SS SR aS ee ~


8. Purehased by His blood.
4. Reclaimed by His Spirit.
5. Employed for His own use and pleasure 75
‘Garden Enclosed,’ the Church a; in-
dicative of—
1. Its preciousnese,
2. The care taken of it,
8. Its preservation for the divine owner’s
special enjoyment .., ...  ... 78
Garden of Nuts (see Nuts).
Gardens; Christian assemblies compared to
such (see Churches),
Gathered Lilies; heaven a place of coe 98
H


‘Heap of Wheat,’ emblematical of evan-
xelical discourses (see Discourses)
Heaven, a place of gathered lilies ee 93
Holy Spirit, compared to a wind—
1. From His invisibility.
2. From His power.
8. From the universality of His operations,
4. From the mysterious nature of His
movements see Giese oo. 76


J

Jah, or Jehovah eee ae sae
Jealousy: Implies—

1, Ardent affection.

2. Fervent desire of enjoyment.

8. Impatience of anything coming betweea

love and its object;
4. Grief for any apparent want of return 125


Joy, in Christ—
I. The joy itself ;
II. The object of its
TII, The resolution regarding it 3
IV. The persons who are the subjects .


vee 125


£1) it ooe ooo ooo


Joy, the Saviour’s :
1. The fellowship of His believing people
on earth;
2. The presence of His people in heaven 3
8. The contemplation of His people’s


graces py sen 93, 105
(See Delight.)
K
King, Christ a ooo oes eno cco «(88
Kisses ooo eee ese La) eee 8
Knocking, of Christ =—


1. By His Word.
2. By His Providence.
8. By His Spirit... ooo ove eo 8]


L
Lily—Emblem of believers...


* Lily among thorns: ’ indicative of—
1. ‘he believer’s situation in the world.
2. His superiority to the ungodly —
1) In character,

is In usefulness,

(3) In final destiny ... see oo 43
Lilies, gathered see eee sea oo
Lilies, use of coe ooo eee nore Wie!
Lerd’s Supper, the soe eee ooo 34, 67, 19


eee 43


see llr


Love, Christ’s :
I. The love itself :—_
1. Its character,
2. Its manifestations ...
Excellence of Christ’s love; from—
1. The nature of love itself,
2. ‘The person whose love it is ..,
‘ Better than wine;’ as—
1. More gladdening and refreshing ;
2. More satisfying.
8. More beneticial.
4. More lasting in its effects ..,
Christ’s love, is—
1. An electing love.
2. A redeeming love.
8. A covenantivg or bridal love.., cor 46
Christ’s love to be remembered —=
I. Waerein?P
1. Io its manifestations
2. In its greatness.
3. In its costliness,
4. In its fruits,
II. Woy? Such remembrance is—
1. A duty.
2. A delight.
8. A necessity.
Its remembrance brings—
1, Glory to Christ.
2. Benefit to our neighbour.
8. Quickening and refreshment to our-
selves,
III. How—or by what means?
1. By reading the Word.
2. By observance of the Sabbath.
8. By frequent celebration of the Lord’s
Supper.
4. By fellowship with living and loving
believers Nee te et OIG
Christ’s Love, the sensible enjoyment of-—
1. Precious; as—
(1) Endearing the Saviour,
(2. Eugaging us to His service.
(3) Deadening us to the world, and
erucifying sin.
2. Temporary and uncertain in the present
life.


ooo §=sD


9, 10


8. Requiring great care in order to
preserve it.

4. Its continuance Christ’s desire,

&. Its suspension occasionally necessary 48


Love to Christ; ‘The Virgins love thee.’
I. ‘the Pzesons who love Him.
1. Genuine believers, or renewed souls,
1) Christ only loved by such.
2) Is loved by all such.
8) The glory of Jesus that He is 20
loved.


2. Young converts.
8. Men of single aud sincere hearte,
4. Angels who have never sinned.
JI. The Love itself.
1. Its character :—
(1) Natural and reasonable,
(2) Ardent and sincere.
(3) Paramount and supreme,
(4) Undivided and admitting no rival,


vi BOMILETICAL INDEX.


eee





tee





(5) Active and practical,
(6) Self-denying.
(7) Pure and holy,
(8) Permanent and abiding.
(9) Unconquerable and unquenchable,
(10) Divine in its origin.
(11) Self-evidencing.
2. I's Evidences—
(1) Obedience to His will.
(2) Devoteduess to His service,
(3) Desire fur His fellowship.
(4) Imitation of His example.
(5) Affection for His people
(6) Interest in His cause, and all that
belongs to Him we 18, 14, 20
Love to Christ, a test of character eo 2h
Love to Christ is—
1. Divine in its origin,
2, Unqnenchaite in its character.
8. Discoverable in its effects,
Leads to—
(1) Obedience.
(2) Self-dedication.
(3) Desire of fellowship.
(4) Love and esteem for all that is His 25
Love’s Conquests ... see 8
Love-sickness for Christ—
1. Natural and reagonable.
2. Blessed and desirable ... ooo
Love, true—description of, in—
. Its strength and irresistibleness,
. Its tenacity.
. Its ardour and intensity.
. Its unquenchableness.
. Itsunpurchaseableness and precionsness:
(1) Cannot be purchased with money or
external gifts.
(2) Nothing to be given or accepted as
a substitute for it.
(8) Not to be detached from its object
by the gifts of another se. woe 124


48, 87


om OOo


M


Marriage-Supper of the Lamb = oxo ove, —«92
Martyrs, Constancy of = .. == one awe 126
Millennial Church .., ose eee 7


M inisters see ooo ooo ooo "69, 86
Ministerial Discourses (see Dis-
courses).


Missing Saviour, The


I. The Persons wh. miss Him.
Il. The Mzans employed to find Him—
1. Dihgentattendance on public ordinances,
2. Private inqniry of spiritual guides.
8. Searching the Scriptures,
4. Secret prayer.
III. The Resutr of the seareh.
IV. The IMPROVEMENT of success,
1, A holding Him fast.
%. An endeavour to make others partakers
of the blessing.
8. Watchfulness and resolution ...


Morning, Emblem of—
1, The Church at and after Pentecost.


woe 60





2. Believers at conversion.


8. The Church at the resu rection eee 10


N
Name, of Christ, “as ointment poured
forth.”


I. The Name itself—
1, Emmanuel,
2. Jesus.
3. Christ.
Name, inclusive of
1. His titles,
2. His offices,
8. His relations,
4. His attributes
5. His character,
II. The Comparison—
1, As ointment.
2, As ‘‘ointment poured forth,” im-
plying—
(1) Abundance.
(2) Manifestation and impartation,
Christ’s name manifested—
1. Externally.
(1) By himself:—
i. In His life ;
ii. In His preaching ;
iii, In His miracles ;
iv. In His death;
v. In the effusion of His Spirit.
(2) By the Apostles and the Church after
Pentecost.
2. Internally, by the Holy Spirit 12, 13


Nuts, garden of; emblematical of the
Church; as—


1, The fruit preserved safe in a hard
shell ;

. The kernel hidden within the shell ;

. The fruit only reached when the shell
is broken;

. Has a rough exterior and a bitter husk,

but a sweet kernel ;

. Composed of shell and kernel ;

. Requires much time for ripening;

. Ordinarily the last fruit in the garden 108


a2 Or | ot


Ordinances, of the Gospel; compared


to an apple or citron-tree; as—


1. Full of Christ jhe true apple-tree,

2. Affording sweet refreshment.

3. Yielding rich and reviving fruit.

4. Imparting comfort and strength 183, 140
— Community of interest in them between

Christ and His people v0e

——-Possess —

\ Freshness and life.


~~ 2. Strength and permanence,


8. Fragrance and Beauty =


P


Palm tree; the Church and believers com-
pared to one; from—
2. Its ereciness.


HOMILETICAL INDEX





SS epg


2. Its regularity,

8. Its fruitfulness,

4, Its perpetual greenneas,

5 Its elasticity and invinciblenesa,

6. Its general beauty oe 114
Paradox, the Christian Aas send
* Pillars of smoke ;’ the Bride compared te

them (see Bride).
Portrait, the Bridegroom’s


eee coe


89, 90


Posture, of New Testament Believers:
“Looketh forth o8 the morning;’ expres-
sive of—

1. Deliverance and change for the better.
2. Cheerfulness and confidence,


8. Interest in others... ee ee. 101
(See also under Believers),
Praise eee ooo ooo coe eee 138
Prayer eee ooo coe cee rrry 32
—— answers to eee eee 200 vee 85
— for others... 128


*Prince’s Danghter;’ the Church and believers
such ; as—
1. Born of God.
2. United to Christ ove vee ooo
8. Princely io their rank and possessions


4. Endowed with a princely spirit see 210
R

Repentance, evangelical ... nee oo §=—84

Restoration of believers 4. ead 88, 84


Return, Christ’s call tos

I. The Persons called.

II. The Catz itself:
1. To the ardour of first love,
2. To renewed zeal in His service,
8. To a holy and Christ-like life.
4. To closeness of walk with Himself.
5. %o the peace and comfort formerly en-


joyed

_ JII. The Manner of the call: a fourfold repe-
tition. ‘Return, return,’ &. ; indicating—

1. Its earnestness.

2. Its continuousness,

3. Its kindness.

4, The difficulty attending compliance,

5. The seriousness of the case.

6. The duty and necessity of immediate com-
pliance.


IV. The Ossecrt of the call eve .. 106


Rocks, the refuge of doves; indicating —
1, Their security.
2. Their isolation and loneliness coe «55


Running after Christ. ‘We will run after
thee: ’
I. The Action; Christ to be run after—
1, As our chief joy and highest good.
2. As our pattern and example,
8. As our leader and commander,
IL, The Persons ranning


Self-dedication ooo coe


Shepherd ; Christ, as such, is—
1. Jabovab’s Shenherd,


16


2. The Good Shepherd.
8. The Great Shepherd,
4. ‘The Chief Shepherd,
5. The One Shepherd,
As a Shepherd, He—
1. Has a flock.
2, Feeds His flock—
(1) With His Word,
a With His Ordinances,
3) With Himeelf,
8. Makes them ‘“‘restatnoon”, the timeof—
(1) Temptation,
4 Trouble.
3) Persecution,
Gives them rest and comfort-—
(1) By the promises of His Word,
(2) By the doctrines of His grace,
(3) By the ordinances of His house
(4) By the dealings of His Providence.
(5) By the consolations of His Spirit.
(6) By the fellowship of His people.


(7) By the manifestations of Himself 26
Shulamite, the rr) eee ooo eee 21
Sickness from love ate oo 48, 87
Sleep, spiritual ; a state of—

1, Security and ease,
2. Indifference and unconcera,
8. Indolence and sloth,
4, Carnal indulgence.
5. Spiritual inactivity.
6. Insensibility to one’s best interesta,
7. Self-deception,
Such sleep the result of—
1. The ‘ body of sin and death,’
2. The world’s temptations,
8. Satan’s endeavours.
4. Sense of safety.
6. Neglect of watching unto prayer, ana
other appointed means.
6. A state of comfort and enjoyment.
7. Avoidance of the cross aes 46, 81
Its effects :—
1. Apprehension of difficulties where none
exist,
2. Unwillingness to deny ourselves,
8. Greater care about personal ease and
comfort than Christ and His kingdom
4. Indifference to our best interests.
5. Forgetfulness of our character and con-
dition as believers.
Spiritual Sleep exhibited—
1. In the state of the Jewish Church at
the time of the Savionr’s advent,
@. In the case of the disciples after the
Lord’s Supper at Jerusalem.
8. In the experience and history of the
Christian Church after the Apostolic
Age.
4. In the occasional experience of the
Children of God coe eco ooo 8@


Sone oF SOLOMON:
First Part of Title,—* Song of Songs ;’
indicative of—
| I, Its Nature: A Song, as—
1. Pleasant and joyous,
2. Profitable,


mene


|


vill HOMILETICAL INDEX.





Il. Its Excerzence: A Song of Songs: 2. The presence of Christ in her


from— 8. The power committed to her==
1, Its character as a composition. (1) In her prayers.


2. Its subject. (2) In her ordinances,
8. Its treatment of that subject (3) In her discipline,








Second Part of Title: ‘ Which is Solomon’s 3” II. The Oss«crs of it,
indicates— ITI. Its Nature ,., ide eee eee 0d
I. The author of the Book. Thorns, Emblem of the ungodly; as—
IL. The subject of it. vasa i
IIT, Its design. oF -Harttal:
1. The giory of the true Solomon. 3. Unprofitable.
T 2. nts Lota Ak eo aeaancecg 5, 6 4. Destined to destruction ose oon «48
A Goa seaiie aig , Turtle-Dove; emblem of the Holy
1, A Christian experience, Vv pane 5 ue
2A loving heart eee co ooo | NOTRE . ° ;
‘ : 1. When the Gospel is preached in its
Spring; its lessons :-— purity.
1. That God is love. y 2. When it is preached with power.
2. That He rules by His Providence. 8. When the fruits of it appear in the
8. That He is faithful te. His promises, lives of those who hear it ... sosmeeee
4, That He is the author of beauty ... 51
ring, emblematical of spiritual Revi- Peta
yasee Eel P Vineyard, Christ’s; the Church such ;
Z he ret f the Jews from Baby- as—
eee aan ‘ 1. Given Him by the Father.
; the Saviour’s incarnation and 2. Christ constituted its Head and King.
: ene Siuutiy, ee 8. Its blessings purchased by His blood 130
8. At Pentecost, the Reformation, and The believer's ... tee ooo 24, 131
other periods of the Church’s history. Virgins ; true believers such ; from—
4. In the believer’s personal experience. 1, Their pure and undivided affection to
(1) At the first realization of Christ's Christ.
redeeming love. 2. Their chaste and faithful adherence to
(2) At subsequent repetitions of that Jesus and His cause,
realization. 8. Their true and scriptural views of Him
(8) In revived life and joy after a and His religion.
period of deadness and discomfort. 4. The purity of their worship and geueral
(4) At their departure for the better conversation.
country ... = vee ae 5. Their meekness, modesty, and tendcr-
“ Streams from Lebanon; ” emblematical of ness of conscience,
the Saviour’s grace, in— 6. Their moral beauty and comeliness of
1. Its fulness, spirit.
9. Its freeness, Visible Church, the... oo ate dee. 24
3. Its liveliness, ; oars , is
oy rib, cee
5. Its abundance, ;


i ‘ 3 I. The Pack of the Visit—‘ Garden of nuts.’
6, Iterefreshing nature. = we ow TA 1, Unspeakable condescension. in such





Surrender, of self to Christ— visits.

I, Its OBsEctT. 9. Christ seeks pleasure in His Charch,
1. His sole possession. 8. Mature believers Christ’s especial de-
2, His pleasure and enjoyment, light.

8. His service. | If. The Ossecr of it—‘ To see,’ &e. io
4. His free disposal, 1, Christ delights to see the spiritual

II. Its CHARACTERS, fruits of His Church. =
1. Willing and cheerfal. 9. Christ careful in observing the spiritual
2. Whole and entire. condition and progress of His people,
3. Present and eternal. 8. Grace found in various stages. |

Ill. The Grounp of it: “His desire fs 4. Different kinds of fruit in Christ’s gar-

is towards me;” Christ’s desire— den.
1. To love and bless, 5. Various characteristics and types among
2. To possess as His own. believers.
8. To have with Himself for ever eee 116 | TIT, The Resutr of it,—*Or ever I was
aware,’ &.:
T 1. Christ’s affections diy by the con=
i templation of His people’s graces.
egal sean es she :; ‘ 2. His people made His chariot in con-
1. Her holy spiritual character, 4 veyiug the Gospel and winning othera,


HOMILETICAL INDEX.





8. The cause of His joy in His people in
and from Himself.

4. The privilege and happiness of His
people that they are made His joy ... 103


WwW


Wall, a; the Church and believers such—

1. Against the attacks and threaten-

ings of adversaries.

2. Against the attempts of false teachers 128
Wheat, a heap of ... ee .» ll
Wilderness ; emblem of the world, as—

1. A piace of hunger and thirst.

2. A place of thorns and briars.

8. A place of danger from man and beast 121


ix,





Wind, the, an emblem of the Holy Spirit
(See Holy Spirit).


Withdrawings, Divine; are—

1. Real.

2. Such as are to be observed and known.

8. The knowledge of them profitable for
believers and others.

4. The result of love.

5. Made in wisdom.

6. The believer’s greatest distress,

7. Affect the joy of Christ’s presence, but
not His love ... ar He coe ©6985


World, the; compared to Lebanon, as—
1. A place of discomfort.
2. A place of danger.
8. Yet a place not without attractions .., 69


General Index.




















A
Abana cose Nowa" ceed ae = 74, 146
Abishag ase oa as ae . 106
Amana = tas pee 68, 146
Amarillis, White oe ove ove vee 42
Ambrsoe, Hymn of aS see «84
Amminadib — eos. 105, 150
Anointing oil, the Holy ves oo 36, 73
Answers to prayer eco eco coe 85
Antiochus Fpiphanes coe ose eee 125
Apple-tree, the _,., nee oe 44, 123
Apples erry - 00@ eee eee 48
Armour, the Christian eee eee coe 97
Army with banners oo ox coe 97
Attila nee ca eee os woo «(97
B
Baalhamon eee tea ee soe 180
Backsiiders ooo Co) coo 86, 107
Racksliding woo tees . 106
Banners see i a See 98, 140
Banquets... soe ove vee we 46
Banqueting-honse . vee nee wee 46
Bathrabbim, gate of coe 00 coe 112
Beauty of the Chureh cea 95, 98, 109
terribleness in see ose 95, 109
Bed. Soiomon’s A eos 63, 142, 143
Believers, posture of toe coe LOL, 121
Bernard, quotation from St, oe repel!
Bisaceps oon eee woe 29, 131
Bride ‘ tee nae ose 61, 145
Bride of Christ cee 200 229 80, 61
—— of Solomon .., eee eee 106
Bridal couch or bed coe veo 61, 63
Bridegroom, the royal ooo coe 65
Brother, Christ the Church's eee eee 120
Building, the spiritual ooo eve 186
Bundle of myrrh 4 ses ooo oo. ©6886
Bunyan, John eos ry e200 ene 97
0
Calvin, John cea oe ooo coe 192
Camphor nae vee ooo ooo oe atl
Cano Vy marria ooo ooo see coe
Cae eee oy eee ese eee aoe 112
Ceesar’s wife ae ace a 80, 102
Chalmers, prayer of Dr. se eee oe, 75
Cham hers, the king’s eee ves eee 16
Chariot, Solomon’s... ace 68, 142, 143
Christ’s cee eee 105, 151
Chariots of Amminadib ver eee eee 150
Choir . eee eee ooo 152
CHRIST, meaning of pert be) |
the eee of the Church 64, 66
His kisses .. ee eae coe
—— Hislove ... Oe pts
—— His excellence and ‘sweetness ese
His titles, offices, &a. coe ooo 12
——— the shepherd 900 cee ooo 26






































Curist, the Chureh’s husband _,., soe 8G
His first and second advent 68, 65
His teaching Se See soe 120
Christian and Faithful es Ras 88, 101
Christianity no failure eee ooo coo 28
Church, the... ooo coo eee ee 22
Christ’s spouse oe. at nel OT
Christ’s sister ove eee oe 71
Christ’s vineyard .., eco cee 80
of the New Testament se. ve 60
the Millennial coe ooo eee wb.
compared toa garden 1 wee 75
_—- toa garden of nuts =... 108
to an army with banners
97, 104
——— the abode of the Spirit ... woe 00
—— militant and triamphant ,., vee 109
her missionary character 1. se. 110
Charches coe eee ooe eee eco 29
Citron-tree ... eas eae aes coo 444
Citrons oor eee coe eee 48
Comeliness, the Church’s “e a coe 96
Coming, Christ’s Second... ies 65, 66
Concern for others ,.. aca aes coe 126
Conquest, love’s ,., aaa aoe eee 83
Courage ove coe eee rey ece 109
Covenant of grace .., ee aaa coe 63
Cowper, the lament of = 45, see nee 107
Crocus 5 eos coe vee eee 42
Crown, nuptial eae Ae aS eae 104
Cypress oe8 coe 0e8 eee eee 87
D
Daimaseus eee eee ooo 200 eee 112
Dance eee eee oe vee vee 152
Dances, religions... eee coo 108, 109
Daughters of Jerusalem — ave eco soe 23
Day, to the Church coo eee wee BB
—— of Christ’s appearing ve ove 58, 65
Delitzsch, quotation from... eco Nee
Diadems eae rr yy coe 82, 83
Diligence, ministerial ooo = wees 1:18
Direction to inquirers Ree oe ene i 4.)
Discipline, the © hurch’s coe eee eee 97
Door, the Chuich a eee eee woe 129
Dove, the ae coe 000 eee 88 »55
the Syrian... woe 88,
—— Emblem of the Holy. Spirit... nee eco 51
—— Emblem of believers , 00 ry) coe «655
—— Fryes of oe aS, vee cee 688
—— Her place of refuge ... eco eco ©6455
—— Christ’ 8 ose eoe eee 55
Dream, the Bride’s supposed, 59; her
second coe oe coe ~ es
Dreams see eee eee est
Durham, quotations from ... eos 4,108
Dying testimony of John Wesley, 108; a
Wilberforce... o0e ooo oo I


GENERAL INDEX,





Early Christians














Heap of wheat


eco ooo e0e
Elders eee eee coe eon
Emmanuel, meaning of 0. — ose
Eng edi eee ooo ooo
Buaeiry after Christ. ece 00
Espousals, So!omon’s ee vee
Christ’s ... eee ove
Eve, a type of Christ’s Bride eco
Excuses ooo coe coe eco
F
Feet, the Church's ... ooo eve
Fellowship, Christian cee ove
Females, Syrian... ooo vee
Flagons_ ane oe ove
Fiavel, experience of oce ove
Flock, Christ’s oy vee oo
Footsteps of the flock eco coe
Fountain, the Charch a eee ooo
Fountains, Eastern ... eee eee
Foxes eee eee rr} ooo
Frankincense, Hill of eee vee
Fruits in Christ’s Garden .., coe
G
* Garden, Solomon’s ... vee oe
of nuts coo eee
the Chorch compared to a
Gardens, Oriental ... one
—— separate churches such ise
Gat of Bathrabbim poe vee
Gat @ Oriental cities ... cco
Gather. d lilies eoe eoe oe
Gazelle ooo ooo ooo eee
Girdle, jewelled 0. ove eco
Girdle-clasp... ace eee
Golden Calf, sin of the Ree eee
H
Hall, Robert, saying of .. coe


Heathen testimony to Early Christians


Henna a5

Henry, Matthew, quotations from
Hermon 4. see oe
Heshbon.... see


Hole of the door ...
Homer, quotations from
Hopeful eee
Horses, Egyptian ...
Arab
Huppah, the
Hymna, Ambrose’s
Hymns, Charles Wesley’s





eco


ooo





Moravian, ose
I
Mlustrations, use of ooo
Infallibility ... eon eee
Inquiry Room, the eve
d
Jackals son eee
Jah, or Jehovah a0 coe
Jealousy ss. vee oe
Jerusalem see ooo eee


86, 141
128
96








ci aieallaieianmiinetiemmntmmmnntn temanmarneterneaaeeemmion


Jesus, meaning of ...
Jewels a0 oes
Joy, the Saviour’s ...


— in the Lord and His service :





























K
Kedar, tents of eee coe
Keepers of vineyards eos
of the fruit ooo
Key, Oriental eee 20e
kids ase ooo
King, chambers of ‘the eee
Kisses va coe eco
Knox, his prayers ... ooo
his work ar ee

L
Land, the better ... cco
Lattice eee coe ooo
Lebanon... ooo oo0
tower of ose
Leo the Great ooo ooo
Lily, the eco
of the valley ove
Lilies, use of oe ooo
gathered see ooo
Little foxes ove eco
Lock, Oriental on ooo
Lord’s Supper, the pee
Love eee oe 980
nature of — see aoe
of Christ eee eco
—— to Christ ooo Cc)
conquest Of so — eve
Love-sickness ove ceo
Lather ece Goa eee

M
Mahanaim oo exe
Mandrakes eee ooo
Marriage, Solomon’s on
processions eco
supper of the Lamb
Married life 65 coe
Martagon, the Scarlet — eee
Martyrs, army of eco


Mary, Queen of Scots
M‘Cheyne, Robert M.
Meadow S»ffron


Militant character of the Chareh


Milton, quotations from
his paradox
Ministers...

lessons for
Missing Saviour ...
Missions, the Church’s calling
Moon, beauty of the eos
bride compared to the
Morning, bride compared to
and evening breczes
Mother, the Church a
Mother’s children ...





eee
eee








house coe a
Mountain of myrrh...
Myrrh ABs coe


eee
eo0
Pad


—— mountain of ...


oee


13


se
pest


PFFP PPP EPEP PEPE TIS


332


9, 10, 48


4, 20, 21, 25


36, 73
68, 79, 8


GENERAL INDEX. .




















N
Name of Christ... ooo woe ew 11
Night to the Chareh eee vee coe 58
Nightingale... nee oe ooo oo. 141
Nats, garden of ras ee coe 103
Oo
Oil, holy anointing... se 0 «- 10
Ointment... wee coe ooo 12. 33
Ointments eee wae Ae 10, 33
Orchard  .. rea ee ae we nde
Ordinances vce eee 39, 40
Oriental customs, 3; 3 in reference to vine-
yards, 24 ; ‘horses and camels, 32;
perfumes, 35, 36, 37; marriages,
61, 141; dress, 110, 111; houses,
114, 148 ; harvest ooo 00e 111
Oriental eourts eco eee eee 99, 187
ae opeeet poet eee eco 48, 111, Us
rich specimen of ... vee
eer re spring oe eee eee ooo 83
— gardens 00 eee coe cn ft)
fountains .., eo ar
Oriental views: in reference to female com.
plexion, 34; female beanty,68; horses 31
Oriental manners .., a eo ©«=—:119, 149
comparisons lll
Ornaments of Eastern women, 83; ‘of horses
and camels, s5.; of believers sb.
rks cae aes eee 29, 131
P
Palanquin, bridal ... oe ee 61, 68, 142
Palm-tree, the ... 118
an emblem of the Chureh and
believers een ee eee 114
Paradox, the believer's un wee wee 21.
—— Milton’ Beco eso eo 122
Pastors eco eco = ooo woo 29
Ph coe 208 620 foo) 74
Pillars of smoke... oes pan cco ©62
Praise gee ue co oa ooo 183
Prayer eooe eee aad ess eee 182
—— answers to ... eo eco eco 85
—— on behalf of others... ae coe 128
——— its place in the che eras Church 133
Preachers, lessons for as wee 118
Presbyters eae ae 29, 131
Primitive Chureh ese oo ee 109
Procession, bridal moe AS See LOL
Promptness, ministerial hes tee coe LS
ing of vines enn tl less we 141
B
Revival a. cee = eo 50
Rivers of Damascus can ‘eae pam oy fe}
a the refage of doves., se o. 55
ooo 200 eg evo eco 48
ie of Sharon ses 41, 189
Rutherford, Samuel AD ee 4%, 16, 184
8























Salt, the Abyssinian traveller os oe 08
Savanarola ae vee cee vos 108
Scarlet Mee sc coo owe vee 42
Seals ose woe 124
Seeond eoming: Christ’ ry nee coos
Seeking Christ oe oe cca oo. 380
Seif-surrender eee ceo oss oe. 116
Sharon eee rey coo os see) 139
Shenir sae ee ooo ooo 68, 146
Shepherd, Christ a cee ooo woe 26
Shepherd’s tents... ace ooe rt!)
beta? Shulamite a eee ooo 628
Shoes eee ove 110
Shulamite ... 8, 31, 29, 105, 110, 117,119, 152:
Shunem __... pee eos vee mee LOO
Sickness, love Ree ies oes we 487
Sirion eee vee ee eee 68 146
Sister eco toe eee soo coo 147
Sleep ooo eee ooo coe pee 148
Smoke, pillars of ove ooo vee 62
Solam vee ory Bee eee ooe 106
Solomon eee ove vce ove ee 86
name of see vee eco coo 106
his writings eee eco pay
his palace ... see cee eee 2]
his bed or palanquin eco oo 63
—— his chariot .. eee eee 00 1b
—w his girdens... oce eee coe 92
a type of Christ... vee 6, 65, 135
Song of Solomon; its nature, § ; excellence,
tb.; character as a composition, 2, 5;
subject, 5, 6; object and design, 2, 6;
author, 1,6; title .. ove 5, 135
Song of loves heel, . | seat ltase 7, 46
Spices ove eco eee eco ooo 99
mountain of ... eee coo 188, 134
Spikenard, ... ae cea ae 83, 35
—— the believer’s .. ove sccnoo
Spouse, Christ’s —... eee ooo .. 66
Spring, eeason of ... nee eee 60, 51
Spring, a sealed coe ooo oo oe 43
Springs in the East...  s00 oe «=» ven.
Stars in Syria sso) | econ eee utecsthun
Starry host ooo eee coe coe coe 102
Stoughton, quotations from Dr. x. 98, 100
Streams from Lebanon i... coe Coo fe
Sulem... eco eee eee 106
Sun, Bride compared ‘to the ose eo. 102
Supper, the Lord's... se = ove 84, 44, 77
the last oe ooo ona, vee 84
Syrian Females oe os eae eee 88
—- Doves eee ee eee eee 8b,
T
Tabernacle, the see vas eos eo 64
Table, the Lord’s ... eee eo eco 84
Teacher, Christ the Church’s eee eoe 120
Teaching, the Church’s — see eco eco 120
Temple, the... ove ooo oe coo | 64
Tente of Kedar eee eso eee eo 21
— the shepherd’s ooo vee eee
Terribleness, the Church’s ... coe oe 96
— of beauty vee vee coe tb.
Theodoret, quotations fromese ose 8, 101
Tirzah eee eee eee 00e ooo 96
Tower of ivory 00 = even 119

















GENERAL INDEX.


SR SS SE


»
ie Re


aEOLOGY |





444726


Fi PADDY
IOAN Y


Tower of Lebanon ... eee sas ee #5. | Wall, the Churcka ... nee cs oo. 128
Trees, fruit ... Ace cea a eee 73 | Warfare, the Christian nee See coe 109
Turtle-dove... eo 51 | Wutchfulness Ave eos ooo woe 60
- qblent of the Holy Spirit eee 26, | Well of living water soe eee say
Wesley, John ooe rrr) eco eos 118
U — his dying testimony ... eee 108
Unity, the Church’s vee eco eee 100 | Wheat, heap of oe eee vee eee 111
Usher, Saying of Archbishop eo = eee: 133 | White Amarylhis... wee) 42
Wiud, emblem of the Holy. Spirit ... eee As 1h
V Winter aoe vee vee 52, 53
Valley, the Zebdany 208 oe ooo 14 Wise men of the East coe oe eo 80
Valleys e as +e, ae eos 140 | Withdrawings, Divine oe eae coe «685
Vine, the True ate eco ose eee 56
Vineyard eee eco eee eee ee 54 Y
—— Solomon's Ass +» 130 | Young, the, to be cared for by the Churck... 127
Shulamite’s on 24, 180, al
Vineyards, watcned by females... eee %
Visible church eee ose eee eco 24 Zebdany Valley, the. ae os eee 74
10m ooo ese oo0 eee Cy 146
a i eg es oe ets eee
ee wn a ee ee ee)
pe OED











| BS491 .P65 / vol 14


_ The Preacher s complete homi letical com 1








| Fos
«/2% THEOLOGY LIBRARY


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA
91711 on
444726 ee


BELO DE ALOMAR AILDEADEEESDEELES EPA RP PEELE ILIAD EE EEERASS EP
thei tes eee? TERE VARMA RIR SY e  S O  a e oe
CAE LILEEE EEL LSS Z PELE ELD LL LSS ‘ oe








PEELE,
Ob eP EE ELT EE EL,
ON Ee OIE aa)


WON Rat Bak
BUONO EOS VS





MEE Ss SVEN
PASTS OS OO OC SS SNA NINO ES
RESIN TET UOC ON CSA AO EONS
Se ES EAA CVO OS OA NINA TCH OR O atet
RTE UNS NUYS NUNA. Cy ER One re Oh ere
SUNOS SE Ve OVW eS ACESS,
QAI ENTRY SION ONIONS SOS ANS


NSS SETS CNN SENS NUNS Ce
Pea A a nents
wS ‘








CAS AU Ae ESS
Nt, NAS ONS
SO ICR tad

TELE LU eS

ve ye ss

BALES BOC NR OSS Eee

PLAT TAA ROM KRONA ER Beet

SUVA SECC ES OS ye








eS as
antes


‘ Nit
TAA Oey CEES ES.
SALES LS OS ES UE Oy
NURSE CL EON


PES SECS TENS STS





ESL Oey
eee NS
RSL


VN.

RUWNENA RS

SMe wy Ve

CEU WE ¥. SRR ws ‘

Le SUS VAS VEVEV EET
Wools yee kh kha S EEE. ELE ENED
SOUS SSO SNA,
FORO BAHAR
DORR A A eh SRO AM
RAR Oe te OS ‘.

na wntloole es WU LCDS SERN

‘ TEN SAME C LEYLA AS

SY Sy WOON

SR








Jas
x ARERR ‘, NAA SECA NOU EON AN ’
: \
SN TA UE AYE DY TEVOETECE TUTE SY WAU EES CETUS
SMA S VETERE TOT AS NAN SERRA OCU Te DIESE FICE EAL USU SUS) OUCH
us APS Da LSRA AAA A AD AR SUNY SST SS » SOAS NN SOYA YANN AVS Ny
4.2 Las A TAY Wea % TN » SOS AY, SASSO
Dy Se Seta Dh TAS x TUN, SSN SY y





.
¥ x. ‘, yO LXV,

Mathy ASS WRU EIEN
+ “7 ae Py Pn





NAVAS SSSA VY JOSS Ry
EC OO OTe ETUC SCTE ENe Ha Ea NOLEN





NOS
