2 abi alll Ma ly 


Wilioyi 
ae Yj 


Aonpi 


THE 


m SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR: 


THE 


PROGRESS OF THE SOUL IN THE KNOWLEDGE 
OF JESUS. 


BY 


O. H. SPURGEON. 


“ Christ is all.”—Cot, iii. 11, 


@oronto : 
ROSE PUBLISHING COMPANY. 


Oe me me Mme meee 


“‘The special work of'our ministry is to Jay open Christ, to 
hold up the tapestry and unfold the mysteries of Christ. Let 
us labour therefore to be always speaking somewhat about 
Christ, or tending that way, When we speak of the law, let it 
drive us to Christ ; when of moral duties, let them teach us to 
walk worthy of Christ, Christ. or something tending to Christ, 
should be our theme and mark to aim at.” P 

IBBS. 


‘*And surely this is the sweetest subject tas ever was 
reached on; is it not an ointment poured forth, whose smell 
s so fragrant, and whose savour is so sweet, that therefore all 

the virgins love him, Is it not a subject which comprehends 


all the glory and excellency and beauty of all the things in 
heaven and in earth?” 


Isaac AMBROSB. 


Oa 


Ec 
Dhe One God of Heaven and Garth, 


ttt 
the Grinity of Dis Sacred Persons, 
be alt onour awd glory, 


sworld without end, 


Attrerr, 


Do the glorious Father, 


as the 


Povenant God of Asracl ; 


Go the gracious Son, 
the 
Redeetner of his People; 


Go the Holy Ghost, 
@he Author of Sanctification; 
be everlasting praise for that experience of free Grace 


and sovereign Zove 
which is shnply described it this Dolume, 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER I. 


OHAPTER IV. 

’ JESUS PARDONING.......0.000+ 

3 OHAPTER V, 

g | 4 JO AT CONVERSION ....cccesssscecccctececesessesesesees 120 


| a 
OHAPTER VI. 


ComprztrE ™ GRBs cececcccacecceqeecceenesceccvcseses 168 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER VII. 
PAG) 
GOVE TO JESUS ...cccccccccscccccccsccce eotbeck us ee ey 


CHAPTER VIII. 


VIN COGI iin vcvceaee<ecebinseewes Kccanstobeuneeuerdee “200 


CHAPTER IX. 
JESUS IN THE Hour oF TROUBLE 


CHAPTER X. 
JEsus Hipinc HIMSELF ..........0-.0006 ecccvcece eveccces 209 


CHAPTER XI. 


THE Causes OF APPARENT DESERTION...... 


CHAPTER XII. 


CoMMUNION PRESERVED ..ccccccccces eeeaoceaneevenee eecaenveeed 303 


e@eeeeeeven 


coos 231 
wee. 259 
woes 276 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


—_——* }& oe —_—__——_— 


L 
The Despised Friend, 


‘¢ We esteemed him not,”—Isa. liii. 3. 


T would not be easy for some of us to recall the 
ZA hour when we first heard the name of Jesus. 
RSs “i In very infancy that sweet sound was as fa- 
miliar to our ear as the hush of lullaby. Our 
earliest recollections are associated with the 
Sp house of God, the family altar, the Holy Bible, the 
on sacred song, and the fervent prayer. Like young 
Samuels, we were lig. ed to our rest by the lamps 
of the sanctuary, and were awakened by the sound of the 
morning hymn. Many a time has the man of God, whom 
a parent’s hospitality has entertained, implored a blessing 
on our head, desiring in all sincerity that we might early 
call the Redeemer blessed ; and to his petition a mother’s 
earnest “Amen” has solemnly responded. Ours were 
happy portions and goodly heritages; but nevertheless, 
being “born in sin, and shapen in iniquity,” these hea- 
A 


10 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


_-———— 


venly privileges did not of themselves avail to give us 
love to Jesus and pardon by his blood. 

We are often compelled to weep over sins aggravated 
by light as clear as noonday,—ordinances undervalued 
from their very frequency,—warnings despised, although 
accompanied with tears from a parent’s eye,—and loath- 
ings felt in the heart if not expressed by the lips, to those 
very blessings which were the rich benisons of heaven. in 
our own persons we are witnesses to the fact of innate 
depravity, the birth-plague of man; and we can testify 
to the doctrine that grace, and grace alone, can change 
the heart. The words of Isaiah are ours with an empha- 
sis, notwithstanding all the hallowed influences which 
surrounded us: and in uttering the confession, “ We es- 
teemed him not,” the haunts of our childhood, the com- 
panions of our youth, and the sins of our manhood, unan- 
imously confirm our truthfulness. 

Starting, then, with our own experience, we are led to 
infer that those who were denied our advantages will cer- 
tainly be compelled to adopt the same humble language. 
If the child of pious parents, who by divine power was 
in youth brought to know the Lord, feels constrained to 
acknowledge that once he did not esteem the Saviour, 
shall the man whose education was irreligion, whose 
childhood was riot, whose youth was license, and whose 
maturity was crime, be able to adopt language less hu- 
mniliating ? No; we believe that all men of this class who 
are now redeemed from the hand of the enemy, will read- 
ily acknowledge that they were the blind neglecters of 
the beauties of qur glorious Emmanuel. Aye, more, we 
venture to challenge the “Church of the first-born” to 
produce a single saint who did not once pass by the cross 
with indifference, if not contempt. 

Whether we review the “ noble army of martyrs,” “ the 
goodly fellowship of the prophets,” “the glorious company 
of the apostles,” or “the holy Church throughout all the 


a a tr 


—_ 


ied 
to give us 


ygoravated 
ndervalued 
1, although 
-and loath- 
ps, to those 
jeaven, 10 
t of innate 
can testify 
ean change 
an empha- 
neces which 
on, “ We es- 
yd, the com- 
hood, unan- 


ve are led to 
ges will cer- 
le language. 
power was 
nstrained to 
the Saviour, 
gion, whose 
p, and whose 
1age less hu- 
his class who 
y, will read- 
neglecter’s of 
ye, more, we 
rst-born” to 
by the cross 


artyrs,” “ the 


ous company 
ryhout all the 


THE DESPISED FRIEND. 


11 


—_—_—— —— 


world,” we shall not discover a single lover of the adora-, 

ble Redeemer who will not join the general confession, 
- “We esteemed him not.” 

Pause, attentive reader, and ask thyself whether thou 
dost esteem him now; for possibly it may happen that 
thou hast not as yet seen in him any “ beauty that thou 
shouldest desire him,” nor canst thou subscribe to the 
exclamation of the spouse, “ Yea, he is altogether lovely.” 
Should this be thine unhappy condition, a meditation 
| thereon may, under the Holy Spirit’s influence, be of 
much use to thee; and I beseech thee, while we unfold 
the secrets of what was once our prison-house, be thou 
intensely anxious that by any means thou also mayest 
escape a bondage which deprives thee of joy here, and 
will shut thee out from bliss hereafter. 

We propose to endeavour first of all to bring the fact 
of our light estimation of Jesus vividly before our eye; 
then, secondly, we will discuss the causes of this folly ; 
and, thirdly, seek to excite emotions proper to such a 
/ mournful contemplation. 


I. Let us go to the potter’s house, and view the un- 
shapen clay which we once were; let us re:nember “ the 
rock whence we were hewn,” and the “hole of the pit 
from which we were digged,” that we may with deeper 
feeling repeat the text, “We esteemed him not.” Let us 
there seriously peruse the diary of memory, for there the 
witnesses of our guilt have faithfully recorded their 
Mames. , 
__ We pause, and consider first owr overt acts of sin, for 
these lie like immense buulders on the sides of the hill of 
Jife, sure testifiers to the rock within. 
__ Few men would dare to read their own autobiography, 
if all their deeds were re¢orded in it; few can look back 
upon their entire career without a blush. “ We have all 
‘sinned, and come short of his glory’” None of us can lay 


12 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


claim to perfection. True, at times a forgetful self-com- 
placency bids us exult in the virtue of our lives; but 
when faithful memory awakes, how instantly she dispels 
the illusion! She waves her mayic wand, and in the 
king's palaces frogs arise in multitudes; the pure rivers 
at her glance become blood; the whole land is creeping 
with ioathsom eness. Where we imagined purity, lo, im- 
he ane te ariseth. The snow-wreath of satisfaction melts 

efore the sun of truth; the nectared bowl of gratulation 
is e:nbittered by sad remembrances ; while, under the 
class of honesty, the deformities and irregularities of a 
life apparently correct are rendered, alas! too visible. 

Let the Christian, whose hair is whitened by the sun- 
light of heaven, tell his life-long story. He may have 
been one of the most upright and moral, but there will 
be one dark spot in his history, upon which he will shed 
the tear of penitence, because then he knew not the fear 
of the Lord. Let yon heroic warrior of Jesus recount his 
deeds ; but he too points to deep scars, the offspring 
of wounds received in the service of the Evil One. Some 
amongst our chosen men, in their days of unregeneracy 
were notorious for guilt, and could well write with Bun- 

an *—“ As for my own natural life for the time that I 
was without God in the world, it was, indeed, according 
to the course of this world and the spirit that now work- 
eth in the children of disobedience (Eph. ii. 2,3). It was 
my delight to be taken captive by the devil at his will 
(2 Tim. ii. 26), being filled with all unrighteousness; the 
which did also so strongly work, both in my heart and 
life, that I had but few equals, both for cursing, swearing, 
lying, and blaspheming the holy name of God.” Suffice 
it, however, that by each of us open sins have been com- 
mitted, which manifest that “we esteemed him not.” 

Could we have rebelled against our Father with so high 
a hand, if his Son had been the object of our love? Should 


*Grace Abounding, 


ee 


Seen eam ae 


ul self-com- 
r lives; but 
, she dispels 
and in the 
2 pure rivers 
1 is creeping 
urity, lo, im- 
faction melts 
£ gratulation 
e, under the 
ilarities of a 
o visible. 
| by the sun- 
He may have 
ut there will 
he will shed 
y not the fear 
s recount his 
the offspring 
il One. Some 
unregeneracy 
te with Bun- 
re time that I 
eed, according 
at now work- 
2,3). It was 
bvil at his will 
eousness; the 
my heart and 
sing, swearing, 
God.” Suffice 
ave been com- 
him not.” 
by with so high 
love? Should 


THE DESPISED FRIEND. 


—_—— 


we have so perpetually trampled on the commands of a 
venerated Jesus? Could we have done such despite to 
his authority, if our hearts had been knit to his adorable 
person? Could we have sinned so terribly, if Calvary 
had been dear to us? Nay; surely our clouds of trans- 
gressions testify our former want of love to him. Had 
we esteemed the God-man, should we so entirely have 
neglected his claims ? could we have wholly forgotten 
his loving words of command? Do men insuit the per- 
' sons they admire ? Will they commit high treason against 
a king they love? Will they slight the person they 
esteem, or wantonly make sport of him they venerate ? 
And yet we have done all this, and more; whereby the 
least word of flattery concerning any natural love to 
Christ is rendered to our now honest hearts as hateful as 
the serpent’s hiss. These iniquities might not so sternly 
prove us to have despised our Lord had they been accom- 
panied by some little service to him, Even now, when 
we do love his name, we are oft unfaithful, but now our 
affection helps us “to creep in service where we cannot 
go;” but before our acts were none of them seasoned 
with the salt of sincere affection, but were all full of the 
all of bitterness. O beloved, let us not seek to avoid the 
| weight of this evidence, but let us own that our gracious 
_ Lord has much to lay to our charge, since we chose to 
obey Satan rather than the Captain of salvation, and pre- 
' ferred sin to holiness. 
_ Let the self-conceited Pharisee bonst that he was born 
- free—we see on our wrists the red marks of the iron; let 
| him glory that he was never blind—our eyes can yet re- 
» member the darkness of Egypt, in which we discerned not 
| the morning star. Others may desire the honour of a 
merited salvation—we know that our highest ambition 
can only hope for pardon and acceptance by grace alone ; 
and well we remember the hour when the only channel 
_ of that grace was despised or neglected by us, 


14 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


The Book of Truth shall next witness against us. The 
time is"not yet erased from memory when this sacred 
fount of living water was unopened by us, our evil hearts 
placed a stone over the mouth of the well, which even 
conscience could not remove. Bible dust once defiled our 
fingers ; the blessed volume was the least sought after of 
all the books in the library. 

Though now we can truly say that his word is a 

matchless temple where we delight to be, to contemplate 
the beauty, the symmetry, and the magnificence of the 
structure, to increase our awe, and excite our devotion to 
the Deity there preached and adored;”* yet at one sad 
period of our lives we refused to tread the jewelled floor 
of the temple, or when for custom’s sake we entered it 
we paced it with hurried tread, unmindful of its sanctity, 
heedless of its beauty, ignorant of its glories, and unsub- 
dued by its majesty. 


Now we can appreciate Herbert’s rapturous affection 
expressed in his poem :— 


“Oh book! infinite sweetness! Iet my heart 
Suck every letter, and a honey gain, 
Frecious for any grief in any part; 
To clear the breast, to mollify all pain.” 


But then every ephemeral poem or trifling novel could 
move our hearts a thousand times more easily than this 
“book of stars,” “this god of books,’ Ah! well,doth this 
neglected Bible prove us to have esteemed Jesus but 
lightly. Verily, had we been full of affection to him, we 
should have sought him in his word. Here he doth un- 
robe himself, showing his inmost heart. Here each page 
is stained with drops of his blood, or emblazoned with 
rays of his glory. At every turn we see him, as divine 
and human, as dying and yet alive, as buried but now 
risen, as the victim and the priest, as the prince and sav- 


in ern te me 


* Boyle. 


OQvotatwesno a 


—$—— + -—————— 


tus, The 
his sacred 
evil hearts 
vhich even 
detiled our 
ht after of 


word is a 
ontemplate 
nce of the 
levotion to 
at one sad 
velled floor 
- entered it 
ts sanctity, 
and unsub- 


g affection 


ovel could 
y than this 
ll. doth this 

Jesus but 
to him, we 
he doth un- 
e each page 
zoned with 
a, as divine 
bd but now 
ce and sav- 


ee] 


THE DESPISED FRIEND. 


iour, and in all those various offices, relationships and 
conditions, each of which render him dear to his people 
and precious to his saints. Oh let us kneel before the Lord 
and own that “we esteemed him not,” or else we should 
have walked with him in the fields of Scripture, and held 
communion with him in the spice-beds of inspiration. 

The Throne of Grace, so long unvisited by us, equally 
proclaims our former guilt. Seldom were our cries heard 
in heaven; our petitions were formal and lifeless, dying 
on the lips which carelessly pronounced them. Oh sad 
state of crime, when the holy offices of adoration were 
unfulfilled, the censer of praise smoked not with a savour 
acceptable unto the Lord, nor were the vials of prayer 
fragrant with precious odours ! 

Unwhitened by devotion, the days of the calendar were 
black with sin ; unimpeded by our supplication, the angel 
of judgment speeded his way to our destruction. At the 
thought of those days of sinful silence, our minds are 
humbled in the dust; and never can we visit the mercy- 
seat without adoring the grace which affords despisers a 
ready welcome. 

But why went not “our heart in pilgrimage?” Why 
sung we not that “tune which all things hear and fear ?” 
Why fed we not at “ the Church’s banquet,” on this “ ex- 
alted manna?” Whatanswer can we give more full and 
complete than this—* We esteemed him not ?” Our little 
regard of Jesus kept us from his throne: for true affec- 
tion would have availed itself of the ready aecess which 
prayer affords to the secret chamber of Jesus, and would 
thereby have taken her fill of loves. Can we now forsake 
the throne? No; our happiest moments are spent upon 
our knees, for there Jesus manifests himself to us. We 
prize the society of this best of friends,-for his divine 
countenance “ giveth such an inward decking to the house 
where he lodgeth, that proudest palaces have, catise to 
envy the gilding.” We celight to frequent the shades of 


16 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


secrecy, for there our Saviour allows us to unbosom our 
joys and sorrows, and roll them alike on him. 

O Lamb of God! our prayerlessness bids us confess 
that once we considered thee to have neither form nor 
comeliness. 

Furthermore, our avoidance of the people of God eon- 
firms the humiliating truth. We who now stand in the 
“ sacramental host of God’s elect,” glorying in the brother- 
hood of the righteous, were once “strangers and foreign- 
ers.” The language of Canaan was to our ear either an 
unmeaniag babble at which we scoffed, a harsh jargon 
which we sought not toimitate, or an “ unknown tongue ” 
above our powers of interpretation. The heirs of life 
were either despised as “earthen pitchers,” the work of 
the hands of the potter, or we removed from their society, 
conscious that we were not fit compeers for “the precious 
sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold.” Many have been 
the weary looks which we cast upon the time-piece when, 
in pious company, the theme has been too spiritual for 
our groveliing understanding; full often have we pre- 
ferred the friendship of the laughing worldling to that of 
the more serious believer. 

Need we ask the source of this dislike? the bitter 
stream is not like the river of Egypt, silent as to its 
source : it proclaims its vwn origin plainly enough ; and 
the ear of self-partiality cannot be deaf to the truthful 
sound—“ Ye loved not the servants, because ye esteemed 
not their master; ye dwelt not amid the brethren, for ye 
had no friendship towards the firstborn of the family.” 

One of the plainest evidences of alienation from God 
is a want of attachment to his people. In a greater or 
Jess degree this once existed in each of us. True, there 
were some Christians whose presence always afforded us 
pleasure; but we must be aware that our delight in their 
company was occasioned more by the affability of their 
manners, or the winning style of their address, than by 


Oy eh eel as Oa Sa eee ee 


9osom our 


us confess 
- form nor 


’ God eon- 
ind in the 
1e brother- 
id foreign- 
r either an 
rsh jargon 
n tongue ” 
irs of life 
ne work of 
eir society, 
ne precious 
have been 
yiece when, 
piritual for 
e we pre- 
r to that of 


the bitter 
as to its 
ough ; and 
e truthful 
re esteemed 
ren, for ye 
family.” 
n from God 
t creater or 
True, there 
afforded us 
vht in their 
ty of their 
ss, than by 


averted from the cross when Jesus himself was visibly 


_ the Saviour has been as fierce as a ravening wolf. In 


_ of Calvary or Gethsemane, this mad soul refused to see 


THE DESPISED FRIEND. 17 


—— 
—— 


the fact of their intrinsic excellence. We valued the gem 
for its setting, but a common pebble in the same ring 
would have equally engrossed our attention. The saints, 
as sainis, were not our chosen friends, nor could we say, 
“Tam a companion of all those that fear thee.” All hail, 
thou leader of the host! we boldly own that from the 
moment when we first loved thy person, all thy followers 
have been dear to us, there’s not a lamb amongst thy flock 
we would disdain to feed; thy servants may be mocked 
by contempt, persecuted by cruelty, branded with infamy, 
oppressed by power, humbled by poverty, and forgotten 
by fame; but to us they are the “ excellent of the earth,” 
and we are not ashamed to call them brethren. 

Such sentiments are the finest products of esteem for 
the Redeemer, and their former absence is conclusive 
evidence that we then “ esteemed him not.” We have no 
further need of aid in this self-condemnation. 

Broken Sabbaths start like warrior clansmen from the 
wild heath of neglected time; they point to the deserted 
sanctuary, for which they would execute a dread revenge 
did not the shield of Jesus cover us; for lo! their bows 
are stringed with neglected ordinances, and their arrows 
are despised messages of mercy. 

But wherefore these accusers? Conscience, the ranger 
of the soul, hath seen enough. He will affirm that he 
hath beheld the ear closed to the wooing voice of the 
friend of sinners; that full often the eyes have been 


set forth. Let him give in his own evidence. Hear him. 
He saith :—I have witnessed the barring of the heart to 
the entrance of Jesus; I have seen the whole man in arms 
to repair the breaches which a powerful minister had 
caused ; I have been present when the struggle against 


vain the sprinkled blood to rivet the attention—heedless — 


18 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


I 


_ the beauties of the Prince of Life, but rather spurned him 
from the heart which was his lawful throne. The sum 
and substance of my declaration is, “We esteemed him 
not.” 

Away then, O pride! we know ‘that “without the 
sovereign influence of God’s extraordinary and immediate 
grace, men do very rarely put off all thy trappings, till 
they who are about them put on their winding-sheet ;” * 
but if anght can lay thee in the grave, the retrospect of 
our treatinent of our loving Lord might avail to do it. 
Pause then, O Christian, and thus soliloquize: “I once 
scorned him who loved me with an everlasting love, I 
once esteemed him as a root out ofa dry ground. I served 
him not, I cared not for his blood, his cross, or his crown ; 
and yet I am now become one of his own children. Verily, 
to grace I will for ever sing :— 


** ¢ Great God of wonders ! all thy ways 
Are matchless, godlike, and divine, 
But the fair glories of thy face 
More godlike and unrivalled shine ; 
Who is a pardoning God like thee ? 
Or who hath grace so rich and free?’ ” 


II. We now enter upon an examination of the latent 
causes of this sin. When the disease is removed, it may 
be useful to learn its origin, that we may serve others and 
benefit ourselves. 

Our coldness towards the Saviour resulted primarily 
from the natural evil of our hearts, We can plainly dis- | 
cern why the dissolute and reprobate entertain but little — 
affection for purity and excellence: the self-same reason [4 
may be given for our disregard of the incarnation of virtue 
in the person of our Lord Jesus. Sin is a madness, dis- 
qualifying the mind for sober Judgment ; a blindness, ren- 
dering the soul incapable of appreciating moral beauty ; ; 


ery ~—~— ct — OD — =— sD 


* Clarendon, 


spurned him 
e, The sum 
steemed him 


without the 
d immediate 
‘appings, till 
ng-sheet ;” * 
retrospect of 
rail to do it. 
ze: “TI once 
sting love, I 
ind. I served 
or his crown ; 


dren. Verily, 


of the latent 
oved, it may 
e others and 


ed primarily 
plainly dis- 
in but little 
same reason 
ion of virtue 
nadness, dis- 
indness, ren- 
bral beauty ; 


a 


THE DESPISED FRIEND. 19 


it is in fact such a perversion of all the faculties, that 
under its terrible influence men will “call evil good, and 
good evil; they will put darkness for light, and light for 
darkness; bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter.” * To 
us in our fallen condition fiends otten appear more fair 
than angels, we mistake the gates of hell for the portals 
of bliss, and prefer the garnished lies of Satan to the eter- 
nal verities of the Most High. Revenge, lust, ambition, 
pride, and self-will, are too often exalted as the gods of 
man’s idolatry ; while holiness, peace, contentment, and 
humility, are viewed as unworthy of a serious thought. 
O sin, what hast thou done! or rather, what hast thou 
undone! Thou hast not been content to rob humanity 
of its crown, to drive it from its happy kingdom, to mar 
its royal garments, and despoil its treasure ; but thou hast 
done more than this! It sufficed not to degrade and dis- 
honour; thou hast even wounded thy victim ; thou hast 
blinded his eyes, stopped his ears, intoxicated his judg- 
ment, and gagged his conscience ; yea, the poison of thy. 
venomed shait hath poured death into the fountain. Thy 
malice hath pierced the heart of manhood, and thereby 
hast thou filled his veins with corruption and his bones 
with depravity. Yea, O monster, thou hast become a 
murderer, for thou hast made us dead in trespasses and 
sin ! 

This last word opens up the entire mystery ; for if we 
are spiritually dead, it is of course impossible for us to 
know and reverence the Prince of glory. Can the dead 
be moved to eestasies, or corpses excited to rapture? Ex- 
ercise your skill on yonder lifeless body. It is not yet 
become a carnival for worms. The frame is still complete, 
though lifeless. Bring hither lute and harp; let melodies 


+ most sweet, and harmonies unequalled, attempt to move 
the man to pleasure: he smileth not at the swelling strain, 


_ 


* Tsaiah v. 29, 


20 THE SAIND AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


i em 


he weepeth not at the plaintive cadence ; yea, could the 
orchestra of the redeemed pour forth their music, he would 
be deaf to the celestial charm. 

Will you assault the city by anotner gate? Place then 
before those eyes the choicest tlowers that e’er were grown 
since Eden’s plants were blasted. Doth he regard. the 
loveliness of the rose or the whiteness of the lily? Nay, 
the man knoweth no more of their sweetness than doth 
the water of Nilus of the lotus which it beareth on its 
bosom. Come, ye gales of Araby, and winds laden with 
the spicy odours of Ceylon; let the incense of fragrant 
gums, of frankincense and myrrh, smoke before him; yet, 
motionless as a statue, the nostril is* not distended, nor 
doth pleasure sit upon the lip. Aye, and ye may bring to 
your aid more powerful means. Ye may combine the 
crash of the avalanche, the roar of the cataract, the fury 
of the ocean, the howling of the winds, the rumbling of 
the earthquake, and the roll of the thunder: but these 
sounds, united into one godlike shout, could not arouse 
the slumberer from his fatal couch. He is dead, doth in 
one word solve the mystery. So also we, though quick- 
ened by the Holy Ghost, were once dead in sin, and hence 
“ we esteemed him not.” Here is the root of all our mis- 
deeds, the source of all our iniquity. 

When we are asked to point out the parent of light, we 
turn our finger to the sun above; and if the question be 
proposed, Whence cometh evil ? we point within us to 
an evil heart of unbelief which departeth from the liv- 
ing “Sod. 

The secondary causes of the folly which we once com- 
mitted lie very near the surface, and may repay a mo- 
ment’s observation. Self-esteem had much to do with our 
ill-treatment of “the sinner’s Friend.” Conceit of our 
own deserts made us indifferent to the claims of one who 
had procured for us a perfect righteousness. “The whole 
need not a physician ;” and we felt insulted by the lan- 


Se gor gS a eae 
- aes so 


——d 


a, could the 
sic, he would 


Place then 
> were grown 
» regard. the 
lily? Nay, 
s than doth 
areth on its 

laden with 
of fragrant 
re him ; yet, 
tended, nor 
nay bring to 
combine ‘the 
ct, the fury 
rumbling of 

but these 
not arouse 
ad, doth in 
ugh quick- 
, and hence 
all our mis- 


bf light, we 

uestion be 
rithin us to 
pm the liv- 


once com- 
Ppay a& mo- 
o with our 
eit of our 
bf one who 
The whole 
by the lan- 


THE DESPISED FRIEND. ot 


am i nn a nn ee 


guage of a gospel which spoke to us as undeserving be- 
ings. The Cross can have little power where pride con- 
ceals the necessity of a pardon ; a sacrifice is little valued 
when we are unconscious of our need thereof. In our 
own opinion we were once most noble creatures; the 
Pharisee’s oration would have sincerely enough emanated 
from us, A few little trifles there might be which were 
not quite carrect, but in the main we thought ourselves 
“rich and increaseu in goods ;” and even when under the 
powerful voice of law we were made to discern our pov- 
erty, we yet hoped by future obedience to reverse the sen - 

tence, and wcre ufterly unwilling to accept a salvation 
which required a renunciation of ail merit and simple trust 
on the crucified Redeemer. Never until all the work of our 
hands had been unravelled, and our fingers themselves had 
become powerless, would we cease from our own labour, 
and leaving the spider’s-web of man’s doings, array our- 
selves in the garment of free justification. No man will 
ever think much of Christ till he thinks little of himself. 
The lower our own views of ourselves become, the higher 
will our thoughts of Jesus -be raised ; and only when self- 
annihilation is complete will the Son of God be our “ all 
in all.” 

Vain glory and self-esteem are fruitful parents of evil. 
Chrysostom calls self-love one of the devil’s three great 
nets ; and Bernard styles it “an arrow which pierceth the 
soul through, and slays it; a sly, insensible enemy, not 
perceived.” Under the sad influence of this power we con- 
monly love him best who does us the most harm ; for 
the flatterer who feeds our vanity with pleasing cries of 
“Peace, peace,” is far more regarded than that. sincere 
friend, the blessed Jesus, who earnestly warns us of our 
ill estate. But when self-confidence is vemoved—when 
the soul is stripped by conviction—when the light of the 
spirit reveals the loathsome state of the heart—when the 
power of the creature fails, how precious is Jesus! As 


22 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


the drowning mariner clutches the floating spar—as the 
dying man looks to some great physician—as the crimi- 
nal values his pardon, so do v hen esteem the deliverer 
of our souls asthe Princeo: ©. kingsoftheearth. Seif- 
loathing begets an ardent passion for the gracious “ lover 
of our souls,” but self-complacency hides his glories from 
us. 
Love of the world has also its share in using this dear 
friend so ill. When he knocked at the door we refused 
him admittance, because another had already entered. 
We had each chosen another husband to whom we basely 
gave away our hearts. “Give me wealth,” said one. 
Jesus replied, “Here am I; I am better than the riches 
of Egypt, and my reproach is more to be desired than hid- 
den treasures.” The answer was, “Thou art not the 
wealth that I seek for; I pant not for an airy wealth like 
thine, O Jesus? Ido not care for a wealth above in the 
future—lI desire a wealth here in the present; I want a 
treasure that I can grasp now ; I wart gold that will buy 
me a house, a farm, and estate; I long for the sparkling 
jewel that will adorn my fingers ; I ask thee not for that 
which is hereafter; I will seek for that when years have 
passed away.” 

Another of us cried, “ I ask for health, for I am sick.” 
The best Physician appears, and gently promises, “I will 
heal thy soul, take away thy leprosy, and make thee 
whole.” “Nay, nay,” we answered, “I ask not for that, | 
O Jesus! I ask to have a body that is strong, that I may 
run like Asahel or wrestle like an Hercules; I long to be 
freed from pain of body, but I do not ask for health of 
soul, that is not what I require.” <A third implored for 
happiness. “Listen to me,” said Jesus, “my ways are 
ways of pleasantness, and all my paths are peace.” “Not 
the joy for which I sigh,” we hastily replied ; “I ask the 
cup filled to the brim, that I may drink it merrily ; I love 
the jovial evening, and the joyous day ; I want the dance, 


spar—as the 
is the crimi- 
he deliverer 
arth. Seif- 
‘ious “lover 
glories from 


ng this dear 
r we refused 
dy entered. 
m we basely 
.” said one, 
in the riches 
ed than hid- 
art not the 
y wealth like 
above in the 
3; I wanta 
hat will buy 

e sparkling 
not for that 

years have 


I am sick.” 
ises, “I will 
make thee 


hot for that, | 


that I may 
It long to be 
r health of 
plored for 
ways are 
e.” “Not 
“T ask the 
ily ; Ilove 
the dance, 


THE DESPISED FRIEND. 23 


—_— 


the revelry, and other fair delights of this world; give 
our hereafter to those who are enthusiasts—let them 
live on hope; I prefer this world and the present.” 

Thus did we each in a different fashion set our affection 
Fon things below, and despise the things above. Surely 
} he was no ill painter who thus sketched us to the life 
with his graphic pencil: “The interpreter took them 
apart again, and had them into a room where there was 
a man that could look no-ways but downwards, with a 
muckrake in his hand; there stood also one over his head 
with a celestial crown in his hand, and proffered him that 
crown for his muckrake; but the man did neither look 
up nor regard, but raked to himself the straws and dust 
of the floor.” 

While we love the world, “the love of the Father is 
not in us;”* nor the love of Jesus theson. Two masters 
we cannot serve. The world and Jesus never will agree, 
We must be able to sing the first portion of Madame 
Guion’s stanza before we can truly join in its concluding 
words: : 


“ Adieu ! ye vain delights of earth, 
Insipid sports, and childish mirth, 
I taste no sweets in you ; 
Unknown delights are in the Cross, 
All joy beside to me is dross ; 
And Jesus thought so too.” 


x It would be a great omission did we not observe that 

four ignorance of Christ was a main cause of our want of 
love towards him. We now see that to know Christ is 
sto love him. It is impossible to have a vision of his face, 
to behold his person, or understand his offices, without 
‘feeling our souls warmed towards him. Such is the 
‘beauty of our blessed Lord, that all men, save the spirit- 
ually blind, pay willing homage to Him. It needs no 
eloquence to set forth Christ to those who see him by 


* 1 John ii. 15, 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


+ Ce SS - ES P ~ 


faith, for in truth he is his own orator; his glory speaks 
his condescension speaks, his life speaks, and, above all, 
his death speaks; and what these utter without sound, 
the heart receiveth willingly. 

Jesus is “curtained from the sight of the gross world” | 
by the wilful unbelief of mankind, or else the sight of § 
him would have begotten veneration for him. Men “know 4 


not the gold which lies in the mine of Christ Jesus, or J 


surely they would dig in it night and day. They have || 


not yet discovered the pearl of great price, or they would 4 | 


have sold their all to buy the field wherein it lies, The 
person of Christ strikes eloquence dumb when it would 
describe him; it palsies the artist’s arm when with fai: 
colours he would portray him ; it would o’er-match the 
sculptor to carve his image even where it possible to chisel 
it in a massive block of diamond, There is nought in 
nature comparable to him. Before his radiance the bril- 3 


liance of the sun is dimmed; yea, nothing can compete e : 


with him, and heaven itself ‘blushes at its own plainness | 
of countenance when his “ altogether lovely ” person is] 
beheld. Ah, ye who pass him by without regard, it is well ” 
said by Rutherford, “Oh if ye knew him, and saw his 
beauty, your love, your heart, your desires, would close 
with him and cleave to him. Love, by nature, when it 
seeth, cannot but cast out its spirit and str ength upon 
amiable objects, and good things, and things love- worthy ; 
and what fairer thing is there ‘than Christ ?” The Jewish 
world crucified him because they knew not their king; 
and we rejected him because we had not seen his adap- 
tation to our wants, and believed not the love he bore ti 
our souls, We can all thus soliloquize with Augustine ;— 
“There was a great dark cloud of vanity before mine 
eyes, so that I could not see the sun of justice and the 
light of truth , I, being the son of darkness, was involve 
in 1 darkness : ‘ I loved my darkness, because I knew not? 
thy light; Twas blind, and loved my blindness, and did 


UR. THE DESPISED FRIEND, 25 
A ag (EES A 9 ——— 

his glory speaks. “alk from darkness to darkness; but Lord, thou art my 
cs, and, above all, tod, who hast led me from darkness and the shadow of 


eath; hast called me into this glorious light, and behold 


” 


see.” Those days of soul-eclipse are gone, but never can 


: without sound, 


ss 


the gross world” | e too much bewail them. Sad were those hours when 
else the sight of | e morning-star shone not, when the cross had no charms, 
him. Men know 74nd the glorious Redeemer no esteem ; could tears obliter- 
? Christ Jesus, or “ie them from the annals of the past, our eyes should 


mpty their cisterns ere our cheeks should be dry—could 
fayers recall them, we would besiege the throne with in- 
ssant supplications. They are gene, alas! beyond the 
m of even omnipotence to restore them ; but we rejoice 
| see their iniquity blotted out and their sin entirely 

ered, 


day. They have 9% 
jce, or they would | 
rein it lies. The © 
mb when it would 
n when with fair 
ald o’er-match the 
it possible to chisel 
‘here is nought in 
; radiance the bril- 
hing can compete 
t its own plainness 
lovely ” person 1s 
but regard, it is well 
him, and saw his” 
hesires, would close” 
py nature, when i” 
and strength upon: 
hinos love-worthy ; 
rist 2” The Jewis! 
hew not their king; 
l not seen his adap: 4 
the love he bore to % 
b with Augustine ;— 
vanity before mint 
of justice and the 
kness, was involve 
ecause I knew no 
y blindness, and did 


The river of sinful neglect of Jesus has doubtless other 
mabutary sources which we cannot now tarry to notice. 

yntemplation need not here wander in a maze, she hath 
path laid straight before her; unchain her feet and bid 
r conduct you over the field of memory, that with her 
u may count the other rills which fed this noxious 
eam. 


IIT. We come now to the practical part of our medita- 
n, and consider the emotions which ought to be excited 
it. 
irst, then, we think deep penitential sorrow will well 
ome us. As tears are the fit moisture for the grave, 
ashes are a fit crown for the head of mourning, so are 
uitential feelings the proper mementyes of conduct now 
saken and abhorred. We caunot understand the chris- 
nity of those men who can narrate their past history 
a kind of self-congratulation. We have met with 
ne who will recount their former crimes with as much 
sto as the old soldier tells his feats in arms. Such men 
even blacken themselves to render their ca:e more 
B 


26 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


worthy of regard, and glory in their past sins as if they 
were ornaments to their new life. To such we say, Not 
thus thought Paul ; when speaking to the Romans, he said, 
“whereof ye are now ashamed.” There are times when 
it is proper, beneficial, and praiseworthy for a converted 
man to tell the sad tale of his former life ; free grace is thus 
glorified, and divine power extolled, and such a story of 
experience may serve to bring about faith in others who 
think themselves too vile; but then let it be done in a 
right spirit, with expressions of unfeigned regret and re- 
pentance. We object not to the narration of the deeds of | 
our unregenerate condition, but to the mode in which it 
is too often done. Let sin have its monument, but let it ~ 
be a heap of stones cast by the hands of execration—not 
a mausoleum erected by the hand of affection. Give it 
the burial of Absalom—let it not sleep in the sepulchre of 
the kings. 

Can we, beloved, enter the dark vault of our former ig- 
norance without a feeling of oppressive gloom? Can we 
traverse the ruins of our misspent years without sighs of 
regret ? Can we behold the havoc of our guilt, and smile 
at the destruction? Nay. It is ours to bewail what we 
cannot efface, and abhor what we cannot retract. 

O fellow-heir of the kingdom, let us go together to the — 
throne of Jesus, that our tears may bathe his feet; that, 
like Mary, we may make our grief a worshipper of 
his person. Let us seek some alabaster-box of very pre- 
cious ointment wherewith to anoint him, or at any rate 
let our eyes supply a tribute of true gratitude. We ap- 
proach his sacred person, and on his feet we see the im- 
press of his love deep-cut by the piercing nails. Come 
now, my heart ! bewail that wound, for thou didst make ~ 
it; the soldier was but thy servant who didst thy bidding, 
but the cruel act was thine. Note weli his hands which 
firmly grasp thee; they too have their scars; and weep ai © 
the remembrance that these were made for thee. Fer 


VIOUR. THE DESPISED FRIEND. 27 


v—_—_—__-— 


ast sins as if they 
> such we say, Not 
he Romans, he said, 
are are times when 
thy for a converted 
e; free grace is thus 
ind such a story of 
aith in others who 
et it be done in a 
oned regret and re- 
tion of the deeds of 
s mode in which it 
nument, but let it 
of execration—not 
affection. Give it 
) in the sepulchre of 


thee he bore the ignominy of the cross, the pain of cruci- 
ixion. Turn not thine eyes away until the hole in the 
ide has been well pondered. See there that frightful 
ash, deep mine which reacheth to his heart. And this, 
ay soul, was done for thee! dost thou not love the suf- 
prer? Yea, thou dost, with a love as deep and bottom- 
pss as the ocean; but forget not that once thou didst des- 
ise him. Many a time hast thou slighted this gracious 
@riend; thy husband was once hated by thee ; thy beloved 
as often received contumely and scorn from thee. Not 
png ago thea didst mock, despise, andinsult him, Hard - 
yords hast thou spoken of him, and ill deeds hast thou 
@one to him. His wooings thou didst disregard, the ten- 
er offerings of love thou didst trample under foot, and 
he deep anguish which he endured for thee was in thine 
Bars an idle tale. What! are the fountains dry? When 
rill thy sorrow find better cause for coining itself in 
pars? Canst thou afford a silly story of a love-sick maid 
tear or two and shall not this—thyself and Jesus— 
nove thy soul? He loved, and thou didst hate; he died, 
et thou didst scoff his agonies; he saved thee, and yet 
hou didst refuse to be his child. O base ingratitude! 
Jlouds might be fit mournersto weep thee away in showers; 
t yet we are, oft hard as the granite rock, and cold as 
he mountain which storeth up its snow, which it might 
ell afford to lavish forth in rivers. We should long to 
el the sweet pleasure of repentance, for indeed it is no 
bmmon delight. Howe has excellently described the joy 
f penitential grief in his “ Delight in God ;”— 
“There is pleasure mingled with such tears, and with 
hose mournings which are not without hope, and which 
ow naturally and without force from a living principle 
ithin, as waters from their still freshly-springing foun- 
fain. When the soul finds itself unbound and set at 
iberty, when it can freely pour out itself to God, dissolve 
indly and melt before him, it doth it with regret only 


lt of our former ig- 7 
e gloom? Can we © 
rs without sighs of 7 
bur guilt, and smile 4 
to bewail what we 
ot retract. 
go together to the 
he his feet; that, 
a worshipper of 
br-box of very pre- 
im, or at any rate 
ratitude. We ap- 
eet we see the im- 
ing nails. Come 
r thou didst make 
didst thy bidding 
i his hands which 
BCars ; and weep at — 
e for thee, Fo 


a a De 


28 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


at what it hath done and been, not at what it is now 
doing, except that it can do it no more ; affecting even to | 
be infinite herein, while if yet sees it must be confined 
within some bounds. It loves to lie in the dust and abase 
itself; and is pleased with the humiliation, contrition, and © 
brokenness of heart which repentance towards God in- © 
cludes in it. So that as God is delighted with this 
sacrifice, so 7¢ is with the offering of it up to him. Many 
men apprehend a certain sweetness in revenge; such a 
one finds it only in this just revenge upon himself. How 
inexpressible a pleasure accompanies its devoting itself . 
to God, when bemoaning itself, and returning with weep- 
ing and supplication, it says, ‘ Now, lo! I come to thee, 
thou art the Lord my God, I have brought thee back thine 
own, what I had sacrilegiously alienated and stulen away, 
the heart which was gone astray, that hath been so long 
a vagabond and fugitive from thy blessed presence, service, 
and communion. ‘Take now the soul which thou hast 


made ; possess thine own right; enter upon it; stamp it 
with the entire impression of thine own seal, and mark 
it for thine. Other lords shall no more have dominion. 
What have I to do any more with the idols wherewith | 
was wont to provoke thee tojealousy ? I will now make 
mention of thy name, and of thine only. 1 bind mysel! 
to thee in everlasting bonds, in a covenant never to be 


999 


forgotten. 
Let not a libation of tears be the only offering at the 
shrine of Jesus; let ws also rejoice with joy unspeakable. 
If we have need to lament our sin, how much more to 
rejoice at our pardon! If our previous state moves us to 
icars, shall not our new condition cause our hearts to leap 
for joy? Yes, we must, we wi'l praise the Lord for his 
sovereign, distinguishing grace. We owe him an eternal 7 
song for this change in our position; he has made us to 
differ, and this from mere unmerited mercy, since we, like © 
others, “esteemed him not.” He certainly did not elect = 


VIOUR. 


at what it is now 


'; affecting even to | 
t must be contined @ 
the dust and abase © 


ion, contrition, and 
e towards God in- 
lighted with this 
up to him. Many 
1 revenge ; such a 
on himself. How 


its devoting itself . 


urning with weep- 
o! I come to thee, 
ht thee back thine 
dand stolen away, 
hath been so long 
d presence, service, 

which thou hast 
upon it; stamp it 
vn seal, and mark 
re have dominion. 
idols wherewith | 

I will now make 
y. IL bind myself 
enant never to be 


ly offering at the 
v joy unspeakable. 
w much more to 
state 1noves us tu 
our hearts to leap 

the Lord for his 
e him an eternal 
e has made us to 
rey, since we, like 
inly did not elect 


THE DESPISED FRIEND. 


ga 2 
ae Tee 


to the high dignity of union with himself because of 
ry love we had toward him, for we confess the very 
verse. Itis said of the writer’s sainted predecessor, Dr. 
ppon, that when asked why God chose his people, he 
lied, “Because he chose them ;” and when the question 
s repeated, he answered yet again, “ Because he did 
pose them, and if you ask mea hundred times I can give 
no other reason.” Verily it is “even so Father, be- 
se soit seemed good in thy sight.” Let our gratitude 
divine grace leap forth in praise; let our whole man — 
§ vocal to hishonour who has elected us in sovereignty, 
eemed us by blood, and called us by grace. 
Should we not also be moved to the deepest prostrution 
spirit at the remembrance of our guilt? Ought not 
subject of our present contemplation to be a stab in 
> very heart of pride? Come hither, Christian, and 
bugh now arrayed in the garments of salvation, behold 
gre thy former nakedness. Boast not of thy riches, re- 
Sinber how sorry a beggar once thou wast. Glory not 
thy virtues, they are exotics in thy heart ; remember 
deadly plants—the native growth of that evil soil. 
op thyself to the earth, and though thou canst not veil 
self with wings as angels do, let repentance and self- 
horrence serve thee instead thereof. Think not that 
mility is weakness; it shall supply the marrow of 
envth to thy bones. Stoop and conquer ; bow thyself, 
become invincible. The proud man has no power 
fer his fellows; the beasts of the forest tremble not at 
loftiness of the giraffe, but the crouching lion is the 
narch of the plain. He who esteeins himself but little, 
nds on a vantage-ground with his fellow-men. Like 
Eastern house, the heart has a Jowly entrance, and 
ry guest must bow his head ere he can cross the 
eshold. He who has felt his own ruin will not imagine 
y to be hopeless ; nor will he think them too fallen to 
worthy his regard. Though he may be a priest or 


ss naan eee 


30 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


—— =, 


Levite in the temple of his God, he will not feel degrade: 
if he stain his hands in binding up the wounds of the vie- 7 
tims of evil. Like the friend of publicans and sinners. he 
will seek out the sick who need a physician. Christianity 
has founded a colony for the outcasts of society. The © 
founder of Rome welcomed to his new-built city the dregs 
of all the nations of the earth; so let every Christian be- 
lieve that Zion’s inhabitants are to be gathered from 
haunts of sin and chambers of vice. How prone are we 
to forestall the damnation of men! How often do we 
write in our book of doom the names of many whom we 
afterwards discover to have been “ ordained unto eternal 
life!” The astronomer will believe that the most erratic 
comet will yet accomplish its journey, and revisit our 
sphere; but we give up those for lost, who have not 
randered one-half the distance from the centre of licht 
and life. We find an excuse for inaction in the fancied 
hopelessness of sinners; while fastidious delicacy, by the 
fear of pollution seeks to mask at once our indolence and 
pride. If we had right views of ourselves, we should 
judge none too base to be reclaimed, and should count it 
no dishonour to bear upon the shoulders of our sympathy, 
the most wandering of the flock. We have amongst us 
too much of the spirit of “Stand by, for I am holier than 
thou.” Those whom Jesus would have grasped by the 
hand, we will scarcely touch with a pair of tongs ; such 
is the pride of many professors, that they need but the 
name to be recognised at once as the true successors of the 
ancicnt Pharisees. If we were more like Christ, we shoul 
be more ready to hope for the hopeless, to value the 
worthless, and to love the depraved. The following anec: 
dote, which the writer received from the lips of an 
esteemed minister of the Church of England, may perhaps, 
as a fact, plead more forcibly than words. A clergyman, 
of a parish in Ireland, in the course of his visitations, had 
called upon every one of his flock with but one exception. 


THE DESPISED FRIEND. 31 


yIOUR. 


net oe Te 


This was 2 woman of most abandoned character, and he 
feared that by entering her house he might give occasion 
‘of offence to gainsayers, and bring dishonour upon his 
profession. One Sabbath he observed her among the fre- 

uenters of his church, and for weeks after he noticed her 
‘attention to the word of life. He thought, too, that amid 
the sound of the responses he could detect one sweet and 
earnest voice, solemnly confessing sin, and imploring 
mercy. The bowels of his pity yearned over this fallen 
daughter of Eve ; he longed to ask her if her heart were 
* indeed broken on account of sii , and he intensely desired 
)to speak with her concerning the abounding grace which, 
Phe hoped, had plucked her from the burning. ' Still the 
H same delicacy of feeling forbode him to enter the house ; 
time after time he passed her door with longing look, 
fanxious for her salvation, but jealous of his own honour 
This lasted for a length of time, but at last it ended. One 
day, she called him to her, and with overflowing tears 
which well betrayed her bursting heart, she said, “ O sir / 
af your Master had been in this village half as long as 
Syou have, he would have called to see me long ago; for 
surely I am the chief of sinners, and therefore have most 
mecd of his mercy.” We may conceive the melting of the 
pastor's heart, when he saw his conduct thus gently con- 
edemned by a comparison with his loving Master. From 
ethat time forth he resolved to neglect none, but to gather 
even the “outcasts of Israel.” Should we, by our medi- 
tation, be constrained to do likewise, we shall have de- 
“rived no little benefit, and possibly some soul may have 
‘reason to bless God that our thoughts were directed into 
such a channel. May the gracious Spirit, who has pro- 
mised to “ lead us into all truth” by his holy influences, 
sanctify to our profit this visit to the house of our nativity, 
‘exciting in us all those emotions which are congenial to 
the subject, and leading us to actions in harmony with 
the grateful retrospect. 


ll not feel degrade 4 
wounds of the vic. 7 
ans and sinners. he 4 
ician, Christianity 4% 
s of society. The | 
built city the dregs 
»very Christian be- 
be gathered from 
How prone are we 
tow often do we 
of many whom we 
lained unto eternal 
at the most erratic 
y, and revisit ow 
st, Who have not 
the centre of Licht 
ion in the fancied 
us delicacy, by the 
our indolence and 
‘selves, we should 
nd should count it 
8 of our sympathy, 

have amongst us 
r 1 am holier than 
re grasped by the 
ir of tongs ; such 
hey need but the 
e successors of the 
Christ, we shoul 
less, to value thie 
he following anec: 
1 the lips of an 
land, may perhaps, 
ds. A clergyman. 
his Visitations, had 
but one exception 


ii 
ei 
5 * 
ee 
ny 
ie 


THF SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


——w 


LO THE UNCONVERTED READER. 


My FRrIenpd,—Although this book was written chiefly 
for the Lord’s family, yet it may please the gracious Spirit 
to bless it to thine own soul. With this desire let me 
seriously entreat thee well to consider the condition thou 
art in. Thou art one who esteems notJesus, This is a 
state, sad in itself by reason of thy loss of present delight 
in him; but how much more terrible if thou ‘dost re- 
member the eternal consequences of refusing Christ. He 
is thine only real hope, and yet thou rejected_him. Thy 
salvation can only come through him, and yet thou dost 
~rilfully remove thyself from him. A few more years 
will Ling thee to the threshold of another world. It will 
go ill with thee if thou dst still “neglect this great sal- 
vation.” Death will soon loosen thy girdle and break 
thy strength. What wilt thou do in the last hour of ex- 
tremity without a Saviour? Judgment will follow on 
the heels of dissolution ; and when the insulted Saviour 
sits upon the judgment-seat, how wilt thou face him ? 
Wilt thou be able to bear the fury of his incensed ma- 
jesty ? As oil, the softest of substances, doth burn the 
most fiercely, so doth love when itis angered. I bid thee 
bethink thyself, how thou wilt endure his ire. The eyes 
which once flowed with tears shall flash lightnings on 
thee. The hands which were nailed to the cross of re- 
demption shall seize the thunderbolts of vengeance, and 
the voice which once in melting tones said, °« Come ye 
weary,” shall pronounce in thundering words the sen- 
tence, “Depart, ye cursed !” 


JR. 


es | es oS 


ADER, 


written chiefly 
» gracious Spirit 
is desire let me 
-condition thou 
esus. Thisisa 
present delight 
’ thou ‘dost re- 
ing Christ. He 
eted_him. Thy 
yet thou dost 
ew more years 
‘world. It will 
this great sal- 
rdle and break 
ast hour of ex- 
will follow on 
sulted Saviour 
hou face him ? 
incensed ma- 
doth burn the 
red. I bid thee 
ire. The eyes 
lightnings on 
he cross of re- 
rengeance, and 
id, “Come ye 
yords the sen- 


THE DESPISED FRIEND. 33 


———— 


Art thou so besotted as to venture on so hazardous a 
course- as continued rebellion ? Dost thou wish to lie 
down in torment, and make thy bed in hell ? 

O my brother-immortal! tarry here anu ponder thy 
woeful estate; and may the Spirit now manifest to thee 
thy lost and helpless condition, that, so stripped of self, 
thou mayest seek my Master’s righteousness. He says :— 
“T love them that love me, and they that seek me early 

shall find me.” 


Ae. 
CN GS OAT LT AAT AB OE SB : 


tes ae 8 

— mR silts FF J PS = 

, a : ys % ry 7) 

h a if ie 
a g Vii f 


IL, 


Eaithiul Wounds, 


‘* Faithful are the wounds of a friend.”—Prov,. xxvii. 6, 


HE death in sin, which we so much Jament- 
ed in the last chapter, is now happily a thing 
of the past with us. Divine grace has quick- 
ened us; heavenly infiuence has preserved us; 

(cs and faithful promises have secured our spirit- 

XS) ual immortality. It is now our delightful duty to 

A adore the love which, even when we were dead in 

sins, was still planning deeds of kindness towards 
us; and which in its own appointed time enlisted Om- 
nipotence in our behalf, whereby we received life from the 
dead. 

In order to raise our hearts heavenward, and tune our 
lips to the psalmody of praise, let us, by the Spirit’s grae- 
ious assistance, review the way whereby the Lord led us 
to himself. Like ourselves, many of our readers will ad- 
mit that the first they ever knew of Jesus was in the cha- 
racter of a faithful friend wounding us for sin. Though 
at that time we knew not that love was mixed with everr 
blow, yet now we perceive it to have been the kind plas 
of a gracious Saviour to bring us to himself. The Roman 
emperor conferred freedom on a slave by smiting him on 


i} 


OVe XXvii. 6, 


>» much Jament- 
happily a thing 
race has quick- 
as preserved us; 
ured our spirit- 
ightful duty to 
e were dead in 
indness towards 
e enlisted Om- 
ed life from the 


, and tune our 
e Spirit’s grae- 
the Lord led us 
readers will ad- 
was in the cha- 
rsin. Though 
xed with everr 
the kind plas 
. The Roman 
smiting him en 


FAITHFUL WOUNDS. 


—_ 


the ear; and Jesus sets us at liberty by a blow upon our 
heart. 


I. We shall dwell first upon the fact that all saved 
persons have been wounded. Neither in the Church mili- 
tant nor the host triumphant is there one who received a 
new heart, and was reclaimed from sin, without a wound 
from Jesus. The pain may have been but slight, and the 
healing may have been speedy; but in each case there 
has been a real bruise, which required a heavenly physi- 
cian to heal. 

1. With some, this wounding commeneed in early life; 
for as soon as infancy gave place to childhood, the rod 
was exercised upon certain of us. We can remember 
early convictions of sin, and apprehensions of the wrath 
of God on its account. An awakened conscience in 
our most tender years drove us to the throne of mercy. 
Though we knew not the hand which chastened our spirit, 
yet did we “bear the yoke in our youth.” How many 
were “the tender buds of hope” which we then put forth, 
alas! too soon to be withered by youthful lusts; how 
often were we “scared with visions” and terrified with 
dreams, while the reproof of a parent, the death of a play- 
fellow, or a solemn sermon made our hearts melt within 
us! Truly, our goodness was but “as the morning cloud 
and the early dew;’” but who can tell how much each of 
these separate woundings contributed toward that killing 
by the law, which proved to be the effectual work of God? 
In each of these arousings we discover a gracious purpose; 
we trace every one of these awakenings to his hand who 
watched over our path, determined to deliver us from our 
sins. The small end of that wedge which has since been 
driven home, was iaserted during these youthful hours of 
inward strife; the ground of our heart-was then endur- 
ing a ploughing preparatory to the seed, 


36 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


— —————  —— - 


Let none despise the strivings of the Spirit in the 
hearts of the young; let not boyish anxieties and juve- 
nile repentances be lightly regarded. He incurs a fearful 
amount of guilt who in the least promotes the aim of the 
Evil One by trampling upon a tender conscience ina 
child. No one knows the age of the youngest child in 
hell; and therefore none can guess at what age children 
become capable of conversion. We at least can bear our 
testimony to the fact that grace operates on some minds 
at a period almost too early for recollection. Nor let it 
be imagined that the feelings of the young are slight and 
superficial—they are frequently of the deepest: character. 
The early woundings of the Saviour are made upon hearts 
not yet rendered callous by worldliness and sensuality. 
The Christian whose lot it was to be smitten in his child- 
hood, will well remember the deep searchings of heart 
and the keen convictions of soul which he endured. 

O beloved, how much have we to bless our Jesus for, 
and how much for which to reprove ourselves! Did we 
not stifle our consience, and silence the voice of reproof ? 
Were we not deaf to the warning voice of our glorious 
Jesus? When he smote us sorely, we returned not to 
kiss his rod, but were as refractory as the bullock un- 
accustomed to the yoke. Our most solemn vows were only 
made to be broken; our earnest prayers ceased when the 
outward pressure was removed; and our partial reforma- 
tions passed away like dreams of the night. Blessed 
be his name, he at last gave us the effectual blow of 
grace; but we must for ever stand in amazement at the 
patience which endured our obstinacy, aud persevered in 
its design of love. 

2. Many of the Lord’s beloved ones have felt the wounds 
to be exceedingly painful. There are degrees in the bit- 
terness of sorrow for sin; all have not the same horrible 
apprehensions of destruction; but some there be who 
bave drank the very wormwood -and gall of repentance. 


Spirit in the 
ies and juve- 
curs a fearful 
he aim of the 
mscience ina 
gest child in 
age children 
can bear our 
1 some minds 
Nor let it 
we slight and 
est: character. 
e upon hearts 
d sensuality. 
. in his child- 
inos of heart 
ndured. 
our Jesus for, 
es! Did we 
e of reproof ? 
our glorious 
rned not to 
bulloek un- 
ws were only 
ed when the 
ial reforma- 
it. Blessed 
al blow of 
ment at the 
rsevered in 


the wounds 
5 in the bit- 

e horrible 
bre be who 
repentance. 


FAITHFUL WOUNDS, 


Usually, such persons have been great sinners previously 
or become great saints in after life. They love much 
because they feel that much has been forgiven; their 
fearful bondage increases their gratitude for glorious lib- 
erty; and the wretchedness of their natural poverty en- 
hances their estimation of the riches of Jesus. The painful 
process is thus a gainful one; but when it is endured it 
is indeed an exceeding fiery furnace—an oven that burn- 
eth with vehement heat. He who hath had his feet fast 
in the stocks of conviction will never forget it till his 
dying day. Well do some of us call to mind the season 
when our true Friend smote our heart, with what we 
then thought the hand of a cruel one. Our mirth was 
turned into mourning, our songs to lamentations, our 
laughter into sighing, and our joys to misery. Black 
thoughts haunted our benighted soul—dreary images of 
woe sat upon the throne of our imagination—sounds akin 
to the wailings of hell were frequent in our ears, united] 

making our entire man so full of agony that it could be 
compared to nothing but the portal of hell. During this 
period, our prayers were truly earnest when we could 
pray; but at times a sense of tremendous guilt bound 
our lips, and choked our utterance. Now and then a 
faint gleam of hope lit up the scene for a moment, only 
to incréase the gloom upon its departure. The nearer we 
approached to our Lord, the more sternly (we thought) 
he repelled us; the more earnest our attempts at amend- 
ment, the more heavy the lash fell upon our shoulders. 
The law grasped us with iron hand, and smote us with 
the scourge of vengeance ; conscience washed the quiver- 
ing flesh with brine; and despondency furnished us with 
a bed of thorns, upon which our poor mangled frame 
found a hard couch. By night we dreamed of torment, by 
day we almost felt its prelude. In vain did we ask Moses 
to propitiate an angry God; in vain did we attempt by 


38 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


vows to move his pity: “ the Breaker” * broke our hearts 
with his heavy hammer, and seemed intent to make our 
agonies intolerable. We dared not touch the hem of his 
garment, lest “ Depart from me!” should be the only 
word he would afford us, A fearful looking-for of judg- 
ment and of fiery indignation wrought in us all manner 
of fears, suspicions, tremblings, despondings, and despair- 
ings. 

Old Burton was no ill limner-when he thus painted the 
soul under the pressure of a burden of guilt :—* Fear takes 
away their content, and dries the blood, wasteth the mar- 
row, alters their countenance, ‘even in their greatest de- 
lights—singing, dancing, feasting—they are still (saith 
Lemnius) tortured in their souls. It consumes them to 
nought. ‘I am like a pelican in the wilderness (saith 
David of himself, temporarily afflicted): an owl, because 
of thine indignation.’ f ‘My heart trembleth within me, 
and the terrors of death have come upon me; fear and 
trembling are come upon me, We., at death’s door,” ‘Their 
soul abhorreth all manner of meat. { Their sleep is (if 
it be any) unquiet, subject to fearful dreams and terrors. 
Peter, in his bonds, slept secure, for he knew God pro- 
tected him. Tully makes it an argument of Roscius 
Amerinus’ innocency (that he '-*"led not his father) because 
he so securely slept. Those martyrs in the primitive 
Church were most cheerful and merry in the midst of 
their persecutions ; but it is far otherwise with these men : 
tossed in a sea, and that continually, without rest or in- 
termission, they can think of nought that is pleasant ; 
‘their conscience will not let them be in quiet ;’ in per- 
petual fear and anxiety, if they be not yet apprehended, 
they are in doubt still, they shall be ready to betray 
themselves, As Cain did, he thinks every man will kill 
him ; and ‘roar for the grief of heart,’ § as David did, as 


*Mic. ii, 13.  +Ps. cii. 6, 10; lv. 4. Ps. cvii. 18. § Ps. xxxv iii.8, 


JR. 


yroke our hearts 
nt to make our 
the hem of his 
ld be the only 
ing-for of judg- 
1 us all manner 
vs, and despair- 


hus painted the 
:—“ Fear takes 
asteth the mar- 
eir greatest de- 
are still (saith 
sumes them to 
‘ilderness (saith 
un owl, because 
leth within me, 
1 me; fear and 
’s door.” ‘Their 
heir sleep is (if 
ms and terrors. 
new God pro- 
ent of Roscius 
father) because 
the primitive 
the midst of 
ith these men: 
out rest or in- 
nt is pleasant ; 
quiet ;’ in per- 
t apprehended, 
ady to betray 
man will kill 
David did, as 


§ Ps. xxxv iii.8, 


FAITHFUL WOUNDS. 39 


——- — 


Job did.* ‘Wherefore is light given to him that is in 
misery, and life to them that have a heavy heart ? Which 
long for death ; and if it come not, search it more than 
treasures, and rejoice when they can find the grave,’ 
They are generally weary of their lives: a trembling 
heart they have, a sorrowful mind, and little or no rest. 
Terror wbique tremor, timor wndique et undique terror : 
‘tears, terrors, and affrights, in all places, at all times 
and seasons. Cibum et potum pertinaciter aversantur 
multi, nodum in scirpo queritantes, et culpam imagin- 
' antes wbi nulla est, as Wierus writes, +‘ they refuse many 
of them meat and drink, cannot rest, aggravating still 
_and supposing grievous offences where there are none.’ 
God’s heavy wrath is kindled in their souls, and notwith’ 
‘standing their continual prayers and supplications to- 
' Christ Jesus, they have no release or ease at all, but a 
> most intolerable torment, and insufferable anguish of con- 
* science; and that makes them, through impatience, to 
} murmur against God many times, to think hardly of him, 
' and even, in some cases, seek to offer violence to them- 
selves. In the morning they wish for evening, and for 
© morning in the evening ; for the sight of their eyes which 
they see, and fear of heart.” ¢ 

Hart knew the deep woundings of this faithful Friend ; 
| witness the following lines: 


‘*The Lord, from whom I long blackslid, 
First checked me with some gentle stings ; 
Turned on me, look’d, and softly chid, 
And bade me hope for greater things. 


*¢ Soon to his bar he made me come 
Arraign’d, convicted, cast, I stood, 
Expecting from his mouth the docm 
Of those who trample on his bl: od. 


‘¢Pangs of remorse my conscience tore, 
Hell open’d hideous to my view ; 


Job xx.3, 21, 22, &. +De Lamiis, lib. iii. c. 7. t Deut. xxviii, 68, 66 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


And what f only heard before, 
I found, by sad experience, true. 


*¢Oh ! what a dismal state was this, 
What horrors shook my feeble frame ! 
But, brethren, surely you can guess, 
For you, perhaps, have felt the same.” 


Doubtless some of our readers will cry out against 
such a description as being too harsh; our only answer 
is, we have felt these things in a measure, and we testify 
what we do know. We do not for one moment teac!, 
that all or that many are thus led in a path strewn with 
horrors, and shrouded in gloom; but we hope to be ac- 
knowledged, by those who have experienced the same, to 
have uttered no strange thing, but the simple tale, unex- 
aggerated and unadorned. We need no better evidences 
to convince all Christian men cf our truthfulness than those 
with which our own pastorate has furnished us. Many 
have we seen in this condition; and we hope that not a 
few have been, by our instrumentality, led into the lib- 
berty wherewith Christ makes men free. 

Such terrible things are not necessary to true repen- 
tance, but they do at times accompany it. Let the man 
who is now floundering in the slough of Despond take 
heart, for the slough lieth right in the middle of the way, 
and the best pilgrims have fallen into it. Your case, O 
soul under spiritual distress, is by no means singular ; and 
if it.were so, it would not be necessarily desperate, for 
Omnipotence knoweth nothing of impossibilities, and 
grace stayeth not for our demerits, A dark cloud is no 
sign that the sun has lost his light; and dark black con- 
victions are no arguments that God has laid aside his 
mercy. Destruction and wrath may thunder, but mercy 
can speak louder than both, One word from our Lord 
can still the waves and winds. Get thee beneath the 
tree of life,and not a drop of the shower of wrath will 
fall on thee, Fear not to go, for the cherubims which 


ame,” 


| ery out against 
our only answer 
re, and we testify 
ne moment teach 
path strewn with 
we hope to be ac- 
‘need the same, to 
simple tale, unex- 
» better evidences 
fulness than those 
lished us. Many 
e hope that not a 
led into the lib- 
‘y to true repen- 
t. Let the man 
of Despond take 
iddle of the way, 
t. Your case, O 
ns singular ; and 
y desperate, for 
possibilities, and 
dark cloud is no 
dark black con- 
ws laid aside his 
nder, but mercy 
from our Lord 

ee beneath the 
by of wrath will 
1erubims which 


4) 


FAITHFUL WOUNDS. 


—— 


you see are not guards to prevent your approach, but 
ministers who will welcome your coming. Oh! sit not 
down in sullen despair, harden not thine heart, for it is a 
friend that wounds thee. He has softened thee in the 
furnace; he is now welding thee with his hammer. 
Let him slay thee, but do thou still trust in him. — If he 
had meant to destroy thee, he would not have showed thee 
such things as these: love is in his heart when chiding is 
on his lips; yea, his very words of reproof are so many 
= tokens for good.” A father will not lift his hand against 
another man’s child, but he exercises discipline upon his 
(own; even so the Lord your God chastens his own, but 
reserveth retribution for the children of wrath in another 
state of being. Bethink thee, also, that it is no small 
‘mercy to feel thy sin; this proves that there is no morti- 
fication in thy frame, but life is there. To feel is an evi- 
dence of life; and spiritual sorrow is a clear proof of 
life in the soul. Moreover, there are thousands who 
would give worlds to be in the same condition as thou 
art; they are grieving because they do not have those 
very feelings which are in thy case thy burden and 
plague. Multitudes envy thee thy groans, thy tears 
md meltings; yea, some advanced saints look at thee 
vith admiration, and wish that their hearts were as 
ender as thine. Oh! take courage; the rough usage of 
o-day is an earnest of loving dealing by-and-bye. It is 
n this manner the sheep is brought into the fold by the 
Marking of the dog; and in this fashion the ship is com- 
delled by the storm to make for the nearest haven. ly 
to Jesus, and believe his grace. 
| 38, A portion of the redeemed have had this season of 
vounding protracted for along time. It was not one 
eavy fall of the rod, but stroke after stroke, repeated for 
Months, and even years, in continual succession, John 
Bunyan was for many years an anxious and desponding 
Becker of mercy ; and thousands more have trodden the 
Cc 


mr 


“apa ih eA POSTE 


See 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


valley of darkness for as longa time. Winters are not a 
usually long in our favoured clime, but some years have | 
seen the earth covered with snow and fettered in ice for 
many adreary month ; so also many souls are soon cheered 
by the light of God’s countenance, but a few find, to their | 
own sorrow, that at times the promise tarries. When th 
sun sets we usually see him in the morning; but Paul, | 
when in a tempest at sea, saw neither sun, moon, nor stars, 
for three days: many a tried soul hath been longer than © 
this in finding light. All ships do not make speedy Voy: | 
ages: the peculiar build of the vessel, the winds, the | 
waves, and the mistakes of the captain, all affect the time | 
of the journey. Some seeds send forth their germs in a 
few days; others abide long in darkness, hidden under 
the clods. The Lord can, when it is his good pleasure, 
send conviction and comfort as rapidly in succession a 
the flash of lightning and the clap of thunder ; but at times 
he delays it for purposes which, though we know not | 
now, we shall know hereafter. Men shall not have an_ 
Easter until they have had Lent ; but God’s Lents are not 
all of the same duration. Let none, then, foolishly imagine | 
that they have entered a long lane which will have no 
turning ; let them consider how long they were in sin, 
and the »y will have little cause to complain that they are 
so long in humiliation. When they remember their own 
ignorance, they will not think they are detained too long 
in the school of penitence. No man has any right : 
murmur because he is waiting a little for the King o 
mercy; for if he considereth what he waits for, he will 
see it to be well worthy of a thousand years’ delay. God 
may say, “ Z'o-day if ye will hear my voice;” but thou, 
O sinner, hast no right to demand that he should hea 
thine at all, much less to-day. Great men often have 
petitioners in their halls, who will wait for hours, and” 
come again and again to obtain promotion : surely, the 
God of heaven should be waited for by them that seek 


FAITHFUL WOUNDS. 


ee ee 


m. Thrice happy is he that getteth an early interview, 
ad doubly blest is he who getteth one at all. Yet it 
des at times seem hard to stand at a door which opens. 
bt to repeated knocking—‘ hope deferred maketh the 
art sick:” and it may be, some reader of this volume 
driven to doubt the eventual result of his strivings and 
Sayers; he may be crying, “ My life is spent with grief, 
d my years with sighing.” 


Winters are not @ 

t some years have] 
fettered in ice for | 
als are soon cheered 7 
a few find, to their 
tarries. When the 
orning; but Paul, 
un, moon, nor stars, 
h been longer than 
/make speedy voy- 
el, the winds, the 
1, all affect the time 
h their germs in a 
1ess, hidden under © 
his good pleasure, ~ 
y in succession as 
under ; but at times 
gh we know not @ 
shall not have an] 
God’s Lents are not ~ 
n, foolishly imagine | 
1ich will have no 
they were in sin, 
plain that they are 
member their own 
b detained too long 
has any right to 
for the King oi 
vaits for, he will 
years’ delay. God — 
oice;” but thou, 
t he should hear 
men often have 
it for hours, and” 
btion: surely, the— 
them that seek 


‘“ How oft have these bare knees been bent to gain 
The slender alms of one poor smile in vain ? 
How often tir’d with the fastidious light 
Have my faint lips implor’d the shades of night ? 
How often have my nightly torments pray’d 
For ling’ring twilight, glutted with the shade ? 
Day worse than night, night worse than day appears ; 
In fears I spend my nights, my days in tears ; . 
I moan unpitied, groan without relief, 

There is no end or measure of my grief. 

The branded slave, that tugs the weary oar, 
Obtains the Sabbath of a welcome shore ; 

His ransom’d stripes are heal’d ; his native soil 
Sweetens the mem’ry of his foreign toil ; 

But ah! my sorrows are not half so blest ; 

My labours find no point, my pains no rest : 

I barter sighs for tears, and tears for groans, 
Still vainly rolling Sisyphzean stones.” 


bse thy complaint, O mourner, the angel is on his way, 
faith shall quicken his flight; while thou art yet 
aking he hears, yea, before thou callest again, he 
y answer thee. 

» Divine sovereignty displays itself in the manner 
ereby souls are brought to Jesus; for while many, as 
we have said, are smitten with deep wounds, there are 
Bhaps a larger number whose smartings are less severe, 
their suffering far less acute. Let us never make 
logies for the superficial religion too common in the 
sent day; above all, let us never lead others to mis- 
e fancies for realities, and evanescent feelings for en- 


44 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


during workings of g grace. We fear that too many are de 
luded with a faise religion, which will be utterly consume 
when the fire shall try all things; and we solemnly wan 
our readers to rest short of nothing less than a real ex§ 
perience of grace within, true repentance, deep selff 
abhorrence, and complete subjection to salvation by graci 
Yet we do believe and know that some of the Lord 
family are, by his marvellous kindness, exempted from th 
exceeding rigour of the terrors of Sinai, and the exces 
sive oviefs engendered by the working of theLaw. Gog 
openeth many hearts with gentle picklocks, while wit 
others he useth the crow-bar of terrible judgments. Tih 
wind of the Spirit, which bloweth where it listeth, als 
bloweth how it pleaseth; it is oftentimes a gentle ¢ cali 
not always a hurricane. When the lofty palm of Zeilale ' 
putteth forth its flower, the sheaths burst with a repowig 
which shakes the for est, but thousands of other flowers 
equal value open in the morning, and the very dew-dro;, 
hear no sound ; so many souls blossom in mercy, ania 
the world hears neither whirlwind nor tempest. Short 
ers frequently fall upon this earth too gently to be hea 
though truly at other seasons the rattling drops proclait 
them ; grace also “droppeth, like the gentle dew frov 
heave en,” on souls whom Jesus would favour, and the 
know nothing of heavy hail and drenching torrents, 

Let none doubt their calling because it came not wit 
sound of the trumpet; let them not sit down to measw. 
their own feelings by those of other men, and because the 
are not precisely the same, at once conclude that they a 
no children of the kingdom: No two leaves upon a tree a 
precisely alike—variety i is the rule of nature; the line 
beauty runs not in one undeviating course; and in yg 
the same rule holds good. Do not, therefore, desire ai 
other man’s repentance, or thy brother's apprehensions 
wrath, Be not wishful to try the depth of the cavern 
misery, but rather rejoice that-thou hast a partial imm 


Teme 


peta ee er 


SS ererese ron 


re tee 
ema ere ees Tr 


46 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


accordance with the state of the soul during the operations 
of conviction, for then it discerns not Jesus, and knows# 
nothing of his love. A faint idea of his saving powerp 
may arise, but it is only the hush between the succeeding I 


gusts of wind, There is an atonement, but the tried) 


conscience rejoices not therein, since the blood has never 
been applied ; HE is able to save unto the uttermost, but 
since the man has not come unto God by him, he as yet 
participates not in the salvation. Nevertheless, an un- 
seen Jesus is a true Jesus; and when we see him not, he 
is none the less present, working all our works in us 
We would insist strongly on this point, because a very 
large number of mourning sinners ascribe their sorrow to 
any source but the right one. 

1.—We know thoseat present in theprison-house of ccn: 
viction who believe themselves to be tormented by the 
devil, and ere haunted by the dreadful thought that hei 
about to devour them, since hell seeins to have begun in 
their souls. May the sacred Comforter render our wor 
profitable to a heart so exercised. It is not an evil one 
who convinces the soul of sin, although the troublei 


spirit is prone to impute its arousings to the machination ~ 


of the devil. It is never the policy of the Prince ¢ 
darkness to disturb his subjects ; he labours to make then 
self-satisfied and content with their position ; spiritui 
uneasiness he looks upon with most crafty suspicion 


since he sees therein the cause of desertion from his evi — 


army. We do not assert that none of the terrors whic 
accompany conviction are the works of the devil, for w 
believe they are; but we maintain that the inward dis 
turbance which originates the commotion is a work ¢ 
love—-a deed of divine compassion, and comes from 1 
other fountain than eternal affection. The dust whi 


surrounds the chariot may arise from beneath, but tli. 
chariot itsclf is paved with the love of heaven. Th 


doubts, the despairings, and the hellish apprehensio 


- 
A 


FAITHFUL WOUNDS. 


VIOUR. 


— ———— e 


may be the work of Diabolus, but the real attack is 
headed by Emmanuel, and it is from very fear that the 
true assault may be successful that Satan attempts 
another. Jesus sends an army to drive us to himself, and 
then the prince of the powers of the air dispatches a host 
to cut off our retreat to Calvary. So harassed is the 
mind when thus beseiged, that like the warriors in old 
Troy, it mistakes friends for foes, not knowing how to dis- 
cern them in the darkness and confusion. Let us labour 
/a moment to point out the helmet of Jesus in the battle 
that his blows may be distinguished from those of a cruel 
one. 

The experience which we have pictured leads us to ab- 
hor sin. Can Satan be the author of this? Is he become 
‘a lover of purity, orcan an unclean spirit be the father of 
such a godly feeling? An adept in sin himself, will he 
seek to reveal its vileness? If indeed it delights him to 
isee a soul unhappy here, would he not far rather allow a 
present bliss, in the malicious prospect of a certain future 
woe for his victim ? We believe Satan to be exceedingly 
wise, but he would be penny wise and pound foolish if 
he should inflict a tempc a y torment on the sinner here, 
and so by bis over haste lose his great object of ruining 
the man forever. Devils may drive swine down a steep 
place into the sea; but they never influenced swine to 
bemoan their ccndit on, and beg to be made sheep. Satan 
might carry Jesus toa pinnacle of the Temple to tempt 
im; but he never carried a publican to the house of 
prayer to smite on his breast and cry, “God le merciful 
to measinner! Nothing which leads to Jesus can be of 
whe Evil One, by this we may judge whether our inward 
rouble be of God or no. That which draws us to Jesus 
math something of Jesus in it: the waggons which fetch 
as to our Joseph may have rumbling wheels, but they are 
sent by Him. When our enemy cannot hinder the voice 
sof God from being heard in the heart, he mingleth there- 


luring the operation 
Jesus, and knows? 
his saving power# 
veen the succeeding @ 
ent, but the tried 
he blood has never™ 
othe uttermost, bu 
by him, he as ye 
evertheless, an un-/7 
we see him not, he 
our works in wie 
nt, because a very % 
ribe their sorrow to 


= 


prison-house of ccn- 
- tormented by th 
1 thought that hei 
s to have begun in’ 
ar rende1 our word 
is not an evil on 
bough the troubled: 
to the machination 
of the Prince ¢ 
tbours to make theu 
position ; spiritua 
t crafty suspicion 
ertion from his evi 
the terrors whic 
bf the devil, for wi 
at the inward dis 
otion is a work ¢ 
nd comes from ni 
The dust whi” 


48 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


ee 


TES eae 


with such horrid yellings and howlings that the coming 
sinner is in doubt whether the voice comes from heaven 
or hell; howbeit, the question may be answered in this 
manner—if it be a harsh, reproving voice which is heard, 
then Satan is angry, and is but counterfeiting, to prevent 
the word of God from having eftect ; but ifit be a sweet 
voice seeking to draw the soul from an earnest aad thor- 
ough repentance, then it cometh wholly from hell. O 
sinner, let a friend warn thee of the syren-song of a smil- 
ing devil—it will be thine eternal shipwreck if thou dost 
not seal thine ears, and neglect his enchanting music; but 
on the other hand, be not afraid of the devil when he 
howleth like a Cer berus, for thus doth he seek to affricht 
thee from the gate of heaven ; stay not for him, but be 
firmly persuaded that the inward goad which urges thee 
forward is in the hand of Jesus, who desires to hasten 
thee to the house of refuge which he has builded. Do not 
think that thy sharp pains are given thee by the old mur- 
derer, for they are the effects of the knife of “ the beloved 
Physician.” Many a man under a surgical operation cries 
out as if he were about to be killed; but ‘f patience had 
its perfect work, he would lool to the ena more than to 
the means. It is hard indved to rejoice under ine heavy 
hand of a chastising Jesus; but it will be somewhat easier 
to thee if thou bearest in mind that Jesus, and not the 
devil; is now smiting thee for thy sins. 

2. Very common also are the cases where the genuine- 
ness of conviction is doubted, because it is conceived to be 
merely an awakened conscience, and not the real lasting 
work of Jesus by his Holy Spirit. Well may this cause 
anxiety, if we reflect that the mere awakenings of con- 
science so often prove to be of no avail. How many 
reformations have been commenced by the command of 
conscience, and have soon crumbled beneath temptation 
like an edifice of sand at the approach of the sea! How 
many prayers have been forced forth like untimely figs by 


mvs cst = 


cm eceaerr nto Nr 


ante 


sens a ns LPO SOIR TONS 


A 


Hi 
: 
q 
A 
uy 
ii 
wy 
bh. 
a 
r 
q a} Fe 
¥ ( 
i 
HE 
Hs 
34 
4) 
Re: 
Bt! 


OUR. 


ee 


; that the coming 
mes from heaven 
answered in this 
se which is heard, 
eiting, to prevent 
it ifit be a sweet 
earnest aad thor- 
lly from hell. O 
en-song of a smil- 
vreck if thou dost 
anting music; but 
he devil when he 
1e seek to affright 
; for him, but be 
which urges thee 
desires to hasten 
builded. Do not 
e by the old mur- 
e of “the beloved 
cal operation cries 
t ‘f patience had 
ena more than to 

under ine heavy 
e somewhat easier 
esus, and not the 


here the genuine- 
s conceived to be 
rt the real lasting 
may this cause 
akenings of con- 
ail. How many 
the command of 
1eath temptation 
' the sea! 


untimely figs by © 


How | 


FAITHFUL WOUNDS. 


a — —— 


the warmth of a little natural feeling! but such prayers 
nave been displaced by the old language of indifference 
or iniquity. Itis but just, therefore, that the anxious 
inquirer should very honestly examine his feclings whe- 
ther they be of God. 

Conscience is that portion of the soul upon which the 
Spirit works in convincing of sin, but conscience cannot 
| of itself produce such a real death to sin as must be the 
experience of every Christian, It may, wheu stirred up 
by a powerful sermon or a solemn providence, alarm the 
whole town of Man-soul; but the bursting of the gates 
und the breaking of the bars of iron must come from an- 
other hand. 3 

Natural conscience may be distinguished from super- 
natural grace by its being far more easily apyeused. A 
small sop will suffice to stop the mouth of a conscience 
which, with all its boasted impartiality, is yet as truly 
depraved as any other portion of the man. We marvel 
fat the Christian minister when he speaks of conscience as 
“ God’s vicegerent,” styling it the judge who cannot be 
bribed, whereas the slightest observation would suffice to 
onvince any man of the corruption of the conscience. 
How many commit acts with allowance which are gross 
ns, but concerning which their unenlightened conscience 
tters no threat; and even when this partial censor does 
ronounce sentence of condemnation, how easily will the 
lightest promise of reformation avert bis wrath, and in- 
luce him to palliate the sin ! 

_ Conscience, when thoroughly aroused, will speak with 
hundering voice; but even his voice cannot wake the 
feadl—spiritual resurrection is the work of Deity alone. 
We have seen men swept with a very tornado of terrible 
houghts and serious emotions; but the hot wind has 
assed away in an hour, and has left no blessing behind 
. There is no healing beneath the wings of a merely 
atural repentance, and its worthlessness may be proved 
y its transitory existence. 


§ 


a 


2 


SERCO PLT SONY 


me 


50 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


—- = —-. ———. ae 


fl 
aK 


iy 


Conscience will be content with reformation ; true grace § , 


will never rest till it receives a knowledge of regenera- | 


tion. Let us each be anxious to be possessors of nothing & 


short of a real inwrought sorrow for sin, a deep sense of 


natural depravity, a true faith in the Lord Jesus, and ac- 4 


tual possession of his Spirit ; whatever is short of this 

lacks the vital elements of religion. If such is our feci- 
ing now—if we now pant for “Jesus in all his glorious 
offices to be ours forever, we need not fear but that. He has 


wounded us in love,and is bringing us to his feet. If we now @ 
feel that nothing but the blood and righteousness of Christ @ 


Jesus can supply the wants we deplore, we may rejoice 
that grace has entered our heart, and will win the victory 
A soul under the influence of the Holy Ghost will be in 


satiable in its longings for a Saviour; you might as well | 


attempt to fill a ship with honour, or a house with water. 


as a truly emptied soul with aught save the Lord Jesus, | 
Is thy soul hungering with such a hunger that husks will | 


not content thee? Art thou thirsting until “thy tongue | 


cleaveth to thy mouth” for the living water of life? Dost | 
thou abhor all counterfeits, and look only for the good — 


gold of the kingdom? Art thou determined to have 
Christ or die? Will nothing less than Jesus allay thy 
fears? Then be of good cheer ; arise, Ie calleth thee; 
cry unto him, and he ‘will assuredly hear. 

Again, we think an excellent test ma y be found on the 
lens gtle of time these feelings have endured. The-awaken- 
ings of an unrenewed conscience soon pass away, and are 
not usually permanent in their character. Arising in a 
night, they perish also in anight. ‘They are acute pains, 


but not chronic ; they are not a part of the man, but sim-~ 
ply incidents in his history. Many aman drops the com- — 


pliment of a tear when justice is at work with him; but 
wiping that tear away, sunshine follows the shower, and 
ollisover. Hast thou, my reader, been a seeker of the 


Lord for a very little while? I beseech thee take it not) 


[OUR. 


nation ; true graca | 
ledge of regenera- § 


ssessors of nothing 


in, a deep sense of #7 
ord Jesus, and ac- § 


‘is short of this, 


[f such is our fecl- 7 
in all his glorious | 
ar but that He has | 
his feet. If we now @ 
teousness of Christ @ 
re, we may rejoice 
ill win the victory, | 
- Ghost will be in- § 
you might as well 
house with water, (3 


ve the Lord Jesus, 


yer that husks will 
until “thy tongue 


ater of life? Dost 
only for the good 
termined to have 
Jesus allay thy 
, Le ealleth thee; 
Pi 
y be found rn the 
d, 
ass away, and are 
er, Arising in a 
y are acute pains, 
the man, but sim- 
an drops the com- 
rk with him; but 
s the shower, and 
a a seeker of the 
thee take it not 


The-awaken- — 


51 


eee 


FAITHFUI. WOUNDS. 


ee elt AO A 


for grented ‘hat thou ari under the influence of the Spirit, 
but plead with God that thine own instability may not 
a esh be manifest in again forgetting what manner of 
man thou art. O ye whose momentary warmth is but as 
the crackling of blazing thorns, this is not the fire from 
heaven ; for that glorious flame is as eternal as its origin, 
being sustained by Omnipotence. Oh ye Pliables, who 
turn back at the first difficulty, crowns and kingdoms in 
the realms of the blessed are not intended for such as you ? 
Unstable as water, ye shall not excel! Your lying vows 
have been:so often heard in heaven, that justice frowns 
upon you. How have ye lied unto God, when ye have 
promised in the hour of sickness to turn to him with full 
purpose of heart ? How will your violated: promises be 
swift witnesses to condemn you, when God shall fetch 
from the archives of the past the memorials of your trea- 
chery ! 
What can be more worthy of your solemn consideration 
than the words of Solomon—* He that being often re- 
proved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, 
and that without renedy.”* It will go hard with some 
of you, my readers, who have abounded with hypocritical 
-repentances when the Lord shall bring you into judg- 
'ment. Ye have no excuse of ignorance; ye cannot cloak 
F your guilt with darkness; “ ye knew-your duty, but ye did 
it not.’ You vowed in deceit ; you prayed in mockery ; 
| you promised with falsehood. Surely, your own lips will 
/say “Amen!” to the anathema which shall call you 
© “cursed,” and the chambers of your memory will, from 
their sin-stained walls, reverberate the sentence, “Cursed! 
» cursed ! cursed !” 
But has the penitent reader been under the hand of 
God for some time? Have his impressions been abiding ? 
Do they bring forth the fruits of real longing after Jesus? 


Then let him be of good cheer. The river which drieth ; 


ee re ee 


*Prov. xxix. 1, 


a 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


not is the river of God; the lighthouse which endureth 
the winds and waves is fo:-nded on a rock ; and the plant 
which is not plucked up our heavenly Father hath 
planted. The stony-ground hearer lost his verdure when 
the sun had arisen with burning heat; but if out of an 
honest and good heart you have received the word which 
abideth for ever, you are one of those upon the good 
ground. When the light remains in one position for a 
long time, it is not likely to be an wnis fatuus ; but 
that which leapeth continually from place to place, even 
the peasant knows to be the will-o’-the wisp, and nothing 
more. ‘True stars fall not ; shooting stars are no stars at 
all, but sundry gases which have long enough held to- 
gether, and blaze at bursting. Rivers which, like Kishon, 
only flow with temporary torrents, may ‘be useful to 
sweep away an invading army, but they cannot fertilise 
the surrounding country; so temporary conviction may 
bring destruction upon a host of sins, but it is not the 
river which makes glad the city of God. The works of 
God are abiding works; he buildeth no houses of sand 
which fall at the rise of the flood, or the rushing of 
the wind. Hast thou, O convinced soul, been long under 
the hand of sorrow ? then take heart, this is all the more 
likely to be the hand of the Lord. If thou feelest, at all 
seasonable hours, a strong desire to seek his face, and 
pour out thine heart before him, then doubtless thou art 
one of those who shall be called—* sought out,” and thou 
shalt dwell in “a city not forsaken.” The morning cloud 
goeth because it is but a cloud; but the rain and the 
snow return not to heaven void, but water the ear th, and 
make it bring forth and bud; if thy soul buddeth with 
desires, and bringeth forth prayers and tears, then have 
we hope for thee that God hath sent his word from above 


to dwell in thine heart. 


Best of all, when we are put out of all heart with our 
doings and with our own capabilities, then indeed the 


UR. 


which endureth 
k ; and the plant 
ly Father hath 
is verdure when 
but if out of an 
the word which 
upon the good 

1e position for a 
nis fatwus ; but 
xe to place, even 
isp, and nothing 
‘3 are no stars at 
enough held to- 
ich, like Kishon, 
y be useful to 
cannot fertilise 
conviction may 
mut it is not the 
. The works of 
houses of sand 
the rushing of 
been long under 
s is all the more 
bu feelest, at all 
< his face, and 

ubtless thou art 
out,” and thou 

b morning cloud 
e rain and the 

the earth, and 

il buddeth with 
ears, then have 

rord from above 


heart with our 
en indeed the 


FAITHFUL WOUNDS. 52 


ate 


Lord is there. So long as we cling in the least degree 
to self, we have ground to distrust the reality of the work 
within. The Spirit is a humbling spirit, and God sends 
him that he may humble us. Every wound given by the 
Saviour is accompanied by the voice, “ This is against thy 
self-righteousness.” Without this process of cutting and 
wounding, we should imagine ourselves to be sumething, 
whereas we are nothing; we should think our fig-leaves 
to be as excellent as court robes, and our own filthy rags 
as white as the spotless robe of Jesus. Hast thou, my 
friend, been learning the lesson, that “ whatsoever is of 
nature’s spinning must be all unravelled before the right- 
eousness of Christ is put on?”* Dost thou now perceive 
“that nature can afford no balsam fit for soul cure?” Art 
thou despairing of all healing from the waters of Abana 
and Pharpar? And wilt thou now gladly wash in Jordan 
and be clean? If it be so with thee, then thou art no 
stranger to the influences of Jesus’ grace upon thine heart, 
but if not, all thy repentances, thy tears, thy sighs, thy 
groans, must go for nothing, being but dross and dung in 
the sight of the rein-trying Jehovah. Self is the fly 
which spoils the whole pot of ointment ; but Jesus is the 
salt which makes the most poisonous river to become 
pure. ‘To be weaned from our own works is the hardest 
weaning in the world. To die not only to all ideas of 
past merit, but to all hopes of future attainments, is a 
death which is as hard as that of the old giant whom 
Greatheart slew. And yet this death is absolutely requi- 
site before salvation, for unless we die to all but Christ, 
we can never live with Christ. 

The carnal professor talks very much of faith, of sane- 
tification, of perfection; but therein he offers sacrifice to 
himself as the great author of his own salvation : like the 
Pharaoh of old, he writes upon the rocks, “ I conquered 
these regions by these my shoulders.” But not so he who 
has really been taught by the God of heaven; he bows 


* Thomas Wilcacks, : 


54 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


i i 


his head, and ascribes his deliverance wholly to the grace 
of the covenant God of Israel. By this, then, can thy 
state he tested—Is self annihilated, or is it not? Art 
thou looking upward, or art thou hoping that thine own 
arm shall br.ng salvation? Thus mayest thou best un- 
derstand how thy soul standeth with regard to a work of 
srace, That which strippeth the creature of all comeli- 
ness, which marreth the beauty of pride, and staineth the 
glory of self-sufficiency, is from Jesus; but that which 
exalteth man, even though it make thee moral, amiable, 
and outwardly religious, is of the devil. Fear rot 
the blow which smites thee to the ground—the lower 
thou liest the better; but shun that which puffeth up 
and lifteth thee to the skies. Remember the Lurd hath 
said, “ And all the trees of the field shall know that I the 
Lord have brought down the high tree, have exalted the 
low tree, have dried up the green tree, and have made the 
dry tree to flourish.”* Be thou ever one of the low trees, 
for then Jesus will regard thee. He putteth down the 
mighty from their seats, but he exalteth the humble and 
meek, None are nearer mercy’s door than those who 
are farthest from their own; none are more likely to get 
a good word from Jesus than they who have nc’ one 
word to say for themselves. He that is clean escaped 
from the hands of self, hath not a step between himself 
and acceptance. It is a good sign of a high tide of grace, 
when the sands of our own righteousness are covered. 
Take heart that Christ loveth thee, when thou hast no 
heart for the work of self-saving. but never, never hope 
that a devout carriage, respectable demeanour, and up- 
right conversation, will justify thee before God— 
‘*For love of grace 
Lay not that flattering unctivn to your soul; 
it will but skin and film the ulcerous place, 


Whiles rank corruption, mining all within, 
Infects unseen ” 


: y Tizek, xvii, 24, 


R. 


ly to the grace 
then, can thy 

it not? Art 
hat thine own 
thou best un- 
d to a work of 
> of all comeli- 
1d staineth the 
ut that which 
moral, amiable, 
vil. Fear not 
nd—the lower 
lich puffeth up 
the Lurd hath 
now that I the 
uve exalted the 
have made the 
f the low trees, 
teth down the 
he humble and 
aan those who 
‘e likely to get 
b have ne’ one 

clean escaped 
tween himself 
h tide of grace, 
ss are covered. 

thou hast no 
yer, never hope 
anour, and up- 


God— 


soul; 
lace, 
thin, 


FAITHFUL WOUNDS. 


Once more : when our soriowful feelings drive us to a 
thorough renunciation of sin, then we may hope. How 
many there are who talk most rapidly of a deep experi- 
ence, of corruption, and of indwelling sin, who never 
heartily renounce their evil ways! But how vain is all 
their idle talk, while their lives show that they love sin 
and delight in transgression! He that is sorry for past 
sin, will be doubly careful to avoid all present acts of it. 
He is a hypocrite before God who talketh of a work 
within when there is no work without. Grace will enter 
n sinful heart, even though it be exceeding vile; yet it 
will never make friendship with sin, but will at once 
commence to drive it out. He has altogether mistaken 
the nature of divine grace, who conccives it possible that 
he can be a partaker of it and yet be the slave of lust, or 
allow sin to reign in his mortal body. The promise runs 
—“let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous 
man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and 
he will have mercy upon him ; and to our God, for he will 
abundantly pardon ;” but we read not of a single word 
of comfort to him who goeth on in his iniquity. Though 
the high and lofty One will stoop over a wounded sinner, 
he will never do so while the weapons of rebellion are 
still in his hands; “ There is no peace, saith my God, un- 
tothe wicked.” Justice will never raise the siege simply 
because of our eries, or promises, or vows: the heart 
shall still be invested with terrors as long as the traitors 


are harboured within its gates. The Spirit saith, by the 


mouth of Paul, “For godly sorrow worketh repentance 
to salvation not to be repented of. For behold this self- 
same thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what 
carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your- 
selves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what 
vehement desire, yea, what xeal, yea, what revenge! In 


| all things ye have approved yourselves in this matter,” * 


a —— 


*2 Cor, vii. 10, 11, 


56 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


—— ee EC =. 


That is no true repentance to eternal life which hath not 
such blessed companions as these. Isaiah saith, “ By 
this, therefore, shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged ; and 
this is all the fruit to take away his sin; when he maketh 
all the stones of the altar as chalkstones that are beaten 
in sunder, the groves and images shall not stand up.”* 
No sooner does penitence enter the heart than down 
goeth every idol, and every idolatrous altar. He whom 
the Lord calleth will, like Gideon,? cast down the altar 
of Baal, cat down the grove, and burn the bullock ; like 
Phineas, { his javelin will pierce through lusts; and 
as the sons of Levi§ at the bidding of Moses, he will 20 
through the camp, and slay the nearest and dearest of his 
bosom sins—his hand shall not spare, neither shal! his 
eye pity: right hands will be cut off, and right eyes 
plucked out; sin wi!l be drowned in floods of godly sor- 
row, and the soul will desire to be free from that which 
it hateth, even to detestation. As Thomas Scott remarks, 


in his Z'reatise on Repentance, “This is the grand dis- 7m ¢ 
tinction betwixt true repentance and all false appear- | he 
ances. Though men be abundant in shedding tears, and Gig W' 
make the most humiliating confessions, or most ample Magm P 
restitution ; though they openly retract their false prin. WgJ° 
ciples, and are zealous in promoting true religion ; though (gy ¢! 
they relate the most plausible story of experiences, and mY ° 
profess to be favoured with the most glorious manifesta: jg?! 


tions ; though they have strong confidence, high affec- | 
tions, orthodox ane ois exact judgment, and extensive Be 
knowledge: yet, except they ‘do works meet for repent- § 
ance, all the rest is nothing, they are still in their sins. | 
For the tree is known by its fruit; and ‘every tree that | 
bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and east into | 
the fire.” Yea, though Cain’s terror, Judah’s confession 
and restitution, Pharaoh’s fair promises, Ahab’s humilia- 
tion, Herod’s reverencing the prophet, heari ing him Se 


*Tsa, xxvii. 9, + Judg, vi. 28, * Num. XXV, § Ex. xxxiii. 26, 


UR, 


» which hath not 
uiah saith, “ By 
> be purged ; and 
when he maketh 
; that are beaten 
not stand up.’* 
eart than down 
ultar, He whom 
{| down the altar 
the bullock ; like 
ugh lusts; and 
Moses, he will go 
nd dearest of his 
neither shal! his 
, and right eyes 
ods of godly sor- 
from that which 


as Scott remarks, | 
s the grand dis- 7 
ll false appear- | 
sdding tears, and § 


, Or most ample 


their false prin- § 
religion ; though § 
experiences, and | 


rious manifesta- 
nce, high aftec- 


nt, and extensive 
meet for repent- @ 
till in their sins. § 
every tree that | 
m, and cast into | 


dah’s confession 
Ahab’s humilia- 


wring him gladly, 


§ Ex. xxxiii. 26, 27, 


FAITHFUL WOUNDS. 


—— 


and doing many things—the stony-ground hearer’s joy— 
together with the tongue of men and angels, the gifts of 
miracles and prophecies, and the knowledge of all mys- 
teries, were combined in one man, they would not prove 
hima true penitent, so long as the love of one lust re- 
mained unmortified in his heart, or the practice of it was 
allowed in his lifé” Ask thyself, then, this all-import- 
ant question, How is my soul affected by sin? Do I hate 
it ? do L avoid it ? do I shun its very shadow? do I sin- 
cerely renounce it, even though by infirmity I fall into 
it? Rest assured if thou canst not give a satisfactory 
answer to these questions thou art yet very far from 
the kingdom; but if, with an honest heart, thou canst 
declare that sin and thyself are at an utter enmity, then 
“the seed of the woman” is begotten in thine heart, and 
dwelleth there the hope ot glory. 

Believer, the hour is fresh in our memory when the di- 
vorce was signed between ourselves and our lusts. We 
can rejoice that we have now dissolved our league with 
hell. But, oh how much we owe to sovereign grace ! for 
we had never left the garlic and fleshpots of Egypt if the 
Passover had not been slain for us. Our inward man re- 
joiceth greatly at the recollection of the hour which pro- 
claimed eternal war between “ the new creature in Christ 
Jesus” and the sin which reigned unto death. It was a 
night to be remembered: we crossed the Rubicon—peace 
was broken—old friendships ceased—the sword was un- 
sheathed,and the seabbard thrown away. We were deliver- 
ed from the power of darkness,and brought into “ the king- 
idlom of God’s dear Son ;” and henceforth weno longer serve 
sin, but the life which we live in the flesh is a life of de- 
pendence on the Son of God, who loved us and gave him- 
ascl{ forus. Let us testify that we never knew what it 
was to have peace with God until we had ceased to parley 
with sin. Not one drop of true comfort did we receive 
until we had foresworn forever the former lusts of our 
D 


58 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


ignorance; till then our mouths were filled with worn. 
wood and gall, until we had cast cut our iniquities af 
loathsome and abominable; but now, having renounced 
the works of darkness, “ we ‘have peace with God, through 
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have received the 
atonement.” 

If thou, O reader, canst satisfactorily answer the solemn 
inquiries here proposed to thee, thy case is assuredly in the 
hands of Jesus the Lord; if thou hast continually bewail- 
ed thy sin, hast renounced thine own works, and escaped 
from thy lusts, then thou art none other than one calledf 
of God to grace and glory. Be thou assured that natural 
conscience can never rise to such a height as this—it may Bag pl 
skim the surface, but it cannot mount aloft. Mere nature p 
never poured contempt on human righteousness, and never jm ne 
severed man from his sins. It needs a mighty one to carry eV 
away the gates of the Gaza of our self-sutticiency, or to lay im wl 
our Philistine sins heaps upon heaps. God alone can send iim no 
the sun of our own excellency back the needed degrees «f| th 
humility, and he alone can bid our sins stand still forever 7am W: 
It is Jesus who hath smitten, if he hath with one blow 3g fol 
uncrowned thee, and with another disarmed thee. He is mi 
wont to perform wonders; but such as these are his own im pic 
peculiar miracles. None but He can kill with one stone} th 
two such birds as our high-soaring righteousness and lovw- ins 


winged lust. I?fGoliath’s head is taken from his shoulders, de: 
and his sword snatched from his hand, no doubt the con- Samm qu 
queror is the Son of David. We give all glory and honow no 
to the adorable name of Jesus, the Breaker, the Healey, thi 
our faithful Friend. me cle 

3. It frequently occurs that the circumstances of the 
person at the time of conversion afford grave cause to doubt ho 
the divine character of the woundings which are felt. It 
is well known that severe sickness and prospect of death kn 
will produce a repentance so like to genuine, godly sor fm pe 


row, that the wisest Christians have been misled by it. ” 


OUR. FAITHFUL WOUNDS. 5 


rn eee 
eer 


filled with worm. 
our iniquities aff 
having renounced 
with God, through 
have received the 


Many have we seen and heard of who have expressed 
the deepest contrition for past guilt, and have vehement- 
ly cried for merey, with promises of amendment apparent- 
ly as sincere as their confessions were truthful—who have 
conversed sweetly of pardon, of joy in the Spirit, and have 
even related ecstacies and marvellous manifestations ; and é 
yet, with all this, have proved to be hynocrites, by return- 
ing at the first opportunity to their old courses of sin and 
folly. It hath happened unto them according to the pro- 
verb, “The dog hath returned to his vomit, and the sow 
that was washed to her wallowing in the mire.” 

Pious Mr. Booth writes, “ I pay more attention to peo- 
ple’s lives than to their deaths. In all the visits I have 
paid to the sick during the course of a long ministry, I 
never met with one, who was not previously serious, that 
ever recovered from what he supposed the brink of death, 
who afterwards performed his vows and became religious, 
notwithstanding the very great appearance there was in 
their favour when they thought they could not recover.” 
We find also, ready to ovr hand, in a valuable work,* the 
| following facts, which are but specimens of a mass which 

might be given :—*“ A certain American physician, whose 
piety led him to attend, not only to people’s bodies, but to 
their souls, stated that he had known a hundred or more 
instances in his practice, of persons who, in prospect of 
death, had been apparently converted, but had, subse- 
| quently, been restored to health. Out of them all he did 
not know of more than three who devoted themselves to 
the service of Christ after their recovery, or gave any evi- 
dence of genuine conversion, If, therefore, they had died, 
as they expected, have we not reason to believe that their 
hopes cf heaven would have proved terrible delusions ? 

“A pious English physician once stated that he had 
| known some three hundred sick persons who, soon ex- 
pecting to die, had been led, as they supposed, to repent- 


© nee «a ee, 


answer the solemn 
is assuredly in the 
mtinually bewail- 
orks, and escaped 
ar than one called fm 
sured that natural 
ht as this—it may @ 
loft. Mere nature 
ousness, and never 
ighty one to carry 
itticiency, or to lay 
yod alone can send 
needed degrees off 
stand still forever,? 
h with one blow ig 
‘med thee. Hew 
these are his owl 
ill with one stone} 
eousness and low-§ 
rom his shoulders; 
o doubt the con: 
glory and honouw 
aker, the Heale, 


mstances of the 
ve cause to doubt 
hich are felt. It 
prospect of death 
auine, godly sor 
en misled by it. 


_ ee 


* Arvine’s Cyclopedia of Anecdotes. 


60 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


ance of their sins, and saving faith in Christ, but had 
eventually been restored to health again. Only ten of 
all this number, so far as he knew, gave any evidence ol 
being really regenerated. Soon after their recovery they 
plunged, as a general thing, into the follies and vices of 
the world, Who would trust, then, in such conversions 2’ 

Such examples serve as a holy warning to us all, lest we 
toc should only feel an excitement produced by terror, and 
should find the flame of piety utterly quenched when the 
cause of alarm is withdrawn. Some of us can trace oui 
first serious thoughts to the bed of sickness, when in the 
loneliness of our chamber, “ we thought upon our ways 
and turned our feet unto his testimonies.”* But this very 
circumstance was at the time a source of doubt, for we 
-aid within ourselves, “ Will this continue when my sick. 
ness is removed, or shall I not find my apathy return, wher 
again I enter on the business of the world?” Our great | 
anxiety was not lest we should die, but lest living we 
should find our holy feelings clear gone, and our piety 
evaporated, Possibly our reader is now sick, and this i: | 
his tronble: let us help you through it. Of course, the 
best proof you can have. of your own sincerity is that § 
which you will receive when health returns, if you con- 
tinue steadfast in the faith of Jesus, and follow on t 
know him. Perseverance, when the pressure is removed 
will discover the reality of your repentance. The na: 
tural wounds inflicted by Providence are healed soon afte 
the removal of the rod, and folly is not thereby brought } 
out of the heart; but when Jesus smites for sin, the 
wounds will smart even when the instrumental rod ol 
correction is removed, while “the blueness of the wound 
cleanseth away evil." We, who had many mock repent- 
ances ere we really turned to the living God, can now see 
the main spring of our error. Every thief loves honesty 


* Prov, cix. 59, + Prov. xx. 


UR. 4 ‘FAITHFUL WOUNDS. 61 


———$—_—_——. 


$$$ ———— - _ 


Christ, but had will regret that he slew a man when he is about to be ex- 
n. Only ten of scuted for his crime: here is the first point of distinction 
any evidence ol ‘hich we beg our reader to observe. 
sir recovery they That repentance which rs genuine ariseth not so much 
lies and vices of Fromedread of punishment as from fear of sin. It is not fear 
sh conversions 2’ of damning, but fear of sinning,which make the tuuly huin- 
sto us all, lost we Migmbled cry out for grace. True, the fear of hell, engendered 
ed by terror, and Baggoy the threatenings of the law, doth work in the soul 
enched when the much horror and dismay ; but it 1s not hel/ appearing ex- 
us ean trace ow eeding dreadful, but sin becoming exceeding sinful and 
ess, when in the fagggebominable, which is the effectual work of grace. Any man 
t upon our ways fin his reason would tremble at everlasting burnings, more 
”* But this very especially when by his nearness to the grave the heat of 
of doubt, for we fgggnell coth, as it were, scorch him ; but it is not every dying 
1e when my sick. man that hates sin—yea, none do so unless the Lord hath 
uthy return, wher had dealings with their souls. Say then, Dost thou hate 
1d?” Our great Miphell or hate sin most? for, verily, if there were no hell, 
t lest living we he real penitent would love sin not one wit the more, 
e, and our piety | and hate evil not one particle the less. Wouldest thou 
sick, and this i: Magove to have thy sin and heaven too? If thou wouldest, 
Of course, the hou hast not a single spark of divine life in thy soul, for 
sincerity is that (jg™gone spark would consume thy love to sin. Sin to a sin- 
inns, if you con- pick soul is so desperate an evil that it would scarce be 
nd follow on tc Maggptraining the truth to say that a real penitent had’ rather 
ssure is removed fagEpuffer the pains of hell without his sins than enter the 
méance,  ‘The-no: bliss of heaven with them, if such things were possible. 
healed soon after Sin, sin, SIN, is the accursed thing which the living sou! 
thereby brought } ateth, 
ites for sin, the fam Aga: saving repentance will most easily mani xest 


rumentak Tod o tsclf when the subjects of owr thoughts are most neavealy. 
». yl M .4 ; Ad nye - 
ss of the wound fay this we mean, if our sorrow only gushes forth when 


bny mock repent: we are musing upon the doom of the wicked, and the 

dd, can now see wrath of God, we have then reason to suspect its evangel- 
i lata hausatt eal character; but if contemplations of Jesus, of his cross, 
every emiidovent f heaven, of eternal love, of covenant grace, of pardoning 


blood and full redemption bring tears to our eyes, we may 


eae RO A TE a 


62 TH SAinT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


i a ET I 


then rejoice that. we sorrow after a godly sort. The sin- 
ner awakened by the Holy Spirit will find the source of 
his stream of scrrow not on the thorn-clad sides of Sinai, 
but on the grassy mound of Calvary. His ery will be, 
“O sin J hate thee, for thou didst murder my Lord ;” and 
his mourrfful dirge over his crucified redeemer will be in 
vlaintive words— 


“? Twas vou, my sins, my cruel sins, 

His chief torsmentors were ; 

Each of my crimes became a nail, 
And unbelief the spear ; 

*Twas you that pull’d the vengeance down 
Upon his guildess head ; 

Break, break, my heart, oh burst mine eyes, 
And let my sorrows bleed.” 


Ye who love the Lord, give your assent to this our 
declaration, that love did melt you more than wrath, that 
the woving voice did more affect you than the condemn- 
ing sentence, and that hope did impel you more than fear. 
It was when viewing our Lord as crucitied, dead, and 
buried-that we most wept. He with his looks made us 
weep bitterly, while the stern face of Moses caused us to 
tremble, but never laid us prostrate confessing our trans- 
gression. We sorrow because our offence is against Hin, 
against his love, his*b!cod, his grace, his heart of affection. 
Jesus is the name which subdues the stubborn heart, if it 
be truly brought into subjection to the Gospel. He is 
the rod which bringeth waters out of the rock, he is the 
hammer which breaketh the rock in pieces. 

Furthermore, saving repentance will render the con- 
science exceedingly tender, so that it will be pained to the 
quick at the very recollection of the smallest sin. Natural 
repentance crieth out at a few master-sins, which have 
been most glaring and heinous—-the more especially if 
soine Visitor point them out as crimes of the blackest dye; 


IR. 


$$ ee 


sort. The sin- 
1 the source of 
1 sides of Sinai, 
lis ery will be, 
my Lord ;” and 
emer will be in 


own 


e eyes, 


nt to this our 
han wrath, that 
1 the condemn- 
more than fear, 
itied, dead, and 
looks made us 
ses caused us to 
ssing our trans- 
is against Him, 
art of affection. 
orn heart, if it 
Gospel. He is 
rock, he is the 
render the con- 
ve pained to the 
tsin. Natural 
1s, Which have 
e especially if 
e blackest dye; 


FAITHFUL WOUNDS, 63 


but when it hath executed one or two of these on tho 
gallows of confession, it is content to let whole hosts of 
less notorious offenders escape without so much as a rep- 
rimand. Not so the man whose penitence is of divine 
origin—he hates the whole race of the Evil One; like 
Elijah he will cry, “ Let none escape;” he will cut up to 
the best of his power every root of bitterness which may 
still remain, nor will he willingly harbour a single traitor 
in his breast. The secret sins, the every-day offences, the 
slight errors (as the world has it), the harmless follies, 
the little transgressions, the peccadilloes, all these will be 
dragged forth to death when the Lord searcheth the heart 
with the candle of his Spirit. 

Jesus never enters the soul of man to drive out one or 
two sins, nor even to overcome a band of vices to the ex. 
ception of others ; his work is perfect, not partial; his 
cleansings are complete baptisms; his purifyings tend to 
remove all our dr oss, and consume all our tin. He sweeps 
the heart from its dust as well as its Dagons; he suffers 
not even the most insignificant spider of lust to spin its 
cobweb, with allowance, on the walls of his temple. All 
heinous sins and private sins, youthful sins and manhood’s 
sins, sins of omission and of commission, of word and of 
deed, of thought and of imagination, sins against God or 
against man, all will combine like a column “of serpents In 
the desert to affright the new-born child of heaven; and 
he will desire to see the head of every one of them broken 
beneath the heel of the destroyer of evil, Jesus, the seed 
of the woman. Believe not thy: self to be truly awakened 
lest thou abhorrest sin in all its stages, from the embryo 
to the ripe fruit, and in all its shades, from the commonly 
allowed lust down to the open and detested crime. When 
Hannibal took oath of perpetual hatred to the Romans, 
he included in that oath plebeians as well as patricians ; 
so if thou art indeed at enmity with evil, thou wilt abhor 
all iniquity, even though it be of the very lowest degree. 


hia nie he BS : 
a A Ren RS Se 


64 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


Beware that thou write not down affright at one sin as 
being repentance for all. 

There are, doubtless, other forms and phases of doubt, 
but our space does not allow us to mention more, nor does 
the character of the volume require that we should ex- 
patiate on more of these than are the most usual causes 
of grief to the Lord’s people. We beseech the ever-gracious 
Spirit to reveal the person of Jesus to every smitten sin- 
ner; to anoint his eyes with eye-salve, that he may see 
the heart of love which moves the hand of rebuke, and to 
guide every mourning seeker to the cross, whence pardon 
and comfort ever flow. It is none other than Jesus who 
thus frowns us to our senses, and chastises us to right 
reason ; may the Holy Ghost lead every troubled one to 
believe this encouraging doctrine, then shall our heart’s 
desire be granted. 

We cannot, however, bring our remarks to a close until 
again we have urged the duty of self-examination, which 
is at once the most important and most neglected of all 
religious exercises, 

When we think how solemn is the alternative “saved” 
or “ danned,” we cannot but importune our readers, as 
they love their souls, to “examine themselves whether 
they be in the faith.” Oh!remember it will be all too late 
to decide this question soon, since it will cease to be a 
question. The time will have passed for hopeful changes 
and gracious discoveries ; the only changes will be to tor- 
ments more excruciating, and discoveries then will but 
reveal horrors more and more terribly astounding. We 
wonder not that men should anxiously inquire concern- 
ing their position ; we might marvel more that the most 
f them are so indifferent, so utterly careless to the things 
f the kingdom of heaven. It is not our body, our estate, 
our liberty, concerning which there is this question at 
law, itis a suit of far weightier nature—our eternal exis- 
tence in heaven or hell. Let us narrowly inspect our in- 


t one sin as 


es of doubt, 
ore, nor does 

should ex- 
usual causes 
ver-graclous 
smitten sin- 
; he may see 
buke, and to 
ence pardon. 
. Jesus who 
us to right 
ubled one to 
our heart’s 


a close until 
ation, which 
lected of all 


ive “saved” 
> readers, as 
es whether 
eall too late 
ase to be a 
ful changes 
ll be to tor- 
en will but 
iding. We 
‘e concern- 
at the most 
o the things 
, our estate, 
question at 
ernal exis- 
pect our in- 


FAITHFUL WOUNDS. 65 


ee 


nermost feelings; let us search what manner of men we 
be; Jet us rigidly serutinize our heart, and learn whether 
it be right with God or no. Let not the good opinion of 
our fellow- men mislead us, but let us search for ourselves 
lest we be found like the mariner who bought his bags of 
one who filled them not with biscuit but w ith stones, and 
he, relying on the merchant’s word, found himself in the 
broad ocean without a morsel of food. Yet if good inen 
tell us we are wrong, let us not despise their opinion, for 
it is more easy to deceive ourselves than the elect. He 
was not far from the truth who said, “ We strive as hard 
to hide our hearts from ourselves as from others, and al- 
ways with more success; for, in deciding upon our own 
case, we are both judge, ‘and j jury, and executioner; and 
where sophistry cannot overcome the first, or flattery the 
second, self-love is always ready to defeat the sentence 
by bribing the third—a bribe that in this case is never 
refused, because she always comes up to the price.”* 
Since we are liable to be self-deecived, let us be the more 
vigilant, giving most earnest heed to every warning and 


yeproof, lest the very warning which we = aleM should be 


that which might have shown us our danger, Many 
tradesmen are ruined by neglecting their books; but he 
who frequently casts up his accounts will know his own 
position, and avoid such things as would be hazardous or 
destructive. No ship was ever wrecked by the captain’s 
over-anxicty in taking his longitude and latitude; but 
the wailing sea bears “sad witness to the fate of careless 
inariners, Who forgot their chart, and wantonly steered 
onward to rocks which prudent foresight would easily 
have avoided. Let us not sleep as do others, but rouse 
ourselves to persevering watchfulness, by the solemn con- 
sideration that if we be at last mistaken in our soul’s 
condition, the error can never be amended. Here, if one 
battle be lost, a hopeful commander expects to retrieve 


*Colton. 


66 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


his fortunes by future victory; but let us once fail to 
overcome in the struggle of life, our defeat is everlasting, 
The bankrupt merchant cheers his spirit with the pros- 
pect of commencing trade again—business may yet pros- 
per, competence may yet bless him, and even wealth may 
deign to fill his house with her hidden treasures ; but he 
who finds himself a bankrupt in another world, without 
God, without Christ, without hope, must abide for ever 
penniless, craving, with a beggar’s lip, the hopeless boon 
of one poor drop of water to cool his burning tongue, 
When life is over with the unrighteous, all is over— 
where the tree falleth there it must lie; death is the Me- 
dusa’s head, petrifying our condition—he that is unholy 
shall be unholy still; he that is unjust, must be unjust 
still. If there were the most remote possibility of recti- 
fying our present errors in a future state of existence, we 
might have some excuse for superficial or infrequent in- 
vestigation ; this, however, is utterly out of the question, 
for grace is bounded by the grave. If we be in Christ, 
all that heaven knows of unimaginable bliss, of inconceiv- 
able glory, of unutterable ecstasy, shall be ours most 
richly to enjoy; but if death shall find us out of Christ, 
horrors surpassing thought, terrors beyond the dreamings 
of despair, and tortures above the guess of misery, must 
be our doleful, desperate doom. How full of trembling is 
the thought, that multitudes of fair professors are now in 
hell: although they, like ourselves, once wore a goodly 
name and hoped, as others said of them, that they were 
ripening for glory; whereas they were fattening for the 
slaughter, and were drugged for execution with the cup 
of delusion, dreaming all the while that they were drink- 
ing the wines on the lees, well refined. Surely, among 
the damned, there are none more horribly tormented in 
the flame than those who looked to walk the golden 
streets, but found themselves cast into outer darkness, 
where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of 


ice fail to 
verlasting, 
h the pros- 
y yet pros- 
vealth may 
‘es ; but he 
ld, without 
le for ever 
peless boon 
ng tongue, 
| is over— 
.is the Me- 
4 is unholy 
t be unjust 
ity of recti- 
cistence, we 
requent in- 
re question, 
e in Christ, 
f inconceiv- 

ours most 
t of Christ, 
> dreamings 
hisery, must 
rembling is 
are now in 
re a goodly 

they were 
ing for the 
th the cup 
were drink- 
‘ely, among 
brmented in 
the golden 
r darkness, 
mashing of 


FAITHFUL WOUNDS, 67 


= 


teeth. The higher the pinnacle from which we slip, the 
more fearful will be our fall; crownless kings, beggared 
princes, and starving robles, are the more pitiable be- 
cause of their former condition of affluence and grandeur : 
so also will fallen professors have a sad pre-eminence of 
damnation, from the very fact that they were once es- 
teemed rich and increased in goods, When we consider 
the vast amount of unsound profession which prevails in 
this age, and which, like a smooth, but shallow sea, doth 
scarcely conceal the rocks of hypocrisy —when we review 
the many lamentable falls which have lately occurred 
among the most eminent in the Chuygch, we would lift up 
our voice like a trumpet, and with all our might entreat 
all men to be sure of their grounds of trust, lest it should 
come to pass that sandy foundations should be discovered 
when total destruction has rendered it too late for any- 
thing but despair. 

O ace of profession, put thyself in the crucible! Ona- 
tion of formalists, take heed lest ye receive the form and | 
reject the Spirit! O reader, let us each commence a 
thorough trial of our own spirits! 

“Oh! what am 1? My soul awake, 
And an impartial survey take: 


Does no dark sign, no ground of fear, 
In practice or in heart appear ? 


“What image does my spirit bear ? 
Is Jesus formed and living there ? 
Say, do his lineaments divine 
In thought, and word, aud action, shine? 


“ Searcher of hearts! oh search me still, 
The secrets of my soul reveal; 
My fears remove, let me appear 
To God and my own conscience clear, 


“ May I at that bless’d world arrive, 
Where Christ through all my soul shall livo, 
And give full proof that he is there, 
Without one gloomy doubt or fear.” 


68 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


III. We close our chapter by tke third remark—the 
wounds of our Jesus were faithful. Here proof will be 
entirely an unnecessary excess, but we think meditation 
wil be a profitable engagement. Ah! brethren, when 
we were groaning under the chastening hand of Jesus, 
we thought him cruel; do we think so ill of him now? 
We conceived that he was wroth with us, and would be 
implacable; how have our surmises proved to be utterly 
unfounded! The abundant benefit which we now reap 
from the deep ploughing of our heart is enough of itself 
to reconcile us to the severity of the process. Precious is 
that wine which is pressed in the winefat of conviction ; 
pure is that gold which is dug from the mines of repent- 
ance; and bright are those pearls which are found in the 
caverns of deep distress. We might never have known 
such deep humility if 4e had not humbled us. We had 
never been so separated from fleshly trusting had he not 
by his rod revealed the corruption and disease of our 
heart. We had never learned tc comfort the feeble- 
minded, and confirm the weak, had he not made us 
ready to halt, and caused our sinew to shrink. If we 
have any power to console the weary, it is the result of 
our remembrance of what we once sutfered—for here lies 
our power to sympathise. If we can now look down with 
scorn upon the boastings of vain, self-conceited man, it is 
because our own vaunted strength has utterly failed us, 
and made us contemptible iu our own eyes. If we can 
now plead with ardent desire for the souls of our fellow- 
men, and especially if we feel a more than common pas- 
sion for the salvation of sinners, we must attribute it in 
no small degree to the fact that we have been smitten for 
sin, and therefore knowing the terrors of the Lord are 
constrained to persuade men. The laborious pastor, the 
fervent minister, the ardent evangelist, the faithful teach- 
er, the powerful intercessor, can all trace the birth of their 
zeal to the sufterings they endured for sin, and the know- 


— ~*~ ——— a | — Oe a —  o e 


ee 


wk—the 
will be 
ditation 
n, when 
xf Jesus, 
im now ? 
vould be 
e utterly 
10W reap 
of itself 
eclous 1S 
nviction ; 
f repent- 
nd in the 
e known 
We had 
vd he not 
se of our 
1e feeble- 
made us 
lf we 
result of 
here lies 
wn with 
man, it is 
failed us, 
£ we can 
r fellow- 
mon pas- 
ute it in 
1itten for 
Lord are 
stor, the 
‘ul teach- 
1 of their 
e know- 


FAITHFUL WOUNDS, 69 


-_——_—— 


ledge they thereby obtained of its evil nature. We have 
ever drawn the sharpest arrows from the quiver of our 
own experience. We find no sword-blades so true in 
metal as those which have been forged in the furnace of 
soul-trouble. Aaron’s rod, that budded, bore not one half 
so much fruit as the rod of the covenant, which is laid 
upon the back of every chosen child of God; this alone 
may render us eternally grateful to the Saviour for his 
rebukes of love. 

We may pause for a moment over another thought, and 
we call to mind our deep depravity. We find within us a 
strong and deep-seated attachment to the world and its 
sinful pleasure; our heart is still prone to wander, and 
our affections yet cleave to things below. Can we won- 
der then that it required a sharp knife to sever us at first 
from our lusts, which were then as dear to us as the mem- 
bers of our body ? so foul a disease could only be healed 
by frequent draughts of bitter medicine. Let us detest 
the sin which rendered such rough dealing necessary, but 
let us adore the Saviour who spared not the child for his 
crying. If our sin had been like the hyssop on the wall, 
our own hand might have gently snapped the roots; but 
having become lofty as a cedar of Lebanon, and firmly 
settled in its place, only the omnipotent voice of Jehovah 
could avail to break it: we will not therefore complain 
of the loudness of the thundez, but rejoice at the overturn- 
ing of our sin, Will the man who is asleep in a burning 
house murmur at his deliverer for shaking him too roughly 
in his bed? Would the traveller, tottering on the brink 
of a precipice, upbraid the friend who started him from 
his reverie, and saved him from destruction. Would not 
the hardest words ana the roughest usage be acknowledged 
most heartily as blows of love and warnings of affection. 
Best of all, when we view these matters in the light of 
eternity, how little are these slight and momentary aftlic- 
tions compared with the doom thereby escaped, or the 


' 


70 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


ee 


bliss afterwards attained! Standing where our ears can 
be filled with the wailings of the lost, where our eyes are 

grieved by sights of the hideous torments of the damned, 

contemplating for an instant the fathomless depth of 
eternal misery, with all its deprivation, desperation, and’ 
agoravation—considering that we at this hour might have 
been in our own persons enduring the doom we deprecate, 
—surely it is easy work to overlook the pain of our con- 
viction, and bless with all sincerity “the hand which re- 
scued us.” O hammer which broke our fetters, how can 

we think ill of thee! Oangel which smote us on the side, 

and let us out of the prison-house, can we do aught but 

love thee! O Jesus, our glorious deliverer, we would love 

thee, live to thee, and die for thee! seeing thou hast loved 

us, and hast proved that love in thy life and in thy death. 

Never can we think thee unmerciful, for thou wast merci- 

fully severe. We are sure not one stroke fell too heavily, 

nor was one pang too painful. Faithful thou wast in all 

thy dealings, and our songs shall exalt thee in all thy 

ways, even when thou causest groans to proceed from 

our wounded spirits. And when our spirits shall fly to- 

ward thy throne of light, though in their unceasing halle- 

lujahs thy tender mercies and lovingkindnesses shall claim 

the highest notes, yet, midst the rapturous hosannahs, 

shall be heard the psalm “ of remembrance” sounding forth 

our praise for the rod of the covenant and the hand of af- 

fliction. While here on earth we hymn thy praise in 

humbler strains, and thus adore thy love— 


‘¢ Long unafilicted, undismayed, 
In pleasure’s path secure | strayed, 
Thou mad’st me feel thy chastening rod, 
And straight I turned unto my God. 


‘¢ What though it pierced my fainting heart, 
I bless the hand that caused the smart ; 
Tt taught my tears awhile to flow, 

But saved me from eternal woe, 


— 


r ears can 
ir eyes are 
e damned, 
, depth of 
‘ation, and’ 
night have 
deprecate, 
of our con- 
| which re- 
;, how can 
on the side, 
aught but 
would love 
ihast loved 
thy death. 
vast mercl- 
‘oo heavily, 
wast in all 
in all thy 
oceed from 
hall fly to- 
ising halle- 
shall claim 
hosannahs, 
nding forth 
hand of af- 
praise in 


FAITHFUL WOUNDS. 


*¢ Oh ! hadst thou left me unchastised 
Thy precepts I had still despised, 

And still the snare, in secret laid 

Had my unwary feet betrayed. . 


‘“T love thee, therefore, O my God 
And breathe towards ‘thy ARs abode, 
Where, in thy presence fully blest, 
Thy “hosen saints for ever rest,” 


THE SAINT ADD HIS SAVIOUR. 


TO THE UNCONVERTED READER, 


FriEND,—In this chapter thou hast parted company 
with the Christian. Thou couldst join with him while 
he esteemed not Jesus, but now that Christ has begun to 
wound the conscience of his child, thou biddest him adieu, 
and proudly boasteth that thou art not one of so misera- 
ble a character. Notwithstanding this, Iam loath to part 
with thee until I have again expostulated with thee. 

Thou thinkest it a blessing to be free from the sad 
feelings we have been describing, but let me tell thee it 
is thy curse—thy greatest, deadliest curse that thou art 
a stranger 0 such inward mourning for thy guilt. In 
the day when the Judge of heaven and earth shall divide 
tares from wheat, thou wilt see how terrible it is to be 
an unregenate sinner. When the flames of hell get hold 
upon thee, thou wilt wish in vain for that very experi- 
ence which now thou dost set at nought. It will not be 
all May-day with thee ; thine hour of death is as sure as 
another man’s, and then a better than I shall convince 
thee of thine error. Laugh not at weeping souls, account 
them not to be in a pitiable plight ; for sad as their con- 
dition appears, it is not half so sac as thine, and there is 
not one of all those moaning penitents who would change 
places with thee for an hour. Their gricf is greater joy 
than thy bliss; thy laughter is not so sweet as their 
groans; and thy pleasant estate is despicable compared 
with their sorest distress. Besides, remember those who 
are now in such darkness willsoon see the light, but thou 
shalt soon walk in increasing and unceasing darkness, 
Their sorrows shall be ended; thine are not yet commene- 


-eanpany 
him while 
; begun 10 
him adieu, 
go misera- 
ith to part 
. thee. 
ym the’ sad 
tell thee it 
it thou art 
guilt, In 
yall divide 
it is to be 
Il get hold 
ry experi- 
vill not be 
as sure as 
1, convince 
Is, account 
their con- 
nd there is 
iuld change 
rreater Joy 
t as their 
compared 
those who 
t, but thou 
darkness, 
commenc- 


FAITHFUL WOUNDS. 73 


ed, and when commenced shall never know a conclusion. 
Theirs is a hopeful distress ; thine will be hopeless agony. 
Their chastisement comes from a loving Jesus ; thine will 
proceed from an angry God. Theirs has for its certain 
end ETERNAL SALVATION ; thine EVERLASTING DAMNATION, 
Oh! bethink thee for a moment, wouldst thou rather 
choose to have painless mortification and so perish, than 
to feel soreness in thy wounds and then receive a cure ? 
Wouldst thou rather lie and rot in a dungeon than bruise 
thyself by climbing the wall to escape? Surely thou 
wouldst endure anything *ather than be damned, and I 
bid thee take this for truth, that thou shalt either repent 
or burn; thou shalt either shed tears of penitence here, 
or else shriek in vain for a drop of water in that pit 
which burneth with fire unquenchable. What sayest 
thou to this? Canst thou dwell with devouring flames? 
Canst thou abide the eternal burnings? Ah! be not 
mad, I entreat thee. Why shouldst thou destroy thyself ? 
What good will come of it when thy blood shall be laid 
at thine own door? Hast thou not sinned? Why then 
think it foolish to repent? Has not God threatened his 
fierce wrath to him that goeth on in his iniquity? Why 
then despise those whom grace has turned, and whe 
therefore are constrained to bid thee turn from the error 
of thy sinful ways? May the Lord stay thy madness in 
time, and give thee repentance, otherwise, “'Tophet is or- 
dained of old: the pile thereof is fire and much wood ; 


the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth 
kindle it.” * 


* Isa, xxx, 33, 


TERE, 


Hesus Desired, 


“Oh that I knew where I might find him ! ”—Jops xxiii. 3. 


———————— 


TER | WHILE the woundings of Jesus are given in 
=| the ac.k, and we do not recognise the hand 
4 which smiteth us; but it is not always to be 
so. Incessant disappoiutments put us out of 
all heart with the former refuges of our souls, 

: and renewed discoveries make us sadly aware 
2 ~=oof:~‘the superlative evil dwelling in our flesh ; 

stripped thus of all covering without, and trembling at 

our own shameful impotence, we hail with gladness the 
news of a Saviour for sinners. As on the frail raft, the 
almost skeleton mariners, having long ago devoured their 
last morsel, raise themselves with al! their remaining 
strength to catch a glimpse of a passing sail, if haply it 
may bring relief, so doth the dying sinner receive with 
eagerness the message of coming grace. He might have 
scorned the terms of mercy once, but, like a city long be- 
sieged, he is now too glad to receive peace at any price. 

The grace which in his high estate he counted as a worth- 

less thing, is now the great object of his combined desires, 

He pants to see the Man who is “mighty to save,” and 

would count it honour to kiss his feet or unloose the 

latchet of his shoes. No cavilling at sovereignty, no 
murmuring at self-humiliation, no scorning the unpurchas- 


Gi 


xxiii. 3. 


re given in 
e the hand 
lways to be 
it us out of 
' our souls, 
adly aware 
our flesh ; 
pmbling at 
adness the 
il raft, the 
oured their 
remaining 
if haply it 
eive with 
light have 
y long be- 
any price. 
s a worth- 
ed desires, 
save, and 
nloose the 
pignty, no 
npurchas- 


JESUS DESIRED. 75 


able gifts of discriminating love ; the man is too poor to 
be proud, too sick to struggle with his physician, too 
much afraid of death to refuse the king’s pardon because 
it puts him under obligation. Happy is it for us if we 
understand this position of utter helplessness into which 
we must all be brought if we would know Christ ! 

It is one of the strange things in the dealings of Jesus 
that even when we arrive at this state of entire spiritual 
destitution, we do not always become at once the objects 
of his justifying grace. Long seasons frequently intervene 
between our knowledge of our ruin, our hearing of a de- 
liverer, and the application of that deliverer’s hand. The 
Lord’s own ealled ones frequently turn their eyes to the 
hills, and find no help coming therefrom ; yea, they wish 
to look unto him, but they are so blinded that they can- 
not discern him as their hope and consolation. This is 
not, as some would rashly conclude, because he is not the 
Saviour for such as they are. Far otherwise. Unbelief 
crieth out, “Ah! my vileness disqualifies me for Christ, 
and my exceeding sinfulness shuts out his love!” How 
foully doth unbelief lie when it thus slandereth the tender 
heart of Jesus! how inhumanly cruel it is when it thus 
takes the cup of salvation from the only lips which have 
aright to drink thereof! We have noticed in the preach- 
ing of the present day too much of a saint’s gospel, and 
too little of a sinner’s gospel. Honesty, morality, and 
goodness, are commended not so much as the marks of 
godliness, as the /?/¢ of it; and men are told that as they 
sow, so they shall reap, without the absolutely necessary 
caveat that salvation is not of man, neither by man, and 
that grace cometh not to him that worketh, but to him 
that believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly. Not 
thus spake our ancient preachers when in all its fulness 
they declared— 


* Not the righteous, not the righteous— 
Sinners, Jesus came to save,” 


76 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


The words of a much calumniated preacher are not less 
bold than true:— 

“There is nothing in men, though never so vile, that 
can debar a person from a part in Christ. Some will not 
have Christ, except they can pay for him; others dare not 
meddle with Christ, because they are such vile and wretch- 
ed creatures, tht they think it impossible that Christ 
should be s1g °.. such wretched persons as they are. You 
know not...) one) what an abominable sinner I am; 
you look up»: otuers, and their sins are but ordinary, but 
mine are of a deep uye, and I shall die in them: the re- 
bellion of my heart is another kind of rebellion than is in 
others. Beloved, let me tell you freely from the Lord, let 
men deem you as they will, and esteem yourself as bad as 
you can, I tell you from the Lord, and I will make it good, 
there is not that sinfulness that can be imagined in a crea- 
ture that can be able to separate or debar any of you from 
a part in Christ ; even though you are thus sinful, Christ 
may be your Christ. Nay, I go further ; suppose one person 
in this congregation should not only be the vilest sinner 
in the world, but should have all the sins of others, besides 
what he himself hath committed; if all these were laid 
upon the back of him, he should be a greater sinner than 
new he is; yet, if he should bear all the sins of others, as 
I said, there is no bar to this person, but Christ may be 
his portion. ‘He bore the sins of many’ (saith the text), 
but he bare them not as his own, he bare them for many. 
Suppose the many, that are sinners, should have all their 
sins translated to one in particular, still there is no more 
sin than Christ died for, though they be all collected to- 
gether. If other men’s sins were translated upon you, and 
they had none, then they needed no Christ ; all the need 
they had of Christ were translated to you, and then 
the whole of Christ’s obedience should be yours. Do but 
observe the strain of tle Géspel, you shall find that no sin 
in the world can be a bar to hinder a person from having 


mn a, EE a al ae Ot oe oe 


re not less 


. vile, that 
e will not 
rs dare not 
nd wretch- 
hat Christ 
yare. You 
aner I am; 
dinary, but 
n: the re- 
1 than is in 
1e Lord, let 
If as bad as 
ike it good, 
d in acrea- 
yf you from 
ful, Christ 
one person 
lest sinner 
ers, besides 
> were laid 
inner than 
f others, as 
st may be 
1 the text), 
1 for many. 
re all their 
is no more 
bllected to- 
n you, and 
Il the need 
and then 
5. Do but 
hat no sin 
om having 


JESUS DESIRED, 


eee 


———- —— 


a part of Christ; look upon the condition of persons (as 
they are revealed in the Gospel) to whom Christ is reach- 
ed out; and the consideration of their perscns will plain- 
ly show to you that there is no kind of sinfulness can bar 
a person from having a part in Christ. Consider Christ’s 
own expression, ‘I came to seek and to save that which 
was lost; I came not to call the righteous, but sinners, to 
repentance ; the whole need not a physician, but they 
that are sick ;’ here still the persons are considered in the 
worst condition (as some might think) rather than in the 
best. Our Saviour is pleased to express himself in a di- 
rect contrary way to the opinion of men. ‘’ came not to 
call the righteous, but sinners ; the poor publican that 
had nothing to plead for himself went away more justified 
than the proud pharisee, who pleaded with God, ‘I thank 
thee that I am not such an one.’ 

“ Men think righteousness brings t em near to Christ ; 
beloved, our righteousness is that which puts a man away 
from Christ ; stumble not at the expression, it is the clear 
truth of the Gospel; not simply a doing of service and 
duty doth put away from Christ; but upon the doing 
of duty and service to expect acceptance with Christ 
or participation in Christ—this kind of righteousness is 
the only separation between Christ and a people; and 
whereas no sinfulness in the world can debar a people, 
their righteousness may debar them.”* 

Possibly some may object to such terms as these being 
too strong and unguarded, but a full consideration of 
them will show that they are such as would naturally 
flow from the lips of a Luther when inculeating faith 
alone as the means of our salvation, and are fully borne 
out by the strong expressions of Paul when writing to 
the Romans and Galatians. The fact is, that very strong 
terms are necessary to make men see the whole of this 
truth, for it is one which of all things the mind can least 
receive. 


* Crisp, 


gn hare a eh TT eI BIS AS rena sirit cor SS al 


nh 0:5 hg ERE ER RE OPN 
> oe “ 


ni darrigos ict + 


78 


ed 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


ee 


If it were possible to make men clearly understand 
that justification is not in the least degree by their own 
works, how easy would it be to comfort them! but 
herein lies the greatest of all difficulties. Man cannot be 
taught that his. goodness is no increase to God’s wealth, 
and his sin no diminution of divine riches ; he will for 
ever be imagining that some little preserits must be offer- 
ed, and that mercy never can be the gratuitous bounty of 
Heaven. Even the miserable creature who has learned. 
his own bankruptcy and beggary, while assured that he 
cannot bring anything, yet trembles to come naked and 
as he is. He knows he cannot do anything, but he can 
scarcely credit the promise which seems too good to be 
vrue—“ I will heal, their backsliding, I will love them 
freely : for mine anger is turned away from him.”* Yea, 
when he cannot den ny the evidence of his own eyes, be- 
cause the kind word stares him in the face he will turn 
away from its glories under the sad supposition that thev 
are intended for all men save himself. The air, the stream, 
the fruit, the joys and luxuries of life, he takes freely 
nor ever asks whether these were not intended for a 
special people; but at the upper springs he stands fear- 
ing to dip his pitcher, lest the flowing flood should refuse 
to enter it because the vessel was too earthy to be fit to 
contain such pure and precious water: conscious that in 
Christ is all his help, it yet appears too great a presump- 
tion even to touch the hem of the Saviour’s garment. 
Nor is it easy to persuade the mourning penitent that sin 
is no barrier to grace, but that “where sin abounded, 
grace did much more abound ; and only the spirit of God 
can make the man who knows himself as nothing at all, 
receive Jesus as his all in all. When the Lord has set his 
heart on a man, it is not a great difficulty that will move 
him from his purpose of salvation, and therefore “he de- 
vises means that his banished be not expelled from him.” + 


a er 


* Hog, xiv. 4. +2 Sam, xiv. 14. 


es 


nderstand 
their own 
em! but 
cannot be 
s wealth, 
e will for 
; be offer- 
bounty of 


is learned 


d that he 
vked and 
it he can 
‘ood to be 
»ve them 
ve Yea, 
eyes, be- 
will turn 
that thev 
e stream, 
es freely 
ed for a 
nds fear- 
ld refuse 
be fit to 
s that in 
bresump- 
arment, 
that sin 
ounded, 
t of God 
ig at all, 
s set his 
ill move 
“he de- 
him,” - 


JESUS DESIRED. 


ie 


By the divine instruction of the Holy Ghost, the sinner 
is “sanghh that Jesus is the sinner’s friend, adapted to his 
case, and “able to save unto the uttermost.” Even then, 
too often, the work is not complete; for the soul now 
labours to find him whom it needs, and it often happens 
that the search is prolonged through months of weariness 
and days of languishing. If the Church, in the canttcles, 
confesses, “ By night on my bed I sought him whom my 
soul loveth; I sought him, but I found him not. I will 
rise now, and go about the city in the streets, and in the 
broad ways I will seek hin whom my soul loveth; I 
sought him but I found him not,” surely, even if our 
reader’s history does not confirm the fact’ that erace is 
sometimes hidden, he will at least assent to the probabil- 
ity of it, and pray for the many who are crying, “ Oh that 
I knew where I might find him.” 

May Jesus smile on our humble endeavour to trace 
the steps of our own soul, so that any who are in this 
miserable condition may escape by the same means! O 
ye prisoners of hope, who are seeking a Redeemer who 
apparently eludes your grasp, let your earnest prayer ac- 
company your reading, while you fervently cry— 


‘* Saviour, cast a pitying eye, 
Bid my sins and sorrows ena : 
Whither should a sinner fly ? 
Art not thou a sinner’s friend ? 
Rest in thee I gasp to find, 
Wretched I, and poor, and blind. 


‘** Didst thou ever see a soul 
More in need of help than mine ? 
Then refuse to make me whole ; 
Then withhold the balm divine : 
But if I do want thee most, 
Come, and seek, and save the lost, 


‘** Haste, oh haste to my relief ; 
From the iron furnace take ; 
Rid me of my sin and griet, 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


For thy love and mercy’s sake ; 
Set my heart at liberty, 
Show forth all thy power in me. 


** Me, the vilest of the race, 
Most unholy, most unclean ; 
Me, the farthest from thy face, 
Full of misery and sin ; 
Me with arms of love receive ; 
Me, of sinners chief—forgive | ’’* 


We propose— 

I. To mark the hopeful signs connected with this state 
of heart ; 

II. To give certain excellent reasons why the soul is 
permitted to tarry in it; and 

III. To hold forth sundry plain directions for beha- 
viour in it, and escape from it. 


I, It is our pleasant duty to note the hopeful signs 
which gladden us when reviewing this state. 

1. We are cheered by observing that the longing of the 
spirit is now entirely after Jesus—“Oh that 1 knew 
where I might find Hii!” Once, like the many whom 
David mentions, the inquiry was, “Who will show us any 
good?” A question indis’riminately addressed to any 
and all within hearing, demanding with eagerness any 
good in all the world. But now the desires have found a 
channel, they are no longer like the wide-spread sheet of 
water covering with shallow depth a tract of marsh teem- 
ing with malaria and pestilence, but having found a 
channel, they rush forward in one deep and rapid stream, 
seeking the broad ocean, where sister streams have long 
since mingled their floods. 

Of most men the complaint is true, that they will 
“bore and thread the spheres” with the “quick, piercing 


> 


eye” of the astronomer, or “cut through the working 
3 * Charles Wesley, 


niet ig) 


this state 
e soul is 


for beha- 


ful signs 


ng of the 
1 knew 
y whom 
us any 
to any 
hess any 
found a 
sheet of 
h teem- 
found a 
stream, 
ve long 


ey will 
lercing 
rorking 


JESUS DES!RED. 81 


-- 


wave” to win the pearl, or wear themselves away in 
smoky toil, while as “subtle chymics” they divest and 
strip the creature naked, till they find the callow princi- 
ples within their nests; in fine, will do anything and 
everything of inferior importance, but here are so negli- 
gent that it is truly asked, 


‘¢ What hath not man sought out and found 
But his dear God?” * 


When the heart can express itself in the words of our 
text,it is far otherwise, for to it every other subject is trivial, 
and every other object vain. Then, too, there was the 
continual prayer after pardon, conversion, washing, in- 
struction, justification, adoption, and all other spiritual 
blessings; but now the soul discerns all mercies bound up 
in one bundle in Jesus, and it inquires no more for cassia, 
aloes, and camphire, but asks for Him who hath the savour 
of all good ointmerts. It is no small mark of grace when 
we can esteem Jesus to be all we want. He who believeth 
there is gold in the mine, and desires to obtain it, will 
not be long before he hath it; and he who knoweth Jesus 
to be full of hid treasures of mercy, and seeketh him 
diligently, shall not be too long detained from a possession 
of him. We have never known a sinner anxious for 
Jesus—for Jesus only—who did not in due time discover 
Jesus as his friend, “ waiting to be gracious.” 

Our own experience recalls us to the period when we 
panted for the Lord, even for Him, our only want. Vain 
to us were the mcre ordinances—vain as bottles scorched 
by the simoom, and drained of their waters. Vain were 
veremonies—vain as empty wells to the thirsty Areb, 
Vain were the delights of the flesh—bitter as the waters 
of Marah, which even the parched lips of Israel refused to 
drink. Vain were the directions of the legal preacher—. 
useless as the howling of the wind to the benighte 


_——— ee 


* Herbert. 


82 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


wanderer. Vain, worse than vain, were our refuges of 
lies, which fell about our cars like Dagon’s temple on the 
heads of the worshippers. One only “hope we had, one 
sole refuge for our misery. Save where that ark floated, 
north, south, east, and west, were one broad expanse of 
troubled waters; save where that star burned, the sky 
was one vast field of unmitigated darkness. Jesus, Jesus 
Jesus! he alone, he without another, had become the 
solitary hiding-place against the storm. As the wounded, 
lying on the battle-field, with wounds which, like fires, 
consume his moisture, utters only one monotonous ery of 
thrilling importunity, “ Water, water, water!” so did we 
perpetually send our prayer to heaven, “Jesus, thou Son 


{9 fi 


of David, have mercy on me! O Jesus, come to me ! | 


“Gracious Lord! incline thine ear, ] 
My requests vouchsafe to hear ; 
Hear my never-ceasing ery— 
Give me Christ, or else I die. 


‘¢ Wealth and honour I disdain, 
Earthly comforts, Lord, are vain; 
These can never satisfy, 

Give me Christ, or else I die. 


‘¢ Lord, deny me what thou wilt, 
Only ease me of my guilt ; 
Suppliant at thy feet I lie, 
Give me Christ, or else I die. ; 


** All unholy and unclean, 
T am nothing else but sin ; 
On thy mercy I rely, 
Give me Christ, or else I die, 


‘Thou dost freely save the lost, 
In thy grace alone I trust ; 

With my earnest suit comply, 
Give me Christ, or else I die. 


refuges of 
nple on the 
e had, one 
ark floated, 
expanse of 
d, the sky 
esus, Jesus 
ecome the 
> wounded, 
, like fires, 
10us ery of 
so did we 
, thou Son 
0 me!” 


JESUS DESIRED. 


‘* Thou ost promise to forgive 
All who in thy Son believe ; 
Lord, I know thou canst not lie, 
Give me Christ, or else I die. 


‘¢ Father, does thy justice frown ? 
Let me shelter in thy Son! 
Jesus to thy arms I fly, 

Come and save me, or I die.” 


As he that tantaiiseth thirst with painted rivers—as 
he that embittereth hunger’s pangs by the offering of 
pictured fruits, so wure they who spoke of ought else save 
Christ and him erucifiel. Our heart ached with a void 
the whole earth could not fill; it heaved with a desire as 
irresistible as the mountain torrent, and as little able to 
be restrained as the volcano when swelling with its fiery 
lava. Every power, every passion, every wish, moved 
onward in one direction, Like an army pressing upwards 
through a breach, did our united powers rush forward to 
enter the city of salvation by one door—that door Jesus 
the Lord. Our soul could spare no portion of itself for 
others ; it pressed the whole of its strength into the ser- 
vice to win Christ, and to be found in him. And oh! how 
glorious did Jesus then seem! what would we not have 


given to have had the seantiest morsel of his grace? “A 


kingdom for a horse!” eried the routed monarch. “A 
kingdom for a look—a world for a smile—our whole 
selves for one kind word!” was then our far wiser prayer. 
Oh what crushing we would have endured, if in the 
crowd we could have approached his person! what tramp- 
ling would we have borne, if our finger might have 
touched the lowest hem of his varments ! ~ Bear us witness, 
ye hours of ardent desire, what horrors we would have 
braved, what dangers we would have encountered, what 
tortures we would have suffered, for one brief f glimpse of 
Him whom our souls desired to know! We could have 
trodden the burning marl of hell at his bidding, if his 


gin ndae e i qantas 


S4 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


face had but been in prospect; and as for Peter’s march 
upon the deep, we would have waded to our very uecks 
without a fear, if it were but with half a hope of a wel- 
come from the Lord on the other side. He had no rob- 
bers then to share his throne, no golden calf to provoke 
him to jealousy. Je was the monarch reigning without 
a vival. No part of our heart was then shut up from him ; 
7 was welcomed in every chamber of our being. There 

vas not a tablet of the heart which was not e1 leTaven 
with his name, nor a string of our harp which did not 
vibrate with his praise, nor an atom of our frame which 
would not have leaped for very joy at the distant sound 
of his footsteps. Such a condition of longing alone for 
Jesus is so healthy, that many advanced believers would 
be well-nigh content to retrace their steps, if they might 
once more be fully occupied with that desire to the ex- 
clusion of every other. 

If my reader be fully resolved to satisfy his hunger only 
with the manna which cometh down from heaven—if he 
be determined to slake his thirst at no stream save that 
which gusheth from the Rock—if he will accept no cor- 
dial of comfort save that which is compounded of the 
herbs of Gethsemane—it is, it must be, well with him. 
If none but Jesus is thy delight, take heart. Augustine 
cast away Tully’s works because there was no Christ in 
them; if thou, like him, dost renounce all but Christ, 
Christ will never renounce thee. 

2, Another pleasing feature of this case is, the intense 
sincerity and ardent earnestness of the soul. Here is an 
“Oh!”—a deep, impassioned, burning ejaculation of de- 
sire. It is no fanciful wish, which a little difficulty will 
presently overcome—it is no effervescence of excitement, 
whieh time will remove; but it is a real want, fixed in 
the core of the heart so firmly, that nothing but a supply 
of the need can silence the importunate petition. It is 
not the passing sigh, which the lhalf-awakened heave as a 


> Carr mnRSeNnE + annsietnteate 


er’s march 
ery necks 
e of a wel- 
id no rob- 
0 provoke 
io without 
from him ; 
1g. There 
t engraven 
h did not 
ume which 
ant sound 
alone for 
ers would 
hey might 
0 the ex- 


inger only 
en—if he 
save that 
Hpt no cor- 
led of the 
with him. 
ugustine 
Christ in 
ut Christ, 


ve intense 
ere 1S an 
on of de- 
ulty will 
citement, 
, fixed in 
a supply 
bn, It is 
eave asa 


JESUS DESIRED. 85 


compliment to an eloquent discourse or a stirring traet,— 
it is not the transient wish of the awe-struck spectator 
whe haz seen a sudden death or a notable judgment,—it 
is not even the longing of a soul in love for a time with 
the moral excellences of Christ; but it is the prayer of 
one who needs must pray, who cannot, who dare not, rest 
satisfied until he finds Jesus—who can no more restrain 
his groaning than the light clouds can refuse to fly before 
the ‘violence of the wind. We have e, we hope, many ¢ 
time enjoyed nearness to the throne of grace in prayer ; 
but perhaps never did such a preyer escape our lips as 
that which we offered in the bitterness of our spirit when 
seeking the Saviour. We have often poured out our 
hearts with greater freedom, with more delight, with 
stronger faith, with more eloquent language ; but never 
never have we cried with more vehemence of unquench- 
able desire, or more burning heat of unsatiable longing. 
There was then no sleepiness or sluggishness in our de- 
votion; we did not then need the whip of command to 
drive us into labours of prayer; but our soul could not be 
content unless with sighs and lamentations—with strong 
crying and tears it gave vent to our bursting hear ts. 
Then we had no need to be dragged to our closets like 
oxen to the slaughter, but we flew to them like doves to 
their windows; and when there we needed no pumping 
up of desires, but they gushed forth like a fountain of 
waters, although at times we felt we could scarcely find 
them a channel. 

Mr. Philpot justly observes, “When the Lord is gra- 
ciously pleased to enable the soul to pour out its desires, 
and to offer up its fervent breathings at his feet, and to 
give them out as He gives them in, then to call upon the 
Lord is no point of duty, which is to be attended to as a 
duty; it is no point ©: legal constraint, which must be 
done because the Word of God speaks of it; but it is a 
feeling, an experience, an inward work, which spring: 


86 THE SAINT AND HIS SAViO Un. 


ee Oe OT ES SNR etre cnemantoneh: ei sirens = +n oer ecouert-inorden tlt 


from the Lord’s hand, and which flows in the Lords own 
divine channel. Thus when the Lord is pleased to pour 
out this ‘Spirit of grace and of supplication, we must 
pray; but we do not pray because we must; we pray be- 
cause we have no better occupation, we have no more 
earnest desire, we have no more powerful feeling, and we 
have no more invincible and irresistible constraint. The 
living child of God groans and sighs, because it is the ex- 
pression of his wants—because it is a language which 
pours forth the feelings of his heart—because groans and 
sighs are pressed out of him by the heavy weight upon 
him. A man lying in the street with a heavy weight 
upon him will call for help; he does not say, ‘It is my 
duty to cry to the passers-by for help ;’ he cries for help 
because he wants to he delivered. A man with a broken 
leg does not say, ‘It is my duty to send for a surgeon ;’ 
he wants him to set the limb. And a man in a raging 
disease does not say, ‘It is my duty to send for a physi- 
cian ;’ he wants him to heal his disease. So when God 
the Holy Spirit works in a child of God, he prays, not 
out of a sense of duty, but from a burdened heart; he 
prays, because he cannot but pray ; he groans, because he 
cannot but groan; he sighs, because he must sigh, having 
an inward weight, an inwer Surden, an inward experi- 
ence, in which, and out of wiich, he is compelled to call 
upon the Lord.” * . 

The supplication of the penitent is no mechanical form 
of devotion, followed for the sake of merit ; it is the natu- 
ral consequence of the wounding of Jesus ; and its offerer 
knows no more of merit in presenting it than in breathing 
or any other act which necessity prevents him from sus- 
pending. This “Oh!” is one which will not rise once 
and then sink forever ; it is not the explosion of a starry 
rocket, succeeded by darkness ; but it will be an inces- 
sant ejaculation of the inner man. As at some of our 


*Se:mon on Prayer and ite Aswwer 


Ta ES ST poor sneer cr ore emer ara es a a a acetate on — eae 
° bee \ , 
fie 


Bet 


aK 
eV 
th 
ex 
wl 
of 
op 
tic 
si’ 
Vil 
me 
wr 


‘ 


wh 
par 
soil 
wil 
eth 
we 
spi 

3 
wh 
mic 
ter: 
eas 
est 
me! 
for 
int 
the 
of 1 
pro 
anc 
hig 
tim 
Go 


rds own 


1 to pour 


we must 
pray be- 
no more 
rand we 
nt. The 
is the ex- 
ye which 
‘oans and 
oht upon 
y weight 
‘It is my 
; for help 
9 broken 
urgeon 3’ 
a raging 
a physi- 
rhen God 
rays, not 
eart; he 
cause he 
, having 
| experi- 
d to eall 


al form 
1e natu- 
s offerer 
eathing 
Om SUS- 
ise once 
a Starry 
1 inces- 
of our 


JESUS DESIRED, 8 


doors every hour brings a post, so at the door of merey 
every hour will hear 2 prayer from such an one; in fact, 
the soul will be full of prayer even when it is not in the 
exercise itself—even as a censer may be filled with incense 
when no fire is burning init. Prayer will become a state 
of the soul, perpetual and habitual, needing nothing but 
opportunity to develop itself in the outward act of "peti- 
tioning at the feet of mercy. It is well when Mr. De- 
sires-awake is sent to court, for he will surely provail. 
¥. iolence taketh the kingdom by force ; hard knocks open 
merey’s door; swift running overtake 8 the promise ; hard 
wrestling wins the ] lessing. 

When the child crieth well, his lungs are sound; and 
when the seeker can with impetuous earnestness implore 
pardon, he is most surely not far from health. When the 
soil of our garden begins to rise, we know that the bulb 
will soon send forth its shoot; so when the heart break- 
eth for the longing which it hath unto God’s testimonies, 
we perceive that Jesus will soon appear to gladden the 
spirit. 

3. We are rejoiced to observe the sense of ignerarce 
which the secker here expresses—* Oh that 1 knew where 1 
might findhim!” Men are by nature very wise in n 
ters of religion, and in their own opinion they might 

easily set up for Doctors of Divi inity without the slighi 
est spiritual enlightenment. It is a remar':able fact that 
men who find every science in the world to be too mueh 
for them, even when they have but waded ankle-deep 
into the elements thereof, can yet affect to be-masters of 
> ology, and competent, yea, infallible judges in matter: 
of religion. Nothing is more easy than to pretend to a 


we nn acquaintance with the religion of the cross, 


and even to maintain a reputation as a well-taught and 
highly-instrueted disciple of the Lamb ; and, at the same 
time, nothing is more rare than really to be taught of 


God, and ‘lluminated by the Spirit; aod yet without 


R8 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


this the religion of Jesus never can be really understood. 
Natural men may array themselves in robes of learning, 
ascend the chair of profession, and thence teach to others 
doctrines with which they fancy themselves to be thor- 
oughly conversant; and if a word were hinted of their 
deticieney in knowledge, and their inherent inability to 
discern spiritual things, how wrathful they would be- 
come, how fiercely would they denounce the bigotry of 
such an assertion, and how furiously would they condemn 
the cant and fanaticism which they conceive to be the 
origin of so humiliating a doctrine! 

To be as little children, and bend their necks to the 
yoke of Jesus, the Master, is quite out of the question 
with the men of this generation who love to philosophise 
the Word, aud give what they call “intellectual” views 
of the Gospel. How little do they suspect that, pro- 
fessing themselves to be wise, they have become fools! 
How little do they imagine that their grand theories and 
learned essays are but ‘methods of the madness of folly, 
and, like paintings on the windows of their understanding, 
assist to shut out the light of the Holy Spirit. Self-con- 
ceit in men who are destitute of heavenly light, uncon- 
sciously to them doth exercise itself on that subject upon 
which their ignorance is of necessity the greatest. They 
willacknowle: lge that when they have studied astronomy, 
its sublimities are beyond them ; they will not arrogate 
to themselyes a lordship of the entire regions of any one 
kingdom of knowledge: but here, in theology, they feel 
themee ives abundantly qualified, if they have some readi- 

sia the original languages, and have visited the schools 
of the universitie a4 where as & man might with as much 
justice wails hi 'mself professor of botany, because he knows 
the scientifis names of the classes and orders, altnough he 
has never seen one of the flowers thus named and arranged 


-for what can education teach of theology but names 
avd theories? Experience alone can bring the things 


een 


nderstood. 
’ learning, 
1 to others 
(0 be thor- 
d of their 
nability to 
would be- 
bigotry of 
y condemn 

to be the 


eks to the 
» question 
Lilosophise 
al” views 
that, pro- 
ome fools ! 
eories and 
ss of folly, 
rstanding, 
Self-con- 
it, uncon- 
pject. upon 
st. They 
stronomy, 
arrogate 
any one 
they feel 
ne readi- 
he schools 
as much 
1e knows 
nough he 
arranged 
it names 
ke things 


JESUS DESIRED. 89 


— 


themselves before our eyes, and in the light of Jesus can 
we alone discern them. We are pleased, theres, to dis- 
cover in the utteranee of the awakened sou’ «. confession 
of ignorance. The man inquires “ Where he can find the 
Lord?” He is self-confident no longer, but is willing to 
ask his way to heaven; he is prepared to go to the very 
dame-school of piety, and learn the alphabet of god ‘ness ; 
may be distinguished for his learning, but now a little 
child may lead him ; his titles, his gowns, his diploma, his 
dignity, all these are laid aside, and down he sits at the 
feet of Jesus to begin with, or rather to commence learn- 
ine What he never ‘knew before. 

Conviction of ignorance is the door step of the temple 
of wisdom. ‘“ Itis said in the Creed that Christ descended 
into hell: descendit wt ascendat—He took his rising from 

he lowest place to ascend into the highest; and herein 
Christ readeth a good lecture unto ws—he teacheth us 
that humility is the way to glory.”* Seneca remarked, 
“T suppose that many might have attained to wisdom, 
had they not thought that they had already attained it, a 
We must first be emptied of every particle of fleshly wis- 
dom, ere we can say that “Christ is made unto us wis- 
dom.” We must know our folly, and confess it, before 
we can be accepted as the disciples of Jesus. It is mar- 
vellous how soon he doth unfrock us of our grand ap 
parel, and how easily our wisdom disappears like a bubble 
vanishing mM air, We were never greater fools than when 
our wisdom was the greatest im our own esteem; but as 
soon as real wisdom came, straightway our opinion of our- 
selves fell from the clouds to the buttom of the mountains. 
We were no divines or doctors when we were under the 
convincing hand of the Spirit ; we were far more like babes 
for ignorance, and we felt ourselves to be very beasts for 
folly,t Like men lost in a dark wood, we could not find 
our paths, the roads which were once e apparent enough 


*Kphr. Udall’s Saved + Seneen de Tra, it, ili, ec. 36. + Pg, Inxili. 9». 
K 


90 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


TI 


were then hedged up with thorns; and the very entrance 
to the narrow way had to be pointed out by Evaagelist,* 
and marked by a light. Nevertheless, blessed is he who 
desireth to learn the fear of the Lord, for he sl 21] find it 
the begining of wisdom. 

Nor, in the present case, hath a serse of ignorarce 
driven the man to pry into secrets too deep for human 
wisdom. He doth not exclaim, “Oh that I knew where 
sin took its origin, or how predestination meeteth the 
agency of man!” No; he seeks only this, “Oh that I 
knew where I might find Him!” Many are puzzling 
themselves about abstract questions while their eternal 
interests are in imminent peril; such men are like the 
man who counted the stars, but tak*ng no heed to his 
feet, fell into a pit and perished. “ We may socner think 
to span the sun, or grasp a star, or see a gnat swallow a 
leviathan, than fully understand the deba/es of eternity. 
.... Too great an inquisitiveness beyond our line is as 
much a provoking arrogance as a blockish negligence of 
‘what is revealed, is a slighting ingratitude.” The qu‘ck- 
ened spirit disdains te plack the wild flowers of carnal 
knowledge; he is not aribitious to reach the tempting 
beauties blooming on the edge of the cliffs which skirt 
the sea of the unrevealed ; but he anxiously looks around 
for the rose of Sharon, the lily of the valley. He who 
thus studieth only to know Christ, shall soon, by the as- 
sistance of the Holy Spirit, learn enough to spell out his 
own salvation. 

4, An evidence of grace is presented to us by the ab- 
sence of all chorce as to where the Saviour is discovered. 
“Oh that T knew where I might find him!” Here is no 
stipulation ; Jesus is wanted, and let him be wherever he 
may, the soul is prepared to go after him. We, when in 
this state of experience, knew little of sect or denomina- 
tion. before our conviction we could fight fox names, 


* Bunyan’s Pilgrim. + Charnock’s Divine Attributes, 


ry entrance 
vaagelist,* 
lis he who 
st all find it 


" ignorance 
for human 
new where 
eeteth the 
‘Oh that I 
e puzzling 
eir eternal 
e like the 
eed to his 
cner think 
swallow a 
f eternity. 
* line is as 
ligence of 
Che quck- 
of carnal 

tempting 
rhich skirt 
ks around 

He who 
by the as- 
ll out his 


the ab- 
lascovered., 
dere is no 
erever he 
when in 
enomira- 
= names, 


JESUS DESIRED. 91 


like mercenaries for other men’s countries. The mottoes 
of our party were higher in our esteem than the golden 
rules of Christianity ; and we should have been by no 
means grieved at the conflagration of every other section 
of professors, if our own might have been elevated on the 
ruins. Every rubric and form, every custom and anti- 
quity, we would have stained with our blood, if necessary, 
in order to preserve them; and mightily did we shout 
coneerning our own Church, “ Great is Diana of the Ephe- 
sians.” Nota nail in the church-docr bat we reverenced 
it—not a vestment which we did not admire; or, if we 
loved not pomp, simplicities were magnified into our very 
household gods. We hated popery, but were essentially 
papistical ; for we could have joined His Unholiness in 
all his anathemas, if he would buthave hurled them against 
those who differed from us. We too did, in our own 
fashion curse by bell, book, and candle, all who were not 
of our faith and order; and could searcely think it possi- 
ble that many attained salvation beyond the paie of our 
Church, or that Jesus deigned to give them so much as ¢ 
transient visit. 

How changed we were when, by Divine grace, the sec- 
tarianism of our ungodliness did hide its head for shame! 
We then thought that we would go among Methodists, 
Baptists, Episcopalians, Independents, Presbyterians, or 
anywhere, so we could but find a Redeemer for our guilty 
souls. [tis more than probable that we found it neces- 
sary to shift our quarters, and attend the very house 
which we lately detested, to bow with the people whom 
once we held in abhorrence. All the fancies of our for- 
mer lives dissolved before the heat of our desire. The 
huntsinan loveth the mountain wl ich shadeth his valley 
more than all its giant brothers; but nevertheless, when 
in hot pursuit of the chamois, he leapeth from crag to 
crag, and asks not what is the name of the rock upon 
which the object of his chase hath bounded; so the sin- 


92 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


ner, ardently following after the Saviour, will pursue him 
whithersoever he goeth. 

Nor at such seasons did we regard the respectability of 
the denomination or the grandeur of the structure in which 
God was adored. The chapel in the dark alley, the des- 
pised and deserted church, the disreputable schoolroom, 
were now no longer noticed with a sneer; but whether 
under the vaulted sky of heaven, the cobwebbed thatch 
of a barn, the dingy ceiling of a village station, or the 
maguitic ent roof of the temple of ‘the oreat assembly, we 
only sought one thing, and that one thing found, all places 
were on a exe No. praising a church for its architectu- 
ral be a meeting-house for its aborig- 
ina] anions both buildings were valued not by their 
ficure but by ‘their contents; and where Jesus was more 
easily to be found, there did we make our haunt. It is 
true our servants, our ploughmen, and our paupers, sat 
with us to hear the same word; but we did not observe 
the difference, though once perhaps we might have looked 
aghast if any but my lady in satin, or my lord in super- 
fine broadcloth, had ventured into a pew within the range 
of our breath. To us the company mattered not, so long 
av the Master of the Feast would but reveal himself. The 
vlace might be unconsecrated, the minister unordained, 
the clerk uneducated, the sect despicable, and the service 
unpretending, but if Jesus did but show his face there it 
was all we wished for. ‘There is no authentic account of 
the dimensions, the fashion, or furniture, of the room in 
which Jesus suddenly appeared and pronounced his “ peace 
be unto you.” Nor do we think that any one of the as- 
sembly even so much as thought thereof while their Lord 
was present. Itis Well when we are content to go whith- 
ersoever the Lamb doth lead. Doubtless, the catacombs 
of Rome, the glens of Scotland, and the conventicles of 
England, have been more frequented by the King of kings 
chan cathedrals or chavels-royal: therefore do the godly 


ursue him 


tability of 
ein which 
7, the des- 
‘hoolroom, 
t whether 
ed thateh 
mn, or the 
mbly, we 
, all places 
rchitectu- 
ts aborig- 
_ by their 
was more 
nt. It is 
upers, sat 
ot observe 
ve looked 
in super- 
the range 
, 80 long 
self The 
ordained, 
e service 
e there it 
count of 
room in 
is “ peace 
bf the as- 
heir Lord 
oO whith- 
tacombs 
ticles of 
of kings 
re godly 


JESUS DESIRED, 93 


count it little where they worship, looking only for His 
presence Which maketh a hovel glorious, and deprecating 
his absence, which makes even a temple desolate. We 
would in our anxious mood have followed Jesus in the 
cave, the mountain, the ravine, or the catacomb, so that 
we might but have been with the circle of his influence. 
Nor would we have blushed to have sought Jesus among 
his kinsfolk and acquaintance—the sick, the poor, the un- 
educated, but yet sincere children of light. How did we 
then delight to sit in that upper room where stars looked 
between the tiles, and hear the he: avenly conversation 
which, froma miserable pallet surrounded by ragged hi ang- 
ings, an enfeebled saint of the Lord did hold with us ! 
Like divers, we valued the pearl, even though the shell 
might be a broken one, Hor did we care where we went to 
win it. When those creaking stairs trembled beneath our 
weight, when that bottomless chair afforded us uncasy 
rest, and when the heat and effluvia of that sick-room 
drove our companion away, did we not feel more than 
doubly repaid while that friend of Jesus told us of all his 
love, his faithfulness and grace? It is frequently the 
case that the most despised ‘servants of the Lord are made 
the chosen instruments of comforting distressed souls, and 
building them up in the faith. The writer confesses his 
eternal obligations to an old cook, who was despised as an 
Antinomian, but who in her kitchen taught him many of 
the deep things of God, and removed many a doubt from 
his youthful mind. Even eminent men have been indebt- 
ed to humble individuals for their deliverance ; take, for 
instance, Paul, and his comforter, Ananias; and in our 
own day, Bunyan, instructed by the holy women at Bed- 
ford. True seekers will hunt everywhere for Jesus, and 
will not be too proud to learn from beggars or little chil- 
dven. We take gold from dark mines or muddy streams ; 
it were foolish to refuse instruction in salvation from the 
most unlettered or uncouth. Let us be really in earnest 


Mase 


1.4 


6” 


1.25 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


W 
Oe 
“er 


<5 
Z 
“2 


N 


94 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


a eee 


after Christ, then circumstance and place will be lightly 
esteemed. 

We remark also that there is no condition for distance 
in this question, it is only “ where ;” and though it be a 
thousand miles away, the man has his feet in readiness 
for the journey. Desire o’erleapeth space; leagues to it 
are inches, and oceans narrow into straits. Where, at 
one time, a mile would tire the body, a long journey after 
the Word is counted as nothing ; yea,to stand in the house 
of God for hours during service is reckoned a pleasure and 
not a hardship. The Hindoo devotee, to find a hopeless 
salvation, will roll himself along for hundreds of miles; it 
seems but natural that we, when searching for etecnal life, 
should count all things bat loss for the excellency of the 
knowledge of Christ Jesus cur Lord. Mar y Magdalene 
only needed to know where they had laid her Lord, and 
her resolve was, “I will take him away ;” for surely, she 
thought, her bodily strenoth could never fait under sucha 
burden, and she measured the power of her body by the 
might of her love, So do destitute sinners, who need a 
Saviour, altogether Jaugh at hazards cr hardships which 
may intervene. Come mountain or valley, rapid or tock, 
whirlpool or tempest, desire hath girded the traveller wi ith 
on omnipotence of heart, and a world of dangers is trod- 
den beneath the feet, with the shout of Deborah—* O my 
soul, thou hast trodden down strength.” 

“T doubt not,” said Rutherford to Lady Kenmure, “ that 
if hell were betwixt you and Christ, as a river which ye 
behoved to cross ere ye could come at him, but ye would 
willingly put in your foot, and make through to be at 
him, upon hope that he would come in himself into the 
deepest of the river, and lend you his hand.” Doubtless 
it is so with thee, reader, if thou art as we have de- 
seribed., 

We think also we may be allowed to add, that the ear- 
nest inquirer d ser not object to any position of humiliation 


1 be lightly 


for distance 
ch it be a 
n readiness 
agues to it 
Where, at 
urney after 
n the house 
leasure and 
| a hopeless 
of miles; it 
eternal life, 
ency of the 
Magdalene 
Lord, and 
surely, she 
nder such a 
ody by the 
vho need a 
nips which 
id or rock, 
veller with 
ers 1s trod- 


h—“*O my 


ure, “that 
t which ye 
» ye would 
h to be at 
lf into the 
Doubtless 
. have de- 


ut_ the ear- 
umiliation 


JESUS DESIRED, 


$$. CC 


which may be requ'ved of him ere he can “see Jesus.” It 
is only demanded “where?” and though the reply may 
ba, “ There, in yonder cell of penitence, on your »ended 
knees, whip of all your glories, shall you alone behold 
him,” no delay will :evea! the lurking pride; but an in- 
stantaneous and joyful obedience will manifest. that the 
ore absorb'ng passion has o tirely swallowed up all ideas 
of dignity, hor our, and pric 

Like Benhadad, when in ‘9 ‘ger, hearing thrt the king 
of Israel is a merciful king, we w! ‘IL consent to put sack- 
c.oth upon our loins, and ropes upon our necks, and go in 
unto him, hopiag for some words of favour. We make a 
surrender at discretion, without reserve of the arms of 
our sins or the. baggage of our pleasures. He that is 
down so low as to be who ‘y submissive, will find that even 
justice will not smite him. Mercy always flieth near the 
ground, ‘The flower of grace groweth in the dells of hu- 
mility. ‘The staxs of love shine in the night of our self- 
despair, Jf truth Je not in a well, certainly mercy doth. 
The hand of jus’'ce spares the sinner who has thrown 
away both the sword of rebellion and the plumes of his 
pride. If we will do and be anything or everything, so 
that we ray but win Christ, we shall soon find him to 
be everythisg to us. There is no more hopeful sign of 
coming @ ace the an emptiness of our own selfish terms 
and conditions, for he resisteth the proud, but giveth grace 
unto the lowly. 

Thus have we tried to sum up all the promises which . 
this state affords, but cheering though they be, we fea: 
few will accept the comfort they afford; for “as he that 
poureth vinegar on nitre, so is he that singeth songs to a 

sad heart ;” and it is generally in vain to condole a pa- 
tient under an operation by any reflections on the benefit 
thereof, seeing that while the pain lasteth he will still ery 
out and groan. Nevertheless, we who have escaped can- 
not refrain from singing without the walls of the dungeon 


96 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


mms nes ae ee te ee eee eee ee 


in the hope that some within may hear and take heart. 
Let us say to every mourner in Zion, Be of good cheer, 
for “He who walked in the garden, and made a noise 
that made Adam hear his voice, will also at some time 
walk in your soul, and make you hear a more sweet 
word, yet ye will not always hear the noise and din of 
his feet when he walketh.” * Ephraim is bemoaning and 
mourning ft “when he thinketh God is afar off, and hear- 
eth not; and yet God is like the bridegroom, standing 
only behind a thin wall,t and laying to his ear, for he 
saith to himself, I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning 
himself.” “I will surely have mercy upon him, saith 
the Lord.” 

~ Be thou of good cheer, O seeker; go on, for hope pro- 
phesies success, and the signs of thy case prognosticate a 
happy deliverance. None who are like thee have failed 
at last; persevere, and be saved. 


II. We are now arrived at our second division, where- 
in we proposed to consider the reasons of this tarvying. 
May our Divine Illuminator enlighten us while we 
write | 

We believe that many are delayed because they seek 
not rightly, or because they seek not eagerly. With these 
we have just now nothing to do; we are dealing with the 
genuine convert, the sincere searcher, who yet cannot find 
his Lord. To the exerci.zd mind no question is more 
hard to answer than this, “ Why doth he not hear?” but 
when delivered from our distress, nothing is more full of 
joy, sa the rich discovery that “he hath done all things 
well,” 

If our reader be now in sorrow, let him believe what 
he cannot see, and receive the testimony of others who 
now bear witness that “God’s way is in the sea, and his 
path in the deep waters.” 


—— —<$ 


*Rutherford. f Jer. xxxi 18, +t Cant. ii. 9. 


ake heart. 
ood cheer, 
de a noise 
some time 
ore sweet 
and din of 
aning and 
and hear- 
, Standing 
ar, for he 
emoaning 
1im, saith 


hope pro- 
osticate a 
ave failed 


n, where- 
tarvying. 
hile we 


hey seek 
ith these 
r with the 
nnot find 
is more 
ar?” but 
re full of 
ll things 


ve what 
1ers who 


, and his 


JESUS DESIRED. 97 


1. We now perceive that it afjorded pleasure to Jesus 
to view the labours of our faith in pursuit after him. 
Jesus doth often hide his face from his children, that he 
may hear the swect music of their cry. When the wo- 
man of Canaan came before our Lord, he answered her 
not a word, and when her importunity did somewhat 
prevail, a harsh sentence was all she obtained. Yet the 
blessed Jesus was not angry with her, but was pleased to 
behold her faith struggling amid the waves of his seem- 
ing neglect, and finding anchorage even on that hard 
word which appeared like a rock ready to wreck her 
hopes. He was so charmed with her holy daring and 
heavenly resolution, that he detained her for a time to 
feast his eyes upon the lovely spectacle. The woman had 
faith in Christ, and Jesus would let all men see what faith 
can do in honour of its Lord. 

Great kings have among their attendants certain well- 
trained artistes who play before them, while they, sitting 
with their court, behold their feats with pleasure. Now, 
Fwith is the king’s champion, whom he delights to put 
upon labours of the most hereulean kind. Faith hath. 
when bidden by its Master, stopped the sun and chained 
the moon; it hath dried the sea and divided rivers; it 
hath dashed bulwarks to the ground; quenched the vio- 
lence of fire; stopped the mouths of lions; turned to 
fight the armies of the aliens, and robbed death of its 
prey. ZImportunity is ‘he king’s running footman ; he 
hath been known to run whole months together without 
losing his breath, and over mountains he leaps with the 
speed of Asahel; therefore doth the Lord at times try 
his endurance, for he Joveth to see what his own child- 
ren can perform. Prayer, also, is one of the royal mu- 
sicians ; and although many do prefer his brother, who is 
called Praise, yet this one hath ever had an equal share 
of the king’s favour. His lute playeth so sweetly that 
the heavens have smiled with sunshine for the space of 


98 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


—_—— Se 


three years and six months *at the sound thereof; and 
when again the melodious notes were heard, the same 
sky did weep for joy, and rain descended on the earth. 
Prayer hath made God’s axe of vengeance stay in mid 
air, when hastening to fell the cumberer to the ground ; 
and his sword hath been lulled to sleep im its scabbard 
by the soft sonnets of prayer, when it sung of pardons 
bought with blood. Therefore, because Jesus delighteth 
in these courtiers whom he hath chosen, he doth ever 
find them work to do, whereby they may minister unto 
his good pleasure. Surely thou who walkest in darkness, 
and seest no light, thou mayst be well content to ¢ evope 
thy way for a while, if it be true that this midnight jour- 
ney is but one of the feats of faith which God is pleased 
that thou shouldst perform, Go on then in confidence. 
2. We may sometimes regard this delay as an eahi- 
bition of Divine sovereignty. God is not bound to per- 
sons nor to time; as he giveth to whom he pleaseth, so 
doth he bestow his favours in his own time and manner, 
Very frequently the prayer and the answer attend each 
other, as the echo doth the speaker’s voice. Usual!s it is, 
“ Before they call I will answer, and while they are yet 
speaking | will hear.” But Divine prerogative must be 
manifested and maintained, and therefore “he doth some- 
times give temporary denials or protracted delays. Through 
some of our squares the right of way is private, and in 
order to maintain the right, although the road is usually 
open, yet there are g: ates which at times are closed for a 
season, lest any should imagine that they could demand 
a passage; so, although mercy be free and speedy, yet it 
is not always immedi: ate, that men may know that the 
giver has a right to refuse, Jesus is no paid physician, 
who is bound to give us his calls ; therefore he will some- 
times step in late in the day, that we may remember that 
he is not our debtor. Oh! our hearts loathe the pride 


ce ee, 


* James v. 17, 18, 


ne 


hereof; and 
1, the same 
1 the earth. 
stay in mid 
he ground ; 
ts secabbard 
of pardons 
; deli¢hteth 
» doth ever 
nister unto 
un darkness, 
nt to gvope 
night jour- 
l is pleased 
contidence, 
S an exhi- 
md to per- 
easeth, so 
id manner, 
ttend éach 
uit it is, 
ley are yet 
ve must be 
loth some- 
. Through 
ute, and in 
is usually 
osed for a 
ld demand 
dy, yet it 
v that the 
physician, 
will some- 
mber that 
the pride 


JESUS DESIRED. 99 


ee 


which bows not to Divine sovereignty, but arrogantly de- 
clares God to be under obligations to his creatures, Those 
who are full of this satanic spirit will not assert this in. 
plain language, but while they cavil at election, talking 
with impious breath about “ partiality,” “ injustice,” “ re- 
spect of persons,” and such like things, they too plainly 
show that their old nature is yet unhumbled by Divine 
grace. We are sure of this, that no convinced sinner, 
when under a sense of his ill-desert, will ever dispute the 
justice of God in damn. .2 him, or quarrel with the dis- 
tinguishing grace which Heaven giveth to one and not to 
another. if such a person has not yet been able to sub- 
scribe to the doctrine of sovereign, discriminating, electing 
grace, we wonder not that he hath found no peace ; for 
verily Jesus will have him know that hi. bounties are in 
his own hand, and that none can lay any claim to them. 
Herbert, in his Country Parson, says, “ He gives no set 
pension unto any, for then, in time, it will lose the name 
of charity with the poor, and they will reckon upon it, as 
on adebt;” truly it would be even so with the loving- 
kindnesses of the Lord, if they were always bestowed 
where man at first desires them. There is nothing over 
which the Lord is more jealous than his crown—his sove- 
reignty—his right to do as he will with his own. How 


grateful should we be that he uses such lenient and gen- 


tle means to preserve his dignity ; and that while he 
might, if he pleased, block up the gates of salvation for 
ever, he doth only for a moment cause them to be closed, 
that we may sing the more loudly when we obtain an 
entrance through them. 

3. A ministry devoid of gospel grace is a frequent cause 
of long delay in finding the Saviour. Some of us in the 
days of our sorrow for sin were compelled by circum- 
stances to sit under a legal preacher who did but increase 
our pain and aggravate our woe. Destitute of all savour 
and unction, but most of all wanting in a clear view of 


100 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


————— 


Jesus the Mediator, the sermons we heard were wells 


without water, and clouds withort rain. Elegant in dic- J 
tion, admirable in style, and faultless in composition, they %y 


fell on our ears even as the beautiful crystals of snow fall 

upon the surface of a brook,and only tend to swell its floods. 

Good morality, consistent practice, upright dealing, amiable 
behaviour, gentle carriage, and modest deportment were 

the everyday themes of the pulpit; but, alas! they were | 
of as little service to us as Instructions to dance would 

be to a man who has lost both his legs. We have often 
been reminded by such preachers of the doctor who told 
a poor penniless widow that her sick son could easily be 
i cured if she would give him the best wine, and remove 
i him at once to Baden-Baden—the poor creature’s fingers 
staring all the while through the tips of her worn-out 
gloves, as if they wished to see the man who gave advice 
so profoundly impracticable. 

Far be it from us to condemn the preaching of moral- 
ity by such men, for it is doubtless all they can preach, 
and their intentions being good, it is probable they may 
sometimes be of service in restraining the community oy 
from acts of disorder; but we do deny the right of many 
to call themselves Christian ministers, while they con- 
stantly and systematically neglect to declare the truths 
which lie at the very foundation of the Gospel. A re- 
spected bishop of the Episcopalian denomination, * in i. 
addressing the clergy of the last century, said, “ We have " 
long been attempting to reform the nation by moral 
preaching. With what effect ? None. On the contrary, 
we have dexterously preached the people into downright 
infidelity. We must change our voice; we must preach 
Christ and him crucified ; nothing but the Gospel is the 
power of God unto salvation.” We fear that in some 
measure this is the case even now—-would that we dared 
to hope otherwise! Let such of us as are engaged in the 


a a NL SN 


* Bishop Lavington. 


1S Rae espera 
1 Raven vane ecpeneeans owe meere reat vars 


——— 
a 1 


were wells 
rant in dic- 
sition, they 
f snow fall 
ll its floods, 
1g, amiable 
ment were 
they were 
nee would 
have often 
’ who told 
leasily be 
nd remove 
e's fingers 

worn-out 
ve advice 


of moral- 
in preach, 
they may 
MMU by 
; of inany 
they con- 
he truths 
1 =A re 
‘ion, * in 
We have 
IY moral 
contrary, 
ownright 
st preach 
el is the 
in some 
ve dared 
<1 in the 


— 


JESUS DESIRED. 101 


_ 


work of the ministry take heed to ourselves, and to our 
doctrine, that we cause no needless pain, and retard no 
men’s progress to a Saviour; and let our reader look to 
his own soul’s salvation, and select his pastor, not for his 
eloquence, learning, amiability, or popularity, but for his 
clear and constant testimony to the Gospel of Christ. 
The witness of the pulpit must be incessantly evangelical, 
nor is a single exception to be allowed. A venerable 
divine justly writes, “ Faithful preachers never preach 
mere philosophy, nor mere metaphysics, nor mere moral- 
ity.’ * How many poor souls may now be in bondage by 
your lifeless preaching, O ye who love anything better 
than the simple Gospel! What ar. ye but polished bolts 
on the dungeon-door of the distressed, or well-dressed 
halberdiers, affrighting men from the palace of mercy ? 
Ah ! it will be well for some if they shall be able to wash 
their hands of the blood of souls, for verily in the cells of 
eternal condemnation there are heard no yells of horror 
more appalling than the shrieks of damned ministers, 
Oh, to have misled men—-to have ruined their souls for 
ever ! 

Happy suicide, who by his own hand escapes the 
sound of the curses of those he victimized! happy in 
comparison with the man who will for ever hear the ac- 
cusing voices of the many who have sunk to perdition 
through the rottenness of the doctrine which he oftered 
them for their support. Here, on our knees we fall, and 
pray for grace that we may ever hold up Jesus to the 
sinner; not doctrine without Jesus, which is as the pole 
without the brazen serpent, but Jesus—a whole Jesus— 
to poor Jost sinners. We are sure that many convinced 
souls have tarried long in the most distressing condition, 
simply because, by reason of the poverty of their spiritual 
food, their weakness was so great that the cry of Heze- 


* Emmons. + Mr. Sadlier. > 


102 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


_—-—— Ee 


children are come to the birth, and there is not strength 
to bring forth.’"* May our glorious Jesus socn come into 
his Church, and raise up shepherds after his own heart, 
who, endowed with the Holy Spirit, full of sympathy, and 
burning with love, shall visit those who are out of the 
way, and guide the wanderer to the fold. Such men are 
still to be found. O reader, search them out, sit at their 
feet, receive their word, and be not disobedient to the 
commands which they utter from heaven. 

4. Misapprehension of the nature of salvation, in some 
cases, delays the happy hour of Christ’s appearance. A 
natural tendency to legal ideas dims the mind to the per- 
ception of the doctrine of Jesus, which is grace and truth. 
A secret desire to do something in part to aid Jesus, pre- 
vents us from viewing him as “all our salvation, ana all 
our desire.” Humbled though we have been by the cut- 
ting down of all our righteousness, yet the old root will 
sprout—“ at the scent of water it will bud;” and so long 
as it does so, there can be no solid peace, no real cleaving 
to Christ. We must learn to spell the words law and 
grace, without mingling the letters. 

While sick men take two kinds of medicine there is 
little hope of a cure, especially if the two draughts are 
compounded of opposing ingredients ; the bird which lives 
on two trees builds its nest on neither; and the soul kalt- 
‘ng between grace and works can never find rest for the 
sole of his feet. Perhaps, my reader, a secret and well- 
nigh imperceptible self-trust is the very thing which shuts 
out Christ from thy soul. Search and look. 

Not a few seekers ar? expecting some extraordinay 
sign and wonder ere they can believe. They imagine that 
conversion will come upon them in some marvellous man- 
ner, like Mary’s visitation by the angel. Naaman-like, 
they are dreaming that the prophet will strike his hand 
over the place, and they shall recover. “Go washin Jor- 


* Isa, Xxxvii, 3. 


JESUS DESIRED, 103 


dan seven times” has not enough mystery in it for their 
voor minds: “Except they see signs and wonders they 
will not believe.” Let none, however, hope for miracles ; 
wonders do occur: some are brought to Jesus by vision 
and revelation, but far more are drawn by the usual 
means of grace, in a manner which is far removed f rom 
the marvellous. The Lord is not in the whirlwind, the 
Lord is not in the fire; but usually he speaketh in the 
still small voice. Surely it should be enough for us, if we 
find pardon in the appointed method, without desiring to 
have rare and curious experiences, with which, in after 
years, we may gratify our own self-love, and elevate our- 
selves as singular favourites cf heaven. Regeneration is 
indeed a supernatural work, but it is usually a silent one. 
It is a pulling down of strongho‘ds, but ihe earth shakes 
not with the fall; it is the building of a temple, but there 
is no sound of hammer at its erection; like the sunrise, it 
is not heralded by the b'ast of trumpet, nor do wonders 
hide beneath its wings. We know who is the mower of 


106 strength 
sn come into 
; own heart, 
mpathy, and 
» out of the 
ich men are 
sit at their 
dient to the 


ion, in some 
sarance. A 
l to the per- 
> and truth. 
_ Jesus, pre- 
on, ana all 
by the cut- 
Id root will 
and so long 
al cleaving 


s law and mystery; do we desire to be her children? Strange 
: phartoms and marvellous creatures find their dwelling- 
e there is 4 place in darkness ; light is not in relationship with mys- 


tery; let none be hoping to find it so. Believe and live 
is the plan of the Gospel; if men would but lay aside 
their old ideas, they would soon find Jesus as their very 
present help; but because they look for unpromised man- 
ifestations, they seek in vain, until disappointment has 


nughts are 
hich lives 

B soul halt- 

est for the 
and well- | 


rhi taught them wisdom. 
ia gs 5 Although the seeking penitent hath renounced all 
raordinay known sin, yet 7¢ may be that some sin of ignorance yet 


remains wneonfessed, and unrepented of, which will fre- 
quently be a cause of great and grievous delay. _ 

God, who searcheth Jerusalem with candles, will have 
us examine ourselves most thoroughly. He has issued a 
search-warrant to conviction, which giveth that officer a 
right to enter every room of our house, and command 


agine that 
lous man- 
unan-like, 

his hand 
whin Jor- 


a 


- See none nae ave —— s 


ee 


—+104 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


every Rachel to rise from her seat lest the images should 
be beneath her, Sin is so skilful in deception, that it is 
hard to discover all its lurking places ; neither is it easy 
to detect its character when brought before our eyes, 
since it will often borrow the garb of virtue, and appear 
as an angel of light; nor should we ourselves use sufti- 
cient diligence in its destruction, if the delay of the needed 
mercy did not urge us toa more vigorous pursuit of the 
traitors who have brought us into grief. Our gracious 
Lord, for our own sake. desires the execution of our secret 
sins, and by his frowns he puts us upon the watch lest we 
should indulge or harbour them. 

Never, perhaps, shall we again possess so deep a horror 
of sin as in that moment when we well-nigh despaired 
of deliverance from it, and therefore never shall we be so 
fully prepared to exterminate it. [ternal wisdom will 
not allow a season so propitious to pass without improve- 
ment; and having melted our heart in the furnace till the 
scum floateth on the surface, it doth not allow it to cool 
until the dross hath been removed. Look to thyself, O 
seeker, for peradventure the cause of thy pain heth in 
thine own heart. Howsmallasplinter prevents the heal- 
ing of a festered wound; extract it, and the cure is easy. 
Be wise; what thou doest do quickly, but do it perfectly ; 
thus shalt thou make sure work for eternity, and speed 
the hour of thine acceptance. Be sure sin will find thee 
out, unless thou dost tind it -out. A warrior stimulated 
the valour of his soldiers by simply pointing to the ene- 
my and exclaiming, “ Lads, there they are, if you do not 
hill them, they will kill you.” Thus would we remind 
thee, that sin will destroy thee if thou dost not destroy 
it. Be concerned, then, to drive it from thine heart. 

6. Usefulness ir after life is often increased by the 
bitter experience with which the soul js exercised while 
seeking after Jesus ; but as this has already received our 
attention, we will close our meditations on the reasons for 


“4 


nages should 
mn, that it is 
er is it easy 
re our eyes, 
, and appear 
es use sufti- 
of the needed 
ursuit of the 
Jur gracious 
of our secret 
atch lest we 


eep a horror 
rh despaired 
all we be so 
wisdom wil] 
ut improve- 
nace till the 
»w it to cool 
0 thyself, O 
ain lieth in 
ts the heal- 
ure is easy. 
it pertectly ; 
, and speed 
ll find thee 
stimulated 
to the ene- 
you do not 
we remind 
not destroy 
heart. 
sed by the 
ised while 
xcelved our 
reasons for 


“hi 


JESUS DESIRED, 


--——— 


protracted delay, by the simple remark, that it is of far 
more importance to a penitent, to use every means for ob- 
taining the Saviour's blessing, than to inquire into the 
motives which have hitherto made him deaf to his peti- 
tions. Earnestly do we entreat the mourner to strive to 
enter in at the straight gate, and to continue his ery— 
“Oh that I knew where I might find him!” 

III. It is now our pleasant duty to direct the troubled 
spirit to the means of obtaining speedy and lasting peace. 
May the God who opened the eyes of the desolate Hagar 
in the wilderness, and guided her so that she saw a well 
of water whereat she filled her empty bottle, use us as 
his finger to point the thirsting, dying sinner to the place 
where He stands, who once said, “ If any man thirst let 
him come unto me and drink.” Our rules shall be ex- 
pressed in simple words—that the wayfaring man, though 
a fool, may not err therein. 

1. Go where he goes. Dost thou desire to present a 
petition to the king—wilt thou not go to his palace to do 
it? Art thou blind—where shouldst thou sit but at the 
way-side, begging? Hast thou a sore disease—where is 
therea placemore fitting for thee than the porch of Bethesda, 
where my Lord doth walk? Art thou palsied—wilt thou 
not desire to be in his presence, though on thy bed thou 
be let down to the spot where he standeth? Did not 
Obadiah and Ahab journey through the whole land of 
Israel to find Elijah ? and wilt not thou visit every place 
where there is hope of meeting Jesus? Dost thou know 
where his haunts are? Hast thou not heard that he 
dwelleth on the hill of Zion, and hath fixed his throne of 
mercy within the gates of Jerusalem? Has it not been 
told thee that he ofttimes cometh ur ic the feast, and 
mingleth with the worshippersin his teniple ? Have not 
the saints assured thee that he walketh in the midst of 
his Church, even as John, in vision, saw him among the 


golden candlesticks? Go, then, to the city which he 
F 


106 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


hath chosen for his dwelling-place, and wait within the 
doors which he hath deigned to enter. If thou knowest 
of a gospel minister, sit in the solemn assembly over 
which he is president. If thou hast heard of a chureh 
which has been favoured with visits from its Lord, 
and make one in the midst of them, that when he cometh 
he may bid thee put thine hand into his side, and be not 
faithless but believing. Lose no opportunity of attending 
the word: Thomas doubted, because he was not there 
when Jesus came. 

Let sermons and prayers be thy delight, because 
they are roads wherein the Saviour walketh. Let the 
righteous be thy constant company, for such ever bring 
him where they come. It is the least thing thou canst 
do to stand where grace usually dispenseth its favour. 
Even the beggar writes his petition on the flag-stone of a 
frequented thoroughfare, because be hopeth that among 
the many passers, some few at least will give him charity ; ; 
learn from him to offer thy prayers where mercies are 
known to move in the greatest number, that amid them 
all there may be one for thee. Keep thy sail up when 
there is no wind, that when it blows thou mayest not 
have need to prepare for it; use means when thou seest 
no grace attending them, for thus wilt thou be in the way 
when grace comes. Better go fifty times and gain nothing 
than lose one good opportunity. If the angel stir not 
the pool, yet lie there still, for it may be the moment 
when thou leavest it will be the season of his descending, 
“ Being in the way, the Lord met with me,” said one of 
old; ‘be thou in the way, that the Lord may meet with 
thee. Old Simeon found the infant Messiah in the 
Temple; had he deserted its hallowed courts he might 
never have said, “Mine eyes have seen thy salvation.” 
Be sure to keep in mercy’s way. 

2. Cryafter Him. ‘Thou hast been lying in his path 
for many a day, but he has not turned his eye upon thee, 


ere” 


--——— 


within the 
ou knowest 
embly over 
of a church 
ss Lord, go 
1 he cometh 
and be not 
f attending 
3s not there 


ht, because 
h. Let the 
ever bring 
‘thou canst 
its favour. 
¢-stone of a 
that among 
im charity ; 
nercies are 
amid them 
1 up when 
nayest not 
thou seest 
in the way 
in nothing 
el stir not 
e moment 
lescending. 
nid one of 
meet with 
nh in the 
he might 
salvation.” 


his path 
pon thee, 


JESUS DESIRED. 107 


a 


What then ? Art thou cc atent to let him pass thee by ? 
Art thou willing to lose so precious an opportunity ? No! 
thou desirest life, and thou wilt not be ashamed to beg 
aloud for it; thou wilt not fear to take him for an ex- 
ample of whom it is written, “When he heard that it 
was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out and say, Jesus, 
thou Son of David have mercy on me! And many charged 
him that he should hold his peace ; but he cried the more 
a great deal, Thou Son of David have mercy on me!” It 
is an old proverb, “We lose nothing by asking,” and it is 
an older promise, “Ask and ye shall receive.” Be not 
afraid of erying too loudly. It is recorded, to the honour 
of Mordecai, that he cried with a loud cry ; and we know 
that the kingdom of heaven sutfereth violence. Think 
it not possible to pray too frequently, but at morning, at 
noon, and at eventide, lift up thy soul unto God. Let not 
despondency stop the voice of thy supplication, for he 
who heareth the young ravens when they cry, will in due 
time listen to the trembling words of thy desire. Give 
him no rest until he hear thee; like the importunate 
widow, be thou always at the heels of the great One; 
give not up because the past has proved apparently fruit- 
less, remember Jericho stood firm for six days, but yet 
when they gave an exceeding great shout, it fell flat to 
to the ground. “ Arise, cry out in the night; in the 
beginning of the watches pour out thine heart like water 
betore the face of the Lord. Let tears run down like a 
river day andnight; give thyself no rest; let not the 
appie of thine eye cease.” * Let groans, and sighs, and 
vows keep up perpetual assault at heaven’s doors, 


‘* Groans fresh’d with vows, and vows made salt with tears ; 
Unscale his eyes, and scale his conquered ears ; 
Shoot up the bosom-shafts of thy desire, 
Feathered with faith, and double-forked with fire ; 
And they will hit; fear not, where heaven bids come, 
Heav’n’s never deaf, but when man’s heart is dumb.” 


* Lam. ii. 18. 19. 


108 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


——— — 


Augustine sweetly writes, “Thou mayest seek after 
honours, and not obtain them; thou mayest labour for 
riches, and yet remain poor; thou mayest dote on 
pleasures, and have many sorrows. But our God of his 
supreme goodness says, Who ever sought me, and found 
me not? who ever desired me, and obtained me not? who 
ever loved me, and missed of me? I am with him that 
seeks for me; he hath me already that wisheth for me ; 
and he that loveth me is sure of my love.” Try whether 
it be not so, O reader, for so have we found it. 

3. Think of his promises. He has uttered many sweet 
and gracious words, which are like the call of the hen, 
inviting thee to nestle beneath his wings, or like white 
flags of truce bidding thee come without fear. There is 
not a single promise which, if followed up, will not lead 
thee to the Lord. He is the centre of the circle, and the 
promises, like radii, all meet in him, and thence become 
Yea and Amen. As the streams run to the ocean, so do 
all the sweet words of Jesus tend to himself: launch thy 
bark upon any one of them, and it shall bear thee on- 
ward to the broad sea of his love. Lost on a dreary 
moor, the wanderer discovers his cottage by the light in 
the window casting a gleam over the darkness of the 
waste ; so also must we find out “our dwelling-place” by 
the lamps of promise which our Saviour hath placed in 
the windows of his word. The handkerchiefs brought 
from the person of Paul healed the sick; surely the pro- 
inises, which are the garments of Christ, will avail for all 
cliseases. We all know that the key of promise will un- 
fasten every lock in Doubting Castle ; will we be content 
to lie any longer in that dungeon when that key is ready 
to our hand? A large number of the ransomed of the 
Lord have received their liberty by means of a cheering 
word applied with power. Be thou constant in reading 
the word and meditation thereon. Amid the fair flowers 
of promise groweth the rose of Sharon—pluck the pro- 


seek after 
labour for 
st dote on 
God of his 
and found 
ie not? who 
h him that 
eth for me ; 
ry whether 


many sweet 
of the hen, 
- like white 
r. There is 
rill not lead 
cle, and the 
nce become 
cean, so do 
launch thy 
par thee on- 
n a dreary 
he light in 
ness of the 
y-place” by 
h placed in 
hfs brought 
ly the pro- 
avail for all 
ise will un- 
be content 
ey is ready 
med of the 

a cheering 

in reading 

air flowers 


k the pro- 


JESUS DESIRED. 109 


eau an -—— + 


mises, and thou mayst find Him with them. He feedeth 
among the lilies—do thou feed there also. The sure words 
of Scripture are the footsteps of Jesus imprinted on the soil 
of merey—follow the track and find Him. The promises 
are cards of admission not only to the throne, the mercy- 
seat, and the audience chamber, but to the very heart of 
Jesus. Look aloft to the sky of Revelation, and thou 
wilt yet find a constellation of promises which shall 
guide thine eye to the star of Bethlehem. Above all, 
cry aloud when thou readest a promise, “ Remember thy 
word unto thy servant, on which thou hast caused me 
to hope.” 

4. Meditate on his person and his work. If we were 
better acquainted with Jesus, we should find it more easy 
to believe him. Many souls mourn because they can- 
not make themselves believe; and the constant exhorta- 
tions of ministers persuading them to faith, cause them 
to sink deeper in the mire, since all their attempts provo 
ineffectual. It were well for both if they would remem- 
ber that the mind is not to be compelled to belief by ex- 
hortation or force of will; a small acquaintance with the 
elements of mental science would suffice to show them that 
faith is a result of previous states of the mind, and flows 
from those antecedent conditions, but is not a position to 
which we can attain without passing through those other 
states which the Divine laws, both of nature and grace, 
have made the stepping -stones thereto. Even in natural 
things, we cannot believe a thing simply because we are 
persuaded to do so; we require evidenc:; we ask, “ What 
are we to believe?” we need instruction cn the matter 
before we can lay hold upon it. In spiritual things es- 
pecially we need to know what we are to believe, and 
why. We cannot by one stride mount to faith, and it is 
at least useless, not to say cruel, to urge us to do so, un- 
less we are told the grounds on which our faith must rest. 
Some men endeavour to preach sinners to Christ; we pre- 


110 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


i ee a 


fer to preach Christ to sinners. We bclieve that a faith- 
ful exhibition of Jesus crucified will, under the Divine 
blessing, beget faith in hearts where fiery oratory and 
vehement declamation have failed. Lei this be borne in 
mind by those who are bewailing themselves in the 
words of John Newtcn: 


‘* Oh, could I but believe, 
Then all would easy be; 
I would, but cannot—Lord relieve ! 
My help must come from thee.” 


Thou wilt not long have need to pray in this fashion if 
thou canst obey the rule we would put before thee, which 
is, meditate on Jesus, reflect on the mystery of his incar- 
nation and redemption ; and frequently picture the agonies 
of Gethsemane and Calvary. The cross not only demands 
faith, but causes it. The same Christ who requires faith for 
salvation doth infuse faith into all those who meekly and 
reverently meditate upon his sacrifice and mediation. We 
learn to believe in an honest man by an acquaintance with 
him,even so(although faith be the gift of God, yet hegiveth 
it in the use of the means) it cometh topass that by frequent 
consideration of Jesus we know him, and therefore trust 
in him. Go thou to the gloomy brook of Kedron, make 
Gethsemane thy garden of retirement, tread the blood- 
stained Gabbatha, climb the hill of Calvary, sit at the foot 
of the accursed tree, watch the victim in his agonies, listen 
to his groans, mark his flowing blood, see his head bowed 
on his breast in death, look into his open side, then walk 
to the tomb of Joseph of Arimathea, behold him rise, 
witness his ascension, and view him exalted far above 
principalitics and powers, as the mediator for sinful men; 
thus shalt thou see and believe, for verily hard is that 
unbelief which can endure such sights; and if the Holy 
Spirit lead thee to a true vision of them, thou shalt be- 


lieve inevitably, finding it impossible longer to be inered- 


o 


hat a faith- 
the Divine 
ratory and 
be borne in 
ves in the 


3 fashion if 
thee, which 
f his inear- 
the agonies 
ly demands 
es faith for 
neekly and 
ation. We 
tance with 
bt hegiveth 
y frequent 
‘efore trust 
lron, make 
the blood- 
at the foot 
nies, listen 
ead bowed 
then walk. 
him rise, 
far above 
inful men: 
ard is that 
the Holy 

1 shalt be- 


be incred- 


~< 


JESUS DESIRED. 11] 


oS EC OOTY Be SC 


ulous. A true view of Calvary will smite unbelief with 
death, and put faith into its place. Spend hours in holy 
retirement, tracing his pilgrimage of woe, and thou shalt 
soon sing, 


** Oh how sweet to view the flowing 
Of his soul-redeeming blood ; 

With Divine assurance knowing 

That he made my peace with God!” 


5. Venture on Him. This is the last but best advice 
we give thee, and if thou hast attended to that which 

precedes it, thou wilt be enabled to follow it. We have 

said “ venture,” but we imply no venture of risk, but one 

of courage. To be saved it is required of thee to renounce 

all hope of salvation by any save Jesus—that thou hast - 
submitted to. Next thou art called upon to cast thyself 

entirely on him, prostrating thyself before his cross, con- 

tent to rely wholly on Hum. Do this and thou art saved, 

refuse and thou art damned. Subscribe thy name to this 

simple rhyme— 


‘¢J’m a poor sinner, and rothing at all, 
But Jesus Christ is my all in all ; 


and, doing this, thou art’secure of heaven, 

Dost thou delay becau’> of unworthiness ? Oh do not 
so, for he invites thee just as thou art. Thou art not too 
sinful, for he is “ able to save unto the uttermost.” Think 
not little of his power or his grace, for he is infinite in 
each ; only fall flat upon his gracious declaration, and 
thou shalt be embraced by his mercy. To believe is to 
take Jesus at his word, and when all things deny thee 
the hope of salvation, still to call Him yours. Now we 
beseech thee launch into the deep, now cut thy moorings 
and give up thyself to the gale, now leave the rudder in 
lis hands, and surrender thy keeping to his guardian- 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


112 


os 


ship: In this way alone shalt thou obtain peace an 


eternal life. 


May the Directing Spirit lead us each to him in whom 


there is light, and whose light is the life of men, 


JESUS DESIRED. 


—— 


h peace and 


im in whom 
1en, 


TO THE UNCONVERTED READER. 


FRIEND,—-Love to thy soul constrains us to set apart 
this small enclosure for thine especial benefit. Oh that 
thou hadst as much love for thine own soul as the writer 
has! Though he may have never seen thee, yet remem- 
ber when he wrote these lines he put up an especial 
prayer for thee, and he had thee on his heart while he 
penned these few but earnest words. 

O Friend, thou art no seeker of Jesus, but the reverse ! 
To thine own confusion thou art going fom him instead 
of tohim! Oh, stay a moment and consider thy. ways— 
thy position—thine end ! 

As for thy ways, they are not only wrong before God, 
but they are uneasy to thyself. Thy conscience, if it be 
not seared with a hot iron, is every day thundering at 
thee on account of thy paths of folly. Oh that thou 
wouldst turn from thine error, while the promise is yet 
within hearing, “ Let the wicked forsake his way, and 
the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return. 
unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and 
unto our God, for he will abundantly pardon.” Be not 
betrayed into a continuance in these ways in the vain 
hope that thy life will be prolonged to an indefinite 
period, wherein thou hopest to accomplish repentance ; 
tor life is as frail as the bubble on the breaker, and as 
swift asthe Indian arrow. To-morrow may neve: come, 
oh use “ to-day ’— 


“* Now, is the constant syllable ticking from the clock of time ; 
Now, is the watchword of the wise ; Now, is on the banner of the 
prudent. 


114 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


ae ener ae Se 


Cherish thy to-day, and prize it well, or ever it be engulphed 
in the past ; 

Husband it, for who can promise if it shall have a to-mor- 
row {” * 


“ To-morrow is a fatal lie—the wrecker’s beacon—the 
wily snare of the destroyer;” be wise, and see to thy 
ways while time waits for thee. 

Consider next thy position. A condemned criminal 
waiting for execution ; a tree, at the root of which the 
axe is gleaming; a target, to which the shaft of death is 
speeding ; an insect beneath the finger of vengeance 
waiting to be crushed; a wretch hurried along by the 
strong torrent of time to an inevitable precipice of doom. 

Thy present position is enough to pale the cheek of 
carelessness, and move’ the iron knees of profanity. A 
man asleep in a burning house, or with his neck upon the 
block of the headsman, or lying before the mouth of a 
cannon, is not ina more dangerous case than thou art. 
Oh bethink thee, ere desolation, destruction, and damna 
tion, seal up thy destiny, and stamp thee with despair ! 

Be sure, also, that thou consider thy latter end, for it 
is thine whether thou consider it or no. Thou art ripen- 
ing for hell; oh, how wilt thou endure its torments! Ah! 
if thou wouldst afford a moment to visit, in imagination, 
the cells of the condemned, it might benefit thee for ever. 
What! fear to examine the house in which thou art to 
dwell? What! rush to a place and fear to see a picture 
of it? Oh let thy thoughts precede thee, and if they 
bring back a dismal story, it may induce thee to change 
thy mind, and tread another path! ‘Thou wilt lose noth- 
ing by meditation, but rather gain much thereby. Oh 
let the miseries of lost souls warn thee lest thou also come 
into this place of torment !—May the day soon arrive 
when thou canst cry after the Lord, and then even thou 
shalt be delivered! 


* Tupper’s Proverbial Philosophy. 


——— ce a tee 


it be engulphed 


have a to-mor- 


s beacon—the 
id see to thy 


med criminal 
of which the 
uft of death is 
of vengeance 
along by the 
ipice of doom, 
the cheek of 
profanity. A 
eck upon the 
mouth of a 
than thou art. 
, and damna 
ith despair ! 
” end, for it 
ou art ripen- 
rments ! Ah! 
imagination, 
thee for ever. 
1 thou art to 
sce a picture 
and if they 
-e to change 
lt lose noth- 
hereby. Oh 
ou also come 
soon arrive 
n even thou 


Hess Dardoning, 


“The blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanseth us from all sin.”—1 Jonny i. 7, 


‘* T will praise thee every day, 
Now thine anger’s turned away ; 
Comfortable thoughts arise 
From the bleeding sacrifice. 
Jesus is become at length, 

My salvation and my strength ; 
And his praises shall prolong, 
While I live, my pleasant song.” 


KT our lips crowd sonnets within the compass 
of a word; let our voice distil hours of melody 
into a single syllable; let our tongue utter in 

one letter the essence of the harmony of ages; 

ee for we write of an hour which as far excelleth 

y) all the days of our life as gold exceedeth dross. As 

¢ 


S 
F 


Wd 
WS) 


Sn 


@, the night of Israel’s passover was a night to be re- 
membered, a theme for bards, and an incessant foun- 
taix. of grateful song, even so is the time of which we now 
rpeak, the never-to-be-forgotten hour,of our emancipation 
from guilt, and of our justification in Jesus. 
Other days have mingled with their fellows till, like 
coins worn in circulation, their image and superscription 
are entirely obliterated ; but this day remaineth new, 


A ELEC L AE LETTE ELLE CRED OL PEN CIE EN CIR EN tc ee. ite ipa mrp ogee —— 


ag gat alias ty - 


SS 


116 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


fresh, bright, as distinct in all its parts as if it were but 
yesterday struck from the mint of time. Memory shall 
drop from her palsied hand full many a memento which 
now she cherishes, but she shall never, even when she tot- 
tereth to the grave, unbind from her heart the token of 
the thrice-happy hour of the redemption of our spirit. 
The emancipated galley-slave may forget the day which 
heard his broken fetters rattle on the ground; the par- 
doned traitor may fail to remember the moment when 
the axe of the headsman was averted by a pardon ; and 
the long-despairing mariner may notrecollect the moment 
when a friendly hand snatched him from the hungry deep: 
but O hour of forgiven sin! moment of perfect pardon ! 
our soul shall never forget thee while within her life and 
being find an immortality. 

Each day of our life hath had its attendant angel ; but 
on this day, like Jacob at Mahanaim, hosts of angels met 
us. The sun hath risen every morning, but on that eventful 
morn he had the light of seven days. As the days of hea- 
ven upon earth—as the years of immortality—as the ages 
of glory—as the bliss of heaven, so were the hours of that 
thrice-happy day. Rapture divine, and ecstacy inexpress- 
ible, filled our soul. Fear, distress, and grief, with all 
their train of woes, fled hastily away; and in their place, 
joys came without number. Like as terrors fly before 
the rising sunlight, so vanished all our dark forebodings, 
and 

*¢ As morn her rosy steps in the eastern clime, 
Advancing, sowed the earth with orient pearl,” 


so did grace strew our heart with priceless gems of joy. 
“For, lo, the winter was past; the rain was over and 
gone; the flowers appeared on the earth; the time of the 
singing of birds was come; and the voice of the turtle 
was heard in our land; the fig-tree put forth her green 
figs, and the vines with the tender grape gave a good 
smell, when our beloved spake, and said, ‘Arise, my love, 


pe 2 oar TA ee ee 


UR. 


s if it were but 
Memory shall 
nemento which 
n when she tot- 
't the token of 
| of our spirit, 
the day which 
ound ; the par- 
moment when 
a pardon ; and 
2cb the moment 
e hungry deep: 
rfect pardon ! 
in her life and 


int angel ; but 
of angels met 
1 that eventful 
ie days of hea- 
y—as the ages 
hours of that 
acy inexpress- 
rief, with all 
n their place, 
rs fly before 
‘ forebodings, 


» 
7] 


’ 
url,” 


gems of joy. 
as over and 
> time of the 
of the turtle 
th her green 
ave a good 
ise, my love, 


117 


JESUS PARDONING. 


my fair one, and come away.” Our buried powers, up- 
springing from the dark earth, where corruption had bur- 
ied them, budded, blossomed, and brought forth clusters of 
fruit. Our soul was all awake to gladness ; conscience 
sung approval; judgment joyfully attested the validity of 
the acquittal; hope painted bright visions for the future ; 
while imagination knew no bounds to the eagle-flight of 
her loosened wing. The city of Mansoul had a grand il- 
lumination, and even its obscurest lanes and alleys were 
hung with lamps of brilliance. The bells of our souls ran 
merry peals, music and dancing filled every chamber, an 
every roo. was perfumed with flowers. Our heart was 
flooded with delight; like a bottle full of new wine, it 
needed vent. It contained as much of heaven as the 
finite can hold of infinity. It was wedding-day with our 
soul, and we wore robes fairer than ever graced a bridal. 
By night angels sang—* Glory to God in the highest, on 
earth peace, goodwill towards men ;” and in the morning, 
remembering their midnight melodies, we sang them o’er 
again. We walked in Paradise; we slept in bowers of 
amaranth ; we drank draughts of nectar from goblets of 
gold, and fed on luscious fruits brought to us in baskets - 
of silver, 


*¢ The liquid drops of tears that we once shed 
Came back again, transform’d to richest pearl ;” 


the breath we spent in sighs returned upon us laden with 
fragrance ; the past, the present, the future, like three fair 
sisters, danced around us, light of foot and gladsome of 
heart. We had discovered the true alchymist’s stone, 
which, turning all to gold, had transmuted all within us 
into the purest metal. We were rich, immensely rich; 
for Christ was ours, and we were heirs with him. 

Our body, too, once the clog and fetter of our spirit, be- 
came the active partner of our bliss. Our eyes were win- 
dows lighted up with happiness; our feet were young 


ee 


SS 


a a 
SS 


118 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


roes bounding with pleasure ; our lips were fountains gush- 
ing with song; and our ears were the seats of minstrels, 
It was hard to contain ou. rapture within the narrow 
bounds of prudence. Like the insects leaping in the sun- 
shine, or the fish sporting in the stream, we could have 
danced to and fro in the convulsions of our delight. Were 
we sick, our pleasure drowned our pain; were we feeble, 
our bliss renewed our strength. Each broken bone praised 
him: each strained sinew blessed him; our whole flesh 
extolled him. Every sense was the inlet of joy, and the 
outlet of praise. As the needle stayeth at the pole, so did 
our quivering frame rest on him. We know no thought 
beyond, no hope above, the perfect. satisfaction of that 
hour: for Christ and his salvation had filled us to the 
very brim. 

All nature appeared to sympathise with us. We went 
forth with joy, and were led forth with peace ; the moun- 
tains and the hills broke forth before us into singing, and 
all the trees of the field clapped their hands. The fields, the 
floods, the sky, the air, the sun, the stars, the cattle, the 
birds, the fish—yea, the very stones seemed sharers of our 
joy. They were the choir, and we the leaders of a band, who 
at the lifting of our hand poured forth whole floods of 
harmony. 

Perhaps our birthday found the earth wrapped in the 
robes of winter, but its snowy whiteness was all in keep- 
ing with the holiday of our spirit. Each snow-flake re- 
newed the assurance of our pardon, for we were now 
washed whiter than snow. The burial of the earth in its 
winding-sheet of white betokened to us the covering of 
our sins by the righteousness of Jesus. The trees, “fes- 
tooned with ice-dro ops, glittered in the sun as if they had 
coined stars to shine upon us; and even the chill blast, as 
it whirled around us , appeared but an image of that power 
which had carried our sins away, as far as s the east is from 


A Fe a 


—e ogo thes 2s: 


 —_ -—_ a.  -. See, Cale tant O. | 


ountains gush- 
s of minstrels, 
n the narrow 
ng in the sun- 
ve could have 
elight. Were 
ere we feeble, 
1 bone praised 
r whole flesh 
' joy, and the 
1e pole, so did 
yno thought 
ction of that 
led us to the 


s. We went 
e; the moun- 
) singing, and 
Lhe tields, the 
ie cattle, the 
sharers of our 
of a band, who 
ole tloods of 


apped in the 
s all in keep- 
ow-flake re- 
were now 
> earth in its 
covering of 
e trees, fes- 
if they had 
hill blast, as 
that power 
east is from 


JESUS PARDONING. 119 


the west. Sure, never was winter less wintry than then, 
for in a nobler sense than the poet* we can aflirm— 


‘With frequent foot, 
Pleased have I, ‘in my cheerful morn of life, 
Trod the pure snows, myself as pure.” 


Grace enabled us to find a song where others did but 
murmur. 

It may be we were brought to love the glorious Re- 
deemer in the spring-time of the year; and if so. our 
quickened spirit found all around it the counterpart of the 
world within. We, too, like the little flowers, were rising 
f,om our tombs ; like the sweet birds, expecting brighter 
days, we sung the songs of promise; like the rippling 
brooks, unbound from our captivity, we leaped in hasty 
joy; and, like the woodlands, we were “ prodigal of har- 
mony. The mountains, lifting their green heads to the 
sky, we charged to tell our Maker how we desired to ap- 
proach his footstool; and the valleys, bleating with the 
tlocks, were bidden to commend us to the notice of the 
ereat Shepherd of the sheep. The falling rains we thanked 
as emblems of him who cometh down “ like rain upon the 
mown grass;” and the smiling sun we owned as a type of 
his great Lord, who bringeth healing beneath his wings. 


“ We walk’d 
The sunny glade, and felt an inward bliss 
Beyond the power of kings to purchase.” 


Aye, and beyond the power of kings to guess if they, too, 
had not felt the same. As the portals of earth were open- 
ing for the coming of the summer, so were we preparing 
for glorious days of happiness and fruitfulness. lvery- 
thing in creation was in keeping -with our condition, as 
if nature were but a dress made by a skilful hand, fitting 
our new-born soul in every part. We were supremely 


ne = ee ee eee Se rs cee 


* Thomson. 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


a a Se Nee 


blest. Our heart was like a bell dancing at bridal joys, 
and the world was full of bells chiming with it. We were 
elad, and nature cried, “Child, lend me thine hand, and 
we will dance together, for I too am at ease since my great 
Lord hath loosed me from my wintry fetters; come on, 
favoured gne, and wander where thou wilt, for 


‘© ¢ The softening air is balm ; 
Echo the mountains round; _ the forest smiles; 
And every sense, and every heart is juy.’ 


Come on, then, and sport with me on this our mutual 
feast.” 

If in summer we brought both fruits meet for repen- 
tance, and were planted in the garden of the Lord, the 
sod on which we trod was prolific of emblems of our own 
condition, and of creatures sympathising with our joy, 
and the sky which canopied our dwelling-place was woven 
like a tapestry with praises of our Lord. When the rain- 
bow bridged the sky, we hailed it as the sign of the eter- 
nal covenant made with us by Him who keepeth truth to 
all generations ; if the steaming river sent.its exhalation 
to the clouds, we put our song upon its altar that it might 
ascend with it; if the dewdrops sparkled on the breast of 
morn, “the dew of our youth” rejoiced at their kindred 
beauty ; or if the soft winds breathed odours, we bade 
them receive another burden,while we perfumed them with 
the name of Jesus. Whether we waiked the sea-side, and 
thought the waves washed blessings to our feet, or found 
beneath the high rock a grateful shelter from the heat, or 
drank the stream whose waters were sweeter to our taste 
than e’er before, we were by every object drawn upward 
evermore to contemplate the Lord our Redeemer, who in 
every scene of nature was set forth in miniature. All 
summers had been winters compared with this; for now 
we had flowers in our heart, a sun in our soul, fruits in 
our spirit, songs in our thoughts, and joy and heat in our 


it. bridal joys, 
it. We were 
ne hand, and 
ince my great 
rs; come on, 
for 


alm ; 
miles ; 
d 


; our mutual 


et for repen- 
the Lord, the 
1s of our own 
vith our joy, 
ce Was Woven 
‘hen the rain- 

of the eter- 
peth truth to 
s exhalation 
hat it might 
the breast, of 
1eir kindred 
rs, we bade 
xd them with 
sea-side, and 
et, or found 
the heat, or 
to our taste 
Mwn upward 

1er, who in 
ature. All 
is; for now 
l, fruits in 
heat in our 


JESUS PARDONING. 12) 


affections. Till then we never knew the glory of this 
mighty world,because we did not know it to be our Father's 
and our own; but then we looked from the hill-top on 
the wide-spread scene with the eyes of a young heir just 
come to his estate, or a fresh-crowned monarch whose fair 
dominions stretched beneath his feet far as the eye can see. 
Then we felt, in fact, what we had only heard in poetry, 
the noble birthright of a regenerated man— 


‘¢ His are the mountains, and the valleys his ; 

And the resplendent rivers. His to enjoy, 

With a propriety that none can feel ; 

But who, with filial confidence inspir’d, 

Can lift to heaven an unpresumptuous eye, 

And smiling say, ‘My Father made them all.’ 

Are they not his by a peculiar right, 

And by an emphasis of interest his, 

Whose eye they fill with tears of holy joy, 

Whose heact with praise, and whose exalted mind 
With worthy thoughts of that unwearied love, 
That plann’d, and built, and still upholds, a world 
So cloth’d with beauty for rebellious man ?” 


O happy spirit! tuned aright to unison with a fair earth, 
man’s fair inheritance, lost till by grace again we call it 
ours, and know it to be beautiful. Words fail to describe 
the Divine rapture of the spirit ; and however well a poet 
may paint nature as he sees it, yet though he succeed to 
his own satisfaction, the new-born child of God, whose 
feelings are richer even than the wealth of poesy, will feel 
that he hath but poorly pencilled what his now enlighten- 
ed eye beholds with raptures of delight. This world is a 
great music-box, and he who hath the key can set it play- 
ing, while others with open mouth are wondering whence 
the song proceedeth. Nature is a colossal organ, and the 
frail fingers of man may move its keysto thunders of music; 
but the organist is usually unseen, and the world knows not 
how such majestic sounds are begotten. Summer is earth 


G 


122 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


in court-dress; and if the heart be so, it will know to what 
court summer belongeth, and will call him friend. 

Need we reiterate our joys by laying autumn also un- 
der contribution? Truly, if then we found our Lord, the 
ripened fruit did taste more lusciously than ever. The 
yellow suit in which the year was clad shone in our eyes 
like burnished gold. Even as old autumn— 


“‘ Joy’d in his plenteous store, 
Laden with friits that made him laugh, full glad 
That he had banish’d hunger,” 


so did we rejoice that our hunger and thirst were satis- 
fied with ripe fruit from the tree of life. The harvest- 
home echoed to our heart’s glad shouts, and the vintage 
songs kept tune with our loud rejoicings. 

All seasons of the year are alike beautiful to those who 
know how to track the Creator’s footsteps along the road 
of pruvidence, or who have found a token of his grace, 
and therefore bless the hour in which it came. There is 
neither stick nor stone, nor insect, nor reptile, which will 
not teach us praise when the soul is in such a state as 
that whereof we now are musing. 


‘¢ There’s music in the sighing of a reed ; 

- There’s music in the gushing of a rill ; 
There’s music in all things, if men have ears ; 
Their earth is but an echo of the spheres.” * 


The one pardoning word of the Lord of all absolution hath 
put music into all things, even as the trump of the arch- 
angel shall breathe lite into the dead. ‘Those drops oz 
atoning blood have put fair colours upon all creation, even 
as the sunrise paints the earth, which else had been one 
huge blot of darkness, 

How doubly dear do all our mercies become at the 
moment when Christ shines on us! the bread of our table 


* Byron, 


cnow to what 
‘iend. 

umn also un- 
yur Lord, the 
n ever. The 
2 in our eyes 


ll glad 


st were satis- 
The harvest- 
1 the vintage 


to those who 
long the road 
of his grace, 
e. There is 
e, which will 
h a state as 


b ears 5 
g,”? * 


olution hath 
of the arch- 
ose drops oz 
‘eation, even 
ad been one 


ome at the 
of our table 


JESUS PARDONING, 123 


ne 
——-—————- 


is well-nigh as holy as the bread of Eucharist; the wine 
we drink tastes as sacred as that of His consecrated cup ; 
each meal is a sacrament, each sleep has its Jacob’s vision ; 
our clothes are vestments, and our house a temple. We 
may be sons of poverty, but when Jesus comes, for that 
day at least, he strews our floor with sand of gold, and 
plants upon the roof hard-by the ancient house-leek, flow- 
ers of sweet contentment, of which heaven need not be 
ashamed. We are made so happy in our low estate at 
that transporting word of grace which gives us liberty, 
that we do not envy princes their crowns, nor would their 
wealth tempt us from the happy spot where our Lord 
deigns to give us his company. 

Oh that blest day! again our memory rushes back to it, 
and rapture glows even at its mention. Many days have 
passed since then ; but as the one draught of sweet water 
refreshes the camel over many a mile of desert, so doth 
that happy hour still cheer usas we remember it. Begin- 
ning of the days of heaven! Firstborn of morning! Pro- 
phet of blessings! Funeral of fears! Birthday of hope! 
Day of our spirit’s betrothal! Day of God and day of 
mercy !—Oh that we had power to sing the joy which 
kindles our passions to a flame while we review thee! or 
rather, oh that we had grace to hymn his praise who 
made thee such aday! Doth the stranger enquire, What 
hath so distinguished that day above its fellows? the 
answer is already knocking at the door of our lips to ob- 
tain an egress. We were released from the thraldom of 
sin, we were delivered from the scourges of conscience, 
we were ransomed from the bondage of law, we were 
eniancipated from the slavery of corruption ; death van- 
ished before the quickening of the Holy Ghost, poverty 
was made rich with infinite treasures of grace, and hunger 
felt itself satisfied with good things. Naked before, we 
on that day put on the robes of princes; black, we washed 
ourselves clean in a bath of blood; sick, we received in- 


124 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


stant healing, despairing, we rejoiced with joy unspeak- 
able. Ask her who has had the issue of her blood 
stanched by a touch; ask yon healed demoniac, or his com- 
panion ~7yho throws away the crutch of his long halting, 
why on that day of recovery they were glad; and tucy 
will exhibit their own persons as reasons for their joy ; 
so, O wondering gazer, look on us and solve the mystery 
of our enthusiastic song. We ourselves are our own an- 
swer to your inquiries. 

Let us summon memory again to lead the choir, while 
all that is within us doth bless his holy name. “ He 
spake and it was done;” “ He said, Let there be light, 
and there was light.” He passed by, in the greatness of 
his love and in. the plenitude of his power, and bade us 
live. O eyes of beauty, how were ye outdone by his 
sweet looks! He was fairer than the sons of men, and 
lovelier than a dream when he manifested himself unto 
us. Lying by the pool of mercy, we pined away with 
disappointiwwent, for none would put us into the healing 
water; but his love stayed not for an instant, he said, 
“Take up thy bed and walk.” Ah, where shall thunders 
be found which will lend us voices ? where floods which 
can lend us uplifted hands? for we need these to utter 
half his praise. Angels, your sonnets and your golden 
canticles are poor, poor things for our sweet Lord Jesus. 
He deserveth notes which your voices cannot afford, and 
musi¢ which dwells not within the strings of your most 
melodious harps. He must be his own poet, for none but 
he can sing himself. He knows, and only he, that depth 
of love within his bleeding heart, some drops of which 
we drank on that auspicious morning of redemption. 
He can tell, and only he, the transporting sound of that 
sweet assurance which laid our fears to rest in his own 
sepulchre. He alone can testify what he hath wrought ; 
for, as for us, we were asleep on the mount of joy ; “ when 
God turned back the captivity of Zion, we were like men 


joy unspeak- 
f her blood 
c, or his com- 
long halting, 
ud ; “and they 

for their joy ; 
the mystery 
/our Own an- 


e choir, while 
name. “ He 
n1ere be light, 
. oreatness of 
, and bade us 
itdone by his 
s of men, and 
hinself unto 
d away with 
o the healing 
stant, he said, 
hall thunders 
floods which 
hese to utter 
your golden 
t Lord Jesus. 
Dt afford, and 
of your most 
for none but 
2, that depth 
ops of which 

redemption. 
ound of that 
st in his own 
uth wrought ; 

joy ; “ when 
ere like men 


JESUS PARDONING. 125 


that dreamed ; our mouth was filled with laughter, and 
our tongue with singing.” * He, our Light, did light a 
candle around us;” our “ conver sation was in heaven ; 
our soul made us like the chariots of Amminadib: 


‘¢ Our rapture seem’d a pleasing dream, 
The grace appear’d so great.” 


We cried out in wonder, love, and praise, “ Whence is this 
to me ?*F and what am I, and what is my Father’s house, 
that the Lord hath visited me, and brought me hitherto.” t 
Our dark and loathsome prison still made our garments 
to smell of its mouldiness, and this quickened our grati- 
tude for our deliverance. Like Jonah, fresh from the 
whale’s belly, we wes willing enough for service of any 
kind; all too glad to have come up alive from “the bottoms 
of the mountains,” where we feared that “ the earth with 
her bars was about us for ever.” Never did lark spring 
from his cage-door to the sky with half such speed as - 
that which we made when we obtained our liberty from 
the iron bondage ; no young roe e’er bounded so nimbly 
over the hills as did our hearts when they were “ like 
hinds let loose.” We could almost re-tread the steps of 
our pilgrimage to sing once more that song of triumph 
over a host of sins buried in the sea of for cetfulness, or 
drink again of the wells of Elim, or sit beneath those 
seventy palm-trees. 

Dear spot of ground where Jesus met us! dear hour 
which brought us to his feet ! and precious, precious lips 
of Jesus, which spoke us free! That hour shall lead the 
song, and every hour shall join the chorus of—“ UNTo 
HIM THAT LOVED US, AND WASHED US FROM OUR SINS IN 
HIS OWN BLOOD, AND HATH MADE US KINGS AND PRIESTS 
UNroO GOD AND HIS FATHER, TO Hid BE GLORY AND DOMIN- 
ION FOR EVER. AMEN.” 


* Ps, oxxvi. 1,2. + Lukei. 43, $2 Sam. vii, 18. 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


Had it been in our power to have handled the poets 
style and measure, we might more fully have expressed 
our emotions ; but if our pen be not that of ready wri- 
ter, at least our heart is inditing a good matter. Weclose 
by an interesting account of conversion, illustrating its 
intense darkness, and its succeeding unspeakable light. 
It is an extract from that valuable and interesting bio- 
graphy, entitled, Struggles for Lnfe. After hearing a 
powerful sermon, he goes home much impressed —«] 
spoke to ho one, and did not dare to lift m y eyes from 
my feet, as I expected the earth to open and swallow me. 
The commotion of my soul was altogether such as lan- 
guage cannot describe. I crept to my room, locked the 
door, and fell upon my knees; but no words came, I 
could not pray. The perspiration was oozing from every 
pore. How long I lay onmy knees I know not; happily, 
this fearful agony of mind did not last long, or I should 
have died. Some hours elapsed—hours like ages; in 
‘which I felt myself before the throne of righteous judg- 
ment, and while the process was going on I was dumb. 
had the salvation of my soul depended upon a word, I 
eculd not have uttered it. But he who had smitten, gra- 
ciously healed. As if they had been slowly unfolded be- 
fore me, there appeared these never-to-be-forgotten 
words :—‘ THE BLOOD OF JESUS CHRIST CLEANSETH US 
FROM ALL SIN.’ 

“T had read and heard these wonderful words often, but 
now they appeared new to me. I! gazed, believed, loved, 
and embraced them. The crisis was past A flood of 
tears rushed from my eyes ; my tongue was set at liberty. 
I prayed, and perhaps it was the first time in my life that 
I really did pray. 

“For three days after this I was filled with indeserib- 
able joy. I thought I saw heaven, with its blessed inha- 
bitants, and its elorious king. I thought he was looking 
on me with unutterable compassion, 2 and that I recognised 


led the poets 
ve expressed 
‘wv ready wri- 
er. Weclose 
lustrating its 
eakable light. 
eresting bio- 
er hearing a 
pressed :—* I 
ny eyes from 
| swallow me. 
such as lan- 
in, locked the 
rds came, I 
ig from every 
not; happily, 
,or I should 
ike ages; in 
rhteous judg- 

was dumb. 
on a word, I 
smitten, gra- 
unfolded be- 
be-forgotten 
EANSETH US 


ds often, but 
lieved, loved, 
A flood of 
set at liberty. 
my life that 


h indeserib- 
lessed inha- 
was looking 
I recognised 


JESUS PARDONING. 127 


him as Jesus, my Saviour, who had laid me under eter- 
nal obligation. The world. and all its concerns, appeared 
utterly worthless. The conduct of ungodly men filled 
me with grief and pity. I saw everything in an entirely 
new light: a strong desire to fly to heathen lands, that I 
might ‘preach the good news to idolaters, filled my heart. 
I longed to speak about the grand discovery I had made, 
and felt assured that I had but. to open my lips to con- 
vince every one of the infinite grace of Christ and the 
infinite value of salvation, And I thought my troubles 
over, and that, henceforth the same scenes of joy and 
hallowed peace were to pass before my eyes, and fill my 
heart.” 

Such feelings are not the lot of all to the same degree ; 
but an exceedingly large proportion of the Lord’s re- 
deemed will recognise this experience as “ the path of the 
just ;” and some ‘who read will rejoice to see here a fair 
copy of their inner life at this very moment. 

May the God of all grace bring each of us to this fair 
land of Beulah, this palace of delights, the chamber of 
bliss. - Amen, 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


TO THE UNCONVERTED READER. 


FRIEND,—Thou art amazed at this, for it sounds like a 
wild legend or fairy tale. Thou knowest nothing of such 
joy ; this is a spring from which thou hast never drawn 
living water. How much dost thou lose by thine impeni- 
tence, and how poor are the things which recompense thy 
loss! What, are thy delights but bubbles? what thy 
pleasure but sweet poison ? and what the most substan- 
tial bliss but a deceptive, illusive vision of the night ? 
Oh that thou wert able to judge between genuine and 
counterfeit, real and fictitious! Sure one grain of right 
reason would teach thee the superority of spiritual joys 
to mere carnal excitements. Thou art not so far bereft 
of judgment as to put any one of thine high carnival days 
in competition with the time of pardoned sin. Thou wilt 
noi venture to compare thy sweetest wine with that wine 
of heaven which flows into the lips of the sinner who is 

forgiven ; nor wilt thou bring thy music into rivalry with 
that which welcomes the returning prodigal. Answer 
these two questions, we beseech thee, What doth it profit 
thee to sin against God? and, What shall it profit thee, 
at last, if thou shouldst gain the whole world and lose 
thine own soul? Willafew carnal merriments repay 
thee for unnumbered woes? Will transient sunlight 
make amends for everlasting darkness? Will wealth, or 
honour, or ambition, or lust, furnish thee with an easy 
pillow when thou shalt make thy bed in hell? In hell 
thou shalt be if thou hast not Christ. Oh! remember 
God is just, and because he will be just PREPARE TO MEET 
THY GoD! 


unds like a 
ing of such 
ever drawn 
ine impeni- 
mpense thy 
' what thy 
st substan- 
the night ? 
enuine and 
rin of right 
ritual joys 
.far bereft 
rnival days 
Thou wilt 
. that wine 
ner who is 
valry with 
|. Answer 
th it profit 
profit thee, 
d and lose 
mts repay 
t sunlight 
wealth, or 
h an easy 
2 In hell 
remember 
EK TO MEET 


Hoy xt Conversion. 


“ The Lord hath done great.things for us ; whereof we are glad.”— 
Ps. cxxvi. 3. 


** O love, thou bottomless abyss ! 
My sins are swallowed up in thee ; 
Covered is my unrighteousness, 
Nor spot of guilt remains on me ; 
While vesus’ blood, through earth and skies, 
Mercy, free, boundless mercy cries, 
With faith I plunge me in this sea ; 
Here is my hope, my joy, my rest ; 
Hither when hell assails I flee , 
I look into my Saviour’s breast ; 
Away, sad doubt, and anxious fear ! 
Mercy is all that’s written there. 
Fixed on this ground will I remain, 
Though my heart fail, and flesh decay ; 
This anchor shall my soul sustain, 
When earth’s foundations melt away ; 
Mercy’s full power I then shall prove, 
Loved with an everlasting love.” 


E who dares to prescribe one uniform standard 
of experience for the children of God, is either 
DP V. grievously ignorant or hopelessly full of self- 
ce Vem esteem. Facts teach us that in the highway 
Ww) to heaven there are many paths, not all equally 
f)\~e@r near to the middle of the road, but neverthe- 
f less trodden by the feet of real pilgrims. Uni- 
formity is not God’s rule; in grace as well as 
providence he delights to display the most charming va- 


130 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


riety. ._ In the matter of conversion this holds good of its 
attendant rejoicing, for all do not alike sing aloud the 
samerapturous song. All are glad, but all are not alike so. 
One is quiet, another excitable; one is constitutionally 
cheerful, another is inclined to melancholy: these will 
necessarily feel different degrees of spiritual ecstasy, and 
will have their own peculiar modes of expressing their 
sense of peace with God. 

It is true, God usually displays unto the newly regen- 
erate much of the riches of his grace; but there are many 
who must be content to wait for this till a future period. 
Though he dearly loves every penitent soul, yet he does 
not always manifest that love. God is a free agent to 
work where he will and when he will, and to reveal his 
love even to his own elect in his own chosen seasons. 
One of the best of the Puritans hath wisely written, 
“God oftentimes works grace in a silent and secret way, 
and takes sometimes five, sometimes ten, sometimes 
twenty years—yea, sometimes more—before he will make 
a clear and satisfying report of his own work upon thesoul. 
It is one thing for God to work a work of grace upon the 
soul, and another thing for God to show the soulthat work. 
Though our graces are our best jewels, yet they are some- 
times at first conversion so weak and imperfect that we 
are not able to see their lustre.” All rules have excep- 
tions ; so we find there are some who do not rejoice with 
this joy of harvest, which many of us have the privilege 
of remembering. 

Let none conceive, therefore, that our book pretends to 
be an infallible map from which none will difier ; on the 
contrary, it thinks itself happy if it shall suit the experi- 
ence of even a few, and shall break the chains of any who 
are enslaved by the system of spiritual standards set up 
by certain men against whom it enters its earnest protest. 
Like the tyrant Procrustes, some classes of religionists 
measure all men by themselves, and insist that an inch 


8 good of its 
g aloud the 
not alike so. 
stitutionally 

: these will 
ecstasy, and 
ressing their 


ewly regen- 
re are many 
ture period. 
yet he does 
ree agent to 
0 reveal his 
en seasons. 
ly written, 
secret way, 
sometimes 
2 will make 
on thesoul, 
‘ce upon the 
[that work. 
y are some- 
ct that we 
We excep- 
sJo1ce with 
e privilege 


retends to 
2’; on the 
he experi- 
f any who 
‘ds set up 
st protest. 
eligionists 
t an inch 


JOY AT CONVERSION, 


much by way of caution; we now proceed. 


to reply to the inquiry. 


great Joy; and, if possible, to discover 


atfor ding us such a season of refr eshing. 


the Delectable Mountains. 


usually attends a sense of pardon. 


and art. 


mind. 


131 


of divergence from their own views must entail upon us 
present and eternal severance from those whom they de- 
light to speak of as the peculiar people, who through much 
tribulation must enter the kingdom of heaven. 


Thus 


The style of our last chapter scarcely allowed us to ask 
the question, Whence this happiness? or if it suggested 
itself, we were too much in haste to express our gladness 
We will now, however, sit down 
coolly and calmly to review the causes of that execeding 
God’s design in 

Those who are 
now mourning the loss of the peaceful hours, sweet still 
to their memory, may perhaps be cheered by the Ebene- 
zers then erected, and by them may be guided again to 
Great Light of the soul, illu- 
minate us each while meditating on thy former mercies. 


I. We shall discuss the causes of the happiness which 
The study of experi- 
ence 1s one far more calculated to excite our admiration of 
the wisdom, love, and power of God than the most profound 
researches which contemplate only the wonders of nature 
It is to be regretted that master-minds have not 
arisen who could reduce a science so eminently practical 
and useful into some kind of order, and render it as rich 
in its literature as the science of medicine or the study of 
Anexceedingly valuable volume might be written 
as a book of spiritual family medicine for the people of 
God, describing each of the diseases to which the saint is 
subject, with its cause, symptoms, and cure ; 
rating the stages of the growth of the healthy believer. 
Such a compilation would be exceedingly interesting, 
and its value could scarcely be estimated. 
sence of such a guide, let us continue our musings by the 
help of such little experience as we may have acquired. 


and enume- 


In the ab- 


132 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


1, Among the many things which contribute to the 
ravishing sweetness of our first spiritual joy, we must 
mention the case wherein it found us. We were con- 
demned by God and by our conscience, and harrassed 
by fears of the immediate wrath of God upon us. We 
were exercised, both day and night, by sorrows of the 
past and the forebodings of the future ; impending de- 
struction prevented sleep, and the sense of guilt made life 
a burden. “ When,” says one, “the usual labours of the 
day required that I should sleep, and my body, toiled and 
wasted with the disquiet of my mind, made me heavy, and 
urged it more, yet I was afraid to close my eyes lest I 
should awaken in hell; and durst not let myself sleep till 
I was by a weary body beguiled into it, lest I should drop 
into the pit before I wasaware. Was itany wonder then 
that the news of pardon and forgiveness was sweet to one 
in such a case—whereby I was made to lie down in 
safety, and take quiet rest, while there was none to make 
me afraid? ‘For so he giveth his beloved sleep’” * It 
is but natural that rest should be exceeding sweet after 
such a period of disquietude. We expect that the sailor will 
exhibit his joy in no ordinary manner when, at last, after 
a weary and tempestuous voyage, he puts his foot upon 
his native shore. We did not wonder when we heard of 
festivities in the islands of the West among the slaves 
who were declared free forever. We do not marvel at the 
shouts of soldiers who have escaped the hundred hands 
of death in the day of battle. Shall we then make it a 
matter of surprise when we behold justified men exulting 
in their liberty in Jesus, and their escape from fearful per- 
dition? We think it but in the ordinary course of things 
that when, like the Psalmist, we have received answers to 
our prayers, we should also sing like him, “Come and hear 
all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he hath done 
for my soul. I cried unto him with my mouth, and he 


—~———e 


* Halyburton. 


ute to the 
7, We must 
were con- 
_ harrassed 
nus. We 
ws of the 
ending de- 
t made life 
urs of the 
toiled and 
1eavy, and 
eyes lest I 
f sleep till 
10uld drop 
nder then 
eet to one 
down in 
e to make 
no * OW 
veet after 
sailor will 
last, after 
foot upon 
heard of 
he slaves 
vel at the 
‘ed hands 
nake it a 
exulting 
urful per- 
of things 
iswers to 
and hear 
ath done 
, and he 


JOY AT CONVERSION, 133 


——— 


was extolled with my tongue. I will go into thy house 
with burnt-offerings: I will pay thee my vows, which my 
lips have uttered, and my mouth hath spe’ = when I was 
in trouble. Thou hast turned for me m, .ourning into 
dancing ; thou hast put off my sackclh.. , and girded 
me with gladness, to the end that my ylory may sing 
praise to thee,and not be silent. Oh Lord my God, I will 
give thanks unto thee for ever.” Men put dark colours 
into the picture to make the lights more apparent; and 
God useth our black griefs to heighten the brightness of his 
mercies. The weeping of penitence is the sowing of jew- 
els of joy. The poet * sang in another sense that which 
we may well quote here 


*¢ And precious their tears as that rain from the sky, t 
Which turns into pearls as it falls in the sea.”’ 


Spiritual sorrow is the architect of the temple of praise ; 
or at least, like Hiram, it floateth on its seas the cedars for 
the pillars of the beautiful house. To appreciate mercies 
we must feel miseries ; to value deliverance we must have 
trembled at the approach of destruction. Our broken 
chains make fine instruments of music, and our feet just 
freed from fetters move right swiftly, dancing to the song: 
we must be glad when our bondage is yet so fresh in our 
memory. Israel sang loud enough when, in the sea of 
Keypt, her oppressors were drowned, because she knew 
too well from what a thraldom she was rescued. Shushan 
was glad, and rest was in the city, when the Jews had 
clean escaped from the wiles of Haman. No Purim was 
ever kept more joyously than that first one when the gal- 
lows were still standing, and the sons of the evil counsel- 
lor yet unburied. We may mourn through much of the 
long pilgrimage to heaven, but the first day is dedicated 


*Moore, 


+ ‘The Nisan, or drops of spring rain, which the Easterns believe to 
produce pearls if they fall into shells.”-— Richardson. 


134 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


to feasting, because yesterday we spent in slavery. Were 
we always mindful of the place from whence we came out, 
perhaps we should be always rejoicing. 

2. There is given unto us at this period a peculiar 
outpouring of grace not always enjoyed in after days. 
The heart is broken-—it needs soft liniments wherewith 
it may be bound; it hath been wounded by the robbers, 
and left half dead upon the road—it is meet that the good 
physician should pour in oil and wines; it is faint—it 
needs a cordial; it is weak—it is therefore carried in the 
bosom of love. He who tempers the wind to the shorn 
lamb breathes gently on the new-born child of grace. He 
gives it milk—the ready-prepared nutriment of heaven; 
he lays it in the soft cradle of conscious security, and 
sings to it sweet notes of tender love. The young plant 
receives double attention from the careful gardener ; so do 
the young plants of grace receive a double portion of sun- 
light by day, and of the dew by night. 

The light wherein for the first time we discover Christ 
is usually clear and sparkling, bringing with it a warming 
force and reviving influence to which we have been 
strangers before. Never is it more truly sweet to see the 
light, or a more pleasant thing to the eyes to behold the 
sun, than when he shines with mild and benignant rays 
upon, our first love. Grace then is grace indeed; for then 
it effectually operates on us, moving us to hearty affection 
and burning zeal, while it absorbs the passions in one 
object, wrapping us up in itself. So rich are the mani- 
festations of Jesus to our souls at that hour, that in after 
life we look back to that time as “the days of our espou- 
sals;” so ardent are we then in love to our Lord, that in 
succeeding years we are are often compelled to ask for 
the same grace, desiring only that it may be with us as in 
months past. 

Though our head shall be anointed with fresh oil every 
day of our life, yet cn the first coronation morning the 


very. Were 
we came out, 


La peculiar 
after days, 
S wherewith 
the robbers, 

hat the good 
is faint—it 
arried in the 
o the shorn 
f grace. He 
; of heaven; 
ecurity, and 
young plant 
lener ; sodo 
tion of sun- 


cover Christ 
ta war ming 
have been 
t to see the 
behold the 
ignant rays 
dl; for then 
ty affection 
ons in one 
the mani- 
hat in after 
our espou- 
rd, that in 
to ask for 
rith us as in 


h oil every 
orning the 


JOY AT CONVERSION. 


fullest horn is emptied upon us. A man may have such 
a clear and glorious revelation of Christ to his soul, and 
such a sense : of his union with Jesus on that becinning of 
days, that he may not have the like all his life after. 
“The fatted calf is not every day slain; the robe of kings 
is notevery day put on; every day must not be a festival 
day or a marriage day; the wife is not every day in the 
bosom; the child is not every day in the arms; the friend 
is not every day at the table; nor the soul every day 
under the manifestations of Divine love.” * Jacob only 
once saw the angels ascending and descending; Samuel 
did not hear from God every night. We do not read that 
the Lord appeared to Solomon save that once in vision. 
Paul was not for ever in the third heaven, nor was John 
in the Spirit every Lord’s day. Grace is at all time a deep, 
unfathomable sea, but it is not always at flood-tide. 

When we are going to our Jesus he will send waggons 
to fetch us to his own country—he will come out to mect 
us in great pomp, and will introduce us to the king; but 
when we are safely settled in Goshen he will love us 
equally, but it may be he will not make so great a point 
of honouring us with high days and festivals. Christ will 
array his chosen ones in goodly attire, and bind flowers 
about their brows, on the day of their union to him; but, 
perhaps, to-morrow he may, for their benefit and his 
glory, “plunge them into the ditch, so that their own 
clothes shall abhor them.” It may be we have a greatcr 
sense and sight of grace at first than we do afterwards, 
and this is the reason of our greater joy. 

3. The exceeding value of the things revealed naturally 
produces a sense of unutterable delight when perceived 
by faith. It is no joy at a fictitious boon—but the benefit 
is real, and in itself of a nature calculated to excite won- 
der and praise. The mercies received are discovered to 
be inestimably precious, and hence their springs at once 


ee 


* Brooks, 


Se 


nian enigmatic IC ei Re I a ee ee 


ce ek - Rag ee to 
eeoeenietisenctanes ronnie : 


136 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


~ 


emotions of joyous gratitude. He would scarce be of a 
sane mind who would not smile upon the receipt of a 
treasure which would free him from heavy liabilities, and 
secure him an abundant provision for life. When the 
naked are clothed, when the hungry are fed, and when 
beggars are elevated from dunghills to thrones, if they 

exhibit no signs of gladness, they give grave cause to 
suspect an absence of reason. And can a sinner receive a 
royal pardon, a princely robe, a promise of a crown, and 
yet remain unmoved ? Can he banish hunger at the 
King’s own table, and feel the embraces of his reconciled 
Monarch, and restrain his joy ? Can he behold himself 
adopted into the family of God, made joint heir with 
Christ, and an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven, and 
still behave himself coldly? No! he must—he will re- 
joice,— 

** For should he refuse to sing 
Sure the very stones would speak.” 


It is no small thing to receive a succession of mercies— 
all priceless, all unmerited, all eternal, and all our own, 
Justification in itself is a “joy worth worlds ;” but when 
its attendants are seen at its heels, we can only say with 
the Queen of Sheba, “There is no heart left in me.” It is 
not enough that we are washed and clothed, but there is 
our Father’s banqueting house open to us—we are feasted 
—we hear music—a fair crown is set upon our head, and 
we are made kings and priests unto our God; and, as if 
all this were little, he gives to us himself, and makes him- 
self our Lord, our God. 

Can a mortal become possessor of Christ, of his person, 
his attributes, his all—and can he then restrain the bliss 
which must find his heart a vessel all too narrow to con- 
tain it ? Surely sweetness is only sweetness when we dis- 
cern Him as our everlasting Friend—ours entirely, ours 
securely, ours eternally. 


Rh ctr Ae — DP 


“SS oft 


[ale | 


i antl 


— —-_ 


|e oe cen el con ot ee © 


~ 


arce be of a 
receipt of a 
abilities, and 

When the 
d, and when 
ones, if they 
ive cause to 
mer receive a 
4 crown, and 
nger at the 
is reconciled 
hold himself 
1t heir with 
heaven, and 
—he will re- 


of mercies— 
ll our own, 
;” but when 
nly say with 
nme.” Itis 
but there is 
e are feasted 
ur head, and 
; and, as if 

makes him- 


f his person, 
rain the bliss 
‘row to con- 
hen we dis- 
ntirely, ours 


JOY AT CONVERSION. 


‘* Known and unknown, human, divine ! 
Sweet human hand, and lips, and eye, 
Dear heavenly friend that canst not die, 

MINE, MINE—for ever, ever MINE !” * 


Truly, the believer might be excused if at the first recog- 
nition of the Redeemer as his own, own Friend, he should 
become sick of love, or faint with overflowing happiness. 
Rhoda opened not the gate for gladness when she heard 
Peter’s voice ; who shall wonder if the believing penitent 
should behave like one who is in a dream, and should lay 


himself under the imputation of madness? Conceive the 


rapturous delights of the sailors of Columbus when they 
hailed the land, or their beaming countenances when they 
found it to be a goodly country, abounding with ail 
wealth ; picture the heroic Greeks when from the moun- 
tain- tops they saw the flood which washed their native 
shore, and shouted—* The sea! the sea!” and you may 
then look on ancther scene without wonder—a company 
of pardoned sinners, singing with all their heart and soul 
and strength the praise of One who hath done great things 
for them, whereof they are glad. 

4, At this season the spirit lives nearer to its God, and 
thus it dwells nearer heaven. The things of the world 
have less power to charm us when we have but lately 
proved their vanity; the flesh hath scarcely ceased to 
smart with the pain caused by the burnings of sin, and 
we are the more afraid of the tire; we have just escaped 
the paw of the lion and the jaw of the bear, and, having 
the fear of these before our eyes, we walk very near to 
the Shepherd. Bear witness, ye saints of God, to the noly 
dew of your youth, for which, alas! you now mourn, Can 
ye not remember how ye w: alked with God, how calm was 
your frame, how heavenly your spirit ! Ye never saw the 
face of man bison ye left your sehen till ye had seen 


*In Memoriam. 


rn Bi 


aR atti SERENA LI oe IGE ig OEE E 


rveviaorcn ima se deter 0 


_and how pleasantly did you commune with heaven ! Grace 


138 » THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


oe a 


the face of God; nor did ye shut your eyes in slumber on 

your beds till ye had first commended your spirit to your 7 
Father in heaven. How artless was your simplicity! { 
how fervid your prayerfulness! how watchful your 
daily behaviour! What a marvellous tenderness of 
conscience characterised you!— you trembled to put 
one foot before the other, lest you should offend 
your God; you avoided the very appearance of evil; you 
were moved by the faintest whispers of duty; and all the 
while what a quiet state of repose your soul did swim in, 


had planted an Eden around you, where you walked with 
Jehovah amid the trees of the garden. You were like 
Daniel by the river Ulai—TrHE MAN’s hand was on your 
shoulder, and his voice called you, “ Man, greatly belov- 

ed.” You drank out of your Master’s cup, and fed out of 

his hand, like the poor man’s ewe-lamb in Nathan’s para- 1 
ble. Your eyes were up unto him, as the eyes of hand- | 
maidens to their mistresses ; nor could you afford the vain, 
harlot world so much as an instant’s gaze. In the-relig- 
ious shows of old times they were wont to represent Medi- 
tation as a fair maiden, with her eyes fixed upon a book 
which she was intently studying; around her they placed 
young boys, dressed as fairies, demons, or harlequins, who, 
with their dancing, tricks, jokes, or frightful howlings, 
sought to divert her from her reading; but she, nothing 
moved, stili continued wholly occupied therewith: now | 
such were we at the young springtime of our piety, when 
we were first consecrated to the Lamb. We were wholly 
engrossed with Jesus, and nothing could draw us from 
him. His name was the sum of all music; his person the 
perfection of all beauty ; his character the epitome of all 
virtue ; himself the total sum of the riches, the glory, the 
love of an entire universe. “One sweet draught, one drop 
of the wine of consolation from the hand of Jesus, had 
made our stomachs loathe the brown bread and the sour 


I 


n slumber on 
spirit to your 
r simplicity ! 
tchful your 
nderness_ of 
bled to put 
ould offend 
of evil; you 
; and all the 
did swim in, 
aven ! Grace 
walked with 
u were like 
was on your 
reatly belov- 
nd fed out of 
ithan’s para- 
res of hand- 
ord the vain, 
n the -relig- 
‘esent Medi- 
pon a book 
they placed 
equins, who, 
ul howlings, 
the, nothing 
swith : now 
piety, When 
vere wholly 
uw us from 
S person the 
itome of all 
e glory, the 
it, one drop 

Jesus, had 
nd the sour 


JOY AT CONVERSION, 139 


drink of this miserable life.”’* We were wholly lost in 
admiring him, and could only ask, i Who knoweth how 
far it is to the bottom cf our Christ’s fulness ? who ever 
weighed Christ in scales ?” or, “Who hath seen the heights, 
and depths, and lengths, and breadths of his surpassing 
ya 

ites is one grand secret of our greater flight of joy at 
that time—we had then more wing than now, for we had 
more communion with God. We were living on high, 
while men lay grovelling below; we were above the 
storms and tempests then, for we had entered into the 
secret place of the tabernacles of the Most High. We 
bathed our brow in the sunlight of an unclouded sky, 
standing on an eminence, up whose lofty sides the clouds 
knew not how to climb. Did we live nearer to our Lord 
now, we should beyond a doubt, enjoy far more of the 
cream of life, and know less of its wermwood. We ecan- 
not expect to have the same enjoyment unless we be oc- 
cupied in the same employment. He who goes away from 
the fire should not ask many times why he does not feel 
the same heat. The young convert is in a holy frame— 
he is most sure to be in a happy one. Distance from God 
is the source of the major part of our aoubts, fears, and 
anxieties; live nearer to him, and we shall be all the 
further from the world, the flesh and the devil, and so we 
shall be less molested by them. We cannot make the sun 
shine, but we can remove from that which may cast a 
shadow on us. Remove then thy sins, O weak believer, 
and thou mayest hope to see Him yet again! 

5. Immediately after conversion we are eminently 
careful to use all the means of grace, and therefore we 
derive morecomfortfromthem than in after years, when we 
are more negligent of them. The young convert is to be 
seen at every prayer meeting, early or late; every reli- 
gious service, even though it be at a considerable distance, 


*Rutherford. 


140 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


finds him as an attendant; the Bible is seldom closed, and 
the season for private devotion is never neglected. In 
after days any excuse will enable us to be absent from 
Divine service with an easy conscience ; but then it would 
have been a high crime and misdemeanour to have been 
absent at any available opportunity. Hence the soul, 
feeding much on heavenly food, waxeth fat, and knoweth 
nothing of the sorrows of the hunger y one who neglects 
the royal table. The young footinan on the heavenly 

‘ace exerts all his strength to win the race, and his pro- 
cress is thus far greater at first than after wards, when 
his breath a little fails him, or the natural slothfulness of 
the flesh induces him to slacken his pace. Would to God 
we could maintain the speed of our youth! we should 
then retain its comforts. We have met with some few of 
the eminently holy who have enjoyed a continual feast 
ever since the day of their espousals; but these were men 
who were constantly fervent in spirit, serving their Lord 
with a diligent heart. Why should it not be so with 
many more > of us? John Bunyan hath well written, “ You 
that are old professors, take you heed that the young 
striplings of Jesus, that began to strip but the other day, 
do not outrun you, so as to have that Scripture fulfilled 
on you, ‘ The last shall be first, and the first last,’ which 
will be a shame to you and a credit to them,” * Oh! that 
we were as obedient now as we were then to the voice of 
the Word from heaven, then would that voice be more 
sweet to our ears, and the face of heaven would not be so 
full of frowns. “The soul of the diligent shall be made 
fat,” is true in spiritual matters equally with temporal. 
“Give diligence to make your calling and election sure; 
for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall, for so an en- 
trance shall be administered to you abundantly into the 
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ.” He that would be rich must still continue his 


Ee 


* Heavenly Footman, 


closed, and 
lected. In 
bsent from 
en it would 
have been 
the soul, 
d knoweth 
ho neglects 
heavenly 
d his pro- 
ards, when 
hfulness of 
uld to God 
we should 
bme few of 
nual feast, 
> were men 
their Lord 
e€ so with 
tten, “You 
she young 
other day, 
e fulfilled 
st,’ which 
Oh! that 
he voice of 
> be more 
not be so 
be made 
temporal. 
10n sure; 
SO an en- 
into the 
ur Jesus 
tinue his 


JOY AT CONVERSION, 141 


heed tohis flocks and his herds. Itis not one venture which 
maketh the soul rich; it is continued perseverance in the 
business of salvation. None but lively, active Christians 
can expect to feel those ravishing joys, sweet comforts, and 
blessed delights which follow at the heels of a healthy 
soul. Stagnant water never sparkles in the sun—it is 
the flowing brook which shines like a vein of silver; set 
thy grace at work, and thy joys shall marvellousi, in- 
crease. If our bucket be empty, we had better ask our- 
selves whether it might not be full again were it sent 
down into the well. Truly, a neglect of means robs us of 
much consolation. 

6. Novelty no doubt had some hand in the singular 
feelings of that joyous season. As an eminent saint says, 
“They were new things, wherewithal I was utterly un- 
acquainted before, and this made them the more affecting.” 
We have all felt the great exciting power of novelty in 
everyday-life, and the same influence exerts itself upon 
the inner life of the soul. At first, pardon, adoption, ac- 
ceptance, and the kindred blessings, are new things, and, 
beside their own value, have the brightness of newly- 
minded mercies to recommend them to our notice. Prayer, 
praise, meditation, and hearing, are fresh exercises ; and, 
like a horse just brought to his labour, we are in haste to 
be engaged in them. “In the morning of life, before its 
wearisome journey, the youthful soul doth expand in the 
simple luxury of being—it hath not contracted its wishes 
nor set a limit to its hopes.’ The morning sun is shining 
on the yet glistening hedgegrows, and the dewdrops are 
all pearls ; the smoke of the earth hath not yet darkened 
the skies, and they are one pure firmament of azure. 
There is more than a little of the Athenian in every man ; 
there is not one of us who is not charmed by something 
which has but lately come to the light of observation. 
True, we shall find the glories of the cross as marvellous 
in after years as they are now, but now they are so start- 


/ 
a 


142 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


a 


ling to us that we cannot but feel astonishment and won- 
der. As he who after a life of blindness at the first sight of 
the stars would naturally lift up his hands in amazement, so 
doth the man from whose spiritual eye the film hath been 
removed, exult in his first vision of the heavenly gifts of 
God. Never is the rose more lovely thun in its bud ; so 
grace is never more graceful than in its beginnings. The 
young lambs frisk in the tields—they will assume a steadier 
gait when they become “ the sheep of his pasture;” but 
till then let them show their joy, for it is the necessary 
consequence of their new-created being. 

7. We are inclined to believe that the most common 
cause is the fact that, at first conversion, the soul relies 
more simply upon Christ,and looks more attentively at 
him than it does in after days, when evidences, good 
works, and graces, become more an object of regard than 
the person of Jesus. When the glorious Redeemer finds 
us lost and ruined in the fall—when he makes us deeply 
conscious of that ruain—then we take him, and him alone, 
for our treasure ; but in future years he gives to us sundry 
rings, jewels, and ornaments, as love-tokens—and we 
most folishly set our eyes more upon these than upon 
the Giver and consequently lose much of the cheering 
effect of a constant view of the Saviour. At the first time 
of love we are too weak to venture on our own feet, but 
cling with bothour arms around theneckof Jesus ; there we 
find an easy carriage, which we lose when our overween- 
ing pride constrains him to set us on the ground to run 
alone. He who hath a speck in the eye of his faith, ob- 
securing his vision of the Saviour, will find much pain re- 
sulting therefrom. ‘That which removes us from the sim- 
plicity of our faith in Christ, although it be in itself most 
excellent, yet to us becomes a curse. Many of us might 
be willing to renounce all our experience, our graces, and 
our evidences, if we might but return to the former child- 
like faith of our spiritual infancy. To lie quietly afloat 


;and won- 
st sight of 
zement, 80 
hath been 
y gifts of 
s bud; so 
igs. The 
a steadier 
re;” but 
necessary 


common 
oul relies 
ntively at 
ces, good 
yard than 
ner finds 
is deeply 
im alone, 
is sundry 
-and we 
an upon 
cheering 
first time 
feet, but 
there we 
verween- 
i to run 
aith, ob- 
pain re- 
the sim- 
self most 

is might 

ces, and 

er child- 

ly afloat 


rT Te 


JOY AT CONVERSION. 143 


on the stream of free grace is the very glory of existence, 
the perfection of earthly happiness, 

No seat is so pleasant as that which is beneath the 
shadow of Jesus. We may fetch our spices from afar, but 
they shall yield no such fragrance as that which is shed 
from the robes of the all-glorious Emmanuel, of whom it 
is written, “ All thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, 
and cassia.” Whatsoever spiritual joy we have which 
springs not from Christ as the Fountain, we shall find it 
sooner or later bitter to our taste. The young convert is 
happy because he drinks only from Jesus, and is yet too 
full of infirmity to attempt the hewing of a cistern for 
himself. 

If we be unfaithful to Christ, we must not expect many 
of his smiles. It matters little what is the object of our 
Aclicht, be it never so lovely, if it become a rival of Jesus, 
he is grieved thereby, and makes us mourn his absence. 
“ When we make creatures, or creature-comforts, or any- 
thing whatever but what we receive by the Spirit of 
Christ to be our joy and our delight, we are false to 
Christ.” * He gave himself wholly for us, and he thinks 
it ill that will not give him sole possession of our 
heart. Jesus, like his Father, is a jealous God—he will 
not brook a rival. He will have us rejoice only in His 
love, hearken only to fis voice, and keep our eyes con- 
stantly on him, and him only. Beyond a doubt, were we 
in constant fellowship with our loving Redeemer, we 
might always retain a measure, if not the entire fulness 
of our early joy ; and did we labour to improve in our 
acquaintance with him, and our devotion to him, our joy 
might poss: ly increase to an indefinite degree, until our 
tabernacle on earth would be like a house built upon the 
wall of heaven, or at least in the suburbs of the city of 
God. It is no wonder that so many lose their first joy 
when we remember how many lose their first love. “It 


* Owen. 


144 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


may be,” saith a holy Puritan to the doubting soul, “ 
may be, if thou hadst minded and endeavoured more 
after community with God and conformity to God, thou 
mightest at this time have looked upward, and seen God 
in Christ smiling upon thee, and have looked inward into 
thy soul, and seen the Spirit of grace witnessing to. thy 
spirit that thou wert a son, an heir, an heir of God, and a 
joint-heir with Christ, But thou hast minded more thine 
own comfort than Christ’s honour; thou hast minded the 
blossoms and the fruit more than Christ, the Root; thou 
hast minded the springs of comfort more than C thrist, the 
Fountain of life; thou hast minded the beams of the sun 
more than the Son of righteousness; and, therefore, it 1 
but a righteous thing with God to leave thee to wall in 
the valley of darkness, to hide his face from thee, and to 
seem to be as an enemy to thee.” Let us labour then to 
keep our eye single, so shall our whole body be full of 
light—light, cheering and delightful beyond what we ean 
even dream, [ti isquice inpossible to detine the limit of 
the happiness mortals may experience in the condeseond- 
ing company of a gracious Saviour ; let us each seek to 
soar into the loftiest air, that we mi ny prove what is the 
joy unspeakable and full of glory, Certain it is that faith 
is the golden pipe which conduets the livi ing waters of oe 
mount of God to the pilgrim sons of Jehovah, Let 1 
keep the course unobstructed, and we may hope to dvink 
deep draughts of true delight. 

It cannot be supposed that we have enumerated more 
than a small proportion of the causes of this spiritual 
vhenomenon ; the rest lie beyond the writer's limited ex- 
perience, or do not at this moment suggest themselves, 
These, perhaps, are the most frequent, and consequently 
the most apparent. 

Should we have a reader who has lost his first love, it 
may be he will, by these suggestions, be able to detect 
the secret robber who has stolen his substance. If so, we 


ne soul, “it 
oured more 
0 God, thou 
d Seen Cod 
inward into 
sing to thy 
God, and a 
I more thine 
minded the 
Root: thou 
Christ, the 
s of the sun 
rofore, it 
to walk in 
hee, and. to 
uur then to 
be full of 
hat we ean 
he limit of 
rondeseenad- 
ch seek to 
That is the 
sthat faith 
aters of the 
h. Let 
ve to drink 


‘ated more 

spiritual 
lmited ex- 
hhemsel ves, 
sequently 


‘st’ love, it 
to detect 
If so, we 


JOY AT CONVERSION, 145 


heseech him, as he loves his own soal, to be in earnest to 
remedy the evil by driving out the Lutaltnid enemy. O 
spirit of God, restore unto us each “the years which the 
locust has eaten ! 


II. We shall now endeavour to discover the designs of 
our heavenly Father in thus favoaring us on that happy 
day of conversion, ‘These are many, and most of them 
unknown: we must, therefore, be content to behold some 
of them; and may the contemplation excite wonder, grati- 
tude, and love. 

Doubtless our Lord would have us ever remember 
that day, and regard it with an especial interest; there- 
fore did he crown it with loving-kindness and tender 
mercies. It was a birthday—he distinguished it with 
festivities ; it was a marriage-day—he ce Jebrated it with 
music; it was a resurreetion—he did attend it with joy- 
ful sound of trumpet. He illuminated that page of our 
biography that we might refer to it with ease. Tt was a 
high day, and he made it high in our esteem by the mar- 
vellous grace which he displayed towards us, At the sign 
ing of M: agna Charta, if on no other occasion, the king and 
his courtiers would array themselves in all their dazzling 
robes and glittering jewels; surely it is not unbecoming 
even in the majesty of heaven to reveal something of ita 
glories when making peace with rebels. The black cap 
is but the fitting accompaniment of the sentence of death ; 
why should it be thought unseemly that garments of 
praise should be displayed on the day of acquittal 7 ? In 
heaven there is held a solemn festival when heirs of glory 
are begotten, and the heart of Jesus rejoices over the re- 
covery of his lost sheep; we need not wonder that the 
cause of such sublime delights i is himself made a sharer 
inthem. Men strike medals to commemorate creat national 
successes ; should it be considered a strange thing that 
Jesus giveth tokens to his people in the day of their sal- 


146 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


vation ? We are but too little mindful of the benefits of 
the Lord; he doth therefore mark this day of the calen- 
dar in golden letters, that we may be compelled to re- 
membrance. 

It can never happen to us again; we are regenerated 
for all—saved in a moment from sin and its consequences ; 
it is meet that we should make merry and be glad, for 
the dead are alive, and the lost are found. The peace has 
just now been welcomed with illuminations and with 
national festivities; shall the eternal peace between 
heaven and the soul be unattended with rejoicings? The 
greater the occasion, the more proper is its rrmembrance— 
and what can be a happier event to us than our salvation ? 
therefore let it be had in perpetual remembrance, and let 
“all kinds of music” unite to sound its praise. Some 
among us honour the anniversary of the building of the 
house of the Lord; but far more do we delight in the re- 
turning day which saw us placed as living stones in the 
temple of Jesus. Bless the Lord, O our souls, who hath 
forgiven all our iniquities and healed all our diseases ! 

2. Our wise and loving Lord graciously designed to 
give us something which might in all after trials be u 
sweet staying to the soul when a present sense of his love 
should be absent. How often have we been enabled to 
recover confidence in the day of our infirmity, by remem- 
bering “the years of the right hand of the Most High!” * 

David, when his soul refused to be comforted, found it 
good “ to consider the days of old,’ and to rehearse his 
former “song in the night.” He declares that his “spirit 
made diligent search,’—meaning that he turned over the 
register and records of God’s former mercies, in order that 
some record, still extant, might help him in his need. 
When the heir of heaven is in doubt as to his inheritance 
among them that are sanctified, it affords no small degree 
of assurance to be able to turn to the birthday register 


a a woEe > 


*Pg, Ixxvii. 10. 


ZI 


1e benefits of 
of the calen- 
npelled to re- 


» regenerated 
consequences ; 
| be glad, for 
rhe peace has 
ns and with 
pace between 
yicings ? The 
mem brance— 
yur salvation ? 
rance, and let 
raise. Some 
ilding of the 
‘ht in the re- 
stones in the 
ils, who hath 
diseases ! 
designed to 
' trials be wu 
¢ of his love 
1 enabled to 
y, by remem- 
ost High!” * 
‘ted, found it 
rehearse his 
at his “ spirit 
ned over the 
in order that 
in his need. 
inheritance 
small degree 
day register 


v7 - 


JOY AT CONVERSION, 147 


= ere 


ee 


and read “of Zionit is said this man was born there ;” 
this decides the case at once in our favour. In times of 
contention, when we “ see not our signs,” we shall find it 
eminently comfortable to look back to the consecrated 
hour which witnessed our acceptance in the beloved, for 
go shall we again be able to assure ourselves of our elec- 
tion by a remembrance of our calling. 

We at times should have had no heart for song if we 
had not found cur harp already tuned, having not yet be- 
come unstrung since the hour of high festivity in the 
halls of bounty. Some despise Ebenezers, and talk slight- 
ingly of the hope which issues from them; such persons 
can scarcely have had more than a superficial experience, 
or they would have learned far better. 

The future would lie for ever in obscurity if we did not 
borrow a lamp from the hand of the past to cheer the 
gloom, and show where a sure foot-hold is to be found. 
This, then, is God’s design in lighting up the hill Mizar of 
our first conversion, that it may cast a light, like Malvern’s 
watch-fire, for many a mile beyond. 

A pleasant anecdote is told of Mr. Kidd, cnce minister 
of Queensferry, near Edinburgh. He was one day very 
much depressed and discouraged, for want of that comfort 
which is produced by simple faith in Jesus. He therefore 
sent a note to Mr. L , the minister of Culross, request- 
ing a visit from him, that a brother’s help might lift him 
out of his Slough of Despond. When the servant arrived 
at Culcross, Mr. L told him that he was too busy to 
wait upon his master, but he was charged to deliver these 
words to him—*“ Remember Torwood/” The man, like 
Jonathan’s lad, knew nothing of the matter, but Mr. Kidd 
understood it well, for at Torwood he had received mani- 
festations of Jesus. Upon being reminded thereof, his 
darkness vanished, and he joyfully cried out, “ Yes, Lord! 
I will remember Thee, from the hill Mizar, and from the 
Hermonites!” It may be that in periods of gloom and 


i NCE DLL REE LL LOCESTT 


| 
] 
i 
Wt 


2 


2 


148 THE SAINT AND HiS SAVIOUR. 


distraction, that place, that spot of ground where Jesus 
met with us for the first time, will prove a very Bethel to 
our spirits. Here is wisdom in this day of joy, let him that 
knoweth it be thankful. 

3. We had sujfered so much in the time of conviction 
that we needed much tenderness, and therefore he gave it 
to us. There was no small fear lest we should be swal- 
lowed up of sorrow, and die under the pangs and throes of 
the new birth, therefore did he tend us with the careful- 
ness of a mother, and watch over us with abundant com- 
passions. Like a sailor snatched from the deep, we were 
ready to perish, and should have expired in our deliverer's 
arms had he not used the most compassionate arts to restore 
us to 'ife. We were sore, broken, and wounded, therefore 
did he place us in an infirmary on the hills of Delight, 
where he made all our bed in our sickness, poured out his 
best wine with his own hand, fed us with royal dainties, 
and all the while did watch us, lest any should disturb 
our rest. When we become somewhat stronger, he leaves 
us to share with our fellow-soldiers in the camp, whose 
rations are not quite so full of marrow and fatness. 

The wise shepherds said to the pilgrim band, “ Come in, 
Mr. Feeblemind ; come in, Mr. Ready-to-halt; come in, 
Mr. Des,ondency and Mrs. Much-afraid, his daughter.” 
These were called by naine because of their weakness, 
while the stronger sort were left to their own liberty. So 
also at their feast they made the viands suitable to the 
condition of the tender ones, “of things easy of. digestion, 
and that were pleasant to the palate, and nour ishing. i 
Many of the promises are made specially for the feeble 
among the Lord’s flock, to be heavenly ambulances for the 
wounded. When grace is young, and as yet but a spark, 
the kind hand of the Lord preserves it from the rough 
wind, and his own warm breath fans it to a flame. He 
doth not deliver the soul of his turtle-dove into the hand 
of its enemies, but for a while houseth it in the rock, or 


UR. 


nd where Jesus 
a very Bethel to 
joy, let him that 


e@ of conviction 
‘efore he gave it 
should be swal- 
gs and throes of 
ith the careful- 
abundant com- 
e deep, we were 
n our deliverer’s 
te arts to restore 
unded, therefore 
ills of Delight, 
s, poured out his 
| royal dainties, 
should disturb 
onger, he leaves 
e camp, whose 
d fatness. 
band, “ Come in, 
halt; come in, 
his daughter.” 
heir weakness, 
pwn liberty. So 
suitable to the 
sy of. digestion, 
nd nourishing.” 
for the feeble 
ulances for the 
et but a spark, 
rom the rough 
> a flame. He 
into the hand 
in the rock, or 


JOY AT CONVERSION. 149 


carricth it in his hand. The tender plant of grace is 
covered all the day long, watered every moment, protected 
from the frost, and fostered in the warm air of communion. 
and endearing fellowship. It should be accepted as a con- 
clusive proof of the wisdom and prudence of our gracious 
God, that he sendeth the soft and refreshing showers upon 
the new-mown grass, and in that blessed manner effaces 
all the ill effects of the severe discipline of conviction. 
« Tf,” says Austin, “one drop of the joy uf the Holy Ghost 
should fall into hell, it would swallow up all the torments 
of hell ;” assuredly it soon removes all the sadness pro- 
duced by pains of repentance. 

4. The journey before us was exceeding long, therefore 
did he refresh us before he sent us on our way. Elijah 
was made to eat once and again before his forty days of 
travelling—so must the spirit be refreshed before it sets 
out on its long pilgrimage. Jesus, in this hour of heaven, 
drops such tokens of love into the hands of his children 
that in after days they may recruit their strength by look- 
ing upon the heavenly earnest. The smiles, embraces, and 
assurances of that hour put spirit and mettle into the 
Christian warrior, enabling him to bid defiance to the 
stoutest enemies, and brave the greatest dangers. Before 
fighting, feasting. The angels met Jacob at Mahanaim 
before he heard of Esau’s threatening approach. Paul was 
caught up into the third heaven before he was buffeted by 
the messenger of Satan. There should be cheering words 
at the buckling on of the harness, for they will all be 
wanted by-and-by. God filleth the believer's bottle full 
when he starteth, for he hath a wide desert to traverse, a 
thirsty heart to carry, and few wells on the road. Al- 
though grace, like manna, must descend day by day—yet 
coinforts, like the quails, come only at seasons, and we 
must gather enough at those times to last us many days. 
It is certain that the delights of the past afford the readiest 
means for exciting pleasure in the present, we carry from 


150 THE SAINT AND HI8 SAVIOUR, 


———_ —__ et ae a ee EY en 


— 


the fires of yesterday burning coals for the kindling of to- 
day. The ship hath mcre provisions on board when it 
starts upon its voyage than it is likely to have in a few 
weeks, and it then showeth all its flags and streamers 
which must soon be furled, and the canvas will be spread, 
which, though more useful, is not so glorious for show, 
The remembrance of the happy shore, and the gaiety of 
the departure, will support the spirit of the mariners 
when storms assail them, and the comforts then placed 
on board will be found none too many for the greatness 
of their toil upon the wide and stormy sea. Gurnal says 
that past experiences are like cold dishes reserved at a 
feast, from which the child of God can make a hearty 
meal when there is nothing else on the table; and when 
we consider how long a time has sometimes elapsed be- 
tween one banquet and another, it is doubtless intended 
that we should set aside an abundant provisio. from the 
well-spread table which furnishes the feast of the peni- 
tent’s reception. ‘Take thy first joys, O little faith, and 
drink full draughts of cordial from them. 

5. By thejoy of his right hand, He put to flight our 
hard thoughts of him. Deceived by the outward appear- 
ance, we thought his chastenings unkind; we attributed 
his wounds to cruelty and enmity ; nor could our mistake 
be corrected until He displayed the richness of his love in 
the most compassionate way—by restoring our soul and 
renewing our strength. Oh! what a death-blow was his 
love to all our unkind thoughts of him; how were we 
ashamed to look at the dear friend whom we had go base- 
ly slandered! We saw it all then, clear as noonday, and 
wept at the recollection of our premature judgment and 
rash surmises, The Lord soon changed our thoughts con- 
cerning his dealings. We said, “It is enough; these things 
are not against me; surely goodness and mercy shall fo! 
low me all the days of my life.” 


errr al 


UR. 


2 a en 
— 


> kindling of to- 
board when it 
o have in a few 
and streamers 
s will be spread, 
rious for show, 
id the gaiety of 
ff the mariners 
rts then placed 
r the greatness 
a. Gurnal says 
s reserved ata 
make a hearty 
ble; and when 
nes elapsed be- 
btless intended 
vision from the 
st of the peni- 
little faith, and 


t to flight our 
butward appear- 
| we attributed 
uld our mistake 
bss of his love in 
our soul and 
h-blow was his 
; how were we 

we had so base- 
8 noonday, and 

judgment and 

r thoughts con- 
h; these things 

ercy shall fo. 


Sonera aia 


PES 5 


JOY AT CONVERSION, 15] 


—$——— ee — 


We might to this hour have been mindful of our 
agonies, if the succeeding joy had not obliterated all; so 
that, like the woman after her deliverance, “we remem- 
per no more the travail” for joy at the result. If we had 
only felt the sore woundings of his arm, and had never 
had a look at his sweet loving face, we might have writ- 
ten hard things against God as well as against ourselves ; 
but now that he visiteth us in mercy, we gladly confess, 
“Thou hast dealt well with thy servant, O Lord, accord- 
ing unto thy word.” When reaping the fruit of that 
rough sowing, we repent most truly of the impatience and 
unbelief which dared to lie against the Lord, and accuse 
him of unkindness. We retracted every word, and would 
have washed those feet with tears which we had bespat- 
tered with our vile suspicions, and kissed away every stain 
which our unbelief had put upon his pure, unmingled 
love. 

6. This cheering manifestation of mercy made us full 
of love to the good ways of holiness, which we then found 
to be exceedingly pleasant. Henceforth we believe and 
know the King’s highway to be a path of peace; and 
when at any time we lose the happiness once enjoyed, we 
look back to the time of love, and remembering how sweet 
was the service of Jesus, we march forward with renewed 
vigour. We had heard the vile calumny that religion was 
a thing of misery and sadness, and that its followers were 
the companions of owls and lovers of lamentation ; but 
the jubilant nature of our reception into the house of the 
saints laid bare the slander, and discovered the reverse of 
our gloomy apprehensions. We thought that glens, ra- 
vines, wildernesses, clouds, tempests, lions, dragons and all 
kinds of horrid things, were the suim-total of Christian 
experience ; but instead thereof we were “led forth with 
peace ;” where we feared a wilderness we found a Sharon, 
and the oil of joy was given us instead of the expected 
mourning. 


152 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


a nn nn ee nen, 


We labour now to exhibit cheerfulness, since we firmly 
believe that this recommends the way to the wavering, 
and is the true method of honouring the God of all con- 
solation. “This world is a howling wilderness to those 
alone who go howling through it;” but 


‘*The men of grace have found 
Glory begun below ; 
Celestial fruits, on earthly ground, 
From faith and hope may grow.” 


He who affirms that godliness is gloominess knoweth 
not what he saith. The Lord desireth to teach us, at the 
very beginning of our Christian career, thathe would have 
us be happy, happy only in himself. He makes us glad 
when we are but beginners, and little in Israel, that we 
may see that we can be made blessed by simple faith, 
without any other assistance. “Christians might avoid 
much trouble,” says Dr. Payson, “if they would only be- 
lieve what they profess—that God is able to make them 
happy without anything else. They imagine, if such 
a dear friend were to die, or such and such blessings to be 
removed, they should be miserable; whereas God can 
make them a thousand times happier without them. To 
mention my own case—God has been depriving me of one 
blessing after another ; but asevery one has been removed, 
he has come in and filled up its place ; and now, when I am 
a cripple, and not able to move, I am happier than ever 
1 was in my life before, or ever expected to be; and if I 
had believed this twenty years ago, I might have been 
spared much anxiety.” This is the very thing our very 
gracious Jesus would teach us, if we were not so slow to 
learn; for, in the very first dawning of life, when graces 
and virtues are not yet developed, he makes himself so 
precious that we may know that he alone is the fountain 
of delights, and the very soul of rejoicing. He puts into 


SN ee ee iad 


JOY AT CONVERSION, 


on. 


since we firmly 
the wavering, 
hod of all con- 
rness to those 


us a ecnstant love for his ways, by that delightful advent 
which he gives us at the very first step we “take therein. 
It is of no use for the infidel to te!l us our course will not 
end in bliss—it began with it, and we are compelled to 
believe that, if the same Jesus be Alpha and Omega too, 
the end must be eternal happiness. 

7. We may also regard these great delights as earnests 
of the future bliss of the righteous, A pledge assures the 
wavering and confirms the weak ; wisdom, therefore, he- 
stows the earnest upon tue young believer that he may be 
rendered confident of ultimate felicity. During our pro- 
gress to the celestial city, our Lord is pleased to refresh 
our souls with sundry “ drops of heaven,” as the foretaste 
of that glorious rest which remains for his people, and this 
early joy is the first of a series of antepasts of heaven 
which we hope to receive while sojourning below. It is, 
so to speak, the enlisting money wherewith the young re- 
cruit is pledged to the king’ Ss service, and assured of his 
bounty. 

The Apostle Paul tells us that the holy spirit of promise 
is the earnest of ovr inheritance. “The original word, 
appaBwv, seems properly to denote the first part of the price 
that is paid in any contract as an earnest and security of 
the remainder, and which therefore is not taken back, but 
kept till the residue is paid to complete the whole sum.”* 
Such are the raptures of the newly-pardoned soul—to- 
kens which he will keep for ever, as the first instalments 
of an eternal weight of glory, and which he may safely 
retain as a portion of his own inheritance. ‘These spirit- 
ual joys are like the cluster of grapes which the spies 
brought from Eschol—they are sweet in themselves, but 
they become more delightful still when they are regarded 
as proofs that the land of Canaan is fertile, and tlowing 
with milk and honey. Thus the rest of the Sabbath is 


a 


iness knoweth 
each us, at the 
he would have 
makes us glad 
Israel, that we 
, simple faith, 
Ss might avoid &@ 
yould only be- | 
to make them 
agine, if such 
blessings to be 
reas God can 
out them. To 
ving me of one 
been removed, 
ow, when I am 
pier than ever 
o be; and if I 
cht have been 
hing our very 
not so slow to 
, when graces 
[eS himself so 
s the fountain 
He puts into 


been 


— 
po 


* Chandler, 


154 THE SAINT AND HiS SAVIOUR. 


described by Stennet as “ the antepast of heaven,” and of 
its true enjoyment he says— 


‘This heavenly calm within the breast 
Ts the dear pledge of glorious rest, 
Which for the Church of God remains— 
The end of cares, the end of pains.” 


The last of the seers whom we feel constrained to quote 
in almost every page, makes “ Hopeful” victorious over 
the scoffing “ Atheist” by the simple expression, “ What! 
no Mount Zion? Did we not see trom the Delectable 
Mountains the gate of the city?” These Sabbath mer- 
cies, delectable views, and days of espousals, are a witness 
within the believer which all the sneers of man, the malice 
of devils, and the doubts of corrupt nature cannot dis- 
prove. Such things are designed to be the true “ internal 
evidence” of the power of the Gospel. 

The ends and purposes of God which we have mentioned 
are far from despicable, and when we remember the mar- 
vellously pleasant process by which such great effects are 
produced, we would desire to ascribe honour to that eter- 
nal wisdom which can use rich wines as well as bitter 
medicines in'the cure of souls. 

And now, reader, what dost thou say to these things ? 
Hast thou tasted the “thousand sacred sweets” which are 
afforded by the hill of Zion? Hast thou felt the “heaven 
begun below” of which we have treated? If thou hast 
not, then allow a word of advice which may well be fur- 
nished trom the subject :—Never believe the falsehood 
which pronounces true veligion to be a miserable thing, for 
a more ungrounded slander can never be imagined. The 
Godly have their trials as well as the rest of the human 
family, but these are rather the effects of sin than of 
grace. They find this world at times a howling wilder- 
ness—but then the manna from above, and the rock which 
follows them, combine to prevent their howling as they 


UR. 
heaven,” and of 


ast 


ins— 


strained to quote 
victorious over 
ession, “ What! 
the Delectable 

Sabbath mer. 
ls, are a witness 
man, the malice 
ure cannot dis- 
e true “internal 


1ave mentioned 
smber the mar- 
reat effects are 
ur to that eter. 

well as bitter 


these things 7 
eets” which are 
It the “heaven 

If thou hast 
Ly well be fur- 

the falsehood 
‘able thing, for 
nagined. The 
of the human 
' sin than of 
wling wilder- 
he rock which 
vling as they 


BM 


JOY AT CONVERSION, 155 


OO 


pass through it, and constrain the wilderness and the soli- 
tary place to be glad for them. Some of them are of a 
sorrowful countenance—but their gloom is the result of 
temperament rather than of religion, and if they had more 
orace, the wrinkles upon their brows might become fewer. 

The Gospel is in itself “ glad tidings of greut joy ;” can 
you suppose that misery is the result of that which is es- 
sentially joyful? The very proclamation of it is a theme 
for exulting song ;* how much more the reception of it? 
If the hope of reconciliation be a just ground of rejoicing, 
how much more the actual agreement of the soul with its 
God ? “ We rejoice in God through Jesus Christ, by wiom 
we have received the atonement.” + To use these are ex- 
press precepts given to “rejoice in the Lord alway.” { 
And that the exhortation might have its full effect, and 
not be accounted hasty, it is solemnly repeated;“ and again 
I say, Rejoice.” Hence, therefore, we may safely conclude 
that the genuine right temper and frame of a healthy 
Christian mind will be an i bitual joyfulness, prevailing 
over all the temporary occasions of sorrow which in this 
life must unavoidably beset us. 

No trial can be thought of so heavy as to outweigh our 
great cause of joy; nor can the kingdom of God ever be 
in its constitution, even when attacked by the most furi- 
ous assaults, anything other than “righteousness, and 
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.”§ “Nor,” says Howe, 
in a letter to the bereaved Lady Russell, “is thisa theory 
only, or the idea and notion of an excellent temper of 
spirit, which we may contemplate indeed, but can never 
attain to. For we find it also to have been the attain- 
ment and usual temner of Christians heretofore, that, ‘ be- 
ing justified by faith, and having peace with God, they 
have rejoiced, in hope of the glory of God, unto that de- 
gree as even to ‘ glory in their tribulat.ons also ;’ || and in 


* Isa, lii. 7-10, + Rom.v. 11. $Phil. iv. 4. §1Thes. v. 16. Rom. v. 1. 3, 


156 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


the confidence that they should ‘be kept by the power of 
God through faith unto salvation, they bave therefore 
‘greatly rejoiced, though with some mixture of heaviness 
(whereof there was need) from their manifold trials. But 
that their joy did surmount and prevail over the?’ heavi- 
ness is manifest,for this is spoken of with muchdiminution, 
whereas they are said to ‘rejoice greatly,’ and with ‘joy 


unspeakable and full of glory.’” * 


if, when the believer is but a feeble thing, “carried 
away by every wind,” he is, despite his weakness, able to 
vise to raptures of joy, who shall dare to suppose him un- 
happy when he has become strong in faith and mighty in 
grace ? If the porch of godliness be paved with gold, what 
must be the interior of the palace? If the very hedge- 
rows of her garden are laden with fruit, what shall we 
not find on the goodly trees in the centre? The blade 
yieldeth much, shall the ear be empty? Nay, “the ways 
of the Lord are right,” and those who walk therein are 
blessed. Think not otherwise of them, but as you wish 
to share their “ last end,” think well also of the way which 
leadeth thither. 

May the Lord direct his children, by his Holy Spirit, in 
reviewing this subject by prayer, to give all the glory of 
their mercies to the adorable person of Jesus. Amen. 


i 


* 1 Pet, i. 5, 6,8, 


eRe Oye OTe + ee ee 8 er 


y the power of 
lave therefore 
re of heaviness 
bld trials. But 
pr the‘: heavi- 
chdiminution, 
nd with ‘joy 


hing, “carried 
kness, able to 
ppose him un- 
und mighty in 
th gold, what 

very hedge- 
vhat shall — 
¢ The blade 
vy, “the ways 
< therein are 
48 you wish 
he way which 


loly Spirit, in 
I the glory of 
. Amen, 


a 


—_ 


JOY AT CONVERSION. 
UE ad 


TO THE UNCONVERTED READER, 


FrIEND,—We have been answering questions concern- 
ing a joy with which thou canst nct intermeddle—for 
thou art, to thine own loss and shame, a stranger from. the 
commonwealth of Israel. But thou, too, hast a question 
or two which it were well to ask thyself. Whence that 
inisery of which thou art at times the victim? Why dost 
thou tremble under an arousing sermon? Why doth the 
funeral knell grate on thine ear? What makes thy knees 
knock together at the sound of thunder? Why dost thou 
quiver at nightfall, though a leaf, all solitary, was the only 
thing which stirred within many a yard of thee? Why 
Jost thou feel such alarm when pestilence is abroad ? Why 
30 anxious after a hundred remedies? Why so fearful if 
thou art but sick an hour? Why so unwilling to visit the 
grave of thy companion? Answer this, O soul, without 
reserve! Is-it not that thou art afraidtodie? It is!— 
thou knowest it is! 

But, O my friend, fear death as much as thou wilt, thou 
canst not escape it. On his pale horse he is pursuing 
thee at no Jame pace, but at arate which thou mayest 
guess of by the wind or the flashing lightning. Noiseless 
is the wing of time, dumb is the lip of death; but time 
isrone the less rapid for its silence, and death not one whit 
the more uncertain because he trumpets not his coming. 
Remember, while thou art fearing, the messenger is hasten- 
ing to arrest thee. Every moment now gliding away is 
another moment lost, and lost to one who little can afford 
it. Oh! ere the wax hath cooled which is sealing thy 


158 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


\ 
Hi a Se 


ee a er ee 


death-warrant, list to a warning from God, fer if the §& 
book of thy doom be once sealed, it shall never be opened | 
| for erasure or inscripticn. Hear Moses and the prophets, 
; and then hear the great Jesus speak :—“ The soul that 
sinneth it shall die.” “ He will by no means spare the 
guilty.” “Cursed is every one that continueth not in 
all things that are written in the book of the law to do 
them.” “Behold the day cometh that shall burn as an 
oven, and all the proud, yea, and ALL THAT DO WICKEDLY, 
| shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall bun @ 
them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them § 
| neither root nor branch.” Regard then the voice of Jesus, 
\ full of merey :—* The Son of Man is come to seek and to 
t save that which was lost.” 


‘* Sinner, is thy heart at rest ? 
Is thy bosom void of fear ? 
Art thou not by guilt oppressed ? 
Speaks not conscience in thine ear ? 


** Can this world afford thee bliss ? 
Can it chase away thy gloom ? 
Flattering, false, and vain it is ; 
Tremble at the worldling’s doom. 


*¢ Long the Gospel thou hast spurn’d, 
Lony delay’d to love thy God, 

Stifled conscience, nor hast turn’d, 

Wooed though by a Saviour’s blood. 


‘Think, O sinner! on thy end ; 
See the judgment-day appear ; 

Thither must thy spirit wend, 

There thy righteous sentence hear, 


** Wretched, ruin’d, helpless soul, 
To a Saviour’s blood apply ; 

He alone can make thee whole— 

Fly to Jesus, sinner, fly.”* 


* Waterbury. 


IR. 


od, fcr if the ' 
ever be opened | 
d the prophets, 
‘The soul that 
eans spare the 
tinueth not in 
f thelaw todo % 
all burn asan_ | VI. 
ue eee 
eth sha urn | 
hall leave them ee ee 
voice of Jesus, 
p to seek and to 


“Ye are complete in him.”—Cot., ii. 10. 


\\ HE pardoned sinner for awhile is content with 
2% the one boon of forgiveness, and is too over- 


7) i . : : 
Qi joyed with a sense of freedom from bondage 


(a to know a wish beyond. In a little time, 
( : however, he bethinks himself of his position 
<&) his wants, and his prospects ; what is then his, 
rapture at the discovery that the roll of his par- 
don is also an indenture of all wealth, a charter 
of all privileges, a title-deed of all needed blessings! Hav- 
ing received Christ, he hath received all things in him. 
He looketh to that cross upon which the dreadful hand- 
writing of ordinances hath been nailed ; to his unutterable 
surprise he beholds it blossom with mercy, and like a tree 
of life bring forth the twelve manne: of fruits—yea, all 
that he requires for life, for death, for time, or for eter- 
nity. Lo! at the foot of the once accursed tree grow 
plants for the healing, and flowers for his delight ; from 
te bleeding feet of the Redeemer flows directing love to 
lead him all the desert through—from the pierced side 
there gushes cleansing water to purge him from the power 
of sin—the nails become a means of securing him to 


\ 


160 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


righteousness, while above the crown hangs visible as the 

gracious reward of perseveranee, All things are in the 
eross—by this we coaquer, by this we live, by this we 
are purified, by this we continue firm to the end, While 
sitting beneath the shadow of ovr Lord, we think our. 
selves most rich, for angels seem to sing, “ Ye are ecom- 
plete in him,” 

“ COMPLETE IN Him !°—precious sentence | sweeter than 
honey to our soul, we would adore the Holy Spirit for 
dictating such glorious words to his servant Paul. Oh! 
may we by grace be made to see that they really are ours 
—for ours they are if we answer to the character deseribed 
in the opening verses of the Epistle to the Colossians. If 
we have faith in Christ Jesus, love towards all the saints, 
and a ae laid up in heaven, we may grasp this golden 
sentence as all our own, Re ader, hast thou been able to 
follow in “hat which has already been described as the 
“way which leads from banishment ?” Then thou mayest 
take this choice sentence to thyself as a portion of thine 
inheritance ; for weak, poor, helpless, unworthy though 
thou be in thyself, in JZim, thy Lord, thy Redeemer, thou 
art complete in the fullest, broadest, and most varied sense 
of that mighty word, and thou wilt, be glad to muse ae 
the wonders of this glorious position, May the Gre: 
Teacher guide us into this mystery of the perfection of 
the elect in Jesus, and may our meditation be cheering 
and profitable to our spirits! As the words are few, let 
us dwell on them, and endeavour to gain the sweets 
which lie so compactly within this little cell. 

Pause over these two little words, “in Him’—in 
Christ ! Here is the doctrine of union and oneness with 
Jesus—a doctrine of undoubted truth and unmingled 
comfort. The Church is so allied with her Lord that she 
is positively one with him. She is the bride, and he the 
bridegroom ; she is the branch, and he the stem; she the 
body, and he the glorious Head. So also is every indi- 


ie 


; 
’ 
Sa 


R, 


8 visible ag the 
nes are in the 
ve, by this wo 
leend, While 
we think cup. 
“Ve are eom- 


! sweeter than 
loly Spirit for 
nt Paul Oh: 
really are ours 
eter deseribed 
olossians. If 
all the saints, 
ip. this golden 
i been able to 
‘rtibed as the 
thou mayest 
rtion of thine 
orthy though 
deemer, thou 
i Varied sense 
oO muse upon 
’ the Great 

per fection of 

be cheering 
ave few, let 

the sweets 


t Him’ —in 
neness with 

unmingled 
ord that: she 
, and he the 
m; she the 
every indi- 


COMPLETE IN CHRIST. 161 


vidual believer united to Clirist. As Levi lay in the loins 
of Abraham when Melchisedek met him, so was every 
believer chosen in Christ, and blessed with all spiritual 
blessinus in heavenly places in him. We have been spared, 
protec ted, converted, justified, and accepted solely and en- 
tirely by virtue of our eternal union with Christ. 

Never ean the convinced soul obtain peace until, like 
Ruth, she finds rest in the house of her kinsman, who be- 
comes her husband—Jesus the Lord. An eminent pastor, 
lately deceased,* said in one of his sermons, “ Now, [ am 
as sure as [am of my own existence that whe rever God 
the Holy Ghost awakens the poor sinner by his mighty 
erace, and imparts spiritual life in his heart, nothing will 
ever satisfy that poor sinner but a believing assurance of 
eternal union with Christ. Unless the soul obtains a 
sweet and satisfactory consciousness of it in the exercise 
of a living faith, it will never ‘enter into rest’ this side 
eternity. ” 

It is from oneness with Christ before all worlds that 
we receive all our mercies. Faith is the precious grace 
which discerns this eternal union, and cements it by an- 
other—a vital union ; so that we become one, not merely 
in the eye of God, but in our own happy experience—one 
in aim, one in he ‘art, cne in holiness, one in communion, 
and, ultimately, one in glory. 

This manifest union is not more real and actual than 
the eternal union of which it is the revelation; it does 
not commence the union, nor does its obscurity or clear- 
ness in the least affect the certainty or safety of the im- 
mutable oneness subsisting between Jesus and the'believer. 
It is eminently desirable that every saint should attain a 
full assurance of his union to Christ, and it is exceedingly 
important that he should labour to maintain a constant 
sense thereof; for although the mercy be the same, yet 
his comfort from it will vary according to his apprehen- 


—— 


* Rev. J oseph Irons, Camberwell. 


« ~ s 
Ss 3 


er 


&. 0 
> 


<i SSR are esa 
= ~ > 


r 
f 


162 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


sion of it. A landscape is as fair by night as by day, but 
who can perceive its beauties in the dark ?—even so we 
must see, or rather believe, this union to rejoice in it. 

No condition out of Paradise can be more blessed than 
that which is produced by a lively sense of oneness with 
Jesus. To know and feel that our interests are mutual, 
our bonds indissoluble, and our lives united, is indeed to 
dip our morsel in the golden dish of heaven. There is no 
sweeter canticle for mortal lips than the sweet song, “My 
beloved is mine, and I am his:”— 


** Fen like two bank-dividing brooks, 
That wash the pebbles with their wanton streams, 
And having rang’d and search’d a thousand nooks, 
Meet both at length in silver-breasted 'Thames, 
Where in a greater current they conjoin ;— 
So I my best beloved’s am, so he is mine.” 


Verily the stream of life floweth along easily enough 
when it is commingled with him who is our life. Walk- 
ing with our arm upon the shoulder of the beloved is not 
simply safe, but delightful; and living with his life is a 
noble style of immortality, which may be enjoyed on 
earth. But to be out of Christ is misery, weakness, and 
death—in short, it is the bud, of which the full-blown 
flower is damnation. Apart from Jesus we have nothing 
save fearful forebodings and terrible remembrances. Be- 
loved, there is no Gospel promise which is ours unless we 
know what it is to beim Him. Out of him all is poverty, 
woe, sorrow, and destruction ; it is only in him, the ark 
of his elect, that we can hope to enjoy covenant mercies, 
or rejoice in the sure blessings of salvation. Can we now 
entertain a hope that we are really hidden in the rock ? 
Do we feel that we are a portion of Christ’s body, and 
and that a real union exists between us? Then may we 
proceed to unfold and appropriate the privileges here 
mentioned, 


UR. 


a 


ht as by day, but 
K /—even so we 
rejoice in it, 

ore blessed than 
of oneness with 
sts are mutual, 
ed, is indeed to 
pn. There is no 
sweet song, “My 


streams, 
d nooks, 
hames, 


easily enough 
r life. Walk- 
beloved is not 
ith his life is a 
be enjoyed on 
weakness, and 
the full-blown 
> have nothino 
ibrances, Be. 
urs unless we 
all is poverty, 
him, the ark 
nant mercies, 
an we now 
in the rock ? 
t's body, and 
Then may we 
Vileges here 


COMPLETE IN CHRIST. 163 


ny ee ne ee 


Ye are complete in him. The word “complete” does 
not convey the whole of the meaning couched in the 
original word eAypwpevo, It is upon the whole the 
best word which can be found in our language, but its 
meaning may be further unveiled by the addition of other 


auxiliary readings. 


I. YE ARE COMPLETE IN Him.—Let us consider the 
meaning of the phrase as it thus stands in our authorised 
version. We arecomplete. In all matters which concern 
our spiritual welfare, and our soul’s salvation, we are com- 
plete in Christ. 

1. Complete without the aid of Jewish ceremonies.— 
These had their uses. They were pictures wherewith the 
law, as a schoolmaster, taught the infant Jewish church ; 
but now that faith is come, we are no longer under a 
schoolmaster, for in the clear light of Christian knowledge 
we need not the aid of symbols :— 


‘‘ Finished are the types and shadows 
Of the ceremonial law.” 


The one sacrifice has so atoned for us that we necd no 
other. In Christ we ave complete without an addition of 
circumcision, sacrifice, passover, or temple service. These 
are now but beggarly elements. They would be incum- 
brances—for what can we need from them when we are 
complete in Christ? What have we to do with moon or 
stars, now that Christ hath shone forth like the sun in his 
strength ? Let the dim lamps be quenched—they would 
but mock the dawn, and the sunlight would deride their 
unnecded glimmerings. We despise not the ceremonial 
lav-—it was “the shadow of good things to come,” and as 
buch we venerate it; but now that the substance hath ap- 
peared, we are not content with guesses of grace, but we 
grasp him who is grace and truth. How much more 
highly are we favoured than the ancient believers, for they 


164 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


by daily offerings confessed themselves to be incomplete! 
They cou!d never stay their hand and say, “ It is enough,” 
for daily sin demanded daily lambs for the altar. The 
Jews were never made complete by their law, for their 
rites “could never make the comers thereunto perfect ; 
but this is our peculiar and superior privilege, that we are 
perfected by the one offering on Calvary. 

2. We are not complete without ue help of philosophy. 
—In Paul's time, there were some wl.. thought that phil- 
osophy might be used as a supplement to faith. They ar- 
gued, contended, and mystified every doctrine of revela- 
tion. Happy would it have been for them and the Church 
had they heeded the words of Paul, and kept entirely to 
the simplicity of the Gospel, glorying only in the cross of 
Christ! The Christian has such a sublime system of doc- 
trine that he never need to fear the vain speculations of 
an infidel science, nor need he ever cat! in the sophisms of 
worldly wise to prop his faith— in Christ he is complete. 
We have never heard of a dying believer asking the aid 
of a worldly philosophy to give him words of comfort in 
the hour of dissolution. No! he has enough in his own 
religion—enough in the person of his Redeemer—enough 
in the comforts of the Holy Ghost. Never let us turn 
aside from the faith because of the sneer of the learned : 
this a Christian will not, cannot do—for we see that eter- 
nal evidence in our religion which we may call its best 
proof, namely, the fact that in it we are complete. 

No man can add anything to the religion of Jesus. Ali 
that is consistent with truth is already incorporated in it, 
and with that which is not true it can form no alliance. 
There is nothing new in theology save that which is false. 
Those who seek to improve the Gospel of Jesus do but 
deface it. It is so perfect in itself that all additions to it 

are but excrescences of error; and it renders us so com- 
plete that aught we join with it is supererogation, or 
worse than that. David would not go to the fight in 


be incomplete ! 
“It is enough,” 
the altar. The 
* law, for their 
unto perfect ;” 
ege, that we are 


of philosophy. 
ught that phil- 
ith. They ar. 
rine of revela- 
und the Church 
ept entirely to 
in the cross of 
system of doc- 
speculations of 
he sophisms of 
he is complete. 
asking the aid 
sof comfort in 
xh in his own 
emer—enough 

r let us turn 
f the learned : 
> see that eter- 
call its best 

mplete. 

of Jesus. Ali 

porated in it, 

n no alliance. 

which is false, 

Jesus do but 

udditions to it 

‘3 US SO com- 

erogation, or 

the fight in 


COMPLETE IN CHR:S3T., 165 


———— 


Saul’s armour, fer he had not proved it; so can we say, 
“the sling and stone are to us abundant weapons ; as for 
the mail of philosophy, we leave that for proud Goliahs to 
wear.’ One of the most evil s'gns of our day is its ten- 
dency to rationalis n, spiritualism, and multitudes of other 
means of beclouding the simple faith of our Lord Jesus ; 
but the Lord’s chosen family will not be beguiled from 
their steadfastness, which is tlfe only hope of an heretical 
generation ; for they know to whom they have believed, 
and will not renounce their confidence in him for the so- 
phistries of “the wise and prudent.” 

3. Complete without the inventions of superstition.— 
God is the author of all revealed and spiritua: religion ; 
but man would write an appendix. There must be works 
of supererogation, deeds of penance, acts of mortification, 
or else the poor papist can never be perfected. Yea, when 
he has most vigorously applied the whip, when he has 
fasted even to physical exhaustion, when he has _ for- 
feited all that is natural to man—yet he is never sure that 
he has done enough, he can never say that he is complete ; 
but the Christian, without any of these, feels that he has 
gained a consummation by those last words of his Saviour 
—‘It is finished!” The blood of his agonizing Lord is 
his only and all-sufticient trust. He despises alike the 
absolutions and indulgences of priest or pontiff; he 
tramples on the refuge of lies which the deceiver has 
builded—his glory and his boast ever centering in the fact 
that he is complete in Christ. Let but this sentence be 
preached throughout the earth, and believed by the inhab- 
itants thereof, and all the despots on its surface could not 
buttress the tottering Church of Rome, even for a single 
hour. Men wouldsoon cry out,“ Away with the usurper ! 
away with her pretensions, there is all in Christ; and 
what can she add thereto, saving her mummeries, pollu- 
tions, and corrupt abominations.” 


166 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


ee en nn Ln De ee 


_ 
———., 


4. We are complete without human merit, our own 
works being regarded us filthy rags.— How many there 
are who, while waxing warm against popery, are foster- 
ing its principles in their own minds! The very marrow 
of popery is reliance on our own works ; and in God’s sight 
the formalist and legalist are as contemptible, if found in 
an orthodox church, as if they were open followers of 
Antichrist. Brethren, let us see to it that we are resting 
alone in the righteousness of Jesus, that he is all in all to 
us. Let us never forget that if we are perfect in him, we 
are perfect onlyin him. While we would diligently cul- 
tivate works of holiness, let us be careful lest «ve seek 
to add to the perfect work of Jesus. The robe of righ- 
teousness that nature spins and weaves is too frail a fab- 
ric to endure the breath of the Almighty, we must, there- 
fore, cast it all away—creature doings must not be united 
with, or regarded as an auxiliary to, Divine satisfaction. 

We would be holy, even as God is, but we are still 
confident that this will not be supplementing the great 
righteousness which is ours by imputation. No; though 
compassed with sin and surrounded by our depravity, we 
know that we are so complete in Jesus that we could not 
be more so, even were we free from all these things, and 
glorified as the spirits of just men made perfect. 

Blessed completely through the God-man, let our utibe- 
lief be ashamed, and let our admiration be fastened upon 
this interesting and delightful state of privilege. Arise, 
believer! and behold thyself “perfect in Christ Jesus.” 
Let not thy sins shake thy faith in the all sufficiency of 
Jesus. Thou art, with all thy depravity, still in him, and 
therefore complete. Thou hast need of nothing beyond 
what there isin him. In him thou art this moment just, 
in him entirely clean, in him an object of divine approval 
and eternal love. Now, as thou art, and where thou art, 
thou art still complete. Feeble, forgetful, frail, fearful, 
and fickle in thyself, yet in Hm thou art all that can be 


OUR, 


ee 
———, 


merit, our own 
ow many there 
ppery, are foster. 
(he very marrow 
nd in God’s sight 
tible, if found in 
pen followers of 
at we are resting 
he is all in all to 
erfect in him, we 
Id diligently cul- 
ful lest -ve seek 
e robe of righ- 
8 too frail a fab- 
,we must, there- 
st not be united 
ine satisfaction. 
ut we are still 
nting the great 
n. No; though 
ir depravity, we 
at we could not 
ese things, and 
erfect. 
n, let our uribe- 
e fastened upon 
‘Ivilege, Arise, 
Christ Jesus.” 
ll sufficiency of 
till in him, and 
1othing beyond 
is moment just, 
livine approval 
vhere thou art, 
|, frail, fearful, 
all that can be 


COMPLETE IN CHRIST. 167 


lesired. Thine unrighteousness is covered, thy righteous- 
ness is accepted, thy strength is perfected, thy safety se- 
cured, and thy heaven certain. Rejoice, then, that thou 
art “complete in him.” Look on thine own nothingness 
and be humble, but look at Jesus, thy great representative, 
and be glad. Be not so content upon thine own corrup- 
tion as to forget his immaculate purity, which he has 
given to thee. Be not so mindful of thy original poverty 
as to forget the infinite riches which he has conferred 
upon thee. It will save the many pangs if thou wilt 
learn to think of thyself as being a Him, and as being 
by his glorious grace accepted in him, and perfect iu 
Christ Jesus. 


IJ, YE ARE FULLY SUPPLIED IN H1m.-—Having him, we 
have all that we can possibly require. The man of God is 
thoroughly furnished in the possession of his great 
Saviour. He never need to look for anything beyond, for 
inhim all is treasured. Do we need forgiveness for the 
past? Pardons, rich and free, are with Jesus. Grace to 
cover all our sin is there ; grace to rise above our follies 
and our faults. Is it wisdom which we lack? He is 
made of God unto us wisdom. His finger shall point out 
our path in the desert ; his rod and staff shall keep us in 
the way when we walk through the valley of the shadow 
of death. In our combats with the foe do we feel want of 
strength 2? Is he not Jehovah, mighty to save? Will he 
not increase power unto the faint, and succour the fallen ? 
Need we go to Assyria, or stay in Egypt, for help ? 
Nay, these are broken reeds. Surely in the Lore Jehe- 
vah have we righteousness and strength. The battle is 
before us, but we tremble not at the foe; we feel armed 
at all points, clad in impenetrable mail, for we are fully 
supplied in him. Do we deplore our ignorance? He will 
give us knowledge; he can open our ear to listen to mys- 
teries unknown. Even babes will know the wonders of 


168 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


me ars ee ee ns ne tee re ae ee a ae eS — Le 


his grace, and children should be taught of the Lord. 
No other teacher is required ; he is alone efficient and all- 
sufficient. Are we at times distressed? We need not 
inquire for comfort, for in him, the consolation of Israel, 


- there are fats full of the oil of joy, and rivers of the wine 


of thanksgiving. The pleaswres cf the world are void to 
us, for we have infinitely more joy than they can give in 
him who has made us complete. 

Ah! my reader, whatever exigencies may arise, we 
shall never need to say, “ We have searched, but cannot 
find what we require; for it is, and ever shall be, found 
in the storehouse of mercy, even in Jesus Christ.” “It hath 
pleased the Father that in him should ad fulness dwell ;’ 
and truly none of the saints have complained of any failure 
in him. ‘Tens of thousands of them have drawn from 
this sacred well, yet 1s it as full as ever, and all who come 
to it are supplied with the full measure of their necessities, 
Jesus is not one single sprig of myrrh, but “a bundle of 
myrrh is my beloved unto me ;” * not one mercy, but a 
string of mercies, for “ my beloved is unto me as a cluster 
of camphire.” “ In Christ is a cluster of all spiritual bless- 
ings, all the blessings of the everlasting covenant are in 
his hands and at his disposal; and saints are blessed with 
all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in him. He is 
the believer’s wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and 
redemption. There is not a mercy we want but is in him 
or a blessing we enjoy but what we have received from 
him. He is the believer's ‘all in all’”+ The word 

translated “complete” is used by Demosthenesin describing 
a ship as fully manned—and truly the Christian’s ship 
from prow to stern, is well manned by her captain, who 
himself steers the vessel, stills the storm, feeds the crew, 
fills the sails, and brings all safe to their desired haven. 
In every position of danger or duty Christ himself is all- 
sufficient for protection or support. Under every concei- 


* Sol. Song, i. 13, 14. + Dr, Gill, 


UR. 


ee a ey —_— 


ht of the Lord 
efficient and all- 

We need not 
lation of Israel, 
vers of the wine 
orld are void to 
they can give in 


may ‘arise, we 
hed, but cannot 
‘shall be, found 
hrist.” “It hath 
fulness dwell ;” 
sd of any failure 
ve drawn from 
id all who come 
heir necessities, 
1t “a bundle of 
ne mercy, but a 
me as a cluster 
spiritual bless- 
oOvenant are in 
re blessed with 
in him. He is 
tification, and 
t but is in him 
received from 
"+ The word 
esin deseribin c 
1ristian’s ship 
r captain, who 
eeds the crew, 
desired haven. 
himself is all- 
every concei- 


COMPLETE IN CHRIST. 169 


ne ee 
—_—_— 


vable or inconceivable trial, we shall find in him sufficient 
grace: should every earthly stream be dried, there is 
enough in him, in the absence of them all. His glorious 

erson is the dwelling-place of all-sufficiency. “In him 
dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily ;” as the 
fulness of Deity is sufficient to create and sustain a 
universe of ponderous orbs, and whole worlds of living 
creatures, can it be supposed that it will be found unable 
to supply the necessities of saints? Such a fear would be 
as foolish as if a man should tremble lest the atmosphere 
should prove too little for his breath, or the rivers too 
shallow for his thirst. To imagine the riches of the in- 
carnate God to fail would be to conceive a bankrupt God, 
or a wasted infinite. Therefore, let us set up our banners 
in his name, and exceedingly rejoice. 


ITI. A third reading is—YE ARE SATISFIED IN Him— 
Satisfaction is a jewel rare and precious. Happy is the 
merchant-man who finds it. ‘vc may seek it in riches, 
but it lieth not there. We may heap up gold and silver, 
pile on pile, until we are rich beyond the dream of avarice, 
then thrust our hands into our bags of gold, and search 
there for satisfaction, but we have it not. Our heart, like 
the horseleech, crieth, “ Give, give.” We may erect the 
palace and conquer mighty nations, but among the trophies 
which decorate the hall, there is not that precious thing 
which worlds cannot buy. But give us Christ, let us 
be allied to him, and our heart is satisfied. We are con- 
tent in poverty—we are rich; in distress we have all, and 
abound. We are full, for we are satisfied in him. 

Again, let us explore the fields of knowledge ; let us 
separate ourselves, and intermeddle with all wisdom ; let 
us dive into the secrets of nature; let the heavens yield 
to the telescope, and the earth to our research; let us turn 
the ponderous tome and pore over the pages of the mighty 
folio; let us take our seat among the wise, and become 
K 


170 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


——— 


professors of science: but, alas! we soon shall loathe it 
all, for “ much study is a weariness of the flesh.” But let 
us turn again to the fountain-head, and drink of the 
waters of revelation: we are then satisfied. Whatever 
the pursuit may be, whether we invoke the trump of fame 
to do us homage, and bid our fellows offer the incense of 
nonovr, cr pursue the pleasures of sin, and dance a giddy 
round of merriment, or follow the less erratic movements 
of eavamerce, and acquire influence among men, we shall 
stil he disappointed, we shall have still an aching void, 
an erentiness within ; but when we gather up our straying 
desires, and bring them to a focus at the foot of Calvary, 
we teel a solid satisfaction, of which the world cannot 
deprive us. 

Aweng the sons of men there are not a few of restless 
spirits, whose uneasy souls are panting for an unknown 
good, the want of which they feel, but the nature of which 
they do not comprehend. These will hurry from country 
to country, to do little else bué attempt a hopeless escape 
from themrgelves; they will flit from pleasure to pleasure, 
with the ouly gain of fresh grief from repeated disappoint- 
ménts, Jt were hard indeed to compound a medicine for 
minds thus diseased. Verily, the aromatics and palms of 
Araby, or the islands of the sea, might be exhausted ere 
the elixir ot satisfaction could be distilled, and every 
mystic name in the vocabulary of the wise might be tried 
in vain to prodnce the all-precious charm of quiet. But 
in the Gospel we ‘ind the inestimable medicine already 
compounded, potené enough toe allay the most burning 
fever, and still the wost violevt palpitations of tho heart. 
This we speak from experience, for we too were ono», like 
the unclean spirit, “ seeking rest and finding neue: * we 
once groaned for an unseen something, whisk iu ali ow 
joys we would not find, and new by God’s great love, W> 
fo found the water whivl has queachad cur thirst—i' 
is that which Jesus gives, “ the living water” of his grace 


Zz 
= 


UR. 


1 shall loathe it 
> flesh.” But let 
1d drink of the 
ied. Whatever 
1e trump of fame 
er the incense of 
d dance a giddy 
ratic Movements 
1@ men, we shall 
an aching void, 
‘up our straying 
foot of Calvary, 
1e world cannot 


a few of restless 
for an unknown 
nature of which 
ry from country 
hopeless escape 
sure to pleasure, 
ated disappoint- 
d a medicine for 
cs and palms of 
exhausted ere 
lled, and every 
e might be tried 
of quiet. But 
edicine already 
b most burning 
ns of thy heart. 
were ona, like 
ling neue: * we 
hisk in all our 

8 great love, ¥> 
. cur thirst—i' 
sv” of his grace 


ae 


a 


COMPLETE IN CHRIST, 171 


ee ee 


We revel in the sweets of the name of Jesus, and tong for 
nought beside. Like Naphtali,we aie satisfied with favour, 
and full of the blk.- «ing of the Lord. Like Jacob, we ex- 
claim, “It is enove 1.” The soul is anchored, the desire is 
“satiated with fatuess,” the whole man is rich to all the 
intents of bliss, and looketh for nothing more. Allen, in 
his Heaven Opened, represents the believer as soliloquising 
in the following joyous manner :—“O happy soul, how 
rich art thou! What a booty have I gotten! It is all 
mine own, I have the promises of this life, and of that 
which is tocome. Oh! what can I wish more? How 
full a charter is here! Now, my doubting soul may boldly 
a: L believingly say with Thomas, ‘My Lord and my God.’ 
Wiiat need we any further witness? We have heard his 
words. He hath sworn by his holiness that his decree 
may not be changed, and hath signed it with his own 
signet. And now retarn to thy rest, O my soul! for the 
Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee. Say, if thy lines 


be not fallen to thee in a pleasant place, and if this be not 
a goodly heritage? O blasphemous discontent! how 
absurd and unreasonable an evil art thou, whom all the 
fulness of the Godhead cannot satisfy, because thou art 
denied in a petty comfort, or crossed in thy vain ex- 
pectations from the world! O my unthankful soul, shall 
nota Trinity content thee ? Shall not all-sufficiency suftice 


thee? Silence, ye murmuring thoughts, for ever. I have 
enough, I abound, and am full. Infiniteness and eternity 
is mine, and what more can I ask ?” 

Oh may we constantly dwell on the blissful summit of 
spiritual content, boasting continually in the complete- 
ness of our salvation IN HM, and may we ever seek to 
live up to our great and inestimable privilege! Let us 
live according to our rank and quality, according to the 
riches conveyed to us by the eternal covenant. As great 
princes are so arrayed that you can read their estates in 
their garments, and discern their riches by their tables, 


172 THE SAINT. AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


ese cs ASR TANEETSTERERENONIPESO ME ce Oo eterna SSS + SUNEDEDHS-G SSUES? _ 


so let our daily carriage express to others the value which 
we set upon the blessings of grace. A murmur is a rag | 
which is ill-suited to be the dress of a soul possessed of | 
Jesus ; a complaining spirit is too mean a thing for an f 
heir of all things to indulge. Let worldlings see that ou | 
Jesus is indeed a sufficient portion. As for those of uy | 
who are continually filled with rejoicing, let us be careful _ 
that our company and converse are in keeping with ow 
high position. Let our satisfaction with Christ beget in 
us a spirit too noble to stoop to the base deeds of ungodly 
men, Let us live among the generation of the just : let 

us dwell in the courts of the great King, behold his 
face, wait at his throne, bear his name, show forth his vir. 
tues, set forth his praises, advance his honour, uphold his 
interest, and reflect his image. It is not becoiming that 
princes of the blood should herd with beggars, or dress as 
they do; let all believers, then, come out from the world, 
and mount the hills of high and holy livi ing; so shall it be 


proved that they are content with Christ, when they ut- 
terly forsake the broken cisterns. 


IV. The text bears within it another meaning—YE Ane 
FILLED IN Him :—so Wickliffe translated it, ‘* And ze ben 
fillid in Day.” A possession of Jesus in the soul is a fill- 
ing thing. Our great Creator never intended that the 
heart should be empty, and hence he has stamped upon it 

the ancient rule that nature abhors a vacuum. The soul 
~ can never be quiet until in every part it is fully occupied. 
It is as insatiable as the grave, until it finds every corner | 
of its being filled with treasure. Now, it can be said of 
Christian salvation, that it and it alone, can fill the mind, 
Man is a compound being, and while one portion of his 
being may be full, another may be empty. There is no- 
thing which can fill the whole man save the possession of 
Christ. 


rs the value which 

A murmur is a yao | 
tm] g 

b soul possessed of | 


‘ing; so shall it be 


ist, when they ut- q 


neaning—YE ARE 


od it, * And ze bey 7 


1 the soul is a fill- 
ntended that the ~ 
s stamped uponit | 


cuum. The soul (3 


is fully occupied, 
inds every corner | 
it can be saidof 3 
can fill the mind, 

1e portion of his | 
ty. There is no- 


the possession of 7 


an a thing for an 
llings see that ow | 
s for those of ys | 
@, let us be carofy| @ 
keeping with ow | 
th Christ beget in 7 
deeds of ungodly 
n of the just; let 7 
King, behold his 4 
show forth his vir. 7 
honour, uphold his “a 
not becoming that 7 
eggurs, or dress ag 7 
at from the world, | 


COMPLETE IN CHRIST. 173 


The man of hard calculation, the lover of facts, may 
feast his head and starve his heart ;—the sentimentalist 
may fill up his full measure of emotion, and destroy his 
understanding ;—the poet may render his imagination 
gigantic, and dwarf his judgment ;—the student may ren- 
der hig brain the very refinement of logic, and his con- 
science may be dying ;—but give us Christ for our study, 
Christ for our science, Christ for our pursuit, and our whole 
man is filled. In his religion we find enough to exercise 
the faculties of the most astute reasoner, while yet our 
heart, by the contemplation, shall be warmed—yea, made 
to burn within us. In him we find room for imagination’s 
utmost stretch, while yet his kind hand preserves us from 
wild and romantic visions. He can satisfy our soul in its 
every part. Our whole man feels that his truth is our 
soul’s proper food, that its powers were made to appropri- 
ate Him, while He is so constituted that he is adapted to 
itsevery want. Herein lies the fault of all human sys- 
tems of religions, they do but subjugate and enlist a por- - 
tion of the man; they light up with doubtful brilliance 
one single chamber of his soul, and leave the rest in dark- 
ness; they cover him in one part, and allow the biting 
frost to benumb and freeze the other, until the man feels 
that something is neglected, for he bears a gnawing within 
him which his false religion cannot satisfy. But let the 
glorious Gospel of the blessed Jesus come into the man, 
let the Holy Spirit apply the word with power, and the 
whole man is filled—every nerve, like the string of a harp, 
is wound up, and gives forth melody—every power blesses 
God—every portion is lighted up with splendour, and the 
man exclaims— 


** There rest, my long divided soul, 
Fixed on this mighty centre, rest.” 


“Shaddai,” the Lord all-sufficient, is a portion large enough 
to afford us fulness of joy and peace. In him, as well as 


Sore ae na == 
SR SADE AAP — Fee eae 


ero et 


174 TiIE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


ne ee EE TT i ie ce ae 


in his house, “there is bread enough and to spare.” In 
the absence of all other good things, he is an overflowing 
river of mercy, and when other blessings are present, they 
owe all their velue to him. He makes our eup so full 
that it runneth over, and so he is just what man’s insatia- 
ble heart requires. It is a fact which ali men must ac- 
knowledge, that we are never full till we run over—the 
soul never has enough till it has more than enough; 

while we can contain, “and measure, and number our pos. 
sessions, we are not quite so rich as we desire. Paupcris 
est numerare pecus—we count ourselves poor so long as 
we can count our wealth. We are never satisfied till we 
have more than will satisfy us. But in Jesus there is 
that superabundance, that lavish richness, that outdoing 
of desire, that we are obliged to exclaim, “ It is enow gh— 
I’m filled to the brim.” 

How desirable is that state of mind which makes every 
part of the soul a spring of joy! The most of men have 
but one well of mirth within them; according to their 
temperament, they derive their happriess from different 
powers of the mind—one from bold imagination, another 
from solitary meditation, and a third from memory; but 
the believer has many wells and many palin-trees, for all 
that is within him is blessed by God. As the wate:s 
cover the sea, so has Divine grace flooded every por! ‘on of 
his being. He has no “aching void,” no “salt land, and 
not inhabited,” no “clouds without rain;” but where 
once were disappointment and discontent, there are now 
“pleasures for evermore,” for the soul is “ filled in him.” 

Seek then, beloved Christian reader to know more and 
more of Jesus, Think not that thou art master of the 
science of Christ crucified. Thou knowest enough of him 
to be supremely blest ; but thou art even now but at the 
beginning. Notwithstanding all thou hast learned of hin, 
remember thou hast but read the child’s first primer ; thou 
art as yet on one of the lower forms; thou hast not yet a 


UR. 


a 


d to spare.” Jn 
Ss an overflowing 
are present, they 
our cup so full 
at man’s insatia- 
i men must. ac- 
re run Over—the 
e than enough; 
number our pos- 
sire. Pauperis 

poor so long as 
satisfied till we 
_ Jesus there is 
s, that outdoing 
“It is enough— 


ich makes every 
ost of men have 
cording to their 
's from different 
nation, another 
mn memory; but 
Imn-trees, for all 
As the wate:s 
every por! ion of 
“salt land, and 
>” but where 
| there are now 
‘ filled in him.” 
Know more and 

master of the 

enough of him 
now but at the 
learned of him, 
st primer ; thou 
hast not yet a 


COMPLETE IN CHRIST, 175 


ne 
-—_——— 


degree in the sacred college. Thou hast but dipped tho 
sole of thy foot in that stream wherein the glorified are 
now swimming. Thou art but a gleaner thou hast not 
at present handled the sheaves with which the ransomed 
return to Zion. King Jesus hath not showed thee all the 
treasure of his house, nor canst thou more than guess the 
value of the least of his jewels. Thou hast at this mo- 
ment a very faint idea of the glory to which thy Redeemer 
has raised thee, or the completeness with which he has 
enriched thee. Thy joys are but sips of the cup, but 
crumbs from under the table. Up then to thine inheri- 
tance, the land is before thee, walk through and survey 
the lot of thine inheritance; but this know, that until 
thou hast washed in Jordan, thou shalt be but as a begin- 
ner, not only in the whole science of Divine love, but even 
in this one short but comprehensive lesson, “ COMPLETE 
IN Hi.’ 


176 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


TO THE UNCONVERTED READER. 


Frienp,—We will venture one assertion, in the full be. 
lief that thou canst not deny it—thow art not entirely 
satisfied. Thou art one of the weary-footed seekers of a 
joy which thou wilt never find out of Christ. Oh! let 
this chapter teach thee to forego thy vain pursuit, and 
look in another direction. Be assured that, as hitherto 
thy chase has been a disappointment, so shall it continue 
to the end unless thou dost run in another manner. Others 
have digged the mines of worldly pleasure and have 
gained nothing but anguish and despair; wilt thou search 
again where others have found nothing ? Let the expe- 
rience of ages teach thee the fallacy of human hopes, and 
let thine own failures warn thee of new attempts. 

But hark! sinner, all thou needest is in Christ. He 
will fill thee, satisfy thee, enrich thee, and gladden thee. 
Oh! let thy friend beseech thee, “ Taste and see that the 
Lord is good.” 


1. the full be. 
not entirely 
seekers of a 
st. Oh! let 
pursuit, and 
as hitherto 
1 it continue 
ler, Others 
e and have 
thou search 
st the expe- 
1 hopes, and 
mpts. 

Christ. He 
adden thee, 
see that the 


I a an 


Vil. 


Love to Hess. 


‘‘ Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love 
thee.”—JoHN xxi, 17, 


HRIST rightly known is most surely Christ be- 

loved. No sooner do we discern his excellen- 
NES cies, behold his glories, and partake of his 
CS oy bounties, than our heart is at once moved with 
Wy love towards him. Let him but speak pardon 
wr 


to our guilty souls we shall not long delay to 

speak wcerds of love to his most adorable person. 
It is utterly impossible for a man to know himself to be 
complete in Christ, and to be destitute of love towards 
Christ Jesus. A believer may be in Christ, and yet, from 
a holy jealousy, he may doubt his own affection to his 
Lord; but love is most assuredly in his bosom, for that 
breast which has never heaved with love to Jesus, is yet 
a stranger to the blood of sprinkling. He that loveth 
not, hath not seen Christ, neither known him. As the seed 
expands in the moisture and the heat, and sends forth its 
green blade—so when the soul becomes affected with the 
mercy of the Saviour, it puts forth its shoots of love to 
him and desire after him. 


S i aa ede ABE TE Na i 3 cata io “a eo a ne . 0 
otha eta SNe ie lire i eval aks ancsaal ORO RS ete aml a 4 inland Dati 
; A 


178 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


i 


This love is no mere heat of excitement, nor does it 
end in a flow of naptarous words; but it causes the 
soul to bring forth the fruits of ric hieous 1ess, to its own 
joy and the Lord’s glery. It is a p-inciple, active aad 
and strong, which exercises itself unto godliness, and 
produces abundantly th'19s which are lovely and of 
good repute. Some of thess we intend to mention, eaf- 
nestly desiring that all of us may exhibit them in our 
lives. Dr. Owen very concisely suins up the effects of true 
love in the two words, adherence and assimilation : the 
one knitting the heart to Jesus, and the other conforming 
us to hisimage. Thisisan excellent summary ; but as our 
design is to be more explicit, we shallin detail review the 
more usual and pleasing of the displays of the power of 
grace, afforded by the soul which ‘is under the influence 
of love to Christ. 

1. One of the earliest and most important signs of love 
to Jesus is the deed of solenvn dedication of ourselves, with 
all we have and are, most unreservedly to the Lord’s ser- 
vice. 

Dr, Doddridge has recommended «solemn covenant be- 
tween the soul and God, to be signed and sealed with due 
deliberation and most fervent prayer. Many of the most 
eminent of the saints have adopted this excellent method 
of devoting themselves in very deed unto the Lord, and 
have reaped no little benefit from the re-perusal of that 
solemn document when they have afresh renewed the act 
of dedication. The writer of the present volume conceives 
that burial with Christ in Baptism is a far more scriptu- 
ral and expressive sign of dedication ; but is not inclined 
to deny his brethren ‘the liberty of confirming that act by 
the other, if it seem good unto them. The remarks of 
John Newton upon this subject are so cautious and sen- 
tentious,* that we cannot forbear quoting them at length:— 
" Many judicious persons have differed in their se ntiments 


2 ee oe Co er ce a ene ape = ae wm eee meen we = ep me ee 


* See “‘ Life of Grimshaw,” p. 18, 


——. 


, nor does it 

causes the 
s, to its own 
e, active aad 
bdliness, and 
vely and of 
mention, eat- 
them in our 
fects of true 
ilation : the 
r conforming 
y; but as our 
il review the 
the power of 
the influence 


sions of love 
rselves, with 
e Lord’s ser- 


ovenant be- 
ed with due 
of the most 
lent method 
ie Lord, and 
usal of that 
wed the act 
16 conceives 
ore scriptu- 
10t inclined 
that act by 
remarks of 
us and sen- 
ut length:—- 
jentiments 


Pc PT 


LOVE TO JESUS. 179 


9 


with respect to the propriety or utility of such written en- 
cagements. They are usually entered into, if at all, in an 
carly stage of profession, ‘when, though the heart is 
warm, there has been little actual experience of its de- 
ceitfulness. In the day when the Lord turns our mour- 
ing into joy, and speaks peace, by the blood of his cross, 
to the conscience burdened by guilt and fear, resolutions 
are formed which, though honest and sincere, prove, like 
Peter’s promise to our Lord, too weak to withstand me 
force of subse ere nt unforeseen temptation. Such vows 
made in too much dependence upon our own strength, not 
occasion a farther Teaneety of our weakness, but fre- 
quently give the enemy advantage to terrify and distress 
the mind, Therefore, some e persons, of more mature ex- 
perience, discountenance the é practice as legal and impro- 
per. But, as ascaffold, though no part of an edifice, and 
designed to be taken down when the building is finished, 
18 yet useful for a time in carrying on the work—so 
many young converts have been helped by expedients 
which, when their judgments are more ripened, and their 
faith more confirmed, are no longer necessary. Every 
true believer, of course, ought to devote himself to the 
service of the R edeemer ; yea, he must and will, for he is 
constrained by love. He will do it not once only, but 
bs And many who have done it in writing can look 
back upon the transaction with thankfulness to the end 
of life, recollecting it as a season of peculiar solemnity and 
impression, accompanied with emotions of heart neither 
to be forgotten nor recalled, ; And the Lord, who does not 
despise the day of small things, nor break the bruised 
reed, nor quench the smoking’ flax, accepts and ratities 
the desire ; and mercifully pardons the mistake S whieh 
they discover, as they attain to more knowledge of him 
and of themselves. And they are encouraged, if not war- 
ranted, to make their surrender in this manner, by the 
words of the prophet Isaiah :—‘ One shall say, [am the 


186 THE SAINT AND HYS SAVIOUR. 


Lorl’s end another shall call himself by the name of 
Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand to the 
Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel.’ ”* 

Whatever view we may take of the form ot consecra- 
tion, we must all agree that the deed itself is absolutely 
necessary as a firstfruit of the Spirit, and that where it 
is absent there is none of the love of which we are treat- 
ing. We are also all of us in union upon the point that 
the surrender must be sincere, entire, unconditional, and 
deliberate; and that it must be accompanied by deep 
humility, from a sense of our unworthiness, simple faith 
in the blood of Jesus as the only medium of acceptance, 
and constant reliance on the Holy Spirit for the fulfil- 
ment of our vows. We must give ourselves to Jesus, to be 
his, to honour and to obey, if necessary, even unto death. 

We must be ready with Mary to break the alabaster 
box, with Abraham to offer up our Isaac, with the apos- 
tles to renounce our worldly wealth at the bidding of 
Christ, with Moses to despise the riches of Egypt, with 
Daniel to enter the lion’s den, and with the three holy 
children to tread the furnace. We cannot retain a por- 
tion of the price, like Ananias, nor love this present 
world with Demas, if we be the genuine followers of the 
Lamb. We conseciate our all when we receive Christ 
as all. 

The professing Church has many in its midst who, if 
they have ever given themselves tc Christ, appear to be 
very oblivious of their solemn obligation. They can 
scarce afford a fragment of their wealth for the Master's 
cause ; their time is wasted, or employed in any service 
but that of Jesus ; their talents are absorbed in worldly 
pursuits; and the veriest refuse of their influence is 
thought to be an abundant satisfaction of all the claims of 
heaven, Can such men be honest in their professions of 
attachme mt to the Lamb ? ? Was their de dication é a sincere 


— —w wanes 2. 


* Tan, die. 5. 


ne ae ee, 


1e name of 
hand to the 
‘ael,’ ”’* 
Dt Consecra- 
absolutely 
nt where it 
e are treat- 
point that 
itional, and 
d by deep 
mple faith 
acceptance, 
r the fulfil- 
Jesus, to be 
into death. 
+ alabaster 
1 the apos- 
bidding of 
vypt, with 
shree holy 
rin a por- 
is present 
ers of the 
ve Christ 


st who, if 
pear to be 
They can 
» Master’s 
y service 

worldly 
luence is 
claims of 
ssions of 
a sincere 


* 


LOV?t! TO JESUS, 181 


te nen 
— 


one? Do they not atiord us grave suspicions a ve ee 
Could they live in sucha fashion if their Na Sige 
right with God’ Can they have any just idea 0 bg 
Saviour’s dese: ings ? Are their hearts really aohctib : 
We leave them to answer for themselves ; | but we me 
entreat them also to ponder the following ena 
they shall have one day to render an Cara oa _ 
Judge. Doth not God abhor the lying lip 7 mn eS 
lying against God to profess that which " do ie he 
out ? Doth not the Saviour loathe those + igs “ uu 
cold nor hot ?- And are not those most truly in a ie 
who serve God with half a heart? What et e si 
doom of those who have insulted Heaven a pat 
vows ? Will not a false profession entail a fear : isle 
ment upon the soul for ever? ane a8 he hbo an 
serves not the Lord with all his might 2 Is it fe . ung 
to be branded as a robber of God ¢ Is it a trifle to i se 
our vows with the Almighty ? Shall a ita a aC 
Maker, and go mata yce es ? And how shall he abide 

ay of the wreth of God ? Sat Pas 
~ God make us ever careful that, by his [ He aoe 
aid, we may be able to live unto him as those _ . se 
alive froin the dead; and since in many things : ‘ : 
short of is perfeet will, let us humble ourselves, a nt 8 
voutly seek the moulding of his hand to renew - cay y 
day. "We ought ever to desire a perfect lif as the rest 
of full consecration, even though we shall often groan 
that “it is not yet attained.” Our prayer should be— 


* Take my soul and body’s powers t. 
‘fake my memory, mind, and will ; 
All my goods, and all my hours : 
All [ know, and all I feel ; 
Al! | think, or speak, or do ; ‘ 
Take my heart—but make it new,” * 


- — ae ee 


* OC, Wesley, 


182 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


ee eee ne te a RE EES RE eR RN CSN RE EE Oe Le eS EE A 


2. Love to Christ will make us “coy and tender to 
offend.’—We shall be most careful lest the Saviour should 
be grieved by our ill manners. When some much-loved 
friend is visiting our house, we are ever fearful lest he 
should be ill at ease; we therefcre watch every movement 
in the family, that nothing may disturb the quiet we de- 
sire him to enjoy. How frequently do we apologise for 
the homeliness of our fare, our own apparent inattention, 
the forgetfulness of our servants, or the radeness of our 
children. If we suppose him to be uncomfortable, how 
readily will we disatrange our household to give him 
pleasure, and how disturbed are we at the least symptom 
that he is not satisfiel with our hosjitality. We are 
grieved if car words appear cold towards him, or our acts 
unkind. We would sooner that he should grieve us than 
that we should displease him, Surely we should not treat 
our heavenly Friend werse thaa our earthly acquaintance; 
but we should sedulously endeavour to please him in all 
things who pleased not himself. Such is the influence of 
real devotion to our precious Redeemer, that the more 
the mind is pervaded with affection to him, the more 
watchful shall we be to give no offence in anything, and 
the more sorrow shall we suffer because our nature is yet 
so imperfect that in many things we come short of his 
glory. A believer, in a healthy state of mind, will be 
extremely sensitive ; he will avoid the appearance of evil, 
and guard against the beginnings of sin. He will often 
be afraid to put one foot before s:other, lest he should 
tread upon forbidden ground ; Le will tremble to speak, 
lest his words should not be ordered aright; he will be 
timid in the world, lest he should be surprised into trans- 
gression ; and even in his holy deeds he will be watchful 
over his heart, lest he should mock his Lord. This feel- 
ing of fear lest we should “slip with our feet,” is a 
precious feature of true spiritual life. It is much to be 
regretted that it is so lightly prized by many, in com- 


d tender to 
viour should 
much-loved 
rful lest he 
y movement 
juiet we de- 
pologise for 
inattention, 
ness of our 
yrtable, how 
oO give him 
st symptom 
y. We are 
,or our acts 
ieve us than 
Id not treat 
quaintance; 
» him in all 
influence of 
tL the more 
a, the more 
ything, and 
ature is yet 
hort of his 
nd, will be 
ince of evil, 
will often 
he should 
to speak, 
he will be 
into trans- 
e watchful 
This feel- 
feet,” is a 
uch to be 
vy, in com- 


LOVE TO JESUS. 183 


parison with the more martial virtues; for, despite its 
- warent insignificance, it is one of the choicest fruits of 
hic 3pirit, and its absence is one of the most deplorable 
evidences of spiritual decay. <A heedless spirit is a curse 
to the soul; a rash, presumptuous conversation will eat 
as doth a canker. “ ‘Too-bold” was never Too-wise nor 
Too-loving. Careful walking is one of the best securities 
of safe and happy standing. It is solemn cause for doubt- 
ing when we are indifferent in our behaviour to our best 
Friend. When the new creature is active, it will be in- 
dignant at the very name of sin; it will condemn it as 
the murderer of the Redeemer, and wage as fierce a war 
against it as the Lord did with Amalek. Christ’s foes 
are our foes when we ave Christ’s friends. Love of Christ 
and love of sin are elements too hostile to reign in the 
same heart. We shall hate iniquity simply because Jesus 
hates it. A good divine * writes ;—‘ If any pretend unto 
an assurance of forgiveness through the merits of Jesus, 
without any experience of shame, sorrow, and hatred of 
sin, on account of its vile nature, I dare boldly pronounce 
such a pretension to be no other than a vain presumption, 
that is likely to be followed by an eternal loss of their 
immortal souls.” 

He that is not afraid of sinning has good need to be 
afraid of damning. ‘Truth hates error, holiness abhoreth 
guilt, and grace cannot but detest sin. If we do not desire 
to be cautious to avoid offending our Lord, we may rest 
confident that we have no part in him, for true love to 
Christ will rather die than wound him. Hence love to 
Christ is “ the best antidote to idolatry ;”-+ for it prevents 
any object from occupying the rightful throne of the 
Saviour. The believer dares not admit a rival into his 
heart, kmowing that this would grievously offend the King. 
The simplest way of preventing an excessive love of the 
creature is to set all our affection upon the Creator. Give 


*J ohn Brine. +James Hamilton. 


184 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


ceeceeseeseememneeeneeee GaN (esenetentnmseme—nenmatersnt> aecpnseeeinencnen-+ ent cement 


thy whole heart to thy Lord, and thou canst not idolize 
the things of earth, for thou wilt have nothing left 
wherewith to worship them. 

3. If we love the Lord Jesus we shall be obedient to his 
commands.—False, vain, and boasting pretenders to 
friendship with Christ think it enough to talk fluently 
of him ; but humble, sincere, and faithful lovers of the 
Lord are not content with words—they must be doing 
the will of their Master. As the affectionate wife obeys 
because she loves her husband, so does the redeemed soul 
delight in keeping the commands of Jesus, although com- 
pelled by no force but that of love. This divine principle 
will render every duty pleasant ; yea, when the labour is 
in itself irksome, this heavenly grace will quicken us in 
its performance by reminding us that it is honourable to 
suffer for our Lord. It will induce an universal obedience 
to all known commands, and overcome that captious spirit 
of rebellion which takes exception to many precepts, and 
obeys only as far as it chooses to do so. It infuses not 
the mere act, but the very spirit of obedience, inclining 
the inmost heart to feel that its new-born nature cannot 
but obey. True, old corruption is still there; but this 
does but prove the hearty willingness of the soul to be 
faithful to the laws of its King, seeing that it is the cause 
of a perpetual and violent contest—the flesh lusting 
against the spirit, and the spirit striving against the flesh. 
We are willing to serve God when we love his Son; there 
may be obstacles, but no unwillingness. We would be 
holy even as God is holy, and perfect even as our Father 
which is in heaven is perfect. And to proceed yet fur- 
ther, love not only removes all unwillingness, but inspires 
the soul with a delight in the service of God, by making 
the lowest act of service to appear honourable. A 
heathen * once exclaimed, Deo servire est regnare— to 
serve God is to reign ;” so does the renewed heart joy- §& 


* Seneca, 


nst not idolize 
> nothing left 


obedient to his 
pretenders to 
» talk fluently 
| lovers of the 
must be doing 
tte wife oheys 
redeemed soul] 
although com- 
livine principle 
n the labour is 
quicken us in 
honourable to 
er'sal obedience 
| captious spirit 
7 precepts, and 
t infuses not 
ence, inclining 
nature cannot 
ere; but this 
he soul to be 
it is the cause 

flesh lusting 
ainst the flesh, 
his Son; there 
We would be 
as our Father 
ceed yet fur- 
s, but inspires 
bd, by making 
nourable, <A 
regnare— to 
ed heart joy- 


LOVE TO JESUS. 185 


ee 
—_— 


fully acknowledge the high honour which it receives by 
obedience to its Lord. He counts it not only his reason- 
able, but his delightful service, to be a humble and _ sub- 
missive disciple of his gracious Friend. He would be un- 
happy ifhe had no opportunity of obedience—his love 
requires channels for its fulness; he would pray for work 
if there were none, for he includes his duties among his 
privileges. In the young dawn of true religion this is 
very observable—would that it were equally so ever 
after! Oh! how jealous we were lest one divine ordinance 
should be neglected, or one rule violated. Nothing pained 
us more than our own too frequent wanderings, and 
nothing gratified us more than to be allowed to hew wood 
or draw water at his bidding. Why is it notso now with 
us all? Why are those wings, once outstretched for 
speedy flight, now folded in sloth? Is our Redeemer less 
deserving ? or is it not that we are less loving? Let us 
seek by greater meditation upon the work and love of 
our Saviour, by the help of the Holy Spirit, to renew our 
love to him; otherwise our lamentation will soon be— 
“ How is the much fine gold become dim! How has the 
glory departed !” 

4. Love to Christ will vmpel us to defend him against 
his foes— 


‘© Tf any touch my friend, or his good name, 
It is my honour and my love to free his blasted fame 
From the least spot or thought of blame.” * 


Good men are more tender over the reputation of Christ 
than over their own good name; for they are willing to 
lose the world’s favourable opinion rather than that Christ 
should be dishonoured. This is no more than Jesus has a 
right to expect. Would not he be a sorry brother who 
should hear me insulted and slandered, and yet be dumb ? 
Would not he be destitute of affection who would allow 


x * Herbert, ; 


186 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


ee 


the character of his nearest relative to be trampled in the 
dust, without a struggle on his behalf? And is not he a 
poor style of Christian who would calmly submit to hear 
his Lord abused? We could bear to be trampled in the 
very mire that he might be exalted ; but to see our 
glorious Head dishonoured is a sight we cannot tame ly 
behold. We would not, like Peter, smite his enemies with 
the sword of man; but we would use the sword of the 
Spirit as well as we are enabled. Oh! how has our blood 
boiled when the name of Jesus has been the theme of 
scornful jest ? how have we been ready to invoke the fire 
of Elias upon the guilty blasphemers! or when our more 
carnal heat has subsided, how have we wept, even to the 
sobbing of a child, at the reproach cast upon his most,hal- 
lowed name! Many a time we have been ready to burst 
with anguish when we have been speechless before the 
scoffer, because the Lord had shut us up, that we could 
not come forth; but at other seasons, with courage more 
than we had considered to be within the range of our 
capability, we have boldly reproved the wicked, and sent 
them back abashed. 

It is a lovely spectacle to behold the timid and feeble 
defending the citadel of truth; not with hard blows of 
logic, or sounding cannonade of rhetoric—but with that 
tearful earnestness, and implicit confidence, against which 
the attacks of revilers are utterly powerless. Overthrown 
in argument, they overcome by faith; covered with con- 
tempt, they think it all joy if they may but avert a soli- 
tary stain from the escutcheon of their Lord. “Call me 
what thou wilt,” says the believer, “but speak not ill of 
my Beloved. He: re, plough these shoulders with your 
lashes, but spare yourselves the sin of cursing him! Ay, 
let me die; I am all too happy to be slain, if my Lord's 
most glorious cause shall live!” 

Ask every regenerate child of God whether he does 
not count it his privilege to maintain the honour of his 


R, 


ees ae 


trampled in the 
(nd is not hea 
submit to heay 
ampled in the 
but to see our 
cannot tamely 
8 enemies with 
sword of the 
v has our blood 

the theme of 
invoke the fire 
vhen our more 
ept, even to the 
n his most hal- 
ready to burst 
less before the 
that we could 
| courage more 

range of our 
cked, and sent 


id and feeble 
hard blows of 
but with that 
fagainst which 
5s. Overthrown 
ered with con- 
t avert a soli- 
brd. “Call me 
eak not ill of 
rs with your 
ing him! Ay, 
if my Lord’s 


ether he does 
onour of his 


LOVE TO JESUS, 


ae 


Master’s name; and though his answer may be worded 
with holy caution, you will not fail to discover in it 
enough of the determined resolution which, by the bless- 
ing of the Holy Spirit, will enable him to stand fast in 
the evil day. He may be careful to reply to such a ques- 
tion, lest he should be presumptuous ; but should he stand 
like the three holy children before an enraged tyrant, in 
the very mouth of a burning fiery furnace, his answer, 
like theirs, would be, “ We are not careful to answer thee 
in this matter. If it be so, our God whom we serve is 
able to deliver us out of the burning fiery furnace, and he 
will deliver us out of thy hand, O king! But if not, be it 
known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, 
nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.” 

In some circles it is believed that in the event of an- 
other reign of persecution, there are very few in our 
churches who would endure the fiery trial; nothing, we 
think, is more unfounded. It is our firm opinion that 
the feeblest saint in our midst would receive grace for 
the struggle, and come off more than a conqueror. God’s 
children are the same now as ever. Real piety will as 
well endure the fire in one century as another. There is 
the same love to impel the martyrdom, the same grace to 
sustain the sufferer, the same promises to cheer his heart, 
and the same crown to adorn his head. We believe that 
those followers of Jesus who may perhaps one day be 
called to the stake, will die as readily as any one who 
have gone before. Love is still as strong as death, and 
grace is still made perfect in weakness. 


** Sweet is the cross, above all sweets, 
To souls enamoured with His smiles ; 
The keenest woe life ever meets, 
Love strips of all its terrors, and beguiles.”’ * 


This j isas true to-day, as it was a thousand years ago, 


* Madame. Guion: 


fe] 
= 
"3 
FE EEF] 
a 
=e 


oO 
= 
—— 
—— 


lO 


Zz 
© 
_ 
< 
a | 
wal 
< 
> 
uu 
bh 
LU) 
< 
= 


TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


Wek 


14 


125 


188 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


EE A ES 


We may be weak in grace, but grace is not weak ; it ts still 
omnipotent, and able to endure the trying day. 

There is one form of this jealousy for the honour of the 
cross, Which will ever distinguish the devout Christian. :— 
he will tremble lest ke himself, by word or deed, by omis- 
sion of duty or commission of sin, should dishonour the 
holy religion which he has prefessed. He will hold per- 
petual controversy with “sinful self” on this account, 
and will loathe himself when he has iaadvertently given 
occasion to the enemy to blaspheme. The King’s favour- 
ite will be sad if, by mistake or carelessness, he has been 
the abettor of traitors ; he desires to be beyond reproach, 
that his Monarch may suffer no disgrace from his courtier, 
Nothing has injured the cause of Christ more than the 
inconsistencies of his avowed friends. Jealousy for the 
honour of Christ is an admirable mark of grace. 

5. A firm attachment to the person of Christ will 
create a constant anxiety to promote his cause—With 
some it has produced that burning zeal which enabled 
them to endure banishment, to brave dangers, and to for- 
sake comforts, in order to evangelise an ungrateful people, 
among whom they were not unwilling to suffer perse- 
cution, or even death, so that they might but enlarge the 
borders of Immanuel’s land. This has inspired ihe 
laborious evangelist with inexhaustible strength to prc- 
claim the word of his Lord from place to place, amidst 
the slander of foes and the coldness of friends ; this has 
moved the generous heart to devise liberal things, that 
the cause might not flag for lack of temporal supplies ; 
and this, in a thousand ways, has stirred up the host of 
God, with various weapons and in divers fields, to fight 
the battles of their Lord. There is little or no love to 
Jesus in that man who is indifferent concerning the pro- 
gress of the truth. The man whose soul is saturated with 
grateful affection to his crucified Lord will weep when 
the enemy seems to get an advantage; he will water his 


eak ; it ts still 
day. 
honour of the 
i Christian :— 
deed, by omis- 
dishonour the 
will hold per- 
this account, 
tently given 
King’s favour- 
s, he has been 
ond reproach, 
m his courtier, 
more than the 
alousy for the 
race, 
P Christ will 
cause.— With 
hich enabled 
rs, and to for- 
‘ateful people, 
suffer perse- 
it enlarge the 
inspired cube 
ength to prc- 
place, amidst 
ds; this has 
things, that 
bral supplies ; 
p the host of 
elds, to fight 
or no love to 
ing the pro- 
urated with 
weep when 
ill water his 


LOVE TO JESUS. 


ee 


couch with tears when he sees a declining church ; he will 
li’t up his voice like a trumpet to arouse the slumbering, 
and with his own hand will labour day and night to build 
up the breaches of Zion; and should his efforts be success- 
ful, with what joyous gratitude will he lift up his heart 
unto the King of Israel, extolling him as much—yea, 
more—for mercies given to the Church than for bounties 
conferred upon himself. How diligently and indefatigably 
will he labour for his Lord, humbly conceiving that he 
cannot do too much, or even enough, for one who gave 
his heart’s blood as the price of our peace. 

We lament that too many among us are like Issachar, 
who was described as “a strong ass crouching down 
between two burdens,’—too lazy to perform the worksof 
piety so imperatively demanded at our hands: but the 
reason of this sad condition is not that fervent love is 
unable to produce activity, but that such are deplorably 
destitute of that intense affection which grace begets in 
the soul. 

Love to Christ smoothes the path of duty, and wings 
the feet to travel it: it is the bow which impels the arrow 
of obedience; it is the mainspring moving the wheels of 
duty ; it is the strong arm tugging the oar of diligence. 
Love is the marrow of the bones of fidelity, the blood in 
the veins of piety, the sinew of spiritual strength—yea, 
the life of sincere devotion. He that hath love can no 
more be motionless than the aspen in the gale, the sere 
leaf in the hurricane, or the spray in the tempest. As 
well may hearts cease to beat, as love to labour. Love is 
instinct with activity, it cannot be idle; it is full of 
energy, it cannot content itself with little: it is the well- 
spring of heroism, and great deeds are the gushings of its 
fountain ; it is a giant—it heapeth mountains upon moun- 
tains, and thinks the pile but little ; it isa mighty mystery, 
for it changes bitter into sweet; it calls death life, and 
life death, and it makes pain less painful than enjoyment. 


190 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


Love has a clear eye, but it can see only one thing—it is 
blind to every interest but that ofits Lord ; it seeth things 
in the light of his glory, and weigheth actions in the 
scales of his honour; it counts royalty but drudgery if it 
cannot reign for Christ, but it delights in servitude as 
much as in honour, if it can thereby advance the Master's 
kingdom ; its end sweetens all its means; its object light- 
ens its toil, and removes its weariness. Love, with re- 
freshing influence, girds up the loins of the pilgrim, 80 
that he forgets fatigue ; it casts a shadow for the way- 
faring man, so that he feels not ihe burning heat; and it 
puts the bottle to the lip of thirst. Have not we found 
it so? And, under the influence of love, are we not pre- 
pared by the Spirit’s sacred aid to do ‘or suffer all that 
thought can suggest, as being likely to promote his 
honour ? 

He who desires not the good of the kingdom is no 
friend to the king; so he who forgets the interests of Zion 
can scarce be a favourite with her Prince. We wish pros- 
perity in estate and household to all those in whom we 
delight ; and if we take pleasure in Jesus, we shall pray 
for the peace of Jerusalem, and labour for her increase. 

May “the Father of lights ” give unto his Church more 
love to her Head, then will she be zealous, valiant, and 
persevering, and then shall her Lord be glorified. 

G. It is w notable fact that fervent love to Jesus will 
enable us to endure anything he is pleased to lay upon 
us.—Love is the mother of resignation ; we gladly receive 
buffeting and blows from Jesus : when our heart ‘is fully 
occupied with his love. Even as a dearly-cherished friend 
does but delight us when he uses freedoms with us, or 
when he takes much liberty in our house—so Jesus, when 
we love him heartily, will never offend us by aught that 
he may do. Should he take our gold, we think his hand 
to be a noble coffer for our wealth; should he remove our 
joys, we reckon it a greater bliss to lose than gain, when 


OR. 


one thing—it is 
; it seeth things 
1 actions in the 
t drudgery if it 
in servitude as 
nce the Mastev’s 
its object light- 

Love, with re- 
the pilgrim, so 
ow for the way- 
ing heat; and it 
re not we found 
are we not pre- 
or suffer all that 
to promote his 


kingdom is no 
nterests of Zion 
We wish pros- 
2 in whom we 
we shall pray 
her increase. 
is Church more 
us, valiant, and 
orified. 
e to Jesus will 
to lay upon 
e gladly receive 
heart is fully 
nerished friend 
ms with us, or 
so Jesus, when 
bs by aught that 
think his hand 
he remove our 
an gain, when 


LOVE TO JESUS. 


—-_-—_ es. 


— 


his will runs in such a channel. Ay, should he smite us 
very sorely, we shall turn to his hand end kiss the rod. 
To believe that Christ has done it, is to extract the sting 
of an affliction. We remember to have heard a preacher 
at a funeral most beautifully setting forth this truth in 
parable. He spoke thus :—“A certain nobleman had a 
spacious garden, which he left to the care of a faithful 
servant, whose delight it was to train the creepers along 
the trellis, to water the seeds in the time of drought, to 
support the stalks of the tender plants, and to do every 
work which could render the garden a Paradise of flowers. 
One morning he rose with joy, expecting to tend his be- 
loved flowers, and hoping to find his favourites increased 
in beauty. To his surprise, he found one of his choicest 
beauties rent from its stem, and, leoking around him, he 
missed from every bed the pride of his garden, the most 
precious of his blooming flowers. Full of grief and anger, 
he hurried to his fellow-servants, and demanded who had 
thus robbed him of his treasures. They had not done it, 
and he did not charge them with it; but he found no 
solace for his grief till one of them remarked :— My lord 
was walking in the garden this morning, and I saw him 
pluek theflowersandcarry themaway. Thentrulyhefound 
he had no cause for his trouble. He felt it was well that 
his master had been pleased to take his own, and he went 
away, smiling at his loss, because his lord had taken them. 
So,” said the preacher, turning to the mourners, “ you 
have lost one whom you regarded with much tender affec- 
tion. The bonds of endearment have not availed for her 
retention upon earth. I know your wounded feelings 
when, instead of the lovely form which was the embodi- 
ment of all that is excellent and amiable, you behold 
nothing but ashes and corruption. But remember, my 
beloved, THE LoRD hath done it; HE hath removed the 
tender mother, the affectionate wife,tne inestimable friend. 
I say again, remember your own Lord has done it; there- 


192 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, - 


fore donot murmu., or yield yourselves to an excess of 
grief.” There was much force as well as beauty in the 
simple allegory ; it were well if all the Lord’s family had 
grace to practise its heavenly lesson, in ali times of bereave- 
ment and afiliction. 

Our favourite master of quaint conceits * has singular’ y 
said in his poem entitled “ Unkindness ”— 


‘¢ My friend may spit upon my curious floor.” 


True, most true, our Beloved may do as he pleases in 
our house, even should he break its ornaments and stain 
its glories. Come in, thou heavenly guest, even though 
each footstep on our floor should crush a thousand of cur 
earthly joys. Thou art thyself more than sufficient re- 
compense for all that thou canst take away. Come in, 
thou brother of our souls, even though thy rod come with 
thee, than lament thine absence even though surrounded 
with all the wealth the waiverse can bestow. 

The Lord’s prisoner in the dungeon of Aberdeen thus 
penned his belief in the love of his “sweet Lord Jesus,” 
and his acquiescence in his Master’s will:—Oh, what 
owe I to the file, to the hammer, to the furnace, of my 
Lord Jesus! who ha‘h now let me see how good the wheat 
of Christ is, which goeth ‘hrough his mill, to be made 
bread for his own table. Grace tried is better than grace, 
and more than grace—it is glory in its infancy. When 
Christ blesses his own crosses with a tongue, they breathe 
out Christ’s love, wisdora, kindness, and care of us. Why 
should I start at the plough of my Lord, that maketh 
deep furrows upon my soul? I know that he is no idle 
husbandman; he purposeth acrop. Oh, that this white, 
whithered lea-ground were made fertile to bear a crop for 
him, by whom it is so painfully dressed, and that this 
fallow-ground were broken up! Why was I (a fool!) 


* Herbert. 


UR, * 


a 


to an excess of 
3 beauty in the 
ord’s family had 
Limes of bereave- 


* has singularly 


is floor,” 


8 he pleases in 
ments and stain 
st, even though 
thousand of our 
an sufficient re- 
way. Come in, 
y rod come with 
ugh surrounded 
W. 

Aberdeen thus 
et Lord Jesus,” 
\l :—* Oh, what 
furnace, of my 
good the wheat 
ll, to be made 
ter than grace, 
ifancy. When 
e, they breathe 
re of us. Why 
I, that maketh 

he is no idle 

at this white, 
bear a crop for 
and that this 
s I (a fool!) 


LOVE TO JESUS. 1938 


— 


crieved that he put his garland and his rose upon my 
head—the glory and honour of his faithful witnesses? 1 
desire now to make no more pleas with Christ. Verily, 
he hath not put me to a loss by what I suffered; he 
oweth me nothing ; for in my bonds how sweet and com- 
fortable have the thoughts of him been to me, wherein I 


? 


find a sufficient recompence of reward 

7. To avoid tiring the reader with a longer list of “the 
precious fruits put forth by the Sun cf love,” we will sum 
up all in the last remark—that the gracious soul wi! la- 
bour after an entire annihilation of selfishness, and + 
complete absorption into Christ of its aims, joys, ‘desires 
and hopes. The highest conceivable state of spirituality 
is produced by a concentration of all the powers and pas- 
sions of the soul upon the person of Christ. We have 
asked a great thing when we have begged to be wholly 
surrendered to be crucified. It is the highest stage of 
manhood to have no wish, no thought, no desire, but 
Christ—to feel that to die were bliss, if it were for Christ 
—that to live in penury, and woe, and scorn, and con- 
tempt, and misery, were sweet for Christ—to feel that it 
matters nothing what hecomes of one’s self, so that our 
Master is but exalted—to feel that though like a sear leaf, 
we are blown in the blast, we are quite careless whither 
we are going, so long as we feel that the Master’s hand is 
guiding us according to his will; or, rather, to feel that 
though like the diamond, we must be exercised with 
sharp tools, yet we care not how sharply we may be cut, 
so that we may be made fit brilliants to adorn his crown. 
If any of us have attained to this sweet feeling of self- 
annihilation, we shall look up to Christ as if he were the 
sun, and we shall say within ourselves, “O Lord, 
I see thy beams; I feel myself to be—not a beam from 
thee—but darkness, swallowed up in thy light. The most 
I ask is, that thou wouldst live in me,—that the life I live 
in the flesh may not be my life, but thy life in me; that 


194 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


ee ee = = en ee | ree ee ce EE cS 


I may say with emphasis, as Paul did, ‘ For me to live is 
Christ.’ ” 

A man who has attained this high position has indeed 
“entered into rest.” ‘'o him the praise or the censure of 
men is alike contemptible, for he has learned to look up- 
on the one as unworthy of his pursuit, and the other as 
beneath his regard. He is no longer vulnerable, since he 
has in himself no separate sensitiveness, but has united 
his whole being with the cause and person of the Re. 
deemer. As long as there is a particle of selfishness re- 
maining in us, it will :aar our sweet enjoyment of Christ: 
and until we get a complete riddance of it, our joy will 
never be unmixed with grief. We must dig at the roots 
of our selfishness to find the worm which eats our happi- 
ness. The soul of the believer will always pant for this 
serene condition of passive surrender, and will not con- 
tent itself until it has thoroughly plunged itself into the 
sea of divine love. Its normal condition is that of com- 
plete dedication, and it esteems every deviation from such 
a state as a plague-mark and a breaking forth of disease. 
Here, in the lowest valley of self-renunciation, the believer 
walks upon a very pinnacle of exaltation; bowing him- 
self, he knows that he is rising immeasurably high when 
he is sinking into nothing, and, falling flat upon his face, 
he feels that he is thus mounting to the highest elevation 
of mental grandeur. 

It is the ambition of most men to absorb others into 
their own life, that they may shine the more brightly by 
the stolen rays of other lights; but it is the Christian’s 
highest aspiration to be absorbed into another, and lose 
himseif in the glories of his sovereign and Saviour. Proud 
men hope that the names of others shall but be remem- 
bered as single words in their own long titles of honour; 
but loving children of God long for nothing more than to 
see their own names _ used as letters in the bright records 
of the doings of the Wonderful, the Councillor. 


e 


TIOUR, 


a 


— 


‘For me to live jg 


osition has indeed 
- or the censure of 
arned to look up. 
and the other as 
Unerable, since he 
, but has united 
rson of the Re. 
of selfishness re- 
9yment of Christ: 
f it, our joy will 
t dig at the roots 
h eats our happi- 
ys pant for this 
and will not con- 
d itself into the 
11s that of com- 
Viation from such 
forth of disease. 
tion, the believer 
1; bowing him- 
‘ably high when 
at upon his face, 
ighest elevation 


orb ei into 
hore brightly b 

the Ohristhen’, 
other, an lose 
Saviour. Proud 
but be remem- 
les of honour ; 
lg more than to 
> bright records 
illor, 


e 


LOVE TO JESUS. 195 


Heaven is a state of entire acquiescence in the will of 
God, and perfect sympathy with his purposes ; it is, there- 
fore, easy to discern that the desires we have just been 
describing are true earnests of the inheritance, and svre 
signs of preparation for it. 

“And now, how is it with the reader? Is he a lover of 
Jesus in verity and truth ? or does he confess that these 
signs are not seen in him? If he be indeed without love 
to Jesus, he has good need to humble himself and turn 
unto the Lord, for his soul is in as evil a condition as it 
can be this side hell; and, alas! will soon be, unless 
grace prevent, in a plight so pitiable, that eternity will 
scarce be long enough for its regrets. 

It is more than probable that some of our readers are 
troubled with doubts concerning the truth of their affee- 
tion for Jesus, although they are indeed his faithful 
friends, Permit us to address such with a word of con- 
solation. 

You have some of the marks of true piety about you, 
—at least, you can join in some of the feelings to which 
we have been giving expression,—but still you fear that 
you are not right in heart towards Christ. What is then 
your reason for such a suspicion ? You reply that your ex- 
cess of attachment towards your friends and relatives is 
proof that you are not sincere, for if you loved Jesus truly, 
you would love him more than these. You word your com- 
plaint thus:—“I fear I love the creature more than 
Christ, and if so my love is hypocritical. I frequently 
feel more vehement and more. ardent motions of my 
heart to my beloved relatives than I do towards heavenly 
objects, and I therefore believe that I am still carnal, and 
the love of God doth not inhabit my heart,” 

Far be it from us to plead the cause of sin, or extenuate 
the undoubted fault which you thus commit; but at the 
same time it would be even further from our design to 
blot out at once the whole of the names of the living 


196 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


family of God, For if our love is to be measured by jts 
temporary violence, we fear there is not one among the 
saints who has not at some time or other had an exeessive 
love to the creature; and who has not, therefore, upon 
such reasoning, proved himself to be a hypocrite. Let it 
be remembered, therefore, that the strength of affeetion is 
rather to be measured by the hold it has upon the heart, 
than by the heat it displays at casual times and seasons, 
Klavel very wisely observes, “As rooted malice argues 
a stronger hatred than a suddea though more violent pas- 
sion, so we must measure our love, not by a violent mo- 
tion of it, now and then, but by the depth of the root, and 
the constancy of its actings, Beeause David was so pas- 
sionately moved for Absalom, Joab concludes that if he 
had lived, and all the people died, it would have pleased 
him well; but that was argued more like a soldier than a 
logician.” 

If your love be constant in its abidings, faithful in its 
actings, and honest in its character, you “need not distrust 
it on account of certain more burning heats, which tem- 
porarily and wickedly inflame the mind. Avoid these as 
sinful, but do net therefore doubt the truthfulness of 
your attachinent to vour Master. True grace may be in 
the soul without being apparent, for, as Baxter truly ob- 
serves, “grace is never apparent and sensible to the soul 
but when it is in action.” Tire may be in the flint, and 

ret be unseen except when oceasion shall bring it out. As 

r. Sibbs observes in his Soul’s Conflict, “ There is some- 
times grief for sin in us, when we think there is none ;” 
so may it be with love which may be there, but not dis- 
coverable till some cireumstance shall lead to its discover y. 
The eminent Puritan pertinently remarks :—‘ You may 
go secking for the hare or partridge many hours, and 
never find them while they lie close and stir not; but 
when once the hare betakes himself to his legs and the 
bird to her wings, then you see them presently. So long 


TOUR, 


© measured by its 
tf one among the 
rhadan exeessive 
t;, therefore, Upon 
hypo rite. — Let it 
eth of affeetion js 
is upon the heart, 
imes and seasons 
ed malice areues 
) more violent pas- 
by a violent. mo- 
hof the root, and 
David was so pas- 
cludes that if he 
uld have pleased 
cea soldier than a 


xs, faithful in its 
need not distrust 
‘ats, which tem- 

Avoid these as 

truthfulness of 
grace may be in 
daxter truly ob- 
sible to the soul 
in the flint, and 
bring it out. As 
“There is some- 
there is none ;” 
‘e, but not dis- 
to its discovery, 
s:—“ You may 
ny hours, and 
1 stir not; but 
1is legs and the 
ently. So long 


LOVE TO JESUS, 197 


as a Christian hath his graces in lively action, so long, for 
the most part, he is assured of them. How can you doubt 
whether you love God in the act of loving ? Or whether 
you believe in the very act of believing ? If, therefore, 
you would be assured whether this sacred fire be kindled 
in your hearts, blow it up, get it into a flame, and then 
‘ou will know ; believe till you feel that you do believe ; 
and love till you feel that you do love.” Seek to keep 
your grace in action by living near to the author of them. 
Live very near to Jesus, and think much of his love to 
you: thus will your love to him become more deep and 
fervent, : 

We pause here, and pray the most gracious Father of 
all good to accept our love, as he has already accepted us, 
in the Beloved; and we humbly crave the benign influ- 
ence of his Holy Spirit, that we may ve made perfect in 
love, and may glorify him to whom we now present our- 
selves as living sacrifices, holy, acceptable unto God, which 
is our reasonable service. 


“ Jesu, thy boundless love to me 
No thought can reach, no tongue declare ; 
O knit my thankful heart to Thee, 
And reign without a rival there ; 
Thine wholly, thine alone, [am ; 
Be Thou alone my constant flame ! 


O grant that nothing in my soul 
May dwell, but thy pure love alone : 
O may Thy love possess me whole, 
My joy, my treasure, and my crown ; 
Strange flames far from my heart remove 3 
My every act, word, thought be luve |’ 


i 
{ 
; j 
! 
i 
Bi 
} 
} 
; Hl 
i 
i 
{ 
cs + al 
' 
tit ) 
W 
i | 
H i I 
t | 
ie 
} 
' 
} 
| 
. 
H 
} 
| hal | 
i lf 
‘ } 
i 
aa | } 
1 ea 
ihe 
’ « i} 
ist ' 
Bi / 
; aa | | 
ii i i 
U ni 
F ! 
Ht 
waa iit 
: tid 
ib 
4 1 
' 
f ait | i 
*. { 
‘ i} | 
i mit | j 
ak 
Tt a 
id 
© eh 
i ae t 
i it | 
Lon 
ei 
f i} H 
Bae i 
it iy 
/ aii 4 ' 
i 
” | } 
t hi 
oe 
i H | t 
1 Hi 
i Wy 
; Ht 
\ 
y | ! i 
AW t 
eS 1} 
ue ' I 
A au | 
Bie mie | 
Bey 
“ee 
t iH i 
4 HT 
r i 
} We 
Se 
| tia | 
bey fie) 1010 it 
Ay 
i wy 
; + i 
i 
| 
4 
’ 


iH 
| 
i 
Ail 

i 


Se ee 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOOR, 


TO THE UNCONVERTED READER. 


Again we turn to thee; and art thou still where we 
left thee? still without hope, still unforgiven? Surely, 
then, thou hast been condemning thyself while reading 
these signs of grace in others. Such experience is too 
high for thee, thou canst no more attain unto it than a 
stone to sensibility ; but, remember, it is not too high for 
the Lord. He can renew thee, and make thee know the 
highest enjoyment of the saints. He alone can do it, 
therefore despair of thine own strength; but He can ac- 
complish it, therefore hope in omnipotent grace. ‘lhou 
art in a wrong state, and thou knowest it: how fearful 
will it be if thou shouldst remain the same until death! 
Yet most assuredly thou wilt unless Divine love shall 
change thee. See, then, how absolutely thou art in the 
hands of God. Labour to feel'this. Seek to know the 
power of this dread but certain fact—that thou liest en- 
tirely at his pleasure ; and there is nothing more likely to 
humble and subdue thee than the thoughts which it will 
beget within thee. 

Know and tremble, hear and be afraid. Bow thyself 
before the Most High, and confess his justice should he 
destroy thee, and admire his grace which proclaims par- 
don to thee. Think not that the words of believers are 
their salvation ; but seek first the root of their graces, 
which lies in Christ, not in themselves. This thou canst 
get nowhere but at the footstool of mercy from the hand 
of Jesus. Thou artshut up to one door of life, and that 
door is Christ crucified. Receive him as God’s free gift 


V1OUR. 


READER. 


hou still where we 
forgiven? Surely 
self while reading 
experience is too 
in unto it than a 
is not too high for 
ike thee know the 
, alone can do it 
h; but He can ac- 
tent grace. Thou 
st it: how fearful 
same until death! 
Divine love shal] 
y thou art in the 
seek to know the 
that thou liest en- 
hing more likely io 
ghts which it will 


aid. Bow thyself 
justice should he 
ch proclaims par- 
s of believers are 
t of their graces, 

This thou canst 
‘cy from the hand 
r of life, and that 
us God’s free gift 


199 


LOVE TO JESUS, 


—--- 


—— 
mes 6 en 
—__—— 


and thine undeserved boon. Renounce every vig ae 
and embrace the Lord J esus as thine only hope. ‘ ~— 
thy soul in his hands. — Sink or swim, let him be thine 
only support, and he will never fail thee. ‘i 
BELIEVE ON THE LoRD JESUS CHRIST, AND THOU SHAL 


BE SAVED. 


VIII. 
Love's Logic. 


“The upright love Thee.”—Sot, Sone i, 4 


AN HE motives of love are in a great degree the 
measure of itsgrowth. The advanced believer 
loves his Lord for higher reasons than those 
which move the heart of the young convert. 
His affection is not more sincere or earnest, 
4 but it is, or ought to be, more steadfast.and unvary- 

ing, because experience has enabled the understand- 
ing to adduce more abundant reasons for the soul’s 
attachment. All true love to the Redeemer is acceptable 
to him, and is to us an infallible evidence of our safety in 
him. We arefar from depreciating the value or suspecting 
the sincerity of the warm emotions of the newly enlight- 
ened, although we prefer the more intelligent and less in- 
terested attachment of the well-instructed Christian. Let 
none doubt the reality of their piety because they are un- 
able to mount to all the heights, or dive into all the depths, 
ofthat love which passeth knowledge. A babe’s fondness 
of its mother is as pleasing to her as the strong devotion of 
her full-grown son. The graces of faith, hope, and love are 
to be estimated more by their honesty than by their de- 
gree, and less by their intellectual than by their emotional 


reat degree the 
lvanced believer 
ons than those 
young convert, 
cere or earnest, 
st.and unvary- 
he undexstand- 
sfor the soul’s 
r is acceptable 
bf our safety in 
e or suspecting 
newly enlight- 
ent and less in- 
Christian. Let 
se they are un- 
all the depths, 
abe’s fondness 
mg devotion of 
he, and love are 
by their de- 
heir emotional 


LOVE'S LOGIC, 201 


characteristics. Yet, without doubt, growth in grace is 
as much displayed in the Christian’s love as in any other 
iruit of the Spirit; and it is our belief that this growth 
may in some degree be traced by the motives which cause 
it, just as we trace the motion of the shower by the po- 
sition of the cloud from which it falls. It may be profit- 
able to dwell upon the motives which cause it, just as we 
trace the motives of love for a brief season, hoping for in- 
struction in so doing. We do not pretend to enter fully 
into the present subject ; and, indeed, our space prevents 
us as much as our incapacity. Owen’s remark will be ap- 
propriate here:— “ Motives unto the love of Christ are so 
creat, so many, so diffused through the whole dispensation 
of God in him unto us, as that they can by no hand be 
fully expressed, let it be allowed ever so much to enlarge 
in the declaration of them; much less can they be repre- 
sented in this short discourse, whereof but a very small 
part is allotted unto their consideration.” * 

In enumerating some of the stages of spiritual growth 
as indicated by higher standards of motive, we pray the 
Holy Spirit to guide our meditations giving us profitable 
wisdom and gracious enlightenment. Let us commence in 
entire dependence upon his aid, and so proceed from step 
to step as he shall be pleased to guide us. We commence 
with the Alpha of Love, the first ripe fruit of affection. 


I. Love oF GratitupE. “ We love him because he 
first loved us.” Here is the starting point of love’s race. 
This is the rippling rill which afterwards swells into a 
river, the torch with which the pile of piety is kindled, 
The emancipated spirit, loves the Saviour for the freedom 
which he has conferred upon it ; it beholds the agony with 
which the priceless gift was purchased, and it adores the 
bleeding sufferer for the pains which he so generously en- 


* Christologia, 
M 


202 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


etic eceettecist coe © deetbeentn etneninenetmelineiaiaon gn <enesstipy esac ecttiatt ieee hse ters ainriaecsisscnsein Aineenebeiineseniiaenes a0 a0 8 = we ee ee 


dured. Jesus is regarded as our benefactor, and the boons 
which we receive at his hands constrain us to give him our 
hearts. If enabled to receive a. the doctrines of the 
Gospel, we bless the nae cf our Redeemer for his free 
erace manifested in our election to eternal life; for his 
efficacious grace exercised in calling us into his kingdom: 
for pardon ‘and just ficat*on through his blood and merits, 
and for everlasting secur ‘ty by virtue of union with his di- 
vine person. Surely here is enough to cveate love of the 
highest order of fervency ; and if the soul should abide 
for ever 1 contemplation of these mighty acts of grace, 
without entering upon the glorious survey of the charac- 
ter and perfec*ions of Jesus, it need never be in want of 
reasons for affection. Here are coals enough to maintain 
the heavenly fire if the Holy Spivit be but present to fan 
the flame. ‘This order of affection is capable of pr roducing 
the most eminent virtues, and stimulating the most ardent 
zeal. It is enough for every practical purpose of the 
heavenly life. But nevertheless, there is a “ yet beyond.” 
There are other motives which are of a higher class in 
themselves, although very seldom more potent in their in- 
fluence. This, however, is the beginning. “I love the 
Lord because he has heard 1 my voice and my supplication.” 
it is his kindness toward us, rather than the graciousness 
of his nature which piimarily attracts us. 

The deeds of the Saviour do not so much arouse our 
early admiration from their intrinsic greatness ani 
graciousness, as from the fact that we have a share in 
them. This thought at first attracts all our regard, and 
en¢rosses all our meditations. Neither the person nor 
the offices of Christ have as yet been fully presented to 
the soul,—it knows him only in his gifts, and loves him 
only for ‘what he has bestowed. Call this loveselfish if you 
will, but do not condemn it. The Saviour frowned not on 
the woman who loved much, because much had been for- 
given, nor did he despise the offering of that heart which 


IOUR. 


ens 


ctor, and the boons 
.us to give him our 
» doctrines of the 
eemer for his free 
ernal life; for his 
into his kingdom; 
blood and merits, 
‘union with his di- 
cveate love of the 
soul should abide 
rhty acts of grace, 
vey of the charac- 
ver be in want of 
ough to maintain 
but present to fan 
pable of producing 
1g the most ardent 
| purpose of the 
sa “yet beyond.” 
a higher class in 
otent in their in- 
g. “TI love the 
my supplication,” 
n the graciousness 
S. 
much arouse our 
greatness anil 
p have a share in 
1] our regard, and 
br the person nor 
ully presented to 
ts, and loves him 
loveselfish if you 
r frowned not on 
ch had been for- 
that heart which 


LOVE'S LOGIC, 


—— 


was first moved with affection at the casting out of its 
seven devils, Perhaps it is from a selfish reason that the 
infant casts the tendrils of its heart around its mother, 
but who would therefore despise its fondness? Base must 
be the man who should wish to eradicate such a heavenly 
cerm because of the poverty of the soil in which it grew. 
Our love to God may even be heightened by due and 
wise self-love. “There isa sinful self-love, when either 
we love that for a self which is not ourself,— when we love 
our flesh and fleshly interest,—or when we love ourselves 
inordinately, more than God, and God only for ourselves ; 
and there is a lawful self-love, when we love ourselves 
in the Lord and for the Lord.’ * This lawful self-love 
leads us to love Christ, and to desire more and more of 
his grace, because we feel that so we shall be the more 
happy in our souls, and useful in our lives. This is in 
some degree earthy, but in no degree sinful, or anything 
but holy. 

It is not needful that the foundation-stones should be 
of polished marble, they will well enough subserve their 
purpose if they act as the underlying ground-work of 
more excellent materials. If it be a crime to be un- 
erateful, then thankfulness is a virtue, and its issue can- 
not be contemptible. Young beginners frequently doubt 
their piety, because they feel but little disinterested 
affection for the Lord Jesus; let them remember that 
that high and excellent gift is not one of the tender 
grapes, but is only to be gathered beneath the ripening 
skies of Christian experience. “Do you love Christ ?” 
is uhe important question, and if the answer be a firm 
avowal of attachment to him, it is decisive as to your 
spiritual condition, even though the further question, 
“why do you love him?” should only receive for answer, 
“T love him because he first loved me.” Indeed, in the 


ee 


* Allen’s Riches of the Covenant, 


204 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


TS 


loftiest stage of heavenly life, there must ever be a great 
and grateful mixture of motives in our love to our divine 
Master. Wedo not cease to love him for his mercies 
when we begin to adore him for his personal excellences 
on the contrary, our sense of the glory of the person who 
is our Redeemer increase our oratitude to him for his 
condescending regard of such insignificant creatures as 
ourselves. Thus the ripening shock of corn can hold 
fellowship with the tender blade, since both are debtors 
to the sunshine. Even the saints before the throne are 
in no small degree moved to rapturous love of their 
exalted King, by the very motive which some have been 
ready to undervalue as selfish and unspiritual. They sing, 
“Thou art worthy for thou wast slain, and hast redeened 
us unto God by thy blood ;” and in their song who shall 
ever doubt that grace, free grace, as exhibited in their own 
salvation, holds the highest place. 

Oh new-born soul, trembling with anxiety, if thou hast 
not yet beheld the fair face of thy beloved, if thou canst 
not as yet delight in the majesty of his offices, and the 
wonders of his person, let thy soul be fully alive to the 
richness of his grace and the preciousness of his blood, 
These thou hast in thy possession,—the pledges of thine 
interest in him; love him then for these, and in due time 
he will discover unto thee fresh wonders and glories, so 
that thou shalt be able to exclaim, “The half has not 
been told me.” Let Calvary and Gethsemane endear thy 
Saviour to thee, though as yet thou hast not seen the 
brightness of Tabor, or heard the eloquence of Olivet, 
Take the lower room if thou canst not reach another, for 
the lowest room is in the house, and its tables shall not be 
naked. But study to look into thy Redeemer’s heart, 
that thou mayst become more closely knit unto him. Re- 
member there is a singular love in the bowels of our Lord 
Jesus to his people, so superlatively excellent, that nothing 
can compare with it. No husband, no wife, nor tender: 


ust ever be a great 
‘love to our divine 
11m-for his mercies 
rsonal excellences. 
of the person who 
de to him for his 
icant creatures as 
© of corn ean hold 
e both are debtors 
fore the throne are 
rous love of their 
ch some have been 
iritual, They sing, 
and hast redeenved 
eir song who shall 
ibited in their own 


nxiety, if thou hast 
oved, if thou canst 
his offices, and the 
» fully alive to the 
isness of his blood, 
1e pledges of thine 
se, and in due time 
lers and glories, so 
The half has not 
semane endear thy 
hast not seen the 
quence of Olivet. 
reach another, for 
tables shall not be 
Redeemer’s heart, 
‘nit unto’ him. Re- 
bowels of our Lord 
llent, that nothing 
» wife, nor tender- 


LOVE'S LOGIC, 


_—_— 


hearted mother can compete with him in affection, for 
his love passeth the love of women. Nothing will con- 
tribute more to make thee see Jesus Christ as admirable 
and lovely than a right apprehension of his love to thee ; 
this is the constraining, ravishing, engaging, and over- 
whelming consideration which will infallibly steep thee 
inasea of love to him, “ Although,” says Durham, * 
“there be much in many mouths of Christ’s love, yet 
there are few that really know and believe the love that 
he hath to his people. (1 John iii. 1.) As this is the cause 
that so few Jove him, and why so many set up other be- 
loveds beside him, so the solid faith of this and the ex- 
pectation of good from him, hath a great engaging virtue 
to draw sinners to him.” Study then his love, and so in- 
flame thine own; for be thou ever mindful that the love 
of Jesus was costly on his part, and undeserved on thine. 

Here it will be right to mention the love which springs 
from a sense of possession of Christ. “ O Lord, Thou art my 
God, early will I seek thee,” is the vow which results from 
a knowledge of our possessing God as our own. As God 
‘we ougit to love him, but as our God we do love him. 
It is Christ as our Christ, his righteousness as imputed to 
us, and his atonement as owr ransom, which at first cause 
our souls to feel the heat of love. “I cannot love 
another man’s Christ,” saith the anxious soul, “he must 
be mine, or my soul can never be knit unto him;” but 
when an interest in Jesus is perceived by the understand- . 
ing, then the heart cries out, “ My Lord and My God, 
thou art mine and I will be thine.” It is worth while to 
be a man, despite all the sorrows of mortality, if we may 
have grace to talk in the fashion of a full assured be- 
liever, when he rejoices in the plenitude of his posses- 
sions, and gratefully returns his love as his only possible 
acknowledgment. Listen to him while he talks in the 
following strain : “My Beloved is mine, and I am his,” 


~ ——— 


_—_— 


en 


* Faposition of Sol, Song. 


206 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


a ae a ne ee en mn ee em ee 


The grant is clear, and my claim is firm. Who shall de- 
spoil me of it when God hath rede me in possession, and 
doth own me as the lawful hc ‘toe? My Lord hath him- 
self assured me that he is mine, and hath bid me eall his 
Father my father. Iknow of a surety that the whole 
Trinity are mine. ‘I will be thy God’ is my sweet assur- 
ance. O, my soul, aise and take possession ; inherit thy 
blessedness, and cast up thy riches; enter into thy rest, 
and tell how the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee, 
I will praise thee, O my God, my King, I subject my 
soul unto thee, O my Glery, in thee will I boast all the 
day; O my Rock, on tuee will I build all my confidence. 
O staff of my life and strength of my heant, the life of 
my joy and joy of my life, I will sit and sing under thy 
shadow, yea, I will sing a song of loves touching my 
WELL-BELOVED.” This is a precious experience, happy is 
the man who enjoys it. It is the marrow of life to read 
our title clear ; and it is for this reason, among others, 
that it creates and fosters a devout ardency of affection 
in the soul which is the possessor of it. Let all believers 
seek after it. 


II. Akin to the love inspired by thankfulness, but 
rising a step higher in gracious attainments, is LovE 
UAUSED BY ADMIRATION of the manner in which the work 
of the Redeemer was performed. Having loved him for 
the deed of salvation, the believer surveys the labours of 
his Deliverer, and finds them in every part so excellent 
and marvellous, that he loves him with new force as he 
meditates upon them. HE is altogether lovely to the 
soul in every office which he has oraciously pleased to as- 
sume. We behold him as our King, and when we see the 
power, the justice, and the grace which attend his throne, 
when we witness the conquest of his enemies, and remark 
his strong defence of his friends, we cannot but adore 
him, and exclaim, “All hail, we crown thee Lord of all.” 


[SUR 


a 


. Who shall de- 
N possession, and 
y Lord hath him- 
th bid me eall his 
y that the whole 
‘my sweet assur- 
sion ; inherit thy 
ter into thy rest, 
ifully with thee, 
1g, I subject my 
1 I boast all the 
ll my confidence, 
heart, the life of 
1 sing under thy 
ves touching My 
erience, happy is 
w of life to read 
n, among others, 
sncy of affection 
Let all believers 


hankfulness, but 
nments, is LOVE 
py which the work 
g loved him for 
ys the labours of 
art so excellent 
1ew force as he 
pr lovely to the 
sly pleased to as- 
when we see the 
ttend his throne, 
ues, and remark 
nnot but adore 
ee Lord of all.” 


LOVE'S LOGIC. 


-—— = 


—=——_—_—— 


If his priestly office engages our meditation, it is precious 
to view him as the faithful High Priest ; remembering 
the efficacy of his meditatiun, and the prevalence of his 
intercession: or, if the mantle of the prophet is viewed 
as worn by him upon whose brow the crown of empire 
and the diadem of the priesthood are both for ever placed, 
how becoming does it seem upon his shoulders who is 
wisdom’s self! In his thieefold character, in which all the 
offices are blended but none confused —all fulfilled 
but none neglected—all carried to their highest length, 
but none misused,— how glorious does our Redeemer 
appear ! Sonnets will never cease for want of themes, 
unless it be that the penury of language should com- 
pel our wonder to abide at home, since it cannot find 
carments in which to clothe its thoaghts. When the soul 
is led by the Holy Spirit to take a clear view of Jesus in 
his various offices, how speedily the heart is on fire with 
love! To see him stooping from his thrcne to become 
man, next yielding to suffering to become man’s sympa- 
thizing friend, ard then bowing to death itself to become © 
his Ransom, is enough to stir every passicn of the soul. 
To discern him by faith as the propitiation for sin, sprink- 
ling his own blood within the veil, and nailing our sins to 
his cross, is a sight which never fails to excite the 
reverent, yet rapturous admiration of the beholder. Who 
can behold the triumphs of the Prince of Peace and not 
applaud him? Who can know his illustrious merits, and 
not extol him ? 

Doubtless this love of admiration is an after-thought, 
and can never be the primary acting of new-born love. 
The sailors rescued by the heroic daring of Grace Darling 
would first of all admire her as their deliverer, and after- 
wards, when they remembered her natural weakness, her 
philanthropic self-denial, her compassionate tenderness, 
and her heroic courage, they would give her their hearts 
for the manner in which the deed was done and the spirit 


208 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


— 


which dictated it. In fact,apart from their own safety 
they could scarcely avoid paying homage to the virtue 
which shone so gloriously in her noble act. Never, 
throughout life, could they “forget their personal obligation 
to that bravest of women ; but at the same time they 
would declare, that had it not been their lot to have been 
rescued from the depths, they could not have refused their 
heart’s admiration of a deed so heroic, though they them- 
selves had not been profited by it. We, who are saved 
by grace, have room enough in our Redeemer’s character 
for eternal love and wonder. Hischaracters are so varicd, 
and all of them so precious, that we may still gaze and 
adore. The Shepherd folding the lambs in his bosom, the 
Breaker dashing into pieees the opposing gates of brass, 
the Captain routing all his foes, the Brother born for ai- 
versity, and a theusand other delightful pictures of Jesus, 
areall calculated to stir the affections of the thoughtful 
Christian. It should be our endeavour to know more of 
Christ, that we may find more reasons for loving him. A 
contemplation of the histor'y, character, attributes, and 
offices of Jesus will often be the readiest way to renew 
our drooping love. The more clear is our view of Christ, 
the more complete will be our idea of him ; and the more 
true our experience of him, so much the more constant 
and unwavering will be our heart’s hoid of him. Hence 
the importance of communion with him, which is‘ to a 
great extent the only means of knowing him. 

We would here caution the reader to make an impor- 
tant distinction when dwelling upon the phase of spirit- 
ual love now under consideration. Let him carefully re- 
member that admiration of the moral character of Jesus 
of Nazareth may exist in an unregenerate heart, and that, 
apart from the love of gratitude, it is no acceptable fruit 
of the Spirit: so that this (in some senses) higher stone 
of the building, leans entirely upon the lower one, and 
without itis of no avail, Some pretend to admire the Pro- 


OUR. 


— 


heir own safety 
re to the virtue 
ble act. Never, 
orsonal obligation 
same time they 
lot to have been 
ave refused their 
ough they them- 
+, Who are saved 
eemer’s character 
ers are so varicd, 
yy still gaze and 
in his bosom, the 
y gates of brass, 
her born for ad- 
pictures of Jesus, 
: the thoughtful 
(0 know more of 
r loving him. <A 
attributes, and 
way to renew 
view of Christ, 
; and the more 
P more constant 
of him. Hence 
which is' to a 
m. 
aake an impor- 
phase of spirit- 
m carefully re- 
racter of Jesus 
heart, and that, 
acceptable fruit 
s) higher stone 
lower one, and 
admire the Pro- 


LOVE'S LOGIC, 209 


— 


phet of Nazareth, but deny him to be the Son of God; 
others wonder at him in his divine and human natures, 
but cannot lxy hold on him as their Redeemer; and many 
honour his perfect example, but despise his glorious sacri- 
fice, Now, it is not love toa part of Christ which is the 
renl work of the Spirit, but it is true devotion to the 
Christ of God in all that he is and does. Many manu- 
facture a Christ of their own, and profess to love him ; 
but it is not respect to our arointed, but to the Lord’s 
anointed, which can prove us to be God’s elect. Seek 
then to know the Lord, that you may with your whole 
soul be united to him in affection. Come, now, lay 
aside this volume for an hour and regale yourself with 
a little of his company, then will you join with the 
devout Hawker in his oft-repeated confession :—“ In fol- 
lowing thee, thou blessed Jesus, every renewed discovery 
of thee is glorious, and every new attainment most ex- 
cellent. In thy person, offices, character, and relations, 
thou art most precious to my soul. Thou art a glorious 
Redeemer, a glorious Head of thy Church and peuple; a 
glorious Husband, Brother, Friend, Prophet, Priest, and 
King in the Zion. And when I behold thee in all these 
relative excellences, and can and do know thee, and en- 
joy thee, and call thee mane under every one of them, 
surely I may well take up the language of this sweet 
Scripture, and say, ‘Thou art more glorious and excellent 
than all the mountains of Prey !’” * 

If you are unable to obtain a view of the Man cf grief 
and love, ask him to reveal himself by his Spirit, and when 
your prayer is heard your soul will speedily be ravished 
with delight, 


“In manifested love explain, 
Thy wonderful design ; 
What meant the Suffering Son of Man, 

The streamlng blood divine? 


ee ee ee 


PC tS ere cee oa 


* See his admirable Portions, 


THE SAINT AND HIS ‘SAVIOUR. 
(sehen scant eae macaiahid tients 


** Come thou, and to ny soul reveal 
The heights and depths of grace ; 
The wounds which all my sorrows heal, 
That dear disfigured face ; 


‘* Before my eyes of faith confest, 
Stand forth a slaughver’d Lamb ; 
And wrap me in thy crimson vest, 
And tell me all thy name.” 


IIT. SyMPATHY wiTH JESUS IN HIS GREAT DESIGN isa 
cause as well as an effect of love to him. Sanctified men 
have an union of heart with Jesus, since their aims are 
common. Both are seeking to honour God, to uproot sin, 
to save souls, and extend the kingdom of God on earth, 
Though the saints are but the pvivate soldiers, while 
Jesus is their glorious Leader, yet they are in the same 
army, and hence they have the same desire for victory, 
From this springs an increase of love ; for we cannot la- 
bour with and for those whem we esteem, without feeling 
ourselves more and more united to them. We love Jesus 
when we are advanced in the divine life, from a participa- 
tion with him in the great work of his incarnation. We 
long to see our fellowmen turned from darkness to light, 
and we love him as the Sun of Righteousness, who can 
alone illuminate them. We hate sin, and therefore we re- 
joice in him as manifested to takeaway sin. We pant for 
holier and happier times, and therefore we adore him as 
the coming Ruler of ali lands, who will bring a millen- 
nium with him in the day of his appearing. .The more 
sincere our desires, and the more earnest our efforts, to 
promote the glory of God and the welfare of man, the 
more will our love to Jesus increase. Idle Christians al- 
ways have lukewarm hearts, which are at once the causes 
and effects of their sloth, When the heart is fully en- 
gaged in God’s great work, it will glow with love of the 
Great Son, who was himself a servant in the same great 
cause. Does my philanthropy lead me to yearn over 


[OUR. 


Lc, 


real 
ae) 
ws heal, 


t, 
D5 
Et, 


{REAT DESIGN isa 
. Sanctified men 
-e their aims are 
God, to uproot sin, 
of God on earth, 
te soldiers, while 
are in the same 

lesire for victory, 
for we cannot la- 
n, without feeling 
We love Jesus 

, from a participa- 
incarnation. We 
Jarkness to light, 
housness, who can 
d therefore we re- 
sin. We pant for 
b we adore him as 
Il bring a millen- 
aring. .The more 
st our efforts, to 
lfare of man, the 
dle Christians al- 
at once the causes 
neart is fully en- 
with love of the 

nthe same great 
he to yearn over 


LOVE'S LOGIC. 211 


RE 


dying men? Is my pity excited by their miseries? Do I 
pray for their salvation, and labour to be the means of it? 
then most assuredly I shall, for this very reason, reverence 
and love the Friend of sinners, the Saviour of the lost. 
Am I so‘engrossed with the idea of God’s majesty, that 
my whole being pants to manifest his glory and extol his 
name? Then shall I most certainly cleave unto him who 
clorified his Father, and in whose person all the attributes 
of Deity are magnified. If a sense of unity in aim be 
capable of binding hosts of men into one compact body, 
beating with one heart, and moving with the same step— 
then it is easy to believe that the heavenly object in 
which the saints and their Saviour are both united, is 
strong enough to form a lasting bond of love between 
them. 

Trusting that we may be enabled in our daily conduct 
to prove this truth, we pass on to another part of the 
subject. 


IV. EXPERIENCE. Experience of the love, tenderness, 
and faithfulness of our Lord Jesus Christ will weld our 
hearts to him. The very thought of the love of Jesus to- 
wards us is enough to inflame our holy passions, but ex- 
perience of it heats the furnace seven times hotter. He 
has been with us in our trials, cheering and consoling us, 
sympathizing with every groan, and regarding every tear 
with affectionate compassion. Do we not love him for 
this? He has befriended us in every time of need, so 
bounteously supplying all our wants out of the riches of 
his fulness, that he has not suffered us to lack any good 
thing. Shall we be unmindful of such unwearying care ? 
He has helped us in every difficulty, furnishing us with 
strength equal to our day; he has levelled the mountains 
before us, and filled up the valleys; he has made rough 
pee plain, and crooked things straight. Do we not love 
1im for this also? In all our doubts he has directed us in 


212 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


a 


the path of wisdom, and led us in the way of knowledge, 
He has not suffered us to wander, he has led us by a 
right way through the pathless wilderness. Shall we not 
praise him for this? He has repelled our enemies, covered 
our heads in the day of battle, broken the teeth of the 
oppressor, and made us more than conquerors. Can we 
forget such mighty grace? When our sins have broken 
our peace, stained our garments, and pierced us with 
many sorrows, he has restored our souls, and led us in the 
path of righteousness for his name’s sake. Are we not 
constrained to call upon all that is within us to bless his 
holy name ? He has been as good as his word; not one 
promise has been broken, but all have come to pass. In 
no single instance has he failed us; he has never been 
unkind, unmindful, or unwise. The harshest strokes of 
his providence have been as full of love as the softest em- 
braces of his condescending fellowship. We cannot, we 
dare not find fault with him. He hath done all things 
well. There is no fla:7 in his behaviour, no suspicion on 
his affection. His love is indeed that perfect love which 
casteth out fear; the review of it is sweet to contempla- 
tion; the very remembrance of it is like ointment poured 
forth, and the present enjoyment of it, the experience of 
it at the present moment, is beyond all things delightful. 
Whatever may be our present position, it has in it peculi- 
arities unknown to any other state, and hence it affords 
secial grounds of love. Are we on the mountains? we 
bless him that he maketh our feet like hind’s feet, and 
maketh us to stand upon our high places. Are we in the 
valley ? then we praise him that his rod and staff do com- 
fort us. Are we in sickness? we love him for his gracious 
visitations. If we be in health, we bless him for his mer- 
ciful preservations. At home or abroad, on the land or 
the sea, in health or sickness, in poverty or wealth, Jesus, 
the never-failing friend, affords us tokens of his grace, 
and binds our hearts to him in tha bonds of constraining 
pratitude 


ay of knowledge, 
1¢ has led us by a 
ass. Shall we not 
r enemies, covered 
the teeth of the 
querors. Can we 
sins have broken 
pierced us with 
, and led us in the 
ke. Are we not 
1in us to bless his 
sword; not one 
come to pass. In 
has never been 
ushest. strokes of 
us the softest em- 
We cannot, we 
done all things 

, NO suspicion on 
erfect love which 
et to contempla- 
ointment poured 
the experience of 
things delightful. 
t has in it peculi- 
hence it attords 
e mountains? we 
hind’s feet, and 
s. Are we in the 
and staff do com- 
m for his gracious 
shim for his mer- 
d, on the land or 
or wealth, Jesus, 
ns of his grace, 
3 of constraining 


LOVE’S LOGIC. 213 


Jt must, however, be confessed that all the saints do not 
profit from their experience in an equal measure, and none 
of them so much as they might. All the experience of a 
Christian is not Christian experience. Much of our time 
is occupied with exercises as unprofitable as they are un- 
pleasant. The progress of a traveller must not be meas- 
ured by the amount of his toil, unless we can obtain a satis- 
factory proof that his toil was expended in the right path ; 
for let him journey ever soswiftly, if his path be full of wan- 
derings, he will gain but little by his labours. When we 
follow on to know the Lord in his own appointed way, the 
promise assures us that we shall attain to knowledge ; but 
if we run in the way of our own devising, we ned not 
wonder if we find ourselves surrounded with darkness 
instead of light. However, the Lord, who graciously over- 
rules evil for good, has been pleased to permit it tu remain 
as a rule in the lives of his children, that they learn by 
experience,—and sure we are, that were we not dull scho- 
lars, we should in the experience of a single day discover 
a thousand reasons for loving the Redeemer. The most 
barren day in all our years blossoms with remembrances 
of his loving-kindness, while the more memorable seasons 
yield a hundred-fold the fruits of his goodness. Though 
some days may add but little to the heap, yet by little and 
little it increases to a mountain. Little experiences, if 
well husbanded, will soon make us rich in love. Though 
the banks of the river do shelve but gently, yet he that is 
up to the ankles shall find the water covering his knees, 
if he do but continue his wading. Blessed is the saint 
whose love to his Lord hath become confirmed with his 
years, so that his heart is fixed, and fired, and fiaming. _ 
He with his grey hairs and venerable countenance com- 
mands the attention of all men when he speaks well of 
the Lord Jesus, whom he hath tried and proved through 
more than half a century of tribulation mingled with re- 
joicing. As a youth his love was true, but we thought it 


214 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


ee eee, 


little more than a momentary flash, which would die as 
hastily as it was born; but now no man can doubt its 
sincerity, for it is a steady flame, like the burning of a 
well-trimmed lamp. Experience, when blessed by the 
Holy Spirit, is the saint’s daily income, by which he get- 
teth rich in affection ; and he who hath for a long time 
amassed his portion of treasure may well be conceived to 
be more rich therein than the young beginner, who has as 
yet received but little. Would to God that we were all 
more careful to obtain and retain the precious gems which 
lie at our feet in our daily experience ! 

The experienced believer is in advance of his younger 
brethren if his experience has developed itself in a deeper, 
steadier, and more abiding love of Christ. He is to the 
babe in grace what the oak is to the sapling—more firmly 
rooted, more strong in heart, and broader in his spread; 
his love, too, is to the affection of the beginner what the 
deep-rolling-river is to the sparkling rill. Especially ig 
this the case if he has done business on great waters, and 
has been buried beneath the billows of affliction. He 
will, if he have passed through such exercises, be a mighty 
witness of the worthiness of his Lord,—tor tribulation un- 
folds the delights of covenant engagements, and drives the 
soul to feed upon them. It cuts away every other prop, 
and compels the soul to test the solidity of the pillar of 
divine faithfulness; it throws a cloud over the face of all 
created good, and leads the spirit to behold the sacred 
beauties of the son of man; and thus it enables the be- 
liever to know in the most certain manner the all-suflici- 
ency of the grace of the Lord Jesus. Tried saints are con- 
strained to love their Redeemer; not only on account of 
deliverance out of trouble, but also because of that sweet 
comfort which he affords them whilst they are enduring 
the cross. They have found adversity to be a wine- press, 
in which the juice of the grapes of Eschol could be trod- 
den out; an olive-press, to extract the precious oil from 


OUR. 


ee, 


ich would die as 
an can doubt its 
the burning of a 
1 blessed by the 
by which he get- 
1 for a long time 
1 be conceived to 
inner, who has as 
that we were all 
cious gems which 


e of his younger 
itself in a deeper, 
ist. He is to the 
ing—more firmly 
er in his spread; 
scinner what the 
ll. Especially is 
oreat waters, and 
f affliction. He 
cises, be a mighty 
or tribulation un- 
nts, and drives the 
every other prop, 
y of the pillar of 
er the face of all 
ehold the sacred 
enables the be- 
er the all-suftici- 
ed saints are con- 
ly on account of 
se of that sweet 
ley are enduring 
) be a wine- press, 
ol could be trod- 
precious oil from 


LOVE’S LOGIC. 215 


—— 


the gracious promises, Christ is the honeycomb, but ex- 
perience must suck forth the luscious drops; he is frank- 
incense, but fiery trials must burn out the perfume ; he is 
a box of spikenard, but the hard hand of trouble must 
break the box and pour forth the ointment. When this 
is done, when Jesus is experimentally known, he is loved 
in a higher manner than the newkorn Christian can as- 
pire to talk of. Aged and mellow saints have so sweet a 
savour of Christ in them tbat their ecnversation is like 
streams from Lebancn, sweetly refreshing to him who de- 
lights to hear of the glories of redeeming love. They 
have tried the anchor in the hour of storm, they have 
tested the armour in te day of battle, they have proved 
the shadow of the great rock in the burning noontide in 
weary land; therefore do they talk of these things, and 
of Him who is all these unto them, with an unction and 
a relish which we, who have but just put on our harness, 
ean enjoy, although we cannot attain unto it at present. 
We must dive into the same waters if we would bring up 
the same pearls. May the great Illuminator sow our path 
with light, that we may increase in knowledge of the love 
of Christ, and in earnestness of love to Christ, in propor- 
tion as we draw near to the celestial city. 

We now advance to another step, which stands in strict 
connection with the subject upon which we have just 
meditated, 


V. CoMMUNION opens up another means by which love 
is excited, and its nature affected. We love him because 
we have seen him, and entered into fellowship with him. 
However true faithful and the tidings which another 
person may bring us concerning the Saviour, we shall 
never. feel love towards him in all the power of it until 
we have with our own eyes beheld him, or, rather, have 
laid hold on him with our own faith. Personal inter- 
course with Jesus is pre-eminently a cause of love, and it 


216 THE SAINT ANP HIS SAVIOUR, 


—_ 


so infallibly quickens the affections that it is impossible 
to live in the society of Jesus without loving him. Near. 
ness of life towards the Lamb will necessarily involve 
greatness of love to him. As nearness to the sun in- 
creases the temperature of the various planets, so close 
communion with Jesus raises the heat of the affections 
towards him. 

We hope to have another opportunity of unfolding the 
sweetness of communion, and therefore we will but notice 
one part of it—viz., Christ’s manifestations, as being a 
mighty incentive to affection. Our blessed Lord, at 
intervals more or less frequent, is graciously pleased to 
shed abroad in the soul a most enchanting and rapturous 
sense of his loye. He opens the ear of the favoured saint 
to hear the sweet canticles of the bridegroom’s joy, and 
softiy he singeth his song of loves. He manifests his 
heart to the heart of his chosen ones, so that they know 
him to be the sweetest, firmest, and most ardent of lovers, 
They feel that he loves as a head, as a father, as a friend, 
as a kinsman, as a brother, as a husband; they behold 
the love of all relationships united and exceeded in the 
love of Christ. They are confident that he loves them 
more than they love themselves ; yea, that he loves them 
above his own life. This tends to raise their souls 
towards him; he becomes wholly delectable unto them, 
and is enshrined upon the highest throne of their hearts, 
Possessed with a-sense of the love of their dying Lord, 
they feel that had they a heart as wide as eternity, it 
could not contain more love than they desire to give him, 
Thus are they impelled to daring service and patient 
suffering for his sake. “There is a power in this love 
which conquers, captivates, and overpowers the man, so 
that he cannot but love. God’s love hath a generative 
power; our love is brought forth by his love.”* Say, 
poor soul, what get you in Christ whenever you go to 


*R, Erskine, 


(OUR. 


at it is impossible 
yving him. Near. 
ecessarily involve 
ss to the sun in- 
; planets, so close 
of the affections 


y of unfolding the 
we will but notice 
ations, as being a 
blessed Lord, at 
ciously pleased to 
ing and rapturous 
the favoured saint 
legroom’s joy, and 
He manifests his 
0 that they know 
t ardent of lovers, 
ather, as a friend, 
and; they behold 
exceeded in the 
at he loves them 
hat he loves them 
raise their souls 
ctable unto them, 
e of their hearts. 
heir dying Lord, 
ide as eternity, it 
lesire to give him. 
vice and patient 
power in this love 
wers the man, so 
ath a generative 
his love.”* Say, 
enever you go to 


LOVE’S LOGIC. 217 | 


ER 


him? Can you not say, Oh! I get more love to him than | 
I had before ; I never approached near to him but I gained 
a large draught and ample fill of love to God. Out of his 
fulness we receive grace for grace, and love for love. In 
a word, by faith we behold the glory of the Lord as in a 
glass, and are changed into the same image—and the 4 
image of God is love. No way so ready for begetting | 
love to Christ as a sense of the love of Christ. The one 
is a loadstone to attract the other. As fire grows by the 
addition of fuel, so does our love to Christ increase by 
renewed and enlarged discoveries of his love tous. Love 
is love’s food. If, as parents, we make known our love 
to our children, and deal wisely with them, it is but 
natural that their affections should become more and more 
knit to us; so it seems but as in the common course of 
things that where much of divine love is perceived by the 
soul, there will be a return of affection in some degree 
proportionate to the measure cf the manifestation. As 
we pour water into a dry pump when we desire to obtain 
more—so must we have the love of Christ imparted to the 
heart before we shall feel any uprisings of delight in him. 
Hence the importance of the apostolic prayer, that we 
may be able to understand with all saints what is the 
breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know’ 
the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge. Beloved 
fellow Christian, pray for more open discoveries of the 
love and loveliness of Christ, and thus shall thy languid 
passions move more readily in the paths of obedience. 
We have all too much canse to mourn the poverty of our 
love; let us not be slow to seek the help of the God of 
Israel to enable us to profit by all the condescending 
manifestations with which the Lord sees fit to favour us. 


VI. Love To THE Person or Jesus is a most delight- 
ful state of divine life. Jt will be observed that the 
Song of the Spouse, which is doubtless intended to be 
N 


218 THE SAINT AYD HIS SAVIOUR. 


el 


the expression of the highest order of love, is composed 
rather of descriptions of the person of the Bridegroom 
than of any relation of the deeds which he performed. The 
whole language of the Rook of Canticles is love, but 
its most overflowing utterances are poured forth upon the 
sacred person of the Well-Beloved. How do the wors 
succeed each other in marvellous and melodious succes- 
sion when the Church pours forth the fulness of its heart 
in praises of his beauties !—-“ My beloved is white and 
ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand. His head is as the 
most fine gold, his locks are bushy, and black as a raven, 
His eyes are as the cyes of doves by the rivers of waters, 
washed with milk, and fitly set. His cheeks are as a bed of 
spices, as sweet flowers: his lips like lilies, dropping sweet 
smelling myrrh. His hands are as gold rings set with 
the beryl: his belly is as bright ivory overlaid with sap- 
phires. His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets 
of fine gold: His countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as 
the cedars. His mouth is most ‘sweet: yea, he is alto- 
gether lovely.” * Here it is not the crown, but the head, 
which is the theme of song: not the garment, but the un- 
robed body: not the siioes but the feet. The song does not 
celebrate his descent from the king of ages, nor his lord- 
ship over the ministers of fire, nor his perpetual priesthood, 
nor his unbounded sovereignty : but he finds music enough 
in his lips, and, beauty sufficient in his eyes without 
the glories which his high oftices and omnipotent grace 
have procured for him. ‘This indeed is true love ; though 
the wife regards her husband’s gifts, and honours bis rank 
and titles, yet she sets her affection upon his person, loves 
him better than his gifts, and esteems him for his own 
sake rather than for his positionamong men. Let us here 
observe, lest we should be misunderstood, that we do not 
for a moment intend to insinuate that in the earlier states 
of the sacred grace of love, there is any lack of love ‘9 his 


* Sol. Song v. 10--16, 


OUR. 


—_, 


love, is composed 
f the Bridegroom 
e performed. Tho 
icles is love, but 
red forth upon the 
fow do the wos 
melodious succes- 
ilness of its heart 
ved is white and 
His head is as the 
black as a raven, 
2 rivers of waters, 
eks are as a bed of 
2s, dropping sweet 
d rings set with 
verlaid with sap- 
, Set upon sockets 
anon, excellent as 
): yea, he is alto- 
own, but the head, 
ment, but the un- 
The song does not 
rages, nor his lord- 
petual priesthood, 
nds music enough 
his eyes without 
omnipotent grace 
true love ; though 
honours bis rank 

his person, loves 

him for hig own 
en. Let us here 
rd, that we do not 
the earlier states 
ack of love io his 


219 


LOVE’S LOGIC. 


person. We know that the first gushing of the fount of 
love is to Christ, and at all times the soul goes out towards 
him: but we make a distinction which we think will be 
readily perceived, between love to the person, for the sake 
of benefits received and offices performed, and love to the 
person for the person’s sake. ‘Yo suppcese that a believer 
loves the office apart from the person is to suppose an 
absurdity, but to say that he may love the person apart 
from the office is but to declare a great fact. We love 
Him at all times, but only the heavenly-minded love him 
for his own person's sake, 

~ What a precious subject for contemplation is the glori- 
ous being who is called Emmanuel, God with us, and yet 
“the I Am,” “ God over all!” The complex person of the 
Mediator, Jesus Christ, is the centre of a believer’s heart. 
He adores him in all the attributes of his God-head, as very 
God of very God—Eternal, Infinite, Almighty, Immutable. 
He bows before him as “ God over all, blessed for ever,” 
and pays him loving homage as the everlasting Father, the 
Prince of Peace ; and at the same time he delights to con- 
sider him as the infant of Bethlehem, the Man of sorrows, 
the Son of man, bone of our bone and flesh of our flesh, 
tempted in all points like as we are, and owning kindred 
with the children of men. As man yet God, creature yet 
creator, infant and Infinite, despised yet exalted, scourged 
though Omnipotant, dying yet eternal,—our dear Re- 
deemer must ever be the object of wondering affection, 
Yea, when faith is dim and the Christian is in doubt as to 
his possession of his Lord, he will at times be able to feel 
that his thoughts of his Master’s person are as high as ever. 
“Though he slay me, [must love him. If he will not look 
upon me, J cannot but bless him still. He is good and 
glorious, even though he damn me forever. I must speak 
well of him, even if he will not permit me to hope in his 
merey; for he is a glorious Christ, and I will not deny it 
though he should now shut up his bowels against an un- 


240 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


Oo ee 


worthy creature like myself.” This is the sentiment of the 
quickened child of God, when his heart is thoroughly occu- 
pied with a full and faithful view of his Divine Lord. 

O the savour of the name of Jesus, when heard by the 
ear which has been opened by the Spirit ! .O the beauty 
of the person of Jesus, when seen with the eye of faith by 
the illumination of the Holy One of Israel! As the light 
of the morning, when the sun ariseth, “as a morning with- 
out clouds,” is our Well-Beloved unto us. The sight of 
the burning bush made Moses put off his shoes, but the 
transporting vision of Jesus makes us put off all the 
world. When once he is seen we can discern no beauties 
in all the creatures in the universe. He, like the sun, 
hath absorbed all other glories into his own excessive 
brightness. This is the pomegranate which love feeds up- 
on, the flagon wherewith it is comforted. A sight of 
Jesus causes such union of heart with him, such goings 
out of the affections after him, and such meltings of the 
spirit towards him, that its expressions often appear to 
carnal men to be extravagant and forced, when they are 
nothing but the free, unstudied, and honest effusions of 
its love. Hence it is that the Song of Solomon has been 
so frequently assailed, and has had its right to a place in 
the canon so fiercely disputed. The same critics would 
deny the piety of Rutherford, or the reverence of Her- 
bert. They are themselves ignorant of the divine passion 
of love to Jesus, and therefore the language of the enrap- 
tured heart is unintelligible to them. They are poor 
translators of love’s celestial tongue who think it to be at 
all allied with the amorous superfluities uttered by carnal 
passions. Jesus is the only one upon whom the loving be- 
liever has fixed his eye,andinhisconverse with his Lord he 
wiil often express himself in language which is meant 
only for his Master’s ear, which worldlings would utterly 
contemn could they but listen to it. Nevertheless love, 
like wisdom, is “justified of her children.” 


IOUR. 


———— 


ie sentiment of the 
s thoroughly occu- 
; Divine Lord. 
yhen heard by the 
it !.O the beauty 
the eye of faith by 
nel! As the light 
8 a morning with- 
us. The sight of 
his shoes, but the 
s put off all the 
iscern no beauties 
He, like the sun, 
iS OWN excessive 
ich love feeds up- 
rted. <A sight of 
him, such goings 
1 meltings of the 
s often appear to 
ed, when they are 
onest effusions of 
Solomon has been 
right to a place in 
me critics would 
everence of Her- 
he divine passion 
age of the enrap- 
They are poor 
) think it to be at 
uttered by carnal 
hom the loving be- 
e with his Lord he 
which is meant 
ngs would utterly 
Nevertheless love, 


LOVE'S LORIC. 


——— 


Heaven itself, althouzh it be a fertile land, flowing 
with milk and honey, can produce no fairer flower than 
the Rose of Sharon; its highest joys mount no higher 
than the head of Jesus ; its sweetest bliss is found in his 
name alone. If we would know heaven, let us know 
Jesus; if we would be heavenly, let us love Jesus. Oh 
that we were perpetually in his company, that our hearts 
might ever be satisfied with his love! Let the young be- 
liever seek after a clear view of the person of Jesus, and 
then let him implore the kindling fire of the Holy Spirit 
to light up his whole soul with fervent affection. Love 
to Jesus is the basis of all true piety, and the intensity of 
this love will ever be the measure of our zeal for his 
glory. Let us love him with all our hearts, and then 
diligent labour and consistent conversation will be sure to 
follow. 


VII. RELATIONSHIP. TO CuHRIST, when fuliy felt and 
realized, produces a peculiar warmth of affection towards 
Him. The Holy Spirit is pleased, at certain favoured 
seasons, to open up to the understanding and reveal to 
the affections the nearness of Jesus to the soul. At one 
time we are blessed with a delightful sense of brotherhood 
with Christ. “The man is thy near kinsman,” sounds like 
news from a far country. “In ties of blood with sinners 
one,” rings in our ears like the music of Sabbath-bells. 
We had said, like the spouse, “O that thou wert as my 
brother!” and lo! the wish is gratified. He stands be- 
fore us in all his condescension, and declares he is not 
ashamed to call us brethren. Unveiling his face, he re- 
veals himself as the Son of man, our kinsman near allied 
by blood. He manifests himself to our rejoicing spirit as 
“the first-born among many brethren,” and he reminds 
us that we are “joint-heirs with him,” although he is 
“heir of all things.” The fraternity of Jesus cannot fail 
to quicken us to the most ardent affection, and when he 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


himself thus confesses the relatiosship, our soul is melted 
at his speech. That sweet rame “ brother ” is like per- 
fume to the believer, and when he lays hold upon it, it 
imparts its fragrance to him. We have sometimes had 
such a sense of satisfaction in meditation upon this 
heavenly doctrine, that we counted all the hcnours and 
glories of this world to be but loss compared with the ex- 
cellency of it. For this one fact of brotherhood with Christ 
we could have bartered crowns and empires, and have 
laughed at the worldly barterer as a fool, infinitely more 
mad than Esau when he tcok a pitiful mess of pottage as 
the purchase-price of a mighty birthright. God the Holy 

Ghost has made the fulness of the doctrine cf the intion 
ship of Jesus roll into our soul like a river, and we have 
been entirely carried away in its wondrous torrent. Our 
thoughts have been entirely absorbed in the one transcen- 
dently g glorious idea of brotherhood with Jesus, and then 
the emotions have arisen with great vehemence, and we 

have pressed Him to our bosom, have wept for joy upon 
his shoulder, and have lost. ourselves in adoring love of 
him who thus discovered himself as bone of our bone, and 
flesh of our flesh. We feel we must love our brother, even 
nature joins her voice with grace to claim the entire 
heart ; and verily, in seasons of such gracious manifesta- 
tions, the claim is fully met, and the right gladly acknow- 
ledged. 

Another delightful relationship of the Lord J esus is 
that of Husband, and here he is indeed to be beloved. 
Young Christians are married to Christ, but they have not 
in most cases realized the gracious privilege ; but the more 
enlightened believer rejoices in the remembrance of the 
marriage union of Christ and his spouse. To him the 
affection, protection, provision, honour, and intimacy in- 
volved in the divine nuptials of the blessed Jesus with his 
elect are well-springs of constant joy. “Thy Maker is 
thy Husband” is to him a choice portion of the Word. and 


TIOUR. 


our soul is melted 
other ” is like per. 
8 hold upon it, it 
ve sometimes had 
itation upon. this 
1 the henours ani 
pared with the ex- 
erhood with Christ 
empires, and have 
ool], infinitely more 
mess of pottage as 
“ht. God the Holy 
rine cf the relation. 
iver, and we have 
rous torrent. Our 
n the cone transcen- 
th Jesus, and then 
ehemence, and we 
wept for joy upon 
in adoring love of 
ne of our bone, and 
e our brother, even 
» claim the entire 
racious manifesta- 
tht gladly acknow- 


the Lord Jesus is 
eed to be beloved, 
, but they have not 
lege ; but the more 
membrance of the 
ouse. ‘To him the 
, and intimacy in- 
ssed Jesus with his 
, “Thy Maker is 
n of the Word, and 


223 


LOVE’S LOGIC, 


he feasts upon it day and night, when the gracious Spirit 
is pleased to enable him to lay hold upon it by faith, A 
tranquil, confident frame will immediately result from a 
satisfactory persuasion of this glorious truth, and with it 
there will be a fervency of affection and a continued 
union of heart to Christ Jesus, which is hardly attainable 
in any other manner. 

In his conjugal relation to his Church, the Lord Jesus 
takes great delight, and desires that he should see the 
elory of it. He would have us consider him in the act of 
betrothing and espousing his Church unto himself: “Go 
forth,” saith he, “O ye daughters of Jerusalem, and behold 
King Solomon with, the crown wherewith his mother 
crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day 
of the gladness of his heart.’* 

“Tt is the gladness of the heart of Christ, and the joy of 
his soul, to take poor sinuers into relation with himself ;’+ 
and if so, it cannot fail to be an equal source of rejoicing 
to those who are thus favoured. Meditate much on thy 
divine relationships, and thine heart shall be much warmed 
thereby. 


VIII. A persuasion of our UNION to Jesus must also stir 
up the passions to a holy flame. We are, by the decree of 
God, made one with our Covenant Head the Lord Jesus. 
From before all worlds this eternal union was most firmly 
settled upon a substantial basis; but our personal know- 
ledge of it is a thing of time, and is vouchsafed to us in 
the appointed season by God the Holy Ghost, How 
swiftly doth the heart pursue its Lord when it has learned 
its oneness to Him! What man will not love his own 
flesh 2 who will not love himself? Now, when the soul 
perceives the indissoluble union which exists between it- 
self and the Saviour, it can no more resist the impulse of 
affection than a man can forbear to love his own body, 


— ee wa ee 


* Sol. Sougiii, 11, © = + Owen. 


224 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


ee ee 


It is doubtless a high attainment in the divine life to be 
fully possessed with a sense of vital union to Christ, and 
hence the love arising from it is of a peculiarly rich and 
vehement character. Some pastures give richness to tha 
flesh of the cattle which feed upon them: truly this is a 
fat pasture, and the affection which feedeth upon it cannot 
be otherwise than excellent to a superlative degree. In 
fine, as an abiding sense of oneness with the Lord is one 
of the sweetest works of the Spirit in the souls of the 
elect, so the love springing therefrom is of the very high- 
est and most spiritual nature. None can surpass it; yea, 
it is questionable whether so high a degree of affection 
can be attained. by any other means, however forcible and 
inflaming. But set it down as a rule that we ought never 
to halt or sit down in any attainment of nearness to Jesus 
until we have brought it to such a measure that no more 
can be enjoyed, and until we have reached the utmost 
possible height therein. If there be an inner chamber 
in which the king doth store his choicest fruits, let us 
enter, for he bids us make free with all in his house ; and 
if there be a secret place where he doth show his loves, let 
us hasten thither and embrace him whom our soul loveth, 
and there let us abide until we see hii face to face in the 
upper skies. 

But what will be the love of heaven? Here we utterly 
fail in description or conception. The best enjoyments 
of Christ on earth are but as the dipping our finger in 
water for the cooling of our thirst ; but heaven is bathug 
in seas of bliss: even so our love here is but one drop of 
the same substance as the waters of the occan, but not 
comparable for magnitude or depth. Oh, how sweet ii 
will be to be married to the Lord Jesus, and to enjoy for 
ever, and without any interruption, the heavenly delights 
of his society! Surely, if a glimpse of him melteth oar 
soul, the full fruition of him will be enough to burn us up 
with affection. It is well that we shall have more noble 


UR. 


divine life to be 
mn to Christ, and 
culiarly rich and 
e richness to the 
1: truly this is a 
th upon it cannot 
itive degree. In 

the Lord is one 
the souls of the 
of the very high- 
1 surpass it ; yea, 
scree of affection 
rever forcible and 
t we ought never 
nearness to Jesus 
ure that no more 
ched the utmost 
n inner chamber 
est fruits, let us 
n his house ; and 
how his loves, let 
1 our soul loveth, 
ace to face in the 


Here we utterly 
best enjoyments 
ng our finger in 
eaven is bathug 
but one drop of 
e ocean, but not 
Dh, how sweet it 
and to enjoy for 
eavenly delights 
him melteth oar 
h to burn us up 
have more noble 


LOVE'S LOGIC, 225 


PE nn cen occa ti my acinar Tere 


frames in heaven than we have here, otherwise we should 
die of love in the very land of life. An honoured saint 
was once so ravished with a revelation of his Lord’s love, 
that feeling his mortal frame unable to sustain more of 
such bliss, he cried, “Hold, Lord, it is enough, it is enough !” 

But there we shall be able to set the bottomless well of 
love to our lips, and drink on for ever, and yet feel no 
weakness. Ah, that will be love indeed which shall over- 
flow our souls for ever in our Father’s house above ! Who 
can tell the transports, the raptures, the amazements of 
delight which that love shall beget in us? and who can 
guess the sweetness of the song, or the swiftness of the 
obedience which will be the heav enly expressions of love 
made perfect? No heart can conceive the passing bliss 
which the saints shall enjoy when the sea of their love to 
Christ, and the ocean of Christ’s love to them, shall meet 
each other, and raise a very tempest of delight, The dis- 
tant prospect is full of joy: what must be the fruition of 

it? To answer that question we must wait all the days 
of our appointed time till our change come, unless the 
Lord himself should suddenly appear in the clouds to 
glorify us with himself throughout eternity. 

Beloved fellow-heirs of the same inheritance, we have 
thus reviewed some of the causes and phases of the Chris- 
tian grace of love; let us now ask ourselves the question, . 
How is it with our love? Is it hot or cold? Is it decay- 
ing or increasing? How stands the heart, God-ward and 
Christ-ward ? “Is it not far too slow in its motions, too 
chilly in its devotion? We must admit that it is so. Let 
us use thé various arguments of this chapter as levers for 
lifting our heavy hearts to greater heights of a:fection, 
and then let us unitedly ery— 


** Come, Holy Spirit, heavenly Dove, 
With all thy quickening powers 
Come, shed abroad the Saviour's love, 
And that shall kindle ours.” 


Tat acedleindgddlanthelidi@ateneneementiaaeetienaneemsameaeeetticeeae 


226 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


It may be that the sneering critic has been offended 
with all this discourse concerning love, and has turned 
upon his heel, protesting with vehemence that he is of a 
philosophic spirit, and will never endure such sickly senti- 
mentalism. To him religion is thought, not emotion. It 
isa cold, speculative, unfeeling divinity which he believes, 
and its effects upon his mind are the reverse of enthu- 
siastic. 

Reason, “heavenly Reason,” is his God, and Fecling 
must lie dormant beneath the throne of his great deity, 
We beg to remind him that th? religion of the cross was 
intended to stir the soul with deep emotion, and that 
where it is truly received it accomplishes its end ; but that 
if the passions be not moved by it, there is a strong pre- 
sumption that it has never been in true operation. We 
do not wonder that, to the man who views religion as a 
mere compendium of truths for the head, it is a powerless 
thing, for it is intended to work in another manner. Wine 
may serve to cheer the heart, but who would expect to 
feel its exhilarating influence by pouring it upon his head. 
The holy Gospel makes its first appeal to man’s heart, and 
until it be heard in that secret chamber it is not heard at 
all. So long as mere reason is the only listener, the 
melody of the cross will be unheard. Charm we never so 
wisely, men cannot hear the music unt’! the ears of the 
heart are opened. Vinet* has thus expressed himself 
upon this subject :—“ Ah! how can reason, cold reason, 
comprehend such a thing as the substitution of the in- 
nocent for the guilty; as the compassion which reveals 
itself in severity of punishment in that shedding of blood, 
without which, it is said, there can be no expiation? It 
will not make, I dare affirm, a single step towards the 
knowledge of that divine mystery, until, casting away its 
ungrateful speculations, it yields to a stronger power the 
task of terminating the difficulty. That power is the 


*See his Vital Christianity. 


UR, 


is been offended 
and has turned 
» that he is of a 
uch sickly senti- 
not emotion. It 
hich he believes, 
everse of enthu- 


od, and Fecling 
' his great deity, 
of the cross was 
1otion, and that 
tsend; but that 
) is a strong pre- 
operation. We 
ws religion as a 
it is a powerless 
rmanner. Wine 
would expect to 
it upon his head, 
man’s heart, and 
tis not heard at 
ly listener, the 
arm we never so 

the ears of the 
pressed himself 
on, cold reason, 
ition of the in- 
1 which reveals 
edding of hlood, 

expiation? It 
ep towards the 
casting away its 
onger power the 
ut power is the 


LOVE'S LOGIC, 227 


ee ee ae cee re eee 


— 


heart, which fixes itself entirely on the love that shines 
forth in the work of redemption; cleaves without dis- 
traction to the sacrifice of the adorable victim: lets the 
natural impression of that unparalleled love penetrate 
freely, and develop itself gradually in its interior. Oh, 
how quickly, then, are the veils torn away, and the shadows 
dissipated forever! How little difficulty does he who 
loves find in: comprehending love!” To the heart all 
divine mysteries are but simplicities, and when reason is 
measuring the apparently inaccessible heights, love is 
already shouting onthe summit. Let the cold calculating 
worshipper of intellect reserve his sneers for himself. Ex- 
perience is one of the highest of sciences, and the emotions 
claim a high precedence in the experience which is from 
God. That which these boasters contemn as an old wives’ 
story, is not one half so contemptible as themselves—yea, 
more, the pious feelings at which they jeer are as uch 
beyond their highest thoughts as the sonnets of angels 
excel the gruntings of swine. 

It has become fashionable to allow the title of “ intel- 
lectual preachers” to a class of men, whose passionless es- 
says are combinations of metaphysical quibbles and her- 
etical doctrines ; who are shocked at the man who excites 
his hearers beyond the freezing-point of insensibility, and 
are quite elated if they hear that their homily could only 
be understood by a few. It is, however, no question 
whether these men deserve their distinctive title ; it may 
be settled as an axiom that falsehood is no intellectual 
feat, and that unintelligible jargon is no evidence of a 
cultured mind. There must be in our religion a fair pro- 
portion of believing, thinking, understanding, and dis- 
cerning, but there must be also the preponderating influ- 


e e e e e e 5 
ences of feeling, loving, delighting, and desiring. That 
religion is worth nothing which has no dwelling in man 
but his brain. To love much is to be wise; to grow in 


affection is to grow in knowledge, and to increase in ten- 


228 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


— 


der attachment is to be making high proficiency in divine 
things. 

Look to thy love, O-Christian ! and let the carnal revile 
thee never so much, do thou persevere in seeking to walk 
with Christ, to feel his love, and triumph in his grace, 


—_—. 


ency in divine 


e carnal revile 
teking to walk 
in his grace, 


LOVE'S LOGIC. 299 


TO THE UNCONVERTED READER. 


FRIEND,—This time we will not preach the terrors of 
the law to thee, although they are thy deserts. We wish 
thee well, and if threatening will not awaken thee, we 
will try what wooing may accomplish, and oh! may the 
Holy Spirit bless the means to thy soul’s salvation. 

The Lord Jesus hath purchased unto himself a number 
beyond all human count, and we would have thee mark 
who and what they were by nature. 

The blood-bought ones, before their regeneration, were 
in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity ; they 
were aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and stran- 
gers from the covenants of promise; they had chosen ta 
themselves other gods, and were joined to idols; they 
walked according to the course of this world, according 
to the Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now 
worketh in the children of disobedience ; they were pol- 
luted in their blood, cast out in the open field to perish ; 
they were despisers of God, in league with hell and in cov- 
enant with Death; but nevertheless they were chosen, 
were redeemef, and have received the glorious title of 
Sons and Daughters. 

Now, Friend, if free grace has done thus with one and 
another, why should it not accomplish the same for thee ? 
Dost thou feel thy deep necessities ? Do thy bowels 
yearn for mercy? Art thou made willing to be saved in 
God’s way? Then be of good cheer. The promise is 
thine, the blood of Jesus was shed for thee, the Holy 
Spirit is at work with thee, thy sa!vation draweth nigh. 


230 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


He that calleth upon the name of the Lord shall be 
saved. Thy cries shall yet be heard, since thev come 
from a broken heart and a contrite spirit. itemember, 
faith in Jesus alone can give thee peace. 

But art thou still hard and stolid, still orutish and 
worldly? Then, permit the writer to weep over thee, and 
bring thy case before the Lord his God. Oh that the 
Lord would melt thee by the fire of his word! Oh that 
he would break thee with his hammer, and humble thee 
at his feet! Alas for thee, unless this be done! Oh that 
omnipotent grace would snatch thee from the ruin of the 
proud, and deliver thy feet from going down into the pit ! 
Miserable man! a brother’s heart longeth after thee, and 
fain would see thee saved. Oh, why art thou so indiffer- 
ent to thyself when others can scarce refrain from tears on 
thy behalf! By thy mother’s prayers, thy sister’s tears, 
and thy father’s anxieties, I beseech thee give a reason for 
thy sottish inditference to thine eternal welfare. Dost 
thou come to thyself, dost thou now exclaim, “I will 
arise and will go to my Father?” Oh, be assured of 
a welcome reception, of gladsome entertainment, and 
loving acceptance. 


‘*From the Mount of Calvary, 
Where the Saviour deigned to die, 
What melodious sounds [| hear, 
Bursting on my ravished ear !— 
Love’s Redeeming work is done ! 

CoME, AND WELCOME, SINNER, COME, 


“¢ Now behold the festal board, 
With its richest dainties stored ; 

T'o thy Father’s bosom press’d, 
Once again a child confess’d. 

From his house no more to roam ; 
CoME; AND WELCOME, SINNER COME,” 


R. 


Lord shall be 
nce they come 
t. itemember, 


ll porutish and 
over thee, and 

Oh that the 
ord! Oh that 
| humble thee 
one! Qh that 
she ruin of the 
n into the pit! 
ufter thee, and 
10U SO indiffer- 
1 from tears on 
’ sister’s tears, 
ve a reason for 
welfare. Dost 
laim, “I will 
be assured of 
tainment, and 


IX, 
Hesus in the Lour vf Trouble, 


‘‘ Who passing through the valley of Baca make it a well ; the rain 
also filleth the pools.”—Ps, Ixxxiv. 6. 


ILGRIMAGE to an appointed shrine seems to 
be an essential part of most religions. The 
tribes of Israel made yearly journeys to Jeru 

pe salem, that at one great altar they might sac- 

2 2’ yifice unto the Lord their God. Borrowing the 
ar td probably, from the Jews, we find false re- 
me ligions inculeating the same. The disciples of 
“Brahma are required to undertake long and pain- 
ful journeys to the temple of Juggernaut, or to the banks 
of their sacred river, the Ganges. The Mahometan has his 
Kebla of worship ; and, if he be thoroughly a devout 
follower of the false prophet, once in his life, offer his 
petitions at Mecca. And who has not heard of the 
palmer plodding his weary way to the Holy Sepulchre, 
or of the Canterbury pilgrim going to the tomb of 
Thomas A’Becket ? 

But the religion of God, the revelation of our most 
merciful Father, does not thus deal with man. It pres- 
cribes no earthly pilgrimage. It knows nothing of local 
restrictions. It declares that “neither in this mountain 


. 


| 
| 


232 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


nor yet at Jerusalem shall men worship the Father ; ” 
that “ God is a spirit,’ everywhere present, and as a 
spirit “must be worshipped,” not merely by outward 
acts, but “in spirit and in truth.” 

Yet “ pilgrimage ” is one of the leading ideas of Christ- 
ianity. Every Christian is mystically a pilgrim. His 
rest is not here. He is not a citizen of earth. Here he 
has no abiding city. He journeys to a shrine unseen by 
mortal eye, whither his fathers have arrived. This life- 
journey is his one incessant occupation. He came into 
the world that he might march through it in haste. He 
is ever a pilgrim, in the fullest and truest sense. 

Nothing can be more pleasing to a thoughtful Christian 
than marking the footsteps of the flock, and tracing the 
track they have left in the blood-besprinkied way. Thus 
the geography of Christian life becomes an interesting 
study. To enter the wicket-gate, to sit in the arbour on 
the hillside, to lie in the chamber of peace in the House 
Beautiful, to stand on the Delectable Mountains, or walk 
among the spice beds of the land of Beulah, yields far 
sweeter pleasure than fairy dreams, or tales coloured by 
fancy, whispered by the lips of music. 

There are many fair and enchanting spots in the high- 
way of salvation—-spots which angels have visited, and 
which the saints have sighed to behold again and again. 
But some other parts of the way are not so inviting ; we 
love not to enter the Valley of the Shadow of Death, nor 
to approach the mountains of the leopards, nor the lions’ 
dens, yet must all of them be passed. 

It is a precious mercy that Jesus, the heavenly Friend, 
is willing and able to acconipany us in all our journey- 
ings, and is the consolation of our souls in periods of 
blackest woe. After surveying the Valley of Baca, 
noticing the toilsome effort of the pilgrims in digging wells 
therein, and remarking the heavenly supply with which 
the pools are filled, we shall consider the grace of our 


the Father ; ” 
ent, and as a 
- by outward 


deas of Christ- 
pilgrim. His 
rth. Here he 
ne unseen by 
ad. This life- 
He came into 
in haste. He 
ense. 

tful Christian 
nd tracing the 
dway. Thus 
an interesting 
the arbour on 
in the House 
tains, or walk 
ah, yields far 
es coloured by 


s in the high- 
e visited, and 
hin and again, 
inviting ; we 
of Death, nor 
nor the lions’ 


venly Friend, 
1 our journey- 
in periods of 
ley of Baca, 
b digging wells 
y with which 
P grace of our 


JESUS IN THE HOUR OF TROUBLE. 233 


Lord Jesus as exhibited to his people in their sorrowful 
passage through this Vale of Tears. 


I. THE VALLEY OF Baca. The best description given 
of the Valley of Baca seems to be, that it was a defile 
through which.a portion of the tribes had to pass on their 
journey to the city of their solemnities. It was a place 
noted for its dryness, and therefore pits were digged 
therein for the purpose of holding rain-water for the 
thirsty wayfarers as they passed through it. But, prob- 
ably, the Psalmist looked not so much at the place as at 
its name, which signifies “ Valley of Sorrow, or Tears.” The 
Septuagint translates it, “ Valley of Lamentation,” and the 
Latin Vulgate, “ Vale of Tears.” We may therefore read 
the verse thus :—* Who passing through the Vale of Tears 
make it a well,” &e. Of this valley we may observe, first, 
It is much frequented. The way to Zion lies through its 
glooms. Many of God’s chosen ones are carried from the 
breast to glory, and thus escape this dreary place, but all 
the rest of God’s children must pass through it. Frequent 
are their sojournings in this “house of mourning.” Not 
once nor twice, but many a time must they tread this val- 
ley. As numerous as their days are the causes of their 
criefs, The molestations of disease, the disappointments 
of business, the losses of adversity, and the havoces of 
death, combining with a thousand other ills, furnish 
enough material for the much tribulation through which 
we inherit the kingdom. All men have their times of 
sadness, but some seem to be always in the deep waters— 
their lives, like Ezekiel’s roll, seem written within and 
without with lamentations. They can just dimly recol- 
lect happier days, but those‘are past long ago. They 
have for some time be the children of grief. They seldom 
eat a crust unmoistened by a tear. Sorrow’s wormwood 
is their daily salad. Perhaps some sudden calamity has 
snatched away the gourd which covered their hend, and, 

O 


steiner 


RB Sate a HO ty Se at som 8 BBN in hate 


234 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


—_— 


Jonah-like, they think they do well to be anvry even unto 
death. A haze, dark and heavy, hangs like a pall before 
their eyes, and clothes life’s scenery with sadness and 
gloom. Some are associated with ungodly partners, by 
whose unkindness their days are made bitter, and their 
lives a burden. Various are the causes of grief. The 
chains of melancholy differ in their size and material, 
Bound in affliction and iron, art thou saying, “ He hath 
made my chain heavy ?” Oh, child of grief, remember 
the vale of tears is much frequented ; thou art not alone 
in thy distress. Sorrow has a numerous family. Say 
not, I am the man that has seen affliction, for there be 
others in the furnace with thee. Remember, moreover, 
the King of kings once went through this valley, and here 
he obtained his name, “the man of sorrows,” for it was 
while passing through it he became “ acquainted with 
rief.” 

But, blessed be God, all his people are not thus clad in 
sackcloth and filled with bitterness. Some of them can 
sing for joy of heart, and, like the lark, rise to heaven’s 
gates, carolling notes of praise. Yet, be it observed, there 
is not one who has not had his valley of Baca. He of 
flashing eye and cheerful countenance was once walking 
in its dark and dreary paths. He who danced before the 
ark had cried out of the depths unto the Lord. He whom 
you heard in prayer, with free heart blessing his Maker, 
was lately in his bed-chamber, crying out with Job, “0 
that my grief were weighed!” and with Jeremiah, “ He 
hath filled me with bitterness, and made me drunken with 
wormwood.” 

Oh, mourner, say not that thow art a target for all 
the arrows of the Almighty; take not to thyself the pre- 
eminence of woe; for thy fellows have trodden the valley 
too, and upon them are the scars of the thorns and briars 
of the dreary pathway. 


nery even unto 
ce a pall before 
h sadness and 
ly partners, by 
itter, and their 
of grief. The 
. and material, 
ing, “ He hath 
rief, remember 
u art not alone 
s family. Say 
yn, for there be 
nber, moreover, 
valley, and here 
ws,” for it was 
cquainted with 


not thus clad in 
me of them can 
rise to heaven's 
observed, there 
rf Baca. He of 
aS once walking 
nced before the 
ord. He whom 
sing his Maker, 
t with Job, “0 
Jeremiah, “ He 
e drunken with 


target for all 


thyself the pre- 
dden the valley 
orns and briars 


JESUS IN THE HOUR OF TROUBLE, 


Secondly, this valley is exceedingly wnpleasant to flesh 
and blood. We love to ascend the mouuatains of myrrh 
and hills of frankincense, rather than to descend into this 
dismal region. For tribulation is not joyous, but grievous, 
Disguise sorrow as we may, it is sorrow still. No pilgrim 
ever wished to enter here for its own sake, though there 
have been many who have rejoiced in the midst of its 
darkest and most gloomy paths. _ Now, let us briefly con- 
sider why this valley is so unpleasant to heaven-bound 
travellers. It is so because we can find no rivers of water 
in it. Earthly joys are continually failing us; and creat- 
ed cisterns, one after another, aro dried up. A hot, dry 
wind steals pe every drop of comfort, and, hungry and 
thirsty, our soul fainteth in us. No fruit of sweetness 
erows here. It well answers the description of Watts :— 


*¢It yields us no supply, 
No ckeering fruits, no wholesome trees, 
Nor streams of living joy.” : 


Many rich mercies are here received by pilgrims, but these 
are not the fruits of the place itself, but the gifts of heaven. 
It is, moreover, disagreeable travelling in this valley, be- 
cause the way is rough andrugged. In some parts of the 
Christian journey we are led into green pastures beside 
the still waters; but this valley is thorny, stony, and 
flinty, and every way uncomfortable. True, there are 
many labourers, called promises, ever at work breaking 
the stones, and helping passengers over its most dif- 
ficult places; but notwithstanding this aid, journeying 
through it is very rougu work for all, but especially for 
those pilgrims who are weak, and ready to halt. It is 
also frequently very dark. The vale of tears is very low, 
and descends far beneath the ordinary level; some parts 
of it, indeed, are tunnelled through rocks of anguish. A 
frequent cause of its darkness is that on either side of the 
valley there are high mountains, called the mountains of 


236 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


—_—_—_ SS 


sin. These rise so high that they obscure the light of the 
sun. Behind these Andes of guilt God hides his face, and 
we are troubled. Then how densely dark the pathway 
becomes! Indeed, this is the very worst thing that can 
be meationed of this valley: for, if it were not so dark, 
pilgrims would not so much dread passing through it. 

The soul of the traveller is also often discouraged on ac- 
count of the length of the way. Through the darkness of 
the place it seems as though it had no termination, for al- 
though it is known that the dark river of death flows 
across its extremity, but, in the night season, the celestial 
city on the other side cannot be seen. This is the Egyp- 
tian darkness which may be felt, and, like solid piles of 
ebony, at such time it appears to have an adamantine 
hardness in it. Besides, this valley is much haunted, 
Evil spirits are very common in it. When a man is in 
the valley of Baca, Satan will soon be at him with his 
fiery darts, cursed insinuations and blasphemous sugges- 
tions. Like the bandit, he waylays us in the roughest 
and darkest part of our way. This much deepens the 
horror of the place. 

Thirdly, this valley, is very healthful. In all the King’s 
dominions, save alone the royal pavilion in glory, there is 
no spot more conducive to the svul’s health than this. 
The air from the sea of affliction is extremely beneficial to 
invalid Christians. Continued prosperity, like a warm 
atmosphere, has a tendency to unbind the sinews and 
soften the bones; but the cold winds of trouble make us 
sturdy, hardy, and well braced in every part. Unbroken 
success often leads to an-undervaluing of mercies and for- 
getfulness of the giver; but the withdrawal of the sun. 
shine leads us to look for the sun. 

Fourthly, it is a very safe place. We are not so likely 
to stumble in rough ways as in smooth and slippery 
places. Better walk on rugged rocks than on slippery 
tice. If we lose our roll, it is in the harbour of ease, not in . 


yR. 


the light of the 
les his face, and 
the pathway 
thing that can 
e not so dark, 
r through it. 
scouraged on ac- 
the darkness of 
mination, for al- 
of death flows 
son, the celestial 
nis is the Egyp- 
<e solid piles of 
an adamantine 
much haunted, 
len a@ man is in 
ut him with his 
yhemous sugges- 
in the roughest 
uch deepens the 


In all the King’s 
n glory, there is 
ealth than this. 
nely beneficial to 
y, like a warm 
the sinews and 
trouble make us 
yart. Unbroken 
mercies and for- 
wal of the sun- 


are not so likely 
hh and _ slippery 
han on slippery 
ur of ease, not in . 


- JESUS IN THE HOUR OF TROUBLE. 237 


LS SE SS 


the valley of Baca. Few Christians backslide while 
under the rod; it is usually when on the lap of plenty 
that believers sin. 

Fifthly, it is therefore, a profitable place. Stars may 
be seen from the bottom. of a deep well when they cannot 
be discerned from the top of a mountain: so are many 
things learned in adversity which the prosperous man 
dreams not of. We need affliction, as the trees need win- 
ter, that we may collect sap and nourishment for future 
blossoms and fruit. Sorrow is as necessary for the soul as 


medicine is to the body :— 
e 


‘¢ The path cf sorrow, and that path alone, 
Leads to the land where sorrow is unknown.” 


The benefits to be derived in the vale of tears are greater 
than its horrors, and far outnumber its disadvantages. 
There was a fiction once of a golden cup at the foot of 
the rainbow ; it would have been no fiction had they put 
the treasure in the dark cloud. In this valley of Baca 
there are mines of gold and of all manner of precious 
things; and sometimes even in the thick darkness, one 
may perceive the diamonds glitter. Full many a pilgrim 
has here been made rich to all the intents of bliss, and 
here have others had their heavenly wealth most marvel- 
lously increased. 
But we proceed to observe— 


IJ. THe Tottsome.EFrFort spoken of in the words at 
the head of the chapter—“ They make it a well,” &c. 
When Eastern shepherds travel, if they find no water, 
they dig a well, and thus obtain a plentiful supply of 
water for themselves and for their cattle. So did Isaac, 
and so also did the rulers for the people in the wilderness, 
When we are thirsty, and there is no water to be found in 
the pools, we must dig deep for it. Calvin translates it,— 


238 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


a en" tenes 


* They, travelling through the valley of weeping, will dig 
a well,” &c. This teaches us that— 

I. Comfort may be obtained even in the deepest trou- 
ble, We often look for it and fancy there is none. Like 
Hagar, the child of our hope is given up, and we lay down 

aie ; but why should we, when there is water to be 
had, if we will but seek for it ? Let no man say, My case 
is hopeless; let none say, I am in the valley, and can 
never again know joy. There is hope. There is the 
water of life to cheer our fainting souls. It certainly is 
not possible for us to be in a position where Omnipotence 
cannot assist us. God hath servants everywhere, and 
where we think he has none his word can create a multi- 
tude. There are “treasures hid in the sand,” * ard the 
Lord’s chosen shall eat thereof. When the clouds hide 
the mountains they are as real as in the sunshine; so the 
promise and the providence of God are unchanged by the 
obscurity of our faith, or the difficulties of our position. 
There is hope, and hope at hand, therefore let us be of 
good cheer. 

2. It teaches that comfort must be obtained by e er- 
tion. Well-digging is hard labour: but better dig for 
water than die of thirst. Much of the misery Christians 
feel arises from inaction. Cold numbs the hand if exer- 
cise be not used. We are bound to use every scriptural 
means to obtain the good we need. The sanctuary, the 
meeting for prayer, the Bible, the company of the saints, 
private prayer and meditation—these revive the soul. 
We must dig the wells. If there be rocky granite we 
must bore it; we must not be disturbed from perseverance 
by the labour of our duties, but continue to dig still; and 
what a mercy! if the well has ever so small a bore the 
water will flow. 

8. It teaches us that the comfort obtained by one is 
often of use to another; just as wells opened by former 


* Deut. xxxiii. 19. 


ping, will dig 


deepest trou- 
snone. Like 
we lay down 
water to be 
say, My case 
ley, and can 
There is the 
, certainly is 
Omnipotence 
rywhere, and 
reate a multi- 
”’ * and the 
» clouds hide 
shine; so the 
anged by the 
our position, 
let us be of 


ned by e er- 
etter dig for 
ry Christians 
and if exer- 
ry scriptural 
netuary, the 
of the saints, 
ive the soul. 

granite we 
perseverance 
dig still; and 
nll a bore the 


ed by one is 
bd by former 


JESUS IN THE HOUR OF TROUBLE. 239 


_ 


travellers would suffice for the company which came after. 
When we read works full of consolation, like Jonathan’s 
rod, dropping with honey, let us remember that our brother 
has been here before us, and digged this well. “ Songs in 
the Night,” could only have been written by that night- 
inyale in the thorns, Susanna Harrison. Many a “ Night 
of Weeping,” “ Midnight Harmonies,” an “ Eternal Day, 
«A Crook in the Lot,” a “ Comfort for Mourners,’ has 
been a well digged by a pilgrim for himself, but has proved 
just as useful to others. Specially we notice this in the 
Psalms, which console us, although they were mournful 
odes to David. ‘Travellers have been delighted to see the 
footprints of man on a barren shore, and we love to see 
the way-marks of the pilgrimage while passing through 
the vale of tears. Yea, the refuse and débris of the receding 
camp often furnish food for the stragglers behind. We 
may notice— 


II]. Toe Heaventy Suepty. The pilgrims dig the 
well, but, strange enough, it fills from the top instead of 
the bottom. We use the means, but the blessing does not 
lie in the means, but in the God of the means. We dig 
the well, but heaven fills it with rain. The horse is pre- 
pared against the day of battle, but salvation is of the 
Lord. The means are divinely connected with the end, 
but they do not produce the blessing. “The rain filleth 
the pools,” so that ordinances and duties are rather reser- 
voirs than fountains, containing comfort, but not creating 
it. In vain are all the ordinances without the divine 
blessing ; as clouds without rain, and pools without water, 
they yield us no supplies. When haven smiles and pours 
down its showers of grace, then they are precious things; 
but without the celestial rain we might as much expect 
water from the arid waste, as a real blessing in the use of 
them, “All my springs are in Thee,” is the believer's daily 


240 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


confession to his Lord,—a confession which .until death 
must ever be upon his lips. 


We now turn to our legitimate subject, from which tho 
beauty of the text has for a while allured us, and wa 
hasten to answer the question. How doth Jesus behave 
himself towards his people in the hour of their distresses? 
Does he leave them when their friends are taken from 
them? Does he desert them in the hour of their poverty ? 
Is he ashamed of them when sackcloth is on their loins, 
and ashes upon their heads? Do the pains of sickness 
affright him from the bed? Can famine and nakedness 
separate his brethren from his love? Is he the samo 
yesterday, to-day, and for ever? Our answer shall be one 
dictated by the experience of the saints, and confirmed in 
the life of the Christian reader. Zhe Lord Jesis is no 
fair-weather friend, but one who loveth at all times—a 
brother born for adversity. 'This he proves to his beloved, 
not by mere words of promise, but by actual deeds of 
affection. As our sufferings abound, so he makes our con- 
sulations to abound. This he does by divers choice acts 
of love. 

1. He affords the tried saint clearer manifestations of 
himself than usual. When he draws the curtain around 
the believer on the bed of sickness, he usually withdraws 
the curtain wherewith he conceals himself. He approaches 
nearer to the soul in its tribulation, even as the sun is said 
to be nearer to the earth in the time of winter. He sheds 
a clear light on his promise when he robes his providence 

‘in darkness; and if both are alike clouded, he reveals him- 
self the more manifestly. Affliction has often proved to 
be a presence-chamber, in which the King of Heaven gives 
audience to his unworthy subjects. As Isaac met his 
bride in the fields at eventide, so do true souls frequently 
find their joy and consolation in the loneliness of solitude, 
and at the sunset of their earthly pleasures, He who 


cit 


‘h until death 


rom which the 
ed us, and we 
1 Jesus behave 
reir distresses? 
re taken from 
their poverty ? 
on their loins, 
ns of sickness 
and nakedness 
she the samo 
rer shall be one 
d confirmed in 
ld Jesus is no 
tall times—a 
to his beloved, 
ctual deeds of 
nakes our con- 
ers choice acts 


nifestations of 
burtain around 
ly withdraws 
He approaches 
the sun is said 
er. He sheds 
his providence 
1e reveals him- 
[ten proved to 
Heaven gives 
saac met his 
uls frequently 
bss of solitude, 
res. He who 


JESUS IN THE HOUR OF TROUBUE, 


—— 


would see the stars sparkling with tenfold lustre must 
dwell in the cold regions of snow; and he who would know 
the full beauties of Jesus, the bright and morning star, 
must see him amid the frosts of trouble and adversity. 
Affliction is often the hand of God, which he places before 
our face to enable us, like Moses, to see the train of his 
clory as he passes by. The saint has had many a pleasant 
view of God’s loving-kindnesss from the top of the hills of 
merey; but tribulation is very frequently the Lord’s 
Pisgah, from which he gives them a view of the land in 
all its length and breadth. 

Mr. Renwick, the last of the Scottish martyrs, speaking 
of his suffering for conscience’ sake, says: ‘“ Knemies 
think themselves satisfied that we are put to wander in 
mosses, and upon mountains ; but even amidst the storms 
of these last two nights, I cannot express what sweet 
times I have had, when I had no covering but the dark 
curtains of night. Yea, in the silent watch, my mind was 
led out to admire the deep and inexpressible ocean of joy 
wherein the whole family of heaven swim. Each star 
led me to wonder what he must be who is the star of 
Jacob, of whom all stars borrow their shining.’ 

This one testimony is the type of many; it is an exhi- 
bition of the great rule of the kingdom—*“ When thou 
passest through the rivers, I will be with thee.” 

Choice discoveries of the wondrous love and grace of 
Jesus are most tenderly vouchsafed unto believers in the 
times of grief. Then it is that he lifts them up from his 
feet, where, like Mary, it is their delight to sit, and exalts 
them to the position of the favoured John, pressing them 
to his breast and bidding them lean on his bosom. Then 
it is that he doth fil] the cup of salvation with the old 
wine of the kingdom, and puts it to the mouth of the 
Christian, that he may in some measure forget the flavour 
of wormwood and grating of gravel-stones which the 
draught of bitterness has placed upon his palate and be- 


242 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


tw2en his teeth. If Crist is more excellent at one time 
than another it certainly is in “tke cloudy and dark day.” 
We ean never see the true colour of Christ’s love as in the 
night of weeping. Christ in the dungeon, Christ on the ted 
of sickness, Christ in poverty, is Christ indeed to a sancti- 
fied man. No vision cf Cirist Jesus is so truly a revelaticn 
as that whi-h is seen in tke Paimuos of suffering. As in 
time of war the city doubles its guards, so does Jesus mul- 
tiply the displays of his affection when his chosen are be- 
sieged by trials. When Habakkuk’s be'ly trembled, and 
his lips quivered, and rcttenness entered into his bones, 
when all his earthly hopes were b'asted, and his comforts 
removed, he had sch az overcoming serse of the presence 
of God that he exclaimed in the midst of all his sorrows, 
“ Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of my 
salvation.” Amoag the family cf God none ace so well 
versed in the knowledge of Christ’s love as these who 
have been long in tke chanber of affliction. What mar- 
vellous things nave these seen, and what secrets have they 
heard? They have kissed the i:ps that others have but 
heard at a distance; they have pressed their heads upon 
the breast which others have but seen with their eyes; and 
they have been embraced in the arms into which others 
have but desired to climb, Give us the Christ of affliction, 
for he is Christ indeed. 

2. As unde sanctified affiiction the manifestations of 
Christ are more clear, so are his visitations more frequent. 
If he pay us a daily visit when we are in our high estate, 
he will be with us hourly when we are cast down from 
our high places. As the sick child hath most of the 
mother’s eye, so doth the afflicted believer receive most of 
his Saviour’s attention, for like as a mother comforteth 
her children, even so doth the Lord comfort his people. 
Pious Brooks writes, “ Oh, the love tokens, the love-letters, 
the bracelets, the jewels that the saints are able to produce 
since they have been in the furnace of affliction!” Of 


t at one time 
nd dark day.” 
love as in the 
ist on the bed 
d to a sancti- 
y a revelation 
ering. As in 
es Jesus mul- 
shosen are be- 
trembled, and 
ito his bones, 
| his comforts 
i the presence 
‘| his sorrows, 
he God of my 
ie are so wel! 
as these who 

What mar- 
ets have they 
i1ers have but 
r heads upon 
neir eyes ; and 
which others 
t of affliction, 


ifestations of 
ore frequent. 
r high estate, 
+t down from 
most of the 
ceive most of 
by comforteth 
t his people. 
e love-letters, 
ble to produce 
iction!” Of 


JESUS IN THE HOUR OF TROUBLE. 243 


ae 


these they had but one in a seascn before, but now that 
their troubles have driven them nearer to their Saviour, 
they have enough to store their cabinet. Now they can 
truly say, “How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, 
O God! how great is the sum of them!” Merc‘es before 
came so constantly that memory could not compute their 
number; but now they appear to cone in weve after 
wave, without a moirent’s cessation. Happy is the man 
who finds the furnace as hot with love as with affliction. 
Let the tried believer look for increased privileges, and 
his faithful Lord w:ll not deceive his expectations. He 
who rides upon the storm when it is ‘ossing the ocean, 
will not be absent when it is beating about his saints. 
“The Lord of hosts is with us,” is not the song of them 
that make merry in the dance, but of those who are 
struggling in battle. “ David, doubtless, ked worse devils 
than we, for without great tribulations he could not have 
had so great and glorious revelations, David made 
psalms; we also will meke psalms and sing, as well as we 
ean, to the honour of our Lord God, and to spite and 
mock the devil.’* Surely, it would be long before our 
“songs of delivereuce” woald end, if we were mindful of 
the manifold tokens for good which our glorious Lord 
vouchsafes us in the hovr of sadness. How doth he 
waken us morning by morr.ing with the turtle voice of 
love ; and how doth he lu] us to our evening repose with 
notes of kind compassion! Each hour brings favours on 
its wings. He is now become an abiding companion, that 
while we tarry with the stuff we share in the spoil.- Oh, 
sweet trouble which brings Jesus nearer tous! AfHiction 
is the black chariot of Christ, in which he rideth to his 
children. Welcome shades that herald or accompany our 
Lord! 

3. In trying times the compassion and sympathy of 
Jesus become more delightfully the subject of faith and 


ne a er ene. — 


* Luther in his Z'able-Talk. + 1Sam. xxx, 24, 


244 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


experience. He ever feels the woes of all the members 
of his mystical body ; in all their afflictions he is afflicted, 
for he is touched with a feeling of our infirmities. This 
golden truth becomes most precious to the soul, when, in 
the midst of losses and crosses, by the Holy Spirit’s in- 
fluence, the power of itis felt inthe soul. A confident 
belief in the fact that Jesus is not an unconcerned spec- 
tator of our tribulation, aad a confident assurance that 
he is in the furnace with us, will furnish a downy pillow 
for our aching head. When the hours limp tardily along, 
how sweet to reflect that he has felt the weariness of 
time when sorrows multiplied! When the spirit is 
wounded by reproach and slander, how comforting to re- 
member that he also once said, “ Reproach has broken 
mine heart!” And, above all, how abundantly full of 


consolation is the thought that now, even now, he feels 
for us, and is a living head, sympathising in every pang 
of his wounded body. The certainty that Jesus knows 


and feels all that we endure, is one of the dainties with 
which afflicted souls are comforted. More especially is 
this a cheering thought when our good is evil spoken of, 
our motives misrepresented, and our zeal condemned. 
Then, in absence of all other balms, this acts as a sove- 
reign remedy for decay of spirit. Give us Christ with us, 
and we can afford to smile in the face of our foes. 

“ As to appreciation and sympathy, we do not depend 
for these on fellow-worms. We can be content to be un- 
appreciated here, so long as Christ understands us, and 
has a fellow-feeling for us. It is for him we labour. One 
of his smiles outweighs all other commendation. To him 
we look for our reward; and oh! is it not enough that 
he has promised it at his coming? It will not be long 
to wait. Do our hearts crave human fellowship and 
sympathy ? We surely have it in our great High Priest. 
Oh, how often should we faint but for the humanity of 
our divine Redeemer! He is bone of our bone, and flesh 


R. 


1 the members 
s he is afflicted, 
rmities. This 
p soul, when, in 
ly Spirit’s in- 
A confident 
oncerned spec- 
assurance that 
2 downy pillow 
p tardily along, 
© weariness of 
the spirit is 
mforting to re- 
ch has broken 
dantly full of 
now, he feels 
in every pang 
J a ie Ws 
dainties with 
re especially is 
evil spoken of, 
al condemned, 
cts as @& sove- 
Christ with us, 
ur foes. 
do not depend 
ntent to be un- 
‘stands us, and 
re labour. One 
ation. To him 
ot enough that 
7ill not be long 
fellowship and 
ut High Priest. 
e humanity of 
bone, and flesh 


JESUS IN THE HOUR OF TROUBLE. 


of our flesh ; yet he has an almighty arm for our deliver- 
ance—human to feel, divine to aid; faithful over all our 
failures and imperfections. What need we more?” * We 
may fancy we want some other encouragement, but if we 
know the value of the sympathy of Christ we shall soon 
find it all-sufficient. We shall think Christ alone to be 
enough to make a list of friends. The orator spake on so 
long as Plato listened, thinking one wise man enough 
audience for him ; let us labour on, and hope on, if Jesus 
be our only helper. Let us in all time of our tribulation 
and affliction, content ourselves with one Comforter, if all 
others fail us. Job had three miserable comforters; better 
far to have one who is full of pity and able to console. 
And who can do this so truly as our own most loving 
Lord Jesus? Moreover, it is not only true that he can do 
it, but he actually does do it, and that in no small degree, 
by making apparent the motio..1s of his own heart. He 
bids us see his breast, as it heaves in unison with ours, 
and he invites us to read his heart, to see if the same 
lines of suffering be not written there. 


‘* T feel at my heart all thy sighs and thy groans, 
For thou art most near me, my flesh and my bones ; 
In all thy distresses thy Head feels the pain, 
They alli are most needful, not one is in vain.” 


Thus doth he gently assuage the floods of our swelling 
orief, 
"4, The Lord Jesus is graciously pleased in many cases 
to give his afflicted saints an unusual insight into the 
deep things of his word,and an wnwonted relish in 
meditation wpon them. Our losses frequently act toward 
us as if they had cleared our eyes; at any rate, sickness 
and sorrow have often been the fingers of Jesus, with 
which he applied the salve of illuminatiiug grace, Either 


* Vide Shady Side, by a Pastor’s Wife. 


246 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


ne AS <NSSSNRNS 


the understaading is more than ordinarily enlarged, or 
else the prom’ses are more simply opened up and ex- 
plained by the Holy Spirit. Who has not observed the 
supernatural wisdem of the long afflicted saint ? Who has 
not known. ihe fact that the school of sanctified sorrow is 
that in which are to be foi ad the richest scholars, 

We learn more ue divinity bv our trials than by our 
books. The great Refcrmer said, “ Prayer is the hest book 
in my library.” He might bave added affliction as the next, 
Sickness is the best Doctor of Divinity in all the world; 
and trial is the finest exposition of Scripture. This is so 
inestimable a mark of the love of our blessed Lord that 
we might almost desire trouble for the sake of it. This 
proves him to be wise in his hardest dealings towards us, 
and therefore sup7emely kind; fcr is it not kindness 
which puts us to a little trouble for the sake of an im- 
mense advantage, and doth, as it were, take oar money 
out of our coffers at home that it may return again with 
mighty interest? Jesus is a friend indeed ! 

5. If the presence of Jesus be not felt and realized, he 
nevertheless sustains the soul by a secret and wnseen 
energy which he imparts to the spirit. Jesus is not 
always absent when he is unseen; but, on the contrary, 
he is frequently near to us when we have ng assurance of 
his presence. Many times the man who pours oil upon the 
flame of our comfort to prevent the quenching of the 
enemy, is behind the wall, where we cannot perceive 
him, * The Lord hath a heart which is ever full of affec- 
tion towards his elect, and when he seems to leave them 
he is still sustaining them. Patience under withdrawals 
of his sensible presence is a sure sign of his real, though 
secret, presence in the soul. <A blind man is really nour- 
ished by the food he eats,even though, he cannot see it ; 
so, when by the blindness of our spiritual vision, we are 
unable to discern the Saviour, yet his grace sustains our 


* See Parable in Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress. 


R. 


$$. 


y enlarged, or 
d up and ex- 
observed the 
int ? Who has 
sified sorrow is 
cholars. 
s than by our 
3 the best book 
on as (e next, 
all the world ; 
‘e. This is so 
ed Lord that 
eof it. This 
¥8 towards us, 
not kindness 
ke of an im- 
@ Our money 
in again with 
a realized, he 
; and wnseen 
Jesus is not 
the contrary, 
assurance of 
s oil upon the 
iching of the 
not perceive 
r full of aftec- 
0 leave them 
withdrawals 
8 real, though 
s really nour- 
annot see it ; 
rision, we are 
» sustains our 


red 


88. 


JESUS IN THE HOUR OF TROUBLE. 24:7 


a ee ee 
——— 


strencth and keeps us alive in famine. The intense de- 
sire after Jesus, the struggling of the soul with doubts and 
fears, and the inward panting of the whole being after 
the living God, prove beyond a doubt that Jesus is at 
work in the soul, though he may be concealed from the 
eye of faith. How should it, therefore, be a matter of 
wonder that secretly he should be able to afford support 
to the sinking saint, even at seasons when his absence‘is 
bemoaned with lamentations and tears? “The real gra- 
cious influences and effects of his favour may be con- 
tinued, upholding, strengthening, and carrying on the soul 
still to obey and fear God, whilst he yet conceals his fa- 
vour; for when Christ complained, My God, my God, 
why hast thou forsaken me? (when as great an eclipse in 
regard of the light of God’s countenance was upon his 
spirit, as was upon the earth in regard to the sun) yet he 
never more obeyed God, was never more strongly supported 
than at that time, for then he was obeying to the death.”* 
God’s favour most assuredly rests on his children’s hearts 
and strengthens their spirits, when the light and comfort of 
it are shut out from their perceptions. Christ puts his 
children upon his lap, and healeth their wounds when, 
by reason of their swooning condition, they feel not his 
hand, and see not his smile. It is said, “All is not gold 
that glitters;” certainly, we may alter the proverb, for it 
is true spiritually that all gold does not glitter; but this 
dimness does not affect is intrinsic worth and value. 

The old theologians used to say, “ Grace may be in the 
heart in esse et operat, when not in cognosci; it may 
have a being and a working there when in thy apprehen- 
sion.” Let us praise our bounteous Lord for unseen 
favours, and let us love our Lord Jesus for his mercies im- 
parted in silence, unobserved. 

6. After long seasons of depression Jesus becomes 
sweetly the consolation of Israel by removing our load wm 


— 


* Goodwin's Child of Light., &e. 


48 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


re SER ET SS 


a manner at once singularly felicitous and marvellously 
efficacious. It may be that the nature or design of the trial 
prevents us from enjoying any comfortable sense of our 
Lord’s:love during the time of its endurance in such caso 
the grace of our Lord Jesus discovers itself in the hour of 
our escape. If we do not see our Lord in the prison, we shall 
meet him on the threshhold in that day which shall see him 
break the gates of brass and cut the bars of iron in sunder, 
Marvellous are his works in the day wherein he brings us 
out of the house of bondage. Halyburton, after escape 
from a cloud and desertion, thus broke silence to a friend 
—“O, what a terrible conflict had I yesterday ! but now 
I can say ‘I have fought the good fight; I have kept the 
faith. Now he has filled my mouth with a new song, 
‘Jehovah Jireh—in the mount of the Lord.’ Praise, 
praise iscom: .y tothe upright. Shortly I shall get a bet- 
ter sight of God than ever I have had, and be more meet 
to praise himthan ever. Oh, the thoughts of an incarnate 
God are sweet and ravishing! And oh, how do I wonder 
as myself that I do not love him more, that I do not admire 
him more. Oh,that I could honourhim! Whata wonder 
that I enjoy such composure under all my bodily troubles! 
Oh, what a mercy that I have the use of my reason till I 
have declared his goodness to me!” Thus it seems that 
the sun is all the brighter for having been awhile hidden 
from us. And here the reader must pardon the writer if he 
introduces a personal narrative, which is to him a most 
memorable proof of the loving kindness of the Lord. 
Such an opportunity of recording my Lord’s goodness may 
never occur again to me; and therefore now, while my 
soul is warm with gratitude for so recent a deliverance, 
let me lay aside the language of an author, and speak for 
myself, as I should tell the story to my friends in conver- 
sation. It may be egotism to weave one’s own sorrows 
into the warp and woof of this meditation; but if the 
heart prompts the act, and the motions of the Holy Spirié 
are not contrary thereto, I think I may venture for this 


marvellously 
on of the trial 
e sense of our 
. in such casa 
in the hour of 
rison, we shall 
h shall see him 
ron in sunder, 
n he brings us 
, after escape 
ce to a friend 
lay ! but now 
have kept the 
1 a new song, 
ord. Praise, 
hall get a bet- 
be more meet 
yf an incarnate 
do I wonder 
do not admire 
hat a wonder 
odily troubles! 
ry reason till I 
it seems that 
awhile hidden 
he writer if he 
to him a most 
of the Lord. 
goodness may 
ow, while my 
a deliverance, 
and speak for 
nds in conver- 
S OWN sorrows 
bn; but if the 
e Holy Spirié 
enture for this 


JESUS IN THE HOUR OF TROUBLE. 249 


once to raise an Ebenezer in public, and rehearse the praise 
of Jesus at the setting up thereof. Egotism is not so 
frightful a thing as ungrateful silence ; certainly it is not 
more contemptible than mock humility. Right or wrong, 
here followeth my story: 

On a night which time will never erase from my mem- 
ory, large numbers of my congregation were scattered, 
many of them wounded and some killed, by the malicious 
acts of wicked men. Strong amid danger, I battled the 
storm, nor did my spirit yield to the overwhelming pres- 
sure while my courage could reassure the wavering or 
confirm the bold. But when, like a whirlwind, the des- 
truction had overpast, when the whole of its devastation 
was visible to my eye, who can conceive the anguish of 
my spirit? I refused to be comforted, tears were my 
meat by day. and dreams my terror by night. I felt as I 
bad never fe:t before. “My thoughts were all a case of 
knives,” cutting my heart in pieces, until a kind of stupor 
of grief ministered a mournful medicine to me. I vould 
have truly sa‘d, “Iam not mad, but surely I have had 
enough to medden me, if I should indulge in meditation 
on it.” I sought and found a solitude which seemed con- 
genial tome. I could tell my griefs to the flowers, and 
the dews could weep with me. Here my mind lay, like 
a wreck upon the sand, incapable of its usual motion. I 
was in a strange land, and a stranger in it. My Bible, 
once my daily food, was but a hand to lift the sluices of 
my woe. Prayer yielded no balm to me; in fact, my soul 
was like an infant’s soul, and I could not rise to the dig- 
nity of-supplication. “ Broken in pieces all asunder,” my 
thoughts, which had been to me like a cup of delights, 
were like pieces of broken glass, the piercing and cutting 
miseries of my pilgrimage : 

‘*The tumult of my thoughts 
Doth but enlarge my woe ; 
My spirit languishes, my heart 
P {s desolate and low. 


250 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


With every morning light 
My sorrow new begins : 

Look on my anguish and my pain 
And pardon all my sins.” 


Then came “ the slander of many ”—barefaced fabrications, 
libellous slanders, and barbarous accusations. These alone 
might have scooped out the last drop of consolation from 
my cup of happiness, but the worst had come to the worst, 
and the utmost malice of the enemy could do no more, 
Lower they cannot sink who are already in the nether- 
most depths. Misery itseli is the guardian of the miser- 
able. All things combined to keep me for a season in the 
darkness where neither the sun nor moon appeared. I 
had hoped for a gradual return to peaceful consciousness, 
and patiently did I wait for the dawning light. But it 
came not as I had desired, for he who doeth for us ex- 
ceedingly abundantly above what we can ask or think 
sent me a happier answer to my requests. I had striven 
to think of the immeasurable love of Jehovah, as display- 
e1 in the sacrifice of Calvary; i had endeavoured to muse 
upon the glorious character of the exalted Jesus; but I 
found it impossible to collect my thoughts in the quiver 
of meditation, or, indeed, to place them anywhere but 
with their points in my wounded spirit, or else at my 
feet, trodden down in an almost childish thoughtlessness. 
On a sudden, like a flash of lightning from the sky, my 
soul returned unto me. The burning lava of my brain 
cooled in an instant. The throbbings of my brow were 
still; the cool wind of comfort fanned my cheek, which 
had been scorched in the furnace. I was free, the iron 
fetter was broken in pieces, my prison door was open, | 
leaped for joy of heart. On wings of a dove my spirit 
mounted to the stars,—yea, beyond them. Whither did it 
wing its flight ? and where did it sing its song of grati- 
tude? It was at the fect of J esus, whose name had charm- 
ed its fears, and placed an end to its mourning. The 


ed fabrications, 
s These alone 
msolation from 
ie to the worst, 
d do no more, 
in the nether- 
1 of the miser- 
a season in the 
n appeared. I 
| consciousness, 
light. But it 
oeth for us ex- 
n ask or think 

I had striven 
yah, as display- 
voured to muse 
d Jesus; but I 
s in the quiver 
anywhere but 
or else at my 
houghtlessness. 
m the sky, my 
a of my brain 
my brow were 
7 cheek, which 
; free, the iron 
or was open, | 
love my spirit 
Whither did it 
song of grati- 
me had charm- 
ourning. The 


JESUS IN THE HOUR OF TROUBLE. 25] 


— SS 


name—the precious name of Jesus, was like Ithuriel’s 
spear, bringing back my soul to its own right and happy 
state. JI was a man again, and what is more, a believer. 
The garden in which I stood became an Eden to me, and 
the spot was then most solemnly consecrated in my most 


grateful memory. Happy hour. Thrice blessed Lord, who 


thus in an instant delivered me from the rock of my des- 
pair, and slew the vulture of my grief! Before I told to 
others the glad news of my recovery, my heart was melo- 
dious with song, and my tongue endeavoured tardily to 
express the music. Then did I give to my Well-Beloved 
« song touching my Well-Beloved; and oh! with what 
rapture did my soul flash forth its praises! but all—all 
were to the honour of Him, the first and the last, the 
Brother born for adversity, the Deliverer of the captive, 
the Breaker of my fetters, the Restorer of my soul. Then 
did I cast my burden upon the Lord; J left my ashes and 
did array myself in the garments of praise, while He did 
anoint me with fresh oil. I could have riven the very 
firmament to get at Him, to cast myself at His feet, and 
lie there bathed in the tears of joy andlove. Never since 
the day of my conversion had I knownso much of his in- 
finite excellence, never had my spirit leaped with such 
unutterable delight. Scorn, tumult, and woe seemed less 
than nothing for his sake. I girded up my loins to run 
before his chariot, and shout forth his glory, for my soul 
was absorbed in the one idea of his glorious exultation 
and divine compassion. 

After a declaration of the exceeding grace of God to- 
wards me, made to my dearest kindred and friends, I es- 
sayed again to preach. The task which J had dreaded to 
perform was another means of comfort, and I can truly 
declare that the words of that morning were as much the 
utterance of my inner man as if I had been standing be- 
fore the bar of God. The text selected runs thus— 
“Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given 


252 THE SAINT AND HIS SAV‘OUR. 


ae a re oe a ee 


him a name wh'ch is akove evevy name: that at the name 
of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and 
things in ear’ 1, ard things under the earth ; and that every 
tongue shoud confess that Jesus Chris: is Lord, to the 
glory of God the Father.”’* May I trouble the readev 
with some of the utterances of the morning, for they were 
the unveilings of my own experience. 

When the mind is intensely set upoa one object, how- 
ever much it may by diver calamities be tossed to and 
fro, it invariably returns to the place which it had chosen 
to be its dwelling place. Ye have noticed it in the case of 
David. When the battle had been won by his warriors, 
they returned flushed with victory. David’s mind had 
doubtless suffered much perturbation in the meantime ; he 
had dreaded alike the effects of victory and of defeat ; but 
have you not noticed how his thoughts in one moment re- 
turned to the darling object of his affections? “Is the 
young man Absa.om safe?” said he, as if it mattered not 
what else had occurred, if his beloved son were but se- 
cure! So, beloved, is it with the Christian. In the midst 
of calamities, whether they be the wreck of nations, the 
crash of empires, the heaving of revolutions or the scourge 
of war, the great question which he asks himself,and asks 
of others too, is this—* Is Christ’s kingdom safe?” In his 
own personal afflictions his chief anxiety is—Will God be 
glorified, and will his honour be increased by it? Ifit be so, 
says he, although I be but as smoking flax, yet if the sun 
is not dimmed I will rejoice; and though I be a bruised 
reed, if the pillars of the temple are unbroken, what mat- 
ters it that my reed is bruised? He finds it sufficient 
corsolation, in the midst of all the breaking in pieces 
which he endures, to think that Christ’s throne stands fast 
and firm, and that though the earth hath rocked beneath 
his feet, yet Christ standeth on a rock which never can be 
moved. Some of these feelings, I think, have crossed our 


Cece aowee tenemos - semanas ae ene A 


*Phil. ii. 9-11, 


-——-— 


eS 


ut the naine 
beaven, and 
d that every 
ord, to the 

the readev 
r they were 


yoject, how- 
ed to and 
t had chosen 
n the case of 
his warriors, 
’s mind had 
eantime ; he 
‘ defeat ; but 
» Moment re- 
sg? “Tg the 
nattered not 
were but se- 
In the midst 
nations, the 
-the scourge 
self,and asks 
afe?” In his 
Will God be 

? Ifit be so, 
ret if the sun 
be a bruised 
, what mat- 
it sufficient 

g in pieces 
1e > stands fast 
‘ked beneath 
never can be 
e crossed our 


JESUS IN THE HOUR OF TROUBLE, 253 


et 


minds, Amidst much tumult and divers rushing to and 
fro of troublous thoughts, our souls have returned to the 
dearest object of our desires, and we have found it no 
small consolation, after all, to say, “It matters not what 
shall become of us; God hath highly exalted him, and 
given him a name which is above every name; that at 
the name of Jesus every knee should bow.” 

Thus is the thought of the love of Jesus in his deliver- 
ing grace most indelibly impressed upon my memory ; 
and the fact that this experience is to me the most mem- 
orable crisis of my life, must be my apology for narrating 
it—an apology which I trast the indulgent reader will 
accept 

7. Although it may be thought that we have reached 
the legitimate boundary of our subject, we cannot refrain 
from adding, that Jesus renders himself peculiarly pre- 
cious by the gracious manner which, by bestowing an 
amazing increase of joy, he entirely obliterates every scar 
which the sword of adversity may have left in our flesh. 
As the joy that a man child is born into the world is said 
to destroy the remembrance of the previous travail of the 
mother, so the glorious manifestations of the Lord do wipe 
out all the bitter memories of the trials of the past. Af- 
ter the showers have fallen from the dark and lowering 
skies, how pleasant is the breathcf nature, how delightfully 
the sun peers through the thick trees, transforming all the 
rain-drops to sparkling gems; and even so, after a 
shower of troubles, it is marvellous to feel the divine re- 
freshings of the Lord of hosts right speedily transforming 
every tear into a jewel of delight, and satisfying the soul 
with balmly peace. The soul’s calm is deep and profound 
when the tempest has fully spent itself, for the same Je- 
sus who in the storm said, “ It is I,” will comfort his 
people. with royal dainties when the winds have been 
hushed to slumber. At the heels of our sorrows we find 
our joys. Great ebbs are succeeded by great floods, and 


254 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


—— 


sharp winters are followed by bright summers. This is 
the sweet fruit of Christ’s love,—he will not have his bre- 
thren so much as remember their sorrows with regret ; 
he so works in them and towards them that their light 
affliction is forgotton in happy contemplation upon his 
eternal weight of glory. Happy is it that unhappiness 
which brings with it such surpassing privileges, and more 
than excellent the grace which makes it so. We need a 
poet to sing the sweet uses of adversity. An ancient 
writer, whose words we are about to quote, has unconsci- 
ously produced a sonnet in prose upon this subject ;— 

“ Stars shine brightest in the darkest night; torches 
are better for the beating ; grapes come not to the proof 
till they come to the press; spices smell sweetest when 
pounded ; young trees root the faster for shaking ; wines 
are the better for bleeding; gold looks the brighter for 
scouring ; glow-worms glisten best in the dark; juniper 
smells sweetest in the fire; pomander becomes most fra- 
grant from chafing; the palm-tree proves the better for 
pressing ; camomile the more you tread it the more you 
spread it: such is the condition of all God’s children, they 
are most triumphant when they are most tempted; most 
glorious when most afflicted; most in the favour of God 
when least in man’s esteem. As their conflicts, so their 
conquests; as their tribulations, so their triumphs. True 
talumanders, they live best in the furnace of persecu- 
sion; so that heavy afflictions are the best benefactors to 
heavenly affections. Where afflictions hang heaviest, 
corruptions hang loosest ; and grace that is hid in nature, 
as sweet water in rose leaves, is most fragrant when the 
fire of affliction is put under to distil it out.’ * 

Let each reader inquire whether this is in harmony 
with his experience, and if it be so, let him testify to his 
tried brethren that he has tasted and handled of the 
goodness of the Lord Jesus, and has found him full of 


—- ee 


* Samuel Clerk, preface to Martyrology. 


———_—— 


1ers, This is 
have his bre- 
with regret ; 
t their light 
ion upon his 
unhappiness 
ges, and more 
| We need a 
An ancient 
has unconsci- 
subject 3— 
night ; torches 
to the proof 
weetest when 
raking ; vines 
» brighter for 
lark; guniper 
mes most fra- 
the better for 
the more you 
children, they 
empted ; most 
favour of God 
licts, so their 
amphs. True 
e of persecu- 
benefactors to 
ang heaviest, 
hid in nature, 
ant when the 
‘a 
sin harmony 
. testify to his 
undled of the 
d him full of 


Lae ae a ee re 


J 


grace to help, and power to comfort. Open thy mouth as 
wide in praise as thou didst in prayer, and let thy grati- 
tude be as lasting as his love, 

But if the reader cannot bear witness to the faithful- 
ness of the Lord in the day of adversity, let him tremble. 
If his religion has forsaken him in his distress, let him at 
once doubt its character, That is not from heaven which 
cannot endure the fire. If the promises afford thee no 
comfort in thy trials, if thy faith doth utterly fail, and 
thou findest thy profession tottering about thine ears, 
look well to thyself that thou be not deceived. We dare 
not say that there is no grace in the man who finds no 
comfort in the Lord in the day of evil, but we do say, 
with much earnestness, there is very grave cause for sus- 
picion, The following sentences from the pen of William 
Gurnall deserve much pondering, they will raise a vital 
question in the mind of those who have never felt the 
sweetness of the promises in the hour of need :—“ Prom- 
ises are like the clothes we wear. If there be heat in the 
body to warm them, they warm us, but if there be none, 
they give none. So where there is living faith, the 
promise will afford warm comfort; but on a dead, unbe- 
lieving heart, it lies cold and ineffectual: it has no more 
effect than pouring a cordial down the throat of a corpse. 
Again, the promises do not throw out comfort as fire 
throws out heat; for then we should only need to go to 
them in order to be warmed: their heat is like the fire in 
the fiint, which must be struck out by force, and this 
force can only be applied by faith.” * 

There is another explanation of the fact that a profes- 
sor in trial sometimes finds no comfort in the promises ; 
and as it is a little more lenient, we add it here, and de- 
sire all such persons to ‘Jee for themselves. It may be 
that thou hast neglected communion, and therefore thy 
troubles weigh heavily. When a bucket is let down into 


ne 5 ee a ee ae 


* Christian Armour. 


256 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


a deep well, and is under the water, it is easily wound 
up, and seems to be light, but when once it is drawn out 
of the water its weight becomes excessive: it is so with 
our sorrows—as long as we keep them submerged in God 
and fellowship they are light enough; but once consider 
them apart from the Lord, and they become a grievous 
and intolerable burden. Faith will have to tug in earnest, 
to lift our adversities when we stand alone without our 
Lord; want of commmnion will rob the promises of their 
comfort, and load our griefs with weights of iron. 

It seems, then, that thou has) one of two faults to find 
with thyself,—either thou art dead, and so unable to feel 
the heat and comfort of the Lord’s presence ; or else thou 
hast been inactive, not improving the means whereby 
the fellowship of the Master may be realized. Search 
thine heart and know the reason. “ Are the consolations 
of God small with thee? Is there any secret thing 
with thee ?”* Look to thyself, for it may be thy sou) 
is in an evil plight, and if so, be sure to give good heed 
unto it. Goto the Lord at once, and ask a fresh supply 
of life and grace. Do not seek to mimic the joy of be- 
lievers, but strive for the reality of it. Rely not on 
thine own power. Trim thy lamp with heavenly oil. If 
the fire of the Roman vestals were ever extinguished, they 
dare not light it except at the sun; be sure that thou do 
not kindle a flame in thy heart with strange fire. Get 
renewal where thou didst get conversion, but be sure to 
get it, and at once. May the Holy Spirit help thee. 


orc a a Ee Se as 


* Job xv, 11, 


sily wound 
3 drawn out 
is so with 
rged in God 
ice consider 
8 a grievous 
1g In earnest 
vithout our 
ises of their 
iron. 

aults to find 
able to feel 
or else thou 
ns whereby 
ed. Search 
consolations 
secret thing 
be thy sou) 
e good heed 
resh supply 
@ joy of be- 
ely not on 
pnly oil. If 
uished, they 
hat thou do 
re fire. Get 
be sure to 
D thee. 


— a ae 


JESUS IN THE HOUR OF TROUBLE. 


—$<$—— TS 


TO THE UNCONVERTED READER. 


Poor sinner, how great a difference is there between 
thee and the believer ! and howapparent is this difference 
when in trouble! You have trials, but you have no God 
to flee to: your afflictions are frequently of the sharp- 
est kind, but you have no promises to blunt their edge; 
you are in the furnace, bat you are without that divine 
companion who can prevent the fire from hurting you. 
To the child of God adve.sity brings many blessings—to 
you it is empty-handed ; to him there ariseth light in the 
darkness—to you there is the darkness but no arising of 
the light ; you have all its miseries, but none of its bene- 
fits. How dreary must your heart feel whea lover and 
friends are put far frcm you, when yourhopes are wither- 
ed, and your joys are removed! You have no Christ to 
cheer you ; he is not there compense of your grief ; he is 
not Jehovah Jireh to you. You have no Almighty arms 
beneath you, no Eternal God to be your refuge, no 
Anointed One to be your shield. Youmust bear your sor- 
rows alone, or, if any attempt to help you, their strength 
is incompetent for the task. 

Oh, ‘wretched man ! for ever enduring the thorn, but 
never reaching the throne; in the floods, but not washed; 
burning in the fire, but not refined; brayed in the mortar, 
but not cleansed of foolishness ; suffering, but unsanctified. 
What misery to have no foundation in the day of the 
tempest, no covert from the wind, no shelter from the 
storm! The saint can bear a world of trouble when the 
strength of Israel doth brace him with omnipotence ; but 


253 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


a at eC SR ee anid = 


thou, without the support of the Most High, art crushed 
before the moth, and overwhelmed when evil getteth hold 
upon thee. Thy present trials are too heavy for thee ; 
what wilt thou do in the swellings of Jordan? In the 
day when the drops shall have become a torrent, and the 
small rain of tribulations has given place to the water- 
spouts of vengeance, how wilt thou endure the unutter- 
able wrath of the Lamb ? 

Lay this to thy heart, and may the Lord enable thee to 
east the burden of thy sin upon the crucified Saviour ; 
then shalt thou have boldness to cast thy griefs there also, 


) 
v9 


SS 


h, art crushed 
il getteth hold 
avy for thee ; 
dan? In the 
rrent, and the 
to the water- 
‘e the unutter- 


enable thee to 
ified Saviour ; 
riefs therealso, 


Heaus hiding Linrsell, 


* Thou didst hide thy face, and I was troubled.”—Ps. xxx. 9. 


‘“ Why dost thou shade thy lovely face? oh, why 
Doth that eclipsing hand so long deny 
The sunshine of thy soul-enlivening eye ? 


‘*¢ Without that light, what light remains in me ? 
Thou art my life, my way, my light ; in thee 
I live, I move, and by thy beams I see. 


‘¢Thou art my life ; if thou but turn away, 
My life’s a thousand deaths : thou art my way ; 
Without thee, Lord, I travel not, but stray. 


“ My light thou art ; without thy glorious sight, 
Mine eyes are darken’d with perpetual night, 

My God, thou art my way, my life, my light.” 
QUARLES. 


hands and graven on his side ; they are design- 
ed for eternal felicity, and to that blessed con- 
©/ summation his hand and his heart are unitedly re- 
we solved tobring them. The meanest lamb of the blood- 
bought flock shall be preserved securely by the 
‘strength of Israel” unto the day of his appearing, and shall, 


260 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


ee CN + =. 


through every season of tribulationand distress, continue to 
be beloved of the Lord. Yetthisdoes notprevent the great 
Shepherd from hiding himself fora season, when his people 
are rebellious. Though the Redeemer’s grace shall never 
be utterly removed, yet there shall be partial withdrawals 
of his presence, whereby our joys shall be dimmed, and 
our evidences darkened. He will sometimes say, “ I will 
go and return uuto my place, until they acknowledge their 
offences which they have committed against me ; Pand at 
other seasons, for a trial of their faith, he will “for a 
small moment” hide himself from them. 

In proportion as the Master's presence is delightful, his 
absence is mournful. Dark is the night which is caused 
by the setting of sucha sun. No blow of Providence can 
ever wound so sorely as this. A blasted crop is as noth- 

ing compared with an absent Reedemer; yea, sickness and 
the approach of death are preferable to the departure of 
Emmanuel, Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath will 
he give for his life ; and more than that would thesincere 
disciple be prepared to surrender for a renewal of his 
Lord’s presence. ‘Oh, that I were as in months past, as in 
days when God preserved me ; when his candle shined 
upon my head, and when by his light I walked throagh 
darkness!” Such will be the sorrowful complairt of 
the spirit when groping its way through the darkness of 
desertion. ‘“God’s hiding himself, though but for trial’s 
sake, will so trouble a Christian that he will quickly bea 
burden to himself, and fear round about, as it is said of 
Pashur.* It will make him weary of the night, and weary 
of the day ; weary of his own house, and weary of God’s 
house ; weary of mirth, and account it madness ; weary 
of riches and honours : ; yea, if it continue long, it will make 
him weary of life itself, and wish for death.”+ The 
effect is always deplorable during the time of its duration, 
but the cause of it is not always the same, There are 


~~ 


om 


* Jer. yx, 3. + Lockyer on Christ’s Communion. 


toate £4 2 


Tr) 


- a ee ee. ee ee 


mm fd oe — 45 = es 45 Oe ZOCOR CO 


3, continue to 
ent the great 
en his people 
é shall never 
withdrawals 
jimmed, and 
say, “I will 
ywledge their 
me;” and at 
will “ for a 


elightfui, his 
ich is caused 
‘ovidence can 
p is as noth- 
sickness and 
departure of 
on hath will 
ild thesincere 
newal of his 
ths past, as in 
andle shined 
ked throagh 
complairt of 
darkness of 
ut for trial’s 
quickly bea 
it is said of 
t, and weary 
ary of God’s 
inevs 5 weary 
rit will make 
ath.” + The 
f its duration, 

There are 


oy 


JESUS HIDING HIMSELF. 261 


—__—_— 


divers reasons for apparent desertions ; we will enter 
upon that interesting subject in the next chapter, and in 
the present meditation we shall chiefly consider the ill 
effects of the absence of Christ. : 

We would carefully distinguish between those with- 
drawals which are evidences of an offence given to our 
Lord, and those which are designed to be trials of our 
faith. Our experience under different varieties of for- 
sakings will vary, and the following remarks, although in 
the main applicable to all desertions, are only intended in 
their detail to refer to those which are brought about by 
our transgressions ; and even then it ‘s not to be imagined 
that each case will exhibit every point which we shall 
now observe. Here we specially refer to those hidings 
of God’s countenance which are brought upon us as a fa- 
therly chastisement. And we do not here dwell upon the 
ultimate and blessed effects of the temporary forsakings 
of God, but are only to be understood to refer to the ills 
which, durifig the time beset the soul. 

Holy men may be left to walk in darkness. “Some- 
times Christians are guilty of acting a part which is offen- 
sive to their dear Saviour, and theretore he withdraws 
from them. Darkness spreads itself over them, thick 
clouds interpose between him and their souls, and they 
see not his smiling face. This was the case with the 
Church when she was inclined unto carnal ease, rather 
than to rise and give her Beloved entrance. He quick- 
ened her desires after the enjoyment of his company, by 
an effectual touch upon her heart ; but he withdrew, de- 
parted, and left her to bewail her folly in her sinful 
neglect. Upon this her bowels were troubled; she arose 
and sought him; but she found him not. It is just with 
him to hide himself from us, if we are indifferent about 
the enjoyments of his delightful presence, and give us oc- 
casion to confess Our ingratitude to him, by the loss we 
sustain in consequence of it. His love vm itself passes 


Fe 
Mi y 
§ 
4 | 
. 
ae 
4 


262 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


— 


under no vicissitude ; it is always the same; that is our 
security ; but the manifestation of it to our souls, from 
which our peace, comfort, and joy spring, may be inter- 
rupted through our negligence, sloth,and sin. A sense of 
it, when it isso, may well break our hearts; for there is no 
ingratitude in the world likeit.” * We would not be un- 
derstood to teach that God punishes his people for sin in 
a legal sense ; this would be a slur upon his justice ; for, 
seeing that he has fully punished their sin in Christ, to in- 
flict any penalty upon them would be demanding a 
double punishment for one offence, which were unjust. 
Let the chastisements be understood in a paternal sense 
as correctives, and the truth is gained. Sin will be chas- 
tened in the elect. “ You only have I known out of all 
the nations of the earth, therefore I will punish you for 
your iniquities.” If we walk contrary to him, he will 
walk contrary to us. The promise of communion is only 
appended to obedience. “He that hath my command- 
ments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he 
that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will 
love him, and will manifest myself to him.’ Now if 
we walk scandalously, and indulge in known sin, no 
wonder though the Lord withdraw himself from us. 
The joy of his salvation must not rest with his erring 
ones, though the salvation itself is ever theirs. Alas for 
us, that our corruption should so frequently mar our com- 
munion ! 

Many times between conversion and the rest of eternity 
the Christian, through sin, will have to walk through a 
salt land, not inhabited, and find the songs of the Canticles 
hushed by the wail of the Lamentations. Yet he would 
fain believe that there are some who have but little cause 
to write their history in black letters, for their life has 
been one continued calm communion, with only here and 
there a hurried interruption. We are far from believing 


ee a 


* Brine, + John xiv, 21 


— 


»; that is our 
ir souls, from 
may be inter- 
1. A sense of 
for there is no 
uld not be un- 
ople for sin in 
s justice ; for, 
1 Christ, to in- 
demanding a 
| were unjust. 
naternal sense 
1 will be chas- 
wn out of all 
inish you for 
him, he will 
nunion is only 
ny command- 
th me: and he 
er, and I will 
n+ Now if 
nown sin, no 
self from us. 
vith his erring 
eirs. Alas for 
rmar our com- 


‘est of eternity 
alk through a 
of the Canticles 
Yet he would 
but little cause 
their life has 
only here and 
rom believing 


JESUS HIDING HIMSELF. 


that the despondency, coldness, and misery produced by a 
loss of the visible love of Christ ought to make up any 
considerable part of the biography of a Christian. That 
they do so in many cases, we readily admit, but that it 
should be so we never can allow. Those men who glory 
in which they proudly call a deep experience,—by which 
they mean great wanderings from the path which Enoch 
trod when he walked with God,—are very prone to exalt 
the infirmities of the Lord’s people into infallible and ad- 
mirable proofs of grace. To them an absent Christ is fine 
stock in trade for a sermon upon their own superlative 
wisdom ; anda heart which mourns abundantly, but loves 
most scantily, is to them what perfection is to the 
Arminian. As if the weeds of the field were precious 
plants because they will grow in the soil ; as if the freckles 
on the face of beauty were to be imitated by all who 
desire to attain to loveliness ; or as if the rocks in the sea 
were the very cause of its fulness. The deepest experience 
in the world is that which deals only with the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and is so sick of man, and of all within him, and 
so confident in the Lord Jesus, that it casts the whole 
weight of the sin and sinfulness of the soul entirely upon 
the Redeemer, and so rejoicing in all-sufficiency, looks 
above the wants and woes of its own evil and ruined 
nature, to the completion of the new man in Christ Jesus. 
That eminent preacher, the late Rowland Hill, has well 
said, “I do not like Christians to live always complaining ; 
but I do not mind how much they complain if they carry 
their corruptions to Jesus.” This is forgotten by many ; 
but those who are careful to practise it will have many 
causes for gladness. 

Blessed be God, the green pastures and the still waters, 
the shepherd’s crook and pleasant company, are objects 
which are quite as familiar to the believer’s mind as the 
howling wilderness and the brandished rod--- 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


‘*The men of grace have found 
Glory begun below; 
Celestial fruits on earthly ground, 
Frcm faith and hope do grow.” 


Yet, to the believer's grief, seasons of absence do occur, 
and those, alas, too frequently. It is our business, as the 
Holy Spirit shall enable us, very briefly to consider the 
subject of apparent ‘ssert’:.1 on account of sim, and may 
He make it useful to 

We shall now proce:: « veview the mischiefs which 
attend upon suspended womnivrion. The effects of the 
withdrawal of the face of Jesus are the outward signs 
shadowing forth the secret sickness of the heart, which 
such a condition necessarily engenders. Although it be 
not fatal, yet is it exceedingly hurtful to miss the com- 
pany of the Lord. As plants thrive not when the light is 
kept froin them, but become blanched and unhealthy, so 
souls deprived of the light of God’s countenance are un- 
able to maintain the verdure of their piety cr the strength 
of their graces. Whot a loss is a lost Christ! 

During this doleful season the believer's evidences are 
eclipsed ; he is in grievous doubt concerning his own con- 
dition before God; his faith is become weak, his hope 
well-nigh buried, and his love cold and languid. The 
graces, which, like planetary stars, once shone upon him 
with light and radiance, are now dark and cheerless for 
the sun has departed, the source of their light is concealed 
in. clouds. Evidences without Christ are like unlit candles 
which afford no light; like fig-trees with leaves only, 
devoid of fruit; like purses without gold, and like barns 
without wheat: they have great capabilities of comfort, 
but without Jesus they are emptiness itself. Evidences 
are like conduit-pipes—-they are sometimes the channels of 
living water, but if the supply from the fountain-heads be 
cut off from them, their waters utterly fail. That man 
will die of thirst who has no better spring to look to than 


ce do occur, 
iness, as the 
consider the 
im, and may 


hiefs which 
fects of the 
itward signs 
heart, which 
hough it be 
iss the com- 
1 the light is 
healthy, so 
ance are un- 
the stzength 
! 
widences are 
his own con- 
Pak, his hope 
neuid. The 
ne upon him 
heerless for 
is concealed 
unlit candles 
leaves only, 
d like barns 
s of comfort, 

Evidences 
e channels of 
ain-heads be 

That man 
look to than 


JESUS HIDING HIMSELF. 265 


—— anne 


an empty pitcher of evidences. Ishmael would have 
perished in the wilderness if his only hope had been in 
the bottle which his mother brought out with her from 
the tent of Abraham; and assuredly without direct sup- 
plies from the gracious hands of the Lord J esus, the saint 
would soon be in an ill plight. Unless the God of our 
oraces be ever at the root of them, they will prove like 
Jonah’s gourd, which withered away when he was most 
in need of it. In this condition we shall find ourselves 
if we lose the presence of the Lord Jesus; we shall be 
racked with fears, and tormented with doabts without 
possessing that sovereign cordial with which ‘in? otter 
days our sorrows have been allayed. We shall find : 
the usual sources of our consolation dried up, and it will 
° . . . = 

be in vain for us to expect a single drop from them. Ahab 
sent Obadiah upon an idle errand, when in the tine of 
ereat drought he said, “Go into the land unto all vuntains 
of water, and unto all brooks: peradventure we may find 
grass to save the horses and mules alive, that we lose 
not all the beasts ;” for it was the presence and prayer of 
Elijah which alone could procure the rain to supply their 
wants; and if we, when we have lost our Master’s societ 

seek to obtain comfort in past experiences and dirmacarere 
evidences, we shall have to weep with bitter tears because 


of a disappointed hope. We must regain the society of | 


Christ, if we would restore the lustre of our assurance 
An absent Saviour and joyous confidene are seldom to 
be spoken of together. 

We know however, that some professors can maintain 
a confident carriage when the presence of the Lord is 
withholden ; they are as content without him as with 
him, and as happy under his frown as when in the sun- 
shine of his smile. Between the outward appearances of 
strong faith and strong delusion there is frequently so 
little difference that the presumptuous boaster is often as 
highly esteemed as the assured believer: nevertheless in 
Q 


i ti RSCTA BAPUEEE IAS ap 88H 


266 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


their inner nature there is an essential distinction. Faith 
believes on Jesus when his comfortable priomise is not 
vouchsafed ; but it does not render the soul indifferent to 
the sweetness of his society. Faith says, “I believe him 
when I do not feel his love manifest towards me, but my 
very persuasion of his faithfulness makes me pant for the 
light of his countenance ;’ but vain presumption exclaims, 
“ Away with evidences and manifestations, I am a vessel 
of mercy, and therefore I am secure; why should I trouble 
myself about grace or graces? I have made up my mind 
that all is right, and I will not break my slumbers who- 
ever may seek to alarm me.” Happy is the man whose 
faith can see in the thick darkness, and whose soul can 
live in the year of drought; but that man is not far from 
a curse who slights the fellowship of the Lord, and esteems 
his smile to be a vain thing. It is an ill signif any of us 
are in a contented state when we are forsaken of the Lord ; 
it is not faith, but wicked indifference, which makes us 
careless concerning communion with him, And yet how 
often have we had cause to lament our want of concern ; 
how frequently have we groaned because we could not 
weep as we ought for the return of our husband who had 
hidden himself from us ! 

When enveloped in the mists of desertion, we lose all 
those pleasant visions of the future which once were the 
jewels in the crown of our life. We have no climbings to 
the top of Pisgah ; no prospects of the better land ; no 
earnests of pure delight ; no foretastes of the richness of 
glory, and no assurance of our title to the goodly land be- 
yond Jordan. It is as much as we can do to preserve 
ourselves from despair ; we cannot aspire to any confi- 
dence of future glory. It is a contested point with us 
whether we are not ripening for hell. We fear that we 
never knew a Saviour’s love, but have been all along de- 
ceivers and deceived; the pit of hell yawns before us 
add we are in great straits to maintain so much as a bare 


tion, Faith 

ymise is not 

different to 

believe him 

me, but my 

pant for the 
on exclaims, 
am a vessel 
ild I trouble 
up my mind 
umbers who- 
. man whose 
ose soul can 
not far from 
,and esteems 
if any of us 
of the Lord ; 
ch makes us 
And yet how 
| of concern ; 
we could not 
and who had 


, we lose all 
nce were the 
) climbings to 
er land ; no 
e richness of 
odly land be- 

to preserve 
to any confi- 
oint with us 
fear that we 
all along de- 
ms before us 
hch as a bare 


JESUS HIDING HIMSELF, 


hope of escape from it. We had once despised others for 
what we thought to be foolish doubts, but now that we 
ourselves are ready to slip with our feet, we think far 
more of the lamps which we despised* when we were at 
ease, and would be willing to change places with them if 
we might have as good an opinion of our own sincerity as 
we have of theirs. We would give anything for half a 
grain of hope, and would be well content to be the mean- 
est of the sheep, if we might but have a glimpse of the 
Shepherd. 

The native buoyancy of spirit which distingwishes the 
heir of heaven is in a great measure removed by the de- 
parture of the Lord. The believer is spiritually a man 
who can float in the deepest waters, and mount above the 
highest billows ; he is able, when in a right condition, to 
keep his head above all the water-floods which may invade 
his peace: but see his Lord depart, and he sinks in deep 
mire, where there is no standing—all the waves and 
billows have gone over him. ‘Troubles which were light 
as a feather to him, are now like mountains of lead; he 
is afraid of every dog that snarls at him, and trembles at 
every shadow. He who in his better days could cut down 
an acre of foemen at a stroke, is affrighted at the approach 
of a single adversary. He whose heart was fixed so that 
he was not afraid of evil tidings, is now alarmed at every 
report. Once he could hurl defiance to earth and hell 
united, and could laugh at persecution, slander and re- 
proach, but he now is timid asa deer, and trembles at 
every phantom that threatens him. His daily cares, 
which once he loved to cast upon the Lord, and courted 
but as the small dust of the balance are now borne upon 
the shoulders of his own anxiety, and are a load intoler- 
ably oppressive. He was once clothed in armour of proof, 
and was not afraid of sword or spear; but now that he 
hath lost his Master’s presence, such is his nakedness that 


ae = ee 


* Job xii, 5, 


268 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


tm 


every thorn pierces him, and every briar fetches blood 
from him ; yea, his spirit is pierced through and through 
with anxious thoughts which once would have been his 
scorn, How are the mighty fallen; how are the princes 


taken in a net, and the nobles cast in the mire of the» 


street! He who could do all things can now do nothing ; 
and he who could rejoice in deep distress is now mourning 
in the midst of blessings. He is like a chariot without 
wheels or horses, a harp without strings, a river without 
water, and a sail without wind. No songs and music now: 
his harp is hanging upon the willows, It is vain to ask 
of him a song, tor “the chief musician upon his stringed 
instruments” has ceased to lead the choir. Can the 
spouse be happy when she has grieved her bridegroom 
and lost his company ? No; she will go weeping through 
every street of the city, until she can again embrace him ; 
her joy shall cease until again she shall behold his 
countenance. 

It is frequently an effect of divine withdrawal that the 
mind becomes grovelling and eurthly. Covetousness and 
love of riches attain a sad preponderance. The Lord will 
hide himself if we love the world; and, on the other hand, 
his absence, which is intended for other purposes, will 
sometimes, through the infirmity of our nature, increase 
the evil which it is intended to cure. When the Lord 
Jesus is present in the soul, and is beheld by it, ambition, 
covetousness, and worldliness flee apace; for such is his 
apparent glory that earthly objects fade away like the 
stars in noonday ; but when He is gone, they will show 
their false glitter, as the stars, however small, will shine 
at midnight. Find a Christian whose soul cleaveth to the 
dust, and who careth for the things of this life, and you 
have found one who has had but little manifest fellowship 
with Jesus. As sure as ever we undervaue t.. Saviour’s 
company, we shall set too high an estimate upon the things 


- 


— 


‘etches blood 
and through 
ave been his 
e the princes 
mire of the + 
y do nothing ; 
ow mourning 
riot without 
iver without 
1 music now; 
3 vain to ask 
his stringed 
ir. Can the 
r bridegroom 
ping through 
embrace him ; 


1 behold his 


awal that the 
atousness and 
The Lord will 
ve other hand, 
purposes, will 
ture, increase 

en the Lord 
y it, ambition, 
or such is his 
way like the 
ey will show 
all, ‘will shine 
eaveth to the 
s life, and you 
est fellowship 
t.. Saviour’s 
pon the things 


JESUS HIDING HIMSELF. 269 


en Se eres 


of this life, and then bitterness and disappointment are at 
tne door. 

At this juncture, moreover, the great enemy of souls ia 
peculiarly busy ; our extremity is his opportunity, and he 
is not backward in availing himself of it. Now that Zion’s 
Captain has removed his royal presence, the evil one con- 
cludes that he may deal with the soul after the devices of 
his own malicious heart. Agcordingly, with many a roar 
and hideous yell, he seeks to affright the saint; and if this 
suffices not, he lifts his arm ef terror and hurls his fiery 
dart. As lions prowl by night, so doth he seek his prey 
in the darkness. The saint is now more than usually be- 
neath his power; every wound from the envenomed dart 
festers and gangrenes more easily than at other times; 
while to the ear of the troubled one the howlings of Satan 
seem to be a thousand times louder than he had ever heard 
before. Doubts of our calling, our election, and adoption, 
fly into our souls like the flies into Pharaoh’s palace, and 
all the while the grim fiend covers us with a darkness that 
may be felt. Had he attacked us in our hours of com- 
munion, we would soon have made him feel the metal of 
our swords; but our arm is palsied, and our strokes are like 
blows from the hand of a child, rather exciting his laugh- 
ter than his fear. Oh for the days when we put to flight 
the armies of the aliens ! Would to God we could again 
put on strength, and by the arm of the Lord o’erthrow the 
hosts of hell! Like Samson we sigh for the hair in which 
our great strength lieth; and when the shouts of the 
Philistines are in our ears, we cry for the strength which 
once laid our enemies “heaps upon heaps” by thonsands, 
We must again enjoy the iaanifest presence of the Lord, 
or we Shall have hard work to lift up a standard against 
the enemy. 

It is not an unusual circumstance to find sin return 
upon the conscience at this critical season, 


snabientat \ ricer anes a 2 a Pete 


: . 
nae Se ae 
sg cepa a! eh UT OIE L AOC S IE TE PRE TT E 


270 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


*¢ Now the heart, disclos’d, betrays 

All its hid disorders ; 

Enmity to God’s right ways, 
Blasphemies and murders 3; 

Malice, envy, lust, and pride, 
Thoughts obscene and filthy, 

Sores corrupt and putrified, 
No part sound or healthy. 


** All things to prémote our fall, 
Show a mighty fitness ; 
Satan will aecuse withal, 
And the conscience witness ; 
Foes within, and foes without, 
Wrath, and law, and terrors ; 
Rash presumption, timid doubt, 
Coldness, deadness, errors.” * 


When Israel had the sea before them, and the moun- 
tains on either hand, their old masters thought it a fit 
time to pursue them; and now that the believer is in 
great straits, his former sins rise up to afflict him and cause 
him renewed sorrow: then, moreover, our sins become 
more formidable to us than they were at our first repent- 
ance; when we were in Egypt wé saw not the Egyptians 
upon horses and in chariots—they only appeared as our 
taskimasters with their whips; but now we see them clad 
in armour, as mighty ones, full of wrath, bearing the in- 
»icuments of death. The pangs of sin, when the Lord 
forsakes us, are frequently as vehement as at first con-. 
version, and in some cases far more so; for a conviction 
of having grieved a Saviour whose love we have once 
known, and whose faithfulness we have proved, will cause 
grief of afar more poignant character than any other 
order of conviction. Men who have been in a room full 
of light, think the darkness more dense than it is consid- 
ered to be by those who have long walked in it; so par- 


Sr 5 a Sia 


ee 


: * Hart. 


nd the moun- 
ught it a fit 
yeliever is in 
1im and cause 

sins become 
r first repent- 
the Egyptians 
peared as our 
see them clad 
earing the in- 
1en the Lord 


at first con-- 


a conviction 
we have once 
ed, will cause 
an any other 
n a room full 
in it is consid- 
in it; so par- 


JESUS HIDING HIMSELF. 271 


doned men think more of the evil of sin than those who 
never saw the light. 

The deserted soul has little or no liberty in prayer : 
he pursues the habit from a sense of duty, but it yields 
him no delight. Jn prayer the spirit is dull and languid, 
and after it the soul feels no more refreshment than is 
afforded to the weary by a sleep disturbed with dreams 
and broken with terrors. He is unable to enter into the 
spirit of worship ; it is rather an attempt at devotion than 
the attainment of it. As when the bird with broken 
wing strives to mount, and rises a little distance, but 
speedily falls to the ground, where it painfully limps and 
flaps its useless pinion—so does the believer strive to 
pray, but fails to reach the height of his desires, and 
sorowfully gropes his way with anguishing attempts to 
soar on high. A pious man once said,—‘“ Often when in 
prayer I feel as if I held between my palms the fatherly 
heart of God and the bloody hand of the Lord Jesus ; for 
I remind the one of his divine love and inconceivable 
mercies, and I grasp the other by his promise, and strive 
to hold him fast and say, ‘I will not let thee go except 
thou bless me.’”* But when left by the Lord such blessed 
nearness of access is impossible; there is no answer of 
peace, no token for good, no message of love, The ladder 
is there, but no angels are ascending and descending upon 
it; the key of prayer is in the hand, but it turns uselessly 
within the lock. Prayer without the Lord’s presence is 
like a bow without a string, or an arrow without a head. 

The Bible, too, that great granary of the finest wheat, 
becomes a place of emptiness, where hunger looks in vain 
for food: in reading it, the distressed soul will think it 
to be all threatenings and no promises; he will see the 
terrors written in capitals, and the consolations printed in 
a type so small as to be almost illegible. Read the Word 
he must, for it has become as necessary as his food ; but 


hg ge — ee ae et ee —y 


* Gen, xxxii, 26. 


272 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


a ES Ns eS 


enjoy it he cannot, for its savour has departed. As well 
might we try to read in the dark as to get joy from Holy 
Scripture unless Christ shall pour his gracious light upon 
the page. As the richest field yields no har vest without 
rain, so the book of revelation brings forth no comfort 
without the dew of the Spirit. 

Our intercourse with Christian friends, once so en- 
riching, is rendered profitless, or at best its only useful- 
ness is to reveal our poverty by enabling us to compare 
our own condition with that of other saints. We cannot 
rainister unto their edification, nor do we feel that their 
company is affording us its usual enjoyment; and it may 
be we turn away From them, longing to see His face 
whose absence we deplore. This barrenness overspreads 
all the ordinances of the Lord’s house, and renders them 
all unprofitable. When Christ is with the Christian, the 
means of grace are like flowers in the sunshine, smelling 
fragrantly and smiling beauteously ; but without Christ 
they are like flowers by night, their fountains of fragrance 
are sealed by the darkness, The songs of the temple shall 
be howlings in that day, and her solemn feasts as mourn- 
ful as her days of fasting. The sacred supper which, when 
Christ is at the table, is a feast of fat things, without him 
isasan empty vine. The holy convocation without him is 
as the gatherings of the market, and the preaching of his 
Word as the shoutings cf the streets. We hear, but the 
outward ear is the only part affected; we sing, but— 


‘* Hosannahs languish on our tongues, 
And our devotion dies.” 


We even attempt to preach (if this be our calling), but we 
speak in heavy chains, full of grievous bondage. We pant 
for God’s house, and then, after we have entered it, we are 
but the worse. We have thirsted for the well, and hav- 
ing reached it we find it empty. 


a 


. As well 
from Holy 
light upon 
st without 
10 comfort 


nee so en- 
nly useful- 
0 compare 
We cannot 
that their 
and it may 
e His face 
yverspreads 
nders them 
ristian, the 
1e, smelling 
hout Christ 
f fragrance 
emple shall 
; as mourn- 
hich, when 
rithout him 
shout him 1s 
ching of his 
ar, but the 
, but— 


ng), but we 

We pant 
d it, we are 
ll, and hav- 


JESUS HIDING HIMSELF. 


Very probably we shall grow censorious, and blame the 
ministry and the church when the blame lies only with 
ourselves. We shall begin to cavil, censure, criticise, and 
blame. Would to God that any who are now doing so 
would pause and inquire the reason of their unhappy ‘dis- 
position. Hear the reproof administered by one of the 
giants of puritanic times: “ You come ofttimes to Wis- 
dom’s home, and though she prepare you all spiritual 
dainties, yet you can relish nothing but some by-things, 
that lie about the dish rather for ornament than for food. 
And would you know the reason of this? It is because 
Christ is not with your spirits. If Christ were with you, 
you would feed on every dish at Wisdom’s table, on pro- 
mises, yea, and on threatenings too, ‘'To the » hungry soul 
every bitter thing is sweet,’ saith Solomon, All that is 
good and wholesome goes down well where Christ is with 
the spirit.”* Oh, for the Master’s smile to impart a relish 
to his dainties. 

Weakness is the unavoidable result of the Lord’s dis- 
pleasure. “The joy of the Lord is our strength,” and if 
this be wanting we necessarily become faint. “ fis pre- 
sence is life,” and the removal of it shakes us to our very 
foundation, Duty is toilsome labour, unless Christ make 
ita delight. “ Without me ye can do nothing,” said the 
Redeemer ; and truly we have found it so. The boldness 
of lion-like courage, the firmness of rooted decision, the 
contidence of unflinching faith, the zeal of quenchless love, 
the vigour of undying devotion, the sweetness of sancti- 
fied fellowship—all hang for support upon the one pillar 
of the Saviour’s presence, and this removed they fail. 
There are many and precious clusters, but they all grow 
on one bough, and if that be broken they fall with it. 
Though we be flourishing like the green bay-tree, yet the 
sharpness of such a winter will leave us leafless and bare, 
Then | ‘the fig- tree shall not b!ossom, |, heither shall there 


* Tvohieee 


O74 THE SAINT AND HITS SAVIOUR. 


ne 6a EE A SL 


be frui+ in the vine; the labour of the olive shall fail, and 
toe ‘eld shall yield no meat.” “ Instead of sweet smell 
there shall be a stink ; and instead of a girdle a rent, 


‘and instead of well-set hair, baldness ; and instead of a 


stomacher a girdling of sackcloth ; and burning instead of 
beauty.* It is then that we shall cry with Saul, “I am 
sore distressed, for the Philistines make war against me, 
and God is departed from me, and answereth me no more, 
neither by prophets nor by dreams.”{- Good it is for us 
that he is not clean gone for ever, but will turn again lest 
we perish. 

Not to weary ourselves upon this mournful topie, we 


may sum up all the manifest effects of a loss of the mani- 


fest favour of Christ in one sad catalogue—misery of 
spirit, faintness in hope, coldness in worship, slackness in 
duty, dulness in prayer, barrenness in meditation, world- 
liness of mind, strife of conscience, attacks from Satan, 
and weakness in resisting the enemy. Such ruin doth a 
withdrawing of Divine presence work in man. From all 
grieving of thy Spirit, from all offending of the Saviour, 
from all withdrawing of thy visible favour, and loss of 
thy presence, good Lord, deliver us. And if at any time 
we have erred, and have lost the light of thy countenance, 
O Lord, help us still to believe thy grace and trust in the 
merits of thy Son, through whom we acidress thee. Amen, 


* Isa, iii, 24, t 1Sam. xxviii, 15, 


vall fail, an? 
sweet smell 
rdle a rent, 
nstead of a 
@ instead of 
saul, “I am 
against me, 
me no more, 
it is for us 
n again lest 


1 tupie, we 
of the mani- 
—misery of 
slackness in 
tion, world. 
from Satan, 
ruin doth a 
. From all 
he Saviour, 
and loss of 
at any time 
ountenance, 
trust in the 
hee. Amen, 


JESUS HIDING HIMSELF. 275 


— ee 


a ES | A 


TO THE UNCONVERTED READER. 


SINNER, if the consequences of the temporary departure 
of God be so terrible, what must it be to be shut out from 
him for ever? If the passing cloud of his seeming anger 
seattereth such grievous rain upon the beloved sons of 
God, how direful will be the continual shower of God’s 
unchanging wrath which will fall on the head of rebelli- 
ous sinners for ever and ever! Ah,and we need not look 
so far as the future! How pitiable is your condition Now! 
How great is the danger to which you are every day ex- 
posed | How can you eat or drink, or sleep or work, while 
the eternal God is your enemy ? He whose wrath makes 
the devils roar in agony is not a God to be trifled with! 
Beware! his frown is death ; ’tis more—'tis hell. Ifyou 
knew the misery of the saint when his Lord deserts him 
but for a small moment, it would be enough to amaze you. 
Then what must it be to endure it throughout eternity ? 
Sinner, thou art hasting to hell, mind what thou art at! 
Do not damn thyself, there are cheaper ways of playing 
fool than that. Go and array thyself in motley, and be- 
come the aping fool, at whom men laugh, but do not make 
laughter for fiends for ever. Carry coals on thy head, or 
dash thine head against the wall, to prove that thou art 
mad, but do not “kick against the pricks ;” do not com- 
mit suicide upon thine own soul for the mere sake of in- 
dulging thy thoughtlessness. Be wise, lest being often 
reprove ed, having hardened thy neck, thou shouldest be 
suddenly destroyed, and that without remedy. 


Se Sel eye DOT sR AT NON 


XL 
Che Ganses of Appareat Desertion, 


“ Show me wherefore thou contendest wish me.”-—JoB x. 2. 


7T would be a grievous imputation upon the 
“much tried children of God, if we should im- 
agine that their greater tr ials are the results of 
greater sin. We see some cf them stretched 
upon the bed of languishing year after year ; 
others are subject to the severest losses in busi- 
ness, and a third class are weeping the oft repeated 
bereavements of death. Are all these chastise- 
ments for sin; and are we.to attribute the excess of trou- 
ble to an enlarged degree of transgressions? Many of 
the Lord’s people ave free from the extreme bitterness 
of such affliction: what is the cause of the difference ? 
Js it always the resuit of sin? We reply, Certainly 
net. In many casos if is, but in as many more it is 
not. David had « comparatively smooth course until 
after his sin wii Bathsheba, and then he commen- 
ced a baa arc hee of deepest woe; but we do not think 
that the trials of Job were preceded by any great fall ; 
on the contrary, Job was never more holy than just before 
the enemy fei! pon him. Trials have other errands be- 


OB x. 2. 


1 upon the 
should im- 
e results of 
stretched 
ufter year ; 
es in busi- 
ft repeated 
ke chastise- 
bss of trou- 
Many of 
bitterness 
difference ? 
Certainly 
nore it is 
burse until 
commen- 
not think 
ereat fall ; 
just before 
rrands be- 


THE CAUSES OF APPARENT DESERTION. 


sides the mortification of the flesh, and other reasons be- 
yond that of chastisement for sin. 

Since the hidings of God’s countenance stand amou.,; 
the chief of our troubles, the previous remark will app'y 
tothem. These are, without doubt, very frequently a 
monition from Christ of his grief at our iniquities; but, 
at the same time, there are so many exceptions to this 
rule that it would be unsafe, as well as untrue, to consider 
it to be general <A portion of the Lord’s family live 
usually in the shade , they are like those sweet flowers 
which bloom nowhere so well as inthe darkest and thick- 
est glades of the forest. Shall we dare to charge them 
with guilt on this account? If we do so, their ‘extreme 
sensitiveness will lead them to plead ouilty ; they will be 
wounded to the quick, and bv their grief and ingenuous 
confession, they will unwittingly refute our er uel suppo- 
sition. Some of these bedarkened travellers exhibit the 
rarest virtues, and the most precious graces. They are, 
of course, wanting in some great points ; but in others they 
so much excel that we are compelled to admire. The 
white and sickly lily is exceedingly fair, although she has 
not the ruddy health which is the glory of the rose. We 
desire that these sons and daughters of mourning may 
come forth to the light, and rejoice in their Lord : “but if 
they shall stili tarry in the Jand of darkness, be it far 
from us to charge them with greater sin because they 
have less joy. ‘We remember well the lines of the poet— 


* Tn this wild world, the fondest and the best 
Are the most tried, most troubled and distrest.” * 


We will now venture to suggest some of the reasons for 
the Saviour’s withdrawals. 

1. Divine sovereignty is manifested in the communion 
of saints with their Lord, as well as in every other step 


* Orapbe. 


78 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. - 


of the journey to heaven. He who giveth no account of 
his matters, out of his own absolute will and good 
pleasure may extinguish the lamps of comfort and quench 
the fires of joy, and yet give to his creature no reason for 
his conduct; yea, and find no reason in the creature, but 
exercise his kingly rights in the most uncontrolled and 
absolute manner. That all men may see that their best 
pleasures flow from the river of God, and are only to te 
found in him, and only to be obtained through his divine 
grace, he is pleased at certain seasons to dry up the 
springs, Lo close the fountain, and to suspend the flowing 
of the stream; so that even the best of men languish, 
and all the godly of the earth do mourn. Lest the green 
fir-tree should exalt itself by reason of its fruitfulness, as 
if it did garnish itself with beauty, the God of our salva- 
tion allows a withering and a blight to seize upon it that 
it may believe the sacred declaration, “FROM ME IS THY 
FRUIT FOUND.” God’s own glory is sometimes his only 
motive for action, and truly it isa reason so great and 
good that he who mocks at it must be a stranger to God, 
and cannot be truly humbled before him. It may be that 
the sole cause of our sad condition hts in the absolute 
will of god; if so, let us bend our lea {s in silence, and 
let him do what seemeth him good. Unhappy is our lot 
when our best beloved is absent; but he shall do as he 
pleases, and we will sigh for his return ; but we will not 
chide him for his absence; “ What if God will use his ab- 
soluteness and prerogative in this his dealings with his 
child, and proceed therein according to no ruled case or 
precedent? This he may do, and who shall ery, ‘What 
doest thou ?’” * 

We think, however, that this case is but of rare occur- 
rence, and we would, under every withdrawal, exhort the 
believer to look for some other cause, and only resort to 
this explanation when he can truly say, as in God’s sight, 


a a ee ee 


* Goodwin. 


account of 
and good 
and quench 
» reason for 
‘eature, but 
trolled and 
their best 
only to le 
1 his divine 
lry up the 
she flowing 
a languish, 
{ the green 
tfulness, as 
our salva- 
pon it that 
ME IS THY 
$s his only 
great and 
ger to God, 
nay be that 
e absolute 
lence, and 
is our lot 
ll do as he 
e will not 
use his ab- 
8 with his 
ed case or 


ry, ‘ What 


rare occur- 
exhort the 
y resort to 
rod’s sight, 


THE CAUSES OF APPARENT DESERTION. 279 


i 


that with diligent searching he cannot discover another. 
Then let him remember that such trouble shall be richly 
recompensed even in this life, as Job’s poverty was fully 
restored by his double wealth. 

2. Without this the believer could not enter into the 
depths of fellowship with Christ in his sufferings. The 
very worst of the Saviour’s agonies lay in his desertion by 
God ; the ery of “My God, my God, why hast thou for- 
saken me?” was the gall of the bitterness of the miseries 
of Jesus. Now, unless we had to endure a measure of the - 
same excruciating torment of desertion, we could not en- 


‘ter into communion with him to any great degree. At 


the very deepest our fellowship is shallow; but give us 
the continued and invariable light of the Lord’s counte- 
nance, and we should for ever remain little children in 
fellowship. Our Master desires that we may know him 
in his death, and sympathise with him in his sufferings. 
That eminent divine, Richard Sibbs, thus writes: “ Now 
all of us must sip of that cup whereof Christ drank the 
dregs, having a taste of what it is to have God to forsake 
us. For the most part, those believers who live any time 
(especially those of great parts) God deals thus with; 
weaker Christians he is more indulgent unto. At sucha 
time we know the use of a mediator, and how miserable 
our condition were without such an one, both to have 
borne and overcome the wrath of God for us!” * Again, 
the deeply experienced Thomas Goodwin says: “ Though 
no creature was able to drink off Christ’s cup to the bot- 
tom, yet taste they might, and Christ tells them they 
should: ‘Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be bap- 
tized with the baptism that I am baptized with, + that is, 
taste of inward aftliction and desertion, as well as of out- 
ward persecution ; and all to make us conformable to him, 
that we might come to know in part what he endured for 


*Sibbs’s Bowels Opened, + Matt. xx. 23. 


Fs. 


Go SR TTR 


280 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


us.”"* Sweet departure of Jesus, which thus enables us 
to approach the nearer to him ! of all reasons for patience 
none can be more powerful than this. 

3. Thus, in some men, the Lord works a preparation 
for eminent service. By the experience of sharp inward 
trouble, the Lord’s mighty men are prepared for the fight, 
To them the heat by day and the frost by night, the shout- 
ings of the war, the spear and the battle-axe, are li‘!lo 
things, for they have been trained in a sterner school, 
They are like plants which have lived through the severi- 
ties of winter, and can well defy the frosts of spring ; they 
are like ships which have crossed the deep and have wea- 
thered the storm, and are not to be upset by every capful 
of wind. To them the loss of man’s applause is of small 
account, for they have endured the loss of Christ’s smile, 
and have yet trusted him. To them the contumely of a 
world, and the rage of hell, are nothing, for they have 
suffered what is a thousand times worse—they have pass- 
ed under the cloud of Christ’s transient forsaking. They 
are wise, for, like Heman, they have been ‘ ‘afflicted and 
ready to die from their youth up,’ ‘tand therefore, like 
him, they are fit to compare with Solomon in some things, 
and are wiser than he in others.{ They are useful, for 
Paul saith of such men, “ Brethren, if a man be overtaken 
in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in 
the spirit of meekness, considering thyself, lest thou also 
be tempted.” There are no preachers in the world like 
those who have passed by the way of trouble to the gate 
of wisdom. Moses prized Hobab because he knew how to 
encamp in the wilderness,§ and so we value the minister 
who has learned as Hobab did, by living in the desert 
himself. Luther said Temptation was one of his masters 
in divinity. We will readily trust ourselves in the hands 
of a physician who has been himself sick of our disease, 


*Child of Light walking in Darkness. ‘Ps. Ixxxviii. 15. $1 Kings iv, 31, 
§ Num. x. 31. 


enables us 
for patience 


reparation, 
arp inward 
or the fight, 
t, the shout- 
e, are li'l 
rner school, 
1 the severi- 
pring ; they 
Lhave wea- 
very capful 
»is of small 
rist’s smile, 
uumely of a 
they have 
y have pass- 
ing. They 
fHicted and 
trefore, like 
ome things, 
useful, for 
overtaken 

h an one in 
st thou also 
world like 
to the gate 
ew how to 
he minister 
the desert 
is masters 
the hands 
bur disease, 


1 Kings iv, 31, 


THE CAUSES OF APPARENT DESERTION. 281 


— 


and has tried the remedies which he prescribes for us; as 
we confide in the advice of the Christian who knows our 
trials by having felt them. What sweet words in season 
do tried saints address to mourners! they are the real 
sons of consolation, the truly good Samaritans. We who 
have a less rugged path, are apt to overdrive the lambs; 
but these have nourished and brought up children, and 
know how to feel for the weaknesses of the little ones. It 
is often remarked that after soul-sorrow our pastors are 
more gifted with words in season, and theirspeech is more 
full of savour: this is to be accounted for by the sweet 
influence of grief when sanctified by the Holy Spirit. 
Blessed Redeemer, we delight in thy love, and thy pre- 
sence is the life of our joys; but if thy brief withdrawals 
qualify us for glorifying thee in cheering thy saints, we 
thank thee for standing behind the wall; and as we seek 
thee by night, it shall somewhat cheer us that thou art 
blessing us when thou takest away thy richest blessing. 

By sad experience of apparent desertion we are some 
of us enabled to preach to sinners with greater affection 
and concern than we could have exhibited without it. Our 
bowels yearn over dying men, for we know what their 
miseries must be, if they die out of Christ. If our light 
affliction, which is but for a moment, is yet at times the 
cause of great heaviness, what must an eternal weight of 
torment be? These thoughts, begotten by our sorrow, are 
very useful in stirring up our hearts in preaching, for un- 
der such emotions we weep over them, we plead with 
them; and, as though God did beseech them by us, we 
pray them in Christ’s stead to be reconciled to God. For 
a proof thereof, let thé reader turn to the Address to the 
Unconverted appended to this chapter ; it was written by 
one who for many years endured the gloom of desertion. 
May God bless it to sinners ! 

4, The Lord Jesus sometimes hides himself from us be- 
cause by his foresight and prudence he is thus able to pre: 
R 


cm 


ay 
Gy ~~. Oo Ah =y, 4 wo : 
OP qY eS 
PNA <é << 
V9 ‘<< 
VW < 
cz ee | ib 
0) 4d aagaai =i 5 Y 
ti oll] =i) ay EE: 
oh = a BS =f 
2% == «== = ) a. 
=u SRE 
eo 

» 

5? he 
> x 
B20 “Sy & & IX 
a Xx GY hs & 6% gS 


NF TG 


282 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


vent the breaking forth of evil. Perhaps pride would rise 
to an alarming height if the pining sickness of devertion 
did not somewhat abate its violence. If some men had 
all their desires the earth would need enlargement, for 
their pride would become intolerable to their fellows ; and, 
certainly, while corruption still remains in our hearts, con- 
tinual comfort would work somewhat in the same manner 
even in us. Because of the haughtiness, which so easily 
arises in the hearts of the Lord’s people if they have a 
little too much feasting, “the Lord in his care and good- 
ness is fain to hold them to hard meat, and to keep them 
to a spare diet.”* Sometimes, also, high living would 
bring on carelessness of walk. We should forget that we 
walk by faith, and not by sight, if it were not for inter- 
vals of darkness in which sense is put to its wit’s ends, 
and only faith is of use to us. Dependence is generally 
the mother of humility ; as long as we feel the one we 
shall not be quite devoid of the other; therefore our Di- 
vine Lord, according to his own wisdom, gives us a bitter 
lesson in both, by stopping the supplies of joy and with- 
holding his presence. The fact is, that in our present state 
touch that is pleasant to us is not good for us. We are 
not able to endure the weight of glory, for our backs are 
weak, and we stagger under it. It is hard to hold a full 
cup with a steady hand, We are like the fire on the 
hearth, which can be extinguished by too much sunlight, 
as well as by floods of water ; even joy can destroy us as 
well as grief. The master said to his disciples, “I have 
yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them 
now. + The incapacity of the saint may account for the 
comparative fewness of his delights. “As it is with a little 
bark, if it should have a great mainmast and broad sail- 
cloths, then, instead of carrying it, it would be overthrown 
by them; therefore men proportion their mast according 
to their ship or bark ; and if it have skilful mariners, they 


en eee 


* Thomas Hooker, + John xvi, 12. 


2 would rise 
of devertion 
ne men had 
rgement, for 
ellows; and, 
hearts, con- 
ame manner 
ch so easily 
they have a 
‘e and good- 
> keep them 
iving would 
rget that we 
ot for inter- 
s wit’s ends, 
is generally 
the one we 
fore our Di- 
ss us a bitter 
py and with- 
present state 
us. We are 
ur backs are 
o hold a full 
fire on the 
ich sunlight, 
estroy us as 
ples, “ I have 
hot bear them 
ount for the 
s with a little 
id broad sail- 
e overthrown 
ast according 
ariners, they 


a 


THE CAUSFS OF APPARENT DESERTION. 


s' ':e sail when they come into the shallow or narrow 
seas. This is the reason why the Lord so deals with us; 
the soul is like the ship, and the sense of God’s love and 
mercy is like the sail that carries us on in a Christian 
course; and if we get but little sail of mercy and favour, 
we go on sweetly and comfortably; but if God gives us 
abundance and assurance, our cursed rotten hearts would 
overturn, and instead of quickening us it would overthrow 
us; so that, though God doth it, the fault is in ourselves,’* 

If we have been sorely tried and severely exercised, our 


. trials should read us a lesson upon the evil of our nature. 


Let us exclaim with that long afflicted saint, Mr Rogers, 
“We that have tasted so much of his displeasure have 
cause to rejoice with trembling; every remembrance of 
that doleful time must be to us anew motive to obedience, 
and a powerful restraint of sin; he chastens us for our 
profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness. Oh, 
what an abundance of foily must there have been lodged 
in our hearts that God is forced to use so sharp and so 
severe a method to whip it out! How benumbed were 
we, that nothing else could awaken us! How diseased, 
that nothing but a potion so bitter could promote our 
cure! How great was our pride, that he was forced to 
beat it down by so violent a stroke! It must have been 
like the pride of Israel, to whom he saith, He led thee 
through that great and terrible wilderness, wherein were 
fiery serpents, and scorpions, and drought ; where there 
was no water ; that he might humble thee, and prove thee, 
to do thee good in thy latter end.” 

5. Our Lord Jesus designs also to try our faith. He 
will see whether we can trust him or no. When we see 
him by sensible enjoyment there is not that space for faith 
which his absence causes: and, moreover, to believe what 
we feel to be true is no hard matter, but to credit what 
present experience appears to contradict is a divine act 


* Soul's Implantation, by T. Hooker, 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


in an ne ae ee re 


( 


which is most honourable to the grace which enables us 
to do it. Our faith is the centre of the target at which 
God doth shoot when he tries us, and if any other grace 
shall escape untried, certainly faith shall not. There is 
no way of piercing faith to its very marrow like the stick- 
ing of the arrow of desertion in it ; this finds it out whether 
it be of the immortals or no. Strip it of its armour of con- 
scious enjoyment, and suffer the terrors of the Lord to set 
themselves in array against it, and that is faith indeed 
which can escape unhurt from the midst of the attack. 
Faith must be tried, and desertion is the furnace, heated 
seven times, into which it must be thrust. Blest is the 
man who can endure the ordeal. 

6. A temporary withdrawal endears Christ to us upon 
his return, and gives the soul some idea of the infinite 
value of his smile. Constant enjoyment of any good 
thing is too much for our corrupt natures. Israel loathed 
the angel’s food, and sighed for the meaner fare of Egypt 
—the garlic and the onions; but if the manna had been 
stayed, how eagerly would they have clamoured for its 
restoration! When rain falls in its needed season we 
scarcely stay to return thanks for the boon; but if it be 
withheld, how do we bless the drops and thank the God 
of heaven for them. Sunlight is never more grateful than 
after a long watch in the midnight blackness; Christ’s 
presence is never more acceptable than after a time of 
weeping, on account of his departure. It is a sad thing 
that we should need to lose our mercies to teach us to be 
grateful for them; let us mourn over this crookedness of 
our nature; and let us strive to express our thankfulness 
for mercies, so that we may not have to lament their 
removal, Let us deal courteously, tenderly, obediently, 
and affectionately, with our glorious Lord, and it may be 
we shall retain him as a constant guest, 

7. This also whets our appetite for heaven, and makes 
us thirst for the land uf bliss, The world has a fascina- 


bles us 
, which 
r grace 
here is 
e stick- 
vhether 
of con- 
d to set 
indeed 
attack. 
heated 
t is the 


“8 Upon 
infinite 
| ood 
joethed 

Egypt 
ad been 
l for its 
asOn we 
if it be 
he God 
ful than 
Christ’s 
time of 
d thing 
s to be 
dness of 
fulness 
nt their 
diently, 
may be 


1 makes 
fascina- 


THE CAUSES OF APPARENT DESERTION. 285 


ey 


ting power which constrains us to love it, if all be well; 
but by removing the light of his face, our Lord Jesus 
breaks the spell, and delivers us from the overweening 
love of the creature. Weaning is sorrowful work, but it 
must be done: we must be made to groan in this body 
that we may be made ready for the unclothing, and the 
“clothing upon,” by which mortality shall be swallowed 
up of life. In heaven they see his face, and his name is 
in their foreheads ; this incites the saint to pant for glory, 
that he may obtain uninterrupted fellowship with Jesus. 
O how sweet it must be to behold his face without the 
shadow of an intervening cloud; to dwell in his house, 
an go no wore out for ever; to lean upon his bosom, and 
never rise from that delightful posture! In our days of 
song and tabret we are still conscious that there is richer 
music in the upper world ; but in the times of fasting and 
sighing, how do we cry out for the living God, and pant 
to appear before him. “ God’s house is an hospital at one 
end, and a palace at the other. In the hospital end are 
Christ’s 1embers upon earth, conflicting with various dis- 
eases, and confined to strict regimen of his appointing. 
What sort of a patient would he be, who would be sorry 
to be told that the hour is come for the dismission from 
the hospital, and to see the doors thrown wide open for 
his admission into the presence of the King.”* Ila 

are the spirits who have ended their fight of faith, and 
now live in the raptures of a sight of Him; yea, th:ize 
happy are the lowest of those seraphs who fly at his bid- 
ding, and do for ever behold the face of our Father which 
is in heaven. The drought of these dry plains stirreth us 
to desire the river of the water of life; the barren fig-trees 
of this weary land urge us to pursue a speedy path to the 
immortal trees upon the banks of the river of God; our 
clouds exhort us to fly above this lower sky up where 
unclouded ages roll; the very thorns and briers, the dust 


a ee ee e+ ee et ee 


* Adam’s Private Thoughts, 


and ‘eat of this world’s pilgrimage and strife, are powerful 
orators to excite our highest thoughts to the things which 
are unseen and eternal. Thus the bitterness of time bids 
us desire the sweetness of immortality, and even prepares 
us for it. 

In times of distress, when the withdrawal of Christ is 
caused by any of these causes, let the saint stay himself 
upon his God. The light is a pleasant thing, but faith 
can walk without it. It is good to have the Lord’s pres- 
ence,-but let us remember that we are not saved by our 
enjoyments of him, but by his efficacy for us. Weare 
full of sin and in our distress we feel it, but he is full of 
grace and truth; let us believe His all-sufficiency and 
rest in it. His blood, not our peace, his merit, not our . 
comfort, his perfection, not our con:munion,—are, the pil- 
lars of our salvation. We love his company, and the 
manifest sense of it is sweet indeed; but, if it be denied 
us, nevertheless “the foundation of God standeth sure.” 
Jesus, the yea and amen, is the same yesterday, to-day, 
and for ever. Our soul hangs upon him in the thick 
darkness, and glories on him in the storm. The promise, 
like an anchor, holds us fast ; and though the pilot sleeps, 
all must be well. It is not our eye on him which is our 
great protection, but his eye on us; let us be assured that 
although we cannot see him, he can see us, and therefore, 
we are safe. Whatever our frame or feeling, the heart of 
Jesus is full of love—love which was not caused by our 
good behaviour, and is not diminished by our follies— 
love which is as sure in the night of darkness, as in the 
brightness of the day of joy. Therefore are we confi- 
dent and fuli of hope, and we can sing with our favourite 
poet— 


*¢ Away, despair; my gracious Lord doth hear, 
Though winds and waves assault my keel, 
He doth preserve it ; he doth steer, 


2 powerful 
ngs which 

time bids 
1 prepares 


Christ is 
uy himself 
but faith 
ord’s pres- 
ed by our 

We are 
e is full of 
iency and 


it, not our . 


re, the pil- 
; “and the 
be denied 
eth sure.” 
uy, to-day, 
the thick 
€ promise, 
ilot sleeps, 
‘ich is our 
sured that 
therefore, 
e heart of 
ed by our 
r follies— 
| asin the 
we confi- 
favourite 


THE CAUSES OF APPARENT DESERTION. 


Even when the boat seems most to reel. 
Storms are the triumph of his art ; 
Well may he close his eyes, but not his heart.”* 


We never live so well as when we live on the Lord 
Jesus simply as he is, and not upon our enjoyments or 
raptures. Faith is never more likely to increase in 
strength than in times which seem adverse to her. When 
she is lightened of trust in joys, experiences, frames, feel- 
ings, and the like, she rises the nearer heaven, like the 
baloon when the bags of sand are emptied. Trust in tl - 
Redeemer’s strength, thou benighted soul; exercise what 
faith thou hast, and by-and-bye he shall arise upon thee 
with healing beneath his wings. 

The next and last case has been already alluded to in 
the previous chapter. Sin, with its hosts, closes the 
rear. We do not intend to do more than instance the 
special iniquities which more readily than any other will 
cause the Master to be gone. 

8. Gross and foul offences of any kind will drive the 
King from the soul very speedily. Let the believer be- 
mire himself with lust, or put forth his hand unto 
violence, or speak lying or lascivious words—let him 
give great and scandalous cause to the enemy to blas- 
pheme,—and, as surely as he is the Lord’s child, his back 
shall smart for it. If we lie in the bed of Jezebel, we shall 
not have the company of Jesus there. As soon expect 
to see an angel in the sty with swine, as Christ Jesus in 
company with the filthy. Should we be left to commit 
adultery like David, we should have our bones brokep as 
he had; if we swear like Peter, we shall have to weep as 
bitterly as he; and if we flee like Jonah from the service 
of the Lord, we may expect to go into as great depths as 
he did. The sun will shine on the dunghill, but Christ 
will not shine on the backslider while he is s indulging i in his 
lusts. How terrible are the agonies of the mind when 


— 


—— + SO 


* Herbert. 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


eianitieeanalaamae a er 


some surprising sin is visited upon us! In an ancient 
work, as rare as its own merits we find the following :— 
“For he withdraweth his face and favour from us, 
kindleth his anger against us, and counteth us as his 
enemies ;* the horror of his wrath is as fire sent from 
above into our bones, and is as the arrows of the Almighty, 
the venom w:tereof drinketh up our spirit. He setteth 
our iniquities before himself, and our secret sins in the 
light of his countenance f he setteth them also in our 
own sight, and our sin is before us continually ;t with his 
hand he bindeth the yoke of our transgressions, and with 
them being Jaid upon our neck he maketh our strength to 
fail ;§ bitter things doth he write against us, and maketh 
us to inherit the iniquities of our youth,|| so that there is 
nothing found in our flesh because of his anger, neither is 
there rest in our bones because of our sin: our wounds 
stink and are corrupt ;{ our veins are full of burning, our 
heart is as wax ; it melteth in the midst of our bowels ;** 
our bones are parched like an hearth, and our moisture | 
is turned to a summer drought, so heavy is his hand upon 
us night and day.{{ Then cry we out for grief of heart ; 
we roar like bears, and mourn like doves ;§§ looking for 
judgment, but there is none—for salvation, but it is far 
from us ; because our trespasses are many, both before him 
and ourselves, for which his terrors do fight against us, he 
‘visiteth us every morning,|||| and tryeth us every moment; 
setteth us as a mark against him, so that we are a burden 
to ourselves. Also, when we cry and shout, he shutteth 
out our prayer,{{ and is even angry against it,*** because 
our iniquities have separated between us and him, and our 
sins have hid his face from us, and he will not hear ;}-++ so 


*Job xix, 11. + Ps. xc.8 Ps. 1i.3. § Lam.i.14._ || Job xiii, 26 

T Ps. xxxviii. 3, 5, 7. **# Ps, xxii, 14. t+Ps, cii. 3. ttPs. xxxii. 4, 

§$Isa, lix. 11, 12. |Job viis 18, 77 Lam. iii, 8. ***Pg, Ixxx, 4, 
fIsa. lix, 2, 


es 


n ancient 
wing :— 
from us, 
us as his 
ent from 
Almighty, 
fe setteth 
ns in the 
so in our 
with his 
and with 
rength to 
d maketh 
there is 
neither is 
r wounds 
ming, our 
vowels ;** 


moisture | 


and upon 
of heart ; 
oking for 
it is far 
pfore him 
st us, he 
moment ; 
a burden 
shutteth. 
because 
, and our 


TTT so 


ob xiii, 26 
PS. XXXii. 4, 
3. Ixxx, 4, 


THE CAUSES OF APPARENT DESERTION, 289 


— 


Se 


loathsome are our trespasses unto him, so venomous to 
ourselves is the biting of those fierce serpents.” 

Careless living, even if we fall not into open transgres- 
sion, will soon build a wall between our Lord and the 
soul, If daily sins are unconfessed and unrepented of, 
they will daily accumulate until they form “ mountains 
of division” between our adorable Friend and our own 
heart. A little filth acquired every day, if it be left un- 
washed, will make us as black as if we had been plunged 
in the mire ; and as sin upon the conscience turns Christ’s 
joy out of the heart, it will be impossible for us to feel the 
delights of communion until all our everyday sins have 
been washed from the conscience by a fresh application 
of the atoning blood. Let us take ‘ieed that we offer the 
morning and evening lamb, constantly looking to the 
blood of the Great Sacrifice, and seeking a fresh discovery 


of its cleansing power. 


Veglect of prayer is a sad grief to the Holy Spirit, and 
will as suvon cause the Lord to withdraw as open sin. 
How many of us from this cause have dropped the thread 
of communion, and so have lost the clue to happiness. 
Jesus will never reveal himself in any marked manner 
unto us while we neglect the throne of grace. We must 
seclude ourselves if we would see our Beloved. It was a 
sweet saying of Bernard, “O saint, knowest thou not that 
thy husband, Christ, is bashful, and will not be familiar 
in company ; retire thyself by meditation into thy closet, 
or into the fields, and there thou shalt have Christ’s em- 
braces.” Rebekah went to the well, and was met by one 
who gave her jewels of gold, and found her a husvand ; 
let us go to the well of prayer, and we shall meet Jesus, 
but those who tarry at home shall lack. 

Idleness in the ways of grace will also hinder commun- 
ion. If we travel slowly, and loiter on the road, Jesus 
will go on before us, and sin will overtake us. If we are 
dilatory and lazy. in the vineyard, the Master will not 


re a eae 
> 


« 
aa: Sitommecy or 


290 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


i nn ne + ae eens: Ne 


smile on us when he walks through his garden. Be active, 
and expect Christ to be with thee ; be idle and the thorns 
and briars will grow so thickly, that he will be shut out 
of thy door. We should never mend our pace on Heaven's 
road if our comforts did not fly ahead of us, so as to 
allure us to speed, by compelling us to pursue them. 

Unthankfulness will soon strip us of our joys. It is 
said of the sun, that none look at him except he be in an 
eclipse ; and we fear we are all too forgettul of Christ un- 
less he veil his face : therefore to chasten us for our ill 
manners, and incite us to a more loving carriage towards 
him, he will hide himself in darkness if we forget his 
goodness. 

Cowardice will also rob us of the Master’s manifest 
presence. The ancient saints who at any time, in order 
to avoid the stake, were led through weakness to deny 
their profession, were made sorely to rue the day that 
they ever did so weak a deed. And we, if we are asham- 
ed of him in the time of rebuke and reproach must not 
look for any love-feasts with him. Captainscannot smile 
on runaway soldiers, or even on men who quake in the 
moment of conflict. - We must be valorous if we would be 
comforted; we must show ourselves men if wé would have 
Christ show himself our loving friend. When Jonah runs 
from Nineveh he must not reckon upon his Lord’s com- 
pany, except it be to rebuke and smite him. “In our 
English chronicles we read of the rare affection of Eleanor, 
the wife of Edward I., who, when the king had been 
wounded with a poisoned dager, set her mouth to the 
wound to suck out the poison, venturing her own life ta 
preserve her husband. Such is the strength of love in a 
healthy Christian, that were it necessary to suck poison 
out of the wounds of Jesus, he would be content to do 
so.” And this he will do in a spiritual sense, for if he can 
in no other way remove contempt and slander from the 
cause of Christ and his Church, he will rather bear it him- 


Be active, 
i the thorns 
be shut out 
mn Heaven’s 
is, SO as to 
them. 
joys. It is 
he be in an 
Christ un- 
for our ill 
ge towards 
forget his 


’s manifest 
e, in order 
sss to deny 
e day that 
are asham- 
») must not 
annot smile 
ake in the 
e would be 
vould have 
Jonah runs 
ord’s com- 
. “In our 
of Eleanor, 
had been 
buth to the 
wn life ta 

love in a 
uck poison 
htent to do 
or it he can 
r from the 
bear it him- 


THE CAUSES OF APPARENT DESERYION. 291 


self than allow it to fallon his Master. But if this noblo 
spirit shall give place to mean self-sceking, and carnal 
care of our personal interests, the Lord will forsake the 
tabernacle where we dwell, and leave us to mourn the dis- 
pleasure of our slighted friend. 

Harshness to the afflicted way bi'ng us into deep waters. 
If the strong cattle push the weak with their horns, and 
thrust with the shoulder, they must have the fatness of 
their strength removed, and the glory of their horns cut 
off, that they may learn to deal gently with the tender- 
hearted and timid. When we hear a strong professor 
dealing roughly with any of the Lord’s attlicte,d as sure 
as he is an heir of heaven he will in due time have cause 
to eat his words. That isan unhumbled heart which can 
allow hard thoughts concerning the little ones ; but God 
will put that pro:.d spirit into the dark until it can bear 
the infirmities of the weak. Be yentle, ye great in Zion, 
lest ye offend the poor and mean of the congregation. 

Pride casts a thick shadow over the path of any be- 
liever who indulges in it. Men love not the proud—their 
company is a torment, and their very presence an offence ; 
how much more opnoxious must it be to the Son of God ! 
Especially must it be exceeding hateful in those who are 
indebted to grace for the very breath in their nostrils, and. 
who, in themselves are the most detestable of creatures, 
but are made the sons of God through great and unmerit- 
ed mercy. When we become conceited with our choice 
experiences, admirable emotions, and marvellousdiscover- 
ies, and in our imaginary greatness grow unmindful of 
the Giver of these good gifts, he will soon level us with 
the ground, and make us groan out of the dust. The 
smoke of the incense of our pride will blind the eyes to 
Christ, and hide Christ from the saint. 

Idolatrous love, whatever may. be the object of it, 1s so 
abominable, that it will shut out the light of God’s coun- 
tenance in a short space, unless it be destroyed. Rivals 


SA SE ARATE | AB, ta Gf LO Mit att 


on, Se 


inthe 


~ 
«Ad RNA i, matin: some te ie ent iN et AON te a a 


THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


eo + ee 


Jesus will not endure ; and unless we give him the high- 
est throne he will leave us to mourn his absence. Love 
not thy wealth, thy name, thy friends, thy life, thy com- 
fort, thy husband, thy wife, or thy children, more than 
thou lovest him, or even so much ; for he will either take 
them from thee, or else his own delightful presence, and 
the loss of either would be an evil not worth the idolatry 
which will surely engender it. Set not your affection on 
things of earth, lest the comfortable enjoyment of Him 
who is from above should be withdrawn from thee. 

Unbelief, distrust and worldly care, will also provoke 
him to return unto his place. If we cannot trust him 
with ourselves, and all that we have, he will not confide 
his heart with us. <A fit of worldly anxiety has many a 
time cut off the streams of fellowship. Fretful trouble 
about many things is a fearful injury to the one thing. 
All the saints will confess that the fair flower of fellow- 
ship will not bloom in the atmosphere of carking care. 
That great rebel, Infidelity, will sometimes turn the key of 
the gates of Mansoul against the Prince Immanuel him- 
self, and cause him to return to the palace of his Father. 
It is a high affront put upon the Lord Jesus when we 
presume to manage our own business instead of leaving 
all with him, The old puritan said, “ Whenever we carve 
for ourselves we cut our own fingers!” He might have 
added, “ And worse still, we highly affront the Head of 
the feast, and cause him to withdraw from the table.” 
Oh ! for grace to leave all with Christ ; it cannot be in 
better hands, and our own care could never produce 
results which could for an instant be compared with the 
effects of his providential consideration. 

But carnal security is the master sin in this point. 
Hence, Bunyan makes a feast in the house of that deceit- 
ful old Diabolian, Mr. Carnal-Security, the scene ofthe dis- 
covery of the departure of Prince Immanuel. There is in 
carnal security a mixture of all other kinds of sin. It isa 


~ 


the high- 
ice. Love 
thy com- 
more than 
sither take 
sence, and 
1e idolatry 
ffection on 
it of Him 
shee. 
0 provoke 
trust him 
ot confide 
is Many a 
ul trouble 
one thing. 
of fellow- 
king care. 
the key of 
nuel him- 
is Father, 
when we 
pf leaving 
we carve 
ight have 
> Head of 
he table.” 
mot be in 

produce 
with the 


his point, 
at deceit- 
bf the dis- 
here is in 
nh. Itisa 


THE CAUSES OF APPARENT DESERTION, 293 


a ca a ee es ae a ee ee ee ee ee 


monster composed of the deformities of all the foul sins 
which man can commit. It is ingratitude, pride, worldli- 
ness, sloth, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence and 
rebellion in one, It is like those fabled monsters which 
bore a resemblance to every other creature, inasmuch 
as the most terrible parts of every beast were in them 
united into one hideous monstrosity. Now whenever 
self-confidence grows in the heart, and destroys our 
implicit dependence and our unfeigned humility, it will 
not be long before Christ and the soul will be far apart-— 

It only remains to add that as we are differently con- 
stituted, certain sins will have greater power over one 
than another, and hence one sin may drive the Saviour 
from one believer, and an opposite sin may grieve him in 
another ; indeed, any one sin, if harboured against light 
and knowledge, is quite sufticient to cast the mind into 
the doleful condition ofa deserted soul. Constant watch- 
fulness is necessary in order to the preservation of com- 
munion ; but of this we will say more in another place. 
so far as any comfortable communion is concerned. 

It wi!l be hard work to sustain faith when sin is arriv- 
ed at such a dangerous height ; but in order that the be- 
liever may be able to do so, by the divine power of the 
Holy Spirit, let him reflect that his present mournful con- 
dition is no sign that he is cast away—nay, let him be- 
lieve it to be the very reverse. If the Lord Jesus had 
not looked upon him, he would never have known how 
evil a thing it is to lose a sense of his love. Blind men 
do not miss the light when it is removed by the setting 
of the sun ; and if the afflicted soul were wholly blind, he 
would not lament the hiding of the Son of righteousness. 
But if thisis too high a comfort, let him remember that 
there is still a fountain opened for sin and foruncleanness ; 
and while he sorrows for his absent Lord let him not 
despair, but let him still look to the cross, and hope. 
Let the deserted one confess his ill-deservings, but let him 


294 THE SAINT AND HTS SAVIOUR. 


—— —— - 


remember that his sin is laid uvon the head of Jesus, 
Punishment for sin is not in any de¢yee mixed up with 
the withdrawal which he is now experiencing. ‘he be- 
liever Owes nothing to punitive justice, and therefore 
nothing can be exacted of him. “ ‘Though the suffe:ings 
of Christ do not secure us from sufferings, they change 
the nature and design of our afflictions, so that, instead of 
their being punishments, they are corrections, and are in- 
flicted not oy the sword of the Judge, but by the rod of 
the Father.’* Let the believer hear the voice of comfort : 
—“Thou hast not a farthing of debt to pay to God’s law ; 
there is no indictment against thee, nor a bill for thee to 
answer—Christ has paid all.”*-- Christ’s departure is not 
for thy.death, but to promote thy better life. He is not 
gone to demand a writ against thee, he is but absent to 
make thee purge out the old leaven, that he may come 
and keep the feast with thee. 

Remember also that a change in the outward dealings 
of the Lord Jesus is not to be looked upon as an altera- 
tion in his love. He has as much affection for us when 
he puts us in the prison-house of desertion as when he 
leads us into the pavilion of communion. Immutability 
will not allow of the shadow of a turning ; and as immuta- 
bility is stamped as much upon the affection of Christ as 
upon his divinity itself, it follows that our variable con- 
dition produces no change in him. 

‘‘ Immutable his will ; 
Though dark may be my frame, 
His loving heart is still 
Unchangeably the same. 
My soul through many changes goes ; 
His love no variation knows,” 


That holy martyr, Master John Bradford, thus comfort- 
ed himself and his friends in a time of gloom—* The 
mother sometimes beateth the child, but,yet her heart 


" Jay’s Christian Contemplated. + Colling’s Cordial for a Dying Soul. 


Be 


ead of Jesus, 
ixed up with 
ing. The be- 
und therefore 
the sufferings 
they change 
hat, instead of 
1s, and are in- 
by the rod of 
ce of comfort : 
to God’s law ; 
ill for thee to 
oarture is not 
». He is not 
but absent to 
1€ may come 


vard dealings 
as an altera- 
for us when 
nh as when he 
mmutability 
d as immuta- 
nb of Christ as 
ariable con- 


me, 
hs) ; 


hus comfort- 
oom— The 
t her heart 


ya Dying Soul, 


THE CAUSES OF APPARENT DESERTION. 295 


melteth upon it even in the very beating ; and therefore 
she casteth the rod into the fire, and calleth the child, 
giveth it an apple, and dandleth it most motherly. And 
to say the truth, the love of mothers to their children is but 
a trace to train us up to behold the love of God towards us ; 
and therefore saith he, ‘Can a mother forget the child of 
her womb ?’ as much as to say, ‘ No, but if she should do 
so, yet will I not forget thee, saith the Lord of Hosts.’ 
Ah, comfortable saying !—I will not forget thee.” 

Wait awhile, and the light which is sown for the right- 
eous shall bring forth a harvest of delights; but water the 
ground with the tears of thy repentance, lest the seed 
should long tarry under the clods. As sure as thou art a 
quickened soul thou wilt, in the dreary winter of thy 
Lord’s absence, pant for renewed communion, and be thou 
sure to use all means to obtain this boon. Do as thou 
didst when thou didst first come to Christ. Read and 
practise the directions given to the secking sinner in the 
third chapter,* for they are well-adapted to thine own 
case, and then take the advice which follows :— 

1, Hunt out and slay the sin which has caused the 
coolness of fellowship between thee and thy Lord. 

2. Most humbly confess this sin, and ask grace to avoid 
it in future. 

3. Come again as a poor guilty sinner to the cross of 
Christ, and put thy trust implicitly in him who died 
upon it. 

4. Use thy closet and thy Bible more frequently, and 
with more earnestness. 

5. Be active in serving Christ, and patient in waiting 
for him, and ere long he will appear to cheer thy spirit 
with floods of his surpassing love. _ If all these fail thee, 
tarry the leisure of thy Master, and thy work shall cer- 
tainly be rewarded in due time. 


See p. 150, 


296 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


Oe re ee ee § re ee me 


May God the Holy Spirit, by his divine influence, be- 
dew with grace the pages of this chapter, that they may 
minister grace to the afflicted reader. 


anew cor +a B® Co 


THE CAUSES OF APPARENT DESERTION. 297 


TO THE UNCONVERTED READER. 


SINNER, we beseech thee listen to the warnings of one* 
who was for a long time sad and sick on account of the 
hidings of his Lord’s face. He was a true and eminent 
saint, yet mark his sorrows, and let them awaken thee to 
fear the wrath to come : : 

“Qh, sinners! Ihave dearly paid for all the delight I 
once had in sin,—for all my indifference and lukewarm- 
ness, my cold and sluggish prayers, my lost and misim- 
elt time. Beware that you do not provoke him, for 

e is a jealous God ; for if you do, you shall also find that 


- those sins which you make a slight matter of will tear 


you to pieces hereafter. You will find them, when your 
consciences are awakened, to be a heavy and intolerable 
burden; they will press you down to hell itself. I could 
not have thought that the displeasure of God had been a 
thing so bitter, and so very dreadfu!. J¢ is a pk gs 
thing to fall into the hands of the lixwng God, for he is a 
oonsuming fire: if his anger be kindled but a little; you 
cannot then fix your mind upon any pleasant objects, nor 
have one easy thought; you cannot then go about your 
business, your trade, or your secular affairs, for your souls 
will be so much amazed that you will be full of horror 
and consternation, Those of us who have felt the ter- 
rors of tke Lord, do most earnestly persuade you to for- 
sake every sin; for if you indulge in and love your in- 
iquities, they will set you on fire round about. Oh, that 
you did but know what you do when yousin! You are 


<——— nw iiXiIiXlM  RRT—————II—I 


* Rev. Timothy Rogers, M. A. 


298 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


opposing that authority that will avenge itself of all its 
obstinate opposers ; you are heaping up fuel for your own 
destruction ; you are whetting that sword which will en- 


- ter into your bowels; you are preparing yourself for bit- 


’ 


terness and trouble; and though God is patient for 
awhile, yet he will not always be so: the shadows cf the 
night are drawing on, and the doleful time will come 
when all your mirth will end in tears, and all your false 
confidence and your foolish hopes will expire and give up 
the ghost. And which of you will live when God shall 
enter into judgment with you ? What will youdo? Where 
will you go for help when he who is your Maker,—he 
who haz weighed your actions, and observed ycur wan- 
derings, shall call you to give an account of allthese things? 
If our blessed Lord, when he came near Jerusalem, lifted 
up his voice an wept, saying, Oh, that thou hadst known, 
even thou in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy 
peace! what cause have we to mourn over our fellow- 
creatures, whom we see to be in danger of misery, and, 
alas, they know it not! Can we see them sleeping on the 
very edge of ruin, and net be greatly troubled for them! 
Oh, poor sinners, you are now sleeping, but the judge is 
at the door; you are rolling the pleasant morsel under 
your tongue, but it will be great vexation to you in the 
end. How can you 1est? how can you be quiet when 
you have none of your sins pardoned? No comfortable 
relation to God ! no well-grounded hope of heaven! How 
can you, with any assurance, go about those things that 
concern your buying, your selling, and the present life, 
when your poor souls, that are of a thousand times more 
value, are neglected all the while! We have felt great 
terrors, inexpressible sorrows, from an angry God, and 
we would fain persuade you not to run upon the thick 
bosses of his buckler, not to dare his justice, not to despise 
his threats as once it was our folly: but we knew not 
wha’ we did. Weare come out of great tribulation, and 


le ee | Cl Se en ee ne ee ree 


f of all its 
yr your own 
ich will en- 
self for bit- 
patient for 
dows cf the 
_ will come 
1 your false 
and give up 
1 God shall 
do? Where 
Maker,—he 
1 ycur wan- 
hese things? 
salem, lifted 
ndst known, 
ng unto thy 
our fellow- 
misery, and, 
eping on the 
d for them! 
he judge is 
orsel under 
you in the 
quiet when 
omfortable 
wven! How 
things that 
present life, 
times more 
e felt great 
God, and 

n the thick 
bt to despise 
b> knew not 
lation, and 


THE CAUSES OF APPARENT DESERTION, 


a fiery furnace, and we would fain persuade you to avoid 
the like danger ; let what we have felt be a caution to 
you. It was the desire of Dives, in his misery, that he 
might leave it to go thence to warn his brethren lest they 
came to the same place of torment; but it could not be 
granted. Some of us here come from the very gates of 
hell to warn you that you may not go thither,—nay, to 
warn you that you may never go so near it as we did. 
We wish you so well that we would not have any of you 
to feel so much sorrow and grief as we have felt. We 
were once asleep, as you are; we did not imagine that 
terror and desolation were so near when they came upon 
us ; and now, having been overtaken by a storm of wrath, 
we come to warn you that we see the clouds gather, that 
there is a sound of much rain and of great misery, though 
your eyes are so fixed on things below, that you see it 
not, You must speedily arise and seek for a shelter, as 
you value the salvation of your souls ; you must not put 
off serious thoughts for your own safety, not for one day, 
not for one hour longer, lest it be too late. We were 
travelling with as little thought of danger as some of you, 
and we fell among thieves ; they plundered us of our peace 
and comfort, and we were even ready to die, when that 
God, whose just displeasure brought us low, was pleased 
to take pity on us, and to send his Son, as the kind 
Samaritan, to bind up our wounds and to cheer our hearts ; 
and we cannot be so uncharitable as not to tell you, when 
we see you going the same way, that there are robbers on 
the road, and that if you do not either return or change 
your course you will smart for your temerity as much as 
we have done. We have been saved indeed at length from 
our fears, as by fire ; but we suffered, while they remained, 
very great loss. Some, perhaps, will be saying within 
themselves, ‘I shall see no evil, though I walk im the 
imaginations of my own heart. These things you talk of 
are the mere product of a melancholy temper, that always 


300 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


_—<--——— 


presages the worst,—that is always frighting itself and 
others with black and fornvidable ideas, and seeing I am 
no way inclinable to that distemper, I need not fear any 
such perplexing thoughts. But know that no briskness 
of temper, no sanguine courageous hopes, no jollities nor 
diversions, can fence you from the wrath of God. Ifyou 
go on in sin, you must feel the bitterness of it either in 
this or the next wcrld; and that may, notwithstanding 
all the strength of your constitution, all the pleasures of 
your unfearing youth, come upon a sudden. Your souls 
are always naked and open before God, and he can make 
terrible impressions of wrath there when he will, though 
by your cheerfulness and mirth you seem to be at the 
greatest distance from it.” 


‘¢ Ye bold, blaspheming souls, 
Whose conscience nothing scares 3 

Ye carnal cold, professing fools, 
Whose state’s as bad as theirs, 


‘* Repent, or you’re undone, 
And pray to God with speed ; 
Perhaps the truth may yet be known, 
And make you free indeed. 


‘The hour of death draws nigh, 

’Tis time to drop the mask ; 
Fall at the feet of Christ, and cry ; 
He gives to all that ask.” 


— ow. we ee ee a. || ee ee. ae ee 


itself and 
ng Tam 
| fear any 
briskness 
llities nor 
1. Ifyou 
t either in 
hstanding 
easures of 
Your souls 
can make 
ill, though 
be at the 


Communion Reserved, 


** But they constrained him, saying, Abide with us, for it is toward even- 
ing, and the day is far spent.”—LuKE xxiv., 29, 


or 


A. = HESE disciples knew not their Lord, but they 
Woner\ loved the unknown stranger who spake so 
i 4 » \ sweetly of him. Blessed are the men who 
NC fi discourse of Jesus; they shall ever find a wel- 
Weeay come in the hearts and homes of the elect. 
“= His name to our hearts is ever melodious, and we 

love that conversation which is fullest of it. We 
would willingly afford the chamber on the wall, the table, 
the stool, and the candlestick, to all those who will talk 
continually of Him. But, alas! there are too many who 
would blush to answer our Saviour’s question, “ What 
manner of communications are these that ye have one to 
another? ”* Too great a number of professors forget the 
words of the prophet, “Then they that feared the Lcrd 
spake often to one another: and the Lord hearkened and 
heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before 
him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon 
his name. And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of 
Hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I 


* Luke xxiv. 17. 


302 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


will spare them as a man spareth his own son that .ser- 
veth him.” * We will not be censorivus, but we believe 
with an old author, that “the metal of the bell is known 
by the sound of the clapper; what is in the well will be 
found in the bucket; what is in the warehouse will be 
shown in the shop: and what is in the heart will be bub. 
bling forth at the mouth.” 

We often miss our Lord’s company Decause our conver- 
sation does not please him. When our Beloved goes down 
into his garden it is to feed there and gather lilies ; t but if 
thorns and nettles are the only products of the soil, he 
will soon be away to the true beds of spices. When two 
walk together, and are agreed in solemn discourse con- 
cerning heavenly things, Jesus will soon make a third. 
So here, on this journey to Emmaus, the Saviour, though 
they “knew him not, because their eyes were hidden,” 
did so wondrously converse with them, that their “ hearts 
burned within them.” He who would stay a man in the 
street would naturally call out his name; and he who 
would bring Jesus into his soul must frequently pro- 
nounce his charming name. 

The Lord having graciously conversed with these fa 
voured travellers, essays to leave them, and continue his 
journey, but they constrain him to remain, and at their 
earnest suit he does so. From this pleasing little inci- 
dent let us glean one or two lessons. 


I. When we have the Saviou’s company for a little 
while we shall not be content until we have more of it. 
These holy men were not content to let him go, but would 
have him tarry with them all night. There are certain 
liquors which men drink that are said to increase thirst : 
it is most true of this rich “ wine on the lees,” that the 
more we drink of it the more we desire. Nor will the 
draught be forbidden us, or prove in any way injurious, 


—s ——y oe 


* Mal. iii. 16 and 17. + Cant. vi. 2. 


1 that .ser- 
we believe 
lis known 
ell will be 
se will be 
‘ill be bub. 


ur conver- 
goes down 
es;t but if 
he soil, he 
When two 
ourse con- 
e a third. 
ur, though 
> hidden,” 
ir ‘“‘ hearts 
man in the 
d he who 
ntly pro- 


these fa 
ntinue his 
at their 
ttle inci- 


ra little 
bre of it. 
t would 
PB certain 
ce thirst : 
that the 
will the 
njurious, 


COMMUNION RESERVED, 303 


Oe ee 


for the spouse bids us “drink, yea, drink abundantly.” 
The soul which has enjoyed communion will never agree 
that it has dwelt long enough on the mount: it will 
far rather build a tabernacle for itself and its Master. 
Never is a Christian tired of his Redeemer’s society, but, 
like Abraham, he cries, “ My Lord, if now I have found 
favour in thy sight, pass not away I pray thee, from thy 
servant,” Any plea will be urged to persuade our Lord. 
to remain. Is it evening? we will plead that the day is 
far spent, and we shall need him to cheer our midnight 
hours. Is it morning? we will! tell him that we fear to 
begin the day without a long visit from him. Is it noon ? we 
will urge then that the sun is hot, and we shall faint un- 
less he allows us to sit beneath his shadow. We will al- 
ways find some reason for his remaining, for love’s logic 
is inexhaustible. If he would become our constant guest 
we should never weary of his company. A thousand 
years would seem but as one dayif all the time we might 
lay our head upon his bosom ; yea, eternity itself shall need 
no other source of joy since this perennial stream is ever 
running. When our wondering eyes have admired the 


_beauties of our Saviour for millions of years we shall be 


quite as willing to continue the meditation, supremely 
blest with that heaven -which our eyes shall drink in 
from his wounded hands and side. The marrow of 
heaven is Jesus; and as we shall never be surfeited 
with bliss, so we shall never have too much of Jesus. 
Fresh glories are discovered in him every hour; his person, 
work, offices, character, affection, and relationships, are 
each of them clusters of stars which the eye of contem- 
plation will view with utterable astonishment as they are 
in their order revealed to the mind. ‘The saint who has 
longest tenanted the mansions of glory will confess that 
the presence of the Saviour has not ceased to be his bliss, 
nor has the freshness of the pleasure been in the least 
diminished. Christ is a flower, but he fadeth not; he is 


304 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


a river, but he is never dry ; he is a sun, but he knoweth 
no eclipse ; he is all in all, but he is something more than 
all. He that longs not for Christ hath not seen him, and 
by just so much as a man has tasted of the sweetness of 
Jesus will he be hungry eae” ..irsty after more of him. 
Men who are content witi. « manifestation once in a 
month will soon become so dull that once a year will suit 
them ; but he who has a visit from the Saviour very fre- 
quently will be panting for fresh views of him every day 
—yea, and every hour of the day. He will never lack 
appetite for spiritual things who lives much on them. 
The poor professor may be content with a few of Christ’s 
pence now and then, but he who is rich in grace thinks 
so small an income beneath his station, and cannot live 
unless he has golden gifts from the hand of his Lord; he 
will covet earnestly this best of gifts, and be a very miser 
after the precious things of the cross, John Owen, the 
most sober of theologians, falls into a perfect ecstasy when 
touching on this subject. In expounding Cant. viii. 6, 7, 
he gives us the following glowing passage: “ The intend- 
ment of what is so loftily set out by so many metaphors 
in these verses is, ‘I am not able to hear the workings of 
my love to thee, unless I may always have society and 
fellowship with thee. There is no satisfying of my love 
without it. It is as the grave, that still says, Give! give! 
Death is not satisfied withoutits prey. Ifit hath not all 
it hath nothing.” Let what will happen, if death hath 
not its whole desire it hath nothing at all. Nor can it be 
withstood in its appointed season ; no ransom will be taken, 
So is my love; if I have thee not wholly I have nothing. 
Nor can all the world bribe it to a diversion; it will be 
no more turned aside than death in its time. Alas! I am 
not able to bear my jealous thoughts; I fear thou dost 
not love me—that thou hast forsaken me, because I know 
I deserve not to be beloved. These thoughts are hard as 
hell ; they give no rest to my soul. If I find not myself 


noweth 
re than 
‘im, and 
tness of 
of him. 
ce in a 
vill suit 
ery fre- 
ery dlay 
er lack 
1 them. 
Christ’s 
thinks 
10t live 
rd; he 
y miser 
an, the 
when 
li. 6, 7, 
ntend- 
aphors 
ngs of 
y and 
love 
give ! 
hot all 
hath 
nh it be 
aken, 
hing, 


COMMUNION RESERVED. 


ee ee eS ee eee 


on thy keart and arm, I am as one that lies down in a 
bed of couls.” ‘The avsence of the Saviour deprives the 
believer of more than joy or light; it seems to destroy 
his very life, and sap the foundations of his being. Let 
us seek then to hold the king in his galleries, 


II. We remark in the next place, that if we would keep 
the Saviour with us we must constrain him. Jesus will 
not tarry if he is not pressed to do so. Not that he is 
ever weary of his people, but because he wovld have them 
show their sense of his value. In the case before us; it is 
said, “he made as if he would go further.” This he 
did to try their affection. ‘“ Not,” says Ness, “that he 
had any purpose to depart from them, but to prove 
them how they prized him, and accounted of his com- 
pany. Therefore this ought not to be misimproved 
to countenance any kind of sinful dissimulation. If 
Solomon might make as though he would do an act that 
in its own nature was unlawful (to slay an innocent 
child),* sure I am our Saviour might do that which is but 
indifferent in itself (whether to go orstay) without being 
charged with the sin of dissembling. But when Christ 
makes to be gone, the two disciples would not let him go, 
but one (as it were) gets hold on one arm and the other 
on the other; there they hang till they constrain him to 
continue with them.” These were wise men, and were, 
therefore, loath to part from a fellow traveller from whom 
they could learn so much. If we are ever privileged to 
receive Jesus under our roof, let us make haste to secure 
the door that he may not soon be gone. If he sees us 
tareless concerning him, and cold towards him, he will 
soon arise and go hence. He will not intrude himself 
where he is not wanted; he needs no lodging, for the 
heaven of heavens is his perpetual palace, and there be 


* 1 Kings iii, 24. 


cant yA A A SAS SEATS a en 


anes 


ae eeeeenenyrenesoneseunes tees 


wpe in enn 
Samumapaspemacens Nnsoneiseboesarssisnranaasvatere rare: 
7 


‘= 


306 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


many hearts of the contrite where he will find a hearty 
welcome. 

When we have the honour of a visit from Prince Imma- 
nuel let everything be done to protract it. Angels’ visits 
are few and far between : when we have the happiness of 
meeting therewith, let us, like Jacob, manfully grasp the 
angel, and detain him, at least until he leaves a blessing. 
Up, Christian, with a holy bravery, and lay hold on the 
mercy while it is within reach! The Son of Man loves 
those who hold him tightly. He will not resent the fami- 
liarity, but will approve of thine earnestness. Let the 
loving bride of the Canticles teach thee by her example, 
for she glories in her deed when she sings, “I found him 
whom my soul loveth, I held him, and I would not let 
him go.” True, ’tis amazing grace which can allow such 
a liberty with the person of so exalted a being; but see- 
ing that he invites us to lay hold on his strength, and has 
sanctioned the act in others, shall we, like Ahaz, when he 
declined to ask a sign, refuse the favour which our Lord 
allows? .<o— , 


‘6 We will maintain our hold ; 
Tis his goodness makes us bold.” 


How can we then prolong our communion with the 
Saviour? Let us reply to the question by sundry direc- 
tions, which, by the aid of the Spirit, we will labour to 
follow. 

1, Allow no rivals to intrude. Jesus will never tarry 
in a divided heart. He must be all or nothing. Search 
then thy heart; dethrone its idols: eject all interlopers ; 
chastise all trespassers; yea, slay the Diabolians who 
lurk in thy soul. If we would enjoy uninterrupted fellow- 
ship with the Son of God we must institute a rigid inqui- 
sition against all kinds of sin. A little evil will at times 
mar our peace, just as a small stone in the shoe will spoil 


hearty 


Imma- 
s’ visits 
iness of 
asp the 
essing. 
on the 
in loves 
ie fami- 
Let the 
xample, 
nd him 
not let 
yw such 
jut see- 
and has 
vhen he 
r Lord 


ith the 
y direc- 
bour to 


s tarry 
Search 
lopers ; 
is who 
fellow- 
inqui- 
times 


Il spoil 


scsi ces; "Ua a. cans in 


COMMUNION RESERVED. 307 


our walking. Tender are the shvots of this vine of com- 
munion, and littie foxes will do no little injury. “The 
Lord thy God is a jealous God,” and Jesus thy husband is 
jealous also. Sorely did he smite Jerusalem, because she 
sought affinity with other gods, and chose to herself many 
lovers. Keep then thy house and heart open to him, 
and shut to all others. With sin he cannot dwell. 
Canst thou expect the “angel of the covenant” to dwell 
with the prince of darkness? Can there be concord with 
Christ and Belial? Awake then, and cry “ Away ye pro- 
fane,” my heart is the temple of Jesus, and ye must not 
defile its hallowed places. If they retire not, get to thy- 
self the scourge of repentance and self-mortification, and 
if it be laid on lustily they will not long avoid the blows. 

It behoves us to remember, also, that there are other 
things besides sins which may become offensive to the 
Saviour. The nearest friend, the partner of our bosom, or 
the offspring of our loins, may excite the Lord’s jealousy. 
If these become the objects of an affection which ought to 
be wholly his, he will be moved to anger with us. The 
calf was no less an idol because it was made of gold. The 
brazen serpent, despite its original service, must be 
broken when men worship it. All things are alike cause of 
jealousy to Jesus if they are exalted to his throne, since 
no creature can in the least possess anything deserving of 
worship. The very mention of a rival’s name will suffice 
to drive our blessed Lord away, He will have the name 
of Baali taken utterly out of our mouth; and he alone 
must be our Ishi. 

Oh ! true believer, is there no strange god with thee? 
Make a thorough search. Bid even thy beloved Rachel 
rise, for the teraph is often concealed beneath the place 
where she sitteth. Say not in haste, I am no idolater, 
The approaches of this sin are insidious in the extreme, 
and ere thou knowest it thou art entangled in its iron net, 
The love of the creature has a bewitching power over 


308 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


men, and they seldom know the treachery of the Delilah 
until their locks are shorn. Oh, daughters of Zion, let 
King Solomon alone have your love ; rehearse his name in 
your songs, and write his achievements on your memo- 
ries ; so will he dwell in the city of David and ride through 
your midst in his chariot paved with love for yow: but if 
ye pay homage to any save himself, he will return unto 
is place and make your beauteous city a byword with 
the enemy. Have no fellowship with strangers, if ye de- 
sire manifestations of love from the adorable Jesus. “ Let 
none be your love and choice, and the flower of your de- 
lights, but your Lord Jesus. Set not your heart upon 
the world, since God hath not made it your portion; for 
it will not fall to you to get two portions, and to rejoice 
twice, and to be happy twice, and to have an upper hea- 
ven and an under heaven too. Most of us have a lover 
and idol besides our husband, Christ, but it *- our folly te 
divide our narrow and little love; it will not serve fox 
two. It is best then to hold it whole and together, and 
to give it to Christ ; for then we get double interest for 
our love, when we lend it to, and lay it out upon, Christ; 
and we are sure, besides, that the stock cannot perish.” 
Let us muse on the words of the writer of The Syna- 
gogue— 


“* Peace, rebel thought, dost thou not know the king, 

My God is here ? 

Cannot his presence, if no other thing, 
Make thee forbear ? 

Or were he absent, all the standers by 
Are but his spies ; 

And well he knows, if thou shouldst it deny, 
Thy words were lies. 

If others will not, yet I must, and will, 
Myself complain. 

My God, even now a base, rebellious thought 
Began to move, 

And subtly twining with me wouid have wrought 
Me from my love ; 


Si a cn lcs lle 


Tb nin tl inet nil 


8 tee ep AA I ON 


COMMUNION RESERVED. 309 


CD 6 eT SS 


Fain he would have me to believe that Sin 
And thou might both 

Take up my heart together for your inn, 
And neither loathe 

The other’s company , a while sit st. 1, 
And part again.” 


2. Give the Saviour a. goodly entertainment, tit for so 
great a prince, and thus he may be persuaded to make a 
longer stay. His rank, his honour, and his benevolence 
entitle him to the most respectful treatment. Shall the 
Son of God be entertained in any but the best room of 
the house? Shall we offer on his altar any save the fat- 
test of the flock and the herd? Shall we spare ourselves 
when he is our guest? Shall gentlemen spend all their 
estates that they may sumptuously feast an earthly mon- 
arch ? and shall we penuriously count the cost of our love 
to him? Beloved, we shall have but brief glimpses of 
Jesus if he does not perceive our souls affected by it. A 
slight from his friends grieves his spirit, and he withdraws 
himself. We ought to count it a cheap bargain if we 
could give cur all to win the constant indwelling of Jesus, 
Princes have melted pearls into the wine wherewith they 
entertained monarchs, let us do the same. Let us make 
rich offerings to Jesus; let our duties be more faithfully 
discharged, our labours more willingly performed, and let 
our zeal be more eminently fervent. If the altar cease 
to smoke with incense, the heart will be made empty and 
void by the departure of its Lord. Self-sacrifice is sweet 
to our Redeemer, he loves to see his dearly-purchased 
people confessing that they are not theirown. Oh, breth- 
ren in the Gospel, do more if ye would receive more; give 
more largely and ye shall be cheered more abundantly. 
The self-denying missionary, the laborious pastor, the ear- 
nest evangelist, and the indefatigable church member, are 

enerally the persons invited to the royal banquets of 
esus, He delights to honour the men who wait at his 


i 
i 
/ 
i 
i 
| 


310 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


gates with diligence, and watch for his coming with vigi- 
lance. Faithful service shall never be unrewarded by the 
master’s notice, and continuance in well-doing shall re- 
ceive as its recompence a perpetuity of approbation. Hold 
thou the Saviour, oh believer! by hands ready for service 
and happy to obey. 

3. Trust the Lord much while he is with you. Keep 
no secrets from him. His secrets are with you ; let your 
secrets be with him. Jesus admires confidence, and if it 
be not afforded him, he will say, “ Farewell,” until we can 
trust him better. So long as we put our lips to the ear 
of Christ, and tell him all, he will never let us be alone.. 
When we reveal every whit, and hide nothing from him, 
he is pleased with us; but when we conceal our designs, our 
troubles, or our fears, he frowns at our want of confidence, 
If thou desirest Christ for a perpetual guest give him all the 
keys of thine heart ; let not one cabinet be locked from up 
him; give him the range of every room,and the key of every 
chamber; thus you will constrain him to remain. True faith 
holds the feet of Jesus and prevents his departure: when he 
rises to continue his journey, she cries, “ Not so, my Lord 
hear onemore word, listen to the wants of thy servant, let at 
least another of my griefs find a tomb in thy loving heart. 
Listen to me this once, for I have somewhat to say unto 
thee which so deeply concerns me, that if thou dost not 
regard me, I know not whither to resort.” Thus she will 
hold her confident by one continued series of confessions, 
We doubt not that our loving Lord frequently hides his face 
from us because we rely not enough upon him. It would 
be the part of wisdom to transfer our cares to him who car- 
eth for us; thus should we imitate David, who urges us to 
“ pour out our hearts before him.” Make Christ manager 
of thine affairs, and so please him. An old writer some- 
where says, “ He who runs before the cloud of divine di- — 
rection goeth a fool’s errand:” let us then desist from 
self-serving, and give ourselves up like children to the 


COMMUNION RESERVED. 311 


loving care of a tender parent, to be led, guided, directed, 
and supplied by our great Covenant Head; so will he al- 
ways have business to do at our house, and will make our 
soul his settled rest. | 

4, Another method of retaining the company of our 
Beloved, is to bring in others of his friends to sit with us. 
It may be if he cometh not to us alone, he will come with 
them, and if perchance some ill word of ours might urge 
him to depart, yet, for the sake of others who sit with 
him, he will remain. One of these disciples might not 
have constrained Christ, but the two effected it. Fire will 
not tarry in a single coal, but if many be laid together it 
will be long before it is clean gone. A single tree may 
not afford much shelter for a traveller, but he will rest 
beneath the thick boughs of the grove: so will Jesus often 
sit longer where many of “the trees of the Lord” are 

lanted. Go to the assemblies of the saints, if you would 
oe the arm of the King of saints. Those who dwell 
most with the daughters of Jerusalem are most likely to 
have a goodly share of Emmanuel’s company. Cannot 
any reader add his own testimony to the fact that fellow- 
ship with the saints is conducive to a continuance of fel- 
lowship with Jesus ? 

5, Earnest prayer is the most potent means of winning 
continued communion. We have found it true, that the 
mercy-seat is the place where the Lord meets his servants. 
Full often our souls have risen from depths of distress to 
heights of delight, by the simple appeal to heaven, which 
we by supplication have been allowed to make. We will 
speak well of the exercise of prayer; we can endorse all 
the titles which old divines have given it, such as—the 
key of heaven, and of all God’s cabinets, the conduit of 
mercy, faith flaming, Jacob’s ladder, an invisible and in- 
vincible weapon, a victory over the Omnipotent, the sweet 
consumption of cares, a box of ointment broken on the 
head of Christ, the perfume of heaven, the mount of trans- 


312 . THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR, 


—_—_—-~ 


figuration, the soul’s messenger, and Satan’s scourge ; but 
we will add another—it is a golden chain which holds the 
Saviour, and secures him to his people. Christ never lin- 
gers long with dumb souls ; if there be no crying out to 
him, he loves not silence, and he departs and betakes him- 
self to those hearts which are full of the music of prayer, 
What a marvellous influence prayer has upon our fellow- 
ship with Jesus! We may always measure one by the 
other. Those pray most fervently and frequently who 
have been constant attendants on the kind Intercessor; 
while, on the other hand, those who wrestle the hardest 
in supplication will hold the angel the longest. Joshua's 
voice stayed the sun in the heavens for a few hours; but 
the voice of prayer can detain the Sun of righteousness 
for months and even years. 

Christian Brethren, wili you slight this exhortation ? 
Shall none of these means be tried? Are you content to 
suffer your Saviour to depart? Are ye careless as to 


his company ? Then you have grave cause for fear; — 


there is something vitally wrong. Pass not by this sad 
admonitory symptom ; search your heart, for a sad disease 
is there. May the great Physician heal thee. 

But surely, as joint-heir with Jesus, thou hast longings 
after him and sighing for his presence. Then let it be 
thy concern to find him, and, having found him, to con- 
strain him to abide with thee forever. 


6‘ Oh, that we could forever sit 
With Mary, at the Masters feet ; 
Be this our happy choice, 
Our only care, delight, and bliss, 
Our joy, our heaven on earth be this, 
To hear the Bridegroom’s voice. 


*¢ Oh, that we could with favour’d John, 
Recline our weary heads upon 
The dear Redeemer’s breast § 


COMMUNION RESERVED. 


From care, and sin, and sorrow free, 
Give us, O Lord, to find in thee 
Our everlasting rest.” 


In a short time it will be our joy to hold further con- 
verse with each other, upon various important points of 
our knowledge of Christ. We trust we shall then be pri- 
vileged to enter more fully into the mysteries of commu- 
nion, and in the mean time we commend our humble effort 
to the blessing of Heaven, trusting that some beginners 
will here read and learn what are the elements of that 
wondrous experience which falls to the lot of a Christian. 


314 THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 


—— ee eee 


es a a ee ee. 


TO THE UNCONVERTED READER. 
WHO IS UNDER CONCERN OF SOUL. 


FRIEND,—You are now commencing the life of grace, 
for thou art just awakened to know the evil of sin. You 
are now feeling the guilt of you life, and are lamenting 
the follies of your youth. You fear there is no hope of 
pardon, no prospect of forgiveness, and you tremble lest 
death should lead your guilty soul unforgiven before its 
Maker. Hear, then, the word of God. Thy pains for sins 
are God’s work in thy soul. He woundeth thee that thou 
mayest seek him. He would not have showed thee thy 
sin if he did not intend to pardon. Thou art now a sin- 
ner, and Jesus came to save sinners, therefore he came to 
save thee ; yea, he issaving thee now. These strivings of 
soul are the work of his mercy; there is love in every 
blow, and grace in every stripe. Believe, O troubled one, 
that he is able to save thee unto the uttermost, and thou 
shalt not believe in vain. Now, in the silence of thine 
agony, look unto him who by his stripes healeth thee, 
Jesus Christ has suffered the penalty of thy sins, and has 
endured the wrath of God on thy behalf. See yonder 
crucified Man on Calvary, and mark thee that those drops 
of blood are falling for thee, those nailed hands are pierced 
for thee, and that open side contains a heart full of love to 
thee. 


‘¢ None but Jesus, none but Jesus, 
Can do helpless sinners good.” 


noe Wee 


prace, 

You 
nting 
ppe of 
e lest 
re its 
r sins 
, thou 
e thy 
4 sin- 
me to 
igs of 
every 
1 one, 
thou 
thine 
thee, 
d has 
onder 
drops 
erced 
ve to 


COMMUNION RESERVED. 315 


— 


It is simple reliance on him which saves. The negro said, 
“ Massa, I fall flat on de promise:” so if you fall flat on 
the promise of Jesus you shall not find him fail you; he 
will bind up your heart, and make an end to the days of 
your mourning. We shall meet in heaven one day to sing 
hallelujah to the condescending Lord ; till then may the 
God of all grace be our helper. Amen 


