PRESENTED 

By  THE  * 


C|}urtl)  of  €n5lanlr 

II,  ADAM  STREET,  STRAND,  LONDON. 


»f 


Founded  1880 


Srfasnrer. 
Frank  A.  Bevan,  Esq. 

SetretHrg. 
John  Shrimpton,  Esq. 


t-'^ 


¥     ■ 


1     5  it?    • 


/^^' 


A^.' 


J'' 


THE    GREAT    PROPHECIES 


BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 


I. 

Earth's  Earliest  Ages,  and   their  connection 
with  IVIodern  Spiritualism  and  Theosophy. 

Fourth  Ediiion.     Revised.     Crown  8vo,  cloth,  7^.  6d. 

11. 

The  Anti-Christ,  Babylon,  and  the  Coming  of 
the  Kingdom. 

Crown  8vo,  cloth,  3^.  6d. 

III. 
Animals:   Their  Past  and  Future. 

8vo,  sewed  wrapper.     Price  dd. 


London:    HODDER    AND    STOUGHTON, 
27,  Paternoster  Row. 


CHART  OF   PROPHETIC  TIMES. 


THE  WORLD 


THE    PEOPLE  OF  GOD 


BABYLON 


THE    SEVENTY    YEARS 
OF    THE    CAPTIVITY 


MEDO-PERSIA 


INTERVAL  BETWEEN  THE  DECREE 

OF  CYRUS  *  THAT  OF  THE 
TWENTIETH  YEAR  OF  ARTAXERXES 


GREECE 


ROME 


MYSTERY 

BABYLON 

THE 

GREAT 


THE   TEN   KINGS  &  ANTICHRIST 

THE    SEALS 

THE    TRUMPETS 

THE    SEVENTH    TRUMPET 

THE  VIALS 


THE  COMMAND   GIVEN   TO  NEHEMIAH- 
TO  RtaUILD  THE  CITY  &  THE  WALL    ' 


THE     SIXTY    NINE    WEEKS 
OR 
FOUR    HUNDRED   &  EIGHTY  THREE 
YEARS 

MESSIAH    THE    PRINCE 


THE 
SOWER 

THE 
TARES 


THE 
MUSTARD     UJ 
TREE  F 


THE 
LEAVEN 

THE 

HIDDEN 

TREASURE 

THE 
PEARL 


cn 
o 
O 

cc 

uJ 

a. 


EPHESUS 


SMYRNA 


PERGAMOS 


THYATIRA 


SARDIS 


uJ 

X 

1- 


THE 
NET 


PHILADELPHIA 


LAODICEA 


ANTICMRIsrs     COVEMAHT    WfTM     THE    JEWS. 

THE    LAST    WEEK,        COMPLETING   THE 

FOUR     HUNOriEO    I,    HINETY    YEABS 

THE     TIME     OF    JACOtPs    TROUBLE 


JERUSALEM    PARTIALLY  TAKEN  »  DESTROYED 


OtSCEWT  Of  THL   LORD  *  OESTHUCTIOH  OF  ANTICHRIST  t  MIS' WORSmPPERS 


THE     MILLENNIAL    REIGN 


WEBeLLlOW   OF  8ATAH.    SENERAL  WESIiRRECTIOM.     LAST   JUDSWEHTT 


THE     ETERNAL    REST 


-FIRST  ASCENSION  OF   SAINTS. 
'  IHESS  IV  16  17     REV.  XII    6). 


SECOND  ASCENSION  OF  SAINTS 
THE  MYSTERY  OF  SOD  FINISHED 
(REV  A  7      I  C0K-XV.52). 


1\T 


THE   GREAT  PROPHECIES 


CONCERNING 


THE    GENTILES,     THE   JEWS,    AND    THE 
CHURCH    OF    GOD. 


;'\^        BY 


e-"   <^ 


G.     H.     PEMBER,     M.A., 

author  of 
"earth's  earliest  ages,"  etc. 


THIRD  EDITION,  REVISED  AND  ENLARGED. 
WITH  A  COLOURED  CHART. 


HODDER    AND     STOUGHTON, 
27,  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 


MDCCCLXXXVII. 

[All  rights  reserved.'] 


Printed  by  Hazell,  Wat&oo,  &  Vioey,  Ld,  London  and  Ajlesbury, 


PREFACE. 


THE  Supreme  God  has  deigned  to  give  revelations 
whereby  He  seeks  to  communicate  His  purposes 
to  men,  and  thus,  by  a  gentle  process,  to  bend  their 
minds  to  His  mighty  and  irresistible  will.  Neverthe- 
less, myriads  of  professing  Christians  are  content  to 
reach  the  end  of  life  in  total  ignorance  of  these  gracious 
disclosures,  while  accredited  ministers  of  Christ  are  too 
frequently  unable  to  expound  them. 

But,  since  God  has  thought  fit  to  set  them  before  us, 
are  we  not  deliberately  charging  Him  with  folly  while 
we  neglect  them  .'*  And  is  not  the  significance  of  our 
conduct  much  the  same  if  we  persist  in  perverting 
them  from  their  proper  meaning  and  use — as,  for  in- 
stance, those  do  who  can  find  little  in  the  Apocalypse 
save  events  that  had  become  history  before  it  was 
written,  and  doctrines  that  are  fully  taught  in  other 
parts  of  Scripture ;  although  the  Lord  Himself  de- 
clares that  the  object  of  the  Book  is  '*  to  show  unto 
His  servants  the  things  that  must  shortly  come  to 
pass  "  .?  ^ 

'  Rev.  i.  I.  With  the  future,  then,  dating  from  the  time  when 
it  was  written,  and  with  that  future  alone,  the  book  is  concerned. 
And  we  do  not  violate  this  rule,  as  we  have  been  accused  of 
doing,  when  we  interpret  the  Travailing  Woman,  in  the  twelfth 
chapter,  of  the  Church  in  affliction.  For  although  her  sorrows 
had  commenced  many  years  before  John  saw  the  vision,  yet  they 
were  still  going  on  at  the  time,  and  were  destined  to  continue  for 
some  eighteen  hundred  years  afterwards. 


ri  PREFACE. 

And  again,  may  we  not  attribute  much  of  the 
apathy  of  Christendom,  the  Laodicean  spirit  with 
which  we  are  surrounded,  and  the  worldliness  of 
popular  Christianity,  to  the  fact  that  behevers  will  not 
give  themselves  to  those  studies  and  contemplations 
which   God   has  provided   for  them. 

A  passage  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  seems  to 
force  such  a  conclusion  upon  us.  The  inspired  writer 
complains  of  the  difficulty  of  communicating  what  he 
wishes  to  say  concerning  Melchizedec,  because  those  to 
whom  he  is  writing  are  dull  of  hearing  and  unskilful 
in  the  Word  of  Righteousness  ;  and  their  condition 
draws  from  him  a  severe  rebuke,  followed  by  the  ex- 
hortation ; — 

"  Wherefore,  leaving  the  word  of  the  beginning  of 
Christ,  let  us  press  on  unto  perfection  ;  not  laying  again 
a  foundation  of  repentance  from  dead  works,  and  of 
faith  toward  God,  of  baptisms  of  instruction,  and  of 
laying  on  of  hands,  and  of  resurrection  of  dead  persons, 
and  of  eternal  judgment."  ^ 

We  may  observe  that  this  list  of  foundations  includes 
nearly  all  the  doctrines  ordinarily  heard  from  our 
pulpits.  And  yet  the  Apostle  compares  those  who  are 
incessantly  occupied  with  them  to  one  who  wastes 
labour  and  time  by  repeatedly  laying  down  and  taking 
up  again  the  foundation  of  a  building,  when  he  ought 
to  be  raising  the  superstructure.  He,  therefore,  solemnly 
urges  the  Hebrews  to  pass  on  from  first  principles  to 
perfection,  and  presses  his  exhortation  with  the  words — 

"  For  it  is  impossible  in  the  case  of  those  who  were 
once  enlightened,  and  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift,  and 
were  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  tasted  the 

'  Heb.  vi.  I 


PREFACE.  vii 

good  word  of  God  and  the  powers  of  the  World  to 
Come,  if  they  shall  fall  away,  to  renew  them  again  unto 
repentance  ;  seeing  they  crucify  to  themselves  the  Son 
of  God  afresh,  and  put  Him  to  an   open  shame."  ^ 

Now,  without  entering  into  the  full  meaning  of  these 
words  of  terror,  we  must  admit  that  the  context 
leaves  us  in  no  doubt  as  to  the  manner  of  persons  who 
are  in  danger  of  the  lapse  contemplated  and  the  appal- 
ling judgment  which  must  inevitably  follow  it.  They 
are  those  who  refuse  to  look  beyond  the  first  principles 
of  Christ  ;  those  who  will  not  study,  meditate  upon, 
and  suffer  the  Holy  Spirit  to  mould  their  minds  by, 
the  revelations  which  God  has  provided  for  that  pur- 
pose, and  with  which  He  has  bidden  us  to  fill  our 
heart  and  satisfy  our  intellect ;  those  who  vainly  strive 
to  excuse  their  indolence,  and  want  of  appetite  for 
heavenly  things,  by  affirming  that  the  simple  Gospel  is 
enough  for  them — as  if  the  effect  of  tasting  the  good 
things  of  God  were  to  make  us  desire  no  more  of  them, 
although  His  banquet  is  spread,  and  He  ceases  not  to 
say  ; — "  Eat,  O  friends  ;  drink,  yea,  drink  abundantly, 
O  beloved." 

Thus,  throughout  the  whole  Christian  o^^pensation, 
spiritual  apathy  and  the  peril  of  apostasy  have  ever 
been  threatening  those  who  neglect  to  become  ac- 
quainted, as  accurately  as  they  may,  with  the  Divine 
utterances,  whereby  alone  we  are  enabled  to  estimate 
earthly  things  aright,  and  are  moved  to  look  for  the 
blessed  hope  and  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God 
and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 

What,  then,  shall  we  say  of  ourselves  upon  whom 
the  end   of  the  age   has  come,  who   seem   to   be    living 

'  Heb.  vi.  4-6. 


viii  PREFACE. 

in  times  when  the  predictions  of  old  are  on  the  point 
of  fulfihnent !  How  far  more  cogent  is  the  word  of 
exhortation  to  us,  who  can  even  see  the  Day  ap- 
proaching ! 

Isaac  Taylor  thought  that  God  would  ultimately 
divide  between  those  who  support  and  those  who 
oppose  the  truth  by  means  of  the  Book  of  the  Reve- 
lation. And  undoubtedly  his  general  idea  is  correct  ; 
for  a  far  higher  and  absolutely  unimpeachable  authority 
has  said  of  the  Old  Testament  Apocalypse  ; — 

"  The  words  are  closed  up  and  sealed  until  the  time 
of  the  end.  Many  shall  be  purified,  and  made  white, 
and  tried  ;  but  the  wicked  shall  do  wickedly.  And 
none  of  the  wicked  shall  understand ;  but  the  wise 
shall  understand."  ^ 

Such,  then,  will  be  the  distinctive  mark  of  God's 
elect  in  the  world's  last  hour  of  trial  ;  and  to  the  wise 
of  that  generation,  whether  it  be  our  own  or  another, 
the  word  of  prophecy  will  seem  no  matter  for  slight  or 
neglect,  but  a  revelation  of  transcendent  importance. 

Nor  can  we  tell  what  mighty  issues  may  be  depend- 
ing upon  its  reception  even  in  the  case  of  those  who 
will  not  live  to  sec  it  become  history.  The  great 
Creator  acts  upon  us  during  the  present  life  in  ways 
that  we  know  not,  and  with  results  which  will  not  fully 
appear  until  this  mortal  shall  have  put  on  immortality. 
And  surely  a  patient  and  prayerful  study  of  revelations 
which  set  forth  His  purposes  must  produce  a  frame  of 
mind  favourable  to  sanctification  and  spiritual  growth, 
and  likely  to  affect  our  eternal  condition  in  no  insigni- 
ficant degree.  God's  prescribed  means  of  education 
must  be  the  best,  and  even  those  who   think  that  the}^ 

'  Dan.  xii.  9-10. 


PREFACE.  ix 

have  done  greater  things  by  labours  of  a  different  kind 
may  find  their  hopes  crushed  by  the  stern  rebuke  ; — 
"  Behold,  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken 
than  the  fat  of  rams  !  " 

But  the  cause  which  most  powerfully  moves  men  to 
neglect  God's  revelations  of  the  future  is  the  repugnance 
of  the  human  mind  to  anything  which  is  contrary, 
either  to  its  experience,  or  to  the  aspirations  of  its 
fallen  nature.  There  was  a  wondrous  depth  of  truth 
in  our  Lord's  rebuke  when  He  said  ; — "  O  fools,  and 
slow  of  heart  to  believe  all  that  the  prophets  have 
spoken  !  "  ^ — not  slow  of  heart  to  know,  or  to  under- 
stand, but  to  believe.  It  was  an  instinctive  aversion 
to  the  course  of  God's  will  which  led  the  very  disciples 
to  misunderstand  the  predictions  of  the  first  advent  ;  a 
similar  feeling  will  cause  many  Christians  to  be  taken 
by  surprise  at  the  second. 

Such  an  aversion  is,  however,  rarely  acknowledged  ; 
it  is  usual  to  assign  its  results  to  unreal  causes,  of 
which  the  most  frequently  urged  is  the  great  diversity 
of  expositions.  But  this  perplexity  is  indefinitely 
increased  by  the  careless  recognition  as  an  interpreter 
of  almost  any  one  who  presents  himself.  In  such 
circumstances  what  wonder  that  we  hear  of  strange  and 
wild  interpretations !  But  if  the  Church  would  awake 
from  her  indifference,  and  be  at  the  pains  to  apply 
proper  tests,  the  mischief  would  be  speedily  checked 
and  restricted.     And  two  obvious  tests  are  these. 

No  one  may  claim  to  be  more  than  a  tentative 
expounder  of  prophecy,  unless  he  can  formulate  a  com- 
plete and  consistent  scheme.^ 

'  Luke  xxiv.  25. 

.'With  permission  to  manipulate  selected  passages  at  will,  it 


X  PREFACE. 

And  no  system  can  be  the  true  one,  unless  all  the 
main  prophecies  of  the  Bible  will  fall  easily  and 
naturally  into  place  in  it. 

We  are  well  aware  that  many  object  to  the  very 
mention  of  a  system  of  prophecy  :  but  surely  it  does 
not  require  much  reflection  to  discover  that  such  a 
sentiment  is  simply  irrational.  If  the  prophecies  are 
all  utterances  of  one  and  the  selfsame  Spirit,  they 
must  be  capable  of  reduction  to  an  orderly  scheme, 
and  certainly  cannot  be  comprehended  in  any  other 
way.  And  unless  we  find  out  what  this  scheme  is, 
woe  to  us  ;  for  if,  as  nearly  all  Christians  seem  to 
agree,  we  are  now  on  the  borders  of  the  last  times,  the 
knowledge  of  it  will  soon  become  the  distinguishing 
mark  of  those  whom  God  has  chosen.  For,  at  the 
time  of  the  end,  "  none  of  the  wicked  shall  understand, 
but  the  wise  shall  understand." 

The  scheme,  which  commends  itself  to  our  mind,  is 
set  before  the  reader  in  the  present  volume,  and  is  con- 
structed with  careful  reference  to  certain  clues,  which 
we  believe  to  have  been  given  for  the  purpose,  and 
which  are  explained  in  the  last  six  chapters  of  the 
Prolegomena. 

The  most  important  of  them  are  a  recognition  of  the 
three  distinct  classes  into  which  mankind  are  divided, 
a  knowledge  of  the  three  prophetic  periods,  and  an 
acquaintance  with  the  simple  principle  upon  which  God 
computes  the  chronology  of  Jewish  history.  A  clear 
apprehension   of  these   points   will,  we   believe,  remove 

would,  of  course,  be  possible  to  apply  prophecy  to  any  given 
event  or  events — just  as  almost  every  conceivable  doctrine  has 
been  already  taught  from  thd  Bible  by  a  skilful,  but  frequently 
unscrupulous,  use  of  isolated  texts. 


PREFACE.  xi 

all  difficulty  and  uncertainty  in  regard  to  general  and 
systematic  interpretation. 

But  when  we  enter  into  details,  it  is  no  longer 
possible  to  speak  with  the  same  confidence  ;  for  there 
are,  doubtless,  some  predictions  which  will  not  be 
perfectly  understood  until  their  fulfilment  is  actually 
impending.  None  the  less,  however,  must  we  study 
and  firmly  grasp  them  with  our  minds  :  and  if  we  do 
so,  that  which  is  lacking  to  us  will  be  revealed  in  the 
hour  of  need  ;  and  at  the  crisis  perplexing  to  others, 
or,  perhaps,  altogether  unperceived  by  them,  we  shall 
have  full  understanding  of  what  is  about  to  happen, 
and  of  what  we  ought  to  do. 

The  early  disciples  were  probably  unable  to  explain 
the  Lord's  command,  that  they  should  flee  to  the 
mountains  as  soon  as  they  saw  Jerusalem  compassed 
with  armies.  How,  they  may  have  thought,  can  we 
flee  in  such  circumstances .''  Surely  the  very  sign 
which  He  has  promised  will  render  obedience  impos- 
sible. 

But  in  due  time  all  became  clear  to  them  ;  and 
their  hearts  must,  indeed,  have  overflowed  with  grati- 
tude when  they  perceived  that  the  Lord's  gracious 
arrangements  had  given,  not  merely  the  signal,  but 
also  the  opportunity,  for  their  flight,  and  had  at  the 
same  time  removed  out  of  the  way  their  bigoted 
countrymen  who  would  have  hindered  it.^ 

"  They  shall  not  be  ashamed  that  wait  for  me."  ^ 

In  preparing  this  work  for  a  second  edition  we  have 

For  an  account  of  this  deeply  interesting  event,  see  the  note 
on  p.  241. 
■  Isa.  xUx.  22^, 


xii  PREFACE 

subjected  it  to  careful  revision  and  correction  ;  much 
explanatory  matter  and  several  new  chapters  have 
been  added  ;  and  it  is  hoped  that  the  book  may  now 
prove  useful  as  a  systematic  manual  for  students  of 
prophecy.  It  does  not,  however,  include  the  whole  of 
the  subject,  but  only  such  portions  of  it  as  seem  most 
nearly  to  concern  those  who  are  waiting  for  the 
summons  of  their  Lord,  The  detailed  events  of  the 
Last  Week,  the  descent  of  Christ  upon  the  Mount  of 
Olives,  the  Millennial  Age,  the  Final  Judgment,  and 
the  Eternal  State,  are  reserved  for  future  treatment. 

A  few  replies  to  adverse  criticisms  have  been 
embodied  in  the  text  ;  but  we  may  at  once  mention 
three  points  in  regard  to  which  we  do  not  recognise 
the  need  of  a  defence. 

The  fact  that  an  event  is,  so  far  as  we  can  see, 
improbable,  is  no  reason  whatever  for  refusing  it  a 
place  in  God's   revelation   of  the  future.    • 

We  have  been  repeatedly  asked  what  ground  we 
have  for  inserting  events  between  the  sixty-ninth  and 
the  seventieth  of  Daniel's  weeks.  Simply  that  in  so 
doing  we  follow  the  prophecy,  which  makes  the  cutting 
off  of  Messiah  take  place  after  the  close  of  the  sixty- 
ninth  week,  and  then  interposes  the  events  in  question 
before  it  proceeds  to  the  seventieth.  It  is  for  those 
who  violate  this  order  to  defend  their  position. 

Lastly,  wc  are  accused  of  Pessimism,  and  have  no 
wish  to  deny  the  charge,  but  confess  to  have  learnt 
that  distrust  in  the  power  of  fallen  man  to  recover 
himself,  which  is  inculcated  in  the  Scriptures  from 
Genesis  to  Revelation.  But  our  Pessimism,  derived 
from  such  a  source,  is  not  hopeless  ;  though  there  be 
little  help  in  ourselves,  we  look  for  the  coming  of  One 


PREFACE.  xiii 

Who  is  mighty  to  save.  Be  the  sky  never  so  dark,  we 
know  that  the  Sun  is  still  shining  in  His  strength 
behind  it,  and  presently,  when  the  tempestuous  clouds 
of  the  Great  Tribulation  shall  part  asunder.  His  light 
and  warmth  will  be  revealed  to  the  rejoicing  earth. 

The  coloured  chart  prefixed  to  the  present  edition 
will,  we  trust,  facilitate  the  reader's  acquaintance  with 
the  scheme. 


CONTENTS. 


PROLEGOMENA. 

I.  Introduction.    Scheme  of  Interpretation 
II.  The  Signs  of  the  Times 

III.  The  Seven  Dispensations 

IV.  The  Three  Lines  of  Prophecy 
V.  The  Three  Prophetic  Periods 

VI.  Mystic  Chronology     - 
VII.  Supernatural  Judgments 


PACK 

3 

i8 


PART  I.— THE  GENTILES. 


I.  The  Prophecy  of  Balaam 53 

II.  The  Kingdom  of  the  Ten  Tribes    -        -        -    5^ 

III.  The  Dream  of  Nebuchadnezzar      -        -        -    6o 

IV.  The  Vision  of  the  Four  Wild  Beasts   -        -    75 
V.  The  Vision  of  the  Ram  and  the  He-Goat    -    91 

VI.  The  Great  Red  Dragon 10& 

VII.  The  Wild  Beast  from  the  Sea        -        -        -  114 

VIII.  The  Wild  Beast  from  the  Earth  -        -        -  126 

IX.  Mystery,  Babylon  the  Great  -        -        -        -  132 

X.  The  Seven  Kings  and  the  Eighth  -        -        -  139 


CONTENTS.  XV 

PAGE 

XI.  The  Overthrow  of  Ecclesiasticism  by  Secu- 
larism      150 

XII.  The  Napoleonic  Theory 153 

XIII.  The  Rebuilding  of  Great  Babylon        -       -  169 


PART  II.— THE  JEWS. 

I.  The  Purpose  of  God  Concerning  Israel       -  185 
II.  The  Perplexity  of  Daniel        -        -        -        -  188 

III.  The  Prophecy  of  the  Seventy  Weeks  -       -  190 

IV,  The  Interval  Foretold  by  Zechariah  -        -  208 
V.  The  Interval  Recognized  by  Matthew         -  210 

VI.  The  Interval  in  other  Visions  of  Daniel   -  216 
VII.  The  Scheme  of  the  Seventy  Weeks  is  the 

Key  to  all  Prophecy         -        .        -        -  219 

Note  on  the  Brethren  of  the  Lord     -        -  226 

VIII.  The  Return  of  the  Jews  to  Palestine         -  236 

IX.  The  Sermon  on  the  Mount  of  Olives    -        -  238 

X.  The  Twenty-fourth  Chapter  of  Matthew  -  242 

XI.  The     Present     Condition    of    the     Jewish 

Nation  and  Land 261 

PART  IIL— THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD 

I.  The  Mystery  Hidden  from  the  Ages     -        -  283 

II.  The  Seven  Parables 291 

III.  The  Parable  of  the  Sower      -        -        -        -  295 

IV.  The  Parable  of  the  Tares       -       -        -        -  300 
V.  The  Parable  of  the  Mustard  Tree        -       -  396 

VI.  The  Parable  of  the  Leaven     -       -       -        -  311 


i.vi  CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

VII.  The  Parable  of  the  Treasure  in  the  Field  319 

VIII,  The  Parable  of  the  Pearl  of  Great  Price  321 

IX.  The  Parable  of  the  Net  Cast  into  the  Sea  324 

X.  Summary  of  the  Seven  Parables    -       -        -  325 

XI.  The  Plan  of  the  Apocalypse    .       .       -       -  327 

XII.  The  Epistles  to  the  Seven  Churches     -       -  336 

XIII.  Ephesus --  339 

XIV.  Smyrna 347 

XV.  Pergajmos       --------  352 

XVI.  Thyatira       -------.  365 

XVII.  Sardis 376 

XVIII.  Philadelphia        --_--.-  385 

XIX.  Laodicea -       _       .  403 

XX.  The  Presence  and  the  Appearing  -       -        -  417 
XXI.  The    First   Rapture,    as    Revealed   to    the 

Thessalonians 425 

XXII.  The  Mystery  Finished 433 

XXIII.  Conclusion 453 


PROLEGOMENA. 


PROLEGOMENA. 
I. 

INTRODUCTION.      SCHEME   OF    INTERPRETATION. 

The  Son  of  God  has  already  visited  our  earth  once 
since  it  became  the  abode  of  sin  and  death.  For 
many  centuries  prophets  had  announced  His  coming, 
and  foretold  the  things  which  should  befall  Him  ; 
nevertheless,  when  He  actually  appeared  at  the  pre- 
dicted time,  and  began  to  fulfil  before  the  eyes  of 
men  all  that  had  been  spoken  of  Him,  they  failed 
to  recognize  the  great  Deliverer.  Even  the  chosen 
people,  to  whom  the  Divine  revelations  had  been 
specially  entrusted,  misunderstood  and  rejected  Him. 
J3ut  they  were  shortly  overtaken  by  the  gravest  con- 
sequences. Not  many  years  had  elapsed  before  the 
flames  of  Jerusalem  were  casting  their  glare  upon  the 
agonized  faces  of  her  leading  citizens  as  they  hung 
upon  crosses  ranged  around  the  walls.  And  the 
remainder  of  the  unhappy  people  either  fell  by  the 
edge  of  the  sword,  or  were  led  into  captivity  among 
all  nations.  Such  were  the  fearful  results  of  neglecting 
or  perverting  the  prophecies  given  by  God  for  the 
guidance  of   those  who  loved  Him,    and  to  serve  as 


4  PROLEGOMENA. 

lamps  in  the  dark  places  through  which  they  had  to 
pass. 

The  unspeakable  importance  of  understanding  what 
has  been  revealed  concerning  our  own  age  and  its 
close  is  thus  sufficiently  evident  ;  and  it  is  hoped  that 
this  volume  may  prove  helpful  to  some  who  are 
desirous  of  acquiring  the  necessary  information. 
With  such  an  object  in  view,  we  have  examined  only 
those  prophecies  which  would  enable  us  to  construct 
the  scheme  of  God's  dealings  with  our  race,  so  far  as 
it  has  pleased  Him  to  disclose  them.  For  if  we  can 
but  discern  the  grand  outline,  all  details  will  easily 
fall  into  place. 

These  pages  are,  however,  put  forth  without  any 
feeling  of  dogmatic  certainty  :  the  writer  is  well  aware 
of  the  feebleness  of  the  human  mind  in  its  attempts 
to  cope  with  so  vast  a  subject,  and  of  the  proneness 
of  the  human  will  to  see  only  that  side  of  a  matter 
which  is  favourable  to  its  own  foregone  conclusions. 
Nevertheless,  he  judges  that  the  Scriptures,  being  a 
revelation  to  men,  can,  therefore,  be  comprehended  by 
them,  if  they  ask  the  Spirit's  aid.  And,  so  far  as  he 
is  conscious,  the  system  here  propounded  was  not  first 
constructed  and  then  justified,  but  has  been  gradually 
evolved  by  a  close  study  of  the  Divine  oracles. 

With  the  different  modes  of  interpretation  the 
reader  is,  probably,  more  or  less  acquainted,  and  they 
have  been  so  often  discussed  that  but  little  need  be 
said  about  them. 

Some  years  ago  the  great  conflict  was  between 
Millenarians  and  Post-Millenarians — those  who  were 
expecting  the  return  of  the  Lord  to  introduce  the 
Millennium,  and  those  who  thought  that  the  thousand 


INTRODUCTION.    SCHEME   OF  INTERPRETATION.       5 

years  of  peace  and  blessing  would  be  brought  in  by 
the  efforts  of  the  Church,  and  would,  therefore,  precede 
the  coming  of  the  King. 

But  among  serious  students  of  prophecy  this 
distinction  is  no  longer  recognised.  It  is  now  generally 
admitted  that  the  consistent  testimony  of  Scripture 
represents  the  world  as  growing  worse  and  worse, 
until  the  Lord  appears  to  destroy  the  corrupters  and 
take  the  Kingdom.  Attempts  have  indeed  been  made 
to  refer  the  predictions  of  human  failure  and  depravity 
to  the  revolt  which  follows  the  Millennium  :  but  these 
predictions  are  often  found  to  contain  direct  evidence 
connecting  them  with  the  close  of  the  present  age. 
And,  even  if  nothing  more  could  be  adduced,  the 
parable  of  the  Tares  alone  would  be  sufficient  to 
refute  such  a  theory,  since  it  admits  of  no  interval  of 
universal  blessing  between  the  sowing  and  the  harvest, 
but  represents  the  tares  as  continually  growing 
flourishing  and  ripening,  until  the  angel-reapers  gather 
them  for  the  fire. 

Again  ;  many  passages,  which  for  centuries  were 
quoted  without  challenge  in  support  of  the  Post- 
Millenarian  theory,  have,  after  more  careful  investiga- 
tion, been  appropriated  by  those  who  maintain  the 
opposite  view.  We  may  instance  the  parables  of  the 
Mustard  Tree  and  the  Leaven,  both  of  which  may  be 
demonstrated,  in  the  light  of  their  context  and  of 
other  Scriptures,  to  indicate  the  spread,  not  of  truth, 
but  of  corruption. 

Lastly  ;  several  isolated  texts,  which  those  who 
were  hoping  to  convert  the  world  had  been  wont  to 
regard  as  conclusive,  have  been  found,  upon  examina- 
tion of  their  settings,  to  refer  to  times  subsequent  to 


6  PROLEGOMENA. 

the  second  advent.  Such  is  the  well-known  prediction 
of  Isaiah,  that  "  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea  "  :  ^  for  a 
glance  at  its  context  reveals  the  significant  fact  that 
it  is  preceded  by  a  description  of  the  fall  of  Antichrist  ^ 
and  the  reign  of  the  Lord  Jesus,^  and  is  also  closely 
connected  with  the  restoration  of  the  Kingdom  to 
Israel.'*' 

So  much,  then,  for  the  Millenarian  controversy. 
But  there  are  also  three  well-defined  and  fundamentally 
antagonistic  schemes  of  interpretation  which  claim  a 
brief  notice,  and  which  are  known  as  the  Praeterist, 
the   Historical,^  and  the  Futurist. 

The  Praeterist  view  was  first  put  forth  as  a  complete 
scheme  by  the  Jesuit  Alcasar  in  his  work  entitled 
"  Vestigatio  Arcani  Sensus  in  Apocalypsi,"  which  was 
published  in  1614.  It  was  thus  unknown  in  the 
early  times  of  the  Church,  and  has  found  but  little 
favour  save  with  Roman  Catholics  and  with  expositors 
of  a  rationalising  tendency.*'  It  limits  the  scope  of  the 
Apocalypse  to  the  events  of  the  seer's  life  and  somie 
other  things  which  he  might  well  have  guessed,  and 
affirms  that  die  whole  prophecy  was  fulfilled  in  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus  and  the  subsequent 

'  Isa.  xi.  g.  "  Isa.  x.  20-34. 

^  Isa.  xi.  i-io.  ''  Isa.  xi.  11-16. 

^  Sometimes  called  the  Continuist,  and,  still  more  frequently, 
the  Protestant  interpretation. 

•^  With  Rationalists,  because  it  helps  them  to  eliminate  the 
supernatural  from  prophecy.  Roman  Catholics  formerly  used 
it  as  a  shield  by  which  to  turn  off  the  darts  of  their  Protestant 
assailants  from  Papal  to  Pagan  Rome.  But  the  Protestants 
urged  that,  if  the  fall  of  Babylon  be  interpreted  of  Pagan  Rome, 
then  Rev.  xviii.  2  must  be  a  description  of  the  same  city  under 
Papal  lule.  The  logic  of  the  retort  was  inexorable,  and  the 
Praeterist  system  ceased  to  be  popular  with  Romanists. 


INTRODUCTION.    SCHEME   OF  INTERPRETATION.       7 

fall  of  the  persecuting  Roman  Empire,  that  is,  in  the 
successive  overthrows  of  Judaism  and  Paganism. 

The  Historical  view,  also  unknown  to  the  early- 
Church,  seems  to  have  first  appeared,  about  the  middle 
of  the  twelfth  century,  in  the  teachings  of  the  heretical 
Cathari.  By  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century 
it  was  systematised  by  the  Abbot  Joachim,  whose 
mantle  descended  upon  our  own  countryman  Walter 
Brute.  Subsequently  it  was  adopted  and  applied  to 
the  Pope  by  the  precursors  and  leaders  of  the  Reforma- 
tion and  by  the  Protestant  Churches,  and  may  be  said 
to  have  reached  its  zenith  in  Mr.  Elliott's  "Horse  Apoca- 
lypticas,"  It  is  frequently  called  the  Protestant  inter- 
pretation, because  it  regards  Popery  as  exhausting  all 
that  has  been  predicted  of  Antichristian  powers,  and 
can  find  nothing  but  it  either  in  the  Harlot  or  the 
two  Beasts.  And  herein  the  system  betrays  its  weak- 
ness :  it  is  the  exposition  of  men  who  gazed  at  a  con- 
temporaneous power  of  evil  until  they  could  con- 
ceive no  other,  and  who  have,  consequently,  forced 
the  Scriptures  into  accord  with  their  own  contracted 
minds. 

As  we  might  expect  in  such  a  case,  its  interpreta- 
tions are  vague  and  unsatisfactory  :  they  are  altogether 
lacking  in  that  exact  and  literal  precision  which  cha- 
racterised the  fulfilment  of  prophecies  connected  with 
the  first  advent — a  fulfilment  which  is  our  only  reliable 
guide  if  we  would  know  how  to  deal  with  predictions 
relating  to  subsequent  times. 

Very  conspicuous  among  the  failures  of  this  School 
are  its  wholly  inadequate  attempts  to  explain  the 
Sixth  Seal  and  the  Two  Witnesses.  These  have, 
however,  been  noticed  so  often  that  we  may  pass  from 


8  PROLEGOMENA. 

them  to  some  other  points  which  more  nearly  affect 
our  present  purpose. 

As  we  remarked  above,  those  who  support  the  Pro- 
testant interpretation  beHeve  Romanism  to  be  the  great 
evil  power  in  which  all  the  prophecies  respecting  Anti- 
christ will  find  their  fulfilment ;  and,  consequently,  they 
hold  that  it  will  continue  until  it  is  destroyed  by  the 
Lord  at  His  appearing. 

If,  however,  we  turn  to  the  latest  prediction  on  this 
subject,  the  seventeenth  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse,  a 
difficulty  seems  to  lie  in  the  way.  The  vision  set 
before  us  is  that  of  a  wild  Beast,  which  may  be  readily 
identified  with  the  Fourth  of  Daniel's  vision,  and,  there- 
fore, represents  the  secular  power  of  Rome.  But  the 
Beast  wears  no  crowns,  as  he  does  in  the  thirteenth 
chapter,  for  a  very  obvious  reason  :  he  is  ridden  and 
directed  by  a  Woman  who  is  universally  admitted  to 
be  the  Church  of  Rome.  We  are  thus  able  to  recognize 
a  picture  of  the  times  during  which  the  Roman  Empire 
has  been  in  abeyance,  and  an  ecclesiastical  sovereignty 
has  more  or  less  taken  its  place. 

But  what  is  the  end  of  the  vision  }  The  Woman  is 
hurled  from  her  scat,  and  destroyed  with  hatred  and 
violence,  not  by  the  Lord,  but  by  the  Ten  Kings,  who 
can  be  identified  with  the  toes  of  Nebuchadnezzar's 
image.  And  after  her  destruction,  these  kings  transfer 
the  sovereignty,  which  she  had  claimed,  to  the  Beast, 
or  secular  power. 

If,   then,   the  usual,   and   undoubtedly  correct,^    Pro- 

'  Correct,  that  is,  so  far  as  it  goes  :  for  the  symbol  of  the 
Woman  comprehends  much  more  than  the  Church  of  Rome, 
nothing  less,  indeed,  than  the  entire  Babylonian  system,  which 
lias  overspread  the  world,  and  of  which  Romanism  is  but  a  local 
and  comparatively  recent  development.     See  Part  I.,  chap.  ix. 


INTRODUCTION.    SCHEME   OF  INTERPRETATION.      9 

testant  interpretation  of  the  Harlot  is  to  stand,  we  have 
a  clear  intimation  that  Popery  will  be  exterminated  by 
Jiiunan  agents^  and  will  be  succeeded  by  a  secular  and 
altogether  antagonistic  power.  And  the  latter  is  that 
which  Christ  will  consume  at  His  appearing  ;  for  then 
the  Beast — and  not  the  Woman — will  be  slain,  and 
his  body  destroyed  and  given  to  the  burning  flame.^ 

Thus  the  fact  that  the  Woman  and  the  Beast  are 
distinct  and  finally  antagonistic  powers  seems  to  break 
up  the  frame-work  of  the  so-called  Protestant  interpre- 
tation. And  we  have  but  to  look  around  us  if  we 
would  see  the  marshalling  of  the  forces  to  which 
Ecclesiasticism    must    shortly    succumb.^ 

Again  ;  according  to  the  Historical  view,  the  Ten 
Kings  appeared  some  thirteen  centuries  ago.  But 
surely  such  a  conclusion  overlooks  the  fact  that  Nebu- 
chadnezzar's vision  exhibits  the  whole  course  of  Gentile 
secular  dominion  until  the  Lord's  appearing ;  that, 
according  to  inspired  interpretation,  the  image  is 
gradually  and  regularly  formed  from  the  head  to  the 
feet,  as  each  new  empire  arises  or  changes  its  shape  ; 
and  that  the  toes  are  the  parts  last  added,  after  which 
there  is  nothing  more  to  come  but  the  instantaneous 
descent  of  the  stone. 

Moreover,  the  kings  represented  by  the  toes  could 
not  have  appeared  until  the  Eastern  and  Western 
Empires,  prefigured  by  the  legs,  had  finished  their  course. 
Yet  Elliott  reckons  up  the  Ten  Kingdoms  "  at  the 
epoch  of  A.D.  532  "  ;^  whereas  the  Eastern  empire  can- 
not, at  least,  be  said  to  have  fallen  until  the  capture  of 
Constantinople  by  the  Turks,  in  A.D.  1453  !      And  even 

'  Daniel  vii.  11.  '  See  Part  I.,  chap   xi. 

^  Hor.  Apoc,  vol.  iii.,  p.  140. 


lo  PROLEGOMENA. 

then,  Russia  claimed  to  be  continuing  its  dominion, 
and,  on  that  ground,  styled  her  emperor  the  Czar,  or 
Ccesar,  and  adopted  as  her  standard  the  two-headed 
eagle,  which  was  the  symbol  of  the  divided  Empire, 
As  to  the  Western  division,  if  the  reader  will  consult 
our  chapter  on  the  Napoleonic  theory  he  will  see  that 
it  continued  to  represent  the  very  Empire  founded  by 
Augustus  until  it  succumbed  to  the  forces  excited 
by  the  French  Revolution  of  1789.  The  latter  epoch 
probably  marked  the  transference  of  power  to  the  feet ;  ^ 
while  the  toes  are  still  undeveloped. 

And  yet  again  ;  Historicists  forget  that,  since  five  of 
the  toes  are  on  the  right  foot  and  the  same  number  on 
the  left,  consistency  requires  that  we  seek  five  of  the 
Ten  Kings  in  the  Western  and  five  in  the  Eastern 
division  of  the  Roman  Empire. 

But  want  of  space  forbids  us  to  continue  these 
remarks  :  we  will  mention  only  one  other  error  of  the 
Historical  School,  that  which  regards  the  Euphrates  as 
representing  the  Turkish  Empire.  There  appears  to 
be  no  foundation  whatever  for  this  idea,  as,  indeed, 
many  who  accept  it  seem  to  feel  :  for  it  is  frequently 
introduced  with  the  vague  remark  that  such  is  the 
generally  admitted  interpretation.  Some,  however, 
cite  the  fact  that  the  river  is  in  the  Turkish  Empire, 
which  is  not  conclusive  ;  others  affirm  that  the  Turks 
began  their  migrations  from  the  Euphrates,  w4iich  is 
scarcely  true,  since  we  can  trace  them  back  some 
hundreds   of  miles   into   the   interior  of  Asia.'^ 

Such,  then,  is  the  Historical  system,  to  which,  per- 

And  also,  as  we  hope  presently  to  show,  the  fall  of  the  Sixth 
Head  of  the  Beast  and  the  rise  of  the  Seventh. 

-  See  Part  I.,  chaps,  ii.  and  xi.     Scripture  appears  to  intimate 
that  the  Turkish  Empire,  as  it  \Yas  before  the  revolt  of  the  Greeks, 


INTRODUCTION.    SCHEME   OF  INTERPRETATION,     ii 

haps,  the  most  serious  general  objection  is  that  it 
eliminates  the  supernatural  from  the  judgments  of  God, 
and  so  contradicts  the  word  of  the  Almighty  Himself.  ^ 
And  we  cannot  better  conclude  our  observations  upon 
it  than  by  quoting  the  subjoined  graphic  sketch  of  its 
rise  and  future  disappearance. 

"  A  thousand  years  passed  away,  and  still  the  Master 
came  not.  To  fill  up  the  interval,  some  sought  present 
accomplishm.ents  of  prophecies  till  then  understood  to 
belong  only  to  the  end.  In  this  way  was  produced 
the  Historical  School  of  interpreters,  which  has  since 
flourished  uninterruptedly,  and  bids  fair  to  flourish,  till 
the  first  sound  of  Apocalyptic  judgment  shall  dispel 
the  dream,  and  Prophecy,  too  long  degraded  and  trifled 
with,  shall  appeal  from  the  visionaries  of  the  closet  to 
the  consent  of  a  terror-stricken  world." ^ 

The  third  or  Futurist  system,  which  is  adopted  in  the 
present  volume,  dates  in  modern  times  only  from  the 
beginning  of  this  century.  It  is,  however,  a  revival  of 
the  earliest  of  all  interpretations  which,  together  with 
much  other  long-lost  truth,  is  in  these  last  times 
restored  to  the  Church,  that  she  may  be  cleansed  from 
her  corruptions,  and  in  purity  of  doctrine  and  holiness 
of  life  go  out  to  meet  her  Lord. 

But  since  the  distinctive  characteristic  of  the 
Futurist  School  has  been  often  misrepresented,  a  few 
words  of  explanation  will  be  necessary.  And  in  the 
first  place,  its  very  name  is  a  misnomer  :  for  it  by  no 
means  relegates  all  prophecies  to  the  future,  and  ignores 

must  ultimately  be  divided  into  four  kingdoms,  with  one  of  which 
Antichrist  will  be  connected.     See  Part  I.,  chap.  v. 

'  Exod  xxxiv.  10.     See  Prol.,  chap.  vii. 

■  Maitland's  "Apostolic  School  of  Prophetic  Interpretation," 
p.  4. 


12  PROLEGOMENA. 

neither  Romanism  nor  the  trials  and  troubles  of  the 
true  Church  during  the  present  age.  But  it  is  so 
termed  because  it  groups  most  of  the  prophecies 
around  the  two  advents,  and  so  refers  the  greater  part 
of  the  Apocalypse^  to  the  last  of  Daniel's  Seventy 
Weeks,  which  is  yet  in  the  future.  The  reasons  for 
this  method  of  interpretation  will  appear  in  the  following 
pages,  and  the  reader  will  perceive  that  the  charges 
usually  brought  against  the  Futurist  School  do  not 
apply  to  the  scheme  here  laid  before  him. 

For  it  does  not  omit  the  Papacy,  but  finds  it  strongly 
marked  in  prophecy,  and  described  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  expose  its  real  nature.  It  sets  forth  Romanism 
as  having  been  hitherto  the  master-piece  of  Satan,  and 
the  great  enemy  of  the  true  Church  ;  but  it  further 
teaches,  in  accordance  with  Scripture,  that  mystery 
Babylon  will  fall  by  the  hands  of  men,  and  be  succeeded, 
for  a  brief  space,  by  a  secular  power  even  more  wicked 
and  terrible. 

It  cannot  be  said  to  ignore  the  Church,  for  it  dis- 
covers two  charts — drawn  by  the  Lord  Himself — of 
all  that  should  befall  her,  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end   of  her  career. 

It  is  not  a  mere  human  speculation,  but  a  scheme 
believed  to  be  unfolded  by  God  in  the  cardinal  reve- 
lation which  gave  skill  and  understanding  to  Daniel, 
and  enabled  him  to  comprehend  his  visions.  And, 
consequently,  it  will  be  found  to  agree  with  and  explain 
every  Scripture  upon  which  it  bears,  and  especially  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount  of  Olives  and  the  Apocalypse. 
Indeed  this  is  the  strongest  point  of  Futurism  :  it  is 
the   only  system  which   is  based  solely  upon  the  great 

'  Rev.  iv.-xix. 


INTRODUCTION.     SCHEME   OF  INTERPRETATION.     13 

interpreting  message  vouchsafed  to  Daniel,  and  the 
Lord's  own  division  of  the  Apocalypse  into  "  the  things 
which  thou  sawest,  and  the  things  which  are,  and  the 
things  which  shall  come  to  pass  after  these."  And, 
accordingly,  it  is  found  to  be  a  return  to  the  interpreta- 
tion preached  by  the  apostles  among  the  earliest  con- 
verts, and  a  return  in  clearer  light  :  for  the  Christians 
of  old  could  only  contemplate  the  mighty  events  of  the 
end  from  an  unknown  distance  ;  while  we,  owing  to  the 
subsequent  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  and  its  gradually 
unfolded  interpretation,  are  enabled  to  discover  that  the 
age  is  almost  exhausted,  and  its  closing  scenes  on  the 
point  of  commencing. 

But  objectors  also  urge  that  the  Futurist  system 
crowds  too  many  great  events  into  the  short  space  of 
three  years  and  a  half,  whereas  the  doings  ascribed  to 
the  personal  Antichrist  would  be  more  likely  to  be 
performed  in  the  course  of  twelve  hundred  and  sixty 
years  by  a  series  of  Antichrists  ;  and,  further,  that  it 
is  in  the  highest  degree  improbable  that  God  would 
have  given  prophecies  so  important  merely  to  warn 
Christians  of  the  nineteenth  century  against  a  single 
foe. 

To  this  we  reply,  generally,  that  it  is  dangerous  to 
argue  respecting  the  probability  or  improbability  of 
God's  dealings  with  men.  His  ways  frequently  differ 
altogether  from  our  expectations,  nor  can  we  know 
anything  concerning  them  except  it  be  revealed.  And, 
in  regard  to  particulars,  there  is  no  w^arrant  for  the 
supposition  that,  when  days  are  mentioned  in  prophecy, 
years  are  intended  :  nor  is  there  any  hint  in  the  New 
Testament  of  a  continuous  line  of  Antichrists,  the 
great  rebel  being  always  treated  as  a  single  individual. 


14  PROLEGOMENA, 

As  to  the  shortness  of  the  time,  the  space  of  three 
years  and  a  half  has  already  been  rendered  memorable 
as  the  time  of  Christ's  ministry  :  it  shall  be  so  once 
again  as  tliat  of  the  Antichrist's  tyranny.  Logical 
consistency  requires  this :  for  in  Scripture  "  the 
Christ  " — 6  XpicTTos — is  opposed  to  "  the  Antichrist " 
—  6  'AvT[)(picrTo<;.  Lawlessness,  also,  shall  finally  cul- 
minate, as  righteousness  has  done,  in  a  single  person,  and 
be  exhibited  unveiled  to  the  world  for  the  same  period. 

Nor  is  the  description  of  what  shall  happen  within 
so  contracted  a  time  useless  to  the  Christians  of 
eighteen  centuries  :  for  since  our  first  father  did  taste 
of  the  fatal  tree,  it  has  now  become  necessary  for  us 
also  to  acquire  so  much  knowledge  of  the  conse- 
quences of  the  fall  as  will  give  us  a  humbling  sense 
of  the  sin  in  which  we  have  become  involved.  We 
must,  therefore,  study  the  predicted  doings  of  Anti- 
christ and  his  worshippers,  that  we  may  understand 
something  of  the  depths  of  Satan,  may  be  warned  to 
resist  the  beginnings  of  evil,  and  may  be  filled  with 
gratitude  as,  with  startled  gaze,  we  behold  the  horrible 
and  loathsome  disease  from  which  we  have  been  saved 
only  by  the  sacrifice  of  the  beloved  Son. 

Plainly  does  Paul  intimate  the  lesson  set  before  us, 
when  he  says  ; — "  For  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  dot/i 
already  ivork :  only  there  is  One  That  restraineth  now, 
until  He  be  taken  out  of  the  way.  And  then  shall 
the  Lawless  One  be  unveiled,  whom  the  Lord  Jesus 
shall  slay  with  the  breath  of  His  mouth,  and  bring  to 
nought  by  the  manifestation  of  His  presence."  ^ 

Men  are  ever  ready  to  break  out  into  the  appalling- 
wickedness   of  the   end  :  "we  live   over   a  mine    which 

'  2  Thcss.  ii.  7,  8. 


INTRODUCTION.    SCHEME   OF  INTERPRETATION.     15 

might  be  sprung  at  any  moment  ;  but  hitherto  there 
has  been  a  restraining  power.  The  Spirit,  Who 
descended  at  Pentecost,  is  still  with  the  Church,  and 
so  mightily  convinces  even  the  world  of  sin,  of  righ- 
teousness, and  of  judgment,  that  men  dare  not  do 
their  worst.  Nevertheless,  defiant  rebellion  is  in  their 
hearts  ;  and,  as  soon  as  the  Spirit  leaves  the  earth 
with  those  believers  who  are  to  be  gathered  to  their 
Lord,  then  the  Powers  of  Darkness  and  their  earthly 
subjects  will  manifest  their  real  character. 

Accordingly,  that  character  is  revealed  to  us  before- 
hand, that  we  may  know  the  true  nature  of  the  law- 
lessness around  us,  disguised  though  it  be  by  plausible 
excuses  and  specious  philosophies  ;  and  that  we  may 
avoid  the  guilt  which  Christians  too  often  incur 
through  such  manifestations  of  it  as  disobedience  to 
parents,  disrespect  to  elders,  indifference  to  the  rela- 
tions of  life,  proneness  to  speak  evil  of  dignities  and 
to  despise  lordship,  and  all  similar  strivings  to  be  first 
where  God  has  called  us  to  be  last,  to  take  the  higher 
room  when  He  has  bidden  us  to  the  lower.  "  Thou 
shalt  do  no  murder,"  was  the  commandment  of  old  ; 
and  the  Lord  tells  us  that  it  meant,  "  Thou  shalt  not 
be  angry  without  a  cause."  And,  just  in  the  same 
way,  the  lawlessness  of  Antichrist  is  set  before  us  that 
we  may  beware  of  everything  v.-hich  could  possibly 
lead  in   the  direction  of  his  bad  eminence. 

We  cannot,  therefore,  admit  that  a  Futurist  inter- 
pretation is  useless  to  all  except  those  who  live  in  the 
actual  times  of  fulfilment ;  for  God  undoubtedly  instructs 
and  disciplines  the  minds  of  believers  by  visions  and 
revelations  of  the  things  which  must  shortly  come  to 
pass  as  the  natural  consequence  of  sin. 


l6  PROLEGOMENA. 

In  regard  to  our  scheme  of  interpretation,  it  has 
been,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  entirely  deduced  from 
the  Scriptures  ;  and  its  conclusions  are  as  follows. 

We  gather  that  there  are  three  peoples  upon  earth  in 
connection  with  whom  God  has  revealed  His  purposes 
— the  Gentiles,  the  Jews,  and  the  Church. 

The  predictions  respecting  the  first  of  these  three  are 
very  simple.  Beginning  with  the  kingdom  of  Nebu- 
chadnezzar, four  successive  empires  were  to  run  their 
course,  the  last  of  them  continuing  until  the  appearing 
of  Christ.  But  the  third  should  fall  apart  into  four 
dominions,  after  existing  for  a  short  time  as  one.  And 
the  course  of  the  fourth  should  be  even  more  varied, 
including  three  phases  of  sovereignty:  it  should  rule 
over  the  earth  first  as  one  undivided  power,  then  as  two 
more  or  less  connected  empires,  lastly  as  ten  kingdoms 
confederated  under  a  great  and  blasphemous  president 
who  should  be  destroyed  by  the  Lord  Himself  But, 
between  its  second  and  third  phases,  this  fourth  empire 
should  be  for  a  Vv'hile  deprived  of  its  sovereignty,  and 
be  dominated  by  an  ecclesiastical  hierarchy.  Thus  the 
times  of  the  Gentiles  should  flow  on  without  interrup- 
tion until  the  return  of  Christ. 

The  Jewish  prophecies  are  a  little  more  intricate, 
and  Daniel  was  unable  to  comprehend  the  purposes  ot 
God  concerning  Judah  and  Jerusalem  until  he  had 
received  a  special  revelation  to  give  him  skill  and 
understanding.  This  revelation  disclosed  that  God 
Avas  about  to  take  four  hundred  and  ninety  years  out 
of  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  for  the  special  discipline, 
under  covenant,  of  the  Jews  ;  that  these  years  would 
commence  from  the  issuing  of  an  edict  to  rebuild  the 
destroyed  city  and  v/alls  of  Jerusalem  ;  that  after  four 


INTRODUCTION.     SCHEME   OF  INTERFKETATION.     17 

hundred  and  eighty-three  of  them  had  passed  by, 
Messiah  would  be  cut  off,  and,  in  consequence  of  His 
rejection,  the  covenant  would  be  broken,  and  a  long 
and  unknown  interval  elapse,  during  which  the  Jews 
would  be  scattered  and  disowned  of  God  ;  that  at  the 
close  of  the  interval  they  would  again  be  found  in  their 
own  land,  and  that  the  last  prince  of  the  Fourth  Empire 
would  make  a  covenant  with  the  majority  of  them  for 
seven  years  ;  that  God  would  at  the  same  time  resume 
His  dealings  with  them,  and  so  complete,  in  the  time 
of  Antichrist's  covenant,  that  which  still  remained  of 
the  four  hundred  and  ninety  years  ;  and  that,  after  they 
had  experienced  a  fearful  discipline  during  the  final 
three  years  and  a  half,  the  Deliverer  should  come  to 
Zion,  and  give  to  the  remnant  of  Israel  "  the  greatness 
of  the  Kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven." 

In  regard  to  the  third  people,  the  Church  of  God, 
we  find  that  they  began  to  be  gathered  out  of  all 
nations  shortly  after  the  Jewish  covenant  had  been 
suspended,  and  that  their  age  was  to  occupy  the 
interval  which  followed.  They  were  to  undergo  a 
variety  of  trials  and  struggles,  concerning  which  they 
were  mstructed  and  warned  in  two  prophecies  uttered 
by  the  Lord  Himself.  They  would  feel  their  love 
growing  cold  as  time  went  on  ;  they  would  have  to 
pass  through  the  fires  of  persecution  ;  they  would  be 
allured  from  the  path  of  humility  by  a  vision  of  earthly 
greatness  ;  their  faith  would  be  stealthily  corrupted  and 
changed,  until  they  would  become  mingled  with 
idolaters  unawares,  and  be  fast  caught  in  the  net  of 
the  Mother  of  Abominations.  After  a  weary  season 
they  would  break  through  her  meshes,  only  to  find 
another   temptation   spread   before   them  ;  they   would 

2 


i8  PROLEGOMENA. 

be  surrounded  by  a  drowsy  and  indifferent  orthodoxy, 
which  would  ultimately  develop  into  Deisrn,  Pantheism, 
and  Atheism,  or  into  a  self-satisfied  religionism.  Yet 
among  the  faithful  there  would,  in  the  latter  days  of 
the  dispensation,  be  a  revival  of  love  which  would  urge 
some  to  wash  their  stained  robes,  to  keep  the  word  of 
Christ,  and  to  confess  His  name.  And  so  the  interval 
would  come  to  its  close.  The  Lord  Jesus  would  de- 
scend into  the  air  :  those  of  the  Church  who  had  died 
would  hear  His  voice  and  come  forth  from  their  graves, 
while  the  living  who  had  been  able  to  endure,  in  spite 
of  temptation,  would  be  at  the  same  moment  changed, 
and  caught  up  together  with  them  into  His  Presence. 
There  they  would  remain  during  the  last  seven  years 
of  the  Jewish  covenant,  before  the  close  of  which  they 
would  be  joined  by  some  of  their  fellows  v/hose  unready 
condition  caused  them  to  be  left  behind  for  a  season. 
And  then  the  whole  multitude,  arrayed  in  white,  would 
appear  v/ith  their  King  in  glory,  and,  after  the  destruc- 
tion of  His  enemies,  rule  as  His  subordinates  over  the 
redeemed  earth. 

Such  is  an  outline  of  the  prophetic  scheme  which 
the  writer  believes  to  be  God's  revelation  :  whether  he 
is  able  to  substantiate  his  opinion,  or  not,  the  reader 
must  judge. 

II. 

The  Signs  of  the  Times. 

When  the  blue-grey  clouds  begin  to  gather  in  the 
sky  and  move  towards  each  other,  though  we  may  as 
yet  have  perceived  neither  flash  nor  sound,  we  know 
that  a  storm  is  impending,  and  that  the  quiet  hills  and 


THE  SIGNS  OF  THE    TIMES.  19 

valleys  will  soon  be  startled  by  the  forked  lightnings 
and  heavily  pealing  thunder. 

"  Ye  hypocrites,"  said  our  Lord  to  the  Pharisees, 
"ye  can  discern  the  face  of  the  sky  and  of  the  earth  ; 
but  how  is  it  that  ye  do  not  discern  this  time  ?  " 

He  spoke  thus  of  His  first  coming,  the  signs  of 
which  are  not  nearly  so  fully  depicted  in  Scripture  as 
those  of  His  second. 

What,  then,  will  He  say  to  us  if  we  fail  to  discover 
the  secret  of  God  in  the  things  which  are  taking  place 
around  us,  when  we  have  so  wonderful  a  commentary 
whereby  to  explain  them  ?  Even  the  statesmen  philo- 
sophers and  thinkers  of  this  world  are  expecting  great 
changes  in  its  social  and  political  condition.  Surely, 
then,  it  becomes  us  to  search  and  see  whether  the 
ceaseless  preparations  which  are  everywhere  apparent, 
the  tendency  of  opinions  in  matters  civil  and  religious, 
and  the  generally  unsettled  and  frequently  lawless  state 
of  Christendom,  do  not  show  that  the  last  times  of  our 
age  have  come  ;  that  the  world  will  shortly  be  con- 
fronted by  her  despised  but  rightful  and  all-pcw^rful 
King  ;  and,  therefore,  that  His  Church — the  living  and 
the  dead  alike — no  longer  may  but  must  speedily  be 
summoned  to  meet  Him  in  the  air. 

Were  we  floating  on  a  broad  river  which  at  no  great 
distance  was  hurling  itself  in  mighty  cataract  to  a 
lower  level,  what  should  we  infer  when  we  found  that 
we  were  being  borne  along  more  swiftly  by  the  quicken- 
ing stream,  when  we  perceived  an  ever  increasing 
agitation  in  the  waters  around  us,  and  began  to  hear 
mingling  with  their  tumult  the  sound  of  a  deeper 
roaring  .?  Should  we  not  at  once  understand  that  we 
were  already  within  the  rapids  caused  by  the  terrific  fall.'' 


20  rROLEGOMENA. 

And  have  we  not  exactly  described  the  present  con- 
dition of  the  stream  of  time  ?  For  both  the  prophets 
and  the  Lord  Himself  foretold  a  mighty  catastrophe 
which  will  usher  in  a  new  age  ;  a  season  of  perplexity 
and  trouble  immediately  preceding  the  times  of  refresh- 
ing from  the  presence  of  the  Lord ;  a  general  disruption 
and  disintegration  of  society,  amid  wars  tumults  and 
the  most  appalling  calamities,  to  be  followed  by  the 
glorious  reign  of  the  Prince  of  Peace.  And  are  not 
signs  of  our  approach  to  these  predicted  days  of  terror 
continually  multiplying  around  us  ?  Do  not  events, 
which  were  wont  to  float  by  in  slow  procession,  now 
chase  each  other  before  our  bewildered  eyes  with  such 
rapidity  that  they  pass  away  in  months,  or  it  may 
be  even  in  weeks,  instead  of  years  ?  Have  not  the 
currents  of  public  opinion  ceased  to  originate  merely  in 
the  schemes  of  a  few  princes  and  statesmen,  and  is  not 
every  country  torn  by  antagonistic  factions  which  drag 
the  State,  now  in  this  direction,  now  in  that?^  Nay, 
are  there  not  also  multitudes  of  private  individuals,  who 
have  each  his  own  nostrum  for  divers  ills,  ever  agitating 
the  surface  of  society  by  thrusting  themselves  into 
notice  ? 

Doubtless  one  chief  cause  of  all  this  confusion  has 
been    that    very  thing   which    the    world   regards   as   a 

'  In  a  speech  delivered  at  Aylesbury,  September  20th,  1876,  the 
late  Lord  Beaconsfield  thus  alluded  to  another  formidable  element 
of  distraction; — "In  the  attempt  to  conduct  the  government  of  this 
world,  there  are  new  elements  to  be  considered  with  which  our 
predecessors  had  not  to  deal.  We  have  not  to  deal  only  with 
emperors,  princes,  and  ministers,  but  there  are  the  secret  societies 
— an  element  which  we  must  take  into  consideration — which  at  the 
last  moment  may  baffle  all  our  arrangements,  which  have  their 
agents  everj'where,  which  have  reckless  agents,  which  counte- 
nance assassination,  and  which,  if  nccessar}',  could  produce  a 
massacre." 


THE  SIGNS  OF  THE   TIMES.  2i 

cure  for  every  evil — the  spread  of  knowledge.  Foi 
many  of  those  who  acquire  a  little  learning — and  the 
majority  of  mankind  can  do  no  more — are  not  slow 
to  give  proof  that  in  very  deed  "  shallow  draughts 
intoxicate  the  brain";  and  are  wont,  by  a  confident 
and  persistent  setting  forth  of  their  opinions,  to  lead 
astray  those  whose  ignorance  exceeds  their  own,  and 
in  this  manner  to  confound  the  counsels  of  wiser  and 
more   experienced    guides'. 

Education  of  a  certain  kind  has  indeed  become 
general  ;  but,  alas  !  not  with  the  expected  result,  since 
morals  seem  at  the  same  time  to  be  degenerating  in 
inverse  ratio.  For  how  common  is  the  lack  of  truth- 
fulness, and  that  not  merely  in  commercial  life,  but 
in  all  ranks  of  society  !  And  this  evil  does  not  only 
exist,  but  is  recognized  as  at  least  a  venial  fault,  if 
not  an  absolute  necessity.  The  law,  "  Swear  to  thine 
own  hurt  and  change  not,"  has  no  popularity  in  the 
present  age,  and  he  who  breaks  it  will  find  many 
advocates  and  defenders. 

Meanwhile,  the  growing  impatience  and  irritability  of 
men,  arising  from  the  indulgence  of  generations,  the 
abuse  of  stimulants  and  narcotics,  and  the  painful 
pressure  and  excitement  of  modern  life,  are  beginning 
to  manifest  themselves  in  deeds  of  recklessness  and 
violence,  such  as  may  be  found  in  the  records  of  any 
newspaper  ;  while  lawlessness  and  crime  of  every  de- 
scription are  increasing,  and — which  is  still  worse — 
often  assume  shape^s  difficult  to  detect  or  punish. 

And  over  all  this  sin  and  misery  the  giant  forms 
of  still  more  terrible  woes  are  projecting  their  ad- 
vancing shadows.  Europe  is  armed  to  an  extent 
hitherto    unknown,    and    has    been    converted     into    a 


23  FROLEGOMENA. 

vast  camp  through  the  jealousy  of  the  great  Powers, 
which  are  simply  waiting  for  an  opportunity  of  carry- 
ing out  their  aggressive  schemes.  The  most  cruel 
and  bloody  war  of  our  days  has  lately  terminated  in 
a  peace  which  can  be  no  more  than  a  lull  in  the 
storm  ;  for  the  dreaded  Eastern  problem  is  still  un- 
solved. Few  are  those  who  expect  more  than  a  brief 
respite  before  the  air  is  again  tormented  with  the  rush 
of  shot  and  shell,  and  polluted  with  the  smoke  of 
burning  villages  and  homesteads.  And  even  during 
the  short  armed  truce  in  Europe,  wars  have  been  raging 
in  parts  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  America. 

Yet  again,  the  rapid  spread  of  Socialistic  principles 
among  all  the  nations  of  Christendom,  and  the 
numerous  secret  leagues  organized  for  their  propaga- 
tion, are  giving  statesmen  grave  cause  to  apprehend 
a  revolutionary  outburst  which  may  shatter  the  whole 
framework   of  society. 

And  lastly  ;  breaches  have  been  made  in  the 
barriers  set  by  God  to  separate  the  dwellers  upon  earth 
from  the  spirit-world,  so  that  an  avowed  intercourse  is 
now  established  between  men  and  demons. 

Nor  are  physical  commotions  wanting  to  heighten 
the  excitement.  The  last  few  years  have  been  un- 
usually prolific  in  violent  storms  and  inundations 
destructive  to  life  and  property.  Earthquakes  have 
become  alarmingly  frequent,  and  seem  by  their 
ubiquity  to  betoken  a  widespread  disturbance  in  the 
bowels  of  the  earth  which  may  culminate  in  some 
appalling  catastrophe.  And  although  the  greater 
number  of  shocks  are  at  present  comparatively  slight, 
yet  there  have  been  not  a  few  grave  disasters — such 
as  those  at  Casamicciola,  Chio,    Ischia,  and   Java,    the 


THE  SIGNS   OF  THE    TIMES.  2.3 

last  of  which  has  been  characterised  by  compctcni; 
authorities  as  the  most  stupendous  convulsion  on 
record.  Famines,  too,  have  occurred  in  divers  places — 
in  different  parts  of  India,  in  Persia,  in  China,  in 
Morocco,  and  in  several  other  countries  ;  while  various 
kinds  of  sickness  and  disease  seem  to  be  more  than 
usually  prevalent. 

Now  all  these  things,  and  many  others  which  might 
be  mentioned,  do  indeed  forebode  disasters  and  wide- 
spread distress,  but  not  necessarily  the  last  tribulation, 
the  final  throes  of  the  world.  For  earth  has  had  her 
times  of  convulsion,  suffering,  and  change,  in  former 
days.  God's  sore  plagues,  war,  famine,  pestilence,  and 
the  beasts  of  the  earth,  have  often  desolated  her  lands 
in  past  years,  and  yet  the  end  has  not  followed.  Nay, 
were  we  to  feel  the  solid  ground  trembling  beneath  us, 
and  behold  the  mountains  lifted  up  and  cast  into  the 
sea,  even  such  a  sight  would  not  in  itself  prove  that  the 
great  Day  of  the  Lord  had  come. 

Men  have  often  forgotten  this,  and,  when  appealing 
to  Scripture,  have  too  frequently  drawn  their  inferences 
from  an  exaggeration  of  one  or  more  detached  texts, 
instead  of  carefully  considering  all  that  the  prophets 
have  spoken.  Hence  there  have  been  many  false  alarms 
and  panics. 

A  remarkable  instance  occurred  at  the  close  of  the 
sixth  century.  At  that  time  men  had  become  so 
accustomed  to  the  domination  of  Rome  that  they 
believed  her  power  could  only  perish  with  the  world 
itself.  And  so,  when  they  saw  her  apparently  in  the 
pangs  of  dissolution,  with  her  lands  wasted  by  war, 
famine,  and  disease,  to  such  a  degree  that  many  once 
populous     places     had     become     pestilential     through 


24  PROLEGOMENA. 

neglect  ;  ^  when  they  beheld  her  supplies  cut  off,  and 
not  a  few  of  her  buildings  destroyed  by  storms  and 
inundations,  they  imagined  that  the  world  also  had 
run  its  course,  and  that  the  last  dread  judgment  was 
near  at  hand. 

Gregory  the  Great  was  strongly  imbued  with  this 
idea,  and,  in  a  letter  to  King  Ethelbert,  he  thus  ex- 
presses it ; — "  We  know  from  the  word  of  Almighty 
God  that  the  end  of  the  present  world  is  now  at  hand, 
and  that  the  reign  of  the  saints,  which  can  never  be 
terminated,  is  about  to  commence.  And  now  that 
the  end  of  the  world  is  approaching,  many  things  will 
take  place  which  have  not  happened  before.  F'or 
there  will  be  atmospheric  changes,  terrors  from  heaven, 
deranged  seasons,  wars,  famines,  pestilences,  and  earth- 
quakes in  divers  places."  ^ 

And  since  there  was  an  Antichrist  required  for  the 
last  daj's,  Gregory  was  sure  he  had  detected  him  in 
the  Patriarch  of  Constantinople,  John  the  Faster,  who 
had  just  irritated  the  See  of  Rome  by  proclaiming 
himself  Universal  Bishop. 

Again,  in  the  tenth  century,  there  was  a  still  more 
general  panic.  It  was  im.agined  that  Satan  had  been 
bound  from  the  time  of  our  Lord's  first  appearing, 
and  that,  since  the  thousand  years  were  almost  accom- 
plished, he  was  about  to  be  loosed  as  a  preparation 
for  the  last  judgment.     As  the  supposed  time  of  this 

'  See  Gregory's  sermon  on  the  plague,  and  Gibbon,  chaps.  xUii. 
and  xlv.  P"rom  a  passage  of  Procopius  (Anecdot.  cap.  xviii.), 
quoted  by  the  latter,  it  appears  to  have  been  calculated,  in  regard 
to  the  times  of  Justinian,  that  no  fewer  than  100,000,000  of  human 
beings  "  had  been  exterminated  under  the  reign  of  the  imperial 
demon." 

■M3edo,  "Eccles.  Tlist.."  i.  32. 


THE  SIGNS   OF   THE   TIMES,  25 

event  drew  nearer  the  terror  of  men  became  piteous. 
Some  handed  over  their  property  to  the  monkish 
foundations,  and  set  out  on  a  pilgrimage  to  Palestine, 
whither  they  expected  Christ  to  descend.  Many 
actually  bound  themselves  by  solemn  oaths  to  be  serfs 
to  churches  or  monasteries,  in  the  hope  that,  if  they 
were  found  acting  as  servants  to  the  servants  of  Christ, 
they  would  be  more  gently  dealt  with  at  the  judgment. 
Buildings  were  allowed  to  fall  into  decay,  since  it  was 
supposed  that  there  would  be  but  little  further  use 
for  them.  And  if  there  happened  to  be  an  eclipse  of 
the  sun  or  moon,  affrighted  crowds  would  fly  to  the 
caverns  of  the  rocks,  or  to  any  other  places  which  they 
thought  might  shelter  them  from  the  glory  of  the 
dreaded  appearing.^ 

But  the  year  One  Thousand  passed  by  ;  nothing 
happened,  and  presently  the  excitement  subsided. 

Now  these  alarms,  and  many  others,  sprang  from 
crude  and  baseless  arguments  which  do  not  for  a 
moment  endure  the  test  of  intelligent  investigation. 
And  their  result  was  something  worse  than  the  mere 
delusion  of  those  who  were  affected  by  them  :  for 
they  caused  a  general  discredit  of,  and  distaste  for, 
the  prophetic  scriptures ;  since  men  are  ever  ready 
to  cast  upon  the  word  of  God  the  blame  of  that 
failure  which  is  solely  due  to  their  foolish  and  short- 
sighted  interpretation. 

Certainly,  then,  our  duty  is  to  take  heed  that  we 
be  not  carried  away  by  such  vain  excitements,  of 
which  there  are  too  many  in  our  days  ;  but  we  must 

'See  Mosheim,  "  Eccles.  Hist."  Cent.  X.,  part  ii.  chap.  iii.  ; 
and  Robertson's  "History  of  the  Cluistian  Church,"  book  iv. 
chap.  V. 


26  PROLEGOMENA, 

be  still  more  careful  to  avoid  the  opposite  extreme. 
It  is  better  to  be  troubled  by  many  false  alarms  than 
to  be  once  taken  by  surprise.  The  inhabitants  of 
earth  must  awake  some  morning  to  find  that  the 
Day  of  the  Lord  is  present ;  and  as  a  snare  will  it 
come  upon  all  those  who  have  not  understood  the 
warnings  of  revelation.  We  should,  therefore,  pray 
for  wisdom  that  we  may  understand,  and  for  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  that  we  may  watch.  Nor  could 
words  be  stronger  than  our  Lord's  injunction  upon 
this  point.  "Take  ye  heed,"  He  said,  "watch  and 
pray :  for  ye  know  not  when  the  time  is.  For  the 
Son  of  man  is  as  a  man  taking  a  far  journey,  who 
^cft  his  house,  and  gave  authority  to  his  servants, 
and  to  every  man  his  work,  and  commanded  the 
porter  to  watch.  Watch  ye,  therefore,  for  ye  know 
not  when  the  Master  of  the  House  cometh,  at  even, 
or  at  midnight,  or  at  the  cockcrowing,  or  in  the 
morning  ;  lest,  coming  suddenly,  He  find  you  sleeping. 
And  what  I  say  unto  you,  I  say  unto  all.  Watch ! " 

To  stimulate  obedience  to  our  Lord's  command, 
by  tracing  out  the  main  streams  of  prophecy,  and 
endeavouring  to  ascertain  our  own  position  in  regard 
to  them,  is  the  object  of  this  book.  And  if  we  dis- 
cover that  the  revealed  counsels  of  God  place  before 
us  the  translation  of  the  Church  as  the  next  event 
to  be  expected  ;  and,  still  further,  that  the  present 
bent  of  human  opinion,  and  the  general  condition 
and  tendency  of  the  world,  are  already  in  the  direc- 
tion of  those  apostasies,  convulsions,  revolutions,  and 
judgments,  which  will  affect  men  after  the  withdrawal 
of  the  Church  ;  then  we.  shall  indeed  have  reason  to 
believe  that  our  age  has   entered  upon   its   last  days. 


THE  SEVEN  DISPENSATIONS.  27 

and  that  those  who  would  be  Christ's  at  His  coming 
have  urgent  need  to  keep  their  garments,  lest  He  be 
suddenly  revealed,  and  they  be  found  naked,  so  that 
all  men  see  their  shame. 

III. 

The  Seven  Dispensations. 

Why    man,    immediately    after    his    introduction    into 

the   world,  should  have   been    exposed    to   temptation 

and   sin    with    all    its    attendant    miseries,  we    cannot 

explain.     We  are  altogether  unable  to  decide  whether 

he    is    now    passing    through    a    fiery    trial    which    is 

intended  to  humble  him  and   eradicate  the  rebellious 

feelings    conceived  in   former  ages,^    v\^hile    the    blood 

of  the  Lord  Jesus  atones  for  them  ;  or  whether  some 

other  and,  perhaps,  widely  different  cause  has  shaped 

the  wise  and  merciful  counsels  of  the  Most   High  in 

regard    to    our    race.       Nor    can    anything    be    more 

foolish  than   the    attempt   to  penetrate  a    mystery   so 

utterly  beyond    our   ken — a    mystery  which,   in    spite 

of  all   our  efforts,  must  remain  hidden  until,  in  some 

'  We  do  not  mention  this  to  express  belief  in  a  previous  exist- 
ence of  man,  but  only  in  the  possibility  of  it.  Should  it  prove 
to  be  an  actual  fact,  the  foundation  of  nearly  all  the  hard 
speeches  which  ungodly  sinners  have  spoken  against  God  would 
be  swept  av.-ay  in  a  moment.  Should  it  not,  God  has  some  far 
better  solution  of  difQcultics,  which  He  may  hereafter  show_  to 
those  who  love  Him.  It  has  been  supposed  that  the  description 
of  man's  creation  precludes  the  question  of  his  pre-existence, 
because  God  is  said  to  have  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath 
of  life.  But  this  expression  is  not  materially  different  from  that 
which  is  found  in  the  prophecy  to  the  dry  bones,  "  Behold,  I  will 
cause  breath  to  enter  into  you,  and  ye  sliall  live."  And  again, 
"Come  from  the  four  winds,  O  breath,  and  breathe  upon  these 
slain,  that  they  may  live"  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  5,  9).  Since,  then,  the 
words  of  this  passage   are  confessedly  used  of  resurrection,   it 


28  PROLEGOMENA, 

future  age,  it  shall  please  the  Almighty  to  draw  back 
the  curtain  with  His  own  hand,  and  so  to  reveal,  to 
those  who  could  trust  Him  amid  the  darkness  of  this 
life,  the  depths  and  faultless  wisdom  of  His  unweary- 
ing love. 

Yet,  although  we  may  not  search  into  the  deep 
things  of  God,  we  cannot  but  be  struck  with  one 
feature  of  His  dealings  with  mankind.  For  while 
the  government  of  this  world  has  undergone  several 
changes,  which  we,  following  the  example  of  Paul, 
term  dispensations  ;  still,  these  dispensations,  vary  as 
they  may  in  laws  and  conditions,  are  ever  constant 
to  one  main  object.  They  all  combine  to  prove  that  , 
in  no  conceivable  circumstances  are  men  able  to  pre-  I 
serve  their  integrity  and  save  themselves  from  corrup- 
tion ;  that  their  sole  hope  lies  in  a  direct  interposition 
of  the  Eternal,  and  so  miraculous  an  infusion  of  His 
Holy  Spirit  that  an  entire  change  is  wrought  in  their 
nature.  And  this  fact  certainly  points  to  some  deep- 
seated  alienation  from  and  tendency  to  rebellion 
against  God,  which  must  be  eradicated  before  peace 
and    harmony    can    be    restored    to    the    human   race. 

would  seem  that  the  verse  in  Genesis  does  not  decide  against  the 
possibility  of  pre-existence,  but  must  be  regarded  as  neutral. 
Yet  let  us  not  dwell  upon  this  impenetrable  mystery ;  for,  while  a 
passing  glance  7nay,  perhaps,  help  a  weak  faith,  any  attempt  to 
speculate  upon  it  must  ha  fraught  with  the  gravest  danger,  since 
there  is  no  revelation.  "  The  secret  things  belong  unto  the  Lord 
our  God ;  but  those  things  which  are  revealed  belong  unto  us,  and 
to  our  children  for  ever."  Oh  that  there  were  a  deeper  reverence 
among  us  for  the  hidden  things  of  the  Almighty,  which  are 
withheld  for  our  discipline,  and  that  we  might  be  taught  to  say 
with  David; — "Lord,  my  heart  is  not  haughty,  nor  mine  eyes 
lofty  ;  neither  do  I  exercise  myself  in  great  matters,  or  in  things 
too  high  for  me."  And  let  us  ever  remember  the  words  of  a 
greater  than  David  ; — "  Except  ye  be  converted,  and  become  as 
little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  Kingdom  of  the  heavens." 


THE  SEVEN  DISPENSATIONS.  .-29 

Whatever  he  be,  or  whatever  the  mystery  which 
enwraps  him,  it  is  at  least  clear  that  man  has  failed  to 
comprehend  the  lesson  of  absolute  dependence  which 
creation  should  have  been  sufficient  to  teach,  and 
can  now  learn  it  only  through  a  redemption  more 
wonderful   than   creation   itself. 

In  the  first  dispensation,  Adam  and  Eve  were 
created  in  a  state  of  innocence  and  entire  freedom 
from  pain  toil  or  anxiety,  and  were  placed  in  a 
garden  of  delight.  As  a  test  of  that  spirit  of  obedi- 
ence to  the  Creator  which  is  both  reasonable  and 
necessary,  but  one  small  thing  was  required  of  them — 
they  were  merely  commanded  to  abstain  from  the 
fruit  of  a  single  tree  in  the  garden.  Easy,  nay, 
imperceptible,  as  this  yoke  must  have  been — for 
surely  nothing  but  the  distempered  fancies  of  pride 
and  self-will  could  have  made  them  feel  it  at  all — • 
they,  nevertheless,  broke  it  from  off  their  necks.  And 
so  they  were  expelled  from  the  Paradise  of  joy,  after 
having  shown  that  man  cannot  retain  his  innocency 
when  he  has  it :  no,  not  even  if  he  be  aided  by  the 
most  favouring  circumstances. 

A  different  age  succeeded.  Adam  and  his  descend- 
ants were  now  tested  to  see  whether,  after  the  painful 
experience  of  the  fall,  they  could  recover  themselves 
by  their  own  innate  goodness  and  without  law  or 
government.  But,  instead  of  improvement,  they  grew 
worse  and  worse,  until  earth  was  so  filled  with  cor- 
ruption and  violence  that  God  was  compelled  to  sweep 
every  living  creature  out  of  it.  And  thus  it  appeared 
that  man,  if  freed  from  restraint  and  left  to  himself, 
will  not  merely  fail  to  effect  his  salvation,  but  also 
rush  headlong  to  destruction. 


30  PROLEGOMENA. 

When  the  flood  had  passed  away,  Noah  came  forth 
from  the  ark,  and  a  third  dispensation  commenced. 
God  now  invested  man  with  the  sword  of  the  magis- 
trate, directing  that  violence  should  thenceforth  be 
checked  by  the  execution  of  the  murderer,  and  thus 
placed  His  fallen  creatures  under  the  discipline  of 
visible  and  earthly  government.  But  political  union  so 
intoxicated  them  with  its  new  power  that  they  delibe- 
rately rebelled  against  Him,  and  were  only  hindered 
from  a  daring  act  of  defiance  by  the  confusion  of 
tongues.  And  while  their  government  served  to  unite 
them  against  their  Creator,  it  at  the  same  time  utterly 
failed  to  restrain  their  moral  corruption.  This  we  may 
learn  from  the  miserable  history  of  the  cities  of  the 
plain,  whose  catastrophe  seems  to  have  closed  the  third 
or  Noachian  period. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  dispensation, 
which  may  be  termed  the  Pilgrim  Age,  God  gave  up 
the  world  as  a  whole,  and  chose  out  for  Himself  a 
single  family,  purposing  first  to  regenerate  the  people 
who  should  spring  from  it,  and  ultimately,  through 
them,  to  restore  and  bless  all  nations.  Abraham  and 
his  descendants  by  Jacob  were,  consequently,  separated 
from  the  remainder  of  mankind,  that  they  might  be 
brought  into  communion  with  Jehovah.  They  v\'ere 
caused  to  wander  a,bout  as  strangers  and  pilgrims, 
having  no  dwelling-place  of  their  own  ;  and  when  at 
last  they  seemed  to  have  settled  in  Egypt,  they  were 
suddenly  made  to  feel  the  hostility  of  the  land  in  which 
they  lived  by  finding  themselves  reduced  to  a  cruel  and 
hopeless  bondage.  Yet  even  this  severe  discipline  of 
separation  and  affliction,  ■  though  it  was  closed  by  a 
wondrous  display  of  God's  faithfulness  and  power,  failed 


THE  SEVEN  DISPENSATIONS.  31 

to  subdue  their  rebellious  self-will,  as  we  may  see  by 
their  conduct  after  deliverance.  Nor  did  the  treatment 
which  they  had  received  from  the  world  change  their 
inclination  towards  it.  For  when,  on  their  journey  to 
Canaan,  they  began  to  be  dissatisfied  with  God,  they 
longed  for  the  flesh-pots,  the  fish,  the  cucumbers,  the 
melons,  the  leeks,  the  onions,  and  the  garlic,  of  Egypt, 
and  turned  back  in  their  hearts  to  the  land  which  had 
so  ruthlessly  oppressed  them. 

The  time  at  last  arrived  for  the  establishment  of  the 
chosen  nation  as  a  Kingdom  upon  earth,  and  the 
introduction  of  the  fifth  age.  Accordingly,  the  Israel- 
ites, awe-struck  by  the  marvels  of  their  deliverance 
from  Egypt,  were  led  through  the  Wilderness  of  Sin — 
being  meanwhile  sustained  by  bread  which  fell  from 
heaven,  and  water  which  streamed  from  the  smitten 
rock — until  they  halted  in  full  view  of  the  steep  and 
rugged  heights  of  Sinai.  There,  amid  the  most  awful 
manifestations  of  the  presence  of  Jehovah,  the  laws  of 
the  Kingdom  were  delivered  to  them,  and  were  after- 
wards written,  in  order  that  they  and  their  children 
might  thenceforth  know  those  things  by  which,  if  they 
did  them,  they  should  live.  But  from  the  very  first 
they  grievously  failed  to  obey ;  and,  in  consequence, 
delayed  their  entrance  into  the  promised  land  for  forty 
years.  And  when  God  did  at  last  establish  them  in 
Palestine,  they  quickly  showed  themselves  to  be  the 
same  stiff-necked  and  wayward  people.  Neither  their 
marvellous  training,  nor  the  possession  of  the  written 
law  of  God,  availed  to  effect  a  radical  change  in  them, 
they  grew  weary  of  Jehovah  as  their  sole  Ruler,  and 
demanded  an  earthly  monarch.  This  request  was 
granted  ;  but,  after  three  successive  reigns,  dissensions 


32  PROLEGOMENA. 

arose  which  caused  the  separation  of  the  people  into 
two  distinct  and,  for  the  most  part,  hostile  states. 
These  kingdoms,  in  spite  of  the  warnings  of  the 
prophets  and  the  oft-repeated  chastisements  of  God, 
proved  so  incorrigibly  prone  to  sorcery  and  idolatry 
that  at  length  the  Almighty  permitted  the  destruction 
of  Israel,  and  some  time  afterwards  suffered  Judah  also 
to  be  carried   away  captive. 

After  seventy  years  the  exiles  of  the  latter  kingdom 
were  allowed  to  return  to  Jerusalem,  and  to  rebuild 
the  Temple  and  the  ruined  walls.  Their  affliction  had 
cured  them  of  open  idolatry,  and  they  practised  it  no 
more.  They  did  not,  however,  on  that  account,  draw 
nearer  to  God,  but  merely  substituted  for  their  former 
sin  a  hypocritical  formality  or  a  sceptical  indifference. 

And  thus  they  became  so  entirely  carnal  that,  when 
God,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  sent  His  only  begotten  Son 
into  the  world,  instead  of  hailing  Him  as  the  long- 
desired  Messiah,  they  rejected  and  crucified  Him.  In 
anger  God  suspended  His  covenant,  refused  at  that  time 
to  restore  the  Kingdom  to  Israel,  again  gave  up  the 
city  and  sanctuary  to  destruction,  and  scattered  the 
Jews  among  all  nations  for  a  second  and  far  longer 
and  more  severe  captivity. 

Then  followed  the  parenthetical  dispensation  of  grace, 
during  which  the  Israelite  is  cast  aside  for  a  season, 
but  not  forgotten  in  the  counsels  of  God.  For  one 
object  of  the  present  age  appears  to  be  the  removal 
of  the  obstacle  to  Israelitish  obedience.  It  was  the 
rebellious  Prince  of  this  World,  assisted  by  his  angels 
and  the  spirits  of  the  air,  who  continually  enticed  the 
children  of  Abraham  cither  to  idolatry  or  hypocrisy. 
Accordingly,  preparations  arc  now  being  made  for  the 


THE  SEVEN  DISPENSATIONS.  35 

expulsion  of  these  hostile  powers — "  the  High  Ones  that 
are  on  high  " — and  the  substitution  of  a  new  spiritual 
government,  that  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  His  Church. 
To  this  end  the  apostles  were  commanded  to  declare 
the  significance  of  the  death  of  Christ  upon  the  cross. 
He  had  offered  Himself  as  a  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the 
whole  world,  and  from  that  time  all  who  loved  and  were 
willing  to  follow  Him  should  be  considered  to  have 
died  in  Him,  and  so  to  have  paid  in  full  the  penalty  of 
their  sins.  Nay,  further,  God  would  regard  them  as 
clothed  with  the  perfect  righteousness  of  their  Saviour  ; 
and,  after  a  short  season  of  trial  for  their  sanctification, 
they  should,  at  the  close  of  the  age,  be  caught  up, 
whether  dead  or  alive,  to  meet  their  Lord  in  the  air, 
and  with  Him  become  the  spiritual  rulers  of  the  world 
in  place  of  Satan  and  his  angels.  And,  in  the  ages  to 
come,  the  Creator  would  show  forth  the  exceeding  riches 
of  His  grace  in  His  kindness  toward  them  through 
Christ  Jesus.^ 

Surely  such  an  exhibition  of  love  on  the  part  of  the 
Most  High  God,  coupled  with  such  glorious  offers  to 
His  fallen  and  undeserving  creatures,  should  have  con- 
strained every  inhabitant  of  earth  to  join  in  one  mighty 
ascription  of  praise  to  Him  That  sitteth  on  the  Throne 
and  to  the  Lamb  !  But  no  ;  men  have  received  the 
announcement  with  stolid  apathy,  or  have  even  been 
roused  by  it  to  feelings  of  bitter  hatred  and  opposition. 
Only  a  {q^,  whose  hearts  the  Lord  has  opened,  have 
heard,  believed,  and  rejoiced.  These  are,  for  the  mosTl 
part,  found  among  the  poor  and  despised  of  men  ;  but 
they  are  known  to  the  great  King;,  and  He  will  shortly 
confess  their  names  before  His  Father  and  the  angels. 

'  Eph.  ii,  7. 

3 


34  PROLEGOMENA. 

The  rest  of  the  world  will  grow  worse  and  worse,  until 
this  sixth  age  also  ends  in  complete  failure,  proving 
that  not  even  the  revelation  of  the  love  of  God  in  Christ 
Jesus  can  soften  the  rebellious  heart  of  man. 

Then    will   follow  the  last  seven    years   of  the   fifth 
dispensation.^      The    majority    of    the    Jewish    people,   i 
which  would  not  receive   Christ,  will  accept  a  covenant  1 
with   Antichrist,   and    the   Lord    will    close    the    dread 
times  of  tribulation  by  appearing,  with   His  redeemed 
Church,  in  glory  to  take  the  Kingdom. 

During  the  Millennial  Age,  the  seventh  and  last  trial  I 
of  the  human  race,  Christ  will  reign  in  the  heavenly 
places,  the  region  now  in  the  possession  of  the  fallen 
angels,  and  will  make  His  people  Israel  the  Kings  of 
the  Earth  upon  the  earth.  Then  will  the  promises  to 
Abraham  and  the  glorious  predictions  of  the  Old 
Testament  prophets  be  at  length  fulfilled.  The  Tempter 
and  his  hosts  of  wickedness  will  be  cast  into  the  abyss, 
and  their  evil  influences  will  no  longer  impregnate  the 
air  with  incitements  to  sin  ;  the  curse  will  be  removed 
from  the  earth,  and  the  visible  glory  of  the  Lord  will 
be  present  at  the  Temple  in  Jerusalem  ;  while  the  car-  j 
cases  of  the  rebels  slain  in  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat  will 
be  ever  exposed  to  view.^ 

But  not  even  this  age  of  marvels,  blessings,  and 
warnings,  with  its  total  immunity  from  5p!ritual  temp- 
tation, will  bring  about  the  recovery  of  fallen  man, 
The  Israelitish  people  will  indeed  be  perfect,  yet  only 
through  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  Who,  in  accord- 
ance with  the  promised  new  covenant,  will  then  have 
written  His  law  upon  their  hearts.^     But  other  nations, 

The  reader  will  find  a  proof  of  this  assertion  in  Part  II. 
"Isa.  l.xvi.  24.  '  Jer.  xxxii.  40, 


THE  SEVEN  DISPENSATIONS,  35 

though  awed  into  acquiescence,  will  yield  but  a  feigned 
submission ;  ^  and  when  at  last  the  Tempter  is  let  loose, 
as  a  final  test  of  obedience,  they  will  gladly  listen  to 
his  suggestions,  and  gather  themselves  together  in 
open  rebellion  against  God.  The  forbearance  of  the 
Almighty  will  then,  however,  have  become  exhausted. 
Fire  will  be  hurled  from  heaven  to  destroy  the  rebel 
host  ;  and,  after  the  general  judgment,  the  eternal  state 
will  follow,  that  age  of  unsullied  glory  when  righteous- 
ness will  not  merely  reign,  as  in  the  Millennium,  but 
will  dwell  in  the  renewed  heavens  and  earth. 

Thus,  by  seven  distinct  and  altogether  diverse  tests,  \ 
it  will  have  been  proved  that  no  possible  circumstances  \ 
can  give  man  the  power  of  recovering  himself  from  j 
sin  ;^  that  he  must  either  cry  out  for  the  help  of  the  '\ 
Lord,  or  perish  from  His  presence  for  ever. 

'Twice  in  the  Psalms — Ixvi.  3,  and  Ixxxi.  15 — the  Hebrew  E^n? 
is  used  to  describe  the  attitude  of  the  Gentiles  towards  Christ 
during  the  Millennium  :  and  yet  again  it  appears  in  Psalm  xviii. 
44,  where  the  ultimate  application,  at  least,  seems  to  be  the  same. 
Now,  when  followed  by  a  dative  case,  as  in  each  of  these  passages, 
the  word  signifies  "to  lie  to"  a  person,  and  then  "to  cringe," 
"  fawn  upon  "  through  fear,  or,  as  the  margin  of  the  Authorised 
Version  has  it,  "  to  yield  feigned  obedience  to." 

If,  then,  such  a  word  can  be  used  of  the  general  condition  of 
the  world  at  a  time  when  men  will  not  merely  be  freed  from  temp- 
tation by  evil  spirits,  but  will  also  be  awed  by  the  visible  presence 
of  the  Lord,  it  is  evident  that  their  outward  submission,  however, 
complete,  will  be  rather  the  result  of  fear  than  of  love.  Conse- 
quently, at  the  close  of  the  age,  as  soon  as  Satan  is  loosed  from 
his  prison,  and  is  again  able  to  stir  up  and  direct  human  wicked- 
ness, the  last  great  rebellion  ensues. 

'•^  Not,  of  course,  that  God  needs  any  proof,  for  He  knows  all 
that  is  in  the  heart  of  man  :  but  it  appears  to  be  necessary  to  His 
purposes  that  man  himself  should  be  convinced.  And  this  is  no 
easy  matter,  as  every  experienced  Christian  is  too  well  aware. 
It  is  one  thing  to  subscribe  to  an  historical  belief  in  the  depravity 
of  the  human  race,  and  quite  another  to  be  humbly  conscious  of 
the  appalling  fact  in  our  own  person.     All  the  trials  of  believers 


36  PROLEGOMENA, 

IV. 

The  Three  Lines  of  Prophecy. 

Before  we  can  attempt  to  interpret  the  prophecies 
of  Scripture,  it  is  necessary  to  ascertain  to  whom  they 
severally  belong  :  for  God  is  now  dealing  with  three 
distinct  classes  of  men  upon  earth,  and  with  each  of 
them  on   lines  peculiar  to  itself. 

Until  the  close  of  the  third  age  He  seems  to  have 
given  all  His  revelations,  and  to  have  issued  every 
command,  to  the  whole  human  race  without  distinction. 
But  by  the  covenant  with  Abraham  He  called  out  one 
tribe  from  among  the  families  of  the  world  to  be 
peculiarly  His  own.  And  some  two  thousand  years 
later  He  proclaimed  the  formation  of  another  elect 
body,  and  men  of  every  kindred  and  tongue  and  people 
and  nation  were  invited  to  join  the  Church  of  Christ, 
and  so  to  become  separate  from  Israelites  as  well  as 
Gentiles. 

Thus  the  population  of  the  earth  is  at  present  divided 
into  three  great  orders,  each  of  which  will  be  found  to 
have  its  own  laws,  covenant,  sovereignty,  and  prophecies. 
^  I.  To  the  Gentiles,  or  world  at  large,  belong  those 
primal  laws  which  were  given  from  the  creation  of 
Adam  to  the  call  of  Abraham. 

Their  covenant  is  the  Noachian,  which  God  made 
between  Himself  "and  all  flesh  that  is  upon  the  earth,"^ 

are  needed  to  bring  them  to  a  realisation  of  their  true  condition  ; 
and  yet  how  often,  when  the  burden  which  has  bowed  them  down 
to  the  dust  is  removed,  do  they  rise  from  their  lowliness  and  join 
the  company  of  the  confident,  until  another  affliction  repeats  the 
lesson  they  have  so  quickly  forgotten. 
'  Gen.  ix.  17. 


THE    THREE  LhVES  OF  PROPHECY.  37 

and  the  conditions  of  which  are  still  in  force  in  the 
case  of  those  who  are  neither  Israelites  nor  members 
of  the  Church.  Indeed  God's  great  controversy  with 
the  Gentiles,  after  the  translation  of  waiting  believers 
and  before  the  Kingdom  is  restored  to  Israel,  has  special 
reference  to  breaches  of  this  covenant,  as  we  may  fairly 
infer  from  the  appearance  of  its  tokens  about  the 
judgment  throne,  which  is  encircled  with  a  rainbow 
and  attended   by  the  Cherubim.^ 

Their  sovereignty  is  earthly :  it  has  failed  once 
already,  and  they  are  now  nearing  the  end  of  their 
second  trial.  In  the  times  of  the  early  Babylonian 
monarchy  they  were  permitted  to  exercise  dominion, 
and  the  result  was  a  general  revolt  against  God.  Yet 
again,  because  of  Israel's  idolatry,  the  supremacy 
reverted  to  them  in  the  person  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  and 
has  ever  since  remained  in  their  hands. 

Their  prophecies — apart  from  those  primeval  utter- 
ances which  belong  to  all  mankind — are  very  easily 
distinguished,  since  they  are  written,  not  in  the  usual 
Hebrew  of  the  Old  Testament,  but  in  Chaldee,  the  | 
language  of  the  first  great  Gentile  world-power.  Six 
chapters  of  Daniel  are  thus  marked  off  for  the  nations,^ 
and  in  the  book  of  Jeremiah  there  is  a  still  more  signi- 
ficant instance.  God  sends  a  short  message  through 
the  prophet  to  the  Gentiles,  and  this  message,  though 
occupying  but  a  single  verse,  is,  nevertheless,  expressed 
in  Chaldee.^ 

II.   Passing  on  to  the  second  division,  we  know  that 

'  Rev.  iv.  3.  6-8.  For  an  exposition  of  the  Cherubim  and  their 
connection  with  the  Noachian  covenant,  see  the  author's  -'Earth's 
Earliest  Ages,"  chap.  viii. 

-  Chapp.  ii. — vii. 

•'  Jer   X.  IT. 


38  FROLEGOMENA. 

the  hope  of  Israel  lies  in  the  covenant  with  Abraham, 
and  that  their  law  was  ^iven  throuGfh  Moses. 

Once  already  the  Kingdom  has  been  within  their 
grasp,  but  they  proved  unworthy  to  possess  it,  and 
were,  therefore,  cast  out  for  discipline.  At  the  close  of 
the  times  of  the  Gentiles  the  sovereignty  will  be  re- 
stored to  them,  but  not  until  they  have  become  regene- 
rate through  the  Spirit  of  God,  so  that  there  will  be 
no  fear  of  a  second  failure. 

All  the  Old  Testament  prophecies  are  theirs,  save 
the  few  mentioned  above  as  belonging  to  the  Gentiles;^ 
while,  in  the  New,  predictions  which  concern  them  may 
be  readily  distinguished,  either  by  the  context,  or  by 
some  indication  which  connects  their  fulfilment  with 
the  Jewish  economy  and  excludes  it  from  our  own. 

III.  For  the  Church,  whose  calling  is  heavenly,  laws 
have  been  laid  down  by  the  Lord  Himself  and  by 
those  apostles  w^io  received  from  Him  the  power  to 
bind  and  to  loose.  Her  covenant  is  that  of  grace,  the 
glorious  Gospel  of  the  blessed  God.  The  Kingdom, 
which  in  her  case  is  heavenly,  has  never  yet  been 
delivered  to  her  ;  but  the  time  will  presently  come  for 
the  Saints  of  the  High  Places  to  take  it,  and  tht*n  her 
reign  will  be  with  Christ.  Her  prophecies  are  all  con 
tained  in  the  New  Testament. 

Such,  then,  are  the  three  great  divisions  of  our  race, 
to  one  of  which  every  human   being   belongs.     And  it 

'The  Church,  as  we  shall  presently  show,  was  a  mystery  hidden 
from  the  ages  until  it  was  made  known  by  the  Lord  and  His 
Apostles.  There  are,  therefore,  no  direct  prophecies  of  the 
heavenly  election  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  only  a  few  allusions 
which  could  not  have  been  understood  without  further  revelation, 
and  will  always  be  found  to  have  reference  to  the  connection 
between  Israel  and  the  Church. 


THE   THREE  LIKES  OF  PROPHECY.  39 

must  be  remembered  that  all  unfaithful  Jews  and 
merely  nominal  Christians  arc  included  in  the  first 
class,  the  only  difference  between  these  and  absolute 
Pagans  being  that  an  awful  responsibility  rests  upon 
the  former  from  which  the  latter  are  free.  Conse- 
quently, two-thirds  of  the  Jews  will  perish  in  the  great 
tribulation  ;  ^  and  when  the  Lord  appears  to  plead  with 
all  flesh  by  fire  and  by  His  sword,  the  rebellious  peoples 
of  Christendom  will  be  destroyed  :  ^  but  He  will  send 
messengers  of  peace  to  the  nations  that  have  not  heard 
His  fame  nor  seen  His  glory .^ 

There  are  many  allusions  in  the  Bible  to  the  three- 
fold division  of  mankind,  and  it  will  be  well,  before  we 
dismiss  the  subject,  to  call  attention  to  some  of  them. 

First,  then,  a  notable  instance  occurs  in  the  fiftieth 
Psalm,  the  commencing  verses  of  which  run  as  follows. 

1.  "  The  God  of  gods,  Jehovah,  hath  spoken, 

And  called  the  earth  from  the  rising  of    the  sun  unto  the 
going  down  thereof. 

2.  Out  of  Zion,  the  perfection  of  beauty,  God  hath  shined. 

3.  Our  God  will  come,  and  will  not  keep  silence  : 
A  fire  will  devour  before  Him, 

And  it  wdll  be  very  tempestuous  round  about  Him, 

4.  He  shall  call  to  the  heavens  above. 

And  to  the  earth,  that  He  may  judge  His  people. 

5.  Gather  ]\Iy  saints  together  unto  Me, 

Those  that  have  made  a  covenant  with  ]\Ie  by  sacrifice  ! 

6.  And  the  heavens  shall  declare  His  righteousness, 
For  God  Himself  is  Judge.     (Selah.)  " 

The  general  meaning  of  these  verses  is  sufficiently 
evident,  they  set  before  us  a  grand  description  of  the 
co;nins['  of   the   Lord.       His   summons   to   the   heaven 


'£> 


•  Zech.  xiii.  8.  "  Matt,  xiii.  40-42. 

^  Isa.  Ixvi.  15-19, 


40  PROLEGOMENA. 

above  and  to  the  earth  beneath  seems  to  refer,  as  the 
context  indicates,  to  the  gathering  to  Him  of  New 
Testament  saints,  whether  they  chance  to  be  then 
waiting  in  the  Paradise  of  God,  or  are  still  alive  upon 
earth.  These  have  made  with  Him  a  covenant  founded 
upon  sacrifice  :  that  is,  they  have  confessed  their  need 
of  atonement,  and  have  accepted  Christ  as  the  propitia- 
tion for  their  sins.  And  they  are  assembled  from 
earth  and  sky  in  order  that  God  may  judge  His 
people,  that  is,  Israel  :  for  as  soon  as  the  Church  is 
removed  from  earth,  Israel  will  again  become  His 
people. 

The  Church,  then,  is  summoned  to  meet  the  Lord  in 
the  air,  and  the  heavens  declare  the  justice  of  God  in 
so  exalting  her  :  for  Christ  who  knew  no  sin  has  been 
made  sin  for  her,  and  now  she  must  needs  be  mani- 
fested as  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him.  The 
destiny  of  the  first  of  the  three  classes  is  made  clear 
and  the  solemn  pause  indicated  by  the  word  Selah 
shows    that    the   subject    is    about    to    change. 

The  remainder  of  the  Psalm  may  be  divided,  at 
the  close  of  the  fifteenth  verse,  into  two  sections. 

Of  these,  the  first  contains  a  tender  appeal  to  the 
sons  of  Jacob,  exhorting  them  to  trust  no  longer  in 
mere  outward  and  formal  sacrifices,  but  to  bring 
spiritual  offerings  to  their  God.  And  it  ends  with 
the  gracious  promise  that,  if  they  hearken  to  His 
voice,  they  shall  call  upon  Him  in  the  day  of  trouble, 
that  is,  in  the  great  tribulation,  and  He  will  deliver 
them,   and   they  shall   glorify   Him. 

But    the    sixteenth    verse    begins     a    very   different 
strain,   an   address   to  "  the  wicked,"  those  who,   what 
ever  they  may  deem  themselves,  can  in  God's  judgment 


THE    THREE  LINES  OF  PROPHECY,  41 

be  ranked  neither  with  Jews  nor  Christians,  and  are, 
consequently,  in  danger  of  the  impending  wrath. 
Their  hypocrisy  is  denounced  in  scathing  terms  :  they 
are  disobedient  ones  who  know  the  Lord's  will  and 
do  it  not ;  nay,  who  even  dare  to  preach  it  to  others, 
though  they  are  themselves  workers  of  iniquity.  Such 
conduct  God  abhors,  and  in  special  detestation  does 
He  hold  the  deceit  by  which  they  rid  themselves  of 
His  fear,  that  is,  by  representing  His  attributes 
according  to  their  own  depraved  conceptions,  and  not 
according  to  His  revelation.  Therefore,  utter  destruc- 
tion is  before  them,  unless  they  quickly  repent,  and 
bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance  by  giving  glory 
to  God.  __ 

Again,  the  three  classes  are  set  before  us  just  as 
clearly  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  Daniel,  where  we 
find  mention  of  the  Four  Beasts,  or  Gentile  World- 
powers  ;  of  the  Saints  of  the  High  Places,  or  the 
Church,  so  called  because  they  are  destined  to  reign 
in  the  High  or  Heavenly  Places  with  Christ  ;  and, 
lastly,  of  the  People  of  the  Saints  of  the  High  Places, 
that  is,  of  the  Israelites,  who  will  be  in  intimate 
connection  with  the  Church  during  the  Millennial 
period. 

Yet  another  instance  occurs  in  Paul's  First  Epistle 
to  the  Corinthians,  where,  according  to  our  Authorised 
Version,  we  read  ; — "  Give  none  offence,  neither  to  the 
Jews,  nor  to  the  Gentiles,  nor  to  the  Church  of  God."  ^ 
Thus  translated  the  passage  needs  no  comment  :  but 
upon  referring  to  the  original,  we  find  that  Paul  wrote 
"  Greeks,"  and  not  "  Gentiles."  This  fact  does  not, 
however,  appear   to  affect  the   sense :    for  in   warning 

'  1  Cor.  X.  32 


42  PROLEGOMENA. 

the  Corinthians  not  to  put  a  stumbling-block  before 
individuals  belonging  to  any  of  the  great  divisions  of 
the  world,  the  apostle  terms  the  second  class  "Greeks" 
merely  because  the  Gentiles  in  contact  with  the 
Corinthians  were  mainly  of  that  nationality.  More- 
over, the  term  Greeks  was  then  applied  to  all  civilized 
nations  in  opposition  to  the  rest  of  mankind  who  were 
characterised  as  Barbarians. 

Other  passages  might  be  cited,  but  these  will  suffice 
to  show  how  distinctly  the  Scriptures  recognise  that 
threefold  division  of  the  human  race  upon  which  the 
interpretation  of  the  present  book  is  founded. 

V. 

The  Three  Prophetic  Periods. 

There  is  yet  another  fact,  the  knowledge  of  which 
is  indispensable  to  those  who  would  comprehend 
Divine  revelations  of  the  future.  Prophetic  time,  from 
the  commencement  of  the  Seventy  Weeks  to  the  Second 
Advent,  is  divided  into  three  grand  periods,  which 
arc  plainly  marked  out  in  the  book  of  Daniel,  and 
as  plainly  recognised  in  the  Apocalypse.  The  evi- 
dences to  this  fact  will  be  given  in  their  proper  place  : 
for  the  present  we  shall  merely  make  a  statement  of  it, 
in  order  that  the  principles  which  guide  our  interpre- 
tation may  be  at  once  laid  before  the  reader. 

In  glancing  through  the  book  of  Daniel  we  observe 
that  the  prophet  could  not  understand  his  earlier 
visions  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  chapters  ;  ^  that  in 
the  ninth  chapter  an  angel   is  sent,  in  ansv.-er  to  h's 

'  Dan.  vii.  28;  viii.  2-]. 


THE    THREE  PROPHETIC  PERIODS,  43 

earnest  prayer,  to  give  him  "skill  and  understanding";^ 
and  that,  after  receiving  this  communication,  he  readily 
comprehended  the  final  vision,^  which  is  narrated  in 
the  tenth  and  following  chapters.  It  is  clear,  then, 
that  the  four  verses  ^  which  contain  the  angel's  words 
are  the  key  to  the  whole  book. 

Now  the  purport  of  these  verses  is,  that  God  had      j. 
divided  what  was  then  future  time  into  three  periods.  ■< 

I.  The  first,  a  definite  time  of  four  hundred  and 
eighty-three  years,  beginning  with  the  issue  of  a 
mandate  for  the  rebuilding  of  the  city  and  walls  of 
Jerusalem,  and  ending  with  the  presentation  of  Messiah 
as  her  King  to  the  daughter  of  Zion,  four  days  before 
His  death. 

II.  The  second,  an  indefinite  period,  beginning 
immediately  upon  the  close  of  the  first,  and  ending 
with  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  in  Christ  and  their 
translation,  together  with  all  waiting  believers  who 
are  then  upon  earth,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air. 
This  is  the  present  age,  the  time  of  the  Church,  during 
which  all  Jewish  prophecies  are  suspended. 

III.  The  third,  a  brief  period  of  but  seven  years,  | 
beginning  on  the  day  when  Antichrist  shall  make  a 
seven  years'  covenant  with  the  majority  of  the  Jewish 
nation,  and  ending  with  the  glorious  appearing  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  to  set  up  His  Kingdom.  This  is  a  time  of 
judgment,  God's  strange  and  short  work,  during  which 
He  will  resume  His  dealings  with  the  Jews  by  casting 
them  into  the  refining  furnace,  carry  on  His  contro- 
versy v/ith  the  Gentiles,  and  permit  the  fulfilment  of 
the  prophecies  concerning  Antichrist  and  the  Great 
Tribulation. 

Dan.  ix.  22.  "  Dan.  x.  i.  '  Dan.  ix.  24-27. 


44  FROLEGOMEyA. 

Now  with  these  three  distinctly  marked  times  before 
us,  let  us  remind  ourselves  of  two  facts. 

First  :  the  Scriptures  cannot  be  broken  or  disagree. 
We  may,  therefore,  justly  expect  to  find  in  the  Apoca- 
lypse a  recognition  of  the  periods  disclosed  to  Daniel. 

And,  secondly,  John  wrote  many  years  after  Christ's 
entry  into  Jerusalem.  Therefore,  the  first  of  Daniel's 
periods  had  then  passed  away,  and  the  apostle  was 
living  in  the  second  or  Church  period. 

Turning  now  to  the  Apocalypse,  we  shall  find  that 
its  contents  are  given  to  us  by  the  Lord  Himself  in 
the  nineteenth  verse  of  the  first  chapter,  where  He 
says  ; — "Write,  therefore,  the  things  which  thou  sawest, 
and  the  things  which  are,  and  the  things  which  shall 
be  after  these  things." 

We  have,  then,  the  following  harmony  with  the 
scl'.eme  of  the  Seventy  Weeks. 

I.   Daniel's  first  period  had  passed  by, 

n.  What  John  had  already  seen  is  written  in  the 
first  chapter,  which  describes  his  vision  of  the  sanctuary 
arranged  tor  the  present  dispensation.  Then,  occupy- 
ing the  second  and  third  chapters,  come  "  the  things 
that  arc,"  or  prophecies  of  the  age  in  which  John  was 
living,  which  is  still  going  on,  and  which  answers  to 
Daniel's  second  and  indefinite  period. 

HI.  Lastly  ;  stretching  from  the  fourth  to  the  nine- 
teenth chapter,  come  "the  things  that  shall  be  after 
these  things,"  that  is,  in  Daniel's  third  period,  the 
seven   years  of  judgment. 

A  careful  application  of  this  Divinely  revealed 
scheme  will  dispel  confusion,  and  enable  us  to  range 
the  predictions  of  the  two  great  prophets,  as  well  as 
those  of  all   others,   in   their  proper  order. 


MYSTIC  CHRONOLOGl.  45 

VI. 

Mystic  Chronology. 

We  must  not  close  our  introductory  remarks  without 
mention  of  the  mystical  chronology  which  inspired 
writers  sometimes  use  in  dealing  with  the  times  of 
Israel,  and  which  is  based  upon  a  very  simple  principle. 

Israel  once  brought  out  of  Egypt  should  have  been 
the  people  of  God  for  ever  without  any  intermission. 
But  they  provoked  Him  by  their  idolatries,  so  that  He 
repeatedly  "sold  them"  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies. 
And  whenever  He  did  so,  the  theocracy  was  suspended, 
and  the  time  of  their  servitude  was  not  reckoned  in  the 
mystic  chronology. 

We  shall  meet  with  a  remarkable  illustration  of  this 
fact  when  we  examine  the  prophecy  of  the  Seventy 
Weeks.  There  the  whole  time  from  the  I^ord's  rejec- 
tion as  King  by  the  daughter  of  Zion  to  the  still  future 
day  on  which  Antichrist  will  make  his  covenant  with 
the  Jews,  is  omitted  from  the  calculation,  because  it  is 
the  Z^-rtwwz-period,  during  which  no  Israelites  of  any 
tribe  can  be  nationally  recognised  as  the  people  of  God. 
But  of  this  we  shall  have  to  speak  presently. 

There  is,  however,  another  instructive  instance  which 
we  shall  not  need  to  mention  again,  and  will,  therefore, 
endeavour  to  set  forth  now. 

In  the  Book  of  Kings,  we  are  told  that  Solomon 
began  to  build  the  Temple  in  the  fourth  year  of  his 
reign,  and  "  in  the  four  hundred  and  eightieth  year 
after  the  children  of  Israel  were  come  out  of  Egypt."  ^ 

But  if  we  turn  to  the  thirteenth  chapter  of  "  Acts  " 

'  I  Kings  vi.  i. 


46  PROLEGOMENA. 

we  shall  meet  with  a  very  different  computation.  For 
there  Paul  speaks  of  the  Israelites  as  having  passed 
forty  years  in  the  wilderness,^  four  hundred  and  fifty 
under  the  judges,-  and  forty  under  Saul.^  If  to  these 
five  hundred  and  thirty  years  we  add  the  forty  during 
which  David  was  king,'^'  and  the  three  of  Solomon's 
reign  which  had  gone  by  before  he  commenced  his^, 
great  work,  we  see  that  Paul  reckons  five  hundred  and  /) 
seventy-three  years  between  the  Exodus  and  the) 
building  of  the  Temple. 

Here,  then,  is  an   apparent  discrepancy  of  no  smal],'^ 
magnitude.     For  the  same  period  contains 

According  to  Paul  .         .         .         .         573       years 
And  according  to  the  Book  of  Kings       480 


»> 


So  that  the  difference  is .         .         .  93  „ 

Now  some  chronologists  defend  Paul's  calculation, 
some  that  of  the  Book  of  Kings  :  but,  for  aught  they 
say,  the  result  is  in  either  case  equally  disastrous,  since 
one  of  the  two  inspired  writers  is  always  shown  to  be 
wrong. 

If,  however,  we  apply  the  principle  stated  above,  the 
discrepancy  vanishes,  and  it  appears  that  neither  the 
author  of  the  Book  of  Kings  nor  Paul  is  mistaken  ; 
but  that  the  former  is  reckoning  by  the  mystical  and 
the  latter  by  the  ordinary  chronology.  Nor  is  there 
any  difficulty  in  demonstrating  the  fact. 

During  the  period  in  question  the  only  instances  of 
God's  formal,  though  temporary,  rejection  of  His  people 
occur  in  the  Book  of  Judges.     And  turning  to   that 

'  Acts  xiii.  18.  Acts  xiii.  21. 

*  Acts  xiii.  20.  I  Kings  ii.  11. 


MYSTIC   CHRONOLOGY.  47 

book  we  find  that  He  sold  them  to  Chushan-rishathaim, 
king  of  Mesopotamia,  for  eight  years  ;  to  Eglon,  king 
of  Moab,  for  eighteen  ;  to  Jabin,  king  of  Canaan,  for 
twenty  ;  to  the  Midianites  for  seven  ;  and  to  the 
Phihstines  for  forty. 

There  is  also  mention  of  an  oppression  by  the 
Ammonites  lasting  eighteen  years  ;  but  this  was  con- 
temporaneous with  that  of  the  Philistines,^  and  may, 
therefore,  be  omitted  from  our  calculation. 

The  times,  then,  during  which  their  enemies  ruled 
over  the  Israelites,  and  the  theocracy  was,  consequently,  ■' 
suspended,  were  as  follows. 


Chushan-rishathaim     . 

8 

yea 

Eglon    .... 

18 

i  * 

Jabin    .... 

20 

>> 

The  Midianites     . 

7 

>> 

The  Philistines     , 

40 

It 

93 


Thus  the  sum  of  the  times  of  servitude  is  ninety- 
three  years,  which,  as  we  have  just  seen,  is  the  exact 
difference  between  the  lengths  assigned  to  the  period 
from  the  Exodus  to  the  Temple  in  the  "  Acts  "  and  the 
Book  of  Kings. 

This  instance  unquestionably  demonstrates  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  mystic  chronology  as  applied  to  the  history 
of  Israel.  And,  among  other  lessons,  it  warns  us  to 
beware  of  finding  mistakes  in  the  Scriptures.  If  a 
discrepancy  so  utterly  hopeless,  to  all  appearance,  as 
that  which  we  have  been  considering  is  made  to  vanish 
in  a  moment  by  the  discovery  and  application  of  one 

'  See  Judges  x.  7,  where  the  double  oppression  is  mentioned, 
and  the  historian  immediately  proceeds  to  describe  that  of  the 
Ammonites,  returning  to  the  Philistines  in  chap.  xiii. 


48  PROLEGOMENA. 

of  the  Divine  laws,  should  we  not  unhesitatingly  attri- 
bute other  difficulties  which  we  may  encounter  to  our 
own  ignorance  of  the  clue  rather  than  to  error  in  the 
revelation  of  God  ? 

VII. 

Supernatural  Judgments. 

The  last  general  principle  of  interpretation  to  which 
we  would  invite  the  reader's  attention  is  the  necessity 
of  recognising  a  supernatural  power  in  the  closing 
events  of  the  age. 

The  Praeterist,  of  course,  openly  denies  this  :  the 
Historicist  is  virtually  on  the  same  side,  since  he  ex- 
plains the  seals  trumpets  and  vials  by  ordinary  occur- 
rences, and  thereby  suggests,  whether  intentionally  or 
not,  that  whatever  still  remains  to  be  fulfilled  will  also 
pass  into  history  in  a  natural  course  of  things.  But 
such  a  suggestion  can  be  received  only  by  those  who 
are  willing  to  ignore  the  words  of  the  Almighty 
Himself. 

When  the  Israelites  had  committed  their  great  sin, 

and  had  broken  the  second  commandment  a  few  days 

after  the  terrors  amid  which  it  had  been  given,  Moses 

interceded  for  them,  and  offered  his  own  soul  for  their 

sake.      But  God  refused  the  proffered  substitution  with 

the    significant  words  ; — "  Whosoever    sinneth    against 

Me,  him  will  I  blot  out  of  My  book."  ^     For  Moses 

was  himself  a  guilty  man  :  there  was  but   One  Who, 

being  sinless,  could  be  made  sin  for  others,  and,  having 

no  transgressions  of  His  own,  could  bear  those  of  His 

fellows. 

*  Exod.  xxxii.  33. 


SUPERNATURAL  JUDGMENTS.  49 

At  length,  however,  the  Lord  revealed  Himself  as 
the  Saviour  of  apostate  Israel  ;  and,  in  answer  to  the 
earnest  entreaties  of  Moses  that  He  would  still  take 
them  for  His  inheritance,  He  replied  as  follows  ; — 

"  Behold,  I  make  a  covenant  :  before  all  thy  people 
I  will  do  marvels,  such  as  have  not  been  done  in  all 
the  earth,  nor  in  any  nation  :  and  all  the  people  among 
which  thou  art  shall  see  the  work  of  the  Lord  :  for  it 
is  a  terrible  thing  that  I  will  do  with  thee."  ^ 

Now  these  words  were  uttered  shortly  after  the 
destruction  of  Egypt  by  the  ten  plagues,  after  the 
dividing  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  at  a  time  when  the  awful 
appearing  of  the  Divine  majesty  upon  Mount  Sinai 
was  still  fresh  in  the  minds  of  the  people.  Events, 
therefore,  more  marvellous  and  more  terrible  than  these 
ancient  wonders  must  take  place  at  the  close  of  the 
times  of  the  Gentiles,  before  Israel  can  again  dwell 
securely  in  the  Holy  Land,  and  be  manifested  as  the 
inheritance  of  God. 

If  we  bear  this  in  mind,  we  shall  be  led  to  under- 
stand in  a  literal  sense  many  predictions  which  we 
may  hitherto  have  regarded  as  symbolic,  and  shall 
not  fail  to  notice  the  similarity  of  the  more  universal 
Apocalyptic  plagues  to  those  which  fell  upon  the  land 
of  Egypt. 

So,  too,  the  appearing  upon  Mount  Sinai  will  be 
repeated,  with  terrors  indescribably  more  appalling, 
when  the  trump  of  God  shall  cause  the  whole  earth  to 
tremble,  and  "  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from 
heaven,  with  His  mighty  angels,  in  flaming  fire  taking 
vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God,  and  that  obey 
not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  ^ 

'  Exod.  xxxiv.  10.  "^  2  Thess.  i.  7,  8 


so  PROLEGOMENA. 

To  this  Paul  refers  when,  quoting  from  Haggai,  he 
says  ; — "  Whose  voice  then  shook  the  earth  :  but  now 
He  hath  promised  saying,  Yet  once  more  I  shake  not 
the  earth  only,  but  also  heaven."  ^ 

It  will  not,  therefore,  be  long  before  God  begins  to 
answer  the  scoffings  of  Positivists,  Evolutionists,  Theo- 
sophists,  and  every  other  kind  of  unbelievers,  in  a 
manner  which  they  little  expect. 

It  will  not  be  long  before  a  Power — far  mightier 
than  the  supernatural  energies  which  are  now  troubling 
the  world — will  be  manifested  in  the  disorganisation  of 
the  laws  of  nature,  vainly  supposed  to  be  unalterable, 
and  in  the  infliction  of  plagues  which  will  cry  with 
ever  increasing  voice  ; — 

"  Fear  God,  and  give  glory  to  Him  ;  for  the  hour  of 
His  judgment  is  come  :  and  worship  Him  That  made 
heaven  and  earth  and  the  sea  and  the  fountains  of 
waters."  - 

The  second  Psalm  seems  to  be  on  the  point  of 
receiving  its  ultimate  fulfilment.  The  rebellion  against 
the  Lord  and  against  His  Anointed  is  gathering 
strength,  and  louder  and  louder  every  day  waxes  the 
defiant  cry  ; — "  Let  us  break  their  bands  asunder,  and 
cast  away  their  cords  from  us  !  " 

Meanv.'hile  the  Lord  still  sits  in  heaven,  veiled  with 
thick  clouds,  and  silent  as  though  He  heard  not  the 
boastings  of  the  sons  of  men  :  but  presently  He  will 
speak  to  them  in  His  wrath,  and  trouble  them  in  His 
sore  displeasure.  The  anger  of  the  Son  will  at  length 
flash  forth  as  the  lightning,  and  blessed,  indeed,  v.-ill 
they  be  Vv'ho  have  put   their  trust   in    Him. 

'  Ilcb.  xii.  26.  ^  Rev.  xiv.  ;. 


PART  I. 
THE   GENTILES, 


I. 

The  Prophecy  of  Balaam. 

THE  sons  of  Abraham  are  the  destined  "Kings  of  the 
Earth  upon  the  earth."  They  may,  therefore,  with 
reason  have  supposed  that,  from  the  day  of  their  settle- 
ment in  Canaan,  supreme  power  would  be  at  once  and 
for  ever  withdrawn  from  all  other  nations.  And  doubt- 
less this  would  have  been  the  case,  had  their  own  hearts 
been  wholly  surrendered  to  their  God.  But  they  were 
stiff-necked  and  rebellious  ;  and,  consequently,  while 
they  were  yet  in  the  wilderness,  Moses  was  instructed 
to  foretell  the  woes  and  captivities  which  would  befall 
them  in  later  days. 

And  again,  towards  the  close  of  their  wanderings, 
God  plainly  declared,  by  the  mouth  of  Balaam,  that 
their  enemies  would  have  power  to  trouble  them,  and 
drive  them  from  their  land  ;  that  a  time  of  Gentile  i 
sovereignty  must  intervene  before  the  fulfilment  of  the 
promises  to  Abraham  ;  but  that  his  seed  should  at 
length  be  delivered  by  the  advent  of  a  mighty  and  all- 
victorious  King.  This  utterance  is  so  grand  and  Im- 
pressive— bringing  into  sight,  as  it  does,  the  dim  and 
threatening  form  of  Gentile  power,  though  it  was  sepa- 
rated from  the  prophet's  standpoint  by  the  vast  stretch 
of  eight  centuries — that  we  subjoin  an  amended  trans- 
lation  of  the   greater  part  of  it.      After  declaring  that 


54  THE   GENTILES. 

his  words  had  reference  to  "the  end  of  the  days,"^  or 
the  time  when  God's  purposes  in  regard  to  Israel  would 
begin  to  find  their  fulfilment,  Balaam  proceeds  as 
follows  ; — 

"  I  see  Him — but  not  now  ; 

I  behold  Him — but  not  nigh. 

A  Star  goes  forth  from  Jacob, 

And  a  Sceptre  arises  out  of  Israel, 

And  smites  the  corners  of  Moab, 

And  destroys  all  the  children  of  tumult. 

And  Edom  becomes  a  possession. 

And  Seir  becomes  a  possession,  His  enemies  ; 

And  Israel  acquires  strength. 

And  a  Ruler  arises  from  Jacob, 

And  destroys  what  is  left  out  of  cities.^ 
And  he  saw  Amalek,  and  took  up  his  parable,  and  said  ; — 

Beginning  of  the  nations  was  AmaleK  : 

But  his  end  is  destruction. 
And  he  saw  the  Kenite,  and  took  up  his  parable,  and  said  ; — 

Durable  is  thy  dwelling, 

And  upon  the  rock  is  thy  nest  laid. 

For  should  Kain^  be  destroyed, 

Until  Asshur*  shall  carry  thee  away  captive  ? 

'  DVp^^n  nnnX3.  An  important  prophetic  phrase.  See  Gen. 
*^lix.  I  ;  Isa.  ii.  2  ;  Dan.  x.  14;  Mic.  iv.  i.  "This  expression 
enotes,  not  only  here  but  in  every  other  place  of  its  occurrence, 
the  time  when  the  promises  and  hopes  of  salvation  given  to  any 
age  should  all  be  fulfilled.  As  Havernick  has  aptly  obsen^ed,  it 
always  points  to  the  horizon  of  a  prophetic  announcement.  For 
any  particular  age  '  the  end  of  the  days  '  commences  when  such 
anticipations  of  salvation  as  are  not  yet  fulfilled,  but  occupy  the 
forefront  of  hope,  patient  waiting,  and  longing  desire,  first  begin 
to  pass  by  fulfilment  into  the  sphere  of  reality." — Kurtz. 

"  T"]/??  is  cmplo)-ed  in  a  collective  and  general  sense,  as  in 
Psa.  Ixxii.  16.  Out  of  every  city  in  which  there  is  a  remnant  of 
Edom,  it  shall  be  destroyed." — Keil. 

'  Kain,  the  name  of  the  tribe-father,  is  used  poetically  for  the 
tribe  which  he  founded. 

*Asshur  was  originally  the  name  of  Assyria  ;  but  it  was  after- 
wards applied  to  the  great  Asiatic  Empire  in  its  later  stages  under 


THE  PROPHECY  OF  BALAAM.  55 

And  he  took  up  his  parable,  and  said  ; — 
Woe  !  who  shall  live  when  God  does  this  ? 
And  ships  come  from  the  side  of  Cyprus, 
And  press  Asshur,  and  press  Eber  ; 
And  he'  also  goes  to  destruction." 

Thus  the  prophecy  opens  with  a  grand  vision  of  the 
second  appearing  of  Christ  as  King  of  kings  and  Lord 
of  lords?  Until  this  great  event  the  enemies  of  Israel 
should  remain  ;  but  then  they  should  be  either  exter- 
minated or  reduced  to  submission. 

Amalek,  however,  which  had  been  the  first  to  attack 
the  chosen  people — for  such  is  the  evident  meaning  of 
the  expression,  "  first  of  the  nations  " — should  be  de- 
stroyed long  before.^ 

Babylon  and  Persia.  In  2  Kings  xxiii.  29,  Nabopolassar  is  called 
"  the  king  of  Asshur ''  :  in  the  apocryphal  Book  of  luditli  a  similar 
title  is  given  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  his  general  Holofernes  is 
described  as  "  the  chief  captain  of  the  army  of  Asshur."  Again, 
in  Ezra  vi.  22,  Darius  Hystaspes  is  styled  "the  king  of  Asshur." 

'  Obviously  the  ultimate  reference  is  to  the  last  head  of  Western 
power,  that  is,  to  Antichrist. 

-  It  is  impossible  to  apply  the  opening  paragraph  to  the  first 
advent,  as  many  have  endeavoured  to  do.  None  of  the  details  are 
concerned  with  the  humiliation  or  sufferings  of  Christ,  but  only 
with  the  glory  which  is  yet  to  follow.  The  power  of  Moab  was  not 
shattered  at  the  first  advent ;  and  in  place  of  Edom  becoming  a 
possession  of  Israel,  it  was  just  at  that  crisis  that  the  Edomite 
family  of  the  Herods  became  rulers  in  Judea.  Nor  did  they  dis- 
appear until  the  Jewish  state  was  destroyed  by  the  Romans  : 
indeed  Herod  Agrippa  II.  fought  on  the  victorious  side  in  the  final 
struggle.  It  is  unnecessary  to  add  that  Israel  acquired  no  strength 
in  that  time  of  trouble,  nor  did  any  Ruler  arise  out  of  Jacob  to 
save  the  miserable  people  from  destruction,  and  from  the  exile 
which  is  not  yet  ended. 

•''  For  an  account  of  the  unprovoked  assault  of  the  Amalekites, 
see  Exod.  xvii.  8-16.  God  manifested  His  hot  displeasure  by  at 
once  declaring,  "  I  will  utterly  put  out  the  remembrance  of  Amalelc 
from  under  heaven."  The  cause  of  the  severity  is  thus  explained 
by  Ebn  Ezra  ; — "  He  had  provoked  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  ;  for 
whilst  the  princes  of  Edom,  the  Moabites,  and  the  Philistines, 
were  overwhelmed  with  fear  on  account  of  the  signs  which  the 


50  THE   GENTILES, 

On  the  other  hand,  the  friendly  Kenlte  should 
endure  until  Israel  itself  should  be  carried  away  cap- 
tive by  Asshur,  an   Eastern   foe. 

Nor  would  this  captivity  be  the  last  of  the  troubles  ; 
for  mightier  nations  would  come  from  the  other  side 
of  Cyprus,  that  is,  from  the  West,  and  oppress  both 
Asshur  and  Eber,  or  the  Asiatics  on  both  sides  of 
the  Euphrates.  Yet  these  also  should  be  destroyed 
when  the  Sceptre  of  Israel  should  smite  the  corners 
of  Moab. 

Thus,  although  at  this  early  date — about  B.C.  1452 
■ — not  one  of  the  destined  world-powers  was  as  yet 
in  existence,  so  that  it  could  be  distinctly  named, 
Balaam,  nevertheless,  foretold  that  the  sovereignty 
would  be  delivered,  first  into  the  hands  of  Eastern, 
and  then  into  those  of  Western  Gentiles.  And  many 
centuries  later  it  was  further  -revealed,  through  Daniel 
and    Zechariah,    that   this    temporary    dominion    would 

Lord  had  done  in  Egypt  and  at  the  Red  Sea,  this  Amalek  came, 
notwithstanding-,  to  combat  against  Israel,  and  had  no  fear  of 
God." 

A  direct  command  was  afterwards  given  to  the  Israelites  to  exe- 
cute the  sentence  of  Jehovah  as  soon  as  they  had  established  them- 
selves in  the  land  of  Canaan  (Deut.  xxv.  19),  and  in  the  reign  of 
Saul  it  was  obeyed  (i  Sam.  xv.),  but  only  in  part.  The  Amalekites 
who  were  spared  became  troublesome  to  David,  and  were  re- 
peatedly chastised  by  him  (i  Sam.  xxvii.  8  ;  xxx  ;  2  Sam.  viii.  12). 
In  the  reign  of  Hezekiah,  five  hundred  Simeonites  went  to  Mount 
Seir,  and  smote  a  remnant  of  Amalekites  who  were  dwelling  there 
(i  Chron.  iv.  42,  43). 

In  the  book  of  Esther,  Haman  is  called  "the  Agagite"  :  the  Jews 
afhrm  that  he  was  a  descendant  of  Agag,  and  in  that  w-ay  accoimt 
for  his  hatred  of  their  nation.  If  this  statement  be  true,  there  is 
something  very  instructive  in  the  rise  of  this  scion  of  the  accursed 
race  after  so  many  centuries,  and  in  the  fact  that  he  all  but 
effected  the  destruction  of  the  people  who  had  disobediently 
suffered  his  ancestors  to  live.  'And  it  may  be  that  in  the  death  of 
Haman  and  his  family  the  doom  of  Amalek  was  accomplished. 


THE  PROPHECY  OF  BALAAM.  57 

be  sustained  by  four  successive  empires,  of  which  the 
first  and  second  were  Asiatic,  the  third  and  fourth 
European.  Such  is  the  most  ancient  prediction  of  the 
times  of  the  Gentiles,  containing,  as  is  usual  with  the 
earher  prophecies,  the  germ  of  all  that  should  follow, 
and  delivered,  most  appropriately,  before  a  Gentile 
king  by  a  prophet  who  was  himself  without  the  pale 
of  the  chosen  people. 

Before  we  proceed,  a  modern  theory,  which  confuses 
the  house  of  Israel  with  some  of  the  nations  of  the 
Fourth  Empire,^  will  oblige  us  to  say  a  few  words 
concerning  that  portion  of  it  which  revolted  from 
Rehoboam. 


•  The  Anglo-Ephraim  theoiy  would  render  the  great  prophecies 
of  Daniel  unintelligible.  These  are  times  of  Gentile  domination, 
and,  as  the  Lord  tells  us,  they  will  continue  until  their  close  is 
announced  by  signs  in  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars.  Since,  there- 
fore, such  signs  have  not  as  yet  appeared,  none  of  the  Ten  Tribes 
could  at  present  be  holding  so  commanding  a  position  in  the 
world  as  that  of  England  ;  nor  indeed — if  our  exposition  on  pp. 
58  and  59  be  correct — could  they  even  be  living  on  this  side  of  the 
Euphrates.  The  mistake  of  Anglo-Ephraimites,  like  that  of 
Post-millenarians,  is  that  they  adduce  Millennial  prophecies,  and 
apply  them  to  this  age.  Many  of  their  assertions  will  not  bear 
the  test  of  Scripture  :  for  instance,  the  idea  that  royalty  must 
always  remain  with  Israel  is  a  direct  contradiction  of  Hosca's 
words  ; — "  For  the  children  of  Isi-ael  shall  abide  many  days  with- 
out a  king,  and  without  a  prince,  and  without  a  sacrifice,  and 
without  an  image,  and  without  an  ephod,  and  without  teraphim  " 
(iii.  4).  But,  worst  of  all,  they  confuse  the  heavenly  calling  with 
the  earthly,  and  in  place  of  that  tribulation  which  the  Lord 
warned  us  to  expect  in  the  world  until  He  calls  us  out  of  it,  point 
us  to  earthly  glory.  They  are  not  content  to  say  with  Paul,  "  For 
our  citizenship  is  in  heaven,  whence  also  we  look  for  the  Lord 
Jesus  "  ;  but  tell  us  that  we  have  a  nation  and  a  land  here,  and 
are  not,  therefore,  strangers  and  pilgrims  upon  earth.  Yet  the 
New  Testament  never  offers  Israelitish  promises  to  Christians, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  informs  Jews  by  birth  that,  if  they  would  be 
followers  of  Christ,  they  must  give  up  their  Jewish  privileges,  for 
that  in  Him  there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek, 


SS  THE   GENTILES. 

II. 

The  Kingdom  of  the  Ten  Tribes. 

The  sad  story  of  the  Israelites  is  well  known. 
From  the  earliest  days  of  their  settlement  in  Canaan 
they  altogether  failed  in  fulfilling  God's  purpose  that 
they  should  be  a  separate  and  holy  people,  and  after 
a  while  the  nation  was  divided  into  two  kingdoms. 
That  of  the  Ten  Tribes  quickly  began  to  worship 
"  other  gods  and  molten  images,"  so  that  the  Lord 
pronounced  sentence  upon  them  before  the  death  of 
their  first  king.  It  was  uttered  by  the  mouth  of  the 
prophet  Ahijah  in  these  terrible  words  ; — "  For  the 
Lord  shall  smite  Israel  as  a  reed  is  shaken  in  the 
water,  and  He  shall  root  up  Israel  out  of  this  good 
land  which  He  gave  to  their  fathers,  and  shall  scatter 
them  beyond  the  river'' — that  is,  the  Euphrates  —  1 
"  because  they  have  made  their  groves,  provoking  the 
Lord  to  anger."  ^  This  was  the  decree  ;  but  the 
mercy  of  God  delayed  its  execution  for  more  than  two 
hundred  years,  at  the  end  of  which  time  Shalmaneser 
transported  the  captive  Israelites  to  localities  in  Assyria 
and  Media,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Euphrates. 

There  is  great  significance  in  the  place  of  exile. 
When  God  called  Abraham  from  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,! 
He  bade  him  leave  the  idolatrous  country  of  his 
kindred,  and  cross  the  Euphrates  into  a  land  which 
He  would  show  him.  Abraham  did  so,  and  was 
forthwith  termed  a  Hebrew — that  is,  "  one  who  has 
crossed  over  " — by  which  name  his  descendants  were 
from  that  time  known  to  .foreigners. 

'  I  Kings  xiv.  15. 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  THE    TEN  TRIBES.  59 

But  because  the  Ten  Tribes  rent  themselves  from 
the  house  of  David,  and  lapsed  into  Demonism  and 
Idolatry  ;  therefore  God  would  allow  them  to  be 
Hebrews  no  longer,  but  sent  them  back  again  to  the 
place  from  whence  He  had  taken  them.  And  there, 
beyond  the  river,  they  have  remained,  and  apparently 
must  still  remain — whether  in  Affghanistan,  China,  or 
elsewhere — until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  are  ended. 
Then,  at  the  bidding  of  the  Lord,  they  will  return 
towards  their  own  land,  and  as  they  approach  the 
barrier-river.  He  will  dry  it  up  before  them,  as  He  did 
the  Jordan,  and  reveal  His  chosen  people  as  "the 
Kings   from   the  East."  ^     Thenceforth  both  they  and 

'  E.ev.  xvi.  12.  Since  they  will  have  to  cross  the  Euphrates, 
they  must  necessarily  come  from  the  East — anh  avaroKris  rjXlov : 
and  after  they  have  effected  a  junction  with  their  brethren,  the 
Jews,  from  the  West,  "the  Kingdom  and  Dominion,  and  the 
greatness  of  the  Kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven,"  will  be 
given  to  them.  The  drying  up  of  the  Euphrates  to  make  a  way 
for  the  return  of  Ephraim  is  twice  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament, 
and  is  coupled  in  both  places  with  a  similar  miracle  in  regard  to 
the  Eg)-ptian  Sea,  by  which  a  passage  is  opened  for  other  Israel- 
ites, probably  Jews,  who  come  through  Egypt.  In  Isaiah  xi.  15,  16, 
we  read  ; — "  And  the  Lord  shall  utterly  destroy  the  tongue  of  the 
Egyptian  Sea;  and  with  His  mighty  wind  shall  He  shake  liis 
hand  over  the  river,  and  He  shall  smite  into  the  seven  streams, 
and  make  men  go  over  dryshod.  And  there  shall  be  a  highway 
for  the  remnant  of  His  people  which  shall  be  left  from  Assyria, 
like  as  it  was  to  Israel  in  the  day  that  he  came  up  out  of  the  land 
of  Egypt."  Now  the  river  in  this  passage  must  be  the  Euphrates, 
because  the  way  made  through  it  will  be  a  highway  from  Assyria 
to  Palestine  ;  and  the  drying  up  must  be  literal,  because  we  are 
told  that  it  shall  be  like  the  drying  up  of  the  Red  Sea  and  the 
Jordan  when  Israel  went  out  of  Egypt  in  the  days  of  old.  The 
remnant  from  Assyria  are,  of  course,  the  Ten  Tribes,  who  were 
led  into  captivity  by  the  Assyrians  ;  and  if  the  reader  will  glance 
at  the  fourteenth  verse,  he  will  find  a  sufficient  explanation  of  the 
Apocalyptic  title,  "Kings  from  the  East."  For  all  the  nations 
must  yield  to  their  sv/ay  :  "  they  vvill  fly  upon  the  shoulder  of  the 
Philistines  towards  the  West  ;  together  they  will  spoil  the  sons 
of  the  East :  they  will  seize  upon   Edom    and  Moab  ;  and   the 


6o  THE   GENTILES. 

their  brethren  will  dwell  within  the  river,  and  their 
boundaries  will  extend,  according  to  the  promise  given 
to  Abraham,  "  from  the  river  of  Egypt  unto  the  great 
river,  the  river  Euphrates."  ^ 


III. 

The  Dream  of  Nebuchadnezzar. 

In  the  manner  just  related  the  Ten  Tribes  disappeared 
from  the  prophetic  scene,  and  will  enter  it  no  more 
until  the  glorious  times  of  the  Lord's  return.  But  the 
case  of  those  which  remained  faithful  to  the  house  of 
David  is  very  different.  For  a  hundred  and  fifty  years 
after  the  desolation  of  Israel,  God  still  continued  to 
plead  with  Judah.  But  neither  warnings,  chastisements, 
nor  deliverances,  availed  to  produce  anything  more  than 
a  temporary  repentance  ;  so  that  at  length  the  patience 
of  God  becran  to  be  exhausted, 

o 

In  the  fourth  year  of  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim,  Nebu- 
chadnezzar appeared  for  the  first  time  in  the  streets  of 
Jerusalem,  the  city  which  he  was  destined  so  soon  to 
destroy.  It  was  a  critical  period  of  the  world's  history : 
for  the  recent  battle  of  Carchernish  had  laid  Egypt  low 
and  exalted  Babylon  to  be  mistress  of  the  nations, 
Pharaoh-Necho  had  come  up  as  the  Nile-flood,  his 
waters  had  rolled  along  like  its  streams  :  he  had  said, 
"  I  will  go  up,  and  will  cover  the  earth  ;   I  will  destroy 

children  of  A mmon  vill  obey  them."  A  similar  prediction  may 
be  found  in  Zechariah  x.  6-11,  where  the  diying  up  of  the  sea  of 
Egypt  and  the  river  of  Ass)'ria  is  again  mentioned.  And  the 
sixth  and  seventh  verses  seem  to  indicate  that  Judah  is  concerned 
with  the  Eg}'ptian  Sea,  and  Ephraim  with  the  river  Euphrates. 
'  Gen,  XV.  18. 


THE  DREAM  OF  NEBUCHADNEZZAR.  6i 

the  city  and  the  inhabitants  thereof."^  But  the  boast- 
ing was  vain  :  the  crown  of  the  world  had  been  given 
to  Babylon,  and  soon  the  cry  went  forth,  "Pharaoh,  king 
of  Egypt,  is  lost  :  he  has  suffered  the  appointed  time  to 
pass  by."  ^ 

Immediately  after  the  victory  Nebuchadnezzar  pushed 
on  to  Jerusalem  to  chastise  the  Jews  for  their  rebellious 
alliance  with  Egypt.  Their  resistance  was  speedily 
overpowered  :  the  city  was  taken,  and  king  Jehoiakim 
loaded  with  fetters  to  be  carried  as  a  prisoner  to 
Babylon.  But  just  at  this  time  some  unknown  cause 
so  changed  the  feelings  of  Nebuchadnezzar  towards  his 
captive  that  he  released  him,  and  set  him  again  upon 
the  throne  to  rule,  as  a  tributary,  over  his  shattered  and 
miserable  kingdom. 

The  proud  conqueror  would  not,  however,  return 
from  Jerusalem  empty-handed.  He  plundered  the 
Temple  of  a  portion  of  its  vessels,  and  also  gave  direc- 
tions to  Ashpenaz,  the  prince  of  his  eunuchs,  to  select, 
from  those  of  royal  or  noble  birth,  the  most:  comely 
and  intellectual  of  the  Hebrew  youths,  and  to  convey 
them  to  Babylon,  that  they  might  there  be  instructed 
in  the  language  and  wisdom  of  the  Chaldeans.  And 
so  the  young  captives,  among  whom  were  Daniel, 
Hananiah,  Mishael,  and  Azariah,  were  brought  to  the 
great  metropolis  of  the  world,  and  placed  under  a  course 
of  training  which  was  to  fit  them  for  the  king's  service. 

Shortly  after  their  appointed  time  of  instruction  had 
come  to  its  end,  Nebuchadnezzar  had  a  strange  dream. 
He  had  been  victorious  over  all  his  enemies  ;  his  power 
was  now  unrivalled  ;  there  was  none  to  dispute  it. 
Nor  was  there  any  city  which  could  be  compared  for 
'  Jer.  xlvi.  8,  -  Jer.  xivi.  17. 


62  THE   GENTILES. 

glory  and  strength  to  "  great  Babylon."  One  day, 
however,  the  king  became  thoughtful,  and,  remembering 
how  quickly  the  glories  of  other  monarchs  had  passed 
away,  wondered  what  would  be  the  end  of  his  own 
magnificence,  and  who  vv'ould  arise  after  him.  While 
he  was  thus  striving  to  peer  into  the  dark  future,  he 
fell  into  a  slumber  ;  but  was  even  then  unable  to  dis- 
miss the  troubled  thoughts,  which  seemed  to  move  like 
black  and  agitated  clouds  before  his  eyes.  Presently  a 
faint  light  began  to  steal  upon  the  gloomy  vision,  and 
gradually  to  assume  a  dim  and  glimmering  form  of 
colossal  proportions.  Imperceptibly  it  became  more 
lustrous  and  more  clearly  defined,  until  at  length  the 
clouds  had  passed  away,  and  lo  !  the  king  was  gazing 
upon  a  majestic  statue,  whose  brightness  was  excellent, 
and  the  form  thereof  terrible. 

It  was  an  image  of  metal,  but  not  of  one  metal  only; 
for  at  the  first  glance  Nebuchadnezzar  perceived  that  it 
was  shedding  four  diverse  gleams.  The  head  was  of 
fine  gold  ;  the  breast  and  the  arms  were  of  silver  ;  the 
belly  and  the  thigh-part  of  brass  ;  the  legs  of  iron,  and 
the  feet  part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay. 

With  awe  the  king  beheld  the  dreadful  apparition  : 
and  then,  casting  his  eyes  upward,  he  saw,  towering  far 
above  the  lofty  statue,  a  rock  whose  top  reached  to  the 
clouds.  While  he  continued  to  watch,  a  stone  was 
detached  without  hands  from  its  summit,  and  hurled 
down  with  mighty  force  upon  the  image.  With  a  crash 
it  struck  the  feet,  and  in  a  moment  clay,  iron,  brass, 
silver,  and  gold,  were  broken  in  pieces  together,  and 
became  like  the  chaff  of  the  summer  threshing-floor,  so 
that  the  wind  carried  them  away. 

Nebuchadnezzar  was  astonished  ;  so  quickly  had  the 


THE  DREAM  OF  NEBUCHADNEZZAR.  63 

form  of  majesty  disappeared,  and  yielded  its  place  to 
the  destroying  stone.  As  he  still  looked  on,  he  saw 
the  stone  beginning  to  grow  larger,  to  spread  forth  its 
sides -and  raise  higher  its  top,  until  at  length  it  had 
become  a  vast  mountain  and  filled  the  whole  earth.^ 

Then  the  king  awoke  in  trouble  and  perplexity.  He 
had  indeed  seen  a  marvellous  and  never-to-be-forgotten 
vision  ;  but  who  should  unfold  to  him  its  dark  enigma.^ 
He  instinctively  recoiled  from  the  thought  of  consulting 
his  soothsayers  and  sorcerers.  Hitherto  they  had 
satisfied  him  ;  but  during  that  night  the  messengers  of 
the  living  God  had  been  with  him,  and  he  could  no 
longer  regard  the  magicians  of  Babylon  with  confi- 
dence. 

There  were,  however,  none  others  to  whom  he  could 
go  ;  and  so  at  last  he  summoned  his  wise  men,  deter- 
mining at  the  same  time  to  put  them  to  a  severe  test. 
Accordingly,  he  bade  them  first  relate  to  him  the  dream 
as  a  guarantee  of  their  power,  and  then  declare  the 
interpretation.  If  they  complied  with  his  request,  they 
should  receive  splendid  gifts  :  but  if  they  did  not,  the 
ministers  of  death  should  punish  their  deception.  In 
vain  the  miserable  Chaldeans  pleaded  that,  if  he  would 
only  show  them  the  dream,  they  would  tell  him  the 
interpretation.  Nebuchadnezzar  was  inexorable,  and 
curtly  replied,  "The  word  has  gone  from  me";  that  is, 
I  have  made  the  decree,  and  will  not  relent.^ 

'  It  is  very  important  to  notice  that  the  stone  does  not  begin  to 
increase  until  after  the  total  disappea7-ance  of  the  image.  This 
fact  emphasises  the  absurdity  of  attempting  to  interpret  the 
descent  of  the  stone  as  a  prediction  of  the  first  advent. 

■'  Such  is  undoubtedly  the  sense  of  the  original.  The  ninth  verse 
proves  that  Nebuchadnezzar  could  not  have  forgotten  his  dream. 
Moreover,  if  he  had  really  done  so,  it  is  too  probable  that  the 
Chaldeans  would  have  attempted  some  deceit. 


64  THE   GENTILES. 

And  SO  the  slaughter  of  the  wise  men  of  Babylon 
had  actually  commenced,  when  Daniel  went  to  Arioch, 
the  captain  of  the  guard,  and  boldly  told  him  that,  if 
a  little  time  were  granted,  he  would  do  what  the  king 
required.  The  offer  having  been  accepted,  Daniel 
returned  to  his  home,  where,  in  answer  to  the  earnest 
prayer  of  himself  and  his  companions,  the  matter  was 
revealed  to  him  in  a  vision  of  the  night.  Then,  after 
uttering  a  glorious  ascription  of  praise  to  the  God  of 
Israel,  he  hastened  into  the  royal  presence,  and  having 
first  described  the  vision  with  minute  accuracy  to  the 
av/e-struck  king,  proceeded  to  unfold  its  interpretation. 

The  Most  High  God  had  deigned  to  gratify  Nebu- 
chadnezzar's wish,  to  draw  back  the  curtain  of  futurity, 
and  to  reveal  to  him  the  things  which  were  coming  to 
pass.  Israel  had  been  rebellious  ;  therefore  the  sove- 
reignty of  the  world  should  now  be  delivered  to  the 
Gentiles,  in  order  that  they  might,  if  they  ''ould,  prove 
themselves  more  obedient  and  worthy  to  hold  it.  And 
the  image,  whose  brightness  was  excellent  and  the 
form  thereof  terrible,  was  a  representation  of  Gentile 
power  from  the  time  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  its  first  head,  I 
till  the  reign  of  that  Lawless  One  whom  the  Lord 
shall  consume  when  He  appears  to  take  the  King- 
dom. 

Daniel,  therefore,  announced  to  Nebuchadnezzar  that 
the  world-power,  previously  reserved  for  Israel,  was 
now  given  to  him  ;  and  that  he  was,  consequently,  a 
king  of  kings  over  all  *:he  children  of  men.  Hitherto 
each  of  the  kingdoms  of  earth  had  been  as  a  wild 
beast  held  in  by  a  leash  ;  till  Israel  was  rejected  none 
of  them  might  obtain  'the  supremacy.  But  now  all 
restraint  was  removed  from  the  royal  lion  of  Babylon 


THE  DREAM  OF  NEBUCHADNEZZAR.  65 

f 

and  he  was  permitted  to  ravin  at  his  will.  '  Nebuchad- 
nezzar was  the  head  of  gold.  And  after  him  should 
arise  three  other  kingdoms  in  succession,  the  last  of 
which  should  pass  through  certain  stages  of  develop- 
ment. Thus  the  outline  of  Balaam  was  to  some  extent 
filled  in,  and  it  was  discovered  that  the  Eastern  and 
Western  dominion  of  which  he  spoke  would  include 
the  rise   and   fall   of  four  empires. 

In  regard  to  the  names  of  these  powers  we  have  no 
perplexity  ;  for  Scripture  reveals  them  all,  becoming  in 
this  as  in  every  other  case,  if  we  only  know  how  to  use 
it,  its  own  interpreter.  ' 

^The  first  kingdom,  Babylon,  is  indicated  by  Daniel 
while  interpreting  the  vision  to  the  Chaldean  monarch — 
"Thou  art  this  head  of  gold." 

QThe  second  he  points  out,  in  his  account  of  Bel- 
shazzar's  feast,  by  the  emphatic  words,  "  In  that  night 
was  Belshazzar  the  king  of  the  Chaldeans  slain,  and 
Darius   the   Median   took  the   kingdom."^  J 

The  third  empire  may  be  discovered  in  the  eighth 
chapter.  For  after  the  ram  has  been  overcome  by  the 
he-goat,  Gabriel  explains  that  the  vision  represents  the 
Medo-Persian  kingdom  and  its  destroyer,  the  Grecian.^ 
The  same  succession  appears  also  in  the  tenth  chapter, 
in  the  words,  "  Now  will  I  return  to  fight  with  the 
Prince  of  Persia  :  and  when  I  am  gone  forth,  lo !  the 
(Prince  of  Grecia  shall  come."  ^  ' 

To  find  the  fourth  power,  we  must  turn  to  the  ninth 
chapter.  There  it  was  predicted  that  Messiah  should 
be  cut  off,  and  that,  afterwards,  Jerusalem  and  the 
Temple  should  be  destroyed  by  the   people   of  a  great 

'  Dan.  ii.  38.  ^  Dan.  viii.  20,  21. 

*  Dan.  V.  30,  31.  *  Dan.  x.  20. 


66  THE  GENTILES. 

Prince  destined  to  meet  his  end  in  the  last  indignation, 
that  is,  by  the  people  of  the  fourth  World-power.^  And 
we  know  that  the  destroyers  of  Jerusalem,  about  forty 
years  after  our  Lord's  death,  were  the  Romans.  Also 
in  the  Gospel  of  Luke  we  read  of  a  decree  of  the  Roman 
Emperor  that  all  the  world  should  be  taxed.^  Augustus ^\ 
is  thus  recognised  in  the  Word  of  God  as  the  head  of  ) 
the  fourth  World-power,  since  the  dominion  of  Greece 
had  then  passed  away. 

(The  four  great  empires  are,  therefore,  Babylon, 
Medo-Persia,  Greece,  and  Rome.j  And  if  we  turn  to 
secular  history,  this  succession  is  most  plainly  corro- 
borated. 

There  is  doubtless  a  significant  appropriateness  in  the 
parts  of  the  human  body  apportioned  to  each  kingdom. 

The  head  seems  to  point  to  the  unity  and  com- 
pactness of  the  Chaldean  empire,  as  being  maintained 
by  one  dominating  people  under  the  absolute  control 
of  one  sovereign.  And  since  the  head  is  the  natural 
director  and  governor  of  all  the  members,  it  may  also 
here  stand  for  the  Babylonian  autocracy  because  such 
a  form  of  government  most  nearly  resembles  that  of 
God,  and  is  the  only  one  which  can  ever  be  perfect. 

The  breast  and  arms,  a  twofold  part,  are  assigned  to 
the  Medo-Persian  empire — the  right  arm  and  breast 
signifying  the  Persians,  the  stronger  of  the  two  nations  ; 
the  left  indicating  the  Medes. 

The  belly  with  the  thighs,  or  rather,  with  the  thigh- 
part,  a  combination  of  two  portions  of  the  body  asso- 
ciated respectively  with  sluggishness  and  vigour,  aptly 
represents  the  kingdom   of  Alexander,   in    which    the 

'  Daniel  ix.  26.     See  amended  translation  in  Part  II. 
^  Luke  ii.  i. 


THE  DREAM  OF  NEBUCHADNEZZAR.  b^ 

ever  active    Greek   ruled   over  the  placid  Asiatic,  but 
could  not  imbue  him  with  his  own  qualities.y 

The  word  which  in  our  version  is  rendered  "  thighs  " 
has  the  possessive  suffix  of  a  singular  noun,  and  is 
only  made  to  appear  plural  by  the  pointing  of  the 
Rabbis.^  Of  the  six  parts  of  the  image  which  are 
mentioned,  the  one  in  question  and  the  head,  which  is 
indisputably  singular,  have  the  same  suffix  ;  while  the 
Chaldean  expressions  for  the  breast,  arms,  belly,  and 
legs,  are  all  plural,  and  are  uniformly  furnished  with 
the  plural  suffix.  There  can  thus  be  little  doubt  that 
nn^^''  is  singular,  and  means  "  the  thigh-part,"  that  is, 
the  lateral  part  of  the  lower  belly  from  which  the  thighs 
issue. 

Lastly,  the  legs  point  to  the  great  division  of  Rome 
into  the  Eastern  and  Western  Empires,)  and  the  toes 
to  the  final  division  into  ten  kingdoms./'  At  the  same 
time  the  legs  and  feet  were  appropriate  members  to 
symbolize  that  power  of  which  we  are  told,  in  the 
seventh  chapter,  that  it  should  tread  down  and  break 
in  pieces  the  whole  earth.^ 

We  may  remark  that  although  the  two  great  nation- 
alities of  the  fourth  kingdom  were  united  for  a  while, 
they  did  not  amalgamate.  From  the  first  Rome  was 
made  up  of  two  distinct  parts,^  the  Greeks  were  never 
completely  merged  in   the   Empire,  but  retained  their 

'  Possibly  the  Rabbis  may  have  followed  the  Septuagint,  which 
has  ol  ij.r]poL 

^  Dan.  vii.  23. 
"The  edict  by  which  Caracalla  extended  to  all  natives  of  the 
Roman  world  the  rights  of  Roman  citizenship,  though  prompted 
by  no  motives  of  kindness,  proved  in  the  end  a  boon.  Annihilat- 
ing legal  distinctions,  it  completed  the  work  which  trade  and 
literature  and  toleration  to  all  beliefs  but  one  were  already  per- 
forming, and  left,  so  far  as  we  can  tell,  only  two  nations  still 


68      .  THE   GENTILES. 

individuality,  until  at  length  the  artificial  bond  of  union 
was  severed. 

By  the  different  metals  of  the  image  a  gradual  dete- 
rioration of  government  appears  to  be  indicated. 

Nebuchadnezzar  received  his  power  directly  from 
God  ;  and  the  prophet,  after  declaring  how  absolute  it 
was,  exclaimed,  "  Thou  art  this  head  of  gold."  On 
another  occasion  also,  Daniel  said  of  the  same  king  ; — • 
'  "  All  people,  nations,  and  languages,  trembled  and  feared 
before  him  :  whom  he  would  he  slew  ;  and  whom  he 
would  he  kept  alive  ;  and  whom  he  would  he  set  up  ; 
and  whom  he  would  he  put  down."  ^ 

The  second  kingdom  is  said  to  be  inferior  to  the 
first,  and  its  metal  is  silver.  For  the  Mcdo-Persian 
empire  was  not  an  autocracy,  but  a  monarchy  depend- 
ent upon  the  support  of  an  hereditary  aristocracy. 
The  king  could  by  no  means  do  what  he  willed  ;  and 
this  we  may  see  in  the  case  of  Darius,  who  earnestly 
desired  to  save  Daniel  from  the  lions'  den,  but  was 
unable  to  resist  the  pressure  of  the  presidents  and 
princes.  Similarly  Ahasuerus  could  not  rescind  his 
order  for  the  slaughter  of  the  Jews,  but  could  only  issue 
a  counter-decree  permitting  them  to  stand  for  their 
lives  and  slay  those  who  would  assault  them. 

The   metal    of  the   third    empire    is   brass ;   and   the 
government  of  Alexander  was  a  monarchy  supported  by 
a   military  aristocracy  of  a  far  coarser  grain   than   the' 
hereditary  nobles  of  Persia. 

cherishing  a  national  feehng.  The  Jew  was  kept  apart  by  his 
religion,  the  Greek  boasted  his  original  intellectual  superiority." 
Bryce's  "  Holy  Roman  Empire." 

Of  course  the  image  which  Nebuchadnezzar  saw  did  not  include 
the  Jews  :  it  was  a  portrayal  of  Gentile  power  exclusively. 

'   Dan.  V.  19. 


THE  DREAM  OF  NEBUCHADNEZZAR.  69 

The  iron  power  of  the  Csesars  showed  a  still  further 
depreciation.  For  they  were  nominally  elected  by  the 
people  ;  they  were  merely  called  First  Magistrates  of 
the  State,  or  Generals  ;  and  for  a  long  time  they  wore 
no  diadem,  but  only  the  laurel  crown  of  a  successful 
commander.  They  had  also  a  Senate  which  was  sup- 
posed to  counsel  and  control  them.  Yet,  underneath 
this  vail  of  popular  authority,  they  usually  wielded  an 
absolute  power.  The  people  were  neither  allowed  to 
legislate  for  them,  nor  to  interfere  with  them.  If  a 
senator  attempted  to  be  independent,  he  was  quickly 
put  out  of  the  way,  and  had  cause  to  congratulate  him- 
self should  the  penalty  be  nothing  worse  than  banish- 
ment to  a  desert  island. 

Thus  the  Empire  remained  metallic  :  it  was  coherent 
and  strong  as  iron.  But,  as  time  went  on,  those 
northern  hordes,  which  had  long  been  the  foes  of  Rome, 
began  to  assert  their  superiority,  and  gradually  drew 
nearer  and  nearer  to  the  imperial  city.  Many  a  time 
they  retired,  as  if  in  fear  lest  some  supernatural  power 
should  burst  upon  and  destroy  them  if  they  essayed 
to  offer  violence  to  Rome  ;  but  at  length  the  spell  was 
broken,  and  the  world  began  to  look  upon  the  great 
city  as  the  Philistines  did  upon  Samson  when,  shorn  of 
his  locks,  he  had  become  weak  as  other  men. 

The  citizens  must  have  felt  this  bitterly  at  the  second 
approach  of  Alaric,  king  of  the  Visigoths.  For  the 
embassy,  which  they  sent  to  terrify  the  barbarian  by 
threatening  to  oppose  to  him  a  numerous  and  well -dis- 
ciplined army,  could  only  evoke  the  insolent  rejoinder, 
"  The  thicker  the  hay,  the  easier  it  is  mowed,"  Finding 
him  indifferent  to  their  menaces,  the  ambassadors 
changed  their  tone,  and  requested  to  know  upon  what 


70  THE   GENTILES. 

terms  he  would  consent  to  withdraw.  His  conditions 
were  so  grasping  that  they  exclaimed  in  despair  ; — "  If 
such,  O  king,  are  your  demands,  what  do  you  intend  to 
leave  us  ?  "  "  Your  lives,"  was  the  brief  reply.  Alaric 
was,  however,  bribed  to  retire  for  a  while  ;  but  he  soon 
returned,  and  the  fatal  day  arrived  on  which  Rome  her- 
self experienced  those  horrors  which  she  had  for 
centuries  inflicted  upon  other  cities.  A  long  period  of 
more  or  less  anarchy  succeeded,  and  the  modern  king- 
doms of  Europe  were  gradually  evolved,  but  under  the 
presidency  of  an  ecclesiastical  hierarchy  which  for  some 
centuries  occupied  the  place  of  the  emperor. 

It  was  by  the  irruption  of  these  northern  barbarians/) 
and  the  spirit  which  they  brought  with  them,  that  the 
clay  began  to  be  mingled  with  the  iron  in  what  we  call 
constitjitionalism,  the  nature  of  which  is  to  be  ever 
inclining  more  and  more  to  pure  democracy.  But  it  is 
impossible  that  governments  so  modelled  should  long 
cohere.  ]\Ien  cannot  be  ruled,  and  at  the  same  time 
be  themselves  the  rulers.  Such  an  arrangement  may 
indeed  be,  in  certain  circumstances,  the  best  palliative 
during  the  present  age  ;  just  as  poisons  are~~often 
medicinally  useful  to  diseased  bodies.  But  it  can  be 
nothing  more  than  a  palliative  :  there  will  be  no  settled 
rest  for  the  fevered  inhabitants  of  earth  until  they  be 
placed  under  the  sway  of  an  Autocrat  of  never-failing 
wisdom,  absolute  righteousness,  and  perfect  love. 

And  this  is  the  solution  of  mundane  dif^culties  which 
God  proposes. 

This  is  the  hope  which  rose  in  glorious  vision  before 
the  eyes  of  David  at  the  close  of  his  chequered  life, 
and  called  forth  the  last  words  of  the  sweet  Psalmist  of 
Israel — 


THE  DREAM  OF  NEBUCHADNEZZAR.  71 

"  A  Ruler  over  men,  just  ; 
A  Ruler  in  the  fear  of  God  ! 

And  He  is  as  the  light  of  the  morning  when  the  sun  riseth, 
As  a  morning  without  clouds  ! 

From   the  sunshine   after  rain  verdure   springeth  out    of   the 
earth!  "^ 

The  Ten  Kingdoms  are  not  yet  clearly  manifested, 
but  are  doubtless,  amid  the  many  changes  of  these  rest- 
less times,  now  in  process  of  formation.  The  portion 
of  the  prophecy  which  has  been  already  fulfilled  assures 
us  that  in  this  case  also  the  figure  will  be  strictly  carried 
out  ;  so  that,  just  as  five  of  the  toes  of  the  image  were 
on  the  right  foot  and  five  on  the  left,  in  like  manner 
(_five  of  the  kingdoms  will  spring  from  the  Western,  and 
five  from  the  Eastern  division  of  the  old  Roman  Empire.J 
Of  the  latter,  four,  as  we  shall  presently  show,  will  be 
the  resuscitated  kingdoms  of  Alexander's  generals, 
covering  the  area  at  present  occupied  by  Greece,  by  the 
Turkish  empire  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa,  and  by  the 
independent  states  between  it  and  Russia.  The  fifth 
may  be  Persia,  which,  it  would  seem,  must  be  included 
in  the  last  great  empire  \^  though,  of  course,  not  neces- 

'  2  Sam.  xxiii.  3,  4.  The  translation  is  literal,  and  the  order  of 
the  Hebrew  words  is  carefully  preserved.  But  only  one  acquainted 
with  the  East  can  rightly  appreciate  the  beauty  of  the  metaphor 
in  the  last  sentence — one  who  has  seen  the  marvellous  change 
which  passes  over  the  face  of  the  earth,  burnt  and  whitened  by  a 
long  drought,  when  at  last  a  copious  rain  is  succeeded  by  the 
clear  shining  of  the  morning  sun,  and  the  tiny  green  blades  begin 
to  appear  in  their  countless  millions.  Such  is  the  figure  set  before 
us  of  the  effect  physical  and  moral  which  will  be  produced  by  the 
rising  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  with  healing  in  His  wings. 
Let  not  men  call  those  pessimists  who,  however  great  their  dis- 
trust of  human  powers,  are  looking  for  such  a  consummation ; 
who  dare  to  believe  that  in  a  few  short  }'ears  sin  may  be  suddenly 
suppressed,  the  miseries  of  life  turned  into  gladness,  and  the 
whole  creation  made  to  rejoice,  by  the  coming  of  the  King-. 

^  Persia  has  never  yet  submitted  to  Roman  sway,  but  even  after 


72  THE   GENTILES. 

sarily  as  one  of  the  Ten  Kingdoms,  but  probably  as  a 
mere  dependency.^ 

For  since  the  image  is  standing  complete  in  all  its 
parts  when  the  stone  strikes  it,  and  since  all  the  parts 
are  destroyed  at  the  same  moment,  it  seems  to  follow 
^  that  the  Ten  Kingdoms  will  either  comprise  or  dominate 
all  that  has  ever  pertained  to  the  Babylonian,  Persian, 
Grecian,  or  old  Roman  empires. 

And,  moreover,  since  the  Fourth  Empire  in  its  final 
phase  will  include  the  feet  and  toes  of  the  image  which 
have  never  yet  belonged  either  to  its  own  dominion  or 
to  any  of  the  other  empires,  it  is  manifest  that  it  will 
exceed,  not  merely  its  own  ancient  limits,  but  also  those 
of  the  three  previous  kingdoms.  For  at  the  addition 
of  each  of  the  other  limbs  there  has  always  been  an 
increase  of  territory  to  the  prophetic  earth ;  nor  is  there 
any  reason  to  suppose  that  a  rule  which  has  invariably 
held  good  will  fail  in  the  single  remaining  case  to  which 
it  can  apply  in  the  future. 

It  would  seem,  then,  that  those  who  take  pains  to 
trace  out  the  bounds  of  the  ancient  Roman  Empire, 
under  the  impression  that  it  will,  in  its  revival,  be  con- 
fined within  the  same  exact  limits,  are  mistaken.  And 
something  yet  stronger  might  be  said  of  the  interpreters 
who  persist  in  affirming  that  England  must  be  separated 
from   Ireland,  and   lose   India  and   other  dependencies, 

these  paration  of  F.ast  and  West  remained  the  determined  foe  of 
the  Byzantine  empire,  until  the  Saracen  made  his  fell  swoop  upon 
both  of  the  exhausted  combatants. 

'  Although  there  can  be  but  ten  sovereign  kingdoms,  yet  it  must 
be  remembered  that  no  limit  is  set  to  their  dependencies,  which 
may  include  the  whole  of  the  known  world.  Indeed,  something 
like  this  seems  to  be  implied  in  the  Apocalyptic  account  of  Anti- 
christ :  for  it  is  said  that  "there  was  given  to  him  authority  over 
every  tribe  and  people  and  tongue  and  nation  "  (Rev.  xiii.  7). 


THE  DREAM  OF  NEBUCHADNEZZAR.  73 

because  these  countries  were  not  formerly  under  the 
sway  of  Rome.  For  their  mistake  becomes  a  practical 
mischief,  helping,  in  its  degree,  to  bring  about  the 
calamity  which  they  predict.  If  the  imperial  spirit  of 
England  declines,  and  she  becomes  weak  and  mean  in 
her  counsels,  she  may  very  probably  lose  both  Ireland 
and  India,  and  with  them  all  the  prosperity  which  her 
vast  empire  has  sustained  for  her — nay,  the  very  security 
of  her  existence.  And  were  so  dire  an  event  to  befall 
her,  we  could  not  but  recognize  it  as  a  just  judgment  of 
God  upon  a  nation  which,  though  most  highly  favoured 
by  Him,  has  continually  abused  its  privileges.  But  it 
would  be  no  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  though  its  causes 
might  afford  a  striking  illustration  of  the  proverb — 
*'  Whom  God  will  destroy,  He  first  deprives  of  sense." 

To  the  delay  in  the  development  of  the  Ten  Kingdoms 
we  may  find  many  parallels  if  we  study  the  past  trans- 
lations of  God's  purposes  into  history.      This  vision,  like 
some    others,    may    seem    to   tarry,  yet    it    is    for    an 
appointed  time  ;  at  the  end  it  shall  speak,  and  not  lie. 
/But  that  the  Roman  Empire  would  disappear  for  a  while 
as  a  secular  power,   and    afterwards    recover  its   sove- 
reignty  in    the  last  days,  is    plainly   intirnated   in    the 
seventeenth    chapter  of  the   Apocalypse./    There   the 
Beast,  which  represents  it,  is  seen  discrowned,  and  ridden 
by  a   Woman  under  whose  sway  it  has  fallen.      This 
Woman,  as  we  hope  presently  to  show,  is  the  ecclesias- 
tical power  which  lifted   itself  up  to  the  throne  of  the  / 
Empire,  and  has  for  centuries  hindered  the  rise  of  the', 
Ten  Kingdoms.     But  they  must  shortly  appear,  and  then 
their  kings  will  hate  the  whore,  and   make  her  desolate 
and  naked,  and  eat  her  flesh,  and  burn  her  with  fire.^ 

"'  Rev.  xvii.  16. 


74  THE   GENTILES. 

This  they  will  do  because  God  will  put  it  in  their  hearts 
to  fulfil  His  will  by  destroying  the  false  Church,  and 
reviving  the  fallen  Empire  under  the  presidency  of  the 
last  and  greatest  of  the  Ceesars.  And  when  all  these 
things  have  been  accomplished,  the  time  for  the  descent 
of  the  stone  will  be  at  hand. 

But  here  a  remarkable  instance  of  God's  justice 
presents  itself :  for  destruction  Avill  not  come  upon  the 
world-empire  until  the  masses  of  the  people  are  them- 
selves responsible  for  their  condition.  Gentile  dominion 
passes  gradually  from  the  head  to  the  feet,  from  the 
organ  which  ought  to  direct  to  the  members  which  are 
only  formed  to  carry  the  body  whither  the  head  guides 
it.  While  it  remains  with  the  autocrat,  there  is  some 
excuse  for  those  who  are  under  his  rule  ;  and  the  same 
remark  applies,  though  in  a  less  degree,  to  every  form 
of  government  short  of  the  absolute  sovereignty  of  the 
people.  Therefore  the  stone  has  not  yet  fallen  upon 
the  image.  But  as  soon  as  the  power  is  really  vested 
in  the  people,  then  the  multitudes  of  mankind  will 
themselves  become  responsible  to  their  Creator  for  the 
ungodliness  and  rebellion  of  the  world.  And  so 
judgment  will  be  no  longer  deferred,  and  the  stone  will 
descend  to  strike  the  image  upon  'Ccio.  feet}  that  is,  to 
destroy  the  body  politic  out  of  which  the  ten  democratic 
kings  arise,  and  of  which  they  form  a  part. 

This  awful  event  will  take  place,  with  the  swiftness 
of  lightning,-  when  the  Lord  Jesus  is  revealed  in  flaming 

'  Dan.  ii.  34. 
It  is  strange  that  the  rapid  descent  of  the  stone,  and  the  in- 
stantaneous pulverization  of  the  image,  could  ever  have  been 
interpreted  of  a  gradual  conversion  of  the  world  from  the  time  of 
the  first  advent.  For — to  pass  by  the  hopeless  incongruity  of  the 
metaphor — if  such  were  the  meaning  to  be  conveyed,  how  could 


THE    VISION  OF  THE   FOUR    WILD  BEASTS.  75 

fire,  as  is  described  in  the  nineteenth  chapter  of  the 
Apocalypse.  Tlie  World-power  of  Christendom  will  be 
destroyed  in  a  moment.  And  when  the  Messiah  shall, 
like  David,  have  gained  the  victory  over  all  His  enemies. 
He  will  become  the  great  Antitype  of  Solomon  ;  and 
His  Kingdom  of  peace,  beginning  from  Jerusalem,  will 
spread  over  the  whole  earth.-^ 

Such,  then,  was  the  dream  and  its  interpretation. 
The  vision  was  granted  to  Nebuchadnezzar ;  but  he 
could  not  understand  it  until  Daniel  came  forward  as 
the  interpreter.  For  although  earthly  power  had  now 
been  transferred  to  the  Gentile,  the  mind  of  God  still 
remained  with  the  Jew.  He  had  not  yet  poured  out 
His  Spirit  upon  all  flesh,  nor  did  He  do  so  until  Israel 
had  rejected  the  Messiah. 

IV. 

The  Vision  of  the  Four  Wild  Beasts. 

Only  a  short  time  after  his  memorable  dream,  the 
rebellion  of  Jerusalem  obliged  Nebuchadnezzar  to  march 

the  stone  strike  the  image  upon  its  feet  when  as  yet  there  were 
neither  feet  nor  legs  ?  The  division  of  Rome  into  the  Eastern  and 
Western  Empires— to  say  nothing  of  the  formation  of  the  Ten 
Kingdoms — did  not  take  place  till  centuries  after  the  first  advent. 

'This  will  take  place  rapidly,  no  doubt,  but  not  instantaneously. 
Irresistible  though  it  be,  it  is  no  more  than  a  stone  which  descends, 
and,  consequently,  the  immediate  effect  of  its  descent  is  locally 
restricted.  But  after  the  destruction  of  the  image,  it  becomes  a 
great  mountain  and  fills  the  whole  earth. 

From  other  Scriptures  we  gather  that  the  agency  by  which 
Christ  will  then  spread  His  Kingdom  will  be  similar  to  that  which 
He  now  uses,Avhile  the  circumstances  will  be  altogether  changed. 

The  word  will  go  forth  no  longer  in  weakness,  but  in  manifested 
power;  its  ministry — as  we  learn  from  Isa.  Ixvi.  19 — will  be 
committed  to  the  children  of  Abraham  ;  and  the  opposition  of  the 
spiritual  powers  of  wickedness  will  have  been  removed. 


76  TtlE   GENTILES. 

against  that  city.      His  invasion  was  irresistible  ;  and 
having  deposed  and — as  the   prophecies    of   Jeremiah 
seem  to  imply — slain  Jehoiakim,  he  placed  the  youthful 
Jehoiachin  upon  the  throne,  and  departed  to  press  the 
siege  of  Tyre.      But  a  fatal  impulse  moved  the  domi- 
nating party  in  Jerusalem  to  resume  their  intrigues  with 
Egypt,  and   caused   the   prompt   return   of   Nebuchad- 
nezzar, whose  determination  so  terrified  the  Jews  that 
Jehoiachin,   his  mother   Nehushta,   and    all    the    royal 
princes  and  officers,  went  out  and  surrendered   them- 
selves to  be  carried  as  captives  to  Babylon.      With  an 
unwonted  clemency,  which  can  only  be  ascribed  to  the 
impressions  wrought  on  him  by  the  revelations  of  Daniel, 
the  wrathful  autocrat  still  refrained  from  destroying  the 
city.       His  forbearance   resulted,  however,  in    nothing 
more  than  a  short  respite  :  for  Zedekiah,  who  had  sworn 
to  rule  as  his  vassal,  was  soon  discovered,  like  his  pre- 
decessors, to  be  "  sending  his  ambassadors  into  Egypt, 
that  they  might  give  him   horses  and   much  people."^ 
Then  the  Chaldean  king  gave  vent  to  his  just  anger  ; 
and,  after  a  little  delay,  Jerusalem  was   levelled  to  the 
ground,   and   the    Temple,    in    which   the   bigoted    but 
ungodly  Jews  had  placed  their  trust,  was  consumed  with 
fire. 

Yet  God  would  not  altogether  give  up  Israel  :  sinful 
as  the  inhabitants  of  Judah  had  been,  they  were  still 
His  people,  and  His  prophets  continued  among  them. 

Stationed  with  the  miserable  remnant  in  Palestine 
was  Jeremiah,  who,  while  he  sternly  rebuked  their  sins, 
nevertheless  foretold  that  earth  would  soon  be  moved 
at  the  ruin  of  great  Babylon,  but  that  'fallen  Israel 
should  rise  again.      And  if  any  of  his  countrymen  were 

'  Ezek.  xvii.  15. 


THE    VISION  OF  THE  FOUR    WILD  BEASTS.  77 

humbled  in  spirit  before  Jehovah,  he  could  comfort  them 
with  the  sweet  assurance  ; — "  For  I  know  the  thoughts 
that  I  think  toward  you,  saith  the  Lord,  thoughts  of 
peace  and  not  of  evil,  to  give  you  an  expected  end."  ^ 

And  even  when  the  Jews,  rebellious  as  ever,  deter- 
mined against  the  will  of  God  to  flee  to  Egypt  for 
refuge,  Jeremiah  still  remained  among  them,  and 
prophesied  to  those  who  dwelt  at  Migdol  and  Tah- 
panes  and  Noph  and  in  the  country  of  Pathros. 

Nor  were  the  captives  by  the  river  of  Chebar  for- 
gotten. With  them  was  the  prophet  Ezekiel,  who 
saw  indeed  mournful  visions  of  the  departure  of  the 
glory  from  the  Temple,  and  of  the  punishment  of  Jeru- 
salem ;  but  who  also  declared  that  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  should  yet  pass  over  the  dry  bones  of  Israel, 
and  cause  the  people  to  arise  from  their  graves,  an 
exceeding  great  army  ;  and  that  the  Messiah  should, 
in  happy  times,  build  a  structure  far  surpassing  the 
Temple  of  Solomon,  to  which  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
should  return,  and  abide  in  it  for  ever. 

Such,  then,  was  the  distribution  of  prophets  among 
the  Jews,  who  in  all  their  afflictions  did  not  cease 
to  be  the  people  of  Jehovah,  until  they  had  filled 
up  the  measure  of  their  iniquities  by  contemning  His 
Son. 

And   since   the   sovereignty   was   now,  according  to 

l:he  purpose  of  God,  delivered  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  and 

X  the  Gentiles  were  being  put  to  the  test,  a  prophet  was 

stationed   at   Babylon    also,   to  reveal   the   Divine  will, 

and  to  direct  or  warn  as  occasion  might  require.      And 

so  the  new  era  commenced. 

It  is,  of  course,  with  the  revelations  of  the  prophet 

'  Jer.  xxix.  1 1 


78  THE   GENTILES. 

appointed  to  minister  to  the  Gentiles  that  we  are  at 
present  concerned.  We  have  already  considered  his 
interpretation  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  vision,  of  the  great 
image  which  represented  Gentile  dominion,  noble  and 
terrible  as  it  would  appear  to  the  eyes  of  men.  We 
saw  that  by  it  four  great  empires  were  disclosed  as 
destined  to  run  their  course  before  the  times  of  the 
Gentiles  should  b2  ended,  and  the  Lord  return  to 
restore  the  Kingdom  to  Israel.  That  the  fourth 
empire  would  be  first  divided  into  two,  and  then,  after 
it  had  become  more  or  less  democratic,  into  ten 
kingdoms,  which  would  nevertheless  be  in  some  way 
united  under  one  head.  That  the  parts  of  the  body 
were  significant  of  the  unity,  or  the  composite  cha- 
racter, of  the  empires  symbolized  by  them.  That  the 
arraneement  of  the  metals  intimated  a  continualyf 
degeneracy  in  the  form  of  government.  That  judg- 
ment will  not  come  until  power  has  descended  to  the 
feet,  or  to  the  lowest  order  of  the  people.  And,  lastly, 
that  the  fourth  empire  will,  in  its  final  phase,  include, 

J  together  with  new  accessions,  all  the  territory  previously 

1  possessed  by  the  others. 

/     Such  is  the  first  great  prophecy  which  relates  ex- 

Iclusively  to  the  Gentile  powers.  Most  significantly 
it  is  not  written  in  Hebrew,  but  in  Chaldean,  the 
world-language  of  that  time.  This  is  also  the  case 
with  the  five  following  chapters  of  Daniel,  the  last  of 
which  contains  a  second  vision  of  the  Gentile  empires  ; 
while  the  intermediate  four,  though  strictly  historical, 
seem  to  be  at  the  same  time  prophetic,  since  they  are 
illustrative  of  the  spirit  which  animates  the  World- 
powers,  and  also  foreshadow  scenes  which  will  take  place 
on  a  far  grander  scale  in  the  closing  years  of  the  age. 


THE    VISION  OF  THE  FOUR    WILD  BEASTS.  79 

In  the  third  chapter,  the  golden  image  which 
Nebuchadnezzar  set  up  in  the  plain  of  Dura  was 
apparently  suggested  by  his  dream.  Some  have  found 
difficulty  in  admitting  this,  because  no  exact  copy  of 
the  vision-statue  was  attempted.  But  since  the  king 
knew  that  the  head  of  gold  represented  himself,  it  was 
surely  natural  that  he  should  use  that  metal  alone  to 
form  the  symbol  of  his  own  power.  Homage  to  the 
statue  may  possibly  have  been  intended  to  mean 
nothing  more  than  submission  to  the  king  by  a 
recognition  of  his  gods  as  superior  to  those  of 
vanquished  nations.  But  far  more  probably  it  was  a 
worship  of  himself — such  as  that  which  Darius  received 
in  the  second  empire,  which  was  offered  to  Alexander 
as  he  entered  Babylon,  and  which  the  Roman  emperors 
were  ever  striving  to  exact  from  the  Christians  of  the 
early  Church.  And  in  this  case  how  completely  does 
the  scene  in  the  plain  of  Dura  foreshadow  that  which 
shall  be  hereafter  !( For  the  last  king  of  the  Gentiles, 
like  the  first,  will  also  set  up  his  image  for  worship  ; 
and  the  false  prophet  who  stands  before  him  will  cause 
all  those  who  refuse  him  Divine  honour  to  be  put  to 
death.y 

Again  ;  the  contents  of  the  fourth  chapter — Nebu- 
chadnezzar's second  dream,  its  interpretation,  and  the 
sequel — are  clearly  a  type  of  the  whole  course  of  God's 
dealings  with  the  Gentiles.  This  is  much  more  plainly 
brought  out  in  the  seventh  chapter,  in  which  we  find 
that  the  World-powers  are  regarded  by  God  as  wild 
beasts  ;  while,  in  contrast  to  them,  the  Lord  Jesus 
takes  the  government  upon  His  shoulders  as  a  Son  of 
man — that  is,  of  man  as  God  originally  made  him, 
before  he  fell  into   the  bestial    condition.     And  what 


8o  THE   GENTILES. 

hope  there  is  for  the  human  race  in  the  restoration 
of  Nebuchadnezzar  to  his  sovereignty  and  glory,  and 
in  the  noble  confession  by  which  he  shows  that  his 
chastisement  has  been  made  a  means  of  healing  to 
him  ! 

The  types  in  the  fifth  and  sixth  chapters  are 
striking  and  obvious.  In  the  seventh  we  come  to  a 
vision  which  aftords  us  another  glimpse  of  the  Gentile 
empires,  but  this  time  from  an  altogether  different 
point  of  view.  For  the  seer  is  no  longer  the  head  of 
the  World-power  gazing  upon  Gentile  dominion  dis- 
played before  his  eyes  in  the  noble  appearance  and 
fair  proportions  of  a  majestic  human  form,  but  the 
prophet  of  God,  who  is  made  to  see  things  as  they 
really  are.  Hence  we  have  now  no  mere  disclosure 
of  the  number  of  the  coming  empires,  and  of  their 
gradual  descent  from  absolute  monarchy  to  democracy, 
but  an  insight  into  their  real  character  as  it  appears, 
not  to  men,  but  to  God. 

It  was  in  the  first  year  of  Belshazzar's  vice-royalty 
at  Babylon — when  the  armies  of  Cyrus  were  advanc- 
ing, and  perhaps  the  defeat  of  the  Babylonians  had 
already  forced  their  king  Nabonadius  to  take  refuge  in 
Borsippa — that  Daniel,  who  was  doubtless  pondering 
the  impending  changes,  received  a  further   revelation. 

He  thought  he  was  standing  on  the  shore  of  the 
great  sea,  and  lo !  from  the  four  corners  of  heaven, 
violent  blasts  were  hurling  themselves  upon  its  rest- 
less waters,  and  lashing  the  whole  surface  of  the  deep 
into  a  tumult  of  dark  foam.  The  prophet  gazed 
with  awe  upon  the  troubled  scene,  and,  while  he  was 
looking,  a  huge  monster  gradually  lifted  itself  up  from 
the  boisterous   waves,   a    creature    in    shape  like   to  a 


IHR    VISION  OF  THE  FOUR    WILD  BEASTS.  8l 

lign,  but  with  eagle's  wings.  Suddenly  its  great 
pinions  were  torn  away,  and  it  was  raised  up  so  as  to 
stand  upon  its  hind  legs  in  the  posture  of  a  man, 
beast  though  it  still  was  ;  and  a  man's  heart  was  given 
to  it.  Then  a  second  creature,  like  to  a  ponderous 
bear,  came  forth  from  the  waters  ;  it  raised  its  right 
side,  and  was  holding  three  ribs  between  its  teeth. 
And  the  prophet  heard  a  voice  crying  to  it  ; — "  Arise, 
devour  much  flesh."  Anon  a  third  beast  appeared, 
resembling  a  spiDtted  leopard  ;  but  upon  its  back  were 
four  wings,  not  like  those  of  an  eagle,  but  of  a  more 
ordinary  bird.  It  had  also  four  heads,  and  dominion 
was  given  unto  it.  Lastly,  there  arose  a  fourth  monster, 
diverse  from  all  the  others,  with  a  form  unlike  that  of 
any  earthly  creature,  having  iron  teeth  and  claws  of 
brass^  with  which  it  devoured,  brake  in  pieces,  and 
stamped  the  residue  under  foot.  Upon  its  head  were^ 
ten  horns,  and  while  it  was  passing  before  Daniel, 
another  small  horn  sprouted,  uprooting,  as  it  gradually 
increased,  three  of  the  ten.  And  the  prophet  perceived 
that  in  this  horn  were  eyes  like  the  eyes  of  a  man,  and 
a  mouth  speaking  great  things. 

Turning  his  face  toward  heaven,  Daniel  saw  that 
judgment  thrones  were  being  set  ^  in  the  empyreal 
height,  the  same  probably  as  those  described  by  John 
in  the  fourth  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse — that  is  to  say, 
the  Throne  of  God  and  those  of  the  twenty-four  elders. 
Then,  in  indescribable  majesty,  the  Ancient  of  days 
appeared  surrounded  by  innumerable  angels,  the  books 
were  opened,  and  Daniel  saw  in  vision  the  great  Assize 

'  Such  is  the  sense  of  the  original:  the  rendering  of  the 
Authorized  Version,  "till  the  thrones  were  cast  down,"  is  in- 
correct. 


82  THE   GENTILES. 

which  shall  hereafter  be  held  over  the  as  yet  uncon- 
scious world.  By  its  sentence  the  career  of  the  fourth 
monster  was  suddenly  arrested  ;  because  of  the  blas- 
phemies of  the  horn  the  beast  was  slain,  and  his  body 
given  to  the  burning  flames.  His  fate  thus  differed 
from  that  of  the  other  beasts  ;  for  though  successively 
deprived  of  their  dominion,  their  lives  had,  nevertheless, 
been  spared. 

Then,  in  place  of  the  beasts,  Daniel  saw  One  like  to 
a  son  of  man  brought  before  the  Ancient  of  days  ;  and 
to  Him  was  given  all  power,  so  that  His  dominion 
should,  unlike  those  which  had  preceded  it,  be  ever- 
lasting, and  His  Kingdom  one  which  should  never  be 
destroyed.  ^ 

Such,  then,  was  the  vision,  a  partial  interpretation 
of  which  was  given  by  an  angel  who  stood  near.  But 
by  comparing  the  previous  revelation  the  prophet  might 
have  perceived  that  the  four  beasts  represented  the 
same  four  empires  which  had  been  displayed  to  Nebu- 
chadnezzar in  the  parts  and  metals  of  the  image ; 
and  that  the  vision  foreshadowed  the  course  and  end 
of  those  Gentile  powers  to  which  God  had  delegated 
the  sovereignty  of  earth,  during  the  chastisement  of 
His  people  Israel. 

Daniel  thought  that  he  was  standing  on  the  shore 
of  "  the  great  sea,"  an  expression  which  in  the  Old 
Testament  always  signifies  the  Mediterranean.^  This 
indicated  the  locality  of  the  world-powers  ;  they  must 
all  border  upon  the  Mediterranean  before  they  could 
have  anything  to  do  with  the  vision.^ 

'  Num.  xxxiv.  6;  Josh.  i.  4;  ix.  i  ;  xv.  12. 

*  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  each  empire  in  succession  acquired 
a  greater  extent  of  Mediterranean  coast-land,  until  at  last  the 
whole  of  "  the  great  sea  "  became  a  Roman  lake. 


THE    VISION  OF  THE  FOUR    IVIID  BEASTS.  83 

In  the  dark  and  troubled  sea  we  have  a  symbol  of 
the  confused  anarchy  of  the  nations,  the  tumults  of  the 
peoples,  out  of  which  empires  are  wont  to  rise  ;  just 
as  did  that  of  Napoleon  from  the  French  revolution 
and   Reign  of  Terror. 

But  unless  they  had  been  provoked,  the  waves 
would  never  have  lashed  themselves  into  the  fury  of 
a  storm.  They  were  impelled  by  external  forces,  the 
blasts  which  were  breaking  upon  them.  And  these 
blasts  represented  the  evil  powers  of  the  air,  the  angels 
and  demons  of  darkness,  which  by  their  ceaseless 
assaults  keep  men  in  a  perpetual  state  of  unrest,  excite 
their  passions,  and  drive  them  on  to  every  kind  of 
wickedness. 

The  fact  that  there  were  four  winds,  corresponding 
to  the  four  quarters  of  heaven,  pointed  to  the  uni- 
versality of  the  influence,  and  showed  that  people  of  all 
regions  of  the  earth  would  be  affected  by  it,  and  moved 
hither  and  thither  in  violent  commotion. 

The  first  beast  which  arose  from  the  seething  foam 
was  in  form  like  a  lion,  but  had  also  the  wings  of  an 
eagle.  Such  figures — of  a  colossal  size,  and  probably 
reminiscences  of  the  Cherubim — were  well  known  in 
Nineveh  and  Babylon,  and  many  of  them  have  been 
disinterred  by  Sir  Henry  Layard,  and  are  now  in  the 
British  Museum.  The  apparition  would,  therefore, 
suggest  to  Daniel  the  Babylonian  Empire  ;  and  he 
would  recognize  the  combination  of  the  lion,  the  king 
of  beasts,  with  the  eagle,  the  chief  of  birds,  as  a 
symbol  similar  in  meaning  to  the  golden  head  of  the 
image.  And  the  kingdom  of  the  Chaldeans  had 
indeed  ruled  royally  like  the  lion,  and  winged  its 
conquering  flight  over  the  world  like  the  eagle.     For 


84  THE   GE.YTILES, 

nothing  was  more  characteristic  of  Nabopolassar  and 
Nebuchadnezzar  than  the  energy  and  rapidity  of  their 
irresistible  movements. 

But  while  Daniel  was  gazing  upon  the  beast,  its 
wings  were  suddenly  plucked  off;  so  that  it  could 
no  more  fly  victoriously  over  the  earth,  or  hover  as  a 
ruler  above  it.  Then  it  was  lifted  up,  and  made  to 
walk  as  a  man  upon  two  feet  instead  of  four,  while 
at  the  same  time  a  man's  heart  ^  was  given  to  it. 
It  was  still  a  beast,  but  it  assumed  the  attitude,  and 
was  endowed  with  the  intellect,  of  a  man.  It  no 
longer  trusted  to  the  savage  strength  of  its  claws  and 
teeth,  which  had  failed  it,  but  had  recourse  to  human 
artifice  and  skill.  By  this  means  it  was  yet  able  to 
compass  its  ends  in  spite  of  the  loss  of  its  brute  force. 
For  although  a  man,  if  he  be  opposed  to  wild  beasts 
with  no  other  defence  than  his  natural  limbs,  will  have 
little  chance  in  the  struggle,  yet  let  him  only  plan  and 
make  his  weapons,  and  he  will  quickly  destroy  the 
most  terrible   monsters. 

The  wings  of  the  lion  were  old  and  heavy  when 
Cyrus  marched  against  its  Lydian  ally :  there  was 
then  no  Nebuchadnezzar  to  hasten  to  the  scene  of 
action,  and  vigorously  arrest  the  progress  of  the 
conquering  Persian.  So  dilatory  had  the  Chaldeans 
become,  that  their  confederates,  the  Lydians  and 
Egyptians,  were  defeated,  Sardis  was  captured,  and 
Crcesus  made  a  prisoner,  before  their  army  had  even 
started  from  Babylon.  When  they  heard  of  these 
disasters,  they  no  longer  dared  to  think  of  advancing 
out  of  their  own  country,  but  began   to  construct  huge 

'  We  must  remember  that  the  Hebrews  ret^arded  the  heart  as 
the  seat  of  the  intellect  as  well  as  of  the  emotions. 


THE    VISION  OF  THE  FOUR    WILD  BEASTS.  Gs 

defensive  works.  The  fierce  brave  spirit  of  that 
bitter  nation,  the  Chaldeans,  had  been  taken  from  it  : 
it  could  no  more  go  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer. 
Fifteen  years  after  the  capture  of  Sardis,  Cyrus  in- 
vaded Babylonia,  swept  everything  before  him,  and 
at  last  took  the  great  city  itself.  Then  the  wings  of 
the  Chaldean  beast  were  plucked  off  for  ev^er  :  he  was 
deprived  of  all  his  brute  strength,  and  was  no  longer 
the  acknowledged  head  of  the  beasts  and  birds  of  the 
earth. 

He  was  not,  however,  destroyed,  but  assumed  the 
attitude  and  received  the  heart  of  a  man.  This 
description  appears  to  glance  at  the  subsequent  his- 
tory of  the  Chaldean  caste.  While  its  members 
wielded  the  still  vigorous  power  of  Babylon,  they  were 
enabled  to  rule  the  world  by  force  ;  but  when  they 
were  driven  out  of  the  city  by  Cyrus  and  the  almost 
monotheistic  Persians,  they  retired  to  Pergamos,  and  ' 
there  sought  by  machination  and  craft  to  compass 
that  which  they  could  no  longer  obtain  by  force.  Of 
their  success,  and  by  what  means  they  recovered  the 
sovereignty  of  the  world,  first  through  the  Empire 
and  then  through  the  Church  of  Rome,  we  shall  have 
to  speak  presently  ;  and  shall  then  be  able  to  explain 
the  manner  in  which  the  existence  of  the  first  beast 
is  prolonged  to  the  times  of  the  end,  and  discern  a 
reason  for  the  breaking  out  of  its  spirit  in  the  fourth, 
as  well  as  for  the  transference  of  the  name  of  Babylon 
to  Rome, 

The  second  empire  is  likened  to  a  bear,  the  strongest 
beast  after  the  lion,  distinguished  for  its  voracity,  and 
called  by  Aristotle  "  an  omnivorous  animal."  It  has 
none   of  the    agility  and    majesty   of  the    lion,  but    is 


86  THE   GENTILES, 

awkward  in  its  movements,  and  effects  its  purpose 
with  comparative  slowness,  by  brute  force  and  sheer 
strength.  As  it  appeared  upon  the  scene  of  Daniel's 
vision,  it  raised  up  itself  on  one  side  in  readiness  to 
attack,  it  held  three  ribs  in  its  mouth,  and  the 
command  was  given  to  it  ; — "  Arise,  devour  much 
flesh." 

Now  all  these  points  find  a  ready  interpretation  in 
the  characteristics  and  history  of  the  second  empire. 
It  was  ponderous  in  its  movements  :  it  did  not  gain 
its  victories  by  bravery  or  skill,  but  overwhelmed  its 
enemies  by  hurling  vast  masses  of  troops  upon  them, 
armies  the  greatest  that  have  ever  been  collected.  For 
instance,  when  Darius  Hystaspes  invaded  Scythia,  he 
took  with  him  700,000  men,  and,  in  addition,  a  naval 
force  of  600  ships  manned  by  120,000  saitors  and 
marines.  Xerxes'  expedition  against  Greece  was 
undertaken  with  2,500,000  fighting  men  gathered  from 
fifty-six  nations.  Adding  the  camp-followers,  the 
whole  body  made  up  some  5,000,000  souls,  a  vast 
multitude,  which,  as  Justin  remarks,  were  able  to  drink 
up  rivers  on  their  march,  but  could  not  exhaust  the 
royal  treasury.  Artaxerxes  Longimanus  used  600,000 
men  to  subdue  the  one  province  of  Egypt,  and  raised 
1,200,000  to  crush  the  rebellion  of  his  brother  Cyrus. 
Even  in  the  last  throes  of  the  empire,  Darius  Codo- 
mannus  opposed  nearly  600,000  troops  to  Alexander 
at  the  battle  of  Issus.  And  after  his  defeat  he  made 
another  supreme  effort,  and  appeared  in  the  plain  of 
Gaugamela  with  a  well-equipped  army  of  1,000,000 
infantry,  40,000  cavalry,  and  200  scythed  chariots. 

In  the  movements  of  such  enormous  bodies  of  men 
much  flesh  was  indeed  devoured,  and  that  not  merely 


THE    VISION  OF  THE  FOUR    WILD  BEASTS,  87 

by  the  sword,  but  by  famines  in  the  countries  requisi- 
tioned for  the  vast  armies,  and  also  by  a  reckless  waste 
of  life  in  the  armies  themselves. 

The  side  of  the  bear  which  was  raised  up  to  attack 
seems  to  signify  Persia,  in  which  lay  the  chief  strength 
of  the  twofold  empire.  It  will  thus  correspond  to  the 
right  breast  and  arm  of  the  image  ;  and  also  to  the 
horn  of  the  ram  which  came  up  last,  but  was  higher 
than  the  other.-^ 

C—The  three  ribs  are  the  three  kingdoms  of  Lydia 
Babylon  and  Egypt,  which  formed  a  league  to  check 
the  Medo-Persian  power,  but  were  all  destroyed  by  it.  ) 
(The  third  beast,  which  represents  the  Grecian  empire 
of  Alexander,  was  like  a  leopard.^  This  is  the  most 
agile  and  graceful  of  creatures  ;  but  its  speed  is  here 
still  further  assisted  by  wings.  Slight  in  its  frame,  but 
strong,  swift,  and  fierce,  its  characteristics  render  it  a 
fitting  symbol  of  the  rapid  conquests  of  Alexander, 
who,  followed  by  small  but  well-equipped  and  splen- 
didly brave  armies,  moved  with  the  greatest  celerity 
and  skill,  and  in  about  ten  years  overthrew  the  unwieldy 
forces  of  Persia,  and  subdued  the  whole  civilized  world. 

The  four  heads  and  four  wings  must  be  interpreted 
of  different  things,  and  not  taken  together  ;  for  other- 
wise there  would  have  been  but  two  heads  to  correspond 
to  the  four  wings. 

Probably  the  wings  denote  spreading  and  extension 
of  dominion  to  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth.  But 
they  are  only  the  wings  of  a  fowl,  and  not  those  of  an 
eagle  ;  the  progress  would  not  be  so  royally  victorious 
as  that  of  the  Chaldean  power. 

The  four  heads,  on  the  other  hand,  are  the  four  king- 

'  Dan.  viii.  3. 


iS  THE   GENTILES. 

I 

I  doms  into  which  the  empire  of  Alexander  was  divided 
by  his  generals,  namely,  Thrace  and  Bithynia,  Mace- 
donia and  Greece,  Syria  Babylon  and  the  East,  and 
Egypt.  In  these  kingdoms  the  empire  of  Alexander 
v/as  continued  until,  in  B.C.  31,  Egypt,  the  last  survivor 
of  them,  was  destroyed  by  the  Romans.  / 

The  fourth  beast,  diverse  from  all  its  predecessors, 
was  indescribably  dreadful  and  terrible,  and  exceedingly 
strong.  And  certainly  the  career  of  the  Roman  Empire 
has  already,  even  in  the  past,  been  more  bloody  than 
those  of  all  the  others,  while  its  crimes  include  the 
murder  of  the  Son  of  God  Himself.  Daniel  beholds 
it  as  it  arose  and  destroyed  the  Grecian  empire  ;  but 
nothing  is  revealed  to  him  of  its  after  career  until  the 
yet  future  time  of  the  Ten  Kingdoms.  To  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, the  Gentile,  its  intermediate  division  into  two 
Empires,  the  Eastern  and  Western,  is  foretold  :  but 
that  event  took  place  in  the  period  during  which 
Hebrew  prophecy  is  in  abeyance  ;  ^  therefore  it  was 
not  disclosed  to  Daniel.  He  sees  only  the  beast  and 
its  ten  horns — the  Empire  in  its  first  phase  till  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus,  and  its  final  condi- 
.  tion,  in  the  last  seven  years  of  God's  dealings  with 
Israel,  when  the  ten  horns,  corresponding  to  the  ten 
j;  toes  of  the  image,  will  be  developed.  He  is  instructed 
that  the  ten  horns  are  ten  kings,  and  that  another  shall 
arise  among  them,  diverse  from  all  the  rest,  who  shall 
subdue  three  of  the  ten,  and  gain  the  ascendency  over 
them  all.  That  this  king  will  be  distinguished  by 
intelligence  and  great  intellectual  power  is  indicated 
by  the  eyes  of  the  horn  ;  while  the  mouth  speaking 

'  The  reader  will  find  this  explained  by  the  comments  on  the 
Prophecy  of  the  Seventy  Weeks  in  Part  II. 


{ 


THE    VISION  OF  THE  FOUR    WILD  BEASTS.  89 

great  things  shows  that  he  will  be  boastful  and  blas- 
phemous. He  is  the  last  monarch  of  the  Gentiles,  who 
will  with  stupendous  magnificence  bring  up  the  rear  of 
that  long  procession  which  was  headed  by  Nebuchad- 
nezzar the  Chaldean  nearly  two  thousand  five  hundred 
years  ago. 

The  brief  account  of  this  potentate  here  given  to 
Daniel  exactly  corresponds  with  the  descriptions  in  the 
thirteenth  and  seventeenth  chapters  of  the  Apocalypse. 
He  will  speak  great  words  against  the  Most  High,  wear 
out  the  Saints  of  the  High  Places,^  and  think  to  change 
times  and  laws.  And  his  power  will  be  limited  only 
by  his  will  for  a  time,  times,  and  the  dividing,  or  half, 

'  It  is  interesting  to  distinguish  the  meanings  of  three  expres- 
sions in  the  seventh  chapter  of  Daniel. 

In  verses  18,  22,  25,  and  2^,  the  Authorised  Version  translates, 
"Saints  of  the  Most  High,"  whereas  it  should  read,  "  Saints  of 
the  High  Places."  Daniel  could  not  of  course  understand  who 
these  would  be — for  the  mystery  of  the  Church  was  not  then  re- 
vealed— but  we  can  easily  recognise  those  who  will  live  and  reign 
with  the  Lord  in  the  heavenly  regions,  taking  the  place  of  "the 
host  of  the  High  Ones  that  are  on  high."  In  ver.  25,  the  refer- 
ence is  specially  to  that  portion  of  them  which  will  be  upon  earth 
during  the  great  tribulation,  but  will  suffer  martyrdom  rather  than 
worship  the  Beast  or  his  image. 

In  ver.  27,  there  is  also  mention  of  another  class,  "the  people 
of  the  Saints  of  the  High  Places  ;  "  that  is,  the  people  which  stand 
in  close  relation  to  these  saints,  namely,  the  Israelites.  To  the 
latter  "the  kingdom  and  the  dominion  and  the  greatness  of  the 
kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven  shall  be  given."  That  is,  they 
shall  become  "the  Kings  of  the  Earth  upon  the  earth,"  in  the 
stead  of  the  destroyed  Gentile  powers  (Isa.  xxiv.  21). 

In  ver.  21,  the  simple  expression,  "the  saints,"  seems  to  em- 
brace all  the  people  of  God  who  are  upon  earth  at  the  time,  the 
believers  who  pass  through  the  tribulation,  and  the  pious  Jews. 
In  ver.  22,  it  includes  still  more,  nothing  less,  indeed,  than  the 
completed  Church  and  the  whole  Israelitish  people  ;  for  the  re- 
ference is  to  the  Millennial  age,  and  "the  Kingdom"  compre- 
hends both  the  heavenly  and  the  earthly  portions  of  Christ's 
government. 


90  THE   GENTILES, 

of  a  time — that  is,  probably,  for  three  years  and  a  half, 
or,  as  it  is  elsewhere  called,  for  forty  and  two  months.^ 
At  the  end  of  that  time  God  will  sit  in  judgment,  the 
dominion  will  be  given  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  He  will 
go  forth  to  consume  the  Lawless  One  with  the  breath 
of  His  mouth.  "  Because  of  the  voice  of  the  great 
words  which  the  horn  spake,  I  beheld  even  till  the 
Beast  was  slain,  and  his  body  destroyed,  and  given  to 
the  burning  flame." 

Since  the  Beast,  which  represents  the  body  politic, 
is  slain  because  of  the  blasphemous  words  of  the  horn, 
it  is  evident  that  Antichrist  will  be  in  perfect  sympathy 
with  the  ungodly  inhabitants  of  earth.  There  is  here 
no  illustration  of  the  famous  line  of  Horace, 

"  Quidquid  delirant  reges  plectuntur  Achivi."  ^ 

Unlike  the  kings  of  former  times,  this  monarch  will 
be  an  exact  exponent  of  the  will  of  the  people  ;  there- 
fore, they  will  justly  share  his  punishment.  Their 
community  of  feeling  is  strikingly  set  forth  in  the 
seventeenth  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse,  where  the 
eighth  king,  who  corresponds  to  the  little  horn,  is  said 
to  be  the  Beast  himself.^ 

The  previous  empires  were  not  destroyed  when  their 
power  was  taken  away  ;  for  Babylon  prolonged  its  life 
in  the  manner  described  above,  while  Persia  and  Greece 
remain  as  insignificant  kingdoms  to  this  day.  But 
with  the  fourth  empire  all  must  meet  their  doom  ;  for, 
in  the  vision  of  the  image,  the  stone  which  strikes  it 
upon  the  feet  breaks  the  whole  into  pieces,  so  that  gold, 
silver,  brass,  iron,  and  clay,  are  mingled  together  in  one 
indistinGfuishable  ruin. 


't>' 


'  Rev.  xili.  5.         ^  Hor.,  Epist.  i.,  2,  14  •  Rev.  xvii.  11. 


THE    VISION  OF  THE  RAM  AND    THE  HE-GOAT.      91 

We  must  not  forget  the  peculiar  significance  of  the 
vision  of  the  four  beasts  to  Daniel  and  the  Je\ys,  for 
they  learnt  from  it  how  long  Jerusalem  must  be  trodden 
down  of  the  Gentiles.  Four  World-empires  were  to 
run  their  course,  and  then  the  times  of  the  Gentiles 
would  be  ended,  and  the  Lord  would  descend  and  re- 
store the  Kingdom   to   Israel. 

This  foreordained  purpose  was  also  disclosed  to 
Zechariah,  when  he  heard  the  angel  of  the  Lord  cry- 
ing ; — "  O  Lord  of  hosts,  how  long  wilt  Thou  not  have 
mercy  on  Jerusalem,  and  on  the  cities  of  Judah,  against 
which  Thou  hast  had  indignation  these  threescore  and 
ten  years  ^ "  For  the  Lord  spoke  comfortably  both  to 
the  angel  and  to  the  prophet,  while  to  the  latter  He 
showed  /o?ir  horns  and  four  smiths.  Zechariah  asked 
for  an  explanation,  and  the  reply  was  ; — "  These  are 
the  horns  which  have  scattered  Judah,  so  that  no  man 
did  lift  up  his  head  :  but  these  are  come  to  fray  them, 
to  cast  out  the  horns  of  the  Gentiles,  which  lifted  up 
their  horn  over  the  land  of  Judah  to  scatter  it."  ^ 

V. 

The  Vision  of  the  Ram  and  the  He-Goat. 

The  eighth  chapter  of  Daniel  reveals  the  connec- 
tion which  will  be  found  to  exist  between  the  third 
empire  and  Antichrist — a  connection  which  may, 
perhaps,  serve  to  identify  him  when  he  appears,  and 
which  at  the  same  time  hints  that  his  rule  will  be 
characterized  by  the  intellectual  brilliancy  and  defect- 
ive morality  of  Greece,  as  well  as  by  the  iron  force  of 
Rome. 

'  Zech.  i.  12-21. 


92  THE   GENTILES. 

It  was  some  two  years  after  the  grand  vision  of  the 
four  beasts,  when  another  wonderful  sight  was  presented 
to  the  eyes  of  Daniel.  The  time  was  critical,  and  the 
prophet  may  hav^e  felt  the  need  of  further  guidance  and 
prayed  for  it  ;  for  the  siege  of  Babylon  was  being 
pressed,  and  her  end  was  so  near  that  in  the  new  reve- 
lation it  is  tacitly  assumed,  and  the  predictions  begin 
with  the  power  which  overthrew  her. 

Daniel's  past  experiences,  and  his  close  walk  with 
God,  had  probably  quickened  his  spiritual  perceptions  ; 
and,  accordingly,  the  Divine  communications  could  now 
reach  him  without  needing  the  medium  of  a  dream. 
While  awake,  and  fully  conscious,  he  seems  to  have 
been  caught  up — like  Ezekiel — by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
and  conveyed  out  of  beleaguered  Babylon  to  the  far 
distant  city  of  Susa,  that  he  might  there  behold  in 
vision  the  fall  of  the  Persian  empire,  of  which  it  was  a 
capital,  and  be  instructed  in  regard  to  the  third  empire 
and  the  arch-enemy  who  should  arise  from  one  of  its 
four  kingdoms  in  the  latter  days. 

He  soon  found  himself  standing  on  the  banks  of 
the  Ulai,  and,  lifting  up  his  eyes,  saw  a  ram  with 
two  horns,  one  of  which  was  higher  than  the  other  ; 
but  the  higher  had  come  up  last.  This  ram  was 
pushing  Westward  and  Northward  and  Southward,  so 
that  none  were  able  to  stand  before  him  :  conse- 
quently, he  did  according  to  his  will  and  became 
great.  But  while  the  prophet  was  considering  the 
sight,  a  he-goat  suddenly  appeared,  coming  from  the 
West  with  such  speed  that  he  seemed  not  to  touch  the 
ground,  and  having  one  great  horn  between  his  eyes. 
In  the  fury  of  his  power,  he  made  for  the  ram,  smote 
him,  shattered  his  horns,  cast  him  down,  and   trampled 


THE    VISION  OF  THE  RAM  AND    THE  HE- CO  AT.      93 

upon  his  prostrate  body :  nor  could  the  ram  either 
resist  him,  or  find  a  deHverer.  Then  the  he-goat 
waxed  powerful  ;  but  in  the  midst  of  his  strength  the 
great  horn  was  broken  off,  and  in  its  place  four  others 
came  up  towards  the  four  winds  of  heaven. 

Out  of  one  of  these  sprang  a  little  horn,  which 
became  exceedingly  great  towards  the  South,  and 
toward  the  East,  and  towards  the  glory — that  is,  the 
land  of  Israel.  Nay,  it  even  grew  up  to  the  host  of 
heaven,  and  cast  dovvm  some  of  the  host  and  of  the 
stars  to  the  ground,  and  trampled  upon  them  :  it 
magnified  itself  against  the  Prince  of  the  host,  and  took 
away  the  daily  sacrifice,  and  destroyed  the  sanctuary. 

Then  Daniel  saw  two  angels  in  conversation,  and, 
endeavouring  to  hear  what  they  were  saying,  seems 
to  have  failed  to  understand  the  first  speaker,  but 
caught  the  meaning  of  the  other,  who  inquired  ; — 
"  How  long  shall  be  the  vision  concerning  the  daily 
sacrifice,  and  the  transgression  of  desolation,  to  give 
both  the  sanctuary  and  the  host  to  be  trodden  under 
foot  ?  "  And  the  first  replied  ; — "  Unto  two  thousand 
and  three  hundred  days  :  then  shall  the  sanctuary  be 
cleansed."  These  words  were  unintelligible  to  Daniel, 
and  caused  him  the  greatest  anxiety ;  but,  while 
pondering  them,  he  was  suddenly  startled  by  the  con- 
sciousness of  an  apparition  facing  him  in  the  distance, 
a  supernatural  presence  in  human  form.  And  then 
he  heard  a  voice  of  command — proceeding,  apparently, 
from  one  who  was  hovering  above  the  waters  of  the 
Ulai — which  said  ; — "  Gabriel,  make  this  man  to 
understand  the  vision." 

Instantly  the  heavenly  being    began    to    move   to- 
ward  him,   and   Daniel,    though   he    was    the    grcatl)- 


94  THE   GENTILES, 

beloved,  experienced  the  indescribable  horror  which 
seizes  upon  every  sinful  man  when  he  is  brought  face 
to  face  with  perfect  holiness.  He  fell  to  the  ground, 
just  catching,  before  he  fainted,  a  single  sentence  from 
the  lip?  of  his  celestial  instructor  ; — "  Understand,  O 
son  of  man  :  for  the  vision  has  reference  to  the  time 
of  the  end." 

Here,  then,  is  the  first  clue  to  the  interpretation. 
The  vision  is  no  prophecy  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes  : 
^the  little  horn  is  another  and  far  more  terrible  persecu- 
tor who  shall  arise  in  the  last  days. 

While  Gabriel  was  speaking,  Daniel  had  fallen  into 
a  swoon  :  but  the  angel  restored  him  by  a  touch,  set 
him  on  his  feet,  and  then  continued  ; — "  Behold,  I  will 
make  thee  know  what  shall  be  in  the  last  end  of  the 
indignation  :  for  it  relates  to  the  appointed  time  of 
the  end." 

Here  is  another  solemn  warning  against  misappre- 
hension. The  first  part  of  the  vision,  which  was  soon 
to  be  fulfilled,  is  merely  used  to  introduce,  connect, 
and  render  intelligible,  what  follows  ;  while  its  main 
burden  is  a  prediction  of  the  closing  days  of  that 
indignation  which  Moses  threatened  to  disobedient 
Israel,  and  under  which  the  Twelve  Tribes  are  now 
suffering,  and  will  suffer  until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles 
be  ended. 

\  Gabriel  then  explains  that  the  ram  signifies  the 
king  of  Media  and  Persia,  and  the  hairy  goat  the 
king  of  Greece.  In  the  former  vision  these  two 
powers  were  represented  by  a  bear  and  a  leopard  ;  but 
the  symbols  are  here  changed,  perhaps  for  the  sake 
of  more  certain  identification.  In  the  earlier  vision 
the  representative  beasts  seem  to  have  been  selected 


THE    VISION  OF  THE  RAM  AND    THE   HE- GO  AT      95 

for  the  purpose  of  delineating  the  characteristics  of 
the  kingdoms  for  which  they  stood:  here  there  is  also 
a  reference  to  heraldic  devices. 

Most  of  the  great  Asiatic  powers  were  founded  by 
mountaineers  or  nomads,  the  Persian  among  them  : 
and  this  probably  explains  the  fact  that  its  recognized 
emblem,  or  one  of  them,  was  a  ram.  In  Taylor's 
"  Calmet "  there  is  an  engraving  of  a  Persian  coin  dis^ 
playing  a  ram's  head  on  the  obverse,  and  a  ram  re- 
cumbent on  the  reverse.  The  same  symbol  is  found 
among  the  sculptures  of  Persepolis,  which  was  the 
capital  of  Persia  proper  from  the  time  of  Darius 
Hystaspes  until  its  wanton  destruction  by  Alexander. 
And  it  seems  to  have  been  long  retained  :  for  Ammi- 
anus  Marcellinus,  in  describing  the  march  of  Sapor, 
tells  us  that  the  Persian  king  rode  in  front  of  his  army 
wearing  "  a  golden  figure  of  a  ram's  head  set  with  gems, 
instead  of  a  diadem."  ^  We  may  add  that,  in  the 
Zendavesta,  Ized  Behram,  the  guardian  spirit  of  Persia, 
appears  "  like  a  ram  with  clean  feet  and  sharp-pointed 
horns." 

The  ram  corresponds  to  the  bear  in  that  it  also  is 
a  heavy  and  strong  animal.  Its  two  horns,  the  one 
higher  than  the  other,  indicate  the  twofold  character  of 
the  empire,  as  well  as  the  superiority  of  the  Persians 
to  the  Medians.^  The  same  facts  are  marked  by  the 
right  and  left  arms  of  the  image  ;  and  in  the  vision  of 
the  four  beasts  by  the  attitude  of  the  bear,  who  raises 
himself  up  so  as  to  strike  with  the  side  on  which  he 
is  strongest. 

Amm.  Marc,  xix.  i. 

The  higher  horn  is  said  to  have  come  tip  last,  because  the 
Median  dynasty  was  earlier  than  the  Persian. 


96  THE   GENTILES. 

The  pushing  of  the  ram  in  three  directions  seems, 
like  the  three  ribs  in  the  bear's  mouth,  to  indicate  the 
conquest  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  league,  Lydia  Baby- 
lon and  Egypt,  of  which  the  first  two  were  subjugated 
by  Cyrus,  the  last  by  his  son  Cambyses. 

And  finally,  the  overthrow  of  all  other  beasts,  and 
the  note  that  none  could  deliver  them  from  the  power 
of  the  ram,  answer  to  the  command  given  to  the  bear  ; 
— "  Arise,  devour  much  flesh." 

Thus  far,  then,  for  the  ram.  The  goat,  on  the  other 
hand,  owing  to  its  connection  v/ith  the  famous  legend 
of  Caranus,^  was  the  national  emblem  of  Macedonia, 
and  is  found  on  the  coins  of  that  country,  the  ancient 
capital  of  which  was  called  ^gse,  or  the  Goat-city,  and 
the  people  iEgeadas ;  while  the  adjacent  waters  received 
the  name  of  the  ^gean,  or  Goat-sea.  Hence  the  son 
of  Alexander  by  Roxana  was  called  -^gus,  or  "  son  of 
a  goat,"  and  some  of  his  successors  are  represented  on 
their  coins  with  goat's  horns.  And  in  his  life  of  Pyrrhus, 
Plutarch    describes    the    enthusiasm    with    which   that 

'  One  of  the  Heraclidae,  and  the  founder  of  Macedonia.  His 
story  is  thus  related  b}'  Justin  ; — "  But  Caranus  also,  who  was 
followed  by  a  large  number  of  Greeks,  when  he  had  been  bidden 
by  the  answer  of  an  oracle  to  look  for  settlements  in  Macedonia, 
came  to  Emathia,  and  seized  the  city  of  Edessa.  He  took  it  by 
surprise,  a  dense  rain  and  mist  having  prevented  the  inhabitants 
from  descrying-  his  approach  ;  v.hile  he  contrived  to  find  his  way 
to  the  place  by  following  a  flock  of  goats  which  were  flying  from 
the  storm.  After  the  capture  he  called  to  mind  an  oracle  by 
which  he  had  been  bidden  to  seek  for  a  kingdom  under  the 
guidance  of  goats,  and  was,  consequently,  induced  to  make  the 
city  his  capital.  And  from  that  time  he  was  scrupulously  parti- 
cular to  have  the  goats  in  front  of  his  standards  whenever  he 
marched  out  with  the  army,  in  order  that  he  might  retain,  for  all 
his  undertakings,  those  guides  which  had  put  him  in  the  way  of 
gaining  his  kingdom,  To  cornmemorate  their  service,  he  changed 
the  name  of  the  city  of  Edessa,  and  called  it  MgTZ,  and  his  people 
the  .(Egeadse  "  (Just.  Hist,  vii,  i). 


THE    VISION  OF  THE   RAM  AND    THE  HE-COAT.      97 

monarch  was  recognised  by  the  Macedonians  when  he 
had  put  on  his  helmet  adorned  with  a  lofty  plume  and 
a  crest  of  goat's  horns.^ 

In  the  ram  and  the  he-goat  there  is  the  same  contrast 
of  dull  strength  and  nimble  energy  as  in  the  bear  and 
the  leopard  ;  and  the  he-goat  comes  from  the  West — 1 
that  is,  from  Greece,  which  is  to  the  West  of  Persia.     / 

He  had  a  notable  horn  between  his  eyes,  a  symbol 
of  pre-eminent  strength  directed  by  intelligence  ;  and 
this,  as  the  angel  explains,  represents  the  first  king  of 
the  Grecian  World-power,  Alexander  the  Great,  whose"! 
marvellous  energy  was  guided  by  an  equally  marvellous  (^ 
intellect. 

The  fury  and  violence  of  the  goat  well  depict  the 
vigour  of  Alexander's  attack,  which  carried  everything 
before  it,  and  of  which  a  wonderful  example  was  given 
in  the  very  first  encounter,  the  fiery  assault  on  the 
Persian  positions  at  the  Granicus.  All  conditions  of 
peace  were  refused,  and  Alexander  openly  declared  to 
the  ambassadors  of  Darius  that  he  would  pursue  their 
master  to  the  death,  not  as  an  honourable  enemy,  but 
as  an  assassin  and  poisoner.  The  decisive  battle  of 
Arbela  followed  ;  after  which  Alexander,  at  the  instiga- 
tion of  an  Athenian  courtesan,  wantonly  destroyedV 
Persepolis,  the  ruins  of  which  prove  it  to  have  been  one  ^ 
of  the  grandest  cities  the  world  has  ever  seen.  Then, 
taking  with  him  a  compact  army,  he  made  a  forced 
march  of  three  hundred  miles  in  eleven  days  in  hot 
pursuit  of  Darius. 

But  while  the  goat  was  at  the  height  of  his  strength, 

'  It  is  possibly  in  allusion  to  such  a  crest  that  Alexander  is 
called  Dhu'lkarnein,  or  the  Two-homed,  in  the  Koran  (chap,  xviii., 
"The  Cave"). 

7 


98  THE   GENTILES. 

the  notable  horn  was  suddenly  broken  off:  and  so,  in  the 
midst  of  his  glory,  with  plans  inconceivably  vast  in  his 
mind,  Alexander  "  succumbed  to  marsh  fever  and  in- 
temperance "  at  Babylon,  in  the  thirty-third  year  of  his 
life.  The  great  centre  of  power  was  broken  ;  but  the 
intelligence  and  energy  of  the  Greeks  remained,  and 
soon  four  horns  sprang  up  in  the  place  of  the  one  :  the 
World-empire  fell  apart  into  four  dominions  extending 
toward  the  four  winds  of  heaven.  For  after  the  battle 
of  Ipsus,  four  of  the  generals  of  Alexander  divided  his 
territories  among  themselves  in  the  following  manner. 

Ptolemy  took  possession  of  Egypt,  Cyrene,  Ccelo- 
Syria,  and  some  of  the  northern  parts  of  Asia  Minor. 

Cassander  of  Macedon  and  Greece. 

Lysimachus  of  Thrace,  Western  Bithynia,  Lesser 
Phrygia,  Mysia,  and  Lydia,  with  the  Meander  for  a 
boundary. 

Seleucus  of  the  remainder  of  Asia  Minor  and  the 
East. 

Just  after  the  appearance  of  the  four  horns,  Daniel 
saw  a  little  horn  issuing  from  one  of  them,  and  becoming 
exceedingly  great.  Had  the  vision  been  transmitted 
to  us  without  interpretation,  we  must  have  supposed 
this  last  to  indicate  some  monarch,  or  state,  arising  from 
one  of  the  four  kingdoms  not  long  after  their  establish- 
ment. But  the  interpreting  angel  explains  that  the 
power  represented  by  it  will  not  appear  until  "  the  latter 
time  of  their  kingdom,  when  the  transgressors  are  come 
to  the  full."  Hence  we  perceive  that  at  this  point  the 
vision  passes  on  to  "  the  time  of  the  end,"  with  which, 
as  we  have  previously  seen,  it  is  mainly  concerned.^ 
J  Now  the  four  kingdoms  "were  all  merged  in  the  Roman 

'See  p.  94. 


THE    VISION  OF  THE  RAM  AND    THE  HE-GOAT.      99 

Empire  before  the  birth  of  Christ — the  last  survivor 
being  Egypt,  which  continued  until  the  defeat  of  Mark 
Antony  and  Cleopatra  by  Augustus,  B.C.  3 1.'-  They 
will,  however,  be  resuscitated  ;  for  "  the  latter  time  of 
their  kingdom"  must  be  synchronous  with  "the  time  of 
the  end  "  and  "the  last  end  of  the  indignation."  Other- 
wise, no  part  of  the  vision  would  refer  to  that  crisis, 
and  the  solemn  declarations  of  Gabriel  would  be  with- 
out meaning.  And  so  we  understand  that  the  period 
of  the  little  horn  will  not  arrive  until  the  closing  days 
of  the  dispensation  in  which  Daniel  lived — that  is,  until 
the  seven  years  which  yet  remain  to  it,  after  our  paren- 
thetical age  has  run  its  course.^ 

But  in  the  previous  vision  there  also  arises,  from 
among  the  ten  horns  of  the  fourth  beast,  a  little  horn, 
which  has  been  usually  distinguished  from  that  which 
we  are  considering,  on  the  ground  that  the  former 
springs  from  the  fourth  beast,  and  the  latter  from  the 
goat,  which  corresponds  to  the  third. 

This,  however,  when  carefully  examined,  proves  to 
be  a  very  superficial  reason.  The  moral  features  of  the 
two  powers  are  precisely  the  same.  Both  of  them  are 
violent  and  blasphemous  oppressors  of  God's  people  : 
both  dare  to  defy  the  Powers  of  heaven,  the  Most  High 
and  the  Prince  of  princes.  Both  exist  at  the  same  time: 
for  the  horn  of  the  seventh  chapter  continues  until 
Christ  comes  to  take  the  Kingdom  ;  while  that  of  the 
eighth  prospers  until  the  last  end  of  the  indignation, 
which  is  also  closed   by  the   appearing  of  the   Lord. 

'  At  this  date,  therefore,  what  we  may  call  the  former  time  of 
their  kingdom  came  to  its  end. 

-  The  reader  will  find  this  statement  fully  explained  in  Part  II., 
:hap.  3. 


100  THE   GENTILES. 

Both  become  exceedingly  great  upon  the  earth,  and 
destroy  terribly  ;  and,  finally,  both  are  at  last  struck 
down  by  the  direct  interposition  of  God,  Scarcely 
would  there  be  room  in  the  world  for  two  such  beings 
at  the  same  time  :  the  descriptions  seem  to  be  of  one 
and  the  same  person. 

The  apparent  difficulty  of  the  diverse  origin  may 
be  easily  explained.  We  have  already  seen,  from  the 
seventh  chapter,  that  the  Roman  Empire  when  resus- 
citated will  consist  of  ten  kingdoms,  locally  governed 
each  by  its  own  king,  but  welded  into  one  great 
dominion  under  Antichrist.  And  'again,  from  the 
eighth  chapter,  we  find  that  the  four  kingdoms  of 
Alexander's  successors  will  also  be  in  existence  during 
the  Last  Week.  But  these  were  merged  in  the  Roman 
Empire  before  its  disappearance  ;  and  even  if  they  had 
not  been,  we  are,  nevertheless,  taught  by  the  vision  of 
Nebuchadnezzar,  as  well  as  by  the  description  of  the 
Beast  in  the  Apocalypse,  that  the  fourth  World-power, 
just  before  its  fall,  will  comprise  all  the  dominions  of 
the  three  previous  empires. 

It  follows,  then,  that  if  the  kingdoms  of  Alexander's 
successors  are  to  be  in  existence  at  the  end,  they 
must  be  among  the  number  of  the  ten  which  will  at 
that  time  make  up  the  Roman  Empire.^  And  so, 
while  the  seventh  chapter  tells  us  no  more  than  that 
Antichrist  may  arise  from  any  one  of  the  ten  king- 
doms, the  subsequent  vision  limits  this  statement, 
and  declares  that  he  will  proceed  from  one  of  the 
four    which    were    formed    out    of    the    territories    of 

'  The  phrase,  "  in  the  latter  time  of  their  kingdom,"  evidently 
indicates  that  they  will  not  be  found  in  the  revived  Empire  as  mere 
dependencies,  but  be  reckoned  among  the  ten  sovereign  states. 


THE    VISION  OF  THE  RAM  AND    THE  HE-GOAT,     roi 

Alexander.  /  To  speak  roughly,  two  of  these  four  will 
fill  the  peninsula  south  of  the  Danube,  Bulgaria 
Turkey  and  Greece,  the  third  will  probably  be  Asia 
Minor,  and  the  fourth  Egypt.  Greece  is  already  a 
separate  kingdom,  and  there  are  not  a  ^qw  indications 
that  the  Turkish  empire  is  about  to  break  up  into 
some  such  portions  as  the  other  three. 

If,  therefore,  this  interpretation  be  correct.  Antichrist 
will  spring  from  the  dominions  of  the  third  empire,  but 
will  hold  sway  over  the  fourth,  which  will  include  all 
the  others. 

Now  the  third  and  fourth  world-powers  were  diverse. 
The  former  was  distinguished  for  its  intellectual  splen- 
dour, though  at  the  same  time  it  was  utterly  devoid  of 
truth  and  morality.^  It  excelled  in  everything  that 
could  beautify  and  adorn  outward  life,  and  it  has 
educated  the  world  :  its  poets,  philosophers,  historians, 
orators,  painters,  and  sculptors,  have  been   models  for 

'  As  a  specimen  of  Greek  morality,  we  may  cite  the  following 
account  of  the  way  in  which  the  Athenian  commander  Paches 
gained  possession  of  Notium.  "  But  he  invited  Hippias,  the  officer 
in  command  of  the  Arcadians  who  were  in  the  fortified  quarter,  to 
a  conference,  on  the  condition  that,  if  he  failed  to  propose  any- 
thing acceptable  to  the  other,  he  should  restore  him  safe  and 
sound  to  the  fortress.  Upon  this  understanding  Hippias  came 
out  to  him,  whereupon  he  held  him  in  custody,  but  did  not  put 
him  into  chains,  and  having  suddenly  assaulted  the  fortress  takes 
it,  since  the  garrison  were  not  expecting  an  attack,  and  puts  to 
death  all  who  were  in  it,  whether  Arcadians  or  foreigners.  After- 
wards, in  accordance  with  his  promise,  he  brings  Hippias  to  the 
fortress,  and,  as  soon  as  the  latter  was  fairly  within  it,  seizes  him 
and  shoots  him  down  "  (Thucyd.  iii.  34).  This  is  the  account  of 
the  philosophical  historian  Thucydides,  who  coolly  relates  it  as  an 
ordinary  transaction  against  which  no  one  would  think  of  raising 
an  objection.  The  reader  will  notice  the  diabolical  scrupulosity 
of  Paches,  which  made  him  avoid  putting  Hippias  into  fetters, 
lest  his  prisoner  should  be  bruised,  and  it  should  th'":  become 
impossible  to  restore  him  safe  and  sound  to  the  fortress. 


102  THE   GENTILES. 

all  succeeding  generations.  Even  the  conquering 
Romans  owned  the  power  of  Greece,  acknowledging 
her  superiority  in  the  intellectual  sphere ;  and  Paul, 
in  his  Epistle  to  them,  divides  the  whole  Gentile  world 
into  Greeks  and  Barbarians.^  For  this  division,  which 
originally  meant  Greeks  and  foreigners,  had,  by  reason 
of  Greek  influence  upon  the  world,  become  not  so 
much  a  designation  of  nationality  as  of  degree  of 
culture.  And  so  the  Romans  themselves  were  reckoned 
as  Greeks,  because  they  had  imported  into  their 
country,  and  become  imbued  with,  the  language  and 
culture  of  Greece. 

The  characteristics  of  the  fourth  power,  on  the 
contrary,  were  its  iron  will,  its  maintenance  of  law. 
and  the  mighty  strength  with  which  it  bent  every- 
thing to  its  rule.  Virgil  has  well  delineated  the 
features  of  either  empire  in  a  celebrated  passage,  which 
we  may  translate  as  follows  ; — 

"  Others  will  mould  with  softer  touch  the  breathing  brass — 
I  grant — the  living  face  from  the  cold  marble  draw ; 
Will  urge  with  rarer  eloquence  their  client's  plea; 
Will  trace  with  skilful  rod  the  tangled  ways  of  heaven, 
And  tell  the  rise  and  setting  of  each  silver  star. 
But,  Roman,  thine  it  is  to  make  the  world  obey  ! 
These  are  thy  noble  arts  :  to  fix  the  terms  of  peace, 
To  spare  the  vanquished  suppliant,  and  fight  down  the  proud.''' 

It  would,  then,  seem  that  Antichrist  will  fascinate 
the  world  by  an  intellectual  brilliancy  like  that  of 
Greece,  which  he  will  use  to  direct  the  irresistible 
will  of  Rome.  And  so  when  the  fourth  beast  appears 
in  his  last  phase,  he  is  no  longer  diverse  from  all  the 
others,  but  is    "like  unto' a  leopard";^    has   assumed 

'  Rom.  i.  14,  15.        -  Virg.  Mn.  vi.  847-853.        '  Rev.  xiii.  2. 


THE    VISION  OF  THE  RAM  AND   THE  HE-GOAT.     103 

much  of  the  outward  grace  and  beauty  of  Greece, 
while  retaining  the  might  and  force  of  Rome.  And 
in  the  chapter  under  our  consideration  the  interpreting 
angel  seems  to  point  to  the  same  thing.  For  the  king 
is  "  fierce  of  countenance  "  ;  that  is  a  characteristic  of 
Rome,  which,  indeed,  is  elsewhere  described  in  the 
very  same  words,  as  "a  nation  fierce  of  countenance."  ^y 
But  the  next  clause,  "  understanding  dark  sentences," 
presents  the  subtlety  of  the  Greek  mind.^ 

Possibly  some  of  the  considerations  just  advanced 
may  explain  the  fact  that  Israel  and  Greece  are  j 
brought  into  sharp  collision,  at  the  time  of  the  end,  ' 
in  Zechariah's  prophecy  ; — "  When  I  shall  have  bent 
Judah  for  Me,  filled  the  bow  with  Ephraim,  and  raised 
up  thy  sons,  O  Zion,  against  thy  sons,  O  Greece."  ^ 
And  it  is  not  unworthy  of  notice  that,  at  the  first 
advent,  the  three  kingdoms  of  Greece  Rome  and 
Israel  are  found  together  in  the  inscription  on  the  cross.''' 

When  it  is  said  of  the  fierce  king  that  "  his  power 
shall  be  mighty,  but  not  by  his  own  power,"  we  are 
reminded  of  those  other  words,  "  And  the  Dragon  gave 
him  his  power,  and  his  throne,  and  great  authority."  ^ 
Strengthened  by  such  a  helper,  he  will  spread  havoc 
in  a  wondrous  manner,  will  by  his  cunning  make  the 
deceit  which  he  devises  successful,  and  will  destroy 
many  by  professions  of  peace,  or,  as  the  words  may 
mean,  by  unexpected  and  malignant  attacks  in  times 
of  security.  It  is  especially  mentioned  that  he  will 
work  the  ruin  of  "  strong  ones  and  the  people  of  the 
saints."     The  latter  would  seem   to  be   the    Jews,   of 

'  Deut.  xxviii.  50.  ^  Zech.  ix.  13. 

^  Dan.  viii.  2},.  ■*  Luke  xxiii.  38. 

*  Rev.  xiii.  2. 


104  THE   GENTILES. 

whom — if  we  render  the  twelfth  verse  more  correctly 
— we  have  already  been  told  that  "  a  host  shall  be 
given  up,  together  with  the  daily  sacrifice,  because  of 
transgression."  It  is  more  difficult  to  find  out  who 
are  indicated  as  the  "  strong  ones,"  but  probably  they 
are  that  nation,  or  those  nations,  which,  comprising 
many  believers  in  Christ,  will  at  first  be  moved  to  resist 
Antichrist  with  the  sword,  and  will,  consequently,  have 
to  pay  the  penalty  with  which  those  who  do  so  are 
threatened.^ 

The  king  will  further  defy  God  by  destroying  the 
Temple,  and  will  at  last  stand  up  against  the  Prince  of 
princes  Himself:  but  he  will  then  be  broken  without 
hand,  dashed  to  pieces  by  the  stone  cut  without  hands 
from  the  mountain. 

The  words  of  the  angel  in  regard  to  the  two 
thousand  three  hundred  days  are  mysterious.  The 
literal  Hebrew  expression  is,  not  "days,"  but  "even- 
ings mornings,"  which  proves  that  actual  days  of 
four-and-twenty  hours  are  intended  ;  just  as  when  we 
hear  of  forty  days  and  forty  nights,  or  of  three  days 
and  three  nights.  And  wc  should  note  that  seven 
full  prophetic  years  would  contain  two  thousand  five 
hundred  and  twenty  days  ;  that  is,  that  the  time 
mentioned  by  the  angel  is  two  hundred  and  twenty 
days  short  of  seven  years. 

Now  it  may  be  that  the  vision  of  the  daily  sacrifice 
and  the  transgression  of  desolation  refers  to  the  whole 
period  of  Antichrist's  connection  with  Jerusalem.  If 
so,  he  is  to  make  a  covenant  with  the  majority  of  the  '^ 
Jewish  nation  for  seven  years,  as  we  shall  see  in  a 
later   chapter,   and    after  the    first   three    years   and    a  ^ 

'  Rev.  xiii.  9,  10. 


THE    VISION  OF  THE  RAM  AND    THE  HE-GOAT.     105 

half  will  cause  the  sacrifice  and  oblation  to  cease. 
The  remaining  three  years  and  a  half  will  be  the 
time  of  the  great  tribulation.  But  the  Lord  Jesus  has 
promised  that  those  days  shall  be  shortened  for  the 
elect's  sake.  *  Possibly,  then,  the  angel's  words  are 
intended  to  give  us  the  extent  of  this  shortening  ;  and 
if  so,  God  will  spare  His  people  two  hundred  and 
twenty  days  from  the  last  year,  ' 

We  have  thus  examined  some  of  the  most  remark- 
able prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament  which  relate  to 
Gentile  dominion.  Before  the  later  Scriptures  were 
written  three  of  the  great  World-powers  had  passed 
away,  so  that  we  no  longer  hear  of  Babylon  Persia 
and  Greece,  but  only  of  Rome.  And  even  of  Rome 
but  little  is  said,  until  she  is  set  before  us  embodied, 
as  she  will  be,  in  her  last  king.  At  that  time,  as  we 
shall  presently  see,  many  Jews  will  be  dwelling  in 
their  own  land,  having  been  gathered  thither  to  endure 
that  purification  by  the  Spirit  of  judgment  and  burning 
which  shall  prepare  the  meek  among  them  for  their 
glorified  inheritance.  And  then,  when  God  begins  to 
remember  Israel,  His  dealings  will  resume  their  direct 
reference  to  the  government  of  earth  ;  so  that  at  this 
point  prophecy  again  enters  into  details  of  earthly 
matters.  But  of  what  will  happen  to  the  kingdoms  of 
this  world  during  the  dispensation  of  grace  only  the 
barest  outline  is  revealed.  For  believers  in  Christ 
have  a  heavenly  calling,  and  are  commanded  not  to 
mind  earthly  things,  but  to  be  ever  waiting  for  the 
coming  of  their  Lord. 

We  will  now  briefly  consider  some  New  Testament 
predictions  respecting  the  fourth  empire. 

*  Matt.  xxiv.  22. 


io6  THE   GENTILES. 

VI. 

The  Great  Red  Dragon. 

The  second  of  the  wonderful  signs  which  John  de- 
scribes in  the  twelfth  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse  is  a 
great  red  Dragon,  having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns, 
and  seven  crowns  upon  his  heads. 

Now  the  Dragon  himself  is  afterwards  declared  to 
be  "the  old  serpent,  he  that  is  called  the  Devil  and 
Satan,  the  deceiver  of  the  whole  world."  ^  But  the 
ten  horns  indicate  also  the  fourth  beast  of  Daniel's 
vision,  and  later  revelations  make  the  seven  heads 
equally  characteristic  of  it.  The  symbol  seems,  there- 
fore, to  represent  the  spiritual  Power  of  Wickedness 
w^ho  impresses  his  image  upon,  and  works  in  the  sphere 
of  flesh,  by  means  of  the  fourth  World-kingdom  ;  in 
other  words,  it  sets  before  us  Satan  in  active  energy 
through  the  medium  of  the   Roman   Empire. 

The  meaning  of  the  heads  and  horns,  in  their  earthly 
development,  will  be  discussed  presently.  We  will 
only  remark  in  anticipation  that  the  former  are  seven 
consecutive  rulers  of  the  Latin  realms,"  special  agents 
of  Satan  in  his  various  attempts  to  corrupt  or  destroy 
the  followers  of  Christ  ;  and  that  they  appear  crowned 
because  the  vision  includes  the  reigns  of  all  the  monarchs 
who  are  represented  by  them. 

The  ten  horns,  on  the  contrary,  are  conteviporaneons 
kings,^  the  same  as  the  toes  of  the  image  and  the 
horns  of  Daniel's  fourth  beast  ;  and  their  crownless 
condition  intimates  that  those  who  arc  signified  by 
them  will  not  receive  kingdoms  v/hile  this  scene  of  the 

'  Rev.  xii.  9.  "  Rev.  xvii.  10.  ^  Rev.  xvii.  12,  13. 


J  HE   GREA7   RED  DRAGON.  107 

vision  is  in  process  of  fulfilment,  but  will  begin  their 
part  in  the  great  drama  at  some  period  subsequent  to 
the  removal  of  the  Man-child. 

Such,  then,  was  the  monster  which  appeared  in 
heaven  :  nor  was  he  standing  in  idle  pose  ;  for  his 
eyes  were  fixed,  and  his  energies  concentrated,  upon  a 
Woman  who  was  writhing  in  travail  before  him,  while 
he  was  waiting  to  devour  her  child  as  soon  as  it  should 
be  born. 

Now  in  Scripture  a  Woman  is  the  symbol  of  a  system 
or  Church  ;  ^  and  the  one  before  us  seems  to  represent 
the  perpetual  system  of  God  in  the  world,  the  corporate 
body  of  those  who,  in  whatever  dispensation  they  may 
live,  are  recognised  as  His  servants,  and  employed  by 
Him  as  instruments  to  work  out  His  great  will  upon 
earth,  and  to  bring  salvation  to  individuals  whom  He 
has  chosen.  It  is  to  this  latter  function  that  we  must 
refer  the  appropriate  figure  of  a  mother. 

In  the  previous  dispensation  such  a  symbol  would 
not  have  comprehended  all  Israel,  but  only  the  really 
faithful,  the  Israelites  indeed.  At  the  close  of  their 
age,  these  were  found  to  be  exclusively  "  the  poor  of 
the  flock,"  ^  who  when  they  heard  the  voice  of  the 
great  Shepherd,  waited  upon  Him,  and  were  gently 
led  out  of  Judaism  into   the  covenant  of  grace. 

The  description  of  the  Woman  seems  to  connect  her 
with  three  dispensations.  Her  head  was  crowned  with 
twelve  stars,  which,  if  we  interpret  them  as  in  Joseph's 
dream,  may  signify  the  twelve  sons  of  Jacob  and  refer 

'  Frequently  also  of  a  city ;  but  such  an  explanation  would  be 
inappropriate  to  the  present  case,  in  which  the  Woman  flies  into 
the  wilderness,  and  is  pursued. 

''■  Zech.  xi.  II. 


io8  THE   G€.NTILES. 

to  the  Patriarchal  age.  The  moon  is  now  beneath  her 
feet  :  it  was  not,  perhaps,  ahvays  so.  In  the  Mosaic 
dispensation  she  needed  its  reflected  light  at  a  time 
when  no  better  was  available,  when  she  could  seek  the 
rays  of  her  Lord's  glory  only  as  they  glanced  with 
diminished  splendour  from  the  Law.  But  now  she  is 
clothed  with  the  sun,  and  appears,  not  on  earth,  but  in 
heaven  :  for  the  Lord  has  revealed  Himself  to  her,  has 
become  her  glorious  covering,  and  has  raised  her  in 
Himself  to  the   Heavenly  Places. 

As  John  gazed  upon  her,  he  saw  that  she  was  with 
child,  and  cried  out  travailing  in  birth  and  in  pain  to 
be  delivered — a  particular  which  enables  us  to  discover 
the  time  of  this  scene  accurately  marked  out  for  us 
both  in   the  Old  and  in  the  New  Testament.^ 

In  the  last  chapter  of  Isaiah,  there  is  also  mention 
of  a  subsequent  delivery  of  the  same  Woman  in  very 
different  circumstances.  For  in  speaking  of  the  resto- 
ration of  Israel  at  the  second  advent,  the  prophet  ex- 
claims ; — "  Before  she  travailed,  she  brought  forth  ; 
before  her  pain  came,  she  was  delivered  of  a  Man- 
child.  Who  hath  heard  such  a  thing  t  Who  hath 
seen  such  things  }  Shall  the  earth  be  made  to  bring 
forth  in  one  day }  Or  shall  a  nation  be  born  at  once  } 
For  as  soon  as  Zion  travailed  she  brought  forth  her 
children."  2 

Here,  as  in  the  passage  before  us,  a  Man-child  is 
born  ;  but  there  is  no  long  period  of  travail  as  in  the 
other  case.  Nor  is  this  child  caught  up  to  God  and 
to  His  throne  :  on  the  contrary,  he  is  nursed  and 
comforted  in  Jerusalem,  and  the  glory  of  the  Gentiles 

'  Micah  V.  1,3;  John  xvi.  19-22. 
""  Isa.  Ixvi.  7,  8. 


THE   GREAT  RED  DRAGON.  109 

comes  to  him  and  his  mother  hke  a  flowing  stream.^ 
In  other  words,  he  represents  the  ruHng  body  upon 
earth,  not  those  who  shall  reign  with  Christ  in 
heaven. 

Of  the  birth  with  which  we  are  now  concerned 
Micah  speaks  when  he  foretells  that  his  people  will 
smite  the  Judge  of  Israel  upon  the  cheek,  and  then 
adds  ; — "  Therefore  will  He  give  them  up  until  the  time 
that  she  which  travaileth  hath  brought  forth :  then 
the  remnant  of  His  brethren''^  shall  return  together  with 
the  sons  of  Israel."  ^ 

Thus  the  travailing  occupies  the  whole  time  of  / 
Israel's  rejection,  that  is  to  say,  the  Church-period,  or 
space  between  the  two  advents.  Guided  by  Micah's 
prophecy  we  may  regard  it  as  commencing  with  the 
anguish  of  the  disciples  when  the  body  of  their 
murdered  Lord  was  lying  in  the  grave,  and  their 
despair  could  find  vent  only  in  the  heart-broken 
lamentation,  "  We  had  hoped  that  it  was  He  which 
should  redeem  Israel."  And  ever  since,  it  has  gone  on 
in  the  trials  afflictions  and  persecutions  of  the  Lord's 
people,  and  will  go  on,  until  that  night  when  of  two 
sleeping  in  the  same  bed,  the  one  shall  be  taken  and 
the  other  left. 

Precisely  the  same  commencing  and  ending  dates 
were  also  given  by  the  Lord  Himself,  when,  on  the 
night  before  His  death,  He  uttered  the  solemn  words  ; — 
"  Do  ye  inquire  among  yourselves  concerning  this  that 
I  said,  A  little  while  and  ye  behold  Me  not,  and  again 

'  Isa.  Ixvi.  12,  13. 

^  That  is,  the  brethren  of   he  Lord  according  to  the  flesh,  or 
♦^he  Jews. 
*  i\licah  V.  3. 


no  THE   GENTILES. 

a  little  while,  and  ye  shall  see  Me  ?  Verily,  verily,  I 
say  unto  you,  that  ye  shall  weep  and  lament,  but  the 
world  shall  rejoice  :  ye  shall  be  sorrowful,  but  your 
sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy.  A  woman  when  she 
is  in  travail  hath  sorrow,  because  her  hour  is  come  : 
but  when  she  is  delivered  of  the  child,  she  remem- 
bereth  no  more  the  anguish,  for  joy  that  a  man  is  born 
into  the  world.  And  ye,  therefore,  now  have  sorrow  : 
but  I  will  see  you  again,  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice, 
and  your  joy  no  one  taketh  away  from  you."  ■^ 

Thus,  then,  the  period  of  travail  and  anguish  is 
exactly  co-extensive  with  the  time  of  the  Lord's 
absence  from   His   Church, 

The  offspring  of  the  Woman  is  a  male  child  as 
opposed  to  a  female  :  for  he  is  to  rule  in  strength. 
Indeed  the  only  particular  given  to  us  for  his  identifi- 
cation is  his  destiny  "  to  rule  all  the  nations  with  a  rod 
of  iron." 

Now,  in  the  second  Psalm,  the  nations  and  the  utter- 
most parts  of  the  earth  are  promised  to  the  Lord 
Jesus,  with  the  added  words  ; — "Thou  shalt  break  them 
with  a  rod  of  iron  ;  Thou  shalt  dash  them  in  pieces 
like  a  potter's  vessel."  ^ 

And  again,  in  the  Apocalypse,  when  He  comes  forth 
to  take  possession  of  His  inheritance, it  is  said; — "And 
out  of  His  mouth  goeth  a  sharp  sword,  that  with  it 
He  should  smite  the  nations  ;  and  He  shall  rule  them 
with  a  rod  of  iron."  ^ 

Therefore  the  destiny  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  that  of 
the  Man-child  are  the  same. 

But  when  the  Lord  appears,  the  unity  of  Himself 
and  His  Church  will  be  made  manifest  :  whatever  He 
'  John.  xvi.  19-22.         -  Psalm  ii.  9.         ^  Rev.  xix.  15. 


THE   GREAT  RED  DRAGON.  in 

has,  she  will  share  with  him.  And  that  the  preroga- 
tive of  the  Man-child  is  no  exception  to  this  law  He 
Himself  assures  us  when  He  says  to  the  remnant  in 
Thyatira  ; — "  But  that  which  ye  have,  hold  fast  till  I 
come.  And  he  that  overcometh,  and  he  that  keepeth 
My  works  unto  the  end,  to  him  will  I  give  authority 
over  the  nations.  And  he  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod 
of  iron,  as  the  vessels  of  the  potter  are  broken  to 
shivers  ;  as   I  also  received  of  My  Father."  ^ 

The  prerogative  was,  then,  originally  given  to  Christ, 
and  He  has  bestowed  it  upon  all  who  overcome  and 
keep  His  works  to  the  end.  And  so  the  Man-child, 
as  being  heir  to  an  inheritance  common  to  the  Lord 
and  His  people,  seems  to  prefigure  a  mystic  Christ  of 
which  the  personal  Christ  is  the  Head,  and  the  first- 
fruits  of  the  Church  the  body  ;  while  the  attitude  of 
the  Dragon  points  to  the  great  object  for  which  Satan 
uses  the  World-power,  namely,  to  destroy  the  people 
of  God. 

We  have  said  that  the  Man-child  includes  only  the 
first-fruits  of  the  Church  :  for  a  consecutive  perusal  of 
the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  chapters  of  the  Apocalypse 
gives  us  the  following  order  of  events  : — 

I.  The  Man-child  caught  away  to  God  and  to  His 
throne. 

n.  Satan  cast  out  of  heaven. 

IH.  Antichrist  evoked  from  the  sea. 

It  is  then  evident  that  the  believers  represented  by 
the  Man-child  will  be  caught  away  to  God  and  to  His 
Throne — that  is,  the  Throne  described  as  set  for  judg- 
ment in  the  fourth  chapter — before  the  appearance  of 

'  Rev.  ii.  25-2 


112  THE   GENTILES. 

Antichrist,    whose     persecutions     they    will,    therefore, 
escape. 

Nevertheless,  when  the  whole  Church  is  assembled, 
we  find  that  it  consists  not  only  of  those  who  sit  upon 
thrones,  or  the  class  of  believers  just  mentioned,  but 
also  of  others  who  have  suffered  death  under  the  power 
of  Antichrist ;  or,  at  least,  have  persisted  in  their  re- 
fusal to  worship  him  or  receive  his  mark.  These  latter 
are  the  remnant  of  the  Woman's  seed  whom  the  Dragon 
presently  persecutes,  those  who  will  come  out  of  the 
great  tribulation,  and  who,  whether  alive  or  dead,  will 
be  caught  up  to  their  Lord  at  its  close,  just  as  the 
Man-child  was  before  it  began.  But  of  this  we  shall 
say  more  in  its  proper  place. 

Thus  the  travailing  of  the  Woman  will  go  on  until 
the  number  of  the  first  fruits  is  accomplished.  Then 
the  Man-child  will  be  completely  born,  and  straightway 
the  whole  body  of  waiting  believers  will  be  caught  up 
to  God  and  to  His  Throne.  And  the  Church  having 
been  thus  broken  up  as  an  earthly  institution,  the  Lord 
will  begin  to  work  the  redemption  of  Israel,  a  sequence 
of  events  which  is  also  signified  in  the  passage  just 
quoted  from  Micah,  which  declares  that  as  soon  as  the 
travailing  Woman  shall  have  brought  forth,  the  remnant 
of  the  Lord's  brethren,  that  is,  the  Jews,  will  return  to- 
gether with  the  sons  of  Israel."  ^  And  again,  it  corre- 
sponds with  Paul's  statement  ; — "  A  hardening  in  part 
has  befallen  Israel,  until  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  be 
come  in  ;  and  so  all  Israel  shall  be  saved."  ^ 

Thus  the  vision  of  the  travailing  Woman  and  the 
Dracron  seems  to  exhibit  the  action  of   Satan  in  his 


't>^ 


Micah  V.  3.  "  Ron.  xi.  25,  26. 


THE    GREAT  RED  DRAGON. 


"3 


endeavours  to  destroy  the  Church  by  means  of  the 
Fourth  Empire,  and  the  manner  in  which  the  Lord 
Jesus  will  finally  baffle  him  by  summoning  His  saints 
to  meet   Him   in  the  air. 

Immediately  after  the  rapture  of  the  Man-child,  Satan 
and  his  angels  are  driven  out  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  Air 
— which,  as  the  World-rulers  of  this  Darkness,  they  are 
now  occupying — and  forced  down  to  earth,  there  to  be 
confined  within  narrow  bounds,  until  the  Lord  shall 
cast  them  into  a  still  lower  and  more  contracted  prison. 
There  is  great  significance  in  the  mention  of  the  agent 
chosen  to  expel  them  :  for  it  would  seem  that  Michael 
is  the  angel  who  was  appointed  to  lead  the  children  of 
Israel  into  Canaan,  and  to  be,  under  Christ,  their  spiri- 
tual prince,  at  least  until  the  promises  have  been  ful- 
filled,^ His  appearance,  therefore,  shows  that  the  sons 
of  Abraham  are  again  coming  into  remembrance  before 
God,  and  identifies  the  conflict  with  that  to  which  the 
heavenly  interpreter  alludes  when  he  tells  Daniel,  "And 
at  that  time  shall  Michael  stand  up,  the  great  prince 
which  standeth  for  the  children  of  thy  people,  and  there 
shall  be  a  time  of  trouble,  such  as  never  was  since  there 
was  a  nation  even  to  that  same  time  :  and  at  that  time 

'Exod.  xxiii.  20-23;  xxxii.  34;  Num.  xx.  16.  That  Michael 
was  this  angel-g-uide  appears  from  passages  in  which  he  is  de- 
scribed to  Daniel  as  "your  prince"  (Dan.  x.  21),  and  as  "the 
great  prince  which  standeth  for  the  children  of  thy  people" 
(Dan.  xii.  i).  We  may  also  iand  a  strong  corroboration  in  Jude  9, 
where  there  is  an  allusion  to  the  rescue  of  Moses'  body  from  him 
that  hath  the  power  of  death,  in  order  that  it  might  be  preserved 
from  corruption.  For  the  archangel,  who  as  the  ruler  of  God's 
host  confronts  the  Prince  of  Darkness,  is  Michael.  Those  who 
have  attempted  to  identify  Michael  with  Christ  must  have  over- 
looked Dan.  X.  13,  where  it  is  plainly  stated  that  the  archangel, 
mighty  though  he  be,  is  not  Lord  of  all,  but  only  "  one  of  the 
chiefprinces"  (DVb'N^n  Dnb'n  iriN). 

8 


114  1HE  GENTILES,. 

thy  people  shall  be  delivered,  every  one  that  shall  be 
found  written  in  the  book."  ^ 

Thus  will  the  air  be  cleared  of  those  evil  powers  which 
are  now  defiling  it,  and  Satan  must  thenceforth  direct 
his  earthly  realms  from  their  own  level.  At  the  same 
time  the  heaven  will  be  prepared  for  Christ  and  His 
Church,  and  will  resound  with  the  loud  cry  of  joy  ; — 
"  Now  is  come  the  salvation,  and  the  power,  and  the 
Kingdom  of  our  God,  and  the  authority  of  His  Christ  : 
for  the  accuser  of  our  brethren  is  cast  down,  which 
accuseth  them  before  our  God  day  and  night.  And 
they  overcame  him  because  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb, 
and  because  of  the  word  of  their  testimony  ;  and  they 
loved  not  their  life  even  unto  death.  Therefore  rejoice, 
O  heavens,  and  ye  that  are  tabernacling  in  them."  But 
the  voice  which  speaks  gladness  to  heaven  has  a  very 
different  message  for  the  world  beneath  it  ; — "  Woe  for 
the  earth  and  for  the  sea ;  because  the  devil  has  gone 
down  unto  you,  having  great  wrath,  knowing  that  he 
hath  but  a  short  time." 

vn. 

The  Wild  Beast  from  the  Sea. 

When  the  Dragon  had  been  cast  out  of  heaven,  John 
saw  him  endeavouring  to  vent  his  disappointed  fury 
upon  the  Woman  ;  but  the  two  wings  of  the  great  eagle 
were  given  to  her,  and  she  was  enabled  to  fly  into  the 
wilderness  and  avoid  his  persecutions. 

At   this    point  there  seems  to  be  need    of   careful 
attention ;  for  if  the  Dragon  could  assail  the  Woman  after 

'  Dan.  xii.  i. 


THE    WILD  BEAST  FROM  THE  SEA.  115 

he  had  been  cast  out  of  heaven,  it  is  clear  that  she  also 
must  have  in  some  way  descended.  And  this  is  just 
what  we  should  expect ;  for  the  rapture  of  the  Man- 
child  is  the  signal  for  a  dispensational  change.  The 
Jew  has  again  become  the  great  centre  of  the  Divine 
action,  and  the  Church  has  ceased  to  be  the  system  of 
God  upon  earth,  though  its  numbers  in  heaven  are  not 
yet  completed.  Believers  still  remaining  below  must, 
therefore,  be  considered  as  stragglers,  and  recruits  en- 
listed by  them,  who  will  presently  join  the  main  body 
above.  Meanwhile,  though  they  preach  and  teach  with 
power,  they  will  not  be  able  to  affect  the  world  at  large, 
but  will  merely  influence  individuals,  by  whose  conver- 
sion the  number  of  the  heavenly  elect  will  be  accom- 
plished. 

The  period  may  thus  be  regarded  as  one  of  transition 
— the  old  order  having  ceased  as  a  recognised  system, 
though  many  are  still  being  brought  to  salvation  by  it  ; 
while  the  new  is  already  in  force,  and  the  discipline 
of  those  who  shall  presently  carry  it  out  in  power  has 
commenced. 

And  so  the  Woman  now  represents  faithful  Israelites 
whom  God  will  lead  into  the  wilderness  for  refuge  from 
the  persecuting  Dragon,  just  as  once  He  led  His  people 
out  of  Egypt,  and  saved  them  from  the  hand  of  Pharaoh, 
bearing  them  upon  eagle's  wings. -^ 

Upon  the  Egyptians  the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea  re- 
turned, and  they  sank  like  lead  into  the  deep  :  now  the 
earth  opens  her  mouth,  and  swallov/s  up  the  pursuing 
hosts  which  the  Dragon  again  sends  In  hot  chase  after 
the  Israel  of  God. 

With  baffled  rage  he  turns  back  to  make  war  upon 

*  Exod.  xix.  4. 


Ii6  7 HE   GENTILES. 

the  remnant  of  her  seed,  "  which  keep  the  command- 
ments of  God,  and  hold  the  testimony  of  Jesus  " — a 
description  intended,  possibly,  to  include  all  the  people 
of  God  who  will  at  that  time  be  exposed  to  his  malice, 
whether  they  be  pious  Jews,  or  Christians  who  were  not 
found  worthy  to  escape  the  impending  woes.  In  order 
to  carry  out  his  purpose,  he  stands  upon  the  shore  of 
the  sea,  and  evokes  from  its  raging  waters  a  seven- 
headed  and  ten-horned  monster,  the  symbol  of  the  great 
Empire  which  at  the  time  of  the  vision  was  ruling  the 
earth,  and  will  again  be  needed  by  the  Powers  of 
Darkness  as  the  end  approaches. 

The  Wild  Beast  thus  called  forth  by  the  Dragon  will, 
however,  be  found  to  differ  from  the  fourth  of  Daniel's 
vision  in  that  it  has  seven  heads.  For  the  revelation 
given  to  the  Jewish  prophet  was  confined  to  those  par- 
ticulars which  affected  his  own  nation  ;  therefore  the 
Beast  which  he  saw  was  merely  one-headed,  as  being  the 
power  which  would  destroy  Jerusalem ;  but,  nevertheless, 
ten-horned,  because  during  the  reign  of  the  Ten  Kings  k 
God  will  have  resumed  His  covenant  with  Israel.  Thus 
the  career  of  the  Roman  Empire  was  exhibited  to  Daniel 
only  at  its  points  of  contact  with  his  city  and  people. 

Again  :  the  Beast  which  now  emerges  from  the  sea 
of  human  revolution  and  anarchy — far  from  being 
diverse  from  all  the  others,  like  the  fourth  of  Daniel's 
vision — is  described  as  displaying  the  graceful  body  of 
the  Grecian  leopard,  the  feet  of  the  Persian  bear,  and 
the  cruel  mouth  of  the  Chaldean  lion.  It  seems,  there- 
fore, to  represent  that  last  and  compound  form  of 
Roman  power  which  shall  include  all  the  territories,  the 
strength,  and  the  characteristics,  of  the  four  empires, 
and  which  stands  before  us,  in  Nebuchadnezzar's  dream 


THE    WILD  BEAST  FROM  THE  SEA.  117 

erect  and  complete  in  all  its  parts  up  to  the  moment 
when  the  stone  descends  from  above  and  grinds  it  to 
powder. 

The  seven  heads  are  no  longer  sparkling  with 
diadems,  because  the  time  of  their  dominion  has  passed 
away.  But  the  horns  are  crowned  ;  for  the  Harlot 
Babylon,  of  whom  we  shall  hear  presently,  has  been 
overthrown,  and  the  Empire  is  now  in  the  hands  of  the 
ten  confederate  kings,  who  give  all  their  power  to  their 
great  chief. 

While,  however,  the  Beast  doubtless  represents   the 
Fourth  World-power  in  the  energy  of  its  last  phase,  it 
has  also  a  restricted  meaning  which  is  more  especially 
set  before  us.     In  the  seventeenth  chapter  we  are  told 
that,  after  the  seven  heads  have  fallen,  one  of  them  shall 
revive,  and  will  then  be  the  Beast  himself^      Hence  Ave 
may   understand  why,  in  the  present  passage,  the  de- 
scription is,  not  that  of  a  state,  but  of  a  man — the  great  ^ 
Antichrist,  who,  as  concentrating  in  his  own  person  all  ' 
the  power  and  intelligence  of  the  Roman  Empire,  and    ( 
directing  it  according  to  his  will,  is  here  identified  with 
it. 

In  regarding  the  Beast  as  the  last  emperor,  we  may 
consider  the  sea  out  of  which  he  arises  to  indicate  that 
which  is  below  it,  namely,  the  abyss,  called  in  the 
Authorized  Version  sometimes  "the  deep,"  sometimes 
"  the  bottomless  pit."  Indeed,  in  another  part  of  the 
Apocalypse^  it  is  plainly  stated  that  Antichrist  will 
ascend  from  the  abyss,  or,  in  other  words,  that  he  will 
be   a    re-incarnated  spirit  from  the  dead.^      How  this 

'  Rev.  xvii.  10,  11.     Compare  xiii.  3. 
"  Rev.  xvii.  8. 
For  further  proofs  see  remarks  upon  Rev.  xix.  20,  p.  143, 


Ii8  -I HE   GENTILES. 

may  be,  we  learn  from  the  account  of  the  fifth  trumpet/ 
at  the  sounding  of  which  John  saw  a  star  which  had 
some  time  previously  fallen  from  heaven,^  "  and  there 
was  given  to  him  the  key  of  the  pit  of  the  abyss." 
Now  there  can  be  little  difficulty  in  identifying  the 
fallen  star  with  Satan  after  his  expulsion  from  the 
heavenly  places  by  Michael.  And,  since  the  power  has 
been  granted  to  him,  just  as  he  opens  the  shaft  of  the 
abyss  to  let  loose  the  infernal  locusts  upon  the  earth, 
so  we  may  infer  that  he  also  unbars  the  gates  of  Death 
for  the  escape  of  Antichrist. 

The  description  of  the  Beast  shows  how  mighty 
will  be  the  dominion  and  manifold  the  energies  of 
the  prince  that  shall  come.  He  is  like  to  a  leopard  ; 
he  will  display  the  quick  determination  and  marvel- 
lously rapid  action  of  Alexander,  and  at  the  same 
time  carry  out  his  plans  with  such  grace  and  plausi- 
bility as  to  secure  the  admiration  of  the  world.  His 
feet  are  as  the  feet  of  a  bear  with  all  their  terrible 
strength  and  power  of  crushing  ;  he  will  add  the  vast 
fleets  and  armies  of  the  second  World-power  to  the 
agility  of  the  third,  and  will  possess  forces  sufficiently 
large  to  overwhelm  and  destroy  all  his  enemies.  His 
mouth  resembles  the  mouth  of  a  lion,  the  terror  of  the 
forest :  for  his  power  will  be  as  that  of  Nebuchadnezzar, 
of  whom  it  was  said,  **  And  for  the  majesty  that  He 
gave  him,  all  people,  nations,  and  languages,  trembled 
and  feared  before  him."  ^ 

Just    as    the    Lord  was    about    to  enter    upon  His 

'  Rev.  ix.  i. 
dcTTipa  e'/c  tov  ovpavov  nenrcoKOTa  ets  tjjp  y^v,  "  a  star  which  had 
fallen  out  of  heaven  to  the  earth." 
Dan.  V.  19. 


THE   WILD  BEAST  FROM   THE  SEA.  119 

public  ministry,  Satan  stood  in  the  way,  and  offered 
to  surrender  into  His  hands  all  the  kingdoms  of  the 
world    and    the  glory  of   them,   if    He  would  but  do 
homage    to    the    god    of   this    age  ;  but    the    Saviour 
repelled   the  blasphemous    temptation.      The  proposal 
will,    it    seems,    be    repeated    to    Antichrist,    and    will 
not   meet  with  a  second    rejection.     Then   Satan  will 
fulfil   his   part   of  the   covenant,  and  will  give  to  the 
Beast  his  power,  his  throne,  and  great  authority  ;  so 
that  the  hearts  of  all  men  will  turn  to  the  latter,  and 
he  will  receive  a  dominion,  not  seized    by  force,  but 
assumed  with  an  unimpeachable  title  based,  probably, 
upon  a  plebiscite  of  all  Christendom.     And  when,  in 
addition  to  this,  the  new  hero  is  invested  with  a  halo  / 
of  supernatural  glory  by  the  discovery  that  he  is  an  1 
illustrious  leader  of  ancient  times  who  has  returned  to  ) 
his  place  after  a  long    sojourn  in  the  regions  of   the  \ 
dead,  then,  indeed,  the  whole  world  will  be  moved  to 
wonder  after  him. 

It  may,  perhaps,  be  difficult  to  conceive  how  a  spirit 
from  the  abyss  could  be  thus  recognised,  after  the 
lapse  of  so  many  centuries,  as  one  who  had  already 
played  a  great  part  in  the  drama  of  men.  Neverthe- 
less, it  is  clear  from  the  third  verse  of  the  thirteenth 
chapter  that  there  will  be  a  recognition  sufficiently 
startling  to  draw  the  whole  world  in  wonder  after  the 
Beast  :  how  it  will  be  brought  about  the  day  must 
declare.  But  so  much  progress  has  been  made  during 
the  last  few  years  in  the  demolition  of  the  partition- 
wall  between  men  and  demons  that  it  is  impossible  to 
say  to  what  lengths  the  forbidden  intercourse  may  not 
shortly  be  carried. 

Some  have  supposed  that  the  seventh  king  will  be 


I20  THE   GENTILES 

slain  ;  and  that  his  body  will  then  be  restored  to  life, 
with  the  mark  of  the  fatal  wound  upon  it,  by  the 
entrance  of  another  spirit.  But  such  a  solution  of  the 
difficulty  does  not  seem  to  be  in  accord  with  what  is 
revealed.  The  eighth  king  must  be  one  of  the  first 
five  resuscitated  ;  since  at  the  time  of  the  vision  in 
the  seventeenth  chapter  he  had  already  passed  to  the 
place  of  the  dead  after  the  completion  of  his  first  life,^ 
and  only  five  of  the  kings  had  then  fallen."  It  is  in 
exact  agreement  with  this  that,  in  the  earlier  vision, 
John  sees  one  of  the  heads  of  the  Beast  "  as  though 
it  had  been  smitten — or,  more  literally,  "  slain  " — unto 
death "  at  some  previous  time  :  for  the  participle 
l(j<^ayixivy]v  is  in  the  perfect  tense.  ^  And  this  is  the 
head  which  subsequently  revives. 

Such,  then,  is  the  inconsistency  of  the  human  heart  ; 
men  scoff  at  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  but  will  shortly 
be  prostrating  themselves  before  a  lost  spirit  from  the 
pit. 

Nay,  they  will  go  still  further,  and  worship  also 
the  Dragon — that  is,  the  Devil — who  will  be  openly 
acknowledged  by  the  resurrected  king  as  his  Saviour. 
And,  startling  as  such  an  idea  would  have  been 
some  years  ago,  the  currents  of  thought  are  now  so 
changed  as  to  make  it  quite  conceivable.  For  the 
terror  once  inspired  by  the  mere  name  of  the  Prince 
of  Darkness  has  been  gradually  dissipated  by  the 
denial  of  his  veiy  existence,  by  the  theories  which 
include  him  in  a  universal  redemption,  and  by  a 
general  disposition  to  regard  him— if  there  be  such  a 
being — as  not  altogether  bad  or  irreclaimable  ;  so 
that  it  will  be  easy  for  those  who  have  gone  thus  far 
'  Rev.  xvii.  8,  ii.         ^  Rev.  xvii.  lo.         ^  Rev.  xiii.  3. 


The  wild  beast  erom  the  sea.  m 

to  go  farther,  until  at  length  they  are  willing,  like 
the  Yezidis,  to  worship  him  as  the  giver  of  all  earthly 
good,  in  other  words,  of  all  that  carnal  men  care  to 
have.  Such  direct  worship  he  has  already  received 
in  former  times  even  from  great  nations,  and  "  the 
thing  that  hath  been,  it  is  that  which  shall  be."  Nor 
would  a  return  to  the  practice  indicate  a  more  violent 
change  in  human  opinion  than  others  which  have  been 
characteristic  of  our  age.  Indeed,  the  way  to  it  is 
even  now  being  pointed  out  by  the  multiform  revival 
among  modern  Spiritualists  and  Theosophists  of  the 
Gnostic  doctrine,  that  the  serpent  is  the  true  friend 
of  man,  as  having  guided  him  to  that  which  is  the 
source  of  all  his  power — to  the  tree  of  knowledge.^ 

As  regards  the  Beast,  a  large  portion  of  Christendom 
is  already  prepared  to  worship  a  man  of  transcendent 
ability  and  unbroken  success.  For,  to  pass  by  the 
adoration  of  saints  in  the  Roman  and  Greek  Churches, 
there  is  even  now  in  existence  a  Positivist  Calendar, 
in  which  each  day  is  appointed  for  the  "  cultus " 
of  some  man  remarkable  in  art,  literature,  philosophy, 
or  in  any  other  of  those  pursuits  which  are  considered 
glorious  among  men.  Meanwhile  the  general  tendency 
of  the  world  to  hero-worship   is  daily  increasing,   and 

'  As  an  illustration  of  this  reversal  of  doctrine,  which  is  be- 
coming popular,  we  quote  an  extract  from  the  letter  of  the  Paris 
correspondent  of  the  Record  (May  27th,  1881).  He  is  speaking- 
of  an  Anti-clerical  Congress  which  had  just  been  convoked  by  M. 
Schoelcher,  an  eminent  senator,  and  of  which  he  gives  the  follow- 
ing account.  "  This  Congress  showed  its  true  spirit  in  electing 
as  Vice-President  Miss  Maria  Deraisme,  a  notorious  atheistic 
lecturer.  In  a  long  speech  she  drew  a  parallel  between  Eve  and 
Mary — Eve  who  freed  mankind  by  the  tree  of  science,  while  the 
education  given  by  Mary  to  Jesus  brought  them  again  under 
bondage.  One  of  the  members  of  the  assembly  proposed  that  all 
children  should  be  educated  in  the  hatred  of  God.'' 


122  THE   GENTILES 

manifests  Itself,  not  only  in  verbal  praise,  but  also  in 
the  frequent  erection  of  statues,  in  the  celebration  of 
centenaries,  and  in  many  other  modes.  To  how  great 
a  height,  then,  will  this  feeling  be  raised  when  it  is 
called  forth  by  one  who  will  concentrate  in  himself  the 
consummate  warrior,  statesman,  legislator,  king,  and 
philosopher  ;  who  will  dazzle  the  world  by  the  inex- 
haustible brilliancy  of  his  abilities,  and  still  more  by  ( 
continual  flashes  of  supernatural  power;  ^  so  that,  to  the  / 
carnal  eye,  he  will  seem  to  be  some  great  deity  who 
has  at  last  appeared  among  men,  to  heal  their  sorrows, 
and  bring  in  that  golden  age  for  which  they  have  long 
been  sighing. 

In  their  wonder  we  are  told  that  they  will  say, 
"  Who  is  like  unto  the  Beast .''  who  is  able  to  make  war 
v.'ith  him  .-*  "  In  the  last  clause  we  may,  perhaps, 
detect  an  allusion  to  the  fulfilment  of  that  which  is 
represented  in  Daniel's  vision  by  the  uprooting  of  three 
horns  before  the  little  horn  ;  and  possibly  also  to  the 
eleventh  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse,  in  which  the  Beast 
makes  war  upon  the  Two  Witnesses,  and  by  slaying 
them  relieves  the  earth  of  their  terrors  and  plagues. 

The  remainder  of  John's  description  contains  a 
thrice-repeated  phrase,  "it  was  given  unto  him";  an 
expression  which  emphasizes  the  fact  that  what  follows 

'  In  2  Thess.  ii.  9,  the  English  Version  reads,  "lying  wonders," 
which  conveys  the  impression  that  the  wonders  themselves  will  be 
mere  delusive  tricks,  like  that  of  the  blood  of  St.  Januarius  ;  but 
this  seems  to  be  incorrect.  The  literal  rendering  of  the  Greek  is, 
"  with  all  power  and  signs  and  wonders  of  a  lie ;  "  that  is,  con- 
nected with  or  belonging  to  a  lie,  used  for  the  purpose  of  authen- 
ticating it.  The  signs  and  wonders  will  be  real  enough  in 
themselves,  and  will  be  effected  by  the  exercise  of  Satanic  power, 
as  we  are  plainly  told  in  the  beginning  of  the  verse  ;  but  they  will 
be  used  to  gain  credence  for  the  lie  that  Antichrist  is  God. 


THE    WILD  BEAST  FROM  THE  SEA.  \2\ 

will  be  specially  allowed  by  God  as  a  means  of  forcing 
half-hearted  believers  to  self-denial  and  decision,  and  of 
hardening  the  godless  for  their  doom.     And,  first  of  all,  ^ 
we  are  particularly  warned  that  the  Beast  is  permitted  C 
to  utter  his  blasphemies.     For  his  words  against  the 
living  God  will  be  so  stout  and  defiant,  that  those  who 
hear  them,   and  see  no  interference,  might  start  back 
appalled,  and  be  led    to  doubt  the  very  existence  of 
Jehovah,  had  they  not  been  previously  told  that  so  it 
must  be.     They   will    be   comforted   also  by  knowing 
that  a  limit  is  set  to  the  power  of  this  terrible  one  ; 
during  forty   and   two   months   he  must   practise   and 
prosper,^  and  then  he  will   fall  to  rise   no  more.     This 
period  seems  to  be  "the  hour  of  temptation,  which  shall  - 
come  upon  all  the  world  to  try  them  that  dwell  upon  \ 
the  earth," ^  the  great  tribulation,  and  the  latter  half  of 
Daniel's  Seventieth  Week. 

The  blasphemy  of  Antichrist  will  not,  however,  ex- 
pend itself  solely  against  God:  he  will  also  assail  "them 
that  are  tabernacling  in  the  heaven"^ — for  so  the  words 
should  be  rendered — that  is,  those  believers  who  have 
been  caught  up  from  earth,  and  of  whose  departure  and 
place  of  sojourn  he  will  evidently  be  aware.  But  they 
will  be  removed  far  beyond  his  reach  ;  therefore  he  will 
turn  fiercely  upon  the  people  of  God  v.'ho  still  remain 
in  the  world,  and  refuse  to  worship  himself  and  the 
Dragon.  Against  them  it  is  said  that  he  will  "  make 
war,"  an  expression  which  supposes  an  organized  resist- 
ance on  their  part.  But  such  a  resistance  will  be  use- 
less, and  could  only  be  attempted  in  culpable  ignorance 
of  the  Divine  revelation  ;  for  power  will  be  given  to  ] 
the  Beast  over  all  kindreds,  and  tongues,  and  nations,  \ 
'  Rev.  xiii.  5.  ^  Rev.  iii.  10.  ^  Rev.  xiii.  6. 


124  THE   GENTILES. 

and  he  will  be  irresistible  until  he  is  confronted  by  the 
great  King. 

There  are,  however,  not  a  few  Christians  who  would 
soon  drift  into  a  policy  of  resisting  evil  by  force  of 
arms,  because  they  are  at  all  times  disposed  to  neglect 
precepts  and  revelations  which  are  not  in  accord  with 
their  own  feelings.  Such  are  those,  who,  forgetting 
their  Lord's  warning  to  beware  of  the  leaven  of  Herod, 
and  the  fact  that  if  their  citizenship  be  in  heaven  they 
must  be  strangers  and  pilgrims  here,  plunge  into  the 
politics  of  this  world  with  as  much  animation,  and  often 
with  more  manifest  emotion,  than  they  evince  in  striving 
for  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens.  They  talk,  too,  of 
what  they  call  liberty,  little  regarding  the  law  of  their 
King,  which  knows  no  liberty  save  that  wherewith 
Christ  has  made  us  free  ;  recognizes  no  citizenship  but 
that  which  is  in  heaven  ;  and,  while  bidding  its  hearers 
obey  in  earthly  things  the  powers  that  be,  teaches  them 
such  complete  indifference  to  their  worldly  condition 
that  it  commands,  "  Wert  thou  called  being  a  slave,  let 
it  not  be  a  trouble  to  thee  ;  but  if  thou  art  even  able 
to  become  free,  use  it — that  is,  remain  in  slavery — 
rather."  ^ 

Christians  who  turn  away  from  the  spirit  of  such 
precepts  are  often  enticed  to  mind  earthly  things  when 
they  should  be  watching  for  the  King  from  heaven,  and 
many  of  them  are   even  now  unconsciously  aiding  the 

'  I  Cor.  vii.  21.  ."  This  rendering,  which  is  that  of  Chr}^sostom, 
Theodoret,  Thcophylact,  Gicumenius,  Photius,  Estius,  Wolf, 
Bengel,  Meyer,  De  Wette,  and  others,  is  required  by  the  usage 
of  the  particle  tl  koi,  by  which  the  Kal,  '  also,'  or  '  even,'  does  not 
belong  to  the  el,  as  in  koI  el,  but  is  spread  over  the  whole  contents 
of  the  concessive  clause.  .  .  .  It  is  also  required  by  the  context ; 
for  the  burden  of  the  whole  passage  is,  Let  each  man  remain  in 
the  state  in  which  he  was  called." — Alford. 


THE    WILD  BEAST  FROM  7 HE  SEA.  125 

Roman  apostasy  to  recover  its  power  over  England. 
Anon  they  will  rue  their  own  work ;  the  Woman 
shall  again  direct  the  Beast,  and  become  drun';en 
with  the  blood  of  the  saints.  Then,  as  soon  as  the 
other  great  foe,  popular  infidelity,  arises  and  assails  the 
false  Church,  they  will  probably  for  a  while  sympathize 
with  the  new  movement,  hoping  that  it  will  tone  down 
to  their  standard  of  right.  When,  however,  the  Law- 
less One  tears  away  his  veil,  and  the  decree  goes  forth 
that  all  must  worship  him  or  die,  these  carnally-minded 
believers  will  receive  a  second  sharp  rebuke. 

But  yet  another  lesson  will  be  needed  ;  for  as  soon 
as  Antichrist,  upon  their  refusal  to  pay  him  adoration, 
prepares  to  move  his  hosts  against  them,  they  will 
altogether  forget  the  example  of  the  Captain  of  their 
salvation,  Who  would  not  suffer  His  servants  to  take 
up  the  sword  in  defence  of  His  own  body,  and  Who 
bade  them  remember  that  the  disciple  is  not  greater 
than  his  Master.  Not  knowing  the  Scriptures,  they 
will  say,  God  cannot  permit  so  great  wickedness !  Who 
is  this  Philistine,  that  he  should  defy  the  armies  of  the 
living  God  .''  And  so  they  will  go  forth  to  war :  scenes 
of  bloodshed  and  slaughter  will  follow,  and  as  they 
perish  in  battle,  or  are  captured  and  put  to  death,  their 
eyes  will  at  length  be  opened,  and  they  will,  perhaps, 
remember  the  words  of  the  angel  to  Daniel  ; — "  And 
some  of  them  of  understanding  shall  fall,  to  try  them, 
and  to  purge,  and  to  make  them  white."  ^  But  hard 
is  the  lot  of  those  who  will  not  be  instructed  by  the 
word  of  Jehovah,  and  can  be  turned  from  earthly  things 
only  by  a  bitter  discipline  which  must  pursue  them  to 
the  'ast  hour  of  life. 

'  Dan.  xi.  35, 


126  THE   GENTILES. 

With  a  warning  to  those  behevers  who  will  be  dis- 
posed to  defend  themselves  by  arms,  John  concludes 
his  account  of  the  first  Beast.  If  any,  he  says,  are  for 
leading  into  captivity,  into  captivity  they  must  go  ;  if 
any  wish  to  kill  with  the  sword,  with  the  sword  they 
must  be  killed.  ^  God  will  not  bless  their  efforts  ;  for, 
as  the  last  sentence  of  the  verse  declares,  this  will  be  (. 
a  time  when  the  saints  must  have  no  weapons  but  j 
patience  and   faith. 

VIII. 

The  Wild  Beast  from  the  Earth. 

While  John  was  still  wondering  at  the  monster  from 
the  sea,  he  saw  a  second  Wild  Beast  ascending  out 
of  the  earth.  In  this  case  also  we  may  probably  look 
for  a  double  meaning,  and  again  regard  the  symbol  as 
representing  a  system  as  well  as  the  man  who  organizes 
it.  In  the  first  application,  "  the  earth  "  may  signify  a 
settled  state  of  things  brought  about,  perhaps,  by  the 
former  Beast,  who  quells  the  tossing  anarchy  out  of 
which  he  arises  and  consolidates  society  :  it  may  point 
to  some  such  condition  of  affairs  as  the  first  Napoleon 
had  already  effected  in  revolutionary  France,  when  he 
essayed  to  move  the  Pope  from  Rome  to  Paris,  and 
make  him  his  subordinate  and   coadjutor. 

In  the  second  or  personal  application,  since  this 
being  also  is  a  spirit  from  Hades,  we  may  take  "  the 
earth  "  in  its  literal  sense,  and  compare  the  words  of 
the  witch  of  Endor  in  regard  to  Samuel's  appearance  ; 
— "  I  saw  a  god  ascending  out  of  the  earth  ; "  "  an  old 
man  cometh  up."     The  same  idea  is  also  found  in  the 

'  Rev.  xiii.  9,  10. 


THE    WILD  BEAST  FROM  THE  EARTH.  iz'j 

fourth  verse  of  the  twenty-ninth  chapter  of  Isaiah, 
which  should  be  rendered  ; — "  And  thy  voice  shall 
come  up  like  that  of  a  demon  from  the  ground,  and 
thy  speech  shall  mutter  out  of  the  dust."  And  in  the 
tenth  Psalm,  the  second  Beast  is  described  as  "the  man 
from  out  of  the  earth." 

He  is  sometimes  called  "  the  False  Prophet  "  ;  while  [ 
the  seven-headed  monster  is  invariably  termed  "  the  ' 
Beast."  He  is  said  to  have  the  horns  of  a  lamb,  but 
the  voice  of  a  dragon  ;  there  is  in  his  outward  appear- 
ance and  profession  a  travesty  of  the  meekness  and 
gentleness  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ ;  but,  whenever  the  i 
fulness  of  his  heart  finds  vent  through  his  mouth,  he 
proves  himself  to  be  inspired  by  the  great  Dragon 
"  which  deceiveth  the  whole  world."  He  is  thus  the 
chief  of  those  of  whom  the  Lord  said,  "  Beware  of 
false  prophets,  which  come  to  you  in  sheep's  clothing, 
but  inwardly  they  are  ravening  wolves."  While,  then, 
the  first  Beast  assumes  the  place  of  Christ  and 
demands  worship,  the  second  stands  before  him  as  his 
prophet.  There  is  no  mention  of  priests  ;  for  the  new 
deity  knows  nothing  of  substitution  or  vicarious  sacrifice, 
and  needs  only  a  prophet  to  declare  and  execute  his 
will. 

This  at  once  shows  us  that  we  have  here  no  refer- 
ence to  Popery,  at  least  in  any  form  in  which  it  has 
hitherto  appeared. 

Though  the  place  of  the  False  Prophet  is  subordi- 
nate, he,  nevertheless,  exercises  all  the  authority  of  his 
chief,  and  uses  it  for  the  one  purpose  of  compelling  men  ' 
to  worship  the  Beast,  on  the  ground  that  he  has  been/, 
slain,  and  has  risen  again  from  the  dead.     To  this  end  ' 
he  puts  forth  miraculous  power,  and,  like  Elijah,  calls 


128  THE   GENTILES. 

down  fire  from  heaven  in  the  sight  of  wondering 
multitudes.  The  effect  of  such  a  display  will  be  very 
great,  more  especially  in  the  case  of  Jews  ;  and  we 
must  remember  that  it  will  be  counteracted  neither 
by  a  Satanic  spirit  of  scepticism,  nor  by  anything 
unpalatable  in  the  doctrines  which  it  supports.  The 
False  Prophet  will  follow  up  his  advantage,  and  at 
once  cause  an  image  of  the  Beast  to  be  made  for 
adoration,  into  which,  when  it  is  completed,  he  will 
send  a  spirit  to  command  from  its  mouth  the  slaughter 
of  any  who  refuse  to  bend  the  knee.  And  that  none 
may  escape  the  ordeal,  all  grades  of  men,  the  small 
and  the  great,  the  poor  and  the  rich,  the  bond  and 
the  free,  will  be  compelled  to  imprint  upon  their 
foreheads  or  right  hands  a  visible  mark,  consisting 
either  of  the  name  or  the  number  of  the  Beast, 
and  exhibited  as  an  open  profession  of  their  devotion 
to  him. 

On  the  part  of  the  Beast  and  False  Prophet,  none 
will  be  allowed  to  buy  or  sell  without  showing  the 
mark  ;  so  that  those  who  refuse  to  receive  it  will  be 
reduced  to  starvation  if  they  conceal  themselves,  or  be 
put  to  death  if  they  are  discovered.  But,  in  vindica- 
tion of  God,  an  angel  will  be  sent  to  fly  in  mid-heaven 
with  the  awful  proclamation  ; — "  If  any  man  worship- 
peth  the  Beast  and  his  image,  and  receiveth  a  mark 
on  his  forehead,  or  upon  his  hand,  he  also  shall  drink 
of  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  God,  which  is  prepared 
unmixed  in  the  cup  of  His  anger  ;  and  he  shall  be 
tormented  with  fire  and  brimstone  in  the  presence  of 
the  holy  angels,  and  in  the  presence  of  the  Lamb  :  and 
the  smoke  of  their  torment  goeth  up  for  ever  and  ever  ; 
and  they  have  no  rest  day  and  night,  they  thc^t  worship 


THE    WILD  BEAST  FROM  THE  EARTH.  125 

the  Beast  and  his  image,  and  whoso  receiveth  the 
mark  of  his  name."  To  this  dreadful  threat  succeeds 
an  exhortation  ; — "  Here  is  the  patience  of  the  saints, 
they  that  keep  the  commandments  of  God,  and  the 
faitli  of  Jesus."  Tliey  must  prove  themselves  to  be 
saints  and  obedient  believers  by  firmly,  but  quietly, 
refusing  to  sanction  in  any  way  the  rebellion  against 
God  and  His  Christ.  If  they  yield,  in  the  very  least 
degree,  to  the  terrible  pressure  which  will  be  brought 
to  bear  upon  them,  they  are  lost  ;  for  this  is  the  test- 
ing time,  the  great  hour  of  temptation.  No  wonder 
that  John  immediately  hears  a  voice  from  heaven, 
saying  ; — "  Write,  blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in 
the  Lord  from  henceforth."  ^  For  as  soon  as  this 
Reign  of  Terror  commences,  from  that  very  moment, 
the  greatest  favour  which  God  can  show  will  be  to 
gather  in  quickly  those  whom  He  loves  with  the 
sickle  of  death. 

In  such  fearful  straits  will  those  believers  find 
themselves  who  are  not  ready  at  their  Lord's  first 
summons  :  so  bitter  will  be  the  discipline  from  which 

'  It  is  the  custom  to  quote  these  words  as  if  they  mig-ht  be  used 
indiscriminately  of  those  who  die  in  the  Lord  at  all  times  ;  but 
the  limitation,  "from  henceforth,"  should  have  checked  this 
general  application.  That  death  is  not  always  a  blessing  to  the 
saved  is  evident  ftom  the  fact  that  Paul  declares  it  to  have  been 
inflicted  as  a  punishment  upon  certain  careless  Corinthian  Chris- 
tians. "  For  this  cause,"  he  says,  "  many  among  you  are  weak 
and  sickl}',  and  not  a  few  sleep  "  (i  Cor.  xi.  30).  It  is  possible 
for  a  believer  to  lose  his  reward  by  being  cut  off  in  the  Lord's 
anger  before  his  work  is  done,  and  the  passage  quoted  above 
seems  to  show  that  this  is  a  thing  of  not  very  infrequent  occur- 
rence. Just  in  the  same  way  the  wicked  may  by  aggravated 
sin  shorten  their  time  of  grace.  "  How  oft  is  the  candle  of  the 
wicked  put  out" — not  suffered  to  burn  out  (Job.  xxi.  17). 
"Bloody  and  deceitful  men  shall  not  live  out  half  their  days" 
(Psa.  Iv.  23). 


I30  THE   GENTILES. 

they  must  learn  to  be  thenceforth  unhesitating  in  their 
obedience  to  the  great  King.  But  strength  will  be 
given  to  them,  so  that  neither  they,  nor  their  converts, 
nor  the  God-fearing  Jews,  will  yield  to  Antichrist ;  but 
will  rather  submit  to  be  destroyed  in  a  persecution 
more  furious  than  any  which  has  yet  raged  against 
the  servants  of  God.  One  of  many  passages  in  which 
it  is  described  is  the  tenth  Psalm,  the  first  verses  of 
which,  when  more  carefully  translated  than  in  our 
version,  run  as  follows. 

1.  "Why,  O  Jehovah,  standest  Thou  afar  off? 
Why  hidest  Thou  Thyself  in  times  of  trouble  ? 

2.  Through  the  pride  of  the  wicked  the  afflicted  is  feverish  with 

fear ; 
They  are  taken  in  the  plots   which  they  (the  wicked)  have 
devised. 

3.  For  the  wicked  boasteth  of  his  soul's  desire  ; 

And  the  spoiler  he  blesseth  ;  he  despiseth  Jehovah. 

4.  The  wicked,  such  is  his  haughtiness,  (saith) ; — '  He  will  not 

require.' 
'  There  is  no  God,'  is  the  sum  of  his  thoughts. 

5.  Strong  are  his  ways  at  all  times  : 

Far  above  are  Thy  judgments,  out  of  his  sight. 
As  for  all  his  adversaries,  he  puffeth  at  them. 

6.  He  saith  in  his  heart,  '  I  shall  not  be  moved ; 

From  one  generation  to  another  I  am  he  who  shall  not  be 
touched  by  evil.' 

7.  Of  cursing  is  his  mouth  full,  of  deceit  and  oppression  ; 
Under  his  tongue  is  mischief  and  wickedness.- 

8.  He  sitteth  in  the  ambush  of  the  villages  ; 

In  the  secret  places  he  slayeth  the  innocent ; 
His  eyes  are  privily  fixed  upon  the  helpless. 
9    He  lieth  in  wait  in  his  secret  places,  like  a  lion  in  his  lair ; 
He  lieth  in  wait  to  catch  the  afflicted ; 
He  catcheth  the  afflicted  by  drawing  him  into  his  net. 
10.  And  crushed  he  (the  afflicted)  sinks  down  and  falls, 
The  helpless  among  his  strong  ones." 


THE    WILD  BEAST  FROM  THE  EARTH.  131 

That  this  Psalm  refers  to  the  persecution  shortly 
to  be  carried  on  by  the  second  Beast  seems  to  be  inti- 
mated by  its  concluding  verse,  in  which  the  oppressor 
is  described  as  "  the  man  from  the  earth."  It  opens 
with  the  cry  of  the  persecuted,  which  ascends  to  God 
like  that  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the  extremity  of  His 
agony,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken 
Me  ! "  Then  their  terrible  condition  is  graphically 
depicted.  They  are  feverish  with  fear  :  life  is  not 
secure  for  a  moment  :  at  any  time  they  may  be  dis- 
covered, dragged  before  the  image  of  the  Beast,  and 
there  forced  either  to  worship  or  to  die.  From  morn- 
ing till  night  snares  are  incessantly  being  laid  to  entrap 
them  into  an  avowal  of  their  faith  :  nor  do  they  dare 
to  enter  any  of  the  markets  or  shops  ;  for  not  even  the 
smallest  necessary  can  be  bought  unless  the  purchaser 
first  uncover  his  forehead  or  hand,  and  show  that  he  is 
stamped  with  the  sign  of  the  Beast. 

The  third  verse  intimates  that  all  the  desires  of  the 
False  Prophet  will  be  towards  the  Wicked  One  who  is 
set  over  him  :  that  he  will  bless  him  and  give  thanks 
to  him,  cruel  spoiler  though  he  be,  while  at  the  same 
time  he  will  despise  Jehovah. 

Indeed,  from  the  following  clauses  we  may  infer 
that  his  chief  characteristic  will  be  an  utter  ignoring 
of  God,  a  development  of  the  infidelity  which  is  even 
now  daily  increasing  in  popularity.  And  whatever 
may  be  his  professions  of  truth,  he  will  be  crafty  and 
altogether  unscrupulous. 

The  eighth  verse  returns  to  the  energetic  cruelty 
of  his  persecutions.  Neither  village  nor  secret  place 
will  be  safe  from  his  agents  :  with  untiring  activity 
they  will  search  every  remote  corner,  and  hunt  down 


132  THE   GENTILES. 

all  those  who  will  not  bow  before  the  image,  whether 
they  be  believers  in  Christ,  or  conscientious  Jews. 

But  possibly  the  secret  places  may  be  establishments 
like  the  Inquisition,  with  its  subterranean  dungeons 
and  hidden  chambers  of  torture  and  death.  And 
with  this  interpretation  the  next  clause  seems  to  agree, 
alluding,  as  it  probably  does,  to  some  frightful  system 
of  espionage. 


IX. 

Mystery,   Babylon   the   Great. 

We  have  now  to  consider  a  mysterious  and  deeply 
interesting  subject,  and  in  order  to  understand  it  must 
carefully  examine  the  seventeenth  chapter  of  the 
Apocalypse.  In  that  famous  passage  we  shall  find 
a  vision  which  closely  affects  ourselves  :  for,  among 
other  things,  it  foreshadows  a  mighty  convulsion,  the 
premonitory  rumblings  of  which  seem  to  be  even  now 
forcing  themselves  upon  our  ears,  and  threatening  the 
present  generation  with  the  terrific  violence  of  its 
shock.  Of  the  particulars  which  are  revealed,  we  wish, 
in  the  first  place,  to  call  attention  to  the  following  : — 

That  for  a  time  the  Roman  Empire  would  cease  to 
exist  as  a  united  and  secular  power  ;  but  that,  in  the 
meanwhile,  its  parts  would  be  held  together  and  domi- 
nated by  an  ecclesiastical  system  which  would  rule 
from  its  ancient  seat  of  government,  the  city  of  Rome. 

That  this  system  would  grievously  persecute  and 
destroy  the  saints  of  God. 

That,  in  the  end,  secular  factions  would  gather 
strength,   and,  after  a  fearful   struggle,    overthrow  the 


MYSTERY,   BABYLON  THE   GREAT.  133 

ecclesiastical     power     amid     scenes     of    the     greatest 
violence  and  cruelty. 

And  that,  at  the  same  time,  the  Roman  Empire, 
arranged  in  Ten  Kingdoms,  would  be  openly  re-united 
under  a  great  emperor,  a  re-incarnated  spirit,  beneath 
whose  sway  it  had  already  once  bowed  before  the 
time  of  the  vision. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  chapter,  John  is  bidden  to 
come  into  the  wilderness  that  he  may  see  the  judgment 
of  the  great  Whore,  or  Babylonian  false  Church,  and 
to  his  amazement  she  appears  mounted  upon  the 
Beast  !  We  can  easily  enter  into  his  feelings  ;  for  up 
to  that  time  there  had  been  only  war  between  the 
Church  and  the  world,  and  the  Master  had  declared 
that  so  it  should  be  until  the  end.  Well,  therefore, 
might  he  be  bewildered  when  he  saw  her  who  pretended 
to  be  a  Church,  not  merely  suffering  herself  to  be 
upheld  by  the  Christ-hating  World-power,  but  actually 
rejoicing  to  sit  as  a  queen  and  direct  its  course,  though 
it  was  still  as  ever  in  its  fallen  and  bestial  condition. 
The  apostle  was  gazing  upon  the  depths  of  Satan, 
learning  something  of  those  wondrous  counterfeits  and 
phantoms  by  means  of  which  the  god  of  this  age 
deludes  our  feeble  intellects  and  diseased  spirits,  and 
allures  into  the  dismal  swamp  of  Death  all  those  who 
are   willing  to  abandon   the   King's  highway. 

On  looking  at  the  Beast,  John  observed  that  neither 
its  heads  nor  its  horns  were  crowned  :  it  was,  therefore, 
exhibited  to  him  at  a  time  when  its  ruling  powers 
would  neither  be  any  of  the  seven  heads,  nor  the 
eighth  emperor  with  his  confederate  kings,  but  the 
ecclesiastical  system  symbolized  by  the  Woman.  And 
it  needs  but  little  study  of  the  Bible  to  teach  us  that 


13-1  THE   GENTILES. 

the  ngure  of  a  whore  would  scarcely  be  used  of  a 
system  avoivedly  hostile  to  Christ ;  but  rather  of  one 
which  gives  itself  out  to  be  the  Church,  though  its 
doctrines  and  practices  are  altogether  opposed  to  its 
claim,  and  it  may  not  even  care  to  disguise  its  hatred 
of  true  believers. 

The  name,  Mystery,  Babylon  the  Great,  intimates 
that  in  some  enigmatical  sense  the  Woman  is  Babylon, 
although  we  are  afterwards  told  in  plain  terms  that  she 
is  Rome.  But  with  our  present  knowledge  the  riddle 
is  quickly  solved,  and  we  find  that  each  of  the  two 
great  cities  was  in  its  turn  the  seat  of  her  power, 
so  that  she  was  identified  with  one  of  them  in  earlier 
times,  and  with  the  other  in  a  later  age.  For  we  have 
here  exhibited  to  us  that  great  organization,  that 
instrument  of  Satan  for  deceiving  and  enslaving  the 
hearts  of  men,  of  which,  in  Old  Testament  days,  it  was 
said,  "  The  nations  have  drunken  of  her  wine  ;  there- 
fore the  nations  are  mad  "  :  ^  while,  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, the  same  power  is  depicted  as  a  Woman  who  is 
called  "  the  Mother  of  the  harlots  and  of  the  abomina- 
tions of  the  earth."  ^ 

Of  her  long  concealed  history,  which  has  been  at 
last  brought  to  the  light  by  the  discoveries  at  Nineveh 
and  Babylon,  our  limits  will  permit  no  more  than  a 
slight  sketch.  It  appears  that  a  secret  organization  of 
unbelievers  was  formed  soon  after  the  death  of  Nimrod, 
at  a  time  when  open  apostasy  was  dangerous,  and  that 
its  members  established  their  headquarters  at  Babylon. 
From  that  centre  they  laboured,  with  ceaseless  activity, 
to  confuse  and  destroy  the  knowledge  of  Jehovah  in 
the  world,  and  to  bring  men  under  the  yoke  of  demon- 
'  Jer.  li.  7.  -  Rev.  xvii.  5. 


MYSTERY,   BABYLON  THE   GREAT.  135 

gods.  They  soon  became  a  powerful  and  influential 
body,  but  found  their  original  method  of  procedure  so 
effective  that,  even  when  they  had  altogether  forgotten 
the  fear  which  suggested  their  precautions,  and  were, 
indeed,  likely  soon  to  be  supreme  in  every  land,  they, 
nevertheless,  did  not  change  the  character  of  their 
corporation,  but  continued  to  be  a  secret  society. 
Those  who  wished  to  share  their  power  and  privileges 
could  only  do  so  by  passing  through  the  ordeal  of 
initiation,  which  included  a  baptism,  after  which  the 
initiate  was  termed  twice-born,  or  regenerate  (^Kfyvq^i). 

Their  worship  was  originally  offered  to  a  Trinity 
consisting  of  father,  mother,  and  son.  But  the  first 
person  was  very  commonly  confused  with  the  third,  and 
at  last  almost  entirely  forgotten  ;  so  that  the  pro- 
minent deities  were  the  mother  and  son.  Of  these,  the 
former  was  by  far  the  most  popular,  and  has  been 
known,  according  to  time  and  place,  as  Queen  of  Heaven, 
Mother  of  the  Gods,  Mylitta,  Astarte,  Diana  of 
Ephesus,  Aphrodite,  Venus,  Isis,  and  the  Blessed 
Virgin.^ 

The  earthly  head  of  the  society  was  a  priest-king, 
who  thus  usurped  a  dignity  which  God  will  permit  to 

'  Mary  is  never  called  "the  Virgin"  in  the  Bible  after  the 
birth  of  her  first-born  Son,  but  always  "the  Lord's  mother,"  or 
"His  mother."  How  completely  the  identification  of  the  Romish 
Virgin  Mary  with  the  Egj'ptian  Isis  has  been  dernonstrated,  may 
be  seen  by  the  following  extra-fis  from  living's  "  Gnostics  and 
their  Remains"  (pages  71,  72).  "To  this  period  belongs  a 
beautiful  sard  in  my  collection,  representing  Serapis  seated  with 
his  attributes,  as  Macrobius  had  seen  him,  whilst  before  him 
stands  Isis,  holding  in  one  hand  the  sistrum,  in  the  other  a 
wheatsheaf,  with  the  legend  17  /cupia"lcn?  ayvr],  '  Immaculate  is  our 
lady  Isis,'  the  very  terms  applied  afterwards  to  that  personage 
who  succeeded  to  her  form,  titles,  symbols,  rites,  and  ceremonies 
Thus  her  devotees  caried  into   the  new  priesthood  the  former 


136  THE   GENTILES. 

no  one  until  He  come  Whose  right  it  is,  and  Who 
shall   be   a  Priest  upon   His  Throne.^ 

Babylon,  as  we  have  before  said,  was  the  ancient 
seat  of  this  rebellious  confederation,  and  from  thence 
its  influence  was  disseminated  throughout  the  world. 
But,  after  the  capture  of  the  city  of  Nebuchadnezzar 
by  the  Medo-Persians,  its  leaders,  driven  from  that 
stronghold,  removed  their  headquarters  to  Pergamos, 
and  remained  there  for  some  centuries.  ^ 

badges  of  their  profession,  the  obligation  to  celibacy,  the  ton- 
sure, and  the  surplice,  omitting,  unfortunately,  the  frequent 
ablutions  prescribed  by  the  ancient  creed.  The  sacred  image 
still  moves  in  procession  as  when  Juvenal  laughed  at  it(vi.  530) — 

' grege  linigero  circnmdatus  et  grege  calvo.' 

'Escorted  by  the  tonsured  surpliced  train.' 

Her  proper  title,  Uomina,  the  exact  translation  of  the  Sanscrit 
I  si,  survives  with  slight  change  in  the  modern  Madonna." 

Mr.  King  goes  on  to  explain  that  the  lotus  of  Isis  is  re-named 
the  lily  for  the  later  goddess  :  and  that  the  tinkling  sound  of  the 
sistrum  is  replaced  by  that  of  the  bell,  which  latter  instrument 
"came  directly  from  the  Buddhist  religious  usages,  where  it 
forms  as  essential  an  element  as  of  yore  in  early  Celtic  Chris- 
tianity, when  the  holy  bell  was  the  actual  tj'pe  of  the  Godhead  to 
the  new  converts."  In  a  note  he  adds  that  "the  '  Black  Virgins,' 
so  highly  reverenced  in  certain  French  cathedrals  during  the 
long  night  of  the  Middle  Ages,  proved,  when  at  last  examined 
critically,  to  be  basalt  figures  of  Isis." 

'  Zech.  vi.  13. 

>■  "  Where  Satan's  throne  is."     Rev.  ii.  13. 

*  Possibly  the  dispersion  consequent  upon  the  fall  of  Babylon 
may  have  given  an  impetus  to  the  missionary  efforts  of  the  initi- 
ated, and  caused  the  revival  of  their  rites  and  doctrines  in  many 
parts  of  the  world.  In  less  than  a  century  after  the  death  of  Bel- 
shazzar  a  new  or  rather  a  reformed  faith  was  spreading  in  India, 
the  Buddhist  religion,  which  is  but  a  slightly  changed" Babyloni- 
anism,  and  bears  tlie  strongest  resemblance  to  Romanism. 
Indeed,  Professor  Max  Miiller  has  lately  pointed  out  that  Buddha 
himself  is  actually  a  saint  in  the  Roman  Catholic  Calendar,  under 
the  name  of  St.  Josaphat.  For  the  story  of  Josaphat  and  Bar- 
laam,  which  first  appears  in  the  works  of  John  of  Damascus,  a 
theologian  of  the  early  part  of  "the  eighth  centurjf,  and  became 
extremely  popular  in  the  Middle  Ages,   has  now  been  certainly 


MYSTERY,   BABYLON  THE   GREAT.  137 

Meanwhile  the  fourth  Gentile  power  was  rapidly 
overshadowing  the  world,  and,  unlike  the  Persian 
kingdom  of  Cyrus,  professed  the  faith  of  the  Chal- 
deans. For  the  religion  of  Rome  was  instituted  by 
the  Etrurian,  Numa  Pompilius,  its  second  king ;  and 
recent  researches  prove  that  the  Etrurians  were  a 
colony,    either    from    Babylonia   itself,    or    from    some 

identified  with  that  of  Buddha.  According  to  it,  a  devout  monk 
named  Barlaam  received  a  Divine  comniand,  and,  in  obedience 
to  it,  travelled  to  India  disguised  as  a  merchant.  There,  having 
gained  access  to  the  young  prince  who  afterwards  became  the 
founder  of  Buddhism,  he  unfolded  his  dogmas  to  him,  and  especi- 
ally the  blessings  of  a  monastic  life.     (See  Yule's  "  Marco  Polo," 

vol.  ii.,  pp.  304-309-)  ,        ^    ,  „  . 

But  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  Buddhism  was  merely  a 
reformation  by  which  the  original  faith,  corrupted  through  the 
priestcraft  of  the  Brahmans,  was  restored  to  something  like  the 
form  in  which  the  Aryan  emigrants  had  brought  it  from  Babylon 
after  the  confusion  of  tongues. 

To  pass  to  another  quarter  of  the  world,  Prescott  tells  us  that, 
when  the  Spaniards  conquered  Mexico,  they  were  astonished  to 
find  stone  crosses  set  up  on  the  roads,  and  were  easily  able  to 
convert  the  Mexicans  to  Popery,  because  the  difterence  between 
it  and  the  Aztec  system  was  but  slight.  Mr.  Pascoe,  who  has 
been  long  a  missionary  in  the  country,  declares  that  the  Mexican 
religion  was  purely  Chaldean,  and  substantiates  his  assertion  by 
the  most  startling  particulars.  He  says  ; — "  They  had  a  regular 
priesthood,  gorgeous  temples,  and  convents :  they  had  proces- 
sions in  which  crosses,  and  even  red  crosses,  were  carried  ;  and 
incense,  flowers,  andfruit-offerings,  were  employed  in  their  worship. 
They  confessed  to  their  priests,  and  generally  confessed  only 
once,  receiving  a  written  absolution,  which  served  for  the  remain- 
der of  their  lives  as  an  effectual  safeguard  against  punishment, 
even  for  crimes  committed  after  receiving  the  said  absolution. 
They  worshipped,  and  afterwards  ate,  a  wafer-god,  an  idol  made 
of  flour  and  honey,  which  they  called  '  the  god  of  penitence  '  ; 
and  they  always  ate  him  fasting.  They  also  venerated  the  black 
calf,  or  bull,  and  adored  a  goddess-mother  with  an  infant  son  in 
her  arms.  They  sacrificed  human  victims  to  the  god  of  hell, 
of  whom  they  considered  the  cross  to  be  a  symbol,  and  to  whom 
human  victims  were  sacrificed  by  laying  them  on  a  great  black 
stone  and  tearing  out  their  hearts."  (Speech  at  the  Mildmay 
Conference,  1876.) 


nS  THE   GENTILES. 

neighbouring  country  which  had  adopted  the  Chaldean 
creed.     And    so    it   happened    that    the    authority    of 
Pergamos  was   never  disputed  by  the   Pontiffs   of  the 
seven-hilled  city ;  and  at  last  Attalus  the  Third,  at  his 
decease,   left    his    royal  priesthood,  his  dominion,  and 
his  vast  wealth,  to  the  Roman  people.      Since,  however, 
their  government  was  a  republic,  they  had  no  citizen 
who  could    undertake  the  kingly  functions  of  Attalus, 
until  Julius   Caesar,    who  had  been   previously  elected")' 
Pontifex  Maximus,  became  emperor  also,  and  was  thus  1 
enabled  to  succeed  to  all  the  dignity  of  the  Babylonian- 
Pontiff.    Forthwith  he  declared  himself  to  be  a  descend-  f 
ant  of  the  goddess   Venus  :    and   from  that   time  the 
Roman   emperor  was  styled   "  divus,"  or  "  divine,"  and  , 
was  adored  as  a  god. 

The    vast    World-power   of    Rome    had  thus    been 
mounted  by  the  Babylonian  Woman  before   Christ  ap- 
peared,   and,   at   her  instigation,  the  whole  machinery 
of  the  Empire  was  set  in  motion  to  crush  His  Church, 
and  persecution  followed  persecution  in  bloody  succes- 
sion.    But  it  was  only  after  the  failure  of  these  efforts 
that  she  exhibited  herself  as    the    Harlot   by  a   false 
profession   of  allegiance  to   that  Jesus  Whom  she  had 
persecuted.     By  open  violence  she  had  effected  nothing:     : 
she    tried    hypocrisy   and    corruption,    and    in    an    in-     1 
credibly  short  space  of  time  the  Christian  Church  was    ( 
completely  Heathenized,   and   persuaded   to  receive  ail    / 
the  old  deities  under  the  new  name  of  Saints,  together    \ 
v/ith  the  doctrines,  ritual,   and  vestments  of  Paganism. 
And   finally,  in   A.D.  366,  by  skilful   manoeuvring  and 
not  a    little  violence,   Damasus,  a  leader  of  the    con- 
spirators, was  pushed  into  the  bishopric  of  Rome,  and, 
having  thus  become  the  head  of  the  Christian  Church, 


THE  SEVEN  KINGS  AND   THE  EIGHTH.  139 

was  also  elected  Pontifex  Maximus  of  the  Heathen 
world.  The  Pagans  could  have  no  further  scruple. 
They  flocked  into  the  Church  in  crowds  ;  the  amalga- 
mation was  soon  completed,  and  its  result  was  the 
Church  of  Rome,  whose  chief  ruler,  under  the  old  title 
of  Pontifex  Maximus,  which  he  retains  to  this  day, ' 
soon  towered  above  all  secular  monarchs,  and  claimed  • 
supremacy  over  Christendom. 

Such,  then,  is  the  history  of  the  Babylonian  Society, 
which  after  swaying  the  first  World-empire,  and 
probably  having  much  to  do  with  the  third,  had,  in 
the  time  of  John,  made  itself  mistress  of  the  fourth  ; 
so  that  the  Woman,  by  governing  the  world  from  the 
seven-hilled  city,  had  become  identified  with  Rome, 
and  the  angel  was  able  to  describe  her  as  "  the  great 
city  which  reigneth  over  the  kings  of  the  earth."  ^  But 
she  was  exhibited  to  the  apostle  as  she  would  be  at  a 
later  stage  in  her  history,  when,  partially  disguised 
beneath  a  robe  stolen  from  the  Church  of  Christ,  she 
would  have  ceased  to  govern  secretly  through  the 
medium  of  the  secular  powers,  and  would  have  openly 
placed  herself  above  them,  and  be  ruling  with  supreme 
authority.  And,  accordingly,  in  this  vision,  the  Beast, 
which  always  stands  for  the  secular  power,  appears 
crownless,  wearing  diadems  neither  upon  his  heads  nor 
his  horns,  but  ridden  and  directed  by  the  Woman. 

X. 

The  Seven  Kings  and  the  Eighth. 

In  explaining   the  significance  of  the  Beast   to  John, 
the  angel  told  him  that  its  seven  heads  had  a  double 

'  Rev.  xvii.  18. 


140  THE  GENTILES. 

meaning,  and  were  to  be  interpreted  in  one  way  in 
their  reference  to  the  Woman,  and  in  another  when 
they  were  taken  in  connection  with  itself.  As  regards 
the  Woman,  they  denoted  seven  mountains  on  which 
she  sat;  and  since  it  was  usual  in  those  days  to  speak  of 
Rome  as  the  City  of  the  Seven  Mountains,^  or,  Hills, 
the  apostle  would  easily  perceive  what  was  intended, 
even  before  the  angel  added  that  the  Woman  was 
the  imperial  city  which  was  then  ruling  the  world. 

But,  when  taken  in  their  connection  with  the  Beast, 
the  seven  heads  have  a  very  different  meaning  :  for' 
they  are  then  said  to  signify  seven  kings,  while  the 
Beast  himself  represents  an  eighth.  Of  these  eight 
monarchs,  we  are  told  that  five  had  already  fallen, 
that  one  was  in  existence  when  John  wrote,  and  that 
a  seventh  was  yet  to  come  ;  and  then  an  eighth,  who 
would  be  one  of  the  seven,  and  would  be  so  identified 
with  the  World-power,  so  perfect  an  exponent  of  the 
popular  will,  that  he  is  not  called  a  head,  but  rather 
the  very  Beast  himself. 

The  five  kings  are  said   to  have   fallen.      From  the 
use  in  the  Apocalypse  of  the  verb  "  to  fall "  we  may, 

'  Although  the  city  soon  exceeded  its  ancient  hmits,  yet  the 
Romans  never  reckoned  more  than  seven  hills.  Indeed,  as 
Niebuhr  remarks,  "  when  Augustus  divided  the  city  into  regions, 
though  it  was  entirely  for  practical  purposes,  he  determined  their 
number  by  doubling  that  of  the  oldest  divisions.  Christian 
Rome,  too,  was  very  early  divided  into  seven  regions." 

The  custom  was  doubtless  p2rpetuated  by  the  Septimontium, 
or  Festival  of  the  Seven  Mountains, held  annually  to  commemorate 
their  inclosure  within  the  walls  of  Rome.  Curiously  enough 
Suetonius  (Dom.  iv.)  mentions  a  celebration  of  this  Festival 
by  Domitian,  the  Emperor  in  whose  reign  the  Apocalypse  was 
written.  About  a  century  afterwards  Tertullian  (De  IdoL  x.) 
complains  that  Christian  schoolmasters  were  in  the  habit  of 
attending  it,  in  order  to  obtain  fresh  pupils. 


THE  SEVEN  KINGS  AND    THE  EIGHTH.  141 

perhaps,  infer  that  they  died  by  violent,  and  not  by 
natural,  deaths.  ^ 

In  the  description  of  the  thirteenth  chapter,  we  are 
told  that  names  of  blasphemy  were  upon  the  seven 
heads  of  the  Beast  ;  in  that  of  the  seventeenth,  that 
his  whole  body  was  full  of  them.  This  apparently 
indicates  that  each  of  the  seven  kings,  as  well  as  the 
eighth,  who  is  the  Beast,  would  set  themselves  forth 
as  gods  to  the  world.  So  far,  therefore,  we  seem  to 
have  the  following  data  for  the  identification  of  these 
kings. 

I.  They  are  all  monarchs  of  the  fourth,  or  Roman, 
World-power. 

II.  Five  of  them  had  already  died  by  violent  deaths, 
before  John  saw  the  vision. 

III.  A  sixth  was  reigning  at  the  time  of  the  vision.  " 

IV.  The  seventh  and  eighth  were  yet  to  come. 

V.  All  were,  or  would  be,  worshipped  as  gods. 
Now,    so   far  as   we  can  judge   from    their  history, 

the  five  who  had  fallen  were  probably  Julius  Caesar, 
Tiberius,  Claudius,.  Caligula,  and  Nero.  "^  The  sixth 
was  doubtless  Domitian,  during  whose  reign  John  ap- 
pears to  have  received  the  revelation.  ^      He  was  the 

'  Whether  the  sixth  and  seventh  kings  were  to  perish  in  like 
manner  the  prophecy  does  not  determine. 

-  We  have  supposed  the  remaining  Caesars  to  be  excluded  from 
the  prophecy  for  the  following  among  other  reasons.  Augustus 
Vespasian  and  Titus,  because  their  lives  were  terminated  by 
ordinary  disease  :  and  Galba  Otho  and  Vitellius,  on  account  of 
their  insignificance  and  the  probability  that  no  one  of  them 
became  an  acting  Grand  Master  of  the  initiated. 

^  The  almost  universal  testimony  of  antiquity  is  in  favour  of  the 
Domitianic  date  of  the  Apocalypse  :  and  against  such  an  array  it 
is  impossible  to  give  any  weight  to  a  statement  of  the  notoriously 
inaccurate  Epiphanius  of  Salamis,  who  flourished  at  the  end  of  the 
fourth  century.     As  a  specimen  of  the  evidence  on  the  other  side, 


J 


142  THE   GENTILES. 

last  of  the  twelve  Csesars,  and  directed  the  second 
persecution  of  the  Church. 

Between  the  sixth  and  the  seventh  it  may  be  that  a 
considerable  space  of  time  intervenes  :  there  is  possibly 
a  hint  of  this  in  the  words,  "  The  other  is  not  yet 
come  ;  and  when  he  cometh,  he  must  continue  a  little 

we  may  cite  that  of  Irenasus,  who  had  been  taught  by  Polycarp, 
a  disciple  of  the  Apostle  John,  and  who  died  at  the  close  of  the 
second,  or  beginning  of  the  third,  century.  Speaking  of  the 
Apocalyptic  vision,  he  says  ; — "  For  it  was  seen,  not  long  ago,  but 
almost  in  our  own  generation,  in  the  last  days  of  the  reign  of 
Domitian  "  (Advers.  Haer.  V.  cap.  xxx.  3).  Such  a  witness  is 
not  likely  to  be  mistaken,  and  he  is  corroborated  by  many  others 
{e.g.,  Eusebius,  Tertullian,  Victorinus,  Jerome,  Sulpicius  Severus), 
and  also  by  the  fact  that  what  we  know  of  John's  banishment  is 
in  perfect  accord  with  the  procedure  of  Domitian;  whereas  Nero's 
persecution  does  not  seem  to  have  extended  beyond  the  immediate 
district  of  Rome,  or  ever  to  have  expended  itself  in  the  punishment 
of  exile. 

As  to  the  alleged  historical  arguments  from  internal  evidence, 
which  have  been  lately  revived,  such  reasonings  can  only  affect 
those  who  believe  the  book  to  have  been  prompted  by,  and  solely 
concerned  with,  contemporaneous  events.  To  one  who  regards 
the  vision  as  a  Divine  prediction,  there  is  nothing  strange  in  the 
fact  that  Jerusalem  and  the  Temple  are  represented  as  standing, 
though  they  had  just  been  destroyed  by  Titus  (Rev.  xi.  i,  2)  ;  for 
the  prophets  contemplated  their  restoration.  Nor  do  we  find  any 
difficulty  in  the  mention  of  the  Twelve  Tribes  as  still  existing 
(vii.  4-8) ;  for  the  Bible  elsewhere  assures  us  that  they  will  yet  be 
gathered. 

To  explain  why  the  Greek  of  the  Apocalypse  is  less  pohshed,  and 
contains  more  Hebraisms  than  that  of  the  Gospel  and  Epistles, 
which  were  written  earlier,  may  be  difficult ;  but  such  a  difficulty 
cannot  be  allowed  to  overthrow  direct  evidence,  ]\Ien  do  not 
necessarily  continue  to  improve  in  a  language  which  they  have 
acquired ;  and  since  John  wrote  his  last  book  in  extreme  old  age, 
it  may  be  that  he  was  an  illustration  of  that  comparison  which 
likens  an  old  man's  mind  to  a  palimpsest;  and  that,  becoming 
somewhat  forgetful  of  the  Greek  which  he  had  learnt,  he 
occasionally  recalled  phrases  and  constructions  of  the  speech  of 
his  youth.  Or,  possibly,  the  subject  of  the  book,  which  is  much 
more  Jewish  than  his  other  works,  had  some  influence  upon  the 
style.       .  ■.        - 


THE  SEVEN  KINGS  AND    THE  EIGHTH,  143 

while."  Perhaps  he  is  still  in  the  future  ;  but  there 
are  some  reasons — which  we  will  presently  consider — 
for  believing  that  he  has  already  appeared  in  the 
person  of  the  first  Napoleon. 

In  regard  to  the  eighth  king,  we  seem  able,  by 
putting  together  the  information  of  the  thirteenth  and 
seventeenth  chapters,  to  deduce  the  following  particulars. 
The  seventeenth  chapter  describes  him  as  one  of  the 
seven  kings — that  is,  one  of  them  .  resuscitated.  And, 
this  being  the  case,  there  is  no  mention  of  an  eighth 
head,  but  only  of  an  eighth  king.  In  the  thirteenth 
chapter  also  there  is  no  notice  of  an  eighth  head  ; 
but  John  perceived  that  one  of  the  seven  had  been 
slain  unto  death — that  is,  had  been  unmistakably 
slain — and  while  he  was  gazing  upon  it,  the  head 
revived,  and  thus  plainly  indicated  the  meaning  of  the 
statement  in  the  later  vision  that  the  last  king  "  is  of 
the  seven." 

Thus  the  eighth  king  is  one  of  the  seven  raised  from 

the  dead  ;  and,  accordingly,  it  is  said  that  the  Beast 

which  represents  him  will  ascend  out  of  the  abyss,  or 

place  of  the  dead.  ^     By  keeping  this  in  mind  we  shall 

understand    his    ultimate    fate,    and   also   that   of   the 

False  Prophet ;  for  being  both  of  them  re-incarnated 

spirits,    and  having,  therefore,  already  experienced   the 

first   death,  they  are  not,  when  seized   at    the  height 

of  their  rebellion,  cast  into  the  abyss,  but  hurled  alive 

into    the   lake   of  fire  and  brimstone.^     For  it  is  ap- 

\  Rev.  xvii.  8. 
Rev.  xix.  20.  Their  immediate  punishment  is  thus  more 
severe  than  that  of  Satan  himself.  The  lattei,  never  having 
suffered  the  first  death,  must  do  so  before  he  can  be  subjected  to 
the  second  ;  and  will,  therefore,  be  confined  in  the  abyss  until 
the  close  of  the  Millennium,  Rev.  xx.  1-3.  See  also  the  exposition 
of  Psa.  Ixxxii.  in  "Earth's  Earliest  As-es."  Chap,  III. 


144  THE   GENTILES. 

pointed  unto  men  once  to  die,  and  afterwards  comes 
the  judgment. 

Again  ;  John  is  told  of  the  Beast  which  is  the  eighth 
king,  that  he  "  was,  and  is  not,  and  is  about  to  come 
up  out  of  the  abyss,  and  to  go  into  perdition."  Or,  in 
other  words,  he  had  been  upon  earth  before  John  saw 
the  vision,  was  then  in  the  place  of  the  dead,  and 
would  in  future  time  ascend  therefrom,  and  head  the 
great  rebellion  which  would  cause  him  to  be  consigned 
to  everlasting  perdition.  Therefore  this  terrible  being, 
who  will  a  second  time  trouble  the  world,  cannot  be 
the  sixth  or  seventh  king,  but  must  be  one  of  those 
who  had  already  fallen  at  the  time  of  the  vision  ; 
that  is,  if  the  names  just  mentioned  be  correct,  one  of 
the  five  Caesars,  Julius,  Tiberius,  Claudius,  Caligula, 
and  Nero. 

Further  than  this  we  can  only  proceed  by  conjecture; 
yet  by  conjecture  so  strongly  supported  that  it  is  at 
least  worth  mention. 

We  have  shown  that  the  Beast  is  a  symbol  of  double 
signification,  which  denotes  the  World-power  as  well 
as  the  eighth  king.  And,  in  considering  the  vision 
of  the  thirteenth  chapter  with  a  view  to  the  former 
interpretation,  we  observe  that  he  combines  features 
taken  from  the  other  three  monsters  ;  for  he  has  the 
body  of  the  leopard,  the  feet  of  the  bear,  and  the 
mouth  of  the  lion.  The  peculiarity  seems,  as  we  have 
already  stated,  to  set  forth  the  last  form  of  the  World- 
power,  when  it  will  represent  the  totality  of  the  four 
empires,  and  include  within  itself  all  that  has  ever 
belonged  to  them  together  with  accessions  of  its  own. 

In  working  out  this  interpretation  the  heads  cannot 
of  course  be  individual  kings,  but  must  stand  for  seven 


THE  SEVEN  KINGS  AND    THE   EIGHTH  145 

different  forms  of  government,  which  is  precisely  the 
number  indicated  in  the  visions  of  Nebuchadnezzar  and 
Daniel.      They  will  be  found  to  be  as  follows  :   the  first    1 
is  Babylon  ;   the  second   Medo-Persia  ;   the  third  Alex-    ' 
ander's   empire  ;  the  fourth   the    four   kingdoms  of  his     \ 
successors  ;   the  fifth   the  Roman    Empire  in   its  unity  ; 
the    sixth    the     Eastern    and   Western    Empires  ;    the 
seventh  the  Ten   Kingdoms. 

Now,   in    analogy   with    the   personal   interpretation, 
we  may  suppose  that  one  of  those  forms  of  government 
which  have  disappeared  will  be   restored   under  Anti- 
christ ;   and    that    one    will    doubtless    be    the   Roman 
Empire    in    unity,    or    the   fifth    head,    which    will    be 
revived  when  the  Ten  Kings   surrender  their  power  to 
the    Beast,    and    so    sink    into    the    position    of    mere 
governors    of    provinces.      Is    it    not    possible  that,    in 
correspondence  with  this,  the  fifth  king  also  will  be  the 
one  who  will  ascend  from  the  abyss  }      If  so,  provided  ^ 
the  five  kings  be  those  whom  we  have  just  mentioned,  / 
Antichrist    would    be    the    re-incarnated    spirit  of    the  V 
terrible    Nero.      Could    there  be  found   another  instru-J 
ment  so  fitted  for  Satan's  purpose  .'' 

Should  we  admit  this  conclusion,  we  could  certainly 
find  startling  corroborations  of  it  in  the  history  of 
Nero,  as  well  as  in  the  conceptions  formed  of  him, 
and  the  rumours  circulated,  by  his  contemporaries 
and  those  who  came  after  them.  Pagans  and  Christians 
alike. 

To   begin    with    his  acts,    some   of  them  were  very  ") 
suggestive  foreshadowings  of  what  Antichrist  will  here-  \ 
after  do.      For  he  was   the  first  to  wield  the  imperial  Y 
power  against  the   Christians,   and   the  bitter  cruelties  \ 
of  his  persecution — among  the  victims  of  which  was    ) 

10 


146  THE   GENTILES. 

Paul,  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles — were  imitated  too 
well  by  succeeding  emperors.  And  again,  it  was  Nero 
who  sent  out  the  expedition,  under  Vespasian  and 
Titus,  w^hich  ravaged  Judea  and  ultimately  destroyed 
Jerusalem  and  the  Temple. 

Not  less  remarkable  were  the  ideas  prevalent  re- 
specting him  in  the  Heathen  world  :  for  it  was  believed 
that  he  would  be  deprived  of  his  power,  and  afterwards 
restored  to  it  ;  nay,  according  to  some  soothsayers, 
Jerusalem  was  to  be  the  capital  city  of  his  second 
Empire.  The  following  is  a  passage  from  his  biography 
by  Suetonius. 

"  It  had  been  long  ago  foretold  to  Nero  by  the 
astrologers  that  his  fate  was  to  be  sometime  forsaken 
of  all.      Hence  that  very  famous  saying  of  his  ; — 

'  Any  land  maintains  an  artist.' 

And  for  this  reason  he  was  wont  with  greater  indul- 
gence to  cultivate  the  art  of  playing  on  the  lyre,  an 
art  which  was  pleasing  to  him  as  the  first  man  of  the 
state,  and  would  be  indispensable  when  he  became  a 
private  person.  Certain  astrologers,  however,  promised 
him  the  dominion  of  the  East  after  he  had  been  for- 
saken of  all ;  some,  particularly,  the  kingdom  of  Jeru- 
salem ;  a  greater  number  the  restoration  of  all  his 
former  good  fortune."  ^ 

Reports  of  these  predictions  spread  far  and  wide, 
and  abundant  evidence  may  be  found  in  the  Classical 
writers  of  the  deep  and  lasting  impression  produced 
by  them.  For  instance,  Suetonius,  after  mentioning 
the  general  joy  at  the  death  of  Nero,  adds  ; — 

"And  yet  there  were  not  wanting  those  v/ho  for  a 

'  Sueton.  Nero   xl. 


THE  SEVEN  KINGS  AND    THE  EIGHTH.  147 

long  time  used  to  deck  his  tomb  with  spring  and 
summer  flowers  ;  and  sometimes  they  would  put  forth 
robed  statues  of  him  in  the  Rostrum,  sometimes  they 
would  issue  edicts,  as  though  he  were  still  living, 
and  would  shortly  return  to  the  great  woe  of  his 
enemies. 

"  Moreover,  Vologesus,  king  of  the  Parthians,  when 
he  sent  ambassadors  to  the  Senate  to  renew  an  alliance, 
urgently  entreated  this  also,  that  the  memory  of  Nero 
might  be  reverenced.  Lastly,  some  twenty  years 
afterwards,  when  I  was  a  youth,  a  man  of  uncertain 
origin  stood  forth,  and  boasted  that  he  was  Nero. 
And  so  attractive  was  the  name  among  the  Parthians 
that  he  was  strenuously  assisted,  and  surrendered  at 
last  with  reluctance."  ^ 

Three  times,  in  the  reigns  of  Galba,  Titus,  and 
Domitian,  the  Parthians  were  on  the  eve  of  fighting  for 
impostors  who  took  the  name  of  Nero.  There  is  some- 
thing striking  in  this  :  for  although  it  seems  necessary 
to  the  fulfilment  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  vision  that  Persia 
should  ultimately  belong  to  the  Fourth  Empire,  yet  the 
Parthians,  who  were  then  in  possession  of  that  kingdom, 
successfully  resisted  all  the  efforts  of  the  Romans  to 
subdue  them,  and  maintained  their  independence.  If, 
therefore,  Nero  is  to  be  Antichrist,  there  seems  to  have 
been  an  almost  prophetic  instinct  in  the  respect  which 
these  sturdy  warriors  paid  to  his  name,  and  in  their 
willingness  to  follow  him,  as  though  they  recognized  a 
destined  chieftain. 

Tacitus  mentions  the  incident  related  by  Suetonius,^ 
and  also  the  subsequent  disturbance  of  Achaia  and 
Asia  through  a  false  alarm  that  Nero  was  alive,  and  on 
'  Sueton.  Nero,  Ivii.  2  -pac.  Hist.  i.  2. 


148  THE   GENTILES. 

his  way  to  the  East.^  Similar  accounts  may  be  found 
in  Dion  Cassius,  Zonaras,  and  other  writers  ;  but  we 
have  said  enough  to  indicate  the  strange  ideas  respecting 
this  emperor  which  were  floating  about  in  the  Heathen 
world. 

And  if,  again,  we  turn  to  the  Christian  communities, 
we  shall  be  no  less  startled  at  the  rumours  which  every- 
where meet  us.  For  there  was  a  common  belief  in  the 
early  Church  that  Paul,  when  speaking  of  the  "  Man  of 
sin"  and  the  Lawless  One,  pointed  to  Nero  the  reigning 
emperor,  though  he  would  not  mention  his  name. 
Hence  arose  the  opinion  that  Nero  was  the  head  of  the 
Beast  which  had  been  fatally  wounded  ;  and  that  he 
would,  therefore,  be  raised  from  the  dead,  and  be  the 
last  great  persecutor  as  he  had  been  the  first.  Lactan- 
tius^  and  Augustine^  both  mention  this  idea  as  being 
prevalent  in  their  respective  times,  but  do  not  subscribe 
to  it. 

It  is,  however,  adopted  without  hesitation  in  the 
earliest  Apocalyptic  commentary  which  has  come  down 
to  us,  that  of  Victorinus  of  Petau,  who  adds  the 
following  remark  ; — ■"  For  it  is  plain  that,  when  the 
cavalry  sent  by  the  Senate  was  pursuing  him,  he  him- 
self cut  his  throat.  Him,  therefore,  when  raised  up, 
God  will  send  as  a  worthy  king  ;  but  worthy  in  such  a 
way  as  the  Jews  merited."  Commodianus  also,  when 
treating  of  Antichrist,  affirms  that  he  will  be  Nero 
raised  up  from  Hell,  and  in  describing  the  last  seven 
years  of  the  age  says  ; — "■  But  Elias  shall  occupy  half  of 

'  Tac.  Hist.  ii.  8.    Tlie  appearance  of  a  third  spurious  Nero,  in 
the  reign  of  Titus,  is  mentioncid  by  Zonaras  (xi.  i8). 
^  Lactant.  De  Mort.  Persec.,  cap.  ii. 
*  August.  l~)e  Civit.  Dei,  xx.  19. 


THE  SEVEN  KINGS  AND    THE  EIGHTH.  149 

the  time,  and  Nero  shall  occupy  half.  Then,  the  whore 
Babylon  being  reduced  to  ashes,  its  embers  shall  thence 
advance  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  the  Latin  conqueror  shall 
say,  '  I  am  Christ  Whom  ye  always  adore.'  "  Lastly, 
Sulpicius  Severus  mentions  the  opinion  of  many  in  his 
days  that  Nero  is  yet  to  come  as  Antichrist,  and  explains 
thus  ; — "  It  is  uncertain  whether  he  destroyed  himself 
Whence  it  is  believed  that,  although  he  may  have  pierced 
himself  with  a  sword,  yet  he  was  saved  by  the  cure  of 
his  wound  in  accordance  with  that  which  is  written, 
*  And  his  deadly  wound  was  healed.'  At  the  close  of 
the  age  he  is  to  be  sent  again,  that  he  may  exercise  the 
mystery  of  iniquity."  Similar  statements  may  be  found 
in  the  Sibylline  prophecies,  and  in  many  other  ancient 
writings. 

Such,  then,  are  specimens  of  the  ideas  prevalent 
among  Heathens  and  Christians  respecting  Nero,  from 
his  own  times  until  the  fifth  century.  That  they  are 
very  remarkable  and  interesting,  and  seem  to  accord 
more  or  less  with  Scripture,  must  be  admitted  ;  that 
they  may  prove  true  in  the  main  is  by  no  means 
impossible  ;  but  further  than  this  we  cannot  go.^ 

'  Soon  after  the  issue  of  our  first  edition  Canon  Farrar  published 
his  "  Early  Days  of  Christianity."  We  much  regret  the  ration- 
alizing theory  which  he  has  applied  to  the  interpretation  of  the 
Apocalypse,  but  the  following  passage  is  curious  and  interesting. 

"  So  died  the  last  of  the  Caesars  .  .  .  but  .  .  .  his  history  docs 
not  end  with  his  grave.  He  was  to  live  in  the  expectation  alike 
of  Jews  and  Christians.  The  fifth  head  of  the  wild  beast  of  the 
Revelation  was  in  some  sort  to  re-appear  as  the  eighth  :  the  head 
with  its  diadem,  and  its  names  of  blasphemy,  had  been  wounded 
to  death,  but  in  the  Apocalyptic  sense  the  deadly  wound  was  to 
be  healed.  The  Roman  world  could  not  believe  that  the  heir  of 
the  deified  Julian  race  could  be  cut  off  thus  suddenly  and  obscurely, 
and  vanish  like  foam  upon  the  water.  The  Christian  felt  sure 
that  it  required  something  more  than  an  ordinary  death-stroke  to 
destroy  the  Antichrist,  and  to  end  the  vitality  of  the  wild  beast 


I50  THE   GENTILES, 

XL 

The  Overthrow  of  Ecclesiasticism  by 
Secularism. 

Before  the  interpreting  angel  discloses  the  manner  in 
which  the  alliance  between  the  Woman  and  the  Beast 
will  end,  he  pauses  for  a  moment  to  explain  an  obscurity 
in  his  description  of  the  Woman.  He  has  called  her 
"  the  great  Whore  that  sitteth  upon  many  waters,"  and 
it  is  necessary  to  inform  the  apostle  that  these  waters 
signify  "  peoples  and  multitudes  and  nations  and 
tongues."  Now  we  must  remember  that,  since  she 
herself  is  the  mystic  Babylon,  the  waters  upon  which 
she  sits  must  be  the  mystic  Euphrates  :  therefore  this 
often  cited  river  is  no  symbol  of  the  Turkish  empire, 
as  so  many  have  expounded,  but  represents  the  peoples 
over  which  the  Babylonian  system  has  dominated  since 
its  establishment  at  Rome  :  it  does  not  signify  Moslem 
power — which,  with  all  its  faults,  has  ever  been  the 
enemy  of  Babylonianism — but  the  kingdoms  of  Chris- 
tendom, those  countries  which  have  bowed  to  the  sway 
of  the  false  Church,  but  will  shortly  welcome  the  rule 
of  Antichrist  and  his  Ten  Kings.^ 

from  the  abyss,  who  had  been  the  first  to  set  himself  in  deadly 
antagonism  against  the  Redeemer,  and  to  wage  war  against  the 
saints  of  God." 

*  We  have  ah-eady  expressed  an  opinion  that  the  drying  up  of 
the  Euphrates  in  Rev.  xvi.  12  is  to  be  understood  literally,  and  not 
figuratively  as  in  xvii.  15.  If  this  point  be  conceded,  the  river 
cannot  in  the  former  passage  signify  the  Turkish  empire.  Nor, 
indeed,  can  it  if  we  prefer  a  figurative  interpretation  ;  for  in  that 
case,  since  the  diying  up  of  the  Euphrates  is  the  consequence  of 
the  sixth  vial,  and  the  fall  of  Babylon  follows  the  outpouring  of 
the  seventh,  there  is  a  manifest  allusion  to  the  capture  of  the  great 


OVERTHROW  OF  ECCLESIASTICISM.  151 

After  this  preface — by  which  the  angel  probably 
intended  to  indicate  with  greater  clearness  the  nations 
involved  in  the  prophecy — the  scene  is  changed,  and 
we  see  before  us  the  terrific  struggle  between  Ei^e- 
siasticism  and  Secularism  for  which  all  Europe  is 
manifestly  preparing,  and  in  which  one  of  the  con- 
tending parties  will  be  the  Romish  Church,  and  all 
who  have  imbibed  her  ecclesiastical  principles,  while 
on  the  other  side  will  be  ranged  the  daily  increasing 
forces  of  Socialists,  Communists,  Nihilists,  Positivists, 
Agnostics,  and  Freethinkers  of  all  kinds.  In  every 
country  of  Christendom  men  are  even  now  rapidly 
filing  off  to  one  or  other  of  the  two  great  camps, 
and  the  final  struggle  is  not  likely  to  be  long  delayed. 
But  its  issue  has  been  already  decided.      Ecclesiasticism 

city  by  Cyrus,  which  was  a  subject  of  prophecy.  And  it  is  well 
known  that  the  Persian  leader  turned  the  stream  of  the  Euphrates, 
and  so  dried  it  up,  not  absolutely,  but  only  in  regard  to  Babylon. 
He  was  thus  enabled  to  march  through  the  channel  of  the  no 
longer  opposing  river,  and  gain  access  to  the  city.  See  Isa.  xliv. 
2^ — xlv.  3;  Herod,  i.  191  ;  and  Xenoph.  Cyrop.  vii.  5.  Hence  it 
would  appear  that  the  sixth  and  seventh  vials  are  related  to  each 
other  as  cause  and  effect. 

In  applying  this  to  the  figurative  interpretation,  it  will  follow 
that  the  mystic  Euphrates  must  be  some  active  power  which  pro- 
tects the  mystic  Babylon.  And  since,  in  Rev.  xvii.  15,  we  are 
told  that  it  represents  peoples  and  multitudes  and  nations  and 
tongues,  these  must  be  the  peoples  which  support  the  system  of 
Babylon,  whatever  that  may  be.  If,  then,  we  allow  the  system  to 
be  Romanism,  the  peoples  must  be  the  nations  of  Christendom. 

As  to  the  meaning  of  the  drying  up  of  the  waters,  since  in  the 
actual  siege  the  volume  of  the  river  was  not  diminished,  but  only 
turned  away  from  Babylon,  so  as  no  longer  to  protect  it ;  similarly 
in  the  figurative  application  we  must  understand,  not  the  ruin  of 
the  nations  of  Christendom,  but  only  their  alienation  from  Eccle- 
siasticism, which  would  render  the  destruction  of  the  Woman  by 
the  Ten  Kings  an  easy  task.  Such  seems  to  be  the  fair  method 
of  interpretation  for  those  who  insist  upon  taking  the  passage 
figuratively. 


152  THE   GENTILES. 

will  be  destroyed  with  fearful  bloodshed,  and  Satan's 
delegate  will  sit  upon  the  throne  of  this  world  as  king 
and  god,  and  receive  that  adoring  homage  of  its  peoples 
and  multitudes  and  nations  and  tongues  which  was 
formerly  given  to  the  Woman. 

It  may  be  that  Rome's  influence  is  already  waning 
to  its  end  ;  that  the  shocks  which  she  has  been  con- 
tinually sustaining  since  the  commencement  of  the  great 
French  revolution  have  so  shattered  her  that,  when  the 
Ten  Kings  appear,  she  will  need  but  a  final  stroke.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  is  possible  that  the  time  of  her  power 
is  not  altogether  exhausted.  In  some  quarters  she  is 
showing  signs  of  renewed  strength,  especially  in  Eng- 
land and  Germany ;  and  we  may  yet  see  a  sudden, 
though  very  short-lived,  reaction  setting  in  throughout 
Europe.  She  may  for  a  moment  find  herself  again 
firmly  seated  upon  the  Beast,  and,  by  taking  advantage 
of  her  popularity  to  renew  her  old  policy  of  persecution, 
become  once  more  drunken  with  the  blood  of  the  saints. 
And  it  may  be  that  her  bloodthirstiness  will  cause  that 
revulsion  of  feeling  and  intense  hatred  in  which  she 
will  be  consumed. 

The  fact  that  none  but  the  Ten  Kings  are  mentioned 
as  the  agents  of  her  destruction,  and  that  they  will 
effect  their  purpose  with  extreme  violence,  would 
seem  to  imply  that  she  will  be  in  full  vigour  when 
they  fall  upon  her.  And  it  is  in  analogy  with  other 
dealings  of  God  that  the  hardened  criminal  should 
meet  his  doom  while  red-handed  with  a  last  crime. 
So  Jerusalem,  which  had  already  killed  the  prophets, 
and  stoned  them  that  were  sent  unto  her,  was  per- 
mitted to  persecute  the  Lord  and  His  disciples  also, 
that    upon    her   might  come    all    the   righteous    blood 


7 HE  NAPOLEONIC    THEORY.  153 

shed  upon  the  earth,  from  the  blood  of  righteous  Abel 
unto  the  blood  of  Zacharias,  the  son  of  Barachias.^ 

Should  this  last  view  prove  correct,  there  would  yet 
be  two  great  persecutions  before  the  appearing  of  the 
Lord,  one  by  the  Harlot,  and  a  second  by  the  Beast. 
And  who  can  look  around  on  the  corrupt  and  inert 
masses  of  professing  Christians  without  admitting  that 
they  have  in  truth  need  of  cleansing  fires,  if  they  are 
ever  to  join  the  purified  and  white-robed  company  which 
shall  appear  with  the  Lord  in  glory  ? 

xn. 

The  Napoleonic  Theory. 

From   the  time   when    Faber  suggested   it,   there   has 
been    a   gradually   increasing    opinion    that    Napoleon 
Buonaparte  was  the  seventh  king,  and  that  the  eighth 
will  also  emerge  from  his  family.     That  there  is  some 
ground   for  this  opinion   cannot  be  denied  :   it   is  well, 
therefore,  that  those  who  would  understand  the  signs  of 
the  times  should  keep  watch   in  the  direction  indicated. 
But,  since  the  evidence  is  not  irresistible,  to  dogmatize 
is   foolish,  to   point  out  any  particular  member  of  the 
Buonaparte  family  as  Antichrist  is  far  worse.      For  cer- 
tainly  it   is   unbecoming  in   Christians  to   slander   any 
man,  and   much  more  so  to  accuse  him  of  being  the 
great  enemy  of  God  and    His  Christ,  when   there  is  no 
proof  whatever  of  the  assertion.      And   it  would   seem  "H 
that  Antichrist  cannot   be   revealed    until   the   Church  ' 
has  been  taken  away,  and  even   then   none  may  point  T 
out  the   Lawless   One  until   the  last  head    of  Roman    \ 
power  has  been  seen  to  arise  from  comparative  obscurity  / 

'  Matt,  xxiii.  34,  35. 


154  THE   GENTILES. 

by  overcoming  three  of  the  Ten  Kingdoms,  and  esta- 
blishing himself  as  emperor  over  all  of  them  ;  has  been 
heard  denying  the  Father  and  the  Son  ;  and  is  known 
to  have  made  a  covenant  with  a  majority  of  the  Jewish 
nation  for  seven  years.  While  these  things  remain  un- 
accomplished, whatever  may  be  our  suspicions,  we  have 
nothing  more  than  possibility,  or  at  the  most  proba- 
bility, on  which  to  rest,  and  must  not  forget  how  little 
we  really  know,  how  eager  we,  unconsciously,  are  to 
translate  prophecy  into  the  history  of  our  own  times, 
and  how  easily  we  may  be  deceived. 

With  this  preface  we  will  mention  some  reasons 
which  make  it  probable  that  the  first  Napoleon  was 
the  seventh  king,  and  seem  also  to  point  to  his  family 
as  being  that  from  which  the  eighth  is  likely  to  arise. 
These  reasons  are  briefly  as  follows. 

I.  Napoleon  effected  an  important  change  in  the 
Roman  Empire  by  putting  an  end  to  the  line  of  em- 
perors which  had  come  down  in  direct  succession  from 
Augustus. 

II.  He  transferred  the  imperial  dignity  from  Ger- 
many to  France  ;  and,  since  the  latter  kingdom,  by  the 
revolution  of  1789,  began  to  spread  the  principles  of 
that  anarchy  out  of  which  Antichrist  will  arise,  it  does 
not  seem  improbable  that  the  great  king  himself  may 
be  a  French  monarch. 

III.  He  aimed  at  the  restoration  of  the  Roman 
Empire,  under  his  own  sway,  in  the  precise  manner  in 
which  it  is  predicted  thac  Antichrist  will  restore  it. 

IV.  He  tampered  with  the  Jews,  and  suffered  them 
to  flatter  him  in  such  terms  as  to  provoke  the  suspicion 
that  he  would  eventually  have  declared  himself  to  be 
their  Messiah,  if  he  had  retained  his  sovereignty. 


r 
J 


THE  NAPOLEONIC   THEORY,  155 

V.  He  displayed  the  names  of  blasphemy,  and  de- 
sired to  be  thought  more  than  human. 

VI.  His  Greek  origin  may  possibly  satisfy  the  pro- 
phecy contained  in  the  eighth  chapter  of  Daniel. 

VH.  His  name  is  remarkable,  and  his  insignia  are 
such  as  would  well  suit  the  pretensions  of  the  last  head 
of  Roman  power. 

In  fine,  the  ideal  of  the  first  Napoleon  clothed  him 
with  a  startling  resemblance  to  the  Antichrist  of  Scrip- 
ture ;  but  he  failed  to  realize  it.  Now  the  tenacity 
with  which  his  family  cling  to  their  traditions  is  well 
known:  it  does  not,  therefore,  seem  impossible  that  one 
of  them  may  succeed  in  carrying  out  the  gigantic 
scheme  of  their  much-revered  founder.  And  should 
this  happen,  the  event  need  not  in  any  way  clash  with 
what  has  been  previously  said  respecting  Nero.  For  it 
is  only  the  spirit  of  Nero  which  could  ascend  from  the 
abyss  ;  the  body  in  which  it  would  take  up  its  abode 
is  not  indicated. 

We  will  now  in  a  few  words  explain  the  reasons  just 
enumerated. 

I.  Napoleon  put  an  end  to  the  succession  of  em- 
perors which  had  descended  in  a  direct  line  from 
Augustus.  To  understand  this  we  must  briefly  trace 
the  vicissitudes  of  the  Empire,  which  for  three  cen- 
turies was  united  under  one  head.  The  first  to  divide 
it  was  Diocletian,  who  gave  up  the  Western  territories 
to  Maximinian,  the  joint  emperors  assuming  respectively 
the  names  of  Jovius  and  Heraclius.  But  even  this 
partition  of  the  cares  of  government  did  not  sufficiently 
lighten  them  ;  and  so  two  other  associates,  Galerius 
and  Constantius,  were  also  appointed,  but  at  the  same 
time  were  considered  to  be  inferior  to  Diocletian  and 


156  THE   GENTILES. 

Maximinian,  the  latter  taking  the  title  of  Augusti. 
while  their  younger  colleagues  were  called  Csesars. 
This  division  was  effected  in  A.D.  292,  and  while  each 
of  the  four  emperors  was  supreme  in  his  own  district, 
their  united  authority  extended  over  the  whole 
Empire. 

About  thirty-two  years  later  the  government  was 
again  centred  in  one  man,  Constantine  :  at  his  death 
it  was  divided  among  his  three  sons.  Then  Julian, 
and  after  him  Jovian,  were  sole  emperors  ;  but  Valen- 
tinian,  who  came  next,  bestowed  the  East  upon  his 
brother  Valens,  retaining  the  West  for  himself.  And 
from  that  time,  if  we  except  the  reigns  of  the  Theo- 
dosii,  there  were  always  two  emperors  until  A.D.  476, 
when  the  Western  Empire  fell,  and  the  Eastern  alone 
remained  to  support  the  dignity  of  Rome. 

But  in  A.D.  759,  the  West,  which  had  hitherto 
owned  allegiance  to  the  East,  revolted,  and  the  Holy 
Roman  Empire  was  formed.  The  primary  cause  ot 
alienation  was  the  Iconoclast  controversy;  and  when  a 
won-.an,  the  Empress  Irene,  was  permitted  to  usurp  the 
throne  of  the  East,  the  indignation  of  the  West  rose 
to  its  climax,  and  Charlemagne  w^as  crowned  Emperor 
of  Rome.  Thus  there  were  again  two  distinct  Em- 
pires until  A.D.  1453,  when  the  Eastern  was  overthrown 
by  the  Turks.  And  from  that  time,  unless  the  claim 
of  Russia  be  admitted,  the  Western  Sovereign  re- 
mained the  sole  representative  of  Rome  ;  until,  in  a.d. 
1806,  Napoleon  compelled  Francis  II.  to  renounce  the 
title  of  King  and  Emperor  of  the  Romans,  and  formed 
some  of  the  countries. 

"•Of  those  who  in  Au.j^ust,  1806,  read  in  the  English  news- 
papers that  the  Emperor  Francis  II.  had  announced  to  the  Diet 
his  resignation  of  the  imperial  crown,  there  were  probab'y  few 


THE  NAPOLEONIC    THEORY.  157 

which  had  constituted  the  Holy  Roman  Empire  into 
the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine,  of  which  he  made 
himself  Protector. 

Thus,  according  to  the  interpretation  which  regards 
the  heads  of  the  Beast  as  forms  of  government,^  he 
destroyed  the  sixth  head  and  established  the  power  of 
the  seventh — an  achievement  which  seems  to  point  to 
him  as  being  also  the  seventh  king. 

II.  In  the  manner  just  related  the  headship  of  the-, 
Roman  Empire  was  transferred  for  the  second  time  to  // 
France.  Now  that  country  is  the  mother  of  modern 
democracy,  and  frightful  were  the  birth-throes  when 
she  was  delivered  of  her  child  ;  for  in  the  revolution 
which  commenced  in  1789  no  less  than  two  million 
persons  were  slaughtered,  so  that  at  one  time  the  very 
rivers  ran  with  blood,  and  even  stained  the  waves  into 
which  they  flowed.  Then  out  of  the  sea  of  raging 
anarchy  arose  the  great  emperor.  But  the  prophecies 
of  God  indicate  that  these  scenes  will  shortly  be 
repeated  on  a  far  larger  scale  :  it  may  be,  then,  that 
the  crown  of  Rome  has  been  given  to  France  because 
she,  who  has  hitherto  played  her  part  so  well,  is 
also  destined  to  be  the  centre  of  the  greater  move- 
ment. 

III.  Napoleon  wished  to  restore  the  Roman  Empire 
in  the  precise  manner  in  which  it  is  predicted  that 
Antichrist  will  restore   it.      On  the  2nd  of  December, 

who  reflected  that  the  oldest  political  institution  in  the  world  had 
come  to  an  end.  Yet  it  was  so.  The  Empire  which  a  note  issued 
by  a  diplomatist  on  the  banks  of  the  Danube  extinguished,  was 
the  same  which  the  crafty  nephew  of  Julius  had  won  for  himself, 
against  the  powers  of  the  East,  beneath  the  cliffs  of  Actium," 
Bryce's  "  Holy  Roman  Empire." 
'  See  p.  144-5. 


158  THE   GENTILES. 

1804,  he  caused  himself  to  be  crowned  emperor  of  the 
French  at  Notre  Dame,  the  ceremony  being  performed 
by  Pope  Pius  VIII.,  whom  he  had  induced  to  visit 
Paris  for  that  purpose.  His  idea  of  his  Empire  is 
revealed  in  the  fact  that  he  had  procured  the  iron 
crown  of  Charlemagne  for  the  coronation,  although  at 
that  time  a  large  portion  of  the  dominions  of  Charle- 
magne owed  allegiance  to  the  emperor  of  Austria. 
But  in  1S06  he  made  use  of  his  victory  at  Austerlitz 
to  wrest  these  provinces  from  the  protectorate  of 
Austria,  and  to  unite  them  to  his  own  sway  under  the 
title  of  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine.  At  the  same 
time  he  was  arranging  to  establish  some  of  his  brothers 
and  generals  as  vassal  kings  over  other  countries  of 
Europe.  His  intentions  in  so  doing  are  thus  explained 
by  one  of  his  latest  biographers, 

"  He  proposed  to  make  a  radical  transformation  in 
the  whole  European  system.  When,  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  empire,  he  was  heard  to  evoke  the  name 
and  memory  of  Charlemagne,  he  had  been  thought  to 
make  a  fanciful  comparison,  using  words  for  the  sake 
of  effect — words  which  had  no  real  connection  with 
the  facts.  After  Austerlitz,  it  was  evident  that  he  had 
meant  something  else  than  a  mere  chance  expression. 
Not  that  the  federation  of  kingdoms,  by  which  he  had 
wished  to  surround  himself,  had  in  reality  anything 
in  common  with  the  ancient  Carlovingian  federation. 
What  he  had  in  view  under  the  name  of  federation 
was  the  strictest  and  most  absolute  unity.  The  vassal 
kings  were  to  be  nothing  more  than  the  humble  in- 
struments of  his  own  domination.  They  were  a  disguise 
to  which  he  had  recourse,  because  the  pure  and  simple 
acknowledgment  of  his  projects  would  have  made  him 


THE  NAPOLEONIC  THEORY.  159 

too  many  enemies  in  the  actual  state  of  European 
conquest.  .  .  .  But  under  the  imposing  titles  of  kings, 
princes,  dukes,  grand  and  petty  feudatories,  all  these 
men  were  mere  servitors  subservient  to  an  iron  cen- 
tralization." ^ 

Thus  far,  then,  Napoleon  aimed  at  the  restoration 
of  the  Western  Empire  in  the  form  in  which  Anti- 
christ will  hereafter  effect  it,  that  of  confederated 
kingdoms  under  himself  as  emperor.  In  a  despatch 
to  the  Pope  during  the  same  year  he  thus  expresses 
himself ; — "  Your  Holiness  is  the  sovereign  of  Rome, 
but  I  am  her  emperor."  In  1809  he  annexed  the 
Papal  States,  and  styled  Rome  the  second  city  of  the 
Empire  ;  and  in  i  8 1  r  he  chose  the  title  of  King  of 
Rome  for  his  infant  son. 

But  his  ambition  aspired  to  yet  greater  power. 
Since  the  division  of  Rome  into  the  Eastern  and 
Western  Empires,  her  standard  had  been  the  two- 
headed  eagle,  still  borne  by  some  of  the  European 
countries  which  formerly  belonged  to  the  Western 
Empire,  and  by  Russia,  whose  Czar,  or  Ceesar,  claims 
to  be  the  head  of  the  Eastern.  But  Napoleon  boldly 
resumed  the  single-headed  eagle,  and  thereby  revealed 
his  design  of  once  more  uniting  the  divided  Empire 
under  his  sole  sway.  And  Alison,  in  speaking  of  the 
Russian  invasion,  remarks  ; — 

"  The  principal  reason  which  directed  the  mighty 
conqueror  to  Moscow,  instead  of  St.  Petersburg,  was 
the  secret  project  which  he  entertained  of  turning  his 
victorious  arms,  after  the  subjugation  of  the  Mus- 
covites, to  the  Southward,  and  placing  on  his  brow 
the  diadem  of  the  Eastern  Empire!' 

%  '  Lanfrey's  "Napoleon,"  vol.  ii.  p.  531 


I  Co  THE   GENTILES. 

This  project  he  had  in  view  from  very  early  times, 
and  is  said,  when  only  a  subaltern  officer  of  artillery, 
to  have  nourished  the  hope  of  being  king  of  Jerusalem. 
Strange  that  he  should  have  wished  for  that  which 
Heathen  soothsayers  predicted  as  the  destiny  of  Nero. 
Satan  will  never  rest  until  he  has  insulted  and  profaned 
the  city  of  the  Great  King  by  making  it  the  throne  of 
the  Beast.  And  at  last  he  will  succeed  ;  but  his  suc- 
cess will  fill  up  the  measure  of  his  iniquities. 

Napoleon  appears  to  have  accepted  the  command 
of  the  Egyptian  army  in  the  hope  of  establishing  an 
Oriental  dynasty,  and,  after  the  failure  of  one  of  his 
assaults  upon  Acre,  delivered  himself  to  his  secretary 
Bourrienne  in  the  following  extraordinary  terms  ; — 

"  That  miserable  fort  has  indeed  cost  me  dear  ;  but 
matters  have  gone  too  far  not  to  make  a  last  eftbrt. 
If  I  succeed,  as  I  trust  I  shall,  I  shall  find  in  the  town 
all  the  treasures  of  the  Pasha,  and  arms  for  three 
hundred  thousand  men.  I  shall  raise  and  arm  all 
Syria,  which  at  this  moment  unanimously  prays  for 
the  success  of  the  assault.  I  will  march  on  Damascus 
and  Aleppo  ;  I  shall  swell  my  army,  as  I  advance, 
with  the  discontented  in  every  country  through  which 
I  pass  ;  I  will  announce  to  the  people  the  breaking 
of  their  chains,  and  the  abolition  of  the  tyranny  of  the 
Pashas.  Do  you  not  see  that  the  Druses  wait  only 
for  the  fall  of  Acre  to  declare  themselves  .''  Have  I 
not  been  already  offered  the  keys  of  Damascus }  I 
have  only  lingered  under  these  walls  because  at  present 
I  could  derive  no  advantage  from  that  great  town. 
Acre  taken,  I  will  secure  Egypt ;  on  the  side  of  Egypt 
cut  off  all  succour  from  the  Beys,  and  proclaim  Devaix 
general-in-chicf  in  that  country.     I  will  arrive  at  Con- 


7 HE    NAPOLEONIC  THEORY.  i6r 

stantinople  with  armed  masses,  overturn  the  empire  of 
the  Turks,  and  establish  a  new  one  in  the  East  which 
will  fix  my  place  with  posterity  ;  and,  perhaps,  I  may 
return  to  Paris  by  Adrianople  and  Vienna,  after  having 
annihilated  the  house  of  Austria." 

In  this  exposition  of  his  vast  schemes,  it  is  interest- 
ing to  mark  how  the  thoughts  of  Napoleon  centre  upon 
Constantinople,  the  ancient  seat  of  the  Eastern  Empire, 
and  the  house  of  Austria,  which  at  that  time  held  the 
titular  headship  of  the  Western.  But  the  bravery  of 
the  Turks  under  English  guidance,  and  the  plague 
which  his  troops  had  brought  with  them  from  Jaffa, 
cut  short  his  purposes,  and  forced  him  to  retreat  with 
the  conviction  that  he  was  relinquishing  a  throne,  and, 
as  he  often  afterwards  remarked,  that  Sir  Sydney  Smith 
had  made  him  miss  his  destiny. 

But  it  was  not  only  in  his  gigantic  project  for 
uniting  the  whole  Roman  Empire  under  himself,  and 
governing  it  by  means  of  vassal  kings,  that  Napoleon 
developed  the  scheme  which  Antichrist  will  yet  carry 
out:  he  also  felt  the  need  of  a  prophet — like  the  second 
Beast — to  strengthen  his  power,  and  endeavoured  to 
supply  the  want.  He  forced  the  Pope  and  his  car- 
dinals to  move  to  Paris,  conveyed  thither  the  archives 
of  the  Vatican,  the  tiara,  and  all  the  insignia  and 
ornaments  of  the  Pontifical  state,  and  attempted  to 
settle  the  Papacy  in  France.  His  purpose  in  so  doing 
is  thus  explained  by  Lanfrey  ; — 

"  It  was  to  be  a  sort  of  Oriental  patriarchate,  in 
which  the  Pope,  swearing  allegiance  to  him,  paid  and 
inspired  by  him,  would  be  nothing  but  a  grand  func- 
tionary of  the  empire,  a  colleague  of  Cambaceres,  a 
species  of  ecclesiastical  arch-chancellor.     'What  a  lever! 

1 1 


i62  THE  GENTILES, 

what  a  medium  of  influence  over  the  rest  of  the  world!' 
he  afterwards  enthusiastically  exclaimed,  when  reviewing 
his  favourite  ideas  of  that  period  on  the  subject  of  the 
Church.  '  I  should  have  made  an  idol  of  the  Pope  ; 
he  should  have  remained  near  me.  Paris  would  have 
become  the  capital  of  the  Christian  world,  and  I  should 
have  governed  the  religious  as  well  as  the  political 
world,  ...  I  should  have  had  my  religious  sessions 
as  well  as  my  legislative  sessions.  My  comicils  would 
have  been  the  representation  of  Christianity,  of  which 
the  Popes  would  have  been  only  the  presidents.'  All 
the  notes,  letters,  and  acts,  of  Napoleon  at  this  period 
prove  that  this  was,  in  fact,  the  ultimate  aim  of  his 
projects  in  the  matter  of  religious  organization.  The 
Church  once  the  slave  of  his  will,  disciplined  like  a 
regiment,  and  the  two  powers  merged  in  the  person 
of  the  Emperor — there  is  no  doubt,  considering  the 
infinite  perfection  to  which  he  had  already  brought  his 
despotism,  that  this  system  would  have  produced  the 
most  absolute  tyranny  the  world  has  ever  seen  ;  a 
scourge  compared  to  which  the  abuses  of  the  temporal 
sovereignty  were  as  nothing."  ^ 

It  thus  appears  that,  if  any  member  of  the  Buona- 
parte family  should  be  able  to  realize  the  ideal  of  the 
first  emperor,  he  would,  in  regard  to  the  extent  and 
arrangement  of  his  dominion,  civil  and  religious, 
exactly  fulfil  the  conditions  of  Antichrist,  provided  that 
his  vassal  kingdoms  should  be  ten  in  number. 

IV.   Napoleon  made  overtures  to  the  Jews,  and  took 

them,  to  some  extent,  under  his  protection.      In  July, 

1806,  he  invited  them  to  hold  their  Sanhedrim  in  Paris; 

and  in  March,  1S07,  seventy-one   doctors  and   leading 

'  Lanfrey's  "Napoleon,"  vol.  iii.  p.  563 


THE  NAPOLEONIC   THEORY  163 

men  of  the  nation  assembled  in  that  city,  and  formed 
themselves  into  a  national  council,  the  like  to  which 
had  not  been  held  for  more  than  seventeen  hundred 
years — not,  indeed,  since  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
by  Titus.  The  imm.ediate  cause  of  his  interest  in  them 
may,  no  doubt,  be  found  in  his  desire  to  conciliate  the 
wealthy  Jews  of  Old  Prussia,  Poland,  and  the  Southern 
provinces  of  Russia.  But  they  looked  upon  him  as 
their  deliverer,  and  styled  him  "  the  Lord's  anointed 
Cyrus "  ;  and  since  we  know  his  designs  in  regard  to 
the  East,  we  may  be  quite  sure  that  he  had  also  some 
ulterior  plan  for  utilizing  them  in  their  own  country. 

V.  He  displayed  the  names  of  blasphemy.  When 
he  was  in  Egypt  he  openly  regretted  that  he  could  not, 
like  Alexander,  give  himself  out  to  be  the  son  of  Jupiter 
Ammon.-^  But  what  he  could  do  he  did,  as  may  be 
seen  by  the  following  proclamation,  issued  after  the 
suppression  of  a  revolt  at  Cairo. 

"  Sheiks,  Ulemas,  Orators  of  the  Mosque,  teach  the 
people  that  those  who  become  my  enemies  shall  have 
no  refuge  in  this  world  or  the  next.  Is  there  any  one 
so  blind  as  not  to  see  that  I  am  the  Man  of  Destiny  } 
Make  the  people  understand  that  from  the  beginning 
of  time  it  was  ordained  that,  having  destroyed  the 
enemies  of  Islam,  and  vanquished  the  Cross,  I  should 
come  from  the  distant  parts  of  the  West  to  accomplish 
my  destined  task.  Show  them  that  in  twenty  passages 
of  the  Koran  my  coming  is  foretold." 

Throughout  the  whole  of  his    career  he  showed  a 

desire  to  be  considered  something  more  than  human, 

and  while    many  of  the   addresses   presented   to   him 

recognised  him  as  a  sort  of  divinity,  it  is  not  on  record 

'  Lanfrey's  "Napoleon,"  vol.  i.  p.  283, 


1 64  THE   GENTILES, 

that  he  ever  imitated  the  noble  conduct  of  Canute.  On 
the  contrary,  he  excused  many  unscrupulous  and  out- 
rageous proceedings  by  the  assertion  that  he  was  acting 
as  the  arm  of  God  ;  he  loved  to  be  addressed  by  the 
title  of  Votre  Providence  ;  and  Lanfrey,  after  quoting 
one  of  his  letters  to  the  Pope,  remarks; — "These  singular 
expressions  show  that  Napoleon  already  considered 
himself  as  something  more  than  the  Pope's  suzerain  ; 
for  he  went  nearly  so  far  as  to  dispute  with  him  his 
title  of  Vicar  of  God." 

In  the  hall  in  which  the  Sanhedrim  met  at  Paris,  the 
cipher  of  Napoleon's  name  and  that  of  Josephine's  were 
blended  with  the  name  of  God,  and  placed  over  the 
Ark  of  the  Covenant  !  But  a  still  more  fearful  instance 
of  blasphemy  is  given  by  Madame  de  Remusat,  in  her 
"  Memoirs."  ^ 

"  Some  years  later,  at  another  yi'/^  given  by  the  city 
of  Paris  to  the  Emperor,  the  repertory  of  inscriptions 
being  exhausted,  a  brilliant  device  was  resorted  to. 
Over  the  throne  which  he  was  to  occupy  were  placed, 
in  letters  of  gold,  the  following  words  from  the  Holy 
Scriptures  :  '  I  am  That  I  am.'  And  no  one  seemed 
to  be  scandalized  !  " 

Surely  the  miserable  man,  by  permitting  so  appalling 
a  crime,  denied  both  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  showed 
a  disposition  to  exalt  himself  above  all  that  is  called 
God,   or  that   is  worshipped. 

VI.   We  have  already  shown   that  Antichrist  must,  \ 
in   some  way,  spring  from   one  of  the  four  kingdoms  I 
into  which   the    Third    Empire  was    divided  ;   and    the 
origin    of    the    Buonapartes    may,   perhaps,   satisfy   this 
condition.       In    the  "Memoirs"    of   the    Duchess    of 

'  Vol.  i.  p.  336 


THE  NAPOLEONIC   THEORY.  165 

Abrantes  their  genealogy  is  traced  back  to  the  noble 
family  of  the  Comneni,  who  "  upheld  for  a  while  the 
sinking  fate  of  the  Eastern  Empire,"  and  of  whom  six 
ascended  the  imperial  throne  at  Constantinople/  After 
the  capture  of  that  city  by  the  Latins,  they  attempted 
to  found  a  new  empire  at  Trebizond,  where  they  ruled 
until  David  II.  surrendered  to  the  Turks  in  A.D.  1461. 
Some  of  his  family  subsequently  migrated  from  the 
shores  of  the  Bosphorus  to  Mania  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Mount  Taygeta.  But,  after  a  lapse  of  two  cen- 
turies, civil  discords  in  Greece  compelled  them  to  fly 
from  their  country,  and  seek  an  asylum  in  Italy. 

On  the  1st  of  January,  1676,  three  thousand  re- 
fugees under  the  leadership  of  Constantine  Comnenus, 
who  had  been  tenth  Frotageras  of  Mania,  landed  at 
Genoa.  The  Senate  of  the  Republic  received  them 
with  cordiality,  treating  the  Comneni  as  persons  of 
distinction,  and,  under  certain  conditions,  ceded  three 
districts  of  Corsica  to  them.  The  title  of  "  Privileged 
Chief"  was  conferred  upon  Constantine,  and  the  clergy 
were  ordered  to  offer  incense  to  him  on  his  arrival, 
apparently  as  a  recognition  of  his  imperial  lineage. 

Of  the  sons  who  accompanied  him,  one  named 
Calomeros^  was  subsequently  despatched  to  Florence 
on  a  mission  to  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany.  But, 
upon  the  death  of  his  father  Constantine  soon  after  his 
departure,  the  Grand  Duke,  who  was  greatly  fascinated 
with  the  young  man,  persuaded  him  to  renounce 
Corsica    and    fix    his    abode    in    Tuscany.       After    an 

'  One  in  the  eleventh,  and  five  in  the  twelfth  century. 

'  That  is,  KoKov  fxepos,  the  exact  Italian  equivalent  of  which  is 
buona   farte.      The   first  member  of  the  compound  appears  ir 
Calo- Johannes,  the  name  given  to  Napoleon's  ancestor  the  Em 
peror  John  Comnenus  (a. D.  11 18). 


l66  THE   GENTILES. 

interval,  one  of  his  descendants  returned  to  Corsica, 
and  became  the  founder  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon's 
family.  He  was  received  as  a  kinsman  by  the  Comneni, 
who,  however,  in  speaking  of  his  line,  always  retained 
the  Greek  form  of  their  name,  calling  them  Calomeri  or 
Calomeriani.^ 

Doubtless  it  was  the  knowledge  of  this  genealogy 
which  inspired  Napoleon,  even  in  his  youth,  with  a  hope 
of  reviving  the  Eastern  Empire,  and  had  he  succeeded 
in  establishing  himself  in  the  West,  we  should,  perhaps, 
have  heard  more  of  his  imperial  descent? 

VII.  Lastly;  the  name  and  insignia  of  Napoleon 
would  seem  to  agree  with  what  we  are  told  of  Anti- 
christ.     The  name  Avill   at   once    become    Greek — the 

'  Of  the  correctness  of  the  genealogy  given  above  there  can 
be  little  doubt,  so  far  as  the  Comneni  are  concerned.  Towards 
the  close  of  the  eighteenth  centur}'  Demetrius  Comnenus  applied 
to  the  French  Government  for  the  restoration  of  his  property, 
which  had  been  appropriated  by  the  Crown,  and  of  his  rank  of 
"Privileged  Chief,"  which  had  been  abolished.  The  justice  of 
his  claims  was  admitted,  provided  he  could  prove  his  extraction. 
And  "after  an  investigation  before  the  king's  council,  a  direct 
filiation  from  David  II.,  last  Emperor  of  Trebisonde,  who  was 
killed  by  order  of  Mahomet  II.,  to  Demetrius  Comnenus  was 
acknowledged,  and  confirmed  by  letters  patent  of  Louis  XVI., 
dated  September  ist,  1783  "  (Madame  Junot's  "  Memoirs  "). 

*If  it  seems  to  any  that  this  connection  with  Greece  is  too  slight 
to  satisfy  the  prophecy  of  the  little  horn  which  springs  from  one 
of  the  four,  the  writer  has  no  wish  to  oppose  tliem.  Time  alone 
can  showthe  certainty  of  these  things;  and  it  is  quite  possible 
that  the  eighth  monarch  may  be  wearing  the  crown  of  Greece,  or 
of  either  of  the  other  three  kingdoms  of  Alexander's  successors, 
when  he  first  appears  upon  the  stage  of  Christendom.  Yet  the 
fact  that  the  Napoleons  are  a  Greek  family  is  certainly  somewhat 
significant,  and  of  course  a  scion  of  the  family  might  hereafter  be 
chosen  as  sovereign  of  the  land  of  his  origin.  It  should  be  noticed 
that  the  eighth  king  has  no  nccessaiy  connection  with  the  seventh  ; 
1  and,  consequently,  that  any  .objection  to  the  arguments  of  this 
book  respecting  the  former  does  not  affect  the  identification  of  the 
first  Napoleon  with  the  latter. 


THE  NAPOLEONIC   THEORY.  167 

language  of  the  New  Testament — by  a  mere  change  of 
the  letters  (NaTToXeoij'),  and  its  meaning  will  then  be_ 
"  the  lion  of  the  thicket."  This  may  be  no  more  than  , 
a  coincidence  :  nevertheless,  it  harmonizes  very  remark- 
ably with  the  great  prophecy  of  Jeremiah  ; — "  The  lion 
is  come  up  from  his  thicket,  and  the  destroyer  of  the 
Gentiles  is  on  his  way  :  he  is  gone  forth  from  his  place 
to  make  thy  land  desolate  ;  and  thy  cities  shall  be  laid 
waste,  without  an  inhabitant."  ^ 

But  a  still  graver  mystery  seems  to  be  hidden  in  this 
name  when  we  discover  that  its  dative  case — NaTToXe'oi/Tt 
— the  case  which  expresses  dedication  or  devotion  to, 
yields  the  exact  number  of  the  Beast,  the  ominous  six  / 
hundred  and  sixty-six.  ' 

The  emblems  of  the  Napoleonic  dynasty  are  equally 
remarkable.  They  are  the  eagle,  the  violet,  and  the 
bee,  which  were  all  included  in  one  of  the  presentations 
made  at  Chislehurst  to  the  late  Prince  Imperial,  when 
he  attained  his  majority.  It  consisted  of  an  inkstand 
shaped  like  a  beehive,  surmounted  by  an  eagle,  and  set 
around  with  amethysts,  which  are  used  to  represent  the 
violet.  And  the  meaning  of  these  devices  seems  to  be 
as  follows  : — 

The  single-headed  eagle  puts  forth  the  union  of  the 
whole  Roman  Empire,  Eastern  and  Western,  as  the 
traditional  aim  of  the  family. 

The  violet — usually  represented  by  the  Oriental 
amethyst,  or  violet  sapphire,  which  is  said  by  Pliny  to 
have  in  perfection  the  very  richest  shades  of  purple — 
may  be  intended  to  mark  the  Napoleons  as  the  imperial 
family  of  the  Roman  Empire. 

'  Jer.  iv.  7.     The  Septuagint  does  not,  however,  use  the  word 
vauT],  or  va-no^,  in  rendering  this  verse. 


I68  THE   GENTILES. 

But  there  is  far  more  significance  in  the  colour  than 
at  first  appears.  In  the  directions  given  for  the  pre- 
paration of  the  Tabernacle,  we  find  frequent  mention  of 
"  blue  and  purple  and  scarlet,"  and  it  will  be  noticed 
that  the  middle  colour  is  produced  by  the  blending  of 
the  two  outer.  Now  the  blue  seems  to  symbolize  the 
heavenly  origin  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  the  scarlet  His 
human  nature  of  flesh  and  blood  ;  while  the  purple 
signifies  the  blending  of  these  natures  in  Christ  Incar- 
nate, the  God-man.  A  similar  meaning  appears  to 
attach  to  the  imperial  purple,  the  wearers  of  which  were 
styled  "  divi,"  and  adored  as  deities.  During  the  early 
persecutions  the  test  usually  proposed  to  Christians  was 
that  they  should  offer  frankincense  on  the  altar  before 
the  emperor's  bust.  And  God's  revelation  of  the  future 
tells  us  that  in  this  matter  also  history  shall  repeat  itself, 
that  "  the  thing  that  hath  been,  it  is  that  which  shall 
be." 

In  regard  to  the  last  symbol,  the  same  noun  is  used 
in  the  Chaldean  language  to  signify  both  "  a  bee  "  and 
"  a  word."  Consequently,  the  bee  was  adopted  by  the 
initiates  as  an  emblem  of  "  the  Word,"  or  "the  Revealer 
of  the  Godhead."  And  hence  the  god  Mithras  was 
sometimes  represented  in  Persian  mythology  as  a  lion 
with  a  bee  in  his  mouth.  The  lion  distinguished  him 
as  the  sun-god,  the  lion  being  the  astrological  house  of 
the  sun  ;  while  the  bee  in  his  mouth  indicated  that  he 
was  the  Word  of  God,  the  Enlightener.  How  well  this 
device  would  suit  the  pretensions  of  Antichrist  is  suffi- 
ciently obvious. 

Such,  then,  are  some  of  the  reasons  for  regarding  the 
first  Napoleon  as  the  seventh  head  of  the  Beast,  and 
for  supposing  that  the  eighth  may  also  arise  in  his  family. 


) 


THE   RE-BUILDING   OF  GREAT  BABYLON.  169 

They  do  not  amount  to  an  absolute  demonstration  of 
the  second  point,  though  it  must  be  admitted  that  even 
there  they  are  not  to  be  lightly  thrust  aside.  But  in 
regard  to  the  first  Napoleon,  we  confess  that  the  testi- 
mony of  history  appears  to  us  complete  and  decisive. 

And  if  this  be  the  case,  the  inference  is  most  grave  ;  -^ 
for  then  the  seventh  head  has  fallen,  and  the  eighth  may  > 
appear  at  any  time.  But,  as  we  gathered  from  the 
twelfth  and  thirteenth  chapters  of  the  Apocalypse,  before 
the  latter  can  ascend  from  the  abyss,  the  summons,  the 
voice  of  the  archangel,  and  the  trump  of  God  must  be 
heard,  and  the  waiting  believers,  whether  living  or  dead, 
be  conveyed  from  the  doomed  earth  into  the  presence 
of  their  Lord. 

XIII. 

.  The  Re-building  of  Great  Babylon. 

The  Woman  called  Mystery  Babylon  represents,  as  wel 
have  already  seen,  that  great   Society  founded  in   con-  (. 
nection  with  Nimrod,  which  has  ever  played  a  leading 
part  in  the  drama  of  mankind,  and  has  done  so  during 
the  Christian  era,  and  in   the  West,  chiefly  by  manipu- 
lating the  Church  of  Rome. 

But  in  the  eighteenth  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse  we 
find  something  quite  different  :  there  a  literal  city  is 
depicted,  the  commercial  centre  of  the  world.  And 
the  error  of  those  who  attempt  to  identify  it  with  the 
Woman  will  appear  from  the  following  considerations. 

I.  The  subject  of  the  seventeenth  chapter  is  "  Mys- 
tery, Babylon  the  Great." 

That  of  the  eighteenth  is  simply  "  Babylon  the 
Great,"  or,  "  that  great  city   Babylon." 


I70  THE   GENTILES. 

II.  Mystery  Babylon  is  to  be  destroyed  by  the  Ten 
Kings,  "  because  God  hath  put  it  into  their  hearts  to 
fulfil  His  will,  and  to  agree  and  give  their  kingdom 
unto  the  Beast."  ^  Thus  the  Woman  is  put  out  of  the 
way  in  order  that  her  power  may  be  transferred  to  the 
Beast  :  her  end  must,  therefore,  precede  the  reign  of 
Antichrist. 

But  the  great  city  Babylon  meets  with  its  doom 
under  the  seventh  vial,  which  is  poured  out  at  the 
close  of  Antichrist's  career.  ^ 

It  thus  appears  that  the  catastrophes  are  distinct, 
and  that  there  is  an  interval  of  not  less  than  three  and 
a  half  years  between  them. 

'  III.  The  Woman  is  hated  by  the  Ten  Kings,  who 
make  her  desolate  and  naked,  and  eat  her  flesh,  and 
burn   her  with   fire.^ 

But  these  same  kings — for  they  arc  "  the  kings  of 
the  earth  "  at  the  time — bewail  and  lament  for  the  fall 
of  the  city.* 

IV.  The  human  agency  of  the  Ten  Kings  works  the 
ruin  of  the  Woman,  and,  apparently,  by  a  lengthened 
process. 

The  city,  on  the  contrary,  perishes  by  some  frightful 
and  instantaneous  judgment,  is  engulphed  in  a  moment, 
like  a  mill-stone  cast  into  the  sea,  and  disappears  amid 
the  flames  vomited  forth  by  the  yawning  earth.  ^     And 

'  Rev.  xvii.  17. 

'  Rev.  xvi.  17-19. 

^  Rev.  xvii.  16. 

^  Rev.  xviii.  9.  In  chap.  xix.  19  the  Ten  Kings  are  again 
called  "  the  kings  of  the  earth." 

^  But,  besides  the  earthquake  of  the  seventh  vial  (Rev.  xvi.  18, 
19)  and  the  burning  (xviii.  8);  plagues  of  "  death  " — that  is,  pes- 
tilence— "  mourning  and  famine  "  are  said  to  come  upon  her  in  one 
day  (xviii.  8).     These  are,  perhaps,  induced,  under  the  sixth  vial, 


THE  RE-BUILDING  OF  GREAT  BABYLON.  171 

SO  unexpected,  so  signal,  so  appalling,  is  her  end,  that 
it  causes  the  sailors  and  merchants,  who  are  on  their 
way  to  her,  to  hal't  at  a  safe  distance  in  consternation 
and   despair. 

If,  then,  we  find  so  many  differences  in  the  details 
given  of  them,  it  is  clear  that  we  cannot  absolutely 
identify  the  Woman  and  the  city.  At  the  same  time 
there  is  doubtless  a  close  connection  between  them,  the 
probable  manner  of  which  we  will  endeavour  to  de- 
scribe. 

In  past  time,  as  the  reader  already  knows,  the  strange 
power  which  had  affected  the  world  from  Babylon 
was  transferred  to  Rome.  In  the  future,  and  possibly 
in  the  near  future,  it  would  seem  that  Rome,  or  at 
least  the  Romish  system,  will  be  destroyed,  and  the 
centre  of  wickedness  restored  for  a  brief  season  to  its 
earliest  seat  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates. 

For  the  predictions  concerning  Babylon  are  not  yet 
accomplished.  She  has  never  been  suddenly  destroyed, 
"  as  when  God  overthrew  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  "  ;  ^ 
nor  has  she,  up  to  the  present  time,  known  complete 
desolation  without  an  inhabitant.  ^  Captured  but  not 
razed,  or  even  seriously  injured,  by  Cyrus,  the  city  was 
retained  as  a  royal  residence  during  the  whole  period 
of  Persian  rule.  Alexander  designed  to  lift  it  from 
the  decay  into  which  it  had  fallen,  to  restore  its 
wondrous  temple  of  Belus,  and  to  make  it  again  the 
capital  of  the  world.     Josephus  and  Philo  tell  us  that 

by  the  drying  up  of  the  great  river  into  which  her  sewerage  flows, 
by  a  water-famine,  and  by  the  sudden  cutting-off  of  the  water- 
transit  by  Vv'hich  she  obtains  the  supplies  necessary  for  her  vast 
population. 

'  Isa.  xiii.  19. 

•  Isa.  xiii.  20. 


172  THE   GENTILES. 

in  their  time  it  contained  the  homes  of  many  Jews  : 
and,  consequently,  we  are  not  surprised  to  find  that 
Peter,  the  apostle  of  the  circumcision,  visited  it,  and 
dated  his  first  Epistle  to  the  "strangers  of  the  disper- 
sion "  from  the  city  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  ^  Five 
hundred  years  after  Christ  it  still  reckoned  large 
numbers  of  Jews  among  its  inhabitants,  and  was  the 
place  from  which  the  Babylonian  Talmud  was  sent 
forth  to  blind  still  more  the  eyes  and  harden  the 
hearts  of  the  Lord's  kinsmen  in  the  flesh.  And  even 
now  the  flourishing  town  of  Hillah  occupies  its  site 
with  a  population  of  some  ten  thousand  souls,  and  is 
surrounded   with  pleasant  gardens  and  date-groves. 

Thus  the  prophecies  of  the  sudden  and  utter  destruc- 
tion of  the  wicked  city,  and  of  its  perpetual  desolation, 
do  not  appear  to  have  been  as  yet  fulfilled  ;  and  we 
should  further  notice  that  both  in  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah 
its  unlooked-for  catastrophe  is  closely  connected  with 
the  final  restoration  of  Israel.  It  would  seem,  then, 
that  Babylon  must  be  rebuilt,  and  become  again  the 
centre  of  the  world  and  the  glory  of  kingdoms,  as  we 
have  it  represented  in  the  eighteenth  chapter  of  the 
Apocalypse. 

Now,  in  connection  with  its  restoration,  there  are 
three  questions  of  deep  interest,  on  each  of  which  we 
must  dwell  for  a  few  minutes. 

I.  Can  we  discern,  in  the  revelations  given  to  us, 
any  cause  which  would  impel  Satan  to  instigate  the 
rebuilding  of  Babylon  .'' 

II.  Is  there  a  probability  of  such  a  restoration  from 
a  purely  human  point  of  view  } 

III.  Does  Scripture  contain  any  intimation  that  the 

'  I  Peter  v.  13. 


THE  RE-BUILDING  OF  GREAT  BABYLON:  173 

centre  of  wickedness  will  be  removed  from  Rome,  and 
conveyed  back  to  its  original  location  on  the  banks  of 
the  Euphrates  ? 

I.  Now,  in  regard  to  the  first  question,  it  is  God's 
Kingdom  in  mystery  which  is  now  on  earth,  and  to 
this  Satan  opposes  Mystery  Babylon.  The  Spirit  is 
still  present  in  Pentecostal  power  :  therefore,  the  worst 
manifestations  of  evil  are  restrained,  and  the  Adversary 
is  compelled  to  carry  on  his  operations  with  craft  and 
more  or  less  of  secrecy.  Hence  his  great  organization 
in  the  past  has  been  a  counterfeit  Church,  which  he 
has  not  guided  to  an  open  denial,  but  to  a  pretended 
confession  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.  With  such 
a  hypocritical  creed  the  Babylonian  Harlot,  already 
settled  at  Rome,  was  disguised  and  tricked  out  as  the 
Church  of  Christ.  But  she  retained  all  her  abomina- 
tions, and  especially  her  goddess,  the  Queen  of  Heaven, 
to  whom,  under  the  new  name  of  the  Virgin  Mary, 
the  worship  due  to  the  Father  and  Son  was  secretly 
diverted,  until  the  time  should  arrive  for  an  open  denial 
of  their  Godhead. 

Such  has  been  the  state  of  things  in  the  past.  But 
before  the  Ten  Kings  give  their  power  to  the  Beast, 
the  Church  will  be  removed  from  earth,  and  the  Spirit, 
Who  now  hinders  the  manifestation  of  evil,  will  also 
depart,  and   so  be   taken   out  of  the  way.  ^ 

All  restraint  being  thus  removed,  Satan  will  imme- 
diately raise  the  standard  of  open  rebellion,  for  which 
the  world  is  already  prepared.  His  false  Church  will 
be  of  no  further  service  ;  nay,  will  even  prove  an 
obstacle  to  his  changed  plans.  Therefore,  he  will  turn 
the  hearts  of  the  children  of  disobedience  against  it, 

'  2  Thess.  ii.  6-8 


174  THE   GENTILES. 

and  incite  them  to  the  violent  and  cruel  destruction 
of  its  organisation  and  its  honest  or  prejudiced 
devotees. 

But  those  who  have  secretly  manipulated  it  for  his 
purposes,  and  all  who  adhere  to  it  from  selfish  con- 
siderations, he  will  move  to  change  their  front,  to  make 
international  commerce  and  worldly  prosperity  the  basis 
of  their  system,  in  place  of  religion,  and  to  rebuild 
Babylon  as  the  seat  of  their  power. 

For  the  return  of  the  Jews,  and  other  signs,  will  be 
testifying  that  God,  having  removed  His  Kingdom  in 
mystery,  is  about  to  restore  the  manifested  Kingdom  to 
Israel  ;  and  Satan,  on  his  part,  will  again  have  need 
of  the  old  enemy  of  Jerusalem,  the  wicked  city  of  the 
Euphrates. 

II.  As  to  the  second  point,  the  revival  of  the  East 
is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  phenomena  now  before 
us  ;  so  many  of  its  countries  are  awakening  from  their 
lethargy,  and  seem  ready  to  open  communications  with 
the  West.  And  there  is,  perhaps,  no  place  more 
suitable  for  a  central  mart  than  the  site  of  Babylon, 
with  its  great  advantages,  and  its  navigable  river. 
Ever  since  1850  a  Euphrates  Valley  Railway  has  been 
in  contemplation,  nor  is  it  likely  to  be  much  longer 
delayed.  In  speaking  of  the  probable  results  of  such 
an  enterprise,  W.  P.  Andrew  remarks  ; — "  It  brings  two 
quarters  of  the  globe  into  juxta  position,  and  three 
Continents — Europe  Asia  and  Australia — into  co- 
relation.  It  binds  the  vast  population  of  Hindustan 
by  an  iron  link  with  the  people  of  Europe  ;  it  inevit- 
ably entails  the  colonization  and  civilization  of  the 
great  valleys  of  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris,  the  resusci- 
tation   in    modern    shape    of    Babylon    and    Nineveh, 


THE  RE-BUILDING   OF  GREAT  BABYLON.  175 

and    the    reawakening   of   Ctesiphon    and    Bagdad    of 
old."^ 

In  1850  the  British  Government  thought  so  seriously 
of  the  project  that  they  sent  out  General  Chesney  to 
survey  and  explore  the  river  Euphrates,  at  a  cost  of 
over  ;£^3 0,000.  Nor  is  England  the  only  nation  which 
has  appreciated  the  value  of  this  district :  for  the  writer 
has  lately  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  W.  Greene,  C.E., 
containing  the  following  interesting  information. 

"About  the  year  185 1,  I  was  engaged  by  some 
eminent  Parisian  Bankers  to  examine  the  country 
between  Madrid  and  Seville  with  a  view  to  the  con- 
struction of  a  Railway  then  in  contemplation  between 
the  two  cities.  Since  there  was  at  that  time,  as  indeed 
there  is  at  the  present,  a  great  scarcity  of  good  maps 
and  surveys  of  the  district,  access  was  procured  for  me 
to  the  Department  of  the  War  Office  in  which  were 
deposited  all  the  valuable  surveys  made  by  order  of 
Napoleon  the  First  for  the  movements  of  his  armies  in 
Spain.  With  the  assistance  of  a  French  draughtsman, 
who  copied  whatever  I  thought  likely  to  be  useful,  I 
examined  many  documents  prepared  for  the  require- 
ments of  the  great  Emperor,  and  among  them  found  a 
survey  of  the  river  Euphrates.  It  contained  a  plan  for 
a  new  Babylon,  with  quays,  river  walls,  and  other 
arrangements  necessary  for  a  large  commercial  city. 
Evidently  the  vast  schemes  of  Napoleon  comprehended 
the  Eastern  as  well  as  the  Western  side  of  the  old 
Roman  Empire,  and  especially  that  wonderfully  fertile 
portion  of  the  Euphrates  valley  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  site  of  Babylon." 

From  this  it  would  seem  that  the  mind  of  Napoleon 
'  "  Memoir  of  the  Euphrates  Valley  Route  to  India.' 


176  THE  GENTILES. 

was  set  on  the  restoration  of  great  Babylon,  the  capital 
city  of  Nebuchadnezzar  and  of  Cyrus,  the  chosen  seat 
of  Alexander,  and,  in  all  probability,  the  destined  royal 
residence  of  the  Fourth  Empire's  mightiest  king. 

And  thus  both  England  and  France  have  formed,  in 
connection  with  the  Euphrates  valley,  projects  which,  if 
they  had  been  carried  out,  would  have  resulted  in  the 
rebuilding  of  Babylon  ;  while  the  newspapers  have 
lately  circulated  a  rumour  of  a  Russian  intrigue  to 
obtain  the  Porte's  permission  for  the  construction  of 
a  Railway  through  the  same  district.  Surely  a  spot 
which  possesses  such  attractions  for  the  nations  is  not 
likely  to  remain  long  in  the  condition  in  which  it  is. 

If,  however,  Babylon  is  to  be  rebuilt,  we  must  not 
allow  its  restoration  to  clash  with  other  predictions  of 
Scripture  by  placing  it  between  present  time  and 
the  coming  of  the  Lord  for  His  Church  ;  but  must 
remember  that  the  enterprise  need  not,  necessarily,  be 
taken  in  hand  until  after  the  first  translation  of  the 
saints. 

And  with  what  rapidity  it  might  be  accomplished 
we  are,  perhaps,  now  able  to  understand.  European 
Congresses  are  becoming  more  and  more  frequent ;  and, 
in  connection  with  the  present  mania  of  the  Great 
Powers  for  annexation,  they  seem  to  indicate  that  the 
separated  parts  of  the  Roman  Empire  are  beginning  to 
draw  together  again,  and  to  assume  the  sovereignty 
which  they  must  ultimately  possess  over  the  whole 
earth. 

When  they  are  more  completely  united,  and  more 
accustomed  to  act  together,  it  is  by  no  means  unlikely, 
even  from  a  human  point  of  view,  that  some  grand 
scheme  of  world-commerce  may  induce  the  Ten  King- 


THE  RE-BUILDING  OF  GREAT  BABYLON.  177 

doms  to  rebuild  Babylon  as  an  international  mart, 
situated,  as  it  is,  just  between  the  civilized  West  and 
the  fast  reviving  East.  In  such  a  case  the  construc- 
tion of  its  own  quarter  of  the  city  would  probably  be 
assigned  to  each  country,  and  there  would  be  a  real- 
ization of  Bunyan's  Vanity  Fair. 

"  Here  is  the  Britain  Row,  the  French  Row,  the 
Italian  Row,  the  Spanish  Row,  the  German  Row, 
where  several  sorts  of  vanities  are  to  be  sold." 

Undoubtedly  the  rivalry  of  the  nations  would  stimu- 
late them  to  set  in  motion  the  whole  machinery  of 
their  vast  resources,  with  a  view  both  to  rapidity  of 
building  and  magnificence  of  architecture.  And  when 
we  also  remember  that  the  attention  of  Satan  and  the 
whole  Kingdom  of  Darkness  would  be  concentrated 
upon  the  work,  and  all  their  power  exerted  to  forward 
it,  we  may  fairly  suppose  that  the  result  would  in  some 
degree  approach  to  the  poet's  fancy ; — 

"Anon  out  of  the  earth  a  fabric  huge 
Rose  like  an  exhalation," 

Thus,  just  as  Babylon — Satan's  centre  of  the  earth 
as  opposed  to  Jerusalem — was  originally  built  by  a 
cosmopolitan  effort  upon  which  the  judgment  of  God 
fell  ;  so  it  would  be  resuscitated  amid  still  grander 
displays  of  human  power  and  pride,  but  only  to  be 
speedily  and  finally  destroyed  by  the  high  hand  and 
the  outstretched  arm  of  the  Almighty. 

III.  Proceeding  now  to  the  third  question,  we  seem 
to  have  a  Scriptural  intimation  that  the  seat  of 
wickedness  will  be  transferred  from  Rome  to  Babylon 
in  the  fifth  chapter  of  Zechariah.  The  prophet  had 
been   made  to  see   three   visions   of  the  night,  in   the 

12 


«78  THE   GENTILES. 

first  of  which  the  Lord  showed  him  that  Jerusalem, 
although  at  the  lime  humbled,  even  as  the  myrtle 
bushes  in  a  hollow,  was,  nevertheless,  guarded  by  His 
angels  and  reserved  for  His  purposes  of  mercy  which 
were  already  beginning  to  work  ;  in  the  second,  that 
four  hostile  kingdoms  must  arise  against  Israel,  but  that 
God  would  find  agents  to  terrify  and  cast  them  out  ; 
and  in  the  third,  that  prosperity  should  finally  return 
to  Israel,  so  that  Jerusalem  should  be  inhabited  as 
towns  without  walls  for  the  multitude  of  men  and 
cattle  therein,  while  the  Lord  would  be  unto  her  a 
wall  of  fire  round  about,  and  be  the  glory  in  the  midst 
of  her. 

But  the  mind  of  Zechariah  may  have  sought  to 
know  how  the  daughter  of  Zion  could  be  cleansed  and 
made  fit  to  receive  blessings  so  great  ;  and  an  answer 
was  vouchsafed  to  him  in  the  following  visions. 

He  was  transported  in  spirit  to  the  Holy  of  Holies, 
and  there  beheld  the  High  Priest,  Joshua,  standing 
before  the  Mercy-seat  on  the  great  Day  of  Atonement, 
Instead,  however,  of  the  usual  robes  of  pure  white, 
Joshua  was  clad  in  filthy  garments,  which  set  forth  his 
own  and  his  nation's  sin  ;  and  Satan  was  there  to  resist 
him.  But  the  Lord,  after  rebuking  the  Adversary,  both 
pardoned  His  people  in  their  representative,  and  pro- 
vided a  righteousness  for  them. 

Thence  the  prophet  seems  to  have  passed  into  the 
Holy  Place,  where  he  saw  the  result  of  the  favour  which 
had  just  been  granted  :  for  the  Jewish  candlestick  was 
burning  brightly  through  the  ministration  of  the  Spirit 
by  the  Two  Witnesses.^ 

Thus  he  learnt  in  what  way  God  would  cover  the 
^  Compare  Zech.  iv.  11-14,  and  Rev.  xi.  4. 


THE  RE-BUILDING  OF  GREAT  BABYLON.  179 

iniquity  of  the  remnant  of  His  people,  according  to  the 
words  of  the  angel  to  Daniel.  And  in  the  following 
visions  of  the  Flying  Roll  and  the  Ephah,  correspond- 
ing respectively  to  the  two  which  precede  them,  he 
was  made  to  understand  the  sin  of  the  corrupters  of 
the  earth,  its  final  development,  and  its  punishment. 

For,  proceeding,  apparently,  into  the  outer  court,  he 
beheld  a  Flying  Roll,^  passing  over  the  face  of  the 
whole  earth,  in  order  that  it  might  enter  the  houses 
of  sinners,  and  destroy  themselves  and  their  dwellings. 
And  the  sinners  are  classified  as  thieves  and  false 
swearers,  offenders  against  the  second  and  the  first 
tables. 

Again  Zechariah  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  an 
Ephah  "  going  forth."  Now  the  Epliah,  which  is  the 
largest  of  Hebrew  dry  measures,  is  often  used  as  a 
symbol  of  commerce,  and  such  is  doubtless  its  meaning 
in  the  vision.  When,  therefore,  the  angel  explains, 
"  This  is  their  appearance  in  all  the  earth,"  he  means 
that  the  thieves  and  false  swearers  who  will  be  de- 
stroyed by  the  Roll,  are  those  who  are  dishonest  and 
perjured  in  commerce,  and  that,  at  the  time  of  the 
vision's  fulfilment,  the  world  will  be  full  of  such  men. 
Just  as  Babylon  of  old  made  all  the  nations  drunken 
so  the  corruption  wrought  by  this  Ephah  of  iniquity 
will  be  universal.  Its  principles  have  already  been 
adopted  by  the  false  Church  which  has  made  merchan- 
dise of  everything — of  sacraments,  of  masses  for  the 
dead,  and  of  the  souls  of  men — but  now  it  is  "  going 

'  Perhaps  its  dimensions,  since  they  are  the  same  as  those  of 
the  flopr  of  the  Holy  Place  in  the  Tabernacle,  indicate  that  the 
prophet  saw  it  issuing  from  thence.  Or  they  may  signify  that  it 
punishes  according  to  the  measure  of  the  Sanctuary 


; 
/ 


i8o  THE    GENTILES. 

forth."  The  expression  is  peculiar,  and  is  more  tnan 
once  used  in  the  Old  Testament  of  those  who  are 
forced  by  the  pressure  of  foes  to  quit  their  own  city,^ 
And  a  similar  meaning  may  attach  to  it  here  :  the 
calamity  at  Rome,  and  the  destruction  of  the  Romish 
Church,  has  compelled  those  who  were  directing  the 
system  of  wickedness  to  flee  from  their  city  and  to 
change  their  tactics.  Accordingly,  the  prophet  sees  the 
Ephah  coming  from  the  West  and  proceeding  to  the 
Euphrates  in  the  East. 

As  he  looked  on,  its  leaden  cover  was  removed,  and 
lo  !  a  Woman  was  sitting  in  it,  who  seems  to  have  im- 
mediately raised  herself.  "  This,"  said  the  angel,  "  is 
Wickedness  ;  "  and,  as  he  spoke,  he  thrust  her  back  into 
the  Ephah,  and  cast  the  leaden  cover  upon  her.  She 
was  to  be  conveyed  in  secrecy  to  Babylon :  none  should 
know  that  she  was  the  spring  of  the  new  system,  until 
in  changed  form  she  should  be  manifested  in  the  land 
of  Shinar,  and  the  Ten  Kings,  who  hated  and  destroyed 
her  as  the  Church  of  Rome,  should  love  her  again  as 
the  Babylonian  Harlot  of  Commerce. 

Again  the  prophet  lifted  up  his  eyes,  "  and  behold 
there  came  out  two  women,  and  the  wind  " — or  "  the 
spirit" — "was  in  their  wings;  for  they  had  wings  like  the 
wings  of  a  stork  :  and  they  lifted  up  the  Ephah  between 
the  earth  and  the  heaven."  He  inquired  its  destination, 
and  was  told  that  it  was  being  borne  to  the  land  of 
Shinar,  where  a  house  should  be  built  for  it,  and  it 
should  be  established,  and  set  upon  its  own  base. 

What  the  women  represent  is  not  easily  determined. 
But  the  work  in  which  they  are  engaged  is  that  of 
Satan,  and  since  the  execution  of  God's  judgments  by 

'  Jer.  xxxix.  4  ;  1.  8. 


THE   RE-BUILDING  OF  GREA7   BABYLON.  i8i 

spiritual  powers  from  His  presence  is  set  forth  in  the 
next  vision,'  it  may  be  that  these  women  are  the 
spiritual  agents  of  Satan  who  will  bring  about  the 
transit  of  the  Ephah.  At  least  there  is  something  very- 
ominous  in  the  description  of  their  wings,  if  we  remem- 
ber three  characteristics  of  the  stork  mentioned  in  the 
Bible. 

For  according  to  the  Mosaic  law  it  is  an  unclean 
fowl.  And  yet  the  name — cJiasid — by  which  it  was 
known  among  men  signifies  "  the  pious  bird."  Hence 
it  seems  to  symbolize  something  which  is  good  in  the 
eyes  of  men,  but  abominable  to  God.  May  we  thus  find 
a  hint  that,  in  the  conveyance  of  the  Ephah,  the  angels 
of  Satan  will  so  act  that  men  will  suppose  them  to  be 
angels  of  light .?  And  is  there  a  similar  meaning  in 
the  lifting  up  of  the  Ephah  between  the  earth  and  the 
heaven  }  It  is  quite  possible  that  there  may  be  some 
flaunting  of  pious  principles  while  Wickedness  still  lies 
in  concealment,  but,  upon  her  manifestation,  they  will 
quickly  disappear. 

Again  ;  we  are  told  of  the  stork  that  "  the  fir  trees  " — 
or  rather,  "  the  cypresses,"  that  is,  the  tall  towering 
trees — "are  her  house."  ^  That  which  she  represents 
rests  upon  the  established  powers  of  earth.  She  is  as 
those  fowls  of  the  air  which  devoured  the  good  seed, 
but  found  shelter  in  the  mustard  plant  when,  by  a 
monstrous  and  unnatural  growth,  it  had  become  a 
tree.^ 

Lastly  ;  "  the  stork  in  the  heaven  knoweth  her  ap- 
pointed times  .  .  .  but  My  people  know  not  the  judg- 
ments of  the  Lord."  ^      Even  the  children  of  this  world 

Zech.  vi.  5.  ^  Psalm  civ.  17. 

See  Part  III.  chaps,  iii.  and  v.  '  Jer.  viii.  7. 


l82  THE   GENTILES. 

are  wise  for  their  generation,  much  more  so  are  the 
spirits  of  evil.  They  are  well  aware  when  they  may 
act,  and  understand  their  seasons,  so  that  even  while 
they  believe  and  tremble  they  are  yet  able  to  say ; — 
"Art  Thou  come  to  torment  us  before  the  time  ?"  Ac- 
cordingly, they  recognise  their  opportunity,  and  at  the 
fitting  moment  carry  back  the  Harlot  enclosed  in  the 
Ephah  to  her  own  place. 

Thus  the  women  may  represent  the  Satanic  agencies 
'by  which  the  relics  of  the  system  destroyed  at  Rome 
will  be  conveyed  to  the  land  of  Shinar,  And  by  its 
new  development  the  last  universal  rebellion  will  be 
brought  about  on  the  very  spot  where  men  first  con- 
spired against  God 


PART    II. 
THE     JEWS 


I. 

The  Purpose  of  God  concerning  Israel. 

WE  have  thus  traced  out  the  whole  line  of  Gentile 
prophecy,  which  flows  in  an  unbroken  stream 
from  Nebuchadnezzar  to  the  last  great  head  of  the 
Fourth   Empire. 

And  we  have  found  that  we  are  now  in  the  clay- 
iron  times  of  the  feet  of  the  image,  and  that  the  world 
is  soon  to  see  the  revival  of  the  Roman  Empire  under 
the  form  of  ten  confederate  kingdoms,  the  brief  but 
memorable  course  of  which  will  be  cut  short  by  the 
fall  of  the  stone  from  the  mountain — that  is,  by  the 
descent  of  the  Lord  Jesus  from  the  height  of  His 
power. 

But  while  earth  was  bending  to  the  sway  of  the 
Babylonian  monarch,  or  shuddering  beneath  the  tread 
of  Persian  myriads  ;  while  men  were  wondering  at  the 
lightning-rapidity  and  irresistible  bravery  of  the  legions 
of  Alexander,  or  saluting  Csesar  as  lord  of  the  world 
and  a  present  deity  ;  when  the  crown  was  placed  on 
the  brow  of  Charlemagne,  and  the  majesty  of  Rome 
again  hovered  over  Europe  ;  while  the  Eastern  Empire 
was  being  destroyed  by  Moslem  hordes  ;  or  while  the 
armies  of  Napoleon  were  spreading  like  a  prairie-fire 
over  the  surface  of  Christendom — what,  during  these 


1 86  THE  JEWS. 

long  times  of  commotion  and  change,  was  the  counsel 
of  God  in  regard  to  the  Jew  ?  Had  He  cast  away 
His  people  ?  God  forbid !  He  had  not  cast  away 
His  people  whom   He  foreknew. 

Through  all  the  turmoil  of  Gentile  times  His 
purpose  concerning  Israel  has  remained  sure.  And 
,  although  the  children  of  Abraham  have  long  been  a 
)  nation  scattered  and  peeled,  a  nation  meted  out  and 
trodden  down,  whose  land  invaders,  like  overflowing 
rivers,  have  spoiled  ;  yet  when  the  iniquity  of  the  Gentiles 
is  full,  and  God's  patience  with  them  exhausted,  Israel 
shall  come  into  remembrance  and  be  again  gathered. 
Great  Babylon  shall  fall,  and  Jerusalem  shall  arise  and 
shine  as  the  true  city  of  the  great  King,  and  the  joy 
of  the  whole  earth. 

Now  the  key  to  the  future  of  Israel  is  to  be  found 
in  the  ninth  chapter  of  Daniel.  If  we  understand  that 
portion  of  God's  Word,  our  difficulty  with  the  remainder 
of  Hebrew  prophecy  will  be  greatly  diminished,  and 
we  shall  easily  see  how  to  arrange  other  predictions 
each  in   its  own  place. 

Nor  is  this  all.  The  closing  verses  of  the  chapter, 
by  marking  out  the  times  of  God's  dealings  with  the 
Jews,  instruct  us  also  in  regard  to  the  position  of  the 
Church  in  the  grand  progress  of  His  purposes  ;  and 
show  us  that,  although  her  members  will  hereafter  reign 
with  Christ,  she,  nevertheless,  at  present  occupies  a 
mere  parenthesis   in   the  world-history. 

Believers  often  fail  to  realize  this  fact  practically, 
even  when  they  agree  to  it  in  theory.  They  are  eager 
to  apply  the  prophetic  Scriptures  directly  to  themselves  ; 
can  spare  but  little  for  the  Israelite ;  nay,  will  sometimes 
even  speak  of  his  history  as  thougrh  the  great  object  of 


THE  PURPOSE   OF  GOD   CONCERNING  ISRAEL.       1S7 

his  existence  were  to  supply  a  type  of  the  Church  of 
this  age. 

To  counteract  such  views,  Paul  wrote  the  eleventh 
chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  in  which  he 
shows  that  the  Gentiles  are  merely  as  the  branches  of 
a  wild  olive  tree  which  are  at  present  grafted  on  the 
Jewish  stock,  but  shall  shortly  be  broken  off  to  make 
way  for  the  restoration  of  the  natural  branches.  He 
warns  the  Gentiles  not  to  be  ignorant  of  this  mystery, 
lest  they  should  grow  wise  in  their  own  conceits  ;  and 
reminds  them  that  God  has  a  covenant  with  Israel,  and 
that  His  gifts  and  callings  are  without  repentance. 
Therefore  the  glory  of  earth  must  return  to  the  children 
of  Abraham,  and  "  if  the  casting  away  of  them  be  the 
reconciling  of  the  world,  what  shall  the  receiving  of 
them  be  but  life  from  the  dead  !  " 

The  Church  has  indeed  a  glorious  destiny  ;  but  her 
calling  is  heavenly,  while  the  Israelites  shall  be  the 
Kings  of  the  Earth.  Since,  therefore,  prophecy  mainly 
refers  to  earth,  the  Israelite  has  by  far  the  greatest 
share  of  it.  For  those  who  are  strangers  and  pilgrims 
here,  and  who  are  commanded  not  to  mind  earthly 
things,  require  to  know  but  little  of  the  world's  history  ; 
those  whose  Saviour,  whose  home,  and  whose  city,  are 
in  heaven,  are  not  much  concerned  with  the  course  of 
events  below.  Those  who  are  warned  that  at  any 
moment,  even  in  an  hour  when  they  think  not,  the 
King's  messengers  may  announce,  "The  Master  is 
come  and  calleth  for  thee,"  have  no  need  to  know  the 
times  and  the  seasons.^ 

The  Lord  has,  consequently,  given  but  two  con- 
tinuous prophecies  of  the  Church,  while  the  prophetic 

'  I  Thesb.  v'.  I 


1 88  THE  JEWS. 

Scriptures  abound  with  details  of  the  time  when   He 
will  resume  His  covenant  relations  with  Israel 


H. 

The   Perplexity  of   Daniel. 

In  the  fourth  year  of  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim,  just 
before  Nebuchadnezzar  came  to  Jerusalem  for  the  first 
time,  God  foretold  the  impending  trouble  by  the  mouth 
of  Jeremiah,  and  also  set  His  limit  to  it.  Judah 
should  be  a  desolation,  and  should  serve  the  king  of 
Babylon  seventy  years  ;  at  the  close  of  which  time 
Babylon  should  be  punished,  and  the  land  of  the 
Chaldeans  destroyed.^  The  prophet  did  not,  however, 
add  anything  respecting  the  restoration  of  his  country- 
men. 

But  shortly  after  the  departure  of  the  second  band 
of  captives — Jehoiachin  and  those  who  were  taken 
with  him — the  false  prophet  Hananiah  declared  that, 
within  the  space  of  two  years,  the  Lord  would  break 
the  yoke  of  Nebuchadnezzar  from  off  the  neck  of  all 
nations,  and  bring  back  to  Jerusalem  the  vessels  of 
the  Lord's  house  which  had  been  carried  away  to 
Babylon.^  The  same  strain  was  taken  up  among  the 
captives  by  Ahab,  the  son  of  Kolaiah,  and  Zedckiah, 
the  son  of  Maaseiah  :  ^  the  hope  of  the  exiles  was 
raised,  and  many  of  them  contemplated  an  immediate 
return  to  Judsea. 

But  this  was  forbidden  by  a  letter  from  Jeremiah, 
who  directed  them  to  settle  in  Babylonia,  since  God 
would  have  them  to  do  so  until  the  end  of  the  Seventy 

'  Jer.  XXV.  S-id.  -  Jer.  xxviii.  10-17.         ^  Jer.  xxix.  20-23. 


THE   PERPLEXITY  OF  DANIEL.  189 

Years,  and  would  then  visit  them  and  permit  them  to 
return  to  their  own  country.^  Apparently  the  people 
obeyed  this  command,  and  remained  where  they  were. 
At  last,  however,  the  empire  of  the  Chaldeans  fell, 
and  in  the  first  year  of  the  reign  of  Darius  the  Mede, 
Daniel,  who  had  been  promoted  to  the  place  of  prime 
minister,  became  perplexed  and  anxious,  probably 
from  a  twofold  cause.  He  had  carefully  studied  the 
prophecies  of  Jeremiah,  and  found  that  permission  had 
been  given  to  return  to  Jerusalem  within  two  years 
from  that  time  ;  for  it  was  then  about  the  sixty-ninth  ^<:j 
year  of  the  captivity.  Yet  when  he  considered  the 
disposition  of  his  people,  he  saw  that  their  exile  had 
not  led  them  back  to  God,  that  they  were  not 
chastened  and  humbled  by  affliction,  and  were,  there- 
fore, by  no  means  in  a  condition  to  receive  mercy  at 
the  hand  of  the  Lord. 

And  again  ;  he  was  well  aware  that  there  would 
be  a  gathering  of  all  Israel  from  the  nations  among 
which  they  had  been  scattered,  when  the  Messiah 
would  rule  over  them  in  their  own  country  ;  and  he 
seems  to  have  looked  upon  this  grand  restoration  as 
identical  with  the  return  at  the  end  of  the  Seventy 
Years.  Hence  a  great  perplexity  ;  for  he  knew  by 
former  revelations  that  four  Gentile  empires  must  run 
their  course  before  the  sovereignty  could  be  transferred 
to  Israel.  And  as  yet  only  one  of  these  had  fallen  . 
there  were  still  three  to  fulfil  their  destiny  and  the 
last  of  them  must  pass  through  three  phases  ;  while 
for  all  these  great  events  there  remained  but  a  little 
more  than  one  year  ! 

Such  seems  to   have  been   Daniel's  perplexity,  and 
'  Jer.  xxix.  d-ii. 


igo  THE  JEWS. 

he  was  quite  unable  to  solve  the  enigma.  His  pro- 
cedure was,  however,  characteristic.  The  difficulty  in 
regard  to  the  empires  he  left,  not  doubting  that  God 
would  find  a  way  to  accomplish  His  own  purpose ; 
but  remembering  that,  in  the  terrible  prediction  of 
Moses  respecting  the  captivity,^  confession  is  men- 
tioned as  that  which  will  cause  the  Lord  to  return  to 
His  people,  he  set  his  face  unto  the  Lord  God,  to  seek 
by  prayer  and  supplication,  with  fasting  and  sackcloth 
and  ashes,  and  made  humble  confession  for  himself 
and  his  people,  earnestly  entreating  the  Lord  to  turn 
away  His  anger  and  fury  from  them  and  from  Jerusa- 
lem for  His  great  mercies'  sake. 

HI. 

The  Prophecy  of  the  Seventy  Weeks. 

An  answer  was  speedily  vouchsafed  to  the  prophet. 
While  he  was  yet  speaking  his  prayer  was  interrupted 
by  a  gentle  touch,  and  looking  round  he  saw  the  man 
Gabriel,  who  had  interpreted  his  previous  vision,  again 
standing  near  him.  This  heavenly  messenger  had 
been  despatched  from  the  Throne  to  assure  the  greatly 
beloved  one  that  his  petition  had  been  heard,  and 
should  ultimately  be  granted  ;  but  that  God  must 
for  a  while  defer  the  removal  of  His  anger  and  fury 
from  Jerusalem.  Daniel  must  patiently  wait  and 
endure,  even  as  the  Lord  did  when  the  cup  He  so 
much  dreaded  might  not  pass  away  ;  or  as  Paul,  when 
it  was  signified  to  him  that  the  thorn  in  the  flesh, 
from    which    he    had    thrice    besought    the    Lord    for 


'a 


Levit.  xxvi.  40-4'', 


THE  PROPHECY  OF  THE  SEVENTY  WEEKS.        191 

deliverance,   must   still   be   a   messenger   of    Satan    to 
)uffet  him. 

But  just  a.3  an  angel  descended  to  strengthen  the 
Lord  in  His  agony,  just  as  Paul  was  told  that  God's 
grace  should  be  sufficient  for  him,  so  Gabriel  was  sent 
to  Daniel  to  give  him  skill  and  understanding,  and  to 
reveal  the  matter  to  him,  and  make  him  know  the 
purposes  of  God.  Thus  the  prayer  of  the  prophet 
opened  a  channel  of  blessing,  and  called  forth  a  great 
revelation  upon  which  all  other  prophecy  appears  to 
hinge,  and  without  a  clear  knowledge  of  which  it  seems 
vain  to  attempt  to  understand  anything.  And  in- 
tensely concentrated  as  this  wondrous  utterance  is,  it, 
nevertheless,  presents  no  great  difficulty,  provided  we 
begin  with  a  good  translation.  The  following  is  a 
literal  rendering  ; — 

Dan.  ix.  24.  "  Seventy  Weeks  have  been  severed  off  upon  thy 
people  and  upon  thy  holy  city,  to  shut  up  the  transgression,  and 
to  seal  up  sins,  and  to  cover  iniquity,  and  to  bring  in  everlasting 
righteousness,  and  to  seal  up  vision  and  prophet,  and  to  anoint  a 
Holy  of  holies." 

Ver.  25.  "Know,  therefore,  and  understand: — From  the  going 
forth  of  a  command  to  restore  and  build  Jerusalem  unto  an 
Anointed  One,  a  Prince,  shall  be  Seven  Weeks,  and  Sixty  and 
Two  Weeks  :  the  street  shall  be  restored  and  built,  and  the  wall, 
even  in  the  pressure  of  the  times. ' ' 

Ver.  26.  "And  after  the  Sixty  and  Two  Weeks  the  Anointed 
One  shall  be  cut  off,  and  there  shall  be  nothing  for  Him.  And  the 
city  and  the  sanctuary  shall  the  people  destroy  of  a  prince  that 
shall  come  :  and  his  end  shall  be  in  the  overflowing  "  (that  is,  of 
God's  wrath),  "and  until  the  end  there  shall  be  war,  that  which 
is  determined  for  desolations." 

Ver.  27.  "  And  he"  (that  is,  the  prince  that  shall  come)  "  shall 
confirm  a  covenant  with  the  majority"  (that  is,  of  the  Jewish 
people)  "for  One  Week  :  and  in  the  midst  of  the  Week  he  shall 
cause  sacrifice  and  ofl:ering  to  cease :   and  upon  the  wing   of 


192  THE  JEWS. 

abominations  shall  be  the  desolater,  even  until  the  consummation, 
and  that  which  has  been  determined  shall  be  poured  upon  the 
desolate." 

We  must  now  examine  these  verses  minutely. 

Seventy  Weeks.  Literally,  Seventy  Sevens.  The 
word  "week"  is  retained,  because  we  have  no  exact 
equivalent  for  the  Hebrew  original,  ^  which  signifies  a 
period  of  seven,  but  does  not  decide  whether  the  seven 
are  hours,  days,  months,  years,  or  any  other  measure 
of  time.  That  point  must  always  be  determined  by 
the  context  ;  and  in  the  present  passage  periods  of 
seven  yeais  each  are  doubtless  intended,  because 
Daniel's  mind  is  dwelling  on  the  Seventy  Years  of 
Jeremiah.  ~  The  meaning  of  the  angel  seems  to  be — 
The  Seventy  Years  of  probation  will  not  suffice  ;  nay, 
after  them  must  come  seven  times  seventy  other 
years.  We  should  remember  that  the  Sabbatical 
years  and  the  Jubilee  made  the  idea  of  a  week  of 
years  very  familiar  to   Israelites. 

Have  been  severed  off.  That  is,  from  the  times  of 
the  Gentiles,  from  the  age  during  which  their  four 
World-empires  should   hold   sway. 

Upon  thy  people  and  upon  thy  holy  city.  This 
prophecy,  then,  is  concerned  with  Israelites,  and  not 
with  Christians.      Seven  times  seventy,  or  four  hundred 

'  Some  commentators  use  "  heptad,"  or  "hebdomad";  either 
of  which  words  would  do,  if  it  could  be  considered  English. 

*  If  Christians  be  suspected  of  bias  in  interpreting  "the  sevens" 
as  weeks  of  years,  because  the  end  of  the  sixtj^-ninth  seven  is 
thus  made  to  synchronize  with  the  time  of  Christ's  death,  it  is 
impossible  to  bring  such  a  charge  against  Jews.  And  yet,  until 
the  Middle  Ages  were  far  advanced,  the  Jews  invariably  adopted 
the  same  explanation,  although  by  so  doing  they  convicted 
themselves  of  rejecting  the  Messiah,  and  placed  a  formidable 
weapon  in  the  hands  of  their  Christian  opponents. 


THE  PROPHECY  OF  THE  SEVENTY  WEEKS.        193 

and  ninety  years  are  to  be  taken  out  of  the  times  of 
the  Gentiles  for  the  special  dealings  of  God  with  the 
Jews  and  Jerusalem  ;  that  is,  of  course,  with  the  Jews 
at  Jerusalem  :  for  the  people  must  during  the  time  be 
dwelling  in  their  own  country. 

The  Four  Hundred  and  Ninety  Years  of  God's  plead- 
ings with   His  people  shall   be  made   to  produce   six 
results,  which  are  named  as  follows. 
I.  To  shut  up  the  transgression. 
II.  To  seal  up  sins, 

III.  To  cover  iniquity. 

IV.  To  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness. 
V.  To  seal  up  vision  and  prophet. 

VI.  To  anoint  a  Holy  of  holies. 

We  may  divide  these  six  consequences  into  two 
classes  :  for  the  first  three  are  concerned  with  the 
taking  away  of  sin,  and  the  last  three  with  the  bringing 
in  of  righteousness.  And  the  latter  will  be  found  to 
correspond,  each  to  each,  with  the  former. 

To  shut  up  the  transgression.  That  is,  to  arrest  and 
restrain  it,  so  that  it  can  no  longer  work  and  spread. 
The  article  probably  indicates  the  whole  course  of 
Israel's  transgression,  or  "  breaking  away  "  from   God, 

To  seal  tip  sins.  The  figure  of  sealing  is  connected 
with  that  of  shutting  up  in  prison  or  restraining. 
So  Darius  seals  the  stone,  which  is  put  at  the  mouth 
of  the  lions'  den,  with  his  own  signet  and  with  that 
of  his  lords.  ^  And  in  the  book  of  Job,  God  is  said 
to  seal  up  the  stars,  so  that  they  do  not  shine  ;  ^  and 
is  also  described  as  sealing  up  the  hand  of  every  man, 
when  by  the  frost  and  rain  of  winter  He  prevents  the 
continuance  of  daily  labour  in  the  fields.^  The  sealing 
'  Dan.  vi.  17.  *  Job  ix.  7,  ^  Job  xxxvii, 

13 


r 


194  '^HE  JEWS. 

up  of  sins  consequently  signifies  their  restraint  under 
safe  custody. 

There  is  a  good  illustration  of  both  figures,  and 
probably  a  clue  to  the  interpretation  of  the  passage, 
in  the  twentieth  chapter  of  the  Revelation,  where  an 
angel,  after  binding  Satan  and  casting  him  into  the 
abyss,  shuts  him  up  and  sets  a  seal  upon  him,  that  he 
may  deceive  the  nations  no  more. 

To  cover  iniqnity.  That  is,  according  to  the  well- 
known  scriptural  figure,  to  make  atonement  for  it. 
While  the  previous  clauses  seem  to  refer  to  the  two- 
thirds  of  the  Jewish  nation  which  will  perish  during 
the  refining  process,  and  have  their  part  with  Satan 
and  his  angels,  these  words  speak  of  another  way  of 
getting  rid  of  sin,  and  point  to  the  one-third  which 
shall  be  saved.^ 

We  now  come  to  the  second  group  of  results. 

To  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness.  When  the 
transgression  is  shut  up  and  sins  are  sealed,  then  ever- 
lasting righteousness  shall  be  brought  in.  This  will 
be  done  by  the  introduction  of  the  new  covenant,  in 
accordance  with  which  God  will  no  longer  write  upon 
tables  of  stone,  but  put  His  law  in  the  inward  parts  of 
His  people  and  write  it  in  their  hearts.^ 

To  seal  tip  vision  and  propliet.  When  sins  are  sealed 
up,  vision  and  prophecy  shall  also  be  laid  aside  as 
being  no  longer  needed.  For  it  was  only  after  sin 
had  come  into  the  world  that  prophecy  was  introduced 
as  a  great  instrument  of  God  in  the  war  against  it  ; 
and  so,  when  sin  is  put  away,  prophecies  also  shall  fail. 

To   anoint  a   Holy ,  of  holies.     Lastly,   in  the  place 
of  the  Tabernacle  and  former  Temples,  in  which  the 
'  Zech.  xiii.  8,  9.  ^  Jcr.  xxxi,  t,2). 


THE  PROPHECY  OF  THE  SEVENTY  WEEKS.        195 

covering,  or  atonement,  was  wont  to  be  typified,  a 
new  Holy  of  holies  shall  be  anointed.  There  is  great 
significance  in  this  announcement ;  for  although  the 
Tabernacle  of  Moses  was  anointed,  there  is  no  men- 
tion of  such  a  ceremony  in  the  consecration  of  the 
Temple  of  Solomon,  the  latter  being  regarded  as  a 
mere  continuation  of  the  former.  And  it  is  doubtless 
for  a  similar  reason  that  we  hear  nothing  of  an  anoint- 
ing in  the  case  of  the  Temple  of  Zerubbabel.  But 
the  Holy  of  holies  of  this  prophecy,  the  grand  Temple 
described  in  the  latter  chapters  of  Ezekiel,  will  be  no 
mere  continuation  of  former  Sanctuaries  :  the  fact  that 
the  great  Sacrifice  has  already  been  offered  once  for 
all,  and  that  sin — as  regards  Israel  at  least — will  then 
be  shut  up  and  sealed,  will  doubtless  cause  great 
changes  in  the  ordinances  and  service.  And,  more- 
over, this  Temple,  which  Messiah  Himself  shall  build, ^ 
will  also  be  the  place  of  the  manifestation  of  His  glory 
during  the  Millennial  reign,  and  the  anointing  will, 
perhaps,  specially  consecrate  it  for  that  purpose. 

Such,  then,  will  be  the  results  of  God's  dealing  with 
the  Jews,  at  the  close  of  the  Four  Hundred  and  Ninety 
Years.  The  trangression  will  be  restrained  and  sins 
sealed  up,  so  as  no  longer  to  affect  them — for  the 
stumbling-blocks  will  then  have  been  consumed  with 
the  wicked  ;^  their  iniquity  will  be  expiated,  and  the 
new  covenant  of  their  God  will  bring  them  everlasting 
righteousness;  all  promises  will  then  have  been  fulfilled  ; 
the  law  of  God  will  be  written  on  the  heart  of  every 
Israelite,  so  that  there  will  be  no  further  need  of  the 
exhortations,  rebukes,  warnings,  and  threatenings,  of 
the  prophets  ;  and  Mount  Zion  will  be  crowned  with 
^  Zech.  vi.  12,  13.  -  Zeph.  i.  3. 


196  THE  JEWS. 

a  Temple,  of  which  the  building  of  Solomon  was  but 
a  veiy  faint  type,  and  to  which — as  we  are  elsewhere 
told — the  Cherubim  and  the  Glory  will  return,  to  be  a 
cloud  and  smoke  by  day,  and  the  shining  of  a  flaming 
fire  by  night.  ^ 

But  what  sign  would  mark  the  commencement  of 
the  Four  Hundred  and  Ninety  Years  ?  And,  when 
they  had  commenced,  would  their  course  be  unbroken 
to  the  end  of  the  period,  or  would  it  be  interrupted  ? 
These  questions  the  angel  now  proceeds  to  answer. 

The  appointed  time  would  begin  at  the  going  forth 
of  a  command  to  restore  and  build  Jerusalem'* — not  the 
Temple,  of  which  there  is  no  mention,  but  the  city,  the 
street  and  the  wall. 

The  prophecy  did  not,  therefore,  take  as  its  com- 
mencing date  the  decree  of  Cyrus,  which  had  reference 
only  to  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple  ;  nor  that  of 
Darius  Hystaspes,  which  was  no  more  than  a  confir- 
mation of  the  permission  granted  by  Cyrus.  And  again, 
the  edict  issued  in  the  seventh  year  of  Artaxerxes 
Longimanus  merely  empowered  Ezra  to  carry  on  the 
Temple  services. 

But  in  the  twentieth  year  of  Artaxerxes,  certain 
men  of  Judah  came  to  Shushan,  and,  in  answer  to 
Nehemiah's  inquiries  after  his  brethren  at  Jerusalem, 
replied  ; — "  The  remnant  that  are  left  of  the  captivity 
there  in  the  province  are  in  great  affliction  and 
reproach  ;  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  also  is  broken  down, 
and  the  gates  thereof  are  burned  with  fire."  ^  Over 
this  intelligence  Nehemiah  mourned,  and,  like  Daniel, 
made  humble  confession  before  God  for  the  sins  of  his 
people. 

'  Ezek.  xliii.  1-5  ;  Isa.  iv.  5,  6.  ^  Neh.  i.  3. 


7 HE  PROPHECY  OF  THE  SEVENTY  WEEKS.        197 

Shortly  afterwards,  in  the  month  Nisan,  he  went 
into  the  royal  presence  to  perform  his  duty  as  cup- 
bearer, and  the  king  observed  that  his  countenance  was 
changed  with  sorrow.  Interrogated  as  to  the  reason, 
Nehemiah  replied ; — "  Let  the  king  live  for  ever  :  why 
should  not  my  countenance  be  sad,  when  the  city,  the 
place  of  my  fathers'  sepulchres,  lieth  waste,  and  the 
gates  thereof  are  consumed  with  fire?"^  Sympathizing 
with  his  distress,  Artaxerxes  immediately  issued  a 
decree  for  the  rebuilding  of  the  city  and  the  wall,  and 
sent  Nehemiah  to  Jerusalem  to  superintend  the  work. 
It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  Four  Hundred  and  Ninety 
Years  commence  from  some  day  of  the  month  Nisan  in 
the  twentieth  year  of  Artaxerxes  Longimanus. 

From  this  date  until  the  appearance  of  an  Anointed 
One  Who  should  also  be  a  Prince — that  is,  a  Royal  ' 
Priest — Seven  Weeks  and  Sixty  and  Two  Weeks  were  '^ 
to  elapse  ;  or,  in  other  words,  there  should  be  Forty- 
nine  and  Four  Hundred  and  Thirty-four,  or  Four 
Hundred  and  Eighty-three  Years  between  the  edict 
and  the  coming  of  Messiah  as  a  Prince. 

The  Forty-nine  Years  are  probably  separated  off  as 
being  the  period  taken  up  by  the  restoration  of  the 
city  and  the  wall.^  Of  the  pressure  of  the  times  we 
may  find  some  account  in  the  book  of  Nehemiah. 

The  Anointed  One,  Who  should  also  be  a  Prince, 
can  be  none  other  than  the  Lord  Jesus,  of  Whom  it 
was  said  ; — "  Thou  art  a  Priest  for  ever  after  the  order 
of   Melchizedek."  ^       And    again  ; — "  Even    He    shall 

Neh.  ii.  3. 

*  The  wall  is  said  to  have  been  finished  in  fifty-two  days 
(Neh.  vi.  15) :  but  this  must  have  been  merely  a  temporary  work 
for  present  exigencies.     Moreover,  the  city  also  was  to  be  rebuilt. 

^  Psalm  ex.  4. 


I 


198  THE  JEWS. 

build  the  Temple  of  the  Lord  ;  and  He  shall  bear  the 
glory,  and  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  His  throne ;  and  He 
shall  be  a  Priest  upon  His  throne."  ^ 

But  at  what  period  of  our  Lord's  life  can  He  be 
said  to  have  presented  Himself  as  Priest  and  King  ? 
Not  at  His  birth  :  for  He  was  then  only  known  as  the 
carpenter's  son.  Not  during  the  greater  part  of  His 
ministry :  for,  although  He  was  anointed  by  the  Spirit, 
and  quickly  revealed  Himself  as  the  great  Priest  by 
teaching  the  people,  by  cleansing  lepers,  and  by  for- 
giving sins,  He,  nevertheless,  would  not  put  Himself 
forward  as  King.  On  the  contrary.  He  forbade  His 
disciples  to  disclose  His  real  nature ;  and  when  the 
crowd,  excited  to  enthusiasm  by  His  wondrous  words 
and  works,  would  have  set  the  crown  upon  His  head, 
He  refused  it,  and  sent  them  away. 

But  at  His  entry  into  Jerusalem,  four  days  before 
His  death.  His  manner  changed,  and  He  suffered  the 
whole  multitude  which  followed  Him  to  break  forth  into 
the  cry  ; — *'  Blessed  be  the  King  That  cometh  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord."  ^  And  when  the  Pharisees  urged 
Him  to  rebuke  His  disciples.  He  replied  ; — "  I  tell  you 
that,  if  these  should  hold  their  peace,  the  stones  would 
immediately  cry  out."  In  other  words.  He  chose  at 
that  time  to  have  Himself  openly  proclaimed  King, 
and  Matthew  informs  us  that  He  did  so  to  fulfil  the 
prophecy  of  Zechariah  ; — "  Tell  ye  the  daughter  of 
Zion,  Behold,  thy  King  cometh  unto  thee,  meek,  and 
sitting  upon  an  ass,  and  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass."  ^ 
This  prophecy  reveals  the  significance  of  the  event, 
and  shows  us  that  the  day  indicated  was  that  of  the 
appearing  of  Messiah  as  the  Prince. 

'  Zech.  vi.  13.  *  Luke  xix.  38.  ^  Matt.  xxi.  5. 


THE  PROPHECY  OF  THE  SEVENTY  WEEKS.        199 

Thus,  then,  the  commencing-point  of  the  Four 
Hundred  and  Ninety  Years  was  the  promulgation  of 
the  edict  in  the  month  Nisan  of  the  twentieth  year  of  / 
the  reign  of  Artaxerxes  Longimanus  ;  and  the  Four  f 
Hundred  and  Eighty-third  Year  ended  on  the  tenth 
day  of  the  month  Nisan,  when  Christ  entered  Jerusalem 
as  the  King  of  the  daughter  of  Zion.  Both  starting- 
point  and  goal  are  so  clearly  indicated  in  Scripture 
that,  as  believers,  we  have  no  need  to  trouble  ourselves 
with  the  uncertainties  of  human  computation,  but  may 
at  once  assume  that  the  interval  was  exactly  four 
hundred  and  eighty-three  years. 

If,  however,  the  prophecy  can  be  verified  chrono- 
logically, its  influence  will  be  greatly  extended  :  it  will 
then  become  a  powerful  testimony  to  unbelievers,  as 
well  as  a  guiding  light  to  the  people  of  God.  And  of 
all  attempts  so  to  verify  it,  the  solution  lately  proposed 
by  Dr.  Anderson  seems  the  most  satisfactory.  We 
will,  therefore,  summarize  it,  recommending  the  reader 
to  seek  further  details  in  the  pages  of  "  The  Coming 
Prince." 

Now  the  first  point  to  be  settled  is  the  length  of  a 
prophetic  year.     And  the  Bible  furnishes  evidence  that  \ 
such  a  year  was  not  reckoned  according  to  the  Julian   \ 
system,  but  contained   only   360   days.      Even    in  the 
history  of  the  flood  we  find  that  the  five  months,  from 
the    seventeenth    day    of   the    second    month    to    the 
seventeenth  of  the  seventh,  are  reckoned  as   150  days.^ . 
And  in  the  Apocalypse  the  same  period  is  described 
as   3^  years,  as  forty-two  months,  and  as    1,260  days. 
Evidently,  therefore,  twelve  months  of  thirty  days  each, 
or  360  days,  are  assigned  to  a  year. 

'  Gen.  vii.  11,  24;  viii.  3,  4. 


zoo  THE  JEWS. 

Consequently,  483  prophetic  years  would  contain 
483    X   360,  or  173,880  days. 

Again  ;  the  starting  point  of  the  prophecy,  as  we 
have  just  shown,  is  some  day  of  the  month  Nisan,  in 
the  twentieth  year  of  Artaxerxes  the  king,"  that  is,  in 
i,  B.C.  445.  And  by  proving  that  Nehemiah  must  have 
commenced  his  journey  to  Jerusalem  very  early  in 
Nisan,  Dr.  Anderson  makes  it  probable  that  the  decree 
was  given  on  the  first  of  the  month,  which  in  that  year 
would  correspond  with  the  14th  of  March. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  close  of  the  483rd  year  is 
signalled  by  the  Lord's  entry  into  Jerusalem  four  days 
before  His  death.  To  find  the  date  of  this  occurrence, 
we  must  remember  that  His  ministry  commenced  in 
the  fifteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tiberias,  that  is,  in 
the  year  which  began  on  the  19th  of  August,  A.D.  28. 

Hence  the  first  Passover  of  our  Lord's  public  ministry 
must  have  been  in  the  Nisan  of  A.D.  29.  And  since  He 
appears  to  have  kept  four,  the  last  would  have  been  in 
the  Nisan  of  A.D.  32.  Now  the  Passover  was  on  the 
fourteenth  of  the  month :  therefore  our  Lord  must  have 
entered  Jerusalem  on  the  loth  of  Nisan,  or  the  6th  of 
April,  A.D.  32. 
,       Thus  then 

The  edict  of  Artaxerxes  was  promulgated,  March 
14th,  B.C.  445. 

Christ  presented  Himself  in  Jerusalem  as  King, 
April  6th,  A.D.  32. 

"  The  intervening  period — according  to  the  Julian 
reckoning — was  476  years  and  24  days  (the  days 
being  reckoned  inclusively,  as  required  by  the  lan- 
guage of  the  prophecy,  .and  in  accordance  with  the 
Jewish  practice). 


THE  PROPHECY  OF  THE  SEVENTY  WEEKS.        201 

But  476x365 173.740  days. 

Add  (14th  March  to  6th  April,  both  inclusive)      .  24       ,, 

Add  for  leap  years •  116      ,, 

173,880  days.'" 

But  it  has  been  shown  above  that  69  of  Daniel's 
weeks,  or  483  prophetic  years,  contain  just  173,880 
days. 

Therefore,  the  first  part  of  this  great  prophecy  was 
exactly  fulfilled  to  the  very  day. 

Now  the  Jews  of  our  Lord's  time  doubtless  retained 
a  copy  of  the  famous  edict  which  restored  their 
national  existence  ;  or,  at  least,  its  date  must  have 
been  well  known  to  them.  And  thus,  with  very  little 
trouble,  they  might  have  calculated  the  precise  day  on 
which  their  Messiah  was  to  present  Himself  as  King  ; 
while  the  prophecy  of  Zechariah  would  have  instructed 
them  as  to  the  manner  of  His  entry  into  the  city. 
With  such  exactness,  and  in  so  literal  a  manner,  are 
the  predictions  of  God  brought  to  their  fulfilment ! 

At  the  close,  then,  of  the  appointed  interval,  Messiah 
the  Prince  moved  towards  Jerusalem ;  and  after  halting 
to  weep  over  it  from  the  heights  of  Olivet,  passed 
under  the  gates  and  through  the  streets  which  were  so 
soon  to  be  levelled  with  the  dust,  and  offered  Himself 
as  her  King  to  the  daughter  of  Zion.  But,  alas  !  she 
saw  no  beauty  in  Him  that  she  should  desire  Him  : 
He  was  despised  and  rejected,  and,  only  four  days 
later,  the  fickle  multitude  which  had  enthusiastically 
cried,  "  Blessed  is  the  King  that  cometh  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord ! "  was  rending  the  air  with  discordant 
shouts  of  "Crucify  Him!   Crucify  Him!" 

'  "The  Coming-  Prince,"  2nd  edition,  p.  128. 


202  THE  JEWS, 

And  so,  after  enduring  the  horrors  of  that  night 
whose  beginning  saw  Him  basely  betrayed  by  one  of 
His  own  disciples,  and  during  the  dark  watches  of 
which  He  gave  His  back  to  the  smiter  and  His  cheek 
to  them  that  plucked  off  the  hair,  and  hid  not  His  face 
from  shame  and  spitting  ;  after  that  mocking  trial,  in 
which  the  judges  bribed  false  witnesses,  but  did  not 
even  then  succeed  in  obtaining  coherent  testimony ; 
after  He  had  been  further  dragged,  once  before  Herod 
and  twice  before  Pilate,  and  none  could  find  aught 
against  Him — then  at  length  the  Anointed  One  was 
cut  off. 

And  there  was  nothing  for  Him  ;  none  of  those 
glories  which  were  to  surround  the  person  of  the 
Messiah.  Instead  of  appearing  as  the  King  of  kings 
and  Lord  of  lords,  He  was  found  in  the  form  of  a 
servant.  And  so  far  was  He  from  possessing  a  king- 
dom above  all,  and  an  everlasting  dominion,  that  He 
had  not,  during  His  life,  where  to  lay  His  head,  and 
was  soon  cut  off  altogether  from  the  land  of  the  living. 
In  place  of  that  Divine  beauty  and  appalling  majesty, 
the  first  glance  of  which  struck  the  persecuting  Saul 
helpless  to  the  ground,  and  which  caused  even  the 
beloved  disciple  John  to  fall  at  His  feet  as  dead,  lo  ! 
His  visage  was  marred  more  than  any  man.  He  had 
no  form  nor  comeliness,  nor  was  there  any  desirable 
beauty  seen  in   Him. 

'  For  His  painful  mission  in  those  days  was  to  bear 
our  griefs,  and  carry  our  sorrows  ;  to  be  wounded  for 

\  our  transgressions,  and  bruised  for  our  iniquities  ;  to 
receive  the  chastisement  which  should  bring  peace  to 
us,  that  by  His  stripes  we  might  be  healed.  He  came 
to  make  His  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  to  pour  out  His 


THE  PROPHECY   OF  THE  SEVENTY   WEEKS.        203 

soul  unto  death,  to  be  numbered  with  the  transgressors, 
to  bear  the  sins  of  many. 

He  was  cut  off,  and  there  was  nothing  for  Him. 

But  the  crucifixion  of  our  Lord  took  place  four  days 
after  His  appearance  as  the  Priest-King — that  is,  four 
days  after  the  close  of  the  Four  Hundred  and  Eighty- 
third  Year — and  yet  it  is  not  said  to  have  happened 
in  the  Seven  Years  which  still  remained  to  be  fulfilled. 
At  this  point,  therefore,  it  seems  that  there  is  a  gap 
separating  the  Four  Hundred  and  Eighty-third  Year 
from  the  last  Seven.  For  God  had  given  up  the  sinful 
nation  which  rejected  His  Son  :  His  covenant  was  sus- 
pended, so  that  they  were  no  longer  His  people  :  and, 
consequently,  the  course  of  the  Four  Hundred  and 
Ninety  Years  had  ceased  to  run  on.-^ 

The  prophecy  then  speaks  of  vengeance  which 
should  follow  for  the  cutting  off  of  Messiah  :  the  city 
and  the  Sanctuary,  Jerusalem  and  the  Temple,  should 
be  destroyed.  This  was  fulfilled  by  the  Romans 
under  Titus,  about  forty  years  after  the  death  of 
Christ :  but  still  there  is  no  mention  of  the  missing 
Seven  Years  ;   the  interval  continues. 

Lastly ;  we  are  told  that,  after  the  destruction  of  the 
city  and  Sanctuary,  there  should  be  wars  and  desola- 
tions until  the  end,  during  a  period  fixed  indeed  by 
God,  but  unknown  to  man.  Terribly  has  this  been 
verified  ;  and  so  frequent  have  been  the  captures  of 
Jerusalem  by  Roman,  Persian,  Saracen,  and  Turk,  that 
the  city  of  our  Lord's  time  has  become  deeply  buried 
beneath  successive  layers  of  ruin  and  debris,  and  is  now 
found  from  fifty  to  eighty  feet  below  the  level  of  the 

'  For  the  principle  on  which  this  explanation  is  based,  see  the 
chapter  on  Mystic  Chronology  in  the  Prolegomena. 


204  THE  IEW5. 

soil.  All  these  destructions  are  included  in  the  words, 
"  And  until  the  end  there  shall  be  war,  that  which  is 
determined  for  desolations  "  ;  and  yet  there  is  no  men- 
tion of  the  final  Seven  Years. 

Thus,  from  the  appearing  of  Messiah  the  Prince, 
there  occurs  an  undefined  interval,  a  great  interruption 
in  the  progress  of  the  Seventy  Weeks,  which,  as  we 
shall  presently  see,  is  not  unnoticed  in  other  parts  of 
Scripture. 

But,  to  retrace  our  steps  for  a  moment,  the  city  and 
Sanctuary  were  to  be  destroyed  by  the  people  of  a 
prince  that  should  afterwards  come  ;  and  since  it  is 
added  that  this  prince  will  meet  his  doom  in  the  last 
great  outpouring  of  God's  wrath,  it  is  manifest  that  he 
cannot  have  appeared  in  past  time.  Now  the  Romans 
destroyed  the  city  and  Sanctuary  :  so  far,  therefore,  we 
gather  that  the  prince  will  be  a  head  of  the  Fourth 
Empire  ;  but  the  time  of  his  end  shows  us  further  that 
he  will  be  the  last  head — that  is,  the  Antichrist. 

In  the  final  verse  of  the  prophecy  we  are  told  that 
he  will  confirm  a  covenant  with  the  majority  of  the 
Jewish  people  for  One  Week.  And  so  at  length  we 
find  the  missing  Seven  Years,  the  Seventieth  Week. 

Now  the  Jews  must  by  this  time  have  settled  again 
^-in  their  own  land,  because  the  prophecy  is  expressly 
connected  with  the  people  and  the  city.  Possibly  the 
prince  may  himself  have  restored  them  :  but,  at  any 
rate,  he  will  find  them  in  some  trouble,  or  terrified  by 
some  impending  danger,  and  will  undertake  their  pro- 
tection in  Palestine  for  seven  years.  The  compact 
may,  perhaps,  be  similar  to  that  by  which  Napoleon  III. 
promised  to  maintain  Maximilian  as  emperor  of  Mexico 
for  a  fixed  time.      But  whatever  the  covenant  may  be. 


THE  PROPHECY  OF  THE  SEVENTY  WEEKS.        20f 

it  will  only  be  accepted  by  a  majority  of  the  people, 
and  not  by  the  whole  nation  :  God  will  again  leave 
Himself  a  remnant  which  shall  not  bow  the  knee  to 
Baal. 

Thus  restored  and  settled  in  their  own  land,  the 
Jews  will  rebuild  their  Temple  and  renew  the  sacrifices 
and  services  ;  but,  probably,  in  a  proud  and  atheistical 
spirit,  and  certainly  in  a  way  very  displeasing  to  God. 
The  last  chapter  of  Isaiah  represents  them  as  engaged 
in  these  works  not  long  before  the  appearing  in  glory 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  a  description  of  which  begins  with^ 
the  fifteenth  verse.  But  their  efforts  will  spring  from 
national  pride,  and  will  not  be  stimulated  by  love  to 
God  ;  therefore  He  declares  ; — "  Thus  saith  the  Lord, 
The  heaven  is  My  throne,  and  the  earth  My  footstool : 
where  is  this  house  that  ye  build  unto  Me .-'  and  where 
is  this  place  of  My  rest  }  For  all  these  things — that 
is,  the  visible  world — My  hand  hath  made  ;  then  all 
these  things  came  into  existence,  saith  the  Lord  ;  but 
to  this  man  will  I  look,  even  to  him  that  is  poor  and 
contrite  in  spirit,  and  trembleth  at  My  word." 

Then,  in  reference  to  the  sacrifices  which  are  again 
being  offered,  the  Lord  adds  ; — "  He  that  killeth  the 
ox  is  as  the  slayer  of  a  man  ;  he  that  sacrificeth  the 
sheep  as  one  that  breaketh  the  neck  of  a  dog ;  he 
that  offereth  an  oblation,  it  is  swine's  blood  ;  he  that 
causeth  incense  to  rise  up  as  a  memorial  is  as  one  that 
blesseth  an  idol."  That  is,  the  offerings  will  be  as 
offensive  to  God  as  if  men  were  insulting  Him  by 
sacrificing  what  He  has  declared  to  be  unclean,  or  by 
paying  adoration  to  false  gods. 

But  the  Jews  will  go  on  in  their  own  ways  during 
the  first  half  of  the  Seven  Years,  and  then  there  will 


2o6  THE  JEWS. 

be  a  change.  In  the  middle  of  the  Week — that  is,  at 
the  end  of  Tliree  Years  and  a  Half — Antichrist  will 
cause  the  sacrifices  to  cease,  and  transfer  the  worship 
of  Jehovah  to  himself,  exalting  "  himself  above  all  that 
is  called  God,  or  that  is  worshipped  ;  so  that  he  as 
God  sitteth  in  the  Temple  of  God,  showing  himself 
that  he  is  God."  ^ 

The  words,  "  upon  the  wing  of  abominations  shall 
be  the  desolater,"  are  difficult ;  but  we  must  remember 
that  "  abomination "  was  a  common  term  among  the 
Hebrews  for  a  false  god.  So,  in  the  first  book  of 
Kings,  we  find  "  Milcom,  the  abomination  of  the  Am- 
monites," "  Chemosh,  the  abomination  of  Moab,"  and 
"Moloch,  the  abomination  of  the  children  of  Ammon."^ 
And  again  ;  the  false  gods  are  declared  in  both  Old 
and  New  Testament  to  be  real  existences.^  "  The 
things  which  the  Gentiles  sacrifice,  they  sacrifice  to 
demons,  and  not  to  God."  ^ 

If,  then,  abominations  may  here  be  taken  to  mean 
demons,  the  reference  may  be  to  some  blasphemous 
imitation  of  the  chariot  of  the  Cherubim,  produced  by 
Satanic  power,  and  perhaps  similar  to  that  on  which 
Satan  might  have  conveyed  our  Lord  from  the  pin- 
nacle of  the  Temple,  could  he  have  bent  Him  to  the 
temptation.  Possibly  the  appearance  of  Antichrist 
thus  borne  aloft  by  the  agency  of  demons  may  be 
that  which  will  finally  determine  the  world  to  worship 
him  as  God  ;  while  the  apostate  Jews  may  regard  it 
as  the  expected  sign  from  heaven,  and  as  the  return  of 


'  2  Thess.  ii.  4. 

I  Kings  xi.  [ 

See  "  Earth' 

I  Cor.  X.  20. 


*  I  Kings  xi.  5-7. 

'  See  "  Earth's  Earliest  Ages,"  2nd  edition,  pp.  245-9. 


THE  PROPHECY  OF  THE  SEVENTY   WEEKS.        207 

the  Glory  to  their  Temple.  For  when  another  shall 
come  in  his  own  name,  him  they  will  receive.  And 
immediately  after  this  will  commence  the  terrible  per- 
secution of  all  who  refuse  to  worship  the  Beast  and 
his  image. 

In  such  a  mockery  of  Godhead  the  prince  will 
continue,  until  the  hour  allotted  to  the  Powers  of 
Darkness  has  come  to  its  full  end.  Then  that  which 
has  been  decreed  will  have  been  poured  upon  the 
desolate  city  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  time  of  the  con- 
summation will  have  arrived.  Down  from  heaven  will 
the  flood  of  God's  indignation  be  poured  :  the  blas- 
phemous pretender  will  be  confounded  by  a  brightness 
— far  above  that  of  the  sun — which,  lighting  up  the 
whole  globe  with  the  speed  of  the  storm-flash,  will 
proclaim  the  long-expected  advent  of  the  King  of 
kings. 

Such,  then,  is  the  great  revelation  granted,  in  answer 
to  Daniel's  confession  and  prayer,  as  a  key  to  all 
Hebrew  prophecies.  Until  he  had  received  it,  he  could 
not  understand  his  own  previous  visions.  After  that 
of  the  Four  Wild  Beasts  we  find  him  saying  ; — "  As  for 
me,  Daniel,  my  cogitations  much  troubled  me,  and  my 
countenance  changed  in  me."  ^  And  at  the  end  of  the 
eighth  chapter  also,  he  remarks ; — "  And  I  Daniel 
fainted,  and  was  sick  certain  days  ;  afterwards  I  rose 
up  and  did  the  king's  business  ;  and  I  was  astonished 
at  the  vision,  but  none  understood  it."  ^ 

But    the  disclosure    of   the    Seventy  Weeks,  which 

was  vouchsafed  to  give  him  skill  and   understanding, 

enabled  him   to    comprehend    the   purposes    of   God  ; 

and,  consequently,  in  his  preface  to  the  next  revelation 

'  Dan.  vii.  28.  -  Dan.  viii.  27. 


2o8  THE  JEWS. 

he  tells  us  that  "  he  understood  the  thing,  and  had 
understanding  of  the  vision."  ^  Surely  that  which 
enlightened  Daniel  is  of  the  greatest  importance  to  us 
also,  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  ages  are  come  ;  nor 
should  we  forget  those  pregnant  words  ; — "  And  none 
of  the  wicked  shall  understand  ;  but  the  wise  shall 
understand."  ^ 

IV. 

The  Interval  foretold  by  Zechariah, 

From  the  words  of  Gabriel  we  have  gathered  that  the 
course  of  the  Four  Hundred  and  Ninety  Years  was  to 
be  interrupted  just  before  the  cutting  off  of  Messiah  : 
are  there  any  other  notices  in  Scripture  of  the  setting 
aside  of  His  covenant  with  the  Jews  at  that  time } 
We  shall  find  one  in  the  eleventh  chapter  of  Zechariah, 
of  the  contents  of  which  the  following  is  a  slight 
sketch. 

The  prophet  begins  with  a  description  of  terrible 
destruction,^  the  reason  for  which  is  given  in  the 
subsequent  verses. 

Then  Judah  is  set  before  us  as  a  flock  destined  for 
slaughter,  whose  rulers  are  swayed  only  by  selfish 
motives  :  their  possessors  the  Romans,  their  sellers 
the  Herodians,  and  their  shepherds  the  Pharisees  and 
Sadducees,  all  join  in  oppressing  them. 

But  the  Lord  undertakes  to  feed  them,  especially 
distinguishing  the  poor  of  the  flock ;  and  as  Moses 
had  his  rod,  so  Christ  takes  two  staves  significant  of 
His  office,  one  of  which  He  calls  Beauty,  or  rather 
Favour,  and  the  other  Bands.  By  the  first  the  full 
'      Dan,  X.  I.  ^  Dan.  xii.  lo.  ^  Zech,  xi,  1-3. 


THE  PROPHECY  OF  THE  SEVENTY  WEEKS.        209 

outpouring  of  God's  love  was  secured  to  the  nation, 
according  to  the  prayer  of  Moses  ; — "  And  let  the 
favour  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  upon  us  ;  and  establish 
Thou  the  work  of  our  hands  upon  us  ;  yea,  the  work 
of  our  hands  establish  Thou  it."  ^  By  the  second, 
even  if  they  lost  for  a  time  the  favour  of  God,  they 
would  still  be  held  together  as  a  covenant  people. 

Having  Himself  undertaken  to  be  Shepherd,  the 
Lord  proceeds  to  cut  off  in  one  month  three  hireling 
shepherds  whom  His  soul  abhorred.  These  were 
probably  the  Pharisees,  Sadducees,  and  Herodians,  the 
silencing  of  whom  we  may  find  in  the  twenty-second 
chapter  of  Matthew.  Our  Lord  Himself  points  them 
out  as  false  teachers  when,  on  one  occasion.  He  warns 
His  disciples  against  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and 
Herodians  ;  ^  on  another,  against  that  of  the  Pharisees 
and  Sadducees.'^ 

Then  because  their  soul  abhorred  Him,  He  declared 
that  He  would  no  longer  feed  them,  and  broke  His 
staff  called  Favour,  giving  as  His  reason,  "  That  I 
might  break  My  covenant  which  I  had  made  with  all 
the  peoples  " — that  is,  the  covenant  which  He  had 
made  with  the  Gentiles  to  restrain  them  from  injuring 
the  Jewish  nation."^  This  withdrawal  of  the  light  of 
His  countenance  was  foretold  by  the  Lord  on  the 
Mount  of  Olives,  when  He  wept  over  the  doomed 
city  :  and  it  was  speedily  carried  into  effect — as  soon  as 

'  Psalm  xc.  17. 

^  Mark  viii.  15. 

'  Matt.  xvi.  6. 

■'  In  Hosea  ii.  18,  God  promises  to  make  a  similar  covenant,  in 
favour  of  Israel,  "with  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  with  the  fowls 
of  heaven,  and  with  the  creeping  things  of  the  ground."  Com- 
pare also  Job  v.  22>,  and  Ezek.  xxxiv.  25. 

14 


2IO  THE  JEWS. 

the  rulers  of  the  people  had  refused  to  recognize  Him 
as  the  King  of  the  daughter  of  Zion — at  a  time  exactly 
corresponding  to  the  prophecy  of  the  Seventy  Weeks. 

Nevertheless,  the  poor  of  the  flock,  as  many  as 
believe  on  Him,  continue  to  wait  on  the  Lord,  and 
He  still  feeds  them  ;  but  of  the  rest  of  the  nation  He 
demands  the  wages  of  His  service  in  anticipation  of 
His  betrayal,  and  is  priced  at  thirty  pieces  of  silver. 

Then  the  second  staff.  Bands,  is  broken  ;  for  the 
Jews  go  on  to  smite  the  Judge  of  Israel  with  a  rod 
upon  the  cheek,  and  can,  therefore,  no  longer  be  held 
together  as  a  covenant  nation  at  Jerusalem,  but  arc 
given  up  to  be  scattered  from  their  city,  until  the 
time  that  she  which  travaileth  hath  brought  forth.-^ 

Such  is  an  outline  of  the  prophecy  to  the  end  of 
the  fourteenth  verse,  after  which  comes  the  interval 
revealed  to  Daniel ;  and,  consequently,  we  are  at  once 
carried  from  the  betrayal  of  the  Messiah  and  the 
dispersion  of  the  Jews  to  the  idol  shepherd,  the  Anti- 
christ, who  will  destroy  the  flock  in  the  last  Week,  and 
be  himself  overthrown  "  when  the  chief  Shepherd  shall 
appear."  ^ 

V. 

The  Interval  recognised  by  Matthew. 

A  SIMILAR  outline  may  be  traced  in  the  dispensational  - 
Gospel  of  Matthew. 

For   both    the   Fore-runner  and    the   Lord    Himself 

begin   their   ministry   with  the   cry,  "  Repent,   for  the 

Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  has  come  nigh."     The  Four 

Hundred   and   Eighty-three  Years  were  drawing  to  a 

'  Micah  V.  I,  3.  *  i  Pet.  v.  4. 


THE  INTERVAL  RECOGNISED  BY  MATTHEW.      211 

close  ;  but  the  dreary  interval  would  not  be  necessary 
if  Israel  could  at  that  time  repent  and  receive  the 
Anointed  Prince. 

In  the  fifth  sixth  and  seventh  chapters,  the  laws  of 
the  Kingdom  are  delivered  by  the  King,  Who  speaks 
throughout  on  the  authority  of  His  own  word,  and 
finally  reveals  Himself  to  the  astonished  multitude  as 
the  future  Judge  of  the  quick  and  the  dead.^ 

But  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  that  such  claims 
should  be  supported  by  proofs  of  no  ordinary  kind  ; 
nor  was  the  expectation  disappointed.  A  leper,  hope- 
lessly stricken  with  the  sacred  disease  which  none  but 
Jehovah  could  heal,  was  listening  at  a  distance  ;  and, 
convinced  by  the  wondrous  words  of  the  Speaker  that 
He  must  be  the  Son  of  God,  ran  boldly  to  Him,  and 
said  ; — "  Lord,  if  Thou  wilt,  Thou  canst  make  me 
clean."  This  simple  faith,  and  unreserved  acknow- 
ledgment of  Jesus  as  Lord,  soon  proved  that  all  things 
are  indeed  possible  to  them  that  believe. 

The  Saviour  put  forth  His  hand,  and,  as  He  touched 
the  pale  sufferer,  uttered  the  word  of  power  ; — "  I  do 
will ;  be  thou  clean."  In  an  instant  the  disease  had 
fled  :  a  warm  flow  of  blood  thrilled  the  stagnant  veins 
of  the  leper,  and  flushed  into  his  white  face,  and  he 
stood  healed  and  sound  in  the  presence  of  the  awe- 
struck multitude. 

Yet  this  was  only  the  beginning  of  the  mighty 
works  by  which  the  Lord  showed  that  He  was  in  very 
truth  the  Son  of  God  :  the  eighth  and  ninth  chapters 
contain  accounts  of  other  stupendous  miracles  testifying 
to  His  absolute  sovereignty  over  disease,  the  elements,. 
the  spirits  of  evil,  and  even  death  itself. 

'  Matt.  vii.  21-23. 


212  THE  JEWS. 

The  leaders  of  Israel  did  not,  however,  hail  Him  as 
the  long-expected  Messiah,  but  disliked  His  teaching, 
and  became  more  and  more  determinedly  opposed  to 
Him  as  He  multiplied  the  signs  of  His  power.  Con- 
sequently, He  soon  began  to  hint  that  there  must  be 
delay  in  the  restoration  of  the  Kingdom,  and  spoke  of 
a  future  absence  of  the  Bridegroom,  during  which  the 
children  of  the  Bride-chamber  should  mourn.^ 

Nevertheless,  when  He  looked  on  the  multitude, 
He  was  moved  wnth  compassion,  "  because  they  were 
harassed  and  scattered  abroad,  as  sheep  having  no 
shepherd."  ^  And  so  He  renewed  His  offer,  and,  by 
sending  out  His  twelve  disciples,  again  appealed  to  the 
hearts  of  the  people  with  the  stirring  proclamation, 
"  The  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  has  drawn  nigh."  ^ 
But  there  was  no  adequate  result :  for  He  presently 
began  to  complain  of  the  waywardness  of  His  gene- 
ration, and  to  upbraid  those  cities  wherein  most  of  His 
mighty  w^orks  had  been  done,  because  they  repented 
not.* 

In  the  twelfth  chapter,  the  malice  and  opposition  of 
the  rulers  is  still  more  marked  ;  and,  unable  to  deny 
His  acts  of  -power,  they  dare  to  say ; — "  This  fellow 
doth  not  cast  out  demons  but  by  Beelzebub  the  prince 
of  the  demons."  Then  at  length  He  began  to  show 
that  His  soul  also  abhorred  them  :  His  mouth  spoke 
terrible  things,  and  He  declared  that  their  despised 
privileges  should  bring  down  the  thunder  of  God's 
judgment  upon  their  heads. 

He  concluded  His  discourse  with  the  prophetic 
parable  of  the  man   put   of  whom  the   unclean   spirit 

'  Matt.  ix.  15.  ^  Matt.  x. 

*  Matt.  ix.  36.  *  Matt.  xi.  16-24. 


THE  INTERVAL  RECOGNISED  BY  MATTHEW.      213 

had  gone,  and  predicted  that  their  cloak  of  hypocrisy 
should  yet  be  torn  away,  and  their  real  apostasy  from 
God  discovered.  The  spirit  of  avowed  idolatry  had 
indeed  been  exorcised  for  the  time  by  the  Babylonian 
captivity,  and  its  grosser  manifestations  they  had  swept 
out  of  their  hearts.  Nor  was  this  all  :  they  had  also 
garnished  the  house ;  but  with  a  cold  and  formal 
religion  which,  though  professing  to  honour  God,  was 
of  no  avail  save  for  purposes  of  self-glorification.  For 
the  Spirit  of  God  had  not  taken  possession  of  them  ; 
therefore  the  foul  demon  should  return  to  the  empty 
dwelling  with  seven  others  worse  than  himself,  and  the 
last  state  of  the  Jews  should  be  more  openly  idolatrous 
than  the  first.  They  had  rejected  the  Lord  of  glory  ; 
but  they  should  be  moved  to  worship  a  man,  even  that 
Lawless  One  who  will  oppose  and  exalt  himself  above 
all  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is  worshipped. 

The  Lord  ceased  to  speak  ;  and  immediately  there 
ensued  a  significant  incident,  pre-arranged  by  His 
power  to  show  that  no  tie  of  the  flesh,  however  strong, 
would  be  recognised  before  Him,  unless  it  were  accom- 
panied by  faith  and  obedience.  His  mother  and  her 
sons  had  come  to  the  outskirts  of  the  crowd  wishing 
to  see  Him,  and  a  bystander  said; — "Behold,  Thy 
mother  and  Thy  brethren  stand  without,  desiring  to 
speak  with  Thee."  But  He  replied  ; — "  Who  is  My 
mother,  and  who  are  My  brethren  ? "  Then,  stretching 
forth  His  hand  towards  His  disciples,  He  said ; — 
"  Behold  My  mother  and  My  brethren  !  For  whoso- 
ever shall  do  the  will  of  My  Father  Which  is  in  heaven, 
the  same  is  My  brother,  and  sister,  and  mother."  The 
mere  earthly  relationship  could  not  avail  to  stay  judg- 
ment :    even    the  seed    of  Abraham    according   to   the 


214  THE  JEWS, 

flesh,  and  the  Lord's  kinsmen,  must  perish  if  they 
continued  in  unbelief:  He  would  mark  for  mercy  only 
those  who  did  the  will  of  His  Father.  And  this  will 
was  that  they  should  believe  on  Him  Whom  the  Father 
had  sent :  but  they  were  rejecting  Him,  and  should, 
therefore,  be  also  themselves  rejected. 

Having  thus  predicted  the  fate  of  the  Jews,  the  Lord 
then  proceeded,  on  the  same  day}  to  foretell  what 
should  follow  ;  to  speak  of  the  branches  of  the  wild 
olive  tree  which  should  be  grafted  in  after  the  breaking 
off  of  the  natural  branches  ;  to  reveal,  though  as  yet 
only  in  parable,  something  of  the  great  mystery  which 
had  been  hidden  from  past  ages.  And  by  so  doing 
He  is  said  to  have  fulfilled  the  prophecy  ; — "  I  will 
open  my  mouth  in  parables  :  I  will  utter  things  which 
have  been  kept  secret  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world."  ^  For  until  the  disposition  of  the  Jews  toward 
the  Lord  had  made  it  evident  that  they  must  be  cast 
off  for  a  season,  God  would  not  reveal  what  should 
take  place  during  the  time  of  their  rejection.  It  is  as 
though  He  had  left  it  open  to  them  to  decide,  by  their 
obedience  or  disobedience,  whether  the  last  of  Daniel's 
Weeks  should  be  fulfilled  immediately  after  the  Sixty- 
ninth,  or  whether  there  should  be  a  wearisome  interval 
of  discipline. 

Henceforth  the  character  of  our  Lord's  preaching 
was  changed,  and  we  find  from  Luke  that,  as  He  drew 
nigh  to  Jerusalem  for  His  death.  He  spoke  a  parable 
to  show  that  the  first  offers  were  withdrawn,  and  that 
the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  could  not  now  imme- 
diately appear.^  A  little  later,  probably  in  the  same 
hour,  He  was  standing  on  the  brow  of  Olivet,  and, 
'  Matt.  xiii.  i.  *  Matt.  xiii.  35.  '  Luke  xix.  11. 


7 HE  INTERVAL  RECOGNISED  BY  MATTHEW.      215 

while  gazing  from  thence  at  the  fair  scene  spread  out 
before  Him,  wept  as  He  uttered  the  memorable  lamen- 
tation ; — "  If  thou  hadst  known,  even  thou,  at  least  in 
this  thy  day,  the  things  which  belong  unto  thy  peace  ! 
But  now  they  are  hid  from  thine  eyes.  For  the  days 
shall  come  upon  thee  that  thine  enemies  shall  cast  a 
trench  about  thee,  and  compass  thee  round,  and  keep 
thee  in  on  every  side,  and  shall  lay  thee  even  with  the 
ground,  and  thy  children  within  thee  ;  and  they  shall 
not  leave  in  thee  one  stone  upon  another ;  because 
thou  knewest  not  the  time  of  thy  visitation."^  For 
Messiah  was  about  to  be  cut  off,  and  afterwards  both 
city  and  Sanctuary  should  be  destroyed. 

Nevertheless,  He  entered  into  the  city  on  this  last  ; 
day  of  the  Four  Hundred  and  Eighty-third  Year   of   /- 
Daniel's  period,  and  he  did   so  "  riding   upon  an   ass  ) 
and    upon    a  colt    the   foal   of   an   ass,"   that,  by  the 
simultaneous   fulfilment   of  two   great   prophecies,    He 
might   make  a  last  appeal  to  the  rebel  Jews.      But  it 
was  all  in  vain  :  the  enthusiasm  of  the  populace  was  ^ 
only  momentary,  while  the  malice  of  their  rulers  was   < 
greatly  intensified. 

Then  the  covenant  was  broken,  and  the  barren  fig 
tree  cursed  as  a  sign  ;  the  parable  of  the  vineyard  was 
uttered  with  its  terrible  conclusion — "  Therefore,  I  say 
unto  you,  the  Kingdom  of  God  shall  be  taken  from 
you,  and  given  to  a  nation  bringing  forth  the  fruits 
thereof"  ;"'^  and  the  Temple  was  given  up  with  the  [ 
words,  "Behold,  your  house  is  left  unto  you  desolate."^   \ 

In  the  prophecy  which  He  immediately  afterwards 
delivered  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,  the  Lord  fills  in 
that    part   of  Daniel's   outline   which   was  yet   future, 

'  Luke  xix.  42-44.         -  Matt.  xxi.  43.        ^  Matt,  xxiii.  38. 


2i6  THE  JEWS, 

even  mentioning  the  prophet  by  name.  He  hints  at 
the  destruction  of  the  city  and  Sanctuary  after  His 
own  decease/  and  then  passes  on  to  notice  what 
should  happen  in  the  days  immediately  preceding  the 
fulfilment  of  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  and  the  simul- 
taneous completion  of  the  last  Seven  Years  of  God's 
dealings  with  the  Jews  in  Jerusalem.  And  thus,  in 
the  New  Testament  also,  the  great  interpreting  reve- 
lation given  to  Daniel  is  found  to  be  the  key  of  all 
prophecy  which  concerns  the  Jew. 

VI. 

The  Interval  in  other  Visions  of  Daniel. 

We  will  now  endeavour  to  trace  the  scheme  of  the 
Seventy  Weeks  in  the  other  visions  of  Daniel :  for,  in 
accordance  with  our  previous  conclusions,  we  expect 
to  find  these  also  concerned  at  first  with  events  not 
later  than  the  destruction  of  the  city  and  Sanctuary, 
and  then  passing  over  the  interval  in  silence,  and 
resuming  their  detail  in  the  last  Week. 

But  of  course  this  expectation  does  not  extend  to 
the  vision  of  the  image  :  for  that  was  granted,  not  to 
the  Hebrew  prophet,  but  to  the  first  head  of  Gentile 
dominion.  Naturally,  therefore,  it  takes  in  the  whole 
period  of  that  dominion,  revealing  its  condition  during 
the  cessation,  as  well  as  during  the  progress,  of  God's 
dealings  with  the  Jews.  Hence,  in  the  two  legs  of 
the  image,  it  discloses  the  division  of  the  fourth  World- 
power  into  two  Empires,  an  event  which  is  not  men- 
tioned in  Hebrew  prophecy,  because  it  was  to  take 
place  during  the  interval. 

'  Matt.  xxiv.  6. 


THE  INTERVAL  IN  OTHER    VISIONS  OF  DANIEL.     217 

On  the  other  hand,  the  first  of  the  visions  seen  by 
Daniel,  that  of  the  Four  Wild  Beasts,  entirely  ignores 
the  events  of  the  interval.     For  the  Fourth  Beast  re-  ] 
presents  the  Roman  Empire  in  unity,  as  it  was  at  the  ^ 
time   of   the    destruction   of  Jerusalem,    and    the   first  \ 
part  of  the  description  well  applies  to  it  up  to  that 
period  of  its  history.      Then  follows   the  clause,  "  And 
it  had   ten  horns,"  referring  to  the  Ten  Kingdoms  in 
which  it  will  ultimately  be  arranged.     Thus  the  division 
of  the  Empire  into  two  parts  is  omitted,  and  we  arc  \ 
carried  on  from  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus   \ 
into  the  last  Week. 

Again  ;  the  vision  of  the  Ram  and  the  He-goat 
begins  to  find  its  fulfilment  in  the  days  of  the  prophet, 
although  the  angel  affirms  that  its  main  reference  is 
to  "  the  time  of  the  end " — a  fact  which  seems  to 
identify  the  little  horn  of  this  revelation  with  that  of 
the  Ten-horned  Beast.  The  horn  of  the  He-goat,  we 
are  told,  is  Alexander  the  Great ;  while  the  four,  which 
spring  up  after  it  has  been  broken,  are  the  four  king-  > 
doms  into  which  the  Macedonian  Empire  was  subse-  \ 
quently  divided,  and  the  last  survivor  of  which — that 
is,  Egypt — was  absorbed  into  Rome  after  the  battle 
of  Actium,  in  B.C.  31.  The  interval,  therefore,  occurs 
between  the  four  horns  and  the  little  one,  and  is 
plainly  intimated  by  the  angel,  who  prefaces  his  descrip- 
tion of  the  king  of  fierce  countenance  with  the  words, 
"  And  in  the  latter  time  of  their  kingdom,  when  the 
transgressors  are  come  to  the  full."  Thus  the  pre- 
diction passes  on  at  once  from  about  B.C.  31,  which 
is  within  the  Sixty-nine  weeks,  to  the  appearance  of 
Antichrist  in  the  Seventieth. 

The  last  revelation  to  Daniel,  contained  in  the  tenth. 


2i8  THE  JEWS. 

eleventh,  and  twelfth  chapters,  also  begins  its  dis- 
closures from  the  times  of  the  prophet,  and  notices 
the  reigns  of  Cambyses,  Pseudo-Smerdis,  Darius  Hy- 
staspes,  and  Xerxes/  From  the  last-mentioned  king 
it  passes  on  to  Alexander,  and  speaks  of  his  great 
dominion  ;  but  at  the  same  time  predicts  that  none 
of  his  posterity  should  retain  his  power,  and  that  his 
empire  should  be  divided  into  four  kingdoms.^  Then 
it  traces  out  the  fortunes  of  two  of  these  kingdoms, 
Syria  and  Egypt,  because  their  policies  and  wars 
affected  Palestine  which  lay  between  them.  With 
occasional  detail  of  wonderful  minuteness  it  foretells 
the  conflicts  of  the  Seleucida^  and  Lagidce,  especially 
dwelling  upon  the  doings  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes.^ 
Afterwards  there  is  an  evident  reference  to  the  Mac- 
cabees in  the  words,  "  But  the  people  that  do  know 
their  God  shall  be  strong,  and  do  exploits."* 

In  the  next  verse  it  mentions  the  rise  of  a  very 
different  class  of  agents,  "  they  that  understand  among 
the  people,"  who  do  no  exploits,  but  "  instruct  many." 
This  is  a  description  in  which  we  cannot  fail  to 
recognize  the  appearance  and  work  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  and  His  disciples.  But  the  instruction  would 
be  rejected  by  the  mass  of  the  people,  and  would  not, 
therefore,  avail  to  forefend  the  approaching  judgment  ; 
for  the  prophecy  continues  ; — "  Yet  they  shall  fall  by 
the  sword  and  by  flame,  by  captivity  and  by  spoil, 
many  days."^ 

This  is  an  evident  reference  to  the  destruction  of 
the  city  and   Sanctuary  by  Titus,  and  the  consequent 

•  Dan.  xi.  2.  •  '  Dan.  xi.  5-32. 

*  Dan.  xi.  3,  4.  ■■  Dan.  xi.  32. 

^  Dan.  xi.  2>li- 


THE  KEY  TO  ALL  PROPHECY.  219 

dispersion  of  the  Jews  ;  and  our  Lord  uses  similar 
language  in  foretelling  the  same  events.^  He  expresses 
the  "  many  days  "  of  Daniel  by  saying  that  "  Jerusalem 
shall  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles,  until  the  times 
of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled." 

Thus  we  are  again  brought  down  to  the  same  crisis 
as  in  the  prophecy  of  the  Seventy  Weeks,  and  then 
immediately  carried  on  to  the  doings  of  Antichrist : 
for  the  thirty-sixth  verse  introduces  the  Wilful  King. 
And  so  the  same  scheme  may  be  detected  in  all  the 
great  revelations  given  to  Daniel. 


VII. 

The  Scheme  of  the  Seventy  Weeks  is  the 
Key  to  all  Prophecy. 

We  have  thus  found  from  the  prophecy  of  the  Seventy 
Weeks — as  well  as  from  other  parts  of  Scripture,  in 
which  the  Lord  is  represented  as  breaking  His  covenant 
with  Israel  just  before  His  death — that  there  has  now 
been  for  more  than  eighteen  hundred  years  an  entire 
cessation  of  God's  dealings  with  the  Jews  as  a  nation. 
A  great  gap  extends — as  we  understand  by  the  words 
of  Daniel,  Zechariah,  and  the  Lord  Himself — from 
Messiah  the  Prince  to  the  false  prince  that  shall  come  ; 
from  the  good  Shepherd,  Whom  the  flock  abhorred 
and  rejected,  to  the  idol  shepherd,  whom  the  majority 
of  them  will  follow  to  their  own  destruction  ;  from 
Him  Who  came  in  His  Father's  name  to  that  other 
who  shall  come  in  his  own  name. 

And  during  the  interval  between  the  true  Messiah 

'  Luke  xxi.  24. 


220  THE  JEWS. 

and  the  false,  Hebrew  prophecy  is  almost  entirely  in 
abeyance,  and  there  remain  in  present  operation  only 
one  or  two  fearful  utterances  which  stretch,  as  it 
were,  here  and  there  across  the  whole  width  of  the 
chasm. 

Such  is  the  cry  of  Hosea,  which  startled  the  pro- 
sperous and  haughty  times  of  Uzziah  with  the  fateful 
words  ; — "  For  the  children  of  Israel  shall  abide  many 
days  without  a  king,  and  without  a  prince,  and  with- 
out a  sacrifice,  and  without  an  image,  and  without  an 
ephod,  and  without  teraphim."^ 

Such  is  the  mournful  burden  of  Micah  that,  because 
of  the  smiting  of  the  Judge  of  Israel  upon  the  cheek, 
God  would  give  up  His  people,  until  the  travailing 
woman  should  bring  forth.^ 

And  such,  especially,  are  the  terrible  fulminations 
in  Leviticus  and  Deuteronomy,  those  words  of  fear  ; — 
"  And  the  Lord  shall  scatter  thee  among  all  people, 
from  the  one  end  of  the  earth  even  unto  the  other  ; 
and  there  thou  shalt  serve  other  gods,  which  neither 
thou  nor  thy  fathers  have  known,  even  wood  and 
stone.  And  among  those  nations  shalt  thou  find  no 
ease,  neither  shall  the  sole  of  thy  foot  have  rest :  but 
the  Lord  shall  give  thee  there  a  trembling  heart,  and 
failing  of  eyes,  and  sorrow  of  mind  :  and  thy  life  shall 
hang  in  doubt  before  thee  ;  and  thou  shalt  fear  day 
and  night,  and  shalt  have  none  assurance  of  thy  life. 
In  the  morning  thou  shalt  say.  Would  God  it  were 
even  !  and  at  even  thou  shalt  say.  Would  God  it  were 
morning  !  for  the  fear  of  thine  heart  wherewith  thou 
shalt  fear,  and  for  the  sight  of  thine  eyes  which  thou 
shalt  see.'" 

'  Hosea  iii.  4.        *  Micah  v.  i,  3.         ^  Deut.  xxviii.  64-67. 


THE  KEY  TO  ALL  PROPHECY.  221 

With  the  exception  of  such  passages  as  these,  and 
the  few  predictions  respecting  the  Gentiles,  all  Old 
Testament  prophecy — which  invariably  refers  to  the 
literal  Judah,  Jerusalem,  and  Israel — centres  upon  the 
events  immediately  connected  with  the  two  advents. 
For,  as  Peter  tells  us,  the  Spirit  through  the  prophets 
"  testified  beforehand  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the 
glory  that  should  follow  "  ^ — that  is,  the  first  coming  to  -^ 
suffer  and  die,  and  the  consequent  rejection  of  the 
Jews  ;  and  the  second  coming  to  rule  with  power,  and  ' 
the  consequent  restoration  of  all  Israel. 

The  knowledge  of  this  fact  is  indispensable  to  a 
right  understanding  of  prophecy ;  for  events  connected 
with  the  two  great,  but  now  widely  separated  eras,  are 
often  mentioned  together,  even  in  the  same  sentence. 
Nor  is  there  any  confusion  in  such  an  arrangement : 
for  had  the  Jews  received  Christ  at  His  first  coming, 
John  the  Baptist  would  have  been  Elijah  to  them,^  the 

•  I  Pet.  i.  II. 

'  It  has  been  supposed  by  many  that  John  exhausted  the  pro- 
phecy in  Mai.  iv.  5.  But  nothing  less  than  the  personal  appear- 
ance of  "  Elijah  the  prophet  " — or  "  Elijah  the  Tishbite,"  as  the 
Septuagint  has  it — can  fulfil  that  utterance.  Moreover,  his 
coming  must  be  just  before  the  second  advent,  "the  great  and 
dreadful  day  of  the  Lord."  When  the  Saviour  speaks  of  this 
subject  it  is  with  an  ambiguity  which  can  onl}'  be  dispelled  by  a 
knowledge  of  the  Seventy  Weeks.  On  one  occasion  He  says  of 
John  ; — "And  if  ye  are  willing  to  receive  him,  this  is  Elijah  which 
is  to  come  "  (Matt.  xi.  14).  That  is,  "  If  you  will  allow  John  to 
do  the  work  of  Elijah,  he  shall  be  Elijah  to  you  ;  the  Seventieth 
Week  shall  follow  immediately  upon  the  Sixty-ninth,  and  then  the 
Kingdom  shall  be  restored  to  Israel."  But  the  preaching  of  the 
Baptist  did  not  turn  the  hearts  of  the  Jews  ;  and  accordingly, 
after  his  death,  when  the  opportunity  had  passed,  the  Lord  said,  1 
"Elijah  indeed  cometh,  and  shall  restore  all  things;  but  I  say  I 
unto  you  that  an  Elijah  came  just  now  (^'5/;  rfkQi),  and  they  knew 
him  not,  but  did  unto  him  whatsoever  they  listed"  (Matt.  xvii. 
II,  12).     Here  the  coming  of  the  personal  Elijah  is  affirmed  to  be 


222  ■         THE  JEWS. 

last  Seven  Years  would  have  followed  immediately,  and 
then  the  Kingdom  would  have  been  restored  to  Israel. 
But  the  unbelief  of  the  Jews  separated  those  things 
which  might  have  been  joined  together,  and,  conse- 
quently, the  marvellous  events  of  the  last  Week  have 
not  yet  begun  to  take  place. 

Lest,  however,  we  should  feel  any  perplexity  in  re- 
gard to  the  interpretation  of  Old  Testament  prophecy, 
the  Lord  Himself  has  given  us  a  clue.  In  the  fourth 
chapter  of  Luke  we  may  find  an  account  of  His  visit 
to  the  synagogue  at  Nazareth,  where  He  read  a  passage 
from  Isaiah,  and  declared  that  it  was  fulfilled  on  that 
day  in  the  ears  of  His  audience.  The  passage  runs 
as  follows  ; — "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  Me  ; 
because  He  hath  anointed  Me  to  preach  the  Gospel  to 
the  poor  ;  He  hath  sent  Me  to  heal  the  broken-hearted, 
to  preach  deliverance  to  the  captives,  and  recovering  of 
sight  to  the  blind  ;  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are 
bruised,  to  preach  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord."  ^ 
When  He  had  read  so  much.  He  closed  the  book  ; 
and  if  we  turn  to  the  sixty-first  chapter  of  Isaiah,  we 
shall  see  in  what  manner  He  extracted  the  passage. 
He  ceased  reading  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence,  because 

still  in  the  future ;  and  we  are  told  that  he  will  do  what  John 
might  have  done  but  did  not,  and  will  bring  back  Israel  from 
apostasy.  In  the  words  which  follow,  the  allusion  to  John  shows 
that  his  appearance  "in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elijah"  was  a 
tentative  fulfilment  of  Malachi's  prophecy,  preparatory  to  the 
offers  of  the  Kingdom  which  Christ  made  in  the  beginning  of  Hii 
ministry,  but  never  repeated  after  the  death  of  John.  For 
although  His  entry  into  Jerusalem  marked  the  time  when  He 
would  have  allowed  Himself  to  be  recognised  as  King,  had  He 
not  been  already  rejected ;  yet  His  lamentation  over  the  doomed 
city,  before  He  passed  its  gates,  proves  that  this  was  no  real 
offer,  because  the  Jews  were  irremediably  hardened. 
'  Luke  iv.  i8,  19 ;  Isa.  l.xi.  i,  2. 


THE  KEY  TO  ALL  PROPHECY.  223 

its  next  clause  leaps  the  wide  chasm  between  the  first 
and  second  advents,  and  speaks  of  "the  day  of  ven- 
geance of  our  God."  Unless,  therefore.  He  had  closed 
the  book  when  He  did,  He  could  not  have  said,  "  This 
day  is  this  Scripture  fulfilled  in  your  ears." 

Before;  however,  we  deduce  a  canon  of  interpretation 
from  our  Lord's  method  of  procedure,  we  should  be 
careful  to  notice  that  prophecy  must  always,  when  it  is 
possible,  be  taken  literally.  The  Bible  is  not  a  riddle, 
but  a  revelation.  Written  to  suit  the  mean  capacities 
of  our  race  while  still  in  the  flesh,  it  is  easily  intelligible 
to  those  who  surrender  themselves  to  the  guidance  of 
the  Spirit.  It  presents  but  few  difficulties,  if  we  are 
willing  to  receive  it  just  as  it  has  been  delivered  to  us, 
and  do  not  wish  to  avoid  that  which  is  supernatural. 
And  with  a  few  avowed  exceptions — such  as  when  the 
mind  that  hath  wisdom  is  challenged,  or  when  he  that 
hath  ears  to  hear  is  bidden  to  hear — if  it  does  speak 
figuratively,  it  employs  plain  and  obvious  figures,  the 
purpose  of  which  is  to  illustrate  and  make  clear,  and 
not  to  mystify. 

That  what  we  affirm  is  true  may  be  seen  by  the 
prophecies  of  the  first  advent,  which,  fulfilled  as  they 
were  with  a  wonderful  literality,  should  make  us  wise 
in  regard  to  the  future.  Let  the  following  serve  as 
examples. 

The  messenger.  Mai.  iii.  i      ...  Mark  i.  2-8. 

The  virgin  mother.  Gen.  iii.  15  ; 

Isa.  vii.  14.  ...  Matt.  i.  18-23.' 

'  In  the  prophecy  of  Isa.  vii.  14,  the  Authorized  Version 
obscures  the  meaning  by  omitting  the  article ;  for  we  should 
read,  "Behold,  the  virgin  conceiving."  The  same  mistake 
occurs  in  the  quotation  in  Matt.  i.  23,  but  is  corrected  in  the 
Revised  Version.    We  scarcely  need  to  say  that  the  article  is  of 


224 


THE  JEWS. 


The  other  children  of  the 

Lord's  mother. 
The  riding  into  Jerusalem. 
The  thirty  pieces  of  silver. 
The  potter's  field. 
The  smiting  and  spitting. 
The  piercing  with  nails'^. 

The  piercing  with  the  Sj^car"^ 
The  garments  and  vesture. 
The  vinegar  and  the  gall. 
The  unbroken  bones. 


Ps.  Ixix.  8.  •  . 

Zech.  ix.  9.    . 
Zech.  xi.  12.  . 
Zech.  xi.  13. 
Isa.  1.  6. 
Psa.  xxii.  16. 

Zech.  xii.  10. 
Psa.  xxii.  18. 
Psa.  Ixix.  21. 
Psa.  xxxiv.  20 


..  Matt.  xii.  46  , 
John  vii.  5 
..  Matt.  xxi.  i-ii. 
..  Matt.  xxvi.  15. 
...  Matt,  xxvii.  7. 
...  Matt.  xxvi.  67. 
...  Matt,  xxvii.  35  ; 
John  XX.  25-27. 
...  John  xix.  34,  2>7. 
...  John  xix.  23,  24. 
...  Matt,  xxvii.  34. 
...  John  xix.  2>2»  36. 


The  list  might  be  greatly  extended,  and  there  is  no 
reason  to  doubt  that  the  prophecies  of  the  second 
advent  will  be  fulfilled  as  literally  as  those  of  the  first. 

From  this  consideration,  and  from  the  example  given 


the  utmost  importance,  since  it  points  back  to  some  particular 
virgin  who  must  have  been  indicated  by  a  previous  revelation, 
and  so  connects  Isaiah's  words  with  the  primeval  utterance 
respecting  "the  seed  of  the  woman."  For  that  unusual  expres- 
sion evidently  implies  that,  just  as  sin  came  into  the  world  through 
the  woman  alone,  so  far  as  earthly  agencies  were  concerned,  so 
the  Deliverer  should  be  introduced  by  the  woman  alone ;  in  other 
words,  that  our  Lord  should  be  bom  of  a  virgin. 

'  In  this  prophecy — the  next  verse  of  which  is  applied  to  Christ 
in  the  New  Testament  (John  ii.  17  ;  Rom.  xv.  3) — the  expres- 
sion, "My  mother's  children,"  precludes  all  attempts  to  show 
that  the  Lord's  brethren  were  either  His  cousins  or  His  half- 
brothers.  Without  doubt  James  and  Joses  and  Simon  and  Judas 
(Matt.  xiii.  55)  were  the  literal  brethren  of  the  Lord,  and  it  would 
never  have  occurred  to  any  one  to  deny  so  plain  a  fact,  had  it  not 
been  for  the  wish  to  substantiate  idolatrous  theories  respecting 
His  mother,  and  to  identify  her  with  Isis,  the  mother  of  Horus, 
and  yet  the  ever-virgin.  See  the  note  at  the  end  of  the  present 
chapter. 

-  In  the  passage  of  the  twenty-second  Psalm — "  They  pierced 
My  hands  and  My  feet — the  word  "INB  (akin  to  1-13  T^?)  is  found, 
which  signifies  to  dig  or  bore  through,  and  is,  therefore,  most 
appropriately  used  of  nails.  But  in  Zech.  xii.  10,  the  verb  is  "li^T. 
which  means  to  pierce  with  a  sword  or  spear. 


THE  KEY  TO  ALL  TROPHECY.  225 

above  of  our  Lord's  way  of  dealing  with   Scripture,  we 
would  suggest  the  following  method  of  interpretation 

In  any  prediction  of  the  Old  Testament,  regard  that 
which  has  been  exactly  fulfilled  at  the  first  advent  as 
already  past. 

Apply  all  else  to  the  times  of  the  second  advent,  as 
literally  as  the  case  will  allow. 

By  way  of  example  we  may  cite  the  words  of  Isaiah ; 
— "For  unto  us  a  Child  is  born,  unto  us  a  Son  is  given ; 
and  the  government  shall  be  upon  His  shoulder."  Now 
the  Child  was  born,  and  the  Son  was  given,  at  the  first 
advent;  but  the  government  did  not  then  devolve  upon 
Him,  for  He  was  cut  off  and  there  was  nothing  for 
Him.  He  left  our  world  as  a  nobleman  going  into  a 
far  country  to  receive  for  himself  a  kingdom  and  to 
return.  At  the  second  advent,  therefore,  will  the 
government  be  placed  upon  His  shoulder.  It  is  only 
after  the  Fourth  Beast  has  been  slain,  and  his  body 
destroyed  and  given  to  the  burning  flame,  that  the  Son 
of  man  shall  be  brought  to  the  Ancient  of  days,  and 
invested  with  dominion,  and  glory,  and  a  Kingdom.^ 

So  in  the  thirteenth  chapter  of  Zechariah,  the  seventh 
verse  refers  to  the  first  advent,^  but  the  eighth  and  ninth 
to  the  second  ;  for  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by 
Titus  resulted  in  the  dispersion  of  the  whole  Jewish 
nation,  not  in  the  deliverance  of  one-third  of  them. 

If,  then,  we  apply  this  process,  of  which  our  Lord 
Himself  gives  us  an  example,  the  Bible  becomes  a 
plain  revelation,  and  is  no  longer  a  tissue  of  enigmas. 
Its  every  page  sparkles  with  glory,  and  it  is  found  to 
be  filled  with  disclosures  and  instructions  which  Paul 
might  well  compare  to  gold,  silver,  and  precious  stones. 
'  Dan.  vii.  11-14,  ''■  Matt.  xxvi.  31. 

15 


226  THE    TEWS. 

Note  on  the  Brethren  of  the  Lord. 

The  actual  blood-relationship  of  our  Lord  to  those 
persons  who  in  the  New  Testament  are  called  "  His 
brethren,"  and  are  usually  mentioned  in  connection 
with  His  mother,  is  a  truth  of  great  importance.  It 
bars  the  way  against  that  doctrine  of  Paganism  which 
has  ever  corrupted  the  nominal  Church  more  powerfully, 
perhaps,  or,  at  least,  more  persistently,  than  any  other. 
And  just  as  it  was  vehemently  assailed  in  the  early 
centuries  of  our  era,  so  now  it  is  either  ignored  or 
opposed  by  many,  because  the  causes  which  first  ren- 
dered it  distasteful  are  once  more  working  actively 
among  us. 

For  Llariolatry  is  gaining  ground  in  those  countries 
which  have  hitherto  been  termed  Protestant ;  while  that 
which  it  really  represents,  namely,  the  worship  of  the 
female  principle  in  nature,  has  of  late  found  favour 
with  many  Secularists — such  as  Strauss,  Comte,  and 
John  Stuart  Mill — and  prevails  extensively  among 
Spiritualists   and  Theosophists. 

Now  this  wide-spread  error,  which  may,  ultimately, 
prove  a  bond  of  union  to  men  of  very  diverse  opinions, 
is  at  once  deprived  of  all  the  support  which  it  pretends 
to  draw  from  Christianity  if  the  Lord's  brethren  can  be 
shown  to  be  the  veritable  sons  of  His  mother.  For 
the  universal  Heathen  goddess  of  many  names,  with 
which  men  have  ever  sought  to  identify  her,  was  the 
mother  of  a  divine  son,  and  yet  a  virgin.  Hence  the 
importance  of  the  question. 

But  to  an  unprejudiced  mind  there  could  be  no 
question  at  all.  Were  we  without  interest  in  the  con- 
troversy,   we     should,    upon    reading     of    the     Lord's 


NOTE   ON  THE  BRETHREN  OF  THE  LORD.         227 

"  mother  and  His  brethren,"  instinctively  understand 
the  brethren  to  be  related  to  Him  in  the  flesh  in  the 
same  literal  sense  in  which  His  mother  was.  And  if 
any  feeling  within  us  forbids  so  obvious  a  conclusion, 
it  certainly  does  not  spring  from  the  Scriptures,  which 
contain  nothing  that  could  possibly  suggest  it. 

On  the  contrary,  the  simple  command  to  Joseph, 
"  F'ear  not  to  take  unto  thee  Mary  thy  wife"  ^  is  suffi- 
cient to  show  that  the  usual  conjugal  relations  sub- 
sisted between  the  pair  after  our  Lord's  birth.  And 
the  plain  narration,  that  Joseph  "  took  unto  him  his 
wife,  and  knew  her  not  till  she  had  brought  forth  her 
firstborn  Son,"  ^  affords  conclusive  evidence  that  Matthew, 
at  least,  had  no  wish  to  guard  against  the  legitimate 
meaning  of  his  words. 

Again  ;  the  significant  but  much  neglected  fact  that, 
in  Scripture,  Mary  is  never  called  a  virgin  after  the 
birth  of  her  firstborn  Son,  is  in  itself  fatal  to  the  purely 
Heathen  doctrine  of  her  perpetual  virginity. 

And  lastly  ;  it  cannot  have  been  without  design  that, 
in  a  Psalm  repeatedly  applied  to  Christ  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  immediately  preceding  a  verse  both  the 
clauses  of  which  are  cited  by  inspired  writers  as  re- 
ferring to  Him,^  we  should  find  the  words  ; — 

"  I  am  become  a  stranger  unto  My  brethren, 
And  an  alien  unto  My  mother's  children.''  * 

It  is  unnecessary  to  say  more  :  the  Bible  certainly 
assumes  the  brethren  of  the  Lord  to  be  the  actual  sons 
of  His  mother,  upon  whom — with  two  memorable  excep- 

Matt.  i.  20. 

Matt.  i.  24,  25. 

Psa.  Ixix.  g.     Compare  John  ii.  17   and  Rom.  xv.  3. 

Psa.  Ixix.  8. 


228  THE  JEWS. 

tions,  of  which  we  shall  speak  presently — it  always  repre- 
sents them  as  being  in  attendance.  So  carefully  did  He 
Who  knows  the  end  from  the  beginning  anticipate  the 
attempt  to  identify  the  Saviour's  earthly  parent  with 
Isis  the  ever-virgin  mother  of  Horus — ^just  as  also,  in 
the  plans  of  the  Tabernacle  and  the  Temple,  He 
directed  that  the  Holy  of  holies  should  be  set  in  the 
West,  and  so  at  once  distinguished  His  worshippers 
from  the  multitudinous  votaries  of  nature  and  the  sun, 
who  turned  towards  the  East. 

But  in  this  case,  as  in  many  others,  human  corrup- 
tion quickly  made  the  Word  of  God  of  none  effect. 
In  very  early  times  the  v/ish  to  assimilate  Christianity 
to  Paganism  by  furnishing  it  with  a  virgin-goddess, 
together  with  the  prevailing  tendency  to  asceticism, 
resulted  in  a  theory  that  Joseph  was  a  widower  when 
he  espoused  Mary,  and  that  the  "  brethren  "  were  his 
sons  by  his  first  wife. 

The  origin  of  this  theory  is  betrayed  by  the  senti- 
ments of  its  supporters.  Not  a  particle  of  evidence 
can  be  adduced  in  its  favour :  for  there  is  no  historical 
mention  of  a  previous  marriage  of  Joseph,  nor  do  the 
fictitious  elder  half-brothers  appear  in  the  few  incidents 
of  the  Lord's  birth  and  childhood  which  are  revealed 
to  us.  Even  Jerome  taunts  those  who  believe  in  it 
with  "  following  the  Apocryphal  waitings,  and  inventing 
a  v/retched  little  woman,  Melcha,  or  Escha." 

But,  in  order  to  Paganise  Christianity,  it  was  not 
enough  to  dispose  of  these  brethren  :  it  was  also  neces- 
sary to  show  that  Mary  could  have  had  no  other  chil- 
dren besides  her  Firstborn.  Accordingly,  about  the 
middle  of  the  second  century,  the  Protevangelium 
Jacobi    represented    Joseph   as    being,    at    the   time    of 


NOTE   ON   'IHE  BRETHREN  OF  THE  LORD.         229 

his  second  marriage,  a  very  old  man  with  adult  chil- 
dren. Unfortunately,  however,  for  the  reputation  of 
that  work,  it  allowed  him  no  daughters,  although  the 
New  Testament  mentions  the  Lord's  sisters  ^  as  well 
as  His  brothers.  But  the  idea  of  Joseph's  extreme  age 
became  very  popular  in  Apocryphal  writings,  and  is 
worked  out  from  them,  with  grotesque  extravagance, 
in  the  Coventry  Miracle  Plays  which  are  preserved  in 
the  British  Museum.  And  while  the  doctrine  of  Mary's 
virginity  was  being  thus  disseminated,  the  name  of 
Theotocus,  or  Mother  of  God,  was  also  assigned  to  her 
and  led  to  the  natural  inference  that  the  Godhead  of 
Christ  as  well  as  His  human  body  proceeded  from  her 
and,  therefore,  that  she  must  herself  have  been  a 
goddess. 

Towards  the  close  of  the  fourth  century,  a  number 
of  female  devotees,  who  had  migrated  from  Thrace  to 
Arabia,  gave  out  that  they  were  priestesses  of  Mary, 
and  commenced  an  idolatrous  worship  which,  by  the 
form  it  assumed,  seems  to  point  to  an  identification  of 
her  with  Ceres.  On  appointed  festival  days  they  con- 
veyed about  in  chariots — such  as  the  Pagans  used  in 
their  religious  processions — certain  cakes,  or  wafers, 
consecrated  to  her  and  called  collyrides,  from  which 
they  derived  their  own  name  of  Collyridians.  After 
presenting  these  cakes  as  offerings,  they  then  ate  them. 
The  ceremony  was,  perhaps,  an  adaptation  of  the 
harvest  festival  of  Ceres,  known  as  the  Thesmophoria  ; 
or,  possibly,  of  the  inizd,  or  round  wafer  used  in  the 
worship  of  Mithras.^     This  last  is  the  prototype  of  the 

'  Matt.  xiii.  56. 

^  From  the  Paganised  Christian  point  of  view    this  would,  ot 
course,  be  a  transfer  of  the  Lord's  Supper  to  the  worship  of  Marj-. 


230  THE  JEWS, 

host,  and  the  origin  of  the  Roman  Catholic  term  missa, 
the  mass. 

Of  course  so  open  a  deification  of  the  Lord's  human 
mother  was  not  carried  on  without  considerable  opposi- 
tion. It  was,  however,  defended  with  fanatical  violence 
by  Epiphanius,  Bishop  of  the  Cyprian  Salamis,  who 
invented  a  name  for  the  opponents  of  his  idolatry, 
calling  them  Antidicomarianites  or  "  Adversaries  of 
Mary." 

Among  those  who  objected  to  the  new  goddess  was 
one  Helvidius,  a  lawyer  of  Rome.  This  man,  shocked 
by  Jerome's  extravagant  praises  of  celibacy,  undertook 
to  confute  the  obnoxious  views,  and,  in  the  course  of 
his  argument,  maintained  that,  after  the  birth  of  the 
Lord,  Mary  had  become  a  wife  and  the  mother  of 
children. 

To  this  statement  Jerome,  who  was  greatly  the 
superior  of  Helvidius  in  learning  and  dialectics,  and 
who  either  disliked  or  distrusted  the  theory  of  Joseph's 
previous  marriage,  replied  that  the  brethren  of  the 
Lord  were  not  the  sons  of  His  mother,  but  merely  His 
cousins.  The  spirit  in  which  he  put  forth  this  opinion 
may  be  gathered  from  his  boast  that  he  claimed  vir- 
ginity, not  for  Mary  only,  but  also  for  Joseph.  The 
argument  by  which  he  supported  it  is  a  worthless  tissue 
of  errors,  and  may  be  stated  as  follows  : — 

In  the  list  of  the  Twelve  there  are  two  apostles 
bearing  the  name  of  James.  And  we  also  read  of 
James  the  Lord's  brother. 

This  last  must,  however,  have  been  one  of  the  Twelve, 
or,  otherwise,  there  would  have  been  three  persons  of 
the  same  name. 

And  in  such  a  case  how  could  one  of  them  be  called 


NOTE   ON  THE  BRETHREN  OF  THE   LORD.         231 

"  James  the  less,"  a  term  which  implies  that  there  was 
but  one  other  ? 

Moreover,  in  writing  to  the  Galatlans  Paul  narrates, 
"  But  other  of  the  apostles  saw  I  none,  save  James  the 
Lord's  brother,"^  thus  classing  the  latter  with  the 
Twelve. 

This  argument,  the  basis  of  Jerome's  whole  theory, 
may  be  disposed  of  without  much  trouble. 

For  such  an  expression  as  "  James  the  less "  is  not 
to  be  found  in  the  original  of  the  New  Testament  :  the 
apostle  is  called  "  James  the  little  " — 6  /xi/c/jog.^ 

And  the  words  of  Paul  may  be  rendered,  "  I  saw  no 
other  apostle — that  is,  no  other  save  Peter  who  has  just 
been  mentioned — but  only  James,  the  Lord's  brother. 
Moreover,  even  if  we  admit  that  this  James  was  an 
apostle,  it  by  no  means  follows  that  he  was  one  of  the 
Twelve.  P'or  the  title  was  conferred  upon  others  also, 
as  for  instance  upon  Barnabas.^  Indeed  in  one  passage 
Paul  appears  to  distinguish  between  "  the  Twelve  "  and 
"  all  the  apostles."  ^ 

Such,  then,  was  the  false  foundation  upon  which 
Jerome  was  content  to  build  the  subjoined  theory. 

Since  James  the  Lord's  brother  is  mentioned  after 
the  death  of  James  the  son  of  Zebedee,  he  must  be 
identified  with  James  the  son  of  Alphseus. 

Now  the  latter  had  a  brother  named  Joses,  and,  in 
the  Gospels  of  Matthew  and  Mark,^  there  is  record  of 
a  Mary  the  mother  of  James  and  Joses  being  present 
at  the  crucifixion.  She  must,  therefore,  have  been  the 
wife  of  Alpha^us. 

'  Gal.  i.  19.  ^  See  Acts  xiv.  /\,  i/[. 

'  Mark  xv.  40.  ■*  i  Cor.  xv.  5,7. 

*  Matt,  xxvii.  56  ;  Mark  xv.  40. 


232  THE  JEWS, 

But  in  the  fourth  Gospel,  in  place  of  the  mother  of 
James  and  Joses  we  read  of  a  Mary  of  Clopas,  the 
sister  of  the  Lord's  mother,  standing  by  the  cross.-^ 
This  must,  therefore,  be  the  same  as  the  wife  of 
Alphaeus,^  who  is  thus  proved  to  be  the  sister  of  the 
Lord's  mother. 

Hence  her  children  were  His  cousins,  and  they  are 
called  His  brethren  merely  because  that  term  is  often 
applied  to  any  near  relations. 

This  elaborate  superstructure  is  as  worthless  as  its 
foundation,  and  a  single  fact  will  suffice  to  prove  our 
assertion.  James  the  Lord's  brother  could  not  have  been 
the  son  of  Alphseus,  for  the  latter  was  one  of  the 
Twelve  ;  whereas  of  the  Lord's  brethren  we  are  told, 
without  reserve,  that  they  did  not  believe  on  Him.^ 
But  although  there  is  no  necessity  for  further  discussion, 
we  will,  nevertheless,  add  one  or  two  remarks  which 
will  help  the  reader  to  a  still  clearer  view  of  the  stand- 
ing of  Jerome  as  a  teacher. 

And,  first,  Mary  the  wife  of  Clopas  is  not  to  be 
identified  with  the  sister  of  the  Lord's  mother.  For 
the  passage  in  John  should  be  read  as  follows  : — "  Now 
there  stood  by  the  cross  of  Jesus  His  mother  and  His 
mother's  sister,  Mary  the  wife  of  Clopas  and  Mary 
Magdalene."  Not  three  only,  but  four  women  are 
mentioned,  and  they  are  arranged  in  couples,  just  as 
the  apostles  are  in  lists  of  the  Twelve.^  And  by 
so  understanding  the  passage,  we  avoid  an  absurdity  : 
for,  according  to  Jerome,  both  the  Lord's  mother  and 

'  John  xix.  25. 

==  The  two  names  Clopas  and  Alphieus  might  be  identified, 
since  both  forms  could  be  derived  from  the  same  Aramsean  ori- 
ginal.    Jerome  was  not,  however,  aware  of  this  fact. 

^  John  vii.  5.  *  Matt.  x.  2-4;  Luke  vi.  id-i6. 


NOTE   ON  THE  BRETHREN  OF  THE  LORD.         233 

her  sister  must  have  borne  the  same  name  of  Mary. 
Indeed,  some  supporters  of  his  theory  are  bold  enough 
to  affirm  that  the  Jews  frequently  gave  the  same  name 
to  sisters  ;  but,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  they  offer  no 
evidence  of  the  prevalence  of  so  irrational  a  custom. 

The  argument  from  the  names  James  and  Joses  is 
also  valueless ;  since  there  were  but  few  names  in 
common  use  among  the  Jews  at  that  time,  as  indeed 
we  might  gather  from  the  frequent  recurrence  of  certain 
appellations  in  the  New  Testament.  Hence  it  is  pro- 
bable that  many  women  in  Judea  might  have  been 
called  mothers  of  James  and  Joses. 

Lastly  ;  the  assertion  that  "  cousins  "  may  be  styled 
"  brothers "  is  scarcely  true,  in  an  absolute  sense  at 
least.  The  instances  adduced  by  Jerome  ^  occur  in 
affectionate  or  rhetorical  appeals  :  he  is  unable  to  cite 
any  from  plain  matter  of  fact  history  such  as  that  of 
the  Gospels.  His  theory  is  rendered  still  more  im- 
probable by  the  mention  of  the  Lord's  sisters,  and 
there  is  yet  another  difficulty.  If  the  "  brethren  "  were 
the  cousins  of  the  Lord,  why  are  they  found  in  continual 
attendance  upon  His  mother  while  their  own  parent 
was  still  alive }  It  could  not  have  been  from  any 
feeling  of  veneration  on  account  of  her  Son  ;  for  in 
Him  they  did  not  believe. 

Such,  then,  is  Jerome's  attempted  explanation,  the 
most  remarkable  fact  in  connection  with  which  is  that 
learned  men  should  ever  have  admitted  so  faulty  and 
preposterous  a  theory  within  the  range  of  their  theology. 
Its  author  was  less  tenacious  of  it  than  some  of  his 
disciples  ;  and  in  the  Epistle  to  Hedibia,  which  belongs 
to  his  later  years,  he  evinces  a  complete  change  of 
'  Gen.  xiii.  8 ;  xxix.  15. 


234  THE  JEWS. 

mind  by  disowning  the  identification  of  the  mother  of 
James  and  Joses  with  the  sister  of  Mary.  Since  this 
is  the  citadel  of  his  position,  it  is  clear  that  he  must 
have  discovered  its  untenableness,  and  so  have  dcHbc- 
rately  abandoned  it. 

Bishop  Lightfoot,  in  the  essay  appended  to  his 
Commentary  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  decides 
peremptorily  against  Jerome  ;  but,  after  wavering  be- 
tween the  literal  theory  and  that  of  the  half-brothers, 
finally  inclines,  like  Hilary  of  Poitiers,  to  the  latter 
for  the  subjoined  reason.  He  conceives  it  to  be 
impossible  that  our  Lord,  when  on  the  cross,  "  would 
have  snapped  asunder  the  most  sacred  ties  of  natural 
affection  "  by  commending  His  mother  to  the  care  of 
John  if  she  had  had  four  sons  of  her  own  living  at 
the  time. 

But  while  it  is  always  dangerous  to  substitute  our 
own  theories  for  the  plain  and  literal  sense  of  Scripture, 
there  is  in  this  case  no  reason  whatever  for  such  a 
course.  Provided  we  be  content  to  waive  tradition 
and  hold  to  revelation,  the  alleged  difficulty  may  be 
very  easily  removed. 

In  the  single  passage  of  the  Gospels  in  which  our 
Lord's  brethren  appear  without  their  mother,^  they 
display  a  strong  spirit  of  opposition,  and  we  are  told 
that  they  did  not  believe  on  Him.  Hence  the  reason 
why  the  mother  is  no  longer  with  them  :  she  had  kept 
the  sayings  of  Jesus  in  her  heart,  and,  therefore,  had 
faith  to  follow  Him  to  the  cross ;  she  had  once 
attempted  to  interfere  with  His  actions,  and  had  learnt 
her  lesson  from  the  rebuke  which  she  received.^ 

'  John  vii.  3,  9. 
Thus  our  latest  glimpse  of  the  brethren,  before  the  crucifixion, 


NOTE   ON  THE  BRETHREN  OF  THE  LORD.         235 

But  if  the  brethren  were  unbeh'evers,  and  were  even 
then  angry  with  the  Lord  because  He  refused  to  seek 
popularity,  what  must  have  been  their  feehngs  as  they 
saw  His  ministry  becoming  more  and  more  opposed 
to  tlie  prejudices  of  their  nation,  and  perceived  that 
the  consequent  hatred  to  His  person  was  increasing 
every  day  ?  Is  it  not  more  than  probable  that  their 
growing  dishke  to  Him,  now  heightened  by  the  fear 
of  family  disgrace,  would  alienate  them  from  His 
mother  who  persisted  in  her  faith  ?  And  thus,  neg- 
lected by  her  own  sons  in  her  time  of  deepest  trouble, 
she  would  be  in  sore  need  of  temporary  protection, 
which  the  Lord  graciously  provided. 

So  far  there  is  surely  no  difficulty  ;  but  at  this  point 
tradition  steps  in  and  adds  a  story,  opposed  to  all 
reasonable  inference  from  Scripture,  that  Mary  remained 
under  the  protection  of  the  apostle  John  for  the  rest 
of  her  life.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  is  a  pure 
fiction  devised  to  support  the  theory  of  her  virginity  ; 
for  the  Bible  plainly  indicates  that  she  returned  to  her 
sons  after  their  conversion/ 

The  tender  heart  of  the  Lord  yearned  for  His 
brethren  in  the  flesh,  and,  accordingly,  after  He  had 
appeared  in  His  resurrected  body  to  Peter,  to  the 
Twelve,  and  to  the  five  hundred  brethren.  He  presented 
Himself  to  his  brother  James.  Who  can  doubt  the 
effect  of  the  glorious  sight  1  The  eyes  of  James  were 
opened,  and  he  beheld  no  longer  the  carpenter's  son 
of  Nazareth,  the  executed  malefactor,  but  the  Con- 
reveals  them  separated  for  the  first  time  from  their  mother  and 
casting  reproaches  upon  the  Lord ;  whereas  at  the  cross  the 
mother  is  seen  deserted  by  her  sons.  It  is  impossible  to  deny 
the  significance  of  such  a  fact. 

'  Acts  i.  14. 


236  THE  JEWS. 

queror  of  Death,  the  Lord  of  all  power,  the  only 
begotten  Son  of  the  Father.  By  his  testimony,  or, 
it  may  be,  by  special  revelations  to  themselves,  the 
other  brethren  were  also  converted  before  the  Lord 
left  the  confines  of  earth. 

We  can  readily  understand  how  such  a  change  of 
mind  would  affect  them  in  regard  to  their  neglected 
mother,  who  seems  to  have  been  at  once  removed  from 
the  temporary  protection  of  John  to  the  loving  care  of 
her  own  family.  And  so  it  happens  that  in  the  list 
of  those  who  continued  in  prayer  in  the  upper  room, 
waiting  for  the  promised  power  from  on  high,  we  find 
the  mother  of  Jesus  and  His  now  believing  brethren 
again  united.^ 

VIII. 

The  Return  of  the  Jews  to  Palestine. 

Such,  then,  is  the  outline  of  God's  dealings  with  the 
Jews,  as  it  was  revealed  to  Daniel.  For  four  hundred 
and  eighty-three  years  His  Spirit  strove  with  them  in 
their  own  land,  and.,  at  the  close  of  that  appointed  time, 
Messiah  the  Prince  appeared,  and  they  rejected  Him. 
He  came  unto  His  own,  and  His  own  received  Him 
not.  Then  He  also  rejected  them,  and  cast  them  out 
to  endure  the  curse  uttered  by  Moses, 

Anon  they  will  return,  and  place  themselves   under 
the  protection  of  the  last  head  of  the  Fourth  Gentile    i 
Lmpire.     And  when  he  makes  his  covenant  with  them, 
then   may  the   world   and   Satan   know  that  but  seven 
short  years  remain  for  the  indulgence  of  unbridled  sin.    I 
At  that  time  the  great  body  of  the  nation  will  be  in 

'  Acts  i.  14. 


THE  RETURN  OF  THE  fElVS   70  PALESTINE.      237 

unbelief,  and  will,  therefore,  share  in  the  madness  of 
the  world,  and  wonder  after  and  worship  the  Beast. 
And  of  the  small  number  who  do  fear  Jehovah,  few,  if 
any,  will  know  the  Lord  Jesus  as  the  Lamb  of  God, 
however  they  may  recognise  Him  as  their  Messiah  and 
King ;  for,  according  to  Zechariah,  neither  the  house 
of  David,  nor  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  will  find 
out  the  fountain  that  is  opened  for  sin  and  for  unclean- 
ness,  until  they  have  actually  beheld  the  face  of  Him 
Whom  they  pierced.^ 

That  they  will  rebuild  the  Temple  is  implied,  as  we 
have  already  seen,  in  the  eighth  and  ninth  chapters  of 
Daniel,  and  so  it  is  also  in  the  sixty-sixth  of  Isaiah. 
But  the  latter  passage  reveals  to  us  the  spirit  in  which 
the  restored  exiles  will  undertake  the  work,  and  the 
Lord's  indignant  rejection  of  that  which  is  done  by 
proud  and  self-willed  sinners,  who  choose  their  own 
ways,  and  know  nothing  of  the  broken  and  contrite 
heart  in  which  alone   He  delights. 

At  the  same  time  there  is  a  recognition  of  some  few 
who  will  tremble  at  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  whose 
brethren  will  hate  them  and  cast  them  out  for  His 
name's  sake,  while  they  hypocritically  say ; — "  Let 
the  Lord  be  glorified."  These  afflicted  ones  arc 
strengthened  for  their  brief  trial  by  the  significant 
words  ; — "  But  He  shall  appear  to  your  joy,  and  they 
shall  be  ashamed."  ^ 

When    the   Temple   has   been    thus   erected  by   the 
unsuspecting  Jews,  all   will   be   ready  for  the    fearful 
scenes  which  are  to  close  the  dispensation,  and  which 
are  especially  foretold  in  the  sermon  on  the  Mount  of  j 
Olives,  and  in  some  of  the  chapters  of  the  Apocalypse.  / 
'  Zech.  Aii.  9 — xiii.  i.  ^  Isa.  Ixvi.  =;. 


238  THE  JEWS. 

And  with  a  brief  comment  on  the  first  of  these  pro- 
phecies, or  rather,  on  that  part  of  it  which  concerns 
our  subject,  we  will  conclude  what  we  have  to  say- 
respecting  Hebrew  predictions. 

IX. 

The  Sermon  on  the  Mount  of  Olives. 

Careful  readers  will  have  noticed  considerable  vari- 
ation in  the  reports  of  this  memorable  discourse  as 
given  by  Matthew  and  Luke.  Such  differences  are, 
however,  perplexing  only  at  first  view  :  to  those  who 
can  search  out  their  meaning,  they  are  not  merely 
intelligible,  but  deeply  instructive  ;  for  we  have  but  to 
keep  in  mind  the  main  object  of  each  Evangelist,  and 
all  will  be  clear.  Now  Matthew  wrote  his  Gospel 
especially  for  Jews,  and  to  set  forth  the  Lord  Jesus 
as  their  King ;  while  Luke  points  out  Christ  as  the 
Son  of  man,  and  is  the  Evangelist  of  all  converts  who, 
being  in  Christ,  are  neither  Jews  nor  Greeks. 

Many  traces  of  these  diverse  aims  may  be  discovered. 
For  instance,  the  object  of  the  genealogy  in  Matthew 
is  to  prove  our  Lord's  title  to  the  crown  of  Israel.  It, 
therefore,  first  shows  Him  to  be  a  genuine  son  of 
Abraham,  the  father  of  the  nation  ;  and  then  gives  His 
official  pedigree,  exhibiting  the  successive  heirs  to  the 
crown  from  David  to  Christ.  But  Luke,  in  placing 
Him  before  us  as  the  Son  of  man,  unfolds  His  natural 
descent,  and  that,  too,  from  Adam,  the  common  parent 
of  all  men.^ 

'  This  consideration,  together  with  two  others,  will  be  found  to 
explain  all  the  apparent  discrepancies  in  the  genealogies  of 
Matthew  and  Luke,   which,  it  must   be  remembered,   are   both 


THE  SERMON  ON   THE  MOUNT   OF  OLIVES.        239 

Again  :  our  Lord's  description  of  the  evil  spirit 
going  out  of  a  man  is  in  Matthew  concluded  with  the 
special  application,  "  Even  so  shall  it  be  also  unto  this 
wicked  generation."  For,  as  the  context  itself  shows, 
it  is  there  to  be  taken  as  a  prophecy  of  the  Jewish 
people.     But  Luke  gives  an  entirely  different  context, 

expressly  said  to  be  pedigrees  of  Joseph.  See  Matt.  i.  16,  and 
Luke  iii.  23.  The  other  two  points  are — (i)  that,  if  a  man's  direct 
line  became  extinct,  the  Jews  were  accustomed  to  enter  his  heir 
upon  the  record  as  his  son;  and  (2)  that  they  were  in  the  habit 
of  abbreviating  genealogies  by  the  simple  process  of  striking 
out  names ;  so  that  a  man  would  often  appear  as  the  son  of  an 
ancestor  who  had  died  a  century  or  more  before  he  was  born. 

Keeping  these  facts  in  mind,  we  will  glance  at  the  lists  of  the 
two  Evangelists,  which,  although  they  agree  from  Abraham  to 
David,  are  entirely  different  from  David  to  Jeconiah.  The  reason 
is,  howevei",  very  simple.  David  was  succeeded  by  Solomon, 
whose  line  occupied  the  throne  until  it  became  extinct  in  the 
childless  Jeconiah  (Jer.  xxii.  30).  Then  the  right  of  the  succes- 
sion passed  over  to  the  family  of  Nathan — another  Son  of  David, 
from  whom  our  Lord  was  actually  descended — and  Salathiel,  the 
son  of  Neri,  became  heir  to  the  throne,  and,  accor^ding  to  Jewish 
custom,  was  transferred  to  the  royal  genealogical  tables  as  "  the 
son  of  Jeconiah."  After  Jeconiah  the  lists  appear  to  coincide  for 
four  generations  :  for  each  of  them  has  Salathiel  and  Zorobabel ; 
Rhesa  (N^'^T^zthe  prince)  is  merely  a  title  of  Zorobabel,  which 
seems  to  have  slipped  into  the  text  from  the  margin  ;  Joanna  is 
omitted  by  Matthew,  according  to  the  practice  mentioned  above  ; 
and  Abiud  and  Juda  are  identical.  Abiud  had  two  sons,  Eliakim 
and  Joseph.  The  line  of  the  former  ceased  with  Eleazer,  and, 
consequently,  Matthat,  of  the  ho-use  of  Joseph,  became  heir  to 
the  crown.  Matthat  had  two  sons,  Jacob  and  Heli.  Jacob  died 
without  issue — or,  at  least,  without  male  issue  ;  for  it  is  very 
probable  that  Mary  was  his  daughter — and  so  Joseph,  the  son  of 
his  younger  brother,  Heli,  became  his  heir,  and  was  placed  on 
the  official  genealogy  as  "the  son  of  Jacob." 

It  may  easily  be  proved  that  names  are  omitted  from  the  record 
by  Matthew  in  order  to  square  the  numbers,  and  this  is  a  suffi- 
cient explanation  of  the  fact  that  he  only  mentions  twenty-eight 
generations  from  David  to  Christ,  while  Luke  has  forty-two.  If 
Mary  was  Joseph's  cousin,  married  by  him,  according  to  Jewish 
custom,  because  he  was  his  uncle's  heir,  the  genealogies  will  of 
course  belong  to  her  as  much  as  to  her  husband. 


240  THE  JEWS. 

and  omits  the  concluding  words,  because  in  his  Gospel 
the  warning  is  written  for  general  and  individual  appli- 
cation. 

It  is  just  so  with  regard  to  the  prophecy  on  the 
Mount  of  Olives.  Whatever  may  be  our  historical 
exegesis,  the  fact  remains  that  the  Lord  has  spoken 
through  the  two  Evangelists  with  special  reference 
to  two  distinct  bodies  of  His  people  respectively. 
Matthew  writes  to  convince  Jews,  and  for  those  un- 
ready believers  who  will  have  to  share  much  the  same 
fate  as  Jews  by  continuing  on  the  earth  during  the 
last  Week.  Therefore,  he  follows  the  usual  line  of 
Jewish  prophecy — that  is,  he  notices  very  briefly  the 
course  of  events  till  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by 
Titus ;  and  then,  passing  over  the  long  interval  in 
silence,  concentrates  our  attention  upon  the  last  Seven 
Years,  when  God  will  again  resume  His  dealings  with 
His  people  and  their  holy  city.  And,  consequently, 
his  warnings  and  directions  apply,  not  to  the  siege  by 
Titus,  but  to  the  far  graver  woes  of  the  future,  when 
all  nations  shall  be  gathered  against  Jerusalem  to 
battle.^ 

On  the  other  hand,  Luke  is  writing  for  believers, 
who  might  indeed  be  concerned  in  the  siege  by  Titus, 
but  who  ought  to  be  standing  before  the  Son  of  man 
when  Antichrist  is  revealed,  and,  consequently,  require 
to  know  but  little  of  the  last  Week. 

In  his  Gospel  the  question  put  to  our  Lord  is  simply. 
When  shall  this  Temple,  upon  which  we  are  now 
gazing,  be  destroyed  ;  and  what  shall  be  the  signs 
accompanying  its  destruction }  Therefore  his  report 
of   the    answer    enters    into  particulars    of   the    times 

'  Zech.  xiv.  2. 


THE  SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT  OF  OLIVES.         241 

immediately  following  the  ascension,  and  speaks  of 
the  temptations,  persecutions,  and  sorrows,  which  be- 
lievers would  then  have  to  endure  ;  nor  does  he  forget 
to  note  that  the  synagogue  would  be  a  principal  cause 
of  their  trouble.^  He  also  gives  them  a  sign  by  which 
they  might  know  when  to  leave  Jerusalem,  and  so 
escape  the  horrors  of  her  supreme  agony?     Then  he 

'  Luke  xxi.  12.     Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  9. 

^  Luke  xxi.  20,  21.  The  sign  was,  "  When  ye  see  Jerusalem 
compassed  with  armies,  then  know  that  her  desolation  is  at 
hand"  ;  and  most  clearly  was  it  set  before  them  at  the  critical 
time,  as  we  may  learn  from  Josephus  (Bell.  Jud.  ii.  cap.  xix.). 
For  Cestius  Gallus  surrounded  the  city  in  the  autumn  of  A.D.  66, 
and  on  the  sixth  day  succeeded  in  undermining  the  Temple,  had 
all  but  taken  it,  and  so  alarmed  the  Jews  that  a  large  number  of 
them  were  preparing  to  open  their  gates.  At  this  crisis  he  sud- 
denly recalled  his  soldiers  from  the  place,  and  retired,  as  Josephus 
says,  "without  any  reason  in  the  world."  "Had  he,"  the  his- 
torian remarks,  "  but  continued  the  siege  a  little  longer,  he  had 
certainly  taken  the  city  ;  but  it  was,  I  suppose,  owing  to  the 
aversion  God  had  already  to  the  city  and  the  Sanctuary,  that  he 
was  hindered  from  putting  an  end  to  the  war  that  very  day." 
This  may  have  been  one  reason,  but  there  was  also  another,  and 
the  Christians  recognized  the  sign  which  the  Lord  had  given 
them  :  they  had  seen  Jerusalem  compassed  with  armies.  And 
with  the  signal  for  flight  came  also  its  opportunity.  In  ordinary 
circumstances  the  insurgents  at  Jerusalem  would  never  have 
permitted  the  departure  of  a  numerous  body  of  Christians ;  but 
the  retreat  of  Cestius  so  raised  their  courage,  and  inflamed  them 
with  such  ardour,  that  they  poured  out  of  the  gates  of  the  city, 
pursued  their  enemies  vigorously  for  more  than  forty  miles  on  the 
road  to  Caesarea,  slew  five  or  six  thousand  of  them,  and  had 
almost  effected  a  capture  of  the  whole  Roman  army.  While 
Jerusalem  was  thus  emptied  of  its  leading  spirits,  the  Christians 
seem  to  have  quietly  fled  in  the  opposite  direction,  towards  the 
Jordan,  and  so  made  good  their  escape. 

It  is  worthy  of  notice  that,  while  the  sign  promised  in  Luke 
was  so  plainly  given  before  the  legions  of  Titus  closed  in  upon  the 
devoted  city,  the  same  cannot  be  said  of  that  which  is  mentioned 
in  Matthew.  For  the  idea  that  the  Roman  eagles,  and  not  the 
image  of  the  Beast,  are  "the  Abomination  of  Desolation,"  is 
untenable ;  and  if  it  were  not  so,  the  Roman  eagles  never  stood 
in  the  Holy  Place— that  is,  in  the  Temple. 

16 


242  THE  JEWS. 

describes  the  days  of  vengeance  in  which  she  should 
be  destroyed,  and  adds  that  from  thenceforth  she 
should  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles,  until  the 
times  of  the  Gentiles  should  be  fulfilled.  The  close  of 
this  long  period  should  be  announced  by  signs  in  the 
sun  and  in  the  moon,  and  by  convulsions  of  nature 
and  distress  of  nations  upon  the  earth  ;  and  then  the 
Son  of  Man  should  come  with  power  and  great  glory.  ! 
Nothing  could  be  clearer,  or  more  easy  of  compre- 
hension, than  the  grand  utterance  of  the  Lord  as  thus 
presented  to  us ;  but  since  we  are  considering  the 
future  of  the  Jewish  nation,  we  are  just  now  more 
nearly  concerned  with  the  account  given  by  Matthew. 

4 

X. 

The  Twenty-fourth  Chapter  of  Matthew. 

The  sermon  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,  as  it  appears 
in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew,  is  closely  connected  with 
the  preceding  chapter,  the  contents  of  which  are,  there- 
fore, included  in  the  question,  "  Tell  us,  when  shall 
these  things  be  ?  "  We  must  understand  the  disciples 
to  be  asking,  How  shall  the  Jews  fill  up  the  measure 
of  their  fathers  ?  When  will  prophets  and  wise  men 
and  scribes  be  sent,  and  be  persecuted  to  the  death } 
At  what  time  will  all  the  righteous  blood  shed  upon 
the  earth  come  upon  this  generation  ?  When  will  the 
Temple  be  destroyed,  and  Jerusalem  left  desolate  ? 
And  when  will  the  people  be  willing  to  cry,  "  Blessed 
is  He  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  "  ,-*  These 
questions  are  all  Jewish  ;  we  may,  therefore,  be  sure 
that  the  answer  will  also  point  to  Jews. 


THE    TWENTY-FOURTH  CHAPTER   OF  MATTHEW.    243 

But  the  disciples  go  on  to  ask,  "  And  what  shall  be 
the  sign  of  Thy  presence,  and  of  the  end  of  the  age  ?  " 
Now  the  taking  up  of  the  Church  will  be  the  sign 
that  Christ  is  present  in  the  air  ;  while  His  judgment 
of  the  living  Gentile  nations  will  be  the  closing  act  of 
the  age.  Hence  the  answer  to  the  three  questions 
involves  the  fate  of  the  Jews,  the  Church,  and  the 
Gentiles,  respectively  ;  and  the  Lord  accordingly  pro- 
ceeds to  unfold  the  manner  in  which  the  present  state 
of  things  will  end  to  each  of  these  three  great  divisions 
of  the  world. ^ 

Beginning  with  the  Jews,  He  .shows,  in  response  to 
the  first  question,  that  these  things  shall  not  be  finally 
accomplished  until  the  last  Week,  just  before  His 
appearing  ;^  and  adds  that,  when  He  appears,  He 
will  send  forth  His  angels  to  gather  together  His  elect 
of  the  Jews.^ 

We  will,  then,  attempt  a  slight  sketch  of  this  part 

'  The  whole  discourse  may  be  simply  divided  into  three  parts, 
corresponding  to  the  three  questions  asked  by  the  disciples. 
The  first  part  (xxiv.  4-35)  concerns  the  Jews,  and  answers  the 
question,  "When  shall  these  things  be?"  The  second  (xxiv. 
36 — XXV.  30)  discloses  the  sign  which  will  make  known  the  pre- 
sence of  Christ  in  the  air;  and  since  it  is  to  be  the  sudden 
removal  of  those  who  are  looking  for  Him,  He  adds  some  in- 
structions and  warnings  respecting  this  solemn  subject.  The 
■concluding  section  (xxv.  31 — 46)  is  a  response  to  the  inquiry, 
"What  will  be  the  sign  of  the  consummation  of  the  age?" 
And  the  Lord  replies  that  His  last  act  in  regard  to  it  will  be 
the  judgment  of  the  quick,  of  those  nations  which,  being  without 
the  circle  of  Christendom,  have  not  heard  His  fame  nor  seen  His 
glory  (Isa.  Ixvi.  19),  and  which  will,  therefore,  be  judged  with 
regard  to  the  way  in  which  they  have  obeyed  the  law  of  mercy 
written  upon  their  hearts  in  their  treatment  of  the  dispersed  Jews. 

-  Matt.  xxiv.  4-30. 

^  Matt.  xxiv.  31.  The  remnant  of  the  Church  will  have  been 
previously  removed  at  the  sounding  of  the  Seventh  Trumpet. 
On  this  subject  the  reader  will  find  a  chapter  in  Part  III. 


244  T?IE  lEWS. 

of  our  Lord's  discourse,  which  wholly  belongs  to  our 
present  subject. 

The  first  words,  to  the  close  of  the  sixth  verse,  refer 
to  the  immediate  future.  There  would  shortly  be 
events  and  signs  and  troubles  in  connection  with 
Judaea,  similar,  on  a  small  scale,  to  those  which  shall 
precede  the  close  of  the  age.  False  Christs  would 
arise — and  we  have  historical  proof  that  this  was  the 
case — and  would  deceive  many,  though  they  would 
be  unable  to  support  their  pretensions  by  miraculous 
power,  such  as  Antichrist  and  the  False  Prophet  will 
exhibit  hereafter.  Again,  there  would  be  wars  and 
rumours  of  wars  in  Judaea,  commotions  which  would 
result  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  Temple. 
Nevertheless,  the  disciples  were  not  to  be  troubled  ; 
for  all  these  things  must  come  to  pass,  but  the  end 
would  not  be  yet. 

By  the  significant  words,  "  the  end  is  not  yet,"  the 
Lord  indicates  the  interval  so  invariably  marked  in 
Jewish  prophecy,  and  then  passes  on  to  the  Seventieth 
Week.  He  had  spoken  of  the  signs  which  would 
make  some  think  that  the  end  had  come,  when  God's 
purpose  was  merely  the  dispersion  of  the  Jews,  that 
they  might  undergo  a  long  sifting  among  the  nations  : 
now  He  reveals  what  will  be  the  beginning  of  the 
actual    end,^    the    throes    or    birth-pangs — for    so    the 


'  The  following  paraphrase  ma}',  perhaps,  explain  the  con- 
necting force  of  "for"  at  the  commencement  of  the  seventh 
verse.  "  These  disturbances,  caused  by  false  Messiahs  in  Judaea 
and  local  wars  and  troubles,  must  happen,  but  will  not  be  signs 
of  the  end  ;  for  before  that  can  come  there  must  be  general  wars 
and  famines,  pestilences  and  earthquakes  in  many  quarters  of 
the  world.  Such  will  be  the  character  of  the  events  which  will 
herald  the  time  of  the  end." 


THE    TWENTY-FOURTH  CHAPTER   OF  MATTHEW.    245 

word  translated  "sorrows"  should  be  rendered — of  earth 
just  before  the  appearing  of  the  King/ 

At  this  time  the  Jews  will,  of  course,  be  again  in 
possession  of  their  own  land,  having  been  restored,  it 
may  be,  by  Antichrist,  or,  perhaps,  by  some  other 
power.  Or,  possibly,  they  wall  return  gradually,  and 
fill  their  country  as  they  are  driven  out  from  among 
the  nations  by  a  hatred  which  seems  to  have  already 
commenced  in  Russia,  Germany,  Austria,  the  inde- 
pendent States  between  Russia  and  Turkey,  Italy,  and 
along  the  north  coast  of  Africa.  But  by  whatever 
means  they  re-occupy  Palestine,  they  will  certainly  be 
found  there  at  the  commencement  of  the  last  Week, 
and  will  be  in  league  with  Antichrist  by  the  provisions 
of  the  seven  years'  covenant.  Then  the  signs  foretold 
by  the  Lord  will  begin  to  appear,  following  each  other 
in  rapid  succession. 

The  first  birth-pang  is  war  ;  but  war  universal,  and 
no  longer  local  :  for  "  nation  shall  rise  against  nation, 
and  kingdom  against  kingdom."^  This  corresponds 
to  the  opening  of  the  second  seal  in  the  Apocalypse, 
when  the  red  horse  went  forth,  "  and  power  was  given 
to  him  that  sat  thereon  to  take  peace  from  the  earth, 
and  that  they  should  kill  one  another  ;  and  there  was 
given  unto  him  a  great  sword." ^  While  our  Lord 
deals  solely  with  the  visible  events,  John  appears  to 
have  seen  the  spiritual  agency  which  will  cause  them. 
And  who  that  considers  the  present  state  of  the  world, 
teeming  as  it  is  with  ever-increasing  hosts  of  armed 
millions,  can  fail  to  see  on  all  sides  a  preparation  for 
this  beginning  of  sorrows  ? 

The  second  sign  will  manifest  itself  in  local  famines. 
'  Matt.  xxiv.  8.  *  Matt.  xxiv.  7.  ^  Rev.  vi.  4. 


246  THE  JEWS. 

This  corresponds  to  the  black  horse  of  the  third  seal, 
whose  rider  causes  scarcity  in  the  necessaries  of  life, 
the  wheat  and  the  barley ;  but  not  in  its  luxuries,  the 
oil  and  the  wine/  Do  we  not  seem  to  have  already 
had  a  rehearsal  of  this  sorrow  in  the  late  severe 
famines  in  various  parts  of  the  world — famines  which 
have  impoverished  many  countries,  and  rendered  them 
less  able  to  face  the  severer  troubles  which  may  be  close 
at  hand  ? 

The  third  sign  is  pestilence,  which  is  also  the  woe 
inflicted  by  the  rider  on  the  livid  horse,  who  appears 
when  the  fourth  seal  is  broken,  and  whose  name  is 
Death.^  This  would  most  certainly  be  the  result  of 
universal  war  and  local  famines  :  and  indeed  all  these 
earlier  throes  are  troubles  which  have  frequently 
occurred  in  the  world's  previous  history ;  but  they 
will  shortly  be  repeated  with  unusual  and  appalling 
severity. 

Then  follow  earthquakes,  the  most  terrible  of  which 
will  doubtless  be  the  great  shock  at  the  opening  of 
the  sixth  seal.^  The  increasing  frequency  and  ubiquity 
of  earthquakes  during  the  last  few  years  must  have 
been  noticed  by  every  one.  And  although  thus  far 
the  majority  of  the  shocks  have  been  comparatively 
slight,*  yet  their  great  number  has  caused  many  to 
suppose  that  we  are  entering  on  a  period  of  terrestrial 
commotion,  a  time,  possibly,  of  terrific  physical   con- 

'  Rev.  vi.  5,  6. 

*  Rev.  vi.  7,  8. 

3  Rev.  vi.  12. 

■•  We  have  remarked  in  a  previous  note  that  this  was  written 
before  the  occurrence  of  the  earthquakes  at  Agram,  Casamicciola, 
Chios,  Ischia,  Java,  Colchester,  and  Andalusia.  For  the  Scrip- 
tural theory  of  earthquakes,  see  Moses'  description  of  the  sub- 
terranean fire  kindled  in  God's  anger  (Deut.  xxxii.  22). 


THE    TWENTY-FOURTH  CHAPTER   OF  MATTHEW.    247 

vulsions  similar  to  those  which  by  their  traces  seem  to 
have  ended  some  of  the  geological  ages. 

The  succeeding  verses,  to  the  end  of  the  thirteenth, 
describe  to  us  the  condition  of  God's  people  during 
these  times  of  wrath  and  trouble.  Probably  the  faith- 
ful Jews,  who  will  be  afflicted  and  killed  by  their  own 
people,  and  hated  of  all  nations,  will  be,  in  great  part, 
those  who  have  been  roused  by  the  preaching  of  the 
Two  Witnesses  ;  and  if  so,  this  would  account  for  their 
persecution.  For  the  world  will  regard  the  Witnesses 
as  its  tormentors,  and,  in  its  anger  and  excitement 
against  them,  will  be  likely  to  show  but  little  love  to 
their  followers. 

This  persecution  is  doubtless  the  same  as  that  which 
is  indicated  at  the  opening  of  the  fifth  seal.^  And  the 
martyrs  there  mentioned  are  clearly  distinguished  as 
belonging  to  the  last  Week,  and  not  to  the  present 
time :  for,  in  the  spirit  of  the  old  dispensation,  they 
cry  for  vengeance,  a  thing  which  no  Christian  of  this 
age  may  dare  to  do. 

The  effects  of  the  persecution  will  not,  however,  be 
confined  to  the  true  worshippers  ;  it  will  also  bring 
the  whole  Jewish  nation  to  the  test.  Those  who  arc 
not  sincere  will  be  offended  by  it,  and  will  hate  and 
betray  their  faithful  relations  and  friends  :  for  to  this 
time  belongs  the  counsel  of  Micah  ; — "  Trust  ye  not 
in  a  friend,  put  ye  not  confidence  in  a  guide  :  keep 
the  doors  of  thy  mouth  from  her  that  lieth  in  thy 
bosom."  ^ 

And  in  the  midst  of  the  prevailing  excitement,  while 
the    pure   worship    of   Jehovah    is    hated,    many    false 
prophets  will  arise,  and  by  their  lying  suggestions  lead 
Rev.  vi.  9-1 1.  *  Micah  vii.  5. 


24S  THE  JEWS. 

multitudes  astray.  Nor  will  this  be  all  :  for,  owing 
to  the  dreadful  immorality  and  lawlessness  which  will 
everywhere  abound,  the  love  of  many,  who  bid  fair 
to  run  well,  will  gradually  lose  its  light  and  warmth, 
and  grow  cold  even  as  that  of  other  men.  These, 
however,  will  not  be  the  elect :  for  only  he  who  is 
enabled  to  withstand  all  the  trials  and  temptations, 
and   to  endure  till  the  end,  shall   be  saved. 

But  by  what  means  will  faith  be  nourished  and 
strengthened  during  this  time  of  terror,  so  that  it  shall 
finally  overcome  ?  Evidently  in  that  way  in  which  it 
always  is  both  manifested  and  sustained,  by  works. 
If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ  he  is  none 
of  His  ;  but  he  that  is  joined  unto  the  Lord  is  one 
Spirit,  and  is,  therefore,  constrained,  in  however  humble 
a  way,  to  co-operate  with  his  Saviour  in  letting  the 
new  light  which  is  placed  in  him  shine  before  men, 
and  in  offering  salvation  to  the  world.  That  which 
avails  is  the  faith  which  worketh  by  love,  and  the 
command  to  all  believers  is,  "  Ye  are  My  witnesses, 
saith  the  Lord." 

Accordingly,  in  the  present  passage,  the  mention 
of  those  who  shall  endure  to  the  end,  and  be  saved, 
is  at  once  followed  by  an  account  of  their  work. 
"  This  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  shall  be  preached  in 
all  the  world,  for  a  witness  unto  all  nations."  What 
zeal  and  energy,  what  a  spending  and  being  spent,  do 
these  words  imply  !  But  the  servants  of  Christ  will 
all  learn  to  be  earnest  when  they  know  by  the  pro- 
mised sign  that  He  has  come  out  of  His  place,  that 
His  presence  is  an  actual  fact,  that  human  society  has 
assumed  its  last  form  of  evil,  and  that  the  pillars  of 
the   world    are    trembling   for    their    fall.      Happy    are 


THE    TWENTY-FOURTH  CHAPTER   OF  MATTHEW.    249 

those  who,  through  the  favour  of  the  Lord,  will  not 
require  the  stimulus  of  that  fearful  time,  but  whose 
simple  faith  is  sufficient  to  rouse  them  from  sloth,  so 
that  they  shall  be  accounted  worthy  to  escape  all  the 
things  that  shall  come  to  pass,  and  to  stand  before  the 
Son  of  Man.  To  them  in  a  special  sense  do  those 
words  apply  ; — "  Blessed  are  they  that  have  not  seen, 
and  yet  have  believed." 

The  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  is  not,  of  course,  the 
same  as  the  Gospel  of  grace  ;  for,  while  the  latter  is 
the  good  news  that  Christ  Jesus  has  died  for  sinners, 
the  former  is  the  glad  tidings  that  His  Kingdom  of 
peace  and  joy  is  just  about  to  be  manifested  upon 
earth,  so  that  His  servants  will  no  longer  need  to 
pray,  *'  Thy  Kingdom  come."  Such  a  Gospel  could, 
therefore,  be  preached  only  on  the  eve  of  the  Lord's 
appearing. 

But  not  even  this  thrilling  proclamation  will  draw 
men  to  God.  It  will,  indeed,  be  made  known  through- 
out the  habitable,  or  at  least  the  civilized,  world  ;  but 
will  for  the  most  part  serve  only  as  a  witness  to  the 
nations,  and  vindicate  God's  righteousness  in  the 
judgments  which  must  immediately  follow. 

Possibly  the  Two  Witnesses  will  be  the  leaders  of  this 
preaching ;  and,  from  the  next  sentence  of  our  Lord's 
discourse,  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  Antichrist  will 
strive  to  wrest  it  to  his  own  advantage  by  giving  out 
that  he  is  the  great  King  Who  is  to  sit  on  the  throne 
of  His  father  David. 

For  the  Lord  seems  to  suggest  some  such  connection 
by  immediately  passing  on  to  speak  of  the  setting  up 
of  the  Abomination  of  Desolation  in  the  Holy  Place. 
The  meaning  of  these  terms  is  readily  discovered  by 


250  THE  JEWS. 

Hebrew  usage:  for  the  Jew  recognized  no  holy  place 
save  the  Temple  ;  ^  and  the  word  "  abomination  "  was 
commonly  used  to  signify  an  idol,  or  false  god.^  And 
in  regard  to  their  application,  the  Lord  bids  us  search 
the  writings  of  Daniel  the  prophet,  who  has  thrice 
spoken  of  "the  Abomination  of  Desolation,"  or  "Abomi- 
nation that  causeth  desolation." 

In  his  eleventh  chapter,^  it  had  been  declared  that 
"  the  Abomination  that  maketh  desolate "  should  be 
set  up  in  the  Sanctuary  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  and 
the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  may  be  found  in  the 
first  book  of  Maccabees,^  and  in  the  history  of 
Josephus.'  For  Antiochus  himself  entered  into  the 
Sanctuary,  and,  after  carrying  away  the  sacred  furniture 
and  treasures,  built  an  idol  altar  upon  the  altar  of 
God — doubtless  setting  up  the  idol  also  in  its  proper 
place — and  sacrificed  swine  upon  it.  This  gives  us  a 
hint  of  what  the  future  Abomination  of  Desolation  will  be. 

Whose  image  will  then  be  set  up  we  may  learn 
from  the  second  passage  of  Daniel,  which  we  have 
already  considered,  and  in  which  it  is  said  of  Anti- 
christ, that  "  upon  the  wing  of  abominations  shall  be 
the  Desolator."  ^ 

Lastly,  in  the  twelfth  chapter,'  the  taking  away  of 
the  daily  sacrifice,  and  the  setting  up  of  the  Abomina- 
tion that  maketh  desolate,  are  mentioned  as  marking 
the  commencement  of  the  Great  Tribulation. 

Subsequent  utterances  of  Paul  and  John  throw  a 
stronger    light   upon    our    Lord's   words,   and    confirm 


*  Acts  vi.  13  ;  xxi.  28.  .  *  i  Mace.  i.  54. 

*  I  Kings  xi.  5-7  ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  13.     ^  Joseph.  Antiq.  xii.  5.  4. 

'  Dan.  xi.  31.  "^  Dan.  ix.27.  See  pp. "206-7. 

'  Dan.  xii.  11. 


THE   TWENTY-FOURTH  CHAPTER   OF  MATTHEW.    251 

their  allusion  to  the  placing  of  the  image  of  the  Beast 
in  the  Temple,  to  the  middle  of  the  last  Week,  when 
the  Lawless  One  shall  cause  the  sacrifice  and  oblation 
to  cease,  and  publicly  deny  the  Father  and  the  Son  by 
exalting  himself  "  above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that 
is  worshipped ;  so  that  he,  as  God,  sitteth  in  the  Temple 
of  God,  showing  himself  that  he  is  God."  ^ 

It  is  possible,  as  we  have  already  remarked,  that  this 
new  era  will  be  inaugurated  by  a  travesty  of  the  return 
of  the  Cherubim  as  foretold  by  Ezekiel,  and  that  the 
prophecy  in  the  ninth  of  Daniel  refers  to  the  blas- 
phemous scene.  If  so,  the  pretended  descent  from 
heaven  would  explain  the  fact  that  the  sign  will  be 
seen  from  the  housetops  and  the  fields. 

But,  however  this  may  be,  the  people  of  God  who 
are  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem  will  be  able  to 
recognize  the  signal,  and  will  know  that  it  is  a  warning  ^ 
to  betake  themselves  to  instant  flight.  For  an  im- 
perial edict  will  be  quickly  issued,  compelling  all  men 
on  pain  of  death  to  worship  the  Beast  and  his  image. 
And  this  will  be  Satan's  scheme  for  the  destruction 
of  the  elect,  the  Dragon's  endeavour  to  devour  the 
Woman,  after  her  Child  has  been  transported  far 
beyond  his  reach. 

Without  a  moment's  delay,  then,  all  those  inhabitants 
of  Judaea  who  are  at  the  time  guided  by  God's  word 
must  fly  in  circumstances  of  great  anxiety  and  suffering. 
Woe  to  the  pregnant,  and  to  the  mother  with  infant  in 
arms!  Yet  the  distress  may  be  mitigated  if  those  who 
are  to  endure  it  will  only  pray  before  the  time  come. 
And  this  the  Lord  exhorts  them  to  do,  that  their 
troubles  may  be  aggravated,  neither  by  natural  causes, 

'  2  Thess.  ii.  4. 


252  THE  JEWS. 

nor  by  human  arrangements.  They  are  directed  to 
entreat  that  their  flight  may  not  be  in  the  winter  ;  for 
then  the  days  would  be  short,  the  weather  inclement, 
the  ground,  on  which  they  must  often  lie,  damp  and 
cold,  and  they  would  find  no  food  either  upon  the 
trees  or  in  the  fields.  They  must  pray,  too,  that  it 
may  not  be  on  the  Sabbath  day  ;  for,  if  it  were,  they 
could  not,  as  conscientious  but  unenlightened  Jews, 
travel  more  than  the  Sabbath  day's  journey,  and  would, 
therefore,  certainly  be  overtaken.  For  they  will  doubt- 
less be  pursued  ;  the  figure  of  the  Dragon  casting  out 
of  his  mouth,  after  the  Woman,  water  as  a  river,  would 
seem  to  indicate  an  expedition  sent  forth  in  hot  haste, 
-..nd,  possibly,  what  follows,  the  earth  helping  the 
Woman  by  opening  its  mouth  and  swallowing  up  the 
river,  may  point  to  the  destruction  of  the  pursuing 
column  by  an  earthquake,  just,  perhaps,  as  they  are  in 
sight  of  their  intended  victims. 

This  flight  will  be  the  commencement  of  the  Great 
Tribulation,  in  which  judgment  must  begin  at  the  house 
of  God,  and  will  then  fall  upon  the  renegade  Jews, 
who  have  consented  to  worship  the  Beast  and  his 
image,  and  upon  the  world.  It  is  described  as  "great 
tribulation,  such  as  was  not  since  the  beginning  of  the 
world  to  this  time,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be."  These 
words  show  that  there  can  be  but  one  such  time  of 
distress  ;  therefore,  it  must  be  the  same  as  that  which  is 
also  mentioned  in  the  last  chapter  of  Daniel,  where  the 
prophet  says ; — "  There  shall  be  a  time  of  trouble  such 
as  never  was  since  there  was  a  nation  even  to  that  same 
time  ;  and  at  that  time  thy  people  shall  be  delivered, 
every  one  that  shall  be  found  written  in  the  book."^ 

'  Dan.  xii.  i. 


THE    TWENTY-FOURTH  CHAPTER   OF  MATTHEW.     253 

Since,  then,  both  the  prophet  and  the  evangehst 
must  be  speaking  of  the  same  tribulation,  the  latter 
clause  of  the  verse  from  Daniel  proves  that  we  are 
right  in  referring  the  passage  under  our  consideration 
to  the  times  of  Antichrist,  and  not  to  the  overthrow 
of  Jerusalem  by  Titus.  For  the  prophet  adds,  "And 
at  that  time  thy  people  shall  be  delivered,"  a  statement 
which  would  be  notoriously  untrue  were  we  to  apply 
the  prophecy  to  the  past  siege,  but  which  exactly 
agrees  with  what  Zechariah  tells  us  of  that  which  is 
still  to  come. 

And  it  is  remarkable  that  Luke,  in  describing  the 
trouble  of  the  immediate  future,  avoids  the  stronger 
expressions  of  Matthew  and  Daniel,  and  merely  says, 
"  There  shall  be  great  distress  upon  the  land,  and 
wrath  unto  this  people."^  For  the  tribulation  of 
which  he  speaks,  though  great,  was  not  unparalleled, 
and  was  only  local  ;  but  this  which  is  to  come  will 
be  universal,  and  more  terrible  than  any  which  ever 
has  been,  or  ever  shall  be  ;  so  that,  unless  its  days 
should  be  shortened,  no  flesh  would  be  saved.  Its 
details  may  be  found  in  many  a  passage  of  the 
prophets  and  in  the  Apocalypse,  and  should  be  care- 
fully studied,  that  we  may  learn  what  shall  be  the  end 
.  of  this  present  age  and  all  who  cast  in  their  lot  with  it. 

In  times  of  distress  which  baffle  their  own  powers 
of  foresight  and  calculation,  men  have  ever  been  prone 
to  turn  to  the  supernatural.  It  was  so  with  the 
polished  Athenians,  and  other  Greeks,  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  Peloponnesian  war,  when,  as  Thucy- 
dides  tells  us  ; — 

"  Many  prophecies  were  being  continually  repeated, 

'  Luke  xxi.  23 


254  THE  JEWS. 

and  oracle-mongers  ceased  not  to  recite  them,  both 
in  those  states  which  were  on  the  point  of  engaging 
in  war  and   in  the  others.""^ 

And  so,  in  our  own  days  of  uncertainty,  perplexity, 
and  fear,  when  all  old  faiths  are  disappearing,  and 
not  merely  one  kingdom,  but  the  whole  world  is  filled 
with  rumours  of  war,  and  seems  to  be  on  the  eve  of 
a  revolutionary  explosion,  the  result  of  which  no  one 
can  forecast — at  this  time  of  excitement,  a  craving 
for  the  supernatural  is  once  more  returning  in  the 
forms  of  Spiritualism  and  Theosophy,  and  in  the  revival 
of  what  was  supposed  to  be  an  ancient  superstition, 
the  art  of  astrology? 

These  movements  will  probably  continue  to  spread 
and  extend  their  influence,  and  from  the  twenty-fourth 
verse  we  find  that  they  will  powerfully  affect  the  Jews 
in  the  Great  Tribulation,  when  their  minds  have  become 
excited  by  the  general  distress,  the  strange  plagues, 
and  the  fear  of  what  may  be  coming  next.^  Perhaps, 
too,  they  will  by  that  time  have  begun  to  distrust  the 
prince  with  whom  they  made  their  covenant,  and  to 

'  Thuc.  ii.  8. 

2  There  are  at  the  present  time  millions  of  Spiritualists  who, 
with  the  aid  of  a  copious  literature,  are  everj-where  influencing 
society,  and  preparing  it  for  the  leadership  of  an  avowed  spirit 
from  the  dead.  Of  their  apostasy,  important  as  it  is,  but  little  is 
said  in  this  volume,  since  it  is  very  fully  discussed  in  another  of 
the  author's  works,  "  Earth's  Earliest  Ages,  and  Their  Connec- 
tion with  Modern  Spiritualism  and  Theosophy,"  published  by 
Messrs.  Hodder  and  Stoughton.  As  to  astrologers,  letters  from 
and  concerning  them  frequently  appear  in  the  daily  newspapers, 
and  Zadkiel  is  fast  becoming  an  authorit}'. 

'^  Hence  we  may  understand  the  meaning  of  Zech.  xiii.  2  ; — 
"  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts, 
that  I  will  cut  off  the  names  of  the  idols  out  of  the  land,  and  they 
shall  no  more  be  remembered  ;  and  also  I  will  cause  the  prophets 
and  the  unclean  spii-it  to  pass  out  of  the  land." 


THE   TWENTY -FOURTH  CHAPTER   Ot  MATTHEW.    255 

feel  his  tyrannous  oppression.  And  so  they  will  be 
longing  for  deliverance ;  not,  however,  in  a  spirit  of 
meekness  and  submission  toward  God,  but  that  they 
may  be  avenged  of  their  enemies,  and  be  exalted  in 
the  world.  Satan  will  not  fail  to  take  advantage  of 
this  temper,  and  will  raise  up  false  Messiahs  to  deceive 
still  further  the  miserable  people  who  would  not  have 
the  Lord  Jesus  to  reign  over  them. 

But  there  will  be  a  notable  difference  between  the 
false  Christs  of  the  last  days  and  those  which  clustered 
around  the  first  advent.  The  latter  were  supported 
only  by  their  own  testimony,  and  could  display  no 
supernatural  marvels  ;  but  the  former  will  have  their 
prophets  to  testify  to  them,  be  filled  with  Satanic 
power,  and  show  forth  great  signs  and  wonders  ;  so 
great,  indeed,  that,  were  it  not  for  the  special  grace 
of  God,  the  very  elect  themselves  would  be  deceived. 

Their  adherents  will  be  vigorous  in  their  endeavours 
to  make  disciples,  and  will  be  continually  saying, 
"  Christ  is  in  the  wilderness,"  or,  "  He  is  in  the 
chambers "  ;  that  is.  He  is  in  the  solitary  wastes,  in 
the  secret  places  far  away  from  the  haunts  of  men  ;  or, 
He  is  hidden  somewhere  in  the  great  cities  where 
only  His  disciples  may  see  Him.  But  neither  of  these 
statements  can  ever  be  true  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  For 
instead  of  appearing  in  secret  to  a  {q.\\\  the  manifesta- 
tion of  His  presence  v;ill  be  as  the  lightning  f^ash 
which  in  a  moment  sweeps  the  heavens  from  East 
to  West.  Nor  will  He  seek  the  desert  places  ;  but 
wherever  the  great  crowd  of  them  which  are  corrupt- 
ing the  earth  is  to  be  found,  thither  will  He  descend 
with  the  ministers  of  His  vengeance,  even  as  the  eagles 
swoop  down  from  the  sky  upon  the  fallen  carcase. 


256  THE  JEWS. 

Immediately  following  upon  the  Great  Tribulation 
— toward  the  close  of  which,  if  not  earlier,  all  nations 
will  come  up  against  Jerusalem  and  besiege  it — there 
will  be  convulsions  of  nature  premonitory  of  the 
approaching  end.  The  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  hitherto 
used  chiefly  for  light,  and  for  seasons,  and  days,  and 
years,  will  now  be  made  to  serve  the  first-mentioned 
purpose  of  their  creation,  and  be  for  "  signs "  that 
the  Lord   is  at  hand. 

The  word  "  immediately "  contrasts  strongly  with 
what  follows  the  account  of  the  days  of  trouble  in 
Luke.  There,  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  we 
are  told  that  the  holy  city  "  shall  be  trodden  down  of 
the  Gentiles,  until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled." 
And  only  at  the  close  of  these  times,  which  have 
already  continued  for  more  than  eighteen  hundred 
years,  will  there  be  "  signs  in  the  sun,  and  in  the  moon, 
and  in  the  stars."  Even  if  there  were  no  other  proof 
that  the  Evangelists  refer  to  different  tribulations,  this 
in  itself  would  be  decisive. 

The  sun,  then,  shall  be  darkened,  the  moon  shall 
not  give  her  light,  the  stars  shall  fall  from  heaven,  and 
all  the  celestial  machinery  be  deranged  :  and  at  this 
awful  moment  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  man  will 
appear.^  What  this  sign  will  be  does  not  seem  to  be 
distinctly  revealed  ;  nor  is  much  light  thrown  upon 
the  obscurity  by  the  conjecture  of  a  flaming  cross,  in 
which  ancient  and  modern  writers  have  delighted. 
Apparently  our  only  Sciiptural  basis  lies  in  the  Lord's 
previous  saying,  that  the  manifestation  of  His  presence 
will  be  as  the  lightning  which  flashes  from  the  one  end 
of   heaven   to   the  other.     It   may   be    that    this  will 

'  Matt,  xxiy.  30 


THE    TWENTY-FOURTH  CHAPTER   OF  MATTHEW     257 

occur  while  men  are  horrified  with  the  unnatural 
darkness,  and  that  it  will  be  caused  by  a  sudden  and 
momentary  cleaving  of  the  black  heavens,  so  that  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  will  break  through,  and  He  will  for 
an  instant  be  revealed  in  close  proximity  to  earth. 
Thus  the  Jew  may  at  last  receive  his  sign  from 
heaven. 

That  which  follows,  and  which  should  be  rendered, 
"  Then  shall  all  the  tribes  of  the  land  mourn,"  points 
to  the  connection  of  this  verse  with  Zechariah's 
prophecy ; — "  And  I  will  pour  upon  the  house  of 
David,  and  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  the 
spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications  :  and  they  shall 
look  upon  Me  Whom  they  have  pierced,  and  they  shall 
mourn  for  Him,  as  one  mourneth  for  his  only  son,  and 
shall  be  in  bitterness  for  Him,  as  one  that  is  in  bitter- 
ness for  his   firstborn."  ■^ 

And  again  ;  the  manner  in  which  Zecharia.h's 
prophecy  is  quoted  in  the  Apocalypse  may,  perhaps, 
afford  some  slight  argument  in  favour  of  the  explana- 
tion suggested  above,  that  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  Man 
is  Christ  Himself  seen  for  a  moment  through  a  rift  in 
the  clouds.  For  John  says  ; — "  Behold  He  cometh 
with  the  clouds  :  and  every  eye  shall  see  Him,  and 
they  also  which  pierced  Him  :  and  all  the  tribes  of  the 
land  shall  mourn  because  of  Him."  ^ 

Thus  the  Jews,  although  they  may  not  as  yet  under- 
stand all,  will  at  least  know  that  it  was  the  Messenger 
of  Jehovah  Whom  they  slew,  and  that  in  so  doing 
they  pierced  Himself.  And  they  will  mourn  with  no 
feigned  lamentation,  but  as  one  mourns  for  his  first- 
born, nay,  his  only  son.  All  their  pride  will  have 
'  Zech.  xii.  10.  -  Rev.  i.  7. 

17 


2si  THE  JEWS. 

broken  down  ;  for  the  word  will  then  have  been  ful- 
filled, "  I  will  take  away  out  of  the  midst  of  thee  them 
that  rejoice  in  thy  pride,  and  thou  shalt  no  more  be 
haughty  because  of  My  holy  mountain.  I  will  also 
leave  in  the  midst  of  thee  an  afflicted  and  poor  people, 
and  they  shall  trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  ■^ 

And  so  God  will  look  down  upon  the  stiff-necked 
and  rebellious  people,  whom  long  centuries  of  chastise-  ( 
ment  could   not  subdue,   and   lo !   a   remnant,  broken-  \ 
hearted   and   contrite,  humbly  confessing  that  they  are 
all  as   an  unclean   thing,  that  all  their  righteousnesses 
are  as  filthy  rags,  that  they  are  all  fading  as  a  leaf, 
and    that    their   iniquities    like    the   wind    have  carried 
them  away.     They  long  for  the  personal  interposition 
of  God  their  Father,  and  cry,  "  Oh  that  Thou  wouldest 
rend  the  heavens,  that  Thou   wouldest   come  down  !  " 
They  are  ready  at  last  for  their  Messiah.      Christ  has 
become  precious  to  them  :  there  is  no  need  that  He 
should  longer  refrain   Himself      He  had    indeed    said, 
"Ye   shall   not   see    Me  henceforth    till    ye*    shall  say, 
Blessed  is  He  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  ^ 
But  that  word  withholds  Him  no  longer  ;  for  now  their 
eyes  are  waiting   for   the    Lord  their    God,   until   that 
He  have  mercy  upon  them  :  their  souls  are  watching 
for  Him  more  than  they  that  watch  for  the   morning. 
And,  as  we  find  from  the  last  chapter   of  Zechariah, 
they  are  also  in   evil  plight,  and  are  all  but  swallowed 
up  by  their  enemies. 

At  this  crisis    He  will   suddenly   come   forth    from 

His  pavilion  of  clouds,  the  whole  earth  will  be  lighted 

with  His  glory,  and  the  sons  of  Abraham,  looking  up, 

will  behold  the  despised  Jesus  of  Nazareth  descending 

'  Zeph.  iii.  ii,  12,  -  Matt,  xxiii.  39. 


THE   TWENTY-FOURTH  CHAPTER  OF  MATTHEW.    259 

toward  Jerusalem,  with  power  and  great  glory,  for  the 
utter  destruction  of  their  enemies. 

The  manner  in  which  He  will  preserve  the  Jews, 
while  He  is  destroying  the  myriads  of  Antichrist,  is 
foretold  by  the  prophets.  Isaiah  gives  a  hint  of  it 
in  the  words,  "  Come,  My  people,  enter  thou  into  thy 
chambers,  and  shut  thy  doors  about  thee  :  hide  thyself 
as  it  were  for  a  little  moment,  until  the  indignation  be 
overpast.  For,  behold,  the  Lord  cometh  out  of  His 
place  to  punish  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  for  their 
iniquity  :  the  earth  also  shall  disclose  her  blood,  and 
shall  no  more  cover  her  slain."  ^  Zephaniah,  again, 
says,  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord,  all  ye  meek  of  the  land 
which  have  wrought  His  judgment ;  seek  righteousness, 
seek  meekness  :  it  may  be  ye  shall  be  hid  in  the  day 
of  the  Lord's  anger."  ^  And  by  comparing  Zech.  xiv. 
4,  5,  with  Mai.  iv.  1-3,  we  may,  perhaps,  see  what  these 
mysterious  utterances  mean.  For  in  the  former  ~^i 
passage  we  find  that,  when  the  Lord  descends,  the  L 
Mount  of  Olives  will  be  cloven  into  two  mountains  ' 
with  a  very  great  valley  between  them,  and  that  into 
the  valley  the  Jews  will  flee  with  haste  out  of  the  all 
but  captured  city.  Such  will  be  the  chamber,  the 
hiding  place  in  which  they  will  be  safely  sheltered 
while  the  lightnings  of  the  Lord  are  doing  their  work 
of  destruction.  ^  And  at  the  close  of  this  day,  "  which 
shall  burn  as  an  oven,"  they  shall  "  go  forth,  and  skip  " 
— not  "  grow  up,"  a  meaning  which  does  not  belong 
to  the  Hebrew  root — "  as  calves  of  the  stall."  *  That 
is,  just  as  calves  come  forth  skipping  with  glee  from 
the  dark    winter  stalls  into  the  pleasant  meadows  of 

'  Isa.  xxvi.  20,  21.  ^  Rev.  xix.  20,  21. 

-  Zeph.  ii.  3.  ^  Mai.  iv.  2, 


26o  THE  JEWS 

spring,  so  shall  the  Jews  issue  from  their  gloomy 
shelter  into  the  fair  Millennial  morning ;  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness  will  arise  upon  them  with  healing  in 
His  wings  ;  and  they  will  find  the  innumerable  armies 
of  the  dreaded  foe  reduced  to  ashes  beneath  their  feet. 

So  will  He  preserve  the  people  that  remain  in  the 
all  but  captured  city.  And  then,  with  a  great  sound 
of  a  trumpet,  He  will  send  forth  His  angels,  and  they 
will  gather  to  Him  at  Jerusalem  the  elect  of  Israel^ 
from  all  places  whither  they  have  been  scattered  ;  and 
He  will  make  Himself  known  to  them,  as  Joseph  made 
himself  known  to  his  brethren,  forgive  them,  comfort 
them,  and  say  ; — "  God  sent  Me  before  you  to  preserve 
you  a  posterity  in  the  earth,  and  to  save  your  lives  by 
a  great  deliverance,"  ^ 

It  is  probably  at  this  time  that  the  Throne  of  Glory 
will  be  set  up,  before  which  the  angels  will  gather  the 
nations  for  the  judgment  of  the  sheep  and  the  goats, 
while  the   Lord's  Jewish   brethren   stand   by. 

Then  will  follow  the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom 
at  Jerusalem,  and  the  Lord's  feast  to  all  peoples  on 
Mount  Zion.  And  so  at  length  the  enemy  and  the 
avenger  shall  be  stilled,  and  the  great  King  shall  rule  in 
righteousness.  The  feverish  dreams  of  men  shall  vanish ; 
the  restlessness,  the  strifes,  the  agonies,  the  universal 
suffering,  of  this  age  be  over,  and  the  glorious  words 
realized,  "  The  whole  earth  is  at  rest,  and  is  quiet  :   they 

'  The  elect  will  probably  be  those  Israelites  who  will  at  the 
time  have  turned  to  Christ,  ro  far  as  to  be  expecting  Him  as  the 
Deliverer.  Possibly  the  formation  of  this  body  has  already  com- 
menced in  the  wonderful  movement  in  South  Russia,  under  Joseph 
Rabinowitch.  But  the  scattered  ones  who  are  still  alienated 
from  Christ  will  be  subsequerttly  gathered  and  conveyed  to  their 
land  by  the  Gentiles.     See  Isa.  Ixvi.  20. 

'^  Gen,  xlv.  7. 


PRESEN7    CONDITION  OF  THE  JEWISH  NATION     261 

break  forth  into  singing."^  And  in  that  day  the  Lord 
will  destroy  "  the  face  of  the  covering  cast  over  all 
people,  and  the  veil  that  is  spread  over  all  nations.  He 
will  swallow  up  death  in  victory  ;  and  the  Lord  God 
will  wipe  away  tears  from  all  faces  ;  and  the  rebuke  of 
His  people  shall  He  take  away  from  off  all  the  earth  : 
for  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it."'^  And  "the  earth  shall 
be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters 
cover  the  sea."^ 

XL 

The  Present  Condition  of  the  Jewish  Nation 

AND  Land. 

Such,  then,  is  a  bare  sketch  of  the  line  of  prophecy 
which  concerns  the  Jew  up  to  the  time  when  the  Lord  will 
restore  the  Kingdom  to  Israel.  The  design  of  this  book, 
and  the  consequent  need  of  brevity,  forbid  any  reference 
to  the  interesting  details  in  which  the  Scriptures  abound ; 
but  we  must  add  a  io."^  words  on  the  present  condition 
of  the  Jewish   nation   and   land. 

It  is  clear  that  the  first  great  sign  of  the  end  must 
be  the  return  of  the  exiles  in  considerable  numbers  to 
their  own  country,  and  the  subsequent  rebuilding  of  the 
Temple.  Now  this  return  has  actually  commenced,  and 
various  causes  already  in  operation  seem  likely  to  favour 
it,  some  of  which  we  propose  to  notice. 

And,  in  the  first  place,  we  may  mention  that  Jeru- 
salem itself  is  gradually  becoming  a  centre  of  civiliza- 
tion, and  is  assuming  the  appearance  of  a  modern  city  : 
villas  are   being  erected   in   its   neighbourhood,  and   no 

'  Isa.  xiv.  7.  ^  Isa.  xxv.  7,  8.  ^  Isa.  xi.  9. 


262  THE  JEWS. 

less  than  three  exclusively  Jewish  building  societies 
have  been  for  some  time  carrying  on  their  work. 

Again  :  during  the  last  ten  years  the  Jewish  popu- 
lation has  doubled  itself,  so  that  at  the  present  time  it 
outnumbers  the  remainder  of  the  inhabitants.  Such  a 
condition  of  things  has  not  previously  been  known  in 
Jerusalem  since  its  destruction  by  Hadrian. 

Various  causes  have  contributed  to  bring  about  this 
result,  and  seem  likely  to  extend  it.  Among  them  are 
the  following : 

In  1840,  at  the  request  of  Sir  Moses  Montefiore,  the 
Sultan  issued  a  firman  for  the  relief  of  his  Jewish 
subjects.  After  stating  in  the  preface  that  the  various 
accusations — such  as  that  of  sacrificing  a  human  being 
to  make  use  of  his  blood  at  the  Passover — which  were 
popularly  brought  against  the  Jews  were  pure  calumnies, 
he  declared  that  thenceforth  the  Israelitish  nation  should 
be  protected  and  defended,  and  should  possess  the  same 
advantages,  and  enjoy  the  same  privileges,  as  the 
numerous  other  nations  under  his  sway.  Thus  one 
great  obstacle  to  the  return  of  the  Jews  to  Palestine 
was  removed. 

In  1867,  the  Turkish  Government  made  an  im- 
portant concession  in  regard  to  their  land  laws,  and 
gave  permission  to  the  subjects  of  foreign  powers  to 
purchase  land  in  their  own  name.  It  is  easy  to  see 
how  favourable  this  change  is,  indirectly,  to  immigra- 
tion, since  any  rich  European  Jew  can  now  buy  up 
property  in  Palestine,  and  let  it  as  he  chooses  to 
families  of  his  own  nation.  And  not  a  few  have  availed 
themselves  of  the  opportunity. 

In  1874,  Russia — in  which  vast  empire  there  are 
between  two  and  three  millions  of  Jews — adopted  the 


i 


PRESENT  CONDITION  OF  THE  JEWISH  NATION.    263 

German  military  system,  so  that  all  Hebrews  became 
liable  to  service  in  the  army.  This  was  very  distasteful 
to  them;  and  about  the  same  time  they  were  subjected, 
especially  in  Poland,  to  divers  persecutions,  such  as  are 
frequently  raised  by  the  Greek  Church.  It  is  reported 
that,  for  these  reasons,  nearly  the  whole  of  the  Jewish 
community  has  resolved  to  leave  Russia,  family  by 
family,  as  each  may  be  able  to  extricate  itself ;  and 
certainly  a  steady  emigration  is  continually  going  on, 
stimulated  at  intervals  by  fierce  assaults  and  cruel 
outrages,  from  which  the  Government  seems  by  no 
means  anxious  to  protect  its  alien  subjects.  Many 
families  have  arrived  in  Palestine,  to  the  great  increase 
of  the  Hebrew  population  :  others  escaped  to  America, 
where  they  found  the  people  strangely  unwilling  to 
receive  them  :  still  larger  numbers  have  poured  into 
Germany. 

In  the  latter  country,  however,  they  find  no  ease, 
neither  rest  for  the  sole  of  their  foot ;  but  seem  likely 
to  be  driven  on  to  seek  another  home,  and  possibly 
even  to  cause  the  departure  of  their  brethren  who  had 
previously  settled  there.  For,  within  the  last  few  years, 
the  ancient  hatred  of  the  Jews  has  been  revived  in 
Germany,  their  wonderful  prosperity  and  rapidly 
increasing  power  having  excited  jealousy  and  prejudice, 
and  induced  a  persuasion  that  many  of  the  ills  of  the 
country  are  to  be  referred  to  their  presence  in  it.  An 
agitation — commenced  by  Herr  Stocker,  the  court 
chaplain — was  lately  set  on  foot  under  the  auspices, 
strange  to  say,  of  the  Liberal  party.  It  was  taken  up 
with  enthusiasm  by  all  ranks  of  society  :  vast  meetings 
were  held,  and  anti-Semitic  associations  formed  through- 
out the  country.     The  object  of  the  agitators  was  to 


264  THE  JEWS. 

check  the  further  immigration  of  foreign  Jews,  and  to 
deprive  those  who  were  already  resident  of  many  of 
their  civil  rights,  by  excluding  them  from  state  or 
judicial  office  and  from  the  legal  and  educational 
professions. 

Just  now  there  is  a  lull  in  the  violence  of  the  perse- 
cution, interrupted,  however,  now  and  then  by  local 
outbreaks,  more  especially  in  Russia  and  Austria.  But 
unless  the  strong  anti-Semitic  feeling  quickly  subsides, 
all  Jews  will  be  compelled  to  leave  the  countries  which 
we  have  mentioned  ;  nor  does  it  seem  certain  that  they 
would  find  a  welcome  among  other  nations  of  Europe. 
A  London  newspaper  recently  remarked  upon  the 
matter  as  follows  ; — 

"  This  feeling  is  not,  of  course,  expressed  in  the 
same  crude  manner  among  ourselves,  nor  in  anything 
like  the  same  measure  ;  but  we  know  from  our  own 
correspondence  that  it  would  be  going  too  far  to  say 
that  Englishmen  themselves  have  got  rid  of  it  com- 
pletely. .  .  .  The  truth  undoubtedly  is,  that  the  Jews 
are  more  or  less  an  object  of  jealousy  in  every  country 
in  Europe.  The  antagonism  they  excite  is,  no  doubt, 
partly  an  antagonism  of  religion,  yet  more  an  antipathy 
of  race  ;  partly,  also,  it  is  the  survival  of  an  age  far 
less  humane  and  much  more  ignorant  than  our  own. 
Mainly,  however,  it  is  due  to  the  fact  that  during  the 
present  century  they  have  made  an  extraordinarily 
rapid  advance  in  enterprize  and  prosperity.  On  this 
point  there  is  little  exaggeration  in  the  talk  of  their 
enemies.  Even  when  trammelled  by  every  kind  of 
restriction,  they  were  in  some  departments  of  com- 
mercial activity  more  than  a  match  for  their  rivals  ; 
and  since  their  emancipation  they  have  vastly  extended 


PRESENT  CONDITION  OF  THE  JEWISH  NATION.     265 

the  scope  of  their  energy.     And  why  they  should  have 
done  so  is  clear  enough  :  they  possess  in  a  high  degree 
the  qualities  which  it  was  to  be  expected  that  centuries  / 
of  oppression  would   develop — patience,  tact,  industry,  \, 
and  resource."^ 

Such  is  a  competent  opinion  upon  the  state  of 
European  feeling  toward  the  Jews,  And  Russia,  Ger- 
many, and  Austria,  are  not  the  only  countries  in 
which  the  sentiment  has  already  ripened  into  open 
hostility  ;  for  the  new  states-  liberated  by  the  Berlin 
Treaty  are,  doubtless  through  the  influence  of  the 
Greek  Church,  showing  a  strong  disposition  to  perse- 
cute the  Hebrew  race.  This  is  no  new  feeling,  as 
may  be  seen  by  a  significant  appeal  from  the  Jews  of 
Bucharest^  which  appeared,  some  time  ago,  in  the 
Jeivish  Chronicle.      The  subjoined  clauses  are  extracted. 

"  The  troubles  which  the  Jews  of  Roumania  are 
compelled  to  suffer  are  well  known  to  you.  It  is  a 
land  whose  princes  are  like  the  wolves  of  the  forest 
in  their  endeavours  to  annihilate  the  children  of  Israel. 
With  fearful  zeal  they  seek  to  persecute  us  ;  one  day 
they  pursue  us  under  the  name  of  religious  enthusiasm, 
and  on  the  morrow  they  abandon  the  cry  which  is 
so  disgraceful  to  them.  But  then  they  conceal  their 
hatred  under  the  name  of  economy,  alleging  that  the 
state  of  trade  and  the  mercantile  prospects  of  the 
country  compel  them  to  act  oppressively  to  the  Jews 
who  absorb  the  substance  of  the  Roumanians,  and 
many  other  such  excuses.  Thus  are  we  constantly 
and  severely  attacked,  and  our  powers  of  endurance 
are    exhausted.      We    have,    therefore,    resolved,   after 

'  SL  Jaines's  Gazette,  Nov.  19th,  1880. 
"  Dated  Aug.  20th,  1880. 


266  THE  JEWS, 

mature  deliberation,  to  leave  the  country.  With  this 
view  we  have  formed  ourselves  into  a  Society  for  the 
Colonization  of  the  Holy  Land,  consisting  of  a  hundred 
families.  Every  one  of  the  members  is  experienced  in 
the  work"  of  cultivating  the  soil,  and  it  is  our  intention 
to  journey  to  Palestine  to  *  till  the  ground  and  to 
guard   it.'"' 

"  God,"  says  ]\Ir.  Friedlander,^  "  has  sent  a  feeling  of 
homelessness  into  the  hearts  of  many  thousands  of 
Jews,  and  that  feeling  is  spreading  far  and  wide.  The 
handful  of  well-to-do  Jews  in  England  and  Germany 
will  not  admit  it,  but  the  fact  remains  all  the  same. 
Wherever  the  spirit  of  persecution  is  prevailing,  there 
the  Jews  begin  to  think  of  Palestine  as  the  only  safe 
home  which  this  world  can  give  them.  The  tJioiigJit  is 
a  new  one,  and  is  forced  upon  them  by  very  remarkable 
occurrences.  That  America,  open  to  all  the  Avorld, 
should  send  back  Jewish  refugees  from  her  shores  is 
30  extraordinary  an  experience  that  all  intending 
smigrants  are  feeling  themselves  shut  up  to  the  one 
idea,  that  in  order  to  found  a  new  home  they  can  go 
nowhere  but  to  Palestine." 

Even  so  :  for  who  can  withstand  the  will  of  the 
Almighty,  or  who  shall  change  His  purposes  .-*  And 
the  set  time  for  their  fulfilment  seems  now  to  have 
come. 

'  I  have  never  had  the  opportunity  of  speaking  to  Roumanians 
about  their  feelings  in  reference  to  the  Jews.  Though  I  would 
fain  hope  that  they  have  some  conscientious  reasons  for  doing 
\Yhat  they  do,  it  is  ver}'  hard  to  understand  them.  With  a  finesse 
worth}-  of  a  better  cause,  they  pass  law  after  law  to  deprive  Jews 
in  Roumania  of  the  means  of  making  a  livelihood,  and  the  result 
is  ever-increasing  emigration." — H.  FriedlaNDER,  Oct.  15th, 
1884. 

^  In  his  interesting  report  of  Oct.  15th,  1884. 


PRESENT  CONDITION  OF  THE  JEWISH  NATION.    267 

Just  before  the  commencement  of  the  anti-Semitic 
agitation  in  Germany,  the  Jews  appeared  to  be  com- 
fortably settled  in  most  parts  of  Europe,  except  Russia. 
Their  wealth  and  influence  were  continually  increasing: 
and,  probably,  their  satisfaction  and  confidence  in  the 
future  had  never  been  so  great  since  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem.  Their  prevailing  sentiment  was  well  illus- 
trated at  the  time  by  an  article  in  the  Jezvisli  Chronicle, 
the  writer  of  which  made  merry  with  the  Christian  idea 
of  the  destiny  of  his  nation.  He  affirmed  that  they 
were  far  too  much  at  home  in  the  luxurious  cities  of 
Europe  to  think  of  returning  to  a  barbarous  Asiatic 
country,  and  quoted  with  approval  the  saying  of  a  well- 
known  Jew,  who,  when  the  prophecies  of  the  restoration 
had  been  mentioned  to  him,  replied  ; — "  Well,  if  we 
have  to  go  back  to  Palestine,  I  know  what  I  shall  do. 
I  shall  petition  his  Judaic  Majesty  to  send  me  as 
ambassador  to  Paris." 

At  last,  then,  the  thought  had  arisen  in  the  hearts 
of  the  children  of  Abraham,  that  they  would  forget 
their  own  land,  and  be  as  the  nations  ;  and  at  the 
same  time  the  hour  for  God's  interference  was  ap- 
proaching. 

A  furious  persecution  was  being  arranged  in  Russia  : 
the  Jews  perceived  the  rising  of  the  storm,  and  intima- 
tions were  conveyed  to  them  from  the  highest  minister 
of  the  Government,  that,  by  paying  a  vast  sum  of 
money,  they  might  avert  it.  They  refused  to  do  so, 
and  a  series  of  cruel  outrages  followed,  involving  great 
destruction  of  life  and  property,  besides  other  sufferings 
of  a  terrible  nature.  And  immediately  afterwards  the 
Germans,  who  had  long  been  regarding  with  envy  and 
anger  the  riches  and  influence  of  the  Jews  in  Germany, 


268  THE  JEWS. 

also  began  to  give  open  proof  that  their  hatred  of  the 
devoted  race  had  revived. 

Could  there  be  a  more  signal  and  literal  fulfilment, 
in  its  first  stage,  of  the  vivid  words  of  Ezekiel  ? 

"  And  that  which  rises  up  in  your  mind  shall  not 
be  at  all,  in  that  ye  say,  We  will  be  as  the  nations, 
as  the  families  of  the  countries,  to  serve  wood  and 
stone. 

As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  surely  with  a 
mighty  hand,  and  with  a  stretched-out  arm,  and  with 
fury   poured   out,   will   I    rule    over  you. 

And  I  will  bring  you  out  from  the  peoples,  and  will 
gather  you  out  of  the  countries  wherein  ye  are 
scattered,  with  a  mighty  hand,  and  with  a  stretched-out 
arm,  and  with  fury  poured  out. 

And  I  will  bring  you  into  the  wilderness  of  the 
peoples,  and  there  will  I   plead  with  you  face  to  face."  ^ 

The  last  verse  contains  a  terrible  threat  which  may 
be  now  in  process  of  fulfilment,  but  is  not  yet  com- 
pletely realised.  We  sometimes  speak  of  the  solitude 
of  London  ;  and  few  circumstances  are  more  depressing 
than  to  suffer  need  and  distress  amid  vast  crowds  in 
which  we  can  perceive  no  glance  of  compassion,  nor 
find  a  helper.  But  the  Jews  seem  likely  before  long  to 
suffer  something  worse  than  this,  and,  wherever  they 
turn,  to  find  themselves  encompassed  with  faces  lower- 
ing, menacing,  and  cruel.  The  wilderness  of  the  nations 
will  prove  far  more  dreadful  to  them  than  the  waste 
howling  desert   in   which    Moses   was   their  leader. 

But  the  jealousy  and  hatred   of  those  among  whom 
they  sojourn  will  be  God's  means  of  driving  them  back  / 
to  the  place  where  He  will  deal  with  them  ;  just  as,  in 

'  Ezek.  XX.  ^^2  35. 


PRESENT  CONDITION  OF  THE  JEWISH  NATION,     zhg 

the  days  of  old,  their  hard  bondage   made   them   glad  ' 
to  leave  the  flesh-pots  of  Egypt,  and  to  turn  their  faces 
toward  Canaan. 

And  it  may  be  that  He  is  already  beginning  to  set 
His  seal  upon  the  elect  remnant  of  which  the  prophets 
so  often  speak,  the  one-third  which  He  will  guide  safely  \ 
through  the  time  of  trouble  into  the  Millennial  glory  :      '' 
for  a  very  startling  and   significant  movement  is   now 
going  on   among  a  portion   of  the  Jews. 

During  the  persecution  in  South  Russia,  a  lawyer  of 
Bessarabia,  named  Joseph  Rabinowitch,  became  im- 
pressed with  the  thought  that  his  harassed  kinsmen 
could  find  rest  only  in  their  own  land.  Meeting  with 
much  sympathy  from  the  Jews  around  him,  he  turned 
his  mind  to  the  ways  and  means  of  carrying  out  his 
idea,  and,  in  order  to  obtain  full  information,  under- 
took a  journey  to  Palestine.  During  his  stay  there,  he 
was  deeply  moved  as  he  realised  the  great  discrepancy 
between  God's  description  of  the  country,  as  a  good 
land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  and  its  present 
actual  condition. 

Had  he  been  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  the  Nine- 
teenth Century,  he  would  have  quickly  solved  his 
difficulties  by  giving  the  lie  to  revelation.  But  he 
believed  in  the  God  Who  made  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  and  the  sea  and  the  fountains  of  waters,  and, 
therefore,  proceeded,  on  the  spot,  to  inquire  how  those 
things  could  be,  by  diligently  searching  the  Old 
Testament  Scriptures.  His  faith  was  rewarded  by  the 
discovery  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the  Messiah  and 
only  hope  of  Israel,  and  that  the  curse  had  fallen  upon 
the  children  of  Abraham  and  their  land  because  they 
rejected   Him. 


270  THE  JEWS. 

Having  so  far  apprehended  the  truth,  from  an  exclu- 
sively Jewish  point  of  view,  he  returned  to  Bessarabia 
and  set  it  forth  in  the  synagogues,  with  the  result  that 
a  separate  community  has  been  formed  which  already 
numbers  some  eight  hundred  persons.  Its  members 
hold  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  Llessiah,  and  the  only 
One  Who  can  restore  His  nation  to  their  own  land  and 
to  peace.  They  do  not,  however,  recognise  Him  as  the 
only  Begotten  Son  of  the  Father,  and  probably  will 
not  do  so,  as  a  body  at  least,  until  they  behold  Him 
with  their  eyes.  But  they  call  themselves  "  The 
National  Jewish  New  Covenant  Congregation,"  and 
have  adopted  a  new  liturgy  for  their  Passover  service, 
in  which  the  Lord  is  recognised  as  their  Redeemer,  and 
as  the  Subject  of  the  fifty-third  chapter  of  Isaiah  and 
other  prophecies. 

Thus,  then,  it  would  seem  that  the  cry,  "  Blessed  is 
He  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,"  is  at  last 
beginning  to  ascend  from  Jewish  hearts  ;  and,  if  it 
continue  and  increase,  the  separation  between  them- 
selves and  their  King  will  be  removed,  and  He  will 
fulfil  His  promise  by  coming  to  them  again  without 
fear  of  a  second  rejection.  Truly  the  purposes  of  God 
are  speeding  to  their  end  ! 

And  while  the  Jews  are  harassed  in  many  other 
lands,  the  finger  of  God  seems  to  be  revealed  in  the 
comparatively  friendly  attitude  of  the  present  owners 
of  Palestine  toward  them,  and  their  appreciation  of  it. 
This  appreciation  they  showed  very  manifestly,  during 
the  late  difficulties  between  England  and  Russia,  by 
their  vigorous  support  of  Lord  Beaconsfield's  policy. 
And  when  they  were  taxed  by  the  Opposition  with 
their  preference  for  Turkey,  a  letter  appeared  in  the 


PRESENT  CONDITION  OF  THE  JEWISH  NATION.    271 

Times  admitting  their  bias,  and  justifying  it  on  the 
ground  that  they  had  always  received  better  treatment 
from  the  Mussulmans  than  from  the  Latin  and  Greek 
Churches  ;  so  much  so,  indeed,  that  for  centuries  they 
had  used  the  proverbial  saying,  "  The  children  of 
Ishmael  are  more  merciful  than  the  children  of 
Edom." 

It  is  not  unlikely  that  these  friendly  relations  may 
continue,  and  that  the  Jews  may  be  re-settled  in  their 
land  with  the  approval  and  good-will  of  the  Turks, 
who  have  once  before  received  them  as  outcasts  from 
Christendom,  and  who  have  never  exhibited  toward 
them  that  systematic  hatred  which  has  at  all  times 
characterized  the  Catholic  Churches, 

But  even  if  the  Turkish  empire  should  have  fallen 
apart  into  its  four  ancient  divisions — as  it  must  do  at 
the  time  of  the  end — before  Palestine  is  re-peopled, 
the  Jews  will,  nevertheless,  have  little  cause  to  com- 
plain of  the  governing  power,  whatever  it  may  then 
be,  in  Syria.  For  the  great  prophecy  of  Ezekiel  ^ 
proves  that  they  will  be  able  to  establish  themselves  in 
peace  and  security,  and  to  dwell  with  all  their  wealth 
in  unfortified  towns,"  until  the  Prince  of  Rosh,  Meshech, 
and  Tubal,  comes  down  upon  them.  It  is  thus  suffi- 
ciently indicated  that  the  instinct  of  the  Jews  is  correct, 
and  that  Russia,  and  not  Turkey,  is  the  great  enemy  of 
Israel. 

Such  are  some  of  the  influences  which  are  powerfully 
affecting  the  exiles  of  the  Two  Tribes.  Their  operation 
may  continue,  or  may  not ;  but  certainly,  so  far  as  we 
can  read  the  present  signs  of  the  times,  God  seems  to 
have  cast  up  a  highway  for  the  return  of  the  Jews,  and 
^  Ezek.  xxxviii.  and  xxxix.  ^  Ezek.  xxxviii.  11,  12. 


272  THE  JEWS. 

to  be  both  driving  and  alluring  them  toward  their  own 
land. 

Meanwhile,  the  general  interest — and  especially  that 
of  British  Christians — which  is  awakened  in  regard  to 
Palestine,  the  frequent  journeyings  of  Europeans  and 
Americans  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  it,  the 
exploring  and  surveying  expeditions,  and  the  exertions 
of  Sir  Moses  Montefiore  and  other  Jews,  have  done 
much  to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  the  country,  and 
remind  us  of  the  prophecy — 

"  Thou  wilt  arise,  and  have  mercy  upon  Zion ; 
For  it  is  time  to  favour  her ; 
For  the  set  time  is  come. 
For  Thy  ser\^ants  take  pleasure  in  her  stones, 
And  favour  the  dust  thereof."  * 

Among  the  many  striking  incidents  of  the  last  few 
years,  we  may  mention  the  proposal  for  the  coloniza- 
tion of  Eastern  Palestine  suggested  by  Mr.  Lawrence 
Oliphant,^  who,  in  common  with  the  majority  of 
thoughtful  and  unprejudiced  Englishmen,  has  viewed 
with  alarm  the  rapid  southward  advance  of  Russia,  and 
felt  the  necessity  of  checking  it  before  the  British 
route  to  India  becomes  seriously  endangered.  For  the 
results  of  the  late  war  have  placed  some  important 
military  positions  in  the  hands  of  the  Czar,  and  have 
extended  the  Russian  empire  into  Armenia ;  while 
Turkey,  owing  to  her  continued  maladministration, 
which  is  ceaselessly  fostered  by  Russia,  can  no  longer 
be  regarded  as  a  reliable  barrier,  and  indeed,  unless 
reforms   be  introduced,   must  soon   collapse,  and   leave 

'  Psa.  cii.  13,  14. 

"  This  scheme  is  explained  in  Mr.  Oliphant's  interesting-  book, 
"The  Land  of  Gilead." 


FRESENT  CONDirrON  OF  THE  JEWISH  NATION.     273 

for  the  Muscovites  an  open  road  to  Jerusalem  and  to 
the  Suez  Canal. 

With  such  a  prospect  into  the  future,  it  occurred  to 
JVTr.  Oliphant  that,  by  placing  a  large  colony  of  Jews  in 
the  land  of  Gilead,  the  finances  of  Turkey  might  be 
increased,  and  an  example  of  good  government  dis- 
played which  would  probably  be  imitated  by  other 
provinces  of  Asia  Minor ;  while,  if  the  colony  could 
be  developed,  a  powerful  Hebrew  community,  with  all 
the  influence  of  the  race,  might  in  course  of  time  be 
interposed  between  Russia  and  the  Red  Sea. 

Accordingly,  he  drew  up  the  outline  of  a  scheme 
which  received  the  private  approval  of  Lords  Beacons- 
field  and  Salisbury,  and  also  of  M.  Waddington,  who 
was  at  that  time  French  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs, 
and  in  which  the  Prince  of  Wales  and  the  Prince  and 
Princess  of  Schleswig-Holstein  evinced  a  warm  interest. 
Shortly  afterwards  he  started  for  Syria,  and  made  a 
careful  survey  of  the  country  in  which  he  proposed  to 
establish  the  colony,  and  which  he  found  to  be  fertile, 
admirably  adapted  for  cultivation,  and  at  the  same 
time  practically  uninhabited. 

He  received  the  cordial  support  of  Midhat  Pasha, 
the  governor  of  Syria,  and  then  proceeded  to  Con- 
stantinople with  his  completed  scheme.  There  the 
Grand  Vizier,  Khaireddin  Pasha,  regarded  the  project 
with  great  favour,  quickly  perceiving  the  advantage 
which  would  accrue  to  the  Turkish  empire  by  a  course 
which  might  easily  be  made  to  procure  for  it  an 
alliance  with  the  whole  of  the  wealthy  and  powerful 
Jewish  race.  But  at  this  critical  time  the  Turkish 
ministry  was  overthrown  ;  and  its  successors  were  suspi- 
cious of  every  proposal  which  emanated  from  a  foreigner. 

18 


274  THE  lElVS. 

All  hope  of  an  immediate  carrying  out  of  the  plan 
was  therefore  checked  :  but  the  delay  may  be  merely 
temporary ;  for  the  political  importance  of  Palestine 
is  daily  increasing.  The  Congress  of  Berlin  has  for 
the  present  placed  a  bar  to  the  advance  of  Russia  in 
Europe  ;  but  that  restless  power,  which  seems  destined 
to  be  a  great  disturber  of  the  world,  is  thereby  ren- 
dered the  more  free  for  operations  in  Asia.  And, 
owing  to  the  late  war,  her  Asiatic  frontiers  arc  now 
as  near  to  the  Mediterranean  as  her  European  ;  ^\•hile 
in  the  countries  bordering  upon  the  former  there  is 
nothing  to  hinder  her  progress,  except  the  Convention 
of  Cyprus,  which  she  is  likely,  owing  to  the  present 
mood  of  the  British  people,  to  regard  as  a  cancelled 
document.  And  if  she  should  thus  reach  her  goal, 
the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  by  way  of  Asia 
Minor,  and  establish  herself  at  Alexandretta,  an  easy 
march  through  Palestine  would  give  her  the  command 
of  the  Suez  Canal,  Egypt,  and  the  Red  Sea  ;  and  the 
British  passage  to  India  would  be  closed. 

But  although  the  command  of  two  seas  and  the 
interception  of  British  communication  with  India  would 
be  advantages  sufficient  in  themselves  to  stimulate 
Russia  to  the  most  desperate  exertion,  there  is,  never- 
theless, another  motive  which  would  urge  her  still  more 
powerfully  along  the  route  which  we  have  mentioned. 
Her  fanatical  population  has  always  longed  for  the 
possession  of  the  holy  places  in  Palestine ;  so  much 
so  that  even  during  the  Crimean  war  their  martial 
feelings  were  excited  and  sustained  by  the  promise 
that  Jeiusalem  should  be  their  ultimate  goal.  Nor 
does  the  intervening  time  appear  to  have  cooled  their 
ardour.     "  Every  year,"  says  Mr.  Oliphant,  "  about  four 


PRESENT  CONDITION  OF  THE  JEWISH  NATION.     275 

thousand  Russian  pilgrims,  composed  largely  of  dis- 
charged soldiers,  make  painful  and  laborious  journeys 
to  visit  the  sacred  shrines.  One  comes  in  contact  with 
them  in  crowds  during  the  Holy  Week,  and  it  is 
impossible  not  to  be  struck  by  the  air  of  fanatical 
superstition  which  characterizes  them."  ^  Such  a 
nation  might  easily  be  incited  to  a  crusade  which, 
while  it  would  satisfy  the  superstitious  desires  of  the 
people,  might  also  be  made  subservient  to  the  insatiable 
ambition  of  their  leaders. 

Should  the  English  discover — before  their  oppor- 
tunity has  passed — the  necessity  of  opposing  a  barrier 
to  Russian  advance  into  Palestine,  it  is  not  improbable 
that  the  establishment  of  a  large  and  influential  Jewish 
colony  would  form  a  part  of  their  plan.  That  such  a 
project  has  received  nmcli  consideration  may  be  inferred 
from  the  fact  that  a  second  gentleman,  Mr.  Cazalet, 
elaborated  a  scheme  similar  to  that  of  Mr.  Oliphant, 
which  was  published  about  the  same  time  as  the 
latter. 

When,  however,  we  consider  the  present  condition 
of  this  country,  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  conclusion 
that  she  may  be  in  the  decrepitude  of  old  age :  for  on 
every  side  we  see  a  waning  of  patriotism,  a  preference 
of  party  to  imperial  interests,  a  general  indifference  to 
the  colonies  and  frontier  lines,  an  unsteadiness  in 
foreign  policy  and  neglect  of  allies,  and  a  false  security 
which  insists  that  the  empire  can  be  defended  by 
thousands,  though  her  ambitious  neighbours  are  begin- 
ning to  reckon  their  armies  by  millions.  Unless  all 
this  be  quickly  changed,  England  will  prove  unequal 
to  the  struggle  which  she  cannot  avoid,  and  in  that 
'  "  Land  of  Gilead,"  pp.  517,  518. 


276  THE  lEVVS. 

case  another  nation  is  ready  to  step  into  the  arena 
The  ceaseless  vigilance  of  France  in  every  matter  which 
concerns  Egypt,  and  her  known  designs  upon  Syria, 
point  to  her  as  the  power  which  will  then  confront 
Russia.  And  the  idea  of  the  restoration  of  the  Jews 
as  an  aid  to  French  policy  in  the  East  is  not  new :  it 
has  been  already  suggested  by  the  first  Napoleon,  and 
seems,  indeed,  to  be  a  part  of  the  traditions  of  his 
family. 

Possibly,  therefore,  we  may  now  be  able  to  discern, 
in  dim  outline,  the  manner  in  which  the  nations  will 
unconsciously  work  out  the  will  of  Him  Who  knows 
the  end  from  the  beginning  ;  but  whether  this  be  the 
case  or  not,  certainly  the  progress  of  events  has  at 
last  made  Palestine  the  centre  of  the  great  Eastern 
question. 

Nor  are  signs  wanting  that  its  soil  is  destined  before 
long  to  be  the  battle-field  of  the  nations,  though  not, 
probably,  until  the  Jews  have  been  settled  in  it.  Then 
the  conflicts  of  opposing  armies,  like  the  ancient  struggle 
of  the  kings  of  Syria  and  Egypt,  may,  perhaps,  form 
no  small  part  of  the  discipline  through  which  the  kins- 
men of  the  Lord  have  yet  to  pass  during  the  time  of 
Jacob's  trouble.  And  what  deep  shadows  these  coming 
events  are  already  casting  before  them  may  be  seen 
by  the  following  extract  from  a  daily  newspaper,  in 
which  the  writer  is  commenting  upon  the  delay  in  the 
publication  of  the  one-inch  map  of  Palestine,  made  in 
the  late  survey.  After  an  historical  sketch  to  prove 
the  strategical  importance  which  has  ever  attached  to 
the  Holy  Land  "  as  the  gateway  between  the  East 
and  the  West,  or  rather,  as  the  barbican  which  ccm- 
mands    the    two    avenues   of   the   Euphrates    and    Red 


PRESENT  CONDI! ION  OF  THE  /ElVISII  NATION.     277 

Sea   lines  of  communication,"  he   concludes   with   the 
words  ; — 

"  It  is  probable  that  the  power  which,  from  the 
date  of  the  inroads  of  Thothmes  III.  to  the  present 
time,  has  made  the  most  advance  towards  a  permanent 
acquisition  of  Palestine,  is  Russia.  '  Standing  on  the 
approximate  site  of  the  old  tower  of  Psephinus,'  says 
the  author  of  '  Tent  Work  in  Palestine,'  '  the  Russian 
hospice  commands  the  whole  town  (of  Jerusalem),  and 
is  thought  by  many  to  be  in  a  position  designedly  of 
military  strength.'  Nor  is  this  the  only  place  on  which 
the  grip  of  the  Czar  has  been  laid.  If  the  contest 
between  the  civilization  of  the  West  and  the  autocratic 
barbarism  of  the  North  be  ever  committed  to  the 
arbitration  of  arms,  nowhere  is  the  contest  so  likely 
to  be  decided  as  in  the  region  which  guards  the  two  \ 
roads  from  the  Mediterranean  to  the  Indian  Ocean. 
Nor  is  it  needful  to  wait  for  that  time  to  become  aware 
of  the  strategical  value  of  the  one-inch  map  of  I 
Palestine."^ 

It  would  seem,  then,  that  we  may  be  very  near  to 
the  times  of  which  it  is  written,  "  And  it  shall  come 
to  pass  in  that  day  that  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a 
burdensome  stone  to  all  the  peoples  ;  all  that  lift  it 
.  shall  be  wounded  ;  and  all  the  nations  of  the  earth 
shall  be  gathered  together  against  it."' 

The  grand  swoop  of  the  Russian  eagle  appears  \ 
to  be  described  in  the  thirty-eighth  and  thirty-ninth 
chapters  of  Ezekiel,  in  which  it  is  now  almost  uni- 
versally admitted  that  the  name  and  titles  of  the 
Northern  king  should  be  rendered,  "  Gog  of  the  land 
of  Magog,  prince  of  Rosh,  Meshech,  and  Tubal."      The 

'  St.  James's  Gazette,  Sept.  15th,  1880.  ^  Zech.  xii.  3. 


278  THE  JEWS. 

kingdom  of  this  leader  can  be  identified  in  no  dubious 
manner  with  the  present  dominions  of  the  Czar,  and, 
as  Dean  Stanley  remarks,  "this  early  Biblical  notice 
of  so  great  an  empire  is  doubly  interesting  from  its 
being  a  solitary  instance.  No  other  name  of  any 
modern   nation  occurs  in  the  Scriptures." 

The  Scythian,  or  Tartar,  tribe  of  Ros — mentioned 
by  Byzantine  writers  of  the  tenth  century  as  being 
located  to  the  north  of  Taurus,  and  by  Ibn  Foszlan, 
an  Arabian  of  the  same  age,  as  dwelling  on  the  banks 
of  the  Rha,  or  Volga — has  been  recently  acknowledged 
by  a  consent  of  Russian  ethnologists  to  be  the  origin 
of  their  name  and  people. 

Meshech  was  another  Scythian  tribe,  known  to 
Classical  writers  as  the  Moschi.  Of  these  Rawlinson 
says; — "  They  are  frequently  mentioned  in  Scripture 
under  the  name  of  Meshech,  and  occur  as  Muskai  in 
many  of  the  Assyrian  inscriptions.  .  .  .  There  is  reason 
to  believe  that  they  ultimately  took  refuge  in  the 
Steppe  country,  where  they  became  known  as  Muscovs, 
ji^nd  gave  their  name  to  (Moscow)  the  old  capital  of 
Russia."^ 

The  clans  of  Tubal,  a  third  Scythian  tribe,  are, 
under  the  name  of  Tuplai,  associated  with  the  Muskai 
in  Assyrian  inscriptions ;  while  in  Classical  authors 
they  are  called  Tibareni,  or  the  people  of  Tubal,  and 
are  usually  coupled  with  the  Moschi.  The  Assyrian 
records  place  them  in  Lower  Cappadocia,  on  the 
Southern  flanks  of  the  Taurus  ;  but,  after  a  few  cen- 
turies, we  find  them  driven  up  to  the  South-eastern 
coast  of  the  Black  Sea ;  and  they  seem  to  have 
subsequently  continued  their  Northward  wanderings 
'  Rawl.  "  Herod,"  vol.  iv.  p.  i8o. 


PRESENT  CONDITION  OF  THE  JEWISH  NATION.     279 

until  they  settled  in  Western  Siberia,  where  they  have 
given  their  names  to  the  river  Tobol,  and  also  to  the    f 
city  and  government  of  Tobolsk. 

Thus  these  three  Scythian  tribes  of  Asia  Minor, 
which  appear  in  olden  time  to  have  lived  in  close 
proximity,  and  two  of  them  at  least  on  terms  of  friend- 
ship and  alliance,  were  gradually  forced  away  from 
their  pleasant  habitations  and  fertile  lands  into  the 
cold  and  inhospitable  region  of  the  Steppes,  and  are 
now  united  as  Russians,  Muscovites,  and  the  people  "^ 
of  Tobolsk,  in  the  great  empire  of  the  Czars.  And  if  > 
we  keep  their  history  in  mind,  it  will,  perhaps,  give  a  ^ 
peculiar  significance  to  the  words  addressed  to  Gog, 
"  I  will  cause  thee  to  return,"^  which  may  have  meant 
that  in  the  latter  times  these  Scythians  should  make 
their  way  back  again  to  the  country  from  whence  they 
came :  that  they  should  burst  the  "  Iron  Gates,"  which 
they  did  when  they  annexed  the  Trans-Caucasian 
provinces,  and  should  stream  on  through  Armenia, 
which  they  have  already  begun  to  do,  until,  having 
re-crossed  the  ridge  of  Taurus,  they  have  reached  the 
plains  of  Mesopotamia  and  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates, 
where  we  first  hear  of  them  in  the  times  of  the  old 
Assyrian  empire.  And  then  they  will  not  be  very  far 
from  the  borders  of  the  Holy  Land,  upon  which  they 
shall  come  as  a  storm,  and  shall  cover  it  like  a  cloud.^ 

There  is,  then,  bitter  tribulation  awaiting  the  sons  of 
Abraham  in  the  immediate  future.  The  curse  which 
the  miserable  people  called  down  upon  their  own  heads 
is  not  yet  exhausted  :   the  blood   of  Him  Whom  the 

'  Ezek.  xxxviii.  4.     This  rendering  is  better  than  that  of  the 
English  Version,  "  I  will  turn  thee  back." 
"  Ezek.  xxxviii.  9. 


2So  THE  JEWS. 

Father  sent  is  still  upon  them  and  upon  their  children  : 
there  is  no  fountain  as  yet  opened  to  the  house  of 
David  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  for  sin  and  for 
uncleanness  ;  they  are  still  bearing  every  one  his  own 
iniquity.  But  the  hour  of  decision  is  approaching, 
when  that  which  can  be  saved  shall  be  saved,  and  that 
which  will  perish  shall  perish  :  the  time  is  near  when 
the  people  shall  be  gathered  in  unbelief  into  their  own 
country,  as  men  "  gather  silver,  and  brass,  and  iron,  and 
lead,  and  tin,  into  the  midst  of  the  furnace,  to  blow  the 
fire  upon  it,  to  melt  it  :"^  the  day  is  not  far  distant  in 
which  the  inhabitant  of  Jerusalem  shall  indeed  say,  "  1 
am  sick,"  and  all  the  cities  and  fields  of  the  devoted 
land  shall  be  anguished  with  pain,  and  sorrow,  and 
crying,  and  death.  For  the  last  end  of  the  indignation, 
like  the  closing  trouble  of  Joseph's  brethren,  shall  be  the 
worst  suffering  of  all.  But  its  fruit  will  be  the  broken 
and  contrite  heart  ;  and  then  mercy  will  take  the  place 
of  judgment,  and  He  shall  appear  Who  is  able  to  save 
to  the  uttermost,  and  Who  "  turneth  the  shadow  of 
death  into  the  morning."  ^ 

Ezek.  xxii.  20,  *  Amos  v.  8 


PART    III. 
THE    CHURCH   OF    GOD 


I. 

The  Mystery  hidden  frotnI  the  Ages. 

IN  the  previous  section  we  have  seen  that,  at  the  first 
advent,  our  Lord  broke  His  covenant  with  the  Jews, 
because  they  rejected  Him  ;  and  that  a  suspension  of 
the  fulfihnent  of  Jewish  prophecy  has,  consequently, 
supervened — a  long  interval  which  seems,  however,  to 
have  almost  exhausted  its  term. 

But  what  were  God's  plans  for  this  interval  ?  Would 
He  during  its  course  remain  without  witnesses,  and 
without  a  people  upon  earth  ?  Not  so  :  while  the 
glory  of  Israel  was  tarrying,  Christ  should  be  a  light  to 
lighten  the  Gentiles,,  and  thus  reveal,  in  its  appointed 
season,  another  purpose  of  the  Almighty. 

It  was  late  in  the  evening  of  that  memorable  day  on 
which  the  Lord  ate  the  last  Passover.  He  was  still 
sitting  at  the  table  with  eleven  of  His  disciples  :  the 
supper  was  ended  :  the  bread  had  been  broken,  and 
the  wine  drunk.  The  traitor  Judas — though  he  had 
been  suffered,  like  many  others  who  shall  never  sit 
down  with  Christ  in  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens,  to 
eat  of  the  bread  and  drink  of  the  wine — could  not  be 
permitted  to  share  the  great  secret  which  was  about  to 
be  disclosed.  Therefore  he  had  been  dismissed,  that 
the  Lord  might  speak  in  peace  the  farewell  words  of 
love  and  hope  to  those  whom  He  had  chosen. 


2S4  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

They  had  just  been  partaking  of  the  joyous  feast  of 
deliverance,  but  there  were  no  signs  of  joy  upon  their 
features  :  deep  sorrow,  nay,  the  very  shadow  of  death, 
seemed  to  have  fallen  upon  the  little  company,  and 
every  face  had  gathered  gloom. 

For  they  had  heard  strange  and  terrible  things  that 
night :  their  security  had  been  dispelled,  and  their 
hopes  utterly  destroyed.  There  was,  indeed,  no  excuse 
for  their  surprise  :  for  in  past  time  the  Lord  had  more 
than  once  foretold  the  impending  trouble.  But  they 
had  neither  heeded,  nor  cared  to  understand.  His 
warnings  ;  and  were,  therefore,  entirely  unprepared  for 
the  events  which  He  had  just  declared  to  be  then 
actually  confronting  them. 

His  first  remark,  before  supper,  must  have  excited 
their  alarm :  for  He  spoke  of  the  intensity  of  His  desire 
to  eat  that  Passover  with  them  before  He  S7iffered. 

Then  He  announced  that  one  of  their  number  was  a 
traitor,   and   would   betray   Him. 

That  Satan  had  demanded  and  obtained  all  of  them, 
that  he  might  sift  them  as  wheat. 

That  Peter,  who  had  been  so  loud  in  expressing  his 
devotion,  would  deny  his  Lord  three  times  in  the 
course  of  that  very  night. 

And,  saddest  of  all,  that  He  Himself  was  just  about 
to  leave  them,  and  that  whither  He  was  going  they 
could  not  then  follow  Him,  though  they  should  do  so 
in   after-time. 

This  last-mentioned  disclosure  must  have  struck  a 
death-blow  at  all  their  hopes.  For  as  yet  they  knew 
nothing  of  the  purposes  of  God  :  they  talked  only  of 
Palestine  and  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  and  never  dreamt 
that   they    were    appointed    to   a  higher    destiny,   that 


THE  MYSTERY  HIDDEN  FROM  THE  AGES.         285 

heaven  was  their  home,  and  the  Jerusalem  which  is 
above  their  mother-city.  According  to  their  concep- 
tions, Christ  should  have  set  up  His  royal  standard, 
and  summoned  all  Judaea  to  follow  Him  ;  should,  after 
the  Roman  legions  had  been  destroyed,  have  caused 
Himself  to  be  crowned  at  Jerusalem,  and  then  have 
placed  them  upon  the  promised  tribal  thrones.  And 
now  He  spoke  of  going  away  ;  of  leaving  them,  and 
abandoning  the  land  promised  to  Abraham's  seed  !  All 
their  expectations  were  shattered  in  a  moment,  and 
they  were  as  those  who  see  the  beauteous  forms  of 
some  fair  dream  breaking  up  and  dissolving  into  the 
cold  grey  mist  of  morning. 

But  not  only  had  their  high  hopes  fallen  ;  there  was 
something  even  worse:  for,  if  their  Lord  should  depart, 
what  would  become  of  them  in  the  world  !  He  had 
been  their  support  and  stay,  their  guide,  their  help  and 
defender  in  all  danger,  the  One  Who  was  never  without 
resource  to  deliver  them  from  every  snare,  to  ward  off 
every  assault  of  their  enemies.  He  had  also  been  their 
joy  ;  and  if  the  Bridegroom  should  be  taken  away, 
what  could  the  children  of  the  bride-chamber  do,  but 
weep  and  lament  for  ever!  Now  they  began  to  com- 
prehend His  dark  saying; — "  The  days  will  come  when 
^e  shall  desire  to  see  one  of  the  days  of  the  Son  of 
Man,  and  ye  shall  not  see  it." 

Who  would  thenceforth  be  able  to  comfort  them  in 
times  of  distress  ;  to  speak  words  which  could  make 
their  hearts  burn  within  them,  and  lift  them  to  hope 
from  the  lowest  despair ,''  Who  would  give  them 
succour  in  every  perplexity,  create  bread  for  them  in 
the  desert,  and  command  the  fishes  of  the  sea  to  bring 
them   the   tribute   money  .'' 


286  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

Who,  if  their  ship  were  again  sinking  beneath  the 
storm,  would  bid  the  boisterous  wind  be  still,  and 
command  the  white-crested  billow  to  fall  back  ere  it 
broke  ?  Who,  if  the  Pharisees  should  excite  a  tumult 
against  them,  would  stand  forth  and  expose  the  hypo- 
crisy of  their  adversaries  with  such  clear  and  incisive 
words  of  power  that  the  surging  crowd  would  melt 
away,  until  there  remained  but  a  few  awe-struck  sinners, 
no  longer  threatening,  but  crying  out  with  emotion, 
"  Never  man  spake  like  this  man  !  "  ? 

And  if  any  among  them  should  He  ill,  who  could 
rebuke  the  disease,  and  in  a  moment  heal  the  sick  ? 
Or  if  the  death  of  a  beloved  one  should  rend  their 
hearts  with  anguish,  who  would  turn  their  mourning 
into  joy  by  commanding,  even  at  the  door  of  the 
sepulchre,  with  a  voice  which  neither  Death  nor  Hades 
could  resist,  "  Lazarus,  come  forth  !  "  ? 

And  who  could  supply  His  tender  affection  ?  For 
He  had  not  been  with  them  those  three  years  without 
entwining  Himself  around  their  hearts,  and  making 
them  feel  that  in  Him  they  had  a  Friend  indeed,  Whose 
love  passed  the  love  of  women,  and  Who  was  nearer  to 
them  than  a  brother.  And  yet  He  had  just  predicted 
that  all  of  them  would,  on  that  very  night,  forsake  Him 
in  the  hour  of  trial  ;  nay,  that  one  would  betray  and 
another  deny  Him  ! 

We  can  imagine  their  despair :  we  can  conceive  the 
confused  thoughts  raging  in  their  minds,  like  the  wild 
waves  of  a  tempestuous  sea.  Yet  they  could  not  dis- 
burden themselves  :  no  sound  escaped  their  lips,  and  a 
gloomy  silence  possessed  the  room. 

At  length  the  Lord  opened  Plis  mouth,  and  broke 
the  oppressive  stillness  with  soothing  words  wliich  shed 


THE  MYSTERY  HIDDEN  FROM  THE  AGES.         287 

hope  upon  their  hearts,  even  as  His  command,  "  Let 
there  be  light,"  had  once  gone  forth  over  the  shoreless 
ocean  of  earth,  and  dispelled  its  darkness. 

"  Let  not  your  hearts  be  troubled,"  He  said.  "  Be- 
lieve in  God,  and  believe  in  Me.  In  My  Father's 
house  are  many  abodes  :  if  it  were  not  so,  I  would 
have  told  you  ;  for  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you. 
And  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  am  coming- 
again,  and  will  receive  you  unto  Myself,  that  where  1 
am,  there  ye  may  be  also." 

It  is  difficult  for  us  to  comprehend  the  surprise 
which  these  words  must  have  occasioned  to  the  dis- 
ciples— if,  at  least,  they  understood  them  at  the  time. 
They  had  thought  only  of  peace  and  glory  in  connec- 
tion with  the  Jerusalem  which  is  on  earth,  and  such  a 
vision  would  have  been  their  sole  consolation  in  the 
present  distress ;  but  the  Lord  removes  this  stay, 
gives  them  no  hope  of  anything  better  than  tribulation 
in  the  world,  and  at  last  reveals  in  plain  terms  the 
great  secret  of  God's  purpose. 

He  bids  them  resign  their  privileges  and  expecta- 
tions as  Jews  ;  for  He  has  called  them  to  a  higher 
destiny.  Because  they  have  received  Him,  He  will 
give  them  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God  ;  and  they 
shall  dwell,  not  at  Jerusalem,  but  with  Him  where  He 
■  is,  that  they  may  behold  His  glory.  And  though  He 
is  about  to  leave  them  for  a  season,  it  is  that  He  may 
prepare  abodes  for  them  in  His  Father's  house  ;  and, 
as  soon  as  they  are  all  gathered  in  and  ready.  He  will 
return,  and  take  them  unto  Himself  for  ever. 

A  few  weeks  later,  when  the  apostles  and  some 
other  faithful  believers  were  assembled  in  an  upper 
room,  the  Holy  Spirit  descended  to  baptize  them  into 


288  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

one  body,  and  to  found  the  Church  of  Christ.  And 
from  that  time  God  began  to  seek  out  for  Himself  a 
people  from  all  flesh  ;  ^  not,  however,  to  rob  the 
Israelite  of  his  future  dominion  over  the  earth,  but  to 
sit  in  the  Heavenly  Places  with  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
in  association  with  Him  to  become  the  spiritual  rulers 
of  the  world. 

Thus  the  present  age  commenced,  but  there  is  no 
prophecy  which  will  enable  us  to  discover  the  exact 
length  of  its  course.  We  must,  however,  remember 
that,  although  dispensations  may  overlap,  and  a  short 
transitional  period  be  the  result,  yet  God  cannot,  with 
this  exception,  have  two  peoples  of  different  callings 
upon  earth  at  the  same  time.  Such  a  law  is  implied 
in  the  prediction  of  Micah,  that,  because  of  the  smiting 
of  the  Judge  of  Israel  on  the  cheek,  the  Jews  should 
be  given  up  for  dispersion  until  the  travailing  Woman 
should  bring  forth — that  is,  until  the  number  of  be- 
lievers should  be  completed.  And  when  this  point  is 
taken  up  in  the  Book  of  Revelation,  we  are  further 
instructed  that,  as  soon  as  the  Man-child  is  born,  he 
shall  be  caught  up  to  God  and  to  His  Throne  ;  so  that 
the  way  will  then  be  cleared  for  the  resumption  of 
dealings  with  the  Jews.  Precisely  similar  is  the  teach- 
ing of  Paul  :  for  he  affirms  that  "  a  hardening  in  part 
has  befallen  Israel,  until  the  fulness  of  tJie  Gentiles  be 
come  in'' ;  and  that,  afterwards,  all  Israel  shall  be  saved. 

Thus  the  first  sign  of  the  end  of  this  age  will  be  the 
sudden  translation  of  all  waiting  saints  :  and  until  that 
event  has  happened,  there  is  no  place  for  calculation. 
P'or,  as  we  have  before  observed,  the  times  of  the 
Church  are  not  properly  a  part  of  the  Fifth  Dispnnsa- 

'  Joel  ii.  28. 


THE  MYSTERY  HIDDEN  FROM  THE  AGES.         2S9 

tion,  but  a  parenthesis  fixed  in  it  on  account  of  the 
perversity  of  the  Jews  ;  an  inserted  period^  unknown  to 
Old  Testament  prophecy,  and  set  apart  for  the  prepara- 
tion of  a  heavenly,  and  not  of  an  earthly  people. 

It  was,  as  we  are  told,  "  at  the  end  of  the  world,  "  or 
rather,  "  of  the  ages, "  that  Christ  appeared,  and  put 
away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself.  For  when  the 
Son  of  Man  bowed  His  head  in  death  upon  the  cross, 
there  remained  but  seven  short  years  for  the  course  of 
this  world.  Mercy  had  been  rejected  ;  the  time  of  for- 
bearance was  exhausted  ;  and  the  terrific  agents  de- 
scribed in  the  Revelation  were  awaiting  the  command 
to  speed  forth  upon  their  deadly  missions,  and  execute 
the  last  indignation.  But  the  wrath  which  had  been 
gathering  burst  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  the  righteous 
sword  of  the  Almighty  was  turned  against  the  Man 
Who  was  His  Fellow  :  and  then  God  granted  a  respite 
to  the  world  for  which  Christ  died  :  then  He  checked 
the  rapid  flight  of  events,  and,  as  it  were,  stayed  the 
wings  of  the  fleeting  age,  until  a  time  shall  have  passed 
the  duration  of  which  is  known  only  to  Himself. 

For  if  the  Church  inquires  when  her  Lord  will  return, 
she  receives  but  the  answers  ; — "  At  an  hour  when  ye 
think  not ;  "  "  Surely  I  come  quickly  ;  "  "  Be  ye  there- 
fore ready."  The  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  warned 
her  of  the  futility  of  attempting  to  compute  the  length 
of  her  stay  upon  earth.  "  But  of  the  times  and  seasons, 
brethren, "  he  said,  "  ye  have  no  need  that  I  write  unto 
you.  For  yourselves  know  perfectly  that  the  Day  of 
the  Lord  so  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night."  The  duty 
of  the  Church  is  to  keep  herself  in  readiness  and  to 
watch,  not  to  reckon  times.  But,  as  soon  as  she  is  re 
moved,  all  will  be  changed.      The  Fifth  Age  will  finish 

19 


290  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

its  intercepted  course  ;  the  Seven  Years  will  quickly 
commence  ;  there  will  be  the  Time,  Times,  and  Half  a 
Time,  the  Three  Years  and  a  Half,  the  Forty  and  Two 
Months,  the  Twelve  Hundred  and  Sixty  Days  :  all 
periods  will  then  be  capable  of  exact  calculation. 

But,  if  we  cannot  accurately  compute  the  times  of 
the  Church,  we  are  by  no  means  without  intimation  of 
the  present  nearness  of  Christ's  coming.  For  we  see 
Christendom  beginning  to  assume  its  last  form,  and  the 
Mystery  of  Lawlessness  daily  gaining  strength  ;  while 
the  Jewish  prophecies  seem  to  be  on  the  point  of  fulfil- 
ment. Since,  therefore,  the  Church  must  be  taken 
away  before  any  of  these  things  is  consummated,  we 
may  be  well  assured  that  the  Lord  is  at  hand,  and 
should  exhort  one  another  so  much  the  more  as  we  see 
the   Day  approaching. 

Moreover,  besides  other  revelations  in  the  New 
Testament,  there  are  two  great  prophecies  from  the 
mouth  of  Christ  Himself,  the  interpretation  of  which 
appears  to  intimate  that  the  acceptable  year  of  the 
Lord  is  almost  ended.  These  prophecies  are  the 
Seven  Parables  in  the  thirteenth  chapter  of  Matthew, 
and  the  Seven  Epistles  in  the  second  and  third 
chapters  of  the  Apocalypse,  both  of  which  we  propose 
now  to  examine. 

The  number  of  Parables  and  of  Epistles  is  seven, 
that  number  being  significant  of  dispensational  com- 
pleteness ;  and,  in  each  of  the  two  prophecies,  we 
apparently  have  set  before  us  seven  successive  phases, 
or  characteristic  epochs,  of  the  Church,  which  embrace 
the  whole  of  her  career  upon  earth.  These  epochs 
commence  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  given  ;  but 
any  of  them   may  overlap  that  which  succeeds  it    or 


THE  SE  VEN  PARABLES.  291 

even  extend  its  influence,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree, 
to  the  end  of  the  age. 

II. 

The  Seven  Parables. 

It  is  usual  to  treat  these  Parables  as  if  they  merdy 
contained  matter  for  what  is  called  practical   applica- 
tion.    This,  however,    as  we  hope  to  show,  is  by  no 
means  the  case  ;  -they  are  a   continuous  prediction  of 
the    whole    career    of   the    Church    between    the    two 
advents.      Undoubtedly   they  will    also  yield  an  abun- 
dant supply  of  more  general  instruction  ;  but  in  this 
context,  at  least,  the  prophetic  is  the  primary  meaning. 
We  have  previously  sketched  the  plan  of  the  earlier 
chapters  of  Matthew,  and  pointed  out  the  manner  in 
which  they  lead  up  to  and  introduce  the  Parables  as 
a  revelation  of  a  new  order  of  things  then  about  to  be 
brought  in.      For,  on    the  one    hand,  they  relate    the 
repeated  offers  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  Jews,  the  pro- 
clamation of  its  laws  by  the   King,  and  the  exhibition 
of    His    marvellous     credentials  ;     on    the    other,    the 
ever-increasing    hatred     of   the    Jevv^ish     leaders,    and 
their     refusal    to    recognize    the     Lord's    authority — a 
refusal  prompted   by  so  bitter  a  spirit  that,  when  they 
are  unable  to  deny  His   mighty  works,  they  even   dare 
to    accuse   Him  of  doing  them  by  the  aid   of  infernal 
power.       By    this     blasphemous     assertion     their    true 
condition    is  revealed  :    their    immediate    salvation    is 
proved  to  be  impossible  ;  and,  at  the  end  of  the  twelfth 
chapter,  the  Lord  intimates  that  they  are  about  to  be 
rejected  of  God.  and  delivered  into  the  hands  of  Satan 
for  a  season. 


292  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

A  crisis  in  the  history  of  the  nation  had  arrived, 
similar  in  some  points  to  the  time  when  Jerusalem  was 
given  up  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  but  involving  a  far  deeper 
degradation. 

For  the  earlier  chastisement  merely  deprived  the 
Jews  for  a  while  of  their  right  to  be  "  the  Kings  of  the 
Earth  upon  the  earth."  God  still  retained  them  as 
His  people,  though  He  sent  them  into  captivity,  and 
caused  them  to  be  bound  in  affliction  and  iron. 
Consequently,  at  that  time  it  was  only  necessary  to 
appoint  temporary  World-rulers,  until  the  Kingdom 
could  be  restored  to  Israel ;  and  this  was  done  by  the 
transfer  of  the  sovereignty  to  the  Gentiles.  And, 
since  the  secret  of  the  Lord  is  always  revealed  to 
them  that  fear  Him,  His  purposes  in  regard  to  the 
change  were  disclosed  to  the  godly  Jews  by  the  pen 
of  Daniel. 

Such  were  the  circumstances  connected  with  the 
assumption  of  the  supremacy  by  Nebuchadnezzar, 
and  the  plan  of  the  Gospel  of  Matthew  is  in  strict 
analogy  with  them.  But,  in  this  second  crisis,  the 
Jews,  by  the  rejection  and  murder  of  the  Son  of  God, 
brought  upon  themselves  a  far  more  grievous  punish- 
ment than  the  mere  loss  of  their  earthly  dominion  ; 
for  the  covenant  of  Jehovah  was  now  altogether  sus- 
pended, and  they  were  no  longer  recognized  as  His 
people.  ]  Yet  it  was  necessary,  during  the  interval 
which  followed,  that  some  witnesses  should  be  chosen 
to  maintain  a  testimony  for  Him  upon  the  earth 
— without,  however,  infringing  the  power  already 
granted  to  the  Gentiles — and,  accordingly,  from  that 
time  He  began  to  raise  up  a  new  band  of  believers 
who    received     a     heavenly    calling.       And    since    the 


THE  SEVEN  PARABLES.  293 

Father  would  again,  as  in  the  days  of  Daniel,  have 
some  knowledge  of  His  purpose  revealed  for  the 
guidance  of  the  humble,  the  Lord  Jesus  proceeded, 
on  the  very  day  in  which  He  announced  the  rejection 
of  the  Jews,  to  unfold  the  mystery  which  had  been 
hidden  from  the  ages,  and  to  foretell  in  parables  what 
should  befall  the  people  of  God  during  the  interval 
between  the  Sixty-ninth  and  Seventieth  of  Daniel's 
weeks. 

That  His  discourse  contained  an  entirely  new 
revelation,  we  are  informed  by  the  Evangelist,  who 
observes  that,  in  delivering  it,  Christ  fulfilled  the 
prophecy  ; — "  I  will  open  My  mouth  in  parables  ;  I 
will  utter  things  hidden  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world."  ^  Indeed,  we  are  more  than  once  reminded 
in  the  New  Testament  that  the  purpose  of  God  in 
regard  to  the  Church  and  the  heavenly  calling  had 
been  kept  secret,  until  the  Lord  Himself  disclosed  it.^ 

Thus  the  Seven  Parables  were  similitudes  of  the 
Kingdom  of  the  Heavens,  intended  to  foreshadow  the 
varying  conditions  under  which  those  who  shall  here- 
after reign  with  Christ  have  been,  and  are  still  being, 
gathered  out  of  the  present  age.  And  the  main 
burden  of  the  prediction  was  that  this  body  would, 
during  its  stay  upon  earth,  be  continually  liable  to 
become  clogged  and  corrupted  by  admixtures  of  evil  ; 
that  it  would  be  interpenetrated,  surrounded,  and 
even  altogether  concealed,  by  a  far  greater  multitude  j 
who  would  profess  to  belong  to  it,  while  they  were  in  • 
reality  the  children  of  the  Wicked  One.  \ 

The  prophecy  is,  therefore,  concerned  with  the  whole 

'Matt.  xiii.  35. 

-Rom.  xvi.  2S,  26;    I  Cor.  ii.  7;  Eph.  iii.  5,  9;  Col.  i,  26. 


294  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

number  of  nominal  believers  throughout  the  world, 
with  every  Church  or  sect  which  professes  to  derive 
its  doctrines  from  the  word  of  God,  and  in  any  way 
acknowledges  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  This  vast  and 
motley  crowd  spreads  over  the  whole  extent  of  Chris- 
tendom in  the  largest  sense  of  the  term  ;  while  here 
and  there  in  the  midst  of  it,  and  ever  acting  more  or 
less  as  a  check  upon  the  corruption  around  them, 
stand  the  scattered  children  of  God,  unable  to  extricate 
themselves  from  the  press,  and  destined  to  continue 
unable,  until  heaven  shall  ring  with  the  cry  ; — "  Gather 
My  saints  together,  those  that  have  made  a  covenant 
with  Me  by  Sacrifice  !  " 

Now  the  whole  of  this  great  mixed  multitude  of 
Christendom  is,  for  the  time,  called  the  Kingdom  of 
the  Heavens,  because  it  holds  within  it — and  so 
entangled  that  none  but  God  can  separate  them — the 
true  heirs  of  the  Kingdom.  Hence  each  of  the  Seven 
Parables  appears  to  foreshadow  some  characteristic 
of  the  nominal  Church  especially  prominent  at  a 
particular  time.  And  they  seem  to  be  arranged  in 
chronological  order  ;  for,  to  pass  by  details  which  we 
shall  presently  consider,  they  begin  with  the  sowing, 
or  first  preaching,  of  the  word,  and  end  with  the 
separation  of  good  and  evil  at  the  close  of  the  dis- 
pensation. 

Yet,  although  they  indicate  the  true  succession  of 
the  phases  which  they  represent,  it  does  not,  of  course, 
necessarily  follow  that  the  period  of  one  Parable  must 
be  completely  ended  before  another  commences  :  on 
the  contrary,  as  we  before  remarked,  it  may  overlap, 
and  be  contemporaneous  with,  that  which  follows  it 
We  will  now  proceed  to  examine  them  separately. 


THE  PARABLE   OF  THE  SOWER.  295 

III. 

The  Parable  of  the  Sower. 

The  first  scene  which  opens  before  us  is  a  large 
field  already  ploughed  and  prepared  for  the  sowing. 
On  one  side  of  it  runs  a  road,  the  wayfarers  and 
waggons  travelling  by  which  have  passed  so  heed- 
lessly that  they  have  trodden  down  and  pressed  the 
bordering  ploughed  land,  until  it  has  become  well-nigh 
as  hard  as  the  highway  itself.  Extending  underneath 
a  considerable  portion  of  the  field  lies  a  slab  of  rock, 
with  but  little  soil  above  it  ;  so  that  this  part  is 
quickly  dried  up  by  the  sun.  A  third  portion  has 
rich  and  deep  mould,  but  abounds  in  thorn-roots 
and  seeds  :  the  remainder  of  the  field  consists  of  soil 
both  clean  and  good. 

Presently  the  sower  comes,  and  scatters  his  seed 
broadcast  over  the  furrows.  Some  of  it  falls  upon 
the  trodden  ground  near  the  highway,  and  lies  exposed 
upon  its  hard  and  smooth  surface.  Possibly  it  might 
yet  sink  into  the  soil,  if  it  could  be  left  untouched  till 
heavy  rains  set  in  ;  but  there  is  no  chance  of  that. 
Multitudes  of  little  birds  are  on  the  watch,  and,  as 
soon  as  the  sower's  back  is  turned,  snatch  up  and 
devour  every  grain. 

Some  seed,  again,  falls  upon  the  rocky  soil,  and, 
being  unable  to  sink  far  beneath  the  surface,  quickly 
sends  forth  blades  of  promise.  But  the  sun  arises  in 
his  strength,  and  they  soon  wither  and  die  ;  for  the 
thin-spread  mould  is  speedily  reduced  to  dust. 

Other  seed  is  scattered  over  the  place  already 
occupied  by  the  thorn-roots  :   it  comes  up    well,    but 


296  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

the  thorns  also  appear  with  it.  It  is  not  injured  by 
the  sun,  for  it  has  depth  of  soil  ;  but  the  ever-increasing 
weeds  draw  away  its  nourishment  and  take  up  its 
room,  until,  almost  concealed  by  their  luxuriant  growth, 
it  becomes  sickly  and  thin,  and  cannot  bring  its  fruit 
to  perfection. 

But  the  seed  which  falls  upon  good  ground  puts 
forth  its  blades  in  due  time,  and  grows  and  produces 
much  fruit,  though  in  varying  quantities  ;  some  grains 
a  hundredfold,  some  sixtyfold,  and  some  thirtyfold. 

This  Parable  exhibits  the  first  period  of  the  Gospel 
dispensation.      The    ploughed    field    is  the  world   pre- 
pared for  the  reception  of  Christ  by  previous  dealings 
of  God  :  the  untilled  highway  is  the  bordering  King- 
dom of  the  Air,  tenanted  by  those  fallen  angels   and 
spirits  to  whom  the  offers  of  Christ  were  not  extended  ; 
so  that  their    realm    is    neither    ploughed    nor    sown. 
The  Sower  is,    first  and    principally,  the    Lord   Jesus 
Himself,  and,   afterwards,    those   who    succeeded  Him 
in   the  work  of  carrying  on   all  that  He  began  to  do 
and  to  teach.      The  seed  is  the  glorious  word  of  the 
Gospel  :  the  various    conditions    of  soil  represent  the 
four  classes   of  hearers  which   are  found  among  men. 
And  the  fact  that  but  one  of  these  brings  forth  the 
desired   fruit  is  a  hint,  at  the   very  outset  of  the  dis- 
course, that   all   expectations    of  the  universal   success 
of  the  Gospel   in   the  present  age  are  false  ;  that  the 
way  of  the  strait  gate  will  remain   narrow,  and  only  a 
few,  comparatively,   find  it,  until  a  change  be  brought 
about  by  the  advent  of  the  King. 

The  first  class  of  hearers  are  those  who  live  so  nigh 
to,  and  in  such  close  communion  with,  the  Powers  of 
Evil,    that   they   have    become    similar    to    them,    and 


THE  PARABLE   OF  THE  SOJVER.  297 

almost  as  hopelessly  callous.  For  if  men,  like 
demons,  do  not  care  to  retain  God  in  their  hearts.  He 
gives  them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind,  so  that  they 
have  no  further  thought  of  Him.  His  Spirit  is 
grieved,  and  ceases  to  strive  :  the  sentence  is  pro- 
nounced, "  Ephraim  is  joined  unto  idols,  let  him 
alone  "  ;  and  henceforth  they  become  more  and  more 
hardened.  Therefore,  the  seed  cannot  penetrate  their 
hearts,  but  lies  on  the  surface,  whence  it  is  imme- 
diately picked  off  and  devoured  by  the  watchful 
spirits  of  the  air,  lest  something  unforeseen  should 
cause  it  to  sink  in  and  quicken.  And  these  agents  of  / 
evil  have  countless  devices  whereby  they  can  steal 
away  the  word — such  as  frivolous  thoughts,  idle  con-  ^ 
versation,  pleasure-excitements,  business-cares,  and 
many  other  things.  And  so  they  destroy  the  germ  of 
good  from  off  the  earth,  that  it  may  benefit  neither  him 
in  whom  it  was  sown,  nor  any  of  those  around  him. 

There  are  other  hearers,  again,  who  have  hearts  as 
hard  as  the  nether  millstone,  but  overspread  with  a 
thin  layer  of  sentiment.  These  receive  the  Gospel, 
or  anything  else,  with  an  eagerness  and  a  gushing 
enthusiasm  which  give  hope  of  abundant  fruit.  But 
if,  perchance,  persecution  appear  on  the  horizon,  or 
they  be  called  to  deny  themselves  an  indulgence  or 
convenience,  they  will  straightway  cast  off  their  faith, 
and,  by  their  unyielding  obduracy  to  all  subsequent 
appeals,  show  how  stony  their  hearts  really  are 
beneath  the  soft  envelope.  Such  people  will  weep  in 
their  comfortable  rooms  over  the  miseries  of  others, 
but  will  rarely  bestir  themselves  to  aid  the  objects  of 
their  compassion.  They  delight  in  talking  of  what 
they    mean  to  do  ;  but,  if  any  opportunity  for  action 


298  THE   CHURCff  OF  GOD. 

should  obtrude  itself,  usually  find  that  they  have  need 
to  attend  to  some  private  care,  or  social  duty,  which 
must  take  precedence  of  the  Lord's  business.      These 
are  they  which  spring    up   on    all    sides    in  times    of 
revival,  and    cast  the  greatest  dishonour    upon   Christ 
by  their  apparent  conversion    and    ostentatious    zeal  : 
for    they    quickly    fall    away,    and    practically,    if    not 
avowedly,  disown  the  faith    for  which  they    had  pro- 
fessed   themselves    ready  even    to   die.      Their    inner  ~) 
selfishness  is  firm  as  a  rock  ;   but,  unstable  as  water  in    >" 
all  other  things,  they  cannot  excel,  and  will  be  found     \ 
at  last  without  the  gates  of  the  Golden  City.  / 

The  mind  of  the  third  class  of  hearers  is  of  a  different 
order.  These  can  think  and  feel  deeply  ;  but  they  can 
do  so  in  regard  to  other  matters  besides  the  love  of 
God  in  Christ.  In  their  heart  the  word  lies  amid 
various  seeds  and  roots,  which  will  presently  spring  up 
into  the  deceitful  pleasure-seekings  of  early  life,  the 
cares  of  middle  age,  and  the  desires  of  other  things 
rather  than  God.  Nor  is  the  range  of  the  last-men- 
tioned temptations  confined  to  such  spheres  as  ambition, 
political  power,  intellect,  love,  hatred,  or  covetousness, 
^can  afford  ;  they  may  be  discovered  in  very  unsuspected 
quarters.  In  some  cases,  for  instance,  they  war  against 
the  soul  by  inducing  a  quiet  indulgence  of  appetites,  to 
which  many  yield,  by  no  means  so  far  as  to  provoke 
the  rebuke  of  their  fellows,  but  just  so  much  as  to 
incline  their  bodies  to  an  apparently  well-meaning 
indolence  and  complacency,  which,  while  it  lasts,  most 
effectually  bars  out  the  powers  of  the  World  to  Come. 
But,  whatever  their  individual  bent,  the  wheat  and 
thorns  grow  up  together  in  persons  of  this  class.  They 
would  be  Christ's,  but  will  not  give  up  the  world  :  they 


THE  PARABLE   OF  THE  SOWER.  299 

persist  in  striving  to  serve  two  masters  ;  and,  since  they 
cannot  hate  the  one,  find  themselves  quite  unable  to 
cleave  to  the  other :  they  do  not  follow  the  Lord  with 
a  whole  heart ;  therefore  He  will  not  accept  them.,  and, 
at  last,  altogether  withdraws  the  pleadings  of  His  Spirit, 
Then  the  thorns  choke  the  word,  and  cover  its  wither- 
ing remains  with  their  luxuriant  growth.  Fruit  may 
have  begun  to  appear,  but  it  is  never  brought  to  perfec- 
tion :   these  are  they  v/ho  are  almost  saved,  but  lost.         i 

Lastly,  there  are  some  who,  humbled  and  broken- 
hearted through  a  sense  of  their  own  sinful  condition, 
receive  the  word  with  gratitude.  These,  realizing  the 
horrors  from  which  they  have  been  rescued,  are  willing 
to  give  up  all  things  for  the  love  of  the  Lord  Who 
redeemed  them  ;  to  deny  themselves  daily,  to  take  up 
their  cross  and  follow  Him  ;  to  count  not  their  lives 
dear,  if  they  may  but  finish  their  course  with  joy.  Li 
the  hearts  of  such  the  word  grows  by  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  so  that  they  are  enabled  to  be  witnesses 
for  their  Saviour,  and  to  do  works  which  shall  be  their 
joy  and  crown  in  the  day  of  His  appearing. 

A  solemn  thought  is  suggested  by  the  mention  of 
the  rates  of  increase — "  some  a  hundredfold,  some  sixty, 
some  thirty."      Less  than  thirtyfold  the  Lord  does  not 
recognize  :  it  is  for  every  true  Christian  to  ask  himself 
whether  the  seed  sown  in  him  can  yet  have  borne  this 
minimum  of  fruit  in  the  conversion  and  edification  of 
others  ;  nay,  whether  he  has  had  any  proof  whatever 
that  he  is  in  the  faith  by  the  fulfilment  in  him  of  the^ 
Lord's    saying; — "He   that   believeth    on    Me,    as   the. 
Scripture  hath  said,  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of . 
living  water."  ^  y 

'  John  vii.  38. 


300  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

\  To  these  four  classes  of  hearers  the  Gospel  began  to 
be  preached,  first  by  the  Lord  Himself,  and  afterwards 
by  His  disciples.  The  latter  commenced  their  labours 
at  Jerusalem,  and  added  three  thousand  souls  to  the 
Church  on  the  very  first  diy  of  their  mission.  So 
active,  indeed,  were  tliey  and  their  converts  in  spread- 
ing the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  that,  in  less  than 
thirty  years,  Paul  could  speak  to  the  Colossians  of  the 
hope  of  the  Gospel,  "  which  ye  heard,  which  was 
preached  in  all  creation  under  heaven."  ^  And  to  the 
truth  of  this  statement  even  Heathen  writers  bear 
ample  testimony.  For  example,  Tacitus  mentions  the 
arrest  of  a  "  vast  multitude "  of  Christians  at  Rome 
only  a  year  or  two  later  than  the  date  of  the  Epistle  to 
the  Romans.  And  about  seventy  years  after  the  Cruci- 
fixion, Pliny,  in  his  famous  letter  to  Trajan,  affirms 
that  "  the  contagion  "  of  Christianity  had  then  seized, 
not  merely  on  the  cities  of  Bithynia  and  Pontus,  but 
even  on  the  villages  and  country  places. 

Thus  was  the  world  sown  in  the  first  age  of  the 
Church  :  and  during  this  time  the  prominent  character- 
istic of  the  followers  of  Christ  was  an  earnest  propaga- 
tion of  their  faith  in  every  land  ;  though,  after  all,  their 
efforts  were  baffled  by  the  generally  unfavourable 
conditions  of  the  human  heart,  and  achieved  but  a  very 
partial  success. 

IV 

The  Parable  of  the  Tares. 

In  the  second  Parable  there  is  also  a  Sower  of  good 
seed  ;  but  he  is  followed  by  a  malignant  enemy,  who 

'  Col.  i.  23. 


THE  PARABLE   OF  THE    TARES.  301 

comes  while  men  are  sleeping,  scatters  tares  upon  the 
wheat,  and  then  steals  away  unperceived.  The  tares 
used  for  this  evil  purpose  are  still  too  well  known  in 
Palestine,  and  so  nearly  resemble  good  wheat  in  their 
growth,  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  distinguish 
them  from  it  until  the  ear  begins  to  ripen,  when  their 
fruit  becomes  black  instead  of  yellow.  In  due  time 
this  proof  of  the  admixture  appears,  and  the  servants  of 
the  lord  of  the  field  inform  him  of  it,  and  ask  if  they 
shall  go  and  pull  up  the  noxious  weeds.  But  he,  after 
explaining  that  an  enemy  has  done  the  mischief,  tells 
them  that  the  crops  are  now  so  inextricably  mingled 
that  they  must  be  left  to  grow  together  until  the  harvest, 
when  the  reapers  shall  separate  them,  and  shall  bind 
the  tares  in  bundles  to  burn  them,  and  gather  the  wheat 
into  the  garner. 

This  Parable  is  also  interpreted  by  the  Lord  Him- 
self. The  field  is  the  world,  and  the  enemy  the  Devil  : 
but  the  meaning  of  the  seed  is  not  the  same  as  in  the 
first  Parable  ;  for  it  no  longer  signifies  doctrines,  but 
persons.  "  The  good  seed  are  the  children  of  the 
Kingdom  ;  and  the  tares  are  the  children  of  the  Wicked  '" 
One."  The  latter  are  those  hypocrites  who  are  found  ) 
to  be  suitable  instruments  for  developing  the  deep  and 
treacherous  designs  of  Satan  ;  who,  though  they  know 
not  Christ,  will  foist  themselves  among  Christians,  and 
make  it  the  business  of  their  lives  to  spread  corruption, 
either  in  doctrine  or  behaviour. 

Many  such  men  crept  into  the  Church  even  in  apo- 
stolic times  ;  but  it  is  the  history  of  the  second  and 
third  centuries  which  affords  the  most  terrible  proof  of 
the  Lord's  foreknowledge.  During  that  period  multi- 
tudes of  grievous  wolves  entered  stealthily  into  the  fold, 


/ 


3C2  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

not  sparing  the  flock  ;  and  many  arose  speaking  per- 
verse things  to  draw  away  the  disciples  after  them. 
Then  heresies  began  to  spring  up  on  all  sides,  heresies 
of  every  imaginable  form,  and  hue,  and  resulting  in  sects 
which  in  manifold  ways  weakened  or  altogether  de- 
stroyed the  power  of  the  word  of  God,  and  provided  an 
attractive  but  useless  religion  for  every  kind  of  intellect 
and  disposition.  The  universal  Church  became  corrupt, 
and  has  never  thrown  off  the  taints  of  this  epoch  :  to 
the  present  day  every  Christian  sect  bears  traces  of 
them  upon  its  tenets  or  ritual. 

Only  those  v/ho  are  acquainted  with  the  literature  of 
the  second  and  third  centuries  can  form  any  adequate 
conception  of  the  multitude  of  tares  which  during  that 
time  were  manifesting  themselves  by  their  black  fruit : 
but  the  study  of  two  works,  which  have  corns  down  to 
us,  will  give  some  idea  of  the  principal  errors  with 
which  Satan  was  then  bewildering  the  Church.  One 
of  these,  put  forth  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  second 
century,  is  a  volume  "  Against  Heresies,"  from  the  pen 
of  Irenaeus  of  Lyons,  a  disciple  of  Polycarp  who  had 
himself  listened  to  the  apostle  John.  The  other  is  "  A 
Refutation  of  all  Heresies,"  written  by  Hippolytus  of 
Portus,  a  pupil  of  Irenaeus,  in  the  first  half  of  the  third 
century. 

From  these  books  we  learn  that,  at  their  early  dates, 
the  seed  of  nearly  all  subsequent  errors  had  been 
imperceptibly  sown  in  the  churches,  with  a  resulting 
crop  of  heresies,  sects,  and  schools,  so  numerous  that  it 
would  be  tedious  even  to  mention  their  names.  And 
these  heresies  were  of  all  degrees,  beginning  with  a 
slight  admixture  of  evil,  and  going  on  to  such  a  pitch 
of   madness    that    some    even    declared    the    accursed 


THE  PARABLE   OF  THE    TARES.  303 

serpent,  the  beguiler  of  Eve,  to  be  the  true  Messiah, 
and  actually  styled  themselves  Ophites,  or  Serpent- 
worshippers.  Another  sect  held  that  the  Scriptures 
did  not  emanate  from  the  Supreme  God,  but  from  a 
lower  and  malignant  deity,  whom  they  called  the 
Demiurge,  and  who,  as  they  affirmed,  had  caused  the 
sacred  history  to  be  distorted,  so  that  the  righteous  in 
it — such  as  Cain,  Esau,  the  men  of  Sodom,  and  Koran 
— were  made  to  appear  wicked,  and  the  wicked  right- 
eous. Hence  they  regarded  Cain  as  the  first  saint 
mentioned  in  the  Bible,  and  from  him  named  them- 
selves Cainites. 

During  the  whole  period  included  by  this  Parable 
violent  persecutions  were  occurring  at  intervals,  and  in 
the  other  continuous  prophecy  of  the  Church  we  shall 
find  them  specially  noticed.  Here,  however,  there  is 
nothing  more  than  a  very  obvious  allusion.  The  Lord 
feared  lest  His  Church  should  take  a  lesson  from  their 
oppressors,  and,  if  at  any  time  they  had  the  power,  put 
to  death  obstinate  heretics.  Hence  the  servants  arc 
ordered  not  to  root  up  the  tares  out  of  the  field — a 
commandment  which  may  be  easily  understood  if  u'e 
remember  that  "  the  tares  are  the  children  of  the 
Wicked   One,"  and  that   "the  field   is  the  world." 

In  regard  to  the  harvest,  a  difficulty  has  arisen  in 
the  minds  of  many,  because  the  command,  "  Gather  )c 
together  first  the  tares,"  seems  to  imply  that  Christ 
.vill  execute  judgment  upon  the  wicked  before  He 
deals  with  His  Church.  It  is,  however,  impossible 
that  such  a  sequence  of  events  could  be  intended,  or 
this  passage  would  stand  alone,  and  oppose  itself  to 
the  general  testimony  of  Scripture. 

As  an  example  of  that  testimony,  we  may  quote  the 


304  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

fourteenth  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse,  in  which  three 
classes  of  men  affected  by  the  Lord's  return  are  repre- 
sented as  Firstfruits,  Harvest,  and  Vintage.  And,  in 
accordance  with  the  order  of  nature,  the  Firstfruits,  as 
we  may  see  by  the  context,  are  those  who  will  be 
*'  redeemed  from  the  earth "  before  the  Tribulation  ; 
the  Harvest  follows  at  its  close  ;  and  still  later  comes 
the  Vintage,  the  grapes  of  which  answer  to  the  tares 
of  the  Parable. 

And  again,  in  the  nineteenth  chapter,  it  is  after  the 
Marriage  Supper  that  John  sees  heaven  opened  and 
the  Lord  appearing,  with  the  whole  Church  in  His 
train,  to  destroy  them  which  corrupt  the  earth. 

Indeed,  if  we  turn  to  the  last  of  this  very  series  of 
Parables,  we  shall  find  the  apparent  order  of  the  second 
reversed  :  for  the  good  fish  are  first  picked  out  of  the 
net  and  placed  in  vessels,  and  then  the  bad  are  cast  away. 

Now  a  right  understanding  of  Scripture  quickly 
dispels  all  supposed  inconsistencies :  how,  then,  can 
we  explain  this  seeming  discrepancy  in  parables  of  the 
same  series.?      Probably  by  the  following  considerations. 

In  the  original  of  the  command  to  the  reapers  there 
is  no  word — such  as  "  then,"  or,  "  afterwards  "- — to 
mark  the  apodosis  to  "  Gather  first."  We  must,  there- 
fore, supply  one,  and  may  do  so  in  the  next  clause. 
For  the  "  but "  (Se)  which  follows  is  often  used  adver- 
satively,  and  may  merely  indicate  an  antithesis  or 
contrast  of  destiny,  without  any  reference  to  order  of 
time.  Thus  the  command  will  read  ; — "  First  collect 
the  tares,  and  then  bind  them  in  bundles  to  burn  them  : 
but  as  to  the  wheat,  gather  that  into  My  barn."  ^ 

'  The  reason  why  the  Lord,  in  His  description  of  the  harvest, 
speaks  first  of  the  tares  is  sufficiently  obvious  ;  since  tliey  are  the 
subject  of  the  Parable. 


THE  PARABLE   OF  THE    TARES.  305 

We  may,  perhaps,  add  that  a  farmer  would  not  be 
likely  to  trouble  himself  about  the  tares,  provided  they 
were  carefully  picked  out  of  the  wheat,  until  he  had 
safely  conveyed  the  latter  to  its  receptacle. 

Again  ;  we  must  remember  that  the  two  Parables 
are  elementary  and  general  :  they  are  by  no  means 
intended  to  furnish  details  of  the  end,  but  only  to  lay 
down  the  broad  principle  that  Christ  will  throughly 
purge  His  floor.  The  inevitable  mingling  of  evil  and 
good  in  the  present  age,  and  the  certainty  of  ultimate 
judgment  and  separation,  are  the  great  lessons  which 
they  teach. 

A  peculiar  Greek  word,  signifying  "  to  gather  by 
picking  out,"  is  used  of  tJic  tares  in  one  Parable  and  of 
the  good  fish  in  the  other  ;  so  that  the  meaning  may  be 
clear  from  both  sides.  Satan  must  sow  his  tares,  and 
they  will  grow  up  with  the  wheat,  and  become  inex- 
tricably entangled  with  it  until  the  harvest.  But  before 
the  Lord  gathers  in  His  own.  He  will  not  fail  to  pick 
out  from  their  midst  all  the  children  of  the  Evil  One. 
And  again  ;  while  the  Gospel  net  is  lying  in  the  sea  of 
the  nations,  the  nominal  Church  must  needs  include 
multitudes  of  merely  intellectual,  of  sentimental,  and 
of  hypocritical  members,  as  well  as  real  believers.  But 
as  soon  as  the  net  is  drawn  to  shore,  just  as  fishermen 
carefully  select  the  good  fish  to  put  into  their  vessels 
and  then  cast  the  rest  away,  so  the  Lord  will  take 
every  soul  of  His  own  out  of  the  great  masses  of 
spurious  worshippers  before  He  consigns  the  latter  to 
their  doom. 

In  passing  on  to  interpret  the  remaining  Parables,  we 
must  keep  one  point  clearly  in  mind.  We  have  just 
seen  that  wheat   and  tares  are  to  grow  together  until 

20 


3o6  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

the  end ;  and,  accordingly,  in  the  seventh  and  last 
Parable  we  shall  find  good  and  bad  fish  mingled  in  the 
same  net.  It  is  manifest,  therefore,  that  all  the  inter- 
vening Parables  must  also  represent  the  Church  in 
conditions  more  or  less  corrupt. 

V. 

The  Parable  of  the  Mustard  Tree. 

In  the  third  similitude,  a  grain  of  mustard — prover- 
bial in  Palestine  as  being  the  smallest  of  familiar 
seeds — is  sown  by  a  man  in  his  field  :  and,  with  a 
solemn  significance,  the  Lord  tells  us  that  this  plant, 
although  really  belonging  to  the  class  of  pot-herbs,  or 
garden  vegetables  (m  \ayavcx),  grows,  nevertheless,  into 
a  tall  tree.^  This  is  an  evident  intimation  of  something 
wrong :  for  God  would  have  every  seed  to  develop 
according  to  the  limits  of  its  kind. 

In  becoming  a  tree  the  mustard  throws  out  great 
branches,^  so  that  the  fowls  of  the  air,  which  in  the 
first  Parable  caught  up  and  devoured  the  good  seed, 
are  able  to  come  and  lodge  under  its  shelter.  Here, 
then,  is  another  very  ominous  hint,  which,  had  it  been 
duly  weighed,  would  have  checked  the  frequent,  and 
undoubtedly  mistaken,  use  of  this  Parable  for  mis- 
sionary sermons. 

The  grain  represented  the  principles  of  the  Church 

^  Thomson  remarks  that  he  has  seen  the  wild  mustard  as  tall 
as  the  horse  and  his  rider,  and  suggests  that  there  may  have  been 
a  perennial  kind  which  grew  into  a  tree,  just  as  the  castor  bean 
sometimes  does.  See  "The  Land  and  the  Book,"  p.  414.  Very 
possibly  there  is  no  exaggeration  in  the  assertion  of  R.  Simeon 
Ben  Chalaphta,  who  says  ; — "A  stalk  of  mustard  was  in  my  field, 
into  which  I  was  wont  to  climb  as  men  climb  into  a  fig  tree." 

-  Mark  iv.  'i^z. 


THE  PARABLE   OF  THE  MUSTARD    TREE.  307 

as  sown  by  Christ  in  the  world  :  the  description  of  its 
unnatural  growth  signified  that  those  principles  would 
be  abandoned  as  the  age  rolled  on — a  prediction  which 
was  very  manifestly  fulfilled. 

For  the  Lord  charged  His  disciples  to  learn  of  Him, 
and  be  meek  and  lowly  in  heart  during  their  sojourn 
upon  earth  ;  to  cast  aside  every  high  thought,  and 
follow  their  despised  and  rejected  Master.  But  Satan, 
by  means  of  false  teachers  and  errors  stealthily  intro- 
duced during  the  period  of  the  tares,  prevailed  on  the 
great  body  of  professing  Christians  to  turn  from  the 
words  of  golden  hope,  "  Behold  I  come  quickly " — 
inscribed,  as  it  were,  by  the  Lord  upon  the  blue  veil  of 
heaven  through  which  He  ascended — and  to  fix  their 
eyes  upon  earthly  things.  He  taught  them  to  think  of 
the  cessation  of  human  enmity,  and  of  their  own 
growing  importance ;  and  so  allured  their  community 
in  the  direction  of  an  eminence  to  which  they  could 
attain  only  by  forsaking  Christ  and  serving  Mammon. 
Then,  when  the  fitting  moment  had  arrived,  he  ap- 
proached them,  and  offered  the  present  favour  of 
earthly  kings  in  exchange  for  the  hope  of  the  King 
from  heaven.  And,  forgetful  of  their  Lord's  example, 
they  accepted  the  offer  :  like  Eve,  they  were  beguiled, 
and  blindly  consented  to  receive  their  power  and 
influence  from  the   Prince  of  this   World, 

The  phase  represented  in  the  Parable  began  to  be 
developed  in  the  early  part  of  the  fourth  century,  when 
Constantine  was  carried  to  the  imperial  throne  upon  the 
shoulders  of  his  British  legionaries,  the  great  majority 
of  whom  were  Christians,  and  a  nominal  Christianity 
became  the  state  religion  of  the  Roman  Empire. 

Now  it  had  been  a  frequent  custom  of  the  polythe- 


3oS  TFIE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

istic  Romans  to  acknowledge  all  the  gods,  while  they 
selected  one  of  them  as  a  special  patron  and  object  of 
adoration.  And,  accordingly,  Constantine,  in  deference 
to  the  feelings  of  his  soldiers,  placed  Christ  in  the 
Pantheon,  and  adopted  Him  as  his  favourite  god  ; 
though,  at  the  same  time,  he  continued  to  worship  the 
Heathen  deities,  giving  the  preference  to  Apollo. 

For  his  religion  was  dictated  by  motives  of  policy, 
and  his  desire  was  to  weld  his  Christian  and  Pagan 
subjects  into  one  people.  To  promote  this  end,  a  set 
of  double-meaning  symbols  was  carefully  prepared,  or 
rather,  a  number  of  recognized  Pagan  symbols  were  so 
adapted  that  those  who  wished  might  interpret  them  of 
Christ,  while  others  continued  to  explain  them  from 
their  own  mythology. 

Among  these  s}'mbols  was  the  mystic  Tau,^  the 
famous  but  obscene  "  sign  of  life,"  known  from  the 
earliest  antiquity  throughout  the  whole  circle  of 
Heathendom,  and  marked  in  baptism  upon  the  fore- 
heads of  those  who  were  being  initiated  into  the  mys- 
teries.^ This  was  brought  into  greater  prominence,  and 
for  Christians  was  made  to  signify  the  cross  of  Christ, 
while  among  the  Pagans  it  retained  its  previous 
meaning. 

'  The  great  Phallic  emblem.  "  It  is  high  time  that  Christians 
.  should  understand  a  fact  of  which  sceptics  have  long  been  talking 
and  writing,  namely,  that  the  cross  was  the  central  symbol  of  all 
^  ancient  Paganism.  What  it  represents  must  remain  untold  :  but 
it  was  probably  made  the  medium  of  our  Lord's  death  through 
the  crafty  devices  of  the  Wicked  One,  into  whose  hands  He  was 
for  a  while  delivered,  with  a  view  to  the  future  corruption  of 
Christianity,  and  the  carrying  on  under  its  name  of  all  the 
abominations  of  the  Heathen." — "  Rome  :  Pagan  and  Papal," 
by  Mourant  Brock. 

-  Another  form  of  this  symbol  was  the  Egj^ptian  crux  ansata, 
the  well-known  sign  of  the  goddess  Venus. 


THE   PARABLE   OF  THE  MUSTARD    TREE.  309 

Just  in  the  same  manner  the  device  on  the  standard 
of  Constantine,  which  he  was  reported  to  have  seen  in 
his  vision,  the  Chi-Rho,  was  set  before  the  Christians 
as  the  monogram  of  Christ  ;  but  the  Heathen  easily 
recognized  it  as  a  slightly  altered  form  of  the  sign  of 
Osiris,  or  Jupiter  Ammon.^  Besides  which,  it  was 
usually  set  upon  the  top  of  the  pole  ;  while  on  the 
purple-silk  field  of  the  banner  below  were  the  heads  of 
the  emperor  and  his  sons,  which  might  be  worshipped 
by  the   Pagans   according  to  their  custom. 

Another  instance  of  Constantine's  policy  is  worth 
mention.  The  Christians  of  that  time  were  scrupulous 
in  keeping  holy  the  first  day  of  the  week  in  remem- 
brance of  their  risen  Lord.  Perceiving  that  this  was 
in  itself  sufficient  to  distinguish  them  from  their  fellow- 
citizens,  and  to  promote  a  party  spirit,  he  issued  an 
edict  that  the  Pagans  should  observe  the  same  day  in  "] 
honour  of  Apollo,  the  Sun-god,  and  should  call  it  Dies 
Solis,  or  the  day  of  the  Sun.  Very  soon  Christ  and 
Apollo  began  to  be  more  or  less  identified,  and  from 
this  unseemly  origin  comes  our  modern  term  "  Sunday." 

It  was  probably  at  the  same  time  that  the  custom  of 
turning  to  the  East  was   introduced   into  the  Church,  --v 
For,  however   this  ceremony   may  be   explained,  it  is  / 
altogether  Pagan,  and  is  connected  with  the  worship  of  "1 
the   Sun-god,      Its   extreme  antiquity   may  be   known 
from  the  fact  that,  when   God  gave  directions  for  the 
arrangements  of  the  Tabernacle  and  Temple,  He  caused 
the  Holy  of  holies  in  both  cases  to  be  set  in  the  West,^ 

'  Jennings'  "  Rosicrucians,"  pp.  147,  180. 

-  The  longer  sides  of  the  Tabernacle  were  to  face  the  North  and 
South  respectively,  so  that  they  extended  from  East  to  West 
(Exod.  xxvi.  18-20).  The  West  end  was  to  be  completely  boarded, 
like    the    sides,  because    the   Holy  of    holies  was  to    be  there 


3IO  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

in  order  that  His  people  might  be  clearly  distinguished 
from  the  idolaters  around  them. 

It  is  only  by  bearing  this  in  mind  that  we  can 
understand  the  deep  significance  of  a  passage  in  Ezekiel. 
That  prophet,  when  relating  how  he  was  caught  up  by 
the  Spirit  and  conveyed  to  Jerusalem  to  see  the  abomi- 
nations which  had  provoked  God  to  doom  both  city  and 
Sanctuary  to  destruction,  thus  describes  the  last  and 
greatest  of  them  ; — "  And  He  brought  me  into  the 
inner  court  of  rhe  Lord's  house  ;  and,  behold,  at  the 
door  of  the  Temple  of  the  Lord,  between  the  porch  and 
the  altar,  were  about  five  and  twenty  men,  with  their 
backs  toward  the  Temple  of  the  Lord,  and  their  faces 
toward  the  East  ;  and  they  worshipped  the  sun  toward 
the  East."  ^ 

The  confusing  and  corrupting  effects  of  Constantine's 
policy  may  be  easily  imagined  :  Christianity  was  trans- 
formed into  a  kind  of  Paganism  with  new  names,  and 
the  world  ceased  to  view  it  with  disfavour.  And,  mean- 
while, the  private  conduct  of  the  emperor,  inasmuch  as 
it  had  to  be  condoned  by  the  Church,  must  have  greatly 
contributed  to  laxity  of  morals  ;  for,  among  other 
crimes,  he  put  to  death  his  eldest  son  and  his  own  wife, 
listening  in  each  case  to  accusations  which  he  afterwards 
discovered  to  be  false.  This  caused  his  enemies  to  say, 
that  he  had  become  a  Christian  because  no  other  religion 
offered  pardon  for  such  atrocities  as  he  chose  to  commit. 

(vv.  22-3).  But  the  East  end  was  the  entrance  to  the  Holy  Place, 
and  was  covered  with  a  curtain.  The  passage  quoted  from 
Ezekiel  in  the  next  paragraph  shows  the  position  of  Solomon's 
Temple,  since  the  men  who  were  worshipping  the  sun  towards  the 
East  had  their  backs  turned  to  the  Temple  of  the  Lord. 

'  Ezek.  viii.  15,  16.  The  number  of  the  men  seems  to  indicate 
that  they  were  the  High  Priest  and  the  heads  of  the  twenty-four 
orders  (i  Chron.  xxiv.). 


THE  PARABLE   OF  THE  LEAVEN.  311 

Certainly,  when  the  Church  accepted  the  alliance  of 
such  a  man,  it  might  well  have  been  said  of  her,  as  of 
Jerusalem,  "How  is  the  faithful  city  become  a  harlot!" 
She  had,  indeed,  grown  great  upon  the  earth  ;  but 
instead  of  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Com- 
forter, the  foul  and  rebellious  spirits  of  the  air  came 
and  lodged  in  her  branches,  took  possession  of  her,  and  ., 
directed  her  ;  so  that  she  ceased,  as  a  visible  body,  to 
be  a  witness  for  Christ,  and  became  a  mighty  instrument  • 
in  the  hands  of  Satan  \ 

VI 

The  Parable  of  the  Leaven. 

In  this  Parable  we  see  before  us  a  woman  hiding  leaven 
in  three  measures  of  fine  meal  ;^  so  that  the  process  of 
fermentation  commences,  and  silently  proceeds,  until 
the  whole  is  leavened.  The  interpretation  of  the  scene 
depends,  of  course,  on  the  meaning  to  be  given  to  leaven, 
which  has  been  commonly  supposed  to  represent  pure 
Christianity.  But  such  an  explanation  could  only  have 
originated  in  the  minds  of  men  who  had  determined  it 
by  their  own  preconceived  ideas  of  what  the  future 
should  be,  and  not  by  patient  investigation  :  for  leaven 
is  an  unmistakable  symbol  of  sin  and  corruption,  as 
will  appear  from  a  consideration  of  the  following 
points. 

I.  The  nature  of  the  leaven  used  by  the  ancients,  and 
its  consequent  figurative  meaning  in  the  Heathen  as 
well  as  the  Jewish  world. 

'  The  measures  are  probably  seahs,  three  of  which  were  con- 
tained in  an  ephah  ;  while  the  latter  seems  to  have  been  a  full 
measure  for  baking.     See  Gen.  xviii.  6;  Judg.  vi,  19  :   i  Sam.  1,24^ 


312  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

II.  The  apparent  basis  of  the  Parable  in  the  Old 
Testament. 

III.  The  invariable  use  of  leaven  as  a  symbol  of  evil 
in   the   Bible. 

IV.  And  the  fact  that,  if  a  contrary  meaning  were 
given  to  it  in  this  instance,  such  an  interpretation  would 
involve  a  doctrine  not  to  be  found  elsewhere  in  Scrip- 
ture. 

I.  In  regard  to  the  first  point,  the  only  leaven  known 
to  the  ancients  was  something  sour ;  and  the  effect 
which  it  produced  was  incipient  corruption  spreading 
through  the  dough  and  rendering  it  sour,  and,  unless 
baked  at  the  right  time,  positively  corrupt.  Hence, 
in  speaking  of  bread,  the  Hebrews  used  "  sour "  for 
leavened,  and  "sweet"  for  unleavened.  And  hence,  also, 
leaven  became  a  symbol  of  corruption  both  to  the  Jews 
and  to  many  Heathen  nations. 

In  the  Talmud  it  is  a  frequent  figure  for  "  evil  affec- 
tions and  the  naughtiness  of  the  heart,"  and,  among 
other  instances,  we  find  the  following  prayer  ; — "  Lord 
of  ages,  it  is  revealed  and  known  before  Thy  face  that 
we  would  do  Thy  will  ;  but  do  Thou  subdue  that  which 
hinders,  namely,  the  leaven  which  is  in  the  lump." 
One  of  the  Rabbis  also  says  ; — "  Trust  not  a  proselyte 
till  twenty-four  generations  ;   for  he  holds  his  leaven." 

At  Rome,  the  Flanien  Dialis,  or  High  Priest  of 
Jupiter,  was  forbidden  to  touch  it  ;  and  Plutarch,  the 
Greek  historian,  explains  the  prohibition  on  the  ground 
that  "  leaven  is  both  itself  generated  by  corruption,  and 
also  corrupts  the  mass  with  which  it  is  mingled." 

II.  Our  Lord,  Who  frequently  founds  His  sayings 
upon  something  written  in  the  Old  Testament,  appears 
to  have  taken  the  present  Parable  from  the  description 


THE  Parable  of  the  Leaven.  313 

of  the  meat-oblation  in  the  second  chapter  of  Leviticus. 
That  offering,  which  seems  to  represent  the  devotion  of 
Christ,  our  Substitute,  in  service,  was  of  fine  flour  ;  and, 
if  the  flour  were  in  any  way  baked,  there  is  an  express 
injunction  that  no  leaven  should  be  in  it.  Moreover, 
this  special  command  is  immediately  followed  by  the 
general  precept  ; — "  For  ye  shall  burn  no  leaven,  nor 
any  honey,  in  any  offering  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire."  ^ 
Thus  the  woman,  by  putting  leaven  into  the  fine  flour, 
was  rendering  it  unfit  for  an  offering  to  the  Lord. 

in.  We  are  directed  to  interpret  Scripture  by  com- 
paring spiritual  things  with  spiritual,  and  leaven  is, 
without  a  single  exception,  used  as  a  familiar  and  well- 
known  figure  of  corruption  in  both  Old  and  New 
Testaments. 

The  Israelites  were  to  put  it  away  from  their  houses 
at  the  Passover  ;^  God  would  have  none  of  it  offered 
upon  His  altar  ; '  and  it  is  expressly  contrasted  with 
salt,  the  symbol  of  purity.'*  Accordingly,  when  Amos, 
in  bitter  irony,  bids  the  people  multiply  their  trans- 
gressions and  provoke  God  still  further,  he  tells  them 
that  this  may  be  done  by  offering  a  sacrifice  of  thanks- 
giving with  leaven.^ 

But,  perhaps,  the  most  striking  instance  of  the  figura- 
tive significance  of  leaven  is  to  be  found  in  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  Feast  of  Pentecost.^  On  that  occasion  two 
ordinary  leavened  loaves,  made  of  the  corn  of  the  year, 
were  to    be  brought  forth  from  the  habitations  of  the 

'  Levit.  ii.  ii. 

^  Exod.  xii.  15,  19,  20  ;  xiii.  6,  7  ;  Deut.  xvi.  3,  4. 
^  Levit.  ii.  4,  5,  11  ;  vi.  17  ;  x.  12. 
J  Levit.  ii.  11,  13. 
J  Amos  iv.  4,  5. 
Levit.  xxiii.  ii^-ai. 


314  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

Israelites  to  the  altar,  as  the  firstfruits  unto  the  Lord. 
But,  because  there  was  leaven  in  them,  they  could  not 
be  burnt  upon  the  altar  and  ascend  from  it  as  a  sweet 
savour,  and  were,  therefore,  set  down  before  it.  These 
loaves,  perhaps,  symbolized  the  Church — which  was 
called  into  existence  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  by  the 
descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  a  kind  of  firstfruits  of 
creation  ^ — presented  before  God,  but  unacceptable  to 
Him  on  account  of  the  sin  which  is  in  it. 

Then  seven  lambs  without  blemish,  a  young  bullock, 
and  two  rams,  were  offered  for  a  burnt  offering,  as  a 
.••ype  of  the  whole  devotion  of  our  Substitute  Christ, 
even  to  the  death.  Each  of  these  sacrifices  was  followed 
by  its  appropriate  meat  and  drink  offering,  pointing  to 
His  perfect  and  willing  service  in  daily  life.  His  fulfil- 
ment of  the  second  table  of  the  Law  for  us.  Then  a 
kid  of  the  goats  was  slain  as  a  sin  offering,  a  shadow  of 
Christ  putting  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself. 
Lastly,  two  lambs  were  brought  to  the  altar  for  peace 
offerings ;  to  set  forth  Christ  reconciling  us  to  God,  and 
restoring  us  to  communion  with   Him. 

And  so,  after  the  whole  work  of  the  Saviour  had 
been  thus  represented,  the  two  loaves  were  taken  up 
and  waved  before  the  Lord,  and — although  they  could 
not,  indeed,  be  placed  upon  the  altar,  on  account  of 
their  leaven — were,  nevertheless,  accepted  and  passed 
on  for  the  use  of  the  priest — a  wondrous  type  of  the 
Church,  which,  spite  of  all  her  faults,  shall  also  be 
accepted   in  the  Beloved. 

The  sin,  then,  which  cleaves  to  us,  and   renders  us 

I  unfit  for  the  presence  of  God,  unless  we  be  cleansed  in 

the  blood  and  clothed  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  is 

'James  i.  i8. 


THE  PARABLE   OF  THE  LEAVEN.  315 

symbolized  by  leaven ;  and,  in  the  New  Testament,  the 
Lord  gives  some  hints  respecting  special  forms  of  this 
evil  by  warning  His  disciples  to  beware  of  the  leaven 
of  the  Pharisees,^  the  Sadducees,^  and  the  Herodians  ^ 
— three  Jewish  sects  which  are  never  without  their 
counterparts  in  the  professing  Church. 

Passing  on  from  the  Gospels  to  the  Epistles  of 
Paul,  we  shall  find  other  examples  of  the  symbolic 
meaning  of  leaven.  On  two  occasions  the  apostle, 
when  exhorting  churches  to  put  away  evil,  remarks  ; — 
"A  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump.'"^'  And 
to  one  of  these  admonitions  he  adds  the  significant 
words  ; — "  Purge  out,  therefore,  the  old  leaven,  that  ye 
may  be  a  new  lump,  even  as  ye  are  tinleaveiied.  For 
our  Passover  also  hath  been  sacrificed,  even  Christ  : 
wherefore  let  us  keep  the  feast,  not  with  old  leaven, 
neither  with  the  leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness,  but 
with  the  wikavened  bread  of  sincerity  and  truth."  ^  It 
is,  then,  an  entire  absence  of  all  leaven  which  God 
desires  in  the  Church  ;  and  we  cannot  consent  to  set 
aside  the  emphatic  and  oft- repeated  meaning  of  the 
symbol  in  the  single  instance  in  which  it  has  been 
disputed. 

IV.  Again ;  were  we  in  this  passage  to  interpret 
leaven  of  a  good  influence,  the  Parable  could  only 
mean  that  all  evil  would  be  overcome  by  a  gentle, 
gradual,  and  almost  imperceptible  process ;  and  it 
would  thus  be  made  to  contradict  the  whole  testimony 
of  the  Bible.  For  the  inspired  writers  repeatedly 
affirm  that  wickedness  will  increase,  until  at  length  it 

•  Luke  xii.  i.  ^  Markviii.  15. 

*  Matt.  xvi.  6.  *  I  Cor.  v.  6  ;  Gal.  v.  9. 

5  I  Cor.  V.  7,  8 


3i6  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

shall  be  forcibly  checked  by  the  interference  of  the 
Lord  Himself.  The  mystery  of  lawlessness  had  begun 
to  work  like  leaven  even  in  apostolic  times,  and  it  must 
go  on  until  its  true  nature  be  revealed  in  the  person 
of  the  Lawless  One.  It  is  needless  to  multiply  pas- 
sages which  speak  of  evil  men  and  seducers  waxing 
worse  and  worse,  deceiving  and  being  deceived,  of 
love  growing  cold,  and  faith  waning  ;  passages  which 
predict  that  the  world  will  again  become  corrupt  and 
filled  with  violence  as  in  the  days  of  Noah,  will  be 
reeking  with  the  foulest  crimes,  like  the  cities  of  the 
plain,  so  that  the  Lord  will  come  forth  out  of  His 
place  to  shake  terribly  the  earth,  and  to  punish  its 
inhabitants  for  their  iniquity. 

Even  in  this  series  of  Parables  we  are  taught  that 
wheat  and  tares  must  both  grow  together  to  the  end 
of  the  age  ;  that  the  children  of  the  Wicked  One  will 
be  left  undisturbed,  until  the  Son  of  Man  sends  forth 
His  angels  to  gather  out  of  His  Kingdom  all  things 
that  offend,  and  them  which  do  iniquity ;  and  that, 
after  the  net  has  been  drawn  to  shore,  the  wicked 
shall  be  severed  from  among  the  righteous,  but  not 
made  like  to  them. 

There  is,  therefore,  no  doubt  in  regard  to  the  Scrip- 
tural significance  of  leaven,  and  if  it  be  accepted,  the 
Parable  falls  easily  into  its  place.  The  agent  in  the 
scene  is  a  woman — the  usual  symbol  of  a  system  or 
Church  ;  and  the  fact  that  she  is  secretly  corrupting 
the  fine  flour,  acting  like  the  enemy  who  sowed  tares 
upon  the  wheat,  proves  her  to  be  the  Harlot,  and  not 
the  true  Church. 

The  leaven  is  corrupt  doctrine,  and  is  explained  for 
us  by  Matthew  in  the  words  ; — "  Then  understood  they 


THE  PARABLE   OF  THE  LEAVEN.  317 

how  that  He  bade  them  not  beware  of  the  leaven  of 
bread,  but  of  the  teaching  of  the  Pharisees  and  Sad- 
ducees."  ^ 

In  the  previous  chapter  we  have  attempted  to 
describe  the  manner  in  which  Christianity  began  to 
be  Heathenized.  The  process  of  transformation  con- 
tinued, until  the  truths  of  revelation  were  entirely 
changed  by  the  gradual  admixture  of  human  traditions 
and  philosophies,  which,  like  leaven,  were  not  merely 
corrupt  in  themselves,  but  had  also  the  property  of 
imparting  their  own  nature  to  that  with  which  they 
were  mingled.  The  earthly  agency  by  which  this 
strange  result  was  achieved  became  more  and  more 
powerful  under  the  name  of  "  the  Catholic  Church." 
And  so  effectual  was  its  organization,  and  so  vigorous 
its  action,  that  in  a  short  time  the  whole  society  of 
the  Roman  world  was  interpenetrated  with  its  influ- 
ence, and  men  regarded  themselves  as  Christians  when 
they  were  really  polytheistic  idolaters  who  had  changed 
the  names  of  their  gods. 

The  three  kinds  of  leaven  mentioned  by  the  Lord 
may  be  easily  distinguished  in  this  apostasy.  In  both 
the  Greek  and  the  Latin  communities  there  has  ever 
been  a  sufficiency  of  Pharisees,  those  who  have,  perhaps, 
some  kind  of  faith  in  what  they  teach,  but  who  put 
their  trust  in  outward  forms,  in  the  traditions  of  men, 
and  in  the  authority  of  their  own  Church  ;  while  they 
look  down,  sometimes  with  pity,  but  more  frequently 
in  a  spirit  of  contempt  and  persecution,  upon  all  who 
venture  to  differ  from  them. 

And  again  ;  there  is  always  a  plentiful  sprinkling  of 
Sadducees,  men  who  decline,  more  or  less,  to  believe 

'  Matt.  xvi.  12. 


3i8  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

anything  which  they  have  not  experienced,  or  cannot 
understand  ;  who  disparage  revelation,  avoid  all  men- 
tion of  the  supernatural,  and  are  ever  unwilling  to  speak 
of  the  atonement ;  who  dream  that  the  new  birth  can 
be  effected  by  education,  human  philosophy,  and  the 
practice  of  virtue  and  philanthropy  ;  and  who,  while 
apparently  acquiescing  in  the  doctrines  and  practices  of 
their  Church,  are  in  their  hearts  altogether  indifferent 
to  them  ;  nay,  are  often  possessed  with  a  bitter  spirit 
of  scepticism  which  resents  the  very  suggestion  of  a 
God.  When  the  false  religion  is  growing  old  in  a 
land,  and  its  authority  is  becoming  relaxed,  these  men 
are  the  fungi  which  draw  life  from  its  decay :  they 
multiply  in  numbers  and  increase  in  boldness,  until  at 
length  they  throw  off  all  disguise,  and  openly  avow 
their  real  sentiments,  and  their  hatred  of  every  form  of 
worship.  Such  are  the  dregs  which  Romanism  invari- 
ably leaves  behind  it  when  all  else  has  evaporated. 

Of  Herodians,  who  would  support  religion  by  the 
arm  of  secular  power,  and  who  consider  political 
intrigue  a  fitting  means  for  advancing  the  interests  of 
Christ's  Kingdom,  it  is  needless  to  speak.  Men  of  this 
class  have  ever  been  conspicuous  in  the  communities  of 
apostate  Churches,  and  in  none  more  than  that  of  Rome. 

But  there  are  also  many  misguided  believers,  of  more 
orthodox  views,  who  so  mind  earthly  things  that  they 
are  often  found  to  be  practically  regarding  the  political 
questions  of  the  day  as  more  important  than  the  far 
weightier  matters  of  the  heavenly  Kingdom.  And  they 
persuade  themselves  to  such  a  state  of  mind  by  the 
false  assumption  that  the  present  work  of  Christ  is  to 
improve  the  world,  forgetting  that  He  bids  us  rather 
co-operate  with  Him  in  gathering  His  elect  out  of  it. 


PARABLE   OF  THE    TREASURE   IN  THE  FIELD.      319 

Such,  then,  was  the  period  of  the  leaven  ;  nor  have 
reformations  or  revivals,  however  great  their  partial 
success,  been  able  to  free  Christendom  from  its  per- 
nicious influence.  It  is  still  found,  to  a  greater  or  less 
extent,  and  in  one  or  other  of  its  forms,  in  every 
Church  and  sect :  it  continues  to  work  in  the  whole 
mass  of  professing  Christians,  though  sometimes  one 
of  its  developments  may  be  more  powerful,  sometimes 
another.  Hitherto  the  Pharisean  and  Herodian  ele- 
ments have  usually  been  the  most  prominent ;  but  for 
a  long  time  the  Sadducean  has  been  rapidly  increasing, 
and  this  will  probably  be  the  chief  agent  in  forcing  the 
mystery  of  lawlessness  to  its  climax.  All  three  will, 
however,  remain  active  until  the  end,  and,  in  their  final 
development,  are  possibly  represented  by  the  three 
unclean  spirits  of  the  Sixth  Vial,  which  will  drive  men 
on  to  the  last  extreme  of  rebellion,  and  "  gather  them 
to  the  battle  of  that  great  day  of  God  Almighty."  ^ 

VII. 

The  Parable  of  the  Treasure  in  the  Field. 

There  is  now  a  pause  in  our  Lord's  discourse,  and 
the  remaining  Parables  are  spoken  to  the  disciples 
alone.  Some  turning-point  is  indicated,  and  possibly 
a  more  confined  area,  as  though  the  action  of  this 
scene  would,  in  the  main,  be  restricted  to  a  few 
favoured  countries  of  Christendom.  And  so  we  seem 
to  recognize  the  results  brought  about  by  the  Refor- 
mation. The  ceaseless  working  and  rapid  progress  of 
the  leaven  is  checked  ;  but  that  is  all :  the  leaven  is 
not    itself  purged    away.      Only  that   which    had    been 

•  Rev.  xvi.  13,  14. 


320  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

active  for  evil  now  settles  down  into  a  cold  inert  mass  ; 
so  that  the  outward  appearance  of  the  nominal  Church 
is  that  of  a  field.  Nevertheless,  hidden  beneath  its 
unpromising  surface  lies  the  heavenly  treasure. 

The  description  is  wonderfully  true  when  applied  to 
the  times  of  Protestant  deadness  which,  quickly  follow- 
ing the  Reformation,  lasted  on  with  but  few  signs  of 
life  to  vary  their  monotony  until  it  was  broken  by  the 
preaching  of  Wesley,  Whitefield,  and  others.  For  after 
the  enthusiasm  of  the  conflict  with  Rome  had  passed 
away,  men  speedily  settled  down  to  a  mere  form  of 
godliness,  while  they  denied  its  power.  They  thought 
it  a  duty  to  go  through  their  heartless  services,  but 
love  had  grown  cold  :  they  boasted  of  their  pure  faith, 
but  failed  to  show  the  works  which  it  should  have 
produced.  And  a  mournful  proof  of  this  may  be 
found  in  the  fact  that  two  centuries  had  elapsed  before 
they  roused  themselves  to  any  general  missionary  effort. 

Soon  the  peoples  of  Christendom  among  whom  the 
Reformation  had  triumphed  were  divided  off  into 
sharply-defined  sects,  like  fenced  fields.  Each  of 
these  sects  held  the  life-giving  doctrine  of  the  atone- 
ment :  but  it  was  often  concealed  more  or  less  by 
other  teachings,  which  in  some  cases  seemed  to  have 
been  very  imperfectly  purged  from  the  leaven. 

During  this  period  the  number  of  believers  was 
usually  increased  in  the  manner  indicated  by  the 
Parable.      A  man   would,   as  it  were  by  chance,^   hear 

'  The  husbandman yfl«;z^  the  treasure  :  while  he  was  eng-aged 
in  ordinary  work,  his  ploughshare  or  mattock,  perhaps,  struck 
upon  something  which  proved  to  be  valuable.  It  was,  then,  an 
instance  of  what  we  call  treasure-trove.  And,  consequently,  the 
interpretation  of  those  who  see  Christ  in  the  husbandman,  and 
His  people  in  the  treasure,  leads  to  ver}'  strange  results.     Surely 


PARABLE   OF  THE  PEARL   OF  GREA7  PRLCE.       321 

the  Gospel  of  Christ,  and,  having  received  it,  would 
in  his  joy  buy  the  whole  field,  that  is,  accept,  at  any 
cost  to  himself,  all  the  doctrines  of  the  community  of 
Christians  in  which  he  had  found  his  treasure.  This 
was  a  very  characteristic  feature  of  the  times  from  the 
Reformation  to  the  middle  of  the  present  century  :  the 
generality  of  good  men,  after  finding  the  heavenly 
treasure  in  some  professing  body,  while  holding  firmly, 
indeed,  to  fundamental  and  vital  truths,  would  in  other 
matters  thenceforth  read  the  word  of  God,  not  indepen- 
dently, but  by  the  light  of,  and  to  prove  the  correctness 
of,  the  doctrines  which  they  had  adopted.  And  the 
various  Protestant  Churches,  while  conceding  salvation 
to  all  believers  in  Christ's  atonement,  were  wont,  never- 
theless, to  preserve  strongly-marked  lines  of  separation, 
and  to  remember  their  distinctive  tenets. 

VIII. 

The  Parable  of  the  Pearl  of  Great  Price. 

In  this  similitude  the  scene  again  changes  :  the  solid 
field  breaks  up  into  the  ever-shifting  waves  of  the  sea, 
and  the  secret  of  the  Kingdom  is  found  as  a  pearl  in 
its  lowest  depths.  This  points  to  times  like  those  on 
which  we  seem  already  to  be  entering  ;  times  in  which 
the  narrow  boundaries  of  sect  are  becoming  indistinct, 
and  are  little  noticed,  while  almost  every  man  holds 
his  own  peculiar  opinions.  And,  just  as  the  pearl  lies 
far  beneath  the  restless  surface  of  the  waves,  so,  in  no 

our  Lord  did  not  accidentally  light  upon  His  Church,  while  He 
was  about  some  other  business  in  the  world !  And  His  people 
can  scarcely  be  called  treasures  at  the  time  when  He  finds  them  : 
they  become  so  afterwards,  by  His  grace,  as  new  creations  in 
Him. 

21 


322  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

distant  day,  will  the  word  of  God  be  hidden  beneath, 
the  many  waters  of  perpetually  changing  confessions, 
creeds,  sects,  opinions,  and  philosophies  ;  and  still  later, 
at  the  culmination  of  the  great  apostasy,  its  very 
existence  will  be  almost  forgotten.  The  truth  of  God 
will  be  no  more  found,  as  it  were,  accidentally — as  a 
man  unexpectedly  stumbles  upon  treasure-trove — but 
only  by  means  of  earnest  inquiry. 

For  in  this  case  a  merchant,  who  knows  the  value 
of  pearls,  is  seeking  for  them  ;  and  the  reward  of  his 
diligence  is  the  discovery  of  the  pearl  of  great  price, 
to  obtain  which  he  gives  up  all  that  he  has.  The 
Lord  thus  signifies  that,  even  in  the  perilous  times  of 
the  end,  those  who  are  really  desirous  of  truth  will 
be  guided  to  the  great  truth.  But,  as  we  learn  from 
other  prophecies,  their  sincerity  will  be  sorely  tested  ; 
they  will  have  to  turn  away  from  that  which  is  ex- 
citing the  enthusiasm  of  the  whole  world  in  order  to 
begin  the  search  ;  and,  when  they  have  been  successful, 
may  be  required  to  surrender  family,  position,  property, 
and  even  life  itself,  if  they  would  possess  the  prize. 

Since,  however,  the  merchant  is  able  to  find  the 
pearl,  we  are  taught  that  God  will  not  leave  Himself 
altogether  without  witnesses  while  the  Lawless  One  is 
reigning  :  there  will  yet  be  fishers,  blessed  of  Him, 
who  will  be  empowered  to  bring  up  His  truth  from 
beneath  the  troubled  waters  of  human  opinions,  and  to 
offer  it  to  those  who  are  honestly  seeking  for  "  glory 
and  honour  and  immortality."  ^ 

'  We  must  carefully  bear  in  mind  that  the  merchant  does  not 
dive  to  bring  up  the  pearl  from  the  deep,  but  merel}'  purchases  it 
from  one  who  has  previously  procured  it.  Great,  therefore,  is  the 
mistake  of  interpreters  who  find  in  this  Parable  a  representation 
of  Christ  seeking  and  saving  His  Church. 


PARABLE   OF  THE  PEARL   OF  GREAT  PRICE.       323 

If  wc  look  around  us,  we  cannot  but  suspect  that  we 
are  living  in  the  transitional  period  between  the  previous 
Parable  and  that  which  we  are  now  considering.  Al- 
ready, on  every  side,  the  fields  of  dogma  are  breaking 
up,  and  where  one  distinct  and  unalterable  law  was 
wont  to  prevail,  there  is  nothing  but  uncertainty  and 
innumerable  opinions — opinions,  too,  which  rarely  claim 
to  be  derived  from  the  revelation  of  God,  but  are 
avowedly  based  upon  human  authority,  whether  ancient 
or  modern,  whether  ecclesiastical  or  secular. 

The  Protestant  sects,  as  communities,  attracted  by 
human  traditions  and  philosophies,  are  ceasing  to  hold 
fast  the  Head,  and  becoming  less  and  less  able  to  with- 
stand the  powerful  influx  of  corruption.  Those  princi- 
ples which  used  to  characterize  them  are,  like  houses 
surprised  by  an  inundation,  already  tottering,  and 
threatening  every  moment  to  fall  through  the  violence 
of  the  floods  ;  so  that  shortly  nothing  will  be  seen  but 
the  tumultuous  waters  out  of  which  Satan  will  evoke 
the  last  great  enemy  of  Christ. 

Some  twenty  or  thirty  years  ago,  the  first  slight 
advances  of  Secularism  were  viewed  with  alarm  wher- 
ever they  were  discovered,  and  the  seven  Essayists  and 
Bishop  Colenso  regarded  as  strange  teachers  in  the 
National  Church.  But  it  is  not  so  now  :  almost  all 
popular  magazines  and  reviews  teem  with  scepticism, 
and  it  is  openly  taught  by  those  who  might  have  been 
expected  to  act  as  barriers  against  it.  Nor  is  the 
spread  of  Romanism,  especially  in  covert  forms,  less  re- 
markable. 

The  scarcely  noticed  summer  stream  has  swelled  into 
a  broad  and  foaming  river,  and  is  bringing  destruction 
with  it  from  the  mountains.     We  cannot  hope  to  stay 


324  THE   CHURCH  OF   GOD. 

its  rapid  tide  ;  for  it  will  prevail,  until  He  appear  unto 
Whom  all  power  is  given.  But  we  must  not,  therefore, 
remain  idle  all  the  day  :  nay,  we  are  exhorted  to  greater 
exertions  as  the  difficulties  increase  and  the  end 
approaches,  lest  the  Lord  coming  suddenly  should  find 
us  sleeping.  We  can  stand  by  the  rushing  torrent,  and 
pull  out  many  a  one,  who  is  being  carried  away  by  it, 
before  his  spirit  is  quite  extinguished  :  we  can  warn 
others,  so  that  they  may  avoid  it  altogether.  And  by 
the  mercy  of  God  there  are  still  large  numbers  of  His 
people  thus  employed.  The  energy  of  evil  is  for  the 
present  provoking  some  little  corresponding  energy  of 
good  ;  but  of  this  we  shall  hear  in  our  Lord's  second 
continuous  prophecy.  For  in  the  Parables  He  deals 
more  especially  with  the  general  outward  appearance 
of  that  which  claims  to  be  the  Church 

IX. 

The  Parable   of   the   Net  Cast  into  the  Sea. 

The  Lord  has  now  completed  the  sad  story  of  the 
mingling  of  Satan's  tares  with  the  wheat  of  God  :  it 
only  remains  to  speak  of  the  final  separation,  which 
shall  once  more  make  it  easy  to  discern  between  the 
righteous  and  the  wicked,  between  him  that  serveth 
God  and  him  that  serveth  Him  not.  And  this  time 
of  judgment  is  depicted  in  the  Parable  of  the  net. 

The  sea  here,  as  often  in  Scripture,  represents  the 
;  world  in  agitation.  So  the  Psalmist  says  of  the  Lord  ; 
— "  Which  stilleth  the  noise  of  the  seas,  the  noise  of 
their  waves,  and  the  tumult  of  the  peoples."^ 

'  Psa.  Ixv.  7.     So,  too,  in  Daniel's  vision,  the  four  Gentile  World- 
powers  are  seen  to  emerge  from  the  raging  sea. 


SUMMARY  OF  THE  SEVEN  PARABLES,  325 

The  net  is  the  circle  of  the  visible  Church,  all  the 
Christian  sects  which  are  used  for  the  gathering  in  of 
God's  people.  We  may,  however,  remark  that  nets  do 
not  catch  all  the  fish  of  the  sea,  nor  is  even  a  mere 
profession  universal.  Also  that,  although  fish  of  every 
kind  are  caught,  there  are  at  last  but  two  sorts  :  all  are 
either  good  or  bad. 

The  net  is  not  brought  to  the  shore,  which  is  the  end 
of  this  age  of  restless  confusion,  until  it  is  full  :  for 
God  has  fore-ordained  how  many  of  the  human  race 
shall  come  within  the  circle  of  the  Gospel  during  the 
times  of  the  Gentiles.  And  the  first  indication  that  it 
has  been  drawn  up  will  be  the  removal  of  a  number  of 
believers  into  the  presence  of  their  Lord  :  then  the 
separating  process  will  be  continued  by  a  second 
ascension  of  saints,  at  the  sounding  of  the  seventh 
trumpet  ;  and  finished  by  the  appearing  of  the  Lord  in 
glory  and  the  destruction  of  the  wicked.  Thus  the 
good  will  first  be  gathered  into  vessels,  and  then  the 
bad  will  be  cast  away. 

X 

Summary  of  the  Seven  Parables. 

Such,  then,  is  the  first  great  revelation  in  regard  to  the 
career  of  the  nominal  Church.  The  Lord  sows  good  seed ; 
but  the  bad  soil  of  human  hearts  renders  it  for  the 
most  part  unfruitful.  And  where  it  is  growing  well,  an 
enemy  causes  disastrous  confusion  by  stealthily  intro- 
ducing disguised  children  of  the  Wicked  One  among 
the  children  of  the  Kingdom.  Changed  by  this  evil 
admixture,  the  professing  Church  casts  off  her  humility, 
and,  ceasing  to  wait  for  the  Lord  from  heaven,  strives 


326  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD, 

to  establish  herself  upon  earth.  Throwing  aside  the 
cross,  she  desires  to  say,  "  I  sit  a  queen,  and  am  no 
widow  "  ;  and,  in  order  to  gratify  her  ambition,  enters 
into  a  shameful  alliance  with  the  great  ones  of  earth, 
and  suffers  the  Powers  of  Darkness,  the  devourers  of  the 
word,  to  take  shelter  in  her  branches.  With  such 
counsellors  and  helpers  she  organizes  herself,  and  so 
corrupts  the  whole  word  of  God  by  the  teachings  of 
demons  that  it  can  no  longer  be  recovered,  any  more 
than  fine  flour  can  be  again  purified  from  that  which 
has  once  leavened  it.  After  a  while  there  follows  a 
time  of  partial  revival,  corresponding  to  the  reformation 
of  the  Jews  under  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua,  but  also 
resembling  that  movement  in  its  speedy  subsidence  to 
apathy  and  deadness.  During  this  period,  however,  the 
word  is  able  to  be  separated  from  the  field,  though  it 
could  not  be  recovered  from  the  leaven,  and  many  a 
one  comes  upon  it  unexpectedly,  and  receives  it  with 
joy  as  a  great  treasure,  although  in  order  to  obtain  it 
he  must  needs  buy  the  whole  field.  Then  the  word  is 
again  hidden  ;  not,  however,  at  this  time  by  fixed  and 
rigid  dogmas,  but  by  opinions  of  perplexing  variety 
which  are  ever  shifting  like  the  waves  of  the  sea.  Yet 
the  agitated  and  threatening  state  of  the  world  moves 
some  to  search  earnestly  for  Divine  revelation  and  truth, 
and  those  who  do  so  find  the  pearl  of  great  price,  and 
if  they  are  willing  to  give  up  all  else,  may  possess  and 
enjoy  it.  At  the  close  of  this  period  the  Lord  suddenly 
begins  to  pass  in  review  the  whole  of  Christendom,  all 
the  nations  who  have  heard  His  Gospel,  and  by  taking 
those  who  have  accepted  it  to  Himself,  and  casting  the 
obstinately  rebellious  ■  into  a  furnace  of  fire,  at  length 
effects    the    separation    which    His    servants   are    not 


THE  PLAN  OF  THE  APOCALYPSE.  327 

permitted    to    attempt,    and    finishes    the    mystery   of 
God. 

Who  can  thoughtfully  consider  these  Parables  and 
refuse  to  admit  their  striking-  fulfilment,  thus  far,  in  the 
history  of  the  professing  Church,  together  with  the  grave 
inference  that  the  days  of  this  dispensation  are  num- 
bered ? 

XI. 

The  Plan  of  the  Apocalypse. 

Before  we  examine  the  prophecy  contained  in  the 
Epistles  to  the  Seven  Churches,  it  will  be  necessary  to 
have  some  idea  of  the  general  scheme  of  the  Apocalypse 
— that  last  gift  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  His  people,  that 
book  without  a  little  understanding  of  which  it  is  un- 
likely that  any  Christian  will  be  kept  from  the  delusions, 
religious  and  political,  which  are  now  overspreading  the 
earth.  "  Blessed  is  he  that  readeth,  and  they  that  hear, 
the  words  of  the  prophecy,  and  keep  the  things  which 
are  written  therein  :  for  the  time  is  at  hand." 

The  beloved  apostle  was  suffering  affliction,  on  the 
barren  island  of  Patmos,  "  for  the  word  of  God,  and  for 
the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,"  when  the  revelation  was 
made  to  him. 

He  was,  as  he  tells  us,  "  in  spirit  on  the  Lord's  day," 
that  is,  according  to  the  majority  of  interpreters,  "  in 
spirit  on  the  first  day  of  the  week."  But  by  such  an 
explanation  John  is  made  to  introduce  a  term  unknown 
to  the  New  Testament  in  place  of  the  invariable 
designation  of  the  Christian  Sabbath.  Moreover,  the 
sense  thus  educed  is  weak  and  inadequate,  having  no 
apparent  connection  with  the  revelations  which  follow. 


J 


28  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 


To  U5,  then,  although  we  admit  a  sh'ght  grammatical 
difficulty,^  the  rendering,  "  I  was  in  spirit  in  the  Day 
of  the  Lord,"  seems  far  more  probable,  and  by  adopting 
it  we  both  secure  a  vigorous  sense  which  bears  upon  the 
whole  Book,  and  at  the  same  time  preserve  for  the 
expression,  "  the  Lord's  day,"  or  the  day  belonging  to 
the  Lord,  that  meaning  which,  however  much  subsequent 
usage  may  have  departed  from  it,  is  always  retained  in 
the  Old  and  New  Testaments. 

By  the  words  "  in  spirit "  John  explains  his  own 
condition  :  he  was  not,  like  Paul  on  a  similar  occasion, 
uncertain  in  regard  to  it,  but  fully  aware  that  he  was 
out  of  the  body  and  on  the  plane  of  spirit.  "  In  the 
Day  of  the  Lord,"  on  the  contrary,  has  reference  to  the 
external  surroundings  in  which  he  found  himself,  and 
furnishes  us  with  a  general  clue  for  the  interpretation 
of  the  visions.  A  strictly  analogous  description  may 
be  found  in  the  second  verse  of  the  fourth  chapter, 
where  he  says  ; — "  And  immediately  I  was  in  spirit ; 
and,  behold,  a  Throne." 

If  the  clause  be  thus  understood,  it  contains  an 
announcement  that  the  vision  is  for  the  time  of  the 
end,  dealing  first  with  Christ's  judgment  of  the  whole 
career  of  His  Church,  and  then  passing  on  to  the  last 
of  the  Seventy  Weeks  in  which  He  will  have  His  great 

'  We  speak  of  it  as  slight,  because  the  Greek  of  the  Apocalypse 
is  by  no  means  severe  Attic,  and  John  may  have  had  in  mind 
rather  the  fact  that  he  found  himself  in  the  Day  of  the  Lord  than 
that  he  was  projected  thither.  In  that  case  there  would  be  little 
difference  between  the  construction  of  this  sentence  and  the 
tyevofXTju  iv  rfj  vrjaco  of  the  preceding  verse. 

A  good  parallel  to  17  Kvpt-oKi)  i]fj.(pa,  in  the  sense  of  the  Day  of  the 
Lord,  may  be  found  in  Paul's  use  of  dpSpunrivr}  fjjjLepa  for  "  man's 
day  "  in  opposition  to  it.  See  i  Cor.  iv.  3 — 5.  The  E.  V.  has 
"man's  judgment,"  which  is,  however,  an  exposition,  not  a 
translation. 


THE  PLAN  OF  THE  APOCALYPSE.  329 

controversy  with  Jew  and  Gentile.  Such  a  meaning 
will  be  in  exact  accord  with  the  nineteenth  verse,  and 
also,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  with  the  whole  structure 
of  the  Book. 

While,  then,  in  spirit,  and  disengaged  from  earthly 
things,  John  suddenly  heard  behind  him  a  great  voice, 
like  that  of  a  trumpet,  saying  ; — "  What  thou  seest, 
write  in  a  book,  and  send  it  to  the  Seven  Churches  ; 
unto  Ephesus,  and  unto  Smyrna,  and  unto  Pergamos, 
and  unto  Thyatira,  and  unto  Sardis,  and  unto  Phila- 
delphia, and  unto  Laodicea." 

At  the  sound  of  this  voice  John  turned,  and  beheld 
a  vision  which,  at  first,  may  have  suggested  to  him  the 
Holy  Place  of  the  Temple.  But  it  was  not  the  Temple  : 
for  he  quickly  perceived  an  absence  of  familiar  objects  ; 
there  was  neither  altar  of  incense,  nor  table  of  shew- 
bread.  Nor  was  he  gazing  upon  any  of  those  heavenly 
realities  which  were  shown  as  a  pattern  to  Moses  on  the 
Mount  ;  for,  in  place  of  a  single  seven-branched  lamp- 
stand,  seven  distinct  lamps  were  set  before  him. 

What  he  saw  was  the  heavenly  Sanctuary  arranged 
for  the  present  parenthetical  dispensation.  And,  con- 
sequently, all  that  had  formerly  represented  Christ  was 
now  removed,  because  He  was  present  in  His  own 
person  :  John  beheld  nothing  save  the  Lord  and  the 
symbols  of  the  Church  for  which  He  had  died.  There 
were  seven  separate  lamps  of  gold,  connected  only  by 
their  association  with  a  glorious  Priestly  Figure  walking 
in  the  midst  of  them. 

But  why  this  change  from  the  one  seven-branched 
lamp  of  Israelitish  times  .'^     The  Lord  Himself  presently 

'  It  will,  perhaps,  occur  to  the  reader  that  there  were  ten  lainp- 
stands  in  the  Temple  of  Solomon  (i  Kings  vii.  49  ;  2  Chron.  iv.  7). 


330  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

gives  the  reason  :  each  lamp  represents  the  Church  of 
a  particular  place  ;  so  that  they  indicate  locality,  and 
not,  as  some  have  supposed,  the  human  divisions  of 
sect,  which  could  never  be  recognized  in  the  heavenly 
Sanctuary. 

In  the  previous  dispensation  there  had  been  one 
earthly  and  visible  centre  of  worship  ;  and,  to  signify 
this,  the  lamp  of  the  Tabernacle  was  in  one  piece.  But 
now  there  is  no  Jerusalem  to  which  men  must  go  :  true 
worshippers  must  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in 
truth.  And  the  Church  of  Christ  is  defined  for  us  as 
consisting  of  "  all  that  call  upon  the  name  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  in  every  place,  their  Lord  and  ours."^  There- 
fore in  every  locality  the  whole  body  of  believers,  to 
whatever  outward  denomination  they  may  individually 
belong,  collectively  formx  the  lamp  of  that  place. 

Alas  !  that  Christians  should  so  often  ignore  this  fact 
of  their  unity  ;  or,  if  their  lips  confess  it,  convict  them- 
selves of  hypocrisy  by  their  deeds  !  Yet,  even  though 
they  be  born  again,  God  can  only  delight  in  them  while 
they  are  walking  as  brethren  ;  for  they  are  members  of 
Christ's   body,  of  His  flesh   and    of   His  bones.      The 

But  we  are  not  told  what  became  of  the  original  light  which  had 
stood  in  the  Tabernacle,  and  may,  therefore,  probably  conclude 
that  it  occupied  its  proper  place  in  the  Temple,  and  understand, 
with  the  Rabbis,  that  the  ten  were  additional  to  it  and  distinct  in 
meaning.  For  in  the  reign  of  Abijah  we  still  find  mention  of  a 
single  lampstand  of  gold  which  it  was  the  priest's  duty  to  keep 
burning  throughout  the  night  (2  Chron.  xiii.  11). 

In  the  Temples  of  Zerubbabel  (i  Alacc.  i.  21  ;  iv.  49)  and  Herod, 
also,  we  hear  of  but  one,  which,  upon  the  destruction  of  its  last 
resting  place,  was  carried  to  Rome,  and,  after  having  graced  the 
triumph  of  Titus,  was  deposited  in  the  Temple  of  Peace.  Accord- 
ing to  one  legend  it  was  finally  lost  in  the  Tiber,  having  fallen  into 
the  water  from  the  INIilvian  bridge  during  the  headlong  flight  of 
Maxentius  from  Constantine. 

*  I  Cor.  i.  2, 


THE  PLAN  OF  THE  APOCALYPSE.  331 

distinctions  of  sect,  however  impossible  it  may  be  to 
get  rid  of  them  in  this  present  distress,  owe  their  exist- 
ence to  human  sin  and  lack  of  love.  Consequently, 
they  will  altogether  disappear  when  the  Church  is 
glorified,  and  should  be  kept  as  much  as  possible  out 
of  sight  in  the  Church  militant. 

Standing,  then,  in  the  midst  of  the  golden  lamps  was 
the  majestic  form  of  the  High  Priest  Who  has  entered 
into  the  heavens,  now  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God 
for  us.  John  did  not,  however,  see  Him  in  the  heavenly 
Holy  of  holies  turned  toward  God  in  intercession,  but 
in  the  Holy  Place  watching  the  lamps,  that  is,  directing 
and  judging  His  Church.  He  was  not  yet  clad  in  the 
robes  of  glory  and  beauty  :  for  His  dress  apparently 
corresponded  to  the  linen  garments  which  were  used  in 
ordinary  priestly  service,  and  especially  by  the  High 
Priest  on  the  great  Day  of  Atonement.  Then,  after  the 
sin-offerings  had  been  sacrificed,  the  atonement  in  the 
Holy  of  holies  accomplished,  and  the  scape-goat  sent 
away,  Aaron  put  off  the  garb  of  service  in  the  Holy 
Place,  and,  clothing  himself  in  his  splendid  array,  lifted 
up  the  veil,  and  appeared  to  the  waiting  people  in  token 
that  their  iniquity  was  covered.  But  Christ's  inter- 
cession was  not  yet  ended  :  it  was  not  the  time  for 
Him  to  fulfil  this  type  by  appearing  to  them  that  look 
for  Him  without  sin  unto  salvation. 

He  was  clad  in  a  garment  reaching  down  to  the 
feet,  and  girt  with  a  golden  girdle.  His  head  and 
His  hair  were  white  and  lustrous  ;  His  eyes  like  flames 
of  fire  ;  His  feet  as  brass  glowing  in  the  furnace  ;  and 
an  effort  is  made  to  give  some  idea  of  the  fulness  and 
majesty  of  His  voice  by  the  glorious  comparison  that 
it   was  as  the  sound  of  many  waters.     In   His  right 


332  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

hand — held,  perhaps,  as  a  garland — were  seven  stars  ; 
and  out  of  His  mouth  went  a  sharp  two-edged  sword  ; 
while  the  face,  in  which  there  was  once  no  beauty  to 
be  desired,  the  visage,  which  was  so  marred  more  than 
any  man,  was  now  resplendent  as  the  sun  shining  in 
his  strength. 

And  although  even  this  was  far  from  being  the 
fulness  of  His  glory,  yet  the  beloved  disciple  was 
unable  to  bear  it,  and  fell  at  His  feet  as  dead. 

Then  the  Lord  touched  him,  and  again  John  heard 
the  loving  words,  "  Fear  not,"  and  was  strengthened 
to  receive  the  command  ; — "  Write  the  things  which 
thou  sawest,  and  the  things  which  are,  and  the  things 
which  shall  come  to  pass  after  these."  ^  It  was  thus 
evidently  implied  that  the  revelation  to  be  written  by 
the  apostle  would  consist  of  three  distinct  parts  :  unless, 
therefore,  we  can  so  divide  the  Apocalypse,  it  is  useless 
to  think  of  interpreting  it. 

Now  in  regard  to  the  first  division  there  can  be 
no  difficulty  :  "  the  things  which  thou  sawest  "^  can  only 
refer  to  the  vision  of  the  heavenly  Sanctuary,  by  which 

'  Dean  Alford  strongly  supports  a  different  rendering  of  this 
verse; — "Write  the  things  which  thou  sawest,  and  what  things 
they  signify,  and  the  things  which  are  about  to  happen  after 
these."  The  change  is  scarcely  necessary,  and,  if  it  be  pre- 
ferred, does  not  affect  our  interpretation.  For  the  exposition  of 
what  John  saw  must  still  reveal  the  things  that  are,  or  the  present 
Church-period  as  symbolised  by  the  lampstands  in  the  Sanctuary. 
And  the  first  verse  of  the  fourth  chapter  still  marks  the  transition 
from  this  dispensation  to  that  which  shall  follow  it. 

-  The  aoribt  tense  tiSej,  v.hich  should  be  rendered,  "  thou 
sawest,"  and  which  is  repeated  in  the  following  verse,  seems 
to  imply  that  the  vision  had  already  passed  away.  In  the  fourth 
and  succeeding  chapters  the  Sanctuary  is  altogether  different. 
The  laver,  the  altars,  and,  finally,  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  reappear, 
showing  that  the  prophecy  is  then  concerned  with  the  Jews  of 
the  last  days. 


THE  PLAN  OF   THE  APOCALYPSE.  333 

the  difference  between  the  Christian  Church  and  the 
Jewish  system  had  been  exhibited,  and  the  solemn  fact 
revealed  that  the  Lord's  eyes  of  flame  are  ever  upon 
those  who  profess  to  be  His. 

"  The  things  that  are  " — or  a  prophetic  outline  of 
the  phases  of  the  nominal  Church,  which  were  to 
succeed  each  other  during  the  present  age — naturally 
follow  in  the  next  chapter.  They  are  also  continued 
in  the  third,  but  no  further  :  for,  in  the  first  verse  of 
the  fourth  chapter,  John  sees  a  door  opened  in  heaven, 
and  hears  a  voice  saying  ; — "  Come  up  hither,  and  I 
will  show  thee  the  things  which  must  come  to  pass 
after  these." 

Then  the  scene  is  shifted  from  earth  to  heaven  ; 
and  the  ascent  of  the  apostle  is  doubtless  a  type  of 
that  translation  of  believers  which  will  close  "  the  things 
that  are,"  and  announce  the  approaching  resumption 
of  the  suspended  covenant  with  Israel.  Henceforth 
the  Church  disappears  from  the  prophecy ;  and  the 
very  name  occurs  no  more  till  we  come  to  the  six- 
teenth verse  of  the  twenty-second  chapter,  where  "  the 
Churches  "  are  indeed  mentioned,  but  merely  as  those 
to  whom  testimony  is  given,  and  not  as  having  any 
part  in  the  scenes  of  terror  which  shall  characterize 
"  the  things  that  must  be  after  these."  This  fact  is 
in  itself  a  most  significant  hint  of  the  removal  of 
believers  from  earth  before  the  judgments  of  the  seals, 
trumpets,  or  vials,  begin  ;  and  there  is  yet  stronger 
evidence  of  a  change  of  dispensation  in  the  fourth 
and  following  chapters. 

For  we  must  not  forget  the  difference  between  the 
previous  age  and  the  present  time  of  grace,  in  that 
God  had  then  a  visible  Kingdom  upon  earth,  which  is 


334  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

not  the  case  now.  Consequently,  during  that  period, 
judgment  was  to  be  executed  upon  those  who  broke 
His  law  :  vengeance,  as  we  so  often  find  in  the  Psalms, 
was  imprecated  upon  all  who  feared  Him  not ;  and  it 
was  right  to  destroy  His  enemies  with  the  sword. 

But  the  Spirit  descended  upon  our  Lord  in  the  form 
of  a  harmless  dove :  and,  accordingly,  we  discover 
nothing  in  His  teaching  or  example  analogous  to  the 
slaying  of  the  firstborn,  or  the  overwhelming  of  Pharaoh 
and  his  host  in  the  Red  Sea  ;  nothing  like  the  extirpa- 
tion of  the  Canaanites,  or  the  calling  down  of  fire  from 
heaven  to  consume  the  adversaries.  On  the  contrary, 
when  His  disciples  would  have  had  Him  imitate  Elijah, 
He  replied  ; — "  Ye  know  not  what  manner  of  spirit  ye 
'  are  of  For  the  Son  of  man  is  not  come  to  destroy 
men's  lives,  but  to  save  them."  '  Hence  any  desire  of 
vengeance  is  unlawful  for  believers  of  our  age  :  we  are 
required  to  love  our  enemies  ;  and  even  if  we  should 
be  persecuted  to  the  death,  have  for  our  prayers  only 
such  models  as,  "  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for  they  know 
not  what  they  do "  ;  or,  "  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to 
their  charge." 

The  Spirit  will,  however,  in  His  dove-like  form, 
ascend  with  the  translated  Church  ;  and,  therefore,  in 
the  fourth  chapter  His  influence  is  very  differently 
represented  as  "  seven  torches  of  fire  burning  before 
the  throne " — an  appearance  which  corresponds  with 
Isaiah's  prophecy  that  God  will,  in  the  times  of  the 
end,  purge  "  the  blood  of  Jerusalem  from  the  midst 
thereof  by  the  Spirit  of  judgment,  and  by  the  Spirit 
of  burning." 

And  this  change  in  the  form  of  the  Heavenly  Power 
soon   manifests   its  solemn   meaning  :  for,  in   the  sixth 


THE  PLAN  OF  THE  APOCALYPSE.  335 

chapter,  the  plagues  of  God  begin  to  trouble  the  world, 
and  the  martyrs  beneath  the  altar  are  heard  crying 
for  vengeance.  Nor  does  their  petition  seem  strange 
when,  in  the  seventh  chapter,  we  discover  that  Israelites 
are  again  the  people  of  the  Lord,  and  that  those  who 
are  sealed  for  preservation  are  of  the  Twelve  Tribes. 
And,  a  little  later,  the  commission  given  to  the  Two 
Witnesses  to  destroy  those  who  would  hurt  them,  and 
the  terrible  severity  with  which  they  exercise  their 
power,  prove  that  they  also  are  not  subject  to  the 
laws  now  in  force,  but  are  connected  with  the  dispen- 
sation of  Moses  and  Elijah. 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  plan  of  the  Apocalypse 
presents  no  serious  difficulty,  provided  that  we  remem- 
ber its  threefold  division,  and  interpret  it  by  means  of 
the  great  clue,  the  prophecy  of  the  Seventy  Weeks. 
We  may  sum  up  its  contents  as  follows. 

Chap.  i.  is  a  vision  of  the  heavenly  Sanctuary  pre- 
pared for  these  present  times. 

Chaps,  ii.  and  iii.  reveal  the  whole  career  of  the 
visible  Church,  from  the  close  of  the  Apostolic  period 
until  the  Lord  comes. 

Chaps,  iv.  and  v.  exhibit  the  preparations  in  heaven 
for  the  judgments  of  the  Last  Week. 

Chaps,  vi. — xviii.  describe  the  appalling  culmination 
of  wickedness  in  the  last  seven  years  :  they  also  fore- 
tell the  judgments  by  which  those  who  corrupt  the 
earth  shall  be  destroyed,  while  the  remnant  of  Israel 
is  being  purged  and  delivered  from  the  oppression  of 
the  world  by  such  fearful  signs,  and  wonders,  and 
plagues,  that  it  shall  no  more  be  said  ; — "  The  Lord 
liveth,  that  brought  up  the  children  of  Israel  out  of 
the  land  of  Egypt ;  but,  the  Lord  liveth,  that  brought 


336  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

up  the  children  of  Israel  from  the  land  of  the  North, 
and  from  all  the  lands  whither  He  had  driven  them." 
These  chapters  are  generally  consecutive  :  we  have 
first  the  seals,  the  seventh  of  which  includes  the  seven 
trumpets  ;  and  then  the  last  trumpet  is  developed  into 
the  seven  vials,  the  final  plagues  by  which  the  wrath 
of  God  is  completed.  Chaps,  xi. — xv.  seem  to  be  a 
parenthesis  inserted  for  the  purpose  of  supplying 
details  of  the  times  of  the  seals,  trumpets,  and  vials. 
The  seventeenth  chapter  is  partly  concerned  with  the 
previous  history  of  the  Woman  and  the  Beast,  in  order 
that  the  last  scene  in  their  joint  history  may  be  better 
understood  :  the  eighteenth  describes  the  fall  of  Baby- 
lon the  Great. 

Chaps,  xix. — xxii.  treat  of  the  appearing  of  the 
Lord,  of  the  destruction  of  His  enemies,  and  of  the 
setting  up  of  His  Kingdom.  Then  there  is  a  brief 
notice  of  a  rebellion  which  will  follow  the  loosing  of 
Satan  from  the  abyss  at  the  end  of  the  thousand  years, 
and  also  of  the  last  judgment ;  and  the  prophecy  closes 
with  a  description  of  the  heavenly  city. 

If  it  be  thus  interpreted,  the  Revelation  is  no 
longer  a  sealed  book.  Those  portions  of  it  which 
have  already  become  history  may  be  explained  without 
difficulty  ;  while  the  remainder  is,  in  general  outline 
at  least,  sufficiently  easy  of  comprehension. 

XII 

The  Epistles  to  the  Seven  Churches. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  letters  were 
primarily  intended  for  the  communities  to  which  they 
yre   inscribed,   and   deal   with   actual    circumstances    of 


THE  EPISTLES   TO    THE  SEVEN  CHURCHES.       337 

the  time.  But,  since  they  are  also  called  "  the  things 
that  are,"  as  distinguished  from  those  which  shall  be 
hereafter  in  a  different  dispensation,  it  seems  equally 
clear  that  the  Churches  addressed  must  have  been 
selected  on  account  of  their  representative  character. 
And  the  arrangement  was  probably  made  to  serve  a 
double  purpose. 

In  the  first  place,  because,  when  taken  together, 
they  exhibited  every  phase  of  Christian  society  which 
would  ever  be  found  in  the  various  parts  of  Christen- 
dom, and  so  enabled  the  Lord  to  give  comfort,  advice, 
exhortation,  warning,  and  threatening,  from  which  some- 
thing could  be  found  to  suit  any  possible  circumstance 
of  His  people  till  the  end  of  the  age. 

And  secondly,  because,  in  the  order  in  which  they 
were  given,  they  foreshadowed  the  successive  pre- 
dominant phases  through  which  the  nominal  Church 
was  to  pass,  from  the  time  when  John  saw  the  vision 
until  the  Lord  should  come. 

We  have  thus  two  reasons  for  the  selection  of  these 
particular  Churches  to  the  exclusion  of  others  of 
equal  or  greater  importance,  and  also  for  the  mystical 
number  seven,  which  here,  as  elsewhere,  signifies 
dispensational  completeness. 

At  present  we  are,  of  course,  mainly  concerned 
with  the  Epistles  as  prophetically  foreshadowing  the 
great  changes  which  should  succeed  each  other  in 
the  condition  of  the  visible  Church.  This  they  do  in 
a  striking  manner  ;  and,  indeed,  the  mere  names  of 
the  Churches,  when  their  meaning  is  understood, 
suggest  seven  ecclesiastical  epochs.  These  names  we 
now  subjoin,  before  going  into  details  in  regard  to 
the  Eoistles  themselves,  adding  their  significations,  and 

22 


338  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

the  periods  of  Church  history  in  which  they  seem  to 
find  their  fulfilment. 

Ephesus  =  relaxation.  The  waning  of  love  at  the 
close  of  the  apostolic  period. 

Smyrna  =  myrrh,  bitterness.     The  Ten  Persecutions. 

Pergamos  =  a  tower.  Earthly  greatness  of  the 
Church  from  the  accession  of  Constantine. 

Thyatira  =  she  that  is  unwearied  in  sacrifices.  The 
Church  of  Rome  with  her  perpetually  repeated  sacri- 
fice of  the  mass. 

Sardis  =  renovation.  The  results  of  the  Reforma- 
tion. 

Philadelphia  =  brotherly  love.  The  gathering  out 
of  those  who  think  the  love  of  Christ  a  stronger  bond 
of  union  than  any  ties  of  sect,  and  who  will  be  caught 
up  to  meet  Him  when  He  comes. 

Laodicea  =  the  judgment  of  the  people,  the  Church 
in  which  the  people  constitute  themselves  judges  of 
what  is  right.  The  self-confident  body  which  goes 
its  own  way,  and  is  thoroughly  satisfied  with  it,  but 
is  rejected  of  the  Lord. 

Thus  the  bare  names  of  the  Churches  furnish  a 
sketch  of  the  history  of  Christendom  until  the  end  of 
the  age  ;  and  the  outline,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  is 
filled  in  by  the  Epistles  themselves.  Nor  is  it  difficult 
to  understand  why  the  Lord  chose  so  peculiar  a  form 
for  His  revelation.  For  while  these  chapters  have  been 
at  all  times  most  useful  for  reproof,  correction,  instruc- 
tion, or  encouragement,  their  prophetic  import  could 
scarcely  have  been  discovered,  or  even  suspected, 
until  they  were  all  but  fulfilled.  And  so  they  would 
never,  by  suggesting  events  that  must  first  happen, 
cause   the   Church  to    say,  "  My   Lord    delayeth    His 


EPHESUS.  339 

coming."  And,  on  the  other  hand,  when,  at  the  time 
of  the  end,  the  Spirit  should  unveil  their  hidden 
meaning,  it  would  bring  deep  conviction  of  the 
nearness  of  the  advent  to  every  thoughtful  and  rever- 
ent mind.^ 

XIII. 

Ephesus. 

The  believers  in  Ephesus  had,  as  a  Church,  enjoyed 
the  greatest  privileges  ;  and  stirred  by  the  ministry  of 
Paul,  Apollos,  Aquila  and  Priscilla,  Timothy,  Tychicus, 
and  others,  they  had  so  far  advanced  in  holiness  and 
the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  Paul,  in 
his  Epistle  to  them,  is  able  to  speak  in  terms  of  high 
commendation.  But  the  letter  which  we  are  now  to 
consider  was  dictated  some  thirty  years  later,  and 
then  the  symptoms  of  a  deadly  decay  were  just  begin- 
ning to  appear.  Another  generation  had  arisen,  still 
holding  fast  the  tradition  of  earnest  devotion  to  Christ, 
but   having   lost   much   of  the   motive   power   of  that 

'  We  must  not  forget  that  in  this  prophecy,  as  in  that  of  the 
Seven  Parables,  a  phase  may  be  continued,  though  with  con- 
tracted area^  far  be3'ond  the  time  of  its  predominance,  even, 
indeed,  until  the  Lord's  return.  There  is  a  plain  intimation  that 
this  will  be  the  case  with  Pergamos — for  the  Lord  has  not  yet 
fought  against  the  Balaamites  with  the  sword  of  His  mouth  ; 
with  Thyatira — for  the  remnant  are  bidden  to  hold  that  fast  which 
they  have  until  He  come;  with  Sardis — for  she  is  told  that,  unless 
she  watches,  He  will  come  upon  her  as  a  thief ;  and  with  Phila- 
delphia— for  He  promises  her  that  He  is  coming  quickly,  and 
charges  her  to  hold  fast  that  which  she  has,  that  no  one  take 
her  crown.  Indeed,  the  nominal  Church  will,  doubtless,  in  ils 
last  as  in  its  first  days  embrace  communities  which,  taken  to- 
gether, will  exhibit  all  the  characteristics  mentioned  by  Christ ; 
so  that  each  of  these  Epistles  will  retain  its  directly  practical 
value  until  the  end.  But  at  that  time  the  prevailing  phase  v/ill 
be  tl  e  Laodicean. 


340  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

devotion.  And  so  this  Church,  with  its  suggestive 
name  of  Ephesus,  or  "  relaxation,"^  could  aptly  repre- 
sent the  waning  of  love  at  the  close  of  apostolic  times. 

To  the  Ephesians,  then,  the  Lord  presents  Himself 
as  the  One  Who  holds  in  full  control  the  seven  angels 
of  the  Churches,  and  walks  continually  in  the  midst 
of  the  lamps  :  for  believers  who  had  lost  their  first 
love  were  likely  to  have  forgotten  these  solemn  facts. 
The  result  of  His  '  ceaseless  inspection  is,  that  He 
knows,  not  merely  every  word  and  deed,  but  even 
every  thought  of  the  Church  ;  and,  most  graciously. 
He  first  mentions  what  is  deserving  of  praise. 

Their  works  and  labour  and  patience,  in  regard  to 
all  who  were  within  the  pale  of  the  professing  body, 
have  not  escaped  His  notice.  He  has  observed  their 
hatred  of  that  which  is  evil,  and  their  carefulness  in 
testing  and  detecting  the  false  apostles  of  whom  they 
had  been  forewarned.^  He  has  seen,  too,  their  attitude 
towards  them  that  are  without,  their  steady  patience 
in  endeavouring  to  lead  them  to  Him,  and  their  will- 
ingness to  bear  persecution  for  His  sake  ;  and  He  has 
marked  that,  spite  of  all  hindrance  and  opposition, 
they  have  not  grown  weary  in  well-doing. 

He  has,  therefore,  no  complaint  to  make  in  regard 
to  doctrine  or  work.  There  is  both  orthodoxy  and 
energy,  and,  moreover,  a  praiseworthy  determination 
to  be  separate  from  evil.  And  yet  all  this  cannot 
avail.  Upon  the  seemingly  perfect  Church  there  is 
a  slowly-spreading  plague-spot  which  causes  Him 
suddenly   to   change   His   tone.     The    praise    He    has 

'  "Ecjieaos  from  e(f)iT]fj.i,  which  often  means  "to  let  go,"  or,  "loosen 
the  rein." 

'  Acts  XX.  28-30. 


EPHESUS.  341 

given  is  deserved,  but  He  adds  ; — "  Nevertheless,  I 
have^  af^ainst  thee  that  thou  hast  left  thy  first  love." 
The  teaching,  labour,  and  zeal,  of  Ephesus  were  blame- 
less ;  but  her  love  was  waxing  cold,  and,  therefore, 
she  was  fast  becoming  as  sounding  brass  or  a  clanging 
cymbal. 

But  the  Lord  would  not  abandon  her  to  ruin.  He 
calls  upon  her  to  remember  ;  to  look  back  upon  what 
she  was,  that  she  may  mourn  for  what  she  is,  and  cry, 
"  Oh  that  I  were  as  in  months  past ! "  For,  after 
all,  this  Church,  which  to  the  eyes  of  men  seemed 
perfect  and  wanting  in  nothing,  is  found  to  be 
"  fallen." 

A  threat  follows.  Unless  Ephesus  repents,  and 
does  the  first  works — not  merely  feels  the  first  feelings, 
but  does  the  works  which  should  spring  from  them — 
the  High  Priest  will  remove  her  candlestick  :  she  shall 
be  His  witness  no  longer.  This  chastisement  does  not 
involve  everlasting  destruction,  but  only  the  withdrawal 
of  power  to  bear  effectual  testimony.  Many  an  un- 
faithful and  worldly-minded  believer  is  smitten  by  it, 
and  walks  the  earth  deprived  of  all  power  of  speaking 
for  his  Saviour.  He  may  utter  words,  but  they  carry 
no  weight :  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  does  not  accom- 
pany them.  For  the  sin  of  his  covetousness,  for  his 
selfishness,  and  because  his  soul  cleaves  to  the  dust  of 
earth,  he  has  been  deprived  of  the  gifts  which  he 
abused  :  he  is  losing  the  precious  seed-time  of  life  : 
there  is  no  reward  laid  up  in  the  heavens  for  him. 
Such  a  one  can  scarcely  hope  to  have  boldness  in  the 

'  The  "  somewhat  "  of  the  Authorized  Version  is  not  found  in 
the  Greek,  and  its  introduction  conceals  the  severity  of  the 
reproof. 


342  THE  CHURCH  OF   GOD. 

Day  of  Judgment,  when  he  stands  before  the  Throne 
of  Christ  to  give  an  account  of  the  things  done  in  the 
body :  he  must  expect  to  suffer  loss,  and  to  be  saved 
only  "so  as  through  fire." 

So  searchingly  has  the  Lord  used  His  eyes  of  flame  ; 
and  in  laying  bare  the  condition  of  Ephesus,  He  reveals 
to  us  the  earliest  symptom  of  decline  which  appeared 
in  the  universal  Church,  the  wane  of  love.  But  what 
depths  of  His  tenderness  are  disclosed  by  this  Epistle  ! 
He  first  speaks  at  length  of  those  things  which  He 
could  commend  ;  and  then,  after  a  very  few  words 
of  censure,  again  reverts  to  praise.  Yet  He  does 
rebuke  :  He  will  not  overlook  our  faults  for  the  sake 
of  our  virtues. 

The  last  thing  for  which  Ephesus  may  be  praised 
is  that  she  hates  the  deeds  of  the  Nicolaitans,  which 
Christ  also  hates.  Possibly  those  to  whom  reference 
is  made  were  a  sect  of  the  day  in  Ephesus ;  yet 
nothing  is  known  of  their  history,  all  notices  in  early 
writers  being  manifest  conjectures  framed  to  explain 
our  Lord's  allusion.  But,  whatever  they  may  have 
been  in  the  literal  Ephesus,  it  is  clear  that  something 
more  than  an  unknown  party  or  sect  is  indicated  in 
a  great  prediction  of  the  whole  Church.  And  so,  in 
the  prophetic  interpretation  of  the  Epistle,  the  name 
Nicolaitan  is  doubtless  typical — like  Jezebel,  Sodom, 
and  Egypt,  in  other  parts  of  the  Apocalypse — rather 
than  historical.  It  signifies  "  subduers  of  the  laity," 
or  "people,"-^  and  its  introduction  seems   to   intimate 

'  NiKoXaiTOL,  from  viKao)  "to  conquer,"  "overpower,"  and  Xa6s 
"people."  From  the  latter  word  comes  the  English  term  "laity," 
through  the  adj.  XaiVos.  The  name  Balaam,  which  is  brought 
into  connection  with  the  Nicolaitans  in  the  Epistle  to  Pergamos, 


EPHESUS  343 

that  the  apostolic  arrangements  for  the  government 
of  the  Churches  were  beginning  to  be  abused  ;  that 
some  were  already  striving  to  act  as  lords  over  the 
charge  allotted  to  them,  endeavouring  to  establish  a 
hierarchy,  a  clerical  caste  which  should  be  distinguished 
from  and  superior  to  the  great  body  of  believers.  No 
authority  for  such  a  scheme  could  be  found  in  the 
New  Testament,  and  those  who  were  guided  by  the 
word  and  Spirit  of  God  must  have  foreseen  how 
disastrous  its  results  would  be.  For,  if  successful,  it 
would  turn  away  the  eyes  of  the  Church  from  her 
great  High  Priest  to  human  leaders  :  it  would  quickly 
arouse  party  feelings,  cause  schisms,  and  tend  to 
secularize  that  which  should  be  purely  spiritual :  and 
it  would  thus  soften,  and  finally  obliterate,  the  line 
of  demarcation  between  the  Church  and  the  world,  and 
induce  the  former  to  use  the  tactics,  and  desire  the 
aid,  of  the  latter. 

Paul  anticipated  Nicolaitanism  in  his  farewell 
address  to  the  Ephesian  elders,  when  he  said  ; — "  For 
I  know  this,  that,  after  my  departing,  shall  grievous 
wolves  enter  in  among  you,  not  sparing  the  flock. 
Also  of  your  own  selves  shall  men  arise,  speaking 
perverse  things,  to  draw  away  the  disciples  after 
them."^  And  these  men,  since  the  Ephesian  Church 
had  not  yet  yielded  to  them,  are  probably  to  be 
identified  with  those  who  said  they  were  apostles,  but 
upon  trial  were  detected  and  found  to  be  liars.^ 

Peter    also    throws    out   a    hint   that    the   evil   was 

has  a  still  stronger  meaning,  and  signifies  ''  devourer  of  the 
people." 

'  Acts  XX.  2<^,  30. 

^  Rev.  ii.  2. 


344  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

spreading  in  other  Churches,  when  he  entreats  the 
elders  to  whom  he  is  writing  not  to  exercise  the 
oversight  of  their  flocks  as  if  they  were  lords  over  the 
charge  allotted  to  them.^  And  John  refers  to  a  par- 
ticular case,  and  speaks  of  one  Diotrephes,  who  loved 
to  have  the  pre-eminence,  and  was  casting  out  of  the 
Church  those  who  would  not  submit  to  him.^ 

But  all  this  mischief  had  been  foreseen  and  repro- 
bated by  the  Saviour  Himself  in  the  memorable 
words  ; — "  Ye  know  that  the  rulers  of  the  Gentiles 
lord  it  over  them,  and  their  great  ones  exercise 
authority  over  them.  Not  so  shall  it  be  among  you  : 
but  whosoever  would  become  great  among  you  shall 
be  your  minister  ;  and  whosoever  would  be  first  among 
you  shall  be  your  servant."  ^ 

The  significant  manner  in  which  the  Lord  notes 
the  rejection,  for  the  time,  of  the  Nicolaitans  by 
Ephesus,  coupled  with  the  emphatic  addition  of  the 
words,  "  which  I  also  hate,"  is,  perhaps,  a  hint  that, 
although  the  Church  was  still  standing  in  that  particu- 
lar, she  had  need  to  take  heed  lest  she  should  fall. 
For  if  any  Church  is  losing  its  love  to  Christ,  how  can 
it  avoid  becoming  a  mere  earthly  organization  under 
human   leaders  .-' 

Some  twelve  years  after  the  dictation  of  this  letter, 
Ignatius  addressed  an  epistle  to  the  Ephesians  which 
contains  unmistakable  evidence  that  a  hierarchy  was 
then  being  established  among  them.  Ignatius  supports 
it,  and  gives  the  most  extravagant  injunctions  respect- 
ing obedience  to  the  bishop,  which  culminate  in  the 
words  ; — "  It  is  manifest,  therefore,  that  we  ought  to 
look  upon  the  bishop  even  as  we  would  look  upon 
'   I  Pet.  V.  2,  3.         '^  3  John  9,  10.         ^  Matt.  xx.  25-27. 


EPHESUS.  345 

the  Lord  Himself."^  The  subject  appears  to  have 
been  attracting  general  attention  at  the  time  ;  for 
Ignatius  often  alludes  to  it,  and  in  his  Epistle  to  the 
Magnesians,  allows  himself  to  say  ; — "  As,  therefore, 
the  Lord  does  nothing  without  the  Father — '  For  I 
can,'  He  says,  '  of  Mine  Own  Self  do  nothing  ' — so  also 
do  ye  nothing  without  the  bishop  ;  whether  ye  be 
presbyters,  or  deacons,  or  laymen  ? "  ^ 

Thus,  then,  the  signs  of  decadence  among  professing 
Christians  of  the  first  age  were  the  waning  of  deep 
and  heartfelt  love  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  a  consequent 
discontent  with  Him  as  the  only  Head  of  His  body 
the  Church — a  feeling  similar,  perhaps,  to  that  which 
prompted  the  Israelites  to  demand  a  king  who  should 
go  before  them.  And  so  men  began  to  form  human 
organizations,  which,  whatever  their  nominal  sove- 
reignty, soon  proved  by  their  deeds  that  they  owed 
allegiance,  not  to  Christ,  but  to  His  adversary,  the 
Prince  of  this  World. 

In  the  last  portion  of  the   Epistle,  the  promise  to 

'  Ignat.  Ad.  Epii.  vi. 

^  Ignat.  Ad.  Magn.  vii.  Ignatius  is  the  first  writer  who  uses 
the  term  "bishop  "  in  the  modern,  rather  than  in  the  apostolic, 
sense.  For  the  apostles  instituted  only  two  orders  of  ministers — 
elders,  or  presbyters,  and  deacons  :  but  as  soon  as  Churches 
began  to  be  organized  among  the  Hellenists,  the  Greek  teim 
"bishop"  (eVio-KOTroy — that  is,  "overseer")  was  frequently  sub- 
stituted for  "elder."  The  two  words  were,  however,  strictly 
synonymous,  as  we  may  see  by  examining  the  following  pas- 
sages ; — Acts  XX.  17  and  28;  Titus  i.  5-7;  i  Peter  v.  i,  2.  In 
Phil.  i.  I,  Paul  salutes  the  bishops  and  deacons  :  he  would  not 
have  left  out  the  presbyters  if  they  had  been  another  order.  So, 
in  I  Tim.  iii.  1-7,  he  speaks  of  bishops,  and  then,  in  vv.  8-13, 
goes  on  at  once  to  deacons.  Clement  of  Rome  uses  bishop  and 
presbyter  as  interchangeable  terms,  and  the  recently  discovered 
"  Teaching  of  the  Apostles"  contains  the  command; — "Appoint, 
therefore,  for  yourselves  bishops  and  deacons  worthy  of  the 
Lord." 


346  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

the  overcomer,  the  Lord  addresses  those  individual 
members  of  the  Church  who  are  so  guided  by  the 
Spirit  that  they  are  able  to  discern  even  the  deep 
things  of  God.  There  is  a  similar  promise  at  the 
close  of  each  of  the  other  letters,  and  they  are  all 
drawn  from  the  Old  Testament,  and  arranged  in 
historical  order.  And  so,  in  this  first  case,  the  reward 
offered  is  the  Tree  of  Life,  which  is  in  the  midst  of 
the  Paradise  of  God. 

The  allusion  is  singularly  appropriate.  The  parents 
of  our  race  were  created  in  innocency,  and  should 
have  eaten  of  the  Tree  of  Life  ;  but  were  commanded 
by  God  not  to  touch  the  Tree  of  the  knowledge  of 
Good  and  Evil.  Then  another  being,  the  Tempter, 
appeared  upon  the  scene,  and  induced  them  to  break 
God's  commandment  on  the  ground  of  expediency. 

Thus  they  turned  from  Jehovah  and  obeyed  Satan  : 
they  ate  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  and  were,  consequently, 
driven  out  of  the  garden,  and  far  away  from  the  Tree 
which  would  have  made  them  live  for  ever. 

So,  in  these  early  days  of  the  Church,  Satan  craftily 
enticed  her  aside  from  her  Lord  ;  and,  as  her  love 
towards  Him  began  to  wax  cold,  suggested  that  His 
spiritual  presence  was  no  sufficient  connecting  bond 
for  the  assemblies  of  His  people  upon  earth,  and  that 
believers  must,  therefore,  endeavour  to  weld  themselves 
into  societies  by  adopting  such  forms  of  government 
as  are  usual  in  the  world. 

To  these  seductions  she  yielded,  and,  despising  the 
wisdom  which  is  from  above,  chose  rather  to  be  led 
by  that  which  is  earthly,  soulish,  and  demon-like.  So 
her  early  purity  became  as  the  morning  dew ;  she  was 
quickly,    as    a    corporate    society,    thrust    out    of    the 


SMYRNA.  347 

Heavenly  places  into  which  she  had  been  called  to  sit 
with  Christ :  her  organization  began  more  and  more 
nearly  to  resemble  those  of  this  world  :  and  she  was 
soon  fain,  by  minding  earthly  things,  to  seek  consola- 
tion for  the  loss  of  that  spiritual  power  which  now 
remained  only  with  some  of  her  individual  members, 

XIV. 

Smyrna. 

We  have  seen  that  in  the  first,  or  Ephesian  period, 
the  Church  was  losing  the  fervour  of  her  love  to  the 
Lord  Jesus.  In  the  second,  we  may  discern  the  cor- 
rection of  this  declension,  the  severe  chastening  which 
followed  closely  upon  the  early  symptoms  of  corrup- 
tion. And  this  is  foreshadowed  in  the  Epistle  to 
Smyrna,  the  very  name  of  which  is  deeply  suggestive  ■} 
for  its  root-meaning  is  "  bitterness ; "  and  it  then 
comes  to  signify  "  myrrh,"  an  unguent  commonly  used 
in  connection  with  death.^  The  love  of  the  Church 
for  Christ  is  diminishing,  therefore  the  world  which 
is  attracting  her  must  be  made  bitter  :  she  must  be 
cast  into  affliction  and  suffering  even  unto  death. 
But  the  loving  sympathy  of  the  Lord  shines  forth 
in  this  painful  crisis.  He  stayeth  His  rough  wind  in 
the  day  of  the  East  wind,  and  has  no  censure  for  the 
persecuted  Church,  but  only  gracious  words  of  praise 
and  encouragement,  and  a  tender  exhortation  to  His 
own  to  be  faithful  unto  the  end,  that  He  may  give 
them  a  crown   of  life. 

'  ^fxvpva  is  used  for  fjLvppa — that  is,  myrrh.  It  is  connected  with 
a  Hebrew  root  which  shows  that  "bitterness"  is  its  primary 
meaning. 

-  John  xix.  39. 


348  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

He  describes  Himself  to  them  as  the  First  and  the 
Last  :  and  how  comforting  is  the  thought  conveyed 
by  this  title  to  those  who  are  suffering  and  depressed. 
For  at  times,  when  hope  has  been  long  deferred,  it 
seems  to  sickening  faith  as  if  God  had  departed  from 
our  world,  and  none  were  left  to  check  the  cruel 
power  of  the  enemy.  But  it  is  not  so  :  whatever 
may  happen  in  the  meanwhile,  He  that  was  the 
First,  and  gave  the  promises,  will  also  appear  with 
irresistible  power  as  the  Last  to  see  that  they  fail 
not  in  the  very  least  particular.  So  that  every  faint- 
ing believer  may  revive  himself  with  the  glorious — 
though  in  our  version  somewhat  obscure — words  of 
Job  ; — "  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  that 
He  shall  arise  as  the  Last  One  over  the  dust  of  my 
grave." 

But  the  Lord  also  reminds  His  troubled  people  that 
He  is  the  One  "  Which  was  dead  and  lived  again." 
"When  He  putteth  forth  His  own  sheep.  He  goeth 
before  them."  All  their  sufferings  He  has  endured  in 
His  own  person  ;  therefore.  He  knows  how  to  succour 
them  :  His  path  of  death  had  led  to  everlasting  life  ; 
and  as  it  had  been  with  Him,  so  should  it  be  with  His 
faithful  disciples. 

With  the  conditions  and  trials  of  this  Church  also 
the  High  Priest  is  fully  acquainted  :  He  has  marked 
her  tribulation,  and  the  patience  with  which  she 
endured  it.  Whenever  affliction  has  altogether  ceased, 
it  is  to  us  much  as  waters  that  have  flowed  by  :  but 
He  remembers  in  what  spirit  we  bore  it,  and  will  by  no 
means  forget  our  trustfulness,  if  we  have  been  enabled 
to  commit  ourselves  into  His  hand  as  unto  a  faithful 
Creator, 


SMYRNA.  349 

The  believers  in  Smyrna  were  bowed  down  by 
oppression,  and  were  also  in  great  poverty ;  but  they 
had  taken  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  their  goods.  And 
the  Lord  declares  that  in  the  meanwhile  their  treasure 
in  heaven  has  been  augmenting,  and  that  they  will 
presently  find  themselves  exceedingly  rich,  and  a 
notable  example  of  the  word  ; — "  There  is  that  scat- 
tereth,  and  yet  increaseth." 

But  He  not  only  knows  the  afflictions  of  His  people, 
and  puts  all  their  tears  into  His  bottle :  He  also  sees 
the  cruelty  and  blasphemy  of  their  oppressors.  In  the 
literal  application  of  the  Epistle,  those  "  which  say  they 
are  Jews,  and  are  not,"  were  probably  actual  Jews 
according  to  the  flesh,  who  in  early  times  were  always 
on  the  side  of  the  enemies  of  the  Church.  And  it  is 
worthy  of  notice  that,  in  the  account  of  Polycarp's 
death  at  Smyrna,  certain  Jews  are  mentioned  as  being 
active  in  providing  the  wood  for  his  martyrdom.  It 
may  have  been  one  of  the  peculiar  trials  of  believers 
in  those  days  to  find  the  children  of  Abraham  in- 
variably ranged  with  the  Heathen  against  them. 
Satan  may  have  plagued  many  with  the  suggestion  ; 
— "  Can  you  possibly  be  right .-'  The  chosen  people 
themselves  are  opposed  to  you,  those  to  whom  the 
oracles  of  God  were  committed.  The  nation  which 
for  so  many  centuries  was  set  forth  by  God  as  His 
witness  upon  earth,  and  from  which  you  confess  that 
your  Messiah  sprang,  declares  that  you  are  deceived." 
But  the  Lord  here  intimates  that  those  who  were 
once  His  people  are  no  longer  so,  but  have  become  a 
synagogue  of  Satan  ;  just  as  He  had  previously  told 
them  to  their  faces ; — "  Ye  are  of  your  father  the 
Devil." 


350  THE  CHURCH  OJP  GOD. 

In  the  prophetic  application  of  the  Epistle,  those 
"which  say  they  are  Jews,  and  are  not,"  represent  the 
multitude  of  false  teachers  who  at  this  time  entered 
the  Church,  and  of  whom  we  have  already  spoken  in 
our  interpretation  of  the  Parable  of  the  Tares.  Many 
of  the  so-called  Fathers  were  among  them  ;  and  they 
strove,  under  a  false  pretext  of  Old  Testament  authority, 
to  introduce  the  Babylonian  priestcraft.  Their  plan 
was  to  magnify  the  importance  of  outward  forms,  and 
then  to  affirm  that  none  but  initiated  priests  could 
rightly  administer  them,  a  doctrine  which  the  Heathen 
would  well  understand.  And  so,  Baptism  and  the 
Lord's  Supper  were  conveniently  modified  ;  and  then, 
although  they  are  but  seldom  mentioned  in  the  New 
Testament,  they  were  made  the  foundation  of  the  false 
Christianity. 

But  the  Church  in  Smyrna  was  not  only  suffering 
from  the  curses  and  revilings  of  Jews,  it  had  also 
known  what  it  was  to  be  despitefully  used  and  perse- 
cuted, and  there  were  yet  worse  troubles  to  come. 
Satan  was  about  to  cast  some  of  the  disciples  into 
prison,  and  would  even  move  his  agents  to  slay  them. 
But  while  the  Adversary  would  do  this  for  their  harm, 
God  would  turn  it  into  good  :  it  should  prove  to  be 
that  trial  of  their  faith  and  patience  which,  after  it  had 
finished  its  work,  should  leave  them  perfect  and  entire, 
wanting  nothing.  And  although  men  might  take 
away  their  lives,  the  Lord  would  turn  the  shadow  of 
death  into  a  glorious  and  everlasting  morning.  Ten 
days  were  doubtless  the  exact  time  of  the  hottest 
persecution  in  the  case  of  the  literal  Smyrna  :  in  the 
prophetic  interpretation  we  may,  probably,  find  a 
reference  to  the   ten    great   persecutions  which   began 


SMiRNA.  351 

with  Nero's  cruelties  at  the  close  of  the  apostolic 
times. 

The  promise  with  which  this  Epistle  concludes  is 
pregnant  with  meaning.  There  is  an  evident  allusion 
in  the  words,  "  He  that  overcometh  shall  not  be  hurt 
of  the  second  death,"  to  the  entrance  of  death  into 
the  world,  after  the  revolving  flame  had  cut  off  all 
access  to  the  Tree  of  Life.  Now  of  the  first  martyr, 
Abel,  we  are  told  that  by  faith  he  offered  a  more 
excellent  sacrifice  than  Cain,  and  that  God  testified 
to  his  righteousness  by  accepting  him,  while  He 
rejected  his  brother.^  But  the  latter  "was  of  that 
Wicked  One  "  :  his  envy  was  excited,  and  he  slew  Abel, 
because  his  own  works  were  evil  and  his  brother's 
righteous.^  This  was  the  first  outburst  of  enmity  from 
the  serpent's  seed,  and  from  that  time  until  now,  he 
that  is  born  of  the  flesh  has  ever  persecuted  him  that 
is  born  of  the  Spirit.  It  was  not  long  before  the 
Church  discovered  this  truth,  and  she  had  bitter  expe- 
rience of  it  in  the  Ten  Persecutions. 

But  she  is  comforted  with  the  promise  that,  if  she 
remains  faithful,  she  shall  suffer  nothing  worse  than 
the  first  death,  and  shall  never  be  hurt  of  the  second, 
which  is  the  Lake  of  Fire  and  Brimstone.^  And  so 
the  Lord  here  repeats  in  another  form  the  solemn 
warning  ; — "  And  I  say  unto  you  My  friends,  Be  not 
afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  have 
no  more  that  they  can  do.  But  I  will  warn  you 
Whom  ye  shall  fear  :  Fear  Him  Which  after  He  hath 
killed  hath  power  to  cast  into  Hell ;  yea,  I  say  unto 
you,  Fear  Him."^ 

'  Heb.  xi.  4.  3  Rev.  xxi.  8. 

^  I  John  iii.  12.  *  Luke  xii.  4,  5. 


352  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD 

XV. 

Pergamos. 

In  examining  the  third  Epistle,  we  shall  find  it 
expedient  to  consider  first  its  practical  bearing  as 
addressed  to  the  literal  Pergamos,^  in  order  that  we 
may  the  more  clearly  understand  its  prophetic  import. 

To  this  Church  the  Lord  is  "  He  that  hath  the  sharp 
two-edged  sword."  Against  Smyrna  the  sword  of  man 
had  been  lifted  up  :  but  now  the  sword  of  the  Lord 
is  drawn,  and  He  stands  confronting  those  who  are 
moving  toward  the  world,  even  as  His  angel  stood 
in  the  way  of  Balaam. 

Pergamos,  as  we  have  already  mentioned,  had  once 
been  the  centre  of  Paganism,  and  still  retained  much 
of  its  prestige.  It  was  said  to  be  more  devoted  to 
the  worship  of  the  deities  than  any  other  city  of 
Asia,  Avhich  is  no  marvel  when  we  remember  how  long 
it  had  been  the  head-quarters  of  the  Chaldean  priest- 
king.  "  It  was,"  says  Mr.  Blakesley,  "a  sort  of  union 
of  a  Pagan  cathedral  city,  a  university  town,  and  a 
royal  residence  embellished,  during  a  succession  of 
years,  by  kings  who  had  a  passion  for  expenditure 
and  ample  means  of  gratifying  it."  Its  inhabitants 
were  styled  veojKopoL  Trpu)roL  ttJ^  'Acrtas,  a  title  which 
it  is  difficult  to  translate,  but  which  indicated  that  they 
were  entrusted  with  the  maintenance  of  some  important 
religious   worship   on    behalf  of  Asia.      What  kind  of 

'  This  name  would  be  more  correctly  written  "  Pergamum  '  ' 
but  we  have  not  altered  the  customary  form.     It  is  connected 
with  TTvpyos,  "  a  tower.''     Hence  nepya^os,  or  the  plural  Uepynfia, 
was  the  name  of  the  citadel  of  Troy,  and  was  afterwards  used 
for  any  citadel 


PEKGAMOS.  353 

worship  it  was,  we  have  no  means  for  determining ; 
probably  it  was  connected  with  the  history  which  we 
have  already  sketched.  But,  however  this  may  be, 
the  Bible  does  not  leave  us  in  uncertainty  as  to  the 
supreme  importance  of  Pergamos  to  Heathendom,  since 
it  reveals  the  fact  that  Satan's  throne  was  still  there. 
In  such  a  city  outbursts  of  fanatical  zeal  would  be 
likely  to  occur,  and  the  Epistle  intimates  that  the 
followers  of  Christ  had  recently  suffered  from  them. 
Satan  had  presented  himself  as  a  roaring  lion  :  he 
had  torn  some  of  the  Pergamean  believers,  and  driven 
others  into  great  distress  ;  but  had  effected  nothing. 
The  Church  had  held  fast  the  name  of  her  Lord,  and 
would  not  deny  His  faith. 

And  now  the  Adversary  was  changing  his  tactics  : 
he  had  lulled  the  storm  of  persecution,  and  was  work- 
ing by  means  of  "  false  apostles,  deceitful  workers, 
fashioning  themselves  into  apostles  of  Christ."  Nay, 
he  was  fashioning  himself  into  an  angel  of  light,  and 
using  seductive  flatteries ;  so  that  the  Church  which 
could  brave  his  fury  was  yielding  to  his  fascinations. 
She  had  ceased  to  cast  out  the  false  teachers,  and 
they  were  rapidly  bridging  the  chasm  between  herself 
and  the  world. 

And  this  is  the  charge  which  the  Lord  had  to  bring 
against  the  Pergameans,  though  He  would  not  utter 
it  until  He  had  first  commended  their  faithfulness  in 
the  hour  of  trial.  But  ease  and  prosperity  were  now 
rendering  them  so  careless  that  they  were  allowing  the 
doctrine  of  the  son  of  Beor  to  prevail  among  them,  and 
did  not  eject  those  who  held  it.  This  was  a  symptom 
of  fearful  declension  :  for  Balaam,  though  called  of  God  ■ 
to  be  a  prophet,  had  taught  Balak,  one  of  the  kings  of 

23 


354  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

this  world,  how  to  cast  a  stumbling-block  before  the 
children  of  Israel,  by  inducing  them  to  eat  things 
sacrificed  to  idols,  and  to  commit  fornication.  And 
that  which  had  been  done  to  the  mischief  of  Israel 
was  now  being  repeated  in  order  to  effect  the  ruin  of 
the  Church  at  Pergamos. 

The  first  part  of  Balaam's  story  is  too  well  known  to 
need  repetition  :  it  is  sufficiently  clear  that,  had  he 
been  permitted,  he  would  have  been  willing,  for  the 
sake  of  gain,  to  abuse  the  powers  entrusted  to  him, 
and  to  curse  the  people  of  God.  In  this,  however,  he 
was  checked  by  the  interposition  of  the  Almighty  ;  but 
even  while  the  Divine  influence  was  upon  him,  he 
continually  wavered,  and,  as  soon  as  it  was  withdrawn, 
appears  to  have  given  the  rein  to  his  covetousness. 
Through  his  greed  for  the  wages  of  the  Gentile  king, 
he  became  anxious  to  assist  him  by  reducing  Israel  to 
the  level  of  Midian,  and  with  this  object  tendered  the 
fiendish  advice,  that  all  open  resistance  to  the  pilgrim- 
nation  should  be  waived,  that  the  hand  of  friendship 
should  be  extended  to  them,  and  the  pleasures  of  sin 
set  before  them.  If  by  such  means  they  could  be 
drawn  into  idolatrous  abominations,  there  would  no 
longer  be  any  reason  why  the  special  favour  of  God 
should  rest  upon  them,  or  why  He  should  destroy  the 
kingdoms  of  the  world  for  their  sake. 

This  guileful  plan  was  speedily  carried  out,  and  idol 
festivals,  with  all  their  sensual  attractions,  were  held 
within  easy  distance  of  the  camp  in  the  wilderness. 
The  curiosity  of  the  Israelites  was  excited  :  the  feeling 
which  had  prompted  them  to  eat  and  drink  and  play 
before  the  calf  was  again  aroused.  Many  of  them  went 
to  see  the  sight  ;  and,  perhaps  to  their  surprise,  were 


PERGAMOS.  355 

received  as  friends  by  the  Midianites,  and  invited  to 
join  the  revel.  Surely  they  could  do  so — ^just  as  they 
had  often  been  present  at  the  orgies  of  Egypt — and 
yet  neither  worship  Baal  nor  provoke  Jehovah.  And, 
after  all,  Jehovah  and  Baal  were  but  different  names 
for  the  same  Supreme  Being,  and  the  Midianites  were 
serving  Him  according  to  their  light.  By  such  thoughts, 
it  may  be,  Israel  was  enticed  within  the  circle  of 
Heathen  abominations,  and  entered  the  fatal  precincts 
surrounded — as  the  people  of  God  always  are,  if  they 
wilfully  approach  temptation — by  hosts  of  evil  spirits 
watching  for  an  opportunity  of  hurling  them  over  the 
precipice  as  soon  as  they  could  see  them  near  the 
brink.  Perhaps,  for  a  short  while,  they  thought  they 
would  only  look  on  ;  but  the  allurements  of  sin  quickly 
overcame  them  :  they  were  soon  feasting  at  the  rich 
table  of  Baal,  and  becoming  fascinated  with  the  seduc- 
tions of  the  daughters  of  Moab.  Meanwhile,  the  Lord 
in  the  heavens  was  whetting  His  glittering  sword, 
bending  His  bow,  and  preparing  His  arrows  upon  the 
string  against  His  own  rebellious  people. 

This  history  seems  to  have  been  repeated  at  Per- 
gamos  ;  for,  after  a  bitter  persecution,  the  Pagans  were 
changing  their  tactics,  and  endeavouring  under  a 
friendly  guise,  and  by  the  attractive  sensuality  of  their 
worship,  to  luTe  away  those  believers  whom  they  had 
failed  to  move  by  fear.  And,  doubtless,  the  Gnostics, 
unwearying  mediators  between  Paganism  and  a  careless 
Christianity,  had  crept  in  among  the  disciples,  and 
were  so  bewildering  them  by  skilful  blendings  and 
explanations,  that  they  were  gradually  yielding,  and 
allowing  themselves  to  be  drawn  into  the  snare.  Their 
own  leaders,  too,  already  accustomed  to  make  a  selfish 


356  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

use  of  their  influence,  were  beginning,  like  Balaam,  to 
run  greedily  after  the  gain  which  could  be  secured  by 
conciliating  the  great  ones  of  earth.  And  so,  as  the 
Church  was  leaving  her  appointed  camp  of  separation. 
the  Lord  suddenly  appeared  in  the  way,  and  sternly 
commanded  those  who  were  His  own  to  repent,  and 
cast  out  the  Balaamites,  lest  He  Himself  should  be 
compelled  to  use  His  flashing  sword. 

Such,  then,  appears  to  have  been  the  condition  ol 
the  Christian  community  at  Pergamos  ;  and,  with  this 
knowledge  of  it,  we  may  proceed  to  consider  the  pro- 
phetic meaning  of  the  Epistle,  as  setting  before  us  the 
third  period  of  the  universal  Church. 

The  times  of  fiery  persecution  had  now  passed  by. 
The  slaughtered  apostles  were  resting  with  their  Lord  ; 
and  the  ashes  of  the  flaming  bodies  used  to  illuminate 
the  gardens  of  Nero  had  now  lain  cold  for  more  than 
two  centuries.  The  cruelties  of  Domitian,  Trajan,  and 
Adrian,  were  almost  forgotten.  Lyons  had  long  ceased 
to  shudder  at  the  pains  of  Blandina  and  Pothinus  ;  nor 
would  Perpetua  be  any  more  worried  by  the  savage 
beasts  of  the  amphitheatre,  or  pierced  by  the  sword  of 
the  gladiator.  Maximus  and  Decius  were  dead  :  the 
African  lime-kiln  and  the  worship  of  Jupiter  were  no 
longer  alternatives.  The  bloody  reign  of  Diocletian 
and  Maximian  was  ended  :  Sebastian  had  endured  his 
second  martyrdom,  and  the  last  sigh  of  Timothy  and 
Maura  had  ascended  to  God  from  their  crucified  bodies. 
A  new  era  had  commenced  :  Satan  had  stayed  the 
persecutions  which  had  proved  so  ineffectual,  and  was 
now  trying  for  better  success  by  means  of  flattery  and 
corruption,  and  by  tempting  the  Church  to  accept 
worldly  power. 


PERGAMOS.  357 

For  this  change  he  had  been  long  preparhig  through 
the  agency  of  the  false  teachers — those  tares  which  he 
had  stealthily  sown  among  the  wheat  in  the  times  of 
trouble,  when  hypocrisy  was  little  suspected.  By  their 
influence  Nicolaitanism  had  become  an  almost  uni- 
versal rule  ;  so  that  the  Churches  were  being  governed, 
in  much  the  same  manner  as  earthly  communities,  by 
those  whose  intellectual  power,  or  rank,  or  wealth,  or 
intrigue,  brought  them  to  the  front.  And,  as  a  natural 
consequence,  many  of  these  leaders  were  craving  an 
extension  of  their  influence,  and  manifesting  a  desire 
for  worldly  pre-eminence  which  soon  caused  a  change 
in  doctrine. 

In  the  earliest  times,  believers  were  taught  by  the 
apostles  to  live  in  daily  expectation  of  the  Lord's 
return,  and  recognized  no  other  way  of  permanent 
deliverance  from  the  troubles  of  this  world  ;  but  now 
ideas  of  a  very  different  kind  began  to  be  ventilated. 
It  was  suggested  that  Christ  could  not  return  to  a 
world  so  unprepared  ;  that  persecution  would  presently 
cease,  and  God  might  then  be  expected  to  give  great 
power  to  His  Church,  and  enable  her  to  convert  all 
men  by  her  preaching.  In  this  way  the  Millennium 
would  be  introduced  without  the  need  of  any  personal 
interference  on  the  part  of  Christ.  And  since  some 
Scriptural  support  was  required  for  the  new  doctrine, 
it  was  obtained  by  affirming  that  the  Jew  had  been 
cast  off  for  ever,  and  then  misapplying  the  prophecies 
of  Israel's  future  glory  to  the  body  of  nominal  believers 
upon  earth.  Thus  the  disciples  were  induced  to  say 
with  the  slothful  servant,  "  My  Lord  delayeth  His 
coming "  ;  and  a  spirit  of  worldliness  continued  to 
prevail   in   the  Church   until,  when   the    fatal   hour  of 


358  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD, 

prosperity  arrived,  she  altogether  ceased  to  wait  for  the 
Son  from  heaven,  and  proudly  thought,  "  I  sit  a  queen, 
and  am  no  widow,  and  shall  see  no  sorrow." 

While  these  opinions  were  being  disseminated,  the 
great  majority  of  Christians  were  manifesting  a  dis- 
position to  become  conformed  as  much  as  possible  in 
outward  appearance  to  the  world  ;  and,  as  an  example 
of  the  tendency,  we  may  note  that  during  this  period 
various  festivals  were  instituted  at  the  times  of  the 
great  Heathen  festivals,  because  the  Christians  did  not 
like  to  appear  singular.  And  although  they  gave  their 
own  names  to  these  holy-days,  nevertheless,  in  order 
to  attain  their  end,  they  were  forced  to  imitate  many 
of  the  Heathen  customs.  We  will  give  one  specimen 
of  this  kind  of  adaptation.-^ 

According  to  Mr.  Greswell,  who  supports  his  pro- 
position by  very  able  reasoning,  our  Lord  must  have 
been  born  on  the  fifth  of  April.  But  whether  this 
date  be  exactly  correct  or  not,  it  is  sufficiently  evident 

'  Many  would  be  disposed  to  say,  "Why  not  suffer  the  curtain 
of  obhvion  to  rest  for  ever  upon  these  lamentable  facts?  Now,  at 
least,  the  days  are  honestly  kept  as  Christian  festivals  :  is  it  well 
to  disturb  men's  minds  by  tracing-  such  obser\^ances  back  to  their 
Pagan  origin  ?  "  There  is,  alas  !  a  very  urgent  reason  for  doing 
so.  Already  there  are  in  circulation  among  the  educated  classes 
infidel  books,  of  considerable  ability,  in  which  the  Pagan  robes  of 
certain  forms  of  Christianity  are  powerfully  and  convincingly  ex- 
posed. And  then,  since  much  which  they  have  been  taught  to 
deem  sacred  is  demonstrated  to  have  been  brought  to  them  from 
Heathen  sources.  Christians  are  invited  to  believe  that  all  other 
doctrines  and  observances  of  their  faith  are  also  of  a  similar 
character.  It  seems,  therefore,  absolutely  necessary  that  we 
should  henceforth  accustom  ourselves  to  discriminate  between 
those  things  which,  being  ordinances  of  men,  are  justified  only 
by  their  value  in  the  war  against  the  world  and  Satan,  and  those 
which,  being  direct  commands  of  the  Lord  and  His  apostles,  must 
be  firmly  retained  in  spite  of  all  opposition  and  of  every  actual  or 
possible  consequence. 


PER  G AMOS.  359 


-~\ 


that  the  twenty-fifth  of  December  could  not  have  p 
been  the  day.  For  shepherds  would  not  have  been 
"  abiding  in  the  field,  keeping  watch  over  their  flock 
by  night,"  at  that  cold  season  of  the  year,  since  they 
are  not  accustomed  to  do  so  later  than  October. 
Besides  which,  our  Lord's  mother  would  scarcely 
have  been  able,  just  before  the  birth  of  her  Son,  to 
travel  from  Nazareth  to  Bethlehem  in  the  very  depth 
of  winter.  "  But  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in 
the  winter,"  is  His  own  injunction  in  the  sermon  on 
the  Mount  of  Olives. 

How  is  it,  then,  that  the  festival  of  Christ's  birth 
is  always  kept  on  the  twenty-fifth  of  December  .?  To 
understand  the  mystery  we  must  glance  at  a  passage 
of  Tertullian,  in  which  he  remonstrates  with  Christians 
of  the  end  of  the  second,  or  beginning  of  the  third, 
century  as   follows. 

"  But  if  we  have  no  right  of  fellowship  in  such 
matters — that  is,  in  Heathen  festivals — with  aliens, 
how  much  more  sinful  is  it  for  brethren  to  assort 
together  therein  !  Who  can  endure  or  maintain  this  } 
The  Holy  Spirit  reproacheth  the  Jews  for  their 
feast  days.  '  Your  Sabbaths,'  saith  He,  '  and  your 
new  moons,  and  your  ordinances.  My  soul  hateth.' 
And  do  we,  to  whom  these  Sabbaths  belong  not,  nor 
the  new  moons,  nor  the  feast  days  once  beloved  of 
God,  celebrate  the  feast  of  Saturn,  and  of  January, 
and  of  the  Winter  Solstice,  and  the  feast  of  Matrons  > 
For  us  shall  presents  flow  in  ;  new  year's  gifts  jingle  ; 
sports  and  banquets  roar  .''  O  truer  fidelity  of  the 
nations  to  their  own  religion,  which  claims  for  itself 
no  solemnity  of  the  Christians  !  No  Lord's  day,  no 
Pentecost,  even  if  they  had   known  them,  would  they 


) 


36o  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

have  shared  with  us  !  For  they  would  be  afraid  lest 
they  should  be  thought  Christians :  we  are  not  afraid 
lest  we  should  seem  to  be   Heathen  ! "  ^ 

This  passage  exposes,  generally,  the  origin  of  many 
of  the  so-called  Church  festivals,  which  were  unknown 
to  earlier  times,  and  were  adapted  from  Paganism 
because  the  Christians  had  grown  cowardly,  and  were 
no  longer  willing  to  bear  testimony  to  Christ  by 
entire  separation  from  the  world.  They  would  not 
remain  on  the  top  of  the  hill,  where  they  could  not 
be  hid,^  and  so  came  half-way  down  towards  the 
valley. 

Now — to  leave  generalities  and  return  to  the  sub- 
ject of  Christmas — the  twenty-first  of  December  is 
the  shortest  day  of  the  year,  the  time  when  the  sun 
has  reached  his  lowest  point ;  and  it  is  not  until  the 
twenty-fifth  that  he  begins  to  lengthen  the  duration 
of  his  light.  Hence,  throughout  the  whole  Heathen 
world,  the  twenty-fifth  was  regarded  as  the  birthday 
of  the  Sun-god,  and  a  high  festival,  which  was  cele-  ^ 
brated  at  Rome  by  the  "  Great  Games  "  of  the  Circus.  M 
And,  for  obvious  reasons,  the  Christians  determined 
to  commemorate  the  birth  of  Christ  at  the  same 
time. 

In  his  thirty-first  homily,  Chrysostom,  after  quoting 
the  directions  from  the  Pagan  Calendar,  remarks  ; — 
"  On  this  day,  also,  the  birthday  of  Christ  was  lately 
fixed  at  Rome,  in  order  that,  while  the  Heathen  were 
busied  with  their  profane  ceremonies,  the  Christians 
might  perform  their  holy  rites  undisturbed."  He 
seems,  however,  to  be  conscious  that  the  proceeding 
required  some  further  •  apology,  besides  the  excuse 
'  Tcrtull.  Dc  Idol.  xiv.  "  Matt.  v.  14. 


PERGAMOS.  361 

contained  in  the  latter  part  of  his  sentence,  and  pre 
sently  adds  ; — "  But  they — that  is,  the  Pagans — call 
this  day  the  birthday  of  the  Invincible  One  :  ^  whOj 
then,  so  invincible  as  the  Lord  that  overthrew  and 
vanquished  death  ?  Or  because  they  style  it  the 
birthday  of  the  Sun  ?  He  is  the  Sun  of  righteous- 
ness." This  is  a  species  of  argument  which  has  con- 
tributed much  to  the  corruption  of  Christianity.  Whal 
confusion  of  thought  was  produced  by  it  in  the 
particular  matter  before  us,  we  may,  perhaps,  discovei 
by  a  Christmas  sermon  of  Leo  the  Great,  who  flourished 
about  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century.  In  it  the  pre- 
late blames  certain  Christians  for  causing  offence  tc 
their  weaker  brethren  by  reverencing  the  festival,  not 
so  much  on  account  of  Christ's  birth,  as  on  that  of  the 
"Rising  of  the  new  Sun."  ^ 

This  instance  will  suffice  to  show  in  what  manner 
the  Christians  were  gradually  induced  to  make  com- 
promises, until  at  last  they  fell,  almost  without 
suspicion,  into  the  snare  which  Satan  had  prepared. 
For  the  process  of  blending  Christianity  and  Paganism 
was  carried  on  until  a  compound  religion  had  been 
manufactured,  of  which  we  may  say,  generally,  that 
Christianity  furnished  the  nomenclature,  and  Paganism 
the  doctrines  and  rites.  The  other  great  festivals 
of  the  "CathoHc  Church"  will  be  found,  like  Christmas, 
to  depend  upon  celestial  phenomena,  and  this  was 
detected  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  who  suggested  that 
they  were  determined  upon  an  astronomical  basis. 
They  were,  in  fact,  arranged  by  the  astrologers  of 
Babylon   for  the  worship  of  the  host  of  heaven,   and 

'  A  common  appellation  of  the  Sun-god. 

'  Serm.  II.     See  King's  "Gnostics,"  pp.  49,  50. 


562  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

having  been  received  by  the  Romans,  as  we  have 
already  explained,  were  afterwards  passed  on  to  the 
nominal  Church,  as  soon  as  she  had  been  sufficiently 
corrupted  to  accept  them. 

Such,  then,  was  the  condition  of  things  when  the 
last  persecution  commenced.  Constantine,  who,  after 
the  death  of  his  father  Constantius,  became  emperor 
of  the  district  to  the  west  of  the  Alps,  did  not 
sanction  the  cruel  treatment  of  the  Church  :  for  his 
own  countries  of  Britain  and  Gaul  were  filled  with 
professing  Christians,  and  his  legions  were  recruited 
from  them.  Consequently,  when  he  had  overpowered 
his  colleagues  in  the  Empire  and  gained  the  whole  for 
himself,  he  showed  especial  favour  to  the  followers  of 
Christ.  Such  a  patronage  caused  large  numbers  of 
insincere  persons  to  join  the  Church  :  the  real  Chris- 
tians were  swamped,  and  the  pastors  and  bishops 
were  elected  by  nominal  believers.  But  Constantine 
found  that  this  mixed  multitude  was  divided  by  the 
Arian  controversy  ;  and,  regarding  the  Church  merely 
as  a  political  instrument,  he  saw  the  necessity  of  heal- 
ing the  breach,  and  determined  upon  summoning  a 
council  of  bishops  to  discuss  the  question  at  issue, 
and  decide  it  by  their  votes.  The  bishops  assembled 
at  Nicsea,  or  Nice,  in  Bithynia,  and  the  orthodox  party 
triumphed  ;  not,  however,  without  purchasing  votes 
by  dangerous  concessions,  one  of  which  is  said  to 
have  introduced  into  the  Church  the  worship  of  Isis 
under  the  name  of  the  Virgin  Mary.  But  the  pro- 
ceedings were  finally  unsuccessful,  and  though  Arius 
was  banished  at  the  time,  the  emperor  quickly  recalled 
him. 

Of  Constantino's  real    opinions,   of  his  attempts  to 


PERGAMOS.  363 

blend  Christianity  and  Paganism  from  motives  of 
policy,  and  of  his  moral  behaviour,  we  have  spoken 
in  the  remarks  on  the  Parable  of  the  Mustard  Tree, 
He  wished  to  make  the  Church  the  handmaid  of  the 
State,  and  the  Christians  had  been  so  prepared  by  the 
craft  of  Satan,  and  had  among  them  so  many  merely 
nominal  believers,  that  they  seemed  only  too  willing 
to  run  greedily  after  the  error  of  Balaam  for  reward. 

And  so  a  new  community  began  to  spread  over  the 
Roman  earth,  professing  to  be  Christian,  but  denying 
one  precept  at  least  of  its  supposed  Founder,  in  that 
it  openly  acknowledged  two  masters  :  for,  while  claim- 
ing to  receive  its  authority  from  the  Lord  of  heaven, 
it  was  willing,  whenever  its  interests  could  be  served, 
to  wield  that  authority  according  to  the  bidding  of. 
the  emperors  of  Rome.  Everywhere  it  indicated  its 
presence  by  the  rise  of  stately  edifices,  by  gorgeous 
rites  and  ceremonies,  and  by  an  adoration  of  heroes 
and  martyrs  somewhat  difficult  to  distinguish  from 
the  Polytheism  which  it  was  understood  to  have 
supplanted. 

The  Balaamites  who  brought  about  this  change 
have  never  yet  been  cast  out  of  the  visible  Church, 
and  are  still  found,  in  some  form  or  other,  professing 
heavenly,  but  minding  earthly  things  :  for  the  Lord 
has  not  yet  come  to  fight  against  them  with  the  sword 
of  His  mouth.  But  when  the  measure  of  their  iniquity 
is  full,  He  will  appear  to  their  dismay,  and  in  answer 
to  their  frantic  appeal,  "  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not 
prophesied  in  Thy  name  .''  "  will  sternly  reply,  "  I  never 
knew  you  :  depart  from  Me,  ye  that  work  iniquity." 

In  the  promise  to  him  that  overcometh,  there  is 
again  a  reference  to  the  times  in  which  Balaam  lived. 


\ 


364  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

The  idea  of  the  hidden  manna  is  not  taken  from  that 
which  formed  the  daily  food  of  the  IsraeHtes,  and 
which  became  corrupt  unless  it  was  immediately  eaten  ; 
but  from  the  pot  of  incorruptible  manna,  which,  having 
been  laid  up  for  the  generations  of  Israel,  was  enclosed 
within  the  Ark,  and  never  seen.  It  represents,  perhaps, 
the  nourishment  of  the  resurrection  body,  laid  up  in 
store  for  those  who,  during  their  sojourn  here,  abstain 
from  things  offered  to  idols,  and  who  refuse  to  change 
the  ways  of  God  in  order,  to  please  the  world,  and 
obtain  its  good  things.  If  we  can  turn  from  the 
dainties  with  which  the  god  of  this  age  tempts  us, 
we  shall  eat  angels'  food,  and  sit  down  to  the  marriage 
supper  of  the  Lamb.  The  great  High  Priest  after  the 
order  of  Melchizedec  will  meet  us  as  we  return  from 
our  warfare  with  the  kings  of  this  world,  and  will  bless 
us,  and  bring  forth  bread  and  wine,  the  royal  dainties 
which  He  reserves  for  them  that  love  Him. 

The  promise  of  the  white  stone  seems  to  belong 
specially  to  those  who  keep  themselves  from  spiritual 
fornication,  from  sinful  communion  with  this  world. 
There  has  been  much  dispute  in  regard  to  the  meta- 
phor ;  but  we  may  at  once  dismiss  those  explanations 
which  are  founded  upon  Classical  allusions  as  altogether 
irrelevant. 

The  word  translated  "  white "  is  often  used  of  a 
bright  and  dazzling  whiteness,  as,  for  instance,  that 
of  a  sunbeam  :  hence  the  white  stone  may  be  a  glitter- 
ing gem  ;  perhaps,  a  diamond.  Now  the  mysterious 
implement  by  which  the  High  Priest  was  enabled  to 
obtain  an  answer  from  the  Lord,  and  which  was  called 
the  Urim  and  Thummim,  or  "  Lights  and  Perfections," 
was  probably  a   diamond  ;    and   it   is    likely  that   the 


THY  A  TIE  A.  365 

name  of  the  Lord  was  inscribed  upon  it.     The  breast- 
plate of  the  High  Priest  formed  a  sort  of  pouch  into 
which  it  was  placed ;  but,  precious  as  the  case  was, 
that   which   was   enclosed  would  reasonably   be  even 
more  so.     Hence,  the  Urim  may  have  been  a  diamond, 
most  costly  of  gems.     The  Lord  will,  therefore,  give 
to  him   that   overcometh  a  glittering  stone  inscribed 
with  His  own  name,  like  that  which  the  High  Priest 
bore    in    the   breastplate    of  judgment ;    so   that   the 
possessor   will   be   enabled   to   know   His   will   at   all 
times,  will  have  the  privilege  of  continual  communion 
with  Him.     So  glorious  a  recompense  is  there  for  him 
who  can  renounce  the  fleeting  and  insincere  friendship 
of  this  world,  and  who,  turning  from  the  luring  phan- 
toms that  beckon  to  him,  sets  his  face  as  a  flint  to  fol- 
low by  the  way  which  the  Master  trod,  and  to  watch 
with  Him  during  the  one  short  hour  of  Hfe, 


XVI. 

Thyatira. 

Next  in  order  comes  the  Church  which  is  ever  offering 
sacrifices,^  and  to  her  the  Lord  presents  Himself  as 
the  Son  of  God,  thus  solemnly  vindicating  His  despised 
majesty  against  her  idolatries,  and  the  claims  of  the 
false  prophetess.  For,  without  any  formal  rejection, 
He  has  been  virtually  denied  by  the  introduction  of 
other  objects  of  worship,  and  the  heed  given  to  spirits 

'  Gvaret/ju,  that  is,  Guwi/  areipijy,   she  that  is  never  weary  of 
presenting  sacrificial  offerings.  - 


366  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

of  darkness.  And  since  Thyatira  imagines  that  she 
has  concealed  her  Heathenism  under  a  cloak  of  Chris- 
tianity, He  speaks  of  His  eyes  of  flame  which  can 
penetrate  the  inmost  secrets  of  man,  and  detect  all  the 
depths  of  Satan  ;  and  intimates  that  He  is  shortly 
coming  to  trample  down  His  foes  beneath  the  feet 
which  glow  like  brass  in  a  furnace. 

In  this  Church  the  great  multitude  of  individual 
members  are  children  of  the  adulterous  Jezebel,  and 
only  a  remnant  belong  to  Christ.  The  latter  are 
sincere,  but,  owing  to  the  corruption  with  which  they 
are  surrounded,  in  great  ignorance  ;  and  to  them 
exclusively  the  Lord  addresses  Himself.  He  sees 
much  to  commend  in  them,  abounding  works,  love, 
faith,  ministry,  and  patience  :  nay,  these  good  fruits 
are  ever  increasing.  But  their  affection  is  unbalanced, 
and  their  power  of  resisting  evil  consequently  weakened. 
They  are  better  than  the  Ephesians  in  that  their  love, 
far  from  waxing  cold,  is  becoming  warmer ;  but  in- 
ferior to  them  in  that  they  have  not  learnt  to  test 
those  who  falsely  claim  to  be  apostles,  and  to  find 
them  liars. 

Foremost  among  these  pretenders  was  a  woman, 
perhaps  of  noble  extraction,  certainly  of  great  influ- 
ence ;  but  a  worshipper  of  idols,  a  sorceress  and  harlot, 
who,  while  she  seems  to  have  borne  the  name  of 
Jezebel,  also  resembled  the  infamous  wife  of  Ahab  in 
her  character  and  actions.  To  understand  what  she 
was  doing  in  Thyatira,  and  more  especially  what  is 
her  prophetic  antitype,  we  must  briefly  consider  the 
history  of  the  Israelitish  queen. 

Jezebel  was  not  by.  birth  a  daughter  of  Abraham, 
but  a  princess  of  idolatrous  Tyre  at  a  time  when  its 


THYATIRA.  367 

royal  family  was  famed  for  cruel  savagery  and  intense 
devotion  to  Baal  and  Astarte.  Her  father  Ethbaai, 
a  priest  of  the  latter  deity,  murdered  the  reigning 
monarch  Pheles,  and  succeeded  him.  Her  nephew, 
whom  Virgil  calls  Sychaeus,  afterwards  became  king 
and  priest  of  Baal,  and  was  the  husband  of  Dido. 
He  was  assassinated  by  his  brother  Pygmalion,  who 
ascended  the  throne  in  his  stead,  and  through  fear  of 
whom  the  widowed  Dido  fled  to  Africa  and  founded 
the  city  of  Carthage.  Born  of  a  family  so  distinguished 
for  fanaticism  and  crime,  Jezebel  proved  herself  in 
every  way  worthy  of  her  lineage,  and  found  the 
condition  of  her  husband's  realm  most  favourable  to 
her  plans. 

For  the  first  monarch  of  Israel  had  disregarded  the 
law  of  God  on  the  ground  of  expediency,  and  had  set 
up  the  golden  calves  at  Bethel  and  Dan,  incurring 
thereby  so  terrible  a  guilt  that  it  is  repeatedly  said  of 
later  kings  ; — "  He  walked  in  all  the  ways  of  Jeroboam, 
the  son  of  Nebat,  and  in  his  sin,  wherewith  he  made 
Israel  to  sin."  By  acquiescing  in  this  act  the  Israelites 
of  the  Ten  Tribes  were  completely  cut  off  from  their 
brethren  ;  nor  was  this  the  end  of  the  mischief.  Within 
their  own  borders,  all  true  servants  of  Jehovah  refused 
to  be  separated  from  His  Temple,  and,  therefore,  left 
their  homes  and  migrated  to  Judah  ;  so  that  the  land 
was  forsaken  by  the  godly.-^  And  restraints  having 
been  thus  removed,  the  Israelites  naturally  inclined 
more  and  more  to  their  Heathen  neighbours,  to  whom, 
indeed,  they  had    become   assimilated   in   religion    by 

'  2  Chron.  xi.  13-17.  This  migration  sufficiently  accounts  foi 
the  presence  of  a  few  families  of  the  Ten  Tribes  among  the  Jew? 
in  New  Testament  times. 


368  THE   CHURCH  0I<   GOD. 

1  the   setting  up    of    the    calves,    since   they  were    now 
(^themselves  image-worshippers,  or  idolaters. 

But  the  lesser  sins  are  pioneers  of  the  greater.  By 
thus  adoring  Jehovah  under  the  form  of  an  image, 
they  were  preparing  their  hearts  for  a  still  worse 
crime,  the  avowed  worship  of  other  gods ;  and,  just 
at  the  right  moment,  Satan  presented  the  temptation 
in  the  person  of  Jezebel.  Aided,  probably,  by  her 
youthful  beauty,  her  winning  fascinations,  and  popular 
manners,  she  propagated  the  religion  of  the  Phoenician 
deities  with  fierce  determination  of  character  and 
fanatical  enthusiasm  ;  and  the  success  attending  her 
efforts  was  so  great,  that  a  temple  with  an  altar 
and  image  of  Baal  was  erected  in  Samaria,  and  Ahab 
also  made  "  a  grove  " — which  is  not  a  plantation  of 
trees,  but  an  obscene  symbol  of  Astarte.  In  fine, 
the  gorgeous  and  lascivious  worship  of  the  Pagans 
was  appreciated  to  such  an  extent  that  it  soon  became 
.the  national  religion,  completely  obliterating  the  old 
{  faith  ;  so  that  Elijah  actually  supposed  himself  to  be 
■  the  only  God-fearing  man  left  in  Israel.  ^  For  no 
voice  of  remonstrance  was  raised,  although  the  altars 
of  Jehovah  had  been  broken  down,  and  His  prophets 
slain  with  the  sword,  and  replaced  by  the  four  hundred 
and  fifty  prophets  of  Baal  and  the  four  hundred 
prophets  of  the  grove,  that  is,  of  Astarte.  Elijah  did, 
indeed,  by  calling  down  fire  from  heaven,  make  the 
renegade  people  fall  on  their  faces  and  cry  out  for 
the  moment,  "  Jehovali,  He  is  the  God  ! "  Yet  the 
influence  of  Jezebel  was  so  powerful,  that  on  the  very 
next  day  he  was  flying  for  his  life.  And  this  influence 
she  exercised,  not  only  while  her  husband  was  alive, 
but  also  during  the  reigns  of  her  two  sons,  Ahaziah 


THYATIRA.  369 

and  Jehoram.  Moreover,  the  marriage  of  her  daughter 
Athaliah  to  Jehoram,  son  of  Jehoshaphat  king  of 
Judah,  suppHed  her  with  a  lever  by  which  to  move 
that  country  also.  Nor  did  Athaliah  disappoint  her 
mother's  hopes,  for  she  caused  a  house  of  Baal  to  be 
built  in  Jerusalem  itself ;  ^  while  her  sons  broke  up  the 
House  of  the  Lord,  and  bestowed  its  dedicated  things  , 
upon  the  Baalim.^ 

We  may  conclude  our  sketch  of  Jezebel's  character 
by  citing  the  words  of  Jehu  to  her  son; — "What  peace, 
so  long  as  the  whoredoms  of  thy  mother  Jezebel  and 
her  witchcrafts  are  so  many  ?  " 

Returning  to  the  Jezebel  of  Thyatira,  we  find  the '^ 
charges  brought  against  her  to  be,  that  she  falsely 
called  herself  a  prophetess,  and  that  she  taught  and 
seduced  the  servants  of  Christ  to  commit  fornication, 
and  to  eat  things  sacrificed  to  idols.  When  we  re- 
member that  the  Christians  of  those  days  were  even 
more  closely  surrounded  by  Heath  inism  than  the 
Israelites  of  old,  we  may  easily  understand  the  process 
of  corruption  to  which  this  lying  prophetess  was 
subjecting  them.  Time  had  been  given  to  her  to 
repent,  but  she  repented  not :  therefore  judgment  was 
near.  She  had  chosen  the  bed  of  sin  :  it  should  be 
changed  into  a  bed  of  anguish  :  her  paramours  should 
be  thrown  into  great  tribulation,  and  her  adulterous 
children  slain.  And  their  fate  should  cause  a  fear 
to  fall  upon  the  Churches,  like  that  which  men  felt 
when  they  saw  Ananias  and  Sapphira  smitten  with 
death  in  the  midst  of  the  assembly. 

Having    thus  pronounced  sentence,  the   Lord  turns 
to   His  own,  whom  He  calls  "  the  rest  " — for  even  in 
'  2  Chron.  xxiii.  17.  ^  Ibid.  xxiv.  7. 

24 


370  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD, 

Thyatira  He  had  much  people  scattered  amid  the 
throng  of  idolatrous  professors  ;  just  as  there  were 
seven  thousand  in  Israel  who  had  not  bowed  the  knee 
to  Baal,  though  Elijah  was  ignorant  of  them.  These 
were,  indeed,  standing  in  rank  side  by  side  with  the 
corrupters,  but  without  consciousness  of  their  real 
position  :  they  were  deceived  by  their  seducers,  and 
knew  nothing  of  the  depths  of  Satan  and  his  dark 
plans. 

The  Gnostics,  as  their  name  implied,  boasted  of  a 
deep  insight  into  the  things  of  God,  and  the  mys- 
teries of  evil  ;  and  under  the  guise  of  assumed  know- 
ledge, led  their  followers  step  by  step  into  an  abyss 
of  wickedness  and  uncleanness.  But  the  remnant 
were  guileless  of  this  great  iniquity  ;  and,  although 
they  had  occasional  scruples  which  they  sometimes 
boldly  avowed,  were,  nevertheless,  honestly  disposed 
to  look  upon  the  evil  around  them  as  more  than 
counterbalanced  by  the  good,  and  did  not  at  all  per- 
ceive the  intention  of  the  whole  system  of  doctrines 
presented  for  their  acceptance.  And  so  in  His  treat- 
ment of  them,  ignorant  and  bewildered  as  they  are, 
the  Lord  is  full  of  consideration  and  tender  love. 
They  have  no  power  to  fathom  the  Satanic  depths  ; 
therefore.  He  will  lay  upon  them  no  other  burden 
than  that  they  hold  fast  what  little  truth  they  have 
until  He  come. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  this  letter  deals  with  a  far 
more  settled  state  of  wickedness  than  that  which 
existed  at  Pergamos.  The  latter  Church  had,  in- 
deed, committed  fornication  with  the  world ;  but  in 
Thyatira  the  children  of  the  adulterous  connection 
appear. 


THYATIRA.  371 

For  the  present  Epistle  foreshadows  the  career  of 
Ecclesiasticism,  that  mysterious  power  which  was 
dominant  during  the  period  of  the  Dark  Ages,  and 
continues  even  in  our  days  to  exercise  a  baleful  in- 
fluence. The  body  of  nominal  Christians  first  attached 
themselves  to  the  Heathen  World-kingdom,  which  was 
under  the  influence  of  Mystery  Babylon  ;  and  then 
suffered  the  Mother  of  Abominations  to  lay  hold  of 
them,  and  use  them  for  her  own  purposes.  For  the 
initiated,  having  once  begun  to  profess  Christianity, 
diplomatized  so  skilfully  that  they  presently  succeeded 
in  procuring  the  bishopric  of  Rome  for  one  of  their  own 
leaders.  This  was  effected  in  the  years  366-367  A.D., 
when — after  his  faction  had  engaged  in  a  bloody 
conflict  with  that  of  his  rival  Ursicinus,  and  had  on 
one  occasion  stormed  a  church  ^  out  of  which  they 
dragged  some  hundred  and  fifty  corpses — Damasus 
found  himself  in  secure  possession  of  the  episcopal 
chair,  and  forthwith  proceeded  to  complete  the  union 
of  the  Christian  and  Heathen  communities.  In  the 
year  378  A.D.,  the  emperor  bestowed  upon  him  the 
title  and  office  of  Pontifex  Maximus,  ^  and  means  were 
then  taken  for  subordinating  the  universal  Church  to 
the  See  of  Rome,  just  as  the  whole  Heathen  world  was 
subject  to  the  Grand  Master  of  the  initiated.  And  all 
who  refused  to  acknowledge  Astarte  under  her  new 
name  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  or  who  would  not  deny  the  ' 
second  coming  of  Christ  in  His  glorified  flesh,  were 
regarded  as  heretics.  " 

In   381    A.D,,   the    second   general    council    met    at 
Constantinople,     and    by    its    decrees     the     Pontifex 

'  Then  called  Liberius,  now  St.  Mary  Major 
-  This  title  is  still  retained  by  the  Pope. 


372  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 


Maximus  was  recognized  as  Head  of  the  universal 
Church,  while  the  Bishop  of  Constantinople  was  to 
rank  as  second  to  him.  The  amalgamation  thus  be- 
came an  accomplished  fact,  and  before  the  year  400  A.D., 
•'  the  tonsured  priests  of  Isis,  sworn  to  celibacy,"  were 
being  received  as  the  ministers  of  Christ.  Just  as 
in  Israel  the  prophets  of  Baal  and  Astarte  replaced 
those  of  Jehovah,  so  the  false  Church,  the  new 
Jezebel,  introduced  the  hierophants  of  the  very  same 
deities,  under  changed  names,  among  the  followers 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Then  all  the  doctrines  of  Paganism 
began  to  be  preached,  with  a  little  change  in  the 
nomenclature,  and  were  declared  to  be  Christian — 
baptismal  regeneration,  justification  by  works,  the 
sacrifice  of  the  mass,  extreme  unction,  prayers  for  the 
dead,  and  many  others.  The  mystic  taiL  was  every- 
where prominent  as  the  sign  of  the  cross  ;  the  wafer 
of  Astarte  was  substituted  for  the  broken  bread  ;  the 
bishop  retained  the  crooked  staff'  of  the  Roman  augur, 
but  called  it  a  crosier  ;  and  wore  on  his  head  the  fish- 
head  mitre  of  the  priests  of  Dagon.^  Everything  was 
Pagan  except  the  bare  names.  The  vast  conspiracy  to 
convert  Christianity  itself  into  Heathenism  had  suc- 
ceeded, so  far  as  the  bulk  of  professing  Christians  was 
concerned. 

To  those  who  were  not  aware  of  this  fearful  mystery, 
and  still  clung  to  the  visible  Church  in  ignorance  of 
the  change  which  had  taken  place,  the  Lord  speaks 
of   knowing    their    works,    and    love,    and    faith,    and 

'  Many  curious  illustrations  of  this  mitre  may  be  found  among 
the  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  antiquities  in  the  British  Museum. 
It  bore  no  resemblance  whatever  to  the  so-called  mitre  of  the 
Israelitish  High  Priest  ;  for  the  latter  was  a  turban  of  fine  linen, 
and  its  name  ^Q^yp  is  derived  from  fJ^V  to  roll. 


7HYA7IRA.  373 

patience.  For  to  these  points  the  preaching  of  the 
innovators  was  mainly  directed,  in  order  that  they 
might  draw  off  the  minds  of  Christians  from  doctrine, 
and  so  retain  their  iniluence  over  them.  The  sincere 
acted  upon  this  preaching,  and  many  wonderful  deeds 
of  love,  labour,  and  self-denial,  resulted.  These  works 
did  not  escape  the  Lord's  notice  :  His  grace  rested 
upon  the  but  partially  enlightened  Christians  who  did 
such  things  out  of  a  pure  heart  ;  and  His  Spirit  taught 
them,  so  that  they  often  detected  error,  and  resisted 
it  even  to  the  death.  For  the  Roman  Jezebel,  like 
the  Phoenician  princess,  soon  began  to  slay  the  pro-"^ 
phets  of  God.  The  latter  should  have  had  sufficient 
perception  to  discover  that  Rome  had  no  part  or  lot 
with  Christ,  and  so  have  disowned  her.  But  they 
were  blind  :  they  suffered  the  woman  to  teach  and 
seduce,  looked  upon  her  as  the  true  Church,  and  strove 
only  against  particular  errors,  which  they  did  not 
associate  with  the  general  system.  Yet,  after  a  while, 
some  began  to  see  the  name  "  Mystery  Babylon  "  upon 
the  forehead  of  the  Harlot. 

The  words,  "  till  I  come,"  seem  to  be  an  intimation 
that  this  apostasy  will  not  altogether  disappear  until 
the  Church  has  been  summoned  to  meet  her  Lord. 
Indeed,  we  have  already  seen  that  the  great  ecclesiasti- 
cal system  will  be  broken  up  and  destroyed  by  the 
Ten  Kings,  in  order  that  they  may  give  all  power  to 
the  Beast  ;  and  that  the  latter  does  not  arise  out  of 
the  troubled  waters  until  the  Man-child  has  been 
safely  conveyed  to  the  Throne  of  God. 

In  this  Epistle  only  the  Lord  adds  something  to  the 
description  of  the  one  who  shall  obtain  the  reward, 
and  designates  him  as  "  he  that   overcometh,  and   he 


374  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

that  keepeth  My  works  unto  the  end."  For  there 
would  be  strong  temptation  to  keep  other  works,  to 
serve  the  Church  rather  than  Christ ;  and  if  any  one 
were  so  influenced,  however  pious  he  might  seem,  he 
would  not  ultimately  be  found  among  the  overcomers. 

Again  the  promise  is  strikingly  appropriate.  After 
the  toils  of  the  wilderness,  the  Israelites  were,  if  they 
remained  faithful,  to  subdue  the  Canaanitish  nations 
and  possess  their  land.  So  shall  the  Church  hereafter 
subjugate  and  rule  over  the  world  with  Christ,  as  soon 
as  the  last  weary  traveller  of  her  long  procession  shall 
have  passed  out  of  the  desert  of  this  life.  In  the 
present  age,  we  are  individually  priests  unto  God,  and 
should  take  heed  that  we  do  not  neglect  the  priestly 
duties  of  interceding  for  and  instructing  the  people  ; 
but,  when  the  great  King  shall  have  gathered  together 
into  one  the  children  of  God  that  are  scattered  abroad, 
then  will  the  time  have  come  for  the  Saints  of  the 
High  Places  to  possess  the  Kingdom.^  The  Roman 
Church  wishes  to  reign  now,  without  the  presence  of 
Christ,  without  His  apostles,  and  v/ithout  the  countless 
members  of  His  body  who  have  already  crossed  the 
stream  ;  but  those  who  resist  her  seductions,  and  are 
willing  to  be  esteemed  as  nothing  in  this  world,  shall, 
when  the  Lord  comes,  enjoy  to  the  full  that  after 
which  she  is  vainly  striving.  And  so  completely  does 
the  Lord  identify  Himself  with  His  own  that  He  gives 

'  It  is,  then,  not  without  deep  meaning  that  we  find,  in  Rev.  i.  6, 
the  remarkable  expression,  "a  Kingdom,  priests"— such  is,  doubt- 
less, the  correct  reading— applied  to  the  Church.  The  difference 
of  number  points  to  the  fact  that,  immediately  after  conversion, 
every  member  of  Christ  is  a  priest  individually;  but  that  believers 
can  only  become  a  Kingdom  when  all  have  been  gathered  together 
to  tlie  Lord. 


THYATIRA.  375 

to  them  the  very  same  power  over  the  nations  which 
He  has  received  from  His  Father. 

"  Faithful  is  the  saying  :  For  if  we  died  with  Him, 
we  shall  also  live  with  Him  :  if  we  endure,  we  shall 
also  reign  with  Him." 

But  there  is  something  more  for  the  overcomer : 
he  shall  have  the  morning-star — a  promise  differing 
from  that  which  was  given  to  the  pious  Jew,  upon 
whom  the  Sun  of  righteousness  shall  arise.  The  ex- 
planation is,  perhaps,  as  follows.  Those  who  anxiously 
wait  for  the  dawn  know  its  welcome  harbinger,  the 
silver  planet,  which  emerges  in  the  glimmer  of  early 
twilight,  bright  and  conspicuous  at  first,  and  then 
growing  fainter  and  fainter  in  the  gradually  increasing 
hght,  until  at  last  it  dies  "  on  a  bed  of  daffodil  sky." 
But  sometimes  it  is  swept  away  in  very  different 
fashion  ;  it  may  be  that  it  has  scarcely  appeared  when 
the  storm-cloud  comes  on,  obliterates  it  in  a  moment, 
shuts  out  the  hope  of  day,  and  brings  back  the  dark- 
ness of  midnight.  Yet,  after  a  while,  the  roar  of  the 
tempest  is  hushed,  the  angry  lightnings  cease,  the 
clouds  part  and  float  away,  and  lo  !  the  sun  has  arisen, 
and  is  looking  down  upon  the  earth  in  all  the  splendour 
of  his  might. 

Such  a  daybreak  as  this  must,  it  would  seem,  be 
in  our  minds  when  we  consider  the  promise  of  the 
morning-star.  Those  servants  of  Christ  who  are  ever 
looking  for  His  coming  will  see  Him  when  He  calls 
His  own  to  Himself.  But  this  manifestation,  of  which 
the  slumbering  world  may  be  altogether  unaware,  will 
be  but  momentary,  and  then  the  storm-clouds  of  the 
Great  Tribulation  will  bring  back  midnight  darkness 
upon  the  earth.     At  the  close,  however,  of  the  time  of 


376  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

trouble,  the  Messiah  will  appear  in  all  His  glory  to 
deliver  the  children  of  Abraham,  and,  as  the  clouds 
part,  will  be  found  to  have  arisen  as  the  Sun  of 
righteousness,  with  healing  in  His  wings,  over  them 
that  fear  the  name  of  the  Lord.-' 

xvn. 

Sardis. 

We  now  pass  on  to  a  Church  of  knowledge,  indeed, 
and  comparative  orthodoxy,  but  withal  to  one  which 
is  fast  sinking  from  the  Heavenly  Places  into  the 
world,  and  losing  all  its  spiritual  power.  The  word 
"Sardis"  is  not  Greek:  hence  some  have  derived  it 
from  a  Hebrew  root,  which  would  give  it  the  meaning 
of  "  remnant "  ;  and  this  they  refer  to  "  the  rest  in 
Thyatira "  mentioned  in  the  preceding  Epistle.  But 
such  a  derivation  is  unfair :  for  the  word  is  no  more 
Hebrew  than  it  is  Greek.  It  is  a  Lydian  name  ;  and, 
therefore,  in  a  Lydian  root  we  must  seek  its  interpre- 
tation, which  will  then  be  "  new,"  "  new-born  with  the 
year,"  "renewed."^  This  at  once  suggests  the  Churches 
originating  in  the  Reformation,  which  have  been  gene- 
rally distinguished  as  orthodox  on  the  whole,  but  very 
seldom  as  showing  a  spiritual  power  in  due  proportion 
to  their  privileges.  For,  as  we  have  previously  re- 
marked, when  the  enthusiasm  occasioned  by  their 
delivery  from  the  thraldom  of  Jezebel  had  subsided, 
instead  of  gathering  in  one  loving  circle  around  the 
Saviour,  they  fell  apart  into  antagonistic  sects,  which, 
so  far  as  the  great  crowd  of  their  members  was  con- 

'  Mai.  iv.  2. 

°  See  Stier's  "  Words  of  the  Risen  Saviour  •" 


^ARDiS,  377 

cerned,  soon  lapsed  into  a  state  of  spiritual  deadness. 
And  few,  indeed,  were  the  exceptions  which  proved 
this  rule,  at  least  until  the  efforts  of  Wesley,  White- 
field,  and  their  contemporaries,  began  to  excite  some 
symptoms  of  returning  life. 

To  the  professing  Christians  of  this  period  the  Lord 
presents  Himself  as  "  He  that  hath  the  seven  Spirits 
of  God,"  a  title  which  is  full  of  meaning  for  them. 
Tliey  lack  vitality,  and  He  appears  as  the  Possessor 
of  the  Spirit  in  all  the  sevenfold  plenitude  of  His 
power  :  whatever  may  be  their  intellectual  force  and 
activity,  they  are  little  moved  by  Divine  energies,  and 
He  comes  with  gracious  purpose,  that  they  may  have 
Hfe,  and  may  have  it  abundantly. 

In  His  hand  He  holds  all  the  seven  stars  which  are 
the  angels  of  the  Churches.  This  seems  to  be,  as  it 
were,  a  solemn  repetition  of  His  claim  to  be  Head 
over  all,  and  to  indicate  the  critical  time  of  a  new 
beginning,  a  fresh  departure,  analogous  to  the  return 
of  the  Jews  from  captivity  and  the  rebuilding  of  the 
Temple. 

Again  the  Lord  knows :  He  has  no  need  that  any 
should  witness  to  Him  of  this  Church,  and  it  is  useless 
for  special  pleaders  to  defend  her.  His  eyes  of  flame 
pierce  through  every  covering  of  hypocrisy  :  therefore, 
void  as  she  is  of  spiritual  power,  it  will  not  avail  her 
to  have  a  name  to  live.  She  may  deceive  men,  and 
may  even,  like  the  more  advanced  Laodicea,  go  on  to 
deceive  herself;  but  she  cannot  hide  her  real  condition 
from  Him.  Against  the  Church  which  preceded  her, 
she  boasts  that  she  holds  to  the  p.,/e  word  of  God  ; 
nevertheless,  her  vitality  is  at  so  low  an  ebb,  that  she 
is  spiritually  almost  as   a  person  in  a  swoon  is  phy- 


378  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

sically:  it  might  be  said  of  her,  as  Paul  says  of  the 
woman  who  lives  in  pleasure,  that  she  "  is  dead  while 
she  liveth."' 

It  is  not  without  deep  significance  that,  whereas 
adversaries  are  found  assailing  five  of  the  Churches 
either  from  within  or  from  without,  there  is  no  mention 
of  any  foe  in  the  Epistles  to  Sardis  and  Laodicea. 
For  these  two  have  ceased  to  be  effectual  witnesses, 
and,  therefore,  Satan  has  no  quarrel  with  them  :  they 
do  not  in  any  way  torment  those  who  have  settled 
down  as  dwellers  upon  the  earth  ;  why,  then,  should 
anger  be  excited  against  them  ?  They  have  a  tacit 
understanding  with  the  world  that,  although  their 
opinions  may  difTer  upon  some  points,  there  is  nothing 
to  hinder  a  mutual  friendship. 

The  first  admonition  of  the  Lord  points  directly  to 
the  source  and  root  of  all  this  deadness  to  spiritual 
things  and  conformity  to  the  world.  "  Become  watch- 
ful," He  commands  ;  and,  if  we  interpret  this  verse  by 
the  next,  we  shall  see  that  He  is  not  speaking  of 
general  watchfulness,  but  of  waiting  for  His  return. 
Yet  such  a  waiting  certainly  includes  watchfulness  in 
all  things  ;  for  he  who  lives  in  the  daily  expectation 
of  seeing  Christ  as  He  is  will  surely  not  be  deficient 
in  zeal  to  purify  himself  even  as  He  is  pure.  But, 
after  the  Reformation,  the  Protestant  Churches  seemed 
to  have  little  love  for  their  Lord's  appearing  :  they 
rarely  mentioned  it,  and  persuaded  themselves  that, 
although  it  was  an  event  which  must  assuredly  take 
place  at  som.e  far-distant  time,  it,  nevertheless,  could 
not  happen  for  a  long"  season  ;  not,  indeed,  until  after 
the  whole  world  had  been  converted  and  changed  by 
means  of  their  exertions.     And  so  they  made  the  fatal 


SARDIS.  379 

mistake,  from  which  the  Scriptures  should  have  saved 
them,  of  saying  in  their  heart,  "  My  Lord  delayeth  His 
coming,"  and  soon  fell  into  the  idle  slumber  from  which 
He  now  calls  upon  them  to  arise,  lest  coming  suddenly 
He  should  find  them  sleeping. 

"  Strengthen,"  He  continues,  **  the  things  which 
remain,  that  are  ready  to  die  " — for  life  was  not  quite 
extinct.  And  in  this  warning  we  may  probably  dis- 
cern a  reference  to  teaching,  as  well  as  to  work  :  the 
thought  of  the  Lord's  appearing  had  been  cast  aside, 
and  all  other  doctrines  were  becoming  indistinct.  The 
great  disclosure,  which  impresses  upon  us,  more  power- 
fully than  any  other  revelation,  the  fact  that  we  are 
strangers  and  pilgrims  here,  was  "  spiritualized,"  and 
whatever  else  seemed  burdensome  was  deprived  of  its 
meaning  in  a  similar  way.  The  literal  presence  of 
Christ  was  not  desired  ;  therefore,  His  person  was  no 
longer  a  constant  subject  of  contemplation.  Compared 
with  the  multitude  who  had  the  responsibility  of  know- 
ledge, but  few  gazed  fixedly  upon  Him  ;  and,  conse- 
quently, but  few  were  changed  from  glory  to  glory  into 
the  same  image.  And  since  the  Church  had  no 
apprehension  of  being  suddenly  called  away,  she  found 
it  easy  to  do  much  the  same  as  the  world,  and,  settling 
down  upon  earth,  began  to  lose  all  the  heavenly  gifts. 
Gradually  it  became  the  custom  to  bring  everything 
to  the  test  of  intellect  and  human  philosophy  ;  so  that, 
as  time  went  on,  the  very  foundation-doctrine  of  the 
Atonement  began  to  disappear  from  the  sight  of  those 
who  were  unaffected  by  the  Philadelphian  revival,  and 
large  numbers  of  professing  Christians  are  now  denying 
the  Lord  Who  bought  them. 

But  the  waning  of  faith  speedily  changes  outward 


38o  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

conduct,  and  so  the  Lord  goes  on  to  say  ; — "  For  I 
have  found  no  work  of  thine  fulfilled  before  My  God." 
The  works  are  deficient  in  quality  :  it  is  not  the  pure 
love  of  Christ  which  constrains  the  doers,  but  lower 
motives.  They  are  wanting  in  quantity :  the  daily 
tale  which  God  has  appointed  is  not  accomplished. 
"  Suffer  it  now  :  for  thus  it  becometh  us  to  fulfil  all 
righteousness,"  said  the  Lord  :  but  the  Sardians,  if 
they  coldly  perform  some  part  of  their  duty,  are 
satisfied  that  they  have  thereby  compounded  for  the 
neglect  of  all  the  rest.  This,  however,  will  not  suffice. 
"  And  say  to  Archippus,  Take  heed  to  the  ministry 
which  thou  hast  received  in  the  Lord,  that  thou  fulfil 
't."^  I"or  God  reviews,  not  merely  the  things  that 
are  done,  but  also  the  things  that  are  left  undone. 

That  she  may  realize  her  present  lifeless  condition, 
Sardis  is  exhorted  to  remember  how  she  received  the 
word  which  was  sent  to  her  ;  with  what  heartiness  of 
joy,  which  is  now  gone  ;  with  what  warmth  of  love, 
which  has  now  grown  cold  ;  with  what  demonstration 
of  the  Spirit  and  power,  which  is  no  longer  felt !  And, 
at  the  same  time,  she  should  call  to  mind  the  substance 
of  the  instruction,  reproof,  and  correction,  which  she 
has  heard  ;  the  earnest  appeals,  the  teachings  of  the 
Spirit,  and  the  great  responsibilities  which  they  involve. 

She  has  received  and  heard,  and,  consequently,  there 
is  no  excuse  for  her,  as  there  was  for  the  remnant  in 
Thyatira.  "  If  yc  were  blind,  ye  would  have  no  sin  : 
but  now  ye  say.  We  see  :  therefore  your  sin  remaineth." 
And  so  a  solemn  appeal  is  made  to  her  ;  she  is  urged 
to  observe  and  keep  what  she  has  heard,  and  to  repent 
quickly :    but   if  she   refuse    to    respond,   the    time  of 

'  Col.  iv.  17. 


SARDIS.  38 1 

visitation  is  passing  :  there  is  a  limit  even  to  the  for- 
bearance of  God.  The  faithless  Church  must  share 
the  fate  of  the  world  which  she  has  loved,  and  That 
Day  come  upon  her  unawares.  At  an  hour  when  she 
thinks  not,  unexpectedly,  as  a  thief  in  the  night,  He 
will  arrive  in  the  air  to  beckon  away  all  who  are 
watching  for  Him  ;  and,  as  Enoch  vanished  from 
among  his  fellows,  they  will  depart,  or  as  Lot  was 
hurried  through  the  streets  of  slumbering  Sodom.  But 
those  believers  who  dare  to  sleep  as  do  other  men, 
who  suffer  their  God-consciousness  to  grow  drowsy, 
so  that  they  become  apathetic,  and  the  powers  of  the 
World  to  Come  lose  their  hold  upon  them — sucii 
foolish  ones  must  be  left  for  a  while  among  the  wicked, 
to  experience  the  full  development  and  unrestrained 
nature  of  that  lawlessness  which  they  have  not  been 
sufficiently  careful  to  avoid. 

But  there  are,  the  Lord  says,  a  few  names  in  Sardis 
which  did  not  defile  their  garments.  How  sweeping 
the  charge  implied  in  these  words !  What !  in  pro- 
fessing Christendom  only  a  few  with  whom  the  Lord 
is  satisfied  !  Even  so  :  for  alas  !  we  may  flatter  our- 
selves now,  but  shall  shortly  be  subjected  to  a  very 
different  kind  of  judgment,  and  shall  discover  how 
fearful  a  mistake  it  is  to  confound  privileges  with  the 
use  made  of  them.  "And  thou,  Capernaum,  shalt  thou 
be  exalted  to  heaven  .''  Thou  shalt  go  down  unto 
Hades :  for  if  the  mighty  works  had  been  done  in 
Sodom  which  were  done  in  thee,  it  would  have 
remained  until  this  day.  Howbeit  I  say  unto  you, 
that  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  the  land  of  Sodom 
in  the  day  of  judgment  than  for  thee."  We  have  ever 
before  us,  in  the  case  of  the  Jews,  an  awful  instance 


582  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

of  the  seventy  of  God  towards  those  who  have  proved 
faithless  in  spite  of  abounding  grace  and  long  forbear- 
ance ;  of  how  much  sorer  punishment  shall  they  be 
judged  worthy  who  could  grow  cold  and  worldly,  who 
could  be  disobedient  and  self-willed,  even  while  Jesus 
Christ  was  being  openly  set  forth  crucified  before 
them  ! 

There  are,  however,  a  few  in  Sardis  whose  garments 
are  not  spotted  by  the  flesh  ;  for  if  at  any  time  they 
have  stained  them,  they  have  gone  at  once  to  the 
fountain,  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb.  They  have  escaped  the  contamination  of  the 
leaven,  and  preserved  purity  of  doctrine  ;  they  have 
esteemed  Christ  in  all  things  as  the  First  and  the 
Last ;  and  if  urged  to  conduct  which  was  not  in  the 
strictest  accord  with  His  commands,  they  have  replied, 
"  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  man,"  and  have 
not  hesitated  to  stand  firm,  even  when  they  were  but 
two  or  three  against  the  great  multitude.  Nor  will 
God  forget  their  faith  and  patience  :  when  others  are 
In  anguish,  when  the  whole  earth  is  writhing  and 
throbbing  beneath  the  repeated  strokes  of  the  Almighty 
in  the  days  of  terror,  they  shall  be  walking  with  Christ 
in  the  heavenly  places,  clothed  in  the  white  robes  of 
righteousness :  they  shall  be  far  removed  from  all 
trouble  and  alarm,  even  as  Abraham  was  when,  from 
the  mountains  of  Canaan,  he  looked  down  upon  the 
smoking  ruins  of  Sodom. 

In  this  promise  there  is  probably  an  allusion  to  the 
procession  of  priests  and  Levites  who,  clothed  in  white 
linen,  followed  Solomon  on  his  way  to  dedicate  the 
newly    built    Temple.-^     And    certainly   the    psalm    of 

'  2  Chron.  v.  ii,  12. 


SARDIS.  383 

praise,  which  at  that  time  ascended  to  God,  will  well 
suit  the  happy  throng  which  shall  hereafter  cluster 
round  the  Lord  Jesus,  never  again  to  leave  Him. 
With  heart  and  lips  will  they  rejoice  to  cry  ; — "  For 
He  is  good  ;  for  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever." 

But  they  shall  fare  thus  because  they  are  worthy. 
Let  not  Christians  of  our  times  dare  to  shrink  from 
that  word  uttered  by  Him  Who  is  the  same  yesterday, 
to-day,  and  for  ever.  The  light  of  the  glorious  Gospel 
must,  indeed,  first  shine  into  our  hearts  by  the  com- 
mand of  God  alone  ;  but  after  the  darkness  has  been 
dispelled,  though  all  the  power  must  still  come  from 
Him,  He,  nevertheless,  expects  a  co-operation  of  hearty 
will  on  our  part.  When  we  know  His  promise  to  give 
His  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  Him,  it  becomes 
our  duty  to  ask  ;  and  if  we  ask,  we  shall  receive,  and 
shall  then  be  enabled  to  do  "  those  good  works  which 
God  afore  prepared  that  we  should  walk  in  them."  ^ 
But  if  we  are  careless  in  this  matter,  we  shall  fail  in 
power,  our  work  will  be  left  undone,  and  we  shall 
not  gain  the  prize  which  is  set  before  us  for  patience 
in  the  race,  and  self-denial  in  the  fight.  It  is  possible 
for  a  Christian  to  suffer  loss,  and  to  be  saved  only 
so  as  through  fire,^  instead  of  having  an  entrance  richly 
supplied  into  the  eternal  Kingdom  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour.^  And  one  way,  at  least,  of  suffering  the  loss 
and  passing  through  the  fire  seems  to  be  the  being 
left  upon  earth  in  the  days  when  the  Lawless  One 
shall  be  unveiled. 

In  the  words  to  the  overcomer,  the  promise  of  white 
raiment  is  repeated  ;  and  we  are,  moreover,  told  that 
those  who  are  thus  arrayed  will  have  passed  beyond 
'  Eph.  ii.  10.  2  I  Cor.  iii.  15.  ^  2  Peter  i.  u. 


3S4  niE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

all  tests,  and  will  never  be  in  jeopardy  again  ;  for  the 
Lord  will  in  no  wise  blot  their  names  out  of  the  Book 
of  Life.  The  expression  is  difficult  :  it  seems  to  imply 
that  all  who  are  brought  under  the  sound  of  the  Gospel 
are  graciously  written  in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life  ; 
just  as  every  Israelite  at  his  birth  was  numbered  among 
the  favoured  people.  But  an  Israelite  might  so  neglect 
or  despise  the  law  of  his  God  that  sacrifice  could  not 
be  accepted  for  him  ;  so  that  he  was  doomed  to  bear 
his  own  iniquity,  and  be  cut  off  from  his  people.^  In 
like  manner,  those  who  have  heard  the  glad  tidings 
of  salvation  may,  by  their  disobedience  and  continued 
rebellion,  cause  their  names  to  be  erased  from  the 
Book  of  Life.  They  may  be  within  the  Gospel-net 
when  it  is  brought  to  shore,  but  be  cast  away  as  bad 
fish  when  the  separation  takes  place. 

In  Ezra  there  is  a  significant  verse  which  careless 
professors  would  do  well  to  ponder.  Of  certain  of  the 
children  of  the  priests  we  read  ; — "  These  sought  their 
register  among  those  that  were  reckoned  by  genealogy, 
but  they  were  not  found  ;  therefore  were  they,  as 
polluted,  put  from  the  priesthood."^ 

The  Lord  will  own  the  overcomers  of  this  Church 
before  His  Father  and  the  angels,  because  they  have 
not  been  ashamed  to  confess  Him  before  men.  Living 
in  the  midst  of  a  cold  and  spiritually  dead  generation, 
who  regarded  any  attempt  to  put  faith  into  practice, 
or  evince  love  by  obedience,  as  the  act  of  a  trouble- 
some enthusiast,  they,  nevertheless,  remained  true  to 
Him  who  died  for  them,  and  accepted  the  consequences. 
And  so  He  meets  them,  when  the  trial  is  over,  with 
the  gracious  acknowledgment,  "  Well  done,  good  and 
'  Levit.  xix,  8;  Num.  xv,  30,  31  ;  xix.  13.  -  Ezra  ii.  62. 


PHILADELPHIA.  385 

faithful  servant"  He  presents  them  to  His  Father 
as  His  own,  those  whom  He  has  chosen  to  reign  with 
Him,  whom  He  has  taken  from  the  dunghill  to  make 
them  inherit  the  Throne  of  Glory .^ 

xvni. 

Philadelphia. 

In  the  Epistles  to  Philadelphia  and  Laodlcea  we  come 
to  the  immediate  times  of  the  end  ;  for  these  Churches 
seem  to  represent  the  final  result  of  the  Reformation- 
period,  and  the  two  classes  which  are  to  be  ultimately- 
evolved  from  it.  Philadelphia,  which  signifies  "brotherly 
love,"  is  the  company  of  the  elect  upon  earth  ;  those 
who  will  be  chosen  when  Laodicea  is  rejected  and 
left  to  suffer  the  judgment  threatened  to  Sardis.  The 
present  Epistle  is,  therefore,  specially  addressed  to 
the  people  of  the  Lord  in  the  last  days,  to  those 
who  shall  be  alive  when  He  comes.  And  the  voice 
of  prophecy  agrees  with  the  course  of  events  in  point- 
ing to  ourselves  as  being  the  persons  directly  con- 
cerned, either  with  this  letter,  or  with  that  which 
follows  it :  so  that  the  solemn  question  for  each  of 
us  is,  Which  of  them  applies  to  my  case  .-'  Am  I 
among  the  beloved  of  the  Lord  who  shall  be  delivered 
from  the  hour  of  temptation  .-•  The  question  is  urgent, 
and  must  be  settled  at  once  while  opportunity  is  still 
granted  :  for  all  things  are  full  of  warning  that  the 
Lord  is  at  hand.  To  the  reasons  which  have  been 
already  suggested  for  this  expectation,  we  will  here 
add  another,  which  is  connected  with  the  subject  of 
this  Epistle. 

'  I  Sam.  ii,  8 

25 


386  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

On  the  day  of  Pentecost,  when  the  Spirit  had 
descended  and  endued  the  disciples  with  His  mighty 
power,  great  was  the  astonishment  of  those  Jews  who 
had  come  from  distant  regions  as  they  heard,  each  in 
his  own  tongue,  the  speech  of  the  Apostles.  "  What 
meaneth  this?"  they  cried  in  their  perplexity.  "Be- 
hold, are  not  all  these  which  speak  Galilaeans  ?  And 
how  hear  we  every  man  in  our  own  language,  wherein 
we  were  born  ? "  But  while  some  were  amazed,  others 
mocked,  and  said  ; — "  They  are  filled  with  new  wine." 
Then,  amid  the  bewildering  din,  the  Twelve  stood  up, 
and  Peter  stepped  forward  as  spokesman.  They  were 
not,  he  said,  drunken  with  wine,  as  some  supposed  ; 
but  God  was  bringing  to  pass  that  which  He  had 
spoken  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophet  Joel  in  the 
glorious  words — 

"And  it  shall  be  in  the  last  days,  saith  God, 
I  will  pour  forth  of  My  Spirit  upon  all  flesh  : 
And  your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy, 
And  your  young  men  shall  see  visions, 
And  your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams  ; 

Yea,  and  on  My  servants  and  on  My  handmaidens  in  those  days 
Will  I  pour  forth  of  My  Spirit ;  and  they  shall  prophesy. 
And  I  will  show  wonders  in  the  heaven  above, 
And  signs  on  the  earth  beneath  ; 
Blood,  and  fire,  and  vapour  of  smoke  : 
The  sun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness, 
And  the  moon  into  blood- 
Before  the  day  of  the  Lord  come. 
That  great  and  notable  day  : 

And  it  shall  be,  that  whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the 
Lord  shall  be  saved." 

Now  this  prophecy  of  the  latter  days  foretold  an 
outpouring  of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  all  flesh — that 
is,  upon  all  nations  without  distinction,  and  not  merely 


PHILADELPHIA,  387 

upon  Israel,  to  which  such  influences  had  been  pre- 
viously confined  ;  and  Peter  affirmed  that  the  promise 
was  even  then  beginning  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  eyes 
of  the  people.  But  the  words  which  he  quoted  go 
on  to  speak  of  signs  in  the  heaven  above,  and  on  the 
earth  beneath,  which  did  not  then  appear,  nor  indeed 
will  do  so,  until  the  close  of  the  dispensation  and  the 
eve  of  the  Day  of  the  Lord.  Indeed,  they  are  the 
same  as  the  signs  mentioned  in  the  discourse  on  the 
Mount  of  Olives,  which  will  be  the  signal  that  the 
times  of  the  Gentiles  are  ended.  And,  consequently, 
the  predicted  work  of  the  Spirit  extends  throughout 
the  whole  of  the  present  age.  Hence,  perhaps,  the 
reason  why  Peter  does  not  say,  "  This  is  the  fulfil- 
ment of  that  which  hath  been  spoken,"  but  only, 
"  This  is  that  which  hath  been  spoken "  ;  in  other 
words,  "  This  is  a  part,"  or,  "  the  beginning  of  it." 
Since,  then,  there  were  to  be  outpourings  like  those 
of  Pentecost  connected  with  the  whole  period  of  the 
dispensation  of  grace,  in  what  way  were  they  to 
happen  .-* 

If  we  keep  in  mind  the  fact  that  the  metaphor  is 
that  of  a  refreshing  shower  of  rain,  we  may  find  an 
answer  to  the  question  in  the  following  words  of 
James; — "Be  patient  therefore,  brethren,  until  the 
coming-  of  the  Lord.  Behold,  the  husbandman  waiteth 
for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth,  being  patient  over 
it,  until  it  receive  the  early  and  latter  rain.  Be  ye 
also  patient ;  stablish  your  hearts :  for  the  coming  of 
the  Lord  is  at  hand."  ^ 

Now  in  Palestine  the  normal  early,  or  autumn, 
rain    begins    in    October,    at   sowing  time  j  while   the 

'  Jas.  V.  7,  8. 


388  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

latter  comes  on  in  March,  and  continues  a  little  way 
into  April.  By  the  middle  of  April  the  barley  is 
ready  for  cutting,  and  the  wheat  harvest  follows  about 
a  fortnight  later.  At  the  present  time  both  the  rains 
are  usually  scanty  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  there 
is  no  absolute  cessation  of  wet  weather  between  the 
seasons.  But  this  is  doubtless  an  abnormal  condition 
of  things  ;  for  in  more  than  one  passage  of  the  Old 
Testament  it  was  plainly  intimated  that  the  rain- 
supply  of  the  Holy  Land  would  depend  upon  the 
obedience  of  the  people.  We  may  cite  the  following 
promise  as  an  instance  ; — "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass, 
if  ye  shall  hearken  diligently  unto  My  commandments 
which  I  command  you  this  day,  to  love  the  Lord  your 
God,  and  to  serve  Him  with  all  your  heart,  and  with 
all  your  soul,  that  I  will  give  you  the  rain  of  your 
land  in  its  due  season,  the  first  rain  and  the  latter 
rain."  ^ 

It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  we  must  understand 
James  to  be  alluding  to  the  regular  early  and  latter 
rains,  the  course  of  which  would  be  after  this  manner. 
The  first  would  come  on  during  sowing-time  :  storms 
would  prevail  for  a  day  or  two  ;  then  there  would  be 
a  short  interval  of  fine  weather  succeeded  by  another 
series  of  showers  ;  and  so  on,  until  the  dry  season  set 
in,  at  the  close  of  which,  about  six  weeks  before 
harvest,  the  clouds  would  return,  and  the  latter  rains 
begin. 

Accordingly,  in  applying  the  figure,  we  should  ex- 
pect copious  outpourings  of  the  Spirit  in  the  early  days 
of  the  Church,  and  also  toward  the  close  of  the  age,  at 

'  Deut.   xi.    13,    14.     Compare  Levit.    xxvi.  3,  4 ;    Jer.   iii.  3  ; 
Joel  ii.  23. 


PHILADELPHIA.  389 

the  sowing  and  just  before  the  reaping,  with  an  inter- 
vening period  of  but  little  power.  And  this  is  precisely 
what  has  happened.  From  the  Pentecost  which  was 
the  birthday  of  the  Church,  there  were  for  some  three 
centuries  showers  of  grace  in  many  countries,  and 
multitudes  of  earnest  preachers  overspread  the  world. 
But  in  the  fourth  century,  when  the  persecutions  had 
ceased,  and  Christianity  was  becoming  corrupt  and 
fashionable,  a  coldness,  worldliness,  and  laxity  of  doc- 
trine, set  in  ;  the  power  of  the  Spirit  was  withdrawn, 
and  there  was  a  great  drought  which  lasted,  without 
any  general  intermission,  through  many  weary  years, 
until  the  close  of  the  Dark  Ages. 

Then  the  season  of  the  latter  rain  seems  to  have 
commenced,  and  the  first  copious  showers  resulted  in 
the  Reformation.  The  next  remarkable  outpouring  in 
this  country  caused  the  awakening  in  the  middle  of 
the  eighteenth  century.  Then  came  a  marvellous  and 
abundant  rain  in  the  revivals  of  1857 — 59>  which 
affected  the  whole  of  the  Protestant  world  ;  and,  lastly, 
the  movement  which  is  still  going  on. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  great  showers  follow  at 
ever-shortening  periods.  Between  the  Reformation 
and  the  days  of  Wesley  more  than  two  centuries  had 
passed  by  ;  but  seventy  or  eighty  years  spanned  the 
interval  between  Wesley  and  the  revival  which  com- 
menced in  America ;  and  about  fourteen  years  after 
the  latter,  the  present  movement  began. 

Another  interesting  fact  is  that  the  former  rain 
lasted  about  three  hundred  years,  and  that  it  is  now 
rather  more  than  that  time  since  the  Reformation. 
Is  the  patient  waiting  for  the  early  and  latter  rain  all 
but  over,  and  has  the  season  of  harvest  come  at  last  ? 


390  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

What  means  the  cry  which  is  ever  gathering  strength 
among  the  people  of  the  Lord  ; — "  Behold,  the  Bride- 
groom Cometh  ;  go  ye  out  to  meet  Him  ! "  ?  Does 
the  eye  of  faith  already  discern  One  like  to  a  son  of 
man  seated  upon  the  white  cloud  with  His  sharp  sickle 
in  His  hand,  and  expecting  the  message,  "  Thrust  in 
Thy  sickle  and  reap  :  for  the  time  is  come  for  Thee  to 
reap  :  for  the  harvest  of  the  earth  is  ripe  ! "  ?  But  if 
so,  how  will  that  harvest  affect  us  ?  Shall  we  be 
gathered  into  the  Master's  garner,  have  an  entrance 
richly  ministered  unto  us  into  the  Kingdom  of  our 
Lord  and  Saviour,  and  pass  through  the  pearly  gates 
of  the  city  with  the  rejoicing  cry,  "  'Tis  heaven  at 
last ! "  ?  Or  shall  vje  be  left  upon  the  reaped  earth, 
miserably  groaning,  "  The  harvest  is  past,  the  summer 
is  ended,  and  we  are  not  saved  ! "  ? 

Yet  one  more  remark  upon  the  four  great  revivals  : 
for  we  may  discern  in  them  a  very  striking  and  signi- 
ficant progress  of  doctrine. 

In  the  times  of  the  first,  the  everlasting  foundation- 
stone,  which  had  been  buried  beneath  the  rubbish  of 
centuries,  was  uncovered,  so  that  it  could  be  seen  by 
all ;  and  once  again  the  apostolic  message  was  freely 
proclaimed,  that  man  can  be  saved  only  through  faith 
in  Christ  Jesus,  and  not  by  his  own  works  or  deservings. 

In  the  second,  the  new  point  chiefly  insisted  upon 
was  that  conversion  is  instantaneous  and  miraculous, 
being  caused  by  the  entrance  into  a  man  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  by  whose  indwelling  he  is  made  a  new  creature 
in  Christ  Jesus,  separated  off  from  the  world,  and 
gradually  sanctified  and   prepared  for  his  glorification. 

In  the  third  movement,  the  great  truth  of  the  unity 
of  the  Church  was  recovered,  and  men  began  to  see, 


PHILADELPHIA.  391 

as  they  never  had  before  in  modern  times,  that  Christ 
Is  the  one  Centre  around  which  all  who  believe  in  Him 
must  cluster ;  that  no  human  sects  or  creeds  must  be 
allowed  to  keep  Christians  apart,  because  the  whole  of 
the  real  Church  has  been  baptized  by  the  Spirit  into 
one  body. 

And  lastly,  during  the  present  outpouring  of  grace, 
two  things  have  been  brought  into  unwonted  promi- 
nence— the  doctrine  of  sanctification  with  the  necessity 
for  a  higher  spiritual  life,  and  the  proclamation  that 
the  Lord  is  at  hand.  These  doctrines  are  closely 
connected,  and  their  simultaneous  appearance  shows 
that  the  Spirit  is  now  pressing  upon  the  Church  the 
words,  "  Therefore,  be  ye  also  ready :  for  in  an  hour 
that  ye  think  not  the  Son  of  Man  cometh." 

These  considerations  may  be  added  to  what  has 
been  previously  said,  as  tending  to  strengthen  the 
conviction  that  we  are  now  living  in  the  time  indicated 
by  the  Epistle  to  the  Church  at  Philadelphia,  the 
prophecy  in  which  is  being  manifestly  fulfilled  around 
us.  For  the  deadness  of  Sardis  has  for  some  time 
given  place  to  the  warmth  of  revival  ;  though  alas  ! 
this  accession  of  energy  is  by  no  means  confined  to 
the  Church  of  Christ :  for  all  the  powers  of  Satan 
seem  on  every  side  to  be  starting  into  activity. 

We  find  in  this  letter  no  open  mention  of  blame  or 
rebuke  in  regard  to  those  who  are  directly  addressed. 
For  Philadelphia  is  the  Church  of  brotherly  love,^  and 
when  that  grace  reigns,  Christ  has  little  fault  to  find. 
We  must,  however,  be  careful  that  we  understand  the 
meaning  which  the  New  Testament  attaches  to  the 
term  :  we  must  not  interpret  it  of  the  world's  love  of 
'  ^i\a8eX<peia,  from  (f)i\e'Li>,  " to  love,"  and  dteX<p6s,  "a  brother." 


392  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

clansmen,  of  the  feeling  which  keeps  together  members 
of  the  same  sect  or  society,  or  of  the  mutual  attraction 
of  minds  which  have  been  cast  in  a  similar  mould. 
For  it  is  a  yearning  toward  all  true  believers,  not  by 
reason  of  any  qualities  they  may  possess,  nor  on 
account  of  coincidence  of  opinion,  but  because  they 
are  the  objects  of  Christ's  affection. 

To  this  John  refers  when  he  says  ; — "  We  know  that 
we  have  passed  out  of  death  into  life,  because  we  love 
the  brethren."  ^  For  if  the  love  of  Christ  constrains  us, 
so  that  we  are  drawn  toward  those  who  would  naturally 
be  unattractive  or  even  offensive  to  us,  we  have  proof 
that  we  are  a  new  creation  in  Him,  because  we  no 
longer  know  our  fellow  men  after  the  flesh,  but  only 
through  the  great  heart  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  Who  has 
become  our  life.^  And  this  grace  must  be  manifested 
in  us,  if  we  would  belong  to  the  Philadelphian  Church, 
and  be  saved  from  the  evil  that  is  coming  upon  a 
flesh. 

To   His    own  people    Christ  chooses    to  be    known 

as  "  He  that  is  holy,"  thereby  intimating  to  us  what 

manner  of  persons  we  also  must  be,  if  we  would   be 

/   His  at  His  coming  ;  for  without  holiness  no  man  shall 

see  the  Lord. 

But  He  also  presents  Himself  as  "  true,"  and  what 
earnest  searchings  of  heart  should  that  word  stir  up  in 
each  one  of  us !  For  how  great  insincerity,  and  what 
confusion  of  motives,  may  be  found  even  in  our  service 
to  God  !  So  natural,  indeed,  is  this  condition  to  us 
that  none  can  tell  how  often  he  offends  ;  and  yet  the 
Most  High  desires  truth  in  the  inward  parts,  and  all 
things  are  naked  and  laid  open  before  the  eyes  of  Him 
'  I  John  iii.  14.  ''^  2  Cor.  v.  14 — 17  ;  Gal.  ii.  20. 


PHILADELPHIA.  393 

with  Whom  we  have  to  do.  Surely  the  most  advanced 
behever  is  ever  needing  to  pray  with  the  Psalmist — 
"  Remove  from  me  the  way  of  lying." 

Lastly  ;  the  Lord  speaks  of  Himself  as  having  the 
key  of  David,  an  expression  of  considerable  difficulty 
on  account  of  the  purpose  for  which  the  key  is  after- 
wards used.  It  seems,  perhaps,  better  not  to  seek  an 
explanation  from  the  twenty-second  chapter  of  Isaiah 
— where  "  the  key  of  the  hoiise  of  David  "  may  have 
a  different  shade  of  meaning — but  to  understand  a 
simple  claim  on  the  part  of  the  Lord  to  the  power  of 
the  throne  of  David. 

When  the  heart  of  Ahaz  was  moved  and  the  heart 
of  his  people,  as  the  trees  of  the  wood  are  moved  by 
the  wind,  through  fear  lest  the  royal  family  of  Judah 
should  be  exterminated,  God  announced  that  the  root 
of  Jesse  should  not  fail  until  a  virgin  should  bring 
forth  a  Son  upon  Whose  shoulder  the  government 
should  rest  for  ever.^  Now  Christ,  alone  of  men,  was 
born  of  a  virgin  mother,  and  He  was  also  the  lineal 
heir  to  the  throne  of  David  ;  therefore,  in  Him  the 
prophecy  must  be  fulfilled.  Accordingly,  He  here 
asserts  His  claim  to  that  power  over  the  world  which 
is  the  prerogative  of  the  Davidic  crown.  He  has  the 
right  to  open,  and  none  dare  shut  ;  or  to  shut,  and 
none  may  open  :  He  alone  can  let  loose,  and  He  can 
restrain.  This  great  power  He  will  shortly  assume  to 
Himself  in  the  sight  of  all  men  ;  but,  even  before  His 
time  comes.  He  will  anticipate  it  in  favour  of  the 
Philadelphians,  so  as  to  set  for  them  an  open  door 
which  no  man  can  shut. 

The  open  door  probably  means  an  opportunity  for 
'  Isa.  vii.  2,  14 ;  ix.  6,  '' 


394  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

testimony.  "Withal  praying  for  us  also,"  says  Paul, 
"  that  God  may  open  unto  us  a  door  for  the  word,  to 
speak  the  mystery  of  Christ."^  And  again  ;  "  But  I 
will  tarry  at  Ephesus  until  Pentecost ;  for  a  great  door 
and  effectual  is  opened  unto  me."^  And  in  yet 
another  place  he  relates  that,  when  he  came  to  Troas 
to  preach  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  a  great  door  was 
opened  unto  him  in  the  Lord.^ 

Thus  the  title,  He  that  hath  the  key  of  David,  taken 
in  connection  with  the  promise  which  follows  it,  may 
have  been  intended  to  signify  that  the  Lord  would  use 
His  rightful  power  over  the  world  to  restrain  opposi- 
tion to  the  preaching  of  His  people  in  the  times  of  the 
end.  In  other  words,  that  a  testimony  should  go  forth, 
a  last  warning  cry,  like  that  of  Enoch  before  he  was 
taken  away  from  the  doomed  earth. 

And  the  promise  is  now  being  fulfilled  before  our 
eyes.  The  world  is  not  changed  ;  yet  at  the  present 
time  it  suffers  the  preaching  of  Christ  with  a  forbear- 
ance never  before  known.  Its  great  and  wise  men  do 
not  indeed  conceal  their  contempt  for  the  Divine  reve- 
lation, though  by  their  sneers  they  are  ever  proving  its 
truth  while  they  cry  ; — "  Where  is  the  promise  of  His 
coming }  For  from  the  day  that  the  fathers  fell 
asleep,  all  things  continue  as  they  were  from  the 
beginning."  Its  ecclesiastics  and  sectaries  are  still  as 
averse  to  the  real  doctrine  of  Christ  as  the  Pharisees 
and  Sadducees  were  at  the  first  advent.  Nevertheless, 
there  is  at  present  no  serious  interference  with  the 
work  of  Evangelical  Christians :  for  the  Lord  has 
opened,  and  there  is  none  who  may  dare  to  shut 
How  fearful  is  our  responsibility  during  a  time  so 
'  Col.  iv.  3.  '  I  Cor.  xvi.  8,  9.  '2  Cor.  ii.  12. 


PHILADELPHIA.  39? 

graciously  given  :  how  earnestly  should  we  strive,  if  by 
any  means  we  may  save  some  of  those  for  whom 
Christ  died  !  Now  it  is  day ;  but  the  day  is  fast  de- 
clining, and  the  night  cometh,  when  no  man  can 
work. 

The  Lord  is,  however,  careful  to  explain  why  He 
has  thus  opened  a  door  for  Philadelphia,  She  has 
heeded  the  warning  given  to  Sardis  :  she  has  strength- 
ened the  things  that  were  ready  to  die,  so  that  she  now 
possesses  "  a  little  power  "  ;  therefore,  He  is  able  to 
fulfil  to  her  His  own  words  ; — "  Unto  every  one  which 
hath  shall  be  given."  This  little  power  has  been 
shown  in  the  fact  that  she  has  not  suffered  herself  to 
be  carried  away  by  any  of  the  currents  of  the  world  : 
she  has  held  fast  to  the  word  of  Christ,  and  has 
yielded  neither  to  the  traditions  nor  to  the  philosophies 
of  men.  And  in  the  present  day  how  hard  it  is  to  do 
this,  how  few  the  number  of  those  who  follow  such  a 
rule  !  Yet  for  this  the  Lord  loves  Philadelphia,  and 
will  save  her  from  the  hour  of  temptation. 

O  that  all  true  believers  would  apply  the  lesson 
thus  presented  to  them,  and  begin  to  prepare  for  the 
impending  change  by  a  strict  comparison  of  their  own 
doctrine  and  practice  with  the  revealed  laws  of  the 
King !  How  otherwise  can  we  be  ready  for  His 
coming  !  And  let  us  not  imagine  that  any  supposed 
service  will  cover  the  defects  of  our  obedience. 
"  Hath  the  Lord  as  great  delight  in  burnt  offerings 
and  sacrifices,  as  in  obeying  the  voice  of  the  Lord  .' 
Behold,  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken 
than  the  fat  of  rams." 

And  we  must  not  forget  that,  to  pass  by  individual 
mistakes,  there  is  not  a  sect  in  Christendom  which  has 


396  THk   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

not  some  errors  in  its  creed,  Tliese  it  is  the  duty  of 
every  Christian  to  detect  and  discard  ;  and  so  all  true 
believers  would  find  themselves  drawing  nearer  and 
nearer  to  each  other,  and  would  soon  be  standing,  in 
these  last  times,  as  one  body,  separated  from  worldly 
religion,  as  well  as  from  every  other  kind  of  world- 
liness,  and  awaiting  the  summons  which  shall  bid  them 
quit  for  ever  the  painful  conflicts  of  earth  for  the 
glory  which  dwells  in  Immanuel's  land.  ^ 

It  is  also  said  of  the  Philadelphians  that  they  did  not 
deny  Christ's  name.  Such  a  denial  is  not  necessarily 
made  in  express  terms  :  we  may  put  an  earthly  Church 
in  His  place  ;  we  may  deify  human  intellect  ;  or, 
perhaps,  the  denial  may  rest  in  an  ignoring  of  Christ's 
name,  either  through  a  false  shame,  or  because,  how- 
ever willing  we  may  be  to  speak  of  Him  as  a  great 
teacher  and  philosopher,  we  do  not  really  believe  Him 
to  be  the  Only  Begotten  Son  of  the  Father,  and  the 
One  Sacrifice  for  sin. 

There  are  many  roads  by  which  Satan  leads  pro- 
fessing Christians  far  away  from  the  pale  of  the  Phila- 
delphian    Church ;    and  yet    how  easy    it  is  in    these 

'  We  do  not  mean  b}'  this  to  suggest  the  formation  of  a  new 
Church  with  none  but  real  Christians  for  its  members.  Such  a 
scheme  has  been  often  tried  with  the  invariable  result  that 
another  sect,  if  not  more  than  one,  has  been  added  to  previous 
distractions.  None  but  the  Chief  Shepherd  Himself  will  ever 
succeed  in  gathering  the  harassed  sheep  into  one  visible  fold. 
But  while  Christians  remain — so  long  as  conscience  permits — in 
whatever  communities  they  may  happen  to  be,  let  them  be  ever 
ready  to  join  in  intercommunions,  and  let  them  remember  the 
solemn  context  of  those  words  ; — "  Then  they  that  feared  the 
Lord  spake  often  one  to  auof/icr."  If  the  distinctions  and 
feelings  of  sect  keep  them  from  these  things,  they  have  little 
hope  of  being  included  within  the  pale  of  the  favoured  Phila- 
delphian  Church. 


PHILADELPHIA.  397 

times  to  confess  Christ,  when  the  worst  consequences 
which  are  Hkely  to  follow  a  faithful  testimony  are 
nothing  more  than  the  derision  of  the  world,  the 
censure  of  nominal  Christians,  and,  perchance,  the  loss 
of  some  few  friends  !  Very  different  will  it  be  when 
liberty  is  taken  away,  and  the  false  king  sits  on  his 
throne  :  for  then,  in  the  case  of  all  who  are  to  be 
saved,  that  confession,  which  love  could  not  call  forth  in 
the  days  of  ease,  must  be  extorted  by  the  fires  of  per- 
secution. 

The  renewed  activity  of  preaching,  caused  by  the 
latter  rain,  moves  Satan  to  repeat  the  stratagem  by 
which  he  gradually  counteracted  the  work  of  the 
early  Church  ;  and,  consequently,  the  false  Jews,  the 
synagogue  of  Satan  mentioned  in  the  Epistle  to 
Smyrna,  appear  for  the  second  time  upon  the  scene. 
For  some  years  they  have  been  rapidly  overspreading 
the  countries  in  which  outpourings  of  the  Spirit  have 
occurred,  especially  England  and  America,  neutra- 
lizing the  pure  word  of  God  by  means  of  Babylonian 
ritual  and  priestcraft,  and  often  guiding  men  back  to 
Rome  itself.  Their  followers  are  taught  to  look  down 
upon  believers  who  hold  more  Scriptural  views,  and  to 
arrogate  to  themselves  the  place  of  God's  Church,  just 
as  the  Pharisees  did  at  the  first  advent. 

But  all  who  are  really  resting  upon  their  Lord  may 
be  well  content  to  endure  this  treatment  for  a  season  ; 
for  He  has  here  promised  to  plead  their  cause  in  His 
own  person,  and  to  show  that  He  has  loved  them. 
And  He  will  do  it  in  such  a  manner  that  some  of  those 
who  have  been  led  blindfold  into  the  false  synagogue, 
through  not  understanding  the  depths  of  Satan,  will 
repent  and  bow  down  before  them,  confessing  that  after 


398  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

all  they  were  the  true  Church,  and  desiring  to  be  joined 
to  them  in   Christ. 

How  this  change  will  be  effected,  and  in  what  way 
He  will  put  a  distinction  between  the  obedient  and  the 
misguided,  the  Lord  now  proceeds  to  explain.  But, 
first  of  all,  there  must  be  no  mistake  in  regard  to  His 
reason  :  because  the  Philadelphians  have  kept  the  word 
of  His  patience,  therefore  He  will  keep  them  from  the 
hour  of  temptation.  How  great  trouble  might  we 
spare  ourselves  did  we  but  keep  the  word  of  Christ ! 
It  is  comparatively  easy  to  receive  it  :  the  difficulty  is 
to  hold  it  fast  with  patience  until  the  end. 

The  idea  conveyed  by  the  Greek  noun  translated 
"  patience  "  is  that  of  manly  endurance  :  the  verb  con- 
nected with  it  is  sometimes  used  of  soldiers  who,  when 
charged  by  the  enemy,  do  not  give  way,  but  stand 
their  ground.  And  so  the  Lord  has  set  each  one  of 
us  in  a  position  which  we  must  maintain  in  spite  of  all 
the  efforts  of  the  Powers  of  Darkness  to  dislodge  us. 

Waiting  amid  trials  and  temptations  is  a  chief  in- 
gredient in  our  cup  of  discipline ;  for  "  it  is  good  that  a 
man  should  both  hope  and  quietly  wait  for  the  salva- 
tion of  the  Lord."  There  is  no  fruition  for  us  now, 
except  peace  and  joy  in  the  Spirit  :  we  must  live  on  the 
future ;  we  must,  like  our  Master,  endure  the  cross, 
despising  the  shame,  for  the  joy  that  is  set  before  us. 
For  here  we  have  no  continuing  city,  but  are  strangers 
and  pilgrims,  until  we  are  brought  into  our  own  city 
which  is  in  heaven.  Hence  Paul  says  to  the  Hebrews  ; 
— "  Ye  have  need  of  patience  that,  after  ye  have  done 
the  will  of  God,  ye  may  receive  the  promises."  And 
he  commends  the  Thessalonians  because  they  turned  to 
God  from  idols,  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God.  and 


PHILADELPHIA,  399 

to  wait  for  His  Son  from  heaven.  This  patience  and 
willingness  to  wait  for  Christ  the  Philadelphians  have, 
and  their  reward  is  that  He  will  keep  them  from  the 
great  hour  of  temptation. 

Now  the  temptation  will  not  be  partial,  but  uni- 
versal ;  for  it  is  to  come  upon  "  the  whole  world  "  : 
and,  consequently,  those  who  are  to  be  delivered  from 
it  must  needs  be  taken  out  of  the  world,  even  as  Enoch 
was  before  the  corruption  and  violence  of  men  had 
come  to  their  worst  in  the  days  of  Noah,  And  that 
this  is  what  the  Lord  means  is  evident  from  the  follow- 
ing words,  "  I  am  coming  quickly."  The  Philadel- 
phians will  obey  the  command  to  watch  and  pray 
always,  that  they  may  be  accounted  worthy  to  escape 
all  the  things  that  shall  come  to  pass,  and  to  stand 
before  the  Son  of  Man  ;  and  they  will  be  heard.  At 
a  time  known  only  to  God,  but,  as  we  have  previously 
seen,  before  the  rise  of  Antichrist,  the  Lord  will 
descend  to  the  mid-region  of  the  air,  and  call  to  Him- 
self all  those  who  are  looking  for  Him.  And  then 
the  temptation  will  come  upon  the  whole  world,  "  to 
test  them  that  dwell  upon  the  earth." 

The  last  expression  is  doubtless  to  be  understood  in 
a  moral  sense  of  all  those  who  have  settled  themselves 
upon  the  earth,  with  little  or  no  aspiration  beyond  it  ; 
and  who  must  be  tested,  because  there  is  some  wheat 
even  in  that  vast  heap  of  chaff.  For  there  are  many 
who  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  but  do  not  go  much 
further  in  His  ways ;  who  are  careless  of  pressing  on 
to  know  Him  and  the  power  of  His  resurrection, 
being  content  with  things  here  below,  with  their 
Churches  and  acts  of  devotion  and  good  works.  And 
so  their  thoughts  are  fixed  upon  earth  :  they  seldom 


400  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

contemplate  the  heavenly  calling,  and  do  not  look  for 
that  blessed  hope  and  appearing  of  the  glory  of  our 
great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 

Such  a  state  of  mind  must  engender  worldliness,  and 
cause  those  who  have  it  to  be  more  or  less  dwellers 
upon  the  earth.  And  to  separate  them  from  the 
altogether  carnal,  to  make  them  start  back  with  horror 
from  the  things  that  are  seen  and  long  for  the  advent 
of  the  Deliverer,  the  hour  of  trial  will  come  :  they  will 
be  made  to  experience  what  the  world  is  when  the 
restraining  influence  of  the  Spirit  is  withdrawn,  and  the 
Mystery  of  Lawlessness  unveiled.  Then  the  miracles 
of  Antichrist  will  bewilder,  and  his  bloody  persecutions 
terrify,  them  ;  but,  since  they  are  the  beloved  of  the 
Lord,  He  will  sustain  them,  and  the  fearful  agitation  of 
the  sifting  shall  prove  them  to  be  wheat. 

Very  different  will  be  the  result  to  the  rest  of  the 
world.  They  will  yield  to  temptation  :  having  rejected 
God  and  His  Christ,  they  will  fill  up  the  measure  of 
their  iniquity  by  bowing  before  Satan  and  the  Beast ; 
and  be,  consequently,  swept  as  chaff  into  the  unquench- 
able fire. 

Since,  however,  the  grace  of  God  will  have  previously 
separated  the  Philadelphians  from  the  world  and  the 
false  Church,  they  will  not  need  the  severity  of  the  last 
winnowing,  and  will,  therefore,  be  removed  before  that 
terrible  purging  of  the  floor  commences.  Their  minds 
should  be  fixed  on  the  promise,  "  I  am  coming  quickly  !  " 
for  their  toil,  and  testifying,  and  light  affliction,  will  not 
last  long  :  Christ  will  shortly  appear,  and  turn  all  their 
sorrow  into  everlasting  joy. 

But  He  adds  a  caution.  Let  them  be  careful  and 
continually  watch  and  pray,  that  they  may  retain  the 


PHILADELPHIA  401 

grace  given  unto  them.  For  although  His  people  can 
never  perish,  neither  shall  any  one  snatch  them  out  of 
His  hand,  yet  they  may  be  beguiled  of  their  reward. 
If  by  yielding  to  their  own  inclination,  and  the  words 
of  those  who  deprecate  fanaticism,  they  lapse  into 
indolence ;  if  they  follow  in  the  way  of  others  and 
indulge  their  fleshly  appetites  ;  if  they  suffer  the  cares 
of  life  to  gather  around  them  like  a  mist  beyond  which 
they  can  see  nothing  ;  if  they  turn  aside  either  to 
human  philosophy  or  tradition — they  may  fail  to  lay 
hold  of  that  for  which  they  were  laid  hold  of  by  Christ, 
and  miss  the  glory  of  the  Kingdom,  though  they  be 
saved  from  eternal  death. 

The  Lord  presses  His  exhortation  still  further  by  the 
promise  to  the  overcomer.  When  those  who  are  ready 
shall  have  been  caught  up  to  Him,  it  will  be  time  to 
begin  the  building  of  the  great  living  Temple.  For  the 
chief  of  the  stones  will  then  have  been  conveyed  to  the 
appointed  spot,  hewn  and  chiselled  and  fitted  each  for 
its  place,  so  that  no  sound  of  hammer,  or  axe,  or  any 
iron  tool  of  affliction,  will  ever  be  heard  there.'^  And 
in  the  glorious  erection  those  who  have  endured  the 
contempt  of  men  for  Christ's  sake  will  be  pillars  of 
strength  and  beauty,  fixed  on  their  bases,  so  that  they 
shall  no  more  go  out.  For  the  former  things  will  then 
have  passed  away,  and  those  who  in  previous  times 
have  been  bidden  to  come  out  from  the  world,  or — 
which  is  still  more  painful — to  turn  their  back  upon  the 
false  Church,  and  go  forth  unto  Christ  without  the 
camp  bearing  His  reproach,  will  then  have  reached  the 
abode  of  everlasting  rest,  the  dwelling  of  glory. 

The  mention  of  the  place  appointed  for  them  in  the 

'  I  Kings  vi.  7. 

26 


402  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

Temple  may  intimate  that,  during  the  interval  between 
their  rapture  and  the  Lord's  appearing  in  glory,  He  will 
judge  them  in  regard  to  the  things  done  in  the  body, 
and  assign  to  each  the  part  he  is  to  sustain  in  the 
celestial  worship. 

But  there  are  yet  other  rewards  for  the  overcomer. 
The  Lord  adds  ; — "  I  will  write  upon  him  the  name  of 
My  God,  and  the  name  of  the  city  of  My  God,  the  new 
Jerusalem,  which  cometh  down  out  of  heaven  from  My 
God,  and  Mine  own  new  name."  There  is  something 
very  gracious  in  the  expression,  "  My  God,"  which 
occurs  four  times  in  this  verse.  We  are  reminded  of  a 
former  utterance  ; — "  Go  unto  My  brethren,  and  say  to 
them,  1  ascend  unto  My  Father  and  your  Father,  and 
My  God  and  your  God."  ^  By  so  speaking  the  Lord 
seems,  in  both  instances,  to  identify  Himself,  as  the 
last  Adam,  with  His  own  people,  in  accordance  with  the 
Scripture  ; — "  For  both  He  That  sanctifieth  and  they 
that  are  sanctified  are  all  of  One  :  for  which  cause  He 
is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren."^ 

In  regard  to  the  significance  of  the  names,  Christ 
will  acknowledge  His  faithful  disciples  before  His 
Father,  Who  will  then  Himself  recognise  them,  and  by 
setting  His  name  upon  them  seal  them  as  His  own. 
The  overcomer  will  also  be  marked  as  a  citizen  of  the 
Jerusalem  which  is  now  above,  but  will  shortly  descend 
to  be  the  light  and  glory  of  the  redeemed  earth.  And, 
lastly,  Christ  will  write  upon  him  His  own  new  name, 
probably  that  to  which  allusion  is  afterwards  made  ; — 
"  And  He  hath  a  name  written,  which  no  man  knoweth 
but   Himself."  ^     In    Immanuel's  land    a    name  is  no 

'  John  XX.  17.  -  Heb.  ii.  n.  '^  Rev.  xix.  12. 


LAO  DICE  A.  403 

empty  sound,  as  with  us  :  it  declares  the  real  nature  of 
its  possessor.  Probably,  therefore,  this  new  name 
indicates  some  glorious  mystery  of  which,  by  his  union 
with  Christ,  the  believer  will  be  made  a  partaker  in  the 
coming  age. 

The  last  words  of  the  Epistle,  the  exhortation  to 
listen,  should  fall  solemnly  upon  our  ears  :  for,  as  we 
said  just  now,  there  is  strong  probability  that  they  apply 
to  us  above  all  others,  that  the  Lord  is  even  now  com- 
pleting the  number  of  the  Philadelphian  Church,  and 
will,  in  the  times  of  the  present  generation,  remove  her 
to  the  Heavenly  Places.  "  Watch  therefore  ;  for  ye 
know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour  wherein  the  Son  of 
man  cometh." 

XIX. 

Laodicea. 

In  its  prophetic  bearing  this  Epistle  depicts  the  great 
body  of  professing  Christians  in  their  last  phase,  and 
describes  that  worldly  and  self-satisfied  disposition  for 
which  Christ  will  at  length  openly  reject  them.  It  is 
also  a  final  warning,  summoning  all  who  can  hear  to 
leave  the  dead,  though  outwardly  prosperous.  Church, 
and  join  the  despised  Philadelphians,  before  Laodicea 
is  disowned  by  Him  Whom  she  insincerely  calls  Lord, 
while  she  does  not  the  things  which  He  has  com- 
manded. For  her  very  name  points  to  her  lawlessness, 
since  it  signifies  the  Church  in  which  the  people  are  the  | 
judges  of  what  is  right.^  And  this  indicates  the  deep- 
seated   cause    of   corruption,   by  which    she    has  been 

'  AaoStK€ia  from  Xady,  "people,"  and  Sikh,  "custom,"  "  usage," 
"right." 


404  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

SO  terribly  affected  that,  while  the  Lord  finds  no  fault 
with  Philadelphia,  He  knows  of  nothing  for  which  He 
can  commend  Laodicea. 

As  Sardis  was  evolved  from  Thyatira,  being  the 
development  of  that  body  which  knew  not  the  depths 
of  Satan,  so  Philadelphia  consists  of  the  faithful  and 
true  who  have  come  out  from  Sardis  ;  but  Laodicea 
- — to  quote  the  striking  words  of  Stier — is  "  the  great 
residuum  of  dead  Christianity  gathered  together  at  the 
last  time." 

To  this  Church  the  Lord  introduces  Himself  in  a 
peculiarly  solemn  way,  which  intimates  that  faith  in 
His  promises  and  person  has  waned  and  almost  dis- 
appeared. For,  in  the  first  place,  He  is  the  Amen, 
that  is,  the  Truth,  the  word  being  the  same  "  Verily " 
with  which  He  was  wont  to  preface  many  of  His  utter- 
ances. He  thus  meets  the  ever-spreading  unbelief, 
which,  in  various  forms  and  degrees,  we  may  detect  in 
almost  every  circle.  It  is  now  the  time  of  the  scoffers, 
who  are  saying  ; — "  Where  is  the  promise  of  His 
coming  } "  Nay,  there  are  not  a  few  who  profess  to  be 
Christians,  and  yet  eliminate  all  that  is  supernatural 
from  their  Christianity  !  And  others,  like  the  Pharisees, 
are  so  satisfied  with  their  own  Church  upon  earth,  that 
they  can  see  no  necessity  for  Christ's  appearing,  and 
dislike  all  thought  of  the  changes  which  such  an  event 
would  occasion.  These  and  similar  ideas  are  destroy- 
ing the  faith  of  many  ;  so  that,  while  they  profess  to 
think  much  of  the  Lord's  moral  teaching,  they  disregard 
or  explain  away  His  prophetic  utterances.  But  their 
folly  will  soon  be  turned  into  bitter  repentance  :  for  all 
that  He  has  said  shall  be  yea  and  amen — a  joy  to  the 
Philadelphians,  but  a  terrible  woe  to  the  Laodiceans. 


LA  ODICEA.  405 

He  is  also  the  Faithful  and  True  Witness:  therefore, 
although  He  is  long-suffering,  yet  His  very  faithfulness 
will  presently  cause  Him  to  send  forth  His  wrath. 
And,  accordingly,  in  the  eleventh  verse  of  the  nine- 
teenth chapter,  where  He  is  represented  as  suddenly 
unveiled  before  the  affrighted  world,  He  is  styled  the 
Faithful  and  True. 

But  there  is  also  another  meaning  to  His  title  ;  for 
Laodicea  has  failed  in  her  testimony,  therefore  He 
must  Himself  appear.  It  is  recorded  of  the  persecuted 
Christians  at  Lyons  and  Vienne  that,  during  their 
severe  and  protracted  sufferings,  they  refused  to  be 
called  martyrs,  or  witnesses,  affirming  that  their  Lord 
was  the  only  true  Martyr.  Self-satisfied  Laodicea  has 
no  such  thoughts  of  Him  ;  and  so  He  declares  His 
character  before  delivering  upon  her  a  judgment  awfully 
contradictory  of  her  own.  She  has  vaunted  herself  to 
others,  but  He  is  the  great  Truth-speaker  :  will  she 
dare  to  support  her  cause  against  Him  t 

Lastly ;  the  Lord  is  "  the  Beginning  of  the  creation 
of  God,"  an  expression  which  Arians  have  interpreted 
to  mean  that  He  was  the  first  of  created  beings.  But 
revelation  teaches  us  that  He  was  the  Only  Begotten 
Son  of  the  Father ;  and,  moreover,  that  "  all  things 
were  made  by  Him  ;  and  without  Him  was  not  any- 
thing made  that  hath  been  made."  Hence,  it  is  evident 
that  He  is  called  "  the  Beginning  of  the  creation  of 
God,"  as  being  the  First  Cause  of  all  created  things. 
He  is  thus  the  Beginning,  and  He  is  also  the  Amen,  or 
the  End  ;  while  in  the  meantime  He  is  the  Faithful 
and  True  Witness. 

As  regards  those  whom  He  addresses,  since  they  are 
described   as   neither  hot   nor  cold,  they   must   be   the 


4o6  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD, 

saved  who  have  allowed  themselves  to  sink  back  into 
"  the  corruption  which  is  in  the  world  through  lust," 
the  unstable  believers  who  strive  to  make  the  best  of 
both  worlds — to  serve  God  and  Mammon.  Such  an 
attempt  can  be  made  only  by  withdrawing  to  a  distance 
from  Christ,  and  then  the  warmth  and  zeal  of  first  love 
quickly  begins  to  cool  in  the  chilly  atmosphere  which 
surrounds  it.  So  is  it  with  Laodiceans,  wherever  they 
are  found :  they  have  ceased  to  be  affected  by  the 
powers  of  the  World  to  Come  ;  Christ  is  no  longer  in 
them  as  the  hope  of  glory  ;  and,  since  they  do  not 
experience  His  constraining  love,  they  are  naturally 
disinclined  to  suffer  inconvenience  for  His  sake,  to 
spend  and  be  spent  in  His  service. 

The  cities  of  Laodicea  and  Colossse  were  very  near 
to  each  other,  so  that  the  Churches  were  closely  con- 
nected ;  and  it  is  interesting  to  notice  that  Paul,  in 
his  letter  to  the  Colossians,  directs  them  to  salute  the 
Laodiceans  for  him,  and  to  send  on  the  Epistle  to  be 
read  in  their  assembly  !^  We  may,  therefore,  fairly 
infer  that  the  proximity  and  intimacy  of  these  Churches 
had  caused  them  to  be  infected  with  similar  errors,  and 
that  the  faults  of  the  one  had  become,  to  some  extent 
at  least,  the  faults  of  the  other. 

Supposing  this  to  have  been  the  case,  we  can  get  a 
glimpse  of  the  state  of  Laodicea  by  carefully  reading 
the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  ;  and,  in  doing  so,  shall 
find  the  great  charge  against  them  to  be,  that  Christ 
had  been  deprived  of  His  honour  and  glory  by  their 
doctrines  and  the  practices  evolved  from  them. 
Accordingly,  in  the'  first  chapter,  Paul  sets  forth  the 
power  and  Godhead  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  a  marvellous 

'  Col.  iv.  15,  16. 


LAODICEA.  407 

description,  and  then  comments  upon  the  errors  which 
had  caused  Him  to  be  slighted. 

The  converts  had  not  looked  for  all  the  treasures  of 
wisdom  and  knowledge  in  Him,  and  were,  consequently, 
allowing  themselves  to  be  made  a  spoil  by  means  of 
philosophy  and  vain  deceit,  after  the  tradition  of  men, 
after  the  rudiments  of  the  world,  and  not  after  Christ. 

For  they  did  not  walk  in  Christ  Jesus,  the  Lord,  as 
they  had  received  Him  and  been  taught :  they  did  not 
consider  themselves  complete  in  Him,  made  full  from 
His  fulness  :  nor  did  they  frankly  believe  that  He  had 
blotted  out  the  handwriting  of  ordinances  which  was 
against  them. 

And  thus  they  were  moved  to  seek  salvation  from 
other  sources,  as  well  as  from  Him  ;  so  that  their 
religion  consisted  largely  of  distinctions  between  clean 
and  unclean  meats,  and  of  observances  of  festivals, 
v/hich  God  had,  indeed,  formerly  appointed  as  a 
shadow  of  the  coming  Saviour,  but  which  had  lost  all 
their  value  now  that  the  body  which  cast  the  shadow 
had  taken  its  place.  They  were  also  devoting  them- 
selves to  a  self-conscious,  and  therefore  profitless, 
humility  ;  and  were  associating  other  objects  of 
worship  with  the  Lord  Jesus,  even  daring  to  pray  to 
those  angelic  beings  whom  He  had  created.  Thus 
they  had  ceased  to  hold  fast  the  Head,  and  just  as  if 
He  had  not  died  for  them,  were  subjecting  themselves 
to  ordinances  which  He  had  never  commanded,  and 
which  could  only  mean  that  His  work  was  not  all- 
sufficient. 

Again  ;  they  practised  fastings  and  other  ncglect- 
ings  of  the  body,  which  Paul  declares  to  be  of  no  value, 
but    merely  to    serve    for  the  satisfying  of   the    flesh. 


4oS  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

And,  in  fine,  instead  of  the  spiritual  service  enjoined 
by  Christ,  they  substituted  a  fruitless  worship  arranged 
according  to  human  ideas,  and  already  condemned  by 
the  words  of  the  Lord  ; — "  In  vain  do  they  worship  Me, 
teaching  for  doctrines  the  commandments  of  men." 
They  were  being  beguiled  of  their  reward,  and  were 
wasting  the  time  which  God  had  given  them  upon 
earth. 

After  thus  sketching  out  their  errors,  Paul  makes  a 
powerful  appeal  to  them.  If  they  really  were  risen 
with  Christ,  they  should  look  far  beyond  the  meaning- 
less trifles  which  were  occupying  their  minds.  What 
had  "  Handle  not,  taste  not,  touch  not,"  to  do  with 
those  who  were  dead  to  the  world,  and  whose  life  was 
hid  with  Christ  in  God  }  It  was  not  theirs  to  be  con- 
structing elaborate  systems  upon  earth  :  they  should  be 
setting  their  affections  on  things  above,  where  Christ 
sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  where  is  the  city  of  true 
believers,  and  whence  they  should  be  looking  for  the 
Lord  Jesus  to  come  and  change  their  vile  bodies  into 
the  likeness  of  His  glorious  body  ! 

But  the  Epistle  which  we  are  considering  shows  that 
Paul's  words  had  not  availed  with  the  Laodiceans, 
whatever  effect  they  may  have  had  upon  the  Colos- 
sians.  The  former  had  proved  themselves  worthy  of 
their  name  :  whatever  was  right  in  their  own  eyes,  that 
was  also  their  faith  and  their  law.  And,  as  a  natural 
consequence,  their  love  for  Christ  had  cooled  to  luke- 
warmness  :  their  religion  was  a  mere  practice  of  out- 
ward rites  and  customs  and  a  belief  of  certain 
doctrines,  and  not  a  personal  attachment  to  their  Lord 
and  Saviour. 

In    the    prophetic    interpretation,  these    Laodiceans 


LAODICEA.  409 

seem  to  be  identified  with,  or  rather  to  include  those 
who  in  the  previous  Epistle  are  described  as  falsely 
calling  themselves  Jews.  And  in  all  that  we  can  learn 
of  them  there  will  be  found  solemn  warnings  against 
the  carnal  religionism  and  human  philosophy  which  are 
now  characterizing  Christendom.  For  the  lukewarm 
are  an  abhorring  to  the  Lord  :  He  would  deal  rather 
with  the  absolutely  cold.  The  former  class  by  their 
lack  of  love  and  inconsistent  conduct  cause  the 
adversaries  to  blaspheme,  and  so  compel  God  to  reject 
them  openly.  If  any  man  hold  the  form  of  godliness 
and  deny  its  power,  his  chastisement  must  be  made 
manifest  to  all,  that  the  holiness  of  God  may  be  vindi- 
cated, and  men  may  know  that  He  does  not  tolerate 
insincerity. 

Therefore  the  Lord  spued ^  out  the  Laodiceans  of 
old,  and  so  will  He  do  to  all  whom  He  finds  like  them 
at  His  coming.  These  are  they  who  shall  be  left 
when  others  are  taken  :  these  shall  stand  without, 
vainly  knocking,  after  the  Master  has  risen  and  shut  to 
the  door  :  these,  having  practically  denied  Christ  by 
adopting  traditions,  teachings,  and  systems,  which  did 
not  come  from  Him,  shall  feel  what  it  is  to  be  denied 
by  Him,  and  be  taught  by  the  sharp  goad  of  persecu- 
tion to  keep  more  carefully  to  the  simple  paths  which 
He  has  revealed. 

But  the  worst  feature  in  Laodicean  Christians  is 
that  they  do  not  realize  their  sad  condition  :  they 
think  highly  of  themselves,  and   say  that  they  are  rich 

'  The  metaphor  is  taken  from  the  use  of  lukewarm  water  as  an 
emetic,  and  expresses  the  very  strongest  abhorrence.  So  the 
land  of  Canaan  is  said  to  have  spued  out  its  inhabitants  on 
account  of  their  abominations  (Levit.  xviii.  28). 


410  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

and  have  grown  rich,  setting  forth  the  asserted  fact 
and  the  process  which  led  up  to  it  in  such  a  way  as 
to  imply  that  their  own  arm  has  done  it  ;  but  the 
assertion  itself  is  utterly  false.  They  feel — most  fatal 
of  symptoms — that  they  have  need  of  nothing  ! 
ordinances  and  will-worship  have  completely  satisfied 
the  flesh. 

Sternly,  therefore,  does  the  Lord  expose  their  real 
condition  in  the  words  ; — "And  knowest  not  that  thou 
art  the  wretched  one,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and 
blind,  and  naked  ! "  . 

How  often  in  this  life  are  men  deluded  by  sensuous 
dreams  and  the  arts  of  evil  spirits,  until  the  time 
comes  for  an  awful  awakening  !  The  rich  man  is 
clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  fares  sumptuously 
every  day  ;  but  presently  he  opens  his  eyes  in  Hades, 
being  in  torments,  and  unable  to  procure  a  drop  of 
water  to  cool  his  tongue.  And  even  among  the  saved, 
how  many  are  now  walking  as  the  first  who  will  have 
to  change  to  the  place  of  the  last  when  the  King 
comes  !  How  many  are  sitting  in  the  chief  seat  who 
will  hear  the  humbling  command  ; — "  Give  this  man 
place  "  ! 

In  the  words,  "  And  knowest  not  that  thou  art  the 
wretched  one,"  the  article  points  to  the  previous 
Epistle,  in  which  those  who  are  here  called  Laodiceans 
are  represented  as  looking  down  with  contempt  upon 
the  Philadelphians  ;  while  the  Lord  comforts  the  latter 
with  the  assurance  that  He  will  make  their  despisers 
to  come  and  worship  before  their  feet,  and  to  know 
that  He  has  loved  them.  Not  the  little  flock  to  whom 
it  is  their  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  the  Kingdom, 
but    the  self-satisfied    professors    and   will-worshippers, 


LAO  DICE  A.  411 

are  those  who  need  pity.  The  Lord  knows  what  is 
impending,  and  calls  them  the  wretched  and  miserable, 
because  He  is  just  about  to  reject  them  as  unworthy  to 
escape  all  the  things  that  shall  come  to  pass.  And 
they  are  also  poor,  for  they  have  nothing  but  the  riches 
and  influence  of  this  world,  which  is  ready  to  fade 
away  ;  blind,  for  they  cannot  see  their  own  miserable 
condition  and  fearful  prospect  ;  naked,  for  the  Lord 
has  not  clothed  them,  so  that  they  may  walk  with  Him 
in  white. 

In  the  following  words,  "  I  counsel  thee,"  there  is  a 
mournful  significance  ;  for  they  intimate  that  Laodicea 
is  departing  from  the  Kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son,  and 
crossing  the  boundary  line  into  the  realms  of  Darkness, 
so  that  He  no  longer  commands  her,  as  He  would 
His  own  subjects,  but  only  offers  counsel.  Indeed, 
Laodicea  has  altogether  lost  the  habit  of  obeying  Him, 
and  seeks  to  traditions,  and  councils,  and  canons,  and 
to  science,  and  great  men,  and  no  longer  to  the  word  of 
God  as  the  sole  authority. 

The  doctrines  of  Pergamos  and  Thyatira  are  re- 
turning, and  ominous  is  the  fact  that  the  Lord  now 
finds  no  extenuating  circumstances,  as  He  previously 
did,  and  mentions  no  good  works  ;  for  this  rebellion  is 
against  light  and  knowledge. 

Yet  He  warns  the  Laodiceans  to  cease  boasting  of 
their  fancied  wealth,  and  to  buy  of  Him  "  gold  refined 
by  fire  "  ;  that  is,  a  faith  which  will  endure  temptation, 
and  be  only  purified  the  more  when  exposed  to  the 
fiery  trial.  ^  Thus,  whatever  their  condition  in  the 
world,  they  would  be  rich  in  faith,  and  heirs  of  the 
Kingdom  which  He  promised  to  them  that  love  Him. 

'  I  Peter  i.  7. 


412  THE    CHURCH  OF   GOD. 

It  is  the  want  of  this  quality  which  is  ruining  them  : 
for  they  who  cannot  trust  Christ  for  every  need  and  in 
every  perplexity  soon  begin  to  put  confidence  in  them- 
selves, or  in  their  Church,  and  so  are  enticed  away  from 
the  One  Foundation. 

He  also  bids  them  come  to  Him  for  white  raiment, 
that  they  may  cover  themselves  with  His  righteousness, 
instead  of  the  filthy  rags  which  can  never  hide  the 
shame  of  their  nakedness.  And,  lastly.  He  points  out 
that  they  need  His  eyesalve  to  heal  their  blindness,  and 
enable  them  to  perceive  what  they  are,  and  whither 
they  are  tending. 

There  is,  however,  but  little  hope  that  Laodicea  can 
be  restored,  except  by  the  Spirit  of  judgment  and  of 
burning  ;  therefore  the  Lord  significantly  adds,  "  As 
many  as  I  love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten  " — words  which 
seem  to  mean  as  follows.  Either  you  are  Mine,  or  you 
are  not.  If  you  are  not,  then  go  your  own  way,  and 
show  the  truth  of  the  Scripture  which  says  ; — "  The 
heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  evil,  and  madness  is  in  their 
heart  while  they  live,  and  after  that  they  go  to  the 
dead."  If,  however,  you  are  Mine,  prepare  for  chastise- 
ment. But  so  terrible  will  be  the  chastisement  of 
those  who  are  left  upon  earth  during  the  days  of 
vengeance  that  the  Lord's  mercy  again  exhorts  ; — "  Be 
zealous,  therefore,  and  repent." 

For  even  now  the  acceptable  time  has  not  quite 
gone  by :  Christ  is  yet  standing  at  the  door.  He 
should,  indeed,  be  in  the  midst  of  those  who  are 
gathered  together  in  His  name  ;  but  their  sins  have 
caused  Him  to  depart  from  His  own  place,  though  He 
still  lingers  near  therh.  The  dispensation  is  closing, 
and  the  scene  is,  perhaps,  similar  to  that  which  Ezekiel 


LA  OD  ICE  A.  413 

witnessed  when  Jerusalem  was  being  given  up  to 
destruction.  For  the  prophet  beheld  the  Glory  of  the 
Lord  withdrawing  slowly  and  unwillingly  from  the 
Temple  :  he  saw  it  halting  first  on  the  threshold  of  the 
House  ;^  then  raising  itself  from  the  earth,  and  taking 
up  a  more  distant  position  above  the  East  gate  ;^  after- 
wards passing  through  the  midst  of  the  city,  and 
lingering  yet  once  more  upon  the  mountain  which  is 
on  the  East  side  of  it,^  before  the  final  ascent  of  the 
Cherubim  and  departure  of  the  Keeper  of  Israel. 

So  the  Lord,  unable  any  longer  to  endure  the  dis- 
obedience and  multiplied  abominations  of  the  Lao- 
dicean period,  is  leaving  the  Church  which  boasts 
His  name.  Yet  He  also  tarries  awhile,  as  did  the 
Glory  in  its  passage  from  the  Temple,  and  turns  again 
to  knock,  if  perchance  any  may  awake  to  the  con- 
sciousness that  He  Who  should  be  the  Centre  is  with- 
out, and  may,  therefore,  run  to  open  to   Him. 

Perhaps  the  knocking  may  refer  to  two  different 
means  which  the  Lord  is  using  to  rouse  His  people. 
The  first  of  them  is,  probably,  chastisement  ;  and, 
while  this  would  seem  to  include  every  kind  of 
uncertainty,  rebuke,  and  affliction,  there  is  one  sorrow 
which  in  a  special  manner  belongs  to  the  present  time. 
For  true  believers  are  being  continually  vexed  by  the 

'  Ezek.  X.  4. 

^  Ezek.  X.  19. 

*  Ezek.  xi.  2}^.  We  are  not  told  that  the  Glory  ascended  imme- 
diately. Perhaps  the  Lord  remained  for  a  while  on  the  Mount  of 
Olives  to  supervise  the  judgment  which  was  about  to  fall  upon  the 
city  and  the  Sanctuary.  Standing  upon  the  same  spot,  He  after- 
wards announced  the  second  destruction  of  Jerusalem  (Luke 
xix.  43,  44),  and  uttered  the  great  prophecy  of  its  final  trouble 
(Matt.  xxiv.).  From  thence  He  ascended  to  heaven,  and  thither 
He  will  return  with  all  His  saints  CZech.  xiv.  4). 


414  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

failure,  and,  still  worse,  perversion  of  testimony,  in  the 
sects  to  which  they  have  joined  themselves,  and  by  the 
corruption  and  lawlessness  which  surround  them. 
They  are  thus  being  deprived  of  that  thoughtless 
security  in  which  some  rest  so  entirely  upon  outward 
organizations,  that  they  seem  to  differ  but  little  from 
the  dwellers  upon  earth.  They  are  being  warned  by 
manifest  tokens  that,  if  the  stream  with  which  they 
have  hitherto  floated  has  been  turned  from  its  proper 
channel,  they  must  no  longer  suffer  themselves  to  be 
borne  along  by  it,  lest  they  be  presently  engulfed  amid 
the  waves  of  destruction  instead  of  being  carried  into 
the  ocean  of  Christ's  love.  They  are  being  taught 
to  cling  more  closely  to  the  person  of  the  Lord,  more 
obediently  to  His  revelation  ;  and  to  long  for  His 
appearing,  by  which  alone  the  power  of  evil  can  be 
checked,  and  the  present  perplexity  disentangled. 

For,  while  He  is  breaking  in  pieces  their  earthly 
rest.  He  has  not  forgotten  to  set  that  glorious  hope 
before  them.  His  secret  has  been  communicated  to 
them  that  fear  Him  :  He  has  not  hidden  from  them 
what  He  is  about  to  do  ;  and,  consequently,  on  all 
sides  proclamation  is  being  made  that  He  is  at 
hand.  And  power  has  been  given  to  those  who  seek  it 
to  understand  the  great  prophetic  utterances  of  God, 
which  have  for  centuries  lain  sealed  and  comparatively 
unnoticed  :  many  have  read  them  through  and  through, 
and  the  knowledge  of  them  has  been  increased. 

Such  are  the  Lord's  appeals,  which,  however.  He 
addresses  no  longer  to  the  whole  Church,  but  only 
to  individual  members  of  it.  "  If  any  man,"  He  says, 
"  hear  My  voice  and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in 
to    him,  and  will    sup  with    him,  and   he   with    Me." 


LAO  DICE  A.  41 S 

A  few  there  may  be  who  will  listen  to  these  words, 
but  the  great  multitude  of  the  Laodiceans  have  no 
desire  to  sup  with  the  Lord. 

They  are  feasting  with  the  dwellers  upon  earth, 
nourishing  their  hearts  in  a  day  of  slaughter,  eating 
and  drinking,  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage  ;  and 
so  they  will  go  on,  until  the  day  that  the  Master  of 
the  house  rises  and  shuts  to  the  door.  Then,  at  the 
sound  of  the  closing  portals,  their  indifference  will  be 
changed  to  feverish  anxiety  :  they  will  shudder  as  they 
perceive  that  the  Hour  of  Judgment  is  come. 

In  these  days  of  luxury  too  many  believers,  like  the 
spouse  in  the  Song  of  songs,  ^  have  left  the  work  of 
tending  their  flocks  in  the  wilderness,  and  gone  into 
the  city  of  the  world  :  they  are  slumbering  at  ease, 
and  stifling  conscience  with  the  weak  excuse,  "  I  sleep, 
but  my  heart  waketh  ; "  I  make  no  outward  show  of 
work  or  labour  of  love,  but  am  right  and  true  within. 
And  so  they  permit  the  fear  of  any  slight  incon- 
venience to  deter  them  from  rising  to  open  unto  their 
Lord,  until  at  last  His  hand  is  seen  through  the  hole 
of  the  door,  until  He  manifests  His  presence  by  the 
rapture  of  those  who  are  looking  for  Him. 

Then  the  careless  ones  awake  to  consciousness : 
they  are  smitten  to  the  heart  with  remorse  and  return- 
ing love  :  they  spring  from  the  sinful  couch,  and  hasten 
to  unbar  the  door. 

But  no  fair  and  glorious  Form  is  waiting  in  the 
darkness  of  the  night ;  the  Beloved  has  withdrawn 
Himself,  and  is  gone  :  they  seek  Him,  but  cannot  find 
Him  :  they  call  Him,  but  no  answer  peals  back  through 
the  gloom.     They  have  trifled  with  warnings  too  long  : 

Song  of  Sol.  V.  2-6. 


4i6  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

the  appointed  time  has  passed,  and  they  writhe  in 
anguish  as  they  perceive  that  the  slighted  threat  has 
been  suddenly  and  inexorably  accomplished.  The 
Master  has  knocked  :  they  were  not  ready  to  open  to 
Him  immediately,  and  He  has  departed  and  left  them 
alone  in  the  midnight  of  woe. 

But  if  any  of  the  lukewarm  Laodiceans  can  be 
roused  before  it  is  too  late,  they  will  be  strengthened 
to  overcome,  and  will  yet  attain  to  the  dignity  of 
sitting  with  Christ  on  the  Throne  of  Glory  from  which 
He  will  judge  the  Millennial  world.  And  even  those 
who  pass  through  the  Tribulation,  provided  they  refuse 
to  worship  the  Beast  or  his  image,  or  to  receive  his 
mark  upon  their  foreheads  or  in  their  hands,  will  also 
reign  with  Christ,  but,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  only 
as  subordinates,  and  not  on  the  Throne. 

We  have  now  considered  the  seven  messages  of  the 
Lord  to  His  people  concerning  the  things  that  are. 
Who  is  wise  that  he  may  understand  these  solemn 
warnings,  and  find  grace  to  act  upon  them  while  there 
is  yet  time .-'  In  his  account  of  Christ's  entry  into 
Jerusalem,  John  remarks  ; — "  These  things  understood 
not  His  disciples  at  the  first  :  but  when  Jesus  was 
glorified,  then  remembered  they  that  these  things  were 
written  of  Him."  How  great  suspense  and  anxiety 
would  they  have  been  spared  if  they  had  studied 
and  applied  the  Scriptures  before  the  death  of  their 
Master,  had  recognized  every  incident  as  it  occurred, 
and  known  that  He  must  first  suffer  those  things  and 
then  enter  into  His  glory !  But  they  did  not  appre- 
hend until  the  great  crisis,  with  its  days  of  perplexity 
and  terror,  had  passed  by.      Shall  we  not  learn  wisdom 


THE   PRESENCE   AND    THE  APPEARING.  417 

from  their  error,  and  avoid  the  far  more  calamitous 
consequences  of  a  similar  mistake  at  the  close  of  this 
age  ?  It  is  toward  evening,  and  the  day  is  now  far 
spent.  He,  then,  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what 
the  Spirit  saith  unto  the  Churches  :  for  the  time  is  at 
hand. 

XX. 

The  Presence  and  the  Appearing. 

We  have  already,  in  discussing  the  Jewish  prophecies, 
commented  upon  the  twenty-fourth  chapter  of  Matthew 
up  to  the  paragraph  in  which  the  Lord  speaks  of 
His  appearing  and  the  deliverance  of  His  Jewish  elect. 
In  the  sentences  immediately  following,  He  teaches  the 
latter  how  they  may  know  that  He  is  near  at  hand, 
and  declares  the  certainty  of  His  predictions.  And 
then,  in  the  thirty-sixth  verse.  He  proceeds  to  answer 
the  second  question  of  His  disciples  ; — "  What  shall  be 
the  sign  of  Thy  Presence  .''  " 

But  before  we  consider  this  solemn  subject,  it  will 
be  necessary  to  avoid  confusion  by  briefly  investigating 
the  meaning  of  the  terms  "  Presence "  and  "  Appear- 
ing." 

The  Greek  word  TrapovcTLa  is  usually  translated  '  com- 
ing '  :  but  we  render  it  '  presence,'  because  the  latter  is 
its  strict  and  literal  meaning ;  while  the  former  is 
derived,  subordinate,  and  never  absolutely  necessary. 
For  the  sense  is  much  the  same  whether  we  say  of  an 
absent  person — "  we  shall  be  glad  of  your  presence," 
or,  "  of  your  coming."  Moreover,  it  is  most  important 
to  retain  the  literal  signification,  because  the  word  is 
used,  not  merely  of  the  descent    of  Christ    from    the 

27 


4i8  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

High  Heavens,  but  of  the  whole  period  of  His  sojourn 
in  the  air,  which  will,  it  seems,  occupy  at  least  seven 
years.-^  During  this  time  His  people  will  be  caught 
up  to  Him  ;  some  immediately  upon  His  descent, 
others  later.  But  all  are  included  in  Paul's  description, 
"  they  that  are  Christ's  at  His  Presence." 

The  taking  up  of  the  first  company  will,  as  we  shall 
presently  see,  be  the  sign  that  He  has  come,  and  that 
the  judgments  of  the  Apocalypse  are  about  to  com- 
mence. We  may  thus  understand  Paul's  appeal  to 
the  Thessalonians  ; — "  Now  we  beseech  you,  brethren, 
by  the  Presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  by  our 
gathering  together  unto  Him,  that  ye  be  not  quickly 
shaken  from  your  mind,  nor  yet  be  troubled,  either  by 
spirit,  or  by  word,  or  by  letter  pretending  to  come  from 
us,  as  that  the  Day  of  the  Lord  is  now  present.""^  The 
Thessalonians  had  been  in  much  affliction,  and,  sup- 
posing that  no  sorrow  could  be  greater  than  theirs, 
rashly  concluded  that  they  were  in  the  last  times,  and 
that  the  Day  of  the  Lord  had  come.  But  Paul  re- 
minds them  that  that  Day  will  be  brought  about  by 
the    Presence  of  Christ  in  the  air,  and  that  the  sign  of 

'  That  is,  of  course,  the  last  of  Daniel's  Weeks  when  the  dis- 
pensation will  again  be  Jewish.  Whether  this  period  will  follow 
immediately  upon  the  removal  of  the  Church,  or  whether  there 
will  be  an  abnormal  interval — similar  to  that  which  came  between 
the  tenth  of  Nisan,  on  which  the  Jewish  covenant  was  suspended, 
and  the  Day  of  Pentecost — is  not  revealed. 

^  2  Thess.  ii.  i,  2.  The  Greek  of  the  last  word  does  not  signify 
"  to  be  at  hand,"  but  "to  be  present."  It  occurs  in  Rom.  viii. 
38,  I  Cor.  iii.  22,  vii.  26,  Gal.  i.  4,  Heb.  ix.  9,  in  each  of  which 
passages  the  English  Version  renders  it  by  "present."  In 
2  Tim.  iii.  i,  where  the  future  is  used,  the  Translators  have 
"perilous  times  shall  co//ie."  In  2  Thess.  ii.  2,  they  have  er- 
roneously rendered  "is* at  hand,"  evidently  for  the  purpose  of 
bringing  the  meaning  into  accord  with  their  own  dogmatic 
eschatology. 


THE  PRESENCE  AND   THE  APPEARING.  419 

His  Presence,   namely,  the   gathering  together  of  His 
people  to  Him,  had  not  then  been  given. 

The  second  term,  eVt^ai^eta,  signifies  "  appearing," 
or,  "  manifestation,"  and  occurs  in  connection  with  the 
first  in  a  passage  which  should  be  rendered  ; — "  Whom 
the  Lord  shall  slay  with  the  breath  of  His  mouth,  and 
bring  to  nought  by  the  Appearing  of  His  Presence."^ 
Here  it  is  used  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ  to  the 
world,  of  the  flashing  forth  of  His  Glory  when  the 
time  of  the  unseen  Presence  is  ended.  But  it  may 
also  be  applied  to  the  revelation  of  this  Presence  to 
those  who  are  caught  up  to  Him  ;  so  that  the  refer- 
ence, in  each  case  of  its  occurrence,  can  only  be 
decided  by  the  context. 

We  will  now  return  to  our  Lord's  discourse  on  the 
Mount  of  Olives.  After  an  admonition,  especially 
designed  for  the  Jewish  converts  of  the  last  days,  to 
remember  that  the  fulfilment  of  the  things  which  He 
had  been  predicting  would  show  that  He  was  near  at 
hand — ^just  as  the  budding  of  the  fig-tree  proclaims 
the  approach  of  summer — He  proceeds  to  speak  of 
His  Presence,  during  which  the  events  mentioned 
between  the  sixth  and  twenty-ninth  verses  will  take 
place.  The  precise  time  of  His  descent  cannot  be 
revealed  ;  for  neither  men,  nor  yet  angels,  may  know 
it.  Like  other  great  judgments  of  God,  it  is  an- 
nounced again  and  again  :  but,  were  its  appointed 
season  declared,  it  could  not  become  the  test  which  He 
intends  it  to  be.  For  those  who  saw  that  it  was  post- 
poned beyond  the  term  of  their  lives  would  altogether 
dismiss  the  subject ;  while  those  who  expected  to  see  it 
might,  when  near  the  appointed  day,  excite  themselves 

'  2  Thess.  ii.  8 


420  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

to  a  faith  as  worthless  as  that  which  men  have  often 
exhibited  in  predictions  fixing  the  hour  of  doom  for 
the  world,  and  which  too  frequently  lapses  into  a 
hopeless  scepticism. 

The  Lord  will,  therefore,  say  nothing  in  regard  to 
the  day  and  the  hour  ;  but,  nevertheless.  He  gives 
signs  by  which  we  may  discover  that  they  are  at 
hand.  A  memorable  period  of  history  shall  be  re- 
peated, and  again  it  shall  be  as  it  was  in  the  time  of 
the  flood,  when  men  were  eating  and  drinking,  marry- 
ing and  giving  in  marriage,  until  the  command  went 
forth,  and  Noah  entered  the  ark.  Then  the  world 
suddenly  perceived  that  the  door  of  escape  had  been 
closed,  and  that  the  execution  of  judgment  had  com- 
menced :  their  thoughtlessness  and  mirth  were  quickly 
changed  into  agonizing  fear,  as  the  vigour  of  life 
found  itself  confronted  by  inexorable  death. 

In  the  parallel  passage  of  Luke,  the  Lord  adduces 
Sodom  also  as  an  illustration  of  what  the  world  will 
be  on  the  eve  of  His  coming.  Putting  together  the 
accounts  of  both  periods  as  given  in  the  book  of 
Genesis,  we  find  that  their  general  characteristics  in- 
clude intercourse  with  beings  of  another  sphere,  the 
corruption  of  all  flesh,  violence,  and  unnatural  crime  ; 
none  of  which  ominous  signs  is  lacking  in  the  world 
of  to-day.  But  the  Lord  does  not  particularize  such 
things  ;  for  they  belong  to  unregenerate  and  demon- 
driven  men,  and  He  uttered  His  prophecy  for  the 
guidance  and  consolation  of  His  own  people,  whether 
Jews  or  Christians.  For  this  reason,  apparently.  He 
specifies  only  those  pursuits  in  which  He  may,  at  His 
coming,  find  the  saved  so  heedlessly  engrossed  that 
He  will  be  compelled  to  leave  them  for  discipline. 


THE  PRESENCE  AND    THE  APPEARING,  421 

They  are  ; — 

Eating  and  drinking. 
Marrying  and  giving  in  marriage. 
Buying  and  selling. 
Planting  and  building. 

Now  all  these  acts  and  occupations  are  lawful  in 
themselves  ;  but,  if  they  be  permitted  to  hide  eternal 
realities  from  our  eyes,  they  become  a  cause  of  destruc- 
tion. The  world  will  be  altorether  absorbed  in  them 
up  to  the  end  ;  and  the  saved  have  need  to  watch  and 
pray,  lest  they  also  should  fall  into  the  snare,  and  be 
taken  by  surprise. 

In  regard  to  their  general  character,  we   may  notice -i 
that  the    judgments  of  God   usually  come  upon   men  \ 
after  they  have  made  considerable  advances  in  civiliza-  T 
tion   and  its  vices  :   for  it  is  then  that  pride,  fulness  of 
bread,  and  abundance  of  idleness,  generate  rebellion  ; 
just  as  was  the  case  with  Sodom,  ^   and   as    in    olden 
time  Jeshurun  waxed  fat  and  kicked.^ 

Luxurious  living  is  a  frequent  characteristic  of  those 
who  are  ripening  for  judgment.  "  Ye  have  nourished 
your  hearts  in  a  day  of  slaughter  ! "  is  a  charge  which 
God  has  more  than  once  brought  against  men.  And 
He  is  especially  indignant  that  those  who  profess  to 
know  Him  should  be  satisfying  the  flesh,  when  they 
ought  rather  to  be  sighing  and  crying  for  the  abomina- 
tions which  surround  them. 

Even  a  slight  excess  may  deprive  a  believer  of  his 
crown  :  for  to  obtain  it  he  must  overcome,  and  among 
his  besetting  sins  there  may  be  one  of  the  kind  which 
gocth  not  out  but  by  prayer  and  fasting.  Or,  if  he 
fares  every  day  sufficiently  well  to  induce  fleshly  con- 
'  Ezek.  xvi.  49.  ^  Deut.  xxxii.  15. 


422  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

tent  and  love  of  ease,  he  will  certainly  be  found  among 
the  slothful  servants.  Any  pampering  of  the  body 
brings  weakness  and  blindness  upon  the  spirit,  and 
solemnly  does  our  Lord  recognise  the  fact  in  those 
words ; — "  Take  heed  to  yourselves,  lest  at  any  time 
your  hearts  be  overcharged  with  surfeiting,  and 
drunkenness,  and  cares  of  this  life,  and  so  that  Day 
come  upon  you  unawares." 

But  there  are  other  insidious  snares  besides  that  of 
luxurious  living.  There  are  the  social  connections, 
which,  pure  and  honourable  as  they  may  be,  too  often 
take  undue  possession  of  the  heart,  and  monopolize 
the  thoughts  to  the  exclusion  of  Christ.  There  is  the 
commercial  temptation  ;  the  craving  to  acquire,  and 
heap  up  treasure  in  the  last  days ;  the  covetousness 
which  sometimes  seeks  to  defend  itself  from  the  eye  of 
the  Almighty  by  large  donations,  which,  nevertheless, 
bear  but  a  trifling  proportion  to  the  means  of  the  giver, 
and  do  not  deprive  him  of  a  single  gratification.  And, 
lastly,  there  is  the  disposal  of  the  wealth  accumulated  ; 
the  preparations  for  a  long  stay  upon  earth,  the  devices 
whereby  life  may  possibly  be  gained  now  and  certainly 
I  lost  hereafter,  the  erection  of  imposing  mansions  which, 
at  the  Judgment,  will  testify  to  the  extravagance,  the 
'  luxury,  and  the  selfishness,  of  the  builders.  "  For  the 
\  stone  from  the  wall  shall  cry  out,  and  the  beam  of  the 
timber  shall  bear  witness."  ^ 

Such  were  the  thoughts  and  occupations  in  the 
midst  of  which  the  Antediluvians  and  the  Sodomites 
perished  miserably,  with  all  that  had  made  up  their 
lives.  And,  in  each  case,  the  silent  removal  of  the 
righteous  was   the   sign  that    the    day    of   grace    had 

'  Hab.  ii.  ii. 


THE  PRESENCE  AND    THE  APPEARING.  423 

passed.  ■^  Will  there,  then,  be  any  similar  sign  to 
announce  that  Christ  is  in  the  air,  and  that  the  Day  of 
the  Lord  has  come  ?  This  question  is  answered  in  the 
next  verse,  and  further  explanation  may  be  found 
in  the  first  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians. 

The  world  will  one  day  be  surprised  by  the  sudden 
and  unaccountable  disappearance  of  many  persons  in 
the  midst  of  their  ordinary  occupations.  Two  men  will 
be  working  in  the  field  in  the  middle  of  the  day  :  one 
will  instantaneously  vanish.^  His  bewildered  comrade 
may  still  see  upon  the  ground  the  garment  which  had 
been  put  off  for  labour,  but  the  man  will  be  gone. 
Two  women  will  be  grinding  the  daily  supply  of  corn 
in  early  morning  ;  the  hand  of  one  will  fail  :  her  com- 
panion will  look  up,  and  see  that  she  is  no  longer  in  her 
place.^  Two  persons — the  reference  is  evidently  to  a 
man  and  his  wife — will  be  in  the  same  bed  at  night  : 
the  one  will  be  taken  away,  and  the  other  will  awake 
to  solitude  and  bereavement.^  As  soon  as  this  sign  is 
given,  then  woe  for  the  earth  and  the  sea  !  Those  who 
shall  be  accounted  worthy  to  escape  will  have  been 
removed  from  the  world  :  the  Holy  Spirit  will  no 
longer  restrain  the  Mystery  of  Lawlessness  ;  nor  will 
the  judgments  of  God  be  delayed. 

With  regard  to  the  meaning  of  the  words,  "one 
shall  be  taken,"  an  error  has  often  been  made  through 
ignorance  of  the  original.  Comparing  the  clause  with 
that   of  the  thirty-ninth   verse,   "  the   flood   came  and 

'  Of  course  only  so  far  as  the  natural  life  was  concerned. 
Space  for  repentance  to  the  saving  of  the  spirit  still  remained, 
until  the  Judgment  was  actually  carried  out. 

-  Matt.  xxiv.  40. 

'  Matt.  xxiv.  41. 

■*  l.uke.  xvii.  34. 


424  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

took  them  all  away,"  some  have  interpreted,  "  the  one 
shall  be  taken  away  in  judgment,  the  other  shall  be 
spared  in  mercy."  But  an  examination  of  the  Greek 
immediately  dissipates  this  idea.  In  the  thirty-ninth 
vcr.'.e  the  verb  used  is  alpetv,  vvhich  means  '  tc 
take  away  by  destruction.'  But  in  the  fortieth  and 
forty-first  verses,  we  find  a  very  different  word, 
TTapaXaix^dveLV,  which  properly  signifies  '  to  receive,' 
or,  '  take  alongside,'  and  then,  sometimes,  '  to  take  with 
one  as  a  companion.'  Thus  the  word  is  most  appro- 
priately used  of  those  who  shall  be  caught  up  to  Christ, 
that  they  may  walk  with  Him  in  white,  that  they  may 
follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth. 

In  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  John,  it  occurs  in  a 
very  significant  passage  ; — "  For  if  I  go  and  prepare 
a  place  for  you,  I  am  coming  again,  and  will  receive 
(TrapaXyjxfjoixaL)  you  unto  Myself ;  that  where  I  am, 
there  }'e  may  be  also."  Here  it  is  used  of  the  very  act 
of  which  the  Lord  speaks  in  Matthew. 

Again,  in  another  place,  we  are  told  that  the  Lord 
"taket/i"  (TTapaXaix/SapeC)  Peter,  James,  and  John,  as 
His  companions  to  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  ^ 
He  selects  three  out  of  the  twelve  disciples  to  behold 
His  glory  ;  while  the  nine  are,  in  the  meantime,  left 
at  the  bottom  of  the  hill  to  struggle  hopelessly  with 
Satan  ;  and,  consequently,  to  be  subjected  to  the  scorn 
of  the  world,  until  at  length  the  Master  is  seen  descend- 
ing the  hill  in  company  with  those  whom  He  had 
taken  with  Him. 

Surely,  this  scene  is  typical,  and  confirms  our 
interpretation  of  the  passage  we  are  considering,  that 
the  one  is  taken  to  be  a  companion  of  the  Lord  and  to 

'  Matt.  .wii.  I. 


THE  FIRST  RAPTURE.  425 

see  His  glory,  while  the  other  is  left  to  agonize  with 
the  world  and  Satan  as  a  further  discipline  :  for  the 
admonition  to  watch  in  the  next  verse  seems  to  imply- 
that  both  of  the  two  are  disciples. 

Having  thus  described  the  sign  of  His  Presence,  the 
Lord  proceeds  to  urge  upon  His  followers  the  necessity 
of  watching,  and  intimates,  by  the  Parable  of  the  House- 
holder and  the  Thief,  that  grievous  loss  will  be  sustained 
by  those  who  neglect  His  directions.  Many  other  such 
\yarnings  may  be  found  in  the  Scriptures,  and  their 
special  object  is  plainly  set  forth  in  the  Lord's  own 
exhortation  ; — "  Watch  ye,  therefore,  and  pray  always 
that  ye  may  be  accounted  worthy  to  escape  all  these  things 
ihs.t  shall  come  to  tass,  and  to  stand  before  the  Son  of 
man,"  ^ 

XXI. 

The    First    Rapture,    as     Revealed    to    the 

Thessalonians. 

To  none  of  the  Churches  with  which  he  was  connected 
did  Paul  communicate  so  many  details  of  the  last 
things  as  to  that  of  the  Thessalonians.  For  in  one  of 
his  Epistles  to  them  we  find  the  most  circumstantial 
prediction  of  the  first  ascension  of  the  saints  ;  while  in 
the  other  there  are  many  particulars  respecting  the 
subsequent  career  of  Antichrist. 

The  planting  of  their  Church  is  described  in  the 
seventeenth  chapter  of  the  "  Acts."  And  from  the 
account  there  given,  as  well  as  from  the  Epistles,  we 
may  infer  that  Paul  spoke  much  to  the  converts  of  the 
coming  and  Kingdom  of  Christ.  It  may  be  that  the 
Spirit,  foreseeing  the  persecutions  and  tribulations  which 

'  Luke  xxi.  36. 


426  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

awaited  them,  had,  on  that  account,  dh-ected  the  apostle 
to  dwell  on  the  glory  that  should  be.  For  even  of  the 
Lord  Himself  we  are  told  that,  for  the  joy  that  was 
set  before  Him,  He  endured  the  cross,  despising  the 
shame. 

The  prominence  given  in  the  teachings  of  Paul  to  the 
future  reign  of  Christ  may  be  discovered  in  the  accusa- 
tion by  which  th@.  Jews  sought  to  prejudice  the  rulers 
against  him.  "  These,"  they  said,  "  that  have  turned 
the  world  upside  down  are  come  hither  also  ;  whom 
Jason  hath  received  :  and  these  all  do  contrary  to  the 
decrees  of  Caesar,  saying  that  there  is  another  king,  one 
Jesus."  ^ 

But,  however  Jews  or  Greeks  may  have  distorted  the 
apostle's  meaning,  the  revelation  of  that  blessed  hope 
and  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our 
Saviour,  Jesus  Christ,  had  lifted  up  the  Thessalonian 
Church  to  enthusiasm.  And  so,  indeed,  it  has  ever 
affected  those  whose  hearts  have  been  opened  for  its 
reception.  It  was  that  hope  which  stimulated  the  early 
Church  to  the  extraordinary  exertions  of  the  first  two 
and  a  half  centuries  :  it  is  that  which  oftentimes  since 
has  supported  believers  throngh  days  of  trial  ;  for 
whenever  persecution  has  arisen  on  account  of  the  word, 
the  Apocalypse  and  the  prophetic  Psalms  have  almost 
invariably  formed  the  great  stay  and  comfort  of  the 
persecuted.  And,  at  this  present  time,  the  same  hope 
is  again  exercising  a  powerful  influence  in  arousing  the 
Church  to  renewed  efforts,  and  in  separating  off  a 
people  for  the  presence  of  the  Lord. 

Yet,  although  the  Thessalonians  received  the  spirit- 
stirring   message    with  joy,  even  they   did  not  rightly 

'  Acts  xvii.  6,  7 


THE  FIRST  RAPTURE.  427 

understand  it  in  all  its  bearings,  and  the  consequencd 
of  their  imperfect  knowledge  was  seen  in  certain  false 
and  mischievous  inferences. 

Excited  by  expectation,  and  assuming  that  the  Lord 
must  come  immediately,  they  could  no  longer  settle 
down  to  the  ordinary  routine  of  life,  and  Paul  found  it 
necessary  to  exhort  them  to  be  quiet,  and  do  their  own 
business,  and  labour  with  their  own  hands,  that  their 
conduct  might  be  seemly  to  those  that  were  without, 
•and  that  they  might  not,  by  neglecting  their  duty,  be 
compelled  to  depend  upon  the  help  of  others. 

And  then  again,  while  they  had  heard  of  the  coming 
of  the  Lord  and  their  gathering  together  unto  Him, 
they  had  not  yet  been  instructed  in  regard  to  the  first 
resurrection.  Consequently,  knowing  only  of  the  final 
resurrection  and  last  judgment,  being  well  aware  that 
these  events  would  not  take  place  until  after  the 
Millennium,  and  distinguishing  clearly  between  the 
Millennium  and  the  Eternal  State,  they  naturally 
concluded  that  all  who  had  the  misfortune  to  die 
before  the  Lord's  return  would  lose  the  glories  of  the 
Kingdom. 

What  wonder,  then,  that  they  mourned  immoderately 
when  the  spirit  of  a  beloved  one  passed  away  from 
their  midst ;  since  they  thought  to  see  his  face  no 
more  until  after  the  long  lapse  of  the  thousand  years  ; 
unless,  indeed,  they  too  should  be  called  to  follow  him 
before  the  Lord  came,  and  so  be  themselves  deprived 
of  the  coveted  glory. 

To  lift  this  gloom  from  their  eyes,  and  reveal  to 
them  the  glad  truth,  is  Paul's  object  in  the  latter  part 
of  the  fourth  chapter.  "  We  would  not  have  you 
ignorant,  brethren,"  he  says,  "  concerning  them  which 


42S  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

have  been  laid  to  sleep  ;  that  ye  sorrow  not,  even  as 
the  rest,  which  have  no  hope." 

And  then  he  reveals  the  wondrous  truth,  that  each 
of  the  great  events  in  our  Lord's  life  has  its  correspond- 
ence in  the  lives  of  His  members  ;  that  if,  in  our 
measure,  we  are  called  to  suffer  as  He  did,  to  be  men 
of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief,  to  endure  the 
contradiction  of  sinners  and  the  hatred  of  the  world, 
ay,  and  presently,  should  He  tarry,  to  gaze  for  the 
last  time  upon  the  light  of  the  natural  sun  ;  we  may, 
nevertheless,  look  up  to  the  eminence  on  the  other  side 
of  the  dark  valley,  where  He  sits  in  glory,  and  know 
that,  by  His  grace,  we  too  cannot  fail  to  emerge  from 
the  night  of  death  into  the  resurrection-morning. 

Mourn  not  so  hopelessly  for  your  dead,  he  says  to 
the  sorrowing  Thessalonians :  you  know  that  Christ 
died  and  rose  again,  and  His  Church  must  share  in  all 
things  with  her  great  Head.  When  He  appears  as 
the  Risen  One,  then  all  those  who  have  been  laid  to 
sleep  through   Him   must   God   bring  with   Him. 

The  expression  "  laid  to  sleep  through  Jesus,"  is 
very  beautiful.  In  the  idea  of  sleep  we  have,  of  course, 
a  hint  that  there  is  no  intermission  of  life,  and  that 
there  will  soon  be  an  awakening.  The  phraseology  is 
that  of  the  Lord  Himself  "Our  friend  Lazarus 
sleepeth,"  He  said,  "  and  I  go  that  I  may  awaken  him 
out  of  sleep." 

But  of  these  saints,  we  are  told  that  they  have  been 
laid  to  sleep  by  means  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  is,  by 
His  death  and  mediation.  Yes  :  for,  without  His 
interposition,  they  had  now  been   not   asleep,  but  dead. 

The  wicked,  when  they  relinquish  natural  life,  do 
not  sleep  :  the}-  are  dead,  and  have  parted  for  ever  with 


THE  FIRST  RAPTURE.  429 

all  hope  of  life  :  they  are  shut  out  from  God.  They 
must,  indeed,  stand  before  the  Great  White  Throne, 
but  that  will  be  in  the  miserable  existence  which  is 
called  death  :  for  death,  in  the  Scriptural  sense,  is  no 
cessation  of  being,  but  eternal  separation  from  Him  in 
Whom  alone  we  may  find  light  and  love  and  rest. 
And  all  who  pass  from  this  world  in  wilful  rejection 
of  Christ  must  be  thus  shut  out.  For  "  this  is  the 
record,  that  God  gave  unto  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life 
is  in  His  Son.  He  that  hath  the  Son,  hath  the  life  : 
he  that  hath  not  the   Son  of  God,  hath  not  the  life." 

But  all  those  departed  ones  who  have  obtained  the  life 
from  the  Lord  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  Him.  Like 
their  Saviour,  they  have  disappeared  from  the  world  ; 
and,  when  He  returns  to  sight,  they  also  must  be  seen 
in  His  company.  Now  that  He  is  invisible.  He  and 
His  Church  are  mystically  united  :  He  is  the  Vine, 
and  they  are  the  branches.  But  that  which  is  mystical 
is  nothing,  unless  it  has  a  reality  behind  it  which  shall 
presently  be  revealed.  Therefore,  as  soon  as  the  Lord 
is  seen  again,  the  connection  between  Himself  and  His 
Church  must  also  become  visible.  "When  Christ  Who 
is  our  Life  shall  appear,  then  shall  ye  also  appear  with 
Him  in  glory."  ^ 

And  so  Paul  proceeds  to  tell  us  how  this  consum- 
mation will  be  brought  about  :  and  he  does  so  "  by 
the  word  of  the  Lord,"  that  is,  by  a  direct  revelation 
to  himself. 

The  words,  "  we  which  are  alive,"  are  of  great 
doctrinal  importance  :  for  they  give  clear  evidence  that 
Paul  contemplated  the  occurrence  of  the  advent  in 
his  own  lifetime  as  a  possibility.      He  was,  ^however, 

'  Col.  iii.  4.  , 


430  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

well  aware  that  none  might  know  the  day  and  the 
hour,  and,  therefore,  expressed  no  definite  expecta- 
tion. 

But  he  had  a  very  definite  desire,  and  gave  utter- 
ance to  it  in  unmistakable  terms  in  another  place. 
"  For  we  that  are  in  this  tabernacle  do  groan  being 
burdened  ;  not  for  that  we  would  be  unclothed,  but 
that  we  would  be  clothed  upon,  that  what  is  mortal 
may  be  swallowed  up  of  life."^ 

Yet  Paul  and  many  others  have  passed  away,  and 
still  the  Lord  tarries.  There  is,  however,  no  reason 
to  believe  that  their  expectant  attitude  is  in  any  way 
changed  :  the  spirits  of  those  who  sleep  are  also  waiting 
for  the  Lord  from  the  high  heavens,  and  longing  for 
the  time  when  the  sons  of  God  shall  be  manifested 
and  their  bodies  redeemed.  In  this  respect  the  hope 
of  the  whole  Church,  on  both  sides  of  the  river  of 
death,  is  the  same.  And  when  the  hour  comes,  whether 
they  be  upon  earth  or  in  the  Paradise  of  God,  they  shall 
be  glorified  together,  and  neither  quick  nor  dead  have 
the  precedence. 

The  words,  "  the  Lord  shall  descend,"  utterly  pre- 
clude the  "  spiritual "  interpretation  to  which  some 
Christians  even  now  cling.  For  His  spiritual  presence 
is  already  with  us,  and  so  will  remain  even  unto  the 
end.  It  is,  therefore,  to  His  glorified  body,  which  can 
be  only  in  one  place  at  a  time,  that  allusion  is  here 
made.  And  the  descent  is  the  first  stage  in  the 
fulfilment  of  the  angels'  words,  that  He  should  so 
come  in  like  manner  as  He  was  seen  to  go  up  into 
heaven. 

And  as  He  passes   through  His  illimitable  realms, 

'  2  Cor.  V.  d. 


THE  FIRST  RAPTURE.  431 

upon  wings  of  lightning,  followed  by  His  glittering 
hosts,  and  causing  the  countless  stars  which  stud  His 
heavens  to  pale  with  His  glory,  He  will  utter  the 
word  of  command,  and  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice 
of  the  Son  of  God  ;  and  they  that  hear,  for  all  will  not 
do  so,  shall  live. 

Forth  from  Paradise  and  the  grave  they  will  come, 
from  the  poor  thief,  whose  mortal  agony  was  prolonged 
until  Heaven  and  Hades  had  thrilled  with  the  mighty 
words,  "  It  is  finished,"  to  the  last  who  shall  have 
been  laid  to  sleep,  just  as  the  trump  of  God  is  pro- 
claiming the  arrival  of  the   King. 

And  scarcely  less  wonderful  will  be  the  change  in 
the  case  of  the  living. 

It  was  a  glad  sight  to  see  the  warm  flush  returning 
to  the  leper's  face,  and  his  decayed  limbs  filling  out 
and  brightening  into  ruddy  health. 

It  must  have  made  the  hearts  of  the  bystanders 
rejoice  to  look  on  when  blind  Bartimzeus  received  the 
reward  of  his  faith,  and  opened  his  wondering  eyes  for 
the  first  time  on  God's  fair  world  and  on  the  tender 
and  loving  face  of  God's  own  Son. 

And  hard  of  heart  must  he  have  been  who  could 
restrain  tears  of  sympathy  when  he  beheld  the  poor 
demoniac  ceasing  from  his  mad  ravings,  his  wanderings 
among  the  tombs,  and  his  cruel  self-mutilations,  and 
sitting  clothed,  and  in  his  right  mind,  at  the  feet  of  Him 
Who  had  saved  him  from  his  fiendish  tormentors. 

But  even  these  miracles  of  love  will  seem  as  nothing 
to  the  deliverances  of  that  glorious  night,  when  the 
Lord  shall  call  His  people,  and,  in  response,  the  bed- 
ridden invalid  of  years,  the  blind,  the  halt,  the 
maimed,  the  consumptive,  the  fever-stricken,  the  poor 


432  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

oppressed  lunatic  or  demoniac,  the  bowed  down  with 
age,  and  pain,  and  care,  and  bereavement,  and  per- 
secution, and  hard  toil — all  shall  come  forth  from  the 
places  of  durance  in  which  they  have  been  graciously 
enabled  to  possess  their  souls  in  patience,  and  shout 
for  joy  that  the  year  of  the  Lord's  redeemed  has 
come. 

And  dropping  every  fetter  of  mortality,  losing  every 
scar  and  disfigurement  as  they  rise,  and  joined  by  the 
company  of  those  who  had  slept,  they  shall  ascend  in 
one  glorious  body  to  the  presence  of  the  King. 

How  precious  will  Christ  then  seem  to  them  !  How 
unspeakable  the  breadth  and  length  and  height  and 
depth  of  His  love,  as  separated  from  every  evil  thing,  and 
caught  up  in  clouds  to  the  place  where  He  is  awaiting 
them,  they  utter  their  rapturous  cry  ; — "  Unto  Him  that 
loveth  us,  and  loosed  us  from  our  sins  by  His  blood  ; 
and  He  made  us  to  be  a  Kingdom,  priests  unto  His 
God  and  Father ;  to  Him  be  the  glory  and  the 
dominion  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen." 

Those  who  shall  be  summoned  to  this  exultant 
gathering  will  find  themselves  suddenly  rapt  away, 
doubtless  by  the  forceful  power  of  that  Spirit  by  Whom 
they  were  sealed  unto  the  Day  of  Redemption.  Woe, 
then,  to  all  who  shall  have  grieved  the  Spirit  of  God 
on  that  unknown  and  fateful  night ! 

The    Greek  words  ft?  andvT-qaLu   imply  that   they 

who  go  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air  will  subsequently 

return  to    earth   with   Him,^   not   without   Him.     For 

there    shall    be    no    more    parting    from    the    beloved 

'  That  is,  when  He  descends  upon  the  Mount  of  Olives  to 
deliver  Jerusalem.  "  And  the  Lord  my  God  shall  come,  and  all 
the  saints  with  Thee."     See  Zech.  xiv.  3-5,  and  compare  Jude 

I4>  15. 


THE  MYSTERY  FINISHED.  433 

Saviour,  or  from  the  friends  vvliich  He  has  restored  to 
us.  Thenceforth  we  shall  be  ever  with  the  Lord  :  we 
shall  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth. 

And  with  thoughts  of  this  glorious  future  we  are 
to  comfort  one  another  in  our  bereavements.  Not  by 
intercourse  with  demons,  who  feign  to  be  the  spirits 
of  our  dead  that  they  may  allure  us  into  paths  of  de- 
struction ;  but  by  looking  on  to  the  time  when  Christ 
shall  come,  and,  with  every  other  blessing,  restore  to 
us  for  ever  those  whom  we  have  loved  and  lost  for  a 
while. 

XXIL 

The  Mystery  Finished. 

In  writing  to  the  Corinthians,  the  Apostle  Paul  bids 
them  regard  himself  and  his  colleagues  as  "  stewards  of 
the  mysteries  of  God  " — an  expression  often  twisted  by 
sacerdotalists  into  accord  with  their  own  views,  and 
interpreted  to  mean  "  dispensers  of  the  sacraments." 

But  neither  Baptism,  nor  the  Lord's  Supper,  is  ever 
called  a  mystery  in  the  New  Testament  :  the  term  is 
inv^ariably  applied  to  revelations  given  by  the  Spirit  for 
communication  to  the  Church.  And  the  nature  of  the 
mysteries  of  which  Paul  was  steward  may  be  readily 
understood  from  the  following  complete  list  of  those 
which  are  mentioned  in  his  Epistles. 

The  mystery  of  Israel's  present  condition  and 

future  deliverance      .....  Rom.  xi.  25,  26. 

The  mystery  of  the  wisdom  of  God  .         .  i  Cor.  ii.  7. 

The  mystery  that  we  shall  not  all  sleep,  but 

shall  all  be  changed  .         .         .         .  i  Cor.  xv.  51,  52. 

fhe  mysterj'^  of  God's  will        ,         ,         .         .  Eph.  i.  9. 

28 


434 


THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 


The  mystery  of  marriage  as  a  type  of  Christ 

and  His  Church 
The  mystery  of  the  Gospel 
The  mystery  of  Christ 
The  mj'stery  of  lawlessness 
The  mystery  of  the  faith 
The  mystery  of  Godliness 

The  mystery  >  of  the  Church 


Eph.  V.  32. 

Eph.  vi.  19. 

Col.  iv.  3. 

2  Thess.  ii.  7, 

I  Tim.  iii.  9. 

I  Tim.  iii.  16. 
/Rom.  xvi.  25. 
j  Eph.  iii.  3-12. 
jCol.  I.  26,  27. 
Icol.  ii.  2. 


The  last  on  the  list  is  the  great  mystery  of  the 
present  dispensation,  and  the  most  frequently  men- 
tioned of  all.  It  is  said  to  have  been  hidden  from  the 
ages,  and  its  secret  was  that  God  would  invite  Jews 
and  Gentiles,  without  distinction,  to  be  one  in  Christ, 
to  become  members  of  His  body,  of  His  flesh  and  of 
His  bones,  and  to  be  partakers  of  a  heavenly  destiny. 
As  we  have  already  seen,  the  Lord  began  to  reveal 
some  of  its  details  in  the  Seven  Parables,  and  in  so 
doing  is  said  to  have  fulfilled  the  prophecy  ; — "  I  will 
utter  things  which  have  been  kept  secret  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world."  '■^ 

Of  its  termination  we  are  told  that,  "  in  the  days  of 

'  There  are  two  other  instances  of  the  use  of  this  word  by 
Paul.  In  I  Cor.  xiii.  2,  he  says  ;—"  Though  I  understand  all 
mysteries"  :  and  in  i  Cor.  xiv.  2,  he  describes  the  speaker  with 
tongues  as  uttering  mysteries  in  spirit.  In  the  synoptic  Gospels 
it  is  applied  to  the  parables  by  which  the  Lord  disclosed  the 
future  of  the  Church.  See  Matt.  xiii.  11,  Mark.  iv.  11,  and  Luke 
viii.  10.  In  the  Apocalypse,  it  is  used  of  the  stars  which  are  the 
angels  of  the  churches  (i.  20)  ;  of  the  Church  itself  (x.  7)  ;  and 
of  the  Woman  seated  on  the  Beast  (xvii.  5,  7).  Mysteries  are, 
therefore,  secrets  revealed  by  God,  with  which  every  one  who  is 
made  a  disciple  for  the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  must  become 
acquainted,  that  he  rriay  be'like  a  householder  which  bringeth 
forth  out  of  his  treasure  things  new  and  old  (Matt.  xiii.  52). 

'■^  Matt.  xiii.  35. 


THE  MYSTERY  FINISHED  435 

the  voice  of  the  seventh  angel,  when  he  is  about  to 
sound,  then  is  finished  the  mystery  of  God."  ^  For,  at 
that  time,  the  last  member  of  the  Church  of  the  First- 
born will  have  been  made  ready,  and,  at  the  blast  of 
the  seventh  trumpet,  its  general  assembly  will  take 
place. 

But  now  the  question  arises — Is  this  event  the  same 
as  that  which  is  described  by  Paul  in  the  First  Epistle 
to  the  Thessalonians  ? 

Several  reasons  induce  us  to  think  that  it  is  not. 

And,  first,  Paul  does  not  preface  his  description 
with  any  notice  of  the  violent  persecutions,  or  super- 
natural judgments,  which  are  to  take  place  just  before 
the  mystery  is  finished. 

Again  ;  in  the  first  five  verses  of  the  next  chapter 
he  manifestly  treats  the  rapture  as  the  introduction  to 
the  Day  of  the  Lord,  just  as  Christ  Himself  gives  it  as 
the  sign  of  His  Presence  in  the  air.  So,  too,  in  the 
Second  Epistle,  when  he  adjured  the  Thessalonians,  by 
the  coming  of  Christ  and  our  gathering  together  unto 
Him,  not  to  be  persuaded  that  the  Day  of  the  Lord 
was  then  in  progress,^  he  clearly  implied  that  the 
coming  and  the  gathering  must  take  place  before  that 
Day. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  blast  which  signals  the  con- 
clusion of  the  mystery  sounds  just  at  the  close  of  the 
time  of  judgment.  For  the  seventh  angel's  period  in- 
cludes the  final  outpouring  of  wrath  from  the  vials,  the 
plagues  of  which  are  of  such  a  nature  that  their 
duration  must  be  very  limited,  or  no  flesh  would  be 
saved.  Moreover,  their  horrors  appear  to  be  cumula- 
tive ;  since,  under  the  fifth  vial,  men  are  represented  as 

'  Rev.  X.  7.  -  2  Thess.  ii.  i,  2.  See  p.  4:8  and  note. 


436  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

blaspheming  God  for  what  they  are  still  suffering  from 
the  first. ' 

It  would  seem,  then,  that  the  rapture  of  which  Paul 
speaks  and  the  fulfilment  of  the  mystery  of  God  are 
distinct  events,  and  there  is  no  lack  of  proof  that  the 
Church  will  be  gathered  to  the  Lord  in  two  translations, 
one  taking  place  before,  and  the  other  after,  the  Great 
Tribulation  and  the  persecutions  of  Antichrist.  But 
we  will  not  adduce  the  evidence  for  this  truth  until 
we  have  considered  a  difficulty  which  has  troubled 
many. 

If,  it  is  asked,  Paul  does  not  include  the  whole 
Church  in  the  translation  which  he  describes,  why  does 
he  say,  "  Then  we  which  are  alive,  and  remain,  shall  be 
caught  up,'  without  a  hint  of  possible  exceptions  to  the 
rule .'' 

The  difficulty  may  be  removed  by  two  considera- 
tions. 

First  ;  Paul  merely  says  "  we  shall  be  caught  up," 
and  not  "  we  shall  all  be  caught  up."  The  significance 
of  the  omission  will  appear  presently. 

In  the  second  place,  the  testimony  of  other  Scriptures 
shows  that  there  will  be  a  second  rapture  at  the 
appointed  time  for  the  assembly  of  the  Church,^  and, 

'  Rev.  xvi.  2,  II. 

■  The  reader  will  find  proofs  of  this  further  on.  Some  complain 
that,  unless  all  believers  be  taken  away  at  the  same  time,  the 
Church  will  be  divided  into  two  parts  ;  but  this  is  a  fallacy.  It 
will  be  no  more  divided  then  than  it  is  now  by  the  circumstance 
that  its  members  are  found  among-  the  quick  as  well  as  among 
the  dead,  and  that  some  of  them  may  not  yet  have  been  bom. 
But  in  the  days  of  the  voice  of  the  seventh  angel,  and  before  the 
manifestation,  all  will  be  safely  gathered  in  :  not  one  will  then  be 
missing. 

Others  do  not  deny  the  second  rapture,  but  suppose  that  all 
believers  will  be  taken  away  at  the  time  of  the  first,  and  that  the 


THE  MYSTERY  FINISHED.  437 

therefore,  that  the  Apostle's  words  are  to  be  regarded 
as  a  general  statement,  expressing  what  should  be,  and 
potentially  may  be,  the  case  with  every  Christian.  We 
may  compare  the  passage  in  which  he  says,  "  It  is 
appointed  unto  men  once  to  die "  ;  and  then,  in  the 
very  next  verse,  reveals  the  secret  that  some  will 
escape  death, ^  or,  as  he  puts  it  in  his  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians,  that  "  we  shall  not  all  sleep."^ 

In  the  same  general  way  the  Lord  gave  the  promise 
to  His  disciples  ; — "  Verily,  I  say  unto  you.  That  ye 
which  have  followed  Me  ...  ye  also  shall  sit  upon 
twelve  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel."^ 
Now  Judas  had  followed  Him,  and  was  at  the  time  one 
of  the  Twelve,  But  it  is  not  possible  that  the  Betrayer 
should  occupy  a  throne  in  the  regeneration,  since  the 
Lord  shortly  afterwards  speaks  of  him  as  a  lost  "  son 
of  perdition."  ^ 

How  much  may  be  signified  by  the  omission  of  the 
word  "  all "  is  seen  in  the  discourse  contained  in  the 
fifth  chapter  of  John.  There  the  Lord  reveals  the 
three  acts  of  power  by  which  He  will  show  that,  "  as 
the  Father  raiseth  up  the  dead,  and  quickeneth  them, 
even  so  the  Son  quickeneth  whom  He  will."'^ 

The  first  of  these  is  the  resurrection  of  the  spirit,  or 
conversion." 

The  second  is  the  bodily  resurrection  of  His  own 
at  His  coming.  And  although  He  will  at  that  time 
raise  only  some  from  among  the   dead,  yet  He   says 

members  of  the  second  will  be  entirely  made  up  of  sinners  sub- 
sequently converted.  Such  an  explanation  does  indeed  cut  the 
Church  in  twain  :  for  if  all  its  members  were  removed  from  earth, 
It  could  only  resume  its  work  after  an  absolute  replanting. 

'  Heb.  ix.  2^],  28.  '  Matt.  xix.  28  *  John  v.  21. 

^       Cor.  XV.  51.  ''  John  xvii.  12.  "  John  v.  24. 


438  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

simply  ; — "  The  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of 
Man/'  1 

But  when  He  speaks  of  the  third  act,  or  resurrection 
of  the  whole  number  of  the  dead,  He  describes  them  as 
''  all  that  are  in  the  graves."  ^ 

There  is,  then,  little  difficulty  in  regard  to  the 
passage  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians.  But  in 
the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  we  have  to  deal 
v/ith  a  far  more  precise  statement.  "  We  shall  not  all 
sleep,"  says  the  Apostle,  "  but  we  shall  all  be  changed, 
in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  the  last 
trump."  ^  There  is  no  possibility  of  misunderstanding 
this  assertion  :  it  can  only  mean  that  all  true  Christians 
who  are  alive  at  the  time  to  which  reference  is  made 
will  be  changed  and  translated.  But  the  time  is  that 
of  the  last  trumpet :  and  the  word  "  last "  evidently 
implies  that  others  have  previously  sounded.  Hence  it 
is  probable  that  Paul  means  the  seventh  trumpet  of  the 
Book  of  Revelation,  the  blast  of  which  will  announce 
that  the  mystery  is  finished. 

We  may  now  be  prepared  to  understand  the  repeated 
allusions  in  the  Apocalypse  to  two  raptures;*  the  first  of 

'  John  V.  25, 

^  John  V.  28. 

^  I  Cor.  XV.  51,  52. 

^  In  Rev.  xvi.  15,  we  find  the  words  ; — "Behold,  I  come  as  a 
thief.  Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth  and  keepeth  his  garments, 
lest  he  walk  naked  and  they  see  his  shame."  This  verse  is  often 
explained  of  the  Church  ;  and  would,  in  that  case,  indicate  a 
third  rapture.  But — .vithout  pressing  the  fact  that  the  mysteiy 
of  God  has  been  already  finished— there  is  nothing  in  its  terms  at 
all  suggestive  of  removal  from  earth.  It  is  rather  a  last  warning 
to  Jews,  that  the  Lord  is  on  the  point  of  descending,  and  all  His 
saints  with  Him  (Zech."  xiv.  5). 

The  figure  in  the  latter  part  of  the  verse  seems  to  be  appropri- 
ately taken  from  a  Jewish  custom,  which — since  it  is  preserved 
in  the  sixth  section  of  the  Misluiah,  under  the  heading  Middoth, 


THE  MYSTERY  FINISHED.  439 

which,  as  we  have  already  remarked,  will  break  up  the 
Church  as  an  institution  upon  earth,  and  so  clear  the 
way  for  the  resumption  of  God's  work  with  the  Jews. 
For  He  never  yet  has  had,  and  is  never  likely  to  have, 
two  elect  peoples  upon  earth  at  the  same  time  under 
different  covenants  and  different  laws.  The  second,  on 
the  other  hand,  will  complete  the  numbers  of  the 
Church  in  heaven. 

To  mention  some  of  the  traces  of  these  two  ascen- 
sions— we  have  already  pointed  out  the  distinction 
between  the  rapture  which  Paul  describes  and  the 
completion  of  the  mystery  of  God. 

We  have  also  shown  that  the  first  three  chapters  of 
the  Apocalypse  deal  only  with  matters  that  concern 
the  Christian  dispensation  ;  whereas  from  the  fourth 
chapter,  in  the  beginning  of  which  John  is  typically 
summoned  to  heaven,  the  Church  altogether  disappears, 
the  Tribes  of  Israel  come  to  the  front,  and  the  dis- 
pensation is  changed,  the  Old  Testament  cries  for 
vengeance  being  again  heard  among  the  people  of 
God.^  And  yet  this  period,  during  which  the  Church 
is  not  recognised  upon  earth,  is  the  time  of  Antichrist's 
persecution,  the  victims  of  which  are  afterwards  found 
among  the  heavenly  elect  .?^  They  must,  therefore,  have 
been  removed  to  heaven  by  a  second  translation. 

Again  ;  the  Man-child  is  caught  away  before  Anti- 
christ receives  his  power.^ 

that  is,  "  Measurements  of  the  Temple  " — may  not  improbably  be 
revived  when  the  Jews  return  to  Palestine.  It  was  as  follows  ; 
— "The  priest  that  walked  the  round  of  the  Temple-guards  by 
night  had  torches  borne  before  him  :  and  if  he  found  any  asleep 
upon  the  guard,  he  burnt  his  clothes  with  the  torches  "  {Middoth, 
cap.  I.  hal.  2).     See  Lightfoot's  Works,  vol.  iii,  p.  357. 

'  See  pp.  332-5.  -Rev.  XX.  4.  'See  pp.  111-2. 


440  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOb. 

But,  in  the  seventh  chapter,  there  stands  before  the 
Throne  a  vast  multitude  of  those  who  have  come  out  of 
"  the  Tribulation  the  Great  one  " — for  such  is  a  literal 
rendering  of  the  Greek — and  who  complete  the  numbers 
of  the  First  Resurrection. 

Similarly  the  fourteenth  chapter  begins  with  the 
description  of  a  hundred  forty  and  four  thousand  stand- 
ing with  the  Lamb  on  Mount  Zion,^  having  been 
redeemed  from  the  earth,  and  from  among  men,  as  a 
Firstfruits  to  God   and   the   Lamb, 

Then  follow  three  angelic  messages,  one  of  which 
has  special  reference  to  the  persecution  of  Antichrist. 

Immediately  afterwards  our  attention  is  directed  to 
the  Harvest,  which  is  gathered  in  by  the  Lord  Himself 
with  "  a  sharp  sickle."  And  doubtless  the  adjective 
alludes  to  the  terrible  discipline  to  which  those 
Christians  will  be  subjected  who  remain  on  earth  dur- 
ing the  reign  of  the  Beast. 

Following  the  Harvest  we  have,  still  in  the  order  of 
nature,  the  Vintage,  or  destruction  of  the  wicked  ;  so 
that  the  chapter  seems  to  present  us  with  the  con- 
trasted end  of  all  those  who  shall  be  alive  when  Christ 
descends  into  the  air. 

Another  indication  of  the  two  raptures  may  be  found 
In  the  sea  of  glass  which  John  saw  before  the  Throne, 
and  was  probably  well  able  to  understand,^  For  the 
appearance  of  the  two  altars  with  the  seven  torches  of 
fire  to  represent  the  lampstand,  and  the  Throne  with 
the  Cherubim  in  the  place  of  the  Ark,  must  immediately 

'  That  is,  of  course,  the  heavenly  Mount  Zion.  For  the  sound 
of  the  harps  comes  out  of  heaven  (v.  2) ;  the  hundred  forty  and 
four  thousand  sing  before  the  Throne ;  and  they  have  been 
redeemed  from  the  earth  (v.  3), 

^  Rev,  iv,  6, 


riiE  MYSTERY  FINISHED.  441 

have  suggested  to  him  that  the  sea  of  glass  was  the 
heavenly  pattern  of  the  lavcr  and  the  molten  sea. 

Now  the  laver,  standing  in  the  court  of  the  Taber- 
nacle, represented  sanctification,  even  as  the  brazen 
altar  did  justification.  It  was  for  the  priests  to  wash 
in  before  they  proceeded  into  the  Holy  Place  for 
service.  And  so  the  sea  which  John  saw  appears  to 
be  the  purifying  element  through  which  those  must 
pass  who  would  go  on  without  fear  to  do  service  before 
the  Throne.  And  what  this  element  is  Paul  discloses 
when  he  speaks  of  Christ  loving  the  Church,  and  giving 
Himself  for  it,  "  that  he  might  sanctify  and  cleanse  it 
with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word."  ^ 

Hence  those  who  pass  through  this  sea  of  glass  are 
men  so  gifted  with  faith  in  the  revelations  of  God  that 
His  Spirit  can  apply  the  word  with  power  to  their 
hearts,  and  cleanse  their  way  by  making  them  take 
heed  thereto  according  to  it.  Clear  as  crystal,  and 
without  any  admixture,^  was  the  heavenly  laver  when 
John  saw  it  prepared  for  the  sanctification  of  those 
whose  ascension  was  represented  by  his  own.  But 
a  little  later,  in  the  fifteenth  chapter,  he  beheld  it  in  a 
very  changed  condition. 

It  was  then  "  a  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire." 
Another  purifying  element  had  been  added  to  the  water, 
one  which,  throughout  the  New  Testament,  is  used  as  a 
figure  of  the  agonizing  chastisement  of  God,  whereby 

'  Eph.  V.  26. 

^  This  does  not,  of  course,  imply  that  those  who  have  part  in 
the  first  rapture  will  suffer  no  affliction.  But  the  word  of  God, 
made  effectual  by  His  Spirit,  will  be  the  chief  means  of  their 
sanctification  :  they  will  need  no  more  than  ordinary  trouble,  and 
will,  therefore,  be  accounted  worthy  to  escape  the  appalling  woes 
and  persecutions  of  the  Great  Tribulation. 


H2  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

the  flesh  is  consumed  and  destroyed,  while  the  spirit  is 
cleansed  and  made  white. 

What  it  specially  means  in  this  case  we  are  at  no 
loss  to  discover  :  for  upon  the  shore  of  the  sea  nearest 
to  the  Throne  stands  a  joyous  multitude  who  have 
passed  through  and  emerged  triumphantly  from  its 
painful  waters,  and  they  are  those  "  that  have  gotten 
the  victory  over  the  Beast,  and  over  his  image,  and  over 
his  mark,  and  over  the  number  of  his  name."  ^  Left 
behind  upon  the  earth,  they  have  endured  to  the  end 
through  the  time  of  fiery  trial,  through  the  hour  of 
temptation  :  they  are  the  Harvest  which  the  Lord 
reaped  with  a  sharp  sickle,  but  which  is  now  safely 
gathered  into  the  heavenly  garner,  whither  the  First- 
fruits  had  been  already  conveyed. 

With  so  much  testimony  in  regard  to  the  two  rap- 
tures, we  are  not  surprised  to  find  that,  when,  at  last, 
heaven  opens,  and  the  Lord  and  His  Church  are  re- 
vealed in  glory.  He  is  said  to  be  followed  by  the 
"  armies  ~  in  the  heaven,"  the  different  divisions  which 
make  up  the  one  body. 

Finally,  in  the  twentieth  chapter,  the  full  assembly 
of  the  Church  of  the  First-born  is  described  in  these 
terms ; — "  And  I  saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  upon 
them,  and  judgment  was  given  to  them  :  and  I  saw 
the  souls  of  them  which  had  been  beheaded  for  the 
testimony  of  Jesus,  and  for  the  word  of  God,  and  such 

'  Rev.  XV.  2 . 

'ra  a-TpaTevfiara.  Rev.  xix.  14.  "Heaven,"  in  the  singular, 
usually  means  the  heaven  of  this  earth,  or  the  Kingdom  of  the 
air,  where  the  Church  has  been  tabernacling  with  Christ.  The 
plural,  on  the  other  hand,  generally  signifies  the  whole  system  of 
the  heavens,  or,  the  heaven  of  heavens,  as  in  the  phrases,  "the 
Kingdom  of  the  heavens";  "Our  Father  Which  art  in  the 
heavens,"  and  others. 


THE  MYSTERY  FINISHED.  443 

as  worshipped  not  the  Beast,  neither  his  image,  and 
received  not  the  mark  upon  their  forehead  and  upon 
their  hand  ;  and  they  hved  and  reigned  with  Christ 
a  thousand  years.  The  rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  until 
the  thousand  years  should  be  finished.  This  is  the 
first  resurrection."^ 

Now  in  this  passage  we  can  discern  three  different 
classes  of  glorified  believers.  There  are,  first,  those 
who  are  seen  sitting  upon  thrones,  and  who  are 
probably  the  company  which  will  be  caught  up  to  the 
Lord  at  the  beginning  of  the  Presence.  Then  there  are 
those  who,  being  left  behind,  Avill  be  martyred  for  the 
testimony  of  Jesus  during  the  Seventieth  Week  ;  and, 
lastly,  those  who  will  be  faithful  witnesses  for  Christ  in 
the  times  of  trial,  neither  worshipping  the  Beast  nor  his 
image,  but  will,  nevertheless,  escape  death,  or,  at  least, 
death  by  persecution.  The  first  class  appears  to  occupy 
a  higher  position  than  the  others  :  but  all  live  and  reign 
with  Christ  for  a  thousand  years  ;  while  the  rest  of  the 
dead  are  not  recalled  to  life  until  the  end  of  that 
period. 

Thus  the  glorified  saints  which  John  saw  are  those 
who,  in  the  Lord's  words,  shall  be  accounted  worthy 
to  obtain  that  age — roD  aiwz^o?  eKeivov — and  the 
resurrection  out  of  the  dead.^  For  they  will  live  and 
reign  during  the  Millennial  age,  while  others  are  still 
confined  to  the  abode  of  disembodied  spirits  :  they  will 
not  wait  for  the  general  awakening,  but  be  raised  up 
from  the  great  multitudes  of  the  dead,  and  have  part 
in  the  First  Resurrection. 

We  should  not  omit  to    notice  that    their  reign   is 
limited  to  a  fixed  time  :  therefore,  this  Kingdom  is  not 
'  Rev.  XX.  4,  5.  *  Luke  xx.  35. 


444  THE   CHURCH  Of   GOD. 

identical  with  eternal  life,  nor  yet  with  the  inheritance 
which,  as  Peter  tells  us,  "  fadeth  not  away."  It  is 
something  additional  to  both  of  these,  and  special. 
And,  whenever  it  is  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament, 
it  appears  to  be  connected  rather  with  the  fruits  of 
faith  than   with   faith   in   the   abstract. 

The  expression,  the  so?ils  of  them  that  had  been 
beheaded,  is  peculiar,  and  its  possible  meaning  not  very 
apparent  to  the  merely  English  reader.  In  Greek  the 
same  word  signifies  'soul'  and  'life' — that  kind  of 
life  which  enables  us  to  rejoice  in  all  that  God  has 
created.  Now  this  word  is  used  by  the  Lord  in  the 
oft-quoted  saying  ; — "  Whosoever  would  save  his  life — 
or,  soul — shall  lose  it :  and  whosoever  shall  lose  his  life 
for  My  sake  shall  find  it."  Of  the  promise  in  the  last 
clause,  all  who  spend  and  are  spent  in  His  service  are 
inheritors,  and  especially  those  whose  love  urges  them 
forward  on  the  path  of  obedience,  even  though  Death 
appear  standing  in  the  wa}-. 

There  is  a  gracious  recognition  of  this  in  a  previous 
vision,  in  which  the  souls  of  martyrs  were  seen  lying 
under  the  great  altar,  poured  out  as  the  blood  of  a 
sacrifice  which  had  been  offered  to  God.  Such  a 
sacrifice,  with  which  He  is  well  pleased,  was  presented 
by  those  who  had  been  beheaded  for  the  testimony  of 
Jesus  :  at  His  command  they  had  cast  their  lives  upon 
the  ground,  and  now,  in  return  for  the  few  and  evil 
years  of  mortal  existence.  He  has  given  them  length  of 
days,  even  life  for  evermore. 

It  is,  then,  the  manifest  teaching  of  Scripture  that 
the  Church  will  ascend  to  the  Lord  in  two  divisions, 
the  first  of  which  will  leave  the  earth  at  the  beginning 
of  the  Presence,  the  other  towards  its  close.      But  it  is 


THE  MYSTERY  FINISHED.  445 

most  important  to  remember  that  the  set  time  for  its  full 
assembly  is  at  the  sounding  of  the  seventh  trumpet. 
Then  the  mystery  of  God  will  be  finished,  and  the 
invitation  to  Jew  and  Gentile  to  become  one  in  Christ, 
as  a  heavenly  people,  be  withdrawn. 

Hence,  so  far,  at  least,  as  the  living  are  concerned,  to 
have  part  in  the  first  rapture  is  a  reward  and  privilege 
given  only  to  those  whom  the  Lord,  when  He  comes, 
shall  find  watching.  It  involves  immunity  from  the 
terrific  woes  of  the  end  :  it  is  that  blessing  for  which 
the  Lord  urges  us  to  strive,  when  He  bids  us  take  heed, 
lest,  coming  suddenly.  He  find  us  sleeping.  And  those 
who  obtain  it  will  have  secured  the  fulfilment  of  His 
promise  ; — "  Because  thou  hast  kept  the  word  of  My 
patience,  I  also  will  keep  thee  from  the  hour  of 
temptation,  which  shall  come  upon  all  the  world,  to 
try  them   that  dwell  upon  the  earth."  ^ 

Surely  such  a  promise  is  of  vital  interest  to  us, 
standing,  as  we  seem  to  be,  hard  by  the  end  of  the  age. 
It  cannot  be  misunderstood  :  it  has  nothing  to  do  with 
Jews,  but  occurs  in  one  of  the  Epistles  to  the  Churches  : 
it  is  not  given  unconditionally  to  mere  believers,  but 
only  to  those  who  walk  consistently,  and  are  willing  to 
endure  with  Christ.  To  them  it  brings  assurance  of 
escape  from  a  temptation  by  which  all  other  men  must 
be  tried,  since  it  is  to  come  upon  the  whole  world. 
And,  as  the  next  verse  intimates,  their  deliverance  will 
be  wrought  by  the  personal  advent  of  the  Lord. 

And  how  earnestly  He  is  longing  to  rescue  His  own 
from  the  frightful  ordeal,  through  which  they  otherwise 
must  pass,  we  may  see  by  the  memorable  but  much 
neglected  command  in  the  Gospel  of  Luke  which  He 

'  Rev.  iii.  lo. 


446  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD.  ^ 

uttered  just  after  He  had  been  portraying  the  terrors 
of  the  Last  Week  ;  — "  Watch  ye,  therefore,  and  pray 
always,  that  ye  may  be  accounted  worthy  to  escape  all 
these  things  that  shall  come  to  pass,  and  to  stand  before 
the  Son  of  Man."^ 

Of  these  words  also  it  is  impossible  to  mistake  the 
meaning,  unless  we  do  so  wilfully.  They  certainly 
intimate  that  a  Christian,  though  sure  of  eternal  life, 
is  not  sure  of  being  removed  from  earth  before  the 
troubles  of  the  Last  Week.  This  favour  will  be 
granted  only  to  those  who  have  progressed  in  holiness, 
only  to  those  who  have  been  so  strengthened  with 
might  in  the  inner  man  that  they  can  watch  and  pray. 
Such  a  growth  in  grace  may,  indeed,  be  attained  by  all 
believers  :  the  poiver  of  watching  and  prayer  is  given 
to  every  man  at  his  conversion  ;  but  if  he  would  be 
able  to  bring  it  into  action,  he  must  be  willing  to  deny 
himself,  to  take  up  his  cross,  and  to  follow  his  Master. 
Then  there  will  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  issue  :  for 
"  faithful  is  He  That  calleth  you,  Who  will  also  do  it."^ 

But  the  Lord  has  no  thought  of  translating  worldly- 
minded  believers  from  the  toils  of  life  into  the  joy  of 
His  Presence,  of  admitting  them  to  honour  and  im- 
mortality by  the  gate  of  glory  instead  of  by  the  dark 
valley  of  Death.  Those  who  vainly  expect  such  a 
thing  are  like  the  Jews,  who  would  have  had  Christ 
put  Himself  at  their  head  as  the  all-victorious  King, 
when  as  yet  He  had  not  saved  them  from  their  sins. 
But  He  will  not  grant  to  the  careless  and  slothful 
servant  that  blessing  which  Paul  craved,  yet  did  not 
receive,  the  joy  of  being  clothed  upon,  without  the 
necessity  of  shuffling  off  this  mortal  coil. 

'  Luke  xxi.  36.  '^  i  Thess.  v.  24. 


THE  MYSTERY  FINISHED.  447 

And  so  He  bids  us  watch  and  pray  always,  that  we 
may  be  accounted  worthy  to  escape  the  time  of  greatest 
trouble,  and  to  stand  before  Him  while  it  is  going  on. 
Who  obeys  the  command  ?  How  many  ev^en  of  the 
readers  of  this  book  ?  But  His  words  may  not  be 
slighted  with  impunity,  and  we  would  suggest  a  solemn 
thought.  Among  those  who  first  ascend  to  meet  Him 
in  the  air,  it  is  not  likely  that  a  single  person  will  be 
found  who  has  neglected  this  loving  command  from 
His  own  mouth. 

Hence  we  cannot  but  see  the  guile  of  the  Adversary, 
craftily  working  to  throw  Christians  off  their  guard, 
in  the  arguments  by  which  many  strive  to  escape  the 
responsibility  of  the  Lord's  injunction,  and  to  cast  it 
upon  the  Jews.  Such  an  evasion  is,  however,  im- 
possible :  for — 

The  Gospel  of  Luke  has  no  Jewish  complexion,  like 
that  of  Matthew  ;  but  is  specially  addressed  to  Chris- 
tians, whether  they  were  previously  Jews  or  Gentiles. 

The  discourse  on  the  Mount  of  Olives  was  delivered 
after  the  Lord  had,  so  far  as  His  first  advent  was 
concerned,  finally  rejected  the  Jew.  He  had  just 
departed  from  the  Temple  with  the  ominous  words  ; — 
"  Behold,  your  house  is  left  unto  you  desolate  !  "  Not 
even  the  very  Holy  of  holies  itself  was  any  longer 
owned  of  God  :  His  relations  with  the  Jews  had  been 
suspended,  because  they  had  rejected  the  King. 

Consequently,  the  whole  discourse  is  addressed  to 
the  disciples  as  the  representatives  of  that  body  which 
should  now  take  the  place  of  Israel  as  witnesses  for 
God. 

To  them,  and  to  them  alone,  could  the  prediction 
be    applied.      The    synagogues  would  be    inimical    to 


448  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

them  ^  :  they  would  suffer  persecution  for  Christ's  sake 
before  the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus  :  ^  the 
promised  signal  for  their  flight  is  that  of  which  the 
Christians  did  actually  avail  themselves  ^  ;  but  by 
which,  so  far  as  we  know,  not  a  single  Jew  was  saved  : 
the  interval  between  the  Sixty-Ninth  and  the  Seven- 
tieth Week  is  plainly  marked  out  as  "  the  times  of  the 
Gentiles,"  *  and  not  merely  understood,  as  it  is  in 
Jewish  prophecies  :  and,  lastly,  but  little  is  said  of  the 
Seventieth  Week  with  which  Jews  are  mainly  con- 
cerned. 

Thus,  since  both  the  setting  and  the  whole  contents 
of  the  prediction  show  it  to  be  distinctively  Christian, 
^\■e  cannot  consenl;  to  disjoin,  and  refer  to  Jews,  the  com- 
mand at  the  close  of  it,  by  which  a  practical  applica- 
tion is  made  of  all  that  has  been  previously  spoken. 

The  further  objection  that  the  title  "  Son  of  Man  " 
has  nothing  to  do  with  our  Lord's  relations  to  the 
Church,  and,  on  that  account,  is  never  used  by  Paul, 
being  a  mere  conjecture  could  not,  in  any  case,  be 
allowed  to  stand  against  the  argument  stated  above. 
And  those  who  raise  it  do  not  appear  to  display  much 
critical  acumen  :  for  the  facts  are  as  follows. 

The  Lord  in  describing  Himself  frequently  makes 
use  of  the  term  Son  of  Man  ;  but,  with  a  single  excep- 
tion, it  is  never  applied  to  Him  by  His  followers  in  any 
part  of  the  New  Testament.  Possibly  the  reason  is 
that  the  title  was  felt  to  be  one  of  humiliation,  which, 
therefore,  would  not  come  well  from  the  servants'  lips, 
but  must  be  left  for  the  gracious  condescension  of  the 
Master. 

'  Luke  xxi.  12.  ^  Luke  xxi.  20.     See  note  to  p.  2^1. 

'  Luke  xxi.  13,  17.        ■*  Luke  xxi.  24. 


THE  MYSTERY  FINISHED.  449 

However,  the  only  man  who  is  recorded  to  have 
used  it,  the  martyr  Stephen,  was  a  member  of  the 
Church.  Just  before  his  death,  be  exclaimed  ; — 
"  Behold,  I  see  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of 
Man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God."  ^  This  does 
not  lead  us  to  regard  the  title  as  void  of  significance 
for  the  heavenly  election.  Nor  does  the  fact  that,  when 
the  Lord  appeared  to  John — certainly  at  the  time  a 
representative  of  the  Church — He  was  "  like  unto  a 
son  of  man  " ;  ^  and  that  the  Apostle  afterwards  de- 
scribed Him  in  the  same  terms  when  he  saw  Him 
seated  on  the  white  cloud,  and  waiting  to  reap  the 
Harvest  which  should  be  borne  away  from  the  field  "^ 
into  His  own  garner  above.* 

But,  if  thoughtless  and  inconsistent  believers  are  to 
be  left  upon  earth  during  the  greater  part  of  the  last 
Week,  though  they  are  no  longer  recognised  as  a 
Church,  we  should,  nevertheless,  expect  to  find  some 
slight  traces  of  their  presence  during  the  times  of 
trouble.  And  this  we  do  in  the  passages  which  tell 
us  of  their  oppression  by  and  victory  over  the  Beast, 
as  well  as  in  the  following  instances. 

When  the  Jewish  martyrs  cry  for  vengeance,  they 
are  bidden  to  rest  in  patience  until  "  their  fellow- 
servants  also  and  their  brethren "  should  be  killed.'^ 
And  while  the  brethren  are  doubtless  the  Jewish 
remnant,  the  fellow-servants  are   probably   Christians. 

Again  ;  we  have  gathered  that  the  travailing  Woman 
represents  the  system  of  God  upon  earth,  whether 
Christian  or    Jewish.     Now  after    the    rapture  of   her 

'  Acts  vii.  56.  ^  Matt.  xiii.  38. 

*  Rev.  i.  13.  "  Rev.  xiv.  14. 

*  Rev.  vi.  II. 

29 


450  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

child,  and  her  own  escape  from  the  Dragon,  the  latter 
returns  to  make  war  upon  the  remnant  of  her  seed, 
"  which  keep  the  commandments  of  God  and  have  the 
testimony  of  Jesus  Christ."^  This  description,  as  we 
have  already  remarked,  appears  to  include  all  the 
people  of  God  who  are  within  the  Dragon's  reach  at 
the  time  ;  the  first  clause  referring  to  pious  Jews,  the 
second  to  Christians. 

And,  perhaps,  when  we  read  of  the  much  incense 
which  is  given  to  an  angel  that  he  may  add  it  to  the 
prayers  of  "  all  the  saints,"  ^  we  are  to  understand  that, 
at  the  solemn  crisis  of  renewed  Judgment,  supplications 
are  ascending  to  God  from  both  classes  of  those  who 
fear  Him,  and  who  are  then  suffering  oppression  upon 
the  earth. 

Before  closing  this  subject,  we  may  notice  that  in  the 
future  of  Israel  there  is  an  exact  analogy  to  the  case 
of  those  Christians  who  will  have  to  endure  the  Great 
Tribulation. 

In  the  seventh  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse,  an  angel 
brings  the  seal  of  the  living  God  to  impress  it  upon 
the  foreheads  of  His  servants  ;  and  twelve  thousand 
men  are  thus  distinguished  in  each  of  the  twelve  tribes 
of  Israel.  But  these  tribes  are  not  tJie  Twelve  :  their 
number  is  made  up  in  an  unwonted  manner,  by  reckon- 
ing the  usually  omitted  tribe  of  Levi  and  leaving  out 
that  of  Dan. 

Many  reasons  may  be  found  for  the  exclusion  of  the 
latter.  A  dark  cloud  overhangs  the  whole  history  of  the 
clan  whose  founder  saw  the  light  through  the  rebellious 
impatience  of  Rachel,-  and  was  the  first  offspring  of  a 
bond-woman  introduced  into  the  family  of  Jacob. 
'Rev.  xii.  I7.  ''Rev.  viii.  3. 


THE  MYSTERY  FINISHED.  451 

When  blessing  his  sons  on  his  death-bed,  the  patri- 
arch could  find  but  the  sinister  comparison  of  a  serpent 
for  Dan.  Moses  did,  indeed,  speak  of  the  tribe  as 
"  a  lion's  whelp  " ;  ^  but  the  ominous  addition  of  the 
words,  "  he  shall  leap  from  Bashan,"  rather  connects  it 
with  that  roaring  lion  which  walketh  about  seeking 
whom  he  may  devour  than  with  the  Lion  of  the  Tribe 
of  Judah.  For  the  Hill  of  Bashan  sets  itself  in 
opposition  to  the  Hill  of  God :  ^  its  bulls  roar 
against  the  Son  of  God  :  ^  its  kine  oppress  the  poor, 
and  crush  the  needy  :  *  its  oaks  are  high,  and  lifted  up 
in  proud  rebellion.^ 

The  tribe  did  not  belie  the  predictions  concerning 
it :  cunning  skill  and  strength  were  its  characteristics. 
In  the  wilderness  it  was  inferior  in  numbers  only  to 
Judah,  and  brought  up  the  rear  of  the  march  :  it  fur- 
nished one  of  the  two  skilled  artists  who  were  employed 
upon  the  Tabernacle  :  ^  Solomon's  chief  workman  was 
connected  with  it  : '''  and  from  its  ranks  sprang  Samson, 
the  great  deliverer,  but  by  no  means  perfect  servant 
of  God.  8 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Israelitish  mother  of  the 
man  stoned  for  blasphemy  was  a  Danite  :  ^  and,  soon 
after  the  entrance  of  the  people  into  Canaan,  some  of 
the  same  tribe  were  the  first  to  establish  idolatry  ;  ^^ 
so  that,  in  subsequent  times,  their  town  was  a  fitting 
locality  for  the  setting  up  of  Jeroboam's  calf^^  And 
perhaps  it  is  because  they  had  thus  proved  a  stumbling- 
block  to  Israel  that  nothing  is  said  of  Dan  in  the 
genealogies  of  the  First  Book  of  Chronicles. 

'  Deut.  xxxiii.  22.  ■*  Amos  iv.  i.         ''2  Chron.  ii.  14. 

^  Psalm  Ixviii.  15,  16.  *  jg^.  ii.  1^.  s  Judges  xiii.  2,  24. 

*  Psalm  xxii.  12,  13.  ^  Exod.  xxxi.  6.     '  Lev.  xxiv.  11 
'"  Judges  xviii.  "  i  Kings  xii.  29,  30. 


452  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

These  particulars  may  point  to  reasons  why  the 
tribe  is  excluded  from  the  sealing  :  but  what  is  the 
import  of  the  exclusion  ?  Is  it  that  the  Danites  will 
be  finally  destroyed,  and  disappear  for  ever  from  among 
the  sons  of  Israel  ? 

Not  so  :  for  the  sealing  takes  place  before  the 
trumpets  and  vials,  and  we  have  in  the  last  chapter  of 
Ezekiel  two  other  lists  of  the  tribes,  connected  with 
later  and  Millennial  times,  in  both  of  which  the  name 
of  Dan  again  appears.  He  will  have  his  portion  in 
the  recovered  land  of  Canaan  ;  but  it  will  be  in  the 
extreme  north,  at  the  furthest  distance  from  the  Temple 
which  Messiah  will  build.^  And  one  of  the  twelve 
gates  in  the  Millennial  Jerusalem  will  be  the  gate  of 
Dan.'-^ 

Not,  then,  for  extinction  is  this  tribe  excluded  from 
the  sealing,  but  for  discipline.  The  angel  with  the 
seal  appears  just  as  four  other  ministers  of  God  are 
about  to  let  loose  His  judgments  upon  the  earth,  and 
with  a  loud  voice  bids  them  refrain  until  he  has  sealed 
the  servants  of  God  for  preservation.^  And,  accord- 
ingly, when  the  infernal  locusts  are  released  from  the 
Abyss,  their  commission  is  to  hurt  the  men  which  have 
not  the  seal  of  God  in  their  foreheads.* 

Hence  the  tribe  of  Dan  will  have  no  exemption  from 
the  torments  of  this  and  other  plagues  ;  and  we  may 
thus  see  the  parallelism  between  theiir  case  and  that  of 
the  unready  Christians. 

It  was  not,  then,  without  meaning  that  Jacob,  when 
speaking  of  the  future  of  Dan,  uttered  the  abrupt  ex- 
clamation;— "I  have  waited  for  Thy  salvation,©  Lord!'  ° 

'  Ezek.  xlviii.  i.  '  Ezek.  xlviii.  ^2. 

*  Rev.  vii.  1-3.  *  Rev.  ix.  4.  ^  Gen.  xlix.  18. 


CONCLUSIOI^.  453 

For  he  seems,  with  prophetic  eye,  to  have  discerned 
that  there  were  difficulties  in  the  way  of  saving  this 
tribe,  which  could  be  overcome  only  by  peculiar  dis- 
cipline and  longer  delay. 


XXIII. 

Conclusion. 

We  trust  that  enough  has  been  said  in  the  preceding 
chapters  to  set  forth  the  great  secret  which  the  Lord 
has  revealed  to  them  that  fear  Him.  At  any  moment, 
of  any  day  or  hour.  He  may  descend  into  the  air,  and 
require  our  instant  attendance.^  And  for  us  the  whole 
duty  of  life  is  to  maintain  a  state  of  continual  readiness 
to  leave  our  earthly  habitations,  and  stand  before  Him 
face  to  face. 

This  we  can  do  only  by  keeping  closely  to  Him  in 
spiritual  communion,  by  ever  waiting  and  watching  for 
Him,  and  by  occupying  the  remaining  time  of  His 
absence  in  those  works  to  which  He  has  called  us. 
Like  Paul,  we  must  labour  that  we  may  be  accepted 
of  Him.2 

And  if  it  be  asked.  Who  is  sufficient  for  these 
things  ? — we  reply.  No  man  in  his  own  strength  ;  but 
power  shall  be  given  to  every  one  who  earnestly  and 
sincerely  desires  it.  The  revelation  of  God  declares 
that  all  grace  is    freely  offered   to    us  ;  and    that   the 

'  To  realise  this,  and  act  upon  it,  is  the  highest  perfection  of  the 
Christian  life.  "  So  that  ye  come  behind  in  no  gift,  waiting,  as 
ye  are,  for  the  revelation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Who  shall  also 
confirm  you  unto  the  end,  that  ye  may  be  blameless  in  the  Day 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  (i  Cor.  i.  7,  8). 

*  2  Cor.  V.  9. 


454  THE   CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

only  hindrance  arises  from  hesitation  on  our  part  to 
receive  His  gifts,  because  we  shrink  from  the  re- 
sponsibilities which  they  involve,  and  love  this  present 
world. 

Sometimes  the  phraseology  of  Scripture  is  very 
instructive  in  regard  to  this  point. 

"  Be  not  drunken  with  wine,  wherein  is  riot,"  says 
Paul  ;  "  but  be  filled  with  the  Spi-rit."  ^  Is  not  the 
second  clause  of  this  verse  as  direct  a  command  as  the 
first  ?  And,  in  another  place,  the  same  Apostle,  after 
quoting  the  words,  "  Yet  once  more  I  shake  not  the 
earth  only,  but  also  the  heaven,"  adds  ; — "  Wherefore, 
since  we  are  receiving  a  Kingdom  which  cannot  be 
shaken,  let  us  have  grace  whereby  we  may  serve  God 
acceptably  with  reverence  and  awe."  ^ 

But  many  Christians  are  unable  to  obtain  this  neces- 
sary grace,  because  they  refuse  to  confront  the  future 
which  God's  word  sets  before  them.  They  either  reject 
the  doctrine  of  the  Lord's  personal  coming  in  plain 
terms,  or,  at  least,  practically  ignore  it. 

But  if  they  love  not  His  appearing,  how  shall  they 
obtain  a  crown  of  Righteousness  .■*  ^  If  they  have  not 
this  hope  in  them,  how  shall  they  purify  themselves 
even  as  He  is  pure  ?  * 

It  is,  again,  no  uncommon  thing  to  hear  those  who 
have  some  idea  of  the  truth,  but  dare  not  put  forth 
their  trembling  hands  to  grasp  it,  excusing  themselves 

'  Eph.  V.  i8.  If  we  render,  "  Be  filled  in  spirit,"  the  sense  is 
still  the  same.  Our  spirit  must  be  filled  either  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  or  with  the  spirits  of  evil,  and  Paul  certainly  does  not  refer 
to  the  latter. 

^  Heb.  xii.  28. 

'  2  Tim.  iv.  8. 

*  I  John  iii.  3. 


CONCLUSION.  \ss 

with  the  remark,  that,  although  they  may  not  care  to 
think  of  the  Lord's  return,  they,  nevertheless,  prepare 
for  death  ;  and  if  they  are  ready  for  that,  so  will  they 
be  for  His  coming,  should  it  happen  in  their  lifetime. 

Is  this  certain  ?  Upon  what  principle,  then,  are  we 
to  explain  the  fact  that,  throughout  the  New  Testa- 
ment, we  are  never  once  commanded  to  prepare  for 
death  ;  but  are  repeatedly  and  urgently  warned  that 
the  Lord  is  at  hand,  and  exhorted  to  watch  and  pray, 
lest,  coming  suddenly.  He  should  find  us  sleeping  ? 
Are  we  not  forced  to  an  inference  directly  opposed  to 
the  opinion  that  it  suffices  to  keep  death  in  view  ? 

And  a  very  little  reflection  will  enable  even  our 
feeble  minds  to  justify  the  course  which  God  has  taken 
in  the  matter. 

When  a  disembodied  spirit  passes  into  the  unseen 
world,  it  goes,  indeed,  to  its  own  place,  to  its  own  side 
of  the  impassable  gulf  But,  if  it  be  a  saved  spirit,  is 
it  likely  that  its  condition  remains  unchanged  until  the 
resurrection  ?  All  analogy  with  God's  known  works 
forbids  such  a  supposition. 

He  that  is  freed  from  the  body  of  sin,  and  from  the 
distractions  of  sense,  is  able  to  concentrate  his  attention 
upon  the  glorious  Being  Who  is,  and  will  be,  all  to 
Him.  And  could  he  do  this,  and  enjoy  the  near  spiri- 
tual   presence^   of    His    Saviour,   without   progressing, 

'  We  must  not  forget  that  the  spirits  of  the  departed  can  have 
nothing  more  than  spiritual  intercourse  with  the  Lord,  and  are 
unable  to  behold  Him  as  He  is.  That  they  can  do  only  when 
their  bodies  are,  like  His,  redeemed  and  glorified  by  resurrection. 
And  so  John  says  ; — "We  know  that  when  He  shall  appear,  we 
shall  be  like  Him  ;  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is  " — words  which 
plainly  imply  that  disembodied  spirits  cannot  so  see  Him.  But 
they  have  the  advantage  of  an  intermediate  stage  in  their  know- 
ledge,  and   by  attaining,    during    the   period    of  uninterruDtcd 


456  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD. 

without  becoming  more  and  more  fit  to  appear  with 
Christ  in  glory  ?      Impossible  ! 

In  the  case,  then,  of  redeemed  spirits,  it  would  seem 
that  some  preparation  for  the  glory  is  going  on  during 
the  intermediate  state. 

On  the  other  hand,  those  who  are  alive  when  the 
Lord  comes  will  have  no  such  advantage  ;  but  will  be 
required  to  pass  immediately  from  the  scenes  of  earth 
to  the  full  light  of  His  majesty.  This  will  be  a  far 
more  abrupt  and  serious  change,  so  that  we  need  not 
wonder  at  the  direction  taken  by  Scriptural  admonition. 
And  certainly  he  who  is  thus  prepared  to  meet  his 
Judge  and  King  has  little  need  to  trouble  himself  in 
regard  to  death.  But  the  converse  of  the  proposition 
can  be  by  no  means  maintained. 

Perhaps,  however,  the  error  of  some  of  us  leads  in 
an  opposite  direction  to  that  which  we  have  been  dis- 
cussing. It  may  be  that  we  acknowledge  the  certainty 
of  the  Lord's  return,  and  even  love  to  converse  on  the 
solemn  subject ;  but  do  we  mean  what  we  say?  Are  the 
desires  which  we  express  real,  and  our  words  unfeigned } 

At  the  time  of  the  first  advent,  the  Pharisees  had 
for  many  years  been  talking  of  the  coming  Messiah  : 
they  had  made  their  boast  in  Him,  and  magnified  them- 
selves above  others  on  His  account.  And  yet,  when 
they  heard  the  inquiry,  "Where  is  He  That  is  born 
King  of  the  Jews  .'* "  they  were  troubled,  and  all 
Jerusalem  with  them.  Their  professions  had  been 
suddenly  brought  to  the  test,  and  lo  !  they  cared  neither 
for  God  nor  for  His  Christ. 

spiritual  intercourse,  to  a  closer  acquaintance  with  Him  than  is 
possible  upon  earth,  they  may  become  more  prepared  for  the 
beatific  vision  of  His  unveiled  presence. 


CONCLUSION.  457 

They  had  been  using  the  sacred  names  merely  to 
add  authority  to  their  own  teachings,  to  support  a 
system  which  they  had  evolved,  and  which  set  them 
in  positions  of  honour  and  influence.  And  feeling 
instinctively  that  the  Lord  of  glory  could  never  be 
persuaded  to  promote  aims  so  selfish  as  theirs,  they 
were  troubled  at  His  birth,  and  when  He  afterwards 
presented  Himself  as  their  Prophet  and  King,  they 
hated  rejected  and  crucified   Him. 

Is  this  sad  story  of  hypocrisy  to  be  repeated  ? 
There  is  too  much  reason  to  fear  that  it  will  be  in 
the  case  of  many — will  be,  that  is,  so  far  as  it  may. 

For  when  He  comes  again,  glorious  in  His  apparel, 
and  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  His  strength,  we 
shall  be  powerless  to  deny  Him  :  but  He  may  reject 
us. 

"  And  now,  little  children,  abide  in  Him,  that  when 
He  shall  appear  we  may  have  confidence,  and  not 
shrink  with  shame  from   Him  at  His  coming."  ^ 

Our  task  is  completed  :  for  we  do  not  propose  to 
speak,  in  the  present  volume,  of  the  Last  Week,  the 
Millennial  Age,  and  the  Final  Judgment.  We  have 
considered  the  great  Gentile  and  Jewish  prophecies  in 
order  that  we  might  better  understand  the  times  of  the 
Church,  and  we  have  traced  the  career  of  the  latter, 
until  we  left  her  in  heaven  with  her  Lord. 

Her  glorified  members  have  exhausted  the  sufferings 
appointed  for  her  sanctification,  and  now  they  live  and 
reign  with  Him.  Not  one  of  them  could  avoid  the 
pains,  the  anxieties,  the  cares,  and  the  pettiness,  of  life  ; 
but  they  were  lifted  up  above  them  all  by  the  power  of 

'  I  John  ii.  28. 


458  THE  CHURCH  OF  COD. 

His  resurrection,  and  lo  !  the  former  things  have  passed 
away,  and  the  days  of  their  mourning  are  ended. 

O  weary  and  care-worn  souls,  look  up  and  behold 
the  glorious  vision  !  It  is  no  mere  dream  of  delight  to 
be  presently  swept  away  by  the  never  failing  stream  of 
woe  :  nay,  it  is  the  joy  which  our  Lord  of  love,  Who 
cannot  lie,  has  set  before  us.  And,  if  we  but  cleave  to 
Him  with  purpose  of  heart,  He,  by  His  almighty 
power,  will  bring  us  safely  to  it,  though,  perhaps, 
through  much  tribulation. 

Does  not  the  very  thought  of  His  promises  lighten  the 
burden  of  the  cross  .''  Sorrows,  conflicts,  and  perplexi- 
ties, may  be  thickening  around  us  :  let  them  only  cause 
us  to  cry  with  greater  earnestness  ; — "  Thy  Kingdom 
come !  "  In  the  sick  chamber,  or  the  place  of  heart- 
breaking toil ;  in  the  lonely  garret,  or  the  full  house  in 
which  we  must  sojourn  as  strangers  among  ungenial 
spirits  ;  by  the  newly  opened  grave,  or  in  the  forsaken 
home  ;  wherever  the  load  of  human  anguish  presses 
most  heavily,  let  us,  even  in  sorrow,  rejoice  that  the 
time  of  suffering  will  soon  be  over.  For  He  has  said, 
"  Behold  I  come  quickly  "  ;  and  then  God  shall  wipe 
away  all  tears  from  our  eyes,  and  death  shall  be  no 
more,  neither  shall  there  any  more  be  mourning,  nor 
crying,  nor  pain. 


Irinted  by  liazell,  'WaUion,  &  Viney,  Ld.,  London  ai.d  Aylesburj 


■;> 


s  ft        ^^•^-:- 


>^d 


IM 


V^.ii,,- 


;v  .'^Iv 


#^ 


> 


H 


1 


;^i 


> 


< 

Q 


c 


r 


University  of  Toronto 
Library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMITED 


