Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


•?_ 


■     -L.  •    ^    •■'       ■' 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


KTITKI>    nv   THE 


REV.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  U.k., 

VICAT:  and  RrRAL  DEAN  OF  8T.   PANCRAfl,   AVP  EXAMISINO   CHAPLAIN   TO  THE  LOUD 

BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  AND   BRISTOL; 


AXI)    BY    TIIK 


REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A, 


WITFI 

1  XTRODUCTTONS 

BY   THE 

YEN.   ARCHDEACON  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.K.S. 

RIGHT   REV.  H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  F.R.S.E. 

VERY    REV.  PRINCIPAL   J.  TULLOCH,  D.I). 

REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A. 

REV.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A. 


-•♦- 


UonDon: 
KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH  &  CO.,  1,  PATERNOSTEE  SQUARE. 

1884. 


10'  .    I 


•-> 


rXINTBD   BY  Will. I  MM  CLOWES   AND  SONS,    I.IMITBD, 
LONl>ON   AND   BECCLBS. 


'The  rigkU  tf  irmnsUtion  and  of  re^rodudioH  are  nursed.') 


THE 


riLI'lT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY    THE 


REV.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A., 

VICAB  AND   BUBAL   DEAN  OF   ST.    PAN0BA9,   AND   EXAMINING   CHAPLAIN   TO  THE   LOBD 

BISHOP  OP  OLOU0E8TEB   AND    BRISTOL; 


AND    BY   THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.\. 


I.     Cll  liOXiCLES. 


(SBxposttion  anli  ^omflettcs 
By  REY.  professor  P.  C.  BARKER,  M.A.,  LL.IV 


f^omtltes  bg  Fadous  ^ut^ots. 

EKV.  PROF.  J.  R.  THOMSON,  MA.        REV.  R.  TUCK,  B.A. 
RKV.  W.  CLARIiSOX,  B.A.  REV.  F.  WHITFJELD.  M.A. 

REV.  RICHARD  GLOVER. 


iL  0  u  D  0  n  : 

KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH  &  CO.,  1,  PATERXOSTER   SQUARE. 

1884. 


THE 


riEST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


■«^«- 


INTKODUCTION. 


§  1.  Title. 

1.  The  Hebrew  title  of  the  Chronicles  is  D*p*rj  nj^.  The  literal  trans- 
lation  of  the  title  is  "  Verba  diemm ; "  and  is  so  offered  ns  by  Jerome  (bom 
331,  died  422),  in  the  preface  to  his  work  on  Kings,  which  he  named  on 
account  of  its  apologetic  character, '  Prologns  Oaleatus  in  Libros  Regnm.* 
By  Hilarius,  Bishop  of  Poictiers  (bom  circ.  300,  died  368),  in  his  *  Prologos 
in  Librnm  Psalm.,'  the  same  title  is  translated,  '*  Sermones  diemm."  But 
there  is  no  donbt  that  the  idiomatic  rendering  wonld  rather  be,  ''  Acta,  or 
Jtea  gestae,  diernm."  This  generic  rendering  will  most  nearly  cover  the 
different  shades  of  meaning  attaching  to  the  Hebrew  word,  in  all  those 
cases  in  which  the  simplest  translation,  "  words,"  would  not  be  the  correct 
one,  as,  for  instance,  in  ch.  xxix.  29.  In  this  verse  the  term  occars  as  many 
as  four  times.  In  the  first  instance  it  is  impossible  to  render  it  as  thoagh 
it  meant  words,  either  literally  or  figuratively ;  and  in  the  other  three 
instances,  if  it  were  so  rendered,  it  could  only  mean  the  written  words  of 
history.  Some  generic  term,  therefore,  like  "  history,"  or  "  acts,"  will  best 
express  its  significance,  and  probably  the  former  of  these  better  than  the 
latter  (*  Memoria  Berum  Qestarnm,'  Sallust,  *  Jugartha,'  iv.).  The  exact  form 
of  words  which  constitutes  the  title  of  this  book  is  not  found  at  all  in  the 
work  entitled  Samiiel  (which  is  essentially  one  with  Kings),  and  probably 
for  no  more  important  reason  than  this,  that,  being  thus  as  it  were  the 
former  half  of  one  whole  work,  it  had  not  arrived  at  the  point  where 
historical  sources  would  need  to  be  cited.  In  point  of  fact,  it  may  be  said 
that  scarcely  one  such  reference  occurs  in  Samuel.  In  the  Books  of  Kings, 
however,  we  find  this  expression  not  fewer  than  thirty-one  times,  beginning 
with  1  Kings  xiv.  19.  It  is  somewhat  more  remarkable  that  the  exact 
phrase  is  found  but  once  in  Chronicles  (ch.  xxvii.  24).  It  is  also  found 
once  in  Nehemiah,  and  three  times  in  Esther,  and  in  almost  all  cases  it  is 
preceded  by  the  word  T^p,  a  writing,  or  book. 

U  GHROKIOLES.  h 


ii  INTRODUCTION  TO 


2.  The  Scptuagmt  (translation  made  probably  about  B.C.  280,  at  Alexan- 
dria, from  older  Hebrew  manuscripts  than  any  we  have)  provides  as  a  title 
for  the  work  now  before  us  the  word  Ila/tKiXciTro/iicviUK — the  substantive 
PiPXlov,  accompanied  or  not  by  one  of  the  first  two  ordinals,  being  under- 
stood before  the  genitive.  The  idea  of  the  translators  of  the  Septuaginfc,  or 
of  those,  whoever  they  were,  who  fixed  on  this  title,  seems  to  have  been  that 
Chronicles  had  mnch  of  the  appearance  of  supplementing  former  historical 
works.  The  Greek  word  is  Latinized  for  us  by  Jerome,  into  Praifermissorum^ 
i,e,  the  book  of  things  omitted.  But  this  is  not  all ;  for  Jerome,  in  his  *  Epistle 
ad  Paulinum,*  speaks  of  this  work  as  "  Indrumenti  Veieris  Epitome ;  "  and 
in  the  same  paragraph  adds,  a  little  further  on,  '*  Per  singula  quippe  nomina 
juncturasque  Verborum,  et  pra;termisso9  in  Hegum  Libris  tanguntur  historiaa, 
et  innumerabiles  explicantur  Evangelii  qucestiones."  Jerome,  therefore, 
evidently  had  present  to  his  mind  the  fuller  description  of  Chronicles  as 
an  "  Epitome  Instrumenti  Vcteris,"  as  well  as  containing  "  PreatermisssB  in 
Libris  Regum  Historice."  To  the  same  effect,  we  find  in  the  *  Synopsis 
Scriptune  Sacrca,*  a  treatise  ranked  among  the  duhia  opera  of  St. 
Athanasius  (bom  ciro.  298,  died  373),  the  remark,  "  Many  things  which 
had  been  omitted  in  Kings  are  comprised  in  these  books,''  i.e.  the  Books 
of  Chronicles.  Once  more,  Isidore  (bom  circ.  565,  died  636),  Bishop  of 
Seville,  says,  "  Paralipomenon  Grsece  dicitur,  quod  pradtermissorum  vel 
reliquomm  nos  dicere  possumus,  quia  ea  quad  in  Lege,  vel  in  Regum  Libris 
vel  omissa  vel  non  plene  relata  sunt,  in  isto  summatini  et  breviter 
explicantia  "  ('  Origines,'  vi.  1). 

3.  The  Vulgate  (executed  by  Jerome  direct  from  the  Hebrew  text,  about 
A.D.  385—405,  and  accepted  since  the  time  of  Gregory  L,  540 — 604,  or 
since  the  Council  of  Trent,  as  the  authentic  and  curreiit  text,  thence  termed 
Vulgate)  shows  in  the  place  of  the  superscription,  both  the  Hebi^ew  and 
the  Septuagint  titles,  viz.  Bihre  Hajamin  and  Paralipomenoriy  written  re- 
spectively in  ordinary  Latin  characters.  Some  later  Latin  ecclesiastical 
writers  have  used  the  words  "  Ephemeridum  libri  "  as  an  equivalent  of  the 
Hebrew  title.  The  appropriateness  as  a  literal  translation  (*  Cic.  pro  P. 
Quintio,'  18,  57)  may  suffice ;  bnt  this  will  not  be  an  idiomatic  equivalent, 
por  could  many  portions  of  Chronicles  bo  very  fitly  resembled  to  the  contents 
of  what  we  mean  in  the  present  day  by  diary  or  calendar. 

4.  Our  own  English  title,  "  Chronicles,"  dates  from  the  time  of  Jerome. 
In  the  same  passage  of  the  *  Prologus  Galeatus  in  Libros  Regum  '  already 
referred  to,  Jerome  appends  to  the  Hebrew  title  the  critique,  "  Quod  signifi- 
cantius  Chronicon  totius  divines  historisB  possumus  appellare."  Some  of 
the  editions  of  the  Vulgate  show  this  title,  "Chronica,"  or  "Chronicorum 
Liber."  It  would  seem  evident  that  the  desiderated  title  should  express,  in 
the  most  general  form,  the  idea  of  a  chronological  record ;  and  perhaps  the 
word  Chronicles  answers  to  this  in  the  least  exceptionable  way.  This  title 
was  adopted  by  Luther  (born  1483,  died  1546),  and  remains  in  nse  through- 
out the  German  Church.    It  may  now  be  added  that  the  treatment  of  the 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  iii 


matter  of  title,  on  the  part  both  of  Jerome  and  the  Sepinagint  translators 
long  before,  evidences  that  what  we  call  the  Hebrew  title  was  not  in  their 
opinion  any  part  of  the  original  work.  If  it  had  been,  they  would  not  have 
presumed  so  to  tamper  with  it. 

§  2.  The  Original  Form  op  thb  Work. 

Chronicles  was  not  originally  divided  into  two  parts  in  the  Hebrew 
manuscripts.  On  the  contrary,  Jerome  (*Ad  Donmion  et  Bogatian ')  says  that 
these  remained  undivided  even  in  his  time,  although  the  division  had  been 
made  by  the  Septuagint  translators,  and  had  long  been  recognized  among 
those  Churches  that  used  the  Septuagint.  Jerome  adopted  the  division  in 
his  Vulgate.  Daniel  Bomberg  (bom  circ.  1480,  died  1549)  was  the  first  to 
exhibit  the  division  in  a  printed  Hebrew  Bible,  in  his  edition  at  Venice 
(1518 — 1536),  and  from  these  sources  the  division  has  now  become 
universal.  The  notes  of  the  Masorites,  from  the  sixth  century,  or  even 
somewhat  earlier,  also  witness  to  the  then  undivided  state  of  the  Hebrew 
manuscripts,  by  the  incidental  mention  of  the  fact  that  the  bisecting  verse 
of  the  work  was  to  be  found  at  what  we  now  call  ch.  xxvii.  25.  Other 
evidences,  were  they  needed,  are  somewhat  abundantly  offered  in  the  ancient 
numeration  of  the  Old  Testament  books,  by  Josephus  (a.d.  37 — 97),  Origen 
(186 — 254),  Jerome,  and  the  Talmud  (supposed  to  belong  to  the  second 
century).  In  case,  then,  anything  in  the  further  consideration  of  this  work 
should  be  found  to  depend  upon  it,  we  may  remember  that  the  work  aa 
originally  composed  was  oncy  and  embraced  the  whole  sweep  of  Scripture 
history  in  an  epitomized  form — epitomized,  indeed,  in  parts  to  the  pro- 
portions of  a  mere  recital  of  names — from  Adam  to  a  date  succeeding  the 
return  from  the  Captivity.  And  the  only  remaining  problem  on  this  part 
of  the  subject  is  whether  the  Book  of  Ezra,  as  it  certainly  is  an  immediate 
continuation  of  the  closing  verses  of  Chronicles,  was  not  also  really  one 
work  with  it,  as  is  believed  by  many. 

§  3.  Thb  Date  op  Compilation. 

Assuming  the  integrity  and  unity  of  Chronicles,  right  down  to  the  verses 
which  appear  with  us  as  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  22,  23,  and  excluding  the  theories 
of  later  interpolations,  we  undoubtedly  possess  certain  time-marks  which 
fix  some  irrefragable  dates  within  which  the  work  could  not  have  been 
compiled.  Thus,  e.g.,  beginning  with  the  last,  so  far  as  its  position  in  our 
work  is  concerned,  the  above-mentioned  verses  necessarily  bring  us  to  the 
year  B.C.  539-8  (Conder's  '  Handbook  to  the  Bible,'  2nd  edit.,  pp.  1,  23). 
Next,  the  ninth  chapter  opens,  in  our  Hebrew  text,  with  a  form  of  statement 
which  purports  to  terminate  the  subject  of  the  genealogies  (ending  at 
different  times,  and  in  part  with  Hezekiah's  reign)  of  the  preceding  eight 
chapters,  by  the  mention  of  "the  carrying  away  of  Israel  and  Judah  to 
Babylon,  for  their  transgressions  ; "  while  the  Masoretic  text,  placing  a  full 


W  INTRODUCTION  TO 


period  at  the  word  "  Israel,"  makes  the  mention  of  Jadah's  captivity  yet 
more  emphatic  as  a  thing  of  the  past.     The  compiler  then  proceeds  (vers. 
2 — 34)  to  describe  the  courae  things  took  in  the  partial  resettlement  of  the 
**  Israelites,  priests,  Levitcs,  and  Nethinim,  in  their  cities,"  on  the  retnm 
from  the  Captivity,  and  likewise  of  the  "  children  of  Judah  and  Benjamin, 
Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  in  Jerusalem."     That  there  is  no  error  in  regarding 
this  as  the  jnst  sense  of  the  passage  becomes  absolutely  plain  from  the 
contents  of  Neh.  xi.  3 — 22 ;  further  aided  by  vii.  45 ;  xii.  25,  26 ;  Ezra  ii. 
42.      On  this  evidence,  then,  unless  we  gratuitously  set  down  nearly  the 
whole  of  ch.  ix.  as  a  later  addition,  we  bring  the  compilation  to  a  date 
subsequent    to   the   return    and   the   partial    resettlement  of    those   who 
returned,  some  "  in  the  cities,"  and  some  "  in  Jerusalem."     Once  more,  the 
remarkable  genealogy  of  Zerubbabel  (ch.  iii.  17 — 24)  is  clear  evidence  in 
point.      Either  these  verses  must  be  proved  to  be   an   interpolation  or 
addition  by  a  later  hand  (as  is  held  by  Bichhorn,  Dahler,  Jahn,  Keil),  or 
we  are  brought  down  to  a  still  lower  date.     Even  when  (with  Berthean)  we 
have  counted  the  six  entries  of  ver.  21  as  names  all  of  hrothersy  six  genera- 
tions (Hananiah,  Shechaniah,  Shemaiah,  Neariah,  Elioenai,  Hodaiah)  appear 
to  succeed  Zerubbabel.      However,  Keil,  Movers,  Havemick,  and  others 
think  that  Zerubbabel's  genealogy  in  this   passage  really  stops  with   the 
grandsons  Pelatiah  and  Jesaiah.     And  there  is  some  reason  for  supposing 
with  Bishop  Hervey  (Smith's  *  Bible  Dictionary,*  i.  ^^^^  ^^*^),  that  these  six 
names  should  not  stand  as  six  generations  after  Zerubbabel.     But  if  both 
of  these  theories  be  inadmissible,  we  are  still   not  necessarily  driven  to 
Prideaux's  position,  that  the  six  generations,  and  the  average  length  which 
lie  assumes  for  them,  will  bring  us  to  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  B.C. 
356—324  (Conder's  *  Handbook  to  the  Bible,'  p.  24 ;  see  also  Ewald's  *  Gesch. 
des  V.  Isr.,*  i.  232).     There  can  be  little  doubt  that  he  over-estimates  the 
average  of  Eastern  generations,  and,  if  this  be  reduced  to  twenty   years 
(*  Speaker's   Commentary,'  iii.   186,  187),  we  shall  only  be  brought  to  a 
date  varying  between    B.C.    420 — 410,   within    the    probable    lifetime  of 
Nehemiah,  and  the  very  possible  lifetime  of  Ezra.     While,  then,  such  a 
date  as  this  is  probably  the  latest  which  needs  to  be  accepted,  it  stands 
to  reason  that  the  limit  at  the  other  extremity  must  not  be  placed  simply 
at  the  time  of  the   Ketu.m«     In  the  nature  of  things,  a   work  like   the 
Chronicles,  though  but  a  matter  of  compilation,  could  not  be  executed 
ofFhand  and  rapidly  at  such  a  time.      On  the  contrary,  the  unsettledness 
and  the  stir  of  the  times  would  constitute  the  nnlikeliest  of  conditions. 
Our  general  conclusion  would  be  that,  judging  from  internal  evidence,  the 
date  of  compilation  must  be  placed  between  a  limit  some  several  years  sub- 
sequent to  the  Return  and  the  year  B.C.  410  or    thereabout — how  much 
nearer  the  latter  than  the  former  still  uncertain.     It  may  be  added  that 
Movers  proposes  the  date  B.C.  400  (*  Krit.  Untersuch.  iiber  die  Bibl.  Chron.,' 
p.  28),  and  that  Zunz  calculates  the  date  B.C.  260  (*  Gottesd.  Vort    der 
Juden,'  §  31). 


TUE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


The  evidence  arising  from  style  of  autliorsliip — of  necessity  limited  and 
inconclusive  in  the  matter  of  a  compilation,  but  which,  so  far  as  it  goes 
favours  the  belief  that  Ezra  himself  was  the  compiler;  and  the  evidence 
arising  from  style  of  diction,  which  exhibits  many  points  of  similarity  with 
ih&t  of  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  and  Esther — certainly  one  Persian  word,  and  not 
a  few  Aramaic  peculiarities,  such  as  the  use  of  he  for  aleph^  and  the  full 
forms  of  kholem  and  khirik — do  indeed  entirely  harmonize  with  the  position 
that  the  compilation  was  subsequent  to  the  Return.  Unfortunately,  it  is 
scarcely  within  their  reach  to  point  the  exacter  date  with  anything  like 
certainty.  Were  it  possible  to  identify  Ezra  positively  as  author  or  compiler, 
it  need  not  be  said  that  the  limits  of  the  inquiry  would  be  very  much 
narrowed.  But  it  is  just  this  which  it  is  impossible  to  do.  Of  Chronicles, 
together  with  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  and  Esther,  Qesenius,  in  the  Introduction  to 
his  *  Hebrew  Grammar,'  says  that,  as  literary  works,  they  are  very  "  inferior 
to  those  of  earlier  date." 

§  4.  The  Question  of  Author  or  Compiler. 

Who  the  author,  or  more  strictly  compiler,  was  is  an  undetermined 
question.  The  Talmud  (iv.  3,  in  *Baba  Bathra,'  15, 1 ;  Condor's  'Handbook 
to  the  Bible,*  p.  xviii.)  says,  "  Esra  scripsit  librum  suum  et  genealogiam 
in  Libro  Chronicorum  usque  ad  se."  Again,  P.  D.  Huet  (born  1630,  died 
1721),  in  his  *  Demonst.  Evangelica  ad  S  D.  iv.  14,'  says,  "  Esram  libros 
Paralipomenon  lucubrasse,  Ebreorum  omnium  est  fama  consentiens."  It 
seems  easier  to  feel  persuaded  that  the  compiler  of  Chronicles,  and  the 
compiler  of  at  all  events  large  parts  of  the  work  known  as  the  Book  of  Ezra, 
were  one  and  the  same  person  (and  even  that  the  two  works  might  have 
once  been  designed  for  a  continuous  whole),  than  to  feel  confident  who 
that  compiler  was.  There  seems  to  be  at  present  no  really  satisfactory 
explanation  of  the  fact  that  the  last  two  verses  of  Chronicles  and  the  first 
two  of  Ezra  are  almost  identical.  The  circumstance  has  been  urged  as  an 
argument  for  the  identity  of  author,  but,  so  far  as  it  goes,  it  would  indeed 
rather  favour  a  contrary  supposition.  It  is  scarcely  likely  that  an  author 
would  do  such  a  thing,  though  much  more  naturally  accounted  for  as  done 
by  the  deliberate  even  if  unadvised  design  of  some  reviser,  or  by  the  error  of 
a  transcriber  of  later  date.  It  must  be  confessed,  however,  that  there  is  no 
evidence  forthcoming  to  support  such  a  charge  of  error,  nor  any  appearance 
of  it  on  the  face  of  the  passage  itself.  On  the  other  hand,  some  of  the  best 
of  modern  criticism  fixes  the  first  chapter  of  Ezra  as  the  very  part  of  the 
work  which  cannot  own  to  the  same  hand  as  the  other  part  or  parts 
(though  still  it  may  have  been  tJie  insertion  of  the  same  compiler),  and 
assigns  it,  with  vers.  9 — 23  of  the  last  chapter  of  Chronicles,  to  the  pen  of 
Daniel  The  resemblance  of  style  to  that  of  Ezra  is  indeed  ample  indica- 
tion, as  already  seen,  as  regards  the  general  period  of  the  compilation  of 
Chronicles;  but  it  is  insufficient  to  fix  one  compiler  with  the  work  of  both. 
In  f acty  when  we  have  reduced  to  the  strictest  compass  the  words  and  phrasca 


vi  INTRODUCTION  TO 


common  to  Chronicles  and  Ezra  alone,  we  find  that  they  obtain  qnite  as 
mnch  between  Chronicles  and  the  part  of  Ezra  least  certainly  his  own 
workmanship  (i. — vi.),  as  the  part  which  almost  all  critics  have  accepted 
as  his.  These  points  of  resemblance,  however,  as  presented  by  De  Wette 
and  others,  are  well  worth  notice,  and  may  bo  judged  of  by  some  few 
specimens.  Compare,  for  instance,  ch.  zv.  16  with  Ezra  iii.  12  ;  ch.  xvi.  40 
with  Ezra  iii.  2 ;  ch.  xxiii.  3  with  Ezra  iii.  8 ;  ch.  xxviii.  17  with  Ezra  i.  10 
and  viii.  27  ;  ch.  xxix.  5,  9,  with  Ezra  iii.  5 ;  2  Chron.  iii.  3  with  Ezra  iii.  11; 
2  Chron.  v.  13  and  vii.  3  with  Ezra  iii.  11 ;  2  Chron.  xii.  14,  xix.  3,  and 
XXX.  19  with  Ezra  vii.  10;  2  Chron.  xxvi.  15  with  Ezra  iii.  13;  2  Chron. 
xxix.  27  with  Ezra  iii.  10 ;  2  Chron.  xxxv.  5  with  Ezra  vi.  18. 

The  following  list  (*  Speaker's  Commentary,*  iii.  158)  also  deserves 
attention,  viz. : — The  constant  nse  of  the  phrase  "  King  of  Persia ; "  the 
describing  the  Jewish  people  as  '^Jndah  and  Benjamin,"  found  out  of 
Chronicles  and  Ezra  only  once  (1  Kings  xii.  23) ;  the  exclusive  employment 
of  the  expressions,  "  the  Sea  of  Joppa;  **  "  take  courage  and  do  ;  "  and  the 
"daric"  coin;  the  frequent  employment  of  expressions,  very  rarely  found 
elsewhere,  as  **  Moses  the  man  of  God  ; "  "  Ncthinim  ;  "  p^p  to  designate 
absolutely  one  "  Jiaving  understanding ; "  Sj*^ ;  and  the  three  phrases, 
"  expressly  mentioned  by  their  names  "  (ch.  xii.  31 ;  Ezra  viii.  20,  etc.), 
"  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  **  (2  Chron.  xii.  14 ;  Ezra  vii.  10,  etc.),  "  that 
reacheth  up  to  heaven  "  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  9 ;  Ezra  ix.  6), 

Though  it  cannot  be  said  that  we  have  the  firmest  ground  of  all  on 
which  to  assert  his  workmanship  of  Ezra  in  Chronicles,  yet  these  two 
things  may  be  said  with  tolerable  confidence :  (1)  that  the  more  it  may 
become  possible  to  identify  Ezra  as  the  compiler  of  the  whole  of  the  book 
that  goes  by  his  name  (except  probably  the  first  chapter),  the  more  near 
may  we  feel  that  we  are  approaching  a  reasonable  decision  as  to  the 
compiler  of  Chronicles ;  and  (2)  that  meantime  the  ancient  traditional 
"  consentiens  fama,"  the  indirect  help  of  the  Septuagint  coming  through  the 
Booh  of  Ezra,  the  points  of  resemblance  of  style,  words,  etc.,  some  of  which 
have  been  presented  to  view  above,  and  the  fact  that  the  narrative  "  breaks 
ofE "  during  the  lifetime  of  Ezra,  combine  to  form  no  despicable  force  of 
evidence,  even  though  it  be  not  entirely  conclusive,  in  favour  of  holding 
Ezra  for  the  writer  of  Chronicles. 

§  5.  The  Originals  of  the  Compilation. 

Although  there  are  not  a  few  interesting  questions  still  unanswered  on 
this  subject,  yet  fortunately  the  compiler  often  refers  with  great  distinct- 
ness to  his  authorities,  i.e.  to  some  of  them.  Before  summarizing  these,  it 
may  be  most  convenient  to  observe  upon  some  of  them,  in  the  order  in 
which  they  occur, 

1.  The  compiler's  first  distinct  allusion  to  an  authority  is  found  in  ch. 
ix.  1 ;  and  it  is  the  authority  for  the  "  genealogies  of  all  Israel "  which 
is  there  cited.    Those  genealogies,  if  we  lay  special  stress  upon  the  word 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  vii 


"  Israel,"  have  occnpied  the  previous  seven  chapters  (i.e.  ch.  ii.  1 — viii.  40). 
And  the  anthority  cited  appears,  both  in  our  Authorized  Version  and  in  our 
Hebrew  text,  as  "  The  Book  of  the  Kings  of  Israel  and  Judah."  But,  as  will 
be  seen  under  the  passage,  the  Masoretic  pointing  will  give  us  rather,  "  The 
Book  of  the  Kings  of  Israel  "  as  the  title  intended  by  the  compiler. 

First,  then,  we  observe  either  that  this  authority  must,  in  fact,  cover  also 
the  contents  of  ch.  i ,  or  that  we  have  no  distinct  statement  as  to  the 
originals  of  that  most  interesting  chapter.     On  these,  therefore,  we  are  left 
to  speculate  for  ourselves.     Now,  the  resemblance  between  it  and  what  we 
have  in  Genesis  in  pari  materia,  is  in  substance  and  in  order,  though 
certainly  not  always  in  form,  so  close  and  almost  identical,  that  we  might  be 
content,  if  it  were  necessary,  simply  to  take  for  granted  that  the  Book  of 
Genesis  and  others  of  the  earlier  books  of  the  Old  Testament  were,  so  far 
as  they  went,  the  sufficient  though  unacknowledged  originals.     However, 
inasmuch  as  we  find  about  a  similar  amount  and  closeness  of  resemblance 
to   Genesis  and  the  other  earlier  books  of  the  Old  Testament  in   other 
portions  (as,  for  instance,  in  ch.  ii.)  of  oar  genealogies,  such  as  do  come 
strictly  within  the  limits  of  genealogies  of  Israel,  and  which,  therefore,  are 
covered  by  the  authority  now  in  question,  it  is  at  least  possible  that  this  latter 
may  by  this  time  have  incorporated  the  earliest  materials  of  all,  and  so  far 
forth  have  been  an  example,  which  the  compiler  of  Chronicles  now  folio wa 
Up  to  this  point,  then,  whatever  other  authorities  may  possibly  have  been 
put  under  contribution  by  the  compiler  (and  evidently  not  a  few  of  the 
most  ancient  documents  and  memoranda  were  among  them),  all  that  he  him- 
self answers  for  is  what  is  described  as  **  The  Book  of  the  filings  of  Israel." 
Secondly,  we  may  ask,  what  is  known  respecting  this  authority  ?     What 
is  it  that  is  here  intended  by  "  The  Book  of  the  filings  of  Israel "  ?      This 
exact  title,  then,  is  found  not  at  aU  in  Kings,  where,  however,  we  do  find 
above  thirty  times  either  the  title,   "  The  Book  of  the  Chronicles  of  the 
Kings  of  Judah,"  or  "  The  Book  of  the  Chronicles  of  the  Kings  of  Israel." 
It  is  found  in  three  places  only    in   Chronicles,  and   under  remarkable 
conditions  in  each  instance.     The  first  depends  upon  the  Masoretic  reading, 
as  explained  above  (ch.  ix.  1).     The  third  shows  the  word  n^"?,  in  place  of 
the  familiar  ngp  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  18).     And  further,  inasmuch  as  Manasseh, 
a  King  of  Judah,  is  the  person  there  in  question,  and  inasmuch  as  the 
separate  kingdom  of  Israel  had  collapsed  now  some  eighty  years,  it  can 
scarcely  be  that  the  title  stands  for  a  separate  work  of  the  kings  of  Israel  as 
distinct  from  those  of  Judah.     The  second  of  the  three  passages  (2  Chron. 
XX.  34)  is  doubly  remarkable.     Although  Jehoshaphat,  whose  memoir  is 
being  spoken  of,  and  his  biographer,  Jehu  the  prophet,  the  son  of  Hanani, 
are  both  of  Judah,  yet  this  latter  prophesied  principally  to    Israel ;  his 
writings,  therefore,  might  have  found  their  way  possibly  into  a  work  that 
belonged  distinctively  to  Israel,  and,  in  fact,  to  say  this  may  be  the  purport 
of  the  somewhat  obscure  last  sentence  of  ver.  34.     Three  passages  of  this 
kind  can  scarcely  be  sufficient  upon  which  to   base    the   theory   of  the 


vili  INTRODUCTION  TO 


existence  of  a  separate  work  entitled,  "  The  Book  of  the  Kings  of  Israel," 
distinct  from  a  work,  for  instance,  so  often  quoted  in  Kings  as  "  The  Book 
of  the  Chronicles  of  the  Kings  of  Israel."  Meanwhile  we  have  reference 
made  four  times  in  Chronicles  to  "  The  Book  of  the  Kings  of  Judah  and 
Israel,"  and  three  times  to  "  The  Book  of  the  Kings  of  Israel  and  Judah." 

A  careful  examination  of  these  seven  occasions,  and  comparison  of  them 
with  their  parallel  passages  in  Kings  (2  Chron.  xvi.  11  with  1  Kings  xv.  23 ; 
2  Chron.  xxv.  26  with  2  Kings  xiv.  18 ;  2  Chron.  xxvii.  7  with  2  King^  xv. 
36  ;  2  Chron.  xxviii.  26  with  2  Kings  xvi.  19  ;  2  Chron.  xxxii.  32  with  2  Kings 
XX.  20;  2  Chron.  xxxv.  27  with  2  Kings  xxiii.  28;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  8  with 
2  Kings  xxiv.  5),  show  that  all  the  cases  in  question  are  of  kings  of  Judah^ 
and  that  the  authority  cited  in  the  parallel  passages  in  Kings  is  always  "  The 
Books  of  the  Chronicles  of  the  Kings  of  Judah,*'  These  facts  give  strong 
countenance  to  the  positions,  (1)  that  it  is  the  same  authority  substantially 
which  is  quoted,  whether  in  Chronicles  or  Kings ;  and  (2)  that  at  the  time  of 
the  compilation  of  Chronicles,  the  two  divisional  works  mentioned  so  often 
in  Kings  had  come  to  be  quoted  as  one,  with  a  somewhat  abbreviated  title, 
of  which  it  was  not  absolutely  material  whether  it  were  quoted  as  "  The 
Books  of  the  Kings  of  Judah  and  Israel "  or  as  "  The  Books  of  the  Klings  of 
Israel  and  Judah."  In  this  last  way  it  certainly  is  quoted  three  times,  even 
when  it  is  a  King  of  Judah  to  whom  reference  is  being  made  (2  Chron. 
xxvii.  7  ;  xxxv.  27  ;  xxxvi.  8).  This  work  must  have  been  a  full  repertory 
of  historical  and  biographical  facts ;  for  it  is  referred  to  not  only  as  an 
authority,  but  repeatedly  as  the  authority  in  which  all  minutiie  may  be 
found  of  "  acts,"  "  wars,"  and  "  ways  "  (2  Chron.  xxvii.  7).  Also  that  it 
was  not  coincident  with  any  of  our  existing  historical  books  is  very  clear 
from  the  fact  that  these  latter  are  again  and  again  found  not  to  contain 
the  very  matters  to  which  attention  is  directed  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  7 ;  xxvii.  7 ; 
xxxiii.  18,  19). 

2.  The  second  distinct  allusion  to  authorities  from  which  the  compiler 
has  drawn  materials  is  found  in  our  ch.  xxix.  29.  That  no  intermediate 
reference  has  occurred  is  easily  explained.  Ch.  ix.  was  more  a  matter  of  the 
compiler's  own  hand,  taken  from  comparatively  recent  and  comparatively 
known  documents.  The  matter  of  the  short  ch.  x,  will  have  been  included 
in  the  authorities  now  quoted,  as  well  as  in  the  previously  cited  authority. 
But  all  the  rest  up  to  the  present  point  is  what  clusters  round  the  name  of 
David.  For  this  stretch  of  subject,  then,  the  authorities  used  are  now 
quoted  as  "  The  Acts,  or  History  [Authorized  Version,  *  book '],  of  Samuel 
the  Seer,"  "  of  Nathan  the  Prophet,"  "  of  Gad  the  Seer."  To  these  may  be 
added  an  incidental  allusion  to  a  work  evidently  known  by  the  compiler, 
viz.  "  The  Chronicles  of  King  David  "  (ch.  xxvii.  24).  Little  or  nothing  else 
is  known  of  these  specific  works,  except  what  may  be  gathered  from  their 
names  and  conjectured  from  the  nature  of  the  case.  Yet  the  contrariety  of 
opinion  as  to  what  they  were  is  considerable.  Some  are  very  strongly 
of  opinion  that  these  are  not  histories  written  hy  Samuel,  Nathan,  and  Gad 


TQE  FIUST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  ir 


(Smith's  '  Bible  Dictionary,'  iii.  1126),  but  rather  histories  of  them,  and 
v.'hich  therefore  inevitably  had  much  to  say  of  David  also.     If  on  this  theory 
it  should  appear  remarkable  that  the  authorship  of  those  works   is  not 
attached  to  them,  nor  mentioned,  this  is  but  in  harmony  with  the  whole  of 
the  historical  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  with  the  exception  of  a  portion  of 
Ezra  and  of  Nehemiah.     Others  think  that  in  the  work  known  with  us  as 
the  Books  of  Samuel,  and  even  of  Kings,  we  have  the  above-named  three 
or  possibly  even  four  **  histories  "  and  "  chronicles  "  (Mover's  *  Krit.  Unter- 
sucb.,*  178;  Home's  *Introd.,'  v.  48).     If  so,  it  would  be  a  thing  to  tempt 
remark  that  a  work  (like  Samuel)  which  had  David  for  its  chief  subject, 
even  to  the  extent  of  three  quarters  of  it,  should  have  come  down  by  the 
name  "  Samuel "  (he  not  being  the  author),  whose  history  occupies  only  a 
sixth  part  of  the  whole.    Nevertheless,  this  sixth  part  comes  at  the  beginning, 
and  may  very  conceivably  be  the  explanation  of  the  name  which  stands  a« 
the  title.     When,  however,  all  is  said,  the  somewhat  irresistible  impression 
produced  by  the  passage  containing  these  authorities  is  that  they  are  quoted 
there,  at  all  events,  as  separate  works ;  and  the  allusion  to  the  "  Chronicles 
of  King  David  "  (ch.  xxvii.  24)  seems  to  confirm  this  reading.     Lastly,  the 
mode  of  reference  to  these  authorities  is   observable.     The  very  common 
formula  of  **the  rest  of  the  acts,"  etc.  (2  Chron.  ix.  29 — 31),  is  not  employed 
here,  but  only  **  the  acts,"  or  better,  "  the  history."     We  are  left,  therefore, 
quite  undirected  as  to  the  proportion  of  his  materials  which  the  compiler  of 
Chronicles  drew  from  these  sources,  as  also  to  the  amount  of  his  indebtedness 
to  the  works  known  with  us  as  the  Books  of  Samuel  and  Kings.      And  the 
interesting  question  is  left  unanswered,  or  anything  but  conclusively  answered, 
whether  any,  and  if  so  what,  of  the  original  authorities  of  Samuel  and  Kanga 
were  still  safe  at  the  time  of  the  compilation  of  Chronicles,  and  may  have 
been  presumably  common  sources  for  both  Samuel  and  Kings  on  the  one 
hand,  and  now  much  later  for  our  Chronicles.     Among  those  who  have  with 
the  greatest  warmth  espoused  the  position  that  our  compiler  used  largely  as 
his  authorities  the  canonical  Books  of  Samuel  and  Kings,  are  Movers,  De 
Wette,  Ewald,  Bleek,  and  Graf;  and  the  direct  contrary  has  been  stoutly 
maintained  by  Havernick,  Bertheaa,  Dillmann,  and  Keil. 

3.  The  remaining  references  to  authorities  on  the  part  of  the  compiler  of 
Chronicles  come  more  thickly  when  the  work  has  passed  well  beyond  its 
middle  point.  They  are  in  the  order  of  their  occurring,  as  follows : — (1) 
The  Prophecy  of  Ahijah  the  Shilonite  (2  Chron.  ix.  29).  (2)  The  Visions 
of  Iddo  the  Seer,  against  Jeroboam  (ibid.) .  (3)  The  Acts  or  History  of 
Shemaiah  the  Prophet  (2  Chron.  xii.  15).  (4)  The  Acts  or  History  of  Iddo 
the  Seer,  concerning  Genealogies  (ibid.).  (5)  The  Commentary  of  the 
Prophet  Iddo  (2  Chron.  xiii.  22).  (6)  The  Acts  or  History  of  Jehu  the 
son  of  Hanani  (2  Chron.  xx.  34).  (7)  The  Commentary  of  the  Book  of 
the  Kings  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  27).  (8)  Isaiah  the  Prophet,  on  Uzziah  (2  Chron. 
xxvi.  22).  (9)  The  Vision  of  Isaiah  the  Prophet  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  32). 
(10)  The  Aot^s  or  History  of  the  Seers  (Hosai  ?)  j  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  19. 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


(a)  The  word  found  in  the  aboyo  list  (5),  (7)  as  "commentary"  (KbTO)  is 
with  little  doubt  the  right  reading  of  what  appears  as  "story"  in  onr 
Authorized  Version.  Though  it  is  not  found  in  this  exact  form  elsewhere 
in  the  Old  Testament,  yet  the  verbal  root  is  found  several  times,  and  in  a 
sense  which  harmonizes  with  this  interpretation.  The  rabbinic  use  of  the 
word,  however,  determines  this  rendering  of  "  commentary,"  or  "  a  study  " 
upon  a  subject. 

(b)  Again,  of  the  Hosai  mentioned  in  the  above  lisb  (10)  nothing  is  found 
elsewhere.  There  can  bo  little  doubt  that  the  word  is  not  the  name  of  a 
person,  but  that  it  is  either  the  mere  corruption  of  some  copyist  or  an 
erroneous  emendation  upon  the  just  repetition  of  the  expression, "  the  words 
of  the  seers,"  in  the  preceding  verso.  For  this  view  Bertheau  argues 
in  his  "Introduction." 

Now,  the  whole  of  tho  above  references  to  authorities  seem  to  be  clear  of 
any  ambiguity  as  regards  their  form  of  title,  unless  possibly  the  titles  (3),  (4), 
(6),  (10),  which  resemble  some  already  discussed,  viz.  "  The  Acts  or  History  of 
Samuel  the  Seer,"  etc.  [2].  Yet  surely  the  latter  part  of  the  titles  (4)  and 
(6)  must  be  allowed  to  deliver  them  also  from  ambiguity.  They  must  mean 
the  histories  written  by  Iddo  and  Jehu  respectively.  May  not  this  reasonably 
determine  all  the  other  cases  of  the  titles  which  contain  the  word  "  acts  "  or 
"  history,"  especially  when  compared  with  the  title  "chronicles,"  as  e.g.  ch. 
xxvii.  24,  where  there  need  be  no  supposition  that  David  was  the  writer  P 

The  works  themselves  were  evidently  individual  treatises  on  individual 
reigns  or  individual  characters  and  periods  of  the  nation's  history.  They 
were  written  probably  exclusively  by  various  prophets,  even  as  such  are 
mentioned  for  the  larger  number  of  them.  The  various  times  and  subjects 
with  which  they  had  to  do  are  made  sufficiently  plain  on  reference  to  each 
citation  severally.  As  individual  treatises,  they  would  be  likely  enough  to 
contain  an  amount  and  a  kind  of  detail  which  a  more  general  history,  written 
after  the  lapse  of  some  time,  would  be  sure  to  exclude.  The  "  Chronicles 
of  King  David  "  and  the  "  Commentary  of  the  Book  of  Kings  "  may  be 
surmised  to  have  been  somewhat  less  specific  in  style  of  treatment,  and 
somewhat  wider  in  their  range,  than  most  of  the  others.  Traces  of  the 
absorption  of  some  of  these  into  a  more  general  compilation  are  with  con- 
siderable reason  believed  to  bo  found  in  a  passage  already  referred  to  in 
connection  with  the  subject  (2  Chix>n.  xx  34) ;  and  also,  though  this  is  not 
apparent  from  the  reading  of  our  Authorized  Version,  in  2  Chron.  xxxii.  32. 

In  addition  to  the  authorities  quoted  as  though  the  compiler  of  Chronicles 
had  been  actually  indebted  to  them,  allusion  is  found  to  some  others,  on 
which  he  had  not  personally  drawn,  such  as  "  The  Writing  of  Elijah  the 
Prophet "  to  Jehoram  (2  Chron.  xxi.  12)  ;  and  "  The  Lamentations,"  pre- 
sumably written  by  Jeremiah,  but  not  his  work  that  goes  by  the  title  in  our 
canon  (2  Chi-on.  xxxv.  25).  To  these  might  be  added  one  remove  further, 
however,  "  The  Writing  (nn?)  of  David  "  and  "  The  Writing  (nn^O)  of  Solo- 
mon" (2  Chron.  xxxv.  4).     These  additional  kinds  of  references  may  serve 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  TUE  CHRONICLES.  xl 


to  show  that  a  little  store  at  all  events  of  wealth  in  tliis  sort  existed  once. 
Nor  is  it  absolutely  impossible  that  what  has  been  lost  may  yet  come  to 
light. 

§  6.  The  Contents  and  Object  op  the  Woek. 

1.  As  regards  the  contents  of  Chronicles,  they  may,  perhaps,  be  best 
divided  into  three  parts. 

(1)  Lists  of  genealogies,  beginning  from  the  very  first,  coming  down  to 
the  tribes,  and  descending  to  different  points  in  the  history  of  these 
respectively  (though  neglecting  Dan  and  Zebulon),  to  the  time  of  the 
Captivity,  and  in  some  instances  even  later.  With  these  genealogies  are 
intermingled  the  ancient  settlements  of  families  and  tribes  and  heads  of 
houses,  and  a  few  brief  but  occasionally  very  significant  touches  of  history. 
This  portion  occupies  ch.  i — ^vii. 

This  is  succeeded  (after  a  brief  statement  of  the  Captivity  and  the  Return) 
by  (2)  an  imperfect  skeleton  sketch  of  the  re-establishment  in  their  ancient 
inheritances  and  settlements,  and  in  some  cases  religious  offices,  of  such 
families  as  returned,  according  to  the  houses  of  their  fathers.  This  portion 
occupies  only  a  part  of  one  chapter,  viz.  ch.  ix.  1 — 34. 

(3)  The  third  portion  extends  from  ch.  ix.  35  right  to  the  end  of  the  work. 
It  consists  of  a  connected  history  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  introduced  very 
naturally  (ch.  ix.  35 — 44)  by  a  repetition  of  that  genealogical  table  which 
exhibited  (ch.  viii.  29 — 38)  the  name  and  pedigree  of  Saul.  Passing  lightly 
over  Saul,  it  dwells  at  special  length  on  the  career  and  reign  of  David,  thence 
through  all  his  successors  of  the  line  of  Judah  to  Zedekiah,  to  the  time  of  the 
Captivity  and  in  effect,  by  virtue  of  its  closing  verses,  to  the  dawn  of  the 
restored  state. 

One  of  the  most  interesting  aspects  under  which  to  view  the  contents  of 
this  book  is  that  which  exhibits  their  relation  to  those  of  the  works  known  as 
the  Books  of  Samuel  and  Kings.  The  difference  between  the  contents  of  these 
severally  may  be  here  noticed  as  a  subject  quite  distinct  from  the  question 
whether  the  compiler  of  Chronicles  adopted  direct  from  them  those  parts  of 
his  own  work  which  are  exactly  similar  to  them — the  negative  reply  to 
which  question  seems  by  far  the  more  probable  to  us.  The  following  is  a 
list,  tabulated  by  Dr.  Davidson,  of  the  chief  passages  found  in  Chronicles 
and  not  found  in  Samuel  or  Kings,  viz.  : — Ch.  xii. ;  xxii. ;  xxiii. — xxvi. ; 
xxvii. ;  XX viii. ;  xxix. ;  2  Chron.  xi.  5 — 23 ;  xiii.  2 — 23 ;  xiv.  8 — 14 ;  xv.  1 — 
15 ;  xvi.  7 — 10 ;  xvii. ;  xix. ;  xx.  1 — 30 ;  xxi.  2 — 4,  11 — 19 ;  xxiv.  15 — 22  ; 
XXV.  5 — 10,  14 — 16  J  xxvi.  6 — 16;  xxvii.  5,  6;  xxx.  1—27;  xxxi.  2 — 21; 
xxxiii.  11 — 13. 

Side  by  side  it  may  be  convenient  to  place  a  list  of  the  chief  matters  not 
found  in  Chronicles  but  found  in  Samuel  or  Kings,  viz. :— 2  Sam.  i. — iv. ; 
vi.  20 — 23  ;  ix. ;  xi.  2 — xii.  25  ;  xiii. — xx. ;  xxi.  1 — 14,  15 — 17  ;  xxii. ;  xxiii. ; 
r  Kings  i.;  ii.  1—9,  26—46;  iii.  1,  16—28;  iv. ;  vii.  1—12,  13— 39;  viii. 
66—61 ;  xi.  1—13,  14—40 ;  2  Kings  xii.  17,  18 ;  xvi.  5—18 ;  xviii.  4—8. 


xU  INTRODUCTION  TO 


So  also  the  accoants  of  Chronicles  are  occasionallj  mach  fuller^  as  e.g.  ch. 
xiii.,  XV.,  xvi.,  compared  with  2  Sam.  vi. 

The  order  of  not  a  few  narratives  in  Chronicles  differs  from  that  found  in 
Samuel  or  Kings.  The  chief  of  these,  also  furnished  by  Davidson,  may  be 
seen  from  comparing  the  following  references  respect iveli/,  viz. : — Ch.  xi. 
1—9,  10—47 ;  xiii. ;  xiv. ;  xv. ;  2  Chron.  i.  3—13,  14—17 ;  ii.,  with  2  Sam. 
vi.  1—10;  xxiii.  8—10;  vi;  3—11;  v.  11—25;  vi.  12—19;  1  Kings  iiu 
4—14 ;  X.  26—29 ;  v. 

Once  more,  there  is  a  tendency  manifested  in  Chronicles  to  detail  lists  of 
other  names,  quite  outside  the  genealogy  tables,  and  some  of  which  are  not 
found  elsewhere.  They  are  lists  of  persons  connected  with  army,  or  temple, 
or  with  the  families  of  individual  kings.  The  following  are  some  of  the 
chief  of  such  lists,  viz. : — Ch.  xi  26 — 47 ;  xii.  1 — 14;  xiv.  4 — 7 ;  xv.  5 — 11, 
17—24 ;  xix.  16—17 ;  xxiv.  7—18  ;  xxv.  9—31 ;  xxvi.  14—19 ;  xxvii.  2—15, 
16—22,  25—31 ;  2  Chron.  xi.  6—10,  18—20  ;  xvii.  7—18 ;  xix.  11 ;  xxi.  2 ; 
xxiii.  1;  xxvi.  11;  xxviii.  7,  12;xxix.  12 — 14;  xxxi.  12 — 15;  xxxiv.  8,  12; 
XXXV.  8,  9. 

2.  The  exact  object  of  the  work  is  nowhere  stated  with  authority.  The 
internal  evidence,  however,  as  to  this,  if  not  absolute,  is  of  a  character  far 
from  obscure.  That  evidence  negatives  at  once  any  such  theory  of  a  merely 
supplemental  character  as  might  seem  to  be  suggested  by  the  Septuagint 
title.  Although,  m  point  of  fact,  the  compiler  of  Chronicles  certainly  makes 
considerable  additions,  as  may  be  easily  tested  from  the  above  lists,  yet,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  identical  repetitions  (as  in  that  case  they  would  be)  are 
too  many  to  consist  with  such  a  theory,  and  the  additions  themselves  have 
no  appearance  of  being  merely  of  a  supplemental  character.  Nor,  again,  can 
that  be  esteemed  a  work  supplemental  to  our  Samuel  and  Kings,  which 
occupies  itself  almost  exclusively  with  the  fortunes  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah, 
and  has  nothing  to  say  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  except  where  the  career 
of  any  of  its  kings  may  involve  it  specially  with  the  history  of  Judah. 
This,  then,  reveals  the  first  manifest  token  of  the  object  of  Chronicles. 
From  the  time  that  it  leaves  its  early  cliapters  of  genealogies,  it  is  concerned 
with  the  great  and  enduring  line  of  Judah.  Supposing  that  its  place  were, 
as  some  say,  last  in  the  whole  Old  Testament  canon,  and  thereby  nearest 
the  dawn  of  New  Testament  events,  and  in  particular  the  birth  of  Christ,  so 
much  the  more  in  harmony  would  its  place  be  with  its  contents. 

There  are,  however,  probably  few  books  in  Scripture  which  have  deeper 
or  distincter  marks  of  individual  character,  and  of  specific  and  well-out- 
lined object.  Occupied  as  it  is  with  the  line  of  Judah,  we  have  been 
already  forewarned,  first,  in  the  points  at  which  some  of  the  genealogies 
terminate,  and  then  by  the  contents  of  ch.  ix.,  that  the  whole  retrospect  is 
taken  from  a  date  subsequent  to  the  Captivity  and  the  return  from 
Babylon.  Though  very  much  of  the  whole  work  was,  without  doubt,  drawn 
from  original  sources — sources  contempoi-ary  or  nearly  so  with  the  events 
tfuccessively  x-ecoi'ded — ^yet  its  general  point  of  view  as  a  compilation  was 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  xlii 

essentially  free  from  the  obsenring  influences  liable  to  gather  ronnd  the 
most  scrapnlons  historian  who  lives  in  or  very  near  to  the  times  and  events 
he  would  describe.  Again,  the  more  numerous  and  abundant  the  contem- 
poraneous or  original  sources  of  information  to  the  hand  of  the  writer  of  a 
new  shape  of  history,  the  more  certain  would  it  appear  that  he  must  have 
had  some  individual  or  special  object  in  his  mind  in  writing.  Now,  if  there 
were  none  other  conceivable,  this  might  have  been  accepted  as  sufficient — 
that  Judah  should  have  its  written  national  history  to  itself,  since  in  itself 
the  succession  and  vitality  of  empire  now  manifestly  lay,  and  since  promise 
and  prophecy  marked  it  as  the  line  in  which  the  Messiah  was  to  come. 
Meantime,  to  the  five-sixths  of  the  whole  work  occupied  almost  exclusively 
with  the  history  of  Judah,  it  was  quite  natural  nevertheless  to  prefix  the 
general  and  complete  genealogies  of  the  whole  people,  as  well  as  the  earliest 
genealogies  of  all. 

Somewhat  closer  examination,  however,  of  the  contents  of  the  work  seems 
abundantly  sufficient  to  indicate  additional  and  very  probable  explanations 
of  the  writing  of  it.  The  theocratic  tone  is  uniformly  and  much  more 
distinctly  audible  from  beginning  to  end.  Great  attention  is  visibly  paid 
through  the  whole  course  of  the  history  to  matters  of  sacerdotal  interest, 
and  to  matters  of  an  ecclesiastical  character  generally,  and  to  temple 
worship.  The  religious  place,  privileges,  duties  of  the  nation  are  redeemed 
to  view  prominently,  and  this  without  the  slightest  appearance  of  priestly 
design  and  priestly  ambition,  as  has  nevertheless  been  unscrupulously 
asserted  (so  De  Wette,  in  his  *  Einleitung,*  §  190).  On  the  contrary,  the 
exact  appearance  of  what  is  written  is  that  which  might  be  expected,  in  the 
language  of  such  teachers  as  would  make  a  wise  use,  and  would  help  others 
to  make  a  wise  use,  of  the  suffering,  discipline,  and  punishment  through 
which,  for  neglect  of  those  very  things,  they  had  been  caused  to  pass.  Any 
histonan  who  belonged  himself  to  the  nation,  and  who  wrote  subsequently 
to  the  return  from  the  Captivity,  whether  he  were  priest,  Levite,  or  prophet 
would  surely  wish  to  encourage  and  restore  the  spirit  of  the  people.  But  to 
this  very  end  he  would  write  also  with  the  desire  to  reform,  would  point 
repeatedly  to  the  causes  which  had  brought  the  nation  to  disgrace  and  ruin, 
would  take  every  opportunity  of  holding  up  to  memory  the  warnings 
and  rebukes  and  neglected  hortatory  matter  which  had  been  once  and 
again  addressed  to  the  decadent  nation,  and  would  lay  stress  upon  those 
religious  observances  which  would  be  strength  and  safety  to  the  nation  in 
the  future.  Moreover,  with  the  temple  rebuilt,  nothing  less  could  be 
expected  than  that  its  services  and  all  its  officers  and  their  **  courses " 
should  be  dwelt  upon  at  considerable  length. 

Now,  these  are  the  indications  which  the  work  presents.  It  looks  like 
the  charter  of  the  reconstruction  of  a  shattered  kingdom  on  its  proper 
historical  basis — that  basis  one  pre-eminently  of  an  ecclesiastical  character 
or  type.  There  is,  indeed,  one  general  pervading  aspect  belonging  to 
Chronicles,  which  might  well  justify  the  character  of  supplemental  which  has 


Xiv  INTRODUCTION  TO 


been  given  to  it.  It  may  be  said  to  be  supplemental,  not  as  to  details  and 
historical  events,  but  as  to  restoring  the  balance  of  the  ecclesiastical  by  the 
side  of  the  prophetical  or  even  political,  and  bringing  to  view  the  Church, 
which  was  the  real  framework  of  that  state.  Such  seems  to  be  the 
impression  constantly  made  ;  and  it  is  an  impression  not  unfreqnently 
caused  as  much  by  the  remarkable  omissions  (as,  for  instance,  of  some  of 
David's  greatest  offences  and  sins  as  an  individual,  yet  non-ecclesiastical 
in  their  essence)  of  the  history  as  by  what  is  present  and  emphatically 
recorded. 

Once  more,  the  satisfactory  resettlement,  not  only  of  all  the  force  of  the 
civil  service,  and  service  of  the  temple  already  alluded  to,  but  also  of 
the  returned  people  and  families  according  to  the  old  and  time-honoured 
territorial  arrangements,  must  have  often  asked  a  ready  reference  to  some 
compendious  authority.  It  may  be  true  enough  that  the  old  documents 
and  archives  relating  in  the  most  authoritative  manner  to  the  subject  were 
neither  destroyed  nor  at  this  time  even  temporarily  lost  or  mislaid,  else  how 
could  the  materials  of  the  present  work  have  been  obtained  with  sufficient 
certainty  and  commanded  sufficient  confidence  ?  But  the  occasions  that 
would  arise  for  referring  to  such  documents  must  have  now  been  frequent 
as  compared  with  the  generations  before  the  Captivity.  And  a  propor- 
tionate need  hence  sprang  up  for  a  work  of  easy  reference.  And,  further- 
more, let  it  bo  granted  that  the  Chronicles  compilation  was  not  completed 
till  after  the  greater  part  by  far  of  the  returned  families  had  already 
located  themselves  as  best  they  could,  and  the  servants  and  officers  of  the 
temple  had  become  reinstated  in  due  course  and  succession ;  yet  a  com- 
pendious work,  to  which  reference  could  easily  be  made  by  appointed 
authorities,  would  be  of  amazing  value  for  preventing  strife,  affording 
satisfaction,  and  proving  title  in  time  to  come.  This  is  provided  manifestly 
by  this  book,  and  it  is  provided  with  all  the  help  of  the  authority  which 
would  flow  from  family  genealogies  of  oldest  time,  and  from  territorial 
arrangements  of  originally  Divine  appointment. 

§  7.  The  Historical  Credibility  op  the  Work. 

The  historical  credibility  of  Chronicles  and  the  trustworthiness  of  the 
writer  have  been  strenuously  attacked.  De  Wette,  in  two  works  (the 
'  Beitrage  '  and  *  Einleitung '),  has  made  himself  the  leader  of  these  attacks. 
And  though,  indeed,  he  has  gone  far  to  leave  nothing  for  others  to  say  in 
the  same  direction,  yet  Gramberg  and  Gesenius  have  been  among  his 
followers,  and  Theodore  Parker,  in  his  translation  of  the  *  Einleitung,*  has 
in  some  respects  even  outdone  him.  These,  on  the  one  side,  have  met 
with  able  responders  in  Dahler,  Movers,  Keil,  Davidson,  and  Bishop 
Hervey.  The  general  charges  of  De  Wette  are  two  in  number.  (I)  That 
the  compiler,  in  an  unscrupulous  indulgence  of  strong  Levitical  prejudices, 
designedly  misleads,  writing  up  everything  belonging  to  Judah  that  looked 
in  the  ecclesiastical  direction,  and  writing  down  everything  belonging  to 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE   CHRONICLES.  it 

Israel.  De  Wette  prefers  even  to  deny  him  the  loophole  of  being  himself 
nnconscionsly  misled  by  the  strength  of  his  alleged  Levitioal  animus,  (2) 
And  that  he  has  a  weak  leaning  to  the  *'  sapernatnral,"  in  obedience  to 
which  he  leans  to  the  temptation  of  both  inventing  and  exaggerating. 

The  first  of  these  charges  may  be  considered  sufficiently  disposed  of  by 
the  far  different  position  already  taken  in  the  previons  section — one  which 
admits  of  being  amply  sustained,  and  which  explains  the  civil  and  religions 
featnres  of  the  critical  and  important  period  of  history,  at  some  date  in 
which  this  compilation  mnst  have  been  made.  An  almost  indefinite  amonnt 
of  confirmation  and  illustration  of  that  position  might  be  produced;  and 
the  moral  evidence  points  with  remarkable  clearness  to  it.  In  the 
history  of  the  reforming  nation  there  must  have  come  the  time  and  the 
circumstances  to  postulate  exactly  such  a  work.  Without  any  symptom  of 
collusion,  the  internal  indications  of  this  work  are  such  as  to  harmonize 
with  the  supposed  time  and  circumstances.  And  the  account  to  be  offered 
of  the  reasons  of  the  prominence  given  to  Judah,  and  to  the  matters  of  the 
temple  services,  and  so  forth,  is  sufficient  to  reduce  the  views  of  De  Wette 
to  little  better  than  gratuitous,  or  at  least  blinded,  assumptions;  while 
there  is  nothing  that  can  even  simulate  the  appearance  of  evidence  of  the 
partiality  of  untruthfulness  towards  Judah  or  of  prejudice  against  IsraeL 
This  may  be  asserted,  but  fails  of  anything  like  proof,  when  brought  to  the 
only  test  which  we  have,  viz.  in  Samuel  and  Kings,  among  the  many  which 
we  might  have,  in  the  numerous  originals  to  which  the  compiler  so  often 
refers.  And  for  these  latter  we  should  indeed  be  compelled  to  wait  before 
it  would  be  possible  to  condemn  the  writer  of  Chronicles  as  untruthful. 

And  as  to  the  addictedness  to  the  supernatural,  alleged  against  him, 
perhaps  even  a  more  decisive  reply  can  be  furnished.  For  first,  the  total 
amount  of  matter  of  this  kind  in  Chronicles  is  much  less  than  in  the 
earlier  work,  owing  to  the  absence  of  those  narrations  of  the  sort  which 
concern  Israel,  and  which,  in  Kings,  are  not  few  in  number.  But  further, 
respecting  such  as  belong  to  Judah  alone,  the  following  references  (see 
*  Speaker's  Commentary '),  showing  some  miracle-narratives  peculiar  to 
Chronicles  : — Ch.  xxi.  26;  2  Chron.  vii.  1 ;  xiii.  14 — 17;  xiv.  11 — 13 ;  xx. 
15 — 24;  xxi.  12 — 19;  are  surely  sufficiently  counterbalanced  by  the 
absence  of  the  following : — 1  Kings  xi.  29 — 39  ;  2  Kings  iii.  14 — 24 ;  xix. 
20 — 34;  XX.  16 — 18;  xxiii.  15 — 17;  and  by  the  very  spare  allusion  to 
Hezekiah's  miraculous  recovery  (2  Chron.  xxii.  24  compared  with  2  Kings 
XX.  1—11). 

Of  less  vague  charges  made  by  the  same  school  against  the  trust* 
worthiness  of  the  writer  of  Chronicles,  instanced  in  particular  passages,  and 
of  the  nature  of  alleged  contradictions,  the  treatment  will  be  found,  for  the 
most  part,  under  the  particular  passages  in  question.  The  following  three 
lists,  however,  not  altogether  exhaustive,  but  conveniently  classified  by  Canon 
G.  Bawlinson,  will  serve  to  indicate  the  kind  and  the  number  of  supposed 
contradictions,  as  well  as  the  places  where  they  are  individually  treated  : — 


x?i  INTRODUCTION  TO 


1.  Instances  of  alleged  *cZ/-contradiction.  Compare  the  following 
coaplets  :— (1)  2  Chron.  xiv.  3,  5  with  xv.  17  ;  (2)  xvii.  6  with  xx.  33 ;  (3) 
XXX.  26  with  XXXV.  18 ;  (4)  xxviii.  1  with  7.  Now,  as  nothing  would  more 
detract,  and  with  justice,  from  the  authority  of  any  historian  than  instances 
of  well -ascertained  self-contradiction,  it  is  necessary  closely  to  examine 
these.  (1)  and  (2).  The  first  two  are  of  an  exactly  similar  kind.  At 
the  beginning  of  the  long  reigns  of  two  kings  (Asa,  who  reigned  forty-one 
years,  and  Jehoshaphat,  who  reigned  twenty-five),  it  is  said  that  the  king  in 
question  "took  away  the  high  places,"  and  in  the  former  of  these  two  reigns, 
it  is  repeated  with  emphasis  of  Asa,  that  *'  he  took  away  out  of  all  the  citie$ 
of  Judah  the  high  places."  At  or  towards  the  end  of  each  reign,  it  is  said, 
**  Bat "  or  "  howbeit  the  high  places  were  not  taken  away."  The  Hebrew 
text  is  in  close  accord  with  the  rendering  of  our  Authorized  Version. 
Compare  also  1  Kings  xv.  12,  14,  where  the  words  of  the  suspected  "  self- 
contradiction  "  are  just  avoided.  Surely  there  is  no  necessary  self-contra- 
diction to  be  detected  here.  The  one  expression  purports  to  say  that,  at  the 
beginning  of  a  long  reign,  the  king  "  took  away,"  i.e.  ordered  to  be  taken 
away,  "  the  high  places ;  "  but  that,  at  the  end,  it  was  found  that  the  evil  had 
not  been  effectually  outrooted,  and  that,  whatever  had  been  the  proclamation 
and  the  "  perfect  "-hearted  purpose  of  the  king,  no  doubt  moi  e  or  less 
tuccessful  for  a  time^  the  people  had  probably  enough  by  relapse  given  in  to 
the  habit  of  using  the  "  high  places."  There  is  no  need  to  suppose,  with 
Movers,  Dahler,  Keil,  and  Bertheau,  that  two  kinds  of  high  places  are 
referred  to  in  these  passages,  even  if  there  were  at  any  time  two  such  kinds. 
And  it  is  not  to  be  overlooked  that,  while  strictly  a  self-contradiction  would 
only  have  lain  had  it  been  said  both  that  the  **  king  did  take  away,"  and 
then  elsewhere  that  he  did  "  not  take  away,"  high  places,  on  the  contrary, 
the  connection  in  both  cases  favours  the  view  we  have  taken.  For  in  the 
instance  of  Asa,  several  verses  of  ch.  xiv.  have  just  been  employed  to 
describe  the  earnest  endeavours  of  the  king  to  obtain  the  co-operation  of  his 
people ;  while  in  the  case  of  Jehoshaphat  the  antithesis  is  expressed  in  so 
many  words  (2  Chron.  xx.  32,  33),  that  while  "  Asa  did  that  which  was  right 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  .  .  .  the  high  places  were  not  removed :  for  as  yet  the 
people  had  not  prepared  their  hearts  unto  the  God  of  their  fathers."  The 
natural  conclusion  is  that  the  two  kings  Asa  and  Jehoshaphat  had  done 
their  part  and  had  done  their  best,  but  had  not  permanently  carried  their 
people  with  them,  (3)  Again,  there  is  no  adequate  foundation  for  the 
allegation  of  self-contradiction  in  the  language  of  2  Chron.  xxx.  26  and 
^xxv.  18.  In  the  first  place,  the  strict  language  of  the  former  of  these 
passages  only  says  that  there  had  not  been  "  like  "  great  joy  in  Jerusalem 
since  the  "  time  of  Solomon."  Let  it,  however,  be  gi-anted  that  the  festival 
itself  is  what  is  intended,  and  there  is  no  denial  whatsoever  of  such  a  feast 
having  been  held,  but  only  of  one  accompanied  by  so  much  gladness  and 
spirit  and  general  joy.  And  in  like  manner  the  assertion  of  ver.  18  in  ch. 
XXXV.  can  be  understood  to  amount  to  this,  that  the  feast  of  Josiah's  time 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  xvii 

sarpassed  eyen  that  of  Hezekiali's,  while  tho  date  to  which  the  memoiy  is 
referred  remounts  not  simply  to  Solomon's  time,  bat  to  the  *'  days  of  Samncl 
the  prophet."  (4)  And,  once  more,  2  Chron.  xxviii.  7  offers  no  self-con- 
tradiction whatever.  Bather  the  only  difl&culty  lies  in  choosing  between 
several  manifest  interpretations,  e.g.  if  Maaseiah  designates  the  son  of  the 
reigning  king,  viz.  Ahaz,  the  unmentioned  time  of  his  being  slain  may  have 
been  towards  the  end  of  Ahaz's  sixteen-year  reign,  when  his  son  may  easily 
have  been  upwards  of  sixteen  years  of  age,  though  Ahaz  did  mount  the 
throne  aged  twenty  only  (ver.  1).  Then,  again,  the  probability  is  strong 
that  Maaseiah  was,  in  fact,  son  of  the  previous  king,  Jotham,  and  that  the 
expression  ''  king's  son  "  designates  no  natural  relationship,  but  an  office  so 
termed  held  by  him.  The  very  verse  favours  the  explanation  in  its  mention 
of  the  other  two  slain,  one  as  "  governor  of  the  house,"  the  other  as  **  next 
to  the  king ; "  and  is  more  confirmed  by  the  consideration  of  the  only  other 
occurrence  of  the  phrase  (1  Kings  xxii.  26).  Compare  also  2  Kings  xxiv.  12 
with  Jer.  xxix.  2.  W.  Aldis  Wright,  in  Smith's  *  Bible  Dictionary,'  well 
instances  the  expression  "  queen  dowager." 

2.  Instances  of  some  asserted  contradictions  of  other  Scriptures  on  the 
part  of  the  writer  of  Chronicles.  Compare  the  following  couplets  : — Ch.  iii. 
15  with  2  Kings  xxiii.  31,  36 ;  ch.  iii.  19  with  Ezra  iii.  2 ;  ch.  x.  6  with 
2  Sam.  ii.  8 ;  ch.  xiv.  12  with  2  Sam.  v.  21 ;  ch.  xxi.  5  with  2  Sam. 
xxiv.  9 ;  ch.  xxi.  6  with  2  Sam.  xxiv.  8,  9 ;  ch.  xxi.  25  with  2  Sam.  xxiv. 
25  ;  ch.  xxii.  8  with  2  Sam.  vii.  5;  ch.  xxii.  14  with  1  Kings  v.  17,  18; 
ch.  xxvii.  1 — 15  with  2  Sam.  xv.  18 ;  2  Chron.  xiv.  2 — 5  with  1  Kings  xv. 
14 ;  2  Chron.  xvii.  6  with  1  Elings  xxii.  43 ;  2  Chron.  xxii.  9  with  2  Kings 
ix.  27 ;  2  Chron.  xxiii.  1 — 11  with  2  Kings  xi.  4 — 12 ;  2  Chron.  xxviii.  5 
with  2  Kings  xvi.  5 ;  2  Chron.  xxviii.  20  with  2  Kings  xvi.  7 ;  2  Chron. 
XXX.  26  with  2  Kings  xxiii.  22 ;  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  11 — 17  with  2  Kings  xxi. 
1 — 17 ;  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  3 — 7  with  2  Kings  xxiii.  4.  The  above  will  be 
found  to  be  dealt  with  in  the  order  of  the  text. 

3.  Instances  of  supposed  errors  of  the  writer  of  Chronicles.  Compare  the 
following  couplets : — Ch.  iv.  31  with  Josh.  xvi.  36  and  xix.  6  j  ch.  xi.  23 
with  2  Sam.  xxiii.  21 ;  2  Chron.  ix.  12  with  1  Kings  x.  13 ;  2  Chron.  ix.  14 
with  1  Kings  x.  15 ;  2  Chron.  xxxv.  25  with  canonical  Book  of  Lamenta- 
tions ;  2  Chron.  ix.  21  and  xx.  37  with  1  Kings  x.  22  and  xxii.  48.  A 
consideration  of  such  difficulty  as  any  of  these  passages  may  be  thought  to 
present  will  also  be  found  under  chapter  and  verse. 

In  conclusion,  it  may  be  affirmed  safely  that  the  most  candid  and  at  the 
same  time  tho  most  searching  examination  of  the  objections  made  to 
Chronicles  on  tho  score  of  autiienticity,  by  such  opponents  as  have  been 
under  notice,  leads  to  the  conviction  that  not  one  of  these  objections  can 
hold  its  own.  There  are,  indeed,  several  numerical  inconsistencies  (e.g.  ch. 
xi.  11 ;  xviii.  4 ;  xix.  18 ;  compared  with  2  Sam.  xxiii.  8 ;  viii.  4  ;  x.  18,  respec- 
tively ;  and  2  Chron.  viii.  18 ;  xxii.  2 ;  xxxvi.  9 ;  compared  with  1  Kings 
iv.  28 ;  2  Kings  viii.  26 ;  xxiv.  8,  respectively),  which  postulate  for  their 

I.  GHBOKICLES.  ^ 


xviii  INTRODUCTION  TO 


only  explanation  the  imperfect  state  of  some  of  onr  Hebrew  manuscripts, 
and  especially  in  the  passages  which  contain  numbers.  Bat  this  defect 
and  misfortune  are  by  no  means  peculiar  to  Chronicles.  But  for  the  rest, 
though  cautious  criticism  may  justly  decline  to  dogmatize  as  to  which  of 
two  or  three  possible  ways  out  of  a  difficulty  may  be  the  way,  and  may 
constitute  the  explanation,  there  is  no  real  lack  of  legitimate  methods  of 
escape.  Out  of  a  grand  total  of  some  thirty  loudly  proclaimed  inconsis- 
tencies, there  are  not  more  than  a  fourth  part  at  the  outside  which  present 
any  real  difficulty.  And  of  these,  with  perhaps  one  exception  (2  Chron.  xx. 
36),  one  or  other  of  alternative  solutions  of  each  problem  will  appear  not 
less  reasonable  than  plausible.  The  examination  may  justly  tend  to  increase 
and  not  to  diminish  our  faith  in  Chronicles  and  the  writer  thereof.  Though 
it  refuses  to  own  to  the  description  of  anything  merely  supplemental  to  the 
preceding  historical  books,  it  is  a  most  interesting  and  valuable  complement 
to  them. 

§  8.  The  Evidences  op  Entirety  and  op  Identity  op  Authorship  in 

Chronicles. 

These  two  subjects  may  be  best  considered  in  close  connection  with  one 
another.  As  to  the  former  of  them,  there  seems  nothing  to  excite  so  much 
as  an  inquiry  or  suspicion  until  we  reach  the  very  close  of  the  work,  or  that 
which  at  the  present  stands  as  the  close.  The  points  from  which  the  begin- 
ning is  made  speaks  for  itself.  The  connecting  links  of  the  genealogies, 
comprising  (according  to  our  threefold  classification)  the  first  part  with  the 
second,  and  that  of  the  second  with  the  third — ^the  prolonged  historical 
portion,  which  forms  the  bulk  of  the  work — are  as  natural  as  they  are  evident. 
The  historical  part  itself  is  continuous,  and  embraces  in  due  order  of  relation 
that  which  would  be  expected  at  the  hands  of  a  writer  who  kept  a  certain 
defined  object  steadily  and  consistently  in  view.  There  is  no  abrupt  break 
and  no  unaccountable  gap  in  the  course  of  it.  The  same  satisfaction,  how- 
ever, cannot  be  felt  when  we  approach  the  close.  There  is  some  appearance 
of  hurry  in  the  treatment  of  the  history  of  the  last  few  kings.  Next,  the 
fact  of  the  last  two  verses  of  the  work,  as  it  now  stands,  being  identical 
with  the  opening  verses  of  Ezra,  is  certainly  startling  and  unnatural.  If, 
therefore,  we  close  the  book  with  the  verse  that  precedes  them,  we  close  it 
with  a  statement  of  the  Captivity,  it  is  true,  but  not  of  the  Return,  which  is 
the  very  thing  for  which  we  should  have  looked.  Perhaps  it  might  appear 
safest  to  leave  such  a  difficulty,  which  is  of  no  pressing  practical  import, 
vdthout  the  pretence  of  any  very  confident  solution.  Yet,  were  it  not  that 
it  seemed  a  too  convenient  adaptation  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case, 
there  is  a  great  deal  to  lead  to  the  view  very  generally  assumed,  as  well  by 
critics  generally  hostile  to  the  character  of  the  work  (as  De  Wette)  as  by 
others  (like  Movers,  Ewald,  etc.)  of  a  very  contrary  tone  of  criticism. 
According  to  this  view,  Chronicles,  originally  finding  its  legitimate  termina- 
tion with  the  chapters  now  ranked  as  the  Book  of  Ezra,  suiPers  truncation 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHBONICLES.  xix 

there,  and  tlie  last  two  verses  remain  an  indication  of  the  severance  there 
effected.  Meantime  Ezra,  made  into  a  separate  book,  was  placed  where  in 
the  Hebrew  canon  we  find  it,  in  due  historical  order,  after  Daniel  (the 
contents  of  which  consist  of  some  account  of  the  period  of  the  Captivity) 
and  hefore  Nehemiah,  while  Chronicles  is  relegated  to  the  position  of  last  in 
the  canon  in  the  Hebrew,  though  not  last  in  our  canon.  Such  an  explana- 
tion postulates  a  certain  anxiety  to  put  the  contents  of  Daniel  into  a 
convenient  position  at  the  expense  of  putting  Chronicles  into  an  unjust 
position,  and  leaving  it  with  an  inconsequential  termination,  and  the  man- 
agement suggests  rather  mismanagement.  However,  it  is  none  the  less  the 
fact  that  Chronicles  is  found  in  the  position  above  described.  It  may  suffice 
to  point  out  that,  whatever  may  be  the  fact  or  the  actual  explanation 
respecting  the  original  order^  no  history  itself  is  deficient  which  is  a  matter 
of  prime  significance.  For  in  Chronicles,  Daniel,  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  we  have 
a  certain  catena  of  history  from  creation,  through  the  period  of  the  Captivity, 
to  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  and  the  resettlement  of  Judah  in  the  land 
after  the  Captivity. 

The  interesting  point  of  the  substantial  unity  of  Chronicles  is  strikingly 
witnessed  to  in  the  internal  evidence  famished  by  the  work.  Those  very 
features  which  might  have  been  expected  to  militate  against  both  the 
probability  of  its  unity,  and  especially  against  facility  in  proving  that  unity, 
do  in  fact  contribute  to  the  furtherance  of  that  proof.  It  can  scarcely  be 
going  too  far  to  say  that,  in  style  and  spirit,  it  is  immistakably  one.  It  is 
most  true  that  the  very  nature  of  genealogical  matter  might  have  been 
expected  to  render  it  almost  out  of  the  question  to  detect  what  sort  of  hand 
had  been  employed  upon  it,  still  less  to  pronounce  with  any  confidence  as 
to  the  sameness  of  the  hand  with  that  which  penned  the  remaining  and  more 
historical  part  of  the  work.  But  on  the  contrary,  the  genealogical  and  other 
tables,  as  well  (1)  by  what  they  bring  into  prominence  or  else  keep  in  the 
shade  or  even  entirely  omit,  as  (2)  by  the  distinct  matter  which  they 
contain  in  the  shape  of  interspersed  reflections  and  moral  points  made  and 
religious  lessons  taught,  go  to  exhibit  strongly  the  evidence  of  unity.  The 
less  such  modes  of  overcoming  the  obstructions  that  genealogical  matter 
would  so  naturally  present,  might  occur  to  the  mind,  the  more  impressive  is 
their  evidence  felt  to  be  when  it  spontaneously  presents  itself.  Thus,  e,g,^ 
it  is  presumable  that  the  genealogies  and  other  tables  affecting  Israel  in 
the  older  records  were,  ujpon  the  whole,  not  less  full  than  those  of  Judah, 
even  if  we  readily  grant  that  there  were  well-understood  reasons  in  provi- 
dence from  the  earliest  for  the  more  special  charge  of  the  latter.  Yet  these 
genealogies  give  very  marked  preponderance  to  the  line  of  Judah.  The 
tribes  of  Dan  and  Zebulon  are  passed  over,  and  scanty  indeed  is  the 
reference  to  Israel,  in  respect  of  Beuben,  Gud,  and  Manasseh,  at  a  most 
critical  time  (ch.  v.  26).  Compare,  however,  the  significant  allusion  to 
Judah  in  the  same  chapter  (ver.  2;  as  also  ch.  xxviii.  4).  The  prominenco 
afterwards  given  throughout  the  historical  portion  to  Judah  is,  in  fact^ 


XX  INTRODUCTION  TO 


foreshadowed  plainly  enongli  in  the  early  tabalar  chapters.  Again,  it  is 
impossible  not  to  notice  that,  so  surely  as  the  indications  of  the  moral  and 
spiritual  objects  of  the  work  remount  and  insist  on  finding  their  place  in 
the  midst  of  old  lists  and  tables  of  genealogies,  so  surely  the  genealogical 
disposition  (as  it  has  been  conveniently  termed)  of  tbe  compiler  or  writer 
is  constantly  betraying  itself,  whenever  there  is  a  possible  opening  for 
it  throughout  the  book.  The  celebrated  forty  or  more  parallel  sections, 
again,  tabulated  by  Keil  and  Davidson,  etc.,  run  with  wonderful  even- 
ness of  occurrence  alongside  the  whole  stretch  of  the  history.  Several 
phrases,  which  are  of  the  rarest  occurrence  elsewhere,  and  in  some  cases  are 
not  to  be  found  out  of  Chronicles,  are  in  this  book  found  indifferently  in 
genealogy  or  in  history,  binding  part  with  part.  The  same  may  be  said  of 
not  a  few  grammatical  forms,  and  which  will  be  found  noted  where  they 
occur.  Much  stress  also  has  been  justly  laid  on  certain  more  general 
characteristics  of  the  writer,  such  as  his  very  brief  touch  of  certain  kinds  of 
matter,  his  very  shortened  treatment  of  others,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
uniform  practice  he  observes  from  beginning  to  end,  of  making  reference, 
with  some  variety  and  readiness  to  amplify,  to  the  punishment  visited  on 
kings  and  people  for  their  sins  and  disobedience.  The  "  Levitical  "  spirit 
and  the  "  priestly  "  spirit  and  the  "  theocratic  "  spirit,  which  have  been  so 
often  remarked  upon  and  not  rarely  so  perversely,  all  find  their  explanation 
here ;  and  meantime  all  help  to  attest  the  unanimity  of  one,  not  of  many 
minds.  The  sum  total  of  indications  of  one  writer  and  one  object  and  one 
unbroken  work  seems  amply  sufficient  to  balance  a  very  few  hitches,  brief 
gaps,  occasional  abruptness,  and  some  apparent  inconsistencies,  a  large 
proportion  of  which  probably  await  for  their  extinction  nothing  but  the 
first  competent  collation  of  Hebrew  texts.  The  Hebrew  student  will  not 
read  far,  vvithont  discovering  the  corruptions  and  imperfections  of  our  pre- 
sent Hebrew  text.  But  if  he  read  to  the  end,  and  microscopically  examine 
every  difficulty  such  as  might  probably  be  referable  to  the  text,  greatly  as 
his  interest  and  curiosity  will  be  intensified,  he  will  not  find  in  them  all  the 
kind  of  indications  that  would  lead  him  to  suspect  his  author  or  his  author's 
work.  He  probably  may  find  many  of  a  very  opposite  turn  and  character. 
The  state  of  the  Hebrew  text  in  Chronicles,  so  far  as  regards  passages  in 
which  numbers  occur,  is  in  very  strict  harmony  with  all  similar  kind  of 
matter  in  any  other  part  of  the  Old  Testament.  Uncertainty  and  incon- 
sistency characterize  all  this  kind  of  matter,  and  for  reasons  well  enough 
known  and  existing  in  the  language  itself. 


§  9.  Literature  op  Chronicles. 

It  can  scarcely  be  said  that  the  literature  of  Chronicles  is  very  scanty  in 
quantity,  but  it  can  yet  less  be  said  to  be  rich  in  quality,  or  very  satis- 
factory so  far  as  it  goes.  There  are  not  wanting,  however,  indications  of  an 
improved  and  fairer  style  of  criticism  of  the  work,  which  wiD  inevitably 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  xxi 

lead  to  some  surer  conclasions  upon  the  greater  qnestions  involved  in  it ; 
while  help  against  the  great  and  frequent  corruption  of  the  text  may  be 
confidently  expected  from  that  invaluable  collation  of  the  Massorah,  about 
to  be  given  to  Hebrew  scholarship  by  the  inde&tigable  labours  of  Dr. 
GKnsburg.  For  the  freer  criticism  and  bolder  challenging  of  questions 
suggested  by  Chronicles,  we  are,  of  course,  indebted  mainly  and  in  the  first 
instance  to  the  theological  expositors  of  Germany.  Their  views,  so  far  as 
they  may  have  anything  characteristic  about  them,  generally  declare  them- 
selves in  a  pronounced  manner,  as  of  one  or  the  other  of  two  opposing 
schools.  These  schools  are  separated,  not  more  by  the  evident  and  almost 
unscrupulous  aim  of  the  one  to  decry  the  authenticity  of  the  work  which 
the  other  consistently  supports,  than  by  an  habitual  disparaging  treatment 
of  its  contents.  The  following  list  gives  the  more  important  critical 
treatises  and  commentaries  : — 

Bertheau:  'Die  Biicher  der  Chronlk.  Erklart.'  Ist  edit,  Leipsic,  1854;  2nd  edit, 
1860.  A  translation  of  this  work  in  its  first  edition  is  found  in  Clark's  Foreign 
Theological  Library.    This  is  the  work  of  a  fair  and  careful  critic. 

Keil:  'Apologet  Versuch.  iiber  die  Biicher  der  Chronik.*  1st  edit,  Berlin,  1833. 
Of  a  much  later  work  (Leipsic,  1870)  there  is  likewise  an  English  translation  in 
Clark's  Library. 

Zockler ;  *  Comment,  fiber  Chronik.,'  in  Lange's  large  '  Bibelwerk.'  Of  the  whole  of 
this  '  Bibelwerk '  there  is  an  English  translation  in  several  imp.  8vo  vols. 

Movei's:  'Erit  Untersuch.  fiber  die  Biblische  Chronik.'  1st  edit,  Bonn,  1834. 
This  work  was  provoked  by  the  attacks  of  De  Wette  and  Gramberg. 

Chraniberg :  *  Die  Chronik.  nach.  i.  Geschicht  Charak.  fiber  i.  GlaubwUrd.'    1823. 

Graf:  *  Die  Geschichtliche  Bficher  der  Alt  Test'    Leipsic,  1866. 

Zum :  *  Gottesdienst.  Vortrage.  d.  Juden.' 

EwaUd :  '  Geschichte.  d.  Volks-Israel.'  An  admirable  translation  of  this  by  Husscl 
Martineau  is  published. 

Dr.  8,  Davidson's  latest  editions  of '  Old  Testament  Introductions.' 

There  are  suggestions,  discussions,  and  short  articles  of  more  or  less  original  value,  in 
various  '  Einleitungen  in  Alt  Test,'  such  as  those  of  Havemick,  De  Wette,  Eichhom, 
Dahler,  Eeil,  Schrader,  Bleek,  and  in  the  article  "  Chronik.,"  by  Dillman^  in  Herzog's 
'  Encyclopa^ia.' 

In  the  well-known  English  'Bible  Dictionaries'  of  Eitto  (Alexander's  edition).  Dr. 
W.  Smith,  and  Fairbaim,  there  are  articles  of  interest,  under  *'  Chronicles,"  more  of  the 
nature  of  summaries  than  marked  by  original  research  or  suggestion ;  as  also  in  the 

eighth  edition  of  the  *  Encyclopaedia  Biitannica,'  by  R.  W n ;  superseded  in  the  ninth 

edition  by  one  of  much  more  comprehensive  scope,  written  by  Professor  W.  Robertson 
Smith. 

§   10.   AjBRJiNaEMENT  OF  THE  WOEK  (1    ChRONICLES)  IN   PaRTS  AND   SECTIONS. 

The  First  Book  of  Chronicles  falls  into  two  parts.  Part  I.  consists  of  a 
series  of  genealogies  (accompanied  by  some  few  geographical  and  ethnical 
touches),  beginning  from  Adam  and  extending  to  Israel  (ch.  i.)  ;  thenco 
in  the  line  of  Israel,  on  to  David  and  the  Captivity ;  and  furthermore,  as 
regards  the  family  of  David,  to  the  building  of  the  second  temple,  and  as 
regards  the  family  of  Aaron,  to  Jozadak  and  his  captivity  under  Nebu- 
chadnezzar (ch.  ii. — ix.).  Part  II.  is  occupied  with  the  history  of  David 
(ch.  X. — xxix.). 


)» 

ff 

tt 

n 

ft 

tt 

it 

tf 

tt 

n 

ft 

tt 

ft 

tt 

tt 

ft 

» 

tt 

M 

i» 

tt 

If 

tt 

If 

n 

tt 

)f 

ft 

it 

>t 

ft 

tt 

tt 

t> 

tt 

It 

Mil    INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  GHRONICLES. 

Part  I.    Cu.  l — ix.    17  Sections. 

The  genealogy  of  the  human  race  from  Adam  to  Noah  and  his  three  sons.    Ch.  i. 

1—4. 
Descendants  direct  and  collateral  of  these  three  sons,  including  those  of  Esau  and 

Seir,  and  the  kings  and  dukes  of  Edom.    Gh.  1.  5 — 54. 
The  descendants  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.    Gh.  ii. — iv,  23. 

Simeon.    Gh.  iv.  24—43. 

Reuben.    Ch.  v.  1 — 10. 

Gad.    Ch.  V.  11— 17. 

Reuben,  Gad,  and  half  Sianasseh.    Cb.  v.  18 — 26. 

Levi.    Ch.  vi. 

Issachar.    Ch.  vii.  1—5. 

Benjamin.    Ch.  vii.  6 — 12. 

Napthali.    Ch.  vii.  13. 

Manasseh.    Ch.  vii.  14 — 19. 

Ephraim.    Ch.  viL  20—29. 

Asher.    Ch.  vii.  30—40. 

Benjamin  (continued).    Ch.  viii. 
The  dwellers  in  Jerusalem.    Ch.  ix.  2 — 34. 
Repetition  (ch.  viil  29—40)  of  the  pedigree  and  house  of  SauL    Ch.  ix.  35—44. 

Part  IL    Gh.  x.— xxix,    27  Sections. 

The  utter  overthrow  of  Saul.    Ch.  x. 

The  reign  of  David  over  all  the  kingdom.    Ch.  xi.  1 — 9. 

The  list  of  his  mighty  men.    Ch.  xL  10 — 47. 

The  list  of  the  adherents  of  David  in  Saul's  time.    Ch.  xlL  1 — 22. 

ThQ  list  of  those  who  supported  him  on  his  enthronement.    Ch.  xii.  23—40. 

The  removal  of  the  ark,  and  its  shelter  in  the  house  of  Obed-edom.    Ch.  xiii. 

The  palace  of  David,  his  wives,  and  the  beginning  of  his  victories.    Ch.  xiv. 

The  successful  removal  of  the  ark,  and  services  and  feast  in  connection  therewith. 

Ch.  XV.,  xvi. 
The  unfolding  of  David's  purpose  to  build  a  house  for  the  Lord.    Ch.  xvii. 
I^vid's  wars  with  Moabitcs,  Philistines,  and  Syrians ;  and  his  chief  officers.     Ch. 

xviii. 
David's  victories  over  Ammon  and  Aram.    Ch.  xix. 
David's  wars  with  Rabbah  and  the  Philistine  giants.    Ch.  xz. 
The  fatal  numbering  of  the  people,  the  propitiation,  and  the  establishing  of  the 

altar  on  Mount  Moriah.    Ch.  xxi. 
David's  preparations  for  the  temple,  and  charges  to  Solomon  and  the  princes.    Ch. 

xxii. 
The  Levites,  their  classes,  families,  and  duties.    Ch.  xxiii. 
The  twenty-four  classes  of  priests  and  Levites.    Ch.  xxiv. 
The  chorister  families,  and  the  choir-leaders.    Ch.  xxv. 
The  porters  and  their  duties.    Ch.  xxvi.  1 — 28. 
The  officers  and  judges.    Gh.  xxvi.  29 — 32. 
The  months'  courses  of  army  captains.    Ch.  xxviL  1 — 15. 
The  princes  of  the  tribes.    Ch.  xxvii.  16—24. 
The  stewards  of  the  treasures.    Ch.  xxvii.  25 — 31. 
The  king's  special  helpers  and  counsellors.    Ch.  xxviL  32 — 34. 
David^s  address  to  Solomon  in  the  presence  of  the  great  convocation  of  the  princes. 

Ch.  xxviiL  1 — 10. 
The  building  plans  of  the  temple.    Ch.  xxviii.  11 — 21. 
The  gifts  of  David  and  the  princes,  the  thanksgiving  of  David,  and  breaking  up  of 

the  solemn  assembly.    Ch.  xxix.  1 — 25. 
The  close  of  the  history  of  David's  reign.    Ch,  xxix.  26 — 30. 


THE 


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


■  Ot 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  L 


Vera.  1 — 4. — A.  List  of  generations 
rsoM  Adam  to  Noah.  These  verses  contain  a 
line  of  genealogical  descents,  ten  in  number, 
from  Adam  to  Noah,  adding  mention  of  the 
three  sons  of  the  latter.  Tiie  stride  from 
Adam  to  Seth,  and  the  genealogy's  entire 
obliviousness  of  Cain  and  Abel,  are  fall  of 
soggestion.  All  of  these  thirteen  names  in 
the  Hebrew  and  in  the  Septuagint  Version, 
though  not  those  in  the  Authoiued  Version, 
are  facsimiles  of  those  which  occur  in  Gen.  v. 
They  are  not  accompanied,  however,  here, 
as  thry  are  there,  by  any  chronological 
attempt  Probably  the  main  reason  of  this 
is  that  any  referencea  of  the  kind  were 
quite  beside  the  objects  which  the  compiler 
of  this  work  had  in  view.  It  is,  however, 
possible  that  other  reasons  for  this  chrono- 
logical silence  may  have  existed.  The 
uncertainties  attaching  to  the  chronology 
found  in  Genesis,  as  regards  thia  table,  may 
have  been  suspected  or  evident — uncertain- 
ilea  which  afterwards  proclaim  themselves 
00  loudly  in  the  differences  observable 
between  the  Hebrew,  Samaritan,  and  Sep- 
tuagint versions.  Thos  the  Hebrew  text 
exhibits  the  total  aggregate  of  years  from 
Adam  to  the  birth  of  Noah,  as  amounting  to 
one  thousand  and  fifty-six;  the  Samaritan 
Tersion  to  seven  hundred  and  seven  only ;  and 
the  Septuagint  to  as  many  as  sixteen  hundred 
and  sixty-two ;  neverth^ess,  aU  three  agreo 
in  adding  five  hundred  years  onward  to  the 
birth  of  Shem,  and  another  hundred  years 
to  the  coming  of  the  Flood.  It  must  be  re* 
marked  of  this  first  genealogical  table, 
whether  occurring  here  or  in  Genesis,  that, 
notwithstanding  its  finished  appearance,  not- 
withstanding the  impression  it  undoubtedly 
first  makes  on  the  reader,  that  it  purports  to 

I.  CHBONICLEfl.        (I 


give  all  the  intervening  generations  from 
the  first  to  Shem,  it  may  not  be  so ;  nor  be 
intended  to  convey  that  impression.  It  is 
held  bv  some  that  names  are  omitted,  and 
with  them  of  course  the  years  which  be- 
longed to  them.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  this  theory  would  go  far  to  remove 
several  great  di£Boulties,  and  that  some 
analogies  might  be  invoked  in  support  of  it, 
from  the  important  genealogies  of  the  New 
Testament  The  altogether  abrupt  opening 
of  this  book — a  succession  of  proper  names 
without  any  verb  or  predication— K^nnot  be 
considered  as  even  partially  compensated 
by  the  first  sentence  of  ch.  ix.,  '*  So  all  Israel 
were  reckoned  by  genealogies ;  and  behold, 
they  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  kings 
of  Israel  and  Judah."  This  verse  applies 
directly  to  the  genealogies  of  Israel  and  the 
tribes,  beginning  ch.  ii.  1,  while  under  any 
circuinstances,  we  must  look  on  the  first 
portion  of  this  book  as  a  series  of  tebles, 
nere  and  there  slightly  annoteted,  and  sud- 
denly suspended  before  the  eyes. 

Vers.  5 — 7. — B.  List  of  sons  and  grand- 
sons or  Jafiieth.  After  the  mention  of 
Noah's  three  sons,  in  the  order  of  their  age 
(though  some  on  slender  ground  think  Ham 
the  youngest),  this  order,  as  in  Gen.  x.  2,  is 
reversed ;  and  the  compiler,  beginning  with 
JaphetJi,  the  youngest,  apparently  with  the 
view  of  disposing  of  what  his  purpose  may 
not  so  particularly  require,  gives  the  names 
of  seven  sons  and  seven  grandsons,  viz. 
three  through  Oomer,  the  eldest  son,  and 
four  through  Javan,  the  fourth  son.  These 
fourteen  names  are  identical  in  the  Autho- 
rized Version  with  the  list  of  Gen.  x.  2—4. 
The  Septuagint,  though  not  identical  in  the 
spelling  of  the  four  names  ICadai,  Tirai, 
Tarshiih,  and  Xittim,  shows  no  material 
differences  in  the  two  places.    In  the  He- 

B 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.        [ch.  l  1— 64. 


brew,  Koordinf;  to  the  tfit  and  editioD  con- 
■olted,  very  alight  Tuiiationaaro  found  in  the 
orthography  of  Tubal  (Vsm  here  for  \sri\') 
and  Tanhiih  (np-e-ini  here  for  r'tf^un:)  and  in 
the  adoption  of  Bipbath  and  Doduiitn  in  thia 
book  for  Diphalk  and  Sodaiiim.  The  names 
Killim  and  Dodanim  louk  leu  like  names 
of  inilividuale  thun  of  eucli  funiil.v,  tribe,  or 
nation  as  desctnclcd  from  Ihe  individunl. 
At  the  clnse  of  this  ihoit  enumeralioa,  ire 
have  in  OenusU  the  alatcment,  "  By  these 
were  the  ieles  of  the  (ientilcs  divided  in 
their  lands ;  erery  one  afltr bis  tongue. after 
their  ramilica.  in  tl.eir  naliuna."  It  is  evi- 
dent here  also  that,  whetbei  the  compiler 
borrowid  fium  tlio  Book  of  Genesis  itcelf,  or 
from  some  common  snurre  open  to  both,  his 
objects  are  not  eiacllj  the  same.  Time  and 
the  present  position  and  condition  of  that 
part  of  bis  people  for  whieh  he  was  writing 
goTcmed  bim.  and  dictated  the  difference. 
Accoiilingiy  we  do  not  pause  hero  on  the 
colonizings  and  tbe  froiin  rests  and  hsbita- 
tions  of  the  sons  and  grandsoni  of  Japhelh. 
The  subject,  one  of  eitrtme  interest,  and 
tbe  threads  of  it  pcrbaps  not  so  hopelessly 
lost  as  is  somotimrs  thouRlit,  belongs  to  the 
plsce  in  Genesis  from  which  tho  above  verse 
IS  cited.  It  may,  tiowever,  be  written  bore 
that  the  rather  verbose  digquisitions  of 
Joseph  Mt-de  are  oeitber  altogether  unin- 
terestingnor  in  some  parts  of  tliem  unlikely. 
Tliey  form  Discourses  47,  48,  bk.  i.  (ediL 
'The  Works  of  Joseph  Uede.'  London, 
ICftt). 
Vers.    8 — IC— 0.    List    or   the    boss, 


This  list  conslstH  of  foor  sons  of  Ham,  of 
six  grandsons,  including  Bimrod,  tbrougli 
Cnih,  the  eldest  son  of  Ham;  of  seven 
grandsons  through  Kimdm,  the  second  son 
of  Ham ;  of  eleven  grandsons  through 
Canaan,  the  fourth  son  of  Uam ;  of  two 
great-grandsons  through  yaT""**,  Gush's 
fourth  soil ;— thirty  descendants  in  all.  No 
issue  is  giveu  of  Fat,  the  third  son  of  Hum. 
The  parallel  list  is  found  in  Gen.  i.  6-20. 
Tho  names  agree  in  tbe  Authorized  Ver- 
sion, with  minute  diffejenccs,  r.ri.  Put 
here  for  Phot  there,  and  so  the  FhUlltines 
for  Philistine,  Caphthoiiu  for  Ca^hlorim, 
Qirgaahits  for  Girgasite.  1'hey  are  slmilnrly 
In  agreement  in  the  Hebrew  text  of  tbe 
two  places,  with  minute  differences,  e.g. 
KTiaei  here  for  .-irsDi  there;  (tnpT]  for 
rojni;  wjh  for  D-W;  jiTsfor  IVi;  ■p'lJJn 
for  'plg^.  However,  in  Genesis  tho  following 
ttat«ment*  are  added  lo  Nimiod's  name : — 
"  He  icaa  a  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord  : 
wherefore  it  is  said.  Even  aa  Nimrod  tbe 
mighty  hunter  before  tbe  Lord.  And  tlie 
beginuing  of  bi«  kiDgdom  was  Babel,  and 
Eracb,  and  Aeead,  a&d  Calneb,  in  the  land 


of  Bbinar.  Out  of  that  land  went  forth 
Ashhur,  and  buildod  Nineveh,  and  the  city 
Rvhoboth,  and  Calah,  and  Rcsen  between 
Nini-veh  and  Calah ;  the  same  is  a  gre«t 
city."  And  again,  at  the  close  of  the  enu- 
of  sons,  grnndsons,  and  great- 
',  follow  the  statements,  "And 
a  nere  the  families  of  the  Canaan- 
ites  spread  abroad.  And  the  border  of  the 
Canaanifes  was  from  Sidoo,  as  tliou  comeat 
to  Gcrar,  onto  Gnza  ;  as  thou  gocBt,  nnto 
Bodom,  and  Gomorrah,  and  Adtnab,  and 
Zcboim,  even  unto  Lasha.  These  ore  tho 
sons  of  Hum,  after  tbeir  families, after  their 
tongues,  in  their  countries,  and  in  their 
Dal  ions." 

Ver.  10.— The  Septuagint  supplies  the 
word  11*117^' aft"  "yi^ai-  Also  after  this  de- 
scription of  Kimrod,  it  proceeds  lo  the  enn- 
meration  of  tbe  posterity  of  Shem,  omitting 
all  mention  of  Uem's  grandsons  through 
Mizraim  and  Cainan.  Up  to  that  point  the 
names  in  this  book  and  Genesis  are  in 
agreement  in  the  Septuagint  Vereion.  It  is 
evident  that  some  of  the  names  in  this  por- 
tion of  tbe  genealogy  ere  not  strictly  tbos* 
of  tbe  individual,  but  of  tbe  tribe  or  nation 
which  cnme  to  be,  as,  for  instance,  Hiiraim, 
Lndim,  the  Jsbniite,  the  Amorita,  and  so  on. 
Ver,  16.— ThU  verse  furnishes  us  with 
one  illustration  of  the  assertion  made  above, 
that  the  clues  to  tbe  ethnological  and  eth- 
nogrsphtcal  statements  of  these  meet  ancient 
n^onrds  are  not  necessarily  all  hopelessly 
lost.  In  tbe  name  Zemaiita,  it  is  suggested 
by  MicbDelis,  that  we  have  allusion  to  the 
place  Bumra,  on  the  west  coast  of  Syria, 
this  Bumra  lx:ing  the  Siniyra  of  Pliny 
{'  Hist.  Nat,"  V.  20),  and  of  the  Bpanisb 
geographer  of  Ihe  first  century,  Pompcmiu 
Mela(i.  12).  But  tbe  place  Zimiia,  in  com- 
pany with  Arpod,  is  found  in  tbe  AssyriMt 
inscriptiona  of  Sargoo,  b.o.  720,  leaving 
little  cause  to  hesitate  in  accepting  th* 
identiflcation  of  Michaelis  (Condor's  'Hand- 
book to  the  Bible,'  p,  233).  Certainty,  bow- 
ever,  cannot  be  felt  on  the  subject. 

Vers.  17— 27.-D.  Thb  list  of  Bboi'i 
SEscENDANTB  TO  Ab&au.  This  list  is  broken 
in  two ;  it  pauses  a  moment  eiactly  half- 
way  to  Abram,  at  the  name  Peleg,  to  men* 
lion  Peleg's  brother  Joktan  and  Joktau'a 
thirteen  sons.  Then,  repeating  tbe  first  Sva 
names  of  lineal  descent,  and  picking  np 
the  thread  at  Fele^,  the  list  gives  the  re- 
maining five  to  Abram.  In  (he  flrat  half 
of  this  list,  we  have  apparently  the  names 
of  nine  sons  of  Bhem,  bnt,  as  Genesis  ex- 
plains, really  the  names  of  five  sons,  and 
through  Anin,  tbe  last  of  them,  Ihe  name* 
of  four  grandsoni.  Another  grandson, 
through  Arphazad  Ihe  third  son,  follows, 
and  through  this  grandson  two  oonsecntiva 
lineal  deKentabriug  ni,  in  the  name  PcIba 


OH.  L  1—64.]        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


balf-wB^  to  Abmm.  It  is  here  the  lineal 
table  pauses  to  giio  Joktan  and  liia  tbirteen 
•nns.  The  namta  then  in  this  portion  of 
the  list  are  twootj-six  in  nnmbcr.  In  the 
Anthoriied  Version  tiioy  corxeapond  with 
those  in  GeneeU,  except  that  M«wba«li 
(-i|f  pi)  here  is  called  Slash  (l^p;)  there ;  Shalall 
here  ia  ipellod  Salah  there;  and  Ebal  (^'V) 
here  is  written  Obal  (^^'iji)  there.  The  dif- 
ference botireen  the  Hebren  texts  justiQei 
tbe  firsl  and  last  of  Ibese  Tatiatioiia  in  the 
Aalboriied  Version,  but  in  all  other  re- 
spects those  texts  are  in  entire  accord  with 
one  UDother,  for  this  paragraph.  The  Bep- 
Inagint  gives  Tcry  little  of  this  portion  of 
the  list.  It  correspon'.is,  whether  with  the 
Hebrew  or  the  Authorized  Version,  onl;  as 
far  as  to  the  namo  Arpbazail,  after  whicli 
it  carries  down  the  line  at  once  to  Abram 
by  the  remaining  eight  names  as  given  in 
our  twenty-fourth  to  twenty- seventh  versus. 
Nor  is  it  in  agreement  with  its  own  version 
in  Genesis,  whiuh  has  points  of  important 
Tsriaiion  wilh  the  Hebrew  text  also.  It  is 
then  at  tliis  break  of  the  list  that,  after  the 
names  of  Joktan's  sons,  we  have  in  Genesis 
these  words,  "And  their  dwelling  was  from 
Me^ha,  as  thou  goest  unto  Sephar  a  monnt 
of  the  east.  These  are  the  sons  of  Bhem, 
after  their  families,  after  their  tongues,  in 
their  lands,  after  their  nations.  Tbeae  are 
tlie  families  of  tbe  sons  of  Noab,  after  tbeil 
genenitions,  in  their  nations  ;  and  by  these 
werethe  nations  divided  in  the  earth  niter  the 
Floud."  Upon  this  follows  the  account  of 
Babel,  in  nine  long  verses,  and  then  a 
elironological  summary  is  furnished  in 
line&l  deuceiit  onli/  from  Shem  to  Abram. 
It  is  wilh  the  names  in  this  chronological 
summary  that  those  in  this  second  part  of 
our  list  (vers.  21—27}  are  found  to  agree. 
But  any  attempt  at  reproduction  of  the  chro- 
nolugy  found  in  Genesis  is  again  absent  here. 
At  this  point  a  siguiQcunt  stage  of  these 
genealogies  is  reached.  The  ever-brooden- 
ing  stream  of  populotion  now  narrows  Bgain, 
Two  thousand  years  have  Sown  by.  then 
Abraham  appears  on  the  stream  and  tide  of 
bnman  life.  Of  that  long  period  the  life  of 
Adam  himself  spanned  nearly  the  half.  Bo 
far  we  Itam  without  partiality  of  all  his 
descendanta  in  conunoo.  But  henceforth, 
the  real,  the  distinct  purpoae  of  the  genea- 
logy becomes  apparent,  in  that  the  line  of 
the  descendants  of  Abraham,  and  that  by 
one  family,  alone  is  maintained,  and  proves 
to  be  a  purpose  leading  by  one  long  straight 
line  toChrist  himself.  Witb  Abraham  "the 
covenant  of  innooeucy,"  long  futfcited  in 
Adam,  is  superieded  by  the  everlasting 
"covenant  of  grace,"  and  we  lose  sight  in 
some  meaame  of  Adam,  the  "  common 
bther  of  our  fleab,"  to  think  of  a  happier 


I  parenlaxa  found  in  Abraham,  the  "oommos 
father  of  (he  faithful." 

Vers.  28  — 37.  — K,  List  or  thb  tons, 

ORANDSONS,     AND     OTHER     D£SCilM>ANTa     OF 

AsnAHAH.  In  the  first  of  these  verses  tlie 
new  form  of  the  name  of  Abraham  is  at  onoa 
used  in  place  of  the  old  form.    And  the 


a  of  t' 


B  give 


by  Sarah,  and  Ishmaal  the  son  bj 
Uagar,  his  Egyptian  bondwoman.  That 
these  stand  in  tbe  inverse  order  of  tiieir 
birth  and  age  requires  no  explanatiun. 
The  distinct  and  separate  mention  of  these 
two  sons,  apart  from  ail  the  others,  is  of 
course  in  harmony  with  Gen.  xxi.  12,  13, 
"In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called.  And  also 
of  the  son  of  the  bondwoman  will  1  muke  a 
nation,  because  be  is  thy  seed."  Although 
stated  in  the  first  place  in  the  order  of  im< 
portance,  and  Isaac  takes  preoeJunce  of 
Isbmael,  the  name  of  thu  latter  and  of  hU 
posterity  are  treated  of  first.  To  note  each 
clear  instance  of  (liis  kind  will  guard  ua 
a^inst  inferring,  in  caaes  Twf  clear,  nuything 
positive,  one  way  or  tbe  other,  respecting 
seniority  merely  from  order.  Tbe  order 
either  of  age  or  of  historic  importance  may  . 
be  given  in  the  first  instance,  to  be  im- 
mediately reversed  in  favour  of  tbe  order 
which  shall  enable  tbe  writer  to  clear  out 
of  his  way  the  less  important- 
Vets.  29-  31  eoutuin  the  list  of  bb- 
mael's  sons,  twelve  in  nnmber.  The  name* 
in  the  Authorizod  Version  and  in  the  Hebrew 
text  are  identical  respectively  wilh  tliose 
in  Gen.  xiv.  13  — IS,  exiept  that  for 
Hadar  there  we  read  Hadad  here.  In  the 
Beptuagint  we  have  Idonma,  Cbondaii,  lettar 
here,  for  Douma,  Choddan,  and  Ictur  there. 
At  the  close  of  this  list  in  Genesis  wo  havo 
Joiood  on  to  "  these  are  tijo  sons  of  lahmael," 
tbe  clauses,  "and  these  are  their  names,  by 
their  towns,  and  by  their  castli's ;  twelvs 
princea  according  to  their  nations.  And 
these  are  the  years  of  the  life  of  Isbmael, 
an  hundred  and  thirty  and  seven  years: 
and  lie  gave  up  the  ghost  and  died ;  and 
was  gathered  uuto  hia  people.  And  tbey 
dwelt  from  UavUah  unto  Bhar,  that  ii 
before  Egypt,  as  thou  goest  toward  Assyria: 
and  he  died  in  the  presence  of  all  hi* 
brethren." 

Vers.  32,  83,  contain  the  list  of  Abra- 
ham's  sons  by  Keturah,  here  called  one  of 
his  concubines;  bnt  in  GenesiB,"B  wife," 
and  appaientlv  not  taken  by  Abraham  till 
after  Burah's  death  (Gen.  xxv.  1—4).  The 
sons  are  six ;  the  grandsons,  two  by  the 
sou  placed  second  in  order,  and  fire  by  the 
son  placed  fourth  in  order ;  in  all  thirteen 
names.  But  the  passage  in  Genesis  givea 
also  three  great-grandsons,  through  the 
•econd  grandson.  All  the  thirteen  are  la 
tbe  Autboriied  Version  idenUoal  In  the  two 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  TOE  CHRONICLES.       [en.  L  1—54. 


places  Bod  in  (lie  Ilebrew  toit;  but  la 
the  SeptuBgiot  iligbt  diSorences  ocaiir,  m 
Znnbmn,  leuu),  Ifadkin,  Bobak,  Soe,  Diidin, 
Bibti,  Ophw,  AbidK.  and  Eldada  here,  for 
Zombno,  lezan,  Mailal,  loebok,  Soio,  Deilaa, 
Saba,  Apheir,  Abeida,  aod  Eldaga  there- 
It  u  caiefullf  stated  ia  Oen.  iiv.  5.  6, 
after  the  enumeration  of  Ketuiah'g  children, 
and  in  apite  of  her  having  been  culled 
**  wife"  in  the  first  varse,  thnt  "Abraham 
gave  all  that  be  bad  unto  Isaac.  But  unto 
the  aon*  of  the  ooneubines,  irhich  Abra- 
ham bad,  Abraham  eave  gifti,  and  svnt 
them  ana;  fram  laaac  Qis  aon,  while  be  jet 
lived,  eaitward,  onto  the  caat  country." 

Ver«.  31  —  37  lead  na  on  to  the  de- 
■cendanti  of  laaao,  the  more  imporlant 
branch  of  Abreham'a  family.  It  breaks 
•gain  at  once  into  two,  Eun,  the  leaa  im- 
portant, treated  of  first ;  and  Iiraal,  reserved 
till  we  enter  on  eh.  iL  Of  Eiati.  the 
names  of  flvo  sons  are  given ;  and  of  seven 
grandsons  by  the  first  in  order,  and  four 
grandsona  by  the  second  in  order  of  these 
■one.  In  Gen.  ixivi.  I — 5  we  have  the 
names  of  the  five  sons  of  Esan,  which  cor- 

.  respond  in  the  AnLhorized  Version  and  in 
the  Hebrew  text  exactly  with  those  of  this 
list.  We  have  there  iu  addition  the  names 
of  their  mothers  respeetivelj,  who  were 
"daughtera  of  Uanaan,"  Adah  of  the  Hit- 
tites.  mother  of  the  first ;  Boshamatb  of 
the  Ishmaelitee,  mother  of  the  second  (and 
by  these  two  lines  came  the  seven  and  four 
grandsons) ;  and  Aholibamah  of  the  Hivites, 
mother  of  the  remaining  three  sons.  The 
names  oorrespond  also  in  the  Septua$;int  in 
the  two  places,  with  the  minute  diflerenoes 
of  Eliphaz  and  leoul  here,  for  Eliphai  and 
Jsoiu  there.  Then  follow  the  names  of 
*even  grandsons  of  Ksan  though  his  son 
Kliphaa,  of  whom  the  first  five  are  found 
and  in  agreement  (Oen.  xiivi.  11),  with 
the  exception  of  Zephi  here  for  Zepho 
there,  both  in  the  Authorized  Version  and  in 
the  Hebrew  text.  But  the  sixth  name  here, 
Timiia,  is  explained  in  Genesis  as  the  name 
of  a  concubine  ot  Eliphaz,  by  whom  he  bad 
the  son  Amalek,  wbo  appears  here  as  the 
■oventb  son.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that 
we  come  here  upon  a  transcriber's  error,  and 
it  would  be  easily  amended  if  we  read  "and 
by  Timno,  Amalek,"  viix  "  and  Timna  and 
Amalek."  If  this  be  the  oorrect  aocount  of 
the  matter,  the  grandsons  of  Esau  of  oonrse 
count  one  fewer  here.  These  two  names 
also  tally  in  the  Authorized  Version  and  in 
the  Hebrew  text  in  the  two  places;  while 
for  all  seven  names  the  agreement  in  the 
Bcptuagint  is  exact,  except  that  we  read 
OottlLaiu  here  for  Oothom  there.     There 

*  remain,  iu  ver.  37,  four  grandsons  to  Ksao, 
by  Beuel.  Their  names  agree  with  Oenesis 
ia  the  Authorized  Verrion,  in  the  Hebrew 


text,  and  [□  theSeptueginl.exn'pt  that  this 
last  reeds  Kaehoi  here  lor  Nachotb  there. 

Vers.  38— 42.- F.  List  oi-  de8Cend»nt» 
or  Seib.  These  verses  contain  the  Dames 
of  seven  sons  of  B«lr  and  one  dangliter. 
and  of  grandsons  through  every  one  of 
the  seven  sons,  viz.  two  through  Lotan 
the  first,  five  through  Shobal  the  second, 
two  through  Zibeon  the  third,  one  through 
Aaah  the  fourth,  four  through  Dlshall 
the  fifth,  three  tbrongh  Xaar  the  sixth, 
and  two  through  lUshaiL  the  seventh, — 
twenty-six  namos  in  all,  or,  including  tba 
one  daughter,  who  i>  introduced  as  Lotan'i 
■liter,  twenty-seven.  The  first  queetion 
which  arisos  is,  who  Seir  was,  now  first 
mentioned  here.  He  is  called  in  Oen. 
xxxvi,  20  "  Seir  the  Horite,"  and  the  only 
previous  mention  of  the  name  Bcir  in  that 
cbapler  Is  In  ver.  8,  "Thus  dwelt  Esau  in 
mount  Seir:  Esau  is  Edom;"  while  we 
read  in  Gen.  xir.  6, "  The  Horites  in  mount 
Seir;"  in  Gen.  xxxii.  3,  "To  the  land  of 
Seir,  the  country  of  Edom."  For  anything 
we  know  of  the  person  Beir,  theu,  we  are 
confined  to  these  two  notices — that  in  Gen. 
ixivi.  20  and  the  one  in  our  text.  The 
name  signifies  "  rough ; "  and  whether  Seir, 
the  person,  took  the  name  from  Seir,  the 
place  (a  mountain  district,  reaching  from 
the  Dead  Sea  to  the  Elanitio  Gulf),  or 
tic*  vtrtd,  it  would  seem  plain  that  tha 
proper  name  belonged  to  the  head  of  the 
tribe,  which  had  become  located  there,  and 
was,  of  course,  not  in  the  line  of  Abraham. 
This  tribe,  called  llorites— Hori  being  the 
name  of  Seir's  eldest  grandson — or  Trogto- 
djles,  acquired  their  name  from  hollowing 
out  dwellings  in  tbe  rocka,  ai  at  Fetra. 
The;  wore  visited  evidently  by  Esbd  :  hs 
married  at  least  one  of  his  wives  from  them ; 
and  his  descendants,  the  Edomitee,  in  due 
time  dispossessed  and  anpetscdcd  them 
(Dent  ii.  12).  No  doubt  some  were  left 
behind,  and  contentedly  submitted  to  tbe 
Edomites  and  became  mingled  with  them. 
These  considerations  put  together  account 
for  the  introduction  here  of  the  names  of 
Seir  and  his  twenty-seven  descendants, 
while  the  particulars  of  their  genealogy,  so 
far  as  here  given,  would  lie  easily  to  hand. 
The  eons  of  Seir  are  called  in  Genesis  aleo 
"dukes  "  ('GiSk),  a  word  answered  to  by 
the  later  "sheikhs;"  and  they  are  called 
"dukes  of  the  Horites,"  or  "tbe  dnkea  of 
Hori,  among  their  dukes  in  the  land  of 
Seir."  Tlie  twenty-six  or  twenty-seven 
names  under  notice  agree  in  the  Authorized 
Version  entirely  with  those  in  Gen.  xxxvL 
20—27,  except  that  for  Homam,  Alias, 
Bbephi,  Amiam,  and  lakan  here,  we  have 
Hemam,  Alvao,  Shepho,  Hcnidan,  and  Akan 
there.      Also    in    the    Hebrew   the    text* 


Jm.  1. 1—54.]        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


mgree  b  tbe  two  places  as  regard!  the«e 
names,  with  the  same  exoeptioiu.  But 
in  Ihe  8e|itiuigint  tbe  names  difler  much 
more  in  the  two  places.  Thus  for  'Raip, 
Aiair  (or  Aioriy),  "AAi*,  Taifld*,  ZufJ,  'Ori*. 
AM,  3arir,  Aauriir,  'Z/ttfii,,  'Amfiir, 
'IiBpJi^  and  Amir  here,  we  have  'Adp, 
'Piair,  TiiXift  raifli|\,  Zu^p,  'QMip,  "Atf, 
'Aril,  Aiiaiir,  'AiuiSlL,  'Aagir,  'IBpir,  and 
'lovKifi  there.  When  tbe  name  of  Anah 
is  reached  in  Genesis,  it  is  added, "  Thl*  wai 
tint  Anah  that  found  the  mules  [D-3>rm^^ 
more  probabl; '  hot  apringa,'  as  tbe  flnder  of 
which  Anah  la  sappoaed  to  have  been 
called  SeerC]  in  the  wildemeaa,  aa  he  fed 
the  asaea  of  Zibeon,  bia  Cutlier."  And 
again,  when  Diahon  ia  mentioned  aa  the 
■on  of  Anah,  there  is  added,  "  And  Aholi- 
bamah  the  daughter  of  Anah."  Note  ia 
DUtde  of  her  name,  no  doubt,  for  the  same 
kind  of  reason  aa  Timna  ia  mentioned  above. 
Aholibamah  (i.f.  "Judith,  the  daughter  of 
Beeri  the  Hittite,"  Gen.  xxvi.  34)  enjoyi 
notice  inaamuob  as  ahe  became  the  wife 
of  Ebhu;  and  Timna,  aa  she  became  the 
concubine  of  Eaau's  sen  Eliphaz,  and 
thereby  tbe  mother  of  Amalek. 

Vera.  42 — 50.  — G.  List  or  Kmoa  or 
Edom.  These  versea  contain  a  libt  oC 
kings  who  reigned  in  Edom,  during  a 
period  expressly  notified  as  anterior  to  tbe 
institution  of  kings  in  Israel.  Some  further 
point  of  practical  use  than  has  been  yet 
ascertained  may  lie  in  the  preeervatinn  of 
these  snalches  of  Edom'a  hiatory.  Some- 
thing surely  hangs  on  the  emphatic  but 
otherwise  gratuitous  statement,  that  kings 
were  unknown  in  Israel  when  this  line 
reigned  in  Edom.  It  may  turn  out  to  ooTer 
the  fulStment  of  some  obscure  point  of 
prophecy,  or  to  subaerre  aome  Important 
cbrooologiool  purpose ;  but  wedged  in  as 
it  is.  It  cannot  be  permitted  to  count  for 
nothing.  That  it  staiida  !□  identical  words 
in  Gen.  xsxtL  81  increaaea  uot  a  little  the 
Bltenlion  to  be  paid  to  it.  It  haa  hence  been 
asaerted  far  too  dogmatically,  aa  by  Spinoza, 
that  the  Book  of  Geneala  waa  no  work  of 
Uoeea;  or  again,  that  the  passage,  in  the 
coarse  of  some  transcription  of  manuscripts, 
had  found  its  way  from  Chronicles,  through 
a  marginal  note,  at  last  into  the  text  of 
Geiieaia  (see  liennicott}.  I)ut  these  posi- 
tions are  only  forced  by  the  aaaumptinn  that 
kings  muat  have  reigned  In  larael  before 
tbe  sentooce  cnnld  have  been  written,  which 
ia  aa  nnuecesaary  aaaumption.  Kings  had 
been  promised  to  Jacnb  (Gen.  sxit.  II),  as 
among  his  poeterity,  and  had  been  pro- 
phesied of  by  Moses  (Deut.  xxviiL  36).  It 
majf  havt  been  that  Edom,  secure  in  her 
kiuga  for  generatinna,  bad  been  wont  to 
make  her  boast  of  them,  in  comparison  of 
and  in  preaenoe  of  her  neighbours,  and  the 


remark  may  have  Oienee  origlaated.  Lastly, 
it  haa  been  correctly  pointed  out  that  tha 
structure  of  the  senteuce  in  the  original 
doea  not  at  all  neceasitate  tha  suggestion 
(of  which  in  the  Engliah  Version  tbera 
la  confessedly  the  apptarane»y,  that  kings 
had  already  bton  in  Israel.  At  the  same 
time,  loo  great  atreaa  must  not  be  laid  upon 
this,  for  tbe  slight  alteration  of  translation 
that  would  auit  Ihe  time  for  Genesia.  would 
throw  it  out  again  for  our  text  here,  and 

5et  tbe  worda  of  the  original  are  identical, 
'hese  kings  are  eight  in  number;  the 
ge  or  the  land  of  each  is  given.  It 
be  noticed  that  the  line  of  royalty  ia 
not  hereditary,  and  that  several  dukes,  or 
heeds  of  tribes,  or  princes  of  distriota,  rule 
nnder  the  king.  The  namea,  whether  of  pei^ 
sons  or  places,  agree  la  the  Authorized  Ver- 
siou  aa  tbey  occur  here  and  in  Gen.  xxxtL 
31 — 33,  except  that  Banl  is  here  spelt  Hhanl, 
and  that  we  have  here  Hadad  and  Pal  for 
Uadar  and  Pan  there.  These  two  difler- 
enoea  are  occasioned  by  the  Hebrew  text, 
and  are  the  only  differencta  between  the 
two  Hebrew  texts,  except  that  atf\r\  hero 
ia  given  □B'n  there,  and  that  tbe  incorrect 
Bpelling  here  of  nij.  ia  found  right  (p'1'!,y 
in  Genesis.  The  anperfluons  statement, 
Hadad  died  alto,  which  begin  a  our  fifty-Brat 
verae,  is  uot  found  in  Genesis.  In  the 
Beptusgint  tha  Tariations  between  t)ie  two 
places  are  greater,  aa  well  as  those  f^m 
the  Hebrew  text  in  either  place.  Thus  we 
have  Asim,  Gethaim,  Sebla,  SoboUi,  Bala- 
annor,  Aebibor,  Adad,  here,  for  Asom,  Oet- 
thaim,  Samoda,  Rooboth,  Ballenon,  Achobor, 
Arad,  there.  There  la  also  an  entire  omia- 
here  of  tbe  name  of  the  wife  ot  the  last 


of  Geoeeis,  aa  found  in  the  Hebrew  text. 

Ver.  44.— It  ia  not  imposaible  that  thia 
Jobab  is  one  with  Job.  Tbe  allusions  in 
Gen.  ixxvi.  II  to"Eliphaz  theTemanito" 
have  directed  attentiua  to  this  ;  and  it  haa 
been  favoured  by  Ihe  Beptuagint  end  tbe 
Fathers. 

Ver.  48.— Behoboth  by  ths  river ;  i.e.  the 
Euphrates,  to  distinguiah  it  probably  from 
"tUeoily  Rehoboth"of  Gen.  x.  11. 

Vers.  51— 54,— H.  List  or  eleven  dukw 
DP  Edoh.  These,  the  remaioiug  veraea 
of  cb.  I.,  appear  to  give  a  list  of  eleven 
dukea  of  Edom,  emphaaized  apparently  aa 
"  the  dukes  of  Eklom,"  aa  though  there  were 
none  before  or  after  them.  But  see  Gen. 
xxxvi.  15,  41,  43,  the  study  of  which  cau 
scarcely  leave  a  doubt  ou  tbe  mind  that 
this  list  is  not  one  of  persona  bnt  of  plncea ; 
t.g.  "the  duke"  of  the  city,  or  region  of 
"Timnab,"  and  ao  on.  The  places  were 
dukedonu.    The  names  of  these  versos,  in 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.        [ch.i.  1— 6i. 


both  Authorized  Version  and  Hebrew  trxt, 
are  an  exact  counterpart  of  tliose  found  in 
Gen.  xxxvi.  40 — 43,  except  that  Allah  here 
(so  Alian,  ver.  40)  stands  for  Alvah  in 
Genesis.  In  the  Septuajiint  wo  have 
Oolada,  Elibaxnas,  and  Babsar  here,  for  Goln, 
Olibemas,  and  Mazar  there.  Thus  this  first 
ctiapter  contains  those  genealogical  tables 
which  concern  the  patriarchs  from  Adam  up 
to  Israel,  spanning  a  stretch  of  some  two 
thousand  three  hundred  years,  and  embracing 
also  tables  of  Kdom  and  certain  of  the  de- 
scendants of  Edom  up  to  the  period  of  kings. 
The  chapter  contains  not  a  single  instance 
of  a  remark  that  could  be  described  as  of  a 
moral,  religious,  or  didactic  kind.  Yet  not 
a  little  is  to  be  learnt  sometimes,  not  a 
little  suggested,  from  omission  and  solemn 
silence  as  well  as  from  speech;  no  more 
notable  instance  of  which  could  perhaps  be 
given,  when  we  take  into  account  time, 
place,  and  circumstances,  than  that  already 


alluded  to  in  the  omissions  involved  in  the 
following  of  the  nume  of  Seth  upon  that 
of  Adam.  The  genealogies  of  this  chapter, 
with  their  parallels  in  Genesis,  aro  notable 
also  for  standing  unique  in  all  the  world's 
writing,  and  far  over  all  the  world's  mytho- 
logy, for  retracing  the  pedigree  of  the  wide 
family  of  men,  and  especially  of  the  now 
scattered  family  of  the  Jew,  to  its  original. 
From  the  time  of  the  close  of  our  Chronicle 
genealogies,  supplemented  by  the  earliest  of 
the  New  Testament,  no  similarly  compro 
henaive  but  useful,  ambitious  but  deliber- 
ately designed  and  successfully  executed 
enterprise  has  been  attempted.  And  aa 
Matthew  Henry  has  well  said,  since  Christ 
came,  the  Jews  have  lost  all  their  genea- 
logies, even  the  most  sacred  of  them,  '*  the 
building  is  reared,  the  scaffold  is  removed ; 
the  Soi'd  is  come,  the  line  that  led  to  him  is 
broken  off." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

On  the  whole  hook — Chrovichs,  It  has  pleased  God  that  a  large  part  of  Old  Testa- 
ment Scripture  should  take  the  form  of  history.  The  sacred  books  of  the  Hebrews 
consist  largely  of  a  record  of  the  national  life.  Here  we  read  of  the  birth  and  growth 
of  the  chosen  people,  their  prosperity,  their  conquests,  their  defeats  and  captivities,  their 
lawgivers,  priests,  prophets,  kings,  and  patriots.  This  Book  of  Chronicles  contains  the 
genealogies  of  Hebrew  tribes  and  families,  and  the  annals  of  the  nation  during  the  long 
and  glorious  reign  of  David.  There  must  be  reasons  why  the  volume  which  contains 
the  revelation  of  the  Divine  character  and  will  should,  in  so  many  parts,  assume  the 
historical  form. 

I.  There  is  a  oekebal  beligious  purpose  answered  by  history.  Man  is  social, 
and  is  appointed  by  Providence  to  live  in  families,  tribes,  and  nations.  Religion  not 
only  summons  the  individual  to  live  a  life  of  allegiance  and  submission  to  the  unseen 
power  of  righteousness  and  grace,  but  requires  men  in  tlieir  political  relations  to 
abide  beneath  the  guiding  eye  of  the  Eternal.  1.  Historical  records  promote  national 
life,  2.  They  encourage  a  sense  of  national  unity  and  responsibility.  "  Not  only," 
Bays  a  great  writer,  *'  does  the  nobleness  of  a  nation  depend  on  the  presence  of  this 
national  consciousness,  but  also  the  nobleness  of  each  individual  citizen."  The  same 
writer  adduces  the  Jews  as  an  illustration  of  this  principle.  3.  They  furnish  us  with 
practical  political  lessons.  Bossuet  has  admimbly  shown  of  what  service  history  must 
needs  be  to  princes  and  rulers.  4.  They  represent  good  and  evil  principles  in  living 
instances.  5.  To  the  devout  mind  they  are  full  of  indications  of  the  presence  and  the 
energy  of  God,  the  moral  Ruler  and  Lord  of  all. 

II.  There  is  a  special  religious  lse  in  Jewish  history.  1.  It  is  the  history  of  a 
very  remarkable  and  favoured — wo  should  say  chosen — people.  2.  Jt  records  direct 
interpositions  of  the  hand  of  God.  In  the  obligation  to  obedience  and  service,  in  the 
chastisement  of  lawlessness  and  rebellion,  the  Christian  can  trace  a  Divine  power, 
whatever  race  or  nation  he  reviews  in  the  pages  of  history  or  contemplates  with  an 
observant  eye.  The  peculiarity  of  the  Israelitish  chronicles  lies  here — the  Divine  power 
is  acknowledged  from  page  to  page.  3.  The  history  of  the  Jews  is  an  epitome  of  the 
history  of  mankind.  Within  that  little  territory  of  Palestine  there  lived  a  microcosm 
of  humanity.  The  parallel  is  ever  presenting  itself  to  our  vision.  4.  The  record  of 
Israel  is  the  story  of  the  preparation  for  the  advent  of  Christianity.  The  Old  Testa- 
ment points  on  to  the  New.  This  Book  of  Chronicles,  in  its  biography  of  David,  leads 
the  mind  on  to  him  who  was  David's  Son  and  David's  Lord. 

Application.    1.  This  book  should  be  read  with  interest  as  presenting  an  especially 


CH.L1— 64.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  7 

Leyitical  view  of  Hebrew  history.  2.  The  reader  should  be  on  the  watch  for  glearoi 
of  light  amidst  the  sombre  catalogues  of  Israelitish  names.  (3)  Sympathy  should  be 
elicited  by  the  presentation  of  the  Divine  side  of  both  biography  and  history.— T. 

On  the  first  nine  chapters — Genealogies,  Most  readers  of  the  Scriptures  shrink  from 
perusing  the  lengthy  genealogical  tables  which  constitute  so  large  a  part  of  the  Books 
of  Numbers  and  of  Chronicles.  It  is  difficult  to  feel  any  interest  in  persons  of  whom 
we  know  nothing  but  the  name.  The  lists  of  Hebrew  names  constitute  dry  and  un- 
attractive reading.  Yet,  as  every  man  amongst  ourselves  who  has  a  distinguished 
pedigree  takes  pleasure  in  tracing  his  own  descent  by  means  of  "the  family  tree" 
which  he  has  in  his  possession,  so  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  Jews  regarded 
their  recorded  genealogies  with  pleasure  and  pride.  There  are,  however,  reasons  why 
we  also  should  contemplate  these  family  records  with  interest. 

I.  There  are  general  reasons  why  genealogies  should  be  recorded  and  preserved. 
1.  Family  life  is  ordained  by  God.  Revelation  teaches  us  that  the  family  is  a  Divine 
institution,  and  society  can  only  prosper  and  retain  stability  when  fixed  upon  this 
basis.  2.  Family  feeling  is  consequently  natural  and  Divine.  The  relationships  of 
the  household  are  bound  up  with  deep,  tender,  and  beneficial  sentiments.  3.  Family 
recollections  and  records  are  of  human  interest  and  moral  advantage.  When  the 
father  tells  the  story  of  his  boyhood  to  his  son,  the  grandfather  to  his  grandson,  there 
is  a  natural  interest  felt,  and  a  wholesome  feeling  of  family  life  and  community 
developed.  4.  In  many  instances  family  history  is  an  important  part  of  national 
history.  The  story  of  the  reigning  family  in  a  monarchical  country,  and  of  families 
distinguished  for  hereditary  ability  and  patriotism  in  all  countries,  can  scarcely  be 
omitted  from  the  chronicles  of  a  nation.  6.  The  federal  family  feeling  is  contributive 
to  the  religious  life.  "  One  generation  shall  praise  thy  works  to  another,  and  shall 
declare  thy  mighty  acts.** 

II.  There  are  special  reasons  why  the  genealogies  of  the  Jews  should  be  preserved. 
The  fact  that  they  have  been  thought  worthy  of  so  prominent  a  place  in  the  canonical 
Scriptures  is  indicative  of  their  importance  to  the  national  and  religious  life  of  the 
Hebrew  people.  1.  In  some  instances  these  genealogies  evince  the  faithfulness  of  God 
in  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy.  This  is  especially  the  case  with  regard  to  the  character 
and  functions  of  the  several  tribes  of  Israel.  2.  In  some  instances  these  tables  indicate 
the  functions  of  families  in  the  nation  and  in  the  service  of  the  sanctuary.  Thus  the 
tribe  of  Judah  is  pointed  out  as  the  monarchical,  the  tribe  of  Levi  as  the  ministerial 
tribe,  and  the  family  of  Aaron  as  the  priestly  family,  3.  One  especial  purpose  of 
Hebrew  genealogy  was  to  provide  that  the  descent  of  the  Messiah  should  be  duly 
traced,  and  that  the  predictions  of  Scripture  should  be  thus  obviously  fulfilled.  The 
genealogies  of  the  Evangelists  should  be  read  in  connection  with  those  of  the  books  of 
the  Old  Testament.  The  Son  of  David,  the  descendant  of  Abraham,  is  thus  shown  to 
be  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Saviour  of  mankind. — T. 

Ver.  10. — A  mighty  one.  In  the  early  history  of  the  world  and  in  the  early 
history  of  most  nations  there  arise,  out  of  the  dimness,  great  gigantic  figures.  We 
know  little  of  such ;  but  they  impress  the  imagination,  and  their  names  suggest  great 
qualities  and  memorable  deeds.  Such  a  figure  is  Nimrod,  of  whom  we  read  that  "  he 
began  to  be  mighty  upon  the  earth." 

I.  Observe  an  instance  of  the  natural  inequality  op  man  with  man.  Many  are 
forgotten  ;  one  is  remembered ;  and  he  who  is  remembered  is,  in  some  respects,  su- 
perior to  his  fellows.  This  inequality  is  divinely  ordered,  and,  on  the  whole,  must  be 
admitted  to  contribute  to  the  welfare  of  society.  The  respects  in  which  men  are 
great  and  distinguished  are  very  various.  Some  are  admired  for  their  bodily  powers, 
their  daring ;  others  for  their  wisdom  ;  others,  again,  for  their  sanctity. 

II.  Observe  men's  natural  tendency  to  do  homage  to  greatness.  This  often 
takes  the  form  of  "hero-worship,"  to  use  the  expression  of  one  of  our  most  influential 
thinkers  and  writers.  The  disposition  to  hero-worship  is  neither  an  unmixed  good  nor 
an  unmixed  evil. 

IIL  Consider  the  cjonsequent  responsibility  of  poweb  and  greatness.  When 
Used  for  an  evil  end,  power  is  indeed  a  corse.    l*he  selfish,  the  ambitious,  the  cruel. 


8  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  TOE  CHRONICLES.        [cii.  l  1— 54. 


arc  a  scourge  to  humanity.  On  the  other  hand,  a  wide  range  of  influence  is  the  means 
of  the  usefulness  of  those  who  are  alike  good  and  great.  The  more  the  talents,  the 
more  serious  the  reckoning  at  last  with  the  Lord  and  Judge.  History  largely  con- 
sists of  the  records  of  the  achievements  of  the  mighty.  What  an  account  must  some 
such  have  to  render  at  the  last ! 

Application.  1.  See  that  the  greatness  you  admire  be  true  greatness,  moral 
grandeur,  spiritual  dignity.  2.  Whether  your  endowments  be  lavish  or  slender,  seek 
to  use  aright  what  a  wise  Providence  has  entrusted  to  your  care. — T. 

On  the  genealogical  iahles  of  the  first  six  chapters  of  the  First  Booh  of  Chronicles. 
It  is  worth  while  to  read  these  long  lists  of  names.  It  is  like  standing  on  a  river-bank 
and  watching  the  flow  of  time.  Solemn  thoughts  of  transiency  of  life,  of  fame,  of 
importance,  are  suggested  by  them.  Solemn  thoughts  of  responsibility  are  started  by 
them,  and  appeals  to  act  worthily  of  the  past  rise  from  them.  They  deepen  our  respect 
for  our  grand  old  world,  the  nurse  of  heroes  and  of  saints^ 

••  Where  half  the  soil  has  trod  the  rest 
In  poets,  heroes,  martyrs,  sages.** 

They  reconcile  us,  to  some  extent,  to  inevitable  evils  in  the  present,  showing  that  wars 
and  conflicts  have  been  the  order  of  the  day  from  the  beginning.  Obsei-ve  more 
particularly — 

I.  How  broadly  the  writer  of  this  book  lays  the  basis  of  human  brothebhood. 
He  is  intensely  devoted  to  the  Jewish  priesthood — almost  certainly  one  of  them.  Some, 
therefore,  would  expect  only  narrowness  from  him.  Priest,  presbyter,  or  pastor  are  all 
supposed  to  have  more  contracted  views  than  neighbours.  But  he  commences  his 
genealogies,  not  with  Moses,  nor  Jacob,  nor  Abraham,  but  with  Adam;  recognizing  at 
the  outset  that  mankind  is  of  one  blood,  one  essential  nature,  one  need,  one  capacity. 
This  is  one  of  the  grand  differences  between  the  Bible  religion  and  all  other  ancient 
religions.  It  recognized  a  common  brotherhood  of  mankind  beneath  the  common 
fatherhood  of  God.  Let  us  learn  this  lesson,  and  go  back  a  little  further  than  the 
Commonwealth  or  the  Conquest,  and  remember  the  English  race  is  not  made  of 
diflerent  clay  from  the  rest  of  mankind.  All  had  the  same  origin,  and  all,  therefore, 
are  capable  of  the  same  elevation. 

II.  Observe,  secondly,  it  becomes  us  to  recognize  our  indebtedness  to  the  past. 
No  Jew  could  read  these  records  without  feeling  it.  If  possessing  fertile  land,  they 
owed  it  to  others — to  the  Simeonites,  five  hundred,  who  occupied  Mount  Seir 
(ch.  iv.  39 — 43);  to  the  men  of  Reuben,  extirpating  Arab  tribes  and  dwelling  in 
their  place  for  centuries ;  to  Caleb,  for  possessing  Hebron ;  to  Machir  and  to  Jair,  and 
to  many  such.  If  enjoying  the  arts  of  life,  they  should  remember  how  much  of  these 
were  inherited.  They  would  recall  with  advantage  "  Joab,  the  father  of  the  valley  of 
craftsmen"  (ch.  iv,  14);  those  who  "wrought  fine  linen  of  the  house  of  Ashbea"  (ver. 
21) ;  and  "  the  potters  "  and  "  those  that  dwelt  among  plants  and  hedges  "  (ver.  23).  If 
they  rejoice  in  their  exquisite  poetry,  and  their  music  probably  matching  it  in  worth, 
they  should  remember  David  and  Heman  (ch.  vi.  33),  Asaph  (ver.  39),  and  Merari 
(ver.  44).  It  is  well  to  remember  the  debt  we  owe  to  the  past.  Science  did  not 
begin  in  the  nineteenth  century,  nor  good  laws,  nor  philanthropy,  nor  even  statesman- 
ship. We  stand  on  the  shoulders  of  the  past.  Some  are  too  confident  and  presumptuous, 
as  if  what  we  possess  had  been  achieved  and  not  inherited.  See  that  we  do  something 
for  posterity,  and  transmit  in  finer  volume  the  advantages  we  have  enjoyed. 

III.  Observe  the  long  blessing  that  follows  the  godly.  The  priestly  line  of 
Aaron  is  traced  through  a  thousand  years  of  eminence  down  to  the  time  of  the  Cap- 
tivity, and  then  it  is  still  strong.  The  royal  line  of  David  is  traced  down  to  the 
Captivity,  the  crown  resting  on  some  member  of  his  family  through  seventeen  genera- 
tions, and  traced  subsequently  in  the  eminence  of  Zerubbabel,  who  is  one  of  the  leaders  of 
the  return.  Blessing  of  long  lines  of  progeny,  inheriting  parents'  success,  are  seen  in 
many  other  cases,  e.g.  Caleb's.  A  grandson  of  the  prophet  Samuel  (Heman)  inherits  his 
poetic  fire.  Evil  extends  its  traces  and  its  curse  to  the  third  or  fourth  generation  of 
those  that  hate  God ;  good  carries  its  blessing  to  "  thousands  of  generations  **  of  those 


«H.Ll--54.]        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  9 


that  love  him.    Do  right  and  do  good,  and  none  can  limit  your  power  of  blessing  your 
fellow-men.    Yet  observe,  lastly— 

IV.  The  pbomisb  op  the  start  is  sometimes  bboken,  and  the  unpromisino 
BEGiNKiNO  TURNS  OUT  WELL.  Some  of  Aaron's  sons  (Nadab  and  Abihu)  have  an 
awful  fate ;  some  of  Judah*s  an  unhappy  character.  But  sometimes  a  family,  beginning 
badly,  improves ;  for  example,  here  is  Judah's,  who  in  the  course  of  a  few  generations 
had  in  it  Er,  Onan,  and  Achau  ("  the  troubler  of  Israel ") ;  yet  it  runs  itself  clear,  and 
gets  better,  purer,  and  stronger  as  it  goes  on.  Therefore  desimir  of  none,  nor  of 
yourself.  Heart  within  and  God  overhead,  whatever  you  have  been,  you  may  become 
a  blessing  to  great  multitudes. — G. 

Ver.  1,  etc. — The  mission  of  Scripture  genealogies.  Since  "all  Scripture  is  ,  ,  . 
profitable,"  etc.  (2  Tim.  iii.  16,  17),  we  may  inquire  what  is  the  purpose  of  the  many 
genealogical  records  that  are  preserved  for  us,  and  how  they  stand  related  to  the  higher 
spiritual  objects  of  the  Divine  revelation.  It  appears  that  genealogies  have  always 
possessed  a  peculiar  attraction  for  Orientals ;  and  still  nothing  so  quickly  seizes  their 
attention,  or  pleases  them  so  much,  as  a  summary  or  review  of  their  histories.  The 
genealogies  of  Scripture,  therefore,  help  to  give  naturalness  and  the  sense  of  genuine- 
ness to  it  as  entirely  an  Eastern  composition.  It  would  be  made  a  plea  against  the 
authenticity  if  such  genealogies  were  not  found  in  it.  Sufficient  reason  for  the  lists 
which  commence  the  Books  of  Chronicles  may  be  found  in  the  date  and  circumstances 
of  their  composition.  Whoever  was  the  editor,  we  are  sure  that  the  work  was  pre- 
pared after  the  return  from  captivity  and  subsequent  to  the  building  of  Zerubbabers 
temple.  The  condition  of  the  people  called  for  such  a  review  of  the  national  history 
as  would  impress  upon  them  their  connection  with  a  long  and  glorious  past,  and  would 
freshen  to  their  view  the  great  principles  on  which  the  national  prosperity  had  rested. 
**  The  people  had  not  yet  gathered  up  the  threads  of  the  old  national  life,  broken  by 
the  Captivity.  They  required  to  be  reminded,  in  the  first  place,  of  their  entire  history, 
of  the  whole  past  course  of  mundane  events,  and  of  the  position  which  they  them- 
selves held  among  the  nations  of  the  earth.  This  was  done,  curtly  and  drily,  but 
sufficiently,  by  means  of  genealogies."  Such  a  picture  of  the  past  revived  hope  and 
encouraged  high  aspirations  for  the  future.  Such  a  summary  became  a  virtual  in- 
troduction to  tne  Gospels,  and  these  genealogies  may  be  compared  with  those  found  in 
St.  Matthew  and  St.  Luke.  But  beyond  the  use  of  "genealogies"  to  Orientals 
generally,  and  to  the  returned  captives  of  that  age  in  particular,  we  inquire  what 
comprehensive  truths  for  the  race,  and  so  for  us,  they  may  be  designed  to  impress. 
And  we  may  fix  attention  on  three:  (1)  the  unity  of  God;  (2)  the  unity  of  the 
race ;  (3)  the  unity  of  the  Divine  dealings  with  the  race. 

I.  The  unitt  of  God.  This  was  the  first  and  essential  truth  committed  to  the  trust 
of  the  Abrahamic  race.  This  they  were  to  conserve  for  the  world  during  the  long 
ages  of  man's  "  free  experiment.''  It  was  opposed  by  the  dualism  of  Persia,  and  the 
more  common  polytheism,  which  associated  "gods"  with  particular  localities  and 
countries.  It  is  significant  that  after  the  Captivity  the  Israelites  never  relapsed  into 
idolatry ;  but  such  a  genealogy  as  this  helped  them  to  realize  fully  that  the  God  of 
their  restoration  was  the  "  one  God  "  of  their  fathers,  and  the  Qod  of  the  whole  earth, 
who  could  not  be  limited  in  thought  to  any  locality,  nation,  or  name.  Illustrate  and 
enforce  the  jealousy  of  the  Divine  unity,  and  the  position  of  this  truth,  as  the  very 
foundation  of  the  Christian  doctrine.  There  may  be  no  question  on  this  point ;  we, 
and  all  the  generations  that  have  ever  lived,  have  to  do  with  one  God,  the  same,  the 
only  Lord  God  Almighty.  If  we  are  at  peace  with  him,  then  we  have  none  else  to 
fear.    "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  " 

II.  The  unity  of  the  race.  All  mankind,  from  the  great  first  parent,  Adam, 
are  gathered  together  in  the  genealogy  as  one  race.  Thus  is  resisted  the  tendency  of 
some  nations  to  a  pride  of  superiority  over  others,  as  though  they  were  of  another 
origin  and  kind;  and  the  disposition  of  Israel  to  exclusiveness  as  a  people  specially 
favoured  by  God.  God  made  all  (Acts  xvii.  26) ;  God  cares  for  all  that  he  has  made. 
And  any  apparently  special  dealings  with  one  race  are  designed  for  the  good  of  the 
whole.  In  these  modern  times  attention  is  being  freshly  given  to  what  is  called  the 
^solidarity"  of  the  race,  and  that  fact  is  assumed  to  explain  much  that  seems 


10  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.        [oh.  l  1—64. 

mysterious.  But  this  is  precisely  the  impression  which  Scripture  designs  to  produce 
by  its  genealogies :  with  this  further  moral  aim,  that  thus  it  confirms  the  claims  of  the 
great  human  brotherhood. 

III.  The  unity  of  the  Divine  dealinqs  with  the  race.  This  is  the  chief  im- 
pression made  by  a  review  of  the  world's  past  history.  It  may  be  illustrated  in  relation 
to  (1)  the  orderings  of  Divine  providence ;  (2)  the  requirements  of  Divine  Law ;  (3) 
the  judgments  of  Divine  wrath ;  (4)  the  signs  of  a  Divine  plan ;  and  (5)  the  fulfil- 
ment of  Divine  promise.  We  may  firmly  stay  our  hearts  upon  the  world's  experience 
of  the  unity  of  God's  dealings.  He  is  the  Lord ;  he  changes  not :  '*  His  years  are 
throughout  all  generations."  This  conviction  concerning  God  is  the  basis  of  social 
order,  of  earthly  governments,  of  the  redemptive  scheme,  and  of  man's  ideal  of 
righteousness.  **  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?  "  These  genealogies 
also  stand  in  special  relation  to  the  promise  of  Messiah,  the  Saviour.  They  show  a 
Divine  purpose  being  wrought  through  all  the  ages,  and  reveal  it  accomplished  at  last  in 
the  Child  of  the  Virgin  Mary.  But  they  teach  that  the  dominion  of  this  Messiah  is 
wide  as  the  race,  and  long  as  the  ages.  It  is  to  be  universal  and  everlasting.  As  a 
practical  conclusion,  it  may  be  shown  that  the  depressing  influence  exerted  on  us  by 
the  brevity  of  human  life,  and  by  the  uprising  and  falling  of  dynasties  and  nations,  is 
corrected  by  this  revelation — ^in  the  genealogies— of  the  "  Faithful  One,"  **  whose  years 
are  throughout  all  generations;"  and  who  so  solemnly  declares,  "All  souls  are 
mine."— R.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  two  great  race-heads.  It  is  a  significant  thing  that  Scripture  so 
distinctly  affirms  a  double  beginning  for  the  human  race,  and  sets  before  us  two  great 
human  fathers.  It  is  usual  to  speak  of  our  "  father  Adam,"  but  it  would  be  at  least  as 
truthful  to  speak  of  our  "  father  Noah."  The  period  from  Adam  to  Noah  is  given  us 
very  briefly,  and  it  is  scarcely  more  than  a  record  of  names.  The  one  fact  that  comes 
out  so  prominently  is  that  the  first  descendants  of  Adam  lived  lives  that  were  so  pro- 
longed as  to  be  almost  inconceivable  to  us.  And  it  is  equally  evident  that  the  new 
race  born  of  Noah  was  a  race  of  short-livers,  their  allotted  time  on  earth  not  being 
greatly  in  excess  of  our  own.  Here  are  facts  so  important  as  to  be  a  fitting  subject  for 
consideration. 

I,  The  head  of  the  long-livers.  Adam  was  himself  a  long-lived  man.  We  know 
that  physical  death  was  not  the  judgment  on  his  sin,  though  the  embittering  of  death 
by  a  smiting  conscience,  and  by  the  suflerings  of  disease  engendered  by  sin,  un- 
doubtedly was.  How  long  men's  earthly  lives  might  have  been  if  they  had  preserved 
the  purity  of  Eden,  we  may  only  imagine,  but  some  hint  of  it  is  given  in  the  experiment 
God  made  of  permitting  even  the  banished  ones  to  live  for  a  thousand  years.  Can  we 
conceive  the  Divine  thought  in  permitting  for  a  time  these  prolonged  lives  1  1.  The 
earth  was  to  be  won  by  the  human  race ;  its  stores  were  to  be  discovered,  and  their 
uses  shown.  This  beginning  of  the  arts  of  civilized  life  would  make  more  rapid  progress 
if  one  man  could  carry  his  experience  over  several  generations,  getting  full  time  for  the 
outworking  of  his  thoughts  and  plans.  We  know  too  often  now  how  sadly  invention 
and  discovery  are  stopp^  by  the  early  death  of  the  workers.  2.  It  might  be  expected 
that  man  would  have  a  fuller  and  fairer  moral  trial  if  his  time  on  earth  were  thus 
prolonged,  and  it  might  reasonably  be  hoped  that  the  continuous  experience  of  GK)d'8 
goodness  would  lead  him  to  repentance  and  restored  relations  with  God.  This  expecta- 
tion, however,  was  not  fulfilled,  but  man's  self-will  look  advantage  of  the  security  of 
life,  and  grew  into  an  awful  majesty  and  pride  of  power,  that  necessitated  the  Divine 
interference  in  an  overwhelming  judgment.  And  it  became  declared  for  all  the  ages 
that  too  prolonged  life  is  not  the  best  thing  for  sinful  and  self-willed  human  creatures. 
It  is  a  trust  too  great.  It  is  better  for  man's  highest  welfare  that  upon  him  should 
constantly  rest  the  sense  of  the  brevity  of  life.  He  only  perverted  to  his  uttermost 
ruin  the  longer  trust.  So  Adam  is  the  father  of  a  race  that  is  passed  and  done  with* 
We  are  not  his  children  in  the  sense  of  being  placed  under  the  same  time-conditions. 

II.  The  head  of  the  bhobt-livers.  This  is  the  first  and  chief  distinction  between 
the  races  before  and  after  the  Flood.  Noah  had  a  cleansed  earth  to  possess,  but  he 
carried  over  into  it  some  relics  of  the  older  evil  in  his  family,  and  so  commenced  the 
new  trial  under  disability.    Before,  the  race  had  kept  in  one  stream ;  under  the  new 


CH.I.1— 64.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  11 

condition  it  divided  into  three  great  strearas,  represented  by  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth, 
and  it  is  found  by  scholars  now  that  this  is  still  the  substantial  division  of  the  human 
race.  But  everywhere  wo  find  the  condition  of  the  shortened  life.  '*  Brief  life  is  here 
our  portion."  And  this  is  made  one  of  the  most  important  influences  in  the  moral 
training  of  mankind.  Show  how  it  fills  each  day  with  importance;  prevents  any  man 
reaching  eitieme  degrees  of  crime;  solemnizes  with  the  shadow  of  coming  judgment, 
etc.  Now,  he  on\y  "  liveth  long  who  liveth  well ; "  and  we  need  to  pray  with  Moses, 
"  So  teach  us  to  number  our  days,  that  we  may  apply  our  hearts  unto  wisdom." 
Impress  the  duty  of  seekincr  at  once  salvation ,  and  at  once  to  he  found  faithful^  in 
view  of  the  brevity  of  our  life.  Compare  Jacob's  confession,  ''Few  and  evil  have  the 
days  of  the  years  of  my  life  been,"  etc. — R.  T. 

Ver.  10. — Nimrody  the  first  conqueror.  Previous  to  this  verse  we  find  recorded 
only  names.  Nimrod  is  recalled  to  mind  by  a  brief  but  suggestive  description.  '*  He 
began  to  be  mighty  upon  tho  earth."  It  is  further  narrated  in  Genesis  (x.  9)  that 
"he  was  a  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord:  wherefore  it  is  said.  Even  as  Nimrod  the 
mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord."  From  this  it  appears  that  proverbs  and  legends 
grew  up  round  his  name.  "  The  Eastern  traditions  make  him  a  man  of  violent,  lawless 
habits,  a  rebel  against  Qod,  and  a  usurper  of  boundless  authority  over  his  fellow-men." 
It  may  suffice,  however,  to  recognize  in  him  the  first  person  to  develop  war  as  an 
agency  for  subjecting  some  portions  of  the  human  family  to  the  dominion  of  others. 
He  is  the  first  warrior,  the  progenitor  of  the  Alexanders  and  Napoleons,  the  great 
world-conquerors.  Many  men  live  to  serve  their  generation,  and  then  they  die  and 
pass  away  out  of  thought,  and  their  very  names  are  forgotten.  But  they  leave  their 
work  and  the  influence  of  their  characters  behind  them :  these  can  never  die.  This 
must  be  the  lot  of  the  great  majority  of  mankind;  and  yet  even  thus  every  man  may 
gain  a  gracious  immortality.  "  He  may  still  be  remembered  by  what  he  has  done*' 
Other  men  leave  their  names  behind  affixed  to  some  principle  or  truth,  and  then,  though 
the  name  is  to  us  no  more  than  a  name,  it  serves  to  recall  the  principle.  And  this 
we  have  in  tho  case  of  Nimrod.  His  name  brings  up  to  our  minds  the  ruin  and  the 
sin  of  man*s  masterfulness  over  his  fellow-men.  The  ruin  and  the  sin  are  set  forth  in 
yery  impressive  forms  in  the  cases  of  such  conquerors  as  Nimrod ;  but  the  mischief 
is  wrought  still,  and  has  been  wrought  through  all  the  ages,  in  the  smaller  spheres  of 
the  family,  society,  the  nation,  and  the  Church.  There  are  still  Nimrods,  who  are 
bent  on  self-aggrandizement,  and  think  little  of  the  claims  or  the  sufferings  of 
others,  as  they  tread  on  to  place  and  wealth  and  power.  The  essence  of  their 
masterfulness  is  that  they  win  and  hold  for  se//",  not  for  God,  To  win  and  hold  for 
God  always  tones  our  relations  with  others,  and  makes  them  tender,  considerato,  and 
gracious. 

I.  Mam's  masterfulness  imferils  the  liberties  of  his  fellow-mak.  Nimrod 
was  a  hunter.  We  only  hunt  to  bring  under  subjection  to  us.  Nimrod  was  a  hunter 
of  men,  that  he  might  subject  them  as  slaves  to  his  authority.  Illustrate  in  cases  of 
other  world-conquerors,  and  show  how  absorbing  becomes  the  lust  of  power.  All  the 
nations  of  the  earth  have  had  to  win  the  measures  of  liberty  they  enjoyed,  by  struggle  and 
tears  and  blood,  from  those  who  held  them  in  subjection.  Eastern  kings  were  always 
independent  and  tyrannical;  and  still,  in  the  smaller  spheres  of  associate  life,  the 
masterful  men  are  always  inconsiderate  of  others,  and  delight  to  make  others  subject 
to  them.  This  masterfulness  is  sometimes  the  natural  disposition ;  then  it  must  be 
repressed  and  overcome,  in  the  grace  and  help  of  God.  At  other  times  it  is  unduly 
fostered  by  the  circumstances  in  which  men  are  placed,  and  the  deference  that  is  paid  to 
them ;  then  we  need  to  "  watch  and  pray  lest  we  enter  into  temptation."  The  "  golden 
rule  "  cuts  it  down  at  the  very  root.  He  will  never  show  himself  to  be  masterful  who 
strives  "  to  do  unto  others  as  he  would  have  others  do  unto  him."  Godliness  and 
masterfulness  can  never  dwell  together  in  peace,  for  the  godly  man  obeys  the  Divine 
Law,  and  seeks  to  **  love  his  neighbour  as  himself." 

II.  Man's  masterfulness  imperils  the  honour  and  the  claims  of  his  God.  It 
lets  the  man  in  the  world's  eye  as  be/ore  Qod,  able  to  control  things,  needing  no  Divine 
aids,  sufficient  in  himself;  and  so  puts  God  out  of  men's  thoughts,  more  especially  it 
the  masterful  man  succeeds.    Compare  Nebuchadnezzar's  boastings  "  Is  not  this  great 


12  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.        [ch.  l  1— 5i 


Babylon,  that  I  have  built?**  For  multitudes  Nimrod  was  the  great  hero,  and 
men  worshipped  the  masterful  man.  Surely  it  is  a  fatal  thing  for  any  one  of  us  that, 
instead  of  standing  on  one  side  and  showing  God  to  our  fellows,  we  stand  hefore  him, 
and  only  let  men  see  ourselves.  Yet  this  is  still  the  temptation  and  the  peril  of  the 
masterful  man,  in  any  and  every  sphere  of  life. — R.  T. 

Ver.  19. — The  divided  earth.  Here  a  man's  name  is  employed  to  fix  an  important 
historical  fact.  The  word  Peleg  means  "  division,*'  but  it  is  uncertain  whether  allu- 
sion is  intended  to  the  dispersion  of  the  people  from  Babel,  or  a  later  separation  of  the 
Shemitic  race  to  which  tnis  Peleg  belonged.  "  The  two  races  which  sprang  from 
Eber  soon  separated  very  widely  from  each  other— the  one,  Eber  and  his  family, 
spreading  north-westward  towards  Mesopotamia  and  Syria ;  the  other,  the  Joktanides, 
southward  into  Arabia.*'  We  dwell  on  the  general  facts  of  the  division,  again  and 
again,  of  the  human  race,  and  endeavour  to  understand  how  by  this  the  Divine 
dealings  with  the  race  are  illustrated.  It  is  important  that  we  should  apprehend 
what  may  be  called  the  experimental  character  of  the  Divine  dealings  with  man. 
There  is  a  true  and  reverent  sense  in  which  we  may  speak  of  God  as  experimenting, 
]f  it  pleased  him,  in  his  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness,  to  make  men,  and  to  entrust 
them  with  a  measure  of  independence  and  free-will,  then  Go<i  designed  to  leave  it  to 
be  seen  how  men  would  act  under  these  conditions ;  and  ho  must  have  intended  to 
leave  his  relations  with  them  open  to  modification,  so  that  he  might  meet  their 
varying  requirements.  God  is  said  to  "repent"  when  he  thus  graciously  adapts  his 
dealings  to  new  circumstances  which  man,  in  his  self-will,  may  have  created.  Such  a 
view  of  God's  dealings  is  quite  consistent  with  his  foreknowledge,  Man,  in  his  most 
wilful  ways,  can  never  "  take  God  at  unawares,"  for  he  "  seeth  the  end  from  the  begin- 
ning.** But  he  may  see  and  know  all  without  active  interference  until  his  own  good 
time. 

I.  Man  is  alone — a  single  paib.  What,  may  we  say,  is  the  experiment  here  ? 
It  is  this :  given  every  surrounding  condition  helpful ;  no  others  to  confuse  the  mind 
or  the  choice  ;  sufficient  knowledge  of  what  their  God  will  have  them  do  and  not  do; 
— will  man  use  his  independence  aright V  Will  he  set  his  will  on  God?  Alas!  he 
failed,  "  serving  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator.*'  Man's  moral  trial  could  never 
be  set  under  greater  advantages ;  and  it  becomes  evident,  in  the  very  first  instance, 
that  free-willed  man*s  only  hope  rests  on  his  receiving  into  his  will  the  grace  and 
the  strength  of  the  Spirit  of  his  God.  And  this  lesson  is  further  pressed  home  by 
every  experiment,  whether  it  be  made  by  the  race,  any  portion  of  the  race,  or  the 
individual*  The  issue  is  to  convince  us  that  it  is  *'  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct 
his  steps."  He  must  learn  to  say,  '*  Hold  thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe."  The  next 
form  of  the  experiment  is — 

IL  Man  is  in  one  great  society.  Virtually  dwelling  together,  in  large  and  ever- 
increasing  masses.  What  comes  of  this  experiment?  Utter  lawlessness,  such  wild 
riotings,  such  debasing  vice,  that  mankind  is  utterly  and  hopelessly  corrupt,  and  God 
can  but  cleanse  the  earth  of  their  presence  and  their  defilement.  Man  is  no  stronger 
for  moral  right  when  he  is  found  in  masses  than  when  he  is  found  alone.  Nay^ 
aggregation  only  gives  man's  will  more  terrible  possibilities  of  evil — power  to  develop 
crimes  that  debase  to  the  uttermost.  The  third  experiment  is  the  one  which  God  has 
been  pleased  to  continue  through  the  long  ages — 

III.  Man  is  in  a  number  of  bocietieb,  variously  located  and  variously 
belated.  God  never  lets  these  grow  too  large ;  famine,  pestilence,  war,  and  emigration 
are  always  putting  limits  on  excessive  populations,  bo  humanity  repeats  its  moral 
trial  under  all  possible  natural  conditions,  in  plains,  on  mountain  sides,  at  sea-boards, 
etc.,  ever  proving  again  and  again  its  absolute  need  of  the  Divine  strengthening  of  the 
will  for  the  attaining  of  all  moral  good.  Impress  these  points.  1.  God  presides  over 
the  moral  culture  of  not  too  large  communities.  2.  God  works  by  the  special  genius 
with  which  he  is  pleased  to  endow  particular  nations.  Illustrate  by  Rome,  Greece, 
Judasa,  etc.  3.  God  works  by  the  mutual  relations  of  the  divided  nations.  Show  how 
these  are  maintained  in  the  interests  of  commerce.  4.  God  works  to  secure  the  per* 
manent  moral  unity  of  the  race  in  its  dependence  on  him,  and  to  this  end  he  has 
graciously  introduced  hi»  redemptive  agency, — 11,  T, 


CH.I.1— 64.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHROXICLES.  13 


Vcr.  27. — Ahraharn's  double  name.  F.  W.  Robertson  has  some  suggestive  remarks 
on  the  signiGcance  of  ancient  names  in  his  sermon  on  '  JacoVs  Wrestling '  (vol.  i.  pp. 
41,  42).  He  recognizes  in  the  Hebrew  history  three  periods  in  which  names  and 
words  bore  very  different  characters.  We  deal  with  the  first  of  these  periods^  when 
**  names  meant  truths,  and  words  were  the  symbols  of  realities.  The  characteristics 
of  the  names  given  then  were  simplicity  and  sincerity.  They  were  drawn  from  a  few 
simple  sources :  either  from  some  characteristic  of  the  individual,  as  Jacob,  the  '  sup- 
planter  ; '  or  from  the  idea  of  family,  as  Benjamin, '  son  of  my  right  hand ; '  or  from  the 
conception  of  the  tribe  or  nation,  then  gradually  consolidating  itself;  or,  lastly,  from  the 
religious  idea  of  Ood."  Scripture  attaches  significance  to  names,  and  the  precise  name 
indicates  the  minuteness  of  the  Divine  knowledge  and  the  tenderness  of  the  Divine  care : 
'*  I  have  called  thee  by  name,"  "  I  will  give  him  a  new  name,"  etc  So  a  change  of  a 
man's  name  may  seal  to  him  the  fact  of  new,  more  important,  and  more  tender  Divine 
relations.  Explain  the  precise  force  of  the  two  names,  Ab-ram  and  Ab-ra-Juim,  and  give 
details  of  the  occasion  chosen  for  changing  the  names  (Qen,  xvii.).  Then  illustrate 
and  enforce  these  three  points — 

L  The  Drvnns  interest  in  a  man's  life.  This  is  so  minutely  detailed  in  such 
lives  as  these  of  Abraham  and  Jacob,  that  we  may  each  gain  the  impression  of  its 
being  the  fact  concerning  ourselves.    We  are  under  the  eye  and  in  the  ?iand. 

II.  The  DrviNB  recognition  of  a  man's  virtue.  Illustrate  by  the  reason  given 
for  God's  telling  Abraham  of  his  proposed  judgment  on  Sodom ;  by  David's  appeal, 
*'  Judge  me  according  to  my  integrity ; "  and  Christ's  aildress  to  the  Church  at  Epnesus, 
^  I  know  thy  works  "  (Rev.  ii.  2). 

IIL  The  Divine  communication  of  Divine  approbation.  We  indeed  may  not 
look  to  get  a  change  of  name,  and  yet  we,  too,  may  be  quite  sure  that  our  progress  in 
the  Divine  life  has  all  its  stages  noticed  and  marked  by  God,  and,  it  may  be,  sealed 
with  a  now  "  unknown  name."  We  want  to  see  the  stages  of  our  spiritual  growth  ;  it  is 
enough  that  we  learn  from  Abraham's  double  name  how  God  watches  them,  and  surely 
marks  them  down  ready  for  the  by-and-by. — R,  T. 

Ven  43. — The  relations  of  Udom  and  Israel.  The  historical  and  geographical 
relations  of  the  two  nations  may  be  given.  Those  of  Israel  are  familiar,  those  of  Edom 
may  be  thus  indicated  :  Mount  Seir,  where  Esau  settled,  was  a  rugged  tract,  east  of 
the  great  valley  of  the  Arabah.  It  consisted  of  limestone  hills,  with  red  and  variegated 
sandstone  cliffs  and  ridges,  marked  by  that  peculiar  ruddy  tinge  of  colour  so  consonant 
with  the  name  of  Edom  (red).  Kings  reigned  in  Edom  long  before  any  descendant  of 
Jacob  occupied  a  throne.  Eight  Edomitish  monarchs  are  enumerated  in  the  early 
records.  The  refusal  of  Edom  to  allow  Israel  to  march  through  the  country  on  the 
route  to  Canaan  both  expressed  and  intensified  the  family  enmity  which  came  as  the 
fruitage  of  Jacob's  deception.  No  friendly  intercourse  could  be  expected  between  the 
nations.  The  relations  between  the  two  peonies,  descended  from  one  parent,  may  be 
used  to  illustrate  the  way  in  which  family  and  social  wrong-doing  will  work  out  into 
practical  evil  in  the  succeeding  generations.  And,  so  treating  the  history  of  these  two 
peoples,  we  may  learn  the  valuable  and  impressive  lesson  that  the  sinner  may  be  for- 
given and  personally  accepted  with  God,  but  the  natural  and  necessary  fruitage  of  his 
wrong-doing  cannot  be  stopped,  and  cannot  always  even  be  checked.  Vindicate  the 
Divine  goodness  and  righteousness  in  thus  permanently  attaching  penalties  of  suffering 
to  sin,  and  letting  these  come  upon  others  beside  the  wrong-doer.  From  the  history 
the  following  topics  may  be  fully  detailed : — 

I.  The  original  wbonq.  It  was  a  double  wrong.  Esau  was  meanly  defrauded  of 
his  birthright  by  his  brother  taking  unfair  advantage  of  his  fatigue  and  hunger.  And 
he  was,  by  a  wicked  scheme,  dodged  out  cf  his  paternal  blessing.  Because  be  was  so 
manifestly  the  wronged  party,  we  may  fail  to  appraise  aright  Esau's  personal  character ; 
but  we  cannot  wonder  that  he  went  forth  to  life  with  the  sense  of  the  grievous  wrong 
done  to  him  rankling  in  his  mind.  It  was  a  grievous  and  shameful  wrong,  which 
nothing  can  extenuate  or  excuse ;  an  utterly  selfish  and  unbrotherly  act.  Such  an  act 
ss  bears  its  natural  penalty  in  hatred,  and  all  the  mischief  that  hatred  can  contrive  to  do. 

n.  The  Divine  forgiveness.  Give  the  scene  at  Mananaim,  and  show  how  it  bore 
relation  to  the  sin  as  against  Qod,     Scripture  urges  that  sin  seemingly  committed 


14  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.        [ch.  l  1—54. 

against  our  brother  is  really  committed  against  God.  "  Thou  hast  not  lied  unto  men, 
but  unto  God."    So  Divine  forgiveness  has  ever  to  be  sought  yir«^. 

III.  The  brotherly  reconciliation.  This  seems  to  have  been  complete  and  satis- 
factory, yet  it  was  too  much  a  matter  of  impulse,  Jacob  was  afraid  to  presume  on  it. 
And  too  often  such  reconciliations  only  prove  temporary,  and  the  old  enmities  come 
back  again ;  and  the  "  last  state  is  worse  than  the  first.'' 

lY.  The  national  enmities  and  envies.  These  had  been  started  before  the 
reconciliation  of  the  brothers,  and  they  could  not  be  stop{)ed.  They  grew  in  strength 
as  the  years  rolled  by.  They  formed  a  predisposition  to  judge  each  other  unworthily, 
and  see  each  other  on  the  bad  side  only.  And  as  time  wore  on  the  evil  broke  out  into 
open  war,  and  brother  races  shed  each  other's  blood  (see  1  Sam.  ziv.  47 ;  2  Sam.  viii* 
14;  1  Kings  zi.  15,  16;  ch.  xviii.  19,  20,  etc.).  In  some  of  these  wars  and  sieges 
such  cruelties  were  practised  as  can  only  be  explained  by  the  intensity  of  the  national 
feud  and  hatred.  So  the  early  wrong  worked  out  into  misery  for  both  parties.  '*  He 
that  soweth  to  the  flesh  ever  reaps  corruption."  Earnestly  warn  against  wrong-doing 
in  family  and  in  social  relationships ;  they  are  often  the  secret  cause  of  long  feud,  war, 
and  woe.  We  need  to  '*  think,  not  on  our  own  things,  but  on  the  things  of  others ; " 
we  should  be  found  jealous  of  our  brother's  rights.  In  the  way  of  righteousness  and 
brotherliness  and  charity  ever  flow  life  and  ])eace  and  fellowship,  all  human  blessed- 
ness, and  the  all-hallowing  Divine  favour. — R.  T. 

Chapters  i.  and  ii. — Genealogies.  In  the  meaning  of  genealogical  names  as 
translated  from  the  original,  volumes  of  spiritual  truth  lie  hid.  In  the  present  day 
names  are  arbitrarily  given,  generally  because  they  belong  to  some  member  of  the 
family ;  indeed,  in  most  cases,  for  no  other  reason.  With  the  Jews  it  was  different. 
It  was  because  of  some  feature  in  the  parent's  character  or  some  of  his  family,  or 
because  of  some  future  relation  to  prophecy,  or  because  of  some  calling  to  which  the 
child  was  to  be  trained.  Jacob,  Samuel,  Solomon,  and  many  others  are  instances  of 
this  fact;  hence  from  these  names  much  information  may  be  gathered  as  to  their 
spiritual  and  natural  life.  The  inner  history  of  families  is  recorded,  revealing  the 
spiritual  and  natural  life  of  each  which  ordinary  history  could  but  imperfectly  bring  to 
light.  The  profession  or  calling  of  the  individual  or  the  family,  or  the  Lord's  special 
dealings  with  it,  or  some  event  in  life  with  all  its  results,— these  are  the  origin  of  most 
of  these  names,  and  bring  to  light  a  hidden  history.  A  great  writer  has  said  that 
Shakespeare  opens  out  to  us  much  of  the  inner  history  and  character  of  the  day 
in  which  he  lived — the  manners  and  customs,  the  thoughts,  habits,  and  feelings 
—which  ordinary  history  never  could  write.  This  illustrates  the  great  importance 
to  the  Christian  student  of  studying  these  genealogies  of  the  Old  Testament,  so 
generally,  if  not  altogether,  overlooked.  And  what  is  the  spiritual  lesson  we  may 
learn  from  this  portion  of  our  subject?  That  just  as  these  names  are  the  embodi«- 
ment  of  spiritual  truths  and  principles  of  life,  and  replete  with  eventful  realities* 
60  should  it  be  in  each  of  our  lives.  Nothing  should  be  meaningless.  Spiritual  truth 
should  permeate  the  smallest  and  meanest  duties.  There  is  a  history  in  even  the 
smallest  action.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  trifle.  Let  us  stamp  everything  with 
that  which  will  survive  us ;  with  that  which  will  speak,  to  generations  yet  unborn,  of 
truth  and  righteousness  and  God  ;  so  that  as  they  read  our  history  they  may  gather 
from  it  what  we  gather  from  these  names — great  principles,  which  may  animatn  and 
encourage  them,  and  thus  "  make  our  lives  sublime,"  thus  live  so  as  to  be  missed,  that 
it  may  be  said  of  us,  '*  He  being  dead  yet  speaketh."  But  what  was  it  made  **  the 
fathers"  put  Divine  meanings  into  their  names?  It  was  that  God  was  to  them  a 
reality;  that  everything  connected  with  him  had  for  them  a  deep  and  solemn 
meaning.  This  so  impressed  the  mind  and  heart  that  it  found  its  expression  in  their 
names  and  in  the  smallest  events  of  their  every-day  life.  Thus  must  God  be  to  us 
if  there  is  to  be  the  impress  of  Divine  and  imperishable  memorials  in  our  history.  Not 
only  the  language  of  a  nation,  but  its  spiritual  life,  is  written  in  its  names  and  words. 
Read  in  this  light,  what  meaning  is  thrown  into  these  dry  genealogical  trees  of  the  Old 
Testament  1    How  replete  with  spiritual  instruction  to  the  Bible  student  1 — W. 

Chapters  L  and  ii.— 7%e  genealogies  in  relation  to  Christ,     It  will  be  seen  thai 


CH^Ll— 64.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  16 

many  of  the  names  in  these  genealogies  have  *'  El "  or  *'  Jah  "  as  a  prefix  or  terminal 
tion — the  former  God  as  Creator,  the  latter  God  in  covenant  or  as  Redeemer.    Thus 
each  individual  hearing  this  Divine  name  is  seen  in  direct  personal  relation  to  God  in 
these  aspects  of  his  character.    But  the  most  important  consideration  in  these  genea- 
logies is  that  they  contain  that  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    We  can  trace  the  thread 
tlm>ugh  all  the  names  till  we  reach  the  holy  family.    It  runs  like  a  vein  of  silver 
through  generations  and  families,  many  of  whom,  despite  the  holy  meaning  of  their 
names,  hring  up  a  history  of  shame  and  sorrow.    This  douhtless  is  the  reason  why  they 
are  so  faithfully  recorded.    They  are  all  here  to  continue  the  genealogy  of  Ciirist — to 
lead  up  eventually  to  him.    He  is  the  fruit  of  every  genealogical  tree.    We  see  the 
seed,  tne  hlade,  the  hlossom,  the  flower,  and  at  last  we  have  the  fruit—Jehovah  Jesus, 
God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  as  he  appeared  among  men.    All  that  is  repulsive  or  flagrant 
in  the  genealogical  tree  only  serves  to  hring  into  more  striking  contrast  the  fruit  that 
grows  out  of  it.   The  summer  fruit  has  sprung  out  of  the  corrupt  ground,  and  has  had 
to  contend  on  every  side  with  elements  at  war  with  its  very  existence.    Sometimes 
these  genealogies,  in  the  very  order  of  their  record  in  the  sacred  volume,  contain  within 
themselves  a  prophecy  pointing  to  him.    An  instance  of  this  in  illustration  may  be 
found  in  Gren.  v.,  the  leading  names  in  which,  when  translated  in  the  order  there 
recorded,  contain  the  beautiful  prophecy, ''  The  blessed  God  shall  come  down  teaching, 
and  his  light  shall  give  life  and  consolation  to  men."    Sometimes  names  of  this  kind 
foreshadow  some  special  aspect  of  Christ's  work.     We  have  the  names  of  El-kanah, 
Abi-jah,  Mori-jah  or  Moriah.    This  last-named  is  the  mount  on  which  Isaac,  the  typt 
of  Christ,  was  offered,  and  on  this  mount  Solomon's  temple  was  built.   "  Mor  "  signifies 
**  bitterness,"  "  Jah  "  means  "  Jehovah."    Thus  the  temple  is  built  on  the  "  bitterness," 
or  sufferings,  of  Jehovah.    So  also  the  spiritual  temple  is  founded  upon  the  cross  of 
Christ.    The  genealogical  tree  of  Christ  runs  through  the  names  in  these  chapters. 
There  are  several  truths  forced  u|)on  our  notice  as  we  think  of  this.    First,  grace  is 
not  hereditary.    In  the  lineal  descent  of  the  Lord  Jesus  we  find  idolaters  and  slaves. 
We  see  it  every  day.     Manasseh  is  son  to  Hezekiah,  Josdah  is  the  son  of  Amon.    It 
is  still  true,  and  will  ever  be  so.   They  who  are  of  the  family  of  God  are  "  bom  not  of 
blood,  nor  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God."    Secondly,  as  Jesus  Christ 
came  through  all  sorts  of  people,  so  he  came  to  save  and  bless  all  sorts  of  people — saints 
and  sinners,  bond  and  free,  rich  and  poor.    He  took  the  humanity  of  each  without  sin, 
that  he  might  bless  them.  "  This  man  eateth  and  drioketh  with  publicans  and  sinners." 
Though  on  his  throne  of  glory,  these  he  still  calls  and  loves  to  gather  round  him. 
Lord  Macaulay  tells  us  of  a  celebrated  artist  who  made  a  beautiful  piece  of  statuary 
which  was  the  admiration  of  Europe.    But  he  had  a  poor  boy  who  was  his  apprentice. 
He  gathered  up  the  broken  fragments  that  fell  from  the  roaster's  hand,  and  with  these 
be  made  a  work  which  eclipsed  his  mastei^s,  so  that  the  latter  died  of  a  broken  heart. 
Jesus  Christ,  the  despised  and  rejected  carpenter's  Son,  has  stooped  down  to  our  fallen 
world  and  gathered  up  the  fragments  of  our  fallen  humanity,  and  is  forming  them 
into  a  kingdom  which  shall  eclipse  in  grandeur  and  glory  every  other. — W. 

Chapters  i.  and  ii. — The  genealogies  in  relatibn  to  the  Church  and  the  world.  Looking 
over  these  chapters,  we  find  prominent  mention  of  '*  families  "  and  "  sons."  These  are 
the  two  words  which,  constantly  used,  are  replete  with  meaning.  The  sons  form  the 
families.  How  important  to  family  life  out  of  which  all  that  is  great  and  good  has 
issued,  that  the  "  sons  "  who  bear  the  names  of  "  £1 "  and  "  Jah  "  should  be  nurtured 
and  trained  to  a  life  worthy  of  those  high  and  holy  names !  Where  this  is  not  the  case, 
thert  is  the  real  breach  of  the  third  commandment.  The  Name  of  the  Lord  Gk)d  has 
been  ''taken  in  vain."  Our  "families"  will  be  what  the  *'sons"  make  them,  and 
our  Churches  and  the  world  will  ever  be  what  the  '*  family  "  is.  Family  training  in  the 
fear  of  God  will  send  forth  messengers  that  will  be  the  brightness  of  the  Church  and 
the  blessing  of  the  world.  All  real  degeneracy  in  one  and  the  other  will  ever  be 
traceable  to  the  "  family,"  and  ultimately  to  the  "  sons."  Mothers,  think  of  this !  It  all, 
under  God,  is  in  your  hands.  And  as  we  saw  in  the  genealogy  of  the  Lord  Jesus  that 
he  passed  through  all  sorts  of  people,  so  we  see  it  here  in  his  people.  Here  we  find 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Israel,  all  honoured  names,  mingled  with  names  worthless  and 
Infamous.    It  is  for  the  same  reason,  to  show  that  grace  is  not  hereditary.    In  the  first 


16  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.        [en.  1. 1—54. 

two  verses  of  the  second  chapter  we  have  the  names  of  the  family  of  Israel.    The  sons 
of  Israel  are  mentioned  in  their  order  of  natural  birthright.    But  immediately  in  the 
same  chapter,  in  the  family  enumeration,  this  order  is  set  aside,  and  instead  of  be- 
ginning with  Reuben,  according  to  the  natural  order,  the  record  begins  with  Judah. 
Thus  grace  is  set  in  the  forefront,  and  nature  put    into  the    luickground.    The 
Bible  is  not  the  record  of  nature,  but  of  grace.     The  history  of  one  little  tribe, 
occupying  a  strip  of  land  not  larger  than  Wales,  fills  the  entire  pages  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, while  huge  empires  are  passed  over  in  silence.    This  is  in  accordance  with  the 
character  of  the  Book.    The  history  of  this  little  tribe  fills  its  pages  because  it  is  the 
history  of  the  kingdom  of  Grod.    Its  design  was  to  manifest  Christ.    Apart  from  him 
the  Word  does  not  acknowledge  history  in  any  sense.    Neither  a  nation  nor  an  indi- 
Tidual  has  any  history  before  God,  except  as  connected  with  him.    Hence  Assyria  and 
Babylon  are  comparatively  overlooked,  and  all  record  is  centred  in  Jerusalem.    Hence 
Sennacherib  is  barely  mentioned,  while  whole  chapters  are  filled  with  Abraham  and 
Hoses  and  Joseph.    Hence  Reuben  is  put  into  the  background  and  Judah  into  the 
forefront.    This  prominence  given  to  Judah  over  Reuben  was  because  the  right  and 
privileges  of  primogeniture  had  been  given  to  him,  and*  because  from  his  tribe  Christ 
was  to  spring.    Thus  in  the  very  foreground  of  this  book  Christ  is  placed.    Judah  is 
also  shown  to  have  pre-eminence  simply  because  of  Christ.    It  is  so  now.    Christ  must 
be  first ;  he  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega.    The  opening  chapter  of  every  history,  every 
event^  every  duty,  every  pleasure,  should  be  him.    If  he  be  not  in  the    forefront  of 
each  one  and  the  centre  round  which  everything  converges,  there  is  no  history  there 
worthy  of  the  name ;  there  is  no  record  there  before  God,  however  great  it  may  be 
before  men.    There  is  no  name  in  heaven  without  this,  though  it  may  be  emblazoned 
on  the  marble  tablets  of  the  world  for  ever.    But  only  Christ  is  true.    There  is  a  blot 
on  every  escutcheon  but  his.    Scarcely  is  Judah*8  pre-eminence  brought  before  us  ere 
we  see  the  dark  picture  of  sin  in  it.     £r  and  Achan  stand  out  pre-eminently  as 
blots  on  Judah's  fair  fame.    Tes,  on  the  very  lineage  of  the  Messiah  himself  there  is 
written,  as  with  a  sunbeam,  "  Cease  ye  from  man.*'    Lust  and  murder  are  the  dark 
lines  drawn  by  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  beautiful  picture.    Only  the  Spirit  of  Gtxl  can 
make  a  Christian.    And  tne  man  may  put  on  all  the  garments  of  a  Christian — the 
knowledge  of  truth,  the  doctrines  of  truth,  the  zeal  for  truth,  the  profession  of  truth  in 
its  holiest  and  purest  form,  and  yet  carry  through  life  an  unchanged  heart,  the  very 
light  which  he  possesses  so  dazzling  him  with  its  brightness  as  to  keep  him  from  seeing 
his  terrible  depravity  and  feeling  his  need  of  a  Saviour.    Reader,  are  you  one  of 
these?— W. 

Vers.  1 — 27. — Natural  and  spiritual  paternity.  There  may  not  be  much  that  is 
positively  instructive  in  these  genealogies ;  yet  there  may  be  found  that  which  is  «ti^- 
gestive  in  them.    They  invite  us  to  think  of — 

I.  The  Adahic,  ob  natural,  fatherhood.  CVer.  1.)  It  is  a  high  distinction  to  be 
the  progenitor  of  an  illustrious  "  family  "  or  of  a  powerful  tribe ;  still  more  so  of  a 
whole  nation ;  and  the  highest  of  its  kind  to  be  the  father  of  the  human  race.  But  the 
honour  is  not  without  its  serious  qualifications.  1.  It  is  of  an  inferior  order.  It  is 
*'  after  the  fiesh ; "  it  pertains  to  Uie  lower  kingdom ;  it  does  not  stand  in  the  first  rank 
in  the  sight  of  Divine  wisdom.  2.  It  involves  shame  as  well  as  honour.  If  in  his 
later  days  Adam  could  boast  of  the  happiness  and  triumphs  which  his  descendants 
enjoyed,  he  must  have  been  covered  with  confusion  as  he  witnessed  the  sorrow  and 
the  humiliation  which  they  endured.    By  his  fatherhood  of  our  race  he  became  the 

Earent  of  guilt  and  shame  as  well  as  of  virtue  and  honour.  They  who  sigh  for  the 
onour  and  joy  of  parentage  may  well  reflect  that,  if  our  firat  father  oould  have  foreseen 
the  misery  and  degradation  to  which  his  sons  and  daughtera  would  sink,  he  would  (or 
might  well)  have  shrunk  from  the  high  distinction  he  enjoyed. 

II.  The  Abbahamic,  OB  BPiBrruAL,  FATHERHOOD.  (Ver.28.)  It  is  true  that  Abraham, 
as  his  name  suggests,  was  the  father  of  a  multitude,  and  that  it  was  of  him,  as  con* 
ceming  the  flesh,  the  Messiah  came.  But  it  is  also  true  that  our  Master  taught  us  to 
think  of  the  Hebrew  patriarch  as  the  father  of  all  faithful  souls  rather  than  as  the  mere 
progenitor  of  a  people.  The  true  children  of  Abraham  are  those  who  "  do  his  works  " 
(John  TiiL  89) — those  who  hear  and  heed  the  Word  of  God.    Not  they  who  are  "  the 


CH.  I.  1—54.]        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  17 

■eed  of  Abraham  "  are  the  children  of  the  promise  (Rom.  ix.  8),  but  they  who  have  the 
si»rit  of  the  believing  and  obedient  patriarch ;  they  who  are  Jews,  "  not  outwardly,  but 
inwardly,  •  • .  whose  praise  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God"  (Kom.  ii.  28,  29).  This  is  the 
paternity  to  which  we  should  aspire,  and  to  which  we  may  attain.  By  (1)  cultivating 
a  Christian  character  and  spirit ;  (2)  living  a  blameless  and  beautiful  life ;  (3)  speaking,  in 
love  and  wisdom,  enlightening  and  redeeming  truth ; — we  may  become  parents  of  faithful 
aouls :  we  may  be  the  means  of  quickening  to  newness  of  life  those  who,  in  their  turn, 
will  lead  others  also  into  the  way  of  life.  We  may  thus  generate  sources  of  holy 
inflnence  through  which,  in  distant  times,  the  erring  shall  be  restored  and  the  dead, 
shall  live. — 0. 

Yer.  19. — The  human  race ;  unity  and  division.  In  the  midst  of  this  genealogical 
table  we  have  a  statement  that  '*  the  earth  was  divided."  We  are  reminded  of  the 
same  finct  of  the  dispersion  of  mankind  by  the  reference  to  different  families  and 
separate  countries.  But  all  are  shown  to  spring  from  one  source,  to  have  a  common 
origin  in  the  first  father  whose  name  heads  the  list,  and  is  the  first  word  of  the  Book 
of  Chronicles.  We  are  thus  admonished  of  that  twofold  fact  which  is  daily  con- 
fironting  as. 

I.  Tbs  diyebsitt  which  mankind  presents.  These  are  distinguished  from  one 
another  by  many  features,  and  are  separated  from  one  another  by  many  barriers.  Dis- 
tinguishing or  dividing  us,  man  from  man,  are  (I)  physical  obstacles  (seas,  mountains, 
Tarieties  of  climate);  (2)  colour;  (3)  creed;  (4)  language;  (5)  social  habits,  mental 
tastes,  and  moral  dispositions. 

U.  The  essential  oneness  of  the  human  world.  Notwithstanding  all  interposing 
obstacles  and  all  separating  divergences,  man  is  everywhere  the  same.  The  blood  of 
one  human  fieither  is  in  his  veins.  One  human  nature,  bodily  and  spiritual,  he  inherits ; 
above  it  he  cannot  rise,  and  beneath  it  he  cannot  fall.  He  is  the  son  of  Adam,  and  fie 
"was  the  son  of  Ood"  ^Luke  iii.  38).  Sin  has  scattered  and  slain  him,  but  he  may 
rise  and  be  revivified.  In  him  still  are  those  germs  of  good  which,  under  heavenly 
culture,  may  spring  into  the  most  perfect  flowers  that  can  anom  the  garden  of  the  Lord. 
In  mankind,  under  all  conceivable  diversities,  are  (I)  the  same  animal  instincts, 
(2)  the  same  family  attachments,  (3)  the  same  capacity  of  mental  culture,  (4)  the  same 
spiritual  nature,  which  is  able  to  receive  the  truth  and  know  the  will  and  live  the  life 
of  the  eternal  Ghxl  himself.  The  unity  and  diversity  of  our  kind  su^xgest  to  us: 
1.  That  there  are  variations  and  separations  which  are  due  to  God's  providence  rather 
than  to  our  sin.  These  are  either  to  be  cheerfully  borne  or  bravely  and  intelligently 
overcome.  They  are  given  us  either  to  try  our  faith  and  patience  or  to  excite  our 
enterprise  and  activity.  2.  That  there  are  septirations  and  distinctions  which  are  the 
penalty  of  sin ;  these  should  humble  us.  3.  That  in  the  gospel  of  Christ  we  have 
resources  which  can  raise  the  lowest  and  reunite  the  most  spiritually  distant.  The 
hour  will  come  when  the  **  earth  that  was  divided  "  so  long  ago  will  be  united  in  one  most 
blessed  bond,  worshipping  one  God,  loving  one  Father,  trusting  one  Saviour,  living  one 
life,  travelling  to  one  home. — C. 

Vers.  47,  48. — Though  iransientj  not  vain.  As  we  read  these  following  verses  and 
find  one  king  mentioned  and  then  another,  with  simply  the  record  of  his  name,  his 
reign,  and  his  death,  we  feel  how  swiftly  flows  the  current  of  human  life,  how  many 
generations  have  come  and  gone,  how  slight  attention  posterity  can  spare  for  those  who 
were  once  great  and  honoured.    Three  thoughts  befit  the  theme — 

L  To  each  man  in  his  time  his  heritage  seems  large  and  lasting.  No  doubt 
Samlah  of  Masrekah  looked  eagerly  forward  to  the  occupancy  of  his  seat  of  power ; 
rejoiced  greatly  as  he  took  possession ;  said  to  himself,  *'  Thou  hast  made  my  mountain 
to  stand  strong;"  thought  that  many  days  of  honour  and  wealth  and  joy  were  before 
him ;  was  one  more  instance  of  the  truth  that  "  All  men  think  all  men  mortal  but 
themselves."  His  day  of  authority  and  enjoyment  seemed  bright  enough  to  him  in 
anticipation,  and  he  rejoiced  in  his  heritage.  To  every  human  eye  a  long  and  happy 
human  life  seems,  at  the  outset  and  for  some  way  on,  a  very  possible  and  desirable  thing. 
But  to  us,  who  look  back  on  that  which  is  over,  it  seems  that— • 

JI.  The  best  earthly  estate  is  a  painfully  transient  thing.  What,  to  all 
I.  chronicles.  0 


18 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.      [ch.  n.  1—65 


these  and  to  all  other  kings  of  all  other  countries,  are  their  sceptres  now?  What  have 
they  been  for  many  thousand  years  ?  Their  grave  is  not  more  quiet,  nor  is  it  better 
known,  than  the  last  resting-place  of  their  meanest  subjects.  Looking  back,  it  seems 
as  if  their  honour  was  but  a  brief  flash  that  struck  a  sudden  splendour  and  then  went 
out  into  the  darkness.  A  brief  day  is  ours  below,  a  little  sunshine  for  a  few  fast- 
fleeting  hours — 

"  And  then  nip^ht  sweeps  along  the  plain. 
And  all  things  fade  away.' 


f» 


But  we  have  a  third  correcting  thought,  namely — 

III.  That  cub  bhokt  earthly  life  is  lono  enough  to  hold  and  to  work  much 
ENDUBiNQ  GOOD.  Though  OUT  human  life  is  transient,  and  though  its  beauty  and 
honour  soon  pass  away,  yet  it  is  not  lived  in  vain.  Spent  in  the  fear  of  God,  devoted 
to  the  glory  of  Christ,  and  having  regard  to  the  well-being  of  the  world,  it  has  an 
excellency  which  true  wisdom  docs  not  despise.  It  is  not  in  vain  (1)  that  it  contains 
pure  and  ennobling  joy ;  (2)  that  it  illustrates  Divine  principles ;  (3)  that  it  diffuses 
Dounty  and  blessedness  on  every  hand ;  (4)  that  it  leaves  behind  it  something  better 
than  it  found — the  harvest  of  its  own  thought  and  toil ;  (5)  that  it  has  been  a  prepara- 
tion for  a  wider  sphere  and  a  larger  life  beyond. — C. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IL 


The  interest  of  this  chapter  owes  some- 
thing to  the  several  unsatisfied  questions 
which  it  suggests,  to  difficult  and  knotty 
points  which  nevertheless  do  not  altogether 
counsel  despair,  and  to  occasional  signifi- 
cant indications  of  sources  drawn  upon  by 
the  compiler,  certainly  quite  additional  to 
the  contents  of  the  existing  books  of  the 
Old  Testament. 

We  know  something  of  what  we  have  to 
expect  when  the  nnme  of  Israel,  or  Jacob,  is 
annoimced  in  the  first  verse,  with  his  twelve 
sons — those  "patriarchs,"  some  of  whom 
(certainly  not  as  many  as  eleven,  for  Reuben 
was  absent,  and,  with  scarcely  a  doubt, 
Benjamin),  **  moved  with  envy,  sold  into 
Egypt  Joseph,"  the  twelfth  (Acts  vii.  9). 
We  here  enter,  in  foot,  upon  the  genealogies 
and  tables  and  enumerations  of  collateral 
lines  of  **  all  Israel,"  to  which  the  whole  of 
the  following  seven  chapters  are  devoted 
(ch.  ix.  1).  This  second  chapter  leads  off 
with  the  most  important  line  of  descant  of 
the  twelve — that  of  Judah.  And  the  con- 
tents of  this  chapter  do  not  exhaust  the  one 
line,  which,  on  the  contrary,  stretches  as 
far  OS  to  ch.  iv.  23.  Within  these  limits 
there  are  just  that  amount  of  repetition 
(ch.  ii.  3;  iv.  1,  etc.)  and  appearance  of 
confusion  which  betoken  the  recourse  of  the 
compiler  to  various  records  and  sources  of  in- 
formation— themselves  sometimes  but  frag- 
mentary, and  probably  to  mere  memory  and 
the  tradition  tnat  depends  upon  it 

The  contents  of  this  chapter  are  best 
mastered  by  noticing  that  they  consist  of: 
1.  The  table  of  Israel's  twelve  sons  (vers. 
1,  2).    2.  The  line  of  Judah  to  the  stage 


wl.erc  it  branches  into  three  great-grandsons 
(vers.  3—9).  3.  The  line  of  Judah  pursued 
through  those  three  branches  to  a  point 
manifestly  significant  in  one,  and  presum- 
ably BO  in  the  others  (vers.  10 — 55). 

Vers.  1,  2. — 1.  Table  of  Israel's  twelve 
SONS.  The  twelve  sons  of  Israel,  not  in  the 
order  of  age  (cf.  Gen.  xxix.  31— xxx.  24; 
XXXV.  16—19),  nor  exactly  in  the  order  of 
children  of  wives  as  against  those  of  hand- 
maids (Gen.  XXV.  2.'J — 26),  nor  in  that  of 
the  ajred  father's  dying  blessing  (Gen.  xlix.), 
nor  in  that  of  Exod.  i.  2 — 4.  It  is  the  place 
of  Dan  which  disturbs  the  fittc-st  order,  and 
Keil  suggests  that  his  place  in  this  text  is 
accounted  for  by  Rachel's  desire  that  her 
handmaid's  child  should  be  acoountcKi  her 
own;  but  surely  this  was  not  exceptional, 
but  applied  to  all  or  most  of  such  cases,  and 
should  have  been  far  rather  tuken  into  con- 
sideration in  any  of  the  other  lists  than  in 
this.  However  accounted  for,  the  order  is— 
first,  the  six  sons  of  the  first  wife  Leah ; 
secondly,  the  elder  son  of  Rachel's  handmaid 
Bilhah ;  thirdly^  the  two  sons  of  the  loved 
wife  Rachel;  fourthly,  the  other  son  of 
Rachel's  handmaid  Bilhah;  lastly,  the  two 
sons  of  Zilpah,  handmaid  of  Leah.  As 
tills  order  corresponds  with  nothing  in  our 
Old  Testament,  it  may  serve  as  one  slight 
indication  that  the  compiler  of  Chronicles 
wiiB  not  dependent  on  these  records  alone. 
The  Hebrew  text  and  the  Septuagint  accord 
exactly  with  the  Authorized  Version  here. 

Vers.  3—9. — 2.  Thb  line  of  Jidah,  to 

HIS    THBEB     GBEAT-GBANDSONS.         The      line 

of  Judah  is,  with  a  well-known  object,  the 
first  to  be  taken  up,  although  Judan  stands 
fourth  of  Israel's  sons.  Judah  has  five 
sons :  three,  Er,  Onan,  Shelah,  by  a  Canaan- 


■.iLl— 51]        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


19 


iteu,  tbe  daughter  of  Shad ;  and  two,  Fharei 
and  Zertli,  by  Tamar,  hU  own  daughter-in- 
law,  under  the  circumstances  described 
(Gen.  xxzviiL  6—30).  There  all  these 
names  are  found  in  exact  accord  in  the  Autho- 
rized Version,  in  the  Hebrew  text,  and  in  the 
Septua^ant.  The  Septuagint  Version,  how- 
ever  (Qen,  xxxyiii.  2),  by  an  evident  in- 
aocuracy  of  translation,  gives  8hua  as  the 
name,  cot  of  the  father,  but  of  the  daughter, 
f  6yofia  Xaufd.  Parallel  passages  are  also 
foond  (Gen.  xlvL  12;  Numb.  xxvi.  19—22). 
Er  and  Ottan  died  without  issue,  and  the 
deteendants  of  Shelah  are  not  mentioned 
till  we  reach  eh.  iv.  21—23.  The  line  is 
now  carried  on  by  the  twin  sons  of  Tamar 
(▼ers.  5,  6).  Pharet,  with  two  sons,  Hexron 
and  Hamnl  (Gen.  xlvL  12 ;  Rutli  iv.  18),  and 
Zerah,  with  five  sons,  Ziinri  (or  Zabdi,  Josh. 
viL  1),  Xthaa,  Heman,  Caleol,  Dara  (or  with 
many  manuscripts,  followed  by  the  Targum, 
Syriao,  and  Arabic  versions,  Darda).  1  f  these 
last  four  names  are  not  identical  with  those  in 
1  Kings  iv.  31,  they  are  not  to  be  found  in 
any  available  connection  elsewhere,  and  the 
last  two  not  at  all.  Upon  this  supposition, 
it  is  held  by  some  that  this  very  passage 
proves  that  the  compiler  drew  on  resources 
not  possessed  by  us.  The  weight  of  evi- 
dence seems,  however,  largely  in  favour  of 
the  persons  being  the  same.  (See  Gilbert 
Barrington's  *  Old  Testament  Genealogies,' 
i  206—208,  well  summarized  in  art. 
••  Darda,"  Smith's  •  Bible  Dictionary,*  for  as 
competent  a  discussion  of  the  question  as 
the  present  data  will  allow.)  It  needs  to  bo 
constantly  remembered  that  an  enumeration 
like  the  above,  of  five  so-called  sons^  does  not 
necessarily  involve  their  being  five  brothers, 
although  in  this  case  it  looks  the  more  as 
though  they  were  so,  as  it  is  said  five  of 
thaminalL 

Ver.  7. — We  have  then  so  far  seven  grand- 
aons  to  Judah,  when  a  new  name,  un men- 
tioned before,  is  introduced — CarmL  Ho  is 
neither  described  as  one  of  the  seven  gmnd- 
aona  nor  as  descended  from  any  one  of  them, 
but  nnenviably  enough  is  marked  as  the 
fiither  of  Aehar — later  form  of  Achan  — 
the  tronbler  of  IiraeL  Josh.  vii.  1—18 
supplies  the  missing  link,  and  states  that 
Carmi  is  son  of  Zimri  (Zabdi),  one  of  the 
aforesaid  seven  gprandsons.  By  the  punish- 
ment of  death,  visited  upon  this  Achar,  with 
bis  sons  and  daughters  (Josh.  vii.  24,  25),  it 
may  be  presumed  that  the  line  of  Judah 
through  him  became  extinct. 

Ver.  8. — The  line  through  Ethan,  another 
of  the  seven  grandsons,  seems  to  stop  with 
Anriah,  a  name  found  nowhere  else. 

Ver.  9.-3.  The  link  of  Judah  pur- 
sued   THROUGH    THE    THREE    BRANCHES    OF 

Hezron's  sons.     The  track  of  genealogy 
then  returns  upon  Pharez,  and  to  the  name 


of  Heiron,  the  most  important  by  far  of  the 
seven  grandsons.  His  three  sons  are  an- 
nounced, and,  as  beginning  with  the  first- 
bom,  so  presumably  in  order  of  seniority. 
They  are:  (A),  Jerahmeel;  (B),  Earn;  (C), 
Chelubai. 

Vers.  10— 15.— (B)  Bam  (the  Aram  of  the 
Septuagint  and  of  Matt.  i.  3 ;  Luke  iii.  33) 
is  taken  first  in  order,  at  once  to  push  on 
the  lineage  of  Judah  to  the  g^reat  landmark 
David,  who  is  reached  at  the  seventh  gene- 
ration from  Ram  (Rutli  iv.  19—22;  Matt, 
i.  3—5 ;  Luke  iii.  31—33),  his  name  being 
ranked  last  of  seven  brothers  only,  sons  ol 
Jesse. 

Ver.  11. — Salma,  Hebrew  w^bb ;  but  Ruth 
iv.  20,  iTD^b  and  in  following  verse  jtoSiy. 
The  variation  of  the  first  two  of  these  forms 
has  many  parallels,  as  between  Chronicles 
and  the  earlier  Old  Testament  Scriptures. 

Vers.  13 — 15  give  us  what  we  have  not 
elsewhere,  the  names  of  the  fourth,  fifth,  and 
sixth  sons  of  Jesse,  viz.  Nathaneel,  Baddai 
(but  see  1  Kings  i.  8),  and  Ozem.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  they  make  it  appear  that 
David  was  the  seventh  of  seven,  instead  of 
(1  Sam.  xiv.  10,  11;  xvii.  12)  the  eighth  of 
eight  sons.  The  missing  son,  any  way,  be- 
longs to  the  seventh  place.  The  Syriao 
and  Arabic  versions  have  taken  the  Elihu 
of  ch.  xxviL  18,  and  put  him  in  this 
place.  Others,  following  the  Septuagint, 
suppose  this  Elihu,  if  strictly  a  brother  of 
David,  to  be  Eliab,  the  oldest.  The  explana- 
tion of  the  absence  of  the  name  here  may  be 
that  he  died  early  and  without  issue,  and 
w^ould  accordingly  be  the  less  wanted  in  a 
genealogical  register. 

Vers.  16,  17. — These  verses  do  not  say 
that  David  ** begat"  Zemiah  and  Abigail, 
but  that  these  two  were  sisters  of  the  fore- 
going seven  brethren.  Light  is  thrown  upon 
this  by  2  Sam.  xvii.  25,  which  says  that 
Abigail  was  the  daughter  of  one  Nahash, 
and  that  Zeruiah  was  her  sister.  But  it  is 
to  leave  us  in  greater  darkness  as  to  who 
Nahath  was :  whether  Nuhath  was  another 
name  for  Jesse,  or  the  name  of  Jesse's  wife, 
or  the  name  of  a  former  husband  of  Jesse's 
wife,  to  whom  she  bore  these  two  daughters 
before  she  became  wife  to  Jesse,  and  that 
former  husband  possibly  none  other  than  the 
Ammonite  king  (2  Sam.  x.  2) — or  whether 
none  of  these  conjectures  be  near  the  truth, 
some  of  which  on  the  face  of  them  seem 
unlikely  enough,  is  as  yet  unsettled.  Mean- 
time it  is  worth  remembering  that  Zeruiah 
named  one   of   her  celebrated   sons,   and 

Srobably  the  eldest  of  them,  Abishai,  after 
esse,  Ishai  being  the  same  as  our  Jesse ;  vet 
from  the  above  premises  it  is  taken  toat 
she  was  strictly  sister  of  Abigail,  and  there- 
fore was  not  really  related  to  Jesse.    The 


20 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,      [cil  ii,  1— 55. 


Bubiect  !b  treated  interestingly  under  the 
various  names  in  Smith's  *  Bible  Dictionary.' 
The  husband  of  Zcruiuh  is  given  nowhere, 
while  the  husband  of  Abigail,  here  called 
Jether  the  Iihxneelite,  is,  in  the  passage 
already  referred  to  (2  Sam.  xvii.  25),  called 
Ithra  (which  is  a  slightlj  altered  form  of 
the  name),  an  I$raeliie,  with  little  doubt  an 
error  for  IshmaeliU,  In  the  same  passage 
also  her  own  name  appears  as  ^rsM ,  in- 
stead of  ^:'3M.,  though  many  manuscripts 
have  this  latter. 

Vers.  18— 20.— (C)  Chelubai.  The  de- 
scendants of  Caleb  (Chelubai),  placed  third 
of  Hezron's  sons,  are  next  dealt  with ;  but 
the  subject  is  almost  immediately  inter- 
rupted by  resumed  reference  to  Heiron 
(vers.  21 — 24X  and  by  the  table  of  Jerah- 
meel  and  his  descendants  (vers.  25 — 41); 
after  which  the  table  of  Caleb,  apparently 
the  same  Oileb,is  carried  on  (vers.  42 — 49). 
Taking  these  broken  portions,  however,  just 
as  they  come,  we  are  immediately  met  by  a 
series  of  uncertainties  and  surprises.  Vcr.  18 
is  obscure  in  that  it  says  Caleb  had  children 
by  Anbah  (the  Hebrew  construction  altto 
unusual),  a  wife,  or  indeed  strictly  a  woman 
(not  even  using  the  ordinarv  formula  "  his 
wife ''),  and  by  Jerioth,  of  whom  nothing  is 
said;  and  the  verse  adds  obscurity  by 
saying,  her  sons  are  these,  without  plaiuly 
indicating  to  which  woman  reference  is 
made.  It  may  be  safely  presumed,  however, 
from  what  follows,  that  Azubah  is  intended, 
though  no  other  part  of  Scripture  helps  us 
by  so  much  as  a  mention  of  the  sonst'  names 
to  determine  it  certainly.  Meantime  one 
Hebrew  manuscript  and  the  Chaldce  Para- 

Jhrase  are  found  to  omit  the  words  **  and  by 
erioth."  The  Vulgate,  and  the  Syriac  and 
Arabic  versions,  make  Jerioth  one  of  tlie 
children — possibly  a  daughter — of  Caleb 
and  Azubah,  and  this  view  is  supported  by 
Kennicott  and  Houbigant  (Bai  rington's 
•Genealogies,'  L  210).  The  tone  of  ver.  19 
may  certainly  be  held  to  offer  some  counte- 
nance to  the  assumption  that  either  Jerioth's 
name  ought  to  appear  ss  that  of  a  child  or 
not  at  all.  The  name  Ephrath  in  this  verse 
abounds  with  interest.  The  ancient  name 
of  the  town  of  Bethlehem,  and  also  ap- 
parentlv  of  a  district  round  it,  is  the  same 
word  which  is  found  here  as  the  name  of  a 
woman.  In  either  cose  it  is  more  generally 
written  nn'ipM,  as  even  in  the  two  other 
appearances  of  it  in  this  very  chapter. 
Two  manuscripts,  followed  by  two  ancient 
editions,  and  apparently  by  the  Vulgate, 
substitute  aleph  for  the  above  final  he. 
In  Mioih  V.  1,  Bethlehem  is  found  united 
with  Ephratah  in  one  compound  word.  The 
mother  Ephrath  is  here  interesting  for  her 
descendants  given,  her  aon  Hnr,  grandson 


Vri,  and  groat-grandson  BeialeeL    Further 
reference  to  these  is  made  in  ver.  50. 

Vers.  21— 24.— The  first  interruption  to 
the  record  of  Caleb's  posterity  is  now  oc- 
casioned by  a  resumed  reference  to  Heiroii, 
who  at  the  age  of  threescore  took  to  wife 
(as  it  seems  from  ver.  24)  Abiah,  sister  to 
Gilead,  dau;;hter  of  the  eminent  man  Kaehir, 
who  was  Manasseli's  oldest  son  by  an 
Aramitess  concubine  (ch.  vii.  14).  Two 
sons  of  Hezron  by  Abiah  are  given  (the 
latter  of  them  a  posthumous  child),  but  the 
elder  having  a  son  called  Jair,  tracked,  no 
doubt  as  one  who  become  famous  by  the 
number  of  cities  he  took.  He  was  thus  con- 
nected on  the  father's  side  with  a  great 
family  of  Judah,  and  on  the  mother's  with 
a  grrcat  family  of  Manasseh.  He  is  probably 
not  the  Jair  of  Judg.  x.  3,  with  his  **  thirty 
sons,  thirty  ass  colts,  and  thirty  cities."  And 
W  OduCos,  Mark  v.  22)  is  not  Tjr^  of 
2  Sam.  xxi.  19;  ch.  xx.  5.  Evident  stress 
is  laid  on  his  maternal  descent  Thus 
(Numb,  xxxii.  41)  he  is  styled  son  of 
Manasseh,  and  hence  also  the  explanation 
of  the  last  clause  of  ver.  23,  tn/ro,  all  these 
belonged  to  the  soni  of  Xaohir  the  father  of 
Oilead.  Some  of  the  cities  alluded  to  are 
the  Havoth-Jair  (Numb,  xxxii.  41 ;  Dent, 
iii.  14;  Josh.  xiii.  30),  Englished  as  the 
**  groups  of  dtoellings  of  Jair,"  on  which  see 
interesting  note  in  Stanley's  *  Sinai  and 
Palestine'  (edit.  186CX  vocabulary,  pp.  526, 
527.  They  lay  in  the  trans-Jordanic  dis- 
trict Tracbonitis,  the  modem  El-leyah  and 
Jebel-Hauran.  It  is  not  possible  to  harmo- 
nize exactly  the  numbers  of  the  cities  given 
here  with  those  in  passages  quoted  above ; 
nor  is  the  translation  of  ver.  23,  Authorized 
Version,  very  certainly  the  correct  one.  E. 
Bertheau,  in  his  '  Die  Biicher  der  Chronik 
erkl'art;  xv.  Kurzgef.  exegetisches  Hand- 
buch.  z.  A.  T.,'  translates,  **  And  Geshur 
and  Aram  took  the  Havvoth-Jair  from  them 
with  Kenath  and  her  daughter-towns,  sixty 
cities."  **  Took  "  is  suppcmed  to  mean  here 
"retook,"  or  "recovered."  Though  this 
suits  the  Hebrew  syntax  better,  it  docs  not 
suit  so  well  our  immediate  context;  nor 
have  we  any  other  information  of  such  re- 
covering of  them. 

Ver.  23. — Oeshnr  was  a  small  district 
between  Argob  and  Bashan;  and  Aram, 
commonly  translated  Syria,  i.e.  the  ancient 
Syria,  viz.  the  territory  of  Damascus. 
Kenath,  rechristened  by  its  subduer  Nobah 
(Numb,  xxxii.  42),  and  retaining  this 
name  at  the  time  of  Gideon,  and  Zeba  and 
Salmunnah  subsequently  vindicated  the  life 
of  its  old  name,  and  regained  it,  replaced  in 
the  present  day  by  Konawilt.  And  the 
towns  thereof;  Hebrew  literally,  her 
daughters;  i.e.  the  small,  subordinate 
groups  of  people  (Numb.  xxL  25,  "  All  the 


cu.  n.  1— 1»5.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


21 


therbof,"  literally,  daughten).  All 
thaia  belonged  to  the  loni  of  Kaehir,  the 
fitiier  of  CHlaftd,  might  perhaps  be  open 
to  Uie  tranalation,  **A11  these  were  the 
pouessions  of  Machir,  the  possessor  of 
Gilead." 

Yer.  24. — The  remaining  Terse  of  this 
•eetion  brings  another  point  of  difficulty 
unaoWed  yet.  No  place  Caleb-ephratah  is 
known,  and  no  sort  of  accounting  for  Hezron 
dying  anywhere  but  in  Egypt,  whither  he 
went  wiUi  Jacob  (Gen.  xlvi.  12),  is  pro- 
ducible. The  Vulgate  has  Ingreasui  eat 
Caleb  ad  Ephratam,  but  our  Hebrew  text 
cannot  be  made  to  justify  it,  if  for  nothing 

else,  for  want  of  a  preposition  ^  before 
«  Ephrata.**  This  reading  of  the  Vufgate  has 
•uggested  to  others  that  by  a  slight  but  still 
gratuitous  alteration  of  our  Hebrew  text 
lo  might  be  substituted  for  the  preposition 

a  prefixed  to  the  name  of  Caleb ;  but  upon 
&ai  showing  we  have  to  ntppoae  that  Caleb 
did  leave  Egypt  on  his  own  account  aud 
travel  to  Ephratah,  and  then  there  fails  any 
ftrong  connection  (but  seeSeptuagint,tnZoe.) 
between  that  fact  and  what  is  said  about 
AMilL  Still,  the  explanation  might  receive 
some  countenance  from  the  fact  that  it  is 
said  that  Abiah's  son  became  the  fiither — or 
founder — of  Tekoa,  a  place  near  Bethlehem, 
in  South  Judah  (1  Sam.  xxx.  14).  Bertheau 
has  at  this  point  suggested  that  Caleb- 
ephratah,  instead  of  being  included  in 
Neger-Caleb,  may  rather,  in  distinction 
from  it,  designate  the  northern  portion  of 
the  territorv  of  Caleb.  The  solution  of  the 
problem  will  probably  not  yield  to  anything 
out  a  justly  restored  text. 

Vers.  25 — 41. — We  reach  here  the  second 
interruption  in  the  account  of  Caleb's  pos- 
terity. (A)  Jerahmeel,  though  the  eldest 
Hezronite  son,  has  as  yet  been  passed  by  in 
£Eivour  of  Ram  and  in  favour  of  Caleb,  so 
far  as  regards  part  of  his  descendants. 
Jerahmeel  himself  is  mentioned  nowhere 
else,  but  his  people  collectively  aro  (1  Sam. 
xxvii.  10;  xxx.  29).  On  the  other  hand, 
this  place  cUone  supplies  the  lists  of  names, 
and  we  have  not  the  aid  of  any  collation. 
Ver.  25  purports  in  the  Authorized  Verdion 
to  give  five  sons  of  Jerahmeel  by  his  first 
wife,  of  name  not  given.  The  absence  of  the 
conjunction  **  and,"  however,  in  the  Hebrew 
text  before  the  last  name,  Ahijah,  suggests 
that  this  may  be  the  name  of  the  first  wife, 
the  presence  of  which  seems  greatly  required 
by  the  contents  of  the  next  verse.  Some 
particle  being  required,  Le  Clerc,  accepting 
the  sugg^tion  of  Junius  and  Tremellius, 
proposes  to  supply  riKS,  and  Bertheau  the 
aame  preposition,  but  in  a  simpler  form,  pre- 
fixed to  the  name  Ahijah  (see  Barriugton's 
•  Genealogies,' i.  180). 


Ver.  26.— For  rncR,  one  manuscript  has 
TDK,  and  another  rrnop. 

Ver.  28. — One  manuscript  makes  Kadab 
and  Abishor  two  additional  sons  of  Onam, 
by  omitting  the  words  and  the  ions  of 
ShammaL 

Ver.  29.— ^rrsK  .  Wpsk  .  ^raK  .  are  the 

readings  of  various   manuscripts   in  this 
verse. 

Vers.  31— 35.— The  Authorized  Version  is 
not  justified  in  substituting  children  for  the 
Hebrew  **  sons ; "  the  object  evidentlv  being 
to  make  this  statement  reconcilable  with 
ver.  34,  which  says  that  Sheshan  had  only 
daughters.  The  difficulty  can  be  removeo, 
possibly,  by  supponing  that  Ahlai  died  (yet 
see  ch.  xi.  41 },  or  that,  at  the  time  to  which 
ver.  34  n^fers,  only  daughters  were  in  ques* 
tion.  Wall's  conjecture,  that  Ahlai  of  ver. 
31  is  the  same  with  Attai  of  ver.  35,  would 
have  more  probability  if  cUeph  were  not  the 
initial  letter  of  the  one,  and  ayin  of  the 
other.  Still,  as  all  the  other  **  sons  "  of  this 
passage  mean  sons  strictly,  it  would  be  un- 
likely that  sons  of  Sheshan  only  should 
mean  **  grand8^)ns."  The  genealogy  now 
proceeds  through  Sheshan's  daughter, 
name  not  given  (unless  possibly  AhlaiX 
married  to  his  Egyptian  servant  Jarha, 
down  to  (ver.  41)  Elinhama,  at  the  twentieth 
generation  from  Jeralimeel.  To  this,  how- 
ever, the  Septuagint  {Juxta  Exemplar  Origin' 
ale  Vaticanum^  of  1G37),  adds  one  generation 
more,  koI  'EXuro/^  4y4vvri(rt  rhy  *I(r/ia^A. 
The  Egyptian  servant  Jarha  is  not  heard  of ' 
elsewhere  ,*  that  he  was  enfranchised  before  , 
his  marriage  with  Sheshan's  daughter  is 
likely  enough  (Dent.  xxiiL  8 ;  1  Sam.  xxx. 
11).  The  language  of  the  end  of  ver.  33, 
These  were  the  sons  of  Jerahmeel,  would  seem 
to  exclude  the  following  thirteen  descend- 
ants of  Jarha  and  Sheshan's  daughter  from 
the  genealogy.  Yet  this  is  scarcely  likely 
to  he  the  intention,  which  perhaps  was 
satisfied  with  simply  marking  a  distinction 
by  the  pause. 

Ver.  36.— The  name  Zabad  throws  con- 
siderable doubt  on  the  opinion  that  no  one 
of  Jerahmeel's  descendants  given  in  this 
genealogy  can  be  found  elsewhere  in  the 
Old  Testament ;  for  compare  again  ch.  xL  41. 

Ver.  38.— So  also  compare  Aiariah  with  2 
Chron.  xxiii.  1.  These  two  names  are  abun- 
dantly interesting  here.*  Zabad,  the  tenth 
from  Jerahmeel,  or  fourteenth  from  the 
patriarch  Judah  himself,  brings  us  to  the 
time  of  David,  by  exactly  the  same  interval 
as  seven  other  perfect  genealogies,  four  of 
these  having  the  very  same  number  of  steps, 
viz.  fourteen,  two  having  fifteen,  and  that 
of  David  himself  having  eleven  steps.  An 
analogous  and  equally  interesting  corre- 
spondence can  bo  traced  with   the  name 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.      [ch.  u.  1— 55. 


Amiiah.    Bee  the  iroporUnt  ut.  "Zabad,"  i 

BmitVa'BibloDictioDu;;'  ami  iti  Further  I 
remarka  aa  to  tha  evidence  of  the  goncalogj  . 
in  the  fact  of  ita  twenty-fourth  and  Last  niiiue 
tallying  well  with  the  time  of  Uolckiuh,  ' 
the  sixth  king  after  Atholioh  (ch.  iv.  41). 

VeiB.  42— 49.~-These  verses  are  occupied 
nith  the  resumptioD  of  doscecduits  of  Celeb 
— the  Caleb  apparently  of  vera.  U  aud  18, 
though,  this  being  ao,  the  tut  clause  in 
Ter.  40,  tha  dfto^htar  of  Caleb,  AoIum,  irill 
require  aocountrng  tor.  This  statement 
would  lead  ni  to  suppose  that  we  were 
assuredly  readiug;  ot  Caleb  the  sod  of 
Jephunneh ;  but  it  cannot  be  so.  The  name 
ol  Caleb,  with  the  questions  gathering 
lonnd  it,  m\l  bo  best  considered  hero.  Of 
the  nine  times  in  which  it  occurs  in  this 
ehapter,  the  mere  duplicates  (of  vers.  20, 
16,  4S)  may  be  at  once  oountad  off.  The 
compound  "  Caleb-epbratah"  of  ver.  21 
hni  lieen  already  dealt  with.  Nor  need 
we  for  the  present  suppose  ver.  50  to  have 
any  real  meaning  inconsistent  with  its 
apparent  meaning,  viz.  that  Caleb  is  the 
name  of  a  grandsun  (son  of  Uur)  as  well 
a*  of  the  grandbtber.  There  remain  the 
Dceasions  of  the  occurring  of  the  word  in 
Ten.  a,  1 6, 42, 49.  I .  J  he  first  appearance, 
then,  of  the  name  in  this  chapter  (ver.  9) 
eibibiti  it  in  a  form  different  from  that  in 
which  it  appear!  the  other  times  iu  thii 
ehaptei  or  elsewhere,  via.  as '3^^,  instead  ot 
ahi  (or  once  aa  a  patrouymlr',  1  Sam.  ixt. 
^'•a^).  The  Vulgate  follows  the  Hebrew, 
but  the  Septuagiot  has  at  once  substituted 
Caleb.  The  Syrioc  Version  has  Salchi,and 
the  Arabic  Sachli,  both  of  Ihem,  do  doubt, 
mete  traascribera'  t-rron  through  the  mistake 
of  a  letter.  This  foim"Che]ubai"  is,  then, 
■D  iftti  Kfy^iiifat,  and  no  different  acconnl 
has  jet  been  given  of  the  name  appearing 
thni  on  this  one  occasion.  It  may  ha 
described,  with  Lange  ('Comm.  Old  Testa- 
ment,' in  he.),  aa  "adjcctivus  geotilis"  to 
3iS;i,  which  word,  however,  occur  where  it 
will,  la  never  treated  aa  a  synonym  with 
Caleb  except  by  the  Septuagint,  and  then 
but  once  (ch.  It.  11),  making  Lange's  furt)ier 
claim  of  three  forms  for  the  name  of  Caleb 
wrong.  The  name  might  be  translated  thb 
"Cheluban"  or"Chelubite."  2.  The  Caleb 
called  here  flr»t"Chtlabai,"again"Calol)  the 
•on  of  HezrOQ,"  and  now  "  Caleb  the  brother 
of  Jerehmeel,"  some,  end  Keil  amnng  tlicm, 
have  endeavoured  to  identify  with  Caleb  the 
ton  of  Jephunnuh.  This  latter  is  a  well- 
known  figure  in  history.  He,  together  with 
Joahua,  was  among  those  who,  departiuj; 
from  Egypt,  were  pursued  of  Pharaoh,  aud 
of  all  the  host  thtse  two  alone  lived  to 
enter  into  the  promised  land.  Tliiaiienougb 
to  give  Um  distinction  and  a  piomiueut 


place  before  the  eye.  To  this  Caleb  nn- 
mielokable  reference  )■  made  in  twenty- 
ei^ht  poasages,  iu  sixteen  of  which  he  i* 
called  "son  of  Jephunneh,"  and  in  three 
of  those  sixteen  "son  of  Jephunneh  the 
Kenaiite."  Now,  he  tolla  u*  bimielf 
(Josh.  liv.  7)  that  he  waa  forty  yean  old 
in  the  second  yc-ar  after  the  Exodus.  But 
it  teema  (O.-n.  ilvi.  12,  26)  Ihut  Ueiron, 
grandson  of  Judah,  and  the  father  of  the 
Culub  of  thid  chapter,  was,  however  young, 
one  of  those  who  went  down  into  Egypt 
with  Jacob,  at  a  date,  according  to  any 
chronology,  which  mutt  render  it  impvasible 
for  any  son  of  hia  to  have  been  alive  aud 
only  forty  yean  of  age  at  the  time  of  the 
EioduB.  This  being  so,  either  the  state- 
ment already  referred  to,  found  at  the  close 
of  ver.  49,  that "  the  daughter  of  Caleb  was 
Aclisa,"  must  be  an  interpolation  from  some 
ignorant  tiansciiber'a  marginal  annotation, 
or.unlikclyosit  is.CalebthesouorHeiron 
and  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh  both  named 
a  daughter  Achsa.  It  is,  moreover,  likely 
enough  that  the  frequent  describing  of 
Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh  in  this  style 
waa  occasioned  by  the  dusiro  to  distingnish 
him  from  some  other  Caleb,  not  a  cou- 
ti-mporary,  indeed,  but  already  well  known 
in  a  generation  preecdini;  but  not  too 
remote.  Other  conoideiations  decidcdij 
concur  with  this  view :  e.g.  Hum  is  brothtr 
of  Caleb  the  son  of  Uezron ;  ho  has  a  grand- 
son, Nahshon,  of  KTeat  distinotion. "  a  prince 
of  the  children  of  Judah,"  whose  sister  Aaron 
married  ;  ho  was  the  elect  of  the  Judalt 
tribe  to  assist  Moses  and  Aaron  in  the  first 
numbering  of  the  people  (Xumb.  i.  7), 
Great  prominence  is  given  to  bim  (Numb. 
vii,  12;  I.  14),  He  was  clearly  (Matt.  i.  4; 
Luke  iii.  32)  fifth  in  deaeent  from  Judah, 
in  perfect  agreement  with  the  table  of  this 
chapter.  Now,  it  was  this  grandvm  ot  tlia 
tlder  brother  of  Caleb  who  was  eontcmporarj 
withCaleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh.  Bimilarly, 
the  Bezaleel  of  this  chapter  (ver.  20),  a 
great-grandson  of  Caleb  uie  Hezronite,  ii 
spoken  or  (Eiod.  iiii.  1 ;  ziiv.  30)  at  the 
lame  date  ciaotly  at  which  Caleb  the  son  ot 
Jephunneh  says  he  was  still  but  forty  years 
of  age  I  3.  The  identity  of  the  Caleb  of 
ver.  50,  inn  of  Hur,  with  Caleb  the  son  of 
Jepliunneh  is  supposed  by  some,  but  is  not 
clear.  It  appears  to  be  asserted,  without 
explanation,  in  the  arts.  "Caleb"  and 
"  Ephrath,"  signed  A-  C.  H.,  Smith's  '  Bilila 
Dictionary,'  tuon;;h  in  the  eeoond  port  of 
the  latter  article  it  is  alluded  to  aa  only 
possible.  On  the  other  hund,  it  may  rather 
be  that  Caleb  the  son  of  Jepliunneh,  instead 
of  being  identical  with  this  Caleb  the  son 
of  Uur,  is  BO  called  in  order  to  distinguish 
bim  from  this  latter  as  a  contemporary. 
Again,   it    haa   been   happily  oonjectured 


ch.il  1—55.]       TnK  FlItST  BOOK  OP  THE  CnROXICLES. 


('Speaker'!  CommeDlHrr.'  in  Ion.)  tbat  jast 
ai  Tcr.  3:)  closes  tlie  ttkble  of  Jemhmeel 
wilh  "Tbogo  were  the  B^.ng  of  JtrahmL-el," 
■o  Tsr.  49  Bbould  close  the  table  of  Caleb 
(Ter.  4!)  wjtii  tbe  words,  Tbew  were  the 
Kou  of  Cileb.  With  a  altgiit  altemtioa, 
rer.  50  vould  then  begiu  The  md*  of  Hnr, 
etc  This  is,  however,  only  onnjecture. 
Ver.  42,  then,  must  be  coneiiJered  to  give 
hb  another  funily  of  Caleb,  i.e.  a  family 
by  another  wife,  of  name  DLit  given,  just 
poraiblv  the  Jerioth  unaccounted  for  in  ver. 
18.  The  first  itatemont  lands  na  in  per- 
plezUy.  Kathft  (pp^)  is  the  Urttboni  (i.«. 
b?  the  wife  or  woman  In  question),  and 
the  tavaAar  of  Ziph.  And  amid  some 
omission  or  corruption  of  text,  we  are  then 
confronted  with  ihe  words,  and  ths  tons  of 
llMMliah  (ntfn?)  tlie  father  (or  again,  per- 
hBpa,/intn({er)  of  Hebron.  Tlii;  rea^lintc  of  tbe 
SeptuB^iut  gives  Mareshah  in  both  of  Ibese 
passages,  and  may  coma  from  a  Hebrew 
text  that  we  hare  not.  The  snbBlitution 
ooald,  howercr,  scarcely  be  accounted  for 
u  a  iti^re  clerical  ctror,  considering  both 
the  omission  of  a  rah  and  the  replacing  of 
an  he  with  an  at/in.  Tbe  eenlence  refuses  at 
presentany  treatment  except  tlie  unsatiafuc- 
tory  one  of  pare  conjecture.  But  employ- 
ing tilit,  it  may  be  noted  tLat  the  omitting 
of  the  words,  "the  sons  of,"  before  Uaresbah 
would  most  help  to  clear  the  verse  of  oun- 
fusion.  In  Ihlii  and  following  vcrEOs,  Ziph, 
Hsbron,  Tappoah,  Jotkoam,  and  Beth-tor, 
are  all  names  of  places  certaiuly,  whether 
or  not  tbey  are  all  of  pemons. 

Vers.  46—49  elve  the  nameB  (the  first  of 
which  appears  aa  that  of  a  man  also,  next 
Tene  and  ch.  1.  33)  of  two  additional  cuncn- 
binei  of  Caleb,  and  of  tbeir  descendants. 

Vci.  47  offers  osanotlier name,  Jahdai,  not 
to  be  accounted  for  with  any  certainty.  It 
is  not  linked  to  tbe  context,  and  nothing 
is  knoan  of  the  six  aona  assigneil  to  tbo 

r on  owning  it.  That  Gazez  occurs  twice 
the  previous  verse  is  rcmarkublo,  and 
•ngRcstive,  possibly,  of  mistake.  The  Sep- 
tuagint  omits  altugethei  the  clause  in  which 
it  is  fuund  tbe  second  time.  Houbignnt 
tiauslales,  "Porro  Harau  gcnuit  Jabilui," 
and  so  summurily  lemoves  the  difficulty 
fttim  liis  way  (Darringlou's  '  Genealogies,'  i. 
210).  Uiller  ('Ouomasticon,'  8.)  would  make 
it  the  same  name  us  Moza,  but  nitbout 
any  pretence  of  argument.  A  more  reason- 
able suggestion  than  tbis  might  tie  that 
Jahdsi  is  the  name  of  yet  another  concu- 
bine of  Caleb  (Lange,  ■  O.T.  Comm.,'  in  loe.). 

Ter.  '49.— Kachhanah  is  an  JE>a{  \tyi. 
furor  (for  Hadmannah  and  Qibea,  Josh.  it. 
81,  ST).  The  last  sentence  of  this  verse  ia 
treated  above. 

Ven.  60— 55.— The  opening 


thcso  verses  Lns  al^o  been  already  discussed. 
It  niav  bo  uoiv  added  (sea  Ketl, '  Commen- 
tary,' til  loe.)  tbat  some  would  understand  the 
words  as  though  they  meant.  Thess  wsre  the 
lOM  of  Caleb,  in  Ihe  lUicxnding  lint  of  Hur, 
Ephratah's  firstborn.  Tbis  rendering  is  got 
at  by  altering  "  tbo  son  of  Hur  "  Into  "  the 
sons  of  Hur,"  which  seems  to  have  been  the 
reading  of  the  Septuagint  manuscripts,  and 
which,  at  all  events,  their  rendering  has. 
The  remainder  of  ver.  50,  with  the  follow- 
ing four,  give  three  sons  of  Caleb :  I.  Skobal, 
prince  of  Klrjath-Jearlm  (city  of  woods ;  Jush. 
U.  17;  *viii,  15;  xv.  9,  00;  of.  xviii.  14),  on 
the  border-land  of  Judah  and  Denjamin,  and 
about  ten  miles  fiom  Jerusulem  on  tbe  road 
til  Emmaus  ^NtiMpolit).  It  is  to  be  identi- 
fied, almost  with  certainty,  with  the  modern 
Kuriet-el-Enab.  Other  references  of  exceed- 
ing interest  are  I  Sain.  vi.  21;vii.  2:2&ain. 
vi.  S;  Kzraii.  25;  Kch.vii  29;  ch.  liil.  6;  2 
Chron.  L  4 ;  Jcr.  xxvi.  £0 ;  Fs.  cxiiiL  6.  This 
Shobal  (ver.  S2)  had  two  sons,  Harosh,  f.e. 
Beainh  (ch.  iv.  5),  end  tbe  pro,-eDitor, 
whatever  hia  name,  of  half  of  the  people 
called  Manahsthitss  (Authorized  Version)— 
a  form  probably  Buggested  by  tbe  Uasoretio 
pointing  of  ver.  S4 — or  Ckatii-Jiammenon- 
eluttlt  (ilebrew  text),  which  Geseuius  treata 
as  a  proper  name,  and  which  means  "  tbs 
midst  of  quiijt  places"  (Fs.  xiiii.  2),  from 
which  comes  the  putronynjio  of  the  next 
verse  but  one  (Barriiigtoo,  '  Genealogies,' 
t.  213).  Prom  the  Kirjath-jtBriiii  family 
were  derived  (ver.  53),  the  IthritM,  Pnhitea, 
Bhumathites,  and  Kiihraites,  of  none  of 
whom,  except  probably  tbo  Ithrites  (2  Sam, 
xxiiL  SS;  ch.  xi.  40),  do  we  find  othol 
mention;  and  from  the  Slishraltes  again 
were  derived  two  offnboots,  the  ZareathitM 
and  EahtatOiteB,  the  towns  of  both  of  whum 
are  with  great  probability  to  be  tracked 
(Josh.  XV.  33;  lix.  41;  Judg.  xiiL.  25; 
iriii.  2).  Tbey  were  situated  In  that  part 
of  Judnh  calleil  the  "  low"  country,  or  tho 
Shtfeloh,  stretching  from  Joppa  to  Gaia  on 
the  Meditciraneuu.  2.  Balma,  prince  of 
Uothlchem.  Tho  ee-called  "sons"  hero 
attributed  to  him,  six  ia  number,  including 
Bethlehem,  evidently  betoken  families 
ralhcr  (ban  the  names  of  individuals.  The 
town  Netopbuh  (Ezra  iL  21;  Meh.  vil. 
2ti)  gave  tbe  gentile  noun  SetopbatUtM 
(2  Bam.  xxiil.  28 ;  Jei.  xl. »).  Atanth,  Qia 
honsa  of  Jeah  (I'.s.  "  crowns"  of  the  house 
of  Jouh),  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere ;  but 
the  reason  of  its  being  dietinguished  thus 
may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  there  was 
another  Ataroth  of  Gad  (Xumh.  xilU.  3, 
34),  and  yet  another  of  Epiiraita  {Jnsh.  xi7. 
5;  iviii.  13).  Ihe  Zorltss  (7.-1V)  Geseuiui 
tliiuks  to  be  another  gentile  form  from 
ny7»  with  "riJJ-ix,  but  of  them  we  do  not  read 
elsewhere.    Ver.  S5  should  not  have  been 


2i 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.      [ch.  n.  1—55. 


separated  from  the  last  word  of  theprevions 
Terde.  The  funiliei  of  the  loribee  is  linked 
on  by  the  oonjnnotion  and  (whioh  has 
coupled  the  former  eons  of  Salma  also  two 
and  two)  with  '*the  Zorites."  This  sixth 
set  of  descendants  from  Salma  is  exhibited 
to  ns  in  the  shape  of  a  trio  of  scribe 
families,  the  heads  of  which  will  have  been, 
presumably.  Tint,  Bhimea,  and  Soohah.  They 
are  said  to  have  dwelt  at  Jabei,  a  place  not 
ascertained ;  and  scarcely  to  be  put  into  con- 
nection with  the  Jabez  of  ch.  iv.  9.  The 
Vulgate  has  translated  the  names  of  these 
three  families:  Canentes  et  reaonantea  et 
in  tahemaculu  commorantes ;"  and  Ber- 
theau  advocates  the  interpretation.  These 
families,  it  appears,  were  not  purely  of 
Judah;  but  very  interesting  it  is  that, 
though  of  the  people  whose  land  and  pos- 
sessions were  to  yield  to  the  descendants  of 
Abraham  (Gen.  xv.  18 — 21),  yet  friendship 
and  intermarriage  bad  found  them  appa- 


rently a  lasting  place  in  Judah  (Judg.  i.  16), 
while  Saul  was  careful  to  urge  them  to  save 
themselves  when  he  was  about  to  smite  the 
Amalokites  (1  Sam.  xv.  6).  Though  nothing 
is  known  of  the  link  of  connection  given 
here  in  the  name  Hemath  (of  which  the 
Vulgate  gives  the  rendering,  Qui  veneruni 
de  celote  jMtrU),  yet  the  house  of  the 
Beohabites  is  well  known  (2  Kings  x.  15, 
23 ;  Jer.  xxxv.  2,  5,  18 ;  and  cf.  2  Sam.  iv. 
2,  particularly  8).  3.  In  ver.  51  HareiA 
(DTi)  only  here;  though  Dpn,  found  Neh. 
▼ii.  24;  x.  20;  Ezra  ii.  18,  may  possibly  be 
connected  with  it.  There  is  noUiing  fuiiher 
said  of  any  people  derived  from  him  except 
that  he  was  father  of  Beth-gader.  The 
identification  of  this  place  is  not  certain. 
Gesenius  thinks  it  perhaps  the  same  with 
Gederah  (Josh.  xv.  36),  but  it  is  more 
probably  the  Gedor  of  same  chapter  (fifty* 
eighth  verse),  on  the  load  between  Hebron 
and  Jerusalem. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 55. — The  human  family.  These  verses  present  a  series  of  family  pictures; 
they  remind  us  that  "Grod  setteth  the  solitary  in  families"  (Ps.  Ixviii.  6).  By 
thus  ordering  human  life  he  has  provided  for  the  maximum  of  happiness  and  of 
spiritual  well-being.    We  are  reminded  of — 

I.  Its  yabioub  belationships.  Here  we  have  husband  and  wife,  father  and  mother, 
son  and  daughter,  brother  and  sister.  How  excellent  is  God's  loving-kindness  in  thus 
binding  our  hearts  and  lives  together  in  such  happy  and  sacred  bonds,  refining  our 
souls  and  multiplying  our  joys  1 

II.  Its  yabioub  dispositioks.  In  some  esses  we  have  parents  and  children  com- 
plete ;  in  others,  parents  without  children  at  all  (ver.  30) ;  in  others,  daughters  without 
sons ;  in  others,  sons  without  daughters ;  in  another  case  a  child  bom  after  its  father's 
death  (ver.  24) ;  in  another  a  servant  elevated  to  a  son-in-law  (ver.  35).  What  almost 
endless  varieties  there  are  in  the  circumstances  and  relations  in  which  our  family  life 
is  found  I 

III.  Its  FBICELE88  ADVANTAGE  TO  OUB  BACE.  1.  It  IS  the  guardian  of  a  nation's 
purity ;  the  morals  of  a  people  are  high  or  low  as  it  respects  or  disregards  the  family 
bond.  2.  It  shields  young  life  from  the  perils  by  which  it  would  otherwise  be  cor- 
rupted. 3.  It  calls  forth  from  maturity  the  best  virtues  which  manhood  and  woman- 
hood can  show.    We  are  thus  led  to — 

IV.  The  disciplike  it  fbovides  fob  each  stage  of  life.  1.  In  childhood  it 
nurtures  obedience,  submission.  2.  In  youth,  industry,  concession.  3.  In  young  man- 
hood, hardihood ;  in  young  womanhood,  delicacy  of  feeling.  4.  In  maturity,  patience, 
self-command,  unselfishness,  mutual  concession,  intercessory  prayer. 

V.  Its  beabikg  on  human  fiety.  We  could  not  have  known  and  trusted  and  loved 
Ood  as  our  heavenly  Father,  but  for  human  parentage ;  we  could  not  have  learned  how 
to  cultivate  the  right  spirit  for  reception  into  and  acceptance  within  the  kingdom,  but 
for  human  childhood  (Matt,  xviii.  2) ;  we  could  not  have  known  how  best  to  regard 
our  fellows  and  feel  toward  them,  but  for  human  brotherhood  (Matt.  xxiiL  8). — G. 

Ver.  7. — A  transgressor  and  troubler.  In  most  instances  in  the  genealogies  of  this 
book,  the  names  of  the  successive  members  of  the  families  of  Israel  are  mentioned 
without  remark.  But  now  and  then  a  memorable  personage  is  named,  and  some  trait 
of  his  character,  some  incident  in  his  life,  is  recorded,  or  rather  referred  to,  by  the 
chronicler.  This  is  the  case  even  when  the  record  is  one  of  shame  and  infamy.  So 
is  it  with  Achan. 


ch.il  1—65.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  25 

L  Achan  was  a  tbaksobessob.  In  transgression  mucli  is  involved :  e.g.  Law,  A 
line  must  be  drawn  in  order  that  it  may  be  passed  over.  A  commandment  must  be 
given  before  it  can  be  violated.  In  the  case  of  Achan,  the  law  was  published  with 
anthority.  CoveUmsness.  Before  there  can  be  sin  there  must  be  lust.  Desires  are 
divinely  implanted,  and  evil  does  not  lie  in  their  existence,  but  in  their  unlawful 
gratification.  Temptation,  There  must  be  some  circumstance  without  eliciting  and 
Kistering  the  desire  within.  Men  often  blame  the  temptation,  but  unreasonably,  for 
the  evil  is  in  themselves,  not  in  the  innocent  and  often  unconscious  occasion  of  their 
transgression.  Yielding  of  the  will  when  tempted.  Without  this,  all  that  goes  before 
is  harmless;  it  is  here  that  the  harm  begins.  If  temptation  is  resisted,  virtue  is 
strengthened  and  character  is  improved ;  if  the  will  succumb,  moral  deterioration 
ensues.  The  latter  was  the  case  with  Achan.  Hiding  of  sin.  This  will  often  follow 
upon  transgression.  There  is  a  hope  that  it  may  be  concealed  from  men,  perhaps  even 
from  Gh)d.  Conscience  of  sin.  This  is  divinely  appointed,  to  lead  the  sinner  to  re- 
pentance and  reformation.  Tet  it  may  prove,  if  it  fail  in  this  mission,  a  scourge  to 
chastise,  awakening  remorse  and  fear. 

IL  Achan  was  a  tboubleb.  The  trouble  which  follows  upon  sin  is  not  confined  to 
the  sinner.  In  the  case  before  us  all  Israel  was  punished  because  of  one  man's  sin. 
8ach  is  the  constitution  of  society,  that  this  is  often  seen,  the  chastisement  of 
many  for  the  transgression  of  one.  Trouble  may  lead  to  inquiry,  and  inquiry  to 
discovery.  This  happened  in  Achan's  case  by  supernatural  agency ;  but  the  same 
happens  every  day  by  means  which  appear  natural.  Discovery  may  lead  to  confession, 
and  confession  may  be  followed  by  punishment.  So  it  was  with  Achan.  And  there 
are  cases  where  there  seem  to  be  no  means  of  avoiding  the  consequences  of  trans- 
gression. Tet  the  sinner  must  remember  that  we  have  been  assured  that  ^  if  we  con- 
fess our  sins,  Grod  is  faithful  and  just  to  fordve  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all 
unrighteousness."  Trouble  may  be  followed  by  Divine  acceptance  and  favour.  There 
eeems  something  harsh  in  Joshua's  language  to  Achan,  '*  Why  hast  thou  troubled 
us?  The  Lord  shall  trouble  thee  this  day."  Yet,  when  the  transgressor  was  removed 
and  the  transgression  was  put  away  from  Israel,  the  Lord  received  his  people  again 
into  his  favour. 

Pbactical  lessons.  1.  Before  transgression,  "  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out." 
2.  After  transgres-sion,  the  trouble  that  comes  upon  the  sinner  is  sent  in  mercy.  3. 
Confession  and  repentance,  and  faith  in  Christ,  are  necessary  in  order  to  reconciUation 
and  acceptance. — T. 

Ver.  55. — The  families  of  the  scribes.  These  Books  of  Chronicles  may  have  been 
the  work  of  Ezra,  the  prince  of  scribes.  In  any  case,  they  bear  traces  of  the  handiwork 
of  that  profession.  A&  learned  men,  whose  learning  was  devoted  to  the  exposition  of 
the  Law  of  Moses,  they  were  peculiarly  suitable  to  preserve  the  records  of  the  theocracy. 

I.  Observe  the  occupation  of  the  scribes.  It  was  to  study  and  to  expound  the 
aacred  books  of  the  nation,  to  read  these  writings  in  public,  and  to  write — probably  to 
write  copies  of  the  Law,  and  commentaries  upon  its  letter  and  spirit.  The  civil  and 
sacred  Law  were  alike  their  theme.  All  legal  and  religious  documents  were  entrusted 
to  their  care. 

II.  Remark  the  pbofessional  position  of  the  scribes.  The  text  speaks  of  ''the 
families  of  the  scribes."  Occupations  have  a  tendency  to  transmit  themselves  from 
fisther  to  son.  Hereditary  pursuits  are  observable  in  all  communities.  Traditions  and 
habits  are  thus  maintained  and  perpetuated.  These  learned  Hebrew  families  seem  to 
have  dwelt  in  certain  fixed  places,  forming,  it  may  be,  colleges  of  studious,  scholarly, 
literary  men. 

III.  Notice  the  gbowth  and  progress  and  history  of  the  scribes.  As  a  class  they 
date  from  the  close  of  the  Captivity ;  and  from  that  time  onward  they  appear  to  have 
exercised  great  and  growing  influence  over  the  national  life  and  religion.  In  the  time 
of  our  Saviour  they  were  evidently  a  very  important  class  of  the  community.  In  their 
two  grades — the  lower,  the  interpreters  of  the  classic  Hebrew  into  the  colloquial 
Aramaic ;  the  higher,  the  doctors  learned  in  the  Pentateuch — they  supplied  to  Israel 
much  of  the  intellectual  and  moral  element  in  the  national  life.  Jesus  admitted  the 
excellence  of  their  work  when  he  denominated  his  ministers  "  scribes  instructed  unto 


26  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.      [ch.  ii.  1-^6. 

tho  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  **  he  pointed  out  their  defects  when  he  required  of  his  followers 
a  higher  righteousness  than  thcira.  And  the  Evangelists  contrast  the  professional 
formalism  of  tho  Jewish  scholars  with  the  freshness  and  authority  of  the  Great  and 
Divine  Teacher. 

Practioal  lessons.  1.  A  literary  profession  may  be  of  great  service  to  the  cause 
of  religion.  Ignorance  is  a  foe  to  truth.  Christianity  will  be  the  more  appreciated 
the  more  it  is  studied,  the  more  the  light  of  cultivated  intellects  is  brought  to  Dear  upon 
it.  2.  A  profession  devoted  to  the  advancement  of  religious  learning  is  not  without 
its  perils.  There  is  danger  lest  the  form  displace  the  substance,  and  the  letter  the 
spirit  True  and  fervent  piety  alone  can  correct  these  tendencies  and  avert  these 
perijs. — T. 

Ver.  1. — Jacob — Israel.  Mistake  is  often  made  concerning  Jacob,  and  his  character 
and  conduct  are  very  imperfectly  estimated.  He  is  set  in  contrast  with  the  open-hearted, 
impulsive,  and  generous  Esau,  to  his  great  disadvantage.  But  we  forget  that  we  are 
able  to  estimate  Jacob's  character  more  fully  because  the  process  of  his  moral  and 
spiritual  training,  in  the  Divine  providential  leadings,  is  detailed,  and  we  therefore 
have  so  much  of  his  badness  revealed  to  us  in  the  process.  We  do  not  really  know 
Esau  as  we  know  Jacob.  The  accounts  that  have  reached  us  concerning  him  only 
deal  with  what  appears  to  be  attractive  and  good,  and  we  see  very  few  indications  of 
the  badness  which  his  complete  story  might  bring  to  light.  Jacob  is  set  before  us  as 
a  man  under  immediate  Divine  training,  and  something  like  the  accomplishment  of 
one  great  stage  of  the  Divine  purpose  is  indicated  in  the  bestowment  of  the  new  name, 
Isrtul,  The  meaning  of  tho  two  names  Jacob — the  supplantcr,  Israd — the  prince  of 
God,  should  be  given  ;  and  the  circumstances  connected  uiih  the  affixing  of  each  name 
should  be  recalled.  They  serve  to  note  the  marked  features  of  the  two  distiuct  portions 
of  Jacob's  life. 

I.  Jacob's  first  name — the  supplanter.  This  declares  the  infirmity  of  his 
natural  disposition.  It  is  clear,  from  tho  record  given  in  Genesis,  that  he  began  life 
under  very  serious  disabilities,  heavily  weighted.  The  doctrine  of  heredity  finds 
forcible  illustration.  He  inherited  his  mother's  disposition — a  tendency  to  scheme,  to 
outwit  others,  to  take  advantage  of  them,  to  trip  them  up,  to  get  one's  own  good  even 
at  the  expense  of  other  people's  loss ;  the  planning,  bargaining,  keen-dealing  spirit. 
This  inherited  evil  disposition  so  influences  him  that  he  "entraps  his  brother,  ha 
deceives  his  lather,  he  makes  a  bargain  oven  in  his  prayer ;  in  his  dealings  with  Laban, 
in  his  meeting  with  Esau,  he  still  calculates  and  contrives  ;  he  distrusts  his  neigh- 
bours ...  he  repels,  even  in  his  lesser  traits,  the  free  confidence  that  we  cannot  with- 
hold from  the  patriarchs  of  the  elder  generation."  What  he  might  have  become  but 
for  the  grace  of  Orod  is  well  indicated  in  Dean  Stanley's  description  of  the  ordinary 
Arab  sheikh :  '*  In  every  respect,  except  that  which  most  concerns  us,  the  likeness  is 
complete  between  the  Bedouin  chief  of  the  present  day  and  the  Bedouin  chief  who 
came  from  Chaldasa  nearly  four  thousand  years  ago.  The  more  we  see  the  outward 
conformity  of  Abraham  and  his  immediate  descendants  to  the  godless^  grasping^  foul-- 
mouthed  Arahs  of  the  modem  desert,  nay,  even  their  fellowship  in  the  infirmities  of 
their  common  state  and  country,  the  more  we  shall  recognize  the  force  of  the  religious 
£aith  which  has  raised  them  from  that  low  estate  to  be  the  heroes  and  saints  of  their 
people."  To  add  to  Jacob's  natural  disabilities,  he  was  the  favourite  child  of  his 
mother,  and,  for  long  years,  was  placed  under  her  influence  and  the  persuasion  of  her 
mischievous  example.  This  tended  to  remove  the  sense  of  evil  from  his  scheming  and 
deceiving  ways.  And  circumstances  seemed  to  favour  him ;  his  brother's  hunger  and 
his  father's  blindness  seemed  to  be  providential  opening  for  carrying  out  his  mother's 
plan  for  securing  the  birthright  and  the  blessing.  So  often  we  deceive  ourselves  with 
the  idea  that  Providence  helps  us  to  do  what  we,  in  our  mere  wilfulness,  intend  to  do. 
All  we  can  say  of  Jacob,  under  his  first  name,  is  that  there  is  force  of  character,  if 
only  it  can  be  toned  aright ;  and  there  is  an  interest  in  religious  things,  a  religious 
thoughtfulness,  which  gives  promise  of  a  true  and  noble  life  when  he  has  passed  through 
a  long  period  of  trial  and  sorrow  and  discipline.  With  all  his  infirmities,  and  with 
that  sad  absence  of  simplicity  and  uprightness  in  him,  there  is  yet  the  making  of  tho  good 
man.   And  so,  even  in  these  first  stages,  his  story  carries  lessons  of  hopefulness  to  thoss 


CH.  n.  1--55.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  27 

who  feel  deeply  the  natural  infirmity  of  their  characters,  or  have  to  do  with  the 
training  of  young  people  who  are  heavily  weighted  with  inherited  infirmities. 

II.  Jacob's  second  name — the  fbince  of  God.  This  declares  the  possible  triumph 
of  Divine  grace  over  natural  infirmity.  We  must  connect  it,  not  with  the  incident  of 
meeting  Esau  only,  but  with  Jacob's  whole  life.  It  seals  the  Divine  training,  and 
afiirms  JacoVs  conversion  from  the  self-willed  and  self-seeking  spirit.  *' Jacob  has 
gone  through  a  long  training  and  chastening  from  the  Qod  of  his  fathers,  to  whose  care 
and  guidance  he  had  given  himself  (at  Bethel)  ;  he  suffers  heavily,  but  he  learns  from 
that  he  suffered."  Trace  the  stages  of  the  Divine  dealing.  The  force  of  the  scene  of 
Mahanaim  in  completing  the  Divine  work  is  suggestively  given  by  F.  W.  Robertson : 
"His  name  was  changed  from  Jacob  to  Israel,  because  himself  was  an  altered 
man.  Hitherto  there  had  been  somethiDg  subtle  in  his  character — ^a  certain  cunning 
and  craft — a  want  of  breadth,  as  if  he  had  no  firm  footing  upon  reality.  Jacob  was 
tender  and  devout  and  grateful  for  God's  pardon,  and  only  half  honest  still.  But  this 
half-insincere  man  is  brought  into  contact  with  the  awful  God,  and  his  subtlety  falls 
from  him — he  becomes  real  at  once.  No  longer  Jacob — the  supplanter,  but  Israel — the 
prince  of  God  ...  a  larger,  more  unselfish  name — a  larger  and  more  unselfish  man— > 
nonest  and  true  at  last."  This,  then,  becomes  the  great  and  searching  question  for  us 
all:  not, "  What  are  we  in  our  inherited  tendencies  and  natural  dispositions?"  but, 
**What  are  we  now,  and  what  are  we  becoming,  in  all  holy  triumph  over  inward 
infirmities  and  outward  foes,  through  yielding  ourselves  fully  to  the  leaoings  and  teach- 
ings and  sanctifyings  of  Divine  grace?"  **  And  such  were  some  of  you,  but  ye  are 
washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
by  the  Spirit  of  our  God."— R.  T. 

Ver.  3. — Divine  judgment  on  individual  sin.  Very  little  is  known  of  Er,  The 
account  in  Genesis  (xxxviii.  7)  is  as  brief  as  that  given  in  the  Chronicles.  Tet  it 
sets  clearly  before  us  a  case  of  early  death,  probably  a  sudden  and  violent  death,  and 
it  declares  to  us  that,  in  this  particular  instance,  the  death,  and  the  manner  of  the 
death,  were  immediate  judgments  on  personal  transgression.  There  is  a  strong 
tendency  to  assume  individual  sin  as  the  cause  of  calamities  and  so-called  accidents,  but 
our  Lord  taught  ns  that  we  cannot  always,  or  necessarily,  trace  such  a  connection.  It 
may  be  so,  but  it  may  not  be  so ;  and  we,  in  Christian  charity,  had  better  leave  the 
discovery  of  the  connection  in  God's  own  hands  (see  Luke  xiii.  1 — ^5).  Still,  we 
should  be  ready  to  learn  the  lessons  which  God  may  design  to  teach  us,  when  he  is 
pleased  to  give  us  illustrative  cases  in  his  Word.  Oftentimes  we  find  the  Divine 
recognition  and  judgment  of  social  and  national  sins  illustrated.  The  old  divine  bids 
us  remember  that  "  God  can  only  punish  nations,  as  such,  in  this  world ;  he  can 
punish  individuals  in  this  world  and  the  next."  Israel  is,  as  a  nation,  the  subject  of 
frequent  Divine  judgments,  and  Israel  is  bidden  observe  how  Divine  judgments  fall  on 
the  guilty  nations  around  her.  But  as  this  feature  of  the  Divine  dealings  is  set  forth 
so  prominently  and  so  constantly,  there  is  some  danger  of  our  assuming  that  Divine 
judgments,  as  executed  here  on  earth,  do  not  concern  the  individual;  and  that  God 
may  be  said  directly  to  govern  the  racef  but  not  the  man.  Such  a  delusion  would  tend 
to  nourish  human  wilfulness  and  pride,  and  still  more  completely  separate  men  from 
God  ;  and,  therefore,  we  have  men's  personal  sins,  and  the  immediate  Divine  judgment 
on  those  sins,  impressively  narrated. 

I.  Er's  sin  was  some  personal  act  of  wronq-doino.  Exactly  what  it  was  we  are 
not  told,  but  we  know  the  ways  in  which  men  nowadays  transgress  God's  laws  and 
insult  the  Divine  honour.  There  are  acts  of  wilful  disobedience  and  rebellion,  acts  of 
bodily  self-indulgence,  and  acts  of  violence  and  cruelty  toward  others.  Wo  have  to 
see  that  this  evil  of  Er's  was  distinctly  personal.  He  did  not  merely  share  in  the 
errors,  or  follies,  or  sins  of  his  age,  in  a  blind  and  heedless  way ;  he  made  wicked  ways 
for  himself,  and  wrought  evil  in  his  own  wilfulness.  Therefore  the  Divine  observation 
rested  upon  him  as  a  man  who  strove  to  set  himself  against  God. 

II.  Er's  sin  be  ve  a  led  a  hopelessly  corrupted  nature.  It  was  such  a  fruitage 
as  could  only  come  out  of  a  corrupt  tree.  Distinguish  between  the  one  sin  into  which 
man  may  be  tempted;  even  the  good  man  may  be  **  drawn  aside  and  enticed,"  **  overtaken 
in  a  fault; "  and  the  continuing  in  sin,  which  indicates  the  love  for  it,  and  the  dete- 


28  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.      [ch.  n.  1— 65, 


riorating  influence  it  has  exerted  on  mind  and  heart.  A  time  may  come  for  the  man 
(as  £r\  or  for  the  nation  (as  Sodom),  when  remedial  agencies  cease  to  be  of  avail,  and 
then  they  can  but  be  "  cut  down."  Illustrate  from  Pharaoh,  with  the  hardened  heart, 
from  King  Saul,  and  from  the  expression  used  in  Hosea  (iv.  17),  *'  Ephraim  is  joined 
to  idols :  let  him  alone." 

III.  Eb*8  sin  brouqht  upon  himself  Divine  judgment.  This  is  briefly  but  forcibly 
intimated  in  the  words,  '*  and  he  slew  him."  His  early  and  sudden  and  violent  death, 
was  no  disease  and  no  accident.  It  was  direct  Divine  judgment.  God  deals  with  the 
individual  exactly  as  with  the  hopelessly  corrupted  world  and  the  utterly  degraded 
Sodom.  Life  on  earth  is  forfeited  it  it  is  so  shamefully  abused.  Discuss  the  question 
how  far  we  may  recognize  calamities  reaching  individuals  as  Divine  judgment  on  their 
personal  transgressions.  In  every  age  there  are  open  and  notorious  cases,  e.g,  Ananias 
and  Sapphira.  We  may  say  that  it  is  quite  possible  for  any  accident  to  be  a  judgment ; 
but  it  may  be  a  judgment  on  a  bad  system,  and  the  sufferer  may  not  be  the  direct 
cause.    Impress  God's  constant  inspection  of  individual  conduct  and  character. — ^B.  T. 

Ver.  7. — Sinners  are  troublers.  Achar  is  but  a  modernized  form  of  the  familiar 
Aehan  (Josh.  vii.  25).  The  story  of  this  man  is  given  so  fully  in  the  early  records, 
and  is  here  so  definitely  recalled,  that  we  may  be  sure  some  important  and  permanent 
lessons  were  taught  by  it,  and  it  may  be  still  for  *'  our  instruction,  on  whom  the  ends  of 
the  world  are  come."  The  narrative  should  be  fully  detailed.  Bring  out  that  Achan's 
sin  was  at  once  stUf-will,  diaobediencef  covetousness^  and  sacrilege.  Explain  that  the 
one  condition  of  Divine  blessing  for  Israel  was  entire  and  unquestioning  loyalty  to  the 
Divine  will.  And  there  is  no  other  condition  of  blessing  now.  That  will  might 
oppose  seemingly  right  feelings;  and  this  brings  us  the  more  subtle  and  anxious 
testings  of  our  loyalty,  e,g.  Abraham's  ofiering  Isaac.  That  will  would  necessarily 
oppose  all  covetous  feeling.  The  man  who  wants  to  get  for  self  will  ever  find  it  hard 
to  accept  God's  will  and  way  for  him.  But  the  covetous  man  who  is  a  member  of  a 
community  not  only  brings  trouble  on  himself,  but  on  others  who  may  be  related 
to  him. 

I.  This  sinner's  sin.  Set  out  its  public  character,  in  view  of  Joshua's  public  pro- 
clamation. Show  its  aggravations,  as  committed  directly  against  the  known  will  of 
God. 

II.  This  sinner's  bin  brought  trouble  on  himself.  As  sin  always  must  do. 
Here  the  sorrow  of  feeling  himself  to  be  the  cause  of  national  disaster ;  the  penalty  of 
his  own  forfeited  life ;  and  the  misery  of  knowing  that  his  family  must  suffer  for  his 
sin,  and  his  very  name  be  blotted  out  of  the  national  records.  As  is  ever  the  case  with 
the  covetous,  Achan  might  glory  over  what  he  had  gained,  until  it  could  be  revealed 
to  him  what  he  had  lost ;  then  the  gain  could  only  appear  to  be  utterly  worthless  and 
hopelessly  ruinous,  a  millstone  hung  round  his  neck  to  drown  him  in  the  sea.    Com- 

Cwhat  Judas  Iscariot  gained — thirty  pieces  of  silver ;  and  what  he  lost — life  and 
^  )  and  Christ, — ^his  alL    But  the  point  which  is  specially  called  up  to  our  remem- 
brance is  that>— 

IIL  This  sinner's  sin  brouqht  trouble  on  others.  So  he  is  known  as  the 
'*  troubler  of  IsraeL"  Set  out  the  trouble  that  came  upon  Israel.  They  were  griev- 
ously smitten  before  their  foes.  Also  the  trouble  that  came  upon  Joshua.  He  was 
humbled  in  the  dust,  filled  with  fears,  and  driven  to  God  in  agonizing  intercessions. 
But  even  more  terribly  Achan's  sin  brought  trouble  upon  his  own  family,  just  as  the 
drunkard  and  the  licentious  and  the  dishonest  now  drag  down  into  their  ruin  those 
they  profess  to  love.  ''  Not  Achan  alone  is  called  forth  to  death,  but  all  his  family,  all 
his  substance.  The  actor  alone  does  not  smart  with  sacrilege ;  all  that  concerns  him  is 
enwrapped  in  the  judgment.  God's  first  revenges  are  so  much  the  more  fearful  because 
they  must  be  exemplary."  On  the  penalty  of  a  man's  wrong-doing  covering  and  including 
those  related  to  him,  ^chbishop  Whitgift  has  this  figure :  '*  The  eagle  that  stole  a  coal 
from  the  altar  thereby  set  her  nest  on  fire,  which  consumed  both  her  young  eagles 
and  herself  that  stole  it."  We  recognize  that,  if  men  are  linked  together  in  family  and 
social  life,  it  is  well  that,  in  God's  providence,  they  should  bear  one  another's  burdens, 
share  one  another's  disabilities,  and  suffer  one  another's  woes.  In  such  a  case  as 
Achan's  we  have  but  God  doing,  by  direct  command^  what  he  is  always  doing  in  the 


CH.  IL  1—55.]        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  29 

orderiDgs  of  Divino  providence.  No  man's  sin  can  ever  stand  alone — it  must  involve 
others  in  its  consequences ;  and  in  this  its  hatefulness  is  revealed  and  a  due  fear  of  it 
is  wrought  in  our  minds.  We  should  not  so  much  hesitate  to  sin  if  we  could  ensure 
the  limitation  of  the  consequences  to  ourselves.  But  our  sin  must  make  us  troublers^ 
Even  if  the  sin  be  forgiven,  the  issues  must  still  go  on.  Then  what  a  sublime  idea 
we  may  gain  of  the  redemption  which  Grod  proposes  1  It  deals  with  us  for  forgiveness 
and  cleansing,  but  it  also  ^oes  on  after  all  the  issues  of  human  sin,  and  will  not  rest 
until  the  whole  world  is  fully  delivered,  recovered,  and  saved. — R.  T. 

Ver.  11. — Lessons  from  the  story  of  Boaz,  The  Book  of  Ruth  is  preserved  to  us  as 
a  picture  of  family  and  social  life  in  the  disorderly  times  of  the  judges.  Both  Ruth 
and  Naomi  have  been  made  the  frequent  subject  of  public  teaching ;  but  Boaz  stands 
out  with  sufficient  prominence  in  the  narrative  to  justify  our  fixing  attention  on  him. 
Give  the  story,  and  especially  the  gleaning  customs  of  those  olden  times ;  the  kindly 
relations  of  masters  and  labourers ;  the  customs  of  seeking  protection  from  the  family 
<7(7d/,  or  avenger ;  of  confirming  covenants  by  the  gift  of  a  shoe ;  and  of  conducting 
matters  of  business  in  the  open  space  within  the  city  gates.  Fully  explain  the  Eastern 
law  of  the  go^L    We  may  find  illustrated  in  the  conduct  of  Boaz — 

L  The  oonsiderateness  of  the  true  gentleman.  See  bis  gentle  and  considerate 
treatment  of  the  poor  gleaner,  and  his  gentle  dealing  with  her  when  she  claimed  his 
protection.  The  essence  of  the  Christian  gentleman  is  oonsiderateness  for  the  feelings 
and  wishes  of  others,  and  a  gentle  way  of  doing  all  things,  even  hard  and  painful 
tilings.  Find  beautiful  illustrations  in  the  tender  oonsiderateness  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ;  and  compare  Paul's  address  to  the  elders  at  Miletus,  and  the  tone  of  the 
Epistle  to  the  Philippians. 

IL  The  besponsiveness  to  akotheb's  trust.  It  is  always  the  mark  of  the  good 
man  that  he  loves  to  be  trusted,  and  readily  responds  to  trust.  So  Boaz  did  when 
Ruth  put  herself  under  his  protection.  The  Lord  Jesus  always  looked  Sot  faith — trust ; 
and  opened  his  best  treasures  for  the  opened,  trusting  heart. 

III.  The  loyalty  to  the  sense  of  duty.  Shown  in  his  taking  up  Ruth's  case  at 
once,  and  earnestly,  and  making  himself  liable  for  all  that  was  involved  in  the  vindi- 
cation of  her  rights.  Then  work  out  how  Divine  benedictions  ever  follow  right 
character  and  conduct.  Ruth  and  Boaz  both  get  their  reward.  The  "  right "  may  not 
always  disclose  its  issues  at  once.  They  often  seem  painfully  delayed,  but,  if  we 
follow  on,  right  is  sure  to  lead  to  practical  blessing.  Bight  never  yet  led  wrong ;  and 
good  never  yet  finally  issued  in  evil, — R.  T. 

Yer.  13.-7^  character  of  Jesse,    Biographies  usually  make  much  of  the  parental 

connections  and  ancestral  relations  of  their  hero.     It  is  even  discussed  whetner  the 

special  genius  of  a  person  is  to  be  traced  to  his  father  or  to  his  mother.    In  the  earlier 

Scriptures  the  mother's  name   and  character  are  seldom  given  (exceptions  may  be 

found  in  the  cases  of  Sarah,  Rebokah,  and  Hannah);  but  in  the  time  of  the  later 

kings  the  mother's  name  is  preserved  with  care.      The  importance  of  hereditary 

connections  may  concern  both  the    intellectual  forces  of  the  mind  and  the  moral 

qualities  making  up  the  character.    There  is  the  heritage  of  goodness  as  well  as  of 

greatness;   and,  therefore,  St.  Paul  thanks  God  that  Timothy  stands  in  the  third 

generation  of  marked  faith  and  piety  (2  Tim.  i.  5).      Almost  nothing  is  known  of 

the  mother  of  David,  and  the  absence  of  information  has  led  to  strange  conjecture ; 

Dean  Stanley  curiously  suggesting  that  she  may  have  been  previously  a  wife  or 

concubine  of  one  Nahash,  possibly  an  Ammonite  king,  who  under  some  circumstances 

not  detailed  became  a  second  wife  of  Jesse,  and  by  him  the  mother  of  David.    All  that 

the  narrative  suggests  is  that  David  was  much  younger  than  his  brothers,  and  the 

child  of  Jesse's  old  age.    He  is  introduced  to  us  as  conversing  with  Samuel  on  the 

occasion  of  the  anointing  of  David  (I  Sam.  xvi.) ;  as  caring  for  the  wants  of  his  children 

while  they  were  away  from  home  in  the  army  of  Saul  (1  Sam.  xvii.) ;  and  as  the 

object  of  David's  s^iecial  care  when  the  personal  enmity  of  Saul  put  his  relatives,  as 

well  as  David  himself,  in  peril  (1  Sam.  xxii.  3, 4).    The  incident  in  which  the  personal 

character  of  Jesse  is  most  fully  indicated  is  that  of  sending  David  with  a  present  to 

bis  sons  in  the  army ;  and  this  suggests  that  he  was  a  thoughtful  and  affectionate  father. 


80  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.      [ch.ii.  1—65. 

and  permits  us  to  trace  something  of  David's  remarkable  family  affection  to  his 
paternity.  He  may  therefore  serve  to  introduce  the  subject  of  paternal  relationships 
and  duties,  and  the  rewards  which  those  may  find  in  the  career  and  virtue  of  their 
children  who  have  not  been  themselves  remarkable  for  anything  save  for  being  good 
fathers.  The  Divine  recognition  of  faithfulness  in  this  precise  office  and  relation  is 
indicated  in  God*8  commendation  of  Abmham  (Gen.  xviii.  19),  *'  For  I  know  him,  that 
he  will  command  his  children  and  his  household  after  him,  and  they  shall  keep  the  way 
of  the  Lord." 

I.  Fatheblt  love  Fnms  fittiko  expression  in  wise  bule  and  bestbaints.  Jesse 
seems  to  have  had  such  authority.  His  sons,  though  of  full  age,  promptly  come 
and  go  at  his  bidding.  He  appears  to  have  had  his  household  fully  under  control, 
appointing  each  member  his  place  and  work.  The  well-being  of  families  depends  on 
the  firmness  of  the  father's  rule.  The  first  conceptions  of  right,  and  of  the  duties  of 
submission  and  obedience,  happily  come  to  us  associated  with  our  reverence  for,  and 
afiection  for,  our  father.  And  worthy  fulfilment,  in  this  respect,  of  the  paternal  duties 
carries  to  our  children  worthy  ideas  of  the  righteousness  and  love  of  "  our  Father  who 
is  in  heaven." 

II.  Fatherly  love  can  make  high  sacbifices.  Illustrated  in  Jesse's  sending  his 
sons  to  the  army  in  the  time  of  national  peril.  How  much  he  felt  their  danger  ia  seen 
in  his  anxiety  to  know  of  their  welfare  while  on  the  battle-field.  Such  sacrifices  have 
often  been  required  of  parents  in  times  of  national  danger,  and  similar  sacrifices  in 
quieter  spheres,  especially  in  devoting  sons  to  missionary  work.  Show  that  to  the 
trueparent  such  sacrifices  are  made  with  mingled  feelings  oijoy  and  sorrow. 

Hi.  Fatherly  love  finds  its  beward  in  the  childben^s  care;  as  Jesse's  life 
was  saved  by  David  when  Saul's  enmity  put  the  family  in  peril.  Loving  children  have 
no  greater  joy  than  that  of  carine  for  and  tending  their  aged  patents  who  have 
toiM  and  suffered  so  much  and  so  long  for  them.  See  our  Lord's  care  of  his  mother 
from  his  cross. — R.  T. 

Ver.  20,'-^Artisti€  gifts  finding  religious  spheres.  (For  the  earlier  references  to 
BezaJeelf  see  Exod.  xxxi.  2;  xxxv.  30;  xxxvi.  1,  2 ;  xxxvii.  1.)  Explain  the  precise 
endowment  of  this  man  and  his  companion,  and  the  assertion  of  his  call  by  God,  who 
specially  ''  filled  him  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  wisdom,  and  in  understanding,  and  in 
knowledge,  and  in  all  manner  of  workmanship."  It  has  been  said  that  "  their  work 
was  to  be  only  that  of  handicraftsmen.  Everything  that  they  had  to  do  was  pre- 
scribed in  strict  and  precise  detail.  There  was  to  be  no  exercise  for  their  original 
powers  of  invention  nor  for  their  taste."  But  this  appears  to  be  a  needless  limitation 
of  their  mission,  especially  as  we  are  told  that  they  were  called  to  '*  devise  cunning 
works,  to  work  in  gold,"  etc. ;  and,  however  minute  patterns  of  artistic  work  may  be, 
even  this  worthy  carrying  out  makes  demand  on  artistic  faculty  and  taste.  We  are 
rather  disposed  to  give  Bezaleel  credit  for  designing  much  of  the  ornamentation,  and 
elaborating  the  details  of  a  general  sketch  furnished  by  Moses.  It  is  curious  to  note 
that,  in  a  mistaken  apprehension  of  the  commandment  TExod.  xx.  4),  the  Jews  would 
not  cultivate  either  the  arts  of  painting  or  sculpture.  Tnis  may  have  been  a  safeguard 
to  them  under  the  temptations  of  surrounding  idolatry,  but  it  seriously  limited  their 
culture  as  a  nation,  and  possibly  made  their  idolatrous  love  of  images  and  aesthetic 
worship  the  more  intense  when  once  the  barriers  were  broken  down.  The  Divine  call 
and  endowments  of  Bezaleel  are  the  Divine  protest  against  the  neglect  of  those  artistio 
faculties  which  are  an  essential  part  of  man's  composite  nature,  as  God  has  been  pleased 
to  create  it  These  faculties  have  their  own  place,  their  right  place ;  and  it  is  at  the 
peril  of  an  imperfect  and  one-sided  culture  that  we,  on  the  one  hand,  neglect  them, 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  push  them  into  an  exaggerated  place. 

I.  The  mission  of  the  abts  in  human  life.  Take  illustrations  from  the  arts  of 
painting,  sculpture,  music,  and  poetry,  and  show  how  they  bear  on  the  refinement 
of  human  life.  Each  holds  out  an  ideal  standard  of  purity  and  beauty,  and  seeking 
for  absolute  grace  of  form  materially  aids  in  securing  real  goodness  and  purity  and 
truth.  Illustrate  by  the  influence  of  works  of  art  in  our  homes  as  aids  to  the  culture 
of  family  life.  They  also  bear  directly  upon  the  pleasure  of  human  life.  For  most  of 
us  the  days  must  be  spent  in  dull,  grinding  toil,  which  wears  out  the  brightness  and 


on.  n.  1-65.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  31 

romance  of  our  Rpirits.  Our  real  world  is  hard  and  depressing.  It  is  of  the  utmost 
concern  to  us  that  we  may  pass  into  an  ideal  world  create^i  by  the  imagination,  and 
find  pleasure  in  its  winsome  and  joyous  scenes.  The  arts  take  us  into  another  world, 
and  bring  to  the  earth-toilers  the  pleasures  of  a  paradise.  Evidently  true  of  music 
and  poetry,  really  true  of  all. 

II.  The  mission  of  the  arts  is  religious  life.  Strangely  in  this  sphere  we 
still  dread  their  influence.  Yet  the  decorations  of  even  the  tabernacle  and  temple 
reproach  us,  and  much  more  David's  elaborate  efforts  to  secure  the  "  beautiful "  and  the 
•*  pleasing  "  in  the  temple- worship.  Explain  that  the  arts  serve  in  religion  the  one 
great  end  of  keeping  the  ideal  and  the  ideally  perfect  ever  before  us,  and  so  they 
become  a  perpetual  uplifting  inspiration,  surrounding  us  ever  with  the  symbols  and 
the  suggestions  of  the  Divine  and  etemaL  They  are  for  us  the  "figures  of  the 
true." 

III.  The  kecessart  limitation  of  the  artistic  in  the  hioher  and  religious 
SPDERES.  The  creations  of  art  must  never  be  sought  for  themselves,  or  they  become 
virtual  idols.  They  may  only  be  symbols  of  realities,  and  handmaids  to  truths.  As 
a  practical  conclusion,  it  may  be  shown  that  a  man  is  not  responsible  for  other  gifts 
than  those  with  which  he  is  personally  entrusted,  but  he  is  bound  to  be  fully  loyal  to 
Gt)d  in  the  use  of  those  he  has.  Sooner  or  later  in  life,  every  man  who  wants  to  be 
faithful  will  discover  his  faculty  a.nd  find  his  sphere, — R.  T. 

Vers.  22,  23. — The  protpess  ofjair.  The  story  of  this  man  is  given  in  Numb,  xxxii. 
41 ;  Deut.  iii.  14 ;  Josh,  xiii,  30.  From  the  repeated  mention  of  him  we  may  assume 
that  he  was  a  remarkable  man  for  military  genius,  and  was  in  so  large  a  degree  success- 
ful in  his  warlike  enterprises  as  to  stand  out  before  the  ages  as  a  prominent  examp'e 
of  the  warlike  endowment,  and  its  place  in  the  Divine  purposes.  The  brief  notice 
of  this  man  suggests  for  our  consideration — The  consecration  to  God  of  the  military 
talent.  We  cannot  accept  fully  the  facts  of  human  history  without  recognizing  the 
Divine  gift  of  the  genius  of  the  warrior.  Different  views  are  held  on  the  righteousness 
of  war.  From  the  Christian  stand{K)int  all  offensive  war  must  be  at  once  and  entirely 
condemned,  but  defensive  war — and  aid  to  those  called  to  de'^ensive  war — appears  to  be 
fully  consistent  with  Christian  principles.  Still,  we  shall  unfeignedly  rejoice  when  the 
principle  of  arbitration  can  be  universally  adopted,  and  the  "  nations  learn  war  no  more." 
It  is,  even  in  its  best  forms,  a  terrible  human  scourge  and  evil.  But,  whatever  our 
view  of  it  may  be,  history  keeps  her  testimony,  and  declares  that,  in  the  long  story  of 
our  race,  war  has  been  one  of  the  important  agencies  used  by  God,  and  overruled  by 
him,  to  the  accomplishment  of  his  gracious  ends;  and  that  he  has,  again  and  again, 
raised  up  men  who  had  "  war "  for  their  life-mission,  and  the  military  endowment  as 
their  precise  trust.  There  have  been  the  Joshuas,  the  Davids,  the  Maccabees,  the 
Marlboroughs,  and  the  Wellingtons,  etc.  Times  and  circumstances  have  made  war 
the  only  possible  agency  for  the  jmnishing  of  wrong  and  the  deliverance  and  confir- 
mation of  the  right.  Still,  we  should  distinctly  observe  that  warfare  is  the  creation  of 
man's  lust  of  power  and  dominion,  his  ambition  to  be  supreme ;  and  that  the  "  God  of 
peace "  does  but — ^if  we  may  so  say — fit,  temporarily,  into  the  circumstances  thus 
created,  until  he  can  get  fully  established  his  kingdom  of  righteousness  in  which  war 
will  be  unknown. 

I.  The  distinctivb  military  gift.  It  is  the  gft  of  command  over  other  mm 
finding  one  particular  mode  of  expression.  This  is  the  essence  of  it,  but  it  is  combined 
with  the  constructive  faculty,  the  power  of  organization^  courage,  bodily  skill,  quick- 
ness of  invention,  etc. — all,  it  may  be  pointed  out,  endowments  which  may  find 
other  spheres  than  battle-fields.  Illustrate  by  the  devotion  of  F.  W.  Robertson's 
soldierly  gifts  to  the  service  of  the  Church,  and  by  the  gift  of  ruling  men  found  in  the 
heads  of  large  mills  and  factories. 

II.  The  loyalty  that  guides  the  use  of  the  military  gifts.  It  is  charac- 
teristic of  the  soldier  that  he  is  loyal  to  his  king,  and  this  loyalty  finds  expression  in 
instant  and  unquestioning  obedience.  So  the  soldier  among  us  is  a  plea  urging  us  to 
maintain  similar  relations  to  our  Lord,  who  is  the  "  King  of  kings."  So  far  as  we  can 
see,  it  would  be  a  loss  to  the  moral  health  of  a  nation  if  the  example  of  soldierly 
loyalty  and  obedience  were  removed.    St.  Paul  was  essentially  a  loyal  soldier.    When 


32 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.      icu.  m.  1—24. 


a  command  came  from  his  Lord,  he  tells  us, "  Immediately  we  conferred  not  with 
flesh  and  Wood." 

III.  The  witness  to  virtue  and  duty  that  is  made  by  military  men.  Lord 
Nelson's  words  embody  the  witness  all  soldiers  make.  We  must  work  for,  suffer  for, 
and,  if  need  be,  die  for,  duty,  ^  England  expects  that  every  man  will  do  his  duty" 
And  in  this  time-serying,  self-seeking,  money-getting  age  we  cannot  afford  to  lose  any 
agency  which  renders  public  witness  to  the  fact  that  there  is  something  nobler  than 
even  U/e — it  is  duty.  If  it  could  be  so  that,  in  the  world  of  the  future,  the  military 
senius  was  no  longer  needed,  still  even  a  world  at  peace  would  need  the  story  of  the 
heroic  ages,  and  its  witness  to  the  dignity  of  endurance,  obedience,  promptitude, 
sacrifice  for  a  high  idea,  and  above  all  to  the  paramount  claims  of  duty, — ^R.  T. 

Ver,  55. — 2%«  mission  of  the  Kenites,  This  people  is  first  mentioned  in  Gen.  xv.  19. 
Thev  were  a  nomadic  tribe,  and  their  principal  seat  seems  to  have  been  the  rocky  tracts 
in  the  south  and  south-west  of  Palestine,  near  the  Amalekites  (see  Numb.  xxiv.  21, 
22).  Jethro  was  a  Kenite.  Jael  was  wife  of  Heber  the  Eenite.  Saul  spared  them  in 
his  expedition  against  the  Amalekit«s  (1  Sam.  xv.  6).  Dayid  maintained  friendly 
relations  with  them  (1  Sam.  xxx.  29).  The  house  of  the  Rechabites  belonged  to  this 
tribe.  The  friendly  feeling  between  the  two  tribes,  based  on  the  conduct  of  the 
Kenites  at  the  time  of  the  Exodus  (Exod.  xviii.  10—19 ;  Numb.  x.  29—32),  led  to 
their  intermixture  and  almost  amalgamation  with  the  Israelites — Eenite  families  not 
only  dwelling  among  them,  but  being  actually  regarded  as  of  one  blood.  Their  semi- 
monastic  austerity  is  their  chief  feature.  They  preserved  their  nomadic  life  and 
customs  even  when  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  the  cities  of  Israel.  Dean  Stanley  thus 
pictures  a  colony  of  them,  that  of  Heber,  the  husband  of  Jael :  "  Between  Hazor, 
the  capital  of  Jabin,  and  Eedesh-Naphtali,  birthplace  of  Barak— each  within  a  day*s 
journey  of  the  other — lies,  raised  high  above  the  plain  of  Merom,  amongst  the  hills  of 
Naphtali,  a  green  plain.  This  plain  is  still  and  was  then  studded  with  massive  terebinths. 
Underneath  the  spreading  branches  of  one  of  them  there  dwelt,  unlike  the  inhabitants 
of  the  surrounding  villages,  a  settlement  of  Bedouins,  living,  as  if  in  the  desert,  with 
their  tents  pitched  and  their  camels  and  asses  around  them,  whence  the  spot  had  ac- 
guired  the  name  of  *  The  Terebinth,'  or  *  Oak,'  of  the  *  Unloading  of  Tents.' "  It  is 
irom  this  peculiarity  of  the  Kenites  that  we  learn  their  mission. 

L  Their  nomadic  life  reminded  Israel  of  God's  mercies.  For  they  had  once 
been  what  the  Kenites  then  were — a  mere  tribe  or  aggregation  of  tribes.  But  God  had, 
in  a  most  glorious  and  gracious  way,  made  them  a  nation,  and  given  them  a  land. 
Such  a  reminder  brought  home  to  them  the  claims  of  Jehovah,  and  should  have 
renewed  their  devotion  and  allegiance  to  him.  Compare  the  witness  made  by  the 
hermits  in  the  times  of  the  early  Church. 

II.  Their  stbict  obedience  to  rule  reproached  Israel  for  the  neglect  of 
the  covenant.  They  were  loyal  to  the  customs  and  rules  of  their  founder,  whatever 
disabilities  such  loyalty  miiiht  seem  to  entail.  Illustrate  by  the  story  of  testing  the 
Rechabites  with  the  offer  of  wine,  given  in  Jer.  xxxv.  Impress  that  we  need  still 
the  witness  of  virtue  and  excellence  in  those  who  are  not  with  us ;  who  are  among 
us,  but  not  of  our  party.  And  in  this  we  may  see  some  good  in  the  association 
together  in  one  nation  of  differing  religions  sects.  Each  may  teach  the  others  some 
valuable  lessons,  and  find  effective  expression  of  some  essential  virtue.  Our  Lord,  in 
his  teachings,  even  ventured  to  draw  lessons  from  the  quick-witted  example  of  the 
had  man.  We  may  learn  something  of  God  and  duty  from  all  those  with  whom  we 
are  brought  into  even  casual  contact. — R.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  m. 

Vers.  1—9.— The  whole  of  this  chapter  la 
occupied  with  the  descendants  of  David: 
the  first  nine  verses  of  it  with  his  own  sons, 
dassified  according  to  the  place  of  their 


birth,  Hebron  or  Jenisalem;  the  remain- 
ing verses  with  the  line  of  kings  of  his 
house  to  Jeooniah  and  Zedekiah  (ver.  16), 
the  grandsons  of  Zerubbabel  (ver.  21),  and 
descendants  of  Shechaniah  (ver.  24).  To  the 
seven  yean  and  six  months  (2  Sam.  iL  11) 


CH.  ni.  1— 24.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES; 


83 


of  David's  roign  at  Hebron  six  sons  boloDg, 
each  of  a  dUifcroDt  mother.  To  the  thirty 
and  three  yiturs  (2  Sam.  v.  5 ;  1  Kings  ii. 
11)  of  his  reign  at  Jerusalem  belong  other 
thirteen  sons,  viz.  four  of  one  mother, 
Bffthffhuft,  and  nine  of  other  mothers,  whose 
names  are  not  given.  The  list  of  the  six 
Hebron  sons,  with  their  mothers,  is  nearly 
identical  with  that  of  2  Sam.  iii.  2—5, 
although  the  differences,  slight  as  they  are, 
would  of  the  two  indicate  our  list  hero 
rather  as  not  copied  than  copied  thence. 
The  only  noticeable  difference,  however,  is 
in  the  name  of  the  second  son,  announced 
hero  as  Daniel,  instead  of  Chileab,  while  the 
Septuagint  hus  Aakovta.  This,  together 
with  the  circumstance  that  one  word  would, 
as  regards  the  Hebrew  characters,  com- 
paratively easily  convert  into  the  other, 
renders  it  probable  that  it  is  merely  a 
corrupt  text  or  text  obscure  at  this  point 
which  has  occasioned  the  difference.  The 
meaning  of  the  name  Daniel,  put  side  by 
side  witii  what  wc  read  in  1  Sam.  xxiv.  15, 
XXV.  Si9,  suggests  strongly  that  it  is  tho 
right  name  of  the  two.  It  was  a  name 
likely  to  be  given  by  David  to  his  firot 
child  by  AbigSu.  Additional  suspicion  is 
thrown  on  the  name  Chileab  through  the 
three  last  letters  of  it,  **Uab"  constitut- 
ing also  tho  three  firot  of  the  very  next 
word*  ••  o/il6igail "  fe^^)  which  looks  very 
much  like  the  over-haste  of  tho  pen  un- 
corrected. It  is  remarkable  that  the  Syriac 
and  Arabic  versions  translate  **  Caleb," 
both  here  and  in  the  parallel  passage.  For 
the  sons  bom  in  Jerusalem  we  have  all 
three  paraUel  lists  at  command,  and  the 
variations  are  rather  greater.  The  other 
two  lists  are  in  2  Sam.  v.  14—16;  ch. 
xiv.  4 — 7,  The  first  of  these  omits 
miphftlat  and  Hogah  (possibly  they  died 
young  or  without  issue),  and  tho  latter 
calls  Eliphelet  Elpalet  (dSdV«).  Again, 
ffhiniAfth  and  ^laiiftwift  in  our  passage  must 
yield,  overruled  by  the  consent  of  the  other 
two,  to  Shammuah  and  Elishua.  Again,  it  is 
to  be  noticed  that  the  name  Eliada  (God  (hn) 
knoweth),  on  occasion  of  its  latest  occur- 
rence (ch.  xiv.  7),  appears  as  Beeliada 
(the  Lord  (^3)  knoweth),  preserving  therein 
probably  its  earlier  form,  viz.  that  used 
before  a  siettled  bad  sense  had  come  to  be 
attached  to  the  word  Baal  (see  *  Speaker's 
Commentary,'  in  he,). 

Yer.  5. — In  this  verse  we  have  the  form 
Bathihna  for  the  familiar  name  Bathsheba, 
i^  yvihra  for  pae^na,  in  whicli  latter  word 
pse^  is  a  shorter  form  of  npinj^.  In  the  same 
verse  we  have  hvnpv  here  for  ojf^hn  in  2  Sam. 
3^i,  8.  The  former  name  occurs  often,  e.g, 

L  CHRONICLES. 


Numb.  xiii.  12;  2  Sam.  ix.  4,  5;  xvii.  27; 
ch.  xxvi.  5.  The  component  parts  of  both 
words  are  tho  same,  but  their  order  is  differ- 
ent— tho  meaning  of  the  one  perhaps  **  the 
people  of  God ; "  of  the  other,  "  the  God  of 
the  people.'* 

^  Ver.  9. — This  verse  plainly  adds  concn- 
bines,  perhaps  the  ton  spoken  of  in  2  Sam. 
XV.  16,  to  the  number  of  the  mothers  of  tho 
foregoing  sons.  The  mention  of  only  ono 
daughter  of  David,  viz.  Tamar,  follows  tho 
manifest  ordinary  rule,  that  daughters  are 
not  recorded  at  all,  except  for  one  of  two 
reasons— either  that  through  a  daughter  tho 
line  wus  saved,  or  that  the  daughter  hod 
from  some  special  reason  mode  a  place  for 
herself  in  history. 

Vers.  10 — 16. — ^The  line  of  royal  descent 
from  David,  is  now  rapidly  carried  down  in 
these  verses— ^r«^ as  far  as  good  King  Josiah, 
sixteen  generations  in  all  (omitting,  quite 
consistently,  Athaiia,  who  reigned  by  her 
own  usurpation  for  six  years  on  the  death 
of  her  son  Azariah) ;  and  then,  by  four  suc- 
cessions (viz.  two  brothers,  sons  of  Josiah, 
uud  a  grandson  and  great-grandson  of 
Josiuh),  to  the  Captivity. 

Ver.  10.— Though  the  Authorized  Ver- 
sion has  Abia  the  Hebrew  word  is  n*3K  both 

T*  -  . 

here  and  in  2  Chron.  xiii.  1, 23  (or  Authorized 
Version,  xiv.  1),  in  both  of  whieh  passages, 
as  also  elsewhere,  our  Authorized  Version 
has  Abijah.  Another  form  is  Abijam  (d^sk), 
as  in  1  Kings  xiv.  31  and  elsewhere.  A 
corrupt  form  On»n>^)  is  found  in  2  Chron.  xiii. 
20.  We  have  the  name  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment genealogy  (Matt.  i.  7,  8). 

Ver.  11. — Ahakah.  This  name  is  found 
as  Azariah  in  2  Chron.  xxii.  6;  and,  by  a 
shifting  of  the  derivative  i>art  of  the  word, 
as  Jehonhaz  in  2  Chron.  xxi.  17 ;  thus, 
n^nr^c  or  Tn^irr. 

T  :  —  :  T  T      : 

Ver.  12.— Aiariah.  This  name  is  found 
in  2  Chron.  xxvi.  1;  xxvii.  2,  as  Uzziah; 
but  in  the  Second  Book  of  Kings  it  is  found 
sometimes  as  Uzziah  and  sometimes  as  Aza- 
riah in  the  very  same  chapter  (cf.  2  Kings 
XV.  13  and  17,  23  and  32,  and  see  Ge- 
eeuius,  *  Lexicon,'  sub  voce).  We  have  the 
name  as  Azariah  in  Matt.  i.  8,  9. 

Ver.  15. — The  first  thing  to  be  observed 
in  this  verse  is  that,  though  it  lays  stress  on 
the  mention  of  the  name  of  Josiah's  first- 
bom  of  four  sons  as  Johanan,  this  is  the  only 
mention  of  him.  Some,  however,  have  taken 
the  Jehoahaz  of  2  Kings  xxiii.  30  for  him. 
Next,  that  Jehoiakim  was  not  the  origi- 
nnl  name  of  the  next  brother,  but  a  name 
slightly  altered  by  Pharaoh-Necho  fr<m 
Eliakim  (2  Kings  xxiii.  34).  If  the  dates 
of  2  Kings  xxiii.  31,  34,  36,  be  correct,  there 
is  no  doubt  that,  though  Jehoiakim,  1.0. 
Eliakim,  reigned    after  Jehoiihaz,  yet  he 

D 


84 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,      [ch.  in.  1—24. 


was  the  elder,  and  ia  in  his  right  place  in 
the  present  passage.  Next,  that  Bhallam 
(Jer.  XX.  II)  is  another  name  of  the  Jehoa- 
haz  of  2  Kings  xxiii.  SO,  31,  34,  and  several 
other  places.  It  is  possible  that  be  finds 
the  last  place  amid  the  four  brothers  of  tliis 
▼ertse  because  of  his  probable  usurpation  of 
the  throne,  in  viola' ion  of  the' right  of  his 
elder  brother,  Jehoiakim,  and  the  early  fall 
he  m«^t  with  in  consequence.  Lastly,  that 
the  fourth  brother,  Zedekiah,  whose  name 
(2  Kings  xxiv.  17)  was  originally  Mattha- 
niah,  was  put  on  the  throne  by  the  King  of 
Babylon,  and  reigned  eleven  years  in  Jeru- 
salem (2  Kings  xxiv.  18)  after  that  his 
nephew  Jehoiachin  (who  could  have  no  son 
ola  enough  to  succeed)  was  (2  Kings  xxiv. 
12, 15,  17)  carried  captive  to  Babylon. 

Ver.  16. — Of  the  above  four  brothers,  sons 
of  Josiah,  the  second,  Jehoiakim,  or  Eliakim, 
had  a  son  called  Jeooniah,  or  Jehoiachin — 
essentially  the  same  word.  He  was  eighteen 
years  of  age  when  he  succeeded  his  father 
(2  Kings  xxiv.  8).  A  touching  glimpse  is 
given  of  him  in  Jer.  lii.  31.  His  name  is 
&iortened  to  Coniah  in  Jer.  xxii.  24  and 
XXX vii.  1,  though  elsewhere  in  the  same 
prophet,  Jeconiah,  and  in  one  place  (Jer. 
Ui.  31),  Jehoiachin.  The  name  of  Zedekiah 
occasions  dithculty  in  this  verse.  In  the 
first  instance,  following  the  examples  of 
Ters.  10 — 14,  we  should  presmne  that  this 
Zedekiah  is  set  forth  as  a  son  of  Jeconiah, 
and  as  it  is  not  said  that  he  reigned  after 
Jeconiah  (for  it  was  undoubtedly  Jeconiah's 
uncle  Zedekiah  who  reigned  after  him),  we 
Dee<l  only  have  read  it  as  a  statement  of  one 
of  his  sons.  Against  this,  however,  there  are 
two  tolerably  decisive  considerations;  for, 
firttj  the  verse  opens  confessedly  by  offering 
OS  sons  of  Jehoiaidm,  and  these  two,  Jeconiah 
and  Zedekiah,  will  fulfil  the  promise  of 
that  plural;  and  again,  the  seventeenth 
Terse  enters  upon  the  formal  enumeration  of 
ioni  to  Jeconiah.  The  question,  therefore, 
returns — Who  was  thid  Zedehiah,  son  of 
Jehoiakim?  Some  'consider  him  identical 
with  the  Zedekiah  of  the  previous  verse,  and 
that  ^  his  son  **  means  here  **  his  successor." 
This  undoes  fewer  difficulties  than  it  makes. 
If  the  text  be  not  corrupt,  the  likelicdt 
aolution  is  to  suppose  that  this  Zedekiah 
of  Ter.  16  is  an  otherwise  unknown  brother 
of  Jeconiah,  and  son  of  Jehoiakim. 

Vers.  17 — 24. — These  verses  contain  a 
line  of  descent  brought  down  to  a  point  not 
merely  posterior  to  the  Exile,  but  possibly 
reaching  to  the  time  of  Alexander.  This 
line,  however,  through  Solomon  is  lost  so 
soon  as  the  first  name,  that  of  Assir,  is 
passed;  Salathiel  (Authorized  Version)  or 
Shealtiel,  being  descended  from  David,  not 
through  Solomon,  but  through  Nathan, 
whole  brother  to  Solomon.     This  Assir  is 


not  known  from  any  parallel  passage;  and 
Luther,  Starke,  Bei^heau,  and  others, 
followed  by  Zoeklur  (in  Lange,  •  Comm.  O. 
T.  *)  translate  the  name  as  captive,  applying 
it  to  Jeconiah.  Not  all  their  reasons,  how- 
ever, for  this,  outweigh  one  which  must  be 
pronuunoed  cigainat  it,  viz.  the  absence  of 
the  article.  The  Septuagint  and  Vulgate 
versions  agree  with  our  own.  The  greater 
probability  might  be  that  Assir  derived  his 
name  from  being  born  after  Jeconiah  was 
in  captivity,  and  such  pass^ages  as  Isa. 
xxxix.  7,  Jer.  xxii.  30,  may  throw  some 
light  upon  the  extinction  of  Solomon's  line 
here,  and  the  transfer  of  the  succession 
(comp.  Numb,  xxvii.  11,  and  see  interesting 
note  on  the  present  place  in  'Speaker's 
Commentary ').  Salathiel  is  the  Authorized 
Version  incorrect  rendering  of  the  Hebrew 
Shealtiel.  In  Matt.  i.  12  it  is  said^ 
"  And  after  they  were  brought  to  Babylon, 
Jechonias  begat  Salathiel;"  and  in  Luke 
iii.  27,  **  Salathiel,  which  was  the  aon  of 
Neri."  Now,  Neri  was  in  the  direct  line 
of  Nathan.  There  seems  only  one  way 
of  reconciling  these  statements — and  the 
method  removes  similar  difficulties  in  other 
places  also — viz.  to  distinguish  between  the 
descent  natural  and  the  descent  royal,  and 
then  acknowledge  that  the  former  was 
swallowed  up,  where  necessary,  of  the  latter. 
One  as  decisive  instance  of  this  kind  as 
that  before  us  is  most  useful  to  rule  other 
cases.  (For  an  important  allusion  to  the 
house  and  family  of  Nathan's  descendants, 
as  well  known  at  the  time,  see  Zech.  xii. 
12 — a  passage  probably  dating  a  few  years 
previous  to  the  de^ruction  of  Jerusalem  by 
M  ebuchadnezzar.), 

Ver.  18. — Of  the  name  Malohiram  and  five 
following,  it  must  be  left  still  doubtful 
whose  sons  they  were — whether  of  Jeconiah 
(comp.  again  2  Kings  xxiv.  12,  15 ;  Jer. 
xxii.  30)  or  of  Neri  as  possibly  brothers  of 
Salathiel,  or  of  neither  of  these.  The  first 
of  these  suppositions  seems  almost  un- 
tenable, the  second  seems  unlikely  enough, 
and  the  exceeding  prevalence  of  a  corrupt 
text  would  strongly  favour  the  third  sup- 
pobition.  At  tiie  same  time,  it  may  be 
observed  that  ver.  19  proves  that  the  names 
must  belong  to  the  royal  succession,  and 
indicates  that,  whoever  Salathiel  was  in  such 
aspect,  that  Peduah  was,  who  becomes 
father  of  Zerubbabel.  The  verses  that 
follow  are  thought  by  Eichhom,  Dahler, 
Keil,  and  some  others  to  be  an  interpolation 
of  Inter  date,  chiefly  on  account  of  the  point 
to  which  the  genealogy  is  brought. 

Ver.  19. — Pedaiah  is  now  given  as  the 
father  of  Zerubbabel  and  BhimeL  Of  the 
latter  of  these  nothing  else  is  known,  unless 
Lord  Hervey's  theory  below  be  correct. 
The  former  is  a  great  name — its  derivation 


I.  in.  1—2*.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa 


perhap*  doubtful.  Btrictl;  It  ligniSci 
"acaltered  to  Bahjion,"  but  (Oaseniut, 
'Lelioon')  ir  the  ioitlat  pait  nt  the  word  b« 
■trengtbeDed  into  ini),  the  ■i)(niBcation  might 
be  "born  in  Babjlon."  We  haro  in  this 
name  anulber  iaatHnoe  of  the  treatment  jiut 
oomment«d  on  witti  regard  to  the  name 
Salathiel  in  I.uke  iii.  28.  Zerubbabel  is 
eliawhere  invariably  deacribeil  as  ion  of 
8i<latliie1,<ir  Bbealtiel;  but  as  the  geaeBligy 
o(  Bt  Luke  ^vea  the  natural  deeoeot  uf 
Salathiel  aa  from  Neri,  >o  doea  our 
genralogy  in  this  one  plaoe  gite  ni  tbe 
natural  descent  of  Zembbabel  aa  from 
Pedaiah,  one  of  Salathiol's  brothen  ;  while 
all  other  paiaagea  [e.g.  Ezra  iii.  S  ;  Hag.  i. 
12;  HatL  i.  12;  Luke  iii.  27)  give  ub  that 
for  which  the  genealogical  table  in  chiefly 
deaigned,  Tia.  the  matter  of  luoeeitioTi, 
aooivding  to  which  Zembbabel  would  be- 
■howD  aa  ion,  i.e.  liok  of  aucocasion,  fol- 
lowing on  Bhealtiel. 

Ver.  19.— KMhnllam.  Though  thli  name 
raoora,  and  very  frequently,  in  Chioniclea, 
Ena,  and  Nehemiah.  yet  the  person  here 
denoted  by  it — eon  of  Zerubbaliel— is  found 
here  only.  Hanantah,  i.q.  Juanna  of  Luke 
iii.  27,  the  names  being  the  Bame,  but  with 
the  oompouent  parts  transpogei],  aa  in  in- 
■tanoea  already  given  above.  In  tbe  Oospel, 
Hananiab  appears  aa  grandMa  of  Zorobubei, 
Rheaa intervening.    Shalomith.   TIj' 


,  chief  of  the  Izarhitea 
(ch.  sxiii.  IS),  bat  very  poasibly  by  a  mere 
clerical  error,  as  tbe  true  form  is  given  in 
the  very  next  chapter  (xxiv.  22)  far  the 
aame  charaoter,  vi*.  nib^*. 

Ver.  20.— The  five  additional  names  of 
thiavetaomoit  presumably  stand  apart  from 
tbe  tiro  Bona  and  one  daughter  of  the  pro- 
eediog  verae,  for  aome  reajon.  What  that 
reoaoa  may  be  la  not  known.  Perhnpe  the 
moat  natiual  aapposition  is  that  their  mother 


Tbe 


of  B< 


of  tbe  names,  as  eapeoially  of  "tbe  last, 
Jubab-hMad,  fa.  "Loving-kindness  is  re- 
tnraed,"  bos  led  Dertheau  aod  others  to  the 
eonjeatore  that  tbey  may  be  separated  as 
children  bom  to  ZerubEubel,  oue  of  the 
leaders  of  the  return  from  captivity,  after 
that  retom.  This  seems  plausible,  except 
for  the  oonaideratian  that,  the  more  plausible 
it  is,  the  more  we  might  expect  tbe  expla- 
nation itself  to  have  been  notified. 

Ver.  21.— The  Hebrew  text,  followed  by 
the  Volgate,  not  followed  by  the  Septaagint, 
reads  here  n'^nr^ai.  Yet  aoioe  raaaiiaoripts 
have  the  plural  "  sons,"  from  which  oomca 
onr  Aathoriied  Version.  The  indication  is 
Important  It  is  doubly  interesting,  aa  the 
mlj    indloatloD  in  our  Hebrew  text  that 


tends  to  give  oonflnnation  to  the  Tory 
noteworthy  diCTorences  of  the  Beptuagint 
Version.  Foralthimgh  thi«  last, apparently 
somewhat  pervtrsely,  begins  its  rerslon 
with  "tool,"  which  plural  dnes  not  so  well 
suit  its  sequel,  instoa  I  of  the  "  son  "  of  onr 
Hebrew  text,  which  would  suit   it,  yet  it 

Erocoeds  with  a  transl.ition  which  must 
avo  been  obtained  from  another  text,  ancb 
text  again  suiting  properly  tbe  (insular — 
"  son  "—of  our  Hebrew.  The  form  of  ita 
translation  ia  analogous  to  that  marked  in 
tbewonlsofvera.  10— li.  "The  sons  [aie 
son]  of  Ananiah,  PslatLah,  and  Jesaiah  Ms 
ton.  Esphaiah  hit  son,  Aman  hit  aOa, 
Obadiah  bt(Bnn,8heohaniahAi'ssoQ,"  making 
BIX  (presumably)  consecutive  generatiooa. 
This,  thertfore,  is  the  reading  which  (if 
correct)  might  carry  down  the  genealogy 
to  the  tiraas  of  Alexander  the  Great,  and 
ideod   to  a  time    a  quarter  of   a  century 


And  i 


luld  0 


of  later  date  than  probably 
any  other  of  the  oanon  1  If  we  reject  tbia 
position  and  reading,  we  have  to  get  over 
the  term,  repenttd  teveral  times,  the  was  ot 
To  do  this,  Burtheau  suggests  that  tbe  in- 
tention of  our  passage  was,  from  the  name 
Bephaiah  incluaive,  not  to  mention  the 
individual  four  brothers'  names,  but  to 
mention  Ihem  as  four  diatinguiBhed  familiea 
among  the  posterity  of  David — an  attempt 
at  explanation  certainly  not  satisfactory. 
The  conclusioo  of  the  matter  it,  that  in  thia 
twenty-first  verae  we  have  difflcultJea  in 
either  alternative,  not  satiafactorilj  ex- 
plained. Either  wo  have  the  names  in  allot 
six  brothers,  being  "sons  of  Uananiah" — tbe 
last  four  of  whom  are  styled,  not  by  their 
individual  names,  but  aa  heads  of  families  ; 
or  we  have  six  lineal  deacendanls  from 
Hananiab.  If  this  last  suppositioQ  were 
correct,  calculate  a  royal  succession  at  the 
lowest  average  (say  something  under  twenty 
years),  and  the  genealogy,  including  what 
Ibllows  in  the  remaining  verses  of  the 
chapter,  will  bring  us,  as  above,  to  a  date 
that  covers  the  whole  life  of  Alexander  ttke 
Great 

Ver.  22,— In  the  obscurity  that  obtains  on 
the  subject,  there  is  one  aomewhat  bright 
star  of  lixht  in  a  sncoeeding  name,  Hattnah, 
to  which  this  verso  leads  us.  This  veraa 
purports  to  help  on  the  line  of  genealogy  by 
a  contribution  of  two  descents,  tbe  effective 
names  being  Sbemalahand  Naariab,  tbe  line 
coming  to  Its  close  by  aid  of  two  other 
effective  names,  £Tioenaiand  (say)  .BodaioA, 
oontained  la  the  last  two  verses  of  the 
chapter.  Although  ouo  manifest  error  in 
ver.  22  (involved  in  the  number  "six" 
when  only  fire  sons  have  been  read)  be- 
tokens the  inaeonrity  of  the  text,  yet  ttie 
measures  of  the  ingenious  Lord  A. 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,     [en.  iii.  1—24. 


0.  Hervey  (seo  bU  Taluable  work  on  tlio 
'OcncnloK'oi  "^  our  Lord  Jobos  Cbriet,'  pp. 
103, 307,  B:!2  ;  ami  niUclea  in  Bniith'a  *  Biblo 
DiotinDBr;,'  i.  66G,  GC7)  cnn  BLWoely  bo 
vuraDlu],  whou  ho  itislicB  Jirit  to  omit 
nitngetlior  tha  «n^le  and  th«  wni  of 
Bhtaaniali;  Bham^jJi;  and  next,  to  rcRonl 
Shemsiah  as  Sfaimei,  Uie  brother  of  Zorub- 
bab«l,  and,  a«  mattot  of  oourao,  thoeo  who 
followed  as  the  deacondunta  of  this  brother 
of  Zonibbabel,  iiiatcod  of  Zerubbnbol  hiiu- 
miU,  Now,  a  pasaa^o  In  the  Uook  of 
Kim  helps  QB  mueh  hero.  Ezra  meiitiona, 
M  one  of  those  of  the  "  anna  of  David  "  who 
wont  np  with  him  from  Bubylon  to  Jo- 
nualem  (Eire  viii.  2,  3),  HattuBh,  '■  of  the 
Mm  of  Bhechaninh."  Th«rB  U  not  only 
nothing  to  prevent  this  Hottnsh  being  the 
tune  (u  the  eldoi  brother  of  Ncariah,  who 
oomet  fourth  in  snceeisLOD  ttoai  Zorubbabel 
(U.  on  the  liypoUieniB  that  the  aii  nameB  of 
TOT.  21  are  brothere,  not  a  line  of  descenta), 
but  kt  tho  ahove-moD tinned  average  of 
twenty  years  the  dates  wil!  admirably  B^n- 
ohroniie— tho  Irut  date  of  Zembbabel  being 
about  B.o.  520,  aod  tliat  of  Noariah  e.o. 
«0;  while  Ihe  dale  of  Eira's  journey  was 
B.O.  458  (Bee  '  Spetiker'B  Commentary,'  iii. 
186,  187).  TblB  coincidence  of  names 
and  dates  mast  not  be  rogardfd  as  con- 
clusive i  but,  pending  further  discovery,  it 
strongly  disfavours  Iho  idea  of  the  iinraes 
of  ver.  21  conatituting  a  suocoaBioii,  and  it 
kccpa  vroil  in  oliook  the  rale  of  Buco<.>oding 
gonerationa,  bringing  tho  last  member  of 


a  dato  that  nay  be 
barmoiiiied  witli  others  whioh  hikvo  for  tho 
moBt  part  hold  their  ground.  Tliat  in  vcr. 
22  ordy  fivo  names  aro  given  for  what  aro 
eummwl  np  as  "tix"  must  lend  tu  the 
supposition  that  one  haa  dropped  out ;  and 
sinco  no  known  mannaoript  of  the  Hebrew 
text,  nor  the  Soptuagint  or  Vulgato  veraiona 
au]}!)!!!.^  na  with  the  niii'Bizig  name,  tlio 
Syriao  and  Arabia  voroiona,  wliieh  aupply 
the  name  Azarinli  botwuan  Neariuh  mid 
Bhophat,  must  bo  viewed  with  aome  auopi. 
oiou.  Igeol  ia,  in  tho  Hi'bruw,  a  word  (^tfl;) 
identieal  witli  the  Itml  of  Numb.  liii.  ?':  2 
Sam.  xxiii.  86— Suptuaglnt  in  tlie  latter 
passages  'lAad\  or  '17^,  but  in  the  prtnimt 
place '[HJ)X.  Of  the  otiier  persons  In  this 
vonie  little  or  nothing  else  is  knouQ. 

Ver.  23.— None  of  the  names  in  this  or 
the  fiillowingl  verso  aaaiata  as  yet  in  throwing 
any  light  upon  the  questions  that  arise  in 
thla  fiat^meut  of  genealogy.  Lord  A.  0. 
Uetvey  would  identify  Hndaiah  (ver.  24) 
with  Abiud  (Uatt  i.  IS)  and  with  Juda 
(Luke  iii.  26),  and  quotes,  for  very  jiiat 
confirmation  of  the  possibility  so  far  as  tho 
mere  names  are  oonoarned,  Ezra  iii.  9;  Noli, 
xi.  S ;  eompnrod  with  Ezra  ii.  40;  eh.  ix.  7. 
His  investigations  on  the  oompariaon  ef  the 
genoalofriea  of  this  chapter  with  those  of 
Halt.  i.  9  and  Luke  iii.  9,  aro  well  worthy 
of  attention,  and  may  bo  found  in  liis  work 
above  referred  to,  and  in  his  articles  of 
Smith's  '  Bible  Dictionary.' 


HOMILIES  Br  VARIOUS  AUTSORa 

Vers.  1 — 9. — Chetkered  life.      These  versos  august  to  us  tho  thought  wliich 
oonliiiunllj'  recurs  in  studying  the  life  of  David,  viz. — 

I.   How   JOY    ANB   BORROW    KINOLB    IN    THE    LIVES   OP  MEN.        To    David    WOrO    given 

mRQf  elements  of  joy  ;  he  had  the  outward  dignity,  the  comfortable  and  even  splendid 
surroundings,  tho  authority  and  influence  which  belong  to  Oriental  sovcrciguty :  ho 
mgned  altogttUor  forty  ycara  (ver.  4).  For  this  largo  period  of  his  life  the  plensurea 
of  regal  pomp,  wealth,  and  jKiwer  were  at  his  command.  But  bis  was  far  from  a 
cloudless  day.  In  the  home  circle,  whore  tlio  sweetest  joys  are  commonly  found,  there 
were  abundant  sources  of  trouble  and  distress.  In  his  "  first  love,"  Michal,  be  was 
bitterly  diaanpointed,  and  she  was  "  childless  unto  the  day  of  her  death."  Hia  concu- 
bines descrtco  and  dishonoured  him  (2  Sam.  kvI.  22).  As  we  read  in  these  verses  (vera. 
1—8)  (ho  names  of  his  children,  we  are  struck  with  the  thought— how  litilo  there  was 
in  them  to  give  their  father  a  parent's  joy  I  how  much  to  cause  him  a  profound  anxiety, 
or  even  poignant  Kriet!  It  national  prosperity  or  military  success  elated  the  king's 
heart,  domestic  dissatisfaction,  homo  troubles,  must  soon  have  clouded  hia  brow.  Thus 
ia  it  with  us  oil :  joy  and  sorrow  may  not  spring  from  these  two  sources,  they  moy 
not  mingle  in  these  proportions,  bat  they  are  bound  up  together  in  the  same  bundle ; 
they  intermingle  and  interlace  in  every  human  life.      B<Sily   gratiBcatlons,  success. 

Ewer,  tho  endearments  of  human  love,  the  hope  of  higher  and  greater  things,  the  joy  of 
neficence,  on  the  one  hand;  care,  loaa,  toil,  disappointment,  regret,  tho  "  wounded 
spirit,"  on  the  olher  hand.  It  is  a  checkered  scene,  tnis  plain  of  hnman  life ;  sunshine 
and  duulow  full  fitfully  upon  it  as  we  pass  on  to  the  bi  borixoo.      This  aspect  nf 


CH.  III.  1—24.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  37 

David*8  household,  recalling  to  us  the  contrasts  of  his  experience,  may  lead  us  to 
remember — 

II.  How  QoD  DISCIPLINES  OUB  HEARTS.  David  would  hardly  have  been  the  humble 
and  devout  man  he  was  and  continued  to  be,  if  he  had  enjoyi'd  an  unbroken  course  of 
triumph  and  satisfaction.  The  best  graces  of  the  human  soul  cannot  thrive  in  per- 
petual sunshine ;  they  must  have  the  searching  winds  and  the  pelting  rains  of  heaven. 
If  God  sends  us  loss  and  trouble,  if  he  "  breaks  our  schemes  of  earthly  joy,"  it  is  to 
foster  in  our  hearts  those  virtues  of  meekness,  resignation,  lowliness  of  heart,  con-* 
siderateness  of  others,  etc.,  which  we  should  not  keep  alive  if  the  "  bams  were  always 
filled  with  plenty,"  and  the  cup  were  always  overflowing  with  earthly  joy.  We  may 
especially  learn  here-* 

UI.  How  Gk)D  PBEPARB8  US  FOB  HOLT  8ERVICB.  David  would  nover  have  left  us 
the  psalms  which  proceeded  from  his  pen  if  his  earthly  life  had  not  been  the 
checkered  thing  it  was.  It  was  from  a  troubled  if  not  a  broken  heart  that  those  deep 
utterances  were  ix)ured.  It  was  from  a  soul  that  could  find  no  rest  and  joy  but  in 
the  fa;thful  Grod,  "  the  very  present  Help  in  troifble,"  that  flowed  the  precious  passages 
which  are  the  comfort  of  mankind.  1.  GKxl  never  calls  us  to  any  estate  so  high  as 
that  of  sacred  service — the  spiritual  help  we  render  our  kind.  2.  We  cannot  possibly 
serve  to  the  full  height  of  our  power  if  we  do  not  learn  sympathy  by  suffering. 
3.  Therefore  God  leadit  his  children  into  deep  waters,  that,  through  such  baptism,  they 
may  comfort,  heal,  and  bless  the  sorrowing  and  stricken  souls  who  wait  their  minis- 
tering hand. — C. 

Vers.  10 — 24. — The  best  rewards  of  piety,  etc.  This  list  of  the  names  of  the  sons 
of  David  before  and  after  the  Captivity  suggest  three  truths— 

I.  The  BEST  REWARDS  OF  PIETT.  To  David  God  gave  the  promise  that  his  children 
should  sit  upon  his  throne ;  to  Solomon  he  gave  a  brilliant  court  and  large  exchequer. 
David  had  the  high  and  lofty  satisfaction  of  looking  forward  to  future  years,  and 
knowing  that  his  descendants  would  be  wielding  power  and  exerting  influence  for  many 
generations.  Solomon  had  his  reward  in  the  *'  things  which  are  seen  and  temporal  "^ 
— in  great  wealth,  in  a  largo  harem,  in  foreign  alliances,  in  growing  merchandise,  etc. 
The  one  reward  was  elevating,  ennobling;  the  other  proved  to  be  hurtful  and 
demoralizing.  We  are  very  apt  to  look  for  temporal  prosperity,  earthly  honour,  material 
gratification,  as  the  guerdon  of  devotion ;  but  if  this  should  bo  given  us,  it  may  end 
at  last  in  spiritual  deprission  and  failure.  Gol  may  give  us  our  request,  and  send 
leanness  into  our  soul  (Ps.  cvi.  15).  We  should  rather  desire  mental  and  spiritual 
bestowments,  delights  of  the  soul,  gladness  of  the  heart— 

"  The  joys  which  satisfy 
And  sanctify  the  mind ; " 

those  which  have  no  tendency  to  enfeeble  or  to  mislead,  but  which  tend  rather  to 
enrich  and  to  enlarge  the  soul. 

II.  The  VAiYiTY  OF  human  fame.  It  is  impossible  not  to  be  struck  with  the 
obscurity  of  the  names  which  occur  in  some  of  these  verses  (vers.  10 — 24).  It  is 
something,  indeed,  that  a  man's  name  should  find  a  place,  however  humble,  in  such  an 
imperishable  record.  But  these  men  lived  and  died  without  enjoying  any  such 
anticipation,  and  it  is  nothing  to  them  now.  The  desire  for  distinction  is  natural  to 
noble  minds ;  and  if  it  be  honourable  fame,  and  not  mere  worthless  notoriety  they  seek, 
we  must  pay  them  praise  and  not  accord  them  blame.     But  the  fact  that,  as  time 

Eroceeds,  human  fame  becomes  of  less  account,  and  that  the  very  names  of  succeeding 
ings  may  become  nothing  more  than  a  tedious  chronicle,  only  read  by  way  of  duty, 
may  well  lead  us  to  choose  a  more  worthy  and  a  more  lasting  portion.  There  are 
blessings  to  be  sought  and  gained,  the  value  of  which  does  not  decline  with  the 
passage  of  the  years  or  even  of  the  centuries.  It  is  these  which  the  wise  will  covet, 
which  the  holy  will  secure. 

III.  The  excellency  of  godlt  zeal.  There  is  one  name  in  this  list  which  stands 
out  among  the  rest  as  that  of  a  man  whom  all  the  servants  of  God  "  delight  to  honour  ** 
— Zerubbabel  (ver.  19).    To  have  been  the  ancestor  or  the  descendant  of  such  a  man 


38  THE  PIBST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  m.  1— 24. 


was  itself  an  honour.  Wc  regard  his  career  as  one  of  the  worthiest  and  most  fruitful 
which  even  the  Holy  Scriptures  have  recorded.  His  godly  zeal  did  much  to  carry  on 
the  purpose  of  Jehovah  from  the  return  of  the  captives  to  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  To 
have  lived  such  a  life  and  to  have  done  such  a  work  may  satisfy  the  very  largest 
ambition  which  the  heart  of  man  can  hold.  To  look  back  from  the  spiritual  world 
on  such  a  work  accomplished  must  be  an  increase  to  heavenly  joy.  There  are  few 
satisfactions,  if  there  be  any,  which  give  a  truer,  deeper,  diviner  delight  to  the  rt^generated 
soul  than  the  conviction  that,  by  the  help  and  grace  of  God,  we  are  sowing  the  seeds  of 
holy  usefulness,  of  which  future  generations  will  reap  the  blessed  harvest. — C, 

Vers.  1 — 24. — Qenecdogy  of  IsraeTB  royal  household.  Before  entering  upon  the 
genealogies  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  in  their  due  order,  we  are  directed  to  fix  our  attention 
on  the  royal  line.  In  vers.  1 — 9  we  have  all  the  sons  of  David  enumerated,  viz.  six 
bom  in  Hebron  and  thirteen  in  Jerusalem.  The  number  of  David's  sons  bom  after 
his  removal  to  Jerusalem  was  eleven ;  only  nine  are  mentioned  here — two  are  omitted, 
either  on  account  of  early  death  or  no  issue.  In  vers.  10 — 16  the  line  is  given  from 
Solomon  to  Jeconiah  and  Zedekiah — the  time  of  the  Exile.  From  vers.  17 — 24  wo 
have  the  line  of  the  captive  and  exiled  Jeconiah,  and  other  families.  David  was  thirty 
years  old  when  he  began  to  reign,  and  he  reigned  over  forty  years.  Seven  years  and 
a  half  of  these  were  over  Judah  in  Hebron,  and  thirty-three  over  Israel  and  Judah 
united  in  Jemsalem.  In  2  Sam.  y.  we  have  his  first  public  anointing  to  be  king 
over  Israel.  This  anointing  took  place  at  the  time  that  David  was  king  over  Judah  in 
Hebron.  In  2  Sam.  ii.  we  are  told  that  the  men  of  Judah  came  to  Hebron — to  which 
place  David  went  by  the  command  of  God — and  there  they  anointed  him  king.  This, 
however,  was  not  his  first  anointing];.  The  Divine  call  and  anointing  took  place  ten 
years  previously,  during  the  reign  of  Saul,  and  was  carried  out  at  God's  command  by 
Samuel  the  prophet,  as  is  fully  recorded  in  1  Sam.  xvi.  Of  Solomon  himself  little  is 
said  in  this  chapter.  He  reigned  forty  years  over  Israel  in  Jerusalem.  Our  attention 
is  chiefly  directed  to  David.  The  historian  enters  into  more  minute  details  in  his 
case,  both  with  regard  to  his  family  and  to  his  reign.  As  the  head  of  the  royal  line, 
he  is  brought  into  greater  prominence.  As  the  type  of  Christ,  this  is  also  as  it  should 
be.  From  this  fountain-head  all  blessings  flow.  David,  like  David's  Son  and  Lord,  has 
here  the  pre-eminence.  Throughout  this  chapter  three  kings  of  the  royal  line  stand 
prominently  forward  in  connection  with  the  people  of  God — David,  Solomon,  and 
Zedekiah.  Others,  such  as  Josiah  and  Hezekiah,  were  distinguished  as  kings,  but  it 
is  to  these  our  attention  is  chiefly  directed,  on  account  of  their  typical  bearing  in 
connection  with  the  kingdom  of  God.  We  shall  look  at  them  in  this  light,  and  see  the 
reason  why  such  promiuence  is  given. — W. 

Vers.  1 — 9. —  The  kings  of  the  royal  line — David  and  Solomon :  the  lessons  of 
their  lives.  Under  the  reign  of  David  the  kingdoms  of  Israel  and  Judah  may  be  said 
to  have  been  established.  It  was  marked  from  first  to  last  by  conflict,  war,  and 
bloodshed.  Foes  on  every  side,  both  hidden  and  open,  had  to  be  encountered,  battle 
after  battle  to  be  fought.  In  all  this  he  stood  alone,  and  thus  stands  before  us  as  the 
type  of  Christ.  He  encountered  all  our  spiritual  foes.  He  fought  the  great  fight.  "  Oft 
the  people  there  was  none  with  him."  All  the  powers  of  darkness  were  leagued  against 
him.  He  endured  the  frown  of  man,  and  bore  the  wrath  of  God.  He  fought  the 
fight  and  won  the  victory,  and  the  kingdom  of  God  was  thus  established  in  the 
Name  of  David's  Son  and  Lord.  In  his  sufferings  in  Gethsemane  and  on  the  cross 
he  trod  all  the  powers  of  darkness  down,  and  in  his  resurrection  from  the  dead  GKxl  set 
his  seal  to  the  accomplishment  of  his  work  and  the  establishment  of  his  spiritual 
kingdom,  against  which  the  gates  of  hell  can  never  prevail.  Of  him  it  could  be  said, 
as  was  said  of  David  himself  (see  ch.  xxii.  18),  only  in  an  infinitely  higher  sense, 
•*  Hath  he  not  given  you  rest  on  every  side  ?  for  he  hath  given  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 
into  mine  hand  ;  and  the  land  is  subdued  before  the  Lord,  and  before  his  people."  But, 
though  David  may  be  said  to  have  founded  and  established  the  kingdom,  he  was  not 
permitted  to  build  the  house  of  GKxi.  lliis  was  to  be  Solomon's  work.  The  kingdom, 
thus  established,  was  passed  over  to  him  to  erect  in  it  the  great  temple  of  God. 
Solomon,  "  the  peaceful  one,"  as  his  name  signifies,  was  thus  entrusted  to  complete  the 


CH.m.1— 24.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  89 

great  work  for  which  David  had  made  all  the  preparation.  Solomon  follows  David 
spiritually  as  surely  as  historically.  It  is  but  the  gospel  story  in  another  form. 
In  these  early  chapters  of  this  book  we  see  these  names  of  David,  Solomon,  and 
Zedekiah  closely  interwoven  with  those  of  the  twelve  tribes,  or  the  entire  family  of 
GK>d.  They  are,  in  fact,  inseparable.  As  the  **  vine  and  the  branches,"  they  are  one 
living  tree.  Not  only  is  it  true  of  David  and  Solomon  spiritually,  but  of  all  God's 
people— it  is  first  conflict,  then  rest.  It  is  through  the  former  we  enter  into  the 
latter.  '*  Through  much  tribulation  we  must  enter  the  kingdom."  Only  they  who 
"fight  the  good  fight  of  &ith,"  who  are  the  true  soldiers  of  the  cross,  know  how 
deep  is  the  peace  of  God  that  becomes  the  portion  of  the  soul.  There  is  a  peace 
which  flows  from  the  sight  of  a  sufiering  Saviour  bearing  our  sins.  This  is  not  the 
peace  we  mean.  It  is  that  peace  which  is  the  result  of  beiDg  true  to  Christ,  living  near 
to  him,  being  wholly  on  his  side — a  marked  man — who  is  not  ashamed  of  his  reproach. 
All  this  involves  a  daily,  yea,  hourly,  conflict ;  and  out  of  this  God  opens  the  channels 
of  the  soul  for  a  peace  to  flow  in  which  "  passeth  all  understanding,"  and  to  which  other 
Christians  are  strangers.  But  not  only  are  David  and  Solomon  the  law  of  the  kingdom 
of  (jk)d, — ^it  is  the  law  of  all  things.  Before  the  peace  always  goes  the  sword.  This  was 
our  Lord's  teaching  when  he  said,  "  I  am  not  come  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword."  Peace 
follows.  The  storm  and  tempest  are  absolutely  necessary  to  purify  the  air.  To  those 
both  spring  and  summer  owe  their  beauty.  It  is  first  the  sorrow  and  then  the  joy  that 
is  the  order  of  life.  "  The  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  first  day,"  and  seem  on  the 
very  first  page  of  GKxi's  Word  to  reflect  this  truth.  Through  the  evening  the  world  still 
passes  to  its  mornings.  The  first  chapter  of  Genesis  is  all  sunlight.  But  what  a  deep, 
dark  cloud  passes  over  all  the  book  of  God,  what  a  history  of  sin  and  sorrow,  crying  and 
tears,  till  we  reach  its  close,  and  then  the  sun  rises  again,  never  more  to  go  down  1  We 
might  go  on  to  show  how  all  life  is  full  of  this  law ;  but  this  will  suffice  to  help  the 
reader's  further  thoughts.  And  as  every  stone  of  Solomon's  temple  rested  on  the  work 
David  had  finished,  and  the  preparation  he  had  made,  so  do  all  the  *'  living  stones  "  of 
God's  spiritual  temple  rest  on  the  finished  work  of  Christ,  and  everything  really  substan- 
tial on  his  conflict,  struggle,  and  cross.  And  peace  deeper  than  anything  Solomon's  reign 
could  shadow  forth  fills  their  souls,  even  that  peace  which  was  his  gift  to  all  his  people 
when  he  said,  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  give  unto^ou :  not  as  the  world 
giveth,  give  I  unto  you." — W, 

Vers.  10 — 24. — Kingn  of  the  royal  line — Zef^ekiah:  the  lesson  of  his  life.  The 
portraiture  of  the  Holy  Spirit  would  be  incomplete  without  that  of  Zedekiah.  In  him 
we  see  how  every  work  of  God  may  be  undone,  how  the  fairest  fabric  may  become 
a  wreck.  If  in  David  and  Solomon  we  have  that  which  will  encourage,  we  have  here  a 
note  of  solemn  warning.  What  is  the  lesson  thus  solemnly  taught  ?  That  sin  undid 
all  the  work  of  David  and  Solomon.  Sin  ruined  the  kingdom,  and  lay  desolate  the 
temple  of  God.  And  in  what  did  that  sin  consist  ?  In  that  which  is  the  fertile  source 
of  all  sin — idolatry.  Idolatry  is  the  heart  going  after  something  else  than  GKxl.  Its 
gross  form  is  image-worship.  Its  more  refined  and  general  form  is  the  love  of  something 
lower  than  Christ.  The  latter  is  the  guiltier,  because  done  under  greater  light.  From 
this  single  source  everything  follows  —loss  of  peace,  darkness  of  soul,  weakness  of 
intellect,  immorality  of  life,  judicial  blindness,  and  the  entire  spiritual  wreck  of  every- 
thing, whether  it  be  in  an  individual  soul  or  in  a  nation.  Let  God  be  supplanted, 
and  there  is  no  abyss  into  which  one  and  the  other  will  not  ultimately  fall.  God's  first 
law  to  Israel  was,  **  Thou  shalt  have  none  other  gods  before  me ; "  and  it  is  his  first  law 
still.  Well  might  the  beloved  apostle  say, "  Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols." 
The  utter  ruin  of  the  kingdoms  of  Israel  and  Judah,  and  the  desolation  of  the  temple, 
had  one  source,  consummated  by  Zedekiah — idolatry.  This  brought  down  upon 
them  that  wrath  of  God  which  has  been  resting  like  a  dark  cloud  on  the  nation  ever 
since.  If  David  and  Solomon  show  us  how  we  may  pass  through  conflict  to  peace, 
Zedekiah  shows  us  how  we  may  pass  from  it  all  to  utter  desolation.  Needful  warning 
to  complete  this  spiritual  picture. — W. 

Ver.  4.— Davt(r«  double  reign.  The  important  fact  is  recalled  to  mind  that  David's 
reign  was  divided  into  two  parts ;  for  some  seven  years  and  a  half  he  reigued  over  a 


40  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,     [oh.  ra.  1—24. 

portion  of  the  nation,  and  tbon  for  three  and  thirty  years  over  the  whole.  His  capital 
during  the  first  part  of  his  reign  was  Hehron ;  and  during  the  second  part,  Jerusalem. 
It  is  evidently  a  point  of  interest  and  instruction  that,  though  designed  for  the  throne, 
and  anointed  in  nis  early  life,  David  only  attained  the  throne  hy  gradual  stages  and 
steps,  and  there  was  a  long  series  of  remarkable  providences  ever  tending  towards,  and 
at  last  fully  realizing  the  Divine  purpose.  From  David's  story  we  learn  that  there  may 
be  even  prolonged  delay  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  promise,  but  that  very  delay 
is  used  in  the  ultimate  and  the  more  perfect  fulfilment  of  the  promise,  'i'his  may  be 
fully  illustrated  in  the  details  of  David's  early  history.  If  God's  promise  seems  "  to 
tarry,  wwt  for  it ;  it  will  surely  come,  it  will  not  tarry.**  Immediately  on  receiving 
news  of  the  death  of  Saul,  David  took  action.  As  long  as  the  anointed  of  the  Lord 
lived,  it  was  his  duty  to  wait  patiently,  not  to  strive,  not  to  assert  his  pretensions  to 
the  throne,  not  to  rebel  in  any  way  against  the  lawful  authority.  But  Saul  being 
removed,  no  claims  remained ;  he  might  assert  at  once  his  right  to  the  throne.  Here, 
however,  the  truly  religious  character  of  David  is  seen.  The  way  seemed  plain  before 
him,  but  he  would  not  take  a  step  without  inquiry  of  the  Lord.  He  asks  both  the 
whm,  the  how,  and  the  where,  desiring  simply  to  follow  the  Divine  lead.  And  he  is 
directed  to  Hebron,  the  sacred  city  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.  His  removal  to  that  city 
was  the  signal  for  the  imion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  under  his  rule.  His  ultimately 
securing  the  allegiance  of  the  entire  people,  and  removing  his  capital  to  Jerusalem,  was 
the  result  of  a  train  of  providential  circumstances,  which  indicated  the  Divine  will  as 
plainly  as  if  words  of  command  had  been  uttered.  Manv  men  sin  by  trying  to  force 
God's  will  into  conformity  with  their  own,  and  deceiving:  themselves  with  the  idea  that 
they  are  doing  God's  will.  Happy  are  they  who,  in  all  simplicity,  follow  God's  lead, 
and  are  quite  willing  to  wait  for  God's  time  and  God's  way.  The  point  in  David's  story 
recalled  by  these  verses  shows  u*— 

I.  Delay  and  partial  fulfilment  trtinq  David's  faith.  Years  passed,  and  the 
promise  of  his  youth  seemed  ever  further  off  from  fulfilment ;  and  even  when  the  fulfil- 
ment came,  it  was  far  below  his  hopes,  scarcely  worth  so  many  years  of  waiting  and 
bearing.  Tet  David  fully  maintained  his  trust.  He  never  failed ;  he  would  not  be 
persuaded  to  make  his  own  way,  by  cutting  off  Saul's  life  when  the  king  was  in  his 
power.  David  never  lost  hope.  Ghod's  way  might  be  in  the  sea,  but  God  can  make 
pathways  even  through  seas.  And  defay  has  ever  been,  and  still  is,  one  of  the  most 
effective  agencies  for  testing  faith.  So  long  as  we  can  do  something,  we  can  keep  trust 
alive ;  but  it  is  so  hard  to  "  flesh  and  blood    to  be  still  and  wait. 

II.  Delay  and  partial  fulfilment  cuLTURiNa  David's  fitnesses.  It  is  always 
more  important  that  we  should  he  fit  for  a  position  than  that  we  should  gain  it ;  and  so 
the  long  years  of  preparatory  waiting  atid  experience  in  lesser  spheres  are  never  wiisted 
years.  David  in  the  court,  David  in  the  cave,  and  David  in  Hebron,  was  being  fitted 
for  full  royalty  at  Jerusalem.  Life  is,  for  us  all,  in  stages,  each  with  a  view  to  the 
next  in  advance.  We  want  to  leap  to  the  best  at  once.  Gbd  will  not  let  us,  save  in 
judgment.  He  brings  through  the  lesser  trusts  slowly  to  the  greater  ones.  This  gives 
us  one  of  our  best  assurances  of  immortality.  We  are  so  evidently  in  this  delay-time 
of  earth  being  fitted  for  something  more  and  higher.  Gain  what  we  may  here  on  earth, 
we  cannot  exhaust  our  spiritual  capacities. — R.  T. 

Vers.  10 — 19,^^Reuiew  of  the  kings.  It  is  specially  worthy  of  notice  that,  according 
to  his  promise,  God  preserved  the  Davidic  line  among  all  the  changes  through  which 
the  kingdom  of  Judah  passed ;  and  this  became  a  pubUc  testimony  to  the  Divine  faith- 
fulness, and  a  constant  plea  against  them  when  tney  publicly  broke  their  side  of  the 
conditions  of  the  national  covenant.    We  may  dwell  on — 

I.  What  this  unfolds  of  God's  LONO-suFFERiNa  meroy.  For  some  of  the  kings 
of  Judah  were  rebellious  and  idolatrous ;  some,  as,  for  instance,  Ahaz  and  Manasseh,  so 
very  bad  that  we  marvel  at  the  mercy  which  held  back  judgment  on  the  Davidic 
dynasty.  Exactly  what  we  have  ever  to  wonder  over  is  the  Divine  long-suffering 
towards  us,  towards  his  Church,  towards  men,  GtoA  is  infinitely  jealous  of  the  honour 
of  his  Name  as  the  Promise- maker  and  the  Promise-keeper,  and  we  may  even  think  of 
God  as  infinitely  hopeful  concerning  his  people,  waiting  on  and  on,  bearing  long  witii 
them,  qnite  sure  that  they  will  yet  turn  to  him  and  live.    But  every  new  impression  of 


CH.  IV.  1—43.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  41 

God's  patient  mercy  made  upon  our  hearts  only  shows  up  the  more  hatefully  our  sin 
in  keeping  on  and  "despising  the  riches  of  his  mercy." 

II.  What  this  unfolds  op  Gob's  witness  to  himself.  God's  dealings  with  men 
are  the  revelation  of  Gk)d's  character »  What  he  does  is  designed  to  unfold  before  us 
what  he  is,  and  so  to  ensure  personal  trust  in  him.  Here  mercy  blends  with  faithful- 
ness, and  we  gain  the  conce[)tion  of  his  righteousness  blending  with  his  love,  justice  and 
mercy  going  hand  in  hand,  the  King  and  the  Father  making  the  sublime  unity  of  the 
Divine  King-Father.  Sometimes  we  gain  impressions  of  Divine  justice,  at  other  times 
impressions  of  Divine  mercy,  and  we  err  if  we  keep  these  apart.  We  only  conceive 
God  himself  aright  when  we  can  blend  them  to  make  the  perfect  harmony  of  him 
who  iB/aith/alf  to  all  his  words — ^faithful  to  punish  and  faithful  to  pity  and  faithful 
to  preserve, 

III.  What  this  unfolds  of  God's  higher  and  spiritual  purposes.  For  from  the 
preservation  of  a  particular  dynasty  wo  rise  to  the  promise  of  the  world's  Messiah,  who 
was  to  be  recognized  by  coming  in  the  Davidic  line,  and  bear  a  royalty  wliich  should 
be  a  sublime  spiritual  royalty,  and  found  a  kingdom  which  should  be  an  invisible  but 
everlasting  kingdom.  David's  kingdom  was,  by  the  promise,  to  be  continued /or  ever; 
and  so  it  is  in  that  Son  of  David,  who  yet  was  David's  Lord,  and  who  hath  now  both 
an  **  unchangeable  priesthood  "  and  an  "  unchangeable  kiDgship."  His  dominion  shall 
yet  prove  to  be  an  "everlasting  dominion;'*  he  "shall  have  the  heathen  for  his  in- 
herittmce,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  his  possession."  And  into  the  eternal 
I^vidic  kingdom  we  should  enter,  and  we  may  enter,  for  the  King  throws  wide  the 
door,  and  caUs  "  whosoever  will "  to  come. — K.  T. 

Yer.  19.^77^  huHder  of  the  second  temple.  Among  the  names  recorded  here,  that 
of  Zerubbabel  suggests  an  interesting  passage  in  the  Jewish  history;  and  he  has  a 
marked  individuality,  so  that  his  work  and  his  times  may  be  profitably  reviewed.  It  is 
noticed  as  a  fulfiiling  of  the  Divine  promise  concerning;  the  Davidic  dynasty,  that 
Zerubbabel  was  a  prince  of  the  house  of  David,  and  so  the  returned  captives  resumed 
their  national  life  under  a  Davidic  lender,  and  with  a  fresh  add  constantly  effective 
remembrance  of  the  Divine  promise  and  faithfulness.  From  the  narrative  in  Ezra, 
details  of  the  work  of  Zerubbabel  may  be  given.  His  mission  concerned  three  things : 
I.  The  leadership  of  the  liberated  captives  on  their  return  journey  to  Palestine,  What 
qualities  this  demanded — command,  courage,  patience,  cheerfulness,  etc.,  should  be 
fully  illustrated.  2.  The  erection  of  a  new  temple  from  the  ruins  of  that  of  Solomon, 
and  the  restoration  of  the  Mosaic  ritual  and  worship.  In  this  he  was  aided  by  Joshua, 
the  high  priest.  Show  what  further  qualities  were  demanded  by  this  work — power  to 
inspire  others,  personal  godliness,  an  enkindling  enthusiasm,  and,  in  view  of  the 
efforts  of  the  Samaritans,  firmness,  unswerving  loyalty  to  Grod,  and  a  holy  jealousy  that 
permitted  no  compromises  in  religion.  3.  The  establishment  of  a  na^iomu  and  govern- 
mental  order  among  the  people,  1'his  was  the  work  for  which  he  probably  had  here- 
ditary genius ;  and  his  position  and  authority,  as  the  Persian  Sheshbazzar,  enabled  him 
effectively  to  carry  out  his  schemes.  In  him  may  be  illustratod  the  threefold  truth :  (1) 
that  circumstances  call  forth  the  best  that  is  in  men ;  (2)  that  men  may  to  a  large 
extent  mould  their  circumstances ;  and  (3)  that  God  is  ever  ready  to  give  his  grace 
and  strength,  unto  the  best  success,  to  every  man  who  sincerely  wishes  to  be  found 
fuithfuL^R.  T. 

EXPOSITION. 
CHAPTER  IV. 


Vers.  1 — 23. — After  the  large  space  given 
to  the  '*8ons  of  David,"  of  the  tribe  of 
Jodah,  in  the  previous  chapter,  this  chapter 
returns  for  twenty-three  verses  to  group 
together  a  few  additional  ramiBcations  of 
the  same  tribe,  whose  registers  were  for 
some  reasons,  perhaps  not  ver^  evident, 
preserved  and   known.     The    first  verses 


follow  in  the  direction  already  indicated  in 
ch.  ii.,  near  the  end  of  which  we  were  left 
with  Shobal  and  Haroeh,  probably  the  same 
with  Reaiah  (the  sumo  name  as  Reaia,  ch. 
V.  5,  though  not  the  same  person). 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  Carmi  of  vor.  1  is  con- 
sidered to  lie  doubtful  between  the  Curmi 
of  ch.  ii.  7  or  the  Chclubai  of  eh.  ii  9,  in 
which  last  alternation  the  five  names  of  this 
verdo  would  repeat  the  line  of  descent  with 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHE0KICLB8.      [ca.  it.  1—43. 


whioli  tit;  U.  had  nude  tu  funiltar.  Erea 
thflit  the  o>^eot  or  advuilage  of  reprnting 
the  flnt  four  of  (ban,  m>  &t  as  vliat  followa 
ti  ooDoetned,  U  not  evident.  We  keep  near 
tba  «l0M  of  oh.  ii.  alio  in  reapeot  of  anuther 
ullniiion  to  tlie  ZoraUaitM  (oh.  ii.  53),  nhoea 
families  were  repleniahed  by  the  two  Bona 
of  Jabatli,  A>"'"^i  and  L^iad,  of  alt  of 
irhom  thia  ia  all  we  know. 

Yen.  S,  4.— Etam  la.  with  little  doubt,  the 
Qsnie  of  a  plaoe  (2  Chron.  zl.  6)  in  Judab, 
nutb  of  Jeruaalem.  It  was  near  Tekoah 
(ver,  5.  and  ch.  ii.  24)  and  Bethlohem 
(next  verce).  The  hiatus  in  the  Bnt  clause 
may  poasiblf  be  rapplied  b;"tbe  fumiliea 
of"  from  the  last  verse,  or,  mote  fitly,  by 
**  the  sons  of,"  Inasmuch  as  some  manuscriptB 
have  it  so.  The  Septuagiut,  however,  and 
Vulgate  df.ptoM  "  the  father  of"  H.t.  chief 
o/\  tepladng  it  by  "the  sons  of."  The 
Hyiiae  Version  leaves  out  any  notice  of  the 
inter,  Haaelelponi,  and  nves  the  former 
part  of  the  verse  thns :  "  T hi'sa  are  Amina- 
dab's  tons,  Ahiiareel,  Nesma,  and  Dibas, 
Phegn^  and  Husia;  These  are  the  sons  of 
Hur,  the  firstborn  of  Epbntba,  who  was 
the  father,"  eto.  With  this  the  Arabic 
VemioD  ia  parlly  in  agreement,  but  oloses 
the  rerae  with  the  words,  "  The«e  are  the 
sons  of  Hur,  son  of  Ephratho,  the  father  of 
whom  [plural]  waa  ot  Bethlehem."  The 
Chroniole  Targuin  translates,  "the  rabbia 
dwelli'm  al  Ktam."  This  variety  indicutea 
tbe  difficulty  felt  by  each  in  turn.  The 
(er«e,  however,  parporta  to  give  the  names 
of  three  brothers  and  one  sister  (UaieJol- 
poni,  t.e.  the  aliadow  looking  at  me, 
beseuiuB)  oonnecled  with  Etam,  as  in  the 
fullowing  vene  Pannel  with  Oedor  (oh.  ii. 
SI)  and  Eur  with  Huhah  (oh.  li.  29; 
3  SanL  xxiii.  27).  Of  no  one  of  these,  in 
all  six  other  desoendanta  of  Hot,  additional 
to  thote  found  at  the  cloee  of  eh.  ii.,  ia  any- 
thing distinct  known.  It  ia  to  be  noted 
that  Hot  himself  li  here  called  fitthar  of 
BMUdiem,  while  (ch.  li.  51)  hia  aon  Bolma 
1»  BO  called. 

Vera.  G — 7. —  Another  before-mentioned 
poraoB  'ch.  ii.  24)  ia  brought  fnrwanl,  vii, 
Aahui,lheposlhnmoua*onoriI(.-zroDbyAbia, 
now  again,  as  there,  styled  father,  or  chief, 
of  TakM,  a  town,  as  above,  near  Etam,  Beth- 
lehem, eto.  He  is  brouglit  forward  thut  the 
nameB  of  his  two  wives,  with  four  children 
to  tlio  latter  of  them  and  three  to  the 
former,  may  be  given.  The  Buman  Septua- 
gint  unaccountably  gives  different  names 
to  the  motliera,  and  toveraea  the  noups  of 
the  fuur  and  three  children.  Nothing  else 
is  known  of  these  nine  persona.  The  last 
two  names  of  the  group  of  four  more  re- 
•emble  in  form  the  name  of  tbe  bead  of  a 
ftmily  than  on  imjividual  name;  and  for 
Janu,  tbe  middle  name  of  the  group  of 


three,  tbe  eaay  Keri  of  "and  Zoliar"  ia 
followed  by  the  Septuogint,  and  was  fol- 
lowed by  our  1611  Authorised  Versian. 

Ver.  S, — The  link  of  connection  between 
the  persona  named  in  this  vcrae  and  the 
tribe  of  Judah  is  utterly  unknown.  The 
introdiiotion  of  them,  abrupt  as  it  is,  ia, 
however,   paralleled    by  many  others   im- 


duoed  in  elucidation  of  any  ono  of  the 
persons  designated  by  these  namea,  or  of 
their  relallou  to  the  conttit. 

Ver,  !).— This  ia  not  less  true  of  tht  name 
of  vers.  9,  10,  which,  however,  haa  made 
its  own  mark  amid  the  whole  aoene.  The 
episode  of  these  two  verses,  offering  itself 
amid  what  should  seeni,  superficial ly,  a  dry 
msas  of  dead  names,  is  welcome  and  grat^ 
ful  oa  the  oasis  of  the  desert,  and  it  wama 
na  that  life  lies  hidden  at  our  every  footfall 
□n  tliis  ground,  spread  over  though  It  ia 
with  monumtnt  and  inscription,  and  hol- 
low, as  we  thought,  with  the  deadest  of  tbo 
dead.  But  the  rlimpse  of  old  real  life 
given  us  in  this  brief  fragment  of  a  bio- 
graphy ia  refreshing  and  is  very  laggeative. 
It  seems  an  insufficient  and  uuimtural 
method  of  accounting  for  the  suddenncan  of 
the  appearanoa  of  this  episode  to  suppose 
('  Speaker's  Commentary,'  in  loe.)  that  the 
name  of  Jabei  was  well  known,  from  any 
cause,  to  those  for  whom  Chronicles  may  he 
supposed  to  huve  been  prtoiarily  intended. 
We  prefer  by  (ir  one  account  of  it,  liz. 
that  the  work  in  our  hands  is  not  in  Ita 
original  complete  state;  or,  variously  put, 
that  it  it  in  its  nncompleted  original  slate. 
No  root  corresponding  to  the  characters  of 
this  name  in  present  order  ia  known  ;  it  is 
possible  that  aome  euphonic  reason  makes 
the  name  ya])^  out  of  the  real  word  (future 
Kal)  3ll>^,  t.e.  he  causea  pains.  We  cau- 
not  suppose  there  wiiold  be  any  "play" 
appreciable  on  a  tranapoaition  of  alpba- 
betioul  characters  for  mert  play'a  sake. 
The  resemblance  that  almost  each  part  of 
tills  brief  and  abruptly  introduced  narra- 
tion bears  to  incidents  recorded  in  Qenesit 
(xixiv.  19  :  xixiii.  20  ;  iv.  !5  ;  xxix.  32  ; 
ixviii.  20)  end  Exodus  speaks  for  itself, 
and  strongly  countenances  tbe  auppoaition 
that  it  is  a  genuine  deposit  of  the ffenuiuely 
oliien  history  ot  Judah.  Tbe  mother's 
teaaon  For  the  naming  of  the  child  ;  tbo 
language  and  matter  and  form  (Gen.  itII. 
IH-a);  Eiod.  xiiii.  32)  ot  the  prayer  of 
tbe  child,  when  presumably  be  was  no 
longer  a  child ;  and  tlie  disetiffiinating  nae 
of  the  words  Elohitn  (ver.  lOj  of  Iirtul,  aa 
compared  with  the  name  Jehoeah  (vh.  ii.  3 ; 
V.  41),  generally  found  here, — ail  help  te 
prodnce  this  impri.'SSion,  although  some  ol 


CH.IV.  1— 43.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


43 


these  particulars  would  carry  little  convic- 
tion by  themselves ;  e.g.  a  mother's  reasons 
for  assiguing  the  name  of  her  child  long 
outlived  the  earlier  times  alone.  Upon  the 
whole,  and  regarding  the  passage  in  its 
present  place,  we  may  say  that  it  must  be 
very  much  misplaced,  or  else  must  be  under- 
stood to  connect  Jabez  with  some  branch  of 
the  family  of  Coz.  There  is  tlie  more  room 
to  assume  this  in  the  vagueness  of  the  la»t 
preceding  clause,  **  The  families  of  Aharhel 
the  son  of  Harum."  The  origin  of  the 
theories  of  some  of  the  older  Jewish 
writers,  to  the  effect  that  Jabez  was  a  doctor 
in  the  law,  with  a  school  of  scribes  around 
liim,  is  probably  to  be  found  in  the  desire 
to  find  a  connection  between  his  proper 
name,  Jabez,  and  the  place  so  named  (ch.  ii. 
55),  and  where,  as  we  are  told,  '*  families  of 
scribes  dwelt,"  belonging  to  the  Kenites. 
That  these  were  connected  with  Bethlehem, 
through  Salma,  and  that  Jal)ez  of  our 
present  passage  was  also  of  a  family  con- 
nected with  Bethlehem,  is  worthy  of  notice, 
but  is  not  enough  by  a  long  wny  to  counte- 
nance the  thought,  in  spite  of  Targum  and 
Talmud  (Smith's  *  Bible  Dictionary,'  siib 
POO.).  The  Targum,  as  well  here  as  in  ch. 
ii.  55,  identifies  Jabez  with  Othniel  **6on 
of  Kenaz "  (Josh.  xv.  17  ;  Judg.  i.  13 ;  iii. 
9),  or  more  probably  **the  Kenizzite" 
merely ;  but  there  is  nothing  to  sustain  such 
an  identification.  The  description,  he  was 
more  honourable  than  his  brethren,  finds  a 
close  parallel,  so  far  as  the  word  honourahle 
goes,  in  Gen.  xzxiv.  19;  although  the 
honourableness  of  Shechem,  the  person 
there  in  question,  does  not  come  out  to 
anything  like  the  same  advantage  with 
that  of  Jabez,  nor  at  all  in  the  same  direc- 
tion. The  word,  however,  is  precisely  the 
same,  is  often  used  elsewhere,  and  uni- 
formly in  a  good  sense,  although  the  range 
of  its  application  is  wide.  The  essential 
idea  of  the  root  appears  to  be  "weight." 
The  phrase  may  therefore  be  supposed  to 
answer  to  our  expressive  phrase,  a  **  man  of 
weight " — the  weight  being  sometimes  due 
chitfiy  to  character,  at  other  times  to  posi- 
tion and  wealth  in  the  first  place,  though 
not  entirely  divorced  from  considerations  of 
character.  We  may  safely  judge,  from  what 
follows,  that  the  intention  in  our  present 
passage  is  to  describe  Jabez  as  a  man  of 
more  ability  and  nobility  than  his  brethren. 
It  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  the  mean- 
ing that  lies  on  the  surface  is  the  correct 
interpretation,  when  it  is  suid  that  his 
mother  named  him  Jabez,  saying,  Beoanso 
I  bare  him  with  sorrow.  The  sorrow  refers 
to  unusual  pains  of  travail,  not  to  any 
attendant  circumstances  of  domestic  trial, 
as  e.g,  that  the  time  of  his  birth  was  coin- 
cident with  her  own  widowhood,  as  hap- 


pened to  the  wife  of  Phinehas,  when  she 
named  her  offspring  **  Ichabod  "  (1  Sam.  iv. 
19—22). 

Ver.  10. — When  Jabez  grew  to  manhood 
he  lias  learnt  to  estimate  rightly  the  value 
of  God's  blessing.    He  invokes  it,  and  de- 
pends upon  it.    His  language  implies  the 
confidence  that  he  had  in   the  reality  of 
providential  blessing.     For  the  expression, 
enlarge  my  coast,  see  Dent.  xii.  20:  xix. 
8 ;  and  though  we  know  nothing  as  matter 
of  fact  about  the  occasion  of  this  prayer,  we 
may  assume  that  it  was  one  when  not  sel- 
fiiihness  and  greed  of  larger  territory,  but 
just  opportunity,  had  awakened  a  strong 
desire  for  enlargement  of  borders.    It  may 
have  been  a  legitimate  occasion  of  recover- 
ing his  own,  lost  or  wrongfully  taken  from 
him  or  his  predecessors  before  him,  or  of 
expelling  successfully  from  their  hold  upon 
it  a  portion  of  the  original  inhabitants  of 
the  promised  laud  of  God's  people.    That 
thine  hand  might  be  with  me.    Many  are 
the  beautiful  parallels  to  be  culled  from  the 
Word  of  God  for  this  expression,  as  e.g, 
Ezra    xii.  9 ;    Ps.   Ixxx.   17  :    cxix.   178 ; 
czxxix.  5,  10 ;  Isa.  xlii.  6.    And  that  thou 
wonldest  keep  me  from  oyil,  that  it  may  not 
grieve  me!    This,  the  last  entreaty  of  the 
prayer,  is  the  largest  and  most  far-seeing. 
Warned  by  his  own  name,  forewarned  by  his 
mother's  emphasizing  of  her  own  pains  in 
him,  he  thus  concludes.    Having  begun  in 
the  evil  of  pain  and  excessive  sorrow,  he 
prays  that  he  and  his  career  may  not  so 
determine  and  end.  He  does  not  necessarily 
pray  to  be  preserved  from  all  suffering,  but 
from  such  baneful  touch  of  evil  itself,  its 
principle,  its  tyrannous,  merciless  hold,  as 
might  bring  him  to  real  and  irreparable  grief. 
Thus  closes  the  whole  prayer,  each  succeed- 
ing clause  of  which  has  been  under  the  rule 
of  the  initial  *Mf,"  translated  with  us,  Oh 
that.    This  well-known    Hebrew    form  of 
prayer  supposes  a  solemn  engai^ement,  and 
that  the  answered  prayer  shall  meet  with 
the  fulfilment  of  a  vowed  promise  on  the 
part  of   the  suppliant,  according   to    the 
pattern  of  Gen.  xxviii.  20.    In  the  absence 
of  that  engagement  here,  we  may  notice, 
with  Keil,  the  greater  grace  of  the  pa&^a^e, 
in  that  it  cIohcs  with  the  statement  of  the 
readiness  to  heaty  and  the  abounding  readi- 
ness to  antwer^  on  the  pai  t  of  Divine  bene- 
ficence :  And  Ood  granted  him  that  which  ho 
requested.     Evidently  the  tiling    that  he 
asked  pleased  the  Lord  (1  Kingd  iii.  10, 12); 
although  it  was  in  this  case  some  form  of 
riches,  and  lons^  life  for  self,  and  the  life  of 
his  enemies,  that  he  asked,  and  was  noi 
altogether  and  in  so  many  words  **  a  wise 
and  understanding  heart."    Perhaps,  also 
there  was  in  the  way  of  asking,  and  in  the 
exact  occasion,  unknown  to  us,  something 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHK0SICLE3.     [en.  iv.  1—48. 


which  quite  jastifioil  tho  mnttci  of  tlio 
prayer,  and  wiilch  thiu  plensol  the  Lonl. 
The  ronuukableand  ikmMting  episode  could 
not  hare  clobed  In  wore  weloomo  or  im- 

Ciwivo  way  Iban  wlion  it  Id  thus  briefly 
t  oDDoluBiTol]'  said,  **  And  God  gnmtod 
him  that  which  he  ToqneaEod." 

Von  II,  12.— Of  the  whole  of  tlio  group 
of  nanus  contained  in  those  two  versee,  ft 
molt  bn  said  tliat  we  are  in  the  dork,  Tlie 
■ureestionof  QroTe,inhiflnrt  "Ir-euuhash" 
(Smith's  *  Bible  Dictiunary ';,  is  worth 
notioo,  that  poBsibl;  the  versca  may  be  a  | 
rotniniscence  of  some  CanoaniUsh  graft  on 
Jndab — the  Sbvati  (nrntf)  of  vtr.  II  point- 
ing to  the  Bhua  (jnW)  of  eh.  11  3;  Gen. 
uiTiii.  2.  B«tii-npha  (tho  house  of  tho  , 
Kiant)  looks  more  like  the  nano  of  a  place 
tiian  of  a  poieon,  though  the  toit  uot'ds  e, 

EeiBon,  and  such  may  be  oovcroil  possibly 
y  this  QBiue,  though  It  be  of  a  ptaoo.  I 
Ii-nahsih  (the  city  of  the  serpent).  Jerome,  ' 
tn  his  'QufCBtinues  Hobmioie  in  Parol.,' 
asBcrta  or  repeats  tlie  awortion  of  some  one 
else  that  this  is  no  other  place  than  Ik'th- 
Icbein,'  taking  Naliosii  as  a  aynonym  with 
Jeeso.    Unlikely  as  this  is,  no  place  of  the 

Vera,  l.t— 15.— We  return  here  tn  tho 
neighbonrhood  of  names  not  quite  stningo. 
From  oouiporisou  of  tho  many  ptuBogca  in 
Nuuibc'Ts,  Joshua,  and  Judges,  wliich  con- 
tain references  to  Othxiel  and  Oslsb  (son 
uf  Jophunneh).  the  stronger  conclusion  to 
whicli  we  are  led  isthutOthoiel  wosyonngor 
brothi'T  of  Colob  (probably  not  by  both 
the  same  parents)  and  Kenat  a  forefatliur, 
of  course  not  litorally  father.  The  conclu- 
sion is  not  arrived  at  without  difficulty,  or 
with  any  real  certainty.  In  the  present 
instunce,  e.g.,  why  should  Othniel,  if  the 
younger  brother  and  so  oxpressly  and  ro- 
peateilly  n.cntioncd,  be  taken  first?  For 
the  possible  Kcnoi  of  this  passage,  wo  mi^ht 
then  refer  to  oh.  L  53;  Gen.  iiiii.  42. 
Hkthath.  The  marginidrGading,  which  joins 
Mconothai  at  once  to  Hnthath,  and  tlion 
•applies  "who"  before  "Ifgal  Ophrah,"  is 
decidedly  to  be  odnptt-d.  Joab  son  of  Beraiah 
Is  not  to  be  aasnmed  to  be  one  with  Joob  son 
(rf  Zomiah.  Ths  vallsy  of  tho  Charothlm 
(see  also  Neh.  li.  35),  i.e.  tmillit,  or  erafti- 
tnen.  lay  eaat  of  Jaffii,  and  behind  the  plain 
ofBliaron;  and  Is  said  by  Jerome,  to  hie 
'Qnnstionca  Hebraicai  in  Paral.,'  to  have 
been,  oocurding  to  tnulition,  namoil  so  bo- 
oause  the  architects  of  the  temple  came 
tlieneo.  Irn.  Pcrliaps  tho  real  name  is  Ir, 
and  tho  final  ikiu  rather  on  ioitial  for  tho 
Di'Xt  name.  £Iah.  ProhaUy  anotlicr  name 
b  wnntiug  afler  this,  whicb  the  nau  will 
then  join  to  Kenoz;  otherwise,  na  niu  will 
not  translate  "wea,"  the  followiug  name 


will  bcoomo,  as  in  the  margin,  UJaua.  The 
wanting  name  might  be  tho  JAataleel  of 
tho  next  verso.  Tliis  lost  name  is  in  the 
Hebrew  identical  with  tho  Jeholclel  of  am 

Authoriioil  Version  (2  Chron.  xxti.  12). 

Ver.  16.— Of  none  of  tho  clinmcters  of 
this  verso  can  anything  be  said  beyond  what 
appears  here. 

Vers.  17,  Ifi.— Fmm  tho  tangle  of  these 
verers  it  Is  hopiless  to  attempt  any  certain 
oouclosloDB.  The  fact  of  tho  antithesiH  of 
the  Jewess  wifo  (by  some  asai'.^ed  as  wife 
to  Exra),  and  tiic  presumably  Egyptian  wifo 
moutiooed  in  the  latter  verse,  is  perhaps 
just  enough  in  tlie  goneral  obscurity  to 
sugjnat  that  Mered,  the  asserted  husband  of 
the  latter,  is  to  be  understood  as  the  hus- 
band of  the  former  also.  But  to  compass  so 
much  as  this,  we  have  to  overlook  omission 
in  ver.  IT  and  Inversion  In  ver.  18.  There 
is  a  tone  about  the  verses,  due  to  names 
they  oontnln,  that  might  suggest  to  us  the 
times  of  Egypt  and  &Ioses,  and  truditions  Id 
keeping  do  not  bil  to  come  to  view  ill 
Jerome  (' QuDationea,'  etc.;  see  also  art. 
"  Merod,"  Smith's '  Bible  Diotiooary ').  Tlio 
four  places.  Sshtemc*,  Oedor,  So«ho,  Zoscth, 
may  ail  with  tolerable  oonfliienco  be  identi- 
fied in  Josh.  XV.  JS— 58,  as  of  tho  nnmber 
of  the  cities  "In  tho  mountains,"  thoat;h 
Zanonh  and  Bocho  oro  found  also  "in  tlie 
valloy  "  (Josh.  XT.  83—86).  In  tliis  pasEOge 
the  ^ptuagint  gives  us  no  hclp,bat  betniyi 


incoherent. 

Ver.  10.— The  first  clause  of  this  verse  lu 
Ihe  Ue1>rew  is.  And  the  sous  of  ths  wif* 
of  Eodiah.    Tho  margin  olfcrs  the  Jaeen 

Xin  for  Hodiah.  Nothing  is  known  ox- 
[latory  of  the  descriptive  word  Oonulta 
litre.  Its  meaning,  according  tn  Ooscniiis, 
is  "  bimy."  Eshtsmoft  is  here  diatiiiguialied 
from  the  same-spelt  word  in  ver.  IT  by  the 
description  the  Maaohathite,  Moochnd  being 
a  region  at  tho  foot  of  Uenuon,  bordering  on 
and  belonging  to  Syria. 

Ver.  20.— The  names  of  this  vot«e  obtain 
no  Ii;-bt  from  other  pnssagos.  The  Bep- 
tuagiiit  I  Alexandrian),  tn  lot.,  speaks  of 
"  Somoion,  the  father  of  Jnmam,  in  the 
former  verse  which  probably  stands  for 
tills  Shimon.  Also  the  Scptua);int  for 
Vulgate,  instead  of  oounting  fisn-hanau  as 
tho  name  of  a  third  mn.  translate  it,  as  of 
Blnnah  "  son  of  Uanau."  Ishi ;  not  to  be 
confused  with  eh,  ii.  31,  son  of  Appaini. 
Our  Aiithoriacd  Voraion,  following  thu  Vul- 
gate, does  Dot  tmuslate  Bsn-soheth,  while 
tho  Hebrew  would  road  naturally  "Zoholh, 
and  the  son  of  Zobi;tb." 

Vers.  21— 23.— The  fintt  of  th«o  verses 
takes  ns  bock  to  cb.  li.  S,  when)  tho  first 


cii.  IV.  1—43.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


and  Sliclnli ;  nhcro  of  Er  it  la  said, "  He 
ovil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  ;  and  ho  elcw 
jim ; "  and  where  notliing  is  itdUcd  of 
Onnn  or  Sholnh.  It  would  nppsai  now  thai 
Bhelab  gnvo  the  narao  vf  the  slain  brother 
to  hii  BOO.  B  apocting  this  Er  of  Leeah— 
vritb  little  doubt  tho  nomo  of  a  oloce — and 
Tja^tth^  nothing  elso  can  be  addDOcd;  but 
■aredlBh  (ch.  it.  42)  ia  tlio  namo  of  a  |>laco 
in  tho  Shr/dah,  girea  io  tho  samo  passage 
with  Kailah  and  Nciib  (Jueh.  it.  44;  see 
also2Chron.  li.  8;  liv.  0).  The  fine  Hnen 
^YQ)  here  apokon  of  ia,  according  to  Gcee- 
nius,  equivnlont  ia  this  passage  and  in  the 
later  Hebron,  to  tho  byema  o1  tbo  Egyp- 
tiauB  (Eiod.  iivi.  31 :  2  Chron.  iii.  14X  the 
tftf_,  from  which  tho  Syrian  tywus  (Eick. 
xxvii.  IG),  to  which  ■ps  does  more  strictly 
apply,  is  diotinguiflhoJ  in  some  other  placca. 
It  was  of  Bno  texture,  ooatly.  and  used  as 
tllochithingofltin6B{ch.  IT.  27),  of  (iriostfl  | 
(2  Chron.  t.  12),  and  of  tho  very  meolthy  ; 
(Eatb.  i.  6;  Tiii.  15),  Goaunius  snys  that,  , 
after  long  reaearcli  and  dispute,  micro- 
■oojHO  ill  vest  igations  in  London  liave  oon- 
cluded  that  the  threads  of  tho  cloth  of  . 
byuiu  aw  linen,  not  cotton.  Aahbea  {Iia^«) 
is  not  yet  reoogoized  clsewhore.  Jakim. 
Gcsoniiu  oonaidura  this  name  (Q^v)  as  a 
contractod  form  of  B-p;!"  (Joiakim)  of  Noh. 
xii.  10.  Choieba.  The  moaning  of  this 
name  ia  "lyins;"  not  found  elscwluro. 
It  is  probably  the  aaiuo  as  the  an^,  a  town 
in  tbe  tribe  of  Judah  (Gen.  iiiviii.  5), 
and  that  is  probably  the  some  as  tho  ansN, 
of  tho  "  valley  "  liat  of  Judali  cities  (Josh. 
sv.  44)  and  of  Mioih  i.  14,  where  it  ia 
mentioned  in  near  oonnectiou  with  the 
Btureshah,  vrhii:h  also  accompinics  it  in 
the  above  "valley  "  lisL  Joash.  This  name 
appears  in  three  forms :  tfit'i<,  as  in  tho 
teit  and  2  Kings  lii.  20;  t^Kiff  as  in 
2  Kings  xii.  I :  and  tip',  as  in  ch.  vii.  8. 
Baraph.  This  is  tbe  word  tlie  plural  of 
which  gives  as  our  leraphim  (Ian.  vi.  2),  and 
iafroua  root  of  somewhat  uncurtain  moining. 
The  different  sigaiBcotions  to  which  the 
root  seoma  to  lend  itself  in  tbe  aubatantive, 
according  oa  it  ia  used  in  the  lingular  or 
plnral, are  startling  (aeeOcacnius, '  Lexicon,' 
tab  voet).  Tho  apparent  meaning  of  tbia 
Terae  ia  that  thoro  waa  a  time  of  old,  wbcn 
tho  above,  of  whom  wo  can  ascertain  uothing 
elsowhoie,  mlod  over  Koab.  Jerome,  in  the 
Vnlgata,  has  made  ■  strange  rendering  of 
this  verao  by  tranahiting  sumo  of  the  proper 
names,  and  reading  nt  least  one  of  them, 
tho  Snt,  aa  tbongb  it  wore  a  form  In  the 
Hebrew  (D-p.).  which  it  is  not :  El  qui 
tlanfeeil  (oiem,  viri^ua  JHendatii  et  Seeurm 


el  Tiretndeni,  'pit  prineipi'tftienint  ia  ifimfr 
el  qui  repern  tuiit  ia  Laheia ;  hn-c  autem 
verba  velera.  Thus  Jokim  is  turned  inlo 
Ellmolech,  and  the  mm  of  Choisba  into 
Mahlon  and  Cbilion  of  tho  Dmk  of  Ruth, 
and  Jaahubi-lsham  into  Naomi  and  Ruth ; 
nnd  tho  last  clause  of  tbe  verse  is  equiva- 
lent to  citing  (he  Bouk  of  Ruth.  Barring- 
ton  ('  Qenoidogics,'  L  179)  regards  Jokim  as 
Bhclah's  third  aon  in  thia  onameratioti ;  and 
others  regard  Jashuhi-lehom  aa  his  fourlli 
aon.  The  prepoaition  S  prefixed  t«  smid, 
and  following  tbe  verb,  is  to  bo  noted. 
Vur.  23  brings  us  to  the  last  of  JudaL.  and 
leaves  us  to  part  with  the  necount  of  the 
tribo  in  tlio  same  obsourjty  wliich  haa 
lately  invulved  it.  The  plant*  and  hadgaa 
are  probably  an  instance  of  innppurlnna 
translation  of  proper  namca,  whicti  should 
rather  appear  as  Netaiia  and  Qerlara,  tho 
former  plaoo  or  people  not  found  elsewhere, 
but  the  latter  possibly  rifurrL-d  to,  Josh.  xv.  36. 
A^ain,  teho  they  wore  thnt  wore  tiie  potter*,  is 
not  clear — whether  all  of  the  preceding  verse, 
or  tho  kat  mentioned.  From  tho  Inst  clause 
it  may  be  probably  aafoly  ooncluiied,  that 
tlinse  dcaigiiatcd,  whoovor  they  were,  were 
employed  imliituully  in  tho  service,  not 
indeed  of  one  king  necesaarily,  but  of  the 
Buccossion  of  toyalty.  Passages  that  may 
be  ta'.on  to  throw  interesting  light  upon 
thia  subject  are  ch.  xxvii.  25—31 ;  2  Chron. 
ixvi.  10:  xxvii.4;  iixii.  27— 29. 

Vord.  24— 27.— Tho  scoond  of  (ho  twelve 
triboa  is  now  taken,  and  occupiL'B  but  small 
Bp:ice  oa  oomparod  with  Judah  proceding, 
or  Levi  and  Banjomin  when  their  turn 
oomea.  Tho  oompariaon  oF  tbe  enumera- 
tion of  the  Bona  of  Simoon  here  wi(h  thai 
in  Gen.  xlvi.  10,  Eiod.  vi.  15,  ia  helpful  in 
dcladiiuR  tho  idea  that  tbe  compiler  of 
Cbroniclea  O0[)iod  diroct  from  QoncBis  and 
EioduB,  or  that  bo  depended  oxcluaivcly 
on  identical  sourcoa  of  information.  That 
comparison  showa  aix  namoa  in  bath  of 
tiioso  passages  for  only  five  hero,  and  It 
ehowa  also  diffcreuco  in  throe  of  the  name*, 
viz.  Jemuel.  Zohor,  and  Jochtn,  for  Hernial, 
Zem,  and  Jarib.  On  tbo  other  hand,  the 
list  of  Mamb.  xxvi.  12  is  in  exact  agree- 
ment with  our  list  bore  (the  omission  of 
Chad  in  both  l>eing  anScicntly  aoonnnted 
for  by  one  and  tho  same  reason),  with  the 
oxooptionof  Jurib  bora  for  Jnchiii  atill  there; 
and  this  solitary  differenca  may  justly  be 
auBpectod  to  be  nothing  but  an  early  cor- 
ruption of  reih  for  caph  and  belh  for  nan 
(see  Kcnnieott,  ■  Dias.,'  i.  178  ;  Barrington's 
'  Genealogies,'  i.  55).  Ver.  25  contains  three 
■-  from  ono  of  theae— Shaul,  Of 
the  firat,  it  may  bo  noted  that 
fourteen  others  of  tho  same  name 
in  the  Old  Toatament;  aud  of  ^■''^m 
and    lltifhTnii  (whom  some  cull   brothers. 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.     L^h-  ".  1—43. 


■Orel;  In  error),  that  there  were  others  of 
the  BBme  nnme  (nad  oerUinly  given  aa 
brotherB),  tiz.  tbe  aoaa  oF  Ishmael  (Gen. 
MT.  13 ;  cb.  i.  20).  Yet.  26  odds  apparently 
dnother  three  den^iitii,  vif.  from  Klahma. 
Of  the  flrst-nnmed  of  these,  Hamnal,  it  may 
be  noted  that  Ihe  Dame  appears  in  many 
Hebrev  manuscripts  as  Chammael ;  of  tho 
tecoDd-Qumed,  Zaeobni,  thnt  six  others  of  the 
■ame  name  (though  tbe  Authorized  Verdion 
gives  them  Zucour)  are  found  in  Numbers, 
the  First  Buok  of  Chroniclea,  and  Mehe- 
miab;  while  nn  tho  third,  Bhiwei  (of  which 
aams  Ihe  Old  Testament  cODtaina  firteon 
others),  our  attention  is  especially  dPtnined 
M  father  of  ilxtMD  Mai  and  liz  dangbtsra, 
though  it  ia  observed  that  bis  brethren 
(query  Hnmmuel  end  Zacehur)  had  not 
luxe  families.  The  smaliness  of  the  whole 
tribe  relatively  lo  Judah,  was  only  saved 
tttaa  being  smaller  by  him.  With  this 
agrees  the  oeusui  of  Kumb.  i  23,  27;  iL 
4,  13;  iivi.  14.  It  is  poaible  that  this 
Bbimei  la  the  same  with  Shemaiah  of 
»er,  87. 

Vers.  28— M,— Those  "thirteen  cities 
with  their  villages"  and  "five  cities" 
are  found,  with  wme  slight  difTorunres,  in 
Josh.  lii.  1—9  (comp.  it,  26—82.  42). 
They  were  carved  out  of  the  "portion  of 
Judah,"  which  had  been  found  dupKpor- 
tloned  during  the  interval  that  elapsed 
between  the  flrat  settlements,  viz.  of  Juilah 
and  Ihe  sons  of  Joseph,  and  the  complelion 
of  the  settlements  westward  of  Jordan 
(Josh,  xviii.  1—6;  comp.  Judg.  L  3,  IT). 
From  the  second  of  these  groups,  Toobea 
(see  suggestion  in  '  Speaker's  Commentary,' 
■n  loo.)  is  omitted  in  Josh.  xii.  T,  where 
only  "four  cities"  are  summed.  The 
rUdsIoii  (ver.  31)  to  the  reign  of  Sarid  is 
sufficiently  explained  by  the  fact  ttiat  during 
hia  peraecuted  wanderings  he  was  often  in 
the  portion  of  Simeon,  to  three  of  the  ciliea 
of  which  he  sent  presvuts  from  the  spoils  of 
the  Amalekitea  (1  Sam.  izx.  26—31) ;  and 
Ziklsg  berame  his  own  (1  Bam.  xxviL  6), 
special  mention  being  mads  of  how  it 
|»B8ed  into  the  tribe  of  Judali.  The  fuller 
name  of  Baal  (ver.  33)  is  given  as  Baalath- 
beer  in  Josh  lii.  8,  where  it  is  foUnwed 
by  the  addition  "Ramath  [fceioU]  of  the 
south."  It  may  be  noted  thnt  this  descrip- 
tion of  the  allotment  of  Simeon  begins  with 
Beer-sheba  and   ends  with   Baalath-beer. 


alog7"- 

uonn— will  be  more  properly  translated, 
their  talile  of  gmaalogg,  or  IMr  regit- 
tr^ioK.  The  following  aiS  may  then 
refer  to  "their  habiutioas"  ratbcr  than 
themselvee,  to  that  tbe  clause,  aa  a  whole, 
would  mean,  "Theae  were  theii  dwellings. 


and  their  registration  was  oorreot  to  them.** 
Ilerlbeau,  however,  takes  the  meaning  to 
be,  "And  there  was  their  family  register 
to  them,"  i.e.  "  They  had  their  own  family 
roaister.** 

Vers.  31— 41.— These  veises  reoord  an 
organized  and  determined  movement  in 
quest  of  new  and  rich  territory  on  the  part 
of  some  of  tho  tribe  of  Simeon.  They  were 
thirteen  ptiooef  of  the  tribe  of  Simeon  who 
led  the  movement,  ^nssibly  representing 
respectively  the  "thirteen 'cities"  given 
above.  The  movement  took  place  in  tbe 
days  of  Eeisklah  king  of  Jndah  (b.i;. 
72(i-6gB).  That  the  bonae  ofthsirbaian 
bad  iaoTMMd  gnatly  is  probably  men- 
tioned aa  some  explanation  of  the  cause 
of  the  movement.  Though  in  one  name 
out  of  the  thirteen  (ver.  35)  the  ancestors 
are  traced  to  the  third  generation,  and  in 
another  (ver.  !i7)  to  the  fifth,  no  name 
is  n.'oolied  of  the  sons  of  Simeon  enu- 
merated in  vers.  21—27.  Thsaa  men- 
tloaed  by  name*  is  to  be  translated  strictly 
then  eoming  by  namei ;  and  it  ia  open  to 
quistion  whether  the  word  of  ver.  41, 
cr3Mi3.-i,  be  not  omitted  after  ONun;  ao 
that  the  passage  would  read, "These  that 
came,  written  by  names,  were  princes  in 
their  families."  OF  the  names,  twenty-two 
lu  all,  found  in  these  Tersea,  just  so  much  is 
known  as  is  here  written. 

Ver.  39. — Tho  plioe  Oeder  oannot  be 
identified  in  this  ronneotion.  There  is  a 
town  of  the  name  situated  in  the  moun- 
tainous district  of  Judah  between  Halhul 
and  Betli-zur,  to  the  north  of  Hebron 
(Josh.  sv.  68).  It  is  evident  tiial  thii  can- 
not be  the  phu»  we  require  here.  There 
ia  anutlier  town  of  tbe  name  (ch.  sii.  7), 
probably  belonging  to  Benjamin,  and  which 
aa  little  admits  of  being  fitted  in  here. 
Xoth  the  Alexandrine  and  the  Vatican 
Codes  of  the  Sepluagint,  however,  etiilently 
read  Ti^  for  -h^.  Now,  Gerar  of  the 
Philistines  would  suit  well  for  position  and 
description,  and  aUo  (Gen.  x.  11)  for  the 
allusion  found  here  (ver.  40)  to  the  dwelling 
there  "of  old"  of  the  people  of  Ham. 
The  Hebrew  word,  hovraver,  generally  ap- 
plied to  the  valley  of  Gerar  (Vu,  wady) 
la  not  the  word  used  here  of  Gedor 
((Tin,  ravine).  See  Stanley's  '  Syria  and 
Palestine,'  p.  139,  and  note.  Not  only 
are  references  frequent  to  the  fertility 
of  Gerar,  but  the  significance  of  that  m 
2  Chron.  liv.  14  speaks  for  itself  Thu 
alteration  of  reading,  however,  with  accept- 
ance of  the  Septuagint  manuscripts,  oannot 
be  regarded  as  altogellier  satisfactory,  and 
Keil  ('  Comm.,*  tn  loc)  offers  eome  suggea- 
tioDS  of  weiebt  against  those  of  Ewahi, 
Berthean,  ana  others. 


CH.  IV.  1—43.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK   OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


47 


Ver.  41. — ^The  habitatloni  that  were  found 
there.  So  the  Authorized  Version,  which  has 
mistakenly  Englished  a  word  which  should 
have  been  left  a  proper  name,  "  the  Maon- 
ites,"  i.e.  the  people  elsewhere  called  in 
the  Author. zed  Version  the  Mahunim.  In 
doing  this,  our  translators  followed  the 
Targum,  copied  by  Luther  and  Junius  (hut 
see  Oesenius,  *  Thesaurus,'  1002  a ;  '  Notes 
on  Burckhardt,'  1069;  Bertheau,  in 
*  Chronik. ; '  and  Septuagint  reading).  Unto 
thifl  day,  in  this  verse,  as  also  in  ver.  43, 
must  not  be  understood  to  mark  the  date  of 
the  compiler  of  Chronicles,  but  that  of  the 
document  or  authority  upon  which  he  as  a 
compiler  drew— anterior,  of  course,  to  the 
Captivity. 

Vers.  42, 43. — These  verses  ei?e  the  further 
exploits,  with  a  view  of  settlement,  of  cer- 
tain of  the  tribe  of  Simeon.  And  of  them 
we  should  prefer  to  apply  to  those  already 
mentioned  (vers.  34 — 41),  did  the  expression 
stand  alone.  But  the  following  clause  in 
apposition,  of  the  eoni  of  Simeoxi,  seems 
intended  to  prevent  the  supposition  that 
iKey  are  the  Simer>nites  to  whom  alone 
allusion  is  made.  Keil  a^in  (*  Comm.,'  in 
loc)  refers  those  intended  to  ver.  27,  because 


he  rc^s,  for  Ishi,  the  Shimei  of  ver.  27,  on 
very  insufficient  grounds.  It  is  a  question 
whether  the  movement  of  ver.  42  is  to  bo 
understood  as  arising  out  of  that  other  the 
account  of  which  closes  in  ver.  41,  or 
whether  it  were  not  a  co-ordinate  move- 
ment. It  still  would  probably  enough 
spring  from  the  same  intnnsio  causes.  T^e 
allotment  of  the  tribe  of  Simeon  carved  out 
of  that  of  Judah  was  found  too  small  for 
their  growing  numbers,  though  Simeon  was 
not  of  the  most  numerous.  Nor  ie  it  ne- 
cessary to  suppose— perhaps  it  is  rather 
necessary  to  correct  the  impression — that  this 
expedition,  issuing  in  a  permanent  settle- 
ment, lay  at  all  near  the  oonqueats  of  tlie 
**  thirteen  princes."  It  is,  on  the  whole, 
most  natural  to  consider  that  one  event 
concludes  with  ver.  41,  and  that  the  follow- 
ing events  (vers.  42,  43)  are  distinct  and 
independent.  All  reouisito  light  as  to  who 
these  "smitten  Amalekites"  were,  is  for 
them  too  significantly  furnished  by  com- 
parison of  1  Sam.  xxvii.  8 ;  xxx.  1 ;  2  Sam. 
viii.  12 ;  with  1  Sam.  xiv.  48 ;  xv.  7.  Of 
the  names,  five  in  number,  found  in  this 
verse,  just  so  much  and  no  more  is  known. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  ^.^-A  unique  instance  qf  the  heneficent  disappointments  of  human  suffering'^ 
cry.  The  remarkable  position  of  the  brief  episode,  consisting  of  this  and  the  follow- 
ing verse,  does  but  draw  our  closer  and  more  willing  attention  to  it  Is  it  not  like  a 
spring  in  the  dry  land  ?  Is  it  not  like  an  oasis  in  the  desert  ?  Or  again,  in  other 
figure,  if  the  whole  scene,  in  the  very  midst  of  which  this  brief  narration  is  found » 
resemble  some  vast  burying-place  (and  surely  it  does  very  much  resemble  this), 
crowded  with  tombstones  which  are  worn  with  age  and  dishonoured  by  forgottenness 
and  indifiference,  here  the  eye  and  the  mind  too  are  detained  by  an  inscription  worthy 
the  notice  and  the  thoughtful  meditation.  The  inscription  in  question  is  not  a  long  one. 
It  is  far  from  savouring  of  anything  fulsome.  But  it  is  striking,  and  with  the  striking- 
ness  of  suggestion  rather  than  of  assertion ;  of  what,  unsaid,  insists  on  coming  to  the 
thought,  rather  than  of  what,  said,  tasks  unwilling  thought  It  must  be  called  a 
Scripture  provideuce  which  has  preserved,  and  has  in  this  way  brought  to  the  front, 
this  interesting  incident  We  will  for  a  moment  shut  ofif  this  verse  from  the  following, 
and  upon  it,  by  itself,  concentrate  attention.  It  suddenly  introduces  to  us  one  Jabei, 
crown  presumably  to  years  of  manhood.  And  in  designed,  we  may  say  manifestly 
designed,  antithesis  to  the  characteristic  so  '' honourable"  affixed  to  the  mention  of  his 
name,  a  reminiscence  of  his  christening  furnishes  us  with  the  intelligence  how  he  came 
by  his  name  of  sorrow.  He  has  disappointed  that  name.  The  promise  of  its  sadness 
he  has  not  ful61Ied.  The  exceeding  pains  of  the  mother  seem  to  nave  led  the  way  to  a 
good  and  happy  career  for  the  son.  And  a  dark  morning*8  outlook  has  grown  to  a 
bright  day.    Let  us  notice  that — 

1.  There  is  a  certain  instruotive  suddenness  in  the  introduction  of  the 
MATTER  OF  THIS  VERSE.  Abruptly  as  the  name  of  Jabez  here  comes  upon  us,  abrupt 
as  is  the  introduction  of  the  brief  sketch  of  his  history,  it  is  nothing  more  abrupt  than 
the  case  as  it  presents  itself  not  unfrequently  in  real  life,  both  then  and  now,  and  the 
facts  of  which  are  identical  with  those  of  the  instance  here  presented  to  us.  The  very 
manner  of  Scripture  history  and  biography  harmonizes  well  with  the  matter  of  well- 
known  life,  and  often  reminds  us  of  it.    The  surprises  which  Providence  prepares  or 


^^^^^•■■»— •— "^r^-^"^     ■'  »t 


48  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  iv.  1—43. 


permits  in  tho  matter  of  human  circumstance^  character,  caroeri  have  always  been 
many ;  and  though  their  number  ceases  not,  they  maintain  the  quality  of  their  force. 

II.  Thebe  is  a  cebtaik  sinqularity  brought  to  notice  in  this  verse,  a  com- 
parison is  distinctly  instituted.  It  is  an  invidious  one.  Happily,  though  invidious,  it 
la  a  scriptural  one.  '*  Jabez  was  more  honourable  than  his  brethren."  It  is  a  com- 
parison the  more  pronounced  in  that  it  lies  within  the  range  of  one  family.  The  defence 
of  it  is :  (1)  First  and  in  part,  that  it  was  no  doubt  utterly  true — ^probably  signally  true. 
Further,  (2)  that  there  was  special,  practical  use  in  giving  prominence  to  it.  It  was  for 
the  good  of  others,  not  for  the  satisfaction  of  individual  pride  or  ostentation.  And  (3) 
that  the  simplest  statement  of  it,  free  from  any  flattery  and  any  enlargement,  was  ser- 
viceable to  gain  a  point  of  great  moment  That  point  was  one  on  a  very  dififerent  scale 
and  of  very  different  magnitude  from  any  mere  ordinary  occasion.  It  brings  into  relief 
a  contrast,  and  a  very  touching  contrast,  between  tho  hasty  verdict  of  present  human 
feeling  and  experience,  and  the  great,  irresistible  purposing  and  doings  of  the  Divine 
mind  in  tho  midst  of  this  lower  scene  of  things.  We  are  borne  on  a  strong  current, 
we  are  whirled  round  on  many  and  frequent  eddyings.  The  cry  of  anguish  and  of 
anger,  tho  murmur  of  discontent  and  of  doubt,  often  break  from  our  lips  and  rise  on 
high.  This  the  reason  thereof — that  wo  thanklessly  forget  that  very  thing,  viz.  that 
we  are  borne  on  a  strong  current,  that  an  irresistible  hand  is  laid  upon  us,  and  a 
sovereign  purpose  is  Lord  over  us.  We  are  not  told  how  or  in  what  respects  **  Jabez 
was  more  honourable  than  his  brethren."  Therefore  that  we  are  told  the  fact  without 
the  detail,  argues  that  a  general  principle  is  offered  to  our  notice,  and  wo  are  invited  to 
gmsp  and  utilize  it  rather  than  linger  amid  the  interest  of  mere  detail. 

III.  The  short-sightedness  of  a  mother  is  deugatelt  but  siqnificantlt  hinted 
in  the  very  verso  which  has  stamped  the  honour  of  her  son.  The  family— Aer  family 
— is  known,  and  known  for  good  too,  by  one  individual  of  it.  But  that  individual  is 
the  child  she  marked  evermore  and  signalized  as  the  cause  of  special  and  exceeding 
sufifering.  But  how  soon  was  that  suflering  over !  How  soon  was  it  obliterated!  How 
little  was  it  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  exceeding  joy,  which,  if  she  livod  to  sec 
it,  the  '*  honourableness  **  of  her  son  was  sure  to  have  g,iven  her  1  The  sufifering  was 
that  of  the  body,  the  joy  was  that  of  mind  and  heart.  What  a  comment  we  have 
here  upon  the  utterances  of  human  lips,  whether  hasty  or  not,  whether  true  to  the 
moment  or  not,  whether  not  to  bo  wondered  at  or  censured  sternly,  or  the  reverse,  and 
the  issues  that  lie  with  Ood,  the  event  which  we  mav  live  to  see,  and  which  shall  bo 
found  to  contrast  so  strangely,  so  sharplv  with  our  old  feeling,  impression,  auticimtion, 
or  foreboding !  The  man  who  rescues  that  motlier's  family  from  oblivion,  and  niids  it 
a  place  on  the  page  of  the  Divine  Word  for  ever  and  ever,  is  the  child  named  of  old— 
Jabez.  This  babe  of  old,  of  bitterer  pains  than  usual,  must  needs  therefore,  by  a 
loving  mother's  own  act,  bo  chartered  to  tell  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  the  tale  of  her 
suffering,  rather  than  to  bear  a  testimony  to  the  spirit  of  endurance  and  hope  and 
trust  that  were  in  her.  So  Heaven  disappoints  humau  calculations,  sometimes  as  much 
by  its  undeserved  beneficenco  as  at  other  times  by  its  just  visitations  of  punishment. 
So  Divine  strength  avails  itself  of  one  method  of  showing  its  perfection  in  human 
weakness.  So  our  Father's  generous  eye  overlooks  and  forgives  the  suspicion  that 
lurks  in  our  eye. 

Vor.  10  (first  part). — An  example  of  earnest  prayer  for  earthly  things,  to  he  imitated, 
"And  Jabez  ,  •  .  enlarge  my  coast."  No  syllable  nor  whisper  is  heard  by  us  of  tho 
child  that  cost  the  mother  so  much  suffering  in  bringing  into  the  world,  from  the  time 
that  he  was  named  till  he  is  now  arrived  at  manhood.  Then  he  is  again  introduced  with 
this  testimony,  that  he  is  '*  more  honourable  than  his  brethren."  The  probability  is 
that  this  expression  does  not  refer  exclusively  to  honourableness  of  moral  and  religious 
character.  It  is  an  equal  probability,  considering  the  remarkably  uniform  usage  of  the 
word  in  a  favourable  sense,  and  the  balance  of  its  use  in  even  a  high  sense,  that  it  does 
by  no  means  exclude  these  elements.  Tho  intermediate  time  is  left  to  our  imagina- 
tion to  fill  up.  It  was  not  like  that  intermediate  time  of  our  Saviour's  life,  lit  up 
only  by  the  incident  of  the  temple  and  the  discussion  with  the  doctors,  when  Jesus 
was  but  twelve  years  of  age.  We  are  warranted  in  permitting  imagination  to  depict 
all  that  interval  as  one  continuous  growth  of  goodness  and  display  of  spotless  hol»« 


cn.iv.  1— 43.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa  49 


ness,  and  it  is  for  quite  other  reasons  that  we  there  bid  imagination  learn  reverence  and 
caution,  and  chasten  itself.  Not  so  here;  in  the  darkness  and  the  silence  of  some 
twenty  years  or  more,  we  are  sure  that  there  mingled  error  and  imperfection  and  sin, 
with  whatever  else  there  was  of  redeeming  feature  in  character  and  conduct.  Still 
maturity  finds  Jabez  an  honoured  man.  Considering  all  things,  that  was  not  a  little 
thing  to  say.  But  better  and  more  to  our  purpose,  it  reveals  him  a  man  of  prayer — a 
man  who  knew,  who  believed  in,  who  practised  prayer.  Nay,  there  is  something  in 
the  first  opening  of  his  mouth  in  this  prayer  whicn  prepossesses  us^  and  invites  special 
consideration.    Let  us  notice — 

I.  Thb  tttlb  xjndeb  which  Jabez  appeals  to  the  objeot  op  his  pbateb.  He 
prays  to  the  "  Ood  of  Israel."  It  is  true  that  these  words  are  not  found  here  within 
the  borders  of  the  prayer  itself,  but  it  is  also  true  that  the  historian  says  that  it  was  to 
the  **  Grod  of  Israel "  that  the  prayer  of  Jabez  was  directed.  This  descriptive  desig- 
nation of  God  would  mean  at  least  three  things  with  Jabez.  The  Gh)d  of  Israel  is  for 
him,  (1)  the  God  of  his  fathers;  (2)  the  (xod  who  had  often  wrought  wonderful 
works  of  interposition,  of  deliverance,  of  victory  and  conquest,  on  behalf  of  his  people; 
and  (3)  he  is  especially  the  God  whose  pronounced  and  most  gracious  covenant  of 
truth  and  mercy  was  with  Israel  The  aids  of  memory  are  great  aids  for  fedth.  A 
lively  memory  of  long-past  mercies  also  tends  to  kindle  gratitude.  He  who  comes  with 
gratitude  into  the  Divine  presence  wins  fresh  favour,  gains  fresh  gifts.  So  also  to  have 
promises  is  one  thing.  These  we  all  have.  To  take  hold  of  them,  avail  ourselves  of 
them,  grasp  them,  is  another  and  far  greater  thing.  To  live  by  the  light,  and  in  the 
strength  and  joy  of  the  covenant^  is  the  grandest  privilege  any  man  could  possess. 

II.  The  detebioked  Ain>  eabnest  dibectkess  of  this  pbayeb.  It  is  the  prayer 
of  well-defined  petition.  Jabez  wants  a  blessing,  knows  the  blessing  that  he  wants, 
asks  it  with  fervour.  He  asks  it  with  earnest  emphasis.  All  argues  his  belief  in  the 
need  of  superhuman  help,  in  the  reality  of  such  a  thing  as  superhuman  help,  and  in  the 
availing  power  of  prayer  to  obtain.  This  constitutes  genuine  prayer.  It  is  not,  indeed, 
any  one  of  those  high  forms  of  spiritual  exercise,  the  meditation  of  the  unseen,  the 
apprehension  of  Divine  realities,  the  spirit's  communion  with  the  Father  of  all  spirit, 
and  refreshment  from  his  presence.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  prayer  which 
links  on  earth  to  heaven,  and  shows  a  human  hand  taking  hold,  with  the  free  permis- 
sion of  mercy,  of  God.  Jabez  goes  far  on  to  say,  "  I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou 
bless  me,"  when  he  says,  ^  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed  1 "  The  emphasis 
"  indeed "  is  the  emphasis  of  importunity,  not  of  distrust.  The  meaning,  as  every 
reader  of  the  Hebrew  knows  at  once,  is  ^  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  greatly  bless  me  I " 
As  though  Jabez  meant,  **  Unworthy  as  I  am,  oh  that  thou  wouldest  grant  me  a  great 
blessing  1 "  How  often  our  posture  is  prayer,  our  language  prayer,  our  tone  prayer,  yet 
the  reality,  the  definiteness,  the  heart  of  prayer,  is  far  from  us  I  We  ask  and  have  not, 
because  we  really  know  not  what  our  own  asking  is.  In  the  midst  of  vague  form  and 
heartless  performance,  nothing  is  asked. 

III.  The  instance  we  have  here,  and  which  we  shall  not  do  wrong  in  drawing  into  a 
precedent,  of  prayer  ofifered,  and  acceptably  offered,  the  burden  of  which  is  temporal 
good,  family  and  private  advantage,  substance  and  possession.  These  all  belong  to  the 
very  structure  and  texture  of  our  present  human  life  and  character.  They  much  tend 
to  make  or  mar  our  character.  The  way  in  which  we  get  them,  use  them,  give  them 
again,  is  often  the  criterion,  and  very  decisive  criterion,  of  everything  with  us,  for  good 
or  for  harm.  The  great  man  of  business  and  the  man  of  great  property  are  borne  on 
a  strong  current,  are  tossed  on  deceitful,  dangerous  tides ;  but  it  may  none  the  less  be 
that,  under  certain  conditions,  they  are  fulfilling  appointed  and  most  important  ofi&ces 
in  the  general  scene  of  the  world's  traffic.  But  how  much  securer  that  man  must  feel 
who  has  gained,  and  gained  much,  not  by  sharp  practice,  chicanery,  unscrupulousness, 
but  by  clear  views,  determined  wishes,  diligent  devotion,  and  the  liberal  *'  blessing," 
the  *' great"  blessing  of  Godl  Desire  for  earthly  substance  is  not  necessarily  mere 
earthly  desire.  It  is  too  true  that  it  is  too  often  this,  but  not  always.  Some  of  the 
greatest  men  of  business  in  the  world  have  been,  and  are  to-day,  the  best  men  of 
business  in  the  Church.  By  their  liberality  and  charity,  by  their  beneficence  and 
philanthropy,  the  **  cords  have  been  lengthened,  the  stakes  strengthened,"  of  the 
tabernacle  of  the  Lord  God  of  IsraeL    And  their  watchfulness,  their  prayerfulncss^ 

L  CUB0NICLE8.  Ji 


60  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.      [ch.  iv.  1—43. 

— 

their  sustidned  Christian  consistency  and  humility,  have  been  an  example  far  and 
wide. 

Ver.  10. — The  prayer  for  the  hand.  "And  that  thine  hand  might  be  with  me." 
This  amplifying  petition  follows  significantly  upon  the  more  definite  and  specific 
entreaty  of  the  b^inning  of  the  verse.  It  also  takes  us  into  the  ancient  workshop  of 
language.  The  countenances  of  us  all,  and  their  infinitely  various  expression,  come 
from  the  different  combinations  of  a  very  few  features  and  other  elements.  All  our 
words  come  from  the  immense  number  of  combinations  possible  between  and  among 
twenty-six  letters.  And  the  amazing  proportion  of  the  whole  vast  mass  of  our  language 
oomes  from  the  figurative  and  the  analogic  appropriations  of  what  would  otherwise 
be,  and  once  was,  a  very  scanty  vocabulary.  This  is  especially  observable  of  our 
religious  and  devotional  language,  though  none  truer  of  it  than  of  our  ordinary  language. 
The  twenty-third  psalm,  and  very  many  sentences  of  other  psalms,  give  abundant 
illustrations  of  the  way  in  which  figurative  language  at  once  doubles,  but  in  point  of 
fact  far  more  than  doubles,  language.  And  the  eentence  of  the  text  is  one  of  the  most 
elementary  and  most  plain  of  all  illustrations  of  the  kind.  The  first  uses  of  a  hand, 
the  many  uses  of  a  hand,  lend  a  wealth  of  ima^i^ery,  and  thereby  of  enrichment,  to 
language.  From  the  suggestion  of  the  prayer  of  Jabez  to  the  efiect  that  **  the  hand  " 
of  Qod  "  might  be  with  '^  him,  let  us  take  opportunity  to  view  some  of  the  chief  scrip- 
tural representations  of  the  exercise  of  the  Divine  hand  and  of  the  effects  thereof,  and 
thus  lead  up  again  to  the  prayer  before  us.    And  we  often  read  of — 

I.  Thb  cbeatiye  hakd.  Man  is  spoken  of  as  the  work  of  God's  creative  bands : 
*'  Thy  hands  have  made  me  and  fashioned  me  "  (Ps.  cxix.  73).  So  also  the  heavens  : 
*'  The  heavens  are  the  work  of  thy  hands  "  (Ps.  cii.  25).  So,  again,  the  earth  and  the 
■ea :  **  The  sea  is  his,  and  he  made  it :  and  his  hands  formed  the  dry  land ''  (Ps.  xcv.  5). 
And  all  living  things  and  things  inanimate :  "  Thou  madest  him  to  have  dominion 
over  the  works  of  thy  hands ;  thou  hast  put  all  things  under  his  feet :  all  sheep  and 
oxen,  yea,  and  the  b^ts  of  the  field ;  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and 
whatsoever  passeth  through  the  paths  of  the  seas  "  (Ps.  viii.  6 — 8).  (See  also  glorious 
reminiscences  to  the  same  efiect.  Job  x.  8 ;  xiv.  15  ;  xxxiv.  19 ;  Isa.  xlviii.  13 ;  Ixiv.  8.) 

II.  The  hand  of  the  bovereion,  absolute  Owkeb.  (Job  v.  18;  xii.  10;  Dan. 
V.  23 ;  Eccl.  ix.  1 ;  ch.  xxix.  12,  16 ;  Ps.  xxxi.  15.) 

III.  The  hand  of  the  pebpetual,  bountiful  Giver.  (Ps.  xcv.  7;  civ.  28; 
cxlv.  16.) 

IV.  The  hand  of  One  that  deltvebs,  uplifts,  and  upholds.  (Exod.  xxxii.  11 ; 
Deut  V.  15 ;  Ezra  vii.  9 ;  Neh.  ii.  8 ;  Ps.  xliv.  3 ;  Ixiii.  8 ;  Ixxiii.  23 ;  Isa.  li.  16.) 

y.  The  hand  of  the  Corbectob  and  Chabtiseb.  (Judg.  ii.  15;  Ps.  xxxii.  4; 
zzxviii.  2;  xxxix.  10;  cvL  26;  Job  ii.  10;  xix.  21.) 

YI.  The  hand  of  widest  swat  and  sovebeign  control,  of  power  to  rule  and  power 
to  overrule.    (Isa.  xl.  12 ;  xlviii.  13 ;  Prov.  xxi.  1 ;  Dan.  iv.  35.) 

VII.  The  hand  that  exalts  to  real  honour.  (See  the  splendid  description  of 
Isa.  Ixii.  3 ;  Ps.  xvi.  11.) 

VIII.   The  hand  that  pledges  and  secures  absolute  and  EVERLASTIKa  SAFETY. 

See  such  passages  as  more  than  satisfy  the  soul ;  they  go  far  even  **  to  ravish  it  with  the 
thoughts  of  the  glory  signified.  "  I  have  graven  thee  on  the  palms  of  my  hand  " 
(Isa.  xlix.  IB) ;  **  They  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  mv 
band.  My  Father,  which  gave  them  me,  is  greater  than  all ;  and  no  man  is  able  to  pluck 
them  out  of  my  Father's  hand  "  TJohn  x.  28,  29).  And,  as  during  all  our  lifetime  it 
had  been  the  lesson  to  be  learnt  uiat  our  breath  is  in  God's  hands,  and  all  our  ways 
and  our  times  in  his  sovereign  hand,  so  at  last  it  is  permitted  us  to  breathe  the 
spirit  into  that  same  mighty,  merciful,  safe  hand:  "Into  thy  hands  I  commit  my 
spirit"  (Ps.  xxxi.  5).  Perhaps  it  was  not  all  of  these  powers  of  the  Divine  hand 
that  could  have  been  as  familiar  to  Jabez  as  they  may  be  to  us ;  yet  it  is  evident 
that  he  knew  and  had  prized  the  meaning  and  the  virtue  of  the  hand  of  God.  And  he 
does  not  ask  to  know  it  in  one  particular  way  nor  in  another.  He  does  not  dictate  or 
suggest — at  least,  not  beyond  a  certain  very  wide  margin.  He  prays  that  the  Divine 
hand  may  be  "  with  **  him — now  to  help  on,  now  to  stop ;  now  to  uphold,  now,  if  neces- 
sary,  to  cast  down ;  now  to  put  it  on  his  lips,  and  to  bid  his  mouth  be  dumb^  and 


CH.  IV.  1—43.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  51 

himself  wait  the  sovereign  will  of  a  sovereign  God — patient,  content,  trustful ;  now  to 
release  those  lips  and  open  his  mouth,  that  he  might  render  grateful  praise  to  the  houn- 
tiful  Giver  of  all  good,  or  the  loving  and  careful  Protector  of  all  those  who  put  their 
trust  in  him.  When  Jabez  says,  *'0h  that  thine  hand  might  be  with  mel"  he  puts 
himself  into  that  vast  and  secure  hand  of  God,  and  wishes  nothing  more,  nothing 
better  for  himself,  than  as  the  little  child,  feeble,  uncertain,  and  easily  wearying,  to 
take  the  strong  hand  of  his  Father.  He  had  simple  faith  that  the  hand,  the  presence 
of  which  "  with "  him  he  entreated,  would  be  under  all  events  a  *'  good  hand  upon  " 
him.  The  surrender  of  dependence  betokened  by  the  prayer  was  justly  as  hopeful  as  it 
was  trustful.  We  need  nothing  more  than  that  the  hand  of  Gtxl,  in  all  its  varied 
exercise,  should  be  with  us.  But  when  we  have  thus  prayed,  we  may  not  forget  what 
our  prayer  has  been.  And  in  great  variety  of  eocperience  on  our  own  part— experience 
of  sorrow,  and  difficulty,  and  toU,  and  slowness,  as  well  as  in  all  the  converse  of  these 
respectively — we  must  remember  to  trace  and  acknowledge  the  tokens  of  t?iai  hand  for 
whiich  we  prayed  being  unth  us,  and  not  another  hand,  inferior  in  goodness  and  wisdom 
as  well  as  power.  For  often  the  variety  and  contrasts  and  reverses  of  our  own  mutable 
state  reflect  the  ever-varying  and  adapting  presence  and  grace  of  One  who  is  in  him* 
self  the  Unchanging.  How  often  has  our  own  hand  misdone,  how  often  has  the  hand 
of  others  misled  or  misdirected  us  I  How  blessed  is  he  who  can  say  that,  for  his  prayer, 
God  ha«  *'  beset  him  behind  and  before,  and  has  laid  his  hand  upon  him  "  1 

Ver.  10. — The  prayer  of  victory  over  evil.  "  And  that  thou  wouldest .  .  .  may  not 
grieve  me."  This  is  the  last  petition  of  the  prayer  of  Jabez.  While  the  foregoing  petition 
was  very  comprehensive  and  wide-reaching  in  one  sense,  this  is  comprehensive  and  far- 
seeing  in  another.  There  could  scarcely  be  a  larger  or  a  wiser  intreaty  than  that  God 
would  vouchsafe  the  perpetual  presence  of  his  hand — the  hand  that  makes,  that  gives, 
that  leads,  that  upholds,  that  shields,  that  at  last  saves  with  an  everlasting  salvation. 
Nor,  on  the  other  hand,  could  there  easily  be  offered  prayer  that  should  more  betoken 
self-knowledge,  self-distrust,  and  a  wise  estimate  of  the  constantly  endangered  position 
in  which  any  man  may  justly  describe  himself  as  placed  in  this  present  world,  than  the 
prayer  with  which  Jabez  now  sums  up  what  he  has  to  say :  "  And  that  thou  wouldest 
keep  me  from  evil,  that  it  may  not  grieve  me  1 "  Of  the  few  petitions  of  our  Lord's 
Prayer,  this  forms  one,  and  an  emphatic  one, ''  Deliver  me  from  eviL"  Evil  is  a  large 
enemy.  In  one  shape  or  another,  it  is  ever  threatening  to  attack.  And  if  in  anything 
we  need  superior  help,  it  is  in  combating  a  foe  so  ubiquitous,  so  persevering,  so  subtle, 
and  so  essentially  disastrous.    We  may  observe  here— 

I.  That  thebe  abe  signs  of  a  useful  lesson  having  been  learnt  from  pain. 
Pain  i$  intrinsically  evil  in  this  world.  It  was  no  original  part  of  it.  It  is  now  utilized 
in  many  a  direction.  It  is  now  overruled  to  many  and  high  advantages.  But  it  is 
none  the  less  to  be  noticed  as  foreign  in  itself  to  the  nature  of  God,  to  the  conception 
of  a  perfect  creation,  to  the  bliss  of  man.  Yet  as  things  are,  and  as  we  are,  it  is  wise  to 
learn  from  even  bodily  pain.  It  is  often  because  we  will  not  learn  from  other  sugges- 
tions that  we  are  compelled  to  learn  from  the  actual  experiences  of  pain.  We  may 
probably  put  down  something  higher  to  the  credit  of  Jabez.  We  do  not  know  as  fact 
that  he  himself  had  been  called  to  endure  much  pain,  or  any  at  all  noteworthy.  But 
he  knew  his  own  name.  He  knew  what  it  meant,  and  how  it  had  come  to  be  given  to 
him.  He  took  the  warning  of  it,  and  the  forewarning  of  his  mother's  method  of  empha- 
sizing what  were  her  opinions  and  convictions  on  the  subject  It  was  not  the  mark  of 
Cain  that  was  on  his  open  brow.  But  the  name  of  a  mother's  love  and  anguish 
mingled  was  named  upon  him.  And  ho  prays  to  the  Mightier  than  he,  to  preserve  him 
so  from  ei^,  that  it  might  not  bring  him  to  fulfil  in  his  nature  what  was  confessedly 
his  name.  Two  things  may  be  ever  well  remembered  respecting  pain:  (1)  that  it 
must  faithfully  and  honestly  be  ranked  among  the  enemies  of  God  and  the  antagonists 
of  perfect  nature ;  but  (2)  that  for  a  time,  and  for  our  present  condition,  it  may  be  a 
timely  lesson,  a  source  of  valuable  suggestion,  the  adapted  caution  of  the  hour,  the 
safeguard  that  may  act  with  the  quickness  and  the  certainty  of  an  instinct.  Yet,  what- 
ever may  be  said  justly  and  correctly  respecting  the  acquired  uses  of  pain,  Jabez  offers 
his  petition  deprecatory  of  that  evil,  the  fruit  and  end  of  which  is  mere  pain. 

II.  That  there  are  signs  of  a  oorbxot  lesson  having  been  learnt  about  evil 


52  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,      [ca  nr.  1— 43. 


ITSELF.  It  is  evident,  from  the  very  words  of  Jabez's  prayer,  that  he  distinguishes 
between  evil  and  gratuitous  pain,  or  unrewarding  ^^ griefs*  as  it  is  here  expressed.  Evil, 
«.«.  suffering,  calamity,  more  or  less  of  occasional  adversity,  disappointment,  are  the 
absolute  lot  of  man  here.  It  would  be  vain  to  shut  the  eyes  to  the  fact,  folly  to  deny 
it.  But  there  are  immense  differences  within  the  range  and  the  limits  of  what  is  called 
m2.  Jabez  had  learnt  this.  He  does  not  pray  to  be  kept  from  all  suffering,  vicissi- 
tude, adversity,  disappointment,  though  doubtless  he  would  fain  be  kept  from  as  much 
of  this  as  may  be.  JBut  we  are  to  understand  that  he  earnestly  deprecates  the  baneful 
touch  of  evil  itself.  He  discerns  what  its  essential  principle  is.  Me  dreads  its  tyran* 
nouB  rule,  its  merciless  hold,  its  mocking  treatment  of  those  who  have  trusted  it,  and, 
if  unstayed,  its  destructive  results.  He  prays,  accordingly,  to  be  kept  from  the  evil 
that  would  *'  assault  and  hurt  the  soul,"  and  prove  the  herald  of  irreparable  grief.  It  is 
lach  intrinsic  form  of  evil  which  the  uncompromising  petition  of  our  Lord's  Prayer 

Sits  upon  the  lips  of  all  his  disciples.  How  certain  and  distinct  this  difference  is  I 
ow  much  "  evil  ^  there  is,  through  which  we  all  are  called  to  pass  1  But  the  deep  water 
does  not  overflow  us.  How  much  disappointed  hope  and  sorrow's  visit  there  is  for  the 
Teiy  b^  of  men,  by  which  in  part  they  have  been  nelped  to  become  what  they  already 
ftre,  right  and  excellent  and  devout,  and  by  which  the  best  of  to-day  become  yet  better 
to-morrow  1  l^is  is  the  *'  evil  we  receive  also  at  the  hand  of  Qod,  as  well  as  "  his  sood. 
It  is  chastening,  purifying,  elevating.  But  contrast  with  this  the  sorrow  that  worketh 
death.  Contrast  with  this  the  *' wounded  spirit."  Contrast  with  this  the  evil  that 
hardens  hearts,  sears  consciences,  cradles  remorse,  and  is  fruitless  of  everything  else 
but  unavailing  regret.  And  we  shall  be  ready  to  join  to  pray,  **  That  thou  wouldest 
keep  me  from  evil,  that "  its  gratuitous  **  grief"  may  not  be  mine. 

III.  That  ▲  lesson  bespeotino  self's  great  need  of  sufebiob  help  in  trb 
FBESENCB  OF  SOME  FOES  HAD  BEEN  WELL  LEABNT.  There  are  somo  passages  of  life 
when  the  best  and  hardest  work  is  the  best  and  most  earnest  prayer.  Not  so  here.  It 
is  said  the  sailor  always  has  his  enemy  before  him,  and  the  battle  ceases  not  till  the 
haven  is  won.  And  men  live  in  such  a  scene  of  evil,  such  surroundings  of  evil,  such 
dispositions  of  evil,  such  a  very  atmosphere  of  evil,  men  are  tossed  upon  such  an  ocean 
of  evil,  that  the  danger  will  prove  overmastering  in  some  direction,  unless  a  man  "  pray 
always,"  and  pray  this  prayer  of  Jabez.  No  armour  of  one's  own,  no  self-knowledge, 
no  vigilance,  no  pride  of  foreknowledge,  no  mere  creed  of  distrust  of  the  vain  world, 
and  the  wicked  heart,  and  the  soul's  chief  adversary,  will  suffice.  This  living,  hearty, 
earnest  prayer  will  alone  command  the  sure  victory  in  the  most  critical  of  warfare. 

Ver.  10. — The  gracious  benignity  of  answer  to  prayer,  "  And  God  granted  him  that 
which  he  requested."  Abruptly  as  the  name  and  the  prayer  of  Jabez  were  introduced, 
with  equal  abruptness  do  they  vanish  from  view.  Favourably  as  they  were  introduced, 
BO  favourably  do  they  seem  to  take  leave  of  us.  The  naming  of  Jabez  was  indeed  that 
of  toilsome  travail  and  tears,  but  therein  was  that  saying  fulfilled,  that  the  going  forth 
with  weeping  and  with  precious  seed  shall  issue  in  a  rejoicing  return  with  golden 
sheaves.  For  that  this  was  the  case  may  be  justly  read  between  the  lines,  when 
we  are  informed  that  **Qod  granted  Jabez  that  which  he  requested."  The  words 
of  this  prayer  and  the  several  petitions  of  it  we  have  before  us,  and  they  speak 
for  themselves,  what  they  are  and  aim  at.  But  whether  the  prayer  conveys  to  us 
the  ^  request "  of  Jabez,  that  one  desire  of  his  heart  which  was  enwrapt  in  all  the 
rest,  is  not  quite  plain.  Probably  it  does,  and  if  so  it  must  have  been  *'  the  enlarging 
of  his  coasts."  This  would  not  be  a  request  out  of  harmony  with  his  time  of  day, 
or  with  what  men  of  his  position  sometimes  earnestly  wbhed,  and  even  with  diviner 
instincts  sought.  To  have  a  sure  footing  and  an  abundant  footing  in  Canaan,  or  in 
whatsoever  land  most  nearly  corresponded  to  Canaan  in  the  time  of  Jabez,  meant  very 
much  more  than  the  mere  inheritance  or  purchase  of  ever  so  tempting  an  estate  or 
property  in  our  day.  But  if  this  were  not  the  burden  of  the  prayer,  and  its  central 
snbject,  we  are  but  relieved  in  this,  as  in  all  the  rest  of  the  context,  from  detail  in 
fSavour  of  principles.  In  the  absence  of  clear  information  as  to  what  Jabez  requested, 
^6  may  make  sure  that  he  did  not  ask  what  was  contrary  to  God's  glory  to  give  or  to 
his  own  good  to  receive,  while  on  the  other  hand  we  are  not  in  want  of  information  as 
how  he  xnade  his  requests  known.    We  have  seen  that  manner  io  be  characterized  by 


CH.  IV.  1—43.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  58 

simplicity  and  forvour,  by  strong  conviction  of  dependence  and  by  tnistful  reliance, 
and  these  were  lighted  up  by  hopefulness.  And  having  watched  the  dependent 
suppliant,  in  sjrmpathy  with  him,  we  are  now  invited  to  see  the  other  sight.  Grod 
sees  his  suppliant,  and  sees  him  with  gracious  eye.  He  hears  his  suppliant,  and  bends 
a  willing  ear.  He  approves  his  suppliant,  and  **  grants  him  that  which  he  requested." 
We  have  here  what  we  may  justly  regard  in  the  first  two  particulars  as  leading 
instances,  in  the  last  as  a  fruitful  suggestion. 

I.  Of  the  efficacy  of  prater  in  general.  The  tale  is  very  short,  very  plain, 
and,  if  not  true,  is  simply  gratuitously  fjEilse  and  misleading.  It  is  the  case  of  the  sup- 
plication of  a  righteous  man  availing  much  in  its  operative  efifect  with  (ML  The 
person  who  prayed  probably  exercis^  no  very  important  and  influential  sway  over 
society  and  his  fellow-beings  around.  The  thing  for  which  he  prayed  probably  stood 
in  no  very  vital  or  active  relation  to  the  well-being  of  those  around.  Probably  the 
time  was  no  very  critical  moment,  when  great  issues  might  depend  on  what  should 
seem  a  very  smaU  matter,  as  afifecting  primarily  but  one  individual.  The  person,  the 
thing  granted,  and  the  time  must  have  had — they  always  do  have— their  importance 
and  their  own  inevitable  significance ;  but  this  was  all  that  they  had  now.  But  in 
the  absence  of  knowledge  of  details  and  of  surroundings,  it  is  deemed  sufficiently 
important  for  the  Divine  page  to  use  this  opportunity  of  showing  us  Qod  annoering 
the  earnest,  trusting  prayer  of  his  child  and  servant. 

XL  Of  the  answer  of  a  man's  prater,  true  to  the  exactt  bequest  ov  it. 
This  is  a  thing  not  always  possible.  We  ask  and  have  not,  because  we  ask  amiss. 
The  ways  of  asking  amiss  are  many,  almost  innumerable.  They  may  be  classified, 
however,  under  few  heads.  The  *'  amiss  "  may  consist  in  the  thing  not  being  good  for 
us ;  not  being  for  Gk)d's  glory  to  give.  The  '*  amiss  "  may  consist  in  the  thing  asked 
not  being  good  for  us  as  yet.  The  **  amiss  "  may  consist  in  the  thing  asked  not  being 
the  best  thing  for  us.  How  often  God  withholds  the  literal  answer  to  give  a  spiritual 
substitute !  How  often,  in  the  very  process  of  gift,  short  as  it  is,  he  substitutes  a  higher, 
better  prize  than  that  which  we  asked !  How  often  the  very  highest  mode  of  answer  is 
found  to  consist  in  withholding  the  solid,  material  substance,  which  is  what  does  not 
last,  in  order  to  give  the  unseen,  spiritual  substance,  which  is  in  its  very  nature  eternal ! 
Sometimes,  again,  the  "  amiss  "  may  consist  in  what  wo  ask  not  being  good  for  others 
as  well  as  self.  Each  of  us  is  part  of  a  great  whole,  and  an  intrinsic  part  of  it  Fellow- 
ship of  joy,  vicariousness  of  sufifering,  combination  in  toil  and  work,  partnership  on  the 
largest  scale,  in  the  largest  sense,  and  in  the  most  searching  detail,  are  all  radical 
elements  of  our  human  nature  and  human  life.  And  the  clear  vision  of  these,  and  the 
prompt  recognition  of  them,  are  constantly  obscured  and  eclipsed  to  us  simply  because 
we  let  self-regard  slip  into  selfishness,  forget  the  second  great  command,  and  try  to 
famish  on  a  lower  principle  in  place  of  flourishing  on  charity.  And  it  is  in  prayer 
that  we  may  not  unfrequently  give  the  most  subtle  illustration  of  this  subtle  snare  of 
our  nature  and  life.  Hence  it  may  be  rarely  that  Chxl  can  give  the  answer  of  prayer 
true  to  the  exact  matter  of  it.  But  here  we  have  a  grateful  and  suggestive  instance  of 
the  kind. 

III.  Of  the  O&ct  that  there  is  in  the  sovereign  Giver  the  gracious  inclination  to  give, 
when  possible,  according  to  this  rule.  His  is  the  disposition  full  of  grace  as  to  the 
met?iod  of  giving,  as  well  as  of  bounty  in  the  matter  of  what  is  given.  We  may  often 
spoil  what  we  give  by  the  manner  in  which  we  give ;  not  so  he.  We  may  often  receive, 
spoiled  by  the  manner  of  it,  what  is  given ;  but  never  so  when  the  gift  is  from  him. 
These  are  some  of  the  chief  marks  of  the  grace  in  giving  which  is  so  acceptable  to 
those  who  ask,  or  who,  without  asking,  stand  in  need ;  and  they  are  all  suggested  by 
this  history.  1.  To  give  if  possible  just  that  which  is  asked.  2.  To  give  it  promptly, 
and  make  it  thereby  twice  given.  3.  To  give  it  without  any  reflections  on  the  past. 
4.  To  give  without  imposing  conditions  on  time  to  come.  6.  Still  to  give,  though 
it  be  on  the  part  of  the  supreme,  gracious  Giver  himself,  without  reminding  there  and 
then  of  the  debt  which  it  involves,  of  the  bounty  which  it  reveals,  of  the  absence  of 
cladm,  right,  merit,  in  defaiUt  of  all  of  which  nevertheless  it  is  not  withheld.  Most 
gratefully  does  that  one  sentence  of  the  sacred  page  suggest  all  these  thoughts  to  us, 
in  which  it  is  said,  with  effective  brevity  in  reference  to  Jabez,  **  And  God  granted  him 
that  which  he  requested/' 


H  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  iv.  1—43. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Yers.  9,  10. — Jahez,  These  two  beautiful  verses  come  in  the  midst  of  a  dry  and  (to 
Bs)  comparatively  uninteresting  genealogy,  like  an  oasis  in  a  desert.  We  know  nothing 
at  all  of  the  person  here  mentioned  except  what  is  recorded  in  this  passage.  Yet  there 
is  so  much  of  meaning  in  these  brief  sentences^  that  Jabez  is  certainly  to  the  readers  of 
this  book  more  than  a  name. 

L  Observe  his  kaub.  Scripture  names  are  often  signiBcant  This  was  given  by 
the  mother,  in  token  and  memory  of  the  sorrow  in  which  she  bore  her  son.  ^  In 
Borrow  shalt  thou  bring  forth  children,"  was  the  primeval  sentence  upon  the  mother  of 
mankind.  Yet,  as  Chribt  reminds  us,  it  is  usually  the  case  that  a  mother  **  remem- 
bereth  no  more  the  anguish,  for  joy  that  a  man  is  bom  into  the  world.**  The  mother 
of  Jabez  did  not  forget,  and  accordingly  named  the  child  in  memory  of  her  pains. 

IL  Observe  his  pbatkb.  It  ia  an  interesting  fact  that  we  know  some  Scripture 
characters  chiefly  by  their  prayers.  Thus  we  know  Agur  as  having  besought  the 
Lord,  '*  Give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches."  And  we  know  Jabez  by  the  compre- 
hensive petition  which  he  is  recorded  to  have  presented  to  Heaven.  1.  It  was  a  prayer 
to  a  covenant  God — the  God  of  IsraeL  2.  It  was  a  prayer  for  blessing ;  i.e.  for  good  as 
the  expression  of  Divine  favour  and  approbation.  8.  It  was  a  prayer  for  prosperity ; 
**  Enlarge  my  coast."  We  know  nothing  of  Jabez*0  way  of  life,  whether  he  was  a  hus- 
bandman, or  a  warrior,  or  a  ruler ;  but  it  is  clear  that  he  asked  for  enlargement  of 
means,  or  authority,  or  territory,  etc.  4.  It  was  a  prayer  for  strength :  "  That  thy 
hand  might  be  with  me."  6.  It  was  a  prayer  for  safety  and  purity.  The  evil  from 
which  this  good  man  would  feiin  be  kept  was,  probably,  both  temporal  and  spiritual. 
How  suitable  a  petition  for  us  all  I  6.  It  was  a  prayer  for  freedom  from  sorrow.  If 
disasters  should  befall  him,  or  if  he  should  be  tempted  to  apostasy  or  sin,  such  a  fate 
would  be  fraught  with  grief  to  his  heart. 

III.  Observe  thb  answsb  to  his  prayer.  The  petition  was  largo,  but  it  was 
offered  to  a  King,  who  was  the  rather  pleased  with  its  magnitude.  There  was  no 
hesitation,  no  withholding.  A  lesson  this  as  to  God*s  willingness  to  hear  and  answer 
the  supplications  of  his  people. 

IV.  Observe  his  honour  amonobt  men.  Who  the  brethren  of  Jabez  were  we  know 
not.  The  verse  contains  nothing  in  disparagement  of  their  character  or  position.  But 
Jabes  was  more  honourable  than  they.  The  Lord  is  wont  to  honour  those  who  honour 
him.  Jabez  acknowledged  God  as  the  Source  of  his  prosperity,  and  Gt)d  rewarded 
Jabez,  by  raising  him  to  a  position  of  authority  and  esteem  in  his  family  and  amongst 
his  countrymen. — T. 

Yers.  21,  23. — Weavers,  hufhandmen,  and  potters.  This  portion  of  the  book  contains 
the  record  of  the  descendants  of  Shelab,  one  of  the  sons  of  Judah.  The  chronicler 
mentions  incidentally  the  employments  of  several  of  these  ancient  families.  Some  were 
engaged  in  weaving  byssus,  or  fine  linen.  Others  were  occupied  in  tilling  the  estates 
and  tending  the  hei*ds  and  flocks  of  the  king.  Others,  again,  pursued  the  calling  of 
the  potter.  Now,  there  is  no  reason  for  surprise  in  meetine  with  such  references  in  a 
book  of  the  canonical  Scriptures.  There  is  a  religious  side  to  all  such  useful  and 
respectable  vocations.  Those  who  follow  them  may  not  always  be  aware  of  the  fact ; 
but  a  fact  it  certainly  is. 

L  Handicraftsmen  and  husbandmen  make  use  of  materials  which  a  kind 
Providence  has  supplied.  The  soil  which  is  tilled,  the  vegetable  substances  which 
that  soil  produces,  the  minerals  which  are  dug  from  it^  are  aU  of  God.  *'  The  earth  is 
the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof.** 

IL  The  faculties  of  body  and  mind  which  such  persons  exeroirb  and  employ 
ARE  ENTRUSTED  BT  THB  CREATOR.  The  limbs  of  the  body,  the  strength  of  the  muscles, 
the  skill  of  the  intelligent  and  designing  mind,  are  all  needed  for  the  production  of  the 
results.  Every  artificer  is  himself  a  miracle  of  creative  power  and  wisdom ;  and  he 
who  framed  the  workman  is  glorified  in  the  handiwork. 

III.  The  WELFARE  OF  civilized  human  society,  which  is  the  consequence  of 
SUCH  labours,  is  a  part  of  the  Divine  plan.     The  arts,  useful  and  lesthetio. 


OH.  IV.  1—43.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa  65 

tend  to  tbe  comfort  and  the  development  of  humanity.  All  the  oonvenienceB  of  human 
life  are  instrumental  in  furthering  the  purposes  of  Ood. 

lY.  Among  such  artificebs  religion  often  finds  warm  adherents,  si7pporter8» 
AND  PROMULGATORS.  The  busy  and  useful  classes  of  society  furnish  the  largest  propor- 
tion of  strength  to  our  Churches.  These  have  often  been  the  salt  of  society,  when  the 
wealthy,  luxurious,  and  dissolute  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  idle  and  predatory  on  the 
other,  would  have  introduced  corruption  and  death  into  the  body  politic. — ^T. 

Ver.  33. — Dwellings  and  genealogies.  In  many  instances  the  chronicler  records 
not  only  the  names  of  the  families  of  Israel,  but  the  places  where  they  were  settled  in 
fixed  habitations.  When  the  land  of  Canaan  was  conquered,  it  was  parcelled  out 
among  the  several  tribes.  In  this  way  family  relationships  and  sentiment  were  closely 
connected  with  territorial  possession.  Even  certain  households  were  attached  to 
estates  and  villages.  And  as  the  Hebrews  were  an  agricultural  and  pastoral  people,  it 
was  natural  that  they  should  cherish  an  hereditary  regard  for  the  lands  tilled  by  thdr 
fathers.  The  sons  of  Simeon  transmitted  to  their  posterity  certain  dties  and  villages. 
*'  These  were  their  habitations,  and  their  genealogy. ' 

L  A    LOCAL    HABITATION    18    DIVINELY    APPOINTED    AND    SANOTIONED.       There    BXB 

many  who,  as  travellers  and  explorers,  as  soldiers  and  seamen,  etc.,  may  serve  society 
without  having  any  fixed  abode;  and  homelessness  may  be  profitable  discipline  in 
youth.  But,  generally  speaking,  a  home  is  the  best  sphere  of  labour,  the  b^t  pledge 
of  diligence,  the  best  guarantee  of  responsibility ;  and  it  is  well  for  those  who,  from 
generation  to  generation,  can  retain  the  same  feelings  towards  an  ancestral  abode. 

II.  Family  registers  and  pedigrees,  in  connection  with  such  dwelungh 
PLACES,  ABE  OF  UNDOUBTED  SERVICE.  The  pubUc  ccusus,  the  domcstio  register,  the 
family  tree,  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  registration  of  births,  deaths,  and  marriages,  are 
all  valuable.  They  may  be  abused  by  pride,  but  they  are  more  likely  to  foster 
humiliation.  They  are  useful  for  civil  purposes,  contributive  to  family  feeling,  pro- 
motive of  patriotism.  The  squire,  the  yeoman,  the  labourer,  are  all  susceptible  to  the 
influence  of  hereditary  feeling  and  local  associations. 

III.  Religion  deals  with  homes  and  households.  Certain  places  and  certain 
families  have  been  noticeable  and  memorable  for  piety.  And  true  religion  is  not  con- 
tent to  deal  with  the  individual ;  it  seeks  to  leaven  families  with  its  influence,  and  to 
penetrate  villages,  cities,  and  nations  with  its  light  and  spiritual  power  and  grace. — ^T. 

Ver.  38. — "  Princes  in  their  families.^*  Words  transferred  from  one  language,  and  on© 
'  state  of  society  to  another,  are  often  misleading.  By  "  princes  "  here  we  are  to  under- 
stand head-men  of  certain  towns  which  were  in  possession  of  families  among  the 
Simeonites.  They  were  persons  of  importance,  of  consideration,  and  influence  in  their 
localities.  The  record  of  them  bears  witness  to  a  settled  state  of  society,  and  to  the 
establishment  of  civil  order  and  subordination. 

I.  Human  authority  is  of  Divine  appointment.  That  this  is  so  in  the  family 
^11  be  admitted  by  all  who  believe  in  a  Creator,  and  in  his  interest  in  the  human  race. 
It  is  also  admitted  by  thoughtful  persons  with  regard  to  civil  and  national  life.  It 
does  not  follow  that  rulers  are  always  righteous,  or  are  even  always  to  be  tolerated  and 
obeyed.  It  is  an  absurd  inference  to  draw  from  the  fact  that  sovereignty  and  sub- 
mission in  some  form  are  of  Divine  appointment — that  kings  have  nothing  to  do  but 
to  command,  and  subjects  nothing  but  to  obey.  The  world  has  had  enough  of  absolute 
monarchy,  and  theologians  have  too  long  inculcated  "the  right  Divine  of  kings  to 
govern  wrong."  Still,  "  the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God ; "  it  was  divinely 
intended  that  men  should  live  in  civil  society,  and  that  order  should  be  maintained 
and  authority  upheld,  and  justice  administered  between  man  and  man. 

n.  As  a  consequence,  subjection  to  civil  authority  is,  within  certain  limits, 
A  HUMAN  duty.  In  ordinary  cases,  where  conscience  does  not  enjoin  the  express  con- 
trary, men  are  bound  to  obey  the  laws  of  the  land.  Esx)ccially  is  this  the  case  where,  as  in 
our  own  country,  the  government  is  constitutional,  and  the  people  have  power  to  amend 
unjust  and  inexpedient  laws,  and  to  reform  abuses  in  administration.  The  immoral 
character  of  lawml  governors  is  no  religious  ground  of  resistance  to  their  decrees. 

III.  Rulers,  small  and  great,  are  themselves  accountable  to  him  who  is  ^  th« 


mmm 


C6  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,      [ch.  iv.  1—48. 

BLESSED    AXD   ONLY  POTENTATE,  KlNG  OF   KISQS,  AKD  LORD    OF  LOBDS.**       Lct  them 

remember  thiSy  and  be  wise  and  just. — T^ 

Ver.  40. — **Fat  pasture.*  This  passa<:;e  relates  an  expedition  of  certain  Simeonite 
chiefs  and  their  followers,  which  took  place  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah.  The  tribe  of 
Simeon  was  restless  and  warlike.  This  exploit  was  performed,  apparently,  from 
selfish,  rapacious  motives.  The  Simeonites  wanted  more  pasture  for  their  flocks; 
and,  finding  just  what  suited  them  in  a  territory  possessed  by  their  neighbours,  they 
invaded  their  fertile  and  peaceful  valley,  slew  the  inhabitants,  and  seized  their  laDds 
for  their  own  use.  What  circumstances  may  have  justified  or  extenuated  such  a  pro- 
ceeding we  are  not  told. 

L  Plentt  is  ▲  DiviNB  GIFT.  The  land  itself  is  the  gift  of  GK)d.  Its  favourable 
situation,  its  chemical  constituents,  the  sunshine  and  the  moisture,  which  make  up  its 
fertility,— -all  are  from  him,  and  are  proofs  of  his  creative  wisdom  and  goodness.  The 
flocks  and  herds,  and  their  increase,  are  his,  whose  are  "  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand 
hills.**  When  the  valleys  are  covered  over  with  com,  when  the  sheep  bleat  in  the 
pastures,  when  there  is  abundant  provision  for  man  and  beast,  then  let  our  hearts 
ascend  in  gratitude  to  him  who  **  openeth  his  hand,  and  satisfieth  the  desire  of  every 
living  thing." 

II.  Plentt  has  maky  advantages.  In  communities  which  are  abundantly  sup- 
plied with  the  necessities  and  comforts  of  life,  there  is  opportunity  and  leisure  for  the 
cultivation  of  arts  and  learning,  there  is  stimulus  for  commerce  and  manufactures, 
ihere  is  capacity  for  benevolence  and  for  evangelization.  If  it  is  well  used,  plenty  is  a 
blessing.  Only  let  all  things  be  received  as  immediately  from  God's  hand,  and  be 
resBU^^  as  a  sacred  trust  to  be  used  for  his  glory  and  in  his  service. 

lU.  Plenty  is  not  without  its  dangers.  It  was  foreseen  that  when  Israel  auitted 
the  wilderness,  and  entered  upon  possession  of  the  land  flowing  with  milk  and  noney, 
there  would  be  a  temptation  to  forget  God,  and  to  take  credit  for  national  prosperity 
and  wealth.  Against  the  perils  of  plenty  and  prosperity,  let  the  fortunate  and  happy 
be  ever  on  their  guard. — T. 

Vers.  9, 10.— -4  model  prayer.  Of  the  man  Jahez  we  have  only  this  brief  record. 
He  is  only  known  by  his  prayer.  Yet  the  prayer  is  a  sufiicieut  revelation  of  the  mau. 
His  character  is  revealed  in  it,  as  is  the  character  of  every  man  to  him  who  is  able  to 
read  man's  prayers  aright.  His  name  means  *'  He  causes  pain,"  and  it  was  attached  to 
him  on  account  of  his  mother's  sufferings  at  his  birth ;  but  it  is  designed  to  seal  a 
certain  gentleness,  lack  of  vigour  and  self-assertion,  and  almost  melancholy  tone,  which 
characterized  his  whole  life.  From  the  occurrence  of  the  same  name  in  ch.  ii.  55,  it  has 
been  assumed  that  this  Jabez  was  the  founder  of  the  schools  of  colleges  of  the  scribes. 
The  date  at  which  he  lived  cannot  be  fixed  with  certainty.  Possibly  the  sorrow  of  Jabez's 
birth  was,  that  his  mother  lost  her  husband  when  she  gained  her  son.  If  so,  she  might 
well  name  her  fatherless  boy  "  Sorrowful."  Yet  he  rose  above  the  sadness  of  his  birth  ; 
he  belied  his  very  name  by  becoming  more  honourable  than  his  brethren.  The  shadow 
which  had  fallen  upon  his  birth  was  dispelled  by  the  uprightness,  the  nobility,  the  God- 
fearing, the  prayerful  spirit  of  his  life.  And  God  made  to  rest  on  him  gracious  signs  of 
his  acceptance.  Begaroing  the  prayer  as  giving  indications  of  the  character  of  Jabez, 
we  may  see— > 

I.  That  Jabez  was  humble.  Estimate  the  tone  of  the  prayer.  He  has  such  a  sense 
of  personal  helplessness,  and  such  a  trembling  fear  of  responsibility,  that  he  asks  for 
guidance  and  keeping,  and  the  true  enrichment  of  the  Divine  blessing.  He  prays  for 
strength,  preservation,  success,  and  blessing,  as  though  a  veiy  deep  sense  of  his  own  weak* 
ness  and  msufficiency  rested  upon  him.  Such  "  humility  "  is  the  marked  featiu*e  of  every 
latdy  good  and  great  and  wise  man ;  and  it  is  sure  to  find  its  fullest  expression  when, 
for  purposes  of  prayer,  he  goes  into  the  presence  of  God.  Illustrate  from  Abraham's 
intocession  for  Sodom,  Solomon's  prayer  at  the  dedication  of  the  temple,  and  Daniel's 
and  Nehemiah's  prayers  for  their  nation.  And,  combined  with  other  characteristics,  the 
same  "  humility  is  found  in  our  Lord's  great  intercessory  prayer ;  and  we  know  that  it 
was  a  marked  and  striking  feature  of  his  beautiful  life.  Such  ''humility  "  is  a  first  and 


to.  IV,  1—43.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  57 

essential  characteristio  of  acceptable  prayer;  and  the  attitude  of  kneeling  is  the  bodily 
expression  of  it. 

II.  That  Jabez  was  nrnsLLiOEirr  akd  thoughtful.  The  prayer  shows  that  he  had 
formed  a  sensible  estimate  of  life.  To.him  it  was  a  scene  of  toil  and  struggle  and  evil ; 
it  seemed  to  be  full  of  work^  duties,  responsibilities,  cares,  and  trusts ;  ana  for  it  all  he 
recognized  the  need  of  a  guiding  and  upholding  hand.  Illustrate  by  our  Lord's  figure 
of  the  man  who  proposed  to  build,  sitting  down  first  and  counting  the  cost.  The  man 
may  discover  no  need  for  prayer  who  rushes  heedlessly  into  life,  only  intending  to  do 
the  best  he  can  under  the  various  circumstances  that  may  arise.  But  he  who  looks 
thoughtfully  out  over  life,  and  intelligently  anticipates  its  duties  and  cares,  will  be  sure 
to  feel  the  importance  and  helpfulness  of  prayer,  and,  with  Jabez,  will  turn  to  Qod, 
saying,  "  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed  1 "  Compare  Moses  pra3ring,  "  If  thy 
presence  go  not  with  me,  carry  us  not  up  hence ; *'  and  Joshua's  resolve,  ''As  for  me 
and  my  house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord." 

III.  That  Jabez  was,  in  a  good  sense,  ambitious.  His  piety  did  not  crush  down 
the  high  imaginations  and  glowing  hopes  of  his  young  heart.  He  prays  God  to  help 
him  '*  enlarge  his  coast,"  or  landed  estate  ;  to  extend  his  possessions,  to  increase  his 
wealth,  and  to  advance  his  influence.  Religion  seeks  to  sanctify  our  ambitions,  but  not 
to  crush  them.  We  may  pray  to  Grod  about  our  plans  and  schemes  for  worldly  advance- 
ment, if  only  we  keep  the  spirit  of  full  loyalty  to  God  and  submission  to  his  will ;  and 
to  pray  freely  and  constantly  about  our  common  human  affairs  is  the  best  way  to 
ensure  our  winning  and  keeping  the  right  spirit  whatever  we  may  attain. 

lY.  That  Jabez  was  happt.  In  spite  of  the  melancholy  tone  that  was  on  him ;  in 
spite  of  the  sorrow  clinging  to  him  from  his  birth.  This  ensures  our  happiness — the 
accomplishment  of  our  life-aims,  when  those  aims  are  right  ones.  "  God  granted  Jabez 
that  which  he  requested."  He  had :  I.  Success  in  life  given  him,  so  that  he  might  add 
field  to  field,  and  become  ^'  more  honourable  than  his  Drethren."  2.  Evil  warded  off 
from  him.  In  "going  out  and  coming  in,"  the  preserving  hand  of  God  kept  him  safe. 
3.  Ood's  Uessing  sanctifying  his  successes ;  by  that  term  meaning  the  satisfying  and 
comforting  sense  of  the  Divine  approval  and  acceptance.  It  may  be  impressed  that  such 
a  prayer  indicates  the  personal  piety  of  Jabez,  and  suggests  that  he  made  a  full  conse- 
cration of  himself  to  the  God  of  his  fathers  in  early  life.  Plead  for  such  a  whole- 
hearted decision,  and  such  a  spirit  of  prayerfulness,  on  the  very  threshold  of  life.  It  is 
well  if,  before  the  foot  falls  on  the  first  step  of  life,  the  heart  goes  up  to  God,  saying, 
'*  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed !  — R.  T. 

Ver.  13. — OthnieVs  adventure;  or,  the  impulse  of  promised  revoards.  For  the  story, 
see  Josh.  xv.  16, 17 ;  Judg.  i.  12, 13 ;  iii.  9.  The  point  of  the  narrative,  for  the  sake 
of  which  it  is  preserved,  appears  to  be  this :  Othniet  acted,  vigorously  and  successfully, 
under  the  impulse  of  offered  reward.  The  daughter  of  one  so  honoured  as  Caleb  was 
a  prize  indeed  worth  winning,  and  she  was  to  be  given  to  the  man  who,  by  his  valour 
and  skill,  could  take  the  city  of  Eirjath-sepher.  Compare  the  offer  of  reward  which 
David  made  on  the  occasion  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  (ch.  xi.  6).  8ome  interest 
attaches  to  Kirjath-sepher  as  meaning  the  *'  Book-town,"  and  suggesting  the  existence 
of  a  literature  at  that  time  among  the  Canaanites.  Its  earlier  name  (Debir,  oracle)  may 
indicate  that  it  was  a  national  sanctuary  where  the  national  records  were  preserved ; 
and,  if  so,  we  may  be  sure  that  it  was  securely  walled  and  stoutly  defended.  The 
incident  may  be  used  to  introduce  the  consideration  of  the  appropriateness  of  offering 
rewards,  as  an  incentive  to  the  doing  of  duty,  and  in  the  higher  spheres  of  morals  and 
religion,  where  all  the  quality  of  actions  must  depend  on  the  motives  for  which  they 
find  expression.  In  relation  to  the  education  and  training  of  the  young,  the  subject  of 
rewards  is  frequently  discussed ;  some  urging  that  childhood  needs  the  help  to  effort 
and  perseverance  which  may  be  found  in  the  promise  of  reward ;  while  others  contend 
that  a  child  is  deteriorated,  and  led  to  adopt  false  sentiments  for  life,  who  is  impelled 
to  exertion  by  the  hope  of  what  is  to  be  gained  by  it,  and  not  to  act  or  to  abstain 
from  acting  because  the  thing  required  is  right.  It  may,  however,  be  fairly  contended 
that,  besides  the  proper  and  high  motives  of  duty  and  right,  we  may  thankfully  accept 
the  aid  of  auxiliary  motives,  and  that  amone  these  may  be  set  in  a  first  place  the 
promise  and  the  hope  of  reward.    But  it  would  seem  to  settle  the  question,  that  we  can 


68  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  iv.  1— 43. 

bIiow  80  fully  how  God  has  been  pleased — in  lesser  spheres  and  in  greater,  in  temporal 
affairs  and  in  spiritual,  throughout  all  the  long  ages — to  use  the  impulse  of  rewards. 
This  may  be  fully  and  impressively  illustrated  in  the  Bible  story ;  and  of  the  character 
of  the  illustrations  we  give  a  few  suggestive  instances.  1.  In  the  first  trial  of 
humanity  it  was  distinctly  understood  that  the  maintenance  of  all  that  was  gathered 
up  in  Paradise  was  the  reward  of  obedience.  2.  To  Abraham  Qt>d  offered  himself, 
in  his  personal  favour,  and  in  his  power  to  guide  and  bless,  as  "  his  exceeding  great 
Reward,**  and  even  Abraham's  faith  and  loyalty  were  upheld  by  the  promise  that  in 
his  "  seed  all  nations  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed.**  3.  Israel  was  helped  to  endure 
the  rigours  of  Egypt,  and  to  make  a  great  stand  for  liberty,  under  the  assurance  of  a 
great  reward,  even  the  heritage  of  the  land  that  flowed  with  milk  and  honey.  And 
It  has  often  been  pointed  out  that  temporal  prosperity  in  Canaan  was  distinctly  offered 
M  the  reward  of  obedience  to  the  Law.  4.  The  prophets — as  may  be  most  impres- 
sively seen  in  Isaiah — held  before  the  people  most  glowing  visions  of  comine  days  as 
the  sure  reward  of  a  full  and  hearty  national  return  to  Jehovah.  6.  Our  Lord  himself 
fitted  the  impulse  of  reward  into  his  most  gracious  invitation,  "  Come  unto  me  .  .  • 
and  I  will  give  you  resC*  6.  The  apostles  urge  the  disciples  to  all  earnestness 
in  the  Christian  lite  and  labour,  by  the  assurance  that  we  run  for  an  "  incorruptible 
crown,**  and  may  hope  to  receive  a  "  crown  of  glory,  that  fadeth  not  away.**  Our  last 
sight  of  Christ  in  the  Word  presents  him  as  saying, "  Behold,  1  come  quickly ;  and  my 
reward  is  with  me.'*  We  may,  then,  use  the  promise  of  rewards  ;  they  appeal  to  senti- 
ments and  feelings  in  us  that  are  good  and  useful.  We  may  magnify  the  grace  of  God 
in  even  thus  helping  us  to  win  "  the  holy.**  And  wo  may  reasonably  expect  present, 
and  certainly  look  (or  future,  gracious  rewards  of  obedience  and  faithfulness. — R.  T. 

Vers.  21— 23.— 2%«  dignity  of  all  work.  These  verses  set  before  us  the  interesting 
fact  that  Gt)d  recognizes  a  man's  occupation,  and  knows  precisely  his  sphere  and  his 
work.  Another  striking  illustration  of  the  precision  of  the  Divine  knowledge,  and  the 
observation  even  of  a  man's  handicraft,  is  found  in  Acts  x.  6,  6,  where  Gkxi  gives  these 
minute  directions :  *'  Send  men  to  Joppa,  and  call  for  one  Simon,  whose  surname  is 
Peter;  he  lodgeth  with  one  Simon,  a  tanner,  whose  house  is  by  the  seaside/*  In  these 
verses  different  occupations  are  honourably  mentioned ;  some  wrought  fine  linen ; 
others  were  potters  and  gardeners  and  hedgers;  and  so  is  suggested  to  us  the 
honoorableness  and  usefulness  of  all  kinds  of  work.  There  was  no  such  sentiment 
among  the  Jews  as  unhappily  prevails  in  all  so-called  highly  civilized  countries,  that 
there  is  a  kind  of  degradation  in  having  to  work  for  your  own  living.  Every  Jewish 
boy  was  required  to  learn  a  trade,  and  the  greatest  rabbis  preserved  their  dignity  and 
learning  along  with  service  to  the  community  in  some  humble  occupation.  Consider-— 

I.  WoBK  AS  ▲  CONDITION  OF  HITMAN  LIFE  ON  THE  EARTH.  If  there  is  ouo  law  more 
absolute  for  mankind  than  another,  it  is  that  they  shall  work.  They  are  set  in  this 
earth-garden,  as  Adam  was  in  Paradise,  to  win  it,  to  use  its  forces,  to  dress  it,  to  keep  it. 
For  "  work  **  man  is  endowed.  He  has  muscles  with  the  needed  physical  strength, 
and  hands  with  the  needed  physical  skill,  and  brains  with  the  needed  guidance  and 
control.  And  he  is  in  the  midst  of  conditions  that  demand  work ;  the  earth  will  only 
yield  her  stores  and  her  increase  in  response  to  man*s  work.  If  a  man  "  will  not 
work,"  then  the  law  Gtxi  has  put  into  the  very  creation  of  the  earth  is,  that  "  he  shall 
not  eat"  And  this  work-condition  is  designed  by  God  to  bear  directly  on  man's  moral 
trainiog.  Only  by  and  through  work  can  character  grow  and  unfold.  Toil  is  testing 
and  trial,  out  of  which  alone  can  virtue  be  bom.    So  all  work  is  noble  and  holy. 

II.  Work  as  a  oondition  of  civilized  life.  Here  its  simplicity  is  lost.  It  becomes 
A  diversified  and  complicated  thing.  As  men  live  together  in  cities  a  thousand  fresh 
wants,  real  and  fancied,  become  created,  and  trades  are  multiplied  for  the  supply  of 
the  thousand  wants.  Work  is  divided  and  subdivided ;  sometimes  it  seems  a  higher 
kind,  and  sometimes  a  lower.  While  some  must  work  by  hand,  others  are  called  forth 
to  work  by  voice,  and  pen,  and  brush,  and  chisel,  and  brain.  Thousands  must  toil  in 
various  ways  to  supply  the  necessaries  of  life,  and  tens  of  thousands  must  toil  to  supply 
the  ever-increasing  demand  for  luxuries.  And  so,  in  civilized  times,  work  seems  too 
often  to  grow  into  man's  curse ;  and  he  toils  at  sweat  of  brain  as  well  as  of  face ;  and 
spends  strength  and  health  and  life  in  winning  bread  from  those  who  "  fare  sump- 


OH.  IV.  1—43.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  60 

tuously  every  day,  and  are  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  liaen ; "  and  we  cannot  greatly 
wonder  that  men  should  grow  hard,  and  lose  the  high  and  inspiring  thought  of  the 
•'  dignity  of  work." 

III.   1'HB  ONB  GOIZDITION  THAT  LIFTS  ALL  HUMAN  TOIL  INTO  DTGNITY.      ItS  nsefulneSS 

to  Others.  It  must  be  done  "  not  unto  self."  And  so  God  has  "  set  the  solitary  in 
families,"  and  put  fathers  and  mothers  under  the  pressure  of  family  responsibility,  that 
in  toiling  for  others  they  may  win  the  joy  of  work.  Illustrate  from  the  artist,  the 
poet,  etc.,  and  see  how  the  condition  may  apply  to  all  workers. 

IV.  Thb  tet  higheb  condition  which  BETS  WORK  IN  ITS  TRUE  PLACE.  It  must  be 
done  as  service  to  God.  Then  work  bears  upon  the  culture  of  religious  character,  and 
becomes  a  stepping-stone  upward  to  the  heavenly.  Character  is  both  exhibited  and 
cultured  by  it;  and  no  kind  of  occupation  can  be  regarded  as  mean  into  which 
character  can  be  put,  and  by  which  others  may  be  served,  and  Ood  may  be  glorified. 
Potters,  gardeners,  hedgers,  and  workers  in  fine  linen  may  all  win  the  '*  Well  done, 
good  and  faithful."— R.  T. 

Vers.  39 — 41. — Might  and  right  The  place  named  Gedor  is  not  otherwise  men- 
tioned in  Scripture.  Ewald  and  Bertheau  think  Oerar  is  the  true  reading;  and  this 
is  given  in  the  Septuagint  Version.  Reference,  then,  is  to  a  portion  of  the  Philistine 
country,  which  was  remarkable  for  its  fertility  (Gen.  zxvL  6—12 ;  2  Chron.  xiv.  1^  16). 
We  cannot  tell  whether  these  princes  had  any  justifiable  ground  for  their  aggression. 
But  we  may  dwell  on  this  as  an  instance  of  *' might "  overmastering  "right; "  for  the 
earlier  occupiers  may  be  fairly  considered  to  have  had  the  "  right,"  and  the  point  of 
the  story  is  that  these  princes  grew  strong,  and  when  they  had  "  might "  they  used  it 
to  drive  out,  and  possess  the  lands  of,  those  who  had  only  "  right."  The  Eastern  mode 
of  keeping  flocks  by  moving  them  to  dififerent  parts  of  wide  pasture-grounds  should 
be  explained,  and  the  rivalry  and  the  quarrelling  which  this  too  often  entails  may  be 
illustrated  in  the  relations  of  Abraham  and  Lot.  And  the  way  in  which  weakening 
and  decaying  tribes  have  to  yield  before  strong  and  rising  tribes  and  nations,  may 
illustrate  the  modem  doctrine  of  the  "  survival  of  the  fittest ; "  and  instances  may  be 
found  in  the  story  of  the  great  nations,  such  as  Persia,  Greece,  Rome,  eta 

I.  Man's  might  is  often  thought  bight.  The  two  things  are  perfectly  distinct. 
What  we  can  do  is  not  necessarily  what  we  otight  to  da  And  man's  power  must  ever 
be  held  down  under  the  mastery  of  a  will  guided  by  good  judgment,  right  principles, 
sweet  charity,  and  tender  consideration  for  the  claims  and  rights  of  others.  The 
Kasmyth  steam-hammer  affords  a  good  illustration  of  splendid  poiver  held  in  full 
control  Tet  in  the  commoner  spheres  of  life,  as  well  as  by  kings  and  great  men, 
might  is  often  mistaken  for  right.  It  is  often  one  of  the  easiest  pieoes  of  self-deception. 
One  of  the  master  principles  swaying  men  is  the  love  ofpotoer.  Therefore  do  men  get 
large  numbers  of  servants,  retainers,  and  workmen ;  they  increase  wealth  and  posses- 
sions ;  push  into  places  of  position  and  influence  ;  and  in  every  possible  way  seek  to 
gain  sway  over  their  fellow-men.  And  this  becomes  a  peril,  and,  for  many  men,  the 
severest  test  of  virtue  and  charity.  Every  true-hearted  man  will  feel  the  peril  of 
confusing  might  with  right ;  and  will  accept  the  fact  that  these  two  will  often  be  in 
conflict,  and  that,  for  such  conflict,  the  issue  must  always  be  the  triumph  of  the  rights 
Man's  might  is  a  fatal  force  for  the  liberty  of  his  fellow-man,  unless  it  not  only  seems 
to  be  to  him,  but  it  actually  is,  the  same  as  the  right  So  the  practical  question  ever 
and  again  recurring  in  life  is  this:  **I  can,  but  may  I?  Will  it  be  right?"  Man's 
nobility  is  full  loyalty  to  the  right. 

IL  God's  bight  always  proves  to  be  might.  Always  "  in  the  long  run.''  We 
make  many  mistakes  by  only  seeing  pieoes  and  parts  of  things ;  so  we  sometimes  say, 
•*  The  way  of  the  Loid  is  not  equaV  Yet  right  does  always  triumph,  if  we  can 
properly  discern  the  "  right,"  and  properly  appraise  **  triumph."  Right  is  invincible. 
Nature,  all  the  good  there  is  in  the  earth,  all  the  long  ages,  and  God  himself,  are  on 
the  side  of  the  right.  This  is  true  for  the  individual  man  when,  in  all  simplicity  and 
loyalty,  he  does  God's  right,  whatever  of  seeming  disabilities  it  may  involve.  He 
may  l.ave  the  most  perfect  confidence  that  God  will  make  it  might,  and  in  the  due 
time  "  bring  forth  his  righteousness  as  the  light,  and  his  judgment  as  the  noonday." 
It  may  be  practically  enforced  that  man's  violence  overreaches  itself,  as  did  Haman  s. 


GO  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  iv.  1—43. 

And  that  all  fordngt  of  his  way  and  will  by  man  imply  a  failing  of  trust  in  God's 
living  love  and  lead.  It  is  a  spirit  in  striking  contrast  with  that  expressed  in  Jabez's 
prayer  (ch.  iv.  10). — R.  T. 

Ver.  43. — Qod*s  ways  with  Amdiek,  The  reference  of  the  verse  is  to  the  remnant 
that  had  escaped  the  great  slaughter  under  King  Saul  (1  Sam.  xv.  7,  8).  Indications 
of  the  existence  of  scattered  portions  of  this  people  may  be  found  in  1  Sam.  xxvii.  8 ; 
XXX.  1 ;  2  Sam.  viii.  12.  The  Amalekites  are  first  mentioned  in  connection  with  the 
aggressive  expedition  of  Cbedorlaomer  (Gen.  xiv.  7).  They  occupied  the  country 
between  Palestine,  Idumasa,  and  Mount  binai,  on  the  elevated  plateau  now  called  Er^ 
Bdkhmah,  They  were  a  nomad  people,  and  their  towns  were  but  collections  of  tents ; 
they  were  rich  in  flocks  and  herds,  and  seem  to  have  acquired  a  vast  power  by  their 
bold  predatory  habits.  They  were  consequently  most  dangerous  neighbours  for  Israel 
to  have  so  close  upon  their  borders.  For  the  Scripture  references  to  the  Amalekites, 
see  Exod.  xvii.  8 — 16;  Deut.  xxv.  17 — 19;  Numb.  xiv.  40 — 45 ;  xxiv.  20;  Judg.  iii, 
13 ;  vi.  3 — 5  ;  xiL  15. 

I.  The  sin  of  Amalek.  This  is  distinctly  stated  in  1  Sam.  xv.  2 :  '*  I  remember 
that  which  Amalek  did  to  Israel,  how  he  laid  wait  for  him  in  the  way,  vehen  he  came 
up  from  Egypt."  The  expressions  used  appear  to  indicate  some  peculiar  treachery  in 
the  conduct  of  this  tribe.  Probably  thev  regarded  themselves  as  having  the  sole  right 
to  the  pasture-grounds  in  the  valleys  and  plains  of  the  higher  ranges  of  Sinai,  and  so 
thought  to  cut  ofif  the  advancing  hosts  of  Israel,  by  taking  them  in  detail  as  they 
toiled  through  the  several  passes.  It  may  also  be  urged  that  the  knowledge  of  the 
deUverance  through  the  Red  Sea  had  spread  among  the  tribes  of  the  desert ;  it  declared 
Uiis  people  to  be  under  Jehovah's  lead,  and  increased  the  responsibility  of  all  who 
attempted  to  hinder  their  progress.  Amalek  added  to  its  sin  by  incursions  in  the 
time  of  the  judges,  and  by  constant  annoyance,  which  in  part  may  explain  the  severe 
manner  in  which  it  was  dealt  with.  The  principle  of  the  treatment  of  Amalek's  sin 
may  be  illustrated  by  our  Lord's  words,  **  Whoso  shall  ofifend  one  of  these  little  ones 
that  believe  in  me,  it  were  better  for  him  that  a  millstone  were  hanged  about  his  neck^ 
and  that  he  were  drowned  in  the  depths  of  the  sea." 

IL  The  Divine  judgment  on  Amalek.  Remarkable  for  its  severity.  Explain 
that  the  form  and  degree  of  Divine  judgments  must  fit  into  the  customs  and  senti- 
ments of  each  age,  if  they  are  to  exert  the  proper  moral  influence  upon  the  age.  The 
extermination  of  a  race  was  not  regarded  in  Saul's  time  as,  with  our  Christian  senti« 
ments,  we  should  regard  it  now.  Human  life  is  less  valued  in  the  East,  and  tribal, 
dynastic,  and  national  changes  have  always  been  more  sudden,  frequent,  and  violent. 
Still,  this  would  be,  even  in  those  days,  so  severe  a  judgment  as  to  prove  a  solemn 
warning  to  the  wUftd  who  would  try  to  force  their  own  will  against  God. 

III.  Man's  execution  of  the  Divine  judgment.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance, 
for  the  due  understanding  of  Old  Testament  Scripture,  that  God  may  use  any  of  his 
creatures  as  agents  in  carrying  out  his  judicial  sentences;  and  man  may  be  his 
executioner  as  well  as  plague,  famine,  or  tempest.  In  such  case  what  the  man  has  to 
do  for  God  is  right,  and  the  man  only  comes  under  the  judgments  of  God  for  the  spirit 
and  the  way  in  which  he  does  it.  Saul  is  not  judged  for  slaying  the  Amalekites,  but  for 
not  executing  his  commission  fully  and  faithfully. 

lY.  Man's  failure  in  executing  the  Divine  judgments.  Distinguish  between 
man  the  agent,  and  man  the  individual,  Gtxi  looks  upon  the  man,  and  treats  with 
him  in  both  ways.  Man's  trusts  from  God  become  tests  of  man  for  God.  And  it 
may  be  that  the  more  complicated  and  difficult  the  trust  is,  the  more  satisfactory  it 
may  prove  as  a  moral  test.  Man  is  honoured  in  being  permitted  to  carry  out  God's 
plans  and  purposes.  He  mav  even,  from  the  gospel  standpoint,  be  a  "co-worker 
together  with  God."  But  Gt)d  will  not  fail  to  carry  out  his  plans  to  perfection,  even 
when  men  may  seem  to  fail  him. — R.  T. 

Vers.  9, 10. — 77ie  prayer  of  Jdbez,  *'  Jabez  was  more  honourable  than  his  brethren : 
and  his  mother  called  him  Jabez,  saying,  Because  I  bare  him  with  sorrow.  And  Jabez 
called  on  the  God  of  Israel,  saying.  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed,  and  enlarge 
my  coast,  and  that  thine  hand  might  be  with  me,  and  that  thou  wouldest  keep  me 


CH.  IV.  1--43.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa  61 

from  evil,  that  it  may  not  grieve  me  1  And  God  granted  him  that  which  he  requested." 
But  little  is  known  of  this  man;  known  in  his  generation  as  a  man  of  prayer; 
famous  for  the  directness  and  simplicity  of  his  appeal  to  God  and  for  the  success  attend- 
ing it.  Probably  he  gave  his  name  to  Jabez,  the  town  mentioned  in  ch.  ii.  55,  as 
Bethlehem,  Ephratah,  Tekoa,  and  many  named  in  these  genealogies  did.  If  so— and 
the  identity  of  several  names  in  the  respective  genealogies,  and  the  singular  eminence 
and  honour  of  the  man,  give  great  weight  to  supposition — then  we  know  something  of  his 
ancestry  and  something  of  his  descendants.  Of  his  ancestry ;  for  then  ch.  ii.  55  makes 
him  a  Eenite,  and  a  descendant  of  Jonadab  the  son  of  Kechab,  one  of  the  early  sect 
described  in  Jer.  xxxv.,  who,  probably  called  into  existence  by  the  testimony  of  Elijah, 
cultivated  simplicity  of  creed,  rejecting  all  idolatry ;  simplicity  of  life,  dwelling  in  tents ; 
simplicity  of  food,  drinking  neither  wine  nor  strong  drink.  A  sect  ready  to  help  Jehu 
m  his  reformation  (2  Kings  xii.  15, 16) ;  respected  by  those  who  could  not  copy  them  ; 
blessed  and  honoured  by  God.  And  we  know  something  of  his  descendants ;  for  he 
was  in  that  case  the  founder  of  the  school  of  scribes,  who  did  so  much  in  the  later 
centuries  of  Jewish  national  history  to  revive  and  maintain  the  purer  worship  of  God. 
A  sect  of  married  monks,  whose  only  vow  was  simplicity  of  life,  they  seemed  to 
exemplify  all  the  advantages  derivable  from  special  callmgs,  consecration,  and  brother- 
hood, while  free  from  all  their  defects.  Their  earnest  faith  turned  them  to  the  Bible  as 
the  best  preservative  of  a  people  from  error.  And  their  simple  tent-life  gave  them 
leisure.  Probably  Jabez  was  a  sort  of  William  Tyndale  of  his  generation,  bent  on  giving 
his  people  the  Bible  in  their  homes.  Tyndale  by  translation,  Jabez  merely  by  tran- 
scription, both  gave  the  priceless  treasure  to  multitudes  who  before  had  lacked  it. 
Assuming  these  things,  there  are  some  lessons  from  his  character  and  from  his  prayer 
that  are  worth  observing. 

I.  First,  a  good  boil  helps  to  makb  a  good  plant.  In  all  self-denial  there  is 
advantage.  Power  of  will,  energy  of  purpose,  security  against  temptation,  are  all 
furthered  by  it.  These  early  total  abstainers  had  some  of  the  vigour  marking  the  class 
in  all  ages.  The  poet  had  not  in  their  case  to  lament  that  "  the  days  of  simple  living 
and  high  thinking  were  no  more."  But  there  they  were.  The  John  the  Baptists  of 
their  time  in  simplicity  of  life  and  profundity  of  thought  and  faith.  The  home  moulds 
the  child.  Let  your  children  find  in  their  parents'  life  purity,  brightness,  love,  and  they 
will  more  easily  copy  it.  Like  as  Milton  and  Cromwell  rose  among  the  Puritans,  so 
Jabez  rose  among  the  Bechabites.    Observe— > 

XL  SoMB  lives  begin  in  gbeat  bobrow  that  leave  behind  them  great  jot. 
What  the  mother's  grief  was  we  do  not  know.  It  may  have  been  unusual  pain  and  danger 
at  his  birth.  It  may  have  been  (the  father  is  not  mentioned)  that  she  lost  her  husband 
before  she  bore  her  child.  And  the  melancholy  of  her  heart  made  her  despair  of  any 
brightness,  and  give  her  boy  (an  unfair  thing  to  do)  a  depressing  name.  It  is  possible, 
too,  that  some  sorrow  may  have  arisen  out  of  this  prayer.  If  it  did,  we  may  observe 
that  a  dull  morning  often  opens  into  a  bright  day.  The  early  life  may  be  obscure, 
pressed  with  disadvantages,  all  uphill,  and  yet  we  may  reach  a  stately  usefulness  and 

comfort. 

**  The  fault,  dear  Brutus,  lies  not  in  our  stars, 
But  in  ourselves." 

m.  Look  at  his  prayer.  There  are  many  points  about  it  worthy  of  remark. 
1.  That  whatever  touched  his  life  he  took  it  to  his  GKxl.  2.  That  he  blends  in  his 
prayer  the  requests  for  moral  and  the  outward  mercies  which  make  up  well-being. 
"That  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed,"  is  probably  a  prayer  for  highest  spiritual 
mercies ;  for  Chad's  smile,  Qod's  grace,  forgiveness,  peace.  "  And  enlarge  my  coast." 
This  was  prayer  for  outward  advantage.  Large  lands  not  needed  for  their  simple 
living ;  probably  they  were  needed  only  for  the  increasing  number  of  disciples.  "  That 
thy  hand  may  be  with  me  *  seems  again  a  spiritual  petition ;  a  prayer  for  guidance 
pre-eminently,  and  for  Ood's  aid.  The  worldly  don't  want  God's  hand  with  them ;  it  is 
apt  to  stop  the  flow  of  their  purposes  and  schemes.  But  the  devout  want  God  to  be  a 
partner  in  all  their  business.  ''  And  to  keep  me  from  evil,  that  it  may  not  grieve  me." 
Here  is  an  illusion  to  his  name.  And  probably  the  prayer  means,  **  Disappoint  a  mother's 
fears^  and  let  not  harm  overtake  me.      In  estimating  aright  the  worth  of  this  prayer, 


e2  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  iv.  1—43. 

tlie  following  suggestion  may  be  of  value : — Only  those  prayers  are  vital  and  real  whichy 
like  this,  combine  requests  for  outward  and  inward  gocJi.  When  you  pray,  say, "  Give 
us  didly  bread,  and  forgive  us  our  debts."  If  you  omit  to  ask  for  the  bread,  you  may 
be  pretty  sure  it  is  not  the  greatness  of  your  spirituality  that  omits  the  request,  but  only 
the  littleness  of  your  faith,  which  makes  you  imagine  God  can  do  nothing  so  substantial 
as  bless  you  in  your  common  needs.  What  is  wanted  by  all  of  us  is  ffoodneu  rather 
than  spirituality,  and  a  religion  of  common  life  rather  than  a  strained,  unnatural 
pietism.  Jabez  had  grand  Dedth  that  God  ruled  in  common  life,  was  lowly  enough  to 
Dless  him,  and  to  help  him  in  his  work.    Observe,  lastly-— 

IV.  The  Ii0BD*8  answer.  It  came  to  him.  Came  so  palpably  that  all  could  see 
It,  that  it  was  a  matter  of  history,  that  it  taught  others  that  they  had  a  Friend 
above,  and  led  them  to  the  throae  of  grace.  Blessed  is  the  circle  in  which  somebody 
prays  1  Pray  on.  You  will  not  need  to  proclaim  the  answers  you  recdve ;  your  neigh- 
Doun  will  see  it  for  themselves.  And  your  prayer  will  thus  be  doubly  blessed.  It  will 
secure  for  you  tiie  good  you  desire,  and  will  guide  many  another  to  the  throne  of  the 
heavenly  grace,  to  get  there  the  blessings  which  they  require. — G. 

Vers.  9, 10.—-^  life  and  its  Useana.  Two  verses  only  relate  the  life  of  Jabez,  but 
they  suffice  to  give  us  some  idea  of  its  nature  and  character ;  also  to  convey  soma 
lessons  for  our  guidance  as  we  pass  through  our  own. 

L  Thses  FEATUBB8  OF  HiB  LIFE.  We  leam  that :  I.  It  was  begun  in  special  sorrow. 
His  mother  called  him  Jabes  because  she  "  bare  him  with  sorrow."  Possibly  his  father 
had  died  before  his  birth,  or  their  estate  may  have  been  so  reduced  as  to  make  another 
<^d  seem  a  burden  rather  than  a  blessing.  2.  It  was  characterized  by  special  piety. 
He  made  his  future  the  subject  of  earnest  prayer  to  God ;  he  earnestly  desired  that  God 
would  bless  him  in  dl  his  doings,  that  the  Divine  hand  might  be  upon  him ;  he 
evidently  believed  and  felt  that  all  things  were  ruled  and  overruled  by  the  Lord  himself. 
He  "  committed  his  way  unto  the  Lord."  8.  It  was  crowned  with  special  peace  and 
honour.  "  Gk>d  granted  him  that  which  he  requested "  (ver.  10).  He  was  '*  more 
honourable  than  his  brethren  ** — ^had  a  larger  estate,  was  held  in  higher  esteem,  attained 
to  greater  eminence.  God  did  **  keep  him  from  the  evil "  from  which  he  sought  Divine 
deliverance,  and  it  did  "  not  grieve  him."  He  did  "  enlarge  his  coast"  Peace  and 
honour  were  his  portion  in  an  unusual  degree.  His  life  must  have  had  its  shadow  as 
well  as  its  sunshine,  but  it  was  brighter  with  earthly  honour  and  less  clouded  with 
worldly  troubles  than  are  the  lives  of  most  men. 

IL  The  lessons  we  mat  oleak  therefbom.  Wo  learn :  1.  That  that  which  has  an 
unpromising  beginning  may  stand  among  the  best.  How  little  did  the  mother  of  Jabea 
imagine  that  the  child  of  her  sorrow  would  have  so  honourable  a  career  1  The  most 
suc^ssful  and  even  glorious  enterprise  may  be  begun  in  weakness  and  in  trembling  of 
heart.  That  which  was  once  only  a  small  gathering  in  a  back  slum  has  grown  into  a 
magnificent  and  beneficent  institution.  They  that  sow  in  tears  may  reap  in  joy.  If  God 
f  rosper  a  human  life  or  a  good  cause,  its  early  insignificance  will  prove  of  small  account. 
Many  a  time  the  widow's  child,  for  whom  it  has  been  hard  to  find  food  and  education* 
has  grown  to  be  a  man  of  weight  and  honour,  filling  a  large  space  and  doing  a  great 
work  in  the  world.  2.  That  it  is  right  to  ask  GKxl  for  material  blessings  in  the  hope  of 
obtaining  them.  These  were  earthly  favours  which  Jabez  asked  for,  and  which  he 
received  of  Qod — enlargement  of  his  estate,  inmiunity  from  trouble  and  loss,  etc.  We 
have  no  authority  for  asking  God  for  wealth  or  immunity  from  sorrow  with  a  positive 
assurance  that  we  shall  have  those  things.  We  do  not  know  that  they  will  suit  us ;  it 
is  auite  possible,  or  even  probable,  that  they  would  prove  the  very  worst  things  we 
could  have.  But  we  may  ask  Gk)d  for  temporal  blessings,  in  the  hope  of  receiving 
them,  if  we  ask  in  a  subject  spirit^  desiring  him  to  withhold  from  us  what  he  knows  it 
would  be  best  to  keep  back.  We  are  to  pray  for  daily  bread ;  that  "  his  hand  may  be 
with  us ; "  that  he  will  be  with  us  in  our  going  out  and  our  coming  in.  3.  That  God 
is  never  served  in  vain.  God  granted  Jal^z  that  which  he  requested.  He  may  not 
give  us  our  heart's  desires  in  the  form  in  which  we  cherish  them,  llie  "  cup  **  did  not 
*'  pass  from  "  the  Saviour,  but  he  "  was  heard  in  that  he  feared  *'  (Heb.  v.  7).  God  has 
ways  of  blessing  us  of  which  we  have  little  thought  when  we  are  on  our  knees.  But 
if  we  ask  we  skm  have— if  not  sooner,  later ;  if  not  in  our  way,  in  his  better  way.-*0» 


OH.  IV.  1—43.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHBONICLES.  03 

Vera.  11 — 43. — General  truHht  from  geneahgiecU  tables.  Beading  lessons  from  this 
list  of  names,  we  gather— 

L  That  obscubitt  is  better  than  pbominbnoe  for  most  of  us.  In  this  long  table 
we  have  one  or  two  celebrated  men,  such  as  Caleb  (ver.  15)  and  Othniel  (ver.  13),  but 
most  of  them  are  men  of  no  repute.  We  only  know  their  names  and  their  relation- 
ship to  those  that  preceded  and  followed  them.  It  is  a  mere  truism  to  say  that  the 
generality  of  men  must  spend  their  lives  in  obscurity,  Uiat  it  is  only  a  few  who  can  be 
conspicuous.  But  it  is  a  truth  worth  treasuring,  that  lowliness  of  position  is  Heut  better 
for  most  of  us  than  elevation  would  be.  But  few  men  can  bear  distinction  without 
spiritual  deterioration.  The  graces  which  the  Master  most  loves  to  see  (and  those  which 
are  most  acceptable  to  man  ako)  flourish  in  the  quiet  valley  far  better  than  on  the  lofty 
mountain.  If  GK)d  ordain  prominence,  "  Be  not  highrminded,  but  fear."  If  obscurity 
be  our  portion,  let  us  say  with  the  psalmist,  "  Lord,  my  heart  is  not  haughty,  nor  mine 
eyes  lofty,"  eta  (Ps.  cxxxL  1).  Let  us  not  be  envious  of  the  exalted,  but  rather  b» 
thankful  that  we  are  not  exposed  to  their  peculiar  perils. 

^  He  that  is  down  need  fear  no  fall. 
He  that  is  low  no  pride.*' 

IL  That  Gk>D  puts  hokour  on  the  useful  arts.  It  is  specially  mentioned  of  some 
"  that  they  were  craftsmen ;  "  of  others  that  they  were  members  of  the  "  house  of  them 
that  wrought  fine  linen  "  (ver.  21).  It  is  significant  enough  that,  in  this  brief  recital, 
these  two  industries  should  have  honourable  mention.  We  should  feel  that  when  wa 
cut  and  carve,  when  we  spin  and  weave,  when  we  are  occupied  in  manufactures,  when 
we  are  turning,  by  industry  and  knowledge,  the  materials  around  us  into  objects  of 
service  and  of  beauty,  we  are  not  only  ''making  money,"  enriching  our  nation, 
^ratifying  human  tastes,  we  are  also  fulfilling  the  will  of  God  concerning  us,  we  are 
doing  that  for  which  he  placed  us  here ;  and  we  should  engage  in  all  usefiH  arts  as  in 
his  sight,  serving  him  in  all  our  labour. 

IIL  That  contented  industry  is  better  than  successful  violence.  Two 
instances  are  given  at  the  close  of  the  chapter  (vers.  39 — 11,  42,  43)  of  appropriation 
by  violence.  The  sons  of  Simeon  took  forcible  possession  of  **  fat  pasture  and  good,'* 
where  "  the  land  was  wide,  and  auiet,  and  peaceable ; "  they  established  themselves  there 
by  **  utterly  destroying  "  the  iimabitants.  Otbera  of  them  (ver.  42)  repeated  the  same 
deed  of  violence.  Possibly  they  may  have  been  justified  in  their  act  by  commands 
which  were  binding,  or  by  a  permission  which  was  sufiicient.  Probably  they  satisfied 
their  own  conscience,  and  wrought  their  work  without  compunction.  But  we  read  with 
fsur  greater  pleasure  of  the  craftsmen  who  gave  their  name  to  the  valley  by  their  industry 
(ver.  14),  and  of  those  who  *'  wrought  fine  linen,"  and  of  those  engaged  in  simple  agri- 
culture (ver.  23),  and  thus  gained  a  peaceful,  honourable  livelihood.  Feats  of  arms  are 
brilliant  things  in  their  way,  but  beneath  the  surface  are  heartrending  injuries,  and  long 
after  they  are  performed  comes  a  series  of  sorrows.  The  industry  and  energy  which 
work  no  mjury  to  the  conscience,  and  which  carry  benefit  and  comfort  in  their  train,  are 
immeasurably  to  be  preferred  to  ^  the  pomp  and  circumstance  of  war." 

IV.  That  it  is  wise  to  consider  ourselves  in  the  light  in  which  we  look 
AT  OTHERS.  The  chrouicler  remarks,  shortly  but  significantly,  "These  are  ancient 
things "  (ver.  22).  The  events  of  h%$  "  modem "  time  are  now  very  much  more 
"  ancient "  to  us  than  those  old  times  of  which  he  was  writing  were  to  his  generation. 
We  stand  in  the  graveyard,  and  the  sloping,  timewom  tombstones  speak  to  our  hearts 
of  the  distant  days  in  which  once  lived  the  generation  beneath  our  feet.  The  day  will 
come  when  we  shall  be  separated  by  the  same  breadth  of  time  from  the  living  men  that 
will  then  be  walking  where  we  sleep.  We  shall  soon  be  nothing  to  the  world  but  the 
people  of  a  day  that  is  passed.  1.  How  great  is  the  folly  of  men  who  own  no  treasure 
but  that  of  this  transient  time  1  2  How  true  the  wisdom  of  those  whose  portion  no 
graveyard  will  hold,  who  in  the  far  hereafter  will  live  with  God,  and  be  rich  with  the 
wealth  of  Heaven  (Rev.  ii.  15—17)  I— 0. 

Ver.  9.— Ja^os :  hU  'history.  Supposed  to  be  the  son  of  Eenaz,  and  an  eminent 
doctor  of  the  law,  whose  reputation  draw  around  him  so  many  scribes  and  learned  men 
that  a  town  was  called  by  his  name  (see  ch.  ii.  56).    We  have  seen  the  pre-eminence 


64  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,     [en.  iv.  1—43. 

given  to  the  tribe  of  Judah  on  account  of  its  connection  with  the  promised  Christ. 
Sefore  tracing  further  the  genealogy  of  the  sons  of  Israel,  an  entire  chapter  is  devoted 
to  the  family  of  David.  This  is  just  as  it  should  be — still  further  prominence  being 
^ven  to  every  one  and  everything  that  foreshadowed  the  true  David,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  The  line  of  David  is  drawn  all  through  the  third  chapter,  through  a  succession 
of  good  and  bad  monarchs.  The  Lord's  eye  is  on  his  beloved  Son ;  and  the  stream 
that  leads  to  him  winds  its  way  through  wastes  and  stagnant  pools  and  dark  morasses 
lying  on  either  side— everything  marked  which  in  any  way  stands  connected  with  it, 
but  beyond  this  as  imworthy  of  notice.  We  can  now  devote  attention  to  one  of 
Qod's  children  in  particular,  and  recorded  in  this  chapter — Jabez.  In  the  midst 
of  a  genealogy  of  some  extent,  the  Spirit  of  God  singles  one  out  for  notice,  and  lingers 
over  it  with  delight.  It  is  a  brignt  gem  on  an  apparently  hard  and  uninteresting 
surface  shining  with  brilliancy.  It  is  a  name,  however,  fully  confirming  all  we  have 
hitherto  referred  to.  It  would  have  no  notice  in  the  inspired  Word  but  for  what  there 
is  of  God  in  it.  We  know  much  of  GKxl  in  Jabez,  very  little  of  who  or  what  be  was. 
Of  what  he  was  in  relation  to  the  world,  in  relation  to  his  fellow-men,  or  to  society,  or  to 
business,  we  know  little.  Of  what  he  was  to  God  there  is  much  said  and  much  known. 
What  matters  the  rest  ?  We  may  be  sure  that  was  all  right.  For  if  men  are  right 
towards  Christ  we  may  take  the  rest  for  granted.  It  is  this  that  gave  Jabez  a  name  in 
heaven.  This  made  him  worthy  of  a  record  in  the  Book  of  God.  But  for  this  he 
would  have  been  unnoticed  and  unknown.  And  what  is  said  of  him  ?  '*  Jabez  was 
more  honourable  than  his  brethren :  and  his  mother  called  his  name  Jabez,  saying, 
Because  I  bare  him  with  sorrow.'*  God*s  sorrowing  ones  are  generally  GKxi's  more 
honourable  ones.  It  is  through  sorrow  we  reach  our  joys.  "  Ye  now  therefore  have 
sorrow,  but  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy.*'  It  is  God's  order — sorrow  the  portal 
to  joy.  The  darkness  first,  then  the  light;  tribulation  here,  then  the  kingdom; 
discipline  here,  then  the  glory.  God's  secret  place  is  darkness.  The  pavilion  round 
about  him  are  '*  dark  waters  and  thick  clouds  '^the  dark  waters  of  sorrow,  the  thick 
clouds  of  baffling  enigma  and  unfathomable  mystery.  But  inside  this  pavilion  of 
darkness  and  cloud  there  is  always  a  brightness  (Fs.  xviii.  11,  12).  This  brightness 
is  Uie  unchanging  love  of  him  who  is  "  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the 
express  image  of  his  person."  Under  his  shadow  the  dark  waters  and  thick  clouds 
will  all  in  due  time  disperse.  Tes,  every  thick  cloud  and  every  dark  waterflood  will 
melt  before  his  love,  who  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."  Before  the  air 
can  be  cleared  and  the  calm  stillness  of  nature  be  felt,  the  thunder-clouds  must  gather 
and  the  lightning-flash  be  seen.  The  stillness  of  nature  comes  heralded  by  tokens  of 
terror.  It  is  the  order  of  God,  both  in  nature  and  grace.  We  see  the  darkness  first, 
and  call  it  "  Jabez."  We  meet  with  bereavement  and  write  "  Jabez  "  upon  it,  though 
Qod  makes  it  a  blessed  means  of  drawing  us  to  fix  our  affections  on  a  world  that  can 
never  pass  away.  We  meet  with  disappointment  and  vexation  and  worry,  and  write 
'^  Jabez"  upon  one  thing  after  another.  Yet  all  these  things  come  out,  in  the  wonder- 
working of  God's  providence,  in  the  deep  riches  of  his  grace,  as  dealings  "  more  honour- 
able," as  blessings  in  disguise.  They  are  the  discipline  of  his  hand,  bringing  glory  to 
him  and  blessing  to  our  own  souls. 

*  Judge  not  the  Lord  by  feeble  senso^ 
But  trust  him  for  his  grace ; 
Behind  a  frowning  providence 
Ue  hides.a  smiUng  face." 

And  what  is  the  prominent  feature  in  the  character  of  this  man  of  Grod  noticed  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  ?  It  is  prayer,  *'  And  Jabez  called  upon  the  Qod  of  IsratV  Jabez  was  a 
man  of  prayer.  In  this  aspect  he  is  first  presented  to  us.  Oh  that  this  was  the 
marked  feature  in  us  all  I  A  man  of  prayer  means  a  man  blessed  of  God.  A  man  of 
prayer  means,  in  its  truest  sense,  a  man  of  God.  It  means  a  marked  man— one  dis- 
tinguished from  others  by  communion  with  God,  and  carrying  that  mark  about  him  in 
all  his  least  and  greatest  acts.  This  is  the  man  on  whom  the  Holy  Spirit  loves  to 
linger,  and  singles  him  out  from  a  mere  mass  of  genealogies  that  have  nothing  worthy 
of  notice,  and  holds  him  before  us  for  a  moment  as  the  one  ^^  whom  the  King  delighteth 
to  honour."    But  on  whom  did  Jabez  call  ?    Kot  on  God ;  not  on  abstract  deity  ;  not 


CH.  IV.  1—43.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa  66 

on  some  "  unknown  God " — some  almighty  abstraction  whom  we  are  for  ever  groping 
after,  but  whom  we  can  never  know.  No ;  this  is  the  atheist's  god,  the  Socinian's 
god,  the  rationalist's  god,  the  god  of  all  men  who  know  not  God  in  Christ,  Jabez 
knew  better.  He  *'  called  on  the  Crod  of  Israel  "—the  covenant  God,  the  God  of  his 
fathers  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  The  saints  of  the  Old  Testament  had  one  expres- 
sion with  regard  to  God  which  corresponded  exactly  with  the  expression  used  by  the 
saints  of  the  New  Testament.  The  latter  knew  God  as  *'  the  God  and  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; "  the  former  knew  God  as  the  "  God  of  Israel/*  the  "  God  of 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob."  And  these  two  meant  exactly  the  same.  The  God  in 
covenant^  and  keeping  that  covenant  for  ever ;  the  God  who  called  his  people  out  of 
the  idolatry  of  heathenism;  who  "  accounts  "  them  righteous  before  him;  who  separates 
them  from  the  world  to  be  his  people ;  who  loves  them,  and  keeps  them,  and  causes 
them  to  inherit  the  land ;  and  who  does  all  this,  not  because  of  tneir  deservings,  but 
because  of  his  own  rich  mercy.  This  is  the  **  God  of  Israel,"  the  **  God  and  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  And  Jabez  knew  this  God.  He  addresses  him  as  One  with 
whom  he  is  familiar;  he  values  his  blessing  above  all  others ;  he  feels  the  need  of  his 
*'  hand/'  his  presence,  continually ;  he  feels  the  need  of  being  "  kept,**  and  feels  that  Qod 
only  can  keep  him ;  he  feels  his  own  liability  to  evil,  and  casts  himself,  in  the  convictiou 
of  his  weakness,  upon  him.    Oh,  surely  Jabez  was  no  ordinary  child  of  God  I — W. 

Ver.  10. — Jahez^s  prayer,  I.  Mark  the  first  line  of  his  prayer:  "Oh  that  thou  wouldest 
BLESS  ME  INDEED ! "  He  needs  the  blessing  of  his  covenant  God.  He  pleads  for  it  He 
pleads  earnestly.  It  is  real  prayer.  It  is  such  prayer  Gk)d  hears,  such  prayer  he  loveB 
to  hear  and  to  answer.  But  oh!  there  is  many  a  blessing  which  may  not  be  a  blessing 
** indeed"  Of  this  Jabez  is  aware.  He  asks  not  for  a  blessing,  but  a  blessing  indeed—^ 
for  that  which  will  be  a  real  blessing.  He  asks  not  for  that  which  may  come  in  the 
form  of  a  blessing  and  in  the  end  prove  a  curse.  He  asks  for  that  to  come  which  will 
be  a  real,  permanent,  abiding  blessing.  "  Let  it  come  in  what  shape  it  may.  That, 
Lord,  I  leave  to  thee.  Let  it  come  in  darkness  or  in  light,  in  suffering  and  sorrow 
or  in  health  and  gladness,  in  the  abundance  of  wealth  or  the  desolation  of  poverty— 
any  way  as  best  may  seem  to  thee,  Lord ;  only  let  it  be  a  blessing  to  me,  a  blessing 
'  indeed.' "  Ah,  this  is  prayer,  and  the  right  sort  of  prayer.  There  was  something  like 
it,  only  in  an  infinitely  higher  degree,  in  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane:  "Father,  thy  will 
be  done."  There  was  just  this  difference  between  the  Son  of  Qod  in  the  bosom  of 
the  Father  and  those  who  are  sons  of  Gcni  only  by  adoption.  He  did  not  need  the 
strengthening  angel  from  heaven  to  give  him  that  submission  of  will.  It  was  not  till 
(ifter  that  submission  the  angel  appeared  to  strengthen  him.  The  angel  was  sent,  not 
to  produce  submission  of  spirit,  but  for  the  weakness  of  the  body,  and  to  carry  out  the 
work  of  redemption.  His  holy  soul  was  always  submissive.  It  was  his  nature  to  be  so. 
With  us,  however,  it  is  diflerent.  We  need  the  strengthening  angel  to  help  us  to  sub* 
mission  to  the  Father's  will  as  well  as  to  do  the  work  of  God.  Our  nature  is  essentially 
rebellious.  We  require  the  discipline  of  God's  hand  to  bring  us  to  submit.  His  holy 
soul  was  submission  itself.  There  is  a  passage  in  the  New  Testament  which  corresponds 
exactly  with  this  distinction  I  have  drawn  in  the  prayer  of  Jabez  between  a  blessing 
and  a  blessing  '* indeed,"  Our  Lord  said  to  the  Jews  (John  viii.  31, 32), "  If  ye  continue 
in  my  Word,  then  are  ye  my  disciples  indeed ;  and  ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the 
truth  shall  make  you  free."  It  is  one  thing  to  be  a  "disciple,"  it  is  another  to  be 
a  "disciple  ifidctfc?."  Jlfawy  were  "  disciples  "  in  our  Lord's  time;  how  few  were  the 
"disciples  indeed"!  Many  followed  him,  but  from  what  motives?  How  few  ^* continued 
in  the  Word,"  "  knew  the  truth  "  with  that  deeper  knowledge  of  the  heart,  and  were 
"  made  free  "  by  that  knowletlge — "  free  "  from  the  bondage  of  guilt  and  sin,  "  free  '* 
from  the  power  of  sin  over  their  lives,  "free"  from  all  that  which  they  felt  was 
contrary  to  the  glory  of  God  I  Ah,  how  little  of  this  freedom  there  may  be  with 
all  our  discipleship  I  1'his  is  what  it  is  to  be  a  " disciple  indeed"  This  is  what  it 
is  to  be  "  blessed  indeed."    Reader,  are  you  a  "  disciple  indeed  "  t 

II.  Mark  the  next  petition:  "And  wouldest  eklaboe  my  coast."  Probably  the  coast 
which  he  prays  may  be  enlarged  was  some  earthly  possession.  Ho  speaks  as  one  who 
had  to  recover  from  the  hand  of  the  enemy  his  portion  of  the  promised  land.  For  the 
recovery  of  this  he  was  about  to  engage  in  war.    And  what  a  spiritual  lesson  we  learn 

L  CHB0K1CLES»  ' 


66  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,     [en.  iv.  1—43. 


from  it  I    It  is  by  conflict  the  child  of  God  obtains  more  and  more  of  the  blessings  laid 
up  for  him  in  Christ.    The  Word  of  the  Lord  is  to  him  what  it  was  to  Israel  of  old :  "Go 
ye  up  and  possess  the  land ; "  "  There  remaineth  yet  very  much  land  to  be  possessed." 
Oh,  what  blessings  are  laid  up  for  us  in  Christ  I    Why  do  we  not  enter  into  our  inherit- 
ance ?    God  has  indeed  *'  blessed  us  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  in 
Christ,"  but  have  we  possessed  them  ?    Have  we  drunk  deep  of  these  wells  of  living 
waters?    Are  our  souls  living  upon  the  riches  that  are  hid  in  Christ  for  us?    Why  do 
we  not  possess  the  land  which  Jesus  has  won  for  us  ?    Because,  dear  reader,  there  is  no 
conflict.    We  must  fight  to  enjoy.    We  must  know  what  it  is,  hour  after  hour,  to  engage 
In  conflict — yes,  in  a  bloody  conflict — with  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.    We  must 
grapple  hour  after  hour  with  flesh  and  blood — with  "  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride 
of  life."    We  must  know  keenly  what  it  is  to  pluck  out  a  right  eye,  and  cut  off  a  right 
hand  or  a  right  foot.    We  must  know  the  struggle  with  sloth  and  indulgence,  with 
natural  inclinations  and  desires,  with  unholy  dispositions,  and  harsh  tempers,  and 
unkind  words,  and  a  fault-finding  spirit.   Have  we  entered  into,  are  we  daily  engaged  in, 
a  conflict  like  this  ?  Ah,  you  will  never  be  a  "  disciple  indeed  "  unless  you  know  some- 
thing of  this  agony.    It  is  through  conflict,  through  warring  a  good  warfare,  that  God 
opens  the  floodgates  of  the  soul  for  all  the  treasures  of  his  grace  to  flow  in.    You  may 
know  them  and  talk  about  them ;  but  have  you  possessed  the  good  land  ?     Is  it  not 
true  that  "  there  remaineth  yet " — ^yes,  yet  after  all  these  years  of  Christian  disciple- 
ghip — **  very  much  land  to  be  possessed  "  ?    Oh  I  no  warfare,  no  conflict,  no  struggle ; 
then  no  deep  joy,  no  sweet  peace,  no  uplifting  communion  with  God,  no  realized 
sweetness  of  the  Word,  no  real  growth  in  grace,  no  likeness  to  Christ.    Jabez's  coast 
would  never  have  been  enlarged  without  a  oeadly  struggle  with  the  foe.    There  will  be 
no  enlargement  of  coast  with  you.  Christian,  without  this.    It  is  thus  we  see  it  in  the 
Lord's  address  to  the  seven  Churches.    Every  promise  is  made  there  not  to  the  Chris- 
tian as  such,  not  to  the  disciple,  but  "  to  him  that  overcometh,"    They  are  made  to  the 
"  disciple  indeed  " — to  the  one  who  knows  something  not  only  of  what  it  is  to  fight, 
but  to  win.    Yes,  Christian,  your  soul  has  been  saved  by  Christ's  finished  work ;  out 
every  inch  of  the  ground  beyond  must  be  fought  for.   You  will  pass  into  God's  presence 
a  naked  soul — just  saved.     Where  are  the  laurels  you  have  won?     Where  is  the 
ground  around  you  bedewed  with  your  tears  from  struggling  in  prayer?    Where  is 
the  inward  struggle  against  indolence  and  sloth,  against  yielding  to  natural  inclination, 
against  a  censorious  spirit,  against  some  unkind  word  at  your  fireside,  against  some 
light  or  frivolous  thought?     Where  is  the  holy  anxiety  to  redeem  time  for  God? 
Where  is  the  agony  and  bloody  sweat  against  temptation  and  sin  ?   Where  is  the  soul's 
inward  yearning  after  God  ?    Where  is  the  surrender  to  him  hour  after  hour — the  full 
consecration  of  self  and  all  things  to  his  glory  ?    Oh,  this  is  the  warfare  with  the  foe ; 
and  the  man  who  knows  something  of  this  alone  knows  what  it  is  to  have  "  enlarge- 
ment of  coast."    Precious  prayer  1    Lord,  "  enlarge  my  coast "  I    Make  more  room  in 
my  heart,  in  my  life,  for  thee  1  I  am  so  narrow,  so  cramped,  so  straitened,  so  wretchedly 
little  I    Oh,  enlarge  this  straitened  soul  of  mine  1     Make  more  room  for  thyself  in  me 
and  in  everything  about  me  1    Yes,  in  my  time,  my  pleasures,  my  duties,  my  cares, 
my  aims,  my  household,  my  children,  my  servants, — in  all  make  more  room  for  thyself  I 
Come,  Lord  Jesus, "  enlarge  my  coast."    And  do  it  now  I    Let  me  not  wait  another 
day,  another  hour.    Reader,  are  you  ready  for  this?     Will  you  to-day  make  this 
your  prayer?    Believe  it,  you  will  not  be  a  stranger  to  the  joy  of  the  Lord  any 
longer  if  you  will.     Oh,  make  this  your  prayer  and  your  aim!     "Go  ye  up  and 
possess  the  land,"  for  "  there  remaineth  yet  very  much  land  to  be  possessed." 

IIL  What  is  the  next  petition  ?  "  That  thine  hand  might  be  with  me."  The  hand 
of  God  is  the  presence  of  God.  But  it  is  more.  It  is  God  in  activity.  It  is  God  in 
life  and  power.  It  is  the  psalmist's  holy  longing :  "  My  soul  thirsteth  for  God,  for 
the  living  God."  The  hana  of  God  is  God  in  power  on  our  behalf.  What  was  the 
hand  of  Jesus  ?  What  mighty  works  were  done  by  it  1  It  touched  the  leper,  and  all 
disease  fled.  It  touched  the  dead,  and  made  it  start  into  life  again.  It  was  laid  oo 
a  sinking  disciple,  and  held  him  amid  the  boiling  water-floods.  It  was  laid  on  a  loving 
disciple  who  had  fallen  prostrate  before  the  glory  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  it  raised  him 
to  his  feet  again,  and  enabled  him  to  stand  in  the  midst  of  all  the  unveiled  glories  of 
the  Apocalypse.    Oh,  the  hand  of  the  God-man  Jesus,  what  power  there  was  in  it  1 


CH.  IV.  1—43.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  6T 

Thus  Jabez  prays,  "  That  thine  hand  may  be  with  me."  Thus  the  child  of  Grod  may 
ever  pray.  It  is  just  what  we  need — him  with  us  in  all  his  glorious  power ;  him  to 
put  away  our  leprous  sin ;  him  to  raise  our  dead  souls  to  life ;  him  to  uphold  our 
sinking  souls  amid  the  storms  and  tempests  of  life ;  him  to  raise  us  out  of  the  dust  of 
grovelling  earthliness,  and  make  us  look  into  the  glory  before  us ;  him  to  bless  us ;  him 
to  do  all.  "  That  thine  hand  may  be  with  me.'*  Reader,  it  is  just  what  you  need — a 
livin<;  Jesus  at  your  side  from  day  to  day,  and  hour  to  hour. 

IV.  Mark  the  concluding  petition:  "That  thou  wouldest  keep  ice  from  evil,  that  it 
may  not  grieve  me."  Observe,  reader,  it  is  not  a  prayer  to  be  kept  from  evil.  It  is  a 
prayer  to  be  kept  from  the  effects  of  evil.  "  That  it  may  not  grieve  me."  "  Have  wo 
received  good  at  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  we  not  receive  evil  ? "  "  Shall  there 
be  evil  in  a  city,  and  I  have  not  done  it?  "  The  Christian  cannot  pray  to  be  delivered 
from  evlL  He  will  have  sorrow  and  suffering  and  trial  here.  The  eye  must  often 
weep  over  sin  ;  the  heart  must  often  mourn  over  its  depravity.  Temptation  must  be 
constantly  endured.  But  this  the  soul  may  pray  for — that  the  sin  within  us  and  the 
temptations  around  us  may  not  grieve  or  hurt  the  soul,  lliis  he  may  pray  for — that 
his  evil  heart  may  not  draw  him  from  God ;  that  an  evil  nature  may  not  be  yielded  to ; 
that  an  evil  spirit  may  not  deaden  his  soul,  and  leave  him  cold  and  heartless  to  the 
Saviour  and  his  glory.  There  is  no  exemption  from  evil  here.  It  is  in  ns  and  around 
us  on  every  side.  But,  blessed  be  Ood,  we  have  One  dwelling  within  us,  even  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  through  his  mighty  working  evil  may  be  turned  into  a  blessing.  It  is  for 
this  we  may  pray,  we  must  pray.  Your  danger  is  not  in  possessing  an  evil  heart,  but 
in  yielding  to  it.  Your  danger  is  not  bein^;  on  the  verge  of  a  precipice,  but  in  being 
unwatchful  there.    Oh,  pray  this  prayer.  Christian  reader  I— W. 

Vers.  31 — 43. — The  Simeonites,  This  tribe  is  classed  with  that  of  Judah,  as  their 
possessions  were  partly  taken  out  of  their  extensive  territory  (see  Josh.  xiz.  1).  As 
ISimeon  had  only  a  limited  portion  of  the  land  of  Judah,  they  were  forced  to  seek 
accommodation  elsewhere.  In  consequence  of  their  sloth  or  cowardice,  some  of  the 
cities  within  their  allotted  territory  were  only  nominally  theirs,  and  were  never  taken 
from  the  Philistines  till  David's  time,  when,  the  Simeonites  having  forfeited  all  claim 
to  them,  he  transferred  them  to  the  tribe  of  Judah  (see  1  Sam.  xxvii.  6).  Let  us  learn 
two  lessons  from  this  tribe — first,  with  reference  to  this  transfer,  and  second,  with 
reference  to  the  sad  results  that  followed  the  snpineness  or  cowardice  which  cha- 
racterized it.  1.  We  learn  from  Gen.  xlix.  5 — 7  that  cruelty  characterized  this  son  of 
Jacob,  and  that  righteous  retribution  followed.  Also  we  see  how  one  sin  begets  another. 
Cruelty  has  in  its  train  cowardice.  True  bravery  and  magnanimity  is  the  result  of 
a  nature  ennobled  by  Divine  grace.  Wherever  we  find  cruelty,  there  we  may  be  certain 
to  find  cowardice  and  supineness.  One  strengthened  grace  strengthens  every  other 
in  the  man.  One  indulged  sin  weakens  every  grace,  and  begets  sins  which  bear  that 
sin's  "  image  and  superscription "  at  every  turn  and  throughout  many  generations. 
Simeon's  descendants,  though  not  personally  guilty  of  their  father's  sin,  have  the 
brand  upon  them.  Their  sins  are  but  the  outward  ripple  on  the  stream  where  their 
father  cast  in  the  first  stone  of  crime.  Thus  Simeon's  sin  lived  in  his  generations. 
Thus  men  live  long  after  they  are  dead.  All  true  living  influence  begins  to  be  potent 
after  we  have  disappeared  from  the  scene.  How  solemn,  then,  how  awfully  responsible, 
is  each  one's  life  I  2.  Now  look  at  the  sad  results  of  their  supineness.  Inasmuch  as  they 
did  not  fight  the  Philistines  and  gain  possession  of  their  cities,  David  took  them  from 
them  and  allotted  them  to  Judah.  What  a  remarkable  confirmation  of  our  Lord's 
words,  "  To  him  that  Jiath  [Judah]  shall  more  be  p^ven ;  and  from  him  that  hath  not 
[Simeon]  even  that  he  hath  shall  be  taken  away  " !  See  another  consequence  of  this 
supineness.  They  sought  larger  territory,  and  found  it  in  the  pastures  of  Gederah. 
For  a  time  all  seemed  bright  and  prosperous.  But  soon  they  were  attacked  by  foes, 
and  had  to  fly  to  Mount  Seir.  This  would  have  been  unnecessary  had  they  been 
valiant,  fought  the  Philistines,  and  become  possessed  in  reality  of  what  they  had  only 
nominal  possession  before.  Reader,  learn  the  solemn  warning.  "  Fight  the  go(Ki  fight 
of  faith,  lay  hold  on  eternal  life;  "  "  Make  your  calling  and  election  sure/*  Make  that 
nominal  possession  of  Christ — that  profession  of  religion  you  wear — a  reality,  a  true 
and  living  possession.  Thus  will  you,  too,  save  yourself  from  similar  results,  and  will 
reap  your  reward.— W. 


68 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,      [ch,  v,  1—26. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  V. 


Vers.  1—10.— The  Sons  of  Rexjben.  The 
tribe  of  Reuben  is  now  token  third  in 
order  by  the  compiler,  though  Reuben 
mraa  the  first  of  all  the  sons  of  Israel. 
The  ditotlnct  statements  of  vers.  1  and  2, 
respect  log  the  degradation  of  Reuben  and 
hu  loss  of  the  rights  of  primogeniture, 
are  not  to  be  undorbtood,  however,  as  men- 
tioned in  any  way  to  account  for  his  stand- 
ing third  here.  That  Judah  takes  in  any 
genealogy  the  first  place  needs  no  other 
apology  ttian  that  contained  in  this  passage, 
**  Judah  prevailed  above  his  brethren,  and 
of  him  came  the  cliief  ruler "  (i.e.  David, 
and  in  him  **David*s  greater  Son  and 
Lord  '*).  And  that  Simeon  is  taken  immedi- 
ately after  Judah  was  natural  enough,  both 
because  the  second  place  belonged  to  him, 
and  because  his  tribe,  in  journeying,  in 
settlement,  and  in  acknowledged  friendship, 
was  so  nearly  related  to  that  of  Judah.  It  is 
as  an  important  historical  fact,  a  lesson  and 
stem  memento  of  crime,  that  the  tale  of 
Reuben  is  here  as  elsewhere  told.  Indeed, 
in  the  remarkably  exalting  language  applied 
to  Reuben  (Gen.  xlix.  3)  by  the  dying  father 
in  those  **  blessings ''  of  his  sons  which 
were  so  marvellously  living  with  prophecy, 
that  **  blessing  "  seemed  weighted  with  hard 
reality,  and  may  really  carry  this  meaning : 
**  O  Reuben  1  though  thou  art  my  firstborn, 
though  my  might  and  the  beginning  of  my 
strength,  though  the  excellency  of  dignity 
and  the  excellency  of  power,"  yef,  because 
of  thy  boiling  luat  (Gen.  xxxv.  22)  **  thou 
Bhalt  not  excel."  In  that  endowing  charter 
of  the  patriarch's  death-bed,  the  birtliright 
of  Reuben  is  not  in  so  many  words  given  to 
Joseph  and  his  sons,  but  what  is  given  to 
Joseph  is  so  abundant  above  the  lut  of  all 
the  others,  that  we  find  no  difficulty  in  ac- 
cepting the  formal  statement  of  tiie  fact 
here  first  found  in  this  passage.  The  large 
measure  of  promise  meted  to  Judah  (Gen. 
xlix.  8 — 12)  rests,  no  doubt,  upon  the 
title  already  referred  to.  There  would  seem 
to  be  also  a  righteous  moral  reason  in  Joseph 
after  all  becoming  heir  to  the  birthriglit, 
inasmuch  as  he  was  the  eldest  child  of  her 
who  was  Ii>raers  real  love,  and  who,  but  for 
deception  and  sharp  practice,  would  have 
been  his  first  wife.  Uow  he  remembered 
her,  and  with  what  determined  practical 
consequence,  the  affecting  passage.  Gen. 
xlviii.  1 — 7,  16,  21,  22,  sufficiently  reveals; 
yet  comp.  Deut.  xxL  15 — 17.  The  meaning 
of  the  last  clause  of  ver.  1  is  evidently  that, 
though  thus  Reuben  was  the  natural  first- 
born, and  Joseph  had  really  the  birthright, 


the  registration  did  not  proceed  in  this 
instance  (probably  partly  for  the  very  reason 
of  the  ambiguity)  by  the  order  of  birthright, 
but  everything  yielded  to  the  special  call  for 
precedence  on  the  part  of  Judan  (ver.  2). 

Ver.  8. — The  fuur  sons  of  Reuben  here 
given  are  first  enumerated  in  Gen.  xIyL  9 ; 
then  in  Exod.  vi.  14 ;  and  again  in  Numb, 
xxvi.  5 — 7,  where  are  also  found  the  oorre- 
sponding  chief  families  of  the  tribe,  the 
total  of  their  fighting  numbers  amounting  to 
43,730,  compared  with  46,500  at  the  time  of 
the  Sinai  census  (Numb.  ii.  11),  a  diminution 
due  to  the  plague  for  the  idolatry  of  Baal- 
peor  (Numb,  xxv.  9). 

Vers.  4 — 6. — From  which  of  the  four  sons 
of  Reuben  the  line  came  in  which  Joel 
would  appear,  we  do  not  know.  Junius 
and  Tremellius  say  Hanoch,  others  Carmi, 
while  the  Syriao  Version  has  Carmi  viee 
Joel.  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  in  Numb, 
xxvi.  8 — 10  a  line  of  descent  through  Paliu 
is  given,  but  reaching  only  to  the  second 
generation.  Beerah  in  the  present  list  will 
be  only  ninth  at  furthest  from  Reuben,  so 
that  it  is  evident  that  it  is  a  very  fragmentary 
genealogy,  whether  the  hiatus  be  only  one, 
viz.  between  Reuben's  son  (whichever  it 
may  be  in  question)  and  Joel,  or  whether 
both  there  and  eLewhere  also.  Of  none  of 
the  eight  persons  beginning  with  Joel  and 
ending  with  Beerah  is  anything  else  known, 
unless  either  Shemaiah  or  ShLnei  may  be 
identical  with  the  Shema  of  ver.  8,  in  which 
case  it  might  be  also  that  the  Joel  of  ver.  8 
is  identical  with  that  of  ver.  4.  In  this 
passage  and  ch.  viii.  30  Baal  appears  as  the 
name  of  a  man.  In  this  passnge,  and  in 
ver.  26  and  2  Chron.  xxviii.  20,  we  have 
a  different  form  in  each  part  of  the  word, 
of  the  Tiglath'piUser  of  2  Kings  xv.  29 ; 
xvi.  7.  These  slight  differences  in  the 
position  of  the  radicals,  with  the  introduction 
or  omitision  of  the  Mi  make  ns  many  as  four 
different  readings  in  the  Hebrew.  Tiglath- 
pilcser,  the  second  Assyrian  king  who  came 
into  confiict  with  the  Israelites,  reigned 
ahout  B.C.  747-727.  Gesenius  thinks  that 
the  former  half  of  the  word  is  the  same  as 
Viglath,  i.q.  Tigris ;  and  that  the  latter,  a 
ruot  occurring  also  in  the  name  Nabo-pola- 
iariSf  is  from  an  Assyrian  verb  meaning  **  to 
guard."  He  translates  the  word  as  **  Lord 
of  the  Tigris."  The  Assyrian  reproduction 
of  the  name  is  Tigulti-pal'tsira  (Smith's 
*  Bible  Dictionary*),  or  TukuUi-pcd-zara 
(*  Speaker's  Ck)mmentary,*  in  toe).  The  Cap- 
tivity is  spoken  of  further  in  the  last  verse 
of  this  chapter  and  in  2  Kings  xv.  27 — 81. 
The  Septuagint  reads  vers.  4  and  5  differ- 
ently :  **  The  sons  of  Joel,  Semei  and  Banssa 


CH.  V.  1— 26.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


69 


his  son ;  an<l  the  sons  of  Gog  the  son  of 
Semei,"  etc.,  and  this  in  all  three  editions — 
Vatican,  Alexandrine,  and  Aldine. 

Vers.  7,  8.— Of  Jeiel,  Zeohariah,  Bela,  and 
Am  nothing  further  is  known.  Shema  and 
Joel  may  be  those  of  ver.  4,  as  above.  The 
expression,  his  brethren,  i.e,  the  brethren  of 
Beerah,  must  be  read  generally.  The  inti- 
mation, when  the  genealogy  of  their  gene- 
rationB  was  reckoned,  ia  probably  explained 
by  the  contents  of  ver.  17  (of  which  here- 
after). Aroer  ("i.P^.  or  "i?[i"»j);  a  place 
east  of  the  Jordan,  overhanging  the  torrent 
of  Arnon,  which  was  a  boundary  between 
Moab  and  the  Amorites,  and  afterwards 
between  Moab  and  Reuben.  There  is 
little  doubt  that  Burckhardt  has  identified 
the  ruins  of  Aroer  (see  Numb,  xxxii.  38 ; 
Deut  ii.  24,  36;  iiL  8,  12, 16;  Josh.  xii.  1, 
2 ;  xiii.  9,  16 ;  Judg.  xi.  13,  26,  where  note 
transposition  of  letters  in  the  Hebrew;  2 
Kings  X.  33).  l^Ioab  seems  to  have  regained 
it  later  (Jer.  xlviii.  1 — 47 ;  see  interestin;]; 
arts.  ••  Arnon  "  and  **  Aroer,"  Smith's  •  Bible 
Dictionary  ').  Kebo  and  Baal-meon  are  also 
mentioned  together  in  Numb,  xxxii.  38; 
and  Baal-meon  with  Moab  in  Ezek.  xxv.  9. 
This  Nebo,  the  town,  is  distinct  from  Mount 
Nebo.  It  is  remarl^ble  that  it  is  not  men- 
tioned, unless  under  one  of  the  "  changed  " 
names  (Numb.  xxxiL  38),  in  the  list  of  the 
towns  of  Reuben  (Josh.  xiii.  15—23).  Nebo 
was  the  name  of  a  heathen  deity,  known 
among  the  Chaldeans  (Isa.  xlvi.  1),  Baby- 
lonians, and  Assyrians ;  and  this  constituted 
one  reason,  if  not  the  reason,  for  changing 
its  name  when  it  had  been  affixed  to  the 
Moabite  city. 

Ver.  9. — Keil  and  others  refer  this  verse 
to  the  people  of  Bcla;  yet  others  apply  it 
to  Joel.    It  would  seem  nearest  the  facts  to 


apply  it  to  the  main  subject  of  the  para- 

fraph— Reuben.    Gilead  (Deut.  iii.  12—16) 
aa  for  its  boundaries,  on  the  north  Bashan, 


on  the  south  Moab,  on  the  east  the  Arabian 
desert  Its  situation  evidently  exposed  it 
to  Assyrian  invasion  and  frequent  en- 
counter with  desert  tribes  (Josh.  xvii.  1 ; 
Numb.  xxvi.  29,  30). 

Ver.  10. — Among  such  conflicts,  one  with 
a  people  descended  presumably  from  Hagor 
or  Islimael  (though  ch.  xxvii.  30, 31,  and  Ps. 
lxxxiii.6are  somewhat  needlessly  interpreted 
to  be  opposed  to  this)  is  here  alluded  to.  It 
takes  us  to  the  time  of  Saul,  and  from  that 
time  up  to  the  time  of  "  the  Captivity  *'  (ver. 
22)  the  victorious  Reuben ites,  Gadites,  and 
people  of  the  half-tribe  Manassoh  ha'l  tlie 
oenefitof  enlarged  domain  at  their  expense : 
••  They  dwelt  iu  their  steads,"  after  seizing 
great  spoil.  It  is  exceedingly  likely  that 
we  have  the  perpetuation  of  the  name  Haga- 
renes  in  the  Agra3ei  (modern  Hejer)  of  Strabo, 
xvi.  767 ;  Pliny, '  HUt  Nat./  vL  32 ;  Diony- 


sins.    *Perieg.,'    956;    Pt   v.    2   (see    art. 
"Hagarenes"  in  Smith's  *  Bible  Dictionary'). 

Vers.  11— 17.— The  tribe  of  Gad  is  taken 
next,  and  occupies  but  few  lines.  Gad  was 
bom  seventh  in  order  of  all  the  sons  of  Jacob 
(Gen.  XXX.  9—12),  and  first  of  the  children 
of  Leah's  maid  Zilpah.  The  compiler  seems 
to  pass  easily  on  to  Gad,  from  the  mere  cir- 
cumstance of  the  namo  of  the  tribe  being  so 
constantly  linked  with  that  precpding,  in 
the  matter  of  looal  settlement  on  the  east  of 
Jordan,  after  the  joumeyings  of  the  wilder* 
ness  (Josh.  xiii.  7,  8).  The  geography  in 
vers.  11  and  16  offers  very  little  difficulty. 
Compared  with  the  time  of  the  first  settling 
of  the  Gadites  (Deut  iii  10—13 ;  Josh, 
xiii.  25,  30),  it  is  evident  that  they  had 
pushed  their  borders  further  to  the  north, 
trenching  somewhat  upon  the  lot  of  the  half- 
tribe  Munasseh,  as  they  also  in  turn  ex- 
tended their  limits  northward  to  Hermon 
(ver.  23).  This  reconciles  Josh.  xiii.  30 
with  the  present  passage.  Salcah,  or  (Au- 
thorized Version)  Sulchah  (Deut  iii.  10; 
Josh.  xiii.  11),  is  probably  to  be  identified 
as  the  modern  Sulkhctd,  at  the  extreme 
eastern  point  of  the  plain  Haurarif  which 
is  bordered  by  the  desert  "  In  Gilead  in 
Bashan "  may  be  read,  with  some,  as  two 
co-ordinate  places,  separating  them  by  a 
stop;  or  may  point  to  a  time  when  Bashan 
included  the  upper  half  of  Gilead.  Sharon, 
which  Keil,  quoting  Reland, « Pal.  111.,'  370, 
would  make  the  well-known  Sharon  of 
Carmel  and  the  Mediterranean,  is,  though 
unmentioncd  elsewhere,  probably  distin- 
guished sufficiently  from  it  by  the  absence 
of  the  article,  which  is  invariably  prefixed 
to  the  other.  Stanley's  suggestion  ('  Sinai 
and  Palestine,'  edit  1866,  pp.  484,  485, 
260)  would  seem  exceedingly  apt,  that  it  is 
one  in  fact,  as  one  in  derivation  and  mean- 
ing, with  the  Mwhor  (i.e.  **  level  lands," 
*^  table-land ")  of  Gilead  and  Bashan. 
With  this  explanation,  however,  the  term 
"suburbs"  does  not  so  well  agree.  Upon 
the  other  side,  distant  as  the  well-known 
Sharon  is,  a  link  of  connection  might  be 
found  with  it,  in  that  the  other  Muuasseh 
half-tribe  stretched  into  its  plains ;  and  in 
that  case  the  last  word  of  the  verse,  DnhMpHn, 
might  mean  (Josh.  xvii.  9)  "  the  outgoings  " 
of  the  land  or  regions  in  question  to  the 
**  sea  "-coast. 

Ver.  12. — The  four  proper  names  in  this 
verse  are  not  known  in  connection  with  the 
same  persons  elsewhere.  Tho  Scptuagiut 
translates  Shaphat  as  "  the  sci  ibc,"  applying 
the  description  to  the  foregoing  Jaanai. 

Ver.  13.— And  their  brethren.  This 
chapter  (see  ver.  7)  seems  to  introduce  the 
use  of  this  word,  which  must  be  understood 
generically.  The  seven  persons  are  nowhere 
else  mentioned* 


70 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  TUE  CURONICLES.      [ch.  v.  1—26. 


Vera.  14,  15.— These  are  the  children  of 
Abihail ;  i.e.  the  seven  "  brethren  "  of  the 
preceding  verse.  A  rapid  lino  of  descent, 
or  rather  of  ascent,  consisting  of  ten  genera- 
tions, from  Abihail  to  Ouni,  here  Allows. 
The  division  between  these  verses  has  un- 
fortunately cut  in  half  one  name,  i.e. 
BuakL  The  translators  of  the  6eptuagint 
saw  that  the  two  verses  composed  one  line 
of  ascent,  but  instead  of  piecing  **  Aki "  to 
"  Biiz,"  translated  it  as  "  brother."  Though 
this  line  takes  us  some  way  back,  we  find 
nowhere  else  any  clue  or  identification  of 
any  of  these  ten  persons.  Of  the  twenty- 
one  persons  in  all,  therefore,  named  as 
belonging  to  the  tribe  of  Gad,  nothing  else 
is  known ;  and  we  have  nothing  to  guide  us 
to  connect  them  with  any  one  rather  than 
another  of  the  original  "  sons  of  Gad  "  (Gen. 
xlvL  16 ;  Numb.  xvi.  15—18). 

Ver.  17. — The  very  form  of  the  language 
of  this  verse  would  indicate  that  two  genea- 
logies are  intended.  This  quite  tallies 
with  the  fact  that  there  were  two  chronicles, 
one  for  each  division  of  the  nation,  i.e,  "  the 
chronicles  of  the  kings  of  Judah  "  (2  Kings 
XV.  6)  and  ^*  the  chronicles  of  tlie  kings  of 
Israel"  (2  Kings  xv.  11),  in  which  same 
chapter  both  Jeroboam  (II.)  of  Israel  and 
Jotham  of  Judah  are  spoken  of,  the  latter 
beginning  to  reign  in  Judah  some  twenty 
▼ears  (the  exact  chronology  is  very  confused 
here)  after  the  death  of  the  former.  Al- 
though presumably  it  would  be  an  object  of 
closer  interest  with  Israel  than  with  Judah 
to  effect  the  registration  of  the  Gadite 
genealogr,  yet  it  was  most  just  that  Judah 
should  do  so  as  well.  This  would  both 
vindicate  Judah*s  own  right  place  and  be  a 
happy  omen  of  the  continued  predominance 
of  her  position  compared  with  that  of  Israel. 
Independently  of  the  question  of  effecting 
the  actual  registration,  however,  it  is  quite 
possible  that,  so  long  as  history  ran  by  the 
side  of  history,  Israel  would  gather  and 
keep  all  it  could  of  Judah,  and  Judah  all  it 
could  of  Israel. 

Vers.  18—22. — Tliese  verses  appear  to  be 
the  fuller  development  of  the  war  in  SauFs 
time,  mentioned  in  ver.  10 — the  account 
apparently  there  delay^  till  the  genealogy 
of  the  tribe  of  Gad  had  been  given,  and 
which  still  seems  premature  till  the  con- 
tents of  vers.  23  and  21  should  have  been 
given. 

Ver.  19. — The  name  of  Kodab  we  have 
not  elsewhere ;  but  those  of  Jetnr  and  Ke- 
phiih  are  names  from  the  very  origin  of  the 
tribe  of  Ishmael  (Gen.  xxv.  13—16;  ch.  i. 
29 — 31).  It  would  be  possible  to  consider 
them  here  as  in  apposition  with  the  descrip- 
tion, the  Eagarites  ^respecting  whom  see 
note  on  ver.  10);  out  they  may  moro 
probably  be  regarded  as  &vourite  names. 


still  repeated  in  the  descendants  of  the  tribe. 
The  people  of  Ncphish  have  not  made  their 
mark  deep  on  the  page  of  ethnographio 
history ;  but  the  people  of  Jetur  have  none 
so.  Their  stinted  territory  appears  in  the 
name  Iturasa  (Luke  iii.  1).  Their  people 
reappear  also  (Josephus,  *  Ant.,'  xiii.  o.  11,  § 
3;  Strabo,  xvi.  518,  520).  Nor  is  it  an  nn- 
noticeablo  contribution  to  the  truth  of  our 
history  here  to  put,  side  by  side  with  the 
description  of  the  qualities  and  of  the  arms 
and  weapons  of  warfare  of  the  Manassitea 
and  their  helpers  of  Reuben  and  Gad  (ver. 
18),  those  of  the  Iturfl)an8,  their  antagonists 
(Virgil, » Georg.,'  ii.  448 ;  Cicero, » Phil,,'  ii. 
41 ;  Lucan,  *  Pharsalia,'  vii.  230 ;  see  Smith's 
*  Bible  Dictionary,*  i.  905). 

Ver.  21.— Of  men ;  literally,  of  the  sotiX,  i.e. 
life  of  men  (comp.  2  Kings  vii.  7  with  Jer. 
xliv.  7,  in  illustration  of  the  twofold  appli- 
cation of  e^p3;  see  also  Numb.  xxxi.  19, 
28,32-35)." 

Vers.  23,  24.— "The  half-tribe  of  Ma- 
nasseh"  is  here  very  briefly  treated  of. 
Manasseh  and  his  brother  Ephraim  stand 
in  the  place  of  Joseph,  both  the  children  of 
Joseph's  Egyptian  wife,  Asenath,  and  born 
before  the  famine.  Though  Manasseh  was 
the  elder,  Jacob  gave  the  chief  blessing 
(Gen.  xlviii.  10—22)  to  Ephraim.  The 
Manassites  were  descended  from  Manasseh 
through  his  son  Machir,  bom  of  a  Syrian 
concubine  (Septuagint,  Gen.  xlvi.  20 ;  1.  23 ; 
Numb.  xxvi.  28—34 ;  Josh.  xvii.  1—3 ;  ch. 
vii.  14,  15).  Machir  evidently  was  spes 
gregis  (though  apparently  not  the  only  son, 
for  see  Asrielf  or  Ashriel,  in  above  refer- 
ences), and  is  repeatedly  mentioned  with 
his  son  Gilcad.  It  is  probable  that  the 
division  of  the  tribe  was  determined  partly 
according  to  the  energy  of  those  who  com- 
posed it  at  the  time  of  division — the  more 
warlike  being  more  adapted  to  the  east  of 
Jordan.  Nevertheless  Machir  is  distinctly 
mentioned  westward,  as  well  as  with  Gilcad 
eastward  (comp.  Judg.  v.  14 — 17 ;  Josh.  xiii. 
29 — 31).  (For  tlie  further  prosecution  of 
this  part  of  the  subject,  see  Exposition,  ch. 
vii.  14—19.) 

Ver.  23. — Baal-hermon,  etc.  These  three 
names  need  scarcely  be  read  as  different 
names  for  exactly  the  same  region,  but  as 
designating  different  sides  or  heights  of 
what  was  essentially  one  and  the  same  well- 
known  mountain  district,  with  which  would 
agree  Ps.  xliii.  6,  "Therefore  will  I  re- 
member thee  from  the  land  of  Jordan  and 
of  the  HermoniteSt  from  the  hill  Mizar." 
So  Deut.  iii.  8 — 10  tolls  us  that  Hermon 
was  called  Sirion  by  the  Sidonians;  Sheuir, 
i.q.  Senir  O^^Jp,  exactly  the  same  word  in  tiie 
Hebrew  text  in  all  the  four  places  of  its 
occurrence — Cant.  iv.  8 ;  Ezek.  xxvii.  5),  by 
the  Amorites.    And  the  suggestion  of  Grove 


ca.T.1— 26.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OK  THE  CHRONICLES. 


it  likel;  enongli,  that  Baal-hennoa  was  the 
Plioeaician  coat  or  the  name.  Jf  any  point 
wore  to  be  gained  by  reading  the  namea, 
boiveTet,  as  iutcnded  to  cover  exactly  the 
tame  tract,  it  may  be  noted  (I)  tbat  the 
Hebrew  eonjunction  will  perrectlj  admit  of 
being  traniilated  "eieD;''  and<2)lh»t  the 
order  of  the  namea,  goine  from  the  foreign 
to  the  natire  Hanwu  itself,  would  ao  far 
laTOUT  it. 

Ver.  24.— Xpher ;  Mme  not  with  Oplirah 
(Jadg.  vi.  11, 15).  Of  tbeaeTen  beads  of  this 
halF-tribe  here  quoted,  no  individual  mention 
ia  made  elsenbcre.  Ch.  xiL  19—22  con- 
firms their  renown  for  valour. 

Vers.  25,  26. — The  "  tranBgreswra"  here 
described  include  mauifestly  not  this  half- 
tribe  Manasseh  alone,  but  the  other  tribes 
of  Israel  of  whom  this  chapter  has  treated. 

Ver.  25. — And  Oitj  want  a  whoring 
(W-T);  so  2  Chron.  iii.  II,  13.  TbU  verb, 
iu  one  form  of  its  root  or  another,  occurs 
as  many  as  ninety-aeTcn  times  in  the  Ponta- 
tench,  Judaea,  Joabuo,  Fsiilma,  Proterbs; 
and  pTophela,  for  only  twice  in  Kings  and 
fiiul  times  in  Chronicles,  in  all  the  rest  of 
the  Old  Testament  writings. 

Ver.  26.— ?nl  and  TUgath-pilnetar.  These 
two  were  chosen  mioifltera  of  God's  will,  if 
not  ministers  of  himself.  We  can  identify 
the  date  of  this  punishment  which  befell 
the  tiAQBgreaaing  Israelites  east  of  the 
Jordan.  The  visit  of  the  former,  ia  the 
reign  of  Menahem  (2  Kings  it.  15—20), 
may  be  iuterpreted  and  might  have  operated 
M  a  lesson  and  n  warn  log.  He  was 
bought  off  with  a  thousand  talents  of 
■ilver.  It  seems  to  be  said  with  signlfl- 
eeDae,"Bo  the  king  of  Assyria  turned  back, 
and  stayed  not  there  in  the  land."  It  was 
iD  the  reign  of  Pekah,  the  usurping  suo- 
ecMorof  Menahem's  son  Pekohiah.jbat  the 


J  Pul  oannot,  it  would  appear,  be 

pure  Assyrian  name,  and  there  is  reason  to 
think  it  may  be  identified  with  FuWimA 
(graodsoD  of  the  Bhalmaueser  who  warred 
with  BcDhadod,  etc.),  a  name  found  on 
Assyrian  monuments,  and  belonging  to  a 
king  who  reigned  at  Calah,  b.o.  800—750 
(SCO  art.  "Pul,"  Smith's 'Bible  Dictionary'). 
Tilqalk-pilneter  (see  Dotea  on  ver.  6)  was 
probably  Ibo  founder  of  tlio  lower  dynasty 
of  Assyria,  and  Qnt  king  of  the  new  empire. 


His  first  invasion  was  one  chiefly  of  Israel 
iind  Samaria  (2  Kings  iv.  29;  Isa.  il.  1). 
His  second  was  of  a  much  more  sigoil3cant 
character.  Called  iu  to  aid  Jmlah  under 
Ahaz  against  Pekah  of  Israel  and  Rezin  of 
Syria  in  alliance,  ho  both  oonquerod  these 
latter  and  brought  into  vaasalage  Judab 
itself  (2  Kings  iv.  S7 ;  ivi.  S,  10 ;  2  Chron. 
iiviii.  6— 6;  Isa.  ii.  1).  Ealah;  Habor; 
Kara;  Ooian.  Tliis  enumeration  eiceeds 
that  of  2  Kings  iviL  6  by  the  addition  of 
Rara,  important  as  helping  with  consistent 
witneu  to  tho  antiquity  of  the  region 
described.  Ealah  (not  the  "CoLlh"  of 
QoD.  I.  II)  is  believed  to  be  identifiable 
with  ChaldtU,  its  verbal  resemblance  to 
which  comes  out  a  little  more  evidently 
in  its  Hebrew  form  (rhny  A  trooe  of  It 
possibly  lemains  in  the'  name  of  a  bill, 
Gia,  on  the  A'Aobour,  i.q,  Hahor  of  this 
^ssage,  an  important  tributary  of  tho 
Euplirates,  and  not  the  "  Chobar "  ot 
Ezckiel.  This  name  KtuAmr  is  found  in 
an  Assyrian  inscription  dating  upward* 
of  eight  centuries  before  Christ.  The 
mention  of  Habor  in  2  Kings  ivii.  6  and 
xviii.  11  is,  in  the  Authorized  Version,  made 
to  convey  tlie  impression  of  a  place  "by" 
the  "river  of  Qozan,"  instead  of  being,  what 
the  Hebrew  lays,  "the  river  of  Gozan." 
Here,  on  the  other  band,  Qozaa  is,  in  tho 
Authorized  Version,  inoorrectly  translated 
ne  a  river  itself,  instead  of  tho  re^ou  of  a 
river.  It  is,  according  to  the  testimony  of 
Layord  ('  Nineveh  aud  Babylon,'  pp.  270 — 
312),  a  remarkably  fertile  tract,  being  the 
Gauzanitit  of  Ploiemy,  and  substantially 
the  Mygdonia  of  Polybius  and  Strabo. 
Eara;  ,17.1,  with  little  donbt,  the  sacoe 
as  ]^,  ffaran,  or  Ci^rran  (Qen.  iL  81), 
the  ancient  adopted  home  of  Abraham,  in 
Padan-aram,  in  Mesopotamia,  on  the  Belik, 
a  small  tributary  of  the  Euphrates.  It  ia 
tho  Greek  Carrftje  of  Strabo  and  Polybiaa. 
Tliese  fonr  names  purport  to  give  us,  pro- 
bably in  brief,  the  information  that  those 
of  the  Captivity  hero  alluded  to  were 
divided — some  to  settle  at  Halab  on  one 
river,  some  in  Hara  on  another,  and  the 
rest  in  the  district  called  GaMzanili*.  The 
region  called  Ualah  and  that  called  Gau- 
lanitis,  however,  were  both  watered  by  the 
Khabour,  and  therefore  the  insertion  of  the 
name  Haran  where  it  is  inserted  oocasioDS 
some  difficulty . 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  2h.—The  tnd  of  idoJalry,  Notwithstanding  the  exceeding  brevity  of  style  of 
the  genealc^cal  portion  of  Chroniclos,  it  is  not  entirely  without  refiections  of  a  moral 
and  religious  kind.  Few  they  certainly  ate ;  hut,  when  they  do  occur,  they  are  of  a 
very  pronounwd  lort.    This  ehapUr  bos  spoken  of  th«  Keabenitoa,  tho  Gaditea,  and 


72  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  v.  1—26. 

the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh,  and  has  spanned  their  history,  though  with  many  a  gap  ia 
it,  from  the  first  up  to  their  captivity.  This  last  event  approached,  is  not  to  be 
recorded,  however,  without  a  previous  and  very  distinct  notification  of  what  led  to  it. 
These  causes,  we  well  know,  were  the  same  with  all  the  other  tribes  who  were  also 
taken  into  captivity,  and  in  other  parts  of  these  genealogies  corresponding  allusion  is 
made  to  the  Captivity  in  respect  of  the  other  tribes  as  weU.  But  the  statements  before 
us,  for  whatever  reason  now  attached  to  the  above-mentioned  two  tribes  and  a  half, 
are  emphatic.  They  invite  us  to  take  the  opportunity  of  lingering  awhile,  and  of 
asking  what  it  is  in  their  twofold  shape  they  contain  and  suggest.  The  brevity  of  the 
solemn  indictment  will  be  helpful  to  us,  and  when  we  have  purposely  departed  awhile 
from  that  brevity  it  will  be  convenient  to  return  to  it  again.  Up  and  down  the 
history  of  these  two  and  a  half  tribes  and  of  all  the  other  tribes,  the  mournful  facts,  the 
miserable  facts,  are  but  too  apparent  during  the  successions  of  many  generations.  Yet 
we  have  the  indictment  almost  formally  drawn  up  (2  Kings  vii.  7 — 17),  and  though  but 
a  summary,  yet  it  reads  with  a  fearful  fulness  and  directness.  The  pointednoss  and 
exactness  of  the  counts  of  the  charge  are  such  as  to  bespeak  only  too  certainly  their 
fidelity  to  facts.  It  seems  necessary  only  in  briefest  outline  to  rehearse  them.  *'  They 
feared  other  gods ;  walked  in  the  statutes  of  the  heathen,  and  of  the  kings  of  Israel, 
which  they  had  made ;  did  secretly  those  things  not  right  against  the  Lord  their  God ; 
built  them  high  places  in  all  their  cities — from  the  tower  of  the  watchman  to  the 
fenced  city;  set  up  imaees  aod  eroves  in  every  hill,  under  every  green  tree;  burnt 
incense  in  all  the  high  pbces  as  did  the  heathen ;  wrought  wicked  things  to  provoke 
the  Lord  to  anger ;  served  idols,  whereof  the  Lord  said, '  Ye  shall  not  do  this;'  would 
not  hear ;  hardened  their  necks ;  rejected  his  statutes  and  his  covenant  with  their  fathers, 
and  his  testimony  ;  followed  vanity ;  became  vain ;  went  after  the  heathen ;  left  all  the 
commandments  of  the  Lord;  made  molten  images,  even  two  calves;  worshipped  all  the 
host  of  heaven ;  served  Baal ;  caused  their  sons  and  their  daughters  to  pass  through 
the  fire ;  used  divinations  and  enchantments ;  sold  themselves  to  do  evil.''  It  is  to  be 
observed,  then,  that  this  thick  succession  of  allegations  of  sin  laid  at  the  door  of  a 
people  who  might  have  been  so  blessed,  is  what  underlies  the  two  concise  statements 
of  the  text,  **  They  transgressed  against  the  God  of  their  fathers,  and  went  a-whoring 
after  the  gods  of  the  people  of  the  liind,  whom  God  destroyed  before  them."  And  these 
two  statements  describe  one  sin,  the  name  of  which  is  idolatry.  We  may  inquire 
here — 

L  In  what  the  sin  of  idolatry  consists.  Doscribed  briefly,  it  consists  in  per- 
mitting the  creature-sense  of  dependence^  of  disposition  to  follouf,  of  affection,  and  the 
creature-duty  of  service,  to  become  supremely  attached  to  any  object  lower  than  the 
highest.  Among  all  matters  of  possession  and  of  material  acquisition  around  us,  that 
may  be  an  admirable  modesty  and  a  moderation  to  be  imitated  which  should  exhibit 
a  man,  not  grasping  the  utmost  possible  of  attainment,  not  straining  for  the  highest 
which  might  possibly  be  touched.  But  there  are  tendencies  of  affection,  of  obedience, 
of  practi(^  service,  belonging  to  us  as  creatures,  and  which  are  bound  to  find  their 
end  in  God  alone,  in  none  beneath  him.  True  nature,  the  simplest  dictates  of  grati- 
tude, reason  itself,  when  unobstructed,  proclaim  the  inherent  right  to  these  to  lie  in 
the  Creator  himself  He  is  the  idolater  who  in  these  circumstances  leaves  the  One 
absolute  Hi^rhest  and  Best,  in  order  to  lean  upon,  to  waste  affection  upon,  to  serve 
systematically,  the  lower.  Once  make  this  concession,  once  sacrifice  this  highest 
dictate  of  an  intelligent  nature,  and  the  heart  and  life  are  laid  wide  open  to  every 
distraction,  to  the  incuraion  of  every  disorder.  The  indictment  already  quoted  above  ia 
the  sufficient  commentary,  the  ample  illustration  hereof. 

II.  What  itis  in  human  natubs  which  seems  in  all  ages  to  have  made  it  so 
BEADT  A  VICTIM  TO  THE  SIN  OF  IDOLATBY.  When  the  nature  of  the  sin  of  idolatry 
is  barely  stated,  as  a  seeming  preference  for  the  lower  and  the  insecure  and  the 
temporary  in  comparison  of  the  opposites  of  these,  it  seems  almost  incredible  that  it 
should  have  had,  should  still  have,  so  wide  a  sway.  It  were  to  have  been  supposed 
that  men  would  know  and  would  choose  in  the  long  run  the  best  for  themselves.  One 
consideration  by  itself  is  sufficient  to  explain  this;  for  idolatry  is  human  n^LtMre's protest 
againtt  living  and  vxUking  by  faith  I  It  is  the  old  battle,  the  battle  also  ever  new,  of 
eemie  against  fid^    And  true  as  it  is  that  faith  is  not  less  really  Aprincijle  of  human 


cii.  V.  1—26.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  73 

nature  than  sense  a  part  of  it,  the  principle  has  too  generally  heen  the  party  in  the 
conflict  compelled  to  succumb.  Men,  till  they  have  been  divinely  renewed,  appear 
always  to  have  fonnd  the  exercise  of  faith,  in  its  higher  domains,  their  ''strange  work." 
They  have  not  repudiated  it  in  their  own  human  relations ;  they  have  testified  to  the 
existence  of  the  germ  of  it  in  themselves ;  that  germ  has  not  refused  to  show  life  and 
growth  in  human  evil  and  while  it  could  raise  its  head  at  all  in  earthly  atmosphere, 
but  it  undoubtedly  has  seemed  smitten  and  blighted  in  proportion  as  the  atmosphere 
offered  it  has  been  most  pure  and  nearest  heaven.  Idolatry  evidently  fights  against 
faith  in  two  of  its  highest  functions.  1.  As  that  which  offers  to  reveal  to  an  inner 
eye  rather  than  display  to  the  bodily  eye.  2.  And  as  that  which  whispers  ever, 
*'  Wait,  wait,"  expectant  of  a  future,  possibly  even  a  distant  future,  in  place  of  seizing 
the  gratification  of  the  present  hour.  It  is  against  these  same  things  that  an  unre- 
generate  human  nature  ever  opposes  itself.  Those  vast  spheres  of  life,  that  tremendous 
force  of  life  which  the  bodily  eye  cannot  see,  and  that  power  which  gives  to  distance 
nearness,  to  the  far,  far-off  future  the  name  of  "  now,"  are  the  aversion  of  sense,  the 
delights  of  faith.  The  Israelites'  idolatry  in  grosser  form  brings  out,  from  the  very  first 
instances  in  which  the  charge  of  it  was  fixed  upon  them,  these  as  the  plain  rather 
than  deep  or  mysterious  cauises  of  it.  A  more  developed  world's  iiiolatry,  a  wiser 
world's  idolatry,  a  far  subtler  world's  idolatry,  needs  not  to  go  in  quest  of  any  deeper, 
remoter  sources.    These  are  deep  enough  and  too  incontestable. 

III.  What  conbidebationb  of  special  aggravation  abb  instanced  here.  1 .  The 
hosts  of  the  people  "  transgressed  against  the  God  of  their  /ather$,"  The  sin  of  their 
idolatry  was,  therefore, heightened  by  the  fact  that  it  was  against:  (I)  One  long  known 
to  them  as  a  nation;  (2)  One  entitled  to  their  more  scrupulous  veneration  for  the 
honour  and  the  love  they  owed  their  own  fathers ;  (3)  One  of  whom  those  fathers  had 
oft  told  them  "  the  wondrous  works  he  had  wrought "  on  their  behalf.  The  liistory 
of  their  own  Gk>d,  which  began  for  them  with  Abraham,  which  received  so  striking  an 
impulse  in  Joseph,  which  was  the  talk  of  the  whole  earth  from  the  deliverance  from 
Egypt  and  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea,  which  glittered  again  with  event  and  circum- 
stance and  miracle  in  the  journey ings  of  the  wilderness,  and  which  shone  bright  as  the 
noonday  sun  in  the  glorious  reigns  of  David  and  Solomon ; — ^was  this  a  history  which 
could  permit  them  to  transgress  idolatrously  against  him  who  had  invested  them  with 
all  that  was  greatest  and  most  merciful  and  fullest  of  glory?  2.  While  the  people 
thus  forsook  their  own  God  and  the  God  of  their  fathers,  for  whom,  for  what  was  it 
they  thus  acted?  It  was  to  supersede  him  (1)  by  the  very  gods  of  the  people  of 
the  land,  whom  they  superseded,  and  of  whose  laud  they  took  possession  ;  (2*)  by  the 
very  gods  of  the  people  whom  their  own  Grod  alone  had  driven  out  and  had  destroyed 
before  them,  and  from  their  vengeance  had  safely  preserved  them.  Privilege,  mercy, 
and  warning  they  flagrantly  set  at  nought.  They  forfeited,  without  the  pretence  of  an 
excuse,  exalted  place,  distinguishing  honour.  Unprovoked,  untempted  except  of  their 
own  evil  heart  and  lusts,  they  forsook  the  true  Gk>d  and  their  true  and  mighty  Friend 
in  order  to  go  with  an  unholy  love,  with  a  self-ruining  service,  after  false  gods.  Such 
rebellion  was  indeed  "  the  sin  of  witchcraft,"  such  **  stubbornness  was  iniquity  and 
idolatry."  And  to  a  people  so  long  led  and  loved  of  the  Lord,  sawell  fed  and  securely 
kept,  that  rebellion  and  stubbornness  brought  what  they  ever  must  bring  to  those 
who  yield  to  them,  the  loss  of  their  very  highest  good,  the  forfeiting  of  their  grandest 
privileges,  and  the  dread  eclipse  of  Divine  favour  and  presence. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  2. — JudaKs  pre-eminence.  The  tribe  of  Judah  holds  the  first  and  most  promi- 
nent place  in  these  genealogies.  Reuben  was  the  firstborn,  and  Joseph  had  the  birth* 
right;  but  precedence  was  given  to  Judah.  This  was  foretold  in  the  remarkable 
language  in  which  old  Jacob,  upon  his  dying  bed,  spoke  of  this  one  of  his  sons  and  the 
tribe  of  which  he  was  the  progenitor. 

I.  The  tbibe  of  Judah  took  pbecedence  of  all.  When  the  tribes  were  numbered 
nnder  Moses,  that  of  Judah  was  found  to  exceed  all  the  others  in  number.  When  the 
Israelites  wore  organized  for  the  war  against  the  Canaanites,  Judah  was  divinely 


74  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.       [ch.v.1— 26. 

appointed  to  he  the  vanguard  of  the  army.    A  similar  precedence  is  accorded  to  the 
trioe  of  Judah  in  this  Book  of  Chronicles. 

II.  From  thb  tribe  of  Judah  sprang  David  and  the  botal  house.  Of  Israel 
the  Lord  chose  Judah,  and  of  that  tribe  the  family  of  Jesse,  and  of  that  family  the 
youthful  David.  The  great  King  of  Israel  and  his  glorious  son  shed  a  splendour  upon 
the  national  annals.  And  when  the  separation  of  the  kingdoms  came  about,  the 
kingdom  of  Judah  was  distinguished  in  many  ways,  both  civil  and  religious,  abore  the 
sister  kingdom  of  Northern  Palestine. 

III.  The  greatest  distinction  and  privilege  of  Judah  was  this :  from  this  tribe 
BPBANa  THE  Messiah.  Jcsus,  the  Son  of  David,  was  a  descendant  from  Judah.  This 
was  the  true  "Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah." 

Practioal  lessons.  1.  Mark  the  hand  of  God  in  family  history.  Providence 
raises  up  one  house  and  sets  down  another.  Families  are  sometimes  selected  to  fulfil 
high  purposes ;  and  when  they  are  found  faithful  to  their  vocation  honour  is  put  upon 
them  by  him  who  says,  "  Them  that  honour  mo  I  will  honour."  2.  Remember  your 
accountability  to  God  for  family  advantages.  If  God  has  given  much,  he  will  require 
the  more, — T. 

Vers.  18 — 22. —  Victon  and  vanquished.  The  two  tribes  and  a  half  who  occupied 
the  province  east  of  the  Jordan  were  naturally  regarded  with  hostility  or  jealousy  by 
their  Arab  neighbours.  Conflicts  arose,  having  reference  especially  to  the  possession  of 
the  rich  pasture-lands.  In  the  time  of  Saul,  and  apparently  under  a  later  king,  there 
was  war  between  the  trans-Jordanic  tribes  and  the  Hagarites,  an  Ishmaelitish  race. 
These  verses  record  the  war  and  its  result,  namely,  the  defeat  of  the  Hagarites  and 
the  possession  of  the  land  by  the  Israelites  until  the  time  of  the  Captivity.    Observe — 

I.  The  INSTRUMENTALITY  OF  THE  VICTORY.  The  warriors  engaged  on  behalf  of 
Israel  were  numerous,  amounting  to  forty >four  thousand  men.  They  were  not  only 
numerous,  but  valiaut,  well  armed,  and  trained  to  fight. 

IL  The  explanation  of  victory.  The  chronicler  gives  this  account  of  the  matter: 
"  The  war  was  of  God ; "  **  They  cried  to  God  in  the  battle,  and  he  was  entreated  of 
them.**  All  strength  and  valour  are  from  God,  and  in  this  respect  we  are  justified  in 
ascribing  victory  unto  him.  It  is  not,  however,  every  just  cause  that  triumphs,  and 
defeat  is  sometimes  the  lot  of  the  innocent  and  those  who  contend  for  their  rights  and 
liberty.  It  is  a  consolation  to  know  that,  in  any  case,  what  happens  is  permitted  by 
Providence  and  is  overruled  by  Providence  for  good.  The  King  of  Sweden,  before  the 
great  battle  of  Lutzen,  prayed,  *' Jesus,  vouchsafe  this  day  to  be  my  strong  Helper,  and 
give  me  courage  to  fight  for  the  honour  of  thy  Name !  " 

III.  The  fruits  of  victory.  There  were  immediate  fruits  in  the  vast  spoil  and 
booty  taken  by  the  conquerors  (ver.  21),  and  abiding  fruits  in  the  lands  which  the 
tribes  won  and  possessed  and  inhabited  for  generations. 

Practical  lessons.  1.  Trace  the  hand  of  God  even  in  human  wars.  2.  Con- 
cerning wars  in  which  both  parties  profess  to  fight  for  justice,  let  nations  accustom 
themselves  deliberately  to  ask,  "Is  the  war  of  God ? "  If  men  would  be  guided  by 
the  answer  to  this  question,  many  wars  would  be  checked  and  prevented,  and  the 
blessings  of  peace  would  oftener  be  secured. — T. 

Vers.  25,  2Q,'^xidgment  and  retribution.  History  is  something  more  than  a  mere 
record  of  events.  Chronicles,  strictly  speaking,  are  the  materials  only  of  history.  But 
this  book  contains,  again  and  again,  the  Divine  philosophy  of  history.  It  exhibits  the 
action  of  the  moral,  the  righteous  Ruler  of  Israel  and  of  mankind.  In  the  history  of 
the  trans-Jordanic  tribes  wo  have  an  illustration  of  the  working  of  great  principles  of 
Divine  government. 

I.  The  occasion  and  reason  of  the  Divine  displeasure.  Surrounded  by  heathen, 
they  themselves  largely  lapsed  into  heathenism.  This  was  all  the  more  discreditable 
in  them  because  they  forsook  Jehovah,  the  God  of  their  fathers,  who  had  done  great 
things  for  their  nation,  and  because  they  attached  themselves  to  the  worship  of  the 
deities  of  the  very  people  over  whom  their  God  had  given  them  victory  and  rule. 
Accordingly  their  conduct  is  represented  as  spiritual  fornication,  or  adultery. 

II.  The  instruments  of  the  Divine  displeasure.    Under  Divine  pruvidcncey  Pul 


CH.V.  1— 26.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  TEIE  CHBONICLES.  75 

was  permitted  to  make  war  upon  the  idolatrous  tribes  and  lay  them  under  tribute, 
and  afterwards  Tilgath-pilneser  was  permitted  to  carry  the  people  away  captive  into 
Assyria.  God  always  has  instruments  to  effect  his  purposes;  even  Uie  wicked  are 
used  by  him  to  chasten  and  punish  the  disobedient  and  rebellious. 

III.  The  consequences  of  the  Divine  displeasure.  It  would  be  an  interesting 
subject  of  inquiry  why  GKxl  thus  chastened  his  chosen  people  again  and  again  by  way 
of  captivity.  This  we  know,  that  the  exile  in  the  East  was  the  means  of  confirming 
the  Hebrews  in  their  monotheism,  and  that  never  again  did  they  lapse  into  idolatry. 

Pbactical  lessons.  1.  As  to  sin,  we  are  taught  that  its  root,  its  essence,  is  in 
departing  from  Qtod.  2.  As  to  the  Divine  government,  wo  are  taught  that  God  "  will 
not  clear  the  guilty,"  and  that  "  the  way  of  transgressors  is  hard."  3.  And  we  have 
suggested  to  us  the  mercy  of  GKxl  in  his  provision  of  reconciliation  and  acceptance 
upon  repentance,  faith,  and  return  to  himself. — T. 

Vers.  1 — 17. — ITie  three  threads  of  destiny,  "  That  is  my  destiny  "  is  the  creed  of 
a  foolish  fatalism  or  else  the  half-hearted  excuse  of  a  soul  sadly  conscious  of  sin  and 
failure.  The  full  truth  respecting  a  man*s  or  a  nation's  destiny  is  that  it  depends  on 
three  factors— -circumstance,  the  Divine  will,  and  character.  This  is  well  illustrated  here. 

I.  CiRCUHSTANCE.  Mention  is  made  of  the  birthright  (ver.  1).  Usually  the  eldest  son 
enjoyed  this,  and,  with  this,  dominion  and  a  double  share  in  the  division  of  the  estate. 
Through  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  for  succeeding  generations,  the  authority  and  the  pos- 
sessions of  individual  men  depended  on  their  birth — whose  children  they  were  and 
whether  they  were  the  firstborn  or  not.  In  the  case  of  Joseph's  sons  (ver.  1),  Manasseh 
and  Ephraim  had  the  headship  of  a  most  powerful  tribe,  because  they  were  the  sons  of 
the  estimable  and  beloved  sons  of  Joseph.  "  The  sons  of  Reuben  *'  (ver.  3)  took  their 
share  of  honour  and  estate,  whatever  may  have  been  left  them  by  their  father,  etc. 
So  with  us  in  every  age  and  land.  What  our  fortune  and  future  will  be,  in  what  society 
we  shall  move,  what  consideration  we  shall  enjoy,  etc., — this  depends  largely  on  what 
men  call  *'  the  accident  of  birth,**  the  parentage  from  which  we  spring,  on  the  circum- 
stances in  which  we  enter  the  world  and  in  which  we  pass  our  earlier  years.  Circum- 
stance is  one  thread  of  destiny.  The  fact  is  a  reason  why  we  should  not  pride  ourselves 
on  our  good  position ;  also  why  we  should  not  despise  others  in  positions  much  lower 
than  our  own. 

II.  The  Divine  will.  **  Judah  prevailed  above  his  brethren,  and  of  him  came  the 
chief  ruler "  (ver.  2).  And  how  came  Judah  to  prevail  ?  Was  it  not  chiefly,  if  not 
wholly,  by  the  distinguishing  grace  of  God  ?  He  chose  David  to  be  the  ruler,  to  be 
King  of  Israel,  to  be  the  ancestor  of  the  Messiah  (see  Gren.  xlix.  8 ;  Judg.  1.  1,  2  ;  ch. 
xxviii.  4).  Our  heritage  here  is,  in  part,  chosen  for  us  of  God  (Ps.  xlvii.  4).  He 
determines  our  portion  by  (I)  the  mental  faculties  and  moral  dispositions  with  which 
he  endows  us ;  (2)  the  providential  openings  he  provides  for  us ;  (3)  the  direct  Divine 
promptings  with  which  he  inspires  us.  And  since  God  has  so  much  to  do  with  our 
fortunes  in  this  world,  we  should  (I)  be  humble  iu  prosperity ;  (2)  be  contented  in  low- 
liness ;  (3)  be  submissive  in  adversity. 

III.  Chabaoteb.  Reuben  might  have  had  a  far  more  honourable  and  influential 
position  than  he  and  his  posterity  enjoyed.  Circumstances  favoured  it;  God  would 
have  been  willing  to  sanction  it.  But  he  forfeited  it  by  his  sin  (ver.  1).  His  shameful 
incontinence  lowered  the  level  of  his  fortunes  and  of  those  of  his  children.  Had  he 
been  a  better  man  he  would  have  held  a  larger  share  of  prominence  and  power. 
Character  is  a  strong  thread  in  the  cord  of  human  destiny.  What  we  shall  be  in  the 
world,  to  what  we  shall  rise,  and  what  heritage  we  shall  leave  to  our  children, — all  this 
depends  in  very  large  part  indeed  on  the  character  we  form  in  youth ;  (1)  purity, 
(2)  sobriety,  (3^  honesty,  (4)  diligence,  (5)  sagacity,  (6)  courage,  (7)  civility  (pleasant- 
ness of  address), — these  are  the  constituents  of  success.  When  these  are  absent,  life 
must  be  a  failure ;  when  present,  it  is  almost  certain  to  be  a  success.  But  there  is  one 
thing  not  to  be  overlooked,  viz.  that  we  may  make  sure  and  must  make  sure  of  the 
destiny  of  the  good  and  holy — "  the  heritage  of  them  that  fear  God's  Name."  Apart 
from  this,  success  is  short-lived  and  superficial.  With  this,  temporal  misfortunes  may 
be  calmly  borne,  for  beyond  is  an  everlasting  portion  which  will  make  these  soon  to  be 
forgotten. — C, 


76  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,      [cil  v.  1— 26. 


Vers.  18 — 26. — Devotiorif  declension^  and  doom.  In  this  brief  story  we  have  a  pain- 
fully characteristic  piece  of  human  history — first,  spiritual  soundness  ;  then  consequent 
prosperity ;  then  laxity  and  sin ;  then  punishment  and  disaster.     We  trace  the  steps. 

L  A  COMMENCEMENT  IN  MORAL  AND  SPIRITUAL  SOUNDNESS.  These  two  tribes  and  a 
half  were  bravo  and  godly  men :  "  valiant  men  "  (ver.  18) ;  godly  men  also,  for  they 
•'  cried  to  God  in  the  battle,  and  •  •  •  they  put  their  trust  in  him  "  (ver.  20) ;  and  it  is 
clear  that  they  were  acting  so  much  under  the  direction  and  in  the  service  of  Jehovah 
that  it  could  be  said  of  their  struggle  **  the  war  was  of  God  "  (ver.  22).  It  is  possible 
that  a  war  of  the  same  kind,  a  struggle  between  contending  armies,  may  now  be  '*  of 
GKxl,"  and  that  godly  soldiers  may  cry,  with  genuine  and  acceptable  devotion,  for  Divine 
succour.  But  such  engagements  are  rare.  The  illustration  of  this  truth  is  found  now 
in  other  fields :  (1)  in  the  battle  of  life ;  (2)  in  the  struggle  against  particular  evils, 
such  as  drunkenness,  impurity,  etc. ;  (3)  in  the  great  missionary  campaign.  Here  are 
three  principal  virtues  in  all  moral  and  spiritual  warfare — valour  (ver.  18),  prayer 
(ver.  20),  and  trust  in  his  Word  (ver.  20). 

II.  Consequent  success  at  the  hand  op  God.  "  They  were  helped  against  them, 
and  the  Hagarites  were  delivered  into  their  hand,"  etc.  (ver.  20).  Beside  the  security 
and  joy  of  victory  came  possessions  (ver.  21)  and  a  home  (vers.  22,  23).  Those  who, 
in  the  battles  they  fight  under  God,  strive  in  accordance  with  his  will,  manfully, 
prayerfully,  and  expectantly,  will  certainly  be  rewarded  with  (1)  tiie  joy  of  victory,  (2) 
increase  of  power  and  spiritual  wealth,  and  (3)  the  approval  and  reward  of  the  Divine 
Captain.    Too  often — alas  for  human  infirmity ! — comes — 

III.  Spiritual  declension.  "  They  transgressed  against  the  God  of  their  fathers," 
etc.  Tver.  25).  Their  comfortable  prosperity  led  to  free  intercourse  with  ungodly 
neighbours,  and  this  to  laxity  of  thought  and  word,  and  this,  ultimately,  to  defection 
and  rank  disobedience.  So  is  it  only  too  often  in  the  history  of  men,  of  Churches,  of 
nations.  Their  early  piety  leads  to  an  enjoyable  prosperity ;  this  leads  to  intimate 
association  and  intercourse  with  those  less  devout  and  pure ;  and  this  to  contamination 
and  corruption.  It  is  the  course  which  humanity  has  taken  in  every  dispensation,  in 
every  land,  in  every  Church ;  not  necessarily,  but  with  a  lamentable  frequency.  So 
common  is  the  case  that  all  prosperous  piety  may  well  hear  a  loud  voice  bidding  it 
Beware  I  Spiritual  declension  is  unperccived  in  its  beginning  ;  spreads  through  the 
soul — through  the  ranks — with  perilous  subtlety  ;  grows  with  gathering  rapidity ;  is 
increasingly  hard  to  overcome ;  is  fatal  in  its  final  issues.    It  leads  to — 

IV.  A  miserable  DOOM.  It  ended,  in  the  case  of  these  Israelites,  in  defeat  and  exile 
—in  national  destruction  (ver.  26).  It  ends,  with  us :  1.  In  utter  defeat  and  failure ;  so 
that  the  purpose  of  our  life,  whether  individual  or  collective,  is  wholly  thwarted.  2. 
In  spiritual  exile ;  in  disastrous  separation  from  God.  He  is  no  longer  with  us  as  he 
once  was ;  he  is  no  longer  in  us.  We  live  apart  from  him  in  a  far  country.  3.  In 
saddest  disappointment.  The  Master  is  grieved  that  his  Church  (his  disciple)  has 
fallen  from  its  (his)  high  estate ;  the  good  and  wise  grieve  over  one  more  deplorable 
defection. — C. 

Vers.  1 — S,-~Beuhen.  Reuben  was  the  eldest  son  of  Jacob.  The  birthright  which 
was  his,  included  dominion  and  a  double  portion;  both  of  these  were  forfeited  by 
sin  (see  Gen.  xlix.  3,  4)  and  were  transferred  to  Joseph.  But  as  Joseph's  posterity 
was  not  mentioned  first,  the  historian  explains  by  saying  that  the  genealo^i^y  was 
not  to  be  reckoned  by  birthright,  as  the  sui)erior  honour  and  privilege  had  been  pre- 
viously conferred  on  Judah.  This  tribe  had  the  pre-eminence  over  all  the  tribes,  not  on 
account  of  Judah  himself,  but  because  Christ,  "the  chief  Kuler"  (see  ver.  2),  was  to 
come  out  of  it.  Reuben's  sin  comes  in  here  as  a  parenthesis.  God  will  brand  sin 
wherever  lie  sees  it.  It  is  no  trifle  with  him,  nor  does  he  ever  forget  it.  Only  one  thing 
can  blot  it  out — the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  We  may  forget  it,  but  he  will  make  it  to  come 
in  as  sl  parenthesis  in  our  own  life  or  in  that  of  our  posterity,  that  we  may  learn  what 
an  evil  and  bitter  thing  it  is,  and  that  he  will  not  trifle  with  it.  But  these  fruits  of 
sin,  these  parentheses,  how  they  come  in  ages  after,  marring  the  brightest  escutcheon, 
hindering  our  blessing,  and  tarnishing  God's  glory  I  The  curse  of  our  crime  is  handed 
down  through  generations,  and  the  innocent  child  is  humiliated  and  thrown  back  and 
its  fairest  prospects  blighted*    Again  we  have  Christ  brought  before  us,  at  the  opening 


cii.  V.  1— 2G.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  77 


of  this  chapter,  in  the  prominence  given  to  the  tribe  of  Judah.  The  natural  birthright 
is  set  aside.  It  is  so  always.  Nature's  order  is  reversed  in  the  kingdom  of  Gk)d» 
"  The  last  shall  be  firsthand  the  first  shall  be  last."  This  is  the  law  of  God's  kingdom. 
Man's  rejected  is  GKxi's  chosen.  Grace,  and  not  nature,  takes  the  lead.  Little  did 
Keuben's  posterity  judge  of  the  chief  reason  why  he  was  set  aside.  Little  did  Judah'a 
posterity  know  the  cAti^  reason  for  his  pre-eminence.  God  was  putting  down  one  and 
raising  up  another  with  reference  to  the  future  manifestation  and  glory  of  his  dear  Son. 
To  human  eye  this  did  not  appear.  Thus  was  God  working  behind  the  scenes,  working 
out  the  counsels  of  his  own  will,  and  all  with  a  view  to  the  glory  of  Christ  So  it  is 
now.  We  see  the  sin  of  man  as  in  Reuben ;  we  see  the  counterworking  of  Satan,  crossing, 
to  all  human  appearance,  the  purposes  of  G^d ;  but  behind  all  God  is  working.  God 
is  raising  up  one  and  putting  down  another,  and  all  with  reference  to  the  advancement 
of  the  kingdom  and  glory  of  his  dear  Son.  It  does  not  appear  so  to  our  short-sighted 
judgment,  but  we  are  no  judges  of  God's  ways  and  thoughts :  *'  His  ways  are  not  our 
ways,  nor  his  thoughts  our  thoughts."  Behind  every  little  event  in  your  daily  life  God 
is  working.  And  he  is  never  more  really  carrying  out  his  purposes  of  wisdom  and  grace 
and  love  than  when  those  events  seem  to  run  counter  to  this  end.  Judge  of  God's  ways 
hy  the  opposite.    The  more  apparently  opposed  the  more  really  he  is  there. — W. 

Vers.  18-^24. — Reuben,  Gad,  and  Manasseh:  their  valour.  We  have  first  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  men  brought  before  us.  They  were  "  valiant  men,  men  able  to  bear  buckler 
and  sword,  and  to  shoot  with  bow,  and  skilful  in  war."  Such  are  God's  children  to  be 
at  all  times.  They  are  not  to  rest  in  their  Christianity,  not  to  sit  down  and  fold  their 
hands  because  they  are  saved.  No ;  they  are  to  *'  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,"  to  *'  war 
a  good  warfare,"  to  "  put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,"  to  be  "  good  soldiers  of  Jesus 
Christ."  In  order  to  be  "  good  soldiers  "  they  must  be  "  valiant "  for  the  truth ;  they 
must  be  "  able  "  men,  endued  with  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  must  be  men 
able  to  bear  "  buckler  and  sword,  and  to  shoot  with  bow,  and  skilful  in  war."  They 
must  be  men  trained  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  men  *'  able  "  to  use  all  the  spiritual  weapons 
of  truth  in  the  armoury  of  Grod.  They  must  be  **  able  to  shoot  with  bow  " — to  send  home 
some  pointed  arrow  of  truth  to  some  heart  and  conscience  by  word  and  by  deed.  They 
must  be  **  able  to  bear  the  sword  " — to  use  the  Word  of  Gt)d,  the  "  sword  of  the  Spirit," 
with  power.  So  that  the  "  sword  "  and  the  "  bow  "  may  be  said  to  take  in  the  near  and 
the  distant — the  "  sword  "  the  hand-to-hand  conflict ;  the  bow  the  distant  weapon,  the 
arrow  well  aimed.  The  different  aspects  of  truth,  the  difiercnt  ways  of  using  it,  the 
different  attitudes  which  the  Christian  is  to  take  with  regard  to  the  enemy, — these 
are  the  points  of  instruction  shadowed  forth  by  this  variety  of  weapon.  He  is  to 
be  taught  of  God's  Spirit,  disciplined  by  prayer,  by  meditation,  by  the  reading  of  the 
Word,  by  dependence  on  God,  yea,  and  by  his  own  defeats  and  failures,  his  sorrows 
and  sins,  so  as  to  be  ^^  skilful  in  war."  And  observe  that  this  spiritual  warfare 
is  to  be  no  mere  Accw^-knowledge,  no  mere  talk,  no  hollow  profession.  It  is  a  real 
thing.  Mark  it  here — "they  went  out  to  the  war;"  "  they  made  war;"  "they  were 
helped  against "  the  enemy  in  the  war ;  they  conquered  in  the  war  (vers.  18 — 20). 
Here  are  the  four  stages  of  Christian  warfare  in  all  its  reality — they  "  went  out ; "  they 
"  made ; "  they  were  "  helped ; "  they  conquered.  And  why  did  they  conquer?  What 
was  the  secret  of  their  victory  ?  Was  it  their  "  valour,"  their  "  sword,"  their  *'  bow," 
their  "buckler,"  their  "skill"?  Ah,  no  I  All  would  have  been  in  vain  if  it  had 
depended  on  these.  "  The  Hagarites  were  delivered  into  their  hand, . . .  for  they  cried 
to  Ood  in  the  battle,**  "  Except  the  Lord  keep  the  city,  the  watchman  waketh  but  in 
vain."  "  If  it  had  not  been  the  Lord  who  was  on  our  side,  now  may  Israel  say ;  if  it 
had  not  been  the  Lord  who  was  on  our  side,  when  men  rose  up  against  us :  then  they  had 
swallowed  us  up  quick,  when  their  wrath  was  kindled  against  us :  then  the  waters  had 
overwhelmed  us,  the  stream  had  gone  over  our  soul :  then  the  proud  waters  had  gone 
over  our  soul.  Blessed  be  the  Lord,  who  hath  not  given  us  as  a  prey  to  their  teeth  "  (Ps. 
cxxiv.  1 — 6).  Nor  were  the  Reubenites  conquerors  only.  "  They  took  away  their  cattle ; 
of  their  camels  fifty  thousand,  and  of  sheep  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand,  and  of  asses 
two  thousarid,  of  men  an  hundred  thousand/*  What  a  victory,  and  what  abundance  of 
spoil  I  Yes ;  the  Lord's  battles  are  always  sure  things— sure  victory  and  sure  spoil. 
He  giveth  great  victory ;  he  enables  us  to  carry  away  rich  blessings  from  the  spiritual 


78  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.       [ch.  v.  1— 26 

conflict.  It  is  no  mere  winning  with  the  Christian.  It  is  a  glorious  warfare  and  an 
equally  glorious  victory.  **  In  all  these  things,"  says  the  apostle,  "we  are  more  than 
conquerors  through  him  that  loved  us."  We  do  indeed  "war  a  good  warfare."  There 
are  "Hagarites"  all  round  you  and  within  you.  Be  "skilful  in  war:"  gird  the 
"  buckler,"  the  "  bow,"  and  the  "  sword  "  of  truth  close  to  your  souls.  "  Oo  out  to 
the  war;"  ''make  war."  "Cry  to  God"  in  the  battle.  "Put  your  trust  in  him." 
"  Your  labour  in  the  Lord  is  not  in  vain."  So  shall  you  be  a  conqueror ;  so  shall  you 
carry  away  great  spoil ;  so  shall  "  many  fall  down  slain  "  by  you.  Be  a  "  valiant  '* 
man ;  so  shall  you  be  "  more  than  conqueror "  in  everything  that  is  against  you. 
And  remember,  it  is  not  your  battle,  but  God's.  Mark  what  is  said :  "  There  fell  down 
many  slain,  because  the  war  was  of  OodJ'*  Yes ;  the  war  is  of  God.  He  cannot  look 
upon  sin.  He  has  no  part  in  this  world.  It  is  all  in  spirit  contrary  to  him.  He 
would  have  you  not  "conformed"  to  it  but  " ^ansformcd."  "  This  is  not  your  rest. 
Arise  ye,  and  depart."  He  has  better  things  in  store  for  you.  Everything  here  is  too 
poor  for  the  King's  sons.  You  are  waiting  lor  the  gold  and  the  jewels  and  the  crowns 
of  the  celestial  city.  "  Arise  ye,  and  depart."  This  war,  this  discipline,  this  struorglo 
with  sin,  those  defeats,  those  humiliations,  those  hot  scalding  tears,  those  bleeding 
hearts,  those  mysteries  and  baffling  enigmas  making  you  cry  out,  "  What  does  it  all 
mean?" — it  is  all  of  God.  This  warfare  is  fitting  you  for  the  glory.  It  is  making 
you  to  know  yourself  and  to  know  Jesus.  It  is  brightening  your  crown  ;  it  is  tuning 
your  golden  harp ;  it  is  weaving  your  starlit  diadem.  Yes ;  "  the  war  is  of  God." 
Oh,  if  you  could  only  see  it  I  If  you  could  only  look  at  \t,just  for  a  moment,  from 
yonder  height  of  glory,  how  it  would  all  seem  right  then  1  If  you  could  only  look  at 
it  through  the  tearless  eye,  up  on  the  height,  out  of  the  smoke  and  din  and  roar  of 
the  battle  in  the  plain,  how  it  would  all  be  right !  Yes ;  "  the  war  is  of  God."  Then 
war  a  good  warfare.  The  Captain  of  your  salvation  will  soon  be  here  to  reward  you 
with  the  crown.  "  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life." 
Mark  the  elements  of  this  great  victory  :  "  They  cried  to  God  in  the  battle,  and  he 
was  entreated  of  them  ;  because  they  put  their  trust  iu  him."  "  When  Moses  held 
up  his  hand,  .  .  .  Israel  prevailed."  So  here.  Not  prayer  without  trust — that  is 
unbelief.  Not  trust  without  prayer — that  is  presumption.  Prayer  and  trust — that 
is  victory. — W. 

Vers.  25,  2G. — Peuhen's/all.  We  now  come  to  the/a7Z  of  the  very  people  who,  only 
a  few  verses  before,  had  been  so  conspicuous  for  prayer  and  faith  and  victory.  And 
what  was  the  cause  of  it?  "They  went  a-whoring  after  the  gods  of  the  people  of  the 
land.**  The  world  around;  the  pleasure-seeking,  self-seeking  world;  the  attractive, 
smiling,  seducing  world  ; — this  drew  them  aside,  this  stole  their  hearts  from  God.  What 
the  Hagarites  had  failed  to  do,  the  "  gods  of  the  people  of  the  land  "  did.  Satan  comes 
to  God's  people  in  one  of  two  forms — either  as  a  "  roaring  lion  "  or  as  an  "  angel  of 
light"  Where  he  cannot  succeed  in  one  way  he  will  try  the  other.  He  came  as  a 
" roaring  lion  "  in  the  form  of  the  "Hagarites,"  but  he  failed.  Ho  then  came  as  an 
"  angel  of  light "  in  the  "  gods  of  the  people  of  the  land ;  "  thus  they  felL  It  is  the  same 
always.  Behold  it  in  the  case  of  good  King  Hezekiah.  Satan  tried  him  as  a  "  roaring 
lion"  in  the  person  of  Sennacherib  and  his  threatening  letter.  Hezekiah  threw  him- 
self on  God,  and  triumphed.  Satan  next  came  as  an  "  angel  of  light "  in  the  form  of 
the  "letters  and  &  present  from  Merodach-baladan,  King  of  Babylon."  Hezekiah  saw 
not  the  hook  beneath  the  gilded  bait ;  thus  he  fell  (Isa.  xxxix.  I).  And  what  is  the 
commentary  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  this  ?  "  Howbeit  in  the  business  of  the  ambassa- 
dors of  the  princes  of  Babylon,  who  sent  unto  him  to  inquire  of  the  wonder  that  was 
done  in  the  land,  Ood  left  him,  to  try  him.**  Why  ?  Only  in  mercy  and  love,  "  that  he 
might  know  all  that  was  in  his  heart"  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  31).  Ah!  when  God  leaves  a 
man,  even  for  a  moment,  there  is  no  foreseeing  to  what  a  depth  he  will  fall.  "  God  left 
him  " — solemn  words ! — "  that  he  might  know  all  that  was  in  his  heart."  How 
little  we  know  what  a  serpent-coil  of  evil  is  hidden  in  our  hearts  1  "  He  that  trustcth 
in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool."  "Out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts,  murders, 
adulteries,"  etc.  What  a  filthy  stream!  Who  would  trust  it?  Who  would  look  into 
it  for  good  ?  None  but  the  fool.  Trust  only  Jesus.  Trust  a  Saviour's  promice,  a 
Saviour's  love,  a  Saviour's  power,  but  never  trust  your  heart.    Christian  reader,  learn 


CH.  V.  1—26.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  79 


the  lessoD.  And  where  are  these  people  of  Grod  seen  next?  "And  the  God  of  Israel 
stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Pul  King  of  Assyria,  and  the  spirit  of  Tilgath-pilneser  Kins 
of  Assyria,  and  he  carried  them  away,  even  the  Reubenites,  and  the  Gadites,  and 
the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh,  and  brought  them  unto  Halah,  and  Habor,  and  Hara,  and 
to  the  river  Gozan,  unto  this  day."  Gk)d  will  chastise.  His  people  must  know  the 
bitterness  of  their  sin.  And  what  strange  places  the  sins  of  Gk)d  s  people  have  brought 
them  into  1  Some  have  gone  back  into  the  world ;  some  are  seen  walkmg  no  more  with 
Jesus;  some  are  buried  in  dififerent  forms  of  error;  some  are  seen  hankering  after 
the  world  and  its  vanities  with  a  fervour  and  anxiety  of  which  the  world  itself  would 
be  ashamed;  some  are  seen  with  marks  and  shadows  in  their  Christian  character, 
that  have  proved  and  are  proving  a  sad  stumbling-block  to  others.  Yes;  these  are 
"  Halah  "  and  "  Habor "  and  "  Hara,"  into  which  their  great  enemy  has  brought 
them.  They  have  been  "carried  away.**  And  what  has  done  it?  Let  the  prophet 
answer :  "  But  we  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing,  and  all  our  righteousnesses  are  as  filthy 
rags :  and  we  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf ;  and  our  iniquities,  like  the  wind,  have  taken  tis 
auxiy"  Christian  reader,  learn  the  solemn  lesson.  Know  your  heart,  but  only  to  disr 
trust  it.    Trust  only  in  Jesus.    Abide  in  him.    Only  thus  can  you  be  safe. — W* 

Ver.  1. — Instability.  For  the  earlier  references  to  Keuben,  see  Gen.  xxix.  32 ;  xxxv. 
22 ;  xlix.  3,  4 ;  com  p.  xlviii.  15,  22.  'i'he  joy  Leah  felt  at  Reuben's  birth  was  not 
maintained  as  his  character  and  disposition  unfolded.  The  weakness  of  his  character 
is  fixed  in  a  sentence  by  his  father,  "Unstable  as  water,  thou  shalt  not  excel." 
Evidently  the  one  act  of  sin  to  which  Jacob  referred  in  illustration  did  but  seal  the 
impression  which  Jacob  previously  had  of  his  firstborn  son.  This  subject  may  be 
efifectivcly  introduced  by  a  picture  of  the  aged  Jacob  spending  his  failing  strength  in 
prophetic  messages  to  his  children.  These  were  evidently  based  on  paternal  observa- 
tion of  their  characteristic  qualities,  but  they  involve  the  seer^s  power  to  discern  how 
those  qualities  affect  the  future  developments  of  each  tribe.  Compare  Moses'  prophecy 
concerning  Reuben  (Deut  xxxiii.  6).  The  figure  of  the  water  (unstable  as  water)  is 
that  of  water  boiling  over,  or  swelling  in  flood,  or  driven  up  in  storm ;  and  includes 
sudden  passion,  violent  impulses,  lack  of  self-restraint,  as  well  as  uncertainty,  unsteadi- 
ness. The  general  lessons  to  be  learned  from  this  recalling  of  Beuben  to  mind  may  be 
thus  set  forth. 

I.  Each  van  has  his  fbovidenttal  place.  It  is  by  no  accident  that  men  have 
their  places  in  families  as  firstborn  or  younger  sons,  or  that  they  belong  to  families  of 
particular  rank  and  class.  These  are  all  in  the  Divine  arrangement.  They  fit  into  the 
precise  endowments  and  possibilities  of  the  individual,  and  the  Divine  method  of  his 
testing  and  culture  by  trial.  Reuben  was  the  firstborn,  and  in  the  faithful  keeping  of 
that  place  lay  all  the  noble  possibilities  of  his  life.  A  man  may  come  to  occupy  other 
places,  and  after  failure  may  recover  position  and  influence  to  some  extent ;  but  it 
should  ever  be  deeply  impressed  upon  us  that  our  highest  hopes  and  best  possibilities 
of  service  to  God  and  to  our  race  must  always  depend  on  our  recognizing,  keeping,  and 
worthily  filling,  our  providenticU  place, 

IL  Keeping  the  providential  place  depends  on  chabacter,  not  circumstancb. 
Illustrate  that  the  firstborn  of  a  family  often  loses  his  place,  and  one  of  the  younger 
members  becomes  practically  the  family  head,  the  one  on  whom  all  depend.  This  may 
occur  through  such  circumstances  as  the  removal  of  the  firstborn  to  a  distance,  but 
more  often  it  is  due  to  failure  in  the  unfolding  of  character.  Time  shows  that  the 
firstborn  cannot  be  relied  on,  cannot  carry  the  family  burden  or  help  to  realize  the 
family  hope.  So,  apart  from  all  the  plottings  of  Jacob,  Esau,  by  reason  of  failure  in 
character,  failed  from  the  family  headship ;  and  Reuben  proves  himself  unfitted  by  his 
untamed  impulsiveness  for  the  place  of  influence  and  authority.  The  birthright  is  not 
taken  away  from  a  man,  but  the  man  loses  it  himself,  or  the  providential  workings  shift 
all  the  honour  and  responsibility  and  dignity  of  it  on  to  the  worthy  shoulders.  It  is 
lately  true  that  a  man  wins  and  keeps  what  he  deserves, 

III.  The  one  thing  that  makes  men  miss  opportunitt  and  place  is  instadilitt. 
lliey  cannot  be  "  steadfast,  unmovdble."  So  much  of  men's  failure  is  not  open  and 
manifest  wrong.  Some  of  the  saddest  failures  in  life  are  of  men  who  are  morally  good, 
but  weak ;  men  who  cannot  reach  "  patient  continuance  in  well-doing."    The  Apostle 


80  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,      [ch.  v.  1—26. 


James  deals  vigorously  with  this  kind  of  failure,  using  the  illustration  of  "water"  or 
the  "  sea-wave  "  (Jas.  i.  6 — 8).  Instability  may  take  a  milder  form,  as  "  uncertainty," 
"  inability  to  decide,"  "  wavering ; "  or  an  intenser  form,  as  is  illustrated  in  Reuben  : 
then  it  is  "  unchecked  impulse,"  **  tendency  to  passion,"  "  failure  to  restrain  one's  self 
by  righteous  principle."  But  each  form  of  the  evil  suffices  to  lose  a  man  his  place. 
Compare  the  Evangelist  Mark.  "  Not  one  great  action,  not  one  judge,  prophet,  or 
leader,  from  the  tribe  of  Reuben  is  ever  mentioned  in  history." 

IV.  Exactly  what  Christian  prixciple  does  for  men  is  to  give  them  strength 
AND  continuance.  Its  work  is  to  give  the  soul  rootage,  as  it  were,  in  God,  so  that  the 
growth  may  be  steadily  upward  and  outward.  It  finds  a  foundation  on  which  the 
whole  building  of  character,  fitly  framed  together,  may  grow  into  a  holy  temple.  Its 
message  is,  "  Be  ye  steadfast,  unraovablc,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  xv.  58)  ;  and  its  models  are  the 
heroic  martyrs  who,  strong  in  God,  stand  fast,  and,  having  done  all,  stand. — R.  T. 

Ver.  2. — Birthrights  and  supremacies,  A  significant  fact  of  the  early  history  of  the 
patriarchs  is  here  brought  to  remembrance.  It  is  one  so  curious  as  to  carry  suggestions 
and  lessons  for  all  the  ages,  and  so  is  recorded  for  our  instruction.  By  providential 
arrangement  the  tribal  birthright  was  Reuben's ;  he,  however,  lost  it  through  his  wrong- 
doing, and  his  father  shifted  it  from  the  eldest  son  of  his  first  wife  to  the  eldest  son  of 
his  second  but  really  his  own  chosen  wife — from  Reuben  to  Joseph.  Man's  adjust* 
ments  of  the  Divine  order  are  not  always  sealed  by  Gtxi.  Jacob's  were  not  in  this  case. 
As  the  years  passed  on,  Judah  came  to  the  front,  ultimately  gained  the  sovereignty,  and 
from  this  tribe  came  the  permanent  Davidic  dynasty.  Joseph,  represented  by  the  tribe 
of  Ephraim,  struggled,  a<!e  after  age,  to  keep  the  birthright  place,  but  in  vain  ;  and  in 
the  conflict  of  the  two  tribes  we  may  find  illustration  of  the  hopelessness  of  pressing 
mere  human  adjustments  against  the  provi«lential  order.  Neither  the  individual  nor 
the  community  may  ever  hope  to  "  re^iist  God  and  prosper."  It  is  ever  ill  work  *•  run- 
ning upon  the  bosses  of  Jehovah's  buckler." 

I.  Man  cannot  readjust  the  Divine  order.  Yet  that  is  exactly  what  we,  in  our 
self-will,  are  ever  striving  to  do.  Even  when  we  know  what  is  God's  will,  we  try  to 
get  it  twisted  about  so  that  it  may  at  least  seem  to  conform  to  our  will.  This  is  a  very 
common  but  very  subtle  form  of  Christian  error  and  sin.  We  know  what  we  wish  or 
want,  so  we  deceive  ourselves  into  the  idea  that  this  is  what  God  wishes  or  wants  for 
us,  and  fail  in  that  simple  openness  to  Divine  lead  which  is  the  right  spirit  to  cherish. 
Scripture  illustrations  may  be  found  in  Rebekah,  whose  will  was  to  gain  the  birthright 
and  blessing  for  her  favourite  son,  so  she  took  the  Divine  order  into  her  own  adjustment, 
and  won  those  things  for  him  by  deceptions  which,  very  properly,  brought  heavy  penal- 
ties on  her  and  on  him.  Or  in  Balaam,  who  professed  to  do  exactly  what  God  wished 
him  to  do,  and  yet  evidently  did  what  he  himself  planned  to  do,  forcing  from  God  that 
fatal  "  Go."  Or  in  Saul,  who  could  not  simply  wait  God's  time  and  the  arrival  of  his 
prophet,  but,  arranging  the  Divine  order  according  to  his  own  self-will,  must  himself 
cflfer  the  sacrifice.  The  forms  in  which  nowadays  men  take  the  ordering  of  their  lives 
into  their  own  hands  may  be  illustrated,  and,  as  a  contrast,  mention  may  be  made  of 
David,  who,  though  tempted  to  slay  King  Saul,  would  not  interfere  with  the  Divine 
order,  though  he  might  easily  have  seemed  to  himself  to  have  been  only  fulfilling  the 
Divine  promise.     We  must  wait  for  God  as  well  as  on  him. 

II.  Man  finds  his  true  good  in  following  the  Divine  order.  Not  in  the 
helplessly  passive  way  of  poor  aged  Eli,  but  in  an  active  and  loyal  way,  we  may  say, 
"It  is  the  Lord;  let  him  do  what  seemeth  him  good."  Keble  expresses  the  right 
state  of  mind  for  the  child  of  Grod,  in  his  picture  of  the  man  sanctified  by  afi^iction, 
**  wishing,  no  longer  struggling,  to  be  free."  The  Divine  order  for  our  life  may  differ 
wholly  from  the  order  of  our  own  plannings.  It  may  even  seem  to  flesh  and  blood 
painful  and  humiliating.  Still  let  life  unfold,  and  it  proves  the  way  of  best  blessing  for 
us  and  for  others  ihrough  us.  Let  eternity  unfold,  and  we  sing  through  all  the  ages  of 
the  "  good  way  wherein  the  Lord  our  God  led  us."  David  shows  us  the  attitude  to 
which  the  Divine  order  is  revealed.  "The  meek  will  he  guide  in  judgment,  and  the 
meek  will  he  teach  his  way." 

III.  Following  the  Divine  order  mat  lead  a  man  to  higher  things  than 
bib  birth  promised.    Illustrate  from  Judah,  and  from  cases  of  men  born  in  the  dis- 


OH.  V.  1—26.]      THE   FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  81 

abilities  of  poverty,  or  of  the  weakness  of  hereditary  disease,  who  have  been  led  in 
6od*8  providence  to  high  place,  powers,  and  usefulness.  Let  us  find  our  faculty  and 
endowment.  It  is  the  key  to  God's  purpose  in  our  life ;  let  us  develop  it.  Life  will 
then  bring  to  us  its  best.  Let  us  but  follow  on  alone  the  line  of  our  Divine  endow- 
ment, and  even  the  **  least  may  become  the  first.'' — B.  T. 

Vers.  18 — 22. — Man's  power  and  OocPapower  %n  war.  It  was  a  characteristic  feature 
of  Jewish  thought,  and  it  was  a  fitting  expression  of  the  theocratic  principle,  that  Qod 
was  recognized  as  directly  concerned  in  and  related  to  every  event,  and  in  such  a  way 
as  made  him,  in  a  very  real  and  deep  sense,  the  cause  of  the  event.    The  observation  of 
this  peculiarity  is  necessary  to  the  understanding  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  and 
it  alone  explains  some  of  the  Scripture  difficulties,  especially  those  which  seem  to 
assert  that  GKxl  is  the  author  of  evil,  that  he  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart,  sent  an  evil 
spirit  to  Saul,  and  a  lying  spirit  into  the  prophets,  etc.    Still,  admitting  this  general 
feature,  there  appears  to  be  an  unusual  positiveness  and  strength  about  the  assertions  in 
this  passage,  that  "  the  war  was  of  God ; "  that  "  they  cried  to  God  in  the  battle,  and 
he  was  entreated  of  them ;  because  they  put  their  trust  in  him."    Probably  the  his- 
torical reference  is  to  the  *'  great  war  in  the  time  of  Saul  between  the  trans-Jordanic 
Israelites  and  the  Hagarenes,  who  then  occupied  the  rich  tract  north  and  north-east  of 
Gilead,  known  as  the  Eauran  at  the  present  day."    A  study  of  the  map  will  impress 
the  importance  of  the  subjection  of  this  district  to  the  security  of  the  trans-Jordanic 
tribes.    The  Hagarenes  were  "  noted  for  their  thievish  habits,  and  were  regarded  as 
savage  and  warlike."    We  note,  from  these  verses,  that  the  difficulty  of  putting  rightly 
together  man's  working  and  OotPs  strengthening  finds  constant  and  ever-varied  illus- 
tration in  Holy  Scripture,  coming  up  to  view  in  very  unlikely  places.     Here  the 
instance  is  a  striking  one,  because,  in  the  common  and  less  thoughtful  estimate  of  men, 
ivar  is  precisely  the  thing  in  which  Grod  is  not  wanted ;  in  which  the  whole  foreground 
is  occupied  with  man's  armies,  man's  weapons,  man's  skill,  and  man's  energies,  and 
there  is  plainly  no  room  for  God.    The  instance  is  an  impressive  one,  because  in  such 
unusual  circumstances  we  are  called  to  learn  the  lesson  of  trust,  and  to  see  that  man 
only  achieves  a  true  success  when  he  is  strong  in  God,    Even  in  his  wars  man  should 
find  the  principle  working  that  is  so  skilfully  expressed  by  the  apostle  in  relation  to 
the  personal  life :  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling ;  for  it  is 
God  who  worketh  in  you  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure  "  (Phil.  ii.  12, 13 ;  see 
the  form  in  the  Revised  Version).    The  possibility  of  uniting  energy  and  trust  in  war- 
times may  be  illustrated  in  the  soldiers  of  Gustavus  Adolphus  and  of  Cromwell. 

L  Man's  own  work  ik  wab.  It  is  usually  entered  upon  for  reasons  of  state.  The 
times  bring  round  to  some  men  the  spirit  of  conquest.  Nations  undertake  wars  to 
secure  their  boundaries,  to  repress  the  encroachments  of  neighbours,  etc. ;  and  even  in 
sacred  wars,  such  as  the  Crusades,  the  real  object  is  the  securing  of  some  human 
sovereignty,  such  as  was  claimed  by  the  nope.  War  is  the  great  sphere  for  the  exercise 
of  man's  trained  physical  powers.  And  it  is  usual  for  success  in  war  to  follow  the 
greatest  army  and  the  hignest  efficiency.  So  it  is  of  all  human  things  the  most 
intensely  human, 

U.  Man's  tbubt  in  God  in  wab.  If  the  object  of  the  war  be  right,  man  need  never 
separate  Gk)d  from  it.  And,  to  impress  this.  Scripture  shows  us  GK)d  fighting  with  and 
by  means  of  armies ;  even  saying  distinctly,  "  the  war  was  of  Gk)d."  We  have  not  to 
decide  the  right  in  historical  cases,  which  demand  a  fuller  basis  of  judgment  and 
more  complete  knowledge  than  we  possess ;  but  we  must  decide  the  right  of  any  wars 
which  we  sanction,  and  only  when  assured  of  the  right  can  we  trust  God  for  success. 

III.  Goo's  wobk  thbouqh  xan  in  wab.  None  can  read  the  story  of  the  race 
without  seeing  that  Gbd  has  used  war  as  one  of  the  severer  agents  in  his  providential 
workings  for  the  sum  total  of  good.  And  no  man  can  read  aright  the  "  signs  of  his 
times  "  without  finding  God  in  battle-fields,  "  making  the  wrath  of  man  praise  him." 
Impress  for  all  right  spheres  of  human  life  the  practical  compatibility  of  trust  and 
<oi/.— R,  T. 

Ver.  25. — The  sin  ofiddairy  and  its  Judgments.  In  the  Divine  wisdom  it  had  been 
planned  that  the  idolatrous  Canaanites  should  be  wholly  dispossessedi  so  that  no  rem- 

L  CHB0NI0LE8.  O 


82  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  vi.  1—81. 

nants  of  the  race  should  exert  an  evil  influence  on  Gbd's  people  when  settled  in  their 
lands.  Such  a  plan  distinctly  intimates  the  Divine  sense  of  the  peril  in  which  the  con* 
tact  of  idolatry  would  place  an  unsophisticated  people.  And  such  the  Israelites  were, 
for  though  their  fathers  had  known  Egyptian  idolatry,  the  race  that  entered  Canaan 
had  been  entirely  isolated  in  the  desert  districts.  They  failed  to  carry  out  fully  the 
Divine  plan.  Some  of  the  Canaanites  were  left  unconquered  through  the  hurry  of  the 
tribes  to  locate  themselves  on  their  allotted  lands.  Some  were  left  because  the  people 
had  not  faith  in  God  enough  to  conquer  them.  And  these  remnants  became  a  snare 
and  a  trap  to  the  simple  people,  who  were  easily  fascinated  by  ceremonial  and  licence. 
We  learn — 

L  The  tekftatiok  of  idolatry.  From  the  standpoint  of  our  spiritual  Christianity, 
we  sometimes  wonder  how  any  one  can  be  attracted  by  the  helpless  and  often  hideous 
idols  of  heathen  nations,  or  deceived  by  the  claims  of  their  priests ;  and  yet  the  appeal 
of  idolatry  being  to  certain  marked  features  of  human  nature,  a  little  searching  might 
show  idolatry,  in  a  skilful  disguise,  even  imperilling  our  spiritual  Christianity,  and  it 
is  not  quite  certain  that  any  of  us  could  claim  the  right  to  "  cast  the  first  stone."  To 
what  in  man  does  idolatry  make  its  appeal  ?  1.  To  the  sensuous  element  We  want 
everything  brought  within  the  sphere  of  the  senses,  and  we  only  consider  that  we 
know  What  the  senses  can  apprehend.  So  it  is  ever  attractive  to  man  to  offer  him  his 
God  as  within  the  grasp  of  his  senses.  He  will  delude  himself  into  the  idea  that  the 
sense-form  only  helps  him  to  realize  the  spiritual  and  invisible  Being,  the  great  Spirit, 
but  almost  inevitably  the  seDse-hold  becomes  a  slavery,  and  the  thing  seen  is  accepted 
as  the  reality.  2.  To  the  cesthetic  element^  or  taste,  the  love  of  the  beautiful.  A 
spiritual  and  invisible  Grod  asks  from  his  creatures  a  spiritual  and  invisible  worship, 
with  a  material  expression  held  within  careful  limitations.  A  God  within  sense-limits 
only  asks  sense-service,  and  man  satisfies  himself  wijbh  making  it  ornate,  elaborate,  and 
the  perfection  of  taste,  according  to  the  sentiment  of  the  age.  Dlustrate  from  refined 
Greek  humanism.  3.  To  the  active  element.  Idolatry  has  something  for  its  votaries  to 
do,  many  prayers  to  say,  pilgrimages  to  take,  sacrifices  to  bring,  etc.,  good  works  by 
which  to  win  favour.  4.  To  the  sensual  element.  All  idolatrous  systems  are  more  or 
less  immoral,  and  give  licence  to  the  bodily  lusts  and  passions.  The  purity  of  the 
claims  of  spiritual  religion  constitute,  for  man  as  he  is,  one  of  its  chief  disabilities. 
Show  how  Canaanite  idolatry  illustrates  these,  in  its  influence  on  the  Israelites. 

II.  The  sin  of  idolatry.  Take  the  case  of  nations  outside  the  covenant ;  what  may 
be  known  of  God  by  them  declares  him  as  above  his  creation,  and  naturally  claiming 
first  and  sole  allegiance  (see  St.  Paul's  speech  at  Athens,  and  Rom.  i.).  Take  the  case 
of  the  nation  within  the  covenant ;  a  special  aggravation  is  its  sin  against  light  and 
against  its  own  pledge.  Idolatry  is  a  rash  sin,  for  it  sins  against  the  basis  command- 
ment, which  requires  us  to  love  God  first.  Its  sinful  character  is  sufficiently  revealed 
and  declared  in  its  corrupting  and  debasing  influence.    It  **  brings  forth  death.*' 

in.  The  judqh ent  of  idolatry.  This  is  always  spiritual ;  seen  in  the  dete- 
rioration of  the  nations  that  serve  idols.  It  is  usually  also  material,  and  is  seen  in  the 
mental,  moral,  and  governmental  slavery  of  the  nations  where  idol-gods  are  sought. 
Divine  judgments  often — we  can  hardly  say  always — take  their  character  from  the  sins 
which  they  judge.  This  the  idea  of  Dante's  *  Inferno.*  Close  by  pressing  St.  John's 
counsel,  **  Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols." — R.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  tribe  of  Levi  is  now  taken. 
The  first  three  verses  prepare  the  way  for 
running  rapidly  down  the  line  of  high  priest 
descend  from  Aaron's  son  Elcazar  to  Jelioza- 
dak,  who  is  reached  at  the  twenty-fifth  name 
from  Levi,  though  not  necessarily  the  twenty- 
fifth  generation,  aa  there  appear  (vers.  11—13) 


to  be  some  omissions.  Nor  are  all  the  names 
which  are  given  those  of  high  priests,  for 
the  genealogy  of  Jehozadak  did  not  always 
pass  though  such. 

Ver.  1. — This  verse  gives  the  three bmnohes 
of  Levi, and  is  in  agreement  with  the  enumera- 
tion of  them  in  Gen.  xlvi.  11  and  Exod.  vi.  16, 
viz.  Oenhon.  Kohath,  and  XerarL  We  have 
not  the  third  parallel  passage  in  the  place  of 


CH.  VI.  1—81.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


83 


mention  of  the  other  tribes  (Numb.  i.  47 — 
54),  ^ut  it  is  compensated  for  somewhat  later 
(Vumb.  iu.  14—20). 

Ver.  2.— The  second  son,  Kohath,  rather 
Kahath  (nnp,  Hebrew,  and  so  Septuagint  and 
Vulgate),  is  at  once  singled  out,  in  order  to 
get  at  the  priest  line.  He  was  one  of  the 
travellore  with  Jacob  into  E^ypt,  was  pro- 
bably about  twenty  years  the  junior  of 
Joseph,  lived  thirty  years  after  his  death,  and 
attained  the  age  of  one  hundred  and  thirty- 
three  years,  after  a  residence  in  Egypt  of  about 
one  hundred  and  fifteen  years  in  all.  The 
KohatUites  are  expressly  mentioned  in  their 
sacred  duties  in  the  time  of  David  (ch.  xv. 
5 — 8),  and  in  the  time  of  Hezokiah  (2  Chron. 
xxix.  12 — 14).  The  four  sous  of  Kohath  are 
next  instanced,  in  order  to  get  another  stop 
nearer  the  clear  beginning  of  the  priest  line. 
This  is  done  in  the  person  of  the  oldest 
brother,  Amram,  who  became  father  of  Aaron 
and  Moses  and  Miriam. 

Ver.  3. — Once  more,  Aaron  is  singled  out, 
and  Eleaiar,  the  third  of  his  four  sons,  fixes 
the  exact  channel  of  descent  required. 

Ver.  4. — Beaiar.  From  this  name  inclusive 

follow  the  twenty-two,  which  terminate  with 

Jehozaduk,  whoindeed  never  attained  himself 

to  the  oflSoe  of  high  priest,  but  was  son  of 

Geraiah,  last  hi^h  priest  before  the  Captivity, 

and  father  of  Jeshua,  high  priest,  who  returned 

with  Zerubbabel  from  the  Captivity.    It  has 

been  pointed  out  by  Lord  A.  C.  Hervey  that 

the  name  JehozadaK  is  of  the  same  meaning 

with  Zedekiah,  the  last  king  before   the 

Captivity ;  and  that  Jeshua  is  the  same  in 

meaning  with  Joshua,  the  leader  of  the  tribes 

into  Canaan.      The  two  elder  brothers  of 

Eleazar,  viz.  Nadab  and  Abihu,  died  without 

issue  (Lev.  x.  1 ;   Numb.  iii.  4,  32 ;   xx.  28 ; 

ch.  xxiv.  1 — 3).    It  is  somewhat  obscurely 

said  that  the  sacred  office  remained  in  the 

family  of  Eleazar  till,  in  the  person  of  Eli, 

it  passed  awhile  into  that  of  Ithamar,  his 

brother  (1  Kings  ii.  26,  27 ;  Josephus,  viii.  1, 

§  3),  to  be  recovered  again  in  the  Zadok  of 

our  Yer.  9  (ch.  xxiv.  3,  4).    Fhinehas;   a 

memorable  man  (Numb.  xxv.  7 — 13 ;  Josh. 

xxii.  10—33 ;  Judg.  xx.  28 ;  Ps.  cvi.  30, 31  ; 

which  Grove  well  compares  with  Gen.  xv.  6 ; 

Bom.  iv.  3).    Abishoa;  only  mentioned  in 

this  chapter  and  Ezra  vii.  1 — 5.     Josephus 

(viii.  1,  §  3)  asserts  that  he  it  was  who  was 

succeeded  in  the  high  priesthood,  not  by 

any  one  of  his  own  descendants,  but  by  Eli, 

till  Zadok,  in  the  time  of  David,  all  the 

intervening  members  of  ihfi  Eleazar  family 

being  private  individuals.      But  no  reliance 

can  be  placed    on  this  assertion,   for  see 

Josephus  again  (v.  11,  §  5). 

Vers.  5 — 7, — Of  the  five  succeeding  names, 
Bnkki,  Uiii,  Zerahiah,  Xeraioth,  Amariah,  it 
may  be  said  that  the^  reappear  in  the  list 
of  llzra  yiL,  but  that  little  or  nothing  else  is 


known  of  them.  Lightfoot  (*  Temple  Service,' 
iv.  §  1)  supposes  that  the  change  of  priest- 
hood family  to  Ithamar  took  place  after 
Meraioth.  But  it  is  just  as  probable  that 
the  gap  between  Abishua  and  Eli,  or  pos- 
sibly even  between  Phinehas  and  Eli,  was 
filled  by  holders  of  the  high  priest  office 
unknown  by  name  to  us. 

Ver.  8.— Ahitnb.    With  this  name  begins 
the  light  again.    Ahitub,  Zadok,  Ahimaas, 
and  Azariah  are  of  frequent  mention  in  the 
Books  of  Samuel  and  Kings.    Ahitub,  here 
and  elsewhere  plainly  given  as  father  of  Za- 
dok, seems  to  be  given  as  father  of  Meraioth 
in  ch.  ix.  11  and  Neh.  xi.  11,  and  grandfather 
of  Zadok;  and  in  both  passages  is  termed 
**  ruler  of  the  house  of  CM  " — an  expression 
probably  equivalent  to  high  priest,  as  Aza- 
riah, high  priest  in  the  reign  of  Hezekiah,  is 
also  so  described  (2  Chron.  xxxi.  13).     The 
recurrence  of  the  two  names  Ahitub  and 
Zadok  in  vers.  11  and  12  is  very  possibly  the 
result  of  some  error;  and  it  is  in  favour  of  such 
a  supposition,  in  some  form  of  it,  at  all  events, 
that  in  that  place,  where,  including  Shallum 
(or  MeshuUam),  only  three  steps  are  found, 
several  more  seem  to  be  required — the  pe- 
riod one  of  some  one  hundred  and  eighty 
years,  and  filled  in  the  list  of  Judah*s  kings 
by  as  manv  as  nine  in  succession.    On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  open  to  question  whether 
the  recurrence  of  the  names  Ahitub  and 
Zadok  be  not  legitimate.    And  this  may 
then  be  the  solution  of  ch.  ix.  11  and  Neh.  xi. 
11,  as  above,  with  their  insertion  of  Meraioth 
— still  other  names  beingabsent  which  would 
make  up  the  requisite  number  of  generations. 
Zadok.   The  earliest  glimpse  we  get  of  him 
is  in  ch.  xii.  28,  where  ho  is  introduced  as 
•*  a  young  man  mighty  of  valour,"  who  now 
casts  in  his  lot  with  David  at  Hebron,  on 
SauPs  death.     In  2  Sam.  xv.  24,  29,  35,  we 
find  him  and  Abiathar  the  recognized  priests. 
In  1  Kings  i.  7, 8,  we  find  him  true  to  David 
when  Abiathar  joined  Adonijah — the  pun- 
ishment of  the  latter  and  the  reward  of  the 
former  being  recorded  in  1  Kings  ii.  27,  35, 
respectively.      Up  to  that  time  it  is  evident 
that  Abiathar  had  precedence  in  rank  over 
Zadok.     His  death  is  not  recorded,  but  it 
must  be  assigned  to  a  date  previous  to  the 
dedication  of  the  temple,  from  the  account 
of  which  (1  Kings  viii.)  his  name  is  entirely 
absent.    The  last  allusions  to  him  are  in  1 
Kings  iv.  2,  4 ;  in  the  latter  of  which  verses 
(specially  coupled  as  the  name  is  with  the 
deposed  Abiathar)  the  notice  is  probably  as 
meroly  historical  as  it  certainly  is  in  the 
former.    This  same  verse  states  that  Aza- 
riah was  **  the  priest,"  and  that  he  was  son, 
i.q.  grandson,  of  Zadok,  proving,  with  very 
littlo  doubt,  that  the  explauatorv  paren- 
thesis  of  our  ver.   10   should   follow  the 
Azariah  mentioned  in  the  previous  verse. 


a4 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,      [ch.vi.1-^1. 


Yer.  9. — ^Ahimaai.  The  first  important 
notice  of  him  is  found  in  2  Sam.  xv.  36,  and 
the  last  in  2  iSam.  xix.  29.  lie  is  not  to  bo 
identiHed  with  Solomon^s  "  oflScer  "  in  Naph- 
tali  (1  Kings  iv.  15).  Acariah.  As  above 
•aid,  it  is  almost  witliout  a  doubt  after  this 
Azariah  (1  Kings  iv.  2)  that  the  parenthe- 
tical comment  of  next  verse  should  be  road. 
Again,  this  Azaiiah  must  not  be  identified 
with  him  of  the  time  of  King  Uzziah  (2 
Chron.  xxvi.  17,  20),  who  must  have  been 
nearly  a  century  later,  and  was  contemporary 
with  Isaiah,  Joel,  and  Amos. 

Yer.  10. — Of  Johanan  and  Aiariah,  his  son, 
nothing  can  be  found  with  any  certainty. 
It  is  presumable  that  they  were  priests  in 
the  reigns  of  Abijah  and  Asa. 

Yer.  11. — Amariah  High  priest  in  the 
leign  of  Jehoshaphat  (2  Chron.  xix.  11 ;  see 
Smith's  *  Bible  Dictionary,'  sub  voce^  2).  A 
Btep  ascertainable  as  this  helps  to  keep  the 
line  and  chronology  steady  amid  surrounding 
obscurity. 

Yer.  12. — (See  above  on  ver.  8.) 

Yer.  IS.—Shallomf  called  in  ch.  ix.  11 
and  Neh.  xi.  11  MeshuUam,  There  are  at 
fewest  fifteen  persons  of  this  name.  The 
present  is  named  as  ancestor  of  Ezra  (Ezra  vii. 
2).  Hillriah.  There  are  seven  persons  of 
this  name.  The  present  was  the  celebrated 
one  of  them  all ;  and  from  three  chief  circum- 
stances :  (1)  for  the  finding  of  the  "  book  of 
the  Law  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  "  (2  Kings 
xxii.  8) ;  (2)  the  zealous  spirit  with  which 
be  joined  in  the  reformation  under  Josiah 
(2  Kings  xxii.  14—20 ;  xxiii.  4—27) ;  (3)  the 
observance  in  his  high  priesthood  of  the 
Passover,  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  Josiah's 
reig^n  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  1 — 19). 

Ver.  14. — Aiariali.  The  third  occurrence 
of  this  name  in  this  list  This  person  is 
found  again  in  Ezra  ii.  1,  but  is  wanting  in 
Neh.  xi.  11.  Seraiah;  found  also  in  Neh. 
XL  11,  in  a  list  which  omits  the  preceding 
Azariah,  and  in  Ezra  vii.  1.  The  end  of 
his  high  priesthood  and  of  himself  is  re- 
corded with  that  of  Zephaniah  (2  Kings 
XXV.  18,  21),  and  (not  the  Seraiah,  'Uhe 
quiet  prince"  of  Jer.  li.  59 — 64)  he  is  also 
spoken  of  in  Jer.  lii.  24 — 27.  He  was  high 
priest  in  the  time  of  Zedekiah. 

Yer.  15. — Jehozadak.  He  did  not  share 
the  violent  end  of  his  father,  nor  did  he 
attain  his  father's  high  priest  office,  but 
lived  to  the  end  a  captive  (see  note  on 
ver.  4).  Where  this  name  occurs  in  Haggai 
and  Zechariah,  it  is  the  same  in  the  Hebrew 
as  here,  though  Englished  in  the  Authorized 
Version  as  Josedech.  Where  it  occurs  in 
Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  the  shorter  form  of 
Jozadak  is  found  in  the  Hebrew  as  in  the 
Authorized  Version. 

Vers.  16 — 19. — These  verses  have  a  re- 
enumeration  of  the  three  sons  of  Levi,  and 


differ  from  the  enumeration  of  ver.  1,  in 
hiding  followed  by  the  eons  of  each  of 
these  three,  and  afterwards  by  the  line  of 
descendants  from  eachj  instead  of  by  th« 
sons  of  only  one,  Kohath,  and  hit  descend- 
ant in  only  one  stem,  the  high  priest  stem, 
and  with  only  one  object.  All  these  names 
agree  with  Exod.  vi.  17—19  and  Numb, 
iii.  17 — 20  (comp.  also  Numb.  iii.  21 — 
36  with  xxvi.  57—60%  with  the  trifling 
exceptions  already  alluded  to,  in  the  Hebrew 
spelling  of  Gershom  and  the  Authorized 
Version  spelling  of  Shimei  and  the  Autho- 
rized Version  Mahali  of  Exod.  vi.  19.  The 
latter  half  of  ver.  19,  according  to  the 
Hebrew,  should  rather  refer  to  what  has 
preceded,  and  be  a  "subscription,"  though 
It  might  best  suit  the  connection  to  regt^ 
it  as  introducing  what  was  to  follow,  and 
as  being  a  **  superscription."  Berthean 
holds  with  the  former  of  these  Tiews,  Keil 
with  the  latter. 

Vers.  20,  21. — (A)  These  verses  appa- 
rently give  seven  lineal  descendants  of 
Oershom,  through  his  eldest  son  libni  The 
question  is  whether  this  list  of  seven  is 
part  of  the  longer  list  of  thirteen  from 
Gershom  (vers.  39 — 43),  terminating  with 
Asaph;  and  it  seems  impossible  to  decide 
the  question  satisfactorily.  From  the  oo- 
currenoe  of  the  name  Shimei  in  this  latter, 
though  in  the  wrong  place,  viz.  after 
Jaliath  in  the  descending  order,  instead  of 
before  him,  some  think,  Keil  and  Zockler 
among  them,  that  it  is  a  line  from  Shimei, 
the  brother  of  Libni,  and  second  son  of 
Gershom.  If  this  be  so,  the  occurrence  of 
three  names,  the  same  and  in  the  same 
order,  is  a  thing  to  be  remarked,  though 
possible  enough  in  itself.  But  if  not,  then 
either  the  names  Joah,  Iddo,  Jeaterai,  in  the 
former  list,  must  be  interchangeable  with 
Ethan,  Adaiah,  Ethni,  respectively  in  the 
latter  (a  thing  which  the  similarity  of  the 
Hebrew  letters  might  render  credible), 
while  the  Shimei  of  ver.  42  is  omitted  from 
ver.  20.  and  the  Libni  of  ver.  20  from  ver. 
43 ;  or  the  one  list  must  pick  up  some  links 
and  leave  others,  and  the  other  do  likewise, 
whilst  those  taken  the  same  by  both  are  in 
the  minority.  This  last  supposition  may 
be  the  more  probable,  though  not  free  from 
difficulty.  Zimmah.  Beside  the  uncertainty 
of  the  identity  of  this  Zimmah  with  the 
same  name  in  ver.  42,  it  is  very  remarkable 
that  we  find  a  Zimmah,  aUo/aOierofa  Joah^ 
in  2  Chron.  xxix.  12 ;  also  in  this  same 
passage  we  find  three  other  reproductions 
of  a  similar  kind— father  and  son — of  what 
have  first  been  found  in  this  sixth  chapter, 
viz.  **  Mahath,  son  of  Amasai "  (ver.  35) ; 
"Joel,  son  of  Azariah"  (ver.  36) ;  "  Kish,  son 
of  Abdi  "  (ver.  44).  It  seems  as  though  the 
individual  descendant  was  quoted  in  these 


CH.VI.1— 81.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


85 


instances  by  the  name  of  the  ancestor  at  a 
certain  point. 

Vers.  22— 28.— <B)  These  verses  give 
descendants^  probably  twenty-one  in  num- 
ber, from  Levi,  through  his  second  son, 
Eohath,  to  Joel,  eldest  son  of  Samuel  and 
(ver.  33)  father  of  Heman.  The  descend- 
ants of  Kohath  through  his  eldest  son, 
Amram,  liave  been  given  from  vers.  3 — 15. 
But  the  descendants  now  to  be  spoken  of 
are  through  another  son,  here  called  Am- 
minadab,  a  name  not  appearing  among  the 
four  of  ver.  2,  but  apparently  standing  for 
the  Izhar  of  that  verse.  For  he  is  said  to 
have  a  son  Eorah,  by  whom,  indeed,  the 
genealogy  moves  on,  while  in  vers.  37,  38, 
and  Numb,  xvi  1,  Eorah  is  said  to  be  the 
son  of  Izhar.  Without  the  occurrence  of 
this  due,  we  should  have  been  at  a  loss  to 
tell  who  Amminadab  was,  as  we  are  now  at 
a  loss  to  explain  the  unexplained  substi- 
tution of  this  new  name.  The  Vatican 
Septuagint  has  Amminadab,  while  the 
Alexandrine  has  altered  to  Izhar,  probably 
deeming  the  other  name  a  mere  error. 

Vers.  22,  23.— Korah  (comp.  Numb.  xvi. 
27,  32,  33,  with  xxvi.  9—11).  From  Exod. 
vi.  24  we  also  learn  that  the  three  next 
in  lineal  succession  to  Eoruh,  were  Assir, 
Bikanah,  and  Ebiasaph,  or  Abiasaph ;  though 
Elkanah  and  Assir  are  omitted  from  ver.  37, 
in  the  ascending  line. 

Vers.  24 — 28.— Tahath.  From  this  name 
onwards  to  the  end  of  ver.  28  we  must  have 
recourse  to  the  reversed  list  of  vers.  33 — 37, 
in  order  to  make  out  our  way.  Even  then 
we  shall  scarcely  have  a  chuin  of  all  the 
links;  e.g,  there  is  no  evidence  here  (as 
there  is  in  the  case  of  Amminadab  above) 
that  Uriel  and  Zephaniah  designate  the  same 
person.  The  lists  may  be  brought,  how- 
ever, into  pretty  close  harmony  without  any 
violent  suppositions  or  substitutions,  thtu: 
Tahath,  Uriel,  Zephaniah,  Uisiah  (t.g.  Aza- 
riah),  Shaul  (t.g.  Joel),  Elkanah,  Amasal, 
Ahimoth  (%.q.  Mabath),  Elkanah  Zophai  (i.g. 
Zuph),  Kahath  (t.g.  Toah,  Tohu,  1  Sam.  i.  1), 
Eliab  (t.g.  Eliel,  Elihu,  1  Sam.  i.  1),  Jero- 
ham,  Elkanah,  Samuel  (t.g.  Shemuel),  Joel 
(1  Sara.  viii.  2,  which  distinctly  gives  Joel 
as  firstborn  son,  and  supplies  the  explana- 
tion of  the  Vaihni  here  by  expressly  men- 
tioning AMah  as  '*  his  second"  son). 

Vers.  29,  30.— <0)  In  ver.  19  the  two  sons 
of  Merari,  viz.  Mahli  and  Mushi,  are  given. 
Here  one  of  them,  Xahli,  is  repeated,  with 
six  descendants,  of  no  one  of  whom  have 
we  any  other  information.  From  compari- 
son of  Numb.  iii.  20  and  xxvi.  58  there  can 
be  no  doubt  that  Mahli  and  Mushi  were 
brothers,  each  of  whom  founded  a  family. 
The  descending  line  of  Mushi,  unalluded  to 
here,  comes  to  the  surface  in  vers.  44 — 47. 

Vers.  81 — 48. — ^In  the  early  verses  of  this 


section  we  may  notice,  if  not  the  first 
beginning,  yet  some  of  the  earliest  crystal- 
lization of  tlie  forms  of  religious  services. 
It  was  given  to  David  to  settle  the  ark  after 
its  travels  through  the  wilderness,  its 
sojourn  in  various  places  since  then,  doubt- 
less always  within  the  care  of  some  Levitical 
family  (except  when  tidcen  by  enemies, 
1  Sam.  iv.  11 ;  v.,  vi.),  and  in  especial  its  pro* 
longed  twenty  years'  sojourn  at  Kirjath- 
jearim  (1  Sam.  vii.  1,  2 ;  2  Sam.  vi  1 — 19 ; 
ch.  xiiL  3 — 14  ;  xv.  1 — 3 ;  xvii.  5).  It  now 
had  rest,  though  its  place  of  rest  was  only 
within  "  curtains "  (2  Sam.  vii  2 ;  ch.  xvii 
1),  t.e.  in  a  special  separate  tent  prepared 
for  it  by  David,  which  tent  was  probably 
the  suggestion,  and  as  it  were  the  nucleus,  of 
the  coming  grand  temple  itself— the  house 
of  God.  The  event  was  naturally  one  of 
ereat  joy  and  thanksgiving,  of  which  David 
himself  was  the  chief  l^er  (2  Sam.  vi 
17—21 ;  ch.  xvi.  1—3) ;  but  it  appears  also 
that  it  furnished  the  occasion  of  appointing 
fixed  choir  conductors,  leaders  of  the  service 
of  song"  (ch.  xvi  4—7, 37, 41, 42 ;  xxv.  1—7). 

Ver.  32. — Instances  full  of  illustration 
of  this  ministering  .  .  .  with  singing  and 
waiting  on  their  office  are  found  in  2  (Jhron. 
V.  12 ;  xxix.  26—31 ;  xxxv.  15,  16. 

Ver.  33. — We  have  now  the  name  and 
pedigree  of  each  of  the  three  chief  singers 
or  musicians  (their  duty  was  both  vocal  and 
instrumental)  of  David's  appointment,  be- 
ginning, according  to  the  analogy  of  ver.  2,. 
supra^  with  Heman,  the  descendant  of 
Kohath,  instead  of  Asaph  from  G^rshom. 
So  the  place  of  Heman  was  still  the  place 
of  honour,  in  the  centre,  with  Asaph  on  the 
right  and  Ethan  on  the  left  (vers.  39,  44). 
Heman  is  the  twenty-first  according  to  this 
list  (vers.  33 — 38)  after  Levi,  but  the  genea- 
logy is  indistinct  (see  above,  vers.  22 — 28) 
between  Shemuel  and  Assir,  and  according 
to  Horvey  (*  Genealogies  of  our  Lord,*  p.  214X 
Heman  comes  fourteenth  after  Levi.  This 
Heman  is  to  be  distinguished  from  Heman 
the  ^  son  of  Zerah  "  (ch.  ii  6),  and  with  but 
little  doubt,  therefore,  from  Heman  the 
Ezrahite  (Zerahite)  of  Ps.  Ixxxviii  On 
the  other  hand,  a  theory  has  been  sugg^ted 
by  Lord  Arthur  0.  Horvey  which  might 
reconcile  the  two.  He  supposes  that  if 
Heman  the  Kohathite  (or  his  father)  had 
married  an  heiress  of  the  house  of  Zerah, 
he  might  have  become  reckoned  in  the  line 
of  Zerah  as  well  as  in  that  of  Kohath. 

Ver.  39. — ^Asaph  is  called  brother  of 
Heman,  either  as  brother  in  office  or  gene- 
rally as  relative  in  the  degree  of  cousin  by 
many  removes.  He  stands  fourteenth  in  line 
of  descent  after  Levi,  while  Ethan  (ver.  44) 
stands  thirteenth.  If  the  line  of  Heman 
(as  given  in  vers.  33 — 38)  were  correct,  U 
would  force  on  us  the  conviction  that  there 


86 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa      [ch.  vi.  1— 81. 


are  ■overal  omiBsions  in  these  two  lines ;  bat 
if  tlioso  uro  correct,  we  munt  conclude  that 
there  are  unwarnmteti  a^lditionA  in  the 
other.  On  the  n^nicd  of  Amph's  anci^stors, 
SCO  notes  on  ven.  20,  21.  From  2  Chron. 
zxix.  30  it  seems  ]>luin  that  Auuph  was  him- 
self a  oomi>oser  of  pHAlm.s  and  not  simplj 
cither  the  miuician  or  reheurdcr  of  those  of 
David. 

Ver.  44. — Sthan.  This  passnfi^o  and  ch. 
zv.  19  are  the  It  atlinj::  |>aiu<age8  for  this  numo 
Ethan.  But  in  Hucceeding  references  (and 
they  are  not  u  few)  to  the  three  chief  leaders 
of  song,  the  name  anpeiirs  as  Jeduthun; 
unless,  as  seems  scarcely  credible,  two  diflft-r- 
ent  ]>er8ons  are  dcHijjrnated.  'I'ho  oecabion 
and  significance  of  the  alteration  of  the 
name  are  not  state<l,  however,  and  elude 
d(  tection  so  fur.  In  2  Chron.  xxzv.  15  tlie 
title  of  *'  kind's  seer "  (nrn)  is  a«ldeil  to 
the  name  Jetluthun,  which  is  variously  bpclt 
(jvin*;  ]VT«T  ;  (Vrr).     This  arrangement  of 

chief  singers,  one  from  each  of  the  three 
branches  of  I.evi*s  family,  lasted  unbroken 
to  Josinh's  rtii^n  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  13);  and 
the  re|)re8entutivo8  of  Je<iuthun,  at  all 
events,  are  mentionwl  in  the  time  of  Nehe- 
miah  (Neh.  xi.  17,  18).  Kishi.  The  most 
frequent  form  of  this  name  is  Kish  (v^p, 

equivalent  to  the  Vulgate  Cm),  if,  indiK^l, 
the  form  of  this  verse  and  that  of  oh.  xv.  17, 
Kushuiah  (n;rY'),  are  not  merely  the  fruit  of 
a  corrupt  text. 

Yer.  4S. — The  all  maimer  of  servioe,  from 
that  of  the  thne  **  leaders  of  song"  on  tlu  ir 
"cymbals  of  br.iss"  (ch.  xv.  19)  down 
through  the  other  Levitical  grades,  is  fu!ly 
illustrated  in  many  places  (ch.  xv.  18 — 24 ; 
xvi.  37—42;  xxiii.  2—32;  xxv.  1—8; 
xxvi.  1—26). 

Vers.  49— 53.— These  verses  allude  to  the 
more  si)ecial  functions  of  '*  Aaron  and  liis 
sons,"  as  they  are  here  called,  i.e.  his  lineal 
descendants  (vers.  4— 15;  Ezra  vii.  2—5), 
whose  names,  stopping  at  Ahimaoz,  the 
eleventh  generation,  are  the  same  witli  those 
of  vers.  3—8.  Tlie  manifest  inference  is 
that  the  present  enumeration,  stopping  with 
the  name  of  one  contemporary  with  David 
(2  Sam.  XV.  27),  was  borrowed  from  tables 
of  the  date  of  Duvid,  and  not  of  the  date  of 
the  Captivity  (ver.  15). 

Ver.  49.— The  altar  of  the  burnt  offerixig 
/Lev.  i.  3—17).  The  altar  of  inoense  (Exod. 
XXV.  6;  XXX.  1—7.  7—9,  34—38;  Lev. 
xvi.  12).  Xoit  holy  (Lev.  xvL  12,  14, 
15, 17,  20).  An  atonement  for  Israel  (Lev. 
xvi.  3—10;  xxiii.  26—32;  Numb.  xxix. 
7—11). 

Ver.  50. — Eleanr.  The  third  son  of  Aaron 

S}y  Elisheba,  daughter  of  Anmiinndab,  and 
escended  from  Judah  through  Pharez)  is 
the  son  whose  deecendauta  ore  given  here, 


inasmuch  as  he  was  appointed  chief  of  the 
Levitcf  (Xumb.  iii.  32);  ministered  mm  m 
priest  with  his  brother  Ithamar,  even  before 
the  death  of  Aaron  ;  and  suooceded  him  as 
high  priest  (Numb.  xx.  28).  It  wae  in 
Eleazar's  familv  that  the  high  prieathood 
remained  (as  aoove)  till  the  time  of  Eli« 
who  was  aesoended  from  Ithamar,  and  it 
returned  agidn  to  the  line  of  Eleaiar  in 
Zad<»k,  fulfilling  the  intimation  of  1  Bam. 
ii.  :{0. 

Vers.  54 — 81. — The  writer  returns  npon 
his  steps  to  give  the  cities  and  dwelling- 
places  of  the  Levites,  beginning  with  the 
priestly  members  of  the  Kohathite  line 
(vers.  54 — 61),  then  taking  those  of  the 
Gershomite  (ver.  62)  and  Blerarite  lines 
(vers.  63 — 65)  in  order;  and  again  in  the 
same  order  disposing  of  the  members  not 
priestly  (vers.  66— 70;  71—76;  77— «1)  of 
the  same  three  branches. 

Vers.  54—61,  64— 70.— And  these  are 
their  dwellingi  aooording  to  their  enelo- 
iorei  in  their  territories.  DnhTp  means  the 
settlements  of  whatever  people  in  question, 
surrounded  and  protected  by  whatever  fence 
or  defence  customary.  For  theirs  was  the 
lot  is  more  intelligible  with  the  addition 
of  the  word  '*  first,"  supplied  in  Josh.  xxxL 
10,  i.e.  theirs  teas  the  first  lot.  The  whole 
drift  of  the  present  passage,  with  the  re- 
mainder of  ttie  chapter,  is  made  entirely 
])lain  by  Numb.  xxxv.  1 — 8  and  Josh.  xxi. 
1 — 10.  But  the  omission  and  the  alteration 
of  individual  names  of  places  occasion  some 
delay.  Our  ver.  55  is  given  somewhat 
more  fully  in  Josh.  xxi.  11;  our  ver.  56  is 
identical  with  Josh.  xxi.  12 ;  and  our  vers. 
57 — 00  corrosiKjnd  substantially  with  Josh. 
xxi.  13—19,  but  from  this  latter  source  we 
are  glud  to  supply  the  two  names  Juttiih 
and  C«il>eon,  without  which  we  cannot  add  up 
correctly  the  thirteen  cities  of  ver.  60.  Also 
in  Joshua,  our  Hilen,  Ashan,  and  Alemeth 
a]»i>ear  as  llolonyAin^  and  Alnwn  respectively, 
altuough  in  regard  to  the  intermediate  name 
of  these  three  the  places  cannot  bo  accepted 
OS  identic(d,  for  they  are  mentioned  side  by 
siile  in  Josh.  xix.  7  and  in  ch.  iv.  32,  but  we 
must  admit  an  error  involved.  Ver.  56 
(see  Josh.  xiv.  14;  xxi.  12).  Ver.  61  seems 
to  be  an  anticipation  of  vers.  66 — ^70,  with 
which  verses,  if  we  incorporate  it,  we  shall 
obtain  substantially  tho  same  results  as  are 
found  in  Josh.  xxi.  5,  20—20 ;  but  again  we 
are  glad  of  the  latter  source  to  supply  for  us 
the  two  places,  Eltekeh  and  Gibbethon,  ne- 
cessary to  enable  us  to  count  up  the  ten  oitiet 
of  our  ver.  61,  while  our  Jokmeam,  Ajier, 
and  Bileam  appear  as  prolxibly  the  corrected 
readings  of  Kibzaim,  Tanach,  and  OcUh- 
rttnmon  respectively  in  Joshua.  The  sons  of 
Kobath ...  left  (ver.  61),  the  residne  (Autho- 
rized Version,  ver.  60),  the  remnant  (ver.  70> 


OH.  VL  1—81.]        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  OHBONIOLES. 


87 


point  (as  aboye)  to  the  non-priestly  de- 
soendanis  in  the  Kohath  line.  Summing 
up,  we  see  that  the  Kohathite  prietU  had 
thirteen  cities  from  the  allotments  of  Judah 
and  Simeon  and  Beniamin,  and  the  Ko- 
hathite non-priests  had  ten,  from  Ephraim, 
Dan,  and  West  Manasseh.  One  might  de- 
tect in  all  this  some  germ  <^  the  more 
modem  parochial  system,  so  far  at  least  as 
regards  the  distributed  residence  of  a  clerical 
and  ministerial  order,  though  not  with 
sacred  buildings  similarly  distributed. 

Yer.  62. — The  twenty-three  cities  that 
belonged  to  the  sons  of  Kohath  are  now 
followed  by  the  thirteen  due  to  the  sons  of 
Gershom,  token  from  the  tribes  of  Issachar, 
Ashor,  Naphtali,  and  half  Manasseh.  The 
fact  only  is  stated  here,  the  details  being 
supplied  in  yers.  71 — ^76.  And  it  is  easily  to 
bo  seen  that,  as  from  the  most  important 
tribes  were  levied  the  cities  for  Levites  first 
in  precedence,  so  the  same  principle  is 
observed  to  the  end. 

Yer.  63. — ^The  distribution  of  cities  to  the 
third  branch  of  Levi's  family,  that  of  Merari, 
now  follows.  They  are  selected,  four  from 
each  of  the  tribes  of  Reuben,  Oad,  Zebulun 
(Josh,  xxi  7, 34—40). 

Yer.  71.— Oolsn  was  one  of  the  throe  cities 
of  refuge  east  of  the  Jordan  (Josh.  xx.  S\  the 
other  two  being  Bezer,  of  the  tribe  of 
Reuben,  and  Ramoth  in  Gilead,  of  the  tribe 
of  Gad.  Aihtaroth,  in  its  previous  history, 
had  been  closely  connected  with  Og  King 
of  Bashan  (Deut  i.  4 ;  Josh.  ix.  9, 10 ;  xiL 
4,  5 ;  xiii  12).  It  is  called  Beeshterah  in 
Josh.  XTi.  27. 

Yer.  72.— Kedesh.  There  were  three 
places  of  this  name.  1.  Kedesh,  at  the 
extreme  south  of  Judah  (Josh.  xy.  23 ;  xix. 
20,  21),  perhaps  the  same  with  Eladesh- 
bamea  («rosh.  xy.  3).  2.  The  Kedesh  of  this 
verse,  perhaps  the  same  with  the  Kedesh  of 
Josh.  xii.  22;  it  is  called  Kishon  in  Josh. 


xxi  28.  a  The  Kedesh  of  yer.  76,  i,e. 
Kedesh  in  €hdilee,one  of  the  cities  of  refuge 
in  the  tribe  of  Naphtali  (Josh.  xix.  87 ;  xx 
7;  xxi.  32;  Judg.  iy.  6—10).  Daberath 
(Authorized  Yersion,  Dabareh,  Josh.  xxL 
28);  mentioned  as  on  the  boundary  of 
Zebulun  in  Josh.  xix.  12. 

Yer.  73.— Ramoth;  called  in  Josh.  xxL 
28,  29,  Jarmuth ;  a  place  of  which  nothing 
else  is  known,  but  possibly  one  with  Rconeth 
(Josh.  xix.  21).    Anem;  probably  the  En* 

gannim  of  Josh.  xix.  21  and  xxi  29,  and  per- 
aps  a  contraction  of  the  name. 

Vers.  74— 76.— Xashal,  Hnkok,  Hammon, 
Kixjathaim,  arc  found  as  Mishal,  HeUcath^ 
nammoth-doTf  Kartatif  in  Josh.  xxL  SO,  81, 
32 ;  xix.  35. 

Yer.  77.— TTnto  the  rest  of  the  ehildren  of 
XerarL  Sinoe  none  have  yet  been  spoken 
of  as  having  received  their  cities,  we  find 
the  explanation  of  these  words  in  their 
order  in  Josh,  xxi  34,  **  Unto  the  families 
of  the  children  of  Merari,  the  rest  of  the 
Levites."  To  our  list  here,  Jokneam  and 
Kartah  (Josh.  xxL  34)  need  to  be  supplied, 
and  Binunon  and  Tabor  here  appear  (Josh, 
xxi.  35),  there  as  Dimndh  and  NahalaL 

Yer.  78.— Beser.  The  full  description  of 
the  place  is  **  Bezer  in  the  wilderness,  in  the 
land  of  the  Mishor "  (Deut.  iv.  43),  and 
**  Bezer  in  the  wilderness,  in  the  Mishor/' 
t.0.  **  the  plain,"  or  as  some,  **  the  downs  " 
(Josh.  XX.  8).  This,  as  mentioned  above^ 
was  one  of  the  three  cities  of  refuge  east  of 
the  Jordan.  Jahah  (Authorized  Yersion, 
Josh,  xxi  36,  Jahazah), 

Yer.  79.— The  two  names  of  this  verse, 
with  the  two  of  the  preceding,  ie.  all  the 
four  names  of  the  cities  of  Reuben,  are 
absent  from  their  proper  place  in  the  list  in 
Josh.  xxi.  in  the  Hebrew  Textus  Receptus 
and  the  Yulgate^  though  found  in  Josh, 
xiii.  18. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  10,  15.— 7t(;o  high  prieats.  Among  the  sons  of  Levi  the  family  of  Aaron 
was  the  most  conspicuous,  ii^Mmuch  as  the  Lord  selected  this  family  for  the  priestly 
office.  The  high  priest  was  always  of  Aaronic  blood.  And  the  succession  of  high 
priests  could  no  more  be  omitted  from  the  chronicles  of  Israel  than  the  succession  of 
popes  from  those  of  Rome  or  the  series  of  Archbishops  of  Canterbury  from  those 
of  England.    We  select  two  high  priests  for  special  notice, 

I.  Thb  high  PBIE8TH00DIN  NATIONAL  FR08PEBITT.  Azariah  cxecutcd  thls  yery 
important  office  during  that  part  of  the  reign  of  Solomon  which  saw  the  dedication  of 
the  magnificent  first  temple.  This  was  the  very  culmination  of  the  splendour  of  the 
Hebrew  monarchy,  and  the  office  and  duties  of  the  national  pontifif  would  be  encom* 
passed  with  peculiar  glory.  As  the  religious  representative  of  the  nation,  Azariah 
had  sacred  functions  to  discharge,  especially  on  the  day  of  atonement,  when  the  sins 
belonging  to  the  people's  prosperity  were  brought  and  confessed  before  the  Lord|  and 
&yoar  8£)wn  to  the  sacrificing  and  repentant  nation. 


88  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa      [ch.  vl  1— 81. 

II.  The  high  priesthood  in  national  adversity.  Jehozadak,  as  in  the  suc- 
cession, nominally  filled  the  same  office  when  the  Jews  were  carried  into  captivity. 
Ho  shared  the  lot,  the  exile,  of  his  countrymen.  It  was  well  that  he  should  go  with 
the  others  and  rather  share  the  fate  of  tiie  nation,  than  remain  in  Jerusalem  to  fulfil 
the  form  of  his  office.     Where  the  nation  was,  it  became  its  religious  head  to  be  also. 

III.  The  conjunction  op  these  two  high  priests  teaches  a  valuable  lesson. 
Ministers  of  religion  should  dwell  among  the  people,  partake  their  lot,  interest  them- 
selves in  their  concerns,  and  be  their  leaders  in  praise,  in  obedience,  in  submission. 
Touched,  like  their  Master,  with  the  feeling  of  the  people's  infirmities,  they  are  thus 
able  to  "  rejoice  with  those  who  do  rejoice,  and  weep  with  those  who  weep."  In  such 
sympathy  lies  their  true,  their  spiritual  and  legitimate,  strength.  Not  as  lords  over 
God's  heritage,  but  as  shepherds,  sharing  the  lot  of  their  flock,  may  they  follow  Christ, 
serve  the  people,  and  do  the  will  of  God. — T. 

Ver.  31. — "  The  service  of  song, *^  The  ministry  of  psalmody,  in  its  definite  organiza- 
tion, was  instituted  by  David.  The  occasion  of  this  was  when  the  ark  was  placed,  as 
in  a  resting-place,  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation.  The  arrangements  then  made 
were  the  germ  of  the  more  elaborate  temple  service  under  Solomon.  From  the  time  of 
David,  "  the  sweet  singer  of  Israel,"  "  the  service  of  song  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  " 
occupied  an  important  position  in  the  religious  observances  of  Israel.  To  justify  this, 
consider  that— 

L  Singing  is  the  natural  expression  of  emotion.  The  outburst  of  joy,  the 
fervour  and  rapture  of  love,  the  pathos  of  sorrow,  find  their  form  and  utterance  in  song. 

II.  Man's  nature  makes  song  the  suitable  expression  of  religious  feeling. 
The  highest  form  of  human  feeling  impels  to  the  expression  vocally  appropriate. 
Psalmody,  especially  choral  and  congregational  psalmody,  forms  the  most  inspiriting 
vehicle  of  religious  gratitude,  adoration,  and  praise. 

III.  Scripture  history  records  several  developments  of  psalmody.  The 
lyric  outbursts  of  joy  which  took  place  when  the  Lord  confounded  Pharaoh  and 
delivered  his  chosen  people,  were  the  first  recorded  instances.  But  David  himself  was 
the  true  leader  of  psalmody,  both  Hebrew  and  Christian.  Christ  and  his  disciples 
*'  sang  an  hymn,"  and  Paul  and  Silas  sang  praises  at  midnight  in  the  gaol  of  Philippi. 
The  early  Christians  were  accustomed  to  sing  God's  praises  in  their  social  assemblies. 

IV.  Scripture  represents  the  service  of  song  as  acceptable  to  God.  Pre- 
suming that  the  service,  the  homage,  the  love,  are  sincere,  the  inspired  writers  summon 
all  God's  people  to  join  in  thus  celebrating  his  praises.  "  Sing  ye  praises ;  praise  Gtxi, 
all  ye  people,"  is  the  admonition  of  the  psalmist;  and  the  apostle  thus  directs  us: 
"  Is  any  merry  ?  let  him  sing  psalms." 

V.  Scripture  sanctions  the  consecration  to  psalmody  of  labour,  art,  and 
devotion.  We  find  that,  under  the  old  dispensation,  there  was  a  regular  ministry 
consecrated  to  "  the  service  of  song."  It  would  be  strange  if  it  were  lawful  to  spend  time, 
money,  strength,  skill,  upon  exercises  intended  to  give  pleasure  to  men,  and  at  the 
same  time  unlawful  to  offer  aught  to  God  save  that  which  cost  us  nothing.  God  will 
have  our  best ;  and  when  we  have  ofiered  this,  of  his  own  have  we  given  him. 

"VI.  Scripture  reminds  us  that  the  efficacy  and  acceptableness  of  the 
service  of  song  depend  upon  the  worshipper's  spirituality  and  sincerity.  The 
form  without  the  substance,  the  art  without  the  spirit,  the  song  without  the  love  and 
faith  it  should  express, — these  are  vain  and  worthless.  Let  us  offer  acceptable  sacrifices, 
the  fruit  of  our  lips,  giving  thanks  unto  his  Name.«>T. 

Ver.  32. — "  Waiting  on  their  office.**  The  Levites  were  the  ministers  of  the  tabernacle 
and  the  temple,  whose  business  it  was,  in  subordination  to  the  priests,  to  attend  to  the 
apix)inted  services,  sacrifices,  ceremonies,  and  festivals.  Of  these,  certain  families  were 
selected  for  the  conduct  of  the  musical  part  of  the  religious  services.  David,  himself 
a  poet  and  a  musician,  set  apart  these  families;  the  members  of  which,  from  his  time 
forward,  were  trained  for  **  the  service  of  song  in  the  house  of  the  Lord."  Clothed  in 
white  garments,  some  performed  upon  cymbals,  psalteries,  harps,  and  other  instruments 
of  music;  whilst  others  lifted  up  their  voices,  and  sang  the  praises  of  him  who  is 
"  good,  and  whose  mercy  endureth  for  ever."    It  is  recorded  that,  upon  certain  great 


^ 


OH.  VL  1—81.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  89 


occasions  in  Jewish  history,  as,  for  example,  when  Solomon  dedicated  his  temple,  when 
Hezekiah  cleansed  the  same  building  ana  restored  the  dignity  of  its  services,  and  when 
Josiah  observed  a  solemn  Passover,  these  musical  attendants  took  a  prominent  part 
and  rendered  an  effective  service  in  the  sacred  solemnities  that  were  observed  (2  Chron. 
V.  12;  xxix.  27 — 30;  xzxv.  15).  Perhaps  nothing  at  once  more  simple  and  more 
significant  can  be  said  of  any  men  or  any  class  of  men  than  is  here  said  in  description 
and  to  the  credit  of  the  families  of  Heman,  Asaph,  and  Jeduthun :  "  They  waited  on 
their  office  according  to  their  order."  The  language  may  fairly  be  taken  as  applicable 
to  all  true  servants  of  God,  to  all  true  friends  and  followers  of  Christ. 

I.  Providence  appoints  fob  every  one  of  us  an  office  to  fill,  a  sebviob  to 
BENDER.  1.  Mark  the  divinity  apparent  in  every  human  life.  It  is  only  within  limits 
that  we  choose  or  that  others  choose  for  us.  "  The  steps  of  a  good  man  are  ordered 
by  the  Lord."  "  Our  times  are  in  his  hands."  2.  Mark  the  individuality  of  every 
man's  vocation.  The  Levites  did  not  perform  the  priests'  service ;  and  amongst  the 
Levites  all  were  not  appointed  to  "  the  service  of  song."  So  is  it  with  us  and  our 
several  positions  in  the  Church  and  in  the  world.  Nothing  is  weaker  and  more  foolish 
than  to  say,  *'  How  well  I  could  fill  the  position  and  do  the  work  of  my  neighbour  I  " 
It  is  your  duty  to  which  you  must  look,  that  there  may  be  no  lack  of  service  through 
your  failure. 

IL  Gk>D  EXPECTS    us  TO  BENDEB    OUB    APPOINTED    BEBVICB    UPON  A  PBOPEB  BTBTEX 

AND  m  AN  OBDERLT  WAY.  The  Levitcs  had  their  regulations  to  which  they  were 
obedient.  And  the  same  is  true  of  us  all.  **  Order  is  Heaven's  first  law."  We  have 
not  only  a  duty  to  fulfil — ^we  have  to  fulfil  it  at  the  right  time  and  place.  Qualities 
necessary  for  efficiency  in  ordinary  business  or  professional  life  are  requisite  in  the 
service  of  Ood.  Take  these  three:  1.  Diligence.  2.  Method.  3.  Perseverance* 
Without  these  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  glorify  God  in  a  practical  and  active  life. 
Without  these  we  shall  lose  our  self-respect,  and  we  shall  lose  our  influence  over  our 
fellow-men, 

III.  For  buoh  bervioe  we  are  responsible  to  the  Divine  Lobd  and  Judge. 
1.  The  watchful  eye  of  Qod  is  always  upon  us.  2.  By  providential  appointment, 
careful  fidelity  makes  its  mark  upon  our  character.  3.  **  Wo  must  all  of  us  appear 
before  the  judgment-seat."    "  The  fire  shall  try  every  man's  work,  of  what  sort  it  is." 

IV.  In    OUB    ENDEAV0UB8    TO    RENDER    BUOH    SERVICE,  WE    HAVE  A  MODEL    AND  A 

MOTIVE  IN  OUR  LoRD  Jesub  Christ.  1.  Consider  how  Christ  *'  waited  upon  his 
office*"  He  came  to  do  the  will  of  God.  "  He  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant." 
He  was  found  faithful.  It  was  only  when  he  could  say,  "  It  is  finished  I "  that  he 
consented  to  die.  In  life  and  in  death  it  was  his  meat  and  drink  to  do  his  Father's 
will.  Thus  he  left  us  an  example.  2.  Consider  that  his  humiliation,  his  cross,  are 
the  inspiration  of  the  service  and  obedience  of  his  people.  It  is  the  love  of  Christ  which 
constraineth  us.  Do  not  suppose  that  Divine  love  cannot  work  according  to  the 
principles  of  human  order  and  system;  these  are  the  machinery,  but  that  is  the 
motive. 

Application.  We  have  here  a  rebuke  to  the  irreligious,  and  a  summons  to  a  better 
life.  We  have  also  an  admonition  and  encouragement  to  those  who  are  endeavouring 
to  serve  their  Saviour,  and  glorify  their  God. — T. 

Vers.  48,  49. — Levites  and  priests.  These  two  verses  contain  a  brief  account  of  the 
offices  of  the  two  orders  of  ministry  in  the  Jewish  Church. 

I.  Lessons  peculiar  to  the  old  covenant.  Nothing  was  more  prominent  or 
important  in  Israel  than  the  provision  alluded  to  in  this  passage.  We  are  reminded : 
1.  That  amongst  the  chosen  people  there  was  a  consecrated  tribe,  and  within  this  a 
consecrated  family.  2.  That  thus  a  provision  was  made  for  perpetual  temple  worship 
and  appointed  sacrifices.  3.  That,  in  obedience  to  these  prescribed  ordinances,  Israel 
abode  beneath  the  favour  of  Jehovah. 

II.  Lessons  generally  applicable  to  the  religious  life.  1.  Order  and  decency 
are  becoming  in  the  service  of  a  righteous  and  holy  God.  It  is  possible  to  regard  the 
form  and  neglect  the  substance,  but  it  is  also  possible  to  despise  the  form  and  so  to 
lose  the  substance.  2.  In  the  service  of  God,  the  most  menial  office  is  honourable, 
whilst  the  loftiest  office  can  never  be  executed  by  man  otherwb^e  than  imperfectly  and 


90  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,      [oh.  vi.  1— 8L 

unworthily.     3.  Under  the  Christian  dispensation,  all  believers  are  ministers  and 

Siests,  daily  serving  in  God's  spiritual  temple,  and  offering,  through  the  Divine 
ediator  and  Intercessor,  spiritual  and  acceptable  sacrifices.    Every  family  and  every 
individual  has  an  appointed  office  and  ministration. — T. 

Ver.  67. — The  city  of  rtfuge,  Hebron  was  one  of  the  six  cities  of  refuge,  which  were 
provided  to  shelter  the  manslayer  from  the  wrath  of  the  avenger  of  blood,  and  thus  to 
check  the  savage  lawlessness  of  a  warlike  people  in  a  primitive  state  of  society.  They 
are,  in  one  passage  of  the  New  Testament,  regarded  as  emblematical  of  the  provision 
made  in  Christ  for  the  security  of  the  penitent  and  returning  sinner.  There  is 
suggested—- 

I.  A  CASE  OP  NEED  AND  DANGER.  The  cause  of  the  peril  and  alarm  is  sin.  iTnd 
the  righteous  Law  and  retributive  government  of  Ood  render  the  case  of  the  sinner 
one  serious  in  itself  and  its  issues.  This  appeal^  from  the  gospel  admonitions  to 
repentance. 

U.  A  PBOVisiON  OF  M EBCT  AND  WISDOM.  As  the  city  of  refuge  was  appointed  for  the 
innocent  manslayer's  escape  from  vengeance  and  death,  so  the  guilty  sinner  is  the  object 
of  the  Divine  compassion  which  has  provided  in  Christ  a  safe  and  eternal  shelter.  In 
the  Divine  Redeemer  is  refuge  from  sin  and  condemnation,  is  the  favour  and  life  of 
God. 

III.  An  action  op  paith  and  enebgy.  The  city  was  of  no  use  except  the 
imperilled  Israelite  fled  unto  it  for  safety.  So  with  Christ,  whose  almighty  sufficiency 
avails  for  those,  and  those  only,  who  accept  him  and  shelter  themselves  in  his  riven 
side.  They  are  saved  who  have  "  fled  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  them  in  the 
gospel." 

iV.   A  DIVINELY  FLEDGED  SECURITY  FOB  THOSE  WHO  ABE  IN  ChBIST.      The  Jewlsh 

Law  assured  of  safety  those  who  made  use  of  the  provision  for  refuse.  And  the  Divine 
word  and  faithfulness  are  pledged  to  those  who  confide  in  Christ,  that  they  shall  never 
perish,  but  shall  have  eternal  life. 

V.  A  TBUE  GOSPEL.  It  is  the  office  of  the  Church  of  the  Redeemer  both  to  warn 
sinners  of  the  danger  to  which  they  are  exposed  and  to  point  them  to  the  one  only 
Refuge  provided  by  Divine  wisdom  for  their  security  and  peace.  It  is  a  refuge  accessible 
to  all  and  sufficient  for  all,  and  there  is  no  reason  in  the  heart  of  GKhI  why  any  poor 
sinner  should  remain  outside  this  refuge  and  spiritually  perish. — T. 

Vers.  1 — 30.— i«Mon»/ron»  lists ;  or^  a  sermon  in  names.  Here  is  a  number  of  names ; 
they  belong  to  men  of  varied  characters  and  different  careers,  though  all  of  them  were 
children  of  privilege,  most  of  them  in  a  high  degree.    We  learn— 

I.  That  there  is  a  vast  difference  in  the  life  and  character  op  privi- 
leged MEN.  We  might  suppose  that  men  who  have  come  under  the  same  class  of 
influences  would  be  much  like  one  another  in  spirit  and  behaviour.  But  such  a  suppo- 
sition would  be  a  great  mistake.  It  is  true  that  there  is  much  of  human  nature  in  us 
all,  and  that  the  best  men  have  their  failings  while  the  worst  have  their  redeeming 
points ;  but  it  remains  true  that  between  man  and  man,  having  the  same  advantages, 
there  is  often  a  great  gulf  found.  In  the  same  list  of  names  of  the  sons  of  Levi  we  have 
Moses  and  Samuel,  who  were  holy  among  the  holy,  and  also  the  sons  of  Samuel,  who 
accepted  bribes  and  pervei-ted  judgment  (vers.  3,  28).  It  is  painful  to  think  that,  while 
aniong  the  children  of  privilege  may  be  found  some  that  are  like  God  himself  in  their 
spirit  and  their  life,  there  are  others  in  whose  heart  the  basest  passions  dwell,  and  whose 
lives  are  pestilent  and  shameful.  It  is  sadly  possible  for  those  that  are  "  exalted  to 
heaven  **  in  privilege  to  be  "  cast  down  to  hell "  in  guilt  and  condemnation. 

II.  That  there  is  a  close  intermingling  of  good  and  bad  upon  the  earth. 
This  is  a  list  of  men  belonging  to  diflerent  generations,  but  wo  are  reminded  by  contrast 
of  the  truth  that  good  and  bad  are  contemporaneous  and  closely  intermingled.  Hero 
the  wheat  and  the  tares  grow  together.  Dwelling  beneath  the  same  roof,  sitting  down 
to  the  same  hearth  and  table,  working  in  the  same  shop,  writing  at  the  same  desk, 
walking  the  same  street,  are  the  holy  and  the  profane,  the  pure  and  the  unclean,  the 
generous  and  the  selfish,  the  wise  and  the  foolish.  1.  What  a  reason  for  watchfulness 
and  prayer  I    2.  What  opportunity  for  usefulness  I 


CH.  VL  1—81.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa  91 

III.  That  oub  bxoobd  will  be  wbittbk  in  thb  book  of  God  as  well  as  nr 
THB  LIVES  OF  MEN.  Not  much  is  written  in  the  Book  of  Qod  respecting  most  of 
these ;  we  know  nothing  of  them  but  their  names.  A  deeper  obBCurity  than  this  will 
be  our  portion ;  not  even  our  names  will  go  down  one  century,  certainly  they  will  not 
descend  to  thirty  centuries.  We  need  not  regret  that ;  but  we  shall  do  well  to  remem- 
ber :  1.  That  not  only  our  names  but  our  actions  are  written  in  some  imperishable 
record  in  GKxl's  unerasible  handwriting.  2.  That  our  lives  are  written  and  are  repeated 
in  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men  whom  we  have  influenced.  Fame  is  rare  enongn  and 
vain  enough.  Lasting  work^  abiding  influence,  is  common  enough  and  serious 
enough. — 0. 

Ver.  3L — **  The  iervke  of  iong  in  the  house  of  the  Lord/*  The  "  house  of  the  Lord  *' 
is  the  place  whither  we  go  primarily  to  worship  him.  So,  at  least,  it  should  be.  We 
may  have  learnt  to  go  thither  in  order  to  enjoy  sacred  oratory  or  even  for  some  less 
honourable  purpose.  The  primary  end  of  service  in  the  sanctuary  is  the  worship  of 
Qod ;  and  the  service  of  song  should  be  regarded  as  one  most  important  feature  oi 
public  worship.  In  sacred  song  we  present  ourselves  to  Ood  in  every  attitude  which  our 
souls  can  assume  toward  him,  and  if  we  went  and  sang  together  with  the  heart  as  well 
as  with  the  voice,  and  then  returned,  we  should  have  rendered  an  acceptable  offering 
and  gained  a  valuable  blessing.  If  **  the  service  of  song  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  '*  be 
perfect,  or  as  perfect  as  it  is  possible  to  make  it,  there  will  be— 

I.  An  appboaoh  to  God  in  evebt  vabiett  of  spmiruAL  access.    In  our  hymns: 

1.  We  shall  adore  him,  as  when  we  sing,  ^  Great  God,  how  infinite  art  thou  1 "  etc.,  or 
"  My  God,  how  wonderful  thou  art  I "  etc.  2.  We  shallpraise  and  bless  him,  as  when 
we  sing,  "  Oh  for  a  thousand  tongues  to  sing,"  etc.  3.  We  shall  corf  ess  our  sin  to  him, 
as  when  we  sing,  '*  Oppressed  with  sin  and  woe,"  etc.  4.  We  shall  make  suvpliccUion 
to  him ;  for  there  is  no  essential  distinction  between  "  praise  *'  and  *'  prayer.'^  In  the 
latter  we  freauently  bless  Qod  for  his  mercies,  while  in  the  former  we  often  supplicate 
him  for  his  blessing,  as  when  we  sing,  '*  Guide  me,  0  thou  great  Jehovah,"  etc.  5.  We 
shall  reconsecrate  ourselves  to  him,  as  when  we  sing,  '*  My  Saviour,  I  am  thine,"  etc., 
or  "  Lord,  in  the  strength  of  grace,"  etc.  6.  We  shall  intercede  with  him  on  behalf  of 
others,  as  when  we  sing,  "  0  Spirit  of  the  living  God,"  etc. 

IL   A  SAOBED  SUMMONS,  AS  IN    HIS    HOLY  PBE8ENCE,  TO    FIDELITT    AND    DEVOTION. 

We  shall  call  upon  ourselves  and  one  another  to  illustrate  our  truest  and  highest  con- 
victions as  Christian  men  and  the  soldiers  of  Christ,  as  when  we  sing,  "Stand  up, 
stand  up  for  Jesus ! "  etc.,  or  **  Ye  servants  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  We  shall  have  holy  and 
elevating  fellowship  with  the  whole  Church  of  Christ,  as  when  we  sing,  '*  Come,  let  us 
join  our  friends  above,"  etc. 

III.  SpiBiruAL  AS  WELL  AS  VOCAL  PABTiciPATioN.  Our  scrvice  of  song  will  be  only 
a  hollow  sound,  unmusical  in  the  Master's  ear,  if  we  rise  no  higher  than  the  harmony 
of  blending  voices.  There  must  be  living,  spiritual  sympathy.  All  souls  must  join 
together  as  well  as  all  tongues.  In  this  great  matter  of  the  service  of  song,  as  in  all 
other  things,  "  the  Lord  looketh  upon  the  heart."  We  must  "  make  melody  in  our 
hearts  "  unto  him,  or  the  sound  of  our  song  will  rise  no  higher  than  the  roof  of  our 
building ;  it  will  not  reach  his  throne. 

IV.  Univebsal  PABTICIPATION.  Choral  singing  may  find  its  place  in  the  new  dis- 
pensation as  it  did  in  the  old ;  but  it  must  take  the  *'  lower  room."  Congregational 
psalmody  is  the  desideratum,  the  perfect  thing,  the  standard  at  which  to  aim.  **  Every 
creature  in  heaven  and  on  the  earth  "  did  John  hear  saying,  '*  Blessing,  and  honour, 
and  glory,"  etc.  (Rev.  v.  13) ;  **  A  great  multitude,  which  no  man  could  number  . . . 
stood  . . .  and  criea  with  a  loud  voice,  saying.  Salvation  to  our  God,"  etc.  (Rev.  vii.  9, 10). 
Let  the  Church  on  earth  anticipate  the  Church  in  heaven,  by  every  voice,  the  voice  of 
a  great  multitude,  being  heard  in  the  accents  of  praise,  participating  in  ''  the  service  of 
song  in  the  house  of  the  Lord."    This  will  be :  1.  A  source  of  joy  to  each  participant. 

2.  A  service  to  fellow-worshippers.   3.  An  acceptable  offering  to  the  Saviour. — 0. 

Vers.  32 — 81. — Religious  ctUture,  The  promised  land  was  to  be  a  well-cultivated 
country  in  more  ways  than  one.  Not  only  was  its  soil  to  be  well  tilled,  but  its  popu- 
lation was  to  be  well  trained.    Harvests  of  grain  were  to  be  gathered  from  its  nelds. 


^  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHBONICLEa      [ch.vi.1— «L 


and  fraitB  of  holiness  were  to  be  seen  in  the  lives  of  its  sons  and  daughters.  Excellent 
and  ample  provision  was  made  for  this  religious  culture.  It  was  to  be^  as  it  should  be 
everywhere  and  always — 

L  Attbactive  in  featubk.  The  tabernacle  service  (ver.  32),  and  subsequently 
the  temple  service,  was  made  inviting  and  enjo>able  with  sacred  song  (ver.  32).  The 
singers  sang  the  praises  of  Jehovah,  and  care  was  taken  that  they  should  not  be  absent 
from  their  post.  Music,  pleasant  and  attractive,  was  to  make  the  heart  more  glad 
when  the  Israelites  were  summoned  to  go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord.  We  are  not 
only  at  liberty,  but  are  under  obligation,  to  draw  as  large  a  company  as  we  can  attract 
to  the  sanctuary  by  making  its  services  agreeable  and  inviting.  Good  reading,  good 
singing,  appropriate  prayer,  simple  and  short  enough  to  be  entered  into  by  the  people, 
earnest  and  faithful  exhortation,  provision  for  all  bodily  needs, — these  are  rightful  and 
desirable  things ;  they  should  be  religiously  provided. 

IL  Well  organized.  "  They  waited  on  their  office  according  to  their  order"  (ver. 
32).  Every  necessary  arrangement  was  made  that,  when  one  course  had  concluded, 
another  should  begin :  the  temple  would  never  be  without  those  who  were  wanted  to 
take  up  what  others  were  laying  down.  Things  must  not  be  left  to  the  impulse  of  the 
hour  or  to  happen  as  they  may :  everything  is  to  be  carefully  and  systematically 
arranged  in  the  service  of  Gro<l,  in  the  culture  of  the  soul. 

IIL  Yaeued  in  manneb  of  service.  '*  The  Levites  .  .  .  were  appointed  unto  all 
numner  of  service,"  etc.  (ver.  48).  These  were  (1)  of  many  kinds ;  and  they  were  probably 
(2)  of  many  degrees  of  importance.  Certainly  there  were  many  that  were  menial,  and 
there  must  have  been  some  that  were  valuable  and  high.  The  priests,  we  know,  had 
nearer  access  to  God,  and  engaged  in  the  more  sacred  offices  (ver.  49).  In  the  Church 
of  Christ  there  must  be  these  varieties  in  kind  and  in  degree.  We  can  only  cover  the 
whole  ground  of  sacred  service,  of  religious  culture,  by  dividing  the  work  into  many 
parts,  and  by  some  taking  higher  while  others  take  lower  posts.  Let  us  feel  that 
(I)  any  work  done  for  God  and  at  his  bidding  is  highly  honourable ;  (2)  those  who  are 
apportioned  to  the  simpler  offices  are  least  burdened  with  responsibility  ;  (3)  they  who 
undertake  the  most  sacred  functions  have  especial  need  of  human  devotedness  and 
Divine  direction. 

IV.  Based  on  popular  intelligence.  Here  we  have  the  cities  through  which  the 
Levites  were  distributed.  They  were  to  be  scattered  throughout  the  land,  to  be  mingled 
with  every  tribe,  in  order  that  they  might  impart  religious  instruction  to  all  (Deut. 
xxxiii.  10;  and  see  2  Chron.  xvii.  9;  xxx.  22;  xxxv.  3).  It  was  their  function  to 
"  teach  the  good  knowledge  of  the  Lord,"  to  make  known  and  understood  the  Law  of 
God.  The  service  of  Jehovah  was  to  rest  on  popular  intelligence.  Ignorance  is  not  the 
mother  of  devotion ;  it  is  the  fruitful  parent  of  superstition  and  folly.  Religion  builds  on 
knowledge,  thrives  on  intelligence.  It  is  the  aim  of  those  who  wish  for  a  land  well  culti- 
vated for  God  that  in  every  town  and  every  smallest  village  the  instructor  in  Christian 
truth  shall  be  found :  1.  Making  known  the  will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.     2.  Inter- 

Ereting  and  explaining,  so  far  as  may  be,  the  mind  of  the  Divine  Master.  3.  Enforcing 
is  will  by  earnest  words,  and  by  a  blameless,  beautiful  life. — C. 

Vers.  31 — 48. — Priesthood  and  service.  In  the  rather  lengthy  genealogy  of  the  priest- 
hood in  this  chapter,  there  is  much  instruction.  The  children  of  God  have  each  their 
appointed  service  in  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord.  Wo  have  here  four  kinds  of  service— 
(1)  The  service  of  rest  (ver.  31);  (2)  the  service  of  song  (ver.  31);  (3)  the  service 
of  waiting  (vers.  32,  33);  (4)  the  service  of  work  (ver.  48).  This  is  the  Divine  order 
of  every  believer's  service. 

I.  The  service  of  rest.  Christ  Jesus,  the  true  Ark,  rests  in  his  own  finished  work 
on  the  cross.  "  This  man,  after  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever,  sat  down 
on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  God."  His  people  find  their  rest  also  in  that  finished 
work.  "  We  which  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest."  This  is  the  first  in  the  Divine 
order.  There  can  be  no  service  of  song  till  we  know  the  service  of  rest.  You  cannot 
praise  God  till  you  know  your  sins  are  forgiven.  You  have  nothing  to  praise  him  for. 
This,  then,  is  the  first  service  in  which  you  are  called  to  engage — the  service  of  rest. 
Rest  In  Jesus,  rest  in  his  finished  work  for  your  soul,  rest  in  his  full  and  free  and  ever- 
lasting salvation.     Reader,  have  you  thus  found  rest  in  Christ  ? 


CH.  VI.  1—81.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  93 

II.  The  bebyicb  of  song.  After  the  servioe  of  rest,  yoa  can  enter  on  the  service  of 
song.  And  what  is  that  song  ?  "  There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them 
that  are  in  Christ  Jesus ; "  **  Unto  him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in 
his  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  Ood  and  his  Father ;  to  him 
be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen ; "  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was 
slain  to  receive  power,  and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and 
blessing."  These  are  some  of  the  notes  in  that  service  of  song  which  they  can  sing 
who  have  entered  on  the  service  of  rest.    Reader,  can  you  sing  them  ? 

III.  Next  is  THE  BKBVioE  OF  WAiTiNO ;  for  *'  They  also  serve  who  only  stand  and 
wait."  Indeed,  it  is  one  of  the  highest  services  in  which  the  redeemed  soul  can 
engage.  What  is  this  service  of  waiting?  It  is  that  spirit  that  waits  upon  God 
continually,  in  each  day  and  each  hour  lookinc:  up  and  saying,  **  Lord,  what  wilt  thou 
have  me  to  do?"  It  is  renouncing  our  own  will,  our  own  way,  our  own  inclination,  our 
own  pleasure,  and  as  '*  the  eyes  of  servants  look  unto  the  hand  of  their  masters,  and 
as  the  eyes  of  a  maiden  unto  the  hand  of  her  mistress,  so  our  eyes  wait  upon  the 
Lord  our  God."  The  cloud  may  tarry  long,  but  wait  for  it.  Waiting  time  is  not  only 
never  lost  time,  but  it  is  most  blessed  discipline  for  the  soul.  "  For  the  vision  is  yet 
for  an  appointed  time,  but  at  the  end  it  shall  speak,  and  not  lie :  though  it  tarry,  wait 
for  it ;  because  it  will  surely  come,  it  will  not  tarry "  (Hab.  ii.  3).  Reader,  are  you 
waiting  thus  upon  God  ? 

IV.  Lastly,  we  have  the  bebvicb  of  work.  Mark  what  is  said  of  this :  "  Their 
brethren  also  the  Levites  were  appointed  unto  aU  manner  of  service  of  the  tabernacle 
of  the  house  of  God  *'  (ver.  48).  Yes,  "  all  manner  of  service."  There  are  all  kinds  of 
work  in  the  great  spiritual  temple  of  God,  and  work  for  all.  And  this  work  may  be 
of  the  very  humblest  kind.  One  day  the  disciples  may  be  summoned  to  hold  converse 
with  Moses  and  Elias,  and  to  behold  their  Saviour  transfigured.  What  a  privilege! 
some  will  say.  A  few  days  afterwards  they  are  sent  to  unloose  a  colt  and  foal — to  do 
what  had  all  the  appearance  of  an  act  of  robbery  1  Yet  it  is  the  same  Master  who 
sends  on  both  erranos.  Some  of  the  eminent  ones  of  Israel,  while  passing  through 
the  wilderness  with  the  tabernacle,  had  to  spend  whole  years  in  taking  care  of  pins, 
others  in  taking  care  of  curtaius,  some  of  boards,  and  bars,  and  pillars,  and  sockets 
(Numb.  iii.).  Yet  all  was  GKxi*s  work.  It  was  to  the  Lord  they  did  it,  not  to  man. 
Look  not  at  the  work,  but  at  the  Master.  It  is  the  Master  that  makes  the  meanest 
service  grand  and  noble.  "  WTiatsoever  ye  do,  do  it  heartily,  as  to  the  Lord,  and  not 
unto  men ;  knowing  that  of  the  Lord  ye  shall  receive  the  reward  of  the  inheritance : 
for  ye  serve  the  Lord  Christ."  This  makes  the  "  cup  of  cold  water"  grand.  Jesus  1 
— this  makes  a  tattered  thought  elorious.  Jesus  I — this  ennobles  every  work,  makes 
the  meanest  honourable,  the  smallest  great.  And  the  mightiest  work  that  has  not 
this  motive  is  lighter  than  the  small  dust  of  the  balance.  Reader,  never  forget  the 
Spirit's  order  of  service :  resting,  praising,  waiting,  working. — W, 

Vers.  14, 15. — A  xoxtness  in  a  man*s  name.  In  the  midst  of  a  long  list  of  names  the 
compiler  of  this  record  stops,  as  if  one  name  set  him  thinking.  The  name  was  one 
with  a  significant  meaning ;  yet  it  was  one  that  seemed  very  strange  when  taken  in  the 
light  of  the  man's  history.  This  name,  Jehozadak,  meant  "  Jehovah  is  righteous ; " 
but  the  man  who  bore  it  "  went  into  captivity,  when  the  Lord  carried  away  Judah  and 
Jerusalem."  "  It  has  been  noted  as  remarkable  that  the  heads  of  both  the  priestly  and 
the  royal  stock  carried  to  Babylon  should  have  had  names  (Zedekiah  and  Jehozadak) 
competed  of  the  same  elements,  and  assertive  of  the  'justice  of  Gk>d,'  which  their 
sufferings  showed  forth  so  signally." 

I.  The  witness  of  a  significant  name.  This  was  a  singular  recurrence  to  the 
ways  of  an  older  time,  when  children's  names  were  given  as  embodying  circumstances 
of  birth,  feelings  of  parents,  etc.,  and  when  names  were  changed  to  express  new 
relations  of  the  life.  In  those  earlier  times  names  became  elements  of  Divine  revela- 
tions and  agents  of  Divine  witness  and  teaching.  Ab-ra-ham  taught  men  by  his  name, 
and  so  did  Is-ra-el.  Other  instances  of  revival  of  this  witness  by  names  may  be  found 
in  the  prophetic  names  given  by  the  later  prophets  to  their  children,  such  as  Immanuel, 
Shear-jashub,  and  Maher-shalal-hash-baz.  It  is  interesting  to  add  that,  among  the 
glories  of  the  future  held  out  before  the  fiedthful,  is  this,  *' And  I  will  give  him  a  neu; 


94  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa      [ch.  vl  1— 8t 

name,'*  So  Jchozadak  had  his  mission  in  his  name.  Down  into  captivity  he  went, 
but  in  all  his  intercourse  with  the  humbled  and  captive  people,  he  pleaded  with  his 
name,  saying,  "  Jehovah  is  righteous.*'  And  so  we  may  learn  that  the  least  thing 
about  us,  a  matter  as  seemingly  unimportant  as  our  name,  may  be  taken  up  into  Qod's 
service,  and  used  by  him.  Therefore  we  "  present  our  bodies'*  (our  entire  selves)  "a 
living  sacrifice" 

II.  The  posbible  contrast  between  a  man*b  name  (or  the  promibe  op  a  man's 
birth)  and  his  circumstances.  It  looked  to  be  a  most  unlikely  thing  that  a  man 
whose  very  name  declared  that  "  Jehovah  was  righteous  "  would  ever  go  into  captivity, 
and  be  remarkable  for  a  suffering  and  humiliated  life.  And  yet  this  is  the  contrast 
often  observed.  It  puzzled  Asaph  and  the  writer  of  Job  and  the  writer  of  Ecclesiastas, 
in  the  olden  time.  It  puzzles  God's  people  still  Men  bom  in  sunshine  spend  lives 
in  the  ever-deepening  shadows ;  and  sufferers  for  life,  lying  in  their  sick-beds,  are  the 
noblest  of  all  witnesses  that  "Jehovah  is  righteous."  Illustrate  by  the  exquisite 
reference  in  the  life  of  Dr.  Arnold  of  Rugby,  to  the  beautiful  witness  for  God  made 
through  long  years  by  his  invalid  sister.  Can  there  be  Jehovah's  righteousness  seen 
even  in  the  sufferings  which  come  upon  men  as  the  natural  fruitage  of  their  own 
wrong-doings?  for  that  is  precisely  the  case  with  Israel  crushed  under  the  Babylo- 
nian tyranny.  The  presence  of  Jehozadak  and  Zedekiah  among  the  captives  declared 
that  there  can  he.  Look  below  the  train  of  causes  of  which  captivity  seems  the 
natural  effect,  and  we  may  see  God's  purposes  being  accomplished,  GKxl's  laws  being 
vindicated,  and  God's  judgments  being  executed.  Ever  we  may  turn  away  from  the 
mere  course  of  history  and  details  of  events,  and  watch  the  *'  Judge  of  all  the  earth 
doing  right."  If,  however,  the  suffering  of  the  good  troubles  us,  we  may  find  rest  in 
an  appeal  to  the  great  case — our  Lord  suffered.  He  was  not  merely  **  smitten  of  God 
and  afflicted."  There  was  Divine  righteousness  in  the  affliction.  He  was  man's  Sin- 
bearer,  and  judged  for  others.  Here  is  a  firm  foundation-truth,  then,  which  no  earthly 
appearances  or  strange  human  experiences  can  shake.  Proclaim  it  once  again,  and 
proclaim  it  ever — "  Jehovah  is  righteous." — R.  T. 

Vers.  31,  32. — The  ministry  of  song.  To  King  David  is  traced  the  ordering  and 
arranging  of  the  service  of  song  in  connection  with  Divine  worship,  but  we  are  hardly 
justified  in  regarding  him  as  the  originator  of  sacred  music  and  song.  Miriam's  chant, 
and  the  songs  of  Moses,  Deborah,  Hannah,  etc.,  indicate  previous  culture  of  both  the 
gifts  of  poetry  and  of  music,  and  the  relation  in  which  both  stood  to  public  acts  of 
worship.  In  the  earlier  Mosaic  system  there  was  the  clanging  of  cymbals  and  blowing 
of  trumpets  on  special  occasions,  but  probably  the  connection  of  intelligent  words  of 
trust  and  praise  with  the  musical  chant,  in  which  the  worshippers  may  unite,  led  by  a 
trained  choir,  must  be  traced  to  David.  It  is  one  of  his  great  achievements  that  he 
helped  to  make  Divine  worship  more  interesting  and  attractive,  lifting  it  from  the 
sacrifice  of  things  to  the  sacrifice  of  praise,  the  utterance  to  God  of  thankful,  trustful, 
and  loving  feelings ;  man  offering  to  God  the  sacrifice  of  his  own  emotions,  and  finding 
Buch  sacrifice  accounted  a  **  sweet  savour."  It  will  at  once  be  recognized  that  the 
poetical  and  musical  endowments  of  David  prepared  him  to  serve  his  Gk)d  and  his 
fellows  in  this  particular  ministry.  And  his  own  practice  and  culture  of  the  gil'ts 
enlarged  his  preparation,  and  so  his  fitness  for  the  work,  when  the  providential  time 
for  it  came.  The  service  of  song  was  commenced  in  the  new  tabernacle  erected  by 
David  on  Mount  Zion,  but  probably  not  until  after  the  ark  was  restored  and  made  to 
rest  within  it ;  and  the  service  was  greatly  extended  and  elaborated  to  fit  in  with  the 
more  gorgeous  surroundings  of  Solomon's  temple.  Many  of  the  psalms  were  composed 
for  use  in  the  public  worship,  and  are  arranged  for  solo  and  chorus,  or  for  answering 
choruses.  "  David  put  the  musical  part  of  the  service  under  the  direction  of  Asaph. 
Distinctions  are  made  between  the  different  kinds  of  instruments  for  which  different 
psalms  were  suited,  indicating  that  bands  composed  of  stringed  instruments,  and  othel 
bands  composed  of  wind  instruments,  were  employed.  We  have  also  notices  of  trained 
men  and  women  singers.  The  singing  was  managed  by  responses,  or  by  solo  and 
chorus,  many  of  the  psalms  lending  themselves  readily  to  these  forms  of  music." 
Taking  the  references  in  these  verses  as  suggestive  of  a  general  truth,  we  dwell  on — 

L  The  fact  that  bono  is  a  Divine  gift.    Among  the  pagans  it  was  so  recognized. 


OH.  VL  1—81.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa  96 


as  it  was  also  in  David's  time.  It  is  singular  to  find  how  small  a  place  poetry  and 
music  took  in  the  apostolic  Church.  The  power  of  song  is  found  characteristic  of 
individuals,  and  it  often  follows  in  &mily  lines,  as  is  illustrated  in  the  cases  of  Asaph 
and  Heman.  It  becomes,  for  the  individual,  the  entrusted  talent,  the  inspired  gift,  the 
faculty  which  is  to  be  put  out  to  the  Lord's  use,  the  speciality  which  gives  a  man  his 
niche  and  his  work. 

II.  Such  a  gift  mat  be  oonseobated  to  the  Diyikb  bebviob.  It  has  its  distinctly 
fitting  place  in  relation  to  public  service ;  and  the  modern  developments  of  worship 
give  it  a  most  prominent  and  important  place.  This  is  true  of  all  forms  that  public 
worship  takest  and  may  be  precisely  illustrated  in  relation  to  each  form.  The  impor- 
tance of  song  as  attracting  to  the  house  of  Grod,  as  interesting  and  spiritually  hen^ting 
those  engaged  in  worship,  and  as  finding  audible  expression  for  devout  feeling,  should 
bo  fully  enforced.  It  therefore  becomes  the  duty  of  all  who  have  the  g^t  to  lay  it  on 
the  altar  of  God's  service  in  the  sanctuary. 

III.  Such  a  gift  mat  be  used  fob  the  comfobt  akd  help  of  othebs.  There  is  a 
sphere  for  the  ministry  of  song  in  our  homes,  in  society,  at  sick-beds,  in  visiting  Uie 
poor,  and  among  the  children.  Illustrate  by  references  to  Philip  Phillips^  the  singing 
pilpjim,  and  to  Ira  Sankey,  the  companion  of  D.  L.  Moody. 

IV.  Such  a  gift  mat  be  tbained  and  set  in  obdeb  fob  the  most  efficient 
8EBVICB,  both  in  public  worship  and  in  private  spheres.  We  are  responsible  to  GKxl 
for  faithful  and  wise  use  of  such  a  gift,  and  for  the  efficient  culture  of  it.  Impress 
on  all  who  have  tho  endowment  the  duty  of  using  it  for  all  gracious  and  loving 
and  helpful  ends  in  all  the  spheres  where  they  may  be  set.— B.  T. 

Ver.  48. — The  honourdbleness  of  lesser  service.  It  is  a  familiar  thought  to  the 
Christian  that  what  is  done  to  others  is  really  done  unto  Christ.  Uppn  it  reste  our 
Divine  Master's  observation,  and  to  it  he  gives  his  Divine  approval.  And  we  are 
permitted  even  to  consider  that  such  approval  may  rest  upon  so  small  and  so  simple  a 
thiug  as  the  ofiering  of  **  a  cup  of  water.''  We  have  the  corresponding  teaching  from 
the  older  dispensation  suggested  iu  this  verse.  What  was  done  in  the  old  tebernacle 
service  was  aono  unto  Qod,  and  was  accepted  of  him.  Common  work,  porters'  work, 
scavengers'  work,  all  the  wide  circle  of  commonplace  Levites'  work,  servante'  work, 
was  as  truly  service  to  Gk)d  as  the  offerings  of  priesto  and  the  chantings  of  Uie  singers. 
Two  things  may  be  fully  opened  and  contrasted. 

I.  Man's  estimate  of  the  gbeat  and  small.  To  him  the  great  is  that  which 
makes  a  large  figure  to  the  eye,  and  man  has  in  every  age  a  set  of  arbitrary  standards 
by  which  he  judges  the  great  and  small. 

II.  GK)d'8  estimate.  To  him  ite  mere  world  figure  and  relation  are  of  little  sigmfi- 
cance.  Things  are  judged  according  to  their  capacity  for  expressing  character,  quality, 
principle,  virtue.  To  God  a  thing  is  miserably  small  that  can  ofier  no  sphere  for  the 
utterance  of  a  soul's  love,  and  loyalty^  and  ob^ience,  and  unselfishness,  and  trust.  So 
often  to  Qod  man's  high  things  are  low,  man's  first  things  are  last.  Nothing  has 
character  in  itself.  It  ^ns  character  only  by  the  spirit  in  which  it  Is  done.  Then  wo 
ask  what  spirit  is  it  which  can  give  greatness  or  littleness  to  our  human  actions.  There 
are  certainly  these  two:  (1)  loyalty  to  Qod  and  the  right;  and  (2)  service  to  others, 
8t.  Paul  argues  that  the  "lesser  services"  have  the  honourable  stamp  of  superior 
necessity  and  usefulness.  Porters'  work  in  the  temple  bore  directly  on  decency  and 
deanlinessy  and  cultivated  the  idea  of  the  pure  and  the  orderly  in  Qod's  worship.  As 
well  do  without  prieste  as  without  Levites.  "  Careful  less  to  please  thee  much  than  to 
serve  Uiee  perfectly."— R.  T. 

Ver.  49. — The  constant  work  of  atonement.  It  is  only  to  the  atonements  of  the 
Mosaic  system  and  the  general  truths  which  they  suggest  that  we  propose  hero  to 
direct  attention.  The  subject  of  tho  Divine  atonement  for  sin  is  too  large  and  many- 
sided  for  efficient  treatment  in  any  one  homily  or  sermon ;  and  yet  there  is  the  danger 
of  producing  an  imperfect  or  erroneous  impression  when  any  piece  or  portion  of  the 
great  subject  is  isolated  for  consideration.  Tho  word  "  atonement "  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment means  a  "  covering  over,"  and  "  hiding  from  view ; "  and  it  is  applied  to  some 
lacrifice  whose  acceptableness  covers  over  and  hides  from  view  the  unworthiness  and 


90  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  vl  1— 8L 


transgression  of  him  who  brings  it,  or  to  some  act,  such  as  that  of  Phinehas,  which, 
becaiiHO  it  vindicates  the  Divine  honour,  Law,  and  righteousness,  is  regarded  as  covering 
over  iniquity,  and  making  possible  the  pardon  of  the  transgressors.  But  some  change! 
passed  in  the  connotation  of  the  term,  so  that  the  New  Testament  Greek  equivalent 
oecame  the  word  "  reconciliation,**  wliich  appears  to  regard  the  word  as  ai-ane-metUf 
but  does  not  carry  over  tlie  idea  of  covering  transgression  by  a  sacrifice  or  a  loyal  act. 
The  appointment  of  Aaron  and  his  sons  for  this  i)articular  work  emphasizes  the  fact 
that,  under  the  older  dis(x;nsation,  there  was  constant  need  for  atonement.  Every  indi- 
vidual nee<lod  that  it  should  be  made  for  liim  again  and  again,  and  every  year  a  great 
public  atonement  was  made  for  the  sins  of  the  ]>eople.  The  reason  appears  to  be  this : 
every  fresh  act  of  wilfulness  and  sin  imperilUnl  the  standing  of  the  individual  and 
the  nation  as  within  the  Divine  covenant,  and  brought  down  upon  them  all  the  penal' 
ties  of  the  broken  covenant — penalties  involving  even  the  surrender  of  life.  It  would 
help  greatly  to  clearness  of  view  if  we  recognizcil  that  atonemtnt  always  bears  relation 
to  man's  standing  bt/ore  Ood^  and  not  to  man*s  personal  cleanness  or  cleansing.  The 
constant  atonement  covered  the  sin  which  broke  the  covenant-relations,  and  restored, 
for  the  individual  and  the  nation,  the  old  covenant-conditions.  The  daily  burnt  offer- 
ing was  a  daily  atonement,  or  vindicatory  act,  which  covered  the  }XK>ple*s  sin  and  set 
them  again  in  full  covenant-standing.  The  private  burnt  offerings  did  the  same  thins 
for  the  individuaL  And  the  '*  day  of  atonement  **  did  it,  in  a  sublime  way,  as  a  grand 
national  spectacle,  for  the  due  impression  of  the  entire  nation.  As  carried  over  into 
Christianity,  and  eaining  its  moral  and  spiritual  aspects,  we  must  duly  conserve  the 
features  illustrated  in  the  Old  Testament  atonements.  These  are:  1.  Man's  loti 
itanding  with  Ood  by  reason  of  his  transgressions.  This  is  fully  argued  by  St.  Paul  in 
the  earlier  chapters  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  Beyond  and  besides  other  effects  of 
human  sin,  this  must  be  fully  recognized — it  sets  us  all  out  of  our  true  standing  with 
God,  out  of  the  covenant-relation  which  is  conditioned  by  our  obedience  and  faithful- 
ness. 2.  Man^s  standing  recovered  on  the  ground  of  something  offered  to  Ood  that  is 
infinitely  acceptable  to  him.  In  Judaic  s3rmbol,  the  spotlessly  pure  and  absolutely 
complete  animal  presented  entire.  In  Christian  history,  the  offering  of  the  person  of 
the  Son  of  God  and  Son  of  man,  the  Lamb  without  blemish  or  spot,  on  the  altar  of  the 
Divine  will.  3.  The  full  acceptance  of  the  atoning  sacrifice,  by  the  offerer,  as  t?ie  repr^^ 
sentation  to  Ood  of  his  own  will  and  purpose.  This  declared  the  sincerity  of  a  Mosaic 
atonement ;  this  makes  Christ's  offering  to  be  for  us.  There  is,  however,  for  us  no  need 
of  a  constantly  renewed  atonement.  The  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  argues 
this  from  the  surpassing  dignity  and  worth  of  the  atonement  offered  by  Christ,  and 
from  the  relation  in  which  he,  the  Divine  Son  and  Divine  man,  stands  both  to  Ghxi  and 
to  us.  But  that  one  sacrifice  is  our  constant  daily  pledge  to  God  that  we  will  keep  in 
the  covenant  of  holy  service  to  him.  Every  morning  to  name  Christ's  Name  is  to  do, 
in  effect,  what  the  Jew  did  every  morning  by  sharing  in  the  burnt  offering.  It  is  to 
declare  our  standing  within  the  new  covenant,  and  to  pledge  ourselves  afresh  that  we 
will  be  true  and  faithful  to  all  its  responsibilities  and  claims. — R.  T. 

Ver.  54. — Carnal  provisions  for  spiritual  men.  The  references  here  made  to  the 
provisions  for  the  support  of  the  priests,  and  the  allotment  of  cities  for  their  residence, 
are  designed  to  confirm  their  claim  for  reinstatement  in  their  properties  on  the  return 
from  the  Captivity.  Priests  and  Levites  had  a  right  to  this  independent  support  by 
the  appointment  of  Gkxl  and  the  good  will  of  the  people  they  served.  Levi  had  no 
proper  tribal  allotment.  This  tribe  was  separated  for  the  religious  service  of  the  whole 
nation.  Its  material  sustenance  was  made  dependent  on  the  people  it  served,  and  each 
tribe  gave  up  certain  of  its  towns  for  the  habitation  of  Lcvitical  families,  and  certain 
lands  to  provide  them  with  necessary  food.  So  we  have  iu  trod  need  for  consideration, 
the  dependence  of  religious  teachers  on  those  they  serve  in  spiritual  things  for  the  due 
supply  of  their  material  wants — a  subject  to  which  St  Paul  gives  careful  considera- 
tion, urging  that  they  who  "  preach  the  gospel  '*  may  reasonably  expect  to  "  live  of 
the  gospel."  Those  engaged  in  spiritual  ministrations  properly  expect  to  receive 
oarrial  ministrations. 

I.  Thb  Divine  designation  of  men  to  spiritual  work.  Seen  in  Aaron  and  his 
descendants^  in  the  prophets,  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself,  in  apostles,  and 


en.  VL  1—81.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  97 

equally  in  the  Christian  Church.  A  designation  recognized  in  (1)  the  demand  for  itich 
work ;  (2)  the  Divine  endowment  of  men /or  such  work;  and  (3)  the  call  of  men  to  under- 
take  such  work,  by  the  inward  impulses  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  the  leadings  of  Divine 
providence,  and  by  the  recognition  of  fitness  on  the  part  of  our  fellow-men.  Spiritual 
work  has  in  every  age  formed  a  sphere  of  its  own,  and  those  engaged  in  it  have  been 
wisely  separated  from  common  business  responsibilities.  Qood  reasons  are  found  in  (1) 
the  absorbing  character  of  spiritual  duties;  (2)  the  prolonged  and  continuous  prepara- 
tions which  such  duties  demand ;  (3)  the  relation  of  efficient  spiritual  work  to  personal 
soul-culture ;  (4)  the  exigencies  of  human  life  making  demands  on  spiritual  men  at  all 
hours  and  seasons ;  (5)  and  the  tendency  of  thorough  occupation  with  spiritual  things 
to  unfit  men  for  the  stress  and  toil  necessary  to  achieve  success  in  business  life.  Some 
forms  of  spiritual  work  (as  Sunday  school,  visiting,  etc.)  are  found  compatible  with  a 
life  amid  ordinary  carnal  scenes ;  but  it  is  well  that  some  should  leave  '*  serving  tables," 
and  give  themselves  "  to  the  Word  and  prayer," 

II.  Such  debionatios  to  bfibitual  wobk  does  not  believe  men  from  oabkal 
NECESSITIES.  The  whole  circle  of  personal  and  family  needs  remains ;  and  Ood  has 
never  seen  fit  to  employ  any  miraculous  means  for  the  supply  of  such  needs  for  Levites, 
prophets,  or  apostles.  The  exception  seems  to  be  Elijah.  But  even  God's  own  Son,  the 
world's  spiritual  Redeemer,  might  not  make  stones  bread,  though  he  felt  hunger,  thirst, 
weariness,  and  want. 

IIL  The  besponsibilitt  bests  on  men  to  abbanoe  the  oabnal  pbovisions. 
€k>d  sends  us  back  on  two  principles:  (1)  brotherhood;  (2)  gratitude  for  blessing 
received.  Each  should  find  for  the  other  what  that  other  lacked.  Those  who  are  con- 
stantly receiving  spiritual  blessings  are  bound  to  acknowledge  them  by  kindly  and 
thoughtful  gifts  and  provisions.  Such  should  ever  be  arranged  on  liberal  and  generous 
scales,  and  such  provision  is  sure  to  prove  a  means  of  grace  to  those  who  provide. 
St.  Paul's  teaching  and  example  on  this  matter  are  opposed.  He  distinctly  claimed 
full  temporal  support  for  all  Christian  teachers;  and  he  refused  such  aid  in  his  own 
case  for  such  sufficient  reasons  as  make  his  case  an  exception  that  proves  the  rule. 

Show  wherein  lies  the  distinction  between  the  spiritual  and  the  carnal,  and  carefully 
urge  that  it  must  not  be  unduly  pressed,  or  the  spiritual  man  will  exaggerate  his 
separateness,  and  the  carnal  man  will  feel  freed  from  all  claim  to  be  spiritual.  The 
carnal  man  is  to  become  spiritual,  learning  how  to  be  *'  in  the  world,  and  not  of  it ; " 
and  aid  in  attaining  this  the  spiritual  man  is  called  to  provide.  So  there  is  to  be 
mutual  helpfulness. — R.  T. 

Vers.  67,  67. — 3%6  doctrinal  witness  of  the  refuge  cities.  (See  Exod.  xxi.  13 ;  Numb. 
XXXV.  6, 11,  14 ;  Deut.  xix.  1 — 10 ;  Josh,  xx.)  The  severity  of  the  Mosaic  laws  and 
institutions  has  often  been  dwelt  on,  but  a  careful  estimate  of  the  prevailing  sentiments 
of  surrounding  nations,  in  those  early  times,  would  rather  impress  us  with  the  mer- 
cifulness  of  Judaism,  and  the  ways  in  which  customs  which  pressed  with  undue 
severity  on  individual  rights  and  liberties  were  toned  and  modified.  In  the  East  two 
things  are  familiar  which  appear  strange  and  unworthy  to  us :  (1)  irresponsible  govern- 
ments, usually  involving  tyrannous  dealings;  and  (2)  a  very  light  estimate  of  the 
value  of  human  life.  The  mercifulness  of  Judaism  is  plainly  seen  in  the  Mosaic 
appointment  of  the  refuge  cities.  The  laws  relating  to  murder  are  clearly  defined, 
and  the  different  forms  of  the  crime  are  duly  recognized.  Premeditated  murder  is 
distinguished  from  unintentional  homicide,  and  the  man  who  accidentally  kills  another 
is  secured  until  he  can  prove  the  circumstances  of  the  accident  But  in  the  arrange- 
ment made  for  him  Moses  wisely  retains  the  older  sentiment  of  justice,  which  called 
upon  the  nearest  relative  of  a  slain  man  to  act  as  his  blood-avenger,  or  goel.  Amongst 
the  other  nations,  as  the  Arab  tribes  of  the  present  day,  **  any  bloodshed  whatever, 
whether  wilful  or  accidental,  laid  the  homicide  open  to  the  duteous  revenge  of  the 
relatives  and  family  of  the  slain  person,  who  again  in  their  turn  were  then  similarly 
watched  and  hunted  by  the  opposite  party,  until  a  family  war  of  extermination  had 
legally  settled  itself  from  generation  to  generation,  without  the  least  prospect  of  a 
peaceful  termination."  Moses  allowed  the  goel  still  to  pursue ;  but  the  homicide  had 
nis  chance  of  escape.  Cities  conveniently  situated  on  both  the  west  and  east  of  Jordan 
were  made  refuge  cities,  and  the  roads  to  them  were  kept  clear.  Once  within  the  gates 
I,  ohbonicles.  h 


08 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHROXICUSL     [ch.  nx.  1— 40. 


A  calm  consideration  of  the  circumstinces  was  assureti ;  and  onlj  if  proTed  goiltj  of 
wilful  murder  could  the  man  be  delivered  up  to  the  ^/-avenger. 

I.  The  social  working  of  thx  refuge  ststem.  Its  induence  maj  be  ahown  in  : 
1.  Its  cultivation  of  a  worthier  sense  o(  justice.  2.  Its  teaching  as  to  the  relation  of 
motive  to  crime,  such  motive  giving  the  act  of  crime  its  serious  quality.  Sw  Its 
tendency  to  relieve  the  individual  from  the  thou;;ht  of  executing  his  own  vengeance. 
4.  Its  claim  to  have  a  fixed  authority  for  the  settling  of  all  social  laws,  and 
their  vindication  by  due  punishments.  A  worthy  and  strongly  enforced  legislative 
system  lies  at  the  very  foundation  of  the  peaceful  order  and  stable  progress  of  every 
nation.  The  element  of  ^-eracncU  passion  must  be  removed  if  pnn^ment  is  to  be 
wisely  administered ;  men  must  be  willing  to  put  aside  their  own  avengings  if  social 
order  is  to  be  secured.  Nations  need  to  be  very  careful  to  secure  purity  in  the  adminis- 
tration of  justice. 

IL  The  beligioub  BuoGEsnoys  of  the  beftoe  system.  These  will  differ  aooord- 
ing  to  the  school  of  thought  to  which  the  preacher  may  belong.  From  the  evangelical 
standpoint,  the  city  of  refuge  symbolizes  Christ.  The  avenger  represents  the  law- 
penalty  under  which  the  sinner  comes,  which  seeks  his  death.  There  is  made  by  Christ 
Jesus  a  free  and  open  road  to  himself,  the  Refuge.  But  the  sinner  must  himself  arise 
and  flee,  running  into  the  shelter  of  the  ever-opHjned  gates.  When  "  in  Christ,*'  if  a 
due  examination  be  made  of  his  sins,  the  all-sufiBcing  answer  which  secures  eternal 
safety  is  this:  "Jesus  has  already  borne  the  penalty  of  them  all,  and  the  Law  cannot 
revive  its  satisfied  claim."  There  is  "  no  condemnation  "  for  those  who  have  '*  fled  for 
refuge  to  lay  hold  of  the  hope  set  before  them  in  the  gospel.*' 

More  generally  treated,  we  may  leam :  I.  The  Divine  righteousness  in  affixing  a 
natural  and  necessary  penalty  to  every  act  of  sin.  2.  The  fallen  state  of  man,  in  that 
he  so  readily  makes  holy  avenging  into  passionate  revenging,  3.  The  mercifulness 
of  the  Divine  administration,  in  that  (rod  puts  man*s  passions  under  wise  restraints ; 
and  secures  the  fair,  considerate,  and  honourable  treatment  even  of  the  sinner.— «R.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  Vn. 


Ver.  1. — The  great  tribes  of  Judah  and 
Levi  being  now  passed,  as  well  as  the  minor 
ones  of  bimeon,  Reuben,  and  Gad,  we  reach 
the  sons  of  Issaohar.  Issachar  was  Jacob's 
fifth  son  by  Leah  (Gen.  xzxv.  23).  In  the 
list  of  Gen.  xlvi.  13  our  Foah  (nhns)  ap- 
pears differontly  spelt  as  Phuvah  (rn^), 
aud  Jashnb  is  found  as  Job,  which  is  cor- 
reotod  by  the  BamEO'itan  Codex  to  Jaehub, 
and  this  reading  the  Beptuagint  follows. 
In  the  other  parallel  passage  (Numb.  xxvi. 
28)  tho  Phuvuh  form  obtains,  but  the  other 
names  arc  the  same  as  here.  Tola.  We 
read  (Judg.  x.  1,  2)  of  another  person  of 
this  name,  who  judged  Israel  twenty-three 
years,  at  Hhnmir,  in  Mount  Kphraim,  and 
who  is  called  *'  tho  son  of  Puah,  tho  son  of 
Dodo,  a  man  of  Issachar."  This  is  a  good 
instance  of  how  tlio  uso  of  tho  same  names, 
though  in  difleront  order,  dung  to  a  tribe 
or  faniilv  through  long  periods. 

Vor.  2. — Tho  six  sons  of  Tola  given  here 
are  stated  to  bo  the  six  hoads  of  the  house 
at  the  time  of  the  census  of  David  (2  Sam. 
xxiv.  1 — 17).  The  verso  further  states 
that  the  Tolaitos  had  g^rown  to  number  at 
that  time  twenty-two  thooiand  six  hundred, 


and  as  this  fact  is  not  stated  elsewhere,  it  is 
pretty  clear  proof  that  the  compiler  had 
other  sources  of  information  in  addition  to 
those  possessed  by  us. 

Ver.  3. — Five.  The  name  of  Iiraliiah's 
sons  count  up  only  four ;  but  if,  with  four 
of  Kennicott's  manuscripts,  the  words,  and 
the  sons  of  Iirahiah,  should  be  omitted,  the 
five  will  count  right  for  sons  of  Usii,  and 
the  little  clause  beginning  this  verse  will 
correspond  exactly  with  that  beginning  ver. 
2.  The  Syriac,  however,  does  not  omit 
"  and  the  sons  of  Izrahiah  ;  "  but  alters  the 
numeral  ♦*  five  "  to  "  four." 

Vers.  4,  5. — The  meaning  of  these  verses, 
especially  of  the  former  of  them,  is  not  quite 
evident.  This  seems  to  say  that  as  the 
Tolaites  were  in  David's  time  twenty-two 
thousand  six  hundred,  so  the  Uzzites  taken 
from  among  them  (or  the  '*  sons  of  Izrahiah," 
as  tho  case  may  be)  numbered  thirty-six 
thousand  additional.  But  were  not  the 
Uzzites  included  in  tho  Tolaites?  and  did 
not  the  figure  thirty-six  thousand  embrace 
tho  accumulated  numbers,  whilst  the  balance 
of  fifty-one  thousand  necessary  to  make  up 
the  eighty-seven  thousand  of  ver.  5,  was 
drawn  from  all  the  other  branches  of  the 
Issachar  tribe?  This  is  not  the  view,  however, 


CH.  vu.  1—40.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


90 


generally  taken,  and  if  the  nnmbera  of  yen. 
2  and  4  are  difitinot,  the  balance  needfal 
for  ver.  5  will,  of  course,  be  twenty-eight 
tboasand  four  hundred.  It  cannot  be  denied 
that  this  view  is  favoured  by  the  special 
description  applied  to  these  Uzzites,  or 
Izrahiahites,  as  bands  of  soldiers  for  war ; 
their  disposition  and  their  training  con- 
stituting possibly  the  reason  of  their  being 
singled  out  for  further  description  from 
amoDg  the  sons  of  Tola.  The  statement  of 
the  total  number  of  the  tribe  of  Issachar  in 
David's  time  is  wonderfully  corroborated 
by  the  two  censuses  of  Moses— Numb.  L  28, 
29,  fifty-four  thousand  four  hundred ;  and 
Numb.  xzvL  23 — 25,  sixty-four  thousand 
three  hundred.  The  total  of  Issachar,  four 
loore  and  seven  thousand,  is  a  good  propor- 
tion of  the  aggregate  total  of  all  the  trioes, 
given  (2  Sam.  zziv.  8,  9)  as  eight  hundred 
thousaud.  Orove,  however,  fuids  all  the 
above  numbers,  and  makes  thereby  Issachar's 
total  (see  Smith's  *  Bible  Dictionary,'  L 
901  6)  one  hundred  and  forty-five  thousand 
six  hundred,  which  seems  disfavoured  by 
the  numbers  at  the  second  census  of  Moses. 
At  the  time  of  this  census  Issachar  came 
third  of  all  the  tribes,  only  Judah  and  Dan 
taking  precedence.  The  bands  of  soldien 
for  war.  This  expression  culminates  in 
the  word  (orm;)  **  bands,"  which  Ib  applied 
(GexL  xlix.  19)  to  Gad,  and  almost  invari- 
ably to  the  irreg^ular  but  special  bodies  of 
fighting  men  of  the  nations  round  (Autho- 
rized Version,  ch.  xii.  23  is  incorrect,  the 
Hebrew  word  being  difierent).  The  examples 
are  too  numerous  to  quote,  but  some  of  the 
more  important  instances  are  2  Kings  vi. 
23 ;  xilL  20 ;  xxiv.  2 ;  Hosea  vi  9 ;  viL  1. 

Yer.  6. — ^The  sons  of  Bex^amin;  Bela,  and 
BMher,  and  Jediael,  three.  We  have  four 
passages  for  our  authorities  as  to  the  sons 
of  Benjamin,  and  it  is  not  altogether  easy 
to  bring  them  into  verbal  harmony.  They 
are  Gen.  xlvi  21 ;  Numb,  xxvl  38—41 ;  the 
present  passage ;  and  ch.  viii.  Our  present 
passage  mentions  three  sons,  as  though  they 
were  all,  and  immediately  proceeds  to  their 
posterity.  The  list  in  Genesis  mentions 
ten,  of  whom,  however,  we  know  (Numb, 
xxvi  40 ;  ch.  viii  3,  4)  that  three,  Naaman, 
Ard,  and  Gera,  were  grandsons,  being  sons 
of  Bela,  under  which  circumstances  the 
order  in  which  the  two  former  stand  in 
Genesis  is  remarkabla  Again,  while  Becher 
is  ffiven  as  the  second  son  in  both  Genesis 
and  our  present  place,  he  is  not  mentioned 
in  Numb,  xxvi  38 — 41  and  in  oh.  viii.  1. 
Ashbel,  who  in  Genesis  is  given  as  the 
third,  is  expressly  called  the  second  son. 
Among  the  Ephndmites,  however  (Numb. 
xxvi  35),  a  Becher,  with  his  descendants 
the  Bachirites,  is  mentioned,  and  it  is  not 
improbable  that,  by  marriage,  the  family 


were  at  that  timey  for  manifest  reasons  of 
inheritance  and  possession,  reckoned  in  this 
tribe,  though  by  blood  of  the  tribe  of 
Benjamin.  This  subject  is  skilfully  dis- 
cussed by  Lord  A.  0.  Hervey  (Smith's 
'  Bible  Dictionary,'  i  175).  Lastly,  Jtdiael 
of  this  passage  and  ver.  10  is  not  found  in 
Genesis,  in  Numbers,  or  in  our  ch.  viii  This 
name  seeuLs  to  have  superseded  in  our 
passage  the  name  Ashbel  in  Genesis,  though 
it  is  impossible  to  speak  certainly.  It  cannot 
be  supposed  to  designate  the  same  person, 
but  rather  a  descendant  in  the  same  branch, 
whoso  fiekmlly  had  come  to  importance  **in 
the  days  of  David." 

Yer.  7.— And  the  sons  of  Bela.  The  first 
and  last  of  the  five  (descendants  or  heads  of 
families)  here  given,  viz.  Esbon  and  Iri,  are 
not  found  in  previous  places  among  Benja- 
mite  families,  but  are  found  (Gen.  xlvi  16; 
Numb,  xxvi  16)  among  Gadite  fiimilies. 
It  would  seem  that  by  David's  time  they 
had  become  in  some  aspects  ranked  among 
the  Benjamitcs,  though  not  originally  of 
them. 

Yer.  8. — Joaah.  This  name,  of  which 
nothing  else  is  known,  is  spelt  with  an 
avtn,  not  with  an  aleph,  as  are  the  names 
of  the  seven  other  persons  called  (Autho- 
rized Yersion)  Joash.  Jerimoth.  This  name 
is  spelt  with  a  tsere,  and  not,  as  the  Jerimoth 
of  ver.  7,  with  khirik.  All  the  names  of 
this  verse  must  be  regarded  as  those  of 
heads  of  families,  and  not  the  literal  sons 
of  Becher. 

Yer.  10.— Bilhan ;  Jensh.  Both  of  these, 
as  well  as  the  name  Bela,  are  of  Edomitish 
origin  (Gen.  xxxvi.  5,  18,  27,  32). 

Yer.  12. — Shuppim  .  .  .  and  Enppim. 
These  two,  called  (Numb,  xxxvi  39) 
"Shupham  and  Hupham,"  and  ch.  viii  5 
**  Shephuphan  and  Huram,"  are  mentioned 
(Gen.  xlvi.  21)  as  among  those  who  went 
down  vdth  Jacob  into  Egypt,  are  called 
*'  Muppim  and  Huppim,"  and  are  described 
as  **sons  of  Benjamin."  They  are  here 
described  as  sons  of  Iri,  or  Ir,  which  would 
make  them  great-g^randsons  of  Benjamin, 
a  thing  impossible.  Hnshim,  the  ions  of 
Aher.  Nothing  can  be  said  with  confidence 
of  either  of  these  names.  The  Hushim  of 
€ren.  xlvi.  23  (called  Shuham,  Numb,  xxvi 
42)  are  expressly  given  as  a  family  of  Dan, 
while  the  Hushim  of  oh.  viii.  8,  11,  is 
manifestly  the  name,  not  of  a  family,  but  of 
an  individual,  and  that  a  woman.  Bertheau 
takes  the  opportunity  of  urging,  in  connec- 
tion with  this  name,  that  Dan  is  not  entirely 
omitted  in  our  work  of  Chronicles  I  But 
his  foundation  is  surely  far  too  slender  to 
build  upon.  Bertheau  and  Zockler  (in 
Lange,  *Alt  Test.')  would  translate  init 
** another,"  or  ''the  other,"  instancing  not 
very  pertinently,  Ezra  ii.  81,  and  referring 


100 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  vii.  1— 40. 


the  allusion  to  Dan.  Ho  also  thinks  that 
this  is  corruborated  by  the  expression,  **  the 
BODS  of  Bilhah/'  in  the  next  verso. 

Ver.  13.— The  lonf  of  Naphtali.  In  an 
order  quite  different  from  the  otherwise 
parallel  pnssa^^es  (Gen.  xlvi.  24;  Numb, 
xxvl.  48 — 50),  the  tribe  of  Naphtali  is  taken. 
Naphtali  was  the  second  son  of  Rachel's 
handmaid  Bilhah,  and  in  order  of  birth  the 
fifth  son  of  Jacob,  and  was  of  course  more 
closely  allied  to  Dan,  Ephraim,  and  Benja- 
min. The  family  was  distinguished  for  its 
•pirit  throughout  its  history.  At  the  Sinai 
census  it  numbered  fifty-three  thousand  four 
hundred  fighting  men  (Numb.  i.  42, 43) ;  but 
at  the  close  of  the  wanderings  through  the 
wilderness  its  numbers  had  become  only 
forty-five  thousand  four  hundred.  Its  ter- 
ritory in  the  north,  largely  mountainous, 
bounded  by  Ashor,  Zebulun,  and  Manasseh, 
wassomoof  the  finest, and  oovercd  the  district 
afterwards  called  Qaliloc,  **the  cradle  of  the 
Christian  faith,  the  native  place  of  most  of 
tlie  apostles,  and  the  home  of  our  Lord" 
(Grove).  The  slight  difference  in  the  spell- 
ing of  Jahxiel  in  Genesis,  and  of  Shallum  in 
Numbers,  may  be  noticed.  The  following 
are  interesting  references  to  Naphtali  in  one 
or  another  portion  of  its  history : — Deut. 
xxxiii.  23  ;  JoHh.  xx.  7 ;  xxi.  32 ;  Judg.  i.  33 ; 
V.  18;  ch.  xxvii.  19;  Ezek.  xlviii.  3,  4,  34; 
Matt.  iv.  15 ;  Rev.  vii.  6.  It  played  a  con- 
siderable and  prominent  part  also  in  the 
confiicts  with  Titus  and  Vespasian,  when 
the  days  of  Jerusalem  were  numbered. 

Yer.  14.— The  Bona  of  Manasseh.  The 
tribe  of  Manasseh  has  been  partly  treated 
of  in  ch.  v.  23 — 26,  viz.  those  of  the  tribe 
who  inhabited  Gilead  and  Bashan.  Here 
those  who  inhabited  this  side  Jordan  are 
treated  of.  And  it  is  very  difficult  to  give 
anjr  coherent  account  of  the  diflferences  of 
this  passage  when  compared  with  Numb. 
xxvi.  28 — 34  and  Josh.  xvii.  1 — 4.  In  these 
places  six  families,  or  heads  of  families,  are 
noted  to  only  two,  or  at  most  three  here,  viz. 
Ashriel,  Shemida,  and  perhaps  Abiozer  (t  q, 
Jeczer,  Numb.  xxvi.  30 ;  com  p.  with  Josh, 
xvii.  2).  The  opening  clause  of  this  verse 
also  is  unmanageable  as  it  stands.  One 
way  of  reducing  it  to  coherence  would  be  to 
Bupply  the  words  "  his  wife  "  between  whom 
and  bare,  the  similarity  of  the  Hebrew  letters 
of  which  to  those  of  the  Hebrew  for  "whom  " 
might  possibly  account  for  the  loss  of  it. 
The  parenthesis  about  the  concubine  would 
then  read  with  emphasis.  But  there  is  not 
the  slightest  reason  to  suppose  there  was 
such  a  wife.  Another  way  would  be  to  read 
the  concubine  as  the  mother  of  Ashriel,  and 
prefix  a  conjunction,  "  and,'*  to  the  second 
"  bare ;  **  t.e. "  and  she  bare,"  or, "  she  bare  also 
Machir."  But  it  seems  pretty  plain  from 
Numbera  and  Joshua  that  Ashriel  was  not 


strictly  a  son,  but  only  descendant  of 
Manasseh ;  and,  further,  the  irresistible 
impression  is  that  Machir  was  the  only  son, 
strictly  speaking  (see  especially  Gen.  1.  23). 
The  position  of  Ashriel  in  our  present  pas- 
sage, first,  is  also  very  unsatisfactory  in  face 
of  Gen.  1.  23  and  the  other  references  already 
given. 

Ver.  15. — Xaaohah.  Of  this  Maachah, 
one  among  ten  of  the  same  name,  nothing 
else  is  known.  The  Pcshito  Syriac  makes 
her  the  mother  instead  of  wife  of  Machir. 
The  distinct  mention  of  the  marriage  of  a 
Manassite  to  a  Benjamite  woman  is  to  be 
noticed.  Zelophehad.  The  meaning  of  the 
preceding  words,  and  the  name  of  the  leoond, 
IS  unintelligible.  Zelophehad  was  son  of 
Hcphcn,  who  was  (through  Gilead  and 
Machir)  great-grandson  of  Manasseh  (Josh. 
xvii.  3).  The  number  and  names  and  wise 
appeal  and  success  of  the  daughters  here 
spoken  of,  are  given  in  Josh.  xvii.  3 — 6; 
Numb.  xxvi.  33 ;  xxvii.  1 — 1 1 ;  xxxvi.  5 — 12. 

Ver.  17. — Bedan.  While  all  the  names  of 
the  preceding  verse  are  strange  to  us,  this 
name  excites  much  interest,  as  possibly  to  be 
identified  with  the  Bedan  (1  Sam.  xii.  11) 
who  is  placed  after  Jerubbaal  (t.^.  Oideon\ 
and  before  Jephthah  and  Samuel.  Who  in 
the  Book  of  Judges  is  to  answer  to  this 
Bedan  of  the  Book  of  Samuel  it  is  impossible 
to  say.  See  Bishop  Cotton's  excellent  short 
article  (Smith's  *  Bible  Dictionary,'  i.  177). 
These  were  the  sons  of  Oilead  (see  ver.  14). 
The  name  Gilead  surpassed  the  name 
Machir,  and  even  rivalled  that  of  Manasseh 
itself. 

Ver.  18. — Abiezer.  He  is  the  nephew, 
then,  of  Gilead,  and  grandson  of  Machir. 
Gideon  sprang  from  him  (Judg.  vi.  11 ;  viii. 
32).  The  name  of  the  mother,  Hammoleketh, 
is  compounded  of  the  article  and  Moleketh, 
or  Melekcth,  a  Chaldoe  form,  found  several 
times  in  the  Book  of  Jeremiah,  of  the  word 
for  '* queen."  Of  Ishod  and  Mahalah  nothing 
is  known,  but  the  latter  name  is  identical 
with  Mahlah,  one  of  the  five  daughters  of 
Zelophehad. 

Ver.  19.— Shemidah.  Josh.  xvii.  2  tells 
us  that  the  descendants  of  Shemida  obtained 
their  inheritance  among  the  male  children 
of  Manasseh;  and  Numb.  xxvL  32  places 
him  in  the  Gilead  family.  Of  Ahian,  Likhl, 
Aniam,  nothing  else  is  known.  Sheohem, 
If  this  name  is  rightly  placed  under  Shemi- 
dah, it  must  be  concluded  from  Josh.  xvlL  2 
and  Numb.  xxvi.  31  that  it  is  a  different 
Shechem  from  the  one  there  found.  This 
latter  was  also  a  Manassite,  belonged  to  the 
family  of  Gilead,  and  was  head  of  a  family 
named  Shechemites  after  him.  His  de- 
scendants are  spoken  of  as  the  **Bons  of 
Shechem  "  in  the  above  passage  of  Joshua. 

Vers.  20— 27.— The  chief  difticulty  of  this 


> 


CH.  vn.  1-40.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


101 


passage  lies  in  reoonoUing  the  points  of 
chronology  which  it  forces  to  the  surface. 
Vers.  20,  21,  purport  to  contain  the  line  of 
descent  from  Ephraim  through  his  son  Shu- 
thelah  to  the  seventh  generation,  viz.  to 
another  Shuthelah.     The  remaining  two 
names,  Ezer  and  Elead,  may  perhaps  he  two 
brothers  of  the  first  Shuthelah,  i.e.  own  sons 
of  Ephraim.    If  it  be  so,  these  two  must  not 
be  supposed  to  correspond  with  Becher  and 
Tahan,  called  ''sons  of  Ephraim*'  in  Numb, 
xxvi.  35;  for  it  is  evident  that  they  were 
generations    nuxeeding  Shuthelah.     Now, 
Ephraim  was  bom  in  £gYpt  (Gen.  xlvi  20), 
so  that,  on  the  above  showing,  the  actual 
sons  of  Ephraim  must   have  made  some 
incursion  from  Egypt  into  the  territories  of 
the  settled  or  possibly  aboriginal  inhabit- 
ants of  Oath,  and  met  the  fate  over  which 
Ephraim  so  mourned.    Such  excursions  on 
the  part  of  the  Israelites  out  of  Egypt  have 
very  little  collateral  evidence.    But  there 
would  seem  to  be  no  impossibility  in  the 
matter,  considering  Gen.  1.  13 — 23.    Next, 
vers.  23—27  seem  to  say  that  in  his  sorrow 
Ephraim  has  another  son,  whom  he  names 
Beriah,  and  of  whose  line  in  the  ninth  de- 
scent comes  Joshua,  the  son  of  Nun.    This 
also  is  very  doubtful.    It  may  very  possibly 
be  that  the  parenthesis  continues  to  the  end 
of  ver.  23  or  24,  and  that  vers.  25—27  carry 
on  the  generations  from  ver.  21.    Meantime 
welcome  l^ht  breaks  in  at  the  stage  (ver. 
26)  at  which  Ammihud  and  Elishama  are 
mentioned.    For  we  find  these  immediate 
ancestors  of  the  great  Joshua  repeatedly 
mentioned  at   the  period  of  the  Exodus 
(Numb,  i  10;  ii.l8;  viL48,  etc.);  yet  none 
of  these  places  assist  us  to  say  that  he  did 
or  did  not  come  through  Beriah.     It  is 
impossible  to  solve  with  any  certainty  the 
involved  question  of  chronology  and  genea- 
logy presented  by  this  section.    The  passage 
is  evidently  mutilated  and  corrupt,  though 
vindicating  a  high  antiquity.  A  very  original 
presentation  of  the  whole  section,  as  inge- 
nious as  it  is  conjectural,  by  Lord  A.C.  Her- 
vey,  may  be  found  in  the  art.  **  Shuthelah," 
Smith's  'Bible  Dictionary,'  ui.  1304.     It 
is  well  worthy  of  attention  that  a  great  point 
is  made  in  bringing  Joshua  to  the  place  of 
the  eighth  generation  from  Joseph,  in  near 
analogy  with    the   numbers  in  so  many 
other  known  cases,  of  the  generations  that 
intervened  from  the  descent  into  Egypt  to 
the  entrance  into  Canaan.    There  also  may 
be  found  the  most  and  best  that  can  be  said 
againfet  the  literal  reading  of  what  is  here 
written  respecting  the  men  of  Gath  and  the 
cattle. 

Ver.  21. — Beoauie  fhey— t.^.  the  men  of 
Ephraim — eame  down  to  take  away  their 
eattle.  This  certainly  may  bo  translated, 
when  they  (i.0.  the  men  of  (iath)  came  dovon 


(i.e.  into  ChMhen")  to  plunder  their  catiie  (jLe, 
the  cattle  of  Ephraim). 

Ver.  24.— His  daughter.  If  the  literal 
interpretation  of  this  whole  section  be  ac- 
cepted, according  to  which  both  Ephraim 
and  Beriah  must  have  passed  their  lifetime 
in  Egypt,  the  "  daughter,"  strictly  so  called, 
of  eitner  the  one  or  the  other  could  not 
have  been  the  founder  of  the  places  here 
mentioned.  The  word  "daughter"  must, 
therefore,  represent  simply  a  female  descend- 
ant. (For  other  references  to  Beth-horon, 
see  Josh.  x.  10, 11;  xvi  3,  5;  zviiL  13,  14; 
xxi.  20-22.) 

Yer.  25.— -Of  the  names  Sephah  and  Be* 
sheph  nothing  else  is  known. 

Ver.  27. — ^Non.  The  same  as  Nun  (Numb, 
xiii.  8. 16> 

Ver.  28. — Kaaran.  This  place  is  probably 
the  same  with  the  Naarath  or  Naarah  of 
Josh.  xvi.  7 ;  though  here  it  is  said  to  be  an 
eastward  limit,  and  there  its  description 
might  rather  seem  that  of  a  southward 
limit.  Gaau  This  name  can  scarcely  de- 
signate the  well-known  Gkza,  assigned  to 
Judah  (Josh.  xv.  47;  Judg.  i.  18),  but  bo 
largely  the  prey  of  the  Philistines  (Judg. 
iii.  3 ;  xvi  21 ;  1  Sam.  vL  17). 

Ver.  29. — ^The  places  mentioned  in  this 
verse  were  assigned  to  Manasseh.  BeUi- 
shean  was  on  the  west  of  Jordan,  and  was 
within  the  bordera  of  Issachar  (Josh.  xviL 
11—13;  1  Kings  iv.  11,  12).  Dor  was 
within  the  borders  of  Asher  (Josh.  xi.  1,  2 ; 
xii.  23 ;  xvii.  11 ;  Judg.  i.  27, 28).  Taanaoh. 
This  place  also  lay  within  the  bordera  of 
Issachar  or  Asher  (Josh.  xvii.  11, 12;  xxi. 
25 ;  Judg.  V.  19).  Hegiddo.  This  place  is 
constantly  coupled  with  the  preceding.  It 
lav  on  the  south  of  the  plain  of  Elsdraelon 
(Josh.  xiL  21 ;  xvii.  12;  Judg.  L  27;  1  Kings 
iv.  12). 

Ver.  30. — The  same  four  sons  and  one 
daughter  of  Asher  are  found  in  Gen.  xlvL 
17 ;  but  the  name  of  the  second  son  is  want- 
ing to  the  list  of  familiee  descended  from 
Asher  of  Numb.  xxvi.  44 — 47,  and  the  name 
of  the  daugliter  is  given  by  itself,  and  not 
as  furnishing  a  family. 

Ver.  31. — These  two  grandsons  are  also 
found  in  the  above  lists  of  both  Genesis  and 
Numbers;  but  nothing  is  found  there  to 
explain  the  name  Binavith,  which  the  Keri 
spells  with  yodj  the  Kethiv  with  vau.  With 
the  former  spelling  its  signification  would 
be  the  "  well  of  olives,"  and  would  point  to 
its  being  the  name  of  a  place  rather  than  of 
a  person,  and,  as  some  think,  that  person  a 
woman  (Gesenius,  'Thes.,'  239).  (For  in- 
stances of  the  expression  "father"  of  a 
place,  see  ch.  ii.  51,  52 ;  iv.  4,  5.) 

Ver.  32.— Japhlet.  This  son  of  Hebei^ 
not  otherwise  known,  cannot  be  identified 
with    the   "Japhletite"   of  Josh.  xvi.  8 


102 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHROXICLEa     [cH.  vn.  1— 4a 


(liimpfrlf  an  enizma, ,  on  the  south  boundary 
of  EphrHirn,  littween  the  m-ther  B«  th-hornn 
and  At'iroth.    Bhomer;  i.q.  >hamer  of  vt-r.  34. 

Ver.  :i:i.— Nothing,  except  what  f*»ll'^wa 
in  the  next  TerHei*,  is  known  of  the  tbn-e 
Wftna  of  Jttphlet  ^iren  in  this  verse.  In 
thern  we  r<rach  the  fourth  peueration  fr«»m 
Abher.  The  g- neratifins  then  travel  for- 
wanl  through  Helem,  prrsumahly  a  third 
brother  of  Jnphli.tf  fiaiifeing  the  eons  of 
Hhanu  r,  or  H homer,  presumably  Japlilet*s 
■econd  brother. 

Vein.  81,  .'15. — Ahl.  It  seems  impossible 
to  dwuhi  with  certainty  whether  thid  is  the 
name  of  a  p^TKon  or  \vhether,  with  the  rau, 
whi^h  oth'-rwine  bf-gins  the  next  word,  it 
thoui'l  not  Ui  translated  **  his  brother/'  ie. 
the  bnither  of  Japhlet.  In  ver.  32  the 
names  of  thnro  brothers  arc  giv<n,  sons  of 
HelMT,  viz.  Japhlet,  Shomer,  and  Hotham. 
Now,  the  name  Helem,  in  ver.  35,  is  sup- 
ftmul  U)  \ftiut  if)  this  Ilothum.  If  it  1)6  so, 
it  would  nt)  far  \>e  an  argument  that  Ahi,  in 
ver.  Hi,  should  l>o  translated  **  his  hrother," 
In  eorrestiofidenco  with  the  undoubt<.'d  *'  his 
brother*  of  ver.  35.  Of  no  one  of  the 
nam<!H  in  these  verses  is  anything  further 
known. 

V<:rs.  30  -  38.— Vers.  30  and  37  ptirport  to 
glre  UN  eleven  s^ms  of  Zophah,  son  of  Ilulcm, 
and  graiidwm  of  Ilebcr,  and  these  hring  us 
to  till)  m'xth  gf^neraiifin  from  Anher;  and 
l^r,n\n  (ver.  3H),  we  reach  the  nevcnth  in 
t\vm'i:\\i  from  AmIi^t,  in  the  thn-e  Hona  of 
J«th«r,  or  Ithran,  the  Itnlh  son  of  Zophah. 

V<ir  351.  una.  Whellwjr  in  this  ver^o  we 
gnt  U}  the  ntfhth  gfM K-ration  doiKjiids  on  who 
may  \m  meant  by  VUa,    It  is  im|K)H8iblo  to 


answer  the  question.  The  anggeatioQ  has 
been  made  that  the  name  may,  by  some 
great  error  of  copyists,  stand  for  either 
Zophah*s  last  son  Beera,  or,  by  happier  oon- 
jvcture,  Jether's  last  son,  Ara.  But  neither 
professes  to  be  anything  better  than  mere 
conjecture. 

Ver.  40.— Twenty  and  nz  thonwmd.  The 
number  of  Asherites,  **  of  twenty  years  old 
and  upwards,  able  to  go  fortn  to  war," 
{riven  in  Xumb.  L  40,  41,  was  forty-one 
thousand  five  hundred.  Forty  years  later 
(Numb.  xxvi.  44 — 47 ;  comp.  ver.  2)  the 
number  was  fifty-three  thousand  four  hun- 
dred. But  it  is  supposed  that  the  twenty- 
six  thousand  of  tliis  verse  may  refer  only 
to  a  portion  of  the  tribe,  i.e.  to  the  large 
and  distin^uishe<l  family  of  Heber.  It  is 
to  be  notict-d  tliat  the  name  of  the  tribe  of 
Asher  is  nut  found  in  the  list  of  the  **  chief 
rulers  "  lower  down  in  this  book  (ch.  zxvii. 
10 — 22).  The  tone  also  in  which  reference 
is  made  to  Asher  and  Manasseh  and  Zebn- 
lun  coming  to  Jerusalem  to  Hezekiah*s 
Passover  (2  Chron.  xxx.  11)  is  very  notice- 
able. This  tribe,  with  Simeon,  gare  no 
judge  to  the  nation,  and  of  all  the  tribes 
west  of  the  Jordan  they  staud  by  themselves 
in  this  redi)ect  There  is  an  ancient  legend 
that  the  parents  of  St  Paul  lived  within 
the  territories  of  Asher,  at  the  place  called 
Ahlab  in  Judg.  i.  31,  otherwise  Giscala,  or 
Gush  Chalcb.  Against  the  uncertainty  of 
the  legend  we  may  gratefully  remember  the 
certainty  of  the  history  of  the  **  Anna,  .  .  , 
daughter  of  Phauuel,  of  the  tribe  of  Aser 
(Luke  ii.  30). 


t» 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver,  22,--Afourn{ng  and  conmlation.  There  is  much  obscurity  about  this  passage, 
SN  n«'ordirt^  an  hiHtorical  incident.  But,  though  it  is  not  easy  to  decide  who  the  per- 
soitH  rcf'Trnd  to  were  and  nt  what  time  they  lived,  the  incident  is  a  witness  to  the 
(!oinfiiiniily  of  htitnan  nature,  lK)th  in  the  bitterness  of  the  earthly  lot  and  in  the  con- 
solutloiiM  wllh  whir,h  it  abounds.     Wo  have  hero  brought  before  us — 

I.  IlKiiKAVKHKNT.  From  the  first  it  has  been  the  fate  of  men  to  endure  this  sorrow, 
for  our  dayM  on  ('urth  ani  as  a  shadow,  and  death  takes  away  from  us  all  in  turn  the 
Jnys  of  (Mir  hearts,  the  dcsiro  of  our  eyes,  the  objects  of  our  hopes.  And  it  is  to  be 
obnrrved  that  theHtidden  and  violent  death  of  our  beloved  ones  is  peculiarly  distressing. 
When  the  young  are  cut  <l()wn  by  wicked  bauds,  in  tumult  or  in  war,  the  shock  to 
survlvnrM  iit  cHiwelally  painful. 

II.  M(MiiiNiN<».  Lamentation  for  our  dead  is  natural  and  right.  "Jesus  wept  "at 
La/.aruM'ii  grave.  There  is  KUch  n  tldng  as  ennctified  sorrow.  In  certain  cases,  even 
iMilgruint  griijf  and  i)r()l()nged  mourning  arc  excusal)lo.  "The  heart  knoweth  his  own 
blllniH'HH."     'I'ho  parent  weeps  for  the  children  because  they  are  not. 

III.  Sympathy  and  conkoimtion.  Those  who  are  near  akin  or  intimate  friends  are 
<ixpe('l.rd  tt»  olVor  their  allertionate  condolence  to  the  bereaved  in  the  hour  of  sorrow  and 
cleMolation.  This  is  the  obligation  of  friendship)  and  its  privilege  also.  Helpful  and 
OiJUHolatury  is  true  sympathy ;  for  who  would  wish  to  bear  his  heaviest  burden  alone? 
Yut  tho  most  i>roiitAblo  mlnistrntious  in  boi-cnvcmcnt  are  those  by  which  the  heart  of 


OH.  vn.  1—40.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  103 

the  bereaved  is  directed  to  take  refuge  in  the  fatherly  wisdom  and  loye  of  God,  and 
in  the  tender  sympathy  of  that  High  Priest  who  "  in  all  our  afiUctions  ...  is  afflicted," 
and  who  is  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities.'* — T. 

Ver.  24. — A  famotu  woman.  We  know  nothing  else  of  Sherah  than  is  recorded  in 
this  verse.  Whether  she  did  herself  build  or  eularge  and  fortify  these  towns,  or 
whether  this  was  the  work  of  her  descendants,  is  not  easy  to  decide.  The  fact,  in  any 
case,  is  of  interest  for  us,  that  her  name  should  be  put  upon  record  in  this  passage,  and 
should  be  associated  with  great  works. 

I.   A   WOMAN   MAT    BE   SELECTED   BT    PbOYIDENOB    TO   FULFIL   80MB    VAST   DESIGN. 

History  records  great  feats  of  feminine  valour ;  for  women  have  defended  castles  and 
cities  by  their  heroism,  and  delivered  nations,  by  personal  bravery  and  by  the 
enthusiastic  support  they  have  commanded.  Some  nations,  as  e,g,  our  own,  number 
among  their  sovereigns  queens  of  singular  sagacity  and  statesmanship.  In  art  and  in 
literature,  and  even  in  science,  women  have,  in  oar  own  times,  won  for  themselves 
a  high  position  and  a  wide  renown. 

II.  The  wobk  of  noble  women  is  ESPECfiALLT  TO  BUILD.  If  not  cities,  societies 
and  families  have  again  and  again  been  built  up  in  strength  and  stateliness  and  ser- 
viceableness  through  feminine  wisdom,  sympathy,  and  devotedness.  A  gifted  and 
fascinating  woman  has  often  been  the  architect  of  fortune,  and,  as  the  centre  and 
inspiration  of  intellectual  and  social  life,  has  not  only  laid  the  foundations,  but  reared 
the  edifice  of  political  and  social  power. 

III.  A  GIFTED  woman's  WORTHIEST  WORK  18  WORK  FOB  Gk>D.  How  many  such  shine 
from  the  pages  of  inspiration  1  Sarah,  Miriam,  Ruth,  Hannah,  Esther,  in  the  Old  l^estar 
ment;  the  Maries,  Jrriscilla,  Dorcas,  Lydia,  in  the  New  Testament,  may  serve  as 
examples.  No  work  is  so  congenial  to  the  female  character,  so  truly  graceful  and 
ornamental  to  the  feminine  life,  as  work  for  Christ. 

IV.  A  WOMAN  WHO  SERVES  THE  LORD  AND  LEAVES  AN  EXAMPLE  OF  PIETT  AND  USE- 
FULNESS IS  WORTHY  OF  BEING  HELD  IN  LASTING  BEMEMBBANCE.       If  the  inspired  writer 

thought  well  to  record  the  name  of  the  builder  of  Beth-horon,  surely  the  memory  of  the 
noblewomen  of  our  Lord's  spiritual  kingdom  should  never  fade. — T. 

Vers.  1 — ^19. — "  The  old  order  changeth*'  It  is  a  significant  fact  that,  in  this  enumera- 
tion of  names  and  these  references  to  ancient  times,  the  only  complimentary  epithets 
used  relate  to  military  afiairs.  "  Their  brethren  among  all  the  families  of  Issachar  were 
valiant  men  of  might "  (ver.  5) ;  "  The  sons  of  Bela  .  .  .  mighty  men  of  valour"  (ver. 
7) ;  •*  The  sons  of  Becher  .  .  .  mighty  men  of  valour  '*  (vers.  8,  9 ;  see  ver.  11).  We 
have  here  an  illustration  of  the  fact^ 

I.  That  military  valour  formed  a  labgb  part  of  ancient  yibttte.  The 
history  of  the  ancient  peoples,  Egyptians,  Assyrians,  Greek,  Romans,  etc.,  proves  this 
statement  with  only  too  monotonous  a  repetition.  The  history  of  the  Jews,  the  ancient 
people  of  Grod,  adds  one  more  note  of  confirmation.  We  might  have  supposed  it  would 
be  otherwise ;  we  might  have  judged  that  they  would  constitute  the  one  exception  to 
the  rule.  But,  so  doing,  we  should  have  erred.  War  involves  certain  most  painful 
incidents,  but  it  is  not  absolutely  and  intrinsically  wrong.  The  simple  fact  that  God 
sanctioned  it  in  many  instances,  that  he  commanded  his  people  to  engage  in  it,  and 
that  he  desired  to  be  inquired  of  and  supplicated  in  regard  to  it,  distinctly  settles  that 
)X)int.  1.  It  has  to  be  remembered  that  war  does  call  out  the  heroic  virtues  of  (1) 
patient  endurance,  (2)  implicit  trust  in  a  faithful  leader,  (3)  courageous  daring  of 
utmost  danger,  and  consequent  (4)  readiness  to  resign  that  which  is  most  precious  at 
the  call  of  duty,  on  behalf  of  country  or  in  obedience  to  what  seems  to  be  the  will  of 
God.  2.  It  has  to  be  remembered  that  men  have  engaged  in  it  without  any  conscious 
departure  from  the  obligations  they  were  under  to  their  kind ;  therefore  without  any 
sense  of  its  evil,  and  therefore  without  any  injury  to  their  conscience  and  character. 
The  idea  that  all  warfare  is  positively  wrong  is  a  modern  sentiment.  With  quite  as 
clear  a  conscience  armies  have  gone  out  to  battle  as  merchants  have  left  home  to  traffic, 
or  travellers  to  explore,  or  even  missionaries  to  evangelize.  Other  thoughts  are  in  our 
minds,  other  feelings  in  our  hearts,  because  we  have  learnt^ 

II.  That  human  life  is  now  to  be  begabded  as  a  veby  bagbed  thing.    At  the 


104  THE  HRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,     [oh.  vn.  1—40. 


feet  of  Christ  we  have  learnt  that  one  human  soul  is  a  thing  of  inestimable  worth. 
Hence  wo  have  come  to  prize,  as  most  precious,  one  human  life;  and  hence  we  have  learnt 
to  shrink  from  volnntftrily  taking  it  away.  That  which  God  only  can  give  or  renew, 
from  which  he  requires  so  much,  and  on  which  such  groat  and  lasting  issues  hang,— 
this  is  something  to  be  reverently  treated.  And  we  have  been  led  to  regard  with  aversion, 
with  deep  rcpugDaDce,  that  ruthless  system,  war,  which  mows  down  human  bodies 
without  remorse,  and  which  counts  amongst  its  triumphs  the  number  of  the  slain.  We 
gratefully  recognize  the  fact  that,  under  the  beneficent  reign  of  the  Trince  of  peace,  we 
are  arriving  at  the  conclusion — 

III.  That  tije  wortuiest  tbiumphs  we  can  win  are  those  we  gain  in  peaoeful 
CONTESTS.  1.  In  the  struggle  we  maintain  against  the  enemies  within  us  :  the  privation 
we  intiict  on  ourselves  iu  foregoing  things  which  are  evil  and  injurious,  the  peraeveraace 
with  which  we  contend  against  recurring  |>assions  that  will  not  be  soon  silenced  and 
•lain.  2.  In  the  war  which  we  wage  against  the  adversaries  of  God  and  man:  the 
hardship  we  suffer  (2  Tim.  ii.  3),  the  risk  we  run  (danger  sometimes  ending  in  death 
Itself,  as  many  a  missionary  chronicle  will  tell),  the  loyalty  we  show  to  our  great 
Captain,  the  faith  we  exercise  in  the  overruling  mind  and  the  conquering  arm  of  our 
rcueeniing  Ood. — C. 

Vers.  20 — 24. — Divine  comptntations.  We  have,  in  brief,  a  story  of  family  life  which 
•till  has  its  interest  and  application  to  us  in  our  domestic  relations.    We  gather—- 

I.  '1*HAT    URIKVOUB   AFFLICTION   SOMETIMES  FALLS   ON   A   HUMAN    HOME   WITH   OVER- 

wiiKLMiN(}  HUDDKNNESH.  Several  sons  of  one  "  house  "  were  slain  in  one  day.  Which- 
ever party  was  the  aggressor,  and  whether  the  Israelites  were  guilty  or  unfortunate, 
the  blow  fell  with  terrible  effect  on  the  elders  of  the  family.  *'  Ephraim  their  father 
niourne<l  many  days  *'  (vcr.  22).  "  Misfortunes  never  come  alone  "  is  only  a  hasty  and 
false  generalization  :  they  generally  do  come  alone.  It  is  far  truer  to  say, ''  One  by  one 
our  B<jrrowM  meet  us."  For  usually  God  tempers  our  griefs  by  sending  them  singly 
and  with  more  or  less  of  interval  as  also  of  preparation.  More  often  than  not  the  evil 
which  awaits  us  "  casts  its  shadow  before  it,  and  we  prepare  our  hearts  for  the  coming 
trouble.  liut  sometimes  it  is  otherwise.  Occasionally,  awful,  aggravated,  multiplied 
fif>rrows  surge  around  us,  and  all  the  waves  and  billows  of  distress  go  over  us  without 
fon? warning ;  from  the  height  of  prosperity  and  joy  we  go  down,  in  one  bitter  hour,  to  the 
dark  d(!ptli  of  loss  and  woe.  No  man  can  tell  what  tragedy  is  at  hand  for  himself  and 
Ids  hoiihe.  The  holiest,  the  most  beloved  of  God,  may  be  standing,  at  any  moment, 
in  immediate  \hm\\  of  an  almost  unendurable  calamity. 

II.  I'll  AT  (Joi)  HAH  MKIUJIKUL  COMPENSATIONS  IN  STORE   FOR  HIS  STRICKEN  CHILDREN. 

Ho  wounds  that  he  may  heal ;  and  that,  as  he  heals,  he  may  bless  and  save.  It  may  be 
that  he  will  send  :  1.  Ilurnan  sympathy.  Ephraim's  "  brethren  came  to  comfort  him.** 
Though  the  sympathy  of  human  hearts  cannot  '*do  "  anything  for  us,  as  men  of  coarse 
iitindH  say,  it  can  and  does  introduce  into  our  hearts  a  soothing  balm  which  is  very 
jireciouH  to  sensitive  and  res|X)nsive  souls.  It  is  seldom  wasted ;  it  is  generally  appre- 
ciated, and  is  often  most  highly  esteemed.  Or  God  may  provide  :  2.  That  which  replaces 
the  loHs,  ^\\i  the  bereaved  Kphraim  he  gave  another  child,  whose  name,  Beriah,  was 
pathetically  suggestive  of  this  sad  breach,  but  whose  presence  in  the  home  must  have 
gone  no  small  way  to  repair  it.  And  now  it  often  happens  that,  instead  of  the  child 
that  1m  taken,  comes  the  infant  who  is  sent  to  fill  its  parents*  hearts  as  well  as  its  mother's 
arms;  or  instead  of  the  fortune  that  is  lost  the  competency  that  is  gained.  Or  GxkI 
may  send  :  [\.  Some  other  compensating  gift.  From  this  stricken  house  he  took  away 
Home  parental  love  by  the  death  of  sons,  but  he  gave  a  large  measure  of  parental  joy  by 
the  enterprising  sj)irit  of  a  daughter  (ver.  24).  It  may  be  well  for  us  that  Gtjd  should 
nxchange  one  source  of  happiness  for  another.  Long- con  tinned  enjoyment  of  one  satis- 
faction often  l)e;;ets  a  false  and  guilty  notion  of  independence,  and  even  right  of 
IjoHsession  in  the  himian  heart.  So  God  withdraws  his  gift  which  is  ceasing  to  be  a 
dessing;  but  he  gives  in  place  of  it  some  other  good  which  will  work  no  evil  to  the 
•oul.  4.  Spiritual  acquisition.  When  Ephraim  was  "  mourning  many  days,"  his  heart 
was  tender,  his  mind  docile,  his  soul  receptive.  Then,  we  may  venture  to  say,  he  looked 
lip  to  God  with  special  earnestness,  with  filial  submission,  with  peculiar  devotion. 
Oroat  sorrows,  sweeping  away  oarthly  satisfactions  and  revealing  our  own  helplessness^ 


CH.  vn.  1— 40J     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  105 

make  the  aid  and  arm  of  man  seem  but  feebleness  and  cast  us  back  on  Qod,  Then  we 
hide  in  him ;  then  we  find  that  he  is  the  Refuge  and  the  Strength  of  his  people,  the  true 
Dwelling-place  of  the  human  soul  in  all  generations.  In  great  and  deep  affliction,  as 
at  no  other  time,  we  (1)  see  the  meaning  and  feel  the  force  of  sacred  truths  ;  (2)  come 
into  close  fellowship  with  the  Father,  the  Friend,  the  Comforter  of  the  human  spirit ; 
(3)  realize  the  littleness  of  earthly  life  and  the  preciousness  of  the  heritage  which  is 
beyond.    Bereft  of  human  wealth,  we  are  "  rich  towards  God." — C. 

Ver.  27. — Joshua  and  Jestu :  resemblance  and  contrast.  The  identity  of  the  names— 
the  one  being  the  Greek  form  of  the  other — has  led  the  Church  to  look  on  the  Hebrew 
captain  as  a  type  of  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  (For  confirmation,  see  Heb.  iv.  8.) 
There  are  certain  resemblances,  though  the  contrasts  are  as  striking  if  not  as  numerous. 

I.  Resemblances  between  Joshua  and  Jesus.  1.  They  both  bore  the  same  name. 
2.  They  both  brought  to  the  people  of  God  deliverance  from  the  enemies  of  GK>d.  8. 
They  were  both  obsdient  to  "  him  that  sent  them,'*  and  wrought  out  the  work  which 
he  gave  them  to  do.  4.  They  both  led  (or,  lead)  the  people  of  God  into  the  promised 
land.  5.  They  both  began  their  earthly  life  in  obscurity,  and  rose  (or,  have  risen)  to  the 
highest  point  of  human  honour. 

II.  Contrasts  between  the  human  captain  and  the  Divine  Delivebse.  1. 
Joshua  was  engaged  in  the  work  of  his  life  for  (at  least)  thirty  years ;  the  Lord  for  (at 
most)  three.  2.  Joshua  fought  with  carnal  weapons,  and  won  victories  with  sword  of 
steel ;  Christ  fought  only  with  spiritual  weapons,  and  his  conquest  is  the  triumph  of 
truth  and  grace.  3.  Joshua  had  good  reason  to  fear  that  by  his  death  his  life-work 
would  be  undone ;  the  Saviour  had  the  best  reason  to  know  that  by  his  death  his  life* 
work  would  be  sealed  and  crowned.  4.  Joshua  led  a  nation  into  a  land  which  would 
prove  a  temporary  inheritance ;  the  redeeming  Lord  leads  the  human  race  *'  into  ever- 
fasting  habitations,"  into  the  one  city  which  is  eternal.  Better  the  humblest  post 
amongst  the  followers  of  Jesus  than  the  proudest  place  in  the  ranks  of  Joshua. — C. 

Ch.  vii.,  viii. — Oenedlogies :  IsKtchar,  Naphtdli,  Ephraim^  Asher,  Benjamin,  Two 
conspicuous  features  are  presented  in  these  chapters — genealogy  and  warfare.  Only 
those  are  numbered  who  were  found  in  the  registers,  and  these  are  all  soldiers  and 
**  mighty  men  of  valour."  They  are  described  in  the  seventh  chapter  Tvers.  11 — 40)  as 
*^fit  to  go  out  for  war  "  and  "  apt  to  the  war."  Thus  it  is  with  all  Gt)d  s  people.  They 
are  of  the  genealogy.  They  are  **  bom  again,"  "  not  of  flesh,  nor  of  blood,  nor  of  the 
will  of  man,  but  of  God."  llieir  names  are  in  the  register,  too,  not  in  the  earthly  book 
—the  baptismal  register  only,  of  which  these  earthly  registers  of  Israel  may  be  con- 
sidered as  figures — but  in  the  "  Lamb's  book  of  life."  They  know  their  genealogy, 
they  can  trace  their  pedigree.  Tbey  are  "sons  and  daughters  of  the  Lord  (^ 
Almighty."  Christ  is  their  elder  Brother.  And  they  are  all  "  soldiers."  They  were 
redeemed  for  this  end,  that  they  should  be  **good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ,"  and  **  war  a 
good  warfare."  But  how  are  they  to  become  "  valiant,"  "  apt,"  "  fit "  ?  By  the  disci- 
pline of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  the  afflictions  and  trials  and  sufferings  of  the  way,  which 
often  make  the  heart  to  bleed  and  the  eye  to  weep.  We  are  told  that  Solomon  had 
**  eighteen  thousand  stone-squarers  "  in  preparing  the  stones  in  Lebanon  for  the  temple 
on  Zion.  God  has  many  more  than  these  in  preparing  his  *'  living  stones "  in  this 
Lebanon-world  for  the  glorious  temple  on  Mount  Zion.  We  have  an  instance  of  this 
spiritual  discipline  in  this  chapter  (vii.  21 — 23).  It  seems  to  have  been  an  episode  in 
Egypt  before  Israel  had  left  it.  The  patriarch  Ephraim  was  then  alive,  and  at  a  very 
advanced  age.  The  men  of  Gath  came  suddenly  down  upon  the  family  of  Ephraim 
(for  they^  not  Ephraim,  were  the  aggressors,  if  we  substitute  the  word  "  when  "  in  ver. 
21  for  "  because,"  the  correct  rendering)  for  the  purpose  of  plundering  their  flocks, 
Ephraim's  sons  were  slain.  The  aged  father  was  deeply  afflicted.  In  accordance  with 
Eastern  custom  (see  Job  ii.  11 ;  John  xi.  19),  distant  relatives  came  to  ofier  their  con- 
dolences. So  deeply  did  the  bereavement  weigh  upon  the  aged  father  that  he  per^ 
petuated  the  memory  of  his  sorrow  by  calling  his  next  son  "  Beriah,  because  it  went 
evil  with  his  house."  So  suddenly  do  calamities  overtake  us  here  I  We  know  not 
what  a  day  may  bring  forth.  The  postman's  knock  may  dash  the  fairest  schemes  to 
pieces  and  drape  our  landscape  in  gloom.    Oh,  what  is  there  sure  here  t    l^othing  but 


106  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa     [oh.  vn.  1— 4a 


CShrist.  And,  like  the  mother  of  Jabez  and  Epbraim  here,  our  sorrows  come,  and  we,  in 
our  unbelief  and  short-sightedness,  look  at  our  sorrows  and  see  nothing  else.  We  see  not 
the  bow  of  mercy  spanning  the  cloud — the  love  that  is  behind — and  so  we  hang  oar 
heads  in  sorrow,  and  we  write  "Jabez**  on  this  and  ''Beriah"  on  ihaL  Oh  that  we 
could  trust  that  love  more  in  darkness  as  well  as  in  light! — W. 

Vers,  2—6. — The  Divine  gift  of  physical  strength.    It  is  remarked  as  being  the 
peculiar  trust  and  endowment  of  some  men  that  they  were  bodily  strong.    They  are 
spoken  of  as  '*  valiant  men  of  might."    In  the  line  of  this  endowment  came  their  life- 
mission,  and  in  the  use  of  this  trust  they  would  be  finally  judged.    On  St.  Paul's 
principle  that  the  "  body  is  for  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  for  the  body,"  we  are  delivered 
from  sentimental  undervaluing  of  our  physical  frame,  and  consequent  neglect  of  its 
culture  into  health  and  vigour,  or  monastic  efforts  to  humble  it  into  a  due  subjection  to 
the. spirit.    In  view  of  the  relations  between  bodily  strength  and  religious  life,  we  ought 
to  regard  health,  vigour,  energy  of  frame,  as  great  gifts  from  Qtod  and,  as  all  Divine 
gifts  are,  great  and  responsible  trusts.    In  the  older  times  physical  strength  found  its 
readiest  sphere  in  armies  and  wars.    So  the  vigour  indicated  in  these  verses  took  the 
form  of  valour.    The  modern  sentiments  concerning  peace  and  war  materially  differ 
from  those  of  earlier  ages.    The  modern  admiration  of  peace  and  horror  of  ofifensive 
war  befit  a  condition  of  advanced  civilization  and  the  tolerably  complete  division  of 
the  earth's  habitable  countries  among  the  different  races  and  nations.    Still,  we  must 
fully  recognize  that  war  has  had  its  im{)ortant  ])lace  in  the  ordering  and  training  of 
the  world.    It  has  often  proved  to  be  the  best  judgment  on,  and  corrective  of,  serious 
moral  evils ;  and  so  there  has  always  been  a  place  and  a  work  for  the  **  mighty  man  of 
valour."    On  Joubcrfs  princi])le,  "  Force  till  riiiht  is  ready,"  the  physical  restraints  of 
social  order  must  come  before  the  intellectual  and  moral  ones ;  and  in  such  early  times  and 
first  stages  of  national  development,  physical  strength,  warlike  skill,  power  of  command, 
and  valour,  are  pro[)erly  recognized  as  Divine  gifts,  and  they  are  as  truly  such  as  are 
the  gifts  of  statesmanship,  diplomacy^  and  arbitration  in  quieter,  more  developed,  more 
civilized  times.    The  laws  that  regulate  the  use  of  all  our  bodily  ^itts  may  bo  effectively 
iUuHtrated  in  relation  to  this  one  of  valour.    It  may  be  pointed  out :  1.  That  it  may 
never  be  used  for  schemes  of  personal  aggrandizement.     2.  That  it  may  not  be  pro- 
Btrated  to  any  evil  uses,  of  tyranny  or  passion.    3.  TJiat  it  is  for  use  in  all  ways  of 
loyalty,  obedience,  brotherhood,  and  piety.    And  there  is  still  the  place  and  the  work 
for  the  gift  of  physical  strength,  though  not  so  much  call  for  it  in  armies  and  battle- 
fields.   Great  things  have  been  dono  for  humanity  by  the  physical  endurance  of 
explorers  and  travellers,  such  as  Livingstone  and  Stanley  and  the  members  of  Arctic 
expeditions.    Great  things  are  done  in  the  saving  of  life  by  strong-armed  and  brave- 
hearted  sailors  in  our  lifeboats,  and  by  firemen  in  our  great  cities.     Still  the  demand  for 
manual  labour  and  bodily  stren^^th  is  made,  in  field  and  workshop  and  yard.    And 
though  so  large  a  proportion  of  modern  toil  is  mental  rather  than  bodily,  and  conse- 
quently physical  vi}j;our  is  unduly  despised,  it  remains  true  that  the  man  of  mind 
imperils  nis  mind  by  failure  to  culture  his  body  into  strength.    It  remains  true  for  the 
mtollectual  nineteenth  century,  as  for  every  other,  that  bodily  strength  is  a  gracious 
Divine  gift,  which  should  bo  treasured,  kept,  cultured,  exercised,  and  put  to  all  noble 
and  holy  uses.    Appeal,  especially  from  the  Christian  standpoint,  that  Christ  expects 
faithfulness  to  the  whole  trust  which  he  commits  to  us;  and  holds  us  responsible  for  the 
moHHure  of  bodily  health  and  energy  we  maintain,  as  well  as  for  the  culture  of  character, 
mind,  and  soul  which  wo  may  gain.    "Body,  soul,  and  spirit"  together  make  the 
living  sacrifice,  which  is  our  "reasonable  service." — R.  T. 

Vor.  15. —  Woman^s  rights  in  ancient  times.  The  condition  and  the  disabilities  of 
Eastern  women  should  be  explained,  described,  and  duly  contrasted  with  the  position 
won  by  women  in  all  Christian  countries.  Especially  deal  with  their  secluded  lives  in 
their  harems,  or  private  apartments ;  the  utter  neglect  of  their  education  and  culture ; 
their  disadvantages  in  never  going  out  into  society ;  and  their  utterly  dependent  position, 
involving  the  crushing  of  their  personal  wills,  or  the  leaving  them  undeveloped  and 
unexercised.  And  yet  among  them  some  women  made  for  themselves  spheres,  by  force 
of  their  character  and  ability.     Give  Bible  illustrations,  such  as  Sarah^  Rebckah, 


CH.vn.  1— 40.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  107 

Moses'  mother,  Miriam^  Deborah,  Hannah,  Jezebel,  Athaliah,  etc.  Always  women 
have  found  spheres  among  the  children  and  dependents,  but  sometimes  wider  and 
public  spheres  have  opened  to  them.  Women  have  little  recognized  legal  or  publio 
rights  in  the  East.  Woman  has  no  standing  apart  from  her  husband,  and  this  makes 
the  lot  of  the  Eastern  widow  so  inexpressibly  sad.  The  name  Zelophehad  recalls  a 
remarkable  exception — a  case  in  which  women,  having  no  male  protector,  succeeded  in 
securing  and  maintaining  their  own  rights ;  and  the  story  is  detailed  in  the  Scripture 
as  affording  important  instructive  features.  Compare  the  modern  assertion  of  woman's 
legal  and  governmental  rights,  and  tell  how  modern  legislation  has  aided  in  removing 
women's  disabilities.  This  Zelophehad  was  a  descendant  of  Manasseh,  who  died  during 
the  wilderness  wanderings,  leaving  no  sons,  only  five  daughters,  who,  by  the  custom  of 
the  time,  would  be  treated  as  uuable  to  inherit  his  estates.  These  five  daughters 
appealed  to  Moses  (Numb,  xxvii.  1—7),  on  the  ground  that  their  father  had  not  died 
under  any  such  judgment  as  disabled  his  children,  and  they  asked  to  be  authorized  to 
stand  as  his  heirs.  The  matter  was  a  new  and  difficult  one,  and  Moses  took  it  directly 
to  God,  and  by  Divine  direction  established  the  new  rule  that  when  there  were  no  sons 
the  daughters  might  claim  the  rights  of  heirs.  A  remarkable  illustration  of  the  wise 
adjustment  of  law  in  its  practical  application  to  new  and  unanticipated  cases.  Bishop 
Wordsworth  says,  **  It  seems  to  have  been  God's  design  in  the  Levitical  dispensation 
to  elevate  woman  from  the  degradation  into  which  she  had  fallen,  and  to  prepare  her 

Gradually  for  that  state  of  dignity  and  grace  to  which  she  is  now  advanced  in  the  gospel 
y  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  Seed  of  the  woman." 
L  Woman's  place  in  family  life.  There  she  properly  takes  a  headship,  bearing 
rule  over  both  children  and  dependents.  Illustrate  by  the  interesting  picture  of  the 
**  virtuous  woman  and  wife  "  given  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs.  If  the  woman  be  but  a 
member  of  the  family  and  not  the  head,  still  there  is  the  due  and  honourable  place 
of  childhood,  sisterhood,  and  friendship.  No  woman  lacks  a  sphere  of  kindly  useful 
service  save  the  woman  who  wants  none,  because  life  is  for  her  a  mere  low  self-sphere. 
Plead  for  the  nobility  of  womanly  duties  and  relations  in  the  home.  Martha  and  Marv 
could  even  prove  ministers  to  the  bodily  needs  of  a  Friend  who  was  the  world  s 
Saviour ;  many  a  woman  since  has  "  entertained  angels  unawares." 

II.  Woman's  place  in  public  life.  Home,  in  most  cases,  provides  ample  and 
satisfying  spheres.  But  for  women  who  are  free  from  family  ties  suitable  publio 
spheres  are  found  among  other  women,  among  the  suffering,  the  poor,  and  the  children ; 
and  where  there  is  endowment  litercUure  finds  work  for  woman.  These  spheres  are 
daily  enlarging.  They  should  be  fully  detailed,  and  an  earnest  plea  shoula  be  made 
against  the  wasting  of  tooman^s  powers  when  such  broad  spheres  claim  her  abilities  and 
energies,  and  on  them  she  may  enter  into  the  joy  of  "  serving  Christ." — R.  T.  ; 

Vers.  21,  22. — Common  family  sorrows.  In  these  verses  is  given  a  very  touching 
episode,  and  yet  it  is  a  very  commonplace  incident  that  is  narrated.  A  father  gains 
tne  news  that  his  sons  have  been  attacked  by  foes  and  killed^  and,  as  the  poor  father 
sits  stricken  with  the  great  sorrow,  his  brethren,  his  relatives,  come  to  mourn  with  him 
and  to  comfort  him.  Children  are  an  anxiety  and  care,  all  through  our  relations  with 
them,  when  '*  about  us  "  in  the  frailties  of  their  childhood,  and  when  away  from  us  in  the 
wilfulnesses  of  their  young  manhood.  Sick-scenes  and  death-scenes  are  familiar  to  most 
parents,  and  few  human  homes  last  long  unbroken.  Nor  is  the  comforting  of  loving 
friends  other  than  a  commonplace  and  yet  most  gracious  fact  of  our  modem  life.  StiU,  the 
thrill  of  hand  and  tear-filled  eye  and  sympathetic  word  bring  relief  and  rest  to  burdened 
and  bereaved  hearts.  Life  repeats  itself  over  and  over  again,  and  tells  its  tale  of  grief 
and  loss  concerning  one  family  after  another.  So  it  was  in  the  olden  times.  Ephraim 
mourns  the  loss  of  his  children,  and  his  brethren  come  to  comfort  him ;  and  thus  it  is  seen 
ihht family  life  becomes  a  moral  training  for  us  all ;  and  as  the  experiences  of  sickness, 
sorrow,  and  loss  go  round  to  one  after  another,  we  all  come  under  the  great  Father's 
sanctifyiug,  and  find  out  how  '*  good  it  is  even  to  be  afflicted." 

I.  The  loss  of  children.  Here  especially  the  greater  loss  of  their  death  rather 
than  the  loss  by  removal,  which  never  quite  quenches  hope.  Such  loss  comes  at 
various  stages,  and  we  never  know  at  which  of  their  ages  the  stroke  falls  lightest  It 
comes  in  various  ways,  slowly  or  suddenly,  and  we  never  can  tell  which  way  seemed 


108 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ch.  vm.  1—40. 


to  crush  us  most.  The  reaper  cuts  the  "  bearded  prain  *•  and  the  "  flowers ;  *•  beautiful 
infants  fly  away,  bright  chihihood  fades,  and  blooming  youth  is  smitten ;  and  all  we 
can  say  about  it  we  say  after  Jacob,  '^  If  I  am  bereaved  of  my  children,  I  am  bereaved,* 
On  this  we  may  dwell  somewhat  more  fully. 

II.  The  parental  oriep  at  the  loss  of  children.  "Ephraim  mourned  many 
days."  Such  «r\e{  is  well  illustrated  in  David's  wailing  over  Absalom,  Elijah's  friend's 
grief  over  her  dead  child,  and  the  poor  Nain  widow  going  out  to  bury  her  only  son.  Tlie 
Eastern  thought  about  the  children  hel|>s  to  explain  the  intensity  of  their  grief. 
Easterns  conceived  of  their  own  earthly  existence  as  continued  in  their  children — they 
had  a  kind  of  immortality  in  their  children,  and  they  pleased  themselves  with  the  idea 
that  their  descendants  would  reach  higher  dignity  and  place  than  they  had  done.  So 
for  their  children  to  die  was  a  plucking  down  of  lofty  imaginations,  an  uprooting;  of 
carefully  raised  hopes.  And  so  it  is  in  measure  for  us,  as  may  be  most  tenderly  illus- 
trated in  the  case  of  the  talented  young  Hallam,  whose  early  death  Tennyson  deplores 
in  his  '*  In  Memoriam.** 

III.  The  family  bonds  sanctified  in  the  loss  of  children.  Such  points  as  these 
may  be  unfolded  and  illustrated.  If  rightly,  piously  borne,  the  death  of  children  may 
be  used :  1.  To  the  producing  of  a  hallowing  tenderness  of  feeling  on  all  the  members. 
2.  To  a  solemnizing  estinyiU  of  the  relative  interests  of  this  brief  life  and  the  coming 
eternal  one,  3.  To  the  self-denying  efforts  of  each  member  to  comfort  the  otherg,  often 
involving  most  precious  lessons  in  self-restraint  4.  To  the  reknitting  of  the  family 
bonds.  One  member  of  a  home  realized  as  being  away  in  the  heavenly  brings  won* 
drously  near  and  makes  aflectingly  real  all  that  belongs  to  the  ''  unseen  and  etemaL'' 
And  in  family  griefs  we  are  "  comforted,  in  order  that  we  may  be  able  to  comfort  them 
that  are  in  any  affliction,  through  the  comfort  wherewith  we  ourselves  are  comforted  of 
God."— R,  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  Vni. 

This  chapter  carries  us  bock  to  the  tribe 
of  BeDJamin,  partly  deiilt  with  already  (ch. 
vii.  6—12).  The  tribe  is  reverted  to  for  the 
same  kind  of  reason  that  called  for  our 
ch.  ill.  David  was  so  important  a  character 
in  the  Judah  tribe.  And  Saul,  with  whom 
the  resume  of  Chronicle-history  begins  (ch. 
viii.  33 ;  ix.  39 ;  x.),  belongs  to  the  Benja- 
min tribe.  Thus  the  genealogy  of  this  tribe 
forms  the  porch  to  the  history  contained  in 
this  work,  and  the  forty  verges  of  thid  chapter 
rehearse  the  sons  and  chief  men  of  Benjamin, 
with  a  view  to  bring  into  prominence  the 
atock  of  Saul. 

Vers.  1,  2. — These  verses  give  flve  sons  to 
Bei^amin.  Of  the  non-appearance  of  Becher 
here  (cli.  vii.  G)  and  the  appearance  of 
Ashbel  in  his  place,  also  of  the  non-appear- 
ance here  of  Jediael  (ch.  vii.  6)  and  the 
appearance  of  Aharah  (t.</.  Ahiram.  Numb, 
xxvi.  38)  in  his  place,  notice  has  been  taken 
on  ch.  vii  6—12.  Of  the  two  additions  to 
the  sons  of  Benjamin  here,  viz.  Kohah  and 
Bapha,  nothing  is  known  elsewhere  ;  yet  it 
may  be  possible  to  count  fioe  families  from 
Kumb.  xxvi.  38,  39. 

Vers.  3—5  —Nine  sons  are  here  assigned 


to  Bela.  Genesis  (xlvi.  4n  only  'finds  us 
clearly  three  of  them,  and  these  in  very 
diflerent  order,  viz.  (Hra,  Naaman,  and 
Arcl .-  and  Numbers  (xxvi.  39,  40)  finds  ua 
only  three,  viz.  Ard,  Naaman,  and  Shupham. 
Yet  our  Hnram  may  correspond  with  Ho- 

Sham,  and  then  the  four  pairs  of  names — 
hephuphan    and   Huram,  Shupham    and 
Ilupham,  Shuppim  and  Huppim,  and  Mup- 

Sim  and  Huppim — may  be  interpreted  as 
esignating  one  and  the  same  couple  of 
persons.  The  recurrence  of  the  name  Qen 
in  ver.  5,  so  close  upon  the  same  name  in 
ver.  3,  would  of  course  be  more  remarkable, 
and  point  inevitably  to  the  disordered  state 
of  the  text,  if  it  were  necessary  to  suppose 
that  these  nine  persons  were  really  brothers, 
as  well  as  called  sons  of  Bela. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Ehud.  We  are  brought  to  a 
halt  again  by  the  sudden  introduction  of 
this  name.  Even  if  it  stand  for  Abihud 
(ver.  3)  or  for  Ahoah  (ver.  4),  why  is  it 
changed  in  so  short  an  interval?  It  is 
impossible  to  establish  order  in  these  verses 
except  by  most  gratuitous  conjecture.  But 
it  may  bo  supposed  that  the  verses  say  that 
Ehud's  people  once  belonged  to  Manahathi 
that  the  heads  of  them  removed  them  to 
Oeba  (Josh,  xviii.  24),  and  that  he  himself 
(query,  Ehud?  but  commonly  read  Gera) 
removed  them,  and  also  Naaman,  and  Ahiali, 
and  Oeia  (which  look  very  much  like  the 


c^ 


CH.  vm.  1—40.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa 


109 


Kaaman,  Ahoah,  and  Gera  of  ven.  4, 5) ;  and 
finally  that  after  the  removing  **he"  had 
two  fresh  sons,  Una  and  Ahihnd. 

Yer.S. — Shaharaim.  It  has  been  propoted, 
in  the  utter  obBOurity  here,  to  add  this  name 
as  a  third  to  Uzza  and  Ahihud.  This  may 
be  a  way  out,  but  if  so,  instead  of  repeating 
**  and  Sliaharaim,"  it  might  be  more  natural 
to  keep  the  former  enigmatic  nominative 
and  object  to  begat,  whether  Ehud  or  Gem. 
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  a  copyist's 
error  has  given  ut  them  (onkt)  in  place  of 
riK,  in  the  latter  part  of  this  verse,  before 
the  names  of  the  wives.  The  sentence  then 
would  translate,  **  after  hid  sending  away 
[whether  by  divorce  or  not]  Hushim  and 
baara  his  wives." 

Vers.  9 — U. — These  verses  give  seven  un- 
known sons  of  Ehud,  Gera,  or  Shaharaim, 
as  the  case  may  be,  by  the  wife  Hodesh, 
whom  one  would  have  been  glad  to  identify 
with  Baara,  and  two  unknown  sons  of  the 
wife  Hnihim. 

Vers.  12 — 28. — One  of  the  sons  of  this  last- 
named  wife,  Hushim,  was  named  ElpouiL 
From  ver.  12  to  ver.  28  we  have  a  numerous 
list  of  his  descendants,  evidently  in  different 
degrees  of  relationship,  but  with  the  thread 
picked  up  apparently  several  times,  in  the 
persons  of  the  first-mentioned  **  sons,*'  viz. 
the  five,  Eber,  Mitham^  Shamed^  Beriahf 
Shema  (see  vers.  16, 18,  21,  25,  27> 

Ver.  12. — Ono  and  Lod.  These  places  are 
not  mentioned  in  Joshua  as  originally  as- 
signed to  Benjamin.  They  were  obtained 
or  **  built "  afterwards.  They  aie  first  men- 
tioned in  this  passage,  afterwards  in  Ezra  ii 
33;  Neh.vi.2:  vii.37;  xL36.  JLo(2is,with 
little  doubt,  the  Lydda  of  Acts  ix.  32. 

Ver.  13. — Ayalon.  A  similar  kind  of  his- 
toiT  belongs  to  this  place.  It  was  asbigned 
to  Dan  (Josh.  xix.  40—48).  Unsubdu^  by 
them  (Judg.  L  34—36),  the  Ephraimites 
possessed  it  awhile  (ch.  vi.  47 — 49),  until  it 
oame  to  be  more  like  the  common  property 
or  care  of  Benjamin  and  Judah,  situated  as 
it  was  on  their  boundary  line  (1  Sam.  xiv. 
81 ;  2  Ghron.  xi.  10 ;  xxviii.  18> 

Ver.  28. — ^These  dwelt  in  Jernsalem  (Josh. 
xviiL  28;  ch.  ix.  2—9;  Neh.  xL  1-4). 

Vers.  29 — 40. — These  verses  are  occupied 
with  the  immediate  ancestors  and  posterity 
of  SauL  And  apparently  the  same  account, 
minus  some  of  its  deficiencies,  is  repeated 
in  the  next  chapter,  vers.  35—44.  The  two 
may  be  taken  together  here,  and  the  latter 
will  help  the  interpretation  of  the  former. 

Ver.  29.— The  father— i.e.  the  chief— of 
eibeon.  (For  Oibeon,  see  Josh.  ix.  3,  7—18; 
X.  2;  xi.  19;  Neh.  vU.  25;  iii.  7.)  The 
father  of  Gibeon  (ch.  ix.  85)  was  Jehiel 

(jmTTi  I  Chethiv  spells  with  vau;  not  ^mtp, 
oh.  XT.  24).    Of  Jehiel  by  tliii  name  we  do 


not  elsewhere  read.  And  even  If  it  were  on 
other  grounds  possible  to  identify  the  person 
witli  the  Abiel  of  1  Sam.  ix.  1  and  xiv.  51,  it 
is  not  possible  to  identify  the  names.  Com- 
pare the  similar  remarkable  omission  of  the 
name  of  the  *' father  of  Gibea"  (oh.  iL  49), 
an  omission  to  be  filled  very  possibly  by 
this  same  name  Jehiel. 

Vers.  30,  31.— These  verses  contain  the 
names  of  eight  sons  of  Jehiel  instead  of  the 
ten  of  ch.  ix.  36,  37.  Both  of  the  missing 
names,  however  (viz.  Ner  after  Baal,  and 
Mikloth  after  ZtLicihin%  are  introduced  in 
verses  immediately  succeeding,  where  their 
sons  are  spoken  of.  One  name,  Zacher,  also 
is  spelt  as  ZechariaU  in  ch.  ix.  37.  Both 
these  passages  agree  in  representing  Ner  as 
the  grand&ther  of  Sanl.  Not  so  the  two 
passages  in  Samuel  (ix.  1 ;  xiv.  51),  the  first 
of  which  writes  Ahisl  in  the  place  of  the 
grandfather  instead  of  g^reat-grand&ther, 
which,  however,  need  occasion  little  diffi- 
culty; and  the  second  of  which  would 
certainly  aUow  Ner  to  be  grandfather  to 
Saul,  but  teenu  to  call  him  uncle.  Even 
then,  if  we  accept  what  the  passage  allows, 
it  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  in  the  next 
verse  Ner  should  be  signalized  as  father  of 
Abner  rather  than  of  Kish — a  difficulty, 
however,  much  less  considerable  if  we  accept 
the  suggestion  (see  'Speaker's  Gommentarv,' 
in  loc,)  to  translate  ver.  51  thus,  by  the  suV- 
stitution  of  the  word** sons"  for  **son:" 
^  And  Kish  the  father  of  Saul,  and  Ner  the 
father  of  Abner,  were  tons  of  Abiel."  It 
must  be  remembered  at  the  same  time  that 
this  is  not  e<^uivalent  to  saying  that  they 
were  necessarily  brothers,  but  onlv  descend- 
ants of  the  aiief  of  the  family,  of  the 
Demarch  or  Phylaroh  under  mention  in  the 
genealogy. 

Vers.  33,  34.— The  number  of  Saul's 
children  was  certainly  nine.  In  addition  to 
the  four  (1  Sam.  xxxi.  2)  mentioned  here, 
there  was  Ishui,  probably  standing  second 
(1  Sam.  xiv.  49),  and  there  were  two 
daughters,  Merab  and  Michal  (1  Sam.  xiv. 
49),  and  there  were  two  sons  by  Rizpah  (2 
Sam.  xxi.  8),  named  Armoni  and  Mepliii- 
bosheth.  Esh-baal;  the  same  with  IMih 
Bheth  (2  Sam.  iL  8 ;  ui.  7—14 ;  iv.  4—12). 
Merib-baal;  the  same  with  Mephlboihetii 
(2  Sam.  ix.  12).  Mioah  is,  therefore,  the 
great-grandson  of  Saul. 

Ver.  35. — ^Tarea;  spelt  Tahrea  in  ver.  41 
of  next  chapter.  Ahas,  the  last  of  the  four 
names  contained  in  this  verse,  is  supplied  in 
italics.  Authorized  Version,  next  chapter, 
ver.  41. 

Ver.  86. — Jehoadah.  The  parallel  passage 
in  next  chapter  Tver.  42)  has  Jarah;  but 
some  manuscripts  have  Jahdah  (prrjr),  which 
comes  very  near  our  JehoadJah  (rn]^n^ 
amxL    It  ii  possible  that  this  Zimri  may 


110 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,     [oh.  vm.  1-40. 


rightly  be  identified  with  the  usurper  Zimri 
of  1  Kings  xvi.  9—20. 

Ver.  37. — Bapha.  This  name  appears  as 
JUj>haiah  in  next  chapter  (ver.  43). 

Vers.  38 — 40. — The  genealogy  runs  on 
from  Mienh  to  Vlam  with  nothing  special  to 
remark  upon.  Ulam  is  twelfth  from  Saul, 
while  his  '*  sons  and  sons'  sons  "  (ver.  40) 
are  spoken  of.    The  time  of  Hezekiah  must 


be  reached,  therefore,  who  was  thirteenth 
from  David.  The  table  of  next  chapter 
stops  with  the  name  AUl  (ix.  44),  and 
wears  the  appearance  of  liaving  just  misaed 
the  last  two  Terses  of  this  chapter. 

Ver.  39.  —The  name  Ulam  is  found  also 
among  the  descendants  of  Gilead,  grandson 
of  Manasseh  (oh.  Tii.  17). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1—40. — Headings  between  the  lines.  "  Reading  between  the  lines,"  or  extractiiig 
from  these  tables  some  moral  truths  which,  if  they  do  not  contain,  they  may  fcurly 
suggest,  we  gather — 

L  That  alliances  often  end  in  entanglements  and  entail  unoonbidebed  cx)h- 
BBQUENCES.  Shaharaim  went  into  Moab  and  there  married  a  Moabitess,  having  children 
of  her  (ver.  8).  The  names  of  his  sons  (ver.  9)  were  Moabitish — Mesha  (see  2  Kings 
iii.  4),  Malcham  (an  idol  of  Moab ;  see  1  Kings  xi.  33  and  Jer.  xlix.  1,  2).  This  fact 
points  clearly  to  the  evil  influence  under  which  his  children  came  through  this  matri- 
monial alliance.  If  we  "  make  affinity  **  with  those  who  are  not  of  like  mind  and  like 
principles  with  ourselves,  we  must  be  prepared  for  serious  spiritual  consequences. 

11.  That  human  activity  may  have  veby  lonq  results.  Shamed,  the  son  of 
Elpaal,  built  two  cities ;  one  of  them  was  Led  (ver.  12).  This  is  identical  with  the 
Lydda  of  our  New  Testament  (Acts  ix.  32),  and  with  the  modern  Ludd.  Here  we  have 
an  instance  of  the  results  of  one  man's  activity  being  witnessed  more  than  thirty 
centuries  after  he  has  been  gathered  to  his  fathers.  Who  can  say  how  far  down  the 
stream  of  time  our  influence  will  go  ?  It  may  be  visible  to  the  eye  of  men  for  genera- 
tions ;  it  wUl  be  apparent  to  the  eye  of  God  to  the  end  of  time. 

**  Our  echoes  roll  from  soul  to  soul, 
And  live  for  ever  and  for  ever." 

in.  That  tiolenoe  is  a  bad  foundation  of  rest  and  power.  In  ver.  13  we  learn 
that,  by  a  noteworthy  coincidence,  Beriah  with  Shema  **  drove  away  the  inhabitants  of 
Oath."  In  the  previous  chapter  (ver.  21)  we  read  that  the  inhabitants  of  Gath  slew 
the  sons  of  Ephraim.  Truly  "  they  that  take  the  sword  shall  perish  with  the  sword." 
Violence  seizes  on  a  neighbour's  land,  and  by  violence  is  itself  dispossessed.  That  which 
we  gain  by  mere  physical  force  we  must  be  prepared  to  part  with  to  the  next  comer 
who  is  stronger  than  we.  The  history  of  the  world  has,  in  a  large  and  painful  degree, 
been  the  record  of  unlawful  seizure  and  reluctant  forfeiture  of  lands  and  goods.  How 
much  wiser  and  better  to  secure  by  honourable  and  worthy  means  that  which  **  no 
man  taketh  away  "  from  us,  treasure  which  we  shall  curry  with  us  whithersoever  we 
go,  which  time  itself  cannot  steal,  and  death  cannot  hold  in  its  grasp  1 

IV.  That  it  is  wise  to  stamp  bad  things  with  an  evil  name.  Esh-baal  (ver.  33) 
is  the  Ishbosheth  of  2  Sam.  xi.  21  ;  while  Merib-baal  (ver.  34)  is  the  Mephibosheth 
of  2  Sam.  iv.  4.  In  these  two  cases  Baal  is  turned  into  Bosheth,  which  signifies  shame. 
Thus,  by  a  simple  name,  the  heathen  deity  was  branded  with  public  reprobation.  The 
evil  thing  was  made  to  seem  the  ugly  and  offensive  thing  it  was.  Nothing  can  be  more 
^)erilous  to  the  community  than  the  wrapping  up  of  a  sin  in  some  pleasant  euphemism ; 
e,g,  if  a  daughter  has  been  sinful  she  should  not  be  called  ^  unfortunate."  Vice  does  not 
lose  half  its  evil  by  losing  all  its  grossness.  If  we  label  sin  with  a  name  that  passes 
current  in  society,  we  are  co-workers  with  the  tempter  himself.  Speak  of  sin  in  terms 
that  will  bring  it  into  disrepute  and  reprobation. 

V.  That  faithful  remembrance  in  the  day  of  power  is  an  excellent  grace. 
The  line  of  Jonathan  is  traced  to  many  generations  (ver.  34,  etc.).  Is  not  the  hand  of 
David  here  ?  Is  this  not  a  sign  that  his  vow  (1  Sam.  xx.  15)  was  honourably  fulfilled  ? 
What  we  promise  as  we  are  rising  we  should  scrupulously  discharge  when  we  have 
attained  the  summit  of  our  desires.  Many  are  profuse  in  promises  when  the  day  of 
performance  is  distant^  but  very  forgetful  of  their  vows  when  the  hour  has  come  to 


CH.  VIII.  1—40.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  Ill 


redeem  them.    It  is  the  m&rk  of  a  true  man  to  carry  out  with  generous  fulness  all  that 
he  undertook  when  he  was  a  long  way  from  the  goal  and  the  prize. 

VL  That  the  thought  of  a  wobthy  anoestby  is  ak  honoubable  nmnoEinsKT  to 
WELL-DOING.  "  These  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  **  (vers.  28,  32).  When  the  captives  returned 
from  Babylon  there  was  a  lack  of  men  to  populate  the  sacred  city.  In  the  country  were 
inviting  fields  waiting  for  cultivation,  while  in  the  city  was  danger  to  be  dared  and  civic 
duty  to  be  discharged.  So  that  '*  the  people  blessed  all  the  men  that  willingly  offered 
themselves  to  dwell  at  Jerusalem**  (Neh.  zi.  2).  The  fact  that  their  ancestors  dwelt 
in  the  city  would  probably  operate  as  a  powerful  inducement  to  lead  many  to  offer 
themselves  as  citizens,  and  these  would  thus  be  led  to  serve  their  country  in  a  very 
serious  crisis.  The  knowledge  of  the  honourable  position  taken  by  our  ancestry  is  a 
very  lawful  motive  to  obedience  and  aspiration.  We  should,  indeed,  range  ourselves  on 
the  right  side,  and  do  the  noblest  deeds  because  our  Gk)d,  our  Saviour,  summons  us  to 
his  side  and  to  the  service  of  our  race.  But  there  are  many  subsidiary  motives  by  which 
we  may  be  impelled.  And  among  these  is  the  consideration  of  the  part  and  place  our 
fathers  took  in  their  day.  We  may  well  be  inspired  by  the  thought  of  their  fidelity,  their 
courage,  their  piety,  their  usefulness.  We  do  well  to  cherish  the  ambition  to  be  worthy 
of  our  sires,  to  maintain  and  magnify  an  honourable  name,  not  only  to  be  "the 
children  of  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven,"  but  the  children  of  our  earthly  ancestors  who 
dwelt  in  the  city  of  God  and  wrought  his  work  in  the  world. — 0. 

Ver.  34. — Poor  Mephiboshetk !  The  name  Merib-haait  or  Meph{bo$heth^  recalls  the 
story  of  one  who  was  unfortunate  from  his  birth  to  his  grave;  one  on  whom  the 
burdens  and  disabilities  of  life  pressed  very  heavily.  And  it  reminds  us  that  we  find 
similar  cases  within  the  sphere  of  our  personal  experiences.  There  are  always  among 
us  the  lifelong  victims  of  accidents ;  the  bearers  for  weary  years  of  congenital  defects ; 
those  heavily  weighted  with  frailty  of  the  vital  organs ;  the  victims  of  incurable  disease ; 
the  blind,  deaf  and  dumb,  idiot,  lame,  etc.  Of  all  such  we  may  regard  Mephibosheth 
as  a  type,  and  with  the  class  before  our  minds  so  typified,  we  may  learn  some  lessons  of 
practical  importance  and  permanent  application.  The  outline  of  the  story  of  Mephi- 
bosheth is  as  follows : — He  was  the  son  of  David's  friend  Jonathan,  and,  at  the  time  of 
the  catastrophe  at  Gilboa,  when  his  father  was  slain,  he  was  only  five  years  old.  In  the 
excitement  and  alarm  of  the  defeat,  his  nurse  caught  up  the  child  to  flee  away  with  him, 
but  she  stumbled  and  fell,  and  caused  thereby  the  child's  incurable  lameness.  Mephi- 
bosheth grew  up  a  weak  and  helpless  cripple.  The  family  estates  were  secured  to  him, 
but  his  aSSiction  put  him  sadly  in  the  power  of  his  bailiff  and  manager,  Ziba,  who  was  of 
a  self-seeking  and  treacherous  disposition.  By  Ziba's  schemings  and  misrepresentations, 
Mephibosheth  fell  under  the  displeasure  of  David  at  the  time  of  the  Absalomic  rebellion, 
and,  though  explanations  were  eventually  made,  the  scheming  servant  was  allowed  to 
retain  the  advantages  he  had  gained.  The  affliction  of  Mephibosheth  had  its  influence 
upon  his  character.  He  was  of  a  gentle,  retiring  disposition,  too  ready  to  let  others  ride 
over  him,  but  capable  of  warm  affections,  faithful  to  those  he  loved  and  from  whom  he 
bad  received  kindnesses,  and  in  the  difficult  circumstances  of  his  life  able  to  manifest 
ereat  magnanimity  of  spirit  (see  2  Sam.  iv.  5 ;  ix. ;  xvi.  1 — i ;  xix.  24 — 30 ;  xxL  7). 
In  the  different  recorded  passages  of  his  life  these  points  find  illustration. 

I.  The  impobtance  of  begubino  health  and  yioouB  in  the  time  of  childhood. 
The  relation  of  robust  childhood  to  energy,  happiness,  and  success  in  the  years  of 
maturity  is  becoming  every  day  better  understood  and  more  fully  realized.  The  con- 
ditions of  civilized  life  put  infancy  under  much  disability,  and  much  motherhood  is 
concerned  in  the  mastery  of  those  disabilities,  and  the  strong  growing  of  the  young  life. 
Perils  come  out  of  hereditary  taints,  infantile  diseases,  and,  as  in  Mephibosheth's  case, 
the  accidents,  or  ignorance,  or  carelessness  of  nurses.  It  is  not,  therefore,  a  little  thing 
that  mothers  and  all  having  to  do  with  young  children  should  be  skilled  in  their  work 
and  trained  into  efficiency ;  and  this  duty  we  urge  in  faithfulness  to  the  great  Father, 
who  gives  this  trust  of  his  young  children  to  the  mothers.  And  no  nobler  or  more 
responsible  earthly  work  is  committed  to  any  one  than  this  watching  and  culturing  of 
the  children. 

IL  The  influenob  whioh  fbailtt  in  childhood  mat  HAyE  upon  chabaoteb.  Tho 
relation  between  our  bodily  frame  and  our  moral  character  is  fully  recognized,  though 


112 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa      [ch.  ix.  1—44 


It  is  too  subtle  for  us  precisely  and  adeauately  to  trace.  Scripture  admits  it  when  It 
says  of  God,  "  He  knoweth  our  frame.''  There  is  a  kiud  of  harmony  between  the 
two,  so  that  strength  in  one  is  matched  by  a  kind  of  strength  in  the  other,  and  frailty 
in  the  one  is  matched  by  a  kind  of  weakness  in  the  other,  lliis  is  seen  in  Timothy. 
He  evidently  had  a  weak  and  sickly  bodily  organization,  and  it  was  matched  by 
a  shriuking,  retiring  disposition,  which  St.  Paul  earnestly  urged  him  to  oyercome, 
"enduring  hardness  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ."  The  secret  of  fret/tdnesB  in 
after  life,  of  suspiciousness,  despondency,  absence  of  perseverance,  and  lack  of  proper 
self-reliance,  may  be  found  in  the  frailties  of  the  childhood  stages.  And  oftentimes  even 
the  bodily  pamperings  and  self-indulgences  and  failure  to  hold  the  passions  under  wise 
restraints,  which  are  degrading  features  of  the  permanent  character,  find  their  tru6 
genesis  in  the  unnourished  early  life.  This  is  a  subject  of  practical  bearing  on  th« 
moral  and  spiritual  well-being  of  the  race,  and  deserves  to  be  thoroughly  thought  out,  and 
presented  in  careful  and  impressive  detail.  It  becomes  a  consideration  full  of  solemnity 
for  all  who  deal  with  childien,  that  the  men  and  women  may  as  plainly  b^ir  on  their 
characters  the  marks  of  the  neglect  or  error  of  mother  and  nurse,  as  Mephibosheth  bore 
for  his  life  the  consequences  of  his  childish  fall. 

III.  The  disabilities  of  frailty  and  deformitt  in  the  important  crises  of  lifs. 
As  seen  in  Mephibosheth's  inability  to  show  his  real  feeling  to  David  when  the  rebelUoa 
tested  David's  friends.  His  frailty  put  him  into  Ziba's  hands.  So  it  is  found,  again 
and  again,  that  a  man's  poor  constitution,  or  his  lameness,  or  his  partial  deafness,  or  his 
deficient  eyesight,  or  his  passionate  temper,  come  up  against  him,  and  close  door  after 
door  which  otherwise  he  might  hopefully  enter.  And  while  this  thought  should  make 
us  very  considerate  and  gentle  witn  any  who  thus  spend  life  under  infirmities,  it  should 
also  serve  to  impress  the  one  lesson  we  are  learning  from  Mephibosheth's  life,  viz.  that 
too  much  care  cannot  be  shown  in  dealing  with  the  young,  tender,  imperilled  life  of  our 
children.    All  this  man's  troubles  were  the  fruitage  of  the  fall  in  his  childhood. 

lY.  The  measure  of  mastery  over  frailty  gained  by  a  sincere  piety  ;  or,  to  put 
it  in  Christian  form,  by  a  full  consecration  of  heart  and  life  to  Christ.  This  is  seen  in 
Mephibosheth,  whose  piety  finds  expression  in  his  submission  under  wrong.  It  is  well 
illustrated  in  the  life  of  Calvin,  Melancthon,  or  Baxter,  and  in  such  frail  men  as  Henry 
Martyn.  The  young  man  who  was  thought  too  weak-bodied  to  go  as  a  missionary, 
nobly  urged  that  "  he  wanted  to  give  his  very  weakness  to  Christ."  The  history  of 
Christ's  Church  most  encouragingly  records  that  God  has  ever  found  gracious  ways  in 
which  feeble  instruments  might  do  his  noblest  works. — B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


Ver.  l.~8o  all  Israel  were  reokoned  by 
genealogies.  The  Hebrew  verb  (^te^n;nn) 
is  sufficiently  satisfied  by  the  rendering 
noere  enrolledj  or  were  registered.  The  beck 
of  the  kings  of  Israel  and  Jndah.  The 
book  referred  to  is  often  styled  "  The  book 
of  the  kings  of  Israel "  (2  Chron.  xx.  34 ; 
zxxiii.  18);  and  it  is  more  probable  that 
that  is  the  intended  title  here,  and  that  the 
words  should  follow  thus :  And  Jndah  were 
carried  captive  to  Babylon  because  of  their 
transgressions.  This  the  Masoretic  accent- 
ing dictates,  though  the  Scptuagint,  Vulgate, 
and  Luther  have  our  Authorized  Version 
order.  The  inconvenience  to  certain  of  not 
being  able  to  find  their  registers  is  alluded 
to  in  Ezra  ii.  59. 

Ver.  2.— Kow  the  first  inhabitants  that 
dwelt  in  their  possessions,  in  their  dtiec. 
Authorities  are  very  divided  as  to  whether 


this  expression  describes  inhabitants  of  the 
land  before  the  Captivity  or  subseq^uent  to 
it.  Almost  all  the  older  authorities,  and 
Keil  amongst  those  of  more  modem  date, 
take  the  former  position ;  Movers,  Bertheao, 
and  others  take  the  latter,  as  also  Canon 
Rawlinson  ('Speaker's  Commentary,*  iiL 
157,  211).  It  must  be  admitted  that  there 
is  some  obscurity,  and  which  accounts  for 
the  contrariety  of  opinion.  But  obscurity 
and  contrariety  notwithstanding,  a  com- 
parison of  vers.  2  and  3  with  Neh.  xL  1 — 4 
prodaces  two  impressions  almost  irresistible, 
viz.  that  the  difficulty  U  occasioned  by  some 
comparatively  slight  corruption  or  mutila- 
tion in  our  ver.  2;  and  that,  whatever  the 
reference  is  in  Neh.  xi.  1 — 4  (and  there  is 
no  ambiguity  there),  that  it  is  in  the  present 
passage.  The  fourfold  classification  intends 
the  Israel  people  (Isa.  xxiv.  2 ;  Hos.  iv.  9), 
the  priests,  the  Levites,  the  Hethinimi,  i,e. 
those  given  as  helpers  of  the  priests,  bond* 


CH.  IX.  1—44.]      THE  FIRST -BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


113 


men  of  the  temple  (Numb.  ?iiL  18,  19; 
xxxi.  47;  Ezra  ii.  40—48;  viu.  17,  20). 
Not  before  the  time  of  the  return  does  the 
name  Nethinim  seem  to  have  crystallized 
upon  this  class  of  helpers,  the  explanation 
of  which  may  possibly  be  that  their  numbers 
and  their  services  then  beaime  so  much 
more  necessary.  To  this  classification  is 
added  in  Neh.  xi.  3,  *'  And  the  children  of 
Solomon's  servants  "  (Ezra  ii.  55). 

Ver.  3. — And  of  the  children  of  Ephraim, 
and  XaoaiMh.  These  words  are  not  found 
in  Neh.  xi.  4. 

Ver.  4.— This  verse  contains  a  short  list, 
with  many  links  wanting,  of  descendants  of 
Judah  through  Pharez,  six  in  number,  and 
in  reverse  order.  A  similar  list  as  regards 
its  extreme  terms  is  that  which  we  find  in 
Neh.  xL  4,  but  only  three  (Uthai,  Imri, 
Pharei)  of  the  six  names  here  can  be  con- 
sidered identical  with  a  likenumber  (^^AaioA, 
Amariahf  Perez)  out  of  the  seven  found  there. 
Neh.  XL  6  adds,  **  The  number  of  the  8one 
of  Perez  that  dwelt  at  Jerusalem  four  hundred 
three  score  and  eight  valiant  men." 

Ver.  5.— The  Shilonites.  These  are  the 
descendants  of  Shelah,  youngest  son  of 
Jadah.  In  place  of  the  one  name  Aiaiah 
here,  Nehemiah  (xi.  7)  give«  a  list  of  seven, 
among  which  Maassiah  is  found,  answering 
to  our  Asaiah. 

Ver.  6. — ^No  corresponding  list  whatever 
is  found  in  Nehemiah,  but  in  xi.  24  mention 
is  made  of  *^  Pethahiah  the  son  of  Meshezaheelf 
of  the  children  of  Zerah,"  Zera  was  twin 
brother  of  Pharez  (Oen.  xxxviii.  30). 

Vers.  7 — 9. — The  corresponding  passage 
(Neh.  xi.  7,  8)  varies  much  in  the  names 
given,  and  adds  up  the  number  of  Benjamite 
chief  men  to  nine  hundred  and  twenty- 
eight,  instead  of  nine  hundred  and  fifty-six. 

Ver.  10. — This  verse  is  correct  in  not 
calling  (as  does  Neh.  xi.  10)  Jedaiah  the 
son  of  Jehoiarib,  or  as  it  is  there  written 
Joiarib,  The  orinn  of  the  names  of  these 
three  priest  families  is  found  in  oh.  xxiv. 
7,17. 

Vers.  11 — 13. — ^This  list  resembles  much 
more  closely  that  of  Neh.  xi.  11 — 14.  The 
one  thousand  and  seven  hundred  and  three 
More  of  this  passage  is  not  reached  by  five 
hundred  and  sixty-eight,  when  the  numbers 
of  Neh.  xi.  12 — 14  are  all  added  together. 
The  name  Aiariah  (in  Nehemiah  appearing, 
probably  simply  by  copyist's  error,  as 
Seraiah)f  here  described  as  ruler  of  the 
house  of  Ood,  probably  points  to  the  high 
priest  Eliathib,  who  held  that  office  in  the 
ume  of  Nehemiah,  and  was  descended  from 
Seraiah  (ch.  vi.  14).  The  ins  and  outs  of 
the  lists  of  these  verses  confirm  the  suppo- 
sition that  the  way  in  which  differences 
in  the  other  lists  occur  are  easily  to  be 
accounted  for,   in   one    compiler    having 

I.  CHRONICLES. 


selected  some  of  the  names  of  the  whole 
line  of  genealogy,  and  another  others, 
though  in  each  several  case  according  to 
reasons  often  unknown  by  us.  Thus, 
between  Jeroham  and  Pashur  the  table  of 
Nehemiah  supplies  three  additional  links 
in  the  names  Pelaliah,  Amzi,  Zechariah; 
while  in  our  very  next  verse,  for  the  three 
between  Kssiiisi  (Amashai)  and  Meihille- 
mith,  Nehemiah  has  only  two  names,  and 
neither  of  those  two  (Aiareel,  Ahasai)  the 
same  as  found  here. 

Vers.  14 — 16. — ^The  correepondiuR  account 
of  these  Levites  (Neh.  xi.  15 — 18)  has  some 
additional  details — as,  for  instance,  that  the 
number  of  **the  Levites  in  the  holy  citv 
were  two  hundred  four  score  and  four;  ' 
that  two  **of  the  chief  of  the  Levites, 
Shabbethai  and  Jozabad,"  not  given  here, 
**  had  the  oversight  of  the  outward  business 
of  the  house  of  God ;  "  that  **  Mattaniah  .  .  . 
was  the  principal  to  begin  tlie  thanksgiving 
in  prayer;"  and  that  Bakbukiah  (here 
culled  Bakbakkar)  was  *'the  second  among 
his  brethren."  HiEiahabiah  is  also  stated  to 
be  *'  the  son  of  Bunni."  The  Hetophathites. 
The  town  Ne^phah  was  either  locally  near 
Bethlehem,  or  in  some  way  closely  related 
to  it  (ch.  ii.  54 ;  Neh.  vii.  26).  It  is  not 
directly  mentioned,  though  existing  long 
before,  till  the  accounts  of  those  who  re- 
turned from  Babylon  with  Zerubbabcl  (Ezra 
ii.  22).  Interesting  facts  respecting  its 
people  are  found  in  ch.  xxvii.  13,  15 ;  Neh. 
xii.  28.  Though  our  Authorized  Version 
has  the  name  here  in  the  plural,  it  is  not  so 
in  the  Hebrew,  nor  is  it  there  accompanied 
by  the  article. 

Ver.  17. — ^The  porters  here  are  those  who 
had  charge  of  the  entrances  to  the  sanctuary. 
The  word  employed  ("ly.fef)  is  used,  however, 
generally  of  gate  or  door  keepers  (2  Sam. 
xvii.  26 ;  John  x.  3 ;  Mark  xiii.  3,  4 ;  John 
xviii.  16).  Their  number,  stated  in  ver.  22 
as  two  hundred  and  twelve,  is  probably 
corrected  in  Neh.  xi.  19  to  one  hundred  ana 
seventy-two,  made  up  of  tweuty-four  for 
every  week  (ch.  xxvi.  17.  18),  **  entering 
on  the  sabbath "  upon  their  work  (2  Kingpi 
XL  5;  2  Chron.  xxiii.  4),  in  rotation  for 
seven  weeks,  and  the  four  "  chief  warders." 
For  the  five  porters  here  mentioned  there 
are  only  two  mentioned  in  Neh.  xi.  19,  and 
neither  of  ihoae  Shsllum,  the  ohief.  But 
see  also  Ezra  iL  42 ;  Neh.  vii.  45. 

Ver.  18.  — Hitherto  (so  John  v.  17). 
The  reference  must  be  to  Shallum,  for 
see  vers.  24—26  and  Ezek.  xlvi.  1—3.  The 
meaning  of  the  remaining  sentence  of  this 
verse  is,  **  These  were  the  gate-keepers  for 
the  Levite  encampments  side,"  or  what,  in 
later  temple  times,  answered  to  it. 

Ver.  19. — Shallum.  Marked  as  a  different 
person  from  the  former  of  the  same  name,  by 

I 


114 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,      [oh.  ix.  1—44. 


the  deaoriptioD  ion  of  Kore,  etc.  The  pedigree 
here  given  enables  vlb  to  identify  the  ^r- 
son  intended  hb  Shelemiah  or  Mesheleniiah. 
(comp.  ch.  vi.  23,27;  xxvi.  1, 14).  Keepers 
of  the  gi^tes  of  the  tahemaele  ...  of  the 
entrj.  These  are  dedcriptions  of  **  service,*' 
not  synonymous  with  those  of  vers.  17  and 
18,  where  the  words  onppn]  and  '^}l^^ 
are  found,  in  place  of  those  used  here,  viz. 
^S  cr^pn  ^ypW  and  Hxiizn  npy.  Tliey 
designate  the  care  of  the  inner  entrances  of 
the  sacred  building.  Their  faUiers  xoere 
keepers  of  the  entrance  to  the  tcJ)ern(iclej 
as  these  to  the  inner  doors  (margin, 
"  thresholds  ")  of  the  temple.  So  the  follow- 
ing verse  points  the  times  of  **  the  fathers." 

Ver.  21.~Z6ohariah  (see  ch.  xxvi.  1,  2, 
11. 14). 

Ver.  22.— The  seer.  It  is  to  be  noticed 
that  the  compiler  of  Chrouicles  uses  else- 
where, as  here,  the  "aforetime"  name  of 
the  prophet,  according  to  1  Sam.  ix.  9.  Note 
in  this  verse  the  linking  together  of  the 
names  of  David  and  Samuel,  to  the  ig^orinff 
of  that  of  Saul.  In  their  set  office.  Keil 
would  translate,  "Upon  their  fidclitv,  i.e. 
beoause  they  had  been  found  faithful." 
But  our  margin  translates  happily,  "in 
their  trust,"  which  will  include,  in  part, 
the  thought  of  Keil,  and  will  suit  our 
ver.  26. 

Vers.  23 — 26. — (See  above  and  ch.  xxvi. 
12—19.)  For  the  chief  porters,  Bertheau 
suggests,  as  an  analogous  expre^ion, 
ffrparTiyoi  rod  Upov  (Luke  xxii.  52).  The 
ohamhers.  We  have  the  account  of  Solo- 
mon's building  of  these  in  1  Kings  vi.  5 — 
10,  16,  19  ;  it  is  scarcelv  likely  that  the 
"chamber  of  mattresses '^ of  2  Kings  xi.  2 
was  one  of  these,  though  the  language  of 
the  following  verse  looks  that  way  (conip. 
also  Ezek.  xlvL  5—11).  And  treasuries. 
These  were  store-houses  (nhiKHKn)  for  gold, 
silver,  as  pertaining  to  the  temple,  though 
of  com,  etc.,  in  other  connections  (1  Kinfl^s 
▼li.  51 ;  2  Kings  xii.  18 ;  2  Chron.  v.  1 ;  en. 
xxvii.  25). 

Ver.  28. — ^That  they  should  bring  them  in 
by  tale  and  by  tale  carry  them  out    That 


is,  that  they  should  scrupulously  number 
them. 

Vers.  29,  30. — The  vessels  and  other 
things  required  for  the  daily  sacrificial 
service  are  here  spoken  of;  the  verses 
receive  abundant  illustration  from  various 
Old  Testament  passages  (Exod.  xxv.  6; 
XXX.  23—38 ;  Lev.  ii.  1—7.  etc.). 

Ver.  31.— Mattithiah.  The  abiqoitous 
Shallum,  that  designates  the  fiamify,  not 
the  individual,  is  probably  here  quoted, 
Mattithiah  being  at  the  time  in  question 
the  representative  son.  The  things  that 
were  made  in  the  pans.  The  word  here 
employed  (Q*Funn)  is  not  found  elsewhere, 
but  other  derivatives  of  the  same  root  are 
often  found  (Lev.  iL  5;  vi.  21;  viL  9;  ch. 
xxiii.  29 ;  Ezek.  iv.  3). 

Ver.  32.— The  shewbread  (nanpn);  literally, 
a  pHe,  and  heuce  applied  to  the  oeikes,  which 
were  piled  in  two  rows  (Lev.  xxlv.  5 — 8) 
"  on  the  pure  table  before  the  Lord." 

Ver.  33. — Translate,  And  these  dn^n, 
chief  of  the  fathers  of  the  Levites,  in  the  tim- 
bers were  free.  The  word  "  free  "  is  surely 
sufficiently  explained  by  the  following  sen- 
tence, in  connection  with  Ezra  vii.  24 ;  Neh. 
xi.  23.  It  is  more  doubtful  whether  the 
expression, "  these  singers,"  refers  to  names, 
which  now  should  have  been  inserted  but 
are  lost,  or  possibly  to  ver.  16,  ante ;  the 
idiom  would  prefer  the  former.  They  were 
employed  in  that  work  day  and  night; 
literally,  for  hy  day  and  hy  night  on  them^  in 
the  work.  If  we  were  to  suppose  the  cheth 
before  the  **  work  "  an  error  for  he,  the  trans- 
lation would  be  easy  and  free  from  all  doubt, 
for  by  day  and  hy  night,  Ote  work  devolved 
upon  them.  Anyway,  the  substanoe  of  the 
sense  is  obvious. 

Ver.  34. — This  verse  can  scarcely  be  other 
than  a  closing  general  comment  respecting 
all  the  chief  fathers  of  the  Levites,  who  have 
been  spoken  of  (ch.  viii.  28);  audit  purports 
to  gay  that  the  same  oraer  and  principle 
obtained  in  the  offices  referred  to  from  gene- 
ration to  generation  of  families. 

Vers.  35 — 44. — (See  last  diapter,  vers.  29 
—40.) 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS 

Ver.  11. — "  The  ruler  of  the  house  of  Ood/*  Whether  this  Azariah  was  the  high  priest 
or  the  '*  second  priest "  does  not  seem  certain.  But  the  office  here  ascribed  to  him  is 
evidently  one  of  great  importance,  and  is  suggestive  of  memorable  truths  with  regard 
to  God's  spiritual  temple  and  kingdom. 

I.  The  true  **  house  of  God  **  is  spiritual.  The  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  the 
emblem  of  the  spiritual  house  which  no  man  has  built — the  Church  of  the  Divine 
Redeemer  and  Lord.  This  is  composed  of  faithful  and  holy  natures^  as  of  **  lively 
stones." 

II.  This  "house  of  God"  is  ordered  and  governed  according  to  Divine 


CH.  IX.  1—44.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  116 

WISDOM.  This  is  suggested  by  the  word  "  ruler."  "  Order  is  Heaven's  first  law,"  and 
this  law  is  certainly  not  violated  in  his  most  precious  and  beluved  work.  God's  own 
wisdom  is  displayed  in  his  own  temple. 

III.  God's  own  Son  is  the  Ruler  in  his  own  house.  No  earthly  sovereign  or 
ecclesiastical  pontiff  is  the  head  of  the  spiritual  society  in  which  God's  Spirit  ever 
dwells.  Christ  is  the  King,  the  Lord,  the  Priest ;  '*  the  Head  over  all  things  to  his 
Church." 

IV.  All  human  rulers  are  surject  and  surordinate  to  the  Divine  Lord. 
Bishops  are  overseers,  and  presbyters  are  pastors ;  but  they  are  not  lords  over  God's 
heritage.  They  have  only  authority  to  declare  his  will,  and  to  execute  his  commands ; 
and  this  trust  they  fulfil,  not  for  their  own  honour,  but  for  the  order  and  prosperity  of 
God's  house.— T. 

Ver.  13. — ^"  Very  able  men/*  In  this  Book  of  Chronicles  praise  is  accorded,  not  only 
to  great  warriors,  but  also  to  scholars  and  ministers  of  religion.  In  this  passage 
priests  are  described  in  language  which  would  seem  more  appropriate  to  soldiers.  They 
are  termed  *'  mighty  men  of  valour,"  or  valiant  heroes,  paraphrased  in  oiu:  version  as 
•*  very  able  men  "  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord.  The  employment  of  persons 
so  highly  qualified  to  render  such  service  is  very  suggestive. 

L  God  can  make  use  of  the  feerlest  and  humrlest  instruments  in  the 
accomplishment  of  his  purposes.  This  should  be  remarked,  lest  any  persons  should 
consider  themselves  disqualified  from  serving  God  because,  in  their  own  judgment,  not 
justly  wortliy  to  be  termed  "  very  able  "  or  effective  labourers. 

n.  No  arilitt  is  too  good,  or  even  good  enough,  for  God's  service.  If 
responsible  posts,  influential  professions,  call  for  the  services  of  men  highly  endowed 
and  thoroughly  furnished,  shall  we  say  that  anything  is  good  enough  for  the  work  of 
God  ?  Remembering  the  honour  of  serving  him,  the  difficulties  peculiar  to  his  service, 
let  us  rather  seek  to  ofi'er  to  him  the  best.  There  is  abundant  scope  for  intellectual 
vigour,  mental  acquisitions,  tender  sympathy,  unsparing  labours,  and  all  other  precious 
gifts,  in  the  service  of  our  redeeming  God. 

III.  Therefore,  the  strong  and  gifted  should  re  especially  summoned  to 
enter  upon  the  work  of  Christ  ;  to  come  up  "  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the 
mighty."  There  is  room  for  others ;  there  is  room  for  all ;  why  not  for  such  ?  If  the 
temple  ministrations  offered  scope  for  "  very  able  men,"  what  need  is  there  for  wise 
master-builders,  capable  pastors,  stout-hearted  labourers,  valiant  soldiers,  in  the  work 
which  is  dear  to  the  heart  of  God,  and  which  has  been  commenced  by  the  grace  of  the 
Divine  Redeemer  I    To  one  and  to  all  we  would  say,  '*  The  Lord  has  need  of  you." — T. 

Vers.  26—32. — Ministers  of  the  sanctuary.  The  arrangements  for  the  service  of  the 
Levites  in  the  Lord's  house  seem  to  have  been  made,  or  at  all  events  settled,  by  Samuel 
and  by  David.  The  same  arrangements,  substantially,  were  adopted  by  Solomon,  in 
connection  with  the  first  temple,  and  by  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  in  the  second  temple 
erected  by  ZerubbabeL  For  the  custody  of  the  holy  house,  four  chief  warders  were 
appointed,  under  whom  were  a  hundred  and  sixty-eight  porters,  who,  in  turn,  fulfilled 
their  important  and  sacred  office.  These  attendants  had  their  homes  in  certain  villages 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem.  A  course  of  twenty-four  of  them  seem  to  have 
attended  we  sanctuary  every  week^  commencing  with  the  sabbath,  and  the  turn  of 
each  course  would  come  round  once  in  seven  weeks. 

L  Ghsbrvb  the  variety  and  unity  of  the  Levitical  service.  1.  The  variety. 
Some  were  entrusted  with  the  duty  of  opening  and  closing  the  doors.  Others  had 
charge  of  the  treasury,  where  coin,  sacred  vessels  and  vestments,  etc.,  were  kept  in 
security.  Others  had  the  custody  of  the  various  vessels  and  instruments  used  in  sacri- 
ficial services.  Others  made  ready  the  sacrifices,  manufactured  the  incense,  or  prepared 
the  sacred  cakes  and  shewbread.  2.  The  unity.  One  God  appointed  them  all,  by  the 
same  law  and  ordinance,  to  their  several  ministries.  One  sanctuary  occupied  their 
attention  and  called  forth  their  activity.  One  nation  and  people  were  served  by  all  the 
ministrations  of  the  priests  and  Levites.  One  object  was  before  them  all — to  serve 
Jehovah,  to  obey  his  Law,  to  seek  his  favour. 

U.  Remark  the  striking  figure  which  we  have  in  these  ministrations  of 


116  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa     [ch.  ix.  1—44. 

THE  Ghubch  of  thb  LIVING  AND  DiviNE  Christ.  1.  There  are  "  diversities  of  gifts" 
and  trusts  and  services.  According  to  the  ahility  and  opportunity  is  the  occupation. 
2.  Beneath  all  these  diversities  there  is  an  admirable  unity.  It  is  '*  the  one  Spirit "  who 
qualifies  and  appoints  all.  There  is  one  body,  one  temple,  one  brotherhood.  And  there 
is  one  aim — the  service  and  glory  of  the  one  God  and  Saviour. 

Practical  lessons.  1.  Let  each  Christian  fulfil  his  own  vocation.  2.  And,  at  the 
same  time,  regard  with  sympathy  and  affection  his  fellow-workers  in  the  same  service. 
8.  And  ever  look  to  the  one  end — the  service  of  his  redeeming  Gk>d. — T. 

Ver.  1. — "  The  far  country"  The  text  speaks  of  those  who  were  "  carried  away  to 
Babylon  for  their  transgression."  In  every  age  and  land  sin  means  exile.  It  is  a 
fruitful  source  of  division,  of  painful  and  hurtful  separation.  Sin,  which  is  "  the  trans- 
gression of  the  Law,"  makes  us  go  out  into  "  a  far  country."    It  takes  us^ 

I.  To  A  STATE  OF  SEPARATION  FROM  GoD  (Isa.  liz.  2)  :  from  his  conscious  presence, 
his  favour,  his  likeness,  his  dwelling-place. 

II.  Far  from  a  true,  an  ideal  manhood.  We  sink  a  long  way  below  the  level 
of  a  pure,  holy,  estimable  humanity. 

III.  Into  the  dreary  region  of  restlessness,  misery,  despair. 

IV.  To  "the  far  country"  of  indifference,  HEAJITLE8SNE88  (" past    feeling," 

Eph.  iv.  19),  UTTER  UNBELIEF. 

V,  To  "THE  OUTER  DARKNESS "  OF  FINAL  EXILE  FROM  THB  CITY  OF  GOD. — C. 

Vers.  11 — IS.^Authority  and  ahUity  in  the  service  of  Ood.  Azariah  was  "  the 
ruler  of  the  house  of  God"  Tver.  11)  ;  concerning  a  thousand  seven  hundred  and  sixty 
it  is  said  that  were  "  very  aole  men  for  the  work  of  the  service  of  the  house  of  God  " 
(ver.  13).  Here  we  have  high  authority  and  eminent  ability  in  the  service  of  the 
Lord. 

I.  Authority  in  sacred  service.  Our  Saviour  did  not  establish  a  hierarchy  in  the 
Christian  Church.  The  apostolate  was  obviously  a  temporary  institution.  We  read 
of  "  elders  that  rule  well "  (1  Tim.  v.  17),  and  the  Hebrew  Christians  were  charged  to 
"  obey  them  that  had  the  rule  over  them  "  (Heb.  xiii.  17).  There  was,  as  there  is  now, 
a  place  in  the  Church  for  authority  on  the  one  hand  and  for  loyalty  on  the  other. 
There  are,  as  there  ever  will  be,  those  who  direct,  control,  organize,  appoint,  remove. 
On  the  part  of  such  there  should  be :  1.  A  sense  of  deep  responsibility ;  for  on  their 
decision  and  direction  great  things  depend.  2.  A  constant  appeal  for  Divine  guidance. 
In  the  affairs  of  his  kingdom  surely  the  Divine  Sovereign  should  be  continually  con- 
sulted by  those  who  s)>cak  in  his  Name.  3.  Great  careiulncss  to  act  in  harmony  with 
his  revealed  will,  so  that  they  may  not,  while  professing  to  work  for  God,  be  simply 
imposing  their  own  fallible  judgment  on  other  minds.  4.  The  cultivation  of  humility, 
lest  they  should  aspire  to  *'have  dominion  over  the  faith"  of  men,  instead  of  walking 
humbly  with  God,  and  serving  in  love  like  that  Son  of  man  who  *'came  not  to  be 
ministered  unto,  but  to  minister." 

II.  Ability  in  sacred  service.  (Ver.  13.)  The  ability  which  these  priests  displayed 
in  the  service  of  the  sanctuary  was  of  a  somewhat  different  order  from  that  which  is  now 
required  in  the  service  of  man  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  But  it  was  inspired  by  the 
same  Divine  Being,  and  it  aimed  at  the  same  end — the  spiritual  well-being  of  the  nation. 
We  remark  concerning  ability  in  sacred  service :  1.  That  it  is,  in  large  part,  the  gift 
of  God.  "  Very  able  men  "  are  **  what  they  are  by  the  grace  of  God."  Their  con- 
spicuous ability  is  his  endowment.  From  the  Author  of  their  being  come  the  faculties 
(memory,  imagination,  judgment,  reason,  enthusiasm,  strength,  will,  etc.)  which  distin- 
guish them  from  their  fellows.  They  owe  their  eminence  to  the  supreme  hand  that 
raises  and  levels  all  things.  Therefore  (1)  let  those  who  possess  remarkable  ability 
wear  their  honours  meekly,  remembering  whence  they  came ;  and  therefore  (2)  let  not 
those  who  lack  it  be  envious  of  those  who  enjoy  it,  for  then  their  "  eye  would  be  evil " 
because  God  is  good.  2.  That  it  is,  in  large  part,  the  product  of  human  eflfort.  The 
greatest  "abilities  "  will  come  to  no  ripeness  and  bear  no  fruit  without  human  industry, 
patience,  effort.  Many  who  have  it  in  them  to  do  great  things  go  to  the  grave  having 
lived  useless,  wasted  lives.  Therefore  (1)  let  those  who  are  gifted  of  God  see  to  it  that 
they  train,  mature,  and  use  the  capacities  they  have  of  him ;  and  (2)  lot  those  who 


CH.  EL  1—44.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  117 

receive  the  benefit  of  such  ability  honour  the  human  while  they  bless  the  Divine 
Author  of  it.  3.  That  it  is  a  uift  for  the  use  of  which  its  possessors  should  feel  a  large 
measure  of  responsibility.  Who  shall  measure  the  vastness  of  the  influence  for  good 
or  evil  which  one  man  of  great  ability  may  exert,  if  we  take  into  account  not  only  the 
direct  but  all  the  indirect  results  of  his  action  ?  4.  That  the  approval  and  award  of  the 
Master  depend,  not  on  ability,  but  on  faithfulness.  They  who  have  served  God  with 
special  powers  will  have  the  gratification  of  seeing  peculiarly  large  results;  but  whether 
our  talents  be  few  or  many,  if  we  be  faithful  at  our  post,  we  shall  all  share  the  *^  Well 
done  "  of  the  righteous  Judge.— 0. 

Vers.  14 — 34.— -4M)ec<»  of  Christian  work.  In  the  service  of  the  sanctuary  there 
were  many  offices  to  be  filled,  various  duties  to  be  discharged.  These  will  bring  to  our 
remembrance  three  aspects  of  our  Christian  service. 

I.  That  lowlt  laboub  in  the  service  of  the  Savioub  is  honoitbable  work. 
The  work  of  the  Nethinims  (ver.  2)  was  not  to  be  despised ;  they  did  work  which  was 
comparatively  menial,  but  it  was  work  that  needed  to  be  done  for  God,  and  was  accepted 
by  him.  Of  the  Levites,  some  ''  had  the  charge  of  the  ministering  vessels  "  (ver.  28*) ; 
others  of  *'  the  fine  flour,  and  the  wine,  and  the  oil,  and  the  frankincense,  and  the 
spices  "  (vers,  29,  30) ;  one  of  them  was  placed  *'  over  the  things  that  were  made  in 
the  pans "  Tver.  Sl\  These  offices  were  humble  enough,  but  they  were  not  counted 
dishonourable  by  tnose  who  rendered  them,  and  they  were  esteemed  worthy  of  record 
in  the  sacred  chronicle.  In  the  cause  of  Christ  and  of  man  there  are  many  duties  that 
are  demanded  of  us,  which,  to  the  eye  of  impiety,  may  seem  servile  and  mean.  If, 
however,  we  are  looking  at  things  with  the  eye  of  faith  and  filial  love,  they  will  not 
wear  this  aspect.  Loyalty  counts  nothing  too  mean  to  be  rendered  to  its  sovereign ; 
love  nothing  too  trivial  to  be  ofifered  to  its  friend.  Our  loyalty  to  the  heaveuly 
King,  our  love  to  our  Divine  Friend,  should  make  us  not  only  willing  but  eager  to 
take  any  part  and  do  any  work  in  his  sacred  service. 

II.  That  a  post  of  trust  is  one  of  special  honoitr.  It  is  very  noticeable  that 
80  much  is  said  about  the  porters  that  kept  the  gates :  *'  the  work  of  the  service "  is 
markedly  referred  to  as  "  keeping  the  gates  of  the  tabernacle ;  "  these  "  over  the  host 
of  the  Lord,"  were  "  keepers  of  the  entry  "  (ver.  19;  see  vers.  21 — 24).  We  read  also 
that  "four  chief  porters  .  .  .  were  over  the  chambers  and  treasuries"  (ver.  26). 
Special  provision  was  made  for  their  entertainment  (ver.  27).  These  actions  were 
simple,  mechanical — ^it  might  be  thought  lowly,  if  not  menial.  But  they  were  places 
of  trust.  It  was  important  that  none  should  be  admitted  to  the  holy  places  but  those 
who  had  the  right  of  entrance.  These  men  had  the  purity  of  the  sacred  courts  at  their 
command ;  they  were  trusted  to  see  that  these  were  not  profaned  by  unhallowed  feet. 
When  we  are  trusted  by  our  fellows  or  by  our  Master  to  do  anything,  whether  it  be 
in  itself  serious  or  slight,  we  should  feel  that  we  are  being  honoured,  and  we  should 
put  forth  all  our  vigilance,  strength,  vigour,  to  prove  ourselves  worthy  of  the  confidence 
placed  in  us.  Nothing  should  make  so  strong  an  appeal  to  our  undivided  energies  as 
being  trusted  to  see  that  something  is  done  well  in  the  service  of  our  Saviour. 

lit  That  constancy  is  a  very  valuable  virtue  in  Christian  service.  The 
singers  "  were  employed  in  that  work  day  and  night "  (ver.  33).  It  was  pleasing  to 
the  ear  of  Jehovah  to  hear  ceaseless  strains  of  holy  song  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  It 
is  pleasing  to  the  heart  of  the  ascended  Saviour  to  witness  spiritual  constancy  in  those 
that  bear  his  name  and  profess  to  be  his  disciples.  He  has  ordained  us  that "  our 
fruit  should  remain  "  (John  xv.  16).  He  wishes  that  we  should  "  continue  in  his  love  ** 
(John  XV.  9).  We  are  to  continue  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ  (Acts  xiv.  22 ;  1  Tim.  iv. 
16 ;  Col.  I.  23),  and  in  brotherly  love  (Heb.  xiii.  1).  The  secret  of  constancy  in  the 
various  graces  of  Christian  character  is  abiding  in  Christ  himself  (John  xv.  1 — 7). 
Abiding  in  him— our  spirit  trustinjs,  resting,  rejoicing,  hoping  in  him— our  life  will 
Dot  flicker  or  expire ;  it  will  shine,  like  the  lamp  in  the  holy  place,  like  the  song  in  the 
sanctuary,  "  day  and  night,"  steadily,  serenely,  abidingly,  in  the  presence  of  God.— 0. 

Ver.  20. — **  Ood  with  us"  "  The  Lord  was  with  him."  These  words  frequently  occur 
in  the  sacred  Scriptures.  Of  many  of  the  worthies  of  ancient  time  is  God*s  favouring 
presence  stated— of  Abraham  (Gen.  xxvi.  24),  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xxviii.  15),  of  Joseph 


118  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  ix.  1— 44. 


(G«n.  xxxix.  2),  of  Samuel  (1  Sam.  iii.  19),  of  David  (I  Sam.  xviii.  14),  etc.    Thero 
is  evidently  something  more  in  the  words  than — 

I.  The  obvious  sense  in  which  (Jod  is  constantly  pbksent  with  evebt  one. 
The  omnipresent  One  cannot  be  separated,  in  space^  from  any  of  his  creatures.  *'  He 
is  not  far  from  every  one  of  us :  for  in  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being  " 
(Acts  xvii.  27,  28). 

**  Awake,  asleep,  at  home,  abroad. 
We  arc  surrounded  still  with  God." 

(See  Ps.  cxxxix.)    We  shall  fail  to  find  in  the  text  its  chief  significance  if  we  do  not 
see — 

II.  The  deepeb  sense  in  which  Ood  is  willing  to  be  neab  us  all.  He  is 
ready  to  be  with  us :  1.  With  his  favouring  presence ;  as  a  loving  friend  is,  in  sweet 
fellowship  with  his  friend.  2.  With  his  sympcUhizing-pte&QXkce'^  as  the  patient  mother 
is  with  her  sick  or  sufifering  child,  taking  his  hand  to  assure  him  of  her  closeness  to 
him  and  tender  care  for  him.  3.  With  his  eneofurctging  presence  ;  as  a  teacher  is  with 
his  pupil,  animating  him  to  do  his  best  in  the  trial-hour.  4.  With  his  guiding  and 
guardian  presence;  as  the  father  leads  his  child  on  in  the  darkness,  at  once  showing 
the  way  and  defending  from  the  unknown  perils  in  the  path.  If  we  yield  ourselves  to 
God  in  the  time  of  our  youth,  and  determine  to  walk  with  Christ  along  the  path  of  life, 
then  his  gracious  presence  will  attend  us  at  every  step,  he  will  be  with  u$  to  our  journey's 
end,  and  will  finally  take  us  to  be  with  him  in  the  eternal  home. — C. 

Vers.  1 — 44. — Genealogy  of  the  returned  exiles.  This  chapter  records  the  genealogies 
of  Israel  when,  as  exiles,  they  had  returned  from  Babylon.  Almost  ail  the  names 
recur  in  Nehemiah  (xi.).  God's  people  may  be  scattered  and  downtrodden  and  degraded 
in  strange  lands,  but  he  has  his  eye  on  each,  and  their  names  are  in  the  book  of  life. 
Not  one  shall  be  missing  when  the  Lord  shall  gather  his  own  again  in  that  land  where 
they  shall  return  to  go  no  more  out.  The  servants  of  God  had  each  their  work  appor- 
tioned. Some  had  the  charge  of  pans ;  some  had  to  number  the  vessels ;  some  to  carry 
them  in  and  out.  Some  were  porters  at  the  door  of  the  house  of  God ;  some  porters  at 
the  king's  gate ;  some  "  keepers  of  the  entry  ; "  some  to  oversee  the  vessels ;  some 
makers  of  "  the  ointment  of  the  spices ; "  and  some  had  the  more  exalted  ofiice  of  rulers  of 
the  house  of  God.  Thus  the  occupation  of  each  was  widely  different,  but  each  one  had  his 
place  in  the  vineyard,  some  exalted,  some  humble.  Oh  to  be  able  to  say,  in  whatever 
position  of  life  God  may  place  us,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?  "  Let  each 
one  fill  his  post,  however  humble  it  may  be,  and  "  do  it  heartily  as  unto  the  Lord." 
The  reward  will  be  given,  not  according  to  the  dignity  of  the  post,  but  according  to 
the  faithfvlness  of  the  servant  '*  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  Uiee 
a  crown  of  life."  There  is  one  service  in  this  list  which  is  worthy  of  note,  ft  is  that 
of  the  Levites  who  were  singers.  They  were  free  because  they  were  in  the  chambers 
of  the  house  of  God,  and  their  work  was  to  praise  day  and  night  (ver.  3d).    Surely 

? raise  is  for  all  times,  and  is  associated  with  freedom  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  word, 
'he  soul  that  has  been  *'made  free'*  can  sing;  and  praise,  unlike  prayer,  will  never 
end.  '*  I  will  bless  the  Lord  at  all  time* :  his  praise  shall  continually  be  in  my  mouth." 
None  can  praise  but  those  whom  "  the  truth  "  has  made  '*  free,"  and  they  can  sing, 
like  Paul  and  Silas,  even  in  a  dungeon.  These  are  the  true  Levites.  They  are  indeoi 
in  "  the  chambers  *' — the  secret  places  of  God's  love.  The  service  of  praise  is  indeed 
**  upon  them  "  (margin).  They  must  praise.  They  cannot  do  otherwise.  They  know 
Jesus.  They  see  him.  And  they  look  forward  to  that  time  when  they  shall  praise 
him  "as  they  ought."  God  hasten  that  glorious  time,  when  heaven  and  earth  shall  be 
vocal  with  praise,  and  Jesus  shall  be  the  Object  of  it  fur  ever! — W. 

Ver.  2. — Betumed  captives.  The  allusion  ma<le  here  to  those  who  were  the^Ers^  to 
reoccupy  their  ancestral  possessions  in  the  Holy  Land,  may  serve  to  introduce  the 
subject  of  the  returned  captives,  and  may  set  us  upon  learning  the  permanent  lessons 
of  their  restoration.  Some  account  may  be  given  of  the  moral  and  religious  condition 
of  the  Jewish  people  while  in  Babylon ;  of  the  literary,  national,  and  religious  influences 
exerted  upon  them  by  the  associations  of  their  captivity ;  of  their  measure  of  fitness 


OH.  IX.  1—44.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  119 

for  restoration  when  the  providential  time  came ;  and  of  the  historical  circumstances 
which  led  up  to  their  release.  For  these  topics  valuable  help  may  be  gained  from 
Stanley's  *  Jewish  Church,'  vol.  iii.  We  only  note  one  or  two  points  which  might  be 
missed  or  under-estimated.  1.  The  work  of  the  prophets  of  the  Captivity,  in  distinctly 
connecting  national  sufiferings  with  national  sins,  and  so  producing  a  national  repentance 
and  a  heart-return  to  Jehovah.  2.  The  influence  exerted  by  the  association  of 
Babylonian  idolatry  with  Babylonian  tyranny ;  a  similar  influence  to  that  exerted  by 
the  Egyptian  experiences  on  the  first  fathers  of  their  race.  They  were  made  to  feel  that 
idolatry  could  never  assure  national  liberty;  it  is  never  anything  but  an  engine  of 
human  tyranny — man's  way  of  mastering  and  managing  the  bodies  and  rainds  of  his 
fellow-men.  The  Jews  have  been,  ever  since  the  Captivity,  the  most  strictly  monotheistic 
race  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  3.  The  sympathy  with  the  Jewish  people  which  Cyrus, 
as  a  monotheist,  was  likely  to  feel.  4.  And  the  limited  and  almost  disappointing 
character  of  the  first  party  to  return.  It  was  but  a  company  representative  of  a  national 
return.  The  majority  of  the  Jews,  having  become  settled  and  prosperous  in  the  land 
of  their  exile,  preferred  to  remain  behind ;  only  42,360,  attended  by  7337  servants, 
were  found  willing  to  return  to  their  native  land.  That  company  started  under  the 
leadership  of  Zerubbabel,  the  head  of  the  house  of  Judah,  and  grandson  of  King 
Jehoiachin.  The  chief  effects  of  the  Captivity  upon  the  Jews  have  been  thus  summa- 
rized .  (1)  The  old  tendency  to  idolatry  had  been  eradicated ;  (2)  there  had  sprung 
up  a  deep  reverence  for  the  letter  of  the  Law,  and  for  their  great  lawgiver,  Moses ; 
(3)  the  love  of  agriculture  had  declined,  and  had  given  place  to  a  taste  for  commerce 
and  trade;  (4)  the  vernacular  language  had  undergone  a  change,  the  old  Hebrew 
giving  place  to  the  Cbaldee.  Fixing  our  attention  on  the  first  returning  company, 
we  not^— 

L  Thet  had  returned  to  lotaltt.  That  is,  to  their  full  allegiance  to  Jehovah, 
their  one,  immediate,  invisible,  spiritual  King.  iTbis  heart-return  and  national 
return  was  the  essential  preparation  for  their  restoration ;  as  we  know  that  repentance, 
confession,  conversion,  and  heart-return  to  GK>d  must  ever  precede  the  assurance  of 
Divine  forgiveness  and  acceptance.  The  sanctiBed  influences  of  the  Captivity  bore 
directly  upon  bowing  the  people  down  in  penitence  and  winning  them  to  full  allegiance 
to  their  God.  So  it  may  be  impressively  urged  that  Divine  blessings  are  always  held 
back  until  we  are  ready  to  receive  them,  and  the  great  readiness  is  full  openness  to 
God,  hearty  loyalty  to  him. 

XL  Thet  now  eeturned  to  priyileoe.  Explain  their  sentiment  about  their 
beloved  land,  as  showing  what  a  privilege  they  esteemed  it  to  be  only  to  go  and  dweil 
in  it.  They  also  had  the  privilege  of  comparative  national  liberty  and  independence. 
They  might  enjoy  their  family  possessions.  They  might  renew  the  Jehovah-worship. 
Gk>d  would  do  great  things  for  his  loyal  people  whereof  they  might  be  glad. 

III.  Thet  found  that  return  to  privilege  meant  return  to  dutt.  A  con- 
nection that  is  universally  preserved  and  constantly  repeated.  Privilege  never  stands 
alone.  No  man  can  ever  get  it  as  an  isolated  and  distinct  thing.  Responsibility  and 
duty  are  always  linked  with  it;  and  whoever  will  have  privUege  must  have  these 
things  with  it.  The  "  returned  captives  "  found  that  they  were  called  to  rebuild  their 
city,  retill  their  lands,  restore  their  ceremonial  worship,  reorganize  their  governmental 
and  social  systems,  secure  their  defence  from  external  foes,  raise  again  their  demolished 
walls,  and  erect  a  new  temple  upon  the  ruins  of  the  old.  And,  beyond  such  material 
things,  they  were  bound  to  "  occupy  for  God,"  they  were  to  present  such  a  model 
"  state  "  as  would  effectively  witness  to  all  surrounding  nations,  and  to  all  succeeding 
generations,  of  G^'s  high  claims,  God*s  infinite  justice,  God's  triumphing  mercy,  and 
God's  sure  faithfulness  alike  to  his  threatenings  and  to  his  promises.  The  forms  in 
which,  for  us,  duty  follows  privilege  may  be  illustrated.  Position  brings  influence, 
wealth  brings  power,  learning  brings  claims,  gifts  bring  spheres,  piety  brings  the  call 
to  witness,  etc. 

Application  may  be  made  to  God's  restorations  from  the  sicknesses  and  calamities 
of  life.  When  God  brings  us  up  again  out  of  any  "  depths,"  we  should  feel  as  did 
David,  "  Before  I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray :  but  now  have  I  kept  thy  Word."  If  we 
thought  aright  we  should  daily  regard  ourselves  as  urged  to  all  holy  endeavour  by  the 
pressure  of  the  feeling  that  we  are  God's  "  restored  ones." — R.  T. 


120  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  xx.  1— 44. 

Ver.  13. — Strong /or  Ood'a  service.  Of  certain  men,  otherwise  unknown,  this  is  the 
permanent  histurical  record,  "  They  were  very  able  men  for  the  work  of  the  terviee  ^ 
the  Jiotue  of  Ood."    It  is  a  description  full  of  interest,  and  reminds  us  that-— 

I.  God  gives  to  men  the  needed  gifts  for  his  work.  For  cdl  his  work  in  the 
world  ;  hut  here  we  are  specially  reminded  of  his  work  in  the  Church  and  in  Divine 
service.  In  older  times  wo  find  Moses  with  the  genius  for  order  and  rule,  and  Rezaleel 
with  the  genius  fur  decoration,  and  Joshua  with  the  genius  for  war,  and  David  with 
the  genius  for  song ;  and  so  on  through  each  age  we  may  go,  marking  the  men  endowed 
with  gifts  for  pious  services.  Each  apostle  has  his  gift.  Reformers,  leaders,  teachers, 
rise  for  their  specific  work  in  each  age — Au^stine,  Anselm,  Bernard,  Luther,  Calvin, 
Pascal,  Whiteneld,  etc.  Ever  and  again  God  gives  us  "  very  ahle  men  for  the  work  of 
the  service  of  his  house."  And  the  greater  and  more  prominent  instances  only  affirm 
and  assure  the  general  truth  that  fur  all  his  work,  he  it  greater  or  smaller  in  man's 
esteem,  God  ever  finds  the  men  and  endows  with  the  gifrs,  and  each  may  hecome,  hy 
the  faithful  culture  of  his  gift,  a  "  very  ahle  man  **  fur  Chxl's  service.  If  he  may  he 
ought, 

II.  The  gift  is  often  unrecognized  bt  him  who  has  it.  And  so  the  Church  loses 
much  of  the  service  she  needs.  Especially  apply  to  the  ministerial  endowment  It  is 
usually  found  associated  with  a  modest  and  retiring  disposition,  and  in  self-diffidence 
manv  fail  to  helieve  in  their  own  powers.  And  powers  often  lie  dormant  and  unrecog- 
nize«[  until  circumstances  of  life  secure  their  development.  Men  are  often  surprise 
hy  the  discovery  of  hitherto  unknown  faculties.  The  men  who  push  are  seldom  the 
men  of  real  power.  But  the  modesty  of  the  highly  endowed  often  prevents  their 
gaining  their  due  place  and  8])here.  As  an  instance  of  unrecognized  gifts,  reference 
may  he  made  to  Dr.  Guthrie,  who,  though  so  successful  as  a  writer,  only  hegan  to 
write  for  the  press  when  he  had  reached  middle  life.  We  need  a  worthier  apprehension 
of  the  truth  that  every  renewed  man  is  also  an  endowed  man.  In  the  light  of  it  we 
may  urge  on  each  individual  the  duty  of  discovering  his  gift,  and  so  cultivating  and 
using  it  that  he  may  prove  a  "  very  ahle  man  "  for  the  work  of  the  Lord.  Exactly 
what  Christ's  Church  needs  is  ''very  able  men,"  hy  endowment  and  culture,  in  all  her 
departments  of  service;  and  we  should  have  the  faith  that  the  endowments  are  given 
us,  and  we  must  secure  the  recognition  and  culture  of  them. 

III.  The  Church  should  discern  the  men  with  the  gifts.  Compare  the  intense 
expression  of  Moses,  "  Would  God  that  all  the  Lord's  people  were  prophets  I  ** 
Sometimes /ea^oiisifs  of  order  and  office  blind  our  eyes  so  that  we  cannot  see  the  gifts 
of  others.  Sometimes  desire  for  the  exclusive  honour  of  place  and  work  makes  us 
wilfully  put  other  men  down.  Sometimes  the  presentation  of  the  gift  informs  whieh 
appear  to  tu  strange,  leads  to  our  making  a  false  and  unworthy  estiiUiite  of  the  gift. 
The  Church  has  often  grievously  erred  in  casting  out  from  her  midst  "  very  able  men 
for  God*8  service."  They  who  watch  for  Divine  endowments  must  be  willing  to 
recognize  them  in  the  great  variety  of  furms  in  which  they  come  to  men.  And  all  we 
really  need  to  be  assured  of  is  the  Divine  stamp  upon  them.  To  refuse  the  men  whom 
God  has  gifted  is  to  be  *'  found  fi«;hting  against  God." 

Press  the  responsibility  of  all  who  arc  in  Church  offices  which  bring  them  into  imme* 
diate  contact  with  the  people  or  the  children.  They  should  be  ever  looking  for  the 
*•  signs  of  power,"  and  leading  out  those  who  may  become  **  very  able  men  for  Gtxl's 
work."  And  then  press  the  responsibility  that  rests  on  the  men  who  are  found  and 
proved  strong,  able  for  God's  work.  Having  "  put  their  hand  to  the  plough,  they  must 
not  draw  back."  Life  for  them  is  full  of  noblest  possibilities.  They  must  be  **  faithful 
unto  death,"  and  win  "  the  crown  of  life." — R.  T. 

Ver.  19,  etc. — Ood*s  door-keepers.  Some  were  appointed  to  serve  as  "keepers  of  the 
gates,"  and  some  as  "  keepers  of  the  entry,"  and  one  man  was  **  porter  of  the  door 
of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation."  David  recognized  an  attractiveness  in  such 
offices  because  they  secured  constant  presence  in  the  holy  courts.  Fle  says,  "  I  had 
rather  be  a  door-keeper  in  the  house  of  my  Gud,  than  to  dwell  in  the  tents  of 
wickedness." 

I.  LowLT  SERVICES  ARE  ASKED  AT  OUR  HANDS.  Commou  life  lu  the  family,  the 
business,  and  society  has  its  many  lowly  services  and  its  few  great  ones.    Aud  in 


GB.  IX.  1-44.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  *  121- 

religiouft  life  tho  same  is  true.  Of  most  of  us  God  asks  that  we  will  do  little  things  for 
him  welL  What  a  gracious  lesson  in  doing  cheerfully  lowly  work  our  Lord  gave  us 
when  he  laid  aside  his  garments,  took  a  towel,  girded  himself,  and  began  to  wash  the 
diBciples'  feet  1    **  He  that  would  be  greatest  among  you  let  him  be  your  servant" 

IL  LOWLT  SERVICES  ABE  NECES8ABT  TO  THE  GENERAL  WELL-BEING.      Illustrate  from 

church  offices.  The  organ-blower's  is  a  very  humble  office,  but  most  necessary  and 
useful.  The  verger,  door-keeper,  cleaner,  etc.,  are  but  in  humble  places  and  duties, 
and  yet  the  comfort  of  "  priest  and  people "  depend  on  their  lowly  work.  So  in  all 
good  enterprises  there  is  a  great  deal  of  mechanical  and  insignificant  work  demanded, 
but  the  efficient  doing  of  them  bears  directly  on  the  entire  success.  Standing  quite 
alone,  the  humble  duty  seems  scarce  worth  the  doin^,  but  when  it  is  seen  fitting  into 
its  place  in  the  great  whole,  its  real  importance  and  dignity  are  recognized.  Illustra- 
tions may  be  found  in  the  importance  of  the  lesser  parts  of  a  great  machine  or  work  of 
mechanical  construction.  A  fine  tower  once  fell  in  ruins  to  the  surprise  of  all,  until 
the  builder  confessed  that  he  had  neglected  the  little  iron  ties — insignificant  things — 
that  held  the  stones  together.  No  man  ever  gains  a  worthy  apprehension  of  life  until 
he  fully  and  finally  settles  with  himself  that  he  will  think  nothing  small,  and  treat 
nothing  as  small, since  ^all  things  have  their  necessary  uses," and  God  asks  for  "faith- 
fulness in  that  which  is  least,** 

IIL   LoWLT  8EBVI0E8   FIND  SPHERES  FOB  THE   EXPBESSION  OF  OHABACTEB.      And  the 

best;  for  men  are  less  sophisticated,  more  simple  and  mure  genuine  in  them.  If  we 
would  know  what  a  man  really  is,  we  must  not  watch  him  merely  on  '*  show  days," 
but  rather  see  him  in  the  private  scenes  of  home  and  business.  We  put  on  character- 
garments  for  public  scenes,  just  as  we  do  outer  coats  fur  the  streets.  When  "  taken 
at  unawares  *'  we  express  what  our  character  really  is. 

IV.  Lowly  sebvices  often  become  the  most  efficient  tests  of  ohabaoter.  The 
necessity  for  personal  attentions  to  the  poor  wounded  man  on  the  road  to  Jericho, 
tested  and  proved  the  selfishness  of  priest  and  Levite,  as  a  call  for  some  high  and 
honourable  service  would  not  have  done.  And  similar  calls  are  made  on  us.  We 
want  to  do  the  great  things,  and  show  off  the  blossoms  of  fine  character  which  we  have 
carefully  8ttu:k  an.  And  God,  in  his  providences,  only  provides  humble  spheres, 
unobserved  places,  and  lowly  work,  which  will  let  the  fine  pretences  alone  to  wither 
and  fsM  ofif,  and  only  test  and  culture  the  real  and  the  worthy  and  the  true.  Who  of 
us  can  review  our  lives,  and  fail  to  see  the  places  where,  again  and  again,  we  were 
"  weighed  in  the  balances  and  found  wanting  "  when  we  were  asked  to  take  some 
humble  place  of  service  or  do  some  little  thing  for  Jesus'  sake  ?  Still  we  are  so 
unwilling  to  take  the  lowest  rooms,  even  though  Christ  taught  us  that  he  looks  among 
the  people  there  to  find  the  right-hearted,  the  worthy,  whom  he  may  bid  "  Go  up 
higher."  In  respect  of  the  power  to  hold  and  exhibit  character,  the  little  things  often 
have  more  capacity  than  the  big, 

V.  Lowly  services  fit  in  with  greater  ones  to  perfect  the  whole  of  service. 
Door-keepers  fit  in  with  porters,  and  sacrificers,  and  singers,  and  priests,  to  make  the 
whole  of  temple  service.  And  the  least  piece  lost  from  the  whole  mars  the  beauty  of 
the  perfect  service.  What  God  asks  is  faithfulness,  and  he  Ciin  find  it  in  the  "least 
things."  Remember  George  Herbert's  familiar  verse,  "  Who  sweeps  a  room,"  etc. 
— R.T. 

Ver.  22. — SamueVs  life-work.  The  assertion  made  in  this  verse,  that  Samuel  was 
concerned  in  the  organization  of  the  tabernacle  service,  comes  upon  us  with  surprise. 
We  are  to  suppose  that  he  provided  for  the  reformation  of  the  ritual  and  ministrations 
in  the  tabernacle  after  the  confusions  in  the  days  of  the  judges ;  though  this  state- 
ment is  not  found  in  any  other  place  in  the  Old  Testament.  '*  Samuel  the  seer  was 
zealous  for  the  external  ordinances  of  God's  house,  and  the  precursor  of  David  in  this 
respect."  We  have  side  hints  given  us  in  the  Scriptures  of  work  done  by  great  and 
good  men  which  is  not  detailed  so  as  to  become  a  part  of  history.  We  neei  not  assume 
that  the  whole  of  any  man's  story  is  preserved  ;  only  such  parts  as  are  likely  to  prove 
permanently  interesting  and  instructive.  An  instance  may  be  found  in  the  case  of 
bavid.  His  public  life  of  incident  pushes  back  out  of  sight  his  valuable  labours  in 
connection  with  the  sanctuary  order  and  worship.     So  the  worthy  estimating  of  any 


122  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,      [ch.  ix.  1—44. 


haipan  life  is  a  difficult,  nearly  an  impossible  thing,  seeing  that  we  have  not  the 
whole  before  us,  nor  can  we  fairly  judge  the  relative  value  of  the  parts.  Full  estimates 
of  human  lives  must  be  left  to  God  and  the  future.  It  is  full  of  instructive  signifi- 
cance that,  as  the  generations  pass,  wholly  different  estimates  are  taken  of  historic 
characters,  as  other  and  fuller  iniormation  concerning  them  comes  to  light.  This  may 
be  illustrated  in  the  cases  of  Lord  liacon,  whose  moral  character  recent  writers  are  able 
to  clear,  and  Protector  Cromwell,  whose  portraiture  Carlyle  has  at  last  succeeded  in 
worthily  drawing.     Apply  these  thoughts  to  Samuel,  and  estimate— 

I.  His  known  wobk  as  a  judge.  He  belongs  to  the  class  so  called,  and  was  a 
deliverer  and  a  magistrate,  combining  the  offices  which  were  characteristic  of  this 
order  of  men.  In  his  deliverings  grandly  loyal  to  Jehovah.  In  his  mwjietracy  pore- 
handed  and  abidingly  faithful  to  men.  Everywhere  and  in  everything  making 
character,  piety,  and  integrity  tell  for  good. 

II.  His  unknown  wobk  as  a  beligious  refobmeb.  Explain  the  influences  upon 
a  national  religion  of  such  changes  and  troubles  as  marked  the  time  of  the  judges. 
Such  conditions  do  not  imperil  personal  piety,  they  rather  intensify  it,  as  may  be  seen 
in  the  story  of  the  persecuted  Christians  in  Madagascar ;  but  they  do  imperil  the  order 
and  ceremonial  of  religion,  and  especially  in  such  a  case  as  that  of  Israel,  in  which  the 
religion  was  centraliz^  on  ooe  spot,  and  to  it  all  the  worshippers  had  to  come  at  fixed 
intervals.  Samuel  would  not  only  have  to  restore  the  tabernacle  eystem  and  services, 
but  also  to  revive  the  reli<;ious  spirit  of  the  people ;  and  to  this,  doubtless,  his  earnest 
attention  was  directed  in  his  regular  circuits  for  the  administration  of  justice. 

III.   HiB  ASSUMED  wobk  A8  THE  FOUNDEB  OF  THE  SCHOOLS  OF  THE  PROPHETS.      For  On 

this  part  of  his  work  we  have  no  certain  information.  "  In  his  time  we  first  hear  of 
what  in  modern  phraseology  are  called  the  '  schools  of  the  prophets.'  Their  imme- 
diate mission  consisted  in  uttering  religious  hymns  or  songs,  accompanied  by  musical 
instruments — psaltery,  tabret,  pipe  and  harp,  and  cymbals.  In  them  the  characteristic 
element  was  that  the  silent  seer  of  visions  found  an  articulate  voice,  gushing  forth  in  a 
rhythmical  flow,  which  at  once  riveted  the  attention  of  the  hearer.  These  or  such  as 
these  were  the  gifts  which  under  Samuel  were  now  organized,  if  one  may  so  say,  into 
a  system.  From  them  went  forth  an  influence  which  awed  and  inspired  even  the 
wild  and  reckless  soldiers  of  that  lawless  age.  Amongst  them  we  find  the  first  authors 
distinctly  named,  in  Hebrew  literature,  of  actual  books  which  descended  to  later  gene- 
rations. Thither,  in  that  age  of  change  and  dissolution,  Samuel  gathered  round  him 
all  that  was  generous  and  devout  in  the  people  of  God."* 

Learn  to  estimate  aright  men's  secondary  influence  and  work,  for  in  this  GKxl  may 
judge  otherwise  than  we  are  wont  to  do,  and  put  our  last  first, — H.  T. 

Vers.  23 — 34. — The  importance  of  order  in  Ood's  worship.  The  point  of  interest  in 
these  verses  is  the  extreme  care  given  to  securing  quietness,  regularity,  order,  and  duo 
solemnity  in  God's  worship.  A  point  emphasized  by  the  apostle  in  his  counsel  to  the 
early  Christian  Church,  *'  Let  all  things  be  done  decently  and  in  order."  The  order  of 
God's  house  has  this  for  its  special  mission,  that  it  declares,  realizes,  and  illustrates  the 
Divine  order  in  creation,  providence,  and  redemption.  "  Order  is  Heaven's  first  law ; " 
and  it  is  the  necessary  attendant  on  truth,  purity,  almightincss,  and  the  eternally 
right.  So  if  man,  in  any  of  his  spheres,  can  present  a  worthy  picture  or  shadow  of 
the  Divine,  one  of  its  essential  features  must  be  orderliness,  and  such  orderliness  will 
prove  to  be  witness  and  power, 

I.  Obder  begakded  as  a  sign  of  obedience.  Since  it  is  God's  will  that  everything 
should  have  its  fitting  place  and  be  in  that  place,  our  setting  things  right  becomes 
a  sign  of  our  true-hearted  obedience  to  him ;  and  the  securing  of  order  gains  moral 
quality,  and  becomes  an  agency  in  the  culture  of  character. 

II.  Obdeb  begabded  as  a  sign  of  sympathy  of  feeling  WITH  God.  Not  merely 
have  we  to  concern  ourselves  with  it  as  our  duty,  but,  from  a  higher  standpoint  of 
kinness  with  Grod  and  fellowship  with  his  mind,  we  want  what  he  wants,  we  love  what 
ho  loves,  and  we  try  to  get  our  works  in  full  harmony  with  his.  We  would  have 
heaven  and  earth  ring  together  the  same  sweet  note. 

III.  Obdeb  begabded  as  oub  witness  against  the  disorder  of  sin.  If  we 
have  rightly  caught  the  redemptive  spirit,  then  we  shall  be  op[)ressed  and  troubled  by 


OH.  X.  1—14.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa 


128 


the  disorders  caused  by  sin,  whatever  forms  they  may  take,  and  we  shall  ever  be 
Uriving  to  reach  them  that  we  may  set  them  straight.  Therefore  Christians  enter  as 
remedial  and  recovering  forces  into  all  family  life,  social  life,  business  life,  and  national 
life ;  everywhere  seeking  to  get  things  out  of  the  disorders  of  evil,  and  set  in  the  eternal 
order  of  righteousness.  And  in  Christ's  Church  and  Christ's  worship  the  devoutness, 
regularity,  and  beauty  of  a  gracious  order  should  make  a  striking  contrast  with  the 
restless,  anxious,  disordered  world  around.  Men  should  find  heart-rest  in  God's 
sanctuary. 

IV.  Obokb  regabded  as  a  moral  force  in  the  world.  For  what  does  it  plead 
and  work  ?  For  (1)  stillness ;  (2)  forethought ;  (3)  grace  of  form ;  (4)  due  relations  of 
office.  But  under  ordinary  human  conditions  even  "  order  "  has  its  perils.  It  may 
come  to  be  sought  for  its  own  sake  and  not  merely  for  its  uses.  It  may  come  to 
•apersede  **  life  "  and  even  to  crush  "  life  "  out,  as  has  been  proved  in  the  over-elabora- 
tion of  Church  ceremonial.  Two  things  are  essential  to  true  aud  worthy  human 
worship.  They  are  fully  compatible  one  with  the  other.  The  culture  of  each  may 
run  along  with  the  culture  of  the  other.  Nothing  can  supersede  *'  life ; "  but  order 
may  be  fully  developed  so  that  it  may  worthily  express  '*  life.*' — li.  T. 

YerSk  28 — 32. — Every  man  to  his  oum  office.  The  distribution  of  gifts  is  constantly 
recognized,  and  on  this  we  have  much  apostolic  teaching.  But  the  answering  distri- 
bution of  offices  requires  to  be  more  fully  apprehended.  The  power  and  the  ]3ace  are 
divinely  fitted  together ;  and  in  the  economy  of  the  Divine  administration  we  may  be 
sore  there  are  no  more  powers  given  than  there  are  places  in  which  the  powers  may 
find  exercise.  It  follows  upon  this  that  each  man  is  bound  to  realize  his  power, 
discover  his  place,  fit  into  it  faithfully,  and  interfere  with  no  other  man's  work.  The 
way  in  which  one  man's  gifts  and  work  may  fit  into  another  man's  is  often  an 
Insoluble  puzzle  to  us,  but  is  quite  plain  in  the  plan  of  Divine  forethought,  and  wil^ 
be  discovered  when  we  can  read  final  issues.  Each  man  stands  right  before  God  when 
he  clearly  sees  his  work  and  says,  "  This  one  thing  I  do."  The  following  points  have 
been,  in  part,  presented  in  previous  outlines ;  they  should  be  dealt  with  now  in  the 
light  of  the  above  topic,  "  Every  man  to  his  own  ofiice : " — 

I.  God  has  both  gifts  and  spheres  for  their  exercise.  That  he  has  gifts  we 
know,  but  we  too  readily  assume  that  the  spheres  are  human  arrangements. 

II.  God's  providences  tend  towards  securing  the  proper  relation  of  gifts  amu 
SPHERES.  A  north-country  proverb  tersely  expresses  this,  **  The  tools  will  come  to 
the  hands  that  can  use  them."  Every  man,  sooner  or  later,  gains  his  providential 
opportunity,  when  he  may  do  what  he  can  do. 

in.  Man's  wilfulness  seriously  mingles  the  gifts  and  the  spheres.  By  some 
men's  failing  to  recognize  their  gifts ;  by  othersr  prostrating  their  Divine  gifts  to  base 
and  selfish  uses;  by  some,  when  they  know  their  gifts,  refusing  to  occupv  their 
spheres ;  and  by  the  forcing  of  too  many  into  certain  particular  s[>heres  for  which  an 
undue  preference  is  shown.  What  we  need  in  Christ  s  Church  and  work  is  a  wise 
subdivision  of  labour  and  more  earnest  endeavour  to  do  faithfully  and  well  our  little 
piece.    And  in  just  this  our  Lord  and  Master  set  us  his  own  holy  example. — R.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  X. 

It  is  evident  that  the  compiler  of  the 
Chronicles  intended  its  history  proper  to 
begin  substantially  with  the  reign  of  David. 
Strictly,  however,  it  opens  with  the  lost 
mournful  chapter  of  the  career  of  Saul  and 
his  sons,  or  of  three  out  of  the  four  (eh.  ix. 
89)  of  them.  The  mention  of  Saul  had 
been  prepared  for  by  the  short  preamble  of 


his  pedigree  and  family;  and,  in  like  manner, 
the  way  is  paved  for  the  introduction  of  the 
reign  and  deeds  of  David  by  the  brief  and 
affueting  narration  of  the  end  of  his  prede- 
cessor on  the  throne.  The  last  chapter  of 
the  First  Book  of  Samuel  oocupies  itself 
with  tlie  Slime  subject  and  covers  the  same 
ground.  Our  present  chapter  compared 
with  that  is  sufficient  to  convince  us  that 
both  were  drawn  from  some  common  souroo 


124 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.       [cH.  x.  1— U 


or  sonrces.  It  is  not  possible  to  suppose 
that  the  writer  of  Chronicles  merely  copied 
from  the  Book  of  SamneL  The  differeDcos 
are  very  slight,  but  they  are  such  as  pro- 
duce a  diflferout  conTiction,  and  arc  not  con- 
sistent with  the  assumption  of  being  mere 
alterations  and  additions  upon  what  is  read 
in  the  other  work.  The  last  two  voriies  of 
this  chapter  form  the  distinctive  feature  of 
it,  compared  with  the  parallel  of  1  Sam.  xxxi. 
The  appropriateness  of  these  two  verses,  as 
bridging  over  the  history  from  Saul  to 
David,  is  evident,  and  is  but  another  inci- 
dental indication  of  the  thorough  unity  of 
purpose  of  the  compiler.  Thoy  may  even  be 
viewed  as  tacitly  compensating  for  the  abrupt 
introduction,  at  the  commencement  of  the 
chapter,  of  the  battle  with  the  Philistines, 
and  the  slaughter  on  Mount  Giiboa. 

Ver.  1. — No  abruptness  marks  this  narra- 
tion in  1  Sam.  xxxi.  On  the  contrary,  it  is 
there  the  natural  conclusion  of  the  wars 
between  the  Philistines  and  Saul.  Tiiis 
engagement  took  place  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  4 ; 
xxix.  1,  11)  on  the  plains  of  Jezreel.  The 
name  Jezreel  marks  either  the  city  (Josh, 
xix.  18;  1  Kings  xxi.  1,  11),  or  the  cele- 
brated valley  or  nlain  called  in  later  times 
Efdraclon,  the  (xreek  form  of  the  word. 
The  plain  in  its  largest  proportions  may  be 
said  to  have  been  bounded  by  the  Moilitor- 
ranean  (although  it  is  called  the  plain  of 
Accho,  where  it  abuts  on  that  sea)  and  the 
Jordan,  and  by  the  Samaria  and  Carmel 
ranges  on  the  south  and  south-west,  and 
those  of  Galilee  on  the  north  and  north- 
east. While  called  a  ''plain"  and  "tlie 
great  plain"  in  Judg.  1.  8,  its  name  in  the 
Old  Testament  is  **  valley."  It  lay  like  a 
scalene  triangle,  with  its  apex  in  the  diroc- 
tion  of  the  Mediterranean,  opening  into  the 
above-mentioned  plain  of  Accho,  and  its 
sides  going  from  right  to  left,  about  fifteen, 
twelve,  and  eighteen  miles  long  respectively. 
The  allusions  to  it  in  Old  Tc8t»ment  history 
are  frequent.  Its  exceeding  richness  is  now 
turned  into  desolation  unexci.'eded.  Megiddo 
(Josh.  xii.  21 ;  Ju  Ig.  i.  27),  the  city,  centre 
of  a  smaller  valley  called  by  the  same  name 
(oh.  vii.  29;  JuJg.  v.  19),  was  situated 
within  it,  in  the  direction  of  Carmel.  (For 
very  full  and  interesting  account  of  the 
Jezreel  with  which  we  have  here  to  do,  and 
of  Esdraelon,  see  Stanley's  ^  Sinai  and 
Palestine,'  pp.  836—356,  edit.  18G6.)  Koiint 
Giiboa  identifies  for  us  the  exact  battle-field 
of  the  text.  It  is  the  same  with  that  on 
which  Gideon  triumphed  (Judg.  vii.  1,  8). 
It  is  in  the  lot  of  Issiachar,  flanked  by  the 
Little  Hermnn  ridge  on  the  norih-east, 
and  by  Giiboa  on  the  south-cast,  a  mountain 


range  of  ten  miles  long,  about  six  hundred 
feet  hiv;h,  and  mentioned  only  in  the  melan- 
choly cormection  of  this  history.  The  flight 
of  the  men  of  Israel  and  of  Saul  was  from 
the  plain  back  to  their  position  on  Mount 
Gdloa,  where  they  were  pursued,  overtaken* 
and  slain.  The  modem  name  of  the  town 
Jezreel  is  Zerin,  the  depraved  aliases  of 
which  appear  as  Gerin  and  Zaztin  (Robin- 
son's *Bibl.  Res.,'  iii.  162— 165,  3rd  edit), 
and  Jezreel,  Shunem,  and  Beth-shean  are 
the  three  most  conspicuous  places  in  this 
part  of  the  whole  plain  of  Esaraelon. 

Ver.  2.  — Followed  hard  after.  Tho 
Hebrew  verb  implies  all  this  and  rather 
more,  viz.  thut  they  made  the  pursuit  of 
Saul  and  his  sons  their  one  special  object. 
Luther's  "  Uingen  sich  au  Saul "  expresses 
this  forcibly.  Abinadab;  or  Ishui  (see  ch. 
viii.  33 ;  1  Sam.  xiv.  49).  The  sons  of  Savl. 
Omit  the  article,  which  is  not  present  in  the 
Hebrew  text.  The  fourth  son,  notwithstand- 
ing our  ver.  6,  survived  (2  Sam.  ii.  8 — 15). 

Ver.  3. — The  archers  hit  him.  The  literal 
translation  would  be,  the  shooUrs.  men  %citk 
the  boWf  found  him.  The  context  makes  it 
plain  that  the  meaning  is  that  the  arrows 
of  the  pursuers  rather  than  the  pursuers 
themselves  "  found  "  him,  and  these  made 
him  argue  all  the  rest.  To  this  our  Antho- 
rizcil  Version  has  jumped  by  the  one  word 
**  hit "  him.  It  is  evident  from  ver.  8  that 
the  Philistines  did  not  find  the  body  of 
Saul  to  recognize  it  till  next  day.  And  he 
was  wounded  of  the  arohers.  The  radical 
meaning  of  the  verb  (Wi)  is  rather  "to 
twist "  (Jorqucre)  or  **  bo  twisted,"  **  writhe  " 
(torqueri).  And  the  meaniny^  here  is  in 
harmony  with  it,  that  Saul  trembled  from 
fear  or  writhed  witli  tho  pain  already  in- 
flicted of  the  arrows.  Hence  the  parallel 
passage  couples  with  this  same  verb,  the 
adverb  "(Kd. 

Ver.  4.— And  abuse  me.  The  main  idea 
of  the  Hithp.  of  the  verb  hero  used  is  to 
satif^fy  the  thirst  of  lust  or  cruelty.  Saul 
probably  feared  not  the  abuse  of  mocking 
only,  but  that  of  torture.  In  the  corre- 
sponding passage  this  verb  is  preceded  by 
the  clause,  and  thrust  me  through.  His 
armour-bearer  would  not.  He  refused  the 
request  or  bidding  of  Saul,  no  doubt  mainly 
in  respect  of  the  fact  that  Saul  was  still 
"  the  anointed."  We  have  a  full  description 
of  both  the  loose  arms  and  of  the  armour  of 
the  body  in  the  cose  of  the  Philistine  Goliath 
(1  Sam.  xvii.  4 — 7).  It  is  one  of  the  world's 
surprising  facts  tliat  the  making  of  arms 
and  armour,  and  the  acquiring  of  skill  in 
the  using  of  them,  should,  as  in  fact  all 
liistory  attests,  date  from  so  early  a  period 
(Gen.  xxxi.  26;  xxxiv.  25).  As  compared 
with  the  history  and  the  fragmentary  re- 
mains of  classical  antiquity,  those  of  Scrip- 


cii.  X.  1—14.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


125 


tare  are  remarkably  scanty  on  tlila  subject. 
Tbe   sword    is  the    earliest   mentionea  in 
Scripture,  carried  in  a  sheath  (1  Sam.  xvii. 
51 ;  2  Sam.  xx.  8 ;  ch.  xxi.  27) ;  though  the 
Hebrew  word  is  hero  different  from  that 
ysetl  in  Samuel.    It  was  slung  by  a  girdle 
(1  Sam.  XXV.  13),  rested  on  hips  or  thigh 
(2  Sam.  XX.  8 ;  Judg.  iii.  16 ;  Ps.  xlv.  3),  and 
was  sometimes  **  two-edged"  (Judg.  iii.  16 ; 
Ps.  cxlix.  6).     Theu   follows  the  spear  in 
several  varieties,  as  in  1  Sam.  xvii.  7 ;  ch. 
xi.  11 ;  XX.  5 ;  xxiii.  9.    Again  as  a  javelin 
(Josh.  viii.  14—25;  Job  xxix.  23;  1  Sam. 
xvii.  6,  where  in  the  Authorized  Version  it  is 
called  target,  or  gorget).    Again  as  a  lancet 
(1  Kings  xviii.  28 ;  ch.  xii.  8,  24  ;   2  Chron. 
3tL12;  Neh.  iv.  13;   Ezek.  xxxix.  9).     In 
addition  to  these  three  chief  varieties  of 
spear — the  spear  proper,  the  javelin,  and  the 
limcet — there  is  mention  of  two  other  weapons 
used  at  all  events  as  the  dart  of  a  light 
kind  would  be  used,  in  2  Chron.  xxiii.  10, 
and  elsewhere,  and  in  2  Sam.  viii.  14,  re- 
spectively.   After  sword  and  spear  rank  the 
bow  and  arrow  (Gen.  xxi.  20 ;  I  Sam.  xxxi. 
3 ;  ch.  viu.  40 ;  xii.  2 ;  Ps.  Ixviu.  9 ;  cxx.  4 ; 
Job  vi.  4)    And  lastly,  the  sliug  (Judg.  xx. 
16;  1  Sam.  xxv.  29;  2  Kings  iii.  25),  and 
a  very  strong  weapon  of  the   same  kind 
mentioned  in  2  Chron.  xxvi.  15.    The  chief 
articles  worn  as  bodily  armour  were  the 
breastplate  (1  Sam.  xvii.  5,  38) ;  the  some- 
what obscure   habergeon,  mentioned    onlv 
twice,  in  no  connection  then  of  battle  (Exoa. 
xxviii.  32 ;  xxxix.  23),  the  originid  name  of 
which,  tacharahf  is  found  on  Egyptian  papyri 
of  the  nineteenth  dynasty, — it  8eems  to  have 
been  a  species  of  doublet  or  corselet;  the 
helmet  (1  Sam.  xvii.  5;  ch.  xxvi.  14;  Ezek. 
xxvii.  10);  greaves  (1  Sam.  xvii.  6);  two 
kinds  of  shield  (1  Sam.  xvii.  7,  41,  com- 
pared with  1  Kings  x.  16;  2  Chron.  ix.  15); 
and  lastly  the  article  mentioned  in  2  Sam. 
viii  7 ;  oh.  xviii.  7 ;  2  Kings  xi.  10 ;  2  Chron. 
xxiii.  9;   Cant  iv.    4;  Jer.  IL    11;   Ezek. 
xxvii.  11 ;  and  of  which  we  can  say  nothing 
certainly  bearing    upon   its  nature    or  its 
use,  except    that   it    was    made    of   gold. 
Armour-bearers,  then,  the  first  distinct  men- 
tion of  whom  we  find  in  Judg.  ix.  54,  may 
well  have  been  a  necessity  for  kings  and  for 
the  great    Joab  had  ten  (2  Sam.  xviii.  15). 
The  word  is  not  expressed  as  a  compound  in 
Hebrew,  but  as  **  one  carrying  (D^'pa)  arms." 

Ver.  5.— And  died.  The  parallel  (1  Sam. 
xxxi.  5)  adds  "  with  him." 

Ver.  6. — All  his  house.  In  place  of  these 
words,  the  parallel  (1  Sam.  xxxi.  6)  has, 
**  And  his  armour-bearer,  and  all  his  men, 
that  same  day  together."  This  reading 
avoids  the  ambiguity  referred  to  already 
(ver.  2).  In  either  passage  the  moral  is 
plain,  that  the  entl  and  ruin  of  Saul's 
faynily  as  a  wholo  had  arrived,  rather  than 


literally  that  the  whole,  including  every 
member,  of  that  family  had  perished. 

Ver.  7.— In  the  valley.  In  place  of  these 
words,  the  parallel  (1  Sam.  xxxi.  7)  has, 
'*  On  the  other  bide  of  the  valley,  and  ...  on 
the  other  side  Jordan."  We  have  here  a  clear 
instance  of  the  desire  of  the  compiler  of 
Chronicles  to  compress  his  narrative,  while 
the  fidelity  of  the  parallel  narrative  is  testi- 
fied in  the  naturalness  of  its  statements, 
amounting  to  this,  that,  quick  as  the  intel- 
ligence or  report  could  reach  all  those 
Israelites  who  were  at  all  within  the  range 
of  the  victorious  Philistines,  they  hastened 
to  vacate  their  abodes. 

Ver.  8. — ^And  his  lonB.  The  parallel 
(1  Sam.  xxxi.  8)  says  explicitly,  '^  And  his 
three  sons." 

Ver.  9. — ^And  when  they  had  stripped  him, 
they  took  his  head,  and  his  armonr.  Some 
comparing  this  with  tlie  parallel  (1  Sam. 
xxxi.  9),  "  They  cut  off  his  head,and  stripped 
off  his  armour,"  say  **  our  author  "  leaves  the 
beheading  unmentioned  1  It  is  certainly 
sufficiently  implied.  To  carry  tidings  nnto 
their  idols.  This  sentence  is  more  clearly 
explained,  and  brought  into  rather  unex- 
pected and  perhaps  unwished  accord  with 
the  most  modern  of  our  ecclesiastical  habits, 
when  in  the  parallel  as  above,  we  find  **  to 
publish  it  in  the  house  of  their  idols  "  as  the 
form  of  expression. 

Ver.  10.— The  house  of  their  godi.  In 
place    of    this    general    designation,    the 

Earallel  (1  Sara.  xxxi.  10)  designates  the 
ouse  more  exactly  as  "  the  house  of 
Ashtaroth"  (Gen.  xiv.  5;  the  Phoonician 
female  deity,  as  Baal  was  their  male  deity. 
The  Greek  form  of  the  name  is  Astarte. 
See  also  Cic,  *  De.  Nat.  Deo.,'  iii.  23).  And 
fastened  his  head  in  the  temple  of  Dagon. 
The  parallel,  as  above,  gives  us,  "  And 
fastened  his  body  to  the  wail  of  Both-shan  " 
(wbi^^h  account  is  corroborated  in  2  Sam. 
xxi.  12 — 14),  and  does  not  say  what  further 
was  done  with  the  head,  it  is  no  doubt 
remarkable  that  one  historian  puts  on 
record  the  one  fact  and  the  other  the  other ; 
and  it  is  one  of  the  clearer  indications  that 
both  took  from  some  common  sources.  It 
is  perhaps  something  to  be  remarked  also 
that,  while  the  historian  in  Samuel  says 
nothing  further  about  the  head  (thoueh 
allusion  to  it  is  probably  included  in  the 
"body"  and  the  "bones,"  the  further 
account  of  which  is  given  in  vers.  12, 13,  as 
well  as  in  2  Sam.  xxi.  12 — 14),  the  compiler 
of  Chronicles  does  revert  to  mention  of 
"  the  body  of  Saul,"  ver.  12,  infra,  though 
without  any  oorresponding  naming  of 
Bethshan.  Bertheau  finds  Tittle  difficulty 
in  the  question,  by  simply  supposing  that 
the  omission  in  Chronicles  is  another  in- 
stance of  the  desire  to  compress;    while 


126 


TIIE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.      [on.  x.  1—14, 


othen  rappoeo  ooimption  in  our  text,  or,  aa 
TheniuB  and  Ewald,  the  loss  of  a  sentence 
to  onr  text  After  all  laid,  the  omission  in 
Samuel  of  the  fate  of  the  head  would  seem 
to  be  fully  as  remarkable  as  the  omission, 
■o  far  as  this  verse  is  concerned,  in 
Chronicles  of  tho  fate  of  the  body.  It  is 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  head  and 
trunk  of  the  body  of  Saul  were  brought 
together  again,  or  it  were  likely  some  allu- 
sion to  the  contrary  would  have  transpired 
in  the  following  verses  of  this  chapter  or  in 
2  Sam.  xxi.  12—14.  With  regard  to  the  act 
of  the  Philistines  in  dedicating  the  armour 
of  Saul,  and  fixing  his  head  in  the  temple  of 
Dagon,  as  though  trophies,  tho  custom  was 
both  ancient  and  not  uncommon  (Judg. 
xvi.  21—30 ;  1  Sam.  v.  1—5 ;  xxi.  9).  The 
house  of  Dagon  (Josh.  xv.  41 ;  xix.  27)  here 
spoken  of  was  that  at  Ashdo:l  (Josh.  xv.  47), 
between  Gaza  and  Joppa.  Though  belong- 
ing to  Judah*s  lot,  it  was  never  subdued 
bv  Israel,  and  remained  throughout  their 
history  one  of  their  worst  foes.  It  is  the 
Axotus  of  Acts  viii.  40.  There  was  another 
Dagon  temple  at  Gaza  (Judg.  xvi.  21 — 31). 
Dagon's  representation  was  the  figure  of  a 
man,  as  to  nead,  hands,  and  bus^  but  for 
the  rest  that  of  a  fish,  which  was  a  symbol 
of  fmitfulness.  As  Ashdod  was  situate  on 
the  extreme  west  of  Palestine,  so  Beth-shan 
— ^generally  written  Beth-shean,  a  city  of 
Manosseh  (oh.  vii.  20\  though  within  the 
borders  of  Issachar  (Josh.  xvii.  11),  from 
which  the  Canaanites  were  not  expelled 
(Judg.  i.  27)— was  on  the  extreme  east  near 
the  Jordan.  It  was  afterwards  culled 
Scy  thupolis.  Considering  the  distance  these 
were  apart,  and  their  contrary  directions, 
we  may  suppose  that  some  sugg^tion  was 
intended  by  the  fixing  the  head  in  the  one 
place  and  the  body  in  the  other. 

Ver.  12. — JabesL  This  is  the  only  place 
where  **  Jabesh  **  is  used  as  an  abbreviation 
for  Jabcsh-gilead,  of  which  it  was  the  chief 
city.  Gilead  comprised  the  lots  of  Reuben 
and  Gad  (Numb.  xxxu.  1—5,  25-32, 
80—41)  ana  of  half  Manasseh  (oh.  xxvii. 
21).  Baul  hud  on  a  celebrated  occasion 
(1  Sam.  xi.  1—13)  befrieuded  the  people 
of  Jabesh-gilead,  coming  to  their  rescue 


against  Nuhath  the  Ammonite,  of  which 
kindness  they  are  now  mindful,  show  thai 
rarest  of  virtues,  gratitude  to  a  hlXen 
monarch,  and  are  further  on  (2  Sam.  ii  5) 
commended  for  it  by  David.  This  verse 
does  not  tell  us,  as  the  parallel  (1  Sam. 
xxxi.  12)  does,  of  the  first  burning  of  the 
bodies,  and  then  of  the  buryiug  of  the 
calcined  bones.  The  silence  is  very  remark- 
able. It  does  name  the  kind  of  tree,  the 
"oak"  or  '♦terebinth."  The  word  for  tha 
tree,  however,  in  both  passages  is  of  doubt- 
ful and  perhaps  only  generic  signification. 
The  several  Hebrew  words  translated  in 
various  places  as  '*oak,"  all  share  a  oommoQ 
mot,  significant  of  the  idea  of  strength.  Dr. 
Thomson  (*The  Land  and  the  Book,'  pp. 
243,  244)  says  that  the  country  owns  still 
to  an  abundance  of  oaks  of  very  fine  growth 
in  some  cases,  and  that  these  are  exceed- 
ingly more  plentiful  and  altogether  a 
stronger  tree  than  the  **  terebinth.**  The 
difierent  names,  though  all  oonnecied  with 
one  root,  referrt^d  to  are  probably  owing  to 
the  large  variety  of  onks.  With  the  state- 
ment of  the  burying  of  the  bones  under  a 
tree,  and  the  fisuiting  of  seven  davs  on  the 
part  of  these  brave  and  grateful  men  of 
Jabesh-gilead,  the  parallel  account  comes 
to  its  end. 

Ver.  13.— So  Said  died  for  Ui  tram- 
grenioiL  (For  this  transgression  and  the 
stress  laid  upon  it  and  its  predicted  oon- 
sequences,  see  1  Sam.  xv.  1—9,  11,  14; 
xxviii.  18.)  7or  asking ...  of ...  a  fiuniliar 
spirit  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  7—24). 

Ver.  14. — And  inquired  not  of  the  Lord. 
Saul  seems  to  have,  in  point  of  fact,  inquired 
in  tome  sense  (1  Sam.  xiv.  37;  xxviii.  5,  6, 
15).  But  the  probable  meaning  is  that  he 
did  not  inquire  in  the  first  instance  (see 
vers.  8,  4);  and  when  he  did  inquire,  he 
did  not  await  the  reply  solely  and  ex- 
clusively of  Jehovah.  Therefore  he  slew 
him  (so  see  ch.  ii.  3).  David  the  son  of 
Jesse.  The  compiler,  having  heretofore 
given  so  scrupulou^y  whatever  of  genealogi- 
cal fact  he  could,  is  now  careful  to  use  it. 
And  he  identifies  the  future  chief  hero  of 
his  history  as  him  who  had  already  beea 
instanced  (ch.  ii.  15),  **  son  of  Jesse.'* 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  13,  14. — The  epitaph,  a  heacon-waming.  So  far  as  this  work  is  concerned, 
Saul  is  introduced  to  us,  and  takes  **  for  ever  "  his  farewell  of  us,  in  this  one  and  the 
same  chapter.  We  know  him,  however,  well  elsewhere.  On  the  background  of  a 
bright  sky,  we  are  at  once  prepared  to  say,  his  figure  stands  out,  and  ever  will  stand 
out,  dark  in  appearance,  of  somewhat  commanding  proportions,  with  the  bearing  of 
no  altogether  ordinary  man — a  striking  figure,  indeed,  but  one  that  strikes  fear  and  a 
chill  feelinfl;  throughout  one,  rather  than  one  that  inspires  reverence,  emulation,  love. 
It  cannot  be  said  of  him  or  of  his  career  that  they  lack  incident  or  dramatic  effect. 


CH.  X.  1—14.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  127 

On  the  contrary,  they  were  bom  in  these  and  abound  in  them.  Saul  and  his  career 
were  remarkably  differenced  from  anything  which  could  be  called  commonplace.  And 
while  the  world  continues,  they  must  n^s  stand  among  the  foremost  examples  for 
iropressiveness,  of  grand  opportunity  and  splendid  prospects  grievously  missed  and  dis- 
honoured. Our  chapter  is  itself  but  a  summary,  the  concluding  snatch  of  a  strange, 
eventful,  solemn  life,  to  the  condemning  faults  of  which,  in  its  course,  the  present  text 
points.  And  we,  following  a  similar  plan,  will  pass  beneath  our  eye,  in  brief  summary, 
the  prominent  facts,  the  moral  qualities,  and  the  opportunities  of  Saul ;  the  troubled 
current  on  which  they  are  hurried  along,  the  dark  abyss  in  which  at  last  they  are  lost. 
Let  us  notice— 

I.  Saul's  summons  prom  obscurity  to  the  service  of  his  country  and  the  full 
GLARE  OF  DAY.  What  we  have  to  notice,  especially  about  this,  is  that  undoubtedly 
it  was  the  doing  of  an  upper  power,  of  a  special  providence,  of  no  purpose  nor  seeking  of 
the  man  who  was  thus  elevated,  nor  even  of  the  contrivance  of  others.  It  was  some- 
thing outside  of  the  individual  life  and  outside  the  national  life.  No  calculation  of 
coincidence  could  count  upon  it  nor  account  for  it.  In  the  presence  of  it,  the  man  who 
disbelieves  Providence  and  providences,  and  special  and  particular  providences,  because 
they  make  too  large  a  demand  on  his  fund  of  belief,  prefers  parsimoniously  to  spare 
expenditure  in  one  direction,  in  order  to  lavish  unscrupulous,  disproportionate  outlay  iu 
another.  What  he  can  believe,  this  he  drains  to  the  dregs  in  oue  of  its  resources, 
because  he  will  not  draw  a  fair  measure  of  it  from  another.  Of  him  it  may  well 
be  said  that  the  heart  that  refuses  a  healthy  faith  is  that  which  grows  the  most 
abundant  crop  of  credulity.  The  kingdom  of  God's  people— only  known  as  yet  for  a 
kingdom,  inasmuch  as  he  himself  was  its  King—has  reached  one  of  its  great  crises. 
Moses  foresaw  it,  and,  strange  to  say,  foreshadowed  and  sketched  the  legislation  adapted 
to  it.  The  special  ministers,  consisting  of  individual  and  local  judges,  have  had  their 
day.  The  majority  of  the  nation  dawns  consciously  upon  it.  The  nation  compares  its 
composite,  federal,  fraternal  constitution  with  the  unity  and  cohesion  of  other  nations, 
foes  around ;  and,  blessed  though  it  is  in  comparison  of  them,  yet  deliberately  estimates 
the  balance  as  unfavourable  to  itself.  Nay^  Samuel  himself,  at  this  time  by  a  moral 
force  and  growth  the  one  judge  and  prophet  of  nearly  the  whole  people,  seems  raised 
up  at  the  moment  to  suggest  that  that  embodiment  of  authority  in  one  person — "  a 
king  that  might  judge  us,  and  go  out  before  us,  and  fight  our  battles  " — was  quite  within 
the  range  of  possibility  in  the  midst  of  themselves.  In  fact,  the  national  voice,  in  a 
remarkable  way  and  with  a  remarkable  unanimity,  had  pronounced  for  this.  But  no 
man,  no  name  even,  was  before  them  for  king.  They  express  no  wish,  ask  no  choice, 
solicit  no  help  nor  advice  from  Samuel  on  this  particular  point,  but  seem  to  leave  it 
entirely  with  him  (1  Sam.  viii.  22),  and  he  leaves  it  entirely  with  God.  Saul,  however, 
a  young  man  whose  only  known  distinction  at  present  is  of  talluess  and  bodily  **  goodli- 
ness,"  by  a  little  chain  of  circumstances  as  uncertain  from  one  to  another  as  they 
were  trivial  in  themselves,  finds  himself  in  the  presence  of  Samuel,  the  seer  of  the 
tribes.  The  supreme  Seer  of  the  nation,  God  himself,  has  already  instructed  Samuel ; 
and  the  issue  is  that  Saul,  *'  of  the  smallest  of  the  tribes  of  Israel,"  his  '*  family  the 
least  of  all  the  families  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  "  (1  Sam.  ix.  21),  is  called  to  be  king 
over  all  Gkxl's  people  1  This  was  *'  the  Lord's  doing,  and  marvellous  was  it  in  the 
eyes  "  of  Saul,  at  all  events,  as  we  are  expressly  told. 

IL  Saul's  conversion.  It  was  a  conversion  of  the  old  day,  of  the  old  Church,  also 
of  the  old  yet  ever  new  Spirit.  How  stirred  the  heart,  the  thoughts,  the  amazement 
of  Saul  at  the  new  future  which  had  been  so  suddenly  presented  before  him  1  We  may 
well  understand  that  he  oould  not,  did  not,  take  it  in  all  at  once.  But  his  heart  was 
to  know  a  greater  stirring,  a  deeper  moving.  '*God  gave  him  another  heart"  before 
ever  he  got  back  to  his  earthly  father's  house  again.  **  The  Spirit  of  God  came  upon 
him"  (1  Sam.  x.  9, 10).  The  great  facts  of  conversion  for  the  old  day,  for  the  old 
Chuich,  and  for  all  time  are  intrinsically  the  same,  and  are  two — Ood*8  gift  of  another 
heart  and  of  his  Spirit  therewith.  And  what  transporting  experience  that  must  have 
been  for  him,  when  ''all  the  signs"  which  had  been  given  him  by  Samuel  *'came  to 
pass; "  and  when  **  he  prophesied"  among  the  company  of  prophets  that  met  him ;  and 
when,  at  his  formal  anointing,  "  all  the  people  shouted,  God  save  the  king  !  "  and 
when,  at  the  close  of  that  solemn  day,  he  went  to  Gibeah,  and  '*  there  went  with  him  a 


128  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  TUE  CHRONICLES.       [ch,  x.  1— U. 


band  of  mon,  whose  hearts  God  had  touched,"  also !  Could  there  have  been  a  more 
striking,  a  fuller,  a  richer  beginning  of  a  new  religious  life,  and  one  shaped  to  highest 
en<l8?  Who  could  ever  lose  the  memory,  the  impressions,  the  force  of  hallowed 
resolutions  belonging  to  such  a  time? 

III.  The  fact  of  the  great  outer  opportunities  which  the  position  of  Saul 

AND  THE   PROVIDENCE   OF   GOD  COMBINED  TO  PROFFER  TO   SAUL.       Uuter  opportunity  18 

not  everything,  and  indeed  it  is  not  anything  where  inner  fitness  and  intrinsic  gift  and 
the  spirit  of  a  mission  may  not  be  present.  But  otherwise,  outer  opportunity  is  matter 
of  great  advanta<:;e.  As  the  plant  must  flower  and  the  tree  must  fruit,  in  order  to 
develop  to  the  highest  advantage,  so  thought  and  purpose,  feeling  and  love,  and  all 
life  of  man,  crave  the  help  of  some  outer  opjX)rtunity.  They  find  expression  thereby, 
and,  in  finding  expression,  unfailingly  develop  jiower  and  quality.  God,  no  doubt, 
measures  opportunity  justly,  wisely,  kindly  to  us  all.  And  where  any  child  of  bis 
may  find  or  fancy  he  finds  himself  cram])ed  and  stinted  in  such  respect,  there  may  be 
overpoweringly  good  reasons  for  it,  of  a  kind  difiicult  for  us  to  trace  with  any  dogmatic 
assurance  at  present ;  and  there  may  be  found  overwhelmingly  ample  com|)ensation  for 
it  later  on  in  life,  or  when  the  si>an  of  the  present  life  is  passed.  Yet  can  there  be  little 
doubt  that,  so  far  as  the  present  life  taken  by  itself  is  concerned,  many  a  beautiful  soul 
pines  away  for  want  of  outer  opportunity  of  action  and  of  exhibition  ?  many  a  mighty 
courage  dwarfs  its  growth  ?  many  a  great  heart  tnfolds  its  rich  powers  and  qualities, 
instead  of  unfolding  them  ?  An  old  Roman  exile  poet,  who  exchanged  sunny  Rome 
for  the  forbidding  Pontus,  and  who  shivered  as  he  wrote  it,  said,  '*  What  am  I  to  do 
alone  ?  How  can  I  utilize  enforced  idleness  ?  How  speed  the  day  unhallowed  by  work  ? 
When  disappointment  is  my  only  pay,  when  to  dance  in  the  dark  is  my  mocking  destiny, 
when  to  write  a  poem  that  can  find  no  reader  is  my  fate, — then  I  learn  how  much  the 
speaker  depends  on  the  hearer,  and  the  fostering  of  virtue  depends  on  the  awarding  of 
praise,  and  how  immense  the  stimulus  of  glory's  opportunity.**  This  old  heathen  seized 
and  put  into  most  effective  poetry  some  of  life's  most  affecting  facts.  Now,  to  the 
unbroken  length  of  Saul's  public  life,  an  uninterrupted  series  of  inspiring  opportunity 
was  undeniably  proffered,  both  of  God  and  man.  Zeal  that  knew  no  bounds,  enthusiasm 
that  threatened  to  consume  intelligent  devotion  that  should  disdain  and  fling  even  to 
an  infinite  distance  all  the  petty  interferences  of  the  brood  of  envy  and  jealousy  and 
suspicion's  spawn, — these  were  the  legitimate  expectations  of  a  whole  world,  from  the 
grand  sphere  of  opportunity  in  the  midst  of  which  Saul  presided.  Some  of  them  he 
realized,  and  he  began  well,  and  did  "awhile  run  well." 

IV.  Some  of  the  leading  indications  of  Saul's  qualities  of  character.  For 
instance,  before  his  call,  we  find  him  the  faithful,  trusted,  considerate  son  (1  Sam.  ix.5). 
The  very  tone  of  his  recorded  conversation  with  his  servant  (1  Sam.  ix.  6 — 10)  impresses 
us  favourably,  as  affable,  respectful,  and  open  to  suggestion  and  to  reply.  The  master, 
especially  if  a  young  man,  who  knows  how  to  unite  such  qualities  as  these  in  his 
treatment  of  his  servants,  may  well  beget  the  prepossessions  of  the  very  best  judges — 
for  the  virtue  is  rare.  Then  at  the  time  of  his  private  call  and  the  first  communications 
made  to  him  by  Samuel,  he  does  not  disappoint  us  for  modesty,  retiringness,  unostenta- 
tious reticence  and  guardedncss  of  the  tongue.  No  boastful  word  was  on  his  lip,  no  eager 
ambition  grasped  at  what  lay  before  him ;  the  opposite  of  even  family  vain-glory  seems 
to  have  characterized  him  (I  Sam.  ix.  21 ;  x.  16).  At  the  time  of  his  public  call  and 
Divine  election  from  among  the  tribes,  he  would  fain  hide  from  the  honour,  and  decline 
the  exalted  responsibility  about  to  be  laid  upon  him  (1  Sam.  x.  21 — 24).  And  he 
crowned  the  day  with  an  instance  of  self-mastery,  teniperateness,  forbearance  (1  Sam. 
X.  27,  compared  with  xi.  12,  13).  The  promptness  of  righteous  indignation  and 
zeal  of  resolution  were  very  conspicuous  in  the  dashing  engagement  by  which  he 
delivered  those  of  Jabesh-gilead  in  the  hour  of  the  Ammonites'  power  (1  Sam.  xi.  4 — 
11),  and  they  were  witnessed  to  by  the  aid  and  effectual  blessing  of  the  "  Spirit  of  God." 
The  events  of  that  day  also  were  crowned  with  renewed  consecration,  with  sacrifices  of 
thanksgiving,  and  with  a  sacred  and  general  joy  on  the  part  of  "  Saul  and  all  the  men 
of  It>rael.''  Yet  from  this  point  all  went  amiss.  The  strange  reversal  of  all  that  Saul 
had  formerly  seemed  began  with  the  unwarrantable  impatience  and  unpardonable 
presumption  which  found  him  anticipating  Samuel  and  sacrificing  to  the  Lord  in 
GilgaU  This  was,  no  doubt,  the  self-willed  presumption  on  which  his  whole  career  was 


CH.  X.  1— 14.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  129 

now  wrecked.  It  was  succeeded  by  fault  after  fault  of  wayward  "  rebellion^"  and  of 
wilful  "  Btubbomness  *'  (1  Sam.  xv.  23),  of  alleged  "  fear  of  the  people  "  and  craving  to 
be  "  honoured "  before  them  (1  Sam.  xv.  24,  30),  till  the  ominous  Knell  is  heard,  and 
his  conversion  "  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  "  is  reversed,  when  "  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
departed  "  from  him  (1  Sam.  xvi.  14).  The  sequel  is  too  well  known.  Jealousy  of 
his  successor,  fierce  fits  of  passion  and  fits  of  brief  repentance,  outbursts  of  short-lived 
afifection  apd  visitations  of  remorse,  unattended  by  any  single  symptom  of  real  refor- 
mation, argued  the  torn,  distracted,  disordered  spirit  within.  He  is  brave  in  war ;  he  is 
cowardly  in  the  massacre  of  the  priests ;  he  is  high  in  spirit  and  high-handed ;  he  is  mor- 
bidly sensitive  to  disgrace.  He  seals  the  Spirit's  departure  and  final  forsaking  of  him 
when,  with  a  formal,  faithless,  professional  inquiry  of  the  Lord,  he  really  makes  his  inquiry 
of  the  witch,  and  fills  up  the  measure  of  his  iniquities.  It  is  hard  to  say  whether  the 
manner  of  his  death  (on  the  field  of  flight  rather  than  of  battle)  expressed  most  aptly 
his  better  or  worse  quality,  but  anyway  it  was  not  altogether  deficient  in  self-devotion 
or  spirit,  such  as  the  circumstances  would  allow.  Yet  what  a  commentary  the  barest 
facts  now  utter  forth  I  He  who  had  often  conquered  the  Philistines  and  other  hostile 
nations,  with  little  of  material  help,  fell  before  them,  because  he  had  guiltily  forfeited  the 
Divine  help.  He  had  presumed  on  himself— it  brings  him  to  make  an  end  of  himself! 
As  repentance  had  been  the  stranger  of  his  company,  so  now  despair  is  the  bosom  friend 
he  hugs.  And  trace  as  best  we  may  the  course  he  ran,  his  character,  and  the  end  of 
a  life  which  had  opened  in  providence  so  abundant  and  so  encouraging,  the  skilled  pen 
of  Scripture  guides  our  last  thought,  and  reveals  the  just  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter : 
'*  Saul  died  for  his  transgressions  which  he  committed  against  the  Lord,  even  against 
the  Word  of  the  Lord,  which  he  kept  not,  and  also  for  asking  ...  of  ...  a  familiar 
spirit,  to  inquire  thereof,  and  he  inquired  not  of  the  Lord  " — this  low-lying  epitaph,  a 
beacon  of  warning  set  up  aloft  to  all  time. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  6,  13. — *^  The  mighty  fallen ! "  The  death  of  Saul  and  Jonathan,  upon  the 
heights  of  Gilboa,  is  one  of  the  grandest  and  most  awful  episodes  in  Hebrew  history. 
Behold  the  chosen  of  God,  the  hero  and  the  idol  of  Israel,  wounded  by  the  archers, 
supplicating  death  from  his  armour-bearer,  falling  in  despair  upon  his  sword  I  Princes 
and  warriors,  '*  swifter  than  eagles,  stronger  than  lions ; "  Saul  and  Jonathan  '*  are  slain 
in  the  high  places."  "  The  shields  of  the  mighty  are  vilely  cast  away  1 "  The  king's 
sons  and  his  body-guards  and  the  flower  of  his  army  perish  with  him  on  this  awful 
day.  '*  How  are  the  mighty  fallen  I "  But  let  us  turn  from  the  dramatic,  the  tragic 
side  of  this  incident,  to  ponder  its  spiritual  lessons. 

I.  Saul's  appalling  fate  reminds  us  of  gbeat  powers  misused.  The  gigantic  stature 
and  amazing  strength  of  the  son  of  Kish  naturally  impressed  all  beholders,  and  con- 
ciliated— almost  commanded — the  respect  and  confidence  of  the  people.  But  he  was 
more  than  an  athlete,  he  was  a  general  who  had  delivered  his  country  and  gained 
many  victories  over  his  enemies.  He  appears  to  have  possessed  great  qualities,  not 
only  of  body,  but  of  mind.  All  this  gave  Saul  great  advantages.  If  he  had  but  used 
these  aright,  he  would  have  retained  the  regard  of  his  subjects  and  the  allegiance  of 
the  brave,  and  he  might  have  lived  to  old  age,  in  possession  of  the  dignity  and  power  of 
kingship.  But  his  moody,  wilful  spirit  gave  a  wrong  bias  to  his  energies.  His  was  a 
wonderful  but  a  wasted  life.  The  valour  and  skill  which  had  defeated  the  Philistines 
in  his  early  days  might  have  defeated  them  now.  But  Saul  was  not  the  same  man  as 
of  old.  Even  so  many,  whom  God  has  richly  endowed  with  gifts  of  body  and  of  mind, 
have  proved  themselves  unworthy  of  these  gifts,  have  misused  them  in  such  manner 
that  it  had  been  better  for  them  that  they  had  never  been  bom.  To  whom  GK>d  has 
given  much,  of  them  he  requires  the  more. 

II.  We  observe  here  a  lofty  vocation  ill  ukderstood  and  ill  FUiiFiLLED.  Saul 
was  the  first  of  Israel's  kings.  Anointed  by  Samuel,  chosen  by  lot,  elected  by  the 
acclamation  of  the  people,  he  entered  upon  the  kingly  office  with  every  omen  and  every 
prospect  of  success.  Called  to  be,  not,  like  one  of  the  judges,  the  chief  of  a  tribe  or 
a  temporary  deliverer,  but  the  ruler  of  a  nation  and  a  king  for  life,  Saul  might  have 

L  CHIiONIOLBS.  K 


130  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  TOE  CHUONICLES.       [ch.  x.  1—14. 

- - 

raised  his  people  to  independence  and  to  power.  But  he  was  disobedient  to  the  voice 
of  the  seer,  he  was  unfaithful  to  the  cause  of  the  God  who  raised  him  to  eminence  and 
invested  him  with  theocratic  authority ;  and  he  reaped  the  Bitter  harvest  of  disobe- 
dience and  unfaithfulness.  To  some  position,  with  some  vocation,  the  Author  of  our 
life  has  called  each  one  of  us.  Not  only  kings  and  rulers,  pastors  and  Church  officers, 
but  all  Christians,  in  every  station  of  life,  have  committed  to  them  a  peculiar  and 
sacred  trust.    Let  each  ask — How  is  this  trust  fulfilled  ? 

III.  There  is  exemplified  here  the  possibility  of  true  religion  beinq  known  and 
TET  FORSAKEN.  In  hls  early  life,  Saul  had  put  within  him  another  heart,  and  became 
another  man.  But  there  are  signs  that  he  came  under  heathen  influences.  Certainly 
one  of  the  last  acts  of  his  life  was  indicative  of  superstition,  when  he  sought  unto  the 
witch  of  Endor,  instead  of  looking  to  Jehovah  for  counsel  and  encouragement.  He 
*'  inquired  not  of  the  Lord."  It  was  a  grievous  defection ;  he,  whose  religious  life 
commenced  so  brightly  under  the  guidance  of  Samuel,  came  to  grovel  before  an  ignorant 
necromancer!  A  lesson  this  of  human  instabilty,  frailty,  and  fickleness.  "Let  him 
that  thiuketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall!"  Alas!  how  often  has  the  bright 
promise  of  youth  been  clouded  in  maturer  years,  and  the  sun  which  rose  in  splendour 
sunk  beneath  the  gloomy  clouds  !    It  is  a  solemn  warning  which  none  should  disregard. 

IV.  We  are  informed  that  the  fall  of  this  first  King  of  Israel  was  a  Divine 
judgment.  "  Saul  died  for  his  transgression  which  he  committed  against  the  Lord." 
We  are  seldom  at  liberty  authoritatively  and  confidently  to  pronounce  calamity  a 
judgment  from  the  Lord.  But  in  the  case  before  us  we  are  expressly  warranted  in 
doing  so.  Saul  had  violated  the  Divine  Law.  He  had  directed  sacrifice  to  be  offered 
without  the  permission  of  the  prophet.  He  had  spared  A<;ag,  and  appropriated  the 
spoil.  He  had  displayed,  again  and  again,  a  rebellious  and  ungodly  disposition  ;  had 
given  way  to  impulses  of  anger,  envy,  jealousy,  and  fear.  He  had  too  often  despised 
God's  Word,  persecuted  God's  servants,  trusted  in  himself,  and  forgotten  that  Jehovah 
had  called  him  to  be  the  leader  of  his  people  in  righteousness.  Now  at  length  the 
long-delayed  retribution  came  upon  the  guilty  monarch.  "  The  Lord  slew  him."  A 
warning  to  the  impenitent,  this  terrible  fate  of  Saul  should  summon  the  sinner  to 
repentance,  and  (thank  God !)  to  "  repentance  unto  life." — T, 

Vers.  1 — 10. — Understanding  (he  end.  The  psalmist  (Ps.  Ixxiii.)  was  much  perplexed 
and  perturbed  in  spirit  "  when  he  saw  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked.**  He  was  disposed 
to  think  that  he  had  "cleansed  his  heart  in  vain,"  and  in  vain  **  washed  his  hands  in 
Innocency  '*  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  1 3).  But  on  further  and  deeper  thought,  he  arrived  at  a  sound  con- 
clusion. When  he  "  went  into  the  sanctuary  of  God,"  i.e.  when  he  looked  at  the  matter 
in  the  light  of  Divine  truth,  then  he  *'  understood  their  end."  If  any  one  should  wonder 
at  Saul's  continued  prosperity,  should  wonder  where  Ood  was  that  a  man  whose  hands 
were  so  stained  with  blood  should  so  long  be  seated  on  a  throne,  he  would  only  have  to 
wait  and  see  the  end  to  know  that  "  verily  there  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth." 
We  learn  from  these  verses — 

I.   That  we  cannot    tell   whether    human    life  will    prove    to  be    ENVIABIiE 

till  it  is  CONCLUDED.  The  ancients  said,  **Call  no  man  happy  till  he  is  dead."  The 
epigram  was  the  outcome  of  the  fact,  finding  frequent  illustration,  that  men  who  were 
supposed  to  be  most  enviable  proved,  after  all,  to  be  those  with  whom  few  would  willingly 
exchange  conditions.  In  the  heyday  of  Saul's  power  and  prominence  there  must  have 
been  many  Israelites  who  wished  that  such  happy  fortune  had  been  theirs;  that  the 
kingly  lot  had  fallen  on  their  tribe,  on  their  faniily,  on  themselves  (1  Sam.  x.  20,  21). 
But  who,  now,  would  wish  to  have  been  the  first  King  of  Israel,  to  have  run  his 
checkered  course,  to  have  been  driven  to  such  sad  and  guilty  shifts,  and  to  have 
terminated  a  career  in  such  ruinous  dishonour  as  that  which  closed  his  clouded  life? 
To  be  miserably  beaten,  to  be  utterly  routed  in  battle  (ver.  3),  to  be  driven  to  suicide  in 
order  to  avoid  the  worst  abuses  (ver.  4),  to  know,  before  he  died,  that  his  house  was 
perishing  with  him  (ver.  5),  to  be  dishonoured  by  the  enemy  after  death  (ver.  9),  to 
nave  his  body  taken  and  exposed  in  the  temple  of  an  idol  (ver.  10), — all  this  was  the 
last  extreme  of  humiliation  and  disaster.  Envy  not  those  whose  outward  career  seems 
enviable.  Who  knows  what  miseries  are  within ;  what  madness  reclines  at  the  royal 
hearth;  what  wretchedness  reposes  under  the  princely  roof;  what  jealousy  drives  in  the 


CH.X.1— 14.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa  131 

gilded  chariot ;  what  insatiable  hatred  or  inappeasable  remorse  sits  down  to  the  sump- 
tuous meal  ?  Who  knows  in  what  black  clouds  of  calamity  the  sun  of  human  greatness 
will  set  ?  Who  can  tell  whether  the  end  will  not,  like  Saul's,  be  such  an  end  that  all 
the  brightness  and  the  excellency  that  went  before  will  be  utterly  eclipsed,  and  that 
all  men  will  join  to  say,  "  What  a  miserable  man  was  he  I " 

II.  That  one  man's  sm  xnyolves  many  men's  supferino.  Because  Saul  had 
sinned,  *'  the  men  of  Israel  fled, .  • .  and  fell  down  slain  "  (ver.  1).  Because  their  faulty 
king  had  fallen,  "the  men  of  Israel  .  .  .  forsook  their  cities  .  .  .  and  the  Philistines 
came  and  dwelt  in  them  "  (ver.  7).  Sinful  sovereigns  have  entailed  heavy  penalties  on 
suffering  nations.  But  it  is  not  kings  only  that  cause  human  hearts  to  bleed,  and  that 
fill  human  lives  with  trouble  and  distress.  How  many  thousands  of  homes  are  the 
abodes  of  sorrow,  of  keen  disappointment,  of  cruel  suffering,  of  dark  foreboding,  because 
one  soul  has  forsaken  Gkxi  and  made  shipwreck  of  a  good  conscience  1 

III.  That  outwabd  fortune  is  no  safe  criterion  of  human  oharaoteb. 
Jonathan  perished  on  the  same  field  with  Saul ;  the  brave  and  generous  son  with  his 
jealous  and  murderous  father!  ''Judge  not  according  to  the  appearance,  but  judge 
righteous  judgment "  (John  vii.  24). 

IV.  That  men  sometimes  tacitly  confess  their  own  folly.  *'  They  sent ...  to 
carry  tidings  unto  their  idols  "  (ver.  9)— to  inform  their  gods  t  Surely  they  were  thus 
condemning  their  own  idolatry.    How  often  do  we  condemn  ourselves  I — 0. 

Vers.  11 — 14. — The  moral  of  misfortune.  The  setting  of  the  sun  of  the  first  King 
of  Israel  in  such  dark  clouds  has  its  truth  to  tell  as  well  as  its  shadows  to  throw.  We 
may  learn — 

1.  That  oub  worst  misfortunes  brinq  out  the  best  feelings  of  oub  fbiends. 
"When  all  Jabesh-gilead  heard,"  etc.  (vers.  11, 12).  Saul,  in  his  earlier  and  better 
days,  had  risen  to  the  height  of  a  noble  opportunity  and  delivered  this  city  from 
impending  ruin  by  an  act  of  great  energy  and  courage  (1  Sam.  xi.).  And  when  the  last 
misfortune  had  befallen  their  deliverer,  and  the  worst  indignities  were  practised  on  his 
dead  body,  the  men  of  Jabedh-gilead  remembered  what  they  owed  him,  gave  free  play  to 
their  gratitude,  summoned  up  their  courage,  and  rescued  his  dishonoured  remains  from 
the  hands  of  the  insolent  enemy.  It  was  worthily  done ;  their  best  traits  were  drawn 
out  by  the  dire  calamity  of  their  friend.  So  it  is  always  and  everywhere.  It  is  one  of 
the  mitigations  of  our  misery  that  the  kindest  and  most  generous  feelings  are  then 
displayed  toward  us  by  those  who  love  us.  Sickness,  loss,  disappointment,  bereave- 
ment, the  larger  and  deeper  sorrows  of  human  life,  evoke  all  that  is  most  tender,  gracious, 
and  (>hrist-like  in  the  human  soul.  In  truth,  we  do  not  know  the  depth  of  the  affection 
with  which  our  kindred  and  our  friends  are  loving  us  until  some  saddening  experience 
calls  out  all  the  latent  sympathy  that  lies  within  their  hearts.  Better  things  as  well 
as  worse  things  than  we  ordinarily  suppose  reside  within  us ;  when  the  occasion  comee 
they  rise  to  the  surface  and  show  themselves  to  the  eyes  of  men.  The  crushing  blow 
which  strikes  us  to  the  ground  is  one  of  these  occasions.  Then  human  love  comes  forth 
to  render  its  truest  and  choicest  ministry. 

IL  That  tbansgression  will  certainly  be  ovebtaken  by  penalty  in  dux 
TIME.  "  Saul  died  for  his  transgression  "  (ver.  13).  Retribution  may  have  seemed  tardy ; 
it  ma^  have  seemed  to  Saul  as  if  he  would  "  escape  the  judgment  of  GKxl.''  Days, 
months,  years,  passed  by  and  the  blow  fell  not.  The  thought  of  his  heart  may  have 
been,  *'  I  am  e»fe  now ;  the  wrath  of  Qod  would  have  descended  if  it  were  coming;  I 
am  secure ;  my  mountain  stands  strong."  But  if  he  thus  thought  he  was  mistaken. 
Penalty  was  on  its  way,  "  l^uien-footed  but  iron-handed,"  slow  of  step  but  sure  of 
stroke,  and  the  days  of  his  life  and  of  his  power  were  numbered.  His  transgression 
was  twofold.  1.  Disobedience :  he  '*  kept  not  the  word  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  13).  2. 
Departure  from  GKxl :  he  "  inquired  not  of  the  Lord,"  but  he  "  asked  counsel  of  one 
that  had  a  familiar  spirit "  (vers.  13, 14).  Instead  of  resorting  to  God  through  his 
prophet,  "  as  he  did  aforetime,"  he  had  recourse  to  the  forbidden  and  dangerous  arts  of 
necromancy,  thus  forsaking  the  Lord,  and  putting  bis  trust  in  a  miserable  and  delusive 
system  of  imposture.  His  punishment,  like  his  sin,  was  twofold.  1.  His  own  death : 
the  Lord  "slew  him."  2.  The  overthrow  of  all  his  hopes  and  plans:  "he  turned 
the  kingdom  imto  David  "  (ver.  14).    Our  transgression  and  our  penalty  often  take 


132  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.       [ch.  x.  1—14. 

these  two  forms.  (1)  First  como  disobedience  and  departure.  We  do  not  the  things 
which  God  enjoins ;  neglecting  that  which,  above  all  things,  is  his  will  concerning  us 
(John  vi.  39^  40).  We  depart  from  his  side  and  his  service,  seeking  our  well-being  in 
other  sources  of  joy  (Jer.  ii.  13).  (2)  Then  come  death  and  overthrow.  Our  soul  dies ; 
its  finer  feelings  disappear,  its  truer  thoughts  give  place  to  false  imaginings,  its  better 
hopes  die  down,  its  wiser  aspirations  sink  and  are  lost ;  the  shadows  of  spiritual  death 
full  upon  us.  And  with  our  own  destruction  comes  the  dispersion  of  our  plans  and 
expectations :  the  "  kingdom  is  turned  away ; "  the  *'  wood,  hay,  and  stubble  of  a  false 
life  are  consumed  in  the  fires  of  Gkxl.  Our  life-work  is  overthrown  and  lost.  The  tower 
we  took  80  long  to  build  is  in  the  dust. — C. 

Ver.  14  (with  ver.  4). — Divine  and  human  agency.  In  the  last  verse  of  this  chapter 
that  event  is  ascribed  to  the  hand  of  God  which,  in  the  fourth  verse,  is  accounted  for 
by  the  act  of  Saul.  "He  [the  Lord]  slew  him^  (ver.  14).  "So  Saul  took  a  sword," 
etc.  (ver.  4).  As  both  statements  are  true,  there  must  be  a  consistency  between  them. 
Evidently  the  one  result  was  due  to  more  than  one  agency.  The  Lord  had  something 
to  do  with  Saul's  death  ;  Saul  also  had  much  to  do  with  it  himself.    We  may  see — 

L  Saul's  agenot  in  bringinq  about  his  end.  He  contributed  to  the  final  result 
by :  1.  Acting  in  such  wise  as  to  make  his  death  due  to  his  folly.  2.  Taking,  generally, 
those  steps  which  led  to  the  final  catastrophe.  3.  Putting  into  play  the  physical  causes 
which  immediately  efifected  it  He  would  not  have  died  at  the  time  and  in  Uie  way  he 
did,  had  he  not  been  personally  responsible  in  these  three  ways. 

II.  God's  Divine  agency  in  detebmining  the  issue.  1.  It  was  in  accordance 
with  his  Divine  desire.  He  desires  that  righteousness  should  be  fully  vindicated, 
€in  attended  with  its  penalty  as  well  as  integrity  with  its  reward,  by  the  events  which 
happen  on  the  earth.  Saul's  death  was  desirable  from  the  standpoint  of  the  supreme 
Judge.  2.  He  permitted  it  to  occur.  He  saw  no  reason  to  interpose  so  that  it  snould 
not  be  the  last  link  in  the  chain  of  circumstances  then  being  forged.  3.  He  so 
ordered  events  that  this  should  be  the  issue.  So  far  as  he  did  touch  the  chain  of 
human  affairs  with  his  intervening  hand,  he  so  touched  it  that  this  occurrence  would 
take  place.  In  some  measure  it  was  due,  positively,  to  the  outworking  of  his  Divine 
hand.  In  regard  to  the  great  subject  of  Divine  and  human  agency  co-operating,  as 
they  do,  to  produce  one  result,  we  conclude :  1.  That  God  might  work  out  his  designs 
by  direct  volition,  but  does  use  human  instrumentality.  2.  That  what  may  seem  to 
us,  at  the  time,  to  be  solely  due  to  our  agency  may  be  the  accomplishment  of  his  pur- 
pose. His  permitting,  controlling,  directing  hand  may  be  found  to  be  much  nearer  than 
we  think,  to  have  had  a  much  larger  share  in  the  issue  than  we  imagine.  3.  That  if 
the  hand  of  God  is  in  such  events  as  this,  we  may  be  sure  that  it  is  present  in  things 
of  another  and  higher  order.  If  it  could  be  said  concerning  a  suicide, "  the  Lord  slew 
him,"  how  much  more  may  it  be  said  conceming  desirable,  admirable,  useful  achievements, 
that  God  brings  them  about  ?  If  the  evil  which  happens  to  the  city  come  of  him  (Amos 
iii.  6),  much  more  shall  we  say  that  he  who  builds  all  things  is  God  (Heb.  iii.  4)?  There- 
fore :  (1)  Let  the  perverse  and  impenitent  beware.  The  observant  eye  of  the  Holy  and 
the  Just  One  is  on  them  and  upon  their  lives,  and  his  retributive  hand  may  show  itself 
at  any  point  in  their  career.  (2)  Let  the  righteous  take  heart  and  hope.  God  is  with 
them ;  he  is  working  for  them  and  in  them  and  through  them.  He  will  sanctify  and 
use  their  efforts  for  the  outworking  of  his  own  gracious  end,  for  the  establishment  of 
his  holy  kingdom. — 0. 

Ver.  4.—^  great  might-have-been  :  Saul,  King  of  Israel,  **  So,  Saul  took  a  sword, 
and  fell  upon  it."  It  is  useful  to  study  achievements  for  inspiration,  and  failures  for 
warning.  Here  we  have  a  great  "  might-have-been,"  or  one  of  those  cases  in  which 
everything  conspired  to  make  a  noble  future  possible,  and  yet,  through  unfortunate 
misdirection,  life  ended  darkly,  and  all  better  success  of  earlier  stages  was  clouded  by 
adversity  and  failure.  It  is  not  death  in  battle,  nor  even  defeat,  which  makes  us  lament 
him.  Nelson  died  in  battle,  but  in  glory  as  well.  And  defeat  is  an  incident  that  all 
armies  may  experience.  It  is  that  it  is  a  dark  close  to  a  darker  history.  That  begin- 
ning brightly,  clouds  gathered  over  his  life,  and  deepened  until  they  closed  in  night. 
Consider-^l)  2%i8  might'have-heen ;  and  (2)  its  lessons  to  us. 


OH.  X.  1—14.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  133 

I.  This  hight-haye-been.  If  ever  a  life  had  fair  opening  and  opportunity,  it  was 
Saul's.  1.  Every  personal  ctdvantage  that  could  he  desired  was  his.  Good  looks  above 
all  in  Israel ;  immense  strength  of  bodily  frame ;  mental  qualities  to  match  ;  wisdom 
and  courage  suitable  for  a  king ;— qualities  that  gained  for  him  the  regard  of  Israel  and 
the  reverence  of  David,  and,  what  is  very  noteworthy,  the  affection  of  Samuel.  Then 
his  circumstances  were  of  that  sort  that  most  persons  would  envy  him.  He  came  of 
one  of  the  wealthiest  families  in  all  the  south  country.  He  was  so  naturally  selected  for 
king  that  there  was  no  difficulty  in  securing  allegiance  of  people.  A  few  murmur,  as 
was  to  be  expected  from  such  as  were  themselves  candidates  for  the  throne  or  backed 
such  as  were.  But  the  support  of  Samuel,  and  the  success  of  first  expedition  against 
Ammon,  stilled  all  murmurs  through  the  land.  None  disputed  his  title  to  the  throne. 
2.  Opportunity  favoured  him.  His  election  proved  the  waking  of  Israel,  The  same 
energy  which  craved  a  leader  inspired  willingness  to  follow.  Samuel's  influence  was 
exerted  on  his  behalf.  That  meant  backing  of  mightiest  in  land.  Nor  was  it  formal 
only.  Samuel  protested  against  wish  of  Israel  to  have  a  king.  But  protesting  against 
the  general  wish  for  a  king,  he  did  not  proceed  to  protest  against  the  particuliu:  choice. 
So  Slt  from  disapproving  of  Saul,  he  loved  him,  and,  when  he  could  do  no  more,  he 
mourned  with  the  sorrow  of  a  saint  and  patriot  over  Saul's  failure.  Then  he  found  the 
grandest  service  available.  There  were  Abner,  David,  Jonathan,  the  worthies  following 
David,  all  ready  to  aid ;  and,  above  all,  God  ready  to  help  him.  Besides  room  for 
him,  there  was  need  for  him.  Israel  was  in  low  water.  So  everything  conspired  to 
create  a  grand  opportunity.  3.  And  no  thing  in  character  made  grand  life  impossible. 
He  comes  before  us  with  many  qualities  which  engage  respect.  (1)  There  is  modesty, 
which  accepts  greatness  as  a  charge  rather  than  eagerly  covets  it.  (2)  Generosity, 
which  tolerates  with  brave  wisdom  the  disafifection  of  minority.  (3)  Courage,  that  suits 
his  calling  and  his  country's  needs.  (4)  Kindliness  of  heart.  One  must  not  overlook 
this  quality ;  the  more  so  as  he  sins  so  deeply  in  the  opposite  direction.  But  he  "  loved 
David  greatly ; "  suggesting  that  he  was  capable  of  great  affections,  and,  but  for  bias, 
might  have  been  remembered  as  like  father  of  his  noble  son.  Then  there  was  some 
working  of  piety  in  him ;  not  much,  but  still  apparently  some.  He  had  a  sensitive 
natnre,  which  occasionally,  in  higher  moments,  suimitting  play  of  Spirit  of  Gkxi  on  it^ 
made  him  prophesy  in  an  exalted  strain.  Though,  in  other  moments,  same  sensitiveness 
lays  him  open  to  influences  of  spirit  not  of  God.  But  there  is  susceptibility.  Everything 
thus  seems  to  concur  to  make  life  not  only  moderate  but  brilliant  success.  Power, 
opportunity,  circumstances,  advantages,  natural  endowment, — all  in  favour.  And  Gk>d, 
always  waiting  to  make  best  of  us,  sought  to  make  the  best  of  him.  And  if  he  had 
but  walked  with  God,  what  service  he  might  have  rendered,  and  what  joy  in  life  have 
won  I  But,  alas  I  amidst  all  these  supreme  advantages  and  natural  probabilities  of 
success,  there  is  one  defect  of  character  which  mars  everything.  There  is  a  wilful" 
ness,  which  is  left  unrestrained ;  a  habit  of  choosing  his  own  path  and  keeping  to  it; 
impatience  of  any  restraint  of  religion  or  duty.  If  Samuel  comes  not  in  time,  no 
reverence  for  sanctity  of  priestly  office  will  prevent  his  assuming  its  functions.  If  Gtxl 
prescribes  utter  destruction  of  Amalek,  he  will  carry  out  precept,  excepting  where  he 
thinks  it  better  to  disobey  it,  saving  cattle,  oxen  (t.e.  the  best  of  spoil),  and  Agag. 
David  becomes,  by  service  he  renders,  a  possible  rival.  His  existence,  therefore,  Saul 
will  not  tolerate.  Self-will,  declining  (I)  the  restraints  of  religion,  and  (2)  those  qf 
conscience,  early  appears  in  him.  He  is  never  humbly  ob^ient,  but  picks  and  chooses 
what  part  of  precept  he  likes,  stopping  short  of  a  whole  obedience.  Always  feeling  at 
liberty  to  revise  and  moderate  the  requirements  of  God,  he  thus  comes  short,  through  wil- 
fulness, of  God's  requirements.  The  self-will  that  declines  to  serve  heartily  soon  ceases 
to  serve  at  all.  And  after  he  has  wrought  great  deliverances  and  secured  independence 
of  Israel,  a  long,  dark  period  ensues,  unrelieved  by  nobler  Quality ^-one  in  which  his  path 
is  downward.  The  very  energy  which,  restrained  and  ordered,  would  have  been  of  vast 
service,  unrestrained,  becomes  terror  to  his  friends.  That  firmness  of  nerve-formation 
which,  consecrated,  would  have  Iain  his  nature  open  to  God,  unconsecrated  lays  him  open 
to  invasion  of  evil  spirit,  to  madness  and  fury.  His  action  is  disapproved  by  his  best 
friends,  by  Jonathan,  by  nation,  by  his  own  heart.  And  wasting  powers  of  nature  in 
following  David,  he  sinks  lower  and  lower,  till  eve  of  last  battle  finds  him  in  sheer 
despair.    There  is  something  terrible  in  hopelessness  with  which  he  addresses  ghost  of 


134  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,      [ch.  x.  l^U. 

Samuel :  "  GK>d  is  departed  from  me,  and  answereth  me  no  more, . . .  therefore  I  have 
called  thee,  that  thou  mayest  make  known  unto  me  what  I  shall  do."  Something 
touching  in  way  in  which,  to  the  end,  he  believes  in  Samuel^  and  longs  to  hear  again 
something  from  his  lips,  and  prefers  to  hear  his  doom  from  him  if  he  has  to  hear  it  at 
all.  And  disobedience  leading  to  despair,  the  two  soon  lead  to  destruction.  Oh 
what  a  loss  was  absence  of  David  on  that  battle-day !  Just  for  want  of  him^  with  his 
heroic  following,  fate  of  battle  adverse.  And  there  is  deplorable  defeat  where  there 
would  have  been  grandest  victory.  All  that  Saul  got  by  opposing  David  was  a  sadder 
life,  a  shorter  reign,  a  darker  fate.  And,  instead  of  his  ranking  with  great  heroes  that 
have  wrought  deliverance  in  the  earth;  he  stands  a  majestic,  melancholy  might-have' 
been,  and  nothing  more.  A  truncated  life ;  a  casting  spoilt  in  the  moulding.  The 
mere  possibility  of  such  a  thing  should  rouse  solicitude  in  all  our  hearts. 

II.  What  lessons  emerge  from  this?  This  is  the  second  point  I  have  to  dwell 
on.  1.  Likelihoods  are  not  certainties.  Your  career  may  have  every  prospect  of  being 
honourable,  useful,  happy.  But  probability  is  not  certainty.  Whether  probability 
realiz'd  will  depend  altoyether  and  exclusively  on  degree  of  faithfutness  you  manifest, 
2.  Danger  of  self-will,  " Our  wills  are  ours  to  make  them  Thine**  says  poet,  nobly 
uttering  grand  philosophy  of  life.  But  reservation  of  some  thing  from  GckI  is  one  of 
the  commonest  temptations.  We  say,  "We  will  do  mtich,  but  not  this.  We  will 
sacrifice  much,  but  not  this.  We  will  follow,  but  will  choose  our  own  time  and  our 
own  way."  Especially  are  we  liable  to  be  deflected  from  path  of  duty  when  wayward- 
ness of  will  strengthened  by  some  strong  passion — greed,  revenge,  dislike.  Let  us 
beware  of  this  self-will.  It  has  a  look  of  force  and  energy ;  but  it  really  destroys  both. 
It  changes  the  may-be  into  the  might-have-been.  We  cannot  be  Christ's  disciples  unless 
we  deny  self  and  follow  him.  Self-will  never  is  allowed  in  any  soul  without  conse- 
quences of  saddest  kind.  Therefore :  3.  Let  us  take  our  Savour  as  en<tr«  Master,  Give 
him  absolute  control.  Withhold  nothing.  The  more  consecrated  we  are,  the  more 
glorified  we  shall  be.  Man  keeps  back  nothing  from  Christ  save  to  his  own  hurt. 
You  give  up  nothing  but  to  your  profit.  Don't  let  our  lives  be  mere  might-haw-beens. 
But  keep  faithfully  to  the  path  of  duty  as  shown  by  Christ,  and  then,  although  men 
of  grandest  early  advantages  and  powers  make  grievous  shipwreck,  you,  with  no 
advantages  and  no  special  power,  will  find  that  **  that  which  concerneth  you  God  will 
perfect." — G. 

Vers.  11, 12. — A  deed  of  honour.  "  And  when  all  Jabesh-gilead  heard  all  that  the 
Philistines  had  done  to  Saul,  they  arose,  all  the  valiant  men,  and  took  away  the  body 
of  Saul,  and  the  bodies  of  his  sons,  and  brought  them  to  Jabesh,  and  buried  their  bones 
under  the  oak  in  Jabesh,  and  fasted  seven  days."  It  is  well  to  study  deeds  of  honour. 
Honour  is  integrity,  gratitude,  or  courage  in  its  finest  bloom.  If  we  aim  no  higher 
than  the  fulfilment  of  our  legal  obligations,  our  action  will  be  apt  to  droop  beneath  that 
meagre  level.  Courage  is  an  essential  quality  of  faith.  Gratitude  a  fine  grace,  which 
fosters  the  growth  of  every  other.  So  that  to  aim  at  honourable  action  is  essential  if 
we  would  live  a  worthy  life.  Sometimes  a  Falstaff  gives  us  a  philosophy  of  honour, 
sounding  very  shrewd,  but  really  very  shallow.  Sometimes  Judas  is  followed  in  his 
example  of  cynical  criticism,  and  we  begin  to  ask,  Cui  bono  f  "  To  what  purpose  is  this 
waste  ?  "  Mary's  anointing  of  the  Saviour  "  for  his  burial ;  *'  the  honour  done  here,  at 
great  risk,  to  the  dead  Saul ;  the  honour  done  David,  when  men  cut  their  way  through 
a  host  to  bring  him  a  draught  of  water  from  the  well  of  Bethlehem ; — are  above  such 
critics.  They  see  no  use  in  such  activities.  They  believe  in  money  and  in  power,  in 
avoiding  injuries  and  gathering  comforts.  But  fine  enthusiasms,  high  devotion,  costly 
tributes  of  affection,  they  cannot  understand.  But  some  can.  The  writer  of  the  Book 
of  Samuel  could  see  a  beauty  in  this  act  of  Jabesh-gilead,  and  relates  it  as  something 
that  gives  a  little  relief  to  the  darkness  of  the  field  of  Gilboa.  The  author  of  the 
Chronicles  felt  it  worth  recording.  David  blessed  them  for  their  coura<:»e  and  their 
gratitude.  It  is  worth  our  while  simply  to  ponder  the  noble  deed.  To  make  this 
victory  as  crushing  in  its  humiliation  for  Israel  as  proud  for  the  cities  of  the  Philistines, 
Saul's  head  is  jmt  in  the  temple  of  Dagon,  and  his  body,  dismembered,  is  hung  insult- 
ingly on  the  walls  of  Beth-shan.  Jabesh-gilead  was  a  city  about  six  miles  to  the  east, 
as  Beth-shan  was  about  six  miles  to  the  west  of  Jordan.    It  had  owed  to  the  energy  of 


OH.  X.  1—14.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  135 


Saul,  immediately  on  his  accession  to  the  kingdom,  that  it  was  saved  from  the  cruel 
fate  which  Nahash  the  Ammonite  intended  and  seemed  able  to  inflict.  When  shame, 
grief,  a  tender  memory  of  the  service  rendered  by  Saul  in  the  days  of  his  youth  rise 
up  within  them,  they  resolve  that,  whatever  risk  has  to  be  faced,  whatever  dangerous 
eminence  their  very  success  may  make  for  them,  they  will  do  honour  to  the  dead.  If 
they  cannot  save  his  life,  they  can  risk  their  own  to  give  him  a  worthy  burial.  And  so, 
not  tarrying,  they  rise  up  by  night,  and  by  the  morning  the  dead  bodies  of  Saiil  and  his 
heroic  sons  are  in  a  friendly  city.  All  the  honour  that  can  be  shown  is  given  in  the 
decent  burial  and  the  week  of  fasting.  The  poor,  spiteful  triumph  of  the  Philistines  is 
curtailed,  and  the  nation,  beginning  to  sink  in  despondency,  wakes  up  to  feel  there  are 
still  heroic  spirits  in  its  midst,  that  can  beard  the  enemy  even  when  flushed  with  victory. 
Several  things  are  noteworthy  here. 

I.  Death  is  not  altooetheb  loss.  It  ended  Saul's  life,  but  it  increased  his 
influence.  Yesterday  criticized,  censured,  object  of  apprehension ;  to-day  he  is  revered 
even  in  his  deepest  failure.  All  now  is  forgotten  of  visitations  of  evil  spirit,  envy  of 
David,  unfortunate  division  which  lost  them  the  help  of  David  in  this  time  of  their 
nation's  need.  Instead  of  which  they  remember  him  as  he  delivered  Gibeon  and  con- 
quered the  Philistines  ;  how  sometimes  be  prophesied ;  how  no  fsimily  in  the  land  had 
shown  itself  more  brave  than  his ;  how,  when  he  was  really  himself,  none  was  manlier 
or  more  generous.  And  now  Saul,  dead,  takes  his  place  once  more  in  the  heart  of  a 
nation's  love.  And  as  David  forgot  all  his  injuries  to  celebrate  his  praise,  so  Jabesh- 
gilead  forgets  her  weakness  and  the  absence  of  all  help,  to  rise  and  do  him  honouc 
Mark  AnUmy  spoke  wrongly  when  he  said«> 

**  The  evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them  ; 
The  good  is  oft  interred  with  their  bones.** 

It  is  the  good  men  do  lives  after  them,  and  all  their  faults  are  buried  in  their  graves. 
Remember  the  canonizing  touch  of  death ;  how  it  rounds  ofif  the  memory  of  the  iife^ 
softens  ill  feeling,  lets  the  better  nature  have  its  proper  influence  over  others. 

II.  Deeds  of  kindly  service  are  long  remembered.  It  is  nearly  forty  years 
since  Saul  had  saved  Jabesh-gilead  from  the  hand  of  Nahash.  Most  of  those  then 
saved  from  the  ignominy  and  mutilation  which  were  to  be  the  terms  of  capitulation, 
had  died.  It  was  another  generation  that  had  risen,  and  you  would  hardly  have  been 
surprised  if  they  had  felt  no  particular  gratitude  for  so  remote  a  favour.  But  with  all 
its  defects,  human  nature  is  not  so  void  of  finer  feelings  as  some  would  paint  it.  In 
estimating  the  deficiency  of  gratitude,  it  has  to  be  remembered  how  exaggerated  some- 
times are  our  estimates  of  service  rendered,  and  how  we  expect  shillings'  worth  of 
service  to  be  requited  by  pounds'  worth  of  gratitude.  We  must  rememl»r,  too,  how 
often  the  service  is  mixed  with  disservice ;  the  graciousness  of  the  act  of  help  destroyed 
in  the  way  of  rendering  it ;  a  gift  is  accompanied  with  a  scold,  or  with  a  threat,  or  with 
an  intimation  of  the  reluctance  with  which  it  is  done,  or  with  a  degree  of  patronage  that 
humiliates  the  receiver.  In  such  cases  grateful  return  is  hardly  due.  The  persons 
rendering  help  have  taken  out  their  payment  for  it  in  self-complacency  or  superiority. 
But  when  these  faults  do  not  mar  the  graciousness  of  help,  is  gratitude  so  rare? 
Kindly  natures,  whose  experience  is  most  large,  are  never  found  complaining  of  ingrati- 
tude. They  rather  agree  with  the  poet,  who  reports  that  the  gratitude  of  men  had  oftener 
left  him  mourning.  The  true  benefactors  of  a  nation,  what  gratitude  invests  their 
memory !  The  kindly  natured  have  a  reward  which  they  at  least  feel  far  surpassing  all 
their  merits.  li*  in  an  humble  position,  love  flows  forth  toward  them  for  their  modest 
ofiices  of  neighbourly  aflection,  they  are  honoured  by  the  confidence  of  men,  and  their 
character  is  that  which  their  fellows  copy.  If  in  somewhat  higher  position,  how  does 
the  reverence  and  kindly  feeling  of  a  whole  city  invest  the  life  of  honourable  kindness  I 
Here  this  distant  act  of  Saul's  is  remembered.  And  a  sort  of  service  which  one  would 
fancy  would  follow  with  soothing  influence  the  spirit  of  the  dead,  is  the  beautiful  firuit 
of  their  grateful  recollection.  Nor  is  this  the  only  fruit ;  for  you  will  observe  that,  in 
the  subsequent  history,  the  house  of  Saul  has  nowhere  more  devoted  adherents  than  the 
inhabitants  of  Gilead.  Do  not  fear  your  good  will  ever  be  unrequited.  Say  neither  to 
God  nor  man,  "  Thou  art  a  hard  master,  and  therefore  I  bury  rhy  talent  in  the  earth ;  ** 
for  the  world  is  froward  to  the  froward,  honourable  to  the  honourable,  grateful  to  the 


136  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,      [oh.  x.  1—14. 

sood ;  a  sort  of  mirror,  in  which  we  find  the  face  we  bring  to  it  With  this  difference, 
however,  that  God  working  on  the  side  of  all  that  is  good,  the  reward  of  any  goodness 
is  always  vastly  larger  than  the  retribution  of  any  ill.  Covet  tlie  beautiful  rewards  of 
kindness.  Scores  of  years  after  they  have  been  rendered  they  will  return  with  a 
blessing  into  your  bosom. 

IIL   A    DEED    OF    HONOUR     ALWAT8    BEARS    SOME    FBUTTS    OF    GRAND    ADVANTAGK. 

Judas  thought  there  was  no  reply  possible  to  his  question  of  cynical  utilitarianism. 
And  some  like  him  in  Jabesh  doubtless  asked.  Cut  Jxmo  f  and  protested  that  the  project 
was  rash ;  that  the  dead  were  not  bettered  by  any  attentions  shown  them ;  that  they 
should  rather  look  after  the  substantial  advantages  of  their  wives  and  families  than 
risk  their  lives  in  sentimental  expeditions.  But  if  some  argued  thus,  the  event  might 
convince  even  such  that  the  project  was  not  quite  so  unwise  as  it  seemed.  What  were 
the  results  ?  They  were  at  least  these.  1.  An  increase  of  their  own  telf-reipect.  Self- 
respect  is  as  valuable  as  self-esteem  is  weakening.  It  is  a  force  daily  lifting  men  higher 
in  purix)8e  and  in  action,  a  restraint  on  what  is  unworthy,  a  stimulus  to  all  that  is  good. 
These  people  had  approval  of  their  own  hearts.  Their  act  saved  them  from  self-con- 
tempt ;  set  a  pattern  for  them  which  they  would  copy  and  exceL  Never  lower  yourself 
in  your  own  esteem,  nor  do  that  for  which  you  will  have  to  excuse  yourself  to  your- 
self. Your  deeds  of  honour  will  raise  your  self-respect,  and  by  doing  so  will  ndse  your 
whole  future  character.  2.  It  had  another  result  in  the  ^ooti  esttem  in  which  all  Israel 
hdd  them.  All  the  tribes  honoured  them  for  their  faithfulness ;  David  solemnly  blessed 
them  for  their  nobility ;  a  kindly  reverence  moved  all  hearts  towards  them,  and  an 
enduring  fame.  Even  the  Judases  can  appreciate  such  an  advantage,  only  they  stickle 
always  at  the  way  that  leads  to  it,  because  the  fame  cannot  be  guaranteed  beforehand. 
We  are  members  one  of  another.    So  act  that  the  esteem  of  your  fellows  shall  be 

Jours.  Only  second  to  Ood's  approval  is  that  of  your  fellow-men.  3.  This  act  inspired 
srael  with  fresh  power  to  resist  the  Philistines,  The  spirit  and  success  of  this  act 
took  the  gilding  off  the  great  victory ;  made  the  Philistines  feel  that  the  end  was  not 
quite  so  absolute  as  they  had  thought,  llie  inspiration  of  the  noble  deed  crept  into 
innumerable  hearts ;  invigorated  aud  nerved  them  for  the  task  of  undoing  the  mischief 
wrought ;  permitted  the  feeble  to  breathe  more  fret'ly,  and  the  brave  to  make  their 
plans  for  further  struggle.  Such  are  some — not  by  any  means  all — of  the  services  of 
this  deed  of  honour.  Are  they  not  very  high  and  noble  ?  "  Go  and  do  thou  likewise." 
In  your  action  towards  your  Saviour,  do  all  that  honour  bids  you ;  and  in  your  action 
towards  your  fellow-men,  let  honour  rather  than  advantage  be  the  principle  of  all  your 
actions. — G. 

Vers.  18,  14.— TXe  danger  of  spiritualism,  "So  Saul  died  for  his  transgression 
which  he  committed  against  the  Lord,  even  against  the  word  of  the  Lord,  which  he 
kept  not,  and  also  for  asking  counsel  of  one  that  had  a  familiar  spirit,  to  inquire  of 
it ;  and  inquired  not  of  the  Lord,"  Consider  not  the  many  and  grievous  faults 
of  Saul,  but  one,  and  that  his  last.  In  modem  language,  the  witch  of  FiUdor 
was  a  "  medium,"  and  Saul's  act  simply  one  of  those  acts  of  consulting  the  dead 
which  many  believe  to  be  at  once  practicable  and  proper.  It  is  not  part  of 
my  province  to  defend  what  some  deem  the  severity  of  the  Mosaic  laws  against 
all  manner  of  witchcraft  in  all  its  forms.  I  only  remark  that  a  defence  of  the  law 
which  inflicted  death  upon  such  might  be  made  by  men  of  tenderest  charity ;  that 
such  would  only  need  to  indicate  the  universal  tendency  of  magic  to  become  "  the 
black  art " — a  means  of  revenge,  prolific  in  murder  and  in  crime — to  justify  the  severest 
measures  necessary  to  repress  it.  It  is  easy  for  the  sorcerer  to  destroy,  difficult  for  him 
to  save  life.  So  in  all  ages  and  lands,  from  the  astrologers  of  Europe,  in  the  Middle 
Ages,  down  to  the  Obea-men  of  the  West  Indies  to-day,  the  sorcerers  have  been  the 
instruments  of  revenge,  at  once  ready  to  commit  and  able  to  conceal  the  greatest  crimes. 
Even  the  English  law,  with  its  nineteenth-century  indifferentism,  finds  it  necessary 
to  punish  the  common  and  vulgar  forms  of  fortune-telling.  I  prefer  to  take  not  the 
forensic  but  the  personal  side  of  this  question ;  and  to  deal  with  it,  not  in  its  darker 
phases,  in  which  it  would  appear  as  a  superstition,  enslaving  the  mind,  tempting  to  by 
offering  facilities  for  crime,  investing  life  with  awful  horrors,  but  rather  in  the  lighter 
form«  in  which  it  seems  harmless,  in  which  a  few  years  ago  in  this  country  and  America 


OH.  X.  1—14.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  137 

it  was  somewhat  fashionable,  in  which  it  might  even  seem  to  be  a  means  of  grace, 
furnishing  some  proof  of  the  existence  of  the  soul  after  death  to  a  gainsaying  and 
materialistic  age.  I  would  make  two  or  three  preliminary  observations.  1.  That  in 
the  nature  of  things  one  would  expect  a  great  deal  of  deception  to  be  practised  in  con- 
nection with  spiritualism.  Even  if  a  large  substratum  of  fact  is  in  it,  yet  there  will 
always  be  a  temptation  to  guess  when  the  oracle  provokes  by  its  silence — ^a  reluctance  to 
be  caught  at  a  loss ;  and  the  tendency  to  eke  out  the  oracles  by  guesses  will  be  all  the 
greater  when  (as  usually  happens^  it  would  be  impossible  to  convict  immediately  of 
error.  2.  That  we  are  at  a  loss  in  this  matter  from  not  knowing  exactly  how  many  senses 
we  have.  To  the  five  commonly  recognized,  one  has  been  added — a  sense  of  heat  and  cold. 
But  probably  we  have  a  great  many  more  senses  than  six :  powers  of  perception,  too 
subtle  to  be  tabulated,  but,  in  some  natures  of  fine  sensibility,  quite  strong  enough  to 
perceive  by  direct  and  natural  but  subtle  apprehension  what  lies  outside  of  the  know- 
ledge of  the  five  homely  senses  that  are  merely  the  strong,  rough  ones,  common  to  us 
alL  3.  That  whatever  be  the  explanation  (and  probably  a  simple  scientific  one  is 
possible),  the  existence  and  practices  of  clairvoyants  in  every  age  and  country,  and 
the  record  of  undoubted  wonders  done  by  them,  make  it  almost  impossible  to  doubt 
that  some  persons  in  some  circumstances  can  perceive  more  than  comes  within  the  range 
of  ordinary  perception.  From  Apollonius  of  Tyana  down  to  Swedenborg ;  from  the 
Delphic  oracle,  which  told  what  Croesus  was  doing  on  a  certain  day,  several  hundreds 
of  miles  away,  to  the  instances  of  second  sight  still  at  least  supposed  to  exist  in  the 
Scottish  Highlands, — you  get  strange  facts,  too  numerous  to  be  met  by  a  universal  denial, 
for  which  we  should,  if  possible,  find  some  explanation  consistent  with  natural  science. 
But  the  more  of  truth  there  is  in  the  claim  of  power  to  reveal  the  distant  or  the  future, 
the  less,  in  my  judgment,  will  any  wise  man  have  to  do  with  such  practices.  I  therefore 
urge  on  many  grounds  the  danger  and  wrong  of  spiritualism.  Perhaps  the  following 
heads  may  sum  up  what  is  material  on  this  matter  : — 

I.  Wb  do  not  need  any  supernatural  help  betond  that  op  God.  For 
ordinary  life  the  ordinary  senses  and  faculties  of  man  suffice.  Foi  ail  work  it  is  a  mis- 
take if  the  tool  be  too  fine,  as  well  as  if  it  is  too  coarse.  Finer  faculties  than  we  have 
would  be  too  fine  for  the  work  of  life ;  would  be  a  source,  not  of  strength,  but  only  of 
pain  and  torment.  That  knowledge  of  the  unseen  and  future,  which  we  always  crave 
for,  would  have  been  given  us  had  it  been  good  for  us.  But  God  has  concluded  that,  as 
regards  the  unknowable,  faith  is  better  than  sight,  and,  as  regards  the  future,  hope 
is  better  than  foreknowledge.  For  common  life,  common  sense  is  requisite  and  is  suffi- 
cient, especially  as  we  all  have  within  reach  aids  of  grace  and  enlightenment,  that  will 
make  our  steps  safe,  if  it  do  not  altogether  satisfy  our  curiosity.  If  we  pray  to  God 
for  guidance,  he  will  answer  that  prayer,  not  in  some  strange  and  supernatural  way,  but 
by  calming  our  over-anxiety,  by  fortifying  our  judgment,  by  presenting  in  clear  light 
the  determining  considerations  which  should  weigh  with  us,  by  restraining  the  temptation 
that  might  mislead  us,  by  ordering  our  circumstances  so  that  the  only  open  path  is  the 
path  of  wisdom  and  of  duty.  More  than  this  no  one  needs,  and  the  imagination  that 
the  knowledge  of  the  concealed  would  benefit  us  is  misleading  and  worrying.  Beyond 
that  of  God  we  need  no  supernatural  help  or  light. 

II.  SuoH  LIGHT  IS  USELESS  AS  WELL.  There  are  some  things  not  essential  but  still 
soothing,  comforting,  and  helpful.  But  the  knowledge  of  the  concealed  is  not  only  not 
essential — ^it  is  useless  in  any  shape  in  which  it  can  come  to  us.  And  that  fur  one 
reason — It  is  never  capable  of  being  verified,  Tou  are  at  the  mercy  of  any  *'  tricksy 
sprite''  that  likes  to  play  with  your  solicitude.  If  ghosts  are  free  to  report  themselves^ 
any  one  of  them  could  simulate  Samuel,  and,  instead  of  the  sober  oracle  you  expect, 
could  give  you  something  with  just  that  shade  of  error  in  it  that  would  make  it 
fatally  seductive.  Tou  cannot  apply  rule-and-compass  argument  or  faculty  to  the 
verification  of  the  message.  Tou  must  "  trust  them  all  or  not  at  all."  Tou  cannot 
prove  the  spirits  in  any  of  the  matters  on  which  you  seek  their  light.  I  say  therefore 
it  is  valueless.  Such  oracles  are  unsigned  cheques,  which  you  cannot  treat  as  money. 
Seeking  to  escape  from  the  painful  necessity  of  relying  on  your  own  judgment,  you 
(like  Roman  Catholics)  have  still  to  rely  on  your  private  judgment  on  the  most  momen- 
tous question  of  the  whole,  viz.  whether  they  are  worthy  to  be  your  guides.  Therefore 
"  pick  no  locks ; "  be  content  to  be  in  the  dark  where  God  has  left  you  in  the  dark.    It 


138  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa      [ch.x.1— 14 


will  be  safer  for  you  to  travel  the  unknown  road  by  God's  moonlight  or  starlight,  than 
to  have  a  blazing  gleam  thrown  round  you,  which  cumos  you  know  not  whence  and 
leads  you  know  not  whither. 

III.  Thebb  is  manifold  injubt  IK  HAVING  BEC0UB8B  TO  SUCH.  1.  T%ere  is  injury 
to  the  body.  There  are  few  whose  nervous  systems  can  stand  either  real  or  imaginary 
communion  with  the  unseen  world.  Converse  with  fellow  men  and  women  has  no 
exciting  element;  but  spirits  either  find  or  leave  the  nerves  unstrung.  Fancy 
takes  reason's  throne.  Man  lives  in  two  worlds,  instead  of  in  one  bright  with  the 
presence  of  God  and  man.  There  can  hardly  be  enjoyment  of  the  friendship 
without  solicitude  as  to  the  enmity  of  the  spirits ;  so  that  calmness  of  nerve 
and  that  fine  physical  health  which  furthers  all  good  growth  is  generally  seriously 
impaired.  2.  There  i$  injury  to  the  mind.  The  proper  self-reliance  which  dignifies 
ana  develops  man  is  interfered  with  by  this  reference  of  all  things  to  a  mysterious 
oracle.  The  Acuities  grow  strong  by  being  trusted.  Jud^^nent  inspired  and  bright- 
ened by  God,  the  more  it  is  used  the  more  it  grows.  Subordinate  it  to  mysterious 
oracles,  and  the  whole  mental  energy  deteriorates  and  slackens.  Above  all :  3.  The 
iotU  suffers.  We  cannot  well  have  two  guides — two  oracles.  We  can  leave  Gkd,  and 
be  guided  by  the  dubious  light  which  mediums  may  find  for  us;  or  we  may  leave  them, 
and  take  God's  light  and  God's  darkness  as  he  sees  fit  to  give  it ;  but  we  cannot  very 
well  have  both.  Even  the  devoutest  we  ima<iine  will  find  the  simplicity  of  their 
dependence  on  God  somewhat  impaired  by  resorting  to  other  guides ;  and  their  simple 
acceptance  of  the  Saviour's  teaching  impaired  by  their  sitting  at  the  feet  of  those 
whose  suggestions  do  not  always  concur  with  his.  So  the  writer  speaks  of  Saul's  act 
as  of  a  backsliding,  pointing  the  despair  into  which  he  had  sunk.  Keep  your  heart 
free  of  all  that  enfeebles  it  and  of  all  that  divides  it  from  the  Lord.  Poor  Saul  got 
nothing  but  a  deeper  despair  that  drove  him  to  his  doom.  Take  Isaiah's  exhortation, 
therefore,  to  the  spiritualists  of  his  day :  "  When  they  shall  say  unto  you.  Seek  unto 
them  that  have  familiar  sjurits, .  .  .  should  not  a  people  seek  unto  their  God  ? "  (Isa. 
vui.  19).— G. 

Vers.  2, 14. — Saul  and  David,  The  portion  of  the  Book  of  Chronicles  referring 
more  particularly  to  the  genealogy  of  Israel  ends  with  the  thirty-fourth  verse  of  the 
ninth  chapter.  With  the  following  verse  commences  the  real  history  of  the  people. 
The  history  of  a  nation  is  the  history  of  its  head  or  king ;  and  we  commence  that 
history  with  the  history  of  Saul  and  David.  They  both  appear  on  the  scene  in  the 
following  verses.  We  must  not  forget,  in  reading  this  history,  that  these  two  personages 
are  representative  characters.  They  are  eminently  typical.  In  Saul  we  must  not  omit 
to  see  the  head  of  the  great  world-power,  or  that  which  is  antagonistic  to  the  kingdom 
of  the  Son  of  God.  In  David,  likewise,  we  must  see  One  greater  than  David,  even  the 
true  David,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Saul  and  David  are  from  beginning  to  end  in 
opposition.  Saul's  history  comes  first.  He  is  the  people's  choice,  the  man  of  the  world. 
His  entire  course  is  enmity  against  David.  Hatred,  opposition,  and  bitter  persecution 
are  the  results  of  this  enmity.  The  end  of  the  world-power,  as  represented  in  him, 
is  defeat  and  failure,  ruin  and  death.  Thus  will  this  world's  rule  end  also.  Never- 
theless, all  this  opposition  and  enmity  are  most  needful  to  David  and  his  few  faithful 
followers.  It  disciplined  and  trained  him  for  the  kingdom  for  which  he  had  been 
anointed  of  God.  So  this  world's  misrule  and  enmity  are  most  needful  for  the  Lord's 
anointed  ones.  David  and  his  followers  under  Saul  were  strangers  and  pilgrims  indeed. 
So  Christ  and  his  people  are  now.  But  their  time  is  at  hand  when  the  weeds  of 
sorrow  shall  be  exchanged  for  the  laurels  of  victory.  I  said  Saul's  history  comes  first. 
It  is  always  so.  Whether  in  the  history  of  individuals  or  nations,  whether  in  nature 
or  in  grace,  in  everything  the  dark  background  comes  first,  and  then  the  lines  of  the 
picture  of  grace  can  be  seen.  The  tenth  chapter  of  this  book  is  man  at  his  best  estate. 
It  is  the  dark  background.  One  chapter  is  enough  for  it.  The  eleventh  chapter 
begins  with  the  GK)d-man,  David,  who  is  the  type  in  it  of  a  "  Greater  than  David."  It 
goes  on  unfolding  chapter  after  chapter.  It  has  not  ended  yet,  for  in  the  history  ol 
David's  Son — the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — it  is  still  going  on.  The  chapters  are  still 
unfolding  him,  and  will  throughout  eternity,  for  he  is  "  the  everlasting  God,"  the  "  I 
am  that  I  am,"  "  which  is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is  to  com<),  the  Almighty."— W. 


OH.  X,  1—14.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  139 

Yer.  4.— 5ciu2's  character,  Saul  was  not  an  atheist.  He  was  a  religious  man  in  his 
way.  This  chapter  shows  it.  Saul  calls  the  Philistines  the  "  uncircumcised  ones." 
Circumcision  distinguished  him,  and  he  evidently  prided  himself  on  it.  It  had  placed 
him  on  a  pedestal  so  that  he  could  look  on  all  others  and  exclaim,  "  Stand  aside ;  for  I 
am  holier  than  thou."  Thus  he  had  the  '^/orm  of  godliness ; "  but  where  was  the 
"power**  f  Was  there  one  iota  of  what  circumcision  was  intended  to  represent  about 
him?  None.  He  rested  in  the  ordinance.  The  meaning  of  that  ordinance  had  in 
him  no  adequate  expression.  Are  there  not  many  now  who  pride  themselves  on  bap- 
tism? But  what  has  baptism  in  them  in  its  true  meaning  ?  Are  they  dead  and  buried 
with  Christ?  Are  they  risen  with  Christ?  Are  they  alive  unto  God  and  dead  indeed 
unto  sin  ?  Where  is  the  crucifixion  of  them  to  the  world  and  the  world  unto  them, 
which  baptism  signifies  ?  Alas  1  they  have  none  of  it.  They  may  look  with  disdain 
upon  the  "  un baptized  "  ones,  as  Saul  did  upon  the  "uncircumcised''  ones ;  but  well  would 
it  have  been  for  him,  and  well  would  it  be  for  them  also,  if  they  had  never  had  it. — W. 

Yer.  13. — Satd^a  ein.  What  was  Saul's  sin  for  which  he  was  slain?  He  followed 
Ckxl  just  so  far  as  suited  his  convenience ;  when  it  interfered  in  any  way  with  his  own 
interests  he  cast  him  ofif.  He  destroyed  the  Amalekites — so  far  he  obeyed  God's  word, 
because  he  had  no  interest  in  doing  otherwise ;  but  he  saved  A  gag  and  part  of  the  cattle 
and  the  chief  things  of  the  Amalekites,  because  they  were  of  advantage  to  himself. 
This  is  the  sin  of  this  day.  We  serve  God  so  far  as  it  does  not  interfere  with  personal 
advantage,  present  or  future ;  but  when  God  comes  in  and  demands  a  full  surrender  at 
any  cost,  we  cast  him  ofif.  Self-interest  and  advantage  are  our  god  in  reality,  though 
it  may  be  very  convenient  to  us,  and  even  help  us  to  the  attainment  of  our  ends,  to 
acknowledge  Jesus  Christ.  But  Saul  committed  a  twofold  sin  against  God.  He  sought 
in  a  time  of  perplexity  to  know  God's  will.  The  Lord  was  silent.  He  was  left  in 
darkness.  Probably  it  was  only  in  form  that  he  sought  God.  God  had  given  his  will 
in  the  matter  of  Agag,  and  he  had  refused  to  act  upon  it.  If  we  go  deliberately 
agunst  God's  will  in  any  matter,  we  must  expect  God  to  be  silent.  It  is  the 
punishment  for  our  sin.  Instead  of  repenting  and  again  seeking  God,  he  had  recourse 
to  a  witch.  This  was  forbidden  by  the  Law,  and  Saul  know  it.  It  mattered  not.  It 
was  for  his  advantage ;  and  Saul,  true  to  his  character,  cared  little  for  the  law  or  any- 
thing else  when  it  stood  in  his  way.  Nay,  worse  than  all,  he  had  put  down  necromancy. 
He  had  issued  penalties  of  death  upon  it,  and  now  he  is  actually  seeking  it  himself  I 
What  tremendous  inconsistency  I  Ah,  but  Saul  would  do  as  King  of  Israel  what  he 
would  not  do  as  an  individual.  He  could  carry  out  God's  will  when  it  did  not  interfere 
with  himself  in  any  way ;  but  when  it  did,  he  would  trample  it  under  his  feet  It  is 
the  picture  of  thousands. — W. 

Yers.  13, 14.— /SauZ's  death.  As  we  look  at  the  account  of  Saul's  death  (vers.  2 — 4), 
how  natural  it  seems — just  in  the  ordinary  course  of  battle  I  No  eye  looking  at  it 
could  put  any  other  interpretation  upon  it.  But  mark  the  Diviue  testimony — "  Qod 
slew  him."  The  battle  and  the  archers  and  all  the  second  causes  are  simply  but  the 
drapery  behind  which  the  Divine  hand  was  carrying  out  its  purposes  of  removing  Saul 
to  set  up  David.  Thus  must  we  look  at  everything  that  passes  before  the  eye.  It  is 
the  province  of  faith  to  look  behind  all  the  drapery  and  see  the  Divine  hand.  To  this 
moral  elevation  none  can  reach  but  they  who  are  habitually  in  communion  with  Qod, 
Not  the  **  archers,"  not  the  armour-bearer's  "  sword  " — not  these,  but  **  God  slew  him,** 
and  '*  turned  the  kingdom  unto  David."  And  observe  the  identification  of  the  Lord's 
vford  here  with  the  Lord  himself.  To  sin  a^rainst  the  Word  is  the  same  as  to  sin 
against  God.  So  it  is  said  of  Jonah  when  he  disobeyed  the  Lord's  Word,  "  he  rose  up 
to  flee  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord."  Let  us  ever  learn  that  the  Lord's  Word  is  Qoa 
himself,  and  the  despite  done  to  one  is  done  to  the  other. — W. 

Yer.  2.-^Innocent  sharing  in  calamity.  The  judgment  that  came  upon  King  Saul 
could  not  be  limited  to  him ;  it  included  his  sous,  his  family,  his  dynasty.  Saul's  sin 
was  distinctly  personal.  He  committed  acts  of  wilfulness  ;  he  failed  in  the  complete- 
ness of  his  obedience  (1  Sam.  xiii.  8 — 14 ;  xv.  8,  9).  And  yet  his  sin  could  not  be 
personal  only — no  man  can  secure  that  his  sin  shall  be^  while  he  comes  into  relations 


140  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa      [oh.  x.  1—14. 

with  others.  Saul's  sin  mnst  also  be  official — the  iniquity  of  the  representative  person, 
the  king ;  and  relational — the  iniquity  of  the  father,  the  head  of  a  family.  So  far  as  a 
man's  sin  starts  a  train  of  consequences,  he  cannot  limit  the  disabilities  to  his  own 
Buffering,  and  he  may  not  wonder  if  the  resultant  calamities  should  strike  him  through 
the  suffering  of  those  most  dear  to  him.  To  our  feeling  the  exceeding  bitterness  of  ti^e 
consequences  of  wilful  sin  lies  in  the  fiEu;t  of  their  involving  others,  and  those  whom  we 
would  most  anxiously  spare. 

I.  The  innocent  do  not  share  in  the  ouilt.  Distinguish  between  the  guilt  and 
the  calamity  that  follows  on  it.  The  guilt  can  rest  only  on  the  man  who  does  the 
wilful  and  guiltv  act,  because  an  action  is  only  guilty  action  when  it  is  wilfully  done 
against  light  and  knowledge.  So,  depending  on  the  will,  it  belongs  exclusively  to  the 
individual.  King  Saul  was  guilty  before  Ood,  but  his  sons  were  not,  save  as  they  may 
have  personally  accepted  and  approved  their  father's  acts,  and  so  made  themselves 
individually  responsible.  This  way  of  becoming  sharers  in  guilt  is  taught  by  St.  Paul 
in  Rom.  L  22.  Ue  comes  under  the  Divine  judgment  who  has  pleoiure  in  them  that 
do  evil  things,  as  well  as  those  who  actually  do  the  evil. 

II.  The  innocent  mat  share  in  the  calamity  that  follows  on  sin.  This  may 
be  illustrated  from  the  family  sphere — a  father's  wrong-doing  breaks  up  the  home,  etc. ; 
or  from  the  social  spheres — neglect  of  sanitary  laws  on  the  part  of  local  governments 
involve  the  innocent  citizens  in  disease  and  plague ;  or  from  the  national  spheres — a 
king's  wrong-doing  brings  war,  and  battle  and  siege  are  calamities  for  women  and 
children  as  well  as  for  soldiers. 

III.  The  innocent  must  share  in  the  calamity  that  follows  on  sin.  For 
this  is  precisely  the  condition  under  which  God  has  set  mankind.  It  follows,  of 
necessity,  upon  that  fact  of  the  "  solidarity  of  the  race,"  which  modem  writers  are 
now  setting  in  prominence,  but  which  St.  Paul  taught  as  one  of  the  basis-principles  of 
Christianity  long  years  ago.  See  his  speech  at  Athens  and  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans. 
Illustrate  by  the  ngure  of  "  many  memoers  in  one  body."  One  limb  or  organ,  diseased, 
nves  pain  and  weakness  in  other  organs  that  are  not  diseased.  Men  are,  in  actual 
life,  as  vitally  related  as  parts  of  the  body,  and  if  one  member  sins  the  other  members 
suffer  with  it 

IV.  The  innocent  sharing  in  calamity  has  a  moral  mission.  It  is  one  of 
warning.  We  only  feel  the  real  evil  of  sin  through  the  pressure  of  the  troubles  that 
follow  upon  it.  But  it  becomes  an  effective  warning  that  we  must  drag  others  down 
with  our  sin ;  and  we  can  never  be  sure  who  will  be  the  chief  sufferer — it  may  possibly 
be  our  dearest  and  best. 

V.  The  innocent  sharing  in  calamity  has  a  recovering  and  redemptive  power. 
It  awakens  to  a  sense  of  sin,  recovering  us  from  the  delusions  of  self-will.  It  binds 
men  together  in  a  brotherhood  of  helpfulness;  seeking  to  relieve  from  burdens  of 
suffering,  they  are  led  to  see  that  suffering  must  be  dealt  with  at  its  root,  which  is  sin. 

Lead  up  to  the  fact  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  innocent  member  of  the  human 
race,  the  spotless  and  perfectly  obedient  Son  of  God,  suffering  in,  with,  and /or  a  guilty 
world.  It  is  precisely  this  which  is  the  fullest  and  most  effective  revelation  of  the 
guilt  of  mankind.  Yet  it  is  precisely  this  which  is  the  great  recovering  and  redemp- 
tive power.  '*  Ho  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,"  and  '*  by  his  stripes  we  are 
healed."— R.  T. 

Vers.  3—6, 13. — The  end  of  self -will.  In  dwelling  on  the  sad  circumstances  of  King 
Saul's  death,  we  are  led  to  review  the  life  which  ended  so  miserably,  and  to  endeavour 
to  find  the  root  of  evil,  in  disposition  or  in  conduct,  which  bore  at  last  such  fruitage. 
The  actual  incidents  of  Saul's  career  should  be  recalled. 

I.  The  hopefulness  of  his  introduction  to  us.  In  his  expedition  to  seek  the  lost 
asses,  in  his  anointing  at  Kaniah,  in  his  election  by  lot  at  Mizpch,  in  the  confirma- 
tion of  his  kingship  at  Gilgal,  and  in  the  first  actions  of  his  government,  there  are  the 
signs  of  a  hopeful  reign.  Especially  may  be  noted  and  illustrated  his  modesty — in 
shrinking  from  the  responsibility  of  kingship ;  his  loyalty  to  duty — where  the  will  of 
God  and  the  people  was  made  plain  to  him ;  his  openness  to  religious  influences — as 
seen  in  his  catcliing  the  prophetic  impulse ;  and  his  generosity — ^shown  in  refusing  to 
take  vengeance  on  those  who  disputed  his  authority.    Many  a  man  has  begun  well.   No 


cfl.  X.  1—14.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  141 

man  knows  himself  nntU  he  has  borne  the  stress  of  middle  life,  and  its  responsibilities^ 
testings,  and  temptations. 

II.  The  peril  of  the  over-developed  body.  For  this  he  was  chosen  and  admired ; 
kn  accordance  with  the  admiration  of  physical  size  and  strength  which  is  common  to  all 
people  who  retain  tribal  notions.  But  there  is  also  the  peril  of  the  bodily  growth  being 
stronger  than  the  mentcd,  and  the  overgrowth  of  body  often  involves  moral  weakness. 
And  these  may  find  expression  in  a  stubbornness  of  self-will,  which,  by  indulgence, 
may  become  mania.  The  self-will  of  moral  weakness  should  be  carefullv  distinguished 
from  the  self-reliance,  power  of  rule,  and  masterfulness,  which  are  as  clearly  the  signs 
of  mental  and  moral  strength. 

IIL  The  test  op  the  new  trust  op  kingship.  The  office  was  quite  a  new  one ;  the 
only  previous  instance  was  the  forced  kingship  of  Abimelech.  Saul  had  really  no 
model  on  which  to  order  his  conduct.  Exactly  what  kingship  could  be  in  a  country 
where  Jehovah  himself  was  the  sole  sovereign  Lord,  he  had  to  find  out.  So  that, 
beyond  the  ordinary  testings  of  any  new  and  untried  situations,  Saul  was  tried  by  the 
uniuueness  of  the  position  in  which  he  was  placed.  Exactly  the  point  at  which  he 
might  fail  was  this — he  might  practically  claim  independence  for  an  office  which  was 
nevertheless  strictly  a  conditioned  and  a  dependent  office.  He  could  be  Jehovah's 
prince  and  viceroy ;  he  would  be  tempted  to  claim  personal  and  independent  kingly 
rights.  So  the  trust  of  the  office  tested  his  wUl,  proved  whether  he  was  fully  and 
sincerelv  loyal  to  God.  This  piece  of  Saul's  life  brought  him  into  the  conflict  of  the 
Been  and  the  unseen^  which  every  man  must  enter.  Would  he,  even  with  all  the  fasci- 
nations and  interest  of  the  '*  seen,"  be  true  to  Ood,  the  unseen  ?  Would  he  be  strictly 
and  wholly  obedient  to  the  Divine  commands  and  the  Divine  leadings?  Not  character 
only,  but  the  verv  root-principle  of  Saul's  being,  was  tested.  Compare  the  searching 
tests  of  Abraham  s  faith  and  Job's  patient  submission.  Saul  fieiiled  under  the  testing ; 
80  we  have  to  consider— 

TV,  The  conditions  of  the  growth  op  self-will.  Apparent  snccess  in  the 
earlier  efforts  of  wilfulness  encourages  the  self-confidence.  But,  in  view  of  Saul's 
case,  we  may  especially  dwell  on  the  influence  of  rejecting  early  Divine  warnings,  and 
refusing  to  be  humbled  under  reproofs  of  earlier  sins  and  failures.  This  involves  the 
hardening  of  the  heart,  as  may  be  illustrated  in  the  case  of  Pharaoh. 

y.  Self-will,  in  the  end,  brings  both  self  and  others  to  ruin.  It  can  never 
have  more  than  a  certain  length  of  tether.  No  man  can  long  *'  resist  God  and  prosper?' 
Saul's  later  days  fully  illustrate  the  inward  miseries  and  outward  ruin  of  self-will ; 
the  "  death  "  which  this  sin,  "  when  it  is  finished,  surely  brings  forth."  Distinguish 
between  the  self-strength  which  God  may  use,  and  the  self-wUl  which  severs  a  man 
wholly  from  Gk>d.  Whatever  may  be  our  station  or  our  office,  there  is  one  condition 
of  success,  and  only  one — we  must  "  fear  God,  and  keep  his  commandments." — H.  T. 

Vers.  11,  12. — The  time  for  returning  kindness  is  sure  to  come.  Recall  the  deliver- 
ance which,  very  early  in  his  kingship,  Saul  had  wrought  for  the  men  of  Jabesh- 
gilead  (1  Sam.  xi.\  It  seemed  most  unlikely  that  those  rescued  citizens  would  ever 
be  able  to  do  anything  for  Saul  which  would  publicly  testify  their  gratitude ;  and  yet 
time  passed  on,  and  presently  brought  them  their  golden  opportunity.  When  the 
stripped  and  dismembered  bodies  of  Saul  and  his  sons  hung  in  front  of  the  gates  of 
Beth-shan,  the  men  of  Jabesh-gilead  felt  they  could  at  least  stop  such  dishonouring  of 
the  dead ;  so  they  made  a  sudden  foray  in  the  dead  of  night,  seized  the  bodies,  gave 
them  honourable  burning,  and  burial  under  a  tree  (1  Sam.  xxxi.  11 — 13).  We  may 
learn  from  this  incident  that— 

L  We  can  help  others  in  their  extremities.  For  precisely  this  we  are  knit 
together  in  the  human  brotherhood ;  and  there  are  no  possible  forms  of  human  need  and 
trouble  for  which  there  are  not  human  alleviations ;  and  these  are  at  our  command. 

II.  Quickness  to  help  others  is  characteristicallt  Christian.  Sensitiveness 
to  human  suffering,  and  sense  of  personal  responsibility  in  relation  to  its  relief,  are 
necessary  features  of  Christian  character,  and  essential  elements  of  true  Christ-likeness. 
"  Himself  bare  our  infirmities  and  carried  our  sorrows."  We  are  to  *'  bear  one  another's 
burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ." 

IIL  Memory  op  help  received  should  be  lovingly  cherished.    Ingratitude  is 


142  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.        [oh.  x.  1—14. 

a  sin  of  peculiar  baseness.    There  may  be  long  delay  ere  gratitude  can  find  its  oppor- 
tunity, but  it  should  be  well  nourished  and  kept  for  its  occasion. 

IV.  Time  brings  round  thb  opportunity  for  all  who  kkep  thb  will.  Illus- 
trate from  incident  of  text,  and  from  the  care  of  our  parents.  We  seem  unable  to  show 
our  gratitude  for  the  hallowing  care  of  our  childhood  ;  but  their  helpless  old  age  comes, 
and  we  get  our  opportunity.  Lead  on  to  that  sense  of  indebtedness  we  should  feel  to 
Christ  for  his  redeeming  work ;  and  to  the  duty  of  keeping  ever  watchful  of  oppoF^ 
tunities  for  serving  him— as  we  may  do,  by  serving  some  of  the  least  of  his  brethren. 
See  McCheyne's  hymn,  "  When  this  passing  world  is  done/'  etc.— R.  T. 

Yer.  14. — Judgments  come  through  men,  hut  they  are  from  the  Lord,  This  topic  is 
suggested  by  the  expression,  *'  Therefore  he  slew  him."  This  passage  gives  the  reason 
for  the  death  of  Saul,  as  viewed  from  a  later  standpoint ;  a  moral  is  pointed  from  it 
that  might  serve  as  a  warning  to  the  returned  captives  of  Babylon.  Saul  came  under 
judgment,  and  we  must  see  that  it  was  Divine  judgment.  It  may  be  well  to  form  a 
careful  estimate  of  Saul's  character  and  reign,  so  that  the  Divine  dealings  with  him 
may  be  worthily  apprehended.  **  It  is  impossible  not  to  recognize  elements  of  good  in 
him.  David's  lament  does  but  express  the  national  admiration  for  one,  who,  in  his  be«t 
days,  must  have  been  both  prudent  in  counsel  and  mighty  in  war.  We  cannot  fail  to 
see  the  evil  taint  of  self-will  making  sinister  marks  across  the  entire  record  and  utterly 
darkening  the  closing  chapters."  There  is  little  but  warning  to  be  gathered  from  the 
story  of  King  Saul ;  but  we  should  receive  those  warnings  humbly,  for  **  let  him  that 
thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall." 

I.  GoD*s  judgments  find  earthlt  spheres.  One  of  the  great  objects  for  the  sake 
of  which  the  Old  Testament  histories  are  preserved  to  us  is  to  convince  us  that  Gkxl 
visits  sins  now,  and  lets  his  judgments  be  executed  here  on  earth.  Judgment,  in  Saul's 
case,  came  on  a  battle-field;  it  may  come  on  a  sick-bed  or  a  ruined  home.  Oar 
tendency  is  to  call  earthly  troubles  accidents,  and  to  shift  the  idea  of  Divine  judg« 
ment  into  the  world  that  is  to  come.  We  think  that  Qod  will  judge,  condemn,  and 
execute  his  judgments  there,  and  so  we  too  easily  separate  him  from  the  calamities 
of  our  life.  It  is  to  be  impressively  apprehended  that  Saul  had  his  judgment  in  this 
sphere.  No  man  can  be  sure  of  i)osti)oning  the  Divine  judgment  to  the  next  life. 
Whosoever  "  transgresseth  "  lies  under  this  exceeding  peril ;  the  Divine  indignation  is 
over  him  now,  and  he  has  no  security  as  to  how  or  when  it  will  fall. 

II.  GoD*s  judgments  find  human  agents.  This  needs  to  be  set  forth  so  as  to 
correct  a  common  fallacy  and  self-deception.  Men  may  be  willing  to  admit  that  fire 
and  tempest,  famine  and  pestilence,  are  executive  agents  of  GKxi,  and  work  out  his 
judgments,  but  they  are  less  willing  to  see  that  their  fellow-men,  even  in  doing  wrong, 
may  be  used  by  God  as  his  executioners.  Even  the  Philistines,  in  their  violence  and 
wilfulness,  became  the  executors  of  the  Divine  wrath  on  SauL  See  how  much  larger 
and  more  comprehensive  a  view  of  the  Divine  administration  this  gives ;  and  it  may 
afford  some  very  humbling  revelations  of  some  misunderstood  passages  of  our  lives. 
Maybe  we  thought  ourselves  only  wronged  by  men;  through  the  wrong  we  were 
punished  by  God. 

III.  The  earthly  and  the  human  judgments  must  not  hide  thb  Divine  in 
THEM.  As  we  see  things,  the  Philistines  defeated  Saul  and  he  ultimately  slew  himself. 
But  we  must  not  thus  obscure  the  Divine.  The  deeper  truth  is  that  Ood  slew  him.  So 
of  the  incidents  of  our  lives ;  nothing  should  hide  the  Divine  meaning  of  theuL 

IV.  The  earthly  and  the  human  should  not  be  allowed  to  confuse  oub 
VIEWS  OF  the  future  AND  ETERNAL  JUDGMENT.  No  judgment,  limited  to  the  earthly 
spheres,  can  be  properly  said  to  exhaust  the  Divine  sentence.  God  wants  the  next  life 
for  the  adequate  vindications  of  his  righteousness.  The  fact  of  a  man's  having  suffered 
in  this  life  gives  him  no  security  against  judgment  to  come. 

V.  The  EARTHLY  AND  THB  HUMAN  FIND  THEIR  COMPLETE  MISSION,  NOT  IN  THB 
SUFFERER,  BUT    IN    THE    WARNING    OF    THOSE    WHO    MAY  HEAR    OF    THE    JUDGMENT. 

This  is  illustrated  in  the  preservation  of  the  records  of  the  Flood,  the  destruction  of 
Sodom,  the  ruin  of  Balaam,  the  miserable  end  of  Saul,  etc.  Deal  with  our  Lord's 
teachings  concerning  "  calamity."  Distinguish  *'  calamity  "  from  "  judgment"  We 
call  a  thing  a  judgment  when  we  can  connect  together — as  in  Saul's  case — the  sin  and 


CH.  XI.  1-47.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


US 


the  suffering.  Otherwise  we  say,  **  It  is  a  calamity,  and  it  may  he  a  judgment."  Plead 
for  a  real  and  practical  belief  in  God's  present  rule,  and  solemn  vindications  of  his  will 
and  authority,  both  in  national  and  individual  spheres.— K.  T« 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XL 


Ver.  1. — Upon  the  death  of  Saul,  Abner, 
for  a  while  espousing  the  cause  of  Ishbo- 
■heth,  the  only  surviving  son  of  Saul, 
**inade  him  king  over"  a  large  proportion 
of  the  people,  exclusive  of  Judah  (2  Sam.  ii. 
8 — 10).  Already  David  had  been  anointed 
at  Hebron  by  **  the  men  of  Judah,  king  over 
the  house  of  Judah''  (2  Sam.  ii.  1 — 4). 
And  David  oontiuuod  **  king  in  Hebron  over 
the  house  of  Judah  seven  years  and  six 
months"  (2  Sam.  iL  11 ;  v.  5;  1  Kings  ii. 
11 ;  eh.  iii.  4).  Notice  the  agreement  of 
this  date  with  the  account  of  the  six  sons 
bom  to  David  in  Hebron  (2  Sam.  iii.  2—5). 
The  explanation  of  the  chronology  for  Ish- 
boeheth  affecting  this  neriod  is  not  easy. 
It  is  said  that  he  reigned  over  Israel  '*  two 
years"  (2  Sam.  ii.  10).  Where  was  the 
difference  of  five  and  a  half  years  lost?  Our 
first  verse  here,  with  its  apparently  em- 
phatic then  (comp.  2  Sam.  v.  1),  would 
seem  to  make  it  very  unlikely  that  it  was 
lost  between  the  death  of  Ishbosheth  and 
the  kingship  of  David  over  "all  the  tribes 
of  Israel"  together  with  Judah.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  interval  in  question  might 
find  its  account  in  the  *'  long  tear  (2  Sam. 
iii.  1,  C,  17—21)  between  the  house  of  Saul 
and  the  house  of  David."  There  is,  how- 
ever, still  possible  the  supposition  that  the 
historian  intends  to  give  the  intrinsically 
correct  facts  of  the  case,  and  means  that, 
what  with  delay  before  getting  the  adhesion 
of  the  people  to  Ishbosheth,  and  what  with 
tlio  early  decay  of  his  sovereign  power,  he 
could  not  be  said  to  have  reigned  more  than 
two  years.  This  verso,  then,  shows  that  the 
history  proper  of  Chronicles  purports  to 
begin  from  tlie  time  of  David's  rule  over  tho 
entire  and  united  people,  at  tho  exact  date 
of  seven  and  a  half  years  after  Saul's  death, 
while  no  mention  is  hero  made  of  his 
intermediate  partial  rule  over  Judah,  or  of 
Ishbodheth*s  temporary  rule  over  Benjamin 
and  Israel.  All  Israel ;  i.e.  '*  all  the  tribes 
of  Israel "  (2  Sara.  v.  1),  by  their  represen- 
tatives, **  the  elders  of  Israel "  (2  Sam.  iii. 
17  ;  V.  3 ;  as  well  as  our  vcr.  3).  The  first 
nine  verses  of  this  chapter  cover  tho  same 
ground  as  the  firdt  ton  verses  of  2  Sam.  v. 
Unto  Hebron.  We  learn  how  David  came 
to  be  here  from  2  Sam.  ii.  1.  **  And  it  came 
to  pvLUB  after  this"  (t'.e.  after  David's 
"lamentation   over   Saul  and  Jonathan") 


(( 


that  David  inquired  of  the  Lord,  saying, 
Shall  I  go  up  into  any  of  the  cities  of 
Judah  ?  And  tho  Lord  said  unto  him,  Qo 
up.  And  David  said,  Whither  shall  I  go 
up  ?  And  he  said,  Unto  Hebron."  Hebron 
was  the  **  earliest  seat  of  civilized  life,  not 
of  Judah  only,  but  of  all  Palestine."  It  and 
Bethlehem  are  two  of  the  most  special 
memorials  of  David.  An  interesting  sketch 
of  the  topography  and  natural  features  of 
this  place,  and  a  succinct  Biblical  history  of 
it  in  Stanley's  *  Sinai  and  Palestine,'  p.  161 
(edit.  186U),from  which  comos  the  following 

Suotation  : —  "  Hebron,  according  to  the 
ewish  tradition,  was  the  primeval  city  of 
ihe  vine.  Its  name  indicates  community  or 
society.  It  was  the  anciont  city  of  £phron 
the  Hittite,  in  whose  gate  he  and  the  elders 
received  the  offer  of  Abraham,  when  as  yet 
no  other  fixed  habitation  of  mun  was  known 
in  central  Palestine.  It  was  the  first  home 
of  Abraham  and  the  patriarchs ;  their  own 
permanent  resting-place  when  they  were 
gradually  exchanging  the  pastoral  for  the 
agricultural  life.  In  its  neighbourhood  can 
be  traced,  by  a  continuous  tradition,  the  site 
of  the  venerable  tree  under  which  Abraham 
pitohed  his  tent,  and  of  the  double  cavern 
in  which  he  and  his  family  were  deposited 
and  perhaps  still  remain.  It  was  the  city 
of  Arba,  the  old  Canaanite  chief,  with  his 
three  giant  sons,  under  whose  walls  the 
trembling  spies  stole  through  tho  land  by 
the  adjacent  valley  of  Eshcol.  Here  Caleb 
chose  his  portion  when,  at  the  head  of  his 
valiant  tribe,  he  drove  out  the  old  inhabit- 
ants, and  called  the  whole  surrounding 
territory  after  his  own  name ;  and  hero  the 
tribe  of  Judah  always  rallied,  when  it 
asserted  its  independent  existence  against 
the  rest  of  the  Israelite  nation.  It  needs 
but  few  words  to  give  the  secret  of  this 
early  selection,  of  tliis  long  continuance  of 
the  metropolitan  city  of  Judah.  Every 
traveller  from  the  desert  must  have  been 
struck  by  the  sight  of  that  pleasant  vale, 
with  its  orchards  and  vineyards  and 
numberless  wells,  and  we  muat  add,  in 
earlier  times,  the  groves  of  terebinths  and 
oaks  which  then  attracted  from  far  tho  eye 
of  the  wandering  tribes.  This  fertility  was 
in  part  owing  to  its  elevation  into  tho  cooler 
and  the  more  watered  region  above  the  dry 
and  withered  valleys  of  the  rest  of  Judna 
— and  commanding  this  fertile  valley,  rose 
Hebron,  on  its  crested  hill."    Behold,  w« 


144 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,      [ch.  xl  1— 47. 


are  thy  bono  and  thy  fleih.  This  is  a 
figurative  expression,  the  pedigree  and 
lineage  of  wluch  it  ia  interesting  to  note 
(see  2  Sam.  xix.  12;  Jud^.  ix.  2;  Gen. 
xxix.  14;  ii.  23).  The  highest  service  to 
which  it  was  promoted  may  be  said  to  be 
reached,  however,  in  £ph.  v.  SO. 

Yer.  2. — ^Thoa  ihalt  feed  my  people  Israel 
(so  2  Sam.  v.  2;  vii.  7;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  71). 
Thus  to  the  servant  is  condescendingly 
vouchsafed  the  same  description  as  the 
Master  takes  through  the  Spirit  for  himself 
— to  the  undcr-Hhepherfl  the  pame  as  the 
Chief  Shepherd  acknowlctlges ;  note  same 
pealm,  ver.  72 ;  Ps.  xxiiL  1--4 ;  c.  S ;  1  Pet. 
V.  4. 

Yer.  8. — Made  a  covenant .  .  .  before  the 
Lord.  A  forcible  use  of  this  plirase  occurs 
in  Judg.  xi.  11.  It  implies  that  the  engage- 
ment was  ratified  in  the  presence  of  a  holy 
Elace,  a  holy  vessel  of  the  sanctuary,  or  a 
oly  person  (1  Sam.  xxi.  6,  7 ;  Josh,  xviii. 
8 ;  Lev.  i.  5).  Whether  the  tabernacle  was 
now  at  Hebron  is  doubtful,  but  the  two 
priests,  Abiathar  and  Zadok,  were.  They 
aaointod  David.  The  first  time  of  David's 
being  anointed  (1  Sam.  xvi.  1, 13)  Samuel 
the  prophet  officiated.  The  second  time 
(2  Sam.  iL  4)  was  when  the  ''men  of 
Judah  '*  anointed  him  king  over  *'  the  house 
of  Judah."  I'his  third  time  when  David 
was  anointed  king  over  the  united  people, 
it  was  at  all  events  at  the  special  instance 
of  *'  all  the  elders  of  Israel,"  although  who 
officiated  on  these  two  last  occasions  is  not 
mentioned.  According  to  the  word  of  the 
Lord  by  Bamnel.  The  sentence  marks  the 
complete  fulfilment  of  what  had  been  fore- 
ihaciowcd  in  1  Sam.  xvi.  12, 13;  and  it  may 
probably  have  been  the  more  carefully 
introduced  by  the  compiler  of  Chronicles, 
in  consideration  of  the  absence  from  his 
own  work  of  previous  details  and  of  the 
previous  anointings  of  David. 

Yer.  4. — Jemsalem,  which  is  Jebns.  This 
ancient  name  of  Jerusalem,  of  Canaanitish 
date,  is  found  only  once  bedidc,  viz.  in 
Judg.  xix.  10, 11 ;  the  Gentile  form  of  the 
noun,  however,  Jebusi,  is  of  more  frequent 
occurrence,  and  sometimes  it  is  found  even 
as  the  name  of  the  city  (Josh.  xv.  8,  C3; 
xviU.  16,  28).  The  derivation  and  meaning 
of  the  word  are  unascertained.  Gesenius 
explains  it  to  mean  **  a  place  dry  or  down- 
tr(xiden  like  a  threshing-floor.*' 

Yer.  5— Thon  shalt  not  oome  hither. 
The  inhabitants  of  Jebns  added  something 
beside  (2  Sam.  v.  6).  They  had  said, 
'*  Except  thou  take  away  the  blind  and  the 
lame,  thou  shalt  not  come  in  hither:  think- 
ing, David  cannot  come  in  hither."  The 
easUe  of  Zion.  This  fort  became  the  site 
of  the  temple.  It  is  the  Acra  of  Josophus, 
and  is  different  from  the  modem  Zion.    It 


was  the  eastern  hill  in  the  city,  was  the 
second  highest  elevation  in  the  city,  and  up 
to  the  time  of  the  destruction  of  the  city 
of  Jerusalem  was  uniformly  named  Zion, 
though  from  the  time  of  Constantino  it  has 
been  used  for  the  name  of  the  western  hill, 
the  site  of  Jeruwlem,  There  is  but  little 
doubt  of  the  identity  of  the  hill  of  Moriah 
with  the  hill  of  Zion,  though  no  individual 
passage  of  Scripture  asserts  it  The  passage 
Dcforo  us,  however,  with  its  parallel,  tells  us 
plainly  enough  that  the  city  of  David,  and 
that  which  became  the  sacred  hill  of  Zion 
are  one ;  and  many  passages  in  the  Psalms 
and  the  prophets  both  confirm  this  and 
point  out  the  difference  between  Zion  and 
Jerusalem. 

Yer.  6. — The  name  and  ftesh  glory  of 
Joab,  as  given  here,  are  not  given  in  2  Sam. 
V.  3— 10;  and  we  could  suppose  that  they 
were  purposely  withheld  there.  It  is  true 
that  Joab  already  held  high  office,  probably 
the  first  phioe  as  captain  of  David's  men, 
but  Bertheau*s  objection  to  the  statements 
of  this  verse  on  such  g^unds  easily  yields 
to  the  considerations — first,  that  there  can 
be  no  doubt  Juab  had  fallen  into  disfavour 
with  David  and  otherif  upon  his  slaying  of 
Abner  (2  Sam.  iiL  26—29,  36,  87);  and 
further,  that  this  was  a  great  oocasioUy 
exceedingly  favourable  for  evoking  any  very 
special  ability  of  younger  or  unknown  men, 
at  present  lost  under  tlie  shadow  of  larger 
growths.  The  advantage  which  Joab 
gained  now  was  one  that  confirmed  his 
position  and  increased  largely  his  influence; 
and  an  indication  that  he  was  not  slow  to 
avail  himself  of  it  is  probably  to  be  traced 
in  the  eighth  verse,  where  it  is  said  while 
**  David  built  .  .  .  even  from  Millo  round 
about,  .  .  .  Joab  repaired  the  rest  of  the 
city." 

Yer.  8.— Millo.  There  is  great  uncertainty 
as  to  the  derivation  and  the  meaning  of 
this  word.  It  is  probably  not  really  of 
Hebrew  extraction,  but  of  the  oldest 
Canaanitish  origin.  In  the  Hebrew  it  is 
always  used  with  the  article,  and  would 
presumably  come  from  the  Hebrew  root 
**to  fill."  Josephus  seems  to  use,  as 
synonymous  expression  for  **David^8  waU 
round  Millo"  this,  viz.  **  buildings  round 
about  the  lower  city"  (*Jud.  Ant^  iii.  2, 
compared  with  5;  'Wars,'  vi.  1,  where  he 
identifies  those  **  buildings,"  etc.,  with  Acrd), 
As  the  name  of  a  family,  it  is  mentioned  in 
connection  with  Sliechem,  known  specially 
as  a  pliice  of  the  Canaanites  (Judg.  ix.  6, 
20).  The  Septuagint  represents  it  by  the 
word  17  hKpa.  In  the  remarkable  passage, 
2  Kings  xii.  20,  the  word  '*Silla"  is  even 
a  greater  enigma,  which,  however,  may 
designate  the  "steps  from  the  city  of 
David  "  (Neh.  iii.  15),  or  **  the  eatueteay  o/ 


OE.  II.  1—47.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHEONIdiES. 


going  up"  to  tba  west  of  the  temple  [eh. 
siii.  1^  The  Jikelicit  view  of  Hillo  it 
that  it  -waM  a  verj  itroog  point  of  forlifl- 
cation  in  the  snrrounding  defenoei  of  the 
hill  of  ZioD  (1  King!  ii.  21;  xl  27).  la 
2  Chron.  uiiL  5  tbo  otlieiwiie  uaTar^ng 
translalioQ  (ii  bcpn)  of  the  Septuagiat  is 
■uperaedecJ  by  rfc  iri^-iiitiia,  »  word  itaelf  of 
doubtfol  Eigoiflcction.  For  while  Bome 
■wonld  rendar  it  by  the  word  "foundation," 
Sohleuaiier  tninBlates  it  ■■height."  Qtots 
(in  Bmith'i  'Bible  Dictionary,'  U.  367) 
pnta  it  in  "the  neighbourhood  of  the 
Tyrop«&n  Taller  at  the  foot  of  Zion." 
Bone  cine  may  lie  in  the  word  "inward," 
applied  to  the  buildiDg  by  David.  Does  it 
imply  a  covering  by  edifltea  of  the  apace,  or 
■ome  portion  of  it,  U>st  lay  between  Zion 
and  the  rest  of  the  city  ?  (See  also  Keil  on 
King!,  vol.  ii.  163.) 

Vera.  10— 25.— This  list  of  chiefa  of 
David'a  "  mighty  men  "  flnda  a  more  appro- 
priate poaitioQ  where  it  is  placed  here,  than 
where  it  ia  found,  after  the  dose  of  the  very 
dying  apeech  of  David,  in  2  Bam.  xiiiL 
8— 2;!.  It  plainly  belonj^s  to  the  time  of 
the  eatdblisliment  of  David's  away  over  the 
whole  people.  The  different  position  of 
the  liat  here  is  itself  an  indicalion  of  some 
force,  that  the  writers  of  the  work  of 
Samuel  and  of  Cbroniclea  availed  them- 
•elves  indnpendently  of  the  commua  lource, 
and  that  tne  latter  did  not  take  through 
the  tiirmer. 

Ver.  11.— Thla  is  th»  ntmber.  The 
Hebrew  has, "  Then  are  the  nnmb^."  The 
aenlcnce  should  probably  he,  "These  are 
the  namti "  (2  Sam.  sxiii.  8>  Jaahabasm. 
In  the  parallel  passage,  thia  name  is  sup. 
pUtd  by  the  words  "The  Tachmonite, 
njFa  St",  Autboriied  Vcraion,  "that  sat 
in  the  seat "  (aee  the  previous  verse),  pri>- 
bably  in  error  for  oar  cp.^r^  (see  Kenoi- 
cott'a  '  Diasert,'  82).  His  immediate  pater. 
nal  anceator  aeema  to  have  been  Zabdiel 
(ch.  xxvii.  2),  I'lie  only  other  notices  of 
him  are  in  ch.  xii.  6;  iivii.  2,  in  which 
latter  paasase  he  is  mentioned  a»  "  over  the 
fint  ooorae  ^r  the  first  month, . . .  and  in  his 
oonrsewere twoDtyaudfoQithouMind."  Th* 
diief  of  tha  taptainit  Tbe  Autbnrized 
Version  follow*  the  Keri  (which  is  distin- 
gaiibed  &om  tbo  Chethiv  by  a  yod  in  place 
of  a  rau),  and  translates  eaptaint.  It  seema 
better  (vera.  15,  25 ;  ch.  lii.  i,  16 ;  iivii.  6) 
to  abide  by  tbe  Chetbiv,  and  translate  "  the 
chief  of  the  thiiiy."  H«  lifted  up  his  ipssi. 
Notice  tbe  probable  error  in  fiamnel, 
occasioned  by  some  similarity  in  the  Hebrew 
letters,  "  Tbe  aame  was  Adino  the  Eznite." 
The  number  of  Jashobeam's  victima  is  stated 
at  "eight  handled"  in  the  parallel  passage 
(2  Bam.  xiiit  8).  (For  analogous  idioms, 
•ee  Eiod.  tU.  20;  xx.  23;  Deut  uviL  S; 

1.  CHBOHICLES. 


Josh.  Tiii.  SI;  Ps.  xU.9:  Ixxiv.  S:  Im.1L 
4:  Ezek.  ixvL  28.) 

Ver.  12.~XlMaar.  Perhaps  the  same  a* 
Azareel  in  the  list  at  ch.  lii.  6,  in  which 
Jaahobeam  is  also  found.  Dodo.  Tbit  nam* 
is  found  in  three  forms,  the  Chethiv  being 
Dodi;  the  Keri,  Dodo;  and  Dodai  being 
found  in  ch.  xiviL  4.  He  is  mentioned  In  cb. 
iiviL  4  as  "  over  the  oonrse  of  the  second 
month  ...  In  his  oourae  likewise  twenty 
and  four  thonaand."  Tbe  Ahohite.  In  the 
parallel  passage  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  9),  for  tiV^ 
here,  we  find  ifirii^3.  Ahohite  is  iSa 
patronymic  of  the  Ahoah,  who  (ch.  TilL 
4)  was  given  among  tbe  sons  of  Bela, 
the  firstborn  of  Benjamin.  The  thna 
migbtief.  Who  la  the  third?  We  hava 
bare  but  too — Jaahobeam  and  Eleaiat.  Tha 
parallel  passage  snppliee  tbe  omission  by 
the  name  of  Slianimah  the  Hararite  (2  Sam. 
iziii.  II,  33;  comp.  our  ver.  27).  And  a 
careful  compariaon  of  tbe  passages  anggeeta 
how  the  omission  came  about,  and  that  it 
waa  but  part  of  a  larger  omission.  Between 
the  sentences,  "and  there  the  Philistine* 
were  gathered  together  to  battle,"  and 
"  where  was  a  parcel  of  ground  full  of 
barley"  (in  oar  next  verse,  13)  there  Is  an 
Ai'ifus  of  two  verses  (viz.  those  found  in  3 
Sam.  xziiL  at  lalUr  half  of  ver.  9,  tst.  10, 
and  former  ha(fo/  ver.  11),  and  thia  hiatua 
waa  occasioned  probably  by  the  recurrence 
of  tbo  expreaaioQ, "  and  the  Fhilisliues  w«ra 
gathered  together,"  in  tbe  remaining  half 
of  ver.  11  (see  Keouioott's  Bible,  and 
*  Bpeaker's  Commentary,'  in  lod.). 
Ver.13.— Paa-danuulm.  This  word,Di^  »% 
appears  in  I  Sam.  xviL  I  as  n^pi  dbk,  and 
is  supposed  to  mean,  in  either  form,  "  the 
boundary  of  blood;"  it  waa  the  acene  of 
frequent  conflicts  with  the  Fhiliatinea,  and 
was  the  spot  where  the;  were  encamped  at 
the  time  of  Goliath's  challenge  (o  lanieL 
It  waa  near  Shoooh,  or  Socoh,  in  Judab, 
some  fourteen  miles  south-west  of  Jerusa- 
lem. Tnll  of  badey.  The  Authorized  Ver- 
sion reading  in  the  parallel  passage  (2  Sam, 
xxiiL  11)  is  "fuU  of  lentileis,"  tbe  Hebrew 
for  "  barley  "  is  onipb,  for  "  lentiles  "  d-^*^ 
Feasibly  the  worda  should  be  the  same,  one 
being  here  spelt,  by  accident,  wrongly  for 
the  other  (so  Kennicott).  The  fint  Bible 
mention  of  "  barley "  occiirs  in  Ezod.  iz. 
31,  32,  &om  which  veisea  we  learn  that  It, 
together  with  "  flax,"  was  an  earlier  crop 
than  "  rye  "  and  "  wheat."  It  was  not  only 
used  far  food  for  man  (Numb.  v.  IS ;  Judg. 
vii.  13;  Ezek.  iv.  12),  but  also  for  bonea 
(1  Kinga  iv.  28).  That  it  waa  nevertheleaa 
of  the  leas-vatned  grain,  we  have  significant 
indications,  in  Ita  neing  preacribed  for  the 
"jealousy  offering"  (Nnmb.  t.  15,  comp. 
with  Lev.  iL  1),  and  in  ita  being  part  of  tha 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHHONICLES.      [oa.  xl  1— *7. 


n  the  Hebruw.froni 
bal  niol  figiiifying  "  to  briatlo,"  U  in  notice- 
able anulci^y  with  the  Ijttin  honhvm,  from 
horrto.  Gescniiu's  obserTatinn,  tbut  tlie 
Bfogulu  oF  tlie  iTord  given  above  ia  the 
Hebrew  morkB  Iho  "  (growing  crop,"  and  the 
p1ut«l  tliB  "  grain  "  iteelf,  seema  huidly  oor- 
loboroted  bj  this  lingla  passage  at  all 
ereule.  The  Utitile,oB  the  other  hand,  vai 
k  Bpeciea  of  {Han,  and  used  much  toT  Boup, 
of  which  Egyptian  tomb-painting*  rurniiih 
itiiutration  (Gcd.iit.  23—34;  2  San.  sviL 
28 ;  Ezek.  iv.  9).  Sonnini,  in  hia  '  Travels ' 
(traoalalion  or  Hunter,  iii.  SSS),  telU  oa 
that  atill  the  Egyptian  poor  eat  lentiU-breail, 
hnt,  what  is  more  apropot  of  thia  pasaage, 
that  in  making  it  they  prefer  to  mix  a  little 
"barley"  with  it  Thia  apparent  diacie- 
panoy  between  the  parallel  accounla  not  only 
oonnt*  in  itaelf  for  Tery  little,  but  may 
•Mily  be  iurmounted  by  lupposing  tlut, 
thongh  It  be  wiitten  that  the  "parcel" 
of  proand  waa  "  full  of  lentilea,"  and  again 
"full  of  barley,"  the  deicription  may  only 
amount  to  this,  that  luch  parcela  were  in 
cloae  juitapoeition.  Bat  if  not,  onr  alia- 
lion  above  to  the  poaeible  error  in  the 
Hebrew  voids  will  auffloiently  explain  the 


Ver.  14.— This,  m  well  aa  the  laltpr  half 
of  the  preceding  verse,  belongs  to  the  ao- 
oonnt  of  Shammah  the  Harorito  (2  Sam. 
xiiii.  1 1),  nnd  in  the  parallel  the  verba  are 
accordingli^  in  the  riagular  number.  lu 
that  snme  place  Bhamniah  la  ealtcd  the 
"son  of  Agee,"  whicb  probably  onawera  to 
the  "  Stage  "  of  the  present  chapter  (ver. 
84),  where  our  readin™  ehould  rather  be, 
"Jonathan  the  aon  of  Shamoiah  the  son  of 
Shage,  the  Hararile."  The  word  "  Hararite  " 
dcaignntea,  accoriling  to  Gcsonius,  "one 
from  the  hill  country,"  f.B.  the  hill-country 
of  Jurlah  01  Ephr,iim,  and  would  be  equiie- 
lent  with  UB  to  auch  a  description  as  "  the 
tnoiintaiiieer." 


either  in  tlio  Book  of  Samuel  or  her'.eicept 
by  implication  of  our  ver.  II,  where  we 
might  imagine  tl^e  scnae  to  be, "  Now  these 
are  the  nnmes  of  the  mighty  men,  in  number 
thirtu.  whom  David  liad,  viz.  Jaahobeam,  an 
Hachmonite.  IhecbiefofffteiftiXE,."  Nnrare 
wetoidin  either  place  who  were  the  "Ihree" 
hero  anokeii  of.  The  article  is  absent  in 
both  placea,  or  it  would  be  convenient  and 
natural  to  auppnae  that  the  three  iuBt  men- 
tioned are  thoae  intended,  which  cannot, 
Iiowever,betakenforgranled.  Thelangnage 
of  vers.  20—22,  25,  might  rather  inrtii-ata 
that  the  three  mentioned  in  those  versca  are 
those  in  qutatiun.  The  repeated  nnoertainty 
In  which  ve  are  left  on  matten  to  which  no 


intrinsla  dilBcuIlj  adherea  seems  evidenea  of 
injured  man uscripte  rather  than  of  anything 
elue.  To  the  roek  to  SaTld.  Thia  ia  tbo 
right  reading,  tit^IJ  nri-Sg;  and  that  in 
the  parallel  poaaagG  ("io  David  in  Oi»  harvat- 
time")  Is  not  correct, tlt"^  ")7p;^«.  Hie 
savs of  Adullam.  AdulIam,evident1japlBca 
of  great  antiquity  (Gen.  xxiiiiL  1, 12, 20),  is 
mentioned  in  Josh.  xii.  15;  iv.  35;  it  was 
ttie  seat  then  of  a  Canaanite  king.  It 
aflprwards  lay  in  Jadah,  in  that  lowland 
(called  often  the  Bhopbelah)  that  ran  from 
Joppn  to  Gaza,  near  the  Mediterranean  Sea. 
It  kept  name  and  fame  to  the  last  (2  ChrOD. 
li.  7;  Nch.  xi.  30>  The  •>  rock  "  marka  the 
limeatone  cliffs  of  the  region  (Stanley'! 
'  Sinai  and  Palestine,'  pp.  254—259,  edit 
186G).  We  read  of  it  aa  David'i  refuge  (1 
6am.  ixii.  1,  2).  From  our  present  passage 
and  ita  parallel  we  should  have  ooududed 
that  it  could  not  have  been  Ear  from  Bethle- 
hem. In  thia  sense  Dr.  ThomaonCTbe  Land 
and  the  Book,' pp.  60S,  607)  refers  to  the  tra- 
ditinn  that  fixes  the  cave  at  a  spot  now 
called  Khureilan,  between  Bethlehem  and 
the  Dead  Sea,  and  says,  "  Leaving  our  horaes 
in  charge  of  wild  Arabs,  and  taking  one  Arab 
for  a  guide,  we  atoited  for  the  cave,  having 
a  fearful  gorge  bolow,  gigantic  clifii  above, 
and  the  path  winding  along  a  shelf  of  the 
rook,  narrow  enough  to  make  the  nervoni 
among  us  shndder.  At  length  from  a  great 
rock,  banging  on  the  edge  of  this  shelf, 
we  apmug  by  a  long  leap  into  a  low  window, 
which  opened  into  the  perpendicular  fare  of 
the  cliff.  We  were  then  within  the  hold  of 
David,  and  creeping  half-doublod  through  a 
narrow  crevice  for  a  few  roda,  we  stood 
beneath  the  dark  vault  of  the  Brat  grand 
chamber  of  tbia  myeterioua  and  oppressive 
cavern.  Our  whole  collection  of  liglits  did 
little  more  than  moke  the  damp  daiknesa 
Tiaible.  After  groping  about  aa  long  aa  we 
bad  time  to  spare,  we  retum{.-d  to  tlie  tight 
ofda}^,  fnlly  oiinvineed  that,  with Davidand 
hia  lion-hearted  followers  inside,  all  the 
atrength  of  Israel  under  Baul  could  not  have 
forced  an  entrance,  and  wonld  not  even  have 
attempted  it."  The  hart,  For  thia  word 
"hoat"  (njriB)  the  parallel  (2  Sam.  x»iii 
13)  has  the  "life  of  the  Fhilistiues  "  (but 
tlie  Authorized  Veraion,  the  "troop  of")^ 
i.t.  the  bpoala  and  cattle  of  the  Philistine*. 
So  also  the  Syriao  Veraion  traoalntea.  Tha 
Beptuagint  shows  in  this  plooe  *apfn0o\^, 
andiuSamuelTdy^o.  ThayaUejofBephalm, 
The  situation  of  this  notable  valley  ia  not 
certain.  Yet  thera  can  be  little  doubt,  io 
spite  of  Fiirst  (>  Handwortbuch,'  ii,  SiS), 
who  supposes  a  situation  north-west  of 
Jerusalem,  that  it  must  be  near  Bethlehem, 
and  theri'fore  aonth-weat  of  the  city.  The 
<*ord  employed  here  fui  "valley"  (p^' 


OH.  XI.  1—47.]      THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  THE  CBBONICLES. 


"The  TKlley  of  Hmnom  vcatnard, 
vhieh  U  at  tbs  end  of  ths  yiMoj  of  the 
gisnU  Dorthward"  (Joah.  xv.  6;  zviii.  16; 
also  2  Sam.  t.  19;  oomp.  with  om  present 
pusRi^;  4iid  3  Sam.  v.  22  oomp.  vilh  ch. 
xiv.  9). 

Vei.  IS.-^taTU  wsa  than  In  th*  holA. 
This  itateroent  may,  peihapi,  snfBcieotly 
identify  this  oecation  with  that  of  2  Sam.  v. 
17, 16;  where  it  la  expressly  Mid  that  "David 
vent  down  to  the  hold"  (rnnp  being  the 
word  fimnd  thert  at  here),  OarTiaan.  The 
Hebrew  here  saya  "officer"  (3'SfX'"''  f" 
parallel  passage  has  "  gnrrlsoQ  "  (3^);  yet, 
Booirding  to  Oesenini  (' Thea.,'  003),  tha 
foTmsr  word  has  both  meanion.  He  ia 
rights  oertainlf,  if  he  Tneans  that  it  has 
received  both  traoslations,  fur  see  1  Kings 
It.  19  for  the  one,  and  onr  pretent  passage 
•applies  the  other  (1  Bam.  x.  9 ;  liiL  8). 

Ver.  17.— The  wsU  of  Bsthlahsm  ...  at 
th*  gate.  Ifothiag  else  is  known  of  this 
welL  No  trace  of  it  exists  now,  aooording 
to  Dr.  Eobinimn  <'  Bibl.  Eee,,'  I.  473).  The 
traditional  well  is  half  a  mile  distant,  to  the 
north  of  the  town,  and  conbists  of  a  group 
of  three  oistems,  while  the  present  town  is 
•npplied  with  water  by  an  aqneduoL 

Ver.  18.— David  .  .  .  poured  It  ont  to  the 
Lord.  This  was  dona  after  the  nature  of  a 
libattoti  (1  Bam.  viL  G;  Judg.  vL  20;  Eiod. 
ux.  9;  Oen,  XXXT.  11). 

Ver.  19.-1IJ  Ood  fOrUd  it  me.  Compare 
the  Hebrew  of  this  with  that  of  tlie  ex- 
pression in  the  parallel  (2  Sam.  xxiil  IT), 
where  rlvv  is  fonod  in  the  place  of  onr 
•tShd.  it  is  probable  that  the  preposition 
niefii  is  lost  from  before  ■*  JehoTah."  Shall 
I  drink  th*  blood,  eto.7  i.s.  the  water  which 
has  been  obtaioed  at  the  imminent  peril  of 
the  life  of  these  three  brave  men  (oomp. 
Gen.  Iv.  10,11;  ix.  4— 6;  John  vL  53,  51). 

Ver.  20.— AUshBi  .  .  .  vas  ohlaf  of  tha 
three.  It  is  Tcmarkahle  that  agnlu  tbe 
name  of  one  of  the  three  is  wanting,  even 
if  we  take  Benaiah  of  vet.  22  for  the  sueood. 

Ver.  21.— Than  the  two.  The  Hebrew 
<°^,^)  cannot  be  thus  translated,  but  poi- 
possibly  the  words  maj  mark  the  leeond  tet 
Of  three. 

Ver.  22.— Baaaiah.  His  father  Jeholnda 
ma  ch'ef  priest  (oh.  xiviL  5).  Benaiah 
was,  therefore,  a  Levite  by  tribe,  tliou;;)! 
Kabzeel  (Joah.  xv.  21)  was  in  Judah  for 
■oath.  He  was  "oaptalu  of  the  host  for 
the  third  month .  .  .  and  in  his  oonne  were 
twenty  aod  four  tbooiand"  (oh.  xiviL  f>). 
When  in  onr  ver.  25  it  Is  said  that  "  David 
set  himorer  his  gaaid,"tbeallnsion  probably 
is  to  Lis  uniform  and  prolonjred  eommand  of 
"the  Cherethitaa  and  Felethitea"  (2  Bam. 


Tiii.  18;ix.23;  1  EingsLSS;  oh.  x*ilLlT> 
His  fidelity  and  infloenoe  remained  into 
Solomon's  time  (1  Kings  i.  8,  10, 32,  38, 44; 
ii.  85 ;  iv.  4). 

Ver.  23.— Five  anbtti  U^  ThI*  height 
is  not  given  in  the  paiallol  passage:  it 
means  seven  feet  ail  inelMS.  A  ipear  like 
a  weavei'e  bean  (eo  1  Sam.  xtii  7 :  2  Sam. 

xxi.  19). 

Ver.  24.— The  nanu.    There  li  no  artici* 

in  tbe  Hebrew. 

Ver.  25, — Over  his  guard.  If  the  referenee 
Is  not  as  above  (see  ver.  22).  tbe  margin  of 
the  parallel  (2  Sam.  xiiii.  23)  may  be  fol' 
lowed,  which  would  translate  "guard"  at 
souneil.  Tills  Gesenius  adopts,  anil  tratv- 
lates  "privy  aooDcil."  There  seems,  bo«> 
ever,  no  ueeesiity  for  this,  witb  the  referenoM 
before  ns  above  given  (2  Sam.  viii.  18,  eta., 
to  which  may  be  added  ch.  sxf  iu  8,  whioh 
•hows  Benaiah  to  be  oaptain  of  the  third 
division). 

Vera.  2S— 41.— These  Tern*  conetpond 
with  vers.  24—89  io  2  Sam.  iiiil.,  and  witb 
tiiem  the  subject  ends  there,  though  not  here. 
Tbe  list  annouQoed  here  as  oomprisiug"th* 
valiant  men  of  tlie  armies,"  is  unannounced 
there,  bat,  beginuiog  with  the  same  namsu 
Asatael,  it  oalls  him  "one  ot  the  thirty,"  and 
suggests  the  inference  ttiat  tho«e  who  follow 
will  make  up  tbe  rest  Tbe  number  that  fol- 
lows (ooincidinj;  in  this  respect  strictly  witii 
our  list  here)  Is  itself  thirty,  which,  thongh 
one  too  many,  may  be  considered  satisbo- 
torilyaccoantedfoiinthefactoftheuDtimel; 
deuth  of  Asahel,  already  recorded  <2  Sam. 
ii.  23).  Considering  lbs  exaot  crisis  at  which 
bedied,itis  very  likely  that  hii  place  should 
be  compensated  for,aKliongh  his  name  were 
unremDveil  from  the  honourable  list.  Amid 
the  difficulties  tliat  develop  themselves  In 
the  eontrnU  of  tlieie  lists,  when  eompared.ths 
comparison  of  tbem  oi'is  tbe  conviotion  that. 
so  far  as  tlio;  go  together,  they  do  ttand 
for  "  tbe  thirty  "  spoken  of  in  both  plaoea, 
and  that  a  sentence  or  two  here  and  there, 
now  lost  ot  oorrupted  beyond  recjgnition, 
would  olcar  up  the  whole  Bnbje>:L  The 
onmparison  also  seems  to  make  it  clear  that 
the  oompilei  of  Chronlolea,  meaning  to  go 
beyond  an  enumerallon  of  tts  thirty,  no- 
where spniks  of  thirtv  after  ver.  25.  On 
the  other  band,  the  writer  of  the  aocount  la 
Samuel  oarefuliy  sum*  ap  all  (ver.  39)  in 
the  words,  '•thirty  and  taetn  in  oU"- an 
addition  which  means  either  tbe  actual 
thirty-one  given  and  tbe  two  sets  of  three 
each ;  or  tlie  thirty,  with  tho  two  sets  of 
three  eaoh  and  Joab  over  all.  Our  present 
ctiapter,  however,  goes  on  to  thn  number 
forty-eight  in  all,  vers.  *1— 47,  adding  six- 
teen  to  the  thirty-two  which  precede.  Ikeida 
some  minor  diQctoucea,  it  must  be  said  that 
at  fewest  three  namRs,  Jlsjtbsr,  Ahijah,  and 


148 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,      [ch.  xl  1—47. 


Mibhar,  in  Chronicles,  resist  identification 
with  those  that  should  (from  position)  oor- 
respond  with  them  in  the  list  ot  Samuel  and 
witn  any  others.  And  the  same  thing  may 
be  said  of  the  same  number  in  the  ILit  of 
Samuel  (Elika^  Eliam,  Bant)  when  compared 
with  the  list  now  before  us.  The  points  of 
contact  and  clearest  identification  are,  there- 
fore, in  so  g^eat  a  majority  and  are  so  uni- 
formly distributed  that,  although  it  is  left 
hsrd  to  decide  the  causes  of  them,  these 
dilTerences  cannot  throw  any  discredit  upon 
the  list   as  a  whole.     Perhaps  the  most 

Sobable  suggestion  to  be  offered  is  that 
e  knowledge  of  the  writer  of  the  Book  of 
fiMnuel  enabled  him  to  supersede  the  names 
^  inch  as  were  soon  lost  to  their  brave 
oareer  by  death  by  other  names;  or,  resting 
on  the  same  fundamental  reason,  there  may 
haye  been  two  different  editiom  of  the  list, 
to  one  of  which  the  writer  of  Samuel  was 
indebted,  and  to  the  other  the  compiler  of 
Chronicles. 

Ver.  27. — Haroiite.  The  parallel  passage 
has  Haroditet  the  local  identification  of 
Bhammoth,  as  from  Harod,  known  for  its 
spring  (Judg.  vii.  1),  by  which  Gideon  en- 
camped, where  also  the  army  was  tested  by 
its  mode  of  drinking.  Some  think  it  the 
same  with  the  fountain  of  Jezreel  (1  Sam. 
^ix.  1).  Izrahite  seems  to  have  been  the 
family  distinction  of  Bhammoth  (ch.  xxvii 
8),  from  Zerah  son  of  Judah.  He  is  the 
fifth  captain.  In  the  parallel  his  name  is 
foUowea  by  Elika,  who  is  also  called  **  the 
Harodite.*'  Heles  the  Felonite.  Though  the 
parallel  place  has  Paltite,  the  present  form 
probably  should  hold  its  own.  Helez  is  the 
seventh  captain  of  division,  and  said  to 
belong  to  the  "  sons  of  Ephraim "  (see  ch. 
xxviL  10,  and  Septuagint  in  all  three 
passages). 

Yer.  29.— Sibbeeai:  HaL  Both  of  these 
names  are  conceivably  reconcilable  with 
the  M^bunnai  and  ZaXmon  of  the  parallel 
place,  through  the  very  possible  misUike 
and  substitution  of  one  Hebrew  character 
for  another.  Sibbecai  was  the  eighth  cap- 
tain ;  he  was  of  the  family  of  Zerah|  and 
of  the  town  of  Hushah  (ch.  iv.  4). 

Yer.  84. — ^The  sons  of  Hsshem  tiie  Giionite. 
This  sentence  is  unmanageable  as  it  stands, 
and  is  insufficiently  assisted  from  its 
parallel.  But  if  from  this  latter  we  take 
the  suggestion  of  the  preposition  **  from  *' 
(Authorized  Yersion)  oefore  **the  sons" 
(which,  however,  is  not  in  the  HebrewX 
and  from  the  Alexandrian  Septuagint,  the 
suggestion  of  the  name  Gouni  («jM),  Gtini, 
(ch.  ▼.  15)  in  the  place  of  OizoniU  Citi\ 
we  should  obtain  a  coherent  reading.  But 
this  would  be  mere  conjecture  suggested 
by  the  Septuagint,  and  "the  Gizonite" 
offers  the  difficulty   of  the  presence  of 


the  article,  which  would  not  subsist  with 
the  proper  name  Guni.  Were  it  not  that 
the  word  ^  is  found  in  both  passages  ail 
difficulty  would  disappear  with  its  disap* 
pearanoe.  The  remainder  of  this  verse,  in 
relation  to  vers.  82  and  33  of  the  parallel, 
illustrates  opportunely  the  uncertainties  of 
the  text  For,  as  seen  above,  Jonathan 
is  the  grandson  of  Shage  (Agee,  2  Sam. 
zxiiL  11),  and  son  of  Shammah,  while  (2 
Chron.  xxiiL  32,  83)  the  parallel  reads 
**  Jonathan,"  with  no  connective  word 
''son*'  at  all,  yet  supplies  the  right  name, 
**  Shammah  the  Hararite"  for  the  &ther, 
and  omits  all  mention  of  Shage. 

Yer.  85. — Saoar  .  .  .  Eliphal  .  .  •  ITr. 
For  these  three  names  the  parallel  ^ows 
Sltaratf  ElipheUt^  and  Ahoibai  respectively. 

Ver.  86.— Hspher  the  Xecherathite. 
Although  this  name  is  not  found  in  the 
parallel  passage,  it  is  tolerably  plain  that 
the  niche  for  it  is  left  before  the  words 
(ver.  84),  ''the  son  of  the  Maachathite,** 
which  last  word  answers  to  our  Mecbera- 
thite.  Ahyah  the  Felonite.  This  name 
cannot  be  identified  with  the  '*£liam  the 
son  of  Ahithophel  the  GUonite,"  which 
answers  to  it  in  the  parallel. 

Yer.  37. — Hesro  appears  as  Hetrai  in 
Samuel.  (For  Carmel,  which  lay  south  of 
Hebron,  see  Josh.  zv.  55.)  Kaani  the  son 
of  EsbaL  The  differences  between  these 
words  and  those  of  the  parallel  (ver.  85), 
*'  Paarai  the  Arbitc,"  or  Arab  (Jush.  xv. 
52),  are  not  formidable  to  reconcile. 

Ver.  38.— Joel.  This  name  is  also  easily 
to  be  reconciled  with  the  Igal  of  the  panillel 
passage  (ver.  3C),  though  there  is  nothing 
to  evidence  which  should  stand.  Mibhar 
the  son  of  Haggeil  For  this  we  have  in 
the  parallel  place  (ver.  36)  the  names 
'*  Bani  the  Gadite  ;  "  but  before  these  comes 
the  last  word  of  the  previous  clause,  "of 
Zobah."  When  these  three  words  are  com- 
pared with  the  three  of  our  present  passage, 
it  is  very  possible  to  bring  them  into  har- 
mony (*  Speaker's  Commentary,'  in  loe.). 
Zobah  was  a  district  of  Syria  in  the  time 
of  Israel's  first  three  kings,  stretching 
north-east  and  east  towards  the  Euphxates  * 
(1  Sam.  xiv.  47 ;  2  Sam.  viii.  7). 

Yer.  89. — Zelek  the  Ammonite,  •  •  •  the 
Berothite.  Among  David's  great  men  were 
evidently  numbered  some  foreigners,  whose 
admiration  and  fidelity  he  must  have  won. 
Hence  the  mention  (ver.  88)  of  Zobahj  and 
here  of  the  Ammonite  (2  Sam.  viii.  12; 
zii.  26 — 31),  the  Beerothite  (Beeroth,  origin- 
ally a  Hivite  city,  Josh.  ix.  17,  fell  to  tho 
lot  of  Benjamin,  Josh.  zviiL  25;  to  it 
belonging  Bimmon  and  his  two  sons,  Bechab 
and  Baanah,  possibly  native  Canaanites,  the 
murderers  of  Ishbosheth,  as  aboveX  and  (ver. 
41)  the  Hittite.    The  armour-bearer.     To 


CH.  XL  1—47.]        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


149 


be  made  armour-bearer  was  a  sign  of  honour 
and  attachmeDt  (1  Sam.  xvL  21;  2  Sam. 
xviii.  15). 

Ver.  40.— The  Ithrite.  One  of  the  families 
of  K  irjatb-jear im  (ch.  ii.  53).  Other  simi lar 
colonists  from  Kirjath-jearim,  and  descended 
from  Shobal,  were  the  Puthite,  the  Shuma- 
thite,  and  the  Izrahite.  With  this  verse 
we  count  up,  including  the  dropped-out 
Elika,  the  names  of  **  thirty  mighty  men." 
And  we  may  understand  Samuel's  thirty- 
ieven  to  consist  of  these,  increased  by 
Uriah  and  the  tioo  partiei  of  three  each. 

Ver.  41 — 47.— These  verses  are  assisted 
by  no  parallel,  either  in  the  Book  of  Samuel 
or  elsewhere.  Of  the  sixteen  names  which 
they  contain,  not  a  few  are  to  be  found  else- 
where, yet  not  as  designating  the  same 
persons.  Also,  while  the  Beubenite  and  the 
Gentile  nouns  Athterathite  and  Aroerite  are 
at  once  recognized,  the  Mithnite,  Tizite^ 
MahaviUf  and  Mewbaite  are  not  traceable 
elsewhere,  the  plural  form  of  the  last  but 
one  being  an  additional  source  of  obscurity. 

Ver.  42.— Thirty  with  him.    The  Hebrew 


preposition  here  translated  **  with  "  appears 
thus,  y^V^\3  And  will  naturally  translate 
**and  in  addition  to  him."  As  he  was  a 
captain,  this  addendum  may  probably  refer 
to  those  over  whom  he  was  captain,  and 
whom  he  brought  in  his  train,  and  who 
were  possibly  themselves  officers.  As  the 
writer  of  Chronicles  indicates  no  differenodi 
nor  any  sense  of  a  change  of  persons  enume- 
rated, when  he  has  reached  (ver.  41^  Uriah 
the  Hittite,  it  would  all  the  rather  oe  con- 
sistent with  his  own  superscription  when 
(rcr.  26)  he  proposes  to  set  forth  simply 
*'  the  valiant  men  of  the  armies "  without 
confining  their  number  to  the  **  thirty." 

Ver.  44.— The  Ashterathite.  Asiitexoth 
was  in  East  Manasseh  (ch.  vi.  71).  Th« 
Aroerite.  Aroer  lay  east  of  the  Jordaa 
(Josh,  xiiu  16,  25). 

Ver.  46.— The  Xahavite.  It  has  been 
suggested  that  this  word  may  stand  for 
Mahanite,  from  Mahanaim. 

Ver.  47.— The  Xesobaite.  This  name  !i 
entirely  unknown,  unless  it  may  be  the 
same  as  Mezobah, 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  2. — The  vicar iotu  aspects  of  human  life  twofold — toward  man  and  towcard 
Ood.  In  this  verse  two  leading  and  very  important  phases  of  human  life  are  brought 
to  our  remembrance.  They  may  seem  of  unequal  importance,  the  second  bemff 
of  higher  character  than  the  first.  Tet,  perhaps,  they  are  more  closely  connected  and 
even  interwoven  with  one  another  than  first  thoughts  might  suppose.  And  so  far- 
reaching  and  widespread  are  the  issues  of  both,  that  it  is  needless  to  insist  on  much 
comparison  between  them  to  the  prejudice  of  the  former.  The  lesson,  also,  of  both  of 
them,  charged  though  it  is  with  serious  responsibility,  is,  on  the  whole,  of  a  cheerful, 
elevating  kind.  We  might  do  well  to  separate  them  sometimes  in  our  private  medita- 
tion, simply  in  order  to  fix  a  more  specific  attention  upon  each.  But  it  is  not  without 
valuable  suggestion  that  they  stand  together  here^  nor  shall  they  be  divorced  in  the 
present  consideration  of  them.    They  remind  us— 

L  Of  the  YioARions  principle  that  ektebs  so  labqelt  nrro  huxak  life,  peb- 

YADINO  IT,  ALMOST  LEAVENING  IT,  IN  UEN's  MUTUAL  RELATIONS.      In  the  illustration  of 

it  now  before  us,  it  shows  itself  in  the  shape  and  the  fact  of  one  enjoying  royal  name 
and  place,  wealth  and  ease  and  dignity,  while  anotJier  incurs  the  risk  and  does  the 
work — ^without  pay— of  that  place.  The  life  that  was  lived  as  between  Saul  and 
David  would  no  doubt  produce  many  instances  and  forms  of  this,  but  the  one  men«» 
tioned  in  this  verse,  and  mentioned  as  it  would  appear  by  many  consentient  voices  at 
the  same  time,  is  enough  to  tell  the  tale.  Those  instances  commenced  from  the  time 
that  David  challenged,  defied,  and  successfully  overcame  Goliath,  the  Philistine 
champion.  But  as  time  went  on,  they  became  systematized  and  almost  the  rule, 
rather  than  merely  matter  of  frequent  occurrence.  The  general  fact  is  patent.  It 
grows  in  the  structure,  it  runs  throughout  and  across  the  texture  of  human  life  and 
society.  It  is  a  phenomenon^  often  merely  as  such  inviting,  often  provoking,  the 
deep  thoughtful  study  of  those  who  are  but  onlookers  at  any  time.  But  again,  it  is 
as  a  personal  keen  experience  that  it  most  commonly  opens  the  eyes  and  wakens  the 
aching  inquiry  of  those  who  have  first  suffered  many  a  pang  and  rasping  mortification. 
The  real  inventor  is  often  a  very  different  man  from  the  nominal  one,  the  real  work- 
man another  than  he  who  carries  off  the  praise.  The  hand  of  one  takes  the  gain  of 
what  was  wrought  by  the  brain  of  another;  and  the  smile  of  one  has  for  its 
correlative  the  bleeding  heart  of  another.    The  temples  of  the  fortune  and  wealth 


150  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa      [ch.  xi.  1— 47. 

and  Kplendour  of  the  very  few  are  built  on  the  excessive  toil  and  wrecked  health  of 
vast  numbere.  And  even  Id  the  natural  order  of  things,  the  fame  of  the  great  rests  on 
the  substructure  of  millions  of  lives  of  the  humble  obscure,  whose  industry,  honesty, 
endurance,  are  the  staple  and  the  strength  of  the  whole  community,  and  whose  head 
and  heart  are  often  of  the  most  superior.  The  edifice  that  towers  the  highest,  in  fact, 
must  rest  on  the  broadest  base.  These  considerations  may  guide  us  to  the  following 
conclusions  upon  the  general  subject,  suggested  by  the  particular  instance  so  naively 
expressed  now  before  us: — 1.  1'here  is,  beyond  doubt,  a  vast  amount  of  gratuitous, 
unjust,  cruel,  vicarious  suffering  in  the  world,  and  found  in  men's  mutual  relations. 
2.  There  is  also,  beyond  doubt,  a  vast  amount  of  vicarious  joy  and  advantage.  The 
striving,  the  toil,  the  genius,  the  self-sacrifice  of  one  often  serve,  not  the  private  selfish 
advantage  of  some  <me  other,  but  to  a  most  beneficent  degree  they  serve  the  advantage 
and  help  the  joy  of  very  many  others.  8.  Whether  it  be  in  the  matter  of  suffering  or  of 
advantage  and  joy,  this  presence  is  by  no  means  all  due  to  the  action,  and  mournful 
action,  of  human  selfishness,  error,  greed.  There  is  Divine  design  in  it.  Divine  use  for 
it.  It  is  one  of  the  strongest  of  the  cohesive  forces  that  contribute  to  hold  together 
the  conglomerate  mass  and  yet  very  various  fellowship  of  humanity.  'J'he  entangle" 
ment  that  results  from  this  unequal  sysfem  of  exchange  and  substitution  (the  particular 
instances  of  which  are  so  intricate,  often  so  inscrutable,  apparently  untoward)  consti- 
tutes probably  one  of  the  most  ubiquitous  and  unresting  of  the  mutual  attachments 
and  attractions  of  human  society.  4.  Even  within  the  experience  of  the  very  indi- 
vidual at  whose  expense  awhile  the  vicariousnesa  seems  to  take  effect,  there  are  not 
unfrequently  large  redeeming  and  compensating  considerations.  As  for  instance  here : 
(1)  David  had  the  opportunity  given  to  him  of  learning^  learning  well,  the  profession 
of  a  king,  learning  it  practically,  "  even  when  Saul  wcu  king  "  in  reality.  If  ho  were 
doing  work  and  encountering  risk,  which  formally  did  not  belong  to  him,  he  was 
deriving  untold  advantages  and  the  facilities  of  experience.  (2^  He  was  being  divinely 
permitted  to  mark  himself  out  for  the  dignity  when  it  shoula  become  vacant,  in  the 
eyes  of  all  those  with  whom,  ere  long,  the  decision  and  gift  of  it  would,  under  God, 
rest.  How  many  men,  in  how  many  directions,  would  value  just  the  corresponding 
opportunity  above  all  things  1  How  much  would  it  be  worth  to  one!  (3)  Even  during 
learning,  education,  and  possibly  much  suffering,  David  was  evidently,  to  the  eye  that 
could  see  deepest,  to  the  heart  that  should  beat  truest,  receiving  the  decoration  of  real 
honour.  To  a  great  mind,  to  a  pure  heart,  it  is  sometimes  the  highest  investment  of 
honour  which  could  be  conferred,  to  be  the  one  divinely  selected  to  do  the  work,  while 
others  take  the  pay.  This  is  not  of  man,  nor  by  man,  but  God's  own  chosen  children 
recognize  and  value  above  everything  else  what  are  also  his  chosen  methods  of  reward. 

II.  Of  the  vicarious   PRIKCIPLE  that  enters  so   liAROELT  INTO  HUMAN  LIFE,  IN 

ITS  MOST  DIRECT  DiviNE  RELATIONS.  The  latter  part  of  the  verse  before  us  is  of  the 
highest  and  most  precious  significance  to  every  Christian  man,  and  certainly  not  least 
80  to  the  Christian  pastor  and  minister.  "  The  Lord  thy  God  said  unto  thee,  Thou 
shalt  feed  my  people  Israel,  and  thou  shalt  be  ruler  over  my  people  Israel."  Every 
servant  of  God  from  the  firet  was  set  to  be  a  witness  of  God  and  a  witness  for  God,  by 
word  and  deed  before  the  world.  And  every  Christian  is  called  to  be  a  witness  of  Jesus 
Christ  and  his  truth,  and  a  witness  for  these  before  the  world,  in  all  he  says  and  does. 
We  object  to  such  an  appellation  as  "  vicar  of  Christ,"  or  "  viceroy "  of  Christ,  on 
behalf  of  the  pope  or  of  any  other  one  man  exclusively  of  others.  But  the  description 
of  the  latter  part  of  this  verse  applies  accurately  to  all  the  pastors — the  under-shephords 
of  Christ's  fold  and  flocks — and  by  inference,  in  their  measure  and  degree,  to  all  his 
people  whomsoever.  All  of  these  have  something  to  say,  have  much  to  do,  "  in  the 
stead  of  Christ."  Nor  should  they  repine  when  they  may  be  called  to  bear  and  suffer 
in  the  Name  and  for  the  sake  of  Christ.  The  fact  before  us  is  just  simply  this,  that 
David  was  entrusted  by  God  and  on  behalf  of  God  with  a  great  work,  which  was  and 
could  be  only  the  work  of  God  himself  in  the  last  resort  The  people  are  emphatically 
his;  none  could  provide  the  food  but  he  (Ps.  xxiii.  1);  none  could  find  the  wisdom  to 
rule,  "the  wisdom  profitable  to  direct,"  the  gift  to  "rule"  but  he.  And  he  said, 
nevertheless,  "Thou  shalt  feed  .  .  .  thou  shalt  be  ruler  over  my  people  Israel."  Out  of 
the  one  simple  but  great  fact  before  us  we  may  select  some  special  phases  of  it.  1.  It 
is  a  very  elevating  reality  of  human  life  and  work  that  it  is  not  altogether  shut  off  to 


CH.  XI.  1—47.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  161 


a  drnclgeiy  pecnliar  to  itself,  but  that  it  is  dignified  by  being  called  to  similar  work 
with  that  of  Christ.  The  power,  the  wisdom,  the  love,  the  very  thought  of  that  work 
must  first  come  from  heavenly  source,  and  be  sustained  by  streams  from  the  heavenly 
source;  but  then  these  should  often  betray  their  heavenly  origin,  and  the  human  worker 
flash  out  tokens  of  the  indwelling  of  Divine  principle,  gift,  grace.  It  had  been  quite 
possible  to  suppose  a  hard-and-fast  line  drawn  between  the  humblest  of  the  Divine 
work  amid  men  and  the  very  highest  of  the  human.  But  it  is  not  so.  It  is  far 
otherwise.  And  so  soon  as  ever  the  clear  pattern  was  shown  on  earth  by  Jesus  him- 
self, of  what  was  to  be  and  to  be  done,  not  a  very  few  and  a  very  picked  band,  but 
every  one  of  his  wide  Church,  was  called  to  do  similar  work — yes,  to  do  it  and  to  bear 
the  burden  of  it,  and  that  not  with  eye-service  as  to  men,  but  "  as  the  servants  of 
Christ,"  2.  It  is  a  very  elevating  and  encouraging  fact  in  the  renewed  life  of 
humanity  that  with  such  solemn  responsibility  attaching  to  it  in  work  to  be  done,  no 
less  than  Godlike  in  character,  no  less  than  Christ-like  in  execution,  it  is  work  noi 
severed  from  Divine  co-operation.  Let  us  call  it  vicarious.  Let  us  the  rather  prize  it 
as  such,  and  "  love  to  have  it  so."  Yet  is  it  not  the  cold  vicariousness  of  so  large  a 
proportion  of  our  earthly  labour — unwarmed  by  the  presence,  by  the  help,  by  the 
smile,  by  the  reward  of  at  least  acknowledgment  at  the  hands  of  those  for  whom  we 
both  do  and  bear  much.  No,  indeed.  It  is  work  of  co-operation^  where  in  those 
co-operating  extremes  meet — the  weakness,  the  poverty,  the  ignorance,  the  finiteness 
of  us  men,  with  the  omnipotence,  the  wealth,  the  knowledge,  and  the  infiniteness  of 
Gbd  the  Father ;  of  Christ,  the  Shepherd  of  the  sheep ;  of  the  Spirit  of  all  grace  and 
lisht.  None  work  for  God  but  his  Spirit  is  with  them.  None  work  for  Jesus  but 
"lo,  he  is  present  in  the  midst"  of  their  smallest  group.  Therefore  it  is  plain  that 
God  does  not  so  honour  us  as  simply  to  devolve  his  work  in  Christ  upon  us,  but  rather 
to  involve  us  in  his  doing,  and  lift  us  up  into  his  sphere  of  work.  The  co-operating  of 
Christ  by  his  Spirit  with  his  servants,  when  their  work  and  their  suffering  shall  seem 
most  vicarious,  is  therefore  a  grand  and  most  noteworthy  fact  as  compared  with  our 
labour-relations  and  our  suffering-relations,  as  fellow-creatures,  to  one  another.  3.  Over 
and  above  all  other  elevating  and  cheering  thoughts  suggested  by  this  fact  of  God's 
calling  us  to  work /or  him,  and  yet  uniting  himself  with  us  therein,  there  remains , 
soch  a  one  as  this.  It  is  a  token  of  a  certain  harmony  of  plan  and  thought  between 
human  society  and  the  perfection  of  that  above.  It  is  some  "  shadow  of  things  to 
come."  It  is  some  foreshadowing  of  Divine  goodness.  The  condescension  and  the 
grace  are  some  indications  of  what  shall  be.  They  are  not  mere  fictitious,  tempting^ 
beguiling  persuasions  of  the  wav,  for  the  "  pilgrims  of  the  night ; "  but  they  are 
rather  snatches  and  earnests  of  the  temper  prevailing  in  the  "  city  yet  to  come."  It 
is  a  large  and  far  from  ignoble  principle,  the  vicarious  principle — cost  what  it  may  of 
smart,  occasionally  or  systematically,  among  ourselves.  But  it  is  an  indefinite  exten- 
sion, an  immense  expansion,  it  is  a  very  glorification  of  the  principle,  when  Christ 
enters  on  a  similar  footing  and  makes  the  circle  henceforth  a  sacred  circle.  After 
doing  and  suffering  all  which  he  has  done,  "even  unto  death,"  for  his  people,  he 
not  simply  hallows  by  his  own  example  the  summons  to  us  to  work  and  to  suffer  for 
our  fellow-creatures  and  for  him,  but  also  favours  therein  the  thou<;ht,  in  its  very 
highest  development,  of  our  being  "one  with  him,  even  as  he  is  one  with  "  the  eternal 
Father.  In  a  word,  to  work  or  to  suffer  in  the  stead  of  Christ  is  some  earnest  of  enter- 
ing in  due  time  the  society  of  which  he  is  the  Head. 

Vers.  3—10. — The  throne  of  justice  and  security.  These  verses  are  morally  and 
essentially  connected  with  one  another.  They  speak  of  one  thing — the  "  making  of 
David  king."    And  we  may  notice  in  them — 

I.  The  form  that  represented  this.  The  most  ancient  Scriptures  enrich  us  with 
the  knowledge  of  the  very  earliest  customs  of  men.  Many  of  these  may  be  obsolete. 
But  two  things  are  remarkable  respecting  them,  viz.  (1)  how  some  of  them  remain, 
and  with  but  slightly  altered  dress ;  (2)  how  those  that  do  not  remain  often  embodied 
some  principle  to  which  all  growth  of  time  has  shown  a  growing  importance  to 
belong.  These  earliest  customs  of  men,  recorded  in  Scripture,  seem,  further,  not  only 
to  have  embodied  certain  principles,  but  passed,  as  they  often  were,  beneath  the  eye  of 
God,  we  miy  feel  that  they  did  something  more — they  enshrined  with  a  real  sacrednesi 


152  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  xl  1— 47. 

and  invested  with  a  special  honour  the  principle  that  was  to  last  and  to  gain  in  signifi- 
cance when  the  outer  shell  of  custom  or  form  was  withered  to  nothing.  The  ceremony 
which  set  forth  the  making  of  a  king  of  Israel  was  that  of  anointing.  This  was  the 
third  time  David  had  been  anointed.  But  these  successive  acts  of  anointing  were  not 
vain  repetitions.  The  first  was  his  private  anointing,  by  Samuel,  according  to  God's 
word  and  according  to  God's  private  call  (1  Sam.  xvi.  1, 12,  13).  The  second  was 
when  David  became  king  over  Judah,  and  when  the  call  and  the  willing  consent  of 
his  fellow-men,  and  of  those  up  to  this  time  his  fellow-citizens,  were  aSded  to  the 
Divine  appointment  (2  Sam.  ii.  4).  And  the  third  was  on  the  occasion  before  us,  when 
the  heads  of  the  whole  people,  with  hearty  unanimity,  added  the  sanction  of  their 
presence  and  consent.  Now,  therefore,  the  anointing  was  finally  performed.  It  was  a 
ceremony,  but  not  one  destitute  of  meaning  and  of  usefulness.  It  marked  David  to 
the  eyes  of  all  the  nation  as  their  "  feeder  and  ruler,"  appointed  of  God,  accepted  of 
themselves.  And  it  reminded  himself  of  the  solemn  responsibility  laid  upon  nim  to 
fulfil  his  duty  to  men  as  under  the  commands  of  God. 

II.  The  condition  precedent  to  it.  "David  made  a  covenant  with  them  . . .  before 
the  Lord."  Beyond  doubt,  the  choice  and  the  call  and  the  ordination  of  David  were 
idl  of  God.  Beyond  doubt,  nothing  could  be  safer  or  better  for  all  the  people  than  to 
accept  his  deed  and  appointment  unquestioningly.  But  there  are  ever  an  earthly 
order  and  a  visible  sign  of  same  kind  for  us  men,  answering  to  the  Divine  will.  These 
God  does  not  only  permit,  but,  as  we  believe,  he  enjoins  them.  It  is  another  indication 
of  the  fact  that  God  would  ever  be  lifting  our  level  nearer  his  own.  The  exact  matter 
of  the  covenant  is  not  here  given  us,  nor  in  fact  in  any  of  the  parallel  places.  Yet 
with  very  little  hesitation  we  may  say  that  we  hear  the  echoes  of  it  from  the  death- 
bed of  Ihivid  (2  Sam.  xxiiL  2 — ^5).  It  consisted  of  a  solemn  mutual  engagement — he 
"  to  rule  just,  ruling  in  the  fear  of  God ; "  they  to  follow  and  obey.  God's  covenants 
with  man  at  any  and  every  time  are  of  the  nature  of  free  promises  of  mercy  and  grace, 
but  of  what  in  their  very  nature  require  the  loving  acceptance  and  use  of  them  to 
impart  availingness  to  them  and  to  keep  them  availing,  and  this  is  the  only  kind  of 
condition  attaching  to  them — no  meritorious  condition.  But  in  the  fact  of  this 
covenant  being  made,  and  in  the  fact  of  its  being  so  explicitly  recorded,  we  have  an 
evidence  of  God's  condescending  attention  to  onr  mutual  relations.  Though  he  it  is 
who  with  sovereign  right  elects  and  with  the  right  of  a  sovereign  voice  ccUls  one  and 
another  to  pre-eminent  place  and  authority  over  us,  yet  he  bids  us  see  and  watch  the 
thing  that  is  transpiring,  and  insist  upon  the  right  and  just  beins;  done,  and  he  submits 
his  own  choice  to  the  verdict  of  the  conscience  of  his  people.  We  have  a  great 
ecclesiastical  principle,  in  embryo,  as  we  might  suppose,  an  instance  of  God's  royal 
congi  d'ilire,  entrusted  to  the  elders  of  all  Israel,  and  not  formally  put  into  efiect  by 
these  until  his  own  chosen  one  has  entered  into  a  covenant  with  them. 

III.  The  moral  supports  necessary  to  this  kiko-makino.  Remarkable,  and  in 
some  respects  even  unique,  as  was  the  raising  of  David  to  be  king,  in  this  final  appoint-^ 
ment  and  anointing  of  him,  yet  it  follows  the  lines  of  any  other  high  appointment  to 
command  of  one  man  amongst  his  fellow-men.  He  is  not  really  and  for  ever  to  be 
hedged  in  as  a  divinity,  nor  of  divinity,  except  as  this  highest  power  works  by  human 
agency.  The  higher  such  a  position  is,  the  more  necessary  is  it  that  it  be  not  arti- 
ficially dissevered  from  the  aid,  the  approval,  the  moral  influence  of  others.  The 
exalted  individual's  temptation  to  forget  this,  and  even  to  override  it,  has  very  often 
been  unceremoniously  enough  called  to  account  and  fiercely  rebuked.  The  hierarchy 
that  obtains  in  human  society,  in  the  human  family,  may  be  accepted  as  an  incon- 
testible  fact,  and,  therefore  so  far  forth  as  authorized  of  nature.  But  neither  ought 
this  to  be  strained  or  exaggerated.  Much  less  are  we  to  create,  favour,  or  permit 
violent  gaps  between  rank  and  rank,  class  and  class.  The  most  insensible  gradations 
from  rank  to  rank  and  class  to  class  make  the  strongest,  safest  society.  History  proves, 
by  instances  almost  innumerable,  that  to  disbelieve  and  affront  this  principle  is  disaster, 
but  to  set  it  at  nought  and  defy  it  is  to  court  destruction,  and  that  without  remedy. 
We  must  not  overlook  the  significance  of  the  expression  that  "  the  chief  of  the 
mighty  men  whom  David  had  "  neither  held  themselves  aloof  from  him  nor  were  held 
at  a  distance  by  him  in  his  new  greatness.  They  stood  near  the  throne.  They  helped 
to  uphold  its  dignity  and  the  authority  of  him  who  sat  upon  it.    There  is  really  no 


CH.  XL  1—47.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  153 

Buch  thing  as  actual  irresponsibility  between  man  and  man.  None  is  so  strong  as  to 
be  able  to  boast  himself  independent  of  the  help,  the  love,  the  good  opinion  of  his 
fellow-men.  Conscience  only  can  claim  for  itself  the  prerogative  of  freedom  to  do  and 
speak  as  though  irresponsible  to  man,  but  even  these  noblest  displays  of  human 
power  and  virtue  do  not  practically  deliver  from  the  consequences  and  tne  patent  fact 
of  responsibility;  while  in  all  inferior  attempts  the  power  is  weakness,  and  the 
travestie  of  the  virtue  is  the  licence  of  vice.  But  no,  David's  mighty  men  strenuously 
held  by  him,  and  they  were  in  turn  seconded  by  the  entire  of  an  enthusiastic  and 
faithful  people.  Their  one  combined  aim  was  to  put  stability  into  hit  kingdom  and 
to  make  him  a  strong  and  prosperous  king.  And  it  was  all  "  according  to  the  word  of 
the  Lord  concemin;;  Israel."  Happy  king !  happy  people  I  David  had  not  to  pay  the 
very  common  penalty  of  exaltedness  and  empire.  The  people  were  a  willing  people  in 
the  day  of  his  power.  Would  that  it  may  last,  last  to  the  end— must  have  been  the 
ardent  wish  of  every  patriot  that  day — the  humble  prayer  of  every  earnest,  spiritual 
Israelite  1 

Vers.  15 — 19. — The  bravery  of  David's  three  mighty  men,  and  the  better  bravery  of 
himself.  The  graphic  narrative  of  these  verses  needs  no  interpretation  in  the  sense 
of  either  criticism  or  explanation.  It  offers  itself,  as  it  were,  exclusively  to  the  use  of 
instruction,  and  to  the  illustration  of  the  possibilities  of  human  character.  In  doing  so, 
it  brings  to  view  something  of  the  weakness,  much  of  the  strength,  and  not  least  what 
is  of  the  Divine  in  that  character.  Lessons  manifestly  present  themselves  from  the 
consideration  of  the  conduct  of  the  three  brave  warriors  in  the  first  instance,  and  then 
of  that  of  David  by  himself.    Let  us  notice — 

I.  The  conduct  of  the  thbee  wabbiobs.  1.  Their  courage.  It  was,  perhaps,  the 
least  part  of  their  excellence  at  this  time.  They  were  trained  to  deeds  of  dash  and 
daring.  They  took  pride  in  these.  They  were,  by  natural  constitution  and  tempera- 
ment, and  now  by  some  training  and  practice,  predisposed  to  them.  Their  courage, 
therefore,  must  be  somewhat  the  less  reckoned  to  their  praise,  as  containing  but  small 
measure  of  effort  of  any  moral  element.  Possibly  we  ought  even  to  deduct  some  litile 
from  it,  as  laying  itself  open  in  a  degree  to  the  charge  of  recklessness,  on  an  occasion 
which  was  not  one  of  absolute  necessity  in  one  aspect,  nor  of  any  moral  necessity  in 
another.  Tet,  nevertheless,  if  we  cannot  but  admire  the  self-risking  bravery,  wo  shall 
not  do  wrong  in  crediting  it  with  some  intrinsic  claim  to  commendation.  For,  to 
say  the  very  least,  how  well  it  contrasts  with  the  carefulness,  the  cautiousness,  the 
lingeringness  of  cold  self-calculation!  And  how  well  it  illustrates  how  quality 
resides  still  in  human  nature  which  on  occasion — if  only  the  occasion  be  an  altogether 
worthy  one— can  achieve  very  great  things  I  2.  Their  utter  unselfishness.  At  all  events, 
there  is  not  the  slightest  trace  of  selfishness  in  what  they  did.  They  ran  not  for  a  prize 
of  honour  or  money.  They  expect  no  crown,  no  garland,  for  their  achievement  if  they 
shall  be  successful.  The  pleasure  of  ministering  to  a  master  they  serve  and  love  is 
the  only  reward  they  appear  to  contemplate.  3.  Their  ^ntaneous  service.  They  wait 
for  no  command,  nor  even  for  a  request.  They  do  not  so  much  as  hear  a  wish,  so 
uttered  that  they  could  interpret  it  into  the  nature  of  an  intended  hint  or  suggestion. 
They  overhear  only,  and  what  they  overhear  is  the  sighing  out  of  a  wish.  And 
prol»bly  it  was  the  naturalness  and  the  homeliness  of  it  which  helped  much  to  move 
them — the  deep-drawn  breath  and  the  utterance  of  heart  which  was  recognizable  in  it, 
though  the  expression  but  of  a  bodily  appetite.  What  chords,  strange  to  say,  one 
sentence,  one  tone,  of  nature's  own  voice  will  have  efficacy  to  wake  in  the  hearts  of 
others,  and,  to  the  testimony  of  human  goodness  be  it  said,  not  least  so  when  the  voice 
is  a  voice  of  want !  "  Grud  loves  a  cheerful  giver,"  a  willing  workman,  an  obedient 
servant ;  rarely  indeed  does  he  behold  more  than  this.  For  we  cannot  anticipate  his 
command,  nor  run  before  his  thought,  nor  be  freer  than  his  will.  Yet  let  us  feel  it 
thus,  not  as  from  man  to  God,  but  as  from  man  to  man.  If  it  be  part  of  his  glory 
and  not  the  least  of  the  tokens  of  his  pitiful  mercy  to  us  feeble,  faltering,  limping  full 
oft,  that  he  take  the  will  for  the  deed,  and  accept  the  thought  for  the  act,  how  well 
must  the  sight  suit  him  as  some  sign  of  nature's  return,  when  he  may  see  the  deed  of 
any  one  of  us  to  a  brother  or  sister^ "  swift  to  the  thought  or  wish  divined^  swift  to  tha 
sigh  o'erheard." 


154  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa      [ch.  xi.  1—47. 

IL  Toe  conduct  of  David.    And  we  note  that  it  is  marked:  1.  By  a  mistake  of 
the  tongue.     Wo  may  allow  that  there  was  everything  that  there  could  be  under  the 
circumstances  to  palliate  the  mistake  of  a  great  man  and  a  good  man.    But  for  that 
very  reason  let  it  be  the  more  closely  scanned.    The  facta  were  simply  these.    Here  is 
a  man  whose  slightest  word  will  be  likely  to  go  further  far  than  the  entreaty  and  the 
argument  and  the  urgent,  plaintive  expostulation  of  others.   His  position,  his  character, 
the  known  character  of  those  now  around  him,  the  crisis  of  the  hour,  which  witnessed 
such  flush  of  military  excitement  in  the  royal  camp,  all  argue  this.    Then  that  was 
the  greater  reason  why,  amid  many  a  thought  within,  and  the  glowing  of  feeling,  a 
special  guard  be  put  on  the  tongue.    Yet  the  wish  itself  was  an  innocent  wish,  the 
outcome  of  a  most  innocent  appetite,  imiversally  allowed  to  be  at  the  same  time  an 
imperious  appetite—innocent  if  gratified,  agonizing  if  denied.    Even  Jesus,  and  on  the 
cross,  said,  *'  I  thirst.*'    But  David's  was  not  a  cry  of  mere  thirst.    It  was  not  merely 
a  sish  for  the  relief  of  thirst.    If  the  thirst  had-  been  severer  the  evident  probability 
is  that  it  would  not  have  been  the  water  of  Bcthleheni's  gate,  but  some  nearer  and 
some  more  possible,  which  would  have  been  invoked.    Or,  again,  we  may  not  grudge 
to  take  into  account  the  praiseworthy  class  of  feelings  on  which  David's  mention  of 
Bethlehem's  well  drew.    Home,  and  youth,  and  memory,  and  affectionate  associations 
all  contributed  to  it.     Tet  the  "  whole  array  "  and  complete  circle  of  explanation  and 
palliation  constitute  the  happier  condition  for  decisively  settling  the  problem.  These  all, 
we  are  reminded,  must  under  certain  circumstances  be  "  blown  away."    They  all  must 
yield  to  facts.    They  only  garland  the  victim  if  allowed  to  remain.    It  seemed  harsh 
when  once  Jesus,  of  gentlest  lip,  said,  *'For  every  idle  word  that  men  shall  speak  "  they 
shall  be  brought  to  judgment,  and  shall  give  account.    How  often,  how  genuinely,  that 
has  struck  men,  and  good  men,  as  "  a  hard  saying  "  1    But,  after  all,  what  is  there  like 
/ads  for  "bringing  men  to  judgment"?     And  the  fact  here  is  that  "the  word," 
inopportunely  sighed  out  with  ever  so  much  feeling,  on  the  part  of  a  good  man  and  a 
great  man,  who  hadn't  a  wish  or  an  idea  of  doing  harm,  produced  effects  immediately, 
at  the  very  thought  of  which  but  a  few  hours  after  he  himself  shuddered  again.     It 
teaches  us,  great  and  small,  how  great  is  the  peril  of  the  tongue,  and  that  the  more 
pensive,  tender,  pathetic  tone  may  be  the  more  mischievous  one.    Born  of  the  heart,  it 
knows  and  exerts  its  energy  to  touch  heart  again,  and  its  sphere  is  amid  material 
the  most  dangerous  because  the  most  explosive.     2.  By  a  noble,  practical  acknotih 
ledgment  of  the  mistake.    David  shuddered  to  think  of  the  narrow  risk  which  had  been 
just  challenged,  and,  though  it  was  now  safely  escaped,  he  refused  to  drink  that 
water.     How  soon,  by  the  way,  mind  can  conquer  body,  conscience  can  master 
appetite,  deep  moral  and  religious  feeling  put  to  flight  sentiment,  and  the  flash  of 
conviction  scathe  like  lightning  a  whole  host  of  excuses  I    This  acknowledgment  of 
mistake  on  the  part  of  David  was  all  the  more  noble:  (1)  Because  it  was  practical.  "He 
would  not  drink  of  it.  .  .  .  My  Gk)d  forbid  it  me,  that  I  should  do  this  thing  .  .  .  drink 
the  blood  of  these  men  that  have  put  their  lives  in  jeopardy ;  for  with  the  jeopardy  of 
their  lives  they  brought  it."    David  does  not  underrate  the  moral  aspects  of  what  had 
been  taking  place,  and  which  was  distinctly  due  to  himself.    He  does  not  allow  the 
plea  that,  as  the  mischief  has  been  done,  the  only  thing  now  left  was  to  make  the  best 
of  it.     There  was  great  moral    honesty  in  this,  loyal  and  even  severe  fidelity  to 
conscience  and  its  upbraidings,  when  he  at  once  determines  that  ho  can  take  no 
advantage  of  enjoyment  or  of  use  from  that  water.     And  from  the  midst  of  error 
there  rises  up  with  fragrance  a  pure  testimony  to  the  moral  feeling  and  moral  principle 
of  the  wrong-doer.    The  recovery  and  return  from  their  mistakes  of  those  who  essen- 
tially desire  and  follow  after  the  right  and  good,  wonderfully  contrast  sometimes  with 
the  corresponding  sequel  in  the  case  of  others.    (2)  Because  it  had  to  run  the  gauntlet 
of  some  of  the  most  painful  of  all  kinds  of  misunderstanding.    It  lay  itself  open  to  a 
suspicion  of  ungratefulness,  that  would  seem  the  greater  in  proportion  to  the  greatness 
of  the  efforts  which  had  been  made  and  the  risk  rim.    The  appearance  of  ingratitude 
at  such  an  untimely  juncture,  in  presence  of  such  devotion,  was  the  appearance  which 
a  keen  and  noble  sensibility  would  shrink  from  above  everything  else.    How  much 
man  will  do  at  one  time  to  save  appearances,  at  another  to  court  api)earances !  but  what 
a  test  of  principle,  of  resolution,  of  moral  bravery,  it  is  when  sometimes  a  man  is  called 
on  to  set  at  naught  appearances,  and  confide  himself  to  right  alone  and  to  present 


CH.  XI.  1—47.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  155 

conviction  alone.  (3)  And  lastly,  because  of  the  homage  which  David  pauI  to  a 
principle  distinctly  religious  as  well  as  moral.  David  did  not  throw  the  water  away, 
ne  did  not  give  it  to  another,  he  did  not  beg  the  heroes  avail  themselves  of  it,  but  he 
"  poured  it  out  to  the  Lord."  This  was,  no  doubt,  from  his  point  of  view  and  for  his 
time  of  day  an  act  of  religion.  That  which  was  sacred  with  human  life  owns  to  one 
sovereign  Proprietor  alone.  To  him  David  took  it,  with  faith  in  his  existence,  with 
faith  in  his  watchful  notice  and  oversight,  with  faith  in  his  rewarding  providence.  It 
may  be  considered,  indeed,  open  to  possibility  that  David  was  permitted  to  feel  in  hia 
own  act  the  meaning  of  the  blood  of  sacrifice.  This,  for  the  benefit  of  whomsoever  it 
may  be,  must  be  poured  out  before  the  Lord  Qod  himself,  if  it  is  to  have  anything  ot 
the  efficacy  of  expiation  and  atonement.  While  for  a  moment  we  should  think  of  it  in 
this  aspect,  we  may  be  taught,  both  for  David  and  for  ourselves,  that  he  who  sacrifices 
to  his  God  the  thing  he  might  most  desire,  shall  find  in  the  very  midst  of  that  sacrifice 
the  principle,  the  earnest,  the  assured  hope  of  life  itself. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Yer.  2. — A  true  leader,  David's  life  was  made  up  of  several  successive  stages ;  and, 
as  we  read  his  biography  and  so  trace  his  course,  we  see  clearly — what  at  the  time  he 
could  not  see — how  one  position,  one  experience,  pref)ared  for  the  next.  His  youth  was 
a  preparation  for  his  manhood,  his  court  life  for  the  throne,  exile  for  power,  rule  over 
Judah  for  sway  over  united  Israel.  The  seven  years  during  which  Saul's  son  ruled 
over  the  other  tribes  were  the  years  of  David's  reign  over  Judah.  At  the  close  of  this 
period,  upon  the  death  of  Ishbosheth,  the  elders  of  all  Israel  came  to  David  at  Hebron 
and  offered  him  the  crown.  This  was  the  occasion  upon  which  they  made  the  acknow- 
ledgment, "  Even  when  Saul  was  king,  thou  wast  he  that  leddest  out  and  broughteat 
in  IsraeL"  This  was  a  recognition  of  the  inborn  qualities  of  true  leadership,  called 
forth  by  circumstances,  and  cultivated  by  responsibility  and  action. 

I.  Human  society  is,  accobdinq  to  thb  APPoiNTMEin?  of  Divine  pbovidbngx, 
couPOSED  OF  THE  LEADEBS  AND  THE  LED.  Whilst  in  government  there  is  much  which 
is  artificial,  there  is  a  natural  foundation  for  the  relationships  which  subsist.  Parents 
direct  the  course  of  their  children ;  elder  brothers  to  some  extent  that  of  the  younger ; 
the  capable,  the  self-confident,  the  experienced,  are  the  natural  leaders  of  the  timid  and 
submissive.  In  all  human  communities  there  are  bom  leaders  of  men.  If  all  distinc- 
tions were  abolished  to-day,  to-morrow  they  would  be  revived  in  other  forms.  There 
is  doubtless  injustice  in  many  political  and  social  arrangements;  but  whilst  the  unjust 
acquisition  and  use  of  authority  is  of  man,  the  priuciple  of  authority  is  from  God. 

II.  Lbadebship  often  galls  OUT  OBEAT  QUALITIES.  The  fact  of  a  man  being  placed 
in  a  position  of  influence  and  authority  is  sure,  if  he  be  capable  and  strong  and  under  the 
domination  of  high  principle,  to  elicit  his  best  and  most  useful  qualities.  Especially  will 
such  a  position  foster  habits  of  sound  judgment  and  quick  decision,  habits  of  self-control 
and  self-reliance,  a  just  discernment  of  character,  and  aptness  in  recognizing  ability 
and  trustworthiness  in  others.  Thus  it  is  that  a  high  position  is  fitted  to  lead  to  one 
yet  higher  (see  this  admirably  shown  in  Henry  Taylor's  '  Philip  van  Artevelde  'X 
It  was  leadership  which  made  of  the  shepherd  son  of  Jesse  the  warrior  and  King  of 
Israel.  As  in  other  departments  of  life,  so  here,  exercise  promotes  strength  and 
development.  Let  none  shrink  from  the  responsibility  of  guioing  others  when  Ptovi- 
dcDce  calls  him  to  this  work ;  strength  and  wisdom  shall  be  "  as  his  day.** 

III.  It  is  fob  the  advantage  of  those  who  abe  led  when  a  buttablb  and 

CAPABLE  LEADEB  IS  PBOVIDED  BT  THE  DlVINE  RuLEB.      The  DOWCr  of  "  USC  and  WOUt  " 

is  very  strong.  When  men  have  been  accustomed  to  be  well  led,  their  confidence  in 
their  leader  grows  with  rapidity,  and  their  attachment  is  consolidated  by  time.  Whea 
the  throne  was  vacant,  the  eyes  of  all  Israel  were  turned  to  David.  Their  experience 
of  hia  ability  and  valour,  his  designation  by  God's  prophet,  were  the  indications  to 
them  that  the  son  of  Jesse  was  the  right  man  to  rule  over  them.  Events  proved  that 
they  were  not  mistaken.-  The  sway  of  David  made  the  chosen  people  one  great  nation, 
and  fitted  them  for  the  work  appointed  for  them  by  the  theocratic  governor.  There 
is  in  this  passage  a  lesson  specially  suitable  to  young  men  of  ability,  education,  and 


156  ,  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  xl  1— 4r. 

position.  For  such  God  in  his  providenoe  has  assuredly  a  work  to  do.  It  is  for  them 
quietly  and  patiently  to  await  tne  indications  of  Divine  providence,  in  the  persuasion 
tnat  futhfulness  and  diligence  in  present  duty  are  the  best  preparation  for  future  responsi- 
bilities.   It  is  Gk>d's  prerogative  to  train  the  workman  and  to  provide  the  work.— T. 

Yer.  3. — David's  accesBum.  With  this  chapter  commences  another  part  of  this  Book 
of  Chronicles,  which,  from  this  point  onwards,  is  occupied  with  the  reign,  the  character, 
and  the  exploits  of  David,  Kiug  of  Judah  and  Israel.  His  accession,  related  in  this 
verse,  occupies  accordingly  a  position  of  interest  and  significance  in  the  narrative.  The 
point  especially  deserving  notice  in  the  language  of  this  verse  is  the  combination  of 
IMvine  and  human  agency  in  the  nomination  of  David  to  the  throne.  This  combina- 
tion, especially  apparent  in  the  history  of  theocratic  Israel,  is  really  discernible  by  the 
reflecting  mind  in  all  the  events  of  life  and  history.    Observe — 

I.  The  human  agency  which  led  to  David's  accession  to  the  throne.  To  many  eyei 
no  other  than  human  agency  was  visible.  1.  His  own  charticter  and  services  marked 
Dttvid  out  as  the  one  only  ruler  whom  Israel  could  select  and  trust.  Bom  a  shepherd, 
he  had  yet  within  him  the  heart  and  the  future  of  a  king.  2.  A  popular  election 
effected  his  elevation.  It  was  the  wish  of  "  all  Israel "  that  David  should  take  the 
responsibilities  of  rule.  In  his  election  the  old  adage  was  verified — Vox  populi  vox 
JDei.  8.  A  senaiorud  requisition  sanctioned  and  enforced  the  popular  nomination. 
**  All  the  elders  of  Israel "  came  to  David,  to  express  the  general  feeling  and  to  prefer 
formally  the  national  request.  The  appointment  of  the  king  was  not  the  work  of  a 
moment  of  enthusiasm,  was  not  the  caprice  of  a  mob ;  it  was  the  deliberate  act  of  the 
wisest  and  the  noblest  in  the  land. 

IL  The  Divine  cause  of  David's  appointment  to  the  throne.  This  may  not  have 
been  apparent  to  all,  but  it  is  acknowledged  with  justice  by  the  sacred  historian.  1. 
A  Divine  prediction  led  to  David's  accession.  The  language  of  the  people  is  very 
noticeable :  "  The  Lord  thy  God  said  unto  thee.  Thou  shalt  feed  my  people  Israel,  and 
thou  shflJt  be  ruler  over  my  people  IsraeL"  2.  A  prophetic  designation  foreshadowed 
it.  The  appointment,  so  we  read,  was  made  "  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  by 
SamneL"  The  same  inspired  seer  who  anointed  Saul  was  directed  to  nominate  his 
immediate  successor.  3.  A  religious  covenant  ratified  the  nomination  of  David,  When 
he  "  made  a  covenant  with  them  in  Hebron  before  the  Lord,"  he  acted  in  accordance 
with  his  religious  convictions,  but  he  acted  also  in  a  manner  harmonizing  with  the 
theocratio  position  of  Israel.  Church  and  state  were  not  merely  allied,  they  were 
identical.  I^othing  more  natural  than  that  a  sacred  ceremony  should  accompany  the 
public  and  political  act.  There  is  no  trace  of  selfish  ambition  on  David's  jxtrt.  He 
acknowledged  the  tremendous  responsibilities  of  reigning.  And  in  the  sight  of  Jehovah 
his  subjects  undertook  to  co-operate  with  the  monarch  in  seeking  the  general  good. 

Pbagtioal  lessons  of  great  value  are  suggested  by  this  passage.  1.  In  all  human 
history  and  biography  there  is  a  blending  of  the  human  and  the  Divine.  Worldly  men 
are  in  danger  of  looking  only  to  "  second  causes ; "  possibly  religious  men  may  some- 
times overlook  these  in  an  exclusive  regard  to  the  one  great  Divine  Agent.  We 
should  seek  the  Divine  in  the  human.  2.  Elevation  to  great  power  involves  great 
responsibility.  A  man  who  can  think  only  of  his  own  pleasure  or  magnificence,  when 
Providence  raises  him  to  an  exalted  station,  is  not  merely  irreligious,  he  is  unreasonable 
and  unreflecting.  8.  Social  and  political  duties  can  only  be  discharged  aright  when 
fulfilled  in  a  devout  and  prayerful  spirit.    The  more  responsible  our  position,  the 

S "eater  our  need  of  a  sincere  confidence  in  the  supreme  Lord  who  is  the  supreme 
uide  of  man. — ^T. 

Ver.  7.—"  ITie  city  of  David/*  Hitherto  the  city  which  crowned  the  height  overlook- 
ing the  Eedron  valley  was  known  as  Jebus,  and  was  held  bv  the  "  people  of  the  land." 
But  from  this  time  forth  it  was  known  as  "  the  city  of  David,"  and  its  stronghold,  Zion, 
with  Millo  and  the  adjacent  quarters,  constituted  the  famous  and  historical  capital 
of  the  united  kingdom — Jerusalem.  Observe  the  significant  name  here  given  to  it. 
Jerusalem  was  called  "  the  city  of  David  "  because  it  was — 

I.  The  tbopht  of  David's  yaloub.  It  was  his  prowess  and  that  of  his  captain, 
Joaby  that  wrested  the  stronghold  from  the  hands  of  the  heathen. 


CH.  XL  1-47.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  167 

II.  Ths  stbuctubs  of  David's  beoal  magnificence  and  wablikb  steateot. 
Probably  before  this  time  it  was  nothing  but  a  primitive  fortress,  strongly  placed  upon 
rocky  heights.  But  David  **  built  the  city  round  about/'  and  "  Joab  repaired  the  rest 
of  the  city."    Henceforth  ''  Jerusalem  was  a  city  compact  together." 

III.  The  scene  of  David's  beign.  Hebron  was  too  far  south  to  be  a  suitable 
capital  for  the  united  kingdom.  Nature  made  Jerusalem  for  a  metropolis.  Here  the 
king  lived  and  ruled,  prospered,  sinned,  suffered,  and  died* 

I  v.  The  seat  of  David's  line.  His  son  Solomon  and  the  successive  occupants 
of  the  throne  of  Judah  held  sway  in  this  city,  and  some  of  them  added  to  its  splendour 
and  its  strength.  Amidst  its  varying  fortunes,  its  sieges,  its  dismantlements,  its 
xebuildings,  its  festivities,  Jerusalem  retained  the  imperishable  interest  conferred  by  its 
association  with  the  great  founder  of  the  Hebrew  monarchy  and  dynasty.  It  was  itself 
a  memorial  of  its  founder's  name  and  life. 

Y.  The  sosnb  of  the  ministbt  and  of  the  bepultubb  of  David's  Son  and 
LoBD.  Many  of  our  Saviour's  miracles  were  performed,  many  of  Christ's  discourses 
were  deliver^,  in  Jerusalem.  It  was  over  this  city  that  Jesus  wept ;  it  was  this  city 
that  Jesus  entered  in  his  lowly  triumph ;  it  was  in  this  city  that  he  died,  for  "  it  could 
not  be  that  a  prophet  perish  out  of  Jerusalem ; "  and  after  our  Lord's  ascension,  when 
his  apostles  preached  his  gospel,  they  were  instructed  to  do  so, "  beginning  at  Jerusalem.** 
Vl  In  its  desolation  and  destruction  it  fubnibhed  an  example  of  betei* 
BUTiVB  JUSTICE  EXECUTED  ON  David's  postebitt.  David's  nation  rejected  David's 
Lord,  and,  according  to  his  own  prediction,  their  unbelief  involved  their  metropolis  in 
ruio. 

**  It  moves  me,  Romans  I 
It  oonfounds  the  oouusel  of  mv  firm  philosophy, 
That  ruin's  merciless  ploughshare  should  pass  o*er 
And  barren  salt  be  sown  on  yon  proud  city  I " 

T. 

Yer.  9. — DavicTs  greatnesi.  From  the  time  that  the  king  be^n  to  reign  over  all  the 
tribes  of  Israel  his  fortunes  began  to  improve.  Dark  days  had  he  gone  tmrough  before ; 
now  the  sun  of  prosperity  blazed  upon  his  path. 

.  I.  The  elements  of  David's  obeatness.  It  consisted:  L  In  warlike  achieve^ 
merUs,  He  was  a  man  of  war  from  his  youth,  and  his  manhood  was  occupied  with  the 
defence  of  his  kingdom  and  the  defeat  of  his  foes.  2.  In  the  valour  of  his  capiaine. 
"  Mightv  men  of  valour  "  gathered  around  him,  and  contributed  to  his  power  and  his 
fame.  o.  In  the  prosperity  of  his  people.  That  David's  reign  was  an  era  of  material 
prosperity  is  evident  enough.  If  nothing  eh^e  proved  it,  it  would  be  established  by  the 
mimificent  offerings  which  the  princes  and  the  people  presented  at  the  close  of  David's 
reign  towards  the  temple  fund.  4.  In  the  prevalence  of  religion.  This  appears  from 
the  establishment  upon  a  grander  scale  of  the  Levitical  and  priestly  orders,  with  Uia 
services,  sacrifices,  and  festivals  connected  with  the  house  of  Qod.  David's  own 
psalms,  sung  as  they  were  by  the  Levitical  choirs,  at  once  evidenced  and  furthered  the 
prosperity  of  true  religion. 

IL  The  obowth  of  David's  obeatness.  He  "  waxed  greater  and  greater."  His 
career  was  one  of  continually  advancing  prosperity.  As  with  most  men  favourably 
circumstanced,  so  in  his  case,  success  and  prosperity  were  the  cause  of  their  own 
increase.    "  He  went  growing  and  growing." 

lU.  The  explanation  of  David's  obeatness.  "The  Lord  of  hosts  was  with  him." 
Ckki  adheereStprsBest  1  the  Lord  GK>d  may  better  say  than  any  earthly  prince.  He  to 
whom  I  attach  myself,  he  shall  prosper.  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  was  with  David : "  I.  To 
give  him  regal  qualities.  2.  To  surround  him  with  prudent  counsellors,  devoted  friends, 
and  fjEdthful  servants.  8.  To  give  him  favour  with  the  people.  4.  To  reveal  himself  to 
his  heart,  as  the  Subject  of  praise,  the  Law  of  righteousness,  the  Lord  of  life. 

Lessons.  1.  It  is  within  the  power  of  all  Christians,  by  the  use  of  the  means  of 
grace,  to  srow  constantly  in  true  excellence.  2.  Only  bv  the  presence  and  aid  of  the 
Jdost  High  can  we  be  justified  in  looking  for  progress  and  true  prosperity. — T. 

Yer.  11. — Mighty  men.    Ghreat  epochs  and  great  leaders  call  forth  great  men.    la 


158  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,      [ch.  xl  1—47. 

most  nations*  histories  there  are  periods  when  greatness  seems  to  spring  forth  sponta- 
neously, and  to  display  itself  in  all  the  departments  of  human  activity.  David  had  the 
Sower— -distinctive  of  true  leadership— of  evoking,  as  it  were,  capable,  valiant,  and 
evoted  followers.  In  his  day  and  in  the  early  periods  of  many  nations,  warlike 
qualities  were  needed,  and  the  recommendations  of  physical  strength  and  courage  were 
tne  highest  of  alL  In  more  settled  states  of  society  and  more  d  vilized  communities,  gi  fts 
of  mind  are  more  prized  than  those  of  body.  The  qualities  that  are  developed  among 
nations  are  for  the  most  part  those  which  are  demanded  by  the  necessities  of  the  times. 

I.  EXTBAOBDINART   GIFTS  OF    BODY  AND    OF    MIND    ABE    ALL    FBOM    €k)D.      This   Is 

indeed  true  of  all  gifts.  "  Wo  are  his  offspring."  **  In  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have 
our  being."  Yet  now  often  is  this  truth  forgotten  in  the  presence  of  splendid  endow- 
ments of  strength  and  skill,  genius  and  influence  I  Men  take  the  praise  to  themselves 
for  the  powers  which  Ood  has  conferred,  for  the  achievements  which  he  has  enabled  them 
to  accomplish.  But  it  should  ever  be  remembered  that  all  human  might  is  but  a  slight 
and  evanescent  glimmer  of  his  glory. 

II.  EXTBAOBDINABT    GIFTS    SHOULD  BB    EVPLOTED    IS   Gk>D*B  8EBTICB.      There   is  a 

notion  that  high  station  and  great  genius  absolve  men  from  allecnance  to  the  ordinary 
laws  of  morality  and  religion.  What  is  regarded  as  proper  for  the  multitude  is  some- 
times deemed  inapplicable  to  the  exalted  kw.  There  can  be  no  greater  error.  Great 
men  have  great  power  for  good  or  for  evil,  and  in  their  case  it  is  pre-eminently  of  impor- 
tance that  the  "  five  talents  "  should  be  employed  in  the  service  of  the  Divine  Lord,  who 
has  a  rightful  claim  to  their  consecration.  ''  Spirits  are  not  finely  touched  but  to  fine 
issues." 

IIL  EXTBAOBDINABT  GIFTS  HUBT  BB  ACOOUKTED    FOB    TO  THEIB  GlYEB.     There  is 

nothing  in  the  fact  of  their  unusual  number  or  magnitude  that  absolves  from  that 
responsibilitv  which  characterizes  all  moral  and  accountable  natures.  The  Divine 
Judge  will  doubtless  require  a  strict  account  at  last.  There  is  no  principle  more  pro- 
minent in  Christian  teaching  than  this :  '*  To  whom  much  is  given,  of  them  much  will 
be  required." 

Conclusion.  1.  Let  those  amply  endowed  with  natural  gifts  beware  of  pride.  There 
is  nothing  so  unreasonable,  nothing  so  spiritually  disastrous,  as  is  this  sin.  2.  Let  such 
"  great  ones  "  remember  to  render  to  Heaven  grateful  acknowledgments,  for  to  Heaven 
such  acknowledgments  are  assuredly  due.  "What  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not 
receive  ?    Who  hath  made  thee  to  differ  ?  "— T. 

Ver.  14. — A  great  deliverance,  David,  by  the  force  of  his  character  and  the  prowess 
of  his  arms,  gathered  around  him  many  able,  valiant  men,  who  were  a  strength  to  him- 
self and  a  protection  to  his  kingdom.  Of  the  thirty  heroes  most  famous  and  mighty, 
some  are  recorded  to  have  wrought  great  and  memorable  exploits.  The  passage  before 
us  relates  a  feat  of  arms  performed  probably  by  Shammah,  one  of  these  mighty  men  of 
valour.  He  attacked  the  Philistines,  who  were  stationed  in  a  field  of  barley  or  lentiles, 
routed  and  slew  the  enemy,  and  secured  a  victory  for  Israel.  It  is  observable  that, 
whilst  the  valour  of  the  hero  is  celebrated,  by  which  a  defeat  was  turned  into  a  victory, 
the  result  is  ascribed  to  Jehovah,  God  of  hosts :  "  The  Lord  saved  them  by  a  great 
deliverance."  This  deliverance  may  be  regarded  as  symbolical  of  that  yet  greater 
salvation  which  onr  redeeming  and  merciful  God  has  wrought  on  behalf,  not  of  Israel 
only,  but  of  mankind — a  spiritual  and  everlasting  deliverance. 

I.  The  Lobd  is  the  Authob  of  this  salvation.  1.  HtB  mind  designed  it.  The 
ffospel  is  the  good  news  of  Divine  compassion,  and  the  expression  of  Divine  wisdom.  It 
bears  the  impress  of  his  character.  It  witnesses  to  his  attributes.  It  is  his  supreme 
word  to  the  children  of  men.  2.  Eis  Son  achieved  it.  The  battle  was  fought  when 
Jesus  lived,  was  won  when  Jesus  died.  He  is  the  Hero  who  girds  his  sword  upon  his 
thigh,  and  goes  forth,  conquering  and  to  conquer.  3.  Eia  Spirit  applies  it.  The 
deliverance  has  to  be  effectea,  not  only /or  but  in  every  ransomed  and  saved  one  who 
experiences  the  Saviour's  interposition  and  shares  his  conquest. 

IL  This  salvation  is  gbeat,  betond  all  compabison,  beyond  all  pbaise.  1. 
To  understand  the  magnitude  of  the  salvation,  consider /rom  what  the  redeemed  of  the 
Lord  are  saved,  Israel  had  been  saved  from  the  bondage  of  Egypt,  and  in  this  book  it 
appears  they  were  repeatedly  saved  from  the  thraldom  of  the  Philistines.    From  how 


CH.  XI.  1-47.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  169 


rauch  worse  a  slavery — a  captivity — are  men  redeemed  by  the  grace  of  God  our  Saviour» 
which  appeared  in  Christ  I  The  gospel  announces  release  from  the  bonds  of  sin  and 
the  yoke  of  Satan.  2.  Consider  at  what  a  cost  we  are  redeemed.  *'Not  with  oor* 
ruptible  things,  such  as  silver  and  gold,  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ**  3.  Con- 
sider the  nature  of  the  safety — the  salvation — which  Christ  secures  for  his  people.  It 
is  not  merely  a  deliverance  from  sin  and  death ;  it  is  a  conferring  of  happiness,  dignity, 
and  joy ;  it  is  the  impartation  of  the  Divine  favour,  the  bestowal  of  the  Divine  Spirit. 
4.  Consider  its  final,  eternal  character.  It  is  a  deliverance  extending  through  time  and 
into  eternity,  a  salvation  from  which  there  is  no  return  to  bondage.  6.  O^nsider  far 
how  great  a  mvUitude  it  ia  obtained.  Many  of  all  nations  enjoy  its  benefits,  and  at 
last  ''a  great  multitude  which  no  man  can  number**  shall  join  in  the  everlasting 
anthem  ascribing  salvation  to  God  and  the  Lamb. 

Practical  lessons.  1.  A  great  deliverance  calls  for  great  gratitude  and  great 
devotion  from  those  who  experience  its  blessings.  2.  A  great  deliverance  published  is 
a  great  opportunity  for  the  enslaved  and  oppressed.  It  is  their  privilege  to  accept  the 
remission  and  the  liberty  proclaimed. — ^T. 

Vers.  16—19. — The  well  of  Bethlehem.  This  is  one  of  the  most  touching  and  poetical 
incidents  in  the  romantic  life  of  the  son  of  Jesse.  It  exhibits  him  in  a  light  in  which 
we  cannot  but  discern  both  his  amiability  and  his  piety. 

I.  David's  desire.  He  was,  with  his  faithful  band  of  valiant  followers,  in  the  strong- 
hold upon  the  borders  of  the  Philistine  territory.  The  enemy  were  in  possession  of  hia 
native  vale,  the  scene  of  his  boyish  happiness  and  youthful  exploits.  It  was  a  position 
of  danger  and  of  privation — this  which  he  occupied  at  this  time.  How  natural,  how 
human,  his  desire  for  a  draught  of  the  bright,  cool  water  from  the  spring  that  gushed 
from  the  hillside  near  his  father's  fields  I  It  was  a  longing  for  home,  it  was  a  clinging 
to  the  associations  of  childhood,  it  was  the  unchanged  heart,  that  prompted  the  desire 
that  found  utterance  in  his  words, ''  Oh  that  one  would  give  me,"  etc.  I 

II.  The  feat  of  the  heroes.  The  men  David  had  around  him  were  men  ready 
for  any  daring  exploit — bold,  fearless,  and  prompt.  Yet  they  had  tender  hearts,  that 
could  sympathize  with  such  a  wish  as  that  their  chief  expressed.  It  was  a  gallant  and 
heroic  feat,  this  which  they  nerformed,  in  breaking  through  the  ranks  of  the  Philis- 
tines, and  bringing  to  Davia  the  draught  of  water  his  soul  desired  from  the  dear 
well  at  Bethlehem. 

III.  The  8ELF-BACRIFICIK0  AND  Fious  ACT  OF  THE  LEADER.  David  appreciated  the 
faithfulness,  the  sympathy,  the  bravery,  of  the  noble  three.  He  could  not  drink  the 
water,  for  it  seemed  to  him  like  the  life-blood  of  the  heroes.  It  was  too  precious  for 
any  but  for  Jehovah.  Accordingly  he  poured  it  out  in  a  pious  libation  before  the  Loid, 
giving  his  best  to  God. 

Lessons.  1.  The  sacredness  and  beauty  of  human  feelinc;.  The  associations  of 
childhood  and  of  home  are  precious,  and  it  is  no  sio^n  of  weakness  to  cherish  them. 
2.  The  beauty  of  self-sacrifice.  What  more  admirable  than  the  willingness  to  run  all 
risks  to  serve,  to  make  happy,  those  whom  we  honour  and  love  ?  3.  The  supremacy 
of  the  Divine  claims.  God  has  a  right  to  our  hearts  and  to  all  that  is  dear  to  them. 
Withhold  not  from  him  liis  own.^T. 

Yers.  1 — 8. — Popular  and  royal  wisdom.  All  Israel  now  gave  their  adhesion  to  the 
person  and  house  of  David.  The  kingdom  was  knit  together  under  one  strong,  wise 
leader  (ver.  1).  In  the  act  by  which  the  national  acceptance  of  David  was  declared  and 
ratified  we  have  a  suggestive  instance  of-^ 

I.  The  wisdom  of  the  coumukitt.  All  Israel:  1.  Made  their  choice  with  dis- 
cernment. The  nation  did  not  act  precipitately,  blindly,  with  a  rash  and  ruinous 
impulsiveness.  It  had  good  reason  for  what  it  did.  It  elected  to  elevate  David  to  the 
supreme  post  because  (1)  he  could  claim  very  close  relationship :  "  We  are  thy  bone 
and  thy  flesh;"  a  fact  which  ensured  his  deep  iuterest  and  patriotism;  (2)  he  had 
rendered  valuable  service  in  past  days :  "  Thou  wast  he  that  le^ldcst  out  and  bioughtest 
in  Israel**  (ver.  2);  (3)  Divine  designation:  «« The  Lord  thy  God  said  unto  thee/'  etc. 
(ver.  2) ; — three  excellent  reasons  for  their  procedure.  2.  Acted  afterwards  with  wise 
precaution.    Instead  of  trusting  absolutely  to  the  lasting  virtue  of  a  good  man,  they 


160  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,      [ch.  XL  1— 47. 

bound  him  to  royal  fidelity  with  a  solemn  pledge :  they  met  the  king  in  Hebron,  and 
•"  he  made  a  covenant  with  them  . . .  before  the  Lord  "  (ver.  3).  This  was  most  wise ; 
they  did  not  then  know  for  a  certainty  what  manner  of  monarch  David  would  prove. 
It  would  have  been  blind  and  foolish  on  their  part,  in  the  last  degree,  to  have  committed 
themselves  absolutely  and  without  any  guarantee  into  the  new  king's  hands.  Here  are 
lessons  for  all  communities  (nations,  societies,  Churches,  etc.)  for  all  time.  (1)  Think 
well  before  takins  an  important  step  which  involves  large  issues.  ^2)  Choose  for  a 
leader  the  man  who  is  likely  to  cherish  a  real  and  living  interest  in  the  well-being  of 
the  communitv.  (3)  Prefer  the  man  who  has  given  assurance,  by  past  action,  of  integrity 
and  ability.  (4)  Alake  much  of  Divine  indications.  (5)  Have  a  distinct  understanding, 
carefully  and  solemnly  ratified,  before  actually  entering  on  the  new  relationship.  Let 
there  be  no  possible  mistake  on  either  side  as  to  what  is  expected. 

II.  The  wisdom  of  tbe  kiko.  David  did  two  wise  things  on  this  occasion.  1.  He 
commenced  his  reign  over  united  Israel  by  an  act  of  courage  and  patriotism  (vers.  4, 5). 
2.  He  gave  prominence  and  power  to  the  man  who  eamea  them  by  his  merit  (ver.  6). 
Here  are  two  lessons  for  leaders  of  all  times.  (1)  Strive  to  start  well.  To  make  a 
favourable  commencement  of  a  ministry,  or  of  a  government  or  ofiice  of  any  kind,  is  not 
everything ;  but  it  is  much.  It  is  a  great  step  toward  a  real  success ;  therefore,  in 
beginning  a  new  work  with  new  workers,  put  forth  the  utmost  energy  and  start 
promisingly.  ^2)  Show  favour  to  the  deserving.  Let  not  kinship,  nor  friendship,  nor 
the  commendations  of  others,  but  personal  merit  shown  in  the  face  of  duty  and  diffi- 
culty, be  the  condition  of  honour.  Let  the  prize  be  to  him  who  has  won  it.  Partiality 
will  soon  destroy  confidence  and  wear  away  affection.  Imjpartiality  will  secure  respect 
and  love.  Hien  as  "David  dwelt  in  the  castle,"  will  the  wise  leader  of  the  com- 
munity dwell  in  the  stronghold  of  the  esteem  and  affection  of  the  Church  or  the 
community. — 0. 

Yer.  9. — Ood*B  enlarging  presence.  If  God  is  with  us  in  Uie  sense  in  which  he  was 
*'  with  "  David,  we  also  shall  **  wax  greater  and  greater." 

I.  How  God's  presekce  pboyed  an  eklabqement  to  the  kiko.  It  resulted  in : 
1.  An  increase  in  his  territory.  God  prospered  him  in  war ;  his  enemies  were  beaten  ; 
his  dominion  was  enlarged,  so  much  so  that  the  prophecy  of  Gen.  xv.  18 — 21  was  ful- 
filled. 2.  The  growth  of  power  and  influence  in  his  royal  person.  David  became  more 
and  more  established  in  the  regard,  the  confidence,  and  the  affection  of  Israel.  The 
whole  nation  came  to  yield  him  a  full  and  unhesitating  allegiance.  3.  The  rise  of 
national  power  and  infiuenco  over  neighbouring  nations.  The  kingdom  of  Israel  had 
been  little  or  nothing  to  the  surrounding  peoples.  Now,  however,  it  acquired  considera- 
tion. The  potentates  of  the  East  were  glad  to  make  treaties,  to  be  on  amicable  terms 
with  it.  4.  The  enlargement  of  his  spiritual  nature.  We  cannot  say  that  David's 
spiritual  course  was  "  the  path  of  the  just,  shining  brighter  and  brighter  unto  the  per- 
fect day."  It  certainly  suffered  temporary  eclipse,  even  if  it  did  not,  after  a  certain 
period,  steadily  decline.  But  we  may  indulge  the  belief  that,  for  some  time  after  his 
elevation  to  supreme  power,  it  was  not  only  in  circumstance  but  in  soul  that  he  "  waxed 
greater  and  greater." 

II.  How  God's  pbesekce  is  ak  enlabgement  to  ourselves.  If  God  be  with  us, 
with  his  Divine  favour,  with  his  providing  and  protecting  care,  with  his  Spirit's  influ- 
ence, it  may  be  that  he  will  give  us  enlargement  in  the  shape  of:  1.  Temporal  pros- 
perity. He  may  "set  our  feet  in  a  large  room  "  (Fs.  xxxi.  b).  We  may  be  made  by 
him  to  "wax  greater  and  greater"  (see  1  Tim.  iy.  8).  It  is  certain  God  will  grant  us 
increase  in :  2.  Our  views.  We  shall  see,  know,  understand,  more  and  more  of  him- 
self, of  ourselves,  of  the  meaning  and  the  capacity  of  our  human  life,  of  his  holy  will 
as  revealed  in  his  Word.  3.  Our  affections.  He  will  "enlarge  our  heart"  (Ps.  cxix. 
82).  We  shall  embrace  more  in  our  kindly  sympathies.  Our  purer,  nobler,  more 
generous  feeling  will  flow  forth  to  all  those  who  are  the  most  necessitous — to  the  "  little 
ones  "  of  Christ,  to  "  them  that  are  afar  off."  4.  Our  influence.  We  shall  become  more 
of  a  blessing  to  those  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  As  God  teaches  us,  disciplines  us, 
ennobles  us,  we  shall  have  a  gathering  and  growing  power  over  our  kindred,  our  asso- 
ciates, our  neighbours.  6.  Our  hopes.  These  will  be  gradually  withdrawn  from  the  small 
oirole  of  time«  and  reach  forth  into  the  vast  amplitude  cC  eternity;  and  they  will 


cir.  XI.  1—47.]     THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  161 

become  ever  higher  and  nobler  as  immortal  life  presents  itself  to  us  less  as  a  mere  end* 
less  enjoyment  and  more  as  a  ceaseless  service.— -C. 

Vers.  10 — 14, 20 — 47. — The  moral  of  the  mighty  men.  We  may  learn  from  this  record 
of  gallant  exploits  and  of  the  names  of  David's  mighty  men— - 

L  That  ko  man^  however  qbkat  and  wise,  can  dispense  with  the  co-opeba- 
TiON  of  others.  David's  elevation  to  the  throne  was  largely  due  to  his  own  character 
and  to  his  own  deeds.  That  was  noble  and  winning ;  these  were  great  and  worthy.  But 
he  could  not  and  would  not  have  become  king  over  all  Israel,  had  not  these  mighty  men 
"  strengthened  themselves  with  him  •  •  •  to  make  him  king  "  (ver.  10).  And  though 
the  power  and  glory  of  his  long  reign  were,  to  a  great  extent,  the  product  of  the  king's 
own  wisdom,  valour,  and  loyalty  to  Jehovah,  yet  the  deeds  of  his  mighty  men  had  much 
to  do  with  the  triumphs  he  won  and  the  power  he  wielded.  No  Christian  leader  can 
accomplish  great  things  without  an  active  following  on  the  part  of  brave  and  true  men, 
who  "  strengthen  themselves  with  him."  Around  the  illustrious  men  whose  names  are 
household  words  and  who  wrought  great  things  for  Christ  and  for  the  world,  there  were 
gathered  others,  less  in  moral  and  spiritual  stature  than  they,  whose  names  were 
unwritten  or  have  faded  from  view,  but  whose  co-operation  ensured  success.  All  who 
would  accomplish  much  must  know  how  to  surround  themselves  with  others  who  will 
second  their  work  and  sustain  their  hands. 

n.  That  hen  mat  bebve  a  good  cause  animated  bt  yabious  motives.  It  la 
impossible  to  suppose  that  all  those  who  "  strengthened  themselves  with  David . . . 
according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  '*  (ver.  10)  took  their  part,  then  and  afterwards,  solely 
on  the  ground  that  they  were  thus  carrying  out  the  Divine  will.  Doubtless  they  had 
their  personal  ambitions.    The  court  at  Jerusalem  was  not  without  its  rivalries  and 

i'ealousies.  The  mighty  men  were  no  doubt  stirred  to  more  daring  deeds  because  they 
loped  to  ^  have  a  name  among  the  three  **  (vers.  20, 24),  if  not  the  "  first  three  "  (ver.  21) ; 
or  among  "  the  thirty  "  (ver.  25),  if  not  the  three ;  or  to  be  counted  among  "  the  valiant 
men  of  the  armies  "  (ver.  26).  In  our  Christian  warfare  we  should  be  actuated  by  the 
very  highest  considerations — by  the  love  of  Christ  and  the  love  of  man.  We  may  also 
be  affected,  may  let  our  zeal  bum  more  steadily  and  brightly,  by  considerations  less 
lofty  than  these — by  the  desire  to  gain  the  approval  of  our  leaders,  by  the  hope  of  a 
large  reward,  etc, 

III.  That  men  mat  dedicate  their  physical  pbowess  to  the  bebyice  of  €k)D 
AND  OF  theib  KIND.  The  Worthies  whose  deeds  are  here  recorded  were  rendering  a 
not  unimportant  service  to  their  race.  The  reign  of  David  had  a  certain  serious  bearing 
on  the  whole  plan  of  Providence.  It  was,  perhaps,  an  essential  link  in  the  whole 
redemptive  chain.  In  this  light  the  exploits  of  these  heroes,  who  helped  to  place  David 
in  regal  power  and  to  sustain  him  on  the  throne  of  Israel,  formed  a  contribution  to  the 
work  of  God  and  the  redemption  of  man.  The  tendency  of  our  nature  is  to  over* 
estimate  such  brilliant  feats  as  those  of  this  chapter  (vers.  11 — 14,  20,  22,  23).  But 
it  is  possible,  by  a  reaction  of  thought,  to  under-estimate  them,  and  even  to  deny  them 
a  place  in  the  account  of  honourable  service.  Physical  prowess  has  served  and  yet  may 
serve  the  cause  of  truth,  righteousness,  wisdom. 

IV.  That  usually  in  otheb  ways  than  these  €k)D  asks  and  accepts  oxtb 
BEBVicE.  Now,  in  these  Christian  times,  it  is  (1)  by  moral  rather  than  by  physical 
courage ;  (2)  in  obscurity  rather  than  in  distinction ;  (3)  with  the  sword  of  the  Spirit 
rather  than  with  the  sword  of  steel,  that  we  are  to  win  victories  and  render  service  to 
our  Lord. — C. 

Vers.  15 — 19.—^  royal  c^terthought.  This  is  a  beautiful  and  touching  episode  in 
the  military  career  of  David.  It  brings  out  both  the  weakness  and  the  strength  of  the 
Hebrew  monarch. 

I.  The  kino's  momentaby  inconsidebateness.  (Ver.  17.)  David  was  not  by  any 
means  thoughtless  of  his  subjects.  He  was  not  made  of  the  hard  material  of  which 
some  celebrated  adventurers  have  been  composed,  which  made  them  utterly  heedless  of 
the  losses  and  sufferings  of  their  followers.  He  had  a  warm  and  generous  heart.  But 
on  this  occasion  he  was  betrayed  into  an  inconsiderate  act.  When  his  thirst  could  not 
possibly  be  allayed  without  placing  the  lives  of  his  men  in  the  most  imminent  risk,  he 
I.  chbonicles.  m 


162  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,     [en.  xi.  1—47. 

should  have  borne  it  in  silence  rather  than  have  uttered  his  wish  for  water.  He  should 
have  remembered  that  the  wish  of  a  sovereign  would  probably  be  interpreted  as  a 
command,  or  be  seized  upon  as  an  occasion  for  distinction  or  a  means  of  securing  a  large 
reward.  To  such  default  all  men  are  liable.  It  requires  unceasing  prayer  and  sleepless 
vigilance  to  avoid  being  surprised  and  '*  overtaken  in  a  fault.'* 

IL  The  devoted  loyalty  op  nis  followers.  (Ver.  18.)  Three  of  his  mighty 
men  no  sooner  heard  his  utterance  of  strong  desire  than  they  set  out  to  gratify  it. 
Daring  the  utmost  danger,  their  life  in  their  hand,  they  "  brake  through  the  host  of  the 
Philistines,  and  drew  water  out  of  the  welL"  David  had  the  rare  faculty  of  attaching 
men  to  himself  with  enthusiastic  devotion.  He  won,  not  only  the  fidelity,  but  the  eager 
and  loving  devotion  of  his  servants.  Surely  his  "  greater  Son,"  the  Prince  of  Peace,  is 
far  more  worthy  of  the  unhesitating,  uncalculating  devotion  of  his  subjects.  Surely 
they  should  eagerly  watch  his  eye,  should  spring  to  do  his  bidding,  should  joyfully  nm 
greatest  risks  and  make  largest  sacrifices  to  fulfil  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will. 

III.  The  bedeemino  aftebthouoht.  (Vers.  18, 19.)  1.  David  disallowed  his  own 
selfishness.  It  is  our  habit  to  cover  our  wrong  deeds  with  plausible  pretexts.  Our 
Ingenuity  is  generally  equal  to  the  discovery  of  reasons  which  will  extenuate  or  justify 
our  errors  and  our  sins.  David  might  have  done  the  same  had  he  been  less  worthy  than 
he  was.  But  he  took  the  nobler  course.  He  rebuked  himself  and  disallowed  his  deed. 
He  shrank  from  the  act  of  profiting  by  his  own  inconsiderateness.  God  forbid  • . . 
shall  I  drink  the  blood  of  these  wen,"  etc.  ?  Well  would  it  have  been  for  this  oppressed 
world  of  ours  if  its  kings  and  rulers  had  always  shrunk  thus  from  **  drinking  the  blood  " 
of  the  people.  In  itself  it  is  doubtless  better  not  to  err  than  to  err  and  afterwards  to 
withdraw,  but  it  is  difficult  for  us  not  to  be  glad  that  David  was  guilty  of  this  momen- 
tary thoughtlessness,  inasmuch  as  it  was  directly  followed  by  this  noble  and  most  honour- 
able afterthought,  that  he  would  not  gratify  his  taste  through  an  act  which  had  imperilled 
the  lives  of  his  followers.  It  was  the  readiest  and  most  practical  way  of  rebuking  him- 
self. 2.  He  rose  into  the  region  of  self-denial  and  devotion.  He  "  poured  it  out  to  the 
Lord."  He  made  it  quite  impossible  for  him  to  drink,  and,  at  the  same  time,  he  offered 
an  oblation  unto  the  Lord.  Seldom  does  so  impromising  a  commencement  issue  in  so 
excellent  an  ending.  But  for  the  profoundly  religious  character  of  David,  it  would  not 
have  done  so.  We  learn  that:  (1)  Deep-seated  principles  of  piety  and  virtue  should  correct 
a  mistake  into  which  we  may  be  surprised,  (2)  That  self-denial  and  devotion  are  truer 
triumphs  than  military  conquests.  We  do  not  think  much  of  Jashobeam's  exploit 
(ver.  11),  but  we  shall  never  forget  this  penitential,  self-sacrificing  deed  of  David. — C. 

Vers.  1—3. — The  promise  fulfilled,  **They  anointed  David  king  over  Israel, 
according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  Samuel."  David  had  a  great  promise  given 
him.  It  was  given  him  early  in  his  life  to  inspire  the  noble  purpose,  and  to  make 
possible  the  necessary  patience.  You  and  I  have  great  promises,  given  us,  not  when  in 
sight  of  the  longed-for  good,  but  when  it  is  yet  distant  and  far  away.  Such  promises 
are  our  morning  stars,  as  they  were  David's.  Often,  however,  to  David  the  fulfilment 
of  its  promise  seemed  an  impossibility.  Often  to  us  the  obstacles  to  the  fulfilment  of 
our  promises  seem  many  and  insuperable.  It  is  worth  while  to  linger  and  to 
observe  how  calmly  and  straight  God  s  providence  marched  onward  to  the  fulfilment 
of  its  promise  in  his  case,  and  to  gather  thence  some  deepening  of  our  confidence  that 
it  will  march  straight  on  to  the  complete  fulfilment  of  every  word  on  which  he  has 
caused  us  to  hope.  I  confine  myself  to  this  one  point,  not  dwelling  on  some  important 
points  likewise  suggested  here.  Others  may  mark  this  to  indicate  the  fact  that 
ultimately  the  people  are  the  source  of  all  power  in  the  state;  or  may  single  out  the 
word  "covenant"  here,  and  dwell  on  the  fact  that  David  is  the  first  example  in  history 
of  a  constitutional  monarchy.  We  look  above  and  beyond  these  things,  to  a  Divine 
Giver  fulfilling  a  long-despaired-of  promise.  That  the  preceilent  may  have  all  its 
weight  of  consolation  for  the  despairing  inheritors  of  God's  promises,  let  us  mark 
successively — (1)  The  seeming  impossibility  of  this  promise  being  fulfilled ;  and  (2) 
its  blessed  and  complete  fulfilment, 

I,  Obsebve  the  seeming  impossibility  of  David's  pbomise  beino  fulfilled.  Not 
many  arguments  are  usually  needed  to  drive  us  to  despair.  Many  of  us  when  all  is 
brightest  cannot  believe  the  good  word  spoken  to  us.    llow  much  more  David  might 


CH.  XI.  1—47.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  163 

have  concluded  that  the  fulfilment  of  this  promise  was  utterly  outside  the  reach  of  all 
possibility!    Look  at  the  arguments  of  despair  with  which  Satan  could  assail  him.    1. 
There  vxu  cUready  a  monarch  estahlished  in  his  throne.    The  choice  of  the  whole 
people.    And  at  the  time  the  promise  was  made  to  David  everything  indicated  he  was 
the  worthy  choice  of  Israel.    He  had  the  hold  which  popular  election,  Divine  approval, 
a  generous  disposition!  great  physical  courage  and  prowess,  great  natural  kingliness, 
conspired  to  give  him.    Nor  had  he  any  lack  of  heirs.    There  were  three  conspicuous 
8on8--Jonathan,  Abinadab,  Melchi-shua,  all  worthy  to  succeed  him.    One  of  them,  by 
his  noble  generosity  and  kindness,  which  blended  with  the  noblest  martial  qualities, 
made  him  the  darling  and  pride  of  the  nation.    There  were  other  sons  and  grandsons. 
How  was  it  possible  that  all  these  should  be  superseded  and  he  made  king?    Kspecially 
impossible  would  this  seem  when  he  remembered  that :  2.  He  did  not  bdong  to  a  tribe 
whose  rulership  would  be  cuxeptable  to  Israel^  and  did  not  even  belong  to  the  chief 
family  of  that  tribe.     Ephraim  aspired  to  be  the  leading  tribe  of  Israel.    Her  land 
centrally  situate,  she  had  been,  from  the  days  of  Joseph  downward,  the  leading  tribe. 
They  might  as  their  first  king  accept  a  man  of  Benjamin,  not  caring  to  press  their 
claims  when  they  were  securing  one  from  a  tribe  always  in  friendliest  alliance  with 
their  own,  and  too  small   to  dream  of  rivalling  them  in  importance.    But  would 
Ephraim  ever  admit  Judah  her  rival  to  give  Israel  a  king  ?    And  even  if  they  were 
willing,  would  the  great  families  of  Judah  accept  that  of  Jesse  as  the  royal  house, 
when  the  family  of  Caleb  was  still  found  in  Hebron  ?    Yea,  if  they  were  willing, 
would  his  own  family  be  ?    There  were  his  brothers,  great  in  warlike  force ;  the  eldest 
sufficiently  kingly  for  Samuel  to  deem  him  the  chosen  of  the  Lord.    There  was  his 
uncle  Joab,  probably  no  older  than  himself,  and  his  brothers,  all  of  them  capable  of 
ambition.    Why  should  he  be  the  one?    Did  his  pride  or  legitimate  complacency 
venture  to  go  back  to  the  great  day  at  Ephes-dammim  when  he  slew  Gk)liath  ?    There 
was  Eleazar,  who  in  the  same  conflict  had  supported  David  and  won  a  great  renown, 
and  Jashobeiun,  who  **  slew  three  hundred  at  one  time,**  and  half  a  score  of  others  who 
had  done  deeds  of  romantic  fame.    So  that  even  before  the  enmity  of  Saul  broke  out 
there  was  enough  to  make  David  despair  of  his  ever  seeing  the  promise  fulfilled.    Then 
next:  3.  Said  with  cUl  his  forces  sets  himself  to  destroy  David,     The  insanity  that 
overtook  Saul  seemed  to  leave  David  no  hope.    The  enmitv  so  persistent ;  the  whole 
Soldiery  of  the  kingdom  available  and  employed  to  seize  and  destroy  him ;  the  land  a 
little  land — not  much  larger  than  Yorkshire ;— what  chance  was  there  of  surviving 
such  a  pursuit  ?    The  only  defenders  he  could  find  were  the  rabble  of  outlawed  people  or 
men  of  broken  character  and  fortunes,  who  could  not  lose  by  any  change,  but  possibly 
might  gain.    Should  he  meet  Saul  in  battle,  his  name  would  have  a  stigma  of  rebellion 
fatal  to  all  kingly  hopes.    Should  ho  avoid  a  battle,  it  was  hard  to  see  by  what  other 
means  he  could  avoid  the  certain  fate  which  seemed  awaiting  him.    And  when  year 
after  year  this  lasted,  and  David  was  "  hunted  like  a  partridge  on  the  mountains,"  how 
inevitably  would  all  hope  of  the  fulfilment  of  Ood's  promise  fade  from  his  soul !    And 
yet  the  greatest  difficulty  of  all  remains  to  be  noted.    At  last  he  cuts  the  knot  of 
suspense,  and,  giving  up  all  hope  of  the  crown,  he  seeks  to  secure  his  life,  and  actually: 
4.  ne  enlists  in  the  service  of  the  enemies  of  Israel,    We  know  not  with  what  reserva- 
tions he  enters  the  service  of  Achish,  whether  he  had  intended  the  treason  of  fighting 
against  Israel,  or  the  treason  of  siding  with  Israel  against  the  Philistines  after  receiving 
their  hospitality  and  pledging  faithfulness  to  them.    Despair  was  working  its  usual 
folly  and  recklessness ;  and  he  had  put  himself  in  one  of  those  false  positions  which 
are  above  all  things  to  be  avoided.    And  doing  so,  he  not  only  abandoned  for  ever  all 
thought  of  being  £ng,  but  seemed  to  make  the  throne  impossible.    But  even  here  God 
steps  in,  and,  by  raising  up  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  lords  of  the  Philistines, 
saves  him  from  the  shame  which  would  have  dishonoured  him  whether  he  had  fought 
against  Israel  or  Israel's  enemies.    But  put  all  these  together :  the  settledness  of  the 
dynastv  of  Saul;  the  disadvantages  of  David's  birth ;  the  persecutions  of  Saul ;  his  own 
break-down  in  faith; — and  would  you  in  his  circumstances  have  been  ever  able  to  hope 
for  the  fulfilment  of  this  great  promise  ?  Would  you  not  rather  have  looked  back  on  it 
as  the  dream  of  a  friendly  nature  and  as  nothing  more  %    Are  there  more  impedimenta 
to-day  in  tiie  way  of  God's  promise  to  you  being  fulfilled  than  studded  the  way  to 
;he  fulfilment  of  these  ?    Yet  observe,  spite  of  all  those  impossibilities— 


161  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,     [en.  xl  1— i7. 

II.  The  complete  and  blessed  fulfilment  of  all  Qod's  promises.  Consider  how 
many  things  p;o  to  this.  1.  There  is  the  opportunity  for  making  himself  known  to  all 
Israel.  2.  Then,  by  marvellous  providential  deliverances  and  by  restraints  on  the 
heart  of  Saul,  every  effort  to  destroy  David  is  frustrate.  3.  Then,  God  saves  him  from 
himself,  from  the  complications  of  his  own  despair,  by  keeping  him  entirely  out  of 
the  war  between  Saul  and  the  Philistines.  4.  Then,  Saul  and  his  three  sons  fall 
together  at  Gilboa,  and  the  only  son  of  Saul  remaining  is  one  without  any  of  the 
strength  requisite  for  kingship.  The  house  of  Judah  accepts  him  as  the  ruler  fittest  to 
secure  them  from  the  Philistines,  one  whose  very  name  is  itself  worth  an  army.  And 
Benjamin,  nearest  to  the  Philistines,  is  glad  to  do  the  same.  Then,  while  the  conflict 
with  Ishbosheth  has  the  minimum  of  slaughter  that  could  be  found  in  civil  war,  it 
daily  made  the  eminence  of  David  more  conspicuous.  And  so  it  happens  that,  with- 
out any  efiurt,  toil,  or  solicitude  on  God's  part,  all  things  are  brought  round  so  perfectly 
that  at  last  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  come  and  invite  him  to  be  king.  And  that  at  the 
right  time,  viz.  as  soon  as  he  was  fit  for  such  a  post.  He  reached  it  and  held  it  forty 
years  in  the  richest  manner ;  his  kingdom  reaching  dimensions  and  prosperity  hitherto 
never  dreamed  of,  and  being  transmitted  to  a  long  line  of  descendants,  seventeen 
generations  holding  the  throne  before  the  Captivity  broke  the  line.  And  even  so,  what 
IS  impossible  with  man  ever  proves  to  be  possible  with  God.  And  the  promise  made 
to  you^^f  pardon  of  your  repented  sins,  or  of  grace  to  conquer  indwelling  evil,  or  of 
answer  to  your  prayer,  or  of  perseverance  to  the  end,  or  of  daily  bread,  or  of  help  in 
every  time  of  trouble — however  impossible  its  fulfilment  may  seem,  will  be  perfectly, 
easily,  richly  fulfilled  by  him  whose  love  and  power  know  none  of  the  limits  within 
which  we  have  to  work. — G. 

"Ver.  10— ch.  xii.  40. — The  groups  of  heroes,  "These  are  the  chief  of  the  mighty  men 
whom  David  had***  lliis  roll  of  ancient  chivalry  is  worthv  of  a  little  notice.  Men  of 
valour  consecrating  that  valour  to  service  of  David  and  their  country,  emulating  each 
other's  deeds  and  all  abounding  in  service  to  their  land,  their  numbers,  association, 
prowess,  has  charmed  many  a  reader  and  inspired  through  many  generations  a  grand 
succession  of  heroic  souls.  As  courage  is  a  constant  requisite  in  all  directions,  let  ua 
study  this  singular  group  of  valiant  men,  and  observe  how— 

L  Heroes  collect  adout  a  hero.  There  are  few  qualities  which  are  not  more  or 
less  contagious.  Corruption  corrupts,  and  strength  invigorates  others.  Honour  sets 
its  fashion,  and  vice  finds  many  to  copy  it.  The  bad  man  has  to  answer,  not  only  for 
the  harm  he  does,  but  for  the  harm  that  he  leads  others  to  do.  The  good  man  has 
the  reward  of  his  service,  which  is  great,  but  of  his  example  as  well,  which 
is  greater  still.  Here  we  see  that  one  hero  makes  a  multitude.  After  one  man 
has  fought  and  slain  a  gigantic  foe,  Beuaiah  can  do  the  same.  And  Jashobeam  and 
Eleazar  can  do  their  marvellous  deeds,  slaying  foes  by  hundreds  who  come  against 
them.  The  nobility  of  David's  nature  attracts  and  elevates  kindred  spirita.  It  attracts 
them;  for  even  when  an  outcast  and  exile,  they  collect  about  him  Tsee  ch.  xii.)  in  the 
cave  of  Adullam  and  in  the  land  of  the  Philistines.  All  Saul's  authority  as  king  and 
kinsman  does  not  prevent  many  of  the  bravest  of  the  Benjamites  attaching  themselves 
to  David,  even  in  Saul's  lifetime.  A  Moabite,  and  an  Ammonite  were  among  his  chief 
captains ;  a  Hittite,  one  of  his  thirty  knights ;  from  beyond  Jordan  many  gather  to 
him;  and  later  on,  from  every  tribe  of  Israel  some  are  attracted  to  his  standard.  There 
is  such  an  attraction  about  every  great  soul.  The  law  of  gravitation,  I  suppose,  is  true 
of  souls,  that  they  attract  each  other  in  the  ratio  of  their  masses ;  and  if  a  nature 
be  tenfold  grander  than  another,  it  has  tenfold  more  attraction.  Great  men  cannot 
help  attracting,  and  men  less  great  from  feeling  the  force  of  that  attraction.  And 
when  the  greatness  is  the  rounded  greatness  in  which  generosity  of  nature  meets  with 
courage  and  with  wisdom,  there  is  no  bound  to  the  attraction  exercised  and  the 
devotion  yielded.  If  God  has  made  you  a  kingly  spirit,  you  need  not  be  over-solicitous 
about  the  recognition  of  your  claims.  He  whom  God  makes  to  be  master  is  master  by 
a  law  of  gravitation,  and  finds  his  level  as  naturally  as  material  things  find  theirs. 
Impatience  to  reach  your  throne  only  delays  it.  Be  stilly  and  if  God  means  you  to 
rule,  there  is  nothing  more  certain  than  that  you  will.  Meanwhile,  as  perhaps  you  have 
not  that  part  to  play,  attach  yourself  as  a  learner  and  a  follower  to  him  whom  you 


> 


CH.  XL  1-47.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  165 

find  better  and  wiser  than  yourself,  and,  sitting  at  his  feet,  you  will,  in  the  practice  of 
obedience,  learn  the  secret  of  command.  David  not  only  attracts,  however,  but  elevates. 
Beneath  the  kindling  inspiration  of  his  valour  all  hearts  grow  brave.  Courage  seems 
so  easy  and  fear  so  shameful  that,  with  him  as  leader,  each  man  is  twice,  ay,  sometimes 
many  times  himself.  A  Bruce,  a  Cromwell,  a  Nelson,  or  a  Wellington,  will  never  lack 
brave  following.  "As  iron  sharpeneth  iron,  so  does  a  man  the  countenance  of  his 
friend."  Valour  in  one  makes  many  valiant.  King  Arthur  had  his  knights  of  the 
Round  Table,  and  David  had  his,  and  all  brave  men  have  theirs.  Such  a  fact  is 
worthy  of  notice,  for  we  are  apt  to  think  evil  a  stronger  thing  than  good ;  the  fact 
being  that  good  is  the  most  omnipotent  thing  on  earth,  kindling  similar  goodness  in 
others'  lives.    Be  brave  and  good,  and  you  will  not  long  be  without  companions. 

II.  A  WISE  KINO  CHOOSES  BRAVE  MEN  FOB  CAPTAINS.  He  did  SO  becausc  he  recog- 
nized the  validity  of  the  principle  we  have  just  been  considering.  His  valour  infused 
into  the  captains;  theirs  would  be  infused  into  the  men.  In  war  an  army  wants  brave 
leaders,  not  figure-heads.  "  Take  the  kings  away  every  man  out  of  his  place,  and  put 
captains  in  their  room,"  said  the  sensible  military  critics  of  Benhadad,  who  had  made 
his  first  invasion  of  Israel  with  thirty-two  kings  as  leaders  of  his  troops.  But  it  is  not 
only  in  military  matters,  but  in  all  others  that  courage  is  wanted.  From  the  teacher  of 
a  Sunday  school  to  a  prime  minister,  from  a  minister  of  religion  to  a  town  councillor^ 
whoever  is  at  the  head  of  his  fellows  should  be  brave ;  wise  as  well,  but  brave.  Prudence 
without  some  daring  and  enterprise  will  so  shrink  from  difficulties  and  risks  that  it  will 
take  ofttimes  the  most  dangerous  course  of  all — doing  nothing.  There  is  always  at  hand, 
available  for  whoever  can  use  it,  abundance  of  power  to  work  reforms,  to  render  needed 
service  to  mankind,  if  only  there  be  leaders  for  it.  Are  you  in  a  position  of  influence  of 
any  sort,  in  Church  or  state,  with  few  or  many  ?  Remember  that  David  would  have  none 
but  heroic  men  for  leaders,  and  if  you  have  not  courage  to  lead  men  forward,  you  should 
give  place  to  those  who  have.  Happy  the  village  Church,  the  Sunday  school,  the  school 
board,  the  town  council,  the  land,  whose  leaders  have  brave  hearts  that  do  not  slacken 
with  languor  or  shrink  from  danger !  With  such  leading,  the  community,  like  Israel, 
will  find  safety,  prosperity,  blessing,  in  richer  measure  than  languid  hearts  ever  dare  to 
dream  of. — G. 

Ver.  22. — "  Benaidh  the  ton  of  Jehoiada,^  ••  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  the  son  of 
a  valiant  man  of  Kabzeel,  who  had  done  many  acts ;  he  slew  two  lionlike  men  of  Moab ; 
also  he  went  down  and  slew  a  lion  in  a  pit  in  a  snowy  day.  And  he  slew  an  Egyptian, 
a  man  of  great  stature,  five  cubits  high  ;  and  in  the  Egyptian's  hand  was  a  spear  like 
a  weaver's  beam  ;  and  he  went  down  to  him  with  a  staff,  and  plucked  the  spear  out  of 
the  Egyptian's  hand,  and  slew  him  with  his  own  spear."  I  venture  to  treat  of  this  hero, 
although  far  removed  from  any  nineteenth -century  characteristics.  He  was  a  priest^ 
son  of  a  high  priest,  yet  a  warrior.  To  find  one  like  him  in  office  and  quality  one  has 
to  go  back  to  the  fighting  bishops  of  the  Middle  Ages.  We  do  not  read  of  his  minister- 
ing at  the  altar.  Yet  we  must  not,  therefore,  imagine  him  some  degenerate  son  of 
Aaron,  affording  warning  rather  than  example.  For  there  is  something  savoury  in  his 
brief  story,  which  occurs  twice  in  the  Bible,  and  just  because  of  its  imusual  combina- 
tions of  characteristics  it  is  worth  our  lingering  on  it.  Let  me  urge  some  simple  lessons 
which  may  be  of  use,  at  least  to  the  more  combative  of  our  readers.    Observe— 

I.   I'HAT  MANLINESS  IS  A  OREAT  DESIDERATUM  IN  A  PRIESTHOOD.      To  make  a  trUO 

priest  of  God,  the  first  and  greatest  thing  required  is  godliness,  and  the  second  is  like 
unto  it — manliness ;  and  on  these  two  qualities  hang  all  efiective  discharge  of  priestly 
duties.  It  may  be  objected  that  this  remark  does  not  necessarily  spring  from  Benaiah, 
who,  though  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  might  be  an  exception  to  rather  than  a  specimen  of  the 
priestly  order.  And  I  should  admit  the  relevancy  of  the  remark  were  it  not  that  the 
tribe  of  Levi  seems,  in  Egypt,  to  have  been  conspicuous  for  its  courage  and  leading 
qualities  (for  otherwise  the  eminence  of  Aaron  before  Moses  received  his  commission 
would  be  inexplicable) ;  that  the  tribe  of  Levi  was  called  pre-eminently  "  the  host,** 
during  all  the  encampments  in  the  wilderness;  that  in  Davia^s  time  the  tribe  of  Levi 
seems  to  have  afforded  one  of  the  monthly  army  corps  of  twenty- four  thousand  men 
(ch.  xxvii.  5) ;  that  from  the  days  of  Phinehas  to  tnose  of  the  Maccabees,  and  even 
later,  the  priesthood  furnished  many  of  IsraePs  noblest  warriors;  so  that,  without 


ice  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,      [ch.  xl  1--47. 

pressiDg  or  straiuing  anything,  we  have  the  fact  clear  that  the  manliness  of  the  tribe 
of  the  Levitcs  was  one  reason  of  its  selection  for  the  priesthood,  or  at  least  one  charac- 
teristic of  it.  There  is  a  vulgar  manliness,  loud,  blatant,  coarse,  unfamiliar  with  any  of 
the  finer  questionings  or  feelings  of  the  soul.  Far  from  all  priestly  work  be  such.  But 
the  noblest  manliness  is  not  coarse.  It  blends  p^cntleness  with  courage,  is  a  thing  of 
force  of  spirit  rather  than  of  bodily  strength,  marked  by  vigour  and  truth,  daring  rather 
than  any  braggart  delight  in  blows.  And  it  should  be  remembered  that  weak  and 
feeble  spirits  are  nowhere  more  out  of  place  than  in  the  Christian  ministry.  To  make  a 
true  minister  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  you  want  essentially,  as  the  raw  material  out 
of  which  God  makes  him — manliness.  Courage  to  avow  the  faith  when  all  may  be  deny- 
ing it ;  to  stand  alone ;  to  resist  all  seduction  to  smother  doubt  and  to  repeat  hearsay ; 
to  dare  to  do  right ;  to  have  the  inspiring  power  which  nerves  others  to  dare  it  as  well ; 
to  rebuke ;  to  warn  ;  to  count  and  accept  the  cost  of  faithfulness  to  principles ;  to  be  a 
leader  and  commander  to  the  people ; — for  these  things  is  manliness  not  needed  ?  is 
courage  not  supremely  requisite  ?  retcr  said, "  Add  to  your  faith  manliness  "  ("  virtue  " 
in  the  Latin  sense,  not  in  the  English).  Christ  said  of  Peter,  *'  Thou  art  a  rock,  and  on 
this  rock  I  will  build  my  Church."  In  Heb.  xi.  you  could  almost  substitute  the  word 
**  courage  '*  for  the  word  '*  faith,'*  so  constantly  and  inseparably  are  they  united.    The 

freat  names  of  the  Church  are  no  less  illustrious  for  courage  than  for  spiritual  insight, 
'aul,  Athanasius  standing  "  alone  against  the  world,"  Luther,  Calvin,  Knox,  Wesley, 
Carey,  Williams,  Livingstone ;  you  have  just  to  go  over  the  great  names  of  the  Church's 
history  to  see  that  the  names  of  those  greatly  good  have  been  those  pre-eminently  of 
men  greatly  brave  as  well.  Whatever  your  work.  Christian,  if  you  would  be  a  true 
priest  of  God  you  must  be  brave.  "  Put  on  thy  strength,  O  Zion."  Religion  never 
enervates  when  it  is  the  real  thing,  but  uses  and  increases  all  the  braver  qualities  of  the 
spirit.  Faith  is  a  fight  in  all  directions.  We  have  sometimes  fostered  a  piety  too 
sentimental,  phrasy,  and  self-conscious.  From  the  manliness  which  God  approved  in 
in  the  old  priesthood,  and  which  Benaiah  had  in  prime  fulness,  learn  that  godliness  and 
manliness  should  meet  to  make  a  thorough  character.  Observe  (what,  indeed,  flows 
from  this) — 

II.  That  the  combativb  quality  in  man,  wnn.E  rr  needs  hallowing,  adhits 
OF  it.  Man  is  very  largely  a  fighting  animal.  His  modes  of  attack  come  almost  as 
instinctively  as  the  various  modes  of  assault  used  by  the  lower  animals.  The  taste  for 
conflict  distinguishing  all  men,  true  religion  does  not  destroy,  but  seeks  to  hallow  it. 
The  mental  analyst  will  tell  you  that  he  needs  some  admixture  of  the  combative 
element  to  produce  some  of  the  finest  qualities  of  nature.  It  is  that  which  gives  hard- 
ness and  a  staying  power  to  the  man.  There  is  no  decision  of  character  without  it. 
We  need  the  power  of  standing  up  against  our  enemies  to  stand  up  against  ourselves. 
There  is  no  pertinacity  of  purpose  without  it.  He  who  has  not  a  little  of  the  com- 
bative element  soon  gives  in.  There  is  no  conquest  of  difficulties  without  it.  We 
shrink  from  every  trouble,  say  a  lion  is  in  the  street,  if  there  is  nothing  of  this  quality 
in  us.  So  that  the  combative  quality  is  not  one  of  nature's  mistakes  that  grace  has 
just  to  weed  out,  but  something  it  has  to  hallow ;  an  edged  tool,  in  learning  the  uses 
of  which  we  often  cut  our  fingers,  but  something  not  on  that  account  to  be  thrown 
away.  It  may  be  hallowed,  but  it  needs  a  good  deal  of  efibrt  to  secure  a  thorough 
hallowing  of  it.  It  is  apt  to  be  a  reckless  quality,  striking  wildly ;  the  weapon  of 
the  passions  rather  than  of  the  reason ;  used  by  and  intensifying  animosity ;  the 
source  of  strife  and  confusion,  and  the  "every  evil  work  "  which  attend  them — shedding 
blood,  devastating  kingdoms,  burdening  conscience  with  guilt,  running  riotous  in  its 
wrong.  When  rijihtly  used,  one  of  the  grandest  blessings  of  life ;  when  ill  used,  one  of  its 
great  curses.  If  so  valuable  hallowed,  so  mischievous  unhallowed,  the  question  rises — 
When  is  it  hallowed,  and  truly  and  divinely  used  ?  And  I  think  Benaiah's  case  gives 
ns,  somewhat  roughly,  perhaps,  but  clearly,  the  true  answer  to  the  question.  It  is  used 
rightly  and  hallowed  when  directed  against  the  enemies  of  the  public  good.  Sometimes 
against  an  Egyptian  host  mustered  to  battle,  sometimes  against  the  Moabites,  and 
sometimes  against  the  wild  beasts.  An  evangelical  generalization  might  not  be  far  out 
of  it  which  stated  it  that  the  combative  element  is  wisely  employed  when  it  operates 
against  whatever  injures  our  own  character  or  our  neighbour's  well-being.  The  man 
fights  foolishly  who  docs  not  begin  the  conflict  by  fighting  wilh  himself.    It  were  vain 


CH.  XL  1—47 J     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  167 

to  fight  against  Egyptians  and  Moabites,  and  then  give  in  and  let  some  lion  destroy  the 
power  so  valuable — power  which  might  have  done  such  splendid  service.  To  say  **  No  " 
to  our  own  weaknesses,  to  protect  the  interests  of  others,  to  oppose  whatever  by  its 
falsehood,  sin,  or  mischief  threatens  the  true  well-being  of  our  friends  and  neighbours. 
Oh,  how  much  there  is  that  needs  fightinc;  t  how  much  of  evil  in  our  own  hearts  1 
how  much  in  the  world !  How  much  of  evil  is  daily  assailing  and  destruving  the  hap- 
piness and  well-being  of  multitudes,  but  for  want  of  brave  hearts  that  think  of  more 
than  merely  getting  to  heaven  themselves,  and  that  are  willing  to  make  some  sacrifice 
of  comfort  and  ease  and  to  risk  what  is  dearer  than  either!  *'  Fight  the  good  fight  of 
faith ;  lay  hold  on  eternal  life ;  **  and  oppose  whatever  harms  your  brethren. 

UI.  That  thebe  arb  a  good  many  different  kinds  of  enemies  to  be  tackled 
IN  THE  COURSE  OF  OUR  LIFE.  Sometimes  Egyptians ;  sometimes  Moabites ;  sometimes 
lions;  sometimes  some  other  foe,  like  the  Philistines  encamped  round  Bethlehem,  through 
whom  Benaiah  and  two  others  broke  to  fetch  David  a  draught  of  water  from  its  well. 
Yes ;  there  is  more  than  one  or  two  or  even  three  sorts  of  enemies  against  which  we  have 
here  to  fight.  Now  it  is  a  subtle  whisper  that  denies  there  is  any  Providence  here  or 
heaven  hereafter ;  now  it  is  some  passion  that,  rising  up  within  us,  clamours  for  mastery 
over  the  reason  and  duty ;  now  it  is  greed,  which  makes  the  fingers  stick  to  the  money 
they  should  part  with ;  now  it  is  one  of  what  are  called  the  minor  faults,  but  which  yet 
are  capable  of  infiicting  much  pain  and  injury  that  needs  to  be  put  down ;  now  it  is 
the  ignorance  of  the  children  of  the  people ;  now  it  is  their  vices,  their  drunkenness ; 
DOW  it  is  the  system  which  is  permitted  to  increase  the  wealth  of  individuals  at  the 
expense  of  corruptiog  the  life  of  the  people.  Oh  for  a  few  Benaidhs^  that  in  conflict 
with  such  evils  will  put  forth  a  noble  strength.  Let  us  not  live  a  merely  private  life. 
Rise  and  assail  the  foe  which  is  injuring  society,  beginning,  I  must  say  again,  with  the 
enemies  that  fight  in  your  own  heart — unbelief  in  Christ,  unwillingness  to  follow  him, 
indulgence  of  your  own  weakness.  There  are  too  many  Reubens  in  every  age  who, 
when  great  issues  are  being  fought  out  big  with  bliss  or  woe  to  generations,  "  abide  " 
ignobly  *'  among  the  bleating  of  the  sheep.  Keener  interest  in  all  efforts  of  philan- 
thropy and  politics  to  further  human  well-being,  is  what  is  required  at  our  hand. 
Lastly,  observe  that — 

IV.  In  all  fiohtino,  the  soul  is  the  main  thing.  Doubtless  Benaiah  had  great 
muscular  strength,  but  that  was  but  a  little  of  his  equipment.  The  splendid  audacity 
that  engaged  with  the  Egyptian,  meaning  to  kill  him  with  his  own  spear.  The  fine 
superiority  to  thought  of  consequences  to  himself  of  engaging  with  that  hungry  lion  on 
a  winter's  day,  in  close  quarters,  where  neither  could  escape  the  other.  It  was  that  brave 
spirit  in  him  which,  never  shrinking  from  attempts  that  seemed  impossible,  nor  kept 
back  by  the  discretion  that  seeks  to  save  its  skin,  wrought  its  grand  marvels.  Oh, 
how  little  of  this  grand  courage  marks  us  I  How  much  solicitude  we  have  about  our 
name,  our  peace,  what  people  may  think  of  ns,  our  money,  the  chance  of  failing !  In 
this  world  the  timid  don't  always  go  most  safely.  It  is  the  brave  heart  that  comes  best 
out  of  all  its  confilcts.  Pluck  up  a  little  strength,  and  call  to  God  for  more,  and  venture 
bravely  wherever  duty  calls  you,  and,  like  Benakih,  you  will  find  fame,  safety,  useful- 
ness, attendant  on  your  steps.— G. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — David's  anointing.  This  chapter  properly  follows  the  twelfth  chapter. 
The  union  of  heart  to  make  David  king  is  taken  up  at  the  commencement  of  this 
eleventh  chapter.  This  event  happened  on  the  death  of  Ishbosheth  (see  2  Sam.  v. 
1 — 3).  The  repeated  anointings  in  the  presence  of  the  heads  of  the  kingdom  seem  to 
have  been  necessary  to  the  general  acknowledgment  of  the  sovereign  by  the  nation. 
In  David  we  are  to  see  Christ.  In  the  *'  oneness  of  heart "  to  make  him  king  (see 
ch.  xii.  38),  we  see  that  love  to  Christ  which  constitutes  all  true  subjects  of  the 
Saviour.  It  was  simply  love  to  himself  which  drew  all  these  heroes  around  David. 
At  his  yearning  for  the  water  of  the  well  of  Bethlehem,  it  was  this  love  that  made 
them  brave  all  danger,  and,  at  the  risk  of  their  lives,  '*  break  through  the  host  of  the 
Philistines."  In  all  this  we  see  the  personal  love  of  the  Lord's  people  to  their  King, 
Jesus.  Love  is  the  mighty  bond — love  to  himself,  love  that  wiU  bravo  all  dangers, 
love  that  will  lay  down  its  life  for  him — the  reflection  of  his  own  shed  abroad  in  their 
hearts.    And  the  object  of  this  great  gathering  was  one^  even  as  their  hearts  were  on^ 


1C8  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,      [ch.  xl  1— 47. 

Tis.  to  make  Dayid  king.  Thus  is  it  also  the  one  desire  of  all  the  followers  of  Christ 
— tiiat  he  shall  be  King.  They  would  cast  every  crown  at  his  feet  and  say,  "  Thou 
art  worthy/'  and  they  long  for  the  time  when  he  shall  be  "  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of 
lords.**  But  while  they  were  **  of  one  heart "  to  make  David  king,  he,  on  his  part, 
maile  a  covenant  with  them.  In  this  covenant  he  made  himself  over  to  them  as  their 
leader  and  captain,  and  that  they  should  partake  of  the  reward  of  his  victories  and  of 
his  glory.  All  this  would  be  include<i  in  that  covenant.  In  thiH,  again,  we  see  Christ, 
our  true  David,  engaging  to  his  faithful  people  all  covenant  blessings.  "I  will  give 
unto  you  the  sure  mercies  of  David.**  His  own  wondrous  love  has  bound  them  to  him- 
self, and  that  same  love  ensures  to  them,  in  a  covenant  that  nothing  can  set  aside, 
every  spiritual  and  temporal  blessing.  ''He  hath  blessed  us  with  all  spiritual  blessings 
in  heavenly  places  in  Christ." — W. 

Vers.  4 — 9. — Capture  o/Jerwalem,  David  and  all  Israel  with  him  went  to  Jerusa- 
lem, then  called  Jebus,  and  in  the  possession  of  the  Jebusites.  But  they  would  have 
none  of  him.  David,  however,  took  the  castle  of  Zion,  and  Joab  subsequently 
ca[)tiired  the  city,  and  was  rewarded  for  his  bravery  by  promotion  to  the  chief  military 
rank.  We  have  seen  the  anointed  king  and  his  subjects,  and  now  we  are  presented  to 
the  royal  residence.  In  all  this  Christ  is  again  shadowed  forth.  We  have  seen  the 
anointed  King  Jesus  and  those  who  are  his  faithful  ones.  He  has  gone  into  '*  the  far 
country  to  receive  for  himself  a  kingdom  and  to  return ; "  and  his  people  shall  share 
in  his  glory  when  he  shall  return.  "  I  go,*'  he  said,  *'  to  prepare  a  place  for  you :  and 
if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again,  and  receive  you  unto  myself; 
that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also."  He  has  purchased  Zion  for  his  loved  ones 
with  his  own  precious  blood,  and  they  shall  reign  with  him  in  his  glory .^-W. 

Vers.  10—25. — David^s  mighty  men.  Among  the  elders  of  Israel  (ver.  3)  who  came 
to  anoint  David  king,  there  were  mighty  men  of  valour,  who  had  in  various  ways 
distinguished  themselves.  These  are  referred  to  in  these  verses,  and  also  in  2  Sam. 
zziiL  8—24.  David  formed  a  military  staff  out  of  this  ** great  host**  that  had 
gathered  around  him.  The  "  mighty  men,"  or  "  champions,**  of  this  staff  were  divided 
into  three  classes.  The  highest  was  Jasbobeam,  the  son  of  Hachmoni ;  the  second, 
Kleazar  the  son  of  Dodo,  the  Ahohite ;  the  third,  Shammah  the  son  of  Agee,  the 
Hararite.  These  were  of  the  first  class  or  highest  rank.  In  the  second  class  were 
first  Abishai  the  brother  of  Joab,  the  son  of  Zeruiah ;  the  second,  Benaiah  the  son  of 
Jehoiada ;  the  third,  Asahel  the  brother  of  Joab.  These  were  of  the  second  rank. 
The  third  class  were  the  thirty  men  enumerated  in  these  chapters,  of  whom  Asahel  was 
the  chief.  Inhere  are  thirty-one  mentioned  in  the  list,  including  Asahel,  which, 
including  the  six  of  the  two  superior  ranks,  make  thirty-seven.  The  first  name  in  the 
chief  rank,  Jashobeam,  was  an  office,  or  *'  seat "  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  8Y  Adino  the  Eznite 
is  said  to  have  filled  this  office  under  Joab.  The  one  who  filled  this  seat  was  president 
of  war.  'ilie  three  chief  men  who  composed  the  ranks  of  each  of  the  first  two  classes 
were  chosen  for  their  valour,  and  the  remarkable  manner  in  which  they  had  distin- 
guished themselves  at  the  time  when  David  was  Saul's  general  against  the  Philistines. 
The  two  chapters  give  in  detail  the  account  of  the  exploits  {)erformed  by  Jashobeam, 
Eleazar,  Shammah,  Abishai,  Benaiah,  and  Asahel.  These  were  the  men  who  had  so 
distinguished  themselves  under  David  when  acting  as  Saul's  general.  Adino  the 
Eznite  is  represented  as  sitting  in  Jashobeam's  seat — probably  acting;  for  him  as  the 
president  of  the  council  of  war.  Jashobeam  is  said  to  have  slain  eight  hundred  men 
with  "  his  own  spear."  The  Philistines  gathered  together  against  David  in  a  field  of 
barley,  or  lentiles.  There  Eleazar  met  them,  and  fought  "  till  his  hand  was  weary,** 
Bnd  it  "  clave  unto  the  sword."  The  same  battle  was  continued  by  Shammah  after 
the  exhaustion  of  Eleazar,  and  he,  by  his  valour,  preserved  the  field.  To  these  two 
the  Lord  gave  a  great  victory,  and  "the  people  returned  after  them  only  to  spoiL" 
These  were  the  exploits  of  the  three  chief  men  of  David's  first  rank.  In  his  second 
rank,  Abisliai  the  brother  of  Joab  slew  with  his  own  spear  three  hundred  men. 
Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada  slew  at  one  time  two  Moabitish  giants ;  at  another  time, 
when  snow  covered  the  ground,  he  slew  a  lion  in  a  pit ;  and  at  another  an  Egyptian 
giant  with  his  own  spear.    Asahel,  the  third  of  the  second  rank,  and  brother  also  of 


<m.  XI.  1—47.]     THE   FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  169 


Joab,  is  merely  described  as  one  of  the  valiant  men.  This  "  great  host "  had  gathered 
to  David  in  the  cave  of  AduUam,  situate  within  a  few  miles  of  Bethlehem.  Drawn 
thither  by  personal  attachment  to  himself,  they  preferred  rejection  and  danger  and 
every  hardship  of  life.  Let  us  learn  a  few  spiritual  lessons  from  this  narrative.  All 
those  who  are  drawn  around  the  true  David,  the  Lord  Jesus,  are  not  only  Christians 
but  warriors.  They  are  to  be  heroes  in  the  Lord's  service — to  "  fight  the  good  fight  of 
faith."  And  as  with  these  "  mighty  men,"  according  to  their  individual  prowess  will 
they  be  rewarded  in  the  day  of  the  true  David's  glory.  Many  of  the  noble  acts  of 
valour  which  distinguished  these  "  mighty  men  "  were  done  in  secret,  and  on  their 
own  special  ground,  never  heard  of  till  now,  and  on  this  account  were  they  chosen  as 
David's  ^  mighty  men  "  now.  Those  who  are  fit  to  fight  the  Lord's  battles  in  public 
are  those  who  have  conquered  in  secret^  on  their  own  Twme  ground,  and  where  no  eye 
has  seen  but  God's.  The  man  who  knows  not,  like  David  himself,  what  it  is  to 
have  killed  the  **  lion  and  the  bear  "  in  secret  is  not  fit  to  stand  in  the  public  arena  to 
contend  with  Goliath  of  Ghkth.  Here  we  have  the  election  of  David  to  the  throne  by 
God,  even  while  Saul  was  reigning.  Just  so  is  it  now.  The  prince  of  this  world 
reigns,  but  Jesus  is  God's  chosen  One.  *'  Why  do  the  heathen  rage,  and  the  people 
imagine  a  vain  thing?  The  kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  and  the  rulers  take 
counsel  together,  against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  Anointed.  .  .  .  Yet  have  I  set  my 
King  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion."  The  anointing  of  David  by  God  is  brought  before 
us  in  1  Sam.  zvi.  12,  13.  The  election  and  anointing  of  David  by  the  people  is 
recorded  in  the  chapter  we  are  now  considering.  In  these  two  passages  we  have  the 
election  of  Jesus  and  his  anointing  by  Ood  shadowed  forth  in  those  of  David,  even 
while  as  yet  the  world's  king  was  reigning.  In  the  mean  time  David,  thus  chosen  and 
anointed  of  God,  is  rejected  and  cast  out  by  the  people  of  God  and  by  the  Gentiles. 
This  is  shadowed  forth  in  the  rejection  by  Saul  and  by  Achish,  King  of  Gath  (1  Sam. 
zxi.  10 — 15).  Thus  Jesus,  the  Chosen  and  Anointed  of  God,  has  been  rejected  by 
Jews  and  Gentiles.  **  Away  with  him  1 "  "  Crucify  him  1 "  was  the  united  cry  of 
both.  The  rejected  king  David  takes  refuge  in  the  cave  of  Adullam,  and  there  '*  a 
great  host  as  the  host  of  God  "  gather  round  him,  drawn  to  him  by  devoted  love,  and 
preferring  to  be  identified  with  him  in  his  rejection  than  to  be  in  honour  under  Saul. 
How  fully  we  see  Christ  in  all  this  I  As  the  rejected  One,  Jesus  is  now  hiding  from 
the  view  of  the  world,  like  David  in  the  cave  of  Adullam.  He  has  ascended  on  high, 
as  the  Chosen  and  Anointed  of  God.  He  is  King,  *'set  upon  his  holy  hill  of  Zion."  And 
now  "a  great  host,  as  the  host  of  Gbd,"  is  being  gathered  out  of  this  world,  ''a 
multitude  which  no  man  can  number,"  drawn  around  this  rejected  One— drawn  by  his 
love,  and  preferring  rejection  with  him  to  *'  enjoyiog  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season." 
The  prince  of  this  world  is  ruling  still ;  but  though  in  the  world,  his  people  are  not  of 
the  world.  Saul  is  not  their  king,  but  David ;  not  Satan,  but  Jesus.  "  He  is  precious ** 
to  them — the  "  chief  of  ten  thousand,  the  altogether  lovely."  And  just  as  there  was 
great  joy  in  this  outgathered  host  of  David  (ch.  xii.  40),  so  there  is  joy  among  the 
people  of  God.  Jesus  is  their  joy.  He  is  coming  to  reign.  They  know  it.  And  the 
joy  which  David's  outgathered  ones  had  in  him  was  indeed  only  a  faint  shadow  of 
that  joy  which  is  theirs,  for  they  have  "  his  joy  fulfilled  in  themselves."  And  what 
was  the  character  of  those  who  were  drawn  to  David  as  the  rejected  one  in  the  cave  of 
Adullam  ?  *'  And  every  one  that  was  in  distress,  and  every  one  that  was  in  debt,  and 
every  one  that  was  bitter  of  soul,  gathered  themselves  unto  him;  and  he  became  a 
captain  over  them."  Could  any  passage  more  accurately  describe  those  who  fiocked 
round  the  standard  of  the  Lord  Jesus  when  on  earth?  "Publicans  and  harlots, 
sinners,"  those  out  of  whom  had  been  cast  seven  devils,  the  broken  in  heart,  the  out- 
cast, the  blind  and  deaf  and  dumb,  the  naked  and  hungry  and  wretehed, — such  were 
those  who  were  drawn  to  the  true  David  when  on  earth— drawn  by  his  love,  and,  with 
his  love  constraining  them,  content  to  *'  count  all  things  as  dung  that  they  might  win 
Christ,  and  be  found  in  him."  And  such  are  they  still  who  are  drawn  to  the  world's 
rejected  One.  They  are  in  "distress" — they  have  nothing,  and  are  full  of  want. 
Wearied  with  the  mockery  of  a  world  that  has  ever  cheated  them,  they  have  cast 
themselves,  weary  and  heavy  laden,  on  Jesus.  Again  and  again  they  have  uttered  the 
cry,  "  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go  ?  thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life."  They  are 
**  in  debt  "—debtors  to  a  broken  Law,  with  the  sword  of  Divine  wrath  hanging  over 


170  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa      [cH.  xi.  1— 47. 

their  beads  on  account  of  guilt  and  sin.  They  are  "  bitter  of  soul ;"  for  sin  has  wounded 
them,  the  world  has  wounded  them,  Satan  has  pierced  them  through  and  through.  They 
had  "  no  hope,  and  were  without  God  in  the  world."  They  were  "  hateful  and  hating 
one  another.  They  were  **  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  Drawn  to  Jesus  by  his  love, 
he  is  now  their  "  All  in  all."  He  has  risen  from  the  dead  and  has  ascended  on  high. 
He  has  "  become  a  Captain  over  them  " — the  "  Captain  of  their  salvation,  made  perfect 
through  sufferings."  The  host  thus  gathering  round  the  true  David  is  indeed  "  the 
host  of  God."  It  is  increasing  and  shall  increase  till  it  becomes  "  a  multitude  that  no 
man  can  number/'  which  shall  come  with  Jesus  when  he  shall  return  in  glory,  and 
shall  reign  with  him,  "  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords."  There  is  one  very  precious 
word  in  this  narrative,  "And  David  went  on  going  and  growing:  for  the  Lond  of  hosts 
was  with  him  "  (see  margin,  2  Sam.  v.  10,  and  ver.  9  of  this  chapter).  What  a  word 
for  each  of  us — "  going  and  growing  " !  Yes ;  they  are  inseparable  I  In  your  "  toalk  " 
with  God  you  must  *^grow"  Oh,  how  many  are  in  the  way  to  heaven,  but  stand- 
ing still!  Reader,  are  you  growing?  Are  you  ''walking"  with  God?  then  you 
must  grow ;  but  not  otherwise.  Less  each  day  in  your  own  eyes,  but  more  in  his. 
Growth  in  grace  is  a  going  down^^^  reversal — to  ourselves.  Christ's  glory  so  rises  till 
the  soul  is  lost  in  it.  ** Going  and  growing"!  And  what  was  the  secret  of  it  ?  Not 
David's  natural  prowess ;  not  the  numbers  who  were  daily  flocking  to  his  standard. 
No ;  none  of  these :  *'  for  the  Lord  of  hosts  was  with  him."  Yes ;  God's  presence- 
abiding  in  Jesus — is  the  secret  of  all  "  going  "  and  the  secret  of  all  "  growing."  None 
without  it. — W. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — OocTs  providences  ftdJU  God*s  promises.  The  fact  is  brought  promi- 
nently before  us  in  these  verses  that  eventually,  after  long  waiting  and  much  trial  of 
faith  and  patience,  the  promised  throne  was  secured  for  David,  and  that  in  a  most  hope- 
ful way,  by  the  good  will  of  the  people  and  the  providential  removal  of  all  possible 
rivals.  It  has  been  said  that  "  They  who  wait  on  providence  will  never  want  a  provi- 
dence on  which  to  wait."  But  we  must  guard  against  making  providence  something 
operating  distinct  from  God.  It  is  really  the  liuing  Ood  working  in  the  sphere  of 
material  things  for  the  highest  good  of  his  peo{)le. 

I.  God's  promise  op  the  thkone  to  David.  It  had  been  made  long  years  before, 
when  David  was  but  a  youth  (1  Sam.  xvi.  13).  It  was  made  by  the  significant  act 
of  anointment,  and  by  the  inward  witness  of  God's  Spirit.  But  it  was  not  accom- 
panied with  any  assurance  of  immediate  fulfilment.  God's  promises  still  may  serve 
for  years  unto  the  culture  of  our  dependence  and  trust,  until  he  finds  the  fitting 
time  for  their  realization.  The  Christian  man  now  has  the  promise  of  the  "  inherit- 
ance undcfiled,"  but  only  the  promise ;  yet  to  him  "  faith  is  the  substance  of  things 
hoped  for." 

II.  When  the  promise  was  given  the  fulfilment  seemed  most  unlikely. 
Another  king  was  actually  seated  on  the  throne.  There  were  no  outward  signs  of  weak- 
ness in  his  rule ;  no  perilous  dissatisfactions  among  the  people ;  and  he  was  a  strong, 
hale  man,  and  likely  to  live  and  rule  for  many  years.  Moreover,  this  King  Saul  had 
a  family,  and,  in  the  natural  order  of  things,  it  would  be  expected  that  they  should 
succeed  him  on  the  throne.  And,  as  time  advanced,  Saul's  enmity  against  David  could 
not  fail  to  create  such  party  feeling  as  would  greatly  hinder,  if  not  absolutely  prevent, 
his  ever  securing  the  full  allegiance  of  the  nation.  Taking  these  things  fully  into 
account,  any  one,  looking  on  from  his  youth-time  to  David's  future,  would  say  that  it 
was  of  all  possible  things  the  most  unlikely  that  he  should  ever  occupy  the  royal 
throne.  But  one  has  skilfully  said  that  'Hhe  unexpected  is  the  thin<j;  that  happens," 
and  the  seemingly  impossible  often  becomes  the  fact.  A  man  who  holds  fast  God's 
promises  need  never  be  troubled  by  disadvantageous  appearances.  Following  the  Divine 
lead,  a  man's  way  unfolds  step  by  step. 

III.  Though  he  held  fast  the  promise,  David  never  forced  its  fui^filment; 
herein  setting  us  a  most  noble  and  pious  example.  He  never  tried  to  make  a  national 
party ;  he  never  pressed  himself  into  high  court  positions ;  he  never  resisted  the  enmity 
of  Saul ;  when  his  enemy  was  actually  in  his  power,  and  a  spear-thrust  apj)eared  to  be 
the  step  on  to  the  throne,  he  would  not  take  matters  into  his  own  hands  (1  Sam.  xxvL 
0— II)*    And  even  when  Saul  was  dead,  David  did  not  press  forward  or  attempt  to 


CH.  XI.  1—47.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK    OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  171 

seize  the  full  kingdom.  It  may  be  urged  that  this  was  good  pdicy,  but  it  was  really 
something  far  deeper — ^it  was  that  true  piety ^  which  finds  its  best  expression  in  waiting 
on  God  and  waiting  for  him.  A  common  Chrisdan  sin  is  saying  we  trust  God,  yet 
taking  life  into  our  own  hands. 

IV.  God  mak£s  his  pboyidbncss  eyentuallt  wobk  out  his  promises.  We  may 
conceive  of  all  things  and  all  events  as  under  bis  control ;  and  the  hearts  of  all  men 
are  in  his  hands.  He  is  the  Divine  Master  of  all  man's  wilfulnesses.  The  long  ages  are 
his  to  work  in.  He  can  not  only  use  forces,  but  fit  forces  together,  and  compel  them  to 
serve  his  ends.  Perhaps  the  greatest  marvel  of  human  life  is  the  way  in  which  things 
unfold^  and  seemingly  impossible  issues  are  reached.  In  St.  Paul's  thought,  ''All 
things  work  together  for  good."  Full  illustration  is  found  in  the  events  which  led 
David  to  his  throne.  What,  then,  becomes  the  duty  of  the  child  of  the  Divine  promises  ? 
Simply  this — let  him  do  the  right,  so  far  as  he  knows  it,  and  in  dependence  on  GxkI's 
strength,  day  by  day ;  and  let  him  rest  assured  that  the  faithful  Promise-keeper  will 
find  the  fittings,  and  lead  on  to  the  final  issues. — R.  T. 

Ver.  6.— «7ba&,  the  military  statesman.  Though  this  man,  Joab,  is  introduced  to  us 
before  (2  Sam.  ii.  13,  26,  etc.),  yet,  in  order  of  time,  this  passage  is  his  first  appear- 
ance, and  only  here  have  we  the  account  of  his  prowess  in  taking  Jebus,  and  his  part  in 
the  building  of  the  city  of  David.  He  probably  had  been  chief  captain  of  David's  band 
of  outlaws,  but  on  this  occasion  he  gained  the  position  of  general  of  the  national  army, 
and  he  became  subsequently  the  great  military  statesman  of  the  kingdom,  and  the 
chief  king's  counsellor.  Probably  he  may  be  regarded  as  the  man  who  exercised  most 
influence  over  the  king,  and  the  careful  review  of  their  relations  produces  a  deep  impres- 
sion that  the  influence  was  seldom  a  good  one.  He  became  David's  master,  and  under 
his  bondage  David  vainly  writhed  and  struggled  in  his  later  years. 

I.  Joab  himself.  The  incidents  by  which  he  is  made  known  to  us  are  mainly  the 
following : — 1.  Abner's  killing  of  Asahel,  Joab's  brother  (2  Sara.  ii.  12—32),  filled  Joab 
with  purposes  of  revenge.  2.  Joab  treacherously  slew  Abner  (2  Sam.  iii.  6—39),  and 
David  felt  himself  too  weak  to  do  more  than  denounce  the  murder ;  he  dare  not 
punish  the  murderer.  3.  Joab  took  a  leading  part  in  the  wars  of  the  reign,  especially 
distinguishing  himself  against  the  Ammonites  (2  Sam.  x.  6—14).  4.  Joab  connived 
at  David's  sin  in  the  matter  of  Bathsheba,  and  so  gained  the  power  over  him  which  he 
so  humiliatingly  used  afterwards.  6.  Joab  was  faithful  in  the  time  of  Absalom's  rebel- 
lion. 6.  He  directly  and  insultingly  disobeyed  his  king  and  lord  in  slaying  Absalom. 
7.  He  showed  his  mastery  and  his  control  of  the  army  by  killing  Amasa,  who  had  been 
appointed  chief  general  in  his  stead.  8.  He  properly  remonstrated  with  David  against 
his  self-willed  scheme  of  taking  a  census.  9.  But  after  David's  death  he  took  the  part 
of  Adonijnh,  and  was  condemned  by  Solomon.  He  was  strictly  a  man  of  the  worlds 
brave,  daring,  manly,  generous,  and  persevering,  but  masterful,  impatient  of  what  ho 
thought  David's  hesitancy  and  weakness ;  a  man  who  saw  clearly  an  end  to  be  aimed 
at,  and  was  in  no  way  particular  about  the  choice  of  means  by  which  to  reach  it.  He 
was  unscrupulous,  having  no  quick  sensitiveness  of  conscience  to  that  which  is  wrong. 
He  ordered  his  life  by  the  rule  of  the  expedient^  not  the  rule  of  the  rights  and  was 
heedless  of  the  claims  of  others  if  they  stood  in  his  way.  A  man  who  was  a  type  of 
a  class  still  to  be  found  in  business  and  social  spheres,  who  are  all  for  self,  and  do  not 
mind  who  they  trample  down  as  they  go  up.  *'  His  character  was  ambitious,  daring, 
unscrupulous,  yet  witn  an  occasional  show  of  piety  "  (2  Sam.  x.  12).  Wordsworth  says, 
"Joab  is  the  personification  of  worldly  policy  and  secular  expediency,  and  temporal 
ambition  eager  for  its  own  personal  aggrandizement,  and  especially  for  the  maintenance 
of  its  own  political  ascendancy,  and  practising  on  the  weaknesses  of  princes  for  its  own 
self-interests ;  but  at  last  the  victim  of  its  own  Machiavellian  shrewdness." 

II.  Joab's  influence  on  David.  Sometimes  it  was  good.  He  skilfully  aided  in  the 
restoration  of  the  banished  Absalom  ;  and  he  properly  roused  the  king  from  the  exces- 
sive grief  he  felt  at  the  death  of  his  favourite  son.  Again  and  again,  with  statesman- 
like genius,  he  enabled  David  promptly  to  seize  the  occasions  that  promised  success ; 
and  he  had  religion  enough,  or  insight  enough,  to  see  where  David  was  wrong  in  the 
matter  of  the  census.  But,  as  a  whole,  Joab's  influence  was  had.  His  unscrupulous- 
ness  led  David  into  crimes,  and  his  masterfulness  prevented  David  from  properly 


172  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  xi.  1—47. 

Sunisbing  crimes.  When  conflict  came  between  state  necessity  and  religious  duty, 
oab  gained  the  victory  for  mere  policy,  and  so  made  David  act  in  ways  that  were 
unworthy  of  one  who  was  only  Jehovah's  vice;;erent.  It  is  never  good  for  us  to  oome 
into  the  power  of  any  fellow-man.  We  should  be  ever  in  OotTs  lead,  but  refuse  any 
fellow-man*s  bonds.  And  no  undue  influence  exerted  by  a  fellow-man  can  ever  relieve 
our  responsibility  before  God.  Craft,  guile,  policy,  are  no  forces  of  blessing  in  any 
human  spheres. — K.  T. 

Ver.  9. — Success  is  guaranteed  if  Ood  he  with  us.  It  is  stated  that  David  "  waxed 
greater  and  greater/'  but  wo  are  not  left  in  any  uncertainty  as  to  the  real  source  of  his 
prosperities.  We  are  not  permitted  to  limit  our  vision  to  merely  favourable  circumstances 
or  unusual  talents.  The  secret  will  go  into  a  sentence :  '*  The  Lord  of  hosts  was  with 
him."  The  introduction  may  be  an  account  of  the  importance  to  David  of  securing 
the  naturally  impregnable  city  of  Jebus  for  his  capital ;  and  of  the  energy  with  which 
both  he  and  Joab  set  about  fortifying  and  building  and  firmly  consolidating  the  king- 
dom.   There  was  an  abundance  of  human  energy. 

I.  The  open  and  apparent  reasons  fob  human  success.  We  can  so  easily  see — or 
fimcy  that  we  see^how  they  are  due  to  human  foras,  such  as  exceptional  talents ; 
marvellous  energy,  such  as  that  of  the  tradesman  in  Chicago,  who  raised  a  hut  of  the 
singed  logs  from  his  burnt  warehouse,  and  put  on  it  this  sign,  '*  All  gone,  save  wife, 
children,  and  energy ; "  or  a  perseverance  that  will  not  yield  to  any  hindrances  or  diffi- 
culties, that  glories  in  triumphing  over  obstacles.  Sometimes  we  say  that  success  is 
due  to  a  happy  combinntion  of  circumstances,  or  good  luck.  And  it  does  seem  as  if 
circumstances  could  favour  individuals.  Asaph,  in  the  olden  time,  puzzled  over  the 
prosperity  that  seems  to  come  so  freely  to  bad  men.  And  we  may,  with  perfect  pro- 
priety and  full  consistency  with  right  religious  feelings,  recognize  that  human  success 
IS,  as  a  rule,  the  appropriate  rewai^  of  talent,  and  faculty,  and  perseverance,  and  good 
Judgment.  Success  cannot  be  guaranteed  as*  the  response  to  these ;  but  it  is  their  ordi- 
nary and  natural  result,  the  proper  issue  toward  which  they  tend.  And  even  from  our 
Christian  standpoint,  we  properly  urge  a  careful  attention  to  all  those  ordinary  condi- 
tions on  which  the  prosperity  of  life  depends.  It  is  quite  true  that  "  the  blessing  of  the 
Lord  makcth  rich  ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  the  blessing  comes  as  a  gracious  using  and 
sanctifying  of  all  right  and  worthy  human  endeavour.  God  will  give  his  best  to  no 
man  unless  the  man  will  do  his  best,  God  blesses  no  man's  idleness  and  no  man's 
thoughtlessness.    We  may  lay  on  God's  altar  for  acceptance  only  our  best  possible, 

II.  The  secret  and  real  reasons  for  human  success.  1.  Divine  permission, 
God  may  withhold  success.  He  may  know  that,  in  particular  cases,  it  would  not 
be  the  best  thing  ;  so  "  if  the  Lord  will "  must  tone  our  very  desire  to  win  earthly  pros- 
perities. 2.  Divine  presence  and  blessing,  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  was  with  him,"  not 
only  in  the  sense  of  giving  his  presence  and  gracious  help,  but  in  the  further  sense  of 
approving  his  schemes  and  aiding  in  their  accomplishment.  Of  the  first  kind  of  Divine 
presence  we  may  be  always  assured.  Of  the  second  kind  we  can  be  assured  only  when 
we  so  fully  hold  ourselves  open  to  the  Divine  love  and  lead  that  what  we  plan  and 
purpose  is  only  and  exactly  wJiat  the  Lord  would  have  u«  do.  Still,  we  must  realize 
that,  for  us,  our  true  life-success  may  not  be  that  which  we  fashion  for  ourselves ;  it  can 
only  be  that  which  God  fashions  for  us.  We  may  be  a  long  time  finding  out  what 
God's  success  for  us  is.  And  it  is  so  often  difficult  for  us  to  read  it  aright  and  under- 
stand it  worthily,  because  it  often  has  this  subtlety  in  it — God  holds  within  it  a 
design  of  personal  culture,  and  thai  he  counts  to  be  the  very  highest  form  of  life- 
success.  The  great  thing  to  win  is  the  "  holiness,  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the 
Lord,"— R.  T. 

Vers.  17 — 19. — David*s  drink  offering.  This  incident  is  narrated  also  in  2  Sam. 
zxiii.  13 — 17.  The  "hold"  that  is  mentioned  is  probably  the  frontier  fortress  of 
Adullam,  on  the  Philistine  border, ''  which,  from  its  strength  and  position  and  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  caverns,  was  judged  by  David  to  be  the  best  place  of  defence 
against  the  invasions  of  the  Philistines."  Robinson  says,  *'  There  is  no  well  of  living 
M^ater  in  or  near  the  town  of  Bethlehem.'*  **  There  is,  however,  a  cistern  of  *deep, 
^lear;  cool  water/  called  by  the  monks  David's  well;  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile  to 


CH.  xn.  1—40.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa.  173 


the  north  of  Bethlehem.  Possibly  the  old  well  has  been  filled  ap  since  the  town  was 
supplied  with  water  by  the  aqueduct"  Josephus  speaks  of  the  well  as  being  near  the 
gate.  David  would  not  drink  of  the  water  when  it  was  brought  him,  for  this  reason-— 
he  looked  upon  it,  not  as  water,  but  as  blood,  seeing  that  it  had  been  procured  at  the 
hazard  of  men's  lives ;  and,  knowing  that  it  was  forbidden  by  the  Law  to  drink  blood 
(Lev.  xvii.  11,  12),  he  poured  it  out  upon  the  ground  as  a  solemn  offering  unto  the 
Lord,  and  as  a  thanksgiving  for  the  preservation  of  their  lives. 

I.  David's  home  feelinos.  In  him  there  was  strong  family  affection.  This  is  seen 
in  his  relations  with  his  grovm-up  sons.  There  was  also  strong  attachment  to  his  early 
home,  the  place  of  his  youthful  associations.  Strong  home  feeling  is  usually  found  in 
the  inhabitants  of  hilly  and  mountainous  countries ;  as  may  be  illustrated  from  the 
mcU-du-^ySy  the  characteristic  sickness  of  the  Swiss  when  away  from  their  mountains. 
It  does  not  appear  that  David  did  more  than  give  utterance  to  a  suddenly  conceived 
wish.  It  was  an  impulsive  utterance,  which  he  did  not  mean  should  be  taken  as  a  com- 
mand. Herein  is  given  us  a  lesson  on  the  importance  of  guarding  carefully  our  speech, 
watching  the  door  of  our  lips.  He  is  not  wise  who  utters  all  he  feels.  It  is  a  great 
grace  to  be  enabled  to  keep  silence, 

II.  The  devotion  of  David's  followers.  This  is  one  of  the  most  interesting 
features  of  the  incident.  It  brings  to  view  the  relations  between  David  and  his  men, 
and  helps  us  to  realize  the  fascination  which  David  exerted.  Some  men  have  this  power 
over  their  fellows — a  gracious  power,  if  they  use  it  to  lead  their  fellow-men  to  higher  and 
holier  things ;  a  fatal  power,  if  they  make  it  the  means  of  dragging  others  down  to  their 
own  doom.  It  may  be  pointed  out  that  special  gifts  ensure  this  kind  of  leadership. 
Of  these,  grrtce  of  body,  generosity  of  disposition,  a  skiU  of  getting  on  other^  level,  an 
absence  of  self-assertive  pride,  and  a  winning  geniality  of  manner,  are  important.  If 
Qod  gives  grace  of  natural  disposition,  such  as  wins  for  us  general  favour,  let  us  remem- 
ber that  this  brings  its  holy  burden  of  responsibility. 

IIL  The  pbowebs  in  which  devotion  found  expeession.  Estimate  it  from  a  mili- 
tary point  of  view.  It  could  but  be  regarded  as  a  "  foolhardy  "  enterprise  ;  and  yet  the 
very  suddenness  and  dash  of  it  almost  guaranteed  its  success.  To  gratify  a  wish  these 
men  would  imperil  their  lives.  > 

IV.  The  pious  estimate  of  the  value  of  life.  This  tended  to  bind  David's 
followers  yet  more  closely  to  him.  Such  considerateness  for  them  showed  his  loving 
and  thoughtful  and  pious  character.  It  was  worth  while  serving  one  who  cared  for 
them  so  tenderly.  Compare  Wellington's  personal  interest  in  his  soldiers,  and  the 
personal  enthusiasm  which  he  created.  The  sense  of  the  value  of  human  life  is  the 
very  foundation  of  social  morality,  it  stays  man's  hand  from  being  lifted  up  against  his 
fellow-man.  And  respect  for  man's  best  treasure — his  life — finds  varied  expression  in 
respect  for  all  his  other  treasures  and  possessions.  We  will  not  injure  him,  in  his  Itfe, 
nor  in  taking  anything  that  is  his,  I^ad  on  to  show  how  the  value  of  life  is  enhanced 
when  we  add  to  it  two  considerations — (1)  Man's  immortality ;  (2)  man's  salvation^ 
through  a  sacrifice  of  infinite  value. — R.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XIL 

This  chapter  is  retroepcotive,  and  the 
contents  of  it  are  not  found  elsewhere.  It 
is  occupied,  first  (vers.  1~22X  with  the 
names  and  some  accounts  of  those  who  had 
come  to  the  help  of  David  in  three  great 
crises  in  time  past,  to  join  themselves  to 
him  and  his  cause.  And  afterwards  (vers. 
23 — 40),  with  an  enumeration  of  those 
representatives  from  the  tribes  who  came 


the  occasion  when  he  was  being  made  king 
of  the  whole  people.  Thus  the  chapter 
would  divide  really  into  four  parts,  to  which 
the  following  sections  will  be  found  suffi- 
ciently to  answer :  viz.  vers.  1 — 7 ;  8 — 18 ; 
19—22;  23—40. 

Ver.  1.— To  Ziklag.  The  occasion  referred 
to  is  evidently  that  recorded  in  1  Sam.  xxvii. 
1,  2,  6,  7;  zzx.  1,  26;  and  generally  in 
those  and  the  intermediate  chapters.  David 
stayed  at  Ziklag  a  veor  and  four  months, 
a  period  which  oToeea  for  him  with  the  death 


(ch.  zi  1,  3)  to  support  the  proceedings  of  j  of  Saul.    Ziklag,  in  Joshus*s  original  allot- 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,     [cu.  xii.  1— 40: 


mcut,  ITU  the  pniK^BBion  of  Simron  (Jnsh,   i 
xli.  S).    It  waa  Bitiia!..-.!  Bouth  of  Juilalt,   I 
«nJ  came  into  Uie  hnodH  of  JuJaL  nhuD   . 
Aehiab  uuwle  it  a  p(t  \o  Daiid  for  a  rcei- 
d«ncu(l  Sam.  ixiii.  5—7}.    Ttio  site  of  it 
bai  not  beou  identified  in  Inter  timea.     It 
witncnacd  one  of  the  n&irowist  and  moat 
remarkable  of  the  cBcnpes  of  Duvid,  ou  an   I 
occasion  which  brought  danger,  not  eo  mnch   I 
from  Bckuowiedged  foot,  as  from  the  mad- 
dened gticf  and  deipair  of  hia  own  friendi   | 
and  people  (I  Sam.  iii.  3— G).    Tlio  whnlo 
•eene  of  thu  broken-hearted  grief  of  David   i 
and  hia  people,  when,  on  dtscovering  the 
■Q00M8ful    raid   of   the  Amalckltes    u]K>n 
Ziklog,  "thef  lifted   np   Iboir  voice    and   , 
wept,  until  tliej  iiad  no  more  power  lo  weep,"   I 
is  one  of  tUe  most  dramatio  on  record.    The   I 
rapid  roverae  to  good  fortune,  when  David   | 
turuB  away  their  hccdteia   anger   agaiast   i 
himself    and    propoaal    to    itone    him,  by   [ 
punning  and  overcoming  the  enemy,  and 
recovering  their  cuptivea  and  their  goods   ' 
near  the  brook  Besor,  completes  the  effi'c-    i 
tiveneu  of  the   Beene.     The  middtti  voioa 
form  of  eipreaaion  ia  this  verso,  k«pt  llilil~   i 
mU  dIom,  manna  lo  Bay  that  David  was,  by 
fear  of  BanI  and  bv  forte  of  liia  enemies, 
more  or  Icsa  hemmed  up  in  Ziklag. 

Ver,  2, — Df  Baul'B  bratliren  of  Banjamiu.  ' 
It  would  be  bettor  to  read  these  words  as  tlie  ' 
commtnotrnvnt  of  the  next  verse.  Promi- 
nence is  gLvcn  to  tlie  fni-t  that  this  set  of  ' 
helpcra  <tf  David,  counting  in  all  twenty- 
three,  comprised  Uenjaiuilca — men  of  the 
same  tribe  with  Baul  (ver.  29).  They  hnd 
•eoQ  and  been  impreaacd  by  the  wroognesB 
and  cruelty  of  Suul,  and  fonnd  thomeclvea 
unable  to  keep  in  sympathy  with  him.  Uf 
such  were  Eleazar,  Hat,  and  Itbai,  men- 
iioned  in  the  preceding  chapter  (li.  12, 
29,  31,  respectively),  Tlio  Uenjamites  were 
noted  botli  for  their  use  of  the  bow,  and  of 
their  own  left  hand  (Jud;;.  iii.  lo,  21 ;  xz. 
15,  le ;  ch.  viii.  39, 40  i  2  Cbron.  liv.  8). 

Ver.  3.— The  ions  of  Shemaah  the  Otbaa- 
thite.  The  Peahito-Syriao  haa  U3  instend  of 
'la.  This  has  the  effect  of  making  Joaah 
the  sou  of  Ahieter,  and  it  makes  Shcmaah  a 
third  name  in  the  list.  This  name  has  in  the 
Hebrew  the  form  for  the  article  before  it, 
and  should  appear 


"Ha»-S 


"the  e 


The 


ne,  togetlicr  with  tliat  of  Azmareth, 
found  in  ch,  viii.  13,  36,  as  belonging  to 
tbo  Bcnjamite  tribe.  The  name  Jeiiel  is 
omitted  ia  the  Syriao  VcrBion,  and  tho  two 
namca  Felet  and  Seraehah  appear  aa  bods 
of  Almaveth  (ch,  xi,  33i  2  !<am.  xiiii.  31, 
whero  the  Baliannite  means  the  Baharumite, 
i.».  the  man  of  liahurim,  in  Benjamin).  The 
AntetUte;  that  ia,  native  of  Anathoth.  The 
place  IB  not  Kiveo  in  Joah.  xviii. ;  but  it  was 
a  "  prieets'  city  "  with  "  iuburbs,"  belonging 


to   Benjamin  (eh.   xi.   28;    Jorii.  xii.  18; 
1  Kings  ii.  26 ;  Jer.  I.  I ;  xxix.  27). 

Ver.  i,-— Among  thi  thiity,  and  cmr  tt« 
thirty.  Yet  the  name  of  lamaiah  does  not 
apptur  in  the  list  of  the  preceding  chapter, 
nor  in  iti  f^rallcl;  nor  is  it  puisible  to 
identify  it  wilb  any  that  doe*  appear  there. 
The  suggested  explanation  ia  that  he  wm 
in  the  firtt  alition  of  that  list,  and  died 
early.  The  expresalon,  "  among  the  thiKy, 
and  over  the  thirty,"  may  poaiibly  mean 
that,  from  distinction  as  one  of  them,  he  was 
promoted  above  them  to  be  leader  of  tbem, 
JMabad  the  Oederathits.  The  name  ahonld 
be  spelt  Jozabad.  The  Oederah  here  ang- 
gcsted  cannot  to  all  appearsnoe  be  that  of 
Josh.  XV,  36,  in  the  Sbepbelah  of  Judah, 
as  Jozabad  was  a  Benjamite.  If  otherwise, 
it  rauBt  be  Bujiposed  to  have  come  In  acmie 
way  iuto  the  possession  of  Benjamin. 

Ver.  5.— Jeilffloth.  Thia  name  b  found 
also  among  Beujamitee  (ch.  vii.  8).  BMUah. 
This  name  comprises  both  the  word  Baai, 
and/ciA/  Hamphita.  The  Masoretic  word 
U  ti-rY\  (Neh.  vii.  34).  The  Eons  of  Hariph 
(Neh.  vii.  24)  may  have  belonged  lo  the 
trihe  of  Btnjamin. 

Ver.  G.— JMhobeam.  Possibly  tbe  Banie 
with  bim  of  ch.  xi.  U :  xavii.  2.  KorhitM. 
borne  authorities  are  as  positive  that  thia 
name  desiiniatea  Levitio  Korahilei,  as  other* 
are  sceptioul  about  it.  Bertheau  eiplaina 
the  tiame  as  meauing  descendants  of  Korah 
of  Judab  (ch.  ii.  43).  Others  aurmise  that 
ft  Benjamite  Korah.  othctwiae  unknown  to 
UB,  ia  pointed  to,  Tliere  does  not  acem  any 
intrinsic  dinicully  in  supposing  that  Ihcae 
were  somo  of  the  Levile  Korahilcs,  whose 
pro|ier  and  allotted  abode  was  in  Benjamin, 
or  jicrhti  ps  in  Judah. 

Ver.  T.— Of  Osdor.  The  place  apparently 
here  spoken  oF  (yet  see  ch.  viii.  31 ;  ix.  37) 
id  unknown,  and  it  is  to  be  observed  that  in 
tho  Hebrew  tho  article  precedes  the  word 
(inj.!).  If  it  be  the  G»lor  in  Judah  (ch. 
iv.  i),  it  is  to  be  noted  still  that  Jeroham  is 
a  name  of  a  Benjamite  (ch.  viLi.  27). 

Ver.  8.— As  ver.  1  is  introduced  by  the 
description  of  tlioae  who  came  together  ■*  to 
Dnvid  to  Ziklng  "  at  a  certain  time,  so  it 
seems  evident  that  this  verse  introducea  the 
mention  of  cerlain  otiiers  vbo  befriended 
David  at  another  time,  by  coming  to  him 
into  the  bold  to  the  vildemeat.  Those 
others  were  Gaditea  in  part,  and  the  hoid 
none  mnre  iikely  than  that  of  Adullam 
(ver.  16  of  lost  chapter),  although  the  word 
here  employed  (nil)^)  for  "  hold "  ia  » 
different  form  of  the  word  (HTiip)  found 
both  there  and  in  the  parallel  (2  Bam.  uiiL 
14).  There  is,  however,  nothinj;  to  negative 
tlio  choice  of  other  spots  and  occnsinoa 
(1  Sam.  xxii.  5  i  xiiii.  14,  19,  24,  29,  Antho- 


CH.  m.  1— 4a]    THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


riicd Yenion :  iiiv.l, Authorized  Vereion). 
This  grephio  descriptioa  of  the  militarj 
and  indeed  native  qaalitiM  of  the«e  Gudltea, 
ia  in  hannODj  with  nutnj  other  glimpsot 
we  get  of  them  and  theii  character  (oh.  t. 
19—22;  2  Bam,  i.  23:  IL  18). 

Ven.  9— 13.— Tbe  eleven  nunea  of  Ibew 
veraea  are  all  known  eUewbere,  but  none  of 
them  ai  deaignating  the  rams  peraona. 

Ver.  14. — Ona  of  the  laait  wiu  arar  ui 
hnndred.  Tbi^  evidently  an  intwrroct  trana- 
latioD,  ia  easily  anpereeded  bj  the  carrect 
literal  veniou,  One  to  a  huttdred  the  liUU  one, 
and  the  great  one  one  to  a  thouiand.  The 
prepoaition  tamed  prefixed  to  the  two 
Qumcrala, "  hundred  and  "  thoosand,"  will 
aignifjr  either  that  the  "little  one  waa  at 
good  at  a  hundrod,  and  the  great  one  at 
good  at  a  tbonaand;"  or  that  the  "little 
one  waa  rare  a*  one  of  a  hundred,  and  the 
great  one  rare  ai  one  of  a  thoiuand." 

Ver.  15, — In  tha  flr«t  month.  Thia  corre- 
iponda  with  our  end  of  March.  The  iQteieet- 
ing  incident  of  this  veree  ia  uureooriled  in 
detail  elaowliere  (Josh.  iiL  15  ;  Jer.  xii.  5  ; 
xliz.ig;  LM). 

Ver.  16.— In  addition  to  (be  Oadilea, 
■ome  others  of  fiaQJamiit  tnd  Jndah  join 
David. 

Ver,  17. — The  solemn  tone  of  David'a 
language  recorded  here,  and  the  beautiful 
patnoa  and  reltgioua  appeal  of  the  laat  two 
Bcnlenoea  of  the  vente,  beape&k  auBeringi 
and  diiappointments  experienced  by  David 
heretofore  through  deception.  It  is,  how- 
ever, noticeable  that  there  is  no  direct 
teatimonjr  of  anything  of  thia  kind,  laaat 
of  all  of  any  flagrant  instanoo  of  it,  on  the 
port  of  aocb  detBcbmenta  of  frtends  aa  had 
eoDie  to  bim;  and  that,  though  tliey  had 
oocaaionallj  been  contributed  from  aoutce* 
not  the  moat  deairable  (1  Bam.  xiii.  2). 

Ver.  18, — The  reaponae  of  the  band,  by 
the  month  of  *—■**'  waa  worthy  of  the 
character  of  the  appeal  that  David  inade,  both 
in  ita  beartineaa  and  ita  high  tone.  Amaiai. 
Foaaibly  the  same  with  Amasa  (ch,  it  17), 
Ihe  son  of  Abigail  (David'a  aietrr),  wife  of 
Jelher  (2  8am,  ivii.25:  iviii,  6;  xii.  13; 
XX,  10).  Ewald  diacuBsea  thia  point  ('  Gen. 
Int.,'  IL  544).  He  was  made  captain  of  Iha 
boat  by  Abralom,  aflerwanU  by  David,  and 
Joab  put  an  end  lo  his  life.  The  Spirit 
(aeeNumb.  xL2e;  Neh.  ix.  30).  The  more 
literal  tranalation  of  tbe  verb  otuaa  upon 
U  bullied.  Moat  inlereiting  and  inatructivo 
U  the  Bubjoct  of  the  gradually  developiug  I 
nianifeatHtion  of  tha  agency  of  the  etomal 
Bpirit  from  the  beginning  of  the  world.  . 
Through  the  ascending  illuatretiona  of  hia 
natural  work  in  creation  (Qen.  I.  2),  hia  | 
(elation  to  human  bodily  life  (Oeu.  li.  7;    i 


xiiv.  2 ;  Jndg.  ix.  29),  we  are 
higheat  apiritual  fnnctLons. 

Ver.  ID.— And  thara  (aU  .  . 

to  David.  Of  this  use  of  -hg  ^  there  are 
many  other  eiamplea  (2  Chrou.  xt.  9;  Jer. 
xiivii.  14;  xxiii.  sy  Tbe  phrase  di«a 
not  correspond  with  out  own  idiom  of  "  fall- 
ing to"  one's  lot,  but  with  that  of  "  falling 
away"  from  the  servioe  or  love  of  one  to 
another,  i.e.  daerting.  The  occaaion  here 
apokon  of  ia  descrilied  in  full  In  1  Hii" 

TLtlX.  2-11, 

Ver.  20.- Althongh  thoae   of  Kananali 

who  wiahed  to  ally  themselves  with  David 
did  not — moat  providential ]y  for  David  and 
hia  Ziklag  people — have  the  opportunity  of 
aiding  bim  when,  on  the  eve  of  Qilboa,  ho 
was  about  to  aid  Acbiaii  tbe  prince  of  the 
Pbiliatioes  against  the  Jeniclilea  and  Banl, 
yet  their  help  muat  have  come  in  useful 
when,  on  his  return  "  to  Ziklag  on  the  third 
day,"  he  found  what  tbe  Amalekilea  bad 
done,  and  pursued  tbem  (1  Sam.  ixi.  1 — 6, 
1 1 — 25).  Seven  is  the  number  also  of  Eastern 
MauHsaeb  mentioned  in  ch.  v,  24.  Nothing 
ia  DOW  said  of  tbe  men  belonging  to  them 
joining  with  them.  JoBbad.  One  manu- 
script quoted  by  Sennioott  has  for  thia  name 
on  itsfiretoccurrence  Jocbabar.  Itisacarcely 
likely  that  the  same  name  should  appear 
twice  in  this  abort  list,  without  some  quali- 
fying mark  being  put  to  one  of  the  two. 
Nothing  else  ia  knovm  of  theae  aeven  eap- 
taina  of  tha  thowMidi  of  Manaaseh, 

Ver.  21. —The  baiLd.  Tbe  band  referrod 
to  ia  evidently  that  of  Amalek  in  1  Sam. 
XIX.  8,  9.  Were  eaptaina;  better,  beeama 
eapiaint. 

Ver.  22.— The  hoat  of  Ooi  A  forcible 
comment  on  the  metaphorical  use  of  thia 
pbraae  ia  found  in  1  Sam.  xiv.  15;  Authoriced 
Vtraion,  " a  iieiy  great  trembling"  la  tbe 
translation  of  Hebrew  "  trembling  of  Qod." 
The  for  with  which  this  verse  oommenoei 
ptobably  explains  the  call  there  waa  foe 
many  and  able  **  oaptaius "  for  a  boat 
beoomins  daily  larger, 

Ver.  23,— Tha  buid*;  rather,  the  ehUf 
fRen.or  eoploi'ni,  by  one  oi  tbe  other  of  which 
words  this  same  term  hoa  been  several  timea 
hitherto  rendered  in  the  immediate  oonteit 
(yet  aoe  Judg,  ix.  37,  44,  and  v,  30  fur  yet 
a  third  signification).  There  follow  (vera. 
24—37)  the  numbara  of  eaob  tribe  (tbe  full 
lAi'rfeen  being  enumerated)  who  "camo  with 
a  perfect  heart  to  Hebron,  to  make  David 
king  over  all  Israel."  The  large  numbera 
of  aome  of  the  Joyful  pilpims  to  Hebron,  aa 
for  instance  of  the  trang-Jordanic  tribes,  the 
very  email  number  that  came  of  the  tribe 
of  Judah  (in  fact,  lowest  bat  one,  i-e. 
Benjamin,  and  yet  nearest  home),  and  of 
aome  otbi'ra,  help  to  invest  with  doubt  tha 
numerals  of  Ibia  passage,  although  it  li  not 


176 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  xn.  1— 4a 


at  all  diPRcult  to  8ugp:o8t  Fomo  very  passable 
explanations  of  these  pht-nomena.  This  doubt 
U  not  lessened  by  the  total,  which, according 
to  this  list,  most  make  a  figure  between  three 
hundred  and  forty  thousand  and  three  hun- 
dred and  fifty  thousand  men.  To  the  host 
have  to  bo  added,  as  we  are  expressly  told, 
Uie  **  asses,  camels,  mules,  and  oxen,"  which 
carried  the  '*  bread,  meat,  meal,  cakes  of  fi(?8 
and  bundles  of  raisins,  and  wine,  and  oil, 
and  oxen,  and  sheep  iu  abundance,"  for  the 
consumption  of  the  host  during  their  "three 
days* "  stay  "with  David,"  and  their  journeys 
to  and  fro.  In  the  presence  of  such  num- 
bers, and  the  celebration  of  such  an  occasion, 
Hebron  must  indeed  have  beheld  the  reflec- 
tion of  its  own  probable  meaning,  of  the 
••fellowship"  or  "community"  of  aocietv. 
To  turn  the  kingdom  of  Saul  to  him  (so  ch. 
X.  14).  The  phrase  is  not  a  common  one. 
Aocording  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  (so  ch. 
xL3;  ISamxvL  1,12,13). 

Vers.  24,  25.— David  had  already  found 
friends  and  adherents  in  these  two  southern 
tribes  of  Judah  and  Simeon. 

Ver.  27.— Jaholada.  lie  was  probably  the 
father  of  Benaiah  (see  oh.  xi.  22 ;  xviii.  17 ; 
xxvii.  5;  2  Sam.  viii.  18).  The  Aaronites. 
This  is,  of  court>e,  equivalent  to  saying  "  the 
priests,"  i,e,  the  priestly  troops,  of  whom 
Jehoiada  was  leader. 

Ver.  28.— Zadok.  This  is  the  first  men- 
tion of  Zadok.  He  was,  no  doubt,  the  cliief 
priest,  son  of  Ahitub,  of  2  Sam.  viii.  17 ; 
1  Kings  i.  8 ;  ch.  xxiv.  3;  xxix.  22.  He  is 
leader  of  the  Levites. 

Ver.  29.— Had  kept  the  ward ;  rather,  had 
hept  on  the  side  of;  the  Hebrew,  nnD?"'?  oncfe*; 
Vulgate,  adhue  sequehatur.  The  proposed 
translation  of  niTiyT  by  "  still "  (*  Speaker's 
0>mmentary,'  in  toe.)  is  very  doubtful. 
The  for  hitherto  of  this  verse  exphiins  the 
reason  of  the  comparatively  small  number 
of  the  Benjamites. 

Ver.  31. —  Wett  Manasseh  is  hare  treated  of. 


Vor.  32.— Had  nndorftanding  of  the  timea 
(2  Chron.  ii.  12;  Esth.  L  13;  Job  xxiv. 
1).  Compare  Tacitus,  ••  gnarus  tempomm  " 
(*  Agricola,'  §  6).  This  verse  does  not  tell  the 
number  of  the  "  children,"  but  only  of  the 
"heads"  of  Iwaohar.  It  is  possible  that 
the  number  has  slipped  out  The  descrip- 
tion of  the  characteristics  of  Issachar  here 
seems  an  advauoe  upon  that  of  (Sen.  zUx. 
14,  15. 

Ver.  33.— Hot  of  double  heart  Thia 
phrase  should  be  connected  closely  with  the 
preceding  clause,  of  which  it  is  the  termi- 
nation, the  sense  being  that  they  were  the 
men  to  face  battle  with  no  doubtful  heart. 

Vers.  31— 36.— HaphtaU,  Dan,  and  Aaher 
all  show  to  advantage,  in  number  at  all 
events. 

Ver.  37. — The  east  of  Jordan  group  muster 
a  high  number,  and  of  well-equipped  men. 

Ver.  39. — The  supplies  for  eating  and 
drinking  were  no  doubt  found  chiefly  in 
kind.  To  sum  the  number  of  the  men  here 
described,  we  should  require  to  allow  for 
those  of  Issachar  and  of  the  Aaronites  and 
Zadokitcs  added  to  the  Levites  (vers.  26— 
28).  That  grand  total  will  not  amount  to 
the  six  hundred  thousand  of  £xod.  xii.  37. 

Ver.  40. — Koreover,  they  that  were  nigh 
them.  The  meaning  is  that  not  only  the 
•'brethren"  of  Judah  and  of  the  nearer  neigh- 
bourhood of  Hebron  joined  to  entertain  and 
to  show  hospitality  to  the  immense  throngs 
of  viBitors,  but  that  others  did  so  in  ever- 
widening  circles,  oven  as  far  as  the  remoter 
Issachar,  Zebulun,  and  Naphtali.  For  there 
was  joy  in  IsraeL  The  joy  must  have  been 
largely  enhanced  by  the  national  conscious- 
ness of  divided  rule  coming  to  an  end,  and 
of  the  cloud  and  frown  of  the  Divine  coun- 
tenance having  cleared  mercifully  away.  Ail 
now  could  join  to  show  loyalty  and  to  feel 
it  towards  one  king,  of  whom  they  had 
reason  to  believe  that  he  was  the  chosen  of 
Gud  as  of  tlicniselves. 


nOMILETICS. 

Ver.  17. — The  suspicion  that  has  power  to  propitiate  favour.  There  is  very  great 
distinction  to  be  drawn  between  suspicion  and  suspiciousness.  The  latter  describes  the 
character,  expresses  a  characteristic,  and  reveals  a  tendency  or  bias  that  can  find  no 
admirer,  unless  it  be  a  man  of  taste  the  most  vitiated  and  unlovely.  The  former  may  be 
easily  enough  the  necessity  of  accident  or  circumstance.  It  may  possibly  mark  out  the 
person  who  on  occasion  manifests  it  as  deserving  and  plaintively  claiming  sympathy 
and  help.  The  fact  of  its  being  betrayed  rather  than  stifled,  and  the  manner  in  which 
it  expresses  itself  when  it  does  so,  may  set  up  additional  pleas  for  kindly  interpretation, 
and  go  some  way  further  than  merely  to  extenuate  it.  Habitual  suspiciousness,  then, 
must  be  either  the  result  of  the  badness  of  inborn  quality — into  the  mysteries  of  which 
suggestion  this  is  not  the  place  to  enter— or  the  outgrowth  of  a  life  and  of  circum- 
stance in  nothing  more  unhappily  placed  than  in  producing  this  as  their  natural  fruit. 
"While  of  the  suspicion  that  may  avail  even  to  ingratiate  a  man  with  the  best  of  his 


CH.  XII.  1—40.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  177 

fellows,  silently  beseech  kindness  and  fidelity  and  propitiate  favour,  we  have  a  touching 
example  in  the  history  of  the  text.    Notice  the  explaining,  justifying,  and  redeeming 
features  of  this  suspicion. 
I.  The  sqspioion  to  which  David  gives  expression  abose  in  the  midst  or 

CIRCUMSTANCES  WHICH  INVOLVED  THE  QUESTION  OF  LITE  OB    DEATH.      This    qUCStion 

of  life  or  death  was  that  which  actually  caused  the  suspicion.  He  who  felt  it  and  spoke 
it  was  in  supreme  danger.  The  disposition  of  frankness,  generosity,  forgivingness,  must 
be  brought  to  think,  calculate,  be  cautious  under  certain  circumstances.  If  otherwise, 
that  disposition  is  no  lonc^er  entitled  to  its  old  honourable  titles,  but  to  titles  of  far  less 
repute,  not  lovely,  not  of  good  report — such  as  recklessness,  or  at  least  heedlessness. 
The  very  perfection  of  the  former  will  be  tarnished  if  they  are  not  answerable  to  certain 
kinds  of  consideration.  Forgivingness  in  itself  is  ever  one  of  the  noblest  dispositions^ 
but  it  is  not  under  all  conceivable  circumstances  to  be  exercised  and  to  become /or^'ve- 
ness.  The  highest  teaching,  that  of  the  New  Testament  and  of  Jesus,  runs  counter  to 
this,  and  the  sternest  and  deepest  facts  of  human  condition  in  the  presence  of  GK>d, 
and  placed  under  the  light  of  Christ's  atonement,  disown  it.  For  then  forgiveness 
would  both  come  of  indifferent  and  insufficient  estimate  of  the  just  and  the  right,  and 
would  be  adapted  to  give  fearful  encouragement  and  incentive  to  the  same.  So  in  the 
same  way,  confidence  is  not  to  be  reposed  with  an  equal  unhesitatingness  in  all  cases, 
just  because  confidingness  is  an  engaging  quality  and  graces  the  character,  while  sus- 
picion does  the  reverse.  In  the  higher  moral  aspects  and  relations  of  our  merely  human 
life  we  constantly  recognize  this  as  a  principle.  And  in  the  highest  spiritual  aspects 
and  relations  of  our  life  its  illustrations  are  inevitable  and  are  arresting  even  to  the 
point  of  admiration.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  the  supreme  issues  of  life  or  death  have 
been  felt  by  the  holiest  men  who  have  lived  to  warrant  the  expression,  for  the  moment, 
of  some  doubt,  until  the  tremblingness  of  the  human  heart  and  the  feebleness  of  the 
human  hand  have  really  felt  the  force  of  the  Divine  presence  and  the  comfort  of  the 
Shepherd's  "  crook  and  staff."  Many  of  the  supreme  facts  of  our  present  life,  if  not  all 
of  them,  bring  us  very  near  indeed  to  those  of  our  spiritual  **  unseen  "  life.  But  even 
far  within  these  limits  human  hearts  ask  large  things  of  one  another,  and  invoke  an 
immensity  of  trust  and  repose  an  immensity  of  trust  not  unfrequently  where  it  is  little 
recognized,  little  honoured.  One  walks  out  with  his  life  in  his  hand  and  a  weight  on 
his  heart  almost  intolerable,  to  meet  another  whose  mirth  it  may  be  to  make  mischief 
and  to  hear  his  sentence  and  receive  his  destiny  to  all  human  intents  from  light  lip  and 
unthinking  heart  This  sobers  human  trust  and  checks  the  luxuriant  growth  of 
mutual  confidence,  and  justifies  David  when  he  prefers  to  express,  rather  tlum  seem  to 
disdain,  his  already  hard-bought  experience  of  human  compassions  and  "  tender  mercies," 
and  finally,  sometimes  turns  the  action  of  suspicion  toward  men  into  the  virtue  of  deeper 
trust  toward  God. 
II.  The  SUSPICION  to  which  David  gives  exfbession  was  not  one  that  obew 

OUT  OF  A  HEABT  THAT  KNEW  IT  BECAUSE  ITSELF  DID  THE  DEEDS  OF  IT  AND  SCENTED 

ITS  OWN  BEWABD,  BUT  FBOM  ONE  CONSCIOUS  OF  INTEOBITT.  David  dircctly  appeals 
to  Heaven  in  attestation  of  his  not  having  earned  any  faithless  treatment  at  the  nands 
of  Saul,  and  of  any  such  as  might  possibly  be  emissaries  of  SauU  It  is  a  great  thing  to 
be  able  to  make  such  an  appeal  honestly  and  with  the  firmness  that  comes  of  the  inner 
answer  of  a  good  conscience.  It  would  have  been  very  different,  it  was  very  different, 
with  Jacob.  When,  after  an  absence  of  twenty-one  years  from  his  father's  house,  he 
must  now  return  and  meet  Esau,  he  met  him  with  ill-suppressed  suspicion  and  very 
natural  distrust,  and  the  worst  misery  of  which  was  that  they  were  self-inflicted  and 
richly  merited.  A  similar  proneness  to  suspicion,  a  similar  distrust  of  every  unwonted 
whisper  of  the  winds  of  providence,  or  unwonted  sign  of  a  fellow-creature's  counten* 
ance  or  tone  of  his  voice,  evidently  dogged  the  steps  and  days  and  very  hours  of  those 
of  Joseph's  brethren  who  had  been  '* verily  guilty  concerning"  him.  For  all  such 
suspicion  there  is  no  redeeming  word  to  be  spoken,  except  that  it  is  of  that  retribution 
which,  partial  though  its  manifestations  be  at  present,  helps  to  establish  thoughtful 
men's  faith  in  the  great  throne  of  righteousness,  justice,  and  judgment.  But  far  other* 
wise  is  it  now  with  David's  suspicion.  **  If,"  says  he,  '*  ye  be  come  to  betray  me  to  mine 
enemies  " — there  was  the  fear  and  the  mistrust  and  the  suspicion — *'  seeing  there  is  no 
nrrong  in  mine  hands  " — there  is  the /earless  assertion  of  innocence — "  the  God  of  our 

I.  CHBONICLES.  ^^ 


178  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.     [ch-xilI— 40. 

fathera  look  thereon,  and  rebuke  it."    So  does  thU  sort  of  suspicion  issne,  in  appealing 
to  the  omniscience  of  God,  in  leaving  the  matter  of  avenging  and  rebuking  to  God,  and 
in  committing  his  own  cause  and  himself  to  the  care  and  love  of  him  that  jodgeth 
righteously. 
III.  Tbb  buspiciok  to  which  David  gives  expression  was  one  bobn  of  a  heart 

THAT    nevertheless    YEARNED    TO    TRUST,    TO    REPOSE    CONFIDENCE,  TO    LOVE    WITH 

THOROUGH  UNION.  David  any  way  incurs  the  risk  of  going  forth  to  meet  these  volun- 
teers. It  would  have  been  madness  to  do  so  had  Saul  himself  been  in  the  company. 
When  Saul  was  most  in  David's  hand  and  within  his  power,  it  is  noticeable  that,  with 
all  his  generous  and  God-taught  sparing  of  him,  David  does  not  neglect  the  manifestly 
necessary  precaution  as  to  himself  and  his  own  safety.  The  oft-aimed  javelin,  though 
it  had  missed  its  literal  aim,  had  not  missed  mark  altogether.  It  had  fixed  what  mignt 
sometimes,  what  under  other  circumstances  often  has  been  worse  than  any  javelin  in 
the  breast  or  heart,  viz.  a  lifelong  cause  for  caution  and  distrust  But  let  there  be  any 
justifiable  doubt,  any  reasonable  ground  for  hope  in  fair  play  and  sincerity,  and  it  is  not 
I)avid's  heart  that  will  be  slow  to  respond  to  it,  hazard  its  genuineness,  and  welcome 
its  approach.  What  an  honest  speech  his  is !  Nothing  disguised,  he  acknowledges  ho 
needea  "  help."  '*  To  help  me  **  is  his  humble  confession,  untinged  by  haughtiness. 
And  nothing  affected,  warrior  though  he  was,  good  with  every  weapon,  the  sling  and 
stone  upward,  yet  his  heart's  deepest  desire  is  peace :  *'  If  ye  be  come  peaceably." 
And  nothing  ungenuine;  his  own  individuality  is  not  sheltered  under  the  cloak  or 
behind  the  bulk  of  a  big-sounding  "  cause  "  or  "  principle,"  or  other  professed  issue  at 
stake.  No ;  he  says,  '*  If  ye  be  come  unto  me.  But  what  then  ?  what  of  all  this  ? 
Why,  "  Mine  heart  shall  be  knit  unto  you,"  my  heart  shall  be  on«  with  you.  There  is 
no  offer  to  make  any  other  bargain.  There  is  no  condition  of  any  sufficient  credentials, 
and  such  as  will  bear  searching  and  microscopic  examination.  He  takes  an  honest 
face,  an  honest  tone,  an  open  offer,  a  loving  heart,  one  that  is  prepared  to  trust  and 
longs  to  trust — suspicion  its  strange  and  unwelcome  work.  And  this  constitutes  for 
him  the  inner  gift  and  discernment,  to  recognize  their  counterparts  in  others.  And 
his  gladdened  ear  hears  the  cheers  of  his  own  catchword,  "  peace,"  twice  re-echoed  for 
himself,  and  again  "  one  cheer  "  for  his  "  helpers."  While  God's  Name  and  praise  and 
faithful  promise  close  the  matter  of  the  dialogue :  "  Thy  God  helpeth  thee."  Happy  if 
every  beginning  of  suspicion  ended  with  such  confidence  1 

Ver.  18. — TJie  Spirit  that  taught  to  fpfak  and  tavght  to  hear  aright.  The  words  of 
Amasai,  the  uttering  of  which  is  especially  ascribed  to  the  impulse  of  the  Spirit,  must 
be  worthy  of  some  particular  notice.  They  may  be  depended  upon  for  containing  and 
being  ready  to  convey  some  instructive  lessons  or  illustrations  of  important  principle. 
The  caution  or  suspicion  of  David  at  a  moment  of  such  uncertainty  for  him  has  been 
accounted  for  and  justified.  Amasai's  answer  that  moment  to  the  doubting  language 
and  bearing  of  David  should  properly  decide  all  either  one  way  or  the  other,  if  he  is  to 
be  depended  on  to  speak  truth  and  without  dissembling.  But  how  did  David  know 
this  ?  Could  he  unerringly  read  the  signs  and  trust  his  own  power  to  discern  ?  There 
are  moments  when  honesty  and  truth  may  be  said  to  be  unable  to  do  anything  else 
than  recognize  honesty  and  truth  ;  they  know  their  own  face  as  a  man  knows  his  own 
face  in  a  mirror.  Tone  also  tells  the  truth,  that  mere  words  may  not  be  depended  upon 
to  tell,  and  certainly  tone  and  look  and  manner  all  added  are  very  reliable  witnesses  one 
way  or  the  other,  witnesses  of  sincerity  or  insincerity.  Any  way,  it  is  scarcely  open  to 
us  in  any  fairness  to  suppose  that  David  would,  by  carelessness  or  by  self-confidence, 
lose  the  second  moment  the  very  advantages  which  his  caution  and  venial  suspicion 
show  that  he  was  in  quest  of  the  former  moment.  So  we  may  suppose  at  all  events 
that  the  same  Spirit  who  taught  Amasai  to  speak  aright  taught  David  to  hear  aright. 
At  the  same  time,  that  Spirit  himself  seldom  moves  without  signs  accompanying  aud 
following.    Some  evidences  of  this  may  be  observable  as  we  proceed.     Notice— 

I.  Some  evidences  of  sinceritt  stamped  on  the  answer  op  Amasal  1.  Its 
promptness.  There  was  no  hesitation,  no  casting  about  for  words,  no  lingering  to  con- 
trive safe  words.  A  falsehood  is  often  boldly  spoken,  and  the  tongue  of  insincerity  is 
practised  in  glibness  and  smoothness.  But  this  will  generally  be  in  paths  already  well 
known,  and  not  as  now,  when  perhaps  the  last  thing  to  have  been  expected  from  the 


CH.  xu.  1—40.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES;  17d 

lip  of  David  was  the  boldness  that  was  required  for  the  outspeaking  of  suspicion.  2. 
Its  unqualified  frankness.  No  limping  sentence,  no  lame  engagement,  no  offer  nor 
attempt  at  contract  or  bargain^  but  uncompromising  self-surrender :  "  Thine  are  we, 
David,  and  on  thy  side,  thou  son  of  Jesse."  Such  is  the  style  of  these  men  and  of 
zealous  fidelity  of  service.  3.  The  absence  of  the  sUghtesi  appearance  offeding  offended. 
There  might  have  seemed  room  in  such  a  case,  some  plausible  room,  for  betraying  a 
sense  of  affrontedness.  Honest  men  come  up  to  offer  their  allegiance,  love,  ana  very 
life,  and  they  are  met  with  question  sceptical  of  their  honesty.  This  was  a  growingly 
good  sign  of  their  sincerity,  for  the  affronted  man  often  enough  knows,  as  often  as  any 
bystander,  that  there  is  no  affront;  that  that  which  may  sound  like  affront  or  look 
like  it  is  the  necessity  of  wisdom  and  of  the  position,  and  he  betrays  himself  in  seeing 
the  dffront — betrays  that  he  wishes  to  take  it.  4.  The  discrimination  shown  in  the 
selection  qf  one  word  used  in  this  reply.  "  Peace "  is  the  key- word  of  their  reply. 
David  had  said — ^had  happened  to  say — no,  had  designed  to  say,  ''If  ye  be  come 
peaceably  unto  me  to  help  me."  Everything  lay  really  in  that  word  ** peaceably/* 
And  the  men  questioned,  perceived,  and  felt  it,  and  Amasai,  led  by  the  Spirit,  answers 
both  to  the  spirit  and  to  the  letter  of  the  somewhat  plaintive  melancholy  "if"  of 
David.  *'  Peace  "  is  the  burden  of  his  response.  6.  The  heart  and  earnestness  thrown 
into  the  reply y  "  Peace,  peace  be  unto  thee,  and  peace  be  to  thine  helpers."  David's  was 
a  question  of  peace  for  himself,  and  of  help  for  himself.  But  such  is  the  confidence  in 
their  cause  and  in  themselves  as  honest  men,  that  those  who  come  to  him  engage  and 
assure  "  Peace,  peace "  for  him  and  for  those  who  should  help  him.  This  loo&  like 
men  thoroughly  conversant  with  their  subject  and  thoroughly  confident  in  it.  They 
seem  to  want  to  say  that  there  is  no  stint  of  peace ;  their  persuasion  of  it  is  such  that 
they  are  sure  it  is  "  enough  "  for  him  and  *'  enough  for  all."  6.  ^ITie  piety  and  right 
sound  practical  theology  thrown  into  it.  The  answer  does  not  "  hesil  slightly."  It 
does  not  promise  "  peace  "  from  a  barren  source.  It  does  not  rest  its  own  confidence 
on  man.  "  For  thy  God  helpeth  thee  "  is  the  assigned  ground  of  Amasai's  confidence, 
that  peace  dawning  splendidly  and  surely  now  for  David  and  for  his  cause.  These 
men  themselves  had  done  right  to  wait  till  they  were  sure  that  the  call  was  of  (}od, 
and  that  God  was  with  David,  and  that  the  cause  of  David  was  the  cause  of  God. 
And  as  soon  as  they  were  convinced  of  this  they  came  to  David.  And  they  came  to 
help,  nerve,  and  brace  up  his  own  faith,  while  they  would  say  to  him,  '^  If  God  be 
with  thee,  who  can  be  against  thee ? "  "If  GK>d  be  with  thee,  what  but  peace  can 
attend  thy  steps  and  those  of  all  thy  helpers?" 

11.  Some  evidence  of  a  good  trustful  heart  in  David.  1.  He  also  makes  no 
delay.  He  receives  them  who  had  answered  so  well  and  so  much  to  the  point.  He 
receives  them  "  graciously."  And  became  then  and  there  a  feeble,  humble,  but  real 
type  of  him  who  "  receives  graciously "  all  who  humbly  and  with  the  spirit  of  self- 
surrender  and  faithful  service  come  to  him.  2.  He  heartily  trusts.  As  they  had  with 
heart  replied  to  him,  and  with  enthusiasm  proffered  to  join  him  and  his  cause,  he 
throws  at  once  to  the  winds  the  last  symptom  of  a  suspicion,  and  reposes  a  hearty  trust 
in  the  new-comers.  "  He  made  them  captains  of  the  band."  There  were  trust  and 
promotion  at  the  same  time.  It  is  not  one  of  the  least  interesting  parts  of  the  study 
of  the  manner  of  Jesus'  miracles  to  observe  how  against  those  occasions  on  which  for 
some  good  reason  he  saw  fit  to  keep  even  an  earnest  supplicant  waiting,  there  were 
others  in  which  alike  with  signal  promptness  he  blessed  them,  and  with  signal  trust 
and  condescension  called  them  to  his  service.  It  now  needed  no  condescemion  on  the 
part  of  David,  but  it  did  need  trust,  and  he  finally  acquits  himself  herein  of  any 
suspicion  of  possessing  a  heart  that  loves  suspicion. 

Yer.  40. — The  earnest  qf  human  joy.  When  the  joy  of  a  vast  number  of  people 
finds  expression  in  imison  it  must  needs  be  exceedingly  impressive.  Were  it  possible  to 
hear  at  once  that  consentaneous  volume  of  sound  of  gladness,  it  would  be  nothing  less 
than  overpowering  in  its  effect  Or,  if  it  were  possible  to  see  at  a  glance  all  the  signs 
and  all  the  manifestations  of  the  sparkling  gladness,  no  scene  of  outer  nature  could  be 
supposed  so  dazzling,  so  bewildering.  But  in  the  known  harmonious  joy  of  a  vast 
multitude  of  people,  it  is  not  the  mere  effect  upon  our  sense  of  the  expression  of  it  or 
the  manifestation  of  it  that  would  invest  it  with  its  most  real  and  in  fact  most  solemn 


180  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.    [cauLl— 401 

force.  This  would  rather  be  due  to  the  suggestions  tliickly,  richly  clustering  round 
about  it.  Whence  it  grew,  what  it  had  intrinsically  in  it,  and  to  what  it  was 
promising  to  grow,  would  assuredly  be  some  of  the  first  of  the  thought  which  we 
should  thereupon  think.  And  these  deeper,  less  visible  feeders  of  our  own  joy  would 
]nroye  the  more  lasting  and  the  more  significant  account  of  the  deep  feeling  wrought 
within  us.  The  point  of  Scripture  narrative  at  which  we  are  now  arrived  reveals  to 
us  a  whole  nation  in  the  crisis  of  its  joy.  There  are  peculiarities  about  that  joy  very 
possibly  of  a  merely  temporary  character,  but  there  are  others  that  are  good  for  study, 
as  permanent  in  their  nature  and  as  having  the  efficacy  of  principles.  Let  us  take  note—* 

I.  Of  some  of  the  causes  of  this  "jot  in  Israel."  The  nearer  causes  are 
not  doubtful.  For :  1.  The  people  were  glad  to  have  reached  the  termination  of  a  period 
harassed  by  suspense.  For  some  years  now  they  had  not  lived  under  any  certain 
satisfactory  rule.  If  their  armies  had  gone  out  best  equipped  and  full  of  courage  ia 
their  cause,  they  were  still  not  confideut  that  the  cause  was  a  safe  one,  a  right  one, 
one  that  would  command  the  presence  among  them  of  the  supreme  Leader  of  their 
hosts,  who  taught  their  hands  to  war  and  their  fingers  to  fight.  And  if  they  were 
awhile  at  peace  at  home,  they  had  no  guarantee  that  the  time  of  peace  was  one  of 
erowth  and  sound  healthy  prosperity.  The  family,  the  business  establishment,  is  ever 
m  uncertainty,  and  there  is  an  absence  of  satisfaction  if  the  parent  or  the  master  is 
all  uncertain  in  habit,  in  character,  in  principle.  2.  They  were  glad  to  have  a  king 
who  was  introduced  to  them  under  far  different  and  far  better  auspices  than  ever  their 
former  king  had  been.  Some  years  had  now  elapsed  since  Saul  took  office,  and 
though  he  was  anointed  by  Divine  command,  yet  the  distinct  announcement  was 
made  of  a  deep  disapproval  in  one  sense  on  the  part  of  the  only  real  King.  Under 
dark  omens  their  visible  monarchy  opened  upon  Israel.  And  the  thoughtful  and 
deeper-seeing  of  the  wise  and  good,  the  *'  Israelites  indeed "  among  them,  will  have 
early  wakened  to  the  process  that  was  going  on,  and  to  that  fulfilment  of  Divine  fore* 
bodings  that  was  transpiring  in  the  overcast  periods  of  Saul's  defection.  But  now  part 
of  their  punibhment  had  already  fallen,  and  for  a  time  they  had  reason  to  think  that 
fairer  things  were  before  them.  They  with  reason  thought  that  the  kins  of  their  own 
enthusiastic  choice  this  day  was  also  "  the  man  after  God's  own  heart.'  They  knew 
he  was  not  an  untried  man.  They  knew  rather  how  tried  he  had  been  and  also  how 
he  had  been  tried,  and  how  he  had  borne  and  acquitted  himself  in  the  trial,  so  as  to 
command  the  growing  honour,  esteem,  and  love  of  all  the  people.  How  tremendous  the 
difference  and  the  consequences  of  the  difference  between  a  good  leader,  parent,  teacher, 
master,  ruler,  and  a  bad  or  indifferent  one  I  No  man  is  so  obscure,  so  stripped  of  all 
surroundings,  as  to  be  absolutely  bereft  of  influence  and  **  to  live  to  himself"  alone,  but 
they  whose  very  life-place  and  life-business  are  to  "  lead  "  or  "  shepherd  "  in  any  way 
are  in  the  very  opposite  extreme  of  such  a  supposition,  and  the  consequences  of  just 
what  they  are,  what  they  say,  what  they  do,  are  incalculable  in  momentousness  and 
in  responsibility.  And  an  unwilling  people  show  now  that  they  had  become  very 
fully  alive  to  this  fact.  3.  All  Israel  were  glad  because  all  Israel  were  now 
again  one  and  at  one  in  the  matter  of  their  king  and  leader.  One  tabernacle  and  one 
court,  one  palace,  one  king,  one  administration  of  justice,  now  again  they  can  call 
theirs.  They  do  not  feel  the  humiliation,  the  disgrace,  the  practical  disadvantage  of 
the  contrary  of  these.  One  of  the  keenest  reproaches  which  the  enemies  of  Israel  must 
have  often  flung  in  their  face  was  their  divided  state  under  so  much  of  Saul's  nominal 
kingship  and  for  a  few  years  subsequently, 

II.  Of  some  of  the  deeper  elements  fixino  the  characteb  of  this  joy.  One 
of  these  did  no  doubt  at  this  time  play  a  considerable  part,  though  the  people  were 
largely  unconscious  of  it.  For :  1.  Even  the  mistaken  aspiration  and  that  which  was 
counted  to  them  as  a  sin,  to  have  a  visible  king,  did  for  all  that  mark  an  aspiration, 
and  this  also  was  counted  to  them  and  counted  for  good  so  far  as  ever  they  permitted 
it.  The  very  language  in  which  they  originally  worded  their  desire  was  remarkable, 
in  this  respect,  though  somewhat  less  so  in  that  they  quoted  as  some  precedent  the 
fashion  of  surrounding  nations — no  models  for  them,  **  Make  us  a  king  to  judge  us, 
•  •  .  that  we  also  may  be  like  all  the  nations ;  and  that  our  king  may  judge  us,  and 
go  out  before  us,  and  fight  our  battles  "  (1  Sam.  viii.  5 — 20).  The  large  multitude  of 
people  in  different  tribes  sharply  outlined,  and  in  families  surprisingly  registered,  were 


% 


CH.  xa.  1—40.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa  181 

feeling  for  somethins  the  reverse  of  classification — the  oneness  of  national  life.  And 
at  present  they  found  the  spiritual  effort  by  itself  severe.  They  craved  some  embodi- 
ment of  the  ideas  and  feelings  which  were  now  strongly  working  within  them.  And 
their  sin  in  desiring  in  aid  hereof  a  visible  judge,  warrior,  king,  was  in  kind  but  like 
the  sin  of  all  those  who  do  not  rise  to  their  opportunity  and  who  do  live  below  their 
time  of  day,  their  light,  their  revekUion,  God  is  ever,  by  providence  and  by  word, 
pronouncing  our  human  nature  to  be  capable  of  doing  better  things  than  it  does,  and 
of  rising  to  higher  things  than  it  consents  to  acknowledge  by  corresponding  effort. 
However  on  the  lower  level  this  people  may  be  beheld,  and  behdd  with  some 
sympathy,  as  they  now  yearned  for  a  closer  brotherhood,  a  more  homogeneous  develop- 
ment of  national  life,  aaemblance  still  of  the  perfect  model,  of  which,  however  strangely, 
they  "judged  themselves  unworthy."  They  took,  or  certainly  seemed  to  themselves 
to  take,  a  great  step  in  advance  in  this  respect  when  to-day  they  not  only  rejoiced 
around  a  king,  one  of  their  own  choice  and  of  God*s  distinctest  choice  as  well,  but 
when  cUl  of  them  were  united  thus  to  rejoice.  There  were  no  longer  two  kings,  one 
nominal,  the  other  real,  nor  a  people  divided  into  two  at  least,  and  an  army  in  two 
camps,  but  when  "  all  Israel "  felt  and  showed  and  spoke  the  great  joy  with  heartfelt^ 
spontaneous  unanimity.  2.  Akin  to  this,  less  acknowledged  but  not  less  potent 
stimulus  of  a  united  nation's  joy,  may  be  ranged  the  various  life,  and  character,  and 
age,  and  condition,  all  fairly  represented,  which  swelled  the  bulk  of  it.  All  classes  of 
citizen  life,  and  the  priest  and  the  warrior ;  all  conditions  of  the  life  of  that  time,  and 
the  rich  and  the  poor;  all  ages  of  lifetime,  the  man  laden  with  memories  and  the 
young  man,  the  strong  and  the  weak ; — ^none  were  shut  out  firom  this  joy.  And  thuA 
this  multifarious  composition  of  it  helped  to  fix  the  joy. 

III.  Of  some  of  the  lasting  suggestions  of  it.  1.  May  it  not  justly  suggest 
the  thought  of  the  fulness  and  special  bliss  there  is  about  unselfish  joy.  Our  individual 
joy  is  often  taioted  with  selfishness,  or  self-regard  only.  Our  domestic  joy  is  not 
unfrequently  tarnished  by  it.  Most  of  the  organizations  of  which  we  form  parts  are 
open  to  fostering  in  some  degree  the  same  partial  fellowship  of  joy.  But  a  general 
national  joy  largely  escapes  this  snare  of  partial  measure.  2.  Does  it  not  opportunely 
suggest  the  large  reserve  of  capacity  of  joy  there  must  be  at  present  in  human 
nature?  We  have  just  enough,  wo  may  bo  thankful  to  believe,  to  supply  to  us  the 
requisite  light  and  heat  in  the  history  of  most  men,  but  there  is  more  cloud  and 
darkness,  more  rain  and  cold,  than  there  is  of  the  real  experience  and  outburst  of  joy. 
We  have  no  right  to  be  unthankful  for  what  our  inner  sky  is,  and  for  the  amount  of 
peace  and  serenity,  warming  betimes  into  cheerfulness  and  into  genialness,  granted  to 
us.  But  where  the  most  and  the  best  of  these  are  true,  we  can  never  mistake  them 
for  the  surrender  of  our  powers,  susceptibility,  and  very  self  to  the  amplitude  of  joy, 
of  which  they  are  capable  even  here.  But  least  of  all  is  it  common  to  find  the 
maximum  of  joy  spr^  at  the  same  time  over  the  maximum  of  people.  3.  And 
does  it  not  betoken  something  of  the  rapture  of  tomectant  humanity — ^humanity 
perfected,  redeemed,  sanctified  ?  Ood  is  full  of  joy.  We  cannot  dare  to  form  an  idea 
of  him  antagonistic  to  such  a  principle.  ^  Fallen  short  of  his  glory,"  as  we  now  are, 
we  have  become  almost  too  complacently  reconciled  to  the  forfeit  paid,  to  the  present 
toned-down  temper  of  life,  to  its  present  strong  admixture  of  sorrow,  woe,  darkness, 
and  we  may  detect  ourselves  sometimes  thinking  this  to  be  the  essential  condition 
instead  of  the  severe  rebuke  rising  gradually  into  the  beneficial  discipline  of  life.  But 
no ;  "  we  look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,**  in  which,  as  surely  as  "  righteousness 
shall  dwell,**  so  surely  shall  joy  reign  for  ever  and  ever.  How  universal,  how  impartial, 
how  perfect  in  all  highest  elements  of  it,  will  be  that  harmony  of  human  joy,  when  the 
kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  have  all  merged  in  the  kingdom  of  the  one  great  King, 
eternal,  immortal,  invisible,  and  he  shall  have  become  the  Chosen  of  all  nations,  of 
every  tribe  and  family — ^'^ great  David's  greater  Sou*'! 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  8— 16.— 7%e  Qadita,  Like  gathers  to  like— the  brave  to  the  brave,  the  good  to 
the  good.    It  is  human  nature  at  its  best  which  recognizes  and  rejoices  in  superiority^ 


182  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,    [en.  xn.  1— 4a 

Homage  and  obedience  should  be  freely  rendered  where  they  are  juatiy  claimed  and 
truly  deserved.  Observe  the  qualities  and  exploits  of  these  sods  of  Gad  who  gathered 
to  David  and  offered  him  their  swords.  They  were  men  of  might,  bold  as  liona,  swift 
PS  eagles ;  men  tfkiiful  in  the  use  of  their  weapons,  apt  for  war,  brave  in  danger,  **  good 
at  need ; "  men  whose  deecls  were  in  the  lips  of  a  nation,  memorable  and  unforgotten. 
We  may  discern  in  the  qualities  of  these  valiant  Oadites  the  qualities  which  (mtUatig 
mufaniitM)  should  characierixe  Christians  as  the  soldiers  of  Christ  and  oombatanta  in 
the  **  holy  war." 

L  The  soldxebs  of  the  cross  abb  deyotedlt  attached  to  theib  Commahdkb. 
As  the  Gadites  '*  separated  themselves  unto  David,"  so  Cnristians  are  drawn  by  the 
Diviue  Spirit  to  the  standard  of  Immanuel.  It  is  distiuctive  of  Christianity  that  it 
involves  pereonal  attachment  and  allejj;iance  to  the  Redeemer.  Chrint  is  **  the  Captain 
of  our  salvation."  Tu  him  we  owe  our  loyalty ;  at  his  summons  we  draw  the  apihtoal 
sword ;  in  his  cause  we  fight. 

IL  The  soldiers  of  the  cross  are  divinelt  qualified  fob  the  cohfugt. 
Their  heavenly  Leader  alike  provides  them  with  weapons  and  breathes  courage  into 
their  souls.  When  he  enlists  them  in  his  spiritual  host,  he  disciplines  and  trains 
them  for  the  warfare.  He  imparts  those  moral  qualities  of  endurance  and  boldness, 
1  romptness  and  devotion,  by  which  alone  they  can  be  qualified  to  **  fight  the  good  fight 
of  faith." 

II L  The  soldiers  of  the  cross  are  expected,  bt  Divine  aid,  to  achikts 
QBE  AT  EXPLOITS.  The  enemy  is  indeed  formidable,  his  opposition  is  fierce.  "We 
wrestle  with  principalities  and  powers."  Within  and  without  we  encounter  a  foe 
whose  craft  and  power  we  must  not  under-estimate.  Tet  have  the  soldiers  of  Christ 
no  reason  for  discouragement.  The  weapons  of  their  warfare,  though  not  carnal,  are 
mizhty.  Their  Leader  has  conquered,  and  has  taken  his  seat  upon  his  victorious  throne ; 
and  thence  he  inspirits,  directs,  and  helps  them.  The  giant  forms  and  mighty  forces 
of  error  and  ignorance,  of  superstition  and  infidelity,  of  vice,  crime,  and  sin,  are  all 
(destined  to  give  way  before  the  onset  of  the  spiritual  forces  of  Immanuel.  It  is  a  "  holy 
war  "  to  which  Christians  are  summoned.  Certain  victory  awaits  the  faithful  combatant. 

Concluding  appeal.  Christ  calls  upon  every  hearer  of  the  gospel  to  enlist  under 
his  banner. 

**  The  Son  of  God  goes  forth  to  war, 
A  kingly  crown  to  gain ; 
His  blood-red  banner  Btrenms  afar : 
Who  follows  in  his  train  ?  " 

T. 

Ver.  18. — Loyalty,  It  was  the  suspicion  and  the  adjuration  of  David  that  called 
forth  this  passionate  language  of  devotion  and  loyalty  on  the  part  of  Amasai,  the 
spokesman  of  the  men  of  Benjamin  and  Judah.  When  these  men  came  forwsjd, 
offering  their  swords  to  the  valiant  son  of  Jesse,  he  appears  to  have  suspected  them  of 
treacherous  designs.  If  language  could  prove  their  sincerity,  the  language  recorded  in 
the  text  must  have  had  this  effect :  "  Thine  are  we,  David,  and  on  thy  side, . . .  peace  be 
unto  thee,  and  ...  to  thine  helpers ;  for  thy  God  heli)eth  thee."  It  is  remarkable  that 
this  utterance  is  declared  to  have  been  prompted  by  "  the  Spirit,"  i.e,  of  God  himself, 
who  is  the  Author  of  truth,  sincerity,  and  fidelity.  If  we  take  this  language  as  appro- 
priate, when  addressed  by  Christians  to  their  Divine  Lord,  it  brings  before  our  minds 
the  nature  and  obligation  of  Christian  loyalty, 

L  Christdinb  recognize  in  their  Savioub  the  "  Help  of  the  Lord."  This  is 
the  literal  meaning  of  the  name  "  Jesus,"  i,e.  "  the  Help  or  Salvation  of  Jehovah." 
David's  Son  and  David's  Lord  is  "  mighty  to  save ; "  in  him  the  Lord  has  indeed  "  laid 
help  upon  One  who  is  mighty." 

n.  Christians  acknowledqe  the  royal  authority  of  Christ.  He  was  King, 
even  when  here  upon  earth  in  his  humiliation,  even  when  crowned  with  thorns,  when 
his  sceptre  was  a  reed,  when  he  wore  the  purple  robe  laid  over  his  shoulders  in  mockery. 
How  much  more  manifestly  is  he  King,  now  that  he  is  in  glory  1  Every  loyal  subject 
of  the  Lord  Christ  delights  to  acknowledge  his  sovereignty,  to  do  him  horoagCi  to  offer 
him  tribute,  to  obey  his  wilL 


cii.  XII.  1—40.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  183 

III.  Christians  offer  to  Christ  their  hearts  and  their  service.  ''Thine 
are  we."  Such  is  the  exclamation  of  the  true  soldiers  of  the  cross.  We  are  his  by 
every  bond.  He  has  a  right  to  our  love,  our  life,  our  all.  Let  him  be  enthroned  in 
our  spirits ;  let  him  rule  in  our  life ;  let  his  love  inspire  our  devotion ;  let  his  law 
direct  our  active  service. 

lY.  Christians  desire  and  prat  for  the  peobperttt  of  Christ's  cause. 
"  Peace,"  said  the  Benjamite  to  David,  *'  Peace  be  unto  thee,  and  ...  to  thine  helpers!" 
If  our  hearts  are  given  to  Christ,  nothing  will  be  so  dear  to  us  as  the  progress  of  his 
kingdom,  the  prosperity  of  his  cause,  the  honour  of  his  gracious  Name.  "  Pray  for  the 
peace  of  Jeruasilem."  **  Prayer  also  shall  be  made  for  him  continually,  and  daily  shall 
he  be  praised." — T. 

Ver.  22. — A  great  work  needs  great  help.  The  way  in  which  David  was  prepared 
for  the  sovereignty  over  Israel  is  very  remarkable.  He  himself  was  disciplined  by 
adversity  for  days  of  power  and  prosperity.  And  the  people  were  gradually,  during 
the  later  years  of  Saul's  life  and  reign,  made  ready  for  the  transfer  of  their  allegiance 
to  his  nobler  successor.  His  life  as  an  outlaw  was  one  of  many  dangers  and  perplexities 
and  straits.  But  during  this  period  many  able  and  valiant  men  became  acquainted 
with  the  daring  and  sagacious  chief,  learned  to  trust  in  him,  attached  themselves  to 
bis  camp,  aod  qualified  themselves  for  posts  of  honour  and  authority  in  the  kingdom 
that  was  to  be  founded  by  the  son  of  Jesse.  It  was  "  at  that  time,"  that,  "  day  by  day, 
there  came  to  David  to  help  him,  until  it  was  a  great  host  Tory '  camp  '1  like  the  camp 
of  God." 

L  In  accomplishing  a  great  work.  Providence  makes  use  of  an  indiyidual 
AS  the  centre  of  influence  and  as  the  leader  of  others.  Israel  was  to  be 
consolidated  into  a  mighty  nation,  and  Qod  chose  David  to  do  the  work.  He  qualified 
him  by  his  Spirit ;  gave  him  valour  and  prudence  and  the  power  of  attracting  others 
and  attaching  them  to  himself.  And  when  God  would  restore  humanity  to  its  intended 
purpose,  and  establish  his  kingdom  upon  earth,  he  "  set  his  King  upon  his  holy  hUl  of 
Zion."  He  chose  to  accomplish  the  great  end  by  means  of  the  Son  of  man,  David's  Son 
and  David's  Lord. 

IL  GOU  GATHERS  MEN  AROUND  THIS  INDIVIDUAL  BT  THE  ATTRACTION  OF  SYMPATHY 

AND  FELLOWSHIP.  David'd  fellow-countrymeu  recognized  in  him  the  qualifications 
necessary  for  a  leader,  a  commander,  a  king.  The  valiant  and  capable,  the  flower  of 
the  youth,  were  drawn  to  him  by  the  bonds  of  a  mighty  attraction.  He  could  never 
have  done  the  work  entrusted  to  him  if  he  had  been  left  alone.  But  he  found 
lieutenants,  counsellors,  friends,  with  whose  help  everything  became  possible  which 
was  possible  to  man.  This  was  an  emblem  of  the  power  which  Christ  possesses  to 
attacn  men's  souls  to  himself.  " I,"  said  he,  "if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto 
myself."  It  was  so  at  the  beginning.  The  apostles  were  Christ's  lieutenants  and  captains 
in  his  holv  war.  The  early  history  of  the  Church  tells  how  capable  and  devoted  men 
were  raised  up,  to  teach  and  preach,  to  organize  and  administer,  to  write  and  expound, 
to  suffer,  to  witness,  and  to  die.  And  firom  that  time  there  has  never  been  an  era  in  which 
noble,  brave,  self-denying  men  have  not  been  drawn  to  the  Saviour  by  the  magnetism 
of  the  Spirit's  influence,  and  qualified  to  render  service  to  the  Church  and  to  its 
Lord. 

III.  These  helpers  come  successively  and  constantly,  as  need  reqihres. 
David's  confederates  came  in  successive  bands,  as  emergencies  arose  in  which  they 
were  needed.  His  heart  must  have  been  cheered  as  they  came,  unexpectedly  and  yet 
most  welcome,  "  day  by  day."  A  gradual  and  constant  accession  was  thus  made  to  his 
following,  and  to  his  power  to  rule  when  the  right  time  came.  It  is  the  same  in  the 
kingdom  of  Christ,  wnich  **  cometh  not  with  observation,"  but  the  history  of  which  is, 
nevertheless,  one  of  incessant  progress.  In  many  ways  God  is  bringing  souls  to  the 
camp  of  his  Son.  And  his  warriors  shall  be  numerous  as  the  dewdrops  of  the  morning, 
as  the  stars  in  the  heavenly  host  of  God. 

IV.  By  the  agency  of  numerous  and  mighty  helpers  the  great  work  is  to  be 
ACCOMPLISHED.  The  preparations  made,  according  to  the  text,  issued  in  the  establish- 
ment of  a  throne  and  dominion.  And  Christ's  kingdom  is  to  come  on  earth,  not  by 
the  agency  of  angels  or  by  the  instrumentality  of  miracles,  but  by  the  consecrated 


184  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa     [ch.xil1— 4a 


adhesion  of  devoted,  fearless,  and  self-denying  spirits.    In  every  congregation  maj 
many  come,  day  by  day,  to  Christ,  to  help  him  in  his  kingdom  and  his  warfare  I — ^T. 


Yer.  32. — Men  of  understanding.  The  position  of  Issachar  amons  the  tribes 
one  central  and  desirable.  Some  of  the  richest  land  in  Palestine  fell  to  their  lot, 
and  they  seem  to  have  enjoyed  material  prosperity.  The  strong  ass  crunched  between 
burdens  is  emblematical  alike  of  plenty  and  of  toil.  How  to  connect  Issachar's  pros- 
perity in  hmibandry  with  the  characteristics  of  the  text  is  by  no  means  easy,  perhaps 
not  possible.  Hut  it  is  high  praise  which  the  chronicler  accords  to  this  tribe,  or  to  **  the 
beads  "  or  leaders  among  them — they  were  **  men  that  had  understanding  of  the  timeSy 
to  know  what  Israel  ought  to  do." 

I.  The  Giver  of  wisdom  is  God.  He  is  "  the  Father  of  lights."  "  If  any  man  lack 
wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God."  From  him  alone  counsel  and  guidance  proceed.  By  his 
Spirit  he  enlightens  men.    Hence  the  reasonableness  and  the  importance  of  prayer. 

II.  The  meakb  of  oainino  wisdom  are  wituin  mek's  reach.  No  doubt  there  are 
certain  natural  qualifications ;  yet  these  may  either  be  left  undeveloped,  or  may  be 
cultivated.  Observation,  conversation  with  the  learned,  the  wise,  and  the  experienced, 
reading,  practical  conduct  of  affairs, — all  these  are  means  of  acquiring  wisdom.  Nor 
must  wo  overlook  one  potent  agency — "  Years,  that  bring  the  philosophic  mind." 

III.  Practical  life  is  the  great  sphere  of  wisdom.  The  text  alludes  to  present 
necessities.  Issachar  had  "  understanding  of  the  times."  True  wisdom  does  not  lie  in 
comprehending  past  states  of  society,  so  much  as  in  realizing  the  characteristics  and 
needs  of  our  own  days.  The  text  alludes  also  to  action.  Historical  and  scientific  and 
speculative  knowledge  are  all  good.  But  knowledge  reduced  to  practice  is  wisdom. 
What  Israel  ought  to  do ;  this  was  what  the  wise  men  of  this  tribe  were  competent  to 
decide.  We  may  set  aside  all  the  explanations  of  this  passage  which  represent  the 
men  of  Issachar  as  versed  in  astronomy,  chronology,  or  other  studies.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  the  reference  is  to  political  sagacity,  military  promptness,  and  practical  habits. 
These  men  recognized  in  David  a  faculty  for  ruling,  strongly,  justly,  and  religiously ; 
and  accordingly  they  were  forward  to  give  in  their  adhesion  to  the  son  of  Jesse,  to 
repair  to  Hebron,  and  take  part  in  the  election  and  installation  of  the  new  king. 

Lessons.  1.  Remember  that  we  are  made  for  action;  knowledge  is  valuable  as 
qualifying  for  practical  life.  2.  Wisdom,  qualifying  for  the  duties  of  our  several 
stations,  is  within  all  men*s  reach.  3.  Statesmen  especially  should  make  it  their  study 
to  know  what  the  nation  owjht  to  do. — T. 

Ver,  33. — "  Singleness  of  heart"  Several  of  the  tribes  who  joined  in  electing  David 
king  are  characterized  by  the  chronicler  in  a  few  graphic  words.  It  was  good  testimony 
which  was  borne  to  the  warriors  of  Zebulun,  that  "  they  were  not  of  double  heart." 
Not  in  war  only,  but  in  all  the  affairs  of  life,  and  especially  in  religion,  it  is  a  weakness 
to  be  double-hearted ;  it  is  strength  to  have  a  single  heart — to  be,  as  in  the  Hebrew, 
*'  without  a  heart  and  heart." 

I.  Describe  the  character  and  position  of  the  double-hearted.  1.  Those 
may  be  assigned  to  this  class  who  are  undecided  whether  to  serve  God  or  the  world. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  those  who  are  in  such  a  state  of  mind  are  decided,  for  the  present, 
against  God.  "He  that  is  not  with  me  is  a;zainst  me."  It  is  a  pitiable,  weak, 
unhappy  condition,  and  none  should  remain  in  it  for  a  single  day.  "  If  the  Lord  be 
Gtid,  serve  him  ;  but  if  Baal,  then  serve  him."  2.  Those  also  may  be  termed  double- 
hearted  who  are  attempting  to  serve  both  God  and  the  world.  There  are  misguided 
persons  who  flatter  themselves  that  they  can  rank  with  both  the  opposing  forces. 
Christ  has  spoken  very  plainly  upon  this  matter,  saying,  "  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and 
mammon ; "  "  No  man  can  serve  two  masters,  for . . .  he  will  love  the  one  and  hate  the 
other."  3.  There  are  those  who  profess  to  serve  God,  hut,  in  reality  and  in  their  heart 
of  hearts,  are  serving  the  world.  These  profess  a  single  eye  to  God*s  glory ;  but  in 
truth  they  are  ever  seeking,  as  the  great  aim  of  their  life,  their  own  glory,  or  wealth, 
or  pleasure,  or  ease.  These  are  hypocrites;  against  such  the  censure  and  condemna- 
tion of  Christ  are  stem  and  unmistakable. 

II.  Describe  the  othlt  and  mischief  of  double-heartedness.  1.  It  is  dis* 
honouring  to  Qod,  who  has  a  just  claim  upon  a  perfect  allegiance  and  service.    By 


CH.xiLl-40.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  185 


every  claim  we  are  bis,  and  his  only,  and  to  witbbold  from  bim  augbt  that  is  onrs  if 
an  infringement  upon  his  rights.  His  demand  is  a  just  and  unvarying  one :  "  My 
son,  give  me  thine  heart."  2.  It  is  evidence  of  ingratitude  towards  Christ,  When  the 
Lord  Jesus  undertook  our  redemption,  he  did  not  leave  bis  work  half  finished,  for  he 
did  not  undertake  it  with  half  a  heart,  with  a  divided  purpose,  a  distracted  love.  Shall 
we  give  a  divided  heart  to  him  who  gave  himself  for  us?  3.  It  is  disastrotu  in  its 
effect  upon  those  who  witness  its  exhibition.  How  many  young  minds  have  been  preju- 
diced against  religion  by  the  double-beartedness  of  its  professors  I  And  what  mis- 
chief has  been  wrought  in  society  by  such  a  spectacle  I  How  often  has  it  shaken 
the  confidence  and  deterred  the  progress  of  inquirers  into  Christianity  1  4.  It 
is  deteriorating  to  the  character  of  those  who  are  tempted  into  it.  What  more  con- 
temptible than  vacillation ?  "A  double-minded  man  is  unstable  in  all  his  ways.** 
The  longer  the  habit  is  persevered  in,  the  more  mischievous  are  its  consequences  to  its 
victim.  He  cannot  but  sink  in  his  own  esteem  and  lose  the  strength  which  is 
imparted  by  self-respect. 

Lessons.  1.  Remind  those  of  double  heart  of  the  fearful  danger  to  which  this  sin 
exposes  them.  2.  Warn  Christians  against  the  temptations  of  sin  and  the  world. 
3.  Encourage  the  young  to  give  their  wnole  heart  to  their  Qod  and  Saviour. — T. 

Yer.  38. — Union.  Too  often  the  counsels  of  Israel  were  divided,  and  their  true 
interest  frustrated  by  party  spirit,  by  envy,  by  faction.  The  occasion  before  us  was 
one  of  national  harmony  and  co-operation.  To  make  David  king  the  people  were  of 
one  heart.  A  lesson  this  as  to  the  spirit  and  the  attitude  becoming  in  the  Church  of 
Christ. 

I.  The  foundation  of  Christian  unitt.  The  unity  to  be  desired  is  not  nominal 
or  formal,  but  real.  This  unity  consists  of:  1.  Stibmission  to  one  Lord,  As  Israel 
did  homage  and  rendered  obedience  to  one  king,  David,  so  wo,  as  Christians,  are 
bound  to  be  subject  to  the  authority  of  our  rightful  Prince,  even  Christ,  David's  Son 
and  David's  Lord.  2.  Acknowledgment  of  one  faith.  The  unity  of  the  faith  is  real. 
All  who  are  Christ's  receive  the  truth  of  Christ,  and  hold  it  fast  for  his  sake.  A 
common  principle,  a  common  sympathy,  a  common  aim,  impart  unity  to  those  who 
cherish  them.  3.  Reception  of  one  baptism.  The  same  Spirit  descends,  in  copious 
showers,  upon  all  the  followers  of  Jesus  Christ,  making  them  partakers  of  the  same 
purity  and  the  same  spiritual  life. 

II.  The  proofs  and  signs  of  unitt.  Unity  consists  in  one  attitude  towards 
Heaven,  but  it  declares  itself  by  certain  palpable  manifestations  amons^st  Christians. 
Especially  mutual  love,  confidence,  and  helpfulness,  and  common  sacrifices  of  prayer 
and  praise,  and  common  labours  for  the  world's  enlightenment  and  salvation. 

III.  The  blessed  results  of  unity.  These  are :  1.  Happiness.  Discord  is  fruitful 
of  misery;  harmony  of  felicity  and  joy.  A  united  Church  is  a  happy  Church. 
2.  Strength.  L'union  fait  la  force.  Israel  under  David  was  powerful,  because  all 
were  of  one  mind  and  heart.  So  in  the  Church  of  the  living  God.  A  united  Church 
is  a  strong  Church.  Its  enemies  cannot  reproach  or  despise  it.  3.  Efficiency.  Christ, 
the  great  Head  and  High  Priest  of  the  Church,  saw  this.  Hence  the  language  of  his 
prayer :  **  That  they  all  may  be  one  . . .  that  the  world  may  know  that  thou  hast 
sent  me."  Oh  that  the  whole  world  were  *'  of  one  heart "  in  acknowledging  Jesua  as 
King  of  kings,  in  crowning  him  Lord  of  all  I — ^T. 

Ver.  40. — **  Joy  in  laraelJ*  After  the  reign  of  Saul,  with  all  its  caprice,  violence, 
and  irreligiousness,  it  was  with  something  more  than  a  feeling  of  relief  that  Israel 
welcomed  the  accession  of  his  successor.  The  unity  of  the  people  was  manifested  in 
the  large  and  representative  assembly  that  gathered  together  at  Hebron,  and  the 
cordial  sympathy  of  the  absent  in  the  presents  and  tribute  forwarded  from  all  parts 
of  the  land.  The  feasting  was  prolonged  for  three  days ;  for  the  tables  were  abun- 
dantly furnished  by  the  contributions  of  the  several  tribes,  even  from  those  in  the 
northern  districts  of  Palestine.  Let  us  regard  the  "  joy  in  Israel "  as  emblematic  of 
that  which  pervades  Christendom  in  the  acknowledgment  of  Christ's  Divine  and  regal 
authority. 

L  The  occasion  of  this  joy.    It  is  the  sovereignty  of  the  Mesnah.    ^  I  have  aet  my 


186  TUE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  TUE  CHRONICLES,     [en.  xii.  1— 40. 

King  upon  my  holy  bill  of  Zion."  Christ  is  the  rightful  King  of  humanity.  He  U  the 
acknowledged  and  actual  King  of  his  ransomed  Church.  "  Ue  shall  reign  until  he  hath 
put  every  enemy  under  his  feet."  Surely  a  race,  distracted  by  lawlessnesa  and 
rebellion,  may  well  rejoice  when  assured  that  a  King  so  mighty  and  so  wiae  ascends 
his  rightful  throne. 

II.  The  subjects  of  this  joy.  **  Let  Israel  bo  glad.**  They  who  own  Jesus  as  King 
are  the  proper  persons  to  offer  the  sacrifices  of  rejoicing.  How  many  are  the  adnumi* 
tions  we  find  in  Scripture  to  rejoice  in  the  reign  of  Immanuel  1  "  Let  all  the  children  of 
Judah  be  joyful  in  their  king  1 "  With  shouts  of  acclaim  and  songs  of  welcome  do 
Christ's  people  exalt  him  to  the  throne  of  their  loyal  hc^arts. 

III.  The  manifestatioks  of  this  joy.  Joy  is  not  wont  to  be  silent  The  ciders  and 
chief  captains  of  Israel  held  high  festival  because  David  accepted  the  crown.  And  Christ's 
true  subjects  cannot  do  other  than  speak  forth  his  praise  and  celebrate  his  exploits. 

IV.  The  results  of  this  jov.  If  we  feel  the  gladness  which  Christ's  kingship  is 
fitted  to  awaken,  we  shall  fiua  it  easy  to  submit  and  to  obey ;  we  shall  learn  that 
"  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength  ;  we  shall  have  some  earnest  of  the  higher  and 
immortal  joy  which  shall  fill  the  courts  of  heaven. 

Lessons.  I.  A  rebuke  to  gloomy  Christians,  Tour  faith,  if  you  have  any,  most  be 
feeble  indeed  if  joy  is  a  strange  emotion  to  your  heart.  2.  An  encouragement  to 
rejoicing  Christiana  to  turn  their  joy  into  motive  power,  that  they  may  aid  in  the 
culture  of  holiness  and  in  the  achievements  of  Christian  service. — T. 

Vers.  1 — 15,  19 — 22. — Th  service  of  the  supreme  King,  In  the  attitude  of  David 
and  in  the  services  rendered  to  him  at  this  juncture  in  his  history  we  have  hints  as  to 
our  true  bearing  toward  the  King  of  kings  at  ail  times. 

L  That  we  mat  sometimes  serve  God  best  bt  patient  waiting.  For  some  years 
after  David  knew  that  he  was  to  be  King  of  Israel,  he  had  to  "  bide  his  time."  His 
duty  was  to  **  keep  himself  close  *'  (ver.  1).  Any  positive  efifort  to  acquire  the  royal 
seat  would  have  been  premature ;  it  would  have  been  disloyal,  and  would  only  have 
defeated  bis  own  end.  There  are  times  when  we  have  to  wait  for  opportunity  to  ofier 
(e.g,  the  missionaries  of  Madagascar  until  the  death  of  the  cruel  Ranavalona).  Patience 
as  well  as  zeal  is  a  factor  in  the  service  of  the  Supreme.  "  All  things  come  to  him  who 
knows  how  to  wait."  Our  eagerness  must  not  run  into  impatience ;  activity  should 
be  early,  but  not  premature. 

II.  That  in  the  active  service  of  God  we  should  employ  all  our  availablb 
RESOURCES.  The  men  of  Benjamin  *'  could  use  both  the  right  hand  and  the  left,"  etc. 
(ver.  2).  "  Of  the  Gadites  there  separated  themselves . . .  men  of  might,  and  men  of  war, 
fit  for  the  battle,  that  could  handle  shield  and  buckler,"  etc.  (ver.  8).  These  soldiers  of  the 
army  of  David  were  men  that  were  thoroughly  and  perfectly  equipi)ed  for  their  work. 
No  mere  "  food  for  powder"  were  they ;  they  were  trained  and  skilled,  competent  to  do 
all  that  was  possible  in  the  military  achievements  of  the  age.  As  soldiers  in  the  nobler 
spiritual  campaign  for  which  we  have  enlisted,  we  are  to  be  masters  of  the  art  of  war ; 
wo  are  to  bo  able  to  do  all  that  is  possible  to  skilled  and  faithful  men.  To  be  this  we 
must :  1.  Serve  with  all  our  spiritual  faculties;  cultivate  strength  and  speed,  be  as  the 
lion  for  one  and  as  the  roe  for  the  other ;  we  must  summon  all  our  mental  and  moral 
capabilities  to  the  work — memory,  reflection,  reason,  imagination,  emotion,  etc. ;  we 
must  employ  argument,  wit,  illustration,  remonstrance,  entreaty,  etc.  2.  Turn  our 
physical  as  well  as  our  spiritual  faculties  to  account.  3.  Know  how  to  defend  as  well 
as  to  attack,  how  to  use  shield  as  well  as  sword  (ver.  8).  4.  Lay  hold  on  favourable 
occasion  (vers.  15,  19 — 21).  And  in  thus  putting  out  all  our  talents  (Matt.  xxv. 
14 — 30)  we  must  remember  that  (1)  only  i)atient  continuance  in  holy  effort  will 
make  us  skilful  and  serviceable ;  the  Benjamitcs  must  have  had  to  go  through  much 
discipline  before  they  could  shoot  as  well  with  one  hand  as  with  the  other.  We  must 
not  be  daunted  or  discouraged  by  the  crudeness  or  even  the  clumsiness  of  our  first 
attempts.  (2)  Faithful  service  will  make  its  mark  on  ourselves  as  well  as  others 
(ver.  8);  we  shall  acquire  the  lion-face,  the  coimtenance  which  will  say,  without 
words,  "  Let  no  man  trouble  me ;  for  I  bear  in  m>  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 
Thus  will  the  strength  of  our  soul  pass  into  our  eye,  and  body  and  spirit  will  be  allies 
in  the  cause  of  the  King. 


CII.XU.1— 40.]      TUB  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa  187 


III.  That  wb  must  bb  beadt  to  take  thb  plagb  for  which  Gk)D  has  itttbd  ua, 
"  Of  the  SODS  of  Gad,  one  of  the  least  was  over  an  hundred,  and  the  greatest  over  a 
thousand  **  (ver.  14).  It  is  in  our  human  nature  to  covet  the  highest  place ;  but  we  are  to 
learn  of  Christ--of  his  example  and  of  his  Word — to  take  with  cheerfulness  the  humbler 
seat.  And  we  may  do  this,  not  only  because  it  is  essentially  Christian,  but  also  because 
(1)  it  is  right  and  reasonable  that  they  who  have  the  greater  qualificatioiia  should 
occupy  the  more  responsible  posts ;  and  because  (2)  it  will  contribute  to  our  own  peace 
and  joy  of  heart  to  have  as  much  as,  but  no  more  than,  we  are  able  to  execute  placed 
in  our  hands. 

IV.  That  thb  caubb  of  Qod  ib  one  that  gathebs  strength  bt  continual 
ACCESSION.  (Vor.  22.)  There  may  come  times  in  the  history  of  the  great  spiritual 
fUruggle  in  which  the  Church  is  occupied  when  large  accessions  are  made  to  the  ranks  of 
God.  But  this  triumph  has  been  preceded  by  lon^,  incessant  toil ;  moreover,  it  is 
not  the  rule,  but  the  exception.  '*  The  kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  with  observation ;  ** 
it  is  *'day  by  day  "  that  souls  come  in,  until  the  army  of  the  great  King  is  made  and 
the  "  host  of  God  "  is  complete, — 0. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — TTie  offer  qf  the  upright,  etc    These  verses  suggest^ 

I.  I'hb  offer  of  the  upright.  (Ver.  17.)  David  made  this  offer  to  the  men  of 
Benjamin  and  Judah  in  good  faith.  He  did  not  mean  one  thing  in  the  moment  of 
danger,  and  another  in  the  hour  of  security.  He  fully  intended  the  thing  he  sud ;  he 
was  prepared,  in  the  event  of  this  band  of  men  coming  over  to  his  side,  to  regard  them 
with  perfect  favour  and  to  give  them  a  good  place  in  his  ranks.  The  maintenance  of 
all  our  social  activities  depends  on  trustworthiness  between  man  and  man ;  therefore 
on  honesty  of  thought  and  integrity  of  word  and  deed  in  ordinary  as  well  as  extra- 
ordinary occasions.  When  uprightness  is  gone  and  confidence  undermined,  all  security 
has  vanished  and  everything  is  in  confusion.  The  engagements  of  daily  life,  of  trade 
and  commerce,  of  all  human  industry,  rest  on  morality  and  ultimately  on  religion. 

n.  The  resource  of  the  devout.  rVer.  17.)  When  David  "  went  out  to  meet  ** 
those  men,  he  placed  himself  (as  1  read  the  story)  in  their  power.  He  made  them  an 
offer  which  they  might  accept  or  not.  Accepting  it,  they  would  reinforce  his  army  and 
strengthen  his  position ;  refusing  it,  they  might  avail  themselves  of  his  venture  and 
get  him  into  tneir  power.  This  latter  alternative  he  vigorously  deprecates ;  but  if 
they  should  abuse  his  confidence  he  has  one  resource — the  appeal  to  God.  **  If  ye  be 
come  to  betray  me  to  mine  enemies  . . .  the  God  of  our  fathers  • . .  rebuke  it."  ]!n  the 
last  extremity  the  devout  man  can  fall  back  on  Divine  interposition:  ''Our  God 
whom  we  serve  is  able  to  deliver  us  .  • .  and  he  will  deliver  us  "  (Dan.  iii.  17).  Thines 
can  never  be  so  bad  with  the  servants  of  righteousness  but  they  have  one  valuable 
resource — the  appeal  to  God,  his  rebuke  of  the  guilty,  his  succour  of  the  upright.  But 
it  is  only  those  who  can  say,  '*  Seeing  there  is  no  wrong  in  mine  hands,**  who  have  a 
consciousness  of  rectitude  and  reconciliation,  that  have  this  refuge  in  the  hour  of  need. 

HI.  Thb  decision,  invocation,  and  acquisition  of  the  wise.  (Ver.  18.)  1.  The 
decision  of  the  wise.  Those  who  know  what  it  is  best  to  do  will  join  themselves,  not  to 
the  cause  of  the  man  who  has  forsaken  God  and  whom  he  has  forsaken — the  party  of 
Saul,  but  to  the  side  of  him  who  serves  Qod  and  whom  he  helps— the  party  of  David. 
He  whom  "  his  Grod  helpeth  "  is  the  champion  to  whom  we  should  attach  ourselves  and 
our  interests.  2.  The  invocation  of  the  wise.  "  Peace,  peace  be  unto  thee  and  .  • .  unto 
thine  helpers."  The  thoughtless  and  "  shallow-hearted  "  may  wish  for  their  friends  the 
cup  of  pleasure,  or  a  sceptre  of  power,  or  a  wreath  of  glory ;  the  wiser  heart  desires 
peace.  There  is  no  blessing  so  true,  profound,  abiding,  as  peace  of  mind,  rest  of  heart, 
stillness  of  soul  in  Qod,  3  And  this  is  the  acquisition  of  the  wise.  **  Peace  be  unto 
thee,  • . .  for  thy  God  helpeth  thee."  If  God  be  the  Helper  of  our  soul,  as  he  is  r^idy  to 
be,  as  he  will  be  to  those  who  earnestly  and  perseveringly  seek  his  aid ;  if  he  grant  the 
helpful  influence  of  his  illumining,  renewing,  sanctifying,  comforting  Spirit,  there  will 
be  peace, "  great  peace  " — the  "  peace  which  passeth  understanding,"  the  peace  of  Christ 
himself  (John  xiv.  27). — G. 

Vers.  23—31,  33— 40.— "Joy  in  (the)  Jtrael  (of  Qod)/"  A  right  Joyous  scene  was 
that  described  in  the  concluding  verses  of  this  chapter.    Never,  probablyi  in  the  three 


188  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ch.  xn.  1—40. 

and  thirty  yean  of  his  subsequent  life  did  David  sit  down  to  bis  table  in  the  royal 
palace  at  tfenisalem  with  so  much  gladness  of  heart  as  ho  did  this  day  at  Hebron. 
Never,  probably,  did  the  thousands  of  Israel  gather  at  such  a  jubilant  assembly  as 
when  they  met  **  to  make  David  king,"  and  were  with  him  "  three  days  eating  and 
drinking  **  (vers.  38,  39).  The  event  justified  their  joy.  They  had  every  promise  of 
national  peace,  prosperity,  security.  They  were  on  the  eve  of  a  new  era,  in  which  their 
race  would  take  a  position  and  enjoy  a  heritage  to  which  it  had  long  looked  forward, 
which  had  been  long  delayed,  but  which  should  now  meet  and  crown  their  brightest 
hopes.  They  had  four  elements  of  strength ;  four  sources,  therefore,  of  satisfaction.  1. 
Large  numbirB,  (Vers. 24 — 37.)  '*Six  thousand  eight  hundred;**  "seven  thousand  one 
hundred,**  etc.— in  all  more  than  three  hundred  and  thirty  thousand.  2.  Discipline 
and  equipment.  The  bands  were  *^  ready  armed  *'  (vers.  23,  24,  37,  38) ;  many  were 
**  mignty  men  of  valour  *'  (ver.  30) ;  many  were  "  expert  in  war  **  (vers,  33,  35,  36% 
8.  Enthusiasm,  "  They  were  not  of  double  heart ;  **  they  were  undivided,  ungle- 
minded,  thorough  (vers.  33, 38).  4.  Wisdom,  For  they  were  doing  the  right  thing  for 
their  country's  welfare;  they  were  acting  "according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord"  (ver. 
23).  Here  was  the  strongest  of  all  reasons  for  congratulation  and  joy,  the  surest  pledge 
of  national  prosperity.  That  there  may  bo  "joy  in  the  Israel  of  God,"  in  the  Christian 
Church,  that  there  may  be  a  sense  of  assured  victory  and  of  security,  there  need  ba 
these  four  elements  of  strength  ;  they  are  all  of  value,  though  not  of  equal  worth. 

I.  There  is  strength  in  numbers  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  A  great  multitude 
of  men  may  be  of  very  little  account;  a  miscellaneous  assembly  is  not  an  army. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  better  that  the  people  of  the  Lord  should  be  counted  by  thousands 
rather  than  by  hundreds.  There  is  more  heart  to  praise  God  when  tlie  church  is  filled 
than  when  it  is  scantily  attended.  Many  labourers  arc  better  than  few  in  the  harvest- 
field  of  Christian  toil  (Matt.  ix.  37,  38). 

II.  There  is  greater  strength  in  discipline  and  consequent  preparedness. 
Ten  men  well  armed  and  "  expert  in  war  '*  will  do  more  than  ten  times  their  number 
unarmed  or  ill  armed  and  without  knowledge  of  the  way  to  strike ;  this  is  true  in 
moral  as  well  as  in  material  contests,  in  Christian  effort  as  well  as  in  the  "  science  of 
war.**  Christ  has  need,  not  only  of  those  who,  untrained,  do  the  best  they  can  at  tho 
moment,  but  of  those  also  who,  by  careful  discipline  of  mind  and  heart,  have  "  bought 
up  the  opportunity,**  and  can  do  well— can  speak  nobly,  can  devise  skilfully,  can 
execute  admirably  in  the  day  of  conflict. 

III.  There  is  equal  strength  in  enthusiasm.  Not  to  "  have  a  heart  and  a 
heart**  (ver.  33,  margin),  but  to  be  of  one  undivided  mind,  one  fixed,  ardent,  resolute 
soul ;  to  be  fireid  by  an  earnest  purpose ;  to  be  eager  for  the  work  ;  to  be  inspired  by 
an  impelling,  exalting  devotion  to  the  great  King ; — this  is  the  source  of  power ;  this 
will  carry  everything  before  it.  And  yet  is  there  one  other  element  of  more  essential 
moment  still. 

IV.  The  greatest  source  op  strength  and  security  is  in  a  wise  obedience. 
Everything  will  fiiil,  however  large  the  number,  careful  the  culture,  fervent  the  spirit, 
if  there  be  not  the  "doing  of  the  will  of  the  Father  who  is  in  heaven" — if  the  command^ 
ment  of  Christ  be  disregarded.  "  Should  it  be  according  to  his  mind,"  it  will  bo  well ; 
otherwise  the  brightest  hopes  will  disappear  in  the  darkness.  In  all  our  projects, 
methods,  enterprises  for  the  extension  of  his  kingdom,  we  must  proceed  "  according  to 
the  Word  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  23).  Then  will  the  issue  be  like  that  at  Hebron  on  this 
cladsome  occasion.  We  do  not  feast  now  as  then,  "  three  days  eating  and  drinking,** 
but  we  have,  or  may  have,  our  joyous  times,  when  the  work  and  the  will  of  the  Lord 
are  done,  when  a  sense  of  unity  and  security  is  in  the  soul,  and  we  look  forward  to  a 
bright  and  victorious  future  in  the  service  of  the  Son  of  David. — C. 

Ver.  82. — SpirituaX  sagacity.  It  is  a  very  high  encomium  which  the  sacred  writer 
passes  on  these  "  children  of  Issachar,**  that  they  were  men  **  that  had  understanding 
of  the  times,  to  know  what  Israel  ought  to  do."  They  were  men  that  had  insight, 
who  could  see  beneath  the  surface,  who  could  look  on  beyond  the  events  of  the  hour — 
men  of  sagacity  and  penetration.    Such  men  are  always  needed. 

I.  The  sagacity  that  was  needed  then.  What  was  most  urgently  required  of  the 
leaders  of  the  tribes  in  those  early  times  was :  1.  Which  dyna^jty  to  support — whether 


CH.  xn.  1— 40.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa  189 


the  house  of  Saul  or  that  of  David*  When  so  much  hung  on  the  will  of  the  reignfnff 
monarch,  that  was  a  vital  question.  2.  What  steps  to  take  to  establish  the  nationu 
unity.  In  presence  of  the  unconquered  Philistines  aad  of  other  neighbouring  powers, 
this  unity  of  Israel  was  of  immense,  indeed  of  essential,  importance.  3.  What  attitude 
to  assume  toward  the  national  enemies — whether  of  submission,  compromise,  or  unmiti* 
gated  hostility.  4.  What  position  to  take  up  respecting  non-Mosaic  usages — whether 
to  permit  the  adoption  of  any  social,  political,  religious  customs  by  Israel,  or  to  abide 
with  strict  severity  by  the  letter  of  the  Sinaitic  commandment     Such  were  the 

?uestions  which  then  demanded  a  practical  answer,  and  concerning  which  the  men  of 
ssachar  '*  had  understanding  of  the  times,  to  know  what  Israel  ought  to  do." 
II.  Thb  baoagity  that  is  kbcsssabt  now.  Those  men  of  Ood,  those  servants  of 
Jesus  Christ,  who  can  be  said  to  deserve  this  eulogy  are  they  who  have  the  sagacity 
to  discern:  1.  What  special  perils  are  threatening  the  integrity  or  progress  of  the 
Church  of  Christ,  and  how  they  shall  be  avert^.  2.  What  particular  aspect  of 
Christian  truth  needs  to  bo  insisted  on  and  enforced  at  the  hour  to  which  the  Church 
has  come.  3.  How  to  present  the  old  and  everlasting  truth  in  the  language,  and  how 
to  accommodate  the  forms  of  Christian  worship  to  the  tastes,  of  the  time  without  com- 
promise and  unfaithfulness.  4.  What  is  the  next  citadel  of  error  or  evil  which  the 
tribes  of  Christian  Israel  shall  attack.  5.  How  to  apply  Christian  ethics  to  the 
domestic,  social,  commercial,  political  questions  of  the  hour.  6.  What  is  the  relation 
which  the  Church  of  Christ  shall  assume  or  resume  to  the  state — whether  of  govern- 
ment, alliance,  or  independence  and  separation.  7.  What  form  the  unity  of  the  Church 
shall  take — whether  organic  and  visible  or  spiritual  and  invisible.  8.  What  are  the 
best  remedial  measures  that  can  be  taken  for  the  elevation  of  the  ignorant  and 
immoral,  and  for  the  ingathering  of  the  heathen  into  the  fold  of  Christ.— C. 

Vers.  1 — 22. — DavitTs  mighty  men:  the  Oddites,  Bemjamites,  and  Jud<ih,  This 
chapter  contains  three  lists  of  those  who  joined  the  standard  while  he  yet  kept  himself 
close  because  of  the  jealousy  of  Saul.  While  he  was  in  the  Philistine  town  of  Ziklag 
these  joined  him  in  rapid  succession,  and  they  afterwards  contributed  so  much  to  the 
glory  of  his  reign.  Preferring  the  exile  and  reproach  of  David  to  the  honour  of  the 
court  of  Saul  they  gave  up  all  for  love  to  him.  Vers.  1— -15  give  us  the  first  list ; 
vers.  16 — ^22  the  second  list ;  vers.  23 — 40  the  third  list.  The  children  of  Benjamin 
loining  his  standard  must  have  been  peculiarly  grateful  to  David.  These  were  of  the 
kindred  of  Saul,  and  included  probably  many  of  his  relatives.  They  could  only  have 
joined  David's  standard  under  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  Ood,  perceiving  the  evident 
withdrawal  of  Gk>d's  favours  from  Saul  and  his  favour  to  David.  It  was  a  public  and 
emphatic  protest  by  those  who  had  means  of  knowing  David  better  than  others  of  the 
excellence  of  his  character  and  the  grievous  wrong  done  by  outlawing  one  who  had 
rendered  such  eminent  services.  We  see  how  David  was  naturally  suspicious  of  these 
Benjamites  joining  him.  In  order  to  remove  David's  suspicion  of  their  being  traitors 
from  the  house  of  Saul,  they  had  probably  asked  the  children  of  Judah  to  accompany 
them  Tvers.  16 — 18).  The  Spirit  of  God,  speaking  through  Amasai,  removed  all  tears. 
David  s  confidence  in  Gk>d  in  an  extremity  which  might  have  been  fatal  to  his  life  and 
the  existence  of  his  kingdom,  is  instructive.  He  casts  himself  upon  God.  A  **  good 
conscience  "  enables  him  to  do  this,  "  seeing  there  is  no  wrong  in  mine  hands."  With 
a  "  good  conscience  "  towards  God,  men  may  never  fear  in  any  emergency,  however 
trying.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  will  always  lead  the  way.  Though  the  cloud  may 
hang  very  long  and  look  very  dark,  the  result  is  as  certain  as  the  most  certain  thmg 
in  the  world.  To  such  a  soul  there  will  be  one  final  issue — "peace  pe^Mse"  (ver.  18) ; 
yes,  "  perfect  peace  "  (Isa.  xxvL  3)  to  all  such. — W. 

Yer.  18. — David^e  mighty  men:  motive /or  §ervice»  Let  us  now  glance  at  the  motive 
of  these  noble  men  who  joined  David's  standard.  Despising  the  court  of  Saul  and  all 
its  honours,  they  were  drawn  to  David.  His  exile  and  reproach  were  dearer  to  them 
than  it  all.  And  why  ?  Instructed  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  recognized  the  Lord's 
anointed.  They  looked  not  at  the  present,  but  forward  to  that  hour  when  the  king 
should  reign.  For  this  they  counted  all  the  honours  of  Saul  as  worthless.  They 
esteemed  David's  reproach  because  they  had  respect  to  liis  future  glory,    ITeed  I  say 


190  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  xii.  1— 4a 

what  ibis  teaches  ?  The  people  of  God  now  are  gathered  round  Jesus,  the  rejected 
One,  the  Exile  from  this  world.  They  esteem  the  reproach  of  Christ,  for  they  haTe 
respect  to  the  recompense  of  the  reward.  '*  Choosing  rather  to  suffer  affliction  with 
the  people  of  God  than  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season."  They  "know 
whom  they  have  believed."  "  The  heathen  rage,  and  the  people  imagine  a  vain  thing." 
The  world  has  set  itself  against  Christ.  Yet  they  know,  notwithstanding  all  this,  that 
"  the  Lord  hath  set  his  King  on  his  holy  hill  of  Zion."  Jesus  is  that  King.  And  bis 
love  has  drawn  them  out  from  this  world's  ruler  and  god,  and  with  joy  they  move 
onward  imder  the  "  Captain  of  their  salvation."— W. 

Vera.  23^40. — DavifPi  mighty  men:  description  and  charaeUr,  "What  is  the 
character  of  these  followers  of  David?  Are  they  mere  followers?  Nay,  in  very  deed 
they  are  soldiers,  warriors  to  the  very  death.  They  fight  David's  battles.  They 
stand  in  the  breach,  in  the  forefront.  They  "loved  not  their  lives  to  the  death," 
**  warring  a  good  warfare "  in  the  service  of  him  who  loved  them  and  attachment  to 
whom  has  drawn  them  out.  Mark  their  character:  '*  men  of  valour; "  "  ready  armed ;" 
"  expert  in  war ;  "  "  famous  in  the  house  of  their  fathers ; "  not  "  double-hearted ; "  of 
*'<m«  heart ;"  of  '*  perfect  heart ; "  men  who  could  *'  keep  rank  ; "  who  could  use  *•  all 
instruments  of  war ; "  who  "could  use  both  hands ; "  who  were  **  swift  as  roes;  "  who 
had  "  faces  like  lions ; "  and  "men  who  had  understanding  of  the  times,  to  know  what 
Israel  ought  to  do."  Blessed  and  noble  warriors  gathered  round  the  exiled  David !  No 
wonder  it  is  called  "  a  great  host,  like  the  host  of  Ood,**  It  is  such  the  true  David 
seeks  now.  These  are  the  men  who  do  honour  to  our  exiled  "  King  of  kings  and  Lord 
of  lords."  These  are  they  who  shall  reign  in  glory  with  him  ere  Ions;.  They  are  men 
who  sit  not  down  at  ease  because  they  are  just  saved  from  hell.  They  do  not  make 
salvation  from  everlasting  death  their  end,  but  their  beginning — their  motive,  their 
power,  their  strength  for  the  fight.  They  know  what  the  Spirit  meant  when  he  said, 
"  To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  with  me  on  my  throne."  Thank  Gbd,  we 
have  such  men  in  the  Church  now,  though  very  few.  Reader,  are  you  one  of  them  ? 
Oh,  rest  not  satisfied  with  being  Just  sawdl  Aim  at  these  features.  Be  not  of 
'*  double  heart."  Aim  at  *'  one-heartedness  " — at  a  perfect  heart.  Be  *'  ready  armed." 
Be  able  to  "keep  rank,"  to  walk  with  those  who  walk  with  God.  Use  "both 
hands" — every  affection,  every  desire,  every  aim,  every  pound.  Let  everything,  little 
and  great,  in  your  hourly  history  be  consecrated  to  God.  Have  a  "  face  like  a  lion  " 
against  all  evil,  and  stand  up  for  Christ.  Be  as  "  swift  as  a  roe  "  for  everything  that 
concerns  your  Saviour's  glory  and  the  blessing  of  others.  "  Run  swiftly "  the  race 
set  before  you,  "looking  unto  Jesus."  And  ask  God  that,  when  the  Church  is  trembling, 
and  truth  is  failing,  and  hearts  on  all  sides  are  quaking,  and  the  true  Israel  of  G(^ 
knoweth  not  what  to  do,  you  may  have  "  understanding  of  the  times,  to  know  what 
you  ought  to  do." — W. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — Friends  in  adversity,  David  appeared  to  have  reached  an  extremity 
when  he  was  compelled  to  escape  from  Gath  and  find  shelter  in  the  cave,  hold,  or 
possible /or^ress  of  Adullam.  Uis  fortunes  then  seemed  to  be  at  their  lowest,  and  at 
first  he  must  have  felt  utterly  friendless  and  forsaken.  Soon,  however,  his  immediate 
relatives  heard  where  he  was,  and  presently  those  discontented  with  Saul's  rule  gathered 
to  him.  The  verses  on  which  we  are  now  dwelling  narrate  an  incident  connected  with 
this  assembling  of  people  round  David,  and  the  point  of  interest  is  that  among  them 
some  Benjamites  came,  who  should  properly  have  belonged  to  the  party  of  Saul,  and 
David  found  it  necessary  to  put  their  friendliness  to  some  testing.  The  incident  may 
introduce  the  subject  of  human  friendship.    We  note— 

I.  Times  of  adversitt  take  awat  oub  seeming  frtekds.  Many  so-called  friends 
are  but  "  fair-weather  friends,"  sharers  of  our  prosi>erity  and  success.  Really  friends 
for  the  sake  of  what  they  can  get  by  it.  Illustration  may  be  found  in  the  parable  of 
the  prodigal  son.     When  his  money  was  gone  his  friends  had  gone  too. 

II.  Times  of  adversity  find  out  the  true  among  our  friends.  The  test  shows 
which  are  the  fi&ithrul  ones.  They  are  not  often  the  boastful  and  forward  ones.  Often 
they  are  those  whom  we  have  almost  neglected.  The  true  brother  is  "bom  for 
adversity,"  and  only  blossoms  out  in  the  shady  night-times  of  calamity. 


en.  xiL  1—40.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  19l 


ni.  TlMBS  OF  ADYER8ITT  8UBPBI8E  US  WITH  THE  FRIENDS  THET  BBINO  TO  US.     Beyond 

proviDg  who  are  our  real  friends,  they  actually  hring  us  new  and  unexpected  friends, 
such  as  are  really  concerned  for  us  and  are  full  of  earnest  purpose  to  help  us.  Often 
we  say  that  it  is  worth  while  getting  into  trouble,  if  only  for  the  sake  of  the  friends 
we  find  and  prove. 

IV.  Times  of  adyebsttt,  above  all  things  else,  prove  the  faithfulness  of  our 
BEST  Friend  ;  he  of  whom  it  may  truly  be  said,  **  He  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother." 
He  is  indeed  the  Example  of  the  man  in  adversity ;  and  from  his  case  we  see  how  aU 
forsook  him  and  fled,  even  St.  John  not  venturing  to  plead  for  him.  And  so  Paul  at 
the  judgment-seat  was  alone,  but  he  found  the  faithfulness  of  the  best  Friend:  "  Never- 
theless the  Lord  stood  by  me." — R.  T. 

Vers.  22,  23. — One  increasing,  another  decreasing.  So  constant  and  so  extensive 
were  the  accessions  to  David*s  party,  that  any  observer  would  have  said,  "  It  is  evident 
that  Saul  is  going  down  and  David  is  going  up.  This  David  is  the  man  of  the  future." 
When  it  is  seen  in  which  direction  the  tide  is  flowing,  every  one  hurries  to  take  advan- 
tage of  it,  hoping  to  float  on  it  to  his  own  fortune.  But  this  very  common  process, 
which  may  be  observed  in  the  various  spheres  of  life  any  day,  is  here  connected  with 
the  Divine  purposes  and  promises.  Silently,  it  may  even  be  said  naturattyy  the  nation 
was  coming  round  to  the  acceptance  of  Gk>d's  arrangement  for  it.  Men  may  say  that 
the  political  change  was  sufficiently  accounted  for  by  political  considerations.  Scripture 
shows  us  in  all  the  outworkings  of  the  Divine  will  (1  Sam.  xvi.  13).  The  instance  in 
which  the  rising  of  one  and  the  decline  of  another  was  piously  and  submissively  accepted 
by  the  declining  one,  is  that  of  our  Lord  and  John  the  Baptist.  It  is  John  himself 
who,  clearly  seeing  the  preparatory  character  of  his  own  work,  and  the  permanent  glory 
of  the  mission  of  the  Lamb  of  GK)d,  says,  "  He  must  increase,  but  I  n^ust  decrease." 
This  success  of  one  and  failure  of  another,  this  success  of  one  resting  upon  the  very 
failure  of  another,  is  one  of  the  most  ordinary  facts  of  life.  It  may  be  painful  and 
oppressive,  or  it  may  become  a  cause  of  submissive  joy,  according  to  the  side  from 
which  we  view  it. 

I.  It  will  be  painful  to  ub  if  we  are  more  ookcerked  for  self  thah  for  Gk>D. 
If  a  man  limits  his  vision  to  his  own  immediate  and  personal  interests,  anything  like 
failure  must  be  to  him  unmitigated  distress.  He  knows  no  side  whence  relief  can  come. 
Failure  can  take  on  no  gracious  shapes ;  it  can  be  nothing  but  miserable  failure.  Tet  is 
*'  success  for  self"  the  end  of  life  ?  Can  we  isolate  ourselves  from  the  Divine  plan  for 
all  ?  Would  it  really  be  well  for  the  individual  if  he  could  ?  And  may  not  Grod's  great 
plan  for  the  wJiole  involve,  in  its  outworking,  some  disabilities  for  the  few  ?— especially 
if  he  counts  the  highest  good,  the  only  real  good,  to  be  good  of  character^  not  of  circum- 
stances? If  we  are  more  anxious  for  God  than  for  self^  then  it  need  never  be  hard  for 
us,  at  his  bidding  and  under  his  lead,  to  step  down  into  seeming  failure,  second  places, 
and  disabilities.  We  may  see  others  go  on  before  us  to  places  of  honour,  quietly 
assured  that  our  Qod  knows  they  may  serve  him  up  there  better  than  we  could  do. 

IL  It  will  be  painful  to  us  if  we  fail  to  recognize  that  one  man's  work 
PREPARES  FOR  ANOTHER,  And  SO  that  which  seems  low  down,  simple,  and  humble  in 
character,  may  bo  truly  honourable  and  important,  because  of  its  preparatory  character. 
David  was  humbled  by  God's  refusal  to  allow  him  to  build  his  temple ;  but  David 
could  prepare  for,  and  so  have  a  true  part  in,  the  success  of  Solomon.  The  same  may 
be  said  of  John  the  Baptist.  It  did  not  matter  that  his  particular  mission  failed  when 
its  work  was  done,  and  it  had  prepared  the  way  for  the  Messiah.  Those  who  only  do 
preparing  work  must  fully  accept  the  fact  that,  in  the  world's  eye,  their  life  will  seem 
to  be  a  failure ;  it  may  even  be  so  to  their  own  view,  but  Qod,  "  seeth  not  as  man 
seeth,"  and  has  his  gracious  ways  of  setting  '*  last  ones  first." 

III.  It  will  be  painful  to  us  if  we  fail  to  realize  that  rewards  ookb  for  what 
A  MAN  IS,  AND  NOT  MERELY  FOR  WHAT  HE  DOES.  Herein  Divine  rewards  so  materially 
ditfer  from  human  ones.  Man  can  only  recognize  what  is  done,  or  attained,  and  he 
gives  his  rewards  for  achievement.  God  searches  into  the  motive  and  the  character, 
and  gives  his  rewards  for  whcU  the  man  is  proved  to  be  in  the  doing.  Success  is  not 
necessary  to  the  best  character ;  finer  qualities  gain  expression  and  culture  in  fiulure, 
disappointment^  and  trouble.    BesuUs  may  be  reached  under  conditions  that  involve  no 


102  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa     [gb.xii.1— 4a 


nobility  of  character.  It  is  ittill  very  largely  true  that  "  deep  in  the  Talleys  rest,  the 
8pirit*8  gifts  most  holv,"  and  heaven  may  have  its  welcome  rather  for  poor  disabled 
Liazinis  at  the  gate  than  for  prosperous  and  luxurious  Dives  on  the  ulken  ooach  at 
the  sumptuous  board.  God  sets  some  of  us  low  down  and  keeps  us  there,  becaase  be 
pMtB/aithfulnesa  far  above  success. 
IV.  It  will  be  painful  to  us  if  wb  refuse  to  admit  that  Divivk  juDoimm 

COME  IN  THE  REMOVAL  OF   MEN   FROM   PLACES  OF  HONOUR  AND  TRUST  ;  aS  WaS  the  CSSe 

with  King  Saul.  So  now,  God  deals  with  his  people ;  sickness  sets  them  aside  from  the 
path  of  ambition.  Their  best  efforts  again  and  again  end  in  failure.  And  true  hearts 
will  not  fail  to  see  in  such  things  Divine  judgments ;  solemn  recognitions  of  failings  in 
motive  and  spirit;  holy  callings  back  to  the  humble  and  trustful  reliances ;  awakenings 
to  the  conviction  that  a  man  prospers  only  "  as  his  soul  prospers."  Then,  when  others 
go  on  past  us  to  wi^alth,  position,  and  honour,  when  they  increase  and  we  decrease,  may 
wc  even  rejoice?  Yes;  if  wo  really  care  more  for  God  than  for  self,  and  more  for  others  than 
for  self.  We  should  bo  ever  ready  to  stand  in  the  chiefest  places,  if  God  would  have  ns 
stand  in  them.  But  we  should  be  quite  as  willing  to  stand  down  and  let  another  take 
our  place,  if  God  would  set  him  up.  The  disabilities  of  life  may  involve  our  **  decrees* 
ing ; "  but  the  time  must  come  when  from  our  hands  the  tools  and  the  weapons  must 
fall,  and,  empty  handed,  we  pass  into  the  eternal  world.  Then  others  must  step  into 
our  places,  and  it  will  be  well  for  us  if,  when  our  works  are  burned  up,  we  ourselves  are 
saved,  "  yet  so  as  by  fire."  Of  this  we  may  be  sure,  if  we  failed  to  win  or  to  keep 
what  we  thought  our  right  place  in  this  world,  in  the  next  God  will  put  us  just  where 
we  ahatdd  be  in  view  of  what,  in  character  and  spirit,  we  have  been  able  to  win  through 
the  failures  or  successes  of  our  human  life.— R.  T. 

Vers.  23—40. — The  hearts  of  all  men  are  in  Ood's  hands.  When  the  proper  Uroe 
came  for  the  promise  made  to  David  to  be  fulfilled,  no  efforts  were  needed  to  secure  the 
throne.  One  difficulty  after  another  faded  away.  One  section  after  another  of  the 
iieople  came  to  offer  their  allegiance.  And  the  signs  of  God's  gracious  moving  of  men's 
niarts  towards  David  in  due  time  were  seen,  in  the  devotion  of  themselves  and  their 
wealth  and  property  to  his  service.  The  men  of  might  came,  and  offered  him  their 
weapons,  their  skill,  and  their  lives.  The  men  of  understanding  came,  and  offered 
him  their  counsel  and  powers  of  rule  and  magistracy.  The  men  of  wealth  came,  and 
offered  abundant  provisions  for  the  host  thus  gathering  round  David  (ver.  40).  Com- 
pare the  consecration  of  property  in  the  early  Pentecostal  days.  Often  in  life  we  are 
made  to  feel  that  the  circwnstances  of  life  arc  in  God's  hands,  and  we  recognize  his 
wonder-working  in  the  removal  of  our  difficulties  and  the  opening  of  our  path ;  but 
even  when  we  seem  to  be  hindered  by  the  action  of  our  fellow-men,  we  do  not  see  that 
their  hearts  are  in  God's  hands,  and  that,  in  answer  to  our  prayer  and  in  fulfilment  of 
his  purposes,  he  can  move  men's  feelings  and  sway  them  as  he  may  please.  Yet  this 
is  the  fuller  and  truer  view  of  life ;  until  we  can  worthily  realize  this  we  do  not  truly 
say,  "  Our  times  are  in  thy  hands."  "  He  maketh  the  wrath  of  man  praise  him,  and 
the  remainder  of  wrath  he  can  restrain." 

I.  A  man's  HEART  CONTROLS  HIS  U8K  OF  HIS  THINGS.      To  the  DiviuO  vicW,  **  aS  S 

man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he."  By  the  term  "  heart "  is  included  a  man's  plans, 
purposes,  and  feelings.  It  may  stand  for  his  disposition.  Then  illustrate  how  all 
condtict,  relations,  and  uses  of  property,  etc.,  arc  toned  by  the  heart  of  the  covetous^  the 
selfish,  the  prejudiced,  the  envious,  the  sufpirious,  or  the  unforgiving  man.  It  is 
hopeless  work  to  try  and  change  the  fixed  habits  of  any  man's  life.  Our  hope  lies  in 
change  of  heart,  and  that  will  ensure  the  needed  change  in  the  outward  relations. 
Therefore  our  Lord  proposes,  in  his  redemptive  work,  to  recover  and  set  right  the  very 
heart  of  men.    His  law  is  thus  expressed ;  "  Ye  must  be  born  again." 

II.  A  man's  heart  is  open  to  Divine  influences.  We  often  feel  how  difficult 
it  is,  as  we  say,  to  get  at  a  man.  Do  what  we  will,  we  seem  to  be  outside  him.  Now, 
the  heart  is  just  the  sphere  that  is  always  open  to  Divine  infiuence.  It  may  please 
God  to  withdraw  and  hold  himself  aloof  from  a  man ;  but  if  he  pleases  to  enter,  no 
man  can  shut  his  heart's  door  against  him.  He  may  enter  fur  conviction  and  for 
judgment,  as  well  as  for  persuasion  and  guidance.  If  men's  attitude  towards  us  is  a 
cause  of  trouble,  we  may  be  comforted  by  the  assurance  that  the  Master  of  all  human 


CH.  xn.  1—40.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  198 

hearts,  who  is  our  Ood,  permits  it  only  as  long  as  be  pleases,  and  will  change  it  when 
he  thinks  best.  With  this  assurance,  no  wrong-doing  of  our  fellow-men  n^  unduly 
distress  us. 

IIL  A  HAK  18  BBSPONSIBLB  FOB  HIS  DBALINO  WITH  God'S  IKWABD  LBADINOS.      This, 

indeed,  is  his  deepest  responsibility.  He  has  an  inward  voice ;  he  is  bound  to  heed  it 
above  all.  He  has  Divine  impulses ;  does  he  crush  them  or  follow  them  ?  Heart- 
hardening  chiefly  comes  in  one  way,  by  resisting  the  Divine  lead ;  or,  in  New  Testa- 
ment phraseology,  "quenching  the  Spirit;"  "resisting  the  Holy  Ghost."  Divine 
impulses  may  he  (1)  resisted ;  (2)  covered  over  with  self-interests ;  (3)  neglected  ;  or 
(4)  watched  for ;  and  (5)  followed. 

IV .  Heart-impulsbs,  duly  followed,  find  expbbssion  in  oonduot  ;  as  all  these 
men  came,  bringing  themselves  and  all  they  had  to  David,  when  they  were  under 
Divine  constrainings.  So  we  shall  be  ready  to  give  self  and  wealth  to  all  holy  uses,  if 
we  are  inwardly  moved  of  GK)d.  Illustrate  from  the  Lord  Jesus :  "  The  seal  of  thine ' 
house  hath  eaten  me  up."  St  Paul's  '*  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us."  Learn 
what  is  the  sphere  of  our  prayer  for  others — viz.  that  God  would  move  their  hearts ; 
and  what  is  our  ?iope  in  doing  Christian  work,  it  is  "  touched  hearts." — R.  T. 

Ver.  32. — **  Understanding  of  the  timesJ*  It  is  remarked  as  peculiarly  the  charao- 
ieristic  of  the  men  of  Issachar,  that  they  had  "  understanding  of  the  times,  to  know 
what  Israel  ought  to  do."  We  should  call  them  "  men  of  political  sagacity."  "  They 
excelled  in  moral  and  political  prudence  and  wisdom,  so  as  to  know  what,  in  any 
season  of  emergency,  the  particular  posture  of  affairs  required  to  be  done."  We  are 
to  understand  that  these  wise  men  approved  of  the  elevation  of  David  to  the  throne. 
The  whole  of  human  capacity  is  for  Divine  uses.  Every  faculty  and  power  should  be 
laid  on  the  Divine  altar.  Some  powers  are  natural,  others  are  develop^  by  the  circum- 
stances and  experiences  of  life ;  but  all  may  be  and  should  be  cultivated  into  the 
highest  practical  efficiency.  No  man  has  the  right  to  withhold  from  the  service  of  his 
fellow-men,  and  so  from  the  service  of  GK)d,  any  talent,  faculty,  capacity,  or  power  of 
influence  that  he  may  possess.  Among  the  Divine  trusts  are  the  gifts  and  insight  of 
the  statesman,  and  these  find  spheres  in  the  lesser  scenes  of  local  government  and 
social  order,  as  well  as  in  the  state.  Men  are  fitted  in  the  lesser  places  for  the  greater. 
And  their  influence  in  every  sphere  bears  directly  on  the  moral  and  socicUy  and  often 
also  upon  the  religious,  good  of  the  people.  The  work  of  the  statesman  may  bo  thus 
defined,  and  each  point  may  be  illustrated  from  times  and  men  taken  from  ancient  and 
modem  history.  1.  To  see  below  the  surface-appearances  and  the  loud  outcries  of 
partisans,  what  is  the  real  want  of  the  times.  2.  To  devise  the  schemes  which  will 
hopefully  meet  both  the  present  necessity  and  demands,  and  also  provide  for  possible, 
but  at  present  unforeseen,  developments.  3.  To  choose  the  time  for  action  which  may 
prove  most  efficient,  and  to  wisely  delay,  even  at  the  peril  of  being  misrepresented. 
4.  To  estimate  fairly  the  wholes^  not  the  parts,  of  a  subject ;  and  so  to  act  for  all  parties 
and  above  party.  Such  men  are  raised  up  in  every  age.  Their  service  fits  into  the 
Divine  plan  for  the  race.  This  gift  is  also  from  the  Lord,  and  what  the  world  so 
greatly  needs  is  t^  use  in  full  loyalty  to  him. — R.  T. 

Vers.  33 — 38. — Single-mindedness,  Two  significant  expressions  are  used :  (1)  "  They 
were  not  of  double  heart ; "  (2)  "  Came  with  a  perfect  heart.**  Scripture  ever  makes 
much  of  sincerity,  whole-heartedness.  The  prophet  complains  of  the  people  that 
"  their  heart  is  divided."  This  is  a  most  searching  reproach,  "  They  feared  the  Lord, 
and  served  other  gods."  Our  Lord  pleaded  with  men  on  the  impossibility  of  "  serving 
God  and  Mammon."  And  the  Apostle  James  has  severe  reproaches  for  the  "  double- 
minded  man."  Practical  life  supports  Scripture  in  its  commendation  of  single-minded^ 
ness.  The  men  who  do  one  thing,  and  put  their  hearts  into  the  doing,  are  the  men  of 
influence  and  success ;  the  kind  of  men  we  are  always  looking  for  in  every  department 
of  life ;  the  good  servants  and  the  good  masters  in  every  sphere.  Those  who  under- 
take too  much,  and  are  ever  skipping  from  one  thing  to  another,  make  nothing 
successful,  and  fail  to  win  and  hold  our  confidence.  The  point  of  excellence  in  the 
men  introduced  in  these  verses  is  that  **  they  would  set  the  battle  in  array  with  no 
double  heart ; "  and,  in  respect  of  allegiance  to  David,  never  permitted  the  slightest 

L  CHB0NICLE8.  0 


IH 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHROXICLEa    [ce.  zm.  1— 14. 


suspicion  cf  t:.eir  i:.!ejrl;y  t-:  tnsp.  Tie  word  "perfect"  u  often  ued  in  Scripture 
as  the  equivaicLt  if  "wr-.'-e,*'  -eLtire,"  " complete."  **lIiLrk  the  perfect  man;** 
*'  Be  ye  therefv  k-  piTrct ;  **  "A?  Tz%i.r  ms  he  j>rfecx," 

L  SiXGX^-jfiM'ti'NLs^  i«  A  c.r.rAT  ^^^L^T  or  sronsB  n?  urs.  More  so  now  than 
ever  it  was,  se<icg  i:.a;  aiivanctii  c:vi.ixa:k-n  cen^anus  diTiidon  of  labour,  and  a  man 
can  only  b«.ipe  to  rea^L  tz:.::i.rcy  :n  ere  ce^iartment.  Remarkable  instanoee  of  euooeee 
acliievcd  on  sii.gle  hii^  &r.i  iz.  parricular  depart menis  are  constantly  being  giTen. 
In  science  men  gain  t:.e  j*.w<:t  <.i  tnr.ciercr  and  exactness  by  keeping  to  one  branch 
of  a  subject :  acd  wbatevtr  r^ay  be  tr.e  ;ise  in  which  a  yocng  man  begins  hia  buainesi 
or  stUiiiuus  life,  he  «h^ulvi  t«  e^cv '^.ragei  to  keep  on  in  it  and  achieve  aucoeM  in  it. 
The  law  vi  triumj-h  is — Thi$  one  thint::  and  this  earnestly. 

II.    SiNGLE-lflNPEPNESS  IS  THE  COyMTIOS   OF  ACCEFTASCX  WITH  GOD.      lUustrate  bj 

Elijali's  api^e.il,  *•  How  losi:  ha^t  ye  between  two  opinions?"  Or,  "  How  long  will  ye 
be  like  a  restless  lirii.  hopj-in^  from  twi^  to  twig?  "  Or  from  Balaam,  who  wanted  to 
oWy  GlxI,  but  wacttpd  a'.z^^  the  cffcri'd  n wards.  Or  frc>m  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  who 
wanted  the  cre^nt  k*{  unusua'-.y  dev«.tod  d;sciples,  but  wanted  also  to  keep  their  pn^ 
rerty.  >irfCrrify  assures  the  IMririe  npjard.  This  is  the  first  condition  of  acceptance. 
Kecoguizini;  this,  IViv.d  prayeil,  *'  Search  me,  O  God,  and  know  mj  heart :  try  me,  and 
know  my  thoughts :  and  see  if  therv  bo  any  wicked  way  in  me."  And  the  apostle  has 
a  striking  Greik  term  for  the  proper  attitude  of  a  Christian :  he  is  one  who  does  not 
fear  to  Ih?  jud^i-d  standing  out  in  the  sunlight  (eilikrineis).  But  this  sincertfy  costs 
tho  eamt^t  m:m  his  gniTost  anxiities,  because  (I)  of  the  peril  of  aelf-dicepHon ;  (2) 
the  siMdief  of  the  ten*f4a1iv'ns  rjftnri  by  tKe  se./;  and  (3)  the  constant  discoTery  of 
mixfii  mottles  even  in  the  holie;»t  tt.ings. 

Im)Tess  that  the  unity  of  our  whole  l^xng  in  the  love  and  service  of  One  so  woTthy, 
and  able  so  thoroughly  to  absorb  all.  as  the  Lord  Jeaus  Christ,  ensures  this  ungle- 
mindodness  as  nothing  else  can.  It  should  not  be  difficult  for  any  of  us  to  be  wholly 
hi fy  and  accept  our  life  as  the  sphere  of  a  single-minded  and  sincere  obedience  to  him. 
BenumU'r  Wellington's  answer  to  the  officer  who  attempted  to  argue  a  point  with 
him,  "  Sir,  we  do  not  wish  you  to  archie,  but  to  obev,**  He  had  one  thing  to  do,— 
enough  if  he  did  it  well.    Compare  St.  Paul's  "  To  mc'to  live  is  Christ."— B,  T. 


EXI\>SITION. 


CUAPTKR  Xm. 


The  opening  verses  of  this  chapter  explain 
and  amplify  tho  compressed  announcement 
of  2  Sam.  vi.  1,  *' Again,  David  pithered 
together  all  the  chosen  of  Israel,  thirty  thou> 
sand."  And  the  remaining  verses  ^0 — 14) 
cover  the  same  ground  as  2  Sam.  vi.  2 — 11. 

Ver.  1.— There  can  be  little  doubt  that 
the  captains  of  thousands  and  hundreds  .  .  . 
with  every  leader,  hero  spoken  of,  repre^nted 
what  had  become  by  this  time  a  confirmed 
iustitution,  although  in  embryo,  dating  from 
the  time  of  Aloses  at  least  (Numb.  xxxi.  14  ; 
Deut.  i.  15;  Judg.  xx.  7;  2  Chron.  xx.  21). 

Ver.  2.— Left  in  all  the  hmd.  Some  think 
that  this  phrase  points  to  the  destruction 
that  had  been  widespread  by  the  Philistines. 

Ver.  3. — Let  us  bring  again  the  ark.  It 
had  been  removed  from  Shiloh  (Josh,  xviii. 
I)  at  the  instance  of  ^  the  elders  of  Israel  " 
to  their  camp,  when  they  were  hard  pressed 
and  smitten  by  the  Philistines  (1  Sam.  iv. 
1—4);  there  it  was  taken  by  the  Philistines 


(1  Sam.  iv.  11. 22%  and  hurried  from  Ashdod 
to  Kkn^n  and  un  to  Beihshemesh  (1  Sam.  t.  I, 
5.  S.  10 :  vi.  1^—13).  For  we  inquired  not  at 
it  in  the  days  of  Saul.  The  allusion  may 
be  considered  delicatelr  worded,  but  an 
inexpi>i?ssible  pathos  and  unmeasured  con* 
denmation  must  be  imagined  aa  clinging  to 
this  sentence,  illustrated  further  by  1  8am. 
vii.  2 ;  xxviii.  6,  15,  16 ;  ch.  x.  14. 

Ver.  5.— All  Israel  The  parallel  gives 
tlie  number  as  thirty  thousand  men  ^2  siun. 
vi.  1,  2).  Shihor  of  Egypt.  According  to 
Gesenius,  this  Shihor  is  from  root  mr'  mean- 
ing "  to  be  turbid  "  or  « black "  (So  LaUn 
file 7o,  from  the  Greek ;  Virgil,  *  Georg.,*  iv. 
278,  291;  Catullus,  Ixvii.  33).  There  can 
surely  be  little  doubt  that  it  is  the  river 
Nile  which  is  here  spoken  of,  after  oompari- 
son  of  the  following  passages :— Joeh.  xiiL 
3 ;  Isa.  xxiii.  3 ;  Jer.  iL  18.  Though  others, 
quoting  Josh.  xiii.  3  and  xix.  26,  and  inter- 
preting Shihor  generically  aa  applicable  to 
any  dark,  turbid  stream,  nudse  it  the  modem 
Wady  el'Ari$h,  However,  the  parallel,  1 
Kings  viii.  65,  does  not  necessarily  dissever 


CH.  xiiL  1—14.]     TDE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


the  hn  tma  -y:o  of  Egypt  (Gbil  st.  18), 
but  rather  tandi  lo  identify  them.  Tlia 
entning  of  H«mmllL ;  i^  the  way  to  Hamath 
(Hebrew,  nwj:Numb.xixiy,7,8).  Hamath 
vae  one  of  the  great  oiliee  of  the  Oronlei 
valley,  in  Upper  STria,  which  formed  the 
boundaiT  in  eapeoial  of  the  empire  of  Solo- 
mon. This  Tslley  is  watered  bj  the  Orootea, 
the  river  of  Antioch,  a  river  remarkable  for 
it«  BbnndBnt  spring  (litwite  immediatelr 
north  of  the  eource  of  the  Leontei),  wbioh 
iron  for  it  the  name,  adong  all  the  other 
■prings  of  STTia,  of  "The  Spring,"  and 
Ttmaikable  for  "  the  length  of  ite  ooune,  the 
Tolume  of  its  waters,  and  the  rioh  vegetation 
of  iti  banka."  It  la  fie  one  of  the  four  rirera 
wbiob  take  their  riae  beneath  the  heighte  of 
the  Ijebauon  and  Anti-Lebaoon  which  be- 
oomea  reall  j  worth;  of  the  name  of  river,  the 
other  threp,  viz.  the  Jordan,  the  Leontca  or 
modem  Litanj/  of  PhcBoicia,  and  the  Abana 
or  modem  Sarada  of  Damasoni,  more  re- 
•embling  the  nalnre  of  the  monntain  stream. 
This  river  was  to  the  ancient  Bomana  "  the 
repreaentative  c^  Byria,  as  the  Thames  might 
be  Mid  to  be  of  Eoeland,  and  in  later  times 
Uie  region  formed  the  chief  point  of  contact 
between  thia  part  of  Asia  aud  the  West" 
(Btanley's  'Binai  and  Palpstine,'  pp.  414, 
s,/,  edit  I8G6>  The  kingdom  of  Hamatb 
oomprlsed  the  tract  of  this  valley  of  the 
Orontes,  skirted  bj  the  hills  aeparating  the 
Leoutes  from  the  Oiontea,  and  extending 
to  the  Pass  of  Daphne  below  Antioch. 
AaiaA(Nmnb.xiiiv.  11;  2  Kings  iiiii.  33) 
liea  on  the  eaat  bank  of  the  Orontes,  tbirty- 
flve  miles  north-east  of  Baal-bek,  or  Baal- 
gad.  The  people  of  Hemath  were  of  the 
race  of  Ham,  of  the  descendanti  of  Canaan 
(Qen.  z.  18),  atid  are  not  to  be  reckoned  u 
of  Phoenician  origin. 

Ver.  6.— To  Baalah,  that  is,  to  Klijath- 
j»Mini(se6  Josh.xv.g— 11;  1  Sam.  iv.— vii.; 
2  6«m,  vL  2 ;  where  tlie  name  is  spelt  with 
a  final  yod  instead  of  he).  A  third  name  of 
this  same  plaoe,  Kiijath-booZ,  is  found  In 
Josh.  XV,  60 ;  zviii.  14.  Probably  the  present 
•Ama,  a  min  (f  g.  Klrjath-arim,  Esra  iL 
29)  on  the  brink  of  the  valley  of  Sorek, 
inar  be  the  plaoe  (see  Conder's  ■  Bible 
Handbook,'  p.  419,  2nd  edit)  We  read  In 
Joah.  iz.  17—27  how  the  men  of  Kirjath- 
jearim  lutd  been  made  b;  Joshua  "  hewers  of 
wood  and  drawen  of  water  for  the  congrega- 
tion, and  for  the  altar  of  the  Lord."  Hither 
to  thia  Eirjathjeaiim  the  ark  had  been 
cwaveyed  from  Bethahemesh  (1  Bam.  vii.  1, 
2),  and  here  it "  abode  "  long  time,  "  for  it 
was  twenty  years."  Perhapa  the  word 
**  abode  "  in  this  paeisge  may  be  eqaivalent 
to  abode  unmoMd  (1  Sam.  zir.  18,  19).  Foe 
thongh  the  chronology  from  the  death  of 
£11,  through  the  remainder  of  Bamoal's 
Mteei  and  of  Banl'i,  teemi  almost  hopeleasly 


nnc«rtain,  yet  It  wnnld  appear  certain  that 
the  loterval  exceeded  twenty  years,  to  the 
time  that  David  now  takei  in  hand  to  bring 
home,  as  it  were,  the  ark.  The  ark  of  QoS, 
the  Lord.  Thongh  the  Anthorized  Version 
of  this  paaaage  ia  better  and  oleurer  than 
that  of  the  parallel  (2  Bam.  vL  2),  yet  it  ia 
left  somewhat  obaonte.  The  comma  should 
follow  the  name  Ood.  JahoTih  sitting  upon 
the  eheruUm  then  follows  aa  a  olanee  In 
apposition,  while  the  last  three  words  (om 
iM  name  is  eaUed,  rather  than  wboat  name) 
state  that  olansa  to  oontain  "the  Name  of 
the  Lord"  (Dent.  x.  8;  xxxL  9;  t  Sam.  iv. 
4;  V.  3;  vi.  8).  Berlhean,  following  The- 
nini,  propcaes  to  ohange  the  Hebruw  w 
into  Dtf.  Bnt  there  are  abondant  objectioaa 
to  this! 

Ver.  7.~Tlie7  sarried;  the  Anthorlied 
Version  of  the  pamllel  "  they  set."  But  the 
TerbiatbeHipb.of33^  a  word  carrying  mors 
of  majesty  in  Its  use  (Deut.  ziziii,  26 ;  Job 
zxx.  22;  Pa.  zvlii.  II ;  llviii.  38 ;  Isa.  zix.  I). 
A  new  out.  The  stress  laid  on  the  newness 
of  thisoart,  the  term  being  twice  repeated  in 
the  pamltel  paaaage,  may  justly  remind  of 
Mark  zi.  2;  Hatt  xxviL  60  (see  'Bpeaker'a 
Commentary  '  on  2  8am.  vi.  3).  The  honaa 
of  Ahinadab.  There  is  no  mention  of  Abina- 
dab  that  would  indicate  that  he  still  lived, 
even  when  twenty  years  before,  the  ark  waa 
plaoed  in  his  lionse.  Eleazar  was  his  eldeat 
Bon  (1  Snm.  viL  1),  and  was  "  saootifled  to 
keep  the  aA  of  the  Lord."  Tna  aod  Ahio 
were  possibly  sons  of  Eleazar,  sod  not  sou 
of  Abinadab,aDd  Eleazar's  younger  brothers. 
The  Septuagint  translutes  Ahio,  and  accord- 
ingly reads,  "  Uzza  and  his  brethren  dravs 

Ver.  8.— flayed  betbrs  Ood.  The  Hebrew 
word  is  the  Pial  of  pntr,  the  root  of  which,  from 
the  simplest  meaning  of  "  to  laugh  "  (and 
with  the  two  appropriate  prepositions  used 
for  laugliing  witli  an  expression  of  derieloit 
or  oontampt),  throngh  the  two  further 
meanings  of  "sporting"  and  "jesting," 
passes  to  the  signification  of  "dancing'* 
(1  BatD.  sviiiT;  Jer.  xtxi.  4>  Its  deep> 
est  idea  seems  to  be  "  to  make  merrv,^'  and 
to  savour  of  the  very  same  ambiguity 
attaching  to  that  idiom  with  ouraelvea. 
The  parallel  of  this  passage  exhibits  "be- 
fore the  Lonl."  Witlt  all  their  might.  Se» 
the  evident  mistake  of  the  parallel  (,"  on  all 
manner  of  instruments  made  of  firwood," 
literally,  wilh  ail  firaoodi)  through  similw- 
ity  of  tne  Hebrew  characters,  (^bala  and 
.  .  .  trumpets.  Of  the  five  names  of  musical 
initruments,  the  same  in  number  in  both 
passages,  the  Biat  three  are  the  same  in  the 
Hebrew,  but  theee  last  two  are  different  words, 
niT]^^*  Djn^^i  here  fbr  cr^yfltBi  o-pjpjpav 
A  vsriatioD  01  this  partiaular  kind  'agi^ 


154 


THE  riBST  KOK  OF  THE  CHBOXICLESl  [gb.  zm.  1 — ^14. 


cf 


e'-JkThr.'^.T  fci'i  \zjt  Li=.">tr  ^i  toe  n-x- 

V«r.  >.— n«    thrwfcnglTcr    cf 

yAAj'S.j  ti:**e  *rft  iw:  i-fc=-e*  *5  i 

Irl^r^.  'r  r-.*  f.rs  u  a  crrr^r:::: 

ccLtr:  b-st  li.*-c  u  tct'-.iz  t:  -if-ier^iii*  i:r 

Qfl    wLirh.      Ow:-r   to    ti«    ia€*=.i-;    ci 

K»r£.:n  k*;=z  -  prtpmn^i,"  the   t«»:-d  c^ 

Aq*::^  i*  ~  t^  th*  prep*r&l  tL«*h.::zl  cr,"* 

vita  vLi'^h  ti4  J:::ft:hAn  T&rrsai  aLZ^hsa. 

mrA,  (i.T  iLiMCLr:z..cltM  p«Maz«.  the  J  *epa 

Targnaa  girrt  7.7s  -r*.     The  tkruki^^ 

pMT  vM  a  eircclAr  plot  of  hftri  crou^d.  fr:-m 

flftT  to  one  LTi^iz^id  f«<t  in  diAzneter,  cs 

vhlch  the  c-zea   tnmplrd  oct   the   ermin. 

TbrM.  i-j?fiooTi     eT.dei:tIy    cftea     b«CAzne 

Undxxurkt.  %xA  helpe<i  to  dr^iznite  pUcc« 

(Geo.  L  10  ;  2   Smei.  xxW.  1^>     T*«  «« 

glCTihiri  In  the  panllcl  pl«.:«  the  Auth^Tized 

Verrton  reLd-vn  -shook  iL**    Toe  Hebrev 

verb  i«  the  lame  (=??)  in  both  place*.    lu 

elemeourj  mean  nz*  are  *'to  itrike**  and  *"to 

fhitiv  'i'/vn."    PerLkp«tLe  meanini^  is  near 

the    Vclzate   Tendering,  eaififraloiit   and 

•qnivalent  to  the  rendenng,  hteamt  rt^iirt. 

Ver.  10. — There  seems  seme  httle  ancer- 

taintj  as  to  vhT  Uzza  waa  to  blame  in  a 

desire  that  wool'l  appear  both  praiievorth j 

and  instinctive,  to  ste^j  the  ark  or  save  it 

fr^m  a/Jtaally  fall.n:?.     t'zza  was  pr-'>:.aMy 

not  a  priest  or  I>:vit4^.  and  it  is  eo  •ii«t.nv:tiv 

tmi  1  his  f'm  conrieied  in  putting  his  hand  to 

the  ark,  \\ui  perhai^  thedi;txti<in"t  Numb. 

IT.  l.*)   mnj  tje    s>iificit-nt  aoo  ur.t  of    the 

Btatter.    bii^^Ai^X  iujuiiction  had  U.-«n  givea 


CEz>i  zzT.  14. 15)  that  the 
t?  'mat  :t  sbrsld  DC4  be 
n^za.  b<:t  be  alvaji 
V*  >-r  '•-«#  that  it  «a 
ark  b«;zz  absclzaeXr  c 
c€  :ts  r.i::iz  c^f^eaddj,  hia 
wc^i  Vrf  have  tha 


withwhieh 
oat  of  th« 
there.  If 
qoMtioa  of  tlia 
bat  simply 
amptoooa* 


I 


an  I'tt.-.-gSTe  i=:p; 
Ver.  II.— INnfiyii     TIm  Hebrew  loot. 

C^,)  he/^JkiZM  a  mizicn  of  anger  and  grief. 
It  is  the  word  oaed  of  Jooah  (iT.  1,  9\  and 
perhaps  c-or  Ea  _ 
"i.srt,"'  woo-d  ecfiTeT  iu 
■aie  a  bzreck:  literally,  had  bnhem  foHh 
a  ^nfofia^  /Mk  oa  I'zxa ;  t.e.  had  fimely 
br.kea  firth  ca  Una.  There  are  maoT 
exact  T  analofT^oa  oiei  of  both  Tob  and 
nonn  in  the  Hebrew.  To  tkia  dej.  This 
phrase,  also  foond  in  the  parallel  plaoa* 
indicates  the  laree  of  time  froin  the  hiitoiiaal 
point  cf  time  to  the  point  of  record. 

Ver.  13.  Obedrfni  tke  Oittita  Thai 
Obed-edom  ii  caUed  ^  the  GitUte,**  Cm.  of 
Gath'rimn.oa,  a  Levite  city  of  Dan  (Joalu 
21).  might  probably  indicate  that  there 
another  Obed-edom,  from  whom  to  dia- 
tinznish  him.  Such  a  one  would  appear 
readily  to  offer  in  the  name  of  Obed-edooiv 
son  of  Je>lnthan,  a  **  Herarite  Lerite  **  (ch. 
XT.  1<— 24 :  xTi.  &,  3d :  xxvL  4— 15>  Bat 
the  difficulty  occurs  that  an  expressioii  in 
this  last  quotation  seems  to  identify  him 
with  the  Obe^l-edom  of  2  Sam.  tL  11 ;  and 
the  l.ut  ^r;tence  of  our  next  rerse.  If  they 
are  one  and  the  same,  it  has  been  suggested 
tb  xi  marriage  mij:ht  account  for  the  Merarite 
livin  J  in  a  KuhAttiiie  city  (see  *  Speaker's 
Cvmmeutary '  ou  2  Sam.  tL  lOJ^ 


DOMILETICa 

Vers.  1 — 14.— 27ie  clapter  of  reverse ;  or,  the  good  enterprise  of  a  good  fnan  dverlhro^m 
in  a  day.  Before  viewiLg  this  chapter  in  any  detail,  there  is  a  general  impression  which 
it  makes,  and  thai,  though  general,  yet  not  vague,  but  of  a  commanding  sort.  Here  is, 
so  to  put  it,  a  certain  day  in  a  man*8  life,  an  important  day,  one  looked  for  and  conse* 
cratea  to  high  end.  It  rose  bright  and  its  joy  spread.  With  intense  activity  the  work 
is  set  about,  and  it  is  at  all  events  designed  and  superintended  by  a  good  man,  though 
it  is  not  possible  that  he  should,  in  his  own  person,  carry  out  every  detail  of  it.  That 
great  day  ended  in  disappointment  and  disaster.  And  though  the  proximate  cause  of 
this  reverse  of  all  that  was  intended,  hoped,  and  prayed  for  is  plainly  enough  told,  the 
providence  that  permitted  it  in  place  of  preventing  it  seems  obscure.  Such  days  happen 
in  not  a  few  lives,  not  least  in  the  lives  of  men  in  exalted  and  responsible  positioiu 
They  produce  sometimes  a  wounded  spirit,  a  sense  of  aggravation  and  of  intense  disap- 
pointment and  grief.  Large  thought,  large  care,  large  love,  seem  to  have  been  thrown 
away  and  rebufifed.  And  though  fault  may  have  been,  yet  that  fault,  the  fault  of  a  mere 
f  ubordinate,  visits  its  worst  effects  upon  the  chief  persons  involved  in  the  enterprise, 
or  on  a  whole  community,  or  upon  both.  It  may  throw  some  light  on  such  disappoint- 
ments and  catastrophes  in  our  own  experience  or  under  our  own  immediate  observation 
if  we  view  them  at  a  little  greater  distance  and  as  they  befell  others.    Notice,  then— 

I.  The  E5TEBPBIBE  ITSELF  AKD  THE  KATUBE  OF  IT.  It  IS  to  bring  again  the  ark  to 
tome  place  of  rights  of  honour,  of  inflaenoe.    1.  To  bring  it  back  to  the  royal  city  waa 


CH.  xm.  1—14.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  197 

only  to  give  it  (I)  the  place  that  belonged  to  it  of  nght;  (2)  the  place  that  for  honour 
it  merited ;  (3)  the  place  where  it  would  be  likely  to  be  most  influential.  Even  the  ark 
out  of  sight  was  only  too  liable  to  be  proportionately  out  of  mind.  There  is,  therefore, 
nothing  of  the  nature  of  a  mere  empty  demonstrativeness  in  the  activity  of  David  and 
his  people.  Of  national,  historic,  and  revealed  sanction,  what  they  sought  to  do  that 
day  was  the  proper  thing  to  do.  Again,  it  was  something  more  than  merely  the 
becoming  thing  to  do.  2.  It  was  a  holy  thought  and  a  holy  deed.  For  the  ark  was  a 
symbol  of  the  highest  kind ;  it  spoke  to  all  who  know  of  it  of  the  Divine  presence. 
To  bring  such  a  remembrancer  into  the  midst  of  the  nation  and  to  its  metropolis  was 
to  put  it  also  at  its  moral  centre,  and  where  it  would  radiate  forth  innumerable  rays  of 
light  and  truth  and  warmth.  Here  placed,  it  taught  (I)  how  God  must  not  be  regarded 
as  a  God  &r  off,  but  as  one  nigh  at  hand ;  (2)  how  God  wills  to  be  in  the  constant  sight 
and  constant  regard  of  his  people,  though  in  veiled  majesty ;  (3)  how  God  would  be 
known,  even  by  symbol  and  emblem  (though  not  by  image),  rather  than  as  merely 
working  through  second  causes  and  inexplicable  influences.  The  ark  ought  to  be  where 
it  can  1^  "  inquired  At"  or  *' sought  to "  in  whatever  may  be  the  ordainM  ways.  Once 
more,  the  ark  was  not  only  the  depository  of  law  and  commandment,  the  stones  of 
Sinai  and  the  strict  impartiality  of  ancient  covenant,  but  its  chiefest  and  most  con- 
spicuous accessory  was  all  of  mercy,  and  mercy  ever  accessible.  3.  It  was  a  course 
tending  to  the  higher  health  of  all  to  bring  that  ark  back.  Not  mere  addition  to 
ecclesiastical  pomp  and  furniture  and  display,  nor  to  a  pervading  and  penetrating  sense 
of  the  awful  and  the  infinite  in  contact  with  human  life,  it  brought  in  benigner 
influences  as  well.  Hope  for  the  sinner ;  pardon  for  the  penitent ;  soothing  to  save 
from  despair ;  bright  and  happy  thoughts  of  the  supreme  Father.  That  mercy-seat 
and  overshadowing  cherubim  served  to  break  up  into  welcome  radiancy  what  would 
otherwise  be  the  insufferable  blaze  of  the  eternal  Light  himself.  It  is  like  an  infinite 
nature  parting  itself  into  those  attributes  by  which  alone  partial  and  finite  creatures 
like  ourselves  can  in  any  wise  lay  hold  upon  it  with  comfort.  Mere  soothing,  mere 
comforting,  mere  subduing  influences  will  not  necessarily  minister  to  the  higher  educa- 
tion of  either  individual  or  community,  but  such  influences  as  these  mitst  do  so.  And 
the  known  and  offered  mercy  of  God,  just  so  fenced  as  it  is,  must  be  all  pure  gain  to 
those  who  look  to  it  and  live  in  it. 

II.  The  failubb  and  the  peculiar  cibcumstakces  of  it.  Though  to  the  eye 
that  looks  on  the  outside  only  it  might  then  have  seemed,  and  may  now  seem,  that  it 
was  not  altogether  necessary  that  failure  should  have  been  allowed  to  be  the  result  of 
the  day  and  of  what  happened  upon  it,  yet:  1.  As  matter  of  fact,  this  vku  the  verdict, 
very  decisively  pronounced  by  the  person  who  bore  the  principal  part  in  the  trans- 
action, and  apparently  no  objection,  no  remonstrance  is  made  by  any  others,  and  they 
were  many,  involved  in  the  loss.  That  the  outer  reason  was  not  very  patent,  and  the 
obstacle  not  very  physical,  may  make  the  difficulty  the  worse.  Nervous  complaints 
may  be  largely  compounded  of  fancies — these  their  chiefest  ingredients — yet  they  are, 
as  matter  of  fact,  not  a  whit  the  less  real ;  they  are  the  stubbornest  to  hold  their  own, 
and  most  indocile  to  argument  or  to  persuasion.  Much  more  are  conscientious  com- 
plaints untractable,  and  justly  so.  Force  will  not  drive  them,  persuasion  will  not 
conauer  or  stifle  them,  their  reason  is  deep-hidden  within  themselves.  And  something 
of  tnis  kind  must  have  been  at  the  heart  of  the  matter  when  David  found  himself  so 
appalled  and  so  stricken  by  a  certain  kind  of  impression  which  he  received  upon  the 
death  of  one  person — an  event  which  must  have  been,  in  all  ordinary  aspects,  one  of 
the  commonest  sights  for  David.  That  the  failure,  therefore,  arose  from  the  unseea 
and  the  intangible  forces  that  were  set  active  confessedly  by  the  death  of  one  man 
made  by  no  means  a  less  real,  less  serious  obstacle,  but  rather  the  reverse.  2.  The 
failure  was  very  unexpected.  It  certainly  was  very  unexpected  as  matter  of  fact.  But 
it  was  also  unexpected  in  the  further  degree  that,  if  it  had  been  thought  of — if  it  had 
entered  into  the  passing  stream  of  thinking  of  any  one,  it  would  have  been  at  once  carried 
out  of  the  current  and  surrendered  itself  to  the  nearest  eddying.  For  (I)  nothing  in  the 
object  at  heart  would  have  warranted  the  gratuitous  conjecture  of  ill  omen ;  (2)  nothing 
in  the  necessities  or  likely  perils  of  circumstances  would  have  suggested  the  conjecture ; 
and  (3)  nothing  (so  far  as  was  known)  done,  or  neglected  in  the  preparations,  would  have 
bespoken  failure  in  the  judgment  of  a  calm,  sympathizing,  kindly  bystander,    Xiittle 


198  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,   [ch.  xra.  1— 14. 

indeed,  then,  was  there  to  prepare  for  such  a  falling  through  of  the  very  cherished 
hopes  and  the  earnest  deeds  of  that  day.  3.  The  failure  was  of  a  sort  to  have  many 
and  wide  effects  and  also  cross-effects.  How  much  thinking  of  friend  and  foe  would  be 
stirred  1  How  many  tongues  of  friend  and  foe  would  allow  themselves  licence  I  How 
would  the  matter  be  viewed  from  one  point  and  another  1  Its  relation  to  the  king  and 
what  he  had  so  fervently  desired — to  the  people  and  their  recent  union  under  one  king, 
would  be  eagerly  scanned.  1'he  ill  omen  would  be  quickly  discerned  by  those  who 
wished  ill  to  David  or  to  Israel.  And  many  a  sincere  heart  would  share  the  pain  and 
anxious  doubt  and  the  fear  of  David  himself.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  greater 
the  previous  interest  and  enthusiasm  in  the  undertaking,  and  pious  seal  towards  it,  so 
much  severer  now  the  stroke  and  the  shock  to  all  concerned. 

II.   TUE    POSSIBLE    USES  AND    EXPLANATION  OF  THE   FAILUBB.      In  default  of  being 

able  to  assign  any  one  positive  reason  for  the  disappointment  of  this  day,  and  for  the 
fact  that  it  fell  heavy  on  those  apparently  free  from  blame  and  inspired  with  all  good 
feeling  and  purpose  it  is  ever  open  to  us  to  notice  results.  We  may  reverently  track 
consequences  of  Divine  judgments  and  providence,  and  thence  gather  something  of  their 
origin,  even  where  it  would  be  most  irreverent  to  dogmatize  on  these  causes,  to  chal* 
lenge  the  equity  or  to  criticise  the  disposition  of  them.  The  deepest  sorrows,  the 
bitterest  griefs,  the  keenest  strokes  which  fall  upon  the  humble  and  the  wise,  are  ever 
found  to  lead  to  conduct  similar  to  this  in  our  actual  life.  When  the  severest  has 
passed,  and  we  are  recovered  but  a  little  from  the  shock,  we  begin  to  cast  about  to 
inquire  with  solemn  self-searchings  what  hidden  fault  there  was  in  ourselves,  to  what 
great  danger  we  were  drawing  near,  heedless  and  unwitting,  and  at  least  what  residuum 
of  good  we  may  derive  out  of  so  much  evil  and  suffering.  This  is  right  conduct  per- 
sonally, and  to  follow  the  lines  of  such  a  practical  analogy  may  help  us  see  our  way 
through  many  a  deep  thicket  of  the  world's  dark  history.  We  never  do  right  when  we 
would  '*  do  wrong  that  good  might  come."  But  Grod  ever  does  right  and  kindness  when 
he  directs  trouble  upon  us,  upon  our  very  head,  into  our  very  heart,  that  good  may  come 
of  it.  It  is  his  to  chasten,  and  he  chastens  for  our  profit.  And  thus,  when  we  have 
seen  Uzza,  the  rash  offender,  suffer  what  must  have  been  the  just  reward  of  his  deeds, 
and  he  is  passed  away,  we  can  but  return  to  ask  what  lesson  the  deep  and  widespread 
disappointment  had  for  all  the  rest,  high  and  low.  In  what  significant  moral  sense  ol 
this  kind  did  this  disaster  find  its  root?  And  the  answer  is  of  this  kind.  1.  It  may 
very  possibly  have  been  that  outward  zeal  exceeded  discretion  and  sincere  piety. 
2.  It  may  have  been  that  David  and  those  high  ecclesiastical  officers  with  whom  lay 
the  ultimate  resix)nsibility  had  not  given  sufficiently  careful  instruction  to  those  who 
only  served,  and  had  neglected  to  copy  the  well  known  minuteness  and  accuracy  of 
their  old  and  revered  Law.  If  so,  they  had  failed  of  their  duty  in  very  high  and  sig* 
nificant  respects.  3.  It  is  certain  that,  for  sanctified  uses^  this  event  must  have 
deepened  the  solemn  fear  and  respect  toward  the  ark  and  him  of  whom  it  told 
throughout  all  the  people  far  and  wide  who  had  lost  some  of  that  essential  reverence 
for  it  during  its  long  absence.  4.  The  disaster  and  disappointment  were  not  a  final  loss. 
The  delay  of  "  three  months"  taught  fear,  raised  hope,  chastised  self-trust,  and  helped 
educate  to  religion  a  whole  people  and  their  priests  and  king. 

Vers.  1,  2, 4. — The  rule  that  makes  a  willing  people.  These  verses  discover  to  us  the 
first,  or  some  of  the  first,  things  which  David  did  on  finding  himself  now  ruler  over  an 
entire  and  united  people.  And  they  serve  to  illustrate  in  particular,  not  merely  the 
good  and  wise  thing  which  he  did,  of  which  we  shall  speak  hereafter,  but  the  good  and 
wise  manner  in  which  he  set  about  doing  it.  Many  a  promising  career  has  been  spoilt 
by  neglecting  to  observe  the  method  which  David  now  pursued,  and  diligently  pur- 
sued, when  the  career  that  Providence  may  have  opened  has  been  of  the  same  nature, 
namely,  that  of  ruler  or  leader  of  men.    Notice — 

I.  The  high  estimate  bet  upon  national  and  religious  harmony.  The  ruler 
now  evidently  bids  for  no  mere  outer  form  of  this,  but  for  the  presence  of  the  deep, 
genuine  spirit  of  it  in  his  people.  The  captains  and  all  the  leaders  and  all  the  congre- 
gation— if  all  these  will  tliink,  and  love,  and  determine,  and  do  the  same  things,  he 
will  be  satisfied,  and  his  heart  will  rejoice.  Though  possibly  he  might  have  been  in 
policy  compelled  to  take  less  than  this  and  effect  or  at  least  accept  a  compromise,  it  ia 


CH.  xm.  1— 14.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa  199 

this  for  which  he  makes  his  first  bid,  and  that  a  sincere  and  hearty  hid.  The  mere 
acknowledgment  of  so  great  a  principle  was  a  happy  inauguration  of  his  own  kingship 
and  a  favourable  omen  for  his  reign.  He  had  learnt  not  a  little  of  the  intrinsic  value 
of  this  harmony  in  previous  affliction  of  his  own,  in  observation  of  how  things  had 
gone  in  the  notorious  absence  of  it  with  Saul,  and  partly  in  his  own  experience  while 
he  ruled  over  only  a  portion  of  the  people.  And  having  now  gained  the  opportunity, 
he  seizes  it  almost  eagerly,  he  sanctifies  it  by  an  immediate  practical  honouring  of  it, 
and  does  his  best  not  to  lose  early  or  needlessly  so  great  and  splendid  an  offer  of  Pro- 
vidence. Who  can  estimate  the  value  of  tho  act  of  a  man  already  known  as  a  good 
man,  and  occupying  the  place  of  a  great  man,  when  he  thus  sees  the  opportunity  of 
advertinng  before  a  whole  nation  (not  the  individual  quality  of  individual  character, 
which  haply  might  claim  retirement  for  its  perfection,  best  blossom  in  the  dark  and  be 
"bom  to  olush  unseen,"  but^  that  intrinsically  good  and  Heaven-bom  principle  which 
the  arbitrary  disposition  ana  the  despot  would  have  made  it  their  first  endeavour  to 
trample  underfoot  and  hide  out  of  the  way  ?  The  man  who  stamps  a  beneOcent  prin- 
ciple of  this  kind  with  royal  approbation— with  that  most  royal  kind  of  approbation 
which  belongs  to  exalted  and  wide  moral  influence— is  one  of  the  very  chiefest  of  the 
benefactors  of  his  kind,  and  honours  his  own  nature  and  its  Author  at  the  same  time. 
His  deed  is  one  of  the  best  in  kind^  most  multifarious  in  good  effect,  and  most  far- 
reaching  in  place  and  time.  The  fashion  of  the  selfish,  the  haughty,  the  arbitrary,  is 
the  contrary — to  smother  with  jealous  fear  for  themselves  and  their  supposed  influence 
the  growth  of  opinion  and  private  judgment  the  co-operation  and  the  sympathy  of  the 
many,  while  they  love  their  obedience  best  when  it  is  the  blindest. 

II.  The  rational  way  taken  to  obtain  that  harmony.  This  was  shown  in  two 
degrees.  David  is  not  a  leveller.  He  knows  well  the  principle  of  hierarchy,  which 
nature  itself  illustrates  in  every  direction,  but  nowhere  more  than  in  the  gift  and 
circumstance  of  man.  These  distinctions  he  does  not  affect  to  ignore  or  to  despise. 
So  (I)  he  consults  the  judgment  of  the  captains  and  everv  leader,  who  themselves 
formed  a  very  "  congregation  of  Israel  **  round  about  him ;  and  (2)  tests  the  willinghood, 
or  professes  to  do  so,  of  the  '*  brethren  "  and  "  the  priests  and  Levites  "  "  everywhere  .  • . 
in  all  the  land  of  Israel."  There  is  no  doing  even  the  best  and  most  religious  thing 
altogether  over  the  heads  of  the  great  people  themselves.  The  principle  of  proxy  in 
religion  is  nobly  and  opportunely  here  dishonoured.  A  religious  people  can  alone  con- 
stitute a  religious  nation.  Willinghood  in  religion  alone  adequately  attests  the  reality 
of  its  nature.  This  ruler  David  yields  of  his  own  accord  what  not  a  few,  even  of 
enlightened,  civilized,  modem  times,  would  think  it  a  great  deal  to  yield — the  pride  of 
commanding^  the  pride  of  personal  authority,  the  pride  of  bearing  down  any  possible 
little  difference  or  contrariety  of  opinion  that  might  be  expressed — in  order  to  attain  th» 
end,  and  an  end  in  itself  supremely  desirable.  How  often  that  end — the  end  answering 
exactly  to  that  description,  that  it  is  supremely  •  desirable — gets  overlooked  and 
suffers  loss  or  absolute  oclipse  because  of  the  eager,  jealous,  unlovely  fray  of  personal, 
class,  or  priestly  feeling  1  When  we  act  thus  we  court  defeat  for  our  cause,  though  it 
be  the  highest ;  and  to  the  great  foe  against  whom  we  should  show  front  so  united  we 
show  inst^  the  joints  in  our  harness  and  armour  and  the  weak  places  of  ourselves. 
When  we  act  thus  it  is  not  the  resistlessness  of  the  force  of  co-operation  that  we  are 
likely  to  get,  for  it  is  not  this  that  we  are  honestly  seeking.  We  are  seeking  tdf  first. 
The  confidence  that  we  do  not  give,  or  offer  to  give,  we  do  not  get  offered  in  retum,  nor 

get  it  at  all.  We  are  poor,  weak,  imcertain.  There  is  not  constitution  in  us,  nor  the 
ealth  and  soundness  of  constitutionalism.  Great  is  the  gulf  between  that  people  of 
whatsoever  sort  and  the  ruler,  the  first  principle  of  the  latter  of  whom  is  that  he  must 
mle  with  unquestioned  and  inelastic  command,  and  they  obey  with  unquestioning  and 
blind  obedience.  Nations  and  communities  and  families  have,  in  numbers  that  cannot 
be  numbered,  suffered  wreck  irretrievable  from  this  one  cause,  and  yet  the  forcible  and 
innumerable  warnings  do  not  seem  as  yet  to  have  secured  a  thorough  mastery  of  the 
lesson  on  the  part  of  the  world.  But  at  all  events  one  clear,  noble,  loving  exemplifica- 
tion of  the  very  opposite  is  furmshed  to  us  by  the  prudent  and  sympathetic  conduct  of 
David  in  the  narrative  before  us.  He  determines  on  ascertaining  whether  it  is  not 
possible  to  have  the  entire  approval  of  the  nation  and  the  hearty  co-operation  of  alL 
And  he  takes  the  right  method  to  evoke  these.    The  effect  is  that  which  has  rarely 


200  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,   [ch.  xm.  1— 14. 


failed  to  bo  the  effect  under  any  fairly  analo^nt  circumstances,  that  a  splendid  exampl« 
of  national  and  religious  willinf;bood  and  harmonious  consent  is  brought  to  view—- a 
coninioii  glory  of  ruler  and  people  and  a  universal  source  of  instruction  to  the  world. 
'^  All  the  congregation  said  that  they  would  do  so :  for  the  thing  was  right  in  the  eyee 
of  all  the  people." 

Yer.  3. — Eeligious  reioluiion  hcued  on  regretful  memoriei,  David  certainly  wSsbet 
to  make  a  contrast,  and  a  decided  one,  between  the  days  and  the  administration  of  Saul 
and  those  of  iiimsclf ;  for  it  was  ripe  time,  both  that  such  contrast  should  be  made,  and 
made  patent  to  all  the  nation.  Yet,  as  we  have  read  what  he  says  and  does,  we  do  not 
take  the  impression  that  he  desires  to  make  that  contrast  ostentatiously,  invidiously,  or 
with  any  degree  of  triumphant  antipathy  toward  his  predecessor.  What  he  does  desire 
is  to  make  it  efifuctive  and  real.  Indeed,  though  we  cannot  hold  David  responsible  for 
the  way  in  which  things  went  in  the  days  of  Saul,  and  for  the  neglect  and  dishonour- 
shown  to  the  ark  as  well  as  to  not  a  few  other  of  the  observances  of  religion,  yet  his 
tone  falls  on  our  ear  with  something  of  the  sound  of  self-reproach.  And  although  it  if 
impossible  that  he  could  in  deep  e<irne8t  have  held  himself  responsible  for  those  things 
— to  profess  it  could  have  amounted  to  mere  affectation — yet  for  all  this  we  observe  that 
he  now  sixiaks  as  though  he  would  voluntarily  include  himself  in  his  measure  amongst 
the  number  of  those  involved  in  the  fault  and  certainly  in  the  disastrous  consequences 
of  it.  He  classes  himself  and  those  whom  he  is  exhorting  in  the  one  common  number 
of  those  who,  let  the  causes  be  what  they  might,  had  long  lived  in  neglect  of  some  of 
the  highest  exercises  and  privileges  of  their  religion.  May  we  not  justly  set  this  down 
again  to  the  forgiving  temper  and  delicate  feeling  and  refined  nobility  of  spirit  in 
IHtvid,  to  which  his  treatment  of  Saul  had  already  often  borne  witness  while  BbmI  yet 
lived  and  though  he  was  his  bitterest  foe?  Therefore  is  it  that  David  now  abstains 
from  making  any  needless,  any  profuse  references  to  the  chief  causes  of  the  irreligion  of 
the  past  reign.  He  does  not  at  all  enlarge  upon  the  conduct  of  the  arch  offender, 
though  in  the  necessity  of  things  he  mentions  his  name.  Two  simplest  sentences  tell 
the  tale  of  what  weighs  deeply  on  his  heart :  "  Let  us  bring  again  the  ark  of  our  Qod 
to  us :  for  we  inquired  not  at  it  in  the  days  of  Saul.*'    Let  us  notice — 

L  The  resolve  upon  immediate  amendment,  and  the  immediate  pboclamation 
OF  it.  We  cannot  doubt  that  the  mind  of  David  was  made  up,  that  his  resolution  was 
formed.  He  is  no  sooner  king  of  the  whole  people  than  he  acknowledges  the  necessity 
of  the  presence  and  the  ark  of  the  God  of  the  whole  people.  '*  Arise,  0  Lord,  into  thy 
rest,  thou  and  the  ark  of  thy  strength  : "  this  is  his  heart*s  earnest  prayer.  And  he 
does  not  merely  *'in  secret"  pray,  but  takes  the  responsibility  of  exhortation.  He  does 
not  smother  his  convictions,  nor  utter  them  with  bated  breath,  nor  hope  others  will 
take  them  up  and  work  them  out  while  he  slumbers ;  but  he  has  the  courage  of  his 
convictions,  and  as  it  were  in  the  audience  of  the  whole  people,  he  rouses  their  sense 
of  duty  and  calls  them  to  a  practical,  even  though  tardy,  repentance.  Clear  duty  is 
always  to  be  honoured  by  prompt  attention  to  it  and  by  prompt  summons  of  others  to 
it.  And  it  is  to  be  observed  with  painful  consequence  that  it  is  clear  interest,  clear 
policy,  clear  present  gain,  that  too  often  wins  this  prompt  attention,  rather  than  clear 
duty  in  tho»o  very  highest  forms  of  it  which  the  pure  acts  of  religion  involve. 
First  then,  the  own  prompt  thought  of  David,  and  8econdly,his  unshrinking  call  to  others, 
bes|)oke  a  genuine  religion  in  this  matter  in  him.  He  is  baulked  by  no  shamefacedness^ 
by  no  timidity  of  such  as  sometimes  seem  to  think  that  their  religion  requires  apolo- 
gizing for,  and  that  they  may  rule  it  rather  than  be  implicitly  ruled  by  it.  But  David 
bt'trays  the  real  spirit  of  thorough  amendment,  and,  though  the  waters  of  repentance 
should  need  to  run  deep  and  very  deep,  they  will  safely  bear  a  man  through  them. 

II.  The  faithful  presence  of  one  of  the  greatest  helm  to  the  amendment  of 
practical  repentance,  namely,  a  frank  admission  and  public  confession  of  the  exact 
facts  of  the  case.  Nothing  is  a  surer  deterrent  for  a  repentance  that  might  be  than  an 
unwilling  facing  of  the  exact  state  of  things.  Nothing  augurs  more  surely  that  the 
repentance  will  die  off  with  the  transitoriness  of  a  "morning  cloud"  than  that  it  ba 
unaccompanied  by  an  uncompromising  confession,  or  be  accompanied  with  but  a  feeble, 
partial  confession.  But  the  assertion  now  made  without  fear  of  contradiction  is  of  the 
most  unequivocal:  '*  We  did  not  inquire  at  it  in  the  days  of  Saul."    As  though  in  our 


CH.  xm.  1—14.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  201 

own  days  a  man  highly  placed  and  of  authority  says  of  himself,  and  inyolves  a  large 
number  of  others  in  the  assertion,  while  he  looks  them  steadfastly  in  the  face,  "  We 
were  never  on  our  knees ; "  "  We  forgot  to  pray ; "  **  We  lived  long,  perilous,  anziouf 
years  without  prayer."  To  tell  myself  honestly  my  own  greatest  sin,  and  make  con- 
fession thereof  to  one's  own  soul  argues  two  things--(l)  some  of  the  truest  courage ; 
(2)  the  likeliest,  surest  evidence  of  genuine  conversion.  However  that  sin  was  to  be 
shared,  and  whoever  might  be  justly  charged  with  being  chiefly  answerable  for  it,  the 
nation  Israel  could  not  be  brought  in  guilty  of  a  greater  or  more  suicidal  sin  than  that 
of  neglecting  "  to  inquire  at  the  ark."  Well  may  we  imagine  that  unmeasured  paUiof, 
sincerest  self-condemnation,  imderlie  this  confession,  "  For  we  inquired  not  at  it  in  Uie 
days  of  Saul." 

IIL  The  entisb  absbhoe  of  ant  apparent  disposition  to  explain  awat  the  snr. 
No  excuse  is  suggested,  no  palliation  is  hinted.  The  bare  fact  announced  seemed  as 
though  to  make  each  one  who  heard,  as  well  as  him  who  had  spoken,  hold  his  breath. 
There  is  no  offer  on  the  part  of  David  to  point  to  what,  so  far  as  fact  was  concerned,  he 
might  justly  have  pointed — ^the  clear,  bad  example  of  Saul,  and  the  distracted,  divided, 
worried  nation,  chief  thanks  to  Saul.  Adam,  as  the  most  natural  thing  in  the  world, 
early  in  the  world  as  he  was,  attempted  to  push  his  sin  a  step  further,  though  to  fix  it 
on  Eve ;  and  Eve  acted  after  an  exactly  similar  type.  But  David  seems  now  to  teach 
how  convinced,  utterly,  he  is  that  no  such  subterfuge  can  be  anything  but  the  subter- 
fuge of  an  hoar.  He  seems  to  know  well  what  Ezekiel  declared  with  such  unsparing 
directness,  none  should  elude  it,  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  Were  there  a 
hundred  manifest  explanations,  a  hundred  plausible  excuses  of  the  fact  that  Israel  for 
a  generation  or  for  one  year  does  ^  not  inquire  at  the  ark,"  not  all  these  will  for  one 
moment  deliver  Israel  from  its  own  inevitable  loss,  all  the  worse  because  s«(^-inflicted, 
all  the  more  cruel  because  ushered  in  by  high  precedents.  And  let  there  be  a  sin 
attaching  to  any  one  of  us,  a  favourite,  a  besetting  sin ;  and  let  us  be  able  to  give  a 
hundred  explanations  and  a  hundred  palliations  of  it.  These  hinder  our  confession, 
but  do  not  help  our  soul ;  they  hinder  our  estimate  of  our  own  siu,  but  lessen  not  its 
malignant  nature ;  they  hinder  our  likely  breaking  free,  for  ever  free,  but  do  not  com- 
pensate for  our  not  being  free. 

IV.  The  illustration  presented  of  the  duty  of  breakino  awat  the  earliest 
POSSIBLE  FROM  ooMPLiciTT  WITH  OTHER  men's  SINS.  Whatever  was  David's  share  in 
the  sin  and  the  loss  of  the  nation  that  had  not  for  so  long  a  time  "  inquired  at  the  ark," 
now  there  comes  for  him  the  time  when  he  has  to  consider  the  position  he  holds  wiUi 
regard  to  the  matter,  no  longer  as  a  private  citizen  and  as  an  individual  man,  but  as 
successor  to  Saul,  and  first  man  in  the  realm.  It  is  found  by  some  one  of  the  hardest 
things,  not  simply  to  break  down  their  own  habits,  but  to  break  through  others'  preoe* 
dents.  Any  number  of  anomalies  are  condoned  and  are  still  permitted  to  exist  b^use 
they  have  existed,  and  perhaps  existed  long.  But  the  anomalies  of  sin  against  (xod  and 
•in  against  man  can  never  be  justly  condoned  on  this  principle,  come  they  recommended 
by  any  number,  any  length,  any  kind  of  precedents.  In  nothing,  perhaps,  is  the  force 
of  precedents  more  willingly  felt,  more  tamely  succumbed  to,  than  in  mattera  of  religion 
and  religious  significance.  And  it  is  here  that  they  should  least  of  all  be  honoured 
thus.  **  To  the  Law  and  to  the  testimony  **  must  they  be  brought.  The  ark  has  been 
neglected ;  the  Bible  has  been  unstudied,  unmeditated ;  the  closet  of  prayer  has  been 
unfrequented.  It  has  got  fashionable  '*to  forsake  the  assembling  of  ourselves  together;** 
and  it  is  considered  wit  to  level  gibe  and  sarcasm  against  God*t  great  ordinance  of 
preaching.  To  break  through  all  this  and  subvert  it,  and  begin  afresh  before  the  eye 
of  man  requires  strong  conviction,  real  religion,  great  courage.  David  frees  himself 
with  few  enough  words  at  the  expense  of  his  predecessor  from  any  complicity  with  hia 
career.  He  sees  the  steps  that  may  be  retraced,  the  evil  courses  that  may  be  reformed, 
and  the  mischief  that  may  be  repaired,  and  he  gives  himself  no  rest  till  the  great  task 
is  begun  and  concluded.    With  him  in  this  matter  to  see  is  to  conquer, 

Yer.  12. — A  mortifying  stumble  sanctified.  On  the  threshold  of  his  reign  David  desired 
to  do  an  act  especially  right,  and  on  the  threshold  it  seems  that  he  is  destined  to  encounter 
m  that  very  attempt  failure  and  keenest  disappointment.  With  enthusiastic  faith  in 
the  ark^  it  is  his  heart's  first  and  deepest  desire  to  bring  it  again  home--at  least  to  itome 


20S  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHROXICLE&   [cb.  xm.  1— 14. 

place  more  like  permaneDce  and  h  -Tiour.  And  in  the  hringing  of  it,  through  no  apparent 
fault  of  Lii  ovL,  the  ei.;<:r:  rl^e  :'^:1&.  d:»a.«tr:<a5>  and  fatal  It.  This  issue  he  must  feel 
equiralent  to  a  penc-i^Al  a£i  Terr  Mrere  rebufL  Yet  there  is  scaroeljr  room  to  doubt  that 
honest  motire,  nli^  o^^  {-.^'..zz  and  pr.nci{%e,  ar.d  sn  ardent  faith  dictated  his  desire  and 
attempt.  And  a£  iiiile  r-x-rj  ii  tLens  appareLtly  to  doubt  that  Darid  rackoned  on  the 
helpful  proteciioi  cf  Pr  -vi  :«r^:e  azaii;^;  vbaterer  could  be  called  aeddent,  and  from  hit 
heart  prayed  for  it.  TLe/j^*:;,  however,  of  tLat  day's  journey  and  work  wo  know;  and 
they  stand  in  pa:::ful  oci:rjk$;  to  what  we  had  hop^  All  the  eircumiianeea  we  do  not 
know,  and  there  inay  be  ex:'.aria::o=.s  not  giren  us  which  would  eaaly  mitigate  our 
si>r;  rise  and  a^xourit  f.r  vLi:  LApiiened.  It  may  be  that  Darid  did  omit  to  give  the 
inost  pn-'per  dirtc:i:ns,  a::d  to  ur^e  the  ne^iful  cautions,  and  to  implore  solemnly  the 
Divine  b*es$:n^.  He  may  Lave  l«e«n  a  little  too  confident  of  the  mere  act  itself,  a  little 
too  trustful  in  the  cxid  iit'rXiti.LS  cf  Lixself,  and  a  little  too  uplifted  because  of  the 
unanimous  c«:it:rr.er.t  of  ali  whom  he  had  consulted.  A  stumble  over  the  threshold 
may  be  very  m  riifyir.^,  very  :.-arLt'.:r.^p  but  no  doubt  it  has  often  sared  infinitely 
worse  calaRiiiy  further  on.  The  very  badness  of  an  omen  may  turn  oonfidenoe  into 
care,  and  will  wcrk  well  for  a  cau$e,  if  it  call  special  attention  to  some  fact, or  principle^ 
or  aspect  of  the  wL-.le  n:at:er  lia>  le  to  lie  overi.*:-ked  or  insufBciently  regarded.  Perhaps 
in  the  present  instance,  dii  we  but  kz.ow  all,  this  might  sufficiently  explain  all  that  at 
first  Kh.  ks  hard  on  David  and  an  ill  encouragement  for  his  pious  zeaL  Pasang,  then* 
fore,  interest  in, i!  but  uncertain  c.^r.jt^ture,  it  is  <>|«n  to  us  to  study  some  of  the  known 
and  ascertained  mults  of  that  same  day  and  that  same  bitter  experience  of  David. 
The  passage  before  us  proclaims  plainly  some  cf  these,  and  proffers  a  leading  illustration 
of  tl:e  principle  cf  present  I*:**  compensated  by  spiritual  results.    Notice — 

I.  The  birth  op  a  df.ep  exligious  feeling  op  feab  op  God  in  Dayih.  **  He 
was  afraid  of  God  that  cay.**  David  was  not  like  a  very  young  man ;  still  less  was 
he  like  a  very  young  man  with  little  knv>wledge,  and  who  had  been  stinted  of  oppor- 
tunity of  gaining  experience.  Much  of  this  he  had  already  accumulated,  and  especially 
of  the  kind  that  had  broUjZht  lessons  of  God  and  his  providence  near  to  him.  There 
is  not  a  little  evidence  going  to  in^iicate  that  David  had  a  certain  predisposition  to 
religious  thvMight  and  foeli:.g.  Tiiere  is  a  wo:iderful  al^sence  of  indication  of  the  con- 
trary. 11  is  mind  had  largely  ore'.:od  to  Divide  n:anifes:aiion,  his  thoughts  frequently 
roved  among  the  thoughts  and  ways  of  God.  Dangers  and  actual  sufferings  and  fears 
had  often  brought  him  into  near  Cv:nverse  with  the  kindness  and  watchfulness  of  the 
"  chief  Shepherd,"  of  whom  he  knew  how  to  speak  so  well.  Perhaps  it  had  never 
struck  him  (^and  perhaps  it  woiild  have  never  struck  us  except  for  this  incident)  that 
there  remained  for  him  something  especial  to  learn  of  God  in  a  very  different  kind  of 
direction  from  all  befc^re.  His  impressions  of  God  were  all  most  grateful,  as  well  they 
might  be.  He  had  found  God  a  **  Sun  and  a  Shield  *" — Light,  Warmth,  and  Protection, 
lie  had  found  God  one  who  **  had  hfted  him  up  on  high,"  and  "  had  not  suffered  him  to 
be  cast  down,"  nv»r  '*  his  foes  to  rojoice  over  him.''  He  had  been  in  earthly  trial  and  per- 
secution much,  but  in  heavenly  favour  more,  and  in  a  wonderful  assurance  of  all  that 
gave  him  '*  boldness  of  access  "  to  God.  And  he  had  not  yet  learned  the  other  side — 
not,  indeed,  of  the  benevolent  character  and  beneficent  working  of  God — ^but  the  other 
side  of  himst?/,  which  might  greatly  need  another  sort  of  manifestation  of  the  Dirina 
power.  Though  he  had  often  seen  Gixi's  ju.<tice  and  his  anger,  and  had  said,  **  God  ii 
angry  with  the  wicked  every  day,"  he  had  never  felt  these,  nor  had  dreamed  that  he  was 
such  that  the  time  might  come  that  he  would  have  to  feel  them,  and  his  experience 
become  enlarged  by  so  much  as  this,  "  ^(y  flesh  trembleth  for  fear  of  thee,  and  I  am 
afraid  of  thv  judgments  **  (Ps.  cxix.  120).  To  know  a  fear  of  God  is  one  of  two  things 
for  the  chil^  of  God.  It  is  either  to  know  the  ftar  of  one's  own  sin  in  honest  earnest ; 
or  to  catch  one  humbling,  overwhelming  sight  of  the  contrast  between  the  finite  and 
erring  nature  of  the  creature  man  and  the  iutinite  perfect  ion  of  God.  As  Adam  first "  was 
afraid ;"  as  Jacob  "  was  afraid  "  when  he  woke  from  that  transporting  dream ;  as  Peter 
was  afraid  in  the  presence  of  the  mighty  Master  of  miracle;  so  was  David  now  "afraid 
of  God."  There  were  slight  differences  of  detail  in  each  case,  and  differences  of  form, 
but  the  fundamental  facts  were  identical,  and  they  were  two  in  one — a  sinful  creature 
seizing  a  moment's  real  idea  of  the  all-holy  Almighty !  And  this  was  the  birth  of  a  deep 
religious  feeling  in  David  which  he  never  forgot,  and  which  no  doubt  served  the  rest  of 
his  life  many  a  valuable  end. 


CH.  xra.  1— 14.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa  203 


n.  CORBECTEB    AND    FULLBB    KNOWLEDGE    OF    Gh)D,    WHILE    IT    INTEBF08E8   DELAY, 
DOES  NOT   INVOLVE  DESPAIR,  BUT  DOES  ENSUBE  A   MORE  EXALTED  ESTIMATE  OF  WHAT 

ms  TO  ENTERTAIN  HIM.  The  ark,  with  the  mercy-seat  upon  it  and  the  overshadowing 
cherubim,  symbolized  the  Divine  presence,  and  was,  when  located  in  the  sanctuary  in 
its  proper  place,  unseen  except  by  the  high  priest.  In  it  centred  the  reverential  feel- 
ing of  the  people.  It  is  exceedingly  likely  that  something  of  the  deep  mysterious  awe 
with  which  it  was  associated  was  lowered  and  impaired  by  its  history,  when  taken  by 
the  Philistines  and  lost  to  its  own  people.  David  himself  may  have  been  among  the 
number  of  those  whose  higher  sense  suffered  some  depreciation.  He  reverenced  the  ark 
and  prized  it ;  he  thought  it  a  necessity  to  the  weli-beiDg  of  the  nation,  and  ardently 
longed  **  to  bring  it  to  himself  to  the  city  of  David."  But  something  of  this  was  form 
and  the  worship  of  form.  Something  of  it  was  reliance  on  "  means  of  grace,"  rather 
than  vital  dependence  on  the  grace  Itself.  Even  David's  time  was  too  late  to  let  this  in 
David's  own  self  be  "  winked  at  "—or  in  the  self  of  any  true  Israelite.  The  Bible  that 
is  possessed  must  be  intelligently  used ;  it  is  not  to  be  lowered  to  the  place  of  a  ttdis- 
man.  The  God  who  is  worshipped  must  bo  worshipped  "  in  Spirit  and  in  truth  "-^ho 
"  seeketh  such  to  worship  him.*'  And  what  David  had  thought  could  be  sufficiently 
well  done  in  a  day  or  two,  he  learns  will  take  "  throe  months' "  preparation.  During 
all  this  time  his  estimate  of  what  it  was  to  have  and  to  entertain  the  Divine  represen- 
tation was  being  raised.  How  many  a  time  did  he  speak  in  this  wise  to  himself,  "  How 
shall  I  bring  the  ark  of  Grod  home  to  me  ?  "  And  the  very  process  of  thought  that  was 
going  on  within  him,  the  mingled  perplexity,  disappointment,  humiliation,  all  wakened 
by  an  unusual  fear,  were  at  the  same  time  raising  his  estimate  of  the  guest  he  fain  would 
welcome,  and  fitting  him  to  entertain  that  guest.  In  this  instance  fear  supplied  the 
missing  Unk,  fear  held  the  key-stone  position,  fear  wakened  the  things  that  "  were  ready 
to  die,"  unsuspectedly  as  the  danger  lurked.  The  theology  must  needs  be  radically 
weak  that  omits  the  justice  of  God,  the  integrity  of  man ;  the  judgment  of  God,  the 
fear  of  man.  But  the  corrector  and  fuller  knowledge  of  the  Divine  nature  and  relation- 
ship to  man,  which  confessedly  is  most  adapted  to  waken  fear,  to  quicken  it,  to  keep  it 
a  steady  and  strong  force  in  our  life,  is  not  that  which  will  permanently  discourage,  dis- 
appoint, or  occasion  desponding.  It  will  interpose  delay,  it  will  occasion  heart-searching, 
it  will  promote  a  wholesome  self-renunciation.  But  thereupon  it  is  provided  that, 
long  ere  despair  is  touched,  a  ransom  will  be  found,  and  a  triumphant  entrance  for  the 
ark  more  prized  than  ever.  "  Mercy  and  truth  are  met  together,  righteousness  and  peace 
have  kissed  each  other." 

Yer.  14. — Besponaihie  service  outvied  hy  abounding  reward,  A  certain  amount  of 
obscurity  hangs  over  the  name  of  Obed-edom,  as  has  been  already  seen.  And  supposing 
that  slight  amount  of  obscurity  removed  or  to  count  for  little,  it  remains  to  take  note  of 
the  fact  that  the  signification  of  the  name  Obed-edom — servant  to  Edom — lends  some 
additional  interest  to  the  circumstance  of  the  ark's  entertainment  for  a  space  of  three 
months  at  his  house.  It  reminds  one  of  some  two  or  three  occasions  in  the  time  of  our 
Saviour  and  in  the  first  history  of  the  apostles,  when  those  who  did  not  bear  the  name 
of  Iffltiel  did  seem  to  do  works  better  than  those  of  Israel,  and  to  carry  a  truer  heart 
within  them,  and  received  a  signal  and  gracious  reward.  But  on  whatever  occasion 
and  in  whatever  way  he  or  the  family  of  which  he  came  became  possessed  of  the  name, 
there  is  little  doubt  that  this  Obed-edom  was  a  Levite,  of  the  Kohathite  family.  And 
as  his  house  would  appear  to  have  been  near  the  scene  of  the  iudgment  that  befell  Uzza, 
while  the  ark  was  now  on  its  way  from  the  house  of  Abinadab,  the  Levite  of  Kiijath- 
jearim,  it  the  rather  invited  David  to  place  it  there  awhile  under  his  care.  David  is  now 
the  victim  of  panic.  Whether  the  panic  were  more  the  offspring  of  good  or  bad  quality^ 
and  had  in  it  preponderance  of  good  element  or  otherwise,  certain  it  is  that  it  lost  David 
for  three  months  the  possession  of  the  ark,  where  he  would  fain  have  it.  Again  he  must 
have  lived  on  mercy,  and  had  to  rest  his  hope  again  on  this — that  the  will  be  taken  for 
the  deed.  It  was  a  shadow  of  how  it  would  be  later  on  with  the  building  of  the  glorious 
temple.  But  equally  certain  was  another  thing — ^that  what  David  lost  of  honour,  nrivi- 
lege^  reward,  another  obtained :  '*  The  ark  of  God  remained  with  the  feimily  of  Obed- 
edom  in  his  house  three  months.  And  the  Lord  blessed  the  house  of  Obed-edom,  and  all 
that  he  bad."    We  have  here  a  kind  of  leading  instance  of  responsible  trust  transferred; 


204  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,   [ch.  xm.  1—14. 


lost  by  one  it  is  gained  by  another,  it  is  worthily  fulfilled,  it  is  bountifully  rewmided. 

KoUce — 

L  TUE  ARDUOUS  TRUST  OF  THE  FIRST  MAN  TV  THE  KINGDOM  HAS  OOMS  ST  dllCCTM- 
STANCES,  WHATEVER  TIIET  MAT  BE,  TO  BE  FORFEITED,  EITHER  TEMFOBARILT  OB  ALTO- 
GETHER, TO  ONE  OF  THE  HUMBLEST.  Very  much  of  human  life  and  circumstance  often 
seems  to  go  by  chance,  often  seems  to  be  most  arbitrary,  often  seems  to  those  who 
most  implicitly  strive  to  believe  in  providence  very  unlike  the  work  of  an  all-wise 
and  beneficent  providence.  But  sometimes  we  seem  more  able  to  get  a  olue  which 
helps  to  strengthen,  refresh,  renew  an  implicit  faitlu  The  mere  glimpse  of  such  an 
explanation  docs  at  the  same  time  rebuke  our  former  doubt  and  foiling  faith.  Have 
we  not  help  here  also?  All  David's  position,  all  his  holy  enthusiasm,  all  his  good 
intention,  do  not  suffice,  it  appears,  to  compensate  the  absence  of  some  certain,  real^ 
moral  quality.  David  had  much  of  the  noble,  the  brave,  the  forgiving,  the  generous, 
about  him.  out  more  than  once  he  lets  himself  down  for  the  want  of  a  calm,  nnap^ng 
CEtithfulness  with  himself.  And  for  want  of  this,  one  of  the  grandest  prixes,  one  of 
the  greatest  opportunities,  now  slips  from  his  fingers.  One  of  the  strongest  forms  of 
human  weakness  will  be  found  to  consist  in  want  of  continuity  of  moral  effort.  One 
of  the  great  victorious  forces,  despite  of  all  human  weakness,  will  be  found  in  the 
reverse  of  this — "  ]Mitient  continuance,''  nndespairing  tenacity,  the  importunity  whidi 
enlists  time  on  its  side.  This  present  in  one  who  seems  to  have  no  outer  advantage  of 
position  or  grace  or  other  gift  will  avail  more  than  a  score  of  other  gifts  of  fortune  and 
gifts  of  character,  if  this  be  absent  or  inconspicuous.  Surprising  dash  is  in  the  long 
run  conquered,  for  it  is  exactly  for  every  matter  of  long  run  that  dash  has  little 
persuasion.  The  lowliest  humility  of  person,  place,  character,  which  has  power  to 
wait,  to  endure,  to  continue,  has  a  career  before  it  which,  without  one  ambitions 
endeavour  or  thought,  gets  borne  on  irresistibly  to  the  highest  goal.  But  the  other 
stylo  may  break  down  irremediably  in  a  moment.  We  should  not  need  always  to 
wonder  so  much  when  "  the  mighty  are  put  down  from  their  seats  and  they  of  low 
degree  are  exalted,**  if  we  would  just  see  that  the  reverse  that  thus  happens  is  empha- 
tically not  that  of  chance  or  reckless  caprice,  but  a  result  of  that  which  God  most 
regards,  the  presence  of  some  deep-lying,  significant  moral  quality,  or  the  want  of  it. 
The  unnoticed  working  of  this  truth  is  not  equivalent  to  any  uncertainty  in  the 
working  of  it.  And  the  invisible  working  of  it,  even  when  roost  invisible  to  man,  is 
no  stealthy  indication  of  the  indefensiblcness  of  it  when  God  should  once  arise  to 
reveal  and  vindicate  all.  And  he  it  is  who  is  Arbiter  of  providence*  Meantime  man- 
kind is  ever  being  offered  openly  enough  its  own  lesson. 

II.  A  TRUST  OF  THE  HIGHEST  RELIGIOUS  CHARACTER  AT  HOME  IN  LOWLT  LODOIKa. 

The  history  of  real  greatness,  of  genuine  goodness,  and  emphatically  of  God's  Church,  is 
a  continuous  illustration  of  this  very  thing.  The  palace  has  seldom  enough  been,  either 
of  human  endeavour  or  Divine  decree,  the  nursery  of  the  only  real  thing  fit  to  be  called 
greatness.  Abundant  privilege,  knowledge,  opportunity,  have  not  been  the  seed-bed 
of  signal  and  bright  displays  of  goodness.  The  places  where  these  grow  are  not  here. 
Nay,  these  two  things  may  be  said — that  it  is  impossible  to  calculate  or  to  foresee  where 
they  will  be  found  ;  and  that  it  is  the  least  correct  account  of  them  to  say  that  they 
'*  grow."  They  at  all  events  **  are  bom."  "  The  Spirit  bloweth  where  it  listeth,"  and 
we  ofttiroes  are  startled  to  hear  the  sound  of  it,  and  are  envious  that  the  pinion  is 
heard  so  fleet  and  so  strong  as  it  passes  our  own  ear  or  our  own  abode  in  order  to  light 
upon  the  head  or  the  roof  of  some  very  humble  neighbour.  No  lodging  was  too 
humble  for  Jesus  from  birth  to  death,  from  stable  and  manger  to  that  cross  upon 
which  he  *'  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head."  And  the  nearest  approaches  to  the  God* 
like  visitation  in  heart  and  home  of  man  have  been  in  the  humble  heart,  the  lowly 
home,  the  meek  spirit,  the  Church  that  "  the  world  knoweth  not."  Whoever  this 
Obed-edom  was,  up  to  this  time  his  name  was  not  inscribed  on  any  roll  of  fame.  And 
had  it  not  been  for  his  being  ready  to  entertain  that  ark  without  the  self-depreciation 
of  Moses  when  he  wanted  to  evade  responsibility ;  without  the  panic  of  David  when 
he  thought  of  his  own  safety  rather  than  of  the  honour  and  safe  housing  of  that  very 
ark  ;  without  the  unmannerly  prayer  of  the  stricken  Peter,  "  Depart  from  me,"  when 
he  feared  his  Saviour  more  than  his  sin, — his  name  would  never  have  been  where  it  finds 
now  its  chiefest  glory,  nor  his  home  one  of  the  veritable  oases  of  the  world's  desert. 


CH.  xm.  1—14.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  205 

Verily  the  ark  of  Qod,  the  presence  of  Gk>d,  the  secret  of  Grod,  the  Spirit  of  GK>d,  the 
Church  of  Grod,  are  all  of  and  with  the  humble  and  ungrasping  and  unexpectant  heart. 
Thdt  kind  of  heart  God  surprises  and  makes  it  his  home. 

UL  High  beligioub  tbust  faithfullt  met  and  fulfilled  beings  fullest, 
BICHE8T  BLESSING.  It  is  weli  to  note  the  great  stress  laid  upon  the  shower  of  blessing 
that  descended  upon  the  house  of  Obed-edom  and  himself,  "  and  all  that  he  had."  It 
were  well  if  it  were  not  too  much  considered  old-fashioned  to  think,  to  say,  heartily  to 
believe,  that  God's  blessing  does  go  with  hospitality  shown  to  his  servants,  liberality 
shown  to  his  Church,  honour  shown  to  his  Word.  The  history  before  us  tells  us  the 
old-day  fact  plainly.  It  is  not  obsolete  as  a  principle.  Let  the  conditions  be  seen 
again,  and  the  results  will  be  seen  again.  If,  indeed,  a  man  give  wealth  and  render 
honour,  hoping  to  receive  for  it  in  another  way  what  he  would  regard  as  a  very  ample 
equivalent,  this  should  earn  for  itself  but  the  name  of  another  form  of  simony,  and 
evoke  again  the  just  anathema,  "  Thy  money  perish  with  thee  •  •  •  thou  hast  neither 
part  nor  lot  in  the  matter  .  •  •  thy  heart  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  Grod."  Therefore 
we  cannot  say,  and  would  not  say,  "  Let  the  experiment  be  but  tried,  and  await  with 
confidence  the  result."  For  so  soon  as  ever  it  be  regarded  as  experiment,  and  take  the 
least  semblance  of  any  of  the  shapes  of  calculation,  the  Spirit  has  gone — the  greater 
Spirit  has  sped  his  flight  fu  enough  distant.  But  when  this  thing  genuinely  appears 
in  heart  or  home,  and  honour  is  first  shown  to  Gkxl,  service  first  shown  to  C^irist,  and  the 
ear  listens  first  of  all  sounds  for  the  whisper  of  the  Spirit — then  three  months'  sojourn 
of  all  Divine  token  is  none  too  much  condescension  for  the  majesty  of  Heaven  to  deign, 
and  perennial  blessing  upon  the  &mily,  the  business,  and  all  unto  which  the  hand  may 
be  set,  none  too  great  bounty  for  the  Giver  of  all  to  bestow.  That  house  is  full  of  fra- 
^nce ;  the  perfume  spreads  grateful  abroad.  More  and  still  more  of  gift  is  not  grasp- 
ingly,  selfishly,  anxiously  sought.  It  comes,  and  the  earth  yields  her  prophetic  fnll 
increase.  Little  enough  is  said  of  what  reverence,  what  care,  what  holy  tear,  Obed- 
edom  and  family  showed  the  ark.  These  are  to  be  supnosed.  But  enough  is  said  of 
how  well  God  pays  his  fieiithful  steward. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Bevival  of  religion.  The  resolve  to  fetch  back  the  ark  of  GK)d  was  a 
sign  of  reviving  interest  in  religion,  of  a  more  lively  desire  for  the  Divine  favour,  and  of 
a  deeper  sense  of  the  importance  of  observing  religious  ordinances.  As  the  symbol  of 
the  Divine  presence,  as  the  depository  of  mementos  and  pledges  of  Jehovah^s  authority 
and  mercy,  the  arh  was  held  sacred  by  the  Hebrew  people.  Its  proper  position  was  in 
the  most  holy  place  of  the  tabernacle.  It  was  justly  felt  to  be  a  national  calamity 
when  the  ark  was  taken  by  the  Philistines  in  battle.  That  it  was  allowed  to  remain 
after  its  restoration  at  Eiijath-jearim  for  seventy  years  was  culpable  negligence,  which 
was  significant  of  religious  indifference.  The  newly  elected  king  was  acting  rightly  as 
the  human  head  of  the  theocratic  kingdom  in  advising  that  the  almost  forgotten  ark 
should  be  brought  up  with  joyful  solemnities  to  JerusaleuL  His  resolution,  supported 
by  the  sympathy  and  co-operation  of  the  people,  was  indicative  of  a  revival  of  religion. 
The  incident  suggests  several  highly  important  lessons. 

L  National  ibbeligion  entails  national  galamitibs.  It  is  always  unjustifiable 
to  attribute  specified  individual  instances  of  calamity  to  the  intentional  interposition  of 
s  retributive  Frovidenoe.  At  the  same  time,  the  world  is  under  a  righteous  Ruler,  and 
communities  as  well  as  individuals  are  subject  to  his  sway.  National  vices  and  crimes 
have  unquestionably  a  tendency  to  produce  national  troubles  and  disastera.  Sin  cannot 
go  unpunished ;  a  nation  suffers  when  a  nation  errs. 

II.  Rspentanoe  18  a  national  duty.  If  a  people  in  its  corporate  capacity  can  err, 
why  can  it  not  in  the  same  capacity  repent?  David  remind^  the  chie£i  that,  as  a 
people,  Israel  had  not  inquired  at  the  ark  in  the  days  of  SauL  Thus  he  quickened  the 
conscience  of  the  community.  InHcnsibility  to  sin  is  of  all  sins  the  worst.  To  recognize 
and  confess,  to  mourn  and  to  forsake  sin,  is  the  indispensable  condition  of  acceptance 
and  of  reformation.    '*  If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful,"  eta 

III.  In  a  great  kobal  gbisis  it  bboomeb  ths  beprbsentatiyis  of  a  nation  to 


206  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,   [ch.  nn.  1— 14. 

CONSULT  WITH  A  VIEW  TO  UNITED  REVIVAL.  David  ooDsulted  every  leader  and  referred 
the  matter  to  all  the  coDgregation.  In  a  theocracy,  no  doubt,  action  was  possible  which 
would  be  impracticable  in  a  nation  where  great  diversity  of  opinion  and  practice 
prevails.  But  how  obviously  appropriate  is  it  that  religious  societies  and  their  leaders 
— the  devout,  the  wise,  the  experienced — should  take  counsel  with  a  view  to  religiooi 
revival  and  reform  I 

IV.  General  counsels  of  reformation  should  issue  in  practical  action.  The 
people  were  not  brought  together  merely  to  "  talk  over  "  the  existing  state  of  things. 
They  were  summoned  under  the  king's  leadership  to  act,  and  they  did  act.  (What  are 
called  '* resolutions "  at  religious  meetings  are  often  misnamed;  it  is  sometimes  the 
case  that  those  who  pass  them  never  dream  of  exerting  themselves  to  carry  them  into 
effect.)  If  religion  is  to  be  revived  and  the  land  to  be  purged  of  iniquity,  if  the  favour 
of  God  is  to  be  recovered  and  the  honour  of  God  to  be  sought,  it  must  be  by  united 
effort  and  action.  Each  godly  person  must  ask,  **  What  can  I  do  towards  such  an  end?'' 
True  acknowledgment  of  God  is  not  merely  verbal,  it  is  practical.  When  all  the 
people,  repenting  of  sin,  turn  unto  the  Lord,  he  too  will  turn  them  again  unto  himself^ 
and  they  shall  be  saved. — T. 

Ver.  4. — Politics  and  morala,  David  no  sooner  set  before  the  people  their  duty 
with  regard  to  the  ark  than  they  immediately  resolved  to  act  in  accordance  with  his 
counseL  The  chronicler  explains  why  they  did  so ;  he  tells  us,  in  language  remark" 
ably  dignified  and  simple :  **  For  the  thing  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  people." 

1.  A  NATION  sometimes    NEGLECTS    TO    DO  WHAT  IS  RIGHT   THROUGH  INATTENTION* 

The  ark  seems  to  have  been  overlooked  during  the  years  it  remained  at  Eiijatb- 
jearim:  "We  inquired  not  at  it  in  the  days  of  Saul."  It  is  singular  that  nations 
sometimes  connive  at  great  national  sins,  that  national  conscience  seems  to  slumber. 
How  otherwise  can  we  account  for  the  prevalence  of  war,  of  slavery,  of  cruelty  to 
prisoners,  and  other  evils,  which  have  disgraced  civil  and  Christian  communities  ? 

II.  It  is  a  happy  thing  when  the  question  is  put  to  a  nation — What  ib 
RIGHT?  It  is  too  common  to  ask  the  people — What  is  customary  and  in  accordance 
with  precedents?  What  is  expedient?  What  will  contribute  to  national  fame?  But 
nations  as  well  as  individuals  are  under  the  government  of  a  righteous  moral  Ruler  and 
King.  And  there  is  one  question  which  those  who  would  elevate  and  guide  a  nation 
should  ever  raise — What  is  right  f 

III.  The  NATIONAL  conscience  sometimes  CORDIALLY  RESPONDS  TO  THE  REVELA- 
TION OF  RIGHT.  Let  not  the  multitude  be  flattered ;  they  are  prone  to  bow  before  the 
furious  gust  of  passion;  yet,  when  the  impulse  of  prejudice  or  anger  is  past,  they 
are  capable  of  proving  themselves  amenable  to  higher  motives.  Great  acts  of  justice 
and  self-sacrifice  have,  in  such  cases,  been  performed  by  a  morally  awakened  society. 
If  "  the  thing  be  right  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  people,"  then  there  may  be  witness^ 
magnificent  displays  of  heroism  and  unselfishness.  Then  is  the  adage  true,  VoxpoptUi 
vox  Dei. 

IV.  National  conscience  only  fulfils  its  part  when  it  leads  to  national 
ACTION.  "  All  the  congregation  said  that  they  would  do  so."  Feeling  must  lead  to 
corresponding  achievement,  or  it  is  mere  worthless  sentimentality.  A  people's 
protest  is  good,  but  a  people's  action  is  better  still. 

Lessons.  1.  Let  those  who  would  forward  a  great  movement  appeal  to  the  people 
at  large,  and  seek  to  enlist  the  national  judgment  and  conscience  on  their  side.  2.  Let 
nations  that  would  enjoy  the  Divine  favour  seek  it  by  doing  the  Divine  will,  by 
pursuing  *'  the  thing  that  right  is." — T. 

Ver.  8. — Holy  mirth.  To  some  minds  the  two  ideas,  holiness  and  mirth,  do  not  seem 
to  harmonize.  Whether  because  goodness  is  sometimes  associated  with  austerity,  and 
religious  observances  with  dulness,  or  because  mirth  is  sometimes  associated  with 
sensual  indulgence  and  profanity ;  the  fact  is  that  to  many  minds  there  appears  a 
mutual  repugnance  between  the  two. 

I.   Wb  have  HEBE  A  SUITABLE  AND  INSPIRITING  OCCASION  OP  HOLY  MIRTH.      General 

rejoicing  should  not  take  place  only  when  temporal  deliverances  or  material  prosperity 
have  been  experience.    When  God  shows  his  mercy  towards  a  people,  in  conferring 


CH.  xiiL  1— 14.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHEONICLES.  207 


upon  them  spiritual  privileges,  then  should  they  show  forth  his  praise,  and  make  a 
juyful  noise  unto  the  Lord. 

II.  The  union  of  all  clabsbs  in  holt  mirth.  King,  priests,  and  people  rejoiced 
together,  and  if  all  orders  and  ranks  are  alike  indebted  to  GKxl's  goodness,  all  should 
alike  join  in  his  service  and  praise.  Widespread  is  the  beneficence  of  the  heavenly 
Father;  let  all  the  children  give  thanks,  and  be  joyful  before  the  Lord  the  King. 

III.  Holy  mibth  finds  an  afpropbiatb  expression  in  conjoined  and  cordial 
services  of  music  and  bono.  Such  utterance  of  mirth  is  natural,  is  in  accordance 
with  the  constitution  Qod  our  Maker  has  given  us.  It  is  scriptural,  for  both  under 
the  old  covenant  and  the  new,  vocal  praise  was  practised  by  the  saints  of  God.  It  is 
acceptable:  '*With  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased."  It  is  an  anticipation  of 
heaven,  where  the  praises  of  the  redeeming  God  are  universal  and  perpetual. 

Lessons.  1.  Discourage  a  severe,  morose  piety.  2.  Let  songs  of  rejoicing  abound 
in  Christian  homes  and  Churches.  3.  Let  the  young  be  trained  to  associate  happiness 
with  religion — to  take  pleasure  in  "  the  service  of  song  in  the  house  of  the  Lord." — T. 

Yer.  10. — Severity  of  judgment  To  understand  this  narrative  it  is  necessary  to  bear 
in  mind  the  character  of  the  older  dispensation.  It  was  an  economy  in  which  persons, 
things,  and  places  were  set  apart  as  holy,  doubtless  in  order  to  iostil  into  the  minds 
of  the  people  ideas  of  spiritual  purity  and  consecration.  The  ark  was  a  holy  thing, 
in  a  sense  in  which  nothing  material  is  holy  under  the  Christian  dispensation.  But 
there  are  principles  which  underlie  these  ceremonial  appointments  and  provisions, 
which  are  deserving  of  our  serious  and  discriminating  attention. 

I.  The  historical  incident.  The  chronicler  here  relates:  1.  A  serious  offence. 
When  Uzza  put  forth  his  hand  and  touched  the  ark,  though  he  did  so  only  for  the 
security  of  the  sacred  chest,  he  incurred  the  Divine  displeasure.  His  act  was  one  of 
oficummeas;  it  was  not  his  business  to  interfere  with  the  apparatus  of  Divine  worship. 
He  was  guilty  of  irreverence ;  for  he  showed  that  he  did  not  stand  in  awe  of  the 
symbol  of  the  Divine  presence.  And  we  may  discern  even  profanity  in  his  conduct; 
it  was  only  for  the  chosen  tribe  to  minister  in  connection  with  the  sanctuary  and  what 
it  contained,  and  although  the  ark  was  in  transit  to  its  resting-place,  its  safe  conduct 
should  have  been  left  to  the  Levites.  2.  A  severe  punishment  "  The  Lord  smote 
him  .  .  •  there  he  died  before  God."  The  penalty  seems  at  first  view  disproportionate. 
Tet  it  was  both  what  might  have  been  anticipated  and  what  was  necessary  to  produce 
a  wholesome  impression.  That  it  did  produce  awe  and  trembling  there  can  be  no 
question.  The  severe  judgment  tempered  the  national  rejoicing  and  even  altered  the 
purpose  of  the  king  as  to  ue  residence  of  the  ark  of  the  Lord. 

IL  The  moral  lesson.  As  we  read  this  narrative  we  are  impressed  with  the 
general  lesson  of :  1.  OoiTa  displecuure  with  disobedience.  The  Scriptures  are  full  of 
lessons  illustrating  this  principle ;  they  begin  on  its  first  page  and  continue  to  its  last. 
There  b  a  more  special  lesson,  viz. :  2.  Thai  unspiritual  men  should  not  meddle  vnth 
spiritual  things.  In  Christian  Churches  it  is  of  the  highest  importance  that  men 
actuated  by  carnal  and  worldly  motives  should  not  be  allowed  to  intrude  and  to 
influence  their  affairs.  Let  those  be  clean  who  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord.  The 
profane  cannot  with  impunity  discharge  sacred  functions. 

Lessons.  1.  Let  God  and  all  that  is  his  be  regarded  with  reverence.  2.  Let  sinners 
spared  by  Divine  mercy  adore  the  forbearance  and  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord,  and 
"  seek  him  whilst  he  may  be  found,  and  call  upon  him  whilst  ho  is  near." — T. 

Yer.  14. — Household  blessing.  **  Prosperity/'  savs  Lord  Bacon,  ''is  the  blessing  of  the 
old  covenant,  adversity  of  the  new."  Certainly  Old  Testament  Scripture  abounds  in 
instances  of  temporal  abundance,  fertility,  and  happiness,  represented  as  proofs  of  the 
favour  of  the  Most  High.  In  the  text  Obed-edom  is  recorded  to  have  received  the  ark 
Into  his  house,  and  with  it  to  have  received  an  abundant  blessing  upon  himself  and 
upon  all  that  pertained  to  him. 

I.  The  ground  of  blessing.  Apparently  this  was,  in  the  case  before  us,  a  regard 
for  what  was  God's.  But  this  was  doubtless  an  expression  of  regard  for  God  himself. 
The  Divine  Searcher  of  hearts  and  Judge  of  all  sanctions  this  principle ;  and  althou;zh 
we  can  give  nothing,  save  our  hearts,  to  God,  we  can  give  to  his  people  much  that  is 


20e  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,  [ct.  xm.  1—14. 


acceptable  to  him.  Our  Lord  Jesus  often  puts  this  motiye  before  his  disciples.  What 
we  ao  we  are  to  do  for  his  sake ;  and  what  we  do  to  his  people  we  are  deemed  to  do 
for  him.    Still,  as  in  the  oldon  days,  God  honours  those  that  honour  him. 

IL  The  biokb  and  tokens  of  blessiko.  Whom  GKjd  blesses  he  blesses  in  them- 
selves— in  thoir  own  persons.  He  enriches  them  with  spiritual  knowledge;  he  reveals 
to  them  his  favour;  he  fits  them  for  his  service.  He  bestows  upon  them  relative  bless* 
Ings.  As  Gbd  blessed  the  house  of  Obed-edom,  so  there  is  no  more  delightful  way  in 
which  he  reveals  his  favour  to  his  people  than  by  visiting  in  mercy  those  most  dear  to 
them— encompassing  them  with  the  protection  of  his  providence,  and  bringing  them 
to  a  knowledge  of  his  grace  and  love.  Ho  blesses  them  in  their  possessions ;  some- 
times, according  to  the  Hebrew  saying,  "  in  their  basket  and  their  store,"  but  always 
by  granting  them  grace  to  make  a  sanctified  use  of  all  they  have.  Let  all  unite  in  the 
prayer,  **  Gud  be  merciful  unto  us,  and  bl€$$  us,  and  cause  his  face  to  shine  upon 
usr— T. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Piety  and  policy.  As  King  of  Israel,  David  made  an  excellent  ban- 
ning; he  commenced  his  reign  by  an  act  in  which  piety  and  policy  were  happily 
united.  His  action  was  :  1.  Indicative  of  the  fifty  which  was  characteristic  of  him. 
We  who  know  David  so  well  from  his  psalms,  as  well  as  from  the  Biblical  history  of 
his  life,  are  not  surprised  that,  when  anointed  king  over  all  Israel,  his  first  thoughts 
were  directed  to  the  service  of  God.  With  many  monarchs  this  would  have  been  the 
last  consideration.  But  it  was  deepest  and  uppermost  with  David.  He  felt,  and  most 
truly,  that  ho  owed  his  elevation  to  the  distinguishing  goodness  of  Jehovah,  and  when 
he  had  reached  the  height  of  his  ambition  he  was  not  going  to  forget  the  hand  that 
had  lifted  him  up.  Piety  was  a  vein  that  ran  straight  through  the  Itfe,  because  right 
through  the  character  of  the  king.  '2.  Politic  in  all  particulars.  He  acted :  (1)  With 
sound  constitutionalism.  Instead  of  deciding  and  decreeing  absolutely,  he  "  consulted,* 
etc.,  he  "  said  unto  all  the  congregation  of  Israel,"  etc.  (vers.  I,  2).  This  was  **  the 
manner  of  the  kinjidom  **  (see  J  udg.  zx.  7  ;  1  Kings  xiL  6 ;  2  Chron.  xx.  21).  It  was 
an  act  likely  to  impress  the  nation  very  favourably.  (2)  With  consideration  toward 
the  sacred  tribe.  '*  Let  us  send  ...  to  the  priests  and  Levites,"  etc.  They  would 
naturally  expect  that  s|)ccial  reference  would  be  made  to  them,  and  they  would  be 
gratified  by  the  royal  attention.  (.'{)  With  regard  to  the  general  wishes  of  the  people. 
All  that  could  come  to  such  a  ceremony  would  like  to  be  present;  all  were  to  be 
invited:  "Our  brethren  everywhere"  were  to  gather  together  (ver.  2);  "David  gathered 
all  Israel  together  "  (ver.  5).  (4)  With  tenderness  toward  the  fallen  house.  He  did 
not  reproach  Saul  with  the  neglect  with  which  he  might  have  been  justly  charged ;  he 
gracefully  included  himself  in  whatever  condemnation  was  implied :  "  For  we  inquired 
not  at  it  in  the  days  of  Saul"  (ver.  3).  (5)  Reserving  one  point  which  must  be  final 
and  supreme.  Their  wishes  were  consulted  and  should  be  carried  out,  but  subject  to 
one  condition — the  approval  of  God  himself:  "  And  that  it  be  of  the  Lord  our  God.* 
(6^  With  personal  i>artici|>ation  and  co-operation.  He  did  not  send  up  and  fetch  the 
arx ;  he  "  went  up,  and  all  Israel  '*  with  him  (ver.  6). 

I.  PoLioy  WITHOUT  PIETY  18  A  POOR  AND  VAIN  TUiNQ.  It  seems  clcver  or  even 
brilliant  to  those  who  imitate  and  practise  it ;  but  it  is  contemned  of  God,  disregarded 
by  the  wise  and  good,  and  certain  to  come  to  an  ignominious  end.  it  works  in  the 
ground,  and  then  sports  in  the  sun  for  its  little  hour,  and  then  it  falls  utterly  to  pieces 
and  cannot  be  liftca  up  again. 

II.  Piety  without  policy  is  a  defective  thing.  A  reverent  spirit  and  a  pious 
purpose  are  admirable  things,  but  if  they  are  dissociated  from  discretion,  and  proceed 
on  their  way  without  regard  to  the  claims,  wants,  and  wishes  of  men,  they  will 
commonly,  if  not  always,  fail  to  secure  the  object  they  have  in  view. 

III.  Piety  and  policy  together  are  a  benignant  power.  Let  good  men  be 
prudent  as  well  as  reverent,  discreet  and  considerate  as  well  as  godly  and  zealous ;  let 
the  cause  of  God  be  championed  and  conducted  by  those  who  have  a  knowledge  of 
"  what  is  in  man  "  and  what  are  the  conditions  under  which  they  work  in  harmony, 
and  then  will  the  goal  be  reached  and  the  prize  be  won. — C. 

Vers.  7 — IZ.-^The  imperfections  of  human  service.    We  cannot  read  this  story  of 


CH.  xni.  1—14.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  20& 


the  first  attempt  to  bring  the  ark  to  the  capital  without  being  impressed,  if  not 
depressed,  with  a  sense  of  the  weakness  and  imperfection  characterizing  our  human 
service.     We  learn— 

I.  That  a  blight  departitre  from  the  Diyinb  will  mat  lead  to  serious 
CONSEQUENCES.  Pavid,  in  a  moment  of  thoughtlessness  or  presumption,  decreed  that 
the  ark  of  Gfod  should  be  "  made  to  ride  "  (ver.  7,  marginal  reading)  "  in  a  new  cart." 
This  was  not  the  way  prescribed  in  '*  the  Book  of  the  Law  of  the  Lord "  (see  Numb, 
iv.  15).  This  irregularity  led  to  the  act  of  Uzza  (ver.  9),  and  this  to  the  stroke  of 
Divine  wrath  which  so  sadly  and  seriously  interrupted  the  day's  proceedings  (vers. 
10 — 13).  We  are  not  now  called  upon  to  conform  our  ritual  to  any  prescribed  order. 
The  commandment  of  Christ  does  not  go  into  the  details  of  outward  observance.  But 
it  is  nevertheless  true  that  any  actual  departure  from  his  will,  though  it  may  seem  to 
be  but  slight,  may  lead  on  and  down  to  a  most  serious  breach.  This  may  apply  to  his 
revealed  will  in  regard  to  (I)  the  temper  and  spirit  we  should  cherish,  (2)  the  attitude 
we  should  assume,  (3)  the  relations  we  should  enter  upon,  in  our  various  spheres. 

II.  That  it  is  a  matter  of  great  moment  to  know  our  place  in  the  sphere  of 
THE  sacred,  and  TO  KEEP  IT.  Uzza  was  not  entitled  to  lay  his  hand  on  the  ark  of 
God ;  he  exceeded  his  right ;  he  intruded  into  a  position  for  which  he  was  not  qualified, 
and  he  paid  for  his  presumption  the  last  penalty  of  sudden  death  at  the  hand  of  God. 
Those  who  now  attempt  a  work  for  which  God  did  not  design  them  and  to  which 
Christ  does  not  summon  them,  whether  that  of  the  Christian  ministry,  of  missions,  or 
any  other  sacred  calling,  will  find  that  they  have  committed  themselves  to  duties  and 
responsibilities,  the  faulty  and  (perhaps)  mechanical,  the  uncongenial  and  therefore 
unspiritual  discharge  of  which  will  redound  to  their  own  serious  ^  not  mortal  injury. 
We  must  take  care  to  keep  within  the  sphere  for  which  our  Lord  designed  us,  in  the 
realm  of  the  sacred  as  well  as  the  secular. 

III.  That  our  bright  and  holy  joys  mat  be  most  unexpectedly  dashed.  The 
eighth  verse  gives  us  a  picture  of  a  company  of  men  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  sacred 
pleasure;  they  were  exulting  before  God  in  the  act  of  service  they  were  rendering. 
Sacred  joy  had  reached  its  very  summit,  and  in  the  very  midst  of  it,  without  a 
moment's  interval  of  preparation,  there  occurred  the  transgression  and  the  punishment. 
Song  was  turned  into  lamentation,  dancing  into  weeping,  gladness  into  perplexity  and 
sorrow,  day  into  night.  So  may  it  be  with  us  at  any  hour  in  this  lower  earthly 
sphere.  We  cannot  reckon  on  the  continuance  of  any  present  good.  Even  our  joy  in 
God,  our  delight  in  his  service,  may  suffer  sudden  and  sad  eclipse,  and  our  noon  of 
devout  exultation  descend  at  once  into  the  midnight  of  discomfiture  and  grief. 

IV.  That  good  men  may  be  much  perplexed  at  Divine  disposals.  We  read  that 
David  was  "  displeased  "  (ver.  11),  and  also  that  he  was  "  afi^d  **  (ver.  12).  We  also 
often  find  ourselves  both  perplexed  and  alarmed  at  the  dealings  of  Gtxl  with  us.  GKxl's 
way  is  often  "  in  the  sea,  his  path  in  the  great  waters,  and  his  footsteps  are  not  known." 
He  is  sometimes  *'  terrible  in  his  doino;s  toward  the  children  of  men.**  Why  he  lets 
the  assassin  do  his  deadly  work  so  well,  the  storm  wreck  the  vessel  which  is  carrying 
missionaries  to  their  post,  the  father  of  the  family  catch  the  fatal  fever,  the  irreplace- 
able minister  perish  in  the  railway  accident,  etc.,  we  do  not  know  and  cannot  think. 
Our  hearts  are  saddened,  perplexed,  troubled,  awed.  Let  us  feel  that  we  are  but  very 
little  children  trying  to  understand  a  Divine  Father,  whose  wisdom  and  love  mtut  be 
nnfathomably  deep,  must  go  down  far  lower  than  ourpoor  plummet  will  sound. 
"  Blessed  are  they  who  do  not  see,  and  yet  believe."  We  **  walk  by  faith,  not  by 
sight."— a 

Vers.  13, 14. — Stipersiitious  error  and  reiigums  truth.  We  must  take  care  to  read 
these  verses  intelligently,  or  we  may  misread  them  altogether.  It  is  possible  to  draw 
from  them  a  conclusion  which  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  mind  of  God.    There  is — 

I.  A  superstitious  error  against  which  to  guard.  It  would  be  a  great  mistake 
to  suppose  that  the  mere  foot  of  the  presence  of  the  ark  in  the  house  ensured  prosperity ; 
or  that,  similarly,  the  mere  presence  of  sacred  rites  or  persons  will  now  command  the 
favouring  regajrd  df  God.  That  there  was  something  more  than  this  in  the  case  of 
Obed-edom  is  proved  by  the  facts :  1.  That  the  presence  of  the  ark  in  the  midst  of  the 
Philistines  proved  to  be  disastrous  (1  Sam.  v.).    2.  That  the  presence  of  the  ark  in 

L  chronicles.  p 


210  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa    [gh.  zm.  1^14^ 


the  camp  of  the  Israelites  proved  to  be  fraitless  of  help  (1  Sam.  \yX  8.  That  the  ark 
was  Dothing  more  in  itself  than  a  box  of  wood,  and,  apart  from  God's  determination  to 
bless,  could  not  possibly  effect  anything  at  alL  4.  That  to  trust  in  a  thing  manu- 
factured  of  man  and  not  in  the  living  God  himself  would  partake  of  the  idolatzoos  (we 
2  Kings  xviii.  4).  If  we  cherish  the  idea  that,  because  we  are  connected  by  blood  (or 
in  any  other  way)  with  sacred  persons,  or  that  because  we  have  much  to  do  <MfficiallT 
with  sacred  things,  with  the  utterance  of  sacred  words,  or  the  performance  of  sacred 
rites,  or  the  care  of  sacred  buildings,  therefore  it  will  be  well  with  at  in  the  booka  of 
heaven,  we  are  only  harbouring  a  fiction,  we  are  leaning  on  a  brittle  reed,  we  are 
building  the  house  of  our  hope  uix>n  the  sand. 

II.  The  belioious  truth  to  be  received  akd  weloomkd.  Gkxi  blessed  the  hooM 
of  Obed-edom  because  he  cheerfully  and  reverently  made  room  for  the  sacred  chest 
His  act  was  one  of  simple  piety,  rendered  in  an  hour  of  need  and  offered  devoutly, 
intelligently  unto  God ;  therefore  God  "  blessed  the  house  of  Obed-edom,  and  all  that  he 
had.*'  It  was  the  mark  of  God's  approval  of  a  service  rightly  and  worthily  rendered. 
The  truth  for  us  to  gather  is  that  Ood'a  abiding  favour  i$  the  one  ture  tource  of  Uesssd- 
iieM.  If  God  be  "  with  us,"  i>.  for  us,  on  our  side,  who  or  what  can  be  against  ns? 
**  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom."  Those  who,  in  constructing  their 
life,  leave  God's  favour  out  of  the  account,  make  a  fundamental  and  latal  error.  Those 
who  go  on  the  principle  that  his  Divine  favour  will  secure  true  prosperity  are  pro- 
ceeding along  the  lines  of  truth.  Let  every  man  be  discontented  and  disturbed  in  aoul 
until  he  has  first  made  sure  of  the  abiding  approval  of  the  Most  Hish.  TiU  then  it 
will  be  wrong  with  him  and  with  all  that  he  has ;  when  that  is  gained,  all  is  wcdl  with 
him  and  his.  But  how  is  this  approval  to  be  secured  ?  1.  By  doing  the  one  thing 
which  God  demands  of  all  his  children  now.  This,  first  of  all  and  most  of  idl,  is  the 
work  or  the  will  of  God,  that  we  **  believe  on  the  Name  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,"  eta 
(see  John  vi.  29 ;  1  John  iii.  23).  The  acceptance  of  Christ  as  our  personal  Saviour  and 
Ix>rd  is  the  way  to  secure  the  abiding  favour  of  the  Father  of  alL  Having  thus  guned 
his  Divine  regcird,  we  must  continue  therein.  2.  By  striving  to  be  and  to  do  all  those 
things  in  all  our  relations  which  are  pleasing  in  his  sight  (see  Phil.  iv.  8 ;  Col.  iiL  17, 
23).  Among  many  other  ways  of  pleasing  Christ,  we  may  win  his  approving  smiia 
in  the  particular  way  suggested  in  the  text.  3.  By  showing  special  attention  to  that 
with  which,  and  to  those  with  wLuni,  he  is  specially  connected — his  house  and  his 
disciples. — C. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — David  and  the  ark.  Now  that  David  had  been  anointed  king  over 
Israel,  his  first  act  was  to  think  of  the  ark.  During  the  reign  of  Saul  it  had  been 
utterly  neglected,  and  the  people  had  become  careless  about  the  ordinances  of  Divine 
worship.  This  was  the  thought  ever  uppermost  in  David*s  heart.  The  ark,  the  out- 
ward symbol  of  the  Divine  presence,  was  everything  to  him.  He  could  not  live  outside 
the  sunshine  of  God's  favour.  To  him  God  was  everything,  and  without  him  there  was 
nothing.  What  to  him  was  all  the  popularity,  the  loyalty  of  those  who  rallied  round 
him  to  proclaim  him  king,  the  devotion  of  the  many  thousands  of  Israel,  if  the  Lord 
was  not  with  him,  the  Centre  and  Source  of  all  ?  Nothing.  We  see  what  David's 
estimate  of  God's  presence  was  by  the  praises  which  he  and  all  Israel  offered  on  the 
occasion  of  bringing  up  the  ark  (ver.  8).  What  had  been  of  old  a  terror  to  the 
Philistines  (see  1  Sam.  vi.)  was  the  highest  joy  to  the  people  of  God.  It  is  so  always. 
God's  presence  is  to  God's  people  their  highest  Joy.  To  those  who  are  out  of  Christ 
what  can  it  be  but  terror  ?  Notice,  again,  how  David  adds  to  "  if  it  seem  good  unto 
you  "  the  words  "  and  it  be  of  the  Lord  our  God."  A  true  Christian  will  never,  in 
any  question,  leave  out  the  latter  words.    They  must  ever  qualify  all  that  precedes.^W. 

Vers.  7,  9—12. — Uzza  and  the  ark.  Since  the  ark  was  last  heard  of  it  had  been  in 
Baalah,  or  Kirjath-jearim.  For  upwards  of  fifty  years,  since  it  had  been  in  the  hands 
of  the  Philistines,  it  had  been  in  the  house  of  Abinadab  of  Gibeah,  under  the  charge  of 
his  two  sons,  Uzza  and  Ahio,  who  were  Levites,  and  who  had  been  consecrated  for  the 
office.  For  the  purpose  of  removing  the  ark  to  Jerusalem  it  was  set  upon  a  new  cart^ 
Ahio  the  son  of  Abinadab  going  before  (2  Sam.  vi.  4)  and  (Jzza  following.  On  the  way 
the  oxen  stumbled,  and  Uzza,  fearing  the  ark  would  fall  off.  laid  hold  of  it    For  this 


ciLxin.  1— 14.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,  211 

he  was  instantly  smitten  of  Gkxl,  and  '*  there  he  died  by  the  ark  "  (2  Sam.  yii.  7), 
'* before  God**  (ver.  10).  David  was  grieved  at  this,  and,  instead  of  proceeding 
further  and  carrying  the  ark  as  he  had  intended  to  Jerusalem,  be  left  it  in  tbe  house 
of  Obed-edom  tbe  Gittite,  where  it  remained  three  months  (ver.  14).  The  setting  of 
tbe  ark  on  a  cart  was  a  hasty  and  inconsiderate  procedure,  in  direct  violation  of  the 
command  of  God  (see  Numb.  iv.  14,  15;  vii.  9;  xviii.  3).  Setting  it  upon  a  cart 
instead  of  having  it  carried  upon  the  shoulders  may  seem  to  be  a  very  small  mistake. 
Touching  it  against  an  express  command  may  seem  to  admit  of  extenuation,  especially 
as  it  seemed  to  be  falling.  To  the  eye  of  man  the  fault,  under  such  circumstances, 
may  seem  only  to  require  a  mitigated  punishment.  But  it  is  not  so  with  God.  The 
entire  act  betrayed  a  forgetfulness  of  the  majesty  and  holiness  of  Jehovah's  presence. 
It  was  also  a  departure  from  the  Word.  Such  departures  from  the  Word,  to  ns  who 
are  accustomed  to  estimate  evil  by  quantity  and  degree  rather  than  by  principle,  may 
seem  lieht  things;  but  God  looks  at  the  motive,  the  principle,  the  underlying 
spirit. — W, 

Vers.  13, 14. — The  ark  in  the  house  of  Ohed-edom.  The  ark  was  in  the  house  of 
Obed-edom  three  months,  and  "  the  Lord  blessed  the  house  of  Obed-edom,  and  all  that 
he  had."  Why  was  this?  Obed-edom  was  a  Levite.  He  had  been  prepared  of  God 
to  minister  before  it.  None  but  a  prepared  heart  can  enjoy  Christ.  The  ark  was  at 
home  with  Obed-edom,  and  he  with  it.  So  it  is  always  with  Christ  and  his  people. 
But  God  not  only  blessed  Obed-edom  and  his  family ;  the  significant  words  are  added, 
'*  and  idl  that  he  had**  Everything  went  right  with  Obed-edom,  in  his  house,  his  family, 
his  duties,  his  joys,  and  his  sorrows,  because  the  ark  was  there.  What  a  lesson  I  Reader, 
why  do  things  not  go  right  with  you  ?  Because  Christ  has  not  his  right  place  in  your 
heart,  in  your  affections,  in  your  home,  in  your  duties,  and  in  all  you  have.  Let 
Christ  be  in  all,  and  then  it  cannot  but  be  with  you  as  it  was  with  Obed-edom,  *'  the 
Lord  blessed  his  house,  and  all  that  he  had." — W. 

Vers.  1—3,  ^,'^UnUy  in  religious  enterprises.  The  ark  was  the  national  religious 
symboL  Its  return  was  a  matter  of  interest  to  the  whole  nation.  So  David  made  a 
very  earnest  effort  to  unite  the  whole  nation  in  the  work  of  its  restoration.  It  was 
but  a  little  thing  that  David,  as  the  king,  should  order  the  ark  to  be  fetched*  It  was 
a  great  mark  of  respect  and  honour  shown  to  Jehovah  that  the  whole  nation  should 
rise,  as  one  man,  and  show  its  care  of  the  Divine  symbol.  Religion  has  its  private 
spheres.  It  is  strictly  an  individual  and  personal  thing.  Men  cannot  be  saved  in 
masses ;  the  regenerating  grace  of  God  only  reaches  them  one  by  one.  But  while  we 
see  this  with  the  utmost  distinctness,  we  must  also  admit  that  religion  Jias  its  public 
spheres,  and  that  these  are  properly  a  care  and  anxiety  to  all  sincere  and  earnest  men. 
We  are  not  to  "  forsake  the  assembling  of  ourselves  together,  as  the  manner  of  some  is." 
Our  Lord  gave  us  his  own  example  of  reverent  sharing  in  public  worship.  With  much 
suggestiveoess  the  evangelist  says, "  Jesus,  as  his  custom  was,  went  into  the  synagogue  " 
(Luke  iv.  16).  The  apostles  afford  the  example  of  sharing  together  in  worship  and 
work.  And  the  best  men  in  every  age  have  fully  recognized  1x)th  the  duty  and  the 
moral  value  of  public  religion.  It  has  been  left  to  our  times  of  luxurious  self- 
indulgence  to  fina  excuses  for  half-day  attendance  at  the  sanctuaries,  which  too  often 
grows  into  entire  neglect  of  all  public  means  of  grace.  Bishop  Wordsworth  notices,  in 
▼er.  3,  that  **  David,  in  his  charitable  spirit  towards  the  memory  of  the  departed  king, 
does  not  say  that  Saul,  being  possessed  by  an  evil  spirit,  became  indifferent  and  careless 
to  religion,  and  was  given  over  to  a  reprobate  mind ;  but  he  speaks  in  general  terms, 
and  takes  a  share  of  the  blame  to  himself :  '  We  troubled  ourselves  little  about  the 
ark  in  the  days  of  SauL*  Here  is  a  happy  example  of  mildness  and  charity,  joined 
with  piety  and  zeal." 

I.  Thb  moral  value  of  unttt  in  religious  enterprise  and  worship.  The  com- 
plete circle  of  human  culture  cannot  be  reached  and  covered  by  a  purely  private 
religious  life.  This  is  fully  illustrated  in  the  case  of  hermits,  nuns,  and  monks,  who 
have  isolated  themselves  from  their  fellows  for  purposes  of  personal  soul-culture.  But 
the  results  have  never  been  the  harmonious  development  of  the  whole  nature.  Some 
sides  have  been  unduly  cultured^  others  have  been  neglected.    In  our  commoner  life 


212  TUE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,   [oh.  zm.  1~14« 

private  culture  can  no  better  suffice.  The  side  of  feeling  becomes  unhealthily  exaggerated. 
Certain  necessary  things  in  the  religious  life  are  only  nourished  by  united  and  public 
acts  of  devotion  and  worship.  We  only  notice  a  few  of  the  chief  influences  for  good 
exerted  by  such  scenes.  1.  They  check  the  Beff-eentering^  introspective  habit,  the 
undue  attention  io  feeling.  2.  They  take  us  out  of  ourselves  by  presenting  to  thought 
matters  of  aymmon  rather  than  individual  interest  3.  They  sway  us  to  higher  ranget 
qffeelina  than  we  could  otherwise  reach.  4.  They  culture  reverence,  And  so  countenct 
&e  tendency  of  private  deyotion  to  nourish  undue  familiarity  with  Ood.  5.  And 
they  provide  peculiar  help  for  those  who,  being  weak  in  piety,  are  very  dependent  on 
sympathy. 

IL  The  power  that  mat  be  given  to  one  man  to  secure  such  unttt  in  xntsb* 
PRISE  and  worship,  illustrated  in  David.  So,  now,  a  man  may  give  the  initiative,  as 
has  been  again  and  again  illustrated  in  modern  missions.  Especially  note  Hudaon 
Taylor's  starting  of  itinerant  work  in  China.  A  man  may  give  a  leading  example.  A 
man  may  use  effort  to  secure  efficiency  and  attractiveness  in  worships  Illustrate  from 
reformers  of  modem  services — those  who  have  improved  Church  singing,  etc.  Impress 
how  superior  sl  force  the  Church  has  and  wields  to  that  exerted,  in  Christian  worc^  1^ 
any  number  of  private  individuals. — R.  T. 

Yer.  8. — The  joy  of  religion.  The  natural  and  fitting  expression  of  the  kingly  and 
national  gladness  in  the  restoration  of  the  sacred  ark  was,  *'  Playing  before  God  with 
all  their  might,  and  with  sinking,  and  with  harps,  and  with  psalteries,  and  with 
timbrels,  and  with  cymbals,  and  with  trumpets."  The  three  kinos  of  musical  instru- 
ments are  here  indicated — those  producing  sound  by  wind,  by  the  vibration  of  stringg, 
and  by  the  clanging  together  of  metals.  For  a  picturesque  realization  of  the  scene  brought 
before  us  in  this  yerse,  see  Stanley's  '  Jewish  Church,'  voL  ii.  74 — 76.  The  mission  of 
music  and  song  is  to  find  expression  for  man's  gladness  and  joy.  It  is  as  natural  to 
sing  as  to  laugh.  Man  has  wonderfully  develop^  the  faculties  of  music  and  song,  and 
now  it  is  one  of  our  chief  modes  of  expressing  human  emotions,  and  of  relieying  them 
by  expression.  It  is  as  truly  one  of  the  great  forces  for  exciting  and  stirring  emotion, 
as  is  well  shown  when  it  is  necessary  to  raise  the  martial  spirit  of  a  nation.  Dr. 
Horace  Bushnell  has  a  yery  striking  paper  on  '  lieligious  Music,  in  his  yolume  '  Work 
and  Play,'  in  which  he  opens  out  and  illustrates  these  two  points :  "The  very  wonder- 
ful fact  that  God  has  hidden  powers  of  music  in  things  without  life ;  and  that  when 
they  are  used,  in  right  distinctions  or  properties  of  sound,  they  discourse  what  we  know 
i— what  meets,  interprets,  and  works  our  feeling,  as  living  and  spiritual  creatures.'* 
"  How  carefully  this  (musical)  part  of  the  worship  was  ordered  in  the  temple  senrice  of 
Israel  is  known  to  eyery  reader  of  the  ancient  Scriptures ;  how  exactly  also  the  chonis 
of  singers  and  of  players  on  instruments  were  arranged,  one  to  answer  to  another  in  the 
deep  wail  of  grief  or  penitence,  the  soft  response  of  love,  tne  lively  sweep  of  festiye 
gladness,  or  all  to  flow  together  in  choral  multitudes  of  praise,  that  might  even  shake 
the  rock  of  Zion  itself."  "  And  if  any  one  wishes  to  know  what  power  there  may  be 
in  music,  as  an  instrument  of  reliizion,  let  him  ask  what  effect  the  songs  of  this  one 
singer  (David)  have  had,  melted  into  men's  hearts,  age  after  age,  by  music,  and  made 
in  that  manner  to  be  their  consecrated  and  customary  expressions  of  worship." 

I.  The  reasonableness  of  joy  in  religion.  We  feel  the  reasonableness  of  the 
songs  and  joy  of  Israel  when  redeemed  from  Egyptian  bondage  and  deliyered  from 
their  raging  foes.  Much  more  is  joy  and  song  right  and  natural  as  our  response  for 
redemption  from  penalty,  and  deliverance  from  evil.  It  can  only  be  a  distorted  religion 
that  fits  with  melancholy.  **  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength  ; "  and  with  "  joy  we 
draw  water  from  the  wells  of  salvation."  Illustrate  from  the  Old  Testament  point  of 
view :  David  and  the  prophets  give  high  examples.  Illustrate  from  the  New  Testa- 
ment point  of  yiew :  apostles  tell  us  if  we  "are  merry,  we  should  sing  psalms;" 
"  Speaking  to  one  another  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs."  Modem  religious 
life  makes  music  and  song  essential  features,  and  these  do  much  towards  preserving  a 
healthy  tone  in  our  piety.  This  may  be  applied  to  private  devotion ;  it  is  greatly 
aided  by  hymn  and  song.    It  is  the  most  attractive  feature  of  public  worship. 

II.  The  helpfulness  of  bono  in  expressing  religious  jot.  What  could  David 
have  done  else,  or  so  well,  in  uttering  his  over-charged  feelings?    Music  at  once  soothea 


CH.xm,l— 14.]    THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa  2? 3 

and  gives  adequate  expression.  A  man  can  put  his  very  heart  into  a  song,  and  ease 
and  quiet  his  intense  emotions  by  so  doing.  Estimate  the  influence  of  son^: :  it  (I) 
upU/tB ;  (2)  brtgktens ;  (3)  aids  feeling ;  (4)  comforU,  Illustrate  by  the  incidents  and 
influences  connected  with  Paul  Oerhardt's  hymns.  Then  we  should  fully  recognize 
the  importance  of  the  gifts  of  song  and  music  which  have  been  granted  to  the  Churchy 
and  see  that  these  are  duly  consecrate  and  cultivated.  Religious  joy  cannot  be  always 
maintained,  and  yet  true  hearts  may  even  find  "  songs  in  the  night "  and  in  the  prison. 
— R.T. 

Vers.  9, 10. — Warnings  against  irreverence.  The  incident  here  recalled  to  mind  is 
one  full  of  difficulties.  Uzza  seems  to  have  been  struck  dead  for  what  was,  in  intention, 
an  act  of  consideration  and  care  for  the  safety  of  the  ark.  To  human  view  his  sin  does 
not  readily  appear,  and  some  explanations  are  necessary  in  making  it  clear.  Uzza*8 
death  ¥ra8  not,  mainly,  a  judgment  on  Uzza,  but  a  lesson,  taught  in  a  very  solemn 
manner,  to  David  and  the  people.  They  had  not  been  associated  with  the  ark  for  a 
long  time,  and  so  may  have  lost  some  of  the  due  solemnity  of  feeling  concerning  it.  By 
the  Mosaic  rules,  the  ark  was  on  no  account  to  be  touched  by  human  hands.  It  would 
not  have  needed  any  steadying  if,  in  obedience  to  the  Law,  it  had  been  carried  by  poles 
on  the  priests'  shoulders.  So  God  permitted  this  one  man's  death  to  teach  the  sofenm 
lesson  oi reverence.  The  sin  was  really  David's  in  neglecting  the  due  order  and  regulations, 
but  it  pleased  God  that  he  should  receive  his  warning  through  the  suffering  of  another. 
One  tradition  says  that  Uzza  was  struck  by  a  lightning  flash ;  another  represents  his 
death  as  occasioned  by  the  withering  of  his  hand  and  arm.  ''  We  cannot  fully  explain 
this  judgment  from  the  side  of  Uzza.  We  must  add  that  man,  in  life  and  in  death, 
may  be  used  by  God  to  teach  his  lessons  and  accomplish  his  work ;  and  Uzza,  in  his 
sudden  death,  was  Gt)d's  appeal  to  a  king  Tand  to  a  nation)  who  had  forgotten  his  holy 
Law,  and  were  '  following  the  devices  and  desires  of  their  own  hearts.'  That  which 
was  a  judgment  to  Uzza  was  a  merciful  call  to  repentance  and  right-heartedness  given 
to  king  and  people." 

I.  Attention  to  forms  mat  expbebs  bbvebence.  Illustrate  by  the  way  in  which 
kneeling  aids  in  securing  the  spirit  of  prayer.  Herein  lies  the  importance  of  care  in 
arranging  the  externals,  the  ceremonials,  of  Christian  worship.  The  associations  of 
God's  house  should  both  secure  and  cultivate  a  due  and  becoming  reverence. 

II.  Ths  neglect  of  forms  mat  tend  to  NoiTBisn  IBBEVEBENCB.  Some  pride  them- 
selves on  freedom  from  forms.  But  while  it  is  quite  conceivable  that  overdone  forms 
may  crush  out  spiritual  life  and  feeling,  it  is  even  more  likely  that  a  despising  of 
religious  forms  may  lead  to  undue  fiEimiliarity  with  God's  Name,  and  sanctuary,  and 
worship,  and  sacraments.  If  to  some  it  may  seem  that  undue  attention  to  ritual  is 
replacing  a  true  reverence  by  a  mere  formalism,  to  othera  it  appears  that  the  age  is 
singularly  and  perilously  irreverent,  and  sorely  needs  again  the  warning  of  Uzza's  death. 

UL  TioAT  WHICH  IS  DONE  FOB  GOD  MUST  BE  DONE  IN  God'S  WAY.      A  IcSSOU  which 

every  age  and  every  individual  needs  to  learn.  David  made  the  very  common  mistake 
of  trying  to  do  God's  work  in  his  own  way.  He  must  be  imfffessively  shown  that  the 
fully  ol^ient  spirit  waits  on  God  to  know  the  how  as  well  as  the  what.  It  not  only 
says,  '*  What  wouldst  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  but  also,  "  How  wouldst  thou  have  me 
do  it  ?  "  To  win  willingness  to  take  God's  way  is  often,  as  with  David,  the  issue  of 
humiliating  failures ;  and  it  is  precisely  the  lesson  which  life-failures  are  designed  to 
teach. 

IV.  Bt  SOLEMN  FBOVIDENCES  SOLEMN  LESSONS  MAT  BE  IMPBE88KD.     Our  Lord  taught 

US  that  we  must  not  venture  to  convict  public  sufiferers  of  special  sins  bringing  on  them 
judgment  (Luke  xiii.  1 — 5).  God  often  teaches  the  mass  of  men  by  his  dealings  with 
a  few.  The  victims  of  so-called  accident  vicariously  suffer  for  the  good  of  others. 
Illustrate  by  those  who  die  of  diseases  caused  by  neglect  of  sanitary  laws.  They 
awaken  attention  to  existing  evils,  and  are  the  means  of  saving  men.  Uzza  really 
saved  the  judgment  that  must  have  fallen  on  David  and  the  nation  if  they  had  kept 
on  acting  in  this  self-willed  way. 

Make  final  appeal  to  modern  feeling  respecting  worship.  There  are  ngns  of  the 
danger  of  losing  the  worshipping  idea,  and  overdoing  the  instruction  idea,  in  our  public 
services.    We  need  recalling  to  a  due  reverence. — K.  T. 


fl4 


THE  FIRST  B»X)K  OF  THE  CHBOXICLE&    [ol  ttf.  1—17. 


Ver.  14. — O^if-f-f'f :  Vf  ?->f«i'-  7.  Ti*  nl;«:t  inirod'iced  bcre  is  *  God  in  the  bouM^ 
G:ii  cberlsr.e«i  :l  th.«  L  ici-^,  al:  G-:d  l-les^iaz  the  hcsie.*  God  wms  pkaied  to  tMch 
Israel  bj  n.-m-S^'j,  bv  %wciu7**.i,  br  pfrwNai  ezf^riifiioes,  and  bj  ae^ions,  at  well  as  bgr 
wordM.  Here  is  given  a  p:c;*ire  •:  f  ubcc-edom'i  home^  and  we  see  that  God'a  chctiilied 
ir-^nce  is  aaffurrid  bles&:nz  f:r  the  heat  ax>d  the  home. 

L  God's  fbxbE5ce  with  rs  ca5  fe  g&axtcd  axd  bealizkb.  Man  can  be,  and  know 
that  he  i^,  the  lesir'.e  0:  t.e  ILvIl.^  G>L  Tne  possibilitj  of  this  is  the  asraranee  ^tcq 
u5  in  the  iLcarLji:.->a  of  Cih»L  Gud  ooa  dwell  with  men;  for  he  has  dwelt  in  the 
**  Man  CLriit  Jesus." 

II.  God's  pfiESEXcz  with  rs  cast  bx  chexxsheo.     So  Darid,  fearing  the  DiTine 

n*.  t  thv  H-.->  S:  Lrit  fxxm  me.*    We  cherish  the  Dirine  indwrilms 


remoTsL  prays, '•Take  _ 

bj  (1)  iiitly  €fitnneu  ;  (2)  def^mdence ;  and  (3}  pruyfr  ;  hot  especiallj  by  daily  follow- 
ing, in  simplicity  and  loyalty,  the  o.nse^uent  inward  Dirine  leadiogSL  Compare  George 
Macdonald's  s^Ltence,  **  If  any  man  will  (£0  the  truth  he  knows,  he  shall  know  all  the 
truth  he  needs  to  kcow.**    God  onlr  stars  with  the  obedient. 

IIL  God's  pbesexce  takes  gbaciouslt  helpitl  fobs  nc  Chbibtiasitt.  It  is  the 
presence  of  Jesus  Christ,  sLd  from  the  records  of  his  earthly  life  we  know  what  an 
infinite  charm  and  help  that  presence  can  be.  Oar  Lord  promised^ "  I  iriU  oome  to 
him,  and  sup  with  him,**  and  he  left  this  last  assuranoey "  Lo,  I  am  with  yon  nlway, 
eren  unto  the  end  of  the  world.'' 

IV.  God's  pbesexcb  still  E5srBEs  pebso5al  axd  faxilt  BE5KDicnosiL  It  does 
not  ensure  freedom  from  care,  but  it  dees  ocr  sanctification  throu^  the  care.  We 
cannot  be  alone  in  any  trouble.  It  brings  a  gracious  aetual  reuani  of  (1)  soul-pros- 
perity ;  (2)  famiiy  peace  and  succesa. 

Plead  for  the  recognition  of  God  in  the  home,  by  m^ntaining  the  habit  ci /amUy 
prayer.    And  show  the  mystery  of  grace  in  God*s  even  using  the  incentire  of 
rewards  of  golliness,  and  giving  Scripture  examples  of  such  rewards. — R  T« 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  xnr. 


The  contents  of  this  chapter  belong  to  a 
period  of  time  sabeequent  to  the  taking  of 
the  fort  of  Zion,  and  find  their  parallel  in 
2  Sam.  T.  11—25.  Bat  if  foand  here  in  the 
same  order  of  ]i1ace  as  there,  they  woald 
have  followed  upon  ch.  ix.  9 ;  Keil  attributes 
this  difference  to  the  desire  of  our  compiler 
to  represent  the  bringing  of  the  ark  to 
Jerusalem  as  David's  first  undertaking  on 
becoming  king  of  the  united  people.  Con- 
sidering the  contents  of  this  chapter,  and 
remembering  that  it  stands  between  the 
unsuocessfal  attempt  to  bring  home  the  ark 
and  the  final  successful  bringing  of  it,  it 
would  seem  a  far  more  natural  thing  to 
suppose  that  this  suggested  its  present  ordi  r ; 
for  compare  cb.  xt.  1,  2.  The  parallel  is 
very  close.  As  far  as  to  the  word  **  Eli^hua  " 
(ver.  5),  there  is  no  difference  in  the  least 
degree  material,  except  that  the  word  **  con- 
cubines "  is  found  in  Samuel,  and  preceding 
the  word  "wives"  of  our  ver.  3  (}-et  see 
ch.  ill.  9>  The  two  names  ElpaUt  and 
Kogah  are  also  not  foimd  in  the  parallel, 


but  our  compiler  is  consistent  with  himself; 
for  see  ch.  iii  6,  7.  Farther,  our  ver.  12 
states  that  the  idols  of  the  Philistines  were 
by  David's  command  **  burned  with  fire,** 
while  the  Hebrew  text  of  Samuel  only  atates 
that  **  David  and  his  men  remoTed  them  ** 
(SMirrX  where  the  Authorised  Version  in- 
correctly translates  **  burned  them.** 

Ver.  1. — The  Kethiv  abandons  here  the 
invariable  analogy  of  Chronicles,  and  reada 
Hiram  for  ^^Huram,"  which  latter  form, 
however,  is  replaced  in  the  Keri.  Beside 
this  Hiram  or  Huram,  the  king,  there  was 
another  Hiram  or  Hurum,the  same  king'a 
chief  artificer,  and  whom  he  sent  to  the 
help  of  Solomon  (1  Kings  rii  13,  40; 
2  Chron.  ih  13;  iv.  11,  16).  The  wiUing 
aid  which  this  king  lent  to  David  on  thia 
occasion,  in  supplying  cedar  timber  and 
workmt  n,  was  **  the  commencement  of  that 
amity  between  the  Tyrians  and  the  Hebrews, 
so  mutually  advantageous  to  the  two  nations, 
the  one  agricultural  and  the  other  com« 
mercial "  (Milmon^s  *  History  of  the  Jews,* 
i.  239).  The  meaning  of  the  name  Hiram 
is  probably  *♦  noble,"  or  •*  high- bom."  Thia 
disposition,  at  all  events,  he  seems  to  have 
illustrated  in  his  generous  friendship  to 
David,  Solomon,  and  their  people.    Very 


CH.  XIV.  1—17.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa 


215 


little  to  be  relied  upon  is  known  of  him 
oatside  Scripture,  but  hia  reign  is  said  to 
have  extendeti  from  B.a  102&— 990. 

Ver.  2.— Wm  lifted  up.  The  panage  in 
Samuel  reads  Kfer^  the  Piel  conjugation. 
The  present  form  is  obscure,  nMra.  It  maj 
be  considered  either  an  irreg^ular  Niphal 
third  pers.  fem. ;  or  Niphal  infin.  absolute 
(2  Sam.  six.  43);  or  nossibly  even  an 
irregular  Piel  form,  in  which  case  the  pro- 
noun **  he"  will  need  to  be  supplied  as  the 
subject  Supposing  that  any  specisl  connec- 
tion subsists  between  this  and  the  preTious 
▼erse,  it  is  not  necessary  to  consider  it 
remote.  Then,  as  now,  the  building  of  a 
house  for  one's  self,  much  more  the  building 
of  a  noble  palace  on  the  part  of  a  king,  is 
an  indication  of  feeling  settled  and  **  con- 
firmed." It  was  a  partud  indication  of  the 
**  lifted-up  kingdom  "  that  the  king  should 
have  a  palace  of  unwonted  magnificence. 
This  must  have  weighed  all  the  more  in 
the  case  of  a  nation  which,  not  for  its  sacred 
things,  nor  for  its  king,  nor  for  its  people, 
had  ever  had  as  yet  any  adequate  and 
worthy  housing. 

Ver.  8. — ^DsTid  took  more  wives.  As 
matter  of  course,  we  do  not  look  in  this  con- 
nection for  any  remarks  to  be  made  by  the 
writer  condemnatory  of  David's  eniargo- 
ment  of  the  harem,  or  of  his  having  an 
harem  at  all.  Yet  it  is  open  to  ns  to  note 
how,  at  a  time  when  polygamy  was  ^  winked 
at,"  and  no  sin  was  ncoessarily  to  lie  on 
tills  account  at  the  door  of  David,  yet  by 
this  very  thing  he  was  undermining  the 
peace  and  unity  of  his  own  family,  the 
comfort  of  his  declining  years  once  and 
again,  and  the  very  stability  of  his  house 
in  the  days  of  Solomon  his  son.  The  less 
necessitated  we  are  to  regard  David's  poly- 
gamy in  the  light  of  individual  sin,  the 
more  emphatic  in  the  light  of  history  does 
the  tendency  of  the  practice  proclaim  itself 
as  thoroughly  and  irredeemably  bad. 

Vers.  4 — 7.-~The  names  of  his  children 
whidi  ha  had  in  Jemsalem.  The  names  of 
the  children  bom  to  David  in  Hebron  are 
given  in  ch.  iiL  1 — 4.  For  a  comparison  of 
this  list  with  that  of  oh.  iii.  5 — ^9,  see  that 

{>lace.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  present 
ist  agrees  with  that  of  Samuel  in  respect 
of  eleven  names,  and  with  ch.  ilL  5—8,  so 
(at  as  number  goes,  with  all  thirteen. 

Vers.  8 — 12. — An  important  victory  over 
As  FhUiitinee. 

Ver.  8. — ^DaTid  .  •  •  went  out  against 
them.  From  a  careftd  comparison  of  this 
passage  with  the  parallel  and  with  2  Sam. 
xxiiL  12—14,  it  appears  likely  that  the 
meaning  is  that  ''David  went  out  against 
them"  after  having  ''gone  down"  fint  to 
the  "hold,"  probably  at  the  "cave  of 
Adnllam"  (ch.  xL  15— 17>     When  it  is 


said  that  the  Philistlnei  went  up  to  seek 
David,  the  sequel  makes  it  evident  that  they 
did  not  seek  him  as  friends.  And  it  is  to 
be  remembered  that  the  Philistines  held 
territory  near  Jerusalem  at  this  time,  and 
to  the  north  of  it  (1  Sam.  xxxL  7 — ^9). 

Ver.  9.— Spread  themselves.  The  root 
DEfD  appears  here  for  the  ru  of  the  parallel 
place.  So  also  again  in  ver.  13  of  this 
chapter.  In  the  valley  of  Bephaim;  t.^.  of 
giants,  though  some  translate  "healers," 
and  yet  others  "chiefs."  Though  not  Ga* 
naamtes,  they  once  held  portions  of  Canaan. 
Their  origin  is  very  uncertain.  Kalisch 
('Commentary  on  Old  Testament,' p.  351) 
thinks  they  were  descendants  of  Japheth 
(Gen.  xiv.  5;  xv.  20;  Dent  ii  9—11 ;  iii 
11).  The  "  valley  "  was  south  of  Jerusalem, 
but  whether  more  south-east  or  south-west 
is  not  certain ;  probably  the  former  (Josh. 
XV.  8 ;  xviiL  16 ;  Isa.  xviL  5). 

Ver.  10.— David  inquired  of  God.  The 
"  inquiring  "  was  made,  as  matter  of  course, 
through  the  high  priest,  and  not  merely,  as 
we  should  say,  in  private  prayer  (Judg.  L  1, 
3 :  XX.  23,  27 ;  1  Sam.  xxiii  2,  4 ;  xxx.  8 ; 
2  Sam.  ii.  1).  The  directness  of  the  Divina 
answer  was  some  echo  of  the  old  reply  when 
Judah  was  authorized  to  go  up  against  tha 
Canaanites  (Jude.  L  2). 

Ver.  11.— Baal-peruim;  literally,  moMter 
of  hreaehee,  Gesenius  traces  this  meaning: 
through  the  intormediato  idea  of  "  possessor, 
to  that  (in  this  case,  that  place),  which 
"possesses,"  i.e.  is  the  subject  of  such  a 
signal  overwhelming  as  is  here  described, 
the  scene  of  overwhelming  defeats,  like  tha 
irresistible  rush  of  waters  (Isa.  xxvlii.  21). 

Ver.  12.— And  i^enthey  had  left  their  godi 
there.  The  parallel  translates  more  hter- 
ally, "  And  there  they  left,"  as  we  might  also 
do  here;  and  goes  on  to  read  "  their  images," 
in  place  of  "  their  gods "  (2  Sam.  v.  21). 
These  they  burned  with  fire,  according  to 
the  command  of  Deut  vii.  5,  25. 

Vers.  13—17. — Another  victory  over  the 
Philistine$. 

Ver.  13.— In  the  valley;  i,e,  the  valley  of 
Bephaim,  as  is  expressly  stated  in  the 
pcundlel  place,  thougn  left  in  no  obscurity 
here. 

Ver.  14. — Ck>  not  itp  after  them ;  turn  awaj 
firom  them,  and  come  upon  them  over  against 
the  mnlborry  trees.  The  meaning  of  the 
directions  as  here  given  is  sufficiently 
evident,  vet  it  is  somewhat  more  forcibly 
expressed  in  the  parallel  place,  "  Thou  slialt 
not  go  up,"  {.0.  "against  the  Philistines" 
(see  our  tenth  verse,  and  note  the  form  of 
David's  inquiry);  "&tU  fetch  a  eompaet 
behind  them,*'  The  mulberry  trees  were 
evidently  behind  the  Philistines.  Tho 
Hebrew  word  for  the  trees  here  nxiken  of 
ii  b*^fn,  and  the  correct  rendering  of  it 


216 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHBONICLES.     [cilxiv.  1— 17. 


ifl  probably  neither  **  mull  vrrj  "  nor,  as  tho 
Heptuiigint  and  Vul<?atc  traiiHlute,  *'  poar  " 
trees.  But  judt;ing  frum  tho  probable 
derivation  (n32,  to  weep),  they  were  trees 
of  tho  balsam  species,  and  it  seoma  that 
this  is  as  fur  ns  wo  can  safely  conjecture. 
One  of  the  latest  authorities  (see  Conder's 
•  Handbook  t<>  tlie  Bible/  p.  31)8.  2n<l  edit.) 
pronounces  it  an  **  unknown  species."  The 
iTv*\  btrangu  to  say,  is  only  mentioned  here 
and  in  the  parallel  place*.  A  summary  of 
opinions  as  to  the  tree  intended  may  Ite 
found  in  Smittrs  '  Bible  Dictionary,'  iL  439, 
and  this  is  just  sulHcicnt  to  show  that  it  is 
not  as  yet  identitied  with  any  semblance 
of  certainty.  However,  it  is  easy  to  under- 
stand how  the  balsam  species,  from  which 
the  exuding  gum  resembles  *'  tears,"  might 
ctme  by  the  name  set  forth  in  the  present 
Hebrew  root 

Ver.  15. — A  soirnd  of  going.  This  is 
Dot  a  mere  generic  or  longer  form  of  ex- 
pression to  signify  a  sound  itself.  There 
is  significance  in  the  word  **  going."  Tho 
sense  of  the  Hebrew  word  would  be 
thrown  out  more  emphatically  by  such  a 
rendering  as,  the  tound  of  itepa  (literally, 
Btepping),  When  the  motion  of  the  agituttnl 
leaves  simulated  the  sound  of  steps,  the 
8tep[)ing  of  men,  then  David  and  his  army 
were  to  step  forth  to  battle.  Though  the 
root  of  the  **  stepping  "  8[X)ken  of  as  heard 
in  tho  trees  is  not  identic^d  with  that  of  the 
"  going "  repeated  twice  in  tho  remainder 
of  the  verse — Then  thou  shalt  go  out .  .  . 
for  Ood  is  gone  forth—yet  it  dues  alliterate 
to  some  extent  with  it,  and  rather  creates 
the  impression  that  it  was  intended  to  do 
so.  However,  the  parallel  place  does  not 
sustain  this  impression,  inasmuch  as  a 
difibrcnt  word,  **  Thou  shalt  hetiir  thyself," 
is  there   employed,  in  place  of   tho  first 


occurrence  of  our  mppnted  alliteration,  ia 
tlie  eluuse,  "*  Thou  shalt  go  out"  There  ia 
something  stirring  to  the  imagination,  and 
probably  it  was  felt  so  by  David  and  his 
men,  in  the  signal  unseen  yet  not  unheard, 
and  in  a  sense  not  of  earth,  but  midwaj 
between  earth  and  heaven.  The  very 
various  voices  of  the  various  trees,  aoooro- 
ing  to  the  character  of  their  foliage,  maj 
well  set  poetry  going,  and  startle  or  fascinate 
imagination,  as  the  case  may  be.  The  musie 
of  one  tree  or  grove  is  as  different  from  &at 
of  another  as  can  be — listen  to  the  difierence 
between  the  melancholy  plaint  so  unoeasinff 
of  some  plantation  of  firs,  and  the  mulu- 
tudinous,  silvery,  rippling  of  but  one  white 
poplar  of  good  size.  Presumably  the  sound 
in  the  present  case  more  resembled  tluit  of 
the  bteady  tramp  of  them  that  march. 

Ver.  16. — Oibeon.  The  parallel  reads 
Otha.  As  Geba  and  Gibeon  were  both 
situate  very  near  to  Jerusalem  (on  the 
north),  as  well  as  near  to  one  another,  both 
texts  may  bo  correct,  and  each  mean  what 
it  says.  But  Isa.  zxviiL  21  confirms  the 
reading  Gibeon.  It  is  evident  that  Gibeon 
was  no  appropriate  resting-place  for  the 
ark  (ch.  ziii.  3,  4 ;  2  Chron.  L  8).  The 
nearness  of  the  Philistines'  approach  to  the 
city  of  Jerusalem  marks  their  daring  on 
tho  one  hand,  and  the  loud  oall  now  for  the 
merciful  interposition  of  Jehovah  on  behalf 
of  his  people.  Oaier.  Hebrew  rnja,  both 
here  and  in  the  parallel  because  of  the 
accent.  Else  the  name  is  Gezer  ("III).  It 
was  about  two  hours  distant  from  Gibeon* 
and  to  the  north  of  it  (Josh.  x.  33 ;  xii.  12 ; 
xxi.  21 ;  Judg.  i.  29;  ch.  xx.  4),  or  "four 
Koman  miles  northward  from  Nicopolis 
(*  Onomasticon  *) ;  now  the  large  ruin  of 
TeU  Jezar"  (Conder's  'Handbook  to  the 
Bible,' p.  412). 


nOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1,  2. — An  important  instance  of  the  presence  of  the  perceiving  heart.  There  ia 
an  obscurity  about  Uiram  which  certainly  does  not  serve  to  diminish  interest  in  him 
and  his  place  in  this  narrative.  The  obscurity  referred  to  affects,  not  merely  himself 
and  his  reign,  but  rather  what  we  now  have  to  do  with,  the  time,  occasion,  manner,  of 
bis  introduction  to  David,  and  the  commencement  of  the  warm  friendship  between  the 
two.  This  place,  with  the  parallel,  is  the  earliest  scriptural  mention  of  Hiram.  Later 
allusion  to  him  (1  Kings  v.  I)  drops  the  significant  testimony,  "  For  Hiram  was  ever 
a  lover  of  David."  This  was  in  the  time  of  Solomon,  and  goes  some  way  to  remind  us 
of  other  instances  in  which  David  won  an  ardent  and  generous  affection  from  his 
fellows.  The  power  to  evoke  this  some  natures  possess  in  a  high  degree.  All,  how- 
ever, that  we  know  for  certain  is  that  Hiram,  hearing  of  the  rising  fame  of  David,  and 
no  doubt  aware  of  very  much  that  had  led  on  and  up  to  it,  from  the  time  of  Goliath, 
sent  "  messengers  "  to  him.  Their  first  messages  consist  presumably  of  hearty  con- 
gratulations, and  then  go  on  to  give  assurance  of  Hiram's  readiness  to  help,  by  material 
and  by  workmen,  to  build  a  worthy  royal  houpc  for  David.  It  is  scarcely  to  be  sup- 
posed under  these  circumstances  that  Uiram  had  not  received  intimation,  more  or  less 


CH.  XIV.  1—17.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  217 

direct,  that  David  would  be  likely  to  be  in  want  of  these  things.  Tet,  whatever 
intimation  Hiram  had  received,  his  response  is  large  and  gracious  and  full  of  free 
will.  Something  in  this  David  saw,  which  perhaps  no  one  else  saw,  but  well  worth 
notice. 

I.  David  saw  that  onb  oontikuous  pubposb  of  God  was  Movnra  on.  It  was 
one  that  affected  *'  his  people  Israel."  Israel  he  had  chosen,  Israel  he  had  for  his 
peculiar  people,  in  Israel  ne  had  a  fixed  purpose,  to  this  already  for  long  ages  he  had 
held,  and  the  ancient  promise  and  covenant  had  been  a  growingly  plain  performing. 
This  continuity  by  itself  riveted  attention,  and  brought  a  doubting,  tired  spirit  home 
again  to  a  strong  peaceful  faith^  when  any  other  circumstance,  though  it  should  seem 
but  a  trivial  one,  served  to  remind  of  it.  Ought  we  not  to  be  herein  reminded  of  such 
things  as  these  ? — 1.  That  all  God's  purposes,  yes,  all  those  that  affect  us  as  individuals 
only,  are  consistent,  determined,  marked  by  a  faithful  continuity  in  this  respect,  that 
they  do  not  cease,  do  not  determine^  till  they  have  fulfilled  their  appointed  put.  This 
may  be  less  than  we  thought,  if  we  thoueht  at  all,  or  it  may  be  more.  It  may  be 
different  from  what  we  thought,  if  we  thought  at  all ;  and  very  certainly  may  be 
different  from  what  we  wished,  because  we  so  readily  wish  without  any  sovereign 
reason  guiding  our  wish.  But  each  little  purpose,  so  to  speak,  of  the  Divine  mind — 
little  in  our  mistaken  estimate — runs  out  to  its  end,  and  does  not  miss  of  the  de8igne4 
end.  2.  That  assuredly  there  must  very  often  be  Divine  purpose  in  what  happens, 
and  as  we  think  inertly  happens,  in  our  experience.  For  the  man  who  honestly 
believes  in  a  supreme  (Governor  of  his  life,  this  must  commend  itself  to  reason.  And 
what  seriousness,  reverence,  sacredness,  dignity,  and  deep-drawn  consolation  would  it 
yield  to  any  life,  as  fervently  to  believe  this,  so  habitually  to  remember  it !  3.  That 
those  purposes  are  upon  a  large  scale.  They  affect  the  whole  family  in  the  individual, 
the  whole  community  in  the  family  or  the  class,  that  may  be  visibly  and  proximately 
the  first  affected,  and  so  on,  till  the  entire  race  shares  in  the  advantage,  and  all  the 
long-drawn-out  subsequent  ages  illustrate  its  beneficence,  as  was  literally  the  case  for 
the  whole  world  in  the  treatment  and  the  checkered  history  of  IsraeL  4.  That,  because 
of  the  large  scale  on  which  Divine  purpose  is  schemed :  Q)  It  may  easily  elude  our 
notice  altogether  if  we  are  not  very  heedful.  (2)  It  will  present  many  difficulties, 
many  obscurities,  many  dark  mysteries,  all  due  to  the  incapacity  of  our  finite  intellects 
to  grasp  the  whole,  to  see  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and  to  be  able  to  gaze  all  down 
the  long  abyss  of  time.  (3)  For  all  this,  some  vivid  personal  incident  will  occasionally 
be  charged  with  suggestion  and  significance  that  will  light  up  a  vast  area  of  human 
life  in  a  moment  of  time,  and  will  display  convincingly  now  Divine  knowledge, 
wisdom,  purpose,  are  intersecting  and  traversing  all  the  tangle  and  the  labyrinth  of  fitful 
human  working!  And  it  was  a  gleam  of  convincing  light  of  this  kind  that  now  shone 
in  on  David's  mind. 

II.  David  saw  that  certain  Divine  providential  method  was  being 
OBSERVED.  In  the  first  place,  an  individual  human  kingdom,  a  personal  dynasty,  is  being 
"  lifted  up  "  for  *'  the  sake  of  the  beloved  people  and  the  settled  purpose."  Jt  ever  was 
there  such  a  comment,  such  a  clear  criticism  on  the  '*  Divine  right  of  kings."  Kings 
and  the  right  of  kings,  it  would  certainly  seem  to  be  here  testified,  are  means  to  an 
end,  and  then  only  is  the  right  most  Divine  when  used  most  divinely,  and  under  most 
solemn  sense  of  responsibility.  The  '*  people  Israel "  are  those  here  called  *'  his  people," 
t.e.  the  people  of  the  Lord,  the  Lord  God.  The  **  people  Israel "  are  those  whom  he 
loves,  are  what  he  loves.  It  is  not  the  "  kingdom,"  nor  the  government,  nor  the  land, 
nor  the  national  bent  and  genius,  nor  even  the  king  himself  merely  as  such,  that  he 
lovesy  but  the  ^  people  "  IsraeL  "  All  is  for  their  sakes,"  as  St.  Paul  in  later  times 
said.  This  kingdom  of  David,  this  djmasty  which  he  represented,  of  which  he  was  to 
be  such  a  brilliant  exponent,  were  to  count  nothing  in  and  of  themselves.  They  were 
for  the  sake  of  something  else.  But  passing  this  greater  general  consideration,  in  the 
second  place,  David  saw  tokens  of  Divine  providential  method  in  the  willing  heart, 
willing  hand,  willing  speech,  of  a  neighbouring  king.  The  willingness  and  the  generosity 
may  not  have  been  altogether  unknown,  but  when  all  the  circumstances  were  combined, 
and  when  we  remember  the  exceptional  position  of  Israel  among  nations  that  often 
wondered  at  Israel's  God,  often  envied  Israel's  unseen  mighty  protection  and  defence, 
there  could  scarcely  have  been  many  precedents,  scarcely  many  parallels,  to  be  quoted. 


218  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa    [chl  xnr.  1— 17. 


All  the  rather  was  David  secretly  in  deepest  heart  convinoed  of  the  reality  of  I^Tiiie 
interposition,  of  providential  forces  at  work.  When  we  allow  that  Hinm  had 
received  some  *'  hints "  and  some  intimation  of  the  likely  desire  of  David  to  build  a 
house  worthy  of  his  people  and  royal  state,  we  have  gone  as  far  as  we  are  warranted 
In  going.  And  to  set  against  all  the  rest,  if  not  against  this  also,  we  have  here  David'a 
evident  language,  and  the  evident  meaning  and  drift  of  it.  David  **  perceived  "  certain 
things  when  Hiram  "  sent  messengers, . .  •  and  timber,"  or  promise  of  it,  and  **  masons  and 
carpenters,"  or  promise  of  them,  and  these  **  to  build  him,**  forsooth,  David,  "  a  house." 
He  "  perceived  that  something  unseen  was  here — a  power,  a  hand,  a  person  InTisible^ 
at  work.  That  all  this  kindness  should  have  come  upon  him ;  and  that  all  this  glory 
should  be  about  to  come  upon  him,  and  the  quondam  shepherd-boy,  and  more  recenthf 
hunted  refugee  of  mountain  and  cave  and  wilderness,  should  be  about  to  be  masnin* 
oently  mansioned, — was  demonstration  to  him  that  a  mighty  and  benignant  proTidenoe 
was  at  work ;  that  it  was  bent  on  its  own  old  purpose,  and  advancing  by  its  own  new 
methods  as  welL  He  found  that  Hiram's  heart  was  in  the  hand  of  some  One,  nor  did  he 
mistake  whose  hand  that  must  be,  even  the  hand  of  him  who  holds  all  heartSb  And  as 
to  that  house  that  was  to  be,  now  at  a  glance  he  saw  and  spake  it,  "  Except  the  Lord 
build  Uie  house,  they  labour  in  vain  that  build."  He  was  convinced  that  God  was 
buildinz. 

III.  David  beooonizkd  most  fully  the  pRiNaPLE  of  what  we  call  nuMAV 
XNSTBUMESTALiTT.  He  rocognized  it  now  in  a  twofold  sense.  It  is  the  same  twofold 
sense  we  ever  need  to  bear  in  mind  and  carry  out  in  practice.  1.  With  deepest 
humility,  with  most  unreserved  confession,  David  pronounces  himself,  in  all  his  grow^ 
inji^  power  and  likely  si)lendour,  the  iervant  of  GKxl  and  his  people,  the  instrument  in  the 
mignty  and  the  good  hand  of  Ood,  the  authorized  means  to  a  great  end.  That  is  all. 
That  was  honour  for  him,  and  honour  enough.  The  Lord  has  confirmed  **  him  king  " 
over  Israel,  and  *'  his  kingdom  "  is  lifted  up  on  high,  not  for  his  own  sake,  not  for  any 
merit  of  his  own,  not  for  self-aggrandizement,  not  to  feed  personal  luxury,  pride, 
ambition,  not  for  any  most  flattering,  mysterious  reason,  but  for  his  people  Israel  I 
When  we  do  remember  that  we  are  servants  of  God,  we  cannot  too  well  remember  this 
—that  it  is  this  very  relation  wo  hold— of  servants.  We  are  to  inquire  for  and  to 
do,  and  to  speak  his  will,  and  to  have  the  least  possible  of  our  own.  2.  He  **  per* 
ooives  "  that  ho  is  being  made  use  of  in  order  that  he  may  fall  in  more  than  ever  with 
God*s  work  and  service.  His  humility  is  real,  therefore  it  does  not  swamp  his  sense  of 
duty  and  responsibility.  In  one  breath  he  admits  himself  only  the  instrument,  but  one 
divinely  raised  up,  divinely  fashioned,  divinely  called ;  and  therefore  he  is  both  the 
more  stirred  to  duty  and  sustained  by  the  strongest  sense  of  support  The  really 
humble  servant  proves  the  really  faithful  servant.  Happy  David,  that  herein  too  the 
Lord  had  given  nim  an  heart  to  perceive  and  understand  I 

Vers.  8 — 12. — The  type  of  enmity  on  the  alert,  foiled  by  watcJifulness  and  prayer. 
From  the  conduct  of  our  foe,  not  less  than  of  the  best  friend,  may  we  sometimes  learn 
lessons  of  supremo  importance  and  interest.  Feeling  and  action  both  own  to 
nossibilitios  not  seen  on  the  surface,  and  seldom  disturbed  in  their  solemn  depth. 
They  are,  however,  always  liable  to  be  evoked,  and,  when  evoked  by  any  of  the  forma 
of  enmity,  they  are  almost  sure  to  show  in  their  own  more  intensified  forms.  It 
cannot  be  maintained  that  enmity  is  a  mightier  impelling  principle  than  love,  that  the 
force  of  the  one  intrinsically  surpasses  that  of  the  other ;  the  contrary  of  this  is  to  be 
maintained.  But  a  very  mighty  force  it  is,  and  it  has  signal  power  to  prevail  in  any 
conflict  where  indifference,  lax  energy,  or  but  a  slightly  diminished  watchfulness 
characterizes  the  object  of  it  Something  of  the  skill  of  enmity  and  of  its  hdbit  is  set 
before  us  here,  and  what  is  said  suggests  to  thought  much  left  unsaid.  We  have  here 
a  little  wayside  picture  of  enmity.  And  we  may  observe  in  this  aspect  of  the 
history— 

L  Signs  of  watchful  observation  on  the  part  of  an  unrem ittino  enemy.  Men 
like  to  be  at  their  ease,  and  rapidly  does  the  tendency  grow.  We  like  to  rest  on  our 
oars,  and  delicious  awhile  are  sensation  and  thought  And  these  resting-times  and 
resting-places  are  not  merelv  welcome ;  they  are  necessities  at  certain  intervals,  they 
are  the  appointed  rewards  of  certain  conflicts  and  victory,  and  they  are  the  preparation 


CH.  XIV.  1—17.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  219 

for  fresh  effort  On  the  other  hand,  life  is  spent  here  in  the  presence  of  the  foe,  and  one 
of  watchful  observation — the  children  of  light  not  so  wise  in  their  generation  nor  so 
awake  as  he.  Keen  is  the  eye  of  enmity.  It  searches  all  round  its  own  armoury  for 
the  weapon  fittest  for  its  purpose,  and  all  round  its  opponent's  armour  to  find  the 
joint  of  his  harness.  And  now^  nothing  goes  on  with  David  and  Israel  but—the 
Philistines  know  it,  and  take  care  to  know  it. 

11.  Signs  of  ciRcnMSPECT  and  fabhseeing  observation.  The  Philistines,  whose 
chief  leader  we  are  not  here  told,  do  no  doubt  take  great  care  to  be  apprised  of  all  that 
is  going  on  within  the  kingdom  of  IsraeL  And  they  can  afford  to  let  much  pass  without 
any  counter  moves  on  their  part.  They  learn  much,  but  it  awakens  no  keen  anxiety^ 
no  special  interest,  no  practical  activity.  But  an  unusual  note  is  heard  at  last ;  it  is 
the  note  of  warning ;  they  hear  it  as  the  note  of  opportunity  sounded,  and  of  oppor* 
tunity  that  must  not  slip  by.  They  cannot  afford  to  be  inactive  now.  It  is  a  time 
when,  even  if  all  depended  on  one  throw,  that  throw  must  be  ventured.  They  had 
known  David  as  a  boy ;  as  a  remarkable  young  man,  but  with  a  very  doubtful  future ; 
as  a  persecuted  refugee ;  as  a  very  rising  man ;  as  king  of  part  of  a  people ;  but  the 
critical  and  vital  point  was  now  at  length,  when  they  ^  h^ird  that  he  was  anointed 
king  over  aU  Israel " — king  over  a  united  people,  king  over  a  people  the  whole  of 
whose  resources  were  now  available  and  could  be  wielded  as  by  one  arm,  king  over  a 
people  of  one  mind  and  one  enthusiastic  heart.  And  this  was  what  the  mdsdom  of  the 
enemy  was  equal  to — to  see  and  ad  as  though  it  saw  that  the  hour  of  a  united  enemy 
was  the  hour  to  strike,  if  haply  it  might  break  the  power  of  that  enemy  at  one  stroke, 
or  otherwise,  that  it  was  the  hour  most  to  be  feared  for  himself.    One  sang-* 

*'  And  Satan  trembles  when  he  sees 
The  weakest  saint  upon  his  knees.** 

But  there  is  another  time  when  Satan  trembles,  and  that  is  when  he  sees  his  enemy 
united,  and  the  ranks  of  his  enemy  held  well  together.  That  **  trembling  **  would  be 
both  more  and  more  apparent  but  for  the  prompt  and  unequivocal  activity  he  brings  to 
bear  on  the  situatifJn,  while  others  were  but "  trembling." 

IIL  Signs  of  PBAcrriOAL  and  vert  dbtebmined.  besolution.  Difficulty,  danger, 
critical  responsibility,  clisarm  many,  but  arm  these  Philistines.  The  courage,  the 
practical  wisdom,  is  to  be  noted,  though  it  be  in  a  bad  cause,  in  order  that  these  may 
be  the  rather  learnt  and  copied  for  the  good  cause.  These  Philistines  do  not  timidly 
wait  and  put  off  a  doubtful  dangerous  day ;  they  court  the  conflict ;  they  go  '^  up  to 
seek  David ; "  they  offer  battle  and  give  the  challenge.  Little  time  is  lost  before  Uiey 
are  "spread"  in  battle  array  and  everything  is  ready  for  the  decisive  verdict. 
Evident  stress  also  is  laid  upon  their  unity.  It  is  not  only  said  that  "all"  the 
Philistines  went  up  to  seek  David,  but  it  is  written  by  the  historian  as  though  the 
emphasis  of  a  significant  antithesis  were  intended.  When  the  Philistines  heani  that 
David  was  anointed  king  over  "  all "  Israel,  they  "  all "  went  to  seek  him. 

IV.  Signs  in  all  this  of  the  debivation  of  vsbt  much  of  human  enmitt.  Strong 
is  the  resemblance  both  of  nature  and  of  method  between  the  hostility  of  human  foe 
and  that  exhibited  by  the  source  of  all  evlL  It  is  abundantly  well  to  note  this  resem- 
blance, for  could  we  persuade  ourselves  to  see  in  our  own  malignant  dispositions,  ill  will, 
and  hostility  the  features  that  are  then  striving  only  too  successfully  to  take  form  of 
the  dark  original  of  all  evil,  we  should  dread  the  presence  in  us,  and  dread  few  things 
more.  The  short  gratification  of  that  which  must  be,  under  any  circumstances,  rul^ 
the  lower  side  of  our  nature,  woulil  be  then  instinctively  acknowledged  too  dearly 
bought,  when  the  eye,  the  lip,  the  thought,  the  strong  force  of  purpose,  and  the  hand 
must  all  be  lent  to  one  in  the  background,  so  odious  in  himself,  and  so  tyrannical  as 
soon  as  ever  his  hold  is  once  yielded  to.  The  shapes  and  methoKis  assumed  by  human 
enmity  are  in  reality  often  nothing  short  of  accurate  copies  of  those  of  the  great  foe  of 
God  and  man.  Surely  it  would  act  as  a  deterrent  influence  in  many  a  mind  not  yet 
gone  too  far,  and  in  which  it  was  not  yet  too  late  to  interpose,  if  it  were  distinctly  seen 
that  as  much  as  love,  goodness,  and  friendship  are  of  God,  so  much  are  bate  and  all  the 
kinds  of  malignity,  and  in  general  enmity  to  a  fellow-creature,  of  the  devil.  Let  us 
observe,  on  the  other  hand,  in  this  portion  of  the  history,  the  foil  of  David  in  the  pre- 
sence of  that  enmity.    1.  Here  is  proof  of  a  wahful  ear.    Many  an  opportunity  is  lost 


r\ 


220  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa    [gb.  zit.  1—17. 

for  want  of  '^  ear  to  hear.*'  And  some  things  the  most  essential  to  hear  are  cmwded 
out  unheard  because  of  the  rush  of  sounds  to  the  ear,  hollow  as  ever  sound  ooold  be. 
But  the  wakefulness  of  an  open  ear  is  here,  and  the  irreparable  does  not  happen^  and  the 
disastrous  stroke  does  not  fall  upon  a  whole  kingdom  and  people  ere  yet  the  tidings  of 
the  danger  have  reached  the  responsible  persons.  I^iTid  mi^t  now  have  nid,  with 
the  prophet  (Isa.  1.  4),  ^  He  wakcneth  morning  by  morning,  he  wakeneth  mine  eer 
to  hear  as  the  learned.*'  And  how  much  depends  on  this  daily  opening  of  our  ew. 
and  this  opening  of  it  in  the  morning^  before  the  dangers  of  the  day^s  life  nave  opened 
npon  us,  instead  of  that  opening  of  it  that  may  come  perforce  at  evening,  or  in  the 
very  night,  or  after  some  startling  calamity,  when  all  except  ike  dttul  have  no  choioe 
but  to  hear  I  Though  Jesus  first  warned  us,  and  after  him  some  of  the  most  solemn 
connection  of  all  Scripture  repeated  the  strain,  how  much  do  we  lose  by  altogether 
under-estimating  the  message  of  the  words,  **  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear '*! 
2.  //ere  is  proof  of  tcake/ul  cart.  The  enemy's  daring  front  and  adventurous 
challenge  scarcely  anticipate  David*8  firm  front  and  readiness  to  accept  the  challenge. 
His  preparedness  is  quite  as  noticeable  as  their  initiating  energy.  Some  initiating 
energies  have  much  cause  to  re])ent  of  themselves,  and  court  their  own  destruction ; 
and  it  prDVcil  so  now  for  the  Philistines.  The  victory  does  not  often  lie  with  those 
that  are  **  first  in  their  own  cause."  David  does  not  live  every  hour  all  in  a  tremble 
of  apprehension  and  suspicion,  it  is  true ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  he  has  wisely  not 
allowed  himself  to  live  forgetful,  unheedful  of  the  constant  proximity  of  a  constant  foe. 
He  is  not  now  caught  napping.  He  is  not  found  now  lapped  in  luxury.  He  is  not 
betrayed  as  one  living  in  a  fool's  paradise,  lulled  in  false  peace,  mistaking  security  for 
safety,  choked  by  pride  in  the  height  and  dignity  of  his  position,  and  deceiving  himself 
as  though  he  were  the  unassailable  and  unimpregnable  itself.  The  sound  of  alarm 
entered  full  sonorouslv  into  his  ear,  but  no  panic  of  alarm  entered  into  his  heart. 
Does  the  *'  foe  "  seek  him,  and  insolently  and  defiantly  scan  his  proportions  and  his 
armour?  he  di^es  not  forget  that  old  matter  of  Goliath  and  the  sling  and  stone  on  the 
one  hand,  nor  is  he  the  man,  either  by  character  or  by  the  emergence  of  unguarded 
position,  to  hide  himself  or  to  have  a  moment's  inclination  to  hiQe  himself,  but  he 
*•  goes  out  to  meet "  the  foe,  well  prepared  to  face  him  and,  if  God  speak  the  word,  to 
encounter  him  als4.>  in  actual  contlict.  Nor  does  he  for«;et  the  spirit  of  the  old  confidence 
and  the  source  whence  he  derivetl  his  own  confidence.  **  Thou  comest  to  me  with  a 
swonl,  and  with  a  si^vu-,  and  with  a  shield ;  but  1  come  to  thee  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  the  Cuxi  of  the  armies  of  Israel,  whom  thou  hast  defied."  3.  Zas%,  here  is 
proiif  j)o$itive  of  jmiyer,  David  has  shown  the  courage  of  the  man  and  of  the  king 
and  of  the  commnnder  of  God*8  i^eople  and  army.  He  presents  himself  and  them  in 
front  of  the  foe  that  courts  the  trial  of  battle.  '  But  before  he  lifts  a  hand,  strikes  a 
blow,  draws  a  swonl,  he  asks  of  the  Lord.  He  asks  for  knowledge  of  duty,  '*  Shall  I 
go  up?"  He  asks  for  warrant  of  the  language  which  he  may  hold  to  his  own  people 
and  to  the  defying  foe.  **  Wilt  thou  deliver  them  into  my  hand?  "  This  last  thing 
he  had  been  iH^rmitteii  to  add  in  his  forewarning  to  Goliath  of  what  awaited  him : 
"  This  day  will  the  Lonl  deliver  thee  into  my  hand ;  and  I  will  smite  thee  .  •  .  that  all 
tlie  earth  may  know  that  there  is  a  GxkI  in  Israel ...  for  the  battle  is  the  Lord's  " 
(1  Sam.  xvii.  45 — 17).  And  ho  wishes  to  be  able  to  do  so  again.  There  would  be 
great  advantage  in  being  able  to  use  confident  language  on  the  matter  on  this  occasion 
also.  God  had  occasionally  permitted  his  own  people  to  go  to  defeat  (as  he  certainly 
does  for  our  discipline  and  for  after  advantage  pennit  us  often  to  find  defeat  awhile),  so 
that  l>avid  might  desire  for  his  own  heart's  sake  to  be  assured  that  this  was  not  going  to 
be  the  case  now.  But  there  was  other  reason  why  authority  to  speak  on  the  matter  of 
victory  certain  would  be  great  advantage.  He  announces  it  to  the  foe,  and  it  comes 
true,  and  then  strikes  a  deep,  lasting  residuum  of  terror  and  of  reverence  for  the  next 
like  occasion.  He  announces  it  to  his  own  pei>ple,  and  it  comes  true ;  and  with  what 
confidence  both  towards  their  God  and  towards  their  king  does  it  invest  them  in  many 
a  future!  Prayer  brings  blessing,  prayer  brings  knowletlse,  prayer  strengthens  and 
exhibits  to  just  view  that  ci^nnectiou  between  himself  and  his  weak  creature  and  child, 
which  the  condescending  Hearer  of  prayer  loves  to  acknowledge. 

Vers.  13— 17. — The  faith  that    is  conttnt  to  lea'-e    sef  in  the  background   and 


cu.  XIV.  1—17.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLED  221 

unhesitatingly  obey  Qod.  One  of  the  most  remarkable  of  the  characteristics  of  Scripture 
Is  its  freedom  from  repetition  and  monotony,  even  when  engaged  on  subjects  that  may 
very  closely  resemble  one  another  in  their  matter.  In  the  present  instance,  the  con* 
nection,  the  subject,  the  time,  all  closely  correspond  with  what  nas  immediately  preceded, 
and  the  important  event  or  issue  is  identical.  Yet  how  greatly  the  scene  differs,  and 
with  what  exceedingly  quickened  interest  do  we  read  of  this  second  appearance  and 
challenge  of  the  Philistines  I  The  general  facts  of  the  situation  are  still  the  same.  Hie 
courage  and  determination,  however,  of  the  Philistines  in  repeating  their  attack  so 
soon,  and  after  so  thorough  and  crushing  a  defeat,  show  well  the  stuff  of  which  they 
were  made,  and  offer  an  additional  touch  to  the  picture.  David  on  his  part  repeats  his 
inquiry  addressed  to  One  whom  he  had  come  to  be  well  persuaded  was  "  the  God  of 
his  salvation."  From  this  point  the  course  of  events  differs  and  pursues  a  new  and 
unwonted  direction.  David  is  divinely  assured  of  victory  over  the  enemy,  but  he  is 
directed  not  to  go  up  in  the  face  of  that  enemy.  He  is  to  go  to  some  plantation  of  trees, 
to  await  there  a  certain  sound  in  them,  to  take  that  as  the  omen  and  sign  that  God  is  his 
Leader  and  the  Leader  of  his  hosts  to  the  battle,  and  then  to  make  his  attack.  Faith 
and  practical  obedience  follow  on  the  part  of  David,  and  the  enemy  suffer  a  great  defeat, 
while  David's  fame  sustains  great  advancement.  Let  us  notice  some  special  peculiatities 
that  mark  the  ordering  of  this  battle,  and  observe  the  probable  lessons  of  them* 

I.  A  DISTINCT  LESSON  OF  PUTTING  SELF  INTO  THE  BAOKGBOUND.      As  SUrely  BS  there 

are  cases  innumerable  when  the  active  exercise  of  our  best  practical  powers  is  Uie 
appointed  and  expected  test  of  our  earnestness  and  reality,  bo  surely  are  there  some  cases 
when  we  are  permitted,  invited,  nay,  even  commanded,  to  approve  a  dutiful  spirit,  in 
'<  standing  still  to  see."  Vast  is  the  difference  between  the  man  whose  disposition  it  is 
always  "  to  stand  still  and  see,"  and  him  who,  when  the  command  comes,  can  consent 
to  renounce  the  endeavour  and  the  effort  and  the  force  of  self,  and  so  "  stand  still  and 
see."  The  one  is  the  disposition  of  supineness  and  even  slotb,  the  other  calls  for  the 
exercise  of  a  very  high  measure  of  self-command  and  temperate  restraint.  The  instance 
before  us  is  remarkable  in  this  aspect  on  every  account.  It  is  a  warrior,  who  is  to  lay 
aside  some  of  the  most  characteristic  qualities  of  the  warrior.  He  is  not  to  foresee,  not 
to  provide,  not  to  prepare,  for  the  battle !  It  is  a  warrior,  who  was  to  the  manner  bom, 
and  who  has  intrinsically  not  a  few  of  the  highest  gifts  of  the  warrior.  It  is  a  warrior 
the  very  day  before  the  battle,  when  desire  and  chivalry  and  courage  are  near  their 
height.  It  is  a  warrior  also  the  day  after  an  engagement ;  he,  together  with  his  hosts, 
is  flushed  with  triumphant  conflict,  elated  with  success,  and  feeling  that  he  is  safe  for 
another  decisive  victory.  Nature  tells  us  of  such  a  man  and  of  such  a  host,  that  they 
burn  for  the  fray,  llie  Divine  word,  however,  told  them  now  that  they  must  count 
themselves  and  their  martial  ardour  and  their  very  bravery  as  nothing.  As  little  like 
brave  soldiers  as  possible,  they  are  not  so  much  as  to  confront  their  foes  face  to  face, 
but  to  steal  unawareb  to  the  rearward  of  them.  The  battle  is  to  be  won,  but  it  plainly 
is  not  to  be  by  the  strength  of  human  arm,  nor  by  the  force  of  human  wisdom.  It  will 
be  won  in  a  way  to  humble  the  pride  of  self,  to  cast  self  into  the  shade,  most  of  all  to 
lower  it  in  its  own  deep  conviction,  and  to  exalt  the  presence  and  power  of  another. 

II.  A  DISTINCT  INSTANCE  OF  THE   FAITH  AND  OBEDIENCE  THAT  CONSENTED  TO  THAT 

LESSON.  **  David  therefore  did  as  God  commanded  him."  We  have  here  a  very  simple 
but  very  clear  case  of  faith.  The  directions  given  to  David  were  not  merely  contrary 
to  individual  predilection  and  character,  but  they  were  contrary  to  the  methods  and 
discernment  of  sense.  David  does  neither  disdain  these  in  his  mind  nor  practically 
disregard  them  in  his  act  on  that  account.  By  faith  he  goes  to  the  trees ;  by  faith  he 
expects  and  wsdts  for  the  appointed  sign  there ;  faith  pours  a  stream  of  confidence  into 
him  when  he  hears  that  signal  for  battle  and  "  the  sound  of  going  in  the  tops  of  the 
trees," — emulates  perfectly  for  him  **  the  going  forth  before  him  "  of  God  to  '*  smite  the 
host  of  the  Philistines."  To  the  temper  of  the  typical  warrior  and  general  all  this 
would  have  been  equally  unnatural  and  trying  but  for  the  force  of  £uth.  There  are 
times  when  sense  and  unbelief,  superstition  and  the  love  of  the  marvellous  revel  just 
herein,  that  is  to  say,  in  a  **  sign."  But  this  sign  will  be  something  very  different 
from  one  so  simple  as  '*  the  sound  of  going  in  the  tops  of  the  trees."  This  was  no 
miracle,  except  as  faith  had  power  to  transmute  it  into  the  best  form  of  miracle.  Faith 
can  feed  on  what  shall  seem  slender  material,  andean  find  richest  enjoyment  in  what 


222  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,    [gb.  xiT.  1— 17. 

shall  Mem  familiar  trifles  to  sense.  This  is  the  grandear  of  fiutb,  when  nothing  is 
great,  nothing  little  to  it  except  as  they  bring  the  invisible  to  sight,  and  make  things 
that  are  not  as  though  they  were.  That  faith  then  becomes  the  secret  aid  snd  pre- 
curaor  to  obedience. 

III.   A  DISTIKCT  OATN  OF  BESPECT,  FEAR,  BEVEREKCK,  FOB  THE  MAH  WHO  KBNOUKCED 

SELF  AND  ACCEPTED  THE  GUIDE  OF  FAITH.  "  The  fame  of  David  went  out  into  all  lands ; 
and  the  Lord  brought  the  fear  of  him  upon  all  nations."  This  was  the  direct  consequence 
of  his  baring  surrendered  himself  entirely  into  the  hands  of  the  great  Commander 
himself,  the  Lord  of  all  hosts.  How  often  had  Saul  used  all  earthly  power  and  been 
impatient  to  do  so,  so  that  he  could  not  wait  even  for  the  right  human  agency'.!  But  he 
failed,  and  for  every  failure  lessened  his  influence  among  tbose  round  him  &r  and  wide. 
Qod  made  the  victories  of  David  marvellous^  and  therein  made  him  marvellooSy  from 
the  time  of  Qoliath  up  to  the  present  moment.  To  trust  self  and  self  *s  welUniffb 
superhuman  exertions  shall  sUIl  leave  a  man  an  utter  failure.  To  trust  God  and  rigiifly 
follow  his  bidding  will  exalt  a  man,  and  will  save  him  from  his  own  liability  to  error 
and  inevitable  loss  of  reputation  thereby.  From  all  this  narrative  we  may  be  very 
forcibly  reminded  of  two  things.  1.  How  God  would  teach  us  that  it  may  be  often 
dangerous  to  go  up  direct  against  even  the  very  worst  of  foes— our  spiritual  foes.  2l 
That  with  these  foes  it  is  alwve  all  necessary  to  have  Qod  himself  to  fight  before  ns^  £or 
na»  with  us. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ter.  2. — "  The  Lord  .  .  .  c(mfirmed  him  king."  To  many  readers  this  phraseology 
■eems  simply  the  language  of  superstition,  to  be  classed  with  similar  language  in  which 
primitive  and  heathen  nations  are  wont  to  attribute  the  triumphs  of  their  warriors  and 
the  greatness  of  their  kings  to  their  tutelar  and  national  deities.  But  believers  in  the 
inspiration  and  authority  of  Holy  Scripture  will  see  in  this  declaration  an  assurance 
of  that  wise  and  watchful  care  which  God  exercises  over  all  men  and  all  communities, 
and  which  is,  for  wise  purposes,  so  clearly  and  devoutly  related  and  recorded  in  the 
documents  of  Hebrew  history. 

I.  The  qualifications  and  the  preparation  of  rulers  are  from  God.  The 
strength  of  character,  wisdom  and  sagacity,  firmess,  justice,  clemency,  affability, — all 
qualities  that  make  an  able  ruler  of  men,  are  the  endowment  of  the  supreme  Lord.  In 
the  case  of  David  we  observe  peculiar  gifts  lavishly  bestowed.  The  same  providential 
care  is  to  be  recognized  in  the  long  and  severe  discipline  by  which  the  son  of  Jesse  was 
fitted  for  a  throne.  It  was  doubtless  this  preparatory  training,  combined  with  the  sore 
experience  through  which  the  nation  had  passed,  which  rendered  David's  accession  so 
popular. 

II.  The  jubt  exercise  of  civil  power  is  divinely  authorized.  The  Lord 
having  prepared  David  for  the  throne  and  the  throne  for  him,  the  monarch  proceeded 
to  fulfil  his  royal  duties  with  the  happy  assurance  that  the  hearts  of  his  people  were 
subject  to  him,  and  with  the  knowledge  that  he  was  supported  by  faithful  and  powerful 
allies.  It  cannot,  indeed,  be  said  that  monarchy  is  the  favourite  form  of  government 
with  the  Lord  of  all ;  for  when  he  gave  Israel  a  king  it  was  in  condescension  to  their 
infirmities.  The  form  of  government  is  of  secondary  importance,  but  the  necesrity  of 
civil  rule  is  written  upon  the  constitution  of  man  and  of  society.  Equity,  impartiality, 
righteousness, — these  are  the  principles  of  all  true  moral  rule,  hirnian  and  Divine.  The 
governor  who  is  guided  by  personal  ambition,  who  is  the  prey  of  petty  prejudices,  who 
is  given  to  intrigues,  who  rules  by  oppression,  is  no  true  king  of  men. 

III.   The  00NSCI0U8NEB8  OF  A  DlVINE  COMMISSION  GIVES  POWER  AND  GRACE  TO  THK 

EXERCISE  OF  AUTHORITY.  "  David  perceived  that  the  Lord  had  confirmed  him  king." 
Thus  his  faith  was  strengthened  and  his  courage  was  sustained.  The  man  who,  in  the 
fulfilment  of  life's  duties,  cannot  see  beyond  his  own  purposes  and  plans,  is  for  all  high 
intents  enfeebled  by  this  unworthy  view  of  his  life ;  whilst  he  who  recognizes  that  he 
is  the  **  minister  of  God,"  is  supported  by  this  conviction,  his  aims  are  ennobled  and 
his  influence  is  hallowed  by  it.  Especially  must  this  be  the  case  with  those  whose 
influence  and  responsibility  are  unusually  great. 


on.  XIV.  1—17.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  223 

IV.  If  authobity  is  fbom  God,  account  ability  is  to  God.  Some  rulers  have 
been  called  to  accouQt  by  their  fellow-potentates  and  some  by  their  subjects.  There  is, 
however,  danger  lest  the  powerful  should  forget  their  inevitable  responsibility.  At  the 
bar  of  God  all  kings  must  stand ;  at  his  throne  they  too  must  sue  for  mercy,  when 
there  they  take  their  places  with  their  subjects,  as  before  the  highest  and  the  final 
tribunal.  *'Be  wise  now  therefore,  0  ye  kings:  be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the 
earth."— T. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — The  Ood  of  baUles,  This  is  one  of  the  many  passages  in  the  Old 
Testament  where  God  is  represented  as  presiding  over  and  prospering  the  military 
expeditions  of  the  Israelites.  Rationalists  see  in  such  passages  nothing  more  than 
evidence  that  the  Hebrews  were  a  warlike  people,  and  that  they,  like  other  nations, 
attributed  their  successes  in  war  to  the  intervention  and  favour  of  their  Deity.  But 
those  who  believe  in  the  inspiration  and  authority  of  Scripture  cannot  be  satisfied  with 
such  an  explanation.  The  text  suggests  some  reflections  which  may  cast  light  upon 
this  difficulty. 

I.  Thebe  is  a  oenebal  sense  in  which  Jehovah  was  and  is  the  Lord  of 
HOSTS,  THE  GoD  OF  BATTLES.  It  would  be  barbarous  and  absurd  to  suppose  that  the 
benevolent  Ruler  of  all  prefers  war  in  itself  to  peace,  that  he  takes  pleasure  in  the 
carnage  and  agony,  the  bereavement  and  desolation,  which  are  distinctive  of  war. 
But  as  all  strength  and  valour,  all  foresight,  skill,  and  patience  are  his  gifts,  to 
him  must  ultimately  be  traced  the  force,  the  generalship,  by  which  victories  are  won. 

II.  There  is  a  Divine  providence  which  overrules  the  conflicts  of  the 
NATIONS.  There  can  be  no  question  that  the  course  of  human  history  has  been,  to  a  large 
extent,  governed  by  the  wars  which  have  occupied  so  much  of  the  energy  and  have 
consumed  so  much  of  the  blood  and  the  treasure  of  mankind.  We  have  read  of  "  the 
fifteen  decisive  battles  of  the  world."  They  who  believe  in  the  providential  government 
of  the  world  at  all  can  scarcely  refuse  to  believe  that  the  warfares  of  the  nations  have 
been  permitted  and  overruled  for  good  by  God.  Great  principles,  even  principles  of 
a  moral  kind,  have  sometimes  been  fought  upon  the  field  of  battle.  Civilization  and 
barbarism,  slavery  and  freedom,  brute  force  and  enlightenment,  have  thus  contended 
together  for  the  mastery  and  the  victory. 

II L  There  were  special  reasons  why  God  should  have  intebested  himself 
IN  THE  wabs  of  THE  Jews.  1.  The  contests  between  Israel  and  Israel's  enemies 
were  contests  between  a  morally  superior  and  certain  morally  inferior  races.  When 
wars  took  place  between  the  Israelites  and  the  Canaanites  or  Philistines,  it  is  plain  to 
every  student  of  history  that  the  victory  of  Israel  was  the  victory  of  monotheism  and 
morality  over  idolatry  and  the  most  flagrant  and  disgusting  vice.  The  cause  of 
Philistia  was  the  cause  of  heathenism,  cruelty,  and  pollution ;  the  cause  of  David  was 
that  of  comparative  justice,  purity,  and  spirituality.  2.  The  victories  of  Israel  furthered 
the  best  interests  of  mankind.  Had  Israel  been  subjugated  or  annihilated,  the  best 
prospects  of  the  human  race  would  have  been  clouded  with  awful  darkness.  The 
independence  and  nationality  of  the  Hebrews  formed  a  distinct  step  forward  in  the* 
march  of  humanity.  3.  The  triumphs  of  David  were  a  link  in  that  cnain  which  led  to 
the  redemption  of  mankind.  We  cannot  separate  the  Old  Testament,  historically  or 
religiouslv,  from  the  New.  The  kingdom  and  the  conquests  of  David  have  relation  to 
the  kingdom  and  the  conquests  of  him  who  was  Son  of  David  and  Son  of  (rod. — T» 

Ver.  12,— 'JJo^ee^  of  idolatry.  The  conduct  of  David,  in  directing  that  the  idols  of 
the  Philistines  should  be  "  burned  with  fire,"  arose  from  the  fervour  of  his  religious 
feelings  and  his  contempt  for  idolatrous  usages.  It  must  always  be  borne  in  mind,  in 
reading  of  the  wars  between  Israel  and  Philistia,  that  these,  like  other  wars  recorded 
in  Old  Testament  history,  were  more  social  and  religious  than  political.  Isolated  from 
Unrounding  nations,  the  people  of  Israel  were  providentially  appointed  to  be  witnesses 
to  the  one  true  God.  Hence  their  repugnance  to  and  hatred  of  polytheism  in  all  its 
offensive  and  degrading  manifestations. 

I.  Idolatry  is  dishonourinq  to  God.  It  is  the  substitution  of  God's  work  for  him- 
self. Idolaters  ''  worship  and  serve  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator,  who  is  blessed 
for  ever,"    Whether  adoration  be  paid  to  the  handiwork  of  the  great  Maker  of  all  or 


224  TUE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CnRONICLES.    [ch.  xiv.  1— 17. 

to  the  workmanship  of  mcn'd  own  handff,  God  is  robbed  of  the  reverence  and  lervioo 
which  are  due  to  him  ahme. 

II.  Idolatry  is  unkkasosadle  Ain>  yaik.  How  strikingly  is  this  portrayed  in  the 
hundred  and  fifteenth  psalm! — ^"They  have  mouths, but  they  speak  noty''etc.;  "They 
that  make  them  are  like  unto  them ;  so  is  every  one  that  trusteth  in  them."  It  is  the 
absurd  and  superstitious  oonfidenco  that  men  have  placed  in  idols  which  has  rendered 
religion  the  laughing-stock  of  the  thoughtless  and  superficial. 

in.  Idolatry  is  deoradixo  and  debasing  to  those  who  pbactibb  it.  Histofy 
abounds  with  proofs  of  this.  The  greater  the  hold  which  idolatry  has  over  a  nation, 
and  the  more  cruel,  sensuous,  and  capridons  are  the  deities  worshipped,  the  more 
degraded  is  the  moral  condition  of  the  community.  We  know  well  now  sunk  were 
the  Philistines  and  their  neighbours,  by  reason  of  their  religion,  in  the  deptha  of  vice 
and  sin. 

IV.  Idolatry  is  doomed  to  perish  and  to  give  place  to  a  puree  axd  koblkk 
FAITH.  David's  "  rough  and  ready  "  method  of  dealing  with  the  Philistine  **  gods  " 
was  natural  to  his  impulnive  disposition.  We  are  assured  by  inspired  predictiona 
that  the  time  shall  come  when  the  idolatrous  peoples,  illumined  by  the  rays  of  the 
gospel,  shall  of  their  own  accord  "  cast  their  idols  to  the  moles  and  to  the  bata.^  So  &r 
&om  the  abolition  of  idolatry  being  the  precursor  to  universal  irreligion,  we  have  every 
reason  to  believe  that  ui)on  the  ruins  of  heathenism  shall  be  rm^  the  stately  and 
holy  temple  of  Christianity,  in  which  an  enlightened  and  regenerated  race  shall  offer 
unceasing  adorations  to  the  one  Ghxi,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 
Saviour  of  nil  men. — T. 

Vcr.  15. — "A  iound  of  going/*  In  his  frequent  contests  with  the  Philistines,  I>avid 
was  asMurcd  of  the  constant  support  and  guidance  of  the  God  of  hosts.  The  king 
sought  the  honour  of  his  Grud,  and  God  prospered  the  exploits  of  his  servant.  On  the 
occasion  referred  to  in  this  passage.  Divine  wisdom  is  said  to  have  directed  the  strategy 
of  the  army  of  Israel,  to  have  indicated  the  moment  of  assault,  and  to  have  asaored  the 
warriors  of  certain  victory.  The  signal  was,  strange  to  say,  "  a  sound  of  going  in 
the  tops  of  the  mulberry  trees."  This  incident  has  usually  been  regarded  as  indicative 
of  the  tokens  of  the  Divine  presence  accorded  to  such  as  are  engaged  in  the  spiritual 
service  of  their  God.    We  are  reminded  of — 

I.  The  poweklebbness  and  insufficiency  of  men  for  the  spiritual  conflict. 
Christians  have  a  warfare  to  wage  against  foes  many  and  mighty,  and  for  this  warfare 
their  native  resources  are  inadequate,  scanty,  and  feeble.  If  we  know  ourselves  we 
niUHt  needs  look  above,  to  the  Stron<;  for  strength,  to  the  Wise  for  wisdom. 

If.  The  okacious  tokens  of  a  Divine  pbesknce  and  go-operation.  The  "  sound 
of  going"  told  David  that  God  was  near — was  on  his  side.  Grod's  people  are  never  lefi 
without  indications  of  the  Divine  presence,  and  these  assure  them  that  they  are  not 
alone,  that  the  "  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  them."*  Sometimes  by  events  in  his  providence, 
sometimes  by  lessons  from  his  Word,  sometimes  by  the  suggestions  of  his  Spirit,  he 
gives  liis  people  to  understand,  in  the  hour  of  their  need  and  helplessness,  that  he  is  on 
thdr  side. 

III.  The  Divine  signal  for  his  peofle^s  action.  As  we  have  not  only  to  know 
but  also  to  do  God's  will,  wo  need  not  only  revelation  of  truth  but  summons  to 
practical  service.  God  gives  his  soldiers  the  watchword,  the  signal  to  advance.  Then 
is  tlic  moment  to  "  go  forward,"  to  repel  and  to  defeat  the  foe.  "  If  God  be  for  na,  who 
can  1)0  against  us?*'  It  is  well  that  we  should  not  run  before  the  word  is  given  ;  yet 
It  will  not  do  to  tarry  when  he  directs  us  to  advance. 

IV.  The  omen  and  presage  of  true  victory.  When  the  sound  of  going  was  heard 
in  the  tree-tops,  it  was  as  the  movement  of  angels'  wings ;  the  mighty  rusning  was  as 
the  tramp  of  the  host  of  God,  the  earnest  of  victory  to  David's  arms.  If  the  Lord  our 
God  goes  forth  with  us  to  the  spiritual  war,  we  shall  surely  overcome*  Ours  shall  be 
the  victory  of  faith,  even  that  which  ovcrcometh  the  world. — T. 

Ver.  17. — Fame  and  fear,  David,  notwithstanding  his  follies  and  sins,  was  ''the 
man  after  Gk>d's  own  heart."  Devout,  obedient,  diligent,  courageous,  he  was  eminently 
adapted  both  to  govern  the  nation,  to  lead  the  army,  to  promote  the  revival  of  true 


CH.  XIV.  1—17.]    THE  PIBST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  225 

religion.  Providence  exalted  him  to  a  lofty  position  and  enabled  him  to  adorn  the 
station  to  which  he  was  raised.  Hence  so  large  a  part  of  the  historical  books  of  the 
Old  Testament  are  occupied  with  the  events  of  his  reign ;  and  hence  he  is  so  fre- 
quently alluded  to  in  the  national  annals,  and  so  often  quoted  both  by  our  Lord  and 
oy  his  inspired  apostles. 

L  David's  fame.  It  was  the  fame  of:  1.  A  nuxess/ul  warrior^  A  man  of  war 
from  his  youth,  he  owed  his  throne  to  his  valour  and  generalship.  2.  A  powerful 
king.  When  he  wielded  the  forces  of  a  nation,  God  gave  him  victory  over  many 
enemies.  3.  A  pious  man.  His  steadfastness  in  worshipping  the  £rne  Grod,  his 
liberality  in  providing  for  the  services  of  the  sanctuary,  his  habitual  devotion,  all  were 
well  known,  and  stamped  David  as  a  truly  religious  man.  4.  A  aacred  poet  and 
muiician.  It  is  as  "  the  sweet  singer  of  Israel "  that  he  is  held  in  lasting  remembrance^ 
and  remembered  with  gratitude  both  widespread  and  sincere. 

II.  David's  feab.  1.  His  subjects  held  him  in  honour  and  had  respect  to  his 
righteous  laws.  2.  His  officers  and  troops  were  devoted  to  his  person  and  obeyed  his 
authoritative  behests.  3.  Traitors  stood  in  awe  of  his  vigour,  promptness,  and  power. 
4.  His  alliance  was  sought  by  neighbouring  nations,  who  dreaded  to  have  him  as  an 
enemy,  and  who  courted  his  friendship.  6.  His  foes  feared  him,  fur  he  defeated  their 
armies  and  held  themselves  in  subjection  and  tribute. 

Pbaotioal  LE880KB.  1.  All  greatness  is  from  God^  to  whom  all  praise  is  due.  2. 
The  great  are  responsible  for  the  use  of  their  power  to  him  who  is  "  King  of  kings  and 
Lord  of  lords."— T. 

Vers.  1,  3—7. — The  house  and  the  home :  wisdom  and  folly.  The  first  verse  of  this 
chapter  presents  the  character  of  David  in  a  very  different  aspect  from  that  of  the 
other  verses  in  our  text.  His  conduct  in  building  himself  a  house  was  in  contrast  with 
that  in  turning  his  home  into  a  harem.    We  have,  then— - 

L  Thbeb  thoughts  ooNCEBKiNa  David's  aotion.  We  judge :  1.  Thai  he  was  wise 
in  building  himself  a  royal  mansion,  (Yer.  1.)  It  would  be  likely  to  give  an  aspect  of 
stability  to  his  throne,  and  thus  add  to  the  security  of  his  position.  It  was  due  to 
his  fjBunily  that  they  should  have  the  full  benefit  of  his  exaltation.  It  was  wise  to 
make  domestic  life  as  attractive  to  himself  and  as  honourable  in  the  eyes  of  his  people 
as  he  could  mi^e  it  appear.  By  taking  greatest  pains,  and  even  going  outsice  the 
limits  of  Israel  to  furnish  himself  with  a  "  house  of  cedar,"  David  was  doing  the  wise 
and  right  thing.  2.  ThcU  he  was  foolish  and  wrong  in  multiplying  the  number  of  his 
wives.  (Yer.  3.)  He  departed  from  God's  intention,  if  not  from  his  positive  precept,  when 
he  '*  took  more  wives  "  at  Jerusalem.  He  availed  himself  of  his  royal  position  to  do 
that  which  was  unbecoming  and  inexpedient  as  well  as  at  variance  with  national  usage. 
It  was  in  accordance  with  the  promptings  of  the  fiesh,  but  out  of  accord  with  the 
teachings  of  his  better  judgment.  3.  That  his  error  outweighed  his  wisdom.  Better 
hi  the  humble  structure  with  one  family  dwelling  therein  in  harmony  and  love,  than 
the  imposing  mansion  wherein  dwelt  domestic  jealousy  and  strife.  David's  after  history 
only  too  sadly  proves  that  he  laid  the  foundation  of  his  worst  troubles  when  he  ^  took 
more  wives  "  to  his  royal  palace  and  converted  what  would  have  been  a  happy  home 
into  an  intriguing  harem.    His  folly  outweighed  his  vrisdom.    We  turn  to  r^ard— 

IL  The  affuoation  of  thesb  thouqhtb  to  oitbselvbs.  And  we  conclude  that 
the  wise  Christian  man  will :  1.  Spare  no  trouble  to  provide  an  inviting  home.  The 
Christian  home  is  the  hope  of  the  world.  As  it  becomes  more  extensively  the  centre 
and  source  of  piety  and  purity,  of  righteousness  and  wisdom,  so  the  kingdom  of  God 
will  come  on  the  earth.  Therefore  let  the  Christian  home  have  everything  about  it 
that  is  attractive ;  let  it  be  strong  and  beautiful ;  let  all  labour  and  care  be  expended 
on  it  that  it  may  have  all  possible  things  to  please  the  pure  eye  and  gratify  the 
cultivated  taste.  2.  Put  all  needful  restraint  on  himself.  He  will  not  merely  not 
"  take  more  wives  " — ^refrain  from  that  which  is  positively  disallowed  by  the  society 
in  which  he  moves— but  guard  himself  against  all  indulgence  which  will  injure  his 
infiucDce  at  home  or  leave  a  stain  on  his  reputation  outside.  3.  Bememher  that  one 
serious  mistake  may  mctr  much  good.  As  David  has  certainly  lost  something  of  the 
lustre  with  which  his  name  would  otherwise  have  shone,  and  now  exerts  somewhat 
less  of  powbr  than  he  would  otherwise  have  wielded,  beoiuse  he  did  not  ulhere  to 

I.  CHBOKICLESb  Q 


226  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  GHBONICLES.    [gh.  sit.  1^17. 

true  domestic  morality,  so  shall  we  inevitably  and  irreooTerablj  lose  weight,  influence^ 
usefulness,  as  well  as  peace  and  gladness  of  heart,  if  we  make  any  one  serious  mistake 
in  the  ordering  of  our  life.  This  is  true  of  the  choice  of  our  vocation,  of  the  aelectioii 
of  our  friends,  and  (more  esi^ecially)  of  the  decision  we  make  as  to  the  lifelong  allianoe 
of  marringe.  How  many  have  cut  their  joy  and  usefulness  in  twain  by  one  sad  error 
here !  How  needful  in  this  respect,  above  most  other  matters,  to  act  not  on  impulse 
but  conviction,  to  ask  the  guidance  of  the  Divine  Friend,  to  act  as  those  who  aie 
responsible  for  all  the  great  choices  of  our  life  1^-0. 


Ver.  2. — Sel/ward,  Ooduxird,  manward.    Here 

I.  SoMKTuiNo  ON  wuicii  David  COULD  coKQBATULATB  HmsBLT.  He  ''perceived 
that  the  Lord  had  confirmed  him  king  .  .  .  his  kingdom  was  lifted  up  on  high.** 
Ho  observed  that  the  first  success  was  being  satisfactorily  sustained,  and  that  his  potrer 
was  being  felt  beyond  the  limits  of  his  own  land.  We  may  congratulate  ourselves 
when  we  nave  made  a  good  beginning,  whether  of  school  life,  or  of  apprenticeship,  or 
of  management  of  afiairs  or  official  position,  or  of  alliance  with  another,  or  of  life 
itself;  but  we  have  greater  reason  for  congratulating  ourselves  when  the  first  start 
has  settled  down  into  lasting  strength,  has  solidified  and  become  an  established  suooess. 
Too  often  the  first  brilliancy  proves  to  be  nothing  more  than  the  shooting  blase  of  the 
rocket.  It  is  well  when  it  proves  to  be  nothing  less  than  the  lasting  light  of  the 
beacon-fire.  We  have  also  reason  to  congratulate  ourselves  when  success  rises  so  hi^ 
as  to  attract  the  attention  of  those  beyond  our  own  circle ;  we  are  then  making  our- 
selves felt  as  well  as  known ;  and  while  a  wise  man  will  care  but  little  for  the  mere 
breath  of  fame,  a  good  man,  if  he  be  also  a  wise  man,  will  care  much  that  he  is  a  power 
and  not  a  cypher  in  the  world. 

II.  SoMKTHiNO  WUICII  TURNED  David*8  THOUGHTS  TO  GoD.  "  David  peTOuved  that 
the  Lord  had  confirmed  him."  He  had  shown  much  statesmanlike  ability  since  he  had 
been  made  king,  and  might  have  been,  as  we  all  are,  under  the  temptation  to  attribato 
his  success  to  his  own  sagacity.  But  he  did  not  yield  to  the  enemy  if  thus  assaileii 
Ho  let  his  prosperity  direct  his  thoughta  to  him  from  whom  cometh  down  every  sood 
gift.  So  also  shall  wo,  if  the  spirit  of  Christ  be  in  us.  We  shall  let  all  things  speak  to 
us  of  the  Father,  of  his  presence  with  us,  his  mindfulness  of  us,  his  love  toward  us,  his 
wisdom  in  all  his  dealing  with  us.  Ami  we  shiill  not  permit  our  prosperity  to  do  that 
which  it  has  a  tendency  to  do— elevate  us  in  our  own  esteem,  and  hide  the  Divine 
Author  of  all  our  mercies  from  the  view  of  our  souL  We  shall  see  that  it,  with  all 
other  experiences,  turns  our  thoughts  in  reverential  love  to  him. 

HI.  The  true  aspect  in  which  prosperity  should  be  viewed.  **  His  kingdom 
was  lifted  up  on  high,  becatise  of  Ais  people  Israel"  or  "for  his  people  Israel's  sake* 
(2  Sam.  V.  12).  David  perceived  that  God  had  exalted  him,  not  only  nor  chiefly  that 
he  and  his  family  mignt  be  distinguished,  but  that  the  nation  might  thereby  be 
blessed ;  that  he  might  confer  on  the  people  over  whom  he  was  to  rule  the  unspeakable 
blessings  of  a  pious  and  upright  reign.  It  is  an  admirable  thing  in  rulers  when  they 
"perceive'*  that  they  are  lifted  up  for  the  sake  of  the  people,  and  not  for  their  own 
sake.  It  is  an  equally  desirable  if  not  an  equally  important  thing  that  all  who 
occupy  posta  of  prominence  and  power — statesmen,  magistrates,  councillors,  presidents, 
ministers,  secretaries,  etc. — should  perceive  the  same  truth,  should  regard  their 
elevation  in  the  same  light.  If  God  sends  us  prosperity,  power,  influence,  it  is  not  only 
that  we  may  rejoice  therein  ourselves,  but  it  is  also,  and  principally,  that  we  may  use 
our  opportunity  to  confer  light,  healing,  help,  hope,  blessedness,  on  those  who  are  less 
favoured  tlian  we  are,  and  whom  we  can  reach  with  our  ministering  hand.— G. 

Vers.  8 — 17.— 7%e  tpiritttal  campaign.  Our  Christian  life  is  no  holiday  excursion 
or  exhilarating  walk ;  it  is  an  earnest  battle,  or  rather  a  protracted  campaign.  We 
may  be  reminded  here — 

I.  That  there  are  notorious  enemies  with  which  evert  Christiait  man 
MUST  EXPECT  TO  FIQHT.  David  kuew  well  that  he  would  have  to  fight  the  Philistines 
before  he  could  gain  full  possession  of  his  throne.  They  were  bent  on  disputing  his 
power,  and  it  was  inevitable  that  a  series  of  engagementa  would  take  place  between 
the  servanta  of  Jehovah  and  these  idolaters,    *'  All  the  Philistines  went  up  to  seek 


ciL  XIV.  1—17.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa  227 

David  "  (ver.  8).  When  a  man  becomes  the  servant  of  the  great  King,  he  knows  that 
his  spiritual  adversaries  will  seek  to  slay  him ;  or,  if  he  does  not,  he  soon  discovers 
that  no  one  is  more  certain  to  be  assailed  by  temptations  than  he  who  has  just  entered 
the  army  of  the  living  God.  L  **  The  wurld  "  will  come  up  against  him — the  various 
hostile  influences  which  breathe  and  move  in  unregenerate  or  unsanctified  society. 
2.  '*  The  flesh  "  will  assail  him — all  those  impulses  toward  evil  which  are  bom  of  the 
lower  appetites  and  passions.  3.  "  The  devil "  will  seek  to  "  devour  "  him — the  "princi- 
palities and  powers,  the  spiritual  forces  which,  though  unseen,  are  strong  opponents 
in  the  field. 

IL  That  hb  must  consult  thb  will  of  God  in  thb  oonduot  of  the  oampaion. 
"David  inquired  of  Gk)d"  (ver.  10);  "David  inquired  again  of  God"  (ver.  11); 
"  David  did  as  Gk)d  commanded  him  **  (ver.  16).  The  King  of  Israel  was  far  from 
relying  on  his  own  generalship ;  and  when  he  had  succeeded  so  well  (vers.  11, 12),  his 
good  fortune  did  not  tempt  him  to  presume ;  he  still  inquired  of  Cfod,  and  acted  in 
strict  accordance  with  Divine  direction.  This  spirit  of  inquiry  and  obedience  must  be 
ours  also.  We  must  not  lean  on  our  own  imderstanding,  but  ask  for  the  guidance  of 
his  Spirit,  both  for  his  direct  illumination  and  for  his  help  through  the  written  Word ; 
and  when  we  have  been  victorious,  we  must  see  that  the  spirit  of  presumption  is  not 
admitted,  but  carefully  excluded,  and  we  must  still  inquire  and  obey. 

III.  That  hb  should  seek  to  inflict  upon  the  enemy  a  gomfletb  defeat. 
David  not  only  smote  the  enemy  (ver.  11),  but  he  burnt  their  gods  with  fire  (ver.  12). 
And  again  he  smote  and  pursued  them  *'from  Gibeon  even  to  Gazer"  (ver.  16).  It 
is  our  wisdom  to  extirpate  our  enemy ;  not  only  to  stun  but  to  slay  the  spiritual  foe. 
It  must  be  war  d  otUranee  or  it  wiU  prove  to  be  unsuccessful.  Nothing  can  be  more 
dangerous  and  unwise  than  to  miuntain  a  dubious  and  wavering  contest  with  some 
besetting  sin.  We  are  to  be  conquerors,  "more  than  conquerors,"  completely  and 
thoroughly  successful,  as  generals  who  not  only  keep  possession  of  their  ground,  but 
drive  uie  enemy  before  them  and  take  possession  of  their  camp,  seizing  or  burning 
their  goods. 

IV.  That  hb  must  be  cautious  as  well  ab  ooubaqeous.  God  did  not  allow 
David  to  fight  the  Philistines  when  he  would  have  had  to  engage  them  at  a  dis- 
advantage. He  instructed  his  servant  to  adopt  a  plan  more  suited  to  the  occasion 
(vers.  14,  16).  We  are  not  to  expect  victory  from  God  if  we  are  negligent  of  the 
means  we  take  to  win  it.  If  we  are  obviously  uneq\ial  to  the  task  under  one  set  of 
conditions,  we  must  change  them  and  place  ourselves  in  more  favourable  ones. 

V.  That  he  must  asobibe  the  victobt  to  the  Divine  abm.  David  said,  "  God 
hath  broken  in,"  etc.  (ver.  11).  Our  spirit,  if  not  our  language,  must  be  that  of  the 
psalmist, "  Not  unto  us,  0  Lord,  not  unto  us,"  etc. — G. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Hiram  and  David.  The  act  of  Hiram  here  in  sending  messengers  to 
•  David  with  timber  and  masons  and  carpenters  to  build  a  house  for  himself,  shows 
how  David's  influence  had  made  itself  felt  fJEur  and  near.  We  are  furnished  with  the 
reason  of  this  influence  (see  ch.  xi.  9).  It  was  because  "  the  Lord  was  with  him." 
Thus  it  ever  is  with  the  Christian :  "  The  Lord  is  with  him."  Hence  his  influence. 
Christ  in  us  is  the  mighty  power  for  a  holy  life  and  for  producing  a  permanent 
impression.  Men  like  Hiram  will  pay  homage  to  this,  however  morally  distant  they  may 
be  from  conversion  to  CK)d.  And  this  is  the  power  the  true  Christian  should  seek  to 
possess,  and  the  influence  he  should  wield.  "  And  David  perceived  that  the  Lord  had 
confirmed  him  king  over  Israel,  for  his  kingdom  was  lifted  up  on  high,  hecauee  of  hie 
people  Israel,'*  Observe  the  latter  part  of  this  passage.  Kings  are  to  remember  why 
they  are  kings.  It  is  on  account  of  God's  kingdom  and  God's  people.  When  they 
forget  their  relation  to  God,  Grod's  people,  and  Gtxl's  work,  they  forget  their  true 
mission  in  God's  world.  "  By  me  kings  reign."  The  sMect  should  never  forget  the 
relation  in  which  he  stands  to  God ;  how  much  less  should  the  kir^  forget  it  I — W. 

Vers.  8 — 12. — First  hatUe  in  ^  valley  of  Bephaim.  No  sooner  was  David 
anointed  than  the  Philistines  were  stirred  up  in  opposition.  This  opposition  arose, 
doubtless,  from  the  conviction  that,  if  he  were  established  on  the  throne,  he  would  take 
revenge  on  them  for  the  national  dishonour  at  the  battle  of  Gilboa,  in  which  Saul  was 


228  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  I'HE  CHRONICLES,    [cs.  znr.  1—17. 


slain.  They  tfierefore  rc8olve<l,  befi^re  his  throne  was  consolidated,  to  accomplish  hia 
destruction.  David's  charncteriBtic  feature  was,  in  every  emergency  of  this  Kind,  to 
cast  himself  upon  God  and  seek  his  guidance.  The  assurance  of  victory  was  dear 
and  unqualified :  *'  And  the  Ix>rd  said, . .  Go  up ,  for  I  will  deliver  them  into  thine 
hand.*'  The  result  of  the  battle  was  a  great  victory  for  IsraeL  Another  feature  in 
l)avid*s  character  was  to  ascribe  all  victorv  to  Qod.  "  Then  David  said,  Ood  hath 
broken  in  upon  mine  enemies  by  mine  hand  like  the  breaking  forth  of  waters." 
Observe,  he  calls  himself  the  Lords  ''hand.**  This  is  our  true  relation  to  God  at  all 
times.  Ourselves  and  all  we  have  are  but  the  "hand"  to  be  put  into  God's  hand 
to  use.  Observe,  too,  that  David  bums  the  "gods"  which  the  Philistines,  in  the 
hurry  and  confusion  of  flight,  had  left  behind.  They  were  no  temptation  to  Aim 
to  idolatry,  but  they  might  have  been  to  some  among  his  ranks;  therefore  every 
vestige  of  idolatry  shall  be  stamped  out  and  every  temptation  removed.  In  all  our 
battles  for  the  Ix)rd,  if  we  would  have  him  with  ns  and  ensure  success,  every  idol 
must  be  stamped  out  and  God  alone  exalted.  It  must  be  Christ  and  Christ  alone  in 
every  heart  and  before  every  eye. — W. 

Vers.  13 — 17. — Second  battle  in  the  vdUey  of  Rephaim.  The  utter  discomfiture  of 
the  Philistines  and  the  victory  of  Israel  had  filled  the  former  with  alarm,  and  a  aeoond 
attempt  was  made  against  Israel.  David  again  cast  himself  upon  the  Lord.  This 
time  the  mode  of  attack  by  David  was,  at  the  command  of  Qod,  to  be  raried.  The 
attack  was  not  forbidden,  but,  instead  of  advancing  against  the  Philistines  openly, 
David  was  to  strike  ofif  in  such  a  direction  as  to  turn  their  flank  and  to  come  upon 
them  from  the  front  of  the  mulberry  trees  or  baca  bushes.  An  important  spiritual 
truth  underlies  this  part  of  the  narrative.  In  this  second  attack  it  would  only  have 
been  natural  that  David  should  have  adopted  the  same  mode  as  before,  especially  when 
his  plans  had  met  with  such  success.  But,  however  right  and  in  every  respect 
preferable  that  course  might  have  appeared,  it  was  not  God%  way.  God  will  have  his 
people  entirely  dependent  upon  himseff,  and  not  upon  pa$i  eoMerienoes.  The  manna 
gathered  to-day  will  not  do  for  to-morrow.  It  must  be  gathered  each  day  afresh. 
The  successful  way  in  the  past  may  not  be  his  way  in  the  future,  and  must  never  be 
relied  on.  It  is  not  past  dealing  or  ways  with  us ;  it  is  himself.  The  look  of  the  soul 
in  every  step  must  be  upward.  I  must  put  nothing — not  evenGod'sjxzs^  ways  with  me 
in  life — between  my  soul  and  him.  It  must  be  God,  and  God  alone,  all  the  way.  And 
"  the  sound  of  going  in  the  tops  of  the  mulberry  trees,"  as  the  sign  of  God's  leading, 
is  not  without  meaning.  It  indicates  still  the  upward  look.  The  sign  was  to  come 
from  above.  There  the  eye  and  the  ear  too  were  to  be  directed.  It  was  nothing  in 
itsdf  any  more  than  any  ordinance  or  means  of  grace.  It  was  an  "outward  sign"  of 
an  "inward  "  and  deeper  reality — Ood;  "  God  is  gune  forth  before  thee  to  smite  the 
host  of  the  Philistines."  The  breeze  of  wind  moving  the  tops  of  the  mulberry  trees 
was  the  vehicle  of  the  Holy  Spirit — God's  presence  going  before,  which  is  at  all  times 
the  Christian's  safety,  strength,  and  victory. — W. 

Ver,  10. — Inquiring  of  Ood  concerning  common  things.  Explain  the  anxiety  of 
the  situation  in  which  David  was  placed,  and  show  what  he  might  have  done.  From 
the  point  of  view  of  the  skilful  general,  he  might  have  counted  his  forces,  estimated 
their  strength,  set  them  on  vantage-ground,  drawn  out  a  plan  of  battle,  and,  swayed 
by  his  own  energy,  he  might  have  led  them  on  to  victory.  But  then  he  would  only 
have  acted  as  Saul  had  acted.  He  would  have  taken  up  the  position  of  the  mde- 
pendent  sovereign,  rather  than  that  of  the  prince  and  vicegerent  of  Jehovah.  It  was 
important  that,  at  the  very  outset  of  his  kingly  career,  he  should  make  it  publicly  and 
distinctly  known  that  he  was  king  only  as  Jehovah's  servant.  He  could  not  make  this 
known  better  than  by  "inquiring  of  the  Lord"  on  the  flrst  occasion  of  national 
anxiety.  It  is  always  of  great  importance  that  we  start  right  But  it  might  be  said 
that  this  was  only  a  business  matter,  and  so  quite  within  the  power  of  David  to 
arrange,  and  he  need  not  "  inquire  of  God "  at  all  about  it.  That  sentiment  is  a 
common,  but  a  sadly  mistaken  one.  It  divides  our  life  into  two  parts,  the  one  of  which 
we  can  manage  ourselves,  but  for  the  other  we  need  the  help  of  Grod.  There  can 
really  be  no  distinction  of  the  "  sacred  "  and  the  "  secular."    There  can  properly  be 


CH.  XIV.  1-17.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  229 


DO  circle  drawn  round  within  which  alone  prayer  can  be  acceptable.  Nothing  interests 
us  that  does  not  interest  our  Gt)d.  "  In  everything^  by  prayer  and  supplication,  •  .  . 
we  may  make  known  our  requests  unto  him."    This  may  be  further  enforced. 

I.  What  is  the  God-sphebb?  The  difficulties  into  which  men  get,  and  the  subtle 
self-seeking  they  manifest,  when  they  try  to  make  the  Gtxl-sphtrre  limited  and  narrow. 
The  awakened  and  sincere  heart  is  prepared  to  say  before  God— 

^  Take  my  body,  spirit,  soul ; 
Only  thou  possess  the  whole." 

The  GFod-sphere  is  a  man's  whole  life,  his  whole  thought,  his  every  interest.  Nothing 
is  too  great  for  God  to  compass ;  nothing  too  small  for  him  to  use  and  glorify.  The 
things  we  count  most  common — air  and  sunshine  and  rain — are  his.  And  the  things 
in  our  lives  that  seem  most  trivial  fit  into  his  great  plan  and  should  be  referred  to 
him.  Illustrate  from  the  teachings  of  the  Apostle  James,  that  our  very  "journey- 
ings,"  our  very  **  buyinss  and  sellings,"  must  be  made  dependent  on  the  Lord's  will 
(Jas.  iv.  13—15).  Modem  sentiment  tends  to  limit  the  sphere  within  which  prayer 
is  appropriate;  it  is  assumed  that  it  should  not  deal  with  the  material  world,  which 
is  under  fixed  law.  But  law  is  not  something  out  beyond  the  control  of  God— or  we 
misname  him ;  for  there  is  something  greater  than  he.  All  laws  are  within  the  Ghxi- 
sphere,  so  we  may  **  inquire  of  God  "  about  them. 

IL  What  is  God's  claim  within  his  sphebb  ?  That  everything  shall  be  referred 
to  him,  and  in  everything  his  counsel  and  direction  shall  be  taken.  Illustrate  from 
David's  feeling  of  the  claims  of  the  theocracy.  The  entire  life  of  the  Israelitish 
nation  being  the  God-sphere,  absolutely  everything  had  to  be  referred  to  him,  and  he 
recognized  and  punished  all  failures  to  meet  his  claim.  By  the  mouth  of  his  prophet 
the  claim  is  distinctly  expressed :  **  For  all  these  things  will  I  be  inquired  of  by  the 
house  of  Israel,  to  do  it  for  them."  This  claim  may  be  shown  in  detailed  application 
to  the  circumstances  of  our  lives.  The  kind  of  reference  to  God  takes  different  forms 
for  different  kinds  of  things. 

III.  The  obedibhgb  of  men  is  better  tested  bt  the  little  than  bt  the 
GREAT.  Practical  observation  of  life  proves  that  it  is  harder  to  do  little  things  in  a 
right  spirit  than  to  do  great  ones.  Many  a  man  stands  well  before  mighty  swords  and 
spears,  and  falls  before  a  pebble  slung  bv  a  youth.  Few  of  us  can  stand  the  serious 
testing  of  the  commoner  scenes  and  relations  of  our  lives.  Tet  the  Divine  testings 
come  most  frequently  in  connection  with  them ;  and  sometimes  God  even  makes  us  do 
nothing-~wB\t ;  and  he  watches  to  see  whether,  even  concerning  this,  we  will  ''inquire 
of  him."— B.  T. 

Yer.  12. — Ijoyailty  to  the  one  Ood.  It  is  noted  that,  in  the  excitement  of  their  defeat 
the  Philistines  left  behind  them  their  idol-images,  and  that,  as  a  mae  and  prudent  act 
as  well  as  a  truly  religious  one,  David  had  them  all  destroyed  by  fire.  This  at  once 
made  a  public  testimony  of  their  vanity  and  helplessness,  and  prevented  their  exerting 
any  evil  influence  on  David's  own  people,  whose  history  shows  that  they  were  very 
sensitive  to  the  attractions  of  idolatry.  "  The  practice  of  carrying  images  of  Uie  gods 
to  battle  was  common  among  the  nations  of  antiquity,  and  arose  from  the  belief  that 
there  was  virtue  in  the  images  themselves,  and  that  militaiv  success  would  be  obtained 
by  means  of  them.  A  similar  belief  seems  to  have  induced  the  Israelites  to  carry  the 
ark  of  the  covenant  with  them  to  battle  in  the  days  of  Eli."  Comparing  this  passage 
with  the  answering  one  in  2  Sam.  v.  21 ,  margin,  we  may  assume  that  the  images  were 
carried  as  trophies  to  Jerusalem,  and,  after  being  exhibited  there,  were  destroyed  by  fiie. 
David's  loyalty  to  the  one  God  was  shown  in  the  vigorous  destruction  of  these  rival 
gods.  This,  however,  must  not  be  confoimded  with  religious  persecution,  David  had 
a  recognized  right  to  deal  as  he  pleased  with  the  spoils  of  battle ;  and  he  was  in  no 
way  boimd  to  recognize  the  sanctity  which  the  Philistines  might  be  pleased  to  attach 
to  their  idol-figures.  Distinguish  oetween  the  destruction  of  idol-figures  and  the  per- 
secution of  idoT-worshipperB.  Man  is  not  alone.  He  has  often  to  act  for  others,  for  the 
family,  the  class,  or  the  nation.  In  this  way  David  acted  on  this  occasion.  Show 
what  idol-gods  may  be  about  now,  within  reach  of  our  children,  etc.    We  do  not  call 


230  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa    [ch.  xiv.  1— 17. 


them  idoh,  but  they  are  such  if  they  attract  and  draw  away  from  God,  or  push  him 
out  of  his  rightful  place— first  in  heart  and  lip  and  life. 

L  Man  may  kot  intebfebe  with  his  neiohboub's  beligion.  That  is,  not  in  any 
physical  way.  He  may  by  moral  forces — ^by  argument,  by  persnasion,  but  not  by 
force,  in  either  private  spheres  of  social  life  or  public  spheres  of  law  and  magistracy* 
And  yet  it  has  taken  all  the  Christian  ages  to  get  this  truth  taught  to  men,  and  it  is 
only  half  learned  yet.  A  modern  preacher  says,  **  What  a  blunder  persecution  for 
religious  convictions  is  1  Has  there  ever  been  a  disability  put  upon  religious  belief 
has  there  ever  been  a  persecution  short  of  absolute  extermination,  that  has  not 
strengthened  the  faith  it  was  meant  to  discourage  ?  Persecution  drives  men  in  upon 
their  convictions — makes  them  hold  more  firmly  by  their  principles."  Tet  we  must  as 
clearly  see  that  we  are  held  responsible  for  onr  neighbour's  religion,  so  £tf  as  the  use  of 
moral  forces  is  concerned.  The  sense  of  this  responsibility  is  the  impulse  of  all 
missionary  labour.  We  must  preach  Christ's  kingdom,  and  with  all  moral  suaaon 
"  compel  them  to  come  in." 

n.  Man  hat  keep  his  neighboub's  beligion  fbom  intebfebino  with  his.  And 
in  resisting  he  may  find  it  necessary  to  use  physical  forces.  David  would  not  have 
been  justified  in  going  to  PhiUstia  and  burning  other  people's  idols.  Had  he  done  so, 
he  would  have  b^n  very  properly  resisted.  But  when  these  idols  were  left  behind,  as 
the  spoil  of  the  victors,  he  was  quite  justified  in  destroying  them,  and  so  preventing 
them  from  becoming  a  snare  to  his  people. 

Apply  to  the  agencies  of  moral  and  religious  mischief  in  our  day,  such  as  evil 
literature,  self-indidgent  pleasures,  infidel  maxims,  etc.  We  are  bound  in  our  loyalty 
to  Gk>d  to  keep  these  away — to  take  them  and  burn  them,  if  need  be,  and  so  keep 
them  away  from  our  children  and  our  servants.  We  should  realize  that,  if  the  day  of 
idolatrous  images  is  passed,  things — artistic  things,  symbolic  things,  literary  things-^ 
may  and  often  do  become  the  most  fascinating  and  degrading  idol-forces. — ^B.  T. 

Yer.  15. — Signs  and  sounds  of  the  Divine  presence.  The  circumstances  connected 
with  the  second  enterprise  of  the  Philistines  are  more  fully  detailed ;  and  it  seems  the 
design  of  the  chronicler  to  remind  us  that,  in  answer  to  prayer  and  dependence,  God 
may  not  only  give  a  general  approval,  but  also  minute  and  careful  directions,  and  such 
as  may  involve  waiting  on  him  and  watching  for  the  right  situation  and  the  right 
moment.  In  some  manifest  and  impressive  way  the  Divine  presence  would  be  declared, 
and  the  Divine  will  made  known.  Often  God  finds  it  necessary  to  teach  his  people 
that  he  must  be  waited /or  as  well  as  waited  on.  A  sound  as  of  marching  or  stepping 
would  presently  be  heard ;  it  would  be  a  rustling  of  the  leaves  of  the  baca  trees,  as  if 
a  wind  were  passing  through  them ;  and  this  would  be  the  sign  that  the  heavenly  host 
had  come  to  assure  the  victory ;  and  immediately  upon  hearing  this  sign,  David  was  to 
act  with  vigour ;  he  was  to  "  bestir  himself,"  or  be  sharp.  *'  The  sound  of  a  going  in 
the  tops  of  the  trees"  had  a  double  significance.  It  was  the  sound  of  the  viewless 
march  of  '*  the  Lord  going  out  before  him  to  smite  the  host  of  the  Philistines."  It 
was  the  sound  of  God  going  forth  to  smite  their  gods,  even  as  he  smote  the  gods  of 
Egypt  (comp.  Ps.  xxix.  4). 

I.  The  Divine  presence  responds  to  man's  dependence  and  pbateb.  To  his 
dependence,  which  is  the  appropriate  state  of  mind  and  feeling.  To  his  prayer,  which 
is  the  appropriate  mode  of  expressing  the  right  feeling.  That  which  shuts  a  man's  door 
against  God  is  self-confidence.  If  a  man  feels  that  he  can  "go  the  warfare  at  his  o?ni 
charges/'  he  does  not  need  God,  and  God  can  but  leave  him  alone  to  learn  the  lesson  of 
his  own  self-impotence.  The  assurance  on  which  the  dependent  man  may  rest  is  this : 
'*  To  that  man  will  I  look,  and  with  him  will  I  dwell,  who  is  humble,  and  contrite  of 
heart,  and  trembleth  at  my  word."  If  we  but  win  and  maintain  this  right  attitude, 
then  we  may  have  perfect  confidence  that  Qod  is  with  us,  although  the  confidence 
may  be  more  a  matter  of  faith  than  of  feeling,  God  was  really  with  David,  though 
the  sensible  sign  of  his  presence  did  not  come  until,  when  the  wind  was  still,  there  was 
that  suggestive  "  sound  of  a  going  in  the  tops  of  the  mulberry  trees." 

II,  The  Divine  presence  may  be  recognized  only  in  results.  It  sometimes 
seems  right  to  God  to  make  us  go  quite  through  our  working-time  only  holding  the 
faith  of  his  presence  and  help,  and  not  in  any  way  aided  by  sensible  signs.    But  such 


CH.  XV.  1— 29J      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


231 


faith  is  a  practical  inspiration  and  strength.  It  is  **  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for, 
the  evidence  of  things  not  seen."  Sometimes  the  issues  and  results  plainly  show  that 
God  was  with  us ;  and  the  final  issues  of  life  will  have  this  for  the  conviction  they 
seal :  "  It  was  a  good  way  wherein  the  Lord  our  Ood  led  tu," 

III.  Thb  Divine  pbesengb  mat  bb  bbcoonized  in  oonscious  btbength  fob  dutt. 
This  truth  is  effectively  illustrated  in  St.  Paul  (2  Cor.  zii.  7 — 9).  He  was  taught  to 
see  God  with  him  just  in  this,  that  '*  strength  was  made  perfect  in  his  weakness."  In 
view  of  the  practical  character  of  our  life,  it  is  a  more  important  thing  to  have  strength 
for  doing  than,  without  strength,  mere  oomfort  of  feeling.  And  yet  men  yearn  most 
for  sensible  signs,  and  undervalue  the  inward  strengthenings. 

lY.  The  Divine  pbesengb  mat  be  indicated  bt  oBAdouB  signs.  As  in  the  case  of 
our  Lord  at  his  baptism  and  at  his  transBguration.  Also  in  his  great  agony  in 
Gtethsemane,  there  appeared  an  ''  angel  from  heaven,  strengthening  him."  On  several 
occasions  of  St.  Paul's  life  he  was  favoured  with  special  visions.  With  the  pious 
servant  of  Gk)d  we  may  say,  '*  The  best  of  aU  is  that  GK)d  is  with  us ; "  but  we  may 
also  ask  for  the  comforting  sense  of  that  presence  through  the  aid  of  gracious  signs. 
And  God  will  grant  these,  both  for  our  own  sakes  and  for  the  sake  of  others  who  may  be 
blessed  through  us.  While  watchful  against  extravagance  and  superstition^  we  ought 
not  to  deny  the  truth  of  visions  and  signs  and  Divine  communications  granted  nowa- 
days to  God's  people.  There  might  well  be  a  fuller  expectancy  of  direct  dealings  with 
dependent  and  prayerful  men,  manifest  Divine  leading  by  inward  impulse,  and 
providential  direction,  and  signs  plain  enough  to  sensitive  souls.— R.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XV. 


Yer.  1. — ^The  contents  of  this  verse  and 
the  following  verses  up  to  the  twenty-fifth 
have  no  parallel  in  the  Book  of  Samuel, 
and  excite  suggestion  respecting  the  dif- 
ferent objects  with  which  the  compiler  of 
Clironicles  wrote,  as  compared  with  those 
of  the  author  of  the  former  work.  They 
also  direct  fresh  attention  to  the  sources 
upon  which  they  drew.  Thb  history  of  the 
preparations  made  for  the  reception  of  the 
ark,  and  for  its  safe  and  religious  escort 
into  the  city,  is  now  proceeded  with.  These 
preparations  occupied  the  three  months,  or 
part  of  tlie  three  months,  spoken  of  in  ch. 
ziii.  14.  The  houses  may  have  been  both 
his  own  (ch.  xiv.  1)  and  the  buildings 
referred  to  in  oh.  xi.  8  and  2  Sam.  v.  9.  The 
old  tent,  or  tobemoele,  is  repeatedly  alluded 
to,asinch.zvi.39;  2Chron.iS.  It  will  be 
remembered  that  the  tabernacle  established 
by  Joshua  at  Sliiloh  remained  there  till  the 
time  of  Eli,  and  the  ark  within  it  (1  Sam. 
lit  8).  Afterwards  we  find  it  removed  to 
Nob,  for  there  David  ate  the  shewbrend 
(1  Sam.  xxL  6).  From  thence,  very  possibly 
after  the  savage  slaughter  of  the  priests  by 
the  order  of  Stul,  it  was  removed,  and  we 
find  it  at  Gibeon,aoooTdiog  to  the  above  refers 
enoes.  Here  at  Gibeon  was  an  altar  and 
**  high  place,"  which,  in  the  earlier  time  of 
Solomon,  formed  the  chief  religious  centre. 
The  wanderings  of  the  ark  already  given 
fromShiloh,  through  Philistia  to  Beth-she- 
mesh,  Kiijath-jearim,  Perez-uzzab,  now  land 


it  in  this  tent  in  Jerusalem.  It  is  no  more 
sheltered  in  the  tabernacle.  But  the  ta- 
bernacle, as  well  as  the  ark,  was  ultimately 
brought  to  the  new-built  temple  of  Solomon 
(1  Kings  viii.  4 ;  ch.  ix.  19 ;  2  Chron.  i  4). 

Yer.  2. — ^This  verse  together  with  vers. 
12—15  show  that  the  severe  lesson  of  the 
destruction  of  Uzzah  had  been  laid  to  hearty 
and  had  made  David  supremely  anxious  to 
take  better  counsel  of  the  Law.  Uzzah, 
though  possibly  the  son  of  a  Levite,  more 
probably  of  a  Hivite  (Josh.  ix.  7,  17),  was 
not  a  priest,  nor  is  there  any  sufficient 
evidence  that  he  was  a  Levite ;  and  most 
distinct  was  the  order  of  the  Law  (Numb, 
i.  51-53;  uL  29—82;  iv.  15—20),  that 
''when  the  tabernacle  setteth  forwiurd,  the 
Levites  shall  take  it  down ;  and  when  the 
tabernacle  is  to  be  pitched,  the  Levites  shall 
set  it  up;  and  the  stranger  that  oometh 
nigh  shall  be  put  to  death."  So  the  sons 
of  Kohath  are  to  come  to  bear  the  sanctuary 
with  all  its  sacred  vessels,  **  but  they  shaU 
not  touch  any  holy  thine,  lest  they  die." 
Many  things  were  allowed  to  be  carried  on 
waggons  under  the  charge  of  the  Gershonites 
and  Merarites,  but  the  strict  contents  of  the 
sanctuary  were  to  be  borne  in  a  specified 
manner  by  the  Eohathites. 

Yer.  8. — ^AU  Israel ;  i.e,  bb  before,  renre- 
sentatives  of  all  Israel.  So  ver.  25  decides : 
**  The  elders  of  Israel,  and  the  captains  over 
thousands,  went  to  bring  up  the  ark  of  the 
covenant  of  the  Lord." 

Vers.  4— 11.— This  classification  of  the 
dhlldren  of  Aaroiit  as  the  special  priests, 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CURONICLEa     [ch.  xt.  1— 2d. 


mill  ortheLeritM,  iiir«inHtuntIy  o)w(Tvcd(ch. 
xii.  *Jt>.  L'7:  xxvii.  17).  Tin*  mention  of  the 
nix  ri-|irriM-ntitivu  I^'viiifiil  faiiiiliefl  follnwi. 
That  of  Kohath  (vit.  5)  tukei  the  lead, 
In-i'iiiiiii^  Diouuh  veoiintl  in  onler  of  birth 
(<{in.  xlvi.  11:  Kx.mI.vi.  IC— ll»:  ch.  vi.  1— 
l\0\  \i»  nriiHtly  iiniKirhmcf  pivn  it  always 
llrnt  rank.  'J'n  tho  Niino  head  l)eloni;ed  also 
thn-4t  f>f  tho  n'lniiiniiiR  tivo  fiimilios,  vis. 
Hebron  (vrr.  \))  utul  Unlel  (vcr.  10),  who  were 
hrotlMrH,  uH  lH*in};  Uith  boiis  of  Kohath 
(Kxoii.  vi.  IS):  aviil  Eliiaphan,  who,  though 
ion  of  Tzzit'l  (Kxod.  vi.  22\  had  oome  to 
n 'I  in 'III 'I  it  u  diMiiiot  family  (Numb.  iii.  30). 
Tht>  othrr  tw(t  riH}uirtil  to  c«>mplete  the  vix 
II  n>  Ataiah  (vor.  (>)  of  the  houio  of  Mornri, 
nn«l  Joel  (vor.  7)  nf  the  houae  of  Gershom. 
Tho  fi  pn'mMitutivt'B,  tlien,  of  these  six 
riiiiii1ii>K.  witli  tho  com|4iny  of  the  brethren 
ItfliuiKMi^  to  nioh  of  thom,  aud  the  two 
luioHtH  Zadok  and  AUathar  (ver.  11),  are 
now  hiiiiiiikmxmI  into  tlio  pn^sence  of  David, 
til  nM'i'iM*  A  nhoit  but  •{n'oiul  charge. 

YiT.  V^.  Sanctify  yonnelTea,  both  ye  and 
your  brethren.  Nothing  of  tho  appointtni 
obirrviinivM  of  tho  I^w  arc  to  be  omit- 
IihI  thin  tiino.  as  in  tho  ha«to  and  want 
of  pionuHlitntitin  of  tlio  fomior  occasion 
{V.xxxl  XIX.  Tl;  xxviii.41;  xl.  Ki;  Lev.  Tiii. 
rJ:  XX.  7:  xxi.  S: 'Jilmni.  v.  11:  xxix.  15). 
ThrM»  "ttrtiiotifvinirH**  iNrnMntitl  of  different 
otHM'i\nniM^!i,  llt^^•nlin^  to  tho  |vrMm  and  the 
iMTiinii'ii.  but  l;iri;oly  of  nblutions  of  the 
ImhIv.  \\:4Khini:  of  thi'  olotho*,  and  kivping 
i>«  piiniti*  from  nil  muuriil  and  tvn^moniul 
rini»i  H  1*1'  nnolrunui  M  in  iTilinary  cacM  s 
of  I.o\itio:il  HrrMiv.  That  ye  may  brings 
HP  tho  ark.  Tlio  wonl  hrix*  on\ploy*>d  for 
•' i»riii>:  "  iii  not  tho  «imo  \k\\\\  tho  "carry** 
of  >«iH  1  iiiid  *J.  Ibit  tho  fi«1Iowini;  vorst'ji 
(Kt  l.'O  ni^'ni  to  intinmto  tii:)t.  whatovortho 
rxni't  miiKM)  for  ^hioh  V/.-uh  had  Ihmu 
|H*nmvtoriIy  cut  otV,  tho  li\ito*  had  rtK-.o 
Imom  to  MiHuo  in  not  Kunotit'xin^  thomsolvcs 
to  cwru  I  ho  nik  l^T  its  staves  iu  tho  way 
«Ti}:initily  itppointcvl. 

V«  r.  \'X  rhi;<  vorsc  purpi^rt*  to  f;iy  th.it 
tho  I.i-xitrH  hitd  Nvn  dilu'init  in  tluir  duty 
in  tho  doubli' MMisoof  not  liavin;;thcn»M*lvo* 
«'\rlniiivi'1y  nndoitakrn  tho  nnuo^al  of  tho 
aik.  iindnot  hn\in>;  cxivuttnl  that  removal 
aflcr  ihedusvrder. 

Vor.  i:».--^^S»  SCO  F.xivl.  xxr.  i:^—!,"^: 
NumK  iv.  1^:  vii.  l>.>  It  iK  phiin  that  fnmi 
tho  tlrut  Ftn'w  wiw  lai.l  n|s»n  tlio  rinirs  and 
tho  htaviH  thnni^h  thom  bv  lahioh  tho  ark 
was  \o  U»  oarriisl.  aj«  a'^M^  tb.o  "  tablo 
of  shittim  wi>y|  "  ^Kxisl.  xx>.  2t?~2,<>  and 
tho  **alt;»r"  (K\i\l.  xxvii.  4 — 7>  and  the 
"  altar  of  inci^n**^ "  i^KxihI.  xxx.  4.  »">\  How- 
ever, tlK^»  rinpj  and  staves  vort^  m^t  fv>und  I 
m  tho  permanent  fumituiv  of  the  temple,  : 
except  only  for  the  ark. 

Vera.  Its  17.— To  appoint  their  brethrtato 


be  the  ilngen.  Thia  wna  the  flnt  afep 
towards  what  we  have  alrendj  read  in  eh. 
▼i.  31—39, 44 ;  ix.  33,  34  (where  see  notes). 

Ver.  18.— Ben.  This  word  is  eitiwr 
altogether  an  aocidental  interpolation,  or 
a  remnant  of  some  statement  of  the  pft- 
trouymic  character  regarding  Zsdiiriak. 
Another  indication  of  the  state  of  the  text 
in  this  Terse  is  to  be  found  in  the  probaUe 
omission  of  the  name  Ataziak  of  tot.  SI, 
after  JeieL  It  will  be  obaenred  that  no  tnase 
of  this  word  Ben  is  fonnd  in  the  repeated 
list  of  ver.  20. 

Vers.  19— 21.— ThepsdtaristoaAkBoft 
(ver.  20X  and  harps  on  tiie  Shsmliiitli  to  exssl 
(ver.  21),  are  descriptions  the  ezaot  signifi- 
oance  of  which  is  not  yet  satisfiMtorily 
ascertained.  Yet  their  oonneotion  in  a 
serios  of  four  divisions  of  mnsieal  doty  does 
throw  some  light  npon  them.  These  four 
verses  manifeetly  purport  to  describe  a 
special  part  to  be  performed  by  those  of 
whom  they  respectively  speak.  Gesenioi 
explains  pmdUriu  on  AlamoQi  to  mean  such 
instruments  as  savoured  of  virvin  tone  or 
piti'h,  t.0.  high  as  compared  with  the  lower 
pitch  of  men's  voices.  This  lower  pitch 
he  mnsiflers  intimated  by  the  word  ''Sh^ 
minitli,"  literally,  ih€  eighth,  or  odave.  The 
added  expression,  **  to  excel,"  need  scaroely 
be,  with  him,  understood  to  mean  *■  to  take 
the  lead  musically,"  but  may  be  read 
generally  to  mark  their  supassing  quality. 

Ver.  22. — For  song.  There  is  considerable 
diversity  of  opinion  as  to  the  meaning  of 
thi:!i  word.  Si^me  think  its  meaning  to  be 
**in  the  carrying  (Ktrca)"  ».e.   of  the  ark. 

Its  exact  po^iti'-^n  here  seems  not  unfavourable 
t(^  i«uch  interpretation.  On  the  other  hand, 
it!)  ('Coition  in  ver.  27  seems  conclusively  to 
pi'int  to  the  traniilation  of  the  8eptuagint 
and  of  our  Authorized  Version  in  this  place 
as  the  correct  one.  Dr.  Murphy,  however, 
to  e»oapo  this,  tl links  **  with  the  singers  **  in 
\\r.  27  to  be  a  ^copyist's  inadvertent 
n-jHtition.** 

Vir.  28.— Berechiah  and  Bkanah  It 
ap)x\ir9  fiom  the  following  verse  that  there 
wa:»  a«8v>  another  couple  of  doorkeepers  (l.e. 
piTsons  to  protect  the  openings  of  the  ark, 
that  it  should  not  be  opened),  vis.  Obed- 
e\1o:n  and  Jthiah, 

Vi  r.  24. — Between  these  couples  probably 
went  tiie  seven  priests  blowing  the  trumpets 
^NumK  X.  1 — i>).  These  trumpets  were  of 
filial  id  silver,  of  one  piece,  were  straight  and 
nan\^w,  anil  hail  an  exoandeti  mouth.  They 
are  found  on  the  arch  of  Titus,  and  are 
diSoriUxl  by  Jo>ephus.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  trumivt,  mt^re  ci-»rrectly  rendered  "cor- 
net '*  Cs^r.  ns  di>tinguiehed  from  our 
T7>;r"),  which  was  used  for  proclaiming 
the  jubilee  for  announcing  the  new  year 


CH.  XV.  1-29.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


233 


for  sentinel  and  other  ipeoial  lignalfl,  and 
for  war,  was  shaped  like  a  rain's  horn,  and 
probably  made  of  the  same.  The  particular 
appropriateness  of  the  use  of  the  former  on 
thu  occasion  is  manifest,  in  addition  to  the 
fact  that  they  were  the  appointed  trumpets 
for  the  journeying  of  the  camp  and  a  fortiori 
of  the  ark  itself  at  a  time  so  essentially 
religions  as  the  present.  Tet,  as  we  learn 
firom  ver.  28,  the  latter  were  used  as  well, 
and  titfnMU,  p9aUerie$,  and  harpt.  The 
original  number  of  the  silver  trumpets  was 
two  only,  and  tiiey  were  to  be  sounded 
strictly  by  the  anointed  priests,  sons  of 
As^on,at  all  events  when  their  employment 
was  within  the  sanctuary.  Their  employ- 
ment, however,  grew  far  more  general,  and 
we  find  (2  Chzon.  v.  12)  that  their  number 
had  n'flen  to  a  hundred  and  twenty  (so  too 
2  Chion.  xiii.  12 ;  Neh.  xu.  35).  For  Obed- 
e^om,  the  doorkeeper,  see  ch.  xvi  38 ;  and 
therewith  note  on  oh.  xiii.  14. 

Ver.  26.— This  verse  with  the  following 
four  are  paralleled  by  2  Sam.  vL  12—16 
The  contents  of  this  verse  in  particular 
reveal  the  intense  anxiety  and  the  trembling 
fear  and  awe  with  which  the  sacred  burden 
was  now  again  lifted.  A  world  of  meaning 
and  of  feeling  for  all  those  present  at  least 
underlay  the  expression.  Whan  Ood  helped 
the  Levitei  that  bare  the  ark  (comp.  1 
Sam.  vi  14,  15;  2  Sam.  vi.  13,  18).  The 
offoring  of  seTsn  bnlloeks  and  seven  rams 
is  thought  by  some  to  be  additional  to 
David's  offering,  when  be  had  gone  **  six 
paces"  (2  Sam.  vi  13).  Much  more  probably, 
however,  the  "six  paces"  meant,  not  six 
footsteps,  but  six  lengths  that  would  make 
some  distance. 

Ver.  27. — Several  things  in  this  verse 
indicate  a  somewhat  uncenain  and  unsteady 
selection  of  particulars  by  the  compiler 
from  his  original  sources.  The  natural 
reading  of  the  verse  would  seem  to  say  that 
David  and  all  those  Levites  who  bore  the 
ark,  and  the  singers,  and  Ghenaniah,  all  wore 
tiie  robe  of  byssns,  while  David  had,  in 
addition,  the  ephod  of  linen.  Tet  it  is 
unUkdy  that  all  did  wear  the  robe.  Again, 
the  Hebrew  text  exhibits  no  preposition 
before  tiie  singers,  on  the  second  occasion  of 
the  oconrrence  of  the  expression  in  this  verse. 
Yet  little  sense  can  be  found  without  a 
preposition.    The  robe  was  not  distinctively 


a  priest's  garment  (1  Sam.  xviiL  4 ;  xxiv.  5, 
12;  2  Sam.xm.  8;  Jobi20;  ii  121  though 
priests  did  wear  it  The  robe  of  oyssus  is 
spoken  of  only  here;  2  Chron.  v.  12;  and 
Esth.  viiL  15.  Byssutf  however,  is  spoken  of 
as  material  for  other  purposes  in  oh.  iv  21 ; 
2  Chron.  u.  14;  iii.  14;  Esth.  L  6;  Ezek. 
xxvii.  16.  The  ej^hodt  on  the  other  hand,  was 
no  doubt  distinctively  a  high  priest* s  garment 
CExod.  xxviiL  4 — 12),  though  we  read  of 
Samuel  wearing  one  (1  Sam.  ii  18,  28),  and 
of  David  doing  the  same,  as  on  this  occasion. 
The  line  linen  (pa),  in  the  flnt  clause  of 

this  verse,  is  not  the  same  with  that  (-|a) 
in  the  last  clause.  The  first  clause  of  this 
verse  (which  makes  the  last  clause  some- 
what redundant)  bears  some  resemblance 
in  letters  to  the  fourteenth  verse  of  2  Chron. 
vi.  first  clause,  which  means,  **  and  David 
danced  with  all  his  might,"  and  the  two 
clauses  exactiv  answer  to  one  another  in 
position— another  suggestion  of  an  uncer- 
tain text  here. 

Ver.  28.~Xaking  a  noise.  This  descrip- 
tion qualifies  the  cymbals  alone,  and  should 
rather  appear  in  our  translation  as  *'  noise- 
making  cymbals." 

Ver.  29. — ^Thus  briefly  is  given  by  our 
compiler  what  occupies  five  verses  ^  Sam. 
vi.  19,  20—23)  in  the  Book  of  Samuel. 
Neither  of  the  words  here  rendered  <i^«w<«g 
and  playinff  (but  which  would  be  better 
rendered  ** leaping  and  dancing")  is  the 
same  with  those  employed  in  2  Sam.  vi.  14, 
16,  where  our  Authorised  Version  rendering 
is  **  dancing  "  and  ^  leaping  and  dancing  " 
respectively.  The  word  in  both  of  those 
verses  that  represents  the  dancing,  does 
oorrectly  so  represent,  but  is  a  somewhat 
generic  form,  as  it  carries  the  idea  of  dancing 
in  a  circle.  The  reason  of  Miohal  ''des- 
pisiuff  David  in  her  heart"  can  only  be 
found  in  the  unreason  and  the  irreligion  of 
that  heart  itself.  She  was  a  type  of  not  a 
few,  who  despise  devotion,  enthusiasm,  and 
above  all  practical  liberality  and  generosity, 
on  the  part  of  any  individual  of  their  own 
family,  when  these  are  shown  to  (yhrist  and 
his  Church,  and  when  they  think  they  may 
be  a  trifle  the  poorer  for  it.  or  when  they 
feel  that  the  liberality  and  devotion  of  an- 
other exposes  their  own  **  poverty  ^  in  both 
these  respects. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 29.^'A  chapter  of  practical  repentance.  There  are  few  happier,  and  perhapi 
no  better,  chapters  in  any  one  s  life  than  the  chapter  of  practical  repentance.  To  have 
to  sorrow  over  the  past  and  to  undo  it  is,  no  doubt,  the  incident  of  a  fallen  nature  and 
of  a  frail,  imperfect  life.  When  once,  however,  the  necessity  has  arisen,  then  to  sorrow 
no  barren  sorrow,  but  to  add  to  it  reparation,  alteration,  amendment,  is  at  one  and  the 


231  TUB  FIKST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa     [cr.  xt.  1-..29. 

parae  time  to  flinv  a  juKt,  niAnly  deBance  at  the  m^rcilew  spirit  of  remorae  and  to  pay 
the  rjKrritMl  hoMia:;c  in  ^inh1ii('.<.s  and  to  God.  The  life  of  many  a  good  man  owns  to 
many  a  fiin,  luany  a  folly ,  an<),  when  he  goes  not  so  far  as  these,  to  many  a  great  and  to- 
be-regret  tc<l  niiHt:ike.  But  the  roost  marked  differences  between  the  good  man  and  ih» 
had  are  then  to  !«  M-on.  This  goes  from  had  to  worse,  and  the  tangled  Tictim  ere  Terr 
lon{!  becomes  the  n.t'uriiful  and  miserable  sacrifioe.  That  goes  from  bad  with  tear,  witn 
striving,  with  prayer,  toward  the  lost  or  awhile  eclipsed  good.  The  rery  mark  of  tha 
roan  made  divinely  wise  ia  discerned  in  the  repentance  wherewith  he  repents,  the 
promptness  of  the  8orn)w  and  the  fear  inapire«1,  the  deliberateness  and  the  thorou^nsM 
of  the  amendment  made  or  attempted.  This  chapter  gives  the  history  of  such  a 
npcntance  and  of  its  happy  consequences.    Notice^ 

I.  The  exceedino  fear  and  intense  obiep  op  fibst  momestb  op  paxluvb  asD 

PUNIHIIMENT  HAD  NOT  BEEN  SUFFERED  TO  OTEBWBELlf  A5D  TO  PB06TRATS  MIKD  ASD 

EVEBOT.  Given  a  little  time  to  n-cuver  nature's  tone — some  three  months  had  by  tkia 
time  passed^-and  something  better  than  nature  did  also  return.  A  willing  thooefat- 
fuluess  sui«rvencd ;  deep  searchings  of  the  heart,  of  the  written  Word,  and  of  what  had 
been  actuslly  <lone  had  their  way;  and  convictions  just  and  right  and  wholesome  wers 
formed.  There  is  always  one  great  model  exhibited  in  Scripture  of  repentance.  To  Saal*s 
exceeding  fear  and  intense  and  Kudden  visitation  there  needed  some  interval  for  reooveiyp 
and  such  iiit<'r\'al  was  granted.  Even  where  it  may  be  possible,  it  is  not  advisaUe  to 
act,  when  under  the  iotlucncc  of  the  extremes  of  feeling  when  the  storm  of  mental 
emotion  is  at  its  height.  Hut  it  is  infinitely  hazardous  to  neglect  the  right  time  of  action; 
and,  HO  sof;n  as  the  first  intensity  of  feeling  is  passed,  how  many  have  waited  proetnte 
till  all  disfottition  to  rouse  to  altered  and  improved  action  has  also  passed! 

II.  Frank,  ofek,  and  even  ruDLio  confession  op  the  srbor  that  had  beest. 
David  now  lays  down  the  Law  (vers.  2, 13)  in  the  very  act  of  confession  of  that  Law 
broken.  lie  lays  down  the  Law,  but  not  out  of  his  own  lip->by  distinct  and  emphatic 
quotation  of  it  Keif.  lie  now  saw  and  read  the  Law  exact,  and  he  saw  how  far  distant 
the  conduct  fur  which  ho  was  in  an  eminent  degree  responsible,  and  of  which  he  had 
litifrally  been  fort,  hiu\  Htraycd  from  the  letter  and  spirit  of  that  exact  Law.  This  is  in 
fact  wliat  Htili  in  (le<;i>e8t  sense,  and  in  the  deepest  hidings  of  our  spiritual  nature,  pro- 
duces conviction  of  tlic  most  spiritual  kind— conviction  of  sin.  When  the  eye  of  the 
ctmwAVAiCfs  can  !«  ^:iit)c<l  for  a  moment  to  see  tliis  si^ht,  and  to  notice  the  wide  difference 
U-twcen  a  holy  ]K;rie<'t  Law  nnd  the  actual  life,  which  should  lie  under  its  governance 
but  di^es  not  ko,  tlic  Spirit  of  God  has  gained  this  end— our  conviction. 

III.   A  CONFKrtHION  THAT  DOES  NOT  SHELVE  THE  BLAME  UFOH  OTHERS,  BUT  AOCEPTB  FTB 

OWN  FULL  HHARR.  Dsvid  ciiiotes  the  Law  that  concerns  the  occasion  (ver.  2).  He 
exhorts  *'  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  the  Levites  **  to  sanctify  themselves  and  prepare  in 
nil  reHjiectH  acconlinK  to  the  Law  for  the  great  and  holy  work  now  before  them  (ver.  12). 
Ho  also  (\iHts  not  shrink  from  addressing  these  pointedly,  as  those  who  were  ofiBcially 
and  in  their  own  |)orwjns  to  blame.  But  he  does  not  finish  his  remonstrating  and 
warnin;;  sentence  without  dihtinctly  including  himself  among  those  in  fault,  and  super- 
seding ^^ye"  by  **u>e"  (ver.  13).  There  was  never  any  biure  verbal  confession  of  sin 
more  open  than  tliat  of  Adam,  but  there  was  never  any  confession  more  worthless,  for 
he  wished  to  lay  all  the  essence  of  the  sin  on  Eve.  The  same  may  be  said  of  Eve,  as 
regards  her  tempter,  the  serpent  That  kind  of  confession  of  sin  is  nothing  worth.  It 
hiiH  no  semblance  of  mcritoriousness  in  it.  No  sacred  virtue  inheres  in  it.  A  double 
depth  (t(  the  heart*s  hardness,  a  double  sluggishness  of  conscience,  sleep,  a  doable  self- 
deception  is  there.  Short  of  this,  however,  there  are  not  a  few,  whose  it  is  to  exhort 
and  warn  others,  who  will  largely  forget  in  spirit,  even  when  not  in  letter,  to  include 
themselves  in  needful  reproof  and  in  united  confession.  Yet  how  often  is  the  leader  of 
the  ilock  doubly  answerable,  in  reality  doubly  blamable,  and  in  deep  truth  tenfold 
called  u()on  to  make  humblest  and  most  penitent  confession  1 

IV.   A  REMARKABLE  AND  SINCERE  READINESS  ON  THE  PART  OF  ALL  TO  REPAIR  WHAT 

HAD  BEEN  AMiHH.  If  we  ofteu  think  too  well  of  ourselves  individually,  and  sometimes 
speak  too  forgetfully  of  the  inherent  disease  of  human  nature,  yet  we  are  frequently  dis- 
jNJsed  to  underrate  the  effect  of  the  word  that  is  spoken  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord,  of  the 
faithful  appeal  that  is  pointed  pUinly  but  lovingly  to  the  consciences  of  those  who  have 
been  in  error,  and  of  tne  influence  of  our  own  repenting  and  confessing  example.    Put 


CH.  XV.  1—29.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  235 

three  such  incentives  as  these  together,  and  they  will  rarely  fail  to  find  their  converts  of 
some  amongst  a  number.  Moreover,  great  as  is  the  contagion  of  evil,  as  seen  when  the 
multitude  will  flock  together  to  do  evil,  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  correspondingly  great  ii 
the  attraction  of  goodness.  The  multitude  of  those  who  worship,  the  multitude  of 
those  who  keep  the  holy  day,  the  multitude  of  those  who  join  to  work  in  and  for  the 
Lord's  temple,  literal  or  spiritual, — all  these  are  facts  as  patent,  bearing  witness  to  the 
affection  that  will  subsist  to  the  highest  ends,  within  a  multitude  l^nt  on  good,  as 
other  £Eicts  bear  patent  witness  to  the  contagion  that  works  in  a  multitude  to  do  evil. 
The  happier  aspect  of  the  multitude  is  here  before  us.  The  shepherd-king  is  shepherd- 
ing rightly,  with  truth  to  the  Law,  with  careful  warning  for  all  as  regards  the  past, 
with  a  faithful  rebuke  of  others,  and  loving  confession  of  his  own — and  the  whole 
people  concerned  are  as  one  man.  They  are  of  one  heart,  of  one  mind,  and  they  proceed 
to  oe  of  one  deed. 

y.  A  8IMILAB  BBADDTESS  ALSO  ON  THE  PART  OF  ALL  TO  AOOEPT  THE  EXACT  PLACE  AND 

DUTY  FOB  WHICH  THBT  WERE  BE8PE0TIVELY  MOST  FITTED.  This  feature  of  the  occasion 
is  shadowed  forth  in  all  the  careful  and  nice  order  of  the  proceedings  from  beginning  to 
end.  But  it  is  more  than  shadowed  forth  in  the  distinct  emphasis  of  allusions,  such  as 
those  of  vers.  16, 17,  22,  24,  which  point  to  the  hierarchy,  so  to  say,  of  office,  of  gift,  of 
grace.  The  Church  of  Grod  as  it  is  in  perpetual  quest  of  the  brotherhood  of  humanity, 
so  is  it,par%pas9Uf  perpetually  contributing  to  reproduce  the  order,  the  very  cosmos  of 
the  world.  One  of  the  grandest  evidences  of  the  presence  of  the  living  Spirit  of  God  in 
any  portion  of  the  Church  is  the  visible  presence  of  order.  St.  Paul  lovod  to  lay  stress 
upon  this :  "  Let  all  things  be  done  decently  and  in  order ; "  **  Peace  ...  as  in  all  Churches 
of  the  saints."  That  Church  of  living,  modern  times,  that  may  first  and  best  find  all 
its  members  awake,  all  ready  for  work,  each  falling  into  his  assigned  place  without 
pride  or  without  envy,  without  murmur  or  without  assumption,  will  first  and  best  prove 
the  Divine  presence  and  glory,  and  challenge  a  usefulness  and  '*  praise  in  the  earth  " 
for  Zion,  hitherto  unknown  except  by  scantiest  earnest  There  are  those  who  are  bom 
teachers  and  leaders  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  that  Church  provides  the  scene  of 
very  various  '*  skill.**  It  is,  perhaps,  because,  some  or  other  forms  of  "  skill "  are  wrongly 
disbelieved,  sceptically  distrusted,  or  even  disclaimed  in  some  quarters  in  modem  days, 
that  our  presentations  of  the  Church  often  seem  to  lack  loveliness,  to  &il  in  finding 
sphere  for  the  gift  of  all  and  each,  and  what  should  be  the  most  attractive  possible 
form  of  human  society  is  shom  of  any  native  grace.  The  light  and  fulness  and  the 
grace  and  joy  of  Ood's  Spirit  can  never  be  adeqiuUely  entertained  in  any  human  organi- 
zation, but,  on  that  very  account,  much  less  may  we  circumscribe  them  within  any 
artificial  lines  of  our  own,  making  for  commandments  of  the  wealthy  and  beauty-loving 
God  the  traditions  of  hard  and  poverty-stricken  men. 

YL  Most  obat^ful  omens  of  the  Divine  satisfaction,  appboval,  blessing.  It 
is  certain  that  Otod  has  never  been  slow  to  ackuowk'dge  the  service  that  has  been 
humbly  and  faithfully  done  to  him.  And  it  is  most  noticeable  that,  after  his  severest 
and  largest  chastisements,  swift  he  will  come  again  to  receive  and  to  welcome  those  who 
have  learnt  to  set  their  face  again  to  him.  How  glad  was  Noah,  when  he  came  forth 
from  the  ark  to  set  foot  upon  a  deluged  desolate  world,  to  find  how  the  smoke  of  his 
sacrifice  ascended,  acceptable  to  God,  and  so  accepted  by  him,  that  the  "  Lord  smelled 
a  sweet  savour,  and  said  in  his  heart,'*  as  we  are  told,  but  evidently  oud  elsewhere  as 
well,  the  worda  of  a  reassuring  gracious  promise,  on  which  the  world's  life  has  ever 
since  and  safely  hung  I  Of  God  it  may  well  be  said,  "  He  smites  to  heal."  And  so 
now,  when  all  is  done  reverently  and  in  order,  and  the  whole  scene  is  sacred  with 
obedience  and  with  practical  repentance,  God's  "  help"  was  given,  and  it  was  felt  such 
a  comfort,  such  an  encouragement,  such  a  present  performed  blessing,  that  anon  the  whole 

firocession  halts  to  offer  '*  sacrifices  of  joy,"  and  to  "  sing,  yea,  sing  praises  to  the  Lord." 
t  is  observable  that  we  are  not  told  how  the  Lord  **  helped  the  Levites  that  bare  the 
ark,"  or  in  what  signs  and  indications  they  recognized  his  helping  presence.  It  may 
have  been  that  as  they  feared  to  lift,  lest  another  fatal  stroke  of  uie  invisible  mighty 
hand  should  descend,  no  such  stroke  fell,  and  the  departing  of  fear  was  equivalent  to  a 
very  inrushing  of  joy  and  confidence.  Thdr  hands  were  stronger,  their  feet  walked 
more  steadily,  their  shoulders  rejoiced  in  their  hallowed  burden,  lliey  didn't  vtutntile^ 
The  inner  peace  and  confidence  that  GK)d's  true  and  faithful  children  and  servants  know. 


230 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa     [ch.  xy.  1—29. 


even  early  after  tliey  have  needed  the  severeat  chasteniDg,  pervade  a  quickened  and 
flenaitive  state  uf  niim],  so  as  to  produce  coovictiona,  experience,  language,  uniotelludfale 
to  the  world,  surpassing  all  its  power  to  give,  outliving  all  ita  power  to  take  away 

VII.   Th«  OUTCOMR  of  TBUKST  REPEHTANGE,  the  PUBE8T  BERVICB  OF  GoD,  THE  DAT 
OF    IIOMRRT    DELIGHT  AND    WOB8HIF,  WILL  OFTEN  EKOUQH    FIND  SOME    FORM  OF   TBB 

woELD  HKADY  TO  FLOUT  IT.  The  welUknown  form  on  this  oocaabn  needa  not  to  be 
dwelt  uiK)n.  But  two  things  under  it  are  well  worthy  of  note  and  lemembrance.  1. 
That  in  the  experience  of  that  mortifying  irritation  or  keen  grief,  aa  the  caae  may  be! 
an  honest  rctro8|)ect  will  often  show  that  we  are  wounded  by  the  thorn  we  <mce  pot 
to  our  own  side.  Moreover,  the  thorn  to  our  spirit  often  originates  with  the  fieah  imd 
the  lust  of  the  flesh— what  we  once  hailed  as  gratification  to  sense,  and  never  thought  of 
pursuing  iU  probable  or  its  poiisible  working  any  deeper  or  further  I  2.  Andthat  In 
the  many  instances  in  which  this  is  not  so,  we  are  but  again  sharers  with  the  apostle, 
and  reminded  of  our  need  of  an  humiliating  lesson  of  the  flesh,  lest  we  "  be  exalted 
above  measure  "  by  the  blesseil,  the  tmnsporting  "  revelation  of  the  Spirit" 

nOMlLIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vcr.  1. — A  place  for  the  ark.  The  ancient  tabernacle  remained  at  Gibeon,  and  was 
there  at  the  accession  of  Solomon.  But  the  ark  was  brought  up  to  Jerusalem.  It  was 
natural  and  right  that  David,  having  made  a  capital  for  his  kincdom,  should  wish  the 
city  his  own  right  hand  hod  won  to  be  the  metropolis  of  Israel,  not  only  politically 
but  also  religiously.  Until  the  temple  was  built  there  were  two  centres  of  religion— 
the  tabernacle  at  Qibeon  and  the  oris  in  its  tent  in  the  city  of  David.  The  king  was 
not  satisfied  to  have  a  statelv  and  luxurious  abode  for  himself;  he  wished  that  the  ark 
of  God  should  be  suitably  housed.  Hence  he  caused  to  be  prepared  for  the  leoeption 
of  this  Rocrcd  object  an  appropriate  and  magnificent  tabernacle. 

I.  TlIlH  WAH   A   SION  or   aiNCEKN    AND    RKVREENCB    FOB    BELIQION.       The    ark  WES 

asstx-'iatitl  with  the  memorable  history  of  Israel,  and  especially  with  the  giving  of  the 
liaw.  It  was  (.■hcrisbed  and  honoured  by  the  nation  generally.  We  know  the  religious 
beliefs  of  David  t<»o  well  to  suspect  him  of  superstition  in  his  regard  for  the  ark  of  the 
covenant.  He  was  well  awaro  of  the  insuflSciency  of  all  things  external,  and  of  the 
necessity  of  iiiwanl,  8])iritual  religion.  But  he  thought  it  right  to  treat  everything 
esjiecially  connected  with  religion  with  a  decent  respect.  It  is  easy  to  detect  superstition 
in  the  manner  in  which  many  persons  treat  religious  persons  and  things ;  but  it  is  too 
possible  and  too  frequent  to  commit  a  mistake  of  the  opposite  kind,  and  to  treat  them 
with  studied  neglect  and  conteni]>t. 

II.  It  was  A  SIGN  OF  DEVOUT  HONOUR  FOR  GoD  HIMSELF.  In  honouring  the  ark, 
David  was  honouring  the  Goil  by  whose  command  the  ark  had  been  originally  con- 
structed,  and  whoso  Law  it  was  intended  by  God  to  contain  and  preserve.  Similarly, 
in  honouring  Go<rs  Word,  God's  day,  God*s  Churches,  God*s  ministers,  we  may  be 
honouring  God  himself     "  Them  that  honour  me,"  saith  he,  "  I  will  honour." 

III.  David's  conduct  evinced  a  concern  for  the  relioioob  welfabb  of  bib 
sunjKCTS.  lie  had  the  ark  brought  to  Jerusalem  because  Jerusalem  was  becoming  the 
capital  of  the  country,  the  centre  of  government,  the  meeting-place  of  multitudes  and 
the  home  of  many  of  the  influential  and  educated.  And  the  presence  of  the  ark  was 
adapted  to  remind  the  population  of  the  city  of  the  presence  of  Jehovidi,  and  of  the 
claims  of  his  Law  uix>n  their  hearts.  David  showed  by  this  act  that  he  desired  to 
recognize  the  supremacy  of  righteousness ;  that  he  designed  his  government  to  be  in 
accordance  with  the  revelations  and  dictates  of  the  King  of  kings. 

IV.  David  s  oonduct  is  an  example  of  the  duty  of  making  effort  and  saorifice 
FOR  the  cause  of  RELIGION.  A  carelcss  and  self-indulgent  king  would  have  said  in  his 
heart,  "  Let  the  ark  stay  where  it  is ;  any  place  is  good  enough  to  accommodate  a 
religious  symbol ;  and  the  less  religion  is  brought  before  the  people,  the  better  for  them- 
selves and  for  me/'  Not  so  David.  He  was  willing  to  take  thought,  to  prepare  plans,  to 
expend  money,  to  employ  artificers,  in  order  to  do  honour  to  the  ark  of  the  Most  High. 
Let  us  not  deem  it  a  hardship,  but  an  honour,  to  do  anything  for  the  advancement  of 
religion  and  for  the  glory  of  God. — T, 


CH.  XV.  1-29.]     THE   FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHKONICLES.  237 

Ver.  12. — ** Sanctify  youndvea/*  Taught  by  experience,  David  now  employed  in  the 
service  of  the  sanctuary,  to  minister  in  connection  with  the  ark,  those  whom  the  Lord 
himself  had  set  apart  for  this  office ;  he  committed  the  business  of  bringing  up  the  ark 
to  the  chief  of  the  feithers  of  the  Levites.  But  it  was  not  enough  that  the  right 
persons  should  be  employed ;  it  was  important  that  the  right  persons  should  do  their 
work  in  a  right  way.  The  Levites  were,  accordingly,  required  to  sanctify  themselves. 
We  know  from  the  Law  that  ceremonial  purity  was  incumbent  upon  those  who  were 
discharging  sacred  functions.    We  are  reminded  by  this  language  that — 

L  God  is  a  holt  Gk)D.  Not  only  did  Jehovah  reveal  himself  as  being  holy  in 
words,  but  also  in  the  laws  he  imposed  and  the  regulations  he  prescribed.  The  Jewish 
economy  was  largely  designed  to  impress  upon  the  minds  of  the  Israelites  the  holy, 
faultless,  perfect  character  of  God.  And  this  lesson  has  been  taught  even  more  effec- 
tively to  us  in  the  character,  life,  and  mediation  of  God's  **  holy  child  Jesus." 

XL  A  HOLT  Gk)D  BBQuntES  HOLT  SBBVANTS.  The  pricsts  and  Levites  were  enjoined  to 
observe  strict  regulations  as  to  their  ceremonial  purity,  especially  when  about  to  engage 
in  the  public  service  of  the  Qod  of  IsraeL  Holy  works  demand  clean  hands,  and  clean 
hands  need  pure  hearts.  The  ceremonial  cleanness  of  the  Levitical  Law  was  the  emblem 
of  spiritual  purity.    How  holy  should  they  be  who  "  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord  "  1 

in.  Holt  sebvicb  is  pbomfted  bt  the  qbaoious  influences  of  the  Holt  Spibit. 
Regeneration  and  sanctificatiou  are  the  especial  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  ^His  cleansing 
influences  are  symbolised  by  the  waters  of  baptism.  God's  servants  all  need  the 
**  washing  of  regeneration  and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  There  is  appro- 
priateness in  the  direction,  "  Sanctify  yourselves ; "  for  me  means  of  grace  are  within 
the  reach  of  Christians,  who  may  obtain  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  by  asking  that  gift  from 
a  merciful  and  liberal  Father  in  heaven. — ^T. 

Ver.  13. — **  Due  order,^  David  explained  the  failure  of  the  former  attempt  to  bring 
the  ark  to  Jerusalem,  by  a  reference  to  the  neglect  by  himself  and  his  people  of  the 
regulations  divinely  prescribed  and  applicable  to  such  a  case.  Li  directing  the  Levites 
to  prepare  for  their  proper  service,  he  acknowledged  that,  when  he  had  before  purposed 
to  bring  up  the  ark  to  its  resting-place,  he  had  acted  thoughtlessly  and  profanely^  and 
had  suieim  in  consequence.  This  lesson  is  inculcated  by  the  text — OacTs  order  %$  Me 
due  order. 

L  Religion  does  not  consist  in  fobm.  Even  imder  the  elder  dispensation,  in  which 
forms  and  ceremonies  were  prescribed  in  abundance,  true  religion  did  not  consist  in  such 
things.  The  psalmists  and  the  prophets  rose  altogether  above  a  merely  aacrifidal  and 
ceremonial  religion.  And  under  the  new  covenant,  the  letter,  the  form,  sink  into  insig- 
nificance, compared  with  the  spiritual  reality  they  are  designed  to  express  and  to 
promote.  "  Cfod  is  a  Spirit :  and  they  that  worship  him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and 
m  truth."  We,  as  Chnstians,  serve  him,  not  in  the  oldness  of  the  letter,  but  in  the 
newness  of  the  spirit. 

n.  Tet  the  manifestations  of  beliqious  life  and  sebviob  ABE  NOT  lawless  and 
disobdeblt.  It  would  be  a  bad  thing  to  substitute  the  form  for  the  reality ;  but  it  does 
not  follow  that  it  is  a  good  thing  to  nave  no  form  at  alL  It  is  the  direction  of  an 
inspired  apostle :  "  Let  all  things  be  done  decently  and  in  order."  Our  worship  should 
be  seemly  and  reverent ;  our  work  should  be  organized  and  systematic ;  our  liberality 
should  be  upon  principle. 

IIL  Pbescbiftions  as  to  obdeb  should  be  cabefullt  obsebved  and  obetbd.  If, 
for  instance,  it  is  foimd  that  the  New  Testament  lays  down  certain  principles  of  Church 
government^  prescribes  certain  ordinances  or  ministries,  spiritual  Christianity  expects 
that  these  will  be  reverently  considered  and  observed.  Obedience  is  required  as  homage 
to  the  authority  of  the  Lawgiver  and  Lord.  We  have  no  right  to  set  our  fuicies  and 
preferences  above  Divine  laws. 

IV.  Obsebvange  of  obdbb  bboomes  oongenial  and  east  when  inspibed  bt 
OBATEFUL  LOVE.  To  a  chUd  of  God,  a  friend  of  Christ,  there  is  nothing  harsh  or 
repugnant  in  compliance  with  Divine  regulations  in  attention  to  "  due  order." — T. 

Ver.  1. — How  litUe  and  how  much  we  may  do  for  Qod,  There  is  something  in  this 
verse  which,  at  first  reading,  painfully  suggests  the  smallness  of  the  efiic^  made  by 


238  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLE&    [cb.  xy.  1—29. 


THivid  in  the  cause  of  God  as  compared  with  those  which  he  made  for  his  own  oonve- 
nience;  he  '^made  him  housta  " — solid  buildings  more  than  one,  for  himself;  he  prepared 
a  place  for  the  ark  of  God,  and  pitched  for  it  a  tent — one  frail  tabernacle  for  Jehovah. 
Doubtless,  under  examination,  all  damaging  reflection  on  the  royal  conduct  will  disap-^ 
pear.  David  was  probably  justified  in  doing  as  much  for  himself;  he  was  certain^ 
justified  in  doing  no  more,  at  that  time,  for  the  manifested  presence  of  GkxL  But  the 
lact  of  his  building  bouses  for  himself  and  one  tent  for  the  Lord  may  well  suggest 
to  us— 

I.  How  LITTLE,  COMPARATIVELY,  WB  DO  FOB  GoD.  There  are  thoee  who  oompl^, 
freely  and  sadly  enough,  that  there  are  "  so  many  claims  '*  on  their  liberality.  But  it 
would  do  us  all  good  to  estimate  how  small  and  trifling  a  proportion  of  aU  we  have  to 
spend  we  devote  directly  to  God  and  to  his  cause.  It  may  seem  large,  sometimeBf  whoi 
we  look  at  it  by  itself;  but  when  compared  with  all  we  have  to  eive-— all  at  our 
command— it  seems  small  and  poor  indeed.  Let  us  reckon  up  and  pot  down  the 
proportion  we  give  to  Christ,  consciously  and  directly,  of  (1)  the  hours  of  all  onr  lime; 
(2)  the  thoughts  of  all  our  care  and  reflection ;  (3)  the  strengUi  of  all  our  energy  ;  (4)  the 
money  of  aU  our  fimds ; — and  we  shall,  in  most  cases,  nnd  that  it  is  the  bulk  we 
reserve  for  ourselves,  and  only  the  "sinall  dust  of  the  balance"  that  we  dedicate  to 
God.  We  build  ourselves  houiet  and  pitch  a  tent  for  the  Lord.  On  the  other  hand^ 
we  may  consider— 

IL   How  MUCH,  IN  FACT  AND  TRUTH,  WB  MAT  DO  FOB  HIM.       For  that  which  W6  Sive 

directly  to  Christ  should  be  but  a  very  small  part  of  all  that  we  present  to  him.  We 
should  lay  at  his  feet  everything  we  have  and  are.  1.  We  dedicate  oiirseZvst  and 
lives  to  him  when,  by  a  sacred  and  living  fisuth,  we  accept  him  for  our  Saviour.  2. 
We  endeavour  to  live^  at  every  conscious  moment,  under  his  observant  eye ;  regulating 
all  our  thoughts,  controlling  all  our  feelings,  ordering  all  our  words,  choosing  all  our 
courses,  executing  all  our  work,  according  to  his  wil^  and  in  the  hope  of  giving  him 
pleasure.  3.  We  hold  ourselves  recuiy  to  lay  down  our  life  and  surrender  all  our  dearest 
treasures  at  his  Divine  bidding. — C. 

Vers.  2 — 15. — Thr(e  valuable  virtues:  rectification,  admonition,  obedience.  We 
have — 

I.  A  ROTAL  RECTIFICATION,  We  have  the  useful  fiction  in  England  that  "  the  kiug 
can  do  no  wrong."  It  has  been  too  often  assumed  by  the  potentates  of  the  earth  that 
they  could  not  be  mistaken,  and  need  not  return  on  their  way.  David  was  not  so  foolish 
and  so  faulty.  He  had  the  sense  to  see  that  he  bad  erred  in  the  way  in  which  he  had 
carried  out  a  good  desire,  and  he  was  prepared  openly  and  honourably  to  retrace  his 
steps.  8o  he  said  to  his  courtiers,  "  No  one  ou^ht  to  carry  the  ark  of  God,"  etc.  (vo*.  21 
with  obvious  reference  to  the  transaction  recorded  in  ch.  xiiL  And  he  **  gathered  all 
Israel  together  to  Jerusalem,"  and  "  assembling  the  children  of  Aaron  and  the  Levites" 
(ver.  4),  he  spoke  plainly  of  the  departure  from  the  Law  of  which  he  and  others  had 
been  guilty  (vers.  12,  13).  We  certainly  need  not  be  ashamed  '*  to  come  after  the 
king  in  the  way  of  retractation.  Where  a  monarch  leads  the  way  we  may  be  content 
to  follow.  There  is  no  more  certain  indication  of  foolish  and  fatal  obstinacy  than  the 
refusal  to  admit  an  error.  They  who  cling  to  their  own  mistakes  and  pertinaciously 
justify  them  are  sure  to  come  to  some  great  grief  in  time.  But  they  who  have  the 
humility  and  penetration  to  see  that  they  are  wrong,  and  also  the  courage  to  avow  and 
correct  it,  are  sure  to  find  themselves  on  the  upward  road.  They  may  take  a  wrong 
turn  or  two,  but  they  move  in  the  right  direction,  and,  like  David  and  the  ark,  wiU 
reach  Jerusalem  in  time. 

II.  A  GRACIOUS  ADMONITION.  (Vers.  11 — 13.)  There  may  have  been  some  doubt  as 
to  where  the  blame  really  lay,  whether  on  the  king  or  on  the  priests,  or  (as  was  probable 
enough)  on  both.  David,  while  he  did  not  exonerate  himself,  evidently  felt  that  the 
priests  and  Levites  were  included  in  the  condemnation :  indeed,  he  addresses  them  and 
admonishes  them  as  delinquents :  "  Because  ye  did  it  not  at  the  first,"  etc  (ver.  13). 
Uis  words  and  their  attitude  together  may  suggest  to  ns  that  admonition  uiould  be 
graciously  given  and  as  graciously  received.  We  should,  on  such  occasions  as  this, 
speak  as  those  (1)  who  convey  their  message  with  reluctance  and  only  on  constraint ; 
(2)  who  desire  to  spare  feeling  as  much  as  faithfulness  will  allow ;  (3)  who  know  thai 


CH.  XV.  1—29.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa  239 

they  have  themselyes  reason  to  desire  all  possible  elemency  to  be  shown;  (4)  who  must 
not  shun  to  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  Uod.    And  on  such  occasions  we  should,  when 
ourselves  admonished,  receiye  the  admonition  as  those  (1)  who  are  likely  enough  to  . 
have  erred ;  ^2)  who  are  prepared  to  be  reproved  by  those  who  are  in  any  position  of 
authority ;  (3)  who  are  ready  to  correct  our  mistake  at  the  earliest  opportunity. 

II L  A  PBOMFT  OBEDIENCE.  (Yen.  14, 15.)  There  seems  to  have  been  no  hesitancy, 
on  the  part  of  the  priests  and  Levitcs ;  they  appear  to  have  applied  themselves  at  once, 
with  due  zest,  to  the  work  which  they  had  neglected  before.  They  sanctified  themselves 
for  it  (ver.  14),  and  then  they  executed  it  (ver.  15),  doing  all  things  "  as  Moses 
commanded,  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord."  Like  them,  and  like  the  prodigal 
of  the  parable  (Luke  xv.),  who  said,  "  I  will  arise,"  and  he  arose,  we  should  leel  and 
do,  conclude  and  act,  with  no  interval  between  of  which  the  enemy  can  make  use. 
When  we  have  taken  due  time  for  understanding,  and  have  seen  the  way  we  should 
take,  then  we  should,  like  the  men  of  whom  we  read  here,  (1^  at  once  make  needful 
preparations  for  action,  and,  (2)  these  made,  carry  our  conclusions  into  efifect.  It 
is  an  evil  spirit  of  uncertainty  and  delay  which  often  makes  penitence  to  be  unavailing ; 
it  is  prompt,  unhesitating  obedience  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord  which  takes  uf  to  the 
post  of  duty  and  then  to  the  seat  of  honour  and  of  joy. — G. 

Vers.  16,,  25,  26,  28. — Sacred  joy.  In  the  bringing  up  of  the  ark  from  the  house 
of  Obed-edom,  the  prevailing  note  is  that  of  sacred  joy.    We  learn— 

L  That  holt  obedience  is  attended  with  saobed  joy.  The  act  was  one  of 
obedience  in  two  ways.  It  was  so  in  apirit ;  for  though  not  commanded  to  take  this 
particular  step,  the  Israelites  were  desired  by  GK)d  to  show  all  possible  honour  to  that 
with  which  his  service  was  connected.  In  removing  the  ark,  therefore,  to  the  capital, 
David  was  acting  conformably  to  the  will  of  God.  It  was  also  obedient  inform,  Thia 
time  the  error  in  the  mode  of  conveying  the  sacred  chest  was  avoided,  and  the  Wofd 
of  the  Lord  strictly  consulted.  And  the  result  was  a  large  measure  of  sacred  joy. 
Gladness  of  heart  filled  the  souls  of  king,  priests,  Levites,  people.  Everything  was 
done,  from  beginning  to  end, "  with  joy  "  (vers.  16,  25).  Holy  obedience  will  ^ways 
have  the  same  effect  upon  the  heart.  If  we  serve  the  Lord  with  our  whole  heart, 
endeavouring  to  do  his  will,  both  in  spirit  and  in  form,  we  shall  have  **  gladness  in  our 
heart  more  tnan  in  the  time  when  their  com  and  their  wine  increase." 

IL  That  bached  jot  uttebs  itself  well  in  baobed  fsalxodt.  "David  spake 
...  to  appoint  .  •  .  the  singers  with  instruments  of  music,**  etc.  (ver.  16).  Sacred 
song  often  gives  utterance  to  sorrow  and  distress,  and  there  are  plaintive  strains,  vocal 
and  instrumental,  which  are  profoundly  expressive  and  touching.  But  gladness  and 
song  seem  to  be  best  associated.  **  Is  any  merry  ?  let  him  sing  psalms  "  (Jas.  ▼.  13). 
When  our  heart  is  glad  in  the  Lord,  we  cannot  do  better  than  join  in  "  psalms  and 
hymns  and  spiritual  songs,  singing  and  making  melody  in  our  heart  to  the  Lord" 
(Eph.  V.  19). 

ilL  That  sacbed  jot  is  bititablt  aooompanied  with  baobifiob.  (Ver.  26.)  The 
ceremony  would  not  have  been  complete  without  sacrifice.  This  was  probablv  a  burnt 
offering  or  thank  offering ;  it  was,  at  any  rate,  an  offering  taken  from  tneir  **  nocks  and 
herds  unto  the  Lord,  and  may  suggest  to  us  that  now,  when  God  will  not  take  such 
sacrifices  at  our  hands^  we  should,  in  tiie  time  of  our  gladness,  present  such  sacrificea 
as  those  with  which  he  is  well  pleased.  We  can  "  do  good  and  communicate  "  (Heb.  xiiL 
16).  Of  our  fulness  we  can  contribute  to  the  need  of  those  who  lack.  Or  from  our 
exchequer  we  can  take  that  which  will  help  to  fill  the  treasury  of  the  Lord, 

IV.  That  bacbed  jot  bhoitld  pbovb  to  be  a  diffusive  thinq.  David  wished 
to  extend  this  rejoicing  to  all  who  would  enter  into  it ;  he  made  it  as  public  as  possible ; 
so  general  was  it  that  we  read  that "  all  Israel  brought  up  the  ark  • .  .  with  shouting," 
etc.  (ver.  28 ;  see  2  Sam.  vi.  19).  We  may  keep  our  griefs  much  to  ourselves,  not 
inflicting  them  on  others,  much  less  parading  tnem  before  others;  but  we  should 
strive  to  make  our  friends  and  neighbours  the  sharers  of  our  joy.  This  is  true  of  all 
gladness  of  heart,  but  it  is  peculiarly  applicable  to  sacred  joy.  When  our  souls  are 
glad  in  him,  our  Father  and  Saviour,  we  should  seek  to  make  all  whom  we  can  reach 
and  influence  partakers  of  "  like  {Hrecious  faith  "  and  hope  and  joy.  Of  the  joy  that 
is  not  diffusive  we  may  be  suspicious.    The  joy  that  is  Divine,  that  comes  from  Qod, 


240  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  xt.  1_29. 


and  that  ia  Id  God,  will  be  after  his  own  nature,  bountiful,  geneiouSy  ocnmnuiil- 
cative. — C. 

Vers.  16—29  (vers.  18,  25,  26,  28,  see  precedini;  homilj).— 7%«  serviee  of  the  Lard, 

This  passage  is  instructive,  as  conveying  some  valuable  lessons,  univeradly  and 
abidingly  applicable,  rcfipecting  our  service  of  the  Supreme.     We  leam — 

I.  TUAT  WE    SHOULD    CnEEBFULLY  RENDER    SUCH    BERVICB    AS  WE   ABB  riTTED  TO 

BRING.  In  this  ceremony  the  services  rendered  were  manifold.  Some  (the  chief  of  the 
Levit<»)  had  the  work  of  selection  and  appointment  (vers.  16, 17) ;  some  took  the  part 
of  playing  with  cymbals  Over,  19) ;  others  with  psalteries  (ver.  20) ;  others  with  harps 
(ver.  21);  others  '*did  dIow  with  the  trumpets"  (ver.  24);  others  acted  as  door- 
keepers or  custodians  of  the  ark  (vers.  23,  24) ;  yet  others  ministered  in  sacred  song 
(vers.  22,  27).  David  himself  danced  and  played  before  the  Lord  (ver.  29;  2  Sam. 
vi.  14).  As  "all  our  s])riu};s  are  in  God" — all  the  sources  of  our  strength  and  joy- 
so  all  our  faculties  may  be  devoted  to  his  service ;  "  as  well  the  singers  as  the  piUyen 
on  instruments^  are  to  be  engaged  in  worshipping  him  (see  Ps.  IxxzviL  7X  We 
have  very  varied  talents,  lK>tb  in  kind  and  in  degree ;  the  only  thing  to  be  careful 
about  is  that  we  do  not  hide  any  of  them  in  the  earth,  but  put  them  all  out  in  the 
service  of  Christ.  Nothing  can  bo  lcs!«  worthy  of  a  Christian  man  than  to  disrmrd 
the  contribution  of  a  neighbour  because  it  is  other  or  smaller  than  our  own ;  nothing 
can  be  more  needless  than  to  be  distressed  because  of  the  larger  or  lofiier  contribution 
than  our  own :  let  each  bring  to  the  Lord  of  love  and  righteousness  that  which  he 
entrusted  to  his  charge,  and  he  shall  "  in  no  wise  lose  his  reward." 

II.  That  we  should  all  make  httino  preparation  for  the  sebyice  wb  abe 
ABOUT  TO  render.  The  king  who  was  careful  to  be  dressed  in  a  way  that  made  him 
most  equal  to  his  combat  with  the  giant  (1  Sam.  xvii.),  now  sees  to  it  that  he  is 
suitably  attired  for  the  work  before  him ;  the  others  who  took  part  in  the  prooesnon 
were  similarly  careful.  When  we  address  ourselves  to  work  for  our  Divine  Master,  we 
should  see  that  we  are  suitably  equipped.  We  may  look  for  help  from  God  (as  we 
shall  see  presently),  but  we  must  not  presumptuously  neglect  the  conditions  of  success. 
We  are  to  be  armed  fur  our  effort  with  all  appropriate  weapons ;  we  are  to  be  clothed, 
not  only  with  humility,  but  with  knowledge,  zeal,  devotion,  perseverance. 

III.  That  we  may  reckon  on  Divine  help  if  we  are  doing  the  work  to 
WHICH  he  calls  us.  *' God  helped  the  Levites  that  bare  the  ark**  (ver.  26).  There 
was  nothing  in  the  act  in  which  they  were  engaged  that  was  peculiarly  trying  to  their 
strength  ;  nevertheless  they  received  help  from  Omnipotence  to  do  their  work.  In  God 
is  the  source  of  all  our  strength  ;  there  is  nothing  we  can  do  purely  "  of  ourselves ; "  all 
our  sufficiency  is  of  him.  And  if  the  Levites  needed  Divine  help  in  bearing  the  buiden 
which  they  carrie<l,  how  much  more  do  we  need  it !  and  with  what  frequency  and 
earnestness  should  we  seek  it,  when  we  bear  those  burdens  for  him  which  require,  not 
some  slight  muscular  exertion,  but  much  mental,  moral,  and  spiritual  excellency  I 

IV.  That  we  must  not  be  detained  from  the  service  of  Gk)D  bt  the  peb- 
VER8ITT  OF  THE  IRRELIGIOUS.  Michal  dcspisod  David  for  his  godly  zeal  (ver.  29). 
She  lacked  the  devotedness  of  heart  which  her  husband  possesMd,  and  therefore  she 
misjudged  his  action.  Ungodliness  cannot  understand,  cannot  appreciate  religious 
earnestness ;  it  therefore  disregards,  and  even  despises  it.  We  are  not  to  be  moved  by 
this  consideration  David  would  not  have  omitted  his  service  had  he  known  before- 
hand tlie  reception  which  awaited  him  at  the  royal  palace.  We  are  not  to  be  detained 
from  the  active,  enthusiastic  service  of  our  Lord  and  of  our  perishing  brethren  because 
we  are  well  aware  that  there  will  be  those  who,  looking  out  from  the  window  of  their 
own  impiety  or  indifference,  will  regard  us  with  cynical  contempt.  All  of  this  will 
weigh  but  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance  against  the  gratitude  of  those  we  serve,  and 
the  "  well  done  "  of  the  approving  Lord. — (), 

Vers.  1 — 16. — The  hearers  of  the  ark.  In  the  account  (2  Sam.  vi.  11 — 23)  of  the 
bringing  of  the  ark  into  Jerusalem,  only  the  principal  facts  are  recorded.  In  this 
chapter  we  are  presented  with  the  religious  aspect  of  this  solemn  act  and  the  prepara- 
tion David  made  for  it.  The  motive  for  bringing  the  ark  to  Jerusalem  was  (see  2  Sam. 
vi.  12)  that  David  had  heard  of  the  great  blessing  the  ark  had  brought  upon  the  house 


CH.XV.  1— 29.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  241 

of  Obed-edom  during  the  time  it  had  been  there.  David  arranges  that  the  ark  should 
be  borne  only  by  Levites,  for  them  only  had  the  Lord  chosen  to  carry  it  By  this 
arrangement  it  is  expressly  acknowledged  that  it  was  contrary  to  law  to  place  it  on  a 
cart,  llie  heads  of  the  priests  and  Levites  are  summoned  to  take  the  matter  in  hand. 
Kohath  is  first  named,  because  Aaron  was  descended  from  Eohath,  and  because  to  the 
Kohathites,  on  account  of  this  near  relation  to  the  priests,  there  belonged  the  duty  of 
serving  in  that  which  was  most  holy,  and  in  bearing  the  holiest  vessels  of  the  tabernacle. 
The  transport  of  the  ark  was  the  Kohathites'  special  work.  These  priests  and  six  of 
the  Levites  were  conmianded  by  David  to  consecrate  themselves  with  their  brethren 
to  bring  up  the  ark.  This  consecration  consisted  of  the  removing  of  all  that  was 
unclean,  the  washing  of  the  body  and  clothes  (Oen.  xxxv.  2),  the  keeping  aloof  from 
every  defilement,  and  from  touching  imclean  things.  David  reminds  them  (ver.  18) 
that  because  Cod  was  not  sought  according  to  his  Word,  there  came  a  breach.  That 
Word  required  that  the  ark  on  which  Jehovah  was  enthroned  should  be  carried  by 
Levites,  and  should  be  touched  by  no  imholy  person  or  one  who  was  not  a  priest 
(see  Numb.  iv.  15).  So  the  Levites,  we  are  told,  hare  the  ark  on  their  shoulders  with 
staves,  according  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  From  this  portion  of  our  chapter  let  us 
learn  three  spiritual  lessons.  1.  It  was  becau9e  David  neard  of  the  blessing  the  ark 
had  been  to  the  house  of  Obed-edom  that  made  him  send  for  it.  That  ark  was  Christ. 
Wherever  he  is  in  a  heart,  a  family,  a  Church,  or  a  nation,  there  a  blessing  will  be 
left.  He  came  to  bless  (see  Acts  iii.  26) ;  and  none  who  receive  him  shall  be  without 
that  blessing.  But  as  in  the  case  of  Obed-edom  those  who  receive  his  blessing  are 
made  the  channel  of  blessine  to  others.  Thev  cannot  be  hid.  David  sends  for  the 
ark  because  Obed-edom  had  been  so  blessed  oy  it.  2.  Those  Levites  who  bore  the 
ark,  though  they  had  been  from  of  old  divinely  appointed  to  this  work,  had  again 
to  be  consecrated.  No  touch  of  uncleanliness,  or  denlement  of  body  or  garment,  must 
come  near  it  So  must  it  be  now  with  all  those  who  have  to  do  with  Christ  To  be 
Christiana  is  not  enough  any  more  than  it  was  to  be  Levites.  They  must  be  dean 
Christians.  There  must  be  plenty  of  "  washing,"  plenty  of  "  keeping  aloof "  from 
things,  and  plenty  of  careful  walking  with  all  those  who  have  to  do  with  him.  "  Be  ye 
holy  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord ; "  "Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy."  3.  It  might 
seem  to  human  observation  a  very  trifling  difiference  between  carrying  the  ark  on  a 
cart  or  carriage,  and  carrying  it  on  the  shoulders  with  staves.  But  the  great  point 
is — What  was  the  Lord's  word  ?  It  was  this  made  the  difference  (ver.  15).  So  is  it 
now  in  every  thins.  It  is  not  what  /  think  or  what  you  think  or  what  any  man 
thinks.  It  is,  '*  What  saith  the  Word  of  the  Lord  ?  "  This  is  to  settle  every  question. 
And  he  would  not  have  been  a  true  Levite  any  more  than  that  man  could  be  a  true 
Christian  who  would  for  a  moment  hesitate  to  accept  this  decision  as  final. — W. 

Vers.  16 — 24. —  The  singers  and  musical  instruments  accompanying  the  ark,  David 
gave  also  a  further  charge  to  the  Levites  to  appoint  singers  and  musical  instruments 
to  accompany  the  ark.  Three  kinds  of  musical  instruments  are  named  (ver.  16) : 
the  psalter,  an  oblong  box  with  broad  bottom  and  a  somewhat  convex  sounding- 
board,  over  which  strings  of  wire  are  stretched;  harps  or  lutes,  and  the  cymbal 
or  instrument  provided  with  a  small  bell.  These  singers  formed  three  choirs  accord- 
ing to  the  instrument  they  played.  Heman,  Asaph,  and  Ethan  played  brazen 
cymbals ,  Benaiah  and  the  seven  who  followed  played  psalteries ;  the  last  six  played 
lutes.  The  former  three  had  cymbals  to  direct  the  song ;  while  the  rest  had  partly 
psalteries,  partly  lutes,  in  order  to  play  the  accompaniment  to  the  singing.  Chenaniah 
was  captain  of  the  Levites  who  had  charge  of  the  bearing  of  the  ark  because  he  was 
instructed  in  what  had  to  be  observed  with  respect  to  it  The  blowing  of  the  silver 
trumpets  by  the  priests  rests  on  Numb.  x.  1 — 10.  The  procession  was  in  all  proba- 
bility arranged  thus :  the  singers  and  players  in  front  in  three  divisions ;  next  Chenaniah, 
captain  of  the  bearers ;  two  doorkeepers ;  the  priests  with  the  trumpets ;  two  door- 
keepers ;  the  king,  with  the  elders  and  captains  of  thousands.  Observe  the  spiritual 
lesson  to  be  learned  from  this  procession.  The  ark  was  to  be  accompanied  by  those 
who  could  sing  and  shout  for  joy  (see  vers.  16,  28).  So  is  it  with  those  who  have  to 
do  with  the  true  Ark — Christ  We  have  had  first  cleanness,  and  now  we  have  joy. 
These  are  inse|«rable.    Not  the  Levite  as  such,  but  the  Levite  washed  and  clean, 

L   CHR0KICLE8.  R 


243  T::E  FIP^T  BOOK  OF  THE  GHROKICLES.     [ch.  xt.  1^29. 

eh:::;ii?  f:r  y.r.  N::  it*  ChrsttAn  &•  foch,  bat  the  Chriftiui  cleanted,  and  Lolj. 
Sach  cr..y  c^z,  \r^  y  -«  fill  of  joy.  It  U  jot  from  oooicioui  uiuoQ  with  Ghxirt  the 
trit  Ark,  mi.  niAlLU^eii  iz.  b.liLecs  of  lilie. — ^W. 

Vers.  2o — 20. — T\£  c^-:t\in'7  rf  t%e  pnaU  and  Leviin.  After  tlie  joaraey  had  been 
acC'Xi.:  Ii5i.€0,  :ie  Icarers  m.i  :io«e  vlo  had  broaght  np  the  ark  offered  thank  offeringi 
of  ecvea  bu..'.cks  &i  i  Kres  ncu — a  perfect  offeriDg.  denoted  bj  the  number  aeTen. 
DaTid  and  all  the  ^  rle«u  a:id  Levites  thit  accompanied  the  ark  were  dothed  in  white 
linen.  Tr.e  outer  zannents  ci'^rrM{K>nded  with  the  clcanneie,  the  holinei^  and  the  joj. 
So  the  vbite-r<  bed  multitu-ie  &re  rr presented  at  ringing  with  pakne  in  their  hanMi 
iDdicating  the  b.Iineee  icd  the  joy,  round  the  tme  Ark,  the  Lord  Jeiua  Ghiiat»  in 
heaven.  No  wonoer  Michal  should  despise  David.  The  heart  of  erery  one  not  expeii- 
mectallj  tcquainted  vith  the  Lord  Je«us  will  alwayi  do  the  lame.  **  The  natortl 
man  nndersunde'h  n«^t  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God:  •  .  •  they  are  fooliahneas 
unto  him.''  Tlc  MicLol-Leart  is  everywhere  around  us.  Oh  the  joy  of  knowing 
Jesus ! — \V. 

Vers.  2, 12,  13. — learning  ike  leftcmt  (/  GodTg  JudgmenU.  We  are  not  left  in  any 
doubt  as  to  the  national  lesson  intended  to  be  taught  by  the  IMyine  Jodment  on 
Uzza.  David  came  to  see  that  "  none  ought  to  carry  the  ark  of  God  bat  theLe^tea  " 
(comp.  Numb.  L  50;  iv.  15 ;  vii.  9;  x.  IT).  The  judgment  showed  that  Qod  had  not 
been  "  sought  after  the  due  order ;  **  and  of  this  error  and  neglect  there  ia  now  the 
honest  confession,  with  due  care  in  the  new  effort,  to  meet  fnllv  the  IMvine  conditions 
and  requirements.  "The  'due  order'  was  that  the  ark  ahouUL  be  borne  on  the 
shoulders  of  the  Kohathite  Levi  tea — not  that  it  should  be  placed  upon  a  cart,  drawn  by 
oxen,  and  rudely  shaken.**  Out  of  his  first  mistaken  attempt  DaTid  learned  the 
valuable,  practical  lesson  that — 

^  Evil  is  wrought  for  want  of  thought, 
As  well  as  for  wmnt  of  hearV 

The  incident  suggests  a  general  treatment  of  the  teachings  of  God's  judgments.  Isaiah 
expresses  the  attitude,  of  which  David  here  gives  us  the  example,  when  he  saya  (Isa. 
xivi.),  '*  In  the  way  of  thy  judgments,  O  Lord,  have  we  waited  for  thee." 

I.  Judgment  taught  David  respect  fob  God's  Law  and  order.  It  doea  not 
apftcar  that  the  full  ceremonial  of  Mosaism  had  been  preserved  during  Saal'a  reign,  and 
certainly  there  had  been  some  neglect  of  the  Scriptures;  but  it  is  especially  to  be 
observed  that,  in  making  a  new  tabernacle  on  Mount  Zion,  and  fitting  it  up  aooordiog 
to  his  own  ideas,  David  was  in  great  peril  of  wilfulness,  and  of  neglecting  to  consult 
and  to  follow  the  Divine  regulations.  Such  a  judgment  as  that  on  Usza  was  needed 
to  thoroughly  arouse  him  to  the  importance  of  a  precise  and  minute  obedience.  So  we 
t^io  often  say,  "What  does  it  matter,  if  the  thing  is  done?"  And  we  have,  often 
bitterly,  to  Icam  that  God  cares  for  the  doing,  and  wants  even  the  right  ihing$  done 
in  the  right  way.  Obedience  in  the  very  forms  and  order  of  Divine  service  testa  the 
dMrp  feeling  of  God's  worshippers.  Apoi^tles  recognized  the  importance  even  of  fonns 
when  they  enjoined,  "  Let  all  things  he  done  decently  and  in  order." 

n.  JlUKlMKNT  taught  THE  NEED   FOB  THOUGUTFULyESS    AND  CARS.       EEastO    ia  ai 

unfitting  an  Kclf-will  in  matters  of  God's  worship.  Consideration;  due  attention  to 
irftM'dentH;  jKsrsonal  ])rcparation  of  spirit;  serious  demeanour ;— all  properly  attend  on 
)ivino  Hcrvico.    God  wants  the  signs  and  indications  of  real  heart-feeling  and  deep 

sincu'rity. 

ill.   ilriKJMENT  TAUGHT  THE  DUTY  OF  FINDING  FIT  INSTRUMENTS  FOB  God's  WOBK. 

Holy  duties  hIiouM  not  be  done  by  unsuitable  hands.  No  common  persona  might  touch 
tlie  HAcruii  ark.  The  proper  persons  were  the  Levites,  and  a  particular  family  of  them. 
llluHtruto  the  need  for  a  wiser  selection  of  instruments  in  connection  with  the  work 
of  the  nuHlern  Church.  Compare  the  a|)ostolic  injunctions,  '*Lay  hands  suddenly  on 
no  man  ; "  "  Let  such  first  be  proved." 

IV.   JUDGMKNT    TAUGHT    THE    REVERENT   TREATMENT   OF   THE   8TMB0L8  OF    DiVIHI 

ruKHKNcK.  Without  adopting  strained  ideas  of  sacramental  virtue,  we  too  may  learn 
this  lesson.    Sanctuaries,  sacraments,  Bibles,  etc.,  because  of  their  sacred  aaaooiationa 


1 


CH.  XT.  1—29.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  243 

and  suggestions,  properly  demand  reverent  treatment  Only  shallow  and  self-satisfied 
natures  fail  in  revereuce.  A  worthy  sense  of  the  infinite  glory  of  the  Unseen,  Eternal, 
and  Divine,  gains  fitting  expression  in  the  reverent  touch  of  all  earth-symbols  that 
bring  the  Eternal  near.  There  may  be  danger  of  stopping  with  the  symbol,  even  as 
heathen  stopped  with  the  idol ;  but  the  fact  that  danger  lies  in  excess  does  not  relieve 
us  from  the  claims  of  the  symbolic,  as  set  within  wise  limitations.  There  is  daneer  of 
overdoing  forms.  But  there  is  also  danger  of  an  undue  indifference  to  forms ;  and  this 
kind  of  danger  is  seriously  imperilling  to  some  important  features  of  the  religious  life. 
This  may  be  practically  illustrated  in  relation  to  long-received  forms  of  doctrine,  and 
long-hallowed  rites  and  symbols.  They  who  would  sincerely  honour  Ckd  must  not  be 
unmindful  of  the  reverence  that  is  due  to  his  ark. — R.  T. 

Vers.  12 — 14. — Due  preparation  for  Divine  service.  Not  only  was  David  on  this 
occasion  careful  to  employ  the  proper  persons,  but  he  was  anxious  that  they  should  be 
properly  prejpared  and  fitted  for  their  solemn  duty.  He  commands  them  to  "sanctify 
themselves,'*^  that  is,  to  go  through  the  ceremonies  by  which  the  Mosaic  priesthood 
were  prepared  for  ritual  duties  (see  Lev.  xi.  44 ;  Numb.  xi.  18 ;  2  Chron.  xxix.  5,  etc.). 
Qod  has  ever  shown  anxiety  over  men's  preparation-times.  A  long  preparation-time 
may  precede  a  very  brief  period  of  work,  but  the  efficiency  of  the  work  always  depends 
on  the  preparation.  Illustrate  from  the  preparations  for  the  first  Passover ;  from  the 
answer  of  our  Lord's  disciples,  '*  Where  wilt  thou  that  we  prepare  for  thee  to  eat  the 
Passover?"  from  the  actual  experience  of  our  Lord,  who  had  thirty  silent  years,  and 
then  a  long  spell  of  desert  meditations ;  from  such  cases  as  that  of  Moses,  who  had 
forty  years  in  the  Horeb  district,  and  of  Saul,  who  was  a  long  while  in  tho  deserts  of 
Arabia ;  from  such  a  case  as  that  of  Savonarola,  who  had  many  years  of  study  and 

J»rayer  in  the  monastery  before  he  commenced  his  brief  eight  years  of  public  ministry, 
n  all  ages,  and  now,  the  holiest  and  best  men  have  deeply  felt  the  need  of  times  of 
devout  meditation  and  prayer  and  spiritual  preparation,  before  engaging  in  Divine 
service ;  and  such  personal  preparations  are  quite  as  important  for  worshippers  as  for 
ministers.  The  neglect  of  tnem  is  the  secret  of  the  limited  blessing  that  so  often 
attends  the  means  of  grace. 

L  Preparation-times  are  necessart.  1.  Because  of  the  solemnity  attaching  to 
every  form  of  Divine  worship  or  work.  2.  Because  of  Ood's  reasonablo  demand  that 
everything  we  do  for  him  shall  be  done  with  our  best  powers  and  our  whole  heart, 
therefore  with  due  consideration  and  effort.  3.  Because  man  is  so  absorbed  in  worldly 
thin^  that  he  cannot  at  once  disengage  himself  so  as  fittingly  to  attend  to  heavenly 
and  Divine  things.  4.  Because  the  hurry  and  bustle  of  life  maJces  an  agitation  and 
excitement  of  mind  and  feeling  that  are  unsuited  to  religious  occupations* 

II.  Preparation-tdcbs  bear  direct  relation  to  FAiTHFULNESfl.  Bocaose  they 
test  our  spirit  when  no  eye  is  upon  us,  and  there  is  none  but  Ood  to  take  account  of 
our  doings.  It  is  an  easy  thing  to  be  devout  and  attentive  and  particular  when  we 
have  all  the  surroundings  of  the  great  congregation ;  but  only  Ood  knows  whether  we 
are  really  in  tone  for  our  work  and  our  worship.  He  reckons  faithfulness  by  our  hcart- 
ttates,  not  merely  by  our  life-actions. 

IIL  Preparation-times  bear  directly  on  spiritual  profit.  This  is  the  other 
aide  of  tiie  matter.  Blessings  come  to  us  only  as  we  are  in  moods  to  jreceive  them. 
There  is  a  '*  set  of  the  soiu"  towards  heavenly  and  Divine  things  on  which  the 
influence  of  teachings  and  holy  surroundings  entirely  depends.  When  that  '*  set  of  the 
soul "  is  secured,  the  smallest  and  simplest  "  means  of  grace  "  prove  nourishing.  And 
we  are  in  luge  measure  responsible  fur  securing  it.  The  great  things  of  Qod  are 
revealed  onto  "  babes,"  onto  the  simple-minded  and  open-hearted  and  devoutly  toned. 
Our  spiritual  profit  depends  on  ounelves. 

IV.  Preparation-times  are  never  wasted  times.  Though  we  are  liable  to  regard 
them  as  such,  because  they  seem  to  have  no  tangible  result,  the  issues  of  them  we 
cannot  count  and  measure.  But  school-time  is  not  wasted  time,  for  it  fits  the  boy  fur 
life.  Apprentice-time  is  not  wasted  time,  for  its  issues  are  seen  in  vigorous  and  skilled 
manhooo.  There  never  can  be  waste  in  efficiently  getting  ready ;  and  this  is  fully  truj 
in  religious  spheres. 

Practical  application  of  these  points  may  be  made  to  three  or  four  forms  of  modern 


244  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.     [oL  zv.  1—29. 


reliiio'js  life :  f.Q.  frarer,  almsziTing,  wonhtps  acimmeDts,  Christian  work.     In  relA- 
Uon  to  them  all  Gvxi*s  call  to  us  ia,  **  Sanctity  rounelTa  for  it." — ^B.  T. 

Ver&  10 — 24. — Music  and  ton-j  ccmsfcrated  U>  GotTs  fem'os.  For  traces  of  nnging 
in  ci.*nDevn:on  with  religious  ceremoaiea,  f««  Exod.  xt.  21 ;  Judg.  t.  1 ;  ch.  xiii.  8. 
It  seems  to  have  l^n  ciil:i rated  in  the  **  schools  of  the  propheu**  (1  Sam.  z.  5)l 
From  the  time  of  David^s  apfK^intment  of  these  Lefites  to  this  special  department, 
**the  services  of  the  tabernacle  and  the  temple  were  regularly  oioraly  and  a  con- 
siderable section  of  the  Leviies  was  trained  in  musical  knowledge,  and  set  apart  to 
c^'Duuct  th:s  part  of  the  natiocal  worship.**  Refierence  may  be  made  to  the  prejudices 
of  the  i'uri;aQ5,  the  Scotch,  and  sonre  sections  of  the  older  Nonconlbrmista  to  music 
and  song  iu  Divine  worship.  Even  Christian  hymns  have  sometimes  been  introdooed 
with  difficulty,  and  any  elaboration  of  the  musio^  part  of  Divine  worship  is,  eren  now, 
often  reganled  with  anxiety.  Such  facts  seem  to  us  Strang ;  bat  they  are  adequately 
expUiLed  by  a  w:w  estimaie  of  the  struggles  and  conflicts  through  which  the  Christian 
Church  has' passed.  The  condict  has  often  been  over  some  non-essential,  and  eren 
indiffereut,  matter;  but  this  was  only  the  outward  seeming.  The  conflict  really  con- 
cerntd  vital  priTicipie,  The  trivial  cutter  over  which  the  tight  seemed  to  wage  gained 
an  undue  importance  thus,  and  the  relics  of  its  fictitious  value  linger  long  with  conser- 
vative-toned Christian  people.  Cultured  Christian  feeling  may  be  safely  left  to  decide 
the  appropriate  and  the  manpropriate  in  Church  music  and  scHig;  and  no  precise 
bUudards  ceed  be  fixed  for  all  cblses  of  the  Christian  community.  Historical  associa- 
tions properly  affect  the  ritual  of  some.  And  successive  generations  of  witnesses  for 
the  cLums  <.f  s}  iritual  life  over  ritual  observance  caDnot  £ui  to  influence  the  practices  of 
others.  Still  the  development  of  the  heart  of  music  has  greatly  tended  to  unite  all 
parties  in  the  full  dedication  of  this  gift  to  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Loid.  As 
this  subject  has  been  previously  treated,  a  simple  outline  may  here  suffice. 

I.  Mrsic  AND  SONG  sERvixo  GoD  IK  FAXiLT  SPHERES.  It  is  ofteu  made  a  gracious 
power  in  the  home.  The  home  is  a  temple,  and  should  always  be  thought  of  as  a 
sanctuary  of  the  Lord,  to  which  should  be  brought  the  best  gifts. 

11.    Music  AM>  S^.^NG  SEUVING  G\?D  IN  SPUEL&ES  OF  PRIVATE  CHRISTIAN  WORK.      Duriug 

a  recent  period  oi  vii>;res:»  ia  M.ii.^!:f>:er,  some  cultivated  Christian  ladies  proved 
how  the  othtTwise  c.osovi  vivvrs  of  the  &..k  and  sxi^ering  poor  could  be  opened  by  the 
attractions  of  beiucii'al  5^^;:g. 

III.  Music  and  song  skkving  God  in  public  Church  services.  Show  the  impor- 
tance oi  choirs  in  relation  to  i:.e  jwhiv  aud  the  }\fasur€  of  Christian  worship. 

IV.  Music  and  song  serving  God  in  special  efforts  to  preach  the  gospel  to 
MAS^F^  As  iUustratod  iu  the  creation  ^,>i  hymns  and  tunes  for  evangelistic  services, 
and  in  rtceut  revival  n-.ovemoLt^s^ 

riead  that  the  faculties  and  taknts  of  music  and  sonz  are /or  the  Lord^  and  that 
they  conu'  under  tiiis  twofold  Liw:  (1)  they  must  be  laid  on  his  altar  of  service; 
and  (J)  they  must  bo  cultured  for  efficient  use. — K.  T. 

Ver.  20. — Inttytstt,  in  rf«-i\^'iVn  is  c/ten  mi<un  lasi'wi,  "One  only  incident  tarnished 
the  brigiituess  ^.f  tins  greau^st  day  oi  David's  life.  Michal,  his  wife,  in  the  proud,  we 
may  almost  mv  conservative,  spirit  of  the  older  dynasty— not  without  a  thought  of 
her  father's  fallen  house — poured  forth  her  contemptuous  reproach  on  the  king  who 
had  descended  to  the  d.ancis  and  song  of  the  Levitical  procession."  There  are  marked 
differences  in  the  di:>(x^itions  of  men  in  relation  to  religion.  The  colder-natured  are 
apt  to  regard  the  impulsive  as  extravagant ;  and  the  warm-hearted  and  excitable  too 
readily  conclude  that  the  quieter-tont^i  people  are  insincere.  Explain  the  Eastern 
ec.-uiic  mt-^ies  oi  expressing  joy.  In  time  of  excitement,  rhythmical  movements,  such 
as  dancing,  afford  gre.it  relief.  And  such  clanging  of  trumpet  and  cymbals  was  the 
very  thing  to  set  the  o-'mjuny  upon  dancing.  Distinguish  the  natural  morements 
and  gestures  of  excited  feeling  frv>m  the  ordered  fashionable  dancing  with  which  we 
are  familiar.  What  lessons  may  be  learned  from  Michal's  inability  to  appreciate 
David's  religious  intensity  ? 

I.  llEUGION    FINDS    DIFFERENT    RESPONSE     IN    DIFFERENT    INDIVIDUALS.      We    mUSt 

not  look  for  the  same  ex|>erieDces  and  manifestations  in  all.     Each  inan*s  nligious 


CH.  XTL  1-43.]    THE  PinST  BflOK  OP  THE  CHEONICLEi 


conduct  will  bear  the  pl^a  impreaa  of  hia  clianoter  ftnd  diBpoaitioa.  This  mny 
be  appUed  to  ezperiencAB  of  cunversion-tlrae,  or  the  be^aDingt  of  the  Christiau 
life.  Ab  bUo  to  the  forms  in  which  men  stand  related  to  public  wonhip  and  ChrtBtiali 
work.  If  we  venture  to  make  mouldt  for  the  necesury  Christian  life,  we  must  take 
care  that  they  are  larae  and  general,  with  no  fine  lines  of  mutt-be  pteuliarilUi  in  them. 
Chriet  g^vea  a  new  life^  and  lenda  each  man  fcxth  to  expieas  it  according  to  hia  own 
gemiua  and  character. 

IL  Beuqioit  oar  nxD  xxpBBmoir  TBBonaH  all  Dnraamoin.  So  we  may  not, 
OTen  Id  thought,  exempt  any  man  from  its  graoiooa  iofluenoe ;  and  wa  may  not  be 
anxious  to  have  the  natural  djeposldous  of  men  changed.  Man  do  not  need  to  be 
made  other  than  they  are.  The  all-suBiciDg  change  is  the  inward  rageneration,  the 
renewal  of  tbo  vital  principle.  We  need  not  want  to  make  the  channel  of  the  rlTor 
bend  and  turn  in  any  other  and,  as  we  think,  more  graceful  forma.  Our  anxiety 
•hould  concern  the  purity  of  the  watera  flowing  down  from  the  fountain-head,  which 
fill  the  stream.  Preservation  of  tbe  characteristic  disposition  is,  however,  quite  con- 
sistent with  all  due  Christian  culture,  and  this  may  sometimes  so  bring  out  to  the 
front  the  best  in  men,  that  they  may  seem  other  than  they  were. 

IIL  Chrutiak  cbaxitt  finds  a  fbeb  aPBiaE  fob  bvbbt  vah.  Just  in  this 
Uichal  fUled.  She  had  not  charity  enough  to  give  David  credit  for  the  stnearify 
which  would  have  clothed  his  set  with  dignity.  A  man's  ways  may  not  be  our  ways, 
may  not  even  be  such  as  ne  can  approve ;  but  it  should  suffice  for  ns  if  we  oan  see  in 
them  the  signs  of  gennine  religious  life  and  feeling.  Then  we  may  wish  him  "  Qod- 
•peed." 

Application  of  a  prootiool  character  may  he  carefully  made  to  those  more  enthusi- 
astio  and  esdted  phases  of  religious  life  and  association  which  are  so  marked  a  featura 
of  nineteenth-century  Christianity.  From  the  calmer,  colder  point  of  view,  such  M 
Hichal  would  take,  there  may  seem  in  all  these  only  a  perilous  fanaticism.  The  charity 
that  "  hopeth  all  things "  may  at  least  enable  us  to  say,  in  the  spirit  of  our  Loro, 
. "  Forbid  them  not,  for  they  that  are  not  against  him  are  on  his  part."  And  his 
kingdom  has  Its  oa<coming  in  wondrous  ways ;  no  man  kuowoth  how. — ^B.  T, 


EXPOSITION, 


CHAPTEB  XVL 


Vers.  I— 3.— These  three  vrrsea  rather 
belong  to  the  olose  of  the  last  chapter,  and 
they  carry  on  the  parallel  of  S  Sam.  vl.  in 
its  vers.  17—19. 

Ter.  1.— In  th*  aldat  of  the  tant  that 
David  had  pttehed  far  It.  Bo  eh.  xv.  1  dis- 
tinotly  states  that  David  had  "pitched  a 
tent "  for  the  ark,  and  evidently  to  be  ready 
for  its  snivai  On  the  other  hand,  there  U 
no  menlion  of  any  aooh  tent  having  been  got 
In  readiness  in  oh.  xUL  or  in  2  Bam.  vL 
1 — II,  which  give  the  aeeonnt  of  the 
attempt  that  disastrously  tailed.  The  ex- 
iiressione  which  are  there  osed  wonld  rathei 
lead  to  the  oonolnaion  that  Ilavld'a  intention 
was  to  lake  tbe  saored  atmoture  Into  bis 
own  home  (2  8am.  vi  8,  10 ;  oh.  xiiL  12, 
13X  for  a  while,  at  all  events.  The  ^ 
(tent)  of  tbe  criminal  designates,  when  In- 
tended strictly,  a  liaircloth  ooveiing,  restlug 
00  poles  or  plaiiks  (Eiod.  zxvL  7,  11; 
xsxvi.  1«,  19%  The  Drst  occasion  of  the 
use  of  tlie  word  is  found  In  Gen.  iv.  SO. 
The  typ  (booth)  was  made  of  leaves  and 


brandies  interwoven  (Lev.  xxiii.  31,  40, 
12;  Deut.  xvl.  13).  The|Sfto  (tabernacle) 
was  the  dwellinK-pUce  or  pavilion,  whioh 
owned  to  tbe  ten  iDnerourtoinsBS  neU  as  the 
outer  covering  and  tbe  framowork  (Eiod. 
xiv.  9;  xitL  1,  12—15,  etc.;  mix.  82; 
il.  2,  29).  The  first  ooaarrence  of  this 
word  is  in  the  first  of  these  last-quoted 
reCersDoee.  Burnt  saeriflees  and  psaee  cffsr- 
ings.  The  idendoal  words  of  2  Bam  vl.  17, 
16,  where  tbe  Authorized  Version  translstea 
"burnt  offerings  and  peace  oflerings."  These 
wera  the  two  great  saorifioes — the  former 

rlring  of  aionmnaU  (Lev.  I.  3 — 9,  eta), 
latter  of  rteimeUiatUm  Reeled  and  tha 
enjnvment  of  peace  (Lev.  uL  I~5,  eto.^ 
Keitner  here  nor  In  the  parallel  plooe  is 
any  mention  made  of  the  altar  upon  which 
these  saerifioea  were  offered. 

Ver.  2.— He  blsMsd  the  people  in  tlw 
same  of  tha  Lord;  Im.  reverently  In  the 
Name  of  the  Lord,  and  as  vividly  conscions 
of  being  in  his  presence,  he  prooonnocs 
blessings  upon  the  people,  «~      *■"  -•---' 


e  proooni 
and   by  s 


«0 


TOE  FIB3T  BOOK  OP  THE  CHnOHICLES.    [en.  xn.  1-48. 


BoIpmoD  (1  Eiogi  liil.  14)  the  king  re*liied 
fu  mnrc  tlnmrly  tli»  idea  of  tlio  pntonial 
rrlation  to  tLe  people  tlian  had  ever  been 
•ince  tb«  time  of  tlie  paliiaichi  of  tlio  elder 
davi. 

SVr.  3.— Eocli  Utile  cinnse  of  th<i  Tcno  U 
rtpletu  «lih  iulereit  Tlic  myal  givrr.who 
nnw  dMit  to  emr  on*  of  Iirul,  wu,  after 
all,  but  a  ebnnncl;  yci,  and  only  one 
clioDnel,  t]irou):h  wliich  tliO  fulncM  and  the 
bounty  of  llie  ruyal  Oivrt  of  every  good  and 
perfL-ct  f-ift,  of  all  pood  vbutvoever,  of  all 
tlingi  nereasary  to  lile  and  godlincM,  ore 
•ujipliid  to  every  one  of  hia  creature-tub- 
jecU.  But  it  ia  bigbett  bonour,  u  wrvant 
and  inBtrumint  aluue,  to  llRuru  fnrlb  him 
bl  any  nay.  Tbe  leconil  liitlc  clause  tclli 
uaeitlur  lliat  womntonkirerognized  plaee 
on  occosinti  of  (bid  jojoui  riutivnl,  or  Ibat  the 
hoai>itality  of  aurb  au  ooeoaioa  did  not 
forjEct  them  and  their  homes.  And  tbe 
ftotiowing  three  little  elauaci  require  closer 
eiaminatLon.  Tbo  word  here  tranilnted 
"loaf'iD  theeipreuion  loaf  of  brMdii  "^a, 
for  which  in  thii  letiM  we  nay  turn  to 
Eiod.  iilK.  23;  Judg.  Till.  5;  I  Bum.  ii.36; 
Z.  S;  Frov.  vi.  20;  Jer.  xuTii.  21.  Tbe 
eorreepouding  word,  howcTi-r,  in  the  pa- 
ralUl  place  i*  n^  (fur  which  te«  Exod. 
ziii.  2,23;  Lev.'ii.  liTii.  12,  13:  riJL  20: 
xiiT.  S;  Numb.  vi.  15,  19;  it.  20).  Tbe 
e««etilial  meaning  of  the  farmer  wrrd  is  a 
eircle.  bcnco  applied  to  the  cake  because  of 
111  aliupe,  and  of  the  latter  wurd  per/uration, 
bcticc  appliel  to  tlio  rake  because  it  was 
pcrforaU'd.  A  good  pieos  of  flesh.  This  is 
tbo  Autboriied  Version  rendering  of  iQrH, 
which  occurs  only  in  tbe  parallul  place  and 
here.  Tbe  Vulgate  translates  mialura  bu- 
baJm  earnii ;  the  Scptuagint,  jsx'v''"'-  The 
imagined  dirivation  of  tbe  wonl  from  i; 
(oi)  and  FK  (Are),  or  from  iptf  (to  hum), 
teems  to  be  what  lias  led  tn  these  tianela- 
lions,  biljicd,  perhaps,  by  the  apparent 
con vcnlc lire  of  adapting  meat  from  tbe 
tacriUco  to  tbe  iirrad.  But  Guieniu#, 
IliWIiger,  Keil,  and  others  prefer  tbe  deri- 
\Btiou  iDb  (to  measure},  and  they  would 
rcmler  "  n  mciLsure  "  of  wine.  And  a  flagon. 
This  is  the  Authorized  Version  rundcting 
of  the  original  ntf'iSK.,  found  in  the  paralltl 
placo  as  well  hi  here,  and  also  in  tlio  only 
olhir  placea  (two  in  number,  nnd  in  tlie 
pluml)  where  it  occurs  (Cant,  ii  5;  Hobob 
iii.  I).  But  there  is  no  doubt,  or  but  little, 
that  tbo  rendering  Bhould  rather  be  "  driiHJ, 
prcEsed  cakca  of  tnisins  or  gmpes."  It  ia 
Iben  to  be  derived  from  tbe  root  trtfv  (to 
press).  Tbe  substantive  baa  both  masculine 
aud  feminine  form  io  plural.  Tbe  ^'u1g(lte 
translates  itmilam  frixam  olfo,  wliicli  means 
a  "baked  cake  of  Qour  and  oil;"  and  the 
BettaagiDt,  Kiyattr   i*b   niyirou   in   the 


pnmllel  place*.    But  faere  the  Baptuglnt 

ri  ads  ipTor  In  iprHnruitv  m)  i/iaftr^r  •■ 
the  whole  account  of  the  loaI|  the  good  piees 
of  flesh,  and  the  flagon. 

Vers.  4— 7.— These  verse*  oontun  k  rtata- 
ment  of  the  amngement  DaTid  iii«d«  of  ft 
more  permanent  natnre,  but  to  d»t«  bom 
tbfn  commenoemi-nt,  for  the  wrviM  of 
thanksgiring  by  the  Levite*. 

Ver.  4.— To  ministar;  i.e.  to  ofBdkte,  •■ 
wo  should  say,  in  tlia  lerTioe  before  the 
ark.  The  Terse  seems  to  destribe  wlwt 
ibonld  be  tbe  essence  of  that  terrioe.  It 
was  threefold— to  reaord,  to  tbank,  aod  to 
praiM  the  Loid  God  of  Israel.  The  word 
bete  used  for  "record"  ia  the  Hiph.  of 
-Di  (to  remember),  and  1>  rem«iked  npon 
by  Geseniut  as  a  title  atrial  ly  appiopriste 
to  the  eharsetor  of  the  two  psalm*  zxxTiiL 
•od  lix.,  on  tbe  head  of  whioh  It  ttmnd*,  aa 
meaning,  "to  make  other*  remembet"  (sea 
also  such  pessage*  a*  Eiod.  xs.  24 ;  S  Sum. 
TiiL  111;  iTiiL  IS;  ».  24;  Iml  slilL  26; 
liiii.  T).  Tbe  minds  of  the  peuple  were  to 
be  refreshed  in  this  serrioe  and  in  their 
Tcry  psalm  of  praise  (so  note  in  thia  ■ 
vers.  8,  9,  12,  21,  etc.),  by  being  reauc 
or  told,  so  far  as  the  youngest  of  them 
might  be  conromed,  of  God's  marrelloa* 
and  merciful  deed*  for  their  tbrefathen  of 
many,  many  e  generation.  Then  tb^  wer» 
to  cive  intelligeot  and  hearty  thank*.  And, 
lastly,  they  were  to  offer  to  approttch  that 
purest  form  of  worship  whieb  oooaiatB  in 
sdoring  praise.  One  might  jmagina  with 
what  zest  tliey  would  have  aooepted,  with 
what  fcrvoDr  Uiey  would  baTe  added  lip 
and  instrumentcif  musiotoit — thstoDeTer** 
which  needed  the  rcrnlulion  yet  of  nearly 
another  tliree  thonsaod  years,  that  it  might 
flow  from  the  derotiun  of  Addison. 
"  When  all  thy  mercies,  O  my  God, 
My  rising  soul  surveys. 
Transported  with  the  view  Tm  Io*t 
In  wonder,  loTe,  and  praise.** 
Ter.  S.— Obed-edom.  No  colon  should 
frlbiw  this  name.  And  the  first  time  uf 
tbe  occurrence  of  (be  name  J*i*l  in  this 
Terse  should  probably  have  shown  the 
Jaaiiel  of  ch.  it.  18.  The  contents  of  thia 
Terse  put  us,  then,  Into  poMeasion  of  this 
much,  that  Asaph  presided  (cb.  tL  S9)  at 
tills  musical  service,  and  that  his  instru- 
ment was  tbe  cymbals  (ch.  xt.  19),  witb 
which  time  was  kept ;  that  Zechariah  wa* 
next  to  him,  and,  with  eight  other*  formed 
a  bnnd,  who  played  on  padteri**  (or  lutea) 
and  harps.  If  wo  may  guide  onrselvea  by 
Ters.  20,  21  of  the  preceding  ehuuter,  three 
of  these— viz.  MHttithia,  Jeiel,  Obed.«dom 
— performed  on  the  harp,  the  other  six  wi 
the  psnllery,  or  lute. 

Ver.  6.-JabaiieL    Frobally  the  Eliewr, 


CH.  xvL  1—43.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa 


247 


who  in  oh.  xt.  24  is  coapled  m  priest  with 
Benaiah,  should  stand  in  the  place  of  this 
name  or  else  viee  vend. 

Yer.  7. — ^The  rendering  should  mn,  On 
thai  day  did  David  first  commit  to  (he  hand 
of  Asaph  and  his  brethren  to  render  praises 
to  Jehovah  ;  ie.  after  the  following  manner 
and  wordis.  The  word  first  marks  the 
solemn  establishment  of  set  public  worship 
in  the  metropolis. 

Vers.  8—36. — These  Torses,  then,  provide 
the  form  of  pndse  which  David  wished  to 
be  used  on  this,  and  probably  in  grateful 
repetition   on  some  succeeding  occasions. 
David  makes  selections  from  four  psalms 
already  known ;  for  it  cannot  be  supposed 
that  the  verses  we  have  here  were  the 
original,  and  that   thev  were   afterwards 
supplemented.      The   first   fifteen    verses 
(viz.  8—22)  are  from  Ps.  cv.  1 — 15.    The 
next  eleven  verses  (23 — 33)  are  from  Ps. 
zovi.  1 — 13 ;  but  a  small  portion  of  the  first 
and  last  of  these  verses  is  omitted.    Our 
thirty-fourth  verse   is  identical  with  Ps. 
oviL  1 ;  cxviii.  1 ;  cxxxvi  1 ;  and  forms  the 
larger  part  of  Pa  cvL  1.    It  is,  in  fact,  a 
doxology.    And  our  thirty-fifth  and  thirty- 
sixth  verses  consist  of  a  short  respondive 
(**and  sav  ye")   invocation,  followed    by 
another  doxology.    These  are  taken  from 
Ps.  cvi.  47,  48.    Hereupon  •*  all  the  people  ** 
are  directed  to  find  the  final  outburst  of 
praise  to  Jehovah,  and  **Amen.''    In  the 
first  of  these  selections  (vers.  8—23)  there  is 
no  material  variation  from  the  language  of 
the  psalm  itself.    Yet  the  original  psalm 
has  Abraham,  where  our  own   thirteenth 
verse  reads  IsraeL    And  the  original  psalm 
uses  the  third  person,  where  our  fifteenth 
and  nineteenth  verses  have  the  second  per- 
son.   In  the  second  selection  it  is  worthy 
of  note  that  our  ver.  29,  **  0>me  before  him," 
probably  preserves  the  ante-temple  reading, 
while   Ps.  xcvi.  8    was   afterwards,  to  fit 
temple  times,  altered  into,  ^  Come  into  his 
courts.**    The  arrangement  of  all  the  suc- 
ceeding clauses  does  not  exactly  agree  with 
the  arrangement  of  them  found  in  the  psalm, 
as  for  instance  in  the  latter  half  of  our  ver.  30 
and  in  ver.  31,  compared  with  the  clauses  of 
vers.  10, 11  of  the  psalm.    Again,  one  clause 
of  the  tenth  verse  of  the  psalm,  **  He  shall 
judge  ihe  people  righteously,"  is  not  found 
in  either   alternative  position  open  to  it 
through  the  inversion  of  clauses,  in  our  vers. 
80,  31.     The  rhythm  and  metre  of   the 
psalm  are,however,equally  unexceptionable. 
The  whole  of  the  twenty-nine  verses  of  this 
psalm  of  praise  (vers.  8 — 36  inclusive)  are 
divided  into  portions  of  three  verses  each, 
except  the  portion  Ters.  23 — 27  inclusive, 
which  consists  of  five  verses.    As  regards 
the  matter  of  it,  it  may  be  remarked  on  as 
breaking  into  two  parts,  in   the  first   of 


which  (vers.  8 — ^22)  the  people  are  reminded 
of  their  past  history  and  of  the  marvellous 
providence  which  had  governed  their  career 
from  Abraham  to  the  time  they  were  settled 
in  Canaan,  but  in  the  second  (vers.  23—36) 
their  thought  is  enlarged,  their  sympathies 
immensely  widened,  so  as  to  include  all  the 
world,  and  their  view  is  borne  on  to  the 
momentous  TesAiijof  judgmenL 

Vers.  8 — 10.— These  verses  are  an  ani- 
mated invocation  to  thanks  and  praise. 

Vers.  11— 14.— The  call  to  thanksgiving 
and  to  the  praise  of  adoration  is  now  in 
these  verses  succeeded  by  an  earnest  admo- 
nition to  practical  seeking  of  the  Lord,  and 
mindful  ooedience  to  him. 

Vers.  14 — 22.— These  verses  rehearse  the 
ancient  and  blissful  covenant  which  had 
made  Israel  so  to  differ.  These  are  called 
mine  anointed  ...  my  prophets,  in  harmony 
with  what  we  read  in  the  splendid  passage, 
Exod.  xix.  3 — 6.  The  substitution  in  our 
vers.  15, 19  of  the  second  person  pronoun 
plural,  in  place  of  the  thiiti  person  of  the 
psalm,  helps  speak  the  reality  of  this  occa- 
sion and  its  dramatic  correctness.  The 
literal  original  of  our  Authorized  Version  in 
ver.  19,  but  few,  even  a  few,  is,  men  of  num^ 
bery  i.e.  men  who  could  easily  be  numbered. 

Vers.  23—36. — ^The  grandeur  and  unusual 
comprehensiveness  of  the  adoration  and 
homage  here  proclaimed,  as  to  be  offered  to 
the  omnipotent  Ruler  of  all  nations,  should 
be  well  pondered.  Our  eye  and  ear  may 
have  become  too  familiar  with  it,  but  when 
put  a  little  into  relief,  and  referred  to  its 
original  time  of  day,  it  is  fit  to  be  ranked 
among  the  strongest  moral  evidences  of 
inspiration  in  the  word  and  the  speaker. 

Yer.  23. — This  verse  is  composed  of  the 
latter  half  of  each  of  the  first  two  verses  of 
the  psalm  (xcvL). 

Vers.  34 — 36. — ^These  verses,  from  the 
first,  forty-seventh,  and  forty-eighth  of  Ps. 
cvi.,  must  have  suggested  the  sad  inter- 
mediate contents  of  that  psalm,  the  signifi- 
cant key-note  of  which  is  sounded  in  our 
thirty-fifth  verse.  The  suggestion  in  the 
midbt  of  the  unbounded  glacbess  of  this  day 
is  affecting,  and  must  have  been  intended 
for  salutary  lesson  and  timely  warning.  In 
the  midst  of  the  fulness  of  praise  and  joy, 
the  people  are  led  to  prayer— say  ye — and  the 
prayer  is  an  humble  petition  for  salvation, 
union,  and  protection  from  every  enemy. 
God's  treatment  of  his  anointed  people  had 
been  on  his  part  one  continued  protection 
and  one  prolonged  salvation.  Yet  they  had 
often  neither  prayed  for  these  nor  acknow- 
ledged them.  Now  they  are  led  again  by 
the  hand,  as  it  were,  to  the  footstool  of  the 
throne. 

Vers.  37 — 43.— These  verses  give  the  now 
new-ordaiued  distribution  of  pritsts  and 


218 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CURONICLEa    [cb.  twi.  1—43. 


Levi  tot,  to  minister  and  t4)  attrnd  to  the  | 
■crvirc*  of  praise  liefnre  the  ark.  Aud  the 
first  of  tbi-ro  ruay  be  considered  to  mark  an 
important  ttL-p  in  advance  in  the  crystal- 
lizing of  thf  world's  rccle>ia8tical  institu- 
tion''. AcUii'h  anii  his  brt-thrcn  of  song  are 
left  there  before  the  ark  of  the  eorenant . . . 
to  miniiter  before  the  ark  eontiiiiiallj,  ae 
every  daj'i  work  required.  A  permanent 
l(K>al  ministry  and  chtjir  arc  tbusesta)ilij(hed, 
witii  a  fixity  of  phice  on  Zion,  and  ri'f^a- 
larity  of  time  tliat  bad  been  hitherto  un- 
attiiiiiable. 

Vcr.  38.— Obed-edom  with  their  brethren. 
Ezjilanation  is  needed  of  the  plural  pronoun 
**t)iiir."  Either  another  name  is  wanted 
wit  1 1  Olied-etlom,  or  tacit  refi-renco  is  made 
to  **  A»uph  and  his  bnthren/*  as  though 
the  name  Asuph  had  not  been  followed  in 
its  own  place  by  the  clause  ^und  his 
brethren."  Kiil  draws  attention  to  the 
**■  three  Hcore  and  two  '*  of  ch.  xzvi.  8,  in 
connectirtn  with  the  three  More  and  eight 
of  this  place;  and  it  has  been  proposed  to 
make  up  this  number  by  some  of  the  sons 
of  Hoiah,  of  our  following  verso  and  of 
ch.  xxvi.  11.  In  this  case  the  name  llitsah 
mi^ht  be  the  name  missing  before,  "and 
their  brethren."  Conjectun*,  however,  has 
not  sufficient  clue  here  to  warrant  it,  and 
the  textual  state  of  this  verse  must  be 
debited  with  the  obscurity.  The  ambiguity 
resjiecting  the  name  Obea-edom  has  already 
(ch.  xiii.  14)  bten  allu<k-d  to.  Nrglecting 
this  ambiguity,  it  may  lie  rrpeati><i  that 
Obed-edom, . . .  ion  of  Jedithnn  (ns  the  Kt-ri 
of  thiri  pa^wage  is)  was  a  Merarito  Invite, 
wliile  OU'd-e<lom  son  of  Jeduthnn  (ch.  xv. 
*/'*)  wns  of  (jath-rimmon,  a  (*ittite  (2  Sum. vL 
10-12;  JoHh.  xxT.  21),  a  Kol.athite  (ch.  vi. 
CO,  (j'J),  aud  a  Korliiti'  (trh.  xxvi.  1—5;.  I 


Ver.  39. — Wliile  thoee  abore-mentioDed 
were  to  officiate  before  the  tk  on  Zioo,  tboea 
mentioned  in  this  and  following  towi  m 
the  officiating  staff  at  Oibeon.  It  is  now 
brought  into  prominence  that  the  ark  and 
the  tabernacle  are  in  two  separftte  place*. 
The  great  ordinary  aacrifioes  and  aernoea, 
"*  all  that  is  written  in  the  Law  of  the  Lord/' 
are  carefully  obeeired  oo  the  original  altar 
(Exoil.  xxxviii.  2)  in  the  tabernacle.  Other 
and  speehil  sacrifices  evidently  were  offered 
in  the  preaenoe  of  the  ark.  The  tabernacle 
erected  in  the  wildemesa  waa  first  stationed 
at  Shiloh  (Joah.  xviii.  1 ;  1  Sam.  iv.  8.  4). 
The  occasion  of  its  removal  to  Nob  (1  8am. 
xxi.  1 :  xxii.  19)  is  not  namted.  The 
present  passage  firat  tells  ns  where  it  had 
been  since  the  slaughter  of  the  priests  at 
Saul's  command  by  Doeg  the  Edomita. 
Some  distinct  statement,  like  that  of  oh.  xxi. 
29  and  2  Chron.  i.  3,  might  have  been  ex- 
pected here.  Zadok  the  priatt  is  given  (ch. 
vi.  4^9)  aa  in  the  line  of  Eleazar. 

Ver.  40.— To  offsr  hunt  dferinga ;  i^  the 
customary  rooming  and  evening  sacrifloea. 

Vers.  41, 42. — Comparing  these  verses  with 
vers.  4— G  and  37 — 40,  it  may  be  supposed 
that  we  are  intended  to  understand  that  of 
all  who  were  set  apart  and  who  had  been  ex- 
pressed by  name  (as  e^,  ch.  xv.  4 — 24),  some 
were  now  formally  appointed  to  serve  before 
the  ark,  and  some  in  the  tabernacle  at 
Gibeon.  The  confusion  existing  in  these 
verges  by  the  repetition  of  the  preposition 
with,  and  the  proper  names  Heman  and 
Jeduthnn,  betrays  some  CDrruptness  of  text 
The  Sept  un gin t  does  not  show  tiiem  in  the 
loiter  verse.  The  sons  of  Jeduthnn  are 
found  in  ch.  xxv.  3. 

Vir.  43.— (Sec  2  Sam.  vi  19,  2a) 


IIOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — J 3. — The  inauyuicU  ter vices  on  ZioiCs  height,  typical.  The  greater  pert  of 
the  contents  of  this  chapter  must  be  viewed  as  borrowed  matter — the  appropriating  of 
portions  of  sacred  songs  or  psalms  which  already  existed,  to  this  individual  occasion. 
The  stricter  homiletic  treatment,  therefore,  of  our  vers.  7 — 3G  may  be  better  found  in 
the  portions  of  the  psalms  coDCcmed,  in  their  own  proper  place.  But  there  are  some 
larger  aspects  offered  by  the  matter  of  this  chapter,  which  may  be  appropriately  con- 
sidered in  this  place.    And  wo  may  notice — 

I.  First  of  all,  the  OATnEKiNo  fobce  of  bkligion.  It  has  indeed  already  gathered 
such  force  as  to  conquer  for  itself  the  place  which  it  holds  on  this  great  day  of  David. 
To  this  it  has  grown  since  the  day  of  Seth  and  Enos,  when  we  read  of  it  thus,  "  Then 
began  men  to  call  on  the  Name  of  the  Lord  "  (Gen.  iv.  26).  And  though  true  it  is  that 
wo  may  not  critically  make  any  great  doctrine  or  argument  depend  on  the  uncertain 
exegesis  of  that  one  sentence,  yet  we  know  that  the/oc^x,  so  far  as  we  require  them  now, 
were  not  distant  from  what  the  sentence  says.  The  religion  of  mankind  then,  where 
existent  at  all,  was  the  pure,  individual,  essential  principle.  Heaven-given  and  reigning 
in  the  hearts  of  a  vciy  few— this  still  and  evermore  of  ncoessity  its  essence.  Then,  bow- 


CH.  xvL  1—43.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  249 

ever,  when  men  could  be  numbered  only  by  the  score,  it  was  manifestly  impossible  for 
religion  to  exhibit  the  "effects  **  which  it  does  in  the  time  of  David.  Nay,  of  ages  after- 
wards it  were,  of  course,  true  to  say  the  same  thing,  and  to  add  this  also,  that  when,  so 
far  as  numbers  were  concerned,  it  became  possible,  still  it  did  not  become  fact.  Through 
all  these  age»,  however,  with  all  receding  tides,  and  notwithstanding  some  extraordinary 
checks,  religion  never  became  utterly  lost  to  sight.  Once  during  those  ages  it  showed  a 
number  not  exceeding  eight,  another  time  not  fewer  than  seven  thousand,  and,  for  the 
most  part,  what  the  number  was,  greater  or  less,  €h)d  only  knew— he  alone  could  say. 
Tet  through  good  report  and  ill,  through  good  times  and  bad,  it  was  acquiring  strenfftb 
unmeasured  and  immeasurable.  It  was  insisting  on  its  own  vitality  ;  it  was  proving 
the  courage  of  its  convictions ;  its  tone  was  of  no  uncertain  kind ;  its  mien  was  ever  of 
the  undaunted.  In  patriarchal  succession  of  families,  what  pungent  lessons  religion  many 
a  time  taught  and  made  itself  known  thereby !  In  Egyptian  times,  amid  temptation  and 
snare,  what  various  knowledge  and  determination  it  was  maturing  1  In  the  wilderness, 
how  carefully  by  form,  by  sacrifice,  by  sign,  by  judgment,  it  was  shaping  individual 
and  national  life.  Amid  the  dangers  and  the  glories  of  the  people's  settlement  in  the 
land  of  promise,  amid  the  achievements  of  judges  and  leaders  and  captains,  and  the 
multitudmous  strifes  of  little  kings,  its  pronounced  voice  spoke  the  word  and  it  was 
done,  or,  if  the  voice  was  silent,  the  people  were  undone.  All  this  time,  measurable  only 
by  thousands  of  years,  it  was  betraying  its  existence,  indicating  its  nature,  betokening  a 
large  store  of  sleeping  strength,  and  anything  but  seeming  to  exhaust  or  to  strain  its  own 
energy.  But  now  the  principle  of  religion  seems  to  have  burst  into  full  life.  Its  many 
and  outspreading  branches  hang  down  with  ripe  and  golden  fruit.  Now  it  is  the  light 
and  life,  the  joy  and  strength,  the  reverence  and  pride  of  a  whole  nation,  from  the  highest 
to  the  lowest.  All  business,  all  pleasure,  all  other  thought  or  care,  stand  still  to  look, 
or  throng  to  join  in  a  scene  festive  of  festivity  itself.  The  day  itself  is  ablaze,  not  with 
the  ordinary  light  and  heat  of  a  splendid  sun  over  Zion*s  heights,  but  with  the  service 
and  joy  of  religion  in  a  hundred  thousand  hearts — in  "  Jerusalem  and  all  Judsoa,''  but 
culminating  in  Zion.  And  it  is  all  because  *'  In  Judah  God  is  known,  his  Name  great 
in  IsraeL  In  Salem  also  is  his  tabernacle,  and  his  dwellins-place  in  Zion."  Blessed 
glimpse  of  what  it  will  be  for  this  world,  when  "  Gkxl  shall  all  renew,"  and  the  joy 
become  universal. 

II.  ThS  attainment  of  a  CONSPICnOUB  AND  FIXED  HOME  FOB  BELIOION.     ThoUgh  the 

world  of  mankind  is  some  three  thousand  years  old,  religion  had  been  as  yet  but  a 
wayfarer.     It  had  never  deserted  men.      Its  spirit  had  influenced,  guided,  ruled  their 
spirit ;  it  had  consoled  their  sorrows,  heightened  their  joys  ten  thousand  separate  times ; 
but  it  has  not  yet  had  an  honoured  dwelling-place,  a  worthy  throne,  a  fixed  home.    To 
this  it  has  now  come,  and  to  this  it  has  been  brought  up  by  the  willing  enthusiasm  of 
king  and  prophet,  priest  and  people.    There  can  be  no  doubt  that  its  local  habitation 
exposes  it  to  some  danger,  to  some  misunderstanding.    The  long  process  of  ages  has 
been  undoing,  is  still  undoing  the  danger,  correcting  the  misunderstanding.    The  city 
then  emphatically  set  on  a  hill  has  never  been  hidden.    Ten  thousand  others,  the 
spiritual  copies  of  it,  have  taken  its  name  upon  them,  and  have  helped  thereby  to 
prove  practically  that  Zion*s  glory  that  day  did  not  foreshadow  the  exdunveness  of  an 
individual  place,  but  only  the  sure  foundation  and  settled  firmness  of  God*s  own 
Church,  and  its  exalted,  commanding  prominence.    The  typical  lessons,  therefore,  of 
the  day  on  which  David  fixed  the  symbols  and  the  services  and  the  servants  of  a 
true,  revealed  religion  on  Zion  are  not  to  the  effect  that  religion  itself  is  anything  less 
than  a  pure,  silent,  but  mighty  principle  in  the  heart,  but  rather  that  it  is  to  be  tho 
avowed,  conspicuous,  and  abiding  principle  of  the  life,  and  of  the  life  of  all    The 
distribution  of  religion  is  emphatically  not  to  be  partial.     The  influences  of  it  are 
emphatically  not  to  be  intelligible  only  to  an  initiated  few.     The  force  of   it  is 
emphatically  not  to  expend  itself  invisibly,  and  exhaust  itself  according  to  individual 
fickleness  or  frailty.    It  is  to  state  its  character,  its  quality,  its  very  nature  before  all 
the  world,  and  under  the  blaze  of  publicity  itself— a  testimony  for  or  against  every 
man  to  the  eye  or  ear  of  whom  it  has  become  proclaimed.    Ana  in  spite  of  one  or  two 
temporary  and  superficial  appearances  to  the  contrary,  these  were  the  truths  which 
that  day  was  proffering  to  tcAch.    For  a  while,  perhaps,  it  was  "  Zion's  height  alone ; " 
fome  thought  it  was  to  be  always  **  Zion's  height  alone ;  *'  but  faithful  history 


250  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ch.  xti.  1— 43. 


and  imperioui  necessity  have  proved  the  contrary,  and  have  prored  thai  to  haTo  been 
never  meant. 

**  Not  now  on  Zion's  height  alone 
Thy  fa? ourcd  worshipper  may  dwelL 
•  •  •  •  • 

**  To  thoe,  at  last,  in  erery  clime 
Shall  temples  rise  and  praise  be  sung." 

III.  TnF.  ELEMBNTB  OP  THB  BELI0I0U8  JOT  OF  A  VATI0K*8  0RAVDE8T  FSmVAU    Theie 

are  certainly  nut  obKurely  told  here.  They  consist  in  thanks  for  all  that  ia,  and 
adoring  praise  for  him,  from  whom  all  good  is.  The  mind  and  memory  have 
been  stirred  up,  and  from  their  depth  and  their  breadth  come  the  testimonials  of  hia 
boundless  compassion,  mighty  deliyerance,  tenderest  mercy,  good  gift  and  grace.  The 
heart  knows  the  meaning,  and,  though  often  too  insensible,  now  owns  the  joj.  Happy 
Is  that  teacher  of  religion  who,  with  Divine  help  and  the  Divine  Spirit,  can  make 
the  mind  and  memory  do  this,  some  of  their  highest  and  most  fruitful  work.  He  will 
be  a  useful  teacher,  preacher,  pastor,  guide  of  souls.  Angels  very  likely  may  aping 
at  onco  to  adoratiou^s  highest  reach  and  strain  direct.  But  we  are  permitted  to  rise 
thither  through  the  appeal  to  our  nature  of  gratitude.  The  religious  service  and  lan- 
guage of  this  day  is  the  reiteration  of  APPJ^d  to  gi?e  thanks,  while  the  ground  for  doing 
so  is  simply  and  impressively  told.  This  mingles  a  vein  of  pathos,  of  confession,  (3 
dependent  prayer ;  and  then  acclamation  and  the  praise  not  of  thanksgiving,  but  of 
adoration,  fill  every  heart  and  tongue.  Such  is  the  worship  for  such  as  we  have  been, 
when  we  get  above.  Such  are  the  songs  of  heaven  and  its  temple.  Such  the  joy  of 
each  and  of  all,  who  there  recount  with  the  fulness  of  gratitude  dangers  past,  sin  for^ven, 
guilt  cleansed  away,  salvation  freely  given,  till  the  enraptured  soul  is  lost  in  adoration 
and  "  glories  in  the  praise  "  of  Jehovah. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  2. — Sacrifice  and  hUssing,  The  manner  in  which  David  celebrated  the  reception 
of  the  ark  into  its  appointed  tent  on  the  height  of  his  city  was  thoroughly  character- 
iMtic.  He  acted  as  a  king,  and  as  a  kind  of  royal  mediator  between  the  Gkd  of  heaven 
and  the  chosen  people  Israel. 

I.  He  blessed  the  Lord  in  tub  name  of  the  peoplb.  For  this  was  certainly  the 
significance  of  the  sacrifices,  burnt  ofiering8,and  peace  offerings.  In  offering  them,  the 
king  was  nublicly  acknowlcd^^ing  the  authority  of  the  supreme  Lord,  was  publicly 
adoring  and  praising  him  as  the  God  of  the  nation,  and  was  publicly  seeking  hia  fovour 
and  countenance.  Not  that  David  offered  these  sacrifices  with  his  own  hands.  What 
he  did  by  means  of  the  priests,  whom  he  directed,  he  is  represented  as  doing  himself. 
It  was  a  high  day,  a  solemn  and  joyful  festivity;  and  it  was  becoming  that  the  Lord 
should  be  recognised,  sought,  and  praised. 

II.  He  dlehhed  the  people  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  Probably  he  pronounced  a 
solemn  bone<liction,  invoking  the  gracious  regard  of  the  God  of  Israel  upon  the  choeen 
nation.  With  the  ark  of  the  covenant  in  their  possession,  in  the  midst  of  their 
metropolis,  the  people  might  well  be  encouraged  to  rejoice  in  the  presence  and  favour 
of  him  who  is  ever  the  Source  of  all  good.  It  is  a  proof  of  David's  policy  that  he  took 
this  opportunity  of  feasting  the  assembled  multitudes.  This  would  no  doubt  create  a 
favourable  impression  upon  all  minds.  Their  spiritual  privileges,  and  their  happineea  in 
having  a  king  so  considerate  and  liberal  as  David  to  reign  over  them,  would  be  associated 
in  their  minds.  They  would  connect  their  religion  and  their  loyalty  together,  and 
would  cherish  happy  recollections  of  the  solemnities  of  the  day. — T. 

Ter.  4. — Ministerial  tervice.  Although  the  Levites  were  set  apart  for  the  service  of 
tlie  Lord's  house,  even  from  the  days  of  Moses,  it  is  certain  that  the  Levitical  acrvicea 
were  more  fully  organized  by  David,  and  that  from  his  time  there  was  more  of  system 
and  more  of  efficiency  in  thvir  ministrations.    There  is  so  marked  a  difference  between 


CH.  XVI.  1—43.]     THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  251 

the  Jewish  Church  and  the  Christian  Church,  that  we  can  only  apply  the  general 
principles  of  the  former  to  the  latter.    Tet  the  text  may  well  suggest  to  us  that — 

I.  PuBUO  WORSHIP  HAS  8CBIFTUBAL  AUTHOBiTT.  Worship,  to  be  acceptable,  must 
be  from  the  heart.  But  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  will  speak.  It  is 
natural  and  appropriate  that  the  sentiments  and  desires  of  the  soul  should  find  a  Yocal 
utterance ;  and  it  is  also  natural  and  appropriate  that  those  who  have  the  same  tribute 
to  ofifer  should  join  together  and  offer  it  in  common.  The  Book  of  the  Acts  in  the 
New  Testament  sanctions  such  worship  equally  with  these  Books  of  Chronicles  in  the 
Old. 

II.  Public  wobship  shoitld  consist  laboelt  of  thanksqivino  and  pbaise.  Accord- 
ing to  the  text,  the  Levites  recorded  and  celebrated  the  glorious  deeds  of  the  Most 
High,  adored  his  attributes,  gave  thanks  for  his  forgiving  mercy,  his  bounty,  and  loving- 
kindness.  We  do  not  want  less  prayer  in  our  congregations,  but  we  do  want  more 
praise.  **  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever ; "  and  while  his  mercy  endures  his  praises  should 
not  cease. 

nL  PcTBLIC  W0B8HIP  SHOULD  BB  LBD  BT  APPODITED  MIKI8TEB8.     CommOU  SCUSe  may 

teach  us  so  much.  If  praise  is  to  be  sung,  some  musical  leaders  must  conduct  it.  If  the 
Scriptures  are  to  be  read,  some  human  voice  must  read  them.  If  prayer  is  to  be  offered, 
some  one  must  pour  forth  the  language  of  petition,  in  which  others  may  join,  whether 
silently  or  audibly.  If  the  gospel  is  to  be  heard  by  men,  *'  how  shall  they  hear  without 
a  preacher?"    Scripture  pr^edents  abound  for  ministerial  service. 

IV.  While  public  worship  must  be  properly  conducted,  it  must  not  be  delegated 

TO  ANT  FUNCnOKABIES  OR  OFFICIALS,  WHOSE  SERVICES  MAT  BB  SUBSTITUTED  FOR  THAT 

OF  THE  PEOPLE.  Lovites  uuder  the  old  dispensation,  pastors  and  teachers  under  the 
new,  may  aid  the  devotions  of  the  people,  but  their  offering  cannot  be  accepted  in  the 
place  of  what  God  requires — a  song,  a  prayer,  from  every  heart.  "  Praise  the  Lord,  aU 
ye  people ! "  The  Christian  Church  admits  of  no  exclusive  priesthood ;  all  Christians 
are  priests  unto  Ood  the  Father,  inasmuch  as  all  offer  to  him  sacrifices  of  willing 
obedience  and  grateful  praise. 

Conclusion.  1.  A  rebuke  to  the  ungrateful  and  undevout,  whO|  whilst  they  daily 
receive  Qod's  mercies,  acknowledge  not  the  Giver.  2.  A  rebuke  to  the  formal  and 
ceremonial,  who  excuse  themselves  from  offering  sacrifices  of  praise  on  the  ground  that 
this  '*  religious  duty  "  is  fulfilled  by  appointed  officials.  3.  A  reminder  and  summons, 
to  which  all  sincere  Christians  will  do  well  to  take  heed.  Some  spiritual  ministry  and 
service  may  be  fulfilled  by  every  Christian:  and  it  is  a  high  honour  to  be  permitted 
to  lead  the  pruses  and  the  supplications  of  the  people  of  the  Lord. — T. 

Vers.  7—36. — A  paalm.  When  the  king  had  organized  a  choir  of  musicians,  had 
provided  them  with  their  instruments,  had  assigned  them  their  duties  and  their  main- 
tenance, it  renuuned  for  him  to  decide  what  they  were  to  sing.  He  was  himself  **  the 
sweet  psalmist  of  Israel."  It  is  difficult  for  us  to  imagine  what  psalmody  must  have 
be^i  before  the  time  of  David.  It  is  a  grand  vocation — that  of  putting  words  of  praise 
into  the  lips  of  worshippers.  And  it  was  a  glorious  burst  of  sacred  song  which  pealed 
from  the  heights  of  Jerusalem  when  the  sublime  odes  of  David  were  first  rolled  to 
heaven  upon  the  wings  of  the  wiud.  What  a  revelation  of  God,  what  an  inspiration 
for  man,  what  new  life  to  the  world,  when  the  psalms  were  first  wrought  into  shape  by 
the  glowing  heart  and  the  glorious  eloquence  of  David  1  The  later  Levitical  psalms 
nre  perhaps  more  reflective  and  elaborate,  but  those  composed  by  the  lyrical  sovereign  of 
Israel  have  at  once  the  simplest  piety,  the  profoundest  feeling,  and  the  most  vigorous 
eloquence.  The  occasion  of  the  composition,  or,  at  all  events,  the  first  public  rendering 
of  David's  odes,  was  one  worthy  of  such  efforts.  When  the  ark  foimd  a  resting-place 
in  the  city  of  David,  when  Jerusalem  was  consecrated  by  the  public  and  regal  recogni- 
tion of  the  Divine  Law,  when  the  Levites  solemnly  addressed  Jehovah  in  the  name  of 
Israel, — then  this  magnificent  psalm  was  sung,  now  in  melodious  recitative,  and  again 
in  resounding  chorus,  to  the  accompaniment  of  cymbal,  of  trumpet,  and  of  harp.  It 
was  a  fitting  inauguration  of  a  series  of  sublime  solemnities.  When  we  examine  the 
structure  of  the  psalm,  we  are  surprised  and  filled  with  admiration  at  the  appropriate- 
ness, the  beauty,  the  comprehen^veness  of  the  composition.  The  psalm,  as  it  is 
recorded  in  this  place,  agrees  with  what  we  find  in  the  hundred  and  fifth,  ninety-si  xth. 


252  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  TOE  CHRONICLES,    [cr.  xn.  1— 4S. 

hnndn-d  and  seyentb,  and  handred  and  sixth  psalms.    Taken  ai  we  here  find  it^  It 
contains — 

I.  An  APMoyiTioN  and  f^uMMOxs  TO  PRAIBK  THK  LoRD.  Thls  18  addressed  to  Batore 
(vers.  30 — 33),  to  mankind  in  general  (ver.  28),  especially  to  Israel  (yer.  13). 

II.  A  RECORD  OP  GoD*8  GOODNESS.  And  tbis  both  to  the  patriarchs  rrers.  15— 18\ 
and  to  Israel  as  a  nation,  to  whom  that  goodness  had  been  displayea  in  the  most 
critical  jieriod  of  their  hiMtorj  (vers.  19 — ^22). 

III.  Fraise  of  God's  atthibutes  and  chaeactkb.  (Yen.  24— 29»  34.)  Never 
hail  tbeuc  been  so  devoutly  and  at  the  same  time  so  poetically  celebrated  as  now  and 
here. 

IV.  Prater  for  saltation.  This  petition  (ver.  35)  flows  most  natorally  oat  of 
what  precedes.  In  the  register  of  Divine  acts,  in  the  recounting  of  Divine  attribates,  a 
foundation  had  been  laid  for  this  devout  and  urgent  entreaty. 

V.  Blessing  and  Amen.  A  glorious  closing  ^ver.  36)  to  a  gloriona  psalm.  ''All 
the  people  "  here  concurred  with,  adopted  as  their  own,  the  worship  of^the  Levitea. 
The  royal  psalmist's  heart  must  have  oeat  high  with  sacred  Joy  when  his  plana  proved 
successful,  when  his  ministers  rendered  bis  compositions  in  a  manner  worthy  of  their 
substance,  and  when  the  soul  of  a  nation  was  raiticd  into  fellowship  with  Qod. — T. 

Vera.  1—3. — JJourt  of  elation.  The  path  of  human  life  lies,  for  the  moat  part,  along 
the  level  of  simple  and  ordinary  experiences,  amid  scenes  and  drcumstancea  that  annoy 
or  denress  but  do  not  greatly  grieve,  or  that  please  or  gladden  but  do  not  ezdte  to 
tumultuous  delights.  Sometimes,  however,  that  path  leMs  down  into  deep  valleys  of 
i)rofoundcst  sorrow ;  sometimes  it  leads  up  to  the  high  hills  of  exhilarmtimig  joy. 
Whether  in  the  depth  or  upon  the  summit,  we  are  in  peculiar  peril.  We  Ineathe  an 
unusual  air  and  are  in  danger  of  losing  control  of  our  full  spiritual  ftcultiee.  Men  are 
sometimes  overwhelmed  by  groat  sorrow  or  by  supreme  delight,  and  either  lose  their 
mental  balance  altogether  or  commit  actions  which  they  never  cease  to  regret.  It 
is  a  great  thing  to  have  a  vent  for  our  intenser  feelings,  a  right  channel  through 
which  they  may  safely  flow,  or  rather  a  sphere  in  which  they  may  spend  their  strength, 
to  our  own  iK>sitivo  advantage  and  to  the  profit  of  others.  Our  text  suggests  such  a 
sphere  for  our  energies  in  the  hours  of  elation.    We  are  reminded— 

J.  That  we  may  go  to  God  in  self-presentation.  In  the  midst  of  their  rejoicing 
"  thoy  offered  burnt  sacriBces  before  God  "  (ver.  1).  The  burnt  offering  was  the  type  of 
self-dedication  unto  God.  As  the  offerer  brought  his  victim  to  be  wholly  presented  to 
Jehovah,  so  we  are  invited  to  offer  our  whole  selves  unto  the  living  God.  Our  intenaest 
joys  attend  our  greatest  mercies,  and  these  may  well  lead  us  to  renew  our  vows  unto 
our  Redeemer,  freely  and  gladly  presenting  ourselves,  once  more,  to  him  whose  we  are. 

II.  Tuat  we  may  go  to  God  in  thanbful  acknowledgment.  "They  offered 
peace  offer! ntrs"  also:  these  are  suggestive  of  the  act  of  praise  by  which  we  render 
thanks  to  God  for  all  his  gor>clneAs  to  us.  There  can  be  no  time  so  suitable  for  this  as 
the  hour  of  elation,  when  unusual  blessings  have  been  conferred  by  him.  We  are  bound 
to  recognize  him  as  the  Source  and  Spring  of  all  our  joy. 

HI.  That  we  mat  go  to  God  in  unsrlfish  invocation.  "When  David  had  made 
an  end  ...  he  blessed  the  pcoj)lc  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  "  Tver.  2),  i.e.  he  invoked 
the  Divine  blessing  \x\xni  them.  He  doubtless  used  such  words  as  these :  "  The  Lord  bless 
you,  and  keep  you ;  the  Lord  make  his  face  shine  ujwn  you,"  etc.  (Numb.  vi.  24—26). 
Wo  have  no  power  to  impart  blessedness  by  any  direct  volition  of  our  own,  but  we  can 
express  our  earnest  desire  that  men  may  be  blessed  ;  and  we  can  do  one  thing  more  and 
better  than  that — we  can  solemnly  and  earnestly  invoke  the  blessing  of  God  to  rest  on 
those  whom  we  love  and  with  whom  we  desire  to  share  our  own  prosperity  and  joy, 

IV.  We  can  go  out  to  our  keioiibours  in  generous  kindness.  David's  good 
feeling  took  the  form  of  hospitality  (ver.  3).  He  gave  to  every  one  then  preseut^  bread, 
flesh,  and  wine,  wherewith  to  find  nourishment  and  pleasure.  When  God,  in  his  pro- 
vidence, sends  us  prosperity,  we  should  distribute  freely  to  our  poorer  fellows.  We  may 
distribute,  as  David  did,  of  those  things  which  furnish  the  table.  We  may  let  our 
generosity  take  other,  possibly  better,  forms  than  this ;  we  may  spend  our  strength  in 
securing  education  for  the  ignorant,  position  for  the  unemployed,  privilege  for  the 
spiritually  destitute,  opportunity  for  the  aspiring.    If  thus,  in  dedicaUoUi  in  thanka- 


en.  xvL  1—43.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  253 

giving,  in  invocation,  in  generosity,  we  escape  from  ourselves  and  go  forth  unto  God 
and  man,  we  shall  pass  scathless  through  the  perilous  hour  of  elalion,  and  be  not  only 
unharmed  by  it  but  blessed  in  it.-*C 

Vers.  4—7,  36 — 43.— >i?e^ti2ar  Divine  service.  These  verses  may  suggest  to  us  whole- 
some truths  respecting  the  constant  worship  of  Ood  as  distinguished  from  acts  of 
exceptional  devotion. 

L  That  devotion  must  not  bb  allowed  to  evaporate  in  temfobabt  exoiteubnt. 
David  was  wise  in  not  sending  the  people  home  (ver.  43)  until  be  had  designed  a  plan 
or  arrangement  in  virtue  of  which  the  thankful  spirit  of  the  people  should  express  itself 
in  ordinary  and  regular  exercises  (vers.  4 — 37).  The  time  of  revival,  of  exceptional 
religious  excitement,  of  spiritual  ecstasy,  may  be  very  pleasant  and  promising,  but  it 
will  end  in  nothing  or  in  positive  evil,  if  those  who  prompt  and  lead  it  do  not  devise 
measures  by  which  it  shall  find  due  utterance  in  permanent  institutions. 

II.  That  sacbed  things  must  be  entbusted  to  the  chaboe  of  capable  and 
BBSFONSiBLE  PEBS0N8.  However  admirable  tbe  institution,  it  will  not  take  care  of  itself. , 
Good  things  will  soon  wane  and  die  if  they  be  not  taken  charge  of  by  living  earnest 
souls.  David  sought  and  found  the  best  men  to  be  engaged  in  the  service  of  praise 
(vers.  6,  6).  In  every  part  of  Divine  service,  success  can  only  be  attained  and  main* 
tained  by  competent  and  responsible  men  taking  the  matter  in  hand.  If  we  trust  to 
the  intrinsic  excellency  of  the  exercise,  and  allow  negligence  or  fiivouritism  to  enter, 
we  may  expect  speedy,  or,  at  any  rate,  certain  decline  and  ultimate  extinction.  In 
Qod*a  service  let  each  post  be  assigned  to  that  man  whom  he  has  made  fittest  for  it,  and 
who  will  feel  that  he  is  personally  accountable  for  the  way  in  which  it  is  kept. 

in.  That  infebiob  posts  abe  not  without  a  beal  ihpobtanoe  in  the  sebvice  of 
God.  Much  mention  is  made  here  (as  elsewhere)  of  doorkeepers  (vers.  38^43 ;  see  Ps. 
Ixxxiv.  10).  The  doorkeepers  of  our  sanctuaries  are  men  of  humble  position ;  never- 
theless, tbey  may  contribute  much  by  conscientious  carefulness  and  Christian  courtesy 
to  the  comfort,  peace  of  mind,  and  devoutness  of  spirit  of  the  worshippers ;  and  thus 
to  the  cause  of  God.  Any  position  in  the  service  of  the  Supreme,  of  a  gracious  and 
almighty  Redeemer,  is  one  which  we  do  well  to  "  magnify  **  in  our  esteem,  that  we  may 
do  our  duty  therein  faithfully,  as  unto  the  Lord  as  well  as  unto  men. 

IV.  That  pbateb  as  well  as  pbaise  must  be  included  in  Divine  sebvice. 
Though  there  was  to  be  daily  service  at  Jerusalem  for  the  future,  there  must  also  be 
daily  sacrifice  at  Gibeon  (vers.  39,  40).  The  choir-master  could  not  do  the  work  of  the 
priest ;  there  must  be  sacrifice  as  well  as  praise.  We  should  multiply  our  service  of 
song  and  can  hardly  go  too  far  in  sacred  psalmody ;  yet  we  must  never  make  light  of 
the  prayer  of  confession,  of  the  entreaty  for  Divine  mercy,  of  our  need  to  seek  again  the 
pardoning  love  of  God. 

V.  That  one  man  mat  lead,  but  all  must  pabticipate  in,  the  sebviob  of  God. 
David  alone  prepared  and  delivered  the  psalm.  Asaph  alone  received  it  at  the  king's 
hand,  and  made  the  musical  arrangements  (vers.  5—7) ;  but  *'  all  the  people  said,  Amen, 
and  praised  the  Lord  "  (ver.  36).  It  is  well  sometimes  that  one  man  shuuld  speak  for 
others,  they  following  and  participating  in  thought,  and  saying  *'  Amen  "  at  the  end,  in 
token  and  utterance  of  their  hearty  assent.  It  is  also  well — perhaps  better — that  **  all 
the  people  *'  should  utter  together  the  words  of  prayer  and  praise.  Most  men  can  best 
follow  the  sense  when  they  utter  the  sound  of  sacred  words.  This  is  a  question  for 
individual  and  congregational  aptitudes  and  preferences ;  the  matter  of  importance  is 
that,  whatever  method  be  adopted,  the  service  of  God  shall  be  one  in  which  all  hearts 
unite  in  supplication,  in  adoration,  in  thanksgiving,  in  consecration.- 


Vers.  8 — 14. — The  const ituenh  of  piety.  In  our  psalms  and  in  our  prayers  we  often 
indicate  the  real  elements  of  religion  as  fully,  and  perhaps  as  clearly,  as  in  our  exhorta- 
tions.   In  this  psalm  of  David  we  have  the  essential  principles  of  piety. 

L  Mindfulness  of  God*s  poweb  and  goodness.  (Vers.  8,  9, 12.)  We  cannot  feel 
toward  him  as  we  should  except  we  consider  **  his  deeds  among  the  people,"  eicept  we 
"  talk  of  all  his  wondrous  works,"  except  we  "  remember  his  marvellous  works." 
Calling  these  to  mind,  we  shall  be  powerfully  and  rightly  afiected  by  a  realization  of  his 
Divine  power  and  goodness.    We  shall  naturally  dwell  on  his  works  in  nature,  his 


r 


254  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  GHRONICLEa    [ca.  xti.  1—43. 


power  ftB  displayed  in  the  creation  and  sostenanoe  of  our  own  spirit  and  our  own  hnmaii 
life,  his  handiwork  in  the  providential  ordering  of  the  world. 

IL   A  BENSB  OF  HIS  INTIMATE  DiTIKE  RELATION  TO  US  AVD  TO  THE  WHOLE  WORLD. 

(Yi'rs.  13, 14.)  As  the  children  of  Israel  felt  that  they  were  chosen  of  Gk)d,  haying 
receiTed  direct  and  special  communication  and  oonsid^tion ;  as  they  oould  speak  of 
themseWes  as  his  "  chosen  ones,"  and  could  say,  '*  He  is  the  Lord  our  God ;  '^  so  we 
may  and  must  feel  that  we  all  are  the  objects  of  his  Divine  regard,  that  he  looks  with 
benignant  eye  on  us  and  stretches  out  the  hand  of  Diyine  friendship  toward  ns,  that  he 
is  the  Lord  our  God  who  has  chosen  us  and  whom  we  have  chosen.  And  as  they  were 
tauf^ht  to  feel  that  "  his  judgments  are  in  all  the  earth,"  so  we  also  are  to  think  of  him 
as  the  supreme  almighty  Power  reigning  and  ruiins  every  where,  **  speaking  and  it  is 
done,  oommaDding  and  it  stands  fast"  (Ps.  xzxiii.  ^ 

III.  Thanksoivino  in  memobt  of  his  goodness  and  mebct.  (Vers.  8,  9.)  A  large 
part  of  the  sacred  service  of  the  Jews  consisted  in  praise.  In  heathendom  there  was 
much  of  deprecation,  something  of  supplication,  little  or  nothing  of  praise.  God's  own 
people  had  such  a  sense  of  his  absolute  excellence  that  they  "  gave  thanks  at  the 
remembrance  of  his  holiness,"  and  such  a  remembrance  of  his  distinguishing  goodness 
to  them  that  they  sang  psalms  of  praise  because  they  were  such  large  recipients  at  hit 
hand.  The  piety  of  the  Hebrew  was  vocal  with  constantly  recurring  praise ;  the  pealiiis 
of  the  '*  sweet  singer  of  Israel,"  and  of  Jewish  worship  altogether,  were  so  laigdj 
hymns  of  thanksgiving,  that  we  always  assodate  the  thought  of  praise  with  the  name 
of  them.  And  from  us,  for  whom  as  for  them  God  has  done  such  great  thingp,  tor 
whom,  indeed,  God  has  done  greater  things  than  for  them,  it  nuy  well  be  that  praise  is 
found  to  be  the  prevailing  note  of  our  worship,  the  chief  strain  in  our  piety. 

IV.  Jot  in  God.  (Ver.  10.)  The  people  were  encouraged  to  "  glory  in  Gk)d*s  holy 
Name,"  to  triumph  in  the  thought  that  they  were  worshipping  him  who  was  the  "  Holy 
One  of  Ittrael,"  in  every  way  worthy  of  their  profoundest  adoration;  also  to  ^rejotoe* 
in  him  as  in  One  the  knowledge  and  service  of  whom  was  the  spriuz  of  tmest  and 
abiding  satisfaction.  We  may  well  do  the  same ;  and  having  "  such  an  High  Priest"  as 
we  have,  such  a  Saviour  and  Divine  Friend,  such  a  Refuge  of  our  soul,  we  may  glory  and 
rejoice  with  in  tenser  joy  than  they. 

V.  Communion  with  God.  (Ver.  11.)  We  do  not  enter  ioto  the  full  heritage  of  the 
pople  of  God  until  we  "  seek  the  face  of  the  Lord  continually."  Both  in  his  house  and 
ID  our  own  home,  we  are  to  seek  him,  to  '*  seek  his  strength,"  to  come  consciously  into 
his  presence,  to  draw  nigh  with  our  spirit  to  his  Spirit,  to  walk  with  him,  to  hold  oon* 
verse  with  him,  to  pour  out  our  heart  before  him,  to  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for 
ever,  beholding  his  beauty  as  well  as  inquiring  in  his  temple  (Ps.  xxvii.  4). — OL 

Vers.  15 — 22. — Human  mindfulness  of  Divine  pi-omises,  I.  That  Gk)D  has  made 
distinct  promises  to  mankind.  David  speaks  here  of  the  *'  covenant  which  GKxl  mads 
with  Abraham,  and  his  oath  unto  Isaac"  (vers.  15,  16;  see  ver.  18  and  Gen.  xviL  2, 
xxvi.  3,  etc.)*  We  know  that  he  also  promised  David  that  he  should  sit  on  the  throne,  and 
his  children  after  him  (ch.  xvii.  17).  Wo  think  also  of  the  primeval  promise,  looking 
far  forward  and  embracing  such  large  results  (G^n.  iii.  15).  GKxi  has  made  **  exceeding 
great  and  precious  promises  "  to  us  in  Christ ;  he  promises  to  those  who  are  in  him  pardon, 
peace,  joy,  the  iDdwelling  Spirit,  sanctity,  eternal  life. 

IL  That  of  these  his  promises  he  has  given  us  assueino  gokfibmation.  He 
"confirmed  the  same  to  Jacob  fur  a  law,  and  to  Israel  for  an  everlasting  oovenant" 
(ver.  17) ;  he  did  this  in  word  (ver.  18)  and  in  deed  (vers.  19—22).  All  the  promises 
which  are  made  to  us  in  Christ  are  confirmed  both  in  word  and  deed.  1.  In  Divine 
Word.  By  repeated  assurances  not  only  from  the  lips  of  the  Lord  himself,  but  also  from 
the  utterances  of  his  inspired  apostles.  In  Scripture  we  have  the  most  abundant  assur- 
ances that  those  who  believe  in  Christ  shall  enjoy  the  favour  of  the  eternal  Father  and 
possess  everlasting  life.  2.  And  also  in  Divine  action  ;  for  we  have  the  testimony  of  all 
succeeding  geoerations  of  Christian  men,  who  bear  unvarying  witness  that  "  God  is 
faithful,  who  hath  called  us  to  the  fellowship  of  his  Son  *"  (1  Cor.  i.  9).  This  is  surely 
a  confirmation  of  God's  working;  for  are  not  all  these  witnesses  his  workmanship?  are 
they  not  his  husbandry,  his  building  (Eph.  ii.  10 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  9)  ? 

IIL  That  it  behovas  us  to  keep  them  in  conti>'ued  and  lively  beneubbakcb. 


cii.  xvL  1— 43.]    THE  PIBST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLSa  266 


'*  Bo  ye  Tnindful  always  of  his  covenant  ^  (ver.  16).  In  tbe  day  of  spiritnal  awakening, 
in  the  midst  of  earnest  ChriBtian  work,  in  the  time  of  tronble,  in  the  hour  of  spiritual 
struggle  and  misgiving,  in  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  we  have  especial  need  to 
be  mindful  of  the  promises  of  Ood.  But  they  should  never  be  far  from  us,  they  should 
be  always  within  reach,  like  a  sword  at  our  side,  like  bread  beneath  the  roof,  that  we 
may  draw  them  at  Uie  approaching  danger,  that  we  may  resort  to  them  when  oor  heart 
is  a-hnngered.    We  may  add,  though  it  is  not  in  the  text — 

IV.  That  ws  must  not  fail  to  oomplt  with  thb  oonditions  attkkdino  thsm. 
God's  promises  are  never  unconditional:  there  is  always  an  "if*  implied  if  not 
expressed  (2  Sam.  vii.  12 ;  1  Kings  11. 4  ;  P^  cxxziL  11, 12).  His  promises  to  na  of 
eternal  life  are  conditional  on  (1)  our  acceptance  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  (2)  our  Duthfulness 
imto  death.— C. 

Vers.  23 — 36. — The  broader  aspect  of  Hebrew  piety.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  there 
i>ras  an  aspect  of  exclusiveness  in  tbe  religion  of  Jewry,  as  seen  in  the  days  of  our 
Lord.  But  it  is  a  question  how  far  this  was  a  lawful  and  how  far  an  unlawful  develop- 
ment of  the  teaching  which  had  come  from  above.  To  some  extent  it  was  necessary 
that  the  people  of  God  should  be  separated,  in  intercourse  as  well  as  in  thoueht  and 
sympathy,  from  the  nations  around  them.  We  may,  however,  be  assured  that  the 
narrow  and  bigoted  ideas  which  were  so  firmly  embedded  in  the  Jewish  mind  were 
the  product  of  their  own  misconstructions  of  the  Divine  Word.  Our  text,  indeed, 
shows :  1.  That  the  Jewish  nation  was  taught  to  feel  that  God  was  their  God  in  a 
peculiar  sense.  He  was  continually  spoken  of,  in  worship,  as  "  the  Lord  God  of  Israel " 
(ver.  36).  He  had  not  dealt  with  anv  nation  as  with  Israel :  he  had  not  made  known 
his  judgments  to  anv  people  as  he  had  to  them  (Ps.  cxlvii.  20).  He  was  Metr  God, 
inasmuch  as  he  had  shown  peculiar  and  distinguishing  favour  to  theuL  2.  That  thej 
looked  to  God  for  deliverance  and  separation  from  other  nations.  ^  Save  na  .  •  •  and 
gather  us  together,  and  deliver  us  from  the  heathen  "  (ver.  36).  They  were  led  to 
regard  surrounding  peoples,  with  their  idolatries  and  immoralities,  as  foes  over  whom 
they  might  religiouBly  triumph,  and  from  contact  with  whom  they  would  wisely 
shrink.  Tet,  on  the  other  hand,  in  distinction  from  this  element  of  exclusiveness  and 
this  narrowness  of  view  and  ambition,  we  have  certain  elements  of  breadtiu  They 
were  taught  to  regard— 

L  The  entibb  earth  as  Gk)D*s  creation,  akd  the  whole  world  as  under  his 
RULE.  They  sang  "  of  his  marvellous  works  among  all  nations  **  (ver.  24).  So  far  were 
they  from  imagining  that  the  gods  of  other  nations  made  those  luids,  while  Jehovah 
brought  themselves  and  their  own  land  into  being,  that  they  sang  continually,  '.'All  the 
gods  of  the  people  are  idols,  but  the  Lord  made  the  heavens  "  (ver.  26) ;  **  The  world 
also  shall  be  stable,  that  it  be  not  moved  "  (ver.  30).  They  undoubtedly  believed  that 
the  God  whom  they  worshipped  had  unbounded  sovereignty  over  all  lands  and  nations. 

U.  The  heathen  as  those  who  ought  to  worship  God.  They  were  invited,  in 
their  public  worship,  to  express  the  sentiment  that  it  was  only  **  due  to  the  Name  of 
the  Lord"  that  " all  the  earth  "  "should  sing  to  him, and  show  forth  his  salvation  from 
day  to  day ;  **  that  all  "  kindreds  of  the  people  "  should  ascribe  "  glory  and  strength  " 
unto  him  (vers.  23,  28,  29).  They  expressed,  before  God,  their  d^re  that  his  glory 
might  be  declared  amone  the  heathen  (ver.  24),  that  all  the  earth  should  fear  him  (ver. 
30).  They  evidently  felt  that  it  was  right  and  due  that  anthems  of  praise  should  be 
suns  to  Jehovah  by  every  lip,  that  before  him  every  knee  should  bow. 

IlL  The  heathen  as  the  future  inheritance  of  God.  In  their  higher  moods 
and  more  exalted  hours,  they  looked  forward  to  the  time  when  all  the  world  ^ould  be 
subject  to  the  Divine  sway.  How  far  this  grand  hope  took  possession  of  the  popular 
mind  we  cannot  tell,  but  it  was  not  beyond  the  reach  of  those  who  thought  the  most 
and  saw  the  furthest  (vers.  31 — 36).  All  inanimate  creation  was  invok«i  to  rejoice, 
because  the  Lord  was  comins  to  judge  the  earth,  because  the  good  and  merciful  One 
(ver.  34)  was  to  reign  over  afi  the  nations  ^ver.  311  It  is  for  us :  1.  To  rtjoice  that 
what  was  only  dimly  foreshadowed  to  them  is  clearly  revealed  to  us.  We  have  a  clear 
vision  of  the  blessed  and  glorious  time  when  '*  Jesus  shall  reign  where'er  the  sun," 
etc.  2.  To  rejoice  that  God's  gracious  purpose  is  being  fulfilled  before  our  eyes.  All 
nations  are  coming  and  worshipping,  etc.  (Ps.  IxxxvL  9).    3.  To  do  our  part  in  our 


•-. 


•        _•        ..••  _        Ji    •      A. 


f"i        ■ 


thzcnic: 


XTL  1—43. 


—  *■■    fc» 


T-.:-„-    .:■•   ■  .--:  ;.  ■    ■  ---^  ~tr-.  n.       j,.^  xj*  r: 


o( 


.r.1.-   : 


•IT  TUT  -r^  3C.2CSS  ncces.     We  its 


„      .  xo.  -  »-■-      ■■    .     ^ 

T  •.-■-.:    '       •  -        .   :  i  •    •  .     : 


^i  ■-   ■  r  L»  -^  :      •:  -rrs  ▼■:;ci  t:aX*  5:r  z'ze 

■     .-    -^'l-        -    1*  -■     I:      a    V     riprap;  i::-!  ioCvCT 

'..:■*  '•"  ."•■: :-»      :--      ■-.  *.:  :   •  -  "zi—'r:  z  ▼":    .:   ir^   ::-  \:  i.m.  2".c  tzozi  ws  r>:~e, 

■^.   .-i^ — _:  :;  V-   i,-*    i.:  :    :  i  -  •.      ?■    str^*    j- -1   »?  "    lerir*    ■iTMi":'^* 

V    ■•-  •— ..'         .-  *■    I'l.      ..--  '-s    :     :r  :._::^t . -^     .-  i  i.^.-.  iz-i  f.rsz^-isK  :f 

I.     •     :  --..i.':-     ..'  .-*•-"       ..1      :  .-  ■    --- .--r -.:.i:  t;,;::!^  ::•*  z.-.'S^z* 

T---*  •  iL.  .   -..■    •.-:_-.•  T       :     -    :  v^-  •  -.■  4«r:    v    z   -^  -   iaL.-ricss    ;£  *•  "^ t^-~^ 

-^•*  V  1  V  r  -*-i  ■-■  :  •'  7'  "'"7  '"  •  t:^-  *  ;-.":^  l.:  ^-.r  iz  '  11^  -.ii;  zlit  r«  rarr 
j,-r*  Li :  *  z.  ..:  z:-z'  '  .1  "--^  r".::"  "  :.  ■;  ▼:. . :  rio—  :^  'ri"  .^11.7  i5C*ec«sc,  rr 
*- -:i  V -__: :  ;     .1^    -  ;f?.- " :  li  :   'i  :^    n:  ■  :■■  -izi'      '.-•?  :■. .."i;:!  vi**  Tfir*  -Cie.    B-s 

.1-    li.T  T     V    :.-  •■        -   J.-   ;.;   J   ?.- .  : ;-.  -r.T- =    T"   r«".     "  "^  r&i..r  zzs 

1         _:  -  . .  ■  "-  *     '.": .    T  ;     ._•-..-:  r   - .: '  t.-t>*.  t  ti^t  ;ti  43.  il:;- 

:■  :■-    ji-*  ir:    1    1  ?   •  : :         '.";.■    v:..^    ^ '-:  im  rLTf.ts^.-   sIjt*!!". 


-.  ■  ZL-n     :  L.'  *.z-    ■_: : 


-~         -        1  '   r. 


.  a*. a. 


I. 


vii  .:  L  -.1" 


-  ■.  :  -■  .:  i  Y —  :  ■  ■  ■ 


:   :.~"  >■ 


>L-.r 


t       "  i. 


Vrra  : '-*    _-  -  :: -i  ii-f   izz-iz'z.r. 

-  ■  • 

;-■■-:     \    -«^>   "."   5*   .  ■■**.  ."■■"    T"  r!^  VJi 


CH^xvLl— 43J    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  267 


rions  of  Grod'8  people  for  centuries ;  whereas  it  is  far  otherwise.  It  is  probahlo  that 
never,  till  the  reign  of  Hezekiah,  was  the  sacrificial  service  of  God  confined  to  one 
sacred  spot.  Samuel  sacrificed  at  Ramah ;  David,  on  the  threshing-floor  of  Araunah ; 
Solomon,  at  Gibeon ;  others  at  Carmel,  Beershoba,  Bethel.  The  true  worship  of  the  true 
God  finding  many  centres  when  the  Law  of  Moses  contemplated  it  should  have  but 
one,  the  later  historian,  imbued  with  stricter  sentiments  of  a  later  day,  brings  it  as  a  fault 
against  almost  all  the  good  kings  of  Judah,  that,  though  they  abolisiied  all  idolatry, 
**  nevertheless  the  high  places  were  not  taken  away ; "  but  our  text  brings  us  face  to 
face  with  something  more  striking  than  this  multiplication  of  centres  of  sacrifice.  It 
reminds  us  that,  for  a  space  of  about  a  hundred  ytars,  the  ark  of  Qod  and  the  taber^ 
node  of  Qod,  which  Qod  had  joined  togetJier,  had  been  put  asunder.  Never  since  the 
ark  was  taken  by  the  Philistines  in  ISamuers  boyhood,  had  it  returned  to  the  taber- 
nacle. It  rests  in  Beth-shemesh  for  a  few  months,  then  for  nearly  a  hundred  years 
in  Eirjath-jearim,  in  the  house  of  Abinadab.  During  all  the  time  of  Samuel  we  hear 
very  little  of  the  tabernacle  at  Shiloh,  and,  I  think,  nothing  of  the  ark.  In  Saul's 
reign  the  tabernacle  is  at  Nob,  and  still  the  ark  is  separated.  The  ark,  God's  earthly 
throne,  the  holiest  centre  of  all  Mosaic  worship,  had  no  tabernacle,  with  its  altars  and 
its  regular  service.  The  tabernacle  had  its  altars  of  burnt  and  of  peace  offerings,  but 
no  presence  within  the  veil.  It  was  a  first  court  without  a  second ;  a  staircase  which 
seemed  to  lead  nowhere.  So  that  for  a  hundred  years  the  tabernacle  worship  was  cut 
in  two— here  altars,  there  ark.  Perhaps  one  may  almost  say,  cut  in  three  during 
part  of  this  period ;  for  the  high  priest  came  with  his  ephod,  and  lived  with  David.  So 
that  the  priesthood  with  its  service  stood  thus :  Abiathar,  with  his  ephod,  *'  inquiring 
of  Gud,"  kept  company  with  David ;  some  of  the  priestly  families  repaired  to  Nob 
after  the  massacre  of  the  three  hundred  priests  by  Saul,  and  there  ofifered  the 
appointed  sacrifices ;  while  at  Kirjath-jearim  was  the  ark,  in  charge  of  a  Levitical 
family,  "  neglected  in  the  days  of  Saul,"  but  doubtless  sought  by  individual  worship- 
pers. To  make  the  confusion  more  complete,  Samuel,  David,  Solomon,  all  sacrifice 
where  is  neither  ark  nor  tabernacle,  and  when  David  brings  the  ark  to  Jerusalem,  ho 
builds  a  new  tabernacle  to  receive  it,  with  its  proper  arrangement  of  altirs,  while 
still  leaving  the  old  one  at  Nob,  to  continue  for  some  time  longer  (until  the  reign  of 
Solomon),  on  its  own  lines,  its  series  of  sacrifices  and  worship.  I  do  not  bring  this  state 
of  confusion  forward  to  justify  it,  or  suggest  that  all  the  ordering  of  G^*s  house, 
concerning  which  so  many  minutest  precepts  had  been  given,  were  unimportant  and 
superfluous.  It  was  undoubtedly  a  vast  gain  to  all  suraequent  generations  when,  in 
Zion,  the  tabernacle  of  God  rose  supreme  above  all  other  places  honoured  by  his 
worship.  It  was  a  still  grander  service  when  all  the  high  places  where  sacrifice  had 
been  offered  were  destroyed.  It  was  fitting  that  the  one  God  should  have  one  earthly 
throne,  everywhere  accessible,  but  in  one  place  revealed.  The  one  temple  rendered 
something  of  the  same  sort  of  service  that  the  one  Bible  did  in  later  times ;  it  kept 
**  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace.*'  But  while,  as  we  shall  see,  the  centering 
of  all  sacrificial  worship  in  one  spot  rendered  grand  service,  yet  it  is  well  to  con- 
template the  state  of  external  confusion  registered  in  the  facts  thus  brought  before  us, 
and  endeavour  to  learn  their  lessons.    What  are  these  ? 

I.  First  of  all  obviously,  there  is  this:  That  thk  external  obderikq  of  Gk)D'iB 
9OD8B  NSYEB  REALIZES  ITS  IDEAL.  As  elsowhere,  so  here.  The  ideal  and  the  real 
go  not  hand-in-hand.  The  most  that  reality  can  say  is,  "  I  follow  after,  if  that  I  may 
attain."  The  letter  of  the  holiest  and  wisest  law  never  gets  complete  accomplishment. 
The  very  generation  to  which  the  Law  of  Sinai  was  given  neglected  one  of  most 
important  sacraments,  circumcision,  through  all  the  wilderness  journey  between  Egypt 
and  Canaan.  Somehow  the  very  eminence  of  judges  and  prophets  made,  for  centuries, 
God's  tabernacle  at  Shiloh  play  an  inconspicuous  part  in  the  history  of  the  nation. 
In  the  instance  of  our  text  tne  tabernacle  is  really  cut  in  two,  and  the  holy  place  is  at 
Nob,  while  the  holy  of  holies  is  miles  away  at  Kirjath-jearim.  Solomon's  temple  was 
hardly  consecrated  before  it  was  desecrated  by  the  neighbourhood  of  idolatrous  temples 
in  Jerusalem  itself.  The  secession  of  the  ten  tribes  deprived  them  of  any  temple 
services,  save  the  irregular  ones  instituted  by  Jeroboam.  There  is  always  something 
missing^  or  something  crooked,  in  the  external  institutions  of  religion.  The  Lord's 
Supper  at  Corinth  is  desecrated  by  selfish. oonyivi^ty,  even  in  Paul's,  lifetime;  and 

L  CHB0KIGLE8.  t 


r 


858  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.    [ch.xtl1— 4a. 

•oroe  disciples  had  beea  baptized  wLo  did  not  so  much  as  know  thera  was  a  Holj 
Ghost.  When  the  Church  went  in  for  more  order,  the  lack  of  the  power  and  the 
charity  of  earlier  times  became  more  ooospicuous.  Churches  that  have  retained  more 
of  external  unity  have  lacked  vitality ;  aud  Cliristian  communities  which  haye  been 
marked  by  great  vitality  have  lacked  unity  of  charity  and  action.  In  Tertullian%  daya 
the  Church  almost  entirely  lost  the  use  of  the  sacrament  of  baptism  by  men  postponing 
the  observance  of  it  to  life's  end,  fearing  there  waa  no  further  or  other  washing  away 
of  sins  after  it  had  taken  place,  I'o-day  she  has  almost  entirely  lost  the  use  of  the 
same  sacrament  by  applying  it  at  life's  beginning  to  those  absolutely  unconscious  of  its 
meaning.    God  is  always  amongst  us,  but  not  always  the  ark,  the  sacraments,  the 

S roper  order.    Reality  is  rough — never  more  than  a  mere  approximation  to  what  we 
esire.    And  if  so,  there  should  be  charity  for  differences,  and  we  should  address  our- 
selves rather  to  the  maintenance  of  "  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace." 

n.  The  second  lesson  to  be  learned  is:  God  makes  thb  most  of  all  tsat  n 
XVPBRFECT,  AND  MAKES  THB  BEST  OF  WHAT  18  WBONO.  In  what  Utter  hopeleHsness 
would  the  religious  state  of  Israel  have  appeared  to  any  ancient  High  Churchman  ] 
The  altars  without  the  ark ;  the  ark  without  the  altars ;  no  high  priest  with  the  ark. 
All  the  suggestion  of  Divine  mercy  on  the  one  hand  and  Divine  lorddiip  on  the  other, 
which  the  ark  suggested,  lost.  Both  in  places  undistinguished.  It  was,  for  the  time, 
an  utter  collai^se  oif  the  entire  system  of  sacrificial  worship  as  instituted  by  Mosea. 
And  in  these  circumstances  what  do  we  witness  ?  The  utter  disappearance  of  hiih 
and  godliness  ?  Far  from  it.  True,  there  was  a  general  coldness,  or  such  a  state  of 
things  would  not  have  been  permitted  to  endure.  But  God  did  not  abandon  his  people 
because  ark  and  altar  were  separate.  The  same  love  which  ordained  all  these  arrange- 
ments for  high,  united,  solemn  fellowship  with  himself,  bent  its  energies  to  supply 
tiie  void  caused  by  their  neglect  in  some  other  way.  Is  the  ark  taken  and  the  priest- 
hood degenerate?  God  raises  up  Samuel  the  prophet.  Are  altara  and  tabernacles 
De<zlectecl  because  weak  through  separateness  ?  God  comes  near,  and,  through  Abiathar, 
Gad,  Nathan,  and  other  prophets,  makes  up  for  the  lack  of  priestly  service.  Has  be 
Tirtually  no  outward  dwelling?  He  comes  nearer  to  individual  souls,  and  woos  them 
with  the  mystic  voice  which  the  sheep  hear  and  gladly  follow ;  so  that  faith,  service^ 
goodness,  are  all  found.  There  are  probably  about  seventy  pealms  written  by  E^vid, 
most  of  them  in  the  first  half  of  the  psalter.  Many  of  these,  written  after  the  ark  had 
found  a  new  dwelling  in  Jerusalem,  breathe  a  profoundly  spiritual  attachment  to  **  the 
house  of  God."  But  the  greater  part  of  them,  written  prior  to  that  event,  are  sltc^ther 
Toid  of  allusion  to  either  tabernacle  or  altar ;  but,  like  the  rest,  rich  in  devoutest 
recognition  of  the  nearness,  preciousness,  and  help  of  God.  An  old  Catholic  theologian 
supposed  that,  just  as  in  the  absence  of  rain,  the  usual  means  of  fertility,  there  was  a 
"  mist  that  came  up  and  watered  Eden,*'  similarly,  in  the  absence  of  all  usual  means 
of  grace,  God  invents  fresh  methods  by  which  he  reaches  and  refreshes  the  hearts  of 
men ;  even  so,  amidst  the  cold  and  unspiritual  half-century  that  intervened  between 
the  death  of  Samuel  and  the  establishment  of  the  ark  in  Jerusalem,  there  were  still 
all  the  Divine  activities  going  on ;  and  the  devout  found  in  **  the  Law "  what  they 
mis8<Ki  in  "  the  service."  And  God  waked  many,  many  hearts  to  seek  after  him.  la 
this  lesson  also  there  is  vast  importance.  We  are  too  apt  to  say  a  blessing  is  impossible 
unless  such  and  such  arraugements  are  made.  Some  said  in  olden  times,  **  Where  the 
Church  is  the  Spirit  is ;  and  outside  the  Church  is  no  salvation.**  Some  in  niodem 
times  hold  sacraments  essential  to  salvation.  Some  with  more  reason,  but  still  going 
beyond  Scripture,  think  Jesus  can  only  save  those  who  know  his  history.  G^  works 
the  more  to  bless  us,  the  more  through  our  ignorance  we  frustrate  his  means  of 
grace.  If  through  presumptuousness  we  neglect  any  duty,  it  is  a  sin  which  he  will 
sternly  correct;  but  if  through  ignorance  we  neglect  any  duty,  God  will  try  and 
make  up  our  loss.  The  evangelical  Churches  of  to-day  have  mostly,  I  think.  It  at 
A  sacrament.  God  makes  the  other  sacrament  do  double  duty,  and  loads  it  with 
double  blessings. 

III.  Tub  EXTER17AL  ORDBBTKG    OF    G0D*8    HOUSE  IN  G0D*8    WAT    CABBIB8  WITH    IT 

A  OBEAT  BLESSiNa.  David  was  Israers  second  Moses.  He  rehabilitated  the  whole 
tabernacle  service  with  ita  Boleam  united  access  to  God ;  helped  the  people  to  unite 
in  approaching  God,  by  bringing  prieata,  ark,  and  altar  tmder  one  tabeniaele.    He  di4 


CH.  XVI.  1-48.]    THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  269 

more ;  arranging  for  the  serrices  of  the  sanctuary,  he  gave  a  liturgy  for  the  closet. 
While  ia  the  sacrifices  men  found  the  proper  form  for  appniacbing  God,  in  the  psalter 
they  caught  the  proper  spirit.  In  my  judgment  the  stronger  grip  that  Judah  took  of 
the  Law  of  Grod  than  Israel ;  her  greater  wi-alth  in  saintly  kings  and  prophets ;  her 
unity ;  her  power  to  learn  the  tweet  uses  of  adversity ;  her  recurrence  after  the  Captivity 
to  a  purer  and  more  ardent  service  of  God  than  siie  had  ever  reached  before ;  her 
grander  service  to  mankind;  her  endurance  in  national  existence  iill  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  by  Titus ;  the  strange  persistence  that  has  marked  the  children  of  Judah 
from  ihat  day  to  this;  all  were  due  in  a  great  degree  to  the  tabernacle  of  David,  the 
temple  of  Solomon,  the  temple  of  Ezra.  From  the  hour  when  the  ark  rested  in  Zion, 
Zion  was  the  sacred  centre  of  the  land,  the  source  of  holy  influences  binding  men  to 
God  and  to  one  another.  Was  it  only  external  arrangements  that  David  made? 
And  is  it  only  an  external  arrangement  that  he  makes  who  builds  a  chapel,  or  erects 
a  school,  or  helps  men  to  come  together  unitedly  to  observe  God*8  sacraments  and  learn 
his  ways?  David,  who  knew  more  of  private  communion  with  Gtxl  than  any  of  us, 
said,  "One  thing  I  have  desired  of  the  Lord,  that  will  I  seek  after;  that  I  may  dwell  in 
the  house  of  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  my  life,  to  behold  the  Kauty  of  the  Loid,  and  to 
inquire  in  bis  temple."  Let  there  be  no  latitudinarianism,  the  poor  substitute  for  trua 
charity.  If  we  can  help  to  give  back  to  the  Church  of  Christ  a  lost  sacrament,  a 
neglected  truth,  a  means  of  freer  fellowship  with  one  another  and  with  (rod,  we  do 
loniething  on  which  the  blessing  of  God  will  rest^  and  from  which  the  good  of  man 
will  flow. — Q. 

Vers.  1-^43.—- DavicTs  thank$givinff  ptailm.  After  having  broTi«:ht  up  the  ark  of 
God  from  the  house  of  Obed-edom  and  set  it  in  the  tent  that  David  had  made  for  it, 
there  was  a  general  ofifering  of  sacrifices  by  David  and  the  congregation  as  thank 
offerings  to  the  Lord,  and  David  blessed  the  people.  Of  these  thank  offerings  he 
ordered  that  certain  portions  should  be  given  to  every  man  and  woman  in  Israel — ^*  a 
loaf  of  bread,  a  good  piece  of  flesh,  and  a  flagon  of  wine."  Having  done  this,  be  set  in 
order  the  service  of  tne  Levites  in  the  holy  tent  on  Zion.  "  Then  on  that  day  David 
delivered  first  this  psalm  to  thank  the  Lord  into  the  hand  of  Asaph  and  his  brethren." 
The  meaning  of  this  passage  is  that  David  committed  to  Asaph  the  carrying  out  of 
the  service  of  song ;  that  liturgical  singing  was  then  to  be  introduced.  This  beautiful 
psalm  was  doubtless  composed  by  David  himself  for  liturgical  song  in  the  public 
worship.  The  first  half  of  the  psalm  (vers.  8 — 22)  recurs  in  Ps.  cv.  1 — 15 ;  the  second 
half  (vers.  23—33)  in  Ps.  zcvi. ;  and  the  conclusion  (vers.  34 — 36)  in  Ps.  cvi  1,  47,  48. 
There  is  a  swelling  ascription  throughout  the  psalm,  commencing  with  ver.  8.  From 
that  verse  down  to  the  end  of  vor.  22  the  call  is  to  Israel  to  praise  the  Lord.  From 
▼er.  23  to  ver.  29  the  call  is  to  the  heathen  or  Gentile  nations  to  praise  the  Lord. 
From  ver.  30  to  ver.  34  the  call  is  to  the  whole  earth  and  to  inanimate  nature  to 
praise  him.  Ver.  35  seems  a  prophetical  anticipation  which  David  commands  to  take 
the  form  of  a  prayer  that  the  time  may  soon  come  when  GKxi's  ancient  people  shall  be 
gathered  to  their  own  land,  and  when  the  Church  of  God  redeemed  from  among  men 
ahsdl  assemble  round  his  throne  throughout  eternity  to  praise  his  holy  Name.  Then 
the  earthly  |)eople  of  God,  having  accepted  the  Lord  Jesus  as  their  Messiah,  and  the 
Church  of  Christ  gathered  to  him  at  his  coming,  shall  sing  their  hallelujahs  of  praise^ 
and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  fill  heaven  and  earth. — W» 

Vers.  1 — Zj—SigiiM  of  entire  eonaeeraiion.  When  the  ark  was  safely  placed  within 
the  curtains  of  David's  new  tabernacle  on  Mount  Zion,  and  the  fact  of  Ck)d*s  dwelling 
with  his  people  was  freshly  impressed  by  the  permanent  presence  of  his  symbol,  it  was 
fitting  that,  m  tome  most  solemn  and  expressive  way,  the  full  consecration  of  the  pec^ple 
to  the  service  of  Jehovah  should  be  declared.  For  this  purpose  s|)ecial  burnt  ofit-rings 
and  peace  offerings  were  presented.  The  special  features  of  these  two  kinds  of  offering 
may  be  indicated  so  as  to  bring  out  their  particular  adaptation  to  the  circumstances  of 
the  day.  The  victim,  in  the  case  of  the  '*  burnt  offering,"  might  bo  any  kind  of 
animsl  fit  for  saorifioea,  but  it  must  be  a  male.  And  it  must  be  wholly  offered,  and 
burnt  wiUi  fire.  Kurts  says  that  this  **  burning  by  fire"  marked  it  as  an  expression 
of  perpetual  obligatioa  to  oomplote^  tanctified  lelf-surrendor  to  Jehovah*    This  kind 


260  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  tlHBONIGLES.  [co.  xtz.  1—18. 

of  ofTerin;;  embodied  the  general  idea  of  mcri6ce,  tnd  in  a  sense  repiesented  tbe  whda 
•aciificial  institute.  ^  The  peace  offering**  was  [iresented  upon  the  acceptance  of  any 
■pfcial  Divine  mercies,  and  portions  of  the  victim  were  Tutored  to  the  offerer«  who, 
with  his  fsniily  and  friends,  feasted  on  them.  **  This  sacrificial  feast  was  peculiar  to 
the  peace  offerings,  and  indicated  that  the  atonement  was  complete,  that  the  sin  was 
covered  and  cancelled  which  had  separated  the  offerer  from  Jehovah,  who  now  welcomed 
him  to  his  table,  and  in  this  meal  gave  him  a  pledge  of  reconciliation  "  and  acceptance. 
60  the  two  offerings,  together  with  the  subsequent  feast,  signified  thankful  reconiitioa 
of  G<  d*s  mercies,  entire  consecration  to  God*8  service,  and  a  happy  realization  of  God's 
acceptance.    These  were  precisely  suitable  to  the  occasion  of  the  restoration  of  the  ark. 

I.  One  thing  is  bight  fob  max — to  bb  wholly  God's.  Right  because  of  tbe 
Divine  relations ;  ri,;ht  because  of  the  Divine  daimt ;  and  right  because  of  the  Divine 
mercieM,  Our  Ix)rd  cxpre»>ed  the  duty  of  man  in  a  brief  sentence,  **  Thou  shalt  love 
the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  mind,  and  9oul,  and  strength." 

II.  Ibis  man  mat  fittisolt  declarb  in  a  solemn  i*ubuc  act.  Because,  in 
bis  love  and  loyalty  to  God,  he  should  wish  to  influence  others  by  his  own  consecration. 
A  man  may  not  keep  his  religious  life  to  himself;  he  is  responsible  to  God  for  making 
it  a  gracious  persuaaion  and  power  upon  others.  Press  the  duty  of  the  public  modes 
of  expressing  our  dedicstion  to  God,  such  as  "  confirmation  "  and  ''joining  the  Church." 
8uch  acts  of  public  consecration  may  be  wisely  and  helpfully  renewed  on  special 
occasions.  Illustrate  by  such  a  public  acknowledgment  of  God  as  was  made  at  tha 
**  thanksgiving  "  for  the  recovery  of  the  Prince  of  Wales.  That  was,  for  this  Christiaa 
age,  just  such  a  scene  as  David's  offering  of  burnt  and  peace  offerings. 

III.  In  olden  times  the  appbopriatb  act  was  offebino  ▲  bubnt  offebino. 
In  it  the  sacrificer  consecrated  to  the  Deity  alone  the  enjoyment  of  the  whole  victim, 
and  it  represented  the  full  and  complete  surrender  of  tbe  man  himself  to  God.  It  was 
called  the  whole  burnt  offering,  or  perfect  sacrifice,  because  the  whole  creature  was 
as  it  were  sent  up  to  God  on  the  wings  of  fire.  It  signified  that  the  offerer  belonged 
wholly  to  God,  and  that  he  dedicated  Mmself  soul  and  body  to  him,  and  placed  his  ufe 
at  his  disfosal. 

IV.  BucH  an  offering  was  biohtlt  made  evert  day.  At  the  morning  and 
evening  services;  and  the  offering  was  doubled  on  the  sabbath  (Exod.  xxix.  38— 44; 
Lev.  vi.  9—13).  "Every  morning  snd  evening  a  lamb  was  sacrificed,  with  its  usual 
meat  and  drink  offering,  as  a  burnt  offering  on  behalf  of  the  whole  covenant  people,  and 
the  evening  victim  was  to  be  so  slowly  consumed  that  it  might  last  till  the  morning,  an 
exiTCHsivc  symbol  of  that  continual  self-dedication  to  God,  which  is  the  duty  of  man.* 

V.  Such  offerings  were  renewed  on  special  occasions.  These  were  (1)  at  the 
new  moon,  (2)  the  three  great  festivals,  (3)  the  great  Day  of  Atonement,  and  (4)  the 
FeSHt  of  Trumpets.  On  every  great  national  occasion  a  solemn  public  reassertion  of 
the  nation's  full  consecration  to  God  was  made  by  means  of  the  burnt  offering.  For 
us  such  oilerings  are  appropriate  at  the  new  year,  birthdays,  etc. 

VI.  Such  offerings  might  be  representative,  and  offered  in  thb  vaxs 
/ND  ON  the  behalf  of  others.  As  was  the  case  with  Job's  offerings  for  his  children, 
and  in  some  degree  with  David's  offerings  on  this  occasion.  1  his  point  leads  on  to 
dealing  with  the  Ix>rd  Jesus  Christ  as  our  great  Burnt  Offering,  which  we  make  ours  by 
faith,  and  present  to  God  as  the  solemn  pledge  that  our  *'  whole  selves  we  dedicate  to 
h\m"  and  hold  as  his.  "  Every  such  sacrifice  was  a  type  of  the  perfect  offering  made 
by  Christ,  on  behalf  of  the  race  of  man,  of  his  hnninn  nature  and  will  to  the  will  of  the 
leather."  Compare  St.  Paurs  pleadings,  "I  beseech  you,  therefore,  by  the  mercies  of 
God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  unto  God,  which 
is  your  reasonable  service." — K.  T, 

Vers.  8 — 10. — The  duty  of  praise,  David  calls  upon  the  people,  as  a  matter  of 
solemn  duty,  to  "  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord  .  .  .  and  sing  psalms  unto  him."  Dr.  Goul- 
burn  well  says,  "  Praise  is  the  religious  exercise — the  one  religious  exercise— of  heaven* 
Angels  are  offering  it  ceaselessly,  resting  not  night  or  day.  Saints  are  offering  it 
ceaselessly  in  paradise.  Nature  in  her  every  district  is  offering  it  ceaselessly.  Fiom 
the  heavens,  which  declare  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  firmament  which  showeth  his 
handiwork,  down  to  the  dew-drop  which  sparkles  with  the  colours  of  the  rainbow^  and 


CH.XTLl— 43.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa  261 


the  lark,  who  tunes  Ills  cheerful  carol  as  he  salutes  the  risinfi:  sun,  the  whole  creatioa 
sends  up  one  grand  chorus  of  praise  to  the  throne  of  God."  The  sincere  heart  will  e^er 
feel  disposed  to  sing — 

Til  praise  mj  Maker  with  my  breath ; 
And  when  my  voice  is  lost  in  death, 

Praise  shall  employ  my  nobler  powers; 
My  days  of  praise  shall  ne'er  be  past. 
While  life,  or  thought,  or  being  last, 

Or  immortality  endures." 

L  Pbaise  IB  DUE  TO  GoD.  **  For  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever."  Recall  the  reasons 
for  praise  each  man  can  find,  and  each  nation,  especially  noting  those  which  are  asso* 
ciated  with  religion,  and  illustrated  in  the  connections  of  this  passaga 

II.  Pbaisb  is  requibed  bt  God.  As  the  fitting  mode  of  expressing  our  feeling  towards 
him  and  our  sense  of  what  he  is  and  does.  His  own  declaration  is,  '*  Whoso  ofifereth 
praise  glorifieth  me." 

III.  Fbaisb  is  acceptable  to  God.  It  is  to  him  as  "sweet-smelling  incense.**  It 
is  the  sacrifice  he  most  desires. 

IV.  Pbaise  is  sebviceablb  to  God.  It  is  a  gracious  influence.  It  draws  forth  right 
feeling  in  men.  The  praise  of  one  calls  out  the  praise  of  many,  and  so  aids  in  carrying 
on  (Ti>d*s  purpose  in  the  blessing  of  men. 

These  points  sufficiently  suggest  of  themselves  lines  of  treatment,  and  scarcely  need 
further  elaboration.  But  it  may  be  well  to  discuss  the  question  how  far  our  praise 
must  needs  be  intelligent — shaped,  that  Lb  into  forms  that  our  minds  can  distinctly 
grasp  and  fully  follow.  Cannot  sound — music  without  words — by  its  tone  and  cha- 
racter find  adequate  utterance  for  soul-emotion  ?  Illustrate  by  the  power  of  music  to 
express  varying  emotion.  A  great  musical  composer  gives  us  '  Son$^  without  Words.* 
On  this  point  the  following  passage  from  a  sermon  of  the  great  Florentine  preacher, 
Savonarola,  may  be  suggestive.  It  refers  directly  to  prayer,  but  it  is  equidly  applicable 
to  praise : — "  In  prayer,  a  man  may  be  attending  to  the  words,  and  this  is  a  thins  of  a 
wholly  material  nature ;  he  may  be  attending  to  the  sense  of  the  words,  and  this  is 
rather  study  than  prayer;  and  lastly,  his  whde  thoughts  mav  be  directed  to  God,  and 
this  alone  is  true  prayer.  It  is  unnecessary  to  be  considering  either  sentences  or 
language — the  mind  must  be  elevated  above  self,  and  must  be  wholly  absorbed  in  the 
thought  of  God.  Arrived  at  this  state,  the  true  believer  forgets  the  world  and  its 
wants ;  he  has  attained  almost  a  foreshadow  of  celestial  happiness.  To  this  state  of 
elevation  the  ignorant  mav  arrive  as  easily  as  the  learned,  it  even  frequently  happens 
that  he  who  repeats  a  psalm  without  imderstanding  its  words  utters  a  much  more  holy 

grayer  than  the  learned  man  who  can  explain  its  meaning.  Words,  in  fact,  are  not 
idispensable  to  an  act  of  prayer :  when  a  man  is  truly  rapt  in  the  spirit  an  uttered 
prayer  becomes  rather  an  imnediment,  and  ought  to  yield  to  that  which  is  wholly 
mental  Thus  it  will  be  seen  now  great  a  mistake  those  commit  who  prescribe  a  fixed 
number  of  prayers.  Grod  does  not  delight  in  a  multitude  of  words,  out  in  a  fervent 
spirit"  Apply  to  the  difficulty  often  felt  in  mentally  following  the  words  and  truths 
and  figures  of  our  hymns,  and  show  how  true  praise  is  not  dependent  on  precise  mental 
apprehensions.  Also  carefully  impress  that  private  acts  of  pi-aise,  however  numerous, 
oroerly,  or  sincere,  can  never  relieve  a  man  from  the  duty  of  joining  in  the  praises  of 
the  great  congregation. — 11.  T, 

Ver.  11. — OocTs  strength  and  OocTs  face.  We  are  bidden.  In  seeking  the  Lord,  to 
seek  both  his  strength  and  his  face ;  and  these  two  are  set  in  such  a  connection  of 
parallel  sentences  that  we  may  assume  them  to  be  dififering  expressions  for  the  same 
thing,  though  each  helps  to  throw  light  on  the  other.  The  uses  of  the  terms  in  the 
Book  of  Psalms  need  careful  study.  In  this  passage  God's  strength  is  thought  of  as 
having  been  illustrated  in  the  successful  bringing  back  of  the  ark ;  but  that  event  was 
quite  as  fully  a  proof  of  the  Divine  favour — it  indicated  that  God*s  face  was  turned 
smilingly  towards  both  the  king  and  the  people.  Such  experiences  of  God*s  "  strength  " 
and  "  face  "  should  establish  the  permanent  resolve  to  seek  that  "  strength  "  and  "  &ce  " 
In  all  the  more  ordinary  scenes  in  the  life  of  the  individual  and  the  nation.    For 


r^ 


262  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa     [ok.  xti.  l_4a. 

"strength,"  comp.  1  Sain.  xv.  29;  Ps.  xxidL  1;  xxix,  1;  Job  ix.  19;  P^  xlvL  1; 
Ixii.  11;  Ixvili.  3t;  Ixxui.  26.  etc;  Isa.  xx^L  4;  xl?.  24.  For  "iiu»,"  comp.  F^ 
xzxi.  16:  Ixvii.  I,  etc. 

I.  God's  strength  STRxyoTHEKETH  mav.  Open  and  explain  tbat  man's  physical 
energy  dciiendH  upon  his  vi(ai  force,  and  his  religious  life  upon  his  tpiriiucU  /orcem 
Goil  has  access  to  these  secret  sources,  and  can  renew  them  with  his  own  Titality.  Ha 
" btreDgtheoeth  us  with  strength  in  our  soul."  He  makes  "all  grace  abound,  so  that 
we  may  have  all-sufiiciency  in  all  things."  The  experience  of  the  religious  life  unfolds 
the  marvellous  adaptations  and  fitnesses  of  Divine  grace  to  the  thousandfold  needs  that 
arise.  No  matter  what  may  be  our  circumstances  of  perplexity  and  difficulty,  there  is 
always  strength  for  us  in  Qud.  It  may  come  as  an  efficient  help  for  bearing  actual  lile- 
burdcns,  or  for  doing  actual  life-duties ;  and  we  should  undertake  none  without  pfayer* 
fully  seeking  to  lay  hold  of  the  Divine  strength.  How  it  can  be  perfect  in  human 
weakness,  so  that  a  man  may  be  strong  to  bear  the  unusual  ills,  and  zealous  to  do  the 
unusual  duties,  of  life,  is  taught  us  in  the  example  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and,  after 
him,  in  the  example  of  his  servant  St  PauL  But  we  should  be  quite  sure  that  it  will 
come  as  an  inward  renewal,  if  it  nuiy  not  come  for  the  achievement  of  material  success. 
We  may  be  "strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  his  might;"  and  this  is  the 
assurance  of  the  eternal  triumph,  if  it  is  not  of  the  earthly. 

II.  Goo*8  STRENGTH  IS  ooNNKCTSD  WITH  GoD*8  FACE.  He  gives  his  Strength  with 
a  smile.  The  turning  of  his  face  towards  us  is  the  sign  of  his  approval  and  acceptance. 
'Ihe  influence  of  such  a  mark  of  Divine  regard  may  be  illustrated.  1.  li  ckeen  and 
encouraget,  "If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?"  Z,  It  recovers  ut  frum 
depieuionf.  There  can  be  nothing  overwhelming  in  our  circumstances  if  God  smiles 
on  us.  We  look  into  his  face  and  feel  that  they  are  causing  him  no  anxiety,  and  so  our 
heads  are  lifted  up.  He  can  make  "  ways  iu  seas  and  paths  in  great  waters."  3.  lirenewi 
our  frrvour  and  weal.  The  smile  tdls  of  such  luve  that  we  feel  we  can  do  or  bear 
anytliing/or  hU  Bake.  4.  Jt  glorifies  the  right ;  for  it  is  only  on  that  God  OTer  smiles. 
He  approves  the  gf*od,  but  turns  away  from  the  eviL  And  that  must  ever  seem  to  us 
to  be  the  most  beautiful  on  which  (Jod*s  smiling  face  can  rest. 

Press,  in  conclni«ion,  how  the  promises  assure  us  that  just  these  two  things,  or,  better, 
this  two-bided  thing,  God's  strength  and  face,  he  is  ever  ready  to  give  to  those  who 
with  tnic  hearts  wait  upon  hiui.  Those  promises  in  effect  say,  *'I  will  help  thee,  yea, 
I  will  uphold  thee.**  And  the  uplifted  smile  says,  "I  have  loved  thee  with  an  ever- 
lasting luve,  therefore  with  lovmg-kindoess  have  I  drawn  thee." — It.  T, 

Vers.  12 — 14. — The  eonteiits  of  a  godly  memory.  "  Remember,  recall  the  records  of 
Divine  dealings;  set  afresh  before  your  minds  your  own  personal  experiences  of  the 
Divine  goodness  and  mercy.*'  The  conceptiun  of  the  "  solidarity  of  the  race  "  is  matched 
by  chat  of  the  essential  unity  of  the  race,  in  its  mental  and  spiritual  experiences, 
throughout  all  the  ages.  Really  to  know  God's  dealings  with  any  one  peoj>le  is  to 
know  his  dealin*:s  with  all  peoples.  And  therefore  the  story  of  his  relations  with  the 
Jews  is  so  minutely  recorde<l,  and  so  graciously  preserved  for  us  on  whom  the  "  ends  of 
the  world  are  come."  And  yet,  further,  it  may  be  shown  that  an  individual  experience 
n-ally  affords  the  race-type.  God  is  essentially  to  each  what  he  is  to  alL-  We  too  often 
fix  our  attention  on  the  changeable  accidents  of  a  man's  career,  and  then  think  that  his 
ex|)ericnce  is  unique.  If  it  were  so  it  were  of  little  use  to  keep  any  record  of  the 
Divine  dealings  with  men,  for  one  man's  experience  could  not  help  another.  What, 
then,  are  the  usual  contents  of  the  godly  memory  ?  We  con  only  deal  with  such  as 
«re  suggested  by  the  terms  of  the  verses  before  us. 

1.  It  holds  its  own  personal  memories  of  God's  goodness.  Not  merely  has  the 
godly  fiian  a  general  belief  in  God  and  God's  merciful  ways,  but  he  has  the  assurance 
that  God  has  been  merciful  to  him.  He  can  see  in  pa'^e  after  page  of  his  life's  story  how 
guidance,  restraint,  comfort,  teaching,  and  streniith  have  come  in  precise  adaptations  to 
his  (iwn  conditions  and  needs.  He  can  spciik  of  the  "good  hand  of  his  God  which  has 
ever  been  ui»on  him  for  good."  The  im|vortance  of  fixing  the  memory  of  God's  dealings 
by  pious  attention  to  them  at  the  time,  and  by  frecjuent  review  of  them  afterwanis, 
should  be  pointed  out.  A  richly  stored  memory  becomes  an  unfailing  well-spring  of 
comfort  in  later  life.    To  our  view  all  our  past  should  be  dotted  over  with  pillars  wv 


caxYLl— 43.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  268 


hftve  raised,  on  which  wo  have  inscrihed  onr  "Ehenezer** — ^"Hitherto  the  Lord  hath 
helped  us;**  and  at  any  time  we  should  be  able  to  look  back  and  bid  these  pillars 
remind  us  of  the  **  wonderful  works  that  he  hath  done." 

II.  It  holds  ths  baob-mkhorialb  op  God*8  goodkbss.  Scripture  tells  us  of  Gbd's 
dealings  with  men,  both  before  he  separated  the  Jewish  people  and  while  he  had  them 
under  his  special  leadings.  "  The  God  of  the  whole  earth  shall  he  be  called."  It  is 
characteristic  of  David's  psalms  that  they  are  full  of  large  broad  thoughts  of  God's 
relations  to  the  whole  world.  And  both  Scripture  and  secular  history  should  proyiile 
us  with  stores  for  the  memory,  as  they  reveal  God's  workings  towards  his  uracious  ends 
of  substantial  and  eternal  good.  If  Israel  may  say,  '^  He  is  the  Lord  our  God/'  it  must 
go  on  to  say,  "  His  judgments  are  in  all  the  earth. ' 

III.  It  holds  thb  ooyxNANT  pboflb*8  MBM0RIAL8  OF  God's  oooDirBSi.  This  is  the 
peculiar  treasure  of  the  godly»  We  haye  the  Bible  records  of  the  covenant  race-— God's 
peculiar  peoplei  whom  he  had  chosen  for  himself^  Show  what  a  Large  portion  of  the 
good  man's  memory  is  taken  up  with  the  Scripture  story  of  Israel.  God's  ways  with 
his  covenant  people  are  to  us  the  model  and  example  of  all  his  dealings,  and  upon  these 
we  argue  what  he  is  and  will  be  in  his  ways  with  us.  But  they  are  wonderful  ways, 
marvellous  works;  often  mysterious,  often  severe;  ways  of  judgment  as  well  as  mercy. 

Impress  that  the  use  of  due  occasions  for  comdderins;  the  contents  of  the  memory,  for 
refreshing  the  memory,  and  for  making  new  groun£i  of  praise  and  trust,  is  a  most 
important,  but  often  neglected,  part  of  Christian  duty,  bearing  direct  relation  to 
Christian  strength  and  joy. — R.  T. 

Ver.  15. — Abiding  thoughU  of  the  covenant  Comparing  the  first  olanse  of  this  rerso 
with  the  answering  clause  in  Ps.  cv.  8,  it  would  seem  Uiat  it  is  rather  a  statement 
concerning  God  than  a  counsel  given  to  man;  and  it  may  be  rendered,  "He  hath 
rememberod,"  or  "  He  hath  been  mindful  always  of  his  covenant."  But  man  may  very 
properly  be  urged  to  keep  God's  covenant  ever  in  mind,  on  the  rery  ground  that  God 
himself,  in  Divine  faithfulness,  keeps  it  ever  before  him.  We  may  dwell  on  the  moral 
influefkce  exerted  by  cherishing  thoughts  of  those  covenant  conditions  under  which  GK)d 
has  been  graciously  pleased  to  set  us.  Explanations  should  be  given  of  the  Adamio 
covenant,  or  covenant  of  creation ;  the  patriarchal  covenant,  renewed  again  and  again 
in  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob;  the  Mosaic  covenant,  solemnly  accepted  by  God  and 
the  people  at  Sinai,  and  made  the  condition  of  the  national  prosperity;  and  the 
Christian  covenant,  pledged  for  all  believers  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
It  should  be  shown  how  fully  the  Mosaic  covenant  became  interwoven  with  Jewish 
thought ;  and  how,  by  fresh  and  arousing  incidents,  the  claims  of  the  covenant  wei« 
renewed ;  and  also  how,  to  the  more  devout  Jewish  mind,  that  covenant  was  glorified* 
Th«  following  points  will  be  suggestive.    It  is  morally  helpful  to  keep  before  u»— 

I.  Thb  hokoub  op  BBura  nr  thb  Ditikb  goybnakt.  All  accesses  to  God  ara 
honourable.  Compare  our  estimate  of  the  honour  of  presentation  to  an  earthly  sove* 
reisn,  and  our  sense  of  the  yet  higher  honour  of  coming  into  direct  relations  of  friendship 
and  service  with  him.  Illustrate  by  Abraham's  oppressed  feeling  at  the  honour  of 
close  communion  with  the  Lord  and  permission  to  intercede  fur  Sodom,  or  by  the  sur- 
prised feeling  of  St.  Paul  when  he  thinks  of  himself  as  being  a  co-worker  together  with 
God.  This  "honour"  exercises  a  moral  influence  on  us  especially  in  this,  tJiat  it 
ins/nrti  uitobe  our  bett  It  makes  us  fcel^  **  What  manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  bo 
in  all  holy  conversation  and  godliness?" 

IL  Thb  fbivilbob  of  bbiko  in  thb  Dtvikb  ooyxnabt.  For  we  must  be  fiiroured 
above  others ;  and  if  we  are  right-minded,  all  siens  of  special  favour  and  regard  bow  us 
down  in  humility^  as  they  did  David,  leading  him  to  say,  **  What  is  man,  that  thou 
art  mindful  of  him,  or  the  son  of  man,  that  thou  visitest  him  ?  "  Seeing  that  there  is 
"  no  respect  of  persons  with  Gud,*'  it  is  necessary  that  we  should  keep  from  associating 
favouritiim  witn  his  dealinp.  If  he  brings  some— a  few — under  a  spcciHl  covenant, 
it  is  only  for  the  service  of  the  many,  nnd  with  a  view  to  the  final  blessing  of  the  who/o 
through  them.  So  the  sense  of  "privilege"  should  always  be  associated  with  the 
"  humility  "  of  the  true  servant ;  and  we  remember  the  covenant  that  we  may  be  ever 
kept  humble  under  God's  gracious  hand. 

III.  Thb  BBSFOHSiBiLrrT  of  bbiko  xh  trb  Dimni  oovbvaht.    For  it  involres 


26i  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.    [ch.xvl1— 43. 

fioTemn  plcd<;e8  bearing  relation  to  the  (1)  maintenance  of  a  high  character ;  (2)  render^ 
tug  of  a  pure  tuUness ;  and  (8)  doirig  an  earnest  work.  These  may  be  set  forth  in  both 
their  Jewish  and  their  Christian  phases.  The  sense  of  responsibility  has  this  moral 
influence — it  cultures  earnestness  and  diligence^  and  it  arouses  the  whole  powers  to  the 
attaiument  of"  faithfulness." 

IV.  The  rewards  of  beinq  in  the  Divine  ooyenant.  Those  rewards  come  in  tha 
fulfilment  of  the  promises  attached  to  the  coyenant.  In  the  Jewish  case  they  con* 
cerned  material  good,  national  peace  and  prosperity.  In  the  Christian  case  they  concern 
moral  and  spiritual  blessings,  with  earthly  good  conditioned  upon  the  Divine  wisdom 
and  will.  Rewards  have  this  moral  influence — ^they  brighten^  cheer,  and  encourftgft 
those  who  may  be  in  the  midst  of  toil  and  trouble. 

In  each  of  the  above  it  may  be  shown  how  the  sense  of  covenant-relations  is  cor- 
rective of  the  precise  forms  of  worldly  influence  to  which  we  are  subject.  And,  in 
conclusion,  we  may  dwell  upon  the  holy  rest  of  the  thought  that  Qod  hiffuelf  is  ia 
pledged  and  holy  covenant  with  us  in  Christ  Jesus. — R.  T. 

Vers.  23 — 26. — Christian  joy  a  witness.  These  verses  reappear  in  Ps.  xcvL  In  thst 
psalm  the  sacred  nation  is  charged  to  praise  Jehovah,  and  to  spread  the  good  tidings  in 
all  places.  Such  praise  is  fitting,  seeing  that  all  other  deities  are  nothing,  and  Jehovah 
is  God  alone.  Calvin,  writing  on  this  psalm,  says,  "  It  is  an  exhortation  to  praise  Qo^ 
addressed  not  to  the  Jews  only,  but  to  all  nations.  Whence  we  infer  that  the  psalm 
refers  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ ;  for  till  he  was  revealed  to  the  world  his  Name  could 
not  be  called  upon  anywhere  but  in  Judsea."  It  is  said  that  when  the  sun  is  going  out 
of  sight  the  pious  Swiss  herdsman  of  the  Alps  takes  his  Alpine  horn  and  shouts  loudly 
through  it,  "  Praise  ye  the  Lord."  Then  a  brother  herdsman  on  some  distant  slope 
takes  up  the  echo,  "  Praise  ye  the  Lord."  Soon  another  answers,  still  higher  up  tha 
mountains,  till  hill  shouts  to  hill,  and  peak  answers  to  peak,  the  sublime  anthem  of 
praise  to  the  Lord  of  alL  Characteristic  of  the  psalmist  vijoy  in  Qod :  and  in  this  ha 
is  the  one  great  Scripture  example ;  Isaisdi,  perhaps,  coming  next  after  him,  and  St  Paul 
having  much  of  the  same  feature  marking  even  bis  toilsome  and  suffering  life.  Joy,  as 
an  element  of  religious  life,  must  in  part  depend  on:  1.  Disposition,  Some  are  of 
sanguine  and  hopeful,  others  of  desponding,  disposition.  Some  can  easily  turn  every- 
thing into  song,  while  others  can  never  get  beyond  stom  prose.  We  are  not  responsible 
for  our  natural  dispositions,  but  we  are  for  their  due  modihcation,  harmony,  and  culture. 
Often  latent  and  unsuspected  faculties  can  be  developed,  and  it  is  seldom  wise  to  excuse 
failure  and  shortcoming  on  the  ground  of  "  human  nature.**  2.  Foeticdl  faculty .  Where 
this  is  given  joy  and  song  would  seem  to  be  easy ;  yet,  on  the  other  side,  it  may  be  said 
that  poets  are  often  sad-toned  men,  probably  because  accompanying  the  poetical  faculty 
is  a  power  of  insight  which  brings  to  the  poet*s  eye  the  wrong  that  lies  at  the  heart  of 
BO  much  that  is  seemingly  good.  But  this  cannot  apply  to  thoughts  and  views  of  Qod^ 
Insight  and  faculty  can  only  find  reasons  for  joy  and  song  when  they  have  to  do  with 
him  and  his  all-merciful  ways.  3.  Youthful  piety.  Those  who  seek  Gkxl  early^  as 
David  did,  usually  have  a  brightness  and  gladness  and  joy  of  full  trust  on  their  whole 
religious  lives  which  the  later-renewed  can  never  reach.  This  is  one  of  the  best  of  the 
rewards  given  to  early  piety.  4.  Earnest  soul-culture.  This,  by  leading  to  renewals 
of  trui^t,  to  firmer  hold  of  revealed  truth,  and  to  deeper  experiences  of  Divine  com- 
munion, bears  directly  upon  the  joy  side  of  Christian  feeling.  When  attained,  Christian 
joy  becomes  a  witness  for  two  reasons  or  in  two  ways. 

I.  It  mekts  the  common  sentiment  that  ▲  thino  must  be  good  in  itself  if  it 
tends  to  make  us  bright  and  happy.  How  common  this  sentiment  is  may  be  shown 
from  ordinary  life.  The  people  who  always  cheer  us,  we  feel  sure,  must  be  good  people, 
and  the  same  may  be  said  of  hooks^  etc.  In  this  way,  therefore,  our  personal  joy  in  God 
may  become  a  gracious  moral  power  on  all  who  are  around  us.  And  happy  Chri$tian% 
have  a  most  noble  and  blessed  witness. 

•*  Sing  on  your  heavenward  way. 
Ye  ransomed  sinners,  sing." 

A  weary  world  sadly  needs  the  sweet  relief  and  cheering  of  much  Christian  song. 

II.  It  sets  Christianity  in  ▲  distinct  and  impressive  contrast  with  all  otbeb 


CH.  xvL  1—43.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  26B 

BELIGIONB.  Thej  are  familiar  enough  with  the  sentiment  of /ear.  In  perilous  rebounds 
they  know  seasons  of  intense  sensual  excitement,  which  caricature  true  joy.  But  the 
prevailing  tone  of  all  other  religions  besides  Christianity  is  sad.  Only  the  Christian 
may  "al^und  ^n  joy  through  the  Holy  Ghost."  Who  could  sing  before  that  Athenian 
altar  whereon  was  inscribed,  "To  the  unknown  God"?  And  who  could  fail  to  sing 
and  give  praise,  that  might  look  into  the  face  of  the  Father  of  Jesus,  and  say,  "This 
God  is  our  God  for  ever  and  ever;  he  will  be  our  Guide  even  unto  death"?— B.  T. 

Ver.  29. — Sincerity  and  fervour  in  worship  shown  by  gifts.  In  accordance  with  the 
Mosaic  regulations,  and  as  a  fitting  expression  of  pious  feeling,  the  people  were  enjoined 
to  "  bring  an  offering,  and  come  before  him."  By  an  *'  offering  "  here  we  are  to  under- 
stand a  gift  rather  than  a  sacrifice  ^see  Mai.  ii.  8 — 10).  From  the  very  earliest  begin- 
nings of  the  human  race  it  was  aistinctly  apprehended — whether  by  following  the 
instincts  with  which  God  endowed  man,  or  by  special  Divine  revelations,  we  cannot 
say — that  a  man  can  and  may  give  himself  to  God  by  and  through  the  presentation 
to  God  of  something  thai  he  has.  This  is  the  underlying  principle  of  all  tithes, 
offerings,  and  sacrifices.  Nothing  presented  to  God  can  be  acceptable  unless  it  carries 
with  it  the  person  presenting,  seeing  that  what  he  cares  for  is  man^s  love  and  trust 
and  service.  Illustrate  from  the  case  of  Cain  and  Abel,  each  bringing  a  thank  offering 
from  that  in  which  God  had  blessed  him.  Show  how  the  principle  gained  develop- 
ment in  the  Mosaic  system ;  the  regular  devotement  of  property  being  enjoined,  and 
gifts  being  required  in  connection  with  all  sanctuary  attendances.  Show  that  the 
principle  has  our  Lord's  commendation, and  passed  over  into  the  early  Church,  forming 
one  of  the  first  impulses  of  awakened  Christian  feelins  (see  Barnabas),  and  being 
specially  commended  to  the  attention  of  the  Churches  by  the  apostles  (Acts  ii.  45 ; 
Gal.  ii.  10 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  1,  2).    It  may  be  enforced — 

I.  That  Christian  feeling  still  impels  gifts.  The  sense  of  indebtedness  and  of 
tJtankfulness  always  wants  this  mode  of  expression. 

II.  That  Chbistian  feeling  still  seeks  right  spheres  for  gifts.  These  are 
found  in  every  age  in  connection  with  Divine  worship.  And  as  Christ  is  not  now 
with  us  in  the  b<^y,  we  find  spheres  for  gifts  in  helping  and  blessing  others  for  his 
sake. 

III.  That  Christian  feeling  still  seeks  to  serye  God  bt  its  gifts.  Letting 
them  be  (1)  signs  to  him,  and  (2)  inspiring  examples  to  our  fellow-men. 

Press  the  duty  of  seeking  right  ideas  concerning  the  trust  of  money,  and  the  due 
apportionment  of  it  so  that  God  may  be  glorified  in  its  use. — B.  T. 

Ver.  29. — The  claims  of  Qod  to  the  worship  and  homage  of  his  creatures.  What  I 
have  to  demonstrate  is :  1.  That  God  is  entitled  to  the  homage  of  his  creatures,  and 
claims  it  as  proper  and  right.  2.  That  these  claims  are  made  upon  us,  his  intelligent 
creatures.  It  will  therefore  be  necessary  to  show  that  we  are  capable  of  knowing  God 
to  all  the  extent  necessary  to  excite  in  our  minds  the  feelings  of  awe,  reverence^ 
and  adniiration,  since  these  are  essential  to  homage  and  worship.  Also  to  prove 
that  such  claims  are  not  only  reasonable,  but  founded  in  justice  and  right.  8.  That 
the  worship  and  homage  required  is  such  that  it  not  only  does  not  degrade,  but 
elevates  the  man  that  pays  it ;  that  it  is  not  the  hard  requirement  of  despotism,  but  the 
righteous  claim  of  infinite  excellence ;  not  the  service  of  flattery  and  servility,  but  the 
free>will  offering  of  a  discerning  and  admiring  mind  (J.  Bobinson). — B.  T. 

Ver.  29. — The  clothing  of  true  worshippers.  The  expression  "In  the  beauty  of 
holiness"  is  rendered  in  the  Septuagint  Version,  "in  his  sanctuary;"  and  by  the 
8yriac  Version,  "  with  reverence  and  thanksgiving."  A  similar  expression  is  found  in 
2  Chron.  xx.  21, "  That  should  praise  the  beauty  of  holiness ; "  this  is  translated 
by  Bertheau,  "  in  holy  attire ; "  and  by  Malvenda,  "  Praise  the  Lord  with  the  same 
costume,  and  dignity,  and  magnificence,  as  in  the  temple."  The  term  "  beauty  of 
holiness"  may  be  regarded  as  including  inward  devotion,  and  also  with  outward 
reverence.  Jennings  and  Lowe,  in  their  note  on  Ps.  xcvi.  9,  translate,  ''in  holy 
vestments ; "  and  they  quote  a  passage  in  Ecclus.  1. 11,  where  it  is  said  that  Simon  the 
high  priest  "put  on  the  robe  of  honour,  and  •  .  •  made  the  garment  of  the  sanctuary 


2C6  THE  HRST  BOOK  OP  THE  GHRONICLEa    [oh*  xti.  1— 4a. 

honourable.**  For  nmn  extemul  forms  of  worship  are  necessary,  hut  in  his  relattODS  to 
them  there  is  a  constant  peril  of  fornmlitj,  and  so  a  constant  need  for  a  watchful  and 
careful  culture  of  the  spiritual  life  and  feeling  which  alone  can  make  forms  acceptable. 
Illustrate  the  danger  of  formality  by  the  Jewish  wearing  of  the  tallith,  etc.,  and  bj 
exag:gerated  rabbinical  regulations.  Note  with  what  constant  anxiety  our  Lord  taught 
thiit  they  who  *'  worship  the  Father  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth." 
Holiness,  as  here  used,  has  no  precise  equivalent.  It  includes  "  sincerity,**  and  also 
"  reverence/'  but  it  should  be  thought  of  as  embracing  '*  whole-heartedness  **  and 
**  devout  earnestness  "  and  "  spiritual  preparedness.*'  The  term  may  be  suggestively 
oompered  with  the  *'  integrity  **  of  David  and  the  "  perfect"  of  the  New  Testament. 
The  worship-clothing  which  is  expressed  in  the  term  '^beauty  of  holiness*'  may  be 
treated  as  including  (1)  humility;  (2)  reverence;  (3)  sincerity;  (4)  eamestneas; 
(5)  preparedness;  (6)  and  openness  to  receive.  If  the  Christian  Church  is  a  "  king^ooi 
of  priests,**  a  **  holy  priesthood,**  then  we  should  be  devoutly  anxioos  to  aecure  the 
priestly  clothing  for  our  high  and  noble  spiriiual  wonhip, — R.  T. 

Ver.  31. — GofTi  prtmnt  reigiu  *•  The  Lord  reigneth,"  or  "  Jehovah  is  king.**  David 
taw,  in  the  restomtion  of  the  ark,  a  new  and  solemn  resumption  of  his  dir^t  govem- 
ment  by  Jehovah  ;  and  of  this  glorious  fact  he  bids  the  people  make  acknowledgment 
and  render  witness.  Explain  fully  the  Jewish  conception  of  the  theocracy,  and  thow 
how  it  was  connected  with  a  present  and  abiding  outward  symbol — at  first  the  pillar^ 
cloud,  and  then  the  ark.  1  he  importance  of  the  theocratic  idea,  and  the  actual 
influence  of  it  on  mind  and  heart,  depended  on  the  differing  religious  dispositions  of 
the  people.  To  the  worldly  minded  Jew  it  would  be  a  vague  notion,  a  sort  of  sublime, 
but  impracUcal,  philosophical  conception — a  sort  of  hereditary  national  sentiment^ 
and  nothing  more.  To  the  truly  spiritually  minded  man  it  was  the  firsts  most 
impressive,  and  most  practical  of  all  truths.  It  was  the  thought  that  put  glorious 
meaning  into  commonplace  life  and  labour.  Life  has  its  holy  issues,  and  it  might 
well  have  its  shrouded  mysteries,  for  **  the  Lord  reigneth."  This  Jewish  notion  posses 
over  into  Christianity,  and  we  realize  Jehovah *8  present  spiritual  reign  in  the  adminie* 
tration  of  the  Lord  jcstis  Christ.  In  the  Maccabean  times  there  was  a  tendency  to 
lose  the  idea  that  "  the  Lord  doth  reign,**  and  to  substitute  for  it  a  phrase  which 
indicated  a  great  outlooking  for  a  coming  Deliverer  and  a  golden  age,  "the  Lord 
ihall  reign.**  And  a  similar  evil  tendency  still  affects  the  Christian  Church ;  failing  to 
realize  Christ's  present  rule,  some  sections  of  the  Church  keep  looking  on  to  aome 
fancied  near  time,  when  Christ  shall  come  again  and  take  to  himself  his  great  power 
and  reign.  And  the  antidote  is  full  and  faithful  teaching  on  the  point  of  whicn  the 
psalmist  mnkcs  so  much — the  present  dii-ect,  and  every  way  practical,  present  reign 
over  the  earth  and  the  Church,  of  Jehovah,  apprehended  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Keeping  the  present  reign  in  Christ  before  our  minds,  it  may  be  instructive 
to  shi»w — 

I.  That  Christ's  lifb  on  f.arth  helps  cub  apprehension  of  thb  beioh.  The 
reif^n  of  Grod  the  Spirit  must  ever  seem  to  man  an  unreal,  intangible  thing,  unless  it 
can  tike  sume  outward  and  material  sharie;  and  yet  that  shajie  and  form  must  be  such 
as  will  in  no  sense  imi^ril  the  spiritual  character  of  the  reign.  No  merely  human 
sovereignty  could  be  satisfactory,  for  none  could  be  worthy  of  that  sublime  royalty 
which  it  presumed  to  represent.  Christ's  life  on  earth  was  the  theocracy  materializeil 
for  human  apprehension.  Our  Lord's  humanity  sets  God  before  our  thought  in 
human  terms  and  figures  such  as  we  can  understand.  And  the  kingship  of  Jesus  was 
felt  and  acknowledged  by  friend  and  foe,  wherever  he  went,  and  not  exclusively  by 
those  disciples  who  knew  him  most  intimately.  Ilis  teaching  was  given  '^with 
authority;"  his  personal  relations  were  a  rule.  It  can  be  no  wonder  that  people 
should  cast  their  garments  in  his  way,  and  wave  palm  branches,  and  shout,  sayings 
*^  Uosanna  to  the  King  that  cometh  in  the  Name  of  the  Lordl  **  His  life  is  the  earth- 
picture  of  the  Divine  reign  over  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men. 

II.  That  Christ's  olort  in  heaven  makes  us  realize  the  reion  ai  ▲  bpimtuat, 
BEION.  It  takes  all  the  merely  carnal  fe:itures  out  of  it.  'i'lic  reign  is  such  a  one  as 
our  exalted,  glorified,  ascended,  spiritual  Lord  and  Saviour  may  have,  who  is  **  Lcxrd  of 
lambs  the  lowly.  King  of  saints  the  holy."    The  risen,  heavenly  Christ  we  feel  moat 


OT.  xvL  1—43.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa  267 

bave,  as  the  sphere  for  his  rule,  not  our  bodily  actions  only,  but  our  wUIi,  our  choice^ 
our  affections ;  gaining,  as  be  must,  his  beginnings  in  our  souls,  and  extending  bis  holy 
authorities  over  all  the  relations  we  sustain. 

Explain  and  impress  how,  in  our  common,  everyday  life,  we  can  realise  the  theo- 
cratic conception,  and  practically  live  in  the  joy  and  impulse  of  being  daily  "  in  the 
great  Taskmaker's  eye." — B.  T. 

Ver.  33. — Ood  always  coming  to  judge,  ''Judgment"  is,  in  Scripture,  a  large  and 
comprehensive  term.  It  is  sometimes  synonymous  with  "  rule,"  or  "government,"  iMscause 
in  ancient  monarchies  actual  magistracy— due  personal  consideration  and  decision  of 
rival  claims,  or  accusations  of  crimes — took  a  prominent  place.  Sometimes  reference  it 
intended  to  that  appointment  of  deserts  in  men's  earthly  experiences  which  may  be 
regarded  as  a  Divine  judgment  continually  working.  And  sometimes  the  allusion  is  to 
that  great  occasion  on  which  the  anomalies  of  life  are  to  gain  permanent  adjustment, 
and  the  issues  of  human  conduct  to  be  eternally  fixed.  Whatever  other  figures  for 
God  may  gain  attraction  to  us,  we  may  not  lose  our  thought  of  him  as  the  "  Judge  of 
all  the  earth."  We  fix  attention  on  the  fact  that  the  judging  of  Ck)d  is  no  merely 
future  thing,  the  glory  of  a  coming  day.    It  may  be  urged  that^> 

I.  God  IS  "EVER  cominq  to  judge"  in  the  witness  of  men's  00NSCIKNCE8.  No  man 
has  to  wait  for  his  judp;ment.  He  has  it  at  once  in  the  inward  conviction  of  the  right* 
ness  or  wrongness  of  his  action.  We  should  never,  in  our  thought,  separate  conscience 
from  the  inward  voice  of  God  our  Judge. 

II.  God  is  eveb  ''coming  to  judge"  in  the  oonneotions  between  snr  and 
SUFFERING.  Suffering  being  the  proper  issue  of  sin,  and  necessarily  connected  with  it 
by  God  in  order  to  reveal  its  character.  All  suffering  may  be  regarded  as  a  beginning 
and  present  illustration  of  God's  judgment. 

III.  God  is  ever  "  coming  to  judge  "  in  the  conyigtions  wrought  bt  the  fbe* 
8ENCB  AMONG  US  OF  HOLT  MEN*  Illustrate  how  Enoch  and  Noah  carried  GKxl's  judg* 
ment  on  their  sinful  generation,  in  the  conviction  produced  by  their  holy  lives.  And 
in  the  fullest  sense  tliis  was  true  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as  the  holiest  of  men.  His  presence 
among  them  was  God's  abiding  jud^nnent  on  a  sinful  and  adulterous  generation.  In 
measure  the  same  is  true  still  of  both  private  and  public  spheres — the  presence  of  holy 
men  and  women  tests  us,  and,  too  often,  both  judges  and  condemns. 

IV.  God  is  ever  ''coming  to  judge"  in  the  orderings  of  Divine  fbovidenob. 
Calamities,  and  even  disappointments,  are  signs  of  the  Divine  presence  recognizing  and 
dealing  with  wilfulness  and  sin.  And  this  is  quite  as  true  when  we  are  able  to  trace 
the  natural  laws  according  to  whose  legitimate  workings  the  calamities  or  faUuree  may 
have  come. 

y.  God  is  burelt  also  coming  with  his  final  judgment  oh  the  lives  and 
RECORDS  OF  NATIONS  AND  OF  MEN.  Of  th&t  fact  we  are  well  assured ;  of  the  manner  and 
method  of  it  we  have  only  as  yet  vague  poetical  figures,  which  we  are  unable  to  trans- 
late into  earthly  fact.  Enough  is  told  us  to  make  the  thought  of  coming  judgment  a 
present  moral  power.  David  connected  the  Divine  "  judjjment"  with  "  righteousness  * 
and  with  "  truth,"  as  these,  he  knew,  had  been  so  gloriously  manifested  in  the  fulfil- 
ment of  ancient  promises.  "  These  being  the  characteristics  of  Jehovah's  judgment  to 
which  the  view  is  directed  in  this  psalm,  the  essentially  joyous  tone  of  it  is  accounted 
for."    Think  aright  of  God's  judgment,  and  of  it  we  may  even  learn  to  sing, — B.  T, 

Ver.  36. — The  peoples  •*  Amen**  With  this  incident  should  be  compared  the  publio 
response  of  the  people  at  the  seasons  for  the  renewal  of  the  covenant  (Josh.  xxiv.  16— > 
24,  etc.).  In  the  united  cry  of  the  people,  when  David's  psalm  closed,  we  have  their 
acceptance  of  all  that  bad  been  said  in  their  behalf.  The  word  "  amen  "  means  "  firm, 
faithful,  verily;"  and  the  proper  signification  of  the  word  is  when  one  person  confirms 
the  word  of  another,  and  expresses  his  wish  for  the  success  and  accomplishment  of  the 
other*s  vows  and  declarations.  For  Scripture  use  of  the  word,  see  the  following  repro- 
st-ntaiive  passages: — Numb.  v.  22;  Deut.  xxvii.  15;  1  Kings i.  36;  Ps.  xli.  13;  cvi.48; 
Jer.  xxviii.  6 ;  Matt  vi.  13 ;  Rev.  xxii.  20.  The  following  early  authorities  confirm  the 
fact  that  the  word  "  Amen  "  was  repeated  aloud  as  a  response  by  the  Christian  con- 
gregations i^Qstin  Martyr,  a.d.  13d|  notices  that  the  people  present  say  the  "  Amen  ** 


BCOS  07  THE  CHB02iICLE9.   [ol  xni.  1-— 2T. 


1a:  zcies,  .siceiiec  ^  lid 


ia 


LiXkTi 


U    £7 


.  I>j:cTc^  of  A>xiadni,  aju  232,  RMtki  of  one  wbo 
£k5irm:.&  lai  >:c:jed  in  the  ''Amen'  which  followed, 
lae  Lcrd*s  Fnjcr  is  Ktled  with  ma  "  Amen." 
fooad  of  the  **  Amen*  of  the  fiomaxi 
all  the  h  jmnt  found  in  the  tliiid 
zIas,  word  KakawMf  which  ii  repceeented 
ji  TrK-seCj  Z2jt  *■  Aii.«9  *  with  which  we  tie  aocustomed  to 
:d^  ViMt  w:ri  w*s  ^Md  in  the  eerrioes  of  the  synftgognei 
*Ti«  f.f=.^^  :c  ?:(ljik-vj:c  zz.  t*if  H.hT  E~:rAnst  it  in  most  ancient  litui^es 
cr  e;v»:  to>  »  sui  i^Mi.  &=.•!  u«e  !«*:•;••«  m^oi  aload.  Amen.*  "In  roost  Greek 
Li.rpes  aic  w^±c  iirt  zrje<  iz.  fc'-'-'.<Sfci=^  sars,  'Soma  Chzialoo,*  the  reoei?era 
mxsAw*^  *  A— ■■-  '     W*  —  IT  iw*  *  t— -> 

L  Thi  ocMMrzy  w:4fc5s:?.  Wi-c-rrer  a  eocsrecatrcn  of  people  gathers  to^ppther  for 
wtc^ltp  in  cv.c^«:i':c  w:;i  T^Jpzi*  le.e— r:ci^  on  It  some  of  them  can  take  actual 
part  tT  T  i^f  cr  ;t  a:i.  A'.^  ri^T  icjjr  is  sTinpaiLT,  interest,  and  common  feeling. 
This  is  Ll^>tra*«»i  in  Datji's  br.rr.^  cp  tike  ark.    AH  shared,  bat  only  a  few  were 


r:r.i..T 


IL  Ths  ufXEscxTAm  t::ct  cr  ^«oes,  of  priest  or  of  angers,  of  minister  or  of 
clerk.  S;:ch  Tv\v>m  an-i  artcrs  sc<:<i' i  he  ccooriTea  as  (1)  aet  forth  by  the  people  to  act 
f  c  :hem :  v.-?  i:5deryraV.i--g  t^  wa;iu,  ooaditkos^  aod  feelings  of  the  pec^;  and  (3) 
speaking  for  the  p«C7*& 

III.  Thi  GULiT  Axes.  This  is  to  be  regarded  as  solemnly  sealing,  acknowledging 
and  acck-pcing  what  has  been  stiu  cr  d-.^oe  in  the  peopie^s  name.  It  is  corious  that  it 
ahould  cv*me  to  be  sfh.*ken  by  the  cinister,  no:  the  people. 

Impress  the  is.:eresx  yl)  to  &>i  c-f  the  peofCe's  Amen;  (2)  to  the  representative 
speaker ;  and  v3)  to  the  p^:>p■Ie  thenuelTea.  Show  the  importance  of  regarding  it  as  a 
solemn  duty  to  attend  $o  ful>  to  D.T:ne  serrice,  that,  in  uttering  our  Amtn,  we  inteUi- 
gentlT  and  solemnly  take  m  hat  is  said,  or  what  is  done,  and  E^ke  ii  oiirt— -oar  own. 
— R.t. 


Exrosmoy. 


CHAPTER  XVIL 


This  chapter  is  paralleled  by  2  Sam.  tIL 
1 — 20 ;  and  tlie  parallel  is  for  the  most  part 
Tery  close.  The  purport  of  the  two  accounts 
may  be  said  to  be  identical,  while  the  varia- 
tions  of  some  few  words  and  sentences  just 
snffice  to  indicate  the  somewhat  diflercnt 
objects  of  the  two  writers,  and  the  Tery 
different  time  when  our  compiler  was  having 
lecour^io  to  the  common  authority.  The 
''good"  purpose  which  wus  in  David's 
heart  is,  like  many  other  good  pur|x>8ei«, 
obstructcKl  by  the  will  and  providence  of 
God  himself.  It  is  not  one  of  that  other 
kind  of  ••  good  intentions,"  with  which  the 
way  to  hoU  is  so  often  paved,  when  tlie 
man  who  forms  the  resolution  and  entertains 
tbo  intention  is  he  who  of  liis  own  choice, 
or  fickleness,  or  indifference,  breaks  it  It 
is  acknowledged,  therefore,  and  meets  in  fact 
with  a  largo  ond  gracious  reward,  in  being 
made  the  occasion  of  the  distinct  revelation 
to  David  of  a  Isstiug  house  and  perpetuated 


I 


kingdom  in  his  line.    The  interest  of  this 

chapter  is  heightened,  as  will  be  seen,  by 

the  aspects  of  royal  '^horne"  life  and  peace 

which  it  presents. 

Ver.  1. — We  may  easily  imagine  how  the 
excitement,  though  not  the  deeper  interest, 
attending  the  removal  of  the  ark  and  the 
festival  on  occasion  of  its  safe  establishment 
on  Zion  had  now  subsided.  David's  thoughts 
Inspecting  the  honour  due  to  God  and  to  the 
ark  of  the  covenant  liad  time  to  grow  into 
convictions,  and  they  were  greatly  and 
rightly  stimulated  by  reflection  on  his  own 
surroundings  of  comfort,  of  safety,  of  stability 
and  spIeiKlour.  He  revolves  the  possible 
methods  and  the  right  methods  of  showing 
that  honour  due.  The  completion  of  his 
own  house,  one  presumably  fit  for  the  per- 
manent abode  of  the  King  of  l8r)iel(ch.  xiv. 
1),  is  the  cletir  demonstration  to  him  that 
the  ark  should  not  dwell  in  a  mere  tent.  It 
is  a  true  touch  of  life,  when  it  is  written  that 
as  David  sat  in  his  house  tlicse  thoughts 
possc^sed  him,  and  so  strongly.  The  exact 
time,  however,  here  designed,  and  the  exact 
occasion  of  his  revealing  the  thoughts  that 
burned  within  him»   to  Nathan*   do   not 


en.  xvn.  1— 27  ]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa 


269 


appear  either  here  or  io  the  parallel  place. 
In  the  opinion  of  some,  an  indication  of 
Bome  interval  having  elapsed  is  found  in  the 
%ords  (2  Sam.  viL  1),  •«  Tlie  Lord  had  given 
him  rest  round  about  from  all  his  enemies ; " 
while  others  consider  those  words  to  refer  to 
the  victories  gained  over  the  Philistines,  as 
recorded  in  ch.  xiv.  Nathan  the  prophet. 
This  name  suddenlv  breaks  upon  us,  without 
any  introduction,  here  for  the  first  time. 
Kathan  is  emphatically  entitled  **the  pro- 
phet," but  perhaps  merely  to  distinguish  him 
from  Nathan,  David's  eighth  son.  Amid 
many  other  important  references  to  Nathan, 
and  wliich  speak  for  themselves,  must  be 
specially  noted  ch.  xxix.  29 ;  2  Chron.  ix. 
29.  And  it  will  be  noticed  from  the  former 
of  these  references,  in  particular  how  Nathan 
is  the  prophet  (M'3jn) ;  not  (like  Samuel  and 
Gad)  seer  (ni^'in  or  rftnn).  Possibly  he  is 
intended  in  1  Kings  iv.  5.  An  houM  of 
eedan.  The  cedar  here  spoken  of  does, 
of  ctiurse,  not  answer  to  our  red,  odorous 
cedar.  The  word  employed  is  m,  in  the 
plural  number.  The  first  Biblical  use  of  this 
word  is  found  in  Lev.  xiv.  4, 6, 49 — 52.  It  is 
derived  byGesenius  from  an  obsolete  word  hm, 
frt^m  the  grip  and  the  firmness  of  its  roots. 
It  is  probably  the  derived  signification,  Uiere- 
fore,  that  should  be  adhered  to  (as  in  the 
Authorized  Version),  and  not  the  original, 
where  in  Ezek.  xzvii.  24,  the  plural  of  the 
passive  participial  is  found,  **  made  of  cedar," 
not  with  A.  Bchultens,  ** made  fast**  The 
cedar  genus  belonging  to  the  order  GoniferaB, 
is  odoriferous,  very  lasting,  and  without 
knots.  The  numerous  good  qualities  which 
it  possesses  are  spoken  to  in  the  varietv 
of  uses,  and  good  kind  of  uses,  to  which  it 
was  p  it— these  all  crowned  by  the  almost 
Bolitaryspiritualizedappropriationofthetree, 
found  in  Ps.  xciL  12.    From  a  comparison  of 

1  Kings  Y.  6, 8  (in  the  Hebrew,  20, 22)  with 

2  Chi  on.  ii.  3,  8,  and  some  other  passages, 
we  may  be  led  to  believe  that  the  cedar  as  the 
name  of  timber  was  used  occasionally  very 
|;enerically.  Nevertheless,  the  very  passages 
in  question  instance  by  name  the  other 
fpeoifio  kinds  of  wood.  Two  of  the  chief 
kinds  of  oedar  were  the  Lebanon  and  the 
Deodara,  which  is  said  not  to  have  grown  in 
Syria,  but  abounds  in  the  Himalayas.  And 
as  the  use  of  the  Lebanon  cedar  for  some 
purposes  (e,g.  for  the  masU  of  ships)  is  almost 
out  of  the  question,  it  is  exceedingly  probable 
that  this  Deodara  and  some  otlier  varieties 
of  pines  are  comprehended  under  the  di-ret. 
Dean  Stanley  points  out  what  may  be  de- 
scribed as  very  interesting  moral  landmark 
naea  of  the  celebrated  cedars  of  Lebanon, 
in  those  passages  which  speak  of  Solomon's 
•weep  of  knowledge,  commencing  in  the 
descending  direction  from  them  (1  Kings  iy. 
93),  of  the  devouring  fire  that  should  begin 


with  the  bramble  and  reach  high  up  to  those 
cedars  (in  Jotham's  parable,  Judg.  ix.  15), 
and  (in  the  parable  of  Joash,  King  of  Israel, 
to  Amaziah,  King  of  Judah,  2  Chron.  xxt. 
18)  of  the  contempt  with  which  the  family 
of  the  cedars  of  Lebanon  is  supposed  to  hear 
of  the  matrimonial  overtures  of  the  family  of 
the  thistles  of  Lebanon.  Stanley's  ptt;;e8 
(*  Sinai  and  Palestine/  edit  1866,  pp.  414— 
414  d)  are  full  of  interest  on  the  subject  of  the 
cedars  of  Lebanon  (see  also  full  article  in 
Dr.  Smith's  •  Bible  Dictionary,'  i.  285,  286  ; 
and  Dr.  Thomson's  *  liand  and  the  Book,*  pp. 
197—200).  Cedar  was  the  choice  wood  for 
pillars  and  beams,  boarding  and  ceiling  of 
the  finest  houses;  and  alike  the  first  and 
second  temples  (Ezra  iiL  7)  depend(^  upon 
the  supply  of  it  ITnder  cnrtaiofl.  Here 
rightly  in  the  plural,  though  our  parallel 
(2  SaoL  TiL  2)  shows  the  singular  (Exod. 
xxvL  1—13;  xxxvi.  8—19). 

Ver.  2. — This  Terse  gives  Nathan's  re- 
sponse on  the  spur  of  the  moment  And  that 
it  was  not  radically  wrong  from  a  prophet  may 
be  inferred  from  the  stress  afterwards  laid 
upon  the  acceptableness  to  God  of  what  had 
been  in  the  heart  ef  David  to  do.  Even  with 
Gild,  silence  would  sometimes  be  understood 
by  a  prophet  to  be  equivalent  to  assent 

Ver.  8. — The  express  word  of  God  oame^ 
however,  that  same  night  It  proved  to  be 
an  overruling  word.  But  it  brought  with 
it  the  point  of  a  fresh  and  most  welcome  new 
departure  for  David.  We  might  glean  here 
by  the  way  a  suggestion  of  the  oeneficent 
operation  of  express  revelation,  superseding 
the  thought,  the  method,  the  reason  of  man. 

Vers.  4 — 15. — These  verses  are  the  unfold- 
ing to  David  of  the  magnificent  and  far- 
stretching  purposes  of  God's  grace  towards 
him  in  his  son  Solomon  nnd  his  descendants 
for  ever.  The  revelation  is  made  by  the 
mouth  of  Nathan. 

Ver.  4.— Thon  shalt  not  build.  The  He« 
brew  marks  the  personal  pronoun  here  as  em* 
phatic,  **  Not  thou  shalt  build,**  i,e,  but  some 
one  else.  In  the  parallel  this  prohibition  is 
conveyed  by  that  interrogative  particle  which 
expects  the  answer  No,  and  may  be  thui 
translated :  **  Is  it  thou  shalt  build  for  me,'* 
etc.? 

Ver.  5. — This  Terse  contains  the  three 
terms— house,  tent,  tabemaele  (see  notes  on 
oh.  xvL  1).  Gesenius  observes  that  when 
the  Hebrew  of  the  last  two  words  is  used 
distinctively,  the  tent  describes  the  outer 
coverings  of  the  twelve  curtains;  and  the 
tabemiule,  the  ten  inner  ourtains  and  frame- 
work as  well,  in  other  wurds,  the  whole 
equipment  of  the  well-known  tabemacleu 
As  compared  with  the  version  we  have  here, 
the  parallel  place  speaks  an  almost  pathetic 
con(&soension,  "*!  was  a  shifting  traveller  in 
tent  and  tabernacle.*'    God  meant  to  remind 


270 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,   [ch.  xvm  1—27. 


David  how  fxirely  and  faithfully  he  had 
shared  the  pilgrim  lot  and  unsettlerlness  of 
his  people.  What  most  holy  the  tahfrnacle 
oontaiued  was  herein  a  type  of  the  bodily 
tabernacle  of  Jesus  Curist  in  later  times. 

Ver.  6.— The  jndget  of  Israel.  The  sub- 
stitution of  the  Hebrew  character  beth  for  p«, 
in  the  word  "judges,**  would  make  it 
**  tribes,**  and  bring  it  into  harmony  with 
the  parallel  place.  But  the  suct*eeding 
elause,  Whom  I  eommanded  to  feed  my 
paoplOf  would  rather  suggest  that  the 
parallel  place,  which  adds  tite  same  clause, 
should  be  brought  into  harmony  with  this 
(see  again  vcr.  10  of  this  chapter).  Tho 
general  meaning  and  the  g^raoious  spirit 
underlying  it  in  evident  enough.  God  had 
never  made  a  suggestion  to  tribe,  or  leailer 
of  tribe,  nor  to  judge,  who  ha<l  been  temporal  ily 
raised  up  to  lead,  and  so  to  feed,  all  his  people 
Israel,  to  build  him  an  house.  He  liad  shared 
their  lot,  and  had  shareil  it  unmurmuringly. 
He  also  "  had  not  opened  his  mouth  '*  (I 
Kings  viii.  12—16;  ch.  xzviii.  3,  4;  Pd. 
Ixxviii.  67 — 71).  Note  also  the  expression, 
**I  chose  no  city  out  of  all  the  tribes  of 
Israel  **  (1  Kings  viii.  16).  It  is  to  be  re- 
marked that  we  learn  from  ch.  zxii.  8  and 
xxviii.  3  the  fuller  causes  why  David  was 
Oct  to  be  permitted  to  be  the  builder  of  the 
house.  It  is  not  apparent  why  those  causes 
are  not  recited  here.  The  same  remark 
applies  to  the  parallel  place. 

Ver.  7. — I  took  thee.  (So  1  Sam.  xvi.  11, 
12;  2  Sam.  vii.  8;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  80.)  The 
shoopcote.  The  Hebrew  7r}i  strictly  signifies 
a  resting  or  place  of  resting.  Hence  the 
habitation  of  men  or  of  auimaU,  and  in 
particular  the  pasture  in  which  flocks  lie 
down  and  rest  (Ps.  xxiii.  2,  plural  con- 
struction; Job  V.  24;  Hosea  ix.  13;  Jer. 
xxiii.  3;  xlix.  20).  The  sheepcote  was 
sometimes  a  tower,  with  roughly  built  hij^h 
wall,  exposed  to  the  sky  at  the  top,  used  for 
protection  from  wild  beasts  at  night ;  some- 
times the  sheepfold  was  a  larger  low  building 
of  ditfereut  shape,  to  which  a  fenced  court- 
yard was  adjacent,  where  the  peril  of  cold  or 
of  wild  beast  was  less  imminent  The  word 
of  our  present  passage,  however,  cannot  be 
compared  with  these  places;  comp.  rather 
Exod.  XV.  13 :  2  Sam.  xv.  25 ;  Isa.  xxxiii. 
20 ;  Ixv.  10 ;  Hosea  ix.  13,  as  above. 

Ver.  8. — And  have  made  thee.  This  may 
be  rendered  and  will  make  thee ;  in  which 
case  the  promise  to  David  commences  with 
this  rather  than  the  following  clause. 

Ver.  9. — AH  the  verbs  of  this  verse  are  in 
the  same  tense  as  those  of  the  foregoing 
verse,  which  are  correctly  translated.  For 
an  expression  similar  to  the  last  clause  of 
the  verse,  Neither  shall  the  children  of 
wickedness  waste  them  any  more,  may  be 
found  in  Pa  Ixxxix.  22. 


Ver.  10. — This  verse  shonld  read  on  oon* 
tinuously  with  the  preceding,  as  far  as  to 
the  word  **  enemies.  The  time  here  de« 
noted  will  stretch  from  the  people's  oocapa- 
tion  of  the  land  to  the  death  of  Saul,  as  the 
expression,  '*at  the  beginning,**  in  ver.  9, 
will  point  to  the  experience  uf  Egyptian  op> 
pression.  Will  build  thee  an  house;  f.e. 
will  guarantee  thee  an  unfailing  line  of 
descendants. 

Ver.  11. — The  promise  is  now,  not  to 
**  Ddvid  and  his  seed,**  but  to  David  person- 
ally. The  verse  contains,  no  doubt,  the 
original  of  the  Apostle  Peter*s  quotation 
(Acts  ii.  29,  30 ;  see  also  Acts  xiii.  34  ;  Luke 
i.  32,  33).  The  last  clause  of  thU  verse  has 
Solomon,  for  the  object  of  its  pronoun 
-his.** 

Vers.  12 — 14. — The  reference  of  these 
promises  was  also  to  Solomon,  and  to  bim 
they  were  faithfully  fulfilled.  They  were 
early  perceived  to  be  prophecies  also,  and  of 
the  hi;{hest  signiHcanoe  and  application  (Ps. 
Ixxxix.  26—37  ;  Isa.  ix.  7 ;  Iv.  3,  4 ;  Jer. 
xxiii.  5,  6;  xxxiii.  17—21 ;  Zeoh.  vL  12,  13; 
Heb.  i.  5 ;  ilL  6).  The  alternative  of  the 
"son  who  commits  iniquity'*  (2  8am.  vii. 
14)  is  omitted  from  the  middle  of  our 
thirteenth  verse.  The  latter  half  of  ver. 
13  manifestly  purports  to  say,  **  I  will  not 
take  my  mercy  away  from  Solomon,  as  I  did 
take  it  away  from  Saul.**  The  clone  of  our 
fourteenth  verse  is  in  the  p;irallel  place  (3 
Sam.  vii.  16)  distinctly  referred  to  David, 
with  the  m>e  of  the  second  person  possessive 
pronoun. 

Vers.  16 — 27. — These  verses  contain 
David*s  response  to  the  gracious  communi- 
cation which  had  been  made  to  him,  and 
thanksgivings  for  the  promise  made  to  him 
as  regards  his  seed.  His  appreciation  of 
the  contents  of  tliat  promise  is  expressed 
in  a  manner  which  would  seem  to  indicate 
that  he  was  not  altogether  untaught,  even 
then,  by  the  Spirit  of  some  of  the  deeper 
signiticance  of  tiie  far-reaching  promise. 

Ver.  16. — Sat  before  the  Lord ;  t.e.  before 
the  ark.  It  has  surprised  many  thait  it 
should  be  said  that  David  $ai  before  the 
Lord,  in  the  act  of  prayer  or  devotion.  Bui 
this  was  not  altogether  unusual  (I  Kings 
xix.  4)  in  tiie  first  place ;  and  then,  secondly, 
it  is  not  quite  clear  that  this  u  said.  Pus- 
sibly  he  sat  awaiting  first  some  such  token 
as  he  mi.uht  know  how  to  construe  into  the 
presence  uf  Jehovah,  and  into  his  gracious 
vouchsafing  to  give  him  audience,  and  tiiere- 
upon  he  may  have  altered  his  attitude. 
Confessedly,  however,  the  other  is  the  more 
natural  reading. 

Ver.  17. — David  here  makes  a  clear  and 
very  iust  difference  between  all  that  had 
been  done  for  him,  and  the  very  great  proe- 
pect  now  in  addition  put  before  him.    takom 


OH.  XTiL  1— 27.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


271 


•  .  .  hast  regarded  me  Moordlng  to  the  aetata 
of  a  man  of  high  degree;  i.e.  thou  boat 
treated  me,  or  dealt  with  me,  in  this  pmmiee 
as  though  i  had  been  of  high  rank  indexed. 
The  parallel  reading  is  very  oonoise  (2  Sam. 
vli.  19),  and  perhaps  somewhat  obscure, 
"And  is  this  the  manner  [or,  'law']  of 
man?"  or,  **And  this  is  to  be  a  law  of 
man,"  i,e,  this  continuity  of  a  great  while 
to  eome.  Elliptical  as  this  reading  may 
seem,  thoro  is  no  real  difficulty  in  feeling 
its  essential  harmony  with  the  passage 
before  us.  DaTid*s  unfeigned  surprise  and 
joy  in  the  **  great  while  to  come  "  nature  of 
the  promises  made  to  him  and  his  house 
overpower  all  else  in  his  estimation.  It  is, 
indeed,  a  most  opportune  emphasis  that  he 
lays  upon  this  element  of  the  full  promise, 
and  accords  exceptii>nally  well  with  our 
later  knowledge  and  brighter  light  Our 
Authorized  Version  rendering  throws  out 
sufficiently  this  surprise,  and  gives  not  in- 
adequately the  drift  of  the  passage.  The 
continuity  and  exaltedness  of  the  promise, 
whioh  was  only  fully  realized  in  the  greater 
Son  of  David,  the  Christ,  might  well  astonish 
David. 

Ver.  la— Thy  aervant  The  Septuagint 
Version  has  not  got  these  words  on  their 
first  occurrence.  They  may  have  found  their 
way  in  wrongfully  out  of  the  next  clause. 
They  are  not  found  in  the  parallel  place. 
If  they  remain,  they  can  mean  nothing  else 
than  **  How  can  David  further  acknowledge 
the  honour  conferred  on  thy  servant," — a 
•ense  by  no  means  far-fetched. 

Ver.  19.— For  thy  aervant'a  aaka.  The 
parallel  place  reails,  **For  thy  word's  sake." 
This  reading  is  superior,  and  well  suits  the 
•onneotion^  auggesting  ^also  whether   the 


first  occurrence  of  the  word  *<  servant "  in 
the  previous  verse  might  not  be  similarly 
explained.  The  similarity  (jf  the  churactera 
of  the  words  in  the  Hebrew  would  render 
easy  the  exchange  of  the  one  word  for  the 
other. 

Ver.  21. — In  the  parallel  verse  (2  Sam, 
vii.  23),  our  Authorized  Version,  following 
the  Hebrew  text  (p^hX  reads,  **  To  do  for  you 
great  things  and  terrible."  The  transition 
is  awkward,  no  way  in  harmony  with  the 
other  short  clauses  of  the  passage,  and  it 
would  be  inexplicable  except  for  the  alter- 
native open  to  us,  of  regarding  it  as  a  quo« 
tation  from  Dent.  iv.  34,  brought  in  regard* 
less  of  the  context  into  which  it  waa 
introduced.  The  difficulty  does  not  meet 
us  in  our  present  passage,  being  obviated  hv 
the  other  sentences  of  our  compiler.  Both 
places,  however,  manifestly  quote  from  tiie 
liook  of  Deuteronomy,  with  the  grand  pas- 
sages and  grand  verbiage  of  which  we  may 
well  imaj^ine  David  familiar.  A  similar 
familiarity  is  also  betokened  in  the  follow- 
ing verses,  aa  regard  other  Pentateuchal 
passages. 

Ver.  22.— Didat  then  make.  Thia  appeara 
in  Samuel,  **  Thou  didst  eanfirm." 

Ver.  24. — ^The  Hebrew  text  reads  hero 
naturally  enough.  And  let  be  eatahliahed  and 
magnified  for  ever  thy  Name.  The  **  es- 
tablished "  in  the  last  clause  of  the  verse  ia 
not  the  same  word  with  that  used  here. 

Ver.  27.— The  marginal.  It  hath  pleased 
thee,  is  the  corrector  rendering  of  the 
Hebrew  here,  though  the  parallel  place  ex- 
hibits the  imperative  mood.  That  tt  may 
he  before  thee  for  ever.  The  fulfilment  oi 
these  words  can  be  found  in  the  Mcasiah 
alone  (oomp.  Ft,  H.  6— 12), 


HOMILETICS. 

Vert.  1^*27.— *!r%e  purport  and  ike  aervice  of  one  individucU  life  unfolded  authoriith 
Hvely,  The  contenta  of  thia  chapter  afford  general  aspects  of  great  interest  and  of  great 
importance.  It  ia  not  often  that  we  can  do  more  than  surmise  the  real  uae  and  intent  of 
the  Uie  of  a  fellow-creature,  or  indeed  even  of  one'a  aelf.  Certain  it  ia  that  from  the 
beginning  none  can  aee  to  the  end,  and  the  lip  that  preaumea  to  prophesy  of  the  child  or 
of  the  yoans  man,  propheaiea  at  least  aa  often  vainly  aa  correctly.  Nor  in  the  midst  of 
Kfe,  ita  heyday  of  joy  and  vigoar,  or  ita  day  of  enforced  reflection  and  calmer  retrospect,  ia 
the  power  very  materially  added  to  that  would  enable  to  gauge  the  life  at  all  adequately, 
ita  geniua,  ita  measure  of  usefulness  or  success,  or  the  place  it  should  be  justly  counted 
to  win  in  the  universal  race.  While,  lastly,  the  biographer's  verdict — whatever  the 
increased  and  enlarged  opportunity  of  his  horoscope — is  among  those  things  that  are 
notorious  for  the  suspicion  they  arouse.  But  here  we  have  very  much  of  a  Divine  pro- 
nouncement on  the  work  of  a  life.  And  that  this  should  occur  in  the  case  of  David, 
harmonizes  well  with  what  Paul  remarked  (Acts  xiii.  36)  respecting  him :  "  For 
David,  after  he  had  served  his  own  generation  by  the  will  of  God,  fell  on  sleep,  and  waa 
laid  to  his  fathers,  and  saw  corruption."  His  life  is  not  yet  cloeed,  his  work  not  yet 
finished ;  but  on  a  remarkable  occaaion  a  voice  from  heaven  apeaka  of  it,  at  the  aame 
lime  that  it  alio  9pmk$  to  it.    David  ia  taught  hia  place ;  it  ia  hia  own  fault  if  he  ia 


272  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,   [ch.  xvn.  1— 27. 

not  greatly  assisted  to  learn  his  own  character,  and  to  see,  plain  as  a  snnheam,  his  life*8 
duty,  or  what  remains  of  it.  The  chapter  exhibits  a  parable  true  in  l^rge  part  of  it 
of  many  a  life,  yet  in  a  very  great  proportion  of  those  lives  true  still  only  like  a 
parable,  unknown,  unacknowledged,  while  life's  best  part  is  being  lived.    It  shows — 

I.  A  LIFE  LONG  SPENT  IK  SOME  OBEDIENCE  TO  DiVINE  MONITIONS  AND  PBINCIPLB 
SUDDENLY  SEEMING  TO  LIFT  ITSELF  UP  FOB  ITS  HIGHEST  EFF0BT8  GrOD-WABD.      It  Caunot 

be  said  nor  thought  that  the  life  of  David,  when  a  boy,  had  been  an  irreligious  life — a  life 
thoughtless  of  God,  his  ways  and  works,  or  defiant  towards  him.  All  the  indications 
are  to  the  contrary.  From  very  earliest  inanh(X)d,  we  know  as  fact  that  David's  life 
had  been  remarkably  answerable  to  Divine  interposition,  reverently  received,  gratefully 
and  modestly  acknowledged.  Further,  through  the  best  and  proudest  of  life's  days 
that  life  had  been  so  baulked,  so  endangered,  so  keenly  exercised,  that  it  were  not  too 
much  to  say  that  even  nature  would  have  taught  it  some  religion,  and  that  it  was 
glad  to  keep  near  to  the  mighty  Friend.  Yet  had  it  known  many  a  lapse,  many  a 
weariness,  many  an  hour  of  faint  faith,  many  an  impure  or  very  mixed  motive.  There 
can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that  hitherto  the  victory  had  always  been  of  the  good.  Its 
greatest  temptations  were  now  upon  it,  when  ease,  peace,  grandeur,  luxury,  were  its 
lot.  It  bears  the  strain,  and  at  the  very  time  seems  gathering  together  its  strength  for 
its  supreme  religious  efibrt  Heart  and  conscience  approve,  ^ay,  a  nation's  heart  and 
conscience  join  to  approve.  Conscious  human  purpose  and  love  offer  themselves  volun- 
teers for  Divine  work.  Can  there  be  a  doubt  of  their  acceptableness?  At  all  events 
there  proves  to  be  a  refusal  of  some  sort  to  their  acceptance. 

IL  A  LIFE  LONG  AND  BBAVELY  SPENT  IN  THE  EXERCISE  OF  ALL  ITS  OWK  ACTIVB 
BNEBGIE8    SUDDENLY  DI8C0VEBED  8TBICTLY  BOUND  BY  DtVINE  CONTBOL.       David  had 

been  no  passive  recipient  of  Divine  favour  and  protection.  He  bad  been  constrained  to 
employ  all  his  own  best  judgment,  talents,  effort,  and  to  add  thereto  many  a  loud  and 
hearty  and  impassioned  prayer  for  help,  mercy,  deliverance.  Judging  from  what  we 
know  of  human  nature,  of  our  own  nature,  we  should  not  have  wondered  if  the  latter 
exercises  of  the  soul  had  often  seemed  lost  in  comparison  of  the  former  energies  of  the 
mind  and  boily.  But  again  it  turns  out  that  it  was  not  really  so.  In  this  character 
we  do  not  have  to  do  with  the  restless,  brooding,  defiant  soul,  of  one  who  feels  so  pressed 
by  circumstance  that  he  cannot  wait  for  priest,  or  prophet,  or  his  God,  but  must  act  for 
himself  and  by  himself.  No ;  a  blank  refusal  evokes  from  David  the  testimony  that 
he  holds  himself  practically  and  intelligently  to  the  distinct  order  of  a  master.  He 
knows  control,  submits  to  control,  promptly  and  gracefully  answers  to  it. 

II L  A  LIFE  THAT  THROUGH  A  LONG  TIME  HAD  BEEN  UNABLE  TO  BEE  THE  REASON  OF 
ITSELF,  AND  TO  WHAT  IT  WAS  TO  LEAD,  AND  WHERE  THE  STRANGE  VICI88ITUDB  SHOULn 
END,    SUDDENLY    AUTHORITATIVELY     INFORMED    THAT    IT  WAS    AND    ALL    THE    WHILE 

HAD  BEEN  TRIBUTARY  TO  HIGHEST  ENDS.  God  tclls  David  that  from  "  the  sheepcote  " 
to  his  present  "  house  of  cedars  "  he  had  been  with  him,  he  had  been  training  him,  he 
had  b^n  evoking  good  out  of  all  evil,  for  him  personally  and  for  all  his  peo^e  Israel. 
He  had  not  been  living,  working,  suffering,  rejoicing,  anguished  with  fear  and  cruelty, 
buoyant  with  hope  and  victory,  for  nothing,  nor  for  a  spasmodic,  theatric,  sensational 
display,  nor  for  a  mockery  of  collapse  at  last.  No ;  it  was  to  make  him  a  name,  and  a 
great  name,  and  a  name  divinely  and  historically  through  all  time  worth  having— a 
model  ruler,  a  model  king,  and  a  blessing  to  his  people  Israel.  All  the  while,  from  the 
first  breathing  of  David's  name  to  this  present,  David  had  been  drawn  through  a  career 
which,  all  appearances  notwithstanding,  had  been  tributary  to  Divine  results.  What 
firmness,  what  confidence,  what  glory,  is  it  to  any  life  that  can  embrace  this  creeds  and 
that  believes  it  with  the  heart  1 

IV.  A  LIFE  THAT  HAD  BEEN  CONDUCTED  THROUGH  EXTREMES  OF  EXPEBISNCB,  AND 
MANY  AN  HUMILIATING  VARIETY  AMONG  THEM,  IS  NOW  APPBI8ED  THAT  IT  IS  ADMITTED 
TO    PARTICIPATION    IN  FULFILLING    THE    VERY    HIGHEST  OF    DiVINE    COUNSEL.       It  iS 

what  astounds  David  beyond  all  else.  It  is  what  rejoices  him  above  all  else.  It  is 
what  more  than  compensates  for  all  the  past.  It  pours  streams  of  enraptured  joy  snd 
corresponding  vigour  through  all  his  nature.  What  thanks  come  from  his  lip  1  What 
adoring  praise  wells  up  from  his  heart !  What  prayer — a  veritable  "  making  request 
with  joy  " — he  has  strength  and  confidence  to  pour  forth  1  His  gladness  for  himself 
(whose  purpose  was  just  denied)  and  for  his  people  is  indistinguiuiably  mingled—oof 


CH.  xra.  1—27.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  «73 

with  his  gladness  in  his  Gbd,  the  incomparable  God  of  Israel,  Lord  of  hosts,  to  whom 
there  is  none  like  for  "  greatness/'  for  "  terribleness,"  for  "  goodness,**  and  for  the 
^  eternal  blessedness  **  of  his  "  blessing."  Such  was  the  course,  such  the  fulfilment, 
such  the  final  "  manifestation,'*  in  that  early  "  day  of  revelation,"  of  one  human  life 
under  heavenly  guidance  and  Divine  benediction.  And  it  utters  forth  a  parable  for 
every  true  servant  of  GKxl  which  little  needs  an  interpretation. 

Ver.  1. — A  just  eonnderation  of  one*8  own  position  in  life  an  incentive  to  toorJes  of 
prctrtical  piety.  Up  to  this  point  the  life  of  David  had  been,  to  a  remarkable  degree,  one 
of  action.  From  childhood  upward  it  is  likely  that  he  had  passed  little  enough  time 
which  could  be  called  idle  time.  The  first  employment,  however,  in  which  he  mid  been 
engaged,  that  of  the  shepherd,  may  be  safely  presumed  to  have  fostered  the  power  of 
contemplation  as  well  as  of  action,  and  to  have  been  distinctly  favourable  to  meditation. 
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  very  germs  of  the  moral  reflection  which  the  psalms 
of  later  life  manifest  in  such  rich  abundance  took  their  origin  thence.  The  grandeur 
of  the  aspects  of  external  nature  were  thence  suggested  to  him  many  a  time,  in  strange 
contrast  to  many  of  the  aspects  of  human  life  and  the  individual  character.  And  again, 
from  the  same  source  of  personal  knowledge,  at  a  glance,  and  quick  as  the  twinkling 
of  an  eye,  he  saw  the  analogy  that  obtained  between  the  works  of  nature  and  those  of 
providence.  Most  noticeable,  likewise,  is  it,  that  David  rarely  enough  speaks  in  the 
filightest  approach  to  the  temper  of  the  censorious  critic  of  others,  or  of  men  in  general. 
When  his  meditation  is  most  comprehensive,  and  his  deliverance  universal  in  its 
application,  it  is  perhaps  even  too  plain,  rather  than  not  plain  enough,  that  they  come 
forth  strongly  marked  with  the  impress  of  personal  conviction,  personal  struggle  of 
thought,  personal  experience.  Nor  is  it  likely  that  the  months  and  years  of  his  fearing 
and  persecuted  life  had  passed  without  much  and  deep  thought.  These  are  the 
realities  of  life  that  nuike  to  think  those  who  have  a  mind  to  think.  Amazed,  pathetic, 
melancholy,  and  anon  all  strong  in  faith  and  buoyant  with  confidence,  were  the  thoughts 
that  paced  what  none  would  deny,  were  the  ample  spaces  of  the  large  mind  of  David. 
Yet  perhaps,  what  with  personal  fear  and  danger,  wars  and  rumours  of  wars,  and  an 
ever-increasing  load  of  responsibility,  succeeded  now,  and  somewhat  suddenly,  by  great- 
ness and  prosperity,  his  care  of  late  had  been  somewhat  too  self-regarding.  He  has 
made  his  position — at  all  events,  his  position  is  made.  His  home  is  no  longer  the  den 
and  cave  of  the  earth ;  he  has  builded  himself  a  mansion  of  mansions — at  aU  events,  such 
•  mansion  is  builded  for  him.  We  wait  with  interest  and  anxiety  to  know  how  he  will 
use  these  great  gifts,  with  what  sort  of  heart  and  hand  he  will  address  himself  to  them. 
We  do  not  wait  very  long,  nor  to  be  disappointed  in  the  event.  David  shows  that  he 
is  moved  by  a  right  principle  himself,  and  he  exhibits  that  principle  in  a  very  simple 
manner,  the  convenient  example  for  all  others.    Let  us  observe-^ 

I.  The  oenebal  principle,  that  in  what  a  man  has,  or  in  what  hb  is  himself, 
HE  FINDS  THE  SUGGESTION  THAT  BEARS  UPON  OTHERS.  I'hls  principle  is  the  prohibition 
of  selflshuess,  absolute  and  pure.  It  is  one  of  the  most  elementary,  most  radical,  most 
significant  of  the  distinctions  of  the  nature  of  man,  as  containing  a  moral  element,  and 
the  nature  of  the  brute  presumably  devoid  of  any  such  element.  Resident  as  it  is 
almost  within  the  sphere  of  the  mere  mental  qualities  of  human  nature,  unless 
destroyed  or  impaired  first  by  causes  of  a  moral  complexion,  it  is  nature's  own  simplest 
assertion  and  easiest  illustration  of  the  outras:e  it  must  be  on  all  creation's  design  in 
man,  when  any  one  "  liveth  to  himself"  to  such  a  degree  as  to  disown  it  practically. 
To  exemplify  this  principle  both  consciously  and  unconsciously,  alike  instinctively  and 
intelligently,  is  to  remain  one  of  the  brotherhood  of  humanity  ;  to  disacknowledge  it, 
or  to  fail  in  practice  to  acknowledge  it,  is  to  exclude  one's  self,  an  imix)verished  and 
miserable  outcast,  from  the  comity  of  the  family  as  such. 

II.  The  principle  that  nr  what  a  man  has  himself  of  good,  he  finds  the 

SUGGESTION  WAKENED  IN  HIM  TO  SEEK  THE  ADVANTAGE  OF  OTHERS.      There  are  UOt  a 

few  who,  thinking  they  have  nothing  or  little,  will  think  of  others  quickly,  but  only 
to  compare  themselves  disparagingly  to  God's  providence  with  them.  There  are  not  a 
few  who,  knowing  that  they  have  much,  will  promptly  think  of  others,  but  it  is  to  feed 
the  ill  nature  within  them,  on  envy  of  those  who  have  more  than  they.  And  there  are 
those  who,  having  all  that  heart  could  wish  and  hands  can  hold,  think  that  it  is  all 

L  CHRONICLES.  t 


274  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,  [ch.  xvu.  1—27 

absolutely  so  their  own,  that  to  think  of  others  ii  only  to  think  that  they  are  withoat 
part  or  lot  in  the  matter.  They  owe  none  of  it  to  Ood'e  gift.  They  owe  nona  of  it  to 
iuan*«  help.  They  have  gained  and  they  have  risen,  all  thanks  and  all  credit  only  to 
themselves.  And  all  that  they  have  aud  all  that  they  are  is  to  and  for  themselves. 
But  there  are  in  human  nature  differeot  dictates  from  these.  There  are  those  who 
compare  themselves  with  others,  to  wonder  unfeignedly  why  God  has  made  them  to 
diiTcr,  and  in  deepest  humility  to  acknowledge  their  indebtedness  to  him.  There 
are  those  who  from  the  heart  believe  that  *'  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive," 
and  whose  first  dictate  is  to  give  of  all  which  they  gain.  They  Know  and  heed  well 
the  word  that  reminded  them  once, "  Freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give^"  and  they 
have  found  for  themselves  that  there  is  no  life  they  so  really  have  as  that  they 
give.  Alike  those  who  long  to  have  but  think  they  have  not,  and  those  who  beyond 
question  have,  and  have  much,  need  most  to  be  reminded  what  thioffs  possession,  and 
lar^  possession,  has  proved  its  power  to  effect.  It  is  very  apt  to  kill  sympathy,  to 
chill  charity,  to  ingrain  selfishness,  and  to  create  the  overweenins  and  haiighty  temper. 
Happy  indeed  when  the  contrary  holds  good,  and  that  which  should  be  in  the  nature 
God  once  created,  exists  and  is  still  manifest.  This  was  the  case  now  with  Dsvid,  in 
spite  of  the  peril  in  which  he  was  placed.  He  had  already  abundantly  shown  that  in  all 
his  own  good  he  wished  others  to  take  a  share. 
III.  The  pbikciplb  of  being  btimolated  bt  the  sxfebismcb  and  exjotmebt 

OF  OKE*B  OWN  GOOD  TO  SEEK  THE  GOOD  OF  OTHERS,  PBE8ENTED  NOW  IN  ONE  OF  THE 

HIGHEST  POSSIBLE  OF  ITS  APPUCATioNB.  The  Visible  object  of  David'a  loving  and 
8ymi>athetic  anxiety  is  now  no  longer  human ;  it  is  the  ark  of  God.  Everything  helps 
favour  and  set  forth  happily  the  example  here  given  to  us.  Though  the  words  are  so 
few,  the  description  so  brief,  it  is  a  very  living  impression  which  they  combine  to 
produce  upon  us.  It  is  not  so  often  that  the  ima^iery  of  the  East,  the  life  of  thres 
thousand  years  ago,  and  the  very  language  of  the  Old  Testament,  so  accord  for  a  moment 
with  our  own  mi^cm  habits  and  feehng.  We  are  invited  to  see  David  at  ease  in  his 
own  new  house.  He  sits  in  that  house.  A  friend  and  sacred  friend,  a  prophet^  Is  with 
him.  Uehas  been  thinking  many  a  time  of  that  which  he  now  resolves  to  put  upon 
his  lip,  and  confide  to  his  prophet-friend.  He  has  a  house  now  for  the  first  time,  it 
may  be  said,  in  all  his  life.  It  is  his  own,  and  in  every  way  his  own,  built  for  him  and 
built  by  him.  He  knows  every  piece  of  cedar  in  it,  and  every  block  of  stone.  This  means 
ct)mrort  for  a  man  who  has  had  a  very  driven,  anxious,  wearying  life.  It  means  sta< 
bility  for  a  man  \i  ho  was  onlered  about  at  first,  hunted  about  secondly,  and  more  lately 
in  his  own  responHibility  has  been  compelled  to  strain  every  nerve  to  meet  the  urgencies 
of  his  position.  It  means  also  safety,  for  David  is  now  undisputed  and  sole  king  of  all 
the  laud.  And  it  means  splendour  exceeding  all  that  his  nation  had  ever  known,  and 
all  that  surrounding  nations  had  known.  That  grand  new  house,  however,  would  never 
have  been  the  joy  and  satibfaction  it  is  but  that  other  work  of  his  hand  bad  been 
blessed,  and  the  ark  is  in  Zion.  Yes,  but  the  ark  is  not  housed  so  worthily  as  David  is 
himself,  whereas  he  feels  justly  that  it  should  be  entertained  far  more  worthily.  It 
appears  that  it  is  not  human  sympathy  merely  which  warms  the  heart  of  David.  The 
principle  is  great  and  sacred,  but  there  is  for  all  that  something  which  is  higher,  mors 
sacred  still.  David  would  do  honour  to  the  God  of  the  ark  in  finding  a  worthy  temple- 
canopy  for  the  ark  of  God.  He  believes  in  the  Church  of  the  living  GK)d,  and  in  the 
living  God  of  the  Church.  The  "  invisible  appears  in  sight ; "  his  gaze,  his  thought,  his 
heart,  are  all  held  by  it.  He  would  spend  untold  labour,  lavish  unmeasured  wealth, 
summon  the  pick  of  all  the  earth's  wisdom  and  art  and  skill,  in  the  service  of  him, 
who  nevertheless  needs  no  richest  gifts  of  man,  because  all  the  wc^dth  of  all  the  universe 
is  his.  And  David's  thought  is  acceptable,  and  his  purpose  is  right.  There  is  the 
unwonted  nobility  of  a  spiritual  purview  about  it.  The  homage  of  the  heart  is  indis- 
putablv  there.  Practical  faith  is  there.  The  merit  of  a  grand  national,  ay,  and  universal, 
example  is  there.  Here  is  no  covert  showing  of  sympathy,  and  giving  of  gift,  and  ren- 
dering of  honour  due,  with  indirect  calculations  and  sidelong  glances  of  how  much  shall 
come  back  in  kind  from  admiring  and  surrounding  and  obsequious  courtiers  and  friends. 
Ko,  the  servant  is  in  the  presence  of  the  Master.  The  subject  before  the  King  of  kings. 
The  creature  before  the  great  Creator.  The  blessed  dependent  before  the  sole  Giver  of 
all  good.    And  this  fills  him  with  shame,  with  humility,  with  impassioned  desire,  and 


CH.  xvn.  1— 27.J  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  275 

the  worship  of  practical  piety.  I,  who  have  received  all,  and  am  but  what  God  has  given 
and  (jod  made  me,  dwell  in  a  house  of  cedar,  while  the  ark  of  his  covenant  remaineth 
under  curtains  1 

Lessons.  1.  There  is  doubtless  no  position  in  human  life  but  has  sufficient  cause  of 
thankfulness  to  stir  up  men  of  grateful  heart  to  the  exercise  of  compassion  toward 
their  fellow-creatures,  and  to  the  service  and  devotion  of  God.  2.  But  there  is  a  law 
going  further.  It  should  be  observed  that  for  all  increcue  of  worldly  good,  strength, 
comfort,  wealth,  splendour,  more  sympathy  with  others,  more  compassion  and  charity 
toward  them,  should  be  yielded  by  the  heart,  and  likewise  more  service  and  devotedness 
to  Ghxl«  d.  The  highest  and  the  surest  forms  of  sympathy  are  those  that  obtain  between 
man,  and  the  Invisible,  Spiritual,  EtemaL 

Vers.  2 — 5. — OocTa  obstructuma  of  the  good  purposes  of  men,  and  tJie  uses  of  suck 
obstructions.  The  greatest  trials  of  man's  faith  tie  in  the  working  of  the  sovereignty  of 
God.  Yet  there  is  not  an  individual  attribute  of  the  Creator  to  be  yielded  to  him  more 
unreservedly  than  this  same  sovereignty,  which  may  be  said  to  include  in  it  the  rights 
of  many  an  attribute.  The  Divine  frustration  of  our  purposes,  disappointment  of  our 
hopes,  and  summary  determination  of  many  a  life  that  we  thought  made  for  the  highest 
service,  often  enough  elude  all  the  acumen  of  our  reason,  and  bring  to  nought  in  one 
m(  ment  the  pride  of  creature-wisdom.  But  so  soon  as  ever  we  are  recovered  from  the 
first  severity  of  the  blow  and  from  the  deep  prostration  which  it  has  inferred,  it  is 
always  left  to  us  to  search  for,  gather,  and  compare  the  relative  uses  that  may  attend 
cases  of  this  description  of  suffering.  We  may  vainly  seek  the  reason,  as  vainly  as  try 
to  search  the  immortal  mind  itself;  but  far  from  vunly  shall  we  attempt  to  observe 
attendant  uses  and  lessons.  Human  wisdom  is,  indeed,  never  in  so  fair  a  way  for  increase 
and  improvement  as  when  thus  engaged.  The  present  narrative  contains  little  or 
nothing  of  difficulty,  however,  either  in  respect  of  finding  the  reasons  of  God's  prohi- 
bition, in  the  instance  before  us,  or  in  respect  of  gathering  the  lessons  and  uses 
suggested  by  that  prohibition.    Let  us  notice — 

I.  The  reasons,  so  fab  as  hebe  given,  of  God*s  denial  of  David  in  the  good 
PUBF08E  of  his  HEART.  It  is  remarkable  that  neither  this  passage  nor  the  parallel  to 
it  states  the  one  of  these  reasons  on  which  the  real  stress  would  have  been  supposed  to 
fall.  We  will  notice  this,  therefore,  in  its  place  j[ph.  xxii.  8),  inasmuch  as  the  silence 
about  it  here  is  entire.  We  must  not  pass  unnoticed,  however,  one  and  perhaps  the  only 
sign  of  an  explanation  of  this  silence  which  we  can  find.  In  both  this  and  the  parallel 
place  the  historian  speaks.  In  ch.  xxii.  8,  xxviii.  3,  where  all  the  facts  are  boldly 
stated,  it  is  the  noble-hearted  David  himself  who  speaks ;  and  in  1  Kings  v.  3,  where  we 
have  what  may  be  called  an  intermediate  account  as  regards  fulness,  the  son  Solomon 
speaks.  Equally  honourable  to  the  historian  and  to  David  himself  are  these  circum- 
stances, to  whatever  further  use  they  lend  themselves.  And  no  distant  anulos^ies  will 
the  New  Testament  yield,  as  e,g,  when  it  is  not  the  Evangelist  John  who  will  record 
some  shortcoming  of  Peter,  where  Peter  himself  would  have  made  clean  breast  of  it  all, 
with  noble  spirit  of  confession  und  self-surrender  (comp.  John  xiii.  36 — 38,  with  Mark 
xiv.  29 — 31).  Confining  ourselves,  then,  to  the  reasons  recorded  in  our  present  passage, 
they  must  stand  confessed  as  of  the  most  condescending  and  touching  description.  We 
must  notice,  first,  that  the  reasons  assigned  for  the  refusal  of  permission  to  David  to 
build  do  not  carry  the  slightest  reflection  on  him  or  his  character,  or  the  character  of  his 
foregoing  life — the  matter  is  viewed  now  not  from  the  "standpoint"  of  David  at  all, 
but,  if  that  may  be  reverently  said  by  human  lip  which  ff  so  graciously  done  by  Divine 
act,  from  the  "  standpoint "  of  the  Divine  Personage  himself;  and  secondly,  that  those 
reasons  do  not  exclude  from  consideration  the  fulfilment  of  the  purpose  of  David's 
heart,  but  only  his  own  fulfilment  of  that  purpose.  **  Praying  breath,"  sings  one,  "  is 
never  spent  in  vain."  And  holy  purpose  and  noble  religious  ambition  are  not  bom 
and  nourished  in  vain.  They  often  fulfil  more  purpose  in  the  subject  of  them,  than 
their  realization  by  himself  would  fulfil  for  the  object  of  them,  or  for  others  generally. 
Personal  disappointment,  times  without  number,  shall  signify  personal  improvement, 
and  not  signify  any  loss  to  the  general  community,  nor  to  the  course  of  the  world. 
Those  rea8t)n8  are  delicately  put,  but  will  have  been  fully  appreciated  by  David ;  and 
they  are  full  of  tendcrest  suggestion*    They  are:  1.  That  the  Divine  Friend,  Loader, 


276  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,   [ch.  xvn.  1— 27. 

CiipUin,  has  for  ages  and  geDerations  nhared  the  pilgrim  lot  of  his  people.  If  they  have 
not  had  a  fixed  home,  so  has  it  heen  with  him  also.  If  they  hare  travelled  from  place 
to  place,  so  has  he  alsa  2.  lliat  he  has  shared  this  pilgrim  lot  of  the  people  without 
a  marmur,  without  a  reproach,  a  request,  or  even  a  suggestion  addressed  to  them.  How 
often  had  they  murmured,  but  he  never  1  How  olten  had  they  done  worse  than 
murmur  1  They  had  rebelled  against  the  Holy  One  of  Israel ;  but  he  had  forgiven  thar 
backslidings,  bad  not  forsaken  them,  and  to  the  last  ripe  hour  would  carry  on  his 
own  wise,  consistent,  gracious  purpose.  They  for  whose  sake  all  the  journey,  all  the 
disdpline,  all  the  teaching,  ail  the  promise  were,  had  wearied,  and  been  impatient ;  but 
lie  had  borne  all  the  sorrow,  and  stood  the  mark  of  all  the  ingratitude,  and  gives  up 
no  jot  nor  tittle  of  the  good  purpose  of  his  great  decrees.  He  suffers  with  them,  for 
them ;  he  bears  and  still  forbears.  3.  That  he  will  not  even  now  anticipate  by  an  hour, 
as  it  were,  the  established  peace,  happiness,  and  home  of  his  people.  Not  till  they  are 
where  he  designs  to  place  them,  and  have  all  that  he  purposes  to  give  them,  will  be 
permit  his  own  house  to  be  builded,  his  own  throne  to  be  set,  or  himself  to  **  arise  and 
enter  into  his  rest."  Great  every  way  is  the  moral  sublimity  of  this  portion,  when 
lurought  into  comparison  with  that  so  often  assumed  by  men.  Each  thinks  for  himself 
each  snatches  for  himself,  each  hastens  to  make  secure  above  all  his  own  norition  first. 
And  in  the  very  instance  before  us,  whether  more  or  less  rightly,  David  has  built  hlf 
own  house  first — has  set  the  example,  and  established  himself  first,  a  representatiTe  of 
the  people,  and  of  how  it  should  be  with  them  also.  But  the  Divine  Leader  and  Lord 
of  the  people  all,  both  nation  and  king,  observes  this  different  order.  He  fixes  the  time^ 
the  place,  the  peace  and  rest  of  all,  before  he  will  allow  that  the  hour  has  come  for  bim« 
self.  It  is  a  little  type  and  a  suggestive  analogy  of  what  is  ever  going  on  throughout 
nature  and  the  entire  world.  All  the  forces  of  these  are  at  work,  and  intensely  active; 
their  push  and  strife  and  tumult  are  wonderful.  They  are  beneath  all  appearancei 
finding  their  own  place  and  fulfilling  their  legitimate  mission,  till  when  they  all  are 
satisfied,  the  Lord  shall  enter  in  an  emphatic  sense  his  holy  temple.  A  moment  all  the 
earth  shall  keep  silence  before  him,  but  the  next  moment  the  vast  theatre  ahall 
resound  again  with  his  praise.  Whatever  fitness  of  time  there  may  have  seemed  to 
David  to  be  present  now,  we  may  understand  GK)d  to  say  that  he  knows  all  that  shall 
be  yet,  and  is  biding  the  moment  of  supreme  occasion.  Nor  is  there  a  lesson  that  more 
needs,  in  all  our  impatience  and  short-sighted  esgerness,  to  be  made  familiar  with  us, 
and  to  be  accepted  with  the  sacredness  of  a  principle. 

II.  The  uses  of  God'b  denial  of  human  purposes,  even  wheh  as  well 
MEANT  AS  THAT  OF  David.  Such  uses  may  have  been  very  many,  and  a  large  pro- 
portion of  them  very  indirect,  in  the  present  instance.  But  if  not  so  in  any  one  particular 
case — if,  on  the  contrary,  very  few  and  definite  in  their  character — the  other  alternative 
will  prove  the  rule.  The  apparent  slight  which  God  puts  on  our  purposes  and  our 
higher  aspirations,  we  may  rest  assured,  is  but  an  apparent  slight.  It  is  not  real,  and 
is  compensated  for  by  what  vastly  outweighs  the  pain  and  disappointment  and  sorrow  of 
it.  Those  Divine  contradictions :  1.  Save  us  from  self-dependence  and  spiritual  pride. 
These  are  two  of  the  most  noxious  weeds,  and  most  baneful  their  shade,  which  grow  in 
a  nature  spiritually  inclined.  2.  They  exert  a  direct  tendency  to  increase  the  wisdom 
and  circumspection  and  adaptedness  of  our  human  purposes.  If  our  aspirations  are  not 
still  continued,  they  were  not  deep,  and  are  not  entitled  to  any  sympathy  if  blown 
away  like  chaff  by  the  wind.  But  if  they  were  deep  and  genuine,  then  we  take  them 
back  agidn,  nurse  them  in  our  hearts,  and  even  improve  upon  them.  The  poor  thing 
called  our  wisdom  then  grows— perhaps  only  then.  3.  They  increase  the  deep,  calm 
purity  of  our  heart's  purpose.  Amazing  is  the  proportion  of  ecclesiastical  zeal,  priestly 
zeal,  zeal  to  have  dominion  over  other  men's  souls,  and  to  usurp  domination  over  their 
whole  life  thereby,  compared  with  the  zeal  for  God's  glory,  simple  and  pure,  and  man's 
soul  in  its  infinite  value,  infinite  danger.  If  any  spiritual  purpose  were  fed  by  the 
inflanmiable  fuel  of  success,  a  fire  would  be  lighted  which  would  know  no  suppression,  but 
which  would  inevitably,  in  a  vast  majority  of  cases,  fatally  envelop  first  of  all  them  that 
lit  it.  4.  They  will  increase  the  reverence  and  deep  religious  fear  of  our  noblest  human 
purposes.     Easy  usefulness,  uniform  success,  rapidly  engenders  perfunctory  service,  and 

Ssrfunctory  service  bespeaks  prompt  disaster,  wherever  it  toudies  the  temple,  the 
hurch,  the  altar.    5.  They  will,  in  fact,  increcue  force.    No  loss  will  in  the  event  be 


CH.  XVII.  1—27.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa  2TT 

sustained.  Tkat  which  can  hest  be  spared  will  have  disappeared.  The  good  will  be 
left  And  though  that  good  may  not  show  the  same  bulk,  nor  utter  the  larger  volume 
of  sound,  it  will  be  irresistible.  It  will  work  its  way,  steal  its  way,  penetrate  its  way; 
it  will  thaw  the  ice,  break  the  stone,  melt  the  iron  of  human  hearts ;  it  will  be  mighty 
with  the  breath  of  God's  own  spirit.  When,  therefore,  God  holds  back  awhile  our 
cood  purpose,  it  is  to  make  good  better.  And  the  better  good  will  always  make  in  the 
long  run  the  mightier  good* 

Yer.  17. — The  last  glory  of  Ood'a  goodness  to  his  servantsfound  in  the  distant  horizon 
he  offers  to  their  vision,  Tfads  verse  contains  a  part  of  David's  response  to  the  com- 
munication which  had  been  made  to  him.  That  communication  had  contained  a 
refusal,  and  one  which  under  most  circumstances  would  have  been  felt  to  be  charged 
with  a  disappointment  sufficient  to  overspread  all  the  scene  with  gloom,  and  to  require 
some  little  time  to  recover  from.  But  there  was  much  in  the  communication  to  heal  at 
once  that  disappointment,  and  to  prevent  the  rankling  of  offended  feeling  and  affection*. 
It  was  all  couched  in  gracious  language,  spoken  in  a  gentle  tone  though  firm,  accompanied 
with  reasoning  and  some  individual  reasons,  softened  by  tender  memories,  and  memories 
very  suggestive  and  instructive ;  and  above  all,  if  it  wanted  in  the  present,  the  present 
want  was  abundantly  compensated  for  by  a  sure  promise  of  the  future ;  if  it  lacked 
anything  directly  to  himself,  it  were  easy  to  bear  it,  when  that  lack  was  to  be  turned 
into  glorious  abundance  in  the  person  of  his  own  best-loved  Son.  Accordingly,  this 
response  of  David  is  found  to  be  one  of  very  prompt,  very  dutiful  submission.  David 
bows  to  the  Divine  fiat  and  kisses  the  rod  which  smites.  The  response  goes  beyond 
meek  surrender  and  unhesitating  acquiescence.  David  cordially  accepts  the  representa- 
tions made,  and  every  turn  and  illustration  and  enforcement  of  them  drawn  from  his  own 
fast  life.  He  knows  every  word  to  be  true.  He  knows  what  he  owes  to  special  favour, 
special  promotion,  special  deliverance,  and  continued  faithful  protection.  The  '*  sheep- 
cotes  "  of  old,  and  his  "  palace  of  cedars  "  of  to-day,  proclaim  f&cts  and  tell  a  tale  that 
melt  his  heart  not  to  submission  only,  but  to  grateful  love.  And  bis  response  is  filled 
with  grateful  thanksgiving,  trustful  prayer,  adoring  praise.  In  all  this  response  of 
David,  nothing,  perhaps,  is  more  effective,  nothing  meant  more  than  the  toucn  con- 
tained in  this  verse,  "  Thou  hast  spoken  of  thy  servant's  house  for  a  great  while  to 
eomeJ*    Let  us  notice  here — 

I.  The  first  fobh  of  a  vebt  great  pbinoiple,  ab  it  fbesented  itself  to  the 
VIEW  OF  David.  Something,  it  is  abimdantly  evident,  took  very  firm  hold  of  David's 
fancy  in  the  continuity  of  the  promise  made  to  him,  in  his  son  Solomon  and  the  line  of 
his  succession.  But  it  is  a  little  thing  to  say  it  took  hold  of  his  fancy.  It  took  hold 
of  much  that  was  deepest  in  him — far  deeper  than  fancy  is  generally  held  to  go.  The 
light  of  David,  we  often  say,  and  probably  not  incorrectly,  was  dim.  But  something  else 
was  not  very  dim,  it  would  appear.  Nature  and  instinct,  feeling  and  affection,  aspira- 
tion and  its  silent  pertinacious  testimony,  looking  ever  to  the  upward  and  the  onward, 
— these  were  not  so  very  dim.  All,  however,  tnat  appears  on  the  surface  now  was 
this.  David  has  been  reminded,  in  language  very  plain,  of  the  rock  whence  he  was  hewn, 
and  the  pit  whence  he  was  digged ;  of  the  low  estate  of  his  onetime  life,  and  of  how  he 
owes  an  unwonted  much  to  the  goodness,  unmerited,  sovereign,  of  his  almighty  Patron 
and  Defender.  His  early  life  is  summarized.  All  his  past  life  to  this  throbbing  hour  is 
exhibited,  brought  well  into  the  foreground.  Not  a  feature  of  it  does  David  dispute. 
No  wounded  vanity,  nor  vanity  unwounded,  strives  to  draw  a  veil  on  his  humble  origin. 
To  the  full  he  accepts  and  proceeds  upon  the  description  given  him  of  himself,  and 
acknowledges,  "  Who  am  I,  0  Lord  God,  and  what  is  my  house,  that  thou  hast  brought 
me  hitherto  ?  And  yet "  (one  might  have  thought  David  knew  the  modem  adage,  though 
reverently,  "  Gratitude  a  lively  sense  of  favours  to  come ")  *'  this  was  a  small  thing  in 
thine  eyes,  0  God  "  (it  evidently  was  now,  comparatively  speaking,  a  small  thing  in  his 
own  eyes) ;  *'  for  thou  hast  also  spoken  of  thy  servant's  house  for  a  great  while  to  come/* 
The  continuity  of  the  goodness  and  favour  of  God,  and  the  continuity  of  them  to  a 
future  a  great  distance  off,  evidently  riveted  and  fascinated  the  thought  of  David.  And 
was  there  not  something  great,  something  good,  something  of  a  high  type  in  this  ?  Let 
us  track— 

IL  The  essential  siGinFiCANOE,  the  badical  elements  pbesent  in  the  pbinciplh 


27a  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,  [ch.  xvu.  1— 27. 

WHICH  APPEAB8  TO  TAKB  NOW  BuoH  A  HOLD  ON  Dayid.  Very  true  it  is  that  the  itidi* 
cations  are  many,  and  scarcely  mistakable,  of  sense  pressing  heavy  on  patriarch  and  priest, 
king  and  prophet,  of  Old  Testament  history.  Some  striking  exceptions,  however,  there 
are  to  the  contrary.  And  perhaps,  in  almost  all  cases,  there  are  to  be  found  traces  of 
exception  in  a  direction  least  to  have  been  reckoned  upon  d  priori,  viz.  in  the  matter  of 
the  admirable  distribution  of  attention  and  love,  which  marked  their  regard  for  both 
body  and  soul  after  death.  For  the  pious  Israelite  great  was  the  fascination  of  the 
future — that  future  that  began  where  sense  ended.  His  reverent  provision  for  the  body 
then  meant  something  altogether  different  from  the  ostentation  of  funeral  obsequies.  It 
was  thought  and  imaginings  upborne  on  strong  pinions  of  faith,  and  impelled  by  the 
temperate  and  obedient  force  of  a  far-enduring  patience.  Pride  of  pedigree  and  of  the 
traceable  gcDealogies  of  a  dozen  centuries  forepast,  how  this  dwarfs  before  the  excursiona 
of  a  taught  fedth,  a  trained  imagination,  an  inspired  hope,  that  peer  into  that  ^  great 
while  to  come "  called  the  eternal  future  1  It  is  evident  that  this  lies  at  the  root  of 
David's  deep  satisfaction  and  adoring  gratitude  now.  He  bad  been  reared  of  nothing, 
and  was  but  of  yesterday,  but  the  revealed  word  that  is  spoken  to  him  gives  him  to 
'scry  a  far  future.  And  for  him  to  feel  joy  in  this,  two  elements  must  have  been  present. 
1.  A  very  vital  faith  took  hold  of  the  idea  that  was  contained  in  assurance  and  promise 
for  his  son  and  his  people.  2.  And  the  idea  becomes  at  once  welcome  fact ;  the  earnest 
is  possession.  His  heart  transports  him  into  the  future,  and  converts  that  future  into  so 
much  good  Icnafide  present.  These  are  among  the  greatest  triumphs  of  a  taught,  a 
receptive,  a  willing  spiritual  nature.  It  is  the  diametrical  opposite  of  the  disposition 
of  tnose  who  must  have  all  now,  and  to  whom  the  future  is  less  ^an  shadow,  nothing 
more  than  utter  fiction.  There  are  not  a  few  who  want  to  have  things  irreconcilable. 
They  want  to  have  the  pleasures  of  sin,  which  are  essentially  "  for  a  season,"  and  not 
forfeit  those  advantages  which  as  essentially  come  of  nresent  abstinence  and  a  patient 
waiting.  The  faith  that  really  apprehends  tiie  unseen,  tne  patient  waiting  that  willingly 
dtferi  fruition,  are  the  two  guarantees,  so  far  as  human  quality  and  human  conditions  are 
involved,  that  qualify  the  human  to  transmute  itself  into  the  Divine,  and  the  mortal  to 
merge  into  immortality.  And  David  testifies  to  these  imperial  possessions  now.  He 
acquiesces  in  one  moment  in  everything  that  is  evidenced  derogatory  to  claim,  merit, 
dimity,  in  his  own  past,  in  order  to  seize  with  passionate  eagerness,  with  grateful  acknow« 
lodgment,  on  that  which  is  spoken  concerning  him  and  his,  for  the  "  great  while  to  come." 
In  these  essential  facts,  then,  David  is  a  religious  model  for  even  Christian  times,  for  all 
times.  To  be  able  to  lose  sight  in  favour  of  gaining  faith,  to  part  with  sense  to  apprehend 
spirit,  to  quit  the  present  in  order  to  dwell  in  the  future  and  occupy  it  with  the  objects 
of  affection  beforehand, — these  are  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  the  spiritual  and 
the  newborn.  And  the  best  part  of  these  David  had,  when  he  pleaded  guilty  to  any  and 
all  disparagement  of  the  past ;  didn't  stop  to  look  a  second  time  at  the  personal  dis- 
appointment of  the  present,  but  did  "  embrace "  eagerly  and  with  all  his  heart  the 
proffered  possession  of  the  *'  great  while  to  come." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Generous  purposes.  Some  time  had  elapsed  since  David  had  brought  up 
the  ark  from  Eirjath-jearim  to  Jerusalem.  Although  the  king  had  lodged  the  sacred 
chest  in  a  handsome  tabernacle,  he  was  not  satisfied ;  for  he  did  not  consider  that  he 
had  rendered  to  the  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence  and  authority  the  honour  that  waa 
due.  Himself  dwelling  in  a  palace  of  cedar-wood,  he  desired  to  see  a  house  of  stately 
magnificence  built  for  the  service  of  his  God. 

I.  A  king's  proposal.  It  was  in  David*s  heart  to  adorn  and  sanctify  his  metropolis 
by  a  temple  which  should  serve  as  the  emblem  of  the  nation's  consecration  to  Jehovah. 
1.  We  observe  in  this  desire  of  the  king  how  respect  for  God  and  Uio  ordinances  of  his 
worship  may  lead  to  purposes  of  labour  and  self-sacrifice.  It  is  possible  that  vanity  and 
ostentation  may  lead  to  some  enterprises  of  magnitude  which  may  pass  for  evidences  of 
religious  fervour.  Yet  oftentimes  an  affectionate  and  grateful  heart  has  found  expression 
in  costly  and  at  the  same  time  useful  undertakings.    2.  We  oi)serve  also  that  generosity 


CH.  XVII.  1—27.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  27? 

is  Dover  better  employed  than  in  advancing  the  glory  of  Ood.  This  may  be  done  not 
merely  by  what  are  distinctively  termed  religious  acts,  but  by  deeds  of  benevolence  and 
philanthropy,  animated  by  the  love  of  Christ. 

II.  A  pbophet's  encoubagemekt.  David  unfolded  to  his  counsellor,  Nathan  the 
prophet,  the  generous  intention  of  his  heart.  Sometimes  those  who  in  such  circumstances 
are  taken  iuto  confidence  and  counsel  repress  the  liberal  designs  unfolded  to  them.  But 
Nathan  took  another  course.  What  wisdom  and  right  feeling  are  apparent  in  the 
counsel,  "  Do  all  that  is  thine  heart ''  1  And  it  should  be  remarked  that  Nathan 
brought  the  truths  and  promises  of  religion  to  bear  upon  the  royal  heart.  "  God  is 
with  thee."  That  was  as  much  as  to  say — God  has  put  the  desire  in  thy  heart ;  God 
will  assist  thee  in  carrying  out  thy  project;  and  God  will  accept  what  it  is  thy  purpose 
to  offer  him, — T. 

Vers,  7 — 11. — Assurance  of  favour.  The  Lord  acknowledged  the  goodness  of  David's 
wish  to  build  him  a  house,  even  when  refusing  permission  for  that  wish  to  be  gratified. 
And  the  Lord  made  this  occurrence  an  opportunity  for  expressing  his  regard  for  his 
servant.  Reminding  David  of  his  past  faithfulness,  he  assured  him  of  continued  favour. 
He  who  had  been  so  distinguished  by  marks  of  Divine  interest  and  approval  in  the 
past,  could  not  fail  to  place  confidence  in  the  expression  of  an  unchanging  kindness. 
This  passage  is  remarkable  as  representing  the  favour  of  Qod  revealed  in  especial  fulness 
and  richness. 

I.  David  was  assured  of  Grod's  favour,  to  himself  personally.  We  are  told  that 
the  poet-king  was  "  a  man  after  God's  heart."  Certainly,  all  his  life  through  he  was 
the  object  of  singular  kindness  and  forbearance.  Elevation  from  a  lowly  to  the  loftiest 
station,  assistance  against  all  his  enemies,  an  honourable  reputation,  an  established 
throne, — such  were  the  instances  of  Divine  favour  which  David  received  at  the  Lord's 
hands.  Prosperity  and  power,  wealth  and  fame,  followed  a  youth  of  romantic  adventure 
and  hardships  and  vicissitudes.  That  outward  prosperity  shall  attend  every  one  of  the 
Lord's  people  is  what  no  intelligent  person  can  expect ;  but  every  true  Christian  may 
rejoice  in  the  assurance  of  that  loving-kindness  which  is  "  better  than  life,"  of  that 
faithfulness  which  never  leaves,  never  forsakes,  those  who  confide  in  it. 

II.  Favour  was  promised  to  David's  postebitt.  All  meii,  and  especially  nobles 
and  kings,  count  the  prosperity  and  advancement  of  their  children  as  part  of  their  own 
well-being.  The  reader  of  Aristotle's '  Ethics '  is  aware  that  the  ancient  Athenians  were 
wont  to  consider  a  man's  happiness  as  bound  up  with  the  good  fortune  of  his  children. 
David  had  won  a  throne  by  his  ability  and  valour ;  it  was  natural  that  he  should  desire 
to  have  a  successor  upon  that  throne  who  should  maintain  the  renown  and  the  power  of 
the  founder  of  the  royal  house.  Hence  the  assurance,  "  The  Lord  will  build  thee  an 
house,"  was  one  peculiarly  welcome  to  the  son  of  Jesse.  No  true  Christian  can  be 
indifferent  as  to  the  welfare  of  his  children.  Nothing  ^ves  such  a  one  greater  joy  than 
to  see  his  sons  and  daughters  walking  in  the  truth.  He  sins  if  he  sets  his  heart  upon 
their  temporal  advancement  and  prosperity.  But  he  is  right  in  seeking  and  in  praying 
for  their  salvation.  AVhen  God  s  favour  brings  them  to  fellowship  with  Christ,  it 
seems  to  him  that  his  "  cup  runneth  over." 

III.  Favour  was  promised  to  David's  people.  When  the  Lord  sent  to  his 
servant  a  message  of  mercy  and  a  promise  of  peace  and  blessing,  he  perfected  the  grace 
by  a  large  and  liberal  declaration  of  his  intentions  of  favour  toward  Israel  Monarch 
and  subjects  were  to  be  alike  blessed.  Israel  should  be  planted,  should  not  be  moved  or 
wasted,  and  should  be  victorious  over  all  enemies.  When  a  nation  is  assured  of  Divine 
care  and  protection,  **  blessed  is  the  people  that  is  in  such  a  case."  For  his  is  the 
blessing  that  maketh  rich,  and  with  it  he  addeth  no  sorrow.  A  true  patriot  will  desire 
for  his  coimtry,  not  only  wealth  and  renown  and  power,  but  the  righteousness  which 
'*  exalteth  a  nation."  Such  prosperity  as,  in  the  ninth  and  eleventh  verses,  was  promised 
to  Israel,  could  not  but  be  welcome.  When  we  implore  the  Divine  favour,  let  it  not  be 
for  ourselves  alone,  but  for  "  our  kindred  according  to  the  flesh."  The  king,  the  states* 
man,  the  reformer,  rejoices  when  his  country's  good  is  secured,  when  the  smile  of  the 
Almighty  rests  upon  the  land  "  from  the  beginning  unto  the  end  of  the  year."  The 
prayer  of  every  true  patriot  should  be,  "  God  be  merciful  unto  us,  and  bless  us,  and 
cause  his  face  to  shine  upon  us."— T. 


280  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa  [cb.  xtil  1—27. 

Vert.  7,  8. — Ood  in  individual  history.  In  what  way  the  Lord  oommnnicated  with 
Nathan  we  do  not  know;  but  the  ncred  hlHtory  represents  him  ai  ehooeiog  tba 
prophet  as  the  means  of  making  known  to  the  king  his  holy  wilL  On  this  occmsioos 
jCathnn  was  dirccti'd  to  preface  his  divinely  given  instructions  by  the  remarkable 
declaration  of  the  text ;  to  remind  David  that  (^  had  been  near  him,  bad  been  with 
him,  all  his  life  throui;h.  General  truths  of  the  most  vital  interest  are  propounded  in 
these  simple  words. 

I.  DiviKE  Pbovidekcb  hab  cabb  of  each  ettxah  lifb.  a  very  childlah  notion  of 
providence  is  that  God  concerns  himself  with  the  af^irs  of  nations  and  Churchea,  bat 
cannot  condescend  to  interest  himself  in  individuals.  This  misconception  arisea  from 
too  mean  a  view  of  the  omnipresent  and  omniscient  Supreme.  Well  may  we 
exclaim,  **  What  is  man,  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him  ?  " 

II.  Divine  Providence  can  summon  fbom  the  lowliest  to  thb  loftiest  station. 
David  was  raised  from  the  sheepcote  to  the  throne.  And  his  is  but  one  of  nuny 
similar  cases  of  marvellous  exaltation.  Grod's  election  of  his  servants  for  work  which 
he  has  for  them  to  do  calls  for  our  amazed  admiration  ;  he  finds  and  fashions  instm* 
ments  for  every  service.  And  Scripture  is  full  of  examples  of  the  exercise  of  Us 
aovereign  prerogative.  He  exalts  the  lowly  and  abases  the  proud.  He  proves  hia 
royalty  by  choosing  those  whom  men  would  have  passed  by,  and  the  event  ever 
honours  and  attests  his  wi^om. 

IlL  Divine  Pbovidence  can  aocomflibh  m  pubfobbs  notwithstandino  all 
obstacles,  llie  Lord  reminded  David  of  his  presence,  of  his  protecting  and  delivering 
care  and  meroy,  of  the  prosperity  which  he  had  vouchsafed  to  nis  servant  When  God 
takes  a  work  in  hand,  he  sufifers  nothing  to  thwart  him.  Obstacles  disappear ;  oppo- 
sition is  disarmed ;  enemies  are  defeated.  When  God  designates  a  man  for  a  special 
service,  he  imparts  all  needful  qualifications;  he  removes  every  hindrance  to  eflSdency ; 
he  gets  himseu  glory  in  the  glory  of  his  servant 

^uotigal  lessons,  1.  Be  content  with  your  lot ;  high  or  low,  it  is  what  an  all-wise 
Father  has  appointed.  2.  Be  grateful  for  the  past,  remembering  the  way  by  which  be 
has  led  you.    3.  Be  trustful  for  the  future. 

"  Father,  I  know  that  all  my  life 
Is  portioned  out  for  me. 
And  the  changes  that  will  surely  coma 

I  do  not  fear  to  see  : 
But  I  ask  thee  for  a  present  mind. 
Intent  on  pleasing  thee." 

T. 

Yer.  12.—-^  mutual  covenant.  This  prophetic  declaration  must  be  read  in  the  light 
of  subsequent  events ;  for  it  was  fulfilled  in  the  annals  of  Solomon's  peaceful  and  proa- 

ferous  reign.  The  king  did  build  God  a  house,  a  service  and  honour  not  permitted  to 
is  father.  God  did  establish  Solomon's  throne,  giving  him  victory,  peace,  wealth, 
wisdom,  and  fame.  The  connection  between  the  two  parts  of  this  verse  is  very 
instructive,  exhibiting  as  it  does  the  relation  between  God  and  his  people.  He,  in 
mercy,  condescends  to  accept  their  services,  and  at  the  same  time  confers  upon  them 
the  tokens  of  his  favour,  blessing  and  prosperity. 

L  What  we  may  do  fob  God.  In  using  such  language,  we  must  bear  in  mind 
our  entire  dependence.  It  is  only  by  employing  the  powers  our  Creator  has  given,  the 
opportunities  he  has  afforded  us,  that  we  can  be  enabled  to  accomplish  any  work  for 
his  glory.  He  gives  the  motive  to  all  service  in  the  love  of  Christ,  the  power  for 
all  service  in  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  Still,  just  as  Solomon  was  permitted  to 
build  God  a  house,  so  every  Christian  has  some  edifice  of  holy,  devoted,  acceptable 
service  to  rear  to  his  Saviour's  praise.  It  is  matter  for  wondering  gratitude  that  we, 
poor,  ignorant,  feeble,  helpless  creatures,  should  be  allowed  to  do  anything  for  the 
honour  of  the  Most  High  God ;  that  he  should  deign  to  accept  anything  at  our  unworthy 
hands.  Yet  we  are  not  only  at  liberty,  we  are  actually  invited,  first,  to  provide  in 
our  heart  an  habitation  for  the  Eternal,  and  further  to  construct  some  building  of  &ir 
deeds  of  holiness  and  benevolence  which  shall  glorify  his  sacred  name. 
U.  What   God  will  do  fob   us.     Regu^ing    Solomon,  this    was  the  Lord's 


OH.  xvn.  1-27.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  TEE  CHRONICLES.  281 

promise :  **  I  will  establish  his  throne  for  ever."  Our  calling,  our  circnmstances,  differ 
from  those  of  Israel's  king.  Tet  there  is  a  certain  appropriateness  in  this  lans^aage,  as 
applied  to  all  the  people  of  Grod.  The  blessings  of  spiritual  strength,  stability,  and 
pence,  are  assured  by  a  gracious  and  covenant  OZd  to  all  his  people.  He  is  their  "  Sun 
and  vShield."  His  compassion  toward  them  shall  not  fail.  They  shall  rejoice  in  his 
favour  and  his  faithfulness.  ''They  shall  not  be  ashamed  or  confounded,  world 
without  end." 

Conclusion.  1.  Let  ns  diligently  seek  God's  favour.  It  is  in  Christ  that  he  has 
shown  himself  gracious.  His  favour  is  life,  and  it  may  be  secured  by  every  lowly, 
faithful  applicant.  2.  Let  us  show  our  sense  of  Ood's  favour  to  us,  by  offering  our 
devoted  service  to  him.  The  wonder  is  even  greater  that  God  should  suffer  us  to  do 
aught  for  him,  than  that  he  should  do  so  much  for  us.  Let  us  respond  to  his  summons, 
and  "  arise  and  build." — T. 

Yer.  13. — Father  and  8<m,  These  words  are  by  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  applied  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  was,  in  an  especially  and  pre-eminent 
sense,  tfie  Son  of  Gt)d.  Tet  the  context,  and  still  more  the  parallel  passage  in  the 
Second  Book  of  Samuel,  makes  it  evident  that  they  were  originally  spoken  with 
reference  to  Solomon.  We  are  warranted,  by  the  teaching  of  the  New  Testament,  in 
applying  them  to  all  those  who  are  children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  who 
have  been  adopted  into  the  spiritual  family,  and  made  heirs  of  Divine  promises. 
Of  this  glorious  doctrine  of  the  Divine  Fatherhood,  so  clearly  and  powerfully  revealed 
in  the  New  Testament,  there  are  intimations,  such  as  the  present,  in  various  parts 
of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures. 

I.  In  what  Gtod'b  fatherhood  gonsists.  This  is  shown  to  some  extent  in  the 
context,  aud  in  the  narrative  of  Solomon's  early  life  and  reign.  But  generally  speaking 
we  may  rejoice  that  the  fatherhood  of  Grod  is  shown  in :  1.  Ilia  providential  care. 
As  a  Father,  our  Creator  supplies  the  wants,  both  temporal  and  spiritual,  of  his 
dependent  family.  2.  Bis  tender  love.  There  is  more  than  goodness,  more  than 
bounty,  in  God's  treatment  of  his  children.  They  have  a  moral  nature  able  to  appro- 
ciate  kindness,  forbearance,  sympathy,  and  love.  And,  in  his  treatment  of  them,  he 
has  adapted  his  communications  and  his  conduct  to  their  spiritual  need.  d.  Ilia  wise 
discipline.  It  is  distinctive  of  a  true  father's  sway,  that  it  aims  at  the  highest  good  of 
the  children.  God  certainly  appoints  trials  for  his  offspring,  and  he  reveals  to  us  the 
consolatory  truth,  "  Whom  he  loveth  he  scourgeth,  and  chasteneth  every  child  whom 
he  receiveth."  When  we  suffer  he  is  not  insensible.  "  Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his 
children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  him."  4.  Eia  jpurpoaea  /or  his  children*$ 
future.  As  a  father  looks  forward,  aud  trains  his  son  for  the  duties  and  responsibilities 
of  after-life,  so  the  great  Father  in  heaven  is  maturing  us  for  other  scenes,  higher 
enjployments,  purer  joys. 

n.  What  human  bonship  xnyolyes.  A  true  son  is  sensible  of  his  father's  watch- 
ful care,  thoughtful  kindness,  tender  affection.  And  he  renders  a  filial  return.  In 
worship  there  is  involved :  1.  Qratitude,  From  God's  spiritual  family  there  goes  up 
to  heaven  a  daily  song  of  thanksgiving  and  praise,  for  favour  and  forbearance  never 
failing.  2.  Reverence  and  submission.  The  awful  superiority  of  God  must  impress 
every  just  mind.  The  prayer  offered  will  begin  with  the  ascription,  "  Hallowed  bo 
thy  Name."  3.  Love,  For,  though  so  high,  God  is  yet  a  Father,  and  "  wo  love  him, 
because  he  first  loved  us."  4.  Obedience,  This  is  the  true  test  of  filial  reverence  and 
of  filial  affection.  There  is  no  unfailing  proof  of  love's  sincerity  save  this.  6.  Likeness, 
For,  born  anew  by  God's  Spirit,  Gtxi's  children  are  imitators  of  (jod,  resembling  him 
in  the  moral  features  of  his  holy  and  amiable  character.  Admire  the  glorious  work  of 
the  Divine  and  gracious  Spirit. — ^T. 

Ver.  16. — Humility,  This  chapter  is  one  of  peculiar  beauty,  as  exhibiting  at  once 
the  gracious  intentions  of  the  Lord  towards  one  of  his  servants,  and  the  grateful  response 
of  that  servant  to  the  condescension  and  loving-kindness  with  which  he  was  treated. 
The  spirit  of  self-abnegation  and  humility  breathing  in  the  language  of  the  text 
awakens  our  admiration,  and  calls  for  our  imitation.  We  are  reminded  by  these 
words  of — 


282  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHROXICLES.    [ch.  xvu.  1—27 


t.  OuB  UNW0BTHIVEF8  AND  ILL  DESERT.  '*  Who  tm  I  •  .  •  that  thoa  luLftt  l>rotiglit 
me  hitherto?"  It  is  an  unwonted  attitude  for  many  minds.  Men  are  so  prone  to 
rrgard  their  own  fancied  excellences,  that  language  of  humiliation  and  contrition  it 
often  8U8|)ected  of  insincerity.  Yet,  in  the  presence  of  him  who  is  at  once  the  perfectly 
hf>ly  and  the  Searcher  of  hearts,  what  more  appropriate  than  prostration  of  soul  i^ 
acknowledgment  of  sin  ? 

II.  GrOD's    OB  ACE    AND    KINDNESS  TO  THOSE    WHO  DEPEND    UPON    HDC       The    Lofd 

ezalta  the  humble  and  meek.  The  king  acknowleilged  not  only  his  own  utter  unworthi- 
ness  of  the  distinction  accorded  to  him,  but  €K)d*s  infinite  mercy  and  goodness  in  his 
treatment  of  his  servant.  "According  to  thine  own  heart  hast  thou  done  all  this 
sreatness."  There  are  in  Scripture  many  beautiful  examples  of  Ood's  graoe  to  the 
lowly  in  heart.  Read  the  song  of  Hannah,  and  the  Magnificat  of  Mary  the  mother  of 
Jesus ;  and  observe  how  the  Lord  is  acknowledged  as  the  great  King  who  delights  to 
have  mercy  upon  the  feeble  who  yet  are  fiuthful,  and  to  put  honour  upon  them,  and 
reveal  to  them  his  love  and  mercy.  In  fact,  revelation  abounds  with  practical  proofs 
of  Gk)d*s  purpose  ever  to  reject  the  proud,  and  to  favour  and  exalt  the  meek,  the  K>wly, 
and  the  contrite.  It  is  upon  those  who  sincerely  ask,  '*  Who  am  I  ?  "  that  the  Lord  of 
glory  delights  to  confer  the  tokens  of  his  approval  and  favour. 

IIL  The  special  favoub  shown  to  us  bt  God,  who  deigns  to  use  us  nr  his 
SEBTICE  AND  KINGDOM.  Evidently  David  felt  that  the  highest  honour  was  put  npon 
him  in  being  allowed  to  serve  Jehovah — to  be  an  instrument  in  his  hands  for  the 
carrying  out  of  Divine  purposes.  What  dignity  and  happiness  does  it  give  to  life,  to 
know  that  we  are  commissioned  and  employed  by  the  King  of  kings  I 

Pbactical  lessons.  1.  These  considerations  should  enhance  our  oonoeptions  of 
Gild's  glory  and  grace.  Let  us  recount  his  mercies,  and  acknowledge  their  Divine 
source.  2.  They  should  induce  us  to  consecrate  afresh  to  Heaven  the  nature  HemveQ 
has  created,  and  the  powers  Heaven  has  conferred. — ^T. 

Vers.  20 — 22. — Qo*!  ineomparahle.  Surrounded  as  they  were  by  idolatrous  nations, 
)t  was  natural  that  the  Israelites  should  often  draw  comparisons  between  their  own 
God,  and  the  God  of  the  whole  earth,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  so-called  gods  of  the 
heathen  on  the  other.  The  most  important  contract  would  be  in  character;  for,  whilst 
the  idolatrous  peoples  worshipped  gods  who  were  the  impersonation  of  cruelty,  caprice, 
and  lust,  Jehovah  was  worshipped  as  a  holy,  a  righteous,  a  merciful  Lord  and  Ruler. 
Yet  there  was  another  contrast — that  between  the  powerlessness  of  the  idols  of  the 
nations,  and  the  might  and  wisdom  of  the  true  and  living  God.  In  Ps.  cxt.  this 
contrast  is  wrought  out  with  vigour  and  irony. 

I.  Thebb  IB  NONE  LIKE  GoD  IN  HIS  BEING.  All  creatures,  as  their  name  implies, 
are  fashioned  by  a  superior  power,  and  upheld  in  life  by  him  in  whom  they  "live  and 
move  and  have  their  being."  The  Lord  is  the  self-existing  Being,  who  is  from  eternity 
to  eternity. 

II.  There  is  none  like  God  in  his  attributes.  All  our  'qnalities  of  mind  are 
derived  from  him,  and,  so  far  as  they  are  excellent,  they  are  gleams  of  his  brightness. 
Human  virtues  aro  the  growth  of  a  Divine  seed.  But  in  Jehovah  all  perfections  meet 
and  harmonize. 

III.  There  is  none  like  God  in  his  providence.  This  seems  espedally  to  have 
impressed  the  mind  of  the  king,  when  he  poured  forth  his  adoring  thanksgiving  before 
the  Lord.  The  recollection  of  God's  goodness  and  faithfulness,  not  only  to  himself  and 
his  household,  but  also  to  the  nation  of  Israel,  awakened  his  grateful  and  admiring 
praises.  And  we  too  have  these  reasons  in  abundance  to  prompt  our  thanksgivings 
and  confidence. 

II.  There  is  none  like  God  in  mercy  and  loving-kindness.  These  are  attributes 
of  God  ;  but  they  are  attributes  called  into  exercise  by  our  state  and  position  as  sinners 
in  the  sight  of  the  Searcher  of  hearts,  the  righteous  Judge  and  King.  In  this  passage 
David  acknowledges  that  God  redeemed  his  people  Israel,  made  them  his  own,  became 
their  God.  How  gloriously  are  these  expressions  justified  in  the  dispensation  of  the 
gospel,  of  God's  infinite  love  towards  our  race  in  the  gift  and  the  effective  mediation  of 
his  dear  Son  1  Let  these  reflections  (1)  awaken  our  gratitude  to  him  who  has  made 
himself  known  to  us,  and  who,  though  incomparable  and  alone,  deigns  to  communicate 


CH.  XVII.  1—27.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa  283 

in  grace  and  compassion  with  us;  and  (2)  prompt  us  to  testify  to  his  adorable 
excellence,  and  to  summon  our  brethren,  the  children  of  men,  to  put  their  trust  under 
the  shadow  of  his  wings. — ^T. 

Ver.  27. — A  father's  prayer.  This  was  a  prayer  founded  upon  a  promise.  Gk)d  had 
declared  his  purposes  towards  the  seed  of  his  servant  David,  and  David  was  honouring 
God's  faithfulness,  as  well  as  expressing  his  own  heart's  desire,  when  he  thus  solemnly 
and  confidently  invoked  the  blessing  of  the  Giver  of  all  good  upon  his  household  and 
his  posterity. 

I.  Faihly  feelino  18  DIVINELY  ORDAINED.  Nfttious  of  warriors  have  sometimes 
regarded  and  treated  such  feeling  as  weakness.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  implanted  by  the 
Creator ;  and  God,  the  universal  Father,  cannot  but  be  pleased  with  fatherly  sentiment 
and  fatherly  care  on  the  part  of  the  heads  of  human  households. 

II.  Family  feeling  is  hallowed  by  belioion.  Always  a  beautiful  thing,  a 
father's  love  becomes  a  holy  thing  when  it  is  sanctified  by  a  spiritual  tone  of  mind  and 
a  spiritual  habit  of  life. 

III.  Family  feelinq  will  prompt  a  fatheb's  prayers.  If  it  is  natural  to  wish 
well  to  our  children,  it  is  religious  to  express  those  wishes  before  him  who  does  so  much 
to  fulfil  our  best  and  purest  desires.  As  it  would  be  criminal  in  any  parent  to  be 
careless  as  to  his  children's  future,  so  it  would  be  monstrous  in  a  Christian  parent  to 
omit  to  commend  his  offspring  to  the  care  and  guidance,  love  and  sympathy,  of  our 
Father  in  heaven. 

IV.  Family  feeling  wn^L  look  forward  to  the  common  enjoyment  of  blessings 
dubing  the  endless  futube.  It  is  questionable  whether  the  language  of  the  text  has 
any  reference  to  the  future  state.  In  praying  that  his  house  might  be  "before  the 
Jx)rd  for  ever,"  and  so  "blessed  for  ever,"  David  was  probably  contemplating  the 
permanence  of  his  throne  and  that  of  his  descendants.  His  prayer  has  been  answered 
in  a  manner  deeper  than  he  could  have  anticipated.  But  we  are  bound  to  seek  for  our 
posterity  an  immortal  happiness,  and  to  anticipate  for  our  families  reunion  in  the 
presence  and  in  the  service  of  the  EternaL — T. 

Vers.  1 — 6.— 2Vu<A«  under  the  surface,  A  very  pleasant  picture  is  here  presented 
to  our  imagination.  We  see  the  King  of  Israel  sitting  in  his  house,  "  the  Lord  having 
given  him  rest  round  about  from  all  his  enemies  "  (2  Sam.  vii.  1),  with  a  happy  and 
grateful  sense  of  prosperity  and  security,  not  wrapping  himself  in  the  dangerous  robe 
of  complacent  self-<;ongratulation,  but  rather  clothed  with  humility  and  thankfulness. 
As  he  surveys  the  stateliness  and  elegance  of  his  palace,  he  thinks  of  God's  goodness  to 
him  in  placing  "  his  feet  in  a  large  room  "  (Ps.  xxxi.  8),  and  his  thought  naturally 
passed  to  the  place  where  the  ark  rested — the  ark  with  which  the  presence  of  Jehovah 
was  so  closely  connected  (Exod.  xxv.  22).  We  do  not  wonder  at  the  thought  which 
then  occurred  to  him.  We  see  in  these  verses  those  truths  which  are  not  upon  the 
surface,  but  which  we  have  no  difiSculty  in  recognizing  beneath  it^ 

I.  The  bound  sentiment  at  the  heabt  of  David's  desibe.  David  felt  that 
there  was  an  impropriety  in  himself  dwelling  "  in  an  house  of  cedars  "  while  '*  the  ark 
of  the  covenant  of  tne  Lord  remained  imder  curtains  "  (ver.  1).  Was  it  for  him  to  be 
in  better  and  more  costly  surroundings  than  was  the  manifested  presence  of  God 
himself  ?  Should  he  be  more  honoured  in  his  dwelling-place  than  the  ark  of  the 
covenant  of  the  Lord  ?  There  is  a  sound  sentiment  here ;  one  that  was  and  is  worthy 
not  only  of  respect  but  cultivation.  We  are  always  to  give  God  the  very  best  we  can 
ofier  him  ;  the  less  costly  we  may  expend  on  ourselves,  the  best  we  should  reserve  for 
him.  We  should  be  ashamed  to  lay  out  large  sums  of  money  on  our  own  homes  while 
the  house  of  God  needs  renovation  or  repair;  to  expend  a  large  proportion  of  our 
income  on  our  own  honour  or  gratification  when  the  cause  of  Christ  is  languishing  for 
want  of  funds,  when  the  treasury  of  Christian  benevolence  is  empty.  Not  most  for 
ourselves  with  a  very  small  fraction  for  Gt)d  and  his  kingdom,  but  enough  (or  even 
more  than  enough)  for  ourselves  and  the  most  and  best  we  can  furnish  for  him  and  for 
his.    That  is  the  true  thought  of  the  reverent  mind,  Hebrew  and  Christian. 

II.  The  true  thought  at  the  heart  of  Nathan's  counsel.  "  Do  all  that  is  in 
thine  heart ;  for  God  is  with  thee."    The  prophet's  encouragement  of  the  king's  desire 


i 


284  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,   [ch.  xvn.  1— 27. 


proved  to  be  mistaken,  but  the  thought  at  the  heart  of  his  words  was  true  and  sound, 
^atlian  spoke  as  one  who  believed  that  the  man  with  whom  GK)d  dwelt  was  likely  to 
come  to  rij^ht  conclusions.  So  he  was ;  and  David  was  only  wrong  in  wishing  that  he 
himself  might  be  the  instrument  of  carrying  out  a  praiseworthy  project  If  God  Is  with 
us  as  he  was  with  David,  it  is  most  likely  we  shall  be  guided  to  right  decisions.  It  is 
not  the  very  learned,  nor  the  very  clever,  nor  the  very  "  practical "  man,  but  the  very 
godly  man,  who  is  likely  to  have  the  true  sentiment  in  his  mind  respecting  the  things 
of  Qod.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him,"  eta  (Ps.  xxv.  14 ;  see 
John  vii.  17 ;  xv.  15).  The  man  who  walks  with  Otod  and  with  whom  God  dwells  may 
fall,  now  and  again,  into  a  mistake,  but  he  is  not  likely  to  be  **  greatly  moved  **  from 
the  path  of  wisdom.  He  is  in  the  way  of  being  led  in  the  paths  of  wisdom,  of  being 
«<guided  into  all  truth." 

III.  The  valuable  truth  contained  ik  the  Divine  declabation.  rVers.  3 — 6.) 
God  declared  that  he  had  never  demanded  of  his  people  that  they  shoulci  make  other 
provision  than  that  of  the  simple  tabernacle  or  tent.  He  had  been  pleased  hitherto  to 
manifest  his  presence  in  connection  with  this  humble  &bric  He  would  remind  his 
servant  David  that  as  there  could  be  no  structure,  however  grand  and  stately,  which 
the  art  of  man  could  raise  that  would  be  a  worthy  home  of  £dm  whom  the  heaven  of 
heavens  could  not  contain,  so,  on  the  other  hand,  there  was  no  covering,  however 
humble,  within  which  he  was  not  ready  to  abide  if  hearts  were  true  and  Uvas  were 
holy.  The  precious  and  vital  thought  of  the  passage  is  that  Qod  does  not  require  tho 
elaborations  of  human  art  or  the  expenditure  of  human  wealth  to  vouchsafe  his  presence 
and  make  known  his  power.  Let  there  be  (1)  the  contrite  heart,  (2)  the  childlike, 
believing  spirit,  (3)  the  obedience  of  the  pure  and  loving  life,  and  then  God's  abiding 
home  wul  oe  found.  Whom  the  costlv  cathedral  will  not  hold,  the  cottage  roof  may 
shelter.  He  may  desert  the  breast  whicn  is  covered  with  the  priestly  garments  to  dwell 
in  the  heart  of  him  who  is  "clothed  in  camel's  hair." — C» 

Vers.  7 — 15. — Three  spiritual  necegsitiea.  The  message  which  Nathan  was  charged 
to  deliver  to  David  calls  before  us  three  necessities  of  our  spiritual  nature,  which  apply 
to  all  men  everywhere,  in  every  position,  and  in  all  ages.     We  have  need  of — 

I.  An  open  mind  to  beceive  God's  special  TEAcmNG.  Nathan  was  familiar  with 
the  broad  and  general  principles  of  religious  truth.  He  was  an  enlightened  servant  of 
Jehovah — a  prophet  whose  inspiration  was  from  on  high.  But  he  needed  a  special 
vision  Tver.  15)  to  see  the  truth  which  was  to  be  declared  on  this  occasion.  Until  he 
received  that  vision  he  was  under  the  impression  that  David  would  do  well  to  carry  out 
his  pious  purpose  ^ver.  2),  but  from  that  time  he  discouraged  and,  indeed,  arrested  the 
intention  of  the  kmg.  If  such  a  man  as  he,  with  whose  spirit  Gkxl  was  in  close  com* 
munion,  needed  to  be  instructed  on  particular  occasions,  how  much  more  do  we  ?  Our 
general  knowledge  of  Divine  truth,  even  taken  in  connection  with  an  abiding  relation 
to  the  Spirit  of  God  (1  Cor.  vi.  19),  does  not  ensure  to  us  an  understanding  of  special 
questions  without  special  illumination  from  the  SSource  of  all  wisdom.  Again  and 
again  we  need  to  have  the  quick  eye  to  see  the  pointing  of  the  Divine  finger,  the 
open  ear  to  hear  the  Divine  voice,  tho  sensitive  heart  to  respond  to  the  Divine  touch. 
This  in  respect  to  our  temporal  affairs,  to  the  government  of  the  home,  to  the  ordering 
of  the  Church  of  Christ. 

II.  A  READY  REMEHBBANCE  OF  God's  PAST  MERCIES.     (YcrS.  7,  8.)     Dsvld  WaS  tO  be 

disappointed  in  being  denied  the  gratification  of  this  strong  wish  of  his  heart ;  but  he 
was  to  remember  what  great  things  God  had  done  for  him,  taking  him  from  ihe  sheep- 
cote  and  placing  him  on  the  throne,  attending  bis  steps  as  Guardian  and  Guide,  giving 
him  the  victory  over  his  enemies,  raising  him  to  a  position  of  eminence  even  among 
kings.  It  was  a  small  thing  to  be  denied  this  one  desire.  We  should  carry  about  us 
at  all  times  such  a  sense  of  the  great  blessings  God  has  given  us — the  endowments,  the 
deliverances,  the  recoveries,  the  bestowments  of  our  whole  past  course — that  at  any 
time  this  may  weigh  down  and  bury  out  of  our  sight  any  small  disappointment  which 
the  Ruler  of  our  lives  may  permit  us  to  suffer.  A  strong  and  full  sense  of  mercies  in 
the  past  will  silence  the  first  sigh  of  discontentment,  will  turn  it  into  a  song  ol  hdy 
gratitude. 
IIL  An  imtellioent  qbasp  or  Divine  promises.    It  may  be  that  we  may  need 


CH.  XVII.  1—27.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  2aS 

more  than  a  view  of  past  mercies :  we  may  require  a  prospect  of  good  things  to  come. 
God  graciously  provided  David  with  both.  He  intimatc^d  to  him  through  Nathan 
that  ho  was  intending  to  do  great  things  for  him.  He  would  (1)  consolidate  the 
kingdom  of  Israel  so  that  it  should  become  strong  and  safe  (ver.  9) ;  (2)  multiply  his 
victories  over  his  enemies  (ver.  10) ;  (3)  establish  his  dynasty  (vers.  10, 14) ;  (4)  give 
his  son  the  privilege  which  he  was  withholding  from  him  (vers.  11, 12) ;  (5)  show  to 
this  son  of  his  a  fatherly  patience  (ver.  13).  These  were  very  great  promises,  amply 
■nfficient  to  compensate  for  one  disappointment.  What  large  promises  does  God  make 
to  us !  "  Exceeding  great  and  precious  "  they  are  (2  Pet  i.  4).  They  begin  with  his 
guidance  and  presence  through  life,  and  they  culminate  in  everlasting  joy  and  glory  at 
his  right  hand.  We  often  n^  to  have  recourse  to  the  promises  of  our  Divine  saviour. 
When  we  do  resort  to  them,  and  do  draw  upon  them,  we  find  a  bountiful  sufficiency 
for  all  our  need. — C. 

Ver.  10  (latter  part). — The  Divine  response:  its  righteousness  and  riches,  I.  The 
RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  THE  DiviNE  BESPONSE.  David  had  it  in  his  heart  to  build  God  a 
house,  but  he  did  not  actually  do  so.  Tet  God  honoured  his  intention,  and  met  it  by 
the  response  intimated  in  the  text :  "  The  Lord  will  build  thee  an  house.**  In  this  we  can 
recognize  the  act  of  a  righteous  God — righteous  because  (1)  the  essence  of  any  act  is  in 
the  intention  of  the  agent ;  (2)  the  intention  of  the  human  mind  is  often  defeated  by 
irresistible  obstacles.  We  are  not  responsible  for  the  event.  With  David,  in  this 
instance,  the  direct  Divine  prohibition  was  interposed.  With  us,  insuperable  obstacles 
often  intervene,  and  the  result  is  not  ascribable  to  anything  but  the  limitation  of  our 
faculties.  Our  righteous  God  accepts,  approves,  honours,  not  indeed  barren  and  worth- 
less sentiment,  but  an  earnest  desire  and  honest  intention  to  please  and  serve  him. 
This  may  be  in  our  personal,  family,  or  Church  relations. 

II.  The  amplitude  (or  biches)  of  the  Divine  besponsb.  David  desired  to  build 
for  God  a  house.  Ghxi  replied  to  his  servant,  *'I  will  build  thee  an  house."  The 
house  which  David  wished  to  build  was  one  of  stone  and  wood,  of  silver  and  gold ;  but 
that  which  the  Divine  Giver  purposed  to  build  was  far  more  precious.  It  was  a  human 
house ;  it  was  the  elevation  of  the  king's  children  and  of  their  children  to  honour  and 
power  and  influence ;  it  was  a  bestowment  of  a  kind  and  character  which  in  its  nature 
tar  outweighed  the  gift  .which  the  servant  of  Jehovah  proposed  to  present.  GK)d*8 
response  had  a  Divine  largeness,  amplitude,  wealth,  answering  to  his  beneficent  and 
bountiful  nature.  Thus  does  he  meet  his  children  now.  He  makes  as  to  know  the 
length,  and  breadth,  and  depth,  and  height  of  his  responsiveness  in  the  gospel  of 
Christ.  He  acts  toward  us  in  the  spirit  of  the  promise  in  Mark  x.  28 — 30.  He 
responds  (1)  to  our  penitence  with  free  forgiveness  and  full  reconciliation ;  (2)  to  our 
tn^t  with  constant  guidance,  provision,  guardianship,  "all  our  journey  through;** 
(S)  to  our  prayer  with  the  indwelling  of  his  own  Divine  Spirit ;  (4)  to  our  faithfiUness 
during  the  brief  period  of  time  with  everlasting  glory.— C. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — Our  relation  to  Ood.  The  attitude  which  David  assumed  and  the 
^ords  of  devotion  he  uttered  on  this  occasion  are  suggestive  of  the  relation  in  which  we 
Btand  to  our  Creator  and  Redeemer.    We  gather— • 

I.  That  we  cannot  be  led  to  a  betteb  state  than  a  deep  sense  of  oub  nothing- 
irxBS  AND  the  Divine  geeatness.  When  Nathan  had  delivered  his  message  David 
placed  himself  in  the  posture  of  deliberate  reflection  (ver.  16),  and,  thus  seated,  he 
became  possessed  of  a  profound  sense  of  his  own  unworthiness.  *'  Who  am  I,  0  Lord, 
and  what  is  my  house?"  etc.  (ver.  16).  He  soon  passed  on  to  cherish  a  deep  feeling  of 
God's  supremacy.  •*  0  Lord,  there  is  none  like  thee,"  etc.  (ver.  20).  This  is  a  most 
suitable  end  to  any  transaction  between  our  God  and  ourselves.  We  are  then  arriving 
at  the  truth,  reaching  a  place  of  spiritual  safety,  in  an  attitude  that  is  most  becoming, 
when  we  are  impressed  with  our  own  nothingness  and  with  the  absolute  greatness  of 
our  God  and  Saviour. 

II.  That  God  not  only  calls  us  to  sonship,  but  tbeats  us  as  his  children. 
^  Thou  hast  regarded  me  according  to  the  estate  of  a  man  of  high  degree "  (ver.  17). 
This  probably  means  that,  in  David's  thought,  God  had  treated  him  as  one  who  was 
znost  exalted,  and  who  might  on  that  ground  look  for  the  largest  things.    At  any  rate 


286  THE  HRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHBOXICLES.   [ch.  xto.  1—27 

it  WBS  true^if  this  be  not  the  exact  thought  of  the  ohecnre  pamge— that  God  was 
tieating  DaWd  in  a  way  which  corresponded  with  the  exalted  podtioii  to  which  he  had 
odled  him.  And  this  truth  has  its  illustratioQ  in  the  Dirine  dealing  with  all  his  sons. 
In  the  gospel  we  are  all  called  to  he  the  sons  of  God  (John  L  12 ;  1  John  iii.  2).  And 
hsTing  reinstated  ns  in  this  filial  position,  our  hearenlj  Father  treats  os  as  the  reoon* 
died  sons  and  daaghtsTB  we  hare  become.  1.  He  confides  in  us ;  not  laying  down  a 
multitude  of  precepts  in  detail,  but  giving  us  a  few  living  principles  to  applj  for  our- 
selrea.  2.  He  gives  us  constant  access  to  his  person;  whensoever  we  will  we  maj 
approach  and  address  him.  3.  He  chastens  rather  than  punishes  us  (Heb.  xii.  5—11). 
IlL  That  God  has  ooktebbed  abouxdcio  hosock  os  ub  gt  Jiscs  CmoBT.  David 
felt  that  God  bad  put  so  much  honour  on  him  that  he  did  not  know  how  he  could  ask 
for  more  (ver.  18).  The  utmost  desires  of  his  heart  were  fulfilled.  And  what  mora  of 
honour  and  position  could  we  have  asked  of  God  that  he  has  not  given  us  in  the  gospel 
of  his  grace?  We  are  even  said  to  be  ^ kings  and  priests  unto  Crod"  (Rev.  i.  6). 
1.  We  are  children  of  the  heavenly  Father :  "  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God."  2.  We  are 
heirs  of  God  TRom.  viii.  17).  3.  We  are  the  friends  of  Christ  (John  xv.  14, 15).  4.  We 
are  fellow -labourers  with  the  living  God,  ''workers  together  with  him  *  (1  Cor.  iiL  9; 
2  Cor.  vL  1 ;  Acts  xv.  4).  What  could  we  speak  more  for  the  honour  of  his  ser- 
vanU?— a 

Vers.  19 — ^24. — Fleas  in  prayer.  David  was  pleading  with  God,  and,  in  asking  him 
to  confirm  and  establish  his  word  of  promise,  he  made  reference  to  four  grounds  of 
appeaL  These  we  may  subetantiallj  adopt,  adding  another  " all-prevaUing  plea" 
which  David  could  not  introduce. 

L  Ck>D'8  LOYK  TO  us  AS  INDIVIDUAL  80UL8.  ''Thy  Servant's  sake*  (ver.  19).  At 
other  times  we  read,  "  For  thv  servant  David's  sake ; "  ie.  for  the  love  which  God  bore 
to  this  servant  and  son  of  his.  We  may  ask  God  to  help  us  because  we  know  he 
loves  us ;  because  he  pities  us  who  fear  him  (Ps.  ciii.  13) ;  because  he  remembers  us 
in  our  low  estate,  and  counts  our  tears,  and  desires  our  happiness  and  well-being. 

II.  His  ows  Divine  bekionitt  akd  honoub.  (Vers.  19, 20, 24.)  "According  to  thine 
own  heart;*'  that  be  may  act  like  himself,  with  the  boundless  grace  and  goodness 
which  beloDg^to  his  Divine  nature.  ^  That  thy  Name  may  be  magnified  for  ever,"  etc. 
(ver.  24) ;  that  all  nations  may  know  that  thou  art  a  faithful  God,  continuing  thy  loving* 
kindnesses,  and  redeeming  thy  word  to  the  land  that  is  so  peculiarly  thine  own.  We  may 
well  plead  the  nature  of  God  as  a  very  strong  reason  why  he  should  bless  us.  If  he 
grant  our  request  ''according  to  his  own  heart,'*  if  he  fill  our  treasury  and  satisfy  our 
want  in  accordance  with  the  tenderness  of  his  heart,  the  strength  aiMi  bounty  of  his 
hand,  and  to  the  glory  of  his  Name,  we  shall  be  enriched  indeed. 

IIL  His  cabe  fob  his  Cuubch.  (Vers.  21,  22.)  As  David  prayed  God  to  fulfil  all 
the  good  pleasure  of  his  will  on  account  of  Israel,  whom  he  had  redeemed  and  attached 
to  himself  by  his  special  mercies,  so  may  we  ask  for  all  great  things  to  be  done  for  us 
OQ  account  of  that  Church  for  which  the  Son  of  God  sufifered  and  died,  which  he 
"redeemed  with  his  precious  blood." 

IV.  Toe  Divine  promise.  '*The  thing  that  thou  hast  spoken  oonoeming  thy 
servant,"  etc.  (ver.  23  ;  see  also  ver.  26).  We  have  great  promises  to  plead  with  God, 
based  on  his  own  inviolable  word ;  and  there  can  be  no  more  solid  ground  on  which  to 
build  our  hope  in  prayer  to  God.  There  is  one  additional  plea  with  which  we  are 
familiar,  but  which  the  King  of  Israel  lived  far  too  soon  to  urge  (see  Luke  x.  24).  We 
plead  with  God — 

V.  The  Name  and  wobk  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Chbist.  For  the  sake  of  him  who 
loved  us  and  gave  himself  for  us,  who  lived  and  died  on  our  behalf,  we  ask  for  all  those 
blessings  we  need;  for  mercy,  for  acceptance  and  sonship,  for  Divine  guidance  and 
protection  along  the  path  of  life,  for  the  indwelling  Spirit,  for  help  and  blessing  in 
Christian  work,  for  an  abundant  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. — G. 

Vers.  25 — 27. — Our  relation  to  the  Divine  promise.  I.  That  God's  pboioss  does 
KOT  EXCLUDE  THE  PROPRIETY  OF  OUR  PETITION.  '*  Thou  hast  told  thy  Servant  that 
thou  wilt  build  him  an  house :  therefore  thy  servant  hath  found  in  his  heart  to  pray 
before  thee  "  (ver.  25).    The  fact  that  God  has  promised  to  do  anything  for  us  is  a 


ca  XVII.  1—27.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK   OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  287 


reason  why  we  should — not  why  we  should  not — ask  him  to  give  it  to  us.  He  has 
promised  to  supply  all  who  love  him  with  all  needful  things  (Matt.  vi.  32,  33 ;  Phil. 
IV.  19).  But  this  does  not  countennand  the  injunction  to  pray  for  our  daily  hread 
(Matt.  vi.  11).  There  are  many  promises  of  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  we  are  there- 
fore to  a^  for  his  outpouring  (Luke  xi.  13).  We  are  assured  that  the  kingdom  of  God 
shall  be  established  in  the  earth ;  none  the  less,  but  all  the  more,  are  we  to  pray,  "  Thy 
kingdom  come."  GKxl's  promise  is  not  to  be  the  excuse  for  our  silence,  but  the  ground 
of  our  supplication. 

II.  That  Groo*s  promise  dobs  not  excludb  the  kxcessitt  fob  oub  holt 
OBEDiEKOE.  David  affirms  in  ver.  26  that  God  has  "  promised  this  goodness  unto 
thy  servant ;  *'  but  in  ver.  27  his  petition  shows  that  he  was  conscious  that  something 
more  was  needed  beyond  the  bare  and  simple  promise,  in  order  that  it  might  be  ulti- 
mately and  fully  realized.  And  he  was  right.  Obedience  was  an  essential  and  vital 
condition.  If  not  expressed,  it  was  always  understood.  The  rending  of  the  kingdom 
in  twain  under  David  s  grandson  proved  only  too  surely  and  sadly  uiat  this  was  the 
case.  All  God*s  promises  to  us  are  conditional  on  our  loyalty  to  him.  If  we  are  faith- 
ful unto  death,  we  shall  have  his  abiding  love,  his  constant  care,  his  gracious  blessing, 
and  finally  his  blissful  presence.  But  we  must  not  be  so  confident  because  of  the 
promise  that  we  are  negligent  of  the  understood  conditions. 

m.  That  (tod's  pboxises  are  often  fulfilled  in  otheb  and  betteb  ways  than 
WE  look  fob.  (Ver.  27.)  David  was  assured  that,  if  God  blessed,  there  would  be  blessed- 
ness for  ever.  He  was  right;  but  the  good  thing  in  store  for  him  was  far  different  from 
that  which  he  was  presenting  to  his  own  mind  at  the  time.  Could  he  have  foreseen 
the  speedy  rupture  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  captivity  after  a  few  generations  had  come 
and  gone,  he  might  have  been  sadly  disappointed,  and  his  faith  might  have  received  a 
serious  shock.  But  could  he  have  foreseen  the  way  in  which  the  Divine  promise  was 
fulfilled  at  length,  could  he  have  realized  that  One  who  was  '*  the  Son  of  David  " 
would  reign  as  Prince  of  peace  and  Lord  of  righteousness  over  all  the  human  world, 
he  would  have  rejoiced  indeed.  God*s  purpose  was  larger  than  his  servant's  thought. 
So  with  us.  The  hope  of  one  period  is  ever  found  to  be  realized  further  on  in  another 
way,  at  first  disappointing  but  afterwards  most  satisfying,  from  that  which  we  expected. 
Touth  is  other,  and  really  better,  than  childhood  pictures  it ;  and  manhood  than  youth 
imagines;  and  the  rest  of  declining  days  than  laborious  prime  expects  to  find  it. 
The  promises  of  life  are  fulfilled,  but  in  ways  which  God  knows  to  be  far  better  for 
US  than  those  which  our  imagination  fancies  and  our  heart  desires.  And  it  may  be 
that  the  heavenly  world  will  prove  to  be  something  very  different  from  that  which 
piety  has  predicted  or  poetry  has  sung — different  but  better  ;  something  which  will  be 
more  fitted  for  our  faculties  as  they  are  at  first  unclothed  and  clothed  upon,  as  death 
is  first  swallowed  up  of  life. — G. 

Vers.  1,  2. — ITie  house  of  the  Lord :  David  and  Nathan.  The  event  recorded  in 
this  chapter  must  have  been  separated  from  the  events  of  the  previous  chapter  by  a 
period  of  several  years.  It  is  in  all  essential  points  identical  with  the  parallel  account 
in  2  Sam.  vii.,  the  differences  being  of  a  purely  formal  kind.  The  contrast  which 
David  felt  between  his  own  dwelling  and  that  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant  awakened 
within  him  a  feeling  of  sorrow,  and  led  him  to  resolve  to  put  an  end  to  it  by  building 
for  the  latter  a  house  worthy  of  it.  This  was  a  right  feeling,  and  was  commended  by 
the  Lord  (see  1  Kings  viii.  18).  But  though  right  in  itself,  and  indicating  a  true  state 
of  heart  towards  God,  it  was  fur  other  reasons  not  in  accordance  with  the  Divine  will. 
David  had  been  a  man  of  war,  and  had  shed  much  blood,  and  on  this  ground  God  would 
not  allow  him  to  carry  out  the  desire  of  his  heart.  David  communicated  his  desire  to  Na- 
than the  prophet.  The  prophet,  knowing  well  the  character  of  David  and  his  devotion  of 
heart  to  the  Lord,  and  that  the  Lord  was  with  him  in  all  that  he  did,  said,  out  of  the 
impulse  of  his  heart,  '*  Do  all  that  is  thine  heart ;  for  God  is  with  thee."  From  this  we 
learn  how  a  man*s  heart  may  be  right  with  God,  how  all  that  he  purposes  to  do  may  be 
highly  commendable,  but  for  other  reasons  it  may  not  be  for  God*s  glory  that  the  Lord 
may  use  him.  It  may  be  more  for  that  glory  that  he  may  be  passed  over  and  another  be 
preferred.  Man  proposes  but  God  disposes.  Not  even  a  prophet  can  step  in  between. 
Observe  another  truth  here.    How  graciously  David  allows  himself  to  be  passed  over 


288  THE  FI2ST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHBOKICLESu  [gb.  xm.  1—27. 


•Zkd  Utat  KDOthcr  i2iaaHi  hart  ibt  bcmcnr!  Tiiisif  cf:eB  bird  to  bar.  Kotblng  but  tbe 
g?aoe  of  Gcid  miiiig  m  a  man*!  bean  can  caiable  bizn  to  60  tbii.  MoMi  endured  kttj 
jcan*  thai  aikd  bardfbip  in  kad:zkg  God*a  peofJe  out  of  Egrpt^  aod  jet  just  aa  be 
geu  is  fight  of  tbe  prcniiaed  land  all  bia  bngbtert  aaticTpaikiiis  are  to  be  nnrealixed, 
azhd  MZt*xatr  teuefm  in  to  reap  tbe  revanL  Darid  bad  formed  tbe  ktngkwn,  foogbt  tbe 
battles  of  tbe  I>jrd,  and  bruogbt  up  tbe  ark  to  itamting-plaoe;  bat  just  aa  be  ia  aboat 
to  reap  a  fall  revird  in  aeeinz  tbe  temple  built  for  tbe  Lord,  hi»  eoo  is  to  step  in  and 
co/T  it,  while  Darid,  like  Moeea.  ia  to  lie  dovn  and  die.  Life  b  full  of  nnrealiied 
aoticipatioDs ;  bet  in  tbe  case  of  God's  people  all  to  be  realised  in  a  brighter  and  better 
world,  to  a  degree  that  ^  ere  batb  not  sees^  nor  ear  beaid,  nor  batb  entered  into  tbe 
beart  of  man  to  oonceiTe.*  Oh  for  sraoe  to  be  passed  OTer,  naT.eren  to  rejoice  In  bdng 
pswed  oxer,  snd  that  othen  should  reoeiTe  tbe  honours  for  which  we  bsTe  toiled,  pro- 
Tided  odIt  that  it  is  God's  will  and  for  bis  gker!  Oh  to  he  nothing,  noikimg  ;  only 
a  "  wemtl  fit  for  the  Master's  ose,*  to  be  osed  bj  him  when  be  will,  how  be  will,  and 
wbers  be  will  1    Tiiis  should  erer  be  tbe  Christianas  desire  and  prayer.-— W. 

Vers.  3 — 15. — G<t^s  menage  to  David,  Though  Darid  was  not  to  bidld  tbe  boose 
of  the  I>>r<^,  God  eives  him  **  great  and  precioas  promises  "  with  respect  to  bis  pos- 
terity snd  to  the  future  glory  of  his  people  LvaeL  We  see  here  that  there  ia  <Hie 
thing  nearer  to  the  heart  of  oar  God  than  an  oatward  boilding,  however  grand  it  may  be. 
**  1  have  not  dwelt  in  an  house  nnce  the  day  that  I  brocght  up  Israel  anto  this  day ;  bat 
bare  gone  from  tent  to  tent,  and  from  one  tabernacle  to  another.*  The  Lord  loves  to 
be  identified  with  his  children  in  all  their  circumstanoea,  however  lowly  thoee  dream* 
stances  msy  be.  **l  dwell  with  the  bumble  and  contrite  heart.*  lliis  is  tbe  joy  of 
the  Lord's  heart,  and  it  comes  infinitely  before  a  grand  boose  or  a  magnificent  pajaoe. 
Mark  further  the  prophetical  character  of  God*s  mcasage  (see  tct.  9).  I  will  oraain  a 
place  for  my  people  Israel,  and  will  plant  them,  and  they  shall  dwell  in  their  pUoe,and 
shall  be  moved  no  more ;  neither  shall  the  children  of  wickedness  wcuie  tkem  amy  more, 
as  st  the  beginning. *  Israel  has  been  **  moved  "  and  **  wasted  "  anoe  this  promise  was 
ma^le,  and  is  being  **  moved  "  and  "  wasted  "  at  the  present  moment.  It  is  dear,  there- 
fore, tbat  this  is  an  unfulfilled  prophecy  of  blessing  yet  in  store  for  wasted  and  scattered 
Israel.  That  time  is  at  hand.  When  "  the  Lord  shall  set  his  hand  the  9eeond  time  Rt 
was  done  the  first  time  by  Cyrus  the  Persian]  to  recover  the  remnant  of  his  peo{U(e| 
which  shall  be  left,  from  Assyria,  and  from  Egypt,  and  from  Pathros,  and  from  Cash,  and 
from  Elam,  and  from  Shinar,  and  from  Hamath,  and  from  the  islands  of  the  sea.  And 
he  shall  set  up  sn  ensign  for  tbe  nations,  and  shall  assemble  the  outcasts  of  Israel,  and 
gstber  tofzcther  the  dispersed  of  Judah /ram  the  four  comers  of  the  efvih  **  (Isa.  zi.  11, 
12).  Mark  another  truth :  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  thy  days  be  expired  that 
thou  mwt  go  to  be  with  thy  fathers,'*  Three  thoughts  are  suggested  by  this  passage. 
1.  Man  lives  by  dnjs,  not  by  years.  "  As  thy  days^  so  shall  thy  strength  be ; "  •*  Lo,  I 
am  with  you  always,  even  to  the  end  of  the  days/*  We  speak  of  years  and  look  for- 
ward to  them.  God  would  teach  us  that  we  have  only  days  to  count  on,  and  should 
therefore  use  each  one  for  him.  2.  "  Thou  muft  go.*'  David  was  wanted  in  another 
world.  There  are  places  to  fill  there.  Just  as  the  stones  that  were  to  form  the 
temple  on  Mount  Zion  were  hewn,  shaped,  and  polished  in  Lebanon,  and  were  sent  for 
just  as  they  were  wanted^  so  is  it  with  the  departure  of  every  true  child  of  God.  Wbat 
may  be  the  nature  of  the  employments  we  cannot  tell ;  but  of  each  one  who  is  taken  we 
may  hear  the  Lord's  voice  saying  of  him  to  the  weeping  ones  left  behind, "  He  must 
so,"  fur  he  is  ic^an^  there."  3.  "  Thou  must  go  to  l^  with  thy  fathers/*  It  is  a 
family  gathering.  In  the  Old  Testament  how  frequently  is  this  word  used!  It  is 
not  death.  It  is— "gone  to  join  the  family  pathering."  «*  Dead"  is  the  Bible  word  for 
those  out  of  Christ.  "  Asleep  "  is  the  word  for  God's  children.  What  a  precious  word  I 
It  is  a  striking  contrast  to  our  word  **  dead "  which  is  always  on  the  lips.  It  is 
like  another  word  we  use.  A  manufacturer  looks  upon  his  men  and  women  in  his 
employ  and  regards  them  as  ^ooc^s,  and  calls  them  *'  hands  " — *'  so  many  hands,**  The 
Uible  word  is  "  souls  " — "  the  sotds  he  had  gotten  in  Haran."  How  aadly  men  have 
departed  from  the  B[)irit  of  patriarchal  days  I  Vers.  12 — 14  are  manifestly  a  reference 
to  the  Messiah,  of  whom  Solomon  was  a  type,  and  to  the  Messianic  times  of  rest  yet  to 
comoy  of  which  his  reign  was  a  shadow.    It  is  clear  from  David's  prayer  (ver.  \1)  that 


CH.  xvn.  1— 27.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  289 

he  BO  understood  them,  especially  when  he  speaks  of  GK)d  haying  regarded  him  **  accord- 
ing to  the  estate  of  a  man  of  high  degree.*' — ^W. 

Vers.  16 — 27. — DavicPa  prayer,  God*s  great  and  precious  promises  to  David  drew 
forth  from  his  heart  this  prayer.  It  is  so  at  all  times.  The  constraining  motive  of 
prayer^  praise,  and  thanksgiving  is  God's  great  mercy  and  wondrous  love  contained  in 
the  "  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  "  to  the  soul.  We  see  also  David's  great 
humility :  "  Who  am  I,  and  what  is  mine  house? "  God's  grace  always  humbles.  We 
see  also  how  David  exalts  God^-another  effect  of  GK>d'8  great  and  precious  promises : 
"  0  Lord,  there  is  none  like  thee,  neither  is  there  any  God  to  be  compared  with  thee." 
And  all  this  grace  in  Qtod  is  "  according  to  all  that  we  have  heard."  Every  experience 
of  the  believer  at  all  times  confirms  the  Divine  testimony  of  God  in  his  Word.  He  is 
ready  to  exclum  as  he  reads,  **  It  is  all  true,  all  of  it,  and  I  have  found  it  so."  And 
this  Qtvd  is  moreover  "  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel  and  a  God  to  Israel."  He 
is  not  only  the  Qtod  of  his  people,  but  a  God  to  them,  to  each  one.  He  is  all  that  his 
name  means  to  each  one  of  his  family.  And  mark  David's  closing  words .  "  Let  it 
please  thee  to  bless  the  house  of  thy  servant,  that  it  may  be  before  thee  for  ever."  This 
is  the  end  for  which  we  should  ask  any  blessing — ^that  we  ourselves  may  be  be/ore  him, 
walk  before  him  and  live  before  him.  *'  Walk  be/ore  mo  and  be  thou  perfect,"  was 
his  word  to  Abraham  of  old,  and  still  is  to  each  one  of  his  people ;  and  it  is  only  as  God's 
promises  and  God's  blessings  lead  to  this  that  they  can  be  real  blessings. — W, 

Yer.  1. — Ood'e  dwdling-place  and  marCe,  This  verse  shows  us  the*  good  man's 
proper  anxiety  to  have  his  God  better  housed  than  himself.  We  may  properly  assume 
that  David  thought  about  this  matter  immediately  after  his  success  in  bringing  the  ark 
of  God  to  Mount  Zion,  and  restoring  the  ancient  service.  When  David  bful  taken  the 
city  of  Jerusalem,  and  proposed  to  make  it  the  capital  of  his  kingdom,  he  found  a  royal 
palace  was  as  important  as  safe  fortifications.  The  erection  of  this  palace  indicates  the 
new  era  which  dawned  in  David.  The  previous  king,  Saul,  did  but  make  a  beginning 
of  a  kingdom,  and  was  little  more  than  the  previous  judges  had  been.  David  is  the 
proper  founder  of  the  Jewish  kingdom.  It  appears,  from  2  Sam.  v.  11,  that  David's 
alliance  with  Hiram  of  Tyre  enabled  him  to  secure  Phoenician  artists,  workmen,  and 
materials  for  his  palace ;  and  this  may  have  been  necessary  because  the  Israelite  work- 
people had  no  training  for  such  work,  and  no  experience  of  such  buildings  as  David 
required.  The  one  point  on  which  David's  thought  more  especially  rests  is,  that  a 
character  of  permanency  and  abiding  rest  attached  to  his  own  house,  while  God's 
earthly  dwelling-place  was  still  a  movable  and  perishable  tent.  He  very  properly  felt 
that  there  should  be  a  closer  harmony  between  the  two,  and  God's  house  suggestive  of 
associations  suitable  to  a  settled  and  permanent  kingdom.  We  may  never  be  indif- 
ferent to  the  "  sense  of  fitness  "  in  Divine  things. 

L  I'he  sense  in  which  God  may  have  an  eabthlt  dwellino-plaoe.  See  the 
teaching  of  Isa.  Ixvi,  1,  2  There  is  a  proper  sense  in  which  the  created  world  may  be 
called  '*  God's  dwelling-place."  There  is  a  much  higher  sense  in  which  the  heart  of 
man  may  be  so  called.  But,  seeing  that  an  external  and  ceremonial  worship  is  found 
to  be  necessary  for  man,  and  earthly  things  may  wiselv  be  made  the  symbols  of 
Divine  truths  and  relations,  place  is  made  for  the  work  of  the,  architect  and  the  builder 
in  expressing  religious  truth  by  sacred  edifices,  churches,  or  temples.  We,  however, 
need  to  watch  lest  any  building  should  limit  our  thought  of  God,  as  though  he  could 
be  wholly  contained  within  it ;  or  as  though  we  could  put  human  limitations  to  his 
revelations,  or  to  himself.  God  permits  us  to  raise  temples  for  him  mainly  that  we 
may  have,  carried  home  to  our  hearts,  the  conviction  of  his  permanently  dxveUing  with 
us.  His  house  is  with  us ;  his  home  is  here ;  he  does  not  come  and  go ;  he  is  with  us 
always. 

II.  The  duty  devolvino  on  man  to  find  tor  God  an  eabthly  dwellino-placb. 
This  is  not  a  duty  directly  enjoined,  but  one  recognized  and  felt  by  the  sincere  and 
pious  soul.  It  is  like  the  duty  of  worship,  and  follows  of  necessity  upon  it.  Explain 
that  man  cannot  satisfy  himself  with  the  conception  of  GKxl  as  spiritual,  and  that  he 
wants  material  help  even  to  realize  this.  Also  the  very  sense  of  appropriating  God 
leads  to  desire  to  fix  him  to  a  house.  Illustrate  by  Gen.  x.  17.  Show  that  in  all  ages 
I.  chronicles.  u 


SJC  rZZ  JOSZ  3CCK   ZW  !SI  CE2i:J33LBL 


:•• 


fifiM  tBUK  if  Tiut  cmr*  if  '  jzcbiaiiu^  **  vyi,  job  nrfn—iii'Mf  ^ubl  s  yg^ 

mtriiAiVi^—maupjiamz  snnnxuss  izii  nr.it*;rLifc     Ingrari  ;3ii  ixrr  <:£  ^^r—.j  i^  |^ 

^LfKtt  IV  733  XXV  ws:  wiTT  ^TTK     Y^xis  3fr  Ivniff  iccix.    E*  5ea  tbat  ooc 

wm  isan^  txuLncL  viij*  u«  ^:cus  wi  3mfi^i-v»iJt!a.    rns  &  icaie  ««t  seeded  bow 

Mtsom  tad  'UaxaziccM  -J  -mt  iiinaei  jaii  :f  •3'jc'i  icibml    Sitrv  vias  *  bc&p  to  tho 
iir.sii  =.  *^  VKGfJC  4f  a  icisM  jct  zLtl.    Lac  ca  sc  ish:w  \j  FisTt  aochx&g  tbtt 


VtTjii**  Ttf\yakX  \j  iut  Frc^fiK  Xaiua.  *  Taoa  foali  ««:t  biiid  bk  aa  booM  to  dwell 
ia«*  Ec;s  t£.ij  rcfuAl  baj  act  be  regiriai  m  as  tcz^i  wttrt  K^trti/ui^  ;  it  was  bated 
i^«  tbe  DiTis^e  nen^^ja  cf  the  critgya  cf  I>&T>i  aa  tbe  inssdnent  for  tbia  parti- 
caStf  ^..fk*  M leb  be  ir>igbt  co  ix  Gcd,  bat  th:a  be  cit  bcc  do ;  aod  tba  diaabtlity 
evcft  fr^ly^-mn^  opr.a  Lxi  Tcry  fiocae  f:r  ibe  ccber  vvffk  wiaea  God  bad  calkd  bim  to  doL 


He  vaa  a  caa  of  war.    His  work  bad  been  tbe  cxte^iiig  aad  aeolis^  cf  tbe  new  kin^ 

I  "  icaa  cf  rBi«,*  to  wbcm  eoiiU 


dont.  Bvt  tbe  "  man  of  buood  *  mut  gxre  p iaoe  to  the 
!•  v*#>n!  wiid  J  eoaiiLttted  tbe  work  of  bcijdxng  a  temple  lor  God,  We  are  bere  taugbt 
tbat  G<>d*a  work,  wbkb  be  would  bare  dooe  on  eann,  is  dxTided  intoptmt ;  tbnt  one 
fiete  ocil J  ia  cjoallj  eommitted  to  tbe  tniat  of  eacb  man ;  tbat  oTcry  man  finda  be  bai 
one  snob  tnut^ abd  tbat  all  tbe  piecea  and  parte  fit  togetber,  and  make  tipooe  great 
wb&le  of  biTine  porpoee,  Tbcre  b  a  Dinne  anangeuent  of  tbe  pieoea.  Tbere  b  a 
,  IHiine  ailotmeDt  of  tbe  piecea  to  indiTidoaliL  And  tbia  inTolTOi  tbe  aelection  of  indi- 
▼idoaU  tii»n  a  LHTine  Rcognitioo  of  particolar  gifta  and  ODdowmentiL  Tben  a  man 
maj  be  thher  fitUd  or  unfitted  for  some  pcrltions  and  for  some  work ;  and  God  will, 
\ij  Lis  ytfMAtuot^  guide  each  man  to  the  work  that  he  may  hopefullj  do ;  and  no  man 
has  oc/aftioD  to  eLtr y  tlie  place  or  work  of  another  man. 

I.  Mav  mat  wuh  fob  fepHERES  OF  6ZBVICB.  God  doos  Hot  leproacb  Darid  for 
wishing  to  build  tbe  temple.  He  now  says,  **  Thou  didst  well  that  it  was  in  thine 
heart.*'  It  is  a  good  sign  that  we  want  to  serve ;  thorgh  so  often  it  is  only  a  sign  of 
our  restlessness  in  the  work  we  hare,  and  our  foolish  fancying  that  some  one  else's  woric 
is  better,  or  easier,  or  nobler  than  our  own.  Faithful  doing  of  present  duty  may  be 
quite  c^mfiistent  with  earnest  desire  to  do  something  else  and  better,  proTid^  it  finds 
cxpr'-fiMion,  as  David*s  did,  in  patient  waiting  on  Gud,  and  earnest  prayer  for  Divine 
directi^in. 

II.  Mav  mat  be  undeb  disabilities  which  hindeb  him  tbom  thb  sfhsbes  he 
SEEKS.  Huch  disabilities  may  aritie  out  of  natural  disposition  and  charader;  eduea' 
tianal  wnditions ;  local  circumstances ;  or,  as  in  David's  case,  out  of  the  very  Itfe-worh 
which  may  1)0  entrusted  to  us.  When  we  remember  how  actions  bear  the  stamp  of  the 
character  of  those  who  perform  them,  and  men  receive  their  impressions  of  the  thing 
itself  from  tho  person  wno  docs  it,  we  realize  how  Gkxl  may  properly  refuse  to  permit  na 
to  do  Just  the  work  wo  may  wish  to  do.  We  need  to  satisfy  ourselves  that  God  knows 
botli  us  and  our  work,  and  so  can  fitly  match  the  two  together,  and  keep  us  firom 
UiifltliriK  spheres. 

III.  The  oueat  secret  of  oub  duty  is  the  doing  well  what  wb  flaiklt 
HAVE  to  do.  Forming  a  very  high  value  of  our  present  trust.  Quite  sure  that  it 
is  the  very  thing  for  us ;  and  cherishing  the  assurance  that  God  makes  our  work  fit 
into  tho  work  that  others  do,  and  that  the  very  thing  which  we  would  like  to  have 
done  ourselves,  God  gets  done  in  his  own  time  and  way,  and  by  the  agents  he  pleases. 
"  One  ploiitoth,  another  wateroth/'  and  God  gives  the  increase  that  crowns  the  union  of 
various  labourers  and  labours. 

Wo  may  learn  :  1.  The  lesson  of  submissive  obedience  to  the  Divine  appointtbents. 
2.  'i'ho  importance  of  keeping  our  minds  free  from  all  envy  of  other  worKers,  even  of 


CH.  xvn.  1—27.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  291 

those  who  seem  to  be  doing  the  very  work  which  we  would  like  to  have  done.  3.  And 
to  be  thankful  for  the  work  that  is  entrusted  to  us ;  quick  to  discern  the  dignity  and 
importance  of  it ;  and  supremely  anxious  that  we  should  be  found  of  God  &thful  in 
the  doing  of  it. — R.  T. 

Vers.  5,  6. — (7oi*s  earthly  dwelling-place  a  iahemadey  not  a  house.  In  the  Di\ine 
reply  sent  to  David  it  is  made  an  important  point  that  Qtod  had  hitherto  dwelt  in  a 
tent,  and  had  expressed  no  desire  for  a  more  permanent  form  of  habitation.  As  the 
message  is  given  in  2  Sam.  vii.  6,  Qod  had  **  walked  in  a  tent  and  in  a  tabernacle ; "  the 
term  *'tent"  properly  indicating  an  erection  of  curtains  and  ropes,  and  the  term 
*'  tabernacle  "  a  somewhat  more  stable  structure  of  boards.  In  either  case  the  point  of 
comparison  is  the  movnblenees  of  the  building  God  had  hitherto  used,  and  the  fixity 
of  the  one  which  David  now  proposed  to  raise.  The  verses  indicate  that  permanency 
in  the  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence  is  not  offered  by  God,  but  sought  by  man,  U 
would  seem  that  there  is  some  peril  in  the  settledness  of  things— even  in  tne  thought 
of  the  Divine  presence — for  sinful  man.  His  conditions  and  his  associations  had  better 
be  changing  and  transitory.  Permanence  can  only  belong  to  that  which  is  "  perfect  ** 
and  **  holy."  Again  and  again  this  reproach  has  rested  on  men :  "  Because  they  have 
no  changes,  therefore  they  forget  God."  It  may  also  be  shown  that  elaboration  of  the 
external,  artistic  form  and  beauty  in  the  house  itself  has  always  for  man  this  peril,  that 
it  may  satisfy  him,  and  take  away  his  thought  from  that  spiritual  reality  of  which  it 
is  the  expression.  Religious  symbols  assume  a  certain  amount  of  religious  culture  and 
sensitiveness  to  the  spiritual ;  if  they  become  of  value  to  us  for  their  own  sakes,  they 
are  nuschievous  as  was  the  old  brazen  serpent,  and  spiritual  reformers  may  well  call 
them  "  Nehushtan,"  worthless  brass.  None  seem  to  have  valued  the  old  tabernacle  for 
its  own  sake,  but  in  after  days  men  thought  the  temple  sacred,  and  assumed  the 
peculiar  acceptableness  of  prayer  offered  within  its  courts,  when  the  Shechinah  glory 
had  passed  away  from  its  holy  place. 

I.   A  TABEBNAOLB  BETTEB  BEPBE8ENTED  MAN'b  BODY  THAN  A  HOUBE  COULD  DO.      See 

St.  Paul's  figure  in  2  Cor.  v.  1-^3.  Illustrate  such  analogies  as  these :  A  tent  is  frail ; 
easily  taken  doum^  and  removed ;  seriously  afiected  by  storms^  and  manifestly  decaying 
swiftly. 

II.  A  TABEBNACLB  BETTEB  BEPBESENTED  MAN'S  LIFE.  Especially  In  it8  lasting  but 
a  little  while — 

•*  Brief  life  is  here  our  portion ; 
Brief  sorrow,  short-lived  care ;  •* 

and  in  its  changeableness.  The  shepherd's  tent  is  set  up  but  for  the  shelter  of  a  night ; 
journeying  on  to  find  fresh  pastures,  he  knows  not  where  he  may  be  on  the  morrow. 
So  in  our  life  on  earth  we  can  seldom  gain  the  security  that  we  may  rest.  Again  and 
again,  so  unexpectedly,  the  moving  pillar-cloud  bids  us  be  up  and  away. 

III.  A  TABEBNACLE  WAS  MOBE  SUGOESTTVE  OF  DlVINB  ADAPTATIONS  TO  HAN'b  CIB- 

CUHSTANCES.  As  BU  easily  movable  thing,  it  could  be  where  it  was  most  wanted : 
sometimes  in  the  centre  of  the  camp,  while  the  people  tarried  in  one  spot ;  at  other 
times  in  the  front  of  the  camp,  when  the  people  journeyed ;  and  at  another  time  in  the 
midst  of  the  divided  Jordan,  holding  back,  as  it  were,  the  waters  until  the  people 
passed  over.  Yet  in  this  there  was  a  peril  of  misuse,  for,  in  their  wilfulness,  the  people 
sent  for  the  ark  to  their  camp,  seeking  to  make  it  a  mere  charm  to  ensure  their  victory, 
and  in  consequence  the  symbol  of  God's  presence  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  No 
one  would  have  thought  of  taking  the  ark  away  from  the  fixed  and  permanent  temple. 

IV.  A  TABEBNACLB  WAS    LESS    LIKELY    TO    TAKE    ATTENTION    OFF   FBOM  GoD  HIM- 

SEi^  THAN  A  HOUSE  WAS.  For  this,  which  may  be  the  lesson  to  impress  in  conclusion, 
see  passive  in  the  introduction  to  this  homily,  and  also  the  previous  sketch  on 
ver.  1.— R.  T, 

Vers.  7 — 10. — God's  grace  magnified  in  David's  history.  Every  Age  of  the  world 
and  every  nation  has  had  its  prominent  men,  its  striking  instances  of  Divine  endowment 
and  special  mission.  But  we  mistake  such  special  cases  if  we  assume  that  they  are 
intended  to  absorb  our  attention,  or  merely  to  magnify  individuals.    They  are  always 


202  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,  [cb.  xvn.  1— 27. 

desired  to  be  imprenive  illnstntioQs  of  great  prindplee  which  are  surely  workiDj^ 
tboogh  not  10  manifettl j  working,  in  the  smaller  and  the  quieter  spheres.  The  **  great " 
is  never  set  before  ns  for  its  own  sake,  but  always  (1)  to  show  us  what  **  almighty 
erace  can  do ; "  and  (2)  to  make  solemn  ihe  possibilities  of  our  smaller  and  feebler  liveOi 
The  mission  of  all  biographies  is  expresbed  in  two  sentences  from  St.  Paul's  writings: 
**  They  glorified  God  in  me  *'  (Ghil.  i.  24) ;  **  For  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy,  that  in  me 
first  Jesus  Christ  might  show  forth  all  long-suffering,  for  a  pattern  to  them  which 
should  hereafter  believe  on  him  to  life  everlasting; "  (1  Tim.  L  16).  David  is  set  before 
lis  as  a  striking  instance  of  Divine  grace  overshadowing,  guiding,  and  sanctifying  a 
whole  life.  God  reminds  him  in  these  verses  of  his  "  gracious  ^odness "  which  had 
ever  rested  upon  him ;  and  with  the  remembrance  comforts  him  under  the  refusal  of 
his  request  which  God  judged  it  necessary  to  send.  In  this  light  the  life  of  David  may 
be  reviewed. 

L  The  bovebeiontt  or  oracb  in  David'i  belectiox.  Carefully  distinguish  between 
iovtreignty  and  favouritism.  There  is  ''no  respect  of  persons"  with  (ML  He 
elects,  not  upon  particular  afifections  for  an  individual,  but  upon  omniscience  of  fitness 
for  particular  work.  Election  is  not  to  privilege  but  to  service,  and  to  privilege  through 
the  service.  Here,  in  the  esse  of  David,  Divine  sovereignty  is  seen  in  the  selection  of 
one  who  was  not  at  all  in  men's  thoughts,  and  was  indeed  in  circumstances  which 
seemed  to  indicate  un$uitahility,  David  was  the  youngest  of  his  family,  somewhat 
despised  by  his  grown-up  brothers,  and  engaged  in  simple  shepherding  work  among  the 
hills  of  Judah.  Yet  Gkxl  estimated  character,  and  found  in  the  young  shepherd  the 
founder  of  a  kingdom  and  a  dynssty.  Illustrate  the  Divine  call  of  men  to  be  poetfl^ 
artists,  preachers,  refonners,  and  rulers ;  and  show  that  now,  as  truly  as  ever,  God 
oalls  those  he  needs  to  come  up  out  of  lowly  and  unknown  places  to  do  his  work.  And 
he  may  have  need  of  us. 

IL  The  fatthfulkess  of  oeacb  nr  Datid's  pbosperitt.  '^  Faithful  is  he  who 
calleth  you,  who  also  will  do  it."  To  the  position  to  which  he  was  called  David  in 
due  time  attuned ;  because,  whenever  God  bids  a  man  do  a  thing,  he  gives  the  needed 
grace  for  the  doing.  If  he  tells  a  man  with  a  helpless  hand  to  "stretch  forth  his  hand," 
he  gives  the  strength  for  such  stretching  forth.  Trace  in  David^s  life  how  all  hindrances 
and  difficulties  were  surely  overcome ;  his  **  enemies  were  cut  off,"  his  throne  estab- 
lished, and  his  name  honoured  (ver.  8). 

HI.  The  benedictions  of  obace  resting  on  others  for  David's  sake.  It  is  one 
of  the  best  signs  of  Divine  acceptance  of  us  that  others  are  blessed  through  us.  This 
exceeding  joy  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had.  For  his  life-work  of  loving  service  he  was 
*'  highly  exalted."  8o  David  was  the  means  of  settling  the  people,  introducing  all  the 
advantages  of  order  snd  good  govemmeDt,  and  restoring  to  full  vigour  the  worSiipping 
side  of  the  national  religious  life. 

IV.  The  continuance  of  grace  on  David's  descendants.  The  man  who  lives  in 
the  grace  of  God  himself  may  be  sure  that  not  only  God's  grace  will  abide  when  he  is 
gone,  but  that  the  grace  will  still  use  his  influence  and  example,  as  agency,  for  the 
blessing  of  the  children  for  a  long  while  to  come  (vers.  10^12). 

Apply  to  that  exceeding  great  grace  which  is  manifested  in  our  personal  redemption. 
That  grace,  we  may  be  sure,  will  cover  and  hallow  all  our  lives,  and  all  our  children's 
lives,  even  as  it  did  the  life  of  David^  and  the  story  of  his  descendants. — B.  T. 

Vers.  11—15. — The  purposes  qf  Qod  concerning  Solomon,  In  the  Divine  communi- 
cation made  to  David  through  the  Prophet  Nathan,  there  is  a  tone  of  very  tender  con- 
sideration, and  an  evident  desire  to  solace  and  comfort  the  aged  servant  of  God,  whose 
request  it  was  found  necessary  to  refuse.  In  one  way  the  desire  of  his  heart  could  be 
met.  He  should  have  an  immortality  in  his  descendants  and  in  his  dynasty.  He  should 
live  on  in  his  son,  and  accomplish  even  his  purpose  concerning  the  temple.  And  he 
may  have,  before  he  dies,  the  comforting  assurance  that  God's  purposes  were  set  upon 
his  son,  and  the  Divine  favour  would  overshadow  his  reign.  Those  gracious  Divine 
purposes  are  indicated  in  those  ventes.  Man's  brief  life  on  the  earth,  which  so  seldom 
permits  him  to  accomplish  any  great  thing,  would  be  very  painful  to  him  were  it  not 
for  the  hope  he  cherishes  that  he  will  live  on  in  his  children,  and  by  them  his  great 
life-work  may  win  completion.    We  cannot  bear  to  think  that  death  cuts  off  our 


CH.  xviL  1— 27.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  293 


influence  and  spoils  our  work.  Man  can  scarcely  say  a  thing  that  hurts  him  more  in 
the  saying  than  this,  "My  purposes  are  broken  off."  What  is  caWed  fame  may  be  won 
by  but  the  few  among  even  good  men ;  but  every  true-hearted  and  earnest  servant  of 
God  may  be  sure  that  his  personal  impress  is  an  abiding  one ;  it  will  get  its  continu- 
ance in  those  who  have  known  him  and  live  after  him ;  his  spirit,  his  principles,  his 
witness,  even  in  measure  his  experience  will  be  still  working.  Philips  Brooks  well  says, 
'*  No  man  or  woman  of  the  humblest  sort  can  really  be  strong,  gentle,  pure,  and  good, 
without  the  world  being  the  better  for  it,  without  somebody  l^ing  helped  and  com- 
forted by  the  very  existence  of  that  goodness."  Illustrate  how  a  man  lives  on  in  a  book 
he  has  written,  or  a  building  he  has  raised.  So  a  roan  lives  on,  oftentimes,  in  the  son 
who  takes  up  his  work.  David  really  lived  on  in  Solomon,  and  did,  in  fact,  build  the 
temple,  seeing  that  Solomon  used  the  materials  he  had  gathered,  and  carried  out  the 
plans  which  he  had  arranged.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  what  in  the  temple  whidi 
was  actually  reared  was  due  to  the  genius  and  consecration  of  David,  and  what  in  it 
bore  the  personal  stamp  of  Solomon.  *'The  design  fixed  upon  indicates  fully  the 
spirit  of  the  times  and  of  the  king.  A  general  relation  to  the  older  tabernacle  must  be 
carefully  preserved — the  outline  of  the  form,  the  proportions,  and  the  principal  division 
of  the  building  into  holy  place  and  most  holy  must  be  continued ;  but  where  Moses 
permitted  ornamentation  and  decoration  it  was  developed,  and  almost  carried  to  an 
extravagant  extent."  In  view  of  God's  unfolding  to  David  his  purposes  concerning 
Solomon,  we  may  learn  that  it  is  full  of  comfort  to  the  man  who  is  passing  away  from 
earth  to  be  assured  that  his  son  will  virtually  have^* 

I.  His  work  to  do;  at  least,  in  its  more  prominent  and  important  aspects.  Certainly 
his  work  in  the  large  sense  of  living  for  God,  and  doing  his  will. 

II.  That  he  will  have,  if  he  seeks  it,  the  same  oracb  fob  the  doino.  Qod*a  years 
are  throughout  all  generations,  and  will  give  our  children  the  joy  and  help  of  the  same 
fatherly  relations  that  he  has  given  us  (ver.  13). 

It  may  be  shown  that,  still,  saints  pass  away  from  earth,  made  willing  to  leave  their 
life-work  incomplete,  and  their  most  cherished  desires  unfulfilled,  and  restfuUy  saying 
in  their  hearts,  *'  Gkxl's  grace  remains,  though  I  pass  away.  That  grace  is  working  on, 
and  working  out,  the  great  purpose,  and  will  surely  raise  up  other  agencies."  David 
may  die,  but  he  may  know  this — the  temple  will  be  built ;  the  kingdom  he  had  founded 
shall  be  secured,  and  even  for  him  the  veil  shall  be  uplifted,  and  he  shall  see  the  glory 
of  this  Divine  purpose.  In  a  high  and  spiritual  sense  David's  kingdom  shall,  Si  his 
greater  Son,  be  established  for  ever  and  ever. — R.  T. 

Yer.  16. — The  humtiing  influence  of  the  Divine  goodness.  Precisely  the  position  and 
the  attitude  of  David  we  cannot  with  certainty  explain.  The  expression  came  indicates 
that  he  left  his  palace  and  crossed  over  within  the  tabernacle  precincts.  But  we  have 
no  means  of  knowing  whether  he  sat  in  the  court  facing  the  sacred  tent,  or  whether  he 
was  permitted  to  go  within  the  sacred  curtains,  and  face  the  entrance  to  the  holy  of 
holies,  where  the  ark  was.  It  is  possible  that  the  king  may  have  chumed  priestly 
rights  so  far  as  to  enter  the  holy  place.  His  attitude  is  explained  by  some  knowledge 
of  Oriental  customs.  "  One  of  the  postures  by  which  a  person  testifies  his  respect  for  a 
superior  is  by  sitting  upon  his  heels,  which  is  considered  as  a  token  of  great  humility." 
The  sitting  was  really  half-sitting  and  half-kneeling,  so  as  to  rest  the  body  upon  the 
heels.  The  Talmudists  say  (but  apparently  only  on  the  authority  of  this  passage)  that 
none  may  pray  sitting  except  only  the  kings  of  the  house  of  David.  But  we  fix  atten- 
tion on  the  spirit  in  which  David  responded  to  the  very  gracious  message  which  God 
sent  to  him,  and  in  his  spirit  we  find  an  example  well  worthy  of  our  imitation.  God's 
goodness  brought  home  to  him  a  sense  of  his  own  unworthiness,  and  filled  him  with 
wonder  that  he  should  be  made  such  a  monument  of  mercy.  The  goodness  of  God 
humbles  true  hearts  much  more  than  does  his  frown.  Its  right  work  is  to  "  lead  us  to 
repentance."    The  following  points  are  suggested  by  this  example  :— 

I.  With  God  fab  off,  man  may  gbow  proud.  He  can  then  see  nothing  but  his  own 
doings. 

II.  With  God  near,  man  bows  in  reverent  awe,  as  is  seen  in  Abraham,  Moses, 
Job,  Isaiah,  and  St.  John. 

III.  God  bfeakinq  words  of  gbaox  humblbs  man  into  penitknoi  and  humility. 


294  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,  {fm.  xm.  1— 27«i 

GifU  are  always  humbling,  because  ihey  awaken  the  sense  of  desert    So  DiTine  ^iU 
are  ever  most  humbling. — 11.  T. 

Vers.  20,  21. — The  uniqueneu  of  the  Divine  dealingt,  David  saw  plainly  a  truth 
which  seems  equally  plain  to  us  from  the  records  given  in  the  Scriptures^  that  God's 
ways  of  dealing  with  the  nation  of  Israel  had  been  throughout  singular,  unique,  and 
surprisingly  gracious.  A  few  illustrative  instances  from  the  history  maj  be  giTeo. 
But  this  is  precisely  the  impression  which  each  one  of  us  receives  upon  a  review  of  our 
own  lives.  The  Divine  dealings  with  us  seem,  in  the  preciseness  of  their  adaptaUons^ 
and  the  tenderness  (if  their  grace,  quite  unique ;  and  it  seems,  to  the  sincere  heart,  that 
nobody  can  sing  just  such  a  thankful,  happy  song  as  he  can.  Now  on  earth,  and  much 
more  yonder^  we  shall  adore  that  special  grace  which  is  so  manifest  in  our  individual 
lives. 

I.  DiviKB  DEALiKOB  ABi  ALWAYS  THB  SAMS.  Very  much  is  made  in  these  days  of 
the  uniformity  and  absolute  working  of  law  in  the  physical  spheres.  But  we  can  more 
than  match  the  truth  by  our  teachings  respecting  the  uniformitj  and  the  absolute 
working  of  law  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  spheres.    Sin  always  carries  its  oonse- 

guences.  Personal  inOuences  on  others  can  be  as  strictly  assured  as  laws  of  nature. 
t.  Paul  boldly  affirms  that  ^  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  hejalso  reap.**  The 
forces  Gk)d  brings  to  bear  on  men  are  always  the  same.  There  is  but  one  goapd  for 
roan's  redemption.  Nobody  can  come  to  God  save  by  the  way  of  penitence  ana  iaith 
and  prayer.  The  truth  may  be  applied  to  the  minutest  conditions  and  circumstances 
of  life.  There  is  nothing  new  in  the  circumstances,  and  Gk)d  will  deal  with  us  in  them 
exactly  as  he  dealt  with  our  fathers.  Because  of  this  uniformity  of  Divine  dealings  in 
the  moral  spheres,  we  can  use  the  experiences  of  the  fathers,  and  be  warned,  encouraged, 
or  taught  by  the  records  left  of  their  life-histories  and  the  Divine  dealinga  with  tl^m. 
No  right-minded  man  would  ever  wish  any  deviation  from  either  the  eternal  principles 
or  practices  for  his  sake.  He  would  rather  just  be  in  the  Divine  arder^  within  the 
conditions  and  provision  of  the  infinitely  wise  and  infinitely  good  Divine  law.  We 
require  to  press  this  point,  because  fanaticism  has  often  assumed  that  God  steps  aside 
of  his  laws  to  deal  in  special  ways  with  favoured  individuals.  There  is  a  sense  in 
which  Divine  dealings  are  special,  but  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  we  gain  first 
hold,  and  firm  hold,  of  the  truth  that  God's  ways  are  orderly  and  regular,  fixed  and 
unalterable,  because  settled  in  the  infinite  Divine  wisdom.  It  may  be  nece&:ary  here  to 
deal  with  the  idea  of  a  miracle.  It  may  be  said,  "  Does  not  God  work  miracles  ?  And 
has  he  not  worked  them  for  individuals  ?  "  We  are  coming  more  clearly  to  see  that 
a  miracle  is  not  a  contravention  of  law,  but  only  a  modification  of  the  workings  together 
of  law,  made  apprehensible  by  man.  Thus  God's  law  of  the  vintage  is  that  vines  bear 
grapes.  Man's  apprehension  of  the  law  is  that  vines  bear  grapes  in  ao  many  months. 
Christ's  miracle  shows  us  that  man's  timfylaw  is  no  essential  part  of  the  law;  the 
vintage  may  come  in  what  man  calls  a  moment.  Christ's  miracles  contravened  no 
laws,  if  the  laws  bo  relieved  of  man's  additions  to  them. 

II.  Divine  dealings  become  unique  by  adaptation  to  the  individual.  We  must 
never  conceive  of  law  as  if  it  were  working  distinct  from  the  Lawgiver.  It  is  not  like 
an  *'  act  of  parliament,"  which  is  passed,  and  then  set  free  to  its  work.  Law,  in  ita 
proper  sense,  is  the  condition  on  which  the  Lawgiver  acts.  And  God  acts  as  a  Father, 
with  special  knowledge  and  care  of  each  individual,  and  due  adjustment  of  law  to  each 
case.  I  am  individual  to  myself,  individual  and  unique.  And  I  may  hold  the  confi- 
dence that  God  will  deal  with  me  just  as  if  no  other  being  lived.  The  uniformity  of 
moral  law  has  this  sublime  qualification,  '*  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his."— R.  T. 

Vers.  22 — 24. — The  eternity  of  David's  kingdom.  It  seems  quite  evident  that  the 
term  **  for  ever  "  is  used  in  the  Scripture  as  a  figure  of  speech,  and  one  which  carries 
with  it  several  distinct  suggestions.  It  is  a  condition  of  human  thought  that  we  must 
set  things  in  the  order  of  time;  and  it  is  usual  for  us  to  estimate  the  value  of  things 
according  to  the  time  they  will  last.  The  words  *'  eternal "  and  "  for  ever  "  and  "  ever- 
lasting" often  stand  for  long  continuance.  Mountains  that  outlast  the  generations  are 
called  *'  everlasting  hills."  Canaan  was  given  to  Israel  as  an  **  everlasting  possession.** 
So  here,  in  these  verses,  God  promises  a  throne  to  David,  an  eternal  kingdom,  a  pos- 


'en.  xvn.  1— 27.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  295 


terity  that  will  never  be  extinguished ;  and  the  first  idea  we  should  attach  to  the 
promise  is  that  David  and  his  descendants'  empire  should  be  of  long  duration,  and  of  a 
stable  character.  It  is  a  further  truth,  embodied  in  the  expression,  that  the  material 
kingdom  of  David  should  by-and-by  pass  into  the  spiritual  kingdom  of  David's  greater 
Son,  and  that  in  him  should  be  established  that  spiritual  theocracy  which  could  be,  and 
should  be,  absolutely  eternal,  enduring  as  long  as  there  should  be  a  God  to  rule,  and 
creatures  of  God  to  be  ruled.  Taking  the  Old  Testament  term  "  for  ever,"  we  may  see 
what  thoughts  are  properly  suggested  by  it,  and  consider  them  in  their  advancing 
order. 

I.  '*  For  ever "  means  lasting  thbouoh  mant  genebatioks.  Matching  the  idea 
concerning  'Mength  of  life"  is  the  idea  of  ''continuance  and  permanence  of  dynasty." 
To  live  long  was,  to  the  Jewish  mind,  the  direct  reward  of  virtue,  a  sign  of  the  Divine 
recognition  of  personal  goodness.  And  so  the  pious  king  who  founded  a  kingdom 
passed  the  thought  on  to  the  life  of  his  race.  Its  prolongation  through  many  genera- 
tions would  be  the  proof  of  Divine  favour  and  acceptance  resting  upon  it.  Show  how 
the  writer  of  a  book  seeks  fame  in  the  continuity  of  its  influence.  The  rich  man,  now* 
adays,  hopes  to  found  a  family  which  shall  outlast  the  generations.  And  this  desire 
for  permanence  of  influence  is  found,  in  various  measures,  influencing  all  men.  So  still 
God  can  promise  to  us  that  noble  living  and  faithful  working  shall  he  made  to  bear  the 
"  eternal  stamp.  In  this  first  sense  the  good  man  never  dies ;  on  earth  he  may  be 
said  to  live  "  for  ever."  David  lives  on  to-obeiy.  He  influences  men  now,  rules  hearts 
and  lives,  more  truly  than  ever. 

II.  "For  ever"  means  under  changed  fobhs  lasting  through  all  humak 
GENERATIONS.  We  must  find  what  is  the  very  essence  of  David's  kingdom,  for  the 
notion  of  its  eternity  can  properly  only  be  applied  to  that.  The  essence  is  this — God*s 
immediate  rule  of  men  through  the  administration  of  man.  David's  kingdom  was  this 
— the  theocracy  practically  realized.  Then  all  that  belonged  to  the  mere  human  form 
and  order  may  change  to  meet  the  exigencies  of  changing  ages;  the  essence  would 
remain,  and  by-and-by  appear  in  the  theocracy  of  the  Church,  in  the  administration  of 
the  exalted  Afan  Christ  Jesus.  We  now  are  members  of  David's  everlasting  kingdom ; 
since  Christ's  kingdom  is  essentially  David's.  In  its  central  principle — ^its  spiritual 
principle— of  direct  governmental  relations  with  Jehovah,  David's  kingdom  must  last 
absolutely  for  ever  and  ever. 

III.  "  For  ever  "  has  this  limitation — In  its  earthly  form  it  is  dependent  on  the 

ALLEGIANCE  OF  DaVID's  DESCENDANTS  TO  THE  SPIRITUAL  PRINCIPLE.      So  far  aS  their 

earthly  features  are  concerned,  God's  promises  are  always  conditional.  And  the  con- 
dition is  always  the  same.  It  is  loycUty,  full  loyalty,  the  obedient  service  of  the  true- 
hearted.  This  point  David  anxiously  impressed  on  his  son  Solomon  (ch.  xxviii.  9, 10). 
Work  out  the  condiilous  oi  perpetuity  still.  "  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth 
for  ever."  And  show  what  is  the  assurance  of  our  earthly  and  our  heavenly  "  for 
ever."  We  shall  live  on  Jiere^  we  shall  live  on  yonder^  in  what  we  have  been  for  God, 
fmd  done  for  him,  in  his  grace  and  strength.— R.  T. 

Ver.  24.— (7od'«  rdatioit  to  his  people,  I.  The  relation  which  God  bears  to  his  people. 
1.  He  has  chosen  them  out  of  the  world,  which  lieth  in  wickedness.  2.  He  has  given 
himself  to  them  in  a  peculiar  way.  3.  He  avows  that  relation  to  them  before  the  whole 
universe. 

IL  Inquire  what,  under  that  relation,  we  may  expect  at  his  hands.  1.  The  care  of 
bis  providence.  2.  The  communication  of  his  grace.  8.  The  manifestations  of  his 
love.    4.  The  possession  of  his  glory. 

III.  What,  under  that  relation,  he  is  entitled  to  expect  from  us.  1.  That  we  ''be  a 
people  to  him."    2.  That  we  give  ourselves  to  him,  as  he  has  given  himself  to  us. 

Conclude  with  two  proposals :  1.  That  we,  at  this  very  hour,  accept  Jehovah  as 
our  God.  2.  That  we  now  consecrate  ourselves  to  him  as  his  people  (Rev.  C. 
Simeon,  M.A.).— R.  T. 

Ver.  26. — The  faithful  Promiser,    David  pleads  before  God  the  fact  of  his  having 

Sromised ;  he  reminds  Qod  of  his  own  Word.    But  he  does  more  than  this.    He  testifies 
is  perfect  confidence  that  the  promise  will  be  fulfilled  because  of  what  Ood  is,  *'  Thou, 


290  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,   [ch.  xra.  1— 27i 

Lord,  art  God  "—there  is  his  rest.  It  is  mnch  to  have  reoeived  a  giadons  promiae,  bat 
it  is  much  more  to  have,  and  to  trust,  a  '*  faithful  Promiser.**  The  promisea  help  and 
comfort  us ;  but  we  want  to  rise  above  even  the  promises,  aod  find  the  "  etemaf  life,* 
and  deep  **  heart-rest "  of  knowing  God,  and  bting  able  to  say  to  him,  '*  Now,  Lord, 
thou  art  God." 

L  The  yalub  or  ▲  pboiosb  depekd6  ufoh  ths  pbomxbe-icakeb.  This  may  ba 
efficiently  illustrated  from  our  ordinary  life-associations.  Some  men's  promisea  wi^ 
never  heed,  never  d*  pend  upon,  because  we  know  them,  and  know  that  they  promis* 
hastily  or  thoughtlessly ;  or  they  have  formed  the  habit  of  getting  out  of  seeming 
difficulties  by  a  promise  which  puts  off  the  evil  day.  (This  tradesmen  too  often  do.) 
Other  men*s  promises  we  implicitly  trust,  because  we  know  them,  and  know  that  they 
count  promises  to  lie  sacrnl,  and  only  fail  to  keep  them  by  some  tmexpected  disabilities, 
or  some  physical  impossibilities.  It  may  be  shown  that  the  value  of  a  promise  does 
not  depend  on  it$  iuojtct  or  on  its  form ;  it  would  be  no  surer  if  confirmed  with  the 
most  terrible  oaths.  It  depends  on  the  character  first,  and  then  on  the  ability,  of  him 
who  makes  it;  and  we  inquire  concerning  him  both  can  he  perform  and  will  he 

Serlorm  it  ?  Our  confidence  or  otherwise  is  in  him ;  and  it  may  be  shown  that  the  con- 
dence  rests  very  much  more  upon  his  character,  which  is  the  essential  thing,  than 
upon  his  mere  ability,  which  is  the  accidental  thing.  We  never  really  trouble  over 
promises  whose  fulfilment  circumstances  may  prevent.  We  feel  the  bitterness  of 
Droken  promises  when  the  failure  reveals  the  weak  will,  or  the  unsound  character  of 
those  in  whom  we  have  trusted.  "  Put  not  your  trust  in  princes,  nor  in  the  son  of  man, 
in  whom  there  is  no  help." 

II.   G0D*S  PBOmSES  QAIN  THS  INFINITE  TALUE  OF  BEING  FBOK  THE  DiVINK  PbOXIBE'* 

XAKEE.  This  is  David's  point  of  assurance,  *'  Thou  art  God,'*  and  thou  "  hast  promised," 
therefore  in  thy  promise  I  put  absolute  and  perfect  confidence.  And  what  ia  gathered 
up  in  this  simple  but  most  comprehensive  expression,  "Thou  art  God  "I  1.  '^Thoa 
art  God  "  who  nast  been  faithful.  So  the  saints  of  all  the  ages  testify.  So  David  himself 
could  both  feel  and  say.  2.  ''  Thou  art  Gx)d,'*  and  as  God  thou  must  be  faithful.  Show 
what  is  necessarily  iDcluded  in  the  very  idea  of  God,  and  that  faithfulneu  is  absolutdy 
essential.  If  we  could  show  one  broken  Divine  promise,  we  would  dethrone  God  and 
make  him  take  rank  with  fallible  man.  **Hath  he  s]X)ken,  and  shall  he  not  do  it?" 
?*  Wo  may  advance  to  a  higher  region,  and  say,  "  Thou  art  God  "  who,  in  giving 
Christ,  hast  so  kept  the  great  promise  as  to  assure  all  other  promises,  St.  Paul  forcibly 
argues,  "  Ho  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he 
not  with  hira  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ?  *'  (Rom.  viii.  32V 

Then  we  may  set  forth  how  God's  promises  cover  and  nallow  all  onr  earthly  life, 
coming  into  precise  adaptation  to  all  our  infinitely  varying  circumstances  aod  needs. 
And  so  we  may  walk  and  work  in  the  li^^ht  and  cheerful  joy  of  this  confidence—all 
are  trustworthy ;  all  will  gain  wise  and  gracious  fulfilment,  since  *'  he  is  faithful  that 
promised,'*  and  he  speaks  calmly  over  our  life's  tumult,  saying,  "Be  still,  and  know 
that  I  am  Goci."— K.  T. 

Ver.  27. — The  blessedness  of  God's  blessings.  David  puts  his  desire  and  prayer  Into 
the  ono  expressive  word  *'  bless,''  and  that  because  he  has  such  a  full  apprehension  of 
what  God's  blessing  is  to  his  people.  "For  thou  blessest,  0  Lord,  and  it  shall  be 
blessed  for  ever.''  Men  ask  for  the  summum  bonum.  David  finds  it  in  the  enrichment 
and  the  satisfying  of  the  Divine  goodness.  "  The  blessing  of  the  Lord  maketh  rich." 
As  tho  verso  on  which  wo  are  dwelling  reads  in  2  Sam.  vii.  29,  "  With  thy  blessing  let 
the  house  of  thy  servant  be  blessed  for  ever."  The  word  "  bless  "  is  used  with  great 
frequency  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  evidently  with  a  variety  of  meanings.  It  is 
diflicult  to  fix  upon  a  definition  of  the  term  which  will  express  the  essential  idea  that 
underlies  tho  diversity  of  its  forms.  A  distinction,  however,  is  made  in  Ps.  cxlv,  10, 
"  All  thy  works  shall  praise  thee,  0  Lord  ;  and  thy  saints  shall  bless  thee."  From  this 
choice  of  difTerent  terms  we  may  learn  that  "  bless  "  carries  the  idea  of  the  intelligent 
agent  who  knows  and  loves  the  object  with  which  he  deals,  and  seeks  for  gracioui 
adaptations  to  feeling  as  well  as  to  need.  If  saints  bless  Grod,  it  means  that  they  intelli- 
gently and  lovingly  apprehend  the  goodness  of  his  dealings,  and  express  their  feelings  of 
thankful  love.    If  God  blesies  saints,  it  means  that  he  intelligently  considers  tiieir  oon* 


CH.  xvm.  1—17.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


297 


ditions,  and  finds  and  adapts  grace  precisely  to  their  needs ;  and  that  whatsoever  he  does 
for  them  turns  out  to  be  for  their  ultimate  good.  We  have  come  to  use  the  term  without 
due  consideration,  and  as  a  mere  formality.  It  often  hides  the  fact  that  we  have  no 
precise  petitions  to  present ;  and  so  we  fall  back  upon  the  general  prayer  lor  blessing. 
We  should  be  placed  in  extreme  difficulty,  if  Grod  were  to  say  in  reply  to  oUr  prayer  for 
blessing,  *'  Say  precisely  what  it  is  you  want.  Translate  your  word.  Use  exact  terms. 
Ask  for  the  very  things  which  press  upon  your  heart.  For  my  blessing  is  this—'  the 
supply  of  all  your  needs  out  of  my  riches  in  glory.' "  It  may  be  well  to  show  further 
what  God*s  blessing  would  be  to  a  royal  house  or  dynasty,  and  to  a  nation  or  people, 
noting  the  special  features  of  that  blessing  as  applied  to  David's  house  and  kingdom. 

I.  ''Bless"  stands  fob  all  kinds  of  real  good — without  venturing  to  specify 
any.  It  may  fittingly  be  used  in  prayer  when  we  have  no  specific  desires,  and  only 
want  to  run  into  the  shadow  of  Qod's  goodness.  And  it  may  be  used  when  we  are  in 
difficulty,  and  do  not  even  know  what  things  we  ought  to  ask.  Sometimes  we  are  afraid 
to  ask  definitely  lest  we  should  ask  amiss ;  and  then  we  may  leave  the  form  of  the 
answer  with  God,  only  asking  him  to  bless. 

II.  "  Bless  **  thbowb  the  matteb  wholly  back  on  the  person  fbom  whok  thx 
GOOD  IS  SOUGHT.  Compare  the  cry  of  Esau,  "  Bless  me,  0  my  father  1  '*  He  could  not 
tell  what  to  ask,  but  left  the  matter  with  his  father,  and  with  full  confidence  in  the 
fatherly  love.  So  for  us  to  ask  God  to  bless  us  should  be  the  expression  of  our  full 
submission  and  entire  surrender  to  his  wisdom  and  grace  in  fixing  the  form  which  the 
good  shall  take ;  so  it  may  be — and  should  be — a  fitting  expression  of  the  right  attitude 
and  spirit  of  God's  people,  who  trust  the  whole  matter  of  their  temporal  and  spiritual 
good  to  him,  and  will  not  even  seem  to  dictate  to  him.    Enough  for  all  true  hearts  to 

Eray  with  David,  "  Let  it  please  thee  to  bless  us/' "  for  with  thy  blessing  shall  the 
ouse  of  thy  servant  be  blessed  for  ever." 

IlL  The  blessings  which  God  finds,  fob  those  who  thus  fully  tbust  mu,  must 
MAKE  theh  infinitely  BLESSED.  The  things  God  sends  will  make  them  blessed,  and 
their  gracious  moral  influence  on  such  recipients  will  make  them  double  blessings. 
Christ^  miracles  of  healing  were  Divine  blessings,  and  the  healed  ones  were  doubly  blessed, 
in  body  and  in  soul.  God's  gifts  and  providences  now  become  double  blessings ;  they 
order  and  hallow  our  lives ;  they  help  to  meeten  us  for  the  "  inheritance  of  the  saints 
in  the  light."    God  still  blesses  with  the  eternal  blesslDgs. — R.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER    XVHL 


The  course  of  last  ohapter*8  parallel  is 
eontinued  here,  and  answers  closely  to  2 
Sam.  viiL  1 — 18.  The  present  chapter  oon- 
talns  the  wars  and  victories  of  David  (vers. 
1 — 13),  with  the  arrangements  consequent 
upon  them ;  and  (vers.  14 — 17)  an  enume- 
ration of  some  of  his  chief  officers. 

Yer.  1. — Took  Oath  and  her  towzii  out 
of  the  hand  of  the  Philistines ;  literally,  her 
daughters.  The  compiler  of  Chronicles 
gives  us  this  plain  statement  where,  in  the 
parallel  place,  we  find,  *'took  Metbeg- 
anmiah,"  or  more  exactly,  MetJieg-ha-ammahf 
the  explanation  of  which  word  (see  2  Sam. 
viii.  1)  is  not  yet  ascertained.  Its  literal 
signification  is  **the  bridle  or  curb  of  the 
mother  city,''  and  may  mark  a  special  strong 
position  which  commanded  Gatb,  or  it  may 
describe  Gkth  as  owning  itself  to  such  a 
position.    Gesenius  understands  it  to  mean 


that  David  ''subjected  the  metropolis  of  the 
Philistines  to  himself,"  quoting  the  Arabian 
proverb,  *•  To  give  one's  oridle  to  any  one," 
as  equivalent  to  submitting  to  him.  He 
quotes  also  Job  xxx.  11.  It  may  be  noted 
tnat  Ammah  is  spoken  of  (2  Sam.  11.  24)  as 
the  name  of  a  hill,  otherwise  unknown, 
however.  Although  David  subdued  so 
many  places,  he  reigned  over  them,  «.«.  over 
many  of  them,  still  by  **  their  own  kings" 
(1  Kings  iv.  24 ;  2  Chron.  ix.  26).  Hence 
we  find  Gath  with  a  king  still  in  1  Kings 
ii.  39. 

Ver.  2.— Brought  gitts;  i,e,  in  the  light  of 
tribute  and  of  acknowledgment  of  subjection. 
There  are  curious  additions  to  this  passage 
in  the  jparallel  place,  telling  the  punish- 
ment inflicted  on  Moab :  "  He  smote  Moab, 
and  measured  them  with  a  line,  casting 
them  down  to  the  ground  [i.e.  causing  them 
to  lie  prostrate'] ;  even  with  two  lines  mea- 
sured he  to  put  to  death,  and  with  one  full 
line  to  keep  alive."    This  appears  to  mean 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHBONICLEa  [ca.  svm.  1— IT. 


that  h«  put  to  daath  two  pMta  ot  them,  and 
kept  tLe  third  put  alive.  The  reason  of 
thii  doUberate  uid  Kvore  pnnUhnieat  i*  not 
•tated.  Onoe  David  and  tlie  Moabitei  had 
been  on  vet;  different  termi  (1  Sam.  xxiL 
S,  4 ;  bat  ace  aUa  Pi.  Iz.  8). 

Vor.  a  —  HadanMi;  in  the  parallel 
fUmoea,  tladadaer ;  tbongb  out  prtaent  form 
li  fonnd  both  in  Bamoel  (e.g.  2  Bam.  x.  16) 
and  In  other  place*  in  Chronielea,  yet  In  all 
thcae  placet  tome  maniucripta  *how  Uada- 
itur  (we  GeMniua,  ■  Lexicon,'  ni6  voce). 
Xetah.  FartotSp'ia.eBitof  U*matb,BJid 
Cn  the  moat  part  of  Ccelo-Sfrla,  north  ot 
DamaKU,  and  atretcbine  in  the  dinction 
of  the  Eophratea.  Poaaibly  it  Is  ono  with 
Ptokmy'i  Haka  (1  SanL  xir.  47;  2  Sam. 
*iit.  S— 10;  X.  B;  I  ElngB  xi.  23—25). 
Kavath.  In  tbevalloy  oftlie  Orontea,  the 
norlbi'TD  bonndarj  of  the  Holy  Land.  It  is 
Inoeoble  from  the  time  of  the  Eiodiu  (Oen. 
X.  IS  1  Numb.  ziii.  El ;  xuIt.  8)  to  that  of 
the  Prophet  A,moa(Ainoa  vl.  12).  Thongh  in 
Zobab,  it  ia  probably  not  the  Uiuneth-Zobah 
td  2  Bam.  riii.  3.  To  itabliih  hi*  dominion. 
In  the  purollel  plaou,  *'  to  rettore,"  t.a.,  do 
doubt,   to  ODileavoor  to  do   so,  and    that 


(18am.xi¥.47.-48). 

Ver.  4.— The  parallel  plaoe  (2  Bom.  viiL 
4)  (imiti,  probably  by  error  merely,  the  word 
"charjnta,"  and  reads  for  our  Mvan  thouaand, 
"iovon  hundroil."  Ab  the  form  ot  expres- 
■ion  in  tlio  laat  two  olansca  of  our  ptcsent 
verso  is  tlio  soiiiu  in  both  cases,  it  is  more 
natural  to  ri'Uili^r,  David  honghsd  kll  the 
ehailot  hoTscB,  bat  teMrred  a  hundred,  i.e. 
a  liuiidrud  horses  unhouglieil;  ho  houghed 
all  but  a  lianilred.  OarAnthuiizod  Version, 
in  the  parallul,  ge\i  over  tlie  dlQlculty  by 
insorliug  '■  for,"  i.s.  ODough  fur,  "  a  hnndred 
ohariota." 

Vl'I.  6.— TLe  Hebrew  text  of  Damueoa, 
hero,  next  verse,  and  iilso  2  Ciiion.  ixiiii.  9, 
■pells  the  word  with  a  rrub,  oiuilting  the 
aageih  furie  in  the  ni«R>  following,  wbich 
Ousonius  inetiuiK^  (see  hia  'Lcxioou')  as 
Uio  SyriftC  orlliography. 

Vcr.  C— Tliu  word  "garrisons"  appears 
in  tlie  text  in  tbe  parallel  place,  and  «ould 
bo  joslly  iuppliud  in  our  llubruw  text  here. 

Vor.  7.— Tbsshlaldi;  Hebrew  c^e.  Much 
doubt  hns  been  rntertnincd  as  lo  the  mcon- 
ins  of  tliis  word.  lis  etymolopy  is  un- 
certain. Geacniua  derives  it  tium  a  root 
signifying  "  bardnoss."  For  the  most  port, 
however,  the  context  of  the  seven  places  of 
its  occurrence  which  he  iostHnces  (2  Sam. 
Tiii7:  2KinesiI.10;  oh.xviii.7:  SChion. 
xxiii.  9;  Cant.  It.  4;  Jer.  li.  11;  Enk. 
xivii.  11)  favour  the  rendering  "shields," 
though  tlie  quotation  fhnn  Jer.  li.  H 
(Ittenlly,  **  Qll  ja  the  shields  ")  is  not  to 


Bstisfactmr.  Tb«  wMlth  of  Zobdi  b,  ef 
course,  illnitrated  by  thete  ihieUs  id  B^ui. 
Ver.  8.— Tlhhath,  ud  .  .  .  Oka.  TbeM 
namei  replace  Bttak  and  BtroOtat  in  tha 
parallel  place.  In  the  former  cue  with  pns- 
iibllity  oforthograpbleexplaDatioD,  bat  not 
In  the  latter.  The  pnrpoae  for  whidi  Darid 
was  glad  to  take  theu  brui  ia  not  mentiomd 
in  Samncl,  but  only  hoe.  n*  tman  Mi, 
and  the  piUan,  and  tha  t— sli  of  bnM  (ms 
1  KiDgs  vii.  14—47;  8  Chron.  ir.  1—18). 
In  this  latter  place  thew  subieata  will  ba 
found  treated  more  fully.  Iliia  so-oaUed 
"  braien  sea  "  (ne'nfn  D^H)took  the  pUoe  in 
Bolomon's  temple  ot  tlie  earlier  braasn  loaar 
(ne^  i>3)  of  the  Moaaio  ritnal  (Bxod. 
xa.  17—21 ;  Lev.  Tiii.  10,  11 ;  1  Kinfli 
viLSS).  It  lsnowcalledaM^  beoMiseor 
Its  lar^e  size.  The  lue  of  the  oigiDal  laTt* 
is  plainly  told,  for  the  priests  to  wash  at  it 
their  hands  and  feet  before  offering  saori- 
floes.  It  stood  in  tbe  court  of  the  tabei- 
naole,  between  the  sitar  aud  the  door.  The 
ten  lavers  of  Solomon's  temple  were  naed 
tor  washing  tbe  sacriBoial  Tiotimo  thes- 
selves  (2  Chron.  iv.  G).     The  brsxon  • 


three  turning  their  faces  to  each  qnartar  i£ 

the  hesvena.    Its  height  waa  five  enbiia,  Us 

diameter  ten   cubita,  tbe  thiekneM  of  ila 

I   metal    a   handbreadth,    and    its    capawi^ 

I   variously  given  at  two  thousand   baths  0. 

I   Kings  vii.  2G)  or  three  tbonsand  (2  Chron. 

I   If.  5).    It  was  removed  from  its  supports  of 

oxen  by  Abai  (i  Kings  ivi.  17),  and  plaoed 

on  a  peilostal  of  stone.     And  it  was  eveuio- 

,   ally  dt'stroyod  by  tbe  Assyrians  (2  Kings 

.  XIV.   13).      And  the   piltaTt.      (For  these 

plllun  of   the  porch,  named   Jurhin   and 

i  Soat,  see  I  Kings  vii.  15—22  ;  2  Chron.  iu. 

;   15-17.)    And  the    vf«eU  of   brau.     (For 

.  these,  BL'fl  1  Kings  vii,  40— SI ;  2  Chron.  iv. 

16—18.) 

Vcr.  8,- Ten.  lo  the  parallel  place,  spelt 
Toi.  Nothing  elso  is  knnwn  of  Ibis  Unr  of 
Bamath.whonow  proffers  his  congratulatums 
to  David. 

Vur.  10. — Eadoram.  In  the  puallsl  place 
written  Joram.  The  &eplua.giDt  has  the 
name  epult  with  d  in  both  places,  wbjfb 
has  led  to  the  sucgeetioa  that  posaiblj  the 
real  name  was  Jeilurum.  Joeephns  8D^;eeti 
tliat  Tou  bod  been  brongbt  into  snbjtntioa 
by  Hadodezer,  and  niuheil  by  his  preaent 
conjnittulalions  and  valuable  gilts  ta  in- 
gratinte  himself  with  David  for  &  purpose. 
Had  var ;  llteially,  inu  a  man  of  tear;  Le. 
bo  bad  shown  his  addictednees  to  war,  or 
hod  warred  abnudautly  with  Ton.  It  is 
evident  that  Tou  had  geneniUy  fared  the 

S'cr.  11. — From  Edom.  This  is  probably 
thi-  correct  reading,  and  not,  sa  in  the  pnai- 


CH.  xvm.  1—17.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


299 


lei,  *^  from  Aram^*  nnless,  as  some  think,  both 
places  were  named  in  the  original  authority. 
From  the  children  of  Ammon.  Perhaps  the 
events  narrated  in  our  succeeding  chapter 
are  here  referred  to  by  the  compiler.  From 
Amalek  (see  1  Sam.  xxx.  1—20,  26—31). 

Yer.  12.— Abishai .  .  .  slew  of  the  Edom- 
ites.  The  parallel  place  omits  to  say  that 
it  was  by  aid  of  Abishai  that  David  slew 
these  eighteen  thousand  Edomites.  They 
are  there  called  Syrians,  which  reading  is 
at  all  events  in  keeping  with  the  Aram  of 
the  previous  verse.  Abishai,  here  named 
son  of  Zeruiah,  possibly  served  under 
**Joab  son  of  Zeruiah "  (ver,  15),  who  is 
spoken  of  (1  Kings  xi.  15,  16)  as  very  tren- 
chant in  this  Edomite  war,  without  any 
mention  beins  made  of  Abishai.  Ps.  Ix. 
(title)  probably  speaks  of  an  instalment  of 
the  eighteen  thousand  spoken  of  here,  as 
the  nation  now  suffered  all  but  extermina- 
tion. The  valley  of  salt.  Situate  in  Edom 
(1  Kings  xi.  14—17 ;  2  KiuM  xiv.  7 ;  2 
Chron.  xxv.  11).  The  word  here  used  for 
•*  valley "  is  K^a  (Ps.  xxiii.  4),  not  the  more 
generic  word  pD]p[,  and  signifies  rather  **  ra- 
vine." The  phrase  occurs  twice  with  the 
article  expressed,  nfTDn  K'jj.  The  place  is 
celebrated  also  for  the  achievements  of 
Amuziah  (in  references  just  given),  who  pro- 
ceeded hence  with  ten  thousand  prisoners, 
to  precipitate  them  down  the  cliffy  i.e.  Petra 

(pSdh,  2  Chron.  xxv.  12).  The  real  situa- 
tion of  this  place  is  still  doubtful.  Since 
the  time  of  the  German  traveller  Geethen 
(*  Reiscn,'  ii.  356%  and  of  Robinson  (•  Bibl. 
Bes.,'  ii.  109),  it  has  been  generally  assumed 
to  be  a  tract  of  land  extending  some  six 
miles  south  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  bounded 
at  that  distance  by  the  range  of  hills  which 
there  runs  across  the  country ;  but  beside 
the  consideration  that  the  word  ** ravine" 
oould  not  describe  that  tract  of  country, 
there  are  others  very  unfavourable  to  the 
supposition  (see  these  carefully  stated  by 
Grove,  in  Smith's  *  Bible  Dictionary,'  iii. 
1097). 

Ver.  15.— Beoorder.  The  word  is  of  the 
■ame  root  with  that  in  ch.  xvi.  4,  **  to  re- 
cord." The  exact  duties  and  position  of 
this  officer  are  not  stated  in  any  one  place, 
but  may  be  gathered  from  2  Sam.  viii.  16; 
XX.  24;  1  Kings  iv.  3;  2  Kings  xviii.  18, 
37 ;  2  Chron.  xxsiv.  8.  From  these  notices, 
belonging  to  somewhat  separate  times,  we 
may  gather  the  dignity  and  responsibility 
ami  trust  of  the  office  which  the  recorder 
filled,  altogether  in  excess  of  his  duty  as 
mere  historical  secretary. 

Ver.  16. — Abimeleoh  the  son  of  Ahiathar. 
The  reading  in  the  parallel  place  is, 
^  Ahimelech  the  son  of  Abiathar,*'  as  also 
inch.  XX iv.  6;  but  comparison  of  1  Sam. 


xxii.  20;  2  Sam.  xx.  25;  1  Kings  i  7,  8, 
suggests  that  the  right  reading  would  be 
^'Abiathar  the  son  of  Ahimelech."  With 
this  Mark  ii.  26  agrees,  and  tells  of  a 
correct  manuscript,  from  which,  indirectly, 
the  quotation  came.  Shaviha.  The  pa- 
rallel place  reads  Seraiaha  ;  2  Sam.  xx.  25 
reads  Sheva ;  and  1  Kings  iv.  3  reads  Shiiha. 
The  differences  are  probably  due  simply  to 
errors  of  transcription.  Scribe.  The  his- 
torical development  of  this  title  is  obscure, 
and  not  easy  to  trace.  The  use  of  some 
form  or  other  of  the  root  is  abundantly  fre- 
quent from  the  times  of  the  earliest  parts 
of  Scripture,  in  the  sense  of  **  numbering," 
or  "declaring,"  or  "recording."  Perhaps 
our  title  of  "secretary"  would  answer  suffi- 
ciently to  it,  and  all  the  better,  because  the 
Old  Testament  scribes  were  also  of  different 
leading  kinds,  like  in  some  degree  to  our 
various  secretaries  of  state.  There  was  the 
kind  of  scribe  of  Judg.  v.  14 — where  our 
Authorized  Version  is  far  from  the  mark, 
and  should  rather  read  "the  staff  of 
the  scribe,"  in  place  of  "  the  pen  of  the 
writer" — a  military  officer,  whose  duty  it  was 
to  keep  the  muster-roll.  There  was  the 
scribe  of  2  Kings  xxv.  19  —a  passage  which 
throws  light  on  the  former  (see  also  Isa. 
xxxliL  18;  Jer.  Iii.  25).  There  were  the 
scribes  of  a  more  literary,  lawyer-like,  or 
clerk-like  kind,  as  here,  and  in  the  parallel 
place,  and  in  2  Sam.  xx.  25 ;  1  Kings  iv.  3 ; 
ch.  ii.  55.  In  the  time  of  Hezekiah,  if  not 
before,  the  scribes  became  distinctly  a  class 
of  men  (Prov.  xxv.  1 ;  Jer.  viii.  8) ;  and  the 
times  of  the  Captivity  greatly  enlarged 
their  importance.  Their  exact  duties  in  the 
best  times  of  the  monarchy  are  not  laid 
down,  but  the  dignified  place  the  king's 
scribe  held  is  evident  from  the  company  in 
which  he  is  placed  here  and  in  the  parallel 
passage. 

Ver.  17. — Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada 
(see  ch.  xi.  22 — 25 ;  xii.  27 ;  2  Sam.  xxiii. 
20—23).  The  Cherethites  and  the  Pele- 
thites.  Two  tribes  of  Philistines  whom 
David  attached.  The  meaning  and  deri- 
vation of  these  two  names  leave  it  possible 
to  translate  them  at  once,  and  to  read, 
"  the  public  executioners,  and  the  publio 
couriers,"  not  treating  them  as  proper 
names,  and  to  this  course  Gesenius  (see 
*  Lexicon  *)  gives  his  sanction.  On  the 
other  hand,  a  comparison  of  1  Sam.  xxx.  14 
and  2  Sam.  xv.  18  would  lead  us  to  treat 
them  as  the  names  of  people,  although  the 
Pelethites  are  not  as  identinable  in  this  sense 
as  the  Cherethites  and  Gittites.  Anyway, 
it  is  evident  they  were  the  special  ^ard  of 
the  king,  and  were  faithful  to  David  and  to 
8olomon  after  him.  Their  duties  included 
those  of  the  executioner  or  Uctor,  and  the 
courier.    They  are  frequently  mentioned  on 


800 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,  [ob.  xtih.  1—17. 


■pedftl  occuiaoM  of  the  king's  morinir.  And 
ordAnfer(2SMn.XT.  18;  xx.7,23;  1  Kingt 
L  38,  44>.  CkM  akoit  tka  kiaf.  Tb^ 
Bthnm  text  here  ii  crinrru    Tbo  word 


ued  in  the  p«ndlel  piece  ie  tryri^ 
sigDiflei  ttrieUy  ^'priesto,"  baft  eometinMs 
more  generally  "  prmces.**  This  ia,  wifthonl 
doubt,  the  meaniiig  of  oar  text. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vcn.  1— 17.— T*e  chipter  that  of  en  the  eermom  of  facts  with  fetocMi  words.  Th# 
chapter  which  to  indifferent  reading  might  seem  moet  bare  of  reUgioua  instruction  will 
Yield  to  careful  attention  the  most  forcible  lessons.  Facts  bring  the  most  impreeaive 
lessons  to  our  Urea.  FacU  teach  the  most  impressive  aspects  of  the  Divine  character  to 
our  present  power  of  apprehending  that  character.  For  aU  we  read  and  memory  retains 
it»  for  all  we  hear  and  faith  believes  it,  for  all  we  think,  and  think  we  see  it  well  and 
clearly,  that  which  we  feel  and  experience  from  the  hard  facts  of  life  or  the  joyful  facts 
of  life  performs  a  tliousand  times  over  the  Urgest  and  most  valuable  part  in  our 
education.  This  chapter  is  a  narration  of  facts — almost  exclusively  this  and  nothing 
else.  But  they  were  fact«  full  of  personal  interest  to  David,  and  fuU  of  illustration  of 
Divine  goodness  and  faithfulness.  The  chapter  tells  indeed  the  simplest  tale  of  events 
that  mi^e  the  joy  of  a  human  life,  strengthened  the  faith  of  a  Divine  life,  rewarded 
the  endurance  and  preparation  of  vears  past  of  a  suffering  and  painful  life,  and  gives 
Qod  the  praise  that  was  his  due.  To  notice  well  such  facts  is  to  listen  well  to  €k)d's 
own  sennons.  Let  us  notice  how  they  part  here  so  very  naturally  into  those  which 
illustrate  the  gracious  attributes  of  the  Teacher  Ood,  and  those  which  illustrate  the 
better  qualities  of  the  learner  David.    We  have  here— 

I.  Thb  God  **  faithful  and  just  "  to  brikq  on  the  tdtb  of  ths  **  rsoom« 
PENSB  of  rkward.**  That  time  is  not  always  to  be  expected  in  the  present  world. 
There  are  sometimes  manifest  reasons  why  this  cannot  be,  or  why  it  should  not  be 
likely,  or  why  it  were  even  to  be  deprecated.  It  is  also  one  of  the  chiefest  distinctions, 
nay,  even  the  difertntiix  of  the  Christian  temper  and  essential  quality,  ^  to  seek  for 
glory  and  honour  and  immortality  by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing,"  with  the  eye 
tixed  on  one  thing  alone  as  the  reward — *'  eternal  life"  Yet  sometimes  it  is  the  case  that 
a  manifest,  ample,  revealed  recompense  of  reward  comes  after  trial  and  sorrow  bome, 
and  work  earnestly  done,  even  before  the  partial  scene  of  this  present  has  passed.  It  is 
BO  now.  Long  had  been  the  discipline  of  I^viil,  frequent  the  strokes  by  which  heart 
and  life  bad  been  smitten,  keen  and  agonizing  the  misconceptions  from  which  he  had 
Buffennl,  and  the  misconstructions  put  upon  his  generous  conduct,  and  sharply  had  the 
iron  of  diRapiH)intment  entered  into  his  susceptible  nature.  But  noiVy  'tis  no  longer  the 
chapter  of  accidents ;  it  is  the  chapter  of  victories.  A  series  of  joyful  successes,  of 
triumphs,  of  honours,  came  to  him.  And  it  was  because  God  "remembered"  him  and 
"  visitetl"  him  and  blessed  him — no  longer  with  the  more  hidden  mercies  proper  to  the 
time  of  preparation  and  discipline,  but  with  these  manifest,  published  mercies  proper  to  one 
who  had  "  borne  the  yoke  in  his  youth,**  and  who  had  in  his  measure  *'  seen  afi^ction 
by  the  rod  of  his  wrath." 

II.  The  God  who  lengthens  out  his  providential  protection  of  his  skbvast. 
How  true  it  is  that  "the  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance"!  He  has 
never  forsaken  David.  He  does  not  weary  of  him.  Ho  does  not  change  for  caprice' 
sake  his  servant,  to  use  a  younger,  a  fresher,  a  choicer.  Ko,  he  keeps  by  him,  and 
"  preserves  him  whithersoever  he  "  goes.  Ho  is  his  Shield  and  Buckler  and  Defence. 
Ho  guides  him  by  day  and  guards  him  by  night.  He  makes  his  enemies  either  fall 
before  him  or  flee  before  him.  Ue  counsels  him  and  {iurrounds  him  with  faithful  coun- 
sellors, captains  of  his  armies,  priests  of  the  Church.  This  is  the  time  that,  through 
the  goodness  of  a  faithful  Providence,  his  com  and  his  wine,  and  his  gold  and  silver, 
are  increased,  and  a  "  table  is  spread  before  him,  e'en  in  the  presence  of  his  enemies." 
Not  a  day  just  now  but  David  feels  what  a  glory  it  is  to  be  the  servant  of  God,  and 
what  safety  there  is  with  him. 

III.  The  continued  faithful  devotion  on  the  part  of  the  servant  of  his 
life  and  powers  to  his  great  Master.  His  wars  are  against  the  enemies  of  GKxi 
and  the  people  of  Gh)d.    There  is  no  sign  of  personal  and  ambitious  objects  in  what 


CH.  xvin.  1—17.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa  801 

David  is  doing.  He  "  reigns  over  all  Israel,**  and  thus  reigning  lie  **  executes  judgment 
and  justice  among  all  his  people."  He  does  not  forget  his  responsibilities  in  the  time  of 
rank,  dignity,  luxury,  nor  surrender  himself  to  indulgence.  It  is  evident  he  holds 
himself,  still  the  servant  of  Gh)d,  the  willing,  conscious,  intelligent  instrument  for  his 
use.  In  undoubted  "  authority,"  his  conduct  is  not  that,  his  bearing  is  not  that,  that 
ever  exposes  him  to  the  finger  of  just  satire  or  ridicule — as  one  who  is  dressed  in  a  "  little 
brief  authority,"  and  for  reality  and  true  dignity  satisfies  himself  with  display.  The 
reaction  from  poverty,  persecution,  subordination,  and  grief  is  not  what  many  bear  welL 
Thus  far  David  has  come  through  the  trial  well.  He  bears  the  burden  nobly,  even  as 
bravely  he  lifted  it  to  his  shoulders ;  and  if  God  has  not  forgotten  his  servant^  neither 
does  David  show  any  sign  of  forgetting  that  he  is  God's  servant. 

IV.  ThB  UNDDONISUED  interest  of  a  great  religious  DETOnOH  STILL  POSSESS- 
ING THE  THOUGHT  AND  HEART  OF  Dayid.  There  wcre  no  doubt  considerations  which 
we  may  suppose  to  nave  oecn  present  to  the  mind  of  David,  in  the  destined  promotion 
and  dignity  of  Solomon,  ancillary  to  his  own  continued  deep  interest  in  the  projected 
temple.  Yet  we  should  not  be  justified  in  putting  all  his  sustained  devotion  down  to 
this  source.  The  project  had  been  a  native  of  ms  own  heart.  And  he  does  not  mean 
to  disown  "  the  better  part "  of  faith  because  ne  is  disappointed  in  sight.  David  was 
now  one  of  the  honoured  rank  of  those  *' kings  and  prophets  who  desired  to  s«0*'a 
certain  sight,  but  died  without  seeing  it.  The  Pisgah -glimpse  possible  to  him  is  that 
which  could  come  of  faith  indeed,  but  of  faith  only.  Yet  his  disappointment  has  not 
soured  him,  his  refusal  has  not  turned  him  sulky.  He  loves  to  think  of  that  **  habitation 
of  Qod*8  house  "  still.  He  can't  envy  his  own  son ;  and  to  console  nevertheless  his  disap- 
pointment that  he  shall  not  see  the  glorious  stones  laid  one  upon  another,  towering 
aloft,  and  the  picked  cedars,  and  the  gold  flashing  again  in  the  sun,  his  thoughts  fill  the 
time  with  collecting,  and  getting,  and  giving,  and  dedicating  for  these  ends.  It  was 
always  now  in  David's  thought.  The  shields  of  gold  and  the  brass  and  the  silver  are 
all  sacred  at  once  in  his  thought  to  one  purpose.  This  is  some  of  the  noblest  of  the 
Divine  working  in  the  heart  and  life  that  are  out  human  after  all.  The  eye  of  David 
shall  not  see  the  reared  temple,  but  his  thought  and  purpose  and  love  are  laid  with  its 
foundations,  and  reach  to  its  highest  pinnacle.  And  the  most  magnificent  block  of  its 
stone,  the  finest  timber  of  all  its  cedar,  the  gold  that  reflected  most  brilliantly  the  light^ 
of  all  that  was  in  it,  may  have  been  those  which  the  eye  and  the  hand  too  of  David 
did  surely  and  literally  touch.    Such  confidence  may  all  the  servants  of  God  entertain* 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  6. — Preservation.  The  contrast  between  the  God  of  the  Bible  and  the  gods  of 
the  heathen,  in  respect  to  moral  character,  is  of  the  most  thorough  and  striking  kind. 
Amongst  other  noticeable  points  of  contrast,  observe  this :  the  imaginary  deities  of 
the  superstitious  idolaters  are  usually  famed  and  feared  for  their  destructive  qualities, 
whilst  the  Lord  is  ever  representea  as  a  God  of  salvation,  delighting  to  preserve  his 
people.  The  bloodthirsty  Shiva,  one  of  the  most  widely  worshipped  gods  of  the 
Hindus,  is  the  destroyer.  Jehovah,  it  is  recorded,  '*  preserved  David  whithersoever  he 
went" 

I.  The  DANGERS  of  ordinary  human  life  are  many.  It  is  not  only  kings  and  warriors 
who  are  exposed  to  peril,  though  the  position  of  mouarchs  exposes  them  to  the  violence 
of  the  assassin,  and  the  occupation  of  the  soldier  is  in  itself  a  challenge  to  the  dart  of 
death ;  but  in  every  position  of  life,  at  every  age  and  in  every  clime,  we  walk  encom- 
passed by  dangers  seen  and  unseen. 

II.  Divine  protection  is  a  truth  supported  by  revelation.  Not  by  reason  of 
favouritism  and  caprice,  not  in  response  to  any  superstitious  observances  or  entreaties, 
but  in  virtue  of  his  own  attributes,  Qod  is  a  Protector.  He  is  not  satisfied  to  create, 
and  then  to  abandon  what  he  has  made.  His  universal  providence,  general  and 
particular,  is  the  joy  and  comfort  of  his  people.  It  is  equally  shown  in  their  prosperity 
and  their  adversity. 

IIL  Hence  the  preservation  of  God's  people  from  harm.  He  is  their  Shield, 
and  Buckler^  their  Defence,  and  Fortress.    He  delivers  their  eyes  from  tears,  their  souls 


302  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHBONIGLE&  [cb.  xnn.  1— 17. 


from  death,  their  feet  from  falling.  The  confidence  of  the  pnlmist  wme  signal  and 
most  instructire  (see  Ps.  xci.).  It  is  a  source  of  secmitj  and  consolatioQ  to  know 
that  our  times  are  in  QotVs  hands. 

**  An  earthqnake  may  he  hid  to  spare 
The  man  that's  strangled  with  a  hair.** 

And  when  Christians  fall  Tictims  to  the  hate  and  hostility  of  sinners,  or  are  slain  hy 
the  oporatiflo  of  natural  laws,  they  still  have  the  assurance  that  no  real  evil  oaa  he£dl 
them. 

**  Angel-gnardf  from  thee  sarromid  ns; 
We  are  safe^  for  thon  art  nigh." 

Well  mtiy  the  friend  of  Jesus  exclaim,  "  I  will  trust  and  not  he  afraid.** 

IV.  The  obligation  is  plain,  obatefullt  to  ACK^owLEiwB  the  pbesbbtibo  hbbct 
or  God.  The  royal  psalmist  was  not  backward  in  recording  with  adoring  gratitude  the 
delivering  and  upholding  mercy  of  a  &iKhful  God.  Never  shotdd  we  forget  that  he  that 
is  our  CK^  is  the  God  of  salvation. — ^T. 

Yer.  llj— Dedication  <^  giJU.  David  was  a  generous  giver.  In  his  many  i^mpalgna 
he  won  great  spoils  from  his  enemies.  We  need  not  approve  his  conduct  in  all  these 
military  expeditions.  But  we  cannot  do  other  than  commend  the  princely  generosity 
which  he  displayed  in  the  disposal  of  his  booty.  Though  not  himself  permitted  to 
build  the  temple,  ho  was  allowed  to  accumulate  treasures  to  be  used  by  his  eon  and 
successor  in  the  construction  of  the  sacred  ediiice.  He  freely  narted  with  his  wealth 
for  this  purpose,  and  for  the  maintenance  of  Divine  worship  m  suitable  dignity  and 

Silendour.  His  example  in  thus  dedicating  gifts  to  the  service  of  Jehovah  is  one  which 
L  CbriHtians  should  follow ;  the  more  so,  as  their  motives  to  consecntion  are  more 
powerful,  and  their  opportunities  of  service  are  more  numerous. 

I.  All  gifts  abb  or  and  fbom  thb  Lord.  **  The  earth  is  the  Lord's^  and  the  ful- 
ness thereof;"  "The  silver  and  the  gold  are  the  Lord's;"  his  are  "the  cattle  upon  a 
thousand  hills."  We  can,  accordingly,  only  offer  unto  tiie  Lord  of  what  is  really  his. 
*'  Of  bis  own  "  we  give  unto  him. 

IL  All  that  Christians  cak  offer  to  God  is  thb  purchase  of  Christ's 
Bi/OOD.  When  our  Saviour  redeemed  us,  he  ransomed  all  our  powers  and  possessions. 
"  Body,  soul,  and  spirit "  arc  his  of  right.  It  is  the  Christian  s  privilege  to  feel  that 
nothing  which  he  has  is  his  own  ;  all  is  his  Lord's. 

IIL  The  gifts  of  Christians  are  the  expression  or  their  grateful  love.  They  do 
not  give  to  the  cause  of  their  Redeemer  merely  because  they  feel  that  they  ought  to  do 
so,  but  because  they  delight  in  any  opportunity  of  showing  their  alTection.  The  most 
oostlv,  lavish  gifts  are  poor  and  worthless,  if  not  the  expression  of  the  heart*s  love  and 
lovalty.  When  the  heart  is  offered,  the  meanest  gifts  are  sufficient  to  represent  ite  love. 
The  "  two  mites"  of  the  widow  were  accepted  and  approved ;  for  they  cost  her  mudi  to 
give,  and  yet  she  gave  them  with  a  willing  mind. 

IV.  Dedicated  gifts  mat  bervb  to  work  out  the  spiritual  plaks  of  God. 
Some  pnifessing  Christians  disjxirage  expenditure  for  religious  objects,  on  the  ground 
that  Qod  cannot  care  for  such  trifles  as  our  material  wealth.  But  they  forget  that,  in 
the  order  of  Divine  X'rovidencc,  God*s  kingdom  upon  earth  is  mysteriously  bound  up 
with  both  the  wealth  and  the  work  of  men.  And  they  forget  that  Christ  r^ards  what 
Is  given  to  his  people  and  to  his  cause  as  given  to  himself,  it  is,  therefore,  an  honour  to 
be  vermittcd  to  dedicate  of  our  substance  to  ends  so  lofty,  to  a  Master  so  gracious. 

V.  Gifts  offered  ih  a  right  spirit  are  acceptable  to  God.  There  is  much 
in  Scripture  which  proves  that  this  is  so.  "  The  Lord  loveth  a  cheerful  giver ; "  "It 
is  accepted  according  to  that  a  man  hath ; "  <'  He  that  soweth  bountifully  shall  reap 
bonntitully."  If  our  offerings  be  dedicated  from  Christian  motives,  and  to  wise  and 
scriptural  objects,  we  need  be  under  no  apprehension  lest  our  Lord  should  despise  the 
givers  or  reject  their  gifts, — T. 

Vcr.  14.-*^  righteoui  ruler.    David's  work  as  a  warrior  was  preparatory  to  his  work 


OH.  xvuL  1—17.]  THE  PIBST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHEONICLES.  803 

as  a  king.  He  defeated  enemies  and  yanquisbed  conspirators,  in  order  that  there  might 
be  peace  and  tranquillity  in  the  land,  in  order  that  the  pursuits  and  arts  of  peace  might 
take  the  place  of  violence,  disorder,  and  turbulence.  It  is  still  sometimes  necessary  that 
the  sword  should  be  drawn  for  the  protection  of  liberty  and  for  the  preservation  of  order. 
There  could  not  be  a  worthier,  a  nobler  outcome  of  David's  campaigns  and  victories 
than  that  recorded  in  the  text :  **  So  David  reigned  over  all  Israel,  and  executed  judg- 
ment and  justice  among  all  his  people." 

I.  Civil  booiety  involves  the  exercisb  of  authobitt.  This  need  not  reside  in  a 
king ;  it  may  be  a  president,  or  other  chief  magistrate.  But  in  some  person  or  persons 
must  be  deposited  the  right  and  power  to  rule.  Unless  men  are  to  live  in  the  condition 
of  savages  or  brutes,  civil  authority  must  be  constituted,  recognized,  and  supported. 
Checks  to  arbitrary  power,  limitations  to  all  personal  action,  there  must  be ;  but  not  to 
the  destruction  of  a  right  to  reign  and  to  require  obedience. 

II.  Civil  societt  involves  the  maintenance  of  justice  between  kah  and  man. 
Power  is  good  when  rightly  used.  Right  and  might  should  go  together.  Rulers  are 
not  entrusted  with  authority  for  the  indulgence  of  their  own  caprice,  or  the  enhance- 
ment of  their  own  glory.  They  are  bound  to  act,  "  not  for  their  own,  but  for  their 
people's  good."  In  Oriental  countries  it  was  and  is  the  custom  for  princes  themselves 
to  sit  in  the  gate  and  to  administer  justice.  It  was  so  with  David  and  Solomon,  and 
with  other  kings  of  Israel.  In  modem  society,  where  law  is  more  complex,  the  adminis- 
tration of  justice  is  confided  to  a  profession — to  judges  and  magistrates.  In  any  case, 
well-ordered  society  requires  both  judicial  and  legislative  fimctions^  in  whomsoever 
centred.    **  The  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  Qod/' 

III.  CrVIL  BOOIETT  is  CONSOLIDATED  AND  PERFECTED  BT  J178TIGB.     *'  David  reigned 

over  all  Israel."  This  was  undoubtedly  the  consequence  of  the  imnartial  administration 
of  justice  among  all  classes.  Civil  rulers  have  often  been  slow  to  learn  the  lesson,  that 
there  is  no  foundation  for  general  content  like  unswerving  justice.  Just  rulers  maJLO 
contented  and  united  peoples. 

IV.  Civil  societt  is  destined  to  extend  rrs  advantages  to  all  kankind.  Every 
community  where  kings  and  rulers  reign  with  justice,  every  nation  which  is  exalted  by 
righteousness,  is  a  beacon  to  the  world.  Peoples  so  favoured  have  a  sacred  mission  to 
fulfil,  and  upon  them  is  laid  a  responsibility  from  which  there  is  no  escape. — ^T. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — The  Christian  campaign.  As  **  David  smote  the  Philistines  and 
subdu^  them,"  so  we,  engaged  in  a  holy  warfare,  must  live  to  smite  and  to  subdue  the 
enemies  of  God.  Our  Christian  life  cannot  be  fully  represented  under  any  one  image,  but 
if  it  can  be  said  to  be  one  thing  more  than  another,  it  is  a  long  spiritual  campaign.  We 
ask  what  are — 

I.  The  enemies  whom  we  have  to  slat.  These  are  not  visible  Philistines,  Moabites, 
Syrians,  such  as  presented  themselves  against  David,  sword  in  hand.  The  adversaries 
of  our  souls  and  of  Qod  are :  1.  Invisible  spiritual  forces  (Eph.  vi.  12).  2.  Evil  things 
embodied  in  the  outer  world.  In  (1)  ungodly  men,  who  deliberately  tempt  us  to  depaxt 
from  rectitude ;  and  (2)  unfaithful  Christian  men,  whose  tone  or  type  of  character  is 
lower  than  our  own,  and  who,  unwittingly  to  themselves  and  imperceptibly  to  us,  draw 
US  down  towards  their  own  spiritual  level ;  (3)  unchristian  institutions.  3.  Evil  forces 
within  our  own  soul.  A  man's  worst  foes  are  those  of  the  household  of  his  own  heart 
—his  own  tendencies  to  pride,  to  self-will,  to  indulgence,  to  worldliness. 

IL  The  weapons  of  oub  wabfabe.  David's  weapons  on  his  fields  of  battle  were 
sword  and  shield,  spear  and  bow,  war-chariots  and  horses.  "  The  weapons  of  our  war- 
fare are  not  carnal,  but  mighty  ...  to  the  pulling  down  of  strongholds  "  (2  Cor.  x.  4). 
They  are :  1.  The  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God.  2.  The  force  of 
Christian  sympathy  and  zeal.    3.  The  co-operation  of  single-minded,  earnest  men. 

III.  Oub  hope  of  success.  David  looked  to  (1)  his  own  generalship ;  (2)  the  support 
of  his  **  mighty  men ; "  (3)  the  valour  and  discipline  of  his  troops ;  but  especially  and 
mainly  to  c4)  the  presence  and  power  of  the  living  God.  We  look  to  (1)  the  perfect 
fitness  of  the  truth  we  preach  for  the  hearts  and  wants  of  men ;  (2)  the  presence  and 
power  of  the  Almighty  Spirit  of  our  God.    He  it  is  who  "  causeth  us  to  triumph." 

lY.  The  spoils  of  victobt.  These  in  David's  wars  were  towns  (ver.  1),  subjects 
(vers.  2y  6),  gifts  (vers.  2, 6),  chariots  and  horses  (ver.  4),  gold  and  brass  (vers.  7, 8),  political 


804  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHBONIGLEa   [cB.  xrm.  1^17. 

alliance  (vers.  9, 10).  Other  spoils  than  these  are  the  reward  of  Tiotory  in  the  Christian 
strife.  They  are :  1.  HfgenenUtd  human  souZs.  "  He  that  conyerteth  a  sinner,*  etc. 
(Jas.  V.  20).  "  What  is  our  crown  of  rejoiciDg  ?  Are  not  eren  ye,"  etc?  (1  Cor.  iL  19). 
Those  whom  we  have  been  the  means  of  enlightening  and  redeeming  are  the  spmls  we 
"  bring  home,"  the  crown  we  wear.  2.  FaeultieM  and  forces  rettorea  to  tKeir  rigktftil 
ttse.  IHTid  took  "  very  much  brass  wherewith  Solomon  made  the  brazen  sea,**  etc. 
(ver.  8),  for  the  house  of  the  Lord  (rer.  11 ;  2  Chron.  iv.  12,  15, 16).  Thus  were  the 
possessions  ot  the  enemy  made  to  contribute  to  the  service  of  Jehovah.  It  is  the  truest 
of  all  triumphs  when  we  succeed  in  so  changing  the  spirit  of  men  that  the  time,  the 
thought,  the  money,  the  energy  which  they  had  given  to  the  service  of  sin  they  now 
devote  to  the  cause  of  Christ  and  to  the  well-being  of  the  world. — C. 

Vers.  11 — ^17. — OocTs  preservina  Inndne$».  The  key-note  *of  this  chapter  is  the 
jvassage,  "  Thus  the  Lord  preserved  David  whithersoever  he  went"  (vers.  6»  13).  We 
mav  let  the  other  verses  of  the  text  take  their  tone  from  this. 

I.  GoD*8  PBEdERviKo  KINDNESS  TO  David.  This  was  manifested  in  variooa  ways : 
God  preserved  him  from:  1.  Injury  in  battle.  He  was  neither  slain  nor  wounded 
by  the  darts  that  roust  have  been  levelled  at  him  by  many  a  foe.  2.  Defeat  in  war. 
He  was  never  beaten  by  any  enemy  he  encountered,  and,  finally,  all  his  foes  submitted 
to  his  rule.  8.  Serious  mistakes  in  public  policy.  Solomon,  his  brilliant  son,  com- 
mitted a  most  serious  error  in  overtaxing  his  people ;  and  Rehoboam,  his  grandson, 
started  on  his  royal  career  with  a  fatal  blunder  (2  Chron.  x.).  But  David  had  been 
thus  far  preserved  from  taking  any  step  which  endangered  his  own  position  or  enfeebled 
his  kingdom ;  hence  he  was  delivered  from :  4.  Disloyalty  on  the  part  of  his  subjects. 
"  Executing  judgment  and  justice  among  all  his  people  "  (ver.  14),  placing  competent 
men  at  the  head  of  the  different  departments  of  the  state  (vers.  15— -17),  he  was  securs 
of  the  attachment  of  his  people,  and  **  reigned  over  all  Israel "  without  (at  this  time) 
any  danger  of  rivalry  or  disturbance.  5.  Special  spiritual  perils.  David  was  exposed 
to  the  peculiar  danger  of  kings,  and  very  particularly  to  the  peril  of  complacency  and 
self-glorification.  He  had  risen  from  the  sheepcote  to  the  throne,  had  enlarged  and 
magnified  the  Hebrew  kiogdom,  had  attained  to  considerable  distinction  in  the  world 
(so  far  as  it  was  known  to  him),  and  he  must,  as  a  fallible  man,  have  been  under  a 
strong  temptation  to  glorify  himself  and  take  great  credit  for  enterprise  and  sagacity. 
From  this  "  the  Lord  preserved  David."  The  human  sovereign  laid  his  victorious 
position  at  the  feet  of  the  Divioe  King.  He  did  not  apply  the  spoils  of  war  to  the 
embellishment  of  his  own  house,  but  "  dedicated  them  unto  the  Lord  "  (ver.  11).  But 
he  did  something  more  and  better  than  this :  he  ascribed  his  successful  career — witness 
his  psalms  of  thanksgiving — to  the  good  hand  of  his  Gt.>d  upon  him.  He  gave  Qod  the 
glory.  Thus  "  the  Lord  preserved  him  whithersoever  he  went,"  even  when  he  went 
iar  along  that  "slippery  place" — prominence,  power,  success  in  battle. 

II.  God's  presekvino  kindness  to  us.  We  have  to  bless  God  as  our  Creator, 
Provider,  Father,  Redeemer ;  we  have  also  to  magnify  him  as  our  continual  Preserver. 
He  preserves  us.  1.  In  life  ;  both  in  the  retention  of  our  being  (Job  x.  12),  and  in  the 
continuance  of  our  existence  on  earth.  2.  In  health ;  in  freedom  from  disease,  in 
deliverance  from  mental  failure,  in  the  possession  of  ''heart  and  hope."  8.  In 
favourable  circumstance ;  saving  from  overwhelming  loss  and  from  crushing  disappoint- 
ment, and  (often  for  very  long  periods  together)  from  saddening  bereavement.  4.  In 
spiritual  integrity.  When  other  things  had  gone,  David  could  find  unspeakable  con* 
eolation  in  the  thought,  "  As  for  me,  thou  upholdest  me  in  mine  integrity  (Ps.  xli.  12). 
And  whatever  may  betide;  though  God  should  remove  health,  treasure,  kindred, 
friends,  from  the  path  on  which  w^e  walk,  yet  if  ho  is  maintaining  us  in  his  fear  and  in 
the  love  of  our  Redeemer,  if  he  is  delivering  us  from  the  shipwreck  of  the  soul  (1  Tim. 
i.  19),  and  sustaining  us  by  the  upholding  power  of  his  Holy  Spirit  (Ps.  li.  12),  then 
may  we  exclaim,  not  in  the  accents  of  despondency  like  the  broken  patriarch  (Job  vii. 
20),  but  in  the  joyous  and  thankful  tones  of  a  successful  spiritual  warrior,  **  What  «WftH 
I  do  unto  thee,  0  thou  Preserver  of  men  ?  " — C. 

Vers.  1 — 5, 12,  13. — David's  wars.    This  chapter  opens  with  an  account  of  David*8 
wars,  followed  by  a  succession  of  brilliant  victories.     Following  on  the  previous 


PH.  XVIII.  1—17.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  305 

chapter,  though  separated  from  it  by  a  considerable  length  of  time,  it  brin^  before  us 
much  spiritual  instniction.  The  previous  chapter  contains  an  account  of  the  many 
'*  exceeaing  great  and  precious  promises  "  made  to  David,  his  confidence  in  them,  and 
also  that  which  invariably  flows  out  of  such  grace— his  communion  with  God.  Com- 
munion with  Qod  is  the  outcome  of  grace  received.  But  out  of  realized  grace  and 
communion  with  Qod  flow  warfare  and  victory.  This  is  the  opening  reconl  of  this 
chapter.  The  former  supplies  strength  for  the  latter,  and  he  who  goes  forth  from 
his  knees  to  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith  will,  in  every  battle,  be  '*  more  than  con- 
queror "  through  him  that  loves  him.  And  mark  how  David  is  single-handed  among 
many  foes,  and  all  of  diverse  character.  **  Edom,  Moab,  the  children  of  Ammon,  the 
Philistines,  Amaiek,  and  the  Syrians.  What  a  host,  and  how  diverse  1  Yet  God's  eye 
follows  the  single-handed  servant  amid  all  these  foes.  A  "wall  of  fire"  is  round 
about  him — "  the  Lord  preserved  David  whithersoever  he  went."  So  is  it  with  every 
servant  of  God  who  goes  forth  to  fight  the  Lord's  battles  direct  from  communion. 
"  Victory  1 "  is  inscribed  on  his  banner.  He  is  invincible,  because  "  strong  in  the  Lord, 
and  in  the  power  of  his  might."  He  may  be  single-handed,  and  his  foes  may  be 
legion  and  of  every  character,  but  he  triumphs  over  all  and,  like  David  hero,  lays  all 
the  trophies  of  victory  at  the  Saviour's  feet. — ^W, 

Vers.  4,  9 — 11. — David,  Eadarezer,  and  Tou,  The  Spirit  of  Qt)d  is  a  faithful 
Biographer.  If  he  records  the  good  features  of  character  in  GK)d's  children,  he  is  no  less 
faithful  in  describing  the  dark  side  of  their  character.  In  this  the  Word  of  God  is  a 
striking  contrast  to  all  human  biography.  David's  cruel  conduct  in  "houghing  the 
ohariot-horses "  is  in  keeping  with  the  imperfect  light  of  that  dispensation,  and  is 
not  recorded  for  our  imitation  any  more  than  the  records  of  crime  in  our  daily  press. 
It  teaches  us  that  there  is  only  One  perfect.  There  is  a  blot  on  every  escutcheon 
except  that  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  and  they  are  recorded  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  order  that 
the  eye  of  the  soul  should  be  over  turning  from  the  best  of  earth's  heroes  to  him  who 
Is  the  "  chief  of  ten  thousand,  and  the  altogether  lovely."  Let  us  be  warned  by  the 
cruelties  of  David's  time  and  mark  his  graces,  and  follow  him  so  far  as  he  followed 
Christ.  Hadarezer's  spoils  and  every  other  are  consecrated  to  Qod,  Not  a  trophy  falls 
into  David*s  hands  but  is  laid  there.  HadarezePs  spoils  and  Ton's  gifts  are  all  alike — - 
the  Lord's.   May  we  follow  him  here,  and  cast  every  crown  at  the  leet  of  Jesus  1 — W. 

Vers.  6,  lS,^^Divine preservations  in  work  and  war.  In  the  record  given  of  David's 
expeditions  and  wars,  one  thing  stands  out  prominently  and  impressively ;  it  is  twice 
repeated  here,  as  if  to  it  attention  was  to  be  particularly  drawn  :  "  The  Lord  preserved 
David  whithersoever  he  went ; "  or,  in  the  quaint  language  of  Nehemiah, "  The  good  hand 
of  his  God  was  upon  him  for  good."    It  may  be  noted— 

I.  That  David  was  in  all  things  God's  servant.  This  relation  set  him  iu  an 
especial  manner  under  God's  care.  At  his  creatures,  we  come  under  his  providences. 
As  his  children,  we  come  into  the  grace  of  his  fatherly  tending.  And  as  his  servants^ 
we  are  assured  of  his  safe  keeping  while  engaged  in  his  mission.  The  fuller  and  nearer 
are  our  relations  with  God,  the  more  complete  may  be  our  security  and  our  rest  in  the 
Divine  hands.  Compare  the  expression,  ''Man  is  immortal  till  his  work  is  done." 
Our  Lord  Jesus  knew  that  no  harm  could  come  to  him  while  he  was  about  *'  his  Father's 
business." 

II.  That  David's  wholb  life  was  in  God's  keeping.  Because  he  never  broke 
free  of  the  idea  of  service.  He  never  wanted  to  isolate  any  part  of  his  life,  and  keep 
it  for  self.  It  is  this  which  alone  severs  a  man  from  Divine  keeping.  A  man's  wil- 
fully taking  his  life  into  his  own  hand  involves  the  withdrawing  of  special  Divine  grace, 
and  then  the  man  learns  the  evil  of  his  own  waywardness  by  the  unrelieved  troubles 
into  which  he  falls.  This  is  the  permanent  lesson  for  the  ages  taught  by  Eve's  wilful- 
ness  in  the  garden  of  Eden.  The  man  who  can  say,  *'  We  serve  the  Lord  Christ,"  and 
apply  it  to  his  whole  time  and  powers  and  spheres,  may  be  sure  that  he  is  altogether 
safe  in  "  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  abiding  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty." 
The  angels  have  charge  concerning  him,  to  keep  him  in  all  his  ways.  They  will  be 
BO  near  that  they  shall  even  bear  him  up  lest  he  '*  dash  his  foot  against  a  stone." 

III.  This  in  no  way  interfered  with  his  showing  energy  and  enterpriss.    It 
X.  chronicles.  X 


806  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  TEE  CHBONICLEa  [cb.  xmi.  1— 17. 


might  leem  that  foch  issanmoe  of  Dirine  pretenration  would  gira  a  senie  of  lecurity 
thit  wo'jld  l«ad  to  indolence  and  indifference.  But  it  never  does  do  so,  because  such 
a  tempution  is  resisted  and  orereome  by  the  impulse  to  faith/uInesM,  To  look  ai^  the 
gcckd  man's  life  should  in  these  respects  be  the  same  as  the  worldly  man's.  On  the 
■urlace  there  should  be  the  ener^,  enterprise,  perseverance,  and  skill,  whieh  are 
the  conditions  cf  sucoss  in  worldly  undertakings.  The  difference  lies  below.  The 
good  man  lives  and  labours  for  God,  and  in  his  strength.  The  worldly  man  has  no 
other  end  than  his  own  fancied  good.  It  may  be  fully  proved  and  illustrated,  from 
Bible  exan^ples,  and  from  those  of  the  Christian  history,  that  full  consecration  to  the 
service  of  Gkd  Las  ever  been  the  impulse  to  a  nobler  living  than  any  other  motive  can 
Inspire  men  to  reach.  God's  servants  always  strive  to  be  the  hett  pouAle  in  every 
sphere  where  they  are  set. 

IV.  It  BEoroHT  David  strexoth  foe  dutt,  axd  best  fob  thb  hbabt,  to  bb 
asscKKD  THAT  GoD*s  SHADOW  WAS  OVER  HDC.  Compare  such  expressions  as,  "  I  wiU 
both  Uy  me  down  in  reace  and  sleep :  for  thou.  Lord,  only  makest  me  dwell  in  safety ;  * 
**  The  Lord  is  my  li/ht  and  my  salvation ;  whom  shall  I  fear?  "  And  compare  snch 
experiences  of  strmifth  as  when  fighting  the  lion  and  bear,  or  the  giant  Goluith ;  and 
such  experiences  of  prtteriyitiom  as  when  hunted  by  King  Saul  upon  the  mount^nn 
AU  new  undertakings  were  entered  upon  with  the  quiet  heart.  God  hath  kept ;  he 
has  promised  to  keep.    **  He  that  keepeth  Israel  neither  slumbers  nor  sleeps." 

Here  meet  the  ever-recurring  difficulty  of  practically  fitting  together  man*t  energy 
and  God's  inspirations ;  man's  enterprise  and  God's  preservations ;  man's  free-will  and 
God*s  absolute  wilL  Show  that  to  the  man  who  fully  trusts,  the  difficulty  fides  away; 
and  that,  in  a  most  real  and  practical  sense,  God's  care  and  preservation  and  giaoe  are 
the  sanctifying  shadow  imder  which  noble  lives  are  now  lived. — R.  T. 

Ver.  11. — Loyalty  to  God  in  Me  time  of  success.  It  is  noted  that  the  best  of  the 
spoils  of  David's  ware  he  loyally  **  dedicated  unto  the  Lord,"  thus  proving  himself  aB 
faithful  In  the  time  of  prosperity  and  success  as  he  had  proved  himself  in  the  time 
of  failure  and  trouble.  The  testing  rower  of  adversity  is  often  considered,  and  is, 
indeed,  one  of  the  faiuiliar  topics  of  public  teaching ;  but  the  testing  power  of  prosperity 
is  not  worthily  estimated  or  efficientlv  treated.  Yet  God  works  by  boih^  and  the 
second  provides  the  more  searching  and  severe  forms  of  testing.  Many  a  man's  root- 
weak  ncsd  of  cbaractor  has  been  discovered  by  success.  It  is  harder  work  to  go  up  in 
life,  keeping  hold  of  Gnxi's  hand,  than  it  is  to  go  down.  And  it  says  much  for  David, 
and  little  for  Solomon,  that  under  God*s  temporal  blessings  David  held  fast  his  integrity, 
and  Solomon  virtually  forsook  the  God  of  his  fathers.  In  the  instance  now  before  us, 
David  had  a  grand  present  from  Tou,  the  King  of  ilamath.  Such  a  present  would  seem 
to  be  his  own  exclusive  pn^i)erty,  and  no  man  could  have  blamed  him  if  he  bad  added 
it  to  his  private  estate.  But,  in  pious  loyalty  to  God,  he  looked  upon  it  as  a  part  of 
the  success  with  which  God  had  attended  his  labours,  so  he  dedicated  it  to  the  honour 
and  service  of  God,  and  gained  a  far  richer  blessing  out  of  the  gift  than  if  he  had  kept 
it  for  himself. 

I.  Success  in  life  may  separate  us  from  God.  It  may,  by  filline  our  life  with  fresh 
interests,  and  crowding  out  God.  It  may,  by  nourishing  pride,  and  destroying  the  con- 
ditions on  which  alone  God  can  dwell  with  us.  It  may,  by  making  the  real  god  of  our 
worship  to  be  self,  and  so  dethroning  the  living  God.  It  may,  by  declaring  our  unfaith- 
fulness as  we  use  the  success  for  self,  and  not  for  God,  and  so  bring  ourselves  under 
Divine  judgments.  Or  it  may,  by  nourishing  carnal  security,  and  bringing  us  into  a 
spiritual  condition  that  must  grieve  and  quench  the  Holy  Spirit. 

II.  Success  in  life  may  bind  us  closely  to  God.  It  will,  if  we  fully  recognize  the 
Source  whence  all  success  comes.  It  will,  if  we  are  watchful  over  our  spiritual  culture, 
through  the  means  of  grace,  while  the  success  is  growing.  It  will,  if  we  are  fully 
resolved  to  consecrate  to  God's  use  any  success  we  may  gain.  It  will,  if  we  carefully 
reproportion  our  gifts,  to  God's  house  and  service,  as  our  success  advances.  Compare 
Jacob's  eariy  vow  at  Bethel  (Gen.  xxviii.  22),  "  Of  all  that  thou  shalt  give  me,  I  will 
BUrely  give  a  tenth  to  thee."  And  illustrate  David's  sacrifices  for  the  tabernacle  and 
temple  during  his  reign,  culminating  in  his  splendid  gift  out  of  his  "own  proper  good," 
his  own  private  property,  just  at  the  close  of  his  career  (ch.  xxix.  3—^).    We  may  be 


OH.  xvra.  1—17.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa.  807 


directly  helped  in  maintaining  the  right  spirit^  under  advancing  prosperities,  by  the 
devotement  of  portions  of  our  guccess  to  pious  uses.  Making  the  gift  of  portions 
testify  that  we  hold  the  whole  as  God's,  and  only  entrusted  to  our  stewardship  in  the 
mystery  of  the  Divine  grace.  **  What  have  we  that  we  have  not  received?'*  Offer 
what  we  may  to  Qod's  service,  of  it  we  must  say  but  this,  "  Of  thine  own  have  we 
given  thee.'  — R.  T. 

Ver.  14. — King's  jusiice.  Of  all  the  features  of  royalty  the  chronicler  selects  one, 
or  apparently  two,  as  special  characteristics  of  David's  reign.  "  He  executed  judgment 
and  justice  among  all  his  people."  Magistracy,  the  deciding  of  disputes,  and  the  punish- 
mcDt  of  criminals,  are  always  prominent  parts  of  kindly  duty.  They  are  less,  apparently, 
in  our  times,  because  our  sovereign  does  not  preside  in  person  in  our  law-courts,  but 
delegates  her  duty  to  her  judges.  They  were  more,  apf>arently,  kingly  work  in  ancient 
times,  and  under  Eastern  conceptions  of  royalty.  When  Solomon  entered  on  the 
responsibilities  of  kingship,  the  thing  that  seemed  most  serious  to  him  was  his  duty  as 
a  judge.  He  felt  the  neea  otjudiciai  insight,  seeing  that,  as  a  young  man,  he  had  no 
treasured  stores  of  experience.  His  request  of  wisdom  chiefly  referred  to  this  necessary 
gift  of  Eastern  kingship.  Kitto  says,  "  The  wisdom  which  he  craved  was  that  of  which 
he  had  already  enough  to  be  able  to  appreciate  the  value  of  its  inci'ease — practical 
wisdom,  sagacity,  clearness  of  judgment  and  intellect  in  the  administration  of  justice 
and  in  the  conduct  of  public  affairs."  The  administration  of  justice  may  well  be  set 
thus  prominently  forward,  for  probably  nothing  bears  so  directly  upon  the  well-being 
of  a  nation  as  the  wisdom  and  the  purity  of  its  judges.  The  terms  used  in  this  versa 
are,  however,  intended  to  include  more  than  court -justice,  and  we  may  see  that-* 

L  EiNGLT  JUSTICE  IS  THE  EXPRESSION  IN  THE  NATION  OF  THE  PATERNAL  BULB.      The 

family  is  the  first  aggregation  of  human  individuals,  and  its  head  and  ruler  is  the 
father.  The  next  a&;gregation  of  men  is  that  of  the  tribe ;  a  number  of  families  uniting 
their  interest,  and  dwelling  together,  and  at  the  head  of  the  tribe,  as  ruler  and  judge^ 
is  the  patriarch,  or  tribal  father.  The  larger  aggregation  of  men  is  the  union  of  tribes 
in  the  nation,  but  the  same  idea  is  preserved,  and  the  recognized  head  and  ruler  is  the 
king-father^  or  the  fatherly  king.  The  associations  of  these  two  terms  need  to  be  care- 
fully  given ;  and  it  should  be  shown  how  the  one  tones  the  other.  This  distinction 
being  set  prominentlv  forward, — The  king  seeks  to  do  the  absolutely  right  without  any 
more  than  a  general  knowledge  of  and  interest  in  his  people ;  a  king  cannot  be  expect^ 
to  know  individuals.  But  exactly  this  is  of  the  very  essence  of  fieitherhood.  The  father 
is  as  loyal  to  the  right  as  the  king,  but  he  seeks  to  apply  the  claims  of  right  to  the 
actual  condition  of  individuals,  whom  he  knows  with  precision,  and  in  whom  he  feels 
a  direct  and  personal  interest  And  so  it  may  be  said  that  the  perfect  idea  of  a  king  is 
expressed  in  the  \/Nm  father^  and  that  a  true  father  must  have  all  that  is  essential  to  a 
king.    It  is  always  said  of  the  good  king,  "  He  is  the  father  of  his  people." 

II.   EiNOLT  JUSTICE  IS  THE  REVELATION  TO  MEN  OF   THE  DiVINE  JUSTICE.      No  Ono 

word  can  suffice  to  present  the  relations  of  God  with  men.  And  that  because  no  words 
contain  an  absolute  and  necessary  meaning.  Their  connotation  differs  for  different 
individuals.  Show  that  neither  king  nor  father  are  sufficient  alone.  We  want  for  Gol 
a  word  which  shall  bring  home  to  our  hearts  the  conviction  that  he  is  dominated  by  the 
sense  of  right ;  but  we  as  certainly  want  a  word  which  shall  assure  us  that  all  his  ways 
with  us  are  toned  with  personal  interest  in  us,  perfect  knowledge  of  us,  and  the  gentlest 
consideration  for  our  weaknesses  and  wants.  So  thtf  justice  of  God  must  be  to  us  both 
kingly  and  fatherly. 

This  subject  opens  np  the  discussion  of  the  true  basis  of  the  "  atonement."  Only  by 
fully  estimating  Divine  justice  as  both  kingly  and  fatherly  can  we  discern  the  "  needs 
be  "  for  a  satisfaction  of  eternal  law^  and  a  persuasive  manifestation  of  eterual 
Zoue.— R.  T. 


308 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHKOyiCLES.    [ca  xix.  1—19. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAITER  XIX. 

Tliii  chftpUr  rum  very  cl^wely  parallel  I 
with  2  Sam.  x.  1—19;  a  chapter  alM  of 
nineteea  vencs.  Tike  ili^ht  difrcrLncet 
between  them  avail  to  make  one  or  the 
other  narrative  a  littlu  clearer  or  a  little 
fuller.  The  time  iioily  mArkvd,  aa  in  the 
fint  ver»e  of  the  precf«ling  chapter,  by  the  too 
general  formula,  **  after  thia.**  Between  the 
laat  verae  of  the  preceding  chapter  and  the 
first  of  thin,  we  find  interposetl,  in  the  Book 
of  Samwl,  the  account  of  David**  thoughta 
ami  deedd  of  kindneaa  "for  Jonathan*^ 
take  "  to  Mephiboflheth  ^  of  the  houae  of 
Bdul,"  who  was  a  son  of  Jonathan,  though 
apparently  not  personally  known  at  present 
to  David. 

The  chapter  gives  an  account  of  David's 
war  with  Ammon  and  Aram  allied  tempo- 
rarily, and  the  ungracious  cause  of  the  war 

the  insult  put  upon  David's  messengers, 

when  sent  on  a  mission  of  kindly  and  sin- 
cere condolence,  on  occaition  of  the  death  of 
Nahash,  King  of  Ammon.  Some  think  that 
the  cont«?iits  of  this  rhftptf-r  are  in  nality  a 
narmtion  at  gri-atcr  len;j:tli  and  in  fuller 
detail,  l)(  Ion j^ing  to  tlio  H{>ace  (ccupicd  by 
vers.  3—13  of  last  chapter.  They  would, 
in  like  manner,  identify  2  gam.  x.  1 — 19 
with  viii.  3—13. 

Ver.  1. — Hahash.  It  is  possible  that  this 
may  bo  the  Nahash  of  1  Sum.  xi.  1,2  and  xii. 
12,  who,  U'ing  nipnally  defeate<l  by  Siiul, 
may  have  been  the  more  inclined  to  i»how 
imrtiulity  to  David.  But  it  would  appear 
that  nearly  sixty  years  had  elapsed,  and  if 
BO,  it  muBt  be  held  very  unlikely,  and  would 
p«iiiit  U)  tlio  conclusion  that  it  was  bis  son 
whose  death  is  here  in  question.  With  this 
the  Htatement  of  Joseph  us  C*  Ant.,*  vi.  5,  §  3), 
would  tally,  which  says  that  the  Nahash  uf 
1  Sam.  xi.  was  killed  in  the  destruction  of 
the  Ammonite  army  then  wrought  by  Saul. 
Possibly  the  word  "  Nahash  "  wus  the  official 
title  of  kings  of  the  Ammonites  (and,  though 
considering  its  signification,  i.e.  icrpentf 
scarcely  a  flattering  one  from  a  modem 
point  of  view,  yet  tliis  is  overruled  by  the 
association  of  the  attribute  of  trisdom  with 
the  seri)ent  in  olden  time,  of  which  we  have 
more  than  a  trace  in  Matt  x.  10),  as  *'  Pha- 
raoh "  of  kings  of  Egypt,  etc. 

Ver.  2.— Beoanie  his  father  showed  kind- 
ness to  me.     The  instance  of  kindness  here 


I  alloded  to  is  not  recorded.    There  may  hav« 


been  many  opportunities  and  oalld  for  it 
during  David^  persecuted  life,  ami  whe  t 
the  Ammonite  king  would  feel  a  motive 
bi'yond  any  intrinsio  goodness  of  heart  to 
**show  kindness"  to  ttie  youth  who  was 
Saul's  object  of  hatred.  It  is,  however, 
very  remarkable  that  we  find  a  genoino 
kiudliness  towards  David  still  eleaving  to 
the  succession  of  Ammonite  kingsi,  even 
afler  the  events  of  this  chapter  (2  Sam. 
xvii.  27—29).  EaavB.  Nothing  else  it 
known  of  this  Hanun,  Though  here  the 
name  of  an  Ammonite  king,  we  find  it  in 
Neh.  iiL  13,  30,  the  name  of  two  of  thoee 
who  helped  repair  the  ci^.  The  ilssyrKia 
lHtcription$  contain  the  name  as  that  of  a 
Philistine  kinir,  tributary  to  Tiglath-pileeer 
(see  *  Speaker's  Commentary '). 

Ver.  3.— Thinkast  then  that  Da^id,  etc? 
The  Hebrew  is,  **In  thine  eyee  doth  David  ?" 
The  order  of  to  orarthrow,  and  to  spj  out  iM 
reversed  in  Samuel. 

Ver.  4. — The  classical  scholar  will  not 
fail  to  bo  reminded,  so  far  as  the  dialing 
hero  spoken  of  is  concerned,  of  the  aooouut 
contained  in  Herodotus,  ii.  121.  The  panUlel 
place  makes  the  resemblance  dose,  in  that 
it  tells  us  that  *«  one-half  of  their  beards" 
was  shaVL-d.  To  shave  them  was  an  afi'njut 
to  their  customs,  dignity,  and  religion ;  to 
shave  them  hulf  abided  mockery ;  and  to  cut 
off  half  their  garments  completed  the  talo 
of  ignominious  and  contemptuous  insult 
(Isa.  XX.  4>  The  beard  was  held  almost 
in  reverence  by  Easterns. 

Ver.  6. — Hade  themselyes  odious.  The 
Hebrew  root  of  very  strong  force,  rna,  is 
hero  employed,  and  which  our  Authorized 
Version  translates,  both  in  the  parallel  place 
and  elsewhere,  far  more  uncompromisingly 
than  here.  A  thousand  talents.  Not  stated 
in  Samuel.  This  talent  was  of  three  thou- 
sand shekels,  believed  to  be  equivalent  to 
£342.  Mesopotamia.  The  parallel  place 
bos  Aram-beth-rehob,  instead  of  our  Aram- 
naharaim  ("  Syria  of  the  Two  Rivers,**  ue, 
Tigris  and  Euphrates ;  Authorized  Version, 
**  Mesopotamia ").  From  comparing  thi* 
verse  with  ver.  16,  it  may  seem  probable 
that  those  strictl v  called  **  of  Mesopotamia  " 
lent  either  no  aid  at  first  or  but  veiy  partial. 
It  is  observable  that  the  numbers  of  men 
supplied  by  Beth-rehob,  Zobah,  and  Ishtob 
in  the  parallel  place  (viz.  thirty-ttpo  thou* 
sand)  agree  with  the  numbers  of  this  verse, 
from  which  we  may  conclude  that,  whatever 
Aram-beth-rehob  (probably  either  Beho- 
tjoth  on  the  Euphrates,  or  Rehob  last  of 
Lebanon)  and  Aram-naharaim  mtt,y  stricif^ 


cu.  XIX  1—19.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


809 


Btand  for  respectiTely,  thej  here  rabstan- 
tially  mean  the  same.  It  is  possible  that 
the  difference  is  that  of  a  corrupt  text  or 
careless  copying.  The  Aram-naharaim 
{Mewpotamia),  which  comes  before  us  first 
in  Gen.  xxi?.  10,  passes  out  of  Scripture 
language  after  the  defeats  of  this  chapter — 
the  tract  of  country  which  it  designated 
(some  seven  hundred  miles  by  twenty  to 
two  hundred  and  fifty)  being  absorbed,  first 
by  Assyria,  and  afterwards  by  Babylon. 
The  Assyrian  Inscriptions  leveal  the  faet 
that  Mesopotamia  was  the  pre^  of  a  largo 
number  of  small  separate  tnbes  at  the 
period  of  the  judges  and  the  early  Jewish 
monarchy,  which  is  quite  consistent  with 
the  glimpses  we  here  get  of  it  and  its 
people.  Aram-maaohah  probably  desig- 
nates the  tract  of  country  north  of  £a:it 
Manasseh,  bordering  on  Palestine,  and 
bounded  by  the  Jordan,  Mount  Hermon, 
and  on  its  east,  Salcah.  2iobah  (see  ch. 
xvm.  3,  note ;  1  Sam.  xiv.  47).  The  parallel 
place  adds  also  '*  the  men  of  Islitob.'* 

Yer.  7.— Thirty  and  two  thousaxid  chariots. 
The  reading  in  the  parallel  place  is  eyidentW 
what  is  intended  (comp.  ch.  xviii.  4  with 
its  parallel,  2  Sam.  viii.  4).  Clearly  a  stop 
should  follow  the  numeral^  which  designates 
the  number  of  the  men  under  arms. 
Hedeba.  Some  four  miles  south-east  of 
Heshbon  (Numb.  xxi.  30 ;  Josh.  xiii.  9, 16 ; 
Isa.  XV.  2),  or  others  give  it  as  nine  miles. 
It  id  not  given  in  SamueL 

Ver.  9. — ^The  kings.  Compare  this  and 
ver.  19  with  ver.  19  of  the  parallel  chapter, 
and  also  with  ver.  8  (2  Sam.  x.  19, 8). 

Ver.  10. — The  meaning  in  brief  of  this 
yerae  is  that,  as  Joab  found  there  were 
practically  two  enemies,  and  two  armies  to 
face,  he  avoided  the  mistake  of  being  shut 
up  between  them  more  than  necessary,  and 


divided  his  own  hosts.  He  took  the  flower 
of  all,  under  his  own  command,  to  face  the 
Syrians  in  the  field,  who  were  the  most  for- 
midable of  the  enemy.  The  rest  he  put 
imder  his  brother  Abishai,  to  face  tha 
Ammonites  at  the  gate,  i.e,  of  the  city 
Medeba.  The  plan  succeeded,  for  if 
Abishai  had  only  done  as  much  as  hold 
back  the  Ammonites  awhile,  so  soon  as  they 
saw  the  Syrians  break  and  flee  they  knew 
that  Joab  and  his  army  would  be  free  to 
"help"  Abishai 

Ver.  15.— Then  Joab  eame  to  Jerusalem. 
This  is  eauivalent  to  saying  that,  for  what 
he  deemed  sufficient  reasons,  Joab  did  not 
stay  to  besiege  the  Ammonites  in  the  city, 
within  the  walls  of  which  they  had  taken 
refuge,  nor  to  pursue  the  Syrians.  Hence 
we  find  these  latter  soon  made  bold  to  rally 
and  to  get  additional  aid. 

Ver.  16.— Beyond  the  river ;  i.e,  the  river 
Euphrates.  Shophaoh.  In  the  parallel 
place  spelt  Shaha^.  Of  him  nothing  else 
IS  known  except  his  death,  as  recorded  in 
ver.  18  and  in  2  Sam.  x.  18. 

Ver.  17. — Came  npon  them.  The  reading 
of  the  parallel  passage  is  probably  correct 
t.e.  they  '*came  to  Helam,"  inasmuch  as 
the  place  is  repeated,  both  in  ver.  16  and 
ver.  17.  Nothing  else,  however,  is  known 
of  Helam.    The  Septuagint  has  Alx^u 

Ver.  18. — Seven  thouiand  men  which 
fought  in  ohariotB.  The  parallel  passage 
has  ^  the  men  of  seven  hundred  chariots." 
There  could  not  be  ten  fighting  men  to  a 
chariot.  The  reading  of  Samuel  is  more 
likely  to  be  eorrect  than  our  present 
reading.  Vorty  thousand  footmen.  The 
parallel  place  shows  ^*  horsemen." 

Ver.  19. — ^Became  his  servants;  i.e.  his 
tributaries  and  vassals. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1—19. — The  iU  work  of  auspicumsness.  Even  when  the  history  and  the 
l)iogTaphy  which  we  come  across  in  Scripture  are  of  a  repulsive  character,  we  manifestly 
have  no  room  to  blame  the  historians,  who  certainly  did  not  make  that  history  nor 
invent  their  biographies,  but  who  did  faithfully  record  in  both  the  manifestations 
of  human  nature.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  much  for  which  to  be  thankful 
in  the  comparison  of  Scripture  history  and  biography  with  other.  Human  hearts, 
human  life,  mcike  history ;  and  according  as  these  are  willingly  or  unwillingly  beneath 
the  strong  overruling  control  of  Divine  providence  do  they  make  history  tluit  gladdens 
the  heart  to  read,  or  that  makes  ashamed.  But  for  instructiveness  much  will  depend 
on  the  selection  and  the  disposition  of  the  material  of  history.  And  Scripture  follows, 
we  doubt  not,  a  perfect  rule  and  wisest  guidance  in  these  respects.  The  sensational 
is  not  its  guiding  principle ;  certainly  the  prurient  is  not ;  nor  that  which  would  afifect 
pr  even  heartily  "  strive  to  wind  "  it 

"...  too  high 
For  mortal  man  beneath  the  sky." 

It  courts  not  extremes  for  extremes'  sake,  nor  ^vcs  prominence  to  the  more  unusual 


i 


810  THE  HRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ch.  xiz.  1— 19? 


ntlier  than  to  that  which,  by  reason  of  its  frequency,  would  be  likely  to  be  the  moro 
useful.  It  cannot  be  told  for  how  much  civilized  society  has  to  be  thankful  that  it 
possesses  such  models  as  the  biography  and  history  of  Scripture  afford,  and  mankind  that 
it  is  offered  such  wealth  of  wisest  and  most  needed  instruction.  The  present  chapter  iiT 
notable  for  a  very  simple  tale  of  the  weaving  of  unmitigated  mischief  by  the  swift  play 
of  that  little  shuttle,  the  shuttle  of  suspicion.  Kindness  and  goodness  and  wisdom — the 
works  of  these  arc  for  t^  miserably  t«7f ravelled ;  and  neither  does  it  do  iiulf  any  good^ 
it  incurs  swift  dcbtruction.    This  portion  of  history  teaches-^ 

I.  The  vitalitt  of  the  seed  of  kikdness.  Whoever  Nahash  was,  some  time  had 
elapsed  since  his  kindness  to  David.  For  that  kindness  will  have  belonged  to  the 
time  of  David's  need.  All  this  is  reversed  now.  Ingratitude  would  have  all  the  looner 
forgotten  it,  now  that  David's  circumstances  were  so  altered,  had  the  heart  of  David 
been  of  the  bad,  ungrateful  sort.  But  this  was  not  so,  and  the  kindness  of  Nahash  bad 
dropped  a  good  seed  in  the  good  soil  of  David's  heart.  It  was  not  a  mere  memory.  It 
was  not  an  action  eagerly  accepted  in  the  pressing  hour,  but  disparaged,  de^ireciatedy 
discounted  in  selfish  thought  after  that  hour  had  passed.  It  was  not  turned  into  a 
reason  for  avoiding  the  sight  of  the  person  to  whom  debt  was  due,  or  for  dropping 
communication  with  him.  Kindnesses  rendered  often  get  treatment  of  this  8ort---«.e. 
no  return  or  ill  return.  But  this  is  not  the  fault  of  the  kindness.  It  lies  at  the  door  of 
the  bad,  ungrateful  heart  of  the  person  to  whom  it  has  been  shovm.  Otherwise  seeds 
of  kindness  possess  great  vitality. 

II.  The  vitality  of   the  seed  of  kindness   amid  CinCUIfSTAKCES  UKFAT0URABI.I 

TO  it.  Strongest  affections  often  grow  in  most  untoward  clime  and  place.  They  throw 
their  roots  down  with  vigorous  determination,  in  stony,  rocky  places.  The  little  soil 
they  find  in  groove,  chink,  fissure,  is  often  good  and  rich,  however,  and  they  use  it  well, 
and  ere  long  make  the  rift  larger^  and  acquire  thereby  more  moisture  and  more  deposit 
of  soil.  And  it  is  so  with  kindness.  The  most  diverse  nature  will  appreciate  it  most. 
Sometimes  just  because  it  is  unexpectedly  offered  to  the  foreigner,  the  outcast,  the 
despised,  the  undeserving,  the  notorious  sinner,  the  man  whom  a  thousand  give  up  as  a 
hardened  hopeless  man,  for  one  who  entertains  a  contrary  thought,  it  takes  amazingly 
to  the  soil,  and  becomes  ere  long  a  vast  and  fruitful  growth.  And  now,  what  had 
impressed  David  much  was,  that  when  his  father  and  mother,  and  king  and  people,  had 
"  forsaken  "  him  (not  all  of  choice  by  any  means),  an  Ammonite  had  *'  taken  him  up," 
and  shown  kindness  to  him. 

III.  The  length  of  vitality  of  the  seed  of  kindness.  As  has  been  said,  we  do 
not  know  the  exact  length  in  this  case.  But  a  considerable  number  of  years  had  pro- 
bably passed.  And  they  were  years  which  had  been  crowded  with  the  kind  of  events 
which  would  drive  many  and  many  a  thing  out  of  the  mind,  and  alter  the  proportions 
and  the  look  of  things,  and  correct  many  an  exaggerated  estimate,  and  naturally  help  a 
man  to  forget  how  hungry  he  once  was^  and  how  unsheltered,  and  how  friendless,  and 
how  downcast  in  heart. 

IV.  Tub  liability  to  destructive  blight  of  the  kindliest  fruits  of  huxan 
KATUBE.  Here  was  the  kindness  of  Nahash  about  to  show  its  remoter  and  its  higher 
de&ri[ition  of  good  result.  It  had  fulfilled  its  first  office  of  real,  practical,  perhaps 
saving  service  to  David.  But  now  its  offspring,  its  scion  of  generous  kind,  was  to 
become  apparent  to  God  and  to  men.  It  was  wishful  to  make  its  returns.  It  was 
goin$(  to  show  the  reproductive  nature.  No  fault  of  its  own,  it  is  baulked,  injured, 
cruelly  blighted.  It  is  a  testimony  that  good  things  in  this  world  are  not  secure  of 
their  good  influence,  that  goodness  postulates  not  unfrequently  a  good  sphere.  Once 
Goodness  itself  "  came  to  its  own,"  but  its  own  "  knew  it  not,"  refused  it,  put  it  to  open 
shame,  crucified  it ! 

V.  That  this  kind  of  blight  is  not  always  a  mystery.  No;  in  this  case,  for 
instance,  it  is  only  too  explicable.  Of  the  blights  of  nature,  it  may  be  said,  that  they 
are  free  of  blame  to  men,  though  not  free  of  disaster  to  them.  They  are  borne  on  the 
winds  of  heaven,  and  in  a  sense  must  be  said  to  come  of  the  will  of  heaven,  much  as 
those  winds  themselves.  No  earthly  power  can  stay  them,  or  do  more  than  partially 
provide  against  their  incursion — partially  undo  and  recover  their  mischief.  But  not  so 
IS  it  with  the  moral  and  spiritual  blights  we  know  and  see  in  our  own  life,  in  the  larger 
area  of  human  history*    Here  it  is  manifestly  due  to  two  conspiring  causes.    1.  To  ue 


CH.  XIX.  1—19.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  811 

bad  advisers  of  iwpieion.  The  princes  of  the  children  of  AmmoD,  round  Hanon,  are 
wise  above  what  was  written^  above  what  was  true.  They  were  bad  advisers,  not 
because  they  meant  ill  to  their  master,  not  because  they  were  false  to  him,  not  because, 
like  Job*s  comforters,  they  were  hard  and  unsympathetic,  and  their  theology  as  shallow 
as  it  was  presumptuous ;  but  because  they  were  feeding  on  suspicion.  Their  philosophy 
of  human  nature  was  to  fault.  They  had  experience,  h&d  had  doubtless  much  experience 
of  human  life  and  character,  but  they  had  not  had  enough.  Their  induction  of  instances 
was  insufficient,  and  thioking  *'  themselves  to  be  wise,  they  became  fools."  2.  To  the 
weakness  of  the  ruling  head.  Hanun  himself  had  to  make  the  decision;  he  was 
answerable  for  the  verdict ;  ho  presumably  had  more  material  than  his  advisers  within 
the  compass  of  his  knowledo^e,  and  he  might  have  overruled  them  and  their  suspicion. 
"  In  the  multitude  of  counsellors  there  is  safety,"  but  the  multitude  must  be  large  enough, 
and  varied  enough,  and  representative  enough,  and  it  was  not  so  now.  How  many  a 
ruler,  from  Behoboam  down  to  our  present  age,  has  ruined  himself  and  his  nation,  and 
involved  them  both  in  utterest  curse  of  most  devastating  murderous  war,  because  of 
his  individual  lack  of  sound  judgment,  of  wise  and  understanding  heart,  of  prayer  and 
piety  unfeigned  1  Suspicion  has  its  use,  with  every  other  power  of  our  nature,  but  now 
it  was  misused.  Suspicion  is  ever  a  faculty  to  be  suspected  of  the  wise  man.  Su8« 
piciousncss  is  one  of  the  unhappiest  of  all  tendencies  of  the  disposition.  It  should  be 
jealously  used  and  scrupulously  guarded. 

VI.  The  vast  gbowth  op  btbifb,  iniquitt,  utteb  uisebt,  that  mat  comb  of 

THE  ONE  FALSE  STEP,  OF  ONE  MAN  ILL-ADVISED  OF  HIS  FELLOWS  AND  UNADVISED  OF  GoD. 

Hence  now  came  wars,  and  those  who  did  the  mischief  were  the  first  to  fly  to  the 
thought  of  war,  and  to  prepare  for  battle.  Their  foolishness  and  iniquity  returned  upon 
their  own  pate.  But  not  there  alone.  How  many  thousands  of  o^ers  were  Involved 
in  the  common  slaughter  1 

VII.  Last  of  all,  the  Divinb  utilization  of  human  brrob,  human  bin.  David's 
enemies,  after  all,  are  they  who  are  exterminated  or  nearly  so.  And  some,  who  bad 
"  halted  between  two  opinions,"  repented  of  their  indecision.  They  "  made  peace  with 
David."  Thev  '*  became  his  servants."  But,  in  addition  to  this,  they  learned  not  to 
"  help  the  children  of  Ammon  any  more."  The  victory  was  won  for  Otod.  Strength 
was  gained  for  his  chosen  people,  and  confidence  wrought  afresh  in  them  in  their 
Divine  Captain.  And  withal  surrounding  nations  learnt  something  of  tiie  truth,  and 
^ith  whom  peace  were  best  to  seek,  surest  to  find. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  2. — Kindness  and  sympathy.  Stem  warrior  though  David  was,  and  capable  of 
tevere  and  even  cruel  actions,  he  nevertheless  had  a  warm  and  tender  heart.  So  much 
night  be  gathered  from  the  story  of  his  youthful  affection  for  Jonathan,  and  from  that 
of  his  subsequent  forbearance  towards  SauL  In  maturer  years  he  retained  the  warm 
sensibilities  of  humanity.  Thus,  when  the  King  of  Ammon  died,  David  felt  sincerely 
tor  his  son  and  successor,  and,  that  he  might  give  expression  to  his  kindly  sympathy, 
**  sent  messengers  to  comfort  him  concerning  bis  father."  His  compassionate  feelings, 
and  his  courteous  and  graceful  expression  of  them,  are  suggestive  of  some  reflections 
upon  human  kindness  and  sympathy. 

I.  Consider  thb  ground  and  origin  of  these  feelings.  They  lie  deep  in  human 
nature,  and  are,  in  fact  (as  Bishop  Butler  has  so  well  shown),  as  much  natural  social 
principles,  as  self-love  is  a  principle  of  individual  action.  They  are  implanted  by  God, 
and  are  akin  to  his  own  gracious  and  benevolent  disposition.  He  is  a  Grod  of  'Move 
and  kindness;"  "in  all  our  afiBictions  he  is  afflicted.'  Especially  is  this  apparent  in 
redemption.  It  was  compassion  that  animated  the  Divine  Father  in  his  purpose  to  save 
our  sinful  race.  It  was  love  that  actuated  the  incarnation  and  sacrifice  of  Immanuel. 
The  dispositions,  then,  of  which  we  are  treating  have  their  deep  foundation  in  the 
character,  the  attributes,  of  our  Creator.  So  far  from  being  signs  of  human  weakness, 
they  are  an  honour  and  ornament  of  humanity. 

II.  Regard  the  occasion  of  the  manifestion  of  these  dispositions.  Human  life  is 
such  as  to  call  them  forth.    No  man,  no  woman,  can  go  through  life  without  abundant 


812  aUE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa    [cH.  xix.  1— la 


opiH^rt unity  for  the  disi>lay  of  these  qualities.  In  times  of  health  and  prosperity  then 
in  ci>ini>ari\'ivi'ly  little  occasion  for  symixithy  aud  t<*nder  kindaess.  But  times  of 
troiiMe,  tticknoss,  sufl'iTin<!,  adversity,  bereavement,  must  come  to  all  men.  Such  times 
are  the  iMoviilt'iitially  ap|K>inted  op{H)rtunitie8  fur  kindly  sym^iathy.  Then  the  friend  will 
**  show  hiniM>lf  friendly.  l>avid*M  heart  was  touched  by  the  tidings  of  his  friend's  death, 
and  ho  was  drawn  to  hhow  kindness  to  the  livinv;  son  for  the  sake  of  the  deceased 
father.  A  sense  of  gratitude  naturally  and  pro|«rly  pive  acnteness  to  these  feelings: 
David  had  in  fornuT  davs  reoeive<l  kindness  from  Nahash,  and  on  this  account  he  all 
the  more  felt  the  claim  ot  the  fatlu-rless  son  ujion  his  friendly  sympathy. 

III.  ObMTvo  TUK  ouTWAKU  FOKMs  which  tliesc  feelings  assume,  lliese  must  be 
detemiiiiCil  by  circumstances,  according  to  relative  ap;e,  social  position,  and  character. 
SomotimoR  by  sympathizing  expression  of  countenance  and  manner,  sometimes  by 
iK'ords  s|H)ken  or  wiitten,  sometimes  by  services,  sometimes  by  appropriate  and  season- 
able ^il'ts,  wo  miy  show  our  cordial  sympathy,  and  thus  rivet  the  sacred  bonds  of 
humanity  and  of  friendship.  David  on  this  occasion  sent  envoys  to  his  friend's  son, 
to  condole  with  him  aud  to  assure  him  of  his  good  feeling  and  lus  good  wishes.  Sucli 
action  must  in  the  circumstances  htive  proved  gratifying  and  strengthening.  Wisdom 
and  tact  will  discern  the  most  suitable  way  of  acting  in  the  several  cases  which  may  arise. 

IV.  Ilefli'ct  uiK>n  THE  valuk  of  these  di8(X)sitions.  To  underestimate,  still  more  to 
despise  kindness,  is  the  sign  of  an  unjust  aud  an  i^znoble  mind.  Shall  we  leave  out  of 
sight,  in  reckoning  life's  riches,  thepri'cious  sympathy,  the  dear  kindness,  of  our  kindred 
and  our  friends  ?  These  dis(K>sitions  hare  a  value  which  only  the  heart  can  appraise ; 
they  are  in  themselves  precious,  and  no  just  mind  would  barter  them  for  diamonids  and 
gold.  They  have  also  a  practical  and  substantial  worth.  When  one  friend  is  taken 
from  us  for  a  season,  it  is  no  mean  advantage  to  have  another  friend,  upon  whose 
counsel  we  mny  lean,  and  u{on  whose  sympathy  and  faithfulness  we  may  count. 
Human  kindness  is  a  poor  substitute  for  Divine  compassion,  but  it  may  well  prove  one 
of  its  fairest  liowers,  its  richest  fruits. — T. 

Vcr.  13. — True  wihur,  Tho  annals  of  the  human  race  arc,  alas!  filled  with  the 
records  of  war,  and  the  happily  unwritten  annals  of  innumerable  tribes  would  have 
Ciuisist«d  of  little  else.  Israel  is  no  excei'tii>n.  Joab,  as  one  of  David's  mighty  men, 
shared  his  chi<'fs  warlike  prowess  without  sharing  all  the  higher  excellences  of  his  cha- 
racter. Yet  on  this  iK'casion  Jv>ab  iiave  utterance  to  language  the  nobility  and  beauty 
of  which  caimot  but  be  acknowledged.  Tho  words  are  an  expression  and  a  description 
of  true  valour. 

I.  TnK  HKAKT  OF  THE  VALIANT.  "  Be  of  good  courago,"  Actiou  needs  motive. 
Tho  heart  within  is  tho  explanation  of  the  outer  life.  In  modem  warfare,  science, 
skill,  command  of  material,  arc  far  more  imix^rtant  than  in  ancient  times,  when  the 
individual  qualities  of  the  hero  were  almost  everything  in  the  conduct  and  results  of 
war.  r.ut,  if  a  country  is  to  be  defended  or  dcliveri-d,  the  iHK)ple  aud  their  leaders  mu&t 
have  a  brave,  a  dauntless  heart. 

II.  TiiK  CONDUCT  OF  THE  VALIANT.  A  bravo  heart  must  find  its  expression  in  brave 
deetls.  "  Lot  us  behave  ourselves  valiantly  I "  "  Who  would  be  free,  themselves  must 
strike  the  blow,"  It  is  so  in  all  deimrtments  of  life.  It  is  not  tho  dreamer  or  tho 
sage,  but  tho  man  of  resolution  and  of  energy,  who  conquers  in  the  strife. 

III.  The  motive  of  tub  valiant.  **  For  our  ])eople,  and  for  the  cities  of  our  God." 
Komark  tho  power  of  unselfishness  to  raise  the  moral  quality  of  actions.  It  was  not 
with  aggressive,  ambitious  purjx)ses  that  the  Israelites  drew  the  sword — 

«*  But  chief  were  tliose  who  not  for  empire  sought, 
liut  \\-ith  their  toils  their  people's  safety  bought" 

Many  wars  doubtless  have  been  undertaken  in  a  mis;*uided,  mistaken  spirit  of  patriot- 
ism. Still,  it  is  a  good  element  so  far  in  any  enterprise,  that  the  motive  animating  it 
is  our  country's  good. 

IV.  The  confidence  of  the  valiant.  •*  Let  the  Lord  do  that  which  is  good  in  his 
sight."  Hero  was  faith  in  Providence;  a  reference  of  all  to  the  wisdom  of  the  Most 
High ;  a  resolve  to  leave  the  issues  in  the  hands  of  the  God  of  hosts.    Fatalism  has 


(m.  XIX,  1—19.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  813 

sometimes  been  regarded  as  favourable  to  valour ;  but  far  more  stimulating  to  couraee 
is  confidence  in  an  all-wise  Ruler  and  Disposer  of  events.  The  soldier  wiU  go  bravely 
to  battle,  the  labourer  to  work,  the  martyr  to  suffering,  when  the  heart  is  inspired  with 
the  assurance  of  the  Divine  presence  and  favour  and  support.  '*  They  that  trust  in  the 
Lord  shall  never  be  ashamed  or  confounded,  world  without  end." — T. 

Vers.  1 — 19. — A  hundU  of  mistakes.  This  is  a  chapter  of  mistakes.  Everything  goes 
wrong;  except,  indeed,  that  the  wron^  is  righted  inasmuch  as  the  wrong-doers  are 
worsted,  and  made  to  pay  a  heavy  penalty  for  their  folly.  David  may  be  said  to  have 
erred  in  acting  as  if  it  were  true — 

I.  That  kindness  is  apprboiated  bt  the  fbowabd.  He  meant  well ;  his  spirit  is 
much  to  be  commended.  Gratitude  for  past  kindnesses  is  a  virtue  which  can  hardly 
be  overpraised ;  it  is  too  often  absent  from  those  in  whom  we  have  a  right  to  look  for  it. 
But  the  Hebrew  king  did  not  reckon  on  the  churlishness  of  the  Ammonite  court.  The 
princes  of  Ammon  were  men  of  a  low  and  froward  type,  and  were  incapable  of  credit- 
ing a  neighbouring  power  with  simple  and  genuine  good  wilL  Hence  an  act  of 
ingenuous  goodness  was  entirely  thrown  away ;  indeed,  it  acted  as  a  spark  to  a  maga- 
zine ;  it  brought  about  an  explosion  of  national  wrath.  It  is  always  well  to  wish  to 
show  kindness  to  any  and  every  one,  but  it  is  not  always  well  to  put  our  wish  into 
practice.  There  is  no  need  to  '*  cast  pearls  before  swine."  Only  we  must  take  care 
that  this  injunction  of  our  Lord  does  not  hinder  us  from  deeds  of  courageous  kindness. 
Judgment  and  generosity  must  go  together  in  the  path  of  good  wilL 

II.  That  there  is  necessarily  wisdom  in  a  number  of  gounsellobs.  (Yer.  8.) 
Hanun  himself  was  probably  inclined  to  accept  David's  overture  of  condolence,  but  he 
allowed  himself  to  be  overruled  by  his  *'  princes."  It  is  wise  to  take  counsel  with 
others,  but  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  there  is  often  truth  in  the  strong  and  bitter 
saying,  '*  Twelve  wise  men  in  counsel  make  one  fool."  Experience  shows  that  where 
one  man  sees  his  way  clearly,  a  number  of  men  will  often  confuse  one  another  and 
come  to  an  unsound  conclusion.  We  are  not  to  allow  a  number  of  men  to  override 
a  strong  conviction,  especially  when  that  conviction  is  reached  after  prayer  and  con- 
sultation of  God's  Wonl^  and  when  it  is  on  the  side  of  generosity. 

III.  That  suspicion  is  nearer  the  truth  than  charity.  Doubtless  these  princes 
who  ascribed  David's  action  to  a  sinister  desire  '*  to  spy  out  the  land  "  (ver.  3)  con- 
sidered themselves  remarkably  astute,  and  believed  that  they  had  hit  upon  the  truth. 
We  know  that  they  were  utterly  wrong.  If  they  had  accepted  the  ostensible  object  of 
the  mission  as  the  real  one,  if  they  had  shown  the  smallest  charity  in  their  spirit  and 
credited  David  with  kindliness  of  heart,  they  would  have  been  in  the  right.  As  it  was, 
their  suspicions  onlv  led  them  directly  away  from  the  truth.  Be  charitable,  and  you 
will  £Eur  more  often  be  just  than  if  you  are  habitually  suspicious. 

lY.  That  anything  is  gained  by  insult.  The  shameful  insult^  amounting  to  out- 
rage in  all  international  codes,  that  was  perpetrated  when  "  Hanun  took  David's  ser- 
vants," etc.  (ver.  4),  wrought  no  good,  and  did  an  immensity  of  harm  to  its  authors. 
It  led  to  disastrous  defeat  in  war  (ver.  15),  and  to  a  strong  exasperation  of  feeling 
against  them  on  the  part  of  a  powerful  neighbouring  people.  Insult  never  answers.  It 
hardens  the  heart  which  indulges  it ;  it  rankles  in  the  breast  of  him  against  whom 
it  is  levelled ;  and,  sooner  or  later,  it  brings  down  retaliation  and  penalty.  Moreover,  it 
provokes  Divine  condemnation  (Matt.  v.  22). 

y.  That  we  can  measure  the  consequences  of  cub  transactions  with  cue 
FELLOWS.  How  little  did  these  Ammonites  think  that  this  act  of  bravery  and  pro- 
vocation would  be  followed  by  the  train  of  bitter  consequences  which  ensued  (vers. 
6—15 ;  ch.  XX.  1 — 3)  I  How  little  did  the  Syrians,  when  tney  hired  themselves  to  the 
Ammonites  (vers.  6,  7),  imagine  that  that  mercenary  militarism  of  theirs  would  end  in 
the  double  overthrow  inflictSl  on  them  at  the  hand  of  David  (vers.  14, 16,  18)  I  We 
can  never  see  how  far  our  transactions  will  extend ;  there  may  be  the  largest  and  longest 
issues  latent  in  very  humble  beginnings.  Of  nothing  is  this  more  true  than  strife 
(Prov.  xvii.  14 ;  Jas.  iii.  5  ;  Matt.  v.  25,  26). 

VI.  That  persistency  prevails  when  we  fight  against  Qod.  In  vain  did  Syrians 
draw  forth  Syrians  "  beyond  the  river  "  (ver.  16)  to  fight  against  Israel.  The  Lord  was 
with  David,  •*  preserving  him  whithersoever  he  went "  (ch.  xviii.  13),  and  to  persist  in  an 


314  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  GHBONICLES.    [cH.  xix.  1— la 


endeavour  to  OYercome  bim  was  only  to  "  fight  against  God  "  (Acts  t.  39"^.  When  wt 
are  seeking  to  crush  truth,  righteousDess,  piety,  Christian  earnestness  and  seal,  we  an 
bound  to  be  beaten.  However  persistent  we  may  be,  we  shall  surely  be  oyeroome  la 
the  end.    It  is  hard  to  kick  against  the  goads  of  Gk)d  (Acts  ix.  5). — G. 

Vers.  10—14. — The  condiiiont  of$tKxes$  in  the  battle  of  life.  When  the  time  shall 
come  that  ^  devout  men  carry  us  to  our  burial,"  when  good  men  will  be  forming  an 
estimate  of  the  life  we  have  lived  on  the  earth,  will  they  be  able  to  sav  of  us  that  we  wcfe 
Tictors  in  the  strife,  or  will  they  have  sorrowfully  to  acknowledge  that  we  were  beaten 
In  the  battle  of  life  ?  That  will  depend  on  how  we  are  conducting  oonelyeB  now. 
There  are  three  conditions  of  success. 

L  Fighting  ok  tub  bight  sidb.  '*  Let  the  Lord  do  that  which  is  good  in  hisaght," 
aaid  Joab.  Whether  we  shall  win  or  not  depends  on  whether  or  not  we  have  Grod  upon 
our  side.  If  he  be  for  uh,  who  or  what  can  be  successful  against  us?  (Rom.  viii.  31 ;  P^ 
cxviii.  6).  And  he  will  be  with  us  if  we  are  on  the  side  of  truth,  rightaouaoeM^ 
freedom,  love. 

II.  Havikg  a  good  heart  fob  the  battls.  (Ver.  13.)  Joab  sought  to  infuse  heart 
into  the  soldiers  he  was  leading.  **  Be  of  good  courage,  and  let  us  behave  ourselves 
valiantly."  He  appealed  to  their  patriotism  ("  for  our  people  ")  and  to  their  mety  ("  for 
the  cities  of  our  God  ").  He  could  not  have  touched  two  more  responsive  cnords  thui 
these.  We  must  summon  one  another,  and  call  upon  ourselves  to  be  courageous  in  the 
strife  before  us,  mindful  of  the  many  reasons  we  have  to  do  valiantly  and  welL  (1) 
The  presence  and  the  promised  help  of  God ;  (2)  the  approval  of  our  own  conscience^  the 
enjoyment  of  self-respect ;  (3)  the  crown  of  joy  we  shall  win  if  we  are  able  to  save 
souls  from  death,  or  lead  many  along  the  path  of  life ;  (4^  the  urgent  want  of  a  sin- 
atricken  world  that  every  brave  and  true  man  should  do  his  best.  The  world  aorely 
needs  all  the  witness  we  can  bear,  all  the  help  we  can  bring. 

III.  Making  a  wise  disposition  of  oub  fobces.  Joab  owed  his  victory  in  part  to 
sagacious  generalship.  He  selected  the  best  soldiera  of  his  army  to  encounter  the 
strongest  troops  of  the  enemy,  the  Syrians  (ver.  10),  hoping  to  be  able  to  repel  the  less 
formidablo  Ammonites  by  the  less  soldierly  of  his  own  forces  (ver.  11).  Moreover,  he 
took  care  to  have  a  reserve  in  case  of  need,  by  arranging  that  whoever  should  be  first 
victorious,  whether  his  brother  or  himself,  instead  of  continuing  the  pursuit  of  the 
flying  enemy,  should  come  at  once  to  strengthen  the  hands  of  the  still-struggling  division 
(ver.  12).  This  was  a  most  wise  arrangement.  Many  a  battle  has  been  decided  by  the 
presence  or  absence  of  a  reserve  force.  At  Naseby  the  battle  was  lost  to  the  king 
because  the  royalist  leader  pursued  too  far,  and  was  gained  for  the  Parliament  because 
its  leader  returned  in  time  from  following  the  retreating  enemy  to  fall  on  the  rear  of  the 
wing  which  was  still  engaged.  In  the  b&ttle  of  life,  the  event  may  turn  on  a  wise  dis- 
position of  our  forces.  VVe  are  so  to  expend  our  physical  fowers  and  our  mental 
resources  that  we  shall  direct  our  strength  to  the  most  difficult  tasks,  leaving  the 
less  serious  ones  to  our  weakness,  and  that  we  shall  always  have  something  in  reserve 
for  the  critical  hour.  Especially  should  we  see  to  it  that  we  have  friends  to  fieLU  back 
upon  in  the  trying  ordeal.  "  Woe  unto  him  that  is  alone  when  he  falleth  1 "  happy  he 
who,  when  he  is  bard  pressed,  has  the  voice  and  grasp  of  friendship  to  sustain  himl 
By  (1)  excellency  and  admirableness  of  character,  by  (2)  beauty  and  attractiveness  of 
spirit,  by  (3)  generosity  of  heart  and  hand,  let  us  secure  the  sympathy  and  the  support 
of  friends  in  the  hour  when  victory  or  defeat  is  trembling  in  the  balances. — C. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — David  and  Hanun,  Between  Nahash  the  King  of  the  Ammonites  and 
David,  there  subsisted  a  very  friendly  relation,  which  had  been  commenced  during  the 
exile  of  the  latter,  and  was  deepened  by  their  mutual  hostility  to  Saul.  Nahash  had 
died,  and  David  was  anxious  to  show  his  sou  Hanun  kindness  in  remembrance  of  his 
deceased  father.  The  princes  of  Hanun  persuaded  the  young  king  that  another  motive 
actuated  David,  in  fact,  that  this  show  of  kindness  concealed  the  spy.  David's  mes* 
sengers  were  disgracefully  treated ;  and,  never  reflecting  for  a  moment  the  consequences 
of  such  conduct,  they  were  sent  away  with  the  marks  of  shame  and  disgrace.  This 
inconsiderate  act  on  the  part  of  Hanun  led  to  a  terrible  war  and  great  slaughter, 
and  eventually  to  the  almost  utter  annihilation  of  the  kingdom  of  Ammon.    What 


CH.  XIX.  1—19.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONIGLEa  815 

terrible  results  follow  from  the  misinterpretation  of  motives !  Yea,  wars  in  families, 
in  the  Church,  in  nations,  and  among  individuals  have  arisen  times  without  number 
from  the  false  construction  our  hearts  put  upon  the  motives  and  conduct  of  others. 
We  may  depend  upon  it  that  in  all  such  cases  the  "charity  that  thinketh  no  evil" 
comes  off  best  in  the  end  not  only  temporally  but  spiritually,  besides  obviating  an 
amount  of  evil  to  ourselves  and  others  of  which  we  have  not  the  smallest  conception 
when  we  act  unguardedly,  or  under  the  impulse  of  the  moment.— W. 

Vers.  6 — 19. — Jodb  and  Ahishat,  and  the  battle  between  the  Israelites  and  tKe  aUied 
armies  of  the  Ammonites  and  Syrians.  One  sin  always  leads  to  another,  and  the  insult 
of  Hanun's  princes  led  on  to  a  bloody  war.  No  doubt  the  inconsiderate  act  of  Hanun 
to  David*s  messengers  was  regretted  shortly  after  it  was  committed.  But  it  was  too 
late.  It  is  a  law  of  God's  moral  government  that  though  the  sv^  of  our  acts  may  be 
forgiven,  the  consequences  of  them  must  be  reaped.  '*  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that 
shall  he  also  reap."  A  little  time  sufficed  to  make  the  princes  of  Hanun  aware  that 
sooner  or  later  there  would  be  a  terrible  reprisal.  David  felt  the  indignity  keenly.  Yet 
the  retribution  did  not  proceed  from  him,  but  from  those  who  had  so  grossly  insulted 
him.  This  is  invariably  the  case.  A  dread  of  retribution  and  a  guilty  conscience 
go  together.  The  inconsiderate  act  of  a  moment,  it  is  foreseen,  will  lead  to  consequences 
which  must  be  averted ;  and  so  another  is  resolved  on,  and  then  follows  a  collapse 
or  utter  ruin.  Thus  it  was  here.  The  consequence  of  a  momentary  impulse  are 
the  destruction  and  ruin  of  a  kingdom  and  nation.  But  notice,  when  the  armies  stood 
face  to  face  with  each  other,  Joab's  conduct.  The  Ammonites  and  the  Syrians  beset 
Israel  behind  and  before.  Juab  was  in  straits.  He  evidently  saw  his  danger.  In  the 
emergency  he  does  his  best,  and  then  casts  himself  and  his  cause  upon  God.  He  asks 
not  for  victory.  He  does  better.  He  makes  the  battle  not  a  matter  between  the 
Ammonites  and  Israel,  but  between  the  Ammonites  and  Ood.  He  asks  not  for  victory, 
but  simply  says,  "  Let  the  Lord  do  that  which  is  good  in  his  sight."  This  is  faith  of  a 
high  order.  Herein  he  is  an  example  for  all  believers.  In  every  perplexity,  difficulty, 
danger,  or  whatever  the  emergency  may  be,  let  us,  as  Joab  did,  devise  the  very  best 
plans,  use  all  means,  and,  having  done  all,  leave  the  result  calmly  and  confidently  with 
God,  feeling  sure  that  whatever  may  be  the  result  *'  all  must  be  well."  Such  confidence 
will  always  sooner  or  later  meet  with  its  reward.  And  so  it  was  here*  Joab*8  iaith  and 
trust  in  God  was  crowned  with  a  great  victory. — W. 

Ver.  2. — Beligious  courtesy.  True  religion  of  necessity  involves  the  culture  of  the 
beautiful,  the  gracious,  the  considerate,  and  the  sympathetic  in  human  character.  Its 
plea  is  effectively  expressed  by  St.  Paul :  *'  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil 
the  law  of  Christ.**  This  verse  presents  an  instance  of  the  courtesy  which  piety 
prompts.  It  is  intended  to  point  out  that  there  was  more  in  this  matter  than  court  for- 
mality ;  David  bore  a  grateful  sense  of  kindness  shovm  him  by  Nahash,  and  found 
what  seemed  a  most  fitting  time  for  acknowledging  it.  Illustrations  may  be  given  of 
the  practical  importance  of  the  *'  polite  *'  in  human  society ;  but  better  than  formal 
politeness  is  the  considerate  courtesy  of  the  good  man.  The  counsel  to  all  Christiana 
18,  **  Be  pitiful,  be  courteous." 

L  The  good  man  is  bensitiye  to  kikdkess  that  mat  bb  shown  him.  As 
David  cherished  the  memory  of  the  kindness  of  Nahash.  Some  people  take  things  done 
for  them  as  their  rights,  and  haughtily  treat  them  as  even  below  their  rights.  Those 
who  are  made  sensible  of  the  mercy  of  God  to  them  in  redemption,  are  always  made 
aensitive  to  human  kindnesses,  which  seem  to  them  shadows  of  the  Divine. 

II.  The  good  man  is  quick  to  observe  opportunities  foe  showing  kindness. 
Knowing  how  good  it  is  to  receive,  he  is  ever  ready  to  give.  The  sympathizing  word 
is  not  restrained.  The  kindly  and  helpful  deed  is  not  postponed.  The  good  man 
cherishes  kind  thoughts,  but  he  will  not  rest  without  giving  expression  to  them.  The 
weak  man  tries  to  satisfy  himself  with  cherishing  good  feelings.  The  large-hearted 
man  is  ever  keenly  observant,  and  nobly  anxious,  to  find  out  the  best  forms  and  times 
for  pressing  good  feeling  into  kindly  word  and  deed.  Our  Master  said,  *'  If  ye  know 
these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them.**  Loyalty  to  truth  ii  fully  consistent 
with  Christian  courtesy,  and  with  the  most  tender  consideratenese  for  the  feelings  of 
others.— B.  T. 


310 


TUE  FIltST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHROKIGLE&       [ch. 


Ver.  3. — The  evil  of  the  iu$picioui  mind.  Shown  by  tbe  counsellors  of  Hanun. 
ObritTvo  the  (UHiculty  men  6n(1  when  they  attempt  to  estimate  motives ;  and  the  nd 
tendency  of  depraved  human  nature  to  light  upon,  and  to  prefer,  the  evil  motive  as  the 
cxplanatiun  uf  conduct.  These  ] joints  may  be  readily  illustrated  by  instances  within 
the  cx|H?riencc  of  every  preacher.     It  may  be  shown  that — 

I.  TitiNiiA  MAY  LOOK  WKI.L  WITHOUT  BEiKQ  WELL,  and  that  therefore — 

II.   TllKUK    M    ALWAYS    NKED    OF  DUE    CAUTION    LEST    WE    SHOULD     BB     DECETVEa 

But  it  should  lie  carifully  shown  and  impret«8cil — 

III.  That  the  srsi'iciocs  uai'.it  or  mind  easily  fancies  thebe  is  evil  or  what 
WAS  meant  wklu 

Then  it  may  W  shi^wn  that  the  srutpicionR  habit  is  only  a  reflection  of  a  man*s  own 
conscious  untrust worthiness  or  badness.  Wc  suspect  in  others  what  we  know  there 
would  havo  been  iit  tlie  act  if  we  ourselves  had  done  it.  These  mean  and  low-natnred 
counsellors  of  llanun  mcasuretl  David  by  the  measure  of  their  own  meanness.  2%^ 
would  have  taken  such  an  opi)ortunity  to  spy  out  a  neighbour's  land  ;  so  they  felt  sore 
that  David  had  a  deceptive  an<l  hostile  intention.  When  we  do  not  eo  this  length,  we 
sometimes  assume  evil  by  establishing  some  general  principle,  by  which  we  force  sn 
explanation  to  everything,  without  being  prc})ared  to  allow  exceptions  in  individual 
cases.    Tlic  misohii'f  of  tlio  suspicious  temper  in  society  and  in  the  Church  may  he 


fully  illustrated ;  e^iiecially  its  iutiuenco  in  starting  jealousy  and  creating  enmity,  and 
seiMrating  "  very  friends.*'  From  the  incident  connected  with  the  verse  show  how  it 
may  even  lead  to  terrible  miseries  for  many.  Press  that  the  suspicious  temper  growi 
on  a  man,  dwarfing  and  crushing  out  the  tru$t/ulne$i  which,  toned  by  wisdom,  is  man's 
true  dignity  and  blessedness,  and  the  basis  of  good  social  relations. — ^H.  T. 

Ver.  13. — SkUl  and  tnut  enuurinq  victory.  In  one  or  two  forms  this  subject  hu 
already  been  dealt  with ;  so,  under  this  heading,  we  proix>so  to  give  here  only  a  brief 
outline,  as  the  filling  up  of  it  must  of  necessity  involve  some  renetition  of  thought 
A  new  outline  may  sug*:;est  some  freshness  of  /onn.  The  principle  expressed  in  tbe 
familiar  wonls,  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,  for  it  Is  God 
that  worketh  in  you,"  finds  illustration  in  every  age,  and  in  every  sphere  of  our  hfc. 
Hive  the  illustrative  incident  connected  with  this  verse.  Joab  skilfully  planhed^  as  a 
g(HHl  general ;  but  he  called  for  a  full  trust  in  God,  and  committal  of  the  matter  to 
him,  f\^  became  the  goinl  man. 

I.   Max   MlIi^T  PLAN  AND  WOllK  AS  IF  EVERYTHINO  DEPENDED  ON  HIS  SKILL.      Thi« 

is  the  ///I'-loyalty. 

II.  Man  must  pray  and  wait  as  if  everythino  depended  on  his  tbust.  This 
is  the  /<mrMoyalty. 

III.  God  01  yes  a  blessing  wnicii  crowns  both  the  working  and  the  waftixo. 
This  is  the  Divine  recognition  of  the  whole  man :  the  acceptance  of  the  offering  of  a 
man's  whole  self,  including  both  the  active  and  the  jxissive  sides  of  his  nature. 

Apply.  Our  fellow-man  can  see  only  our  working^  and  so  our  success  may  seem  to 
bo  the  natural  fruitage  i>f  our  owu  work.  But  we  know,  and  God  sees,  that  our  suc- 
cesses are  the  l)ivino  benedictions  that  rest  upon  the  life-toil  and  the  heart-trust,  when 
these  are  fully  and  lovingly  blended  tog«.ther. — R.  T. 


KxrosmoN. 


CHAPTER  XX. 


The  contents  of  this  chapter  are  all  to  ho 
found  in  the  work  of  Samuel,  but  woven  in, 
in  very  different  places.  The  cause  of  the 
first  considerable  difference  of  this  kind  is 
in  connection  with  the  occurrence  of  what 
would  havo  seemed  a  mere  casual  detail  of 
expression  in  our  first  verse,  "  But  David 


tarried  at  Jerusalem,**  at  which  same  state- 
ment, however,  the  writer  of  Samuel  baits, 
to  a]^pend  all  that  then  happened  with 
David  in  the  disastrous  matter  of  Bath- 
sheba  and  Uriah,  occupying  nearly  two 
whole  chapters  (2  Sam.  xi.  2 — xii.  25)— a 
history  not  recorded  at  all  by  the  Chronicle 
compiler.  Why  David  tarried  at  Jerusalem, 
and  how  for  he  did  so  legitimately  and  in 


cii,  XX.  1—8.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


817 


harmony  with  the  necessities  of  government, 
we  know  not,  but  certain  it  is,  he  was 
tempted  to  make  the  nnhappiest  use  of  his 
**  tarrying  at  Jerusalem." 

Ver.  1. — The  fifteenth  verse  of  the  pre- 
vious chapter  stated  that  the  diaoomfited 
Ammonites  **  fled  .  .  .  and  entered  into  the 
city/'  i.a,  into  Rabbah.  Hither  we  now  learn 
that,  by  the  command  of  David  (2  Sam.  xi.  IX 
Joab,at  the  "return  of  the  year,"  i.e.  probably 
at  the  return  of  spring  (Exod.  zxiiL  16; 
xxxiv.  22),  brings  the  power  of  the  army, 
and,  after  ravaging  the  country  surrounding 
it,  sits  down  to  besiege  Rabbah  itself.  The 
aeries  of  feasts,  beginning  in  spring  and  end- 
ing in  autumn,  regulated  the  year.  The  sacred 
year  began  with  the  new  moon  that  became 
full  next  after  the  spring  equinox ;  but  the 
civil  year  at  the  seventh  new  moon.  This 
one  verse  illustrates  in  four  several  instances 
at  fewest  the  advantage  of  having  two  ver- 
sions of  the  same  events,  even  though  in  this 
ease  in  comparatively  immaterial  respects. 
1.  We  here  read  that  Joab  wasted  the 
eovntry  of  the  ehildren  of  Ammon  .  .  •  and 
besieged  Babbah,  in  place  of  the  less  con- 
sistent reading  of  2  Snm.  xi.  1,  *' destroyed 
the  children  of  Ammon,  and  besieged  Rab- 
bah." 2.  We  have  here  in  the  Hebrew  the 
right  word  for  "kings"  (Qo^n),  instead 
of  the  word  for  "  angels  "  (d^dkJ^^j-i),  as  in 
the  parallel  place.  3.  While  we  read  here 
that  Joab  smote  Babbah,  and  destroyed  it, 
the  parallel  place,  now  sliifted  to  2  Sam.  xii. 
27—29,  tells  of  Joab's  generosity  (if  it  were 
this,  and  not  fear  or  possibly  somewhat 
tardy  obedience  to  strict  commands  given 
on  his  commission),  in  his  message  to  David, 
to  repair  to  the  spot  immediately  and  share 
the  glory  of  the  re<luction  of  the  city,  or  be 
its  nominal  captor.  4.  And,  once  more, 
while  we  read  here  that  Joab  emote  Babbah, 
and  destroyed  it,  and  yet  read  in  the  parallel 
place  of  the  delay  and  the  vinit  of  David 
(with  which  the  very  first  clause  of  our 
ver.  2,  **And  David  took,"  etc,  is  in 
perfect  accord)  and  of  David's  nominal 
taking  of  the  city,  we  find  probably  the 
just  and  inartificial  explanation  of  all  this 
m  2  Sam.  xii.  26—29.  There  we  read  more 
particularly  that  Joab  sent  word  he  nad 
taken  the  "  city  of  waters,"  i.e.  tl  o  lower 
part  of  the  city  (where  a  stream  had  iia 
source,  and  no  doubt  supplied  the  city  with 
waterX  which  was  very  likely  the  key  of  the 
whole  position, and  called  upon  David  tocome 
up  and  "  encamp  against  ttte  citv  and  take  it," 
ue.  the  city,  or  citadel,  which  stood  upon 
the  heights  north  of  the  stream.  Glimpses 
of  this  kind  may  sufiSce  to  convince  us  how 
rapidly  a  text,  really  correct,  would  melt 
away  for  us  a  very  large  proportion  of  the 
whole  number  of  the  lesser  obstacles  which 


often  impede  our  path  in  the  historical 
books  of  the  Old  Testament  At  the  time 
that  kings  go  out  It  was  no  doubt  the  case 
that,  even  in  Palestine,  the  winter  was  often 
a  period  of  enforced  inactivity.  Babbah. 
The  punishment  of  Ammon  for  the  treat- 
ment of  David's  well-intended  embassy  of 
condolence  is  now  about  to  be  completed. 
The  familiar  root  of  Rabbuh  signifies  multi- 
tudinous number,  and»  resulting  thence,  the 
greatness  of  importance.  It  was  the  chief 
city  of  the  Ammonites,  if  not  their  only 
city  of  importance  enough  for  mention.  In 
five  passages  its  connection  with  Ammon  is 
coupled  with  its  name  (Dent  iii.  11;  2  Sam. 
xii.  26;  xvii.27;  Jer.xlix.2;  £zek.xxL20), 
"  Rabbah  of  the  children  of  Ammon."  It 
has  been  ooniectured  to  be  the  Ham  of  the 
Zuzim,  or  the  Ashteroth  Kamaim  of  the 
Rephaim  (Gen.  xiv.  5),  of  which  latter 
theory  there  is  some  interesting  evidence  of 
a  corroborating  tendency  at  all  events  (see 
Smith's  '  Bible  Dictionary,'  it  985).  Rabbah 
is  the  proper  spelling  of  the  word,  except 
when  in  a  constructive  state,  as  in  the  above 
phrase.  The  relations  of  Moab  and  Ammon 
with  Israel  are  full  of  interest.  After  the 
overthrow  of  Og,  King  of  Bashan  (Numh. 
xxi.  33), "  Moab  and  Ammon  still  remained 
independent  allies  south  and  cast  of  the 
Israelite  settlements.  Both  fell  before  David 
— Moab,  evidently  the  weaker,  first;  Ammon 
not  without  a  long  resistance,  which  made 
the  siege  and  fall  of  its  capital,  Rabbah- 
ammon,  the  crowning  act  of  David's  con- 
quests. The  ruins  which  now  adorn  the 
*  royal  city '  are  of  a  later  Roman  date ;  but 
the  commanding  position  of  the  citadel 
remains ;  and  the  unusual  sight  of  a  living 
stream  abounding  in  fish  (2  Sam.  xii.  27 ; 
Isa.  xvi.  2)  marks  the  signiiSoanoe  of  Joab's 
song  of  victory,  *I  have  fought  against 
Rabbah,  and  have  taken  the  city  of  waters'" 
(Stanley's  *  Sinai  and  Palestine/  323,  edit. 
18G6). 

Ver.  2.— Found  it  to  weigh  a  talent  of 
gold.  Two  ditliculties  present  themselves 
in  this  verse,  viz.  the  reported  weight  of 
this  crown,  and  the  uncertainty  as  to  what 
head  it  was  from  which  David  took  it. 
Whatever  was  its  weight,  if  David's  head 
was  able  to  sustain  it  for  a  minute  or  two, 
the  head  of  the  King  of  the  Ammonites 
might  also  occasionally  have  borne  it  Yet 
it  would  scarcely  bo  likely  that  the  King 
of  the  Ammonites  would  have  so  ponderous 
a  crown  (calculated  at  a  weight  of  a  hundred 
and  fourteen  pounds  Troy,  or  a  little  more  or 
less  than  one  hundredweight)  as  one  of  ordi- 
nary wear,  or  that  he  would  have  one  of  extra- 
ordinary wear  on  his  head  precisely  at  such 
a  juncture.    Both  of  these  difficulties  will 

remove  if  we  suppose  that  the  Hebrew  ds^^ 

instead  of  meaning  their  king,  is  the  name 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLE.       [oh.  xx.  1—8. 


of  the  AmmonltiBb  and  Monbitisb  idol  (i.q.  I 
Holooh),  and  which  we  find  (Aulhonzod 
VenioD)  in  Zepb.  i.  5,  and  probaoly  (though 
not  AuthoiiMd  Version)  in  Jet,  ilii.  1,  3, 
and  AmoB  i.  15.  The  Beptuaglnt  tceato  the 
word  tliuB.  The  point,  however,  cannot  be 
oonildered  *ettli^ 

Ver.  3.— Ont  them  with  lawi  (to  Heb. 
iL  H7).  We  hiive  here  the  very  doabtfut  (bo 
far  w  regacda  lis  real  Biguiflcatiqn)  Hebrew 
word  1^.  (and  he  cut}  instead  or  atir  (he 

St).  Probably  it  is  noirhere  else  naed  in 
e  sense  of  "cutting,"  if  it  is  here.  Its 
otdinnry  sense  U  to  rule  or  put  into  aub- 
jeotion.  The  par&ilel  place  (2  Bam.  ziL.  31) 
oorreoti,  in  the  word  (Aulhotized  Version) 
axet,  onr  Bebrew  text,  which  repeats  the 
wold  for  MW|  though  putting  it  in  the 
plural,  and  whioh  themby  shows  rni^3\ 
tostead  of  ri^ifjs?^  This  last  void  means 
"axes"  or  "scythes,"  and  is  from  the  root 
■nj,  to  cut  (2  Kings  vL  1).  It  is  found 
<ml7  in  2  Sam.  xii.  31,  though  it  should  ap- 
pear here  also.  There  is  a  fonrth  severity 
of  pUDJahment  mentioned  in  the  parallel 
place,  that  the  people  were  "made  to  pasa 
through  the  briok-kilnt,"  a  form  of  torture 
possibly  anggeated  bj  the  own  familiar 
oraelty  of  the  Anunooites  in  "  making 
their  children  to  pass  through  the  fire  to 
Holooh."  HoweTer,  in  harmony  with  what 
Is  above  said  respecting  the  doubtfulness  of 
the  just  signiQcation  of  theTerb~il;-i,  much 
uncertainty  hangs  over  the  interpretation  of 
this  verse.  Instead  of  severity  and  need- 
less cruelty  on  the  part  of  David,  it  may 
rather  sot  forth  that  he  tuhjpcled  them  to 
hard  tasks  in  coaiieotion  with  the  cultiva- 
tion of  the  soil  and  with  the  making  of 
bricks.    The  saws  and   harrows       ' 


indicting  torture,  when  the  ordinary  weaponi 
of  battle  and  n-orfare  were  close  at  hand. 
This  view,  however,  il  contrary  to  the 
verdict,  so  far  as  the  above  Hebrew  verb 
Is  concerned,  of  Ocsenius's  'Thesaurus,'  p. 
1326,  and  of  Tbenius,  on  this  and  the 
parallel  pnasage.     Wticn  such  puniebmonte 


e  of  tl 


e  of  tl 


,  the  c 


lelty 


).  "The  criminal 
inder  lengthwise ; 
this  was  more  especially  the  practice  in 
Persia.  Isaiah,  according  to  the  Talmnd- 
Ists,  was  pot  to  death  id  this  wise  by 
King  MansEseh,  'Sanhediin,'  p.  103,  c  2  ; 
oomp.  Justin's  dialogue  with  Trypho " 
(Jahn's  'Sacred  Antiquities,' p.  132,  §  2(;0, 
vii.).  WUh  taw:  The  word  in  the  ociginsl 
Is  not  in  the  plural.  It  occurs  apiin  only 
in  the  parallel  place  (2  Sam.  xii.  31)  and  in 
1  Kings  vli.  9,  both  times  in  the  singular. 
The  («eth  of  Eastern  sans  then  atul  dow 


usually  incline  to  the  handle  Instaad  of 
from  iL  With  hairowi  of  inn.  The  only 
hanau  known  to  have  been  nsed  at  Out 
time  consigted  of  a  thick  block  of  wood 
homo  down  by  a  weight,  or  on  which  a 
man  sat,  drawn  over  the  ploughed  land  by 
oxen  (Is&.  xiviii.  24,  25;  Job  zizix.  10; 
Bosea  s.  11),  and  the  root  of  tho  Hebrew 
word  expresses  the  idea  of  crushing  ot 
levelling  the  land.  But  onr  present  irord 
is  very  diS'ereDt,  and  is  found  only  hare  sod 
in  the  parallel  place,  with  the  word  "  iron  " 
accompanying  it,  so  as  to  be  equivalent  to 
a  compound  word,  and  appearj  to  mean 
*'  shnrp  instruments  of  iron,"  or  sharp 
threshing  instruments.  The  use  of  tha 
former  part  of  this  phrase  (1  Bam.  xviL 
18)  for  cheeie*  U  the  only  other  iustauca 
of  its  cccurrence.  Bam  should  be  "  aisa," 
or  "  scythes,"  aa  slated  above,  though  it  is 
not  any  of  the  three  more  ordinary  word* 
for  "  axe  "  (see  Smith's  ■  Btbte  Dictionary,' 
L  H2). 

Ver.  4.— For  the  0*»r  (t;))  of  thia  tow, 
the  parallel  place  (2  Sam.  zzi.  18}  shows 
Qob  (3'ii),  a  name  not  known,  hut  which 
careless  transcription  may  have  easily  mado 
out  of  the  former.  The  Syriao  Version,  how 
ever,  as  well  as  the  Beptuagint,  has  Chlk  In 
that  verse  as  well  as  in  thetwo  verses  follow, 
fng  (2  Sam.  xxi.  18 — 20),  another  name  alto 
easily  interchangeable  in  Hebrew  ohaiacterf 
with  Geier.  Tiie  "  yet  again  "  of  our  ver.  6 
would  well  accord  with  the  supposition  that 
the  conflict  with  the  PhilistiTies  was  at  Gath, 
or  at  the  lame  place,  each  of  the  three  times. 
Geser  belonged  to  Ephraim,  and  was  situ- 
ated to  the  north  of  Philistia  (ch.  vii. 
28;  liv.  16).  Bihheohai  (see  also  ch.  zL  29 ; 
izvii.  11).  BippaL  In  the  parallel  place 
spelt  Saph.  It  is  remarkable  that,  iu  the 
Peshito  Syriao,  over  Ps.  ciliii.  is  found  the 
inscription,  "  Of  David,  when  he  slew  Asaph, 
the  brother  of  Gulyod,  and  thanksgiving 
tbat  be  had  conqiieT«l."  Of  thaohildiBa  H 
the  giant  The  Hebrew  word  tor  "  giant," 
rapba  (always  in  these  verses  spelt  with  a 
final  altph,  but  in  the  parallel  verses  always 
with  he  final),  is  here  (Authorized  Version) 
translated.  "  The  Hapha,"  a  native  of 
Gath,  was  the  forefatlier  of  the  Canaan- 
itish  Sephaim,  mentioned  as  early  as  Oen. 
xiv.5:xv.  20;  Deutii.  11:  iii.  11 ;  Josh.xiL 
4;  XV.  8;  xvU.  IS.  The  slaying  of  Isbbi- 
benob  (2  Sam.  ixL  16)  is  not  here  given. 
It  is  also  to  be  observed  tbat  tlie  lengthy 
account  oi  Samuel,  respecting  Absalom  and 
big  rebellion  (2  Bam.  xiii. —  xxi.)  is  not  found 

Ver.  S.—ZDutBan  the  nm  of  Tail.  In 
BamuelJair  appears  as  Jaars.  ThiaEUhanan 
is  probably  different  from  him  of  ob.  xL  26. 
There  is  estrange  eon  fusion  in  the  reading  ot 
this  and  its  parallel  versa.    If  our  pr«aent 


CH.XX.1— «.J       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


819 


verse  is  to  stand  corrected  by  accepting  from 
its  parallel  <*  the  Bethlehemite  "  in  place  of 
our  Lamhii  then  either  we  have  no  name 
given  for  the  brother  of  Ooliath,  the  Ctit- 
tite ;  or,  if  we  drop  the  word  **  brother " 
(changing  the  ^nn^  of  Chronicles  into  the  dm 

of  SamuelX  and  make  Goliath  the  Gittite 
the  man  slain  by  Elhanan,  then  of  tuch  a 
Goliath  we  know  nothing,  and  it  is  a  most 
unlikely  coincidence  of  name  with  the 
conquered  of  David's  sling.  Eennicott*s 
seventy-eighth  di:<sertation  is  oocupi^, 
and  ably,  with  the  pro$  and  eons  of  this 
question;  and  the  curiosities  of  Jerome 
on  the  passage  may  be  found  in  his 
'QusBstiones  Hebraicsd/  There  seems  no 
Bufficieut  reason  to  depart  from  our  read- 
ing here,  to  which  it  were  preferable  to 
adjust  the  reading  in  the  parallel  place, 
which  exhibits  almost  certainly  a  glaring 
corruption  of  text  in  another  respect 

Ver.  6. — ^A  man  of  .  .  .  stature.  The  He- 
brew text  is  iTTD,  as  also  in  ch.  xL  23 ;  and 
(in  the  plural)  in  Numb.  xiii.  32.  An 
eccentric  and  probably  corrupt  form  appears 
in  the  parallel  place.  Pliny  (*  Nat.  Hist.,'  ii. 
43)  speaks  of  the  Sedigiti^  and  places  them 
in  the  feunily  of  ForU,  among  the  Him- 
yarites. 

Ver.  7. — Jonathan  (see  1  6am.  xiii.  8, 
82;  oh«  xxvii.  82  (oomp.  also  ch.  iL  13), 


where  it  is  probable  that  **  nephew  "  should 
be  read  for  *" uncle").  It  is  to  be  noticed 
that  the  name  of  this  child  of  the  giant,  of 
twelve  fingers  and  twelve  toes,  is  not  men- 
tioned. We  are  not  oompeUedt  therefore,  to 
regard  it  as  remarkable  that  he  of  the  fifth 
verso  should  not  be  named. 

Ver.  8. — These  were  bom  unto  the  giant 
in  Oath.  The  parallel  place  reads,  **  These 
four,**  etc.  The  first  of  the  four  in  view 
there  is  not  mentioned  here.  The  account 
is  given  in  2  Sam.  xxi.  15—17.  And  as  it 
was  in  that  encounter  that  David  himself 
played  the  chief  part  (though,  apparently,  it 
was  Abishai  who  dealt  Ishbi-benob  the  fatal 
blow  in  **  succouring  "  David),  the  notice  of  it 
would  have  seemed  necessary  to  complete  fully 
the  sense  of  the  following  clauses,  **  They 
fell  by  the  hand  of  David,  and  by  the  hand 
of  his  servants."  Still  this,  it  may  justly 
be  argued,  may  have  been  the  very  reason 
of  the  form  of  expression  here  chosen, 
coupling  David's  work  and  that  of  his 
servants.  This  brief  summary  in  the  last 
verse  of  this  chapter,  as  also  in  the  last 
verse  of  the  corresponding  chapter,  just 
serves  to  reveal  to  us  the  nexus  that  bound 
together  the  three  or  four  exploits  for  naiv 
ration.  It  consisted  in  the  common  descent 
of  the  four  giant  victimai 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — On  the  toars  of  tJie  Israelites,  and  on  war  generally,  **  At  tbe  time  tbat  kings,** 
etc.  lliis  chapter  also  seems  to  contain  little  of  homiletic  interest  Nevertheless  it 
cfiers  abundantly  the  opportunity  of  some  consideration  of  the  subject  of  the  wars 
undertaken  by  the  separated  people,  and  thence  of  the  subject  of  war  since  and  generally. 
This  chapter  repeats  the  word  "  war "  three  times  in  vers.  4 — 6.  But  yet  rather 
the  very  turn  of  the  expression  in  ver.  1,  "  At  the  time  that  kings  go  out  to  battle,"  far 
surpasses  any  suggest! veness  that  might  arise  merely  from  the  repetition  of  a  word. 
At  the  outset  of  any  consideration  of  this  subject  as  it  arises  in  connection  with 
Scripture,  attention  is  arrested,  and  it  may  be  said  universally  arrested,  by  certain  patent 
fact^  They  are  facts  from  which  we  cannot  run  away,  ana  which^  however  they  may 
eufier  explanation  in  themselves,  will  soon  show  that  they  refuse  to  be  explained  away. 
The  more  necessary  is  it  to  treat  them  accordingly,  and  to  face  them  steadily.  The 
facts  alluded  to  are  such  as  these :  1.  That  a  very  large  part  of  the  whole  bulk  of  Old 
Testament  history  is  concerned  with  the  recital  of  matters  of  war.  2.  That  war 
manifestly  played  a  large  part  in  the  education  and  formation  of  character  of  the  people 
Israel.  3.  Tbat  it  was  by  no  means  entirely  or  even  principally  owing  to  any  fust  of 
Strife  or  even  of  conquest  which  might  have  possessed  the  people  that  they  warred  so 
much,  but  this  was  assigned  to  them  as  a  very  part  of  their  duty  and  pirt  of  their 
mission.  4.  Tbat  with  a  directness  that  cannot  be  mistaken,  war  is  not  only  prescribed, 
and  that  again  and  again,  by  God  to  his  people,  but  he  represents  himself  as  Leader  of 
armies,  Captain  of  hosts,  and  as  "  going  forth  "  with  men  to  battle,  the  impersonation  of 
a  mighty  warrior.  The  sovereign  right  of  death,  as  of  life,  belongs,  no  doubt,  to  Gk>d — his 
to  destroy,  as  bis  to  create.  But  the  observable  thing  in  war,  so  far  as  those  of  the 
Old  Testament  Scriptures  are  concerned,  lies  in  the  fact  which  would  seem  infinitely 
more  enormous  and  astounding  than,  through  our  familiarity  with  it,  it  now  does — 
tiiat  GK)d  destroys  human  beings  by  the  agency  of  other  human  beings.    The  sweeping 


820  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.       [ch.  xx.  1— a 


away  of  vast  populations  by  plague  and  famine,  by  fire,  and  by  what  we  call  the 
accident  of  sea  or  land,  would  not  present  a  tithe  of  the  difficulty  that  lies  before  our 
feet  when  the  one  element  is  produced  of  the  sword  and  weapon  of  warfiu^  wielded 
consciously,  deliberately,  determinedly,  by  men  on  the  battle-field  for  the  destrnctioD 
of  fellow-men.  Yet  we  must  renounce  the  credibility  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptares, 
or  must  acknowledge  that  the  destruction  of  human  life  was  abundantly  effected 
by  war,  undertaken  and  carried  through  to  the  bitter  end  by  Divine  sanction  and 
ordinance.  Nothing  can  be  more  natural  than  to  ask  how  this  is,  and,  the  facts  being 
indisputable,  what  account  can  be  given  of  them.  It  seems  likely  enough  that  we 
may  not  be  able  to  feci  that  we  have  found  under  any  circumstances  a  complete  solution 
of  the  problem  before  us.  It  may  rest  upon  deeix^r  reason  than  we  can  fathom,  be  part 
of  a  larger  justice  than  we  can  mete,  belong  to  a  wider  circle  or  range  of  analogy  than 
all  we  have  yet  cnught  sight  of.  But  there  can  be  no  question  that  it  is  as  usual  open 
to  us  to  approach  in  the  direction  of  the  desired  result,  though  we  may  stop  short  of 
the  goal.    And — 

I.  Of  the  diyinklt  cosni anded  wabs  and  battles  of  Isbael.  Here  the  snbject 
of  war  is  relieved  at  once  of  one  of  its  greatest  difiiculties.  For  in  this  case  we  need 
not  stop  to  debate  respecting  the  abstract  possibility  of  justification  of  war.  Its  justifi* 
cation  in  these  cases  is  for  us  of  the  kind  called  positive.  And  of  war  thus  oonditionei 
we  must  remark :  1.  That  its  motive  does  not  come  into  the  question,  and  cannot  be 
challenged.  2.  That  its  object  must  be  held  to  have  been  for  the  universal  benefit 
8.  That  the  fact  of  its  being  a  method  of  chastisement  and  of  destruction  of  human  life 
hy  the  agency  of  human  beings  must  be  held  to  be  the  one  difficult  question  at  issue. 
Om  there  be  found  compensating  and  justifying  considerations,  and  these  not  of  such 
a  nature  as  absolutely  to  refuse  to  be  reconciled  with  our  moral  sense  ?  The  following 
considerations  may,  at  all  events,  be  helpful  to  those  who  would  not  impugn,  not  even 
for  a  moment  impugn,  the  right  of  Gbd  to  take  human  lives,  in  whatever  number, 
unquestioned,  by  same  method.  With  others,  as  matter  of  course,  they  could  have 
little  weight.  For  the  destruction  of  human  life  in  battle,  on  the  part  of  a  people 
constituted  and  set  apart  like  Israel,  at  the  command  of  God  was  (1)  equivalent  to  a 
consenting  adoption  by  them  of  the  sovereignty  of  God.  Now,  the  unity,  the  absolute 
soleness,  and  the  80verfi<i:nty  were  the  three  greatest  and  most  fundamental  attributes 
of  Deity,  which  it  was  the  8i)ecial  business  of  the  Israelites  to  learn.  These  their  educa- 
tion was  to  master  well.  (2)  It  was  a  vital  protection  for  them  against  both  a  super- 
stitious and  a  supine  trust  of  the  invisible,  superior  power.  Had  the  invisible  Qod  always 
swept  their  enemies,  for  instance,  from  before  them  without  their  own  instrumentality 
and  co-operation,  it  is  not  difficult  to  calculate  something  of  what  sort  of  expectance 
and  what  sort  of  trust  would  have  been  engendered  in  them.  But  now,  though  the 
battle  is  of  the  Lord,  and  the  strength  is  of  him,  and  the  victory  his,  with  most 
strenuous  effort  must  the  people  do  the  work,  gird  themselves  for  the  fight,  and  sufier 
much  while  they  win.  (3)  Next  to  those  who  suffered  the  infliction  of  the  Divine 
purpose  and  justice,  it  was  to  those  who  executed  them  the  most  impressive  possible 
manifestation  of  all  that  death  and  slaughter  have  it  in  them  to  brand  upon  human 
minds  and  fasten  in  human  convictions  and  light  up  to  human  imagination.  The 
terrible  assertion  of  the  final  power  to  control,  to  punish,  to  avenge,  was  often  needed, 
is  often  needed,  to  "  sum  up  the  whole  matter,'*  and  to  be  the  unchallengeable  "conclu- 
sion of  the  whole  matter."  (4)  It  was  the  beginning  and  germ  of  that  constitution  of 
human  society  which  now  peremptorily  devolves  for  a  while  upon  men  the  entire  actual 
visible  conduct  of  the  affairs  of  men.  The  Hulcr,  the  King,  "  the  Lord  of  those  men,**  is 
gone  away  awhile  into  a  far  distant  country,  and  "  the  \Vord  of  the  Lord  is  precious," 
and  "  there  is  no  vision  nor  dream.**  The  day  of  reckoning  and  account  is  assuredly  to 
come,  and  all  are  forewarned  of  it ;  but  as  assuredly  it  is  not  yet.  And  this  one  fact 
constitutes  the  most  awful  view  of  human  responsibility,  whether  in  war  or  in  peace. 

II.   Of  war    in    general,   and    not    those    cases    of  it  alone  which  WEBB    OF 

Divine  command.  1.  War,  horror  and  scourge  that  it  is,  yet  snatches  its  occasion  in 
one  of  the  most  necessary  and  ultimate  forms  of  association  of  human  kind,  viz.  the 
nation.  Men  are  associated  together  in  nations  by  necessity.  They  are  bronght 
together  by  geographical  position.  They  are  held  together  by  community  of  race. 
The  necessity  is  a  natural  one.  the  consequences  are  full  of  significance,  the  advantages 


CH.XX.1— 8.]      THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  821 

are  of  a  high,  beneficent,  and  far-reaching  kind.  But  the  final  risk  involved  in  war 
produces  a  phenumenon,  and  more  than  merely  a  phenomenon,  in  some  aspects  among 
the  most  terrible,  nay,  incomparably  the  most  terrible,  to  be  witnessed  beneath  the  sun. 
There  are  ever  ascending  and  brcMtdening  forms  of  strife,  as  of  philanthropy  among 
mankind.  The  strife  so  familiar,  as  it  shows  itself  between  individuals,  is  passed,  by 
that  of  families,  and  of  cliques,  and  of  many  and  various  an  association  of  multitudes 
of  almost  every  description.  The  strife  that  so  often  appears  between  such  units  as 
these  is  passed  again,  by  that  between  Churches,  and  this  finally  by  that  between  nations, 
and  nations  which  even  league  together  in  order  to  prosecute  their  strife  more  success- 
fully and  on  larger  scale.  Now,  for  all  these  forms  and  occasions  of  strife  there  is 
some  sort  of  judge,  arbiter,  or  external  authority  to  end  it,  except  for  that  between 
nations.  Hence  the  principle  of  resistance  shows  itself  in  its  own  unqualified  hideous- 
ness,  in  its  own  repulsive  malignity  of  essence.  It  culminates  in  war,  which  is  another 
word  for  the  slaughter  in  systematic  form  of  numbers  of  human  beings  by  others 
animated  by  no  personal  ill  will,  and  to  whom  they  are  personally  unknown.  2.  War 
cannot  profess  to  anything  more,  anything  deeper,  than  a  trial  of  force  against  force. 
The  stronger  force  has  to  be  accepted  pro  tern.,  even  though  the  time  be  prolonged. 
Nor  is  it  in  this  respect  out  of  analogy  with  the  decisions  of  courts  of  justice  in  the 
internal  life  and  administration  of  a  nation.  These  decisions  are  respected  by  those 
against  whom  they  are  given  by  the  judge,  not  because  they  are  believed  to  be  right, 
vet  less  because  they  are  felt  to  be  right,  nor  even  because  in  all  cases  they  are  right, 
but  because  they  are  supported  by  the  overwhelming  power  of  the  strong  arm  of  the 
law,  with  all  which  that  phrase  means.  The  order  of  society  is  pitted  against  the 
passion,  the  misapprehension,  or  sometimes  even  the  right  of  the  individual  in  his 
solitary  plaint.  3.  Though  war  can  pretend  to  nothing  but  the  determination  of  who  is 
the  stronger,  yet  right  is  presumably  one  of  the  combatants.  That  right  sharing  the 
constant  present  fate  of  right  is  often  enough  overpowered,  defeated,  the  loser.  Yet  it 
has  had  the  opportunity  of  asserting  itself.  It  has  asserted  itself.  It  has  insisted  in 
a  very  practical  manner  on  making  its  voice  heard.  It  has  insisted  on  its  presence  and 
its  force  counting  for  something.  And  then  again,  though  stricken  and  bleeding  afresh 
from  many  a  new-made  wound,  it  is  sent  l^k  to  take  its  patient  though  oppressed 
station  yet  awhile  and  to  bide  its  time.  4.  The  real  measure  of  the  condemnableness 
of  war  depends  on  its  motives,  on  the  real  causes,  hidden  or  proclaimed,  which  occasion 
it.  But  then  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  greater  and  more  decisive  the  condemnation 
that  may  be  shown  on  the  one  hand,  the  more  the  defensibleness  conceded  to  the  other 
side,  which  resists  even  unto  blood.  The  proportion  that  greed,  vanity,  passion,  mere 
pique,  or  absolute  lust  of  conquest  bear  in  the  production  of  war  will  be  the  real 
measure— whoever  is  in  the  position  to  assign  it— of  the  guilt  of  the  guilty  and  of  the 
defence  of  the  innocent  6.  A  just  estimate  of  the  real  nature  of  war  demands  that  the 
physical  untold  misery  of  it  be  kept  separate  in  our  minds  from  the  moral  aspects  and 
results  of  it.  War  has  offered  to  view  some  of  the  highest  possibilities  of  human  nature 
in  its  self-devotion,  in  its  sentiment  disentangled  of  individual  hostility  or  animosity,  in 
its  obedience  of  the  individual  to  the  principle  of  the  community's  necessity  or  weal. 
6.  The  long-looked-for  time,  the  long-prayed-for  era,  when  war  shall  cease,  is  the  goal 
to  be  reached  only  by  the  purified  and  heightened  moral  sense  and  goodness  of  the 
individuals  of  a>ll  nations.  This  is  equivalent  to  saying,  the  goal  can  only  be  reached 
by  Christianity,  in  its  spread  universal,  in  its  diffusion  impartial,  in  its  penetratingness 
individual,  in  its  efficaciousness  sovereign.  No  policy,  no  wisdom,  no  external  authority 
seems  imaginable  that  should  subdue  it,  and  put  it  under  the  feet  of  men,  a  destroyed 
thing.  Only  the  victory  of  all  victories  can  be  looked  forward  to  to  lead  captive  this 
captivity,  and  accomplish  its  end.  The  clear  and  sure  destruction  of  this  at  the  same 
time  most  barbarous  and  keenest  destroyer  of  men  will  be  among  the  last,  the  grandest, 
the  crowning  achievements  of  Christ,  Prince  of  peace,  the  promise  of  "  peace  on  earth,** 
the  expression  of  **  good  will  to  men." 

Ver.  1. — One  cunning  bosom  sin.  "But  David  tarried  at  Jerusalem.*'  There  is  not 
so  much  as  the  suggestion  of  any  evidence  from  which  we  could  justify  the  inference 
that  David,  in  thus  '^  tarrying  at  Jerusalem,'*  was  actuated  by  any  wrong  design,  or  was 
laying  himself  open  to  the  charge  of  neglect  of  duty,  indifiference  to  his  high  responsi- 

I.  CHRONICLES.  Y 


822  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  GHBONICLEa     £oh.  xx.  1-^ 


bilities  or  inactivity.  It  is  more  probable  that  daty  to  his  people  in  the  ocntral 
of  authority  found  him  more  in  his  place  at  Jerusalem  than  in  the  field  of  hattle.  That 
which  r^s  confessedly  as  a  rather  peremptory  style  of  summons  on  the  part  of  Joab^ 
in  the  fuller  account  of  2  Sam.  xii.  28,  cannot  be  relied  upon  as  any  suflSdent  indication 
to  the  disadvantage  of  David  in  such  a  direction.  It  is  more  naturally  explainable  in 
other  ways.  Joab^s  message  at  the  crisis  which  afifairs  had  somewhat  suddenly  reached 
may  have  been  cither  an  act  of  obedience  to  strict  orders  of  imperial  sort^  or  in  yet 
nobler  obedience  to  the  instincts  of  strict  loyalty.  The  "tarrying  at  Jerusalem,** 
however,  bodcil  anything  but  good  (2  Sam.  xi.  1,  2).  The  words  of  simplicity  in  which 
the  mere  historical  fact  is  announced,  provoke  inevitably  the  memory  of  other  words, 
where  it  is  written  on  pace  yet  more  sacred,  of  the  *'  greater  Son  '*  of  David  on  a  certain 
occasion,  "  And  the  child  Jesus  tarried  behind  at  Jerusalem.**  But  beyond  the  irre- 
sistible BuggCHtion  of  the  words,  thought  declines  to  ga  There  is  no  room  for  comparison. 
The  case  is  one  the  op[K)8itc  of  analogy.  And  even  contrast  should  seem  too  gratui tons, 
and  to  threaten  dislionour  to  the  latter  occasion,  breathing  upon  it  with  an  unholy 
breath,  and  not  with  the  breath  of  the  Spirit  most  holy.  To  this  interval^  anyway, 
belonged  the  greatest  blots  on  all  the  life  of  David,  the  sorest  stains  on  his  'scutcheon, 
and  wounds  that  went  direct  and  deep  to  the  soul.  And  we  are  taught  here  something 
in  general  of  the  uncertainty,  the  untractableness  of  human  nature ;  but  may  rather 
take  the  instruction  of  the  passage  in  this  more  particular  form — the  strengtb  and 
blinded  headstrong  way  that  "  one  cunning  bosom  sin  '*  has  with  it 

I.  The  iktebval  of  best  is  bet  at  nought  bt  it.  Granted  that  David  did  not 
Stay  behind  at  Jerusalem  in  order  to  escape  all  work  and  elude  the  activity  of  duty ; 
granted  that  business  of  government,  the  government  of  his  city  and  his  nation,  occu- 
pied him ;  yet  the  very  change  of  occupation,  and  the  fact  that  it  was  at  home,  wot  a 
rest  It  was  very  different  irom  camp  Ufe  and  military  superintendence.  The  himd 
that  holds  the  pen  knows  how  great  the  change  is,  after  it  has  been  rather  holding  the 
sword  and  wielding  the  sword  for  months,  ay,  for  years  past  The  greatest  warrior, 
the  most  successful  general,  the  bravest  soldier  must  surely  awhile  feel  the  repoee 
sacred  and  delicious  which  permits  him  to  sheathe  the  sword,  forsake  the  field,  and  do 
the  works  of  iMjaco  ratlier  than  of  war.  Yet  this  privilege  as  soon  as  enjoyed  is  abused ; 
this  interval  as  soon  as  given  becomes  the  mournful  and  miserable  occasion  of  inde- 
lible disgrace  and  shame. 

IL  The  sanctities  of  home  are  set  at  nought  by  it.  Nothing  will  ever  divest 
home  of  its  sacred  claims.  They  dwell  in  it,  they  haunt  its  retreats,  they  pervade 
its  air.  Not  truer  that  "  the  heart  knoweth  his  own  bitterness,"  than  that  home 
knowcth  its  own  incflable  sweetness.  The  nursery  of  purest  affections,  the  school  of 
sound  instruction,  the  point  of  dejwrture  for  young  ambition,  the  beacon  of  good  prin- 
ciple to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  the  incentive  to  honourable  effort  and  noble  exploit,  and 
anon  as  age  grows,  the  realm  and  very  throne  of  most  l)cnign  authority, — it  is  this  home 
which  the  cunning  bosom  sin  of  passion  discredits,  dishonours,  disgraces.  David  knew 
what  the  blessing  of  home  was.  He  often  shows  it  by  the  way  he  speaks  directly  and 
indirectly  of  hoiuo  and  of  "  father  and  mother.**  But  he  knew  the  blessing  yet  more 
certainly  by  evidence  of  the  too  reliable  aphorism  that  we  then  first  best  know  our 
blessing  wlien  it  is  taken  from  us.  And  for  years  the  blessing  had  been  a  lost  one  to 
David.  How  he  hun<:ered  and  thirsted  and  craved  for  it !  And  now  he  has  it,  fear- 
fully to  desecrate  it,  because  he  is  led  captive,  blinded  by  what  he  saw,  headstrong  by 
what  he  felt — reason  and  goodness  and  conscience  all  dragged  in  chains  behind  the 
triumph  of  passion  1 

III.  The  inspiration  of  the  associations  of  Jerusalem  is  smothered  bt  it.  It 
is  the  metroi)olis  of  the  country,  but  sacred  l)eyond  the  sacredness  of  any  other  metro- 
polis, and  U)  David  beyond  what  it  was  to  any  other  king.  How  he  thought  of  Jeru- 
salem! How  he  spoke  and  sang  of  it,  with  the  joy  that  was  growing  brighter  and 
brighter  to  perfect  day,  and  long  before  those  strains  wliich  others  sang  to  minor  key, 
plaintive  wail,  and  exquisitely  saddened  memories !  How  much  he  had  lately  joyed  in 
it !  What  honour  had  been  his  to  bring  to  it  the  ark  1  What  glorious  heart-stirring 
festival  of  the  whole  kingdom  had  centred  within  its  walls  thereupon  I  Place  has  ever 
had  its  quantum  of  influence.  The  hardest  heart  and  most  callous  insensibility  will  bo 
touched  by  it.    The  tender  heart  and  sensitive  nature  will  be  resj^nsive  to  it  as  to  but 


CH.  xx.1-^.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  823 

a  lower  grade  of  inspiratioa  And  now,  almost  for  the  first  time,  David  has  the  oppor- 
tunity of  surrendering  himself  to  the  religion  of  the  place,  of  giving  undivided  thanks 
and  grateful  praise  in  the  place,  and  enjoying  in  it  some  earnest  of  the  Jerusalem 
above.  But  no ;  lust  smears  the  sight  of  his  eye,  which  sees  no  longer  even  the  Jeru- 
salem that  is  below,  its  fame  and  glory  and  pride. 

lY.  The  imperial  claims  of  duty,  consciekce,  of  beliqion  akd  humanitt,  abb 
SET  AT  KOUOHT  BT  IT.  To  the  hot  fire  of  passion  these  are  but  as  straws.  They  resist 
nothing  at  alL  They  do  serve  to  bystanders  to  increase  the  show  of  the  disastrous, 
destructive  fire.  The  pride  of  imperial  position  and  the  throne  stoop  for  the  time 
without  a  struggle,  and  come  down  from  their  exaltation  to  do  homage  to  creature- 
lust.  So  much,  then,  human  nature  has  to  say  of  itself,  and  so  little  1  So  much  we  are 
taught  do  we  ever  need  watchfulness  and  prayer!  The  high  plateau  of  honour,  glorious 
opportunity,  religion,  rest  fulness,  and  home  enjoyment  may  be  the  accursed  ground  of 
our  own  worst  dereliction  of  duty,  devotion,  and  even  decency.  Unsafe  when  we  are 
left  to  self,  we  are  not  more  safe  when  we  are  left  by  ourselves.  "  Let  him  alone  "  is 
the  darkest  doom  that  even  Divine  judgment  and  justice  can  decree.  But  when  left 
alone  (and  that  our  wish  and  petition)  only  for  an  hour,  we  shall  not  be  safe,  however 
secure,  unless  we  can  take  back  the  words  as  Jesus  on  so  signal  an  occasion  did,  and 
say,  "  And  yet  I  am  not  alone,  for  the  Father  is  with  me." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vcr.  3.-7^6  barbarity  of  man  to  man.  There  are  signal  inconsistencies  in  the 
character  of  David.  He  was  capable  of  kindness,  self-denial,  and  generosity,  but  he 
was  capable  also  of  cruelty  amounting  to  inhumanity  and  savagery.  Perhaps  no  act 
more  disgraceful  and  inexcusable  is  related  to  have  been  performed  by  him  tban  that 
recorded  in  the  text.  The  people  of  Rabbah  had  long  resisted  his  arms  ;  and  when  the 
city  fell  David  seems  to  have  given  the  reins  to  his  passions,  and  to  have  treated  the 
captive  population  with  what  seems  to  ns  all  but  incredible  cruelty.  But  allowance 
must  be  made  for  the  manners  and  morals  of  the  age.  Humanity  towards  enemies  is 
comparatively  a  modern  virtue.  Though  history  records  a  few  striking  exceptions  to 
the  general  rule,  that  rule  was  undoubtedly  one  of  utter  insensibility  to  the  miseries  of 
a  vanquished  foe.  The  chronicler  here  relates,  evidently  as  a  matter  calling  for  no 
surprise  or  indignation,  that  David  in  cold  blood  cut  the  people  with  saws,  broke  their 
limbs  with  threshing-instruments,  and  flung  them,  whilst  still  alive,  into  the  red-hot 
brick-kilns ! 

I.  Cbueltt  is  an  OUTCOME  AND  A  FOBM  OF  SIN.  Ffom  the  time,  and  in  consequence 
of,  man's  original  departure  from  Gtxi,  human  society  has  been  cursed  with  all  the 
horrors  which  result  from  the  violation  of  Divine  law,  the  defiance  of  Divine  authority. 
Hatred,  envy,  and  strife  have  run  riot,  and  their  manifestations  have  been  the  main 
factors  in  what  is  called  human  history.  Hence  the  barbarities  heartlessly  and  ruth- 
lessly practised  among  all  rude  nations.  Modem  war  is  nothing  but  a  disgraceful  sur- 
vival of  the  savage  barbarism  of  the  sinful  and  inhuman  past.  Even  now  the  practices 
common  in  war  are  enough  to  sadden  and  to  sicken  every  sensitive  mind.  "  Whence 
come  wars  and  fightings  ?    Come  they  not  hence  of  your  lusts  ?  " 

II.  Restbaints  and  checks  upon  cbueltt  have  been  oompabattvelt  feeblb  jlvd 
INEFFECTIVE.  David  was  a  very  religious  man,  but  his  religion  did  not  preserve  him 
from  adultery  and  murder;  nor  did  it  restrain  him  from  cold-blooded  cruelty.  The 
ancient  civilizations,  the  ancient  religions,  failed  to  check  the  prevalent  insensibility  to 
suiTering,  the  prevalent  habit  of  revenge.  Even  the  religion  of  the  Old  Testament  had 
very  partial  power  to  secure  these  ends.  Mitigations  of  the  horrors  of  war  have  doubt- 
less been  introduced  by  Christianity  and  by  chivalry.  Yet  the  professed  servants  of 
the  meek  and  holy  Jesus  have  too  often  sanctioned  and  applauded  the  barbarities  of 
war,  the  infamies  of  slavery,  the  tortures  of  the  Inquisition. 

II L  Vital  and  scriptubal  Chbistianity  alone  can  cope  with  and  vanquish 
THIS  EVIL.  Rules  and  maxims  are  of  little  avail  to  contend  with  the  fierce  passions  of 
our  fallen  nature.  The  new  heart,  with  its  changed  dispositions,  is  alone  sufiicient.  The 
example  and  the  spirit  of  our  Divine  Saviour  are  incompatible  with  cruelty.    In  pro- 


324  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.       [ch.  xx.  1—8. 

portion  as  Christ  himself  liyos  in  the  hearts  and  goveras  the  liyes  of  men,  "will  inha- 
nianity  diminish  until  it  disappear,  and  until  such  deeds  as  those  described  in  the  text 
become  impossible.  The  prophecies  and  promises  of  Qod's  Word  point  forward  to  a  day 
when  the  '*  new  commandment "  shall  be  everywhere  observed,  and  when  craclty  shall 
be  no  more. — T. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Further  consequenen  of  fdly^  eU.    "We  learn  these  five  lessons— 

L  The  lonq  train  of  the  consequences  of  follt.    It  is  long  before  the  wliole 

Snalty  of  a  great  mistake  is  paid.  Hanun  and  his  foolish  princes  (ch.  xix.  3)  doubtless 
I  crestfallen  enough  when  they  were  miserably  defeated  in  battle,  but  they  probably 
comforted  themselves  with  the  consideration  that  they  had  borne  their  punishment, 
and  would  have  no  more  bitter  fruits  to  swallow.  If  so,  they  were  mistaken.  In  the 
next  chapter  we  meet  with  more  consequences  of  their  folly.  The  next  spring,  they  had 
to  encounter  another  army  in  the  fie.d  (ver.  1).  Oiten,  when  we  think  we  have  escaped 
from  the  wretched  results  of  our  thoughtlessness  or  our  sin,  we  find  that  we  have 
not :  there  they  arc  again,  walking  at  our  side,  or  meeting  us  sword  in  hand.  Let  us 
earnestly  pray  and  vigilantly  watch,  that  we  may  not  be  surprised  into  folly,  may  not 
fall  into  the  power  of  temptation,  so  that  our  life  may  not  be  darkened  by  the  appeaianoe 
and  reappearance  of  the  penalties  of  wrong-doing. 

U.  The  evil  of  absolutism.  No  doubt  this  little  kingdom  of  Ammon  was  auto- 
cratic. It  is  true,  indeed,  that  the  princes  advised,  but  the  king  decided.  And  what 
terrible  penalties  his  poor  i)eople  paid  for  his  decision  1  The  city  of  Rabbah  was  sacked 
(ver.  2),  and  its  inhabitants  not  only  lost  their  property  but  were  subjected  to  cruel 
tortures ;  and  **  even  so  dealt  David  with  all  the  cities,**  etc.  (ver.  3).  Our  heart  is 
touched  with  sorrow  and  indignation  as  we  think  how  one  man's  (or  how  a  few  men's) 
incensate  folly  brought  down  upon  thousands  of  the  innocent  such  a  wretched  fate. 
Let  us  thank  God  that  public  policy  is  largely  taken  out  of  the  hands  of  one  man  who 
may  be  shamelessly  selfish  or  utterly  incapable,  and  is  deposited  with  the  many  who 
consult  the  large  and  general  interests  of  the  nation. 

III.  The  perils  of  power.  One  may  well  believe  that  Hanun  had  little  happiness, 
if  any  at  all,  in  the  subsequent  years  of  his  rei;»n.  Surely  the  cries  that  came  from 
these  mutilated  subjects  and  from  these  bereaved  homes  must  have  rung  in  his  ears, 
and  made  discord  of  every  oilier  sound  that  greeted  him.  Men  covet  power,  but  it  is 
a  perilous  thing  to  possess.  One  great  mistake,  and  we  involve  numbers  of  our  fellow- 
men  in  suffering  and  sorrow.  1.  IIow  should  they  who  wield  it  be  solicitous  and 
prayerful  that  they  may  be  preserved  from  abusing  it !  2.  IIow  well  may  those  who 
are  denied  it  be  content  to  take  the  lower  place,  and  be  secure  from  such  solemn  and 
weighty  responsibilities  as  they  would  otherwise  incur  1 

IV.  The  need  for  reflection  in  tub  hour  of  anger.  It  would  be  altogether 
unjust  to  judge  David  by  the  humane  and  merciful  standards  of  our  own  age ;  yet  we 
cannot  but  regret  that  he  inflicted  such  cruelties  on  the  children  of  Ammon  (ver.  3). 
We  should  have  liked  it  (and  him)  better  if  he  had  entertained  and  acted  upon  the 
thought  which,  on  another  occasion,  he  admitted  to  his  mind,  ^'  These  sheep,  what  have 
they  done?**  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  17).  He  had  been  greatly  provoked,  but  he  carried  his 
indignation  further  than  he  was  obliged  to  do,  and  beyond  the  point  at  which  a  large- 
minded,  God-taught  man  should  surely  have  stopped.  In  anger  we  should  jmuse  and 
think,  for  we  are  in  great  danger  of  speaking  too  harshly  and  striking  too  hard  (Bom. 
xii.  19). 

V.  The  best  crown  to  win  and  wear.  (Ver.  2.)  David  seems  to  have  set  much 
store  on  this  crown,  which  was  taken  from  the  King  of  Ammon  and  ilaced  on  his  head 
(Ps.  xxi.  3).  Better  far  the  crown  of  God's  favour,  the  crown  of  righteousness,  the 
crown  of  giateful  love,  the  crown  of  glory.  These  are  (1)  untarnished  with  severities ; 
(2)  adornments  of  our  true  selves  (our  souls) ;  (3)  unfading  with  time. — ^0. 

Vers.  4 — 8. — Little  things  and  great.  How  small  and  insignificant  in  our  esteem  are 
the  physical  peculiarities  of  these  "  children  of  the  giant "  1  How  little  we  care  to  trea- 
sure their  names  and  deeds  in  our  memories  I  They  probably  thought  much  of  them- 
selves, and  were  made  much  of  by  their  contemporaries;  but  they  have  sunk  into  entire 
insignificance  now.    We  feel  that— 


CH.XX.1— 8.]       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHKONICLES.  326 

I.  DiSTINCmON  BASED  ON  BODILY  PECULIARITY  IS  OF  LITTLE  WORT^.      Great  StatOTe 

makes  its  possessor  oonspicuous  among  bis  fellows,  if  that  be  a  desirable  thing ;  great 
muscular  strength  serves  in  good  stead  on  those  rare  occasions  when  a  man  has  to 
resist  by  physical  force.  Unusual  beauty  of  countenance  attracts  the  eye  and  wins  the 
admiration  of  the  opposite  sex.  But  these  visible  specialities  have  their  drawbacks,  ^ 
not  their  evils.  The  first  of  these  often  secures  a  most  undesirable  and  even  painful 
notoriety ;  the  second  tempts  to  acts  of  violence  which  are  regrettable ;  the  last  exposes 
to  peculiar  perils  of  its  own.  And  how  speedily  they  perishl  In  this  war  with  the  Philis- 
tines these  giants  "  were  subdued  "  (ver.  4).  Lahmi*s  great  spear  did  not  save  him  from 
the  skill  of  Elhanan  (ver.  6) ;  nor  the  immense  stature  of  the  giant  with  twenty-four 
fingers  and  toes,  from  the  courage  and  capacity  of  Jonathan  (vers.  6,  7).  "  They  fell 
by  the  hand  ...  of  David's  servants  "  (ver.  8).  Mere  size  of  body,  mere  power  of 
muscle,  mere  skill  of  fence,  and  even  beauty  of  face  and  charm  of  manner, — all  these 
are  either  overmatched  with  something  that  is  stronger,  or  they  soon  fade  and  fall 
under  the  resistless  ravages  of  time.  And  when  they  pass,  Aou;  soon  they  are  forgotten ! 
We  hardly  recognize  some  of  these  names ;  or,  if  we  remember  them,  we  associate 
them  with  other  men  who  bore  them,  but  were  distinguished  by  other  and  nobler 
features.  The  next  generation  will  care  little  for  those  who  have  nothing  better  to 
claim  than  great  strcugth,  or  commanding  stature,  or  some  other  bodily  peculiarity* 
On  the  other  hand,  we  feel  that — 

II.  Distinction  based  on  spirituaii  worth  is  a  desirable  excellenot.  1* 
Menial  strength,  when  gained  by  diligent  self-culture  and  devoted  to  useful  ends,  enjoys 
a  more  lasting  honour  and  effects  a  far  greater  good.  2.  But  spiritucU  worth  is  the 
most  valuable  acquisition  ;  that  is  the  true  greatness  of  man.  (1)  It  raises  him 
highest  in  the  scale  of  being.  (2)  It  renders  nobler  and  truer  service.  (3)  It  yields  a 
finer  fragrance  in  grateful  recollection  (Prov.  x.  7).  (4)  It  lives  on  to  distant  genera- 
tions in  benignant  influence.  The  "  good  men  do  "  is  not  "  interred  with  their  Iwnes;'* 
it  lives  and  blossoms,  and  bears  precious  fruit  in  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men. — 0. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  wasting  of  the  Ammonites,  cmd  David*s  wars  with  the  giants.  The 
outrage  inflicted  on  the  Hebrew  ambassadors  was  still  further  to  be  avenged  by  David. 
Joab  was  sent  out  with  the  power  of  the  army  to  waste  the  country  of  the  Ammonites. 
The  former  campaign  had  been  disastrous  because  of  the  hir^  auxiliaries  of  tho 
Ammonites.  Now  the  full  strength  of  David's  army  was  to  be  led  forth  to  complete  tho 
ruin  both  of  the  people  and  their  land.  *'  At  the  time  that  kings  go  out  to  battle,"  ij$. 
spring-time,  the  expedition  set  out.  Having  besieged  the  capital,  Rabbah,  and  having 
after  a  protracted  siege  taken  the  lower  town,  or  '*  city  of  waters,"  and  knowing  that 
the  royal  city  would  soon  fall,  Joab  invited  King  David  to  come  in  person  and  have  the 
honour  of  taking  it  himself  (see  2  Sam.  xii.  26).  We  are  thus  enabled  to  reconcile  the 
two  statements,  that "  David  tarried  at  Jerusalem"  (ver.  1),  and  **  David  and  all  the  people 
returned  to  Jerusalem  "  (ver.  3).  David  took  the  king's  crown,  and  it  was  set  on  David's 
head.  This  crown  weighed  a  talent,  or  one  hundred  and  fourteen  pounds'  weight  of 
gold.  The  crowns  of  Eastern  kings  were  not  usually  worn  on  the  head  (and  could 
not  have  been  in  this  case),  but  were  suspended  by  chains  of  gold  over  the  throne.  We 
again  notice  the  cruelties  of  war  and  especially  of  that  time  (ver.  3).  These  are 
recorded,  not  for  example,  but  to  deepen  our  sense  of  gratitude  for  the  blessings  which 
Christianity  has  brought  in  introducing  a  humane  mode  of  warfare.  It  may  also 
make  us  long  for  the  time  when  ''nations  shall  learn  war  no  more,"  and  when 
"righteousness  shall  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea."  We  see  here 
David's  victories  over  the  giants.  The  "stripling"  in  God's  hand  has  overthrown 
kingdoms  and  slain  the  giants  of  wickedness.  In  God's  hand  "  the  worm  Jacob  shall 
thresh  the  mountains."  As  wo  review  David's  rise  from  the  "stripling"  of  the 
wilderness  to  the  highest  place  in  the  land,  we  may  say,  "What  hath  God  wrought  1** 
"  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  To  the 
outward  eye  of  sense  a  man  may  be  a  "  stripling,"  and  in  his  own  eyes  "  a  dead  dog  •* 
and  "a  flea ;"  but  it  is  such  instruments  God  overuses  to  accomplish  his  mighty  works 
and  to  advance  his  kingdom  in  the  world.  Gideon's  "  lamps  and  pitchers,"  Naaman's 
"little  maid,"  the  widow's  "pot  of  oil,"  Jonah's  "worm^*  and  "gourd,"  and  Sam- 
son's "jawbone  of  an  ass/' — these  God  uses  for  in  these  he  can  be  glorified.    Mau'a 


326  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa       [ch. 

might  and  power  is  passed  by,  for  there  is  no  room  in  them  for  Gk>d  to  be  glorified.  If 
we  are  only  low  enough,  onlv  little  enough,  only  nothing  before  him,  he  can  and  will 
use  us ;  and  the  reason  he  has  so  often  to  pass  by  the  "  vessel "  is,  that  it  is  too/uU 
and  not  "  fit  for  the  Master's  use."  "  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  world 
to  confound  the  wise;  and  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  things  that 
are  mighty ;  and  base  things  of  the  world,  and  things  which  are  despised,  hath  God 
chosen,  yea,  and  things  which  are  not  [too  contemptible  to  be  named],  to  bring  to 
nought  things  that  are :  that  no  flesh  ihotUa  glory  in  hie  presence  ^  (1  Cor.  i.  27 — ^29). — W. 

Yer.  3. — The  horrors  of  war.  All  actions,  both  of  nations  and  of  individuals,  should 
be  judged  in  the  light  of  the  prevailing  standards  and  sentiments  of  the  age  in  which  they 
are  done.  This  is  a  most  important  principle,  but  it  is  a  difficult  one  to  apply  wisely ; 
and  it  is  one  that  may  be  easily  misrepresented.  Right  can  never  be  other  than  rights 
and  wrong  can  never  be  other  than  wrong.  But  custom  and  sentiment  give  a  temporary 
character  to  many  actions  which  tend  to  confuse  our  apprehension  of  their  essential 
rishtness  or  wrongness.  Limited  knowledge  also  leads  to  the  permission  of  things 
which  advancing  civilization  shows  to  be  unworthy  and  even  wrong.  These  points 
may  be  illustrated  from  slavery,  truthfulness,  sense  of  the  value  of  life,  ideas  of  property, 
and  war.  Another  important  consideration,  which  greatly  helps  to  explain  Old  Testa- 
ment narratives,  is  that  national  judgments  must  of  necessity  take  national  character. 
An  old  divine  well  says,  **  God  can  punish  individuals  both  in  this  life  and  in  the 
next ;  but  he  can  only  punish  nations  in  this.*  There  are  distinctly  personal  and 
individual  sins,  and  there  are  as  distinctly  national  sins ;  wrong  done  by  the  rulers  in 
the  name  of  the  people ;  or  a  wrong  spirit  pervading  the  people ;  or  times  when  vice  is 
permitted  to  run  an  unrestrained  and  ruinous  course.  And  such  national  sin  Jehovah 
ever  regards,  using  such  agencies  as  famine,  plague,  or  war,  for  its  due  punishment. 
In  this  light  the  Old  Testament  over  rep;ards  war ;  the  aggressive  force  b  always  treated 
as  the  executioner  who  carries  out  the  Divine  judgments.  And  it  may  be  urged  that 
this  is  still  the  deeper  view  to  take  of  war,  and  that  it  is  quite  consistent  with  a  clear 
recognition  of  the  fact  that  such  an  aggressive  force  may  act  in  mere  wilfulness,  or 
in  furtherance  of  wicked  schemes  of  self-aggrandizement.  God  makes  the  very  "  wrath 
of  man  "  praise  him.  In  treating  the  incidents  of  this  chapter,  it  may  be  well  to  point 
out  the  distinction  between  what  usually  happens  under  the  excitements  of  a  siege,  and 
the  deliberate  judgment  that  may  be  pronounced  upon  a  conquered  people.  As  may  be 
painfully  illustrated  from  the  conduct  of  the  British  soldiers  in  India  and  in  Spain,  when 
a  city  is  taken  by  storm,  a  scene  of  wild  and  awful  rioting  usually  follows.  Illustrate 
also  from  the  Roman  siege  of  Jerusalem.  For  liabbah,  the  city  here  referr^  to,  see  the 
Expository  portion  of  this  Commentary,  and  2  Sam.  xi.  1. 

r.  Ancient  horrors  of  war.  Illustrate  from  different  kinds  of  war — wars  of  races^ 
the  young  and  strong  pushing  out  the  old  and  weak ;  hardy  mountain  races  occupying 
the  cultured  plains  of  the  over-civilized  and  effeminate ;  dynastic  wars,  occasioned 
by  the  rivalries  of  different  royal  houses ;  sacred  wars,  such  as  the  Crusades,  to  recover 
possession  of  the  Lord's  tomb;  and  wars  of  revenge,  undertaken  to  clear  off  supposed  or 
real  insults.  Of  this  latter  kind  was  the  war  with  Ammon  (see  ch.  xix.).  Modem  ideas 
concerning  war  make  it  impossible  for  us  to  approve  of  the  treatment  to  which  the 
conquered  Ammonites  were  subjected.  Some  writers  have  urged  that  David  merely 
condemned  the  captives  to  severe  bodily  labours,  to  hewing  and  sawing  wood,  to  burning 
of  bricks,  and  to  working  in  iron-mines ;  but  probably  the  more  terrible  translation  of 
the  language  must  be  accepted,  in  view  of  the  common  war-law  of  that  stern  age.  And, 
with  its  best  mitigations,  war  must  still  bo  regarded  as  a  dreadful  thing.  The  whole 
world  sighs  for  the  day  when  "  the  nations  shall  learn  war  no  more." 

II.  Christian  mitigations  op  the  horrors  of  war.  Illustrate  from  modem 
treatment  of  the  dead,  the  wounded,  the  prisoner,  and  the  conquered.  Show  how  a 
prolonged  period  of  comparative  peace  has  influenced  national  sentiment  conceming  war. 
Explain,  illustrate,  and  impress  that  the  Christian  law  of  tho  universal  human  brother- 
hood seeks  to  destroy  all  forms  of  war ;  and  the  day  of  its  full  triimiph  is  surely 
coming. — R.  T. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Strong  in  body,  and  strong  in  Ood,    Here  are  introduced  to  ns  *'  a  man  ol 


CH.  XXI.  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


827 


great  stature,"  and  of  abnonnal  deyelopment ;  a  striking  instance  of  mere  bodily  power: 
and  a  man  who  could  overcome  this  giant,  by  virtue  of  his  loyalty  to  Gk)d  and  reliance 
on  his  strength.  It  seems  to  be  a  fact  that  hugeness  of  body  is  usually  associated 
with  dulness  of  mind.  The  quick-witted  David  is  always  more  than  a  match  for  the 
ponderous  (joliath.  It  seems  to  be  the  fact — at  least  under  our  present  human  conditions 
— that  the  culture  of  the  mind  tends  to  ensure  the  frailty  of  the  body.  It  seems  to  be 
now  very  difficult,  if  it  may  not  be  called  impossible,  to  gain  and  to  keep  the  menssana 
in  corpore  sano.  Yet  we  should  feel  that  both  the  body  and  the  soiU  are  sacred  trusts,  and 
that  we  are  responsible  to  God  for  the  full  and  wise  and  harmonious  culture  of  them 
both.  The  "  body  is  to  be  for  the  Lord,**  and  we  are  to  "  prosper  even  as  our  souls 
prosper."  There  are  two  principles  by  which  our  life  should  be  toned.  We  should 
seek  to  be^ 

I.  Stuono  in  body  ;  that  is,  in  the  bodily  powers  and  resources.  Applications  may 
be  made  to  hmlth,  vigour  of  frame,  due  control  of  passione,  and  proper  training  of  mental 
faciUties,  But  it  should  be  shown  that  there  are  limitations  to  the  success  which  we 
may  reach  in  these  matters — ^limitations  from  constitutional  peculiarities,  from 
hereditary  tendencies,  and  from  disabilities  of  circumstance.  In  this  each  of  us  can  but 
reach  his  best  possible. 

II.  Stbono  in  God  ;  that  is,  in  the  higher  moral  capadties  and  forces,  tn  the  culture 
of  these  there  need  be  no  qualifications  or  limitations.  Due  training  of  these  will 
ensure  complete  dominion  over  the  bodily  powers  and  relations,  so  that  all  the  lower 
faculties  take  their  due  place  of  ministry  or  service.  And  this  is  the  high  ideal  after 
which  we  all  should  strive — ^the  true  man,  who  is  like  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  strong  in 
Ood,  and  therefore  strong  in  body. — R.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


This  very  important  chapter  in  David's 
history  is  the  parallel  of  2  Sam.  xxiv.  1—25, 
which  contains  some  details  not  found  here, 
e.g.  the  route  taken  by  those  who  went  to 
number  Israel  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  5—8),  and 
omits  others.  This  chapter  furnishes*  one 
of  the  clearer  proofs  (in  respect  of  what  it 
supplies,  not  found  in  Samuel)  that  its 
indebtedness  is  not  to  that  book,  but  to  a 
work  open  as  well  to  the  compiler  of 
Chronicles  as  to  the  writer  of  Samuel. 
Its  contents  fall  into  five  sections.  1. 
David's  command  to  number  the  people, 
with  Joab's  remonstrances  (vers.  1 — 6). 
2.  The  means  taken  to  rouse  David  to  a 
sense  of  his  sin,  and  his  confession  thereof 
(vers.  7, 8).  3.  The  choice  between  punish- 
ments presented  to  him  and  his  prayer  under 
the  drawn  sword  of  the  angel  for  the  spar- 
ing of  the  people  (vers.  9—17).  4.  The 
accepted  propitiatory  sacrifices  and  offer- 
ings of  David,  and  ihe  consequent  stay  of 
the  plague  (vers.  18 — ^27).  5.  David's  grate- 
ful establishment  of  that  same  spot  as  the 
place  of  sacrifice  (vers.  28 — 30). 

Ver.  1. — Satan  stood  up  against  Israel,  and 
provoked  David  to  number  IiraeL    This  re- 


markable sentence  takes  the  place  of  the 
statements  in  the  parallel,  **  And  again  the 
anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against 
Israel,  and  he  moved  David  against  them 
to  say,  Gk>,  number  Israel  and  Judah." 
Our  own  passage  seems  to  oonfine  the  temp- 
tation ana  sin  to  David.  David  also  seems 
to  be  spoken  of  as  the  object  of  malignant 
attack  on  the  part  of  Satan,  though  Israel 
is  spoken  of  as  the  object  of  malignant 
envy  and  animosity.  It  is  also  to  be 
noticed  that  in  ver.  17  David  takes  all 
the  blame  to  himself,  and  speaks  of  the 
people  as  ^*  innocent  sheep."  A  people  and 
whole  nation  have,  indeed,  often  suffered  the 
smart  of  one  ruler's  sin.  Yet  here  the  light 
thrown  upon  the  whole  event  by  the  aooount 
in  the  Book  of  Samuel  must  be  accepted 
as  revealing  the  fact  that  there  had  been 
previously  something  amiss  on  the  part  of 
the  people  —  perhaps  something  of  illest 
significance  lurking  in  their  constitution. 
This  alone  could  "kindle  the  anger  of  Uie 
Ix>rd  against  Israel."  It  is  the  opposite  of 
this  which  kindles  the  anger  of  Satun — when 
he  witnesses  excellence,  surpassing  excel- 
lence, as  when  he  witnesses  "  the  wedkeit 
saint,"  yet  in  that  strongest  position, "  on  hi» 
knees,**  The  apparent  inoonsistencv  in  Satan 
being  spoken  of  as  resisting  Israel,  and  the 
anger  of  the  Lord  being  spoken  of  as 
kindled  against  Israel,  is  but  apparent 
and  superficial.  In  the  first  place,  these 
histories  do  only  purport  to  stato  the  facts 


r 


328 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ch.  xxi.  1— 30, 


overt    And  in  this  tense  either  alterna- 
tiye  statement  gives  the  primd  facie  facts. 
Either  is  true,  and  both  may  be  true  in 
di^rent  chronological  order.    And  further, 
that  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled 
against  iHTuei  is  no  disproof  that  Satan  will 
see  and  seize  his  opportunity.    It  looks  the 
contrary  way.    There  was  a  time  and  an 
occasion  in  Eden  when  Siiton  thought  he 
■aw  an  opportunity,  tried  it,  and  found  it, 
when  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  noi  kindled 
against  Adum  and  Eve  for  certain.    But 
much  more  prompt  will  be  the  executive  of 
Satan  at  another  and  less  doubtful  time. 
The  paths  in    written   history   are    often 
awhile  rugged  and  broken  up ;  the  written 
history  ot  Scripture  is  no  exception.    And 
in  thus  being  the  more  in  analogy  with 
history  itself,  those  unevenne^ses  and  breaks 
are  the  better  attestation  of  both  the  reality 
of  the  Scripture  history  and  the  veracity  of 
its  writers.    The  word  (pb)  occurs  twenty^ 
four  times  in  the  Old  Testament.    On  all 
occasions  of  its  occurrence  in  the  Book  of 
Job  and  in  the  prophecies  of  Zechariah,  it 
shows    the    prefixed   definite   article;    in 
all  other  places   it    is,  with  the   present 
passage,  unaccompanied  by  the  article.    Its 
translation  here  might  appear  strictly  as 
that  of  a  proper  name.    But  this  cannot  be 
•aid  of  the  otlior  iubtunces  of  its  use,  when 
without  the  article  (Numb.  xxii.  22,  82; 
1   Sam.  xxix.  4).     This  constitutes  with 
some    the    ground    of   the    very    opposite 
opinion   and   opposite   translation.     If    we 
regard  tlio  name  as  utterly  expressing  the 
personality  of  Satan,  the  pa>Kage  is  very 
noteworthy,   and   will  be  most  safely   re- 
gardcd   as   the  language  of  the  compiler, 
and  not  as  copied  from  the  original  source. 
The  sijj;nificiition  of  the  word  "  Satiin,"  as 
is    well   known,  is  "adversary,"   or    •'ac- 
cuser."   The  sin  of  David  in   giving  the 
order  of  this  verse  was  of  a  technical  and 
oeremoniid    charaotor,  in    the   first   place, 
whatever   his  motives  w^ere,  and   however 
intensified  by  other  causes  of  a  moral  and 
more    individual    complexion.      We    learn 
(Kxod.    XXX.   12 — 16)   the    special    enact- 
ments respecting  what  was  to  bo  observed 
when  **  the  sum  of  the  children  of  Israel 
after  their  number  "  was  to  be  taken.    How- 
ever, thu  same  passage  does  not  sav,  it  fails  to 
say,  when  such  a  numbering  wuuld  be  legiti- 
mate or  when  not.    It  is  left  us,  therefore, 
to  deduce  this  from  observation.    And  we 
notice,  in  the  first  place,  that,  on  the  occasion 
of  its  undoubted  rightness,  it  is  the  work  of 
the  distinct  commandment  of  God  (Numb. 
i.  1 — 3 ;  xxvi.  1 — 4).    Next,  we  notice  the 
religious  contribution,  "  the  ransom,"  that 
was  required  with  it  (Exod.  xxx.  12 — 10; 
xxxviii.    25,    26 ;    Numb.    xxxi.    48 — 54). 
Again,    we    notice    that    the    numberings 


narrated  both  in  the  beginning  of  the  Book 
of  Numbers  (i.)  and  toward  the  cloae 
(xxtL)  had  specific  moral  objects  as  «•• 
signed  by  God— among  them  the  forcible 
teaching  of  the  loss  entailed  by  the  tuooee- 
sive  reUil lions  of  the  people  (Numb.  xxvi. 
'64,  65 ;  Dent.  ii.  14,  15).  And  thonsh  last, 
not  least,  all  these  indications  are  lighted 
up  by  the  cxprem  and  emphatic  annoonoe- 
mentis  in  God*8  original  promises  to  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  that  their  seed  should  be- 
come p<ut  numbcrin;?,  multitudinous  as  the 
stars,  and  as  the  sands  of  the  seashore. 
From  all  which  we  may  conclude  that  onlr 
that  numl>ering  was  held  legitimate  whusa 
was  for  God's  service  in  some  form,  and  as 
againtt  human  pride  and  boastfulness — by 
God's  command  as  against  a  human  king^s 
fancy — and  which  was  attended  by  the  pay* 
ment  of  that  solemn  ^  ransom "  money,  toe 
hekdh,  or  half-shekel  (Exod.  xxx.  12).  Other 
numbering  had  snares  about  it,  and  it  was 
no  doubt  because  it  had  such  intrineieaUv 
that  it  was  divinely  discountenanced,  and 
in  this  case  severely  punished.  It  seems 
gratuitous  with  some  to  tax  David  with 
having  other  motives  than  those  of  some 
sort  of  vanity  now  at  work,  sinister  designs 
of  preparing,  unaided  and  unpermitted,  some 
fresh  military  exploits,  or  stealing  a  march 
on  the  nation  itself  in  the  matter  of  some 
new  system  of  taxation.  The  context  offers 
no  corroboration  of  either  of  these  notions, 
while  several  lesser  indications  point  to  the 
simplest  explanation  (ch.  xxvii.  23). 

Ver.  2. — And  to  the  rulers  of  the  people. 
So  Numb.  i.  4,  *'  And  with  you  there  shall 
be  a  man  of  every  tribe ;  every  one  head  of 
the  house  of  his  fathers"  (see  also  ch. 
xxvii.  22—21 ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  4,  5). 

Ver.  3. — But  my  lord  the  kixig,  are  they 
not  all  my  lord's  servants  ?  The  place  of 
this  perfectly  intelligible  sentence,  indicat- 
ing that  Joab  discerned  the  object  of  David 
in  desiring  the  numbering  of  the  people,  is 
occupied  in  the  Book  of  Samuel  by  the 
words,  "  And  that  the  eyes  of  my  lord  the 
king  may  see  it ;  "  which  some  for  no  very 
evident  reason  prefer.  It  was,  no  doubt,  a 
very  radical  clement  of  David's  sin  in  this 
matter  that  he  was  thinking  of  the  nation 
too  much  as  his  own  servants,  instead  of  as 
the  servants  of  his  one  Muster.  The  Lord 
ever  knoweth  who  are  his,  and  numbereth 
not  only  them  and  their  names,  but  their 
every  si^h,  tear,  prayer.  A  cause  of  tres- 
pass. This  clause  may  be  explained  as 
thou«;h  treKpass  was  equivalent  to  the  con- 
sequences, I.e.  the  puuisliment  of  trespass. 
This,  however,  rather  tends  to  explain  away 
than  to  explain  a  phrase.  More  probably 
the  deeper  meaning  is  that,  in  the  fact  of 
the  numbering,  nation  and  king  would  be- 
come one  in  act,  and  would  become  in- 


OH.  XXL  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


329 


yol  ved  together  in  indisputable  sin.  Though 
there  were  no  unfeigned  assent  and  consent 
in  the  great  body  of  the  nation  to  the 
numbering,  yet  they  would  become  par- 
ticipators in  the  wrong-doing.  It  would 
further  seem  evident,  from  Joab  addressing 
these  words  to  the  king,  that  it  was  a  thing 
familiarly  known  and  thoroughly  under- 
stood that  the  course  David  was  now  bent 
on  following  was  one  virtually,  if  not 
actually,  prohibited,  and  not  one  merely 
likely  to  be  displeasing  to  God  on  account 
of  any  individual  disposition  in  David  to 
be  boastful  or  self-confident.  Otherwise  it 
would  be  scarcely  within  the  province  of 
Joab  either  to  express  or  suppose  this  of  hid 
royal  master. 

Ver.  4. — Wherefore  Joab  departed,  and 
went  thronghont  all  Israel,  and  came  to 
Jemsalem.  This  short  verse  stands  in  the 
place  of  all  the  five  verses  of  2  Sam.  zxiv. 
4 — 8,  with  their  interesting  contents,  giving 
the  route  which  Joab  and  his  assistants 
took,  and  the  time  occupied  (nine  months 
and  twenty  days)  to  their  return. 

Ver.  5. — The  report  of  the  numbers  as 
given  in  this  verse  does  not  tally  with  that 
of  the  parallel  place.  Here  they  are  three 
hundred  thousand  more  for  Israel,  and  thirty 
thousand  fewer  for  Judah,  than  there.  No 
really  satisfactory  explanation  of  these 
discrepancies  has  yet  appeared.  Tiie 
somewhat  ingenious  suggebtion  that  the 
Chronicle-compiler  counted  in  the  stand- 
ing army  (two  hundred  and  eighty-eight 
thousand,  ch.  xxvii.  1 — 15)  for  Israel,  and 
omitted  from  Judah  a  supposed  **  thirty 
thousand,''  under  the  head  of  "  the  thirty  " 
of  our  ch.  xi. ;  while  the  writer  of  the  Book 
of  Samuel  did  exactly  the  converse, — can 
scarcely  pass  muster,  although  it  mubt  be 
noticed  that  it  would  meet  in  the  main  the 
exigencies  of  tho  case.  A  likelier  sugges- 
tion might  be  found  in  a  comparison  of  the 
statements  of  our  ver.  6  compared  with 
oh.  xxvii.  22 — 24.  Indeed,  the  last  sen- 
tence of  this  last-quoted  verse  (ch.  xxvii. 
24)  may  possibly  contain  the  explanation  of 
all  (comp.  Numb.  i.  47—50;  ii.  33).  That 
Joab  utterly  refused  to  number  Levi,  because 
this  was  a  thing  most  distinctly  prohibited 
(and  further  because  it  was  not  ni;itcrial  to 
David's  presumable  objects),  was  quite  to  bo 
expected.  And  though  Joab  is  said  in 
the  following  verse  not  to  have  numbered 
Benjamin,  it  is  possible  enough  that  he  may 
have  known  thi:i  number  (ch.  vii.  6 — 11). 
Yet  see  what  follows. 

Ver.  6. — Averse  to  his  task  as  Joab  was, 
he  may  have  been  indf  bted  to  tho  memory 
of  the  exemption  of  Levi  from  census  for 
the  idea  of  enlarging  upon  it  and  omitting 
Benjamin  as  well.  The  important  contents 
of  this  short  verse  are  not  found  in  Samuel, 


so  that  we  can  borrow  no  light  thence.  Bui 
Benjamin  was  **  the  least  of  the  tribes  ** 
(Judg.  xxi.  1 — 23),  and  Poole  has  suggested 
that  God  would  not  permit  the  numbers  of 
either  of  these  tribes  to  be  lessened,  as  he 
foresaw  that  they  would  bo  faithful  to  the 
throne  of  David  on  the  division  of  the  king- 
dom. Others  think  that  the  omission  of 
these  tribes  in  the  census  may  have  been 
due  to  Joab's  recall  to  Jerusalem  before  the 
completion  of  the  work,  and  to  the  king's 
repentance  in  the  interim  cutting  o£f  ue 
necessity  of  completing  it  This  little 
agrees,  however,  with  the  resolute  tone  and 
assigned  reason  contained  in  this  verso. 
Poole's  explanation,  meantime,  explains 
nothing  in  respect  of  the  statement  that 
the  king's  word  was  abominable  to  Joab. 

Ver.  7.— Smote  Israel.  These  two  words 
serve  simply  to  summarize  in  the  first  in« 
stance  what  the  compiler  is  about  to  rehearse 
at  greater  length.  The  parallel  place 
shows,  **  And  David's  heart  smote  him  after 
that  he  had  numbered  the  people."  Some 
better  power  occasioned  thcU  smiting.  Re- 
flection brought  to  David's  heart  and  con- 
science (I  Sam.  xxiv.  5),  as  often  to  those  of 
others,  restored  vitality.  The  exact  ciroum« 
stances  or  providences,  however,  which  roused 
into  action  the  conscience  of  David  are  not 
stated.  The  second  clause  of  our  verse  can* 
not  refer  to  any  preliminary  smiting,  but  to 
the  oncoming  visitation  of  pestilence.  It 
is  noticeable,  if  only  as  a  coincidence,  that 
the  eleventh  verse  of  the  parallel  passage 
(2  Sam.  xxiv.  11)  opens  with  a  similarly 
ambiguously  placed  clause,  *^  For  when 
David  was  up  in  the  morning,  the  word  of 
the  Lord  came  to  the  Prophet  Gad,"  although 
this  is  explainable  simply  as  our  insufficient 
Authorized  Version  rendering.  However, 
failing  any  external  cause,  the  beginning  of 
ver.  10  in  this  same  parallel  place  may  in- 
timate the  adequate  account  of  all  in  the 
spontaneous  stirring  of  David's  conscience — 
"the  bitter  thou;;hts  of  conscience  bom." 
In  these  two  verses  we  suddenly  come  upon 
the  name  "  God  "  instead  of  "  the  Lord,"  i^. 
Jehovah. 

Ver.  9.— 6ad,  David's  seer.  The  parallel 
place  says,  "The  Prophet  Gad  0<^33.-|), 
David's  seer"  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  11).  The  He- 
brew word  here  used  in  both  passages  for 
**  seer,"  is  njn,  in  place  of  the  word  of  higher 
import,  HKhn,  the  use  of  which  is  confined  to 
Samuel,  Hanani,  and  to  tho  person  spoken 
of  in  Isa.  xxx.  10.  In  this  last  passage  our 
Authorized  Version  translates  "prophet," 
while  in  ch.  xxix.  29  our  Authorized 
Version  translates  both  Hebrew  names  in 
the  very  same  verse  by  the  one  English  word 
"  seer."  Gad  was,  perhaps,  a  pupil  of  David 
(2  Sam.  xxii.  8),  and  was  the  successor  of 
Samuel  (ch.  ix.  22)  in  this  office. 


380 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa    [oh.  xxl  1— 3a 


Yer.  12.— Three  jmn*  fiunine.  The 
ptumllel  place  has,  in  our  Hebrew  text, 
•'eeTen"  instead  of  *«  three."  But  the 
Beptuagiiit  indicates  this  to  be  but  a  cor- 
ruption of  a  later  text ;  for  it  reads  **  three/' 
as  here.  The  parallel  place  shows  no 
mention  of  the  destroying  angel  here  spoken 
of.  The  three  inflictions  of  famine,  sword, 
pestilence,  are  found  not  nnfrequently  else- 
where in  Scripture  (eoe  Deut.  zzviii.  21 — 
25;  Ezek.  xiv.  21 ;  Bev.  vi.  4-8).  Now 
. . .  adTlse  thyself.  The  simple  text  is  **  Now 
■ee,**  in  place  of  ^  Now  know  and  see "  of 
the  parallel  passage. 

Yer.  13.— It  Ia  in  such  answers  as  these — 
answers  of  equal  piety  and  practical  wisdom, 
that  the  differeace  is  often  visible  between 
the  man  radically  bad,  and  the  man  good  at 
heart  and  the  child  of  grace,  even  when 
fidlen  into  the  deepest  depth  of  sin. 

Yer.  14. — So  the  Lord  sent  pestUenee  upon 
InML  This  sentence  is  followed  in  the 
parallel  place  by  **  from  the  morning  even 
to  the  time  appointed."  It  has  been  sug- 
gested that  ^the  time  appointed"  may 
mean  the  time  of  the  evening  sacrifice,  and 
that  God  shortened  thus  the  three  davs  to 
a  short  one  day.  There  seems  nothing 
sufficient  to  support  the  suggestion,  uuless 
it  might  lie  in  the  **  repenting"'  of  the  Lord, 
and  his  ** staying"  of  the  angel's  hand,  in 
▼er.  15.  There  ttU  of  Israel  seventy  thousand 
The  whole  number  of  Israel,  including 


women,  must  have  readied  near  to  five 
millions.  On  this  ttdsuinption,  the  sacrifice  of 
life  for  Israel  would  bo  something  like  1*4 
per  cent.,  or  fourteen  in  the  thousand. 

Ver.  15. — And  God  sent  an  angeL  It  is 
at  this  point  fint  that  any  mention  of  an 
angel  is  found  iu  the  parallel  place,  but  then 
not  in  the  present  form,  but  in  a  sentence 
which  would  seem  to  presuppose  the  know- 
ledge of  the  agency  of  an  angel  on  the  oc- 
casion :  **  And  when  the  angel  btretched  out 
his  hand  upon  Jerusalem  to  destroy  it,  the 
Lord  repented  him  of  the  evil "  (2  Sam.  xxiv. 
16).  Stood  by  the  threshing-floor  of  Oman. 
The  verb  "stood"  is  employed  here  quite 
gencrically.  It  does  not  imply  that  the  angel 
stood  on  the  ground  ;  for  see  next  verse,  in 
which  it  is  said  that  he  "  stood  between  the 
earth  and  the  heaven,"  the  Hebrew  verb 
being  exactly  the  same.  Oman  is  the  uni- 
form form  and  spelling  of  the  name  in 
Chronicles.  In  Samuel,  however,  the  name 
appears  as  i"n?TNt  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  20),  or 
Araunah.  Yet  in  ver.  16,  of  the  same  chapter 
the  Kethiv  inverts  the  order  of  the  resh  and 
vaUf  prefixing  the  article,  or  what  looks  like 
it,  and  again  in  ver.  18  tlie  Kethiv  shows  the 
form  rrpx.  Oman,  then,  or  Araunah,  was 
a  descendant  of  the  old  Jebusite  race  to 
whom  the  fort  of  Zion  once  belon;;e(].  And 
the  present  narrative  finds  him  living  on 


the  Hill  of  Moriah  (Gonder's  '  Bible  Hand- 
book,' 2nd  edit,  236  [6]).  The  arething' 
floor.  The  primitive  threshing-floors  of  the 
Israelites  still  essentially  obtain.  They 
were  level  spots  of  stamped  and  well-troddmi 
earth,  about  fifty  feet  in  diameter,  and  ae- 
leoted  in  positions  most  exposed  to  the  wind, 
in  order  to  take  the  advantage  of  its  help  in 
the  separating  of  the  grain  fnmi  the  onafL 
On  these  circular  spoto  of  hard  earth  the 
sheaves  of  grain,  of  whatever  kind,  were 
distributed  in  all  sorts  of  disorder.  Oxen 
and  other  cattle  trod  them.  And  sometimei 
these  beasts  were  driven  round  and  round  five 
abreast  The  stalk  of  the  grain  was,  of  ooorse, 
much  bmised  and  crush^  and  the  method 
is  described  still  as  of  a  very  rough  and 
wasteful  kind.  Instruments  were  also  em- 
ployed, as  the  "*  fiaU "  (Ruth  u.  17 :  Isa. 
xxviii.  27,  28);  the  "sledge,"  to  which 
|)osiiibly  reference  is  made  in  Judg.  viiL  7» 
16,  under  the  name  barhanim  (Authorized 
Version,  **  briers  ").  These  sledges  were  of 
two  kinds:  (1)  the  morag  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  22;  oh. 
xxi.  23 ;  Isa.  xli.  15),  made  of  flat  plaidcs 
joined  together,  and  fumished  with  rough 
studs  on  the  under  surface ;  and  (2)  agalahf 
rendered  Authorized  Version,  **  cart-wheel  ** 
(Isa.  xxviii.  27),  made  of  wooden  rollers,  or 
rollers  of  iron  or  stone,  and  dragged  by  cattle 
over  the  sheaves.  Egypt  and  Syria,  as  well 
as  Palestine,  still  show  these  instruments  (see 
Robinson's  *  Bibl.  Bes.,'  i.  550  ;  and  Thom- 
son's •  Laud  and  the  Book.'  pp.  538—541). 

Vers.  16, 17. — These  verses  ofier  instances, 
especially  the  former, of  the  shorter  narratives 
not  being  with  Chronicles,  but  with  SamucL 
And  the  longer  narrative  being  with  Chro- 
nicles is  found  uniformly  in  the  cases  in 
which  reference  is  had,  whether  more  or  lose 
directly,  to  the  ecclesiastical  or  permanent 
institution  of  the  Israelites. 

Ver.  18. — The  angel.  The  Hebrew  shows 
no  article  (see  Numb.  xxii.  34,  35 ;  1  Kings 
xiii.  18 ;  xix.  5 ;  Zech.  i.  9).  Tbe  place  where 
the  altar  was  now  about  to  be  erected  was 
that  made  famous  by  the  sacrifice  of  Abra- 
ham (Gen.  xxii.  2,  9),  and,  though  less 
certainly,  that  known  to  the  priesthood  of 
Melchizedek  (Gen.  xiv.  17—20). 

Ver.  20. — This  verse  is  not  found  in  the 
parallel  place.  The  Septuagint  reading  of 
"  king"  iu  this  verse,  in  place  of  **  angel,"  is 
no  doubt  an  error.  The  drift  of  this  and  the 
following  verse  is  plain  and  continuous. 
Oman  and  his  sons  had  hidden  themselves 
on  the  apparition  of  the  angel,  but  came  out 
on  the  advent  of  David,  to  welcome  him. 

Ver.  22.~The  place  of  this  threshing-floor ; 
i.e.  the  place  on  which  the  threshing-floor 
was  made.  It  was  the  level  summit  of  the 
middle  elevated  ground  of  the  eastern 
ridge  on  which  Jerusalem  was  situate  (oh. 
XL  4—7). 


cu.  XXI.  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


331 


Ver.  23.— Ornan'a  oflfer  to  Dayid  of  the 
threflhing-floor  and  all  its  belongings,  as  a 
gift,  reminds  of  £phron*s  offer  to  Abraham 
(Qen.  xxiii.  11).  Oman's  prompt  offer  of 
gift  was,  perhaps,  all  the  prompter  from  the 
(ieflire  to  render  every  assistance  to  the 
staying  of  the  plague.  For  burnt  offerings 
...  for  the  meat  offering.  The  whole  code 
of  regulations  for  offerings — sin  offering, 
trespass  offering,  peace  offering,  burnt 
offering,  meat  and  drink  offering— is  to  be 
found  in  Lev.  i. — vii.  As  regards  the  burnt 
offering^  see  Lev.  L  ;  vi  8—13.  It  was  called 

rhy,  from  its  ** ascending"  accepted  to  heaven, 
or  else  from  its  being  put  up  or  raised  up 
(Hiph.  conjugation) on  the  altar;  and  some- 
times ^3,  from  being  **  wholly  "  consumed. 
The  sin  and  trespass  offerings  were  for  special 
sins,  but  this  was  of  a  more  oomprelieusive 
kind  and  of  much  greater  dignity,  as  stand- 
ing for  the  *•  purging  of  the  conscience."  The 
entire  consuming  of  the  sacrifice  signified 
the  unqualified  self-surrender  of  him  who 
brought  the  sacrifice.  It  was  a  voluntary 
offering,  the  offerer  laid  his  hand  on  the 
head  of  the  victim,  and  the  blood  of  the 
victim  was  sprinkled  round  about  the  altar. 
The  meat  offering  (nnjp)  is  fully  described  in 
Lev.  ii. ;  vi.  14 — 23.  It  was  an  offering  with- 
out blood,  and  therefore  was  an  accompani- 
ment of  an  offering  of  blood.  It  was  composed 
of  flour  or  cokes,  prepared  with  salt,  oil,  and 
frankincense — the  salt  emblematic  of  non- 
decay  ;  the  oil,  of  spiritual  grace ;  and  the 
frankincense,  of  acceptable  fragrance.  A 
portion  of  this  offering  was  to  be  burnt,  and 
a  portion  eaten  by  the  priests  in  the  court, 
unless  it  was  for  a  priest  himself,  when  all 
must  be  burnt  Meantime  a  drink  offering 
of  wine  was,  in  fact,  a  part  of  the  meat  offer- 
ing itself  (Exod.  zxix.  40,  41 ;  Lev.  xxiii. 
13 ;  Numb.  xv.  4—7,  9, 10).  The  material 
of  the  meat  offering  might  be  the  green  or 
fresh-gathered  ears  of  corn.  The  Septuagint 
translates  lS>pav ;  Luther,  tpeis-opfer ;  and  it 
need  scarcely  be  said  that  our  Authorized 
Version  meat  offering  exhibits  only  the 
generic  employment  of  the  word  ^meat" 
for  food. 

Yer.  25. — Six  hundred  shekels  of  |^ld  by 
weight.  The  on  ly  way  to  reoonoile  tins  state- 


ment with  that  of  the  parallel  place,  which 
(2  Sam.  xxiv.  24)  speaks  of  '*  fifty  shekels 
of  silver"  (t.e.  taking  the  shekel  at  2b,  Sd., 
equal  to  about  £6  13«.  4d.)  as  the  price  of 
**  the  threshing-floor  and  the  oxen^*  is  to  sup* 
pose  that  the  fifty  shekels  speak  of  the  pur- 
chase money  of  the  oxen  indeed,  but  not  of  the 
floor  itself,  which  was  valuable,  not  only  for 
size  and  situation,  but  also  for  its  prepared 
construction ;  or  again,  keeping  to  the  literal 
language  of  Samuel,  that  **  the  floor  and  the 
oxen "  are  intended,  while  our  expression, 
**  the  place,"  may  desig^te  the  whole  hill. 
The  value  of  gold  as  compared  with  silver 
was  as  sixteen  to  one.  If  this  be  the  solution, 
we  should  have  again  an  instance  of  the 
compiler  of  this  book  seizing  for  perpetuation 
the  point  of  greatest  and  most  permanent 
interest,  i.e.  the  purchase  of  the  vohole  place. 

Ver.  26. — He  answered  him  from  heaven 
by  fire.  There  is  no  doubt  significance  in 
the  fact  that  the  compiler  of  Chronicles 
records  this  answer  by  fire,  unmentioned  in 
the  Book  of  Samuel.  He  would  give  pro- 
minence to  this  great  token,  as  determining, 
or  going  a  great  way  towards  determining, 
the  site  of  the  temple.  The  answer  by  fire 
was  given  on  critical  and  special  oooasions 
(Lev.  ix.  24 ;  1  Kings  xviU.  24.  38). 

Ver.  28.— David  saw  that  the  Lord  had 
answered  him  in  the  threshing-floor.  David 
"  saw  "  this  by  the  fire  on  tlie  altar,  and  by 
the  fact  that  uod,  at  the  voice  of  tbe  angel 
(ver.  18),  had  not  misdirected  him,  but  had 
guided  him  aright.  He  sacrificed  tiiere. 
This  means  to  say  that  he  thenceforward 
"  sacrificed  there;"  and  eetablished  there  the 
service  of  sacrifices.  David  was  so  impressed 
'*  at  that  time,"  by  the  answer  given  in  fire 
from  heaven,  that  he  began  systematically 
to  sacrifice  on  the  site  of  this  threshing-floor, 
instead  of  going  to  the  high  place  at  Gibeon, 
where  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  still  stood. 
To  have  attempted  to  go  thither  would  not 
only  have  meant  a  long  and  wasteful  delay, 
but  would  also  have  meant  the  neglecting  of 
the  august  omen  of  the  angel  present.  An 
awful  sanction  is  thus  given  to  **  this  place,** 
Moriah,  and  it  becomes  **  the  house  of  the  Lord 
(?o(2,"and  the  place  of  lawful  and  establLihed 
sacrifice. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  l—SO.—fi/pkaly  ain,  suffering,  sorrow,  sacrifice.  The  study  of  the  narrative 
before  us,  together  with  its  parallel,  leads,  with  little  room  for  hesitation,  to  the  conclusion 
that  there  must  have  been  symptoms  in  the  national  character  of  Israel  at  this  time  calling 
for  some  severe  check  or  peremptory  visitation.  Failing  this  8up})i)sition,  we  cannot 
satisfactorily  get  over  the  language  of  the  opening  verse  in  the  parallel  record  of  2  Sam, 
xxiv.  It  is,  however,  undeniable  that  in  both  places  the  history  kys  the  whole  head 
and  front  of  the  offending  upon  David,  and  that  the  offending  was  his  is  corroliorated 


/ 


332  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ch,  xxl  1—30. 

by  his  own  forcible  confession  in  the  seventeenth  verse  of  the  present  chapter.  The 
brunt  of  the  iuffering,  on  the  other  hand,  falls  upon  the  people,  who  were  cut  down  by 
the  pestilence,  and  upun  those  who,  from  the  ties  of  nature,  to  say  none  other,  mourned 
their  loss.  This  is  so  entirely  the  tenor  of  the  history,  that  our  exposition  has  no 
choice  but  to  follow  its  lead.  And  we  shall  therefore  unfold  the  moral  and  spiritual 
significance  of  the  section  from  the  standpoint  of  David,  counting  him  the  sinner, 
holding  him  responsible  for  the  suffering,  watching  him  in  his  struggle  to  emerge  from 
the  consequences  of  bis  conduct,  and  to  lift  his  people  out  after  liim,  and  observing  the 
sanctified  result  to  which  all  was  turned  by  the  over-  and  ever-ruling  providence  of  God. 
Let  us  notice^ 

L  The  sin  of  David  in  kumbebino  the  people.    (Vers.  1 — 6.)    1.  Whatever  was 
the  exact  nature  of  this  ofifence,  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  discount  it  in  allowing  any* 
thing  for  the  consideration  already  supposed,  that  Israel  was  ripe  for  some  punishment, 
and  stood  in  need  of  some  severe  visitation.    This  may  have  been  true  enough.    Yet 
their  leader,  their  shepherd,  their  king,  should  have  been  the  first  to  watch  each  symp* 
torn  of  the  kind,  to  study  them  anxiously,  to  counteract  them  in  place  of  neglecting 
them  or  of  co-opcrating  with  them,  above  all  of  becoming  the  actual  exponent  of  them. 
It  is  for  the  shepherd  to  warn,  to  watch,  to  keep  the  fiock.    For  every  station  in  life 
there  are  its  own  proper  duties,  and  for  every  increased  and  more  exalted  privilege  of 
life  there  are  its  own  proportioned  opportunities  and  responsibilities.    This  is  a  moral 
canon  of  human  life  and  society,  always,  everywhere,  and  that  cannot  be  escaped  in  its 
solemn  obligation.    But  how  far  David  practically  forgot  it  appears  from  this  history. 
It  is  Scripture  that  represents  it  thus  to  us,  that  Satan  knew  the  readiness  of  Israel  to 
fall,  designed  disastrous  damage  to  the  flock,  but  that  he  saw  and  used  his  opportunity 
with  no  miscalculation,  ** scattering  the  flock"  actually  through  and  by  aid  of  Um 
shepherd.  Once  this  way  ascertained  to  be  practicable  in  this  instance,  and  Satan  knew 
too  well  for  Israel  that  it  was  the  readiest  way,  the  method  most  trenchant — easiest  for 
himself,  and  most  humiliating  to  those  for  whom  he  designed  harm.    A  roan's  own 
sphere,  special  privilege,  particular  duty,  will  always  have  it  in  it  to  reveal  the  possi- 
bilities of  sin,  to  find  the  occasion  for  sin,  to  enhance  the  triumph  of  sin,  and  to  make 
it  burn  with  fierc<>r  blaze  and  more  lurid  glare.     Many  difliculties  have  been  made 
out  of  such  detail  as  the  lan^age  of  Scriptuie  contains  here,  and  in  places  of  similar 
kind.    But  Scripture  traverses  all  these,  simply  ignoring  the  sceptic's  misuse  of  them. 
Scripture  keeps  in  the  tracks  of  the  undoubted  analogies  of  fact,    Israel  was  i-cady  to 
go  wrong.     Granted ;  but  so  also  was  he  whose  highest  work  and  highest  honour  it 
was  to  watch  and  to  know  and  to  guard  Israel  from  going  wrong.    2.  David's  sin  was 
the  further  removed  from  excuse,  in  that  those  who  were  second  to  him  in  place  and 
authority  put  him  in  mind,  and  remonstrated  with  him,  and  evidently  with  that 
earnest,  nervous  feeling  which  should  have  been  at  once  as  good  as  conviction  to  him. 
The  offence  was  deliberate,  determined,  and  would  not  brook  expostulation.    For  so  it 
is  written,  "  The  word  of  the  king  prevailed  against  that  of  Joab  and  the  captains  of 
the  host."    It  is  the  same  thing  as  to  say  that  the  word  of  intolerant  and  arbitrary 
authority  was  encouraged  to  override  the  "  Law  and  the  testimony,"  the  suggestions  of 
memory,  the  remonstrances  of  conscience,  and  the  kindly  spoken,  courteous  advice  of 
friendly  and  constitutional  counsellors.     The  man  who  has  it  in  him  to  set  at  nought 
certain  kinds  of  expression  of  disapproval,  that  tell  tales  so  true  to  nature's  touch,  has 
it  in  him  also,  so  far  at  least  as  that  humour  is  concerned,  to  set  anything  at  nought. 
And  the  impression  cannot  be  resisted  that  it  was  just  so  with  David  at  this  crisis. 
8.  Tlio  offence  of  David  in  numbering  the  people,  unrelieved  as  it  was  by  any  external 
considerations,  offers  also  a  peculiar  kind  of  evidence  of  the  large  infusion  of  the  moral 
element.     It  is  not,  indeed,  that  the  record  of  Scripture  fails  to  furnish  the  grounds  on 
which  his  action  stood  condemned ;  yet  it  may  be  admitted  that  we  feel  them  to  be 
wanting  in  some  measure  in  precision.    Considering  all  that  resulted  from  the  offence, 
this  very  thing  proves  the  larger  presence  of  no  technical,  no  mere  ceremonial  fault,  but 
of  deeper  moral  fault.  Is  David  condemned  by  the  letter?    lie  is  condemned  tenfold  by 
the  spirit.   On  the  evidence,  we  are  bound  to  find  him  guilty  on  the  counts  of  principle 
rather  than  of  the  violation  of  positive  commandment.    Why,  for  instance,  does  not 
Joab  in  his  ill-disguised  disgust  (which  even  grew  with  his  task,  ver.  6)  quote  the  com^ 
tnandmentf  give  chapter  and  verse  for  his  intense  disapproval  and  indignation?    Oh 


CH.  XXL  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  333 

yes,  there  are  sins  of  the  heart,  of  the  subtle  undergrowth  of  pride  and  ambition,  and 
trust  of  self,  which  far  surpass  all  others  in  significance  and  heinousness.  Surely  it 
were  enough  for  the  quondam  shepherd-boy,  now  King  of  Israel,  to  be  vicegerent  of  the 
King  of  kings  ?  But  David  has  slipped  the  charm  of  modest  love  and  reverent  fear  and 
devoted  religious  service,  and  aims  to  be  ruler  in  his  own  right.  He  does  this  just  as 
really  as  Judas  Iscariot,  the  disciple,  thought  it  was  open  to  him  to  compass  and  super- 
sede the  Master  if  he  could.  This  constitutes  the  essence  of  what  seems  to  be  held  up 
to  view  as  the  unparalleled  offence  of  David,  that  he  forgets  his  subordinate  place,  and 
presumes  to  try  to  steal  an  advantage  on  his  own  supreme  Master.  Does  David  wish 
to  know  the  number  of  his  fighting  men  ?  It  is  perhaps  in  part  matter  of  pure  vanity, 
probably  in  greater  part  in  order  to  estimate  the  strength  of  his  own  supposed  resources; 
la  other  words,  to  calculate  how  far  he  may  afford  to  dispense  with  simple,  trustful, 
humble,  daily  dependence — dependence  on  the  Lord  his  Grod.  Nor  was  the  calculating 
less  or  less  pernicious,  that  it  was  unacknowledged,  unconscious. 

II.  The  bufferino  entailed  by  the  one  sinful  determination  op  one  man. 
(Vers.  14, 15.)  1.  We  have  to  credit  David  with  causing  now  one  of  the  most  dreadful 
forms  of  human  suffering.  The  state  of  mind  which  is  filled  with  apprehension  of 
Buffering  is  itself  suffering  of  the  worst  kind  for  any  individual.  It  is  not  diminished  by 
company,  nor  distributed  by  being  shared  among  many.  It  is  terribly  intensified  when 
a  community,  a  nation,  an  army,  is  the  prey  of  it.  First,  excited  imagination  very 
likely  goes  beyond  the  ensuing  realities  if  they  were  but  left  to  themselves.  Then  the 
fa^ts  result  otherwbte,  and  the  realities  on  which  the  sun  in  the  heavens  has  looked 
down  in  not  a  few  such  cases  surpass  imagination,  even  to  beggaring  it.  History's  very 
devotee  declines  to  believe.  What  cries,  what  wails,  what  madd»-ned  curses  must  have 
rent  the  air  wherever  the  ear  of  David  was  to  hear,  whether  he  travelled  or  rested, 
whether  he  listened  or  strove  to  shut  out  every  sound !  When  once  pestilence  walks 
abroad,  it  not  only  kills  so  many  thousands  of  its  own  professional  right,  but  from  hour 
to  hour,  from  morning  to  night,  it  tortures  an  uncounted  number,  who  "  hang  in  doubt 
of  their  life,"  and  have  no  rest,  because  they  **have  no  assurance  of  their  life"  nor, 
indeed,  of  lives  dearer  to  them  than  their  own.  And  it  is  this  which  David  does  for 
the  very  flock  it  was  his  life-work  to  fold,  to  feed,  and  to  shield  free  even  from  the 
breath  of  fear.  2.  We  have  to  credit  David  with  having  cut  short  some  seventy  thou- 
sand human  careers.  Even  though  the  nation  may  have  deserved  the  punishment,  and 
their  crimes  have  cried  for  judgment,  David  has  laden  himself  withal  with  the  responsi- 
bility of  inflicting  it.  So  many  streams  of  human  life  he  has  dried  up.  So  many  deaths 
lie  at  his  door.  At  so  many  burials  the  loud  mourners  and  the  low  mourners,  say  it  is 
he  who  has  rifled  the  home  of  life  and  love,  and  opened  the  sepulchre's  dark  door  to 
receive  an  untimely  prey.  Youth  he  has  cut  down,  beauty  he  has  blighted,  in  their 
opening  freshest  hope.  The  strong  men,  the  pride  and  defence  of  his  kingdom,  and 
the  support  of  its  homes,  he  has  laid  weak  as  the  weakest.  And  for  the  peaceful 
or  splendid  sunsetting  of  old  age  he  has  substituted  a  horizon  overspread  with  the 
gloomiest  clouds.  This  is  what  one  sinful  determination  of  one  man  carried  through 
could  do,  and  really  did.  And  it  is  a  type  of  many,  many  an  antitype.  It  is  a  type 
not  least  in  this  one  element  of  it,  that  it  did  what  it  never  meant  nor  thought  to  do, 
and  yet  is  to  the  full  answerable  for  it,  because  it  was  not  in  the  path  of  duty,  and  was 
distinctly  out  of  it.  Sin  sometimes  takes  very  heavy  toll  out  of  those  who  do  wrong,  not 
because  they  mean  to  do  so,  but  because  they  do  not  mean  not  to  do  it,  and  do  not  live 
with  watching  and  prayer.  3.  We  have  to  credit  David's  sin  with  an  incalculable  amount 
of  human  grief.  Not  always,  by  any  means,  is  he  who  is  gone  the  one  who  deserves 
most  pity,  even  as  he  certainly  is  past  the  reach  of  any  sympathy,  but  rather  those 
who  remain,  who  remember,  who  grieve,  who  weep,  and  not  merely  "  would  not  be  com- 
forted," but  cannot  be  comforted,  for  comfort  is  not.  To  wound  human  affections,  to 
make  hearts  bleed,  to  crush  human  courage,  hope,  life,  is  surely  among  the  deadly  sins, 
and  to  be  revealed  "  in  that  day."  If  AbeFs  blood  cried  to  GKxi  from  the  very  earth, 
what  cries  must  have  reached  him  from  the  innumerable  bleeding  hearts  of  bereft  homes 
now,  wrecked  of  hope  and  joy  and  peace  by  David  1 

III.  The  struggle  of  David  to  emerge  from  the  oonsequbnceb  of  nis  bin,  and 
to  extricate  his  people  after  him.  (Vers.  12, 13, 16, 17.)  And  it  must  be  allowed 
at  once  that  David  begins  to  resume  again  his  better  self.     1.  The  struggle  was  the 


t34  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ch.  xzi.  1— ^a 


■truggle  of  oonyiction,  oonfeflsion,  prayer,  eren  to  wrestling ;  no^  the  struggle  against 
these.  Although  it  may  be  held  that  there  is  some  ambiguity  about  it,  yet  a  oom- 
parison  and  oombination  of  the  two  accounts  need  leave  little  hesitation  as  to  the  real 
order  of  things.  David's  heart  "smote  him"  after  that  he  had  numbered  the  people. 
Never  mind  that,  it  was  not  quite  a  spontaneous  stirring  of  the  conscience  and  heart 
that  were  within  him;  yet  there  was  the  fact — branded  and  seared  ihty  were  not. 
Gad*8  sudden  morning  call  and  message  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  11)  roused  David  from  his  torpor 
in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  It  was  upon  this  event  that  conviction,  most  unreaervad 
confession,  entreaty  for  pardon  and  mercy,  and  in  due  time  intercession,  followed.  And 
they  followed  with  no  other  calculation  than  the  calculation  most  instinctive  of  an 
awakened  and  alarmed  souL  The  real  ring,  solemn  though  the  ring  was,  of  other  well- 
known  self-condemnation  of  David,  is  now .  unmistakably  heard.  Kot  a  syllable  of 
excuse,  not  an  accent  of  extenuation,  is  to  be  detected  in  the  tone.  2.  The  struggle 
shows  David  in  the  midst  of  the  very  paroxysm  of  grief,  and  fresh  from  the  rebuke  of  his 
great  Master,  to  be  possessed  in  a  peculiar  manner  of  the  wisest  and  rightest  attitude  of 
disposition  towards  God.  (1)  God  offers  an  option.  David  declines  it.  He  has  already 
used  his  own  free  will  and  power  to  choose  once  too  often.  He  will  renounce  it  now. 
(2)  In  declining  to  avail  himself  of  that  proffered  option,  he  gives  a  reason,  which 
shows  how  accurately  he  had  struck  the  balance  between  the  ^  mercies "  of  God  and 
the  *'  hand  "  of  man.  It  apparently  now  amounts  to  an  instinct  with  him,  that  there 
was  no  room  for  a  moment's  hesitation  between  throwing  himself  and  people  upon  the 
*'  mercies  "  of  God,  or  being  thrown  into  the  hands  of  men.  This  his  strongest  impree> 
sion  was  also  his  correctest,  which  cannot  always  be  said  of  our  strongest  and  most 
absolute  impressions.  Tis  a  great  lesson  for  all  to  learn,  and  a  great  fact  in  the  world's 
history  all  up  to  this  present  moment,  that  the  paternal  love  is  to  be  better  trusted 
than  the  fraternal.  The  fatherhood  of  God  is,  after  all,  a  better-ascertained  reality 
than  the  brotherhood  of  humanity.  (3^  At  the  very  time  that  David  is  expecting  his 
punishment,  and  acknowledging  that  he  is  'Mn  a  great  strait,"  he  honours  God  by 
recording  a  testimony  which  had  come  of  his  own  long  experience  of  him :  '*  For  very 
great  are  bis  mercies."  The  rod  often  brings  us  to  our  senses,  and  when  only  uplifted 
will  suffice  to  bring  a  man  to  himself.  But  rarely  did  David — or  any  one  else  who 
had  known,  loved,  done  the  truth,  but  fallen  away  from  it  too — recover  himself  so 
rapidly  and  ap])arently  so  completely  in  all  essential  respects.  3.  The  struggle  offers  an 
undesigned  but  fine  example  of  an  intelligent  acknowledgment  of  the  essence  of  the 
principle  of  sacrifice.  When  the  scene  is  gone  a  little  further,  and  the  angel  with  drawn 
sword  is  beheld,  David  in  an  agony  of  pleading  is  heard  beseeching  that  **  the  innocent" 
may  be  spared.  He  proclaims  who  are  the  innocent  (so  far,  at  dl  events,  as  his  act  is 
concerned) ;  he  begs  that  the  guilty  one  may  suffer,  and  proposes  himself  and  his 
fathers  house  as  the  justly  designated  resource  for  sacrifice.  Ihe  "altar  and  the  wood," 
ay,  and  the  knife  too,  are  there,  and  they  shall  not  want  the  sacrifice.  It  seems  poe- 
sible,  probable,  that  not  merely  (1)  David's  offer  of  himself  for  the  object  of  punishment, 
but  (2)  the  very  fact  of  his  idea  and  suggestion  of  submitting  to  a  punishment,  all 
equivalent  to  sacrifice,  was  acceptable  to  God.  David's  importunate  expostulation,  inter- 
cession, prayer — tlirec  in  one — contain  implicitly  the  principle  of  sacrifice.  And  it  is 
observable  that  it  is  from  that  moment  that  David  is  authorized,  and  indeed  ordered,  to 
seek  a  place  of  sacrifice,  and  to  erect  an  altar  of  sacrifice.  Thus  in  the  struggle  to  purge 
himself  as  far  as  possible  of  his  offence,  and  at  hast  to  extricate  his  people  from  the 
fierceness  of  plague  and  suffering,  he  rises  to  this  point  of  view,  to  entreat  that  on  him- 
self and  his  father's  house  may  be  concentrated  the  punishment  now  falling  far  and 
wide  on  a  nation. 

IV.  The  results  to  which  one  man's  bin  and  an  immensity  of  consequent 
BUFFEiiiNG  WERE  NOW  OVERRULED.  (Vers.  26—30.)  Somc  of  thcso  results  were  of 
special  significance  in  the  then  time  of  day,  and  for  the  people  of  Israel.  Others  are 
ol  significance  for  all  ages.  1.  For  the  thousandth  time  were  shown  forth  these  things 
—the  loving  fatheriy  heart  of  God,  the  hand  that  forbore,  the  yearning  pity  that 
*'  repented "  because  of  its  own  tenderness  of  even  the  most  deserved  chastisement. 
Touching  indeed  is  the  language  of  ver.  15.  So  in  older  time  the  Lord  himself  to  the 
angel,  and  the  angel  to  Abraham,  had  cried, "  Forbear ;  it  is  enough."  But  not  so  when 
that  dreader  scene  gathered  in  its  fulness  over  Jerusalem.    Though  twelve  legions  of 


OH.  XXL  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  835 


aneels  looked  on, and  might  have  come  to  the  rescue,  no  voice  said  "  Forbear;"  and  the 
only  voice  that  did  then  speak  as  with  authority — authority  notwithstanding  toJuU  it 
must  say  and  how  it  must  say  it — said  this,  "Not  my  will  be  done;"  and  again,  "  It  is 
finished  " — a  signal  for  the  awful  sacrifice  to  go  on  to  its  solemn  end.  2.  The  stricter 
typical  principle  of  sacrifice  was  led  up  to,  and  an  instance  of  it  exhibited.  Blood  flows 
for  sin,  and  the  blood  of  those  who  were  so  far  forth  innocent  was  now  flowing  for  sin. 
And  this  doubtless,  though  it  fell  on  the  innocent,  was  the  punishment  of  sin.  But  we 
see  David  acknowledge  the  principle  that  sacrifice  may  avail  to  stay  the  punishment. 
He,  however,  viewed,  and  justly  viewed,  himtdf  <u  the  guilty,  and  therefore  as  the  one 
who  ought  to  suffer.  He  does  not  oome  before  us  as  an  instonce  of  the  innocent  pro- 
posing to  suffer  in  the  place  of  the  guilty.  The  issue  is  that  the  sacrifices  of  the  Law 
were  offered  in  great  abundance.  3.  By  auguries  memorable  and  solemn  an  altar  of 
sacrifice  and  a  place  of  worship  were  designated.  They  became  consecrate  for  the 
service  of  a  thousand  years  at  one  stretch,  and  for  what  more  to  oome  we  know  not. 
Though  we  must  fail  to  realize  what  seemed  to  David  and  to  Israel  greatest  in  this,  yet 
analogies  of  the  most  Intrinsic  kind  guide  us  in  the  same  direction.  Meantime  not  the 
grandest  building  we  may  raise  and  dedicate  to  the  worship  and  glory  of  Gk)d,  to  the 
love  and  service  of  Jesus,  need  mean  either  more  or  less  to  us  than  that  site  and  that 
altar  meant  to  David  and  Israel.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  it  may  with  equal  truth  be 
said  that  the  humblest  building,  the  least  pretentious  schoolroom  for  the  service  of 
Christ,  means  more  for  knowledge,  for  heavenly  light,  for  real  beauty,  than  David  and 
the  temple,  and  Solomon  and  "  all  his  glory." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — A  1cing*8  pride.  The  Scripture  historians  do  not  conceal  David's  faults. 
Though  they  represent  him  as  the  man  after  God's  heart,  they  faithfully  record  his 
grievous  defections.  He  was  evidently  a  man  in  whom  the  ordinary  principles  of  human 
nature  were  unusually  vigorous.  There  was,  accordingly,  warmth  in  his  piety,  and  his 
sins  were  those  peculiar  to  an  ardent  and  passionate  nature.  His  warlike  impulses  led 
him  into  cruelty,  his  amatory  passions  into  adultery,  his  violence  into  murder,  his  self- 
confidcnoe  into  the  act  of  regal  pride  which  is  condemned  in  this  passage.  Accus- 
tomed as  we  are  to  a  periodical  census,  and  indeed  to  statistics  of  all  kinds,  it  is 
difficult  for  us  to  understand  how  blamable  was  David's  conduct  in  numbering  the 
people. 

I.  Observe  at  whose  ikstiqation  the  king  acted.  Although  in  Samuel  we  are  told 
that  the  Lord's  anger  with  Israel  was  the  deepest  reason  for  the  act  and  the  explana- 
tion of  all  that  followed  it,  our  text  refers  the  conduct  of  David  to  "  an  adversary." 
Whether  this  enemy  was  human,  or,  as  is  generally  supposed,  superhuman,  diabolical, 
is  not  material.  A  tempter,  an  adversary,  suggested  the  sinful  motive  and  the  dis- 
obedient action. 

II.  Observe  the  motive  which  led  to  this  act.  It  was  a  motive  often  influential 
with  the  prosperous  and  the  powerful.  It  was  vanity,  confidence  in  his  own  greatness, 
in  the  number  of  his  soldiers,  in  the  resources  of  his  subjects.  David  had  been  a  warrior 
whose  arms  had  been  attended  with  remarkable  success,  and,  like  many  such,  he 
doubtless  deemed  himself  invincible. 

HI.  Observe  David's  persevebance  in  bpitb  op  warnino.  Many  sins  are  com- 
mitted heedlessly.  Not  so  this  \  for  Joab,  who  was  by  no  means  a  counsellor  always  to 
be  trusted,  warned  his  master  against  this  act  of  folly,  which  he  saw  was  "  a  cause  of 
trespass  to  Israel."  David  was  not  to  be  deterred,  and  perhaps  resented,  as  such 
characters  are  wont  to  do,  any  resistance  to  his  will.  Temptation  from  without,  evil 
passions  from  within,  are  often  enough  to  overcome  the  calmest  and  the  wisest  counsels 
and  admonitions.  A  lesson  this  of  human  frailty.  A  summons  also  to  penitence  and 
to  humility. — T. 


Ver.  8. — Contrition,  David  was  a  man  who  both  sinned  grievously  and  repented 
bitterly.  If  we  have  nowhere  more  striking  examples  than  in  his  life  of  human  frailty, 
we  have  nowhere  more  than  in  his  recorded  experience  an  example  of  anguish  and  of 


836  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONIGLEa    [gb.  zzi.  l—Sa 

penitence  for  sin.    Witness  the  state  of  mind  manifested  in  the  fifty-first  psalm.     Wa 
have  in  this  most  touching  verse^ 

L  Confession  of  bin.  This  langnaji^e  may  be  regarded  as  a  model  of  dnoerelj 
uttered  confession.  1.  It  was  offered  to  God.  "  David  said  unto  God."  So  in  Ps.  IL^ 
"Against  thee,  thee  only,  have  I  sinned."  Not  against  society,  not  against  the  state ; 
but  against  the  Searcher  of  hearts  and  the  Judge  of  all.  2.  It  was  a  taking  to  himself 
of  the  guilt.  ^  1  have  sinned."  Instead  of  laying  the  blame  upon  another,  the  king 
accepted  it  for  himself.  It  is  a  sad  thing  when  men  take  excuses  into  the  presence  of 
God.  3.  David  had  a  just  sense  of  the  heinousness  of  his  sin.  He  felt  that  he  had  sinned 
greatly.  It  was  not  in  his  view  a  li;:ht  thing  of  which  he  had  been  guilty.  How  can 
we,  as  Christians,  rc^^ard  sin  as  a  light  matter,  when  we  remember  that  sin  brought  our 
boly  Saviour,  the  Lord  of  glory,  to  the  ignominious  cross  ?  4.  The  folly  of  sin  was 
Tory  apparent  to  David's  mind  when  he  poured  out  his  soul  in  contrite  confessions 
before  the  Lord.    ^  I  have  done  very  foolisnly." 

XL  Entbeatt  fob  pabdon.  It  would  be  a  sad  case,  indeed,  if,  when  the  sinner 
acknowledged  his  errors  and  faults,  he  did  so  with  no  hope  or  expectation  of  grace  and 
forgiveness.  But  David  knew  that  God  was  a  Grod  deli;^hting  in  mercy  and  ready  to 
forgive.  Accordingly  he  added  to  his  confession  this  entreaty :  '*  I  beseech  thee,  do 
away  the  iniquity  of  thy  servant."  What  abundant  encouragement  have  we  to  present 
s  prayer  like  this!  The  revelation  of  God's  character,  the  provision  of  a  IXvine 
Bedeemer,  the  promises  of  a  welcome  gospel,  all  alike  induce  us  to  come  unto  GK>d  in  the 
attitude,  not  only  of  sinners,  but  of  suppliants,  beseeching  of  him  a  fayourable  reception, 
and  the  extension  to  us  as  sinners  of  his  clemency  and  grace. — T. 

Ver.  IZ.'^-'FdlUng  into  the  hand  of  the  Lord.  There  is  something  very  simple  and 
touching  in  this  expression.  "  The  hand  of  the  Lord  "  is,  for  the  most  part,  mentioned 
in  Scripture  as  the  emblem  of  (jod's  protecting,  upholding,  preserving  power.  Here  it 
indicates  chastisement.  How  truly  submissive  and  filial  was  the  spirit  which  was 
manifested  in  this  petition  1  Whether  God's  hand  was  raised  to  deliver  or  to  smite,  his 
servant  was  content — so  that  it  was  God's. 

L  The  Lobd  sometimes  chastens  even  bepentino  offendebs.  Some  unthinkinff 
persons  may  wonder  why,  if  the  sinner  be  penitent  and  the  sin  forgiven,  there  should 
be  any  necessity  for  punishment  at  all.  But  facts  cannot  be  explained  away.  The 
great  Lord  and  Judge  of  all  does  sometimes,  as  in  the  instance  before  us,  permit  the 
sinner  to  endure  temporal  consequences  of  sin,  although  his  anger  is  turned  away  from 
the  repentant  heart.  God  thus  avenges  his  own  Law,  upholds  his  own  authority, 
shows  himself  a  righteous  Sovereign  and  Ruler. 

II.  ThEBB  ABE  BEAS0N8  FOB  MEEKLY   SUBMITTINO   TO  DiVINE  CHASTISEMENT.      An 

alternative  of  punishment  is  not  God's  usual  offer  to  repenting  sinners.  There  is  much 
to  commend  in  the  choice  which  David  made  when  Gad,  at  the  Lord's  command,  per- 
mitted the  king  to  elect  one  form  of  penalty  rather  than  another.  David  referred  the 
matter  wholly  into  '*  the  hand  "  of  a  wise  and  merciful  God.  There  are  many  reasons 
why  we  should  thus  submit  when  the  Lord  chastens.  1.  Qod  is  the  AU'merci/ul, 
For  this  reason  his  people  may  well  be  content  to  "  fall  into  his  hand."  "  Very  great 
are  his  mercies,"  He  is  "  merciful  and  gracious,  forgiving  iniquity,  transgression,  and 
sin."  His  character,  his  promises,  and  especially  his  "unspeakable  gift,"  should 
encourage  us  to  lay  aside  all  rebellion,  murmuring,  and  fear,  and  to  submit  with 
patience,  and  "  endure  chastening."  It  is,  no  doubt,  in  his  power  to  punish  with  far 
greater  severity  than  any  human  enemy  is  capable  of  doing.  But  whilst  *'  the  tender 
mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel,"  the  mercy  of  God  is  boundless  as  his  nature.  2.  Ood 
knows,  not  only  the  sin,  hut  the  repentance  by  which  it  is  followed.  He  reads  the  heart, 
and  hears  the  sighs,  and  marks  the  tears  of  every  contrite  penitent  He  sees  when  a 
deep  impression  of  the  sinfulness  of  sin  has  been  produced.  He  knew  that  though 
David  was  a  great  sinner,  he  was  a  sincere,  submissive,  and  lowly  penitent.  He  makes 
a  distinction  between  the  punishment  which  is  a  mark  of  his  righteous  displeasure  with 
the  sin,  and  that  which  is  needed  to  bring  the  offender  to  a  just  sense  of  his  ill  desert. 
3.  Ood  tempers  his  chastisements  with  Divine  consolations  and  support.  He  does  not 
desert  his  children,  even  in  their  deserved  distresses.  He  is  with  them  in  the  furnace. 
When  they  are  ready  to  sink  beneath  their  merited  sorrows,  lo  1  his  everlauBting  arms 


C&.XXL1— 30J    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  837 


are  found  to  be  underneath  tbem.  4.  Ood  designs,  hy  cdl  his  chastening,  to  secure  his 
people* s  spiritucU  good.  He  afflicts,  not  for  his  pleasure,  but  for  our  profit.  His  purpose 
is  that  we  may  "  bring  forth  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness."  Men  may  wreak 
malicious  yengeance ;  God's  discipline  is  that  of  a  holy  and  compassionate  Father. — ^T. 

Ver.  15. — Ood's  repentance.  How  often,  in  the  Scriptures,  are  human  emotions 
attributed  to  God !  The  charge  of  *'  anthropopathy  "  has^  in  consequence,  sometimes 
been  brought  against  what  we  hold  to  be  Divine  revelation.  The  truth  is  that  objectors 
do  not  truly  believe  in  the  personality  of  God.  The  Bible  does  teach  us  to  think  of 
Gt)d  as  a  Person — a  living,  conscious  Being,  with  moral  attributes  and  purposes.  It  even 
speaks,  as  in  the  text,  of  God's  repentance. 

I.  This  is  not  the  bepentakce  of  one  who  has  done  wrong.  This  is  the  usual 
application  of  the  word,  but  it  obviously  has  no  place  here.  The  penalty  inflicted  upon 
David  was  a  just  and  deserved  one.  "  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?  '* 
As  a  Ruler  of  inflexible  righteousness,  the  Lord  demands  our  reverence  and  confldenoe 
in  all  the  proceedings  of  his  providence. 

II.  It  is  the  repentance  of  pitt.  We  find  a  satisfaction  in  attributing  to  the  Lord 
the  emotions  of  pity,  of  lons;-suflering,  and  of  love.  The  spectacle  of  the  sufifering 
nation,  and  the  humbled,  afflicted,  contrite  king,  was  one  which  deeply  affected  the 
Divine  and  fatherly  heart.  Repentance  arose  upon  the  perception  that  the  chastening 
had  now  answered  its  purpose  in  rousing  the  sense  of  sin,  in  bringing  the  sinner  low 
before  the  feet  of  a  justly  offended  Judge  and  Lord.  When  the  Lord  saw  this  result,  his 
heart  relented  and  his  wrath  assuaged. 

III.  It  is  repentance  issuing  in  salvation.  Then  "  he  said  to  the  angel  that 
destroyed.  It  is  enough,  stay  now  thy  hand."  Pity  may  be  sincere,  but  ineffectual. 
Kot  so  with  the  Divine  King.  He  utters  his  fiat,  and  '*  in  the  midst  of  wrath  remembers 
mercy." 

Pbactioal  lessons.  1.  Adore  and  gratefully  praise  the  forbearance  and  forgiving 
mercy  of  Gt)d.  2.  Consider  the  gracious  terms  upon  which  clemency  is  offered.  3. 
Recognize  in  the  gospel  of  Christ  the  supreme  illustration  of  the  principle  exemplified 
in  the  incident  recorded  in  the  text. — T. 

Yer.  17. — Sin  taken  home.  It  is  a  most  pathetic  scene.  The  angel  of  the  Lord,  who 
had  smitten  with  his  destroying  sword  "  throughout  all  the  coasts  of  Israel,"  was  pass- 
ing by  the  threshing-floor  of  the  Jobusite.  His  drawn  sword  was  stretched  out  over 
Jerusalem ;  yet  it  iell  not,  for  he  was  bidden  to  "  stay  his  hand."  The  king  and  his 
princes  and  counsellors,  clad  in  sackcloth,  were  prostrate  in  penitence  and  supplication 
before  the  vision — before  the  Lord.  And  David  was  taking  the  sin  to  himself,  and 
invoking  the  penalty  upon  himself,  as  he  bowed  low  before  the  righteous  Judge  and 
Avenger.    We  observe  in  David's  language  — 

L  A  SPIRIT  DIFFERENT  FROM  THAT  OFTEN  OBSERVABLE  IN  HEN's  CONFESSIONS.      Then 

is  no  sign  of :  I.  A  disposition  to  shift  the  sin  upon  others.  2.  Or  of  a  willingness 
that  others  should  bear  the  penalty  of  the  sin.  3.  Or  of  a  tendency  to  extenuate  the 
guilt  of  sinful  action.    We  observe — 

II.  A  FRANK    AND    FULL    CONFESSION    OF  PERSONAL  GUILT.      This    includcS :  1.  An 

acknowledgment  of  his  own  offence.  2.  A  submission  to  the  Divine  wisdom  and 
justice.  He  is  willing  that  the  hand  of  God,  that  is,  the  chastening  and  afflicting  hand, 
should  fall  upon  him  and  inflict  the  strokes  which  he  is  well  aware  he  merits. 

IIL  Compassion  and  intercession  for  the  unoffending  sufferers.  How  truly 
is  this  David's  language  I  Under  the  influence  of  deep  emotion  he  speaks,  as  men  are 
wont  to  do  in  such  circumstances,  the  language  of  his  youth.  His  poor  subjects  are, 
to  his  view,  like  guileless,  helpless  sheep,  scattered  and  smitten.  He  implores  that  in 
compassion  it  may  please  the  Lord  to  save  them. 

I Y.  The  recognition  bt  the  Lord  of  this  spirit  and  language.  David's  attitude 
was  pleasing  to  the  Lord.  Reconciliation  ensued.  An  altar  was  built,  and  sacrifices 
offered  and  accepted.  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  "  put  up  his  sword  again  into  the 
sheath  thereof."— T. 

Ver.  24. — Cheap  sacrifice  disdained.    It  is  a  scene  of  historical  and  of  sacred  interest. 
I.  chronicles.  z 


338  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,    [en.  xxi.  1— 3a 

Upon  the  thrcshiDg-floor  of  the  old  Jebusite  chieftain,  the  son  of  Jesse,  by  his  repent- 
ance and  prayer,  secured  the  cessation  of  the  pestilence  which  was  desolating  the  land. 
The  Divine  command  enjoins  that  on  this  spot  where  the  plague  was  stayed,  an  altar 
shall  be  reared  to  Jehovali  in  acknowledgment  of  sparing  mercy.  The  site  is  the 
property  of  Oman,  who  with  his  four  sons  is  threshing  wheat  When  David 
approaches,  the  Jcbusite  bows  before  him  with  reverence.  The  representatives  of  '*  the 
old  order  "  and  '*  the  new  "  meet  together.  The  scene  is  truly  Oriental.  The  king  asks 
for  the  site ;  the  chief  offers  it  as  a  gift ;  the  king  refuses  to  accept  it  upon  such  terms; 
and  an  agreement  is  entered  into  that  the  site  shall  become  David's  in  exchange  for  six 
hundred  shekels  of  gold.  Thus  is  acquired  the  land  upon  which  an  altar  is  built,  and 
which  is  to  become  hereafter  the  site  of  the  splendid  temple  of  Solomon.  David's 
conduct  and  language  convey  a  general  principle  of  universal  validity,  viz.  that  it 
does  not  become  man  to  offer,  and  that  Crod  wilt  not  accept,  a  gift  or  sacrifice  which 
costs  the  giver  nothing. 

I.  Our  God  has  a  kigiit  and  claiv  to  all  that  we  call  otjrs.  We  call  it  ours, 
but  our  possession  Ih  derived  from  and  is  subordinate  to  his  creative  bounty,  his  provi- 
dential goodness.  What  have  we  that  we  did  not  receive  from  him  ?  Our  property, 
and  our  powers  of  body  and  of  mind,  we  have  from  him  and  owe  to  him.  That  we 
cannot  enrich  him  by  our  giving,  this  is  certain.  But  we  can  please  him  and  can 
advantage  ourselves  by  giving  to  his  i)eople  and  to  his  cause. 

II.  Gifts  and  sacrifices  that  cost  us  notuino  are  contemned  and  rejected  bt 
OoD.  David  felt  this,  and  expressed  it  in  noble  and  memorable  language,  when  he  said, 
"  I  will  not  take  that  which  is  thine  for  the  Lord,  nor  offer  burnt  offerings  without 
cost.**  Every  sincerely  religious  mind  must  sympathize  with  the  spirit  here  displayed. 
We  are  reminded  that  the  widow*s  mite  was  approved  and  accepted  by  our  Lord  Jesus. 
It  is  not  the  ma^itude  of  the  gift,  but  the  proportion  of  the  gift  to  the  giver's  means, 
and,  above  all,  the  spirit  of  self-denial  displayed  in  the  act  of  giving,  which  meets  with 
the  approbation  of  the  Searcher  of  hearts. 

III.  There  is  pleasure  and  profit  in  self-sacrifice  for  the  cause  of  God. 
The  King  of  Israel  found  this  to  be  so  in  his  own  experience,  and  the  experience  of  all 
who  in  this  have  followed  his  example  coincides  with  David's.  Our  Lord  has  said, 
"  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive." — T. 

Ver.  26. — Accepted  offerings.  The  site  of  Oman's  threshing-floor,  once  secured,  was 
without  delay  consecrated  to  the  apix)inted  puriwse.  The  altar  was  reared,  the  priests 
were  summoned,  the  victims  were  prepared,  the  prayers  were  offered ;  and  then  the 
favour  of  the  Most  High  was  manifested,  and  the  nation  was  spared, 

I.  The  offerings.  Those  which  were  presented  on  this  occasion  were  of  two  kinds. 
The  burnt  offerings  were  typical  of  the  consecration  of  the  worshipper,  body,  soul,  and 
spirit,  to  the  God  of  Israel.  The  peace  offerings  were  expressive  of  reconciliation  and 
fellowship  with  Heaven.     The  appropriateness  of  both  in  the  case  before  us  is  manifest. 

II.  Tub  offerer.  In  David's  offering  we  remark  as  characteristic  of  himself:  1.  His 
obedience.  As  appears  from  ver.  18,  he  was  acting  in  literal  and  immediate  compliance 
with  the  direction  he  had  received  from  the  Lord  through  the  angel.  He  had  learned 
from  Samuel  the  seer  that  "  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken  than  the 
fat  of  rams."  In  this  case  the  sacrifice  and  the  obedience  were  one.  2.  lJi$  prayer, 
David  called  upon  the  Lord.  He  w^as  emphatically  a  man  of  prayer,  and  it  was  in 
answer  to  his  prayer  that  the  plague  was  stayed.  We  learn  that  his  sacrifice  was  not 
merely  a  ceremonial  act,  but  that  it  was  accompanied  with  spiritual  desires  and  acknow- 
ledgments. 3.  His  humility  and  submission.  The  kinj;  clothed  himself  in  sackcloth 
and  fell  upon  his  face ;  and  the  man  who  in  such  a  spirit  sought  to  avert  the  Lord's 
anger  would  certainly  accompany  his  offering  with  contrition  and  submission. 

III.  The  acceptance.  This  was  apparent  in  two  ways.  1.  God  answered  him 
from  heaven  by  fire,  thus  showing  that  the  sacrifice  and  the  worshipper  were  not  rejected. 
2.  "  The  Lord  commanded  the  angel,  and  he  put  up  his  sword  again  into  the  sheath 
thereof."    His  wraih  was  laid  aside,  his  mercy  was  manifested,  the  people  were  spared. 

Practical  lessons.  1.  The  spirit  of  David  is  an  example  to  every  suppliant  sinner 
who  deprecates  the  wrath,  and  would  be  delivered  from  the  condemnation,  of  the 
righteous  Judge.    2.  The  offerings  of  David  are  a  symbol  of  the  one  Offering,  Christ 


CH.  XXI.  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  339 


Jesus,  provided  by  Grod  himself.  3.  The  acceptance  of  David  is  an  encouragement  to 
cyery  true  penitent  to  approach  the  Lord  with  confidence,  coming  in  God's  own  appointed 
way,  and  in  the  spirit  God  approves. — T. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Human  action.  Probably  there  will  always  remain  a  measure  of 
mystery  about  this  act  of  numbering  the  nation.  We  shall  always  be  more  or  less 
uncertain  as  to  the  precise  elements  of  wrong  which  God  saw  in  it,  and  which  brought 
down  so  terrible  a  condemnation  and  penalty.  There  are,  however,  some  features  of  the 
whole  transaction  which  are  certain  and  which  are  instructive.    We  see — 

I.  That  the  souboes  whioh  cx)Ntribute  to  one  human  action  are  manifold. 

1.  We  see  by  the  narrative  in  2  Sam.  xxiv.  1  that  God  at  least  permitted  it  to 
occur.  "  He  moved  David  ...  to  say.  Go,  number,"  etc  2.  We  see  Tver.  1)  that 
Satan  incited  David  to  the  act.  3.  The  king's  own  feeling  and  judgment  had  most  of 
all  to  do  with  it ;  this  was  the  source  of  the  evil.  David  persisted  in  it  against  better 
counsel  (vers.  3,  4).  4.  It  may  be  fairly  contended  that  the  condition  of  the  people 
helped  to  account  for  it.  We  may  infer  from  2  Sam.  xxiv.  1  that  God  was  displeased 
with  Israel,  and  that  his  displeasure  accounted  for  the  absence  of  the  Divine  interven- 
tion which  would  otherwise  have  held  back  the  king  from  his  folly.  Our  acts  are 
seldom,  if  ever,  so  simple  as  they  seem ;  usually,  if  not  always,  more  sources  contribute 
to  them  than  are  seen  upon  the  surface.  They  spring  from  hidden  habits  which  have 
long  been  rooting  and  growing  in  the  heart;  they  are  the  consequence  of  our  own 
volition  at  the  moment ;  they  are  the  result  of  the  agency  of  others  who  surround  and 
influence  us ;  they  are  afifected  by  unseen  forces  which  play  upon  us  from  below  and 
also  from  above.    We  are  sure  of  this,  yet  we  are  equally  sure^ — 

II.  That  we  are  all  responsible  for  the  actions  we  commit.  **  GK>d  was  dis- 
pleased with  this  thing  "  (ver.  7).  He  saw  in  it  that  which  was  sinful  and  wrong, 
worthy  of  Divine  condemnation,  calling  for  Divine  retribution.  Moreover,  David  owned 
to  himself  and  confessed  to  God  his  personal  guiltiness :  **  I  have  sinned  greatly,  because 
I  have  done  this  thing,"  etc.  (ver.  8).  No  analysis  of  the  forces  which  are  at  work  upon 
and  within  us  can  affect  the  question  of  responsibility.  1.  God  "will  not  hold  us 
guiltless  **  if  we  break  his  laws,  if  we  wrong  our  neighbours,  if  we  injure  ourselves. 

2.  Nor  shall  be  able  to  acquit  ourselves.  It  will  be  long  before  sin  will  so  harden  ns 
that  we  shall  not  suffer  keenly  from  the  reproaches  of  our  own  conscience,  and  then  It 
will  not  be  long  before  that  fire  within  is  rekindled  by  the  hand  of  Gtxi,  and  its  terrible 
flame  will  bum  up  all  sophistries  of  the  soul.  3.  Nor  will  our  fellow-men  exonerate 
us ;  they  will  condemn  us  freely,  and  we  must  suffer  the  sting  of  their  censure. 

III.  That  the  rectitude  ob  wrongness  of  an  action  depends  mainly  on  tea 
MOTIVE  by  which  it  is  inspired.  The  act  of  numbering  the  people  was  not  intrinsically 
wrong  (see  Exod.  xxx.  12, 13).  When  the  census  was  taken  in  order  to  ascertain  what 
was  due  to  the  service  of  Jehovah  or  of  the  state,  it  was  positively  good  and  commend- 
able. But  on  this  occasion,  when  it  was  done,  as  we  must  presume,  in  a  vain-glorious 
spirit,  in  order  that  the  king  might  boast  of  the  increasing  number  of  his  subjects,  or 
else  in  a  faithless  spirit,  that  the  king  might  know  on  what  he  could  rely — forgetting 
that  his  confidence  was  not  in  the  arm  of  flesh,  but  in  the  living  God — then  it  became 
sinful,  oondemnable,  disastrous.  Almost  everything  is  in  the  motive  of  our  deeds.  The 
fairest  actions  in  the  sight  of  man  may  be  hollow  or  utterly  corrupt  in  the  sight  of  him 
who  looketh  on  the  heart  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7).  The  simplest  and  smallest  actions  may  be 
great  and  noble  in  the  estimate  of  him  who  measures  with  heavenly  scales  each  hamaa 
thought  and  deed. 

IV.  That  the  good  or  evil  of  a  human  action  ib  not  'determined  by  thb 
CHARACTER  OF  THE  AGENT  OR  HIS  JUDGES.  Usually  the  good  man  does  the  good  thing, 
but  not  invariably.  Usually  the  man  of  lower  excellence  takes  the  wrong  view  when 
he  differs  from  the  man  of  greater  worth ;  but  not  necessarily.  Evidently  a  Joab  may 
be  right  when  a  David  is  wrong.  It  was  antecedently  likely,  in  a  high  degree,  that  if 
these  two  men  differed  in  any  point,  David  would  take  the  true  and  Joab  the  false 
view.  But  here  it  was  otherwise  (vers.  3,  4).  On  this  occasion  the  better  man  might 
have  learned  from  his  spiritual  inferior.  We  do  well  to  expect  good  deeds  from  good 
men,  and,  when  they  seem  to  be  wrong,  to  suspend  our  judgment  until  we  have 
searched  everything  through*    But  we  must  not  trust  blindly  to  the  reputed  worthies 


840  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ch.  xxi.  1— 30. 

of  our  day,  or  we  may  be  following  a  good  man  when  be  is  in  error ;  or  we  may  be  simply 
patting  ourselves  into  the  bands  and  walking  in  tbe  steps  of  scribes  and  Pharisees. 
With  tbe  belp  of  Qod's  Word  and  bis  Spirit  we  are  to  *' judge  of  aursdvea  what  is 
ri^t*(Lukexii.  57).— C. 

Vers.  8 — 13. — The  human  and  the  Divine  in  the  hour  of  penitence.  We  baye  illoa- 
trated  bere — 

I.  The  human  afpboach  to  Qod  in  tbe  bour  of  penitence.  "  David  said  unto 
Qod^  I  have  sinned  greatly,  because  I  have  done  this  thing :  but  now,  I  beseech  thee, 
do  away  the  iniquity  of  itty  servant,"  etc.  (ver.  8).  Here  is,  what  there  ever  should 
be,  (1)  a  deep  sense  of  sin  in  tbe  soul ;  (2)  a  frank  admission  of  guilt,  in  word ;  (3)  a 
prayer  that  it  may  be  put  away,  or  forgiven ;  (4)  an  intention  to  put  it  away  from  our 
own  heart  and  life. 

IL  The  Divine  ovebtubb  to  man.  GKkL  met  tbe  attitude  of  his  penitent  servant 
with  forgiveness  and  a  penalty.  Thus  be  met  David's  penitence  before.  "  David 
said  ...  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord.  And  Nathan  said  unto  David,  The  Lord  bath 
put  away  thy  sin ;  thou  shalt  not  die.  Howbeit  . . .  the  child  shall  surely  die  "  (2  Sam. 
xii.  13,  141  On  the  present  occasion  Qod  offered  David  bis  mercy  (not,  indeed, 
expressed,  but  clearly  understood),  accompanied  by  a  penalty  in  respect  of  which  be 
might  exercise  his  own  judgment.  In  the  choice  which  Jehovah  thus  offered  David 
there  was  something  exceptional.  In  his  dealing  with  mankind  God  does,  indeed,  give 
us  the  one  alternative  of  going  on  in  sin  with  utter  ruin  at  the  end  of  it,  or  repentance 
and  forgiveness  with  some  penalty  to  be  paid  for  past  offences ;  but  this  is  the  only 
option  he  gives  us.  If  we  come  to  him,  liie  David,  penitently  and  trustfully,  owning 
transgression,  and  pleading  for  mercv  through  Jesus  Christ,  he  will  reinstate  us  in  our 
forfeited  position,  be  will  pardon  ana  accept  us  as  bis  reconciled  children,  and  he  will 
lequiro  oi  us  that  we  suffer  the  necessary  and  inevitable  consequences  of  our  past 
misdeeds.  If  we  have  wasted  our  youth  in  folly,  he  gives  us  a  regenerated  and  holy 
manhood  and  age,  but  he  condemns  us  to  go  forward  with  a  sense  that  we  have  lost 
for  ever  a  large  portion  of  the  opportunity  of  life.  If  we  have  injured  our  beaUb, 
enfeebled  our  intellect,  and  impaired  our  moral  and  spiritual  force  by  guilty  indul- 
gences, he  grants  us  his  mercy  and  a  cleansed  and  purified  future,  but  he  sends  us 
on  our  way  with  a  lessened  manhood  and  talents  reduced  that  should  have  been 
multiplied  and  enlarged.  If  we  have  thrown  away  the  esteem  and  affection  of  the 
wise  and  holy,  he  receives  us,  when  penitent,  into  the  embrace  of  his  Divine  affec- 
tion, but  he  makes  us  pay  the  penalty  of  our  folly  by  climbing  slowly  up  the  steeps  of 
regained  reputation  and  of  renewed  confidence  and  love.  Forgiveness,  not  unattended 
with  inevitable  penalty, — that  is  the  overture  of  God  to  the  repentant  sinner.  In  the 
penalty  we  jxiy  there  is  no  choice  allowed  us.  The  moral  laws  of  the  universe  are 
simply  not  inverted  or  annulled  ;  they  do  their  work  upon  and  within  us :  only  with 
his  pardoning  love  comes  his  Divine  grace  to  enable  us  to  endure,  and  to  give  us  the 
^ctory  in  the  strife. 

III.  The  human  beception  op  the  Divine  offeb.  The  spirit  of  David  was  one 
of  holy  submission  ;  he  said,  "  Let  me  fall  now  into  the  hand  of  the  Lord ;  for  very 
great  are  his  mercies  "  (ver.  13).  In  the  acceptance  of  the  overture  and  in  the  choice 
which  he  made,  David  expressed  a  devout  and  obedient  disposition.  This  is  to  be  our 
spirit  also.  We  are  (1)  gratefully  to  accept  the  mercy  of  tne  Lord ;  (2)  cheerfully  to 
\mT  whatever  penalty  the  guilty  past  may  carry  on  into  the  near  future;  (3)  gladly  to 
believe  that  the  further  future  will  free  us  from  all  consequences  of  sin,  and  hold 
nothing  in  its  hand  but  Divine  grace  and  goodness. — C. 

Ver.  13. — Tolerable  and  intolerable  troubles.    These  are  not  only— 

I.  The  lessee  and  the  larger  trials  of  our  life.  Those,  on  the  one  band, 
which  cause  temporary  inconvenience,  or  slight  annoyance,  or  little  regret ;  and  those, 
on  the  other  hand,  which  upset  all  our  plans,  or  remove  that  which  nothing  can 
restore,  or  cut  to  the  quick  our  lacerated  and  bleeding  hearts.  Not  only  these,  as 
thus  regarded,  but  also— 

II.  Those  which  are  unattended  and  those  which  are  accompanied  with 
KEMORSE.    1.  When  our  troubles  come  upon  us  as  the  consequence  of  our  fidelity  and 


CH.  XXI.  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  341 

devotion,  the  source  of  them  is  a  positive  alleviation  of  our  pain  of  mind.  2.  When 
they  arrive  as  the  consequence  of  forces  with  which  we  nave  nothing  to  do,  our 
mental  pain  is  neither  sootned  nor  aggravated  by  their  source.  3.  When  we  have  to 
reproach  ourselves  as  the  authors  of  our  own  miseries,  our  souls  smart  with  a  keen- 
ness of  sufifering  which  makes  us  feel  that ''  our  punishment  is  greater  than  we  can 
bear."  But  our  troubles  are  divided  into  the  tolerable  and  the  intolerable  (or  the  less 
tolerable)  when,  as  suggested  by  the  text,  we  view  them  as — 

III.  Those  which  abb  of  Divine  and  those  which  are  of  human  infliction. 
David  uttered  a  sentiment  which  is  common  to  every  pious  heart  when  he  said,  *'  Let 
me  fall  now  into  the  hand  of  the  Lord ;  • .  •  but  let  me  not  fall  into  the  hand  of  men." 
When  the  evils  which  are  oppressing  us,  when  the  sorrows  which  are  saddening  us,  are 
embittered  by  the  feeling  that  they  are  due  to  the  heedlessness  and  heartlessness  of  men, 
especially  when  due  to  the  inconsiderateness  of  those  whose  relation  to  ourselves  cadis 
for  peculiar  thoughtfulness  and  attention — and  still  more,  when  they  are  inflicted  on 
us  by  the  positive  mcUignity  of  our  fellows,  who  find  a  cruel  and  horrible  satis- 
faction in  our  losses  and  griefs,  then  oar  trouble  is  at  its  very  heaviest,  and  seems 
to  us  quite  intolerable.  But  when,  as  in  unaccountable  sickness,  or  in  unavoidable 
loss,  or  in  inevitable  bereavement,  we  can  feel  that  the  hand  of  God  is  upon  us, 
that  we  have  '*  fallen  into  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  and  not  into  the  hand  of  man,**  then 
we  are  not  tempted  to  add  the  bitterness  of  resentment  to  the  heaviness  of  disappoint- 
ment or  to  th^  poignancy  of  grief.  It  is  well  for  us  to  remember :  1.  That  even  those 
troubles  which  seem  to  be  wholly  of  human  origin  are  yet  to  be  borne  as  evils  per- 
mitted of  God.  If  David  had  chosen  defeat  in  war,  thit  would  have  had  the  Divine 
as  well  as  the  human  in  its  origin  and  infliction.  'In  our  very  worst  distress,  in  the 
most  cruel  aggravations  we  can  experience,  we  should  "  be  in  subjection  to  the  Father 
of  spirits,  and  live."  He  allows  them  to  come ;  he  would  have  us  be  patient  and 
docile  under  them ;  he  will  brin^;  us  out  from  under  them ;  he  will  overrule  them  for  good 
in  his  own  time  and  way.  2.  That  we  have  reason  to  be  thankful  when  the  trouble  that 
comes  to  us  is  such  as  we  can  readily  ascribe  to  the  Father's  hand.  We  must  all  pass 
through  tribulation  on  our  way  to  the  heavenly  kingdom :  only  by  the  waters  of 
chastisement  can  we  hope  to  be  cleansed  from  some  sins  which  beset  us.  It  is  well  for 
us  when  the  sorrow  through  which  the  Divine  Father  makes  us  to  pass  is  of  such  a  kind 
that  we  have  no  difficulty  in  referring  it  to  his  wisdom  and  love,  and  when,  feeling  that 
we  have  **  fallen  into  the  hands  of  God,"  we  can  (1)  breathe  freely  the  spirit  of  resig- 
nation, (2)  learn  readily  the  lessons  of  aJQ^ction. — 0. 

Vers.  14 — ^27. — T?ie  arrested  hand.  The  hand  of  Divine  wrath  was  stretched  out, 
and  dire  calamity  ensued.  "  The  Lord  sent  pestilence  upon  Israel,  and  there  fell . . . 
seventy  thousand  men  "  (ver.  14).  And  GKxl  sent  an  angel  of  destruction  to  Jerusalem : 
this  terrible  messenger  stood  with  drawn  sword  (ver.  16)  over  the  city  of  David,  and 
commenced  the  dread  work  of  death  there  (ver.  15).  But  suddenly  the  hand  of  God 
was  arrested,  the  sword  of  the  angel  was  sheathed,  the  ravages  of  the  pestilence 
ceased,  Jerusalem  was  saved.    Whence  this  salvation  ?    It  is  clear — 

I.  That  Gtod^s  dibect  dealings  with  Israel  had  no  small  pabt  in  the  mattes. 
The  king  was  vastly  more  responsible  than  any  other  individual  in  the  realm  for  the 
coming  of  the  visitation,  and  he  was  more  concerned  in  its  departure  than  any  other. 
But  the  people  of  Israel  were  not  irresponsible  for  the  one,  nor  were  they  without  a 
share  in  the  other.  It  would  have  been  impossible  for  us  to  believe  that  the  multi- 
tudes of  Israel  would  suffer  as  they  did  for  this  sin  of  David,  absolutely  irrespecdve 
of  their  own  deserviogs ;  that  would  have  been  manifestly  imjust.  And,  similarly,  we 
should  have  found  the  greatest  difficulty  in  believing  that  Divine  compassion  had 
nothing  to  do  with  the  cessation  of  the  plague.  But  the  Scriptures  sanction  the  con- 
clusion of  our  judgment,  if  they  do  not  suggest  or  even  affirm  it — that  the  cominfl;  and 
the  going  of  the  pestilence  were  partly  due  to  the  direct  relations  of  God  to  Israel. 
Respecting  its  comins,  we  read  that  "  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  agunst  Israel, 
and  he  moved  David  against  them,"  etc.  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  1).  Respecting  its  going,  we 
read  that  ''  the  Lord  beheld,  and  he  repented  him  of  the  evil,"  etc.  (ver.  15) ;  t.e.  the 
pity  of  the  Lord  was  stirred,  and  he  stayed  his  hand.  We  may  learn  here  the  lessons 
that  God  has  direct  dealings  with  nations,  approving  their  piety  and  their  purity^ 


342  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,    [en.  xxL  1— 30. 


condemning  thoir  ingratitude  and  disobedience,  rewarding  the  one  and  punishing  the 
other. 

II.  That  it  was  largely  due  to  the  kino's  intebcession.  f Vers.  16, 17.)  Though 
it  is  not  positively  stattd  that  the  withdrawal  of  the  angel's  nand  was  owing  to  the 
attitude  and  action  of  the  king  and  the  elders,  yet  we  may  safely  assume  that  in 
large  measure  it  was  so  (ver.  27).  Inhere  was  everything  in  David's  spiritual  pos- 
ture to  draw  down  a  Divine  response.  1.  He  was  ))enetratod  with  a  spirit  of  peni- 
tence; he  freely  and  frankly  owned  that  the  sin  was  his :  "It  is  I  that  have  sinned 
and  done  evil."  2.  He  was  filled  with  a  pure  compassion  for  his  people:  "These 
sheep,  what  have  they  done?  ...  not  on  thy  Tjeople,"  etc.  (ver.  17).  3.  He  was 
animated  by  a  spirit  of  noble  self-renunciation.  No  doubt  the  desire  of  founding  a 
royal  dynasty  had  grown  strong  and  intense  with  years  of  sovereignty,  and  must 
have  struck  very  deep  root  in  David's  heart ;  yet  he  offers  to  resign  all  his  hopes  if  the 
people  may  be  spared.  "  Let  thine  hand ...  be  on  me  and  on  my  father's  house."  When 
intercession  is  thus  humble,  compassionate,  and  self-renouncing,  it  is  likely  to  prevail 
with  God. 

HI.  That  it  was  suitably  attended  with  sacrifice.  (Vers.  18 — ^26.)  David  was 
instructed  by  Gad  to  "  set  up  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  in  the  threshing-floor  of  Oman  " 
(ver.  18).  After  the  usual  Oriental  ceremonies,  the  king  purchased  the  site  and  reared 
the  altar:  there  he  offered  sacrifices  of  propitiation,  dedication,  and  gratitude;  there  he 
presented  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offenngs  (ver.  26) ;  and  Jehovah  signified  his  accept- 
ance of  the  penitential  and  sacrificial  spirit  of  bis  servants  by  "  answering  from  heaven 
by  fire  upon  the  altar  "  (ver.  26).  Inhere  are  times  when  we  renew  our  return  unto  the 
Lord,  and  he  renews  his  acceptance  of  us.  Such  a  time  is  the  hour  when  we  have 
sinned  and  have  suffered.  Then  it  becomes  us  to  return  once  again  unto  the  Lord, 
(1)  in  penitence ;  (2)  in  the  exercise  of  futh  in  the  one  atoning  sacrifice  of  the  Divine 
redeemer ;  (3)  in  rededication  of  ourselves ;  (4)  in  gratitude  for  his  saving  mercy. — 0. 

Ver.  28 — ch.  xxii.  5. — Divine  overruling  and  human  service.  In  the  concluding 
verses  of  one  chapter  and  the  opening  verses  of  the  other,  we  learn  some  lessons  as 
to  the  way  in  wliich  Divine  wisdom  made  the  past,  which  was  one  of  error,  prepare  for 
the  future,  which  was  one  of  honour  and  even  of  glory.  Wo  also  learn  two  things 
respecting  human  service.    We  see — 

I.  How   Goo   CAN   CONSTRAIN   AN   EVIL   TO   FURNISH    INCIDENTAL   GOOD.      The    siu   of 

David  led  to  the  pestilence ;  the  pestilence  spread  to  Jerusalem.  At  Jcruitalem  David 
and  the  elders  came  forth  to  intercede  with  God ;  and,  so  doing,  they  sacrificed  on  the 
threshing-floor  of  Oman.  The  fear  of  the  angel  of  destruction  impelled  David  to  besin 
and  (probably)  to  continue  to  sacrifice  there  (ver.  30).  At  any  rate,  the  offering  on  this 
one  occasion  led  naturally,  if  not  necessarily,  to  the  continuance  of  the  act  in  the  same 
place.  This  led  to  the  determination  to  choose  the  spot  as  the  site  for  the  future 
temple ;  and  this  to  the  king's  energetic  and  successful  preparation  for  the  erection  of 
that  noble  edifice.  Thus  from  evil  came  incidental  good ;  and  thus,  continually,  human 
error,  faultiness,  and  transgression  are  made,  under  the  far-reaching  and  overruling 
hand  of  the  Supreme,  to  contribute  in  some  way  to  good.  Thus  he  "  maketh  the 
wrath  of  man  to  praise  him  "  (see  Acts  viii.  3, 4 ;  Phil.  i.  12). 

II.  How   SUITABLE   WAS  TUE   BITE   FOB  THE   TEMPLE   OF  THE  LoRD.      1.   Taken  ffOm 

a  Canaanite,  it  suggested  and  predicted  the  ultimate  triumph  of  the  truth  of  God  over 
all  human  error.  The  kingdom  of  God  would  rise  and  stand  in  every  heathen  land,  as 
the  temple  of  Jehovah  rose  and  stood  o^  Gentile  soil.  2.  It  was  suitable  that  a 
threshing-floor  should  become  the  base  of  a  temple.  Where  God  gives  to  us  all  nourish- 
ment for  our  necessities,  there  we,  in  glad  response,  may  well  give  back  to  him  idl 
worship  of  the  soul,  all  thanksgiving  of  heart  and  tongue,  all  offerings  of  the  treasury. 

III.  How    GODLY    ZEAL   WILL    FIND    A   REASON    AND    A    SPHERE   FOB    ITS    ACTIVITT. 

David's  desire  to  build  the  temple  had  been  positively  disallowed.  Any  man  in  his 
position  who  had  not  that  work  very  much  at  heart  would  have  abandoned  all  further 
concern  on  the  subject,  and  left  the  matter  to  his  successor.  But  David's  heart  was  so 
full  of  holy  zeal  for  the  "  house  of  the  Lord,*'  that  he  caught  with  eagerness  at  the  idea 
of  making  preparation  for  it,  though  he  was  not  permittwi  to  erect  it.  "  This  is  the 
house  of  the  Lord  God/'  etc.  (ver.  1),  and  forthwith  he  pressed  into  the  service  masons 


% 


OH.  XXI.  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,  343 


to  hew  stones  (ver.  2),  and  prepared  abundance  of  iron  and  brass,  and  of  cedar  (vers. 
2^4).  Thus  his  zeal  discovered  a  sphere  of  activity;  nor  was  he  wanting  in  the 
discernment  of  a  reason  for  action.  He  might  have  argued  that  while  his  advancing 
age  would  excuse  inaction  on  his  part,  the  youth  of  Solomon  would  ensure  and  demand 
the  utmost  activity.  That  is  the  light  in  which  lukewarmness  would  have  viewed  it. 
Kot  so  the  king.  He  argued  that,  as  Solomon  his  son  was  young  and  tender,  and  the 
house  was  to  be  magnificent,  etc.  (see  ver.  5),  he  had  better  bring  his  experience  to 
the  work,  that  it  might  be  as  complete  as  possible.  If  we  are  really  in  earnest  in  the 
work  of  the  Lord,  we  shall  not  see  the  reasons  which  might  be  found  for  our  absten- 
tion or  delay ;  we  shall  readily  observe  strong  grounds  for  immediate  and  strenuous 
exertion.  What  is  seen,  in  this  as  well  as  in  other  spheres,  depends  far  more  upon  the 
eye  than  upon  the  object. 

IV.   How  MUCH    BOOM    THEBE    IS    IN    THE    FIELD    OP    HOLY    USEFULNESS    FOB    THE 

EXPEBiENCB  OF  LATER  TEARS,  llierc  Is  good  rcasou  why  all  the  work  of  the  Lord 
should  not  be  left  to  those  who  are  *'  young  and  tender."  By  all  means  let  maturity 
bring  its  solid  strength ;  and  let  age,  also,  bring  its  varied  experience,  its  gatherea 
and  garnered  wisdom  to  the  chamber  of  consultation  and  the  field  of  labour.  "  Old 
age  hath  yet  its  honour  and  its  toil,"  its  witness  to  bear,  its  counsel  to  give,  its  work 
to  finish, — 0. 

Vers.  1— 6.— Davuf  numbering  the  people.    In  consideriog  this  act  of  David,  our 
attention  must  be  first  directed  to  the  statement  in  the  very  first  verse  of  this  chapter, 
in  connection  with  the  corresponding  passage  in  2  Sam.  xxiv.  1.    In  one  chapter  it  is 
stated  that  "  Satan  stood  up  against  Israel,  and  provoked  David  to  number  Israel ; "  ia 
the  latter  passage  it  is  said,  "  Again  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  Israel, 
and  he  moved  David  against  them."    Manifestly  there  needs  some  way  of  reconciling 
these  two  statements  so  apparently  conflicting.    The  latter  passage  implies  that  there 
was  some  guilt  in  Israel  for  GKxl  to  take  this  step,  and  this  may  be  found  in  the 
rebellions  of  Absalom  and  Sheba  against  David's  kingdom.    The  word  "  again  "  points 
back  to  the  judgment  of  Gkxi  on  Israel  recorded  in  2  Sam.  xxi.    But  although  there 
was  guilt  on  the  nation  on  account  of  these  rebellions,  David  himself  was  the  instrument 
by  which  Israel  was  to  be  punished.    On  the  other  hand,  there  was,  as  Joab's  words 
imply,  considerable  pride  and  vanity  in  David's  heart  in  wishing  for  this  census  of  the 
people.    As  he  was  about  to  glory  in  the  number  of  his  people,  God  reduced  that 
number  by  seventy  thousand,  so  that  he  should  not  have  the  glory.    God's  law  is  to 
compel  wickedness  hid  in  the  heart  to  manifest  itself  outwardly  by  furnishing  the  oppor- 
tunities  for  its  manifestation.    Hence  it  is  perfectly  true  to  say,  on  the  one  hand,  that 
Ood  used  David's  sin  to  punish  Israel  for  their  guilt,  and,  on  the  other,  that  ScUan 
moved  David  to  number  them.    The  latter  was  but  Gt)d  giving  David  the  opportunity  for 
the  evil  of  his  heart  to  manifest  itself,  while  of  course  Satan  was  the  source  of  that  evil. 
God  used  David's  sin  to  punish  Israel ;  God  gave  the  opportunity  to  David  to  number 
Israel  in  order  to  manifest  the  evil  of  David's  heart  outwardly.    Thus  God  punished 
Israel  and  humbled  David.    This  may  suggest  to  us  the  difference  in  the  Bible  between 
trial  and  temptation.    In  the  Book  of  Genesis  it  is  said,  "  God  did  tempt  [or, '  try  '1 
Abraham."    In  the  Epistle  of  James  it  is  said  of  God,  "  Neither  tempteth  he  any  man.' 
God  tries ;  Satan  tempts.    Let  us  illustrate.    Some  thousands  of  pounds  are  lying  on 
the  parlour  table  when  a  servant  enters  the  room.    This  is  a  trial  of  the  servant's 
honesty,  and  thus  is  from  God.    Satan  says,  "  Steal  some ; "  this  is  the  temptation. 
So  that  every  trial  from  God  may  at  the  same  time  be  a  temptation  from  Satan.    To 
return  now  to  the  act  of  David  in  numbering  the  people.    We  have  seen  the  sin  of  this 
act  in  that  he  was  about  to  glory  in  the  number  of  his  people.    "  No  flesh  shall  glory 
in  his  presence  ;  *  and  so  Otod  reduced  the  number  by  seventy  thousand.    The  mention 
of  Satan  as  the  author  of  this  act  is  intended  to  show  us  that  David's  purpose  in  it  was, 
from  the  very  first,  an  ungodly  thing.    Joab  was  aware  of  this,  and  regarded  the  act  as 
'*  abominable."    His  language  in  reply  to  the  king  indicates  its  enormity :  '*  Why  will 
he  be  a  cause  of  trespass  to  Israel?"    The  word  ''trespass"  here  is  significant.    It 
means  not  only  a  trespass  committed,  but  one  which  must  be  atoned  for.    This  shows  in 
what  a  heinous  light  he  regarded  David's  act.    The  king's  word  prevailed,  however, 
and  Joab  reluctantly  obeyed,    Levi  and  Benjamin  were  not  counted  with  the  numbei; 


344  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa    [ch.  rxL  1-80. 


The  tribe  of  Levi  was  always  exempt  in  such  censases,  and  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  was 
uot  numbered  because  David,  in  the  mean  time,  having  become  conscious  of  his  no, 
stopped  the  census  before  it  was  completed.  Joab  gave  the  sum  of  the  people  to  the 
king.  It  amounted  to  one  million  one  hundred  thousand  men  in  Israel.  This  great 
population  in  so  limited  an  extent  of  country  is  a  proof  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise 
(Qen,  XV.  5).  Such  great  prosperity,  however,  is  too  frequently  a  snare,  as  it  was  in 
this  case.  It  proved  too  strong  a  temptation  to  David's  pride  and  vanity;  and  though 
the  Lord  used  it  to  discipline  David's  soul  into  deeper  humility,  it  led  to  lamentable 
consequences.  Wo  see  how  little  God  can  trust  his  children  long  with  prosperous 
circumstances.  It  is  for  this  reason  the  pressure  of  Ood's  hand  is  laid  on  many  of  them, 
and  continue,  in  one  form  or  another,  through  life ;  for,  were  it  withdrawn,  the  heart 
would  soon  wander  from  God,  and  run  the  risk  of  forfeiting  its  heavenly  inheritance,  or 
its  future  glorious  reward. — W. 

Vers.  7—18,  29,  SO.-^Effects  of  David's  sin.  The  first  effect  of  David's  act  was  that 
of  incurring  Goil's  severe  displeasure.  David's  eyes  were  opened  to  see  his  sin  and  its 
ffreatness.  In  earnest  prayer  he  besought  God  to  "  do  away  the  iniquity  of  thy  servant ; 
(or  I  have  done  very  foolishly."  This,  however,  cannot  be.  Sin  may  be  forgiven  but 
its  sad  consequences  must  be  felt.  A  man  who  has  brought  ruin  upon  himself  and 
family  by  a  sinful  life  may  have  all  his  sin  forgiven,  but  he  must  suffer  the  consequences 
and  his  lamily  also,  it  may  be,  for  generations  to  come.  Nothing  is  more  palpable  on 
every  side  of  us  than  this  law  in  God's  moral  government — "  visiting  the  iniquity  of 
the  fathers  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate 
me ; "  and  *'  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  In  David's  sin  we  see 
also  another  law  in  God's  moral  govemment^ — a  man's  punishment  is  always  in  the 
same  line  of  his  sin.  David's  pride  was  in  the  great  number  of  his  people ;  the  punish- 
ment lay  in  the  destruction  of  seventy  thousand  of  that  number.  There  is  an 
unvarying  connection  between  the  two,  indicating  the  law  of  righteous  retribution. 
Asa  judgment  the  Lord  offered  David  his  choice  of  three  evils,  and  in  David's  answer 
we  see  the  true  wisdom  of  a  chastened  and  humbled  child  of  Gt)d.  *'  And  David  said 
unto  God,  I  am  in  a  great  strait :  let  me  fall  now  into  tlie  hand  of  the  Lord  ;  for  very 
great  are  his  mercies :  but  let  me  not  fall  into  the  hand  of  man.  So  the  Lord  sent 
a  pestilence,  and  there  fell  of  Israel  seventy  thousand  men."  It  is  the  truest  wisdom 
of  the  soul  in  every  such  emergency  to  fall  into  the  hand  of  God.  Our  loving  Father 
does  all  things  well ;  and  while  we  must  reap  what  we  have  sown  in  order  to  learn  by 
deep  experience  what  a  bitter  thing  sin  is,  **  a  Father's  hand  will  never  cause  his  child 
a  needless  tear."  God  hates  sin,  and  he  will  have  us  learn  what  a  fearful  thing  it  is 
that  we  may  hate  it  too.  The  hand  of  God  in  this  outpour  of  judgment  is  vividly 
pictured  in  this  portion  of  the  chapter.  "  And  David  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  the 
angel  of  the  Lord  stand  between  the  earth  and  the  heaven,  having  a  drawn  sword  in 
his  hand  stretched  out  over  Jerusalem  ; "  but  just  as  he  had  begun  to  destroy,  we  are 
told  God  said,  "  It  is  enough,  stay  now  thine  hand."  How  much  greater  might  the 
destruction  have  been  but  for  him  who  in  the  midst  of  judgment  remembers  mercy  ! 
Yes,  in  the  midst  of  all  our  judgments,  our  trials,  our  suflferings,  how  much  greater 
they  might  have  been,  may  each  one  say  1  We  can  count  our  trials,  but  never  our 
mercies.  They  are  as  the  sands  of  the  shore  or  the  stars  over  our  heads.  The  darkest 
cloud  has  ever  a  silver  lining.  And  so  it  is  here.  There  was  another  effect  of  David's 
sin  besides  this  terrible  destruction  of  Israel,  for  in  its  results  sin  is  always  hydra* 
headed.  Each  one  carries  with  it  a  fruitful  crop.  We  find  this  effect  in  David's  own 
relation  to  God  (ver.  30).  **  Ho  was  afraid."  Exactly  the  same  words  are  used  by 
Adam  in  the  garden,  and  the  slothful  servant  in  the  New  Testament.  Sin  produces 
distance  from  God.  David  was  as  truly  behind  a  tree  as  Adam  in  the  garden.  Peace, 
communion,  freedom,  all  that  sweet  interchange  of  fellowship  between  God  and  the 
soul,  have  all  gone  now !  O  Sin,  how  terrible  art  thou  in  thy  consequences  I  One 
more  thought  is  suggested  by  this  portion  of  the  chapter.  The  tabernacle  of  the  Lord 
and  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  were  at  this  time  at  Gibeon.  Here  was  the  prescribed 
place  of  sacrifice  and  here,  according  to  orthodox  ideas,  David  should  have  gone  to  offer 
his  sacrifices.  But  God  can  give  a  man  rest  anywhere.  He  can  apply  his  mercy  to 
^he  soul  and  accept  its  sacrifices  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  as  well  in  Oman's  barn  as 


CH.  XXL  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  845 

on  Gibeon's  high  places.  David  had  seen  the  sheathed  sword  and  the  hallowed  fire 
from  heaven,  not  on  Gibeon's  heights,  but  in  Oman's  bam.  Whatever  orthodoxy  might 
think  of  the  former,  the  latter  was  God's  chosen  place  for  the  temple,  (rod's  expert* 
enced  mercy,  where  justice  had  sheathed  its  sword  and  grace  had  answered  prayer, 
roside  the  gronnd  hallowed.  It  is  so  still ;  and  may  every  member  of  the  Church  of 
Christ  never  forget  it. — W. 

Vers.  18 — 27,  ch.  xxii.  1. — Oman*8  threshing-floor.  It  was  in  the  threshing-floor  of 
Oman  the  Jebusite  that  the  angel  of  the  Lord  sheathed  his  sword  and  where  the  voice 
of  the  Lord  was  heard,  "It  is  enough,  stay  now  thine  hand.**  There,  by  Divine 
command,  the  altar  was  to  be  reared.  The  Lord's  altar  in  a  barn  1  Well,  what  matters 
it?  Tlie  altar  hallows  the  bam.  Christ  is  the  true  sacrificial  Altar,  and  whatever  or 
whoever  he  touches  becomes  the  "  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Oman  was  probably 
the  Hebrew  or  Jewish  name  of  the  owner  of  this  threshing-floor ;  Araunah  his  Jebusite 
or  Canaanitish  name.  We  see  in  the  twenty-third  verse  the  noble  generosity  of  this 
man  in  oflcring  to  present  David  with  the  threshing-floor,  oxen,  instruments,  and 
wheat,  free  of  cost.  It  is  tme  that  in  some  cases  (see  G^n.  xxiii.)  this  apparent 
generosity,  accompanied  with  so  much  Eastern  courtesy  and  politeness,  is  only  a  thin 
guise  to  cover  larger  expectations  from  those  to  whom  it  is  made.  This  Abraham  well 
knew  when  he  so  resolutely  declined  the  ofier  of  the  sons  of  Heth.  This  was  not  the 
case  with  Oman.  His  was  the  ofispring  from  the  noble  and  generous  heart  of  one  who 
loved  and  served  God.  The  inspired  penman  gives  us  the  true  interpretation  of  Oman's 
offer  when  he  says  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  23),  "  All  these  things  did  Arannah,  as  a  king,  give 
unto  the  king."  But  however  kingly  Araunah's  conduct  was  here,  David  felt  he  could 
not  accept  it.  God  must  not  be  put  ofi"  with  that  which  costs  us  nothing.  "  Thou  hast 
offered  me  no  sweet  cane  with  money"  was  God's  charge  of  old  against  IsraeL  "  Yq 
offer  the  blind  and  the  lame  for  sacritice.  Is  it  not  evil  ?  "  said  Malachi.  It  is  the  law 
of  life.  That  which  costs  us  nothing  is  not  worth  having ;  how  much  less  when  offered 
to  G^  I  The  widow's  two  mites  are  of  more  value  than  all  the  gifts  of  gold  in  the 
temple  chest.  So  David  would  only  have  the  threshing-floor  for  the  Lord's  temple  at 
the  '*  full  price.'*  And  mark  the  typical  character  of  this  threshing-floor.  It  was  there 
the  sword  of  vengeance  was  sheathed.  It  was  there  God's  voice  was  heard,  **  Stay  now 
thine  hand,  it  is  enough."  It  was  there  the  hallowed  fire  descended  in  token  of  God's 
acceptance  of  the  victim  on  the  altar ;  and  there  consequently  the  future  temple  was  to 
be  erected  which  exceeded  in  glory  all  that  Israel  haa  ever  seen.  So,  centuries  after, 
the  cross  of  Christ  was  the  substance  of  which  all  this  was  only  the  shadow.  In  that 
cross  we  see  the  sword  of  God's  wrath  against  sin  for  ever  sheathed.  We  hear  Gxxl's 
voice  saying,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  Gcd,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  I " 
In  the  midnight  darkness,  the  earthquake,  the  rent  rocks,  the  opened  graves,  and  the 
rent  veil,  we  hear  Gtxi's  voice  again  from  heaven,  testifying  to  the  majesty  of  that 
Sacrifice,  and  drawing  from  the  lips  of  even  heathen  bystanders,  "  Surely  this  was 
the  Son  of  God."  And  on  that  Sacrifice,  that  one  Offering  once  offered,  we  see  built 
the  great  spiritual  temple  of  Christ's  body,  the  Church.  "  Other  foundation  can  no 
man  lay  than  that  which  is  laid,  Christ  Jesus."  May  we  take  up  David's  language 
and  say,  **  This  is  the  house  of  the  Lord  God,  and  this  is  the  altar  of  the  burnt  offering 
for  Israel."— W. 

Ver.  1. — Satanic  temptations.  The  passage  similar  to  this  in  2  Sam.  xxiv.  1  should 
be  compared  with  it.  The  word  Satan  would  have  been  more  correctly  translated  an 
adversary ;  and  the  sentence  in  Samuel  would  be  correctly  rendered,  *'One  moved  David 
against  them."  The  historical  fact  appears  to  be  that  one  of  the  courtiers  pressed  this 
evil  advice  on  the  king,  and  the  Bible  writers  properly  see  in  such  a  man  a  tempter,  an 
adversary,  a  Satan ;  and  they  recognize  in  all  the  consequences  that  follow  the  outworking 
of  Divine  judgments.  The  question  of  the  Bible  presentation  of  a  chief  evil  spirit  need 
not  be  discussed  in  connection  with  this  passage.  It  is  to  one  aspect  only  of  the  influence 
of  such  a  being  that  our  attention  is  directed.  The  Miltonic  figure  of  Satan  should  be 
carefully  distinguished  from  the  Biblical ;  and  in  the  instance  before  us  the  "  adversary  " 
is  treated  as  a  Divine  agency  used  for  the  testing  of  God's  people  by  temptation  to  sin. 
If  we  fully  accept  the  idea  of  the  Divine  education  and  training  of  men,  it  will  be  no 


846  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ch.  xzl  1— aa 


difficulty  to  118  that  times  of  moral  trial  should  be  found,  and  subjection  to  evil  entice- 
ments  should  form  part  of  the  Divine  plan.  We  know  that  Grod  tries  and  tests  us  by 
thing9,  and  it  should  not  be  difficult  for  us  to  realize  that  he  may  try  and  test  os 
by  peraofiM,  This  is,  indeed,  our  most  subtle  and  most  severe  form  of  testing.  A  man 
may  stand  firm  under  all  the  various  trials  of  affliction,  and  fall  at  last  under  the 
temptings  and  delusions  of  subtle  sin.  lliis  is  the  point  in  David's  case.  We  should 
notice  the  time  in  his  life  when  this  severe  temptation  came.  It  was  when  we  might 
reasonably  have  assumed  that  David  was  confirmed  in  goodness.  "Let  him  that 
thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall.**  Interesting  comparisons  may  be  made 
with  Abraham,  tested  late  in  life  by  the  command  to  offer  his  son ;  and  with  Job,  tried, 
when  fully  established  in  family  and  property,  by  the  sudden  loss  of  all,  and  his  own 
extreme  bodily  suffering.  David's  trial  came  when  all  his  enemies  were  subdued,  and 
his  kingdom  extended  to  its  widest  limits.  We  cannot  suppose  that  the  mere  act  of 
taking  a  census  of  the  people  was  regarded  as  wrong.  All  acts  gain  their  qualities  by 
the  spirit  in  which  they  are  done,  and  David's  wrong  was  wrong  of  purpose  and 
of  will 

L  Satanic  temptations  REaARDED  as  human  peril.  Illnstrate  from  our  Lord's 
words  to  St.  Peter,  **  Simon,  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  you,  that  he  may  sift  yon  as 
wheat"  Danger-times  occur  again  and  agun  in  a  man's  life.  He  must  conceive  of 
his  spiritual  foe  as  ever  on  the  watch  for  the  weak,  unguarded  moment.  Illustrate  the 
Satanic  opportunities  found  in  times  of  frail  health,  of  success  in  undertakings,  of 
circumstances  having  an  exciting  character,  of  carnal  security,  of  flattery,  or  of  pride. 
Especially  show  that  the  moments  of  rebound  from  success,  and  exhaustion  after 
yictonr,  put  us  in  extreme  peril.  Skilfully  adjusting  temptations  to  a  man's  stronger 
side,  Satan  has  oftentimes  succeeded.  Every  hour  is  an  hour  of  peril,  and  we  need  the 
hourly  prayer,  '*  Hold  thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe." 

IL  Satanio  temptations  reqarded  as  Diyinb  discipline.  We  may  not  separate 
any  of  the  things  happening  to  us  in  life  from  the  Divine  purpose  and  overruling. 
What  we  call  evil  Is  properly  seen  as  part  of  the  Divine  agency  for  our  moral  culture. 
Divine  overrulings  do  not  change  the  character  or  quality  of  things,  but  they  directly 
affect  the  result  of  things.  All  life  is  probation.  We  are  being  moulded  in  righteous- 
ness. So  wo  find  that  even  these  strange  Satanic  temptations  serve  gracious  Divine 
purposes  in  the  individual  man  ;  and  when  we  cannot  see  this,  we  may  see  that  they 
serve  gracious  Divine  purposes  in  the  warning  and  teaching  of  others,  and  that  some  (H 
us  may  even,  as  David,  stumble  unto  falling  vicariously. — R.  T. 

Ver.  2. — The  sin  of  self-gratulation.  The  narrative  does  not  clearly  and  explicitly 
state  David's  intention  in  thus  commanding  a  census  of  the  people  to  be  made.  Probably 
he  desired  to  know  the  numbers  of  the  people  of  his  kingdom  as  it  had  been  extended 
by  successful  war;  but  tliis  he  wished  rather  for  his  own  self-glorying  than  for  national 
purposes.  It  was  an  act  of  self-will,  and  it  failed  from  full  loyalty  to  the  theocratic 
idea  which  had  been  so  well  maintained  during  David's  reign.  In  just  this  lay  its 
sin  and  its  mischief.  Dean  Stanley  calls  the  taking  of  this  census  '*  an  attempt  not 
unnaturally  suggested  by  the  increase  of  his  power,  but  implying  a  confidence  and  pride 
alien  to  the  spirit  inculcated  on  the  kings  of  the  chosen  people.  The  apprehension  of 
a  Nemesis  on  any  overweening  display  of  prosperity,  if  not  consistent  with  the  highest 
revelations  of  the  Divine  nature  in  the  g(^spel,  pervades  all  ancient,  especially  all 
Oriental,  religions."  And  Ewald  says,  "The  only  satisfactory  explanation  of  this 
measure  is  that  it  was  intended  as  the  foundation  of  an  organized  and  vigorous  govern- 
ment, like  that  of  Egypt  or  Phoenicia,  under  which  the  exact  number  of  the  houses 
and  inhabitants  of  every  city  and  village  would  have  to  be  obtained  so  as  to  be  able 
to  summon  the  people  for  general  taxation.  But  it  is  well  known  what  a  profound 
aversion  and  what  an  instinctive  abhorrence  certain  nations,  ancient  and  modem, 
harbour  against  any  such  design  which  they  dimly  suspect,  not  perhaps  without  good 
reason,  is  likely  to  result  in  a  dangerous  extension  of  the  governing  power,  ana  its 
encroachment  on  the  sanctity  of  the  private  homo."  We  may  notice  what  peril  often 
lies  in  the  return  of  temptation  upon  a  man  after  he  has  conquered  it.  David  had 
warred  in  loyal  dependence  on  God,  but  he  fell  when  attempting  to  gather  up  the  results 
of  his  victory.    A  camp  is  never  so  exposed  to  attack  as  in  the  time  of  exhaustion  and 


OH.  XXI.  1— 30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa  347 

over-confidence  that  immediately  succeeds  a  victory.    Illustrate  from  the  power  that 
lies  in  the  hackward  suck  of  a  broken  wave. 

I.  Self-gbatulation  ok  AOOOITNT  OF  BESULTS  OF  LAB0X7B.  Compare  Nebuchad- 
nezzar's boasting  over  great  Babylon.  Contrast  the  spirit  manifested  in  St.  Paul's 
boastings.  He  says,  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am."  Show  how  keen  we  are 
for  results,  both  in  business  and  in  religions  spheres.  The  miser  delights  to  count  up 
his  hoards,  and  the  religious  man  is  in  peril  of  self-satisfaction  in  reckoning  up  his 
converts.  Few  of  us  can  bear  to  have  the  true  fruitage  of  our  life-labour  shown  us  yet ; 
and  we  learn  to  think  it  most  wise  and  good  of  our  great  Master  that  he  puts  off  the 
harvest-day  until  by-and-by.  Then  we  may  venture  to  come  "  bringing  our  sheaves 
with  us."    Enough  now  for  us  is  the  joy  of  workers  in  their  work. 

II.  Self-obatulatiok  on  aogoukt  of  spibitual  tbiumphs.  Illustrate  from  the 
peril  of  the  hermit,  monk,  or  nun ;  persons  who  devote  themselves  wholly  to  spiritual 
culture.  Show  that  the  humility  they  seek  is  ever  slipping  from  their  grasp,  and  subtle 
pride  is  asserting  its  place.  St  Simeon  Stylites  on  his  pillar  was  probably  prouder 
than  any  king.  And  so  now  exclusive  attention  to  the  training  of  feelings  and  emotions 
tends  to  self-gratulation.  Perhaps  more  men  are  proud  of  their  goodness  than  proud 
of  their  greatness.  Against  this  subtle  and  insidious  form  of  evil  we  all  need  to  watch. 
And  the  great  Heart-searcher  needs  to  cleanse  the  very  thoughts  and  heart,  finding 
out  for  us  our  secret  wicked  ways. 

III.  The  SINFULNESS  of  all  self-gratulation  is  seen  in  the  evil  influence  of  it  on 
others.  Some  it  excites  to  imitations.  Others  it  impresses  with  our  insincerity,  and 
so  with  an  idea  of  the  worthlessness  of  all  religion.  It  prevents  our  exercising  a  good 
influence  on  others.  Nothing  more  certainly  shuts  up  a  man's  power  than  the  impression 
he  may  produce  of  his  pride  and  self-conceit.  Whatever  we  may  win,  one  law  applies 
— <ion'<  tcxw*.— R.  T. 

Ver.  3.— -3^  spirit  that  refuses  good  advice,  Joab  was  not  always  a  good  adviser. 
More  than  once  he  had  led  David  into  difiBculties.  But  he  was  a  skiSul  and  bold 
statesman.  He  looked  rather  to  the  consequences  and  ultimate  influences  of  political 
actions  than  to  the  maintenance  of  high  political  principles.  In  this  case  he  feared 
more  the  penalty  that  would  follow  than  the  sin  itself.  But  his  advice  was  good.  We 
may  not  say  that  even  good  advice  is  necessarily  to  be  taken.  Our  judgment  con- 
cerning it  should  be  exercised,  and  our  decisions  upon  it  should  be  made.  That  which 
is  absolutely  good,  or  in  a  general  way  good,  may  not  be  the  best  thing  at  a  particular 
time,  or  for  a  particular  individual. 

I.  Good  advice  may  be  unacceptable  in  itself.  It  may  demand  hard  things  or 
unpleasant  things.  It  may  be  difficult  to  discern  the  grounds  on  which  it  is  based.  It 
may  involve  humiliations  and  confessions  of  mistake.  It  may  bring  heavy  respon- 
sibilities. It  may  unduly  strain  feeling.  It  may  be  quite  different  from  the  advice  we 
expected.    It  may  seem,  to  our  judgment,  anything  but  good. 

II.  Good  advice  may  be  unacceptable  thbough  the  pebson  who  gives  it.  We 
estimate  the  value  of  advice  by  the  giver.  Our  confidence  in  him  gives  quality  to  his 
advice.  Probably  David  was  at  this  time  so  annoyed  with  Joab  that  his  eyes  were 
blinded,  and  he  could  not  see  how  wise  his  counsel  was.  To  judge  advice  by  the  giver 
is,  as  a  rule,  quite  safe ;  but  care  is  needed  lest  prejudice  should  prevent  our  recognizing 
the  good  in  the  counsel  of  those  we  dislike,  and  lest  undue  affection  should  prevent 
our  seeing  the  error  in  the  advice  of  those  whom  we  may  personally  esteem.  "  Faithful 
are  the  wounds  of  a  friend,"  etc. 

III.  Good  advice  may  be  unacceptable  thbouoh  the  state  of  mind  of  thefebson 
WHO  beceives  it.  There  may  be  a  proud  unwillingness  to  receive  advice  at  all ;  an 
over  and  undue  self-reliance.  There  may  be  a  strong  purpose  and  resolve  against 
which  the  advice  goes,  as  in  David*s  case. 

So  we  learn  that  to  be  proper  recipients  of  good  advice  from  our  fellow-men,  or  from 
God's  Word,  we  need  to  win  and  to  keep  the  humble,  open  heart. — R.  T. 

Vers.  7,  8. — Judgment  revealing  iniquity.  In  these  verses  it  is  noted  that  God's 
judgment  on  sin  revealed  the  sinfulness  of  his  doings  to  the  sinner.  "  Qod  is  known 
by  the  judgment  that  he  execateth.**    Still,  it  is  largely  true  that  men  do  not  see  their 


348  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ca  xxl  1— 30. 


dn  in  its  proper  light  uDtil  they  come  uuder  the  sufferings  which  it  involves.  Illustrate 
hj  the  licentious  man  and  the  drunkard.  God*s  plan  is  to  affix  consequences  to  mn, 
and  make  these  always  to  be  of  an  afflictive  and  distressing  and  humiliating  character, 
80  that  by  them  the  character  and  quality  of  sin  might  be  shown  up.  **  Whatsoever  a 
man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap.**  Illustrations  are  at  hand  in  Old  Testament 
history,  ordinary  national  histories,  and  modern  life.  ''Though  hand  join  in  hand, 
the  sinner  shall  not  go  unpunished."  The  consequences  of  sin  come  in  a  great  variety 
of  forms,  but  always  with  precise  adaptation  to  the  moral  purpose  which  God  holds  in 
view  in  sending  them.  If  the  sin  be  only  that  of  a  man  as  an  individual,  the  con- 
ftequences  may  come  wholly  on  the  man's  body.  If  the  sin  be  that  of  a  man  as  a 
father,  the  consequences  may  be  such  as  will  affect  the  family.  And  if  the  sin  be  that 
of  a  man  as  a  king^  we  may  reasonably  expect  that  the  consequences  will  reach  to  affect 
the  nation.  And  this  is  the  case  of  David  which  is  now  before  us  for  consideration.  An 
act  is  right  or  wrong,  according  to  God*s  eternal  laws,  whoever  does  it ;  but  acts  gain 
some  of  their  precise  qualities  through  the  relational  or  representative  character  of  the 
persons  who  do  them ;  and  this  often  affords  the  true  explanations  of  the  particular 
judgments  that  attend  them. 

I.  David's  sin.  His  act,  considered  apart  from  his  state  of  mind  and  his  purpose, 
cannot  be  called  wrong.  We  at  least  are  familiar  with  the  idea  of  taking  census,  and 
understand  it  to  be  a  necessary  attendant  on  orderly  government.  Two  things  aid  us 
in  recognizing  David's  sin.  1.  The  sentiment  of  Eastern  peoples  concerning  a  census ; 
they  regarded  it  as  imperilling  their  liberty,  and  as  a  state  device  for  inflicting  on  them 
a  tyrannous  taxation.  2.  David  was  not  an  independent  sovereign ;  he  was  Jehovah's 
prince ;  and  such  a  work  as  this  should  only  have  been  undertaken  at  the  direct  com- 
mand of  the  true  King.  In  a  previoas  sketch,  on  ver.  2,  the  precise  character  of  David'a 
act  has  been  shown.  His  purpose  was  vain-glory.  He  would  boast  of  the  great 
kingdom  he  had  founded ;  so  be  utterly  failed  from  the  theocratic  kingship  with  which 
he  had  been  entrusted.  And  his  sin  was  that  of  the  king ;  it  was  paxt  of  his  govern- 
ment ;  and,  therefore,  it  affected  the  people  whom  he  governed,  and  the  consequences 
fell  on  him  through  them,  just  as  the  judgments  on  parental  sin  come  on  parents  through 
their  children. 

II.  Its  consequences  in  the  Divine  administration.  These  were  apparently 
special.  Gad,  God's  prophet,  announced  the  impending  judgments,  bidding  David 
select  which  of  them  should  fall.  But  this  speciality  is  only  in  appearance,  and  it  is 
designed  to  be  illustrative  of  the  ordinary  and  orderly  judgments  which  are  surely 
wrought  out  in  God's  providences.  Sometimes  God  permits  us  to  trace  processes,  but 
it  is  only  that  wo  may  gain  full  conviction  of  the  essential  connections  between  sin  and 
suffering.  Much  is  made  in  our  day  of  the  working  of  law  in  nature.  It  would  be 
altogether  healthier  and  better  for  us  to  make  much  of  the  working  of  law  in  morals. 
No  law  is  so  absolute  as  this  one :  "  The  soul  that  sinncth,  it  shall  die." 

III.  The  revealing  power  of  such  consequences.  That  is,  their  power  to  disclose 
and  impress  the  character  of  men's  sins,  as  viewed  by  God.  In  the  narrative  before  us, 
the  impressions  made  on  the  king  (ver.  8),  on  the  people,  and,  through  these,  upon  us, 
may  be  illustrated. 

The  mission  of  all  judgments  and  so-called  calamities  is  here  shown.  The  revela- 
tions which  they  make  are  O)  a  vindication  of  God ;  (2)  a  gracious  aid  to  a  worthy 
apprehension  of  God ;  and  (3)  the  only  way  to  secure  our  due  restoration  to  a  right 
mind  and  right  relations. — K.  T. 

Vers.  9 — 13. — An  appalling  offer  and  a  wise  choice.  The  details  may  be  given  as 
explained  in  the  Expository  portion  of  this  Commentary.  Famine,  war,  and  plague  are 
the  three  ordinary  Divine  agencies  used  for  the  judgment  of  nations.  Each  affects 
numbers  and  arouses  national  ftding,  Yerj  seldom,  indeed,  does  God  make  men  the 
offer  of  a  choice  of  punishments ;  and  we  can  fully  understand  that  it  would  not  be  con- 
sistent with  his  honour  so  to  do.  Then  why  did  he  do  it  in  this  particular  case  ? 
Because  this  was  special,  and  designed  to  bear  mainly  on  the  recovery  of  a  good  man's 
full  trust  in  God.  God  cannot  usually  make  offers  to  men,  because  there  is  no  good  and 
right  feeling  in  them  to  which  his  offer  may  appeal.  God  could  make  such  offer  to  David, 
because  his  was  only  a  temporary  aberration  and  failure  from  the  true  spirit  and  full 


CTi.  XXI.  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  349 


loyalty.  Even  in  the  matter  of  his  own  judgment,  God  may  take  David,  the  "  man 
after  his  own  heart/'  into  his  counsel. 

L  The  point  of  the  threefold  offer.  It  tested  David's  trust  in  God.  Would  he 
prefer  judgment  which  came  very  evidently  through  human  agency^  or  would  he  prefer 
judgment  which  was  plainly  sent  direct  from  God  ?  We  know  that  pestilence  is  as 
truly  due  to  human  neglect  and  error  as  is  famine  or  war ;  but,  in  the  sentiment  of 
David's  time,  plague  was  the  direct  visitation  of  God. 

II.  The  point  of  David's  ohoiob.  (Ver.  13.)  1.  He  felt  that  he  could  better  trust 
the  direct  Divine  asency  than  man's  ministry,  which  might  be  toned  with  ill  feeling. 
2.  There  was  more  nope  of  the  limitations  and  qualifications  of  mercy  in  G^'s  dealings 
than  in  man's.  3.  The  national  honour  and  the  integrity  of  the  kingdom  and  the 
stability  of  the  throne  would  not  be  so  seriously  affected  by  a  plague,  as  they  would 
be  by  the  temporary  triumph  of  the  national  foes. 

When  we  are,  with  David,  fully  willing  to  fall  into  God's  hands,  then  the  Divine 
judgments  may  be  graciously  tempered,  and  even  removed. — R.  T. 

Vers.  11,  12. — The  necessary  connection  between  sin  and  Judgment.  Prove  and 
illustrate  the  universality  of  the  connection.  Illustrations  may  be  found  in  every  age 
and  every  sphere.  See  the  idea  of  a  Nemesis ;  and  show  that  pointing  out  this  con- 
nection is  the  commonplace  of  the  moral  and  religious  teacher. 

I,  See  clearly  what  sin  is.  Give  the  theories  about  sin ;  but  apart  from  theory, 
or  doctrine,  endeavour  to  understand  what  sin  is  (1)  in  itself;  (2)  in  its  power  of 
growth;  (3)  in  its  subtle  and  mischievous  influences;  (4)  in  its  interference  with  the  Divine 
order ;  (5)  in  its  relations  with  the  Divine  Law ;  (6)  in  the  sight  of  Ood,  as  intimated 
in  the  Scriptures.  When  a  suitable  impression  is  gained  of  what  sin  is^  we  are  pre- 
pared to — 

II.  See  why  it  must  be  met  with  judgments.  Because  (1)  it  beclouds  man*s  con~ 
science,  and  judgment  alone  removes  such  clouds ;  (2)  it  subverts  Divine  authority,  and 
such  authority  judgments  alone  can  vindicate ;  (3)  it  interferes  with  the  Divine  plans  and 
purposes,  and  these  judgments  alone  can  rectify.  The  importance  of  the  relation 
between  sin  and  suffering,  transgression  and  judgment,  is  b^t  shown  by  the  effort  to 
realize  what  would  now  be  the  moral  sentiments  of  men  if  this  connection  had  not  been 
assured,  and  men  could  now  plead  that  any  one  of  their  number  had  ever  sinned  with 
impunity.  So  essential,  indeed,  is  the  connection,  that  when  God  grants  forgiveness  of 
the  sin  he  seldom,  if  ever,  interferes  with  the  external  consequences  of  the  wrong.  Thev 
are  left  to  work  on  their  severe  but  beneficent  mission.  Judgment,  in  both  the  smidl 
and  the  largo  spheres,  is  the  minister,  the  angel,  of  the  Divine  mercy ;  and  we  may  bless 
God  for  his  judgments.  Note  also  that  Christ,  as  man,  came,  for  man,  under  Divine 
judgments,  because  he  was  the  Representative  of  sinners. — ^R.  T. 

Vers.  15, 16. — The  sight  of  the  destroying  angeh  It  is  noted  in  these  verses  that  the 
Divine  judgment  was  executed  by  an  angel,  and  that  God  and  David  both  watched 
him  carrying  out  his  fearful  commission.  The  sight  produced  different  effects  on  the 
watchers,  and  these  suggest  useful  thoughts  and  truths.  The  Bible  idea  of  an  angel 
seems  to  be  that  of  an  agent,  other  than  man,  employed  to  carry  out  the  Divine 
purposes  in  the  sphere  of  creation,  and  especially  in  this  our  world.  If  we  accept  this 
comprehensive  conception  of  an  angel,  we  shall  understand  how  there  may  be  angels  of 
afiliction,  angels  of  death,  and  even  angels  of  temptation,  all  engaged  directly  in  the 
Divine  service.  There  may  be  God's  angel  of  pestilence  for  the  punishment  of  David, 
and  God's  angel  of  temptation,  or  testing,  for  the  purifying  of  Job.  It  may  be  shown 
that  destruction  by  pestilence  is  on  several  occasions  attributed  to  the  ministry  of  an 
angel :  e,g,  destruction  of  the  firstborn  in  Egypt  and  of  Sennacherib's  army.  This 
is  still  a  familiar  poetical  figure.  Sometimes  unseen  things  have  been  graciously  set 
within  the  sphere  of  the  senses,  in  order  to  help  men  to  feel  the  reality  of  the  unseen. 
Angels  are  unseen  beings ;  the  Divine  workings  are  largely  secret  and  unseen ;  but  it 
pleases  God  to  set  his  people  sometimes  "  within  the  veil ; "  or,  we  may  say,  "  behind 
the  scenes; "  or  down  below  among  the  machinery,  so  that  they  may  gain  for  themselves, 
and  give  to  others,  fitting  impressions  of  the  reality  of  the  Divine  working.  For  a 
similar  reason  God,  the  infinite  and  spiritual  Being,  is  spoken  of  under  human  figures^ 


350  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa    [ge.zxl1— 30. 


as  though  ho  were  a  man,  doing  a  man*8  deeds  and  feeling  a  man's  feelings.  Some 
explanation  of  anthropomorphism  and  anthropopathism  may  here  suitably  be  given. 
In  the  verses  now  for  consideration,  we  find  a  double  vision  and  a  double  r^entanee, 
God  saw  the  angel  and  repented,  so  did  David. 

I.  A  DOUBLE  VISION — God's  akd  han'b.  It  IS  precisely  noticed  that  as  the  angel  was 
engaged  in  his  work  of  destruction,  **  the  Lord  beheld."  Here  is  set  before  us  something 
more  than  God*s  perfect  knowledge  of  everything  that  happens.  It  impresses  upon  us 
his  personal  interest  in  his  administration  of  human  affairs ;  his  immediate  attention  to 
the  execution  of  the  judgments  he  denounces ;  and  his  sensitiveness  to  the  effects  of 
his  ju(^ments  on  those  who  suffer  them.  So  it  convinces  us  of  what  we  may  caH  the 
paternity  of  God.  We  also  gain  the  assurance  that  suffering,  when  it  comes  as  pencUty, 
can  never  get  beyond  God's  inspection  and  control.  This  conviction  makes  us  willing, 
as  David  was,  to  **  fall  into  the  hands  of  God."  Compare  our  Lord,  in  his  extreme 
suffering,  commending  himself  to  the  '*  hands  of  the  Father."  Further,  it  reveals  to  us 
the  fact  that  God  brings  his  pitying  mercies  into  our  very  calamities.  David  also  saw 
the  angel,  and  by  the  sight  was  enabled  distinctly  to  recognize  the  Divine  agency  in 
what  otherwise  he  might  have  called  a  calamity. 

II.  A  DOUBLE  REPBNTAKCB.  Give  explanations  of  the  Old  Testament  and  New 
Testament  uses  of  the  term.  Distinguish  metanoia  from  metameleui.  Begin  with 
general  idea  of  repentance  as  change  of  mind ;  reconsideration  with  a  view  to  a  new  course 
of  conduct.  Show  in  what  senses  the  term  can  be  applied  to  God,  and  not  to  man ;  to 
man,  and  not  to  God.  Especially  show  that  in  God's  changes  of  action,  or  relation,  there 
is  adaptation  to  new  conditions,  without  any  regret,  conviction  of  mistake,  or  sense  q^ 
wrong.  In  the  case  before  us  God  repents,  in  the  sense  of  recognizing  a  sufficient 
fulfilment  of  his  purpose  in  the  judgment,  and  so  the  possibility  of  relieving  Israel  of 
the  plague.  David  repents  in  a  wholly  different  sense.  He  is  aroused  to  full  conviction 
of  his  sin,  and  humbles  himself  before  €k>d  in  solemn  confessions.  David  now  sees  the 
connection  between  suffering  and  sin ;  the  relation  of  one  mau's  sin  to  many  men*8 
sufferings ;  and  above  all,  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  his  oum  sin, — B.  T. 

Ver.  17. — Conviction  of  personal  sin.  For  the  particular  character  of  David's  sin 
reference  may  bo  made  to  the  sketch  given  on  ver.  2.  And  for  the  kind  of  conviction 
which  David  cherished  when  acts  of  sin  were  brought  home  to  him,  illustration  may  be 
taken  from  Ps.  li.  His  sin  might  have  been  the  sin  of  David  the  man ;  as  was  his  sin 
in  the  matter  of  Bathsheba.  Or  it  might  have  been  the  sin  of  David  the  king ;  and  so 
God  regarded  it,  adjusting  his  judgments  accordingly.  When  convicted,  it  is  a  point 
of  exceeding  nobility  in  David  that  he  seeks  to  bring  the  whole  responsibility  upon 
himself,  asking  God  to  treat  the  sin  as  that  of  the  man,  not  of  the  king.  We  may  fix 
attention  upon  this  point.  In  this  instance  David  stood  for  and  acted  for  the  nation, 
without  the  nation's  consent.  It  is  a  most  solemn  thing  for  parents,  masters,  magistrates, 
etc.,  that  they  cannot  always  separate  the  oflicial  character  from  their  acts ;  and  they 
are  responsible  for  the  well-being  of  the  children,  the  servants,  or  the  citizens,  whom 
they  represent.  Placed  in  such  relations,  men  may  act  in  ways  that  do  not  carry  the 
feeling  or  wish  of  those  for  whom  they  stand ;  and  so  they  may  be  the  means  of  bring- 
ing upon  them  undeserved  Divine  judgments.  The  case  of  Jonah  may  be  compared. 
The  sailors'  lives  were  imperilled  by  his  act,  though  in  it  they  had  taken  no  share. 

I.  Man  may  be  officially — or  even  by  his  temporary  relations — the  cause  of  the 

INNOCENT  SUFFERINO. 

II.  Such  cases  must  always  be  regarded  as  exceedingly  PEBPLEXiNa  and 
PAINFUL.    See  Asaph's  psalms,  and  the  discussions  in  the  Book  of  Job. 

III.  The  riuht-hearted  man  will  earnestly  seek  to  have  the  sufferino 
limited  to  himself,  and  to  this  end  will  be  ready  fully  to  acknowledge  his  personal 
guilt. 

Impress  that  our  relationships  give  the  overwhelmingly  painful  character  to  our 
sins. — K.  T. 

Ver.  2i,^Bight  feeling  concerning  giving  to  Ood.  David  apprehended  that  the  value 
of  a  gift  greatly  dejxjnds  on  the  self-denial  for  which  it  finds  expression.  CJompare  the 
very  interesting  scene  of  Abraham  negotiating  with  the  sons  of  Heth  for  the  purchase 


CH.  XXI.  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  TEE  CHRONICLES.  361 

of  the  field  and  cave  of  Machpelah.  There,  considerations  of  personal  dignity  pre- 
vented his  taking  the  property ;  and  he  felt  that  he  could  not  lay  his  beloved  partner 
down,  save  in  a  place  which  was  his  by  purchase.  Here,  in  the  case  of  David,  the 
feeling  is  a  different  one,  yet  it  is  in  full  harmony  with  the  sentiment  of  the  elder 
patriarch ;  right  religious  feeling,  the  sense  of  what  was  due  to  GK>d,  prevented  David 
from  offering  what  was  not  really  his  by  right  of  purchase.  Personal  dignity,  and  sen- 
sitiveness  to  what  is  befitting,  both  in  social  intercourse  and  in  matters  of  religion, 
have  their  appropriate  place ;  and  their  due  cultivation  is  a  part  of  Christian  duty. 
Some  account  of  the  symbolical  significance  of  the  burnt  offeriug  may  fitly  explain 
why  David  chose  this  form  of  sacrifice  as  appropriate  to  this  occasion.  Its  central  and 
characteristic  meauiug  may  be  thus  expressed  in  the  words  of  Ewald :  *'  In  this,  man's 
share  in  the  consumption  of  the  offering  altogether  vaDished.  The  sacrificer  conse- 
crated to  the  Deity  alone  the  enjoyment  of  the  whole,  and  this  not  to  punish  himself, 
or  because  he  was  punished,  on  account  of  a  special  consciousness  of  guilt  by  depri- 
vation of  sensuous  participation,  but  rather  from  frte  resolve  and  purest  self-deniah" 
Kurtz  says,  "  The  burning  by  fire  was  the  chief  point  in  this  class  of  offering,  and 
marked  it  as  an  expression  of  perpetual  obligation  to  complete,  sanctified,  self-surrender 
to  Jehovah."  The  sacrifice  was  a  solemn  declaration  that  the  offerer  belonged  wholly 
to  God,  and  that  ho  dedicated  himself,  soul  and  body,  to  him,  and  placed  his  life  at 
his  disposal  We  treat  David's  burnt  offering  as  a  typical  religious  service,  and 
consider — 

I.  That  the  value  of  all  beligious  service  lies  in  the  spirit  of  hdc  who 
RENDERS  IT.  A  bumt  offering  is  in  itself  a  valueless  and  unacceptable  thing ;  and  so 
is  every  act  of  formal  worship.  Therefore  in  the  unspiritual  days  of  later  Judaism, 
the  prophets,  as  Isaiah,  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  Grod  "  hated  "  the  mere  formalities  of 
religion,  and  found  them  a  "  weariness  "  to  him.  All  a  man's  gifts  and  acts  must;  liko 
his  words,  carry  a  feeling,  and  express  a  desire  and  purpose.  A  man  must  utter  him- 
self in  his  words,  or  his  words  will  be  worthless.  And  so  a  man  must  utter  himself  in 
his  offerings,  sacrifices,  and  services,  or  Ood  will  say  he  **  cannot  away  with  them." 
This  point  may  be  searchingly  applied  to  our  spiritual  fitness  for  present-day  services* 
Still  it  is  true  that  our  feeling  must  be  the  life  of  our  worship. 

II.  The  best  thing  we  can  express  to  God  is  our  self-detotement.  This  is  the 
main  idea  of  the  bumt  offeriug.  This  is  the  proper  feeling  cherished  by  David,  and 
expressed  in  his  sacrifice.  It  may  be  shown  as  the  ultimate  and  comprehensive  demand 
of  St.  Paul,  in  Rom.  xii.  1,  **  1  beseech  you  •  •  .  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living 
sacrifice" 

III.  Such  self-devotement  can  be  best  expressed  by  self-denial.  This  David 
felt,  and  it  led  him  to  refuse  to  offer  to  God  some  one  else's  self-denial.  He  would  have 
it  to  be  his  own  sacrifice,  the  act  of  his  own  self-denial.  Show  that  what  is  given  to  Gkxl 
should  be  a  man^s  own,  and  all  the  better  if  it  is  a  man's  own  by  conscious  effort,  and 
if  to  set  it  aside  for  God  involves  some  severe  self-mastery.  Such  self-denialB  carry 
into  expression  the  soul-feeling  which  alone  is  acceptable  to  GK)d. 

This  subject  lends  itself  to  careful  applications  connected  with  modem  religious 
worship  and  duty.  It  would  be  the  dawn  of  a  glorious  day  for  the  Church  if  every 
man  felt  as  David  did  that  he  must  utter  his  soul  to  God  in  gifts  and  offerings,  and  that 
these  must  come  out  of  his  "  own  proper  good,"  and  carry  a  noble  buiden  of  self- 
denials. — ^li.  T. 

Ver.  26. — Propitiation,  On  a  subject  of  so  much  complexity,  it  is  hardly  fitting  to 
raise  a  full  discussion  from  a  merely  iucidental  illustration,  especially  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  this  incident  is  in  harmony  with  the  Old  Testament  conceptions  of  propitiation, 
and  fuller  and  clear  doctrinal  light  has  siuce  come  in  the  teachings  of  the  apostles. 
Here  we  note  that  David  offered  himself  to  God  by  a  sacrifice,  as  a  man  convicted, 
penitent,  and  recovered  to  a  right  mind,  and  cherishing  a  spirit  of  full  consecration. 
This  offering  Gtxi  was  pleased  to  accept  by  a  symbol  of  fire,  and  to  make  a  ground  on 
which  he  could  be  propitiated.  With  the  dbtinct  understanding  that  we  do  but  touch 
one  side  or  aspect  of  a  profound  and  mysterious  subject,  and  that  to  deal  with  a  part 
fully  recognizes  the  importance  of  the  other  parts  which  go  to  make  up  the  whole,  we 
suggest  the  consideration  of  the  following  points : — 


352  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,    [cb.  xxl  1— 80. 


I.  JUDOMENT  IS  THE  DlYINE  RECOGNITION  OF  A  M AN's  WRONO  STATE.     Carefully  dls- 

tinguish  between  a  man^s  wrong  state  of  mind  and  will,  and  a  wrong  <iet.  Both  must 
be  evil  in  the  sight  of  God,  but  he  must  consider  the  wrong  state  as  more  serious  than 
the  wrong  act.  Judgment,  coming  as  it  must  in  the  human  and  earthly  spheres,  will 
always  seem  to  us  to  be  the  recognition  of  wrong  acts ;  but  when  we  come  to  see  the 
deeper  truth,  we  find  it  is  Divine  revelation  of  man's  stale,  and  due  punishment  of  it. 
This  David  found  out.  The  plague  seemed  to  be  judgment  on  his  wrong  oc/,  in  ordering 
the  "  census.**  When  he  came  to  his  right  mind,  he  found  that  it  was  Divine  recognition 
of  the  wilfulness  &nd  self-glorying  out  of  which  the  foolish  command  to  take  the  census 
had  come.  Show  that  precisely  the  convictions  which  GK>d's  judgments  aim  to  pro- 
duce arc  convictions  of  inner  wrong,  heart-evil,  sin  of  will. 

II.  Propitiation  is  the  offering  to  God  of  a  man's  state  recovered  to  bight. 
This  is  the  essence,  but,  as  may  be  seen  in  David's  example,  it  may  proi)crly  find  out- 
ward expression  in  fitting  acts.  And  this  view  helps  us  most  materially  in  our 
apprehension  of  the  propitiation  made  by  the  Lonl  Jesus  Christ.  In  the  light  of  his 
spotlessness  and  sinless  obedience,  we  can  see  that,  standing  for  man,  as  man's  Repre- 
sentative and  Head,  he  presented  to  God  man  recovered  to  right, 

IIL  Upon  the  recognition  of  man's  right  state,  judgment  can  be  removed  and 
the  sense  of  acceptance  granted.  Because  the  end  of  judgment  is  evidently  reached 
(for  we  can  only  conceive  of  Divine  judgments  as  revelatiooal  and  corrective)  and  mercy 
may  have  its  free,  unhindered  path.  And  it  therefore  appears  that  all  the  humiliations 
and  all  the  persuasions  of  the  gospel  have  this  for  their  supreme  aim,  to  bring  us  men 
into  a  right  state  so  that  we  may  actually  be  represented  by  the  infinitely  acceptable 
Son  of  God  and  Son  of  man.  For  what  Christ  pledges  on  our  behalf  we  are  bound 
actually  to  be.  But  this  further  truth  needs  to  be  here  stated,  that  Christ  is  now 
working  in  us,  by  his  Spirit,  that  right  state  of  mind  and  heart  which  he  hss,  in  his 
great  sacrifice,  pledged  us  to  win. — R.  T. 

Ver.  28. — Answer  to  prayer  consecrating  the  place  of  prayer.  It  is  noted  that  David 
felt  the  threshing-fioor  to  have  become  a  sacred  i)1ace,  precisely  because  there  he  had 
gained  the  answer  to  his  prayer.  A  similar  fouling  is  illustrated  in  the  case  of  the 
patriarchs.  Abraham  erected  his  altars  where  the  signs  of  the  Divine  favour  came  to 
nim  ;  and  Jacob  raised  his  pillow-stone  as  a  pillar,  and  consecrated  his  place  of  vision. 
Bethel,  the  house  of  God.  We  may  recognize  instances  of  the  same  kind  in  our  own 
religious  experiences.  Certain  places  are,  to  our  feeling,  peculiarly  sacred,  and  we  know 
that  they  have  gained  their  sacredness  out  of  prayer-times,  wrestling  scenes,  and 
gracious  Divine  responses.  It  appears  that  David  had  received  answer  to  his  prayer 
under  two  symbols.  (1)  By  the  descending  of  heavenly  fire  for  the  consuming  of  his 
sacrifice,  and  (2)  by  the  signt  of  the  angel  reverently  and  obeiiiently  putting  the  great 
plague-sword  back  into  its  scabbard  (vers.  26,  27).  These  outward  signs  did  but  assure 
the  fact  of  God's  gracious  answer,  and  should  not  be  thought  of  as  necessary  to  the 
answer,  or  we  may  find  difficulty  in  realizing  that  nowadays  God  answers  our  prayers, 
and  gives  us  of  the  answer  an  inward  witness  and  not  an  outward  sign. 

I.  The  freedom  of  spiritual  worship  from  all  limitations  of  place.  Every 
place  is  holy  ground.  God's  temple-dome  is  the  "  arch  of  yon  unmeasured  sky ; " 
God's  temple-area  is  the  floor  of  the  whole  earth.  This  point  may  be  illustrated  from 
the  large  variety  of  places  which  the  holy  men  of  Scripture  made  prayer-places:  e.g. 
the  inside  of  an  ark,  a  cave  in  a  mountain,  the  belly  of  a  fish,  etc.  Or  from  tiie  strik- 
ing language  of  the  Prophet  Isaiah  (Ixvi.  1) :  "  The  heaven  is  my  throne,  and  tlie 
earth  is  my  footstool :  where  is  the  house  that  ye  build  unto  me  ?  and  where  is  the 
place  of  my  rest?  "  Or  from  the  teachings  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  John  iv.  21 — 
23 :  **  The  hour  cometh,  when  neither  in  this  mountain,  nor  in  Jerusalem,  shall  ye 
worship  the  Father  .  .  .  The  true  worshippers  shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and 
in  truth.'*  This  point  being  well  established  and  efiicienlly  illustrated,  there  may  be 
shown — 

II.  The  helpfulness  that  may  lie  in  local  assocl/itions  op  worship.  There  is  a 
right  and  reasonable  attachment  to  particular  churches,  places,  and  ordinances.  Build- 
ings and  rooms  gain  a  sacredness  by  their  devotement  to  prayer  and  religious  uses.  And 
this  feeling  is  to  be  encouraged,  though  we  need  to  be  reminded  how  easily  it  may 


CH,  m.  l-3a]    THE  PIBST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  868 

become  mere  setitimeDt  and  superstition*  The  honse  of  Grod  where  onr  fathers  v/or- 
shipped  should  be  sacred  to  us.  The  sanctuary  where  the  truth  of  Qod'a  saving  love 
first  came  home  to  our  hearts  must  seem  sacred  to  us.  And  it  should  be  easier  to  win 
reverence,  worship,  and  power  of  prayer  in  such  consecrated  places. 

III.  This  apflies  to  a  man's  pebsonal  beligious  expekiekces  dt  his  pbiyatb 
BELiGious  LIFE.  Illustrate  from  such  instances  as  may  be  typified  by  an  instance  in 
the  life  of  Luther.  That  spot  in  the  forest  where  Alexis  was  struck  down  by  the  light- 
niog,  and  he  himself  spared,  must  have  been  ever  after  a  sacred  spot  to  him.  Or  take 
a  case  of  prayer  under  some  particular  pressure,  as  when  a  beloved  one,  in  sickness, 
seemed  to  be  passing  away.  Ttie  place  where  prayer  was  offered  and  answered  seems 
never  to  lose  the  hallowing  associations.  Our  lives,  indeed,  ought  to  be  full  of  conse- 
crated spots,  where  we  have  raised,  a^in  and  again,  our  pillars,  inscribing  thereon 
our  Ebenezer,  **  Hitherto  hath  the  Lord  helped  us." 

Impress  that  if  our  religion  is  to  be,  in  any  real  and  vigorous  sense,  personal,  we 
must  have  made  our  own  sacred  place.  The  sanctuaries  set  apart  for  worship  are  most 
precious  and  most  helpful,  and  the  true  hearts  in  all  the  ages  have  said^  **  Lord,  I  have 
loved  the  habitation  of  thy  house."  But  more  is  needed.  Each  man  wants  a  temple 
of  his  own,  raised  in  response  to  Divine  goodness  personally  apprehended — a  sacrod 
place  where,  with  the  fullest  emotion,  he  may  offer  his  sacrifice  of  love  and  praise^  evun 
as  David  did.— B.  T. 

Vers.  29,  30. — 77ie  relics  left  on  feeling  from  ih/e  humhling  scenes  of  life,  •*  Some 
have  supposed  that  the  terror  which  David  had  felt  at  the  si^ht  of  the  destroying  angel 
(ver.  16)  produced  a  bodily  infirmity  which  made  it  physically  impossible  for  him  to  go 
to  Gibeon ;  but  probably  no  more  than  a  moral  impediment  is  meant.  David,  knowing 
that  by  sacrifice  on  this  altar  he  had  caused  the  angel  to  stay  his  hand,  was  afraid  to 
transfer  his  ofl'erings  elsewhere,  lest  the  angel  should  resume  his  task,  and  pestilence 
again  break  out."  David  seemed  ever  after  to  see  that  sword  before  the  tabernacle.  It 
may  be  said  that  all  Divine  dealings  have  an  immediate,  and  also  a  remote  and  perma- 
nent design.  We  are  often  dwelling  on  the  immediate  lessons  that  are  impressed,  but 
probably  the  best  lessons  are  those  which  are  learned  by-and-by,  after  a  while,  when 
the  excitement  of  the  incidents  has  passed,  and  the  whole  is  taken  into  quiet  and 
serious  review.  Things  seem  so  different  when  they  are  calmly  looked  back  upon ; 
aspects  and  relations  come  into  view  which  we  had  not  previously  suspected.  We 
know  how  true  this  is  of  our  review  of  the  lives  of  those  whom  we  have  known  and 
loved ;  but  it  is  equally  true  of  the  events  and  incidents  of  our  own  lives. 

I.  A   man's  sins  and  FAILINOS  leave  THEIB  TBACES  on  CHABACTEB  and  FEELINa. 

Even  when  they  are  forgiven,  and  a  man  is  fully  recovered  from  their  influence,  be 
cannot  be  rid  of  them  altogether.  There  is  a  new  reverence,  or  a  fear  of  self,  or  a  |)erilou8 
openness  to  particular  temptation,  or  a  strange  shyness  left  behind,  of  which  the  man 
will  never  be  rid.  Illustrative  cases  from  Scripture  and  modem  life  may  be  given.  A 
good  Scripture  instance,  in  which  there  was  a  huroblinc;  ezi)erience,  but  one  free  from  the 
bitterness  of  personal  sin,  is  that  (*f  King  Hezekiah  (see  Isa.  xxxviiL  15,  '*  I  shall  go 
softly  all  my  [spared]  years  in  the  bitterness  of  my  soul "). 

II.  Such  continued  feeling  insensibly  guides  futube  conduct.  This  Is  seen  in 
the  case  of  David.  Perhaps  he  hardly  admitted  to  himself  what  it  really  was  that 
kept  him  from  going  to  inquire  of  God  at  Gibeon.  And  so  we  find  in  our  fcl low-men 
and  in  ourselves  singular  hesitations;  we  feel  difficulties  and  shrink  back,  when  there 
seems  no  real  occasion.  We  cannot  tell  others,  we  hardly  like  to  admit  to  ourselves, 
that  it  is  the  relic  of  some  great  stumble,  or  even  fill  I  and  sin  and  shame ;  the  very  real 
ghost  of  our  former  ilL  Compare  the  man  who,  late  in  life,  said,  remembering  bis 
riotous  youth-time,  '*I  would  give  my  right  arm  if  I  could  be  quit  of  the  evils  leit  in 
thought  from  my  youthful  sins." 

III.  Such  cx)ntinued  feeling  indicates  a  continued  sanctifying  wobk.  For  Gkxi 
graciously  uses,  not  merely  things  themselves,  but  their  after-effects.  No  influence 
has  its  bare  limits.  The  after-effects  may  differ  greatly  in  different  dispositions,  but 
some  of  God's  best  work  in  our  hearts  and  lives  is  done  by  means  of  them.  This  may 
be  illustrated  by  the  afbei^influence  exerted  on  the  Apostle  St.  Peter  by  his  ead  and 
shameful  falL    And  David  expresses  this  continuous  sanctifying  Influence  of  remembered 

L  CHBONIOLM.  2  A 


861  THE  PIBST  BOOK  OP  THE  CBRONTCLE&  [ca.  ixn.  1— 19. 

hnmblii);:!  viat  he  nya,  "  Before  I  wm  afflicted  I  went  utnj,  but  now  w31 1  keep 
thy  Word.' 

Apply  eapecially  to  tbtt  gnU  work  of  nnctifyiag,  tha  ptoduclng  of  the  httmility  of 
the  true  depeodeace.  8how  ihftt  it  ia  mott  perfectly  mought  in  the  fklten  and  for- 
Biven,  who  ever  lire  in  the  aolemn  ahadow  of  the  great  axpenenoe.— B.  T, 


CHAFfKE  XXn. 

From  the  oommeQcement  of  thii  chapter 
to  the  oloM  of  the  Firat  Book  of  the  Chro- 
nlolea  we  Kg^iia  travel  alone,  and,  wlUi 
thej  exception  of  parallel  paavgca  of  a 
merely  ordinary  character,  have  no  longer 
the  BMiatanoe  of  comparing  ditTi'rent  de- 
•oriptioni  oT  the  tame  itretchea  of  history. 
The  preeent  chapter  relates  Datid't  inte- 
letled  and  Kealoua  preparation*  for  the 
building  of  the  temple  (Ten.  1—5);  his 
eshortatioD)  and  aolemD  charge  to  hti  aoa 
and  gnccessot  (vera.  6 — 16)  i  and  afterward* 
bis  lojuactionB  to  the  "prince*  of  larael  " 
(Ton.  17 — 19)  to  help  Solomon. 

Ter.  1. — TliU  nne  eridently  belong!  to 
the  cloie  of  the  lait  cliaptar,  and  ihould 
haTS  had  iCa  place  there.  Itindioatea  a  d(«p 
eenae  of  relief  ttiat  now  riaited  David'i 
mind.  Wo  cuQ  imagine  how  he  bad  pon- 
dered often  and  long  the  "  place  (there  "  of 
the  "eicco'liog  magniUcent  "  house  wbiob 
it  was  in  liis  hvart  to  build  for  the  l^td. 
The  plaea  was  now  fonnd,  and  the  moie 
unexpected  and  "dreadful"  (Gen.  xiviii. 
17)  the  method  by  which  it  was  airivcd 
ftt,  the  more  cou*iDciDg  and  aatiafactory,  at 
all  eventa  in  some  poiut«  of  view.  The 
extraordinary  and  inipreMJTe  deaignatiag 
of  this  spot  was  in  itself  a  signal  for  an 
active  commencement  of  tbe  work,  and  made 
at  the  lame  time  such  cooimcuctment  prac- 
ticable. Solomon  and  mac;  othera  would 
afterwarda  often  tijinit,  often  speak,  of  Ihe 
"  threHhing-floor  of  Oman  the  Jebuaito"  aa 
the  place  "which  waa  shown  to  David  bis 
father,"  and  which  "David  had  prepareii" 
<2Chron. iii.  1).  Here,  then, he  builds  "  Ihe 
altar  of  burnt  ofibritig,"  aa,  on  tbe  ceigb- 
bonring  "hill  of  Zion,"  be  had  reared  ttie 
"tabernacle  for  tbe  aik." 

Ver.  2.— The  (trangan.  Theu  are  plainly 
called  in  tbe  Septungint  "proaeljlea"  (tovi 
wfeav^trrovi).  They  were,  of  course, 
foreign  workmen,  who  came  in  parauit 
of  their  trade.  The  inJnnctioDS  as  to 
"itraiiBreTS,"  and  with  regard  to  showing 
them  kindness,  are  very  numerous,  h»- 
ginning  with  Etod.  xii.  19,  48,  49:  xiii. 
£1  (20) ;  xiiii.  9 ;  Lev.  xix.  10,  33,  34 ;  xv. 
It— I6i  DeaL  x.  18,  19;  Joeh.  vui.  33—85. 


It  waa  not  David's  object  merely  to  gain 
cheap  or  compulsory  work  (2  Ctiroo.  iL  17, 
IS),  but  to  obtain  a  skill,  which  immigrants 
from  certain  places  would  poaaeaa,  in  exoeaa 
of  that  of  hi*  own  people  (2  Chron.  iL  7,  8, 
19. 14),  especially  considering  the  atiaorption 
of  Israel  in  the  punuit  of  war,  which  had 


Ver.  3. — Iron  . . .  thaJolBhun;  anlbrSM. 
The  very  Brat  Bible  moution  of  metal*  (Oen. 
iv.  22)  places  tbese  two  together.  Whence 
BolomOD  got  bis  "  abundance"  of  the  latter 
we  have  read  in  cb.  xviii.  8;  for  the  "abou- 
dance"  of  the  former  he  wunld  not  neoea- 
nriiy  go  further  than  hi*  own  land. 
Aitbiugh  the  expression,  "  the  land  whose 
(tones  are  iron"  (Deut.  vJii.  9),  I*  possibly 
enough  a  poetical  flgnie  where  it  stands, 
yet  some  of  Ihe  force  of  the  figure  may  have 
sprung  &om  its  ceemees  to  fact  The 
■bniidaut  use  of  iron  in  a  great  variety  of 
tuoia,  implcQieiita,  weapons,  and  the  know- 
ledge of  it  in  bar  and  sheet,  might  be 
illustrated  from  a  large  number  of  quota- 
tions from  Bcriptnre  (Dent.  xix.  5 ;  ixvii.  5 ; 
2  Sam.  xii.  31;  2  KJnga  vi.  5;  Isa.  i.  34 ; 
Amos  L  3;  and  many  othcre).  The  "join- 
ings "  vert.'  the  clamps  and  pUtes  of  variooa 
size  and  shape,  which  held  strongly  to- 
gether, whether  beam*  of  wood  or  block*  of 

Ver.  4. — The  glrlnwl.n.  and  thsy  of  Tyra 


Homer,  Herodotus,  and  BCrabo,  wbicb  apeak 
of  Zidon,  etc,  are  in  entire  acoonl  witli 
vihat  is  here  said,  and  are  well  worth 
perusal;  e.g.  'Iliad,'  vi.  289—295,  "And 
she  descended  to  tbe  vaulted  chamt>er, 
where  wero  the  garments  oil  embroidered, 
tbe  works  of  women  of  Bidon,  whom 
tbe  godlike  Alextinder  himself  brought 
from  bidon  when  be  crossed  tlie  wide  sea, 
by  the  way  tliat  be  brought  Helen  of  noble 
linoagc ;  "  •  Iliad,'  ixiii.  743,  7*4,  "  And  this 
veaaol  was  of  unaurpassed  fame  for  beauty 
over  all  the  land,  for  tho  men  of  Sidon,  cun- 
ning artificers,  hail  skilfully  wrought  it,  and 
rbCETiiGiaDS  had  brought  it  over  the  dark 
sea ; "  '  Odjasej,'  iv,  615—618,  "  And  it  was 
all  silver,  but  tha  borders  were  miogled 
with  gold.  It  was  the  work  of  Hephnstas. 
The  illDstrions  FbOKlemn*,  King  of  the 


en.  xxn.  1—19.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


355 


Sidonians,  gave  it  me  when  bis  palace 
sheltered    me    on    my    return    thither;" 

*  Odyssey,*  xv.  424»  "  I  boast  to  come  from 
Sidon,  famed  for  its  skill  in  the  working  of 
brass."  Similar  references  may  be  found  in 
Herodotus  (vii.  44,  96)  and  Strabo  (xvi.  2, 
§  23.  See  also  'Speaker's  Conmientary,* 
under  1  Kings  v.  6). 

Yer.  5. — Solomon  ...  is  yoxing  and 
tender.  It  is  impossible  to  fix  the  exact  age 
of  Solomon  as  marked  by  these  words.  In 
a  "fragment"  of  Eupolemus  (see  Cory's 

*  Ancient  Fragments  of  the  Phoenician,  etc., 
Writers,*  edit.  London,  1832)  he  is  put  down 
at  twelve  yeiirs  of  age.  Josephus  (*Ant 
Jud.,'  viii.  7,  §  8)  as  vaguely  supposes  he  was 
fourteen  at  the  time  that  he  took  the  throne. 
Ho  was  the  second  son  of  Bathsheba,  and 
can  scarcely  have  exceeded  the  last-men- 
tioned age  by  more  than  three  or  four  years 
(yet  comp.  1  Kings  ii.  2;  iii.  1,  7).  This 
same  language,  "youug  and  tender,"  is 
repeated  in  ch.  xxix.  1.  The  reign  of 
Solomon  lasted  forty  years  (1  Kings  xi.  42 ; 
2  Chron.  ix.  30).  He  is  called  old  (I  Kings 
xi.  4)  when  his  strange  wives  "turned 
away  his  heart  after  other  gods."  We  are 
not  told  his  age  at  the  time  of  his  death. 
There  are,  in  fact,  no  sufficient  data  for 
fixing  to  the  year,  or  indeed  within  the 
liberal  margin  of  several  years,  the  age  now 
designated  as  young  and  Under. 

Ver.  7.— (Comp.  oh.  xvii.  1,  2;  2  SauL 
vii.  2,  3.)  For  my  son,  the  Chethiv  shows 
**  his  son,"  the  Keri  substituting  "  my." 

Ver.  8.— Beoante  thou  hast  shed  much 
blood.  This  is  repeated  very  distinctly 
below  (ch.  xxviii.  3),  and  appears  there 
again  as  acknowledged  by  the  lip  of  David 
himself.  It  seems  remarkable  that  no 
previous  statement  of  this  objection, 
nor  even  allusion  to  it,  is  found.  Further, 
there  seems  no  very  opportune  place  for  it 
in  either  our  ch.  xvit  1 — 15  or  in  2  Sam. 
viL  1 — 17.  Yet,  if  it  seem  impossible  to 
resist  the  impressioii  that  it  must  have 
found  expression  on  the  occasion  referred 
to  in  those  two  passages,  we  may  fit  it  in 
best  between  vers.  10  and  11  of  the  former 
reference,  and  between  vers.  11  and  12  of 
the  latter.  So  fiar,  however,  as  our  Hebrew 
text  goes,  this  is  the  first  place  in  which  the 
statement  is  made. 

Ver.  9.— Shall  be  bom.  This  is  not  the 
necessary   translation    of  the   verb.    The 

form  nS}3  does  not  express  here  future  time. 
Solomon  was  already  bom  when  the  word 
of  the  Lord  came  to  David.  On  the  other 
hand,  we  may  suppose  special  emphasis  to 
belong  to  ttie  clause.  His  name  shall  be 
Solomon.  The  name  designates  the  man 
of  peace,  and  the  clause  is  an  announcement, 
probably  intended  to  throw  further  into  the 
shade  the  alternative  name  Jedidtah,  which 


also  had  been  divinely  given  (2  Sam.  xiL 
24,  25). 

Ver.  10. — ^The  substance  of  this  verse  is 
found  also  in  Nathan's  language  (ch.  xviL 
12,13;  2  Sam.  vii.  13,  14). 

Ver.  12. — The  father's  prayer  for  the  son, 
and  in  his  hearing  will  have  often  recurred 
to  the  memory  of  Solomon,  and  may  have 
been  the  germ  of  the  son's  own  prayer,  which 
•* pleased  the  Lord"  (1  Kings  iii  5—14; 
2  Chron.  i.  7—12). 

Ver.  13. — The  references  to  olden  time, 
and  the  pointed  reference  to  Moses,  must  be 
regarded  as  emphatic.  In  ch.  xxviii.  20  we 
find  the  additional  words,  "and  do  it," 
inserted  after  the  animated  and  intensely 
earnest  exhortation.  Be  strong,  and  of  good 
courage.  This  inspiriting  summons  was  no 
new  one.  It  was  probably  already  hallowed 
in  the  name  of  religious  language,  and 
would  be  often  quoted  (Deut.  iv.  1 ;  xxxt 
5—8;  Josh.  i.  5— 9). 

Ver.  14. — ^Now,  behold,  in  my  tronble. 
The  Septuagint,  Vulgate,  and  Luther's  trans- 
lation adopt  here  our  marginal  reading, 
"poverty."  Keil,  Bertheau,  and  others 
translate,  with  much  greater  probability, 
**  by  severe  effort,"  which  translation  may 
be  fortified^  not  only  by  such  references  as 
Gen.  xxxi.  43  and  Ps.  cxxxii.  1  (where  the 
same  root  is  found  in  Pual  infinitive),  but 
by  the  expression  evidently  answering  to 

the  present  one  in  oh.  xxix.  2  (/iH3~^3a), 
"  with  all  my  strength."  Moreover,  David 
oould  not  with  correctness  speak  of  poverty 
as  characterizing  his  condition  during  the 
time  that  he  had  been  collecting  for  the 
object  of  his  heart's  desire.  And  scarcely 
with  any  greater  oorrectness  could  he  speak 
of  the  necessary  anxieties  and  responsi- 
bilities of  his  royal  office  as  at  all  specially 
marking  this  period.  A  hundred  thousand 
talents  of  gold,  and  a  thousand  thousand 
talents  of  silver.  Our  sense  of  dissatis- 
faction in  being  able  neither  heartily  to 
accept  nor  conclusively  to  reject  this  state- 
ment of  the  quantities  of  gold  and  silver 
prepared  by  Dftvid,  may  be  lessened  in  some 
degree  by  the  statement  found  in  ver.  1€^ 
that  "of  the  gold,  the  silver,  and  the  brass, 
and  the  iron,  there  is  no  number."  Milmarp^ 
in  his  *  History  of  the  Jews'(L  266,  267, 
edit.  1830),  says  upon  the  general  subject  of 
this  verde,  "But  enormous  as  this  wealth 
(i.e.  that  of  Solomon)  appears,  the  statement 
of  his  expenditure  on  the  temple,  and  of  his 
annaal  revenue,  so  passes  all  credibility, 
that  any  attempt  at  forming  a  calculation, 
on  the  uncertain  data  we  possess,  may  at 
once  be  abandoned  as  a  hopeless  task.  No 
better  proof  can  be  given  of  the  uncertainty 
of  our  authorities,  of  our  imperfect  know- 
ledge of  the  Hebrew  weights  of  money,  and, 
above  all,  of  our  total  ignore  noe  of  the 


S56 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa  [ch.  xxn.  1— 19. 


lelative  yaluo  which  the  precious  metals 
bore  to  the  oommoditiet  of  life,  than  the 
estimate  made   by  Dr.   Prideaux    of  the 
treasures  left  by  David,  amountinpr  to  eight 
hundred  millions,  nearly  the  capital  of  our 
national  debt."    It  must  be  noted,  however, 
that  Mil  man  himself  proceeds,  when  speak- 
in)(  of  **  the  tourres  of  the  vast  wealth  which 
Solomon  undoubtedly  possessed,"  to  brin^ 
▼ery  enormous    sums  (whether  somewhat 
leas  or  even  somewhat  more  than  the  above 
estimate  of  Dr.  Prideaux)  more  within  the 
range  of  the  posnible,  to  our  imagination. 
He  justly  remarks,  for  instance,  that  it  is 
to  be  remembered  that  '*  the  treasures  of 
David  were  accumulated  rather  by  oonquest 
than  tn^c,  that  some  of  the  nations  he 
gobdued,  particularly  the  Edomltes,  were 
▼ery  wealthy.    All  the  tribes  seem  to  have 
worn  a  great  deal  of  gold  and  silver,  both  in 
their  ornaments  and  in  their  armour ;  their 
idols  were  often  of  gold  ;  and  the  treasuries 
of  tlieir   temples,  perhaps,  contained  con- 
siderable wealth.    But  during  the  reign  of 
Solomon,  almoft  the  whole  commerce  of  the 
world  passed  into  his  territories."     After 
substantiating  by  details  these  and  similar 
positions  (pp.  267 — 271),  he  sums  up,  "  It 
was  from  these  various  sources  of  wealth 
that  the    precious   metals   and  all  other 
valuable  commodities  were  in  such  abun- 
diince  that,  m  the  figurative  language  of 
the  sacred   historian,  *$ilver  was  in  Jeru- 
ealem  as  stones^  and  cedar  tree*  as  sycamores.^ " 
Since  the  date  of  Milman*8  words  just  quoted, 
however,  investigation   of   ancient  weights 
and    measures,  and  of  those  of  h;cripture, 
has  made  some  advance,  yet  not  sufficient 
to  enable  us  to  arrive  at  any  certainty  as  to 
those  of  our  present  passage.      Assuming 
that  the  text  of  our  present  verse  is  not  cor- 
rupt, and  that  the  figures  which  it  gives  are 
correct,  the  weight  and  the  value  of  the  gold 
and  silver  mentioned  are  very  great,  what- 
ever the  talent  in  question.    This  assump- 
tion, howev(?r,  cannot  be  relied  upon,  and  it 
seems  scarcely  legitimate  to  interpret  the 
talent  as  any  than  the  Hebrew  talent,  con- 
sidering the  silence  observed  as  regards  any 
other.     It  need  not  be  said  here  that  the 
exchanges  of  money  value  were  estimated  in 
these  times  by  so  much  weight  of  gold  or 
silver.    Further,  **  the  shekel  of  the  sanc- 
tuary "  (Exod.  XXX.  13 ;  Lev.  xxvii.  3),  pos- 
sibly the  same  with  "  the  shekel  after  the 
king's  weight "  (2  Sam.  xvi.  26),  and  which 
was  kept  in  the  tabernacle,  and  afterwards 
in  the  temple — was  presumably  the  standard. 
The  gold  talent  was  double  the  UDeight  of 
the    silver   talent    It   weighed   1,320,000 
grains,  instead  of  660,000.    The  silver  talent 
oontained  50  manohs,  of  60  shekels  each ; 
but  the  gold  talent  contained  100  manehs,  of 
100  shekels  each.    The  modern  money  equi- 


valents of  these  weights  are  very  uncertain. 
Both  the  silver  and  the  gold  talent  have 
been  very  variouslv  calculated  in  this 
relation.  Some  of  the  best  authorities  put 
the  silver  t'llent  at  £342  3s.  9<2.,  and  the 
gold  at  £5475.  This  would  make  the  money 
value  described  by  this  verse  nearly  nine 
hundred  millions  of  our  money.  Other 
estimates  are  considerably  in  excess  of  this 
sum,  and  but  few  fall  below  it  Vast  as  the 
sum  is,  we  may  be  helped  in  some  degree  to 
accept  it  by  the  statement  of  Pliny,  who 
C  Nat.  Hist,*  xxxiL  15)  tells  us  that  Cyrus, 
in  his  subjugation  of  Asia,  took  half  as  many 
talents  of  silver  as  are  here  mentioned,  and 
thirtv-four  thousand  pounds  of  gold  vsee 
articles  in  Smith's  *  Bible  Dictionary,'  on 
**  Mt»ney,"  and  on  **  Weights  and  Measures  "). 
Among  the  most  valuable  works  on  these 
subiects  are  De  6aulcy*s  *  Numismatique 
Judaique,'  and  F.  Madden's  'Jewish 
Coinage.' 

Ver.  15. — So  tooch.  xxviii.  21;  2  Chron. 
ii.  7,  17, 18 ;  as  well  as  vers.  2--4  of  the 
present  chapter. 

Yer.  16.— Arise  .  .  .  and  be  doing.  The 
first  and  last  words  of  Ezra  x.  4  are  found 
here,  and  noto  may  be  made  of  the  similarity 
of  tlie  expression. 

Vers.  17 — 19. — These  verses  contain 
David*s  command,  accompanied  by  urgent 
argument,  to  the  princes  of  Israel,  to  render 
their  hearty  assistance. 

Ver.  17.-^A11  the  princes ;  f.e.  those  who 
held  positions  of  authority  as  commanders, 
leaders,  elders,  heads  of  tribes,  aud  chiefs  of 
the  fathers  (ch.  xxvii.  22 ;  xxiii.  2 ;  xxviii.  1). 

Ver.  18. — The  whole  of  this  verse  should 
have  been  suggestive  of  memories  thrilling 
with  interest.  What  D.ivid  says  hero  is 
equivalent  to  the  declaration  of  the  perfect 
fulfilment  of  the  promises  of  nino  hundred 
years  ago.  By  faith  of  those  very  promises 
how  many  generations  had  lived  1  What 
journey ings,  suspense,  punishment,  and 
struggle,  the  intervening  centuries  had 
witnessed  I  And  now  at  last  it  is  given  to 
the  Up  of  the  aged  David  to  pronounce 
the  termination  of  a  nation's  prolonged  con- 
flict, its  entrance  into  peace,  and  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  most  impassioned  wishes,  ima- 
ginings, end  prayers  of  the  patriarchs,  of 
Moses,  and  of  a  long  line  of  the  faithful. 
It  was  well  for  David  that  he  could  not 
foresee  and  did  not  know  how  near  the  cul- 
minating of  a  nation's  glory  and  prosperity 
might  be  to  its  woeful  fall  and  prolonged 
decay.  The  analogy  that  obtains  in  this 
respect  between  the  history  of  an  individual 
and  of  a  nation  is  as  remarkable  as  it  should 
be  instructive  and  turned  to  the  uses  of 
warning. 

Ver.  19. — ^To  bring  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
of  the  Lord,  and  the  holy  Tsssels  of  God.    To 


% 


CH.  xxn.  1—19.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES, 


857 


settle  these  in  a  fixed  home  had  now  been 
of  a  long  time  the  oonBuming  desire  of 
David's  heart  (so  eh.  xy.  1 ;  2  Chron.  v. 
2—4).  Into  the  home  that  ii  to  be  built 
The  preposition  ^  instead  of  ^^^  before  **  the 
house,"  is  to  be  noticed  here  (oh.  xxv.  26 ; 
Keh.  z.  35).    Also  the  Kiphal  participle. 


r^pjn,  here  translated  "  that  iato  he  bnilt," 
is  to  be  noticed.  The  meaning  of  Dayid 
would  be  better  met  probably  thus :  "  Arise, 
build  the  sanctuary ...  to  bring  the  ark 
.  .  .  into  the  house  (then)  baHded  to  the 
Name  of  the  Lord." 


HOMILETICS, 

Ver.  8. — BeliginuB  enthusiasm  in  old  age^a  model  soliloquy.  This  soliloquy  exhibits 
the  settled  thought  of  years  past.  The  house  that  is  to  be  builded  fur  the  Lord, 
remaining  still  to  old  age,  the  imperial  thought  of  David's  heart.  And  we  may  notice 
that— 

I.  The  ftjbposb  that  is  hallowed  in  owninq  fob  its  chief  object  the  wblfabe 
OF  the  Church  of  God  is  one  that  does  theive  well  even  to  old  age.  Other 
designs,  projects,  and  purposes  are,  it  is  true,  often  seen  to  flourish  to  old  age  as  matter 
of  fact  But  in  innumerable  instances  how  much  better  it  had  been  if  their  fascination 
had  been  long  before  resisted,  and  their  tyrannous  demand  on  the  force  that  so  plainly 
threatens  to  ebb  had  been  long  since  denied  them  1  They  imduly  consume  strength  of 
mind  and  body.  They  inappropriately  occupy  the  strength  of  the  heart.  They  have 
really  nothing  in  common  with  the  momentous  future  that  is  so  imminent  They  oftea 
contrast  painfully  and  repulsively  with  it  Far  otherwise  was  it  now  with  David's  pur- 
pose, and  with  such  as  are  in  any  analogy  with  it  In  his  faithful  heart  a  holy  piirposa 
had  been  cherished.  It  still  stands  fast,  and  harmonizes  well  with  age— with  the 
thoughts  appropriate  to  age,  with  the  experience  and  corrector  judgments  of  age,  and 
with  its  near  prospects. 

II.  The  pubpose  that  is  hallowed  in  hayinq  fob  its  distinct  object  the  wel* 

FABE  OF  THE  ChUBCH  OF  GoD  OFFERS  AMPLE  BOOH  FOB  THE  EXEBCISE  OF  A  NOBLE  AMBI- 
TION. **  The  house  . . .  must  be  exceeding  magnifical,  of  fame  and  of  glory  throughout 
all  countries."  1.  An  exalting  force  in  human  character  finds  exercise  and  abundant 
scope  at  a  time  when  it  might  otherwise  be  on  the  decay,  or,  if  not  on  the  decay,  able 
to  find  no  really  worthy  object  2.  It  finds  exercise  not  merely  healthful  to  the  person 
who  exhibits  it,  but  of  widespread  usefulness.  Beside  personal  aspiration  after  heaven, 
its  beatific  visions,  its  perfect  holiness,  there  is  distinctly  an  ambition  which  shall 
become  a  dying  bed — the  ambition  to  leave  with  the  world  what  will  be  a  continuing 
and  growing  blessing  to  it,  and  a  lasting  witness  for  God  and  his  truth.  In  no  way, 
other  things  being  equal,  is  blessing  so  surely  given  as  when  directly  given  in  con- 
nection with  spiritual  work,  and  with  that  grandest  enterprise,  the  Church  of  Gtod. 
Where  all  other  grandeur  of  earth  must  fJEide  therefore,  and  the  eye  has  become  passion- 
less to  all  other,  its  brightest  colours,  the  Church  of  God,  as  well  material  as  spiritual, 
has  been  known  to  enter  a  successftd  competition  with  whatever  else  occupied  a  dying 
hour. 

III.  PUBPOSES  HALLOWED  THBOUGH  THEIB  CONNECTION  WITH  THE  ChUBCH  OF  QOD 
WILL  NOT  TOLEBATE  THE  BISK   OF   THEIB   GBEAT  OBJECTS   BEING   PBEJUDICED  BT  ANT 

CAUSES  AVOIDABLE.  Even  though  natural  relationship  might  have  tempted  the  risk, 
and  Divine  designation  might  have  been  pressed  into  some  warrant  of  it,  David  does 
not  for  a  moment  yield  to  it.  He  does  promptly  and  with  guarded  zealous  fore- 
thought, acknowledge  to  the  danger,  and  do  the  best  to  provide  against  it.  Religious 
princi[>le  ought  to  overcome  hereditary  instincts,  and  the  ties  of  nature  ought  not  to 
override  those  of  diviner  origin.  "  Whoso  loveth  father  or  mother  more  than  me,"  sud 
Jesus,  "  is  not  worthy  of  me."  David  was  doubtless  ^ery  proud  of  his  son,  very  tender 
of  him;  but  he  was  justly  prouder  of  the  work  of  his  God,  and  justly  tenderer  of  it  and 
its  secured  welfare.  Genuine  holy  purposes  seem  to  own  to  a  native  circumspection. 
They  seem  to  possess  a  secret  si^eguard  within  themselves.  Of  these  it  is  not  true, 
and  it  is  not  said,  that  the  children  of  nature  are  in  their  generation  wiser  than  they. 
The  forethought,  then,  that  works  so  largely  in  human  life,  and  is  so  fruitful  of  various 
good|  shows  to  great  advantage  in  such  conduct  as  that  of  David  at  this  crisis.    Thero 


353  THE  nBST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHBOXICLE&   [ch.  xxu.  1—19. 

Ate,  izAfii'l,  »?:'i^cs  in  which  it  ieat  he  ni>l  &Im«j«t  to  Mjng  to  citure  to  consider  and  to 
act  f'T  f'^uowin^  g  nentionf.  For  eo  "  the  husbac'lman  plants  many  a  tree,  no  berrj 
of  which  h«  cnn  reckon  on  liring  to  behoM.*  But  it  is  the  work  of  something  mors 
than  Lat'ire,  KizLer  than  natrire,  when  holv  purpjtsea  waken  Tig>'>ur,  fire,  enthusiasm, 
and  zt^lo^B  \z\.*jnz  in  old  are.  And  strlkinglv  are  such  purposes  distinguished  from 
those  ^^f/od  mtentions**  which  hare  won  for  themselves  a  proverbial  and  a  bad 
character. 

Ver.  8. — The  $tain  f/Uocd.  We  diatiEctly  read  here,  as  also  in  the  strcter  parallel 
of  t^is  place  (ch.  xxviii.  3),  that  it  was  because  Darid  had  **■  shed  blood  abundantly," 
had  "  shed  much  blood  on  the  earth"  in  the  sisrht  of  G<jd«  had  "^made  great  wars,**  that 
the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  him,  saying,  ^Thou  shalt  not  build  an  house  to  mj 
Name."  After  the  death  of  David  we  find  Solomon^^o  far  as  we  may  go  by  his 
]anguage--seeming  to  put  a  E<:>mewhat  different  shade  of  interpretation  on  the  matter. 
He  does  not,  indei-d,  say  anything  different  from  the  truth,  or  necessarily  inconsistent 
with  it;  but  i^erhaps  moved  by  a  son's  filial  dutifulness,  he  purposes  to  omit  those 
aspects  which  were  the  more  painful  aspects,  and  grievous  to  a  son's  lip  to  enlarge 
upon.  He  fiays  (I  Kings  v.  3),  "llion  knowest  how  that  David  my  father  could  not 
build  an  house  unto  the  Name  of  the  Lord  his  God  for  the  wars  which  were  about  him 
OD  every  i>ide,  until  the  Lord  put  them  under  the  soles  of  his  feeL"  l*his  version  is  also 
quite  con.«i.<»t<;nt  with  the  inaications  of  our  compiler  (ch.  zviL  1),  and  with  those  of 
2  Sam.  vii.  1.  With  one  fuller,  however,  and  more  plain-spoken,  from  the  honest  lip 
of  the  father  himself  to  his  son,  not  of  the  son  to  the  outer  world,  we  have  here  to  do. 
And  we  are  taught^- 

L  That  as  bCBELT  as  judgment  is  Ood's  strange  wobk,  so  surely  would  hx 

THAT  THAT  WORST  JUDGMENT,  WAR,  AND  THE  SHEDDING  OF  FELLOW-MAN^S  BLOOD  SHOULD 

BE  THE  STRANGE  WORK  OF  HIS  PEOPLE.  If  there  be  times  when  these  be  necessary,  yet 
are  they  intrinsically  **  strange  work,"  and  are  emphatically  by  the  Divine  will  to  be  so 
Regarded.  The  man  who  has  been  but  the  bare  instrument  of  this  kind  of  thins  among 
his  fellow-men  on  earth,  shall  not  be  the  man  whose  hands  shall  be  honoured  to  rear 
the  tcmyle  of  G<jd,  the  Church  of  love  and  peace,  and  of  the  perfecter  brotherhood  of 
humanity. 

II.  1'haT  THE  PREVAILING  BENT  OB  HABIT,  OR  MERE  OCCUPATION  OP  OUR  PRETIOUS 
LIFE,  WILL  NOT  UNFHEQUENTLY  AT  SOME  CRITICAL  MOMENT,  AND  ONE  WHICH  WE  MAT 
IMAGINE   TO   BE   OF   BUPKEME   IMPORT,  DECIDE   THE   LOT  THAT  SHALL   FALL  TO  U9,  OR  BE 

FORFEITED  FOB  EVER.  Sin  may  be  forgiven,  the  tyranny  of  evil  habit  may  be  broken, 
the  usurjKjr  of  the  heart's  throne  may  be  dethroned,  circumstance  may  have  been  almost 
revolutionized  ;  but  in  hard  fact,  the  things  that  have  been  cannot  be  made  as  though 
they  had  not  l)een,  nor  shall  we  be  counted  as  though  they  had  not  been.  Some  stains 
are  very  stubborn  things.  And  they  are  not  superstitiously  but  legitimately  regarded 
such.  The  stain  of  blood  is  notoriously  of  this  description.  Two  such  contrasts  as 
Cain  and  David  attest  it.  Contrasts  violent  as  the  savage  sacriiices  of  heathendom 
through  unnumbered  ages  and  those  of  revelation  illustrate  it.  But  the  tremendous 
demonstration  jtsclf  may  be  held  to  come  from  the  mark,  the  sprinkling,  the  efficacy  of 
that  bloo<l  of  which  they  once  cried  out,  let  it  "  be  on  us  ana  on  our  children."  On 
these  both  the  dreadful  stain  of  it,  and  the  infinite  virtue  of  it,  have  been  from  time  to 
time,  and  still  are,  and  shall  be.  Yet  how  many  imixjitant  and  solemn  illustrations  of 
the  same  principle  there  are  which  shall  fall  very  far  short  of  those  that  bloodshed 
offers,  David's  habit  in  this  sort,  nevertheless,  our  typical  warning  all  the  while !  The 
element  of  doubtfulness  in  your  profession,  your  business,  your  tactics,  your  line  of 
well-known  conduct  awhile,  may  prove  to  lie  just  in  this,  the  irresistible  suspicion 
which  they  shall  inevitably  engender  in  the  better  part  of  human  nature,  in  its  higher 
instmcts — in  a  word,  in  the  humaner  portion  of  humanity.  That  suspicion  need  be 
voted  no  freak  of  caprice,  of  superstition,  of  mock  purity.  It  is  a  suspicion  of  the  kind 
safe  to  incur  itself.  And  it  may  be  distinctly  noted  that  it  is  incurred :  1.  By  the 
unwela/me,  unsavoury  nature  of  the  actual  dteds  asked  or  invoh'ed.  Though  haply  it 
be  necessary  that  these  be  done,  yet  in  good  men's  minds  there  shall  be  a  veiled  revulsion 
from  the  touch  of  the  hand  that  is  the  minister  of  them.  2.  By  the  quality  of  cha- 
ruder,  which  they  are  plainly  calculat(d  to  beyet  or  to  foster.    One  that  may  betoken 


CH.  xxn.  1-19.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  859 

disparagement  of  thought,  of  feeling,  of  human  inalienahle  rights,  which  should  he  held 
ever  sacred.  3.  By  their  resolute  owning  to  the  endowment  of  an  unavoidable  tenacity 
of  life.  They  have  a  name  to  live,  though  not  an  enviable  name.  They  will  make 
their  name  to  he  heard  when  their  doer  would  heartily  wish  they  had  never  lived  at  alL 
They  insist  on  reappearing,  and  brighten  out  to  vision  at  times  the  most  inopportune. 
III.  That  he  who  now  befubes  the  nobler  service  of  David,  though  AooEPriNa 

THE  purpose  of  HIS  HEART,  IB  HE  SOME  OF  WHOSE  MIGHTIEST  TITLES  B0X7ND  OF  BATTLE 

AND  VICTORY.  The  force  of  the  lessons  suggested  to  us  by  this  passage  certainly  suffer 
no  loss  when  we  note  an  inconsistency  which  justifies  itself  in  the  very  speaking  of  it 
Vengeance,  retribution,  ultimate  punishment,  human  blood,  human  life,  lie  all  specially 
within  the  one  supreme  jurisdiction.  And  though  doubtless  God  devolves  the  execution 
of  these  into  the  hands  of  others,  the  right  of  them  he  does  not  devolve.  For  David, 
for  kings,  for  statesmen,  for  every  man,  the  danger  is  that  he  encroach  a  hair's  breadth 
upon  such  a  right.  Now  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  armies,  the  mighty  Man  of  war, 
the  Captain,  the  Avenger,  the  glorious  Victor,  is  he  alone  to  whom  could  safely  attadi 
the  vast  trust  of  human  life  and  destiny,  and  the  prerogative  of  the  unquestioned  dispo- 
sition of  them.  It  is  he  who,  those  titles  of  his  own  notwithstanding,  pronounces  the 
word  that  David  shall  not  be  the  honoured  builder  of  the  temple,  that  olden  type  of  the 
Church.  Not  because  the  object  was  not  a  good  one,  not  because  the  purpose  of  David's 
heart  was  an  impure  or  mingled  one,  but  because  it  had  fallen  so  often  to  David  to 
pour  on  the  ground  the  life-blood  of  his  fellows  which  the  Church  comes  to  save,  there- 
fore was  the  prohibition  peremptory.  Nor  is  any  respite  of  allowance  granted  to  the 
indisputable  fact,  that  many  of  David's  wars  had  bsen  under  Divine  sanction  and 
by  Divine  command.  Yet  is  there  herein  no  mystery  of  Divine  sovereignty  to  be 
pondered,  no  inscrutableness  of  ^  the  things  hidden  "  to  be  adored.  For  human  feeUng, 
humoL  instinct,  reason's  convictions  and  calmest  utterances  justify  and  approve  tho 
verdict. 

Vers.  11—13. —  The  aged  hinges  charge  to  his  son  and  successor.  The  language  of 
David  to  his  son  here,  and  shortly  afterwards  to  the  princes  of  the  kingdom,  indicate 
well  his  recognition  and  lively  memory  of  the  fact  that  stone  and  wood,  gold  and  iron, 
will  need  williog  hands,  earnest  minds,  devoted  hearts,  and  that  even  the  best  mateiial 
of  doctrine  and  truth  will  lie  dead  without  the  energy  of  the  will  and  the  living  Spirit 
The  present  utterances  of  David's  lips,  though  somewhat  various,  go  together  to  make 
what  may  still  be  correctly  called  one  charge.  And  this  charge  is  formulated  ia 
words  of — 

I.  Direct  address  and  incitement.  David  uses  the  direct  human  means.  He  looks 
upon  his  son.  He  speaks  as  a  father  to  his  son.  With  these  natural  aids  of  human 
look  and  voice  he  appeals  to  him,  and  remembers  that  the  memory  of  them  may  possess 
an  influence  of  incalculable  helpfulness  at  some  critical  moments  in  time  to  come.  It 
is  not  sufiBcient  that  we  think  and  pray  over  God's  work  and  over  others.  We  must 
use  that  word  as  a  weapon,  and  wield  it  with  all  such  force,  both  of  kind  and  of  degree, 
as  may  be  open  to  us.  So  to  preaching  and  teaching  the  best,  the  purest,  and  the  most 
prepared  of  Divine  truth,  we  must  add  the  instrument  of  appeal.  That  appeal  must  he 
in  God's  name,  and  must  consist  of  his  truth,  but  it  must  still  be  our  appesu,  warm  with 
the  love  and  sympathy  of  the  heart  of  a  fellow-creature,  and  quivering  with  the  anxious 
tones  of  a  fellow-creature's  voice.  And  in  carrying  out  these  methods,  however  unde- 
signedly, David :  1.  Announces  the  opportunity  that  lies  before  his  son.  He  will  not 
suffer  any  risk  in  the  matter,  but  constrains  his  son  to  look  at  the  opporttmity,  secures 
his  surveying  it  in  something  of  its  proper  dimensions.  Solomon  was  very  young  still ; 
but  youth  often  uneier-estimates  the  dimensions  of  the  things  that  are  greatest  of  all. 
Just  as  the  vast  scenery  that  the  eye  looks  on  for  the  first  time  seems  to  have  been 
over-described  and  exaggerated,  till  the  truth  grows  on  the  eye  day  after  day,  and 
month  after  month,  and  that  eye  becomes  educated  to  estimate  magnitude  more 
correctly.  David,  therefore,  fixes  attention,  at  all  events,  upon  the  grandeur  of  the  oppor- 
tunity which  has  now  fallen  to  the  lot  of  a  very  young  man-—"  Build  the  house  of  the 
Lord  thy  God."  2.  Emphasizes  the  value  of  the  suggestions  arising  from  a  fathef's 
experience,  David  has  not  concealed  from  his  young  son  what  it  had  been  in  himself 
which  had  stood  in  the  way  of  his  accomplishing  his  own  desire.    It  is  not  always  to 


360  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,    [oh^  xxii.  1— 10. 

be  expected,  nor  always  wise  or  riizht,  that  a  father  *'make  a  clean  breast  of  it "  to  a 
young  son.  But  David  has  done  this  now,  and  adds  advice,  and  the  tones  of  an  earnest 
deep  feeling  which  failed  not  to  betray  itself.  3.  Urges  the  far  more  potent  inducement 
of  the  Divine  dt  signation.  "  Build  the  house  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  as  he  hath  said  of 
thee."  Ifsomewliat  veiled,  this  is  in  e£fcct  the  strong  argument  enwrapt  in  St.  Paulas 
ezhorlAtion,  "Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling, /or  it  is  Qud  that 
worketh  in  yon  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure  "  (Phil.  ii.  12,  13).  What  a 
tremendous  force  has  developed  itself  from  the  midst  of  all  the  weakness  of  human 
powers,  when  tlicse  have  heard  and  surrendered  themselves  to  the  Divine  colli  Nothing 
80  disarms  as  ttio  consciousness  that  God  and  his  truth  are  Against  you ;  and  nothing 
fills  the  heart  with  such  tnie  fire  and  such  abiding,  growing  determination  as  the  happy 
contrary.  4.  Appeals  to  the  principle  of  tanctified  courage.  '*  Be  strong,  and  of  good 
courage;  dread  not,  nor  be  dismayed."  The  strength,  the  coura.s^e,  the  fearlessness,  not 
such  as  should  have  to  be  shown  against  any  outer  f«^,  but  against  the  foe  who  must  be 
feared  from  within.  To  fear  responsibility  rather  than  to  dare  it,  is  one  thing ;  to  run 
away  from  duty,  from  high  endeavour,  from  difticult  enterprise  because  of  responsibility, 
is  another  things  and  an  ignoble  thing.  Against  temptation  of  this  kind  even  a  man's 
natural  courage  should  largely  defend  him,  much  more  should  godly  courage. 

II.  Indirect  address,  as  overheard,  for  ikstance,  in  the  suggestions  of  fekvemt 
PBAYER.  Of  all  malevolent  influences,  one  of  the  mo&t  disastrous  is  when  the  impression 
is  pnxluced  upon  one  that  he  is  "  prayed  against"  Of  all  tendering,  melting  influences, 
one  of  the  most  eflVctive  has  been  ohserve<l  to  be  when  genuine  prayer  has  been  oi^er- 
heard  ;  the  person  praying  unconscious  thereof,  and  the  (person  prayed  for  convinced  of 
the  same.  But  in  this  case  David  wishes  his  young  son  to  hear  and  knew  his  prayer 
ond  deei)est  desires  for  him.  And  Solomon  hears  therein  :  1.  The  prayer  that  speaks 
gentle^  thoughtful  afftction.  "The  Lord  be  with  theo" — the  unchauging,  almighty, 
unerring  Friend.  This  petition,  too  familiar  to  our  ear,  too  little  familiar  to  our 
thought,  knows  no  limit  of  time,  sets  no  bound  to  help,  begs  constant  mercy,  constant 
love.  2.  The  prayer  that  suggests  the  mtmory  of  need — the  need  of  "wisdom  and 
understanding."  Amid  high  ix)sition,  great  power,  immense  wealth  and  glory,  David 
will  not  have  his  son  forget  the  need  of  that  "  wisdom  and  understanding  "  which  were 
more  precious  than  rubies,  and  above  all  price.  Nor  will  he  have  him  forget  that  from 
God  alone  are  these  to  be  derived.  And  the  exceeding  importance  that  David  attaches 
to  the  possession  of  these  is  further  indicated  by  the  word  "  only."  If  only  these  are 
given  by  the  Giver  of  all  good,  if  only  these  are  treasured  by  his  son,  all  else  may  be 
trusted  to  go  well.  3.  The  prayer  that  honours  obedience,  Solomon  must  "  keep  the 
Law  of  the  Lord  his  God;'*  he  must  "  take  heed  to  fulfil  the  stitutes  and  judgments 
with  which  the  Lord  charged  Moses  concerning  Israel."  His  principle,  his  idea,  his 
habit — none  of  these  must  look  the  way  of  doing  his  own  will,  ruling  for  his  own  ends 
or  glory.  He  is  but  a  viceii^erent  over  God*s  people,  and  follows  in  tiiis  respect  the 
greatest  exemplars  and  models  of  his  people  from  most  ancient,  most  honoured  times. 
God  had  so  "  cliarged"  Moses  concerning  Israel,  that  Moses  had  for  the  most  part  been 
obedient  and  "faitiiful  as  a  servant;  "  and  David  prays  that  a  similarly  gracious,  con- 
descending, and  commanding  "  charge  "  may  be  vouchsafed  to  Solomon,  and  heard  and 
"  kept "  by  Solomon.  4.  The  prayer  that  authoritatively  pronounces  the  embryo 
blessing.  **  Then  shalt  thou  prosper."  So  this  charge,  both  for  its  matter  and  for  its 
manner,  for  its  following  the  precedents  of  wise  human  means,  and  foi  its  imploring  the 
Divine  blessing  and  unhesitatingly  avowing  the  ix2rp:?tnal  need  cf  Divine  interposition, 
was  well  adapted  to  produce  lasting  impression  on  Solomon.  What  couU  the  loving 
father  and  the  dying  king  do  more  for  his  people,  for  his  son,  for  his  God  ? 

Ver.  19. — The  aged  king's  parting  injunctions  to  the  prinren  of  his  kingdom.  There 
both  seems  to  have  been,  and  on  many  accounts  it  is  likely  that  there  was^  much 
savouring  of  the  despotic  in  the  position  of  the  kings  of  Israel,  and  this  even  in  their 
best  times.  It  was  in  part  the  purposed  and  just  result  of  their  Divine  call  to  the 
office  they  were  to  hold.  And  the  despotic  disposition  was  often  as  inconspicuous  as 
could  be  desired.  The  characteristic  evils  of  the  desjx>tic  temper  did  not  push  them- 
selves into  any  prominence,  did  not  even  make  themselves  visible,  so  long  as  that  king 
divinely  designated  remembered  faithfully  to  hold  himself  at  the  sovereign  disposal  of 


CH.  xxn.  1— 19.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHKONICLES.  86t 

the  King  of  kings.  Bat  when  this  was  not  the  case,  they  developed  rapidly  and 
disastrously.  It  is  nevertheless  abundantly  plain  that,  when  the  authority  and  voice 
of  the  good  kins;  sounded  most  absolute,  the  facts  of  human  life  and  character  were  not 
disregarded.  Full  account  was  made  of  them,  and  the  nature  of  human  society  was 
religiously  respected.  Hence,  at  the  present  time,  David  calls  on  the  princes  of  the 
kingdom,  as  well  as  on  his  own  son  and  successor.  He  calls  on  them  to  close  up  their 
ranks  round  him,  and  addresses  them  as  though  they  were  truly  the  responsible  props 
of  the  throne.  He  intreats  them  to  co-operate  with  Solomon  as  sympathizing  fellow- 
labourers  in  a  grand  religious  enterprise.  Such  association  of  subjects  with  ruler  it 
necessary  to  bind  together  strongly  and  safely  the  framework  of  any  community  fit 
to  be  called  sound.  Disintegration  inevitably  sets  in  with  the  deceitful  interstices 
often  found  between  class  and  class,  or  between  ruler  and  ruled.  We  may  notice  hera 
how  David^ 

I.  Sketches  the  elements  op  a  nation's  opportunity.  These  elements  in  the 
present  instance  are  found  in:  1.  The  fact  that  there  is  trustworthy  ground /or  being 
sure  that  the  Lord  is  on  the  side  of  his  people.  He  is  with  them,  and  if  so,  they  may 
feel  that  they  have  One  with  them  far  greater  than  all  they  who  are  against  them. 
Confidence  in  a  good  cause  is  a  great  moral  help  and  support.  The  confidence  that 
comes  of  knowing  that  in  the  last  resort  one  has  a  strong  friend,  is  otten  a  ereat 
strength.  But  to  have  God  on  one's  side  is  to  have  both  these  in  one.  It  is  to  have 
all  in  one.  He  will  not  be  found  with  a  bad  cause.  And  he  brings  unerring  wisdom, 
perfect  knowledge,  and  an  omnipotent  arm  into  the  field.  Nor  is  the  consciousness  of 
the  presence  and  favourable  regard  of  the  Lord  of  less  significance  when  not  the  works 
of  war  but  those  of  peace  are  in  question.  Thought  and  works  of  skill  and  cunning 
invention,  of  beauty  and  of  wisdom,  memory  and  reason,  and  the  highest  attempts  and 
successes  of  imagination,  all  lie  open  to  his  inspiration.  ''The  inspiration  of  the 
Almighty  giveth  them  understanding  **  (Job  xzxii.  8).  And  an  even  special  stress  is 
repeatedly  laid  upon  the  efi'ects  of  this  condescending  presence  upon  the  intelligence  and 
the  humble  works  of  man,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  matter  of  the  preparation  of  the 
materials  used  in  the  construction  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  wilderness  (Ezod.  zxzi. 
1 — 6).  And  this  may  be  called  the  central  element  in  David's  suggestions  as  to  the 
opportunity  now  before  his  nation.  2.  The  (ibsence  of  external  causes  of  anxiety  and 
apprehension.  Worldly  care  is  no  doubt  a  part  of  the  necessity,  the  discipline,  the 
improving  education  of  the  present  life.  But  the  distraction  of  it  often  has  hindered 
the  noblest  developments  of  the  powers  that  lie  in  human  nature.  These  noblest  efiforts 
need  the  '*  united  heart,"  the  undivided  zeal ;  and  if  you  are  to  soar  aloft,  yours  must 
be  an  unbroken  wing.  A  nation's  life  has  times  without  number  illustrated  all  this  on 
a  large  scale.  By  severe  effort  the  individual  may  occasionally  triumph  over  distraction, 
but  the  mass  are  interested  in  and  follow  but  one  thing  at  a  time.  3.  The  sense  of 
rest/ulness  now  the  portion  of  the  people.  Their  own  dwelling-place,  home,  the 
earthly  Canaan,  at  aU  events, — these  are  now  their  portion.  And  the  spontaneous 
suggestion  of  them  is  some  grateful  earnest  tribute  forthcoming  to  their  Giver.  Home 
is  for  rest ;  rest  is  for  work.  Security  is  not  to  produce  the  fruit  of  sluggishness,  but  to 
yield  that  kind  of  *'  quietness  and  confidence "  that  shall  make  into  strong,  calm, 
determined  purpose. 

II.  Makes  a  stbonq  appeal  to  the  leadebs  of  the  nation  to  use  to  the  full 
THE  opportunity.  This  appeal  is  twofold.  1.  It  asks  the  enthusiasm,  the  devotion^ 
ihefuU  afection  of  heart  and  soul,  in  the  first  place.  These  must  be  "set  to  seek  the 
Lord  God."  They  must  not  be  left  to  take  their  hopeful  chance,  or  chance  more  or  less 
hopeful ;  they  must  be  charged  to  rise  to  their  higlier  selves.  '*  My  soul,  wait  thou 
only  upon  Gud."  Some  men  of  God  of  old  recognized  very  distinctly  how  it  devolved 
upon  them  to  take  their  own  heart,  to  talk,  reason  with  it,  urge  it,  ''stir  up  its  good 

fift,"  and  lay  upon  it  its  solemn  responsibility,  its  high  privilege.  2.  It  asks  the 
onesly  of  action.  Great  afiections  will  pine  without  the  bracing  effects  of  exercise  and 
trial  and  strenuous  enterprise.  Innumerable  great  purposes  have  come  to  ruin ;  and 
the  wreckage  has  been  visible  enough  and  mournful  enough.  But  the  inner  invisible 
wreck  that  has  come  of  purposes  great  and  holy,  which  never  saw  the  light,  never 
dared  the  breath  of  criticism,  nor  the  winds  of  opposition,  has  been  a  thousandfold 
mournful  and  fatal.    So  David  specifies,  if  not  details^  yet  the  leading  divisions  <rf 


362  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,    {ce.  xxn.  1^19. 

practical  duty  now.    **  Arise  •  .  .  build  the  sanctuary  •  •  •  bring  the  ark  of  de  oovenanty 
.  .  •  and  the  holy  vessels  into  the  bouse,**  when  ''  built  to  the  Kame  of  the  Lord.** 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  B.^-'Preparation  far  the  temple,  A  site  having  been  secured  for  the  house  oi 
the  LorJ,  the  next  thing  to  be  done  was  to  make  what  preparations  wore  possible  in 
view  of  the  great  undertaking.  David's  forethought  and  hberality,  as  described  in  this 
passaj^,  are  deserving  of  our  afimiration.  Not  permitted  to  do  the  work  himself,  he 
was  allowed  to  commence  and  carry  forward  preparations  for  the  construction  of  the 
temple.    The  considerations  which  led  to  thb  course  of  action  were— > 

I.  The  greatness  and  olobt  of  the  wobk  to  be  execcted.  A  house  for  the 
Lord,  the  Eternal,  whom  *'  the  heaven  and  the  heaven  [of  heavens  cannot  contain," 
a  house  which  should  be  "  exceeding  ma.:;nifical,"  obviously  needed  vast  and  prolonged 
and  costly  preparation.  Masonry,  metals,  cedar-wood,  joinery, — all  were  made  ready 
beforehand  by  the  provident  generosity  of  the  king.  Thus,  when  the  time  came  to 
build,  it  was  found  that  much  was  already  prepared  for  the  workmen's  hands. 

IL  The  youth  akd  ikexpebience  of  the  prince  who  was  to  cabbt  out  thk 
project.  As  this  was  David's  own  son,  it  was  natural  that  a  kind  consideration  of  the 
difficulties  of  the  enterprise  committed  to  him  should  govern  David's  conduct  Grreat 
interest  gathers  round  a  young  monarch,  especially  if  he  comes  to  the  throne  at  a  time 
when  great  things  are  expected  of  him,  or  when  his  position  is  encompassed  with 
difficulties.  Solomon  was  *'  young  and  tender,**  and  it  was  natural  and  right  that  his 
experienced  father  should  take  measures  to  lighten  the  burden  which  Providence 
designed  to  fall  upon  the  youthful  and  inexperienced. 

III.  His  OWN  INTEREST  IN  THE  WOBK.  David  would  fain  have  undertaken  the  great 
enterprise  himself.  His  mind  conceived  the  purpose  which  his  son  was  appointed  to 
execute.  He  sacrificed  self,  and  sank  his  personal  ambition  in  the  great  project. 
Reverence  and  gratitude  to  the  God  to  whom  he  owed  so  much  induced  him  to 
acquiesce  in  the  ai)]X)intmcnt  of  Divine  wisdom,  and  to  further  the  undertaking,  if 
not  in  his  own  way,  yet  in  God's. 

Practical  application.  1.  The  consU^cfion  of  the  Lord's  spiriiual  temple  is  a 
work  in  which  it  behoves  all  Christians  to  take  a  deep  interest.  There  groweth  "an 
holy  temple  unto  the  Lord."  In  this  temple  Christ's  people  are  not  only  living  stones, 
they  are  active  builders.  They  wrong  themselves  and  their  Saviour,  if  they  are 
absorbed  in  their  own  petty  plans  and  negligent  of  this  great  cause  which  should 
excite  the  attention  and  sympathy  of  all.  2.  Jiven  though  our  part  in  this  work  he 
subordinate  and  unnoticeable^  we  should  not  slight  the  privilege  granted  us.  Our  work 
may  be  underground  work  which  no  one  sees,  or  preparatory  work  which  no  one 
values  at  its  true  worth.  But  if  God  has  assigned  it  to  us,  let  us  count  it  an  honour  to 
work  for  him.  3.  In  the  service  of  God  we  may  be  fellow-helpers  one  of  another.  As 
David  and  Solomon  wroup;ht  in  harmony,  so  should  all  the  builders  in  the  spiritual 
temple.  Sympathy  and  co-operation  distinguish  the  sanctified  activities  of  the  Lord's 
servants.  4.  Our  time  for  work  is  short.  Death  will  soon  call  upon  us  to  lay  down 
the  implements  of  toil.  Let  us  therefore  work  while  it  is  day,  "  for  the  night  cometh 
when  no  man  can  work." — T. 

Vera.  11 — 13. — Fatherly  wishes  and  prayers.  David  was  not  satisfied  to  make 
material  preparations  for  the  erection  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  He  had  something 
more  valuable  than  metals  and  stone  and  timber  to  give  his  son,  in  view  of  the  great 
work  which  it  should  devolve  upon  him  to  execute.  He  gave  to  Solomon  his  coun- 
sels and  his  prayers.     In  these  verses  David— 

I.  Lays  down  the  conditions  and  qualifications  op  sttccessful  work  fob  the 
Lord.  These  are :  1.  Intellectual  gifts, "  wisdom  and  understanding."  If  bodily  strength 
is  a  gift  from  the  Lord,  much  more  is  vigour  and  versatility  of  mind.  A  curse  when 
employed  in  the  service  of  self  and  sin,  these  endowments  become  a  precious  and 
unspeakable  blessing  when  consecrated  to  the  cause  of  God.  2.  A  position  of  influence 
and  authority,    Solomon  had  "charge  concerning  Israel."    All  who  by  birth,  station. 


OH.  xxn.  1-19.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  363 


position,  or  office  have  special  influence  over  others  have  also  special  responsibilities. 
This  is  true,  not  only  of  political,  but  also  of  social  and  educational  influence.  3. 
Beverent  regard  to  Qod's  unll.  Solomon's  strength  was  in  **  keeping  the  Law  of  tho 
Lord,"  in  "  taking  heed  to  fulfil  the  statutes  and  judgments  which  the  Lord  charged 
Moses  with  concerning  Israel."  4.  A  fearless  and  courageous  spirit.  This  seems 
natural  to  some  men ;  but  in  those  naturally  self-distrustful  courage  may  be  cultivated 
by  an  habitual  reliance  upon  the  grace  and  promises  of  God.  6.  Above  all,  the  presence 
of  the  Lord,  If  he  be  with  his  servants,  his  work  shall  prosper  in  their  hands.  Here 
David  also — 

II.  Expresses  his  heart's  desike  and  prayer  on  his  son's  behalf.  We  read 
David's  heart  in  these  utterances.  Whilst  his  judgment  as  to  the  conditions  of  pros- 
perity are  laid  down,  how  devoutly  does  he  desire  that  success  may  crown  Solomon's 
efforts,  that  the  work  of  the  Lord  may  be  accomplished  I  It  was  natural  to  the  King 
of  Israel  to  shape  his  wishes  into  prayers;  the  wishes  of  so  pious  a  man  could  be 
nothing  less  than  prayers.  His  heart's  desire  for  his  son  was  this — The  Lord  be  with 
thee  1  give  thee  all  qualifications  and  all  help  in  his  service ! 

Practical  lessons.  1.  Eegard  and  seek  ail  means  of  usefulness.  Especially  should 
the  young  prize  every  means  gf  serving  their  generation  according  to  the  will  of  God, 
Nothing  is  to  be  despised  or  rejected  which  can  tend  to  bring  about  an  end  so  desirable. 
2.  In  the  acquisition  and  employment  of  all  means  of  usefulness,  neglect  not  thos§ 
habits  of  prayer  which  will  tend  to  make  those  means  abundantly  efficacious, — T. 

Ver.  16. — "  Be  doing,^^  When  David  had  done  all  that  lay  in  his  power,  ho  com- 
mended the  rest  to  his  son  Solomon.  The  son  was  not  to  rest  in  indolence  because  the 
father  had  wrought  with  zeal  and  given  with  liberality.  Nor,  because  assured  of  the 
approval  and  the  help  of  Heaven,  was  he  to  remit  diligence  and  devotion.  This  David 
clearly  impressed  upon  him  in  addressing  to  Solomon  the  brief  but  stirring  admonition 
of  the  text :  "  Arise,  and  be  doing,  and  the  Lord  be  with  thee."  The  summons  may 
well  be  addressed  to  every  Christian  heart. 

I.  Man's  nature  is  active.  We  are  made,  not  only  to  think  and  to  feel,  but  to  do. 
The  contemplative  man,  if  his  contemplations  have  no  influence  upon  his  life,  is  justly 
despised.  "  In  all  labour  there  is  profit."  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it 
with  thy  might." 

XL  The  demands  of  human  existence  are  for  action.  The  world  in  which  we 
find  ourselves  corresponds  to  the  nature  with  which  we  are  endowed.  In  every  position 
of  life  there  is  a  loud  call  for  activity.  Without  exertion  and  labour  no  good  can  be 
accomplished. 

III.  The  summons  of  true  religion  is  to  activity.  The  sloth  of  men  may  some- 
times misinterpret  religion ;  may  endeavour  to  persuade  them  that  all  they  need  is  to 
believe  the  truth,  and  to  feel  deeply  when  religious  truth  is  addressed  to  them.  But 
the  Scriptures  give  no  countenance  to  such  errors,  but  teach  us  to  "show  our  faith  by 
our  works,"  and  so  prove  the  sincerity  of  our  love. 

IV.  The  example  of  Christ  is  an  example  of  activity.  He  both  did  tho  will  of 
his  Father  and  taught  men  to  do  likewise.  This  was  his  meat  and  drink ;  of  this  he 
never  wearied.     "  He  wrought  the  works  of  him  that  sent  him  while  it  was  day." 

V.  The  blessing  of  God  may  be  expected  to  rest  upon  sanctified  activity. 
The  Holy  Spirit  of  God  alike  inspires,  directs,  and  prospers  the  labours  of  his 
people.— T. 

Ver.  18. — "  Best  on  every  side,^  David  had  a  word  of  encouragement,  not  only  for 
his  son,  but  for  the  princes  of  the  kingdom.  Solomon  would  need  their  aid  in  achieving 
his  great  undertaking.  The  king  pointed  out  to  them  that  the  peace  and  prosperity 
established  by  Divine  Providence  were  an  indication  of  his  will  that,  relieved  from 
foreign  anxieties,  they  should  devote  themselves  to  the  service  of  Jehovah  at  home,  in 
their  own  land,  their  own  capital,    "  Hath  he  not  given  you  rest  on  every  side  ?  " 

I.  Observe  the  nature  of  the  rest  here  spoken  of.  It  is  not  rest  from  labour ; 
that,  except  for  temporary  relaxation,  is,  for  the  most  part,  not  desirable  in  this  world, 
where  so  much  has  to  be  done  for  God  and  for  man.  It  was  rest  from  their  enemies, 
rest  from  war,  rest  from  hindrances,  disturbances,  harassmcnts;  from  the .  aboriginal 


8C4  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ch.  xxii.  1—19. 


Inhabitants  of  the  land,  and  from  the  heathen  tribes  and  nations  aroond.  It  la  a 
blessing  for  any  nation  to  bo  at  peace. 

II.  C0K8IDER  THE  MEAKS  BT  WHICH  THIS  BEST  WAS  8ECUBED.      The  feign  of  DaVld 

had  been,  on  the  whole,  one  of  strife  and  warfare.  Such  a  condition  of  things  was  not 
desirable  on  its  own  account,  lor  its  own  sake.  The  end  of  efifort,  counsel,  even  war 
itself,  is  the  rest  of  i^eace. 

III.  Consider  the  purposes  for  which  such  best  is  iktekded.  Not  for  sloth, 
luxury,  and  6elf-iudul<;ence ;  but  in  order  that  the  work  of  God  may  go  forward 
unhindered,  and  with  growing  and  conspicuous  prosperity.  It  was  a  noble  use  to 
which  the  peaceful  rciiin  ot  Solomon  was  put — the  erection  of  the  temple  unto  the 
Lord.  And  whenever  God  in  his  providence  grants  a  nation  rest  on  every  side,  it  is  a 
probation  of  national  faithfulness,  to  see  whether  the  precious  opportunity  will  be  used 
aright  for  the  development  of  national  resources,  for  the  advancement  of  education  and 
social  well-being,  and  for  the  furtherance  of  genuine  and  practical  religion. — T. 

Ver.  19. — "Arise,  and  huild.^  Before  the  old  king  died,  he  wished  to  see  his 
■nccessof  s  work  in  train  and  order.  Accordingly,  both  to  Solomon  and  to  the  princesy 
David  addressed  stirring  words  of  admonition.  And  as  what  he  had  most  at  heart  was 
the  erection  of  the  temple,  it  was  natural  that  he  should  lay  the  greatest  stress  upon 
this  vast  and  glorious  undertaking. 

L  Note  first,  as  here  described,  the  nature  akd  character  of  the  BiriLDiNa. 
It  was  "  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord  God ; "  it  was  to  be  built  '*  to  the  Name  of  the 
Lord.**  A  Divine  dwelling,  a  habitation  for  the  Most  IIi;;h,  a  holy  place.  In  all  this 
an  emblem  of  the  temple  of  our  Saviour's  body,  and  of  that  spiritual  house  which  is  the 
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

II.  Remark  next,  the  purpose  of  the  building.  It  was  to  contain  *'  the  ark  of  the 
covenant  of  the  Loid,  and  the  holy  vessels  of  God."  That  is  to  say,  it  was  not  only 
the  locality  of  God's  manifested  presence,  but  it  was  the  scene  of  sacrifice  and  worship 
and  the  centre  of  the  nation's  religion.  This  gave  a  practical  and  political  signifi- 
cance to  the  erection  of  the  sanctuary." 

III.  Instructive  is  the  account  given  of  the  disposition  and  spirit  of  the 
Bi'iLDKRS.  The  work  was  not  to  be  done  mechanically,  or  from  a  feeling  of  constraint. 
They  were  to  "  set  their  heart  and  their  soul  to  seek  the  Lord  their  God."  That  is, 
they  were  to  undertake  the  work  as  one  distinctively  religious,  and  from  a  religious  motive 
and  with  a  religious  aim. 

Practical  lkssons.  1.  Let  everything  that  is  God's  engage  your  sympathy  and 
interest  and  zeal.  Let  each  Christian  hear  the  voice  from  heaven  saying  to  him, 
**  Arise,  and  build."  2.  Let  God*8  work  he  done  in  a  devout  and  religious  spirit.  In 
serving  the  Lord  seek  him,  and  he  will  be  found  of  you. — T. 

Vers.  6 — 16. — Successful  service.  David's  charge  to  his  son  Solomon  will  furnish  us 
with  the  conditions  of  all  successful  work  done  in  the  Name  of  Christ  and  for  the 
extension  of  his  kingdom.  We  may  remark,  preliminarily,  that  our  leisure  time  cannot 
bo  better  spent  than  in  Christian  work.  Solomon  was  to  have  time  for  internal 
administration.  His  father  had  defeated  and  subdued  all  the  national  enemies.  In  the 
midst  of  i)r<'tractcd  "jjcacc  and  quietness"  (ver.  U)  he  would  have  an  ample  interval 
in  which  to  build  a  house  for  the  Lord.  The  time  which  the  labour  of  others,  or  our 
own  toil,  has  secured  to  us  we  spend  most  admirably  when  wo  give  it  to  the  direct 
service  of  the  Divine  Master.     The  conditions  of  successful  work  for  him  are — 

I.  Secukino  Divine  direction.  "Only  the  Lord  give  thee  wisdom  and  under- 
standing" (ver.  12).  David  clearly  felt,  as  this  "only"  indicates,  that  everything 
would  utterly  fail  if  God  did  not  grant  his  Diviuo  succour.  That  failing,  everything 
must  prove  to  bo  a  failure. 

II.  Ensuring  pkksonal  fitness.  (Vers.  7—9.)  David  was  rendered  personally  unfit 
for  the  work  by  his  much  fii;;hling.  It  was  not  fitting  that  a  man  of  war  should  build 
the  temple  of  the  God  of  love.  The  two  things  did  not  go  well  together.  It  was  far 
more  becoming  that  Solomon,  the  "man  of  rest,"  should  execute  this  woik.  Our 
guilty  past  may  have  been  pardoned,  our  occupation  may  not  be  absolutely  wrong,  our 
surroundings  may  not  be  censurable,  our  position  may  not  be  blameworthy^  and  yet 


en.  xxn.  1—19.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  865 

there  may  be  somethiDg  about  one  of  these  which  makes  it  unsuitable  for  us  and 
desirable  for  some  one  else  to  do  the  work  which  is  required  to  be  done. 

III.  Maintaining  personal  integrity.  (Vers.  II — 13.)  "  Prosper  thou,  and  build 
the  house  .  .  .  that  thou  mayest  keep  the  Law  of  the  Lord  thy  God.  Then  sbalt  thou 
prosper,  if  thou  takest  heed,"  etc.  God  distinctly  promised  to  be  Solomon's  Father,  and 
to  establish  his  throne  (ver.  10);  but  this  prosperity  must  depend  on  loyalty  and  the 
keeping  of  the  Law.  Without  the  maintenance  of  our  moral  and  8X)iritual  integrity  we 
cannot  expect  to  be  prospered  in  any  work  we  do  for  God. 

IV.  Making  all  dub  treparation.  Solomon  would  have  found  himself  overtasked 
and  unable  to  do  as  ho  did  if  David  had  not  "  in  bis  trouble  prepared  for  the  house  '* 
(vers.  14 — 16).  The  aged  king  may  be  said  to  have  laid  the  foundation  of  the 
building  by  all  the  pains  he  took  to  collect  material  and  make  everything  ready  for  his 
son  to  begin  the  work.  We  never  strike  a  better  stroke  in  the  service  of  God  than 
when  we  are  engaged  in  the  work  of  preparation.  Moses  in  Horeb,  Paul  in  Arabia,  the 
Master  himself  in  the  quiet  home  in  Galilee  and  the  still  more  quiet  resting-place  of 
the  mountain-fold  and  the  seaside  of  after  days,  we  ourselves  in  the  chamber  of  com* 
munion  and  at  the  study  desk,  are  "  working  for  God,"  for  we  are  doing  that  which  is 
positively  essential  to  true,  abiding  issues  in  the  field  of  Christian  labour. 

V.  Acting  in  accordance  with  the  revealed  will  of  Christ.  "  Build  the  house 
of  the  Lord,  ,  »  .  as  he  hath  said  of  thee*^  (ver.  11). 

VI  Cherishing  the  coNriDENCE  which  is  closely  allied  to  strength.  "Be 
strong,  and  of  good  courage "  (ver.  13).  There  is  a  confidence  which  is  presumption^ 
and  which  will  be  dishonoured ;  but  there  is  a  confidence  which  is  in  the  truth  and  in 
God,  and  which  is  a  large  element  of  success.  Where  the  diffident  are  defeated,  the 
assured  and  courageous  win.  Let  the  Christian  workman  feel  that  behind  him  are 
Divine  promises  which  "cannot  be  broken/'  and  he  will  advance  boldly  and  strike 
successfully. 

VII.  Making  the  way  plain  fob  our  successors.  (Vers.  6 — 16.)  Nothing  is  more 
hateful  than  the  spirit  of  "  apr^s  moi  le  deluge."  No  worthy  Christian  workman  will 
be  content  unless,  like  David,  as  he  considers  who  and  what  are  to  come  after  him,  he 
feels  a  devout  thankfulness  that  ho  has  made  a  plain  path  for  his  successors,  in  which 
they  may  walk  in  peace,  honour,  and  usefulness.  We  may  place  by  itself  as  a  con* 
dition  of  success  which  is  involved  in  some  of  the  foregoing,  but  yet  which  deserves  to 
be  mentioned  separately,  cultivating  and  exhibiting  the  spirit  of  devotion.  Thrice  in 
this  paternal  counsel  does  David  invoke  the  presence  and  blessing  of  Almighty  God 
(vers.  11,  12,  16).  It  is  in  the  spirit  of  conscious  dependence  on  God  and  earnest 
uplooking  to  him  for  his  Divine  help  (Fs.  xxx.  10)  that  the  workman  of  the  Lord  will 
render  successful  service  to  his  Master  and  mankind. — C. 

A''ers.  17 — 19. — The  wisdom  of  the  strong.  We  may  take  the  "  princes  of  Israel "  as 
types  and  representatives  of  the  strong  men,  the  leaders  in  the  kingdom,  or  Church,  or 
society  of  which  they  are  members,  those  who  are  responsible  for  the  measures  which 
are  adopted,  for  the  course  which  is  chosen,  for  the  principles  which  are  professed. 
Thus  regarding  them,  we  may  gather  from  the  text — 

I.  That  it  is  the  wisdom  op  the  strong  to  gain  the  favour  of  Ctod  for 
themselves  and  for  the  community.  "  Set  your  heart  and  your  soul  to  seek  the  Lord 
your  God  **  (ver.  19) ;  ue,  strenuously  and  perseveringly  endeavour  to  gain  Qt)d's 
approval,  to  do  his  will  and  win  his  smile.  That  is  the  "  beginning  of  wisdom"  and 
the  end  of  it,  in  all  cases  now,  with  all  leaders  everywhere.  They  are  to  do  this  by  (1) 
takin;;  earnest  h^  to  his  revelation  of  himself ;  (2)  accepting  him  who  is  the  Mani- 
ff'station  of  his  mind  and  will ;  (3)  fashioning  their  own  lives  and  directing  those  of 
others  according  to  his  holy  Word. 

II.  That  the  wisdom  of  the  steono  is  in  making  the  most  of  fayoxtrable 
OPPORTUNITY.  David  urged  the  x>rinces  to  activity  on  the  ground  that  the  time  had 
come  for  action.  ^  Is  not  the  Lord  your  Gt)d  with  you  ?  and  hath  he  not  given  you  rest 
on  every  side  ? "  etc.  (ver.  18).  Now  that  the  energy  of  the  people  neaied  not  to  be 
devoted  to  the  art  of  war,  it  was  most  fitting  that  it  should  be  given  to  the  building  of 
a  house  for  the  Lord.  The  time  of  peace  b  the  hour  of  national  industry  and  progress, 
when  the  useful  arts  and  religious  institutions  shoidd  receive  particular  attention.    It  is 


,*^6  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ch.  xxii.  1—19. 

the  part  of  wise  and  oonsciontious  leaders,  in  the  Church  as  well  as  in  the  state,  to 
watcn  fur  the  time  of  opportunity,  to  make  the  utmost  of  the  "  golden  hour/*  to  strike 
when  the  blows  will  tell.  Can-fulness  or  negligence  iu  this  matter  may  make  all  the 
difference  between  success  and  failure.  These  are  favourable  times  for  (1)  reorganizaUam^ 
(2)  reeoncilicUion,  (3)  evangelization, 

III.  That  it  w  tue  wwdom  op  the  stroxo  to  bitild  up  that  which  hoij)6  thi 
MOBT  SACRED  THINGS.  **  Build  ye  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord  God,  to  bring  the  ark  of 
the  covenant  of  the  F^ord,  and  the  holy  vessels  of  God,  into  the  house  **  (ver.  19).  The 
princes  could  do  nothing  better  for  Israel  than  build  the  house  in  which  the  ark 
would  abide ;  for  the  Lord  himself  would  dwell  above  the  mercy-seat,  and  so  long  as 
Israel  worshipped  purely  in  the  house  they  were  building  they  mi<:ht  count  on  his 
presence  and  his  favour.  Our  leaders  do  well  to  incite  us  to  build  (1)  hotiset  of  the 
Lord  in  which  he  himself  will  dwell,  and  receive  the  homage  of  his  people  and  teach 
them  his  truth;  (2)  institutions — Churches,  societies,  families — in  which  the  holy 
principles  Christ  has  taught  us  shall  be  incorporated ;  (3)  national  character^  which 
shall  contain  and  enilxxly  those  pure  and  righteous  habits  which  are  found  in  the  life 
of  the  great  Exemplar.  These  are  of  more  value  than  all  the  ^  holy  vessels  **  which 
David's  zejvl  could  collect. — C. 

Vers.  1 — 5,  11. — David^s  preparation  for  building  the  temple,  David  was  now  in 
the  last  years  of  his  reign,  and  these  were  spent  in  making  preparation  for  the  bnilding 
of  the  temple.  In  order  to  procure  the  necessary  workmen,  he  commanded  to  gather 
together  the  strangers  in  the  land  of  Israel  or  the  descendants  of  the  Canaanites  whom 
the  Israelites  had  not  destroyed  when  they  took  poss(>8sion  of  the  land,  but  had  reduced 
to  bondage.  The  number  was  so  considerable  that  Solomon  was  able  to  employ  one 
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  of  them  as  labourers  and  stone-cutters.  Of  these  David  **  set 
masons  to  hew  wrought  stones  to  build  the  house  of  God."  Solomon  was  but  a  tender  youth 
— >not  yet  in  his  twentieth  year — and  the  work  to  be  executed  was  so  great  that  David 
determined  to  make  all  the  preparation  he  could  himself.  The  materials  prepared  were 
many  and  costly.  Iron,  brass,  and  cedar  trees ;  the  two  former  without  weight,  for  they 
were  so  abundant.  But  of  gold  there  was  one  hundred  thousand  talents,  and  of  silver 
one  million  talents.  As  the  talent  was  one  thousand  shekels,  and  the  shekel  according  to 
the  Mosaic  wi'i;:;ht  worth  about  two  shillings  and  six[>euce,  the  silver  would  thus 
amount  to  £375,000,000,  and  the  gold  to  £130,000,<X)0.  This  money  seems  to  have 
been  the  fruit  of  the  s\)o\\s  of  the  wars  in  which  David  had  been  engage<l.  This 
enormous  sum  was  at  once  laid  out  for  the  Lord's  house.  Thus  all  the  accumulation  of 
l")avid's  life  is  here  consecrated  to  God.  Thus  should  it  be  in  the  life  of  every  true 
Christian.  Ilis  money,  his  talents,  his  time,  his  opix)rlunities,  are  all  the  Lord  s  and 
are  to  be  consecrateil  to  his  service.  **  Ye  are  Iwught  with  a  price.**  The  Christian  is 
in  one  sense  the  poorest  man  in  the  world,  for  all  he  has  belongs  to  the  Lord ;  yet  he  is  the 
wealthiest,  because  God  himself  is  his.  We  have  no  riglit  to  take  a  walk  without  it  is 
the  Lord's  will,  nor  s^^nd  a  i)cnny  unless  as  he  would  have  us  do  it.  When  a  man 
l)ecomes  the  Lord's,  everything  he  possessed  passes  over  to  him  who  has  bought  him. 
And  he  is  but  a  steward  of  all  he  possesses,  and  soon  to  be  called  to  give  an  account  of 
his  stewardship. — W. 

Vers.  6 — IG. — DavitTs  charge  to  Solomon,  This  was  a  solemn  charge  delivered  by 
David  in  view  of  his  death.  The  shadow  of  death  makes  everything  solemn.  But 
while  we  hear  the  charge  to  Solomon,  it  is  imiwssible  not  to  perceive  from  David's  words 
that  "a  greater  than  Solomon  is  here."  Ihe  throne  of  Solomon  was  not  established 
"  for  ever.**  It  is  a  promise  of  God  which,  like  many  such  promises  in  the  Old  Testament, 
look  forward  to  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah,  in  whom  alone  they  receive  their  literal 
and  perfect  fulfilment.  Let  us  listen  to  their  perfect  consummation:  "He  shall  be 
great,  and  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  the  Highest:  and  the  Lord  God  shall  give  unto  him 
the  throne  of  his  father  David :  and  he  shall  reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  for  ever ; 
and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end  *'  (Luke  i.  32,  33).  Unless  we  notice  the 
unexhausted  promises  and  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament,  we  shall  read  God's  Word 
to  little  real  profit,  and  it  will  be  full  of  difficulties  and  perplexities.  David  connects 
in  this  charge  two  things  which  are  inseparable — successful  building  and  taking  heed 


cH.xxn.  1-19.]  THE  FinST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES;  367 


to  the  Law  of  €k)d.  If  a  roan  is  to  buUd  well  he  must  be  a  man  of  Qod.  AH 
successful  building  is  inseparable  from  a  heart  under  the  constant  influence  of  Divine 
truth.  "  Arise  therefore,  and  be  doing/'  says  David,  "  and  the  Lord  be  with  thee.'* 
God  can  only  be  with  us  as  our  own  hearts  are  abidingly  under  the  power  of  his  Word ; 
and  if  he  be  not  with  us,  how  can  we  build  ?  *'  Except  the  Lord  build  tbe  house,  their 
labour  is  but  lost  that  build  it ;  except  the  Lord  keep  the  city,  the  watchman  waketh 
but  in  vain."  The  secret  of  all  true  rising  in  life,  of  all  progress  and  attainment,  is  for 
the  heart  to  be  under  the  influeDce  and  constant  guidance  of  the  Word.  Life  wUl,  in 
the  end,  be  "life's  labour  lost"  without  this. — W. 

Vers.  17 — 19. — David's  charge  to  the  princes  of  Israd,  After  charging  so  solemnly 
his  son,  David  turned  to  the  princes  of  Israel,  giving  them  an  equally  solemn 
charge  to  help  his  son  Solomon  in  his  great  work.  Every  line  of  this  charge  to  the 
princes  is  replete  with  spiritual  instruction.  The  first  line  is  a  precious  one :  "  Is  not 
the  Lord  your  God  with  you  ?  "  The  presence  of  God  is  the  Christian's  great  power  for 
all  work.  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  to  the  end  of  the  world."  Moses  knew  its 
importance  when  he  said,  "  If  thy  presence  go  not  with  us,  lead  us  not  up  tbence."  The 
second  line  is  equally  precious :  '*  Hath  he  not  given  you  rest  on  every  side  f  "  The  true 
Christian  has  indeed  found  '*  rest "  in  Christ  the  true  David,  and  for  the  reason  assigned 
here  in  David's  third  line — "  for  he  hath  given  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  [the  Canaanites] 
into  mine  hand."  Every  enemy  the  child  of  God  has  is  in  the  hand  of  Christ.  Every 
sin  he  has  committed,  as  well  as  the  broken  Law,  and  everything  else  that  shut 
him  out  from  God,  have  all  been  laid  on  Jesus.  Everything  that  could  injure  or  stand 
in  the  Christian's  way,  in  the  present  or  in  the  future,  is  all  in  the  hand  of  Jesus. 
"  Subdued  "  is  the  word  written  by  Christ's  cross  on  all  his  sins,  on  all  his  foes,  on 
everything  against  him.  Nay  more :  in  all  these  things  "  he  is  more  than  conqueror 
through  him  that  loved  him."  This  being  so,  to  what  end  is  it  all  ?  David  tells  us : 
"  Now  set  your  heart  and  your  soul  to  seek  the  Lord  your  God."  Every  affection,  every 
desire,  every  energy,  every  aim,  everything  within  us,  is  to  be  "  set"  And  where  ?  Christ- 
ward.  On  him  who  has  done  such  great  things  for  us.  And  does  such  grace  tend  to 
sloth  or  indifference  ?  Far  otherwise.  "  Arise  therefore."  Get  up  out  of  sloth,  out  of 
sin,  out  of  earthliness  of  every  kind.  (Jet  higher,  "  Nearer  my  Qod  to  thee,  nearer 
to  thee."  And  how  is  this  rising  to  show  itself  ?  "  Build  ye  the  sanctuary."  Let 
every  thought  and  energy,  every  heart  and  every  hand,  be  put  to  build  up  the  kingdom 
of  Qod — the  true  sanctuary  of  God  in  this  world.  And  the  last  word  in  this  charge  is 
the  climax — the  great  end  to  which  everything  points :  **  Build  ye  the  sanctuniy  of  the 
Lord  God,  to  bring  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord,  and  the  holy  vessels  of  God  into 
the  house  that  is  to  be  built  to  the  Name  of  the  Lord."  Observe  the  sanctuary  was  for 
this  end — "  to  bring  in  the  ark  of  the  covenant  and  the  holy  vessels."  So  is  it  now. 
That  ark  is  Christ.  The  ''holy  vessels"  are  everything  that  pertains  to  that  ark. 
This  is  the  great  end  of  every  building — to  bring  in  Christ  and  everything  that  is  of 
Christ.  Is  the  sanctuary  the  believer's  soul  ?  Then  let  Christ  and  everything  Christ- 
like be  brought  in  there.  Is  the  "  sanctuary  "  a  Church — any  of  the  Churches  of  Christ 
or  the  entire  Church — the  body  of  Christ  ?  Then  see  that  the  ark  is  brought  in  and  its 
vessels — Christ  and  everything  that  will  glorify  him.  The  house  was  "  to  be  built 
to  the  Name  of  the  Lord."  This  Name  is  on  the  Christian,  on  every  Christian 
Church,  on  every  Christian  duty,  on  every  Christian  nation,  on  every  Christian  work. 
See  that  the  ark  and  its  vessels  are  where  the  name  is.  See  that  we  have  not  the 
name  without  the  ark  and  its  vessels.  We  may  have  the  name  in  baptism,  in  the 
Holy  Communion,  in  the  Church  and  its  ordinances,  but  the  grand  question  is,  ^  Are 
the  ark  and  its  vessels  there  ?  " — W, 

Yer.  2,^^Mien  help  in  OocTs  service,  David  was  willing  to  employ  those  who  were 
not  Israelites  in  the  work  of  building  the  temple,  and  this  is  recorded  as  an  indication 
of  liberality  and  large-mindedness.  By  the  "strangers"  mentioned  here  we  are  to 
understand  **  aliens,'  the  non-Israelite  population  of  Sie  land  ;  and  we  have  no  ground 
for  assuming  that  the  persons  he  employed  were  necessarily  proselytes.  From 
2  Chron.  iL  17  we  learn  that  David  took  a  census  of  these  aliens,  with  the  design  of 
employing  them  in  forced  labours,  as  hewers  of  wood  and  stone,  bearers  of  burdens,  etc 


r«8  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHROXICLEa   [cr.  ^*w  i^ul 


It  does  not  appear  that  the  Israelites,  as  a  people,  hare  erer  ditplmjed  mechanial  or 

c^nstmctive  &kill.  Their  blu  has  been  towards  a:;ncaltnre  and  trade.  It  is  dtea 
feme  what  anxio*i.3*v  q'ies:;oDe>i  whether  sanctuary  help--aid  in  chnrch-bnilding,  and 
saintenar.ce  of  CLris-iUa  worship  and  work^<an  f  pjperly  be  receired  from  worldly 
fxrrs'jns,  wi.o  canr.ot  be  5'ip;^o»&d  to  dve  themsclTcs  to  God  throagh  their  icifts  ii 
fu:  i^jTi  o:  hia  f>er^i:e.  Wi<ivr  ar.ii  ri<.bl-.r  views  vf  G<>t*5  relations  with  men,  mnd  bairns 
up  Ti  the  service  "f  all  men,  wo'jM  make  such  questioning  impossible.  EzcIosiTt 
ffc.inz*— Cisto  s-Ltiri.eriii— jirtjw  uf-'in  us  oniy  t«»  easily;  but  they  are  alwayi 
n.incLieT'-'H :  tl.rv  r.-eil  t>  1<  cir  f  :.^y  watcheii  and  rcprirsred;  and  Christians,  abort 
all  n>en,  *>'[.<•  r.'i  cu.:'.vat«?  tho  m  fi  liUral  a:.<i  izenerous  senuments.  It  should  be  thdr 
j- y  in  0  «1,  thit  ••t:;e  G-^i  o:  tbe  u-.We  tartk  must  he  be  called."  Keeping  in  mind 
that  theolJ«.-ct  of  thi^  hon.ily  is  to  o.rrect  tiic  ^narrowness*  which  is  too  often  the 
markei]  feature  of  i>i<ius  sentiment*,  we  consfi-ior— 

I.  All  sr.uLS  ap.f.  Gild's.  *'  All  souls  are  mine."  George  Macdonald  well  writei^ 
**  We  are  accrsti.iijed  tu  Niy  that  we  are  hcdits,  and  Aai*^  souls,  whereas  we  shoold 
rather  say  that  we  art  souls,  ar.d  Aa?^  bodies."  Paul  pleads  with  the  Gentile  that  we 
are  all  the  "  offspring  oi  Gol."  And  our  Lord,  in  his  teaching  on  the  moant,  reTealed 
Gc<l  as  prcviiiin:;  f<T  and  overshaiiowing  all,  "  making  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and 
on  the  goo*),  and  sendin:;  his  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust."  All  souls  are  to  coma 
under  the  Divine  judgment,  and  that  judgment  must  be  based  on  DiTine  dealings  with 
men,  and  men*s  res^tonse  thereto. 

II.  All  lives  shoi'ld  be  consecrated  to  God.  By  the  claims  of  creation, 
relation,  and  providence,  G<>1  urjes  upon  every  man  the  duty  of  surrenr^er  to  him.  See 
the  fam  liar  answer  to  the  question,  "  What  is  the  chief  duty  of  man?  "  When  Paul 
urge<(  the  Iiomans  to  '*  present  their  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,"  he  does  but  express  the 
demand  made  by  the  God  **  in  whose  hand  our  breath  is,  and  whose  are  all  our  ways." 
If  this  be  established  as  a  universal  principle,  then  these  two  things  follow.  1.  'All 
man's  service  he  claims.  Whatever  a  man  can  do,  God  has  the  right  to  ask  him  to  do 
for  him.  Illustrate  by  the  sentiments  of  earlier  times  in  regard  to  a  king's  right  to 
claim  the  service  of  any  member  of  his  kingdom,  day  or  night.  God  has  the  infinite 
right  to  make  such  claim ;  and  the  gorily  min  fully  recognizes  it,  and 


•*  Take  my  body,  spirit,  soul ; 
(July  thou  |X)a»cad  thu  whole/ 


2.  All  man's  possessions  are  for  Gmi's  use  as  he  m.\v  nquire  them.  Not  merely  what  a 
wan  is  he  is  for  God,  but  what  a  man  has  he  has  f.»r  G«.Hi.  David  fully  recognized  this, 
and  in  presenting  to  God  the  gathered  material  fur  the  temple,  he  said,  "  Of  thine  own 
have  we  given  thee."  So  whtn  a  worldly  man  gives  of  his  property  or  time  to  God's 
service,  we  should  feel  that  he  is  imperfectly  and  incompletely  doing  a  part  of  the 
duty  which  rests  on  every  man.  Mothing  of  human  service  can  be  alien  to  God; 
and  nothing  should  be  alien  to  his  people  in  working  for  him.  We  may  encourage 
every  man  to  do  something,  or  give  something  to  Gxd,  in  the  hope  that,  by-and-by, 
they  may  come  to  love  God's  service,  and  God  himself. — R.  T, 

Yers.  2 — 5. —  Willingness  to  do  what  tee  may  when  we  are  forbidden  to  do  what  toe 
would.  For  reasons  sufliciently  defined,  God  did  not  allow  David  to  build  his  temple ; 
and  David  received  the  Divine  refusal  in  a  right  spirit.  It  might  have  crushed  him, 
and  led  him  to  feel  that  he  could  do  nothing ;  but  he  nobly  decided  that  if  he  might  not 
actually  build,  he  would  gather  the  materials  for  building,  and  make  nil  necessary 
preparations.  Too  often,  when  a  man's  particular  plans  are  hindered,  he  throws  up 
Christian  work  altogether.  W^e  therefore  commend  the  really  beautiful  example  of  the 
pious  David.  A  man  should  bo  cheerfully  willing  to  do  what  ho  can  when  he  cannot 
do  what  he  would. 

L  The  place  for  man's  will  in  religious  work.  He  ought  to  purpose,  devise,  and 
plan  great  things,  and  expect  that  his  enterprise  and  energy  will  serve  the  gracious 
Divine  purpose.  Man's  will  is  not  broken  down  by  a  true  piety  ;  it  is  rather  quickened 
and  renewcHi,  though  toned  with  submission  to  the  Divine  will. 

IL  The  place  for  the  Divine  will  in  religious  work.  That  tmU  must  be 
regarded  as  the  final  court  of  appeal,  and  reference  must  be  made  to  it.     The  good 


Cff.  xxn.  1— 19.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES;  369 


man's  last  word  is,  **  If  the  Lord  will,  I  shall  live,  and  do  this  or  that.**  Illustrate  by 
the  expression  used  in  the  Acts  concernins;  Paul's  travelling  plans,  "  The  Spirit  8ulTer(^d 
us  not."  We  recognize  the  place  of  the  Divine  will  in  personal  experience ;  we  should 
also  recognize  its  place  in  relation  to  Christian  work.  God  does  not  alwiiys  permit  us 
to  do  what  our  hearts  desire  to  do.    The  blocks  in  our  way  are  Divine  hindrances. 

lU.  The  true  submission  is  active  obedience  within  Divine  limits.  Most 
unworthy  is  the  sullen  refusal  to  do  nothing  because  we  cannot  have  our  own  way. 
True  humility  finds  expression  in  cheerfully  doing  what  God  will  let  us  do. 

Apply  to  Church  life.  God  exprcs^ies  his  will  often  by  putting  disabilities  in  our 
way,  but  he  at  the  same  time  opens  up  other  ways  for  us.  If  we  are  willing  to  do 
what  we  may,  we  shall  find  it  JiU  in  for  the  outworking  of  God's  perfect  plan. — H.  T* 

Yer.  5. — Right  %dea$  concerning  God*8  earthly  sanctuaries,  David's  language  in  this 
verse  is  striking  and  suigestive,  and  it  expresses  a  right  feeling  in  relation  to  God'a 
worship,  a:id  the  places  in  which  his  worship  is  otfered.  He  s;iys,  *'  The  house  that  is 
to  be  builded  for  the  Lord  must  be  exceeding  magnifical,  of  fame  and  of  glory  through- 
out all  countries."  David  did  not  desire  a  merely  grand  huilding,  but  rather  one  whose 
magnificence  should  be  of  such  a  character  that  it  would  draw  universal  attention  to 
Jehovah  and  magnify  his  Name.  '*  The  temple  was  to  have,  as  it  were,  a  missionary 
character  and  office  in  proclaiming  the  Name  of  the  Lord  to  all  nations."  The  principles 
iliustraled  in  this  sentiment  of  David's  may  be  thus  dealt  with. 

I.  The  duty  of  conserving  spibitual  conceptions  of  God.  "  God  is  a  Spirit :  and 
they  who  worship  him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  The  uuity  and 
spirituality  of  God  are  foundi\tion  and  essential  truths  of  religion.  How  jealously  they 
were  regarded  is  indicated  by  the  strong  expressions  of  the  two  first  commandments. 
We  must  as  anxiously  guard  them  from  doctrines  or  sentiments  that  imperil  them,  as 
Israel  must  guard  them  from  idolatrous  customs.  No  earthly  thing  adequately  repre- 
sents God.  No  earthly  figure  or  image  properly  fits  him.  And  no  earthly  dwelling 
may  be  thought  of  as  containing  him.  The  omnipresence  of  Jehovah  is  beyond  our 
power  of  apprehension ;  yet  we  may  conceive  of  him  as  coming  under  no  kind  of 
human  limitations.  Material  figures  and  forms  of  thought  greatly  help  us,  but  none 
can  know  the  Almighty  to  perfection.  In  our  day  of  pronounced  atheism,  it  is  the 
more  incumbent  on  us  to  witness  fully  concerning  the  immaterial  and  spiritual  nature 
of  God.  Men  may  resist  our  representations  and  descriptions  of  God,  and  find  these 
stumbling-blocks  in  the  way  of  their  conceiving  (rod  himself;  and  therefore  we  should 
ever  cherish  high,  mystical,  and  spiritual  thoughts  of  the  great  Source  of  all  being. 

II.  Though  we  may  not  bepeesent  God  himself,  we  may  bepbesent  the  sphebb 
ABOUND  HIM.  Moses  and  the  elders  did  not  represent  the  being  or  person  of  GKxi  him- 
self; only  the  glory  of  the  '*  sapphire"  round  about  him.  Isaiah  did  not  see  him  who 
sat  on  the  throne ;  only  the  splendour  of  the  throne,  and  the  attitudes  of  the  attendant 
courtiers.  Heaven  is  so  fully  described  in  the  New  Testament  as  the  sphere  where 
Qt)d  dwells,  in  order  to  relieve  us  of  distress  on  account  of  the  impossibility  of 
picturing  to  us  God  himself.  We  see  the  doud  that  shrouds  him,  and  the  fire  that  is 
an  emblem  of  him ;  and  we  are  taught  to  see  in  the  vast  blue  dome  of  the  sky  the 
abode  where  he  dwells.  And  being  thus  fittingly  impressed,  we  are  encouraged  to  argue 
out  the  question — What  must  he  be,  whose  '*  robe  is  the  light,  whose  canopy  space  "  ? 

in.  OUB  BEPBESENT ATIONS  SHOULD  WOBTHILY  EXPBESS    OUB    CONCEPTIONS    OF    TJIR 

Divine  subboundinos.  'J'his  is  the  ground  on  which  we  consecrate  architectural  genius 
and  artistic  skill  to  the  building  and  the  decoration  of  our  sanctuaries.  If  we  may 
represent  the  surroundings  of  God,  we  must  try  to  represent  them  worthily.  The  palaco 
of  the  great  King  of  kings  ought  to  be  ''exceeding  magnifical."  God's  own  vepresen*- 
tation  of  his  surroundings  is  sublime  creation :  the  blue,  star-studded  dome  of  sky ; 
the  many-soimding,  vast  sea ;  the  everlasting  mountains ;  the  harvest-laden  plains ;  the 
million-fiowered  earth.  Our  representation — in  our  temples  and  churches — should  bo 
the  ideal  beauty  of  each  age ;  classic,  GK>thic,  or  otherwise,  as  fits  the  sentiment  of  each 
age.  Illustrate  what  proper  moral  impressions  are  produced  by  our  cathedrals,  abbeys, 
and  churches  towering  above  the  houses  of  our  cities,  and  made  our  architectural 
models.  It  is  a  right  and  true  feeline  which  leads  us  to  build  magnificent  temples 
and  churches,  and  to  arrange  beautiful  and  artistio  services.    Tet  we  must  jealously 

J.  CHB0NICLE8.  2  D 


370  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLESL    [gh.  xxn.  1— 1ft 


keop  the  fcelioe  that  the«ie  are,  at  best,  but  suggestions  of  the  ''snrraandings  **  of  God, 
and  they  leave  the  infinite  mystery  of  God  himself  wholly  unrepealed. — R.  T. 

Vers.  7,  8. — The  groundi  of  Divine  rtfutaU,  God  would  not  permit  David  to  build 
his  temple,  and  he  was  graciously  pleased  to  signify  to  him  the  grounds  on  which  this 
refusal  was  maile :  "  Because  thou  hast  shed  much  blood  upon  the  earth  in  vaj  sight" 
Fur  illustrations  of  the  blcHxiy  character  of  David's  wars,  see  2  Sam.  viii.  2,  6  ;  x.  18; 
xii.  31 ;  1  Kings  xi.  16.  David's  mission  did  not  appear  to  consort  with  David's  wishes 
He  did  not,  however,  see  an  unfitness  which  God  recognized.  A  man  must  let  God  tell 
him  what  he  may  do  and  what  he  may  not ;  and  full  willingness  thus  to  receive  Divine 
direction  is  a  high  sign  of  the  true  submission.  JSo  man  ever  finds  it  easy  to  give  ap 
his  long-cherished  ^i^hes. 

I.  A  MAX  VAT  WILL  MOBB  THAN  HE  MAT  FERFOBSi.  Distinguish  carefnlljT  between 
willing,  or  seriously  pun^osing,  and  mere  wishing,  A  man's  sentimental  wishes  mean 
nothing,  and  cannot  8tand  in  place  of  right  deeds;  but  a  man's  definite  plans  and 
purp««e8  may  be  as  true  expressions  of  character  and  righteousness  as  actual  deeds 
could  l^ ;  and  so  God  may  say, "  Thou  didst  well  that  it  was  in  thine  heart."  One  of  the 
gravest  troubles  to  the  earnest  man  is  the  impossibility  of  carrying  into  effect  one-half 
of  what  he  can  purpose  and  desire  to  da  The  artist  has  his  visions  of  more  and  better 
pictures  than  he  can  ever  paint.  The  author  plans  more  and  better  books  than  he  will 
ever  write.  The  Christian  resolves  upon  nobler  works  than  he  will  ever  acoomplidi, 
and  a  nobler  life  than  he  will  ever  li%'e.  From  this  common  fieu^t  an  important 
argument  for  man's  immortality  may  be  drawn.  There  must  be  the  larger  sphere  in 
which  man  may  find  the  room  which  he  vainly  seeks  here. 

II.  A  van's  fbovidektial  place  mat  put  hix  in  LiMTTATiONa  David  was  where 
God  had  put  him,  and  in  his  wars  he  had  been  doing  the  work  which  God  required  him 
to  do ;  and  yet  he  found  his  very  life-work  limited  him ;  and  his  very  faithfulness  to 
God  hindered  his  acco^)pli^hment  of  his  own  cherished  desires.  So  it  often  is  stilL  A 
man's  providential  place  is  one  he  never  would  have  chosen.  A  man's  life-work  is  one 
that  prevents  his  following  out  his  own  wishes.  At  this  men  often  fret,  fancying  them* 
selves  fit  for  far  higher  work  than  is  given  to  their  charge.  But  the  true-hearted  man 
accepts  the  Divine  overruling  and  the  painful  limitations,  learning  to  say  calmly,  **  My 
times  are  in  thine  hand,"  and  thankful  that  in  some  sphere  he  may  carry  out  the  Divine 
purjwses  of  grace. 

III.  The  Divine  refusal  of  a  van's  personal  wish  is  alwats  wisely  based. 
God  sees  influences  and  consequences  which  the  man  himself  may  fail  to  discern.  God 
works  ever  for  the  larger  good  of  the  whole,  and  his  sphere  takes  in  wider  considerations 
than  any  individual  can  reach,  (rod's  estimate  of  what  a  man  is,  and  is  fit  for,  may 
well  ditler  from  a  man's  own  estimate  of  himself.  And  God's  sensitiveness  to  what  is 
befitting  we  may  be  sure  is  keener  and  altogether  more  refined  and  subtle  than  any 
man's.  Enough  that  we  are  sure  all  God's  decisions  are  based  on  the  judgments  of 
infinite  wisdom,  and  never  on  mere  eccentricities  of  feeling. 

IV.  Yet  the  purpose  which  a  man  may  not  execute  may  win  the  Divinb 
acceptance.  David's  intention  was  acknowledc^ed  graciously,  and  the  next  best  thing 
was  given  him.  Uis  son  should  do  what  he  might  not  do ;  and  that  son  should  do  it  as 
soon  as  David  hail  passed  away.  And  even  more  than  this :  the  preparation  work  David 
was  himself  permitted  to  arrange,  and  the  plan  he  might  devise ;  so  that,  after  all,  the 
temple  that  was  ultimately  built  was  more  David's  than  Solomon's. 

Plead  that  a  man  does  well  who  has  great  things  in  his  heart ;  but  he  must  be  snie 
that  Divine  providences  and  leadings — and  nothing  else — keep  him  for  carrying  them 
out  and  giving  them  practical  eflect. — K.  T, 

Ver.  9. — The  mission  of  the  men  of  rest.  The  anticipatlve  description  of  Solomon, 
as  the  man  conceived  by  God  to  be  fitted  for  the  work  of  buihling  his  temple,  is  this — 
**  He  shall  be  a  man  of  rest."  Very  remarkable  is  the  fact  which  may  constantly  be 
observed,  that  successors  in  ofiBce  are  usually  marked  contrasts  in  character,  disposition, 
and  modes  of  working.  This  is  often  observed  in  clergymen  and  ministers,  and  it  is 
very  marked  in  the  succession  of  Solomon  to  David.  The  connections  between  tbe  two 
we  often  cannot  trace,  and  it  seems  as  if  the  one  could  not  possibly  carry  on  to  its  com- 


i 


CH.  xxiL  1— 19.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  871 

pletion  the  work  of  the  fonner.  Tet  what  seem  to  us  to  be  contrasts  may  seem  to 
God  to  be  relations,  the  one  becoming  an  actual  preparation  for  the  other.  There  are 
times  when  the  work  of  God  in  the  world  needs  the  men  of  battle — the  Davids  and  the 
Wellingtons ;  and  there  are  other  times  when  God  needs  the  men  of  rest — the  Solomons 
and  the  Gladstones.  It  may  be  well  to  show  what  gracious  work  for  the  well-being  of 
mankind  has  always  been  done  in  times  of  peace  and  by  men  of  peace.  And  yet  such 
times  have  their  peril,  and  round  again  comes  the  necessity  for  the  rougher  ages  of 
conflict  and  intenser  feeling.  These  points  may  be  dealt  with  under  several  headings. 
Before  presenting  these,  a  few  sentences  from  F.  W.  Robertson's  lecture  on  Wordsworth 
may  be  given,  as  suggestive  of  the  mission  of  the  men  of  rest.  He  says,  **  I  will 
remark  that  Wordsworth's  was  a  life  of  contemplation,  not  of  action,  and  therein 
differed  from  Arnold's  of  Rugby.  Arnold  is  the  type  of  English  action ;  Wordsworth 
is  the  type  of  English  thought.  If  you  look  at  the  portraits  of  the  two  men,  you  will 
distinguish  the  difference.  In  one  there  is  concentrativeness,  energy,  proclaimed ;  in 
the  eye  of  the  other  there  is  vacancy,  dreaminess.  The  life  of  Wordsworth  was  the 
life  of  a  recluse.  In  these  days  it  is  the  fashion  to  talk  of  the  dignity  of  work  as  the 
one  sole  aim  and  end  of  human  life,  and  foremost  in  proclaiming  this  as  a  great  truth 
we  find  Thomas  Carlyle.  ...  In  opposition  to  this,  t  believe  that  as  the  vocation  of 
some  is  naturally  work,  so  the  vocation,  the  Heaven-born  vocation  of  others^  is  naturally 
contemplation." 
I.  What  mat  be  done  by  '*  men  op  rest  "  m  the  national  obdeb  ?    Explsun  the 

girilous  sentiments,  painful  conditions,  and  sense  of  exhaustion  left  from  war-times, 
arvests  soon  wave  again  where  heroes  shed  their  blood,  but  the  moral  condition  of  a 
nation  cannot  soon  be  recovered  from  the  evils  of  war.  New  sentiments  have  to  bo 
inculcated,  and  the  arts  of  peace  have  to  be  cultivated.  Show  how  much  peace-loving 
men  do  in  our  day  towards  keeping  the  nations,  in  their  disputes,  from  seeking  the 
fearful  arbitrament  of  war.  Nations  ought  to  thank  God  more  for  her  great  peace- 
leaders  than  for  her  great  war-victors. 

IL  What  mat  be  done  by  "  men  op  rest  '*  m  the  social  spheres?  In  war-times 
social  evils  are  neglected,  and  suffered  to  grow  rank,  as  ill  weeds  do  in  the  untended 
garden.  And  the  good  things  of  education  and  artistic  culture,  and  the  right  develop- 
ment of  the  family  life,  are  lightly  esteemed.  The  "  men  of  rest"  6nd  out  the  prevail- 
ing evils  of  an  age,  reveal  them  in  satire,  or  poetry,  or  picture,  or  moral  teachings,  and 
devise  schemes  for  national  and  social  reformations.  Illustrate  from  some  of  the  social 
and  educational  schemes  of  the  last  sixty  years  of  comparative  peace  since  Waterloo. 
Recall  names  of  men  who  have  done  good  social  work. 

in.  What  may  be  done  by  **  men  of  rest  "  in  the  religious  world  of  thought 
And  life  ?  Apply  to  Christian  doctrine.  Men  have  framed  doctrinal  schemes  in  times 
of  conflict — conflict  of  opinions  and  conflict  of  nations — and  the  man  does  an  infinite 
good  to  Christian  thought  who,  only  in  small  degrees,  relieves  from  Christian  doctrine 
the  mischievous  war  associations,  and  puts  in  their  place  the  truer  family  ones.  But 
we  may  apply  also  to  Christian  worship  and  Christian  life.  Mystical  and  spiritual 
insight  of  the  fuller  truth  is  given  only  to  the  **  men  of  rest."  Solomon's  times  remind 
us  that  peaceful  ages  have  their  own  perils,  and  peaceful  men  their  own  tempta- 
tions.—R.  T. 

Ver.  lO.—Early  signs  of  the  filial  relation.  God  gathers  up  into  one  expressive,  sug- 
gestive, and  satisfying  term  the  relation  in  which  he  would  stand  to  Solomon.  That  term 
could  be  no  other  than  Father — "  And  1  vrill  be  his  Father ; "  "  He  shall  be  my  son." 
The  revelation  of  the  Divine  fatherhood  was  the  distinctive  mission  of  Christ.  The 
commendation  of  ih^fiiial  spirit  was  the  special  duty  of  the  apostles.  These  may  be 
illustrated  as  introductory  to  the  subject  on  which  we  now  more  particularly  dwell ; 
which  is,  the  Old  Testament  indications  of  the  fatherhood  of  GtxL  and  sonship  of  men. 
It  must  be  admitted  that  the  term  Father  as  applied  to  God  in  the  Old  Testament  is 
only  a  figure  of  speech,  designed  to  bring  out  and  express  God's  affectionate  interest  in 
his  people ;  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  his  own  sonship  and  teaching,  brought  to 
light  those  comprehensive,  inspiring,  and  ennobling  views  of  the  Divine  fatherhood 
which  we  now  know  and  properly  regard  asxharacteristioBdly  Christian.  The  figure  of 
God  iis  a  Father  was  an  aid  to  the  complete  apprehension  of  God,  but  it  i»  now  the  one 


375  THS  FI3ST  BGCK  OF  THS  CESOTKXESL    fcs.  xzzl  1— It, 


sl%L::i:;:ii:In2  -sancmiim  -if  '3vjf«i.  'vhich  is  u  ones  die  fbimiiidon  of  tlicologj  and  of 
iuch.  I3.  'aiA.  u  Ji  «i  sacd  •siae.  '.lu  '  JLi  r-tfrCizienc  pncand  2ur  chfi  Xcw.  In  leiiep- 
iziff  '.'li  T-«iamifac  r^!ere!ii:fis  ii  •j'i*!  u  i  Fuiier.  -ve  ai  cc? — 

L  T3H  rx^*'Hi:?«t  •  p  rss  ?-ir3iA3CH.t:.  igr.ntznj.    Is  ooa  net  beea  nzfficientlj  con- 

Si:f*n*ri  'I'l.u  '^<!  iric  eia^.i-n  Ji  ^Hicii  '}<:4i  puurc.i  maa.  u  a  Minz  ouzaide  HiTw>lf  yg^ 
taa:  i"  /itit^r.  E.  ■»  -vru:  7:11*.  :i  A>Lmi*i  i^iL  ».',i^  wm  A-iam'i  *}ii-  The  most  cjwn- 
ca-.  :*?«ir:t.a  f  !i  iir.iia  >*i::j?  ji  'Jiac  :i  lat* -ar?n*  imi  ohiLiren.  This  highest  and 
mi. tit  ai«f:i»S!-ar7  t^^z\»  r  Tia  rje  ^Oiuirw  mti  :^':'»Lar:<:a  zi  the  L*iTine  relaxion.  For  a 
iicj  p*ri>i  uiii  pa:7-.ar*::j.  ^7^t•»IIl  irfcc  :.ie  rar^e:  iiij«:c  prrmintnitly  before  the  minds  of 
men.  TT-ns  ir»at  zr.2^/i:.'ier — ^wrar^h — vm  tlie  •artn-^y  repreaeniaciTe  of  the  Drfine 
B^inx.  :^r.ii;i'i  ▼iit}^  n^nc  .litizui  ^^  ao»tm;i::i  •>  •!  loii  xs  rsiadons  with  men  wen 
rsatmei.  y  w  T:;ir.  in.  ziitt  T-irv  irsc  :i:m  :t  araer^t:*:!!,  nie.  nchoritj-,  gOTcmano^ 
wer*  o.-^Ti'ia*  •iiemeaa;  tj**  father  ina  vtrtiia*  if.j'/.  inii  siiira  mere. 

II.  Taz  *-5-Lii2  AL-'JLT'-JE  ■:f  thcz  piztt  Ef  ETssT  A-JE.  The  good  man  ii 
cccneiT^i  u  1  wn  :  mil  the  r-rv  itwal  :t  i^:i:ti2t»ad  a  la  -.cediea:,  ifTecticnace.  and  sab* 
niidai^-«  «.n.  I.l  L-<*r:L:e  Lr':ai  l^aac'i  riia::ca  :■:  Abraham,  espaiiiHj  in  the  matter  of 
the  rwi.r<!ii  »k:r.dce.  Ea:  :li.1t  Lll.::iC7ace  £r:m  ±e  B*:ok  of  Fialms.  The  more  per- 
fect. 7  :hrt  ^pir.c  v:ixa  the  psalmist  unru  and  iM.is  is  arrrehentied,  live  more  dearljit 
acpeara  cha:  1:  will  p:  :z:o  the  cci?  w:r-i  "^ sccrthip."  Ike  s^ibmision  cf  reverence  and 
Cf^nniiecce,  w::h  the  ibt-dieoin  oc  tecderesc  afectico,  are  chief  teatares  of  sincere  pietjp 
and  as  cprtJi2>  preci:ie  feamres  ':c  zr«:d  scii:*hip.  The  sm-dgares,  as  used  in  the  Old 
Testament— such  as  in  the  text — iLi:<il<i  be  ziven. 

II L  The  tew  to&cz  ?ct  ctto  the  aELairov  bt  tee  psopbzts^  GlTing  pcominenoa 
to  the  4rLrl':LiI  over  the  cersmonia*  anii  zoTemsienral,  the  prophets  cannot  be  satis- 
fied wich  a  kicilj  repreientaiicii  of  Gt:«i,  or  a  rrlestir.  Tnej  want  to  pre;>«nt  a  Divine 
relarion  to  men  wh:ca  is  m^i-re  than  official,  other  tha;i  ojtdal ;  so  they  use  the  parental 
fig-ire,  and  the  terms  **  father  "^  and  **  doo.'^  Eristrative  instances  maj  be  found  in  laa. 
ix.  6 ;  IxiiL  1*) ;  Ixir.  d  ;  Jer.  mi.  9 ;  Mai.  i.  6 ;  IL  10,  etc.  God  in  Judgment  will  cer- 
tainly be  misapprehended  a::!efu  we  see  him  to  be  the  Fathttr-God  in  ju>igmenty  and 
are  willing  to  take  our  illiwtrariTe  fijr-ires  fri.:a  the  father,  wiwly,  judiciously,  and  with 
a  vi^ff  M  the  hi^h'^st  g-ioi,  chistt?ii:z.z  lis  cLili  wh«.m  he  loves.  "Whom  the  Lord 
lo^eth  he  c:.a.-ten-.th."  In.  a  i:zL:',AT  wiv  every  re'.arivn  of  G'--i  may  be  taken,  and  the 
Imf^.rt^ir.ce  of  acceptiiz  the  'i.wt  an-i  fil.eat  revditioa  of  Gi>],as  Father,  may  be  shown 
to  tA:  L*^:Of;«.'anp'  to  i'A  pr-.p*:r  ar  prel:  c.-i-jn.  We  sh-j-'iM  rise  from  such  preparatory  and 
siJ2^e>t;ve  figures  of  ci^tch  as  tlj-  in  the  text,  to  the  hijh  Christian  conception  of  God 
as  lue  **  Father  of  Jesus,"  the  **  h^^iy  Father,"  the  **  r.ghttous  Father." — R.  T. 

Vers.  12, 13. — CcnditiGna  0/ pro^rUy,  Solomon  was  distinctly  informed  that  con- 
tinuance cf  fjrofsperity  def*nd»-d  entir-Jy  on  his  continuing  faithfulness  to  Jehovah. 
Tlic  "  throne  of  hi  is  kingdom  was  to  be  established  for  ever"  but  only  then  should  he 


to  take  into  due  consideration  the  character  and  the  conduct  of  those  to  whom  the 
promiflo  is  made.  lilustrate  by  the  great  covenant  made  with  Israel ;  by  the  assurances 
given  to  Jrmhua  (Josh.  i.  7);  and  by  such  prophetic  declarations  as  Isa.  i.  18,  19;  Iv. 
1 — .3,  6,  7,  etc  There  is  always  an  i/ attache  1  to  the  Lord*a  promise,  but  it  is  always 
virtually  the  same  if — "if  ye  be  willing  and  obedient."  We  may  say  that  there  are 
four  conditions  on  which  piusjierity  is  dependent. 

I.  We  ml'ht  work  fou  God.  Having  this  as  our  supreme  aim  ;  and  not  being,  even 
in  any  subtle  ways,  set  uprm  mere  self-seeking.  Full  loyalty  to  this  supreme  motive  is 
quite  conhi.sfftnt  with  piving  due  place  to  inferir>r  motives.  And  the  daily  culture  of 
spiritual  life  b^ars  directly  on  this  working Jor  God;  keeping  ourselves  ever  as  in  the 
**  great  Taskmaster's  eye." 

If.  We  must  work  in  the  spirit  of  faith  and  devotion.  Of  faith,  as  trust, 
making  us  lean  on  Divine  strength ;  and  devotion  as  keeping  our  souls  fully  open  to 
I>ivinc  influence.    Carrying  the  spirit  of  prayer  into  daily  work. 

III.  We  mitst  work  in  accordance  with  the  Law.  Both  that  written  in  the 
IWK)k,  and  that  over  freshly  written  by  the  Spirit  on  the  "  fleshy  tables  of  the  heart.** 


ck.  xxn.  1—19.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  873 

IV.  Wk  must  work  with  enebgy  Ain)  good  will.  Wisely  and  skilfully  com- 
bining the  human  powers  that  guarantee  success,  with  the  trust  in  Ood  on  which 
success  must  ultimately  depend.    The  man  who  triists  most  always  works  hardest. 

On  these  conditions  the  true  prosperity  must  come ;  but  it  may  be  such  as  men  will 
not  so  name. — R.  T. 

Vers.  11 — 16. — One  man's  teork  for  Ood  fits  into,  and  follows  on,  another  man% 
David  was  the  preparer  for  Solomon  the  builder,  and  it  is  not  for  us  to  say  which  ixxr^ 
of  the  work  was  the  more  important.  Both  together  wcut  to  the  execution  oi  the 
Divine  purpose.  So,  in  every  age,  '*  one  soweth  and  another  reapeth,*'  but  the  sower 
ever  prepares  for  the  reaper.  Every  man  may  cherish  the  conviction  that  his  work  has 
its  place,  and,  if  he  faithfully  does  it,  it  will  be  sure  to  fit,  and  help  towards  the 
realization  of  the  good  Divine  thought  for  the  race.  This  may  be  illustrated  in  science : 
the  inventions  and  discoveries  of  one  ap;e  prepare  the  way  for  the  advances  made  in  a 
later  age.  Franklin  would  be  as  much  amazed  as  any  of  us  with  the  modern  mysteries 
of  telegraph  and  telephone  and  electric  lights  and  yet,  by  his  discovery,  he  distinctly 
prepared  the  way  for  all  these  developments.  The  same  may  be  seen  in  relation  to  our 
Lord's  life-mission.  It  could  not  have  been  all  that  we  know  it  was,  if  it  had  been  a 
sudden  and  unconnected  thing.  Patriarch,  and  lawgiver,  and  psalmist,  and  poet,  and 
prophet,  and  Baptist,  may  fairly  and  truly  say  that  they  took  part  in  the  r^emptioa 
of  the  world,  since  each  one,  in  his  sphere,  helped  to  prepare  the  way  for  Christ. 

I.  Isolate  ant  man's  life,  and  rr  mat  seem  to  bb  a  failubb.  Do  this  with 
any  of  the  world's  great  men,  in  Scripture  or  in  history,  and  nothing  can  be  made  of 
their  careers.  In  their  connections  only  can  their  meaning  and  purpose  be  unfolded. 
This  reveals  the  reason  for  the  imperfection  in  our  estimate  of  the  life-work  of  any  maa 
who  lives  and  dies  among  us.  His  personnel  fills  our  vision.  We  see  him.  He  is 
isolated ;  and  we  cannot  well  see  how  he  fits  into  his  place.  Men  have  to  die,  their 
stories  must  become  history,  before  we  can  cease  to  isolate  them.  No  man  can  hope  to 
be  fairly  judged  by  his  own  generation.  And  no  man  can  efficiently  judge  his  own 
work.  Even  our  Lord's  life-mission  cannot  be  apprehended  if  we  venture  to  separate 
him  firom  his  historical  associations.  Apply  these  considerations  to  the  distress  into 
which  good  people  sometimes  get  respecting  the  value  of  their  work.  It  seems  to  be 
brief,  worthless,  cut  off  while  incomplete.  So  we  may  think  when  our  eyes  are  fixed 
only  on  it ;  but  the  view  is  incomplete  and  therefore  unworthy.  It  may  well  be  oor* 
rected  by  a  larger  vision. 

II.  Connect  ant   mants  life  with  the  past  and  the  futube,  and  it  will 

BECX)ME  PLAIN  HOW  HE  FITS    INTO  THE   DlVINE  PUBPOBE,   AND  AIDS  THE  HUMAN  PBO- 

obess.  This  we  may,  indeed,  be  only  able  to  do  in  part,  but  we  can  do  it  sufficiently 
to  assure  our  hearts  that  he  who  has  the  perfect  vision  sees  the  fittings  and  relations  of 
each  man  and  each  man's  service.  We  can  see  some  of  the  ways  in  which  men  at  once 
serve  their  generations,  and  prepare  for  the  generation  that  is  coming.  1.  Some  men 
have  to  drag  and  hold  back  a  too  hurried  and  perilous  advance.  This  is  the  work 
given  of  God  to  the  conservative-4oned  men  among  us.  2.  Some  men  have  to  keep  up 
the  standards,  in  morals  and  opinion.  These  may  be  men  of  battle,  who  are  keen  to 
discern  and  quick  to  resist  evils ;  or  they  may  be  men  of  contemplation,  who  lift  up 
seemingly  unattainable  ideals,  3.  And  some  men  have  to  advance  the  standards.  These 
are  the  men  whom  we  regard  as  "  he/ore  their  time,"  who,  at  some  peril  to  their  own 
reputation,  and  much  to  their  own  comfort,  bring  us  foreshadowings  of  the  truths  which 
are  to  be  the  commonplaces  of  the  next  generations. 

God  always  has  other  men  ready  to  take  up  our  work  when  we  drop  it.  A  beautiful 
and  effective  illustration  may  be  drawn  from  the  stru:;gle  for  the  standard  at  the  Battle 
of  Lutzen,  where  Zwingle  fell,  as  described  by  PAubign^  in  his  '  History  of  the 
BeformatioiL' — R.  T. 

Ver.  19. — Work  for  Ood  must  be  done  with  heart  and  sotd,  **  Now  set  your  heart 
and  your  sotU  to  seek  the  Lord  your  God."  Scripture  uses  several  terms  for  the  com- 
posite bein?,  man,  but  it  may  be  questioned  whetner,  without  undue  forcing,  we  can 
form,  on  a  Scripture  basis,  either  a  dualistic  or  tripartite  theory  of  man's  being.  We 
fuid  the  term  body,  as  indicating  the  physical  beiog,  set  in  relations  with  an  external 


374 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,    [gh.  -rxm  i— S2. 


world  by  its  five  rcnws ;  the  term  heart,  as  inclusive  of  the  mind  and  the  afiectioni, 
set  in  relations  with  the  world  of  thought,  and  the  world  of  fellow  human  beings ;  and 
(he  term  soul,  as  the  equivalent  of  that  spiritual  being  which  is  set  in  relation  with 
God,  and  has  its  life  only  in  him.  But,  though  these  may  be  the  stricter  meanings 
and  uses  of  these  terms,  they  are  often  used  in  Scripture  as  figures  of  speech  ;  and  a 
man  is  said  to  work  with  his  heart  when  he  likes  to  do  what  he  is  undertaking,  and 
a  man  is  said  to  do  a  thing  with  his  soul  when  ho  does  it  with  a  will,  with  energy  and 
perseverance.  It  will  afford  some  effective  contrasts  to  consider  conceivable  ways  of 
working  for  God,  and  the  illustrations  of  each  will  be  at  once  suggested,  so  that  thqr 
will  nrcd  no  more  than  statement 

L  Work  fob  God  mat  bb  bt  accidekt;  either  of  place,  or  circomstancey  or 
association. 

II.  Work  for  God  mat  bb  bt  oompulsiok;  as  maybe  illustrated  in  the  case  of 
Cyrus,  of  whom  God  says,  ^  I  girded  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known  me."  God 
makes  even  the  '*  wrath  of  man  praise  him ; "  and  bad  men  have,  unwillingly,  done  his 
sovt-reign  will. 

III.  Work  for  God  mat  be  done  through  working  for  self  ;  one  who  seeks  only 
his  own  ends  may  find  that,  without  credit  or  blessing  to  himself  he  has  really 
served  Ocid. 

IV.  Work  for  God  mat  be  done  half-heabtedlt.  We  may  **  fear  the  Lord,  and 
serve  other  gods." 

V.  Work  for  God  mat  be  done,  and  should  be  done,  with  cultured  bodxlt 
powers;  wfth  heart-jot  in  God;  and  with  the  inspiration  of  the  soul^ 
devotion.  Of  such  work  for  God  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  presents  the  highest  type  ;  bnt 
the  example  is — as  a  human  example,  within  human  reach. — E.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEK  XXni. 

This  chapter  is  the  first  of  four  employed 
on  the  subject  of  the  Levites  and  the  ser- 
vices distributed  among  them.  The  twenty- 
four  orders  of  priests,  sons  of  Aaron,  occupy 
ch.  xxiv.  The  twenty-four  orders  of  the 
singers  and  musicians  occupy  the  contents 
of  ch.  XXV.  And  the  divisions  of  the 
porters,  with  their  gates;  and  of  those 
Levites  who  had  the  keeping  of  the  trea- 
sures of  the  house  of  God ;  and  the  officers 
and  judges,  fill  up  ch.  xxvL  After  which 
the  compiler  is  again  awhile  clear  of  the 
Levitical  tribe. 

Returning  to  our  present  chapter,  it  gives 
an  account  of  thu  numbers  of  the  Levites, 
of  their  classification,  of  David's  fresh 
arrangement  of  them  and  fresh  distri- 
bution of  their  work  (vers.  1 — 6).  But 
altogether  the  largest  portion  of  the  chapter 
(vers.  6 — 32)  is  occupied  with  the  rehearsal 
of  the  heads  of  houses  composing  the  four 
Lcvite  families,  and  their  offices. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  numbering  and  the 
tlnssiftcation  of  the  Levites. 

Yer.  1. — ^David  •  .  .  made  Solomon  his  son 
Jdng  over  Israel.      Those  words  give  the 


key-note  of  what  remains  in  this  book. 
David  made  his  son  king,  as  he  himself 
acknowledges  (ch.  xxviiL  5),  under  the 
superintending  directitm  of  God.  The 
manner  in  which  the  formal  event  was  pre- 
cipitated by  the  conduct  of  Adonijah  is 
found  at  length  in  1  Kings  i.  11 — 53.  The 
original  occasion  alluded  to  there  more  than 
once,  on  which  David  promised,  '*  and 
sware  "  to  Bothshebo,  tliat  her  son  should 
be  his  chief  heir  and  successor  to  the 
throne,  is  not  distinctly  recorded.  We  can 
easily  assign  one  convenient  place  in  the 
history  for  it  to  have  found  mention,  viz.  in 
2  6am.  xii.  25.  The  brevity  of  tho  state* 
ment  which  composes  this  vers«,  when  com- 
pared with  all  the  deeply  interesting  matter 
recorded  in  1  Kings  i.  11 — 53,  is  one  among 
many  other  very  clear  illustrations  of  the 
purposed  silence  of  our  present  history  in 
certain  directions. 

Ver.  2.— He  gathered  together  all  the 
princes  of  Israel,  with  the  priests  and  the 
Levites.  As  on  an  occasiion  of  supreme 
importance,  David,  in  view  of  his  own 
death  and  of  his  son's  succession  at  the 
present  time,  calls  together  the  full  council, 
and  the  highest  possible  representative 
council  of  the  nation.  So  ch.  xxii.  17; 
xxiv.  6 ;  XXV.  1 ;  in  which  last  passage  the 
word  "captains"  should  have  have  been 
rendered  "princes"  (nir).     The  arrange- 


CH.  xxtn.  1-32.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


ment  of  the  Levitei,  and  the  dUtrlbution  of 
tbeir  fuDctions  in  the  presence  of  the 
princes,  u  here  described,  and  as  it  is  eveQ 
more  stion^rlj  put  (oh.  iir.  1),  "  by"  tbem, 
■implj  points  to  the  fact  thnt  the  altimnte 
outer  authnritj,  as  between  Chureli  and 
stale,  \aj  with  the  state.  TheChurcli  was 
made  for  it,  not  it  foi  the  Church.  And  it 
KM  the  dut;  of  the  state  to  defend  tha 
Church. 

Ver.  3. — Bow  the  LovltM  wen  nnmbered 
from  tha  age  of  thirty  ye"*  ui^  tipward. 
The  thing  which  Joab  bad  rightly  resisted 
<ch.  ui.  'i — 6)  and  shrunk  from  doing  was 
now  rigbtlj  done.  There  was  now  a  prac- 
tical and  B  legitimate  object  for  doiog  it 
Tbis  Donsidenition  helps  to  determluo  what 
it  was  that  "displeased  the  Lord"  in  the 
former  general  oeosus  of  David.  In  oon- 
Dection  with  this  alanse,  ch.  ixvii.  23 
should  be  noted,  wbete  we  read,  "  But 
David  took  not  the  number  of  them  from 
twentjr  jears  old  aDdnnder:  because  the 
Lord  had  said  he  would  increase  Israel 
like  to  the  stars  of  the  heaTens."  The 
period  from  the  age  of  thirty  jeora  np  to 
fifty  (Numb.  It.  S,  23,  35,  39)  was  fixed 
under  Mcise.<,  for  those  "  that  came  to  do  the 
service  of  the  miniatrj,  and  the  seriiee  of 
the  burden  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  congre- 
gation "  (Numb.  IT.  17).  It  U  not  ocrtain, 
howeier,  that  this  census  d^d  not  inquire,  in 
point  of  ^t,  respecting  some  below  this 
limit  of  age.  For  we  may  note  »er.  24  in 
the  Srst  place,  and  this  is  partly  explained 
by  Numb.  TiiL  23  —  25.  Tha  number 
■■  thirty  and  eight  tboosand  "  of  our  present 
verse  may  be  compared  with  the  "eight 
thousand  and  five  hmidred  uud  four  score  " 
of  Numb.  iv.  47,  48.  It  is  to  be  observed 
how  promptly  the  natioaal  council  did  oa 
this  occasion  commence  with  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  micisters  of  religion,  "the 
Levites."  As  we  read  (Numb.  iv.  S)  of 
"  thirty  years  "  of  sge  as  the  appointed  age 
for  the  commencement  of  their  ministry,  and 
(Nnmb.  Tii.  3)  of  tlie  present  or  "  offcriug  " 
of  "  sii  ODvercd  naggoas  and  twelve  oxen," 
which  the  twelvu  "princes  of  Israel,  lieada 
of  tho  house  of  tbeir  fathers,  princes  of  the 
tribes,"  offered  "before  the  UiTd,"   whioU 

Eatly  le^ened  the  laborious  work  of  the 
(ik'S;  BO  wo  find  the  commencing  age 
reduced  from  time  to  lime,  to  "  twentj-flTe  " 
years  (Numb.  viu.  24),  and  to  "twenty 
years"  of  age,  a*  in  our  present  chapter 
(vers.  24—28). 

Ver.  4. — To  Mt  forward  (Hebrew  n»A, 
Piel  conjugation).  The  strict  meaning  of 
the  word  liere  is  to  tuperinttnd.  The  word 
has  already  occurred  in  the  same  reuse  in 
ch.  XT.  21.  Offlsera  ud  JndgM  (Hebrew 
D-pat^^  cr'^mb'^).  The  explanation  of  (lie 
nuturo  of  the  work  of  thue^  M  really  oat- 


ward  work,  fbr  the  "outward  busineM  of 
Israel,"  is  distinctly  stated  in  ch.  ixvL  29; 
2  Chron.  lix.  5-11.  These  q^atr»  ore 
mentioned  under  tho  same  Hebrew  term  in 
Exod.  T.  6,  in  a  very  different  conneottoa. 
It  is  p?ain  that  thoy  were  genpially  foremen, 
or  overaeera  ;  while  tlie  judpes  took  cog- 
nizance of  matters  wliioh  involved  tha 
interests  uf  religion.  This  verse  and  tho 
following  give  Iwtween  tliem  the  /uur  divi- 
sions of  Levites,  afterwards  to  be  more 
fully  deacribod.  The  fuller  oocount  of  the 
"  twonty-tuur  ihnnsond  "  priests  (including 
attendants)  occupies  ch.  xxIt.  ;  the  "six 
thousand"  officers  and  judges,  cb.  xxri. 
20—32 ;  the  "  four  thousand  '  porters,  oh. 
iivi.  I — 19;  and  the  "four  thousand  who 
praised  the  Lord  with  the  instruments," 
oh.  IXT. 

Ver.  S.— Porters  (Hebrew  nnptf);  door- 
keeperi.  The  word  is  so  translated  in  ch. 
XT.  23.  21.  It  was  the  duty  of  tlieee  to 
keep  the  entrances  of  tho  sanctuary,  by  day 
and  night,  in  their  oonraes  (see  also  8 
Kings  Tii.  10, 11).  The  Cbaldaie  eguivalant 
of  tEis  word  is  inn  (Ezra  nL  21 ;  Dan.  ii. 
49).  There  is  no  connection  between  either 
the  word  or  idea  we  baTe  here,  and  those 
of  Pa.  liiiiv.  II,  where  the  Hithp.  conju- 
gation of  cpo  is  used,  and  the  sense  of  real- 
dence  probably  intended  to  be  conveyed. 
The   inftrnmsnta   whleli    I  made  .  . 


oden  on  David's  lipa  Men  give 
to  music  may  have  been  veiy  conacloua  of  it, 
in  ancient  days,  as  well  as  in  modern.  Tha 
language,  however,  does  not  neoesairily 
assert  that  David  claimed  the  Inventing  or 
in  any  similar  sense  the  mahiag  of  these 
musical  instruments,  hut  that  he  oppointed 
tbem  for  the  service  of  praise.  What  some 
of  them  were  may  beseoniu  2  Chron.  y.  12 — 
"  cymbals,  psalteries,  harps,  trumpets  "  (aea 
al8o2Chron.iiix25— 27;  Neh.xiL  35,  36; 
Amos  vi.  5). 

Ver.  6.— Here  begin  the  families  of  th» 
Levitcs,  as  arranged  in  courses  by  David. 
These  arrangimenls  were  scrupulonaly 
observed  by  Solomon  (2  Chron.  viiL  11 ; 
X»ii.  25). 

Ver.  7.— The  heads  of  the  houses  of  the 
first  Levite  family,  viz.,  of  Oershon,  are  now 
enumerated.  The  subject  occupies  tho  flvs 
verses  that  close  with  the  eleventh.  Tha 
Eimily  of  Qershon  branohea  into  two — tha 
name  of  the  one  Loadan  (so  written  again  in 
cb.  Iivi.  21 ;  but  in  cb.  vi.  17,  20,  as  well  •■ 
in  Eiod.  vi.  17  nod  Numb.  iti.  18,  writlea 
Libni),  and  the  name  of  the  other  Bhlmd- 


Ver. ! 


—This  1 


«or 


the  three  so-called  aons  of  laadan,  but  (oh. 
zivi.  22)  the  last  two  appear  to  have  been 
grandsons. 
Ver.  e. — This  vene  purporta  to  glre  tha 


d76 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,     [ch.  -t^tti,  1-«L 


til  roe  pons  of  Bhimci,  but  not  the  Bbimoi  of 
ver.  7,  but  of  a  deeceiidaiit  of  liOadan.  Ttiis 
is  made  clear,  not  only  bj  the  remaining 
clause  of  this  verso,  which  says,  **  Thf>8e 
were  the  cliicf  of  the  fathers  of  I^oadan," 
and  apiin  by  the  enumeration  in  ver.  10  of 
tons  of  that  Hhimci  who  is  coupled  with 
Laadan  in  ver.  7,  but  also  by  a  comparison 
of  ch.  xxiv.  22;  xxvi.  21— 2(>.  It  is,  of 
coun'C,  ])(>8friblo  lliat  the  name  stands  here 
in  error  for  some  other  name,  but  the  suppo- 
ail  ion  is  p:ratuitou8. 

Ver.  10.-(See  Zech.  xil.  13.)  The  Zina 
of  this  verse  is  Zizah  in  the  verv  next  verse, 
whicli  diffurence  of  form  cannot  be  occountctl 
for  by  any  mere  elcrieal  explanation.  The 
name  Jahath  tK'enis  to  have  been  a  favourite 
name  in  this  family  (ch.  vi.  43). 

Ver.  1 1 . — In  one  reckoning.  The  Hebrew 
of  the  word  hero  transhitrd  **  reckoning  *'  is 
rnp^,  i.e,  *'  enumeration."     The  meaning 

ii  tht  y  were  nccounted  as  only  one  "father's 
hiiuse."  The  derivative  8i;;nilieation8  of 
the  word  nru  *•  care,"  **  custodv,"  and 
ponernlly  ** office''  (2  Chron.  xxiii.  18). 
The  total  of  Gcrbhonito  hoiihcs  will  amount 
to  niiif,  three  of  these  being  houses  of 
Bhiniei,  and  hix  of  Laadnn. 

Vur.  12. — This  and  the  following  cipht 
Tcr>C8  give  tho  Kokath  heads  of  houses  (ch. 
y.  28 ;  vi.  2,  3,  18 :  Kxod  vi.  18  ;  Numb,  iii 
27).  four  in  their  leading  divisions. 

Ver.  13. — The  sons  of  Amram.  From 
Amram,  tho  iirrit-mt>ntioned  son  of  Kohatb, 
coniu  tlie  two  great  names  of  Aaron  and 
Xoses  (Kxnd.  vi.  20).  Aaron  was  separated, 
.  .  .  and  his  sons  for  ever.  This  statemmt 
must  be  read,  lK)th  with  ver.  3 — into  the 
number  of  Lcvites  mentioned  in  whicli 
Aaron  and  his  tjons  do  not  count — and  with 
yur.  14,  which  implies  tijat  Muses  and  his 
sons  did  count  into  that  number.  Tlie  sons 
of  Aaron  arc  dealt  with  in  ch.  xxiv.  1 — 19, 
infra.  That  he  shoold  sanctify  the  most 
koly  things.  The  Hebrew  text  renders  it 
doubtful  whether  tlie  rendering  hero  should 
not  rather  be,  "  Aaron  was  f>epii rated  to 
sanctify  him  as  most  holy,"  etc.  If  it  be  so, 
this  is  tho  onlv  place  where  tho  forcible 
term,  "holy  of  holies"  (mtist  holy),  is  used 
of  Aaron.  Tho  duties  of  tho  priest  arc 
described  as  threefold,  in  this  place,  viz. : 
"to  bum  incense  before  the  Lord," — this 
will  carry  the  id( a  of  n:aking  atonement; 
•*  to  minister  to  GckI,"  on  behalf  of  man, — 
this  will  be  one  part  of  the  work  of  a  medi- 
ator; and  "to  bless  in  the  Name  of  God," 
—this  will  fulfil  the  remaining  part.  For 
ever.  The  proviso  may,  no  doubt,  include 
reference  to  tho  "  ever- living  High  Priest." 
Tiio  threefold  summary  of  solemn  and  bene- 
ficent duties  receives  ample  illustration  from 
many  nassagcs,  and  in  special  connection 
^ith  the  names  of   Aaron    and  his  sous 


(Exod.  xxviii.  1,  38,  43 :  xxix.  1,  85,  45. 
XXX.  7—10;  Numb.  vL  22 — 27). 
Ver.  14. — Moms  the  num  A  Ood.    TUs 

title  is  distinguished  by  the  presence  of  tbs 
article.  The  *  Speaker*8  Commentarj '  men- 
tions it  as  occurring  only  nine  times*  of 
which  five  instances  belonji^  to  Moses  (Dent 
xxxiii.  1 ;  Josh.  xiv.  6  ;  2  Chron.  xxz.  16; 
Ezra  iii.  2 ;  with  the  present  place) ;  three 
instances  show  tho  title  applied  to  David 
(2  Chron.  viii.  14;  Neb.  xii.  24,  36):  sod 
once  it  is  applied  to  Shemaiah  (1  Kings  xiL 
22).  AltIiou«:h  the  sons  of  Moses  belonged, 
OS  is  here  said,  to  the  tribe  of  Levi,  they  did 
not  belong  to  that  portion  which  discharged 
priestly  duties. 

Ver.'lS.— We  read  of  the  birth  of  OsnhoiK 
to  Moses  and  Zipponih  (Exod.  ii.  22;  see 
also  xviii.  4,  where  Elieser  is  also  spoken  of). 
Ver.  16.-«8hebn6l  (comp.  ch.  xxiv.  20, 
where  the  name  appears  as  SJiubael ;  sad 
xxvi.  24). 

Ver.  17.— BehaUah.  He  was  the  eUif 
(e'Ki'i);  but  it  happened  that  he  was  also  the 
only  son.  Hence  it  is  added  in  antithesis 
that  his  sons  were  Ysry  many  (see  the  name 
again,  ch.  xxvi.  25).  The  non-priestly  Am- 
raniitts  are  therefore  seen  to  correspond  with 
tho  houses  of  Shebuel  and  Kehabiah. 

Ver.  18.— Of  the  sons  of  Ishar.  While 
six  names  in  all  are  mentioned  under  Amram, 
only  one,  Shelomith,  is  found  under  hi^  next 
brother,  Izhar.  This  Shtdorcith  (spelt  ShtUh 
vwth  in  cli.  xxiv.  2*2)  is  not  tho  auuie  with 
tho  Shilomitli  of  ch.  xxvi.  25,  26. 

Ver.  19.— Hebron.  This  third  son  of 
Kohath  furnishes  four  houses.  8o  again 
in  tho  twenty-third  verse  of  the  following 
chapti-r. 

Ver.  20.— Jesiah  ;  in  ver.  25  of  next  chapter 
written  I»hiah.  The  two  houses  from 
Uzziel  given  in  this  verse  make  up  the 
number  of  houses  from  Kohath  to  nine  (as 
given  again  in  ch.  xxiv.  20—24),  and  to 
those  must  be  added  the  priests  through 
Aaron  and  his  sons,  two  houses,  making  iu 
all  eleven. 

Ver.  21. — This  and  the  followinpr  two 
verses  give  tlio  houses  of  Merari,  contribut- 
ing four  houses,  and,  with  tho  nine  Ger- 
shonite  and  eleven  Kohathite,  adding  up  to 
twentvfour.  Merari  is  tho  third  son  of 
Levi  (Gen.  xlvi.  11).  Tho  Mahli  and  Xnshi 
of  this  verse  were  possibly  grand  ton  and 
son  of  ^lemri,  if  wo  follow  the  guidance  of 
ch.  vi.  47.  Yet  it  would  seem  far  more 
natural  to  explain  this  last-quoted  passage 
by  our  ver.  23,  which  would  then  parallel  it. 
Otherwise  wo  must  account  for  the  name  of 
Mahli  habitually  standing  firat,  as  here,  as 
in  eh.  vi.  10  also,  and  ch.  xxiv.  26,  as  also 
in  Exod.  vi.  19;  Numb.  iii.  20,  33,  etc;  in 
all  of  which  places  the  statement  is  as  dis- 
tinct OS  iu  this  verse,  that  Mahli  and  Mushi 


cfl.  xxm.  1— 32.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


877 


were  Bona.  This  and  the  following  verso 
roust  b©  compared  particularly  with  ch.  xxiv. 
26—29 :  the  Jaaziah  of  which  passage  was 
evidently  no  son  of  Merari,  on  a  par  with 
l^Iahli  and  Mushi,  but  a  later  descendant. 
His  descendants  were  three — Shoham,  Zac- 
cur,  and  Ibri  (Beno  being  no  proper  name, 
but  signifying  "  his  son"). 

Ver.  22.— Their  brethren  .  .  .  took  them ; 
{.e.  their  kinsmen,  as  margin,  "took  them" 
to  wife  (Numb,  xxxvi.  5—12).  (For  the  sons 
of  Kish,  sec  ch.  xxiv.  29.) 

Ver.  23. — ^The  soni  of  Kiuhi  (comp.  ch. 
xxiv.  30). 

Ver.  24. — This  and  the  remaining  verses 
of  the  chapter  contain  some  general  pro- 
yihions  regarding  the  offices  and  future  work 
of  the  Levites— in  part  David's  last  edition 
of  such  provisions.  (On  the  present  verse 
oomp.  Numb.  i.  1—4 ;  iv.  1—3,  21—23,  29, 
30 ;  viii.  23 — 26.)  It  is  not  easy  to  reconcile 
this  verge  with  ver.  3.  Keil  cuts  the  knot 
at  once  by  supposing  the  "  thirty  "  years  of 
ver.  3  to  be  tho  error  of  a  copyist,  to  whoso 
memory  the  Mosaic  census  was  present 
And  with  Bertheau,  ho  objects  to  the  suppo- 
sition that  this  verse  describes  a  supple- 
mentary census,  in  conformity  with  "David's 
lust  words"  (ver. 27), and  as  contrasted  with 
his  former  directions.  With  the  exception 
of  what  is  contained  in  vers.  25—27,  it  is 
true  that  these  do  not  offer  themselves  suffi- 
cient indications  to  make  one  feel  confident 
of  this  explanation.  On  the  other  hand,  to 
set  down  the  number  **  thirty  "  in  ver.  3  at 
once  to  the  mistake  of  a  copyist  is  too 
summary  and  convenient  a  way  of  escaping 
an  awkward  difficulty.  It  is  evident  that 
the  following  three  verses  do  purport  to 
explain  why  at  this  time  the  age  of  allow- 
able service  was  altered  to  a  standard  so 
much  lower  than  of  old,  and  to  assert  that 
this  alteration  was  recognized  by  tho  last 
orders  of  David. 

Ver.  25.— For  David  laid.  The  "  for  "  of 
this  clause  cannot  be  supposed  to  account 
exclusively  for  the  inclusion  in  the  census 
of  Levites  beginning  from  the  age  of  twenty 
years;  it  accounts  no  doubt  for  the  whole 
proceeding.  Since  there  would  bo  no  more 
joumeyings  for  people,  for  buildings,  or  for 
sacred  vessels,  it  was  now  fully  time  to 
organize  religious  duty  and  *'  the  service  of 
the  house  of  God  "  in  a  manner  adapted  to 
permanent  institutions.  In  order  to  this, 
the  first  step  was  to  know  and  to  arrange  the 
number  of  those  who  were  answerable  for 
sacred  duties. 

Ver.  26.— And  also  unto  the  Levites. 
Emphasis  is  laid  on  the  thought  of  the 
relief  that  permanent  habitation  in  Jeru- 
salem conferred  on  the  Levites  over  and 
above  the  whole  body  of  the  rest  of  the 
,  people.    They  will  no  more  be  mere  burden- 


bearers,  though  the  burdens  they  bore  were 
of  the  most  sacred  character. 

Ver.  27. — ^The  .  .  .  words  of  David.  Al- 
though tliere  are  many  instances  of  the  ex- 
pression, **  the  words  of"  David  or  some 
other  king,  as  equivalent  to  hiu  'Moings** 
(ch.  xxix.  29 ;  2  Chron.  ix.  29),  and  not  a 
few  instances  of  the  same  phrase,  standing 
for  the  "  account "  or  "  historv "  of  any 
one  (ch.  xxvii.  24 ;  xxix.  29,  three  times ; 
2  Chron.  ix.  29X  the  expression  here  mav 
rather  parallel  ))assages  like  2  8am.  xxiii. 
1 ;  2  Chron.  xxix.  30. 

Ver.  28.— Beoanse  their  oifiee;  i.e.  pro- 
bably the  office  or  position  of  all,  including 
the  younger  Levites.  The  development 
and  greater  detail  of  their  varied  duties, 
as  the  working  staff  of  the  '*  sons  of 
Aaron,"  are  alluded  to  here;  and  how 
priests,  licvites,  and  Nethinim  (ch.  ix.  2) 
all  now  formally  undertook  the  whole  range 
and  scope  of  their  functions  is  suggested. 
The  work  of  these  assistants  of  the  **  sent 
of  Aaron  "  is  detailed  in  three  or  four  items, 
so  far  as  this  verse  geos.  They  are  first 
generally  for  the  sacred  servioe  of  the  home 
of  the  Lord.  That  sacred  service  is  in  the 
matter  of  the  oonrti  (Exod.  xxvii.  9;  1 
Kings  vi.  30 ;  Condor's  '  Bible  Handbook,* 
pp.  376 — 378,  2nd  edit.) ;  of  the  ohamben 
(ch.  ix.  26;  Ezek.  xl.  17;  xlii.  1 ;  Neh.  x. 
38;  Conder's  'Bible  Handbook,'  pp.  376, 
380);  of  the  purifying  of  all  holy  things; 
and  of  the  work,  t.e,  the  performing  of  the 
sacred  servioe  of  the  house  of  Ood. 

Ver.  29. — Both  for  the  shewbread,  and 
.  .  .  site.  Seven  other  specifications  of  ser- 
vice are  continued  in  this  verse,  with  which 
wo  may  compare  ch.  ix.  26—32.  For  Vie 
shewbread.  The  first  mention  of  shewbread 
is  found  in  Exod.  xxv.  30.  The  directions 
for  making  it  are  found  in  Lev.  xxiv.  5 — 9. 
The  twelve  unleavened  cakes  of  which  it 
consisted,  heaped  on  the  table  in  two  piles, 
represented  tlie  twelve  tribes,  and  intimated 
the  Divine  acceptance  of  the  offerings  of 
each  faithful  trine  (see  also  2  Chron.  xiii. 
11).  For  the  fine  flonr  for  meat  offering. 
This  is  spoken  of  in  Exod.  xxix.  40 ;  Lev.  iL 
1—7 ;  vi.  14,  15,  19—27 ;  xxiiL  13 ;  xxiv. 
5.  For  the  unleavened  wkes  ...  the  pan 
.  .  .  fried.  These  are  spoken  of  in  Lev.  ii. 
4 — 7,    For  all  manner  of  measure  and  slie ; 

Hebrew  nrtD^  rmipp-^D^  These  two  words 
occur  also  in  Lev.  xix.  35, 36,  where  they  are 
rendered  respectively  '•  in  measure  "and  "  in 
meteyard."  Perhaps  the  exactor  rendering 
here  would  be  **for  all  matters  of  liquid 
and  solid  measure." 

Ver.  30.— To  stand  every  morning  to 
thank  and  praise  the  Lord  (so  ver.  13  of 
this  chapter  and  ch.  xxv.  7).  Though 
Berthcau  sees  no  special  sign  in  tiie  con- 
nection for  this  description  to  be  confined  to 


378 


I'HK  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ch.  xxm.  1-«L 


the  four  thonmiid  whose  special  work  and 
privik'iB^  it  was,  yet  it  is  in  entire  aualogy 
with  the  whole  oontext  so  to  confine  it 

Yer.  31.->And  to  offer;  Hebrew,  "and 
for  all  the  olfirin*;  of  burnt  offerings." 
For  other  references  to  the  help  which 
the  Levites  p^ave  in  the  matter  of  the 
borut  offerings,  and  for  the  number  (2 
Sam.  ii.  15 ;  Numb,  xxviii.  1—81)  of  them, 
see  Numb.  xxix.  2—31;  2  Chron.  xxix.  32 
— 34  ;  XXXV.  2 — 12.  The  priests  alouo  per- 
formed the  actual  sacrifices.  The  set  feasts. 
These  refer  to  the  three :  (1)  the  PossoYer 


(Lev.  xxiii.  4,  5);  (2)  the  Penteoost  (Ler. 
xxiii.  15—17);  (3)  the  Feoat  of  IVibenudM 
(Lev.  xxiii.  33—37). 

Yer.  32.— Keep  the  tHuagn  ot  the  teto* 
naele  .  .  .  holy  place  •  •  .  monm  of  Aazoa. 
This  concluding  verse   ia  eqalTalent  to  a 

Quotation  from  Numb,  xviti.  1 — 7;  in  the 
rst  verse  of  which  passage  Aaron  and  the 
priests  generally  are  reminded  both  of  their 
representative  character  and  position,  and 
of  the  solemn  rebponsibilitj  which  rested 
on  them. 


H0MILETIC9. 

Yer.  13. — The  three/old /unctions  of  the  priest.  In  the  words  of  this  verse  the  com- 
piler of  the  Chrunicles  sums  the  characteristic  functions  of  the  priest.  It  was  now  nearly 
five  centuries  since  these  had  been  distinctly  prescribed  by  heavenly  legislation  for  the 
religious  observance  of  a  nation,  and  for  the  religious  education  of  far  more  than  a 
nation,  when  David  reviews  the  solemn  institution  of  the  priesthood.  He  wishes  to 
see  holy  men  in  their  places,  and  holy  duties  efficiently  discharged.  Time  has  helped 
to  show  their  importance,  and  to  illustrate  the  deeper  significance  which  inheredin 
them.  Perhaps  it  has  in  some  degree  availed  also  to  disconnect  men*s  minds  from  their 
pure  original.  A  journeying  people,  a  warring  nation,  a  wandering  ark  and  sometimes 
dishonoured,  an  irregular  celebration  of  religious  service,  have  all  tended  in  some  degn^ 
to  harm  the  freshness  of  impression  and  of  stamp  which  a  Heaven-derived  **  pattern" 
should  make  on  men*8  hearts  though  ages  and  centuries  have  passed.  Now  that  the 
nation  was  settling  in  its  new  territory  long  promised,  the  crisis  was  opportune  for  David 
to  reconnect  the  great  religious  authorities  of  his  kingdom  with  their  original  beginning. 
And  our  chronicler,  though  added  centuries  have  passed,  when  he  writes,  knows  their 
importance  too  well  to  omit  the  record  of  the  fact,  even  though  it  be  repetition  and 
copy  ouly.  The  threefold  work  of  the  priest  is  the  matter  of  description  here,  and 
consists  of — 

I.  The  duty  to  burn  incense  before  the  Lord.  The  burning  of  the  incense  on 
that  golden  altar  in  the  holy  place,  which  was  constantly  fed  with  the  costliest  of 
material,  was  the  act  distinctively  of  the  priest.  For  the  "  stranger  to  come  near  ** 
with  any  view  of  usurping  this  function  was  to  incur  prompt  punishment  (Numb.  xvL 
40;  2  Chron.  xxvi.  16, 18).  Do  sudden  danger  and  the  threat  of  wrath  imjjend?  the 
ruler,  legislator,  prophet,  conjures  the  priest  to  "  take  a  censer,  and  put  fire  therein  from 
off  the  altar,  and  put  on  incense,  and  go  quickly  unto  the  congregation,  and  make  an 
atonement  for  them  "  (Numb.  xvi.  46,  47).  The  burning  of  the  incense  was  the  immediate 
preliminary  of  the  morning  sacrifice,  or  immediate  accompaniment  of  the  evening 
sacriiice  (Exod.  xxx.  7, 9 ;  Luke  i.  9, 10 ;  Lev.  xvi.  13),  and  was  a  very  special  part  of  the 
arrangements  of  the  ccr(?monial  on  the  great  Day  of  Atonement,  and  of  its  sacrifice  (Lev. 
xvi.  11 — 13).  It  is  difficult,  amid  a  choice  of  many  theories,  to  identify  with  any 
comfortable  assurance  the  real  symbolical  significance  of  incense  and  its  burning,  yet 
the  fact  remains  patent  of  its  close  relationship  with  the  act  of  sacrifice  in  all  the  formal 
services  of  the  Israelites.  As  it  is  said,  "And  without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission  " 
(Heb.  ix.  22),  so  it  might  almost  without  qualification  be  said  that  without  incense 
there  was  no  shedding  of  blood  for  any  of  the  stated  sacrificial  objects.  This  would 
sufficiently  defend  the  use  of  this  part  of  the  high  priest's  (and  later  of  the  ordinary 
priest's)  duty,  as  speaking  the  very  first  and  cliiefest  of  all  that  makes  up  his  raison 
d'etre.  But  beyond  this,  it  is  irai)ossiblo  to  doubt  that  the  burning  of  the  incense,  in 
the  golden  censer  and  with  the  special  fire,  had  its  own  significance,  worthy  of  the 

Eriest's  own  performing.  Whether  it  were  expressive  of  the  fragrant  acccpti\bleness  of 
uman  service  and  sacrifice  to  him  in  heaven,  as  it  ascended ;  or  whether  rather  its 
diffusive  and  pervading  influences  amid  the  congregation  or  the  groups  of  humanity 
below  were  regarded ;  whether  it  symbolized  the  rising  prayers  and  aspirations  and 
glowing  devotion  of  those  who  sought  their  Father  and  God,  or,  as  has  been  suggested^ 


CH.  xxnL  1—32.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  379 

sornething  more  specific,  as  e,g,  prayer  alone,  or  that  form  of  prayer  called  intercession, 
aud  so  understood,  to  be  regarded  as  typical  of  the  intercession  of  the  great  Intercessor; 
it  spoke  some  proffered  approach  of  the  sinful  creature  to  the  condescending  Creator, 
fit  to  be  set  forth  by  the  priest  himself,  and  by  none  inferior  to  him.  For  the  modem 
apostle  of  Christ,  for  the  modem  minister  and  preacher  of  the  truth  of  Christ,  for  the 
modern  pastor  and  under-shepberd  of  *'  the  flock  of  God,"  there  is  no  duty  that  consists 
in  the  offering  of  sacrifice  on  their  behalf  or  the  burning  of  incense ;  but  upon  such 
lies  perpetual  and  most  solemn  the  responsibility  of  pointing  to  the  Sacrifice  for  sin,  and 
of  insisting  on  all  that  helps  to  denote  the  acceptableness  and  the  fragrance  of  that 
Sacrifice  so  illustrious.  There  is  nothing  more  incumbent  on  the  man  who  professes  to 
seek  to  lead  his  fellow-creature  to  God  than  this.  And  it  should  have  a  prominence 
given  to  it,  not  less  decided  than  that  indicated  by  the  place  here  given  in  this  three- 
fold description  of  the  priest's  duties  to  the  burning  of  incense. 

II.  The  duty  to  ministeb  unto  thb  Lord.  Tiiis  simple  and  ezpresdve  description 
occurs  above  eighty  times  in  the  Pentateuchal,  historical,  and  prophetical  books  of 
Scripture.  It  covers  the  whole  range  of  those  religious  services,  whether  of  the  con- 
gregational or  of  the  individual  kind,  allowed  or  appointed  as  the  acceptable  methods 
of  the  approach  to  €K>d  of  his  people  Israel.  He  was  not  accessible  to  every  person 
directly  nor  by  every  directest  conceivable  method.  Long  and  plain  as  were  the  typical 
teachings  of  the  sacrifices  as  such,  so  long  aud  plain  was  the  typical  teaching  under  the 
ancient  system  of  priests,  of  thU  fact,  that  the  high  and  holy  One  was  to  be  approached 
not  without  introduction,  intervention,  interposition.  The  various  conditions  of  the  inter- 
mediate approach  were  committed  to  the  faithful  priest.  He  was  to  become  instructed 
and  versed  In  them.  He  was  to  see  that  the  people  in  no  way  suffered  loss  or  unnecessary 
delay  or  difiBculty  in  complying  with  them.  And  he  was  answerable  directly  to  the  Loni, 
whose  servant  he  was  for  the  people's  sake.  Hence  he  is  said  to  '*  minister  unto  the 
Lord,*'  although  it  was  on  behalf  of  the  congregation  or  the  individual  Israelite.  While, 
again,  the  modem  preacher  and  pastor  has  no  duty  that  can  be  described  as  the  fao- 
simile  of  this,  yet  in  the  first  place,  for  all  congregational  prayer  at  least,  his  voioe 
performs  a  service  not  dissimilar,  as  for  some  pastoral  helps  as  well.  But  much  rather 
would  we  again  trace  the  deeper  analogy.  The  Minister,  the  Intercessor,  is  to  be 
pointed  to,  of  whom  it  is  said,  "  He  is  Minister  of  the  sanctuary,  and  true  tabernacle, 
which  the  Lord  pitched,  and  not  man ; "  and  that  '*  he  bath  obtained  a  more  excellent 
ministry,  by  how  much  also  he  is  the  Mediator  of  a  better  covenant "  (Heb.  viii.  2,  6). 

III.  The  duty  to  bless  ik  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  This  completes  the  sketch  of  the 
priesfs  work.  He  not  only  presents  sacrifice  and  bums  incense ;  he  not  only  ushers 
the  worshipper  and  his  worship  into  the  presence  of  the  high  and  holy  God ;  he  also 
is  privileged  to  speak  the  great  God*s  blessings,  to  pronounce  his  favour,  to  assure  of  his 
pardon  and  mercy,  and  to  wake  to  melody  the  hearts  and  voices  of  the  vast  congre^- 
tion  sometimes,  in  response  to  an  announcement  of  Divine  goodness  and  love.  We 
know  now  no  priests  who  have  power  to  pronounce  in  their  own  right  the  absolution 
or  remission  of  sins,  or  to  volunteer  the  assurance  of  Divine  benediction.  The  priests 
of  Israel  had  not  themselves  such  a  right.  But  neither  now  does  God  authorize  or 
inspire  any  class  of  men,  or  any  individual  man,  to  speak  in  these  tones  to  their  fellow- 
men,  except  on  the  real  humble,  hearty  compliance  of  these  latter  with  the  conditions 
laid  down  in  Scnpture,  To  these  men  must  apply,  not  to  the  voice  or  even  the  wisest^ 
holiest  judgment  of  a  living  man,  who  cannot  tell  the  inmost  heart  nor  gauge  the 
absolute  sincerity  of  the  applicant  Still,  indeed,  may  we  Sjpeak  hope  to  the  repentant^ 
peace  to  the  humble  of  heart,  mercy  and  love  to  the  tmstful  and  true,  but  as  it  were  in 
the  quotations  of  Scri|)ture,  and  well  safe-guarded  by  the  Scripture  conditions.  All 
beyond  this,  all  beside  this,  will  be  beyond  our  power  and  beside  our  ri^^hts.  And 
instead  of  being  the  better  part  of  a  true  priest,  we  are  tumed  into  false  prophets  even. 

Ver.  26. — The  eye  open  to  religious  opportunity.  And  that  th«  eye  of  David  showed 
itself  now  ojien  to  religious  opportunity  is  not  more  plain  than  the  reason  of  it — that 
his  heart  was  open  to  it,  nay,  anxious  and  eager  for  it  also.  A  crisis  has  now  come,  for 
which  presumably  the  innermost  heart  of  David  has  often  longed.  Though  he  had 
been  the  man  of  much  war  and  of  abounding  activity,  yet  up  and  down  his  doings  and 
his  sayings  there  are  not  wanting  indications  that  his  heart  sighed  £ar  peace  and 


8B0  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHBONIGLBBL    [ok.  zabiLP-tt 


iwl.  *0b  ibftt  I  bad  winn  like  a  dotel  for  then  would  I  fljr  Away;  and  In  at  ml* 
rPfe.lT.  6);  "  Rest  In  the  Lord  *  (Pt.  xxxtU.  7) ;  «' Return  to  thy  nat,  O  my  Mai" 
(P*.  cxtL  7).  The  crbit  it  not  one  when  pasdon  most  haTO  ita  way,  wlica  ita 
measures  must  be  taken,  when  all  things  must  be  left  to  drift  or  elae  all  ba  tooM 
with  an  unwontedlj  firm  band.  It  is  a  cri»is  of  much  happier  kind.  Yoluma  aftv 
Tolume  of  the  historv  of  Israel  has  been  filled,  and  yolumes  not  a  few  of  the  psmad 
biography  of  David  have  been  unerringly  written.  The  last  opena.  Before  his  natios 
is  sprnd  out  a  wide,  fair,  enduring  prospect  of  rest  Jerusalem  ^  is  at  rest,  and  is  quiet* 
(Isa.  x\r.  7).  David's  whole  heart  enters  Into  the  satisfaction  of  the  thov^k  14 
US  note  the  admirable  use  he  makes  of  this  state  of  things. 

L  Ua  U8E8  THE  CRISIS  FOB  TUB  puaposBS  OF  BEViEW.  1.  SpecUl  audiblo  acknowkdl|» 
ment  is  made  of  surpasung  mercy.  **  David  sauj"  it.  He  did  not  merely  obeertei^ 
ponder  it,  and  then  keep  it  locked  in  his  own  heart.  While  he  himaelf  enten  into  thi 
satisfaction  of  the  thought,  he  utters  it  aloud.  2.  David  owns  the  OiTor  of  the  good  it 
question.  It  has  not  come  of  itself.  It  has  not  come  of  circumstanoea,  of  rcactki 
traceable  enough,  of  secondary  causes  whether  more  or  less  remote.  **  Tlie  Lord  God 
of  Israel "  is  the  Giver,  to  whom  all  the  nation's  Indebtedness  shall  be  ccmfeawd.  IL 
David  suggests  the  harmony  of  the  gift  with  the  Giver.  Gkxl  is  the  Giyer.  Hie  people  thosi 
who  take  all  the  benefit  of  his  giving.  And  this  the  gift — rtit  Hast  under  the  DMm 
l^otection,  In  the  Divine  shade,  the  shadow  of  his  wings  and  hia  throne^  who  bean  a 
special  favour  to  ''his  people,"  and  who  alone  can  make  them  ''dwell  eeeuteL"  Foil 
cve^  vray  of  iuffgestian  Is  the  utterance  of  David,  were  It  but  an  articcilate  aoliloqnj. 

if.  David,  as  a  kino,  lbadeb,  tbacheb,  illustbates  the  dutt  op  bdob  a  a 
0EIBI8.  Vr  bile  his  laiigiuige  necessitates  the  comparison  of  the  present  with  the  peat  Vf 
Tery  force  of  the  contrast  they  present,  and  while  it  Invites  men  to  enter  gratefully  oa  the 
present  enjoyments  divinely  offered,  yet  it  associates  new  work,  new  opportunity,  with 
these.  Still  the  quest  Is  to  be  loyalty  and  love  to  duty.  He  practically  leminda  a 
whole  nation  that :  1.  Rest  Is  favourable  for  order,  ^ow,  order  may  be  boaoond. 
recovered  where  it  had  been  disturbed,  studied  to  greater  perfection  even  where  it  had 
not  been  very  palpably  Infringed.  Order  is  the  beauty  and  glory  of  the  whole  unlTena 
What  room  for  improvement  in  it,  in  each  individual  heart  and  life,  and  in  the  life  of 
every  community  f  2.  Ki-st  is  favourable  to  growth.  The  winds  that  rock  the  trees 
help  far  down  in  the  earth  to  provoke  their  roots  to  feel  room  for  further  growth,  but 
the  growing  itself  is  not  done  while  the  storm  lasts.  How  true  this  is  of  human  character  I 
It  is  our  passionate,  importunate  cry  to  bo  hidden,  to  be  sheltered,  till  the  tempest  is 
overpast,  and  the  fury  of  the  storm  is  spent  But  afterward  we  grow.  3.  Rest  la  the 
time  for  the  cultivation  of  the  devotion  of  the  heart.  It  is  true  with  no  superficial,  no 
mere  sentimental  truth,  tbat^> 

*"  The  calm  retreat,  the  silent  shade, 
With  prayer  and  praise  agree. 
And  seom  by  thy  sweet  bounty  made 
For  those  that  follow  thee." 

That  Jesus  recommended  the  sanctum  of  the  closet  of  prayer  with  the  door  closed  •  that 
he  also  himself  sought  retirement,  privacy,  solitude,  with  either  the  cover  of  deep  shade 
or  the  suggestion  of  commanding  prospects  unfolding  to  the  gaze,  on  mountain  aide  or 
summit,  are  strong  testimonies  to  the  genius  of  rest  and  to  the  habitat  of  genuine 
devotion.  4.  Kest  gives  grand  opportunity  for  religious  enterprise.  Does  the  language 
sound  a  contradiction  or  paradoxical  ?  It  is  not  so  in  reality.  The  higher  forma  and 
conceptions  of  rest  do  not  c^msist  in  inactivity,  in  the  indulgence  of  lassitude,  but  in  the 
cessation  of  waste  energy,  toil  as  unprofitable  as  lal)oriou8,  or,  if  necessary  (as  the  wan 
of  Israel),  as  painful  to  the  heart  as  strenuous  to  the  hand.  Most  significant  in  this 
direction  the  wonls,  "  For  he  that  hath  entered  into  his  rest,  he  also  hath  ceased  from 
his  own  works  "  (Ueb.  iv.  10).  Hoiven  itself  cannot  possibly  be  viewed  with  satisfac- 
tion as  a  place  or  a  state  of  inactivity.  All  the  tasks  of  highest  devotion  may  be  sup* 
posed  to  be  there  the  material  of  most  strenuous  achievement.  But  it  will  surely  be 
both  a  place  and  a  state  delivered  from  the  restless  worry  of  care,  the  restless  strife 
with  sin,  the  restless  struggle  to  elude  or  to  bear  sorrow,  so  familiar  to  the  preseni.  So 
when  all  outer  care  and  war  and  work  were  removed  awhile  from  the  lot  of  Israel. 


CH.  xxm.  1— 32.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  881 


David  flies  to  the  thought  of  the  great  opportunity  open  for  the  works  of  religion.  To 
these  he  directs  his  own  enthusiastic  study  and  labour.  To  these  he  calls  h&  princes, 
priests,  and  a  whole  people. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  14. — **  The  man  of  GodJ*  This  designation  was  not  peculiar  to  Moses.  In  the 
historical  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  we  find  prophets  sent  with  a  Divine  message  to 
their  fellow-mortals  described  as  men  of  God.  In  the  New  Testament  we  meet  with  the 
expression  in  Paul's  Epistles,  where  the  inspired  writers  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  are 
denominated  **holy  men  of  God,"  and  where  Timothy  is  addressed  in  similar  lanc^uage. 
Moses  is  designated  *'  the  man  of  God  **  in  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  is  so  called  by 
Caleb  as  we  read  in  the  Book  of  Joshua,  and  is  so  denominated  in  the  title  prefixed  to 
the  ninetieth  psalm. 

I.  MoSES  WAS  THE  MAN  OF  G0D*8  SELECTION  AND  PRESERVATION.     A  kind  Provideuce 

watched  over  him  from  the  beginning  of  his  life.  Whilst  multitudes  were  put  to  death, 
the  child  of  Divine  beauty  was  spared. 

II.  MosES  WAS  THE  MAN  OF  God's  EDUCATION  AND  DISCIPLINE.  Trained  in  the  court 
and  the  learning  of  Egypt,  and  afterwards  in  the  rougher  but  wholesome  school  of  the 
Midian  desert,  this  man  was  fitted  by  knowledge,  by  hardship,  by  society  of  the  most 
diverse  kinds,  for  the  great  future  before  him. 

III.  Moses  was  the  man  of  God's  vocation.  When  God  had  trained  him  for  his 
work,  he  called  him,  and  made  known  to  him  his  sacred  Name  and  attributes,  that 
thenceforth  he  might  have  the  living  consciousness  of  the  Divine  presence. 

IV.  MoSES  WAS  THE  MAN  WHOM  GOD  ADMITTED  TO  SPECIAL  COMMUNION  WITH  HIM- 
SELF. By  the  flaming  thorn  tree,  upon  the  mountain  solitude,  at  the  door  of  the 
sacred  tent,  Jehovah  met  with  his  servant,  and  spake  with  him  as  a  man  with  his 
friend* 

y.  MOSBS  WAS  A  MAN  TO  WHOM  GOD  COMMUNICATED  HIS  OWN  SPIRIT  AND  HIS  OWK 

<;haracteb.  Again  and  again  did  the  Lord  speak  words  of  confidence  and  approval 
with  regard  to  his  servant  Moses.  His  meekness  and  holiness,  his  zeal  for  the  glory  of 
Grod,  his  patriotic  desires  for  the  welfare  of  his  nation,  all  were  indications  that  he  was 
no  unconscious  instrument,  but  a  willing  and  consecrated  agent,  in  the  hands  of  Heaven. 

YL  Moses  was  the  man  whom  God  authorized  to  declare  his  will.  "The 
Law  was  given  by  Moses."  Hence  he  is  called  "  the  lawgiver."  Penetrated  with  the 
mind  of  the  Supreme,  he  was  empowered  to  promulgate,  for  the  guidance  of  Israel,  a 
code  of  laws  altogether  superior  to  those  of  other  nations  in  ancient  times.  These  laws 
embraced  the  moral  as  well  as  the  civic  life  of  the  community,  and  aimed  at  the 
regulation  of  the  heart  as  well  as  the  life.  Not  only  ordinances  for  conduct  generally, 
but  instructions  for  religious  worship  and  sacrifice,  were  communicated  by  this 
"  mediator  "  and  "  servant "  and  *'  man  "  of  God. 

VIJ.  Moses  was  the  man  God  chose  to  bring  out  and  lead  his  people.  He 
was  the  shepherd  who  brought  up  the  flock  out  of  Egypt,  and  conducted  the  wanderers 
through  the  wilderness,  and  brought  them  to  the  verge  of  the  green  pastures  of  Canaan. 
Qod  led,  by  the  hand  of  his  servant,  the  people  who  were  his  heritage. 

VIII.  MosES  WAS  the  man  whom  God  buried  and  so  took  to  himself.  As  he 
was  often  alone  with  Jehovah  in  life,  so  he  was  alone  with  him  in  death. 

IX.  Moses  was  God's  type  of  Christ.  Jesus  was  the  Prophet  whom  God  raised 
up  like  unto  his  servant  Moses.  '*  The  Law  was  given  by  Moses,  but  grace  and  truth 
came  by  Jesus  Christ." 

Practical  lesson.  If  the  children  of  Israel  were  bound  to  hear  and  obey  Moses, 
the  man  of  God,  the  servant^  how  much  more  are  we  bound  to  hear  and  obey  Christ, 
theSonofGodl— T. 

Ver.  30. — Morning  and  evening  praise.  The  work  of  the  Levites  was  "  to  wait  on 
the  sons  of  Aaron  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord."  It  was,  therefore,  to  some 
extent  servile  and  menial.  Tet  the  work  was  dignified  and  hallowed  by  the  fact  that  it 
was  truly  rendered  to  the  Grod  of  Israel,  the  Lord  of  alL    The  function,  however^ 


382  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHBONIGLEa     [cb.  ^imT  1-S. 

described  in  the  text  is  the  most  honourable  that  can  be  performed  by  man.  Tk 
glorified  assembly  above,  the  angelic  hosts  before  the  throne,  are  thus  peipetosDj 
occupied. 

I.  Thr  office  itbelf  of  praise.  The  Levites  were  doubtless  organized  by  Darid, 
as  never  before.  His  poetical  and  musical  gifts  were  consecrated  to  the  praise  of 
Jehovah.  His  psalms  from  that  time  forward  became  the  vehicle  of  human  thankt- 
giviog  and  adoration.  The  instruments  of  music  which  he  appointed  became  easentisl 
to  the  eccK^siastical  orchestra  of  the  temple.  And  whilst  thanks  and  praise  are  das 
firom  all  iutelli^ient  beings  to  the  God  of  providence,  the  human  race  has  a  special  iooc 
to  present,  a  special  service  to  offer — thanks  and  praise  to  the  God  of  all  grace  aai 
salvation. 

II.  Tub  periodical  offering  of  praise.  It  was  appointed  for  the  Levites  to  stand, 
in  due  order  and  according  to  their  courses,  in  the  presence  of  Jehovah.  And  eveiy 
momiog  and  every  evening  the  sacrifice  of  praise  was  offered  as  regularly  as  the  burnt 
offering  itself.  How  suitable  was  this  arrangement  must  be  api)arent  to  every  reflectioK 
mind.  Each  day  brings  with  it  new  favours,  which  should  be  welcomed  with  a  gr^sfbl 
song.  Each  evening  summons  us  to  record  renewed  instances  of  Divine  meicy  and 
forbearance,  for  which  the  Giver  of  all  good  should  be  warmly  praised. 

Practical  lessons.  I.  The  duty  and  privilege  of  thank^givrng  and  adoration.  "It 
is  a  good  thing  to  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord,  and  to  sing  praises  unto  the  Name  of  the 
Most  High."  2.  1  he  desirableness  of  periodical  and  regular  daily  devotions :  *'  To  show 
forth  his  loving-kindness  in  the  morning,  and  his  faithfulness  every  night." — T. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Our  hold  upon  the  future.  When  **  David  was  old,  and  full  of  days  "  he 
contemplated  his  own  death  and  what  should  then  ensue — who  should  succeed  him  on 
the  throne,  and  what  should  be  the  work  and  history  of  the  nation  he  had  governed.  We 
are  reminded  of — 

I.  Our  desire  to  keep  a  hold  ttfon  the  future.  As  the  king,  like  all  otMr 
monarchs,  earnestly  desired  that,  after  his  death,  his  own  son  should  sit  upon  hv 
throne ;  as  he  took  the  necessary  steps  to  secure  this  by  summoning  all  the  leaders  in 
the  kingdom  and  givin|]j  them  charge  concerning  him  (ver.  2),  so  we  desire  to  retain  as 
much  hold  on  human  life  as  we  can,  even  when  our  eyes  shall  be  closed  to  its  scenes 
and  our  ears  be  deaf  to  all  its  voices.  Either  in  the  person  of  those  who  are  our  second 
selves — the  children  of  our  love  and  our  charge — or  through  our  deliberately  uttered 
wishes  in  documents  or  dying  words,  we  desire  to  make  ourselves  felt,  as  the  pos- 
sessors of  ix)wer,  by  the  generation  which  will  remain  when  we  are  no  longer  on  the 
earth. 

II.  Our  power  to  carry  out  our  wishes.  "  David  mctde  Solomon  his  son  king  over 
Israel."  He  had  the  constitutional  right  to  nominate  his  successor,  and  by  solemnly 
designating  him  as  such  in  the  presence  of  "  all  the  princes  of  Israel "  he  ensured  his 
occupancy  of  the  throne.  There  are  ways  by  which  we  can  make  ourselves  felt  in  tbo 
days  which  succeed  our  own.  1.  By  indoctrinating  our  children  with  our  own  beliefis 
and  instilling  into  their  minds  our  own  spirit,  we  may  live  on  in  them  and  in  their  lives, 
2.  By  bequeathing  our  property  in  such  a  way  that  future  generations  shall  have  cause 
to  remember  us  (e.g,  the  founding  of  parks,  hosi)itals,  homes,  etc.).  3.  By  documents 
which  are  valid  in  law  by  which  we  decide  the  way  in  which  our  property  shall  be  used 
or  our  relatives  be  circumstanced. 

III.  The  limitations  of  Tins  power.  David  could  only  make  Solomon  king  by 
calling  all  his  counsellors  together  and  getting  them  to  ratify  his  own  decision ;  and 
then  he  had  to  leave  the  issue  to  Solomon's  own  discretion.  Had  he  (Solomon)  acted 
as  foolishly  as  his  son  afterwards  acted,  the  throne  would  soon  have  passed  away  from 
him,  and  his  father's  eager  anticipations  would  have  been  defeated.  Do  what  we  may 
to  retain  a  hold  on  the  future  through  those  who  should  be  the  inheritors  of  our  prin- 
ciples and  the  executors  of  our  will,  we  cannot  really  ensure  anything  we  may  deviae. 
Those  on  whom  we  rest  our  strongest  hojx's  may  disapi)oint  all  our  expectations  and 
overthrow  all  our  plans.  The  statesman's  great  measure  is  repciiled,  the  warrior's  proud 
conquest,  is  undone,  the  millionaire's  splendid  fortune  is  dissipated,  the  nobleman's 
"house"  is  extinguished,  the  discoverer's  invention  is  superseded,  the  writer's  chief 
work  is  shelved,  the  teacher's  famous  doctrine  is  exploded  ,*  the  world  movf;s  on  and 


CH.  xxm.  1—32.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  8a3 


leaves  us  all  behind.  We  need  some  better  solace  in  the  declining  hour  than  the 
expectation  that  the  kingdom  will  go  to  our  sons,  and  thus  be  retained  by  ourselyes. 
And  we  have  a  better  one  in — 

IV.  The  Christian  aspibation.  There  are  two  worthy  and  honourable  ambitions 
we  may  cherish  respecting  the  future.  1.  To  live  on,  ourselves,  in  another  sphere. 
Though  not  acting  directly  on  the  men  and  things  we  leave  behind  us,  we  shall  be  living 
and  acting  elsewhere  in  some  other  province  of  God's  great  domain.  Enough  for  us  that, 
in  the  sphere  which  God  chooses  for  us,  we  shall  be  using  our  powers  for  good — more 
than  enough,  for  that  will  be  a  wider  sphere,  and  they  will  be  *'  enlarged  and  liberated 
powers."  2.  To  leave  behind  us  in  many  hearts  and  lives  tbe  holy  influence  we  have 
been  exerting.  If  day  by  day  we  are  scattering  ''  the  good  seed  of  the  kingdom  "  in  true 
thoughts,  in  holy  principles,  in  Christ-like  impressions,  these  must  and  will  appear  again 
in  other  lives,  and  be  again  resown  to  reappear  in  others  still ;  thus  shall  we  have  a 
blessed  share  in  a  far  future,  even  in  this  lower  realm. — C. 

Vers.  3 — 32. — The  sacred  tribe  :  their  service  and  ours.  We  have  here — 
L  The  special  beryice  which  the  Leyites  rendered  to  Israel.  This  was  four- 
fold. 1.  Assisting  at  the  service  of  sacriflce.  They  were  "  to  set  forward  the  work  of 
the  house  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  4) ;  "  their  ofiBce  was  to  wait  on  the  sons  of  Aaron  for  the 
service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  (vers.  28,  29) ;  "  to  offer  [i.e,  to  help  at  the 
offering  of]  all  burnt  sacrifices,"  etc.  (vers.  31,  32).  2.  Rendering  the  service  of  praise. 
"  Four  thousand  of  them  praised  the  Lord,"  etc.  (ver.  5).  These  were  to  stand  every 
morning  and  evening  to  thank  and  praise  the  Lord  (ver.  30).  3.  Administration  of 
civic  business  and  pacification :  "  officers  and  judges "  (ver.  4).  4.  Guardianship  of 
the  gates;  preserving  from  profanation,  and  so  from  Divine  oispleasure:  "porters," 
i,e,  gatekeepers  (ver.  6). 

II.  The  changes  which  occur  in  the  form  of  beryicb.  Even  under  the  same 
dispensation  occasional  changes  occnrred  of  the  way  in  which  God  was  served.  An 
instance  and  indication  of  this  is  found  here.  The  Levites  had  no  more  need  to  carry 
the  tabernacle  from  place  to  place ;  they  thus  laid  down  one  of  their  most  solemn  and 
important  functions  (vers.  26,  26).  They  were  also  henceforth  to  be  numbered  from 
twenty  (instead  of  thirty)  years  of  age  (vers.  27,  28).  And,  further,  they  entered  now 
on  the  service  of  instrumental  music,  systematically  arranged  (vers.  5,  30).  If  such 
minor  changes  occurred  in  the  same  era  of  religious  history,  how  much  greater  changes 
in  the  order  of  service  might  we  expect  to  find  when  one  dispensation  gave  place  to 
another,  when  the  Law  was  lost  in  the  gospel  ?  Such  we  do  find.  We  look,  there- 
fore, at — 

III.  Our  ooRRESFONDiNa  BERYICE  UNDER  Christ.  1.  In  the  matter  of  sacrifice,  the 
Levites  cannot  properly  be  said  to  have  any  successors ;  for,  the  one  all-sufficient  atone- 
ment having  been  offered,  there  is  no  sacrifice  to  be  presented,  and,  there  beiog  no 
officiating  priest  and  no  altar  '*  in  Christ  Jesus,"  there  is  needed  no  ministering  Levite. 
Only  that  we  are  all  to  be  priests  and  Levites  in  that  we  are  all  to  present  "  spiritnal 
sacrifices  "  of  prayer  and  praise,  and  of  *'  doing  good  and  communicating,"  continually 
unto  him.  However,  there  are  humbler  services  to  be  rendered,  needful  work  to  be 
done,  "for  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord**  (ver.  24);  and  in  this  useful  and 
worthy  ministry,  those  who  take  their  part  cheerfully  and  do  their  work  faithfully  are 
**  approved  of  him."  2.  In  the  matter  of  praise,  tbe  Levites  find  their  successors  in 
(1)  those  who  teach  and  lead  in  the  service  of  song  in  the  Christian  sanctuary ;  (2)  all 
who  join  in  and  thus  encourage  others  in  that  service.  And  they  who  do  their  best  to 
perfect  the  praises  of  God — understanding  by  that  not  only  attaining  to  the  perfect 
scientific  form  of  service,  but  reaching  the  moral  and  spiritual  ideal  of  a  service  in 
which  the  music  of  the  instrument  and  of  the  voice  is  subordinated  to  the  melody  of  the 
heart  (Eph.  v.  19),— these  render  an  invaluable  ministry  to  the  Church  of  Christ.  3.  In 
respect  of  administration  (officers  and  judgesV  as  ecclesiastical  law  has  given  place  to 
civil  law,  this  function  of  Jehovah's  servants  has  passed  into  other  hands ;  yet  perhaps 
they  who  are  peacemakers  between  their  fellows  and  help  to  decide  disputes  between 
brethren  may  be  said  to  be  the  "judges"  of  the  present  time.  4.  As  to  guardianship 
of  the  gates,  with  the  open  throne  of  grace  and  access  at  all  times  to  all  men,  there  ib 
little  room  for  us  to  perpetuate  thia  work  <tf  the  Levite.    But  we  can,  and  should,  take 


•384  THE  7IBST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHBONICLBB.   XcK 


great  palDs  to  praflerre  the  spirit  of  rererenoe  and  pun  dfltotSon  in  the  h«Hrti  of  aOiAi 
oome  to  worship  Christ. — 0. 

Vera.  l-*32. — Enumeraiion  and  arranfffmetU  if  ihe  Lw&et  finr  iksir  mmrim.    Th 

four  chapters  with  which  this  commences  give  a  oonoected  view  of  the  ocmditiaii  of  tki 
Levi  tea  towards  the  end.  tliat  is,  the  fortieth  year  of  David's  reign,  nnd  of  the  aeetkMi 
into  which  they  were  divided  aooordioff  to  their  various  services.    In  this  chapter  tki 
first  thioK  with  which  we  are  presented  is  the  total  number  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  and 
their  divisions  according  to  the  duties  devolving  upon  them.    Next  we  hare  tiie  enu- 
meration of  the  licads  of  the  houses  of  the  fathers  into  which  the  four  fmmiliea  of  tha 
Levites  had  branched  out,  with  a  brief  account  of  their  duties.   All  theae  emmgemeDts 
immediately  preceded  Siilomon's  elevation  to  the  throne.    The  first  pert  ofthe  thlid 
verse  has  reference  to  what  was  the  original  age  at  which  the  Leritea  were  nombend. 
If  we  read,  "  Now  the  Levites  had  heen  numbered  from  thirty  years  old  and  npwaid/ 
it  will  present  no  difficulty  (see  Numb.  iv.).    Moses  himself  liad,  however,  at  a  latar 
date,  made  their  time  of  service  from  twenty-five  to  fifty  years  of  age  (see  Nomh,  v3L 
23—26).    David  reduced  even  tliis  (see  ver.  24),  and  made  their  serrioe  to  oonunenea 
at  the  age  of  twenty.    The  reason  for  this  is  given  (see  ver.  25).    The  Leritea  had  now 
not  to  do  the  heavy  work  they  had  when  marching  throup:h  the  wildemesa,  when  they 
had  to  carry  the  tabernacle  and  ita  vessels.     Now  that  this  was  over  and  the  Loid  hail 
given  them  rest,  they  might  enter  on  their  work  at  an  earlier  age*    llie  oensna  picaeatB 
us  with  the  total  number,  namely,  thirty-eight  thousand  men.    Of  theae^  tweniy-lbiir 
^ousand  were  to  conduct  and  carry  on  the  work  of  the  house  of  the  Lord;  aiz 
thousand  were  to  be  officers  and  judges;  four  thousand  porters,  and  four  thouauid  ta 
praise  the  Lord.    The  work  assigned  to  the  twenty-four  thousand  ia  more  partieularij 
defined  in  vers.  28 — 32.     Two  great  spiritual  truths  are  presented  in  thia  efaanCar. 
1.  Every  man  has  his  own  place  to  fill  and  his  own  special  work  appointed  by  God. 
This  work  is  of  various  and  diverse  kinds.    Some  of  it  was  more  honourable^  in  a 
human  point  of  view,  than  another ;  but  each  man  was  in  his  ovm  divinely  appointed 
place.    Thus  only  can  there  be  order  and  progress  in  the  Lord's  work  by  each  one 
filling  that  place.    "God  is  not  the  author  of  confusion/'  but  of  order.     **The  eye 
cannot  Bay  to  the  hand,  I  have  no  need  of  thee :  nor  again  the  head  to  the  feet,  I  have 
no  need  of  you.    But  God  hath  tempered  the  body  together  •  .  .  that  there  should  ba 
no  schism  in  the  body"  (1  Cor.  xii.  21—25).    2.  The  second  truth  is  the  great  number 
set  apart  for  praise  and  thanksgiving  morning  and  evening  (see  vers.  5,  30).     Tbia  waa 
to  form  a  conspicuous  part  of  their  service,  and  to  take  a  prominent  place.    Thia  is 
the  highest  kind  of  service.    The  New  Testament  is  full  of  injunctions  to  Joy  and 
praise  and  thanksgiving.    It  implied,  in  Israel  of  old,  ''how  much  we  have  to  praise 
him  for  1 "    And  is  it  not  true  in  all  our  work  and  service  for  God  ?    Surely  they  who 
know  the  Saviour,  and  think  for  a  moment  what  he  is  in  himself,  what  he  did  for  ua  on 
the  cross,  and  what  he  is  doing  for  us  every  day  and  every  hour,  have  to  praise  him 
now  and  throughout  eternity !    Such  praises  should  ever  be  in  the  heart  and  on  the 
lips.    One  heart-look  at  Christ  should  banish  all  doubt  and  fear  and  make  that  heart 
aing  for  joy.— \V. 

Vers.  2,  3. — The  mission  of  the  Levites.  They  were  called  to  service  which  men 
might  call  "  menial,"  but  which  was  truly  *'  honourable,"  and  might  be  made  '*  mora 
honourable  by  the  loyal,  devout,  and  loving  spirit  in  which  it  was  done.  But  there  an 
indications  that  the  Levites  were  tempted  to  undervalue  their  place  and  their  work ;  they 
sometimes  envied  the  priests,  and  fretfully  wanted  to  be  other  than  they  were  (see  NumU 
xvi.  9).  Confusion  and  difficulty  are  sure  to  arise  when  men  undervalue  the  positions  in 
which  they  are  set,  and  the  work  that  is  entrusted  to  them  to  do,  and  begin  to  envy  other 
people's  positions  and  other  people's  work.  We  treat  here  the  mission  of  the  Levitea  m 
introducing  the  subject  of  our  separation  unto  God's  service.  What  is  called  the  Divina 
election  may  be  fittingly  called  the  Divine  selection^  for  it  really  is  God,  in  his  infinite 
foreknowledge,  selecting  fitting  agents,  and,  in  the  ordering  of  his  providences,  sepa- 
rating them  unto  the  work  for  which  he  has  chosen  them.  The  sacred  Word  ia  full  of 
instances  of  these  Divine  selectinss  and  separatings.  Q'he  race  of  Seth  is^separated  fiom 
the  other  descendants  of  Adam.  Noah  is  separated  from  the  ungodly  world.    Japheth  ii 


5H.  xxin.  1—32.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  3S5 


separated  from  the  new  races  coming  from  Noah.  Abraham  is  separated  from  the 
idolatrous  Chaldeans.  Isaac  is  separated  as  the  sole  heir  of  the  covenant.  Jacobj 
Judah,  and  Ephraim  are  separated  by  Divine  interference  with  the  right  of  eldest  sons. 
The  nation  of  Israel  is  separated  from  all  nations  to  be  the  repository  of  God's  revela- 
tion. The  tribe  of  Levi  is  separated  to  special  service  in  the  Divine  tabernacle.  Saul 
is  separated  to  be  the  first  king.  David  is  separated  from  the  sheepfoMs.  Our  Lord 
separates  twelve  from  among  his  disciples.  Barnabas  and  Saul  are  separated  unto  the 
work  of  the  ministry.  Fixing  our  attention  on  the  senses  in  which  the  Leviies  were 
separated  from  the  conjjregation,  we  may  learn  some  of  the  ways  in  which  we  should 
regard  our  <?lves  now  as  "  separated  unto  God."  The  Levites  were  not  made  a  distinct 
class,  dwelling  together ;  they  lived  about  among  the  people,  and  shared  the  common 
life.  They  worked  for  a  part  at  least  of  their  living ;  their  families  gri'W  up  around 
them  ;  they  joined  in  the  local  feast  as  well  as  in  the  yearly  festival.  Their  pleasures 
and  their  daily  interests  were  precisely  those  of  the  people  about  them.  And  yet  they 
were  God's  by  special  call  and  consecration.  Wheresoever  they  went  the  stamp  of  the 
Holy  rested  upon  them,  Their  very  presence  tended  to  check  sin,  and  to  purify  the 
social  atmospheres.  The  distinctness  of  the  Levites  belonged  to  their  character,  spirit, 
and  tone  of  conduct.  And  they  were  called  to  a  particular  service.  They  were  to 
attend  on  the  worship  of  the  tabernacle,  taking  their  orderly  turns.  They  were  selected 
by  God  for  this  one  life-work,  **to  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord."  They  were  called  to 
receive  a  trust,  and  called  to  manifest  the  spirit  which  was  becoming  to  that  **  trust." 
Still  we  find  separation  unto  God  quite  compatible  with  taking  our  place  among  our 
fellow-men,  ana  entering  heartily  into  everything  that  properly  belongs  to  family  and 
social  and  national  life.  The  world  in  which  we  live  is  God's  world.  In  it  there  is 
nothing  unclean,  save  to  him  who  makes  a  thing  unclean.  Work  is  holy  ;  rest  is  holy ; 
pleasure  is  holy ;  friendship  is  holy.  The  Christian  and  the  Christian  Church  staml 
out  from  all  the  world,  and  are  set  "  in  the  world's  eye ; "  and  yet  it  is  equally  true 
that  the  Christian  and  the  Christian  Church  blend  and  mingle  in  every  spliere  of  life. 
They  force  no  distinctions  upon  men*s  notice,  and  yet  they  are  "  separate  "  everywhere. 
Their  distinction  comes  out  of  their  first  and  ruling  principles.  The  thought  of  God, 
the  reference  of  all  things  to  the  will  of  God,  and  the  effort  to  be  in  full  ha»*mony  with 
the  mind  of  God,  are  so  essential  to  the  Christian,  and  so  characteristic  of  him,  that  he 
must  bring  the  sense  of  God's  presence  into  every  life-association.  And  just  in  this 
lies  his  peculiarity  and  his  mission.  When  a  Jew  looked  upon  a  Levite  in  the  midst  of 
the  people,  he  thought  of  Jehovah.  When  a  Jew  talked  to  a  Levite,  if  he  was  a  true 
Levite,  he  would  make  the  man  feel  God*s  relation  to  the  matter  in  hand.  And  so  it  is 
the  Christian's  mission  to  be  an  open  "  epistle  of  Christ."  Levites  failed  from  their 
duty,  and  from  the  joy  of  their  duty,  when  they  began  to  count  their  separation  unto 
Grod  a  light  thing.  And  this  came  about  by  then:  not  putting  their  heaits  into  their 
work ;  by  their  nourishing  jealousies  and  envyings ;  and  by  their  failing  to  recognize 
how  their  work  fitted  into  the  great  whole  of  God's  service.  Do  we  think  it  a  small 
thing  to  have  been  separated  unto  God  ?  Do  we  think  unworthily  of  the  talent  com- 
mitted to  our  trust  ?  Can  it  be  a  little  thing  to  be  God's  priests  and  Levites  in  his 
great  world,  ministering  his  truth,  his  will,  his  love,  to  men?  Can  it  be  a  little  thing 
to  be  the  "  candlestick  "  that  holds  out  the  light  of  God's  holiness  and  God's  gospel  to 
men  ?  Here  is  one  chief  root  of  the  Christian  evils  which  we  deplore — under-valuing 
our  Christian  standing;  under-estimating  our  Divine  call,  and  the  mission  which  is 
given  us  to  fulfil,  *'  Ye  have  not  chosen  me,  but  I  have  chosen  you,  and  ordained  you, 
that  you  should  go  and  bring  forth  fruit,  and  that  your  fruit  should  remain." — R.  T. 

Ver.  3. — Consecrated  maturity.  On  the  occasion  of  the  "  census,"  the  tribe  of  Levi 
had  not  been  taken.  A  special  enumeration  of  them  was  now  made,  and  the  pattern 
of  the  Mosaic  census  was  followed.  Those  at  the  age  of  thirty  and  above,  but  under 
fifty,  alone  were  numbered.  But  the  years  from  thirty  to  fifty  represent  and  include 
a  man's  maturity;  and,  in  the  case  of  the  Levites,  this  their  maturity  lay  as  a 
"  living  sacrifice "  on  the  altar  of  God's  service.  It  appears  that  our  Lord  began 
his  ministry  at  the  age  of  thirty.  But  "  who  shall  declare  his  generation  ?  S  or 
he  was  cut  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living ;  for  the  transgression  of  my  people 
was  he  stricken."    For  probably  at  most  three  years  of  his  maturity  did  he  lie  a 

I.  CHBONICLES.  2  0 


386  THE  FIRST  LOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.     [cR.  xzm.  1-£L 


**  living  sacrifice."  Make  the  burden  of  addrees  a  ■eriona  and  eamaiit  pica  that  tinif 
men  should  give  the  stren<;th  of  their  manhood  to  holy  service  for  Qoa  in  the  C3»utt 
and  the  world.  It  is  the  weakness  of  so  many  Christian  institutiona  and  entaqprisea* 
as  it  so  notably  is  of  our  Sunday  school  system — that  the  experienced  men  and  moMi 
of  middle  life  hold  aloof  from  tliem.  There  have  indeed  been  cases  of  precocioua  denita^ 
ment  before  the  a'4e  of  thirty ;  and  we  may  not,  even  in  our  tbeoriea  or  our  tboiigiU% 
set  limits  to  the  gluriously  free  o^ierations  of  that  Divine  Spirit  'who  **  dividea  to  efoy 
man  wiverally  as  he  wills."  Still,  the  general  rule,  comprenensively  working,  is  tbt 
full  culture— including  something  like  adequate  experience  and  due  aelf-controL — isnol 
reached  before  that  age.  F.  W.  Uubertson,  A.  HalLim,  R.  A.  Vaughan,  are  ¥917  fiimiliir 
illustrations  of  early  maturity.  It  is  also  true  that  there  is  a  limit — all  too  aoon  roadbed 
in  roost  cases— to  a  man's  freshness,  power,  and  originality.  A  man  reachea  maturity, 
and  may  maintain  it  awhile;  but  the  time  of  strong  and  individual  force  for  anj  maa ii 
usually  very  brief.  No  doubt  there  are  cases  of  strength  retained  beyond  the  age  of 
fifty  ;  and  there  is  suitable  work  in  the  world  for  the  older  men  to  do.  But  atill,  it  ii 
in  large  measure  true  that  a  man's  distinct  life-witness  and  life-work  are  very  brief— s 
few  swiltly  passing  years.  ^Vhen  they  are  done  he  either  passes  from  the  earth-apbere^ 
or  else  he  must  step  aside  lest  he  be  run  down  by  the  hurrying  throng  who  go  ao  mudi 
faster  than  he  can  go,  and  who,  he  begins  to  think,  are  going  wrong.  A  inan*a  atnag 
manhood  is  his  great  trust,  and  this  must  be  for  the  Lord,  wholly  conaecrated  onto  him. 
Then  it  may  be  earnestly  pressed  upon  us  that — 

I.   Wb  BUOULD    E8TI1SATB  ARIGHT  THE  PKEPARING-TIMEa  OF  LIFE:   the  Bpring-timfll^ 

on  which  depends  the  summer  beauty ;  the  seed-time,  on  which  depends  the  autamn 
harvest;  the  child-time,  on  which  depends  wise  iatherhoud;  the  apprenticaahip-timc^cii 
which  de|)ond  the  business  successes. 

II.  We  should  feel  the  besponbibilitt  of  matitbe  timbb:  when  we  can  pot 
strength,  good  judgment,  cultured  skilly  ripe  powers,  into  whatever  work  we  undertake. 
It  is  often  pressed  on  our  attention  that  we  are  respomuble  for  what  we  have  ;  it  may 
be  much  more  earnestly  impressed  u^on  us  that  we  are  responsible  lor  what  we  an  or 
can  be, 

III.  We  should  accept  the  provtdences  that  set  ub  abide  fob  BKBrnffo-mnaL 
Some  such  come  in  the  midst  of  life's  works  for  our  refreshing.  Such  come  at  last 
when  our  great  lile-work  is  done.  We  may  be  s|Ared  awhile  in  the  Beulah-land,  but  in 
our  resting-tiiTies  we  have  new  and  other  missions  to  fulfil.  Alas  1  it  takes  much  graos 
to  make  us  willing  to  stip  quietly  aside,  and  say  of  the  new  generation  growing  up 
round  us,  "  He  must  increase,  but  I  must  decrease.** 

In  the  mystery  of  the  Divine  order  the  later  and  resting-times  of  a  man^s  life  may  be 
pro^tariugs  for  the  consecrated  maturities  of  the  heavenly  and  eternal  spheres. — R.  T. 

Ver.  6. — Oi'derUness  required  in  God*8  service.  The  chronicler  here  reviews  the 
arrangements  made  by  David  for  the  eflicient  conducting  of  Divine  service  in  the  taber- 
nacle  and  temple,  and  the  importance  of  order  in  worship  is  suggested  for  our  oon- 
sideratiun. 

I.  Such  ORDERLiNEfis  secures  due  preparation.  Anything  like  hurry  is  unsuitahle 
in  connection  with  Divine  worship  and  work.  Each  man  should  know  beforohaod  his 
place.  **  Hands  should  be  laid  on  no  man  suddenly."  Seriousness,  quietness,  and 
though tfulness  are  proper  in  the  house  of  God.  Now  men  need  to  "sanctify  them- 
selves "  by  meditation  and  prayer  before  going  to  the  temple,  just  as  the  old  priesta  and 
Levites  did. 

II.  Such  orderliness  aids  the  devotion  of  the  worshippers.  Stillness  and 
regular  occupations  that  do  not  call  off  the  attention  or  disturb  meditation  are  impor- 
tant helps  to  wor8hip|)ers.    Itemcmber  Keble's  linos  on  the  sacramental  season— 

*•  Sweet  awful  hour  1  the  only  sound 
One  gentle  footstep  gliding  round, 
OlTi  ring  by  turns  on  Jesus'  part 
Tho  cross  to  every  hand  and  heart." 

III.  Such  orderliness  gives  right  tone  to  worship.  Show  here  how  diatinck  the 
idea  of  worship  is  from  mere  sermon-hearing,  or  mere  receiving  of  religious  instructioo 


CH.  xxiiL  1—32.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  887 


or  excitiDg  of  religions  feeling.  Worship  should  take  us  wholly  out  of  the  self-sphere, 
and  set  us  in  the  Qod-sphere.  And  order,  quiet,  the  beautiful  in  form  and  expression, 
are  important  associations  of  worship.  Illustrate  by  the  way  in  which  our  feelings  are 
toned  on  entering  the  cathedral  or  sharing  in  stately  cathedral  service.  No  section  of 
Christian  people  can  safely  neglect  this  element  of  orderliness ;  and  each  Christian  wor- 
shipper should  personally  and  anxiously  aid  in  its  maintenance.  Here  some  of  the  forms 
in  which  modern  worship  fails  may  be  dealt  with  :  these  will  differ  as  apprehended  by 
members  of  the  different  religious  communities.  "  Order  is  Heaven's  first  law."  Order 
is  man's  witness  for  (rod,  who  rules  and  tones  all  things.  Order  may  be  the  charac- 
teristic feature  of  all  worship,  whatever  may  be  its  form — whether  it  be  severe  as  the 
Puritanic,  or  artistic  as  the  Itoman  Catholic.  Illustrate  by  the  moral  influeuce  exerted 
by  the  well-ordered  home,  and  its  relation  to  the  comfort,  peace,  and  good  culture  of  the 
family.— R.  T. 

Yer.  13. — Separation  and  consecration,  Aaron  was  separated  in  order  that  lie  might 
be  consecrated  to  the  ''sanctifying  of  the  most  holy  things"  (see  Exod.  xxviii.).  All 
of  us  should  be  consecratedf  but  some  of  us  may  be  also  called  and  separated  unto  some 
special  service.  Expressing  the  consecrated  separateness  of  Christian  believers,  St. 
Peter  says,  **  Te  also,  as  lively  stones,  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house,  an  holy  priesthood, 
to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ "  (1  Pet  ii.  5). 

I.  The  DrviKE  bequibehent  of  cqaeacteb.  Personal  holiness  and  the  refined 
culture  of  all  faculty  and  virtue  are  necessary  if  we  would  serve  GK>d  in  any  sphere.  It 
should  be  distinctly  apprehended  that  Ood  calls  to  his  service  not  men^s  powers,  but  men 
with  their  powers,  and  so  a  man's  character  Ood  wants  consecrated  for  him  and  to  him. 

II.  The  Divine  election  to  service.  Much  of  the  difficulty  felt  concerning  Ood's 
election  has  arisen  from  our  fixing  attention  on  election  to  privilege,  and  setting  in  quite 
the  background  election  to  service.  But  Gk)d  puts  first  "  election  to  service,"  and  bases 
such  election  on  the  known  fitness  of  particular  men  for  particular  work.  The  atten- 
dant "privilege"  is  little  more  than  the  accident  attending  on,  or  the  reward  given  to, 
faithful  service.    Aaron  was  honoured  by  his  place  and  sphere  of  work. 

III.  The  Divine  bepaeation  to  pabticulab  sebvice.  God  condescends  to  the 
minutest  things,  and  fits  his  people  for  the  smallest  places.  We  easily  recognize  the 
Divine  call  ot  men  upon  emergencies,  and  the  special  caU  of  the  men  of  genius  in  every 
age ;  but  we  should  feel  that  every  one  of  us,  in  the  family,  the  Church,  and  the  world, 
is  called  of  God,  and  separated  unto  hb  particular  work ;  and  "  every  man,  wherein  he 
is  called,  should  therein  abide  with  God." 

IV.  The  belation  of  all  bepabated  ones  to  the  whole.  Each,  in  his  separated 
sphere,  is  to  become  an  example,  and  so  a  sanctifying  power,  upon  the  rest.  There  is  a 
tendency  in  us  all  to  feel  the  force  of  an  example  shown  in  some  oQier  sphere  than  our 
own,  and  in  this  way  each  one  of  us  exerts  a  real  infiuence  on  the  whole.  Aaron 
pleaded  by  his  example  for  the  sanctified  life  of  every  Israelite.  Common  consecration 
to  God,  and  openness  to  yield  to  all  Divine  calls  and  separations,  are  the  secrets  of 
deliverance  from  all  jealousies  and  envies. — R.  T. 

Yer.  24. — Work  that  young  people  may  do.  The  time  of  Levitical  service  dated  from 
the  age  of  thirty,  but  service  of  particular  kinds  was  accepted  from  those  as  young  as 
twenty.  Some  things  are  beyond  the  young  people.  Tbey  could  not  do  them  welL 
They  require  gifts  and  maturity  which  the  young  do  not  possess.  It  is  well  for  them 
to  learn  what  is  within  their  reach — what  they  may  do,  ana  what  they  may  not  do. 

I.  Young  people  should  accept  the  fact  of  theib  limited  poweb  and  limited 
FITNESS.    This  would  check  their  characteristic  disposition  to  over  self-confidence. 

II.  Young  people  should  estimate  faibly  the  measube  of  theib  poweb,  and  so 
work  up  to  their  highest  limit.  St.  John  gives  his  advice  to  young  men  "  because  they 
are  strong.** 

III.  Young  people  should  hold  all  theib  powebs  at  God*8  sebvice,  seeing  that  he 
asks  for  life's  morning  as  well  as  life's  noontide. 

IV.  Young  people  should  be  sube  that  thebe  abe  sphebes  of  sebvice  exactly 
matching  theib  powebs.  And  they  should  be  watching,  ever  ready  to  enter  upon 
all  such. 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  THE  GHBONIGLE&     [c&  zxir.  l-a 


In  the  fidthfiil  doing  of  tbe  least  Uiingi  of  oar  yoath-timo  alone  lies  our  kn 
of  tniDing  for  the  undertaking  of  more  and  better  work  aa  manly  powen  vDwi 
Bbow  that  the  nobleit  of  Gof  •  worken  have  coniecrated  their  yoath-time  to  hk 
ieifioe.'"— IL  T* 

Ycr.  30. — 7^0  miiffton  </  iho9e  who  praUe.  Some  were  to  **  atand  every  mondi^ti 
thank  and  praise  the  Lord,  and  likewise  at  even."  This  was  the  spedUtl  wwk  of  oertaa 
of  the  younger  Levites,  whose  Yoices  retained  their  tone  and  power.  They  famed  a 
tkoir  to  aid  in  the  interest  and  beauty  of  Divine  service.  Aa  this  subject  haa  ham 
somewhat  fully  dealt  with  in  previous  outline  homilies,  we  do  but  eaggeat  a  new  £taa» 
work,  which  the  earlier  materials  will  enable  the  rnder  to  clothe.  Deal  with  tk 
mission  of  church  ohoirs  and  sin^^ng  bands,  and  show — 

L  Theib  missioh  to  oitx  EXFBuaioH  TO  OTHEBs'  TEKLaQB,  and  to  strangthon  thai 
by  expression. 

IT.  Their  mssioH  to  iktebest  others  im  Divine  THmos. 

III.  Their  missioh  in  abodbino  othsbs  to  religious  anxiett,  s»  with  the  ■Jwjfrt 
of  revival  hymns. 

Then  press  the  importance  of  cultured  apirihud  6tnes8  for  the  eflSoient  lulfilmeiit  of 
this  mission.  They  who  sin;;  for  the  religious  hel(dng  and  teaching  of  men  must  them* 
selves  be  sincere,  <ievout,  earnest,  and  pious.  It  is  as  true  of  this  as  of  any  other  fam 
of  Christian  service,  that  **  we  can  only  kindle  fire  when  we  are  ourselves  on  fiie.*  **  In 
order  to  the  high  result  intended,  the  music  of  religion  must  be  religious.  There  must 
be  a  distinction  of  sounds.  As  tibis  language  is  given  for  the  heart,  it  beoomes  a  fizit 
principle  that  it  must  be  of  the  heart,  else  it  is  an  unknown  tongue.  And  so  true  is 
thil^  that  nothing  can  really  fulfil  the  idea  of  religious  mu^c  which  is  not  the  fansthing 
of  true  love  and  worship.  Even  instruments  without  life  will  not  speak  the  true  notes 
of  power  unless  the  touch  of  faith  is  on  them,  and  the  breath  of  holy  feeling  is  in  them; 
bow  much  less  the  voice  itself,  whose  very  qualities  of  sound  are  inevitabhr  toned  br 
the  secret  feding  of  the  spirit  ?  "  (Dr.  Horace  Bushnell).— B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


Vers.  1— 19.— 2%«  twetUy-four  eUusea  of 
prieiti, 

Ver.  1. — The  Hebrew  of  this  vorse  reads, 
And  to  the  sons  of  Aaron,  their  divisions 

DH'pf^D);  the  sons  of  Aaron:  Hadab  and 

AUhn,  Eleasar  and  Ithamar.  The  word 
**  divisions  "  is  the  same  word  that  is  trans- 
lated "  courses  "  in  ver.  6,  and  which  verse 
also  would  read  literally,  '*  And  David  di- 
vided them  divisions  to  the  sons  of  Levi, 
to  Gershon,  Kohath,  and  Merari."  Our 
present  verse  evidently  continues  both  the 
sabject  and  oonstmotion  of  that  verse.  Of 
the  four  sons  (Exod.  vi.  23^  two  died  with- 
out issue,  viz.  Nadab  and  Abihu  (ver.  2); 
and  the  other  two  have  to  supply  the  *•  chief 
men  of  the  house,"  viz.  Eleazor  sixteen,  and 
Ithamar  eight  (ver.  4). 

Ver.  2.~(Comp.  I^v.  x.  1,  2,  for  the 
death  of  these ;  and  for  their  being  child- 
less, Numb.  iii.  2—4;  xxvi.  60,  61.) 

Ver.  3.~The  Hebrew  of  this  verse  reads, 
And  David  divided  them,  and  Zadok  of  the 
sons  of  Eleasar,  and  Ahimeleoh  of  the  sons  of 
Itiiamar,  aooording  to  their  oiBoes  (onioD^)^ 


in  their  service  (onnbp.^).  And  the  evident 
purport  of  it  is  that  the  three,  David,  Zadok, 
and  Ahimelech,  conjointly  made  the  arrange- 
ments. This  is  virtually  repeated  in  vera.  ^ 
81  (see  also  ch.  xxv.  1  for  an  analogooa  case). 
For  the  **  Ahimelech  *'  of  this  verse  and 
vers.  6,  31,  should  be  read  "  Abinthar/'  as 
shown  in  ch.  xviii.  16,  by  comparison  of  1 
Sam.  xxii.  20^;  2  Sam.  zx.  25;  1  Kinea  L  7. 
8 ;  Mark  ii  26. 

Ver.  4. — The  simpler  translation  of  this 
verse  might  run  thus :  And  there  were  fonad 
(of)  sons  of  Eleasar,  more  for  diiaf  men»  tiiaa 
(of)  sons  of  Ithamar,  and  tbsy  divided  theoa— 
to  sons  of  Eleasar,  sixteen  ohieft  ef  fsthanf 
houses ;  and  to  sons  of  Ithamar,  eight. 

Ver.  5.—  Translate,  And  thej  divided  tbaai 
by  lots,  these  with  those ;  i.e,  as  there  wae  no 
ground  of  choice  between  the  two  families, 
which  differed  only  in  number,  and  as  the 
highest  ecclesinstieal  places  had  been  filled 
already  by  both  of  them,  the  impartiality  of 
the  ^  lot"  was  resorted  to, for  the  settling  of 
the  order  in  which  they  would  taJce  the 
services  now  in  question  (ch.  xxv.  Sy.  The 
governors;  read  rather,  the  prineet.  The 
distinction  intended  between  **the  holy 
princes,"  or  **  princes  of  the  sanctuarjr/'  on 


I.  iXiT.  1— 31.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHBONICLEa 


tbe  one  hand,  and  "  the  princes  of  God  "  on 
tha  otlier,ia  notvcrj  clear.  One  iQetallce  of 
the  former  expression  is  found  in  Ibo.  xliiL 
28.      Kail  anpposes  there  may  be  no  di»- 

tinotioD  betwevD  Ihem,  bnt  addii  that  if 
tbeni  IB,  he  would  Like  the  "  princes  of 
Ood  "  to  Htand  for  the  regular  high  priests 
exclusive];,  viz.  those  whu  could  enter  into 
■    holy   plBcB    before    God.      Tbo 


Ver.  6. — Tha  person  vho  acted  as  dork 
or  secretury  on  tLo  occasion,  and  tha  whole 
numbur  of  the  wilnesaes,  and  the  lot- 
taking  itsflf,  arc  here  given.  Ttie  present 
Hebrew  text  repeats  the  word  mN  (taken) 
twice,  before  the  name  of  Ithamar,  at  the 
end  of  the  seDtenee.  Tbe  evident  and  nay 
oonection  ot  the  first  occurrenoe  of  which 
into  Tnti  (one)  will  make  tbe  clause  and  sense 
correspond  irith  what  goes  before.  Ber- 
thcau,  however,  and  Keil,  and  some  others 
do  not  accept  this  correction,  and  would 
keep  the  present  Hebrew  text,  the  firai- 
iiamed,  moreover,  ooiilenJing  that  the  repe- 
tition of  tbo  wonl  for  "taking"  points  to 
two  lold  being  represented  by  each  house  of 
Ithumni,  whodB  total  namber  was  only 
eight,  for  one  of  ELuazar,  whose  total  was 
sixtotn.  Not  only  does  the  repetition  of 
the  present  Hebrew  text  not  avail  to  autho- 
rize such  a  supposition,  bnt  tha  supposition 
itself  would  be  unsupported  and  gratuitous. 
What  is  really  told  ua  amouuts  to  this  only, 
that  tbe  drawing  was  liibt  fnim  tha  collec- 
tion of  families  under  tha  name  of  Eli^azar, 
and  then  from  that  descandtd  from  Ithamar. 
For  anything  we  are  here  told,  the  urn  of 
Itliamar  can  have  held  out  only  half  as  long 
as  that  of  Elcazar,  and  it  Can  be  only  con- 
jecture to  suppose  thiit  two  lots  were  drawn 
from  tbe  tan  of  Eleaiar  for  every  one  from 
that  of  Ithamar,  so  as  to  make  thorn  run 
ODt  together  at  the  end.  Could  any  one  of 
the  names  from  sixteen  to  twenty-four  that 
are  recorded  in  this  chapter  as  "cuniing 
forth"  in  Che  shape  ofa  ■'  lot,"  be  idL-ntifli'd 
as  belonging  to  famtliea  descended  froni 
Itbaniar,  the  question  might  lie  solved. 
Ahimsleoh  ths  wn  of  Abiathac;  read,  as 
above,  ver.  3,  cb.  xviiL  16,  etc.,  Abiathar 
Ihe  ton  of  Ah  I'melech. 

Ver.  7. — Jeboiarib.  Written  thns  only 
here  and  in  cb.  ii.  ID;  elsewhere  always 
Joiarib.  He  then  is  the  head  of  the  first 
of  tbe  twenty-four  courses  of  priests  in 
Palid's  time,  and  according  to  bis  plan. 
(For  the  evidence  of  the  return  oF  some  of 
tills  family  I'rom  the  Eiile,  see  Neii. 


„_   ___     ..  .t  of    I     .  .    .._^ 

suspicious;  xil.  6,  19;  see  also  interesting 
arlicio  under  Uiis  name,  witli  tables,  Smith, 
•llible  Dictionary,' i.OIG.)    Jedaiah.    (Eor 


the  retnm  of  some  of  tbe  deecendanls  of 
this  family,  see  Ezra  iL  36;  Neh.  vii.  39; 
oomp.  also  Neh.  xij.  6,  7, 19,  21.) 

Ver,  8. — Harim  (see  Barrington'a' Genea- 
logies,' i.  94.  09,  lai,  ItiS :  see  also  for  the 
of  descendants,  Ezra  ii 


Neh.  ' 


..  i2;  X,  5;  . 


4  (wlie. 


the  a 


ippcara  as  Hehum),  15).  The  sons  of  Harim 
mentioned  in  Ezraii.  S2;  1.31,-  Neh.  viL 
35 ;  s.  27,  were  not  a  prieet-fsmily.  EMria. 
This  name  does  not  occur  again. 

Ver.  9,— HaUhijah.  An  earlier  priest  of 
this  same  name  is  mentiined  in  ch.  ix,  12, 
who  is  again  mentioned  in  Neh,  li.  12 ;  Jer. 
xii.  1 :  iiiviii.  1.  The  name  in  our  present 
verse  is  probably  the  same  (but  used  to  mark 
a  family  and  not  the  individual)  as  that  foand 
in  Neh.  x.  3  (see  also  Neh.  lii.  42).  ThB 
Xalchijah  of  Neh.  iii.  11  and  Eira  x.  23  is 
the  name  of  an  Israelitish  layman.  H^amiB. 
In  like  manner,  this  as  a /anily  name  reap- 
pears in  Neh.  X.  7;  xiL  5  (in  the  form 
iftamtn),  17,  41  (in  the  fbrm  Miniamtn); 
see  also  2  Cbron.  xiii.  15,  where  the 
Scptuagint,  the  Volgate,  and  tho  Peshito 
Syrian  read  Benjamin.  The  name  as  of  a 
layman  also  appears  in  Ezra  x.  25. 

A'or.  10.— HakkoB.  The  first  half  of  thia 
word  is  the  definite  article,  as  may  be  seen 
in  Neh.  iii.  4,  21  and  E»to  u.  61,  where 
the  name  is  found,  as  in  the  cases  above,  for 
the  priest-family.  Abijah  (see  again  Neh. 
x.  7 ;  Luke  i.  5).  To  this  oourde,  therefore, 
Zacbarias,  father  of  John  the  Baptist,  bfr- 
longed. 

Var.  11.— JetLuh.  In  Ezra  ii.  36  and 
Neb.  TiL  39  oeriain  "children  of  Jt-daiah," 
who  returned  from  Babylon,  are  mentioned 
as  belonging  to  the  "house  of  Joshua." 
and  distinguished  presumably  thereby  from 
children  of  another  Jmlaiah.  This  aocoids 
with  the  fact  that  in  Neh.  iii.6.7,audaguin 
in  19.  21,  two  families  of  the  name  Jedaiah 
are  given  in  the  priest-lists.  We  may, 
therefore,  conclude  that  families  deeuended 
from  the  Jeshuah  of  our  present  verse  were 
among  those  who  returned  from  captivity 
(Ezra  ii.  36;  Nell.  viL  39).  Sbaoaniah  (see 
Neh.  xii.  3,  where  spell  ShechanitJ,).  Of 
those  similarly  named  in  Ezra  viiL  3,  5,  tbe 
former  may  possibly  have  been  daaoendaat* 
of  this  Shecanbib,  tbe  latter  not  so. 

Ver.  12.— Sliashib.  Not  the  progenitor 
of  the  Eliashib  of  Neh.  iiL  1,  20,  21 ;  for 
see  cb.  iii.  10,  22. 23.  for  the  pedigree  of  the 
latter.     Jttkiin.     This  name  does  not   re- 

Ver.  13.— Hnppah  .  .  .  Jsthebsab.  Tha 
former  of  these  names  Is  not  found  again 
among  priest-namea,  and    the    latter  not 

Ver.  14.— BUgali  .  .  .  Immer.  The 
former  name  reappears,  not  for  the  same  per- 
son, in  Neh.  xil.  9,  16 ;  and,  nndrr  a  (lighily 


390 


THE  FIRST  DOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,     [en.  xxiv.  1— 3L 


altfred  f«»nn,  liihjai,  in  Nih.  x.  8.  Tho 
lutttT  \B  tho  name  uf  a  fiuiiily  known  ul- 
tviu\j  (ch.  ix.  12),  ami  which  bccamo 
niuch  l>ottor  known  (Kzm  ii.  37;  x.  20; 
Nth.  iii.  'iO;  vii.  40;  xL  13;  Jer.  xx.  1). 
Tho  uoiUtii  imnilk'l  to  ono  another  (Ezra 
ii.  69 ;  N«h.  vii.  Gl )  uro  inton-HtinK,  biit  ob- 
■curo.  They  itrfiUibly  B|M-ak  of  a  place 
nillod  Imuicr,  out  even  thin  \»  not  t^uito 
oliMir. 

Vor.  15.— Henr  .  .  .  AphMt.  The  for- 
mvT  name,  aa  that  of  a  Inyman,  is  found 
a^niiii  in  Neh.  x.  20.  Of  tho  latter,  8|M.lt 
in  tho  Hebrew  Ilapizez,  nothhig  more  i« 
known. 

ViT.  IC— Pethahiah  .  .  .  Jehenkal.  Tlie 
former  numo  reai>|H'ars  as  one  (tf  those  who 
■eiHirateil  themiH'lv<>s  fnnn  tho  alliaiiecs 
thev  hnil  coiitnicte<l  in  tho  land  of  their 
cap'tivity  (Ezra  x.  23;  Neh.  ix.  5).  Tho 
latter  u  in  its  clmrartors  CrMpTrr  )  the  same 

with  those  of  Ezekiel,  though  hero  Eng- 
lished Jchezekcl  I 

Ver.  17. — Jaohin  .  .  .  Oamnl.  Thclatter 
of  these  mine's  is  not  found  again  in  any 
connection  witli  a  priest-family.  Of  the 
former  wo  read  as  well  iu  oh.  ix.  10  as  in 
Neh.  xi.  10,  and  probably  he  is  tho  Achim 
of  Mutt.  i.  14. 

Ver.  18.— Delaiali  .  .  .  Kaaiiah.  The 
spelling  of  tho  former  of  these  names,  as  it 
api>ears  Iioro  anil  in  Jer.  xxxvi.  12,  25, 
ditFers  by  the  mMition  of  a  tthurek  (^)  from 
tho  iiaiiKs  opt  It  tho  s;imo  in  tho  English 
Vorsiitn,  fnuntl  in  ch.  iii.  21;  Ni'h.  vi.  10; 
vii.  02 ;  Kzra  ii.  (iO.  Tho  latter  name  n*- 
curs  in  Nuh.  x.  8,  otc.,  though  without  a  final 
ihurtk, 

Vor.  19. — The  onler  has  bet-n  thns  given 
of  tho  twenty-four  clusnes  or  courses  of 
the  pri<  sts.  Ea<'h  course  serve<l  a  week 
from  tho  seventh  day  to  tho  seventh  (2 
Kings  xi.  9 ;  2  Chron.  xxiii.  8).  An 
interenting  allusion  to  this  order  of  courses 
is  tacitly  niado  in  Ezek.  viii.  1(3 — 18,  where 
tho  twenty-fifth  idolater  may  be  supposed 
to  be  the  high  priest.  Some  have,  on  very 
insutVicicnt  grounds,  BupiK)sed  that  this 
"ordering"  of  courses  was  not  really  the 
institution  of  David,  but  attributed  to  him 
after  tho  Exile  for  tho  sake  of  tho  authority 
of  his  name.  In  Neh.  xii.  1 — 7,  moreover, 
the  names  do  not  apiK.'ar  as  evi  n  twenty- 
four,  but  twenty-two^leficient  by  twol — a 
thing  most  easily  to  bo  accounted  for.  In 
addition  to  tho  direct  scriptural  witness  on 
this  subject,  Josephus's  (*  Ant,*  vii.  14)  tes- 
timony confirms  tho  account  of  our  present 
chapter,  while  Movers  (in  *  Chronik.,'  279) 
and  Dohler  (in  Uerzog's  *  R.  E.,*  xii.  185) 
effectively  combat  the  jHwitions  of  Do  Wette 
and  (iramborg,  and  of  HorzWg,  in  his 
'History  of  tho  People  of  Israel.* 


Vers.   20—31.— The    dislribuHon  €f  Hi 

Ver.  20.— TlLt  nit  of  tlM  nos  of  X«fi 
designated  here  are  explained  BQllloieotly 
clearly  by  ver.  30.  They  were  those  who 
were  not  of  the  sons  of  Aaron,  not  prioiti. 
but  whose  *'  (tfRce  was  to  wait  on  the  iom 
of  Aaron  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  the 
Lord  *'  (ch.  xxiii.  28),  for  certain  si 
work,  some  of  which  was  of  the 
menial  character.  These,  of  ooorse,  do  not 
exhanet  the  whole  of  the  non-priestljr 
I^evit-s;  fur  wc  read  distinctly  in  the  follow- 
ing two  chapters  of  other  detachmenti 
of  the  non-priestly  I^evitcs,  whoee  oiBes 
was  as  singers,  doorkeepers,  and  treasme* 
keepers.  And  this  eondideration  msy  of 
itself  possibly  be  a  sufBoient  acoonnt  oi  the 
absence  of  an^  of  the  family  of  Gershou* 
ites  in  the  list  of  the  present  chapter, 
though  they  do  appear  to  view  for  othflr 
work  in  ch.  xxvi.21,oto.  Amii^Tw  .  ,  .  g^j^ 
baeL  The  latter  of  these  two  names  marki 
tlio  line  of  Moses,  in  his  elder  son,  Qershona 
whose  son  was  8hebuel  (ch.  xxiii.  15,  16X 
as  the  former  is  the  name  of  the  £alher  of 
Moses,  and  eldett  son  of  Kohalh. 

Ver.  21. — Behabiah.  This  name  marks  the 
line  of  Moses,  in  the  person  of  his  younger 
SOD,  Eliezor,  father  of  Rehabiah.  And  the 
practical  result  of  these  two  Tersea  is  to  give 
us  the  two  **  chiefs,"  or  heads,  or  represents 
tives,  Jehdeiah  and  Iishish,  both  Amramitea 

Ver.  22. — Jahath.  Here  follows  in  order 
after  tho  Amramites,  Jcihath,  a  doecendant 
from  Izhar,  Kohath's  tecond  son  (ch.  xxiii. 
12,  18),  through  Shelomoth  (otherwise 
Shelomith).  This  Jahath  fumishee  for  us 
the  third  name  of  this  series  of  **  other  sons 
of  lAi\i"  And  Kcil  plausibly  argues,  from 
tho  absence  of  these  three  names  from  the 
list  of  ch.  xxiii.  0 — 23,  that,  while  that  list 
is  occupied  witli  fathers*  houses,  this  list  is 
occupii'd  with  tho  ollicial  classes  of  tlie 
Leviti  s  who  were  to  be  engaged  in  the  way 
already  stated. 

Ver.  23. — This  verse  is  manifestly  im- 
perfect. What  is  ntcessaryto  fill  up  the 
evident  gaps  is  to  bo  found,  however,  in  ch. 
xxiii.  19 :  also  the  pointed  allusitiU  to  the 
time  of  David,  iu  ch.  xxvi.  31,  is  deserving 
of  es]MK*ial  notice.  The  four  names  of  this 
verse,  then,  are  descendants  of  Kohath's 
third  sou,  Hebron  (ch.  xxiii.  12). 

Vers.  24,  25. — These  verses  give  ns 
Shamir  and  Zeohariah,  descendants  of 
I'zziel,  Koliath*s  f<nirth  stm  (ch,  xxiii.  12), 
the  former  through  Alichah  ( ch.  xxiii.  20), 
and  tho  latter  throu<;h  Michah's  brother, 
Isshiah  (ch.  xxiii.  20),  calleil  here  **  eons  of 
Uzziel,**  but  presumably  not  intended  for 
immediate  sons  (Exod.  vi.  22).  In  all  these 
fourteen  heads  were  drawn  from  the  four 
sous  of  Kohath. 


CH.  XXIV.  1— 31.J    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


801 


Vera.  26—29. — We  now  pass  fifom  the 
Eohath  family  to  that  of  Merari.  For  the 
oft-repeated  Mahli  and  Moshi,  they  belonged 
to  the  time  of  Moses  (Exod.  vi.  19 ;  Numb, 
iii.  33).  The  elder  of  these,  Mahli,  as 
already  seen  in  ch.  xxiii.  21,  22,  had  two 
sons,  Eleazar  and  Kish,  the  sons  of  the 
latter  of  whom  took  the  daughters  of 
Eleazar,  who  had  no  sons,  and  thus  kept 
only  one  house  surviving,  the  head  of 
which  was  (ver.  29)  JerahmeeL  This  would 
seem  to  complete  all  that  needs  to  be  said 
of  the  Mahli  line.  Meantime,  however,  we 
are  confronted  by  the  contents  of  the  latter 
half  of  our  ver.  26  and  ver.  27.  These 
purport  to  g^ve,  amid  some  confusion  of  ex- 
pression, sons  of  Merari  by  Jaaiiah  hiB 
son  {Beno).  No  anterior  authority,  how- 
ever, can  be  found  for  this  Jaaiiali.  Neither 
of  him  nor  of  any  of  the  three  names 
(omitting  Beno,  which  is  evidently  to  be 
translated  **  his  son  ")  here  linked  on  to  his, 
is  anything  known.  While  we  accept  the 
text  as  it  at  present  is,  we  have  an  ad- 
ditional branch  with  three  families  to  add 
to  the  account  of  Merari — the  branch  of 
Jaaiiah,  the  three  families  of  Shoham, 
Zaconr,  Ibri.  Even  so  we  have  in  ver.  27 
to  obliterate  arbitrarily  the  conjunction  vau^ 
prefixed  to  the  name  Shoham.  Under  these 
tircumstances,  Keil  impatiently  rejects  these 
clauses  altogether,  as  an  interpolation, 
though  one  of  which  he  can  give  no  ac- 
count, and  adds  up,  in  consequence,  the 
families  of  Levi  (exclusive  of  the  priests) 
to  twenty-two  inBtc>ad  of  the  unexplained 


twenty-five  of  the  present  text.  Cn  the 
other  hand,  Bertheau  retains  the  present 
reading,  and  accepts  Jaaziah  as  a  third 
branch  of  the  family  of  Merari.  If  this 
were  so,  it  is  surprising  that  nowhere  else 
is  room  found  for  the  slightest  mention  of 
Jaaziah,  nor  any  other  mention  of  these 
supposed  descendants. 

Ver.  30. — The  three  sons  of  Moshi  here 
given  agree  with  ch.  xxiii.  23.  It  is  to  be 
observed  that,  in  the  foregoing  verses,  we 
have  no  expressed  .sum  of  the  families  or 
heads  to  which  they  add  up.  Hence  Ber- 
theau finds  twenty-five  in  all,  which  he 
would  reduce  to  the  twenty-four  he  wants 
by  omitting,  without  any  adequate  justifica- 
cation,  the  Mahli  of  ver.  30.  Others,  omit- 
ting the  three  names  of  Shoham,  Zaccur, 
Ibri,  bring  the  twenty-five  to  twenty-two. 
Keil  finds  only  fifteen  "  heads  "  or  •*  classes," 
but  surmises  that  the  Hebronite  and 
Mushite  '*  fathers'  houses "  may  have  been 
numerous  enough  to  find  more  than  one 
"  class ;  '*  and  thereby  to  make  up  the 
twenty-four  classes  which  he  desires  as  well 
for  symmetry's  sake  as  for  the  patent  sug- 
gestions of  ver.  31. 

Ver.  31.— Over  against  .  .  .  over  against. 
This  translation  of  the  Hebrew  (ncpS)  is 
obscure  and  awkward.  The  meaning  is 
**  equally  with,"  or  *'  correspondingly  with  " 
(ch.  xxvi.  12,  16,  etc.).  The  root  means 
**  communion,"  and  the  word  is  found  only 
in  the  constructive  stnte.  The  Vulgate 
shows  the  translation,  Omnes  tors  mqualUer 
dicidebat ;  tarn  majores  quam  minorea. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  2. — Principles  in  a  parenthesis.  This  verse  is  parenthetical ;  we  may  let  it 
suggest  to  US  some  valuable  principles. 

I.  That  sin  reappears  in  its  effects,  both  in  life  and  in  history.  After  the 
full  statement  of  the  sin  committed  by  these  young  men  (Lev.  x.),  and  the  allusion  made 
to  it  in  the  Book  of  Numbers  (iii.  4),  we  might  have  supposed  that  we  had  heard  the 
last  of  it  in  the  sacred  narrative.  But  here  it  comes  up  again ;  once  more  we  are 
reminded  how  Aaron's  sons  provoked  the  Lord,  and  brought  down  his  displeasure* 
So  now  are  there  sins  against  God  and  crimes  against  men  which  history  will  not 
let  alone ;  it  records  them  on  its  page,  and,  further  on,  it  writes  them  down  again,  that 
the  attention  of  another  generation  may  be  called  thereto.  Some  iniquities  there  are 
which  are  of  such  significance  that  no  writer  of  his  country's  story  will  leave  them  out 
of  bis  record.  But  this  is  as  pathetically  true  of  individual  life.  Too  often  it  happens 
that  men  cannot  shake  themselves  free  from  the  sins  of  earlier  days.  They  think  they 
have  done  with  them,  but  some  way  further  on  they  present  themselves  again,  and 
look  them  in  the  face.  How  many  a  man  is  called  upon  to  say,  again  and  again,  as  the 
miserable  effects  of  past  sin  come  up  to  reproach,  or  to  enfeeble,  or  to  baulk  him,  '*  Ah  I 
that  that  word  had  been  left  unspoken,  that  deed  undone,  that  habit  unformed,  that 
course  unchosenl"  If  such  is  sin  in  its  resurgent  powers,  (1)  what  a  compensatory 
fact  we  have  in  the  truth  that  it  may  be  wholly  forgiven  by  the  mercy  of  God  in 
Christ  Jesus,  so  that  it  does  not  continue  to  interpose  between  our  souls  and  his  Divine 
fvivour  1  and  (2)  how  wise  to  bring  our  life  at  its  very  commencement  under  the  law 


:m  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CUR0NICLE8.     [cH.  xxiv.  1-Sl 


uf  hnlineos,  fk>  that  those  sins  may  be  avoided  which  would,  if  incuired,  dog  our  ati|i 
aud  haunt  uur  Kpirits ! 

II.  That  mn  invkuts  tiir  KAxrRAL  order  of  things  in  thb  x.tfb  of  mav.  8o&r 
ns  the  word  can  be  used  appropriately  in  such  a  case,  we  may  say  that  it  is  the  natanl 
tiling;  for  tlie  Hfiis  to  dosv  tlie  eyes  of  their  father  (see  Gen.  xlvi.  4),  to  carry  him  to 
the  •^nive,  to  cherish  his  memory,  to  follow  his  last  directions.  There  is  somethinf 
fttrikiujjly  uniianinil  wiien  it  lias  to  be  written  that "  they  died  before  their  fatherr 
But  it  is  the  coh-tiaiit  ci'iiscqucuce  of  sin.  Sin  is  the  great  overturning,  confusing 
inverting  ]K»wtT  in  the  wnrld ;  puttin^^  that  before  which  should  be  behindhand  thit 
IhIow  which  hlii)ul<l  Ih!  al>ove,  disoriiering  and  disarranging  everything  in  the  wodd 
which  (Ju<l  made  beautiful  and  blessed.  Illustrations  abound  ijx  every  snhen  <tf 
hnmnn  activity. 

III.  That  kin  citts  off  thk  good  which  it  is  in  €k>D'8  thouoht  to  giv«  n 
These  youn;^  men  die<i,  an«l  '*  had  no  chilirL'n."  In  the  common  course  of  providence 
they  Would  have  hxd  the  di*e]s  full  joy  of  luirenti*,  and  their  children  and  aescendaati 
would  have  carried  down  their  lineage  to  the  distant  future.  But  that  oca  ''pn- 
Mimptui'us  sin  **  cut  all  this  off.  In  how  many  ways  does  human  guilt  shut  the  hand 
ot  Imiu  ticcnce,  imjx^veri.sliin^  itself  and  all  whom  it  can  affect  1 

IV.  That  it  is  wisi:  Ti>  hk  riiEPAUKi)  i-\»r  early  death  or  fob  i.onxlt  abk, 
The^e  words  may  be  writtni  of  those  who  are  not  sinful  but  unfortuuatet.  In  tin 
families  oi'  the  hi>ly  and  the  faithful  it  is  often  the  painful  record — the  young  men,  tlia 
young  women,  "die  before  their  i»arciit?."  No  one  who  is  wise  will  ritik  anything  as 
the  assurance  of  continued  life.  Youth  in  all  its  vi;;our  may  be  but  a  step  or  two 
distant  from  the  •;rave.  Strong  manhood,  rejoicing  motherhood,  may  be  about  to  enter 
on  a  life  o(  cIou<ied  loneliness.  De  ready  for  early  death,  and  for  the  long  dark  shadow 
of  liereavement.- 


Vcr.  19. — The  will  of  the  Lord.  "  As  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  had  commanded  him.' 
These  Words  may  be  said  to  constitute  the  key-note  of  the  whole  Law  (Exod-  xxxix. 
42;  Lev.  xxvii.  34 ;  Numb,  xxxvi.  13;  Deut.  xxxiv.  9).    Just  as  Israel  should  pay 

heed  to  this  cvniinanilment  of  Jehovah,  so  it  would  flourish  and  rejoice ;  in  proportion 
as  it  slioiild  depart  from  these  commaudnients,  so  it  would  fail  and  be  distressed. 
Kverythinsx  Inin.:  on  a  loyal  obedience  to  the  Divine  will.  There  were  three  forms  of 
obedience  then,  and  th<  re  is  tlie  Siiuie  number  now.     We  look  at  both. 

I.    TlIK  TIIUKK  FORMS  OF  0IU:niKNCK  WIIU  II    IsilAEL  WAS  TO  RENDER.       1.    Minute  COD- 

formity  to  })ositive  precept.  Kverythiiij!;,  to  the  smallest  particular,  was  to  be  "after 
the  pattern"  (Jtixod.  xxv.  0,  40;  Numb.  viii.  4).  In  the  celebration  of  the  sacrificei, 
the  priests  wore  to  be  studious  to  foUow  the  exact  directions  given  in  the  *'  command- 
ment of  the  Lord,"  and  any  deviation,  though  but  slight  aud  apparently  immaterial 
in  itbelf,  would  vitiate  evorythinj^  that  was  done.  2.  Application  of  broad  principles. 
It  was  hoi)eless  to  anticipate  every  }>ossihIe  breach  of  such  laws  as,  "Thou  shalt  not 
defiaiid  tliy  neighlnjur ; '*  "Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  An  inter- 
pretation and  a]>plication  of  such  commandments  as  these  must  have  been  left  largely 
to  tlie  individual  conscience.  3.  Inquiry  of  the  Lord  to  know  his  will,  and  so  to  do 
it.  This  was  the  cjise,  like  that  recordeii  in  this  chajiter,  whenever  the  mind  of  Gk»d 
was  taken  by  means  of  the  Int  (vers.  5,  (J).  A  direct  appeal  was  then  made  to  liinr^  for 
his  tiirection,  and,  thus  gained,  it  was  followed. 

II.  The  forms  of  oukuienceto  which  our  Lord  is  summoning  us.  They  correspond 
to  the  preceding,  yet  dilVer  in  some  respects  In-m  them.  1.  Christ  has  left  us  but  few 
|)Opitive  enactments.  We  seldom  meet  with  any  minute  prcscrij^tions  regulating 
l>ehaviour  in  our  New  Testaments  Pays,  forms,  and  methods  of  devotion  and  service 
are  left  to  our  conscience  and  jml^mcnt.  But  there  are  some  interdictions  and  require- 
ments which  still  exist,  and  which  bind  us  to  the  obedience  of  conformity  to  statute. 
2.  Christ  requires  of  us  that  we  make  constant  apj)lication  of  the  broad  principles  he 
has  tauj^ht  us.  He  has  said  to  us,  "Love  mc  ;  Follow  nie  :  Csire  for  my  friends  and 
little  ones :  Walk  in  love,  in  humility,  in  purity  :  i )o  ^ood  and  communicate,"  etc.  •  and 
he  leavis  it  to  tlio.se  who  benr  his  Name  toa|  ]»ly  and  illustrate  these  his  general  com- 
mandments, in  all  the  details  of  their  indiviiiual,  family,  Church,  national  life.  Tiie 
ij.aii  {)]•  ihe  Church  that  docs  not  try  to  find  out  the  will  of  Christ  from  his  life  and  i'$ 


cfl.  XXIV.  1—31.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  393 


words,  and  to  do  that  will  when  thus  discovered,  is  '*  not  worthy  of  him,"  is  no  trae 
friend  of  his  (John  xv.  14).  3.  Christ  desires  us  to  be  continually  seeking  his  will  from 
bis  own  Divine  Spirit.  He  has  promised  to  come  to  us,  to  dwell  with  us  and  within 
us,  to  instruct  and  inspire  us  by  the  communications  of  the  Spirit  of  Grod.  We  are 
thus  to  learn  his  will,  and,  when  thus  directed,  are  to  do  what  is  right  and  pleasing  in 
his  sight.  So  far  is  the  life  of  Christian  obedience  from  being  one  that  is  merely  formal 
and  mechanical.  In  Christ  Jesus  the  statutes  are  few ;  the  application  of  heavenly 
principles  is  our  daily  duty  ;  the  inquiry  of  the  Lord  to  know  what  he  would  have  us  do 
is  our  high  privilege  and  our  abiding  obligation. — C 

Ch.  xxiv.,  XXV. — The  Aaroniies  and  other  descendants  of  Levi:  orders  of  the 
musicians.  In  these  chapters  we  have  brought  before  us  a  catalogue  of  the  Aaronites, 
or  priests,  who  were  divided  into  twenty-four  classes,  corresponding  to  the  sons  of 
Eleazar  and  Ithamar,  and  appointed  to  perform  the  service  in  succession  as  determined 
by  lot,  prominent  notice  being  given  to  the  heads  of  these  twenty-four  classes ;  and  a 
list  of  the  fathers*  houses  of  the  other  descendants  of  Levi,  in  the  order  of  succes- 
sion, also  settled  by  lot.  In  ch.  xxv.  we  see  the  list  of  twenty-four  orders  of  musicians 
in  the  order  determined  by  lot.  The  lot  was  a  direct  appeal  to  Ood,  and  by  it  all 
cases  were  decided.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  all  chance  games  are  wroog,  and  should 
never  be  encouraged  by  the  Christian.  It  is  briuging  down  a  holy  ordinance  to  a  pro- 
fane level,  and  is,  without  doubt,  a  breach  of  the  third  commandment.  The  expres- 
sion **  prophesied,"  which  occurs  in  ch.  xxv.  2,  3,  is  used  in  its  deeper  signification 
of  siugmg  and  playing  to  the  praise  of  Grod,  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  In 
ch.  xxv.  5  Hemau  is  called  '*  the  seer  of  the  king  in  the  words  of  Ood,'*  because 
along  with  his  gift  of  song  he  was  endowed  with  the  prophetic  gift,  and  thus  made 
kcown  to  the  king  revelations  of  God.  The  expression  **to  lift  up  the  horn"  in 
this  verse  also  needs  explanation.  The  Levites  did  not  blow  horns.  It  was  not  one  ol 
the  instruments  of  worship.  The  lifting  up  of  the  horn  signifies  invariably  to  heighten 
or  show  forth  the  power  of  any  one.  This  is  the  meanino:  of  the  word  in  this  passage. 
And  the  words  "  to  lift  up  the  born  "  must  be  connected  with  the  words  that  follow,  thus : 
'*  To  give  Ueman's  race  power  for  the  praise  of  God  God  gave  to  Heman  fourteen  sons 
and  three  daughters.  We  also  learn,  in  ch.  xxv.  7,  that  there  were  those  who  were 
''instructed,"  and  were  " cunning "  or  skilful  in  the  songs  of  the  Lord.  From  these 
passages  we  may  learn  that  families,  and  especially  large  families  like  Heman's,  are  Qod*8 
gifts  for  the  purpose  of  being  used  in  his  service.  And  secondly,  that  in  all  praise  an4 
singing,  whilst  we  are  never  to  forget  the  apostolic  injunction,  "  Singing  and  making 
melody  in  your  hearts  to  the  Lord,''  we  are  to  "  sing  with  the  understanding  also,"  and 
that  it  is  to  be  of  the  very  best  kind ;  and  that  with  it  all  there  must  be  that  without 
which  it  will  be  empty  sound — singing  in  the  Iloly  Ohost,  as  they  did  who  are  named 
in  the  second  and  thiid  verses  of  ch.  xxv.  Thus  *'  teachers "  and  ''scholars"  (ver.  8) 
will  fill  their  divinely  appointed  places  to  the  glory  of  Ghxi. — W. 

Ver.  2. — The  abiding  warning  of  the  wilful.  The  narrative  of  Nadab  and  Abihu 
which  is  here  recalled  is  given  in  Lev.  x.  1 — 5.  The  wordiog  of  the  verse  is  taken 
from  Numb.  iii.  4.  It  is  a  story  which  we  find  it  difficult  to  understand.  Probably  its 
explanation  depends  on  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  Jewish  system,  and  the 
sentiments  prevailing  in  those  earlier  times.  JNadab  and  Abihu  had  been  honoured 
with  special  privileges  (see  Exod.  xxiv.  1,  9,  10) ;  by  reason  of  this  they  may  have 
become  unduly  exalted,  and  have  been  tempted  by  spiritual  pride  to  imagine  that  they 
were  not  bound  by  ordinary  rules  in  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  the  priest's  office. 
Kitto  gives  a  brief  but  sufficient  sketch  of  the  incident.  *'  Among  the  priestly  services 
was  that  of  offering  the  precious  incense  upon  the  golden  altar  wiihin  the  tabernacle^ 
at  the  very  time  that  the  daily  sacrifice  was  being  consumed  upon  the  brazen  altar  in 
the  court  without.  At  the  time  the  ritual  service  had  been  inaugurated,  the  fire  of  the 
great  altar  was  kindled  from  heaven ;  and  it  was  made  an  ordinance  that  this  holy  fire 
should  always  be  kept  up  and  preserved,  and  that  this,  and  this  alone,  was  to  be  used 
in  all  the  sacred  services.  The  priests  who  offered  incense  had,  therefore,  to  fill  their 
censers  with  fire  from  the  great  altar  when  they  went  into  the  tabernacle  to  bum 
iLcense.    It  was  in  this  nutter  that  Nadab  and  Abihu  sinned.    Treating  this  ordinance 


394  rTHE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ch.  xxiv.  1— SI. 

as  of  no  importance,  thinking  to  themselves  that  common  fire  would  bam  thdr  inoenae 
quite  as  well  as  the  other ;  or,  perhaps,  as  there  is  reason  to  fear,  having  been  led  into  a 
mistake,  or  neglect,  by  inebriety,  thev  filled  their  censers  with  'strange  fire/ 
unhallowed  fire,  not  from  the  altar,  and  ventured  to  bring  it  into  the  tab^acle*" 
Permanent  instruction  may  be  drawn  from  this  incident  by  regarding  wilfulnen  as  the 
very  essence  of  these  men's  sin.  When  there  was  a  distinct,  definite,  and  well-known 
Divine  command,  it  pleased  them  to  act  on  the  dictate  of  their  own  feeling.  In  view 
of  that  full  loyalty  to  Christ,  and  daily  waiting  upon  him  for  guidance  and  direction, 
which  are  necessary  features  of  the  Christian  life,  wilfulness  is  as  perilous  and  as  wicked 
in  the  modern  dinpcnsation  as  in  the  older.  In  setting  forth  this  evil  and  its  fatal 
influence,  consider — 

I.  Wilfulness  as  a  disposition  of  characteb.  It  is  the  bias  left  on  humanity  from 
our  first  father's  fall.  We  see  the  signs  of  human  depravity  mainly  in  this — that  men's 
wills  are  set  against  God's  will,  and  have  to  be  subdued  to  his  obedience.  This  is  tme 
of  man  as  an  individual,  and  equally  true  of  men  when  acting  together  in  society  or  in 
the  nation.  But  there  are  different  degrees  of  wilfulness,  and  in  some  the  self-will  is  a 
master-{)assion.  Some  measures  of  wilfulness  in  the  common  affnirs  of  life  ensore 
energy  and  mastery  of  circumstance ;  but  it  is  wholly  out  of  place  in  the  religious 
spheres,  where  energy  must  depend  on  the  spirit  of  service  to  Christ. 

II.  Wilfulness  finding  expression  in  acts.  Illustrate  from  King  Saul  in  his  later 
and  worse  moods,  or  from  Judas  Iscariot,  who,  with  views  of  his  own,  came  to  betray 
his  very  Lord.  The  apostle  warns  us  concerning  those  who  '*  will  be  rich,  and  so  fall 
into  temptation  and  a  snare."  Wilfulness  expressed  in  acts  brings  us  at  once  under 
Divine  notice,  because  it  then  afifects  the  comfort  and  well-being  of  others, 

III.  Wilfulness  corrupting  the  whole  religious  life.  It  puts  a  wrong  tone 
npon  all  the  relations,  and  spoils  the  whole  life  by  possessing  it  with  the  spirit  of  seff, 
Ood  the  Spirit  cannot  rule  the  life,  and  self  rule  at  the  same  time ;  and  if  it  be  self  that 
really  rules,  then  we  are  "  dead  while  we  live."  Practically  dead,  because  none  of  the 
'*  means  of  grace  "  can  prove  the  soul's  nourishment  when  wilfulness  rules. 

IV.  Wilfulness  bringing  us  under  Divine  judgments.  Illustrated  in  the  case 
of  Nadab  and  Abihu.  Where  wilfulness  is  but  growing,  Divine  chastisements  come  for 
Correction.  Where  wilfulness  has  gained  full  mastery,  there  must  be  Divine  judgments, 
such  as  utterly  crush  down  the  pride. 

Exactly  what  Christianity  proposes  is  the  "conversion  of  self-will,"  and  the  bestow- 
ment  of  the  spirit  that  worships,  and  follows  wholly,  the  "  sweet  will "  of  God. — ^R.  T. 

Ver.  19. — Ancient  Divine  rules  preserved  in  modem  adjustments,  David  found  it 
necessary  to  make  alterations  and  adaptations  when  he  reconstituted  the  worship  for 
the  new  tabernacle  and  the  anticipated  temple,  but  in  all  his  adaptations  he  anxiously 
preserved  the  Mosaic  principles  and  the  Mosaic  order;  thereby  giving  an  important 
example  of  the  spirit  and  the  manner  in  which  modern  adjustments  of  permanent 

f>rinciples  should  be  made.  We  must  accept  the  fact  of  the  changeableness  of  human 
ife,  thought,  and  forms  of  relationship  and  society.  Age  difiers  from  age.  A  succeed- 
ing age  will  often  strive  to  realize  a  contrast  mth  the  age  preceding;  it  will  prefer 
what  it  disliked,  and  put  in  the  front  what  it  had  set  in  the  background.  We  must 
take  care  that  the  changes  are  set  under  wise  limitations,  and  the  first  of  these  is  the 
fair  and  adequate  representation,  in  the  new  scenes,  of  the  old  and  permanent  social,  or 
moral,  or  religious  principles.  Some  persons  love  change  for  change's  sake ;  and  such 
persons  often  put  the  best  things  in  peril,  and  prevent  tiie  noblest  schemes  for  human 
well-being  from  gaining  an  adequate  trial.  Others  resist  change  as  if  it  were  wholly 
wrong  and  injurious  ;  and  such  persons  help  to  keep  the  yokes  pressing  on  men's  necks 
long  after  it  is  manifest  how  tne  neck  has  become  galled  and  painful.  And  many 
persons  fail  to  take  "change"  at  the  hopeful  time,  and  so  they  lose  all  the  finest 
opportunities  that  life  brings.  These  diversities  of  relation  to  necessary  change  may  be 
illustrated  in  relation  to  human  customs,  to  political  history,  to  ecclesiastical  order,  and 
to  Church  doctrine.  We  are  instructed  not  to  "  meddle  with  those  who  are  given  to 
change; "  but  we  have  a  very  proper  admiration  for  such  a  man  as  the  Apostle  St, 
Paul,  who,  with  far-seeing  wisdom,  discerned  how  Judaism  was  passing  into  the  broader 
spiritual  Christianity,  and  put  himself  forward  as  a  leader  in  the  change.    Another  fiict 


CH.  XXV.  1—31.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


395 


requires  attention.  All  forms  for  the  expression  of  principles  tend  to  exhaust  their 
capacity  for  expressing  truth.  Like  vessels,  or  pipes,  that  get  encrusted  with  use,  they 
have  to  he  taken  away,  and  replaced  by  other  and  larger  forms.  All  we  have  to  care 
for,  from  the  most  conservative  standpoint,  is  that  the  old  life  shall  flow  into  and 
through  the  new  forms,  and  that  the  new  form  shall  bo  fully  adequate  to  convey  the 
great  flow  of  the  old  life.  We  may  even  plead  that,  in  view  of  the  ever-varying  wants 
of  men,  we  should  be  ready  to  adopt  new  forms  and  modes  in  the  religious  life  and 
service.  Illustration  may  be  taken  from  the  attitude  advisable  towards  such  schemes  as 
that  of  the  Salvation  Army,  or  mo<lern  mission  halls  and  revivals.  David  lived  in  one 
of  the  so-called  ^  periods  of  transition,"  antl  it  is  very  interesting  to  mark  how  he  led 
the  change  that  was  demanded,  but  carefully  toned  it  with  due  reference  to  the  rules 
and  order  which  had  been  divinely  given.  We  may  more  fully  illustrate  from  practices 
and  order  of  worship,  customs  of  relieious  life,  and  Church  doctrine,  one  necessary 
condition  of  change  that  may  be  regarded  as  wise  and  healthy — the  old  rule,  or  principle, 
must  find  adequate  expression  in  the  new  form.  The  form  is  bad  if  it  dwarfs,  or  hides, 
or  misrepresents,  or  attenuates  the  principle.  The  body  must  worthily  aud  sufficiently 
express  the  man.  If  it  be  so  that  men  ever  gain  a  larger  and  fuller  grasp  of  any 
principle  or  truth,  they  are  following  a  genuine  inspiration  when  they  seek  a  larger 
form  in  which  to  give  it  expression.  And  this  condition,  duly  observed,  guarantees  the 
safety  of  what  is  called  "  modem  religious  thought."  This  subject  may  be  used  to 
quiet  the  minds  of  those  who  fear  the  many  and  apparently  extensive  changes  in  the 
expression  of  religious  truth  in  our  times.  We  may  be  sure  that  God  will  watch 
jealously  over  his  truth  ;  and  will  have,  in  every  ase,  godly  men  who  will  '*  earnestly 
contend  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints." — R.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


Vers.  1—8.-2^  famUies  of  the  three 
chiefs  in  song, 

Ver.  1. — The  twenty-four  courses  of  those 
who  were  to  be  eDga<;ed  in  the  temple 
service  as  singers  and  musicians  fill  up  this 
chapter.  They  are  to  be  taken  from  the 
three  great  families  of  Asaph,  Heman,  and 
Jeduthun.  For  the  captains  of  the  host,  as 
designating  those  who  superintended  the 
onler  of  U'mplo  worship,  see  ch.  xxii.  17; 
zxiii.  2 ;  xxiv.  G ;  as  also  Numb.  iv.  3 ;  viii. 
23.  The  sons  of  Asaph.  (For  a  clear  instance 
of  the  use  of  tlu*  preposition  (Jiamed)  prefixed, 
as  here,  see  Ezra  viii.  24.)  The  English 
should  appear  **  the  sons  of  Asaph."  Asaph, 
Heman,  and  J<'duthun  belonged  respectively 
to  the  Gershon,  Kohath,  and  Merarite 
fiunilies  (ch.  vi.  18 — 32).  Thus  these  singers 
and  musicians  were  drawn  from  each  great 
branch  of  Levi;  viz.  from  Gershon,  four 
through  Asai»h;  from  Kohath,  six  through 
Jeduthun ;  and  from  Merari,  fourteen 
through  Heman;  while  the  whole  namber 
of  those  trained  to  sing  was  two  hundred 
and  eighty-eight  Who  should  prophesy. 
The  Hebrew  D««a|n  (Jer.  xiv.  14,  16) 
stands  for  Niphal  participle  plural,  the 
singular  of  which  (Main)  appears  in  the 
following  two  verses.  These  were  the 
utlerers  in  song  of  the  Divine  mind  and 


will.  The  essential  meaning  of  the  ex- 
pression evidently  is  to  use  the  voice  ia 
sacred  service,  more  or  less  under  Divine 
impulse.  With  oymbali.  These  instruments 
were  used  to  regulate  the  tivne  (compare 
this  verse  with  oh.  xiii.  8>  For  some 
particulars  respecting  these  and  other 
musical  instruments  used  in  Israel  at  this 
time,  the  article  **  Music  "  in  Smith's  *  Bible 
Dictionary '  may  be  consulted  with  advan- 
tage. And  the  namber,  etc.  The  literal 
trannlation  of  the  last  clause  of  this  verse 
is.  And  UHU  their  number,  (he  men  of  work, 
for  their  service,  i.e.  "And  the  number  of 
workmen  for  the  service  was."  The  work' 
men  intend,  of  course,  those  who  performed 
the  service. 

Ver.  2. — Four  sons  of  Asaph  are  here 
given,  the  number,  however,  not  being  ex- 
pressed, although  it  is  expr^sed  in  the 
cases  of  Jeduthun  and  Hiniau  (vers.  3,  5). 
•*For  Asaph,"  we  find  twelve  pfcalms  in- 
scribed, viz.  Ps.  1.;  IxxiiL— Ixxxiii. ;  of 
some  of  which  he  was  himself  the  inspired 
composer.  When  it  is  said  "for  Asaph," 
the  meaning  is  for  those  "  under  his  hand,'* 
or  direction,  and  who  as  a  bind  bore  his 
name,  and  performed  among  other  odes 
those  which  he  prophesied.  Zaocnr.  A 
descendant  after  the  Return  is  mentioned  in 
Neh.  xii.  35.  Asarelah,  This  last  of  the 
four  sons  of  Asaph  is  called  in  ver.  14, 
Jesharelah.  Under  the  hands  of .  .  .  aeoord- 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,      [ca,  xit.  1—31. 


lag  to  tba  oidar  of.  Tho  Ilclin-w  worcU  are 
■■to  tlio  hnud  of  ami  "ti>  ttio  Imtidv  of." 
Ikttwt'on  tlio  liRiiiUcntinii  of  tlicxo  two 
fomui,  tho  uno  eztircaMil  in  tlio  «iiii;uliU' 
unmbi'T  uiitl  tlio  otliei  in  the  |ililnkl,  tlicni 
dnvl  liut  nvcm  to  bo  anj  iliHtinclUni,  luiil 
acanhliiib'ly  tlicy  tui),'lil  Iw  bitlvr  thiiiHlated, 
utultr  llu  .UrMiim  of  .  .  .  m.J.T  the 
dinetioM  uf.  Tliu  latti'i  rmiu  to  that  fuunJ 
iu  vvro.  a,  G. 

Vei.  S. — Six  wu  are  lii're  aaiJ  to  bo 
niulor  the  iliruatioa  nl  Joduthon  (or  ECtliun, 
ob.  vi.  44).  TUu  namo  iiiiB>iiiK  io  t^bimei, 
■applied  by  vor.  IT,  ami  vliicli  tlio  Ali-x- 
ftnuriiio  Sojitua^iit  [ilaruii  fmirth  iu  tliil 
lUt.  ThiM  ta  cluir  fniiL  tho  list  of  Tura. 
9 — 31,  wliicli  ouulaiDB  all  tho  aaiuo  namca 
■■  are  fouuil  in  thu  pn-iout  vera.  2—4.  and 
oue  more,  Sliiiiiui,  wliii^h  thi'rcfuro  offu'H  to 
Biiplilji  tlio  plucu  vacaut  hero.  Tliu  nuiuu 
Zari  ica]ii)t-nra  in  vcr.  II  a<  l:ri.  Who 
piopliNied  (see  liciuliriga  to  Vt.  xixiK.; 
Ixii.;  Ixxvii.:  wo  do  not  know,  however, 
tliut  Jvlutbiin  amipotnl  any  of  Iheei-,  iiur 
(loi-B  thu  «ord  "pruiilicsy"  nccesaibite  it). 

Vcr.  4.  — Tho  two  names  Vniel  and 
Bhebnd,  in  tliia  vcrac,  rcatipcar  ros|H.i'livulv 
ill  vera.  IK.  '2U,  as  Aiarrd  ami  Shnl'ivl.  It 
la  niuarkalilo  that  tho  ninth  aod  tenth 
uatnesorthialiatiWith  tho  twclrth,  thirteenth, 
uud  fiiartcoiith,  when  pnt  toRelhor,  run  into 
two  lim-s  nf  vorM?,  whieh  may  be  truniilated. 
"These  bextciwid  great  iiliil  lii^h  hi'l|i:  I 
have  iibuiuhiiitly  iittervd  oruclus."  Ewuld 
BUKgoHtB  thilt  llie^e  may  be  the  cnmnivuciu); 
lines  of  luuuo  nticii'iit  pinphrt's  oriii'lea 
(Kwatd,  'Lehrbucli  d.r  II.  ^yr.,'  §  27*.  B. 
1172,  711)  edit.,  cited  by  Kuil). 

Ver.  5. — For  the  expreiiiiinn.  the  king*! 
nor,  and  as  other  instimcos  nf  thi>  uflli'C, 
•oooh.  III.!);  2Uhrmi.  xxxv.  IS.in  neither 
of  whirh  jilaoes,  however,  hiivo  wo  tiio 
atlendnnt  pIimb?,  in  tba  words  of  Ood.  Yet 
wo  liavo  the  same  si-nao  slrirtly  implied  in 
oh.  ixi.  9,  I'.l.  The  expresBion  ntwilit  nut  to 
be  goncrnliK.'d  into"in  the  matters  of  tloil," 
but  evidently  ilcucribcs  thu  bi-er  (liiiinan, 
Gail, or  Jcilul'hun) ns  tliu authorizml luiiliiim 
of  verbal  ooiunitmic(iti<m  htitwet-ii  Oiil  and 
tlio  kini;.  Theru  is  diAtculty  in  awigiiiug 
the  rigiit  phice  of  the  olanao,  to  lift  up  tho 
Iwrn.  Theru  can  bo  tto  doubt  nt  all  that 
it  contains  no  alliisiiin  whatever  to  tho 
bom  a«  nu  instrnuient  of  sr>und  (tlie  almost 
solitary  a|i]iroaah  to  which  uso  of  tho  word 
Is  found  in  Jiwh.  vL  5),  but  tlmt  it  fulls  in 
with  the  very  frciim'nt^gurud're  use  of  the 

fhnist)  M  it  occurs  in  tho  vury  same  wunis 
l>(.  IxxT.  5,  6;  Ixxxix.  18,  23;  xcii.  12; 
Gzii.  9;  1  Bum.  IL  1,  10,  etc.),  and  whiih 
ueans^toaild  hi  the  strength  "  or  "honour" 
of  any  one.  The  allusion  is  to  the  number 
iif  llcmau's  rhildreii  bfir>g  n  nmrk  of  tho 
lioiir:ur  (led  sut  on  him.    The  nords  c;;umot 


f-o  wilh  the  latter  part  of  the  tene,  while 
tho  ooDJuiirtioti  (snu)  in  \rrr\_  opena  it  The 
pnsaiblo  order  may  be,  AU  Iheae  m»u  teen  (s 
U'tnon,  Ur  hiag't  seer,  fcjj  (As  mtnU  at  Goi, 
to  lift  up  the  horn.  Tho  absenoo  of  the 
thinl  pemnnal  pri'iioun  suffix  to  fc  n 
noticeable,  pinoe  tho  oUubq  wher«  we  will 
The  statemL'ot  of  the  fonxtasn  Mnu  tut 
throe  daughters  belonring  t<i  Hemao,  in 
IhJH  verse,  shows  that  up  to  this  point  tha 
wenl  "sons"  u  uw-U  in  ita  stricter  sense, 
liow.'vor  true  it  may  be  that  the  seaae  if 
ampliHed  in  vers.  10—31. 

Ver.  C-Thia  vorse  d.  eda  nothing  esoepi 
exnot  trannlation  to  make  ita  moaning-  clear 
and  oonaifllent,  AU  tbOM  (i\e.  the  nantea  li 
vers.  2—4)  were  nndar  tha  diraotiaaa  of 
their  fathsr,  In  the  song  of  the  hons*  of  tte 
Lord,  with  oymbalt,  psalt«riea,  and  haipk 
for  the  serrioa  of  the  honsa  of  Ood,  -~'it 
the  directions  of  tha  kins',  Awiph,  aal 
Jsdnthun  and  Eemau. 

Ver.  7.— This  verso  inlroduces  a  lain 
addilioiittl  nninber  of  those  culled  for  the 
preatnt  brethiea  of  the  toregoiug  twoDly- 
four.    ThoBO  brethren  (portly  eompoeed  of 

their  soi«,  as  appears    from   vers.   9 31) 

wuro  to  aid  in  tlie  songs  of  tho  Lotd,  and 
wert'  niipanntly  under  instruotion  for  that 
purpose.  Kach  one  of  the  twenty-four  had 
eleven  associated  snbordinatea  with  him, 
and  for  whnee  instnietlon  and  s«rvioe  be 
was  jimbabl;?  answerable.  Those  would,  of 
foorsc,  mulliply  up  id  the  two  hundred  four 
fears  and  sight  mentioned  in  the  rer^o. 
T)iisvir»eap[K>ar8 (contrary  to  the  iQU>ri>ro- 
liitiin  of  Ketl.  Bvrtheau,  and  others)  with 
Bullici,nt  l>r<.Tiaion  to  mark  two  daaaee 
■r?-''p^,  and  |'aEri,  tho  latter  not  em- 
bracing tho  former,  but  the  two  together 
making  up  the  two  hundred  and  eiglitj- 
eight  spi'ki-n  of.  These  two  classes  will 
surely  eatisfy  tho  "  teacher  and  the  scholar" 
c lass ili cation  of  the  following  verse;  tho 
clas,ies  aro  denoted  by  the  same  Hebrew 
ro.itfl.  In  ver.  7  tho  pansivo  Puiil  partleiple 
of  tho  instructed  and  the  Hiphil  partioiple 
of  the  cunning,  or  skilled,  correspond 
exactly  wilh  the  "scholar"  (Tn^n)  aud  the 
"teacher"  (]'^c)  of  ver.  S,  Thu  contents 
of  vers.  9— ill  point  to  the  eanie,  being  a* 
thuy  are  willioiit  an  allusion  to  any  other 
onlf  iders— to  any  but  the  aln^aiiy  introduced 
names  of  "sons"  and  "  brutlireu."  The 
supposing,  therefore,  of  any  allusiun  here  to 
the  "four  thousiind"  of  oh.  iiiii.  5  iioetns 
unnece.'^ary  aud  unnatural  in  whatever 
way  thuy  were  distributed — and  probubly 

enough  it  was  in  un  analogous  niamier no 

distinct  rererence  is  made  to  them  here. 

Ver.  8.— This  verse  ehould  be  tmnslated. 
And  they  oast  lota  of  attsndance,  small  »»i|i 
great  squally,  teacher  with  scholar.     Tha 


cii.  XXV.  1—31.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


307 


Septuagint  translates  rnpvfn  rrfriM  by  the 

Words  K^iipous  i^fitpwv. 

Vers.  9-31.— Z>M«  of  the  choirs  in  the 
order  in  which  their  lots  came.  The  formula, 
his  sons,  and  hlB  brethren,  which  follows 
twenty-two  out  of  the  twenty-four  loaders' 
names  which  now  come  before  us,  is  absent 
from  ver.  9,  where  we  should  have  looked 
for  it,  viz.  after  the  name  Joseph.  It  has 
been  supposed  that  this  is  a  mere  omission 
of  carelessness.  But  this  can  scarcely  be 
asserted  conclusively.  It  is  observable,  for 
instance,  that  the  order  of  the  formula  in 
the  same  verse,  on  occabion  of  its  very  first 
occurrence,  is  not  identical  with  the  other 
twenty-two  instances  of  it,  the  word 
"brethren"  preceding  "sons,"  and  the  x>ro- 
noun  "he"  being  expressed.  The  pre- 
position (S)  is  sometimes  expressed  and 
sometimes  not  expressed  before  both  the 
proper  names  and  the  ordinal  numerals  of 
the  list  Examination  of  the  contents  of 
these  verses  sliows,  either  that  it  was  due 
to  the  Divine  direction  of  the  lot  (Pri»v. 
xvL  33)  that  an  issue  resulted  which  looks 
so  unlike  mere  chance,  and  the  system  of 
which  is  so  methodical  and  traceable ;  or 
that  the  lot-taking  was  not  one  of  families 
and  sons,  all  thrown  together  from  the  first 
Tliis  supposition  would,  of  course,  leave  room 
for  some  such  ingenious  hypothesis  as  that 


of  Berthcau,  too  artificial  by  far  to  bo 
defensible  except  as  a  theory  that  would 
indeed  work  out  the  result  He  suggests 
that  the  modus  operandi  was  by  two  urns, 
one  for  the  first  seven  odd  numbers,  into 
which  were  put  the  names  of  Asaph's  four 
sons  and  of  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  of 
Heman ;  the  other  for  the  first  seven  even 
numbers,  into  which  were  put  the  six  sons 
of  Jeduthun  and  the  first  of  Heman.  Turn- 
ing from  such  a  concocted  theory  to  theso 
verses,  we  find  that  the  first  cast  brings  to 
the  surface  the  second  son  of  Asaph,  and 
the  second  cast  brings  up  the  eldest  son  of 
Jeduthun.  At  the  end  of  the  seventh  all 
of  Asaph's  sons  are  exliausted,  and  what 
would  have  been  his  next  place  (the  ninth) 
is  occupied  by  the  second  son  of  Heman, 
whose  eldest  had  just  taken  the  sixth  place 
80  thrown  out  by  the  lot  At  the  end  of 
the  fourteenth  throw  Jeduthun's  six  sons 
are  all  used  up,  and  all  the  remaining  places 
belong  to  Heman's  sons,  but  still  in  the 
order  in  which  they  are  thrown  out  by  the 
lot 

Ver.  21.— M attithiah  (see  ch.  xv.  18,  21). 
No  other  of  these  twenty-four  names  ii 
found  elsewhere  out  of  this  chapter  in  the 
history,  a  just  indication  of  the  ^stworthi- 
ness  rather  than  the  contrary  of  this  table. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUl^HORS. 

Ver.  7. — Instruction  in  songs.  It  was  according  to  the  king's  order  that  schools  of 
psalmody  were  appointed  in  connection  with  Levitical  ministrations.  He  was  himself 
fitted  by  temperament,  by  genius,  by  piety,  by  proficiency  in  art,  to  found  such  schools^ 
and  to  give  them  an  impulse  and  inspiration.  In  the  skill  and  system  with  which  ho 
gave  himself  to  this  work,  he  showed  his  far-sighted  wisdom.  For  out  of  his  labour 
and  care  sprang,  directly,  all  Hebrew  minstrelsy  of  later  times^  and^  indirectly,  in  no 
small  measure,  all  Christian  psalmody. 

I.  The  sriBiTUAL  substance  of  fsalmodt.  If  the  singing  of  hymns,  the  chanting 
of  psalms,  the  vocal  rendering  of  carols,  canticles,  and  anthems,  be  mere  musical  exer- 
cise and  enjoyment,  it  is  no  psalmody  in  Grod's  ear.  In  acceptable  praise  the  heart  is 
the  all-essential  element.  David  felt  this  when  he  exclaimed,  "  Sing  ye  praises  with 
understanding ; "  and  Paul  when  he  admonished  Christians  to  "  make  melody  with  their 
heart  unto  the  Lord." 

II.  The  metrical  and  musical  form  of  psalmody.  The  utterance  of  praise  may 
be  spontaneous.  But  if  it  is  to  be  social,  such  as  many  may  join  in,  it  must  be  prepared. 
Thanksgiving,  when  it  assumes  a  permanent  shape  and  finds  a  social  utterance,  must 
come  under  tlie  control  of  the  rules  of  art.  Metrical  language  and  melody  and  har- 
mony thus  became  the  body  of  which  adoration  and  gratitude,  confidence  and  love,  are 
the  soul.  We  see  an  illustration  of  these  principles  in  the  sacred  minstrelsy  of  David. 
He  composed  devout  and  spiritual  odes,  and  directed  that  these  should  be  sung  by 
trained  choirs  to  the  accompaniment  of  instrumental  music.  However  different  may 
be  the  language  and  the  music  of  our  social  praise,  we  cannot  dispense  with  art  The 
choice  in  psalmody  does  not  lie  between  spontaneity  and  art,  but  between  bad  art  and 
good.  Hence  the  perpetual  importance  of  what  is  called  in  the  text  "  instruction  in 
the  songs  of  the  Lord.  There  must  be  teaching  and  teachers,  labour  and  skill,  adap- 
tation to  persons  and  seasooB-HEdl  alike  penetrated  by  the  spirit  of  true  devotion. 


i 


B9e  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.    [ch.xxv.  1— SI. 

CoNGLUSioK.  1.  The  importance  of  a  due  attention  to  "  the  service  of  song  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord.**  2.  The  danger,  on  the  one  hand^  of  carelessness  and  slovenlineaSy 
which  spring  from  and  conduce  to  irreverence ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  of  losing  the 
spirit  in  exaggerating  the  importance  of  the  form.  3.  The  desirableness  of  cultivatins 
a  devout  andgratefid  spirit  towards  him  who  "  inhabiteth  the  praises  of  Israel,"  and 
who  receives  the  unceasing  adoration  of  the  heavenly  hosts. — T. 

Ver.  8. — **  Small  and  great,  teacher  and  scholar"  We  have  here  an  enumerar 
tion  of  the  several  courses  of  the  Levites,  appointed  by  lot  to  minister  in  due  order. 
In  the  words  which  precede  the  enumeration,  we  have  summarized  the  variety  of  ages 
and  classes,  all  of  whom  were  employed  and  accepted  by  the  Lord  in  his  service. 

I.  An  epitome  of  human  sooiett  as  constituted  bt  God.  Our  common  humanity 
is  consistent  with  great  variety  and  intermixture  of  elements.  It  has  pleased  GK)d  not 
only  that  generation  should  succeed  generation,  but  that  members  of  the  human  race 
of  all  ages  should  exist  together  in  human  society.  It  is  obviously  his  will  that  man- 
kind should  be  composed  of  those  who  teach  and  those  who  learn. 

II.  An  abbanoement  to  weigh  the  provisions  of  redemption  exactly  oobbb- 
(SFOND.  If  the  same  Ghxi  rules  in  providence  and  saves  in  redemption,  we  may  expect  to 
find  a  suitable  provision  made  for  the  varied  wants  of  varied  cUsses.  Accordingly  we 
find  that  the  Bible  is  equally  adapted  to  young  and  old;  that  the  redemption  of  Christ 
is  limited  to  no  age  or  class ;  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  poured  out  from  above  without 
regard  to  the  distinctions  upon  which  men  often  lay  an  undue  stress ;  that  religion  is 
equally  intended  for  the  benefit  of  all  mankind. 

III.  That  society  should  be  bo  constituted  is  productive  op  mutual  adtah- 
TAOE.  The  great  serve  the  small,  and  the  small  the  great ;  the  scholar  is  indebted  to 
the  teacher^  who  in  turn  derives  many  benefits  from  his  pupils.  There  is  no  member 
of  the  human  race  who  is  not  both  a  benefactor  and  a  beneficiary.  It  is  well  that  all 
should  live  in  voluntary  and  cheerful  compliance  with  this  Divine  ordinance. 

IV.  All  classes  and  ages  may  co-opebate  fob  the  bpbead  of  the  gospel 
AND  THE  8EBVICE  OF  GoD.  The  causo  of  Christ  is  one  which  the  feeblest  child  may- 
help  to  advance,  and  which  may  employ  the  abilities  of  the  greatest  and  most  learned. 
Our  Lord  disdains  not  the  lowliest  service;  and  the  loftiest  are  honoured  in  being  per- 
mitted to  do  his  will  and  glorify  his  Name. — T. 

Vers.  1—31. — '*  The  service  of  the  house  of  Ood^  In  this  chapter,  which  gives  the 
musical  arrangements  made  for  the  "service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,"  we  have 
suggestions  which  take  our  thoughts  over  the  wider  ground  of  public  worship.  We 
have — 

I.  Two  ELEMENTS  WHICH  IT  SHOULD  INCLUDE.  Divine  servico  is  felt  to  be  essentially 
incomplete  without :  1.  Praise,  All  who  love  the  house  of  God  delight  "  to  give  thanks 
and  to  praise  the  Lord  '*  (ver.  3).  We  have  such  a  God  for  our  God  that  we  can  **  give 
thanks  and  praise  "  him  whenever  we  remember  him.  The  devotees  of  heathen  deities 
cannot  do  so ;  they  can  only  prostrate  themselves  abjectly  before  their  gods,  or  depre- 
cate their  capricious  wrath :  there  is  nothing  in  the  beings  they  worship  worthy  of 
their  honour.  In  the  only  wise  Gt)d,  in  the  holy  and  pitiful  Father  of  our  spirits,  in  the 
righteous  Lord  of  all,  in  the  merciful  Bedcemer  of  mankind,  in  the  patient,  striving, 
cleansing  Spirit  of  God,  in  this  God  who  is  our  God,  we  have  One  whom  we  can  praise 
continually,  and  with  all  the  energies  and  faculties  of  our  nature,  and  then  feel  that  we 
have  failed  to  render  unto  him  **  the  glory  which  is  due  unto  his  Name."  2.  Instruo' 
tion.  There  were  to  be  workmen  "  who  should  prophesy  "  (ver.  1),  and  they  "  prophesied 
with  a  harp  ; "  i.e,  their  function  was  to  utter  sacred,  instructive,  inspiring  words  in 
their  capacity  as  choristers.  The  music  of  the  sanctuary  was  to  be  sulwrdinated  to  the 
utterance  of  Divine  truth,  the  sound  to  the  sense,  the  ear  to  the  soul.  One  musical 
leader  was  even  spoken  of  as  "  the  king's  seer  in  the  words  of  God  "  (ver.  6).  Here 
we  have  an  argument  a  fortiori.  If  in  the  act  of  praising,  when  the  first  end  in  view  is 
the  offering  thus  presented  to  God  himself,  we  are  to  use  words  which  will  be  instructive 
and  elevating  to  the  worshippers,  how  much  more  are  we  to  provide  that  other  parts  ol 
Divine  service  shall  be  full  of  sacred  instruction,  shall  tend  to  edify,  to  enlighten,  tc 
sustain  ! 


CH.  XXV.  1—31.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  399 

n.   FOUB  FEATURES  BY  WHICH  IT  SHOULD  BE  CHARACTEBIZED.      1.    Order.      The  wLole 

chapter  is  an  argument  for  this ;  the  division  into  choirs,  with  their  respective  leaders, 
and  the  arrangement  as  to  their  turn  of  service,  speak  of  careful  orderliness.  The  heauty 
of  holiness  in  which  we  should  worship  requires  that  there  be  no  confusion,  embarrass- 
ment, disorder  (1  Cor.  iv.  33,  40).  2.  Excellency,  They  were  duly  "  instructed  in  the 
songs  of  the  Lord "  (ver.  7).  No  doubt  they  were  taught  to  t^e  their  parts  well 
•*  under  the  hands  of  their  father,"  or  of  some  competent  teacher.  In  everything  we  do 
in  God*s  house  we  should  aim  at  excellency.  Whether  it  be  in  offering  prayer,  or  in 
reading,  or  in  preaching,  or  in  singing,  every  one  should  do  his  very  best.  Tliere  is  no 
place  where  men  and  women  should  be  so  desirous  of  putting  forth  their  utmost  talents 
as  in  the  house  of  him  from  whom  all  faculty  and  all  opportunity  have  been  received. 
3.  Variety.  The  instruments  of  music  used  were  various — "  cymbals,  psalteries,  and 
harps."  Doubtless  others  would  have  been  used  if  they  had  been  known  and  found 
fitting.  We  may  do  better  to  use  one  instrument  of  music  only,  but  we  do  not  well  to 
make  Gt)d'8  service  monotonous.  We  should  make  it  as  attractive  with  variety  of  engage- 
ments, freshness  of  thought  and  newness  of  method  as  is  consistent  with  reverence  and 
propriety.  4.  Amity.  *'  They  cast  lots  ...  as  well  the  small  as  the  great,  the  teacher 
as  the  scholar."  The  arrangement  was  'made  so  that  there  should  be  no  partiality  in 
the  appointment  made,  and,  if  possible,  no  dissatisfaction  with  the  place  taken.  We 
should  shun  giving  offence,  and  also  taking  it.  Happy  the  Church  where  there  is 
ooncord/rom  the  choir  and  no  discord  within  it. — C. 

Vers.  1,  3. — Prophesying  with  a  harp.  "  Prophesy  with  harps,  with  psalteries,  and 
with  cymbals;"  "Who  prophesied  with  a  harp.**  The  point  suggested  is  that  musiCf 
which  is  skill  of  hand,  may  help  song,  which  is  skill  of  voice.  The  term  "  prophesying  " 
is  variously  employed  in  the  Scriptures.  Sometimes  it  seems  to  stand,  in  a  very  general 
way,  for  sharing  in  religious  worship.  At  other  times  the  idea  of  instructing  people 
in  the  will  of  (jod,  as  it  had  been  immediately  revealed  to  the  speaker,  is  promi- 
nent. And  at  yet  other  times  there  is  reference  to  the  fore-announcing  of  coming 
events.  Here,  in  the  passages  before  us,  the  element  of  instruction  is  the  prominent 
thing,  or  the  exerting  of  a  gracious  influence  on  others  by  music,  which  should  bear 
direct  relation  to  the  culture  of  their  spiritual  life.  And  this  is  the  proper  and  the  high 
function  of  religious  music.     Consider — 

I.  Instruction  as  the  equivalent  of  culture.  This  involves  a  large  view  of 
instruction,  as  bearing  relation  to  the  whole  man — ^heart  and  feel  ins;  as  well  as  mind. 
For  the  purpose  of  a  man's  instruction — edification,  soul-culture — there  need  not  be  a 
direct  appeal  to  his  intelligence,  because  his  receptive  faculties  are  not  limited  to  his 
intellect ;  a  man  receives  even  more  through  feeling  than  through  brain  and  mind. 
But  in  an  age  when  there  is  an  extravagant  worship  of  knowledge,  this  point  needs  con- 
sideration and  prominence,  in  order  that  better  attention  may  be  paid  to  the  means  for 
reaching  the  religious  sensibility.  John  Howe  has  a  sentence  which  may  bear  on  this 
possibility  of  culture  otherwise  than  through  a  man's  mind.  He  says,  in  one  of  his  most 
serious  moods,  **  Nor  do  I  believe  it  can  ever  be  proved  that  GKxi  never  doth  immediately 
testify  his  own  special  love  to  holy  souls  without  the  intervention  of  some  part  of  his 
eternal  Word,  made  use  of  as  a  present  instrument  to  that  purpose ;  or  that  he  always 
doth  it  in  the  way  of  methodical  reasoning  therefrom."  It  is  plain  that  in  our  general 
education  a  thousand  other  influences  than  the  intellectual  reach  us  and  aid  us,  and 
other  men  than  those  who  can  be  called  intellectual  influence  us ;  and  we  may  be  sure 
that  the  same  is  true  of  the  education  of  our  soul's  spiritual  life.  Let  our  idea  of 
instruction  pass  into  the  larger,  broader  thought  o{  culture,  edification^  and  then  we  see 
that — 

II.  MuBio  hat  become  an  imfortant  agency  in  soul-culture.  By  many  and 
various  illustrations  the  refining,  ennobling,  educative  influence  of  music  may  be 
shown.  1.  Childhood  songs  implant  the  first  seeds  of  good.  2.  Rhyme  bears  direct 
relation  to  memory,  and  materially  aids  the  retention  of  good  sentiments  and  thoughts. 
3.  Music  has  a  soothing  power,  as  seen  in  King  Saul ;  and  often  becomes  a  moral  pre- 
paration for  the  due  reception  of  instruction  in  the  milder  aspects  of  truth  and  the 
gentler  forms  of  duty.  4.  Music  often  finds  relieving  expression  for  emotions,  either 
of  joy  or  of  sorrow,  which  are  too  intense  for  language. 


400 


THE  FIRST  1KX)K  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa     [cH.xxn.1-31 


'  Mimir  I    Oh  how  faint*  how  weak — 
I jiiiKUUtfi*  fmlet  U'fore  thy  8pi-li  I 
Why  ithould  filling  ever  vpeaky 
WhcQ  thou  canst  breathe  her  soal 


■o  well  ?< 


llliiMmte  liy  Mi  ndclKSiihn'H  '  S(>n<:8  without  Words.'  6.  Music  bean  direct  nlitioB ti 
rolijii.nii  fu'lin;:.  Soumh  of  ninsic  bear  a  twin  influence  with  the  9ight§  of  uton: 
U»th  brini;  limiie  tn  iiunuiii  hearts  some  sen^o  of  the  eternal  harmonies  and  beaatieici 
the  W(>rl<l>  uiisi.i'n,  unii  of  the  gluriuus  GikI  who  is  above  and  in  them  alL  ThentiN 
gift  of  ruHsir^  as  will  as  Hon;x,  must  lie  ou  God*8  altar.  Of  the  earth-temple,  as  well « 
of  the  htaveiily,  it  nmst  be  true,  *'As  well  the  singers  as  the  platen  on  in^tmmma* 
shall  be  thLre."— U.  T.  *^^  "UMpnuiwn. 

V«T.  7.—  Coh9frrat'il  ronff,  "  Instructed  in  the  8onj»  of  the  Lord,  even  all  thst  iw 
cuniiinv;."  The  jjeiieral  hubject  of  the  cunsecration  of  song  to  the  Lord^s  serrioe  btf 
been  dL-nlt  with  in  ]>revi(m8  homilies.  Hero  two  points  gain  prominence.  Men  who 
serve  with  rmij;  must  bo  (1)  men  with  a  gift ;  and  (2)  men  with  the  gift  cultured. 

I.  Mkn'  with  a  (JitT.  "Cimnin*:,"  clever,  skilled,  having  this  as  a  natural  endos^ 
ment.  l)w*'ll  on  the  importance  of  fully  recognizing  the  Divine  distribution  of  fdftiiB 
our  times,  as  truly  ns  in  the  a.:e  of  the  aijostles;  and  then  the  practical  importune  d 
looking  out  the  men  and  wnmen  among  us  who  have  a  Divine  endowment.  Sich  oneU 
us  should  1)0  anxious  to  find  his  or  her  own  f;ift,  and  each  one  should  be  quick  to  obffm 
his  bn)ther's  ^iiU  The  thin;;  which  lifts  a  man  above  conunonplaoe  is  his  sifL  and  in 
honouring;  it  we  honour  God  in  him. 

II.  Mkn  with  the  gift  cultured.  In  this  matter  our  responsibility  comes  to  view. 
In  our  Kcrvico  to  God  we  aro  bound  to  see  to  it  that  the  men  and  women  of  gifts  Awwrng 
us  have  their  chanco  of  due  instruction  and  culture.  Worldly  men  are  keen  to  dinofa 
talent,  and  train  it>.  Hut  this  needs  to  be  more  fully  done  within  Christ's  Chuich.  tnd 
in  re8iH?ct  especially  of  the  pifts  of  preaching,  music,  and  song*  "reut 

Dealing  with  the  song-gift,  it  may  be  shown  how  dependent  it  is  upon  culture*  bow 
it  resiwnds  to  instruction  and  practice,  and  what  a  power  it  exerts  on  men  as  hvmn- 
power,  anthom-i)ower,  choni8-iK)wer,  song-^wwer.  The  ancient  legend  of  Eurydice  did 
but  declare  the  womlrous  si>ell  that  ever  goes  with  beauteous  song — - 

**  P«  rehanco  at  Inet, 
Zona  willincr,  this  dumb  lyre  iiiul  whi8|K'n-d  voico 
Shall  wake,  by  love  inspired,  to  such  elcar  noto 
Ah  soars  uIkivo  the  stnrs,  and  swelling,  H/U 
Our  souU  to  hi'jhist  heaven.** 


R.T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CnAPTKR  XXVL 


This  chapter  is  occupied  in  its  first  nine- 
teen verses  with  an  enumeration  of  the 
porters  and  then  of  tlieir  amingcmont.  The 
porters  were  those  who  were  to  have  charge 
of  the  entrances  of  the  sanctuary.  For  at 
present,  all  was  in  plan  only,  thus  set  out 
by  David  beforehand. 

Ver.  1. — The  subject  of  the  porters  has 
been  before  uh  in  oh.  ix.  17—27 ;  xv.  23, 2t  ; 
xvi.  38 ;  xxiii.  5,  in  which  last  passage  wo 
are  told  that  there  were  four  thousimd  of 
the  Levites  who  were  porters.  The  divisions 
of  the  porters  sjwken  of  in  the  present  chap- 
ter were  from  the  sons  of  Korah  or  Kore, 
and  Merari  (vers.  10,  19).     The  Korahite 


portcrR  are  given  ns  in  tlje  first  nine  verst* 
The  lirst  mentioned  is  Meshelemiah,  who, 
though  called  the  same  in  vers.  2  9  Ap- 
pears as  Sheleniitth  in  ver.  14,  and  in  ch.  ix. 
19  as  Shallum.  Asaph,  given  here  as  one 
of  the  ancestors,  must  be  replaced  by  Ebi- 
osaph  (ch.  vi.  23,  87 ;  ix.  19 ;  also  Exod.  vL 
24),  who  was  a  Korahite,  whereas  Asaph 
was  a  Gershonite  (eh.  vi.  39,  43). 

Vers.  2,  3.— These  ver&es    contain    the 
enumeration  of  seven  sons  of  6helemiah 
of  the  fir8tl)orn  of  whom,  viz.  Zeehaziah,* 
express  mention  was  ma<le  in  ch.  ix.  21. 

Vers.  4,5.— Here  we  have  the  enuiner:ition 
of  eiglit  sons  of  Obed-edom  (ch.  xv.  21,  24  • 
xvi.  38).  That  in  this  last  i-eferencc  Obod* 
idom  seems  to  be  called  **8on  of  Joduthun " 
is  owing  probably  to  the  omission  of  a  name. 
For   former   occurrences  of  the  sentence^ 


Oa.  xxn.  1— 32.]    THE  PIH8T  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


Ood  U*a*l  ^'^"■,  with  its  preMiit  evident 
HUnaioE,  Bee  ch.  jjii.  14;  2  Bam.  tI.  11.  To 
thit  passage,  the  clpresiion  of  ch.  zxv.  S, 
"  to  lift  up  the  bom,"  UpTobably  analogous, 

Vers.  6,  7.— Ill  Ibe  former  of  tlieae  Tenos, 
mlogjr  U  pronounced  by  anticipation  on  the 
■ix  grandsons  of  Obed-ednm  through  his 
son  Shemaiah.  about  to  be  mentioTied  in  tba 
latter  verse.  The  singular  number  of  (bo 
wrb  (_-frv),  with  a  plural  nominative,  as 
fonad  here,  often  occurs  elsewbere,  and  re. 

Ktedty,  even  in  this  book,  in  cases  where 
relative  pronoua  -nefit  intervenes  between 
the  subject  and  its  verb.  That  roled 
thton^ut  the  beiua  ot  theit  fsther.  The 
plural  mascnlioe  abstract  noon  (o'Wp^n) 
here  employed,  in  place  of  a  verbal  or 
parlicipial  form,  is  intended  to  gain  furoe. 
A  simiW  use  of  the  feminino  form  of  the 
•ome  noun  in  the  singular,  acid  with  sutlix, 
may  be  cited  from  2  Chron.  iiiii.  9.  Whose 
bfethnn.  An  erroneous  tranalatinn  for  hit 
lirelhrttt  ;  a  oorrection,  however,  rendering 
more  patent  the  inconvenience  of  the  uiiei' 
plained  absence  of  the  conju notion,  nhich 
seems  to  be  called  for  beforo  both  "  Elzo- 
Iwd,"  and  "his  brethren."  Bertheau  sug- 
gests tiist  other  names  are  wanting  which 
should  fill  up  the  meaningof  "  his  brethren." 
The  bretliceii  intended  were  prohably  Elihu 
and  Semachiah. 

Ver.  8.— AUe  men  for  itreugtlL  for  tlie 
MTvioB.  The  Hebrew  gives  this  in  the 
•ingulnr,  Vrre''M,  etc.  The  apparent  iDlantioQ 
is  to  dittribuU  equally  to  each  and  every 
one  of  all  ot  the  sani  ot  Obed-edom,  the  high 
character  for  strength  givea  to  Ihom  M 
grouped  here  together. 

Ver.  9. — This  somewhat  sudden  Tetnm 
to  the  name  of  Xeshslemiali  is  evidently  in 
order  to  put  his  numbers  in  a  convenient 
positiuD,  to  be  added  to  those  of  Obod«dom 
Just  stated,  thus  makiug  in  all  eighty  porten 
from  the  Komhites. 

Vers.  II),  11.— The  porters  from  the  de- 
aoentknts  of  Kerari  are  given  in  these  two 
venes,  in  all  thirteen.  HoBah,  it  will  be 
lemembered,  is  found  together  with  Obed- 
edom  inch,  zvi.  US,  as  one  of  the  porters  of  the 
the  ark.  These  thirteen  bring  up  the  numlier 
of  porters  lo  niuotythree.  We  huve  read  (oil. 
ii.  22)  llint  luter  the  number  became  two 
hundredand  twelve.  Though  .  . .  yet.  The 
likelier  tninelatioa  of  the  Hebrew  would  be, 
Tor  thsrs  vas  not  a  flrstbom  {i.e.  the  issue 
of  the  flrstbom  hod  failed,  and  his  line  wns 
therefore  extinct),  and  his  fiithsr  made  him 
the  ohief.  Moreover,  it  is  but  probable  that, 
if  it  hail  been  a  case  of  superseding  the  flrst- 
bom, the  fact  would  not  have  been  stated 
withont  an  eiplimatioD  of  what  had  led  to 
itorjnstifted  it 

LCHBONICLE& 


Ter.  12.— Translate,  To  thete  dlvldoui  ot 
the  porten,  ■•  ngtxia  the  ehlef  mm,  bo- 
longsd  Che  ehuge  tonther  with  th^  bn- 
thren  to  oMdato  in  Bie  honaa  of  the  Lord. 

Ai'oording  to  (he  present  chaptor,  then,  the 
diniiioni  a<!d  up  to  ninely-three.  And  if  at 
any  time  of  the  iiibtory  it  wore  the  rase  that 
these  ninety-three  were  the  lunders  of  groups 
among  the  total  of  "  fnur  thouBond  porters," 
it  would  put  exactly  forty-two  under  each 
of  these  nmety-thrije,  leaving  but  one  over. 
This  nnmber  ninety -throe,  meantime,  does 
not  agree  with  the  too  hundred  and  taelve 
of  ch.  ii.  22.  And  the  Ihrta  scors  and  Iteo 
of  Obed-edom  in  ver.  6  of  the  present 
chapter  does  not  agree  with  the  Ihrtt  leart 
and  eight  of  Obed-ednm  in  oh.  zvi.  3lt.  At 
the  same  time,  no  little  light  may  be  thrown 
on  this  subject  by  noticing  that  the  porten 
numbered  in  Zerubbabtrs  time  one  hundred 
and  Ihirty-nine  (Bzru  ii.  12);  and  that  the 
number  oris  kujulred  and  sitDentif-fic>o  is  given 
for  them  by  Nohemiah  (Neli.  li.  19).  The 
conclusion  may  well  be  that  the  numbers 
varied  in  David's  time  and  tlio  other  limes 
severally ;  and  that  the  date  in  questioa 
(ch.  ii.  22)  was  not  the  same  with  tne  date 
of  David  in  our  present  chnpter,  bnt  was  a 
subsequent  date  nearer  the  time  of  tlie 
Captivity.  There  ia,  therefore,  no  special 
ground  for  doubting  the  accuracy  of  the 
numbers  given  in  this  chapter. 

Vers.  11— 16.— The  costing  of  lots  for  the 
four  chief  names  and  the  four  ohief  aspects 
of  gates,  now  proceeds.  A  special  note  is 
made  of  the  core  taken  for  the  konaa  of 
Amppim ;  i.e.  of  "  gatburings  "  or  "  stores." 
For  ull  that  we  know  oF  this  "house,"  we 
seem  to  be  left  to  the  verses  ( 15,  17)  of  this 
passage,  and  to  tlie  expression  (Neh.  liL 
25),  "  the  storehouses,  or  stores  of  the 
gates"  (though  the  Authorised  Version,  the 
"thresholds  of  the  gates),  which  would 
have  been  more  intelligible  had  it  been 
reversed,  "the  gales  of  the  stores."  Pre- 
sumably it  was  a  building  for  keeping  safe 
certain  of  the  sacred  property,  and  was 
situated  south  of  the  temple,  and,  judging 
from  ver.  17,  bad  two  doorways.  The  Vul- 
gnte  translates  lenitiruni  ameCiujn.  To 
Shnppim.  Nothing  can  be  made  of  this 
word  in  this  connection,  as  a  proper  name, 
though  we  huve  it  (ch.  vii.  12, 15)  bj  such. 
It  is  now  generally  rejected,  as  probnbly  due 
to  tlie  error  of  some  traiiscri  l>er,  wlmse  eye 
may  have  been  oiiught  again  by  the  last 
too  Hvllahlcd  of  tlie  closely  preceding  "  Asup- 

Eim.''  But  some  would  plooe  it  as  the 
ut  word  of  the  previnns  verse,  and  mnke 
I  it  amplify  the  meaning  of  Aiiippiia,  ej. 
"  gatherings  for  stores."  Shalleoheth.  By 
derivation,  this  word  means  "  sending  or 
throwing  down."  Henee  some  call  it,  "  the 
refuiie  gate."     The  situation  of  it  is,  how- 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  TUB  CHRONICLES,    [oh.  xxti.  1—82. 


er,   defined   hen,  u   bj   the   Miua«mr  | 


cording  to  Gnuo  (in  Smith's  '  Bible  Die- 
tioDUf'),  this  cBuwway  is  still  tTBcmble: 
it  runs  up  from  the  central  Ttklley  of  the 
town  to  tbe  kicdhI  site  went  of  tlje  temple 
()  Kin|^  I.  S;  2  Chron,  ii.  i);  and  GrriTB 
would  identify  the  "  ffatn  ot  Shnllerheth  "' 
milU  the  present  Sab  Sihileh.  TJie  Sep- 
tuagint  truialfttos  4  »iiA)i  Toaro^opUv,  i.t. 
the  gate  of  the  temple-ei-ll,  whii-h  nord 
they  could  get  from  the  inverting  of  the 
order  of  the  lirnt  two  Itttets  of  the  Hebrew 
Shaiieehtlh.  The  SeptwiglDt  then  oinitd  the 
following  word,  f^op.  Ward  agaiut  waid; 
i«.  vmtek  rrit\  teateh.  The  eipreuion  np- 
peara  to  refer  to  the  fact  that  Hoaeh's  lot 
threw  to  liim  the  eliargeof  a  double  position. 
Vera.  17,  IN.— Tlieie  verses  give  the 
Dnmber  of  Individiinla  who  oompoaed  the 
watch  at  a  lime,  beginning  again  from  Bhe- 
lemiiih's  eaatward  position.  Tlie  two  and 
two  toward  Amppim  suggest  most  naturally 
the  tnppoaiton  of  two  attendants  at  each  of 
two  galea,  ot  else  ot  two  sucpeedinR  two. 
Tarbur  (laTfi).  Tbi»  word  appears  as  T-ia 
in  2  Kings  ixiii.  11.  These  wordi,  with 
trmaa  akin  to  them,  are  often  found  in  the 
Targums.  but  not  elsewhere  in  the  Bcrip- 
tnws.  The  neatest  approach  to  themwining 
of  Ihe  word,  aayetdiBcovercd,  iaa  "snburb," 


The   c 


t  dr.  a 


indieuto  tbat,  HliireiM  four  portcia  kept  tlie 
eanseway  gale,  the  Purhnr  gale  wns  in  cb«LT 
pro:!itiiity  to  the  tetnplo  tliat  was  to  be,  but 
what  this  Parhar  really  was  is  not  jct  ascer- 
tained. Poaeibly  it  is  Ihe  wftim-imr  of 
Jaaophna  (•  Am.,'  xt.  li.  5).  If  we  add  the 
numbirs  of  Leritei  given  in  these  two  vcrsea, 
it  will  bo  noticed  that  they  mount  up  to 
twenty -four. 

Vera.  20— 28.— These  veracs  describe  those 
Levitea  to  whom  belonged  the  caro  of  Iht 
IreOMaet  of  the  6om<  0/  God  an<1  of  Vie  Irta- 
tuTtt  of  thingi  dedicated,  i.e.  "dedicated  to 
maintain  the  house  of  the  Lord"  (vors. 
27.  2»). 

Ver.  20.— First,  the  Hebrew  text  conlaina 
no  "of"  in  the  flret  word  of  this  verse;  and, 
Meondly,  no  meaning  can  bo  obtiined  out 
of  the  name  Ah^ah  as  it  ia  pluci-d  here. 
The  Septuagint  reading,  "thiir  bretLion," 
is  exactly  what  we  gbould  expect,  and  is 
parallfh'd  by  other  passu  gcs  (2  Chron.  ixii. 
34).  This  correction  of  the  preeent  tcit 
may  he  safely  otccplcd,  vii.  DnnH  for  rvntt. 
The  two  clnsses  of  Ireasuies  are  here 
marked,  preparatory  to  the  slatcmonts  of 
Tors.  22  and  28—28. 

Vers.  21,  22.— These  verses  name  those 
who  bad  the  oare  of  the  treaanres  of  fha 
houM  of  the  Lard.    Tbey  are  OenheoitM 


throngh  Tj.a.n  previonilj  celled  Libni 
(oh.  Ti.  17;  also  Eiod.  vi.  17;  Numb.  iiL 
IS).  The  sons  namc:d  as  heads  of  honaee 
are  three,  vii.  Jehiali  (ch.  iiiii.  S)  and  hia 
Rons,  Zetham  and  Josl.  Those  who  think 
that  ch.  xxiii.  8  carriee  with  it  the  meaaioc 
that  Juliipli,  Zetham,  and  Joel  were  all 
three  limllicrs,  can,  in  point  ot  fact,  plaoaiUT 
reduee  this  verde  to  tbc'ir  shape.  Fortheyel 
not  welcome  at  the  end  of  the  name  Jekuli 
here,  mi^hl  be  read  the  conjunction  caa  in 
both  instances  in  which  it  occurs.  The 
reading  would  then  rnnthua:  "  Jehiel  and 
the  sons  of  Jehiel,  both  Zetham  and  Joel 

Ver.  ^3.- The  chiefs  ot  the  preceding  two 
verseii  were  inlruduced  as  descendant  of 
Qcri-hon  throiit:;h  his  son  Leadan.  The 
four  names  of  this  Verse  would  leem  to 
stand  collectively  for  tliat  of  tbeir  father 
Kohnth.  One  micht,  under  theae  clrcnm- 
staiiocB,  have  looked  for  the  name  of  some 
member  of  each  of  these  sub-familiea  to 
appear  in  the  number  of  the  treaaur<'-keepera 
just  about  to  bo  mentioned.  This  ia  not  lo. 
let  among  other  officials,  and  before  the 
end  of  the  general  aubjcet,  the  Tajm^tai 
(ver.  29}  and  tlie  HebnmitM  (vers.  SO,  31) 
do  appear.  This  may  poaaibly  explain  ths 
mapping  out  thus  of  ihe  Koheth  familv 

Vera,  24,  25.— Bhebnal  (ch.  xxiii.  16; 
xxir.  20),  then,  was  the  AmrBmite  repre- 
stntativo  (and  appurently  a  very  special  one 
in  th(:  olTloe  of  T;;,  here  attributed  to  him) 
throiiijh  Oershom,  the  cider  son  of  Mosea. 
N'l'Xt,  through  Elieter,  the  second  son  of 
ftlones,  and  through  Behabiah,  son  of 
ElieziT  (rh.  xxiii.  17),  we  are  brought 
to  the  four— JsshaialL  (<^h.  ixiv,  21,  ItAiaJi), 
and  Joram,  and  Ziohri,  and  Bhalomith,  who 
seem  at  first  to  mark  four  succeasions  of 
genonitiona  upon  Rehabiah,  but  wbo  more 
probably  (thouf;h  it  cannot  bo  said  pod- 
tively)  were  four  brothere,  each  a  son  of 
Ilehabiah  (ch.  xxiii.  IT).  And  it  may  he 
that  it  is  to  these  four  that  reference  is  made 
in  the  first  clause  of  oar  next  verso  (26), 
"  Which  Shelomith  and  his  brethren,"  etc. 
The  Shehmilh  hero  intended  as  an  Am- 
ramite  mu«t  bo  distinguished  from  the 
(•eralionite  of  ch.  iiiii,  9,  and  from  the 
Izbarite  of  ch.  xxiii.  IS. 

Ver.  26.— The  treasurea.  The  very  first 
use  of  Ihia  word  to  signify  a  place  where 
treaaurcs  were  kept  is  in  Josh.  vi.  19,  24. 
Ttie  same  nord  is  used  for  either  the  place 
or  the  trensiirca  kept  in  it.  Not  found  in 
the  Books  of  Sumnel,  the  word  often  occura 
in  the  two  Books  of  Kiugs  and  of  Chro- 
nicles, once  in  Ezra,  several  timea  in 
Nehomiah,  eto.  In  our  next  chapter  (ch, 
xxvii.  25,  27,  28)  it  appears  in  the  An- 
thorized  Version  as  "slorehoDsea"  and 
"cellars,"     Captaisi   otm   t*"'iitiiiii1i    and 


en.  xivi.  1—82.]    THE  FIH8T  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa 


bondradi    (so   lee   Exod.    xdit.    tl,   25; 

Numb.  mi.  14,  ela.;  Deut.  1.  15;  1  Sam. 
TiiL  12,  etc.).  Ckptaini  of  ths  bort  (so 
DeuL  II.  9:  Josb.  t.  H,  IS;  Judg.  ir.  2; 

1  Sam.  lyii.  55.  elc). 

Ver.  27.— For  auoh  proceeds  of  war,  Bee 
2Sam.  »lii  10— 12,  etc. 

Vet.  28. — It  i«,  pcrliapa,  Bomenhat  le- 
marksble  that,  though  the  lacred  history 
Bui^gt^Bts  to  ut  naniiToua  fit  otcaBiatu  for 
the  "  dedioatimiB  "  epoken  of  In  thi^i  verse, 
yet  they  are  not  desi'rilied  in  detail,  nor 
ereo  alluded  to  at  the  times  when  they 
oocurred.  Samnel,  Saul,  Ahaer.  and  Joab 
hod  tboD  been  Dowitlingl;  finding  wime  of 
the  treuBurea  now  dispoaed  to  bighest  lue 
by  David. 

Vers.  29— 32.— The  chapter  oloaea  with 
lome  euumeration  of  those  who  were  ap- 
pointed to  the  outward  bniintM  (tdm^^ 
^.i^ri?^)  OT*!  Im«li  <■«■  the  teculai  or  cino 
rather  than  temple  baainesB. 

Ver.  29.— Though  the  Authorized  VerBroa 
of  ch.  IT.  22  would  make  it  appear  very 
unlikeiy  that  tho  Clienaciah,  a  "chief  of 
the  Levitea,"  here  spoken  of  was  identical 
with  the  present  Ohenaniah,  yet  tho  other 
translation  of  that  passage,  and  the  view 
that  some  take  of  it  us  describing  one  nho 
bad  the  special  ordering  of  the  tarryingot 
the  ark,  would  leave  it  more  likely.  For 
the  ofttMra  and  judges,  see  ob.   iziii.  1 ; 

2  Chron.  lii.  S— II.  The  too  generic  term 
"offlcera"  (Eiod.  v.  $—19;  Numb.  li.  16, 
etc.)  may  be  advantageously  superseded  by 
the  worn  "scribes."  Tliese  aciibes  and 
judges,  it  appears,  were  taken  from  the 
families  of  Izlior  and  Hebron  alone,  without 
■ny  Amramite  or  Uzzielite  of  the  other 
KobathitcB,  and  without  any  Gersbouile  or 
Merarile  of  the  other  Levites. 

Ver.  80. —  Were  ofBoars  among'  tbam  of 
ItlMl  The  simpler  translation  would  be, 
teen  for  lia  tuptrinUiuiing  of  larad  (ooiU' 
pare  the  verb  in  ver.  3ld).  On  tbifl  fide 
Jordan  westward;  litenlly,  ocnMt  Jordan 
tietticard,  the  point  of  view  being  From  the 
PemiBTi  side.  Bo  Ezra  iv.  16;  tL  6:  viii. 
36;  Neh.  ii.  7;  bnt  also  Josh,  v,  I;  iiii.  7, 
whidu  the  point  of  view  was  that  of  those 
who  had  still  to  noas  the  Jordan  to  the 
weat.    Tbe  expressiOQ,  in  ftll  the  biuln«M  of 


B  at  ftrst  sight 
a  to  say  that  the 
the  lust  year  of 
jMor  of  Qile«d, 


tbe  Lord,  is  probably 
of.  the  temple  ot  semi-Booced  business  (such 
OB  the  gathering  of  the  tithes,  etc.),  but 
rather  tho  reongnition  of  the  fact  that  all 
that  pertained  to  the  right  discharge  of  the 
civil  duties  of  an  Israelito's  lile  luy  within 
that  description. 

Ver.  31.— Tills  verso 
obscure;  but  its  purport 
Hebronite  family  was,  ic 
Daviil's  reign,  found  at 
wbicb  seems  a  lltraritt  city  (Jmh.  liii.  25 ; 
III.  39:  Numb.  xii.  32),  and  that  Jorijab 
(ch.  xxiii.  19;  xiiv.  23}  was  then  ebief  of 
them.  He  and  bis  brethren  were  now 
appointed  to  the  su peri n lend e nee  of  the  two 
tribes  and  a  half  eastward  of  Jnnlan,  while 
"Hashabiah  and  his  brethren"  fulfilled 
tho  like  duties  westward  of  Jordan  The 
□umber  of  those  east  of  Jordan  constituted 
OTerseers  seems  large  in  proportion  to  thoaa 
moutioned  on  the  west ;  but  wo  must  bear 
in  mind  that  the  numbers  of  Cbonaniah 
and  their  range  of  sphere  are  not  stated. 
These  will  presnmably  oomph^te  the  six 
thousand  of  cb.  xxiiL  4.  Otherwise  we 
have  but  to  fall  back  on  tbe  oonvicUon  that 
the  present  account  ii  imperfect  as  well  as 

Ver.  82.- Chief  ffttbon.  Tbe  number  of 
chief  fathers  mentioned  in  tbia  verse  leads 
Keil  to  point  out  very  justly  that  here  at 
least  the  designation  cannot  moan  anything 
beyond  tbe  fathers  of  individual  families — 
cannot  mean  the  heads  of  those  gmaps 
which  are  oompoeed  ot  all  the  braoehea  or 
relations  of  one  bouae.  They  muet  have 
been  heads  of  householda  {-rrriots),  not 
beads  oi  faOteri  bouKt  (irarpiaQ.  The  am- 
biguity u  owing  to  the  use  of  the  worda 
nUK,;i  ytf-\  in  ver.  32,  the  latter  of  which 
worda  has  so  often  supposed  the  word  rra 
to  precede  it,  coupled  to  it  by  a  hyphen. 
Adding  the  numbers  of  vers.  30  and  32,  wa 
find  a  total    of   Hebronits    "officers    and 

{'udges"  amounting  to  four  thousand  fonr 
lundred.  The  remaining  siiteen  hundred 
to  complete  tbe  "six  thousand"  were  drawn 
from  the  Gershon,  Amram,  and  Ishar 
families.  Some  of  tho  Uizielitsa  probably 
helped  tbe  Uebrooites. 


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTH0B3. 

Ver.  14. — "  A  vjxtt  eounmMor,"    Nothing  more  li  told  ua  of  this  person  than  is  coa- 
ttined  in  these  words ;  but  bow  moch  does  evea  so  brief  a  record  imply  1 

I.  Thk  ETEDTfl  OF  HDHAN  LITl  omN  CALL  FOB  THE  SXBRCISE  or  WISDOK  IB  OOtTKSEL. 

It  is  BO  in  the  Church,  in  order  that  proviiion  mvj  be  made  for  apiritual  waots,  that 
employment  may  be  found  for  apiritual  gifts,  that  differences  may  be  composed  and 
strength  consoLidated.    It  Is  so  in  tho  world;  kc  human  society  presents  so  many 


404  THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  THK  GHRONIGLKa    I<bL  zXfi.  Ip-H 


difficult  problems,  and  folly  and  ignoimnoe  an  lo  goieral,  that  only  a  leKwrnkd 
can  preaerre  mankind  from  oumiptioo  and  diaaolotion. 

IL  Tho0B  not  febsonallt  ookcebvsd  dt  aht  BU8IXB8S  ABB  BOMBX'iMBa  aoar  wtam 
to  ADYUB.  A  wise  man  is  not  only  wise  for  himself;  his  wisdom  la  intaoded  hj  IM- 
dence  to  be  plucvd  at  the  service  of  others.  And  the  impartlAlitj  of  an  onloolEsr  dim 
enables  him  to  take  a  wider  view  and  to  form  a  fairer  judgmaat  thaa  on  be  poaiVi 
to  others  more  iuteavted  and  excited. 

III.  TUEEB  ABE  QUAUTIE8  WHICH  ABB  BPBCIALLT  OOBTTMBUTiVJi  TO  WDDQIE.    TImI 

may  be  enumerated — natural  sanity,  prolonged  experience,  koowledge^  impaitlslilfcf 
mind,  sympathy  with  human  feelings,  insight  into  diaracter,  eta  StMugiftsMi 
acouireinents  make  a  man  "  a  wise  counsellor." 

lY.  GK)D,  nr  his  pbovidehcb,  n  eybb  BAmxa  up  such  nniiii«WrT^iMt  Ttm  tbe  nsnoi 
or  MAHKiND.  It  has  often  been  observed  that,  in  tiie  conduct  of  great  movements^  Fkori- 
dence  employs  men  of  impulse  and  energy^  and  conjoins  with  them  in  eerrioe  meaof 
deliberate,  <^m,  sagacious  judgment  And  it  is  not  only  in  what  are  called  mt 
affairs  that  this  arrangement  is  observable.  Wise  men  may  be  found  In  all  ^vww»iti«M 
of  lifo. 

Y.  The  bafpibst  bbsults  follow  thb  oouksbls  or  thb  wibb.  Thw  axe  the  bmoi 
of  directinjc  the  young,  of  succouring  the  tempted,  of  euiding  the  affidn  oi  atataflf 
promoting  the  peace  of  Churches,  of  MYancing  the  gospel  of  G^iat. — ^T. 

Yer.  20. — Temple  trecuurei.  Only  very  thoughtless  persona  can  soppoee  ^H  nDlflB 
and  money  can  be  dissociated.  In  this  world  things  material  and  apiiitaal  aie  m 
blended  that  we  have  not  to  ask — Must  the  cause  of  Qod  have  anythmg  to  do  with 
wealth  and  pronerty?  but — ^Whatare  the  proper  and  scriptural  idations  between  themt 
In  explaining  tnese,  we  remark — 

L  All  tbeabubb  is  the  LoBD'a  He  created  all  that  men  nae  and  prise.  It  Is  hk 
own  property.    If  we  give  to  him,  we  can  only  give  **  of  his  own.*' 

II.  In  the  hakds  or  thb  Lobd*8  peoplb  tebasubb  is  a  tbubt*  The  imUdov 
cannot  be  expected  so  to  regard  it ;  but  it  is  marvellous  that  enlightened  Christians  esa 
ever  look  upon  the  matter  in  any  other  light.  God  lends  men  their  possessions  thst 
they  may  use  them  for  his  glory,  and  prepare  to  give  in  an  account  to  himself,  apz»ov« 
ing  their  fidelity  aud  piety.  * 

IIL  Treasure  may  be  oonsecrated  to  the  Lord's  temple.  What  in  the  olden 
time  among  the  Jews  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  regarded  as  being,  that  the  Church 
of  Christ  is  in  this  dispensation.  And  money  may  lawfully  and  wisely  be  expended  in 
the  erection  of  churches,  cha])els,  schools,  mission-rooms,  etc.,  and  in  the  maiotenancs 
of  pastors,  teachers,  and  evangelists.  Christian  wisdom  may  define  the  limits  and 
extent  of  generous  gifts.  But,  although  in  the  ages  of  superstition  there  may  have 
been  danger  of  excess  in  donations  and  endowments,  there  is  very  little  danger  in  our 
days,  when  large  sums  are  spent  on  personal  luxuries  and  ostentation,  and  when  theie 
is  an  impression  that  the  one  special  department  for  economy  is  religion. 

IV.  It  is  important  that  the  Lord's  treasure  should  be  in  safe  b:xbfino.  It  is 
an  honourable  ofiice  to  have  charge  of  religious  and  benevolent  fnnds.  It  should  be 
regarded  as  a  stewardship  from  Heaven.  Many  who  cannot  preach  or  teach  may 
render  service  in  Christ's  Churches  by  acting  as  treasurers  and  almoners,  and  by  their 
faithful  custody  and  ^ise  disbursement  of  funds  may  serve  the  body  of  Christ  and 
please  the  Divine  Head. — ^1\ 

Ver.  29. — "  Officers  and  judges,^  Israel  was  a  theocracy ;  tbe  state  was  the  Chuich« 
and  the  Church  was  the  state.  Hence  the  king  seems  half  a  priest ;  and  the  Levitea 
were  appointed  to  the  discharge  of  civil  and  magisterial  offices. 

I.  Civil  society  and  civil  order  are  of  God.  Jehovah  is  the  supreme  Gk>Temor 
the  Lord  and  King  of  all.  Subordination  and  obedience  are  principles  in  the  Divine 
government.  Earthly  governments  are  all  imperfect,  yet  they  contain  in  them  elements 
of  Divine  significance.  "  The  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God ; "  not  that  all  mien 
act  righteously,  or  that  there  are  no  cases  where  resistance  is  justifiable ;  but  that  so 
far  as  governments  embody  tlie  principles  of  peace  and  order  they  have  the  sanction  of 
the  King  of  kings. 


OH.  XXVI.  1-32.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  i05 

II.  It  is  lawful  for  religious  men  to  serve  in  the  state.  Just  as  labour,  trade, 
navigation,  etc.,  are  all  lawful,  and  are  sancti6ed  by  the  Word  of  God  and  by  prayer, 
80  is  it  with  the  office  of  the  magistrate,  the  servant  of  the  state. 

III.  It  is  for  the  advantage  of  all  parties  that  religious  men  should  take 
civil  office.  For  the  officers  and  judges  themselves,  as  the  position  will  enlarge  the 
area  of  their  influence,  and  promote  the  soundness  of  their  judgment  and  the  widening 
of  their  sympathies.  For  the  subjects  generally,  who  will  benefit  when  Christianity  is 
brought  to  bear  upon  the  discharge  of  duties  which  involve  the  general  interests. 

IV.  Good  rulers  should  be  supported  by  the  confidence,  co-operation,  and 
PRATERS  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  We  caunot  be  too  thankful  when  men  of  Christian  character 
are  appointed  to  public  positions.  It  becomes  us,  remembering  the  special  dangers  and 
temptatioDS  to  which  such  persons  are  exposed,  to  plead  on  their  behalf  at  the  throne 
of  grace,  that  they  may  be  taught  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  speak  the  truth  fearlessly,  to 
rebuke  iniquity,  to  act  righteously,  and  so  to  secure  the  public  tranquillity  and  well- 
being,  and  the  glory  of  Gcd. — ^T. 

Vers.  1 — 28. — The  blessing  of  Ood.  There  lies  much  meaning  in  the  simple  words, 
*'  God  blessed  him  **  (ver.  5).    They  refer  to  Obed-edom,  and  may  remind  us— 

L  That  it  is  the  accompaniment  of  a  right  state  of  heart  toward  God.  Obed- 
edom  had  taken  the  ark  into  his  house  when  God  '*  made  a  breach  upon  Uzza  "  (ch. 
xiiL  II).  He  then  and  thus  gained  the  favour  of  Jehovah,  not  indeed  by  the  mere  fact 
that  the  ark  of  the  covenant  was  under  his  roof,  but  because  his  readiness  to  receive 
and  preserve  it  was  the  expression  of  a  true  and  genuine  piety  (see  homily  in  he.).  If 
our  *'  heart  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God,"  so  that  we  are  eager  to  render  to  him  or  to  his 
cause  any  service  we  can  bring,  we  are  then  in  that  spiritual  condition  in  which  we 
may  look  for  the  Divine  blessing.  It  is  not  any  one  single  action,  but  a  right  relation 
of  soul  to  God,  that  draws  down  his  abiding  favour. 

II.  That  it  takes  various  forms  with  us,  as  it  did  in  ancient  times.  1.  The 
temporal  forms  it  assumed  then.  These  were :  (1)  Family  mercies — God  blessed  Obed- 
edom  by  enlar^ng  his  household  (yers.  4,  5),  and  giving  him  descendants  of  whom  he 
could  be  proud  (vers.  6 — 8).  (2)  Military  reputation — some  were  "mightv  men  of 
valour"  ^ver.  6.)  (3)  Bodily  vigour— others  were  "able  men  fat  strength  for  the 
senrice  "  (ver.  8).  (4)  Posts  of  special  honour— others  were  "  over  the  treasures  of  the 
dedicated  things  "  (vers.  20 — 28).  Qod  may  grant  us  his  blessing  in  much  the  same 
way  now ;  but  while  we  gratefully  accept  it  and  conscientiously  use  it,  if  he  does  so 
bestow  it,  we  must  not  reckon  on  these  lower  manifestations  of  his  Divine  regard.  We 
are  on  sure  ground  when  we  speak  of:  2.  The  spiritual  forms  it  assumes  now.  lliey 
are  such  as  these:  (I)  Concord  and  piety  in  the  home;  (2)  reputation  for  devoted 
service  of  Christ;  (3)  capacity  for  holy  usefulness;  (4)  tmstfulness.  These  are 
blessings  which  correspond  with  those  of  the  older  dispensation,  but  which  take  a  more 
spiritual  form.  They  are  blessings  which  611  the  heart  rather  than  the  hand,  benedic- 
tions of  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven  "  rather  than  bestowments  of  the  monarchy  of  earth. 
If  it  can  be  said  of  any  of  us,  in  any  large  and  full  sense,  that  '*  God  blessed  him,"  such 
a  one  will  be  the  recipient  of  other  bestowments  beside  these — of  (5)  rest  of  heart  in 
Christ ;  (6)  joy  of  faithful  and  loving  service ;  (7)  hope  of  eternal  glory. — 0. 

Vers.  29 — 32. — The  husiness  of  the  Lord  and  the  service  of  the  king.  The  duties 
which  an  Israelite  might  render  to  his  Divine  and  to  his  earthly  sovereign  are  thus 
expressed  (ver.  30\  They  are  also  spoken  of  as  "  matters  pertaining  to  God  and 
afifairs  of  the  king  (ver.  32).  The  distinction  thus  drawn  is  suggestive  of  the  relation 
which  the  two  services  sustain  to  one  another.    We  conclude — 

I.  That  they  are  clearly  distinguishable,  one  from  the  other.  It  is  one  thing 
to  "serve  God*'  and  another  thing  to  " honour  the  king."  We  may  remember  those 
who  have  been  most  devoted  courtiers,  but  indifferent  servants  of  God.  "Had  I  but 
served  my  God,"  etc.  (Wolsey).  There  have  been  very  consecrated  men  who  have 
lived  a  life  of  protest  or  even  of  hostility  to  the  •'  reigning  bouse."  Indeed,  it  uiay  be 
the  bounden  duty  of  a  good  man  to  disobey  the  mandates  of  his  earthly  sovereijrn.  The 
honours  we  pay  to  the  "  noble  army  of  martyrs  "  are  the  best  witness  that  we  do  make 
this  distinction  in  our  minds.   It  is  a  possible  thing  that  we  may  find  ourselves  citizens 


406  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ch.  xxvl  1-J 


of  a  country  where  the  laws  of  the  land  are  directly  at  variance  with  the  will  of  G( 
fiut  it  is  also  tnie^ 

II.  That  they  are  oommoklt  fouxd  to  bb  oonbirtentt  okb  with  the  othi 
Happily  it  i»  not  oftrn  the  caao  now  that  a  man  has  to  cho<:>se  whether  he  will  ''lore  i 
one  and  hate  the  other,"  etc.  Usually  both  may  be  honourably  and  faithfully  aerred 
the  same  time.  Indeeil,  it  will  be  found :  1.  That  we  never  serve  the  kiue  better  thi 
whvn  we  arc  actively  nervinjr  God.  To  be  engaging  in  Divine  worship,  and  thi 
enoouniging  piety  and  the  gcK>d  morals  which  are  its  invariable  attendant  *  to  be  erai 
g<-UzinLr,  anii  tlius  to  be  elevating  and  enriching  those  who   have   fallen  into  sin  u 


Jew,  pat  riot  ism  and  im-ty  were  insejxirably  united.  He  who  wi^sbed  to  please  and 
honour  Jehovah  strove  to  serve  Iitrael.  He  who  injured  the  peo|>Je  of  God  was  in 
cmniy  ol  the  M«'st  High.  And  so  with  us.  The  statesman  who  is  faithfully  andooD- 
scienfiously  serving  his  country  may  be  pleasing  and  serving  God  quite  as  much  as  tin 
minister  in  tlu*  pulpit,  or  the  writer  of  sacred  books  at  his  desk.  And  not  only  tk 
statesman  who  ia  chargetl  with  great  and  high  things:  all  of  us  in  our  humbler  imnbi 
when  we  join  wiih  our  fellow-citizens  in  promoting  the  welfare  of  our  common  couDtrr 
may  be  "serving  Grod  aeci'ptably."  Only,  if  we  wi8»h  to  enjoy  his  smile  and  winhii 
Divine  blessing  in  the  act,  wo  must  do  our  work  (1)  unselfishly,  ^2)  devoutly. CL 

Vers.  1 — 32. — Doorkeepers,  ireasure-leepers,  and  external  aerviceM,  We  are 
presented  in  this  chapter  with  three  separate  lists.  First,  the  classes  of  the  door> 
keepers  (vers.  1 — 10);  secondly,  the  stewards  of  the  sanctuary  treasures  (vers.  20— 
28) ;  thirdly,  those  appointed  for  the  external  business  (vers.  29— 32\  Accordim;  to 
ver.  19  the  doorkefixrs  were  Korahites  and  Merantes.  To  the  latter  belon*^ 
Ol>od-c(loni  and  his  family,  numbering  eight  sons  and  sixty-two  grandchildrcn,°all 
valiant  lieroes.      All  tliese  d(.K)rkeepers  were  so  distributetl   that    twenty-four   cuard 


^ 41 

One  spiritual  lesson  may  l)0  Uamwl  from  the  twenty-seventh  verse  of  this  chapter: 
"Out  of  tlie  siK»ils  won  in  battles  did  they  dedicate  to  maintain  the  house  of  the  Lord.** 
The  spiritual  [xiints  may  be  suggested  by  the  following  heads  : — 1.  The  house  of  the 
Lord — God's  spiritual  kingdom — whether  it  Ikj  in  a  man's  own  soul  or  whether  it  be  a 
Church  or  nation,  must  not  only  be  set  up  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  but  it  must  be  ktpt 
up  or  "  maintnined."  2.  It  is  maintained  by  fighting — fij;htin^  our  worse  tliM 
Canaauitish  foes — the  corruptions  of  our  nature,  the  self-will,  i)ride,  and  evil  of  our 
hearts,  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  within  us  and  around  us.  3  The 
"sjKiils"  of  this  spiritual  warfare — every  victory  over  sin,  every  triumph  over  passion 
evil  inclination,  and  temptation — these  are  all  trophies  or  "spoils"  which  wemust 
"dedicate  "  to  God,  from  whom  they  have  all  come.  His  the  jower,  the  stren<^th  the 
victory.  All  arc  to  be  laid  at  the  Saviour's  feet  and  used  for  his  glory.  4,  This!  not 
one  battle,  but  "  battles  "—many  of  every  kind.  The  armour  continually  on  the  ficht 
continually  maintained.  "  Wherefore  take  unto  you  the  whole  armour  of  Gro<L  that  ye 
may  be  able  to  withstand  in  the  evil  day,  and  having  done  all,  to  stand  "  (Eph  vL  131 
6.  Thus,  and  only  thus,  can  the  "house"  or  kingdom  of  God  in  a  man's' soul  be 
"  maintained." — W, 

Vers.  4,  5. — Culture  ly  trusts.  The  reference  made  to  Olied-edom  recalls  the  fact 
that  he  and  his  family  were  bftssed  in  the  trust  of  work  to  do  for  God,  the  work  of 
caring  for  his  sacred  ark-symboL    We  may  dwell  on  God*s  design  in  re'lation  to  the 


CH.  XXVI.  1—32.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES.  407 


moral  and  spirittial  characters  of  men  by  his  putting  them  in  trust,  pressing  them  under 
the  sense  of  responsibility. 

I.  Men  put  in  tbust.  Life  is  full  of  these  trusts  from  its  beginning  to  its  close. 
The  Divine  idea  for  all  men  is  exhibited  in  the  two  great  heads  of  the  race.  The 
first  Adam  was  put  in  Eden,  and  trusted  to  dress  and  keep  it,  and  not  to  touch  the  tree 
of  the  knowlcdi^e  of  good  and  evil.  The  second  Adam  was  set  in  our  human  spheres^ 
and  tn^ted  with  the  great  work  of  revealing  God  to  men,  and  redeeming  men  from 
their  sins.  We  may  trace  the  same  dealing  with  men  at  every  stage  of  life.  Man  is 
not  his  own;  he  is  under  authority,  trusted  with  his  Lord's  goods,  and  his  Lord's 
commissions.  1.  We  deal  with  our  children  on  this  principle.  We  train  character  by 
trusts  of  increasing  value.  It  is  only  the  bad  child  that  may  not  be  trusted.  2.  In 
youth-time  there  are  foretastes  of  the  grave  life-responsibilities  which  help  to  prepare 
us  to  undertake  them.  In  youth-time  we  begin  to  feel  the  gravity  of  life,  and  there 
is  a  deepening  thoughtfulness,  the  overshadowing  of  the  seriousness  of  full  manhood. 
3.  The  beginning  of  manhood  brings  larger  and  heavier  trusts  and  responsibilities, 
which  call  out  our  best  powers.  These  trusts  concern  business,  the  family,  society,  and 
religion.  4.  And  advancing  life  provides  constant  addition  of  trusts,  until  our  middle 
manhood  sometimes  seems  to  be  overweighted,  and  flesh  and  heart  almost  faU. 
Illustrate  by  a  few  special  cases :  e,g,  (I)  A  man  waking  up  to  the  consciousness  of 
power,  in  knowledge,  skill,  influence,  position,  or  wealth  :  if  he  be  a  true-hearted  man  to 
feel — I  can — brings  a  solemn  sense  of  responsibility,  and  a  great  longing  to  be  found 
faithful.  (2)  A  girl  changed  into  a  woman  by  the  responsibilty  of  becoming  a  wife  and 
a  mother.  (3)  The  case  of  accepting  a  religious  life.  The  religious  man  goes  every 
day  under  the  pressure  of  this  trust — *'  a  God  to  glorify."  And  if  there  is  any  peculiar 
nobility  and  power  about  the  life  of  the  religious  man,  it  comes  out  of  his  "  trust,"  and 
is  cultured  by  his  **  trust"  Then  we  are  no  true  men  or  women  until  we  have  found 
out  our  holy  burden,  and  are  taking  it  up,  and  bearing  it  cheerfully,  as  our  Lord's  yoke 
Laid  upon  us.  When  a  man  views  life  on  earth  aright,  he  finds  it  to  be  no  play-scene,  in 
which  mere  appearances  meet  the  eye  and  the  ear.  He  finds  it  full  of  awful  realities 
and  possibilities — a  life,  not  a  pastime. 

IL  Men  cubsed  or  blessed  through  their  trusts.  A  design  of  blessing  is  in 
them,  and  a  tremendous  possibility  of  curse.  Lest  they  should  become  a  curse,  they  are 
only  given  up  to  the  measure  of  a  man's  ability.  If  more  were  entrusted  to  us  than  we 
coidd  undertake,  our  natures  could  only  be  crushed.  In  this  view  some  may  be 
thankful  that  they  have  only  one  talent ;  and  some  warnings  come  from  the  careers  of 
those  whom  we  call  "men  of  genius."  Men  are  Messed  by  their  trusts  when  their 
whole  natures  open  to  accept  them, — as  flowers,  responsive  to  sun  and  shower,  open  to 
receive,  and  are  blessed.  In  lifting  ourselves  up  to  meet  trusts  is  found  the  repression 
of  all  evil,  and  the  culture  of  all  good — the  very  blossoming  of  our  nature.  The  true 
conception  of  the  angel  is  not  with  folded  wings,  standing,  but  with  poised,  or  outspread 
wings,  ready  to  obey,  rising  to  meet  his  trust.  Men  are  cursed  by  their  trusts,  when 
they  despise  or  neglect  them ;  when  they  are  unwilling  to  belong  to  another ;  when 
their  natures  are  shut  up  to  pleasure,  not  to  duty ;  to  self,  not  to  Ghod. 

Do  you  say — But  my  trusts  seem  such  little  things  ?  So  they  are.  So  must  all 
human  trusts  be.  It  is  a  little  thing  just  to  take  care  of  God's  ark.  Nevertheless  they 
are  arranged  in  the  heavenly  Father's  wisdom,  and  they  may — if  we  will  let  them — 
culture  the  earth-children  for  their  heavenly  home.  Let  us  be  '*  faithful  over  the  few 
things."— R.  T. 

Ver.  12. — The  acceptahleness  of  hwly  services.  **  The  porters."  This  subject  has 
been  previously  treated  (see  homily  on  ch«  ix.  19),  but  another  outline  may  be 
suggested. 

I.  Man's  estimate  of  the  lofty  and  the  lowlt  in  service.  On  what  con- 
siderations docs  it  rest  ?  And  what  decisions  does  it  involve  ?  Indicate  some  of  the 
mistakes  men  make,  especially  in  undervaluing  kinds  of  service  that  do  not  gain 
prominence. 

II.  The  superior  practical  necessity  of  lowly  services  in  actual  life* 
Illustrate  that  for  our  physical  and  moral  good  we  could  much  better  dispense  with 
the  few  great  services  than  with  the  thousandfold  lowly  ones.      On  these  the  real 


408  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHBONICLES.  [gh.  xzni.  1— 81. 

sum  of  buman  hapniness  depends.  And  it  may  some  day  oome  to  light  that  our 
Lord's  blessed  kingdom  was  more  prospered  and  advanced  by  Christian  fidthfulnsea 
in  little  things,  than  by  the  great  doings  which  won  men's  attention  and  praise. 

III.  ThB  FOSBIBILITT  of  FIKDUrO  EXPRE88I0K  FOB  HIOH  ChBISTIAN  CHARAOTBB  DT 
ALL  KIKD6  OF  SEBTIOB^BOTH  IN  THB  LOFTT  AND  IN  THE  LOWLT.     Porter   and  priest 

may  both  show  themselves,  and  utter  their  sanctified  characters,  in  their  seveml  work, 

lY.   ThB  8UPEBI0B  OPPORTUNITIES  FOB  EXPRESSING  CHARACTER  WHICH  ABB   VOUHD  Dl 

THE  LOWLT  PLACES.  BecBUM  a  certdin  Belf-conscioumeas  tends  to  spoil  all  publio  work. 
In  the  lowly  spheres  no  **  eye  of  man  "  attracts  our  attention.  We  work  altogethsr 
"in  the  great  Taskmaster's  eye;"  and  so  we  can  be  altogether  more  simple  and 
genuine.  There  is  too  much  of  ss^  always  tempting  men  who  toil  in  what  aie  called 
the  higher  kinds  of  service. 

In  conclusion,  show  the  Divine  estimate  of  plofie  and  iffork,  and  how  it  stands  in 
the  second  place,  subordinate  always  to  the  Divine  estimate  of  charcteter.  God,  we 
may  surely  say,  is  chiefly  concerned  not  with  what  we  did,  but  with  how  we  did  ^ 
The  welcome  is  given  at  last  to  eharaeier.  To  priest  and  porter  God  will  onlj  nj 
at  last,  **  Well  dune,  good  and  faithfuL"— B.  T. 

Yer.  20. — On  dedicating  things.      The  general  idea  seems  to  be  that  Christiana 
must  dedicate  themf^ves  to  God ;  and  though  this  is  most  true,  it  may  be  presented 
so  as  to  hide  away  the  fact  that  GKxi  requires  the  Christian  to  dedicate  to  him  all  be 
has,  as  well  as  all  ho  it.     Still,  as  in  the  older  times,  Gi  d  is  to  be  served  by  tkingg 
as  well  as  by  pereone.    In  the  text  it  is  noticed  that  *'  Ahijah  was  over  the  treasures 
of  the  house  of  God,  and  over  the  treasures  of  the  dedicated  things/*     It  may  be 
well  to  point  out  the  important  relations  which  things  bear  to  persons.    (1)  The  sense 
of  pcsseuion  in  things.    (2)  The  selection  and  preservation  of  things  as  expressing 
f^raeter.    (3)  The  power  of  representation  in  thmgs ;  a  gift  may  carry  a  man  himseu 
to  his  friend.    (4)  The  use  of  things  to  indicate  feeling.    It  may  be  said  that  GhMi 
does  not  really  care  for  "things,"  and  that  all  ^things"  are  already  his ;   t^t  he 
even  refuses  sacrifice  and  ofiferings,  and  only  asks  for  men's  devotion,  love,  and  troat. 
But  if  God  permits  us  to  have  the  sense  of  possession,  and,  in  ever  so  limited  a  senses 
to  call  things  our  own,  we  may  be  sure  that  he  does  care  for  things,  because  they  can 
do  just  what  our  voice  in  worship  can  do— (1)  reveal  man  to  him ;  and  (2)  express  man's 
particular  emotions  to  him.  We  can  translate  into  their  fitting  meanings  other  signs  than 
verbal  ones ;  and  we  can  make  our  acts,  our  gifts,  and  our  possessions  speak  his  praise^ 
directly,  and  through  others  whom  we  may  influence  and  inspire  by  the  devotion  to 
God  of  what  we  have.    Then  show  what  our  things  may  be  made  to  express,  illus- 
trating from  the  devotion  of  our  property  and  acquirements  to  God's  service,    Cl^ 
Dependence  on  the  living  God,  who  giveth  to  us   *'  all  things  richly  to  enjoy."    (2) 
Thanksgiving  to  him,  whose  gifts  so  manifestly  pass  our  deserts.     (3)  Consecration  of 
self;  for  to  be  acceptable  everything  must  carry  to  God  ourselves — his  "  living  sacri- 
fices."     (4)  Zeal  in  his  honour,  that  keeps  us  anxious  to  devote  to  him  our  best. 
Plead — where  are  our  "  dedicated  things  "  ?    Are  they  worthy  o(usf    Are  they  worthy 
of  the  God  whom  w^e  love,  who  has  done  such  great  things  for  us  ? — B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 

CHAPTEB  XXVn. 

This  chapter,  coutinuing  the  general  sub- 
ject of  David's  arrangements  of  all  the 
leading  departments,  sacred  and  civil,  of 
the  kingdom,  which  he  was  so  soon  to  yield 
Into  the  hands  of  his  son  Solomon,  proceeds 
in  the  first  fifteen  verses  to  the  enumeration 
of  the  military  courses  of  his  people,  month 
by  mouth.    These  were  twelve  in  number. 


and  the  captain,  or  chief,  or  chief  father,  of 
each  is  specially  mentioned. 

Ver.  1. — It  is  impossible  to  feel  folly 
satisfied  with  any  translation  which  the 
words  of  this  verse  offer.  Yet  there  can 
scarcely  be  any  doubt  of  the  meaning  of  the 
verse,  viz.  that  the  writer  would  speak  of 
the  children  of  Israel,  inoluding  the  chief 
fathen  and  captains  of  thousands  ^a^d 
hundreds,  as  regards  their  eonrses  and  their 
number  in  their  oonrses,  as  they  snoeesdsd 
each  oontaining  twenty*four  thousand  men ;  ^  one   another,   month  by  month,  ttn^iiri^fay 


eft.  xivn.  1—34.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


409 


alfo  all  those  offioen  who  served  the  king 
in  any  relation  to  these  courses — ^the  oonrses 
were  twelve,  and  each  eonrse  was  numbered 
twenty-four  thousand.  Meantimo,  when  we 
turn  to  the  liBt,  we  do  not  find  any  full 
oomplement  of  chiefs,  eaptains^  and  officers 
specified,  but  apparently  only  the  chief  of 
each  course,  with  somowhat  ambiguous 
additions  in  vers.  4  (Mikloth),  6  (Am- 
mizaba<l),  7  (Zebadiah);  wliile  what  seems 
an  unnecessary  stress  repeats  the  number 
each  time.  This,  however,  in  fact,  tallies 
with  the  clause  **  respecting  their  number  " 
in  the  first  verse,  and  mny  constitute  the 
explanation  of  the  apparent  inconsitfteney 
in  question.  Milman  (^liist.'of  the  Jews,' 
L  251,  edit.  1830)  says  on  this  military 
portion  of  David's  preparations,  that  ho 
"organized  an  immense  disposable  force; 
every  month  twenty-four  thousand  men, 
furnished  in  rotation  by  the  tribes,  appeared 
in  arms,  and  were  trained  as  the  standing 
militia  of  the  country.  At  the  head  of  his 
army  were  officers  of  consummate  experience 
and,  what  was  more  highly  esteemed  in  the 
warfare  of  the  time,  extraordinary  personal 
activity,  strength,  and  valour.  His  heroes 
remind  us  of  those  of  Arthuror  Charlemagne, 
ezct^pting  that  the  armour  of  the  feudal 
chieftains  constituted  their  superiority ; 
here,  main  strength  of  body  and  dauntless 
fortitude  of  mind.*'  Which  eame  in  and 
went  out  month  by  month ;  i.e.  exchanged 
places  in  rotation  (2  Kings  zL  5—7,  9 ;  2 
Chron.  xxiii.  8). 

Ver.  2.^  Jashobeam  is  mentioned  in  oh. 
zii.  11  as  son  of  Hachmoni,  and  as  one  of 
thoso  *'  three  mighties  "  of  David,  of  whom 
the  other  two  were  Eleazar  and  Shammah 
(see  also  ch.  xii.  6);  he  is  again  referred  to 
(2  Sam.  xxiii.  8)  in  a  verso  of  which  the 
text  is  corrupt,  as  *'the  Tachmonite,"  or 
more  correctly  **  the  Tahh-cemonite."  The 
tau  in  this  word  is  probably  an  error  for  the 
article.  Kennicott  ODiss.,'  72,  82)  con- 
firms this  sup]K)8ition  by  noting  that  the 
Book  of  Samuel  constantly  replaces  by  the 
definite  article  what  appears  in  Chronicles 
as  *'  son  of."  Ho  has  also  shown  reason  for 
believing  that  the  words  iu  this  passage, 
**  that  sat  iu  the  seat/'  are  a  corruption  of 
the  Hebrew  text  for  characters  that  would 
spell  our  name  **  Jashobeam."  We  know 
nothing  of  this  name  **Haohmon,"  which 
may  be  the  name  of  an  earlier  forefather, 
while  Zabdiel,  thence  named  '*  the  Hach- 
monite,"  appears  to  be  the  name  of  the 
actual  fathf^r  of  Jashobcum.  Jashobeam 
was  of  Judah. 

Ver.  3. — This  verse  tells  us  that  Jasho- 
beam belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Judah, 
through  Perei,  the  fourth  son  of  Judah  (ch. 
ii.  4). 

Yer.  4. — Before  the  name  Dodai  we  must 


supply  "  Eleazar  the  son  of,"  on  the  authority 
of  oil.  xi.  12 ;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  9.  The  allusion 
to  Mikloth  (of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  accord- 
ing to  ch.  viii.  32 ;  ix.  37)  in  this  verse  is  not 
plain.  The  translation  may  possibly  be  the 
same  which  our  Authorized  Version  gives. 
And  over  the  course  of  the  second  month  was 
(Eleazar,  the  son  oO  Dodai  the  Ahohite,  and 
(over)  his  (or,  its)  course  also  Miklotii  was 
ruler.  The  appearances  of  the  Hebrew 
text,  however,  favour  the  supposition  of  an 
inaccurate  text.  A  somewhat  similar  con- 
struction and  position  of  words  in  ver.  6 
is  less  difficult  by  the  absence  of  a  conjuno* 
tion  before  Ammizabad. 

Ver.  5.— Benaiah  (ch.  xi.  22 — 25 ;  2  Sam. 
xxiii.  20—23).  To  this  name  Keil  thinks 
the  word  chief  (triti),  in  the  succeeding  ex- 
pression, chief  priesty  belongs.  Thus  Jchoiada 
would  be  named  here  only  priest.  Yet  see 
ch.  xii.  27,  where  Jehoiada  is  called  Tisn 
I'tik'?  ;  and  2  Kings  xxv.  18 ;  where  vfikin  jni 
stands  for  our  tr'i^n  |ri2.i,  as  applied  to  Se* 

raiah.     Benuiah  was  manifestly  a  Aaronite. 

Yer.  7. — With  this  verse,  as  Keil  observes, 
the  description  of  the  successive  courses  is 
given  with  the  greatest  brevity.  Zebadiah 
was  of  Judah.  Inasmuch  as  Asahel  (ch.  xL 
26 ;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  24)  was  killed  by  Abner 
(2  Sam.  ii.  23)  before  this  division  of  mili- 
tary courses  was  made,  it  is  evident  that 
his  name  in  this  place  marks,  not  tiie  indi- 
vidual, but  the  family.  Possibly  he  and 
his  name  were  held  in  all  the  greater  regard, 
and  his  son  Zebadiah  best  known  for  the 
sake  of  his  father. 

Yer.  8. — Shamhnth.  For  variations  in 
the  form  of  this  name,  see  oh.  xi.  27;  2 
Sam.  xxiiL  25.  In  the  former  of  these 
passages  also  we  have  llarorite  in  place  of 
our  Iirahite,  and  in  the  latter  Uarodite, 
The  Izrahite  probably  means  of  the  family 
of  Zerdh  (ch.  ii.  4,  6),  and  of  course  marks 
one  of  tho  tribe  of  Judah.  The  Hebrew 
nTT»n  evidently  does  not  justify  the  form 
as  translated  **  Izrahita" 

Yer.  9.~For  Ira,  see  ch.  xi.  28 ;  2  Sam. 
xxiii.  26.  He  was  of  Tekoa,  belonging  to 
Judah. 

Yer.  10.— For  Helei,  see  ch.  xi.  27 ;  2  Sam. 
xxiii.  26.     Ho  belonged  to  Ephraim. 

Yer.  11. — For  Sibbecai,  see  ch.  xi.  29; 
XX.  4 ;  2  Sam.  xxi.  18 ;  xxiii.  27,  where  by 
a  corropti(m  the  name  Mebunnai  is  found 
for  Sibbechai,  a  corruption  all  the  easier 
to  account  for  in  tho  similarity  of  the 
characters  that  form  the  names.  He  was  a 
Zarhite,  and  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Judah. 

Yer.  12. — For  Abieser,  of  the  tribe  of 
Benjamin,  see  ch.  xi.  28 ;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  27. 
For  Anetnthite  (Anathoth)  see  ch.  vi  60  (45) ; 
Josh.  xxi.  18 ;  Jer.  i.  1 ;  xi.  21 ;  xxxii.  7 — 9. 

Yer.  13.— For  Maharai,  of  the  tribe  of 


410 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,   [ch.  xxvn.  1-W. 


Judah,  see  oh.  xi.  30 ;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  28.  The 
Vetophathifta.  Thouj^h  the  name  of  the  town 
Netophah  happens  to  occur  only  after  the 
Captivity  (e.g,  Ezra  ii.  22;  Xih.  vii.  26X 
yet  the  name  of  the  people,  as  in  this  pas- 
sage, was  evidently  a  name  exidtin>?  l>cfore 
the  Captivity  (see  aIi»o  ch.  ii.  54 ;  ix.  16). 

Ver.  14. — For  this  Banaiah,  who  was  of 
Ephraim,  see  ch.  xi.  31 ;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  30. 
For  Pirathon,  see  Judg.  xii.  15,  where  alone 
the  place  is  mentioned. 

Ver.  15.— For  Heldai,  who  belonged  to 
Judah,  see  ch.  xi.  30,  where  tlie  namo 
appears  as  Ilthaly  and  2  Sam.  xxiii.  29, 
where  it  appears  as  Heleb,  For  Othniel 
(who  was  Dei>hew  and  son-in-law  of  Caleb, 
and  first  deliverer  of  the  peoide  after 
JoshuaX  Bee  Josh.  xv.  17;  Judg.  iii.  9. 
Thr>se  twelve  captains  then  come— from 
Judah  seven,  from  Benjamin  and  Ephraim 
two  each,  and  from  Levi  one. 

Vers.  16 — 22. — These  verses  give  the 
names  of  the  rulen  (ver.  16),  or  princes  (ver. 
22),  of  ten  out  of  the  twelve  triftes  of  Itrael. 
The  tribes  not  mentioned  are  Gad  and 
Aslier,  an  omission  which  reminds  of  that 
of  the  two  tribes  Dan  and  Zebulon  from 
the  genealogies  contained  in  ch.  iv. — 
▼ii.,  and  equally  unexplained.  These 
designations  ruler  (t:j)  and  prince  (ib)  are 
the  same  as  are  found  in  the  list  of  vers. 
1 — 15 — the  former  in  ver.  4,  and  translated 
also  as  here  **  ruler;"  and  the  latter  in  vers. 
1,  3,  5,  8,  under  the  Authcirized  Version 
word  of  "  captains."  This  rehearsal  of  tlio 
rulers  or  captains  of  the  tribes  staiuU 
evidently  in  no  special  relation  to  the  pre- 
ceding military  enumeration,  but  it  fonns 
naturally  enough  one  of  four  lists  in  this 
chapter  that  purport  to  set  forth  David's 
complete  arrangement  of  the  affairs  of  the 
kingdom.  So  far  as  the  enumeration  goes, 
it  appears  to  aim  at  fulness  and  no  omission, 
for  the  "  Aaronites"  (ver.  17)  are  given,  and 
Ephraim  and  the  two  halves  of  Manasseh 
separately  (vers.  20,  21). 

Ver.  17. — It  ia,  peihaps,  remarkable  that 
Hashabiah — presumably  a  Gershonite — is 
not  dihtinguished  from  the  Hebronite  (i.e. 
Kohathite)  of  the  same  namo  (ch.  xxvi. 
80);  some,  however,  think  that  our  Hanha- 
hinh  is  the  Kohathite  (see  Smith's  *liiblo 
Dictionary,*  i.  759  h).  For  Zadok,  see  ch. 
vi.  4,  12.    He  was  of  the  line  of  Eleazar. 

Ver.  18. — David's  eldest  brotiier  Eliab  is 
no  doubt  intended  liere  by  the  name  Elihu. 
The  Scptuagint  gives  Eliab.  For  Michael, 
see  ch.  vii.  3. 

Ver.  21. — There  is  no  reason  to  doubt 
that  Jaasiel  is  the  son  of  tiie  Abner  who 
was  Saul's  own  cousin  (ch.  ix.  3G ;  1  Sam. 
xiv.  50). 

Ver.  22. — These  thirteen  princes  of  the 
tnles   of  Israel  were  presumably  in  each 


ease  those  who  represented  the  tribe  ae- 
cording  to  lineal  descent  in  Dayid's  time. 
Tiiough  Gad  and  Asher  are  left  out,  the 
thirteen  are  filled  up  by  the  allowance  of 
two  for  Levi,  viz.  one  for  the  LeTitee  and 
one  for  the  priests ;  and  three  for  Joseph, 
viz.  one  for  Ephraim  and  two  for  the  divi£d 
tribe  of  Mana>8eh. 

Ver.  23. — The  contents  of  tliia  and  the 
following  verse  may  be  supposed  to  be  sng^ 
gestel  by  the  distinct  reference  to  the  matter 
of  number  in  the  first  yerse  of  the  chapter, 
and  in  the  latter  halves  of  the  following 
fourteen  verses,  coiitMstiog  with  the  ntter 
absence  of  any  allusion  to  the  same  matter, 
when  the  whole  body  of  the  tribes  and  their 

princes  are  the  subject,  in   vers.    16 ^22. 

The  deeper  significance  of  the  latter  part  of 
this  verse  probably  comes  to  this,  that  God 
had  already  given  his  people  the  pioadest 
name  for  their  numbers,  in  saying^  that  thej 
should  be  numberless,  like  to  the  stars  of 
the  heavens,  and  perpetually  on  the  in- 
crease. 

Ver.  24. — It  seems  a  little  surprising'  to 
read  of  Joab,  fixed  on  the  page  of  history 
as  the  person  who  began  to  nnmbery  hnt  •  •  • 
flmshed  not,  when  we  have  been  already 
particularly  told  thit  it  was  he  to  whom 
King  David's  command  to  number  was 
*'  abominable  "  (ch.  xxi.  6).  However  dif- 
ferently enough  from  the  method  of  either 
nature  or  mankind,  the  antidote  has  here 
preceded  the  evil.  For  because  there  fell 
wrath  for  it,  read  the  Hebrew,  and  there  wot 
for  thin  wrath  upon  Israel.  The  last  sen- 
tence of  tlie  verso  purports  to  say  that  such 
numbering  as  had  been  done    before   the 

Soint  at  which  Joab  stop|>ed  was  not 
onoured  by  a  place,  where  other  numbers 
were  found,  in  the  register  of  the  chronicles 
of  King  David. 

Vers.  25—31. — These  verses  have  for  their 
primary  object,  not  to  give  an  cxhuustire 
summary  of  the  wealth  of  David  and  the 
sources  thereof,  but  to  give  the  names  of 
those  perscms  who  were  charged  with  the 
care,  or  the  management  and  carc^  of  it.   The 
chissilication,  however,  is   interesting,  and 
may  be  naturally  expected  to  be  tolerably 
complete.     We  do  not  find  any  distinction 
made  between  such  property  as  might  have 
belonged  to  David  as  private  property,  and 
sucli  as  belonged  to  him  as  king — probably 
because  there  was  none  worth  making. 

Ver.  25. — For  storehouses,  rea<],  as  in 
former  clause,  treasures.  The  suggestion  of 
the  second  half  of  this  verse  in  comparison 
with  the  first  is  that  Azmaveth*s  charge 
was  over  treasures  in  Jerusalem.  For  the 
castles,  see  2  Chron.  xvii.  12  ;  xxvii.  4.  The 
word  i^iK,  though  the  same  in  both 
clauses,  may  probably  enough  cover  precious 
treasiu-c,  as  of  gold,  silver,  costly  raiment. 


i 


CH.  xxTn.  1— 3t]  THE  PIHST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLE. 


etc.(l  KiDgB  liv.  26;  it.  18),  more  pti- 
ticulorl;  in  the  Brat  cltnBO,  and  gTaio.  fruit, 
etc  (2  Chron.  li.  H),  in  the  latter,  for  the 
word  ha«  distinctl]'  tliis  double  apptication. 
(Bee  for  lotce  illustmtioD  of  this  vetse  aUo, 
Bullust., '  Db  Bello  Jugurth.;  lii.) 

Vti.  26,— This  verse  appt-ars  to  giTO  the 
name,  not  (u  io  the  lonner  veige)  of  the 
person  who  bud  charge  of  the  stored  grain, 
fruits,  elo,,  but  of  the  chief  supcriatendcnt 
sod  mnnuger  of  the  labour  and  labuurert  of 
the  field. 

Ver.  27.— This  verse  BpcciSes  the  officer 
who  hod  the  maaagemoDt  of  the  vinejanig, 
oDd  also  the  officer  who  had  charge  over  the 
wine-cellurs.  Tlie  description  of  aamathite 
does  not  assist  us  to  identify  Shiiuei,  though 
the  choice  of  place  is  amjile  (Joab.  liii.  26  ; 
iviii.  25;  lii.  2'J.  36;  Judg.  iv,  17).  For 
Shiphmite,  see  Numb,  zixiv.  10, 11 ;  (o  the 
place  Sliepham,  mentioned  in  which  pa»- 
Mkge,  thu  reference  here  may  be.  For  over 
the  inoreats,  read  avrr  Ihal  uAicA  in  Uie  vina- 
yardi,  etc.,  where  the  initiul  ^  stands  for 

Ver.  29. — A  similar  oonple  of  offloer*  to 
IhaseofthelaatverBearadeBcribedhcre.  By 
the  low  plain*  bcre  in  the  Authorised  Version 
is  translaled  what  had  been  better  left  un- 
tniiBlateil,  i.t.  the  Shephelah,  one  of  the  five 
divisions  of  Judna  (Couder'a  '  Bible  Hand- 
book,' 2Dd  edit.,  ISSO,  p.  257).  It  oom- 
prisS  the  low-lying  tiaot  of  land  on  the 
ooaat  and,  roughly  epcaking,  sttelohing 
from  Joppa.to  Gaza.  The  tyoMUore  tiM 
(Disp^.;i,  a  plural  masculine,  and  ones 
niop^,  a  plural  feminine,  Ps.  liiviii.  87) 
is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  syca- 
mine, being  that  kind  oF  mvBierry  tree 
called  fig  mu/berrj;.  The  Septuagint,  how- 
ever, does  not  observe  the  diatinolion,  and 
always  translates  auKif^iroi.  It  was  a  com- 
mon tree,  and  useful  to  the  poor.  It  is  the 
same  with  the  black  mulberry  of  Egypt,  and 
abounded  in  Palestine  (1  Kings  i.  27).  Its 
fruit  was  eatable,  and  its  wood,  though  soft, 
yet  valuable  for  endiiringness  (see  Smith's 
'Bible  Dictionary,'  iii.  p.  1391;  Condci's 
'Bible  Handbook,'  2nd  edit,  pp.  223,  399; 
Stanley's  'Sinai  and  Palestine,' edit.  1806, 
pp.  146,  393).  The  name  Bul-haun  cornea 
Hrat  before  as  as  that  of  a  King  of  Edom 
(Gen.  iiivi.  38,  30;  ch.  i.  49).  The  place 
Oederah  (Jnah.  zv.  36),  or  Beth-gader  (ch.  ii. 
51),  attached  to  the  name  of  the  present 
Baal-hanan,  renders  it  not  less  probable  that 
he  was  of  similar  extraction. 

Ver.  29,— Sharon  (see  ch.  v.  16,  21>  It 
means  with  the  article,  which,  with  one  ex- 
ceplion,  always  nccompauios  it,  "  the  level 
land,"  and  on  the  west  of  the  Jordan  ex- 
actly corresponds  with  the  Midior  on  the 
eaet,  a  word  of  identical  signification  with 
Sharon.     The  tract  of  puture-Und  which 


It  deei^ated  ttratohed  from  Cormel  to 
Joppa  (Stanley's '  Sinai  and  Palestine,'  ediL 
18G6,  pp.  485,  260,  261),  The  nlleTl  hen 
intended  are  not  speciBed. 

Ver.  30.— Whether  the  word  ObU  (Vata), 
is  a  proper  nnme  or  nut.  It  signifies  "  a  ten- 
der of  camels"  by  derivation.  The  taak 
suited  the  Ishmaelite,  no  doubt  I  Nothing 
is  known  of  the  ICeronoUiite,  oorof  the  sU>ut< 
tion  of  the  place  called  Meronoth,  unlesa 
anything  may  be  oonjectuied  from   Neh. 

Ver.  31,— For  the  Hageiite  tribe,  see  ch.  t. 
10, 18—22.  For  the  nUen  of  the  mbttaiiH, 
tlio  Htbrew  words  are  tfunn  '*,  The 
number  of  them  adds  np  again  to  twelve; 
Keil  justly  supposea  that  the  two  named 
in  ver.  25  were  those  principal  oflScers  to 
whom  the  other  ten  delivered  the  prooeedf 
of  their  respective  charges. 

Vers,  32— 34.— These  veraea  contain  the 
names  of  seven  men  of  high  position,  and 
who  were,  at  all  evenls,  important  enough, 
in  one  respect  or  another,  for  this  closing 
special  mention.  1.  JonathiiL  and  A^llf^^^ 
ptisl  are  singled  out  as  oonnsellart  (y^V) 
of  the  king.  2,  Hnshal  the  Aiohite  is 
mentioned  as  the  Dompanian  (^^_)  of  the 
king.  3,  Jahoiada  the  ion  of  Banalah,  ud 
AbUthar  are  mentioned  as  standing  in  k 
similar  relation  of  counsellors  to  the  king 
wilhAliithophel.butaftBrhini.  4.  The  great 
general  of  the  wUoIe  army  of  the  king 
(H3i':le>>,  Joab,  has  a  place  found  for 
his  name.  5,  And  the  name  of.  Jshial  la 
mentioned  as  of  one  with  ths  king's  mu. 
Tbe^rri  thing  which  may  be  observed  as  to 
this  enumeration  is  that  It  is  not  one 
whole  belonging  to  the  later  portion  of 
David's  time.  Ahithophel  had  long  beii>r« 
put  an  end  to  his  own  life  (2  Sam.  ivii.  21 
—23  ;  also  see  iv.  12,  31,  34 ;  ivL  20-23). 
Stam^y,  that  out  of  the  seven  names,  four 
or  five  are  already  well  known  to  us  in 
some  other  capacity ;  for  see  the  lists  of 
ch.  xviU.  14—17;  2  Sam.  viii.  16—18;  «. 
23—26.  And  thirdly,  that  in  one  or  twa 
instances,  a  difl*ereDt  or  additionalpart  U 
assigned  to  the  names  mentioned.  'The  im- 
prosaion  left  with  na  ia  rather  of  hononrnble 
or  epeuial  mention  mode  of  seven  who  had 
been  distinguished  holpers  of  the  king  or 
the  kingdom  at  one  lime  or  another. 

Ver.  32. — Notliing  is  known  of  any  uwde 
to  David,  named  Jonathan,  bnt  special 
mention  is  mado,  in  ch.  xx.  7  and  2  Sam.  iiL 
21,  of  a  nephew,  son  of  Shimca,  ivlio  ren- 
dered valuable  Bcrvico,  and  nlioso  nnmo 
was  Jonntlian,  It  is  possible  Hint  tbo 
Hebrew  Tin  niny  mean  "nephow,"  SB  Bimpiy 
menuiug  "  rclntivD."  It  must  bo  admitted, 
however,  as  very  remarkable,  that  in  Le- 
Titlotu,   Nnmbers,   the   hiatorical    books. 


412 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHBONICLES.  [ch.  xxvu.  1— 84. 


Jeremiah,  and  Amos,  to  the  nnmber  of  six- 
teen times  in  all,  the  word  confessedly 
means** uncle;"  while  this  seventeenth  time, 
it  would  appear  to  mean  **  nephew."  On  the 
other  hand,  in  Proverbs,  Canticles,  Isaiah, 
Ezekiel,  to  the  number  of  thirty-six  times 
in  all,  the  word  follows  its  other  branch  of 
aigni^cation  of  ^love,"  and  in  particular 
**one  beloved."  Nothing  certain  can  be 
said  of  the  Jehiel  of  this  verse,  but,  if  a  son 
of  Hachmoni,  we  may  presume  him  to  have 
been  related  to  Jashobeam  of  ver.  2  and 
ch.  XL  11. 


Ver.  88.— For  Hnshai  the  Ardhite,  Bee  2 
Sam.  XV.  32,  37 ;  xvi.  16 ;  xvii.  14,  15. 

Ver.  34. — ^The  after  of  this  vene  inaj 
possibly  be  the  after  of  time,  i,e,  after  the 
death  of  Ahitliophel,  instead  of  the  afler  of 
place,  t.0.  suboniinate.  Jehoiada  the  wm 
of  Benaiah.  Either  the  individual  of  ver.  5 ; 
ch.  xviii.  17 ;  2  Sam.  viii.  18 ;  xx.  28,  is  not 
the  person  here  intended,  or  we  have  here 
the  names  aocidently  reversed.  There  seems 
no  sufficient  reason  to  doubt  that  tiie  high 
priest  of  the  Ithamar  branch  is  here  meant. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  23. — The  increase  of  Israel,  A  devout  mind  will  ever  acknowledge  that  not 
only  individual,  but  also  national,  prosperity  is  from  God.  It  was  a  conviction  with  all 
the  pious  Hebrews  that  their  nation  had  been  selected  by  a  special  decree  and  appointed 
to  a  special  purpose.  This  conviction  came  to  their  minds  to  sober  them  in  times  of 
national  prosperity,  and  to  comfort  and  fortify  them  in  periods  of  affliction,  disaster, 
and  captivity. 

I.  When  this  fbohibe  was  givek.  It  was  given  at  the  very  commencement  of 
Israel's  life ;  it  was  given  to  Abraham,  the  father  of  the  faithful  The  Lord  showed 
Abraham  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  assured  him  that  so  numerous  should  be  his  seed. 

II.  How  THIS  PROMISE  WAS  BEGARDED.  It  wss  not  likely  that  an  assurance  so  inspi- 
riting, so  glorious,  should  be  forgotten ;  it  was  embodied  in  national  tradition ;  it  was 
enshrined  in  sacred  literature ;  it  was  fitted  to  dignify  their  conception  of  their  callins 
as  a  people ;  and  it  was  a  rebuke  to  their  national  pride.  As  on  the  occasion  referred 
to  in  the  text,  it  was  designed  to  lead  them  to  place  their  hopes,  not  so  much  in  their 
own  strength  or  fortune,  as  in  the  purpose  and  the  promises  of  the  God  of  Israel,  the 
God  of  all  the  nations  of  the  earth. 

III.  In  WHAT  WAY  THIS    PROMISE    WAS,   AND  IS    YET    TO    BE,   FULFILLED.        Under 

Solomon  the  nation  of  Israel  reached  its  highest  pitch  of  fame  and  power.  But  it  is 
pleasant  and  encouraging  to  believe  that  the  promise  recorded  in  the  text  will  be 
fulfilled  in  a  deeper  sense  than  that  which  appears  on  the  surface.  There  is  a  true 
Israel,  composed  of  all  who,  sharing  Abraham's  faith,  are  Abraham's  spiritual  children. 
These  are  destined  to  be  numerous  as  the  sands  of  the  desert,  as  the  leaves  of  the 
forest,  as  the  dew-drops  of  the  morning,  as  the  stars  of  heaven.  This  is  a  kingdom 
whose  subjects  shall  ever  multiply,  whoso  glory  shall  know  no  limit  and  no  end. — T. 

Vers.  25 — 31. — Earth's  produce,  David  was  a  man  of  war,  and  it  is  not  surprising 
that  these  historical  books  are  largely  occupied  with  an  enumeration  of  his  armies, 
catalogues  of  his  mighty  men  of  valour,  and  records  of  his  military  exploits.  But  it 
is  interesting  and  instructive  to  observe  that  the  chronicler  does  not  pass  unnoticed 
matters  which  give  an  aspect  of  peace  and  prosperity  to  David's  reign.  The  king  was 
not  only  a  commander  and  a  judge,  but  also  an  administrator  and  an  economist.  The 
chronicler,  in  referring  as  he  does  in  this  place  to  the  accumulation  of  wealth  and  to 
material  prosperity  generally,  indicates  that  in  his  judgment  a  nation's  greatness  does 
not  consist  simply  in  the  number  of  its  warriors  or  the  brilliance  of  its  feats  of  arms. 

I.  The  produce  of  the  eauth  is  from  the  Lord.  There  are  here  enumerated 
the  stores  of  corn,  the  vineyards  and  the  oliveyards,  the  flocks,  the  camels,  and  the 
herds  which  largely  constituted  David's  wealth.  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the 
fulness  thereof." 

II.  The  gifts  of  God's  bounty  are  to  be  received  with  gratitude.  The 
Creator  has  made  all  things  for  man's  use  and  comfort.  "  He  hath  put  all  things  under 
his  feet,  all  sheep  and  oxen,  all  beasts  of  the  field."    To  him  daily  thanks  are  due. 

III.  The  gifts  of  God  are  to  be  enjoyed  with  temperakce  akd  sobriett. 


CH.  xxvii.  1—34.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLEa  413 


When  the  creature  is  abused,  the  Creator  is  dishonoured ;  but  a  just  and  temperate  use 
of  material  wealth  is  improving  to  man  and  honourable  to  God. 

IV.  The  possessob  of  material  wealth  should  consecrate  all  to  the  Giver. 
Christians  especially,  who  are  "  not  their  own,"  are  bound  to  regard  and  to  use  all  their 
property  as  God's.  So  used,  it  will  not  minister  to  pride,  but  will  become  a  means  of 
grace.    In  this  certainly  David  has  set  us  an  example  worthy  of  imitation. — T« 

Vers.  1 — 34. — Wisdom,  kindness,  and  folly.  In  reading  this  chapter  we  are  struck 
"With  three  features  of  David's  rule.  1.  The  presence  of  royal  wisdom  in :  (1)  Securing 
the  safety  of  his  jkingdom  by  a  sufficient  militia  without  sustaining  a  burdensome 
standing  army.  One  month's  practice  in  the  year  would  suffice  to  maintain  their 
soldierly  qualities  without  seriously  interfering  with  their  civil  pursuits  (ver.  1). 
(2)  Adopting  the  system  of  promotion  by  merit.  In  the  list  of  captains  (vers.  2— -15) 
we  meet  with  names  of  men  that  had  distinguished  themselves  by  their  courage  and 
capacity,  and  who  had  "  earned  their  promotion."  Favouritism  is  a  ruinous  policy, 
and  fatal  to  kings  and  ministers.  ^3)  Limiting  his  own  personal  requirements  to  a 
moderate  demand.  David  lived  as  oecame  such  a  king  as  he  was,  but  he  did  not 
indulge  in  a  costly  and  oppressive  "  civil  list "  (see  vers.  25—31).  (4)  Choosing  so 
sagacious  a  counsellor  as  Ahithophel  (2  Sam.  xvii.  1 — 3, 14),  and  so  true  and  brave 
a  friend  as  Hushai  (2  Sam.  xvii.  7 — 14).  2.  The  presence  of  personal  kindness. 
Although  David  acted,  most  wisely,  on  the  principle  that  the  highest  posts  should  be 
reserved  for  the  most  capable  men  and  those  who  *'  deserved  well  of  their  country,"  yet 
he  did  not  neglect  his  own  kindred  in  the  hour  of  his  opportunity.  We  find,  amongst 
Others  of  the  foremost  men,  the  names  of  his  relatives,  Asahel  (ver.  7);  Jonathan,  his 
uncle  (ver.  32) ;  Joab  (ver.  34).  3,  The  presence  of  royal  folly.  We  are  reminded 
here  of  the  grievous  error,  the  disastrous  departure  from  rectitude,  when,  notwith- 
standing the  wise  counsel  and  somewhat  strenuous  opposition  of  Joab,  he  insisted  on 
numbering  the  people  (vers.  23,  24).    Regarding  the  folly  of  the  king,  we  learn — 

I.  That  human  nature,  even  at  its  best,  bears  the  stain  of  iifPEBFEOTioir. 
Devout  and  humble  as  David  was,  prosperous  and  beneficent  as  was  his  reign,  he  yet 
fell,  more  than  once,  into  sin ;  and  on  this  occasion  (of  the  numbering)  he  involved 
the  nation  in  a  terrible  calamity.  He  resembled  all  other  good  men  of  every  age. 
Human  excellency  is  a  beautiful  but  a  blemished  thing ;  it  has  admirable  qualities,  but 
is  never  without  defects;  it  halts  somewhere.  Therefore:  1.  Let  us  conclude  that 
there  is  certain  to  be  something  in  ourselves  which  needs  to  be  corrected ;  we  also, 
though  we  possess  the  mens  conscia  recti,  have  faults  which  others  see  and  which  they 
regret  to  see  in  us.  2.  Let  us  not  be  hasty  in  estimating  the  character  of  others ;  if 
we  judge  men  by  the  first  thing  we  see  in  them,  it  may  be  that  we  shall  apprise  them  by 
the  one  pardonable  fault  behind  which,  unrecognized  by  us,  hide  a  hundred  virtues.  We 
should  not  like  to  be  judged  by  the  first  action  our  neighbours  chanced  to  witness  in 
us.  3.  Let  us  make  all  kindly  allowance  for  men  when  we  know  them  ;  and  placing 
their  many  solid  graces  against  their  few  superficial  failin^^s,  let  us  not  withhold  our 
esteem,  or  our  confidence,  or  our  affection.    Regarding  David's  kindness,  we  learn— 

II.  That  we  do  well  to  use  oub  own  elevation  to  serve  our  kindred. 
Nepotism  is  a  crime  as  well  as  a  sin,  but,  when  other  things  are  equal  and  when 
opportunity  offers,  we  should  surely  remember  those  whom,  by  the  ties  of  affinity,  Ood 
commends  to  our  kindness,  and  those  whom,  by  profession  of  friendship  in  earlier  and 
humbler  days,  we  promised  to  assist.  And  in  view  of  the  king's  wisdom,  we  may 
learn — 

HI.  That  goodness  and  wisdom  together  abb  a  source  of  incalculable 
BENEFIT.  David  without  his  devoutness  would  have  been  nothing  to  his  country  or 
his  kind ;  without  his  wisdom  he  would  have  been  little  more.  Piety  and  prudence 
together  are  a  power  for  God  and  man. — C. 

Vers.  1—34. — The  army,  tribal  princes,  royal  possessions,  and  chief  counsellors  of  the 
king.  This  chapter  brings  before  us  the  organization  of  the  army,  and  also  the  public 
administration  (vers.  1 — 15) ;  next  we  have  a  list  of  the  princes  of  the  twelve  tribes 
(vers.  16 — ^24^ ;  then  we  have  the  managers  of  the  domains  and  royal  possessions 
.vers.  25 — 31);  and  lastly^  the  chief  counsellors  of  the  king  (vers.  82*34).    These 


414  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHBOKICLEa  [ob.  xxyix.  1— S4. 


■abjecU  follow  the  arrangement  of  the  Leyitea^  service,  becaiue  it  was  David** 
desire  before  his  death  to  give  the  oonstitnUon  of  his  kingdom  a  more  stable  fbni. 
David's  object  in  numbering  the  people,  as  we  may  gather  from  the  twenty-tibiid  vem, 
was  to  leave  his  Idngdom,  strong  within  and  without,  to  his  son.  There  were  twehre 
diivisions  of  the  army,  oonmsting  of  twenty-four  thousand  men  in  each.  In  the 
enumeration  of  the  tribal  princes,  the  tribes  of  Gad  and  Asher  are  omitted  without 
any  reason  being  assij^ned  for  the  omission.  With  regard  to  David's  donudna  and 
possessions,  the  property  and  income  of  the  king  were  divided  into  treasures  of  the  king» 
treasures  in  the  country,  in  the  cities,  the  villages,  and  the  castles.  The  treasona  of 
the  king  were  the  treasures  of  the  royal  palace  in  Jerusalem.  The  remAioing  tnasnrai 
were  fi^ds,  vineyards,  plantations,  cattle,  camels,  asses,  and  sheep.  OflScers  were  set 
over  these  various  departments.  With  reference  to  David's  oounsellora  (veraL  82 — 34)^ 
we  have  here  enumerated  three  catalogues,  and  the  mention  of  Joab  as  the  oomznander- 
in-chief  of  the  army. — W. 

Yer.  28. — OocTa  pramuei  checking  man*i  wiff^nesi.    The  imnulse  on  David  leai^ng 
him  to  number  Israel  has  never  been  adequately  explained.    Probably  there  were  aome 
peculiar  national  conditions  which  are  not  detidled.    The  connection  of  the  lefeienos 
to  the  '^  numbering,"  which  is  made  in  this  verse,  intimates  that  it  was  a  part  of  ar^nt 
military  arrangements  which  the  king  was  advised  to  make.    PossiUy  in  order  to  fix 
the  amount  of  his  standing  army,  he  desired  to  know  the  number  of  men  in  his  kingdom 
who  were  above  the  age  of  twenty,  the  age  from  which  military  service  was  requiiedi 
Eastern  writers  give  curious  illustrations  of  the  Oriental  prejudice  against  numoering 
possessions.    **  The  apprehension  of  a  Nemesis  on  any  overweening  display  of  |»t)sperity, 
u  not  consistent  with  the  highest  revelations  of  the  Divine  nature  in  the  GhMpehTiper- 
vaded  all  ancient,  especially  all  Oriental  religions.    David's  act  implied  a  oonfidenos 
and  pride  alien  to  the  spirit  inculcated  on  the  kings  of  the  choeen  people.**     What  does 
oome  prominently  out  in  the  narrative  is  that  David  was  wifful  in  the  matter,  but  thai 
Qod  kept  his  very  wilfulness  under  some  limitaUcms  and  restraints.    David  was  kept 
from  taking  a  complete  census,  because  he  felt  it  irreverent  to  attempt  to  count  what 
God  was  understood  to  have  promised  should  be  countless,  •  David's  own  heart,  as  well 
as  Divine  judgments,  brought  to  him  the  conviction  of  his  wilfulness  and  sin.     Apply  to 
modem  phases  of  religious  life  and  religious  work.    In  both  we  are  so  keen  to  observe, 
and  so  anxious  to  reckon  np  and  boast  of,  the  results  of  our  work.    The  individual 
Christian  wants  to  count  and  value  the  steps  of  his  personal  spiritual  growth  ;  and  the 
Christian  worker,  in  his  varied  spheres,  despairs  if  he  cannot  show  the  actual  fruitage  of 
his  toil,  thinking  there  will  be  no  harvest  from  his  seeding  if  his  own  hand  does  not 
bind  the  sheaves.    Much  may  be  said,  and  much  may  be  said  severely,  of  the  almost 
mania  that  poesessos  some  Churches  for  *'  numbering  the  people,"  and  counting  up  the 
net  gains  of  Christian  work.    In  both  spheres  God's  promises  should  check  this  deaire 
to  count. 

I.  Apply  to  pebsokal  beliqious  experience.  God  has  promised  to  **  bring  na  off 
more  than  conquerors ; "  to  '*  perfect  that  which  concerns  us ;  "  to  give  us  **  more  grace ;  * 
to  ensure  us  '*  all  sufficiency  in  all  good  things ; "  and  to  be  '^  with  us  alwaya ; "  so  there 
is  no  need  for  constantly  testing  our  own  sniritual  state,  and  trying  to  gain  assurance 
by  counting  the  steps  upward  which  we  may  have  made.  Our  best  help  is  the  (1)  ^finth 
that  daily  keeps  '^ looking  off"  unto  Jesus;  (2)  the  prayer  that  keeps  us  mindful  of, 
and  ever  pleading,  the  promises;  and  (3)  the  ^^wark"  for  Christ  which  ao  thoroughly 
absorbs  us  that  we  have  no  time  to  think  about  our  own  feelings. 

II.  Apply  to  Christian  labours  in  the  Church  and  in  the  world.  God  baa 
promised  abundant  fruitage  as  the  result  of  faithful  Christian  toil :  a  wondrona  harvest* 
home,  and  not  one  sheaf  missing.  It  is  enough.  Why  should  we  trouble  about  results, 
and  count  up  converts?  Let  them  be  as  many  as  ever  God  wills,  and  let  us  be  satined 
with  the  joy  of  our  working,  and  the  smile  of  our  Master  which  surely  rests  upon  ua  in 
the  doing. 

Still,  as  in  the  older  days  of  Bavid,  there  is  grave  reason  to  fear  that  numherimg 
rendti  tends  to  nourish  human  pride  and  conceit,  and  sets  men  upon  boasting  of  the 
**  great  Babylon  which  they  have  builded."  The  most  essential  quality  of  Qiriatiaii 
work  is  the  meekneis  qf  8^-/orge(fulne9if  that  will  be  wholly  amaa^d  if,  one  wondrou 


on.  XXVIII.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES. 


415 


day,  Ood  should  point  to  sheaves  safe  in  his  garner,  and  say,  '*  These  were  gathered  in 
by  thee."  True  and  humble  hearts  learn  to  leave  all  the  "  numbering"  work  to  God, 
and  to  the  great  revealing  day. — R.  T. 

Vers.  25 — 31. — The  trust  of  richeB.  In  these  verses  some  of  David's  wealth  is 
enumerated,  especially  that  portion  which  consisted  in  estates,  herds,  and  ilocka. 
Accepting  life  on  the  earth  as  the  sphere  of  our  "  probation/*  or  **  moral  training/*  we 
need  to  see  that  all  things  which  bear  their  influence  upon  us  may  be,  and  indeed  are, 
used  by  God  as  agencies  in  this  gracious  work  over  which  he  presides.  Riches,  there- 
fore, may  be  a  Divine  trust  committed  to  some  men  with  a  distinct  view  to  their  culture 
through  this  trust ;  and  it  is  precisely  this  view  of  riches  which  needs  to  be  more 
generally  taught  and  apprehended,  so  that  it  may  become  a  most  solemn  thing  for  any 
man  to  have  this  trust,  and  all  who  have  it  may  be  much  more  impressed  with  the 
responsibility  of  it  than  with  the  advantage  and  privilege  of  it  We  easily  take  up 
with  two  imperfect  notions.  1.  We  say  that  riches  are  tokens  of  Divine  favour.  But 
this  may  not  be  assumed  as  a  universal  fact  Riches  may  be  a  token  of  Divine  wrath 
and  judgment,  and  the  very  agency  of  a  man's  punishment.  And  riches  may  be  a  sign 
of  God*s  anxiety  about  our  moral  state,  and  the  need  for  subjecting  us  to  some  severe 
moral  testing.  To  some  natures  no  more  searching  test  could  be  found  than  the  trust 
of  prosperity  and  wealth.  2.  Or  we  say  that  riches  are  the  rewards  of  virtue,  and 
assume  that  men  must  be  acceptable  to  God  because  they  are  rich,  and  that  others  must 
be  out  of  acceptance,  seeing  that  they  are  poor.  But  then  we  must  face  the  difficulty 
which  the  Psalmist  Asaph  felt  so  bitterly  (Ps.  Ixxiii.)— the  wicked  are  often  the  rich, 
and  the  righteous  are  among  the  down-trodden  poor.  It  is  evident  that  no  general  rule 
will  fit  all  cases,  and  that,  in  wise  Divine  orderings,  wealth  and  poverty  are  arranged 
for  the  highest  good  of  the  individual  and  the  permanent  good  of  the  whole.  Did  we 
know  all,  we  should  never  envy  those  to  whom  God  entrusts  the  riches.  Neither  of 
these  conceptions  is  sufficiently  true  to  be  accepted  without  due  consideration  of  certain 
other  and  important  representations,  such  as  (1)  that  riches  may  be  Divine  judgments ; 

S2)  that  riches  may  be  Divine  trials ;  (3)  that  riches  always  are  Divine  trusts,  of  which 
lue  account  will  presently  be  required.  Then  attention  needs  to  be  directed  to  three 
things  in  relation  to  our  riches :  (1)  The  wise  care  of  them,  as  not  ours,  but  God*s ;  (2)  the 
faithful  use  of  them,  as  not  given  to  us /or  our  sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  others,  whom  we 
may  bless  by  means  of  them ;  and  (3)  the  watchful  culture  of  the  soul's  life  while  in  the 
enjoyment  of  them,  seeing  thai  the  precise  peril  of  them  is  that  they  tend  to  nourish  a 
self-confidence  which  is  fatally  injurious  to  the  soul's  health  and  life.  Illustrate  from  the 
parable  of  the  farmer  who  was  getting  over-rich,  and  had  no  storehouses  large  enoush 
for  his  harvests,  but  who  was  not  rich  toward  Qod,  And  see  the  coimsels  given  to  the 
rich  by  the  Apostle  James. — R.  T 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 


The  contents  of  this  chapter  may  be  said 
to  form  one  scene  with  those  of  the  next  up 
to  ver.  25.  They  represent  David  in  the 
presence  of  a  magnificent  company  of  wit- 
nesses, the  flower  of  the  Church,  the  military 
and  the  civil  elements  of  his  kingdom, 
devolving  upon  his  son  both  the  building 
of  the  temple  and  the  throne  Itself. 

Ver.  1. — One  Hebrew  word  (nb?)  stands 
for  the  princes  (twice),  eaptains  (three 
times),  and  stewarids  (once)  of  this  verse. 
The  classification  of  the  verse  speaks  for 
itself.  There  are  the  prinees  of  Imel ;  t.^. 
the  princes  of  the  tribes  (ch.  xxvti.  16,  22). 


Otherwise  the  former  of  these  expressions 
may  be  of  an  entirely  generic  kind,  and 
apply  to  all  that  succeeds.  There  are, 
secondly,  the  princes  of  the  twelve  military 
oompanies  ...  by  oonrse  of  the  months 
(eh.  xxvii.  1 — 15).  Thirdly,  there  are  the 
princes  of  thousands  and  hnndreds  (Deut  L 
15;  1  Sam.  viii.  12;  xvii.  18;  xviii.  18; 
xxiii.  7;  ch.  xii.  14;  xxvii.  1).  There 
follow,  fourthly,  the  princes  of  aU  the  snb- 
stanoe  and  eatfle  of  the  king,  and  (as  seems 
to  be  added  here)  of  his  sons.  There  can  be 
no  doubt  that  the  Hebrew  text  does  say 
this,  and  does  not  merely  register  the  fact 
of  the  attendance  and  presence  of  the  sons 
of  the  king,  as  also  it  does  not  specialize 
the  attendance  of  Solomon  himself,  though 
it  is  ocrtain  that  he  was  present    Otherwise 


416 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,  [ch.  xxvm.  1— 21. 


it  may  be  doubtful,  considering  the  facts  of 
the  occa8ion,  and  comparing  ch.  xxix.  24, 
whether  the  oriKinal  dtx^iinient  is  not  mis- 
roprcrcntod  here.  Next,  fifthly^  mention  is 
made  of  the  offleen  (o^nrX  the  Hebrew 
f<»r  which  word  gciierully  means  **  eunuch," 
and  such  use  of  it  must  have  IxM^onie  much 
more  familiar  during  and  after  the  Captivity, 
and,  tiiereforc,  of  roursc,  at  the  time  of  the 
oompiUition  of  this  work ;  but  it  does  not 
Ileoe^sa^ily  mc^n  it.  Eunuchs  are  never 
mentioned  elsewhere  in  David's  reign. 
There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  the  wonl 
means  **  eunuch/'  for  instance,  in  Gen. 
xxxvii.  86;  xxxix.  1;  1  8ani.  viii.  15; 
1  Kings  zxii.  9;  2  Kings  xxiv.  12;  zxv. 
19;  Jer.  xxxiv.  19.  Under  any  circum- 
stances, it  would  seem  unnecessary  that 
such  officers  of  a  royal  establish  men  t  as 
eunuchs  should  be  summoned  under  that 
doscrii)tion  to  an  assembly  of  this  kind. 
Sixthly,  the  mighty  men  (ch.  zi.  10—25) 
were  called  to  the  assembly.  And  perhaps 
a  Berenth  division  may  bo  made  of  all  the 
faliant  men  (ch.  zi.  26—40),  who  belonged 
to  other  places,  or  who  were  at  this  time 
more  esp<-cially  in  Jerusalem,  as  residents. 

Ver.  2. — ^Tho  expression,  David  the  king 
•tood  np  upon  his  feet,  probably  means  to 
emphasize  the  fact  that  hitherto,  having 
been  in  a  sitting  or  recumbent  position, 
owing  to  his  age  and  infirmity,  ho  now  with 
effort  force<l  himsi'lf  to  ftand  in  the  presence 
of  the  unu!«ual  congregntion  and  in  con- 
sidrration  of  what  lie  iVlt  was  duo  to  the 
ocouHion.  He  had  not  loht  the  man  and  the 
brother  in  his  oilleial  and  exultod  rank,  and, 
following  ancient  precedenlH  ((icn.  xxix.  4; 
Judg.  xix.  2:^ ;  2  iSam.  xix.  12),  ho  addresses 
the  congregation  as  my  brethren,  and  my 
people.  David  says  he  had  it  in  hin  heart 
to  build  a  house  of  rcHt,  i.e.  an  abiding 
house  (Ps.  cxxxii.  8,  14)  for  the  ark  of  the 
eovenant,  instead  of  tho  moving  one,  and  for 
the  footstool  of  our  Ood.  By  this  ho  means 
the  mercy-seat,  to  which  cspocial  allusion  is 
made  ver.  11  (nnban  n2).  God  is  often 
spoken  of  as  **  dicdling  bu'tween  tho  cheru- 
bim," and  somelime.s  (I's.  xcix.  1)  as  "  fitting 
between  the  cheruhim,"  which  were  over  the 
lid  of  the  ark,  calkHl  the  mercy-seat. 

Ver.  3. — The  contents  of  tliis  verse  are 
stated,  as  already  seen,  even  more  forcibly  in 
ch.  xxii.  8 ;  wliile  far  less  forcibly  in  2  Sam. 
vii.  5 ;  1  Kings  v.  5. 

Vers.  4 — 7.— David  mentions  himself  as 
the  elect  of  Go<l  among  all  tho  members 
of  his  father's  family,  and  from  tlienco  is 
led  to  trace  tlio  call  from  the  first,  by  tho 
following  steps : — Tlio  tribe  of  Judah  (Gen. 
zlix.  8;  ch.  v.  2);  tho  lutuse  of  Jt  site  (1  Sam. 
zvi.  1);  thirdly,  of  himself  (1  Sam.  xvi.  13); 
and  lastly  of  Solomon  (ch.  xxii.  9,  10;  xvii. 
11—14;  2  Sam.  vii.  12—16).     The  exact 


time  and  method  of  Dayid's  reoeiTing  the 
identification   of  Solomon  aa    the   aon   to 
succeed  him,  is  nowhere  given.    The  thnna 
of  the  kingdom  of  the    Lord    OT«r  IirasL 
This  expression,  not  found  in   its  entirety 
elsowhert%  is  an  emphatic  statement  here  oC 
the  true  theocracy,  which  should  have  ever 
prevailed  among  the  people  of  Israel,  and 
which  is  now  partiUeled  by  the  kingship  of 
tho  Lord  in  his  own  Church  (ch.  xvii.  14; 
zxiz.  28).    The  solemn  and  moitt  distinot 
proviso.  If  he  be  eonstant  to  do  my  ooa- 
mandments  tad  my  judgments,  as  at  this 
day,  reminds  us  of  Ps.  czzzii.    12.      This 
proviso  is  emphatically  presented  again  to 
the  attention  of  Solomon,  when   the  time 
comes  for  the  direct  appeal  of  God  to  bim^ 
(1  Kings  iii.  14  ;  viii.  61 ;  iz.  4). 

Vers.  8—10. — The  double  charge  of  these 
verses,  first  to  the  people    and    then    to 
Solomon,   is    full   of  force    and    majesty. 
Tran;«late,  Now  therefore  in    the  sight  of 
all  Israel — the  eongregation   of   the  Lord, 
tad  in  the  hearing  of  oar  Ood  (^  Hear  me^'* 
ver.    2),  keep  ye  and  stndj  to  do  all  the 
commandments  of  the  Lord  your  God  (Dent 
iv.  21,  26;  XXX.  19;  Lev.  zzv.  46;  Jer.  iii 
18).    The  expression.  Know  thou  tiie  Ood  of 
thy  father,  for  a  practical  knowledge  and 
fear  of  Go<1,  is  analogous  with  the  ezpreesion, 
^Uear  thou,"  for  the  matter  of  practical 
obedience;    e.g.    "If  they  Iiear    not   5foeea 
and  the  prophets"  (Luke  xvi.  Ji2).  Although 
there  are  not  very  many  instiiiicos  of  this 
use  of  the  word  **  know,"  its  nntii|uity  and 
clas8ic;il  cliaracter  may  be  coii.-iilcre*!   gim- 
raiitetd  by  such  pas&ages  as  Job  xviii.  21 ; 
1  Sam.  ii.  12;  Prov.  iii.  6;  Ps.  xxx\i.  10; 
Jer.  ix.  2 ;  Hos.  v.  4 ;  vi.  3.    Tho  expre;}sion, 
*♦  th«'   God    of  thy   father,"    evidently    in- 
tended to  lx»  touching,  is  more  fully  given 
in  ver.  20,  "  God,  even  my  G(k1,  will  bo  with 
thee,"  which  in  its  turn  reminds  lis  of  i^aul's 
language,   *'  But  my  (lod  shall  supply  all 
your  need  "  (i*hil.  iv.  19).     The  urpt»u't  en- 
treaty on  the  part  of  David    breatljCA  in 
©very  sentence  of  it,  thought,  and  a  mude  of 
presentation  of  it,  feeling,  and  depth  of  eon- 
viction,  with  which  wo  are  familiar  in  his 
]>salms.     lie  speaks  from  his  own  ynried, 
remarkable,nnd  rich  experience  of  the  Divine 
care  and  jealous  love,  and  from  much  per- 
sonal experience  of  the  deceitfulness  of  the 
hetirt,  to  Solomon,  into  whom,  were  it  {)ossible, 
ho  would  pour  the  advantage  of  all  he  had 
learned,  and   fr»»m   whom   he   would    hide 
notliing  of  his  intense  and  anxious  solici- 
tude.    To  tho  same  strain  ho  returns  in  ver. 
20,  but  there  with  more  exclusive  refercnoe 
to  tho  undertaking  of  tho  building  of  **the 
houbo  of  the  Lord,"  or  the  house  for  the 
sanctuary.    One  thing  only  fails,  perhaps,  to 
be  made  quite  apparent  from  the  language 
of  David,  viz.  why  he  deemed  it  necessary 


CH.  xxvm.  1-^1.]    THE  FIKST  BOOK  OP  THE  OHBONICLES. 


to  nrge  m  itrennonilj  on  Solomon  tho 
enterpriBO  of  building  the  temple  and  of 
carrjing  it  to  completion.  With  abuodance 
of  means  and  preparatiana  >o  large  already 
made,  one  might  have  mpposed  a  young 
king  and  a  youne  man  would  have  needed 
lilllo  pteaanre  antl  liltlaeihortalion.  Never- 
^elesa,  in  the  maniregt  preaence  of  David's 
worils,  it  is  very  for  from  impoaaible  to 
■nppose  the  dangers  and  temptations  of 
Bolanton's  position  aa  constituting  a  serious 
risk. 

Verf.  11 — 19- — These  hintarospeoting  the 
parts  of  the  building  that  was  to  bo,  and 
niBpecting  tha  Cnrniture  of  it,  will  come  in 
for  fuller  consideration  in  tha  fuller  tnait- 
taent  of  tbem,  found  in  tlia  narration  of  tbe 
actual  construction  of  the  building  in  2 
Chmnicles  compared  vith  2  Kings  tl,  eta. 
It  is  evident  that  David  desired  to  make  a 
BOlomn  and  set  business  of  handing  over 
eveu  the  patterns  and  plans.  Nor  is  this 
undt^r  any  circnmstanoes  wonderful,  but 
leiist  of  all  oonsideriiig  their  Divine  origin. 
The  Divine  original  of  the  tabernacle  and 
•II  it«  belongings  (Eiod.  zxT.— zix. ;  Heb. 
Till.  5)  was  not  to  be  a  neglected  precedent 
lit  regards  the  greater  temple.  It  ia  said 
that  "  Djvid  gave  "  these  "  patterns  to 
Bolomon  hia  son  "  (ver.  11).  and  the  form  in 
which  lie  g^ve  them  is  explained  in  ver.  19. 
There  we  rrod,  "  The  whole  in  writing 
from  the  hand  of  Jehovah  upon  me,  be 
made  me  to  understand — all  the  works  of 
this  pattern."  Whatever  we  generally  accept 
respecting  the  writing  of  tlie  tables  of  tha 
*  Law  by  tbe  finger  of  Qod  (Eiod.  xiiv.  12  ; 
ziii.  IS:  luii.  15,  16;  Deut.  iv.  13;  v.  5, 
22  :  ii.  10),  is  at  all  events  open  for  accept- 
ance here.  At  the  same  time,  tbe  phraseo- 
logy of  onr  nineteenth  verse  is  certainly  not 
so  uncompromising  as  that  of  the  references 
just  iustsoced  from  the  Books  of  Exodus 
and  DeuterODomv.  The  worils  of  ver.  19 
maybe  satisfied  uy  the  meaning  that  David 
was  in  such  manner  and  degree  "in  the 
Spirit  "  (Rev.  i.  10),  that  in  the  writing  and 
the  drawing  of  patterns  his  hand  was 
entirely  under  tbe  guidance  of  that  Spirit. 
In  eittier  alternative,  to  band  over  such 
documents  and  such  "  patterns  "  must  have 
been  felt' by  David  .and  uU  present  an  act  of 
which  much  should  be  made. 

Ver.  II.— ThepattamioriiTpartaof  the 
future  building  are  here  delivered  over  to 
Solomon.  1.  The  poteh;  oSwn  (1  Kings  vl. 
S;  vii.  6;  Ezek.xl.  7;  viiLlfi;  Joel  ii.  17; 
2  ClirOD.  iii.  4,  where  we  read  that  tlie 
length  was  twenty  cubits,  and  the  height 
one  hundred  and  twenty  cubila;  viiL  12isv. 
fi;  iiiz.  7,  17);  Septuogint,  rt  aDUm  mZ 
faau  generally,  but  in  this  verse  tov  ivaD  ia 
all  that  appears.  Tbia  poreik  was  built  on 
the  east  of  the  temple.     2.   The  hoiuea 

L  CaSOKICLES, 


thereof;  fs.  not  of  the  pnroh,  but  of  the 
whole  building :  vra;  Btptuagint,  rttc  sTmir 
B^aii.  The  word  "houses"  in  this  place 
designates  the  "  greater  house,"  or  "  temple," 
or  holy  place  of  2  Chron.  iii.  5 ;  1  Kings  vi. 
S,  17;  and  the  "  inner  bouse,"  or  "oraule," 
or  "  most  holy  house,"  or  "  holy  of  holies," 
of  2  Cbron.  iii.  8;  1  Kings  vi.  10—27. 
3.  The  treaiurisa  thereof ;  i'bt)),  a  word 
found  only  herein  this  form,  with  a  Chaldee 
terroioation  in  i|-  ;  Septuagiut,  tar  foicx"* 
oln-oD.  The  treiuuriet  were  chambers  for 
receiving  gifts,  and  storing  the  treaiurca  now 
or  old  of  the  temple.  Which  of  tbe  rooms 
that  were  bnilt  against  tbe  sides  of  the 
temple  were  set  apart  as  these  trensuro- 
ohambers  is  not  known.  Feriiaps  thiy  were 
the  thtee-storied  wings  of  tlie  temple  (I 
Kings  vi.  S).  4.  The  nppir  Dhambtit 
thsTBof;  vri'';p, ;  Septuagiut,  rav  Inrtpiffr 
(for  fuller  treatment  of  these,  see  2  Chron. 
iii.  9).  We  may  only  with  confidence  say 
of  these  chambers  that  they  wore  upper 
chambers,  but  whether  over  the  "oroclo" 
as  Eeil  and  Bertbeau  think,  or  over  the 
"  porcb,"  or  tbe  higher  of  those,  that  leaned 
against  the  sides  of  the  maiu  building,  it  ia 
impossible  to  determine  from  sui^h  c^ta  m 
we  at  present  have.  5.  The  inner  parlonn 
thoroot;  D^:^"]  innn;  Septuagiut, t»k iio- 
9v«ir  Tar  iaaTipaji.  There  can  be  littla 
doubt  that  these  designate  the  lower  rooma 
of  the  side  buildiu^ts  of  tho  holy  place,  and 
perhaps  also  of  the  porch.  6.  The  place  of 
the  meroy-sMt ;  nihsn  n'a ;  Septuagint,  Toii 
tISKou  TDii  i^i\aaiiai. 

Ver.  12.— Bertboan,  Keil,  and  tome  others 
regard  the  spirit  here  spokon  of  as  referrinK 
to  the  spirit  and  mind  of  David,  and 
Berthean  goes  so  far  as  to  translate,  or  para- 

C-ase.  "  the  pattern  of  all  that  floated 
3re  his  mind."  Such  manifest  stress  hat 
beea  laid  upon  the  two  facts— that  the 
patterns  were  of  Ood's  giving,  and  that 
they  were  now  in  auch  form  that  tbey 
could  be  given  over  into  the  haudt  of 
Solomon — that  such  an  interpretation  seems 
inadmissible.  Rather  translate,  And  tlw 
pattern  of  all  wbloh  waa  Ly  tha  spirit  with 
him.  For  tbs  eonrit  of  tha  houae  of  the 
Lord,  see  1  Kings  vi.  36 ;  2  Chron.  iv.  S. 
The  ehamben  ronnd  about ;  3'3p  n\3j;'yi 
(oh.  xxiii.  28).  There  seems  no  necessity  to 
suppose  that  these  chambers  were  separate 
from  tbe  building.  For  the  trsasnriet,  the 
correct  translatiou  is  Ota  Ireiuurci  (cb.  xzvi. 
20). 

Ver.  13.— This'verte  either  continues  the 
■nbject  of  the  giving  of  the  patterns,  which 
will  read  rather  tu^hly,  as  preceding  tht 
oonnet  of  the  prieiti  ioA  the  Levitet,  and 
ooold  only  mean  directiona  or  inatruotions 
(or  their  inlerobange,  et& ;  or  it  may  eon- 


418 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,   [ch.  xivm.  1—21. 


iinne  the  Bubjcct  of  the  "  chambers  round 
about"  **for  the  treasures  of  the  house  of 
God,"  etc.,  also  for  the  convenience  "  of  the 
courses  of  the  prieista,"  etc.,  and  "for  all 
the  work,"  etc.,  and  for  ke(>ping  ^all  the 
vei^sels  of  seryice,"  etc.  Bertheau  and  Keil 
somewhat  scout  the  former  supposition,  and 
adliere  to  the  latter. 

Vers.  14,  15. — The  general  meaning  of 
these  yerses  is  that,  if  the  question  were 
one  of  gold,  or  one  of  silver,  Dayid  assigned 
for  each  vessel  and  each  part  of  the  candle- 
sticks, the  proportionate  weight  of  gold 
that  was  to  be  employed. 

Ver.  16. — So  too  as  regards  the  tables  of 
shewbread,  whether  in  sort  of  gold  or  of 
silver,  he  assigned  the  due  weight  of  metal 
for  either  sort.  We  should  have  been  at  a 
loss  to  understiind  the  plural  here  employed, 
showing  more  than  one  table  (Exod.  xxv.  23 ; 

1  Kings  vii.  48  ;  2  Chron.  xxix.  18),  but  for 

2  Chron.  iv.  8, 19 ;  in  the  former  of  which 
verses  we  read  of  **  ten  tables  "  being  made 
«n(l  placed  on  "the  rig! it  side  and  on  the 
left,  in  the  temple,"  and  in  the  latter  verse, 
yet  more  distinctly,  of  "  tables,  whereon  the 
shewbread  was  set." 

Ver.  17. — It  is  to  be  observed  that  the 
teim  bafons  (onHDip),  which  appear  to  have 


been  covered  goblets,  is  only  found  here  and 
in  Ezra  i.  10 :  viiL  27. 

Ver.  18. — By  the  ohaiiot  of  the  ehemliiBii^ 
is  of  course  not  meant  that  the  cherubim 
had  a  chariot,  but  that  they  constituted  the 
chariot  of  Jehovah  (Ps.  xviii.  11). 

Ver.  19.— This  abrupt  bringing  in  of 
David  as  the  speaker  himself  has  already 
had  one  illustration  in  oh.  xxiii.  5.  (See  on 
the  matter  of  tliis  verse,  note  on  ver.  11 ; 
aud  oomp.  2  Kings  iii.  15  for  the  parallel 
of  an  expression  which  evidently  intends  to 
assert  an  inspiring  hand  of  the  Lord.) 

Vers.  20,  21.— These  verses,  as  above  seen, 
continue  and  close  David*s  urgent  and  last 
exhortation  to  Solomon.  He  has  now  done 
with  admonition  and  urgent  appeal,  but  he 
offers  prayer  for  him  (ch.  xxix.  19). 

Ver.  20. — David  in  this  verse  enlarges 
upon  the  certainty  of  God's  faithful  ateady 
presence  with  Solomon  and  support  of  his 
work  to  the  end. 

Yer.  21. — In  this  verse  David  reminds 
Solomon  what  servants  and  helpers  he  has 
ready  to  hand  rn  earth,  as  well  as  his  Qod 
above — priests  and  .  .  •  LeTites,  .  .  .  aU 
manner  of  workmen, .  .  .  willing  and  aUlfli], 
•  .  .  princes  and .  .  .  peopls. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1— lO.—Well  worth  reproduction  by  the  annalist  of  centuries  afterwards  was 

the  solemn  and  inspiring  scene  pourtrayed  in  this  and  following  sections.     For  the  same 
reason  that  particulars,  however  gloriously  interesting  or  terribly  interesting,  yet  of 
merely  indivi<lual  concernment,  are  absent  from  the  Chronicles,  those  of  the  highest 
national  significance  are  sketched  afresh,  and  engraved  with  deeper-cut  lines.     Much  of 
the  sorrow  and  misfortune  of  David,  much  of  wherein  he  sinned,  or  was  sinned  against, 
would  be  inexplicably  denied  to  the  reader  but  for  the  steady  observance  on  the  part  of  the 
annalist— we  doubt  not  under  inspiration's  guidance — of  the  principle  that  the  nation's 
religious  history  is  to  be  his  grand  subject,  its  lessons  his  theme.    Well,  too,  might  the 
religious  teacher  of  a  nation  that  had  passed  through  a  strange  stretch  of  apostasy  a 
stranger  severity  of  punishment  on  account  of  it,  and  had  now,  strangest  of  all,  another 
ofler  of  opportunity  priceless  in  prospect,  be  supremely  anxious  to  give  all  legitimate 
prominence  to  such  a  scene.    History  enabled  them  once  more  with  fidelity  to  produce 
It.   a  hey  rested  in  it  themselves  with  delight.     'J'hey  longed  to  imbue  the  people  with  iU 
spirit  and  its  ancient  original  fascination.    All  things  considered,  the  sun  had  scarcely 
risen,  through  the  reijin  and  whole  life  of  David,  on  a  day  of  more  real  grandeur,  more 
essential  honour  to   himself— certainly  not  among  the  number  of  those  that  were 
inevitably  declining  days,  and  their  brightest,  warmest  suns,  those  of  mellow  light  and 
temperature,  subdued.     Age  was  now  a  crown  of  glory  to  him.    The  experience  of  a  life 
moderately  long,  of  a  reign  remarkably  long,  of  vicissitudes  and  events  strangely  varied 
was  dignity  higher  than  anything  artificial,  than  anything  outward.     And  weakness 
of  bodily  ibrce  and  limb  brought  out  in  greater  relief  the  moral  deference  he  had  made 
all  his  own,  while  a  nation  attend  his  voice,  and  receive  in  a  young  son  of  his  their 
future  shepherd  and  king.    Kor  was  David  himself  at  all  insensible  to  what  was  most 
peculiar,  most  characteristic  in  the  scene.    A  word  or  two,  an  action  or  two,  an  atti- 
tude, betray  his  nervous  appreciation  of  it.    That  day,  that  hour,  that  scene— what  three 
ways  met  there  and  then !     The  past  way  of  his  people,  and  their  undiscovered  futurt 
path,  and  not  least  momentous  that  by  which  his  otvn  departure  must  forthwith  be  made. 


CH.  xxvra.  1— 21.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  419 


In  a  scene  of  an  exceptional  character,  with  much  of  just  importance  in  it,  and  of  essential 
impressiveness,  let  us  pause  to  note  the  main  features. 

I.  The  assembly  itself  was  one  of  a  dignified  chabacteb.  And  the  dignity  of 
it  was  a  true  dignity.  The  assemhly  represented  a  nation.  It  represented  the  toorth 
and  the  substance  of  a  nation.  It  was  not  its  idle  wealth,  its  idle  fashion,  its  idle 
glitter,  its  sinecnrism,  but  the  strong  head  and  strong  purpose  and  strong  arm  of  the 
nation.  There  was  position  in  abundance  there,  but  it  was  that  healthy  position  that 
comes  of  high  office  worthily  filled,  of  doing  a  nation's  work  and  of  adjudged  compe- 
tence to  do  it.  This  assembly  represented,  therefore,  the  diligence  of  a  united,  happy, 
active  people.  And  when  we  consider  the  purpose  for  which  the  assembly  was 
gathered  together,  it  undoubtedly  bespeaks  its  highest  honour  as  representative  of  the 
order  and  obedience  of  a  divinely  governed  nation.  There  is  no  nation  that  is  governed 
fit  to  be  so  named,  that  is  not  divinely  governed,  if  only  that  be  taken  into  account  which 
is  transpiring  a  very  small  depth  below  the  surface.  And  this  fact  postulates  order,  a 
listening  ear,  and  ohetlience.  The  government,  the  legislature,  the  nation  that  go  on 
with  but  just  a  moderate  workable  amount  of  these,  know  a  certain  unsatisfactoriness, 
but  they  little  know  the  wreck  and  absolute  misery  of  ruin  where  the  indispensable 
mimmum  is  absent.  On  the  other  hand,  the  nation  then  moit  nearly  touches  the  point 
of  perfection  when  its  order,  attention,  and  obedience,  as  perfect  as  that  of  an  army, 
are  at  the  same  time  moral  in  their  character  and  voluntary  in  their  forthcoming. 

II.  Special  elements  of  diqnitt  gather  bound  the  person  who  convenes  this 
ASSEMBLY.  David  is  the  centre  of  it ;  the  chief,  not  to  say  the  only  speaker  in  it.  Yet 
even  he  is  not  acting  in  his  own  name  and  right  alone.  He  is  the  visible  deputy  of  one 
far  higher,  and  who  is  invisible.  He  is  an  aged  man,  and  furthermore  older  than  his 
years.  Great  is  the  contrast,  wonderfully  efifective  the  contrast,  between  what  ho 
now  is,  putting  off  the  armour,  and  what  he  once  was,  when  he  "  assaved  to  go  "  in  the 
improved  armour  of  Saul,  and  "  put  it  off""  also  (1  Sam.  xvii.  39).  The  juvenility,  the 
simplicity,  the  unexpectingness,  the  inexperience  of  that  day  are  at  the  extreme 
antipodes  of  what  he  now  is  and  feels.  Then  so  ruddy  and  robust,  of  rude  physical 
health,  and  of  abounding  energy  of  limb,  but  now  with  sunken  eye  and  sallow  cheek, 
only  with  difficulty  able  to  rise  from  his  royal  chair,  and  *'  beside  those  thinc;s  that  are 
without"  (2  Cor.  xi.  28),  more  weighted  still  with  the  responsibilities  of  office  and  the 
accumulations  of  experience,  and  *'  the  care  of  all  the  "  nation.  The  figure  of  that 
•'old  man  eloquent,*  but  yet  "more  eloquent"  in  deeds  through  his  whole  life  than  in 
words  even,  must  stand  a  sculpture  of  most  defined  and  enduring  outline  against  the 
Bible  sky  while  the  Bible  lasts.  But  the  life  that  was  bounded  by  these  two  extremes 
had  played  a  great  part,  and  the  tides  had  risen  full  and  high  and  tumultuous,  times 
without  number,  in  it.  Yet  through  all  the  conflicts,  work,  perils,  and  sins,  and  virtues 
of  the  life,  a  certain  thread  of  continuity  had  been  preserved,  and  indeed  had  preserved 
it.  As  the  truest  image  often  comes  out  clearest  and  best  in  death,  so  was  it  now. 
There  had  been  a  thing  long  in  the  heart  of  David.  The  decline  of  life  speaks  it  out 
with  extraordinary  emphasis.  And  does  he  not  then  touch  the  highest  point  of  his 
fame  when,  with  the  grand  company  in  front  of  him,  he  rises  with  some  effort,  addresses 
those  who  listen  to  their  father  and  their  king,  as  "  my  brethren  and  my  people/'  and 
shares  with  them  the  deepest  wish  and  the  most  real  ambition  to  which  his  life  owned  ? 
How  difierent  this  from  the  close  of  many  careers  I  Nay,  how  very  few  are  those  who 
have  the  faith,  the  calm  determination  (or  even  the  merciful  opportunity  given  them), 
to  put  into  the  hand  of  another  the  secret  of  a  brilliant  future  that  had  been  thought 
of  by  themselves,  longed  for  by  themselves,  but  denied  to  themselves  1  When  Paul 
wrote  to  Timothy  he  was  a  yet  higher  illustration  of  this,  yet  it  must  be  taken  into 
account  that  Paul  was  not  disappointed  as  David  was. 

III.  Statements  of  eminently  moral  significance  in  the  address,  in  wniCH 
David  now  admits  all  to  be  sharers  of  his  bosom's  dearest  secret.  1.  After  a 
courteous  appeal  to  all,  addressing  them  under  kindly  titles  to  hear  him,  who  might, 
from  his  office  and  age,  have  commanded,  David  credits  the  sovereignty  of  all  the  kingdom 
to  God.  The  throne  is  '*  the  throne  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Lord  over  Israel  **  (ver.  5). 
2.  3e  credits  aU  th<U  he  was  himsdf,  all  which  had  been  given  him,  all  to  which  he  had 
been  raised,  to  the  sovereignty  of  Ood,  These  David  traces  through  four  stages.  The 
Divine  sovereign  choice  of  tlie  tribe  of  Jadahi  of  the  house  of  his  lather,  of  himself  out  of 


i20  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHBOKICLE&   lea.  zacmi.  1-2L 


all  tbe  rest  of  his  father*8  family,  and  he  earrks  It  down  to  the  designatioD  of  his  &Toanti 
80D  Solomon, as  buccessor  to  his  throne.    '*  Howbeit  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  c:hoae  me  bdbn 
all  the  houM  of  my  father  to  be  king  oyer  Israel  for  erer :  for  he  hath  chosen  Jndah  to 
be  the  ruler ;  and  of  the  house  of  Judah,  the  house  of  my  father  ;  and  among  the  aai 
of  my  father  he  liked  me  to  make  me  king  over  all  Israel :  and  of  all  mj  sons,  (kt 
the  LKifd  hath  given  me  many  sons,)  he  hath  chotien  Solomon  my  son  to  sit  upon  the 
throne  of  th«.'  kin^<li>m  of  th*.*  Lord  over  IsraeL    And  he  said  unto  me,  Solomon  thy 
son,  be  shall  hiiild  my  house  and  my  courts:  for  I  have  chosen  him  to  be 'my  son  and! 
will  Ik-  his  Father  "  (vers.  4— C).    3.   With  the  frankness  of  truth  and  the  unmiatakdik 
iifigUntM  of  aim  of  an  aged  man  "ready  to  denart,"  David  tpeaks  out  what  had  hem 
hia  own  pioui  de>ijn,  his  cherished  rcaolve,  and  the  actual  preparation  he  had  mads 
for  it.    **  I  had  iu  my  heart  to  build  an  house  of  rest  for  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
of  the  Lord,  and  for  the  footstool  of  our  God,  and  had  made  ready  for  the  bnilding* 
(ver.  2).     It  is  to  be  noted  that  no  matter  of  personal   advantage,   or  of  fiunily 
advanta«;;e,  or  even  of  a  noble  amMtion,  but  yet  a  mere  ambition,  is  here  ooncemei 
It  is  the  calm,  correct,  intelligent  prompting  of  religion.    No   doubt   the  desire  of 
David's  heart  carried  to  completion  must  re«lound  to  the  honour  and  fame  of  him- 
self and  his   family  to   all    generations,  and  must   be  oeilculated    to   secoie  gnat 
practical  benefit  to  a  whole  nation.    Nevertheless  it  were  a  gratuitous   maligninf 
of  a  good  heart  to  mistake  these,  or  any  of  them,  as  the  motives  of  Dayid.    Ha 
is  leiirning  and  is  illuHtratinu:  the  great  though    alphabetic  principleM    that  mla 
the    man    who    dintinctly  believes    in    the    invisible,  and    worships    the    invisibli 
One.     It  is  his  right  and  due,  it  is  justice,  that  a  settled  house,  a  permanent  place  of 
abiding,  a  worthy  temple,  be  raised  to  him,  and  that  nothing  take  real  precedence  of  it 
4.  With  a  different  frankness,  a  frankness  of  perhaps  even  rarer  sort,  he  withholdi 
nothing  of  all  that  had  passed  between  God  and  himself.    He  gives  the  reasons  correct 
and  exact,  on  account  of  which  his  heart's  desire  is  denied  to  him.     It  cannot  be  denied 
that  there  was  something  about  them  which  a  man  less  brave  and  strong  might  havs 
inclined  to  suppress.    There  are  things  in  life  which,  far  from  criminal,  and  &r  moit 
misfortune  than  fault,  nevertheless  ask  for  a  veil  of  kindly  forgetfulness,  and  beg  not  to 
be  thriibt  into  prominenre.     But  David  tells  all  without  disguise.     It  comes  to  this 
that  in  the  strongcijt  of  his  days  he  had  been  very  busy  in  work  not  of  the  most 
savoury,  not  of  the  most  spiritual,  not  even  of  the  most  humane,  and  the  stain  of  it 
cleaved  to  him — that  stain  the  stain  of  blood.    A  very  busy  life  in  some  directiooa 
often  uinkes  good  works  imi)0ssibleat  the  time.     But  this  is  not  necessarily  the  worst 
of  it.     The  more  signiticant  and  sad  thing  is  that  it  does  one  or  both  of  two  other 
things.     It  cither  finally  takes  away  all  taste  and  disposition  to  do  the  work  of  higher 
goodness  ;  or  if,  as  with  David  now,  it  does  not  do  this,  yet  it  clothes  the  man  against 
his  will  with  a  character  of  unsnitableness  to  it.     In  this  neither  is  man  censorious  nor 
God  unjust.     But  nature  is  vindicating  its  reality  and  strength,  and  another  illustraticii 
is  added  of  the  truth,  that  "  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."     This, 
then,  is  David's  frank  confession  :  "  God  said  unto  me.  Thou  shalt  not  build  an  houso 
for  my  Name,  because  thou  hast  been  a  man  of  war,  and  hast  shed  blood  **  (ver.  3), 
6,  With  grateful  memory  David  records  the  promise  that  God  had  made  in  substitu* 
tion  for  granting  the  exact  desire  of  his  heart.     This  promise  of  what  should  be  dons 
in  and  by  Solomon  was  "  the  word  on  which  God  had  caused  David  to  hope."    And 
reflection  u])on  it  was  very  food  to  him,  commemoration  of  it  was  a  welcomed  and  sacred 
duty.    The  promise  had  been  given  in  close  connection  with  a  detailed  reminder  of 
how  God  had  selected  David,  and  called  him,  and  made  such  a  changed  career  for  him, 
U|)on  nil  that  had  naturally  loomed  before  him  (2  Sam.  vii.  8 — 16).    The  w^hole  scene 
and  purport  of  that  roi)ort  that  Kathan  made  to  David  in  his  interview  with  him,  had 
staniiKjd  one  clear,  efi'ective  impression  on  his  mind.     And  it  is  evident  that  his  own 
address  to  the  people  and  to  Solomon  now  answers  feature  for  feature  to  it.     But  in  the 
centre  of  it  was  this  promise  about  Solomon ;  all  the  rest  clustered  round  it,  and  th* 
grateful  promise  holds  the  central  place  now  in  David's  memory  and  heart.     6.  I%s 
closing  charge  of  David — a  double  charge^  one  to  the  people,  one  to  their  future  king,  ons 
to  the  Church,  the  other  to  the  minister,  "  the  leader  and  shepherd  of  IsraeL'*    (1)7  The 
charge  to  the  laity.    The  very  essence  of  impressiveness  lies  sometimes  in  the  direct- 
nen  of  personal  appeal*    There  may  be  personal  appeal  without  individual  appesU 


en.  xxvm.  1—21.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES-  •  421- 

Each  in  a  large  number  shall  sometimes  sufficiently  feel  that  the  address  is  to  himself. 
In  the  brief  language  of  David  much  is  contained.    Its  sententiousness  is  telling  and 
emphatic.     The  great  throng  of  human  witnesses  is  instanced.    The  supreme  omniscient 
Witnesser  is  pointed  to,  is  well  held  up  to  view,     "  In  the  sight  of  all  Israel  the  con» 
gregation  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  audience  of  our  God  ; "  these  are  the  imposing  sanc- 
tions which  precede  the  solemn  burden  itself  of  command  or  earnest  exhorting.     Thea 
follows  such  exhortation — it  is  entreaty  itself:  "  Keep  and  seek  for  all  the  command- 
toents  of  the  Lord  your  God."    The  rule  for  nation,  leaders,  ay,  and  for  individual,  if 
they  are  to  be  safe  and  sure,  is  thus  constituted.     Obeditnce,  inquiring  obedience,  and 
impartial,  uniform  obedience,  are  the  triple  essentials  of  that  wise  and  holy  law.     And 
the  scriptural  reward  of  obedience  is  set  forth,  and  in  that  finer  form  to  which  Scriptura 
gives,  in  one  way  or  another,  so  unique  a  prominence,  viz.  the  reward  not  to  self  and 
present  time  alone,  but  to  the  future  and  to  generations  yet  unborn.    This  tendency  to 
suggest  the  future,  to  point  to  it,  and  to  urge  the  taking  it  into  account,  is  one  of  the 
noteworthiest  marks  of  the  diviner  methods  of  monition  and  impression.    Where  the 
subject-matter  may  make  it  impossible  in  one  way,  it  will,  if  possible,  insist  on  appear- 
ing  in  another  way.    "  That  ye  may  possess  this  good  land,  and  leave  it  for  an  inherit- 
ance for  your  children  after  you /or  ever"     (2)  The  charge  to  his  own  loved  son. 
Now  all  the  father's  heart  and  soul  are  moved.    Every  short  clause,  in  its  full,  majestic 
Hebrew  vocabulary,  thrilled  with  the  deep  conviction  and  earnest  persuasion  that  the 
abounding  experience  of  an  aged  and  holy  father  would  bring  to  bear  upon  his  son. 
What  influences  they  are  that  offer  themselves  to  produce  an  ever-remaining  impressioa 
on  the  young  man  I    At  a  moment  when  all  the  eyes  of  a  vast  and  august  assembly 
are  bended  on  the  young  Hebrew  prince,  a  solemn  individual  appeal  is  made  to  him. 
Again  the  beaming  of  the  height  of  paternal  love  and  pride  is  shining  on  him.    Again 
the  familiarly  known  earthly  father's  name  is  raised  into  union  with  the  Name  of  the 
one  Being  above  all :  *'  Know  thou  the  God  of  thy  father,  and  serve  him  with  a 
perfect  heart  and  with  a  willing  mind."    Then  are  brought  into  prominence  the  grand 
characteristics  of  that  Being,  as  One  *'  who  searches  all  hearts,  and  perfectly  understands 
all  the  imaginations  of  them."    His  gracious  approachableness,  if  sought,  and  his  deep 
offence  and  sure  punishment,  if  neglected,  are  declared,  till  the  close  of  all  is  reached. 
This  consists  (a)  of  the  distinct  admonition  to  watch ;  of  the  (6)  suggestion  of  strong 
comfort  and  support  that  lie  in  the  thought  of  the  Lord's  choice  and  decree ;  and  (^ 
of  the  challenge,  in  the  name  of  all  which  had  gone  before,  to  "  &e  strong  and  do  it.* 

Vers.  12, 19. — Divine  inspiration  the  guide  of  human  worle.  These  veises  amount 
to  a  very  real  and  very  interesting  assertion  of  Divine  inspiration.  The  "  things  thai 
float  before  the  mind,"  to  use  Bertheau's  words,  without  his  meaning  in  them,  may  none 
the  less  be  the  fruit  of  inspiration.  But  beside  and  in  addition  to  the  mind's  ordinary 
command  of  its  own  gifts,  in  addition  to  the  exercise  of  reason,  to  the  aids  of  the 
accumulations  of  experience,  and  of  even  some  touch  of  foresight,  which  belong  by 
nature  to  all,  and  which  attach  to  some  in  a  very  high  degree  by  training  and  by  purity 
of  mind,  the  Divine  Spirit  gives  as  he  lists  special  impulses  and  sure  guidance,  an 
unusual  discernment  and  unerring  correctness  of  deliverance,  and  truth  absolute  betimes. 
The  leading  instance  and  type  of  such  inspiration  is  to  be  found,  no  doubt,  in  those 
impulses  and  that  Divine  suj^erin  tend  ing  and  Divine  informing  of  certain  men's  minds 
in  the  essential  T/ki^^er  of  spiritual  truth,  which  by  many  an  instalment  and  through  a 
very  long  stretch  of  ages  secured  for  us  at  last  the  grand  total  we  now  call  our  Bible. 
This  may  be  called  the  inspiration  of  word  or  of  truth  ;  while  that  exercise  of  inspiration 
which  the  present  passage  leads  us  to  notice  might  rather  be  designated  the  inspiration 
of  work.  There  is,  of  course,  nothing  manifest  to  distinguish  these  in  their  nature,  for 
the  same  gracious  Spirit,  the  same  mighty  and  heavenly  Force,  is  in  either  case  at  work. 
But  there  are  important  and  grateful  thoughts  suggested  to  us  in  the  fact  that  the 
quickening,  informing,  revealing  Spirit  comes  to  our  aid  not  only  in  the  deepest  and 
hi;:he8t  things  that  can  touch  soul,  but  in  the  literal  works  of  our  hands.  Let  us 
notice — 

I.  The  Spirit  does  not  disdain  to  co-operate  with  men,  in  suooestino,  shapino, 

AND  completing   THAT  WHICH  IS  TO  BB  MADE    BY  THEIR   HANDS,  AND  TO   AFFECT  THEM 

1U0VQU  THS  MINISTSX  01*  THE  SENSES.    Though  the  inevitable  and  just  inference  in  our 


4S  THE  F1£ST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHBOHICLBSL    [cs.  zxmL  1-2L 


rz,  rz-iiiiii  LtntL  U  of  ti<e  rco^eaoesisxii  of  the  Spirit,  jet  w  need  not  pes  ow  tbt 
ooc«>vienv:i^  liu  i'i:§  if  ::.  Lttz  ii.£  vitii  an  imJozr  thmt  we  might  expect  vonld  be 
ofcMTTtc.  Aj  m.  Pfe.1^  loeLcs  ui  f  icr^blr.  in  the  first  chapter  of  hie  Epistle  to  da 
Ecc^^A,  *ia:  tber  &re  ti- 1«  a:; -3  're>i  tcciiit  of  tbe  aerereat  oondeinnation  who  iffas 
to  l*:kn.  lit  :iT.»  ':  jr  ii::.p  :f  G.c  L  zistlf  £n?m  Au  worka  visible  m  creatioOy  ao  tte 
S;>..'::  v  ^^i  l:  u-^-i  :*  c  ir  '.mU'  v.eJLs  ri^t  mnhods  of  approeching  the  Being  vita 
iLi*:  i.-  :it  iri  ;*  >*  *•  ir  r*  :::*i  :-  fjnt  asd  in  tnath." 

ll.lEZ  >J1^:Z  Trm  B   >  :-TZ  ryS  the  EXr&ZSeI05  05  THE  FAST  OF  MAST  OP'hD  VOUOP 

ATI*  ^rLv:  £  '7  G::'.  ivrx  i5  the  ^itlb  ieqi  unites  or  them,  Hiat  which  hasoxt 
DCt- ::  z  'i  niitr.  of  »k^  ,  cf  ii->ur'r.i,  of  care,  is  not  what  is  to  be  offered  to  God. 
It  V-. ..  i  ic:  br  -fi'fi ::  ibose  ve  ^.red  cc  respected  among  our  fellow-cieatiueii  and 
yet  l'?.f  *■!   -1  ::  tie  ■.■ft***:  i-:-  Lim. 

II I.  The  Miirr  evvove*  nr  fabtictxab  the  EXAcrnrpK  A2n>  perfkctios  n  m 
SIM*  Of  ikE%T  Is  GIVE 5  t^'j  Gi  i^.  TLt  ^jcrijicf  must  be  the  Toung  and  the  pore  ind 
XLk  lltrL  -:  '.r«*-  A:.d  a  tinilir  j-riiicijle  cuit  be  obserred  through  oat  oar  auiiceof 
G^.  r^t  Lvw  cf:ei«  Low  cri'w'.y,  L:w  iJOt-.-riousIj",  how  self-deceiringly,  is  thia  plan 
jT  r.c  :  ".e  c.*r<-rar:t*:  Iv  n:  -li.: -id**  cf  pcvftA&iLZ Christians  !  To  God  is  giTcn  last;  to 
G-C  'I*-  ea*-: :  *■-'  Cr.-i  that  wLich  is  t^x.  pt-^r  i3  keep  or  to  give  elsewhere. 


was 

aacre: 

and  ajain  xo  the  severity,  en  their  fi»t  HiiefionarT  joumevs,  were  a  pattern  ;  the 

were  a  yattem ;   John,  Peter,  and  Paul  were  ca^h  respectirely  a  pattern.      And  for  the 

firfct  f\\i  t^TTiple  that  ir>f onned  and  intelligent  worship  of  God  ever  reared,  the  Spirit 

gave  tLe  jatt*  n.,  ar  d  pattern  after  pattern  for  details. 

V.  S711.L  THE  rfnaiT  gives  but  the  fatteut.  He  does  not  supersede  oar  acCivs 
exertions,  our  I'e&x  exertions,  nor  permits  as  to  reckon  on  even  Ait  proxj.  But  he  dosi 
uait  to  lead,  cfftrr  to  show  and  to  Uofh^  and  above  all  in  thia  particular  way — the 
way  of  imfiartir  g  principl€$  of  rght  action,  of  holy  action,  of  heautifai  action. 

VI.  The  ^^naiT  gave  the  texfle  model,  which  is  yebt  deed  bpokk  fbiscifu 

15  EVEI.YTIJIVG   THAT   HIOHT    fi<'U7fD   MC-ST  LIKE   DETAIL,  BECAUSE  THAT   TEXPLX    WA» 

ITSELF  THE  TYFE  OF  G'D's  Chubch  OX  eaeth.  No  txclustve  sanctity  belonged  to  it. 
It  a;.d  :t5  liLeal  s':ckx'Bs<.ts  were  to  lie  level  with  the  ground.  But  its  seed  was  to  be 
as  the  fctars  of  heaven,  or  as  the  sand  cpc-n  the  shore.  "  Neither  in  this  monntaiiiy 
nor  yet  at  Jerusalem,''  ir.eaiit  no  doc-m,  no  cur^,  no  disparagement  of  tbe  temple.  Those 
words  of  Je.-'US  E^</ke  the  charter  of  Gcd's  Church,  as  a  growing,  an  ever-growing,  and 
a  prevailing  reality  in  the  world.  Literally  innumerable  have  been  ab^ady  tbe  co|nes 
aft<;r  That  type.  And  they  have  yet  to  be  manifold  more.  The  building  itself  was 
errj]'}.at:caliy  not  an  ordinary  buildinc:,  nor  a  mere  building.  The  thought  of  it  in 
David's  he-art  was  not  inditienous  to  that  heart,  nor  was  the  execution  of  it  to  be  liable 
to  \je  dan^erouijiy  ascribed  either  to  his  architecture,  or  his  sons,  or  to  that  of  the 
corTibined  professional  taleot  of  the  nation,  or  of  all  nations.  No,  it  is  unique.  It  has 
virtue  in  it.  It,  in  the  person  of  its  successor,  just i6es  Jesus' admiration,  and  a  share  of 
liiii  t<arM.  It  breathes  and  moves  ubiquit/^usly,  and  has  life  in  it.  And  it  was  because 
it  v^as  neceK^ary  that  it  should  have  thc-se  endowments,  that  though  David  thought  and 
gave  arid  fire  pared,  and  a  nation  now  banded  as  one  man  consented  and  gave  and 
wjougi.t  CDihusiastically,  yet  the  Architect  was  Gud  the  Spirit. 

Verp.  20, 21. —  77ie  courage  ofagt^and  ifs  grand  advantages  as  grounded  inexperience. 
Once  more,  tlion,  the  ^oiceoi  the  aged  kin;;:  and  the  aged  father  is  heard.  Its  subject 
th<j  tame,  its  tones  htill  more  and  more  earnest,  persuasive,  imploring.  Age  calms, 
meil'.WH,  huKlues,  in  almost  all  direction?,  but  not  literally  in  alL 

I.  \N'E  are  ARREbTED   BY  OVERHEARING  THE   URC.EXT  TONES  OF  OLD  AGE.      The   VOicO 

is  ijot  weak,  do<'8  not  treiuble,  lisps  not,  nor  hesitates.  It  is  firm,  full  of  vigour,  and 
rin:;*  again  more  musical  than  even  of  old.  There  must  be  some  significant  reason  for 
thiff. 

II.  We  ARE  ARRESTED  BT   BEEXING  TO  HEAR  AGE  UBGE  IXFETUOUSNESS  AND  DABING 

OH  YOUTH.  Surely  the  five  times  repeated  exhortation, "  Be  strong,"  "  of  good  courage/* 
"  do  it,"  •'  fear  not,"  "  nor  be  dismayed/'  must  betoken  some  very  risky,  presumptuous 


CH.  xxvni.  1— 21.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  42$ 

and  even  daring  enterprise.  And  yet  it  is  the  old  man  who  is  pressing  on  the  young 
man,  appealing  to  him  as  though  he  would  rouse  him  to  an  all  but  forlorn  hope,  instead 
of  to  a  wise,  prudent,  and  good  work. 

III.  Wb  ark  arrested  by  HEABINa  IN  THE  MIDST  OF  THESE  URGENT  AND  IMPASSIONED 
TONES  PROMISES  OP  THE  HIQHEST  INDUCEMENT,  AND  THAT  BORROW  THE  NAME  OP  HeaVEN 

AND  God.  a  father's  experience,  encouragement,  and  entreaty  may  well  weigh  much 
with  a  son ;  a  father's  savings,  preparations,  and  enlistment  throuih  nil  the  force  of  his 
influence,  of  much  sure  help  from  "princes  and  people,"  may  well  add  inducement  and 
confidence.  But  these  are  indefinitely  exalted  now  hy  the  challenge  to  believe  that 
Heaven  itself  would  work  for  and  with  Solomon.  "  The  Lord  God  will  bo  with  thee ; 
he  will  not  fail  thee,  nor  forsake  thee,  until  thou  hast  finished." 
IV.  One  little  familiar  word,  amid  all  the  rest,  arrests  oub  ear  and  warms 

THE  whole  appeal  WITH  THE  TONE  OF  PERSONAL  INTEREST.      That  little    WOrd  is  the 

one  which  counts  so  often  for  so  much — the  word  "  my."  At  the  very  crisis  of  invoking, 
in  the  great  and  terrible  and  reverend  Name  of  "  the  Lord  Grod,"  the  very  highest 
possible  sanction,  David  does  not  forbear  to  link  his  own  name  with  it :  "  The  Lord  God, 
my  God,  will  be  with  thee/*  This  is  the  same  David  who  in  many  a  psalm  could  sing 
in  the  very  lowliest  strain  and  confession  of  the  demerit  of  man  and  his  poverty  and 
his  sinful  nature  and  sinful  practice.  Yet  the  two  things  are  not  inconsistent,  and 
David  does  not  do  wrong.  The  Qod  of  all,  of  all  worlds,  the  universal  God,  loves  to  bo 
sought,  to  be  clung  to,  to  be  appropriated  by  the  individual.  The  poorer,  the  lowlier, 
the  more  solitary,  so  that  his  child's  trust  corresponds  in  thoroughness  and  tenacity 
with  his  condition  of  want,  so  much  the  more  welcome  is  that  child,  and  not  a  woid 
shall  be  said  to  him  that  he  presumes.  Note,  then,  that  in  the  happy  expression  of 
David  to  his  son,"  My  God,"  we  have:  1.  TTie  creature^s  rightful  and  blessed  appropria* 
Hon  of  the  Creator ;  the  only  all-sufficient,  the  inexhaustible  and  ever-communicating, 
the  one  strong  support  of  everything  within  the  compass  of  his  dominions.  2.  The 
consecrated  diminutive  of  affection.  The  thing  or  the  person  I  believe  I  chiefly  love, 
that  thing  or  that  person  I  restlessly,  ceaselessly  long  to  call  mine^  my  own.  Nor 
is  there  a  simpler,  grander,  juster  use  of  this  little  word,  the  consecrate  word  of 
affection  the  world  all  over,  than  when  a  creature,  sinner,  penitent,  poor,  and  dependent, 
breathes  out  from  all  that  is  within  him  "  My  God."  3.  The  grateful  outcome  of  tried 
experience.  Age  gives  the  opportunity  of  valuable  experience  in  many  a  direction, 
but  in  none  so  much  as  in  those  relations  which  subsist  direct  between  man  and  his 
God.  There  is  nowhere  such  room  for  experience  to  have  its  way,  to  grow  and  to 
attain  results  of  surpassing  value.  After  the  experience  that  David  had  accumulated 
of  God,  and  of  what  a  God,  God  had  been  to  him,  he  rightly  desires  to  make  a  point 
of  this  to  his  son.  It  was  not  simply  the  sentiment  of  the  father's  Grod,  one  to  be  held  to 
by  the  son  ;  it  was  no  mere  dictate  of  family  pride,  or  of  hereditary  attachment  to  some 
lares  et penates.  No;  the  hard  but  telling  facts  of  experience  enable  David  to  pledge 
and  guarantee  "  his  "  God,  as  the  good  G^  and  the  wonderful  God,  and  the  safe  God 
for  his  son.  So  Paul  said  to  the  Philippians,  "  My  GKxi  shall  supply  all  your  need,**  in 
that  he,  above  any  living  Christian  of  that  time,  bad  suffered  peril,  need,  persecution 
(2  Cor.  xi.  23 — 31),  and  hsid  found  God,  the  *'  very  present  Help  and  Refuge  in  time  of 
trouble,"  whom  the  psalmist  a  thousand  years  before  had  tested.  All  distances  of  time, 
differences  of  dispensation,  contrasts  of  character  and  of  cireer,  sometimes  seem  to  meet 
in  one  place,  one  confession,  and  one  adoration.  Each  utters,  "  My  God,"  and  all  are 
found  to  have  contributed  the  proof  of  a  God  unchangeable — **  the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever."  Meantime  the  experience  and  testimony  of  each  helps  to  iiifluence  and 
instruct  and  strengthen  the  faith  and  love  of  some  nearest  by  nature  or  by  friendship. 
And  to  many  a  son  Solomon  has  come,  with  equal  truth  and  effect,  the  aged  father's 
confession  of  what,  through  a  long,  a  hard,  a  tried  life,  he  has  found  his  God  to  be, 
**  The  Lord  God,  my  God,  will  be  with  thee."  Happy  the  fathers  who  have  such 
experience,  and  happy  the  children  who  hear  their  counsel  in  time.  And  happy  for  the 
long-favoured  people  of  Israel,  " blest  beyond  compare "  already,  if  their  mw  young 
king  hear,  and  for  ever  heed,  the  advice  of  his  aged  and  richly  experienced  father,  and 
adopt  his  God  for  his  own  "  even  unto  death." 


424  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa    [gb.  zxvm.  1— 2L 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Yer.  9. — Early  piety,  A  father's  solicitude  for  Ms  son  is  too  often  oonfined  to  bis 
temix)ral  prosperity.  It  was  not  so  with  David.  The  ap^ed  monarch  -was  indf^  annons 
for  iSulomon's  stability  on  the  throne,  for  his  fitness  to  discharge  all  regal  duties,  for  the 
magnificence  of  his  public  works,  and  for  the  splendour  of  his  reign.  But  he  was  well 
enough  acquainted  with  human  nature  to  know  that  character  is  the  key  to  life.  His 
supreme  desire  was  that  liis  son  should  be  right  at  heart,  that  his  principles  should  be 
sound,  that  he  should  honour,  trust,  and  serve  his  Qod.  Hence  the  beautiful  language 
of  the  text. 

I.  The  nature  of  eablt  pirtt.  It  does  not  consist  merely  in  oatwnrd  associationi 
or  in  outward  obstrvances.  1.  The  basis  of  such  piety  is  knowledge.  *•  Know  thou  the 
God  of  thy  father."  Hence  the  importance  of  early  instruction  in  religious  truth. 
2.  The  substance  of  such  piety  is  a  cheerful  service  of  Grod.  The  practical  energies  of 
youth  neeil  to  be  employed  in  doin<;  the  Lord*s  will.  Willingness  and  cheerfulness 
should  characterize  all  work  done  for  God.  It  is  well  that  the  young  should  be  trained 
to  find  their  delight  in  the  practical  service  of  their  God  and  Saviour. 

II.  The  motives  to  early  piety.  1.  The  obligation  of  duty.  It  is  right  to 
••rememlMjr  thy  Cnator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth."  2.  The  assurance  of  the  I»rd's 
perfect  knowledge :  "  For  the  Loni  searcheth  all  hearts,  and  understandeth  all  the 
unaninations  of  the  thoughts."  3.  The  encouragement  of  promise :  "  If  thou  seek  him,  he 
will  be  found  of  thee."  There  are  many  similar  assurances  in  Scripture  fitted  to  encour- 
age the  young  to  seek  the  God  of  salvation.  4.  The  fearful  alternative  :  '*  If  thou  for- 
sake him,  he  will  cast  thee  off  for  ever." — ^T. 

Yer.  12. — The  pattern  of  the  Spirit.  We  sometimes  make  a  great  mistake  in 
nezlccting  to  remark  the  presence  and  operation  of  God  in  the  ordinary  and  secular 
affairs  of  life.  The  Hebrews  were  in  this  respect  in  advance  of  us ;  they  justly  attributed 
all  wise  and  good  works  to  that  Spirit  from  whom  all  wisdom  and  goodness  proceed. 
Thus  the  workers  in  the  construction  of  the  tabernacle  are  expressly  said  to  have 
received  from  the  Spirit  of  God  the  knowled^^e  and  skill  they  needed  to  fulfil  their 
undertaking,  and  in  the  passage  before  us  David  is  represented  as  having  received  by 
inspiration  from  Heaven  the  ^ans  upon  which  his  son  was  to  erect  the  temple  of 
Jehovah. 

I.  The  plan  of  every  great  akd  good  work  is  from  God.  That  is,  so  far  as 
it  is  good  and  great.  There  is  human  ignorance  and  human  folly  discernible  in  many 
noble  enterprises ;  but  the  impulse  of  piety  or  benevolence  to  which  they  owe  their 
being  is  from  above.  This  is  so  either,  as  probably  in  the  case  before  us,  from  a  direct 
ins[)iration,  or,  as  is  usually  the  case,  in  a  more  ordinary  manner.  The  inspiration  of 
the  Almighty  giveth  man  understanding;  and  every  high  and  holy  purpose,  every 
inspiriting  truth  and  influence,  should  be  traced  up  to  the  Giver  of  every  gpod  gift  and 
every  perfect  gift. 

II.  Such  plans  should  then  be  formed  with  reverence  and  wtth  pbayeb. 
If  we  would  have  the  Spirit's  guidance,  we  must  ourselves  be  "filled  with  the  Spirit; " 
we  must  seek  his  teaching  in  humility  and  docility  of  heart. 

HI.  Such  plans  should  be  carried  out  with  earnestness,  and  with  a 
LOWLY  dei'endence  UPON  THE  GRACE  AND  AID  OF  GoD.  In  these  rcspccts  the  kings 
of  l.srael,  who  were  concerned  in  the  erection  of  the  temple,  stand  before  us  as  a  bri^iht 
example.  It  is  only  as  all  our  works  are  "  begun,  continued,  and  ended"  in  God,  that 
we  can  justly  hope  for  blessing  and  prosperity. — T, 

Ver.  20. — *'  Be  strong,*^  Worship  and  work  together  make  up  the  expression,  the 
manifestation,  of  relijiiun.  Where  the  heart  has  true,  living  faith  in  Christ,  both  these 
will  be.  Worship  is  the  soul,  and  work  the  body,  of  the  religious  life.  And  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  the  Mediator  of  worship,  and  the  Inspiration  of  work.  David's  closing  admo- 
nitions to  his  son  and  successor  naturally  had  respect  to  the  high  station  he  was  about 
to  occupy,  and  the  great  service  he  was  about  to  render.  Thus  he  set  before  Solomon  a 
grand  conception  of  the  purpose  of  his  future  life,  and  glorious  encouragement  and 


CH.  xxviii.  1— 21.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  425 

assurances  to  induce  him  to  go  forward  with  courage  and  with  zeal.    In  these  words  we 
have^ 

I.  A  VIEW  OP  LiFB  A8  PRACTICAL  AND  STRENUOUS  SERVICE.  There  is  work  for  all 
true  and  loyal  hearts,  for  all  willing,  active  hands.  We  are  all,  as  Christians,  huilders 
in  the  house,  the  temple,  of  the  most  high  God.  The  edifice  of  our  life  and  happiness, 
our  influence  and  usefulness,  is  not  to  rise  by  chance  or  magic ;  it  is  to  be  reared  by  our 
own  labour  and  diligence,  our  own  perseverance  and  prayers.  What  dignity,  beauty, 
and  interest,  are  lent  to  our  life  by  the  conviction  that  we  are  building  in  the  Lord's 
house !  Whether  our  life  be  public  or  private,  whether  our  sphere  of  influence  be  home, 
or  profession,  or  business ;  whether  our  xelations  to  others  be  official  or  social, — we  may 
all  be  builders  under  God. 

II.  Admonition  and  enoouraoement  to  fulfil  life's  work.  As  David  spoke 
to  his  son  in  terms  of  fatherly  symi^athy  and  good  cheer,  so  let  the  elder  encourage  the 
younger  in  the  service  of  their  God  and  Saviour.  1.  Observe  the  disposition  which  is  to 
he  avoided,  "  Fear  not,  nor  be  dismayed."  Some  minds  are  naturally  timorous.  A 
nervous  temperament,  a  difiident  habit  of  mind,  depressing  circumstances,  may  account 
for  this.  Some  are  ever  in  dread  of  adversaries ;  others  are  more  apprehensive  of  their 
own  weakness  and  insufficiency.  Accordingly,  Scripture  contains  many  dissuasives  from 
timidity  and  faint-heartedness.  "  Fear  not,  for  I  am  with  thee ;  be  not  dismayed,  for  I 
am  thy  God."  2.  Observe  the  disposition  to  he  fostered.  **  Be  strong  *  and  of  good 
courage."  To  many  of  his  servants,  placed  in  critical  positions,  has  the  supreme  Lord 
addressed  such  admonitions.  "  Be  strong  and  of  a  good  courage,"  Jehovah  had  said  to 
Joshua  and  to  Israel,  in  the  prospect  of  their  entering  upon  Canaan  as  their  inheritance. 
A  courageous  heart  can  do  wonders;  it  can  ever  bear  up  a  feeble  body,  contend  with 
adverse  circumstances,  defy  malignant  opposition.  We  are  not  taught  to  place  confidence 
in  ourselves,  but  we  are  taught  not  to  shrink  from  duty  because  of  our  felt  inadequacy. 
Strength  comes  with  a  brave  heart,  a  fixed  resolution,  a  calm  confidence  in  Divine  grace 
and  aid.  3.  Observe  the  admonition  to  action,  "Do  it."  David  had  prepared  for  the 
building  of  the  temple ;  it  was  for  his  son  to  carry  out  the  plans  which  had  been  made. 
It  is  for  us  all,  as  followers  of  Christ,  not  to  dream  or  to  purpose,  but  to  act.  We  are 
gifted  with  active  powers,  and  are  called  to  an  active  life.  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand 
findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might." 

III.  Fromlses  to  animate  the  true-hearted  worker.  Mere  admonition  and 
advice  from  fellow-men  is  insufficient.  The  question  of  practical  moment  for  us,  in  our 
endeavours  to  serve,  is  this — Is  there  help  from  above  ?  We  have  the  answer  in  the 
text.  1.  Divine  presence  and  aid  are  assured.  '*  The  Lord  Qod  will  be  with  thee."  How 
far  better  than  the  presence  and  counsel  even  of  a  faithful  earthly  friend,  a  judicious 
earthly  father  I  "  Vain  is  the  help  of  man."  But  "  if  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be 
against  us  ? "  2.  The  same  Gbd  who  has  been  the  dwelling-place  of  his  people  in  all 
generations,  is  our  God.  It  is  very  significant  that  David  says,  '*  Even  my  QodL," 
The  memory  of  former  interpositions,  of  the  great  works  which  God  did  in  the  days  of 
our  fathers,  should  hearten  and  cheer  and  comfort  us.  He  is  neither  an  unknown  nor 
an  untried  God.  3.  He  will  not  fail  or  forsake  his  people  until  their  work  is  finished. 
Other  helpers  may  fail  us,  may  be  summoned  from  earth,  or  may  prove  unfaithful. 
We  may  fear  lest  God  himself  should  de]>art  from  ns.  But  he  is  faithful  to  all  his 
promises.  *'  The  mountains  may  depart,"  etc.  Solomon  enjoyed  the  countenance, 
protection,  and  guidance  of  God  until  the  temple  was  completed.  God  only  knows 
what  our  life-work  is  to  be ;  but  we  may  all  be  assured  that,  if  he  has  entrusted  to  us 
any  service,  he  will  not  withdraw  from  us,  he  will  not  abandon  our  undertaking,  until 
his  purpose  is  fulfilled,  until  our  work  is  done. 

Practical  lessons.  1.  Let  every  hearer  of  the  gospel  obey  the  call,  and  enter 
without  delay  upon  the  Lord's  work.  2.  Let  God's  servants  who  are  dismayed  by 
difficulties  and  a  sense  of  insufficiency  betake  themselves  to  the  Word  of  God  and  to 
prayer. — T. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Lessons  from  the  end.  As  the  slain  warrior  in  battle,  finding  his 
/strength  fast  ebbing  away,  gathers  up  his  remaining  powers  and  deals  one  last  mighty 
blow  against  some  prominent  enemy,  so  David,  the  soldier  of  the  Lord,  perceiving  that 
his  end  was  near,  summoned  aH  the  force  that  was  left  to  him  to  strike  one  more  good 


426  THE  FIfiST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHBOKICLE&   [ch.  zxtiix.  1— SL 


•tioka  in  Uie  etnae  of  the  God  he  had  eenred  tad  of  the  people  whom  be  loved.    From 
IhU  leeDe  at  the  end  we  learn  many  lessonB. 

L  That  ▲  vobu  ur  u  gbowhso  bt  ohi  sdtuicr  kftoit  at  ths  IiAst.  Thna 
did  Hoies  crown  bit  illustrioni  career  (Deut.  zxxL — xxxiiL).  Thua  did  Joshua  worthily 
oloeehit  honourable  ooune  (Joeh.  xziii.^  xxir.).  So,  indeed,  we  may  speak  of  oar  han 
himielf ;  fo  by  his  panion  and  bis  death  he  wrought  for  the  haman  raoe  a  Car  gnater 
work  than  eren  hs  hid  aooomplished  by  all  the  woi^  and  works  of  his  life-ministiy.  It 
nay  well  be  onr  ambition  to  act  in  this  spirit,  if  we  do  not  adopt  this  particular  r^tfMW^, 
«•  go  much  the  more  as  ye  see  the  day  approschiog  "  (Heb.  x.  25). 

IL  That  ▲  tbub  aitd  biobtbous  max  will  XAnnsTLT  ooncebh'  himself  as  io 
THAT  WHICH  ooMSS  AFTEB  iiDC.  David  was  most  solicitous  to  leave  nothing  undons 
that  he  could  do  to  secure  the  happiness  and  well-being  of  Ivael  after  his  death ;  there- 
fore he  convened  this  great  assembly  and  gave  this  solemn  charge.  In  the  same  spirit  hs 
adjured  them  to  do  the  one  right  things  in  order  that,  in  their  turn,  thej  might  **  leave 
the  good  land  for  an  inheritance  for  their  children,**  etc.  (ver.  8).  The  spirit  of 
indifference  respecting  the  days  that  will  succeed  our  own  is  one  which  the  discipl«  of 
Jesus  Christ  should  be  ashamed  to  cherish.  It  is  {^rofoundlir  uochristiaD ;  it  is  ss  &r 
as  it  can  be  from  the  spirit  of  him  who  died  that,  after  and  through  his  dsalh,  then 
might  be  righteousness,  joy,  life,  upon  the  earth. 

IIL  That  authobitt  and  affbgtion  oo  wsll  tooetbsb.  ''Hear  ms^  my 
brethren  and  my  people  **  (ver.  2).  The  king  addresses  his  people  as  his  brethreot ;  it  is 
in  the  fulness  of  his  heart  that  he  thus  spesks.  His  soul  is  filled  with  an  earnest  and 
loving  regard  for  them,  and  for  the  nation  they  represent ;  hence  Uie  affeotioiiate  torn 
which  he  employs.  It  is  well  for  all  who  are  in  authority  to  assure  those  whom  they 
direct  that  thev  "  have  them  in  their  heart  **  as  well  as  in  their  hand  ;  that  they  love 
them  as  "  brethren  **  while  they  rule  over  them  as  their  **  people.** 

IV.  That  rr  u  a  obbat  thdvo  to  be  williho  to  bbbvb  ths  Lobd.  **  I  had  it 
in  my  heart  to  build  an  house  of  rest,**  eta  (ver.  2).  ^  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Dtoivid 
•  •  .  thou  didst  well  that  it  was  in  thine  heart  *  (1  Kings  viiL  18).  When  a  man 
purposes,  with  pure  and  complete  int^rity  of  soul,  to  do  anything  for  the  cause  of 
Christ — to  give  largely,  or  to  go  far  afield,  or  to  work  devotedly  at  home,  or  to  spare 
some  loved  one,  and  wlien  the  providence  of  God  interposes  to  prevent,  is  it  not  written 
in  the  record  which  is  on  high,  *'  Thou  didst  well  that  it  was  in  thine  heart  *'  ? 

y.  That  it  is  a  great  thing  to  do  what  we  can  when  our  strongest  wishes 
ABB  denied.  Perhaps  it  spoke  most  for  the  genuine  piety  of  David  that,  when  God 
said  to  him,  '*  Thou  shalt  not  build  an  house  for  my  Name,"  etc  (ver.  3),  he  did  not 
oease  to  "  make  ready  for  the  building  "  (ver.  2),  but  continued  to  the  end  to  store  up 
all  manner  of  precious  things,  that  his  son  might  have  his  labour  lightened  and  might 
do  his  work  with  more  completeness.  So  far  from  sulkily  retiring  because  he  could 
not  have  the  very  thing  which  he  desired,  David  did  the  thing  that  he  was  per- 
mitted to  do— the  laborious  but  comparatively  unhonoured  work  of  preparation — cheer- 
fully leaving  the  glory  of  building  to  one  that  should  succeed  him.  Uow  many  are 
there  who  Uve  in  this  later  and  brighter  dispensation  who  might  learn  a  lesson  of 
cheerful  continuance  in  well-doing  from  this  Hebrew  king  I 

VI.  That  much  in  human  life  is  decided  bt  the  electing  oracb  of  God. 
(Vers.  4 — 7.)  He  who  chose  the  tribe,  the  family,  the  individual  man,  for  the  sovereignty 
of  iHrael,  now  chooses  individual  souls  to  be  kings  among  men.  By  the  mental  and 
spiritual  endowments  he  is  pleased  to  bestow,  by  the  teaching  and  training  he  is 
pleased  to  grant,  by  the  privileges  and  openings  he  is  pleased  to  afibrd,  he  marks  out 
one  rather  than  another  for  office,  influence,  power.  He  still  '*  chooses  our  inheritance 
for  us  "  (Ps.  xlvii.  4).  Let  the  fact  that  he  docs  so  condemn  pride,  ingratituds,  and 
envy. 

VII.  That  much  in  human  life  is  left  to  our  decision.  "  ffhe  he  eonstani^^ 
etc.  (Ver.  7.)  "  Now  therefore  .  .  .  keep  and  seek  for  all  the  commandments  ,  .  . 
that  ye  may  possess,"  etc.  (ver.  8).  God  proposes  and  arranges,  but  not  without  regaurd 
to  our  response  to  bis  invitation,  our  obedience  to  his  commandments.  Nothing  in  his 
ordering  interferes  with  the  conditions  he  has  imposed.    We  reap  that  which  we  sow. — GL 

Vers.  9«  10.— il  jparental  charge :  a  sermon  to  the  young.    The  scene  is  one  of  ffo- 


v 


OH.  XXVIII.  1—21.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  427 

found  interest,  for  it  is  one  of  deep  and  strong  emotion.  A  father  who  feels  that  his 
end  is  near  is  delivering  an  earnest  charge  to  his  son,  who  has,  as  he  hopes,  a  brilliant 
course  before  him.  There  is  everything  to  add  solemnity  and  pathos  to  the  scene. 
The  aged  king  excited  to  one  last  painful  effort,  the  assembled  princes  of  Israel,  the 
"young  and  tender"  Solomon  (ch.  xxii.  5)  kneeling  before  his  father,  the  outpouring 
of  royal  and  parental  tenderness  and  solicitude, — everything  combines  to  make  the 
occasion  one  of  greatest  interest.  And  what  can  be  more  impressive  than  the  last 
injunction  given  by  a  departing  father  to  the  son  who  is  his  destined  heir :  who  will,  if 
any  one  does,  carry  on  his  work  when  he  himself  is  removed  ?  David's  supreme  desire 
is  that  Solomon  shall  be  a  faithful  servant  of  God,  and  do  the  special  work  which 
awaits  his  care.     We  are  invited  to  consider— 

I.  In  what  true  piety  consists.  It  embraces  two  things.  1.  A  practical  know- 
ledge of  God.  "  Thou,  Solomon  my  son,  know  thou  the  G^,"  etc.  And  this  know- 
ledge of  God  includes  (1)  an  intelligent  understanding  of  his  nature  and  his  attitude 
toward  the  children  of  men.  We  must  have  some  mental  apprehension  of  him ;  we 
must  understand  that  he  is  a  holy,  pure,  ever-present,  all-observant  Spirit ;  claiming 
our  reverence,  love,  obedience,  and  submission ;  condemning  our  ingratitude,  our 
departure  from  himself,  our  sin ;  ready  to  receive,  forgive,  restore  all  who  return  to 
him  in  penitence  and  faith.  (2)  A  direct,  practical  acquaintance  with  him.  Such 
acquaintance  as  is  gained  by  coming  to  him  in  personal  approach ;  by  contact  of  our 
spirit  with  his  Spirit ;  by  the  prayer,  the  pleading,  the  surrender,  which  is  not  formal  but 
spiritual — ^not  "  after  the  flesh,"  but  from  the  soul ;  for  "  the  Lord  searcheth  all  hearts," 
etc.  2.  Continuous  spiritual  service.  '*  Servo  him  with  a  perfect  heart  and  a  willing 
mind."  Having  found  his  favour  and  entered  into  his  kingdom,  we  must  live  con- 
tinuously in  his  service.  We  must  render  this  "  with  a  gladsome  mind,"  not  con- 
strainedly and  as  of  necessity,  not  hypocritically,  not  servilely,  but  cheerfully  and 
heartily — the  obedience  of  love,  of  those  who  are  satisfied  if  he  is  pleased.  This  our 
service  is  (1)  to  be  lifelong ;  (2)  to  cover  all  the  particulars  of  our  life,  extending  to  all 
our  human  relationships  and  all  our  various  spheres  of  activity. 

II.  What  powerful  inducements  wb  have  to  devote  oubselyes  at  oncb  to 
God.  These  are  four  in  number.  1.  Strong  filial  considerations  urge  us  to  do  so. 
David  pleaded  with  Solomon  to  "  know  the  God  of  his  father."  The  young  prince 
must  have  felt  that  if  he  gave  his  life  to  the  service  of  God,  he  would  be  (1)  delighting 
the  heart  of  his  beloved  father,  and  (2)  treading  closely  in  his  honoured  parent's  foot- 
steps ;  in  both  ways  acting  worthily  and  '*  as  bscame  his  father's  son."  The  same  or 
similar  considerations  should  be  potent  and  prevalent  with  ourselves,  fi.  By  so  doing 
we  may  hope  to  accomplish  great  things.  Solomon  had  the  prospect  of  "  building  a 
house  for  the  sanctuary."  We  may  not  anticipate  such  an  achievement,  but  we  may 
hope  to  do  good  and  even  great  things  for  our  God  and  our  race,  if  we  devote  our  whole 
powers  from  the  beginning  to  the  service  of  Christ.  We  may  (1)  influence,  during  a 
long  course,  many  hundreds  or  even  thousands  of  souls  for  good ;  (2)  help  many  a  g^)d 
and  beneficent  work ;  (3)  render  invaluable  aid  to  some  one  useful  cause  or  Church.  8, 
Honest  and  persevering  effort  to  find  his  favour  is  certain  to  be  rewarded  with  suc- 
cess. "  If  thou  seek  him,  he  will  be  found  of  thee"  (see  Matt.  vii.  7 — 11).  4.  Neg- 
lected opportunity  has  a  disastrous  end.  "  If  thou  forsake  him,  he  will  cast  thee  oflf 
for  ever."  Those  who  in  youth  are  conscious  of  the  heavenly  call,  but  who  give  not 
heed  to  the  voice  Divine  and  to  parental  earnestness,  but  yield  to  the  lower  and  ignobler 
impulses,  enter  on  a  course  of  folly  and  sin,  which  too  often  runs  on  to  an  evil  end, 
to  a  life  without  nobility  and  without  achievement,  to  a  death  without  hope,  to  a 
future  without  the  joy  of  home. — C. 

Vers.  11 — ^21. — The  way  to  succeed  in  a  great  work.  David's  heart  was  set  on  his 
son's  successful  discharge  of  the  high  mission  to  which  God  had  called  him.  That 
nothing  should  be  left  undone,  so  far  as  he  himself  was  concerned,  he  gave  this 
inspiriting  charge.  It  will  suggest  to  us  the  constant  condition  of  successful  work  in  the 
kingdom  of  Christ. 

I.  Carbtino  out  Divine  directions.  David  formally  entrusted  to  his  son  "  the 
pattern  of  all  that  he  had  by  the  Spirit  "(ver.  12) — *'  all  that  the  Lord  made  him  under- 
stand," etc.  (ver.  19);  particulars  of  the  temple  furniture,  which  was  to  be  made  after 


i2S  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,  [oh.  xxvm.  1— 21, 


the  mind  and  according  to  the  will  of  him  who  was  to  be  worslupped  in  its  **  most  holy 
place."  When  we  enter  upon  any  great  enterprise  for  God,  whether  we  **  arise  and 
build,"  or  whether  we  go  forth  and  preach,  or  whether  we  organize  and  establish,  we 
must  seek  to  act  according  to  Divine  instructions.  But  we  must  not  now  look  for 
pattetms,  but  for  principles.  In  our  New  Testament  we  have  the  broad  principles  of  all 
holy  action,  of  all  Christian  association,  of  all  missionary  enterprise.  These  are  not 
far  from  sight,  aud  if  we  honestly  and  earnestly  seek  them,  we  shall  find  them  and  maj 
apply  them. 

II.  GAiNiNa  Divine  help.  *'  The  Lord  God  will  be  with  thee  ...  he  will  not  fail 
thee,  nor  forsake  thee  "  (ver.  20).  If  we  proceed  in  a  devoted  and  prayerful  spirit,  we 
may  claim  these  words  as  applicable  to  ourselves.  We  want,  and  can  secure  :  1.  The 
inspiration  which  will  prompt  us  to  faithful  work.  2.  The  effectuating  power  which 
will  make  our  work  succeed  and  endure.  3.  The  upholding  grace  which  will  carry  ua 
through  all  difficulties  to  the  end. 

III.  Securing  human  go-operation.  Solomon  would  receive  (1)  help  in  material 
from  the  rich  stores  of  his  father  (vers.  13 — 18) ;  (2)  the  sympathy  and  assistance  of 
(a)  priests  and  Levites,  (b)  skilful  workmen,  (c)  the  people  generally,  from  the  prince  to 
the  peasant  (ver.  21).  We  must  not  aspire  to  do  God's  work  alone ;  it  is  in  every  way 
better  that  we  should  share  the  privilege  and  the  responsibility  with  others.  It  is  so  for 
our  own  sake,  for  theirs,  and  also  for  the  sake  of  the  more  perfect  accomplishment  of  the 
work  itself.  We  may  ask  and  accept  aid  in  material  and  in  men ;  from  those  whose 
special  function  it  is  to  render  service  in  sacred  things  ("  priests  and  Levites  "},  and 
those  who  are  not  thus  professionally  obligated ;  from  those  who  are  *'  skilful  "  as  well 
as  "  willing  "  (ver.  20),  and  from  those  who  are  willing  but  have  skill  to  acquire,  who 
will  gain  something  of  skilfulness  in  Christian  work  by  taking  a  humble  part  in  the 
work  in  hand ;  from  those  who  are  "  princes  "  in  social  station  and  religious  reputation^ 
and  from  those  who  only  belong  to  the  "  common  people ; "  from  cUl  who  are  willing^ 
and  who  will  act,  and  thus  learn  to  act  more  perfectly. 

IV.  Maintaining  our  spiritual  strength.     **  Be  strong  and  of  good  courage  *• 

fver.  20).  We  want  the  strength  which  accompanies  courage.  Timidity  is  weak ; 
earlessness  is  strong.  And  courage  is  not  merely  a  matter  of  strong  nerves ;  when  of 
the  noblest  order,  it  is  the  outcome  of  spiritual  excellency ;  it  is  the  fruit  of  faith  in 
God.  "  Be  strong  and  of  good  courage  means  this :  maintain  your  integrity  before 
God  ;  abide  in  Jesus  Christ,  that  his  Spirit  may  abide  in  you  (John  xv.  4) ;  nourish  the 
sustaining  assurance  that  God  is  with  you,  to  befriend  and  inspire  you ;  go  forth  and 
h(»ld  on  in  the  strength  of  the  Strong  and  in  the  wisdom  of  the  Wise,  and  you  will  not 
fail  nor  be  discouraged.  "  They  that  wait  on  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength,"  etc. 
(Isa.  xl.  31).— C. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — David's  address  to  the  princes  of  his  kingdom.  In  the  last  two  chapters 
we  have  David's  final  words  to  the  princes  of  the  people  and  to  his  son  Solomon.  In  order 
to  pass  the  kingdom  over  to  his  son  and  to  secure  the  succession,  he  summoned  the 
princes,  and  solemnly,  in  the  presence  of  them  all,  apix)inted  Solomon  his  successor. 
These  princes  included  the  princes  of  the  tribes  enumerated  in  ch.  xxvii.  16 — 22  ;  the 
princes  of  the  divisions  which  served  the  king  (ch.  xxvii.  1 — 15) ;  the  princes  of  thousands 
and  hundreds  ;  the  chiefs  and  captains  of  the  twelve  army  corps  (ch.  xxvii.  1) ;  the  princes 
of  the  domains  and  possessions  of  the  king  (ch.  xxvii.  25— -31).  The  king  "stood 
up  uiK)n  his  feet"  to  address  this  assembly.  Previously,  on  account  of  age  and  feeble* 
jQcss,  he  had  sat  in  bed.  The  first  part  of  David's  address  we  have  had  previously  (ch, 
xxii.  7 — 13).  In  the  fourth  verse  he  states  how  his  election  to  be  king  was  of  God  who 
had  chosen  Judah  to  be  ruler,  and  that  in  the  same  way  God  had  chosen  Solomon  from 
among  his  sons  to  be  heir  to  the  kingdom,  and  had  committed  to  him  the  building  of 
the  temple,  and  concludes  it  by  exhorting  the  whole  assembly  to  continue  faithfuf  to 
God.  Observe,  the  blessings  of  the  throne  and  kingdom  are  linked  to  an  inseparable 
condition  (ver.  7) — that  Solomon  be  '*  constant  to  do  my  commandments  and  my  judg- 
ments." Thus  temporal  prosperity  is  inseparably  connected  with  faithfulness  to  God's 
iruth.  Without  this  neither  king  nor  kinj:dom,  man  nor  his  work,  can  prosper  in 
the  true  sense  of  the  word.  In  this  consists  real  "  estahlishmenty  What  the  founda- 
tion ifl  to  a  house  God*8  truth  is  to  a  king's  throne,  and  to  a  man's  soul  and  all 


cd.  X3>ra.  1— 21.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES:  420 

his  ways.  David  goes  into  particulars  as  to  Low  this  is  to  be  done.  **  Keep  and  seek 
for  all  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  your  God."  The  soul  must  hold  fast  to  the 
truth,  must  treasure  it  up  within  the  inmost  recesses  of  its  being.  This  is  to  keep  the 
truth.  And  it  must  **8eek  for"  it — looking  out  for  it  in  everything  as  for  special 
treasure,  setting  the  heart  on  it  and  gath(  ring  it  up  for  use.  The  degree  and  earnest- 
ness  with  which  we  seek  for  it  will  depend  upon  the  way  in  which  we  "  kerp  "  what  wd 
have  gathered.  "  To  him  that  hath  shall  more  be  given,"  is  God's  universal  law  in 
nature  and  in  grace.  Keeping  is  digestion,  by  which  the  appetite  is  stimulated  to 
"  seek."  Mark,  also,  it  is  not  seeking  some  truths  or  some  favourite  truths;  it  is**  all 
the  commandments.*'  It  is  whole-hearted  ness  to  the  whole  truth.  Pet  doctrines 
and  pet  passages  make  us  half-Christians — narrow,  one-sided,  harsh,  and  sectarian. 
It  is  the  heart's  preparedness  for  every  message  from  God  that  makes  a  whole 
Christian — such  a  one  as  God  would  have  us  all  to  be.  Mark  the  two  results.  "  That 
ye  may  possess  this  good  land.*'  It  was  one  thing  for  an  Israelite  to  be  in  the 
land ;  it  was  quite  another  to  possess  it.  It  is  one  thing  to  be  in  Christ ;  it  is  quite 
another  to  possess  so  as  to  make  our  very  own  all  the  treasures  of  grace  and  truth  that 
are  in  Christ.  Some  Christians,  like  some  Israelites,  are  all  their  lives  in  the  land  with- 
out possessing  a  foot.  Have  you  life  in  Christ?  '* Lay  hold  on  eternal  life."  Are  you 
one  of  God's  elect?  "Make  your  calling  and  election  sure,'*  Have  you  that  Divine 
faith  that  will  carry  you  into  the  kingdom?  "  Add  to  your  faith,"  so  that  you  may 
have  an  "  a^iiwrfani  entrance  into  the  kingdom."  This  is  to  ^* possess  the  land."  It 
was  Joshua's  continued  exhortation  to  Israel ;  it  has  need  to  be  ours  too.  Look  at 
the  second  result :  "  And  leave  it  for  an  inheritance  for  your  children  after  you  forever." 
Mark,  it  is  only  those  who  possess  the  good  land  who  shall  *'  leave  it  for  an  inheritance*' 
It  is  your  half-<Jhristians,  your  narrow-souled,  crooked,  unwise  Christians,  who  leave  no 
spiritual  influences  behind.  Their  children  get  soured  by  the  caricature  of  religion  they 
see  in  their  parents.  When  parental  restraint  is  over,  there  are  no  deep  spiritual  prin- 
ciples laid  in  the  soul  in  early  life,  and  they  cast  off  what  they  feel  has  been  a  yoke. 
As  a  rule^  most  parents  have  to  blame  themselves  for  what  they  mourn  over  in  their 
children. — W. 

Vers.  9,  10,  20,  21. — David's  charge  to  Solomon,  From  the  princes  of  the  congrega- 
tion David  turns  to  Solomon  his  son.  Every  line  is  full  of  instruction.  "  Know  thou  the 
God  of  thy  father."  We  may  conclude  Solomon  already  knew  something,  and  perhaps 
much,  of  God.  But  this  refers  to  a  further  and  deeper  knowledge  of  him,  as  his  father 
David  had  ex|)erienced.  It  is  this  deeper  knowledge  of  God  that  is  spoken  of  in  the  New 
Testament.  St.  Paul,  though  he  knew  Christ  well,  still  says,  "  That  I  may  know  him." 
However  much  we  know  there  is  always  more  to  he  known.  It  is  this  knowledge  of 
him  that  our  Lord  refers  to  when  he  says  (John  vii.  17),  "  If  any  man  will  do  his  will, 
he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine."  There  is  a  knowledge  of  Christ  as  the  Saviour  from 
sin ;  there  is  a  still  further  knowledge  which  springs  from  obedience  in  all  things  to  his 
will.  But  David  continues,  "  And  serve  him  with  a  perfect  heart  and  a  willing  mind." 
Mark  here,  service  and  the  character  of  it  depend  on  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  this 
knowledge  a  deepening  one.  This  is  ever  the  Divine  order.  All  the  graces  of  the 
Christian  character  act  and  react  on  each  other.  True  knowledge  ever  l^gets  service, 
and  faithful  service  deepens  real  knowledge.  But  there  are  always  two  conditions 
attached  to  real  knowledge  and  true  service,  viz.  "A  perfect  heart  and  a  willing  mind." 
A  perfect,  or  as  the  word  means,  an  "  undivided  "  heart,  is  one  that  is  whole-hearted. 
Not  "a  heart  within  a  heart"  which  God  hates.  Not  a  heart  that  will  follow  and 
serve  the  Lord  when  it  is  convenient  but  not  when  it  is  inconvenient.  Not  "  in  season  '* 
only,  but  also  "om<  of  season."  Next  to  this  is  a  *' willing  mind,"  or  a  mind  that 
desires  only  that  which  will  please  God.  A  mind  that  will  say  always  and  in  everything, 
**  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  A  heart  devoted  and  a  will  given  up — this  is 
what  David  means,  and  this  is  what  God  asks  for.  David  enforces  this  by  the  state- 
ment of  God's  omniscience.  Solomon  might  deceive  men  by  having  the  outer  life  fair, 
while  inwardly  the  other  might  be  lacking,  but  he  could  not  deceive  God;  and  to  him 
Solomon  and  every  man  will  have  eventually  to  render  account.  David  further  enforces 
these  words  by  a  solemn  warning :  **  If  thou  seek  him,  he  will  be  found  of  thee ;  but  if 
thou  forsake  him,  he  will  cast  thee  off  for  ever.     Take  heed  now."    It  reminds  us  of 


430  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CEmOOTCLEa    [ch.  xrvm  1-a 


Paul's  solemn  words  to  Timothy  :  **  Take  heed  to  thyself,  and  to  the  doctrine ;  oontiniM 
in  them :  for  in  so  doing  thou  shalt  both  save  thyself,  and  them  that  hear  thee."    Tiw 
toul  must  be  watched  and  kt*pt,  and  then  the  doctrine  will  be  sound.     If  we  atek 
the  Lord  he  will  ever  be  found ;  bat  if  we  turn  our  backs  on  him,  then  we  slull 
experience  that  spiritual  darkness  and  misery  within  that  will   be  praetieally^  thowh 
to  one  saved  in  the  Loid  may  never  be  judicially,  a  casting  off  from  Grod.     Thongb  a 
true  believer  may  never  fall  from  Ood^  ho  may  fall  from  the  grace  of  God ;  and  thia 
though  not  judicial,  is  yet  practical  and  experimental  exclusion  from  Grod.    Darid 
enjoins  Solomon  to  *'  take  heed  **  because  he  is  **  cho$en,"      It  is  the  dignity  conferred 
that  demands  the  responsibility  find  $;ives  the  power  to  rule.     Is  it  not  so  with  men  pot 
into  high  places  over  our  land?    Before  men  get  into  office,  what  do  they  not  say? 
and  how  do  they  not  act?    But  when  they  are  in  office  the  dignity  crntrols  and 
directs,  and  gives  wisdom  and  judgment.    So  is  it  in  the  Divine  life.     God's  giaoe 
chooses  a  man,  makes  him  one  of  his  children,  puts  upon  him  the  highest  dignity  aad 
thus  he  possesses  a  motive  power  for  holiness  which  nothing  else  can  give  him«  David's 
final  wonls  to  Solomon  at  the  close  of  this  chapter  are  equally  solemn  and  susgestivc: 
"  Be  strong  and  of  good  courage,  and  do  it :  fear  not,  nor  be  dismayed."    What  a  string 
of  holy  exhortations!    On  what  are  they  built?     On  Ood's  presence  with  his  people* 
"  for  the  Lord  Gud,  even  my  God,  will  be  with  thee ;  he  will  not  fail  thee,  nor  fornks 
thee,  until  thou  hast  finished  all  the  work  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord." 
God*s  presence  is  the  believer's  joy ;  it  is  also  his  strength  and  power  for  work.    Tbs 
expression  *'  my  God  "  reminds  us  again  of  Paul :  "  My  Gtxi  shall  supply  all  your  need." 
It  was  the  personal  and  experimental  acquaintance  with  Grod's  unchan^ng  love  and 
faithfulness,  and  that  alone,  which  gave  to  David  and  Paul  such  confidenoe  and  mads 
them  speak  thus.    But  Solomon  might  have  said,  as  many  others  often  say,  '*  These  an 
precious  promises  and  encouragements,  and  I  am  but  *  young  and  tender/  and  the  week 
IS  so  great;  how  shall  I  get  the  means,  and  who  will  help  me,  and  how  shall  I  know  they 
will  he  ready  and  willing  ?  **    These  and  a  thousand  other  questions  rise  up  in  the  sonl 
when  God  sets  a  clear  path  before  us,  or  a  plain  duty,    llow  often  we  stand,  we  hesirate  I 
We  are  already  taking  one  step  back.    Gkxi  comes  in  again  to  strengthen  our  faltering 
faith.     "  The  priests  and  Levites  shall  be  with  thee,  .  .  .  and  there  shall  be  with  ihee 
every  willing  and  skilful  man,  .  .  .  the  princes  and  all  the  people  will  be  wholly  at  thy 
commandment."     What  a  promise — **  All  things  are  yours  "1     So  it  is  always.     Having 
the  Lord  with  us,  we  shall  have  everything  else :  "  life  and  death,  things  present  and 
things  to  come,"  yea,  "a/Z  things  are  our«."    How  completely  every  question  of  the  soul 
is  met  from  the  unchanging  faithfulness  and  love  of  our  God  I — W. 

Vers.  11 — 19. — David's  transfer  of  the  patterns  to  Solomon,     After  the  solemn 
charge  to  the  congregation  and  to  Solomon,  David  handed  over  to  Solomon  the  patterns 
of  the  temple,  the  enumeration  beginning  from  outside  to  inside,  and  from  thence  to  the 
courts  and  buildin^^s  and  the  vessels,  and  they  include  the  minutest  details  of  all  per- 
taining to  it.    Let  us  mark  the  spiritual  truths  connected  with  this  portion  of  God*s 
Word,  and  they  are  many.   We  refer  only  to  a  few.    First,  as  to  the  patterns  themselves. 
How  did  David  get  them?     They  came  from  "the  Lord  "(see  ver.  19).    Secondly, 
they  came  by  a  "  writing."    Thirdly,  they  came  "  through  the  Spirit,"  or  by  Divine 
inspiration.     Fourthly,  they  came  through  God's  "  hand  upon  him."    These  are  all 
important  points  in  the  narrative.    This  great  temple  of  old  was  a  type  of  the  great 
spiritual  temple  now — the  kinirdom  of  God  in  this  world.    In  a  secondary  sense  it  may 
he  taken  as  the  believer  himself:  "  Ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living  Goii."     Mark,  Uien, 
first,  everything  of  a  Divine  character  comes  from  the  Lord  himself.     The  Lord  himself 
is  the  Architect  of  his  own  house,  whether  it  bo  in  a  man's  soul  or  the  Church  of  Christ 
Secondly,  the  Divine  pattern  of  everything  spiritual  comes  through  the  "  writing,"  the 
Word  of  God  written.     Thirdly,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Divine  Communicator  of  this 
Word.    He  speaks  through  that  Word,  which  is  the  breath  of  God.     And,  lastly,  it  is 
through  the  ^^hand*'  of  the  Lord  laid  upon  us  that  the  Word  becomes  effectual  and 
operative.    As  David  handed  the  patterns  to  Solomon,  so  should  these  be  the  patterns 
handed  down  now,  through  the  Word  and  the  Spirit,  and  applied  with  power  by  the 
"hand  "  of  the  Lord.   Solomon  could  not  lay  a  single  stone,  nor  make  a  single  beam,  nor 
deviate  one  hair's  breadth  from  this  pattern  thus  handed  to  him.    No  mora  may  we. 


CH.  xxviii.  1— 21.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  481 


There  is  one  truth  more  in  this  narrative.  It  is  a  very  precious  one.  It  is  brought  before 
us  in  the  fourteenth  verse,  and  again  in  ch.  xxix.  2 — 5.  *'  Grold  for  things  of  gold,  and  silver 
for  things  to  be  made  of  silver,  brass  for  things  of  brass,  iron  for  things  of  iron,  and  wood 
for  things  of  wood."  In  other  words,  whatever  golden  things  were  needed,  David  had 
the  gold  provided  for  them ;  or  whatever  things  of  silver,  brass,  iron,  or  wood,  David 
had  the  silver,  brass,  iron,  and  wood  ready  for  them.  It  is  so  still  in  the  Church  of 
Christ  as  well  as  in  the  individual  Christian's  own  history.  What  is  our  need  ?  Do 
we  occupy  a  golden  position,  or  one  of  iron  or  wood  f  In  Christ,  the  true  David,  there 
is  the  fulness  to  meet  it.  There  is  all  we  need  for  every  position,  every  duty,  every  want, 
every  hour  of  need.  I'hese  needs  may  be  great  or  small,  lofty  or  lowly,  corresponding 
to  the  "  gold  "  or  the  "  wood  ; "  but  he  has  exactly  what  is  suited  to  meet  the  emer- 
gency or  the  need,  whatever  it  may  be :  "  My  God  shall  supply  all  your  need  out  of 
his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus."  How  truly  the  teaching  of  the  New  Testament  is 
contained  in  the  Old ! — W, 

Ver.  2. — Old  men^s  testimony.  The  emphatic  sentence,  '*  Then  David  the  king  stood 
up  upon  his  feet,''  brings  before  us  a  vivid  picture  of  the  aged  and  infirm  king  making 
a  great  effort,  gathering  up  all  his  strength,  and  once  again  standing  up  that  he  might 
render  a  last  testimony  for  Jehovah.  "Towards  the  end  of  David's  life,  he  was 
obliged  to  keep  to  his  chamber,  and  almost  to  his  bed.  In  those  later  and  quiet  days 
he  seems  to  have  reviewed  his  long  and  checkered  career,  and  his  last  song  embodies 
the  thoughts  with  which  he  regarded  it.  That  last  song  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  1 — 7)  is  full  of 
mingled  regret  and  hope  ;  over  the  scenes  of  his  shame  he  lingers  for  a  moment  sadly, 
but  from  them  he  turns  to  look  up  to  the  faithful  Ood,  whom  he  had  ever  desired  to 
serve,  and  assured  his  heart  of  the  permanence  of  that  everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in  all 
things  and  sure.  In  those  closing  words  the  old  prophet-power  came  back  to  him,  and 
we  wish  that  such  sentiments  of  humility,  trust,  and  joy  in  God  were  the  only  dyinz 
utterances  of  his  that  had  been  preserved  for  us."  The  occasion  of  the  effort  recorded 
in  our  text  was  a  public  one :  the  solemn  commendation  of  Solomon  to  the  people,  and 
closing  public  instructions  for  Solomon  himself.  The  subject  suggested  is  the  moral 
influence  exerted  by  the  aged  godly  man,  who  has  behind  him  the  varied  erperiences  of  a 
long  and  checkered  life.  The  importance  of  the  witness  of  such  a  man's  life,  and  of 
such  a  man's  own  expression  of  the  results  of  his  life,  and  of  his  moods  of  mind  on 
coming  to  its  close,  need  to  be  pointed  out,  as  these  may  bear  on  the  men  of  his  own 
age,  and  as  they  may  bear  on  the  young  generation  that  is  growing  up  to  take  the 
place  of  those  who  are  "  passing  away.'  As  the  treatment  of  these  divisions  must 
directly  depend  on  the  feeling  and  experience  of  the  preacher,  we  prefer  to  give  only 
the  barest  outline,  at  most  suggesting  lines  along  which  the  development  and  illus- 
tration of  each  point  may  run.  As  far  as  possible  the  treatment  should  be  made 
cheerful  and  hopeful,  the  experience  of  those  wno  see  more  good  than  evil  in  life  being 
preferred. 

I.  The  old  man's  testimony  coNCERNiNa  life.  He  will  say  that  he  has  found  it 
other — but,  on  the  whole,  better — than  he  expected.  Contrast  the  sunny  anticipations 
of  the  youth  with  the  serious  reviews  of  the  aged.  A  thousand  anticipations  have  never 
been  realized,  but  more  than  a  thousand  good  things,  of  which  youth  could  not  have 
dreamed,  have  crowned  the  passing  days  with  beauty  and  joy.  Many  an  old  man  speaks 
brightly  of  the  "  good  way  wheftein  the  Lord  his  God  has  led  him." 

II.  The  old  man's  testimony  ooncebnino  man.  Looking  back,  he  can  to  some 
extent  know  himself  and  judge  his  fellows.  This  at  least  the  old  man  has  learned. 
Man  imagines  and  even  purposes  more  than  he  can  ever  accomplish,  and  he  lives,  works, 
and  dies  with  scaffoldings  all  about  which  were  but  beginnings  of  buildings  that  were 
never  built.  He  has  to  shelter  in  the  great  hope  that  God  will  accept  his  purposes. 
And  so  God  will,  if  the  unwrought  schemes  were  no  mere  sentimental  dreams,  but 
resolves  as  serious  as  David's,  to  build  a  temple  for  the  Lord  his  God. 

III.  The  old  man's  testimony  ooncebnino  God.  He  says  he  is  the  Wonder-worker 
who  always  gets  his  will  over  man's.  And  he  is  the  faithful  One,  who  keeps  covenant 
and  fulfils  promise,  and  may  be  wholly  trusted.  He  says,  "  I  have  been  young,  and 
now  am  old,  yet  have  I  never  seen  the  righteous  forsaken,  nor  his  seed  begging  bread." 
The  light  of  the  old  men's  experience  may  well  brighten  and  cheer  the  young  men's 


432  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,   [cff.  xxvm.  1— 2h 

toil,  and  make  easier  the  yoke  of  those  who  bear  the  burden  and  heat   of  the 
day.— R.  T. 

Yer.  2. — Ood^s  earthly  footstool,  ITsing  a  striking  poetical  ficrure,  David  speaks  of  the 
ark  aa  being  "  the  footstool  of  our  God ; "  regarding  Gk)d  as  enthroned  above  it  in  the 
Shechinah-cloud.  The  figure  is  otherwise  used  in  Scripture,  in  Ps.  xcix.  6 ;  cxxxii.  7 ; 
Isa.  Ixvi.  1 ;  Lam.  ii.  I ;  Matt.  v.  35.  We  must  not  imagine  that  the  ark  contained 
God,  or  that  in  any  sense  he  dwelt  in  the  ark.  He  came,  ia  the  gracious  symbol  of  the 
blight  cloud,  above  the  ark,  between  the  attendant  angel-figures,  only  resting,  as  one 
rests  his  feet  on  a  footstool,  upon  the  lid  of  the  ark.  This  lid,  from  another  point  of 
view,  is  regarded  as  the  propitiatory,  or  mercy-seat.  Some  idea  of  an  Eastern  throno 
may  aid  in  the  proper  realization  of  this  figure.  Yan  Lennep  says,  "  Solomon's  throne 
was  *  made  of  ivory,  overlaid  with  the  best  gold ;  it  had  six  steps,  and  the  top  of  the 


Buch  chairs  in  Egypt,  and  there  is  a  picture  of  Ramescs  seated  upon  a  throne,  bearing, 
apparently,  a  close  resemblance  to  that  of  Solomon,  with  the  exception  of  some  peculiarly 
Egyptian  emblems.  The  Assyrian  kings  also  sat  upon  thrones  of  this  kind.  It  should, 
however,  be  remembered  that  this  mode  of  sitting  has  ever  been  exceptional  in  the 
East ;  and  though  it  cannot  be  denied  that  princes  sometimes  sat  in  state,  after  what 
we  call  the  European  mode,  yet  the  analogies  of  the  case  favour  the  sup)K)sition  that 
the  king's  throne  was  more  commonly  in  the  form  of  a  sofa,  or  divan,  upon  which  he 
sat  cross-legged.''  It  may  be  well  to  point  out  that,  in  this  figure,  we  have  an  instance  of 
anthropomorphic  representation,  or  God's  way  of  graciously  aiding  our  apprehension 
of  himself  and  of  his  relations,  by  speaking  of  himself,  or  allowing  himself  to  be  spoken 
of,  as  if  he  were  a  man.  What  is  suggested  by  such  figures,  rather  than  the  form  of 
the  figure,  requires  our  attention.  Three  things  are  suggested  by  the  figure  on  which  we 
are  now  dwelling. 

I.  God'b  footstool  implies  that  God  is  there.  Evidently  the  footstool  is  in  use. 
David  conceives  of  God  as  really  present,  and  in  his  time  the  "  glory-cloud  "  did  rest 
between  the  cherubim,  and  the  high  priest  might  even  see  it  on  the  ark-lid,  which  is 


presence  of  God  is  now  spiritually  realized.  Our  Lord  made  so  much  of  it  in  his 
teaching,  even  promising  that  his  Father  and  he  would  come,  and  sup  with,  and  dwell 
with,  the  open  and  trusting  heart,  making  it  his  footstool.  Such  promises  should  make 
us  also  anxious  that  the  uprising  temple  of  our  character  and  life  should  be  in  every 
way  worthy  of  the  indwelling  Deity.  "  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temples  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  which  is  in  you  V  '* 

II.  G0D*8  FOOTSTOOL  IMPLIES  THAT  HE  IS  THERE  IN  CONDESCENSION.      This  SecmS  a 

prominent  point  in  the  message  sent  by  Isaiah, "  Heaven  is  my  throne,  the  earth  is  my 
footstool."  We  think  properly  of  the  footstool  as  having  a  lowly  office,  and  so  easily 
regard  willingness  to  put  a  foot  upon  it  as  a  condescending  act.  We  cannot  think  any 
temple  we  can  build  is  worthy  to  be  God*s  throne.  He  must  condescend  to  enter  our 
very  noblest.  And  so  of  the  temple  of  our  character  and  life,  it  can  be  no  more  than 
his  footstool.  "  Will  Gt)d  in  very  dc'ed  dwell  with  man  on  the  earth  ?  "  It  is  wonderful 
grace  that  he  is  found  willing  to  rest  upon  it  his  foot. 

III.  God's  footstool  implies  that  God  is  not  limited  to  the  place  whebb  his 
PRESENCE  18  APPREHENDED.  His  throne  is  not  there.  Only  his/oot  is  there.  We  must 
keep  the  sublime  thought  that  he  is  above  all  things,  though  he  fills  all  things.  Show 
in  what  senses  God  may  now  be  thought  of  as  present  in  our  churches.  And  earnestly 
impress  the  need  of  keeping  up  the  sense  of  his  non-limitation  by  any  human  places 
or  human  forms.  All  earth  can  at  best  be  but  a  footstool,  which  he  may  touch  if  he 
will. — R.  T. 

Ver.  8. — Persuasions  to  obedience.  "  Keep  and  seek  for  all  the  commandments  of 
the  Lord  your  God."  '  Speaker's  Commentary '  says,  "  The  sense  would  be  clearer  if  the 


DH.  xxvm.  1— 21.]    The  first  book  of  the  chronicles.  433 

words  were,  •  I  charge  yon,  keep  and  seek ;  *  and  some  commentators  suppose  that  they 
did  so  run  originally."  In  view  of  the  connections  of  this  verse,  the  fullowing  per- 
suasions may  he  illustrated  and  enforced.  Obedience  to  Gk)d*s  commands  is  man's 
natural  duty ;  the  duty  that  necessarily  attends  upon  the  dependent  relation  in  which 
he  stands  towards  Ood.  But  such  is  man's  deterioration,  through  sin,  that  now  he 
needs  to  he  urged  to  his  duty  by  all  kinds  of  inspiring  persuasions. 

I.  God's  gracious  promises  are  a  persuasion.  (Vers.  6, 7.)  David  urges  that  those 
promises  rest  upon  Solomon,  and  the  grace  of  them  should  ever  lead  him  to  say^ 
"  What  manner  of  person  ought  I  to  be  ?  "  But  David  realizes  that  even  the  promises 
are  conditional  upon  man's  constancy,  so  they  always  urge  to  faithfulness, 

II.  God's  presence  is  a  persuasion.  Illustrate  the  moral  influence  exerted  by  the 
actual  presence  of  the  schoolmaster,  the  farmer,  the  business  man,  or  the  king.  *'  Thou 
God  seest  me  "  ought  to  be  to  us,  not  a  terror,  but  the  inspiration  to  all  goodness.  For 
our  moral  culture  no  assurance  is  more  important  than  this:  "Certainly  I  will  be 
with  thee." 

IIL  Surrounding  people  become  a  persuasion  to  each  one.  David  has  this 
scene  enacted  publicly  that  Solomon  may  feel  how  every  man's  expectations  and  hopes 
rest  on  him,  and  every  eye  will  anxiously  watch  his  career.  For  others'  sakes  wo  must 
be  true,  obedient,  and  faithful,  for  we  "  are  made  a  spectacle  unto  men  and  unto 
angels." 

IV.  The  conditions  op  our  relations  with  God  are  a  persuasion.  Their 
maintenance  depends  entirely  on  our  obedience  (vcr.  9\  They  are  not  sovereign 
relations,  but  difttinctly  conditional.  If  we  forsake  Gt)d,  ne  will  cast  us  off  for  ever. 
So  the  burden  of  responsibility  is  made  to  lie  heavily  on  our  own  shoulders.  We  must 
•*  take  heed ; "  we  must "  seek  for  "  and  "  keep  "  the  commandments  of  our  GKxi,  tho 
all-comprehensive  commands  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. — R.  T. 

Ver.  9. — The  faithfulness  of  the  great  Heart-searcher,  **  For  the  Lord  searcheth  all 
hearts,  and  understandeth  all  the  imaginations  of  the  thoughts."  For  this  conception 
of  God,  compare  1  Sam.  xvi.  7 ;  Ps.  vii.  9 ;  cxxxix.  2 ;  Jer.  xi.  20 ;  xvii.  10 ;  xx.  12. 
The  expressions  of  the  text  suggest  the  accuracy  and  intimacy  of  the  Divine  knowledge 
of  men's  affairs.  Apprehend  God  rightly,  and  his  interest  in  us  fills  us  with  grateful 
burprise.  Illustrate  David's  feeling,  **  When  I  consider  thy  heavens  .  •  .  what  is  man 
that  thou  art  mindful  of  him  ?  "  Solomon's,  "  Will  God  in  very  deed  dwell  with  man 
on  the  earth  ?  "  Isaiah's,  "  To  whom  then  will  ye  liken  God  ?  ...  He  giveth  power 
to  the  faint,"  etc.  See  the  Divine  interest :  1.  In  the  spheres  of  natural  l\fe ;  i.e.  in 
us  as  beings.  He  is  near  as  Creator,  Sustainer,  Provider.  Birth,  preservation,  and  death 
are  all  his.  2.  In  the  spheres  of  associated  life ;  i.e.  as  beings  in  relations.  Govern- 
ment, family,  and  Church  are  all  under  his  Divine  inspections.  3.  In  the  spheres  of 
mejital  life ;  i.e.  as  intellectual  beings.  All  movements  of  mind  he  presides  over.  4. 
]  n  the  spheres  of  spiritual  life ;  i.e.  as  moral  beings.  God  knows  and  watches  all 
unfoldings  of  character  and  religion.  All  spheres  are  accessible  to  him.  '*  All  things 
are  naked  and  open  to  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do."  Dwell  on  the 
subtlety  of  the  human  heart;  its  labyrinths  and  hiding-places  and  self-deceivings. 
How  imperfect,  at  its  best,  is  a  man's  own  knowledge  of  his  heart  I  How  impossible 
it  is  for  one  man  to  know  the  intricate  workings  of  the  heart  of  another  man  I  Searching 
the  heart  is  required,  that  its  subtle  evils  may  be  discovered.  Bat  all  depends  on  who 
it  is  that  does  the  searching  work,  and  with  what  aim  and  purpose  the  searching 
is  done. 

I.  God  can  search  the  human  heart.  He  can^  for  he  designed  it,  and  knows  all 
its  possibilities.  He  can,  for  he  has  never  let  it  slip  away  from  his  observation  and 
control,  and  so  all  its  "  latent  mazes"  he  knows,  and  all  its  wilfulnesses  he  controls. 

IL  God  searches  the  human  heart  with  a  definite  and  gracious  purpose. 
Even  its  deliverance  from  evil  and  perfecting  in  holiness.  This  purpose  makes  good 
men  regard  the  Divine  searching  as  a  most  precious  thing.  In  view  of  it  David  can 
pray,  "  Search  me,  0  God."  He  feels,  *'  God  does  not  know  me  as  a  mere  ordinary 
matter  of  knowledge.  He  is  graciously  and  lovingly  interested  in  me,  and  so  he 
knows  me  helpfully,  that  he  may  adapt  his  grace  to  my  various  and  subtle  needs." 
This  personal  interest  in  our  highest  good,  which  gives  tone  to  his  searching,  is  brought 
I.  chronicles.  2  F 


434  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ca  xxix.  1—30. 

home  to  our  hearts  by  the  tender  interest  shown  in  humanity,  and  in  indiriduals  of 
humanity,  by  the  God-Man,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  We  feel  that  we  never  can  resist  his 
searching  us  through  and  through,  and  knowing  us  altogether.  The  close  inspections 
of  God  may  be :  I.  ^  terror  to  us.  Illustrate  the  influence  of  the  words,  '*  Thou  Qod 
seest  me,"  sometimes  on  little  children.  They  are  even  used  to  frighten  them  into  good* 
ness.  Compare  Jacob's,  "How  dreadful  is  this  place ! "  From  Job,  Isaiah,  and  John  we 
learn  that  solemnity  and  awe  should  always  attend  the  consciousness  of  God's  near 
presence.  2.  It  may  be  a  real  practical  help  to  us,  as  David  expected  it  to  be  to  Solomon, 
He  who  knows  us  so  well,  does  not  only  know ;  he  also  gives  strength.  David,  who 
trembles  at  God's  searchings,  can  only  say,  "  It  is  God  that  girdeth  me  with  strength, 
and  maketh  my  way  perfect."  3.  It  may  he  cherished  as  our  holiest  joy.  No  harm 
can  come  to  us,  for  God's  eye  and  hand  are  always  on  us.  No  good  thing  can  fail  us, 
for  GK)d  knows  all  our  real  wants.  Our  Lord  taught  so  often  about  the  intimate  know* 
ledge  and  care  of  the  heavenly  Father,  who  keeps  the  sparrows,  clothes  the  grass, 
watches  over  the  seeds,  paints  the  lilies,  waves  the  harvests,  and  knows  that  we  are 
of  more  value  than  flowers  or  sparrows. 

Show  that  this  truth,  of  God's  knowledge  and  heart-searchings,  bears  upon  men's 
tendency  to  self-deception.  It  is  only  possible  to  sin  on  when  we  have  deludea  ourselves 
into  the  idea  that  "  Qod  doth  not  see.*— R.  T» 

Ver.  20. — Ptrsonal  relations  with  Qod,  **  The  Lord  God,  even  my  QodJ*  It  is  possible 
for  us  to  have  thoughts  of  God  that  keep  him  wholly  external  to  ns,  and  altogether 
unrelated  to  uSk  And  it  may  be  feared  that  such  are  the  Uioughts  of  God  usually  cherished 
by  men*  Though  they  may  have  a  certain  influence  on  us,  the  full  and  saving  power 
of  God  cannot  be  known  until  we  have  appropriated  him,  and  come  into  direct  and 
personal  relations  with  him.  A  man  finds  God  a  living  force  upon  thought,  heart,  life, 
and  conduct  when  he  calls  him  my  God,  The  work  of  Christ  is,  in  great  part,  the 
bringing  about  of  this  relation,  and  the  persuasion  of  the  man  to  recognize  it  fully. 
Man  lost  says,  *'  I  heard  thy  voice  in  the  garden,  and  I  was  afraid,  and  hid  myself  J* 
Man  redeemed,  and  standing  right  with  God,  says,  '^  I  flee  unto  thee  to  hide  meJ*  **  For 
thou  art  my  Qod  J* 

I.  How  CAN  God  be  thus  pebsoNally  apprehended  ?  1.  By  accepting  the  reve- 
lation of  his  fatherhood  which  he  makes  in  Christ  the  Son,  and  entering  into  the 
privilege  and  duty  which  it  involves.  2.  By  winning  the  trustful,  thankful  love 
of  those  who  know  they  are  forgiven  and  redeemed.  3.  By  maintaining  those  close 
and  intimate  communions  with  God  which  bring  freshly  to  us  the  joy  of  his  care. 

II.  What  is  involved  in  buch  personal  relations?  1.  On  Qod*s  part.  Just 
what  God  loves,  and  what  he  is  sure  to  meet  with  the  fullest  bestowments  of  his  grace, 
is  man's  love  and  trust  expressed  in  the  words  "  my  Qod,^  2.  On  man^s  part.  The 
relation  becomes  the  most  hallowing  force  exerted  on  the  whole  life.  The  man  wants 
to  bo  worthy  of,  wants  to  be  like,  his  God. 

-  III.  What  may  imperil  buch  relations  after  they  have  been  apprehended? 
This  may  be  treated  in  detail,  or  in  the  general  principle.  To  say,  "my  God,"  involves 
maintaining  the  trustfulness  of  full  and  obedient  submission ;  and,  therefore,  the  peril 
lies  in  some  returning  form  of  wilfulness.  This  separates  us  at  once,  in  feeling,  from 
God,  so  that  the  words  "  my  God    will  not  rise  to  our  lips. — R.  T. 

EXPOSITION. 

CHAPTER  XXIX.  alluded   to,    no   doubt,    for   the    sake   of 

^  example.    On  the  faith  of  them  he  grounds 

Vers.  1—9.— These  verses  continue  the  with  tenfold  effect  his  appeal  to  people  and 

account  of  what  David  said  to  the  whole  princes  to  join  heartily  in  the  work     The 

congregation,  respecting  his  son  Solomon  verses  (6—9)  also  contain  the  statement  of 

and  his  tender  age  in  view  of  the  great  the  hearty  practical  response  which  was  made 

enterprise  of  building  the  temple ;  respect-  by  the  *♦  chiefs  of  the  fathers  and  princea  of 

ing  the  public  preparations  which  had  been  the  tribes,"  and  other  varieties  of  Riven. 

already  made,  and  the  gifts  of  his  own  in-  and  of  the  consequent  general  joy. 

dividual      property— these     latter     being  Ver.  1.— The  anxiety  which  David  felt  on 


OH.  XXIX.  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


(tccount  of  tbs  yoDth  of  Solomon  (repeated 
from  ch.  iiii.  5)  evideotlj  presied  heavU; 
on  bim.  TLe  additional  eipreaaion  here  U 
to  bo  Dotked,  wham  alons  Ood  hath  ohoMn. 
Bf  this  plea,  full  of  truth  as  it  was,  we  ma; 
Buppose  that  David  would  alicllcr  himself 
from  any  poeaible  blamo  or  refltction  on  tbe 
part  of  the  people,  from  tbe  cbarge  of 
paitislit;  on  the  part  of  his  elder  children, 
and  any  unjust  ilight  to  them,  aod  aUo 
from  any  idf-reproaeh,  in  that  be  waa 
devolviog  luch  a  responsible  task  on  ao 
young  md  MndM  B  man.  Falaoa.  Thia 
word  (nran),  by  which  the  t«mple  i«  dosig- 
nated  here  and  in  ret.  19,  aeems  to  be  very 
probably  a  word  of  Persian  derivatiOD.  It 
is  found  in  Neh.  i  1 ;  in  Dau.  viii.  2  ;  but 
Tery  frequently  in  Esther,  where  it  is  used 
not  only  of  "  Hhusban  the  palace  "  (Eath.  L 
2 :  ii.  3 ;  iii.  15),  oa  the  royal  abode,  but  also 
of  the  special  part  of  the  city  adjoining  the 
palace  proper  (Katb.  i.  5;  iL  5;  viii.  II; 
II.  6).  Tbe  word  ia  found  also  io  Neh.  ii. 
6 ;  but  there  it  carries  the  signiBcation  of 
tbe  fortress  of  the  temple.  There  may  be 
some  spscial  appropriatuneu  in  its  use  here, 
in  couaidetBtioa  of  the  oircunutance  of  the 
fortiScatioiu  .and  wall,  which   flanked  the 

Ver.  2.— The  six  designations  of  itonM  in 
this  verse  are  as  follows :— 1.  Onyx  itonai ; 
D.-iEf  (Gen.  iL  12;  Eiod.  xxv.  7;  iiviiL 
O]  iur.9:  xsxiz.6;  Job  xiviii.lG;  Eiek. 
szviii.  IS).  2.  BtoDestohetetcrKi^orD'KSi; 
(Eiod.iiv.7;iiiv.  9,27;  tbe  feminine  form 
of  tbe  same  word  is  found  iu  Eiod.  xxviit.  17, 
20 ;  ixiii.  13).  The  other  meanings  of  this 
word  are  {nauguration  to  the  priest's  oCQca 
(Lev.  viii.  33),  and  the  taerifiee  of  iaauguni' 
tion  (Lev.  viL  37).  3,  OliKeriitg  itonM ; 
■ijie.  GeseuiuB  says  thia  is  tbe  same  root 
with  ifiuiiai,  seaweed.  From  thia  seaweed  an 
alkaline  pigment  was  prepared,  which  came 
to  be  called  by  tbe  same  word.  Thia 
Hebrew  word  also  meant  a  "  dye  "  mads 
from  itibivm,  the  Latin  name  of  antinumy 
(Septuagint,  d-ti>i^:  Vulgate,  dibium),  with 
which  Hebrew  women  stained  their  eye- 
lashes (see  also  2  Kings  ii.  30 ;  Im.  liv.  II ; 
Jer.  iv.  30).  Geaeuius  would  tranalBte  here 
"stooea  of  pigment,"  and  undeislanda  them 
lo  mean  possibly  marble  for  covering,  as 
though  with  a  solid  paint,  the  wells.  1. 
Stoues  of  direiB  eolonn ;  rtasy  This  word, 
which  means  "variegated,"  is  only  in  thia 
passage  applied  to  stones.  It  is  applied 
<ince  lo  the  feathers  of  the  eagle  (£zek. 
xvii.  3) ;  but  almost  always  to  needlework 
or  garments,  often  being  translated  in  tbe 
Authorized  Version  aa  ■'  broidered"  (Judg. 
V.  30;  Pb.  ilv,  15;  Eiek.  ivL  10,  13,  IB; 
iivi.  16;xiviL7, 16,  24).  5.AUmaDQerot 
prNtou  (toBiL    The  feminine  form,  rnff.. 


The  aimplest  idea  of  the  word  ia  "  heavy," 
thence  precious,  dear,  nue  (2  Sam.  zii.  30 ; 
1  Kinfca  V.  31 :  viL  9 ;  x.  2 ;  ch.  xi.  2 ;  2 
CbroQ.  iu.  6;  ii.  1 ;  Job  xiviiL  IB;  xixu 
26;  Prov.  i.  13;  iii.  15;  Isa.  xxviii.  16; 
Euk.  xiviiL  13;  Dan.  li.  3S).  6.  Marble 
(tonei;  e.-E',  the  elementary  ideaof  which  ia 
whiteness.  This  word  is  fnund  only  here; 
Septuagint  and  Vulgalo,  "Pariun  marble." 
A  word  akin  (tfr),  meaning  also  "  white 
marble  "  is  found  in  Esth.  i.  6 ;  Cant  t.  16. 
The  further  trratment  of  these  stones  will 
be  found  on  2  Chron.  iii  6. 

Ver.  3.— Translate,  And,  moTeever,  heeftOM 
cf  my  delight  in  the  house  of  my  Ood,  v)M 
I  bavg  ai  mine  own  treasure  of  gold  and  of 
■Urer  I  have  given  to  the  houta  at  my  Ood, 
over  and  above  »11  I  have  prepared  for  th» 
holy  honw.  The  word  rh^i},  on  the  wven 
other  occasions  of  iU  use  (Eiod.  xix.  5; 
Dent.  vii.  6:  xiv.  2 ;  iivi.  18;  Pb.  ouxv. 
4;  Ecoles.  ii.  8 ;  Blid.  iii  17),  is  fouud  in  the 
Authorized  Vergionas  "peculiar  treaBure''oi 
"  special  treasure  "  and  once  "jewels,"  bnt  in 
every  instance  it  is  evident  that  the  apecial- 
ness  denoted  is  at  one  with  the  idea  of  tha 
affection  that  is  borne  hj  a  person  to  bis  own 
possession  and  property. 
Ver.  i. — Bespe-" — "■- 

amounts  here  dei_ , 

of  the  present  text  be  acoepted  as  oorreot; 
see  note  on  cb.  xxU.  11.  Bertbeau  and 
Eeil  make  thrM  thcnund  talent*  of  gold 
tbe  equivalent  of  thirteen  millions  and  • 
half  of  uur  money,  and  seven  thonaand 
talent!  of  nlTei  the  equivalent  of  two  and 
a  half  millions  of  our  mooey—ur,  if  tbe  royal 
shekel  instead  of  the  sacred  be  supposed  to 
be  the  itaDilBrd,  they  make  then  the  half 
of  thoee  two  amnunU  respectively.  Others 
calculate  tbt  value  of  Uie  gold  to  reach 
thirty  millions,  and  of  tbe  silver  three 
millions  of  our  money  (see  Conder's  'Biblo 
Handbook,'  2od  edit.,  pp.  63—65,  81> 
Tbe  situation  of  Ophii  is  atill  considered 
undetermined.  Tbe  other  occasions  on  whicb 
it  is  mentioned  ore  as  follows  : — Qen.  I-  29 
(cb.  i.  23):  1  Kings  ix.  2S;  x.  U;  xxii. 
i9 ;  2  Cbron.  TiiL  18 ;  ix.  10 ;  Job  xxii.  24 : 
xiviii.  16;  Ps.  xlv.  10;  Isa.  xiii.  12.  It 
must  be  understood  also  that  it  is  to  it  that 
allusion  is  made  in  1  Kings  x.  22,  where  we 
read  that  silver,  ivory,  apea,  and  pencocks, 
beside  the  gold,  wore  imported  into  Judsa 
from  it.  'Tbe  "  almug  "  tree  is  also  aaid  to 
have  been  brought  in  tbe  same  sliips  which 
brought  the  gold  of  Ophir.  The  Septuagint 
nlways  tranalatee  by  some  form  of  the  word 
loufJi  (except  in  Gen.  x.  29),  which  word 
comes  very  near  tbe  Coptic  name  for  India. 
There  Is  tdso  a  place  in  India,  mentioned  by 
Ptolemy,  Ammianus,  and  Abulfeda,  tbe 
•its  of  the  present  emjwriuin  of  Goa,  called 


436 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ch.  xxix.  1—30. 


iZovxdpa,  and  which  would  explain  both  the 
Hebrew  and  the  Soptuagint  words.  An 
Indian  Bite  for  Ophir  would  also  well  snit 
the  mention  of  the  ivory  and  the  particular 
wood  which  the  ships  brought.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  first  occasion  of  this  name 
Opliir  finds  it  placed  among  the  tribes  of 
Joktan*8  descendants,  who  occupied  South 
Arabia.  It  is  there  (Gen.  x.  29 ;  ch.  L  23) 
placed  between  Sheba  and  Havilah,  both 
abounding  in  gold.  There  are  other  con- 
siderations that  favour  Arabia.  Many  other 
places  have  been  Bugp;este<1,  and  some  of 
tliem  supported  by  respectable  authorities, 
such  as  Eastern  Africa,  South  America  and 
Pern,  Phrygia,  etc.  If  there  be  a  real 
question  about  it,  to  the  prejudice  of  Arabia, 
it  would  be  to  India  wo  must  look.  That 
some  of  the  commodities  brought  belonged 
more  especially  to  India,  though  even  in 
that  case  the  majority  belonged  undoubtedly 
to  Arabia,  is  very  true.  This  circumstance 
throws  great  probability  into  the  suggestion 
that  whether  Ophir  were  in  Arabia  or  India, 
it  waa  a  great  emporium,  and  not  simply 
an  exporter  of  its  own  particular  produce 
(see  Gesenius,  *  Lexicon,'  ntb  voce;  Smith's 
*  Bible  Dictionary ').  The  last  sentence  of 
this  verse  certainly  says  that  the  destined 
nse  of  the  refined  nlver,  as  well  as  of  the 
gold  of  Ophir,  was  to  overlay  the  walls  of  the 
houses.  We  know  that  gold  was  used  for 
this  purpose  (2  Chron.  iii.  5—10).  But  we 
do  not  read  of  the  silver  being  used  for  over' 
laying  purposes.  We  also  read  that  none  of 
the  driukin*];- vessels  of  Solomon  were  of 
silver,  as  "  it  was  nothing  accounted  of  in 
the  days  of  Solomon"  (1  Kings  x.  21;  2 
Chron.  ix.  20).  It  is  possible,  the  order  of 
the  sentences  notwithstanding,  that  the 
mention  of  the  refined  silver  is  only  to  pre- 
pare the  way  for  the  contents  of  ver.  5,  and 
that  it  must  not  beappliod  to  the  last  sentence 
of  our  present  verse. 

Ver.  5. — The  Authorized  Version,  to  con- 
secrate his  service,  might  in  this  instance 
seem  to  bo  not  merely  an  inaccurate  but  an 
incorrect  translation.  For  David's  evident 
meaning  was,  after  rehearsing  his  own 
example,  to  base  on  it  tho  appeal,  Who  if 
.  .  .willing  to  bring  an  ungrudging  handful 
this  day  to  the  Lord  1  and  2  Chron.  xiii.  9 
might  perhaps  be  cited  as  a  confirmatory 
instance.  But  on  the  other  hand,  the  idiom 
was  evidently,  by  the  witness  of  many 
passages,  a  general  one,  and  tho  meaning  of 
it  is  not  incorrectly  conveyed  in  tho  Autho- 
rized Version,  where  service  means  in  every 
case  active  and  practical  help  (Exod.  xxviii. 
41;  xxix.  9;  xxxii.  29;  Numb.  iii.  8,  etc.). 
The  question  now  is  not  one  of  consecrating 
heart  and  afiection,  but  rather  of  giving  the 
practical  proof  of  them. 

Vet    6.— The  responfe  was  hearty;    it 


comprised  voluntary  gifts  horn  the  most  of 
those  mentioned  in  ch.  xxviiL  1 ;  and  de- 
scribed in  ch.  xxviL  16 — 31.    For  the  mlcri 
of  the  king's  work,  see  ch.  xxviL  26 ;  xxviiL 
1.    As  the  more  general  term  *'  work  **  is 
employed,  we  are  not  bound  to  confine  the 
expression  to  include  only  those  who  managed 
'*  the  substance  and  cattle  "  of  ch.  xxviiL  1. 
Ver.  7. — The  Authorized  Version  tranahi- 
tion  drains  occurs  also  twice  in  Ezra  and  twioe 
in  Nehemiah.    There  is  no  doubt  that  the ' 
coin  referred  to  is  the  Persian  daria,  with 
'which  the  Jews  became  familiar  during  the 
time  of  their  exile.    TheHebrewwonl  appears 
in  three  different  forms.    1.  As  IHsTiM ;  here 

and  Ezra  viiL  27.  2.  As  fxaini  *  ^^Izra  IL 
69;  Neh.  viL  70—72.  3.  As  j'qti;  in  rab- 
binical writings,  but  not  in  Scripture.  Be- 
specting  the  possible  derivations  of  the 
words  in  the  nrst  and  second  forms,  see 
Gesenius's  *  Lexicon,'  tub  voce,  and  Gender's 
*  Handbook  to  the  Bible'  (2nd  edit^  p. 
181).  The  obverse  of  the  coin  shows  the 
image  of  a  king,  with  bow  and  spear.  The 
value  of  tho  coin  is  variously  compnted  at 
thirteen  shillings  and  sixpence  or  twenty- 
two  shillings  and  sixpence.  Kcil  suggests 
that  the  mention  of  dartcs  as  well  as  talents 
in  this  verse  may  point  to  some  of  the  gold 
being  contributed  in  the  shape  of  oout 
instead  of  talentsHoatg^^  This  does  not 
seem  likely,  however,  because,  of  course,  the 
dartc  itself  was  not  in  nse  in  Jerusalem  in 
David's  time,  and  any  gold  coin  that  was 
then  in  uso  might  have  received  mention 
on  its  own  account,  even  if  translated  idso 
into  the  daric  The  Septuagint  translates 
in  this  verse  merely  by  the  word  xpv<roOs, 
tho  Vulgate  by  solidos.  Under  any  circum- 
stances, the  coin  is  to  be  distinguished  from 
the  ^paxfi'fi'  Specimens  of  the  daric,  both 
in  gold  and  silver,  exist  in  the  Fans  and 
Vienna  Museums.  The  Hebrew  word  for 
the  ten  thousand  preceding  the  so-called 
drams  of  this  verse  is  the  word  for  •*  myriad  ** 
fian,  a  shortened  form  of  niai),  found  also 
in  Ezra  ii.  64;  Neh.  viL  66;  Dan.  xL  12; 
Jonah  iv.  11. 

Ver.  8. — For  Jehiel,  see  ch.  xxiiL  7,  8; 
xxvi.  20—22  ;  and  for  the  stones  contributed 
among  the  other  gifts,  see  Exod.  xxxv.  9,  27. 
Of  the  same  chapter  in  Exodus,  especially 
in  its  vers.  4—9  and  20 — 29,  the  whole  of 
our  present  passage  so  vividly  reminds  us 
that  the  difficulty  might  be  to  doubi  that 
it  was  present  as  a  model  to  the  mind  ef 
David  himself. 

Vers.  10— 20.— The  majesty  and  compre- 
hensiveness of  this  passage — a  national 
liturgy  of  itself— are  in  direct  proportion  to 
the  brevity  of  it.  It  includes  adoration, 
acknowledgment  of  the  inherent  nature  of 
human   dependence,  self-humiliation,  and 


CH.  XXIX.  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


437 


confession,  dedication  of  all  the  offerings, 
and  pniyer  both  for  the  whole  people  in 
general,  and  for  Solomon  in  particular,  in 
view  of  his  future  position  and  responsi- 
bilities.   Its  utter  repudiation  of  all  idea 
of  meritoriousness  is  very  striking.     The 
traces  are  visible  of  what  may  be  called 
snatches  of  memory  on  the  part  of  David 
from    various    religious    odes  of   his  own 
•authorship,  as  well  as  from  those  of  others 
still  on  record,  as,  for  instance,  especially 
in  vers.  14-— 17,  compared  with  passages  in 
Ps.   xxiv. ;   1. ;    Ixxxix. ;  xxxix. ;  xc. ;  cii. ; 
cxliv. ;  vii. ;   xvii. ;   and  cxxxix.    But  the 
unity  of  this  service  is  abundantly    con- 
spicuous, and  every  sentence  seems  weighed 
and  measured  for  the  occasion.    The  scene, 
reaching  its  climax  in  what  is  recorded  in 
ver.  20,  must  have  been  one  of  the  utmost 
religious  grandeur  and  impressiveness.    It 
is  true  that  the  very  last  clause,  which 
couples  the  reverence  done  on  the  part  of 
the  assemble  multitude  to  the  king,  with 
that  done  to  Jehovah  himself,  strikes  us  as 
an  unfortunate  conjunction.    It  does  not, 
indeed,  need  upon  its  merits  anv  vindication, 
considering  the  tenor  of  all  which  has  pre- 
ceded ;  but  it  may  be  felt  an  extenuation  of 
the  form  in  which  the  expression  occurs,  if 
we  suppose  (as  we  justly  may)  that  the 
people  viewed  their  act  in  the  light  of  part 
of  their  religious  service  at  that  particular 
time.     In    1  Kings  i.  31  the  same  words 
express  the  reverence  paid  to  David,  though 
in  numerous  other  passages  they  mark  that 
offered  to  God  (Exod.  iv.  31 ;  2  Chron.  xxix. 
30 ;  Neh.  viii.  6). 

Ver.  1 5. — Of  the  seven  other  clear  occasions 
of  occurrence  of  the  word  here  translated 
abiding  (irpQ),  it  bears  three    times  the 

meaning  of  "a  gathering  together"  as  of 
waters  (Gen.  i.  10 ;  Exod.  vii.  19 ;  Lev.  xi. 
3G).  The  other  four  times  it  is  translated  in 
the  Authorized  Version  **  hope,"  either  in  the 
abstract  (Ezra  x.  2),  or  in  the  personal  object 
of  it  (Jer.  xiv.  8 ;  xvii.  13 ;  1. 7).  Probably 
the  word  "abiding,"  as  drawn  from  this 
latter  aspect  of  the  word,  expresses  with 
sufhcient  accuracy  the  intended  meaning 
here. 

Ver.  17. — ^It  may  very  possibly  be  that 
the  stress  with  which  David  here  says,  I 
know,  had  its  special  cause.  The  thought 
of  God  as  one  who  "  trie<l  "  the  heart  is  one 
often  brought  out  in  David's  psalms,  but 
a  strong  conviction  of  it  may  have  been 
wrought  in  David's  mind  by  Samuel's 
rehearsal  of  the  language  God  used  to  him 
at  the  very  time  of  the  election  of  David 
from  amid  all  the  other  of  Jesse's  sons 
(1  Sam.  xvi.  7). 

Vtr.  18.— In  the  imagination  of  the 
thoughts  of  the  heart  We  have  hero  again 
a  reminiscence  of  the  early  language   of 


Genesis  (Gen.  vi,  5;  viii.  21.  See  also  our 
book,  ch.  xxviii.  9;  Deut.  xxxi.  21).  This 
same  word  for  **  imagination  "  (ir^  is  found 
in  the  Authorized  Version  in  Isa.  xxvi.  3, 
"Whose  mind  is  stayed,"  etc.;  and  in  Ps.  ciii. 
14;  Isa.  xxix.  16;  Hab.  ii.  18;  in  the  last 
three  passages  translated  as  "frame," 
"framed,"  and  "  work." 

Ver.  10. — For  the  palace,  see  ver.  1. 

Vers.  21 — 25. — These  verses  record  "  the 
sacrifices  and  drink  offerings"  by  which  all 
the  service  of  this  day  was  ratified  as  it  were 
on  the  following  day;  also  the  solemn 
"  anointing  of  Solomon  to  the  Lord  as  chief 
governor,  and  of  Zadok  as  priest,"  with  the 
visible  enthronement  of  Solomon,  and  the 
submission  to  him  "of  all  Israel,  of  all 
the  princes  and  mighty  men,  and  also  of  all 
the  sons  of  David"  (1  Kings  i.  49—53). 

Ver.  21. — In  tliis  verse  the  distinction  ia 
to  be  noticed  between  the  saorifioes  of  thank 
offerings  (d'hst);  those  of  bnmt  offisringf 
(Di'^p);  and  their  drink  offerings,  i,e  the 
drink  qffering$  that  went  with  them  (DrrapJX 
For  the  first  of  these    the  more  specifio 

Hebrew  word  is  nrh^  (Lev.  vii.  20 ;  ix.  4) 
or  D^p^s^  naj  (Lev.  iiL  1;  viL  11,  13,  15; 
Numb.  vii.  17).  The  breast  and  right 
shoulder  were  the  priest's  share.  All  the 
rest  belonged  to  the  person  who  sacrificed, 
and  his  friends,  and  must  be  eaten  the  same 
or  the  next  day  (Lev.  vii.  11—18,  29—34). 
Other  particulars  may  be  found  in  Smith's 
*  Bible  Dictionary,'  iii.  1470,  1471.  The  last 
clause  of  our  verse  tells  us  how  ample  was 
the  feast  provided  by  these  sacrifices  on  this 
occasion,  being  in  abundance  for  all  IsraeL 
The  burnt  offering  is  first  mentioned  in  Gen. 
viii.  20:  it  is  the  only  sacrifice  that  the 
Book  of  Genesis  (see  xv.  9,  etc. ;  xxii.  2, 
etc.)  knows.  The  offering  (pnp)  of  Gen. 
iv.  4  is  somewhat  obscure,  but  does  not 
appear  to  have  been  a  sacrifice  of  blood. 
This  sacrifice  was  one  which  was  whoUj 
consumed  on  the  altar  of  fire,  and  sun- 
posed  to  ascend  to  heaven.  The  chief  kinds 
of  burnt  offerings  were  (1)  the  daily  (Exod. 
xxix.  38—42 ;  Numb,  xxviii.  3—8) ;  (2)  the 
sabbath  (Numb,  xxviii.  8—10);  (3)  that  at 
tho  new  moon,  the  Day  of  Atonement,  the 
three  great  festivals  and  the  Feast  of  Trum- 
pets  (Numb,  xxviii.  11 — xxix.  39).  Beside 
these,  there  were  the  several  kinds  of  free- 
will  and  private  burnt  offerings.  Tho  first, 
seventh,  and  eighth  chapters  of  Leviticus 
contain  full  accounts  of  the  ceremonial. 
The  drink  offering  is  spoken  of  as  early  as 
Gen.  XXXV.  14  ;  but  those  to  which  reference 
is  here  made  as  appertiiiniug  to  the  before- 
mentioneil  sacrifices  are  more  explicitly 
spoken  of  in  such  passages  as  Exod.  xxix. 
40;  Lev.  xxiii.  13;  Numb.  vL  17;  xv. 
6—24 ;  xxviU.  10—14. 


4*.? 


n:5r  DV'K  OP  THE  CHBOXICLEa     [ch. 


1-30. 


t-T 


tk«  Ler^.  i^i  '.t^  c  iit  iz»  xz.xlzz  :€  >& 
J:rr.  >  :i.ki  \ift  :  mnr.  Ti-t  mwJ 
1  K  -r?  l\:-*i-K  .  «£.   XI.-  1.     Tzk  fzxxt- 

ir  >.lc:»:-  k.ir  ;--  §«•  t-i  tis*";  ca 

cr*=.  a:.  l::i:-z  vz-.-rs  Lki  =»-«  b««a  bef-r-re 

cziikTl;  f.  (;•*;*.:•:  :i:  let  *;  :Le  «ks«  uzie, 
tb»  f*rt  -if  ACT  fKii.-Qf  wnecF-r.T  c/  t£« 
kiz.i  "i >ctf  *•:<  £-A»<^n  t*:  b«  c.a;;^*c«L  Zsdrk 

h^  cte^::  *-.Lnt  |r.«»t  vit:.  A't'trhfcr  cf  the 
lir>i  ri  Ii.Ar.>rigc.  XT.  11;  2  S4ia- 2i,  i> ; 

xix.  II  >:  bet  H'.v  L«  v««  A^'iirTed  nzid^r 
cilCTncfUilOE*  c4  «f«<E&i  (alIi*ritT,  acd  at 
m  crjfu  cf  fffttcbJ  i:::er^<t,  to  i^perKde 
AlLatr.ir,  vLo  Lid  »i*i^  «i;h  Adocij&h, 
ftii<l  «Lo  w&A  coriT  (:•  b^  kii>:t^  albrctrther 
from  tLe  «h..'rcd  'c£ce  (1  Kings  L  7, »,  32, 
3t^.44.45:  11.26,27;. 

Ver.  23.— For  the  happr  exprarico.  1k« 
tkroat  cf  th«  Lorl.  fee  chT  xxviit.  5c  And 
for  tviiknre  that  Sc-t  men  did  realij  exercue 
TOfTil  Authr-ritT   t^foK  Ltarid**  dieAth,  tee 

1  kings  i.  32,  45— 1^ ;  iL  1. 

Vtrr.  25. — Aay  king  bcfort  kim  nt  ImaL 
Thtre  wtpe,  cf  cr-nnj*.-,  onlj  two  king*  •*  be* 
fore"  S*  1  n-t  n  in  I«rat:l.  The  pprmise  of 
Gi  d  t.:-  S.l- r::  d,  L'.-»tv.:-r,  whtQ  Lv  wa* 
••pk-ii-**!"  ifcii'i  xL'i  si«>oh  of  ti.e  j-raytr 
wliirii  L^ir  ofi*.r».«i  a  vt-rv  hLort  time  euUse- 
queMi y.  wa*  much  larg^rr,  and  siiiTsj^rSt*  itself 
U:;  life  aj>  what  m  iv  really  have  letrn  present 
to  the  mind  of  the  Li^t'»rian  when  he  lued 
the  le.-B  c<'mprthcn*ive  words abore  (2Chroii. 
L  J2;  1  Kin.:6iv.  12,  i:i> 

Vers.  'J^i— 3«). — TI.e?*  verses  contain  la«t 
worda  re.-j»ectin;r  David's  rvign,  iu  extent 
and  ito  b.ij;:tii ;  rei^jc^rtin^  bis  death  and  age, 
and  iin:  fcucceetion  of  S  -lomon  ;  and  n.'Siitct- 
injr  ti.e  K»ur^-3  of  the  history  of  himself,  his 
rei^n,  hiii  fie<»ple,  and  other  countrita. 

V<r.  20.— 'Ihe  words  of  this  verse,  not  in- 
deed hanl  to  follow  here,  but  marking  the 
c\t)H'.  irihtf-^td  of  the  cr-mmencement  or  career 
of  David'i  reign  over  all  Israel,  are  parallt- led 
by  tti<-  earlier  (yahsage,  ch.  xviii.  14 ;  2  Sam. 
Yiii.  15. 

V«:r.  27.— In  the  pnme  way  the  contents 
of  thJM  \i-Twt  are  paralleled  by  ch.   iii.  4; 

2  Haiii.  V.  .0;  ]  KinpTH  ii.  11  ;  this  last  pas- 
Hage  Piiving  only  i^veii  yearn  instead  of  tho 
heveii  years  and  hix  months  for  the  reign  in 
llehron. 

V<  r.  28. — We  leani  from  2  Sam.  v.  4,  5, 
that  David  was  thirty  years  old  when  he 
b(  g.'in  i()  reign  in  Hebron.     lie  must,  there- 


frrp,  hare  died  in  hfa  aeTenty-fint  ymr, 
ThAt  this  is  called  here  a  good  old  in 
thriTs  that  the  length  of  hmiMui  life  had 
o^  V  greatly  subsided.  In  oompariaon  of  all 
his  SQorea*irs  on  the  tfaroneo  of  Jadah  and 
ef  Israel,  his  age  wma  clearly  a  ''good  old 


I 


I 


Ver.  29.— The  Hebrew  word  here  tzans- 
kted  acta  is  identical  with  tho  words  tiaiis- 
Uied  three  timeo  aflerwards  in  this  T«ns 
book.    A  uniform  rendering  for  all  might 
be  f'>and  in  the  general  word  •* hiatonr" of 
'-actk"    The  qaeotioa  as  to  the  probabla 
natore  of  these  worka,  and  whether  Mentieal 
with  our  Books  of  6amnel«  haa  been  treated 
cf  in  the  Introduction.     The  Hebrew  wnd 
for  *^  teer^"  applied  in  this  Terse  to  Saniiid, 
is  irry.    And  that  applied  to  Gad,  tboogh 
the  Anthorixed  Tersion  has  the  i^twA  traoa- 
lauon,  *•  seer,"  ia  rnrrt.     There  can  be  no 
doabt  that  the   word  applied    to  Somnel 
woold,  under  any  oirmunstanceot  stand  as 
the  higher  of  the  two  names,  were  there  any 
ccmpariwn  intended  between  them.    This 
is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  it  ia  foimdnsed 
only  of  him  (1  Sam.  ix.  9,  11, 18, 19 ;  2  Sam. 
XT.  27;  ch.  ix.  22;  xxvi  28;  xxix.  29)  and 
of  Hanaui  (2  Chron.  xtL  7,  lOX  whereas  the 
word  applied  to  Gad  in  this  Terse  is  tho 
gfntrie  name  for  seers,  and  ia  nsed  sereni 
times  in  the  Books  of  Chrenicles  of  other 
penons  than  Gad.    At  the  same  time,  tba 
parenthesis  in  1  gam.  ix.  9,  to  the  effect 
that  the  word  here  used  of  Samael  as  §eer 
("'*■"'!)  ^as  superseded  in  later  times  (as,  for 
instance,  at  the  time  of  the  writing  of  tho 
Biioks  of  Samuel)  by  the  word  prophet  (,^2^% 
compared  with   Isa.  xxx.    10,  points  in  a 
somewhat  different  direction.    In  the  fint 
place,  it  would  indicate  that  onr  Authorized 
Version  in  Isa.  xxx.  10  should  rather  stand, 
**  Which  say  to  the  prophets,  Prophesy  not, 
and    to    the    seers,"  etc.     While    for  our 
present  passage  it  would  indicate  that  no 
insidious   comparison  is   poesible   between 
Samuel  and  Gad  as  seers,  but  rather  that 
Samuel  retains  the  old  honoured  name  by 
which  he  had  been  wont  to  be  called,  and 
that  to  Nathan  is  with  equal  naturalness 
attached  the  more  modem  name — the  func- 
tions represented  being  essentially  the  same, 
or  at  lea&t  analogous. 

Ver.  30. — Tho  phrase  in  this  verse,  Ths 
times  that  went  oyer  him,  is  noticeable  as 
an  hapux  Ugomencn,  There  are,  howt  ver, 
not  a  few  phrases  more  or  less  nearly  ap- 
proaching it  in  sense,  and  all  hinging  on  the 
word  times  (ch.  xii.  32  ;  Esth.  i.  13 ;  Job 
xxiv.  i. ;  Ps.  xxxi.  15 ;  Dan.  vii.  25).  The 
last  sentence  of  this  chapter  is  illustrated, 
and  most  suggestively,  by  2  Chron.  xii  8 ; 
xvii.  10,  11,  22—30 ;  Ex'a  ix. 


CH.  XXIX.  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  439 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — Qod^s  choosing^  and  man^s  right  attitude  in  ike  presence  of  it.  It  is  very 
evident  that  great  anxiety  pressed  upon  the  mind  of  David  whenever  he  thought  of  the 
youthfulness  of  Solomon  side  by  side  with  the  magnitude  of  the  enterprise  in  store  for 
him.  Nervousness,  however,  does  not  paralyze  David,  but  does  make  him  thoughtful, 
provident,  and  careful  (as  far  as  he  can  see  the  way)  to  disarm,  at  all  events,  the  more 
apparent  and  threatening  dangers.  The  remoter,  human  calculation  must  fail  to  gauge, 
and  must  leave  with  humble  trust  and  humbler  confession  of  its  own  limited  powers. 
Notice  in  this  connection — 

I.  The  significant  assebtion  on  the  pabt  op  David  op  God's  act  op  choice. 
Addressing  all  the  congregation  of  the  people,  and  consciously  facing  all  the  perils  of 
the  situation — not  blinding  himself  to  them  nor  trying  to  cloke  them  from  others- 
David  says,  "  Solomon  my  son,  ...  is  yet  young  and  tender,  and  the  work  is  great ; " 
but  in  the  middle  he  finds  opportunity  to  insert  this  suggestive  qualification,  "  Whom 
alone  God  hath  chosen."  1.  God's  choice^  God's  caUf  where  they  can  be  truly  asserted, 
are  the  unchallengeable  vindication  of  whatsoever  may  seem  unusual,  unreasonable, 
even  unjust.  He  has  legitimate  power  over  all  that  he  has  made.  He  gives  not 
account  to  any  one  of  his  doings.  The  things  most  unexpected  are  what  he  fr^ 
qucntly  brings  to  pass.  This  is  David's  tacit  answer  to  all  his  elder  children,  if  they  are 
murmuring  in  their  hearts ;  this  his  pronounced  vindication  of  himself  before  "  all  the 
congregation  of  the  people,"  if  they  should  censure  him,  that  in  one  and  the  same 
breath  he  makes  Solomon  his  chief  heir  and  successor  and  responsible  for  so  great  a 
work,  and  yet  betrays  an  unfeigned  anxiety  as  to  his  fitness  and  competency  for  the 
position.  It  suffices  to  clear  him  of  the  suspicion  of  an  unpatemal  partiality,  on  the 
one  hand,  in  his  family,  and  in  his  nation  on  the  other  hand,  of  a  weak  and  unpatriotio 
favouritism.  2,  God's  choice — ^his  call,  the  persuasion  of  his  decree — is  the  one  source 
of  confidence  to  the  innermost  heart  of  the  man,  who  must  otherwise  often  be  the  tor* 
tured  victim  of  anxiety,  of  doubt,  of  mystery.  In  human  life  there  may  often  bo  not 
one  word  of  worldly  wisdom  to  be  urged  for  a  course  for  which  the  individual  heart  never* 
theless  may  have  not  so  truly  its  own  reasons  as  God's  own  reasons.  The  thing  that 
conspicuously  fails  to  justify  itself  before  the  eye  of  the  whole  world  may  find  its 
sovereign  raison  d'etre  in  what  was  the  dictate  of  an  unmistakable  inspiration.  The 
grain  of  seed  was  of  heavenly  sowing.  The  spot  where  it  fell  was  lighted  by  the  light 
of  God's  eye.  The  germinating  and  all  the  subsequent  stages  of  growth  to  the  very 
ripening  of  it  were  all  watched  and  favoured  by  Divine  tending.  The  result  is  secure. 
And  that  result  stands  good  and  the  fruits  of  it  have  spread  far  and  wide,  when  all  the 
criticism  with  which  it  was  assailed  has  perished  ignominiously.  The  strength  of  the 
martyr  has,  of  course,  been  rooted  in  this,  and  the  paradox  has  been  times  without 
number  witnessed  of  the  gentlest,  meekest,  and  most  self-surrendering  standing  the 
strongest,  speaking  the  most  dogmatically,  and  refusing  to  surrender  a  jot  of  what  they 
held.  So  with  healthiest  communication  God  visits  the  very  heart  of  mankind,  and  in 
reaching  one  so  deeply,  so  surely,  influences  millions,  and  colours  the  complexion  of 
centuries  succeeding.  Whatever  natural  apprehension  remained  now  on  the  mind 
of  David,  it  was  he  who  most  felt  of  what  a  load  of  responsibility  he  was  relieved  when 
he  could  say  of  Solomon, "  Whom  alone  God  hath  chosen."  3.  The  conviction  of  God's 
choice,  call,  or  decree  being  in  question  inspires,  not  force,  confidence,  comfort  only,  but 
also  reverence,  unquestioning  submission,  implicit  obedience.  This  proved  already  by 
the  conduct  of  David  and  his  own  careful  exhortation  of  Solomon  and,  so  to  say,  educa- 
tion of  him  for  his  future  place,  is  also  abundantly  evidenced  in  the  tone  of  his  present 
address  to  the  people  in  alluding  to  the  subject.  Perhaps  no  aspect  of  the  character  of 
God  given  us  by  revelation  has  met  with  more  irreverent,  sceptical,  and  quibbling 
treatment  than  this  from  that  part  of  the  world  '*  that  knoweth  not  God."  Yet,  in 
strictest  harmony  as  it  is  with  all  the  original  facts  of  the  spontaneity  of  One  who  mast 
needs  be  a  sovereign  Creator  if  he  be  any  at  all,  the  deepest  things  involved  in  the 
choice  and  the  call  and  the  decree  of  God  must  be  the  deepest,  coolest  springs  of 
reverence,  resignation,  and  loving  obedience  to  the  other  part  oi  the  world.  Then 
Tsre  sing— 


440  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ca  xxix.  1— 3a 


"  When  my  dim  reason  would  demand 
Why  tnat  or  this  thou  dost  ordain, 
By  some  vast  deep  I  seem  to  stand. 
Whose  seorets  I  must  ask  in  vain. 

**  When  doubts  disturb  my  troubled  breast. 
And  all  is  dark  as  night  to  me, 
Here  as  on  solid  rock  I  rest — 
That  80  it  seemeth  good  to  thee. 

**  Be  this  my  joy,  that  eyermore 

Thou  rulest  all  things  at  thy  wllL 
Thy  sovereign  wisdom  I  adore — 
And  calmly,  sweetly  trust  thee  still/* 

II.  The  firm  absebtiok  befobb  the  nation  of  what  it  is  that  gifts  akt  work 

OF  MAN  WITH  TRUE  DIONITY,  WITH  OENUINB  IHFOBTANCB.      **  The  palace  is  .  •    .   fOF  tho 

Lord  God."    This  is  to  put  things  in  their  right  places ^Gk)d,  heaven,  immortality^ 
the  unperishing  first  of  all.    1.  A  sound  religious  principle  is  bravely  upheld  before  alL 
There  is  none  of  the  bated  breath  and  the  semi-suppression  offered  to  it  which  are  so 
often  offered  to  the  principles  of  revealed  religion.    2.  A  most  neglected  aspect  ot 
TeligiouB  practice  is  here  brought  into  prominence.    Truths  and  principles  of  religion, 
acknowleaged  by  the  lip,  are  too  often  ignored  in  practice.    The  prayers  we  say,  the 
praise  we  sing,  the  adoration  we  ejaculate,  are  not  unfrequently  dishonoured  to  the 
degree  of  being  rendered  worthless  through  the  next  deed  we  do  or  fail  to  do.    It  is  not 
the  tender,  the  immature,  the  inexperienced,  the  incompetent  who,  nntmsted  ia 
statesmanship,  untrusted  in  the  professions  of  human  life,  are  to  bo  indifferently  or 
recklessly  trusted  with  the  affairs  of  *'  the  kingdom."    And  even  when  God  calls  sucfa« 
man,  both  prince  and  people,  the  skilled  and  the  experienced,  are  only  to  hear  more 
practically  the  call  to  rally  round  the  Lord's  choice.  3.  The  non-performance  of  humaa 
work  for  God  is  sufficiently  guarded  from  confusion  with  the  non-meritoriousness  of 
human  work  for  God.    The  distinction,  abundantly  plain  to  all  who  have  eyes  to  see,  is 
often  treated  as  though  it  were  among  the  inscrutable  mysteries.    To  such  an  extent 
is  this  pretence  carried  that  the  neglect  of  a  high  and  conscientious  performance  of 
works  for  God  is  assumed  to  be  warranted  by  the  mere  fact  that  no  merit  lives  in 
them  in  their  aspects  Godward.    Yet  the  less  of  meritoriousness  the  more  peremptory 
may  he  the  demand  that  that  humble  quotum  of  duty  be  punctiliously  and  as  heartily 
performed.    How  healthy,  how  natural  to  an  unsophisticated  conscience  and  judgment, 
sounds  the  tone  of  David's  language  now,  '*  The  work  is  great :  for  the  palace  is  not  for 
man,  but  for  the  Lord  God  "  1     Will  anything  in  modem  days  pass  muster  to  be  given 
to  God,  to  the  Church  of  Christ,  to  his  work  ?    Yet  this  is  the  spirit  of  much  language 
we  hear,  of  much  more  conduct  we  witness.    In  the  gifts  of  the  hand,  in  the  gifts  of  the 
mind,  and  in  the  gifts  of  the  heart,  the  weak  and  poor,  the  blind  and  blemished  and 
lame,  are  too  frequently  presented  to  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  to  the  Church  of  Chrbt, 
to  the  highest  office  of  the  ministry  of  Christ's  gospel.    The  work  is  not  held  great,  ju^t 
because  it  is  of  an  ecclesiastical  cast.    It  would  have  enlisted  tenfold  to  an  hundred- 
fold interest  or  enthusiasm  if  it  had  been  of  a  civic,  of  a  patriotic,  or  of  a  domestic  sort. 
So  David  thought  not,  did  not,  whether  now  in  the  last  hours  of  mortal  life  or  in  the 
days  when  youth  glowed,  strength  abounded,  and  the  heart  loved  to  sing  of '^  Jerusalem 
as  its  chief  joy  "  and  God  as  its  "  Strength  and  Portion  for  evermore." 

Vers.  2 — 9. — A  pattern  for  religious  devotion.  There  is  much  religious  feeling  that 
fails  of  fruitfulness.  It  resembles  often  the  fragrant  blossom  of  the  early  spring  on  the 
fruit  tree,  and  which  promises  well  even  beyond  the  time  of  the  setting,  but  still  fails 
most  disappointingly  of  bringing  fruit  to  }>erfection.  These  fidlures  are  generally  easily 
traceable  in  each  successive  instance  to  their  proper  cause.  But  when  so  traced  the 
mischief  is  done,  the  forfeiture  is  suffered,  and  the  wisdom  comes  all  too  late.  The  real 
composition  of  genuine  religious  devotion,  the  elements  necessary  to  practical  religious 
devotion,  are  well  illustrated  in  this  series  of  verses.  'J'hey  have  much  in  common  with 
the  characteristic  marks  of  Christian  compassion.  Either  of  these  principles  is  very 
often  found  to  i>iue,  just  as  though  for  want  of  stamina.    To  prevent  this  disappoint- 


cm.  XXIX.  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  441 

ment  and  waste  would  be  to  add  an  incalculable  amount  to  the  growth  of  goodness  and 
to  the  benefit  of  the  world.  And  the  pattern  good  for  religious  devotion  exhibited  to 
us  here  shows  the  following  characteristics : — 

I.  It  seeks  an  individual  object.  The  house  to  be  builded  for  the  Lord,  the  temple, 
IS  now  the  thought  of  David's  heart  and  the  object  of  what  remains  to  him  of  earthly 
life.  And  of  this  he  might  truly  say  in  the  language  used  long  after  by  St.  Paul, 
•*  This  one  thing  I  do."  This  was  confessedly  in  David's  time,  and  from  the  point  of  view 
of  his  nation,  a  very  great  enterprise ;  yet  it  was  one  thing  to  think  of  and  another 
to  do.  How  much  time  and  feeling  and  earnestness  are  frittered  away,  counting  for 
nothing  except  mournful  moral  reBection  in  the  retrospect,  with  those  who  wait  to  do 
anything  until  they  might,  as  they  fondly  imagine,  do  all,  or,  if  not  all,  might  embrace 
a  very  large  compass  in  their  beneficent  aspiration  1  Universal  observation  rebukes  the 
large  foible.  The  useful  men  have  been  those  who  have  steadily  and  with  determina- 
tion pursued  one  thing  at  the  time.  This  is  the  first  healthy  sign  of  religious  devotion, 
when  with  heart  and  hand  it  weds  itself  to  one  object  of  zeal  and  pursuit.  Concentra* 
tion  of  purpose,  of  affection,  of  energy,  is  as  much  the  secret  of  great  usefulness  directed 
to  the  very  highest  ends  as  it  is  of  that  poor  travesty  of  it,  earthly  success,  so  often 
mistaken  and  mishonoured  as  the  equivalent  of  usefulness. 

II.  It  studies  its  object  with  discriminating,  painstaking  oabb.  We  are  often 
tempted  to  buy  off  individual  responsibility  by  doing  just  what  others  do,  and  giving 
just  what  others  give,  and  suffering  ourselves  to  bo  borne  on  the  general  stream  of 
opinion,  or  on  the  old  stream  of  opinion,  as  though  no  individual  judgment,  or  con- 
science, or  conviction  were  possible  to  us.  This,  however,  is  the  very  opposite  of 
what  we  do  when  we  feel  our  own  individual  interest  to  be  concerned.  If  we  are  to 
give  reality  and  honesty  to  Ood's  work  and  grace  and  finish  to  our  work  for  man,  for 
Christ's  sake,  it  must  be  by  this  latter  "rule  that  we  are  guided.  And  very  lovingly 
and  heartily  must  we  resign  ourselves  to  its  methods.  How  carefully  David  had  sur- 
veyed in  thought  the  whole  and  every  part  of  the  one  work  to  which  he  had  "  set  his 
affection  "  I  The  gold,  and  silver,  and  brass,  and  iron,  and  wood,  and  onyx  stones,  and 
glistering  stones,  and  stones  of  divers  colours,  and  all  manner  of  precious  stones,  and 
marble  stones  in  abundance, — all  the  variety  of  them  had  been  imagined  and  provided 
for,  or  all  the  weight  and  purity  of  the  metal  had  been  measured  and  contracted  for. 
Thought  and  discrimination  and  pains  had  been  spared  in  nothing  of  all  these.  The 
circumspection  and  minuteness  of  care  and  fond  anxiety  which  men  know  so  well  to 
spend  on  themselves  and  their  own  transient,  temporal  interests,  David  now  spends  on 
the  work  of  God.  Such  exercise  of  religious  devotion  throws  thrilling  interest  and 
unwonted  animation  into  any  holy  work,  and  invokes  with  unerring  importunity 
Heaven's  abounding  blessing. 

III.  It  pursues  its  anxious  preparations,  and,  if  negessaby,  fubsues  them  fob  ▲ 
LONG  time  in  silence,  ob  IN  ooMPABATTVE  SILENCE.  Nothing  less  needs  ostentation, 
nothing  less  warrants  display,  than  our  work  for  God.  When  any  man  is  deeply  conscious 
that  it  is  God's  work  that  he  has  in  hand,  then  he  feels  it  is  God's  glory  that  he  has 
at  heart,  and  this  dispenses  with  all  craving  for  notice  and  applause.  This  latter  is  poor 
food  for  any  one  whomsoever  who  has  already  known  and  tasted  the  other.  Now,  the 
case  of  David  at  the  present  time  was  such  that  what  he  was  doing  must  needs  have 
been  known.  It  could  not  have  been  hidden  in  his  own  heart  or  anywhere  else.  Yet 
it  is  plain  that  he  had  for  some  time  been  patiently,  and  with  no  needless  publicity, 
making  his  zealous  preparations.  He  was  certainly  far  from  finding  himself  in  the 
position  of  Noah  when  planning  and  building  the  ark — the  object  of  ridicule,  hindrance, 
and  jeering  of  the  people.  No,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  is  he  continually  sounding  the 
trumpet  and  calling  attention  to  himself  and  his  doings.  But  now  the  ripe  moment 
had  come  when  the  loving  and  patient  preparations  of  one  must  be  handed  over,  not 
exactly  to  another,  but  into  the  trust  of  the  representatives  of  a  nation  as  well.  It  was 
a  moment  when  it  was  needful  that  the  deeds  and  the  purposes  of  David  should  no 
longer  simply  escape  into  the  knowledge  of  others,  but  be  formally  and  solemnly 
announced  to  all  a  listening  people.  The  work  of  Christ  in  the  world  loves  silence, 
patience,  hiddenness  long  time.  Neither  he  nor  his  kingdom  nor  his  chiefest  servants 
"come  with  observation,"  nor  live  **with  observation;"  yet  the  longer  the  delay  and 
the  humbler  the  obscurity,  the  more  eifectiTe  and  heart-stirring  will  the  final  '*  mani- 


442  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,    [oh.  xxix.  1— da 

festation**  be.  The  self-cienial,  the  deep  interest,  the  long  labour  of  the  hmnblefli 
fiEkithful  seiraQt  will  be  proclaimed  before  a  kingdom  and  in  a  Kingdom  which  ahall  have 
gathered  all  others  into  itself,  and  by  the  King  of  kings  himself. 

rV.  It  giybb  of  its  own  bitbstance.  The  temptation  is  great  witb  some  leaden 
of  the  people  merely  to  lead,  to  direct,  to  administer.  And  when  this  is  the  caae  the 
deficiency  will  very  generally  express  itself  somewhere  before  long.  Enthusiasm  will 
be  wanting  in  the  followers.  In  their  minds  an  irresistible  sense  of  mireality  will  get 
awakened.  With  a  good  conscience,  indeed,  David  can  appeal  to  the  Hherality  of 
others  by  a  simple  reference  to  his  own  example.  **  Of  his  own  proper  good,**  «a 
**  private  substance,*'  he  had  contributed  largely.  The  influence  of  such  an  annoanoe- 
ment  is  at  least  twofold.  1.  It  attests  the  honesty  of  the  leader.  2.  It  speaks  more 
strongly  than  any  words  could  urge  the  powerful,  sometimes  omnipotent,  siimalus  of 
example. 

y.  It  owns  to  ak  iktbiksio  zeal  ik  appbalino  to  othbbs.  One  can  almost 
imagine  David  saying  to  himself,  after  all  that  he  has  thought,  prepared,  done,  sUIl  this 
further,  "  Woe  is  to  me  if  I  do  not  testify  with  my  dying  Hps,  and  testify  in  thia  way 
— by  appealing  earnestly  to  others  1"  True  enough,  there  is  preaching  that  is  of  the 
weakest.  Its  feeble  tones,  its  timid  essaying  of  its  vocabulary,  its  apologetic  style, 
bespeak  its  insincerity,  at  all  events  its  untrustworthiness.  It  has  no  ring  about  it. 
But  the  devotion  that  is  real  is  confident  in  itself.  If  it  sometimes  seem  to  overstep  the 
threshold  of  moderation,  it  is  ashamed  to  stay  this  side  of  it.  The  very  best  zeal  for 
inflaming  others  is  that  which  consumes  self,  ^  ^^  **  greater  Son  of  David  "  came  to 
a  time  when  the  truest  utterance  of  his  pure  life  was  this,  *'  The  z^  of  thine  house 
hath  eaten  me  up."  The  highest  Christian  devotion  has  never  failed  to  find  this  voice : 
"  Who  is  willing  to  consecrate  his  service  this  day  unto  the  Lcmi?  "  Who  is  willing 
to  consecrate  himself  this  day  unto  the  Lord?  Who  is  willing  '*  to  fiU  his  hand,"  and 
iMinff  such  handful  to  the  Lord  ?  lliese  are  the  appeals  that  are  likely  to  be  heard  bj 
all  cLuses  of  men,  the  rich  and  the  poor,  people  and  princes.  And  they  sound  the  key- 
note ;  they  constitute  themselves  just  the  watchword ;  joy  is  awakened  unfeigned  m 
every  heart ;  praise  leaps  to  the  lips  of  alL  Then  men  **  offer  willingly  and  with  perfect 
heart"  The  scene — an  inspiration  itself— would  not  have  had  its  place  on  the  page  of 
GhDd's  Word,  but  for  the  religious  devotion,  real,  practical,  of  which  David  unconsciously 
ofiers  us  an  illustrious  example,  model  lesson. 

Vers.  10 — 20. — The  last  thanksgiving  of  the  royal  life  in  iis  varied  demeniM. 
Perhaps  David  had  been  in  some  doubt  as  to  how  his  address  would  be  received.  If 
received  favourably,  he  may  have  been  in  doubt  as  to  the  practical  response  to  it  for 
which  his  heart  longed.  And  even  if  of  this  also  he  felt  he  might  make  quite  sure,  yet 
there  was  the  hoiur  of  his  own  last  great  efibrt  now  past.  That  effort  had  been  made 
with  whatever  demand  on  body  and  mind  went  along  with  it,  and  the  suspense  is  over. 
Qreat  hearts  alone  can  know  great  joys.  There  are  few  greater  joys  than  are  found 
in  relief  from  the  strain  of  anxiety,  from  the  burden  of  long  preparation,  and  the 
conscious  weight  of  responsibility.  But  when  the  natural  welling  up  of  joy  from  such 
causes  coincides  with  an  unparalleled  success,  and  this  in  matter  of  religious  moment, 
then  every  possible  element  seems  present.  And  a  good  heart  gives  itself  up  to  a  trans- 
port, which  can  find  no  sympathetic  expression  but  at  the  foot  of  the  throne  of  thrones 
itself.  And  hither  does  David  now  betake  himself;  but  not  alone — thither  he  leads 
also  a  nation.  These  verses  contain  more  than  thanks^ving.  They  may,  however, 
be  appropriately  enough  called  the  service  of  thanksgiving.  And  the  service  appro- 
priates in  impartial  measures  the  characteristics  of  majesty  and  comprehensiveness. 
Here  are  unqualified  thanksgiving,  profound  adoration,  the  confession  of  creature 
dependence,  and  the  humiliation  befitting  it;  here  are  meditation  and  reminiscence, 
and  all  symptom  of  moral  sympathies  in  strongest  activity ;  here  is  petition,  fervent 
petition,  for  the  present  and  for  the  long  future  of  the  palace,  the  people,  and  the  son 
himself  of  David.  The  opening  sentence  of  this  service  gives  its  key-note  and  bespeaks 
its  main  design.    In  its  rich  variety,  however,  as  a  whole,  let  us  notice-* 

I.  Its  stately  ascbiption.  "  Blessed  be  thou,  Lord  G^od  of  Israel  our  father,  for 
ever  and  ever."  What  words  can  do  they  are  intended  here  to  do.  They  sometimes  do 
the  more  for  their  fewness,  and  they  are  few  here.    This  word  '*  blessed,"  when  applied 


CH.  XXIX.  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  443 

to  the  Divine  Personage,  is  a  picked,  choice,  word  of  the  spiritnal  vocabulary  that  is  open 
to  a  creature  approaching  the  Creator.  It  is  the  word  of  highest  and  most  refined 
effort.  Human  exclamation  has  done  its  best,  has  touched  its  highest  note,  when, 
having  passed  through  thanks,  gratitude,  praise,  glorifying,  magnifying,  and,  if  there  be 
any  other,  it  soars  on  this  note,  and  rests  and  poises  itself  as  it  were  on  this  note : 
'*  Blessed  be  thou.  Lord  God."  The  soul  that  has  striven  to  give  his  due  to  the  Lord 
GKxl,  yet  striven  too  anxiously  in  vain,  flings  itself  on  that  one  remaining  word,  and, 
lost  in  admiration,  it  breathes  the  simplicity  and  sincerity  of  an  impassioned  genuine 
fervour  into  it,  and  must  be  content.  This  word  '*  blessed,"  when  applied  to  the  Divine 
Being,  is  confessedly  a  familiar  one  to  our  ear,  to  our  lip ;  but,  if  estimated  by  the  freight 
it  contained  now,  has  contained  times  without  number,  and  may  this  day  oontain,  it  is 
one  owning  to  priceless  sacredness  and  beauty.  And  it  is  this,  not  so  much  for  what  it 
speaks,  but  for  the  fact  that  when  first  speech  most  fails,  it  comes  the  only  volunteer  to 
bear  Heavenward  what  we  mean.  Note,  again,  the  telling  accompaniments  of  this 
ascription  in  the  time-view  of  it.  1.  It  stretches  backward  to  the  birth  of  the  favoured 
and  now  enrapt  people,  "  Lord  God  of  Israel  our  Father.*'  2.  It  stretches  forward,  far^ 
for  further,  "  For  ever  and  ever." 

IL  Its  adoring  acknowledgment  of  God's  sovereign,  nNiYERSAii  proprietor- 
ship. To  give  to  God  his  own  even  in  language  is  a  thing  often  forgotten.  Thought  is 
careless  to  do  it.  Faith  is  sleepy  to  do  it.  Aspiration's  effort  is  weak  on  vnng  to  try 
it.  Men  grovel  in  the  use  of  even  the  infinitesimally  small,  and  forsake  the  mighty 
inspiration  of  the  mere  attempt  at  a  survey  of  all.  But  what  source  of  comfort  and  of 
nndelusive  strength  it  should  be  for  the  creature  to  rehearse  to  himself  the  infinite 
fulness,  the  glorious  riches  of  his  Maker,  Father,  Gt>d  1  That  the  contrast  should  seem 
appalling,  great  even  to  overwhelming,  is  not  the  just  and  legitimate  result  of  the 
meditation  and  acknowledgment.  To  be  timid,  anxious,  uncertain,  is  the  portion  for 
those  who  know  not  on  what  they  have  to  depend,  or  who  do  know  that  he  on  whom 
they  depend  has  himself  but  impoverished  means  1  But  the  weakest  creatiure  is  strong, 
comforted,  blessed,  whose  eye  of  faith  surveys  this  wealth  of  possession,  these  boundless 
surroundings  of  the  supreme  Being.  Yes ;  we  leave  unsaid,  unthought,  the  exalting 
sovereign  truth  now  (as  fully  as  it  is  simply)  recited  by  David  and  his  people.  "  Thine, 
0  Lord,  is  the  greatness,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory,  and  the  victory,  and  the  majesty : 
all  that  is  in  the  heaven  and  in  the  earth  is  thine ;  thine  is  the  kingdom,  0  Lord,  and  thou 
art  exalted  as  head  above  all.  Both  riches  and  honour  come  of  thee,  and  thou  reignest 
over  all ; . . .  and  in  thine  hand  it  is  to  make  great,  and  to  give  strength  unto  alL"  We 
may  distinguish  in  the  beautiful  riches  of  this  descriptive  and  this  majestically  pic- 
turesque sketch  of  the  infinite  Being  :  1.  The  intrinsic  attributes  given  to  him.  2.  The 
absolute  universal  possession  perceived  in  him.  3.  His  position  and  consequent  active 
Tide.  4.  His  bestowments  of  such  things  as  "  riches  and  honour.**  6.  His  bestowments 
of  such  other  more  intrinsic  vital  gifts,  as  "  to  make  great "  and  **  to  give  strength." 
There  are  gifts  for  the  hand,  but  there  are  other  gifts  for  the  very  springs  of  one's  oum 
life.  These  assimilate,  as  it  were,  vnth  our  spontaneous  force,  and  the  human  then 
shows  more  or  less  Divine.  GKxl  owns  all ;  and  great  is  the  all  which  he  owns.  And 
he  gives.  He  is  not  more  adorable  for  the  all  that  he  has  than  he  is  for  the  all  that  he 
gives.  And  it  is  very  interesting  to  observe,  as  by  the  help  of  this  passage,  how  difficult 
is  it  to  divorce  the  possessing  of  (rod  from  his  bestowing — all  creation  itself,  the  over- 
flowing of  his  fulness.  ^ 

III.  Its  simplest  pronoukckd  thanksgivino  and  praise.  When  the  adoring 
ecstasy  is  passed,  then  reason  and  justice,  though  on  the  humblest  scale,  are  to  resume 
their  place,  and  the  creaLtuie-debt  of  thanks  and  praise  is  to  be  paid,  sacredly,  simply 
paid,  with  the  lip.  To  this  David  leads  his  people  with  himself:  **Now  therefore,  our 
God,  we  thank  thee,  and  praise  thy  glorious  Name." 

IV.  Its  unqualified  disclaimer  of  ai.l  merit  on  the  part  of  king  and 
PEOPLE.  To  not  a  rag  of  self-righteousness  will  David  permit  the  whole  gathering  of 
his  nation  to  lay  claim.  Have  they  given  ?  they  have  given  what  was  first  given  to 
themselves.  Have  they  given  heartily  ?  they  have  given  to  the  Giver  himself.  There 
has  been  no  merit  in  their  doings.  No ;  nor  can  there  be  any  meritoriousness  about 
themselves.  For  what  are  they  ?  There  is  not  the  substance  in  them  of  which  merit 
could  be  made^  nor  the  root  to  them  of  which  it  could  grow,  nor  the  continuance 


444  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLEa    [ch.  ^rrr  i— aa 


belonging  to  them  by  which  it  might  ripen.  Their  life,  their  home,  thenudva,  are  all 
dependent  just  on  mercy,  and  their  hopes  lie  in  infinite  loving-kindness.  And  it  vas 
the  same  with  their  fathers  before  them«  To  such  material  and  such  m  history  merit 
cannot  find  where  to  attach. 

V.  Its  ukfaltebinq  appeal  to  conscious  nrrEaRrrr.  David  disclaims  all  merit, 
but  he  claims  confidently  before  the  all-seeing,  the  heart-searching  One,  his  own 
''uprightness,"  f.«.  pure  motive  and  sincere  zeal.  Few  things  have  owned  to  mors 
various  quality  under  one  face  than  the  profession  of  zeal  for  the  glory  of  God. 
Religious  zeal  t«,  no  doubt,  religious  zeal,  but  nine-tenths  of  what  is  named  religioos 
zeal  is  a  far  difiercnt  thing.  It  is  the  hybrid  ecclesiastical  zeal.  And  ecclesiastical 
seal  is  not  merely  a  thing  very  inferior  always,  but  often  absolutely  antagonistic  to  the 
genuine  thing,  religious  zeaL  That  David  protests  his  own  zeal  and  heartfelt  pleasora 
in  the  great  work  of  the  temple-building  may  seem  unnecessary,  and  his  object  ia 
doing  so  may  seem  somewhat  obscure.  Yet  probably  all  found  here  is  true  to  nature. 
First,  he  could  not  be  wrong  in  formally  dedicating  at  this  time,  with  express  rehearsal  ci 
it,  his  own  work  and  his  oum  giving  to  God.  But  further,  as  we  shall  see,  his  doing  so 
mav  have  been  the  sugge:ition  of  what  he  brings  next  into  prominence.  ThoU  is  ia 
reality  grafted  upon  his  own  enterprise  and  is  best  introduced  by  it. 

YI.  Its  emphatic  expression  of  a  delighted  and  unusual  sykpatht.     Soma 
of  the  most  subtle  flattery  that  the  human  heart  offers  to  itself,  and  then  most  eagerly 
receives,  consists  in  its  very  ready  assumption  of  moral  and  spiritual  superiority.    The 
Pharisee,  as  portrayed  by  the  master  Limner  himself  of  human  characters,  is  never 
extinct.    But  in  form  less  gross,  in  effect  more  insidious,  the  essence  of  the  Pharisaic 
spirit  perpetually  reappears  to  some  degree  or  other,  and  in  some  form  or  other.     To 
affect  a  zeal  for  the  good  and  the  right,  an  appreciation  of  them,  a  sympathy  with  them 
far  in  excess  of  those  of  others,  is  a  common  foible,  ay,  a  vice  of  the  pseudo-spirituaL  Nor 
are  there  wanting  instances  where  the  spread  of  knowledge,  of  presentation  of  facts,  in 
a  word,  of  legitimate  inducement,  are  suppressed,  lest  an  enthusiasm  now  confined  to  ons 
or  a  very  few  should  become  general,  and  lest  an  envious  distinction  should  be  forfeited, 
born  of  singularity  alone.    Sincerity's  death-knell  is  sounding  then  most  surely.    But 
now,  if  David  recite  his  own  zeal,  and  appeal  to  the  all-searching  One  to  sec  and  try  it, 
he  does  so  in  truth  to  pave  the  way  for  deli,j;hteJ  and  sympathetic  celebration  of  the 
facts  that  so  many  are  "  like-minded,  havinj;  the  same  love,  being  of  one  accord,  of  one 
mind"  (Phil.  ii.  3).     To  witness  the  indications  of  a  right  state  of  heart  in  others,  and 
to  witness  them  with  unaffected  joy,  mark  the  life  of  holy  sympathies,  and  the  health 
of  one's  own  spiritual  state.     The  Apostle  Paul,  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans  (i.  52), 
speaks  of  it  as  the  direst  condemnation  of  certain  that  they  "not  only  do"  things  of 
the  worst  moral  significance  (which  might  possibly  be  done  under  the  force  of  strong 
present  temptation),  but  that  they  also  '*  have  pleasure  in  them  that  do  them."    St. 
Paul  is  there  stigmatizing  certain  immoral  sympathies,  as  marking  the  depths  of  deepest 
degradation.     On  the  other  hand,  we  are  prone  to  slight  the  value  of  intense  moral 
sympathies  with  goodness.    But  in  fact,  the  presence  of  these  measures  the  real  strength 
of  a  new  nature  very  accurately.     And  the  example  of  David  invites  our  notice  of  them 
here.    He  brings  into  special  prominence  the  right  feeling  and  the  right  doing  of  the 
people,  and  utters  his  own  unfeigned  joy  because  of  them. 

VII.  Its  appropriate  and  earnest  prayer.  All  will  fail  if  it  be  not  "  sanctified  by 
the  Word  of  God  and  by  prayer."  Feelin;::,  purpose,  aspiration,  and  the  right  beginning 
of  doing  may  yet  all  fall  through.  Promise  may  soon  die  off,  or  it  may  die  oflf  some- 
what later.  Only  it  will  die  off,  unless  there  be  given  to  it  from  above  the  needed 
element  of  perpetuity.  How  much  there  is  of  the  future  of  ourselves,  and  of  those 
unspeakably  dear  to  us,  which  we  relegate  to  the  mere  domain  of  hope,  flattering,  fond, 
frail,  false  Jiope  I  We  do  so  often  with  mistaken  humility,  under  the  impression  that 
we  can  do  nothing  else  for  the  future,  that  we  must  not  allow  excessive  anxiety  about 
it,  that  "  Sufficient  to  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof."  But  we  are  then  forgettino;  the  force 
of  prayer,  and  that  it  is  lar;;ely  of  its  nature  and  privilege  to  **  reach  a  hand  through 
time  to  catch  ...  a  far-off  interest."  David  offers  prayer,  and  the  right  prayer.  Had 
his  nation  but  lived  by  that  prayer,  their  grandeur  would  have  survived,  an  unj^^aralleled 
grandeur,  to  this  day.  Kotice,  therefore,  in  the  prayer  :  1.  How  David  makes  this  the 
one  burden  of  it — that  the  thing  of  right  present  appearance  and  of  happy  promise  may 


cm.  XXIX.  1— 30J    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE   CHRONICLES.  445 

be  "  for  ever,"  may  be  '*  stablished,"  may  be  "  kept."  2.  How  he  asks  that  this  per- 
petuity may  be  derived  from  deepest  source,  '*  the  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  the 
heart ;  "  "  the  stablished  heart ; "  **  the  perfect  heart."  3.  How  he  invokes  €K)d  by  the 
titles  that  might  by  supposed  most  to  move  Deity,  and  most  to  call  his  children  trust- 
fully and  gratefully  to  his  feet.  Many  a  temple,  palace,  castle,  would  we  build ;  for  many 
such  would  we  "  make  provision."  But  they  never  are  builded.  And  they  are  not 
builded  because  we  forget  that  *'  Except  the  Lord  build  the  house,  they  labour  in  vain 
that  build."  And  we  have  left  unmade  the  most  necessary  "provision"  of  all,  if  we 
have  forgotten  to  sanctify  our  enterprise  by  submitting  it  to  the  **  Lord  Qtxi  of  our 
fathers  "  and  of  ourselves,  and  begging  him  to  give  of  his  own  stability  and  enduring- 
ness  to  those  whose  hands  are  to  build. 

VIII.  Its  close,  heard  amid  the  echoes  op  one  unanimous  outburst  of  purb 
ADORATION. .  It  may  be  reverently  said  that  the  abdicating  king — abdicating  because  he 
was  abdicating  the  present  life — "  gave  the  word,  and  great  was  the  company  of  them 
that  published  it"  The  **  word  "  consisted  of  a  summons  to  "  bless  the  Lord  God." 
And  that  word  was  heard  and  obeyed  by  the  vast  throng.  Though  many  an  occasion 
may  invite  large  numbers  of  mankind  to  unite  to  one  end,  yet  in  no  one  employment 
could  the  vast  family  of  man  so  justly,  so  enthusiastically  unite  as  in  a  "  work  and 
worship  so  Divine  "  as  here  described.  Are  we  not  here  studying  a  "  type  "  indeed  ? 
Do  we  not  listen  herein  to  rehearsal  of  what  some  day — even  if  '*  far  off,  at  last  "— 
Heaven  shall  listen  to,  as  it  arises  from  earth,  and  of  what  earth  itself  shall  raise,  when 
earth  itself  is  raised  to  heaven?  So  this  service  ended.  So  we  believe  the  service 
of  earth  will  end ;  and  so  that  of  heaven  begin,  never,  never  to  end.  Gk)d  shall  be 
all  and  in  all.  He  shall  be  to  each  and  to  all  the  eternal  Ail  in  all.  Oh  for  the 
dawning  of  that  moment  when,  at  the  signal  of  an  inner  impulse,  the  innumerable 
congregation  itself  shall  fall  prostrate  in  irrepressible  adoring,  and  as  though  snatching 
at  this  word,  "  Now  bless  the  Lord  your  God  "  I 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. —  Toutliful  service,  1.  David's  words  bring  before  us  a  tender  worker. 
Solomon  was  yet  young,  and  his  father  seemed  to  regard  him  as  peculiarly  insufficient 
for  the  position  Providence  was  preparing  for  him.  Perhaps  his  character  thus  far 
was  unformed ;  and  it  may  have  been  his  accession  to  the  throne  which  was  the  occa- 
sion of  his  recognizing  his  responsibilities,  and  preparing  himself  for  his  kingly  duties. 
2.  They  bring  before  us  also  a  great  work.  The  young  monarch  was  to  build  a 
palace,  not  for  man,  but  for  God ;  to  carry  out  a  magnificent  and  costly  scheme — a 
work  which  should  be  of  lasting  importance,  both  for  Israel  and  the  world.  There  was 
an  apparent  want  of  correspondence  between  a  worker  so  tender  and  inexperienced, 
and  a  work  so  vast.  Yet  it  was  the  Divine  appointment  that  Solomon  should  build 
the  temple ;  and  events  proved  that,  with  God's  blessing,  he  was  able  to  carry  out  the 
great  undertaking.  The  lesson  of  this  verse  is  that  there  is  Divine  authority  for 
youthful  consecration  and  service ;  that  there  is  no  real  inconsistency  between  a  tender 
worker  and  an  important  work. 

I.  There  is  a  summons,  addressed  to  the  toung,  to  work  for  the  Lord. 
There  was  nothing  peculiar  or  exceptional  in  the  requirement  made  of  Solomon.  The 
kind  of  work  entrusted  to  him  was  special;  but  there  was  nothing  special  in  his 
call  to  work  tor  the  Lord.  Every  young  person  who  hears  the  tidings  of  the  gospel, 
wno  receives  the  Divine  revelation,  is  under  an  obligation  to  work  for  Christ.  When 
you  enjoy  the  privileges,  you  are  subjected  to  the  claims,  of  religion.  Jesus,  who  calls 
you  to  rejoice  in  his  love,  calls  you  to  engage  in  his  service.  In  detail^  God  by  his 
providence  will  point  out  to  you  how  you  may  glorify  him ;  in  principle,  the  service 
required  of  you  will  be  the  same  as  that  required  of  Solomon.  A  cheerful  mind,  a 
willing  heart,  an  unmurmuring  submission,  a  lifelong  devotion, — these  are  what 
Heaven  delights  in.  A  truly  Christian  life  is,  in  any  case,  a  great  work.  You  have  a 
palace  to  build  for  God;  and  all  holy  thoughts  and  righteous  deeds  and  wise  and 
kindly  words  are  as  stones  in  the  edifice — an  edifice  to  be  reared  to  God*s  glory.  How 
many  are  the  admonitions  we  find  in  Scripture  to  youthful  piety  and  consecration  I — 


446  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,    [oh.  xxix.  1-W. 


**  Remember  now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth  I  **  '*  My  son,  give  me  thine 
heart  1 "  "  Wilt  tiiou  not  from  this  time  cry  onto  me,  My  Father,  thoa  art  the  Guide 
of  my  youth  ?  " 

II.  There  are  makt  advantages  in  youthful  oonbeoration  to  thb  Lobd*i 
SERVICE.  1.  It  is  advantageous  to  the  worker,  A  sound  basis  is  thus  laid  for  a  noble 
character.  There  is  scope  for  development.  A  direction  is  given  to  the  active  nature 
which  there  will  be  no  occasion  to  reverse  or  alter.  2.  It  is  advantageous/or  the  work. 
There  is  time  for  doing  it  thoroughly  and  consistently.  The  youthful  worker  can 
adapt  himself  to  the  work,  and  his  interest  in  it  will  deepen  as  the  years  pass  cm. 
Youthful  enterprise  and  energy  will  tend  to  its  vigorous  prosecution.  Enthusiasm  and 
perseverance  combined,  under  the  guidance  and  with  the  blessing  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
God,  cannot  fail  to  forward  the  sacred  enterprise,  to  advance  the  rearing  of  the  spiritual 
structure.  3.  It  i$  acceptable  to  him  who  provides  the  work  and  quaiifie^  the  workmanm 
God  cannot  but  be  pleased  when  his  own  work  is  taken  in  liand  and  carried  on  by 
those  whom  he  himself  has  designed  for  it 

Practical  conclusion.  1.  Let  the  young  seriously  consider  the  call  of  Heaven, 
readily  accept  the  trust,  and  prayerfully  seek  guidance  and  help  for  its  fulfilment. 
God  comes  to  you  and  says,  "  Son,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard."  2.  Let  all 
Christians  encompass  youthful  workers  for  Christ  with  interest,  symiMthy,  and  suppli- 
cation. As  David  commended  the  young  prince,  his  son,  to  the  considerate  sympathy 
and  support  of  the  mighty  men,  priests,  and  counsellors,  so  would  we  beg  all  mature 
and  experienced  servants  of  the  Lord  to  uphold  their  younger  friends  ana  colleagues 
by  affectionate  interest  and  prayers. — ^T. 

Ver.  3. — Affection  for  God's  house.  It  would  be  absurd  to  compare  David's  attach* 
ment  to  the  projected  temple  to  a  Christian's  attachment  to  any  material  structure. 
The  tabernacle  and  temple  occupied  under  the  old  dispensation  a  position  no  building 
can  now  occupy.  The  true  comparison  is  with  the  spiritual  temple,  the  house  of  CK>d — 
the  great  edifice  constructed  of  living  stones,  even  of  consecrated  hearts. 

I.  Reasons  for  David*s  affection  to  the  Lord's  house.  1.  Mainly  his  attach* 
ment  to  the  Lord  himself,  in  whose  honour  it  was  to  be  reared.  2.  Secondarily,  the 
fact  that  the  project  was  one  which  he  himself  had  formed.  3.  And  further,  his 
knowledge  that  the  work  would  be  accomplished  by  his  own  loved  son. 

II.  Practical  proofs  of  this  affection.  1.  His  own  most  liberal  gifts  in  prepa* 
ration  for  the  work.    2.  His  encouragement  to  his  people  to  give  with  generosity. 

III.  Results  to  their  own  hearts.  They  could  not  cherish  such  feelings  of 
interest,  affection,  and  attachment,  and  manifest  their  feelings  in  so  practical  a  way, 
without  reaping  some  harvest  of  profit  in  their  own  souls.  Their  deep  and  disin- 
terested joy  in  their  gifts  is  an  evidence  of  the  benefit  which  they  received.  This 
example  should  encourage  Christians  to  cherish  and  display  a  religious  attachment 
towards  the  Church  purchased  by  our  Saviour's  blood. — T. 

Ver.  5. — Consecrated  service.  These  words  are  an  appeal  of  David  to  the  nobles,  and 
to  the  people  generally,  to  contribute  towards  the  building  of  the  temple  of  Jehovah  at 
Jerusalem.  He  himself  set  the  example  of  liberality ;  and  his  subjects  generally 
followed  the  example  he  gave.  "  Who  then,"  asked  he,  "  is  willing  to  fill  his  hand 
this  day  unto  the  Lord  ?  As  these  gifts  were  really  an  expression  of  the  devotion 
that  animated  the  hearts  of  the  Israelites,  the  English  Version  may  be  said  to  offer 
rather  an  enlargement  than  a  perversion  of  the  language.  And  the  question  is  one 
which  may  be  addressed  to  all  hearers  of  the  gospel.  For  all  are  call(xl  upon  to  give 
themselves  and  all  they  have  and  are  unto  the  God  who  made  them,  and  the  Redeemer 
who  bought  them.     We  have  here— 

I,  A  claim  affirmed.  Religion  not  only  offers  a  blessing,  it  requires  a  service. 
Salvation  is  the  substance  of  what  God  gives ;  consecration  is  what  God  demands. 
Salvation  is  from  past  sin  ;  consecration  is  for  future  life  and  service.  God  has  a  right 
to  the  surrender  of  our  will,  the^devotion  of  our  powers,  the  offering  of  our  possessioni, 
the  service  of  our  hands.  The  heart  is  his  first  demand ;  our  labours,  our  influence, 
our  liberality,  will  all  follow.  This  is  a  just  claim.  It  is  founded  on  Divine  right  and 
authority ;  for  he  is  our  Creator  and  King.    He  has  a  powerful  claim  upon  our  gratituds ; 


CH.  XXIX.  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  6F  THE  CHRONICLES.  447 


for  be  bas  treated  us  with  bounty,  and  be  bas  given  us  bis  Son  to  redeem  us  from 
iniquity  and  from  destruction.  We  are  for  ever  dependent  upon  him,  who  is  our  Lord 
and  Judge ;  and,  in  giving  unto  him,  we  do  but  give  him  his  own. 

II.  The  response  expected.  1.  A  willing  response.  In  fact,  there  can  be  no  unwill- 
ing response.  Ood  does  not  use  constraint,  and  a  grudged  offering  would  not  be  accept- 
able to  him ;  for  it  is  our  affection  and  devotion  that  he  desires.  2.  An  immeduUe 
response.  "  Who  is  willing  this  day  f  "  To-day  is  not  too  early ;  to-morrow  may  bo 
too  late.  The  old  have  no  time  to  lose.  Tbe  middle-aged  and  busy  should  not  leave 
decision  until  old  age  comes,  if  come  it  should.  But  it  is  chiefly  from  tbe  yoimg  that 
an  immediate  acceptance  of  the  invitation  of  the  gospel  is  desired,  that  so  they  may 
spend  a  whole  life  in  his  delightful  service.  '*  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voioe^  harden 
not  your  heart." 

III.  An  appeal  ubged.  "  Who  is  willing  ?  *  All  who  are  capable  of  understanding 
the  entreaty  and  the  ground  upon  which  it  is  based ;  all  who  enjoy  religious  privileges, 
who  hear  God*s  Word,  Christ's  gospel,  are  under  a  sacred  obligation  to  yield  themselves 
a  living  sacrifice  unto  God.  Motives,  inducements,  persuasions, — all  are  brought  to  bear 
upon  the  soul.  A  most  honourable  and  happy  service,  the  most  desirable  recompense^ 
the  profoundest  satisfaction, — all  are  proffered  to  you  upon  the  terms  of  unconditional 
surrender,  complete  consecration.  '*  Who  then  is  willing  to  consecrate  bis  service  this 
day  unto  the  Lord  ?  "— T. 

Ver.  9. — Oenerosity  and  joy.  There  was  true  unity  between  king  and  subjects.  It 
was  a  national  movement  in  which  they  joined,  and  it  was  a  national  emotion  which 
they  shared. 

I.  The  cause  to  which  thet  gave.  It  was  their  own  cause,  but  in  a  higher  sense 
it  was  the  Lord's.  It  was  for  the  glorv  of  Jehovah  and  for  the  spread  of  his  worship 
and  obedience  that  the  temple  was  to  be  reared;  a  cause  this  which  justified  all  their 
enthusiasm  and  all  their  liberality. 

II.  What  they  oavb.  They  offered  of  their  own  substance,  and  according  to  their 
several  ability ;  and  their  gifts  were  appropriate,  costly,  and  generous. 

III.  How  THET  GAVE.  '*  The  Lord  loveth  a  cheerful  giver ; "  and  such  givers  Israel 
furnished  on  this  occasion  in  great  abundance.  They  gave  willingly,  and  not  simply  in 
conformity  to  their  sovereign's  example*  They  gave  with  a  perfect  heart ;  f.0.  from  dis- 
interested, devout,  and  pious  motives. 

IV.  The  CONSEQUENCE  OP  THEiB  GiviKG.  "They  rejoiced.'*  A  simple  but  very 
expressive  account  of  the  feelings  of  both  monarch  and  subjects.  They  felt  by  antici- 
pation the  truth  of  oiur  Lord's  sayings  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive." 
The  selfish  and  niggardly  are  ever  the  miserable ;  the  sympathetic,  liberal,  and  self- 
denying  are  ever  the  happy  and  lightsome  of  heart. — ^T. 

Vers.  10 — 19. — Bavid^s  hUssing,  One  of  the  closing  acts  of  David's  life  was  a  public 
acknowledgment  of  Ood's  favour,  and  a  public  entreaty  of  Grod's  blessing  upon  his 
people  and  upon  his  son.  It  was  a  sacred  and  solemn  act  of  devotion,  and  only  inferior 
in  sublimity  to  the  invocation  and  prayer  of  Solomon  upon  the  occasion  of  the  dedica- 
tion of  the  temple.  The  aged  king  acted,  not  only  as  the  civil  ruler,  but  as  the  religious 
leader  of  Israel.  Gkithering  the  princes,  the  warriors,  and  the  multitude  together,  he, 
as  their  representative,  offered  spiritual  sacrifices  of  adoration,  thanksgiving,  and 
prayer  before  Israel's  God.  We  observe,  in  this  address  to  Heaven,  a  combination  of 
the  several  parts  of  which  devotion  should  be  composed. 

I.  The  RECOGNITION  OF  THE  DiviNE  CHABACTEB.  In  vcrs.  11  and  12  the  attributes 
of  Jehovah  are  celebrated  with  devout  reverence,  and  in  language  of  memorable  beauty 
and  eloquence.  The  propriety  of  such  an  invocation  is  manifest.  When  we  draw 
near  to  God,  it  is  not  simply  to  bring  our  sin  and  want  before  him ;  it  is  to  bring  bis 
holiness  and  greatness  and  beneficence  before  our  minds.  The  Lord  Jesus,  in  tho 
prayer  known  as  the  Lord's  Prayer,  has  given  us  an  example  of  such  adoration ;  for 
the  petitions  are  prefaced  by  a  reverent  invoking  of  the  Divine  Father. 

II.  The  BLESSING  OF  God's  Name.  The  contemplation  of  God's  power,  majesty,  and 
dominion  fails  to  produce  its  due  result,  unless  it  awakens  our  hearts  to  grateful  praise. 
Ver.  13,  '*  We  thank  thee,  and  praise  thy  glorious  Name."    Prayer  without  thanks- 


448  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHROOTCLE&    [ch.  xjtk.  1— aa 

giving  cannot  be  acceptable ;  what  God  has  done,  what  he  has  giTen,  must  be  acknow* 
lodged  by  those  who  have  fresh  favours  to  implore. 

III.  Humiliation  and  confession.  The  language  of  ver8.'14  and  15  is  marrelloiis 
for  sublimity  and  pathos,  has  wrought  itself  into  the  speech  and  the  prayers  of  mem 
Feeble,  finite,  dependent,  and  short-lived  denizens  of  earth,  when  we  come  into  tiut 
presence  of  the  Unchangeable  and  Eternal,  it  becomes  us  to  cherish  a  sense  of  our 
utter  unworthiness.  We  cannot  even  undertake  to  engage  in  the  service  of  God  with- 
out feeling  that  for  that  service  we  are  altogether  un6t.  Confession  of  sin  and  humili- 
ation before  the  All-holy  must  be  part  of  all  truly  acceptable  devotion. 

IV.  Intercession.  In  ver.  18  David  prays  for  Israel  at  large ;  in  ver.  19  for  his  son 
Solomon.  For  his  people  the  king's  chief  desire  was  that  the  Lord  would  "  prepare 
their  heart  unto  himself."  Their  allegiance  to  Heaven,  their  spiritual  good,  their  quali- 
fication for  whatever  work  God  should  call  them  to  undertake, — such  were  the  bleoa- 
iogs  the  aged  king  sought  on  behalf  of  his  subjects.  And  for  his  son,  how  eamestlj 
and  appropriately  did  he  plead  I  His  prayer  was  that  Solomon's  character  and  his  life- 
work  might  alike  be  acceptable  to  God.  A  prayer  so  comprehensive,  so  devout^  so 
suited  to  the  circumstances  in  which  it  was  uttered,  surely  deserves  the  attentive 
study  of  those  who  would  draw  near  to  God  in  such  a  spirit  as  may  justify  the  expeo« 
tation  that  he  will  draw  near  to  them. — T. 

Ver.  20. — WorsJtip,  David  was  a  true  leader  ;  for  he  not  only  directed,  he  preceded 
his  subjects  in  the  path  of  duty.  If  he  called  upon  his  soldiers  to  fight,  he  led  them  to 
the  field ;  if  he  desired  the  princes  to  offer  gifts,  he  first  himself  gave  munificently ; 
and  if  he  would  have  his  people  worship,  he  himsdf  set  them  the  example.  Thus,  upon 
the  occasion  of  presenting  offerings  towards  the  building  of  the  temple,  the  Idng 
summoned  the  inhabitants  of  Jenualem  together,  and  in  their  presence  and  hearing 
addressed  to  Heaven  the  adorations  and  petitions  recorded  in  this  chapter.  Only  after 
this  did  he  use  the  language  of  the  text,  *'  Now  bless  the  Lord  your  Grod." 

I.  The  nature  of  worship  :  in  what  worship  consists.  Worship  of  some  sort  has 
been  general  among  all  nations.  Revealed  religion  directs  and  consecrates  what  seems 
a  natural  tendency ;  and  both  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New  contain  many  admoni- 
tions to,  many  examples  of,  true  and  acceptable  worship.  1.  True  worship  is  spiritual. 
"  God  is  a  Spirit :  and  they  that  worship  him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth.** 
It  consists  in  the  recognition  of  the  Divine  attributes,  the  acknowledgment  of  the 
Divine  reign,  and  gratitude  for  Divine  mercies — gifts,  forbearance,  loving-kindness. 
Nothing  is  more  hateful  to  God  than  the  language  and  posture  of  worship  from  which 
spiritual  devotion  is  absent.  Of  the  insincere  he  speaks  with  indignation,  "  This 
people  draweth  near  unto  me  with  their  lips,  but  their  heart  is  far  from  me."  Silence 
is  compatible  with  true  worship;  insincerity  is  not.  2.  A  devout  heart  will  find 
expression  for  its  sentiments.  "The  people  bowed  down  their  heads,  and  worshipped." 
Language  is  an  assistance  to  the  intelligent  worshipper,  though  an  unuttered  aspiration 
or  affection  is  heaixi  and  accepted  by  Gcd.  And  attitudes  of  kneeling,  standing,  Dowing 
the  head,  stretching  forth  the  hands,  are  all  appropriate  as  expressive  of  the  feelings  ot 
the  devout  worshipper.  It  is  only  when  they  are  substituted  for  spiritual  worship  that 
they  are  bad  and  displeasing  to  him  who  searches  the  hearts  and  tries  the  reins  of  the 
children  of  men. 

II.  The  Object  of  worship  :  to  whom  worship  is  due.  The  congregation  of  Israel 
"  worshipped  the  Lord,  and  the  king."  Yet  the  homage  offered  to  David  was  civil,  not 
religious ;  and  there  could  have  been  no  danger  of  confusing  the  one  with  the  other.  Whilst 
the  heathen  worship  **  gods  many  and  lords  many,''  to  us  there  is  but "  one  €K)d,  and 
one  Mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus.''  The  Christian  adores  and 
blesses  God  in  Christ.  Notice  that  he  is  :  1.  Your  God.  The  Israelites  were  reminded  of 
this ;  and  we  all  are  summoned  to  regard  him  as  ours ;  for  he  has  made  us  and  redeemed 
us,  and  by  his  own  Spirit  renewed  us,  so  that  we  are  his  and  he  is  ours.  2.  And  he  is 
also  your  fathers'  God.  ITie  Hebrews  knew  him  as  "  the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac, 
and  of  Jacob."  And  we  can  exclaim,  when  we  approach  him, "  Doubtless  thou  art 
our  Father,  though  Abraham  be  ignorant  of  us,  and  Israel  acknowledge  us  not.**  The 
fact  tliat  God  made  himself  knowL  unto  the  fathers  of  mankind,  that  our  parent*  or 
ancestors  kuuw  and  acknowledged  him,  adds  a  pathos  and  a  power  to  our  prayers. 


CH.  XXIX.  1—30.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  449 

III.  Thb  W0B8HIPPER8.  David  summoned  "  all  the  congregation  "  to  worship,  bles«, 
and  praise  the  Lord.  1.  All  men  have  abundant  reason  to  bless  the  Lord.  He  is 
"good  unto  all."  His  bounty,  care,  watchfulness,  and  long-suffering,  have  been 
experienced  by  all.  No  wonder  that  the  psalmist  in  so  many  passages  calls  upon 
all  people — all  nations — to  praise  the  Lord ;  summons  young  men  and  maiden?, 
old  men  and  children,  to  praise  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  2.  All  men  are  in  the  gospel 
encouraged  to  present  acceptable  worship  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ,  The  Saviour 
reveals  the  Father  as  the  Object  of  worship,  and  himself  provides  the  new  and  living 
way  of  access,  and  offers  the  intercession  which  secures  Divine  acceptance  and  approval 
for  the  believing  worshipper.  "  I  will,"  says  the  Apostle  Paul,  **  that  men  pray  every- 
where, lifting  up  holy  hands,  without  wrath  and  doubting." 

Questions.  1.  Do  you  worship  God  yourselves  ?  2.  Do  you  admonish  and  encourage 
others,  especially  the  young,  to  bless  and  praise  the  Lord  ? — T. 

Ver.  22. — Church  and  state.  When  Solomon  was  anointed  ta  be  chief  governor, 
and  Zadok  to  be  priest,  Israel  acknowledged  dependence  upon  God  and  loyalty  to  God 
in  the  two  realms  of  civil  and  ecclesiastical  life.  The  Hebrew  nation  was  a  theocracy, 
and  however  it  may  now  be  possible  to  separate  between  these  two  realms,  it  was  not 
possible  then.  Without  entering  into  any  controversy,  we  may  accept  from  this  text 
the  following  suggestions : — 

L  Both  civil  and  ecclesiastical  lifb  abe  from  Qod,  Our  Creator  has  con- 
stituted us  social  beings,  and  social  we  are  and  must  be.  By  this  necessity  it  is 
established  that  mutual  help  and  due  order  and  subordination  are  from  God.  All 
attempts  to  violate  these  fundamental  principles  of  human  nature  have  issued  in 
disastrous  failure. 

IL  The  same  persons  are  united  to  both  oroanizations  alike.  A  man's  being  a 
citizen  is  not  inconsistent  with  his  being  a  member  of  a  Christian  Church.  So  far  from 
there  being  any  incompatibility  between  the  two  relations,  they  are  mutually  helpful 
each  to  the  other. 

III.  In  both  relations  men  need  representatives,  leaders,  administrators. 
As  in  Israel  there  was  king  and  priest,  so  in  modern  Christian  society  we  not  only  need 
sovereigns,  presidents,  judges,  legislators,  etc.,  but  we  need  also  bishops,  pastors,  mode* 
rators,  and  officers  of  various  kinds. 

IV.  Oroanizations  and  officials,  both  civil  and  ecclesiastical,  are  intended 
FOR  THE  public  GOOD.  The  end  of  such  institutions  and  appointments  is  to  be  sought, 
not  in  private  interests,  or  emolument,  or  power,  but  in  the  well-being  of  the  body 
politic. 

V.  Civil  and  ecclesiastical  powers  may  be  helpful  to  each  other.  States  are 
bound  to  protect  the  Churches  in  the  profession  and  propagation  of  religious  faith  with 
all  possible  liberty.  And  Christian  Churches  are  under  a  sacred  obligation  to  seek  the 
order,  welfare,  and  peace  of  the  community.  The  relations  between  spiritual  springs 
and  political  mechanism  will  often  involve  difficulty,  but  from  the  relations  themselves 
there  can  be  no  escape,  for  they  are  divinely  ordained. — T. 

Ver.  28. — David's  death,  Aristotle  quotes  Solon's  saying  that  no  man  should  be 
called  happy  until  his  end.  One  reason  for  this  much-controverted  dictum,  no  doubt, 
was  this — that  a  human  life  may  be  marked  by  prosperity  up  to  a  certain  point,  at 
which  fortune  may  turn  her  wheel.  This  was,  of  course,  not  a  Christian  view  of  life ; 
we  have  learned  to  look  at  the  problem  as  one  rather  of  character  than  of  fortune,  and 
to  sympathize  with  the  estimate  of  the  all-seeing  and  heart-searching  Lord  and  Judge. 
The  circumstances  mentioned  in  the  text  must  m  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  rest  of 
the  narrative,  if  we  would  have  a  scriptural  view  of  David's  prosperity  and  felicity. 

L  His  aob.  "  A  good  old  &%e  "  is  not  here  what  we  should  call  such ;  for  David's  life 
does  not  seem  to  have  exceeded  seventy  years.  Yet  it  was  not  cut  short ;  and,  as  he 
was  suffered  to  live  for  the  appointed  term  of  life,  he  had  opportunity  to  carry  out  his 
plans  and  to  see  their  success.     He  was,  in  the  expressive  Hebraism,  "  full  of  days." 

II.  His  riches.  These  were  acquired  by  the  industry  of  the  population  ami  by  the 
spoils  of  war.  They  enabled  him  to  adorn  the  metropolis  which  he  had  won  by  his 
•word,  and  to  make  preparation  for  building  the  temple  of  his  God. 

I.  chronicles.  2  a 


450  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,  [ch.  xxix.  1—30. 

in.  His  honoub.  He  had  been  raised  from  the  sheepfold  to  the  throne.  He  had 
been  fortunate  in  his  counsellors  and  his  generals.  His  victories  had  given  him  a 
widespread  renown.  And  in  his  spiritual  lyrics  he  had  laid,  all  unwittingly,  the  founda- 
tions of  a  far  wider  and  more  honourable  fame.  As  '*  the  sweet  singer  of  Israel/'  and 
*'  the  man  alter  God's  heart,'*  he  is  known  throughout  the  Jewish  and  the  ChxiBtiaii 
world. 

Practical  lessons.  1.  The  life  of  David  is  one  fitted  to  encourage  onr  oonfidenoe 
in  Divine  providence.  The  man  himself  felt,  and  the  sacred  historians  felt,  that  there 
never  was  a  more  signal  instance  of  an  individual  being  called  forth  by  God's  voice 
and  qualified  by  Divine  discipline  for  a  great  work  in  life.  It  gives  peace  and  dignity 
to  our  lite  to  be  ever  assured  that  *'  our  times  are  in  God's  hands,"  and  that  he  will  use 
us  for  his  glory.  2.  The  life  of  David  is  a  warning  against  yielding  to  temptation. 
He  gave  way  alike  to  sins  of  the  flesh  and  to  sins  of  the  spirit,  and  again  and  agaia 
proved  his  fallibility  and  infirmity.  Well  may  each  reader  of  his  biography  lay 
to  heart  the  lesson ^  "Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall;" 
"  Watch  and  pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptatioD."  3,  The  life  of  David  shows  bow 
possible  it  is  to  serve  God  in  different  ways.  He  was  a  soldier,  a  poet,  a  king,  m 
religious  leader ;  and  in  all  capacities  he  glorified  God.  We  may  have  few  gifts,  but 
we  may  learn  that  the  use  of  one  gift  is  no  excuse  for  the  neglect  of  another.  4.  The 
life  of  David  reveals  the  true  secret  of  happiness  and  usefulness.  He  was  one  whoae 
fellowship  was  much  with  God  ;  hence  his  strength.  Read  his  psalms,  and  you  will  be 
convinced  that  this  was  so.  It  is  thus  that  strength  and  fortitude  are  to  be  sustained* 
6.  The  life  of  David  shows  us  that,  during  this  earthly  existence,  a  good  man  may 
begin  a  good  work  which  shall  continue  after  bis  death.  David  did  not  abide  for  ever, 
but  he  prepared  a  throne  for  his  son ;  he  did  not  build  the  temple,  but  he  put  all  things 
in  train  with  a  view  to  the  work.  Let  us  live  so  that  when  we  are  no  more  here  others 
may  say,  "  He  being  dead  yet  speaketh." — ^T, 

Ver.  28. — Solomon's  accession.  The  book  which  has  been  so  largely  occupied  with 
the  acts  and  the  reign  of  David,  closes  with  the  accession  of  his  son.  It  is  an  exempli- 
fication  of  the  old  saying,  '*One  generation  passeth  away  and  another  generatioQ 
cometh."  Each  generation  has  its  own  work  to  do,  and  has  then  to  mi^e  way  for  its 
successor.  David's  part  was  to  conquer  by  valour  and  power ;  Solomon's  part  was  to 
reign  in  magnificence.  David  prepared  for  the  temple ;  Solomon  built  it.  Everything 
that  a  father  could  do  to  facilitate  a  son's  work  David  certainly  did  for  his  successor,  who 
entered  upon  a  heritage  of  peace  and  power. 

I.  The  foundation  of  Solomon's  throne  was  laid  in  religion.  They  "  anointed 
him  unto  the  Lord ; "  he  "  sat  on  the  throne  of  the  Lord."  These  expressions,  taken 
in  connection  with  the  narrative  of  the  events  following  Solomon's  accession,  indicate 
that  he  began  his  reicrn  in  a  truly  religious  spirit,  with  a  desire  to  consecrate  his  posi- 
tion and  iufluence  to  the  glory  of  God. 

II.  The  commencement  of  Solomon's  beign  was  marked  by  the  allegiakce  of 

THE  princes  and  THE  OBEDIENCE  OF  THE  POPULATION  GENERALLY.      With  COnspicUOOS 

loyalty  the  ancient  captains  and  chiefs  of  David  transferred  their  allegiance  to  his 
youthful  successor,  and  the  people  who  had  been  dazzled  into  obedience  by  the  exploits 
of  the  father,  at  once  and  cheerfully  submitted  to  the  sway  of  the  son. 

III.  The  PROGRESS  of  Solomon's  reign  was  distinguished  by  prosperitt  and  9t 
MAJESTY.  This  glory  is  by  the  chronicler  justly  attributed  to  the  favour  of  the  Loid. 
The  "  royal  majesty  "  of  the  youthful  occupant  of  the  throne  exceeded  anything  befnra 
known  in  Israel.  The  following  Book  of  Chronicles  is  an  abundant  proof  of  this. 
During  the  first  part,  at  all  events,  of  this  splendid  reign,  Solomon  was  faithful  to  his 
trust  and  to  his  God.  He  was  a  type  of  the  Prince  of  peace,  whose  kingdom  is  an 
everlasting  kingdom,  and  whose  dominion  endureth  throughout  all  generations. — ^T. 

Vers.  1-— 9. — The  path  of  progress  in  Christian  enterprise.  In  the  history  of  a  natkm 
or  of  a  Church  it  frequently  occurs  that  some  great  enterprise  has  to  be  carried  through, 
like  the  building  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord  on  this  great  occasion.  What,  then,  are  the 
successive  steps  in  the  progress  of  the  work  ? 

I.  Persuasiveness  on  the  part  of  those  who  project  it    David  was  in  a  positi<m  to 


OIL  XXIX.  1—30.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  iol 

command,  to  require,  to  enact  But  be  evidently  felt  that  this  was  an  occasion  on  which 
it  was  far  better  to  persuade.  After  pleading  the  youthfulness  of  bis  son  (ver.  1),  the 
sacredness  of  the  work  (ver.  1),  the  energy  be  himself  bad  shown  in  the  matter  (**  With 
all  my  might,"  ver.  2),  the  affection  be  felt,  and  the  personal  sacrifices  he  had  made 
(vers.  3,  4),  the  consideration  he  bad  shown  for  the  various  necessities  of  the  case 
(ver.  6),  he  appealed  to  the  congregation,  "Who  then  is  willing?"  If  King  David» 
under  the  Law,  thus  resorted  to  persuasion  rather  than  to  enactment,  much  more  may 
we  under  the  gospeL  The  spirit  of  the  gospel  is  the  spirit  of  persuasion.  We  need  not 
wish  for  "  compulsory  powers ; "  we  should  rejoice  that  the  better  way  is  given  us  of 
convincing  by  argument,  of  affecting  by  entreaty,  of  winning  by  earnestness.  And,  on 
the  part  of  those  who  are  influenced,  there  must  be — 

II.  WiLLiNONESS.  *'  Who  then  is  willing  f "  (ver.  6).  "  Then  the  chief  of  the 
fathers  .  .  .  offered  willingly "  (ver.  6).  Nothing  is  gained  of  any  vital  consequence 
until  the  heart  is  willing,  until  every  barrier  of  indifference  and  objection  is  brok^x 
down,  and  our  will  consents  to  go  in  the  path  of  service,  of  contribution,  of  activity. 

III.  Eagerness.  David  had  shown  not  only  readiness,  but  eagerness.  He  **  pre- 
pared with  all  his  might "  (ver.  2) ;  he  '*  set  his  affection  to  the  house  of  his  Gbd  " 
(ver.  3).  The  people  were  not  only  prepared  to  respond  to  the  king  without  demur, 
they  consented  cordially;  "  With  perfect  heart  they  offered  willingly"  (ver.  9).  A  very 
great  step  is  taken  when  willingness  passes  into  eagerness;  when  those  whom  we  ask  to 
serve  not  only  come  forward,  but  walk  in  the  path  of  usefulness  with  elastic  step,  as 
those  who  have  a  heart  as  well  as  a  hand  in  the  undertaking. 

IV.  Sebviceableness  and  suitableness.  David  gave  of  the  spoils  of  war  (ver.  2), 
and  also  of  his  own  personal  property  (ver.  3),  things  which  would  be  of  practical 
value  for  the  work  before  them — gold,  silver,  etc. ;  so  did  the  people  (vers.  7,  8).  And 
not  only  generally  serviceable,  but  specially  suitable  things  he  and  they  took  care  to 
offer ;  "  Gold  for  things  to  be  made  of  gold,"  etc.  (ver.  2).  David  was  mindful  of  the 
thought  that  commoner  as  well  as  rarer  metals  would  be  of  use,  and  he  furnished  both. 
We  must  bring  to  the  work  of  the  Lord  (I)  that  which  is  practical  and  precious  (gold 
and  silver),  that  which  we  esteem  as  valuable  for  the  purposes  of  human  life ;  and  (2) 
that  particular  contribution  which  the  special  service  demands — not  cleverness  when 
kindness  is  wanted,  not  learning  when  sympathy  is  demanded,  not  counsel  when 
money  is  the  only  thing  that  will  avail,  not  refinement  when  rugged  simplicity  is  the 
desirable  thing,  etc. ;  gold  for  the  things  of  gold,  brass  for  the  things  of  brass,  etc. 

V.  Gladness.  "  Then  the  people  rejoiced  **  (ver.  9).  The  outcome  of  devoted  work 
for  Christ  and  man  is  heartfelt  joy.  There  is  no  deeper,  stronger,  purer  joy  than  that 
of  "  consecrating  our  service  unto  the  Lord  "  (ver.  5),  and  doing  this  with  the  "  perfect 
heart"  of  entire  willingness,  giving  ourselves  freely  and  lavishly  for  him  who  gave 
himself  for  us.  It  is  "  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive.'*  They  who  do  not  know 
the  joy  of  the  people  at  Jerusalem  on  this  occasion,  the  joy  of  hearty  devotedness,  have 
not  ascended  to  the  summit  of  human  blessedness. 

YI.  Contagiousness.  David  communicated  his  enthusiasm  to  the  people.  Their 
fire  of  devotion  was  caught  from  the  flame  that  was  burning  on  the  altar  of  his  heart. 
Similarly  their  joy  was  communicated  to  him.  "  The  people  rejoiced  .  .  .  and  David 
the  king  also  rejoiced  with  great  joy  '*  (ver.  9).  Unhappily,  evil  passions  are  extended 
through  this  channel  of  contagiousness ;  one  mind  passes  on  its  sinful  principles  and 
unholy  excitements.  But,  happily  for  the  world,  goodness  is  as  diffusive  as  evil.  We 
catch  animation,  zeal,  consecration  from  one  another ;  we  light  our  lamps  from  the  fire 
that  bums  in  our  brothcr*s  heart ;  we  pass  on  our  joy  in  God  till  ''all  the  congregation*' 
"  rejoice  with  great  joy  "  in  him  and  in  the  victory  of  bis  cause. — C. 

Vers.  10 — 22. — Bejoudng  hefore  God,  The  verses  present  to  us  a  scene  of  sacred  joy, 
Israel  had  seen  and  would  see  few  happier  days  than  this,  and  its  joy  was  godly. 
David's  end  drew  near,  and  they  might,  as  patriots,  have  entertained  some  very  serious 
anxieties  as  to  the  future  of  their  country.  But  all  these,  if  such  there  were,  were 
forgotten  in  the  joy  of  devoting  themselves  to  the  service  of  God  by  large  contributions 
to  the  house  which  was  soon  to  rise.    Concerning  this  sacred  gladness,  we  remark — 

I.  That  it  rested  on  consciousness  of  personal  integrity,  and  belief  in  the 
integrity  of  others  (ver.  17).    If  we  realize  that  God  is  one  who  '*^tries  the  heart,  and 


452  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONIOLEa   [ch.  xxix.  1— 80. 

bas  pleasure  in  uprightness,**  we  shall  not  venture  to  rejoice  if  we  have  not  within  us 
tliat  sense  of  spiritual  rectitude  which  will  allow  us  to  say  with  David,  **  As  for  me,  in 
the  uprightness  of  my  heart,"  etc. ;  with  Paul,  *'  I  have  kept  the  faith  ; "  with  John, 
''If  our  heart  condemn  us  not,  then  have  we  confidence  toward  God*'  (1  John  iii.  21). 
If  we  rejoice  as  those  who  are  members  of  a  community  (family.  Church,  or  nation),  wa 
must  alM)  believe  that  our  fellows  also  are  right  in  the  sight  of  the  heart-searching 
One,  even  as  David  was  able  to  add,  "  Thy  people  which  are  present  here." 

II.    I'hAT  it  will  be   accompanied   with    a    sense  07   OUB   OWN   LITTLEirsaS    AND 

UNW0RTHINE8S.  (Vers.  14,  15.)  Whatever  angelic,  heavenly  piety  may  be,  that  of 
man  on  earth  always  includes  humility.  In  the  conscious  presence  of  Ood  we  must 
feel  our  own  nothingness  ;  the  exceeding  smallness  of  our  brief  span  of  life,  **  We  are 
strangers  before  thee  and  sojourners,"  etc. ;  our  unworthiness  to  do  anything  for  the 
holy  and  eternal  One,  *'  Who  am  1,"  etc.  ?  The  sense  of  our  own  insignificance  and  ill 
desert  is  one  of  those  marks  of  genuineness  which  we  should  see  with  satisfaction  in 
ourselves  and  others,  the  absence  of  which  may  well  lead  us  to  ask  serious  questions  as 
to  the  genuineness  of  our  piety. 

III.  That  it  utters  itself  in  adobation.  (Vers.  11, 12.)  There  are  no  nobler 
words  in  which  human  reverence  has  found  expression  before  the  Divine  Sovereign 
than  these.  We  do  not  care  to  analyze  them ;  we  use  them ;  we  take  them  on  to  our 
own  lips  as  we  find  them ;  they  perfectly  voice  our  own  hearts'  homage.  All  joy 
before  Qod  should  be  profoundly  reverential,  and  here  David  gives  it  simple  but 
admirable  utterance. 

IV.  That  it  expbesses  itselv  in  thanksoivino,  and  in  thankful  acknowled<^nent 
(vers.  10, 13, 16, 20).  David  himself  *'  before  all  the  conjiregation"  (ver.  10),  and  then  at 
his  desire  all  the  congregation  itself,  ''blessed  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers*'  (ver.  20) ;  he 
and  they  thanked  and  praised  him  (ver.  13).  David  freely  and  frankly  acknowledged  that, 
in  giving  to  Grod,  they  were  but  presenting  to  him  that  which  was  his  own:  *'0f  thine 
own  have  we  given  thee**  (ver.  14).  When  we  contribute  to  the  cause  of  Grod  we  should 
bear  in  mind  that  God  claims  all  that  we  have ;  that  at  any  time  he  may  be  pleased  to 
resume  it ;  that  we  do  but  willingly  make  over  to  some  special  work  of  his  that  which 
he  has  entrusted  to  us  for  his  glory  and  the  well-being  of  his  children. 

V.  That  it  finds  ample  room  fob  prayer.  (Vers.  18,  19.)  In  the  midst  of  our 
gratitude  and  joy  we  remember  our  dependence  on  God.  And  this  is  no  jarring  note ; 
it  does  not  anywise  detract  from  our  thankfulness  or  our  gladness  of  heart  Let  praise 
always  pass  into  prayer,  both  for  ourselves  and  (as  here)  for  others,  and  especially  for 
those  whose  youth  or  other  insufficiency  makes  them  to  be  peculiarly  in  need  of  help 
from  above. 

VI.  That  it  ends  in  oonbecration  and  communion.  (Vers.  21,  22.)  The  whole 
scene  ended  in  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings,  in  sacrifice  and  sacred  festivity.  Our 
piety  finds  its  worthiest  expression  in  devoting  ourselves  and  our  substance  to  the 
cause  and  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  also  in  communion  with  our  Lord  and  with  one 
another. — C. 

Vers.  22 — 30. — David  and  Solomon :  contrast  **  They  made  Solomon  the  son  of 
David  king  "  (ver.  22).  **  Then  Solomon  sat  on  the  throne  .  .  .  instead  of  David  his 
father"  (ver.  23).  "And  David  died  in  a  good  old  age  .  .  .  and  Solomon  his  son 
reigned  in  his  stead  "  (ver.  28).  We  have  our  thought  directed  to  the  respective  virtues 
of  the  two  kings,  father  and  son,  and  the  comparative  value  of  their  life  and  reign.  In 
some  respects  they  are  open  to  comparison,  but  in  others  to  contrast.  Both  were  (1) 
kings  of  united  Israel ;  (2)  servants  of  Jehovah  ;  (3)  writers  of  inspired  and  immortal 
literature.  But  we  are  more  struck  with  the  contrasts  than  the  likenesses  between  the 
two.     We  gather  from  a  survey  of  their  lives  and  public  careers— 

I.  That  the  end  and  the  BEoiNNiNa  or  a  course  do  not  always  answer  to  one 
another.  Who  could  have  supposed  that  of  the  shepherd  lad  of  Bethlehem  it  would 
be  written,  "  He  died  full  of  days,  riches,  and  honour  "  (ver.  28) ;  that  a  prophet  of  the 
Lord  would  write  of  "his  reisn  and  his  might"  (vers.  29,  30)?  His  path  was  an 
ascending  one :  from  a  shepherd  he  became  a  victorious  combatant,  a  leader  of  a  band 
of  men,  the  king  of  a  tribe,  the  monarch  of  the  land,  the  sovereign  who  raised  his 
eountry  to  the  fulness  of  its  dominion,  and  impressed  on  it  the  love  of  the  Law  of  the 


PH.  XXIX,  1— 30.]   THE  FIRST  BOOK   OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  453 


Lord.  Solomon  began  his  course  as  the  chosen  heir  of  the  beloved  king,  **  magnified 
exceedingly  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel,"  etc.  (ver.  25),  receiving  the  subjection  of  all 
within  the  kingdom,  from  the  court  to  the  peasantry  (ver.  24) ;  he  ended  his  career 
with  no  little  disapproval  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  lamented  his  spiritual  defection, 
and  with  no  little  alienation  on  the  part  of  those  who  groaned  under  the  exnctions  of 
his  magnificence.  Let  us  regard  the  lowly  as  those  whom  God  may  have  fitted  and 
destined  for  rank  and  power;  let  those  who  are  exalted  by  birth  and  circumstance 
remember  that  there  is  a  downward  as  well  as  an  upward  path  in  estimation  and 
influence. 

II.  That  brilliance  is  worth  littlk  in  comparison  with  solid  worth.  David's 
reign  would  compare  ill  with  that  of  his  son  in  respect  of  biilliancy.  His  palaces,  his 
retinue,  his  table,  his  exchequer,  his  navy,  the  outward  grandeurs  of  his  reign,  were 
but  slight  and  insignificant  in  comparison  with  those  of  Solomon.  But  the  contribu- 
tion of  David  to  the  unity,  consolidation,  religious  truth,  moral  excellency  of  his  people 
was  immeasurably  greater  than  that  of  his  brilliant  son.  In  all  that  is  desirable  to 
look  back  upon  at  the  end  of  life  or  from  the  **  other  side  the  river,"  David's  work  was 
Letter  and  nobler  far.  Far  more  to  be  desired  the  life  that  adds  to  the  virtue,  godliness, 
strength,  stability  of  the  community  than  the  one  which  flashes  beams  of  brightness 
that  fade  with  tlie  passing  day.  Better  far  than  any  amount  of  "  royal  majesty  "  is 
the  influence  for  good  which  lives  in  human  hearts  when  ours  are  still  in  death,  and 
which  tells  on  human  lives  when  ours  are  closed  for  ever, 

III.  That  passing  inconsistency  is  less  to  be  dreaded  than  coNnNUOUB  declinb. 
We  still  look  back  with  unfeigned  regret  on  the  lamentable  inconsistencies  of  David ; 
but  these  were  bitterly  repented  of,  and  heartily  repudiated  by  himself,  and  were  for« 
giveu  by  God.  Un  measurably  worse  was  the  steady  spiritual  decline  of  Solomon,  which 
took  him  down  from  the  heights  of  holiness  to  the  deep  and  miry  places  of  ungodliness 
and  vice.  Best  of  all,  the  day  wherein  the  sun  shines  serenely  from  morning  till 
evening ;  but  better  far  the  day  on  which  the  storm  sweeps  swiftly  by  and  leaves  the 
heavens  clear,  than  that  which  begins  with  a  brilliant  morning,  but  passes  into  a 
clouded  noon,  and  ends  in  a  starless,  drenching  night.  Strenuously  and  patiently 
should  we  strive  against "  the  one  dark  hour  which  brings  remorse,"  for  that  leaves 
a  long,  deep  shadow  on  the  path  of  life ;  but  with  still  more  devout  and  determined 
energy  must  we  contend  against  *'  the  sin  that  burns  into  the  blood,*'  for  it  is  that 
which  decides  our  destiny,  which  "  will  brand  us  after  of  whose  fold  we  be." 

IV.  That  Divine  wisdom  is  loftier  than  human  prudence,  and  the  service  of 
example  than  that  of  painful  warning.  Solomon's  writings  are  not  without  many 
passages  of  sacred  import,  but  the  strain  of  them  is  rather  human  than  Divine.  They 
teach  us  rather  how  to  adjust  ourselves  to  our  human  relations  than  how  to  abide  in 
the  favour  and  rise  to  the  resemblance  of  God.  But  David's  psalms  bear  the  mark  of 
a  Divine  hand ;  they  breathe  throughout  the  inspiration  of  God ;  they  take  us  up  to 
the  throne  of  the  heavenly  King ;  they  help  us  toward  the  possession  of  his  likeness. 
Solomon,  in  his  most  fascinating  work  (Ecclesiat^tes),  warns  his  readers  from  the  perilous 
snare  by  recounting  his  own  sad  experiences.  He  says  to  us  continually,  "  Be  not  as  I 
was ;  shun  the  path  I  trod,  that  you  share  not  the  fate  1  sufl'er."  But  David,  in  his 
immortal  songs,  invites  his  readers  to  accompany  him  along  the  path  of  life,  to  resort 
with  him  to  the  throne  of  grace ;  he  pours  out  of  a  full  heart  the  devotion,  gratitude, 
and  sacred  joy  of  which  his  pages  are  full,  and  says  for  ever  to  the  Church  of  God, 
"  Walk  with  me  in  the  way  of  wisdom,  drink  with  me  the  waters  of  life ;  let  us  par- 
take, together,  the  truth  which  is  sweeter  than  honey  and  the  honeycomb ;  let  us  gather, 
together,  the  heavenly  treasure  which  will  make  richer  than  the  fine  gold  of  earth, 
which  will  make  *  rich  toward  God,'  even  rich  for  evermore." — C. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — David's  further  address  to  the  congregation,  David  gives  an  explanation 
at  the  commencement  of  this  chapter  why  he  himself  had  prepared  so  much  for  the 
house  of  God,  viz.  that  Solomon  himself  was  as  yet  young  and  tender,  and  the  work 
was  great.  But  David  assigns  the  true  reason  why  the  work  was  great,  viz.  that  the 
house  was  "  not  for  man,  but  for  the  Lord  God."  It  is  true  that  the  house  was  a 
great  one,  and  that  the  work  was  great  in  a  natural  point  of  view.  But  all  such 
thougl^ts  are  lost  or  sink  behind  ihaX  which  alone  makes  anything  great — the  Lord 


454  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.    [cH.  xxix.  1— 3a 

God.  There  are  two  ways  of  estimatiDg  greatness— one  that  strikes  tha  mere  out* 
ward  sense,  and  one  that  looks  at  God.  It  nnay  be  that  the  building  Is  only  a  hiit| 
but  if  it  is  to  the  Lord  it  is  infinitely  greater  than  the  grandest  building  ertf 
erected  by  the  art  of  man.  And  because  it  was  for  the  Lord,  David  had  prepaid  for 
it  "  with  all  his  might."  It  is  this  motive  which  gives  power  and  strength  and  delight 
and  earnestness  to  all  work.  But  it  was  not  only  as  a  king  David  had  thus  preparad* 
In  this  world  men  may  separate  the  office  from  the  person  ;  but  not  so  in  the  kingdom 
of  God.  God's  claims  on  men  are  not  only  official  but  personal ;  not  only  as  kiDga, 
but  as  Christian  men.  David  had  prepared  so  much  (see  ver.  2)  as  Israel's  king,  Imt 
he  had  also  prepared  so  much  of  **  his  own  proper  good  "  (see  ver.  3).  A  minister  of 
Christ  has  not  only  to  walk  worthy  of  his  vocation  as  a  minister^  but  also  as  a  man; 
not  only  in  the  pulpit  and  parish,  but  as  a  man  in  all  the  private  relations  of  Ufa. 
Having  fulfilled  both  of  these  relations  to  the  house  of  God,  he  can  now  make  his 
appeal  to  others.  He  has  set  the  example  :  who  will  follow  it  ?  '*  Who  then  is  willing 
to  consecrate  his  service  this  day  unto  the  Lord  ? "  "  Those  things  which  ye  have 
both  learned,  and  received,  and  heard,  and  seen  in  me,  do "  (Phil.  iv.  9).  And 
consecration  is  simply  to  "  fill  the  hand  "  (see  margin).  *'  He  has  his  hands  full  **  it 
a  familiar  saying.  Yes ;  it  is  every  faculty  of  the  man-— body,  soul,  and  spirit  takm 
up  with  the  Lord  and  his  work.  No  room  for  anything  else.  Not  even  a  grain  more 
can  the  hand  hold.  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ."  All  our  secular  work  done  to  him. 
Thus  life  becomes  transfigured.  And  this  is  not  for  to-morrow.  It  is  "  this  day/*  Qod 
asks  for  it  now.  Two  of  God's  requirements  there  are  which  admit  of  no  to-morrow. 
One  is  the  salvation  of  the  soul:  '^ Now  is  the  accepted  time;  now  is  the  day  of 
salvation."  Another  is  consecration — dedication  to  God :  "  Who  then  is  willing  to  oonse* 
crate  his  service  this  day  unto  the  Lord  ?  "  It  is  not  so  much  a  command  as  an  appeal. 
It  must  come  from  the  heart  or  it  cannot  be  accepted.  "  Whom  shall  I  send,  and 
who  will  go  for  us?"  (Isa.  vi.)  is  made  to  the  heart  of  the  prophet.  That  heart  had 
*'  seen  the  King,"  and  out  of  the  fulness  of  a  love  that  had  penetrated  its  inmost  recesses 
it  exclaimed,  *'  Here  am  I,  Lord ;  send  me."  So  it  was  here.  All  the  prinoes  and 
rulers  and  congregation  of  Israel  responded  to  this  appeal  from  one  whom  they  loved, 
and  oflered  largely  and  "  willingly."  No  wonder  all  was  joy.  The  king,  the  prinoes^ 
the  congregation,  were  overflowing  with  joy.  It  was  the  response  of  a  "  perfect  heart," 
a  true,  whole-hearted,  joyous  surrender  of  themselves  and  all  they  had  to  the  Lord. 
This  is  the  spring  of  all  real  joy.  It  is  nowhere  else — an  unconditional  surrender  of 
ourselves  and  all  we  have  to  him  '*  who  loved  us  and  gave  himself  for  us." — W, 

Vers.  10 — 24. — David*s  prayer  and  blessing.  In  this  blessing  we  observe  how  every- 
thing is  ascribed  to  God — greatness,  power,  glory,  victory,  majesty,  riches,  honour,  the 
kingdom  ;  all  are  his  and  from  him.  What  an  exalted  view  of  God  is  here !  And  there 
follows  that  which  always  follows  on  man's  side,  "humility"  (vers.  14 — 16).  GKxl'0 
greatness  bows  down  the  soul  in  conscious  littleness.  We  are  "  strangers,"  "  sojourners ;  * 
our  days  a  "  shadow  "  and  "  none  abiding."  In  order,  then,  to  be  humble,  we  should  ev» 
have  God*s  greatness  and  God's  grace  filling  the  soul.  The  eye  on  God,  and  thers 
is  no  room  for  the  creature  but  in  the  dust.  David's  prayers  close  with  one  for  the 
people  (ver.  18)  and  one  for  Solomon  (ver.  19).  He  prays  for  the  congregation,  that 
God  would  keep  them  ever  in  this  frame  of  heart,  viz.  of  willing,  joyful,  whole-hearted 
surrender  of  themselves  and  all  they  had  to  him  ;  and  also  that  their  hearts  might  be 
ever  set  towards  God  himself.  For  Solomon  he  prays  that  God  would  give  him  an 
undivided  heart.  And  this  whole-heartedness  would  show  itself  first  in  relation  to  Qod 
and  his  truth — "  To  keep  thy  commandments,  thy  testimonies,  thy  statutes,  and, to  do 
all  these  things ;  "  and  secondly,  "  to  build  the  palace  for  the  which  I  have  made  pro- 
vision." This  is  ever  the  Divine  order  in  David's  mmd—'Ood  and  his  truth  first,  and 
the  work  of  Qod  next.  And  finally,  he  calls  upon  the  whole  assembly  to  praise  the 
Lord,  which  they  did,  bowing  before  the  Lord  and  the  king,  and  worshipping.  In 
order  to  seal  their  confession  thus  made  in  word  and  deed,  they  proposed  a  great  feast 
on  the  following  day,  consisting  of  a  thousand  bullocks,  a  thousand  rams,  and  a  thousand 
lambs,  with  drink  offerings  and  thank  offerings  to  correspond.  Thus  ended  the  otm- 
sccration,  the  prayer  and  praise,  viz.  in  joy  and  *'  great  gladness."  These  are  ever  the 
results,  and  there  never  will  be  joy  and  gladness  in  the  Lord  without  them.^W. 


CH.  XXIX.  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES.  455 

•"  ■ ^^ ^ — ^ 

Vers.  26 — 30. — David's  death.  Our  book  ends  with  David's  death.  He  had  reigned 
forty  years,  viz.  seven  years  and  a  half  in  Hebron  (1  Kings  ii.  11),  and  thirty-three  in 
Jerusalem.  And  the  Spirit  of  Grod  writes  his  obituary :  "  He  died  in  a  good  old  age." 
Many  an  age  is  "  old,"  but  not  "  good."  But  David  had  set  God  before  him  through 
life,  and  God  sets  the  crown  upon  it  in  these  words.  The  Bible  obituaries  of  good  men 
are  short.  There  is  no  parade,  no  lengthened  record  on  marble  monument  or  polished 
stone.  They  need  none.  Their  record  is  in  heaven.  In  this  they  form  a  striking 
contrast  to  the  fulsome  epitaphs  of  this  world.  The  greatest  of  men  in  Bible  history 
have  short  records.  '*  So  Moses  died,  and  the  Lord  buried  him."  Is  that  all,  and 
of  such  a  man  I  Yes ;  for  it  is  the  life  that  should  speak  and  not  the  death  ;  and  that 
life  is  the  character  of  the  man,  whatever  the  world  may  say  of  his  death.  "  Full  of 
days,  riches,  and  honour,"  all  worthy  of  a  record  because  consecrated  to  God.  Our  days 
are  only  *'  full "  when  thus  used.  What  empty  days  fill  up  the  lives  of  most  around 
us— days  of  which  an  unseen  hand  has  written  '*  vanity,"  but  for  which  the  soul  must 
give  an  account  to  God !  It  is  said  here  that  a  record  is  given  of  '*  the  times  that  went 
over  him."  There  were  "times"  of  sorrow  and  "  times"  of  joy,  times  of  trouble  and 
times  of  rest,  times  of  weakness  and  times  of  strcnq;th ;  but  when  Gk>d  is  in  them 
there  are  no  empty  days.  They  were  full  because  God  was  in  them.  In  the  midst  of 
all  the  changes  and  chances  of  this  mortal  life  may  such  be  our  days ! — W. 

Ver.  3. — Personal  sacrifice  for  God's  service.  It  is  a  very  easy  thing  for  a  man  to 
recognize  and  admit  that  people  should  give  of  their  substance  for  God*s  service.  And 
it  is  as  easy  a  thing  to  urge  other  people  to  do  their  duty  in  this  respect,  and  to  give  for 
God*s  service.  But  it  is  never  for  any  one  an  easy  thing  to  do  our  own  duty  in  thia 
matter,  to  make  our  own  personal  sacrifices,  and  to  take  our  full,  fair,  noble  share  in 
religious  gifts  and  works.  Precisely  in  this  the  soundness  of  David's  religious  principle 
is  declared.  He  asked  no  man  to  do  what  he  was  not  prepared  to  do  himself.  He 
would  even,  by  his  own  personal  sacrifices,  be  an  inspiration  and  help  to  others ;  on  the 
example  of  his  own  generosities  lifting  them  up  to  nobler  things.  David  might  have 
satisfied  his  conscience  by  devoting  to  the  service  of  God  a  portion  of  that  national 
wealth  which  was  entrusted  to  his  keeping  as  king.  We  are  often  tempted  to  be  very 
liberal  with  other  people's  money  or  with  public  money.  David  felt  that  such  giving 
cost  no  personal  effort  or  sacrifice,  and  so  could  not  carry  to  God  the  expression  of  his 
own  devotion  and  love.  Nothing  could  satisfy  his  feeling  save  a  large  offering  from 
his  own  personal  and  private  property.  This  voluntary  gift  was  selected  with  the 
greatest  care ;  the  gold  was  that  of  Ophir,  esteemed  the  finest  in  the  world,  and  the 
amount  was  three  thousand  talents  of  gold,  and  seven  thousand  talents  of  refined  silver. 

L  A   MAN  HAS  WHAT  HE  MAT  CALL  HIS  '*0WN  PROPER  GOOD."       It    is    quitO    true 

that  WO  really  have  nothing,  and  that  what  we  seem  to  have  is  God's,  and  only 
entrusted  to  our  charge.  But  it  is  equally  true  that  God  does  permit  us  to  cherish 
the  sense  of  possession,  and  to  feel  that  some  things  are  ours.  The  distinction  between 
mine  and  thine  lies  at  the  basis  of  social  morality ;  and  if  we  can  have  nothing  ours  as 
separate  from  God,  we  can  have  something  ours  as  separate  from  our  fellow-men.  If 
the  distinctness  of  a  man's  property  is  recognized  in  the  common  social  relations,  it  may 
also  be  recognized  in  the  higher  religious  spheres ;  a  man's  "  own  proper  good  "  having 
this  for  its  peculiarity,  that  it  is  under  the  immediate  control  of  the  man's  own  will. 
Press  the  importance  of  recognizing  the  responsibility  attending  on  the  sense  of  personal 
possession,  and  the  trust  of  our  "  own  proper  good." 

IL  It  is  in  relation  to  its  treatment  and  use  that  a  man's  character  gains 
EXPRESSION.  In  public  a  man  makes  himself  appear  oftentimes  other  than  he  is.  Ho 
is  revealed  in  private  life.  So  a  man  may  be  very  generous  indeed  in  voting  away 
public  and  society  money ;  and  his  mean  character  be  shown  up  in  his  miserable 
distributions  from  his  "  own  proper  good."  Money  is  one  of  the  most  searching  tests 
of  character.  Illustrate  how  some  men  hoard  and  reveal  their  acquisitiveness ;  others 
spend  vjastefully,  and  reveal  their  sensuality  or  love  of  self-indulgence ;  yet  others  tise 
carefully  and  thoughtfully,  and  so  reveal  their  caution  and,  it  may  be,  the  power  of 
their  religious  principle ;  and  yet  others  again  give  largely,  and  reveal  their  open  and 
generous  dispositions.  God  finds  out  the  very  depths  of  a  man's  nature  by  giving  to 
him  a  greater  or  less  trust  *'  of  his  own  proper  good." 


456  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,    [ch.  xxi3L  1— 30. 

in.  In  CX)NKECnON  with  it,  the  BELIOIOUB  PB0FE88I0N  GETS  ITS  SEYEBEST  TESTINGS. 

In  these  days,  when  wealth  is  so  suddenly  acquired,  we  see  too  often  religious  men 
fail,  and  become  indifferent  and  worldly.  Few  can  stand  the  increase  of  riches.  Few, 
indeed,  care  to  pray  Agur's  prayer.  When  men  make  money,  the  impulse  that  grows 
into  a  passion  is  to  keep  it  from  Ood,  and  keep  its  use  to  one's  seff.  And  what  God 
asks  is  that  the  growing  wealth  should  be  so  consecrated  to  his  service  that  it  may 
help  to  keep  the  man's  heart  true. 
Appeal — How  would  Grod  judge  you  in  respect  of  your  "  own  proper  good  "  ? — ^R.  T. 

Ver.  16. — Man  JnU  a  sojourner.  Before  **  life  and  immortality  "  had  been  "  brought  to 
light,"  the  brevity  of  man*s  life  on  the  earth  seems  to  have  caused  much  distress,  even 
to  godly  people.  There  is  a  wailing  tone  about  many  of  the  Old  Testament  references 
to  short  life  and  remorseless  death  that  seem  but  little  in  advance  of  the  despairings  of 
the  pagan,  who  cried  after  his  passing  friend,  **  Vale,  vale,  sBtemum  vale  I "  A  few 
specimens  may  be  given.  *^  For  what  is  your  life  ?  It  is  even  a  vapour,  that  appearetli 
for  a  little  time,  and  then  vanisheth  away.''  '*  All  flesh  is  grass,  and  all  the  goxilineBs 
thereof  is  as  the  flower  of  the  field ;  the  grass  withereth,  the  flower  fadeth,  b^use  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  bloweth  upon  it :  surely  the  people  is  grass."  "  My  days  are  swifter 
than  a  post :  they  flee  away,  they  see  no  good.  They  are  passed  away  as  the  swift  ships: 
as  the  eagle  that  hasteth  to  the  prey."  "  My  days  are  swiner  than  a  weaver's  shuttle,  and 
are  spent  without  hope."  "  Let  me  alone;  for  my  days  are  vanity."  There  is,  happily, 
another  side  to  the  Old  Testament  representations,  and  the  pious  men  of  the  olden  times 
looked  away  from  swift  passing  life,  and  from  the  sorrow  of  death  and  separation,  to 
the  unchanging  stability  of  the  everlasting  God,  and  the  high  and  eternal  hopes  that 
rest  upon  his  gracious  provisions  and  promises.     Transitoriness  is  the  condition  of 

E resent  being,  not  for  us  men  only,  but  also  for  all  the  created  things  with  which  we 
ave  to  do.  All  nature  tells  of  change  and  passing  away ;  things  are  here  for  a  little 
while,  and  then  they  vanish  away.  The  winter  snow  falls  lightly,  and  lies  in  its  white 
purity — mystic,  wonderful— over  all  the  land ;  but  soon  it  soils  and  browns  and  sinks 
away.  The  spring  flowers  that  come,  responsive  to  the  low  sunshine  and  the  gentle 
breath,  are  so  fragile,  and  they  stay  with  us  but  such  a  little  time,  and  then  pass  away. 
The  summer  blossoms  multiply  and  stand  thick  over  the  ground,  and  they  seem  strong 
with  their  deep  rich  colouring ;  and  yet  they  too  wither  and  droop  and  pass  away. 
The  autumn  fruits  cluster  on  the  tree  branches,  and  grow  big,  and  win  their  soft  rich 
bloom  of  ripeness ;  but  they  too  are  plucked  in  due  season,  and  pass  away.  The  gay 
dress  of  varied  leafage  is  soon  stripped  off  by  the  wild  winds ;  one  or  two  trembling 
leaves  cling  long  to  the  outmost  boughs,  but  by-and-by  even  they  fall  and  pass  away. 
Down  every  channel  of  the  hillside  are  borne  the  crumblings  washed  from  the  "  ever- 
lasting hills,"  as  we  call  them,  that  are,  nevertheless,  fast  passing  away.  All  around 
us  is  speaking  of  change  and  decay.  The  writing  is  on  wasting  rock  and  crumbling 
p<'ak,  on  the  old  tower  and  the  ivied  wall,  the  flowing  stream  and  the  autumn  tints,-— 
'  Here  is  no  rest.'  Man  and  his  world  are  but  sojourners.  Recall  Coi6,  the  ancient 
Briton's,  figure  of  man's  brief  life  as  a  bird,  coming  out  of  the  dark  and  flying 
through  the  lighted  hall  away  out  into  the  dark  again  ;  and  illustrate  and  enforce  the 
following  points :— The  brevity  of  man's  life  on  the  earth  is  designed  to— 

I.  Make  serious  the  present.  Its  voice  is,  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do, 
do  it  with  thy  might."  It  says :  1.  What  has  to  be  done  should  be  done  quickly,  2. 
What  has  to  be  done  must  be  done  earnestly,  3.  And  seeing  the  time  is  so  short,  and 
so  much  has  to  be  accomplished,  we  need  mucJi  grace  for  the  doing. 

II.  Glorify  the  future.  By  giving  us  the  assurance  that  it  is  the  home  where 
we  are  to  stay. 

III.  Set  the  present  and  the  futube  in  right  belations.  Convincing  us  that 
we  are  here  for  some  important  purpose  and  mission  ;  and  that  we  are  here  on  our  way 
home,  getting  ready  for  the  life  at  home  by  the  experiences  of  our  sojourning-time. 

Should  we  then,  as  Christians,  grieve  that  life  is  short,  and  we  are  only  here  on  earth 
awhile  as  the  stranger  who  turns  aside  to  tarry  for  a  night?  Surely  not,  if  we  keep 
close  home  to  our  hearts  the  conviction  that  we  are  homeward  hound, — R.  T. 

Ver.  17. — The  assured  acceptance  of  the  sincere,    "  Hast  pleasure  in  uprightness.r 


CH.  XXIX.  1—30.]    THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONIOLEa  457 

It  is  a  characteristic  of  David  that  ho  makes  constant  appeal  to  his  consciow  integrity 
and  expects  to  gain  Divine  acceptance  for  his  sincerity  and  uprightness.  But  this, 
conflicts  \vith  the  Christian  notion  that  a  man  cannot  be  accepted  for  anything  in  him- 
self,  and  so  it  needs  coDsideration  and  explanation.  We  have  often  to  notice  how  certain 
words  get  a  stiff,  rigid,  and  limited  meaning  fixed  upon  them,  through  their  use  in  the 
expression  of  theological  opinions  and  creeds.  Illustration  may  be  taken  from  the  terms 
grace,  law,  faith,  Justi/yy  eternal,  Joubert  says,  "  The  trick  of  personifying  words  is  a 
fatal  source  of  mischief  in  theology."  The  words  "integrity,**  "righteousness,"  have 
suffered  at  the  hands  of  theologians,  and  their  larger  and  more  comprehensive  meanings  are 
almost  lost  sight  of.  David  can  stand  before  God,  and  appeal  to  his  personal  righteous- 
ness, and  ask  to  bo  judged  by  his  integrity.  Our  Lord  implies  that  a  man  may  have  a  . 
righteousness,  when  he  says,  "  Except  your  righteousness  shall  exceed  the  righteousness 
of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,**  etc  The  words  will  not  stiffen  into  one  rigid  meaning. 
Sometimes  they  mean  right-heartedness,  sincerity,  and  show  us  a  man  at  heart  centred 
on  God  and  virtue.  At  other  times  they  refer  to  that  renewed  state  into  which  we  are 
brought  by  the  regenerations  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Illustrate  the  first  of  these  two  mean- 
ings from  David's  career.  This  great  impression  had  been  left  on  him  from  his  own 
experiences,  and  to  it  he  gives  utterance  as  life  closes :  "  I  know  that  thou  hast  pleasure 
in  uprightness.**  Throughout  his  career — save  in  halting  moments — David  was  right  at 
heart  We  have  a  way  of  speaking  of  men  as  being  "  good  at  bottom."  If  we  say  that 
as  any  excuse  for  men's  sins,  we  are  miserably  and  shamefully  wrong.  If  we  say  it 
with  due  recognition  of  human  frailty,  with  fitting  discernment  of  life  as  the  conflict  of 
the  human  will  over  the  disabilities  that  surround  the  man,  then  it  may  be  a  true  and 
worthy  expression.  Many  men  around  us — yes,  even  we  ourselves — are,  like  David, 
*'  good  at  bottom."  The  "  desire  of  our  soul  is  to  the  Divine  Name.*'  We  are  pilgrims, 
indeed,  who  have  come  in  at  the  gate,  and  right  by  the  cross,  even  if  men  or  angels  do 
find  us  wandering  out  of  the  way  into  By-path  meadows,  and  sleeping  in  arbours,  and 
losing  our  rolls.  David's  example  permits  us  to  realize  and  rejoice  in  our  conscious 
integrity ;  not  proudly,  in  any  way  of  self-confidence  or  self-conceit,  but  humbly,  in  a 
thankful  recognition  of  "grace  abounding"  to  usward.  David's  sincerity  and  integrity 
come  out  when  we  compare  him  with  King  Saul.  Saul  failed  altogether,  and  fell  away 
from  God,  because  his  sins  were  sins  of  will ;  neither  his  heart  nor  his  life  were  right 
with  God.  David  stumbled,  but  he  did  not  utterl}'  fall ;  because,  in  his  case,  the  will 
was  only  forced  to  consent  to  sin,  and  it  sprang  back  to  God  as  soon  as  the  force  of 
•bodily  passion  that  held  it  down  was  removed.  David  only  failed  in  the  ftocfy-sphere ; 
S;iul  failed  in  both  the  body  and  the  soul  spheres.  It  would  have  been  better  indeed  if,  like 
Samuel,  heart  and  life  had  both  shown,  throughout  his  career,  the  harmony  of  goodness ; 
but  Gk)d  and  man  recognize  the  acceptableness  of  sincerity  of  heart,  even  if  qualified  by 
some  failings  of  life.  But,  from  the  Christian  standpoint,  it  should  be  earnestly  pressed 
tiiat  sincerity,  which  is  acceptable  to  God,  is  properly  one  of  the  after-si;;ns  of  Divine 
renewal ;  and  that  we  all  need  to  be  made  n^A/— converted,  regenerated^re  we  can 
bo  set  right  and  kept  right,  and  dare  ask  God  to  search  and  see  whether  we  are  sincerely 
and  wholly  his. — R.  T. 

Ver.  28. — Honoured  in  death  by  Ood  and  man.  This  was  the  case  with  King 
David.  "  He  died  in  a  good  old  age,  full  of  days,  riches,  and  honour."  With  the 
reverent  love  of  a  whole  nation  round  him,  they  bore  him  to  his  royal  tomb.  **  David 
died,  according  to  Josephus,  at  the  age  of  seventy.  The  general  sentiment  which 
forbade  interment  within  the  habitations  of  men,  gave  way  in  his  case,  as  in  that  of 
Samuel.  He  was  "  biuied  in  the  city  of  David,*'  in  the  city  which  he  had  made  his 
own,  and  which  could  only  be  honoured,  not  polluted,  by  containing  his  grave.  It 
was,  no  doubt,  hewn  in  the  rocky  side  of  the  hill,  and  became  the  centre  of  the  catacomb 
in  which  his  descendants,  the  kings  of  Judah,  were  interred  after  him.'*  "  The  only 
site  which  is  actually  consecrated  by  traditionsil  sentiment  as  the  tomb  of  David,  is  the 
vault  underneath  the  Mussulman  Mosque  of  David,  on  the  southern  side  of  modem  Jeru- 
salem. The  vault  professes  to  be  built  above  the  cavern,  and  contains  only  the  cenotaph 
usual  in  the  tombs  of  Mussulman  saints,  with  the  inscription  in  Arabic,  *0  David, 
whom  God  has  made  vicar,  rule  mankind  in  truth.' "  Observing  how  honouied  in  death 
King  David  was,  and  how  honoured  in  memory  King  David  is,  though  his  life  was  so 


458  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  THE  CHRONICLES,    [oh.  xxix.  1—30. 

checkered  and  so  seriously  marred  with  wilfalness,  indulgence,  and  sin,  we  are  reminded 
or  the  lines  often  quoted  from  our  greatest  national  poet— 

**  The  evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them ; 
The  good  is  oft  interred  with  their  bones ; " 

and  we  ask— -Are  these  lines,  in  any  large  and  important  sense,  true ;  and  must  we  so 
invert  our  fixed  notions  as  to  admit  that  the  good  in  our  lives  is  temporary  and  fading, 
while  the  evil  is  permanent,  and  must  go  on,  with  its  mischievous  influences,  when  we 
have  passed  away  ?  We  cannot  think  this.  What  is  true  about  men^-espccially  such 
public  men  as  David — may  be  stated  under  three  headings. 

I.  EvEBT  man's  life,  wbile  beixq  lived,  18  SUBJECT  TO  cRiTrciSM.  We  must 
all  accept  of  this  condition.  W^e  must  not  wonder  if  the  criticism  finds  out  and  unduly 
magnifies  the  evil  that  may  be  in  us.  Though  often  a  source  of  much  bitterness  and 
trouble,  and  often  painfully  depressing  to  the  earnest  man,  it  is,  on  the  whole,  healthy 
that  public  men  snould  be  thus  exposed,  and  must  take  count  of  the  fact  that  their 
fellows  will  never  let  their  wrong-doings  or  wrong  teachino^  hide  away  or  work  in 
secret.    It  is  more  true  that  the  *'  evil  of  a  man  "  lives  while  he  lives. 

II.  In  THE  TIME  07  A  man's  DEATH  0BITICI8M  IB  DI8ABMED.  Such  a  time  has  a 
strange  calming  and  solemnizing  influence  even  on  political  and  theological  opponents. 
The  *'  other  party  "  will  write  sketches  of  the  dead  man's  life  without  a  trace  of  bitter- 
ness or  reference  to  a  disputed  topic.  Perhaps  this  was  never  more  strikingly  illustrated 
than  at  the  death  of  the  good  Dean  Stanley.  Touchingly  tender  and  beautilol  were  the 
references  made  to  him,  and  all  vied  in  saying  good  or  saying  nothing.  The  good,  not 
the  evil,  lived  after  him.  And  so  in  David's  death-time,  all  the  evil  and  the  enmity 
were  put  aside,  that  the  nation  might  do  homage  to  its  great  and  good  king. 

III.  After  death  criticism  is  kindly.  By  common  consent  men  try  to  forget  the 
evil,  and  fix  their  thoughts  only  on  the  good.  Biographies  scarcely  even  hint  the  natural 
weaknesses,  the  stumblings,  or  the  stains.  Nay,  a  kind  of  glory-halo  gathers  round  the 
heroic  dead,  in  which  we  even  lose  sight  of  their  infirmities ;  and  so  it  is  the  good  in  a 
man  that  lives  after  him. 

Then  comes  the  question — ^Does  our  homage  in  death  to  a  man  necessarily  imply 
approval  of  his  career  ?  Yes ;  it  does  of  his  career  as  a  whole— of  the  great  features  of 
it.  Though  this  must  be  admitted,  that  the  homage  is  far  oftener  rendered  to  geniui 
than  to  character, — R.  T. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 


TO 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 


>Ot 


CHAPTER  L 

PAOV 

On  the  whole  Book — GhronicleB      •••  6 
On  the  First  Nine  Chapters— Genoa- 

Ic^es ...            ..•           •••           •••  ' 

A  Mighty  One     ...           ...            •••  7 

On  the  Genealogical  Tables  of  the 

First  Six  Chapters          ...            ...  8 

The  Mission  of  Scriptnre  Genealogies  9 

The  Two  Great  Raoe-Heads             ...  10 

Kfmrod,  the  First  Conqueror            ...  11 

The  Divided  Earth             12 

Abraham's  Double  Name   ...            ...  13 

The  Relations  of  Edom  and  Israel  ...  13 

Genealogies          ...           ...           ...  14 

The  Genealogies  in  Relation  to  Christ  14 
The  Genealogies  in  Relation  to  the 

Church  and  the  World    »..            ...  15 

Natuial  and  Spiritual  Paternity       ...  16 

The  Human  Race ;  Unity  and  Division  17 

Though  Transient,  not  Vain            •••  17 


••• 


CHAPTER  II. 

The  Human  Family 
A  Transgressor  and  Tronblcr 
The  Families  of  the  Scribes 
Jacob — ^Israel        ... 
Divine  Judgment  on  Individual  Sin 
Sinnen  are  Troublers 
Lessons  from  the  Story  of  Boaz 
The  Character  of  Jesse 
Artistic     Gifts     finding     Religious 
Spheres  ...  ...  ».. 

The  Prowess  of  Jair 

The  Mission  of  the  Kenites 


»•• 


0*t 


24 
21 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
29 

SO 
31 
82 


CHAPTER  IIL 

TBCm  TAQM 

Checkered  Life     ...           ...           ...  86 

The  Best  Rewards  of  Piety,  etc.       ...  87 

Genealogy  of  Israel's  Royal  Household  88 
The  Kings  of  the  Royal  Line— David 
and  Solomon :  the  Lessons  of  their 

XjI VOS    ...                ...                •••                .«•  So 

Kings  of  the  Royal  Line— Zcdekiah : 

the  Lesson  of  his  Life     ...           ...  89 

David's  Double  Reign        ...            ...  89 

Review  of  the  Kings           ...            ...  40 

The  Builder  of  the  Second  Temple  ...  41 

CHAPTER  IV. 

A  Unique  Instance  of  the  Beneficent 
Disappointments  of  Human  Suffer- 
ing's Cry           ...            ...           ...  47 

An  Example  of  Earnest  Prayer  for 

Earthly  Things,  to  be  Imitated    ...  48 

The  Prayer  for  the  Hand  ...           ...  50 

The  Prayer  of  Victory  over  Evil      ...  51 
The  Gracious  Benignity  of  Answer  to 

Prayer               ...           •••           ...  52 
Jabez      ...           ...            ...              54, 63 

Weavers,  Husbandmen,  and  Potters  54 

Dwellings  and  Genealogies              ...  55 

**Princes  in  their  Families'*             ...  55 

♦«  Fat  Pasture  " 56 

A  Model  Prayer  ...  ...         56,  60,  65 

Othneil's  Adventure ;  or,  the  Impulse 

of  Promised  Rewards       •••           ...  57 

The  Dignity  of  all  Work     58 

Might  and  Right ...            •••           #••  50 

God's  Ways  with  Amalek  .«•           t**  60 


ii 


INDEX. 


TAQZ 

A  Life  and  its  Lessons       ...           ...  62 

General  Truths  from  the  Qenealogical 

Tables               ...            ...            ...  63 

Jabez :  his  History              ...           ...  63 

Jabez's  Prayer      ...            ...            ...  65 

The  Simeonites    ...            ...           •••  67 


••• 


CHAPTER  V. 

The  End  of  Idolatry 

Judah's  Pre-eminence         ...  ... 

Victcnrs  and  Vanquished     ... 
Judgment  and  Retribution  ... 

The  Three  Threads  of  Destiny 
Devotion,  Deolonsion,  and  Doom 
xvcuDen  •••  •.*  ...  ... 

Reuben,  Gad,  and  Manasseh :    their 

Valour  ... 

Reuben's  Fall 
Instability  ...  ...  ... 

Birthrights  and  Supremacies 

Man's  Power  and  God's  Power  in  War 

The  Sin  of  Idolatry  and  its  Judgments 


71 
73 
74 
74 
75 
76 
76 

77 
78 
79 
80 
81 
81 


CHAPTER  VI. 

The  Two  High  Priests 
•*  The  SerTice  of  Song  " 
**  Waiting  on  their  Office  '* ... 
Levites  and  Priests 
The  City  of  Refuge 


...      87 

88,  91,  94 
...       Oo 

...  b«7 

...      90 


Lessons  from  Lists;  or,  a  Sermon  in 

Names               ...            ...            ...  90 

Religious  Culture                ...            ...  91 

Priesthood  and  Service       ...            ...  92 

A  "Witness  in  a  Man's  Name             ...  03 

The  Honourableness  of  Lcs&er  Service  95 

The  Constant  Work  of  Atonement    ...  95 

Carnal  Provisions  for  Spiritual  Men  96 
The  Doctrinal  Witness  of  the  Refuge* 

Cities                 ...            ...            •••  97 


CHAPTER  VIL 


...    102 

...     103 


Mourning  and  Consolation  ... 

A  Famous  Woman 

"  The  Old  Order  changeth  "  ...     103 

Divine  Compensations         ...  ...     104 

Joshua  and  Jesus:  Resemblance  and 

Contrast  ...  ...  ...     105 

Genealogies :      Issachar,      Naphtuli, 

Epliraim,  Asher,  Benjamin  ...     105 

The  Divine  Gift  of  Physical  Strength  lOG 
Woman's  Rights  in  Ancient  Times  ...  106 
Common  Family  Sorrows   •••  t*.    107 


CHAPTER  Vni. 

Totan 

Readings  between  the  Lines 
Poor  Mephibosheth  I  ... 


•.. 


••. 


FAOS 
110 
111 


CHAPTER  IX. 

«« The  Ruler  of  the  House  of  God  "  ...  114 

"Very  Able  Men"  115 

Ministers  of  the  Sanctuary ...  ...  115 

"The  Far  Country"  lid 

Authority  and  Ability  in  the  Serrioe 

of  God  ...  ...  ...  116 

Aspects  of  Christian  Work  ..,  117 

"God  with  us" 117 

Genealogy  of  the  Returned  Exiles  »•.  118 

Returned  Captives  ...  ...  118 

Strong  for  God's  Service     •••  ...  120 

God's  Door-Eeepers  ...  ...  120 

Samuel's  Life- Work  ...  ...  121 

The  Importanoe  of  Order  in  God's 

Worship  ...  ...  ...  122* 

Every  Man  to  his  own  Office  -.  123 

CHAPTER  X. 

The  Epitaph,  a  Beaeon- Warning     .».  126 

"The  Mighty  Fallen!"     129 

Understanding  the  End     ...  ...  130 

The  Moral  of  Misfortune    »..  ...  131 

Divine  and  Human  Agency  ...  132 

A  Great  Might-have-been :  Saul,  King 

of  Israel  ...  ...  ...  132 

A  Deed  of  Honour  ...  ...  131 

The  Danger  of  Spiritualism  •••  136 

Saul  and  David    ...  ..•  ...  138 

Saul's  Character   ...  ...  ...  139 

Saul's  Sin  ...  139 

Saul's  Death         ...  ...  ...  139 

Innocent  sharing  in  Calamity  ...  139 

The  End  of  Self-Will  ...  *..  HO 

The  Time  for  Returning  Kinducss  is 

sure  to  come      ...  ...  ...  141 

Judgments  come  through   Men,  but 

they  are  from  the  Lord   ...  ...  142 

CHAPTER  XL 

The  Vicarious  Aspects  of  Human  Life 
Twofold — toward  Man  and  toward 

\jlOQ       ...  •>.  ...  ...  JL'i«7 

The  Throne  of  Justice  and  Security...  151 
The  Bravery  of  David's  Three  Blighty 
Men,  and  the   Better    Bravery  <^ 

himself  ...  ...  •••  153 

A  True  Leader     #••  —  ••»  155 


INDEX. 


iri 


••• 


••• 


David's  Accession 
«*  The  City  of  David" 
David's  Greatness 
Mighty  Men         ...  ..• 

A  Great  Deliverance  ... 

The  W«ll  of  Bethlehem      ^. 
Popular  and  Royal  Wisdom 
God's  Enlarging  Presence  ... 
The  Moral  of  tlie  Mighty  Men 
A  Bajal  Afterthought 
The  Promise  fulfilled 
The  Groups  of  Heroes 


rAos 

...  150 

...  156 

...  157 
157,  168 

...  158 

...  159 

...  159 

^.  160 

...  161 

...  161 

...  162 

...  164 


«  Benaiah  the  Son  of  Jehoiada  "       ...  165 

David's  Anointing              ...           ...  167 

Capture  of  Jerusalem         ...            ...  168 

God's  Providences  fulfil  God'sPromises  170 

Joab,  the  Military  Statesman           ...  171 
Success  is  guaranteed  if  God  be  with 

US            ...                   ...                   •••                   •.•  1  /  ifi 

David's  Drink  Offering      .«.            ...  172 

CHAPTEB  XXL 

The  Suspicion  that  has  Power  to  pro- 
pitiate Favour  ...           ...           ...  176 

The  Spirit  that  taught  to  speak  and 

taught  to  hear  aright      ...            ...  178 

The  Earnest  of  Human  Joy              .«•  179 

TheGadites         ...            ...            ...  181 

Loyalty  ...           ...           ...            ...  182 

A  Great  Work  needs  Great  Help     ...  183 
Men  of  Understanding        ...            184,193 
<•  Singleness  of  Heart "       ...            184,  193 

Union     ...            •••            ...            ...  185 

"Joy  in  Israel"   ...            ...            ...  185 

The  Service  of  the  Supreme  King    ...  186 

The  Offer  of  the  Upright    ...            ...  187 

« Joy  in  (the)  Israel  (of  God)"          ...  187 

Spiritual  Sagacity               ...            ...  188 

David's  Mighty  Men :    the  Gadites, 

Benjamites,  and  Judah   ...            ...  1 89 

David's   Mighty    Men:    Motive   for 

Service              ...           ...           ...  189 

David's  Mighty  Men :  Description  and 

Character          ...            ...            ...  190 

Friends  in  Adversity          ...            ...  1 90 

One  increasing.  Another  decreasing ...  191 
The  Hearts  of  all  Men  are  in  God's 

Bands               ...           ...           ...  192 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

The  Chapter  of  Reverse ;  or,  the  Good 
Enterprise  of  a  Good  Man   over- 

.   thrown  in  a  Day             ...           ...  196 


PAOB 

The  Rule  that  makes  a  Willing  People  198 
Religious  Resolution  based  on  Regret- 
ful Memories    ...            ...           ..,  200 

A  Mortifying  Stumble  sanctified     ...  201 
Responsible  Service  outvied  by  Abound- 
ing Reward       ...            ...            ...  203 

Revival  of  Religion             ...            ...  205 

Politics  and  Morals           ^           ...  206 

Holy  Mirth           ...            ...            ,..  206 

Severity  of  Judgment         ...           ...  207 

Household  Blessing            ,^           ...  207 

Piety  and  Policy  ...            ...            ...  208 

The  Imperfections  of  Human  Service  208 
Superstitious    Error   and    Religious 

Truth...            ...            ...            „.  209 

David  and  the  Ark             ,*,            ...  210 

Uzza  and  the  Ark              ...            ...  210 

The  Ark  in  the  House  of  Obcd-Edom  211 

Unity  in  Religious  Enterprises         ...  211 

The  Joy  of  Religion           212 

Warnings  against  Irreverence           ...  213 

Obed-Edom's  Blessing        ...           ...  214 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

An  Important  Instance  of  the  Presence 

of  the  Perceiving  Heart  ...           ...  216 

The  Type  of  Enmity  on  the  Alert, 

foiled  by  Watchfulness  and  Prayer  218 
The  Faith  that  is  content  to  leave 
Self   in  the  Background  and  un- 
hesitatingly obey  God     ...           ...  221 

"  The  Lord  . . .  confirmed  him  King  "  222 

The  God  of  Battles             ...            ...  223 

Hatred  of  Idolatry              «..            ...  223 

•*  A  Sound  of  Going  "          ...            ...  224 

Fame  and  Fear     ...            ...           ...  224 

The  House  and  the  Home:  Wisdom 

and  Folly          ...           ...           ...  225 

Selfward,  God  ward,  Manward          ...  226 

The  Spiritaal  Campaign    ...           ...  226 

Hiram  and  David               ...            ...  227 

First  Battle  in  the  Valley  of  Rephaim  227 
Second  Battle  in  the  Valley  of  Re- 
phaim              ...            ...           ...  228 

Inquiring  of  God  concemiDg  Common 

Things              ...            ...            ...  228 

Loyalty  to  the  One  God     ...           ...  229 

Signs  and  Sounds  of  the  Divine  Pre- 
sence ...            ...           ...           ...  230 

CHAPTER  XV. 

A  Chapter  of  Practical  Repentance  ...  233 

A  Place  for  the  Ark           ...           ...  236 


\r 


INDEX. 


THZXS  TAOK 

**  Sanctify  younelves"       237 

"Dae  Order"       287 

How  Little  and  how  Much  we  may 

do  for  God         ...  •..  ...  237 

Three  Valuable  Yirtaes:  Rectification, 

Admonition,  Obedience  ...  ...  238 

Sacred  Joy  ...  •••  ...  239 

The  Service  of  the  Lord     •••  ...  240 

The  Bearers  of  the  Ark      ...  ...  240 

The  Singers  and  Musical  Instruments 

accompanying  the  Ark   ...  ...  241 

The   Clothing   of    the   Priests   and 

Levites             •••           ...           •.•  242 
Learning  the  Lessons  of  Gk)d*s  Judg- 
ments ...           ...           ...           •••  242 

Due  Preparation  for  Divine  Service  243 
Music  and  Song  consecrated  to  God's 

Service  ...  ...  ...  244 

Intensity  in  Religion  is  often   mLs- 

understood        ...  •••  •••  244 

CHAPTER  XVL 

The    Inaugural    Services   on  Zion's 

Height,  Typical  ...  ...  248 

Sacrifice  and  Blessing        ...  ...  250 

Ministerial  Service  ...  ...  250 

A  Psalm  ••.  ...  ...  251 

Hoursof  Elation  ...  ...  ...  252 

Regular  Divine  Service      ...  ...  253 

The  Constituents  of  Piety  ...  ...  253 

Human  Mindfulness  of  Divine  Pro- 

mises  ...  ...  ...  ...  aOt 

The     Broader    Aspect    of     Hebrew 

Ari6«y   ...  ...  ...  ...  £0o 

The  Right,  the  Acceptable,  and  the 

Beautiful  Thing  ...  ...  256 

The  Ark  and  the  Taboraaclo  ...  256 

David's  Thanksgiving  Psalm  ...  259 

Signs  of  Entire  Consecration  ...  259 

The  Duty  of  Praise  ...  ...  260 

God's  Strength  and  God's  Face        ...  261 

The  Contents  of  a  Godly  Memory    ...  262 

Abiding  Thoughts  of  the  Covenant ...  263 

Christian  Joy  a  Witness     ...  ...  264 

Sincerity  and    Fervour    in  Worship 

shown  by  Gifta  ...  ...  265 

The  Claims  of  God  to  the  Worship 

and  Homage  of  his  Creatures        ...  265 

The  Clothing  of  True  Worshippers  ...  265 

God's  Present  Reign  ...  ...  26G 

God  always  coming  to  judge  ...  267 

The  People's  *•  Amen "       ...  ...  267 


CHAPTER  XVIL 
Tmara  wamm 

The  Purport  and  the  Service  of  One 
Individual  Life  unfolded  authori- 
tatively ...  ...  ...    271 

A  Just  Consideration  of  One's  Own 
Position    in   Life  an  Incentive  to 
Works  of  Practical  Piety  ...    273 

God's  Obstructions  of  the  Good  Pur- 
poses of  Men*  and  the  Uses  of  sudi 
Obstructions      ...  ...  ...    275 

The  Last  Glory  of  God's  Goodness  to 
his  Servants  found  in  the  Distant 
Horizon  he  ofEers  to  their  Vision  ...    277 
Generous  Purposes  ...  •••    278 

Assurance  of  Favour  ..•  »..    279 

God  in  Individual  History ...  ...    280 

A  Mutual  Covenant  ...  ...    280 

Father  and  Son    ..•  ...  ...    281 

Humility  ...  ...  ...    281 

God  Incomparable  ...  ...    282 

A  Father's  Prayer  ...  ...    283 

Truths  under  the  Surface  ...  ...    283 

Three  Spiritual  Necessities  ...    284 

The  Divine  Response :  its  Righteous- 
ness and  Riches  ...  ...    285 

Our  Relation  to  God  ...  ...    285 

Pleas  in  Prayer    ...  ...  ...    286 

Our  Relation  to  the  Divine  Promise        2€6 
The  House  of  the  Lord :  David  and 
Nathan  ...  ...  ...    287 

God's  Message  to  David      ...  ...    288 

David's  Prayer     ...  ...  ...    289 

God's  Dwelling.PIace  and  Man's      ...    289 
Unfitness  for  Some  Parts  of   God's 
Work  ...  ...  ...  ...    290 

God's  Earthly  D welUng-Plaoe  a  Taber- 
nacle, not  a  House  ...  ...     291 

God's  Grace   magnified    in    David's 
HLdtory  ...  ...  ...    291 

The   Purposes   of    God   concerning 
Solomon  ...  ...  ...    292 

The  Humbling  Influence  of  the  Divine 
Goodness  ...  ...  ...     293 

The  Uniqueness  of  the  Divine  Deal- 

lugs       ...  ...  ...  ...      ZVx 

The  Eternity  of  David's  Kiugdom   ...  294 

God's  Relation  to  his  People  ...  295 

The  Faithful  Promiser       ...  ...  293 

The  Blessedness  of  God's  Blessings  ...  296 


CHAPTER  XVIIL 

The  Chapter  that  offers  the  Sermons 
of  Facts  with  Fewest  Words 


800 


INDEX. 


••• 


Preservation 

Ded  ica tion  of  G  Ifts 

A  Righteous  Bulcr 

Tlie  Christian  Campaign    ... 

God*8  Preserving  Kindness 

David's  Wars 

David,  Hudarezer,  and  Ton 


PAOX 

...  30J 

...  302 

...  303 

...  30i 

...  301 

...  305 


Divine  Preservations  in    Work    and 

War  ...            ...            ...            ...  305 

Loyalty  to  Grod  in  the  Time  of  Success  306 

King's  Justice      ...           ...           •••  307 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

The  111  Work  of  Suspiciousness       ...  309 

Kindness  and  Sympathy     ...            ...  311 

True  Valour         ...            ...            ...  312 

A  Bundle  of  Mistakes        ...            ...  313 

The  Conditions  of  Sncooss  in  the  Battle 

of  Life              ...            ...            ...  314 

David  and  Hanun               ...            ...  314 

Joab  and  Abishai,  and  the  Battle  be- 
tween the  Israelites  and  the  Allied 
Armies   of     the   Ammonites    and 

Syrians             ...            ...            ...  315 

Religious  Courtesy             ...            ...  315 

The  Evil  of  the  Suspicious  Mind     ...  316 

Skill  and  Trust  ensuring  Victory     ...  816 

CHAPTER  XX. 

On  the  Wars  of  the  Israelites,  and  on 

War  generally  ...            ...            ...  319 

One  Cunning  Bosom  Sin    ...           «..  321 

The  Barbarity  of  Man  to  Blan          ...  323 

Further  Consequences  of  Folly        «..  324 

Little  Things  and  Great    ...            ...  324 

The  Wasting  of  the  Ammonites,  and 

David's  Wars  with  the  Giants      ...  325 

The  Horrors  of  War            ...           ...  326 

Strong  in  Body,  and  Strong  in  God  ...  326 

CHAPTER  XXI 

Typical  Sin,  Sufiering,  Sorrow,  and 

Sacrifice            •••           ...            ...  831 

A  King's  Pride    ...            ...            ...  335 

Contrition             ...            ...             ..  335 

Falling  into  the  Hand  of  the  Lord  ...  336 

God's  Repentance               ...            ...  837 

Sin  taken  Home   ...            ...            ...  337 

Cheap  Sacrifice  disdained  ...            ...  837 

Accepted  Offerings             .,•            ,..  338 

Human  Action     ...            ...           ...  839 


TmtMV  rAGS 

The  Human  and  the  Divine  in  the 

Hour  of  Penitence           ...            ...  840 

Tolerable  and  Intolerable  Trou  bles . . .  840 

The  Arrested  Hand             ...           ...  841 

Divine     Overruling     and     Human 

Service              ...            ...            ...  342 

David  numbering  the  People            ...  343 

Effects  of  David's  Sin         ...            ...  344 

Oman's  Threshing-Floor    ...           ...  345 

Satanic  Temptations          ...            »..  345 

The  Sin  of  Self-Gratulation              ...  816 

The  Spirit  that  refuses  Good  Advice  847 

Judgment  revealing  Iniqnity            ...  847 
An    Appalling   Offer    and   a    Wise 

Choice               ...            ...            ...  848 

The   Necessary  Connection  between 

Sin  and  Judgment          ...            ...  349 

The  Sight  of  the  Destroying  Angel ...  349 

Conviction  of  Personal  Sin               ...  850 
Right  Feeling  concerning  Giving  to 

0(>d     ...            ...            ...            ...  850 

Propitiation           ...            ...            ...  851 

Answer    to  Prayer  consecrating  the 

Place  of  Prayer               ...            ...  852 

The  Relics  left  on  Feeling  from  the 

Humbling  Scenes  of  Life              ...  353 

CHAPTER  XXn. 

Religious  Enthubiasm  in  Old  Age — a 

Model  Soliloquy              ...            ...  357 

The  Stain  of  Blood              ...            ...  858 

The  Aged  King's  Charge  to  his  Son 
and  Successor    ...  ...  859,866 

The  Aged  King's  Parting  Injunctions 

to  the  Princes  of  his  Kingdom      860,  8G7 
Preparation  for  the  Temple  362,  366 

Fatherly  Wishes  and  Prayers          ...  862 

"Be  doing"          863 

"  Rest  on  Every  Side "       ...           «.  868 

"Arise,  and  Build"            ...            ...  864 

Successful  Service               ...            t»«  364 

The  Wisdom  of  the  Strong               ...  365 

Alien  Help  in  God's  Service            ...  867 
Willingness  to  do  wliat  we  may  when 
we  are   forbidden  to  do  what  we 

would...           ...            ...            ...  368 

Right  Ideas  concerning  God's  Earthly 

Sanctuaries       ...           ...            ...  869 

The  Grounds  of  Divine  Refusals      ...  870 

The  Mission  of  the  Men  of  Reet       ...  870 

Early  Signs  of  the  Filial  Relation    ...  871 

Conditions  of  Prosperity    ...            ...  872 


▼I 


INDEX. 


378 

379 
H81 
381 
382 

383 

38( 
384 
385 
386 
387 
387 
388 


TBBMV  ^AOB 

One  Med'b  Work  for  God  fits  into,  and 
follows  on,  Another  Man's  ...    373 

Work  for  God  must  be  done  with  Heart 
and  Soul  ...  ...  ...    373 

CHAPTER  XXin. 

The  TbrcofoM  Functions  of  the  Priest 
The  Eye  Open  to  {tvligious  Oppor- 

Sunity ...  •*.  ...  ••• 

''The  Man  of  God" 
Morning  and  Evening  Praise 
Our  Hold  upon  the  Future 
The  Sacred  Tribe :  tlieir  Service  and 

ours    •••  *••  ...  •*. 

Enumeration  and  Arrangement  of  the 

Levitcs  for  their  Service ... 
The  Mission  of  the  Lcvitea 
Consecrated  Maturity 
Orderliness  required  in  God*8  Service 
Separation  and  Consecration 
Work  that  Young  People  may  do     ••• 
The  Mission  of  those  who  praise 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Principles  in  a  Purentliesis 

The  Will  of  the  I^»M  

The  Aaronitca  an<l  Other  Deacendantd 

of  Levi :  Onlora  of  the  MusioiiuiH  ... 
The  Abidin-  Warning  of  the  Wilful 
Anoieut   Divine  KuU-s   pn.'8erved   in 

Modem  Adjudtiiieuts      ...  ... 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

Iiibtruction  in  Songs 
**  Small    and    Great,     Teacher    and 
Scholar"  ...  ...  ... 

"  The  Service  of  the  House  of  God  " 
Prophesying  with  a  Harp   ... 
CoiJbecrated  Song... 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

•'A  Wise  Counsellor" 

Temple  Treasures 

*•  Oilicers  and  Judges  " 

The  Blessing  of  God 

The  Business  of  the   Lord  and  the 

Services  of  the  King 
Door-Keepers,  Treasure-Keepers,  and 

External  Services  ...  ,,, 

Culture  by  Trusts 


301 

892 

,303 

3u:j 

394 


397 

398 
398 
.309 
400 


••• 


403 
404 
401 
405 

405 

40G 
406 


••• 


The  Acceptahlenetf  of  Lowly 
On  dedicating  Thinga] 


CHAPTER  XXVIL 

The  Increase  of  Israel 

Earth's  Produce  ... 

Wisdom,  Kindness,  and  Folly  ,.. 

Thet  Army,  Tribal  Princes,  Royal  Po*- 
sessions,  and  Chief  CoimsellorB  of 
the  King 

God's  Promises  checking  Man's  Wil- 
fulness 

The  Trust  of  Riches 


•.• 


CHAPTER  XXVin. 

The  Assembly 

Divine  Inspiration  the  Guide  of 
Human  Work    ... 

The  Courage  of  Age,  and  its  Grand 
Advantages  as  grounded  in  Experi- 
ence    ...  ...  ...  ,,, 

Early  Piety 

The  Pattern  of  the  Spirit  ... 

••Be  Strong"        

Lessons  from  the  End 

A  Parental  Charge :  a  Sermon  to  the 


... 


••. 


... 


Young 


... 


a.. 


•  •• 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

God's  Choosing,  and  Man's  Right 
Attitude  in  the  Presence  of  it 

A  Pattern  for  Religious  Devotion     ... 

The  Last  Thanksgiving  of  the  Royal 
Life  in  its  Varied  Elements 

Youthful  Service  ... 

Affection  for  God*6  Hoiue  ... 

Consecrated  Service 

Generosity  and  Joy 

David's  Blessing  ...  .«. 

Worship...  •••  ••• 


••• 


407 
408 


411 

412 
413 


413 

414 
415 


418 
421 


422 
424 
424 
424 
425 

426 


The  Way  to  succeed  in  a  Great  Work    427 
David's  Address  to  the  Princes  of  his 

Kingdom 
David's  Charge  to  Solomon 
David's  Transfer  of  the  Patterns   to 

Solomon 
Old  Men's  Testimony 
God's  Earthly  Foot-^tool      ... 
Persuasions  to  Obedience   ... 
The  Faithfulness  of  the  Great  Heart- 

ScArcher 
Personal  Relations  with  God 


428 
429 

430 
431 
432 
432 


433 
434 


••• 


439 

440 

442 
445 
446 
446 
447 
447 
448 


INDEX. 


Vll 


••• 


THKMl 

Church  and  Stato... 

David's  Doath 

Solomon's  Accession 

The  Path  of  Progress  in  Christian  Kz- 

perioDce  ..* 

Bejoicing  before  God  ...  • . . 

David  and  Solomon :  Contrast 


••• 


PAOK 

449 
449 
450 

450 
451 
452 


THEMB  PAQB 

David's  further  Address  to  the  Con- 

greg;ation          ...            ...            ...  453 

David's  Prayer  and  Blessing             ...  454 

Personal  Sacrifice  for  God's  Service  455 

Man  but  a  Sojourner          ...            ...  456 

The  Assurcft  Acceptance  of  the  Sinoere  456 

Honoured  in  Deatli  by  God  and  Man  457 


L   CHB0NICLE8. 


2   H 


In  course  of  publication,  Super-Royal  %vo. 
DT  MOHTHLY  PABTS  AND  DT  VOLUMES,  SOLD  SEPABATELY. 

The  Pulpit  Commentary 

ON  THE  OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENTS. 

Edited  by  the  Rev.  Canon  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A., 

Vvcas  and  Rural  Dean  of  St  Pancras,  and  Examining  Chaplain  to  the  Lord  Bishop  of  Gloucester 

and  Bristol ;  and 

By  the   Rev.  JOSEPH   S.  EXELL,   M.A. 

WITH  INTRODUCTIONS 
By  the  Ven.  Archdeacon  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  the  Right   Rev.  BISHOP   OF  EDIN- 
BURGH,  the  Very  Rev.  Principal  TULLOCH,  D.D.,  the  Rev.  Canon  G.  RAWLINSON, 

M.A.,  and  the  Rev.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D. ;  and 

HOMILIES  AND  EXPOSITIONS  BY  UPWARDS  OF  A  HUNDRED 

CONTRIBUTORS, 


The  aim  of  The  Pulpit  Commentary  is  to  provide  scholarly  Introductions  to  the  sacred 
books ;  to  divide  the  text  of  Scripture  into  paragraphs,  and  to  supply  each  paragraph  with  such 
Exposition  as  shall  meet  the  wants  of  the  Student,  and  such  Homiletical  suggestions  as  shall 
assist  the  preparations  of  the  Preacher. 

The  EXPOSITIONS  give  Textual  Criticism.  Revised  Translation  where  necessary,  Explan- 
ation, Apologetics,  Reference  to  Ancient  Customs,  Contemporary  History,  Natural  History, 
Geographical  Research,  Science,  and  anything  that  tends  to  light  up  the  Text,  and  make 
it  available  for  practical  instruction.  These  are  followed  by  a  comprehensive  SERMON 
OUTLINE,  embracing  the  salient  points  of  the  preceding  critical  and  expository  section,  and  by 
brief  HOMILIES  FROM  VARIOUS  CONTRIBUTORS,  designed  to  show  different  modes  of 
treatment,  and  to  bring  into  relief  different  aspects  of  the  passages  under  consideration. 


OLD  TESTAMENT  SERIES. 

THE   FOLLOWING    VOLUMES   ARE   NOW  READY:^ 

GENESIS. 

By  Rev.  T.  WHITELAW,  M.A. ;  with  Homilies  by  Very  Rev.  J.  F.MONTGOMERY,  D.D., 
Rev.  Prof.  R.  A.  REDFORD,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  Rev.  F.  HASTINGS,  and  Rev.  W. 
ROBERTS,  M.A.  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Old  Testament  by  Vcn.  Archdeacon 
FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.  ;  and  Introductions  to  the  Pentateuch  by  the  Right  Rev. 
H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  and  Rev.  T.  WHITELAW,  M.A.   i^Eighth  Edition.)   Price  15*. 


OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS. 


"  It  is  quite  impossible,  in  the  limits  of  a  brief  notice, 
to  review  and  characterize  these  ponderous  volumes  sis 
they  deserve.  But  I  may  say  at  once  that  the  exposi- 
tions contained  in  them,  especially  considering  that  they 
are  meant  for  popular  use,  maintain  a  very  hiRh  level. 


mentary  upon  Genesis  in  the  English  language  quite 
e<)ual  to  it.  Fuller  and  more  comprehensive  than  either 
Bishop  Wordsworth's,  J.  H.  Blunt's.  or  the  'Speaker's' 
Commentary,  it  yet  avoids  the  prolixity,  the  faults  of 
style,   the  somewhat    pedantic   and  over-learned    dis- 


From  the  strictly  orthodox  point  of  view,  I  doubt,  for  '  quisitions  of  Lan;e's  '  Bittl-werk,*  which  it  sometimes 
instance,  whether  any  better  commentary  on  the  Book  ■  tasks  even  a  scholar  to  disentangle ;  while  its  comments 
of  Genesis  has  been  written  than  that  of  Air.  Whitelaw,  1  are.  in  all  respects,  adctjuate  and  learned,  and  wherever 
or  has  been  written  in  a  better  spirit." — Tfu  Expositor.       we  have  te'i>ted  them  pious  and  orthodox." — Tkt  LUt- 

"We  are  bound  to  say  that  the  more  we  see  of  this  ^'^  Churchman. 
Commentary  the  better  we  like  it ;  and  the  more  hiKhly  I  "  The  Introductions  of  the  volume  on  Genesis  are 
do  we  estimate  the  ability,  piety,  and  sound  jud^mt^nt  <  sitccially  able  and  complete.  Canon  Farrar  contributes 
with  which  it  is  being  carried  on.  Most  readers  will  i  a  (leneral  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament — setting 
feel  that  they  understand  fax  better  the  plan  and  purpose  '  forth  the  way  in  which  for  homiletical  purftoscs  it  is  to 
of  the  entire  Commentary  after  an  attentive  perusal  of  |  be  interpreted  and  used— full  of  scholarly  and  common- 
the  volume  upon  Genesis ;  and  it  would  not  be  too  much  ;  sense  canons  and  suggestions  ;  Bishop  Cotterill  an 
to  say  that,  take  it  altogether,  there  is  no  other  Com-  I  elaborate  dissertation  on  the  development  of  the  idea  of 


{ 


s.t  _■ 


'         •        .  -_-     i     7       -;     -~»:  :1j_  T 


1 


■^        -:--- 


—  -  .^  -z.j.\. 


1    .1  -IT"   »^^-*--7"  "-" 


^-•..'    —  ■*.    ~~      t-i  _  .. 


:•-  *  :    -  -      i. 


■  -.    * 


I'  :   r 


-f-**.- 


v-~;  fc 


I'i  '     ^'"S  .1  irij.ji.~.z  t^  A 


—  —  ■^  -         —      ■» 


^  ■  ^    ■    "x  ■ 


<  >  «^ 


"  I ".  ~     ■"    i        -  -- 


' .    I.  : v'^  L'  H  AK  T ,   ar.d 

.  «      A  «  id  • 


-     —    -  < 


t        '     ■ 


ra-  :t  :  i 


■:-:■    :■;  :  i'  :'  -~.f  :  ;r  _--\  ersA.  use.  — j   r^  c  ^f*^\  /»"a«r  x 


-.-  ....       ..  ._         —  _._        ,_  »■     i .  ^  :    .  I ' "  -<^ ..  A .  -T    -  -■  rt-t  *    .  -       c  X  .-^  ..^       .is 

.....     ^*  1.     ".'"1.  .".'       J,  -. -—--i  -\\»  -..  :.- --.r  •■;■;■*«.*■■:::  '>.:■*  u-s  the  t-:  .:>\A::h 

.."_■■■--.-  •.<■•■  ., 

'    ;-     _  '  J-    -    ■  ••.•  .^   .         .,'.--  ....  -J       "      "  :  ■"■  -:   :■;!".  u?**  ■*  ."-■T':  :"-'.. cr  ~ji:;;r;al  rr.-iy  '.x.  :'..:ir.J.  3-i 

*  '    "   "      .—      :".r     :^u::  r.-   .--r. i    c.  Iv". ;;    r.  .w    ts    m/.'^e   t';.t    ■.■■•r*l 

^,.       ._,...  ...  ..  .;■--?     -J.:  -. :' :-t  -.i.:rci  :r.\:  .-ir;  f-trcAn  i"  .■:".  j:. J .*:..: e. 

.,   .    .         ,  .  .    ,    L  -  -        .....'  N  .    A-s.iii   p.:.; ::   a-::r-;-<;«  w:.  ic  j(.irv- . r.-. ^  iiter  ihe 

.  '      ■  "        .--...»-.-.•....'...•(  .::  — :..:.. r.  ::'  i.-;>  irulv  r-oii::;ai  worii." — /..-.Vj.-.ijj.-rla/ 

-      ^i.,,.r.i  ■■"'■-       *•"*  «  • 

-'  •     :  ■     r^  \-:.^-    \:'-:-^   -Cr-/*:^    <^Vrlrc  <^'*^--''- 

It  .•  *•  I'r.fe>*..r   Kaw-ins;!!  has  d-  ne  his  very  ixu^vrtanl 


.  ■  -  ■  -  ■ 


t  ■• 


□iei:it;it:vn,  bcLoLiriy  hACicL  azi(J  symp^ahetic  heiiirta  have      Times. 


\ 


THE  PULPIT  COMMENTARY,— OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS. 


LEVITICUS. 

By  Rev.  Preb.  MEYRICK,  M.A. ;  with  introductions  by  Rev.  R.  COLLINS,  and  Rev. 
Prof.  A.  CAVE  ;  and  Homilies  by  Rev.  Prof.  REDFORD,  LL.B.,  Rev.  W.  CLARKSON, 
Rev.  J.  A.  MACDONALD,  Rev.  S.  R.  ALDRIDGE,  and  Rev.  McCHEYNE  EDGAR, 
M.A.    {^Fourth  Edition.)    Price  15J. 


OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS. 


"A  valuable  addition  to  our  stock  of  commcnlaries 
on  this  part  of  the  Books  of  Moses."— 7<;>b(  BmIL 

"This  volume  is  of  substantial  worth,  and  will  form 
a  valuable  addition  to  the  preacher's  library."— /Ww/- 
tiv«  Methodist. 

^ "  \ye  know  not  where  the  reader  will  find  more  ample 
disquisitions  on  all  the  Levitical  sacrifices  and  rites,  and 
their  manifold  relations,  than  in  this  volume.  It  is  also 
very  rich  in  the  hoinilctic  treatment  of  these  subjects." — 
Irish  Ecclesiastical  Gatette. 

"For  the  religious  cultivation  of  the  imagination  and 
the  development  of  the  true  spirit  of  poetry  there  is  no 
better  help  than  the  Book  of  Leviticus.  In  it  is  fuund 
how  the  kingdom  of  nature  corresponds  to  that  of  grace, 
and  in  some  sense  typifies,  figures,  or  symbolizes  it. 
The  study  of  nature  is  thus  ennobled.     But  in  order  to 


discover  these  resemblances,  there  is  needed  a  clear- 
sighted, sober,  and  experienced  guide.  Such  is  one  of 
the  many  benefits  rendered  to  students  and  ordinary 
readers  by  this  scIioLorly  and  exhaustive  Pulpit  Cum- 
mentary  on  Leviticus." — Leeds  Mercury. 

"  We  question  whether,  for  working  purposes,  better 
commentaries  on  the  Old  Testament  are  to  be  had 
anywhere  than  in  this  'Pulpit  Commentar>''  series. 
They  are  scholarly,  without  l>eing  tediously  erudite ; 
full,  without  being  pn>lix ;  lucid,  without  descending  to 

f)Iatitude  ;  conservative,  yet  with  moderation  ;  rarely 
ailing  to  hit  the  true  sense  of  a  passage,  yet  careful  to 
furni^li  the  reader  with  the  materials  fur  correcting  a 
wrone  juclgrnent,  if  in  any  case  he  should  think  that 
they  have  missed  the  mark.  We  admire  in  them,  above 
all,  their  businesslike  directness  and  their  usually  just 
appreciation  of  what  are  likely  to  be  the  points  on  which 
information  is  sought."— 6V<ix^<>w  Herald. 


NUMBERS. 

By  Rev.  R.  WINTERBOTHAM,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  B.Sc.  ;  with  an  introduction  by  Rev.  T. 
WHITELAW,  M.A.  ;  and  ^^-ith  Homilies  by  Rev.  Prof.  W.  BINNIE,  D.D.,  Rev.  E.  S. 
PROUT,  M.A.,  Rev.  D.  YOUNG,  B.A.,  and  Rev.  J.  WAITE,  B.A.  {.Fourth  Edition.) 
Price  1 5 J. 


OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS, 


**  Competent  scholarship,  exact  thought,  and  reverent 
handling  of  the  Scriptures  xure  apparent  on  every  page. 
He  has  mastered  the  voluminous  literature  which  has 
gathered  round  this  special  book  of  Scripture,  and  is 
acauainted  at  first  hand  with  all  the  critical,  historical, 
and  geographical  problems  which  await  solution."— 
Dmily  Free  Press. 

"  Of  course,  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  read  care- 
fully the  whole  of  these  five  hundred  closely  printed 
buqge  octavo  pages,  and  it  may  be  there  are  some 
opinions  in  it  from  which  we  might  dissent ;  but  judging 
from  what  we  have  read,  we  can  confidently  recommend 
it.  Whilst  it  may  be  inferior  in  scholar>hip  to  the  ereat 
works  of  Keil  and  Delitzsch,  Kwald,  Kurtz,  and  Heng- 
stenberg,  it  will  be  found  more  UNeful  than  those,  not 
only  generally,  but  also  for  its  special  purpose.  It  may 
be  confidently  asserted  that  when  completed  the  '  Pulpit 
Commentary'  will  be  the  best  purely  English  com- 
mentary in  existence.  It  divides  th^  book  into  short 
paragraphs,  of  each  of  whicli  there  i<»  a  good  exposition. 
The  homiletic  outlines  follow,  which  may  be  used  or 
read  as  a  substitute  for  sermons.  I'hen  come  homilies 
or  sermon  outlines  on  the  same  paragraphs  by  Rev. 
Prof.  W.  Binnie,  D.D.,  Rev.  E.  S.  Prout,  M.A.,  Rev. 
D.  Young,  B.A.,  and  Rev.  J.  Waitc,  B.A.  In  different 
parts  of  tne  work  there  are  special  articles — for  instance, 
on  the  position  of  Kadcsh,  the  thirty-eight  years'  sub- 
mergence of  the  history  after  the  rebellion  at  Kadesh, 
the  history  of  Balaam.  Balaam's  prophecies,  the  zeal  of 
Phinehas,  the  extermination  of  the  Midianites,  and  the 
two  lists  of  stations  between  EgY]>t  and  the  Jordan.  A 
homiletical  index  at  the  end  of  the  volume  adds  greatly 
to  its  value." — Leeds  Mercury. 

"As  the  Book  of  Numbers  has  never  yet  been  fully 
expounded,  we  all  the  more  heartily  welcome  this 
volume.  If  by  any  good  word  of  ours  we  could  increase 
the  sale  of  this  noule  series  of  commentaries,  we  should 
count  the  time  and  space  to  be  most  profitably  employed. 
Messrs.  C  Kegan  Paul  and  Co.  deserve  to  be  supported 
abundantly  in  an  enterprise  so  daringly  planned  and  so 


admirably  executed.  Perhaps  the  best  ser\'ice  we  can 
render  both  to  our  readers  and  the  publisher^  is  to  quote 
from  the  prospectus  the  following  statement  as  to  the 
design  of  thef»e  volumes,  upon  wliich  the  liest  scholars 
of  the  age  are  employed." — Rev.  C  H.  Sfl'RCEON,  in 
Sword  and  Tro%vel. 

"The  great  difficulties  created  by  the  gaps  of  time  in 
the  Book  of  Numbers^  by  the  slaughter  of  the  Midianitish 
women,  the  (Htrplexi ties  created  by  Kuenen  and  Colenso 
with  reference  to  the  two  censuses,  and  the  number  of 
fighting  men  in  the  camp  of  Israel,  are  handled  by  Mr. 
Whitclaw  very  judiciously  and  ably,  and  the  textual 
commentary  by  Mr.  Winterbotham,  with  its  special 
notes,  does  not  shirk  difficulties  which  have  been  often 
felt.  Some  very  happy  homiletic  use  is  made  of  the 
grander  portions  of  the  sublime  story."— EvaHgnelical 
Ma^azitu. 

"  The  wisdom  of  the  editors  has  in  no  instance  been 
more  clearly  exhibited  than  in  the  selection  of  Mr. 
Winterbotham  as  expositor  and  homilist ;  and  we  are 
gl.-xd  to  meet  him  on  ground  where  his  exegetical  powers 
are  tested  to  the  utmost.  His  colleagues,  too,  bear 
names  which  guarantee  ability  and  soundness.  The 
difficulties  of  the  book  are  dealt  with  mainly  in  two 
elaborate  introductions ;  one  by  Mr.  Whitelaw,  whose 
valuable  contribution  on  Genesis  we  have  already  re- 
viewed ;  and  one  by  Mr.  Winterbotham.  Of  the  former 
it  is  impossible  to  speak  too  highly.  The  questions 
raised  by  the  thirty-seven  years'  chasm,  the  number  of 
fighting  men.  and  of  the  congregation,  the  duties  of  the 
priest,  the  marshalling  of  the  host,  the  Midianitish 
victory,  etc. ,  are  handled  in  the  clearest  and  most  satis- 
factory manner.  With  regard  to  the  so-called  barren 
details  of  the  book,  we  have  seldom  read  anything  more 
interestinji;  and  suggestive  than  the  manner  in  which 
some  of  them  are  dealt  yf'\i\i.*'—Methcdist. 

"  Fully  up  to  the  level  of  the  former  issues,  and  we 
may  specify  the  episode  of  Balaam  as  being  worked  out 
with  great  care."— CA«rrA  Times. 


THE  PULPIT  COMMENTARY.^OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS. 


DEUTERONOMY. 

By  Rev.  W.  L.  ALEXANDER,  D.D.  ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  D.  DAVIES,  M.A.,  Rev.  C. 
CLEMANCE,  D.D.,  Rev.  J.  ORR,  B.D.,  and  Rev.  R.  M.  EDGAR,  M.A.  {Third 
Edition,)    Price  1 5/. 


OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS, 


"The  G>minentary  is  searching,  guarded,  and  able. 
Dr.  Alexander  has  the  candour  as  well  as  the  learning 
of  a  true  scholar,  and  does  not  affirm  beyond  what  the 
evidence  justifies.  .  .  .  It  is  one  of  the  best  of  the  series, 
and  especially  welcome  as  a  contribution  to  a  present 
controversy." — British  QuarUrly  Revirw, 

"The  present  volume  seems  to  be  auite  on  a  level 
with  its  predecessors.  ...  It  is  carefully  written,  and 
ably  copes  with  the  modem  ejections  which,  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  whole  consensus  of  antiquity,  would  ascribe 
the  authorship  of  Deuteronomy  to  some  one  other  than 
Moses." — Record. 


"  The  present  volume  contains  a  considerable  amount 
of  sound  and  moral  xvisXixxQtxovi,**'— Scotsman, 

"  If  we  might  be  allowed  to  suggest  one  Society  more 
it  would  be  this :  to  secure  the  presentation  on  nominal 
terms  of  all  really  valuable  books  like  the  '  Pulpit  Com- 
mentary '  to  every  teacher  of  religion  in  the  three  king- 
doms.  Nothing  would  more  certainly  produce  an  able 
clergy  than  a  really  first-class  ]x\>nxy.— Ecclesiastical 
Gazette. 

"The  exposition  is  very  full  and  careful,  and  the 
homiletics  and  homilies  are,  as  usual,  fresh,  vigorous, 
comprehensive,  and  suggestive."  —  Catholic  Presby' 
terian. 


JOSHUA. 


By  Rev.  J.  J.  LIAS,  M.A. ;  with  introduction  to  the  Historical  Books  by  Rev.  A. 
PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D.;  and  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  E.  DE  PRESSENS^,  D.D., 
Rev.  R.  GLOVER,  Rev.  J.  WAITE,  B.A.,  Rev.  S.  R.  ALDRIDGE,  B.A.,  Rev. 
W.  F.  ADENEY,  M.A.     {Fifth  Edition,)    Price  12s.  bd. 


OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS. 


"Joshua  is  treated  by  Rev.  J.  J.  Lias^  and  his  entire 

work    is  fully  deserving  of  similar  praise But 

of  publications  of  our  own  day,  the  work  before 
us  must  easily  bear  away  the  palm  for  method  and 
comprehensiveness,  lliere  has  been  nothing  like  it 
for  the  methodical  way  in  which  the  whole  surface  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures  has  been  treated  with  a  homiletical 
intention,  and  we  must  say  also  in  the  general  power 
and  ability  with  which  the  work  is  done.  The  volumes 
are  of  a  goodly  size  and  length,  for  it  is  hardly  possible 
to  compress  the  work  very  greatly  ;  so  that  we  fear  the 
completed  work  must  be  a  lengthy  one.  It  .ippcars  to 
be  conceived  and  carried  on  in  a  thoroughly  fair  and 
candid  spirit,  though  not  entirely  by  Churchmen;  and 
the  names  of  the  various  writers  (each  of  them  men  of 
eminence  in  their  several  positions)  speak  for  them- 
selves. .  .  .  All  that  learning,  much  industry,  and  an 
excellent  method  can  do  has  been  done  to  produce  a 
work  in  which  the  lalx>riou«  preacher  may  find  the  exact 
information  for  suggestive  t nought  or  careful  generali- 
zation which  he  needs  for  his  pulpit  work,  ready  to  his 
hand.  And  this  is  no  small  praise." — Ecclesiastical 
Gazette. 

"  No  commentary  worthy  of  the  sacred  text  of  Joshua 
has  appeared  in  an  English  dress  till  the  publication 
of  the  present  volume.  Keil  is  hardly  up  to  his  usual 
mark.  Fay,  in  Lange,  is  far  below  even  the  average 
of  that  unequal  work  ;  even  Calvin's  masculine  intellect 
seems  at  fault  here,  and  Mr.  Espin,  in  the  '  Speaker's 
Commentary,'  while  reasonably  full  and  sound  on  the 
whole,  hardly  reaches  a  high  standard  of  excellence. 
We  have  examined  this  volume  with  much  care,  and 
have  no  hesitation  in  pronouncing  it  immex<urably  the 
best  interpretation  of  Joshua  in  the  language.  Mr.  Lias, 
in  addition  to  having  the  whole  existing  literature  on 
the  subject  to  work  upon,  has  broueht  to  his  task  critical 
and  exegetical  powers  of  a  rare  order,  and  the  industry, 
judgment  and  literary  skill  of  the  late  learned  Hebrew 
professor  at  Lampeter,  have  produced  a  commentary 
that  will  be  the  standard  work  for  this  and  the  next 
generation.  ' — Methodist. 

"The  Commentary  on  Joshua  by  Mr.  Lias  is  as 
scholarly,  painstaking,  and  effective  as  his  contributions 
to  the  Cambridge  Hible  for  schools,  which  have  been 
characterized  in  these  pages  more  than  once." — 
Expositor. 

•'Turning  to  the  Commentary  itself,  we  must  express 
unmixed  satisfaction  with  the  opening  excursus  of  Prin- 


cipal Plummer,  in  which,  while  showing  his  thorough 
familiarity  with  the  objections  of  Ewald,  Dr.  Davids^ 
and  others,  to  the  narrative  of  Joshua,  he  exposes  their 
unduly  dogmatic  tone,  and  gives  abundant  evidence  for 
accepting  the  authenticity  of  the  book  itself  and  pre- 
serving  it  in  the  canon  of  Scripture.  ...  As  a  specimen 
of  the  expository  part  of  this  book,  we  may  refer  to  the 
annotations  on  the  Cities  of  Refuge^  which  contain  some 
excellent  thinking  in  small  space,  m  addition  to  which 
it  may  be  said  that  the  fairness  in  relation  to  real  dif- 
ficulties conspicuous  throughout  cannot  be  better  illus- 
trated than  in  the  exegesis  on  the  crucial  passage  about 
the  sun  and  the  moon  standing  still  in  the  valley  of 
Ajalon.  ...  *  The  Pulpit  Commentary,'  when  com- 
pleted, must  take  its  place  supreme  and  without  a  rival 
among  all  the  expositions  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures 
publisned  in  our  language." — Liverpool  Mercury. 

"As  several  volumes  of  the  'Pulpit  Commentary' 
have  already  reached  a  third  or  fourth  edition,  their 
value  appears  to  be  understood  and  appreciated.  The 
present  volume  opens  with  an  introduction  to  the  his- 
torical books  from  Joshua  to  Nehemiah,  by  the  Rev. 
A.  Plummcr,  Master  of  University  College,  Durham. 
Although  there  is  nothing  specially  original  in  this  in- 
troduction, the  materials  of  previous  investigations  and 
criticisms  are  well  arranged  and  grouped  ;  and  the 
whole  aflbrds  a  concise  yet  graphic  account  of  the  history 
of  Israel  during  the  time  referred  to.  The  special  in- 
troduction to  the  Book  of  Joshua,  from  the  pen  of  the 
Rev.  J.  J.  Lias,  late  Hebrew  Lecturer  at  I^ampeter 
College,  ably  deals  with  the  various  critical  questions 
involved  ;  vmdicates  the  integrity  and  early  authorship 
of  the  book ;  and  discusses  wuh  candour  and  clearness 
the  so-called  moral  and  miraculous  difficulties  which  it 
presents.  Mr.  Lias  also  supplies  the  exposition  and 
homilies  in  a  series  of  concise  and  condensed  notes, 
which  presents  the  latest  results  of  scholarship.  The 
homilies  are  by  Dr.  E.  dc  Pressensd,  and  the  Revs. 
R.  Glover,  J.  Waite,  W.  F.  .A.deney.  and  S.  R.  Aldridge  ; 
and,  while  very  various  in  character,  are  valuable  and 
suggestive.  Tne  volume  throughout  is  a  useiul  help  to 
the  homiletical  student  of  the  Book  of  Joshua.** — Leeds 
Mercury. 

'*  We  repeat  with  even  fuller  emphasis  the  opinion 
we  expressed  in  noticing  previous  volumes  of  the  Com- 
mentary, that  it  stands  first  in  its  own  department."— 
British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review. 


THE  PULPIT  COMMENTARY.^OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS, 


JUDCxES   AND   RUTH. 


By  the  Bishop  of  BATH  and  WELLS  and  Rev.  J.  MORISON,  D.D. ;  with  Homilies  by 
Rev.  Prof.  J.  R.  THOMSON,  M.A.,  Rev.  W.  M.  STATHAM,  Rev.  A.  F.  MUIR,  M.A., 
and  Rev.  W.  F.  ADENEY,  M.A.     {Fourth  Edition.)     Price  lOJ.  6d. 


OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS, 


"The  introduction,  as  well  as  the  commentary,  is 
vigorous  and  suggestive." — British  Quarterly  Rrvitw. 

"The  Book  of  Judges  has  been  entrusted  to  I^rd 
Arthur  Hervey,  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells,  for  '  expo- 
sition and  homiletics,'  and  is  well  and  thoroughly  done, 
as  would  be  expected  from  a  divine  who  has  made  that 
portion  of  Scripture  to  some  extent  his  special  study." — 
Ecclesiastical  Gasette. 

"In  the  volume  before  us  we  have,  too,  the  work  of  a 
scholar  who  has  made  this  part  of  Scripture  his  peculiar 
study.  The  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells  speaks,  there- 
fore, with  the  confidence  of  one  who  is  familiar  with  his 
subject;  and  his  notes  and  'homiletics'  can  hardly  fail 
to  be  of  great  use  to  the  preacher,  wherever  he  mav 
consult  them.  ...  The  commentary  on  Ruth  is  itself 
as  good  and  edifying,  and  the  entire  volume  quite  equal 
to  those  which  have  preceded  it." — Church  Quarterly 
Review, 


ableness.  Nothing  is  said  that  shocks  the  moral  sensi- 
bilities. The  note  on  Jephthah's  vow  is  also  good." — 
Irish  EccUsiasticai  Gasette. 


"  Homilies 
formist. 


full   of  suggestive   thought." — Nanc^n- 


"  No  clergyman  ought  to  complain  of  the  difficulty  of 
pulpit  preparation  with  such  a  work  in  his  hands ;  the 
danger  is  rather  lest  the  business  of  preaching  be  ren- 
dered too  easy,  and  the  preacher  himself  robbed  of  his 
independence.  Looking  over  this  volume,  however,  we 
do  not  see  that  there  is  much  fear  for  this  result ;  the 
homiletic  notes  are  more  suggestive  (as  it  is  so  desirable 
that  they  should)  than  exhaustive.  The  reader  will  find 
no  sermon  complete  and  to  his  hand,  but  he  will  find 
what  it  is  intended  he  should  find,  hontiletic  notes,  to  be 
worked  up  in  the  laboratory  of  his  mind,  and  put  into 
shape  for  the  pulpit  by  dint  of  arrangement  and  thought 
on  his  (Kirt.  we  have  been  careful  to  examine  into  the 
treatment  which  some  of  the  more  difficult  passages  in 
the  'Judges'  have  received  at  the  hands  of  the  com- 
mentators, and  find  it  eminently  satisfactory.  For 
example,  Mr.  Adeney's  note,  the  murder  of  Sisera  by 
Jael,  IS  to  be  commended  for  its  good  sense  and  reason- 


"Of  'The  Pulpit  Commentary/  edited  by  Canon 
Spence  and  the  Rev.  Joseph  Exell,  an  equally  satis- 
factory account  may  most  conscientiously  be  given.  The 
volumes  are  got  up  in  the  same  handsome  style ;  authors 
eminent  for  ability  and  piety  furnish  the  material ;  and 
the  horailetical  object  is  kept  constantly  in  view.  When 
this  undertaking  was  begun,  one  feared  lest  it  should  be 
somewhat  fru^mentary  and  crude ;  but  we  are  boiud  to 
say  that  the  best  means  have  been  taJcen  to  make  it  a 
thorough  and  trustworthy  work.  Mr.  £xell  deserves 
credit  for  his  services  in  the  cause.  He  has  helped 
greatly  to  raise  Homiletics  to  the  rank  of  a  brancnof 
theological  science  ;  and  his  endeavour  to  maintain 
Homiletics  in  vital  connection  with  her  twin-sister,  Exe- 
getics,  is  much  to  be  commended.  It  is  the  homiletical 
element  that  distinguishes  the  Commentary,  and  by  which 
it  is  to  be  judged.  That  element  is  singularly  nch  and 
full,  and  It  gives  one  a  remarkable  impression  of  the 
manifoldness  of  Bible  teaching,  even  in  the  historical 
books." — Catholic  Presbyterian. 

"  It  is  unnecessary  to  speak  in  detail  of  the  fulness  and 
excellence  of  this  exhaustive  Commentary,  a  library  in 
itself,  and  which  every  clergyman's  library  ought  to 
possess.  .  .^ .  With  this  Commentary  in  his  library,  the 
clergyman  is  almost  free  from  the  necessity  of  obtaining 
any  othtr."— Clergyman's  Magazine. 

"  The  story  of  Ruth  is  brought  out  with  fine  tact  and 
ample  learning,  and  Mr.  Statham's  and  Mr.  Thomson's 

homilies    are    very    vigorous,    and    to    the    point." 

Evangelical  Magazine. 


FIRST   BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 

By  Very  Rev.  R.  PAYNE  SMITH,  D.D.  (Dean  of  Canterbury) ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev. 
D.  ERASER,  D.D.,  Rev.  Prof.  CHAPMAN,  M.A.,  and  Rev.  BRYAN  DALE,  M.A. 
{Sixth  Edition,)     Price  15J.  

OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS, 


"  The  Dean  of  Canterbury's  commentary  on  i  Samuel 
is,  as  those  who  know  him  and  his  course  of  study 
would  expect,  quite  the  best  help  to  the  reading  of  that 
attractive  book  to  be  found  in  English  literature." — 
Expositor. 

"  I  thank  you  much  for  the  large  and  handsome 
volume  on  x  Samuel  which  you  have  Icindlv  sent  me.  I 
have  examined  it  in  a  few  places,  and  feel  sure  that,  in 
its  special  character  of  a  homiletical  commentary,  it  will 
prove  of  the  greatest  use  to  students  of  Holy  Scripture." 
-The  Right  Rev.  C  J.  Ellicott,  D.D.,  Lord  Bishop 
of  Gloucester  and  Bristol. 

"  We  have  thus  endeavoured  to  give  some  slight  idea 
of  the  plan  of  the  work.  There  is  nothing  like  it  in  the 
language.  It  is  a  mine  of  wealth  for  the  preacher  to  dig 
in,  and  no  one  can  fail  to  derive  much  that  is  valuable 
and  excellent  from  it.  ^  To  attempt  to  criticise  the  work 
in  detail  is  manifestly  impossible.  We  can  only  counsel 
all  readers  to  possess  themselves  of  it,  for  if  further  com- 
mendation is  wanted,  it  may  be  found  in  the  illustration 
hereby  afforded  to  the  proverbial  saying  that  •  nothing 
succeeds  like  success.'  The  first  volume  of  the  '  Pulpit 
Commentary '  that  was  published  only  a  few  months  a«o 
is  already  in  its  third  edition,  and  a  second  edition  of  the 
inesent  volume,  which  is  but  just  out,  has  already  been 
called  for.  It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  the  work  sup- 
plies a  felt  want,  and  that  the  public  accordingly  will 


have  it."— Stanley  Leathes,  D.D.,  Prof.  0/ Hebrew, 
King's  College,  London. 

"  There  was  ample  room  for  a  comment  upon  Samuel, 
for  there  is  scarcelv  anything  upon  that  book  worth 
mentioning.  This  noble  volume  fills  the  gap  exceedingly 
well,  and  yriW  be  invaluable  to  all  ministers."— Rev. 
C.  H.  Spi'RCeon,  in  Sword  and  TrouKl. 

"  Indeed,  the  Commentary  stands  in  the  same  rela- 
tion to  this  age  that  Farrar's  *  Life  of  Christ '  does ;  it  is 
alive  with  be.iuty  of  style  and  vigour  of  thought,  and 
conscious  of  all  the  light  that  recent  years  have  cast  on 

I  the  study  of  the  sacred  Scriptures.  We  do  not  hesitate 
to  say  that  for  exegetical  purposes,  and  for    helpftil 

^  stimulus.  It  will  prove  the  Commentary  of  the  day ;  and 
teachers  especially,  whether  in  church  or  school,  will 
find  the  inspiration  that  they  too  often  seek  in  vain  m 
the  dull  and  dreary  platitudes  of  many  so-called  aids 
and  helps."-  Christian  IP'oHd. 

I  "The  book  is  a  great  storehouse  of  expository  and 
homiletical  matier."— l/nitarian  Herald. 

I      '.*  Professor  Chapman  sums  up  homiletically  the  charac-* 
teristics  of  each  section,  and  Dr.  Donald  Fraser  and  Mr. 
I5r>'an  Dale  supplv  homilies  on  the  principal  ideas  and 

I  verses.    Those  of^  Mr.  Dale  especially  are  happy  and 

I  vigorous,  and  will  be  very  useful  to  preachers.  The 
work    so    far    worthily  justifies    iu    uxX^.'^—Bt  ititk 

1  Quarterly, 


«fc  '   '  ' 


._■■.--.• 


"-•.r^         -  h.  c  ■     ^- 


\ 


THE  PULPIT  COMMENTARY, 


JEREMIAH. 

By  Rev.  T.  K.  CHEYNE,  M.A.  ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  W.  F.  ADENEY,  M.A., 
Rev.  b.  YOUNG,  B.A.,  Rev.  J.  WAITE,  B.A.,  Rev.  S.  CONWAY,  B.A.,  and  Rev. 
A.  F.  MUIR,  M.A.     Vol.  I.     {Second  Edition.)     Price  15J. 

OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS, 

**  We  arc  glad  to  receive  this  new  Commentary  upon         "  We  have  read  many  parts  with  intense  interest, 

the  many  interesting  questions  which  still  Remain  to  be     feeling  more  than  ever  that  Jeremiah  was  indeed  an 

dealt  with,  connected  with  the  Prophecy  of  Jeremiah ;  :  evangelical  prophet  of  the  most  earnest  kind." — EccU- 

and  we  are  particularly  glad  to  receive  it  from  the  hands     siastical  Gazette. 

of  Mr.  Cheyne,  who  is  one  of  the  comparatively  small         .«The    introduction  is   short,   but    furnishes  an  in- 

number  of  men  among  us  whose  views  on  the  prophetica    1  jeresting  account  of  the   Prophet   Jeremiah,  whUe  a 

literature  deser\e,  and  will  be  sure  to  receive,  careful  ^        ,,t  ^^^1  of  valuable  information  relating  to  his  pro- 

and  res|)ectful  attention,  and  no  common  degree  of  con-     phecies  is  introduced  throughout  the  voXyxai^.^'—Recerd. 

fidence.  — Literary  Churchman.  1       ..  n    1.    •        j      •  j  ■»•  j         j 

'Roth   introduction    and    exposition  are  good,  and 

"We  regard  the  volume  as  a  worthy  companion  to  reveal  everywhere  the  hand  of  a  master.  The  homiletica 
those  which  have  preceded  it,  and  as  adding  much  :  and  homilies  are  full  of  good  matter,  which  will  doubt- 
strength  to  the  claim  of  this  Commentary  to  be  con-  !«/«.  be  of  much  use  to  many  who  have  not  time  or 
sidered  the  best  for  preachers  which  this  age  has  pro-  '  ability  to  think  out  their  sermons  for  themselves.  .  .  . 
dnctA."—Methvdist  New  Connexion  Magazine.  1  T^»e  volume  before  us  is  quite  equal  to  anv  of  its  predc- 

'  ccs«>rs.     If  It  promote,  as  we  earnestly  hope,  a  more 

"The  introduction  furnishes  us  with  a  very  learned,  1  careful  study  of  the  prophecies  and  the  times  of  Jere- 
careful,  and  exhaustive  account  of  Jeremiah  as  a  pro-  miah.  it  will  reveal  abundant  and  most  valuable  matter 
phet,  and  of  his  great  work,  the  time  in  which  it  was  I  for  pulp't  ministrations.  —Methodtst  Recorder. 
written,  its  aim,  its  nature,  its  relation  to  other  works  of  "The  general  homiletical  arrangement  of  a  book  of 
a  cognate  kind,  its  difficulties — historical,  textual,  and  I  Scripture  is  in  every  way  valuable,  and  is  here  done 
prophetical— and  its  chronology."— ii'i«^//jr/i  Church-  1  with  scholarly  skill,  vigour,  and  ability." — British 
man.  '  Quarterly  Rcrie^v. 


II.  CHRONICLES.  By  Rev.  Prof.  P.  C.  Barker,  M.A.,  LL.B.  ;  with  Homilies  by 
Rev.  Prof.  Thomson,  Rev.  R.  Tuck,  B.A.,  Rev.  W.  Clarkson,  B.A.,  Rev.  F. 
Whitfield,  M.A.,  etc.  [/« the  Press, 


NEW  TESTAMENT  SERIES. 

THE   FOLLOWING    VOLUMES   ARE   NOW  READY i-^ 

ST.  MARK. 

By  Very  Rev.  Dean  BICKERSTETII,  D.D. ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  Prof.  J.  R. 
THOMSON,  M.A.,  Rev.  Prof.  E.  JOHNSON,  M.A.,  Rev.  Prof.  J.  J.  GIVEN  M.A., 
Rev.  A.  ROWLAND,  B.A.,  LL.B.,  Rev.  A.  F.  MUIR,  M.A.,  and  Rev.  R.  GREEN. 
{^Fourth  Edition.)     2  vols.     Price  2\s. 

OPINION  OF  THE,  PRESS. 

"  We  have  had  the  pleasant  duty  in  months  past  of  {  extremely  valuable,  gathering  up  all  the  points  which 
welcoming  the  Old  Testament  instalments  as  they  were 


issued,  and  in  urging  our  readers  to  purchase  the  whole 
of  St.  Mark's  Gospel  we  feel  warranted  in  speaking 
with  equal  decision.  It  was  well  to  select  it  as  the  first, 
as  it  stands  alone  and  unique  in  many  parts,  dealing 
more  with  deeds  than  words,  and  compressing  a  life  of 
activity  into  a  very  limited  space.    The  introduction  is 


lend  such  a  charm  to  St.  Slark.  Of  the  general  c3om- 
mcntary  we  have  no  room  now  to  speak  at  any  length. 
Wc  have  examined  the  two  volumes,  but  the  notes 
disarm  our  criticism  by  their  candour,  ability,  and 
absence  of  mere  verbal  reconstruction." — Ecclesiastical 
Gazette. 


I.    CORINTHIANS. 


By  the  Ven.  Archdeacon  FARRAR,  D.D.  ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  DAVID  THO.MAS,D.D., 
Rev.  DONALD  FRASER,  D.D.,  Rev.  ExChancellor  LIPSCOMB,  LL.D.,  Rev.  E. 
HURNDALL,  M.A.,  Rev.  Prof.  J.  R.  THOMSON,  M.A.,  Rev.  R.  TUCK,  B.A., 
Rev.  J.  WAITE,  B.A.,  Rev.  II.  BREMNER,  B.D.     Price  15^. 


OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS, 


"We  cin  but  add  that,  under  the  learned,  we  had  ]  ^  ^  'u^'^^.  hands,  and  largely  in  the  heads,  of  every 
Marty  w^ritlen  magic,  pens  of  the  writers,  we  see  Corinth         ~    -  -  ^  -  -         »:•--»--   -.--   »^       .. 

alTvCt   and    its  numerous  doctrinal    differences    given 
depth  and  breadth  to,  and  Paul  proved  a  more  pro- 


found and  a  clearer  theologian  than  the  critics  have 
often  acknowledged.    The  '  Pulpit  Commentary '  ought 


man  who  enters  a  pulpit." — Ecclesiastical  Gazette. 

"The  new  volume  of  this  truly  great  work  is  fully 
equal  to  the  best  of  its  predeces.sors.  Archdeacon 
Farrar's  exposition  is  a  monument  of  learning,  industry, 
judgment,  and  literary  skill,  and  reveals  critical  and 


8 


THE  PULPIT  COMMENTARY:  NEW  TESTAMENT 


Cxeg[etical  powers  of  a  very  high  order.  Dr.  Thomas's 
homiletics  abundantly  prove  that  the  eye  of  this  great 
homilist  is  not  dim,  nor  is  his  natural  force  abated. 
The  various  homilies  are  generally  able,  suggestive, 
and  helpful.  There  are  no  words  in  our  vocabulary 
expressive  enough  to  represent  our  profound  and 
deepening  conviction  of  the  priceless  value  of  this  noble 
series  of  commentaries.  No  preacher,  desiring  to  be 
a  workman  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  can  afford 


to  be  without  these  volumes.  To  young  ministers  in 
particular  we  say  most  emphatically.  '  Sell  all  that  you 
nave,  if  need  be,  to  get  them.'  "—Primitive  Methodist, 

^  "Marked  by  clear  thinking  and  equally  clear  expres* 
sion,  and  the_  comments  are  frequently  enriched  by 
classical  allusions  and  illustrations  drawn  from  the 
writers'  wide  study  of  the  great  Latin  and  Gceek 
writers. " — Baptist, 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 

By  the  Bishop  of  BATH  and  WELLS  ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  Prof.  P.  C.  BARKER,  M.A., 
LL.B.,  Rev.  Prof.  E.  JOHNSON,  M.A.,  Rev.  Prof.  R.  A.  REDFORD,  M.A.,  Rev.  W. 
CLARKSON,  B.A.,  and  Rev.  R.  TUCK,  B.A.     2  vols.     Price  2ij. 


IN  PREPARA  TION. 

ST.  MATTHEW.  By  Rev.  Prof.  J.  R.  Lumby,  D.D.;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  Marcus 
DoDS,  D.D.,  Rev.  J.  A.  Macdonald,  Rev.  B.  C.  Caffin,  M.A.,  Rev.  P.  C.  Barker, 
M.A.,  LL.B.,  and  Rev.  Ex-Chancellor  Lipscomb,  LL.D. 

ST,  LUKE.  By  Rev.  Canon  Spence  ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.,  Rev. 
R.  M.  Edgar,  M.A.,  Rev.  J.  M.  Lang,  D.D.,  Rev.  H.  J.  Piggott,  B.A.,  and 
Rev.  R.  Glover. 

ST.  JOHN.     By  Rev.  Prof.  H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D. 

ROMANS.  By  Rev.  J.  Morison,  D.D. ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  Prof.  J.  R.  Thomson,  M.  A., 
Rev.  R.  M.  Edgar,  M.A.,  Rev.  T.  F.  Lockyer,  B.A.,  and  Rev.  R.  S.  Aldridge,  B.A. 

n.  CORINTHIANS.  By  Ven.  Archdeacon  F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.  ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev. 
Ex-Chancellor  Lipscomb,  LL.D.,  Rev.  David  Thomas,  D.D.,  Rev.  R.  Tuck,  B.A., 
Rev.  E.  Hurndall,  M.A.,  and  Rev.  J.  R.  Thomson,  M.A. 

GALATIANS.  By  Rev.  Preb.  Huxtable,  M.A. ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  R.  Finlayson,  B.  A., 
Rev.  W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.,  Rev.  R.  M.  Edgar,  M.A.,  and  Rev.  T.  Croskerry,  D.D. 

EPHESIANS.  By  Rev.  Prof.  W.  G.  Blackie,  D.D.  ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  D.  Thomas, 
D.D.,  Rev.  R.  M.  Edgar,  M. A.,  Rev.  R.  Finlayson,  B.  A.,  Rev.  W.  F.  Adeney,  M.  A., 
and  Rev.  T.  Croskerry,  D.D. 

PHILIPPIANS.  By  Rev.  B.X:.  Caffin,  M.A. ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  D.  Thomas,  D.D., 
Rev.  R.  Finlayson,  B.A.,  Rev.  R.  M.  Edgar,  M.A.,  Rev.  T.  Croskerry,  D.D., 
and  Rev.  W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A. 

COLOSSIANS.  By  Rev.  G.  G.  Findlay,  B.A. ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  U.  R.  Thomas, 
D.D.,  Rev.  R.  Finlayson,  B.A.,  Rev.  E.  S.  Prout,  M.A.,  Rev.  W.  F.  Adeney, 
M.A.,  and  Rev.  T.  Croskerry,  D.D. 

I.  &  H.  THESSALONIANS.  By  Rev.  P.  J.  Gloag,  D.D.  ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  R. 
Finlayson,  B.A.,  Rev.  T.  Croskerry,  D.D.,  Rev.  W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.,  and  Rev. 
B.  C.  Caffin,  M.A. 

L  &  n.  TIMOTHY.     By  the  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells. 

TITUS.  By  Very  Rev.  Dean  IIowsoN,  D.D.  ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  D.  Thomas,  D.D., 
Rev.  E.  Hurndall,  M.A.,  and  Rev.  T.  Croskerry,  D.D. 

PHILEMON.     By  Rev.  Principal  S.  J.  Eales,  M.A. 

HEBREWS.  By  Rev.  J.  Bramby,  M.A.  ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  C.  Jerdan,  M.A., 
Rev.  C.  New,  Rev.  D.  Young,  B.A.,  and  Rev.  W.  Jones. 

JAMES.  By  Rev.  Preb.  E.  S.  Gibson,  M.A.  ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  C.  Jkrdan,  M.A., 
Rev.  T.  V.  Lockyer,  B.A.,  Rev.  R.  M.  Edgar,  M.A.,  and  Rev.  U.  R.  Thomas,  D.D. 

I.  &  II.  PETER.  By  Rev.  David  Brown,  D.D.  ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  U.  R.  Thomas, 
D.D.,  Rev.  A.  Maclaren,  D.D.,  Rev.  C.  New,  and  Rev.  W.  L.  Watkinson. 

I.,  IL,  &  III.  JOHN.  By  Rev.  A.  Plummer,  M.A.,  D.D.  ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  C. 
Clemance,  D.D.,  Rev.  U.  R.  Thomas,  D.D.,  Rev.  W.  Jones,  and  Rev.  R.  Finlayson, 
B.A. 

REVELATION.  By  Rev.  A.  Plummer,  M.A.,  D.D.  ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  C.  Clemance, 
]J.]J.,  Rev.  R.  Green,  Rev.  D.  Thomas,  D.D.,  and  Rev.  S.  Conway,  B.A. 


For  the  convenience  of  New  Subscribers  the  Oommentary  on  the  Old  Testament 
is  now  being  issued  in  Monthly  Parts,  at  Half  a  Crown  each. 

L<:)NDON:  KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH  &  CO.,  i.  Paternoster  Square,  E.C. 


NOW  READY. 

Vols.  land  11.    Price  16s.  each. 

( The  remaining  Vols,  will  be  issued  Quarterly.) 


THIRTY    THOUSAND 

THOUGHTS 

EDITED  BT 

Eev.  canon    SPENCE,    M.A. 

Bev.  J.  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

Eev.  C.  NEIL,  M.A. 

WITH  INTBODUCTION  BY  BEAN  ffOWSON. 

30,000   THOnQHTS 

ON  ALL  SUBJECTS.  FROM  ALL  SOURCES. 

THEOLOGICAL  PATRISTIC 

PHILOSOPHICAL  MEDIEVAL 

SCRIPTURE  PURITAN 

CHARACTERS  MODERN 

PRACTICAL  FOREIGN 

ETHICAL  SCIENTIFIC 

BIBLICAL  CLASSICAL 

ECCLESIASTICAL 

EOMILETICALLT  ABBANGED. 


LONDON:  KEGAN  PAUL,  TBENCH  &   CO. 


