;|||| 

m 

"1 11 

ll 

!!i;iH!IHIIHil»:t  i 

i 

ORNELL   UNWEBSITY    UBBARV 

Jllllllll 


i    -5""7§^4   101    104  564 


jTiip  mi"    ■  ,i.i:*!!:  I  ■'I. 
"    liHlJlUifimiHlririilHtfa 


l!iiii;li!i';!':'"iiRH!iiii:l:jS 

iiiiii 


I 


l|i||!i!illllit!illii«l<i 


i 


i 


li 


if  '>fl1  '• 

™*'!.fi  ;L'• 


'  I  .1 


JwYi-'itlii''!  ■!■: ...  1 .;;'' 

W'i'l""''  ■,.'   '  '■   i'     .1   't 
wiv.  !''!■''  '  '  .    I'!  \'atu 

ifai|,iil,i>'>!'l»     /■■.■;...      ^W 


is ''•'■'"><..  I;  ' '    : 


•'■^!4;.1 


v;, 


w^m 


lii{ia'iat''i»iia 


CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


The  original  of  this  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104564 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED   BY  THE 

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 
AND   BY   THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY  THE 


VEN.  ARCHDEACON  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.— RT.  REV.  H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  F,R.S  E. 

VERY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.— REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A. 

REV.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yoek  and  Toronto. 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY  THE 


VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A., 


DEAN   OF   GLOUCESTER  , 


AND   BY  THE 


REV.  JOSEPH    S.    EXKLL,   M.A. 


ISAIAH. 

(E^liosition  anh  i|omiletic6 : 
Bi    REV.   GEORGE  RAWLINSON,  M.A., 

ClROa  or  CANTERBURY  ;  AND  CAMDEN  PROFESSOR  OF  ADCIENT  HISTORY,  OXFOBE 

^omilies  bg  t)anons  ^ntliore : 

ttVV.    PROF.   E.   JOHNSON,   M.A.  REV.   W.   CLARKSON.   B.A. 

REV.   W.   H.   STATHAM.  REV.   R.   TUCK.   B.A. 

VOZ.  I. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE 

BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 

INTRODUCTION. 


§  1.    On  thb  PBEsoNAtnr  op  Isauh. 

Isaidh'i  name.  The  name  borne  by  this  great  prophet  was  really  YSsTia- 
ydhn,  which  signifies  "  the  Salvation  of  Jehovah."  The  name  was  not  an 
ancommon  one.  It  was  borne  by  one  of  the  heads  of  the  singers  in  the 
time  of  David  (1  Ohron.  xxv.  3,  16),  by  a  Levite  of  the  same  period  (1 
Ohron.  xxvi.  25),  by  one  of  the  chief  men  who  retnrned  to  Jerusalem  with 
Ezra  (Ezra  viii.  7),  by  a  Benjamite  mentioned  in  Nehemiah  (xi.  7),  and 
others.  The  form  may  be  compared  with  that  of  Khizki-ydhu,  or  Hezekiah, 
which  meant  "the  Strength  of  Jehovah,"  and  Tsidki-ydhu,  or  Zedekiah, 
which  meant  "the  Bighteonsness  of  Jehovah."  It  was  one  of  singular 
appropriateness  in  the  case  of  the  great  prophet,  since  "  the  salvation  of 
Jehovah "  was  the  sabject  which  Isaiah  was  especially  commissioned  to 
set  forth. 

His  parentage  and  family,  Isaiah  was,  m  he  tells  us  repeatedly  (ch. 
i.  1 ;  ii.  1 ;  xiii.  1,  etc.),  "  the  son  of  Amoz."  This  name  must  not  be  con- 
fonnded  with  that  of  the  Prophet  Amos,  from  which  it  differs  both  in  its 
initial  and  in  ^'ts  final  letter.  ,  Amoz,  according  to  a  Jewish  tradition,  was 
a  brother  of  King  Amaziah ;  but  this  tradition  can  scarcely  be  authentic, 
since  it  woald  make  Isaiah  too  old.  Amoz  wa«  probably  not  a  man  of  any 
high  distinction,  since  he  is  never  mentioned  excepting  as  Isaiah's  father. 
Isaiah  was  married,  and  his  wife  was  known  as  "  the  prophetess  "  (ch. 
viii.  3),  which,  however,  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  the  prophetic  gift 
had  been  bestowed  npon  her.  It  may  have  been,  as  it  was  npon  Deborah 
(Jndg.  iv.  4)  and  npon  Huldah  (2  Kings  xxii.  14 — 20) ;  or  she  may  have 
been  called  "the  prophetess  "  simply  as  being  the  wife  of  "  the  prophet " 
(ch.  xxxviii.  1).     tsaiah  tells  ns  that  he  had  two  sons,  Shear-jashub  and 

ISAIAS.  i 


U  INTBODUOTION  TO 


Maher-shalal-hasli-baz,  whose  names  are  connectied  witli  his  prophetical 
office.     Shear- jashub  was  the  elder  of  the  two  by  many  yeans. 

HU  date.  The  prophet  tells  ns  that  he  "  saw  a  vision  concerning  Jndah 
and  Jerusalem  in  the  days  of  IJzziah,  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezekiah  "  (ch. 
i.  1).  It  would  follow  from  this,  that,  even  if  he  began  his  prophetic 
career  as  early  as  the  twentieth  year  of  his  age,  he  must  have  been  bom 
twenty  years  before  Uzziah's  death,  or  in  B.C.  779.  He  certainly  lived 
till  the  fourteenth  year  of  Hezekiah,  or  B.O.  714,  and  probably  outlived 
that  monarch,  who  died  in  B.O.  699-8.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  he  was 
even  contemporary  for  some  years  with  Manasseh,  Hezekiah's  son ;  so  that 
wo  may,  perhaps,  assign  him,  conjectnyally,  the  space  between  B.O.  780  and 
B.C.  690,  which  would  give  him  a  lifetime  of  ninety  years. 

His  positicm.  "  That  Isaiah  was  a  Jew  of  good  position,  dwelling  at  Jeru- 
salem, and  admitted  to  familiar  intercourse  with  the  Jewish  monarchs, 
Ahaz  and  Hezekiah,  is  sufficiently  apparent  (ch.  vii.  3 — 16 ;  xxxvii.  21 — 
35 ;  xxxviii.  1 — 22 ;  xxxix.  3 — 8).  Whether  or  no  he  was  brought  np  in 
the  "  schools  of  the  prophets  "  is  uncertain ;  but  he  must  have  received 
his  call  at  a  very  early  age,  probably  when  he  was  about  twenty.  That 
he  was  historiographer  at  the  Hebrew  court  during  the  reign  of  Jotham, 
and  again  during  the  reign  of  Hezekiah,  appears  from  the  Second  Book 
of  Chronicles  (xxvi.  22 ;  xxxii.  32).  In  this  capacity  he  wrote  an  account 
of  the  reign  of  Uzziah,  and  also  one  of  the  reign  of  Hezekiah  for  the 
"  Book  of  the  Kings."  He  may  also  have  written  accounts  of  the  reigns 
of  Jotham  and  Ahaz,  but  this  is  not  stated.  His  main  office  was  that  of 
prophet,  or  preacher  to  both  king  and  people ;  and  the  composition  of  his 
numerous  and  elaborate  prophecies,  which  are  poems  of  a  high  order,  must 
have  furnished  him  with  continual  occupation.  It  is  not  certain  that  we 
possess  all  his  prophecies ;  for  the  book,  as  it  has  come  down  to  us,  has 
a  fragmentary  character,  and  appears  to  be  a  compilation. 

His  call.  Isaiah  relates,  in  his  sixth  chapter,  a  very  solemn  call  which 
he  received  from  God  "  in  the  year  that  King  Uzziah  died."  It  is  thought 
by  some  that  this  was  his  original  call  to  the  prophetical  office.'  But  the 
majority  of  commentators  are  of  a  different  opinion.  They  note  that  the 
original  call  of  a  propheit,  where  recorded,  naturally  occupies  the  first  place 
in  his  work,  and  that  there  is  no  conceivable  reason  for  Isaiah's  having 
postponed  to  his  sixth  chapter  an  account  of  an  event  which  ex  hypothesi 
preceded  his  first.  It  would  follow  that  the  original  call  of  the  prophet 
is  unrecorded,  as  is  the  case  with  most  prophets ;  e.g.  Daniel,  Joel,  Amos, 
Obadiah,  Micah,  Nahum,  Habakkuk,  Zephaniah,  Haggai,  Zechariah,  Malachi. 

His  prophetic  career.  The  career  of  Isaiah  as  a  prophet  commenced,  as 
he  tells  UB,  in  the  reign  of  King  Uzziah,  or  Azariah.  It  is  a  reasonable 
supposition  that  it  began  late  in  that  monarcTi's  reign,  but  still  a  year 
or  two  before  its  close.     Uzziah  was  at  that  time  a  leper,  and  "  dwelt  in 

■  De  Wette,  'EiBlaitmig  ia  das  Alt.  Test.,'  §  207. 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


a  several  house,"  Jotham  his  son  being  regent  and  having  the  direction 
of  affaii-s  (2  Kings  xv.  5 ;  2  Ohron.  xxvii.  21).  Isaiah's  early  prophecies 
(ch.  i. — v.)  were  probably  written  at  this  time.  "In  the  year  that  King 
Uzziah  died  "  (ch.  vi.  1) — probably,  bat  not  certainly,  before  his  death  * — 
Isaiah  saw  the  vision  recorded  in  ch.  vi.,  and  received  thus  a  fresh  designa- 
tion to  his  office  nnder  circumstances  of  the  deepest  solemnity.  It  is 
remarkable,  however,  that  we  cannot  assign  any  of  his  extant  writings, 
except  ch.  vi.,  to  the  next  period  of  sixteen  years.  Apparently,  during  the 
reign  of  Jotham  he  was  silent.  But  with  the  accession  of  Jotham's  son 
Ahaz,  the  father  of  Hezekiah  (b.o.  743),  commenced  a  period  of  prophetic 
activity.  The  prophecies  from  oh.  vii.  1  to  ch.  x.  4  have  a  structural  con- 
nection and  a  unity  of  purpose  which  unite  them  into  a  single  body,  and 
belong  manifestly  to  the  portion  of  the  reign  of  Ahaz  when  he  was  engaged 
in  the  Syro-Ephraimite  war.  A  prophecy  in  ch.  xiv.  (vers.  28 — 32)  is 
assigned  by  the  writer  to  the  last  year  of  the  same  king.  Hitherto  the 
prophetic  energy  of  Isaiah  had,  seemingly,  been  fitful  and  spasmodic,  but 
from  henceforth  it  proceeded  to  flow  in  a  steady  continuous  stream.  There 
are  sufficient  grounds  for  assigning  to  the  reign  of  Hezekiah  the  entire 
series  of  prophecies  following  upon  ch.  x.  5,  with  the  single  exception  of 
the  short  "  Burden  of  Palestine,"  dated  in  Ahaz's  last  year.  The  contents 
of  these  prophecies  tend  to  spread  them  over  the  difEerent  periods  of  Heze- 
kiah's  reign,  and  show  us  the  prophet  constantly  active  throughout  its 
entire  duration.  Whether  Isaiah's  prophetic  career  lasted  still  longer, 
extending  into  the  earlier  part  of  the  reign  of  Manasseh,  is  doubtful.  A 
portion  of  the  prophecies  contained  in  his  book  are  thought  by  some  to 
belong  to  Manasseh's  time,'  and  Jewish  tradition  places  his  death  nnder 
Manasseh.  Our  conjectural  estimate  of  his  lifetime,  as  falling  between 
B.C.  780  and  B.C.  690,  would  make  him  contemporary  with  Manasseh  for 
the  space  of  nine  years. 

His  death.  The  tradition  of  the  rabbis  concerning  Isaiah's  death  placed 
it  in  the  reign  of  Manasseh,  and  declared  it  to  have  been  a  most  horrible 
and  painful  martyrdom.'  Isaiah,  having  resisted  some  of  Manasseh's 
idolatrous  acts  and  ordinances,  was  seized  by  his  orders,  and,  having  been 
fastened  between  two  planks,  was  killed  by  being  "  sawn  asunder."  The 
mention  of  this  mode  of  punishment  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is 
thought  by  many  to  be  an  allusion  to  Isaiah's  fate  (Heb.  xi.  37). 

His  character.  Isaiah's  temper  is  one  of  great  earnestness  and  boldness. 
He  lives  under  five  kings,  of  whom  one  only  is  of  a  religious  and  God- 

'  Dr.  Kay  says  the  phrase  me^ng  "  after  his  death  "  ('  Speaker's  Commentary,'  toL  v. 
p.  67);  but  he  adduces  no  proof.  To  us  the  probability  seems  the  other  way.  Why  men- 
tion Uzziah  at  all,  unless  he  was  on  the  throne  ?  Why  not  say,  "  In  the  first  year  of 
Jotham"? 

»  Ewald,  '  History  of  Israel,'  vol.  v.  p.  15,  note  4. 

■  '  Jebamotb,'  xlix.  2 ;  '  Sanhedr.,'  ciii.  2.  The  tradition  was  accepted  u  anthentio  bj 
Jiutln  Martyr,  Tertullian,  Lactantius,  Jerome,  and  Augustins 


INTBODUCTION   TO 


fearing  disposition;  jet  he  maintains  towards  all  of  them  an  nncompio- 
mising  attitude  of  firmness  with  respect  to  all  that  bears  npon  religion. 
He  conceals  nothing,  keeps  nothing  back,  out  of  a  desire  for  court  faronr. 
"  la  it  a  small  thing  for  you  to  weary  men  P  "  he  says  to  one  king ;  "  but 
must  ye  weary  my  God  also  P  "  (oh.  vii.  13).     "  Set  thine  house  in  order," 
he  says  to  another;  "for  thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live"  (oh.  xxxvui.  1). 
Tet  more  bold  is  he  in  his  addresses  to  the  nobles  and  the  powerful  ofiS.cial 
class,  which  in  his  day  had  the  chief  direction  of  affairs,  and  was   most 
unscrupulous  in  its  treatment  of  adversaries  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  17 — 22 ;  ch. 
i.  15,  21,  etc.).     He  denounces  in  the  strongest  terms  their  injustice,  their 
oppression,  their  grasping  coveteousness,  their  sensuality,  their  pride  and 
haughtiness  (ch.  i.  10—23;  ii.  11—17;  iii.  9—15;  v.  7—25;  xxviii.  7—16, 
etc.);    Nor  does  he  seek  to  curry  favour  with  the  people.    It  is  "the  faithful 
city  "  itself  which  has  "  become  an  harlot  "  (ch.  i.  21).     The  nation  is  "  a 
sinful  nation  "  (ch.  i.  4),  the  .people  are  "  laden  with  iniquity,  a  seed  of 
evil-doers,  children  that  are  corrupters"  (ch.  i.  4).     They  "draw  near  to 
God  with  their  mouth,  and  with  their  lips  do  honour  him,  but  have  removed 
their  hearts  far  from  him  "  (ch.  xxix.  13).     They  are  ''  a  rebellious  people, 
lying  children,  children  that  will  not  hear  the  Law  of  the  Lord  "  (oh.  xxx. 
9) .     But  this  boldness  and  severity  for  God,  and  uncompromising  sternness 
where  his  honour  is  concerned,  are  counterbalanced  by  a  remarkable  tender- 
ness  and   compassion  towards  the  individuals  who  fall  under  notice  as 
having  provoked  God's  anger.     Not  only  does  he  "weep  bitterly,"  and 
refuse  to  be  comforted,  "because  of  the  spoiliDg  of  the  daughter  of  his 
people"  (ch.  xxii.  4),  but  even  the  woes  of  a  foreign  nation,  like  Moab, 
draTs    forth  his  compassion,  and  make  his  "  bowels "  thrill  with  sorrow 
(ch.  XV.  6 ;  xvi.  9 — 11).     He  detests  sin,  but  he  mourns  over  the  &te  of 
sinrers      For  Babylon  itself  his  "  loins  are  filled  with  pain  :  pangs  take 
hold  upon  him,  as  the  pangs  of  a  woman  that  travaileth:  he  is  bowed 
dowE   at  the  hearing;    he  is  dismayed  at  the  seeing;    his  heart  pants; 
fearf alness  affrights  him :  the  night  of  his  pleasure  is  turned  into  fear  for 
him''   (ch.  xxi.  3,  4).      And   as  he   sympathizes  in   the  calamities   and 
sufferings   of  all   nations,  so  has  he  a  heart  wide  enough,  and  a  spirit 
ooiaprehensive   enough,  to  delight  in  their  prosperity,    their   exaltation, 

their  admission  to  the  final  kingdom  of  the  Messiah  (ch.  ii.  2  ;  xi.  10 12  • 

xviii.  7;  xix  23—25;  xl.  6;  xlii.  1 — 4;  liv.  3,  etc.).  No  narrow  views  of 
race-privilege,  or  even  of  covenant-advantage,  hem  him  in,  and  cramp  his 
sympathies  and  affections.  Tet  still  he  is  not  so  cosmopolite  as  to  be 
devoid  of  patriotism,  or  to  view  with  unconcern  anything  which  affects  the 
welfare  of  his  country,  his  city,  his  countrymen.  Whether  it  be  Syria  and 
Ephraim.  that  plot  against  Judah,  or  Sennacherib  that  seeks  to  come  in  and 
crush  her  with  an  overwhelming  flood  of  invasion,  he  is  equally  indignant^ 
equally  contemptuous  (ch.  vii.  5;  xxxvii.  22).  Against  Babylon,  as  the  fated 
destroyer  of  the  holy  city  and  ravager  of  the  Holy  Land,  he  nourishes  a 
deep-seated  hostility,  which  shows  itself  in  almost  every  section  of  the 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  IBAIAH. 


book  (oh.  xiii.  1—22;  xiv.  4—23;  xxi.  1—10;  xlv.  1—8;  xlvi.  1—11; 
xlvii.  1 — 15;  xlviii.  14,  etc.).  Again,  upon  the  enemies  of  God  he  lets 
loose,  not  only  a  storm  of  indignation  and  fierce  anger,  bnt  also  the  keen 
arrows  of  his  sarcasia  and  irony.  A  delicate  vein  of  satire  mns  through 
the  description  of  female  luxury  in  ch.  iii.  (vers.  16 — 24).  A  bitter  sarcasm 
points  the  description  of  Pekah  and  Bezin — "  the  two  tails  of  these  smoking 
firebrands"  (ch.  vii.  4).  Against  idolaters  a  somewhat  coarser  rhetoric 
is  employed :  "  The  smith  with  the  tongs  both  worketh  in  the  coals,  and 
fashioneth  it  with  hFiimmers,  and  worketh  it  with  the  strength  of  his  arms : 
yea,  he  is  hungry,  and  his  strength  faileth ;  he  drinketh  no  water,  and  is 
faint.  The  carpenter  stretcheth  out  his  rule;  he  marketh  it  out  with  a 
line;  he  fitteth  it  with  planes,  and  he  marketh  it  out  with  the  compass, 
and  maketh  it  after  the  figure  of  a  man,  according  to  the  beauty  of  a  man ; 
that  it  may  remain  in  the  house.  He  heweth  him  down  cedars,  and  taketh 
the  cypress  and  the  oak,  which  he  strengtheneth  for  himself  among  the 
trees  of  the  forest :  he  planteth  an  oak,  and  the  rain  doth  nourish  it.  Then 
shall  it  be  for  a  man  to  bum  :  for  he  will  take  thereof,  and  warm  himself ; 
yea,  he  kindleth  it,  and  baketh  bread ;  yea,  he  maketh  a  god,  and  wor- 
shippeth  it ;  he  maketh  it  a  graven  image,  and  f alleth  down  thereto.  B  e 
burneth  part  thereof  in  the  fire;  with  part  thereof  he  eateth  flesh;  be 
roasteth  roast,  and  is  satisfied :  yea,  he  warmeth  himself,  and  saith.  Aha, 
I  am  warm,  I  have  seen  the  fire  :  and  the  residue  thereof  he  maketh  a 
god,  even  his  graven  image  :  he  faileth  down  unto  it,  and  worshippeth  it, 
and  prayeth  unto  it,  and  saith.  Deliver  me  ;  for  thou  art  my  god  "  (ch.  xliv. 
12—17;  comp.  Jer.  x.  3—16;  Baruch  vi.  12—49).  While  the  prophet 
reserves  sarcasm  for  certain  rare  occasions,  he  shows  himself  a  thorough 
master  of  it,  and  pours  a  stream  of  scorn  on  those  who  provoke  his  scorn, 
which  effectually  disposes  of  their  pretensions. 

Two  other  qualities  must  be  noted  in  Isaiah — his  spirituality  and  his 
tone  of  deep  reverence.  The  formal,  the  outward,  the  manifest  in  religion, 
are  with  him  absolutely  of  no  account ;  nothing  is  of  importance  but  the 
inward,  the  spiritual,  the  "hidden  man  of  the  heart."  Temples  are  worth- 
less (ch.  Ixvi.  1) ;  sacrifices  are  worthless  (ch.  i.  11 — 18 ;  Ixvi.  3) ;  the 
observance  of  days  is  woithless  (ch.  i.  14)  ;  attendance  at  assemblies  is 
worthless  (ch.  i.  13) ;  nothing  has  any  value  with  God  but  real  purity  of 
Ufe  and  heart — obedience  (oh.  i.  19),  righteousness,  "  a  poor  and  contrite 
spirit"  (ch.  Ixvi.  2).  The  imagery  which  he  of  necessity  employs  in 
describing  spiritual  conditions  is  drawn  from  material  things,  from  the 
circumstances  of  our  earthly  environment.  But  it  is  plainly  not  intended 
in  any  literal  sense.  The  abundance  and  variety  of  the  imagery,  some- 
times the  incongruity  of  one  feature  with  another  (ch.  Ixvi.  24),  show  that 
it  is  imagery — a  mere  shadowing  out  of  spiritual  things  by  means  of  trope 
and  figure.  And  Isaiah's  reverence  is  profound.  His  most  usual  title  for 
God  is  "  the  Holy  One  of  Israel ; "  sometimes,  still  more  emphatically,  "  the 
Holy  One;"  once  with  special  elaboration,  "the  high  and  lofty  One  that 


vi  INTRODUCTION  TO 


inhabitetli  eternity"  (ch.  Ivii.  15).  God  is  primarily  with  him  an  object  ol 
reverent  fear  and  awe.  "  Sanctify  the  Lord  of  hosts  himself,"  he  exclaims; 
"and  let  him  be  your  fear,  and  let  him  be  your  dread  "  (ch.  viii.  13)  ;  and 
again,  "Enter  into  the  rock,  and  hide  thee  in  the  dnst,  for  fear  of  the 
Lord,  and  for  the  glory  of  his  majesty  "  (oh.  ii.  10).  It  is  as  if  the  memory 
of  his  "  vision  of  God  "  never  quitted  him — as  if  he  felt  himself  ever 
standing  before  the  throne,  where  he  "  saw  the  Lord  sitting,  high  and 
lifted  up,  and  his  train  filled  the  temple.  Above  it  stood  the  seraphims : 
each  one  had  six  wings ;  with  twain  he  covered  his  face,  and  with  twain 
he  covered  his  feet,  and  with  twain  he  did  fly.  And  one  cried  unto  another, 
and  said.  Holy,  holy,  holy,  is  the  Lord  of  hosts  :  the  whole  earth  is  full  of 
his  glory.  And  the  posts  of  the  door  moved  at  the  voice  of  him  that  cried, 
and  the  house  was  filled  with  smoke."  And  the  prophet  cried,  "  Woe  is 
me  !  for  I  am  undone ;  because  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips,  and  I  dwell 
in  the  midst  of  a  people  of  unclean  Ups  :  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  the  King, 
the  Lord  of  hosts  "  (ch.  vi.  1 — 5). 

§  2.    On  the  Historical  OiRcnMSTANCES  under  which  Isaiah  lived 

AND   WROTE. 

Isaiah  grew  to  manhood  as  a  subject  of  the  Jndsean  kingdom,  durinc 
the  period  of  the  two  kingdoms  known  respectively  as  those  of  Israel  and 
Judah.  Israel,  the  schismatical  kingdom  established  by  Jeroboam  on  the 
death  of  Solomon,  was  approaching  to  its  fall.  After  existing  for  two 
centuries  under  eighteen  monarchs  of  eight  different  families,  and  with 
some  difficulty  maintaining  its  independence  against  the  attacks  of  its 
northern  neighbour,  Syria  of  Damascus,  the  Israelitish  kingdom  was  on 
the  point  of  succumbing  to  a  far  greater  power,  the  well-known  Assyrian 
empire.  When  Isaiah  was  about  ten  or  twelve  years  of  age,  an  Assyrian 
monarch,  whom  the  Hebrews  called  Pul,  "  came  against  the  land,"  and 
his  enmity  had  to  be  bought  off  by  the  payment  of  a  thousand  talents  of 
silver  (2  Kings  xv.  19).  A  far  greater  monarch,  Tiglath-Pileser  II. 
ascended  the  Assyrian  throne  about  twenty  years  later  (b.o.  745),  when 
Isaiah  may  have  been  thirty  or  thirty-five,  and  began  at  once  a  career  of 
conquest,  which  spread  alarm  over  all  the  neighbouring  nations.  In  Syria 
it  was  felt  that  the  new  enemy  could  only  be  resisted  by  a  general  con- 
federacy of  the  petty  monarchs  who  divided  among  them  the  Syro- 
Palestinian  region;  and  accordingly  an  effort  was  made  to  unite  them  all 
under  the  presidency  of  Bezin  of  Damascus.^  Ahaz,  however,  the  kins 
of  Judah  at  the  time,  declined  to  make  common  cause  with  the  other  petty 
princes.  Taking  a  narrow  view  of  the  situation,  he  thought  that  his  own 
interests  would  be  best  promoted  by  the  crippling  of  Syria  and  Israel 
powers  generally  hostile  to  Jadah,  and  close  upon  his  borders.  The 
immediate  consequence  of  his  refusal  to  join  the  league  was  mn.  attempt 
'  B«e  '  Ancient  Monarohieg,'  yiA.  iL  p.  181. 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


to  coerce  him,  or  to  depose  him  and  place  upon  his  throne  a  prince  who 
would  adopt  the  Syrian  policy.  Rezin  of  Damascus  and  Pekah  of  Samaria 
attacked  him  in  difFerent  quarters,  and  inflicted  on  him  severe  defeats 
(2  Chron.  zxviii.  5,  6).  They  then  conjointly  marched  into  the  heart  of 
his  kingdom,  and  besieged  Jerusalem  (2  Kings  xvi.  5).  Under  these 
circumstances,  Ahaz  placed  himself  under  the  protection  of  the  Assyrian 
monarch,  declared  himself  his  "  servant,"  and  humbly  besought  his  aid. 
Tiglath-Pileser  readily  complied,  and,  having  marched  a  great  army  into 
Syria,  conquered  Damascus,  slew  Rezin,  defeated  Pekah,  and  carried  a 
large  portion  of  the  Israelite  nation  into  captivity  (2  Kings  xv.  29 ;  xvi. 
9;  1  Chron.  v.  26).  Ahaz  personally  appeared  before  him  at  Damascus, 
and  did  homage  for  hia  crown,  thenceforth  reigning  as  a  vassal  and 
tributary  monarch. 

The  crushing  blow  dealt  to  the  kingdom  of  Israel  by  Tiglath-Pileser  was 
shortly  followed  by  a  still  severer  calamity.  In  B.C.  724,  when  Isaiah  was 
about  fifty-five  years  of  age,  Shalmaneser  IV.,  Tiglath-Pileser's  successor, 
determined  to  destroy  the  last  vestige  of  Israelite  independence,  and,  march- 
ing an  army  into  the  country,  laid  siege  to  Samaria.  The  city  was  one  of 
great  strength,  and  for  three  years  resisted  every  assault.  Finally,  how- 
ever, in  B.C.  722,  it  fell,  just  about  the  time  that  Shalmaneser  was  dis- 
possessed of  his  throne  by  the  usurping  Sargon.  Sargon  claims  the  glory 
of  having  captured  the  place,  and  of  having  carried  off  from  it  27,280 
prisoners.* 

Judsea  now  stood  stripped  of  independent  neighbours,  manifestly  the  next 
country  on  which  the  weight  of  the  Assyrian  arms  would  fall.  The  sub- 
mission of  Ahaz,  and  his  subserviency  to  Assyria  throughout  his  whole  reign 
(2  Kings  xvi.  10 — 18),  had  helped  to  defer  the  evil  day ;  in  addition  to  wbich 
Assyria  had  been  much  occupied  by  revolts  of  conquered  countries  and  by 
Internal  dissensions.  '  But  with  the  accession  of  Hezekiah  (b.o.  727)  a  bolder 
line  of  policy  had  been  adopted  by  the  Jewish  state.  Hezekiah  "rebelled 
against  the  King  of  Assyria,  and  served  him  not"  (2  Kings  iviii.  7).  In 
this  rebellion  he  had  probably  the  countenance  and  support  of  Isaiah,  who 
always  exhorted  his  countrymen  not  to  be  afraid  of  the  Assyrians  (ch.  x. 
24 ;  xxxvii.  6).  Isaiah's  counsel  was  that  no  foreign  alliance  should  be 
sought,  but  that  entire  dependence  should  be  placed  on  Jehovah,  who  would 
protect  his  own  people,  and  discomfit  the  Assyrians,  should  they  venture  on 
making  an  attack.  Hezekiah,  however,  had  other  advisers  also,  men  of  a 
different  stamp,  politicians  such  as  Shebna  and  Bliakim,  to  whom  the  simple 
faith  of  the  prophet  appeared  fanaticism  and  folly.  The  dictates  of  worldly 
wisdom  seemed  to  them  to  require  that  the  alUance  of  some  poweriul  nation 
should  be  courted,  and  a  treaty  made  whereby  Judsea  might  secure  the  assist- 
ance of  a  strong  body  of  auxiliaries,  should  her  independence  be  menaced. 
The  political  horiion  presented  at  the  time  one  only  power  of  this  kind — 

•  G.  Smith, '  Eponym  Canon.' 


viil  INTEODUOTION  TO 


one  onlj  possible  rival  to  Assyria — ^viz.  Egypt.  Egypt  was,  like  Assyria,  an 
organized  monarchy,  with  a  considerable  population,  long  trained  to  arms, 
and  especially  strong  where  Jndoea  was  most  defective — that  is,  in  horses 
and  chariots.  £ehind  Egypt,  closely  allied  virith  her,  and  exercising  a  species 
of  suzerainty  over  her,  was  Ethiopia,  with  resources  from  which,  in  case  of 
need,  Egypt  might  draw.'  It  is  uncertain  at  what  date  the  Assyrian  monarch 
began  to  threaten  Hezekiah  with  his  vengeance.  Sargon  certainly  made 
several  expeditions  into  Syria,  and  even  into  Philistia,  and  in  one  place  he 
calls  himself  "  the  conqueror  of  the  land  of  Judah; "  but  there  is  no  sufficient 
evidence  of  his  having  really  made  any  serious  attempt  to  reduce  Judaea  to 
subjection.  Apparently  it  was  not  until  after  Sennacherib  had  ascended  the 
Assyrian  throne  (in  B.C.  705)  that  the  conquest  of  the  rebellious  Jews  was 
actually  taken  in  hand  by  the  great  monarch.  But  the  danger  had  impended 
during  the  whole  of  Hezekiah's  reign ;  and,  as  it  became  more  imminent, 
the  counsels  of  the  anti-religious  party  prevailed.  Ambassadors  were  sent 
into  Egypt  (ch.  xxx.  2 — 4),  and  an  alliance  appears  to  have  been  concluded, 
whereby  the  reigning  Pharaoh,  Shabatok,  and  his  Ethiopian  suzerain, 
Tirhakah,  undertook  to  famish  an  army  for  the  defence  of  Judaea,  if  it  were 
attacked  by  the  Assyrians.*  In  the  fifth  year  of  Sennacherib  (B.C.  701)  the 
attack  came.  Sennacherib  in  person  conducted  his  army  into  Palestine, 
spread  his  troops  over  the  whole  country,  took  all  the  smaller  fortified 
towns — forty-six  in  number,  according  to  his  own  account" — and,  con- 
centrating his  forces  about  ^Jerusalem,  formally  laid  siege  to  the  city 
(ch.  xxii.  1 — 14).  Hezekiah  endured  the  siege  for  a  time,  but,  despairing 
of  being  able  to  resist  for  long,  and  receiving  no  aid  from  Egypt,  felt  him- 
self after  a  while  forced  to  come  to  terms,  and  buy  ofE  his  adversary.  On 
the  receipt  of  a  large  sum  in  gold  and  silver,  derived  chiefly  from  the  temple 
treasures  (2  Kings  xviii.  14 — 16),  Sennacherib  retired,  Hezekiah  submitting 
himself,  and  professedly  resuming  the  position  of  a  tributary. 

But  this  position  of  things  satisfied  neither  party.  Sennaoherib  dis- 
trusted Hezekiah,  and  Hezekiah  no  sooner  saw  the  Assyrian  hosts  retire 
than  he  resumed  his  intrigues  with  Egypt.  After  a  very  brief  interval — to 
be  counted,  perhaps,  by  months — war  once  more  broke  out.  Sennacherib 
with  his  main  forces  occupied  the  Shefeleh  and  Philistia,  keeping  watch 
on  Egypt ;  while  at  the  same  time  he  sent  a  detachment  under  a  general  to 
threaten,  and,  should  opportunity  offer,  seize  Jerusalem.  Of  the  proceedings 
of  this  detachment  Isaiah  gives  a  detailed  account  (ch.  zxxvi.  2 — 22 ;  xxzvii. 
8).  He  was  himself  present  in  Jerusalem,  and  encouraged  Hezekiah  to 
defy  his  foes  (ch.  xxxvii.  1 — 7).  Hezekiah  acted  on  his  advice;  and  Sen- 
nacherib was  provoked  to  write  a  letter  containing  still  more  violent  threats 
against  the  holy  city.    This  Hezekiah  "spread  before  the  Lord"  (oh.  xxxvii. 

'  BawIiBBon, '  Hi«tory  of  Ancient  Egypt,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  433 — 158. 

-  This  is  not  distinctly  stated,  but  Menu  to  be  implied  ia  eh.  «tt  2,  7 ;  xxxl.  1 ;  xxzvL 
6,  9 ;  xxxTiL  9. 

'  O.  Bmiih,  '  Rponjm  Canon.' 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


14)  J  and  then  the  fiat  went  forth  for  the  desfcrnotion  of  his  host.  The  place 
of  the  slaughter  is  uncertain ;  bnt  there  can  be  no  manner  of  doubt  that 
a  tremendous  disaster  befell  his  army,  producing  complete  panic  and  a  hasty 
retreat.  Nor  were  the  consequences  merely  temporary.  "  Like  Xerxes  in 
Greece,  Sennacherib  never  recovered  from  the  shock  of  the  disaster  in 
Judah.  He  made  no  more  expeditions  against  either  Southern  Palestine 
or  Egypt." » 

Jadseawaa  now  for  a  considerable  space  of  time  completely  relieved  from 
all  threat  of  attack  or  invasion.  The  closing  years  of  Hezekiah's  life  were 
peaceful  and  prosperous  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  23,  27 — 29).  Manasseh,  during  his 
early  reign,  was  untroubled  by  any  foreign  foe,  and  was  too  young  to  introduce 
innovations  in  religion.  If  Isaiah's  sun  set  ultimately  in  blood-red  clouds, 
he  must  still  have  enjoyed  an  interval  of  peace  and  rest  between  the  final 
withdrawal  of  the  Assyrians  and  the  commencement  of  Manasseh'a  persecu- 
tion. The  interval  may  have  sufficed  for  the  composition  of  the  "  Book  of 
Consolation." 

$  3.  On  the  Character  and  Contents  of  the  Book  ascribed  to  Isatah, 
AS  it  has  come  down  to  vs. 

The  Book  of  Isaiah,  as  it  has  come  down  to  us,  presents  a  certain  com- 
posite character.  To  the  critical  and  the  uncritical  it  is  equally  apparent 
that  it  divides  itself  into  three  main  parts,  each  with  characteristics  of  its 
own.  The  first  thirty-five  chapters  are  wholly,  or  almost  wholly,  prophetic 
— that  is  to  say,  they  are  didactic,  admonitory,  hortatory,  containing  next 
to  no  narrative — a  declaration  to  the  Israelites  of  the  "  word  of  the  Lord," 
or  of  the  will  of  Gtod  with  respect  to  them.  Those  thirty-five  prophetical 
chapters  are  followed  by  four  historical  ones  (ch.  xxxvi. — ^zxxix.),  which 
contain  a  plain  and  simple  narrative  of  certain  events  in  the  reign  of 
Hezekiah.  The  work  concludes  with  a  third  part,  which  is,  like  the  first, 
prophetical,  and  which  extends  to  twenty-seven  chapters  (from  ch.  xl.  to 
ch.  Ixvi.). 

There  is  a  marked  contrast  of  subject-matter,  and  of  certain  features  in 
the  composition,  between  Part  I.  and  Part  III.  The  main  enemy  of  Israel 
m  Part  1.  is  Assyria ;  in  Part  III.,  Babylon.  Part  I.  deals  with  the  times 
of  Hezekiah  and  Isaiah  ;  Part  III.,  with  the  time  of  the  Babylonian  captivity. 
Part  I.  contains  numerous  headings  and  dates,  which  very  palpably  divide 
it  into  portions  (ch.  i.  1 ;  ii.  I ;  vi.  1 ;  vii.  1 ;  xiii.  1 ;  xiv.  28 ;  xr,  1 ; 
xvii.  1,  etc.)  ;  Part  III.  has  no  such  subdivisions,  but  seems  to  flow  on 
continuously.  Part  I.  is  chiefly  denunciatory ;  Part  III.  chiefly  consolatory. 
Part  I.  embraces  all  the  known  world;  Part  III.  touches  only  Babylon, 
Persift,  and  Palestine.  Both  parts  are  Messianic;  but  Part  I.  presents 
Messiah  as  a  mighty  King  and  Buler ;  Part  III.  reveals  liiin  aa  a  ■offering 
Viotim,  a  meek  and  lowly  Redeemer. 

'  ProfeMor  Bayoe,  ■  Anaient  Emplraa  of  tha  East,'  p.  8M. 


INTKODUC'J  ION  TO 


Further,  wlien  Parts  I.  and  III.  are  carefully  examined,  they  are  found 
to  resemble  compilations  rather  than  continuous  and  connected  composi- 
tions. Part  I.  manifestly  divides  itself  into  a  number  of  sections,  each  of 
which  is  complete  in  itself,  and  but  slightly  connected  with  what  precedes 
or  follows.  Part  IIL  has  less  appearance  of  discontinuity,  but  really  con- 
tains so  many  and  such  abrupt  transitions,  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to 
regard  it  as  a  continuous  whole.  The  entire  book  thus  presents  the  charac- 
teristics of  a  collection  or  compilation — an  artificial  gathering  into  one  of 
prophecies,  uttered  at  various  times  and  on  various  occasions,  each  of 
which  was  complete  in  itself,  and  originally  intended  to  stand  by  itself, 
without  proem  or  sequel. 

The  general  arrangement  of  the  book,  by  whomsoever  it  was  compiled, 
which  wiU  be  considered  later,'  seems  to  be  chronological.  All  the  notes 
of  time  contained  in  Part  I.  are  in  their  proper  order,''  and  all  are  anterior 
to  the  period  considered  in  Part  II.,  which  again  belongs  probably  to  an 
earlier  date  than  the  composition  of  Part  III.  It  is  not  clear,  however, 
that  chronological  order  has  always  been  observed  in  the  arrangement  of 
the  sections  whereof  Parts  I.  and  III.  are  composed.  The  prophecies  were 
apparently  delivered  orally  at  the  first,  and  reduced  to  writing  subsequently, 
sometimes  at  a  considerable  interval.  In  their  earliest  written  form  they 
were  thus  a  number  of  separate  documents.  From  time  to  time  collections 
seem  to  have  been  made,  and  in  some  of  these  an  order  other  than  the 
chronological  may  have  been  followed.  For  instance  in  the  "  Book  of 
Burdens,"  extending  from  ch.  xiii.  to  ch.  xxiii.,  the  opening  burden,  that 
of  Babylon,  is  not  likely  to  have  been  composed  nearly  so  early  as  several 
of  the  others  ;  and  the  fifth  burden,  that  of  Egypt,  contains  ijadications  of 
still  later  authorship.  The  compiler  would  seem  to  have  thrown  together 
prophecies  that  were  similar  in  character,  whatever  might  have  been  the 
date  of  their  composition. 

To  enter  a  little  more  into  detail,  Part  I.  seems  to  oontain  eleven 
sections — 

Section  I.,  which   is  ch.  i.  in  the  Hebrew  text,  is  a  sort  of  general  introduction, 

reproachful  and  minatoTy. 
Section  II.,  which  forms  ch.  ii. — v.,  opens  with  an  announcement  of  Christ's  kingdom, 

and  then  contains  a  series  of  denunciations  of  the  various  sins  of  God's  people. 
Section  III.,  which  corresponds  to  ch.  vi.,  records  a  vision  vouchsafed  to  Isaiah,  and 

a  special  mission  given  to  him. 
Section  IV.,  which  extends  from  ch.  vii.  1  to  ch.  x.  4,  contains  a  series  of  prophecies, 

largely  Messianic,  delivered  in  connection  with  the  Syro-Israelite  war. 
Section  V.,  which  begins  with  oh,  x.  5  and  extends  to  the  close  of  ch.  xxiii.,  has  been 

called  the  "  Book  of  Burdens,"  and  consists  of  a  series  of  denunciations  of  woe  upon 

different  nations,  chiefly  upon  the  enemies  of  Israel. 

■  Bee  below,  §  6. 

•  E^.  oh.  vi  1  (B.O.  759);  oh.  vii.  1  (b.o.  734—730);  ch.  xiv.  28  (b.o.  727);  oh.  zz.  1 
(B.O.  711). 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  xi 

Section  VI.,  which  comprises  oh.  xxiv. — xxvii.,  consists  of  denunciations  of  woe  upon 
tlie  world  at  large,  relieved  by  promises  of  the  salvation  of  a  remnant. 

Section  VII.,  which  extends  from  ch.  xxviii.  to  ch.  xxxL,  consists  of  renewed  denunci- 
ations of  woe  upon  Israel  and  Judah. 

Section  Vm.,  which  is  limited  to  the  first  eight  verses  of  ch.  xxxii.,  is  a  prophecy  of 
Messiah's  kingdom. 

Section  IX.,  which  forms  the  remainder  of  ch.  xxxii.,  is  a  renewal  of  denunciations  of 
woe  upon  Israel,  joined  with  promises. 

Section  X.,  which  coincides  with  ch.  xxxiii.,  5s  a  prophecy  of  judgment  on  Assyria. 

Section  XL,  which  comprises  ch.  xxxiv.  and  xxxv.,  declares  the  Divine  judgment  upon 
the  world,  and  the  glory  of  the  Church  consequent  upon  it. 

Part  II.  consists  of  two  sections — 

Section  I.  is  formed  of  ch.  xxxvi.  and  xxxvii.,  and  contain'!  an  account  of  the  threaten- 
ing embassy  of  Rabshakeh,  the  letter  of  Sennacherib  to  Hezekiah,  and  the  miraculous 
destruction  of  SennacheriWs  army.  (It  corresponds  closely  with  ch.  xviii.  and  xix. 
of  2  Kings.) 

Section  11.  is  formed  of  ch.  ixxviii.  and  xxxix.  It  contains  an  account  of  Hezekiah's 
illness  and  recovery,  of  the  embassy  of  Merodach-Baladan,  and  of  Isaiah's  prediction 
of  the  ultimate  conquest  of  Judaaa  by  Babylon.  (It  corresponds  with  ch.  xx.  of 
2  Kings.) 

Part  III.  appears  at  first  sight  to  be  divided  into  three  equal  sections, 
eaoh  composed  of  nine  chapters — (1)  ch.  xl. — xlviii. ;  (2)  ch.  xlix. — Iviii. ; 
\^3)  ch.  Iviii. — Ixvi. ;  the  same  refrain  ("  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God, 
to  the  wicked  ")  terminating  both  the  first  and  the  second  portions  ;  and  it 
is  almost  certain  that  whoever  made  the  present  arrangement  into  chapters 
mast  have  intended  this  division.  But  such  a  division  of  Part  III.  would 
be  one  according  to  form,  and  not  according  to  substance.  Considered  in 
respect  of  its  subject-matter,  the  "Part"  divides,  like  Part  I.,  not  into 
three,  but  into  a  much  larger  number  of  sections.  No  doubt  different 
arrangements  might  be  made ;  but  the  following  seems  to  us'  the  most  free 
from  objection : — 

Section  I.  coincides  with  ch.  xl.,  and  is  an  address  of  consolation  to  the  people  of  God 
in  some  deep  affliction — presumably  the  Babylonian  captivity. 

Section  11  extends  from  ch.  xli.  to  ch.  xlviii.,  and  is  a  prophecy  of  the  recovery  of  the 
people  ?1  God  from  their  sin,  and  from  their  bondage  in  Babylon. 

Section  III.  extends  from  ch.  xlix.  to  ch.  liii.,  and  is  an  account  of  the  mission  of  a 
great  Deliverer  who  is  called  the  "  Servant  of  Jehovah." 

Section  IV.  extends  from  ch.  liv.  to  ch.  Ivi.  8,  and  consists  of  promises  to  Israel,  com- 
bined with  exhortations. 

Suction  Y.  begins  with  ver.  9  of  ch.  Ivi.,  and  extends  to  the  close  of  ch.  Ivii.  It  is  an 
address  of  warning  to  the  wicked. 

Section  VL  consists  of  ch.  Iviii.  and  lix.,  and  contains  practical  instructions  and 
warnings,  followed  by  a  confession  and  a  promise. 

Section  YII.  coincides  with  ch.  be.,  and  consists  of  a  description  of  the  glories  of  the 
restored  Jerusalem. 

Section  VIII.  comprises  ch.  Ixi.  and  Ixii.,  and  is  a  soliloquy  of  the  "Servant  of 
Jekovah,"  who  promises  peace  and  prosperity  to  the  restored  Jerusalem. 


xil  INTRODUCTION  TO 


Section  IX.  contains  the  first  six  versos  only  of  ch.  Ixiii.,  and  gives  a  picture  of  God's 

judgment  upon  his  enemies. 
Section  X.  extends  from  ver.  7  of  ch.  Ixiii.  to  the  close  of  cb.  Ixiv.,  and  is  an  address 

of  the  Jewish  Church  in  Babylonia  to  God,  including  thanksgiving,  confession  of 

■in,  and  prayer. 
Section  XI.  coincides  with  ch.  Let.,  and  contains  God's  answer  to  hia  exiled  Church's 

prayer. 
Section  XII.  coincides  with  oh,  Levi.,  and  consists  of  very  solemn  final  threatenings 

and  promises. 

§  4.    On  the  Sttlb  and  Diction  or  the  "  Book  or  Isatah." 

It  IB  generally  allowed  that  Isaiah,  as  a  writer,  transcends  all  the  other 
Hebrew  prophets.  "  In  Isaiah,"  says  Ewald,  "  we  see  prophetic  authorship 
reaching  its  culminating  point.  Everything  conspired  to  raise  him  to  an 
elevation  to  which  no  prophet,  either  before  or  after,  could  as  writer  attain. 
Among  the  other  prophets,  each  of  the  more  important  ones  is  distinguished 
by  some  one  particular  excellence,  and  some  one  peculiar  talent ;  in  Isaiah, 
all  kinds  of  talent  and  all  beauties  of  prophetic  discourse  meet  together,  so 
as  mutually  to  temper  and  qualify  each  other ;  it  is  not  so  much  any  single 
feature  that  distinguishes  him,  as  the  symmetry  and  perfection  of  the 
whole." ' 

A  lofty  and  majestic  calmness,  a  grandeur  and  dignity  of  expression,  is 
perhaps  his  first,  most  patent  characteristic.  However  strong  the  feelings 
that  move  him,  however  exciting  the  circumstances  under  which  he  writes, 
lie  always  succeeds  in  maintaining  a  perfect  self-control,  and  a  command 
over  his  language  which  prevents  it  from  ever  becoming  extravagant  or 
inappropriate.  While  the  strain  rises  and  falls  in  accordance  with  the 
variety  of  the  subject-matter,  and  the  language  at  times  becomes  highly 
poetic,  figurative,  and  out  of  the  common,  there  seems  always  to  preside 
over  the  composition  a  calm  spirit  of  self-restraint,  which  checks  hyperbole, 
bridles  passion,  and  renders  the  progress  and  development  of  the  discourse 
majestic,  and,  in  a  certain  sense,  equable.  As  Ewald  observes,  "  we  note 
in  him  an  overflowing,  swelling  fulness  of  thought,  which  might  readily 
lose  itself  in  the  vast  and  indefinite,  but  which  always  at  the  right  time, 
with  tight  rein,  collects  and  tempers  its  exuberance,  to  the  bottom" 
exhausting  the  thought  and  completing  the  utterance,  and  yet  never  too 
diffuse.  This  severe  self-control  is  the  most  admirably  seen  in  those  shorter 
utterances,  which,  by  briefly  sketched  images  and  thoughts,  give  us  the 
vague  apprehension  of  something  infinite,  while  nevertheless  they  stand 
before  us  complete  in  themselves  and  clearly  delineated." 

Next  to  this  lofty  and  majestic  calmness,  the  energy  and  liTelineis  of 
Isaiah's  style  seem  to  demand  notice.     This  energy  and  liveliness  are  pro- 
duced, primarily,  by  the  profuse  employment  of  striking  images ;  secondly, 
by  dramatic  representation;  thirdly,  by  the  large  employment  of  pointed 
'  '  Propheten  des  Alten  Bundea,'  p.  166, 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  xiii 

antithesiB ;  foarthly,  by  frequent  play  upon  words ;  fifthly,  by  the  strength 
of  the  expressions  used ;  sixthly,  by  vivid  descriptions ;  and  seventhly,  by 
the  amplification  and  elaboration  of  occasional  points. 

1.  The  profase  employment  of  striking  images  mast  be  evident  to  every 
reader.  Not  a  paragraph,  scarcely  a  verse,  is  withont  some  simile  or 
metaphor,  which  gives  a  poetical  turn  to  the  form  of  expression,  and  elevates 
the  language  above  that  of  ordinary  life.  And  the  variety  and  force  of  the 
metaphors  are  most  remarkable.  Assyria  is  a  swarm  of  bees  (ch.  vii.  18), 
a  raging  stream  (ch.  viii.  7,  8),  a  razor  (ch.  vii.  20),  a  lion  (ch.  v.  29),  a 
rod  (ch.  z.  5),  an  axe  (ch.  x.  15),  etc.  Jehovah  is  a  potter  (ch.  xxLx.  16; 
xlv.  9,  etc.),  a  shepherd  (ch.  xl.  11),  a  man  of  war  (ch.  xlii.  15),  a  stone  of 
stumbling  and  rook  of  offence  (ch.  viii.  14),  a  gin  and  a  snare  (ch.  viii.  14), 
a  purger  of  metals  (ch.  i.  25),  a  lion  (ch.  xxxi.  4),  birds  flying  (ch.  xzxi. 
5),  a  strong  fortress  guarded  by  moats  and  streams  (ch.  xxxiii.  21),  a  rock 
(ch.  xvii.  10),  a  shadow  (ch.  xxv.  4),  a  crown  of  glory  (ch.  xxviii.  6).  Zion 
is  a  cottage  in  a  vineyard  (ch.  i.  8),  a  lodge  in  a  garden  of  encumbers  (ch. 
i.  8),  the  mountain  of  the  Lord  (ch.  ii.  3),  a  captive  sitting  in  the  dust 
(ch.  lii.  2),  a  woman  in  travail  (ch.  Ixvi.  8).  Israel  generally  is  a  diseased 
body  (ch.  i.  5,  6),  an  oak  whose  leaf  fadeth  (ch.  i.  30),  an  unproductive 
vineyard  (ch.  v.  7),  a  bulging  wall  that  is  about  to  burst  (ch.  xxx.  13). 
Messiah  is  "a  root  of  Jesse"  (ch.  xi.  10),  "a  rod"  (ch.  xi.  1),  "a  branch  " 
(ch.  xi.  1),  "a  tender  plant"  (ch.  liii.  2),  "a  servant"  (ch.  xlii.  1),  "a  man 
of  sorrows"  (ch.  liii.  3),  "a  lamb  brought  to  the  slaughter"  (ch.  liii.  7), 
"  a  sheep  dumb  before  her  shearers "  (ch.  liii.  7).  The  degenerate  are 
described  as  those  "  whose  silver  has  become  dross,  whose  wine  is  mixed 
with  water"  (ch.  i.  22)  ;  the  persistently  wicked  as  those  who  "draw  ini- 
quity with  cords  of  vanity,  and  sin  as  it  were  with  a  cart-rope  "  (ch.  v.  18). 
Boasters  "  conceive  chaff,  and  bring  forth  stubble  "  (ch.  xxxiii.  11)  ;  nations 
are  in  God's  sight  "  as  a  drop  from  a  bucket,  and  as  small  dust  upon  a 
balance"  (ch.  xl.  15)  ;  humanity  in  general  is  as  "grass  that  withereth," 
and  as  "  the  flower  that  fadeth."  Among  specially  beautiful  metaphors 
may  be  cited :  "  His  heart  was  moved,  and  the  heart  of  his  people,  as  the 
trees  of  the  wood  are  moved  with  the  wind  "  (ch.  vii.  2)  ;  "  The  people  which 
walked  in  darkness  have  seen  a  great  light :  they  that  dwell  in  the  land  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  upon  them  hath  the  light  shined "  (ch.  ix.  2)  ;  "  The  earth 
shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea  "  (ch. 
xi.  9)  ;  "  With  joy  shall  ye  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation  "  (ch.  xii. 
3)  ;  "A  man  shall  be  .  .  .  a«  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land " 
(ch.  xxxii.  2).  To  do  full  justice,  however,  to  this  branch  of  the  subject, 
we  should  have  to  quote  from  every  chapter,  almost  from  every  paragraph, 
since  the  beauly  of  which  we  are  speaking  pervades  the  entire  composition, 
even  entering  into  the  historical  chapters  (ch.  xxxvii,  3,  22,  25,  27,  29; 
xxxviii.  12,  14,  18,  etc.),  where  it  was  scarcely  to  be  expected. 

2.  Dramatic  representation  is,  comparatively  speaking,  infrequent,  but 
still  occurs  sufficiently  often  to  be  characteristic,  and  to  have  an  appreciable 


INTRODUCTION   TO 


effect  upon  the  liveliness  of  the  composition.     The  most  remarkable  instance 
of  it  is  the  dialogue  at  the  beginning  of  ch.  Ixiii. — 

•  Who  is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah?  thfa  that  is 
glorious  in  his  apparel,  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength  ?  " 

"  I  that  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save." 

"  Wlierefore  art  thou  red  in  thine  apparel,  and  thy  garments  like  him  that  treadeth  in 
the  wine-fat?" 

"I  have  trodden  the  wine-press  alone;  and  of  the  people  there  was  no  man  with 
me,"  etc. 

But  there  are  also  numerous  other  passages,  where,  for  a  verse  or  two  at  a 
time  words  are  put  into  the  mouth  of  speakers  other  than  the  author,  with 
a  lively  and  stirring  effect  (see  ch.  iii.  6,7;  iv.  1 ;  v.  19 ;  vii.  12 ;  viii.  19 
ix.  10;  X.  8—11,  13,  14;  xiv.  10,  13,  14,  16,  17;  xix.  11;  xxi.  8,  11,  12 
xxii.  13;  xxviii.  15;  xxix.  11,  12,  15;  xxx.  10,  11,  16;  xl.  3,  6,  27;  xli.  6 
xlii.  17;  xliv.  16—20;  xlv.  9,  10,  14;  xlvii.  7,  10;  xlix.  14,  20,  21;  Iii.  7 
Ivi.  3,  12 ;  Iviii.  3 ;  Ixv.  5  ;  Ixvi.  5). 

3.  Antithesis  is,  no  doubt,  a  characteristic  of  Hebrew  poetry  generally, 
but  in  the  other  sacred  writers  it  is  often  rather  verbal  than  real,  while  in 
Isaiah  it  is  almost  always  true,  pointed,  and  telling.  The  following  may 
suffice  as  instances  :  "Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white 
as  snow  ;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool "  (ch.  i.  18)  ; 
"  It  shall  come  to  pass,  that  instead  of  sweet  smell  [spice]  there  shall  be 
rottenness ;  and  instead  of  a  girdle,  a  rope ;  and  instead  of  well-set  hair,  bald- 
ness ;  and  instead  of  a  stomacher,  a  girdle  of  saclccloth ;  turning  instead  of 
beauty  "  (ch.  iii.  24)  ;  "He  looked  for  judgment,  but  behold  oppression;  for 
righteousness,  but  behold  a  cry  "  (ch.  v.  7) ;  "  Ten  acres  of  vineyard  shall 
yield  one  bath,  and  the  seed  of  an  homer  [or,  '  a  homer  of  seed ']  shall  yield 
an  ephah  "  (ch.  v.  10)  ;  "  Woe  unto  them  that  call  evil  good,  and  good  etnl ; 
that  put  darkness  for  light,  and  light  for  darkness  ;  that  put  bitter  for  sweet, 
and  sweet  for  bitter  "  (ch.  v.  20)  ;  "  Behold,  my  servants  shall  eat,  but  ye  shall 
be  hungry :  behold,  my  servants  shall  drink,  but  ye  shall  be  thirsty :  behold, 
my  servants  shall  rejoice,  but  ye  shall  be  ashamed :  behold,  m,y  servants  shall 
sing  for  joy  of  heart,  but  ye  shall  cry  for  sorrow  of  heart,  and  shall  howl  for 
vexation  of  spirit  "  (ch.  Ixv.  13,  14). 

4.  "  Play  upon  words  "  is  also  a  common  feature  in  Hebrew  literature ; 
but  only  a  few  of  the  sacred  writers  use  it  so  frequently,  or  give  it  such 
prominence,  as  Isaiah.  Knobel  gives,  as  instances,^  ch.  i.  23 ;  v.  7 ;  vii.  9  ; 
xvii.  1,  2 ;  xxii.  5,  6  ;  xxviii.  10,  et  seqq.;  xxix.  1,  2, 9 ;  xxx.  16 ;  zxxii.  7, 17 
19 ;  to  which  may  be  added  ch.  xxxiv.  14 ;  Ixii.  4 ;  and  Ixv.  10.  As,  how- 
ever, this  ornp,ment,  depending  generally  upon  the  assonance  of  the  Hebrew 
words,  is  necessarily  lost  in  translation,  and  can  only  be  appreciated  by  a 
Hebrew  scholar,  we  do  not  propose  further  to  dwell  upon  it. 

5.  The  "strength"  of  Isaiah's  expressions  will  be  recognized  by  all  who 

*  *  Exegetisohes  Handbuch,'  vol.  vL  p.  11. 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


XT 


have  studied  his  work,  and  may  be  seen  to  a  certain  extent  even  tlirongh 
the  veil  of  a  translation.     Such  phrases  as  the  following  arrest  attention, 
and  lodge  themselves  in  the  memory,  from  their  intensity  and  inherent 
force:  "There  is  no  soundness  in  it;  but  lootrnd!*,  and  bruises,  &nd  putre- 
fying sores"  (ch.  i.  6)  ;  "  How  is  the  faithful  city  become  an  harlot  I"  (oh. 
i.  21)  ;  "  Enter  into  the  rock,  and  hide  thee  in  the  dust "  (ch.  ii.  10)  ;  "  Whaik 
mean  ye  that  ye  heat  my  people  to  pieces,  and  grind  the  faces  of  the  poor  f 
(ch.  iii.  15)  ;  "  Hell  hath  enlarged  her  desire,  and  opened  her  mouth  without 
measure  "  (ch.  v.  14)  ;  "  Their  horses'  hoofs  shall  be  counted  Uke  flint,  and 
their  wheels  like  a  whirhvind  "  (ch.  v.  28)  ;  "  The  two  tails  of  these  smoking 
firebrands "  (ch.  vii.  4)  ;  "  His  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  Oounsellor, 
Mighty  God,  Everlasting  Father,  Prince  of  Peace  "  (ch.  ix.  6) ;  "  He  shall 
smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  his  mouth,  and  with  the  breath  of  his  lips  shall 
he  tlay  the  wicked "   (ch.  xi.  4)  ;  "  The  earth  shall  reel  to  and  fro  Uke  a 
drunkard  "  (ch.  xxiv.  20)  ;  "  God  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory  "  (ch,  xxv. 
8)  ;    "  The   Lord   with   hia  sore  and  great  and  strong  sword  shall  punish 
leviathan  the  piercing  [swift]  serpent  "  (ch.  xxvii.  1)  ;  "  The  people  shall  be 
as  the  burnings  of  Ume  "  (ch.  xxxiii.  12)  ;  "  They  that  wait  upon  the  IJord 
shall  renew  their  strength  ;  they  shall  mmmt  up  with  wings  as  eagles  "  (ch.  xl. 
31)  ;  "  A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,  and  smoking  flax  shall  he  not  quench  " 
(ch.  xlii.  3)  ;  "I  clothe  the  heavens  with  blackness,  and  I  make  sackcloth  their 
covering  "   (ch.  1.  3) ;   "  His  visage  was  so  marred  more  than  any  man  " 
(ch.  Hi.  14) ;  "  The  wicked  are  like  the  troubled  sea,  when  it  cannot  rest,  whoso 
waters  cast  up  mire  and  dirt "  (ch.  Ivii.  20)  ;  "  The  Lord  will  com.e  withjvre, 
and  with  his  chariots  Uke  a  whirlwind,  to  render  his  anger  with  fury  and  his 
rebuke  with  flames  of  fire  "  (ch.  Ixvi.  16)  ;  "  Their  worm  shall  not  die,  neither 
shall  their  fire  he  quenched;  and  they  shall  be  an  abhorring  unto  all  flesh  " 
(ch.  Ixvi.  24). 

6.  The  power  of  vivid  description  is  remarkably  shown  :  (1)  In  the  pictures 
of  desolation  which  are  so  frequent,  especially  in  those  of  ch.  xiii.,  xiv.,  and 
xxxiv.  "  Babylon,  the  glory  of  kingdoms,  the  beauty  of  the  Chaldees 
excellency,  shall  be  as  when  God  overthrew  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  It 
shall  never  be  inhabited,  neither  shall  it  be  dwelt  in  from  generation  to 
generation  :  neither  shall  the  Arabian  pitch  tent  there ;  neither  shall  the 
shepherds  make  their  fold  there.  But  wild  beasts  of  the  desert  shall  lie 
there;  and  their  houses  shall  be  full  of  doleful  creatures;  and  owls  [or, 
'  ostriches ']  shall  dwell  there,  and  satyrs  (?)  shall  dance  there.  And  jackals 
shall  ciy  in  their  castles,  and  dragons  in  their  pleasant  palaces :  and  her 
time  is  near  to  come,  and  her  days  shall  not  be  prolonged  "  (ch.  xiii.  19 — 22). 
"  I  will  make  it  [equivalent  to  '  Babylon ']  a  possession  for  the  bittern,  and 
pools  of  water :  and  I  will  sweep  it  with  the  bosom  of  destruction,  saith  the 
Lord  of  hosts  "  (ch.  xiv.  23).  "  The  pelican  and  the  bittern  shall  possess  ii 
[equivalent  to  '  Edom ']  ;  the  owl  also  and  the  raven  shall  dwell  in  it :  and  one 
shall  stretch  out  upon  it  the  line  of  confusion,  and  the  plummet  of  emptiness. 
They  shaU  call  the  nobles  thereof  to  the  kingdom,  but  none  shall  be  there, 


xvl  IKTRODUCTION  TO 


and  all  her  princes  shall  be  nothing.  And  thorns  shall  come  np  in  her 
palaces,  nettles  and  brambles  in  the  fortresses  thereof ;  and  it  shall  be  an 
habitation  of  dragons,  a  court  for  owls  [or,  '  ostriches  *].  And  the  wild 
beasts  of  the  desert  shall  meet  with  the  wild  beasts  of  the  island  [equiyalent 
to  '  jackals  '],  and  the  satyr  shall  cry  to  his  fellow ;  the  night-monster  also 
shall  rest  there,  and  find  for  herself  a  place  of  rest.  There  shall  the  arrow- 
snake  make  her  nest,  and  lay,  and  hatch,  and  gather  under  her  shadow ; 
there,  verily,  shall  the  valtnres  assemble,  every  one  with  her  mate "  (ch. 
xxxiv.  11 — 15).  (2)  In  the  idyllic  passages,  ch.  xi.  6 — 9;  xxxv.  1 — 10; 
xl.  11 ;  and  Ixv.  25,  of  which  we  wUl  quote  one  only :  "  The  wolf  also  shall 
dwell  with  the  lamb,  and  the  leopard  shall  lie  down  with  the  kid ;  and  the 
calf  and  the  young  lion  and  the  fatling  together;  and  a  little  child  shall 
lead  them.  And  the  cow  and  the  bear  shall  feed ;  their  young  ones  shall 
lie  down  together :  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox.  And  the  suck- 
ing child  shall  play  on  the  hole  of  the  asp,  and  the  weaned  child  shall  pat 
his  hand  on  the  basilisk's  den.  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my 
holy  mountain."  (3)  In  the  account  of  woman's  finery  (ch.  iii.  16 — 24). 
(4)  In  the  imitative  description  of  rushing  water,  in  ch.  xvii. :  "  Woe  to  the 
multitude  of  many  people,  which  make  a  noise  like  the  noise  of  the  seas ; 
and  to  the  rushing  of  nations,  that  make  a  rushing  like  the  rushing  of 
mighty  waters.  The  nations  shall  rush  like  the  rnshing  of  many  waters  " 
(ch.  xvii.  12,  13).  (5)  In  the  graphic  portraiture  of  an  army  marching  on 
Jerusalem  :  "  He  is  come  to  Aiath,  he  is  passed  through  Migron ;  at  l^ch- 
mash  he  hath  laid  up  his  baggage :  they  are  gone  over  the  passage :  they 
have  taken  up  their  lodging  at  Geba ;  Bama  is  afraid ;  Gibeah  of  Saul  ia 
fled.  Lift  up  thy  voice,  O  daughter  of  Gallim :  Hearken,  0  Laisha !  O 
thou  poor  Anathoth  1  Madmenah  is  removed ;  the  inhabitants  of  Gebim 
gather  themselves  to  flee.  That  very  day  shall  he  halt  at  Nob ;  he  shall 
shake  his  hand  at  the  mount  of  the  daughter  of  Zion,  the  hill  of  Jerusalem  " 
(ch.  X.  28—32). 

7.  The  seventh  and  last  point,  giving  energy  and  force  to  Isaiah's  style, 
is  the  effective  use  of  rhetorical  amplification.  By  a  repetition  of  the  same 
idea  in  different  words,  which  is  sometimes  twofold,  sometimes  threefold, 
often  fourfold,  occasionally  as  much  as  fivefold,  a  deep  impression  is  pro- 
duced— an  impression  at  once  of  the  earnestness  of  the  writer  and  of  the 
vast  importance  of  the  points  on  which  he  insists  with  so  much  reiteration. 
"  Ah  sinful  nation,"  he  says,  "  a  people  laden  with  iniquity,  a  seed  of  evil- 
doers, children  that  deal  cormptly :  they  have  forsaken  the  Lord,  they  have 
provoked  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  unto  anger,  they  are  gone  away  back- 
ward "  (ch.  i.  4).  And  again,  "  Thou  hast  been  a  strength  to  the  poor,  a 
strength  to  the  needy  in  his  distress,  a  refuge  from  the  storm,  a  shadow 
from  the  heat,  when  the  blast  of  the  terrible  ones  is  as  a  storm  against  the 
wall "  (ch.  XXV.  4).-  And,  "Who  hath  measured  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of 
his  hand,  and  meted  out  heaven  with  the  span,  and  comprehended  the  dust 
of  the  earth  in  a  measure,  and  weighed  the  n&ountains  in  scales,  and  the 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  xvi) 


hills  in  a  balance  P  "  (ch.  xl.  12).  And,  "  With  whom  took  he  counsel,  and 
who  instraoted  him,  and  tanght  him  in  the  path  of  judgment,  and  tanght 
him  knowledge,  and  showed  to  him  the  way  of  understanding  ?  "  (ch.  xl.  14). 
And,  "He  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows.  .  .  .  He  was 
wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he  was  braised  for  our  iniquities:  the 
chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him ;  and  with  his  stripes  we  are 
healed"  (oh.  liii.  4,  5).  Another  form  of  rhetorical  amplification  may 
be  noted  in  ch.  iL  13—16;  iii.  2,  3,  18—23;  v.  12;  xxii.  12,  13;  xli.  19, 
xlvii.  13,  etc. 

A  further  characteristic  of  Isaiah's  style  is  its  wonderful  variety.  Some 
times  smooth  and  gently  flowing  (ch.  xi.  6 — 9 ;  xxxv.  6 — 10 ;  Iv.  10 — 13), 
at  other  times  abrupt  and  harsh  (ch.  xxi.  11,  12;  Ivi.  9 — 12),  now  and 
then  simple  and  prosaic  (ch.  vii.  1 — 3 ;  viii.  1 — 4),  anon  soaring  into  the 
highest  flights  of  poetic  imagery  (ch.  ix.  2 — 7 ;  xi.  1 — 9 ;  xiv.  4 — 23,  etc.), 
it  includes  every  kind  of  artificial  ornament  known  at  the  time — parable 
(ch.  y.  1 — 7),  vision  (ch.  vi.  1 — 13),  symbolic  action  (ch.  xx.  2),  di-amatio 
dialogue  (ch.  xxi.  8,  9;  xxix.  11,  12;  xl.  6 — 8;  Ixiii.  1 — 6),  lyric  bursts  of 
song  (oh.  xii.  1 — 6;  xxvi.  1 — 18),  refrains  (ch.  ii.  11,  17;  v.  25;  ix.  12,  17, 
20;  X.  4;  xlviii.  22;  Ivii.  21,  etc.),  assonance  (ch.  v.  7;  vii.  9,  etc.);  and 
uses  all,  as  occasion  arises,  with  equal  point  and  appositeness.  Isaiah's 
style  has  thus  no  single  peculiar  colouring.  As  Ewald  remarks,  "  He  is 
neither  the  specially  logical,  nor  the  specially  elegiacal,  nor  the  specially 
oratorical,  nor  the  specially  admonitory  prophet,  as  perhaps  Joel,  or  Hosea, 
or  Micah,  in  whom  a  particular  colouring  more  predominates.  Isaiah  is 
rapable  of  adapting  his  style  to  the  most  different  subjects,  and  in  this 
consists  his  greatness  and  his  most  distinguished  excellence." ' 

The  diction  of  the  book  is  that  of  the  purest  and  best  times  of  Hebrew 
literature.  It  is  remarkably  free  from  archaisms.  A  certain  number  of 
"  Aramaisms "  or  "  Chaldaisms  "  have  been  pointed  out,'  more  especially 
in  the  later  prophecies ;  but  these  are  not  sufiSciently  numerous  to  disturb 
the  general  conclusion  (which  is  that  of  Dr.  S.  Davidson*  and  of  Mr. 
Oheyne,*  as  well  as  of  other  critics)  that  the  vocabulary,  on  the  whole, 
may  be  pronounced  "pure  and  free  from  Chaldaisms."  The  number 
of  words  not  occurring  elsewhere  in  the  Bible  (iwaf  Xeyo/xeva)  is  large, 
and  the  vocabulary  is  ampler  than  perhaps  that  of  any  other  book  of 
Scripture. 

■  'Propheten  des  Alten  Bundei,'  p.  173. 

•  See  Mr.  Oheyne'i  'Prophedes  of  Iraiah.'  toL  U.  p.  243;  Knobal,  '  BzaKetiieliM 
Handbuch,'  vol.  v.  p.  297. 

»  « Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament,'  voL  U.  {k  Hi 

*  '  PropheoiM  of  laaiali,'  t«L  U.  p.  241 


haux. 


sra  IKTEODUCTION  TO 


§  5.  chi  csetain  modbkn  theories  as  to  the  authobship  of  the 
Existing  "Book." 

A  theory  -was  started,  towards  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century,  by 
a  German  writer  named  Koppe,  in  his  translation  of  Bishop  Lowth's 
'  Isaiah,'  to  the  effect  that  Isaiah  was  not  the  real  author  of  the  piophecies 
contained  in  ch.  xl. — Ltri.  of  the  work  ascribed  to  him.  The  work  of  an 
entirely  different  prophet,  living  towards  the  close  of  the  Captivity,  had,  he 
conjectured,  been  attached  by  some  accident  to  the  genuine  prophecies  of 
the  son  of  Amoz,  and  had  thenceforth  passed  by  his  name.  The  theory 
thus  started  was  welcomed  by  other  Germans  of  the  rationalistic  school, 
and  could  shortly  boast  among  its  supporters  the  names  of  Doderlin, 
Eichhom,  Paulus,  Bauer,  Rosenmiiller,  De  Wette,  Justi,  and  the  great 
Hebraist  Gesenius.  It  based  itself  mainly  on  two  grounds :  (I)  that  the 
author  of  ch.  xl. — livi.  takes  for  his  standpoint  the  time  of  the  Babylonian 
captivity,  and,  speaking  as  if  that  were  present,  from  thence  looks  forward 
into  the  subsequent  future ;  (2)  that  he  has  a  knowledge  of  the  name  and 
career  of  Cyrus,  which  a  prophet  living  two  centuries  before  could  not 
possibly  have  had.  The  theory  was  subsequently  further  supported  by 
alleged  differences  between  the  style  and  diction  of  ch.  i. — xxiii.  and  ch. 
zl. — Ixvi.,  which  were  declared  to  necessitate  different  authors,  and  to 
mark  ch.  xl. — Ixvi.  as  the  production  of  a  later  age. 

The  simple  theory  thus  started  of  two  Isaiahs,  an  earlier  and  a  later,  one 
contemporary  with  Hezekiah,  the  other  with  the  later  Captivity,  whose 
works  had  been  accidentally  thrown  together,  has,  since  its  original  pro- 
mulgation, been  elaborated  and  expanded,  chiefly  by  the  labours  of  Ewald, 
in  a  wonderful  way.  Ewald  traces  in  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  as  it  has  come 
down  to  us,  the  work  of  at  least  seven  hands.*  To  Isaiah,  the  contemporary 
of  Hezekiah,  the  son  of  Amoz,  he  ascribes  thirty  chapters  only  out  of  the 
sixty-six,  together  with  parts  of  two  others.  To  a  second  great  prophet, 
whom  he  calls  "  the  Great  Unnamed,"  and  whom  he  places  towards  the 
close  of  the  Captivity,  he  assigns  eighteen  chapters,  with  parts  of  four 
others.  A  third  prophet,  who  lived  in  the  reign  of  Manasseh,  wrote  one 
whole  chapter  (the  priceless  fifty-third)  and  portions  of  four  or  five  others. 
A  fourth,  belonging  to  the  time  of  Ezekiel,  wrote  almost  the  whole  of  four 
chapters.  Another,  perhaps  Jeremiah,  wrote  two  chapters;  and  two 
others  wrote  portiong  of  chapters — one  of  them  the  prophecy  in  ch.  xxi. 
1 — 10;  and  the  other  that  beginning  ch.  xiii.  2  and  terminating  ch.  xiv.  28. 
The  Book  of  Isaiah,  as  it  has  come  down  to  us,  is  thus  a  patchwork  of  an 
extraordinary  kind.  Bwald's  theory  may  be  thus  exhibited  in  a  tabular 
form — 

'  ImU'i  viawi  an  propounded,  partly  m  hit  'Frophetan  deg  Alten  Bundei,'  bat  mora 
wnpletaly  i«  bi«  '  BitUtrj  of  I»raei,'  toI.  it  p.  207,  *t  leq^. ;  and  toL  t.  pp.  15,  41— 47, 


THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


AUTBOB. 

•AT*. 

Ch.  i. — zii.        ...        ••• 

Isaiah  himself 

... 

B.0 

759—713 

Ch.  xiji.— xiv.  23 

Unknown  author  (No. 

1) 

•  •• 

*t 

670—560 

Ch.  xiv.  24— XX. 

Isaiah  himself 

•  •• 

n 

727—710 

Ch.  xxi.  1 — 10 

Unknown  author  (No. 

2) 

•  •• 

n 

570—560 

Ch.  xxi.  11 — xxxiii. 

Isaiah  himself 

•  •• 

M 

715—700 

Ch.  xxxiv.  and  xxxt.   ... 

Jeremiah  (?) 

•  •• 

» 

540-638 

Ch.  xxxvi. — xxxix. 

Not  assigned. 

Ch.  xl.— lii.  12 

The  Great  Unnamed 

•  •■ 

» 

560—540 

Ch.  liL  la— liv.  12 

Unknown  author  (No. 

3) 

•  •• 

9f 

690—640 

Ch.  liv.  13— Ivi.  8 

The  Great  Unnamed 

•  •• 

If 

550—540 

Ch.  Ivi.  9— Ivii.  11       ... 

Unknown  author  (No. 

3) 

•  •• 

n 

690—640 

Ch.  Ivii.  12—21 

The  Great  Unnamed 

!•• 

If 

550—540 

Ch.  Iviii.  1— lix.  20      ... 

Unknown  author  (No. 

4) 

•  >• 

» 

595—576 

Ch.  lix.  21— Ixii. 

The  Great  Unnamed 

t** 

» 

550—540 

Ch.  Ixiii.  and  Ixiv.        ... 

Unknown  author  (No. 

*) 

•  •• 

n 

595—576 

Ch.  Ixv.  and  Ixvi.         ... 

The  Great  Unnamed 

•  •■ 

n 

550-540 

Nor  does  it  at  all  appear  that  with  Bwald's  theory  of  a  sevenfold  authorship 
o£  "  Isaiah  "  we  have  reached  the  final  outcome  of  the  separatist  hypothesis 
started  by  Koppe.  The  latest  English  writer*  is  of  opinion  that  "  Ewald's 
treatment  of  the  latter  part  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  cannot,"  at  any  rate,  "  he 
complained  of  on  the  score  of  excessive  analysis."  He  declares  that  "  it  is 
becoming  more  and  more  certain  (?)  that  the  present  form  of  the  prophetic 
Scriptures  is  due  to  a  literary  class  (the  so-called  Sopherim,  '  scribes,'  or 
'  Scripturists '),  whose  principal  function  was  collecting  and  supplementing 
the  scattered  records  of  prophetic  revelation.  This  function  they  performed 
with  rare  self-abnegation.  Of  a  regard  on  their  part  for  personal  distinc- 
tion there  is  not  a  -trace ;  self-conscionsness  is  swallowed  up  in  the  sense 
of  belonging,  if  only  in  a  secondary  degree,  to  the  company  of  inspired  men. 
They  wrote,  they  recast,  they  edited,  in  the  same  spirit  in  which  a  gifted 
artist  of  our  own  day  devoted  himself  to  the  glory  of  modern  painters." 
The  result  is  that  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  as  it  has  come  down  to  ns,  is  a 
'■  mosaic,"  or  patchwork,  the  production  of  no  one  knows  how  many 
authors,  brought  gradually  into  its  present  condition. 

Nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  these  theories  did  not  originate  in  any 
marked  difEerences  of  style  between  the  portions  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah 
which  are  assigned  to  different  authors.  They  arose  entirely  from  the 
subject-matter  of  the  prophecies.  "  The  really  decisive  arguments  against 
the  unity  of  authorship  are  derived,"  we  are  told,  "  (1)  from  the  historical 
circumstances  implied  in  the  disputed  chapters,  and  (2)  from  the  originality 
of  the  ideas,  or  of  the  forms  in  which  the  ideas  are  expressed."  *    Under 

*  See  Mr.  Cheyne's '  Prophecies  of  Isaiah,'  vol.  ii.,  Easay  vl.  pp.  215 — 217, 
»  Cbejrne, '  The  Pook  of  Jsaiah  ebropoloipcally  i^rranged,'  p.  X»4. 


INTRODUCTION   TO 


the  former  head,  the  sole  groaiid  urged  is  the  standpoint  occupied  by  the 
writer  of  the  later  chapters,  which  is  that  of  an  exile  in  Babylon,  writing 
when  Jerusalem  and  the  temple  have  long  lain  in  ruins,  and  the  Jews  are 
becoming  dispirited  at  the  apparent  refusal  of  God  to  interpose  in  their 
behalf;  under  the  latter  come  the  sarcastic  descriptions  of  idolatry,  the 
appeals  to  the  victories  of  Cyrus,  the  references  to  the  influence  of  the 
angelic  powers  (ch.  xxiv.  21),  the  resurrection  of  the  body  (ch.  xxvi.  19), 
the  everlasting  punishment  of  the  wicked  (ch.  1.  11;  Ixvi.  24),  and  the 
idea  of  vicarious  atonement  (ch.  liii.).'  It  was  only  after  Isaiah  had  been 
i?plit  up  into  fragments  upon  the  ground  of  the  contents  of  the  different 
portions,  that  the  argument  from  differences  in  the  style  of  different  parts 
occurred  to  the  critics,  and  was  brought  forward  as  subsidiary.  Even  now 
no  great  stress  is  laid  upon  it.  It  is  admitted  that  questions  concerning 
style  are  very  much  matters  of  taste,  and  that  no  unanimity  can  be  expected 
on  them."  It  is  allowed  that  "  the  Great  Unnamed,"  if  a  different  writer 
from  Isaiah,  often  imitated  his  style,  and  knew  his  prophecies  by  heart.' 
It  is  not  even  pretended  that  seven  styles  can  be  made  out,  corresponding 
to  the  seven  Isaianio  authors  of  Ewald's  list.  The  most  that  has  been 
attempted  is  to  prove  two  styles — an  earlier  and  a  later;  but  even  here 
the  success  of  the  efforts  made  is  not  great.  In  Germany  the  unity  of 
the  style  has  been  maintained,  in  spite  of  them,  by  Jahn,  Hengstenberg, 
Kleinert,  Havernick,  Stier,  Keil,  Delltzsch,  and  F.  Windischmann ;  in 
England,  by  Henderson,  Huxtable,  Kay,  Urwick,  Dean  Payne  Smith. 
Professor  Birks,  and  Professor  Stanley  Leathes.  A  recent  advocate  of 
the  separatist  theory  seems  almost  to  concede  the  point,  when  he  sets 
himself  to  argue  that  unity  of  style  does  not  necessarily  imply  unity  of 
authorship,  and  so  that  "  Isaiah  "  may  be  a  work  by  several  hands,  even 
though  the  style  be  uniform.* 

§  6.  A  Defence  of  the  Unity  or  the  Book. 

The  question  whether  "  Isaiah  "  be  the  work  of  one  writer  or  more,  is  to 
be  regarded  rather  as  one  of  literary  interest  than  of  theological  importance. 
Nobody  doubts  but  that  the  "  book  "  existed  in  the  form  in  which  we  have  it 
during  the  time  of  our  Lord  and  his  apostles ;  and  it  is  thus  our  present 
hook  which  has  their  sanction  as  a  portion  of  the  inspired  Word  of  God. 
This  it  is  equally,  whether  it  is  the  work  of  one  prophet,  or  of  seven,  or  of 
seventy.  The  controversy  may  therefore  be  conducted  without  heat  or 
asperity,  being  one  as  purely  literary  as  that  of  the  unity  of  the  *  Odyssey ' 
or  the 'Iliad.' 

'  Oheyne, '  The  Book  of  leaiah  ohionologioally  uranged,'  p.  zxUi.  It  ii  noticeable  that, 
in  two  oases,  these  "  late  ideas  "  are  contained  in  passages  which  Ewald  assig^i  to  Iiaiah 
himself. 

'  Oheyne,  '  Prophecies  of  Isaiah,'  vol.  ii.  p.  218.  Compare  Moody-Stuart, '  The  Bible 
True  to  Itself,'  p.  416,  who  quotes  Professor  Robertson  Smith  and  Bleek  to  the  same  efllot. 

•  Oheyne,  'Propheoiea  of  Isaiah,'  vol.  ii.  p.  23?,  <  Jbid.,  p.  219. 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  xxi 

The  argumenta  in  favour  of  the  unity  may  be  divided  into  the  external 
and  the  internal.  Of  external  arguments,  the  first  and  most  important  is 
that  of  the  verBions,  especially  the  Sepfcuagint,  which  is  a  distinct  evidence 
that,  aa  early  as  about  B.C.  250,  the  entire  contents  of  the  "book"  were 
ascribed  to  laaiah  the  son  of  Amoz.  It  is  said  that  the  Psalms  were 
similarly  ascribed  to  David,  though  many  were  not  of  his  composition;  but 
thia  is  not  the  fact.  The  Septnagint  translators  headed  the  Book  of  Psalms 
with  the  simple  word  "  Psalms ;  "  and  in  their  headings  to  particular  psalms 
assigned  several  to  authors  other  than  David,  as  Moses,  Jeremiah,  Asapb, 
Ethan,  Haggai,  and  Zechariah. 

The  next  external  testimony  is  that  of  Jesus  the  son  of  Sirach,  the  author 
of  the  Book  of  Bcclesiasticus.  The  writer  is  supposed  to  have  lived  about 
B.C.  180.  He  distinctly  ascribes  to  the  Isaiah  who  was  contemporary  with 
Hezekiah  the  portion  of  the  work  (ch.  xl. — Ixvi.)  which  the  separatists  of 
all  shades  assign  to  an  anthor,  or  authors,  of  a  later  date  (Bcclus.  xlviii. 
18 — 24).  Now  the  prologue  to  the  son  of  Sirach 's  work  declares  him  to 
have  been  "a  man  of  great  diligence  and  wisdom  among  the  Hebrews," 
and  "no  less  famous  for  great  learning,"  so  that  he  may  be  assumed  to 
deliver  the  judgment  of  the  most  learned  among  the  Jews  of  his  time. 

Isaiah's  authorship  of -the  later  (dispiitcil)  chapters  was  further,  most 
clearly,  accepted  by  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament  and  their  contempo- 
raries— by  St.  Matthew  (iii.  3,  etc.)  ;  St.  Mark  (i.  2,  Revised  Version),  St. 
Luke  (iii.  4—6)  ;  St.  John  (xii.  38)  ;  St.  Paul  (Rom.  x.  16—21,  etc.) ; 
St.  John  the  Baptist  (John  i.  28) ;  the  Ethiopian  eunuch  (Acts  viii.  28 — 
34)  ;  the  elders  of  Nazareth  (Luke  iv.  16 — 20)  ;  Josephus  ('  Ant.  Jud.,'  xi. 
1),  etc.  If  the  greater  part  of  these  were  unlearned  and  uncritical  men, 
yet  St.  Paul,  at  any  rate,  who  was  "  brought  up  at  the  feet  of  Gamahel " 
(Acts  xxii.  3),  had  been  fully  instructed  in  the  Scriptures,  and  "  must  have 
knovm,"  as  Mr.  Urwick  says,  "if  the  learned  Jews  of  his  day  recognized 
two  Isaiahs,  or  the  absorption  of  the  prophecies  of  a  very  great  yet  un- 
named exile  into  those  of  the  first  Isaiah."  ^  Josephus  was  also  a  man  of 
considerable  reading  and  research ;  yet  he  unhesitatingly  ascribes  to  Isaiah 
the  composition  of  the  prophecies  respecting  Cyrus  (ch.  xliv.  28,  etc.).  It 
may  be  confidently  laid  down  that  there  was  no  Jewish  tradition  which 
taught  that  the  "  Book  of  Isaiah  "  was  a  composite  work— a  congeries  of 
prophecies  of  various  dates,  and  from  the  hands  of  various  authors. 

Aben  Ezra,  who  wrote  in  the  twelfth  century  after  our  era,  wbb  the  first 
critic  who  ventured  on  the  suggestion  that  the  prophecies  of  ch.  xl.— Ixvi. 
might  not  be  the  actual  work  of  Isaiah.  Previously  to  his  time,  and  again 
from  his  date  until  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century,  uot  a  breath  of 
Bttspicion  was  uttered,  not  a  whisper  on  the  subject  was  heard.  The  Book 
of  Psalma  was  known  to  be  composite;  the  Book  of  Proverbs  bore  on  its 
face  that  it  consisted  of  four  collections  (Prov.  i.  I ;  xxv.  1 ;  xxx.  1 ;  xxxi. 
1)  ;  but  Isaiah  was  universally  accepted  as  the  continuous  work  of  one  and 

the  same  author. 

«  '  The  Servant  of  Jehovah,'  p.  9. 


ixil  INTEODUOTION  TO 


The  internal  evidence  of  nnity  divides  itself  nnder  five  heads:  1. 
Identity  in  respect  of  the  greatness,  Mid  the  quality,  of  the  genins  exhibited 
by  the  writer.  2.  Similarity  in  the  language  and  constmctions.  3.  Simi- 
larity in  the  thonghts,  images,  and  other  rhetorical  ornaments.  4.  Simi- 
larity in  little  characteristic  expressions.  5.  Correspondences,  partly  in  the 
way  of  repetition,  partly  in  that  of  completion,  in  the  later  chapters,  of 
thoughts  left  incomplete  in  the  earlier. 

1.  It  is  universally  allowed  by  critics  that  the  genius  exhibited  in  the 
writings  acknowledged  as  Isaiah's  is  extraordinary,  transcendent,  such  as  in 
the  entire  history  of  the  world  has  been  possessed  by  few.  The  genins  ia 
also  admitted  to  be  of  a  peculiar  quality,  characterized  by  sublimity,  pro- 
fusion and  novelty  of  thought,  breadth  and  variety  of  power,  and  a  self- 
control  which  keeps  the  utterances  free  from  any  approach  to  bombast  oi 
extravagance.  We  maintain  that  not  only  is  the  genius  exhibited  in  the 
disputed  chapters  equal  to  that  shown  in  the  undisputed,  but  that  it  is  a 
genius  of  exactly  the  same  hind.  The  sublimity  of  ch.  Ui.  and  liii.  is  allowed 
on  all  hands,  as  also  is  that  of  ch.  xl. ;  xliii.  1 — 4,  and  Ixiii.  1 — 6.  Ewald 
says  of  two  of  these  passages,  "  The  strain  here  attains  to  such  a  pure 
luminous  sublimity,  and  carries  the  hearer  away  with  such  a  wonderful 
charm  of  diction,  that  a  person  might  be  ready  to  fancy  he  was  listening 
to  another  prophet  altogether."^  The  great  variety  of  power  is  similarly 
attested.  "  In  no  prophet,"  observes  Ewald  again,  "  does  the  mood  in  the 
composition  of  particular  passages  so  much  vary,  as  throughout  the  three 
several  sections  into  which  this  part  of  the  book  (ch.  xl. — Ixvi.)  is  divided, 
while  under  vehement  excitement  the  prophet  pursues  the  most  diverse 
objects.  .  .  .  The  complexion  of  the  style,  although  hardly  anywhere  pass- 
ing into  the  representation  of  visions  properly  so  called,  varies  in  a  constant 
interchange ;  and  rightly  to  recognize  these  changes  is  the  great  problem 
for  the  interpretation."'  The  profusion  of  thought  cannot  possibly  be 
questioned;  and  the  self-control  is  certainly  as  noticeable  in  the  disputed 
chapters  as  in  the  undisputed. 

2.  The  similarity  in  the  language  and  constructions  has  been  abundantly 
proved  by  Delitzsch '  and  Urwick.*  It  is  true  that  it  has  been  also  denied, 
atrennonsly  by  Knobel;*  more  faintly  by  others.  To  examine  the  point 
thoroughly  would  require  an  elaborate  treatise,  and  would  involve  the 
copious  use  of  Hebrew  type,  and  the  employment  of  arguments  only  appre- 
ciable by  the  advanced  Hebrew  scholar.  We  must  therefore  content 
ourselves,  under  this  head,  with  alleging  the  authorities  of  Delitzsch,  Dr. 
Kay,  Professor  Stanley  Leathes,  Professor  Birks,  Dean  Payne  Smith,  Mr. 
Urwick,  and  Dr.  S.  Davidson,  himself  a  separatist,  who  agrees  that  there 
is  a  general  naity  in  the  phraseology  throughout  the  prophecies,  or,  at  any 

•  '  Propheten  dc«  Alien  BundeB,'  vol.  ii  p.  407.                •  Ibid.,  pp.  408,  409. 
»  '  Commentarj  on  the  Piopheoies  of  Isaiah,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  128 618. 

•  '  The  Servant  of  Jehovah,'  pp.  86—47. 

•  '  Exegetiwhei  Handbuoh,'  vol.  vi.  pp.  296—298. 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


rate,  that  "  there  ia  not  enough  evidence  in  the  style  and  diction  to  Bhow 
the  later  origin  "  *■  of  the  disputed  chapters. 

3.  The  similarity  in  the  thoughts,  images,  and  other  rhetorical  ornaments 
is  another  large  subject,  whioh  it  is  almost  impossible,  within  the  limits  of 
snch  an  Introduction  as  the  present,  to  treat  adequately.  Isaiah's  pre- 
dominant thought  -with  respect  to  God  is  of  his  holiness — his  spotless, 
perfect  purity,  before  whioh  nothing  "  unclean "  can  stand.  Hence  the 
favourite  title  of  God,  "  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,"  nsed  eleven  times  in 
undisputed  and  thirteen  times  in  disputed  chapters,  and  only  five  times 
in  the  rest  of  the  Old  Testament.  Hence  his  words  (in  Part  I.),  when  he 
sees  God,  "Woe  is  me!  for  I  am  undone;  because  I  am  a  man  of  unclean 
lips"  (oh.  vi.  5)  ;  and  his  description  of  God  (in  Part  III.)  as  "  the  high 
and  lofty  One  that  inhabiteth  eternity,  whose  name  is  Holy"  (ch.  Ivii.  15). 
Next  to  God's  holiness,  he  loves  to  magnify  his  power.  Hence  he  is  "  the 
Mighty  One  of  Israel"  (ch.  i.  24;  xlix.  26;  Ix.  16),  and  has  his  power 
magnificently  described  in  such  passages  as  cli.  ii.  10,  21 ;  xl.  12 — 17,  etc. 
The  high  and  holy  One  has  entered  into  covenant  with  Israel — they  are 
his  "people,"  his  "children,"  his  "  well-beloved,"  as  no  other  people  are 
(ch.  i.  2,  3 ;  ii.  6 ;  iii.  12,  etc. ;  and  ch.  xl.  1,  11 ;  xli.  8,  9 ;  xliii.  1,  15, 
etc.).  But  they  have  rebelled  against  him,  they  have  broken  the  covenant, 
they  have  provoked  him  by  their  sins  (ch.  i.  2 — 4,  21—23 ;  v.  4 ;  xliii. 
22 — 24;  xlviii.  1 — 8;  Ixiii.  10,  etc.),  by  oppression  and  injustice  (ch.  i. 
17,  23;  iii.  12,  15;  v.  7,  23  ;  lix.  8,  13,  14),  by  their  idolatries  (ch.  i.  29; 
ii.  8,  20;  xxxi.  7;  xl.  19,  20  ;  xli.  7;  xliv.  9—20;  Ivii.  5),  by  their  shedding 
of  innocent  blood  (ch.  i.  15,  21 ;  iv.  4 ;  lix.  3,  7).  And  for  this  they  have 
been  in  his  counsels  cast  off,  rejected,  put  away,  forsaken  (ch.  i.  15 ;  ii.  6 ; 
iii.  8 ;  iv.  6,  etc.,  in  Part  I. ;  and  ch.  xlii.  18 — 25  ;  xliii.  28 ;  xlix.  14,  etc., 
in  Part  III.),  carried  into  captivity  (ch.  v.  13;  vi.  11,  12;  xiv.  3,  etc.,  and 
ch.  xlii.  22  ;  xliii.  5,  6 ;  xlv.  13 ;  xlviii.  20),  to  Babylon  (ch.  xiv.  2—4 ; 
ixxix.  6,  7  ;  xlvii.  6  ;  xlviii.  20,  etc.).  They  are  not,  however,  wholly  cast 
off  ;  God  is  chastening  them,  and  will  bring  back  a  "  remnant "  (ch.  vi.  13 ; 
X.  20 — 22 ;  xL  12 ;  xiv.  1 — 3,  etc. ;  and  ch.  xliii.  1 — 6 ;  xlviii.  9 — 20  ;  xlix. 
25,  etc.),  and  plant  them  again  in  their  own  land  (vi.  13 ;  x.  21  ;  xiv.  1 ; 
XXXV.  10;  and  ch.  xliv.  26;  xlv.  13;  Ii.  11,  etc.),  and  give  them  peace  and 
prosperity  (ch.  xi.  11 — 16 ;  xii. ;  xiv.  3  ;  xxv.  6 — 8  ;  xxxii.  15 — 18 ;  xixv. 
1—10  ;  and  ch.  xl.  9—11 ;  xliii.  19,  20 ;  xlix.  8--13 ;  Ii.  11 ;  Iii.  7—10, 
etc.).  And  then  for  their  greater  glory,  he  will  call  the  Gentiles,  and  join 
the  Gentiles  with  them  into  one  Church  or  nation  (ch.  xi.  10 ;  xxv.  6 ; 
xlii.  6;  xlix.  6;  Iv.  5;  Ix.  3,  etc.).  Of  this  nation  there  will  be  a  great 
Kiag  (ch.  ix.  6,  7 ;  xxiv.  23 ;  xxxii.  1 ;  xxxiii.  17 ;  xlii.  1—4 ;  xlix.  1—12, 
etc.),  who  will  reign  in  "  God's  holy  mountain  "  (ch.  ii.  2 ;  xi.  9 ;  Ivi.  7  ; 
Ivii.  18;  Ixv.  11,  25;  Ixvi.  20)  over  his  holy  people  perpetually.  This 
"King"  will  be  also  a  Bedeemer  (ch.  i.  27;  xxxv.  9,  10;  xli.  14;  lix.  20) 
and  a  Saviour  (oh.  xxxt.  4 ;  liii.  5—12)  ;  he  will  reign  in  rigfateousries* 
>  Dr.  S.  Davidion,  'Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament,'  Tel.  ii.  p.  JK. 


xxiT  INTBODUCTION   TO 


and  peace  (ch.  ix.  7  ;  xxxli.  1,  17  ;  xlii.  1 — 4- ;  xlix.  8 — 10),  in  a  place  where 
the  voice  of  weeping  will  be  heard  no  more  (ch.  xxxv,  10;  li.  11 ;  liv.  19), 
and  where  there  will  be  no  more  hurt  nor  destruction  (ch.  xi.  9  ;  Lev.  25). 

Among  the  favourite  images  which  pervade  the  book,  and  belong  alike 
to  the  disputed  and  the  undisputed  chapters,  may  be  noticed — 

(1)  The  image  of  "  light  "  and  "  darkness,"  used  in  a  spiritual  sense  for 
moral  ignorance  and  moral  enlightenment.  We  are  rendered  so  familiar 
with  the  imagery  by  the  constant  employment  of  it  in  the  New  Testament, 
that  wo  are  apt  to  regard  it  as  biblical  generally,  and  not  as  characterizing 
particular  authors.  The  metaphorical  use  of  "  light "  and  "  darkness  "  is, 
however,  rare  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  characterizies  three  books  only — 
Job,  the  Psalms,  and  Isaiah.  Isaiah  is  the  only  prophet  in  whose  writings 
the  imagery  is  at  all  frequent.  He  uses  the  word  "  light "  in  a  meta- 
phorical sense  at  least  eighteen  times,  and  "  darkness "  at  least  sixteen 
contrasting  the  two  together  in  nine.  Of  the  contrasts,  four  occur  in 
undisputed  chapters  (ch.  v.  20,  30 ;  ix.  2 ;  xiii.  10),  five  in  disputed  ones 
(ch.  xlii.  16;  1.  10;  Iviii.  10;  lix.  9;  Ix.  1 — 3).  Of  the  other  uses,  seven 
we  in  undisputed  (ch.  ii.  5 ;  viii.  20,  22 ;  ix.  19  ;  x.  17 ;  xxix.  18 ;  xxx. 
26),  and  nine  in  disputed  chapters  (ch.  xlii.  6,  7;  xlv.  3;  xlvii.  6;  xlix. 
6,  9;  li.  4;  Ix.  19,  20). 

(2)  The  images  of  "blindness"  and  "  deafness,"  for  a  similar  condition, 
especially  when  self-induced.  This  is  a  use  almost  peculiar  to  Isaiah 
among  Old  Testament  writers,  and  occurs  at  least  twelve  times — four 
times  in  undisputed  cliapters  (ch.  vi.  10 ;  xxix.  10,  18;  xxxii.  3),  and  eight 
in  disputed  ones  (ch.  xxxv.  5;  xlii.  7,  16,  18,  19;  xliii.  8;  xhv.  18;  Ivi.  9). 

(3)  The  image  of  humanity  as  "  a  flower  that  fadeth,"  or  "  a  leaf  that 
fadeth,"  occurs  in  ch.  i.  30;  xviii.  15  (undisputed),  and  in  ch.  xl.  7  and 
Ixiv.  6  (disputed). 

(4)  The  image  of  a  "  rod,"  "  stem,"  or  "  sprout,"  applied  to  the  Messiah, 
occurs  in  ch.  xi.  1,  10  and  in  ch.  liii.  2.  The  latter  is  a  disputed,  the  former 
an  undisputed  chapter. 

(5)  The  imagery  expressive  of  the  final  peace  and  prosperity  of  Messiah's 
kingdom  is  closely  similar,  almost  identical,  in  the  "  true  Isaiah  "  and  the 
"  other  writers ;  "  e.g.  ch.  ii.  4,  "  He  shall  judge  among  the  nations,  and 
shall  rebuke  many  people ;  and  they  shall  beat  their  swords  into  plough- 
shares, and  their  spears  into  pruning-hooks  :  nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword 
against  nation,  neither  shall  they  learn  war  any  more."  Oh.  xi.  5 — 9, 
"  Righteousness  shall  be  the  girdle  of  his  loins,  and  faithfulness  the  girdle 
of  his  reins.  The  wolf  also  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb,  and  the  leopard 
shall  lie  down  with  the  kid.  .  .  .  And  the  cow  and  the  bear  shall  feed; 
their  young  ones  shall  lie  down  together:  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like 
the  ox.  .  .  .  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain :  for 
the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the 
sea."  Oh.  Ixv.  24,  25,  "It  shall  come  to  pass,  that  before  they  call,  I  will 
answer ;  and  while  they  are  yet  speaking,  I  will  hear.     The  wolf  and  the 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


lamb  shall  feed  together,  and  the  Hon  shall  eat  straw  like  the  bullock :  and 
dust  shall  be  the  serpent's  meat.  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all 
my  holy  mountain,  saith  the  Lord." 

(6)  The  image  of  "  water,"  for  spiritual  life  and  refreshment,  occurs  in 
both  tke  disputed  and  the  undisputed  chapters,  most  frequently  in  the 
former,  but  still  unmistakably  in  the  latter  also  (comp.  ch.  xxx.  25  and 
XKxiii.21  withch.xixv.6;  xli.17,18;  xliii.19,20;  Iv.l;  Iviii.ll;  lxvi.l2). 

(7)  The  comparison  of  God  with  a  potter,  and  of  a  man  with  the  vessel 
which  he  fashions,  is  found  both  in  oh.  zxix.  16,  an  nndis[)uted  chapter, 
and  also  in  two  of  the  disputed  chapters  (ch.  xlv.  9  and  Ixiv.  8). 

(8)  Jerusalem  is  represented  as  a  tent,  with  stakes,  cords,  etc.,  both  in 
ch.  xxxii.  20,  an  undisputed  chapter,  and  in  ch.  liv.  2,  a  disputed  one. 

(9)  Israel's  purification  from  sin  is  described  as  the  purging  of  dross 
from  a  metal,  both  in  ch.  i.  25  (undisputed)  and  in  ch.  xlviii.  10  (dispiiteri). 

(10)  Other  examples  of  metaphors  common  to  the  disputed  and  undis- 
puted chapters  are  the  metaphor  of  "  tow,"  for  something  weak  and  easily 
consumed  (oh.  i.  31  ;  xliii.  17)  ;  of  "stubble,"  for  the  same  (ch.  v.  24 ;  xl. 
24 ;  xli.  2 ;  xlvii.  14)  ;  of  "  the  wilderness  blossoming,"  for  a  time  of 
spiritual  well-being  (ch.  xxxii.  15 ;  xxxv.  1,  2 ;  U.  3 ;  Iv.  12,  13) ;  of 
"  drunkenness,"  for  spiritual  infatuation  (oh.  xxix.  9 ;  li.  21,  "  drunken, 
but  not  with  wine '')  ;  of  the  "  healing  of  men's  wounds,"  for  God's 
forgiveness  of  sin  (ch.  i.  6;  xxx.  26;  liii.  5;  Ivii.  18);  of  "an  overflowing 
stream,"  for  an  invading  host  (ch.  viii.  7,  8 ;  xvii.  12,  13 ;  lix.  19)  ;  of  a 
''  whirlwind,"  for  the  rush  of  chariot-wheels  (ch.  v.  28 ;  Ixvi.  15) ;  of  the 
"dove's  note,"  for  lamentation  (ch.  xxxviii.  14;  lix.  11)  ;  of  "the  worm," 
for  decay  or  dissolution  (ch.  xiv.  11 ;  li.  8)  ;  of  a  nation  "  eating  its  own 
flesh,"  for  internal  discord  and  disunion  (ch.  ix.  20;  xlix.  18) ;  of  "shadow," 
for  God's  protection  (ch.  xxv.  4;  xxxii.  2;  xlix.  2;  li.  16)  ;  of  "a  feast  of 
fat  things,"  for  spiritual  blessings  (ch.  xxv.  6 ;  Iv.  2) ;  of  "  earth  bursting 
out  into  singing,"  for  mankind  rejoicing  (ch.  xxxv.  2;  Iv.  12);  and  of 
"  harlotry,"  for  spiritual  unfaithfulness  (ch.  i.  21 ;  Ivii.  3,  etc.). 

Among  the  other  rhetorical  ornaments  which  characterize  Isaiah's  style 
in  the  undisputed  chapters,  there  is  not  one  which  does  not  also  charac- 
terize the  disputed  ones.  Dramatic  representation,  pointed  antithesis,  play 
upon  words,  strong  expressions,  vivid  descriptions,  amplifications,  variety, 
are  as  noticeable  in  the  one  set  as  in  the  other,  as  may  be  seen  by  reference 
to  the  passages  already  quoted  in  pp.  xiii. — xvi.  Even  the  very  peculiar 
ornament  called  iiravatftopd,  or  the  repetition  of  a  word  or  words  at  the  end 
of  a  sentence  previously  used  at  the  beginning,  is  to  be  found  alike  in  both, 
and  can  scarcely  be  said  to  be  more  frequent  in  the  one  set  than  in  the 
other  (see  ch.  i.  7 ;  iv.  3  ;  vi.  11 ;  viii.  9 ;  xiii.  10 ;  xiv.  25  ;  xv.  8 ;  xxx.  20 ; 
and  ch.  xxxiv.  7 ;  xl.  19 ;  xiii.  15,  19 ;  xlviii.  21  j  li.  13 ;  liii.  6,  7 ;  liv.  4, 13  ; 
Iviii,  2  i  lix.  8). 

4.  The  similarity  of  the  disputed  with  the  undisputed  chapters  in  little 
characteristic  expressions  has  frequently  been  pointed  out,  but  cannot  bo 


ixvi  INTEODUCTION  TO 


omitted  in  a  review  like  the  preBent.  Note  especially  the  following :  (1) 
the  designation  of  God  as  "the  Holy  One  of  Israel "  (ch.  i.  4;  v.  19,  24; 
X.  20 ;  xii.  6 ;  xvii.  7 ;  xxix.  19 ;  xxi.  11, 12, 15 ;  xxxi.  1 ;  and  ch.  xxxvii.  23 ; 
xli.  14,  16,  20;  xHii.  3,  14;  ilv  11 ;  xlvii.  4;  xlyiii.  17;  xlix.  7;  lir.  5;  Iv. 
6;  Ix.  9,  li);  (2)  the  combinavion  of  "Jacob"  with  "Israel"  (ch.  ix.8; 
X.  21,  22 ;  xiv.  1 ;  xvii.  3,  4 ;  xxvii.  6  ;  xxix.  23 ;  and  ch.  xl.  27  ;  xli.  8 ;  xlii. 
24;  xliii.  1,  22,  28;  xliv.  1,  5,  23;  xlv.  4;  xlvi.  3);  (3)  the  phrase,  "the 
month  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it "  (ch.  i.  20 ;  xl.  5 ;  Iviii.  14)  ;  (4)  the 
nnnsnal  form,  yomar  Yehovah,  or  yomar  JElohim,  in  the  middle  or  at  the  end 
of  a  statement  (ch.  i.  11,  18  ;  xxxiii.  10  ;  and  also  in  ch.  xl.  1,  25 ;  xli.  21 » 
Ixvi.  9)  ;  (5)  the  quasi-hypostatic  recognition  of  "  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  " 
(ch.  xi.  2;  xxxiv.  16;  xl.  7,  13;  xlviii.  16;  lix.  19;  Ixi.  1,  etc.);  (6)  the 
application  of  the  term  "  Maker  "  to  God  in  the  plural  (ch.  x.  15 ;  liv.  5)  ■ 
(7)  the  frequent  mention  of  tohu,  "  chaos  "  (ch.  xxiv.  10;  xxix.  21 ;  xxxiv. 
11;  xl.  17,  23;  xli.  29;  xliv.  9;  xlv.  18,  19;  lix.  4);  (8)  the  frequent 
mention  of  "  lifting  up  an  ensign  "  (ch.  v.  26  ;  xi.  10,  12 ;  xiii.  2 ;  xviii.  3 ; 
and  ch.  xlix.  22 ;  Ixii.  10)  ;  (9)  the  designation  of  God's  people  as  "  out- 
casts "  or  "  outcasts  of  Israel "  (ch.  xi.  12 ;  xvi.  3,  4 ;  xxvii.  13 ;  and  Ivi.  8)  : 
(10)  the  peculiar  expression,  "  from  henceforth,  even  for  ever  "  (ch.  ix.  7  and 
lix.  21)  ;  (11)  the  declaration  that  God's  wrath  against  his  people  endures 
but  "  a  little  while  "  (ch.  xxvi.  20  and  liv.  7,  8)  ;  (12)  the  use  of  the  rare 
word  ndkoakh  for  "right  things,"  "uprightness"  (ch.  xxvi.  10;  xxx.  10; 
Ivii.  2 ;  lix.  14)  ;  (13)  the  phrase,  "  Who  shall  turn  it  back  ?  "  to  express  the 
irreversibility  of  God's  doings  (ch.  xiv.  27  and  xliii.  13, — in  both  places  as 
the  concluding  clause)  ;  (14)  the  expression,  "  Peace,  peace,"  for  "  perfect 
peace  "  (ch.  xxvi.  3  and  Ivii.  19),  only  used  elsewhere  in  1  Chron.  xii.  18. 

5.  Among  correspondences,  in  the  way  of  repetition,  may  be  noted  the 
following : — 

Ch.  i.  13,  "Bring  no  more  vain  oblations;     Ch.  Ixvi.  3,  "  He  that  offereth  an  oblation 
incense  is  an  abomination  unto  me."  is  as  if  be  oiTorcd  swine's  blood ;  he  that 

burneth   incense,   as  if   he  blessed  an 
idol." 
Ch.  L  29,  "  Te  shall  be  confoimded  for  the    Ch.  Ixvi.  17,  "  They  sanctify  themselves 

gardens  that  ye  have  chosen."  and  purify  themselves  in  the  gardens." 

Ch.  ix.  7,  "  The  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts     Oh.  xxxvii.  32,  "  The  zeal  of  the  Lord  of 

will  perform  this."  hosts  shall  do  this." 

Ch.  xL  9,  "  They  shdl  not  hurt  nor  destroy     Ch.  Ixv.  25,   "  They   shall   not  hurt  nor 
ill  all  my  holy  mountain."  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain,  saith 

the  Lord." 
Ch.  xi.  7,  "  The  lion  shall  eat  stiaw  like    Ch.  Ixv.  26,  "  The  lion  shall  eat  straw  like 

the  ox."  the  bullock." 

Ch.  xiv.  24,  "  As  I  have  purposed,  so  shall    Ch.  xlvi.  10,  "  My  counsel  shall  stand." 

it  stand." 
Oh.  xvi.  11,  "  My  bowels  shall  sound  like    Ch.  IxliL  15, "  The  soundmg  of  thy  bowels 
an  harp  for  Moab,"  and  of  thy  mercies  towards  me,  are  they 

restrained  ?  " 


Tflfi  BOOB.  Ot  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


Ch.  ixW.  19,  20,  "The  earth  is  utterly  Oh.  li.  6,  "Lift  up  your  eyes  to  the  heavens, 

broken   down,  the  earth   is  clean  dis-  and  look  upon  the  earth  beneath:   for 

solred,  the  earth  is  moved  exceedingly.  the    heavens    shall    vanish    away   like 

The  earth  ghall  roil  to  and  fro  like  a  Bmoke,  and  the  earth  shall  wax  old  like 

drunkard,  and  shall  be  removed  like  a  a  garment,  and  they  that  dwell  therein 

cottage."  shall  die  in  like  manner." 

Ch.  xxiv.  23,  "Then  the  moon  shall  be  Ch.  Ix.  19,  "The  sun  shall  be  no  more 

confounded,  and  the  sun  ashamed,  when  thy  light  by  day ;  neither  for  brightness 

the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  reign  in  Mount  shall  the  moon  give  light  unto  thee : 

ZioB."  but  the  Lord  shall   be  unto  thee  an 

everlasting  Light." 

Ch.  XXV.  8,  "The  Lord  God  will  wipe  Oh.  Ixv.  19,  "The  voice  of  weeping  shall 

away  tears  from  off  all  faces."  be  no  more  heard  in  her,  nor  the  voice 

of  crying." 

Ch.  xxvi.  1,  "  Salvation  will  Glod  appoint  Oh.  Ix.  18,  "  Thou  shalt  call  thy  walls 

for  walls  and  bulwarks."  Salvation." 

Ch.  xxvii.  1,  "  In  that  day  the  Lord,  with  Oh.  li.  9,  "  Art  thou  not  it  that  hath  cut 

his  sore   and  great  and   stroug  sword  Bahab,  and  wounded  the  dragon  1 " 
shall  punish  leviathan  the  piercing  ser- 
pent, even  leviathan  that  crooked  ser- 
pent ;  and  he  shall  slay  the  dragon  that 
is  in  the  sea." 

Correspondences  of  a  more  recondite  kind  have  also  been  pointed  oiit,' 
where  tte  later  portion  of  the  prophecy  appears  to  fill  up  and  complete 
the  earlier.  Snch  are  the  following :  In  Part  I.  Israel  is  threatened  : 
"  Te  shall  be  as  an  oak  whose  leaf  fadeth  (ch.  i.  40)  ;  in  Part  III.  the 
threat  is  accomplished,  and  Israel  confesses  :  "  We  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf " 
(ch.  Ixiv.  6).  In  Part  I.  God  promises  "a  feast  of  fat  things,  a  feast  of 
winoa  OB  the  lees  "  (ch.  xxv.  6)  ;  in  Part  III.  he  issues  an  invitation  to  the 
world  at  large  to  partake  of  it :  "  Come  ye  .  .  .  buy  wine  and  milk  without 
money  and  without  price  .  .  .  eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and  let  your  soul 
delight  itself  in  fatness  "  (ch.  Iv.  1,  2).  In  Part  I.  Jerusalem  is  represented 
as  desolate  and  sitting  in  the  dust  (ch.  iii.  26)  ;  in  Part  III.  she  is  bidden 
to  "  arise  "  from  the  dnst  and  shake  herself  free  of  it  (ch.  Iii.  2).  In  Part 
I.  Israel  is  "  a  garden  that  hath  no  water  "  (ch.  i.  30) — a  vineyard  on 
which  the  clouds  have  been  commanded  to  "  rain  no  rain  "  (ch.  v.  6)  ;  in 
Part  III.  the  promise  is  made  that  she  shall  "  be  like  a  watered  garden  " 
(ch.  Iviii.  11).  God  (in  Part  I.)  forsook  her  for  her  iniquities  (ch.  v.  5 — 7 ; 
xxxii.  10 — 14)  ;  but  in  Part  III.  the  promise  is  made,  "  Thou  shalt  no 
more  be  termed  Forsaken ;  neither  shall  thy  land  any  more  be  termed  Deso- 
late. .  .  And  they  shall  call  them,  The  holy  people,  The  redeemed  of  the 
Lord :  and  thou  shalt  be  called.  Sought  out,  A  city  not  forsaken  "  (ch.  Ixii. 
4 — 12).  Again,  in  Part  I.,  Jehovah  is  set  forth  as  "a  crown  of  glory  and 
a  diadem  of  beauty  "  to  his  people  (ch.  xxviii.  5)  ;  while  in  Part  III.  is 
found  the  complement  of  the  image,  Israel  being  set  forth  as  "  a  crown  of 

>  Bee  'The  Bible  True  to  Itself,'  by  Dr.  Moody-Stewart  (2nd.  edit.,  London,  1881),  pp. 
874—414. 


sxvui  INTRODOCTION  TO 


glory  and  a  royal  diadem"  in  the  hand  of  Jehovah  (ch.  Ixii.  3).  The 
"  thorns  and  briars,"  which  are  represented  in  Part  I.  as  all  that  Israel 
produces  (ch.  v.  6 ;  xxxii.  13),  give  place  in  Part  III.  to  a  better  growth : 
"Instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  npthe  fir  tree,  and  instead  of  the  briar 
shall  come  np  the  myrtle  tree  "  (ch.  Iv.  13)  ;  "  They  shall  spring  np  as 
among  the  grass,  as  willows  by  the  water-courses  "  (ch.  xliv.  4). 

It  may  also  be  observed  that  the  local  colouring,  including  the  allusiuns 
to  scenery  and  natural  objects,  to  mountains,  forests,  trees,  rocks,  streams, 
fertile  fields,  etc.,  has  the  same  cast  in  both  the  earlier  and  the  later 
chapters.  The  scenery  is  throughout  that  of  Syria  and  Palestine,  not  that 
of  Babylonia  or  of  Egypt,  except  in  one  short  passage  (ch.  xix.  5 — 10). 
The  writer's  admiration  is  for  Lebanon,  with  its  cedars  that  are  high  and 
lifted  up  (ch.  ii.  13;  x.  34 ;  xiv.  8 ;  xxix.  17  ;  xxxiii.  9 ;  xxxv.  2  ;  xxxvii.  24 ; 
xl.  16  ;  Ix.  13)  ;  its  "  choice  firs,"  its  "pines,"  and  "  box  trees ;  "  for  Bashan, 
with  its  oaks  (ch.  ii.  13)  and  orchards  (ch.  xxxiii.  9)  ;  for  Carmel  (ch.  v. 
18;  xvi.  10;  xxix.  17;  xxxii.  15,  16;  xxxv.  2;  xxxvii.  24);  for  Sharon 
(ch.  xxxiii.  9 ;  xxxv.  2 ;  Ixv.  10)  ;  for  the  rich  Gilead  region,  with  its 
vineyards  and  "summer  fruits,"  and  glad  harvests  (ch.  xv.  9,  10).  The 
trees  are  all  of  them  Palestinian,  or  at  any  rate  Syrian — cedars,  oaks,  firs, 
pines,  box  trees,  sycamores,  cypresses,  shittah  trees,  olives,  vines,  myrtles. 
The  palm,  which  is  the  great  glory  of  Babylonia,  obtains  no  mention.  The 
abonnding  river  Euphrates  occurs  once  only  (oh.  viii.  7),  and  that  once  is 
in  Part  L  Elsewhere  the  water  spoken  of  consists  of  "  streams,"  "  brooks," 
"fountains,"  "pools"  or  reservoirs,  "springs,"  and  the  like  (ch.  xr.  7; 
xxii.  11 ;  XXX.  25  ;  xxxv.  7  ;  xli.  18  ;  xlviii.  21 ;  Iviii.  11,  etc.) — ^all  forms  of 
water  familiar  to  dwellers  in  Palestine.  Rocks,  "  ragged  rocks,"  "  clefts 
in  the  rock,"  "  holes  in  the  rock,"  are  also  portions  of  the  writer's  scenery 
(ch.  ii.  10,  19,  21 ;  xlii.  22  ;  Ivii.  5) — ^things  unknown  in  Babylonia.  Moun- 
tainB,  woods,  forests,  wild  beasts  of  the  forest,  bears,  are  equally  within  his 
cognizance,  and  furnish  him  with  frequent  images  (ch.  ii.  14 ;  ix.  18 ;  x. 
18,  34;  xiii.  4;  xl.  12;  xlii.  11 ;  liv.  10  ;  Iv.  12,  13 ;  Ivi.  9 ;  lix.  11,  etc.). 
Mr.  Cheyne  confesses  the  force  of  this  entire  argument,  when  he  says — 

"  Some  passages  of  II.  Isaiah  (i.e.  ch.  xl. — Ixvi.)  are  in  various  degrees 
really  favourable  to  the  theory  of  a  Palestinian  origin.  Thus,  in  ch.  Ivii.  5, 
the  reference  to  torrent-beds  is  altogether  inapplicable  to  the  alluvial  plains 
of  Babylonia ;  and  equally  so  is  that  to  subterranean  '  holes '  in  ch.  xlii. 
22 ;  and,  though  no  doubt  Babylonia  was  more  wooded  in  ancient  times 
than  it  is  at  present,  it  is  certain  that  the  trees  mentioned  in  ch.  xU.  19 
were  not  for  the  most  part  natives  of  that  country,  while  the  date-palm, 
the  commonest  of  all  the  Babylonian  trees,  is  not  once  referred  to."  ^ 

It  ifl  evident  that  the  "  Palestinian  origfin "  of  II.  Isaiah,  though  not 
conclnsively  proving  Isaiah's  authorship,  is  in  thorough  harmony  with  it, 
and  has  an  appreciable  value  as  a  subsidiarj  argument  in  favour  of  the 
unify  of  the  book. 

'  '  Fropheoiei  of  Isaiah,'  toL  U.  pi.  tlL 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  TOGPnET  ISAIAH. 


I   7.   LlTBRATtTBB  OF  IBAIAH. 

The  earlie8t,  and  one  of  the  best,  comments  on  Isaiah  is  that  of  Jerome,  vrritten  in 
Latin,  about  the  year  a.d.  410.  It  is  divided  into  eighteen  books,  and  coTitains  much 
that  is  of  the  highest  value,  especially  on  philological  and  geographical  poiots.  Jerome's 
knowledge  of  Hebrew  was  great,  and  his  acquaintance  with  the  works  of  the  Jewish 
rabbis  extensive.  But  his  exegesis  is  to  a  large  extent  fanciful.  Jerome  was  followed, 
towards  the  end  of  the  fifth  or  beginning  of  the  sixth  century,  by  Procopius  of  Uaza, 
who  wrote,  in  Greek,  a  long  and  elaborate  work,  which  was  little  known  until  it  was 
translated  into  Latin  by  Curterius  towards  the  close  of  the  sixteenth  century  ('In 
Esaiam  Prophetam  Commentationum  Epitome,'  Gr^ce  et  Latine,  J.  Curterio  interprets, 
folio,  Paris,  1580).  Christian  interpretation  had  then  a  lona  pause,  and  the  exegesis  of 
Isaiah  was  carried  on  in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries  liy  Jewish  scholars,  of  whom 
the  most  eminent  were  Bashi  (died  1107),  Aben  Ezra  (died  1167),  and  D.  Kimchi 
(died  1235).  Bashi's  works  are  printed  in  the  rabbinical  Bibles,  and  have  been  partly 
translated  into  Latin  by  Breithaupt  (3  vols.,  Gotha,  1710),  Aben  Ezra's  commentary 
on  Isaiah  has  been  translated  by  Dr.  Friedlander,  and  published,  with  the  text,  for  the 
Society  of  Hebrew  Literature,  by  Triibner  and  Co.  (London,  translation  in  1873,  text 
in  1877).  D.  Kimohi's  work  was  printed,  with  a  Latin  version,  at  Ulyssipolis,  in 
1492.  Of  these  three  commentators,  Aben  Ezra  is  regarded  as  the  best.  He  is  cUar- 
headed,  laborious,  and  clever,  though  somewhat  given  to  scepticism.  The  labours  of 
the  Jewish  writers  were  utilized  for  the  Church  by  Nicolas  de  Lyra,  a  Franciscan 
ii^onk,  about  a.d.  1300-40.  His  critical  work,  entitled  '  Postillje  Perpetuse,'  in  eiiihty- 
five  books,  was  published  by  the  Benedictines  at  Antwerp  in  1634.  It  has  considerable 
merit,  though  somewhat  too  venturous  in  its  allegorical  interpretations,  as  theauthor 
himself  felt  in  his  later  yean. 

With  the  Beformation  an  increased  amount  of  attention  was  devoted  to  the  writings 
of  "the  evangelical  prophet."  Calvin  (' Commentationes  in  Isaiam,'  folio,  Geneva, 
1551)' gave  the  views  on  the  subject  taken  by  the  more  advanced  Eeformers;  while 
Musculus  ('In  Esaiam  Prophetam  Oommentarii  locupletissimi,'  BMe,  1570)  wrote  frnm 
the  Lutheran  standpoint,  Marloratus  ('Esaiss  Prophetia,  cum  Catholica  Kiposiiione 
Boclesiastica,'  folio,  Paris,  1564)  and  Pintus  ('  Commentaria  in  Esaiam,'  folio,  Lyons, 
1561)  from  the  Boman.  Of  these  commentaries,  Calvin's  is  by  far  the  most  important. 
"Calvin's  works,"  says  Diestel, "  offer  even  yet  a  rich  store  of  biblical  knowledge."  His 
comment  on  Isaiah  will  be  found  largely  quoted  in  the  present  work.  Another  writer 
on  Isaiah,  belonging  to  the  Beformation  period,  was  Pellicanus,  a  good  Hebraist,  whose 
notes  upon  Isaiah  will  be  found  in  the  third  volume  of  his  '  Commentaria  Sacra '  (3  vols., 
Zurich,  1540). 

The  seventeenth  century  did  not  do  very  much  for  the  criticism  or  exegesis  of  Isaiah. 
Its  chief  theological  writers  belonged  to  the  Dutch  school,  and  comprised  Hugo  Grotius, 
whose  scanty  notes  upon  Isaiah,  in  his  'Annotata  ad  Vetiis  Testamontum,"  vol.  ii. 
(folio,  Paris,  1644),  are  of  little  value;  De  Dieu,  who  wrote  ' Animadversiones  in 
Veteris  Testamenti  Libros  Omnes '  (Leyden,  1648) ;  Schultens,  whose '  Animadversiones 
CriticJB  et  Philologicw  ad  Varia  Loca  Veteris  Testamenti '  (Amsterdam,  1709)  were 
highly  esteemed  by  Gesenius;  and  Vitringa,  whose  great  work  (' Comnientarius  in 
Librum  Prophetiarum  Jesaisa,'  2  vols,  folio,  Leuwarden,  1704-10)  is  still  regarded  as  "  a 
vast  mine  of  rich  materials  "  by  modern  critics.  This  commentary  is  characterixed  by 
considerable  learning  and  much  sound  sense,  but  is  spoilt  by  its  diffuseness. 

Towards  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  England  began  to"  show  her  interest  in 
the  study  of  the  greatest  of  Hebrew  prophets,  and  to  produce  commentaries  and  transla- 
tions. The  lead  was  taken  by  Bobert  Lowth,  Professor  of  Po  try  at  Oxford,  and  after- 
wards Bishop  of  London,  who  published,  in  1753,  a  work  on  the  '  Sacred  Poetry  of  the 
Hebrews,'  which  he  followed  up,  in  1778,  by  'Isaiah:  a  New  Translation  with  a  Pre- 
liminary Dissertation, and  Notes  Critical,  Philological,  and  Explanatory '  (1  vol.  4to).  This 
work  excited  great  attention.  It  was  translated  into  German  in  the  year  following,  by 
J.  B.  Koppe,  under  the  title,  'Dr.  E,  Lowth's  Jesaias  neu  ttbersetzt,  nebst  einer  Ein- 
leitung '  (2  vols.  8vo,  Leipzig,  1779),  and  provoked  criticism  both  in  Germany  and  in 
England.    Rocber  in  Germany  criticised  its  emendations  of  the  Hebrew  text  In  a  swiUl 


XM  INTRODUCTION  TO 


volume,  entitled, '  Vindicia  S.  Teitus  HebraBi  Esaias  VetU '  (Berae,  1786).  In  England, 
a  layman,  Mr.  M.  Dodson,  endeavoured  to  improve  upon  it  in  his  work, '  Isaiah  :  a  New 
Translation,  with  Notes  Supplementary  to  those  of  Bishop  Lowth,'  by  a  layman  (1  vol. 
8vo,  London,  1790) ;  and  this  work  was  shortly  followed  by  another  of  the  same  kind, 
from  the  pen  of  a  Dr.  Joseph  Stock,  called, '  The  Book  of  the  Prophet  Isaiah  in  Hebrew 
and  English,  the  Hebrew  metrically  arranged,  and  the  Translation  altered  from  that  of 
Bishop  Lowth,  with  Notes,'  etc.  (Bath,  1803).  Bishop  Lowth's  work  has,  however,  held 
its  ground  against  all  attacks,  and,  though  far  from  faultless,  still  deserves  the  attention 
of  students. 

A  French  translation  of  Isaiah  was  published  in  the  year  1760,  by  M.  Deschamps 
('  Esaias,  Traduction  Nouvelle,'  12mo,  Paris) ;  and  a  second  German  translation  ('  Jesaias 
neu  iibersetzt')  by  Hensler,  in  1788.  J.  C.  Doderlein  also  published  the  text,  with  a 
Latin  version  (8vo,  Altorf),  in  1780.     None  of  these  works  is  of  any  considerable  merit. 

The  first  step  in  advance  that  was  made  after  Bishop  Lowth's  labours  was  by  the 
publication  of  the  comment  and  translation  of  Gesenius  ('  Philologisch-kritischer  und 
historischer  Commentar  iiber  den  Jesaia,'  2  vols.  8vo,  Leipzig,  1820, 1821).  Gesenius, 
as  a  Hebraist,  far  excelled  Lowth.  He  possessed  more  historical  and  antiquarian  know- 
ledge. His  work,  we  are  told,  "is  hardly, yet  superseded."  He  had,  however,  the 
demerit  of  being  a  pronounced  rationalist,  an  absolute  unbeliever  in  either  miracle  or 
prophecy,  and  his  exegesis  is  thus  poor  and  shallow,  nay,  almost  wholly  worthless. 

Gesenius  was  followed  by  Hitzig,  a  writer  of  the  same  class  and  type.  Hitzig's  work 
on  Isaiah  ('  Der  Prophet  Jesaia  iibersetzt  und  ausgelehrt,'  8vo,  Heidelberg,  1833) 
intensified  Gesenius's  rationalizing  tone,  but  had  merits  which  must  not  be  denied. 
Hitzig's  intellect  is  acute,  his  historical  knowledge  extensive,  his  grasp  upon  Hebrew 
grammar  unusual.  He  is  sometimes  overbold,  sometimes  oyersubtle ;  but  the  serious 
student  can  scarcely  dispense  with  the  light  to  be  derived  from  his  explanations. 
Eosenmiiller's  '  Scholia  in  Esaiam  '  (3  vols.  8vo,  Leipzig,  1811-20)  are  also  frequently 
of  great  service,  though  he  also  belongs  to  the  rationalistic  or  sceptical  school.  Con- 
temporary with  Hitzig,  but  somewhat  later  in  publishing  his  views,  was  the  distinguished 
critic  and  historian  Ewald,  '  the  second  founder  of  the  science  of  the  Hebrew  language,' 
acute,  philosophic,  profound,  of  a  poi^tic  temperament.  Ewald's  criticism  of  Isaiah  wiU 
be  found,  partly  in  his  general  work  upon  the  prophets  ('Die  Piopheten  des  Alton 
Bundes,'  Berlin,  1st  edit.,  2  vols.  8vo,  1840-41 ;  2nd  edit.,  3  vols.  8vo,  1867-68),  partly 
in  his '  Histoiy  of  the  People  of  Israel '.('  Geschichte  des  Volkes  Israel,'  Gbttingen,  5  vols. 
8vo,  1843-55),  translated  into  English,  and  published  in  five  volumes  by  Longman, 
(London,  1869-71).  Ewald  is  to  be  read  with  caution.  He  is  overbold,  oversubtle, 
overfond  of  minute  systematizing,  and  possessed  of  an  overweening  self-confidence, 
which  makes  him  put  forward  the  merest  theories  as  ascertained  facts.  Another  com- 
mentator of  importance,  belonging  to  the  sceptical  school,  is  Knobel,  whose  work  ('  Der 
Prophet  Jesaia  erkliirt,'  forming  the  sixth  volume  of  the  '  Kurzgefasstes  Exegetisches 
Handbuch  zum  Alten  Testament,'  Leipzig,  1854,  2nd  edit.)  will  be,  for  its  linguistic 
and  archaeological  notices,  found  of  service  by  every  student. 

The  anti-rationalistic  school  in  Germany  has  not  been  idle  on  its  side  in  the  Isaian 
controversy.  Hengstenberg's  views  are  contained  in  his  '  Ghristology  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment,' translated  for  Clark's  Foreign  Theological  Library  (Edinburgh,  1854 — 7), 
and  are  well  worthy  of  attention.  Dreschler  produced,  between  1845  and  1851,  his 
valuable  treatise, '  Der  Prophet  Jesaja  iibersetzt  und  erklart,'  which  was  continued  after 
his  death  by  Hahn  and  Delitzsch.  Eleinert  had,  in  1829,  published  a  noteworthy 
defence  of  the  genuii)eness  of  the  whole  of  Isaiah  ('  Die  .^chtheit  des  Jesaias,'  Berlin, 
1829).  This  was  followed,  in  1850,  by  the  excellent  work  of  Stier  ('  Jesaias,  nicht  Pseudo- 
Jesaias,'  Barmen,  1850),  a  comment  on  ch.  xl. — Ixvi.,  "  of  real  value  for  its  spiritual 
insight;"  and  in  1866,  Delitzsch,  the  continuator  of  Dreschler,  produced  what  is 
generally  allowed  to  be  the  best  and  most  complete  of  all  existing  commentaries 
('Commentar  iiber  Jesaias,'  1st  edit.,  1866;  3rd  edit.,  1879)  which  has  been  made 
accessible  to  the  English  reader  in  Clark's  Foi  eign  Theological  Library. 

Of  recent  English  commentaries  on  Isaiah,  the  most  important  are  the  following :  Dr. 
E.  Henderson, '  The  Book  of  the  Prophet  Isaiah,  translated  from  the  Hebrew,  with  a 
Commentary,  Critical,  Philological,  and  Bxegetioal '  (1  vol.  8vo,  London,  Ist  edit.,  1848 ; 
gljd  edit.,  1857)  j  J.  A-  Alexander,  '  Isaiah,  TransUted  *nd  Explained '  (?  vols,  8vq 


THE  BOOK  Of  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  xxxi 

New  York,  1861-2) ;  Professor  Birks,  '  Commentary  on  Isaiah,  Critical,  Historical, 
and  Prophetical'  (1st  edit.,  Cambridge,  1871;  2nd  edit.,  London,  1878);  Dr.  Kay, 
'  Commentary  on  Isaiah '  (London,  Murray,  1875,  published  in  vol.  vii.  of  the  '  Speaker's 
Commentary ') ;  and  Rev.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  '  The  Prophecies  of  Isaiah,  a  New  Translation, 
with  Commentary  and  Appendices  '  (2  vols.  8vo,  London,  1882).  Of  these  the  com- 
mentaries of  Dr.  Kay  and  Mr.  Cheyne  are  specially  to  be  commended — the  former  for  its 
boldness  and  originality,  the  latter  for  its  thoroughness,  its  large  grasp  of  the  historical 
facts,  and  its  candour  and  fairness  towards  critics  of  different  views.  Both  writeri  are 
remarkable  for  their  profound  knowledge  of  Hebrew,  and  acquaintance  with  other 
kindred  dialect.^.  Mr.  Cheyne  is  distinguished  by  the  large  use  which  he  makes  of  the 
recently  discovered  cuneiform  inscriptions. 

Among  minor  works  connected  with  Isaiah,  and  worthy  of  the  student's  attention, 
may  be  enumerated,  C.  P.  Caspari's '  Beitrage  zur  Einleitung  in  das  Buch  Jesaja '  (Berlin, 
1848) ;  Meier, '  Der  Prophet  Jesaja '  (Pforzheim,  1850) ;  S.  D.  Luzzatto, '  II  Profeta  Isaia 
Volgarizzato  e  Commentate  ad  uso  degli  Israeliti '  (Padua,  1855-67) ;  G.  Vance  Smith, 
'  Prophecies  relating  to  Nineveh  and  the  Assyrians '  (1  vol.  8vo,  London,  1857) ;  Dean 
Payne  Smith, '  The  Authenticity  and  Messianic  Interpretation  of  the  Prophecies  of 
Isaiah  vindicated '  (Oxford  and  London,  1862) ;  Rev.  Rowland  Williams, '  The  Hebrew 
Prophets,'  translated  afresh  from  the  original  (2  vols.  8vo,  London,  1866-71) ;  E.  Reuss, 
'  Les  Prophetes '  (2  vols,  8vo,  Paris,  1876) ;  Neubauer  and  Dr.  Driver, '  The  Fifty-Third 
Chapter  of  Isaiah  according  to  the  Jewish  Interpreters'  (Oxford,  1877) ;  Rev.  T.  K.  Cheyne, 
'  Notes  and  Criticisms  on  the  Hebrew  Text  of  Isaiah '  (1  vol.  8vo,  London,  1868)  ;  and 
'  The  Book  of  Isaiah  chronologically  arranged '  (1  vol.  8vo,  London,  1870) ;  Klostermann, 
'Jesaja  cap.  xl. — livi.,  eine  Bitte  um  Hiilfe  in  grosser  Noth/  published  in  the  Zeitschri/t 
fwr  lutheritche  Theologie  of  1876  (pp.  1—60) ;  Urwick,  '  The  Servant  of  Jehovah ' 
(1  vol.  8vo,  Edinburgh,  1877) ;  P.  Kostlin, '  Jesaia  und  Jeremia,  Ihr  Leben  und  Wirken 
aus  ihren  Schriften  dargestellt '  (Berlin,  1879) ;  Moody-Stuart, '  The  Old  Isaiah '  (Edin- 
burgh, 1880) ;  H.  Kruger, '  Essai  sur  la  theologie  d'i^saie  xl. — Ixvi.  (Paris,  1881);  and 
W.  Robertsoa  Smith,  '  The  Prophets  of  Israel,  and  their  Place  in  History  to  the  Closo 
of  the  Eighth  Century  b.c'  (Edinburgh,  1882). 

The  following  English  translations  have  been  published,  besides  those  of  the  Autho- 
rized and  Revised  Versions :  (1)  '  The  Prophecye  of  Isaye,'  by  George  Joy,  8vo, 
Strasburg,  1531) ;  (2)  '  Isaiah,  a  New  Translation,  with  a  Preliminary  Dissertation,'  etc., 
by  Bishop  Low  th  (London,  1778) ;  (3)  '  Isaiah,  a  New  Translation,  with  Notes  supple- 
mentary >o  those  of  Bishop  Lowth,'  by  M.  Dodson  (London,  1790) ;  (4)  '  Isaiah  Versified,' 
by  Dr.  G.  Butt  (London,  1785)  ;  (5)  '  The  Book  of  Isaiah  in  Hebrew  and  English,'  by 
Dr.  Joseph  Siock  (iiath,  1803);  (6)  'Isaiah  1'ranslated,  with  Critical  and  Explanatory 
Notes,'  by  Rev.  A.  Jenour,  (Oxford,  1830);  (7)  'Isaiah  Translated,'  by  Rev.  J.  Jones 
(London,  1830) ;  and  (8)  '  The  Prophecies  of  Isaiah,  a  New  Translation,  with  Commen- 
tary and  Ajpf  endices,'  by  Rev.  X.  K._Cheyue  (London,  1882), 


THE 


BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH, 


PART  I.    EARLIER  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH 
(CH.  I.— XXXV.). 

Beotion  L    The  Gbeat  Arraignment  (ch.  l). 


EXPOSITION. 


CnAPTER  L 


Var.  1. — Title  of  the  Work.  It  i»  ques- 
tioned whether  the  title  can  be  regarded  as 
Isaiah's,  or  as  prcperly  belonging  to  the 
work,  and  it  is  suggested  that  it  is  rather  a 
hrailing  invented  by  a  collector  who  brought 
together  into  a  volume  such  prophecies  of 
Isaiah  as  were  known  to  him,  the  collection 
being  a  much  smaller  one  than  that  which 
was  made  ultimately.  In  favour  of  thii 
view  it  is  uiged  (1)  that  the  prophecies, 
as  we  ha^e  them,  do  not  all  "  concern  Judah 
and  Jerusalem ; "  (2)  that  there  is  a  misti.ke 
in  the  title,  wDiqh  Isaiah  could  not  have 
made,  none  of  the  prophecies  belonging  to 
the  reign  of  Uzziah.  But  it  may  be  an- 
swered, that,  in  the  scriptural  sense,  all 
prophecy  "  concerns  .fudah  and  Jerusalem," 
i.e.  the  people  and  city  of  God;  and, 
further,  that  it  is  quite  impossible  to  prove 
that  no  part  of  the  "vision"  was  seen  in 
the  leign  of  Uzziah.  There  are  no  means 
of  knowing  whether  Isaiah  collected  his 
prophecies  into  a  volume  himself  or  whether 
the  collection  was  the  work  of  others.  In 
either  case,  the  existitig  title  must  be  re- 
garded as  designed   foi  the  entire  work. 

IflATAH. 


All  the  earlier  prophecies — those  of  Hosea, 
Joel,  Amos,  Obadiab,  Micah,  Nahuiu,  and 
Zejiliauiah — have  some  title  introducing 
them. 

Ver.  1. — The  vision  (comp.  Obad.  i.  1  ; 
Nah.  i.  1).  The  term  is  probably  used  in 
a  collective  sense,  but  is  also  intended  to 
suggest  the  intrinsic  unity  of  the  entire  bnily 
of  propliecics  put  forth  by  Isaiah.  As  pro- 
phets were  originally  callud  "  seers"  (1  Sam. 
i».  9),  so  prophecy  was  called  "  vision  ;  " 
and  this  latter  use  continued  long  after  tjie 
oiher  (comp.  1  Cliron.  xvii.  15 ;  Ezik.  xii. 
27;  Dan.  ix.  23;  Obad.  i.  1,  etc.).  Isaian 
the  son  of  Amoz  (comp.  oh.  ii.  1 ;  xiii.  1 ; 
xxxvii.  2,  etc. ;  2  Kings  xi.  1 ;  2-  Ohron. 
xxxii.  32).  The  signification  of  tlie  name 
Isaiah  is  "  the  salvation  of  Jehovah."  The 
name  Amoz  (^Amdts)  is  not  to  be  confused 
with  Amos  ('ilmds),  who  seems  to  have  been 
a  contemporary  (Amos  i.  1).  Concerning 
Judah  and  Jerusalem.  The  iiropliecies  of 
Isaiah  concern  primarily  the  kingdum  of 
Judah,  not  that  of  Israel.  They  embrace 
a  vast  variety  of  nations  and  countries  (scu 
especially  oh.  xiii.,  xv. — xxi.,  xxiii.,  xlviL). 
but  these  nations  and  countries  are  ipokca 
of  "only  because  of  the  relation  in  which 
they  stand  to  Judah  and  Jerusalem " (Kay), 
or  at  any  rate  to  the  people  of  Goil,  sym- 
bolized under  those  names.  Jerusalem  occu- 
pies a  prominent  place  in  the  propheciea 
(see  ch.  i.  8, 21 ;  iii.  16—26;  iv.  3—6 ;  xxii. 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPUET  ISAIAH. 


[CB.  L  1—31. 


I  —8;  xxxi.  4 — 9,  etc.).  In  the  days  of  Uzziah, 
Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezeklali.  Uzziah  (or 
Azariah,  as  he  is  sometimes  called)  reigned 
flfty-two  years — probably  from  b.o.  811  to 
B.C.  759 ;  Jotham  sixteen  years — from  b.o. 

759  to  B.C.  743 ;  Ahaz  also  sixteen  years — 
from  B.o.  743  to  B.o.  727;  and  Hezukiah 
twenty-nine  years — from  B.C.  727  to  b.o. 
698.  Isaiah  probably  prophesied  only  in 
the  later  years  of  Uzziah,  say  from  B.o. 

760  ;  but  as  lie  certainly  continued  his  pro- 
phetical career  till  Sennacherib's  invasion 
of  Judsea  (oh.  xxxvii.  5),  which  was  not 
earlitr  than  b.o.  705,  he  must  have  exercised 
the  prophet's  office  for  at  least  fifty-six 
years.  The  lowest  possible  estimate  of  the 
duration  of  his  ministry  is  forty-seven  years 
— from  the  last  year  of  Uzziah,  B.C.  759,  to 
the  fourteenth  of  Hezekiah  (cli.  xxxviii.  5). 
The  highest  known  to  us  is  sixty-four  years 
— from  the  foui  th  year  before  Uzziah's  death 
(B.C.  762)  to  tlie  iast  year  of  Hezekiah  (b.o. 
698).  (See  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  vol.  v. 
p.  5.)  , 

Vers.  2 — 6.— God's  Complaint  against 
HIS  People.  The  groundwork  of  Isaiah's 
entire  prophecy  is  Judah's  defection  from 
God.  God's  people  have  sinned,  done  amiss, 
dealt  wickedly.  The  hour  of  vengeance 
approaches.  Punishment  has  begun,  and 
will  go  on,  oontinnally  increasing  in  severity. 
Nalinniil  repentance  would  avert  God'a 
judgments,  but  the  nation  will  not  repent. 
God's  vengeance  will  fall,  and  by  it  a  rem- 
nant will  be  purified,  and  return  to  God, 
and  bo  Ida  true  peoplr.  In  the  present 
section  the  indictment  is  laid.  Judah's  sins 
are  called  to  her  remembrance. 

Ver.  2. — Hear,  0  heavens,  and  give  ear, 
0  earth.  "  A  grave  and  magnificent  exor- 
dium 1  All  nature  is  invoked  to  hear  Jeho- 
vah make  complaint  of  the  ingratitude  of 
ha  people"  (Kosenmiiller).  The  invocation 
is  cast  in  the  same  form  with  that  so  common 
in  Deuteronomy  (iv.  26';  xxx.  19 ;  xxxi.  28 ; 
xxxii.  1),  and  seems  to  indicate  familiarity 
with  that  bouk.  The  idea  extends  widely 
among  sacred  and  other  poets  (see  Ps.  1. 
3,  4;  Micah  vi.  1,  2;  Ms^■h.,  'P.  V.,'  11. 
88—92).  The  Lord  hath  spoken;  rather, 
the  Lord  (literally,  Jehovah)  tpealceih  (so 
l.owth,  Cheyue,  and  ( Jeeenius).  The  speech 
of  Jehovaii  follows  in  vers.  2,  3.  I  have 
nourished  and  brought  up  children ;  lite- 
rally, (my)  sons  I  have  made  great  and  high; 
Lb,  I  iiave  raised  Israel  to  greatness  and 
cKalted  him  among  the  nations,  Notwith- 
sluuding  their  disobedience,  God  still  ac- 
knowledges them  as  his  "sons."  They  have 
rebelled  against  me.  The  verb  used  is 
generally  rendered  in  our  version  "trans- 
gressed "  (»ee  Jer.   iii.   13 ;   Hob.   vii.   13 ; 


Amos  It.  4);    but  it  may  also  haTe  the 

stronger  sense  here  assigned  it.  Lowth 
translates,  "revolted  from  me;"  Gestnius, 
"fallen  away  from  me;"  Cheyne, "  broken 
away  from  me." 

Ver.  3.— The  ox  .  .  .  the  ass.  The  ox 
and  the  ass  are  probably  selected  as  the 
least  intelligent  of  domesticated  animals 
(so  Jerome,  EosenmuUer,  and  Gesenius). 
Yet  even  they  recognize  their  owner  or 
master.  Jeremiah  contrasts  the  brutish 
stupidity  of  Israel  with  the  wise  instinct 
of  animals  that  have  not  been  domesticated, 
as  tlie  stork,  the  turtle-dove,  the  crane, 
and  the  swallow  (viii.  7).  Israel  doth  not 
know  ;  i.e.  does  not  acknowledge  its  Master 
and  Owner,  pays  him  no  respect,  does 
not  recognize  him  as  either  Owner  or  Master. 
My  people.  Compare  the  formula,  so  fre- 
quent in  Exodus,  "Let  my  people  go"  (vii. 
16;  viii.  1,  20;  ix.  1,  etc.).  Israel  was 
God's  people  by  election  (Gen.  xv.  13),  by 
covenant  (Bxod.  xix.  5 — 8;  xxiv.  3 — 8), 
by  pardoning  grace  (Exod.  xxxiii.  12 — 17). 
Despite  all  their  backslidings,  he  had  not 
yet  cast  them  off.  They  are  still  "his 
people  "  in  Isaiah  from  first  to  last,  standing 
in  contrast  with  "the  nations,"  or  "the 
Gentiles,"  among  whom  they  are  to  be  "  set 
as  a  sign"  (ch.  Ixvi.  19).  Doth  not  consider. 
GeseniuB  translates,  "doth  not  consider 
thereof; "  Cheyne,  "  is  without  understand- 
ing." Bishop  Lowth  retains  the  words  of 
the'  Authorized  Version.  The  meaning 
would  seem  to  be,  "My  people  doth  not 
consider  me,  doth  not  reflect  on  my  relation 
to  them  as  Lord  and  Master." 

Ver.  4. — Ah  sinful  nation.  These  are  the 
words  of  Isaiah,  not  of  Jehovah.  The  pro- 
phet, having  delivered  God's  message  in 
vers.  2  and  3,  proceeds  to  impress  and  en- 
force it  on  the  people  by  remarks  of  his  own. 
He  begins  with  a  lamentation  over  their 
wickedness  and  impenitence :  "  Ah  sinful 
nation  I  "  or  "Alas  for  the  sinful  nation  I " — 
the  nation  called  to  be  holy  (Exod.  xix.  6 ; 
Lev.  XX.  26,  etc.),  but  sunk  in  sin  and 
wickedness.  How  sad  their  condition  I 
How  almost  hopeless  I  Laden  with  iniquity ; 
literally,  heavy  with  guilt.  But  our  version 
well  expresses  the  sense.  As  the  psalmist 
says,  ">Iy  sins  have  gone  up  over  my  head, 
and  are  like  a  sore  burden,  too  heavy  for 
me  to  bear  "  (Ps.  xxxviii.  i ;  of.  Matt.  xi.  28). 
A  seed  of  evil-;oers.  Not  descendants  of 
evil-doors,  but  "an  evil-doing  seed,"  or 
"  race  "  ((nrep^o  iroi/Tjpiiv,  LXX, ;  comp.  oh. 
xiv.  20;  Ixi.  9;  Ixv.  23).  Children  that  are 
oorrupters ;  literally,  totu  that  do  corruptly. 
It  is  ncjt  their  corrupting  of  others,  though 
that  might  follow,  but  the  corruption  that 
was  in  themselves,  which  is  spoken  of. 
The  corruption  was  both  moral  and  doctrinal 
(see  ver.  21).  In  corroboration  of  the  fact, 
see  2  Chron.  xxvii.  2.    They  have  forsaken 


OH.  1.  1— 31.J  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


the  Lord.  Not  by  renouncing  his  worship, 
which  they  still  continued  (see  vers.  11 — 15), 
but  by  reducing  it  to  a  formality.  The 
people  "  honoured  him  witli  their  lips,  while 
their  hearts  were  far  from  him  "  (oh.  xxix. 
13).  _  They  have  provoked  to  anger ;  rather, 
despieed  (Revised  Version),  or  soorned  (Kay, 
Cheyne),  or  rejected  with  disdain  (Lowth), 
in  allusion  to  their  disobeying  his  command- 
ments (see  ve(s.  21—23).  The  Holy  One  of 
Israel.  This  title  of  God  is  a  favourite  one 
with  Isaiah  (see  oh.  v.  19,  24 ;  a.  17,  20 ; 
xii.  6;  xvii.  7;  xxix.  19,  23;  xxx.  11,  12, 
1.^;  xxxi.  1;  xxxvii.  23;  xli.  14,  16,  20; 
xlui.  3,  14;  xlv.  11;  xlix.  7;  liv.  5;  Iv.  5; 
Ix.  9, 14),  and  is  very  rarely  used  by  the  other 
sacred  writers.  We  find  it  thrice  in  the 
Psalms  (Ps.  Ixxi.  22 ;  Ixxviii.  41  ;  Ixxxix. 
18);  once  in  Kings  (2  Kings  xix.  22),  but 
then  in  the  mouth  of  Isaiah ;  twice  in 
Jeremiah  (1.  29 ;  li.  5) ;  and  once  in  Ezekiel 
(xxxix.  7).  According  to  Isaiali's  concep- 
tion of  God,  holiness  is  the  most  essential 
element  of  his  nature  (see  ch.  vi.  3,  5,  7). 
They  are  gone  away  backward;  literally, 
Ihey  are  eetranged  haclnoarda ;  or,  as  Bishop 
Lowth  paraphrases,  "they  are  estranged 
from  him ;  they  have  turned  their  back 
upon  him."  Instead  of  looking  to  God,  and 
following  after  him,  they  "  followed  a  multi- 
tude to  do  evil "  (Exod.  xxiii.  2). 

Ver.  5. — Why  should  ye,  etc.  ?  Translate, 
WTiy  ivtll  ye  be  etill  emitten,  revolting  more 
and  morei  or,  Why  will  ye  persist  in  re- 
bellion, and  to  be  smitten  yet  morel  The 
Authorized  Version  does  not  express  the 
sense,  which  is  that  suffering  miist  follow 
Bin — that  if  they  still  revolt,  tney  must  still 
be  smitten  for  it — why,  then,  will  they  do 
so  ?  Compare  Ezekiel's  ''  Why  will  ye  die, 
0  house  of  Israel  ?  "  (xviii.  31).  The  whole 
head  .  .  .  the  whole  heart.  Mr.  Cheyne 
translates,  "  Ehery  head  .  .  .  every  heart ;  " 
but  Lowth,  Gesenius,  and  Ewald  agree  with 
the  Authorized  Version.  The  prophet  per- 
sonifies Israel,  and  means  to  say  that  the 
whole  head  of  the  nation  is  diseased,  its 
whole  heart  faint,  or  "  prostrate  with  lan- 
guor "  (Kay).  The  head"  and  heart  repre- 
sent respectively  the  intellectual  and  moral 
natures. 

Ver.  6. — From  the  sole  of  the  foot  even 
unto  the  head  (comp.  Job  ii.  7).  From  top 
to  bottom,  the  body  corporate  is  diseased 
throughout  -  there  is  no  soundness  in  it 
(cf.  Ps.  xxxviii.  3,  7) — all  is  one  wound, 
<me  livid  bruise,  one  festering  sore.  Note 
the  use  of  the  singular  number  in  the  ori- 
ginal. They  have  not  been  closed ;  lite- 
rally, they  have  not  been  pressed;  which  is 
explained  to  mean  (Aben  Ezra,  Kay)  that 
they  have  not  had  the  matter  formed  by 
suppuration  pressed  out  of  them.  Xeithar 
bonnd  np ;  <.«.  not  bandaged.   Neither  moUi- 


fled  with  ointment;  rather,  with  oil.  On 
the  treatment  of  wounds  and  ulcers  with  oil 
in  ancient  times,  see  Hippocrat.,  '  De  Uloeri. 
bus,'  §  4 ;  Galen., '  De  Compos.  Medic.,'  §  2 ; 
and  comp.  Luke  x.  34.  Recent  medical 
science  has  revived  the  practice,  and  wounds 
of  all  kinds  are  now  frequently  treated  with 
nothing  but  carbolic  oil.  The  genenil 
sentiment  of  the  entire  passage  is  that 
there  has  been  no  medical  treatment  of  tho 
wounds  of  any  kind ;  they  have  been  left 
to  themselves,  to  spread  corruption  over  the 
whole  body — no  attempt  has  been  made  tu 
cure  them. 

Ver.  7. — Tour  ooantry  is  desolate.  Me- 
taphor is  now  dropped,  and  the  prophet 
describes  in  strong  but  simple  language  the 
judgments  of  God,  which  have  already  fol- 
lowed the  sins  of  the  nation.  First  of  all, 
their  land  is  "  a  desolation."  It  has  been 
recently  ravaged  by  an  enemy ;  the  towns 
have  been  burnt,  the  crops  devoured. 
There  is  nothing  to  determine  who  the 
enemy  had  been.  Knobel  supposes  the 
Edomites  and  Philistines,  who  invaded 
Judaea  in  the  time  of  Ahaz  (2  Chron.  xxviii. 
17,  18),  to  be  intended;  Rosenmiiller  sug- 
gests the  Israelites  under  Amaziah  (2 Chron. 
XXV.  21 — 24);  while  Mr.  Cheyne  supposes  the 
devastation  to  have  been  wrought  by  the 
Assyrians  under  Sargon.  If  we  could  be 
assured  that  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  are 
arranged  in  chronological  order,  we  should 
either  have  to  accept  Rosenmiiller's  view, 
or  to  suppose  some  invasion  of  Judsea  to 
have  taken  place  in  the  later  years  of 
Uzziah  of  which  no  mention  is  made  by 
the  authors  of  Kings  and  Chronicles;  but 
it  is  impossible  to  be  certain  on  what  prin- 
ciple Isaiah's  prophecies  are  arranged.  The 
mention  of  "  strangers  "  is  in  favour  of  the 
enemy  having  been  actual  foreigners,  and 
therefore  not  the  Israelites.  Yen;  cities  are 
burned  with  fire.  The  common  fate  of 
cities  taken  in  war.  In  the  Assyrian  sculp- 
tures we  often  see  the  torch  applied  to 
them.  Your  land.  Mr.  Cheyne  translates, 
"  your  tillage."  Adamah  means  "  soil "  or 
"  ground  "  generally ;  but  here  no  doubt 
denotes  the  ground  which  bore  crops. 
Strangers  devour  it;  i.e.  "foreigners" — 
others  than  the  sons  of  the  soil — not  neces- 
sarily persons  of  a  different  race,  but  still 
probably  such  persons.  In  your  presence ; 
before  your  eyas,  as  you  look  on — an 
aggravation  of  the  Rfiiiction.  It  is  desolate, 
as  overthrown  by  strangers ;  liti  rally,  it  is 
a  desolation,  Wee  an  overthrow  by  strangers. 
The  near  aiiproach  to  repetition  displeases 
modems,  who  conjecture  (1)  that  zarim, 
strangers,  has  another  meaning,  and  should 
be  here  translated  by  "  inundation  "  or 
"  deluge  "  (Aben  Ezra,  Miohaelis,  Lowth) ; 
or  (2)  that  it  is  a  wrong  reading,  and  should 


THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH, 


[OH.1.  1— 31. 


be  altered  Into  eodim,  a  word  not  very 
differunt  (Ewulil,  Cheyne).  But  "the 
return  to  wor.ld  whose  Bounds  are  yet 
lingering  in  tlie  ear"  is  characteristic  of 
ancient  writing,  and  a  favourite  practice  of 
Isaiah's  (Kay).  The  translation  of  the 
Authorized  Version  may  therefore  stand. 

Ver.  8.— The  daughter  of  Zion.  Not  "  the 
faithful  Cluu-i  h  "  (Kay),  but  the  city  of 
Jerusalem,  wb  ich  is  thus  personified.  Comj). 
ch.  xlvii.  1,  5,  where  Babylon  is  called  the 
"daughter  of  the  Chaldeans;"  and  Lam.  i. 
6;  ii.  1,  i,  8,  10,  wbcie  the  phrase  here 
used  is  repeated  in  the  s;ime  sense.  More 
commonly  it  designates  the  people  without 
the  city  (Lam.  ii.  13 ;  iv.  22 ;  Mioah  iii. 
8,  10,  13;  Zeph.  iii.  14;  Zech.  ii.  10; 
ix.  9,  etc.).  As  a  cottage ;  rather,  as  a  bnnlh 
(Kevised  Version  ;  si  e  Lev.  xxiii  12).  Vine- 
yards required  to  be  watcbed  for  a  few 
weeks  only  as  the  fruit  began  to  ripen ;  and 
the  watchers,  or  keeptrs,  built  themselves, 
therefore,  mere  "  booths  "  for  their  protectinu 
(Job  xxvii.  18).  Tli(  se  were  frail,  solitary 
dwellings — very  forlorn,  very  helpless. 
Such  was  now  Jerusalem.  As  a  lodge  in 
a  garden  of  cucumbers.  Cucumber-gardens 
required  watching  throughout  the  season, 
i.e.  from  spring  to  autumn,  and  their 
watcher  needed  a  more  solid  edifice  than  a 
booth.  Hence  such  gardens  had  "lodges" 
in  them,  i.e.  permanent  huts  or  sheds,  such 
as  those  still  seen  in  Palestine  (Tristram's 
'Natural  History  of  Palestine,'  p.  442). 
As  a  besieged  city.  Though  not  yet  be- 
sieged, Jerusalem  is  as  if  besieged — isolated, 
surrounded  by  waste  tracts,  threatened. 

Ver.  9. — Except  the  lord  of  hosts  had 
left  unto  us  a  very  small  remnant,  we  should 
have  been  as  Sodom.  Lowth  and  Cheyne 
prefer  to  divide  the  two  clauses  differently, 
and  to  translate,  "  Except  the  Lord  of 
bosts  had  left  us  a  remnant,  within  a  little 
we  should  have  been  like  Sodim."  The 
"remnant"  is  that  of  the  few  godly  men 
who  still  inhabit  Jerusalem.  The  com- 
parison of  Jerusalem  with  Sodom  is  "made 
again  in  ch.  iii.  9,  and  is  carried  out  at 
some  length  by  Ezekiel  (xvi.  44 — 57).  It 
implies  a  condition  of  extieine  depravity. 

Vers.   10 — 15. — The  People's   Plea  no 

KXCTJSE,     BtJT    AN    AOOEAVATION    OF    THEIR 

GxjiLT.  The  prophet  supposes  the  people, 
by  the  mouth  of  their  rulers,  to  meet 
the  charge  of  rebellion  with  an  appeal  to 
the  fact  that  they  maintain  all  the  outward 
ordinances  of  religion,  as  required  by  the 
Law,  and  are  therefore  blameless.  This 
draws  from  him  a  bur.-it  of  indignant 
eloquence,  which  the  Holy  Spirit  directs 
him  to  put,  mainly,  into  the  mouth  of 
God    (vers.    IX — 15),    denouncing    such  a 


pretence  of  religion  as  an  aggravation  of 
their  sin,  and  oharuolerizing  their  whole 
worship  as  an  "  abomination." 

Ver.  10.— Hear  the  word  of  the  lord  ;  i.e. 
"Do  not  epedk  to  no  purpose,  but  hear." 
The  ruleis  are  supposed  to  have  begun  their 
plea,  but  the  prophet  stops  them.  Ye  mlers 
of  Sodom.  Having  said  in  the  preceding 
verse  how  nearly  Jerusalem  had  suffered 
tbe  fate  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  the  writer 
grows  more  bold,  and  proceeds  to  give  Jeru- 
salem the  obnoxious  names.  Her  "  rulers," 
literally,  judges  Qcatsin  in  Hebrew  corre- 
sponding to  kadi  in  Arabic),  are  "  rulers  of 
Sodom ; "  her  people  are  the  "  people  of 
Gomorrah."  There  is  as  much  wickedness, 
though  it  may  be  not  the  same  wiekeduess, 
in  "  the  daughter  of  Zion  "  at  the  existing 
time,  as  in  the  cities  of  the  plain  when  God 
destroyed  them.  The  law  of  our  God.  Not 
the  Levitioal  Law,  though  the  word  used 
has  generally  that  sense,  but  the  "in- 
struction "  or  "  direction  "  tl  lat  was  about  to 
be  uttered  (comp.  Ps.  Ixsviii.  1 ;  and  see 
below,  ch.  ii.  3  and  Ii.  4).  See  Mr.  Cheyne's 
note  on  the  passage. 

Ver.  11. — To  what  purpose  is  the  multi- 
tude of  your  sacrifices  unto  me  ?  Cui  bnno  1 
What  good  end  do  tliey  serve?  "  Thinkest 
thou  that  I  will  eat  (he  flesh  of  bulls,  and 
drink  the  blood  of  goats  ?  "  (Ps.  1.  1 3).  God 
"duliglus  not  in  burnt  oUerings."  From 
the  time  of  Samuel  he  had  decliired, 
"  Beli^  Id,  to  obey  is  better  then  sacrifice, 
and  to  hearken  thin  the  fat  of  rams" 
(1  Sam.  XV.  22).  Daviil  had  said  of  him, 
"  Sacrifice  and  mi  at  offering  thou  wouldest 
not;  burnt  ofTcriiigs  aniKsacrifice  for  sin 
hast  thou  not  requii  ed  "  (Ps.  xl.  8,  9) ;  and 
again,  "  I  will  not  reprove  thee  because  of 
thy  sacrifices,  or  for  thy  burnt  offerings, 
because  they  were  not  always  before  me. 
I  will  take  no  bullock  out  of  thy  house,  nor 
he- goat  out  of  thy  folds;  for  all  the  beasts 
of  the  forest  are  mine,  and  so  are  the  cattle 
upon  a  thousand  hills"  (Ps.  1.  8 — 10).  Not, 
of  course,  that  either  David  or  Isaiah 
desired  to  abolish  saciifice,  or  had  any  com- 
mission so  to  do ;  but  they  were,  both  of 
them,  anxious  to  impress  on  men  that  >a- 
crilice,  by  itself,  was  nothing — that  self- 
dedication,  self-renunciation,  true  devotion 
of  the  heart,  with  its  necessary  concomitant 
obedience,  must  accompany  sacrifice,  for 
God  to  be  pleased  therewith.  Tlie  sacrifices 
of  a  people  such  as  is  described  in  vers. 
21 — 23  could  not  but  be  an  offence  to  him. 
Saith  the  Lord.  The  phrase  employed  is 
unusual,  and  almost  confined  to  Isaiah, 
occurring  elsewhere  only  in  Ps.  xii.  5. 
Isaiah  uses  it  again  in  ver.  18,  and  also  in 
ch.  xxxiii.  10;  xli.  21  ;  and  Ixvi.  9.  It  ii 
explained  to  be  emjihatic,  implying  that 
this  is  what  God  says,  and  will  suy,  con- 


aa.  1. 1—31.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


oeming  the  matter  in  hand,  once  nnd  for 
ever  (Kay).  I  am  full  of  the  burnt  offerings 
of  rams;  rfitlur,  /  am  overfull,  saliafed, 
wearied  with  tlum.  Hams  fonned  a  part 
of  the  reqiiired  sacrifice  on  all  great  occa- 
sions, as  nt  tlie  Passover  (Numb,  xxviii.  19), 
at  the  Keast  of  Weeks  (Xumb.  xxviii.  27),  at 
tlie  Feast  of  Tabernacles  (Numb.  xxix.  13, 
17,  20,  23,  26,  29,  32,  3U),  at  the  Feast  of 
Trumpets  (Numb.  xxix.  2),  and  on  tlie 
great  Day  of  Atonement  (Numb.  xxix. 
S).  They  were  commanded  as  the  sole 
sacrifice  for  a  ti'espass  ofleriiig  (Lev.  v.  16, 
18).  Under  David  were  oli'ered  on  one 
occasion  "a  thousand  rams"  (1  Chron. 
xxix.  21);  and  the  occasions  where  seven 
rams  foimed  the  legitimate  sacrifice  were 
niaTiy.  Unaccompn.nied  by  a  proper  frame 
of  mind,  each  such  offering  was  an  oilence 
to  God,  displeased  liim,  wearied  him.  _  The 
fat  of  fed  boasts.  The  fat  was  always 
regarded,  both  by  the  Hebrews  and  the 
(iroelcB,  as  especially  suitable  for  sacrifice. 
It  was  burnt  upon  the  altar  in  every  case, 
even  where  the  {!;reater  part  of  the  victim 
was  consumed  as  food  (see  Lev.  i.  8,  12 ;  iii. 
3,  10,  etc.;  note  particularly  the  expression 
in  Lev.  iii.  16,  "  All  the  fat" is  the  Lord's  "). 
"  Fed  beasts "  are  those  which  were  kept 
separate  in  sfalla  or  slieds  for  some  time 
before  the  sacrifice,  and  given  food  in  which 
tliere  was  nothing  "  unclean."  The  Paschal 
lambs  were  required  to  be  thus  separated 
and  fed  for  four  days  (Exod.  xii.  3,  G).  I 
delfght  not  in  the  blood.  The  blood, 
"  which  is  the  life  "  (Lev.  xvii.  14),  was  to 
be  sprinkled  on  the  altar  in  every  sacrifice 
of  a  victim.  This  sprinkling  was  of  the 
very  essence  of  the  saciifice  (Lev.  i.  5;  iii. 
2,  8,  13 ;  iv.  6,  17,  25,  30,  etc.).  Bullocks 
.  .  .  lambs  .  .  .  he-goats.  These,  together 
with  rams,  constituted  all  the  sacrificial 
beasts  of  the  Hebrews. 

Ver.  12. — When  ye  come  to  appear  before 
mo.  Mr.  Cheyne  translates,  "  to  see  my 
face ;  "  but  most  other  commentators  (Gese- 
nius,  Delitzsch,  Ewald,  Kay)  regard  the 
phrase  used  as  equivalent  to  that  employed 
in  Exod.  xxiii.  17;  xx±iv.23;  Deut.  xvi.  16; 
and  the  passage  as  referring  to  that  attend- 
ance in  the  temple  at  the  three  great  annual 
festivals,  which  was  requiied  of  all  adult 
male  Israelites.  The  requiiement  of  the 
Law  was  still  observed  in  the  letter,  but 
not  in  the  spirit.  They  came  with  no  true 
religious  object  Hence  the  question  whicli 
follows:  Who  hath  required  this  at  your 
hand,  to  tread  my  courts  j  This  was  not 
what  God  had  enjoined — a  mere  bodily 
attendance,  a  trampling  of  his  courts  with 
their  feet,  when  their  hearts  were  far  from 
him. 

Ver.  13. — Bring  no  more  vain  oblations. 
The    command    is  not    "  Bring    no    more 


oblations,"  as  though  the  daily  oblation  was 
to  cease ;  but  "  bring  no  more  oblations 
that  are  vain  ones,"  i.e.  empty  and  unreal — 
mere  forms,  without  the  proper  correspond- 
ing spirit.  The  "  oblation  "  spoken  of  is  the 
mTOoAoA,  or  "  meat  offering,"  of  Lev.  ii.  1  — 
11 ;  Numb,  xxviii.  12 — 31,  which  was  a  cakf 
of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil,  and  generally 
had  incense  joined  with  it,  which  explain, 
the  nexus  of  this  clause  with  the  following 
one.  Inoense  is  an  abomination  onto  me. 
God  had  commanded  the  use  of  incense  in 
worship,  as  he  had  commanded  burnt  offer- 
ings and  oblations  (Exod.  xxx.  1 — 8,  34 — 38 ; 
Lev.  ii.  2 ;  xvi.  12,  13).  But  incense  sym- 
b'^ized  prayer  (Ps.  oxli.  2) ;  and  if  no  heart- 
felt prayer  accompanied  its  use,  it  was 
emptied  of  all  its  significance,  and  became 
hateful  to  God — a  mere  form,  and  conse- 
quently an  "  abominatien."  The  new  moons 
and  sabbaths,  the  calling  of  assemblies,  I 
cannot  away  with.  The  weekly  festival  of 
the  sabbath,  the  monthly  one  of  the  "  new 
moon,"  and  the  annual  "  assemblies "  or 
"  solemn  feasts  "  (2  Chron.  viii.  13),  were  the 
main  occasions  of  Jewish  worship.  As  at 
this  time  conducted,  God  could  eiidure  none 
of  them;  all  were  tainted  with  the  preva- 
lent unreality.  The  construction  of  the 
passage  is  highly  rhetorical,  and  indicates 
great  excitement  of  feeling.  Kay  translates 
it  literally,  ''  New  moon  and  sabbath,  the 
calling  of  assemblies,  I  cannot — it  is 
ungodliness — even  the  solemn  meeting." 
The  authors  of  the  Revised  Version  also 
suppose  am  aposiopesis.  The  solemn  meet- 
ing. The  word  thus  translated  is  applied 
only  to  pai*ticular  days  in  the  great  festival 
seasons,  as  to  the  eighth  day  of  the  Feast 
of  Tabernacles  (Lev.  xxiii.  36;  Numb.  xxix. 
35 ;  Neb.  viii.  18),  and  the  seventh  day  of 
the  Passover  (Deut.  xvi.  8),  or  else  to  dn\  s 
specially  appointed  for  religious  services  h\ 
civil  authority  (2  Kings  x.  20  ;  2  Chron.  vii. 
9 ;  Joel  i.  14 ;  ii.  l.'i).  The  meaning  thus 
is,  that  even  the  very  highest  occasions  ol 
religious  worship  were  abused  by  the  Is- 
raelites of  the  time,  and  made  an  offence  to 
God. 

Ver.  14. — Your  new  moons.  (For  the 
ceremonies  to  be  observed  at  the  opening  of 
eachmonth,see  Numli.  xxviii.  11 — 15.)  Your 
appointed  feasts.  The  "appointed  feasts" 
are  the  great  festival-times — the  Feast  of 
Unleavened  Bread,  the  Feast  of  Weeks,  and 
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  They  do  not 
include  the  sabbath  or  the  "  new  moon," 
with  which  they  are,  both  here  and  else- 
where (1  Chron.  xxiii.  31 ;  2  Chron.  ixxi.  3). 
contrasted.  They  are  a  trouble  unto  me ; 
literally,  an  encumbrance  (see  Deut.  i.  12). 

Ver.  15. — I  will  hide  mine  eyes,  etc.  A 
time  comes  when  the  wicked  are  alarmed, 
and  seek  to  turn  to  God  ;  but  it  is  too  late 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOFHET  ISAIAH. 


[CH.  1.  1—31. 


"Then  Bhall  they  call  upon  me,  but  I 
will  not  answer ;  liiey  shall  seek  me  3aily, 
but  they  shall  not  find  me  "  (Piov.  i.  28). 
When  ye  make  many  prayers;  literally, 
multiply  prayer.  Full  of  blood  (comp.  ver. 
21).  Actual  bloodshed  may  be  poiuted  at, 
as  the  murder  of  Zechariah  (2  Chron.  xxiv 
21),  and  the  fate  which  befeU  Isaiah  himself, 
according  to  the  tradition,  would  seem  to 
show.  But  cruelty  and  oppression,  produc- 
ing poverty  and  wretchedness,  and  tending 
to  shorten  life,  are  no  doubt  also  included 
(comp.  Mioah  ili.  10,  11).  These  were  the 
special  sins  of  the  time  (see  vers.  17,  23). 

Vers.  16 — 20. — The  Eequirement  ov 
God — Amendment  of  Life.  God,  having 
put  aside  the  worthless  plea  _of  outward 
religiousness  made  by  his  people,  goes  on 
to  declare,  by  the  mouth  of  his  prophet, 
what  he  requires.  First,  in  general  terms 
(ver.  16),  and  then  with  distinct  specifica- 
tion (ver.  17),  he  calls  on  them  to  amend 
their  ways,  both  negatively  ("  cease  to  do 
evil ")  and  positively  ("  learn  to  do  well "). 
If  they  will  really  amend,  then  he  assures 
them  of  forgiveness  and  favour;  if  they 
refuse  and  continue  their  rebellion,  the 
sword  will  devour  them. 

Ver.  16. — Wash  you,  make  you  elean. 
The  analogy  of  sin  to  defilement,  and  of 
washing  to  cleansing  from  sin,  has  been  felt 
among  men  universally  wherever  there  has 
been  any  sense  of  sin.  Outward  purification 
by  water  has  been  constantly  made  use  of 
as  typical  of  the  recovery  of  inward  purity. 
Hence  the  numerous  washings  of  the  Levi- 
tical  Law  <'Exod.  xxix.  4 ;  Lev.  i.  9,  13 ; 
Numb.  xix.  7,  8, 19 ;  Deut.  xxi.  6 ;  xxiii.  11 ; 
etc.) ;  hence  the  ablutions  of  the  priests  in 
Egypt  (Herod.,  ii.  37) ;  hence  the  appro- 
priateness of  the  rite  of  baptism ;  hence  the 
symbolical  washing  of  hands  to  free  from 
complicity  in  blood-guiltiness  (Matt,  xxvii. 
24).  "  Wash  you,  make  you  clean,"  could 
not  be  misunderstood  by  the  Israelites ;  they 
would  know  that  it  was  a  requirement  to 
"  wash  their  hands  in  inuocency "  (Ps. 
xxvi.  6;  Ixxiii.  13),  even  apart  from  what 
follows.  Put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings 
trom  before  mine  eyes.  Not  "  hide  it,"  for 
that  was  impossible;  but  remove  it  alto- 
gether— in  other  words,  "  cease  from  it." 
"  Cast  off  all  the  works  of  darkness ;  "  get 
rid  of  evil,  to  begin  with.  So  much  is 
negative. 

Ver.  17. — Leam  to  do  well.  Now  comes 
the  positive;  first,  in  the  general  form — 
"  learn,"  etc. ;  which  resembles  the  apostle's 
"  Put  on  the  armour  of  light "  (Kom.  xiii.  12). 
Then  follow  the  particulars.  Seek  judg- 
ment ;  or,  leek  outjuUice  ;  i.e.  endeavour  to 


get  justice  done  to  all  men ;  see  that  they 
"  have  right."  Believe  the  oppressed.  So 
the  LXX.,  the  Vulgate,  the  Syriac,  and  tlie 
Chaldean  Versions.  But  the  word  translated 
"  oppressed "  is  thought  by  many  to  mean 
"oppressor"  (Kimohi,  Gesenius,  Cheyne). 
This  is  certainly  its  meaning  in  Ps.  Ixxi.  4. 
Translate,  righten  the  (^pressor ;  i.e.  coireot 
and  chasten  him.  Judge  the  fatherless; 
rather,  do  justice  to  the  orphan  (Cheyne) ;  see 
that  he  is  not  wronged — be  his  champion. 
Plead  for  the  widow;  i.e.  plead  her  cause 
in  the  courts ;  or,  if  judge,  and  she  have  no 
advocate,  lean  towards  her,  as  if  her 
advocate.  The  widow  and  the  orphan 
were  taken  under  God's  special  protection 
from  the  time  of  Moses,  and  constantly  com- 
mended to  the  tender  care  of  the  righteous 
(Bxod.  xxii.  22—24;  Deut.  x.  18;  xxiv.  17  ; 
xxvii.  19,  etc.). 

Ver.  18.— Come  now,  and  let  us  reason 
together.  God  has  from  time  to  time 
permitted  man  to  reason  with  him  (Gen. 
xviii.  23—32;  Exod.  iv.  1—17;  Job  xxiii. 
3 — 7  ;  Micah  vi.  2) ;  but  it  is  difBoult  to 
see  that  there  is  any  "  reasoning  "  or  "  con- 
troversy" here.  Mr.  Cheyne  translates, 
"Let  UB  bring  our  -dispute  to  an  end." 
Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  .  .  .  like 
crimson ;  t.e.  "  open,  evident,  glaiing."  Or 
there  may  he  an  allusion  to  their  blood- 
guiltiness  (see  vers.  15,  19).  They  shall  he 
as  white  as  snow.  Comp.  Ps.  li.  7,  which  is 
completely  parallel,  whether  it  was  written 
before  or  after.  There  can  be  no  better 
imago  of  purity  than  snow  (comp.  Job  ix. 
30 ;  Lam.  iv.  7).  As  wool.  A  weaker 
illustration  than  the  preceding  one,  but 
needed  for  the  parallelism,  ('fhe  resem- 
blance of  falling  snow  to  wool  is  noted  in 
Ps.  cxlvii.  16.) 

Ver.  19.— If  ye  be  willing  and  obedient. 
Kosenmiiller  explains  this  as  equivalent  to 
"if  ye  be  willing  to  obey"  (of.  Ezek.  iii. 
7);  but  perhaps  it  is  better  to  give  each 
verb  its  separate  force :  "  If  you  consent  in 
your  wills,  and  are  also  obedient  in  your 
actions ''  (so  Kay).  Ye  shall  eat  the  good 
of  the  land;  i.e.  there  shall  be  no  invasion; 
strangers  shall  not  devour  your  crops  (see 
ver.  7) ;  you  shall  consume  them  your- 
selves. "  The  good  of  the  land  "  is  a  com- 
mon expression  for  its  produce  (Gen.  xlv. 
18,  20;  Ezra  ix.  12;  Neh.  ix.  36;  Jer. 
ii.  7). 

Ver.  20. — If  ye  refuse  and  rebel ;  i.e.  '« U 
ye  neither  consent  in  will,  nor  obey  in  act," 
antithetical  to  the  two  verbs  in  the  first 
clause  of  ver.  19.  Ye  shall  be  devoured; 
or,  ye  shall  he  eaten.  The  same  verb  as  in 
the  latter  clause  of  vor.  19.  With  the  sword. 
The  metaphor  is  not  a  common  one,  but 
orcura  in  Jeitmiah  (ii.  30;  xii.  12;  xlvi. 
10,  14)  and  Nahum  fii.  13).    The  mouth  of 


IIH.I.1— 31.] 


THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


the  Lord  hath  spoken  it.  A  weighty  end- 
ing, indicating  the  certainty  of  fulfilment. 
Jeiiovah,  who  cannot  lie,  hag  spol^en ;  the 
result  will  assuredly  follow. 

Vers.  21 — 23. — Isaiah's  Lament  over 
Jebusaleu.  The  exhortation  to  amendment 
has  been  made — the  results  have  been  set 
forth;  the  temporal  reward  has  been  pro- 
mised ;  the  temporal  vengeance,  unless  they 
amend,  threatened.  Time  must  be  allowed 
the  people  for  the  prophet's  words  to  reach 
them,  and  do  their  work  upon  them,  i.e. 
either  soften  or  harden  them.  Meanwhile, 
[saiah  reflects  on  the  condition  of  Jerusalem, 
and  the  unlikelihood  of  its  rulers  turning  to 
God  in  consequence  of  his  preaching. 

Ver.  21. — How  is  the  faithful  city  become 
an  harlot !  Not  here  an  idolatress,  but  one 
that  has  left  her  first  love,  and  turned  to 
uthra  attractions.  Faithful  once  to  her  lord 
lier  spouse  (Cant.,  paitim),  she  has  now  cast 
him  off — she  is  an  adulteroua  wife,  she  no 
longer  obeys  or  loves  her  husband.  It  was 
full  of  judgment ;  righteousness,  etc.  "  She 
that  was  Ml"  (Revised  Version).  Under 
Soloiiion  (1  Kings  iii.  9-28)  and  again 
under  Jehoshaphat  (2  Chron.  xix.  5—11). 
It  ii  not  clear  when  the  systematic  perver- 
sion of  justice  by  the  rulers  began.  Perhaps 
it  originated  in  the  latter  part  of  Uzziah's 
reign,  when  the  royal  authority  was  weak- 
ened by  being  divided  between  Uzziah  and 
Jotham  (2  Ohron.  ixvi.  21).  But  now 
murderers  (see  the  last  note  on  ver.  15). 

Ver.  22. — Thy  silver  is  become  dross. 
Primarily, "thy  great  men  have  deteriorated." 
Prom  pure  silver,  they  have  become  mere 
dross,  the  vile  refuse  ofthe  smelted  ore,  only 
fit  to  be  cast  away  as  worthless.  But  per- 
haps there  is  some  further  reference  to  all 
that  was  once  precious  in  Jerusalem ;  there 
had  been  a  general  deterioration — all  the 
silver  was  now  a  debased  metal  of  no  value. 
Thy  wine  mixed  with  water.  A  parallelism ; 
but  (as  80  often  happens)  a  weakened  itera- 
tion of  tlie  preceding  sentiment. 

Ver.  23. — Thy  prxnoes  are  rebellious ;  i.e. 
"  rebels  against  their  true  King,  Jehovah." 
Companions  of  thieves.  Leagued  with  those 
who  are  engaged  in  filching  away  the  in- 
heritance of  the  widow  and  the  orphan  by 
cliicane  in  the  law  courts  (see  above,  vers. 
15 — 17 ;  and  compare  the  Homiletics  on  vers. 
16  -  20).  Gifts  .  .  .  rewards ;  i.e.  "  bribes," 
given  and  taken  on  the  condition  of  their 
perverting  justice  (comp.  Jer.  xiii.  17; 
h^zok.  xxii.  12  ;  Micah  iii.  11;  vii.  3).  They 
judge  not  the  fatherless,  etc.  They  dismiss 
the  orplian's  complaint  without  hearing  it, 
and  are  so  noted  for  perversion  of  justice  that 
the  widow  does  not  even  bring  her  cause 
before  them. 


Vers.  24 — 31 . — Thb  Dbolabation  of  God's. 
JrDGMEKT.  It  is  foreknown  to  (Jed  that 
Israel  will  not  repent.  He  therefore  fulmi- 
nates his  judgment ;  which,  however,  is  still 
conditional,  so  far  as  individuals  are  con- 
cerned. His  vengeance  will  fall  upon  the 
land ;  but  the  result  will  be  twofold. 
Destruction  will  come  upon  the  unrighteous 
and  the  sinners  (ver.  28) — they  will  be  "con- 
sumed "(ver.  28),  and  "confounded"  (ver. 
29) ;  but  there  will  be  some  on  whom  the 
punishment  will  have  a  purifying  power, 
whose  dross  it  will  purge  away,  and  whom 
it  will  convert  to  God  (vers.  25,  27).  From 
these  will  rise  up  a  new  Jerusalem — a  "  city 
of  righteousness,"  a  "  faithful  stronghold  " 
(ver.  26). 

Ver.  24.— The  lord,  the  lord  of  hosts.  In 
the  original,  Ha-Adon,  Jehovah  Sahaath — 
i.e.  "  The  Lord  "  (or  "  Master  "  of  men  and 
angels), "  the  Belf-Existing  One  of  the  hosts 
of  heaven  " — t.e.  their  God,  the  only  proper 
object  of  their  worship.  It  gives  peculiar 
weight  and  significance  to  this  prophecy, 
that  it  is  introduced  by  a  triple  designation 
of  the  Divine  Being.  The  Mighty  One  of 
Israel.  A  very  unusual  designation,  only 
found  here  and,  with  the  modification  of 
"Jacob"  for  "Israel,"  in  the  following 
places;  ch.  xlix.  26 ;  Ix.  16 ;  Gen.  xlix.  24  ; 
Ps.  cxxxii.  2,  5.  GJod's  might  would  be 
shown  alike  in  his  vengeance  on  bis 
enemies,  and  in  his  purification  of  a  remnant 
to  serve  him.  I  will  ease  me  of  mine 
adversaries ;  literally,  I  will  comfort  me ;  i.e. 
I  will  rid  myself  of  them,  and  so  obtain  the 
only  comfort  that  they  will  allow  me  to 
receive  from  them  (comp.  Ezek.  v.  13,  "  I 
will  cause  my  fury  to  rest  upon  them,  and 
I  will  be  comforted  "). 

Ver.  25. — I  will  turn  my  hand  upon  thee ; 
rather,  I  will  bring  back  my  hand  upon  thee ; 
i.e.  I  will  once  more  put  forth  the  "  strong 
hand  and  mighty  aim,"  with  which  I  brought 
thee  out  of  Bj<ypt  (Ps.  cxxxvi.  12),  and  will 
work  another  deliverance — the  deliverance  of 
Israel  out  of  captivity.  Purely  purge  away 
thy  dross ;  literally,  will  purge  away  thy  dross 
like  borax,  which  was  used  as  a  flux  in  puri- 
fying the  metal.  The  prophet  continues  the 
metaphor  of  ver.  22.  And  take  away  all  thy 
tin;  rather,  thy  lead — the  alloy  with  which 
the  "  silver  "  had  become  mixed. 

Ver.  26. — I  will  restore  thy  judges  a>  at 
the  first  (see  Exod.  xix.  25,  26).  In  the  early 
times  there  was  no  bribery,  no  perversion  of 
justice  (Jer.  ii.  2,  3).  God  will  bring  back 
a  time  when  the  nation  will  renew  its  first 
love,  and  be  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Moses 
and  Joshua.  Thy  counsellors  (comp.  2  Sam. 
XV.  12;    1  Chron.  xxvi.  J4;  xxvii.  32,  33^ 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


[oh.  1. 1—31. 


etc.).  The  city  of  righteousness;  or,  of 
iuitice.  The  proplieoy  may  have  been  ful- 
filled in  part  by  the  earthly  Jerusalem  under 
Zenibbabel,  Ezra,  and  the  Maccabees,  but  « 
mainly  fulfilled  in  the  heavenly  Jerusalem 
— ^the  Church  of  God,  the  true  Israel.  The 
faithful  city  (comp.  ver.  21).  Certainly,  the 
post-Captivity  Church  was  "  faithful "  to 
Jehovah,  in  the  way  of  acknowledging  him, 
and  him  only,  to  be  God,  to  a  very  remark- 
able degrie,  and  in  strong  contrast  to  its 
inclination  during  pre-Captivity  times. 

Ver.  27. — Eedeemed  with  judgment; 
rather,  delivered  through  judgment  ^  i.e.  God's 
judgment  shall  have  the  effect  of  "deliver- 
ing" a  remnant,  who  shall  build  up  Zion 
once  more,  and  dwell  in  it.  Her  converts ; 
i.e.  those  of  iier  children  who  turn  to  (Jod, 
shall  be  delivered  through  God's  righttous- 
ness.  I.e.  through  the  righteous  vengeance 
which  he  txeeiites  upon  the  unfaithful 
nation.  Some,  however,  understand  both 
clauses  to  mean  tliat  the  penitent  remnant 
shall  "deliver  their  own  souls  by  their 
righteousness "  (comp.  Ezek.  xiv.  14,  20 ; 
xviii.  27,  etc.). 

Ver.  28. — ■Transgressors  .  ,  .  sinners  .  .  . 
they  that  forsake  the  Lord  (cnmp.  vers.  2 
and  4).  These  are  scarcely  distinct  cla.s8es — 
lather  diiferent  names  for  the  ungodly.  All 
of  them,  by  whatever  name  they  were  called, 
would  perish  "  together." 


Ver.  29. — ^The  oaka  which  ye  ha^e  desired 
are,  primarily,  the  "green  trees"  under 
which  images  were  set  up  (2  Kingi  xvii.  10), 
but  perhaps  represent  also  any  worldly 
attractions  which  draw  the  soul  away  from 
God — as  wealth,  or  power,  or  honours.  In 
the  day  of  suffering,  sinners  are  ashamed  of 
having  been  led  away  by  such  poor  tempta- 
tions as  those  to  which  they  have  yieldeil 
(comp.  Rom.  vi.  21,  "  What  fruit  had  ye 
then  in  tliose  things  whereof  ye  are  now 
asl  lamed  ?").  The  gardens,  Kay  suggests 
"  idolatrous  pleasure-gardens  as  those  at 
Daphne,  near  Antiooh,"  which  is  a  reason- 
able exegesis.  Such  were  probably  to  be 
found  wherever  Astart^,  or  the  "  Dea  Syra," 
was  worshipped. 

Ver.  30. — Ye  shall  be  as  an  oak,  etc.  Con- 
trast the  case  of  the  godly,  whose  "leaf 
shall  not  wither"  (Ps.  i.  3). 

Ver.  31. — The  strong  (literally,  the  strong 
one)  shall  he  as  tow ;  i.e.  weak  and  powerles  i 
(cnmp.  Judg.  xvi.  9),  utterly  unable  to 
resist  the  Divine  fiat  when  it  goes  forth. 
The  maker  of  it.  An  e.xtraordinary  mis- 
translation, since  po'al  nevei  means  anything 
but  "  work."  His  own  acts  would  light  the 
fire  by  which  the  "  strong  one "  would  be 
consumed  and  perish. 

"  Neo  lex  justior  uUa  eit, 
Quam  necis  artifices  arte  perire  ana." 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — "The  vision  of  Isaiah  which  he  saw.''  The  modem  theory,  that  the  prophetical 
gift  was  a  mere  "  presentiment,"  or  "  insight,"  closely  akin  to  that  by  which  clear-sighted 
men  of  all  times  and  nations  have  been  able,  in  many  respects,  to  forecast  the  coming 
course  of  events,  is  not  very  easily  reconcilable  with  these  words,  "  the  vision  of 
Isaiah  which  he  snw."  As  a  commentator  whose  freedom  from  the  shackles  of  tradition 
is  beyond  dispute  observes,  "With  Isaiah,  it"  (i.e.  prophecy)  "is  not  a  mere  presenti- 
ment ;  it  is  a  calm  and  settled  conviction,  based  on  a  direct  revelation,  and  confirmed  by 
a  deep  insight  into  the  laws  of  the  Divine  government "  (Cheyne,  '  Prophecies  of  Isaiah,' 
vol.  i.  p.  233,  note).  Isaiah  "  sees  "  that  which  he  announces.  It  is  placed  distinctly 
before  him,  as  that  which  is  about  to  be.  He  no  more  doubts  it  than  he  doubts  that 
which  is  presented  to  his  bodily  vision.     Hence  it  may  be  concluded — 

I.  That  the  prophetic  inspiration  was  absolutely  convincing  to  those  who  were 
favoured  with  it,  and  precluded  all  feeling  of  doubt. 

II.  That  it  was  wholly  different  in  kind  from  that  power  of  prevision  which  all  men 
more  or  less  possess,  resting,  not  upon  grounds  of  reason  or  experience,  but  upon  an 
inward  spiritual  conviction  that  the  substance  of  the  prophetic  announcement  had  been 
communicated  to  the  prophet  by  God. 

Vers.  2,  3. — Ood's  arraignment  of  his  people.  God  claims  his  people's  willing 
obedience  on  three  grounds.  1.  They  are  his  children.  2.  He  has  made  them  great.  3. 
He  has  exalted  them  to  eminence  among  the  nations. 

I.  As  HIS  OHii.DREs,  they  are  bound  to  love  and  serve  him,  to  be  grateful  to  him  for 
his  manifold  mercies,  and  to  yield  him  entire  obedience  He  is  the  Author  of  their 
being ;  he  sustains  their  life ;  he  feeds  them,  supports  thorn,  gives  them  every  blessing 
which  they  enjoy.  In  return,  what  less  can  .  they  do  than  love  him  unfeignedly, 
serve  him  truly,  and  obey  him  implicitly  ?     Earthly  children  a.-o  bound  to  act   thui 


Ctt.  1. 1— 31.j  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  iSAlAH.  9 

towards  thoir  earthly  parents :  how  much  more  God's  children  towards  their  heavenly 
Father ! 

II.  As  KAisED  BY  HIM  TO  powBR  AND  GBEATNE8S,  they  are  yet  more  bound  to  serve 
him.  Evory  gift  of  God  to  us  increases  our  responsibilities,  lays  us  under  a  more 
stringent  obligation  to  make  a  duo  return  to  oar  Benefactor.  Israel  was  increased  from 
a  family  into  a  nation,  w.is  multiplied  in  numbers,  given  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and 
honey,  raised  from  the  bondage  of  Egypt  to  an  independent  and  commanding  i)osition. 
Bach  step  in  their  progress  constituted  a  demand  on  them  for  greater  love,  profounder 
gratitude,  more  exact  observance  of  every  Divine  commandment. 

III.  As  EXALTKi)  AMONO  THK  NATIONS,  they  are  at  once  called  upon  for  additional 
thankfulness,  and  requii'cd  to  manifest  to  the  heathen  that  God's  favour  has  not  been 
bestowed  on  them  by  mere  caprice,  but  with  some  reference  to  their  caiiacity  of  profiting 
by  it.  "A  city  set  on  a  hill  cannot  be  hid"  (Matt.  v.  14).  Eminence  of  whatever 
kind  calls  upon  us  for  increased  exertion.  Noblesse  oblige.  If  men  are  bound  to  serve 
God  in  the  lowest  walks  of  life,  still  more  are  they  bound  to  serve  him  when  he  has 
"  raised  them  out  of  the  dust,  and  lifted  them  out  of  the  dunghill,  that  he  may  get  them 
with  princes,  even  with  the  princes  of  his  people"  (Ps.  cxiii.  7,  8).  And  as  with 
individuals,  so  with  nations.  Eminence  among  the  powers  of  the  earth  calls  on  them 
to  set  a  good  example — to  "  let  their  light  shine  before  men,"  to  make  a  decided  pro- 
fession of  religion,  and  to  carry  out  their  profession  in  their  acts. 

Israel,  however,  had  acknowledged  none  of  these  obligations.  They  had  "  rebelled 
against  God,"  turned  away  from  following  him,  cast  his  words  behind  their  back.  More 
dull  than  either  ox  or  ass,  they  had  refused  to  "know  God,"  to  have  him  in  their 
thoughts,  to  "consider  his  operations"  (ch.  v.  10).  Have  not  multitudes  of  Christians 
also  followed  their  example  ?  They  too  are  God's  children  (Rom.  viii.  16 ;  1  John 
iii.  1,  etc.),  created  by  him,  regenerated  by  him,  adopted  by  him  in  his  beloved  Son, 
Jesus  Christ.  They  too  have  been  raised  by  him  to  greatness,  increased  from  a  "little 
flook  "  to  hundreds  of  millions,  "  carried  on  eagles'  wings  "  (Exod.  xix.  4),  borne  safely 
through  the  storms  of  centuries.  And  they  have  been  exalted  among  the  nations  of 
the  earth,  given  the  chief  place,  manifestly  elevated  above  both  Jews  and  heathen. 
Must  not  Christians,  if  they  rebel,  if  they  refuse  to  "  know  God  "  or  "  consider  "  him, 
expect  the  same  terrible  punishments  as  overtook  the  Israelites,  or  others  similar  to 
them?  "If  we  sin  wilfully  after  that  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth, 
there  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sins,  but  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment 
and  fiery  indignation,  which  shall  devour  the  adversaries  "  (Heb.  x.  26,  27).  "  It  is  a 
fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God"  (Heb.  x.  31). 

Vers.  4 — 9. — The  prophefs  enforcement  of  Qod's  charge.  God's  words  are  so  weighty, 
that  they  may  well  be  few ;  the  preacher's  enforcement  of  them  must  needs  be,  com- 
paraJtively  speaking,  lengthy.  Isai.ih,  in  addressing  his  erring  countrymen,  aimed  at 
producing  in  them — 

I.  Conviction  of  sin.  For  tliis  purpose,  he  begins  with  an  array  of  seven  charges 
(ver.  4),  varying,  as  it  were,  the  counts  of  the  indictment:  (1)  they  are  a  sinful  nation; 
(2)  they  are  laden  with  guilt ;  (3)  they  are  a,  race  of  evil-doers ;  (4)  they  are  children 
that  act  coriLiptly ;  (5)  they  have  forsaken  Jehovah ;  (6)  they  have  .■scorned  him ; 
(7)  they  have  estranged  themselves  from  him,  and,  as  it  were,  turned  away  from  him 
and  gone  backward.  The  first  four  are  general,  and  seem  to  be  little  more  than 
rhetorical  vaiiations  of  one  and  the  same  theme.  We.  may  learn  from  them  that 
rhetorical  variation  is  allowable,  nay,  proper,  since  different  worfs  catch  hold  of  different 
persons,  rouse  them,  touch  them  to  the  quick,  are  effectual  to  the  producing  of  repent- 
ance. The  last  three  charges  are  particular,  and  to  some  extent  different,  each  exceed- 
ing the  last  in  heinousness,  and  thus  rising  in  the  way  of  climax — desertion,  insult, 
complete  estrangement.  Metaphor  is  then  called  in  to  work  on  the  imagination,  and 
through  the  imagination  on  tlie  conscience :  tlie  nation  is  depicted  as  a  diseased  and 
stricken  body,  a  mass  of  sores  and  corrujition  (vers.  5,  6). 

II.  Fear  of  punishment.  Undoubt('<lly  fear  is  a  low  motive  in  religion — some  think 
it  altogether  an  unworthy  one.  But  while  human  nature  remains  such  as  it  is,  while 
the  mass  of  men  are  incapable-of  being  stirred  by  the  hiszher  motives,  appeal  must  be 
made  to  the  lower  ones.     The  prophet,  therefore,  reminds  his  people  of  God's  judgments 


10  THE  BOOK   OF   THE  PEOPIIET  ISAIAH.  [oh.  i.  1—31. 

in  the  pa«t  (vcr.  7),  threatens  them  with  further  judgments  in  the  future  (rer.  5),  »nd 
ends  the  paragraph  by  suggesting  that  his  people  have  barely  escaped  the  most  terrible 
of  all  judgments — a  destruction  like  that  of  Sudom  and  Gomorrah. 

Vers.  11 — 14. — The  outward  form  of  religion,  without  inward  piety,  an  offence  to 
Qod.  It  is  strange  how  deeply  ingrained  the  idea  is  in  man,  that  formal  acts  of  worship, 
outward  acknowledgment,  ritual,  ceremonial,  pageantry,  constitute  religion,  and  will  be 
accepted  by  God  in  lieu  of  the  inward  devotion  of  the  heart.  Heathenism  was  full  of 
the  notion.  Plato  tells  us  that  the  Greeks  thought  they  might  commit  any  number  and 
any  kind  of  sins  or  crimes,  and  obtain  pardon  for  them  at  the  hands  of  the  gods,  if  they 
offered  sufficient  sacrifices  (Plato,  '  Eep.,'  ii.  §  7).  It  is  evident  that  the  Jews  of 
Isaiah's  time  were  possessed  with  a  similar  idea.  They  "tried  to  compensate  for  their 
unrighteous  lives  by  sumptuous — perhaps  extravagant — performance  of  ceremonial 
observances  "  (Kay).  So  did  the  Pharisees  of  our  Lord's  day.  "  Ye  pay  tithe  of  mint 
and  anise  and  cummin,  and  have  omitted  the  weightier  matters  of  the  Law,  judg- 
ment, mercy,  and  faith."  "  Ye  devour  widows'  houses,  and  for  a  pretence  make  long 
prayer"  (Matt,  xxiii. 23,  14).  And  do  not  professed  Christians  too  often  do  the  same  'I 
Is  not  "  saying  prayers  "  too  often  made  a  substitute  for  private  devotion,  and  "  going 
to  church  "  for  the  true  public  worship  of  God?  Nay,  is  not  attendance  at  the  Holy 
Eucharist  itself  sometimes  allowed  to  become  a  mere  form?  Aliis!  Isaiah's  warning 
voice  is  needed  as  much  by  Christians  as  by  Jews.  He  tells  us  that  the  outward  form 
of  religion,  without  inward  piety,  is  not  only  not  pleasing  to  God,  but  is  an  offence  unto 
him.    It  is  so — 

I.  As  IMPLYING  A  LOW  AND  UNWORTHY  CONCEPTION  OF  GoD.  To  imagine  that  God 
will  be  content  with  external  observance  is  to  suppose,  either  that  he  is  unable  to  rend 
our  hearts  or  that  he  does  not  care  how  we  are  in  our  hearts  disposed  towards  him.  It 
is  thus  either  to  question  his  omniscience  or  to  deny  his  moral  nature.  A  good  father 
does  care  whether  his  sons  render  him  a  mere  formal  obedience  or  are  heartily  bent  on 
obeying  him  through  love  and  gratitude.  Only  one  unworthy  of  the  name  is  careless 
upon  the  point,  and  content  so  long  as  that  which  he  commands  is  done. 

II.  As  A  SPECIES  OP  HYPOCRISY.  "  Woc  unto  you,  scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocritet  J " 
was  our  Lord's  denunciation  of  those  who  paid  tithe  of  every  minutest  vegetable,  yet 
were  without  mercy  and  faith  (Matt,  xxiii.  23).  The  outward  acts  uf  religion- — prayer, 
praise,  observance  of  fa»t  and  festival,  attendance  at  sacraments,  and  the  like — constitute 
a  profession  of  certain  inward  feelings — love,  gratitude,  faith,  reverence— and,  if  these 
are  absent,  the  performance  of  the  acts  is  deceptive  and  hypocritical.  It  is  to  make  a 
pretence  that  we  are  what  we  are  not.  It  is  bad  enough  if  it  is  done  to  deceive  men ; 
but  it  is  worse  if  we  think  thereby  to  hoodwink  God.  God  hates  hypocrisy,  and  is 
revolted  by  the  conduct  of  such  as  "  honour  him  with  their  lips,  while  their  hearts  are 
far  from  him." 

III.  As  A  DESECRATION  OF  THINGS  SACRED.  The  observances  of  religion  have  some- 
thing sacred  about  them.  They  are  either  suggested  by  nature  or  formally  ordained  by 
God  for  a  holy  use ;  and,  if  practised  in  an  irreligious,  or  even  in  a  non-religious,  spirit, 
they  are  desecrated.  It  is  a  mockery  to  bend  the  knee  and  repeat  the  words  of  for- 
mularies while  our  thoughts  are  straying  to  other  matters,  as  business,  amusements, 
gaieties— it  is  emptying  things  holy  of  their  holiness,  and  bringing  them  down  to  a 
lower  level.  We  injure  ourselves  by  so  doing,  we  scandalize  the  truly  religious,  we 
give  occasion  to  the  enemies  of  God  to  blaspheme.  Better  not  to  "  tread  God's  courts  " 
at  all  than  to  do  so  without  a  reverent  and  prayerful  spirit. 

Ver.  15. — Ood  will  not  listen  to  the  prayers  of  the  wicked.  Sinners  sometimes  think 
that  they  may  persist  in  sin  as  long  as  they  like,  because  they  can  at  any  time  turn  to 
God,  ask  his  forgiveness,  obtain  pardon,  and  be  saved.  But  Scriptufe  is  very  full  of 
lyarnings  that  this  is  not  the  case.  There  is  "  a  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,"  which 
•'  shall  not  be  forgiven  to  men,  neither  in  this  world,  neither  in  the  world  to  come  " 
(Matt.  xii.  32).  There  is  a  persistence  in  sin,  which  "  quenches  the  Sphit "  (1  Thess.  v.  17). 
Men  cannot  turn  to  God  whenever  they  please.  The  "  accepted  time  "  passes  away,  and 
they  find  it  impossible  to  turn  to  him  in  true  faith  and  penitence.  They  may  "  say 
prayers,"  but  they  do  not  really  pray.      And  God  shuts  his  ears  against  luch  prayers 


CH.1. 1— 31.J  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  11 

(see,  besides  the  present  passage,  Job  xxvii.  8, 9 ;  Prov.  i.  28 ;  Jer.  xi.  11 ;  Ezek.  yiii.  18 ; 
Heb.  vi.  4^-6  j  x.  26—29 ;  1  Jobn  v.  16). 

Vers.  16 — ^20. — No  return  to  Ood^s  favour  without  amendment  of  life.  The  outward 
show  of  religiofl,  which  the  Israelites  maintained,  vain  and  futile  as  it  was,  seemed  to 
indicate  that  they  were  not  wholly  irreclaimable — they  did  not  desire  to  break  altogethei 
with  God.  The  prophet,  therefore,  assumes  that  they  would  wish  to  know  the  way  by 
which  they  may  remove  Gkid's  anger,  and  enter  once  more  into  favour  with  him ;  and 
he  proceeds  to  point  out  that  the  one  and  only  road  open  to  tliem  is  to  amend  theii 
ways — to  reverse  their  course  of  life.  This  amendment  consists  in  two  things :  one 
negative,  the  other  positive. 

I.  Negatively  :  amendment  consists  in  obasxno  to  do  evil.  This  is  the  first  thing 
needed.  Men  must  break  off'  their  sins,  put  away  the  iniquity  of  their  doings,  reso- 
lutely determine  that  the  works  of  darkness  shall  be  done  by  them  no  more.  The  works 
will  be  different  in  different  cases.  To  one  man  they  will  be  impure  acts  and  words ; 
to  another,  falsehood,  deception,  equivocation ;  to  another,  profanity  of  speech ;  to 
another,  drunkenness ;  to  another,  intemperate  anger,  and  so  on.  To  the  Israelites  at 
this  time,  or  at  any  rate  to  their  chief  men,  who  are  here  specially  addressed  (ver.  10), 
the  evil-doing  most  common,  and  to  which  they  were  most  prone,  was  cruelty  and 
oppression.  The  chief  men  acted  as  judges,  held  courts,  heard  complaints,  determiued 
causes ;  but,  instead  of  seeking  to  do  justice  between  man  and  man,  they  sought  merely 
to  advance  their  own  interests  by  means  of  this  office  entrusted  to  them.  They  accepted 
bribes  from  rich  suitors  to  determine  law-suits  in  their  favour;  they  leaned  in  their 
judgments  against  the  weak  and  the  defenceless.  They  were  probably  a  clique,  who 
enriched  themselves  by  playing  into  each  others'  hands,  and  ousting  weak  persons  from 
their  properties  and  estates  by  legal  artifices.  All  this  whole  system  of  evil-doing  they 
were  required,  first  of  all,  to  put  aside,  before  they  could  hope  that  God  would  look  upon 
them  with  anything  but  anger  and  reprobation. 

II.  Positively  :  amendment  consists  in  leabnino  to  do  well.  Negative  goodness 
is  not  enough.  God  expects  each  man  to  glorify  him  by  good  actions.  Those  who  have 
gone  astray  must  not  only  retrace  their  steps,  but  must  enter  resolutely  on  the  path  of 
virtue.  They  must  "  set  themselves  in  some  good  way."  And  this  must  be  especially 
done  in  the  matters  wherein  they  have  failed.  The  Jewish  judges  had  failed  in  their  task 
of  administering  justice — they  had  given  unjust  sentences,  favoured  oppressors,  dialt 
hardly  with  the  widow  and  the  orphan.  Hence  the  prophet's  exhortations  to  them  are 
"  Seek  out  justice ;  correct  the  oppressor ;  right  the  orphan ;  plead  the  cause  of  the 
widow  "  (ver.  17).  And  so  it  must  be  with  all  the  varieties  of  evil-doers.  Each  must 
be  exhorted  to  the  virtue  which  is  the  opposite  of  the  vice  that  he  has  indulged  in. 
Each  must  labour,  if  he  really  seeks  restoration  to  God's  favour,  to  do  deeds  the  very 
opposite  of  those  which  he  did  formerly.  If  he  was  a  drunkard,  he  does  well  to  become 
a  total  abstainer ;  if  a  glutton,  to  chasten  his  flesh  by  fasting ;  if  impure,  to  give  him- 
self to  the  reclaiming  of  outcasts ;  if  niggardly,  "  to  sell  all  that  he  has  and  give  to  the 
poor ; "  if  violent,  to  suffer  wrong,  and  turn  his  cheek  to  the  smiter. 

From  the  nature  of  amendment,  the  prophet  proceeds  to  its  consequences,  which  are 
likewise  twofold,  consisting  in— 

I.  The  cleansing  of  the  individual  soul.  Here  much  is  kept  back  which  is 
revealed  later,  as  (1)  the  mode  whereby  the  soul  is  cleansed,  or  in  other  words,  the 
doctrine  of  the  atonement,  which  appears  in  ch.  liii.  5,  6 ;  (2)  the  necessity  of  laying 
hold  of  the  atonement  by  faith  (Eom.  iii.  25 ;  iv.  5,  etc.) ;  and  (3)  the  immediate 
removal  of  the  guilt  of  sin,  when  God  justifies  us,  and  the  gradual  removal  of  its  taint, 
as  he  sanctifies  us.  But  the  declaration  of  the  fact  of  our  cleansing  is  directly  made, 
»nd  made  with  the  utmost  plainness  :  "  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as 
white  as  snow,"  etc.  The  cleansing  will  be  entire,  complete,  thorough.  Snow  will  not 
be  purer  than  the  redeemed"  soul,  which  "  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  has  cleansed  from 
all  sin  "  (1  John  i.  7). 

II.  A    RBWABD,    EXTERNAL    TO    THE    BOUL   ITSELF,    WHICH    Qod's    FBEE    GRACE    WILl 

BESTOW.  Here  still  more  is  kept  back.  The  reward  held  out  is  merely  t'emporal :  "  Ye 
shall  eat  the  good  of  the  land."  Ye  shall  Uve  in  peace  and  prosperity,  under  your  own 
vines  and  fig  trees,  and  enjoy  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  which  Gud  in  his  bounty  gives  you 


12  TfiE  300KOF    THE  PROPHET  ISaIABL  t™-i-l— ^1- 


Not  a  whisper  of  the  eternal  reward — the  blessedness  reserved  for  man  in  heaven,  the 
bliss  which  "  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  ol 
man  to  conceive."  , Probably  the  Israelites  of  Isaiah's  day  were  too  gross  and  sensual, 
too  much  wrapt  up  in  material  things,  to  have  been  stirred  to  action  by  anything  so 
distant  and  intangible  as  the  heavenly  life,  even  if  they  could  have  formed  the  faintest 
conception  of  it.  Here,  again,  "  God  has  provided  better  things  for  us  "  (Heb.  x.  40), 
and  given  us  a  motive  for  exertion  far  beyond  any  that  was  presented  to  bis  ancient 
people. 

Vers.  21 — 23. —  The  grievousness  of  the  sin  of  oppression  in  OocCs  sight.  The  Israelites 
of  Isaiah's  time  were  guilty  of  many  heinous  sins,  as  we  see  by  later  chapters.  They 
were  idolaters  (ch.  ii.  8),  haughty  (ch.  ii.  11, 17),  wanton  (ch.  iii.  16),  covetous  (ch.  v.  8), 
drunken  (ch.  v.  11),  perverse  (ch.  v.  20),  vain  (ch.  v.  21).  But  of  all  their  sins,  none 
seems  to  nave  so  much  offended  God  as  their  oppression  of  the  poor  and  weak.  The 
prophet  refers  to  it  over  and  over  again  (ch.  i.  15,  21, 23 ;  iii.  5, 12, 14, 15  ;  v.  7, 23,  etc.). 
He  denounces  it  in  the  strongest  terms  (ch.  i.  15,  23).  He  represents  it  as  an  especial 
offence  to  Jehovah  (ch.  iii.  15 ;  v.  7).     The  reasons  would  seem  to  be — 

I.  Bbcaube  oppBESSiOiSr  18  A  BREACH  OF  TBUST.  To  opprcss  another  we  must  have 
authority  over  him,  and  all  authority  is  coirimitted  to  man  by  God,  as  a  trust.  "  Thou 
couldest  have  no  power  at  all  against  me  except  it  were  given  thee  from  above" 
(John  xix.  11).  God  entrusts  us  with  power  over  others  for  their  benefit  and  for  our 
own  moral  training.  He  puts  us  in  his  place,  to  act  for  him,  to  be  his  instruments : 
"  By  me  kings  reign,  and  princes  decree  justice"  (Prov.  viii.  15).  Abuse  of  our  position 
is  breach  of  trust ;  it  is  to  use  the  power  God  has  committed  to  us  for  a  purpo"*  the 
very  oppo.site  to  that  which  he  intended.     It  is  flagrant  rebellion  against  him 

II.  Because  it  is  cruel  aKd  inhuman. 

"  'Tis  excellent  to  have  a  giant's  strength. 
But  tyrannous  to  use  it  like  a  giant." 

Weakness  naturally  makes  an  appeal  to  our  emotions  of  pity  and  compassion.  To 
injure  the  defenceless,  to  hurt,  crush,  ruin  the  poor  and  the  weak,  instead  of  being 
their  champion,  is  to  be  wanting  altogether  in  manhood.  It  is  to  be  at  once  unjust 
and  cowardly.  Oppressors  have  always  been  the  objects  of  general  hatred  and  con- 
demnation. Rameses  II.,  Nebuchadnezzar,  Tarquin,  Nero,  Bajazet,  have  hft  an  evil 
memory  behind  them,  which  will  continue  while  the  world  endures.  Oppressors  are 
of  various  kinds.  Some  are  emperors  or  kings,  some  princes,  some  judges,  and  other 
public  personages.  But  there  is  far  more  oppression  in  private  life  than  in  public. 
Slave-owners,  and  still  more,  slave-drivers,  are  apt  to  be  fearful  oppressors,  making 
the  lives  of  hundreds  a  burden  to  them.  Even  employers  of  free  labour  are  often 
oppressors,  when  they  take  advantage  of  competition  to  beat  down  wages  below  the 
rate  at  which  life  can  be  sustained  in  decent  comfort.  Masters  often  act  oppressively 
towards  their  servants,  heads  of  schools  towards  their  pupils,  even  parents  towards 
their  children.  Of  all  the  evils  "  done  under  the  sun,"  there  is  none  more  widespread 
than  oppi  ession  (Eccles.  iv.  1),  and  none  more  hateful. 

III.  BiXAUsii  IT  OUTRAGES  God's  ATTRIBUTE  OF  JUSTICE.  To  bejust  is  of  the  Very 
essence  of  God's  nature.  "  tShall  not  the  Judge  of  all  tlie  earth  do  right  ?"  (Gen.  xviii.  25). 
Exact  justice  is  what  he  deals  out  even  to  the  feeblest,  the  weakest,  the  most  con- 
temptible of  his  creatures.  And  he  "  has  made  man  upright "  (Eccles.  vii.  29).  He  has 
implanted  in  man  a  sense  of  justice,  the  reflex  of  his  own  attribute,  and  made  him  to  be 
self-condemned  if  he  transgresses  it.  God's  law  of  conduct,  "  Do  unto  others  as  thou 
wouldst  have  thcra  do  to  thee,"  is  a  law  of  strict,  equal  justice,  and  if  carried  out  would 
put  an  end  to  all  oppression  and  wrong.  Thus,  when  men  oppress  their  fellow-men, 
they  disobey  buth  God's  inward  and  his  outward  law ;  nay,  more,  they  outrage  him  by 
showing  contempt  for  one  of  his  highest  attributes. 

Ver.  2r>.—  The  purifying  power  of  punishment.  Great  national  judgments,  such  as 
tliat  whicli  Isaiah  was  sent  to  announce,  have  a  purifying  effect  in  three  ways. 

I.    ThEV     alarm    a     certain    number     of     persons,    AND     INDUCE     THEM     TO    QUIT 

THEIR  SINS.     The  careless  and  indifferent  have  theii  attention  excited  and  their  fears 


CH.  1.1—31.]  THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  15 

aroused  by  the  dangers  which  manifestly  threaten  all,  and  the  calan-  ities  which  naturally 
fall  on  some.  The  class  of  waverers,  who  would  faiu  be  on  the  side  uf  good,  but  continu- 
ally fall  away  when  temptation  assails  them,  find  their  power  of  resistance  strengthened 
by  the  perils  of  the  time,  which  render  sinful  enjoyment  insecure,  and  bring  home  to 
them  the  certainty  that  there  is  retribution  in  store  for  sin.  Even  among  pronounced 
and  habitual  sinners  there  are  apt  to  be  some  whom  the  novel  circumstances  uf  tlie  time 
startle  and  induce  to  "consider  their  ways."  It  is  an  undeniable  fact,  that  of  such 
penitents  a  certain  proportion  repent  with  extreme  earnestness,  and  become  examples  to 
the  flock,  advancing  with  the  same  impulse  and  fervour  in  the  way  of  godliness  as  they 
formerly  advanced  in  the  "  way  which  leadeth  to  destruction"  (Matt.  vii.  13). 

II.  They  incbease  the  seriousnkss  of  the  dkttek  disposed,  and  besdbr  them 
MOBE  ciBCUMSPECT  AND  STRICT  IN  THEIB  CONDUCT.  Men  are  aware,  under  ordinary 
circumstances,  that  they  may  at  any  moment  be  summoned  to  meet  their  Judge.  But 
they  do  not  commonly  realize  the  possibility.  It  is  one  of  the  effects  of  great  national 
judgments — war,  pestilence,  famine— that  they  force  on  men  the  consideration  of  the 
peril  in  which  they  stand,  and  compel  them  to  contemplate  death  as  near,  and  their  own 
siieedy  demise  as  probable.  They  lead  men's  thouglits  to  existence  beyond  the  grave, 
and  encoiu'age  them  to  prepare  for  the  great  change  which  death  will  make  in  their 
condition.  They  break  in  upon  the  placid  calm  of  everyday  life,  wliicli  laps  so  many 
souls  in  an  elysium  of  unconsciousness,  and  remind  men  of  their  Lord's  solemn  injunction 
to  them  :  "  Watch"  (Mark  xiii.  37). 

III.  They  give  opponTUNiTiES  fob  the  exercise  of  the  hkboic  vtbtues,  and 

HAVE    THUS  AN  ELEVA'riSO    AND    PUBIKYINGt   INFLUENOB   ON    THE   BEST   MEN.      There   13 

more  room  for  self-devotion  in  times  of  national  calamity  than  under  any  other  oircum- 
stauoeB.  Thousands  are  thrown  upon  the  charity  of  their  neighbours.  The  suffering 
which  exists  is  at  once  quasi-universal  and  extreme.  Much  danger  has  to  be  encountered 
in  its  relief.  The  best  men  at  such  times  give  themselves  up  wholly  to  the  task  of 
ifclleviating  their  neighbours'  woes.  Singly,  or  in  bands,  they  go  forth,  fling  themselves 
into  the  thick  of  the  struggle,  and  do  their  best  to  relieve  the  general  distress  and  misery. 
Whether  they  succeed  or  whether  they  fail  in  their  object  of  helping  others,  they  do  not, 
cannot  fail  in  one  thing — the  improvement  of  their  own  characters.  Their  "  dross  "  is 
certain  to  be  "  purged  away "  by  their  unselfish  efforts,  and  the  pure  metal  of  their 
virtue  to  shine  forth  ever  more  and  more,  as  time  goes  on,  free  from  all  alloy  of  pride, 
or  -vanity,  or  self-seeking.  Affliction  has  also  a  purifying  effect  on  the  individual. 
"Whom  the  Lord  lovcth,  he  chasteneth,"  etc.  Thus  only  can  "patience  have  her 
perfect  work"  (Jas.  1.  4).  Thus  only  can  faith  be  tried  (1  Pet.  i.  7)  and  strengthened. 
Thus  only  can  "  the  fellowship  of  Christ's  sufferings "  (Phil.  iii.  10)  be  known  and 
realized.  But  this  branch  of  the  subject  lies  outside  of  Isaiah's  teaching  in  the  present 
chapter. 


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHOBS. 

Vera.  1 — ^9. — Jehovah  arraigns  his  people.  I.  Inoratitudb  thb  basest  of  bins. 
He,  the  Father,  has  been  faithlessly  forsaken  by  ungrateful  sons.  This  is  the  worat 
k>rm  of  ingratitude. 

"Filial  ingratitude  I 
Is  it  not  B8  this  mouth  should  tear  this  hand 
For  lifting  food  to 't?" 

('KingLear.^ 
Tt  haa  been  laid  that 

"  The  wretch  whom  gratitude  once  fails  to  bind. 
To  truth  or  honour  let  him  lay  no  claim. 
But  staud  confess'd  the  brute  disguised  in  man,^ 

But  the  brutes  are  grateful ;  while  Jehovah's  sons  seem  to  have  neither  memory  nor 
understanding.  Man,  by  his  nature,  if  he  does  not  rise  above,  must  sink  below,  the 
level  of  the  beast.  There  is  nothing  more  hateful,  then,  because  more  radically  amiss 
and  evil,  than  ingratitude.  It  is,  great  men  have  said,  the  sum  of  guilt  and  evil,  worse 
than  any  taint  of  the  blood,  more  odious  than  lying,  vainness,  babbling,  drunkenness. 


U  THE    BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  [ch.  I.  1— 31. 

II.  The  people  have  added  rebellion  to  inoeatitudb.  They  haye  forsaken, 
reviled,  "  gone  backward"  from  him.  This  is  a  climax  of  sin.  Our  passions  are  ever 
in  movement ;  there  is  no.  stagnation.  Insensibility  to  God's  goodness  soon  leads  to 
antipathy,  antipathy  to  active  hatred,  and  this  to  open  revolt.  "  Be  ye  thankful." 
The  neglect  of  the  heart  and  its  proper  attitude  to  God  is  certain  to  lay  us  open  to 
every  sin.  The  greatest  physical  pests  of  the  city,  and  not  less  its  moral  corruptioLS, 
may  be  traced  to  neglect.  Some  "  covenant "  of  God  made  known  to  us  in  natural  or 
in  spiiitual  law  has  been  broken;  hence  sin  and  sorrow,  and  hence  alone,  as  the 
prophets  ever  teach. 

III.  Heaven  and  eabth  witnesses  of  man's  quilt.  The  whole  language  and  style 
call  up  to  mind  the  court  of  justice.  All  human  events  form  part  of  a  drama,  of  which 
God  and  the  angels  are  spectators.  We  in  all  our  thoughts  and  deeds  are  surrounded 
by  a  great  cloud  of  spectators.  The  great  solid  mountains,  for  example,  seem  the  very 
symbols  of  those  fixed  laws  by  which  our  actions  must  be  judged.  Napoleon  in 
Egypt  called  his  soldiers  to  reflect  that  "  forty  centuries  were  looking  down  upon  them 
from  the  pyramids."  By  a  similar  figure,  Micah  summons  the  people  to  trial  in  the 
Presence  of  the  mountains  (vi.  2) ;  the  1  >euteronomist  appeals  to  heaven  and  earth  to 
listen  to  his  words  (xxxii.  1).  So  does  a  psalmist  (Ps.  1.)  represent  Jehovah  as  demand- 
ing the  attention  of  earth  from  east  to  west.  Ail  our  acts  run  out  into  a  universal 
significance. 

IV.  The  extremity  of  national  kuin.  The  people  have  run  the  whole  course 
of  sin,  have  left  no  stone  unturned  in  the  attempt  to  defeat  Jehovah ;  and  lo  1  the 
result.  The  body  corporate  is  one  mass  of  disease  and  wounds,  fresh  and  bleeding. 
The  land  is  devastated  and  fire-scarred.  Barbarians  are  devouring  it ;  it  reminds  of 
awful  Sodom's  ruin.  Jerusalem,  indeed,  is  as  yet  unscathed ;  but  she  stands  alone 
in  the  midst  of  the  dread  silence.  Like  "  a  booth  in  the  vineyard,  a  hammock  in  a 
cucumber-field,"  is  she  I  Thus,  when  appeals  to  the  ear  have  been  repeatedly  neglected, 
God  paints  the  truth  upon  the  field  of  vision.  If  we  heed  not  the  voice,  we  must  feel 
the  weight  of  the  hand,  of  the  Lord.  Yet  there  is  still  a  spark  of  hope.  Jerusalem  is 
all  hut,  yei  not  quite,  a  Sodom  or  Gomorrah.  There  is  still  a  remnant  of  people  left 
Thank  God,  while  there  is  life  there  is  hope.  At  the  very  moment  when  we  are 
tempted  to  say  of  the  ruined  nation,  the  broken  life,  "  All  is  lost  1 "  a  voice  is  heard, 
"  All  may  yet  be  restored ! " — J. 

Vera.  10 — 17. — The  people's  plea  considered.  The  leading  men  of  Jerusalem  are 
supposed  to  reply  to  the  charge  of  Jehovah,  pointing  to  the  elaborate  manner  in  which 
his  worship  is  kept  up.     And  Jehovah  rejects  their  plea  with  scom. 

I.  The  Divine  indignation  against  wickedness.  No  more  scathing  denunciation 
could  there  be  than  to  term  the  rulers  of  the  holy  city  "  chiefs  of  Sodom,"  and  the 
people  in  general  "people  of  Gomorrah."  Those  were  names  of  horror  and  shame. 
Christ  used  them  in  the  same  manner  of  extreme  denunciation.  Three  forms  of  sin 
were  prevalent — luxm-y,  violence,  and  oppression.  The  widow  and  the  orphan  stand 
out  especially  as  victims  of  greed  and  hard-hearted,  grasping  selfishness.  As  nothing 
could  be  more  humane  and  gentle  than  the  spirit  of  the  Law,  so  nothing  could  be  more 
wicked  than  the  disregard  of  it.  The  Talmud,  no  less  than  the  prophets,  said  the 
strongest  things  against  injustice.  The  judge  is  particularly  cautioned  not  to  be  biassed 
m  favour  of  the  poor  against  the  rick.  What  a  light  does  this  throw  upon  the  fine 
education  of  the  conscience !  How  much  more  flagrant  the  opposite  fault!  "  He  who 
unjustly  hands  over  one  man's  goods  to  another,  he  shall  pay  God  for  it  with  his  own 
soul.  In  the  hour  when  the  judge  sits  in  judgment  over  his  fellow-man,  he  shall  feel 
as  it  were  a  sword  pointed  at  his  own  heart."  So  says  the  Talmud,  tferusalem  had 
evidently,  in  the  earlier  time  of  Isaiah,  been  obscuring  its  highest  conscience. 

n.  Divine  contempt  for  sacrifices  and  ritual.  1.  These  things  were  never 
beautiful  nor  acceptable  unless  as  expressions  of  piety.  Tf  the  piety  were  not  existent, 
the  streams  of  blood,  the  reek  of  incense,  became  a  spiritual  disgust.  The  beasts  choaen 
for  sacrifice  were  from  the  meeker  and  pursued  animals :  how  horrible  a  lie  for  the 
persecutor  and  the  proud  to  bring  such  symbols  to  Qod  I  Says  the  Talmud,  "  Look  at 
Scripture :  there  ii  not  a  single  bird  more  persecuted  than  the  dove ;  yet  God  has 
chosen  her  to  be  ofiWred  up  on  his  altar.     The  bull  ii  hunted  by  the  lion,  the  sheep  by 


OH.  I.  1—31  ]  THE  BOOK  OP   THE   PEOPHBT   ISAIAH.  15 


the  wolf,  the  goat  by  the  tigor.  And  God  said,  '  Bring  me  a  sacrifice,  not  from  them 
that  persecute,  but  from  them  that  are  persecuted.' "  2.  Mere  attendance  on  public 
worship  is  not  acceptable.  Who  has  required  them,  Jehovah  asks,  to  "  wear  out "  his 
courts?  Their  thronging  and  their  noise  is  oflfensive  to  him.  Their  meat  offerings  are 
vanity ;  meaning  nothing  spiritual,  they  have  no  value  whatever.  The  incense  itself, 
the  finest  flavour  and  aroma  of  the  offering,  stinks  as  it  were  in  the  nostrils  of  God.  New 
moon  and  sabbath,  and  all  the  innumerable  solemnities, — they  are  hateful  and  burden- 
some to  Jehovah.  Ho  cannot  endure  the  contradiction — wickedness  and  worship. 
Quantity  goes  for  notliing,  quality  is  everything  in  the  service  of  God.  There  is  only 
one  act  of  true  worship,  but  it  fills  a  lifetime.  Repetitions  of  unmeaning  acts  harden 
the  heart,  dull  the  perceptions,  accumulate  guilt.  Homer  spoke  of  the  crimes  of  men 
"  going  up  to  the  iron  heaven."  So  here  the  heaven  is  like  an  iron  bound,  not  suffering 
the  prayers  of  the  wicked  to  pass  through. 

HI.  The  tbue  Divine  sebvicb.  1.  It  consists  in  moral,  as  distinguished  from 
ritual  acts.  In  making  the  "  inside  of  the  cup  and  platter  clean.  It  is  a  "washing" 
of  the  soul  from  those  thoughts  and  passions  which  lead  to  sin.  It  is  a  giving  of 
one's  self  up  to  the  godly  sorrow  that  works  repentance.  "  When  the  gates  of  prayer  in 
heaven  are  shut,  that  of  tears  is  open,"  says  the  Talmud.  What  more  blessed  than  the 
tears  of  the  sinner  over  his  sin  ?     The  rainbow  of  hope  never  fails  to  overarch  them. 

2.  It  has  a  negative  side.  Self  must  be  denied  in  every  evil  meaning  that  self  bears. 
The  evil  lusts  and  habits  in  the  embrace  of  wliich  we  have  been  locked,  must  now  be 
held  at  arm's  length,  and  a  divorce  a  mensd  et  toro  be  effected.  Every  true  learning 
must  be  preceded  by  an  unlearning ;  there  must  be  a  pause'and  a  turning  of  the  whole 
person,  in  short,  a  conversion,  before  we  can  start  on  a  new  course.  God's  voice  says  to 
us,  "  Hold  I  Leave  off ! "  as  often  as  it  says,  "  Go  forward ! "  Habits  form  unconsciously. 
It  is,  perhaps,  a  question  more  important  to  ask,  because  easier  to  be  answered  and  dealt 
with — Are  we  doing  anything  to  break  off  bad  habits  ?  It  is  God's  part  to  weave  and 
form  the  good  in  us.     We  should  make  space  and  room  for  him  to  operate  in  our  souls. 

3.  It  has  a  positive  side.  We  are  to  learn — ^to  inquire,  to  seek,  in  order  to  act  rightly. 
Thought  is  the  soul  of  act.  We  learn  to  do  well  by  looking  to  good  examples.  The 
"  consideration  "  of  Christ  is  the  life-business  and  art  of  the  Christian.  "  Why  do  I  tell 
you  incessantly  to  study  the  old  masters?"  asked  a  great  painter  of  his  pupils. 
"  Because  the  great  masters  are  nearest  to  nature  "  (Ingres).  So  Christ  is  nearest  to 
God,  to  the  nature  and  soul  of  all  goodness.  "  Learn  of  me !  "  Nor  can  we  approxi- 
mate to  right  living  without  much  seeking,  much  thought,  comparison  of  experiences, 
much  earnest  prayer.  ".Show  me  thy  ways,  teach  me  thy  paths!"  Note  the  stress 
laid  upon  justice.  This  is  the  basis  of  character.  Love  is  a  vague  sentiment  without 
it,  and  may  work  as  much  harm  as  good.  Love  strengthened  and  purified  by  j  ustice. — 
this  is  the  ideal  of  the  good  man's  character.  It  is  the  imitation  of  God.  And  to  seek 
to  resemble  the  revealed  Divine  in  temper  and  in  life, — this  is  the  essence  of  .worship, 
the  heart  of  piety. — J. 

Vers.  18 — 23. — Argument  and  conviction.  I.  The  trial  of  the  case.  1.  God  is 
reason,  otherwise  he  could  not  be  Qod  of  justice.  And  if  the  nature  can  defend  itself, 
clear  itself  from  guilt,  its  plea  will  be  allowed.  Just  so  in  ch.  xliii.  19,  the  imagery  of 
a  court  of  justice  is  presented :  "  Let  them  bring  forth  their  witnesses  that  they  may 
be  justified,  and  let  them  hear,  and  say.  It  is  true."  The  question  is — Can  the  nation 
clear  itself  from  the  charges  alleged  against  it  ?  If  so,  the  deep  fixed  stain  that  now 
seems  to  rest  upon  them  shall  bo  taken  away,  and  they  shall  be  white  as  driven  snow 
or  as  undyed  wool  2.  Ood  appeals  to  fixed  principles  of  right.  These  have  long  been 
known,  are  written  in  the  conscience  of  the  people.  A  willing  spirit  of  obedience  to 
Divine  law  is  assured  of  blessing ;  rebellion  brings  about  hostility,  invasion,  and  all  those 
calamities  from  which  the  people  are  now  suffering.  Have  these  curses  come  "  cause- 
less "  upon  the  people  ?  Or  are  they  the  just  consequences  of  disobedience  ?  Let  them 
answer.  A  long  pause  and  silence  convey  the  admission  of  guilt.  They  have  no 
Argument  to  urge,  no  cause  to  show  why  judgment  should  be  stayed. 

II.  The  prophet's  lamentation.  He,  as  daysman,  or  go-between,  mourns  over  the 
city  thus  convicted,  unable  to  stand  in  judgment  against  Jehovah.  He  is  compelled  in 
this  cause  to  turn  witness  against  his  own  people.     Once  loyal  and  pledged  as  in  tha 


16  THE   BOOK   OF    THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  [ch.  l  1—31. 

covenant  of  marriage  to  Jehovah,  the  city  has  become  like  her  who  "  forsakes  the 
guide  of  her  youth  and  forgets  the  covenant  of  her  God."  Where  once  the  splendid 
seat  of  justice  and  purity  stood,  there  is  now  lawless  bloodshed.  The  pure  metal  of  her 
virtue  has  been  debased ;  and  "  as  water  unto  wine "  is  her  moral  feebleness  now  as 
contrasted  with  her  moral  strength  then.  They  who,  as  rulers,  were  set  for  an  example 
of  obedience  to  God,  integrity  among  men.  are  rebels  and  thieves'  comrades.  Instead 
of  withholding  their  hands  from  bribes,  tney  greedily  clutch  after  them.  Pity  and 
mercy  are  extinct ;  the  orphan  and  the  widow  are  thrust  aside.  The  guilt  of  guilt  lies 
in  the  use  of  power  witho.it  love.  Christ,  as  the  impersonation  of  humanity  and  of  love, 
points  out  that  the  condemnation  of  evil  conduct  lies  in  this,  that  love  is  wanting. ,  The 
splendiil  tLmple  ritual  was  naught,  because  there  was  no  love  in  it,  as  their  conduct  out 
of  the  temple  so  clearly  showed.  We  may  never  miss  a  Sunday  service  or  a  celebration 
of  the  communion,  yet  for  all  that  bo  undone.  And  many  who  have  never  been 
"  professed  "  Christians  will  be,  on  other  grounds,  professed  by  Christ. — J. 

Vers.  24 — 31. — Sentence  paused.  I.  The  Judge.  He  is  "  Jehovah  of  hosts,  the 
Strong  One  of  Israel."  He  saith,  "  By  the  strength  of  my  hand  I  have  done  it "  (ch.  x.  13). 
He  has  power  to  carry  out  his  sentences.  The  holy  fire  of  his  indignation  breaks  forth 
like  a  volcanic  flood.  Prom  one  point  of  view  evil  men  must  bo  conceived  as  the 
enemies  of  God,  and  their  punishment  as  his  vengeance.  If  a/une  dwelt  upon,  such  a 
representation  becomes  false,  because  it  ignores  the  aspect  of  Divine  love,  whiclj  convert* 
this  holy  vengeance  into  a  remedial  process.  Human  vengeance  would  extinguish  the 
sinner  and  the  sin  in  one  act;  Divine  vengeance  would  save  the  sinner  by  extinguishing 
the  sin. 

II.  The  PDBP08E  OF  JUDGMENT.  1.  It  is  Separation.  The  dross  and  the  lead  are  to 
be  detached  from  the  silver.  Human  nature  is  a  mixture.  There  are  two  extremes  to 
be  avoided  in  thinking  of  it — one  that  it  is  all  evil,  the  other  that  it  is  all  pure.  Pes- 
simism enervates,  and  optimism  hoodwinks  us.  The  Bible  always  takes  the  middle 
view.  Things  are  bad  enough  with  us,  but  they  might  be  worse.  We  are  sunk  low 
enough,  but  cannot  sink  out  of  sight  of  our  spiritual  end,  nor  beyond  the  redeeming 
power  of  God;  The  separation  of  the  gross  and  base  element  f  om  the  spiritual  in  men 
involves  &  fiery  process.  This  fire  is  always  burning  in  the  heart  of  mankind,  sometimes 
b-eaking  out  into  flame  and  fume  of  war  or  pestilence,  to  remind  of  its  presence. 
God  has  in  constant  operation  his  purgatory  for  souls.  It  is  this  truth  which  only  can 
reconcile  us  to  the  presence  of  suffering.  As  mere  pain  it  seims  intolerable ;  as  the 
means  to  the  removal  of  evil  it  is  blessed.  .2.  It  is  restoration.  The  better  or  golden 
age  is  ever  ready  to  begin ;  good  judges  and  rulers  will  again  be  given  to  the  city,  and 
it  will  deserve  the  title  of  Righteous  and  Faithful  once  more.  When  we  see  clearly 
the  abuses  that  exist,  and  the  necessity  of  fiery  suffering  for  the  renewal  of  purity,  we 
have  grasped  a  hope  that  cannot  fail.  God  is  evei'  remaking  and  recasting  life.  Not 
a  day  passes  but  some  rust  gathers,  some  disintegration  of  solid  structure  takes  place. 
It  may  appear  in  any  and  every  day  that  sucioty  is  becoming  hopelessly  choked  in  its 
vices ;  or  that  we  ourselves  are  slipping  down  into  moial  ruin.  Yet  in  a  happier 
morning  mood  it  seems  that  all  is  mending  with  ourselves  and  the  world.  God's 
holiness  is  the  vital  sap  of  human  lifr,  and  when  we  die  to  hope  of  ourselves,  we  live 
anew  in  him.  Conversion,  if  real,  will  take  place,  not  once,  but  many  times  in  a  life.  The 
lieliotrope  turns  every  morning  by  a  fresh  uffuit  to  the  sun.  The  result  of  many  such 
[lersonal  acts  is  seen  now  and  again  in  times  of  religious  revival,  when  the  multitude 
lurns  as  one  man,  saying,  "  Let  us  walk  in  the  light  of  Jehovah ! " 

III.  The  pbbdition  of  the  obstinate.  One  will  may  defeat  the  remedial  purposes 
of  God.  If  man  says,  "  I  will  be  joined  to  my  idols  and  my  sins,"  no  fire,  no  earthquake 
has  power  to  dislodge  him.  If  we  will  not  relax  our  hold  on  the  evil  object,  we  must 
share  its  fate.  To  fix  our  affections  on  objects  unworthy  of  our  choice  is  to  bring  on 
ourselves  shame  and  self-contempt.  The  terebinth  trees  and  the  pleasant  gardens,  the 
seats  of  ancient  idolatry,  are  typical  of  all  scenes  of  spurious  enjoyment.  The  volup- 
tuary, the  mammon-worshipper,  the  votary  of  ambition,  create  around  them  a  world  of 
objects,  fascinating,  but  unreal.  The  terebinth  shall  wither;  the  gard<n,  parched  for 
want  of  water,  shall  lo6e  all  its  charm.  The  man  who  seemed  but  now  the  very  t/p, 
of  force,  shall  feel  himself  slack  as  tow,  and  his  life-work  the  spark  that  sets  it  uu  fire 


OH.  1. 1—31.]         THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  17 

So  both  shall  irretrievably  be  consumed.  What  are  the  "  terebinth  trees  and  pleasant 
gardens  "  of  our  idolatry  ?  Each  man's  soul  must  answer.  Any  and  every  pleasure  is 
good  under  right  conditions ;  pernicious  else.  Everything  that  is  naturally  precious  to 
the  human  heart  should  be  precious  to  each  one  of  us.  In  the  soul  lies  the  only  test. 
In  the  way  that  objects  react  upon  our  finest  feeling  wo  know  whether  they  are  objects 
for  our  personal  pursuit  or  no :  idols  that  must  degrade  us  to  their  level,  or  symbols  and 
sacraments  of  God.  It  is  in  the  life  of  imagination  and  association  that  we  differ. 
Any  scene  supposed  to  be  holy  may  become  an  idolatrous  pleasure-garden  to  the  ill- 
ordered  fancy ;  and  the  soul  that  lives  in  Grod,  seeking  ever  the  true  amidst  the  false, 
will  ever  convert  the  terebinth  tree  of  ill  repute  into  an  altar  of  pure  religion.  The 
world  is  to  us  what  our  will  permits  it  to  seem.  Wedded  to  the  sensual,  we  must 
perish  from  the  spiritual ;  united  to  the  spiritual,  the  sensual  becomes  transformed  and 
acquires  new  associations. — J. 

Ver.  4. — "  Children  that  are  corrupters."  Here  we  have  a  broad  light  on  the  mission 
of  Isaiah  the  prophet.  The  holy  nation  had  become  evil.  Plants  are  more  poison- 
spreading  in  their  corruption  than  forest  trees.  It  is  an  old  proverb,  "  The  corruption 
of  the  best  is  the  worst."  "  Children  that  are  corrupt."  How  solemn  the  emphasis  of 
the  prophet's  adjuration !  "  Hear,  0  heavens,  and  give  ear,  0  earth  :  for  the  Lord  fjath 
spoken,  I  have  nourished  and  brought  up  children,  and  they  have  rebelled  against  me." 

I.  The  measure  ok  life  is  the  measure  of  corruption.  Even  physically  it  is  so. 
The  horse  does  not  breed  such  corruption  as  man.  The  body,  God's  most  perfect  work, 
must  in  its  corpse  state  be  buried  quickly.  Israel  was  a  privileged  people.  They  had 
the  Law  and  the  prophets  and  the  glory ;  but  their  rottenness  was  complete  :  "  From  the 
sole  of  the  foot  even  unto  the  head  there  is  no  soundness  in  it ;  but  wounds,  and  bruises, 
and  putrefying  sores  "  (ver.  6).  Such,  then,  is  the  revealed  philosophy  concerning  evii 
— the  richer  the  life  the  more  rotten  the  corruption. 

II.  The  measure  op  oppobtu*'  ty  is  the  measure  op  responsibility.  "The  whole 
head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint."  But  in  head  and  heart  they  had  been 
"  nourished  and  brought  up  as  children."  And  as  children  their  character  ought  to  have 
reflected  the  Father's  image.  "  Ye  are  my  witnesses,"  saith  the  Lord.  But  Israel  had 
become  vain,  proud,  carnal,  self-seeking,  idolatrous.  They  imagined  themselves  elected 
to  the  enjoyment  of  privilege  instead  of  to  the  use  and  responsibility  of  privilege. 
Hence  they  sought  to  become  a  "  vortex"  instead  of  a  "  foimtain."  And  evil  had  spread 
through  them.  Their  lofty  position  had  made  the  leaven  of  their  influence  wider.  Ala.M ! 
the  "  children  "  were  "  corrupters  " ! — W.  M.  8. 

Ver.  9. — The  faithful  remnant.  "Except  the  Lord  of  hosts  had  left  unto  us  a 
very  small  remnant,  we  should  have  been  as  Sodom,  and  we  should  have  been  like  unto 
Gomorrah."  This  is  as  music  of  hope  amid  a  strain  of  grief.  And  it  is  the  first  note 
of  an  evangelic  prophecy,  which  is  to  merge  into  the  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  ray  jieople,'' 
of  a  later  chapter.  Where  there  is  life  there  is  hope  in  national  calamity  as  well  as  in 
personal  sickness.  ,  "A  cottage  in  a  vineyard"  is  a  cottage  that  speaks  of  home  (ver.  8), 
"  a  lodge  in  a  garden  of  cucumbers  "  is  a  centre  of  care  and  toil ;  and  a  very  small  remnan  t 
may  be  a  branch  of  healing  to  save  a  nation. 

I.  The  small  remnant  bblonos  to  the  Lord  of  hosts.  Therefore  powev  is  on 
their  side.  What  a  contrast ! — "  host "  and  "  remnant."  Even  so.  God  can  multiplj 
the  loaves  and  fishes.  God  can  put  such  power  into  the  remnant  that  they  may  be 
able  to  say,  "  Greater  is  he  that  is  for  us  than  all  that  can  be  against  us."  Wo  must 
not  judge  by  numbers  or  statistics,  nor  by  quantity,  but  by  qiiality.  Whose  are  these  ? 
Decide  that ;  and  then  "  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith," 
for  that  faith  centres  in  God. 

II.  Thk  shall  remnant  is  antiseptic.  It  can  arrest  disease.  It  can  heal.  Take 
a  few  grains  of  some  chemical  substance,  and  they  will  colour  and  cleanse  an  ei'tire 
stream.  "  We  should  have  been  as  Sodom  is."  Yes ;  God's  judgments  on  a  nation,  as 
in  our  own  at  the  time  when  profligate  plays  had  undermined  the  moral  hfe,  have  saved 
the  nation.  For  when  men  laugh  at  sin,  well-nigh  the  deepest  depth  has  been  reached  ; 
but  godly  souls  are  then  used  as  leaven  to  purify  the  body  politic.  Judah  and  Jerusalem 
were  almost  gone,  but  the  Lord  had  mercy  on  them. 

I8AIAK.  0 


18  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.         [ch.  1. 1— 31. 

III.  The  small  kemnant  is  tc  spread  the  Word  op  the  Lord.  The  next  verw 
says,  "  Hear  ye  the  Word  of  the  Lord."  It  is  a  Divine  revelation  that  is  to  save  them. 
A.nd  the  prophet  who  speaks  is  called  Isaiah,  or  lesahiaha,  signifying  "  the  salvation  of 
the  Lord ; "  so  that  though  the  prophet  speaks  stem  words  of  rebuke,  his  very  name 
contains  the  glorious  issue  of  his  work.  His  work  was  laborious  and  long — he  prophesied 
[a  the  days  of  Uzziah,  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezekiah.  Terribly  profane  were  those  days, 
for  in  the  days  of  Ahaz  "  the  doors  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  were  shut  up,  and  idolatrous 
altars  were  erected  in  every  comer  of  Jerusalem."  But  God  sent  his  Word  and  healed 
them ;  and  that  is  the  tme  regenerator  in  every  age. — W.  M.  S. 

Yer.  13. — Salvation  to  the  uttermost.  "  Come  now,  and  let  ua  reason  together, 
saith  the  Lord :  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow ;  though 
they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wooL"  The  previous  verses  show  that  the  Jews 
had  mistaken  the  ideal  of  Divine  services ;  they  had  turned  them  into  a  correct  ritual, 
to  a  multitude  of  sacrifices  without  purpose.  And  purpose  or  motive  is  the  very  heart 
of  religion.  They  were  devotional,  but  cruel.  "  When  ye  make  many  prayers,  I  will 
not  hear :  your  hands  are  full  of  blood."  It  was  all  empty  ceremony.  The  solemn 
meeting  even  was  iniquity.  A  change  must  come.  And  it  must  begin  in  character. 
"Cease  to  do  evil."  Yes;  but  that  is  not  enough.  Negation  is  not  salvation.  There 
must  be  life  unto  God  as  well  as  death  unto  sin.  "  Learn  to  do  weU."  Then  come  the 
words  of  our  text.  They  sound  a  strange  note  at  first ;  they  speak  of  what  man  cannot 
do  and  what  God  can. 

I.  Here  is  the  gospel  in  Isaiah.  Free,  full,  perfect  redemption.  We  see  in  these 
words  Gethsemane  and  Calvary.  There  God's  purpose  was  fulfilled ;  but  it  is  in  his  heart 
when  these  words  are  spoken,  for  "  the  Lamb  was  slain  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world."  It  is  a  glorious  gospel — God  giving  himself  for  the  world.  And  now,  as  we 
read  Israel's  sins  in  this  record^  we  may  see  even  then  that,  where  sin  abounded,  grace 
did  much  more  abound. 

II.  Here  is  the  reasonablekess  of  BELioioiir.  How  condescending  I  Let  iis — the 
Infinite  and  the  finite,  the  immaculate  and  the  evil.  Yet  so  it  is.  God  says,  "  While 
you  are  stained  with  blood  and  cloaked  witli  hypocrisy,  I  can  have  nothing  to  say  to 
you  or  to  do  with  you."  It  cannot  be  that  light  should  have  fellowship  with  darkness. 
That  is  reasonable  surely.  But  how  can  the  sins  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  be  purged 
away  ?  Amendment  is  not  atonement.  And  God  is  their  Ransom,  the  high  God  is 
their  Redeemer! 

III.  Here  is  the  charter  op  the  Church's  liberty.  These  words  will  never  be 
forgotten.  They  have  comforted  millions.  It  is  not  liberty  to  sin,  but  salvation  from  all 
sin,  and  from  the  punishment  of  sin.  Not  from  punishment  only,  but  from  sin  itself,  in 
all  its  forms,  all  its  depths,  all  its  degrees !  For  the  colours  are  chosen  as  the  symbols 
of  the  most  marked  and  malignant  evil — scarlet  and  crimson.  Tet  God  is  able  to  save 
to  the  uttermost.  The  words  are  best  understood  beneath  the  cross  and  in  the  history 
of  redeemed  men  in  every  age. — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Ingratitude  and  intervention.  The  "  vision  of  Isaiah  "  during  the  reigns 
of  four  kings  of  Judah  (ver.  1),  and  the  declaration  (ver.  2)  that  "  the  Lord  hath  spoken  " 
(or  speaketh),  suggests — 

I.  The  fact  that  God  has  intervened  and  does  intervene  in  human  affairs. 
I.  Such  Divine  intervention  ought  not  to  have  been  necessary.  For  God  has  so 
ordered  everything  around  us,  and  has  so  constituted  us  ourselves,  that  there  were 
abundant  sources  of  truth  and  heavenly  wisdom  without  it.  All  visible  nature 
(Rom.  i.  20) ;  the  bounties  of  Divine  providence  (Acts  xiv.  17) ;  the  manifestations 
of  Divine  pleasure  and  displeasure  in  the  events  and  issues  of  life  (Ps.  xxxiv.  15, 
16) ;  the  conscience  that  speaks  and  strikes  within  the  soul — the  moral  judgment 
of  which  oiu:  spiritual  nature  is  capable  (Prov.  xx.  27 ;  Acts  xxiv.  16 ;  Rom.  ii.  15) ; 
— ^these  should  nave  sufficed  for  man's  instruction,  integrity,  perfection.  But  we  find, 
from  the  religious  history  of  our  race,  that  these  sources  of  enlightenment  and  influence 
have  not  been  sufficient.  2.  There  has  been  needed,  and  there  has  been  granted,  special 
intervetUion  from  God.  "  The  Lord  hath  spoken "  to  mankind  :  (1)  Prom  the  FaU 
to  the  Incarnation,  Qoi  iaterrened,  "at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners" — by 


OH.  1. 1—31.]     .      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROi'HET  ISAIAH.  19 

such  visions  m  those  he  gave  to  Isaiah,  and  which  the  prophet  communicated  to  the 
people ;  by  creating  and  ordaining  men  of  illumination  and  leadership,  such  legislators 
as  Moses  and  Nijhemiah,  such  kings  as  David  and  Hezekiah,  such  prophets  as  Elijah 
and  John  Baptist ;  by  the  institutions  and  precepts  of  the  Law ;  by  parental  chastise- 
ments. (2)  At  an^  in  the  Incarnation  itself:  when  the  eternal  Father  said  to  tlic  human 
race,  " This  is  my  beloved  Son,  hear  him ; "  by  the  words,  the  works,  the  soriow,  the 
death,  the  resurrection,  of  that  Son  of  man  who  was  the  Son  of  God.  '  (3)  From  the 
Ascension  to  this  present  time  :  by  the  Word  of  his  truth ;  by  the  ministy  of  the  gospel ; 
by  the  corrections  of  his  disciplinary  hand ;  by  the  quickening  influences  of  his  Spirit. 
By  these  things  "  the  Lord  is  speaking  "  to  us  still,  is  speaking  to  us  all. 

II.  Human  ingkatitudb  the  occasion  of  the  Divine  intervention.  What  is  it 
that  calls  forth  the  Divine  utterance  ?  It  is  the  shameful  ingratitude  of  his  own  sons. 
"  I  have  nourished  and  brought  up  children,  and  they  have  rebelled  against  me."  There 
are  great  and  terrible  crimes  which  have  to  be  recorded  against  the  human  race ;  there 
are  evil  and  shameful  wrong-doings  which  stain  and  darken  many  individual  lives;  but 
there  is  one  common  and  inexcusable  wrong,  to  which  all  people  and  all  souls  must 
plead  guilty,  one  common  sin,  with  which  we  have  all  to  reproach  omselves, — it  is  that 
with  which  God  himself  reproaches  Israel — heinous  and  aggravated  ingratitude.  1.  God 
has  done  everything  to  attach  us  to  himself.  He  has  closely  related  us  to  himself ;  he 
has  made  us  his  children ;  he  has  expended  upon  us  the  lavish  love,  the  patient  care, 
the  multiplied  bounties,  of  a  Father's  heart,  of  a  Father's  hand.  2.  We  have  broken 
away  from  his  benignant  rule.  We  "  have  rebelled  against  him ; "  our  rebellion  includes 
forgetfulness,  inattention,  dislike,  insubmissiveness,  disobedience.  To  whom  we  owe 
everything  we  are  and  have,  to  him  we  have  rendered  nothing  for  which  he  has  been 
looking,  everything  which  has  been  grievous  in  his  sight. 

III.  Our  fitting  attitude  when  God  is  speaking.  When  God  speaks,  let  every 
Toice  be  hushed ;  let  all  things  everywhere,  even  the  greatest  and  most  majestic  of  all, 
lend  their  reverent  attention.  "  Hear,  0  heavens,  and  give  ear,  0  earth."  There  are 
(1)  those  who  mock ;  (2)  those  who  are  deliberately  deaf,  who  close  their  ears  by  filling 
them  with  noisy  activities  or  absorbing  pleasures  ;  (3)  those  who  are  persistently  uncon- 
cerned ;  (4)  those  who  pay  a  passing  and  fruitless  consideration ;  (5)  those  who  bring 
•  reverent  and  obedient  inquiry. — 0. 

Ver.  3. — Obligation  and  interest.  I.  The  weightiest  obuoation.  Isaiah  speaks 
of  ownership  as  a  relation  existing  between  a  brute  beast  and  a  man ;  the  "  ox  knoweth 
its  owner."  There  is  a  legal  and  not  unimportant  sense  in  which  a  man  may  own  an 
animal ;  the  creature  is  his  in  so  far  as  this,  that  no  one  else  can  lay  an  equal  claim  to 
its  use,  and  no  one  can  dispute  his  legal  right  to  employ  it  in  his  service.  In  a  far  larger 
sense  than  this  does  man  belong  to  God.  God  has  that  strong  and  indefeasible  claim 
(1)  which  the  Creator  has  on  the  creature  he  has  called  into  being;  (2)  which  the 
Divine  Sustainer  has  on  the  one  whom  he  has  been  momentarily  preserving  in  being ; 
(3)  which  the  generous  Giver  has  on  the  one  upon  whom  he  is  bestowing  innumerable 
.  and  invaluable  benefactions ;  (4)  which  the  merciful  Judge  has  on  the  one  he  has 
spared  again  and  again  when  life  has  been  forfeited  by  wrong-doing ;  (5)  which  the 
Divine  Friend  has  on  the  one  whom  he  has  delivered  at  the  greatest  possible  cost  to 
himself.  Surely  he  is,  in  very  deed,  our  Divine  Owner :  to  him  we  belong ;  our  lives, 
our  powers,  ourselves,  are  his.  There  is  nothing  which  the  brute  of  the  field  owes  to  his 
human  master,  there  is  nothing  which  man  owes  to  man  that  is  comparable  to  that 
strong,  supreme  obligation  under  which  we  all  rest  to  God. 

II.  The  highest  interest.  The  ass  or  any  other  domestic  animal  has  the  greatest 
interest  in  his  "  crib : "  there  he  finds  food,  rest,  renewal, — life.  The  highest  interest 
which  man  has  is  not  in  the  place  where  he  secures  food  and  rest.  This  is,  indeed, 
necessary  for  his  bodily  well-being.  But  in  gaining  this  he  does  not  find  his  life.  The 
life  of  man  is  in  an  instructed  mind  and,  still  more  distinctively,  in  a  well-ordered  soul ; 
in  an  intelligence  that  holds  the  highest  truth  it  is  capable  of  receiving ;  in  a  heart  that 
fills  and  overflows  with  purest  and  holiest  emotions ;  in  a  will  that  chooses  the  wisest 
courses;  in  a  spiritual  nature  that  realizes  and  rejoices  in  its  hi'^hest  relationships.  A 
man  who  acts  as  if  his  chief  interest  were  in  a  comfortnblo  "  ci  il ,"  a  well-stocked  "fctall," 
is  a  man  who  does  not  know  himself  and  his  opportunities. 


20  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PllOPHET  ISAIAH.  [oh.  i.  1-31. 

m.  The  Divine  beproach.  "  Tke  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  am  his  muter's 
crib,"  etc.  The  brute  beast  has  sense  enough  to  recognize  his  master,  diacemment  enough 
to  porceiTe  what  is  best  for  him  to  do,  but  instructed  and  enlightened  Israel,  recipients 
of  so  many  mercies,  and  with  all  their  golden  chances  of  enlargement  and  elevation,  did 
not  recognize  their  God  nor  understand  their  true  and  real  interests.  When  we  live  in 
ignorance  of  Gjod  and  in  pursuit  of  the  lower  instead  of  the  higher  blessedness,  we  may 
see  ourselves  condemned  and  feel  ashamed  in  our  soul  as  we  look  on  the  beasts  of  the 
field,  and  see  them  using  their  humble  powers  to  discharge  their  duties  and  to  enjoy 
their  heritage.  A  life  of  spiritual  ignorance  is  (1)  a  shameful  thing,  rebuked  by  the 
"  beasts  that  perish ; "  (2)  a  guilty  thing,  exciting  the  high  displeasure  of  Almighty 
God,  drawing  down  his  urgent  and  powerful  remonstrance;  (3)  a  needless  thing, — ^it  is 
in  our  power  to  rise  above  it,  if  we  will  and  when  we  will.  The  last  word  of  the  text, 
as  rendered  in  our  version,  is  suggestive  of  the  true  way  of  return.  We  have  to 
"consider,"  to  reflect  upon  our  obligation  and  our  interest;  and  honest  and  seriou:; 
consideration  must  lead  to  self-condemnation,  conviction  will  end  in  repentance,  and 
repentance  will  issue  in  eternal  life. — C. 

Ver.  4. — Tfte  course  of  sin.  It  is  true  that  both  righteousness  and  ain  have  very 
varied  manifestations,  the  course  of  one  good  or  one  bad  man's  life  differing  widely  from 
that  of  another.  Yet  there  is  a  logical  and  moral  order  in  which  both  holiness  and 
iniquity  pursue  their  path  from  their  beginning  to  their  end.  The  course  of  sin  ia  not 
indicated  by  the  sequence  of  these  accusations,  but  the  different  steps  are  included  in 
the  prophetic  demmciation. 

I.  It  begins  in  the  withdrawal  of  the  soul  from  God.  The  first  movement 
in  the  soul's  downward  course  is  to  "  forsake  the  Lord  " — to  withdraw  itself  from  him. 
At  l:rst  it  has  no  intention  to  take  up  an  attitude  of  positive  rebellion ;  it  does  not  say 
to  itself,  "  I  wiU  not  have  this  One  to  reign  over  me."  But  it  withholds  its  thoughts, 
its  affection,  its  consultation  of  his  revealed  will,  its  activity  and  contribution  in  the 
field  of  Christian  work.  It  fails  to  "  magnify  "  him  in  its  own  mind  and  sphere ;  it 
"  follows  afar  off;"  it  loses  its  hold  on  him,  and  its  joy  in  him.  It  allows  an  increasing 
distance  to  be  placed  between  itself  and  him. 

II.  It  shows  itself  in  weono-doing.  They  who  withhold  from  God  the  reverence 
and  the  obedience  which  are  his  due  soon  become  "  a  seed  of  evil-doers."  Morality  rests 
on  religion  as  on  its  only  solid  basis.  Without  a  sense  of  religious  obligation — as  indi- 
vidual and  national  histories  abundantly  testify — moral  principles  will  soon  decline  and 
disappear.  When  God  is  forgotten  and  his  will  is  disregarded,  life  becomes  darkened 
with  evil  deeds,  it  is  stained  with  vice  and  crime. 

in.  It  passes  into  deliberate  disloyalty  to  him.  "  They  are  gone  away  back- 
ward;"  or,  "  they  have  turned  their  backs  upon  him."  The  outcome  of  irreligion  and 
iniquity  is  presumptuous  infidelity,  unblushing  atheism :  man  turns  his  back  on  God. 

IV.  It  brings  down  the  high  DihPLBASUBn  OF  THE  HoLY  Oke.  "They  have 
provoked  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  imto  anger."  We  read  that  God  is  "  angry  with  the 
wicked  every  day"  (Ps.  vii.  11);  that  sin  "grieves  him  at  his  heart"  (Gen.  vi.  6). 
The  Divine  emotion  is  doubtless  different,  in  some  respects,  from  that  with  which  we 
are  familiar,  but  there  is  enough  resemblance  between  a  holy  man  and  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel  for  us  to  say  that  such  grief  anil  anger  as  we  feel  when  we  look  upon  shameful 
sin  and  shocking  crime  God  himself  feels  in  an  infinitely  greater  degree.  It  is  a 
thought  as  true  as  it  is  terrible  that,  when  we  forsake,  disobey,  and  disavow  the  Lord, 
his  high  and  awful  wrath  is  directed  against  our  souls. 

V.  It  results  in  the  heaviest  of  all  penalties  that  can  bb  borne.  "  A 
people  laden  with  iniquity."  Sin,  "  when  it  is  finished,"  when  it  has  run  its  course  and 
done  its  work,  triumphs  over  the  sinner ;  it  may  seem  at  first  to  be  a  power  under  his 
feet,  and  then  to  be  a  pleasure  to  his  heart ;  but  it  ends  in  being  a  crushing  weight  upon 
his  head.  It  becomes  an  insupportable  burden;  he  becomes  a  soul  "laden  with 
iniquity."  1.  Iniquity  itself,  ever  growing  and  spreading,  covers  the  entire  surface  of 
his  life.  2.  The  effect  of  sin  is  to  dwarf  and  shrivel  his  whole  nature.  A  man  who  has 
given  away  to  sin  (notably  to  such  a  hateful  vice  as  intemperance,  or  licentiousness,  or 
gambling)  suffers  like  a  man  who  all  liis  life  Dears  a  burdensome  weight  upon  his 
shoulders.    He  "  bears  his  iniquity."    Ilis  soul  is  dominated  damaged,  tyrannized,  bv 


ca.Ll— 31.]  THE  BOOK  OF  tllE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  21 

it.  He  is  the  miserable,  pitiable  slave  of  his  own  sin  ;  it  bears  him  down  to  the  very 
groundin  feebleness  and  humiliation.  Yet  there  is  one  aspect  of  the  course  of  sin  which 
is  even  worse. 

VI.  It  culminates  in  the  perpbtbation  op  spibitdal  mischief.  The  people 
laden  with  iniquity  are  "  children  that  are  con-upters."  The  very  darkest  aspect  of 
evil  is  that  it  communicates  itself  on  every  hand.  It  is  a  terribly  infectious  thing. 
Every  corrupt  man  is  a  corrupter  of  souls.  Who  shall  estimate  the  evil  which  one  false 
life  starts  and  spreads  ?  Who  shall  calculate  the  distance,  in  space  or  time,  which  the 
consequences  of  one  wrong  action  travel  ?  1.  What  need  of  mercy  I  2,  What  need  of 
Divine  direction  and  guardianship ! — 0. 


Vers.  5 — 9.— Sm  in  its  hopelessness.  I.  That  sin  is  more  ob  less  beclaimablb. 
Whatever  we  might  have  antecedently  expected,  we  find  practically,  that  there  are 
those  on  whom  Divilie  truth  is  far  more  likely  to  tell  than  it  is  on  others.  Thus  (1) 
youth  is  more  impressionable  than  age;  (2)  poverty  is  more  accessible  than  riches; 
f8)  the  unprivileged  are  more  open  to  influence  than  the  "  children  of  the  kingdom." 
Time,  pleasure,  the  misuse  of  sacred  opportunity,— these  things  indurate  the  soul  and 
make  it  far  less  responsive  than  it  once  was ;  so  that  there  are  some  that  are  more  hope- 
less than  others. 

II.  That  those  who  have  been  unchanged  by  the  discipline  of  God  aee  the 
most  hopeless  of  all.  Many  things  are  effective  as  spiritual  weapons — the  Word  of 
God,  the  ministry  of  the  gospel,  the  entreaties  of  friendship,  the  influence  of  a  godly 
home,  sacred  literature,  etc. ;  but  not  one  of  them  is  so  penetrating,  so  affecting,  so 
reformative,  as  the  discipline  of  the  Divine  hand.  When  God  comes  to  a  man  in  his 
providence ;  when  he  sends  loss,  disappointment,  bereavement ;  when  he  lays  his 
correcting  hand  on  the  man  himself, — then  there  is  the  deepest  silence  in  the  soul,  then 
the  voices  which  are  from  heaven  reach  the  inmost  chambers  of  the  spirit.  And  if  these 
be  felt  and  heard  in  vain,  if  the  lessons  which  come  thus  be  unlearned  by  the  rebellious 
heart,  then  the  last  state  of  that  man  is  about  the  worst  that  is  imaginable  :  "  There  is 
more  hope  of  a  fool  than  of  him." 

III.  That  there  are  those  upon  whom  God  seems  to  havb  exhaostbd  his 
disciplinary  besodeces.  The  prophet  says  (ver.  5),  "  'i'he  whole  head  is  sick,"  etc., 
already.  As  it  is,  the  entire  body  is  covered  with  open,  unhealed  wounds  (ver.  6) ;  the 
nation  (the  body  politic)  was  witnessing  the  most  harrowing  evils  and  the  most 
humiliating  indignities  to  Which  it  could  be  subjected  (vers.  7,  8).  What  further 
chastisement  could  the  arm  of  the  Almighty  inflict  ?  By  what  severer  blows  could  he 
recall  his  people  to  repentance  and  righteousness  ?  So  with  individual  men.  God  has 
sent  them  chastisement  after  chastisement,  reminder  on  reminder ;  he  has  touched  them 
in  one  part  of  their  nature,  he  has  laid^his  correcting  hand  on  another  part ;  he  has 
visited  them  in  many  ways;  he  has  multiplied  his  most  solemn  lessons  unto  them. 
What  more  can  he  do  ?  Where  "  can  they  be  stricken  any  more  "  ?  In  what  other 
way  shall  he  strike  their  follies  and  seek  to  save  their  souls? 

IV.  That  in  their  case  fubtheb  suffering  would  probably  result  in  aooba- 
VATED  SIN.  Isaiah  might  well  ask  (if  that  be  not  the  precise  point),  "  Why  should  ye 
be  smitten  any  more  ?  "  (ver.  5)  ;  he  certainly  does  say, "  Ye  will  revolt  more  and  more." 
His  thought  apparently  is  that  added  blows  will  only  mean  increased  rebelliousness. 
When  a  man  (or  a  nation)  has  reached  a  certain  depth  in  iniquity,  the  very  thing 
(Divine  chastisement)  which  ought  to  arrest  and  restore  him  will  only  goad  him  to 
proceed  with  quickened  step  on  his  evil  way.  Thus  are  the  purposes  of  love  defeated 
and  the  means  of  recovery  perverted.  And  yet  there  remams  one  redeeming  thought, 
via.—' 

V.  That,  though  compabatively,  sin  is  not  uttkely  hopeless  muut.  The 
"  daughter  of  Zion  "  was  little  better  than  a  "  cottage  in  a  vineyard,"  a  "  lodge  in  a 
garden  of  cucumbers "  (ver.  8);  but  it  was  left,  to  be  at  least  as  much  as  that.  The 
Lord  of  hosts  had  left  a  "  remnant,"  though  that  was  "  very  small "  (ver.  9).  Jerusalem 
had  not  yet  become  as  "  the  cities  of  the  plain."  The  penalty  of  sin  is  great :  it  reduces 
the  sinner  very  low  indeed ;  it  robs  him  of  his  heritage ;  it  leaves  him  almost  nothing 
of  the  spirituill  faculties,  of  the  filial  portion  (Luke  xv.  12),  of  the  heavenly  hopes  with 
which  ho  was  endowed.     But  it  leaves  something — some  sensibility  to  which  we  can 


22  THE   BOOK   OF  THE    PHOPIIET  ISAIAH.  [ch.  i.  1—31 

appeal ;  aome  thread  of  willingness  by  which  we  can  draw  him ;  lome  plank  bjr  which, 
through  a  thousand  perils,  he  may  yet  reach  the  shore. 

"The  blackest  night  that  veils  the  »ky 
Of  beauty  hath  a  share, 
The  darkest  soul  hath  signi  to  tell 
That  Ood  itill  lingers  there." 

c. 

Vers.  10 — 20. — The  prophetic  ttrain.  Isaiah  had'  gone  only  a  very  little  way  in  his 
testimony  when  he  broke  into  the  true  prophetic  strain.  The  prophets  were  God's 
witnesses  against  the  mere  shows  and  semblances  of  l)ioty,  and  for  the  reality  of  godliness 
and  virtue;  they  lived  to  expose  the  false  and  to  e.Kpuand  the  true,  to  pierce  with  keen- 
edged  sword  that  which  was  hollow  and  rotten,  and  to  commend  with  glowing  zeal  that 
which  was  sound  and  good.  Here  we  have  a  deliverance  which  evidently  came  hot 
from  a  heart  that  burned  with  fiery  indignation. 

I.  The   DTTEB   INStrFFICIENCT   of   mere   EITtJAt   TO   COMMAND   THE   DlVItTE    FAVOUE. 

"  To  what  purpose  is  the  multitude  of  your  sacrifices  unto  me  ?  "  etc.  (vers.  11^13). 
These  various  offerings  were  all  according  to  the  commandment,  correct,  scriptural ;  but 
they  were  unacceptable;  they  were  "  vain  oblations,"  all  of  them.  They  were  ineffectual, 
because  they  came  from  hands  that  were  unclean,  from  hearts  that  were  unholy.  It  is 
a  significant  and  solemn  fact  that  men  may  be  engaged  in  doing  those  very  things,  using 
those  very  words  which  God  has  plainly  prescribed,  and  yet  they  may  be  utterly  failing 
to  win  his  Divine  favour.  The  services , of  the  sanctuary,  the  "  eating  of  that  bread  and 
drinking  of  that  cup,"  the  ministries  of  the  pulpit  and  the  study, — all  these  may  be 
uniiiipeachably  correct,  but  yet  wholly  unacceptable.  If  the  heart  be  not  right,  if  the 
life  be  not  pure,  they  are  unacceptable. 

II.  Its  possible  odioosness  in  the  sight  op  God.  Those  who  are  rendering  an 
abundance  of  formal  devotion  are  actually  denominated  by  a  term  which  indicates  the 
last  extremity  of  wrong-doing  :  "  Ye  rulers  of  Sodom,"  "  ye  people  of  Gomorrah  ;  "  they 
are  addressed  as  if  they  were  responsible  citizens  of  those  infamous  cities.  Jehovah  not 
only  does  "  not  delight  in  the  blood  of  bullocks  "  (ver.  11),  and  not  only  does  not  reipiire 
this  kind  of  service  (ver.  12) ;  not  only  does  he  call  the  oblations  "  vain,"  but  he  declares 
incense  to  be  an  abomination  to  him  (ver.  13).  "  Your  new  moons  .  .  .  my  soul 
hateth :  they  are  a  troulile  unto  me  ;  I  am  weary  to  bear  them  "  (ver.  14).  The  thought 
is  positively  terrible  that  the  very  things  we  are  doing  with  a  view  to  gain  God's 
pleasure  may  be  bringing  dovm  upon  us  his  awful  anger ;  that  the  very  means  we  are 
taking  to  avert  his  wrath  may  be  only  adding  to  its  weight.  It  is  certain  that  the 
offerings  of  the  hypocrite  are  of  this  kind.  This  prophetic  strain  is  not  only  applicable 
to  the  specialities  of  the  Hebrew  ritual ;  it  includes  all  the  ordinary  approaches  of  the 
human  soul  to  the  Divine  Father ;  it  embraces  that  which  we  call  "  prayer "  (see 
ver.  15).  And  we  have  to  face  the  fact  that  the  most  devout  utt'rances  of  our  lips,  in 
the  most  approved  or  even  in  biblical  phraseology,  may  be  worse  than  worthless  in  the 
Bight  of  God. 

III.  The  primary  ddtt  of  bepentanob.  "  Wash  you,  make  you  clean ;  put  away 
the  evil  of  your  doings,"  etc.  (vers.  16,  17).  When  men  are  loving  and  practising 
unrighteousness,  the  first  thing  they  have  to  do  is  to  "  put  it  away,"  both  from  their  minds 
and  from  their  lives.  The  drunkard  must  first  dash  down  his  cup,  the  untruthful  man 
must  at  once  give  up  his  falsehoods,  the  licentious  man  his  impurities,  the  dishonest 
man  hi»  rogueries ;  it  is  a  vain  and  even  guilty  thing  for  a  man  to  kneel  in  prayer  or  to 
sit  down  at  the  Lord's  table  when  he  is  deliberately  intendin^j  to  go  on  in  his  sin :  that  is 
nothing  less  than  mockery ;  it  is  defiance  assuming  the  attitude  of  devotion.  "  Let  the 
wicked  forsake  his  way,"  etc.  (ch.  Iv.  7). 

IV.  The  readiness  of  God  to  pardon  the  penitent.    (Ver.  18.) 

V.  The  alternative  which  God  places  before  all  his  children — obey  and 
prosper,  or  refuse  and  suffer.  (Vers.  19,  20.)  They  who  now  return  unto  the  Lord 
from  the  state  of  sin  in  which  they  are  foimd — from  crime,  from  vice,  from  ungodliness, 
from  indecision — and  who  attach  themselves  to  the  service  of  Jesus  Christ,  shall  "  cat 
the  good  of  the  land;"  to  them  shall  be  granted  the  sunshine  of  God's  favour,  the 
bleasedness  of  Christ's  friendship  and  service,  the  hope  of  a  heavenly  heritage.     But 


OH.  I.  1—31.]         THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  23 


thJBjr  who  remain  apart  and  afar  from  God,  who  will  not  have  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  to 
reign  over  them — they  must  abide  under  the  condemnation  of  the  Holy  and  the  Just. — C. 

Ver.  18. — The  magnitude  of  the  Divine  mercy.  I.  Thk  fulness  of  the  Divine 
MERCT,  In  estimating  the  fulness  of  God's  grace  to  mankind,  we  must  include :  1.  His 
patience  toward  all  men,  both  penitent  and  impenitent.  From  the  beginning  of  sin 
until  the  present  hour  God  has  been  forbearinj?  to  inflict  penalty.  "  He  has  not  dealt 
with  us  after  our  sins,  nor  rewarded  ug  according  to  our  iniquities."  The  times  of  long- 
continued  ignorance  God  overlooked,  or  did  not  interpose  with  special  penalty  or 
redemption  (Acts  xvii.  30).  2.  His  pardon  offered  to  the  penitent  and  believing.  In 
the  Law  we  read  that  he  is  "  the  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious,"  etc.  (Bxod.  xxxiv. 
6, 7) ;  in  the  Psalms  we  read  that  he  is  "  plenteous  in  mercy,"  etc.  (Ps.  ciii.  8,  11, 12) ; 
in  the  prophets  we  read  that  "  he  is  merciful  and  will  not  keep  anger  for  ever  "  (Jer. 
iii.  12 ;  and  see  text  and  ch.  Iv.  7 — 9 ;  Dan.  ix.  9).  In  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  remis- 
sion of  sins  is  a  cardinal  doctrine  (Matt.  xxvi.  28;  Luke  xxiv.  47;  Acts  ii.  38;  v.  31 ; 
X.  43 ;  xxvi.  18).  3.  The  thoroughness  of  his  forgiveness.  (1)  ITie  breadth  which  it 
covers,  (a)  The  worst  kinds  of  sin — blasphemy,  idolatry,  all  forms  of  impurity,  murder, 
etc. ;  (6)  the  most  criminal  condition — long-continued  forgetfulness,  sin  against  multi- 
plied privilege,  persistent  and  obdurate  rebelliousness  of  heart,  etc.  (2)  Th«  depth 
to  which  it  goes  down,  (a)  Penetrating  to  the  most  secret  thoughts  of  the  mind,  to  the 
most  inward  motives  of  the  soul,  to  the  slightest;  choices  of  the  will ;  (b)  extending  to 
the  thoughts  and  things  which  have  been  overlooked  and  omitted,  as  well  as  to  those 
wliich  have  been  entertained  and  wrought.  (3)  The  height  to  which  it  rises,  (a) 
Leading  to  actual  holiness — for  pardon  is  the  fruit  of  peniteoice  and  faith,  and  with  them 
in  the  soul,  the  scarlet  becomes  as  snow,  the  crimson  as  wool,  the  mind  is  radically 
changed,  the  life  is  thoroughly  transformed ;  (b)  including  full  restoration,  not  nverely 
the  not  exacting  penalty,  but  the  actual  bestowal  of  the  Divine  favour — admitting  to 
the  Father's  home  and  table,  lavishing  upon  th«  accepted  child  every  sign  and  probf  of 
parental  love. 

II.  The  Divine  arguuekt  THEuiSFROM.  God  condescends  to  "  reason  "  with  vs ;  he 
appeals  to  our  sense  of  obligation,  to  our  regard  for  our  own  interests,  to  our  human 
affections,  etc.  The  argument  here  is  not  stated,  but  it  may  be  easily  inferred.  If 
such  is  the  Divine  mercy — so  large  and  full  and  free,  then  how  wise  to  seek  it  at  once  1 
because  of :  1.  The  blessedness  of  being  right  with  God  henceforth.  2.  The  uncertainty 
of  the  future.  Between  our  souls  and  its  possession  may  be  interposed  (1)  sudden  death ; 
(2)  hardening  of  the  heart ;  (3)  increased  outward  obstacles.  3.  I'he  immeasurable 
issues  which  are  at  stake — "  everlasting  punishment  or  life  eternal." — 0. 

Vers.  21 — 81. — Divine  dealing  with  the  degenerate.  We  have  her^— 

I.  Deplorable  degeneracy.  1.  Degeneracy  of  character.  "  How  is  the  faithful  city 
become  an  harlot ! "  etc.  (vers.  21,  23).  There  is  nothing  more  melancholy  than  the 
sight  of  a  people  or  city  or  of  a  human  being  fallen  from  spiritual  and  moral  mtegrity  to 
a  depth  of  sin  and  folly — devoutness  exchanged  for  impiety,  conscientiousness  for  unscru- 
pulousness,  self-restraint  and  self-respect  for  laxity  or  even  for  licentiousness,  spiritual 
excellency  for  moral  unloveliuess.  But  many  illustrations  confront  us,  both  in  history 
and  experience.  2.  Degeneracy  of  power.  The  result  of  this  spiritual  decline  is  weak- 
ness :  the  silver  becomes  dross,  the  wine  is  mixed  with  water  (ver.  22).  The  sinner  is 
not  long  before  he  finds  that  there  is  "  no  might  in  his  hand  "  (Deut.  xxviii.  32).  Sin 
saps  the  life-blood  from  the  soul,  and  leaves  it  strengthless  and  useless.  It  makes  him 
to  be  as  an  Oriental  garden  from  which  the  life-giving  waters  have  been  withdrawn,  u 
a  tree  whose  leaves  have  faded  and  fallen  (ver.  30) — everything  is  parched,  barren, 
fruitless. 

II.  Divimt  visitation.  This  includes:  1.  Punishment;  the  outpouring  of  wrath 
upon  the  wicked,  involving  (1)  personal  ruin  (vers.  24,  28);  and  this  (2)  the  result  of 
the  sinner's  evil  deeds :  the  man  himself  is  as  tow,  and  his  work  (not  the  maker  of  it)  is 
as  a  spark  which  enkindles  it  (ver.  31).  The  "  work  "  of  the  drunkard,  i.e.  his  intem- 
perance, consumes  him — it  wastes  his  estate,  it  enfeebles  his  strength,  it  reduces  the 
number  of  his  friends,  it  brings  him  to  destruction  j  and  so  with  other  vices  which  are 
the  "works"  of  the  unholy;  they  bum  and  they  consume,  and  nothing  quenches 


21  THE  BOOK  OP   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.!.  1—81. 

them.  One  part  of  the  Divine  punisliment  is  (3)  the  shame  with  which  the  guilty  are 
confounded :  "  They  shall  be  ashamed  .  .  .  and  confounded  "  (ver.  29).  It  is  one  of  the 
constant  penalties  of  sin  that,  when  enjoyment  is  over,  then  comes  shame  and  confusion 
of  face.  The  soul  is  smitten  with  a  sense  of  abasement;  it  suffers  the  smartings  of 
conscience,  the  pangs  of  remorse.  2.  PuHfication.  (Vers.  25 — 27.)  God  uould  turn 
hia  hand — his  hand  that  healed  and  saved  ;  and,  in  his  purity,  would  puru'e  away  the 
dross,  and  restore  to  the  favoured  city  its  ancient  righteousness.  Penalty  would  become 
correction,  and  correction  would  end  in  transformation  and  redemption.  Whether  God 
visits  (1)  nations,  or  (2)  churches,  or  (3)  individual  souls,  it  is  that  they  may  "  come  to 
themselves;"  that  they  may  return  unto  him;  that  they  may  be  purified  of  their 
iniquity,  their  pride,  their  selfislmess,  their  worldliness,  their  self-indulgence ;  and  that 
they  may  rejoice  in  his  holy  service. — 0. 

Ver.  1. — The  times  and  mission  of  Isaiah.  God  raises  up  the  man  for  the  age, 
giving  him  gifts  for  the  particular  work  which  the  age  may  demand.  History  is  not  a 
mere  faithful  record  of  things  done,  but  a  wise  and  sympathetic  estimate  of  men  doing. 
A  man  has  more  power  on  us  than  a  triitli.  A  man  is  grander  than  any  doctline  or 
any  book.  Christianity,  as  a  mere  system,  is  a  powerless  thing;  it  never  quickened 
anybody  from  his  death  of  trespasses  and  sins.  The  personal  Christ  is  our  life.  In 
the  sphere  of  philanthiopy  we  are  interested  in  the  doings  of  Howard  and  Wilberforce 
and  Nightingale ;  in  politics  we  trace  the  influence  of  Pitt  and  Burke  and  Cobden ;  and 
in  the  field  of  patriotism  you  kindle  into  cntliusiasm  all  America  when  you  speak  of 
Washington  and  Lincoln,  and  all  Scotland  when  you  speak  of  John  Knox.  But  it  is 
not  an  easy  thing  for  us  to  reproduce  the  men  of  a  long  bygone  histoiy.  The  men  of 
one  period  must  not  be  judged  by  the  ideas  and  manners  and  social  sentiments  of  another 
period ;  and  yet  it  makes  a  surpassing  demand  on  us  if  we  have  to  create,  with  our 
imaginations,  times  wholly  differing  from  our  own.  If  we  could  be  set  down  amidst  the 
ruins  of  the  buried  Pompeii,  and  see  around  us  the  rooms,  the  furniture,  the  pictures, 
the  ornaments,  and  the  utensils,  we  think  that,  with  their  help,  it  would  be  easy  to 
reproduce  the  life  of  old  Home ;  we  could  fill  banqueting-hall,  and  theatre,  and  baths,  and 
market-place  with  the  men  and  women  of  that  age.  With  old  Israel  we  can  have  no 
such  helps ;  we  are  dependent  on  the  liistorical  and  imaginative  faculties. 

I.  Thk  pkophet  himself.  "  The  vision  of  Isaiah,  the  son  of  Amotz."  Little  is 
known  of  his  private  life,  and  nothing  of  his  personal  appearance.  He  resided  in  Jeru- 
salem ;  he  was  married,  and  his  wife  is  spoken  of  as  a  prophetess.  They  had  two  sons ; 
both  were  named  with  prophetic  names,  the  two  taken  togctlier  embodying  the  substance 
of  Isaiah's  message.  The  one  was  called  "  Maher-shalal-hasli-baz  " — "  He  hasteth  to  the 
prey" — indicating  the  swift  desolating  forces  that  were  coming  on  the  people  of  Judasa; 
the  other  was  called  "  Shear-Jashub '' — a  "  remnant  shall  return  " — indicating  the  mercy 
of  God  towards  some,  the  mercy  with  which  so  much  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  deals.  It 
appears  that  the  prophet  wore  a  garment  of  haircloth  or  sackcloth,  the  ordinary  symbol 
of  repentance  among  Eastern  nations ;  and  so  his  very  appearance  reminded  the  people 
of  his  message.  Isaiah  prophesied  for  nearly  fifty  years.  No  record  is  left  of  his  death, 
but  Jewish  traditions  represent  him  as  martyred  in  the  reign  of  Manasseh — sawn  asunder 
with  a  wooden  saw.  He  was  a  prophet,  not  necessarily  foretelling  fuiure  events,  but 
a  directly  inspired  man ;  one  who  received  communications  from  God  which  he  was  to 
address  to  the  people.  The  prophet  had  three  things  to  do:  (1)  to  awaken  the  nation 
to  a  sense  of  sin  in  disobeying  and  forsaking  tlie  Lord  their  God;  (2)  to  counteract  the 
delusion  that  an  external  observance  of  rites  and  ceremonies  is  sufficient  to  satisfy  God; 
and  (3)  to  oppose  the  delusions  of  those  who  imagined  that  their  election  as  a  nation, 
and  their  covenant  with  Jehovah,  formed  an  absolute  security  against  overwhelming 
national  judgments. 

II.  The  times  in  which  the  prophet  lived.  They  were  times  of  national  decline 
and  decay.  Isaiah  saw  four  kings  upon  the  throne  of  J  udah.  He  saw  the  flickering  cf 
the  candle  ere  it  \»ent  out  in  the  darkness.  There  uas  some  ajipcarance  of  prosperity; 
but  Isaiah  knew  that  it  did  but  gloze  over  deep  uatiunil  corruption  that  called  for 
national  judgments.  During  the  time  of  Isaiah  the  neighbouring  kiugdom  of  the  ten 
tribes  did  actually  fall — the  corruptions  of  idolatry  and  sensuality,  in  their  case,  running 
k  8\f  ifter  course ;  and  the  prophet  holds  up  their  case  as  a  solemn  warning  to  the  peopls 


Oft.  L 1—31.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  26 


of  Judah.  The  first  six  chapters  of  Isaiah  have  been  referred  to  the  reign  of  Uzziah,  a 
■king  whose  prosperity  developed  a  strong  self-will  and  masterfulness,  which  led  him  to 
attempt  a  sad  act  of  sacrilege.  Jotham  was  a  pious  king ;  but  Ahaz  plunged  into  all 
the  idolatries  of  the  surrounding  nations,  making  molten  images  for  Baal,  and  sacri- 
ficing his  children  by  passing  them  through  the  burning  hands  of  Moloch  in  the  valley 
of  Hinnom.  The  people  were  only  too  ready  for  this  debasing  change.  But  judgment 
quickly  followed  on  the  heels  of  iniquity.  Pekah  of  Israel  and  Eezin  of  Damascus 
attacked  and  injured  the  country,  though  they  failed  to  take  Jerusalem.  Soon  other 
enemies  came — Syrians  in  front,  Philistines  behind.  Ahaz  sought  help  from  Tiglath- 
Pileser,  King  of  Assyria,  who  soon  turned  upon  him,  and  Assyria  became  the  gravest 
enemy  of  Israel. 

III.  The  work  which  the  prophet  had  to  do.  1.  His  first  work  was  to  make 
men  understand  that  their  sufferings  were  actual  Divine  judgments  on  their  sins,  and 
therefore  calls,  like  thunder-peals,  to  awaken  them  to  repentance.  God  wiU  not  leave 
men  in  their  troubles  to  imagine  that  some  evil  chance  has  befallen  them,  that  they 
are  the  victims  of  accident.  By  the  mouth  of  some  prophet  he  will  assuredly  vindicate 
the  connection  between  sin  and  suffering.  2.  But  Isaiah  had  also  to  bring  comfort  to 
the  people  of  God  in  the  time  of  national  calamity.  Godly  people  are  often  bowed 
down  by  the  pressure  of  surrounding  evil,  and  in  their  despairing  they  sometimes  say, 
"  God  hath  forgotten  to  be  gracious."  God  will  never  leave  his  faithful  few  to  sink 
under  discouragements.  3.  Isaiah's  work  may  be  more  precisely  stated  as  this :  he 
was  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  spiritual  kingdom  of  God,  in  the  person  of  Messiah  the 
crucified  yet  glorified  Eedeemer.  The  old  theocracy  was  breaking  up,  and  God's  rule 
in  the  world  might  be  lost.  Isaiah  was  to  say  that  it  was  only  passing  into  a  spiritual 
theocracy,  giving  place  to  the  spiritual  and  eternal  reign  of  God  in  souls.  In  Isaiah 
messages  of  severity  and  of  mercy  are  most  graciously  blended.  The  following  passage 
precisely  represents  his  mission :  "  Behold  therefore  the  goodness  and  severity  of  God : 
on  them  which  fell,  severity ;  but  toward  thee,  goodness,  if  thou  continue  in  his  goodness : 
otherwise  thou  also  shalt  be  cut  off." — B.  T. 

Ver.  2. — Sin  as  broken  sonship.  Literally,  the  verse  reads,  "  Sons  I  haVe  made  great 
and  high,  and  they  have  broken  away  from  me."  The  later  conception  of  the  Jewish 
covenant  embraced  the  ideas  of  fatherhood  and  sonship,  and  thus  prepared  for  the 
revelation  of  the  fatherhood  of  God  in  the  teachings  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  for  the 
apprehension  of  the  "  sonship  of  men  "  through  Christ's  own  sonship.  It  is  the  point 
of  impression,  that  this  relation  intensifies  the  guilt  of  the  people's  unfaithfulness  and 
rebellion,  just  as  Absalom's  relation,  as  son,  to  David  aggravates  the  criminality  of  his 
deceptions  and  his  revolt.  In  addition  to  the  actual  relation  of  father  and  sun,  the  text 
suggests  the  exceptional  goodness  and  considerateness  of  Israel's  Father-God.  He  had 
brought  the  nation  to  its  maturity,  and  given  it  a  high  place  among  the  kingdoms. 
And  still  the  extreme  painfulness  of  sin  is  not  its  breaking  of  law,  its  insult  to  kingly 
majesty,  or  the  necessarily  bitter  consequences  that  must  attend  upon  it ;  it  is  its  filial 
ingratitude,  its  dishonour  of  the  sacred  claims  and  duties  of  sonship.  AU  heaven 
and  earth  may  be  called  to  see  this  shameful  sight — children  turning  against  their 
father. 

I.  The  sin  op  the  unfilial  son.  Dwell  upon  its  characteristic  features.  We 
estimate  the  motive  and  spirit  of  the  wrongs  rather  than  the  precise  nature  of  the  acts. 
Show  the  aggravations  of  such  sin.  Every  persuasion  of  dependence,  love,  and  duty 
must  be  pushed  aside  ere  unfilial  Bin  can  become  possible. 

II.  Its  possible  ExonsB  in  an  unworthy  father.  This  is  the  only  excuse  that 
can  be  urged,  and  this  does  not  count  for  much.  The  natural  relation  sustains  the 
demand  for  obedience,  and  nothing  can  conflict  with  parental  law  save  the  supreme 
law  of  God.  If  even  parents  command  what  is  contrary  to  God's  revealed  will,  we 
must  obey  the  Father  in  heaven  rather  than  the  father  on  earth.  Illustrate  how 
this  conflict  of  the  human  and  Divine  law  was  the  biuden  of  the  Greek  dramas.  Short 
of  this,  obedience  must  be  fully  rendered,  even  when  fatherly  requirements  cannot  be 
ajiproved. 

III.  The  absence  op  all  s0oh  BxctrsE  when  the  Father  is  God.  His  will  is 
right;,  ia  love.     Apprehend  what  he  u.     Apprehend  what  he  has  been  to  our  forefathers 


26  THE   BOOK   OF    THE   PEOPEET   ISAIAH.  L™  i.  1—31. 

and  to  U8.  Realize  the  "  goodnesa"  of  him  in  whom  our  breath  is,  and  whose  are  all 
our  ways,  and  then  the  unspeakable  iniquity  must  be  to  grieve  him,  disobey  him,  and 
revolt  from  him. — R.  T. 

Ver.  5. — The  fooUshnest  of  increasing  Divine  Judgments.  The  plea  of  the  prophet 
appears  to  be  this  :  "  You  have  run  terrible  lengths  in  sin ;  and  you  have  seriously 
sufiered  from  the  consequences  of  sin;  now  why  will  you  bring  down  fresh  judgments 
upon  your  head  through  persisting  in  your  infidelity  "  (comp.  Ezek.  xviii.  31^?  So 
serious,  indeed,  had  been  the  penalties  of  transgression  already  that  there  seemed  to  be 
no  part  of  the  body  politic  upon  which  another  stroke  might  fall;  new  inflictions  must 
come  upon  old  sores  and  wounds.  "  The  two  noblest  parts  of  the  human  body  are  here 
selected  to  represent  the  body  politic ;  and  the  extreme  danger  to  which  it  was  exposed 
is  significantly  set  forth  under  the  image  of  universal  sickness  and  languor.  There 
were  no  parts  which  did  not  suffer  from  the  calamities  which  sin  had  entailed." 
Remember  the  expression  of  St.  Paul  (Rom.  ii.  5),  "After  thy  hardness  and  impenitent 
heart  treasure-st  up  unto  thyself  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath  and  revelation  of  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God." 

I.  All  sins  are  followed  by  judoments.  We  say,  by  consequences ;  and  we  even 
admit  that  they  are  usually  "unpleasant  "  consequences;  but  we  must  go  further  and 
admit  that  every  sin — be  it  neglect,  or  be  it  wilful  disobedience,  whether  it  concern 
the  individual  or  tie  community— is  attended  by  its  appropriate  and  necessary  result, 
and  that  this  is  always  the  Divine  judgment.  Sorrow  waits  on  sin.  Sufl'ering  follows 
sin.  Moral  deterioration  is  Divine  judgment.  Painful  circumstance  is  Divine  judgment. 
The  old  world  sins,  and  comes  under  the  judgment  of  the  Flood.  Sodom  sins,  and 
comes  into  the  judj^ment  of  the  Divine  fires.  David  sins,  and  quarrel  and  curse 
break  up  his  family  and  break  his  heart.  Judgment  always  links  on  to  sin,  and  no 
human  power  can  snap  the  uniting  tie.  If  we  will  enjoy  sin  we  must  bear  suffering. 
Illustrate  by  the  pngan  conceptions  of  the  Furies  and  tlie  Fates.  Something  bad  grows 
out  of  all  sin;  and  "  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  sh;dl  he  also  renp." 

II.  All  judgments  aee  chastisements.  It  is  impossible  to  associate  punishment, 
as  a  mere  exercise  of  tyrannical  power,  with  God  the  great  Father.  In  the  long  run,  or 
in  the  short  run,  all  Divine  judgments  must  be  proved  to  have  been  remedial  in  their 
design.  It  is  quite  beyoud  our  province  to  decide  to  what  extent  the  free-will,  the 
self-will,  of  man  may  resist  the  remedial  purpose  of  God's  judgments.  AU  we  can  say 
is,  that  a  father's  punishments  must  be,  at  the  very  heart  of  them,  chastisements ; 
and  that  the  plea  of  the  passage  before  us  rests  upon  the  fact  that  God  had  been  smiting 
in  order  to  correct,  and  was  deeply  grieved  because  his  correcting  purpose  had  hitherto 
been  so  successfully  resisted.  Illustrate  how  epidemics  and  plai^ues,  following  upon 
sanitary  sins,  are  designed  to  correct  sanitary  evils.  The  same  applies  in  moral  splieres. 
From  this  point  a  review  of  God's  dealings  with  us  in  our  past  lives  may  be  taken,  and 
we  may  be  searchingly  reminded  how  we  have  resisted  the  remedial  influence  of  God's 
chastisements. 

III.  Refusal  to  leabn  by  chastisement  is  fbbsh  sin.  This  the  prophet  pleads. 
"  You  are  further  grieving  God  by  this,  that  you  will  not  be  humbled;  you  will  not 
learn ;  you  will  not  let  him  lift  his  judgments  off  you."  Illustrate  by  the  hardened  boy 
who  will  not  respond  to  his  father's  punishment  That  hardened  resistance  is  a 
fresh  sin. 

IV.  Fbesh  sin  involves  further  and  worse  judgments.  Before,  the  judgment 
was  but  to  reveal  the  evil  character  of  the  sin ;  now,  the  judgment  has  to  bear  upon 
the  heart-hardness,  and  it  must  be  more  searching  and  severe.  The  secret  of  more 
than  half  our  calamities  and  afflictions  is,  that  they  are  second  and  sharper  strokes 
because  we  would  not  heed  the  first.  Israel  was  swept  away  into  captivity  at  last, 
because  she  would  resist  the  smaller  national  calamities  that  were  gracious  Divine 
persuasions  to  repentance.  In  a  great  measure  it  is  true  that  our  life-troubles  are  in 
our  own  liands.  We  suffer  so  much  because  we  are  such  dull  and  unwilling  scholars  in 
the  school  of  God. 

V.  The  worst  of  all  woes  would  be  the  suspension  of  Divine  judgments. 
There  is  no  more  teriihle  conception  than  that  ordinarily  awakened  hy  the  passage 
"Ephraim  is  joined  to  his  idols,  let  him  alone."     The  unspeakable  calamity,  for  • 


OH.  1.1— 81.]  THE   BOOK  OF    THE    rROPUBT    ISAIAH.  27 

man  or  for  •  nation  would  be  for  God  to  lay  down  Us  chastening  rod,  and  rtop  hi,^ 
judgments.     There  is  hope  for  ub  so  long  as  he  will  smite. — B.  T. 

VerB.  11 — 13. — Mere  ceremonial  an  offence  to  God,  What  a  painful  sight  it  would 
be  to  see  some  of  our  houses  with  the  fronts  off  I — to  look  into  the  abodes  of  vice  ;  to 
witness  the  impurity  and  profanity,  and  wretchedness  and  wild  licence,  and  seething 
corruption  of  our  large  towns !  That  sight  we  may  escape,  but  we  must  see  ourselves 
with  the  fronts  off — those  false  fronts  with  which  self-worship  hides  the  truth  from 
view.  We  must  look  behind  the  gaily  painted  scenes  of  a  decent  moral  life  and 
conformity  with  outward  social  laws.  We  must  know  our  souls  if  we  would  know 
ourselves.  Isaiah  seeks  to  lay  bare  to  the  view  of  Israel  their  transgressions,  by 
lifting  off  them  that  covering  of  religious  service  under  which  they  tried  to  hide  the 
truth  of  their  moral  state.  That  is  the  burden  of  this  first  chapter.  The  people  drew 
near  to  God  with  the  lip,  but  their  heart  was  far  from  him.  Their  relations  to  the 
worship  of  God  in  the  temple  were  anxiously  maintained,  but  with  that  they  thought 
to  be  satisfied ;  and,  while  keeping  up  the  ceremonials,  they  "  followed  the  devices  and 
desires  of  their  own  hearts."  Jehovah  declares  that  the  merely  formal  service  of  the 
impure  is  an  abomination  unto  him.  Those  very  sacrifices  and  offerings  which  were 
his  delight,  became  hateful  to  him  when  offered  with  unclean  hands,  and  when  no 
loving,  trusting,  obedient  hearts  found  expression  through  them.  "  1  cannot  away 
with  iniquity  and  the  solenjn  meeting." 

I.  The  possibility  of  uniting  together  iniquity  and  the  bolemx  mbetdjo.  At 
first  it  may  seem  as  if  that  were  not  possible.  Surely  conscience  will  prevent  men 
.'jom  joining  in  religious  worship  who  are  indulging  in  open  sin.  Perhaps  this  is  the 
real  reason  why  so  many  people  around  us  stay  away  from  worship.  But  it  is  a  fact 
that  many  of  the  worst  men  have  kept,  all  through  their  lives,  in  outward  association 
with  religious  worship.  In  the  times  of  the  old  monasteries  you  might  have  listened 
to  the  solemn  services  and  heard  the  monks  breathe  out  strains  of  holy  music  set  to 
holy  words.  You  might  have  seen  priests  in  gorgeous  garments  waving  incense  and 
uplifting  the  symbol  of  the  Redeemer.  They  were  precise  in  all  prayers,  minute  in  all 
cirumonial.  And  many  of  them  were  faithful  and  true  men.  But  History  writes  one  of 
her  saddest  pages  about  many  of  them.  They  were  given  over  to  gluttony,  drunken- 
ness, and  immorality,  and  were  uniting  "iniquity  and  the  solemn  meetiug."  This  is 
even  a  possibility  for  our  own  times  and  for  ourselves.  Many  of  us,  if  we  were  conscious 
of  heart-sins  and  life-sins  cherished  and  loved,  would  only  become  more  exact  in 
religious  formalities,  trying  to  cover  up  the  wrong  and  hide  itj  as  far  as  possible  from 
our  own  view.  We  do  religiously  somewhat  as  Cain  did  when  he  hid  his  murdered 
brother  in  the  ground,  and  then  si  t  vigorously  to  work  in  his  fields,  trying,  by  sheer 
earnestness  in  work^  to  persuade  himself  and  to  persuade  others  that  he  knew  nothing 
whatever  of  his  brother's  blood.  We  are  not,  however,  so  likely  to  unite  the  open 
forms  of  iniquity  with  the  solemn  meeting  as  we  are  the  more  secret  forms,  the  inner 
heart-sins,  which  may  be  cherished  without  disgracing  us  before  God;  such  sins  as: 
1.  The  unforgiving  spirit.  To  fail  to  forgive  is  to  sin.  2.  Backslidings  and  lustings  of 
heart:  proud,  selfish,  sensual,  corrupting  thoughts.  "  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart, 
so  is  he."  And  the  God  to  whom  we  offer  worship  is  the  Heart-searcher,  the  Thought- 
searcher.  3.  Openness  to  the  vanities  of  the  world.  4.  Occasional  yieldings  to  tempta- 
tion and  self-indulgence.  Many  indulge  the  idea  that,  if  their  indulgences  do  noi 
become  habitual,  i  hey  need  not  interfere  with  their  religious  worship.  Plead  the  Divine 
requirement  as  given  in  Ps.  xxiv.  3 — 5. 

II.  The  view  God  takes  or  uniting  iniquity  and  the  solemn  meeting.  "  I  am 
weary  to  bear."  "  I  cannot  away  with."  "  It  is  an  abomination  to  me."  We  should 
clearly  distinguish  what  it  is  which  is  thus  hateful  to  God.  It  is  not  the  sacrifice,  or 
the  offering,  or  the  solemn  meeting.  God  takes  delight  in  those  places  and  in  those 
services  in  which  his  Name  is  recorded.  They  are  the  highest  things  that  can  engage 
human  attention,  the  seasons  in  which  man  transcends  the  earthly  and  anticipates  the 
hallowed  occupations  of  heaven.  They  are  the  times  in  which  man  ought  to  be  the 
truest,  the  most  sincere,  the  most  himself;  all  cloaks,  all  hoods,  all  masks,  all  pride, 
ought  to  be  laid  aside  whenever  we  pass  the  threshold  of  God's  sanctuary.  Naked, 
guileless,  open  souls  alone  mav  stand  before  the  aU-holy  Lord.     The  thing  whdch  is  so 


28  THE   BOOK  OP   THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  [oh.i.  1— 31. 

hateful  is  the  separation  between  a  worshipping  and  an  obedient  heart.  God  has 
encouraged  outward  worship,  tliat  it  might  express,  and  strengthen  while  it  expresses, 
the  love  and  trust  of  an  obedient  heart.  The  husk  becomes  worthless  when  the  worm 
of  self  and  pride  has  eaten  out  the  kernel.  The  dress  is  hideous  which  no  longer 
clothes  a  wann  living  body,  but  covers,  and  scarcely  hides,  the  skeleton  of  rebellion. 
The  Toice  is  hateful  that  is  only  a  voice,  and  utters  no  joy,  no  trust,  no  love  of  the 
heart.  Be  true  in  thy  worship,  be  spiritual,  and  (Jod  will  look  down  on  thee  with 
delight  and  acceptance.  Be  formal,  be  insincere,  and  God  will  frown  thee  from  his 
presence ;  from  thine  hands  he  will  reject  the  costliest  sacrifices  and  the  grandest  show 
of  devotion.  Our  cherished  sins  will  as  surely  be  an  offence  to  God  as  were  those 
which  are  referred  to  in  this  chapter.  Ours,  indeed,  are  not  sins  of  violence  and  blood, 
but  rather  sins  of  secret  indulgence.  We  have  seen  the  light  of  the  sun  as  effectually 
hidden  by  thin  light  mists  as  by  black  thunder-clouds.  And  God's  face  has  often  been 
hidden  by  the  mists  of  little  transgressions.  He  notices  sins  of  will.  He  observes  sins 
of  inadvertence.  He  sees  sins  of  neglect.  He  reckons  sins  of  nourished  evil  thoughts. 
More  souls  have  died  away  from  the  love  of  God  through  the  subtle  plague-breath  of 
little  heart-sins  than  have  fallen  under  the  strokes  of  temptation  in  open  conflict  with 
evil.  And  what  shall  we  do,  if  it  is  revealed  to  us  that  secret  evils  have  come  in  upon 
our  souls,  and  that  the  devil's  work  of  woe  has  been  progressing  in  tis,  and  the  work 
uf  God's  grace  in  us  is  flagging  and  failing  ?  Wiiat  shall  we  do  if  we  can  detect  stains  of 
secret  disobediences,  unforgivings,  and  self-indulgences  ?  Let  us  not  stay  away  from 
worship ;  but  let  us  at  once  obey  in  this :  "  Wash  you,  make  you  clean ;  put  away  the 
evil  of  your  doings  from  before  mine  eyes ;  cease  to  do  evil ;  learn  to  do  well." — E.  T. 

Vers.  16,  17. — Conditions  of  Divine  acceptance.  The  prophet  has  been  dealing  with 
the  insufficiency  of  mere  ceremonial  as  a  ground  of  acceptance  before  God.  He  is 
equally  severe  on  mere  professions  of  penitence,  that  find  no  adequate  expression  in 
changed  moral  conduct  and  hearty  return  to  the  rules  of  duty  and  charity. 

I.  It  woxjld  be  mischievous  to  accept  the  hardened.  Mischievous  for  the  har- 
dened themselves,  who  would  be  made  yet  harder  by  a  goodness  they  could  not  fail  to 
misunderstand.  Mischievous  for  all  others,  in  whose  minds  moral  distinctions  would 
be  confused,  and  the  Divine  righteousness  sullied.  Under  no  pretence,  by  no  equivo- 
cations, through  no  disguises,  can  God  possibly  accept  the  guilty  and  impenitent.  In 
this,  as  in  all  else,  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  do  right. 

II.  It  is  hopeless,  to  accept  mbkb  peofessobs.  For  they  are  self-deluded,  and 
would  be  kept  from  awakening  to  their  true  state,  if  God  accepted  them  as  they  are. 
The  man  who  is  eatisfied  with  profession,  and  fails  to  aim  at  godly  living,  can  never 
appreciate  Divine  acceptance  or  rightly  respond  to  it.  Divine  acceptance  is  one  great 
help  to  righteousness,  and  this  the  professor  neither  admires  nor  seeks.  What  good  is 
it  to  accept  professors?  God  cannot  get  beyond  their  fine  outer  shell.  They  are  apples 
of  Sodom,  acceptable  neither  to  God  nor  man.  "  He  that  doeth  righteousness  is 
righteous,  even  as  he  is  righteous." 

III.  God  accepts  only  those  whose  penitence  finds  expression  in  efforts  to  do 
RIGHT.  They  only  show  that  they  are  sincerely  desirous  of  help ;  and  they  only  are 
in  a  moral  condition  to  receive,  and  to  use  well.  Divine  forgiveness  and  favour.  Show 
how  intensely  practical  the  plea  is  in  the  text :  "  Put  away  just  those  very  sins 
that  you  have  been  so  freely  indulging  in.  But  do  not  be  satisfied  with  any  mere 
negation  of  evil ;  seek  opportunities  of  doing  justice ;  take  care  to  blend  justice  with 
charity ;  do  the  right,  and  do  the  kind  to  all  those  who  cannot  right  themselves." 
Goodness  as  a  sentiment  is  of  little  value.  Goodness  as  a  life  God  looks  for,  and  man 
aska  from  his  fellows.    "  I  will  show  thee  my  futh  hy  my  works." — R.  T. 

Ver.  18. — Reasoning  with  Ood  about  our  tins.  Conceive  a  man  responding  to  this 
api)eal,  what  may  we  think  he  would  say  to  God,  and  what  may  we  suppose  God  would 
reply  ? 

I.  First  plea.  "  Thou  art  revealed  as  the  great  God,  inhabiting  eternity,  whose 
Name  is  Holy ;  who  art  of  purer  eyes  thar  to  look  upon  iniquity.  I  am  afraid  thou 
wouldst  not  concern  thyself  about  the  sin,  much  less  about  the  forgiveness,  of  such 
creature!  as  we  are."    What  ia  God's  answer ?    "I  have  a  great  interest  in  that  littlt 


OH.  L 1—31.]  THE  BOOK  OF  TUE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  29 

wwld  where  you  dwell.  I  have  given  you  many  proofs  of  it.  I  have  bidden  my  great 
sun  to  shine  on  you,  and  quicken  life  and  beauty  everywhere  around  you.  I  am  coming 
down  continually  in  the  rains  and  winds  that  provide  food  for  you,  coming  down  to 
attend  your  steps  and  ward  off  evils  from  you.  It  is  quite  true  that  by  me  even  '  the 
very  hairs  of  your  head  are  aU  numbered.'  If  I  take  such  interest  in  you,  should  I 
not  concern  myself  about  your  sin,  the  worst  of  the  evils  that  gather  about  you  ?  Do 
you  think  I  could  temper  the  storms  and  the  sunshine,  keep  away  pestilence  and  blight, 
and  not  strive  to  take  away  sin  ?  And  there  is  something  more :  I  am  '  merciful  and 
gracious,  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kindness.'  You  know  that  I  am  Light,  Power, 
Majesty,  King,  Judge.  But  you  do  not  really  know  me  till  you  know  that  I  am  Love, 
and  love  will  spend  itself  until  every  stain  is  cleansed  from  those  whom  it  loves.  My 
love  sends  forth  streams  that  wash  away  sins."  When  love  opens  the  cleansing  fountain, 
what  can  we  do  but 

"Plunge  into  the  purple  flood. 
And  rise  into  the  life  of  God  "  7 

n.  Second  tlea.  "  I  read  that  thou  hast  given  a  great  Law,  by  which  thy  creatures 
are  to  be  judged.  '  The  Law  is  holy,  and  the  commandment  holy  and  just  and  good,' 
Thou  hast  said, '  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die.'  I  do  not  see  how  thou  canst  keep 
thy  justice  and  thy  truth,  and  yet  blot  out  my  scarlet,  my  crimson  sins."  What  is 
the  reply?  "  It  is  indeed  the  mystery  of  mysteries,  but  love  has  solved  it.  I  can  be 
just  and  justifying.  I  have  set  forth  my  dear  Son  as  your  Sin-bearer,  your  Substitute, 
the  Propitiatiun  for  your  sin.  In  his  righteous  life;  by  his  vicarious  death,  my  Law  is 
magnified  and  shown  to  be  honourable.  Not  a  stain  can  even  seem  to  lie  upon  it  after 
such  an  obedience  as  Christ  rendered,  if  I  did  gather  every  sinful  creature  into  my  love 
and  heaven.  I  have  myself  put  such  an  eternal  honour  upon  Law  by  permitting  my 
Son  to  submit  to  it,  that  none  can  ever  doubt  the  transcendent  glory  of  my  justice." 

III.  Third  plea.  "  But  my  sins  are  so  great,  so  aggravated,  it  seems  to  me  as 
though  such  sins  as  mine  cannot  even  be  atoned  for ;  even  if  atoned  for,  I  think  1 
should  never  be  able  to  hold  up  my  head  for  very  shame."  Some  of  us  know  what 
scarlet  sins  mean,  crimson  sins,  sins  of  deepest  die.  What  is  God's  reply  ?  "I  have 
provided  for  the  uttermost  of  sin  in  the  infinite  merit  of  my  Son.  His  worth  outweighs 
all  sin ;  it  can  cover  and  blot  out  the  deepest  crimson  stains.  His  saciifice  sends  up 
suet  a  fragrant  incense  to  me  that  I  can  freely  pardon  all  your  iniquity.  If  his  robe  of 
righteoubness  cover  you,  I  shall  not  see  any  of  those  stains;  I  shall  accept  you  in 
him." 

IV.  Fourth  plea.  "  But  my  sins  are  not  just  acts  of  wilfulness  and  rebellion,  they 
are  the  habits  of  my  life,  the  neglectings  and  self-servings  of  my  life.  I  hear  of  rolling 
sin  as  a  sweet  morsel  under  the  tongue,  and  that  is  just  the  way  with  me.  If  I  were 
forgiven,  I  fear  I  should  just  go  on  sinning  still."  But  God  answers,  "  I  have  provided 
also  for  this.  I  wiU  pour  out  of  my  Spirit  upon  you ;  and  to  them  that  have  no  might 
he  shall  increase  strength.  He  shall  be  Teacher,  Guide,  Comforter,  Earnest,  and  Seal. 
He  shall  be  with  you  always." 

V.  Fifth  plea.  "  Even  if  my  scarlet  sins  are  made  like  wool,  and  my  crimson  sins 
like  the  snow,  I  fear  I  shall  never  be  able  to  return  anything  for  such  grace  abounding." 
What  a  wonderful  reply  God  makes  to  you,  closing  up  your  mouth  and  humbling  you 
in  the  very  dust  1  "  Not  for  your  sakes  do  I  this,  0  house  of  Israel,  but  for  mine  own 
Name's  sake."  Truly  that  is  a  wonderful  answer.  It  is  like  God  coming  to  us,  opening 
the  fountain  of  his  being,  and  saying,  "  Look  in,  look  long,  and  peer  into  the  depths. 
J  am  love."  There  is  all  the  secret.  Love  saves.  Love  saves  even  those  who  never  can 
hope  to  make  worthy  returns  for  love. — R.  T. 

Veri.  19 — ^23. —  UnrighUousneu  a  nation's  cwit.  Comp.  Prov.  xiv.  34,  "Right- 
eousness exalteth  a  nation ;  but  sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  people."  The  prophet  is  pic- 
turing the  corrupt  state  of  the  metropolis,  and  contrasting  its  present  moral  degradation 
with  the  high  and  honourable  character  which  it  had  formerly  sustained.  The  following 
points  may  be  illustrated,  and  the  lessons  of  them  enforced. 

L  UKBIOKXBOUSNKSB  IB  TKB  LEADERS  IS  THE  0UB8E  OV  A  BAD  EXAUPLK.      Hlustratfl 


30 


THE       BOOK   OF    THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.        [ch.  u.  1—22. 


by  the  mischieTOUB  influence  of"  a  corrupt  court  and  aristocracy,  and  by  the  discontent 
produced  by  corruptions  of  the  fountains  of  justice. 

II.  Unrighteousness  in  the  people  enfeebles  the  national  life.  Illustrate  by 
the  effect  of  prevalent  sensuality  on  the  morale  of  soldiers.  The  moral  degradation  of 
Prance  was  the  secret  of  her  weakness  when  struggling  against  Germany.  A  nation's 
manhood  sinks  under  the  pcwer  of  self-indulgence  and  sin.  This  was  strikingly  illuB- 
trated  again  and  a.s;ain  in  the  history  of  Gkid's  people  Israel.  When  they  were  idolatrous 
and  immoral  they  were  weak  before  their  foes.     Virtue  is  strength. 

III.  Unkighteousxess  peepabes  the  way  fob  national  evils.  Both  for  such  as 
are  internal  and  for  such  as  are  external.  Family  life,  society,  religion,  all  are  affected. 
Ordinary  checks  are  removed.  The  sense  of  common  weal  no  longer  binds  men  together 
to  seek  national  interests.  And  the  "  enemy  coming  in  like  a  flood  "  finds  no  "  standard 
of  the  Lord  lifted  up  against  them."  Illustrate  by  the  iniquities  wrought  by  and 
encouraged  by  Hophni  and  Phinehas,  and  the  consequent  despising  of  Jehovah's 
worship,  and  inability  to  stand  before  the  nation's  foes.  Nobody  from  outside  can 
really  hurt  a  nation.  Nations  hurt  themselves  by  permitting  vice  and  iniquity  to  run 
riot.  Show  what  are  the  features  of  modem  city  sins,  country  sins,  national  iniquities. 
These  are  our  peril,  our  woe,  our  curse.  Against  these  every  servant  of  the  Lord  must 
strive  and  plead  and  fight.  Nations  can  build  national  life  securely  on  no  other 
foundation  than  this — ^morality,  righteousness,  the  clean  heart,  and  the  clean  hand. 
— E.  T. 

Vers.  24,  25. — Hope  in  Ood's  reflnings.  Cheyne  translates,  "  Ha  !  I  will  appease  me 
through  mine  adversaries,  and  avenge  me  on  mine  enemies,  and  will  bring  back  my 
hand  upon  thee,  smelting  out  as  with  lye  thy  dross,  and  will  take  away  all  thy  lead- 
alloy."  The  "lye"  referred  to  is  potash,  which  was  used  as  a  flux  in  purifying  metals. 
Calamities,  diseases,  bereavements,  failures,  anxieties,  are  God's  refining  forces,  but 
their  influence  for  good  depends  on  the  state  and  condition  of  those  to  whom  they  come. 

I.  Calamities  of  life  to  men  standing  alone.  Without  any  faith  in  God,  or  idea 
of  the  gracious  meaning  there  is  in  earthly  trouble.  How  such  men  fret  and  chafe,  and 
question  why  they  have  to  suffer,  and  give  way  to  rebellious  thoughts  I  Too  often 
troubles  only  harden  them,  and  drive  them  further  still  from  God. 

II.  Calamities  of  life  to  men  under  God's  wkatk.  These  must  take  intense  and 
severe  foims.  They  must  first  crush  and  humble,  breaking  down  proud  wiUs  and 
rebellious  spirits.  They  must  first  look  like  overwhelming  judgments,  and  then,  if  men 
wiU  respond  to  them,  they  shall  seem  to  be  gracious  chastisements  and  reflnings. 

III.  Calamities  of  life  to  men  undeh  God's  mercy.  This  opens  the  whole  subject 
of  God's  refmini;  and  purifying  of  his  people.  We  all  have  so  much  tin  and  dross 
mingled  with  our  gold,  and  it  is  so  good  of  God  that  he  wiU  not  let  the  dross  stay. 
With  his  "  fires  "  and  his  "  lye  "  he  wiU  graciously  refine  us,  until  all  the  dross  is  got 
away,  and  bis  image  shines  clear  on  our  purified  gold.  And  God's  dealings  with  indi- 
viduals may  be  illustrated  by  his  dealings  with  nations,  and  especially  with  hia  own 
favoured  nation. — R.  T. 


Skotion  IL    Dbnunciation  of  God's  .Judgments  upon  his  People  (ch.  n. — ^v.). 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  n. 

Ver.  1. — ^Title  of  the  Chapter.  It  is 
generally  allowed  that  the  heading  belongs, 
not  to  this  chapter  only,  but  to  a  section  of 
the  work,  beginning  here  and  ending  at  the 
close,  either  of  oh.  iv.  or  of  ch.  v.  It  is 
probable  tliat  the  section  was  originally 
published  separately. 


Vers.  2 — 4. — Propheot  o»  this  Last 
Days.  The  resemblance  of  this  prophecy 
to  Micah  iv.  1-^3  is  so  close  as  to  neces- 
sitate the  conclusion  either  that  one  of  the 
two  prophets  copied  from  the  other,  or  that 
both  copied  from  an  earlier  document.  The 
latter  view,  which  is  that  tal;un  by  Eosen- 
miiller,  Maurer,  De  Wette,  Maor,  and  Mr 
Cheyne,  seems  preferable. 


CH.  n.  1— 22.]  THE  BOOK   OF   THE    PROPHET    ISAIAH. 


31 


Yer.  2.— In  the  last  dajn ;  liteTally,  tn  the 
lequd  of  the  dayi ;  but  generally  used  of  a 
remote  future  (Gen.  xlix.  1;  Numb.  xxiv. 
14 ;  Seut.  iv.  30,  etc.).  The  mountain  of 
the  Lord's  house ;  i.e.  the  Churcli,  the  true 
Zion,  which  is  to  be  the  antitype  of  the  exist- 
ing Zion,  and  is  therefore  given  its  material 
attributes.  Spiritually,  it  would  be  a 
"mountain,"  as  "a  city  set  on  a  hill," 
which  "  could  not  be  bid "  (Matt.  v.  14) ; 
and  again,  as  occupying  a  position  from 
which  it  would  command  the  whole  earth. 
In  the  top  of  the  mountains ;  rather,  at  the 
head  of  the  mountains ;  i.e.  with  pre-emi- 
nence over  them.  The  metaphor  is  drawn 
from  the  common  physical  fact  of  a  l)igh 
mountain  range  culminating  in  a  siuj^Ie 
supreme  eminence.  So  Mount  Hermon 
towers  above  the  rest  of  the  Antilibanus, 
Demavend  over  Elbuiz,  Rowandiz  over 
ZagTos.  The  "mountains"  above  which 
the  true  Zion  shail  tower  are  the  kingdoms, 
or  perhaps  the  religions,  of  the  earth.  All 
nations ;  literally,  all  the  nati(mi ;  i.e.  "  all 
the  nations  of  the  earth  "  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxii. 
11).  Shall  flow ;  or,  itream.  A  constant 
accession  of  converts  from  all  quarters  is 
intended.  These  are  represented  as  con- 
tinually streaming  upward  into  the  holy 
mountain  of  God's  house, 

Ver.  3.  —  Many  people ;  rather,  many 
people:  Shall  go ;  or,  let  forth.  'Phe  pro- 
phet means  to  represent  the  nations  as  en- 
couraging one  another  on  the  way.  There 
is  uo  jealousy  among  them,  for  the  "moun- 
tain" can  hold  them  all.  He  will  teach  us. 
The  nations  feel  their  ignorance  of  God, 
and  their  need  of  "teaching."  God  alone 
can  teaoli  them  concerning  himself  (Bom. 
li.  33,  34;  1  Cor.  ii.  10,  11);  and  "he  will 
teach"  them,  either  directly,  as  the  In- 
carnate Son,  or  indirectly  through  tliose 
whom  he  has  appointed  to  be  "teachers" 
(1  Cor.  xii.  28).  Of  his  ways  ;  i.e.  "  some  of 
his  ways,"  not  "  all  of  them ; "  for  at  pre- 
sent "  we  know  in  part "  only  (1  Cor.  xiii. 
9),  and  the  greater  portion  of  his  ways  are 
"past  finding  out"  (Bom.  xi.  38).  The 
"  ways  "  here  spoken  of  are,  no  donbt,  rules 
for  the  conduct  of  life,  which  are  practically 
inexhaustible.  God,  however,  will  teach 
every  man,  who  honestly  seeks  to  learn, 
enough  to  enable  him  to  "  walk  in  his 
paths."  Out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  Law ; 
rather,  instruction,  or  teaching.  The  word 
(forah)  is  without  the  article.  The  instruc- 
tion intended  is  that  of  the  Church  of  God. 
Ver.  4. — He  shall  judge  among  the  na- 
tions. This  is  clearly  not  yet  fulfilled. 
How  God  shall  ultimately  "jndge  among 
the  nations,"  or  rather  "between  nation 
and  nation,"  is  a  mystery  which  only  the 
future  can  leTeaL  It  has  been  supposed 
that  "by  hia  providential   retributions   he 


will  decide  those  international  questions 
out  of  which  war  ordinarily  springs  "  (Kay). 
But  it  would  seem  to  be  at  least  as  likely 
that  he  will  bring  the  nations  to  such  a 
pitch  of  wiudoiu  and  moderation,  that  they 
will  voluntarily  discard'  war,  and  agree  to 
decide  any  disputes  that  aric^e  by  means  of 
arbiters.  The  arbiter  would  then,  like 
other  judges,  represent  God,  and  "by  him 
decree  justice  "  (Prov.  viii.  15).  Shall  re- 
buke. BusenMiiiller  translates,  "  Arbiter 
pads  sit;"  Cheyne,  "shall  arbitrate." 
Here  again,  as  in  ver.  3,  "  people "  should 
be  "  peoples."  They  shall  beat,  etc.  On  a 
sudden  call  to  war,  nations  "  beat  tbeir 
ploughshares  into  swords,  and  their  pruning- 
hooks  into  spears  "  (Joel  iii.  10).  They  will 
do  the  reverse  "in  the  latter  days,"  when 
God  shall  have  "  made  wars  to  cease  "  (Ps. 
xlvi.  9)  and  "  speak  peace  unto  the  nations  " 
(Zech.  ix.  10). 

Vers.  5 — 11. — Thb  Contrast  of  the 
Present  with  the  Future.  Having  shown 
to  Israel  the  vision  of  a  far-distant  future, 
when  holiness  and  peace  would  reign  upon 
the  earth,  and  "the  mountain  of  the  Lord's 
house"  would  draw  all  men  into  it,  the 
prophet  returns  to  things  as  they  are — first 
exhorting  Israel  to  "walk  in  the  light  of 
Jehovah  "  (ver.  5),  and  then  showing  how 
far  they  have  withdrawn  from  the  light ;  (1) 
by  magical  practices  (ver.  6) ;  (2)  by  com- 
mercial greed  (vers.  6,  7)  ;  (3)  by  ostenta- 
tion and  luxury  (ver.  7);  (4)  by  idolatry 
(ver.  8).  Such  being  the  case,  punishment 
must  come — mean  and  pireat  must  be  equally 
brought  low  (ver.  9)— the  people  must  fly  to 
their  cave-fastnesses  (ver.  10),  and  hide 
themselves;  they  must  be  humiliated  to 
the  uttermost  (ver.  11). 

Ver.  5. — 0  house  of  Jacob.  "House  of 
Jacob  "  is  the  common  expression  in  Isaiah, 
instead  of  "house  of  Israel"  (see  ch.  viii. 
17  ;  X.  20 ;  liv.  1 ;  xxix.  22 ;  xlvi.  3 ;  xlviii.  1 ; 
Iviii.  1).  It  has  no  particular  force,  merely 
signifying  "  Israelites."  Come  ye,  and  let  us 
walk.  The  same  words  as  those  of  the 
"  nations  "  in  ver.  3,  "  Come  ye,  and  let  us 
go  up."  As  the  nations  will  invite  each 
other  "  in  the  last  days,"  so  the  prophet 
now  invites  his  countrymen  to  walk  with 
God. 

Ver.  6. — Therefore;  rather,  for.  The 
prophet,  in  calling  upon  Israel  to  "  walk  in 
the  light  of  the  Lord,"  implies  that  they 
are  not  so  walking.  He  then  proceeds  to 
give  the  reasons  of  this.  They  are  not,  '^fur 
God  has  forsaken"  them,  or,  "oast  them 
off."  The  first  reason  is  because,  they  be 
replenished  from  the  east  (Revised  Version, 


THE   BOOK  OP   THE   PKOFHET   ISAIAH.  [oh.  ii.  1—22. 


"  they  be  filled  with  cuttomt  from  the  east) ; 
i.e.  they  have  adopted  a  number  of  Syrian, 
Assyrian,  and  Ammonite  superstitions ;  e.g. 
high  places,  images,  and  "  groves,"  the 
burning  of  tiieir  children  in  honour  of  Mo- 
loch, uie  use  of '  divination  and  enchant- 
ment, etc.  (2  Kings  XV.  4 ;  xvi.  3,  4 ;  xvii. 
10—12,  16,  17,  etc.).  Most  of  these  prac- 
tices reached  the  Israelites  from  Syria, 
though  many  had  tlieir  origin  either  in 
Assyria  or  Babylonia.  Soothsayers,  like 
the  Philistines.  The  "diviners"  of  the 
I'liilistines  are  mentioned  in  1  Sam.  vi.  2. 
By  the  word  here  employed,  it  would  seem 
that  they  foretold  the  future  from  observa- 
tions on  the  clouds  and  the  general  appear- 
ance of  the  sky.  During  the  reign  of  Uz- 
ziah,  the  Israelites  had  been  brought  into 
cloiser  contact  with  the  Philistines  than 
usual,  through  his  conquest  of  several  of 
their  cities  (2  Chron.  xxvl.  6).  They  please 
tbemselTes  in  the  children  of  strangers; 
literally,  strike  hands  taith  the  children  of 
strangers  (comp.  Job  xxvii.  23).  This  is 
tiiought  to  refer  to  striking  hands  upon  a 
bargain  (Cheyne),  and  to  be  an  allusion  to 
the  commercial  activity  of  the  reigns  of 
Uzziab  and  Jotham  (2,King8  xiv.  22;  xvi. 
6).  But  perhaps  it  does  not  mean  more 
than  familiarity. 

Ver.  7.— rnll  of  iilver  and  gold.  The 
results  of  the  commercial  activity — ^not  evil 
things  in  themselves,  but  probably  acquired 
by  sharp  dealing,  and  leading  to  undue 
softness  and  luxury.  The  Law  had  given  a 
warning  against  "greatly  multiplying  silver 
and  gold "  (Dent.  xvii.  17).  For  the  fact 
of  the  vast  abundance  of  the  precious 
matals  in  Judssa  at  this  time,  see  2  Kings 
xiv.  16;  XX.  13;  2  CJhron.  xxxii.  27;  and 
eompare  Sennacherib's  inscription  on  the 
Taylor  Cylinder  ('Ancient  Monarchies,' 
vol.  ii.  p.  163,  2nd  edit.).  FnU  of  horses 
.  .  .  chariots  (comp.  Micah  v.  10).  There 
Is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  Jews  or 
Israelites  ever  possessed  (unless  it  were 
under  Solomon)  any  considerable  cavalry 
or  chariot  force.  But  from  the  time  of 
David  horses  and  chaiiots  were  imported 
for  convenience  and  for  show  by  the  kings, 
the  princes,  and  the  nobles  (see  2  Sam. 
XV.  1 ;  1  Kings  iv.  26 ;  x.  28,  29;  xxii.  31 ; 
Eccles.  X.  7^.  Like  the  silver  and  the  gold, 
they  were  signs  of  luxury  and  ostentation. 

Ver.  8.— Full  of  idols.  The  historians 
declare  that  both  Uzziah  and  Jotham  main- 
tained the  worship  of  Jehovah  and  dis- 
allowed idolatry  (2  Kings  xv.  3,  34;  2 
Chron.  xxvi.  4 ;  xxvii.  2),  so  that  we  must 
regard  the  idol-worship  of  the  time  as  an 
irregular  and  private  practice.  (It  is,  per- 
haps, alluded  to  in  2  Chron.  xxvii.  2 ;  and 
the  fact  of  its  prevalence  is  stated  in  Amos 
ii.  4 ;  Micah  t.  13.)   Perhaps  Bishop  Lowth 


is  right  in  regarding  it  ae  mainly  ■>  con- 
tinuation of  the  old  private  teraphim-wor- 
ship  ('  Notes,'  p.  25). 

Ver.  9. — And  the  mean  man  boweth 
down,  etc.  So  Ewald  and  Kay ;  but  most 
other  commentators  render,  "Therefon 
shall  the  mean  man  be  bowed  down,  and 
the  great  man  brought  low,  ami  thou  shall 
not  [or,  '  canst  not ']  forgive  them " 
(Eoseumiiller,  Lowth,  Gresenius,  Knobel, 
Cheyne).  The  transition  from  narrative  to 
threatening  comes  best  at  the  beginning  ot 
the  verse. 

Ver.  1 0. — Enter  into  the  rook.  The  lime- 
stone rocks  of  Palestine  are  full  of  extensive 
caverns,  to  which  the  Israelites  often  be- 
took themselves  in  times  of  danger  (see 
Judg.  vi.  2;  1  Sam.  ziii.  6;  xxii.  I,  etc.). 
The  prophet  exhorts  them  to  flee  thither 
now,  but  without  stating  what  exactly  is 
the  peril  (comp.  vers.  19,  21).  Hide  thee 
in  the  dvist.  Not  "the  dust  of  humiliu- 
tion  "  (Kay),  but  "  the  dust  of  the  earth  " 
(Gen.  ii.  7),  put  here  for  the  earth  itself,  as 
in  ver.  19.  For  fear  of  the  Lord ;  rather, 
from  before  the  terror  of  Jehonah,  Some 
awful  manifestation  of  Jehovah's  power  is 
intended,  its  nature  being  still  kept  back 
and  shrouded  in  darkness. 

Ver.  11.— The  effect  of  the  judgment 
which,  in  ver.  9,  was  said  to  be  the  humili- 
ation of  high  and  low  alike,  is  here  declared 
with  special  reference  to  the  high-minded 
and  proud,  whom  it  will  humble  more  tli^iu 
others.  The  Lord  alone  shall  be  exalted ; 
like  a  lofty  and  strong  tower  (comp.  ch.  xii. 
4 ;  xxxiii.  5). 

Vers.  12 — 22. — The  Descbiption  op  the 
Day  of  the  Lobd.  The  prophet  now, 
having  announced  that  God  is  about  to 
visit  his  people  in  anger  (vers.  10,  11), 
proceeds  to  describe  in  highly  rhetorical 
language  the  visitation  itself,  (1)  as  to  its 
object,  which  is  to  bring  down  all  that 
exalts  itself  against  God  (ver.  12) ;  (2)  as 
to  its  scope — it  is  to  be  open  trees,  moun- 
tains, hills,  towers,  walls,  ships,  pleasant 
pictures,  idols  (vers.  13 — 18);  (3)  as  to  its 
practical  effect,  which  will  be  to  alarm  and 
terrify,  to  make  men  fly  and  hide  them- 
selves, and  to  produce  contempt  of  the 
idols  in  which  they  have  so  long  trusted 
(vers.  19—21). 

Ver.  12.— For  the  day  of  the  Lord  of 
hosts  shall  be  upon  every  one ;  rather.  For 
the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  have  a  day  upon 
everything.  The  passage  is  exegetical  of 
"  OuU  day "  in  the  preceding  verse.  A 
"  day  "—or  time — is  certainly  coming  which 
shall  be  emphatically  '■  the  Lord's  " — a  day 
on  which    he  will  descend  to  judgment 


OH.  n.  1—22,]  THE   BOOK  Ot'   THE  PHOl'HET   ISAIAH. 


33 


Frond  .  .  .  lofty  .  .  .  lifted  up  (oomp. 
ver.  11).  "The  ideas  of  eminenoe,  pride, 
and  opposition  to  God  melt  into  each  other 
in  the  Old  Teotamont "  (Cheyne).  And  ho 
shall  he  brought  low ;  rather,  that  it  may 
be  brought  low  (so  Gesenius  and  Cheyne). 

Ver.  13. — Upon  all  the  cedars  of  Lebanon. 
It  is  usual  to  take  this  metaphorically ;.  and 
no  douht  men  are  often  compared  to  trees 
in  Scripture  (Ps.  i.  3;  Jer.  xvii.  8 ;  Job  vii\ 
16,  17),  and  "cedars  of  Lebanon"  espi:- 
cially  art  symbold  of  the  great  and  proml 
ones  (Ezct.  sxxi.  3).  But  it  has  been  well 
observed  that  either  all  the  details  of  the 
description  in  the  text  must  be  taken 
literally,  or  all  of  them  metaphorically,  and 
that  the  mention  of  such  objects  as  "sliips 
of  Tarshi«ih  "  and  "  pleasant  piotui  es  " 
pleads  strongly  for  a  literal  interpretation. 
The  day  of  the  Lord  was  upon  the  cedars 
when  Sennacherib  "  with  chariots  upon 
chariots  came  up  to  tlie  height  of  the 
mountains,  to  the  sides  of  Lebanon,  and  cut 
down  the  tall  cedars  thereof,  and  the  choice 
fir  trees  theieof "  (oh.  xxxvii.  24) ;  and 
similar  devastation  accompanied,  it  is  pro- 
bable, the  other  invasions  of  the  Assyrians 
(see  'Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  i.  pp.  474, 
475).  Upon  all  the  oaks  of  Bashau.  The 
"  oaks  of  Bashau "  are  celebrated  also  by 
Ezeliiel  (xxvii.  6)  and  by  Zecliariali  (xi.  2). 
It  is  quite  likoly  that  tho  Assyrians  cut 
timber  in  Bashnn,  as  they  did  iu  Lebanon 
and  Amanus. 

Ver.  14.— Mountains  .  .  .  hills.  It  is 
Sennaclierib's  boast  tliat  he  "came  up  to  the 
bciglit  of  the  mountains"  (ch.  xxxvii.  24). 

Ver.  15. — Upon  every  high  tower.  Uz- 
ziah  and  Jotliam  had,  both  of  tlieni,  paiil 
much  attention  to  fortifications,  and  bad 
especially  "  built  towers,"  both  at  Jerusalem 
and  in  other  parts  of  Ju  laea  (2  Chrun.  xxvi. 
9,  10 ;  xxvii.  4).  Isaiali  means  to  pour 
contempt  on  these  indications  of  "  trust  in 
an  arm  of  flesh,"  and  to  say  that  they  will 
be  of  no  avail  wlien  the  time  of  calamity 
arrives.  Every  fenced  wall.  "  On  the  wall 
of  Ophel "  Jotham  had  "  built  mucli " 
(2  Chron.  xxvii.  3).  Hosea  (viii.  14)  and 
Micah  (iv.  11)  also  no  I  ice  the  trust  of 
Judah  in  her  fortresses,  and  threaten  their 
destruction. 

Ver.  16.  — All  the  ships  of  Tarshish. 
"  Ships  of  Tarshish "  meant  originally 
"  ships  built  to  sail  to  Tarshibli ;  "  but  was 
used  by  the  later  writers  for  ships  of  a 
certain  class  or  size  (1  Kings  xxii.  48; 
Ps.  xlviii.  7;  Ezek.  xxvii.  25).  Tarshish 
was  Tartessus,  in  Spain,  and  voyages  thither 
were  regarded  as  long  and  dangerous 
(Herod.,  i.  Iti3).  Consequently,  the  ships 
which  were  built  for  the  Tartessian  trade 
were  of  unusual  size  and  strength.  Uzziah 
had    "built  [<.«.    rebuilt]   Elath,"  in  the 

ISAJ.Ml, 


eastern  arm  of  the  Red  Sea,  early  in  bii 
I  eign  (2  Kings  xiv.  22),  and  no  doubt  main- 
tained a  fleet  there,  as  Jehoshaphat  had  done 
(1  Kings  xxii.  48).  Elath  remained  in  tho 
possession  of  the  Jews  till  the  reign  of 
Ahaz,  when  it  was  taken  by  Eezin,  and 
restored  to  Edom  (see  '  Spenkei's  Com- 
mentary '  on  2  Kings  xvi.  6).  Upon  all 
pleasant  pictures ;  Revised  Version,  all 
pleamnt  imagery.  The  exact  word  hero 
translated  "  pictures  "  does  not  occur  elee- 
where  in  the  Old  Testament;  but  a  cognate 
word  is  not  uncommon.  From  the  passages 
in  which  this  cognate  word  occurs  (espe- 
oially  Lev.  xxvi.  1  ;  Numb,  xxxiii.  52  ; 
Prov.  XXV.  11;  Ezek.  viii.  12),  it  ig  con- 
cluded that  works  of  art,  of  some  sort  or 
other,  are  intended.  More  than  this  can 
scarcely  be  determined.  Dr.  Kay  thinks 
the  term  to  include  "sculptures  and  fresco 
paintings."  Mr.  Cheyne  translates  "  all 
ill  ligbtful  works  of  imagery."  The  senti- 
ment is  that  the  judgment  of  God  will  fall 
on  tlie  most  valued  contents  of  palaces  and 
grand  houses,  no  less  than  upon  the  forests 
and  tlie  mountains,  the  fortified  places,  and 
the  national  navy.  All  will  be  involved  in 
one  sweeping  destruction. 

Ver.  17. — The  loftiness  of  man.  This 
verse  interrupts  the  sequence  of  the 
thoughts  somewhat  awkwar.lly.  It  is  a 
sort  of  refrain  (see  ver.  11 ;  and  for  the  use 
of  refrains  in  Hebrew  poetry,  see  ICxud.  xv. 
I,  21;  Ps.  cvii.  8,  15,  21,  31),  and  perhaps 
comes  in  for  rhythmical  reasons,  to  thp 
detriment  of  the  sense. 

Ver.  18. — And  the  idols  he  shall  utterly 
abolish;  tather,  and  the  idols  shall  utterly 
pass  away.  While  the  visitation  sJiall  fall 
only  paitially  on  tho  other  objects  precious 
to  Israel — the  cedars,  the  oaks,  the  terraced 
mountains  and  hills,  the  stronfrholds,  the 
ships,  and  the  works  of  art— the  idols  shall 
be  wholly  swept  away  by  it.  It  is  impos- 
sible to  say  what  visitation  exactly  was  in 
the  prophet's  mind  ;  but  if  we  may  suppose 
that  the  Babylonian  captivity  came  within 
tlie  range  of  the  prophetic  vision,  we  must 
pronuuiice  the  piediction  to  have  received 
a  very  rcraark.il.le  fnllilment  in  this  matter, 
since  that  c.ihunity  did  put  an  entin  end 
to  the  idolatry  of  the  nation. 

Ver.  19. — They  shall  go  into  the  holes  of 
the  rooks,  i  Ic.  (see  ver.  10,  which  is  an 
exhortation  to  do  what  this  verse  declares 
will  be  done).  On  the  abnndant  caves  of 
Palestine,  see  note  on  the  former  passage. 
To  shake  terribly  the  earth  ;  literally,  to 
affright  the  earth.  It  is  not  said  in  what 
way  he  will  affright  it.  The  cognate 
Arabic  verb  has  the  meaning  "  to  shake ; " 
but  it  is  not  clear  that  the  Hebrew  one  has 
ever  this  sense. 

Ver.  20. — In  that  day  a  man  ihall  cast,  etc 


34 


THE   BOOK  Ob'   THE   PKOPUET   ISAIAH.  (.oh.  u.  1—22. 


When  tLe  idols  disappoint  their  worship- 
perg,  and  prove  to  be  unable  to  save  them, 
they  are  treated  with  scorn  and  ignominy. 
The  African  beats  his  fetish  on  such  occa- 
sions. The  Israelites  would  fling  theirs  to 
the  molei  and  the  bats.  Idols  of  silver  .  .  . 
idols  of  gold  (comp.  Exod.  xz.  23;  Pi. 
cxv.  4;  cxxxv.  15;  eh.  xxx.  22;  xxxi.  7; 
Hoa.  viiL  4 ;  xiU.  2).  A  passage  of  Uabak- 
kok  (ii.  19)  shows  that  sometimes  the  main 
bulk  of  the  idol  was  of  stone,  which  was 
overlaid  with  a  coating  of  one  or  other  of 
the  two  precious  metals ;  but  it  would  seem 
that  ordinarily  the  entire  image  was  either 
of  gold  or  silver  (comp.  £x<.d.  xxxii. 
4,  24 ;  1  Kings  xii.  28).  No  doubt  it  was 
thought  that  the  god  worshipped  through 
the  image  was  more  honoured,  and  there- 
fore better  pleased,  by  the  more  costly 
material.  Which  they  made  each  one  for 
himself;  rathei,  wMch  they  (i.e.  the  manu- 
facturers) have  made  for  him.  Idol-making 
was  a  trade,  as  we  see  by  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  (xlx.  24 — 27).  To  the  moles; 
literally,  to  the  dig-holea.  The  metaphor 
must  not  be  pressed.  They  would  throw 
the  idols  into  holes  and  corners,  pits  and 
caverns,  where  moles,  and  bats  might  be 
expected  to  be   the  only  visitants.    Some 


idea  of  the  blindnett  implied  in  any  regard 
for  idols  may  have  prompted  the  imagery. 

Ver.  21. — To  go  into ;  or,  at  they  go  into; 
i.e.  "  as  they  make  their  escape,  they  shall 
fling  the  idols  away."  The  clefts  of  th« 
rocks  (comp.  Exod.  xxxiii  22,  the  only 
other  passage  of  Scripture  wliere  the  word 
occurs).  The  tops  of  the  ragged  rooks  ; 
rather,  the  rents,  or  crevices.  The  idea  of 
hiding  themselves  from  the  awful  majesty 
of  God  is  kept  up  throughont  (cf.  vers.  lU 
and  19 ;  and  see  also  Luke  xxiii.  30). 

Ver.  22. — Cease  ye  from  man.  This 
verse  is  regarded  by  many  as  a  late  mar- 
ginal note,  whirh  lias  accidentally  crept  into 
the  text  (Diestel,  Studer,  Cheyne).  It  is 
omitted  in  the  Septuagint,  and  interrupts 
the  sequence  of  ch.  iii.  on  ch.  ii.  somewhat 
awkwardly.  If  retained,  it  must  be  re- 
gnrded  as  an  appeal  to  Israel  on  the  part 
of  the  prophet  to  give  up  their  trust  in 
man,  whence  had  flowed  all  their  other 
errors.  Whose  breath  is  in  bis  nostrils ; 
i.e.  "  whose  life  is  a  mere  breath  ;  who,  if 
he  ceases  to  breathe,  ceases  to  live."  For 
wherein  is  he  to  be  acooonted  of  t  or,  for  of 
what  account  is  het  Surely,  of  no  account 
at  alL 


HOMILETICS, 

Vers.  1 — 4. — Hope  and  fear  to  he  both  called  out  as  motives  hy  the  preacher.  Already 
in  the  first  chapter  Isaiah  has  appealed  to  both  motives,  and  while  for  the  most  part 
denouncing  Israel's  sins,  and  declaring  their  coming  punishment,  has  taken  care  to 
intersperse  among  these  warnings  announcements  of  a  more  cheerful  character  (see 
particularly  vers.  9, 19,  and  25 — 27).  Now,  being  about  to  devote  almost  two  whole 
chapters  to  denunciations,  he  prefaces  them  with  one  of  the  most  glorious  and  joy- 
inspiring  of  all  his  prophecies,  thus  setting  forth  a  light  which  not  all  the  gloom  of  the 
succeeding  sections  can  wholly  obscure,  but  which  casts  some  portion  of  its  radiance 
into  their  darkest  places.  The  reasons  for  thus  intermingling  light  and  darkness,  joy 
and  sorrow,  warning  and  promise,  would  seem  to  be — 

I.  On  account  of  the  intermixtckb  op  good  and  evil  in  the  wobld.  Tares  are 
always  mingled  with  the  good  seed.  In  no  nation,  in  no  state  of  society,  is  the  whole 
mass  utterly  corrupt.  There  is  always  "  a  remnant "  (ch.  i.  9).  Nay,  more — in  no 
man  is  the  character  u  holly  evil,  absolutely  without  redeeming  points,  altogether  wicked. 
The  preacher  has  to  take  care  lest  he  "  break  the  bruised  reed,"  or  "  quench  the  smoking 
flax "  (Matt.  xii.  20).  He  must  tenderly  nurture  what  there  is  of  gobd  in  a  corrupt 
society  or  character ;  and  this  can  only  be  done  by  comforting  announcements,  cheerful 
views,  words  of  promise.  On  the  other  hand,  never  is  there  any  state  of  society  or 
human  character  without  some  defilement  of  evil,  some  darker  shades,  some  blemishes 
(to  say  the  least)  and  imperfections.  Never,  therefore,  can  the  preacher  dispense  with 
the  motive  of  fear.  Never  must  he  give  himself  up  wholly  to  "  speaking  smooth 
things,"  else  will  he  assuredly  "  prophesy  deceits  "  (ch.  xzx.  10). 

II.  On  account  of  tbe  double  danqeb  of  despair  on  the  one  hand,  and  oyeb- 
coNFiDENOE  ON  THE  OTHEB.  If  all  that  is  prcachcd  is  denunciation  of  sin,  declaration 
of  Qod's  wrath  against  sinners,  and  threatenings  of  his  vengeance,  the  soul  may  be  made 
sad  whom  God  has  not  made  sad — the  timid  may  be  scared,  and  the  penitent  "  swallowed 
up  with  overmuch  sorrow  "  (2  Cor.  ii.  7).  Nay,  absolute  despair  may  be  produced,  and 
the  soul  lost  which  we  sought  merely  to  rouse.  To  prevent  such  a  result,  it  is  needful 
constantly  to  set  forth,  not  only  Qod's  judgments,  but  his  mercies;  not  only  his  wrath, 


CH.  n.  1— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PRuPHE'i    iBA^AH.  3S 


but  hisloriD^-KindreH.  Ob  the  other  nana,  it  mese  aione  are  set  fortli,  it'  his  jtiBiice 
IS  iraiored,  if  tl^e  severity  of  "ais  ju-sgmenta  upon  sinners  is  concealed,  a  feeling  of  over- 
'X.Iiuaence  is  apt  to  be  producfd  and  then  carelessness  and  general  laxity  of  life  follow. 
The  wise.'  preacher  will  steer  'leaf  of  both  dangers,  will  avoid  alike  Scylla  and  Charybdis. 
He  will  njake  his  appeal  in  all  cases  to  both  motives,  but  will  dwell  upon  the  one 
or  upon,  the  other,  as  the  circumstinces  of  the  case  require.  If  he  has  reason  to 
suspect  over-confidence,  which  is  the  more  usual  peril,  he  will  enlarge  on  the  "  terrors 
of  the  Lord ;  "  if,  on  the  contrary,  he  has  to  deal  with  tender  consciences  and  souls  too 
timid  and  distrustful,  he  will  choose  topics  of  a  cheerful  character,  and  make  his  com- 
fortable assurances  preponderate  over  his  warnings. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — National  judgment  the  result  of  national  tins.  God's  dealings  with 
Israel  are  to  be  viewed  as  a  pattern  of  his  dealings  with  nations  generally.  He  has  not 
two  standards  of  right  and  wrong,  or  two  rules  of  action  under  like  circumstances.  He 
is  "  no  respecter  of  persons."  As  he  dealt  with  his  own  peculiar  people,  so  will  he  deal, 
BO  has  he  always  dealt,  with  the  other  nations  of  the  world. 

I.  EvBET  NATION  HAS  ITS  PROBATION.  God  provcd  Israel  during  the  space  of  above 
seven  hundred  years  by  the  laws  which  he  gave  them,  and  the  circumstances  in  which 
he  caused  them  to  be  placed  (Exod.  xv.  25;  xvi.  4;  xx.  20;  Deut.  viii.  2,16;  Judg. 
ii.  22 ;  iii.  1,  4,  etc.).  He  chastened  them  by  foreign  enemies,  comforted  them  by 
deliverances,  warned  them  by  his  prophets,  afflicted  them  by  famine  and  pestilence, 
gave  them  "  times  of  refreshing."  So  long  as  there  was  any  hope  of  their  repentance 
and  reformation,  he  bore  with  them,  forgave  their  transgressions,  prolonged  their  time 
of  trial,  "  destroyed  them  not."  It  was  only  after  all  the  resources  of  his  mercy  had 
been  exhausted,  and  there  was  "  no  remedy  "  left  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  16),  that  the  destruction 
fell,  and  the  nation  ceased  to  exist.  And  so  it  was  with  the  other  nations  of  the  earth. 
God  raised  them  up,  set  each  a  work  to  do,  gave  them  laws,  if  not  by  revelation,  at  any 
rate  through  their  conscience,  and  proceeded  to  "prove  them,"  whether  they  would 
work  his  will  or  no.  Each  fell  in  its  turn  because  it  rebelled  against  God,  and  persisted 
in  its  rebellion,  until  God  could  suffer  it  no  more.  (See  the  example  of  Assyria  in 
ch.  X.  5—19.) 

n.  The  pkobation  is  oarkibd  on  pabtlt  by  the  bestowal  or  pavoubs.  Peace, 
prosperity,  good  seasons  and  rich  harvests,  a  succession  of  capable  monarchs  or  ministers, 
and,  again,  success  in  war,  victories,  conquests,  and  the  wealth  that  sometimes  flows  in 
through  conquests,  are,  all  of  them,  blessings  which  God  bestows  on  nations  with  the 
object  of  trying  them.  Will  they  be  thankful?  Will  they  make  a  good  use  of  the 
favours  granted  them  ?  Will  they  maintain  their  equanimity,  and  not,  like  Assyria, 
be  unduly  puifed  up  ?  The  discipline  of  prosperity  is  exceedingly  trying ;  and  under 
it  nations  almost  invariably  wax  wanton  and  proud.  Israel  was  thus  tried  in  the  times 
of  David  and  Solomon,  and  also  under  Uzziah  and  Jotham  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  6 — 16 ; 
xxvii.  3 — 6).  Assyria  underwent  the  probation  for  many  centuries,  from  the  time  of 
the  king  contemporary  with  Ahab  to  the  great  blow  received  imder  Sennacherib. 
Egypt  in  early  days,  and  Bome  in  later  ones,  had  even  longer  periods  of  unmixed  pros- 
perity, and  became  proportionally  "  lifted  up,"  It  is  rarely,  indeed,  that  we  find  any 
nation  improve  under  this  kind  of  probation.  Almost  invariably  there  is  a  rapid  change 
for  the  worse. 

III.  The  probation  is  fubthee  cabbied  on  by  the  infliction  of  judgments.  God 
has  many  arrows  in  his  quiver,  many  plagues  whereby  he  can  punish  nations,  as  he 
showed  in  Egypt  (Exod.  vii. — xii.) ;  but  three  of  these  stand  out  from  the  rest  as  the 
especial  instruments  of  his  wrath — the  sword,  famine,  and  pestilence.  (See  2  Sam.  xxiv. 
13 ;  1  Chron.  xxi.  12 ;  Bzek.  xxxiv.  17.  In  Ezek.  xiv.  12 — 21,  "  four  sore  judgments  " 
are  mentioned ;  but  "  the  noisome  beast "  is  clearly  not  on  a  par  with  the  other  three.) 
On  the  employment  of  the  sword  to  chastise  Israel,  see  Exod.  xxii.  24 ;  Lev.  xxvi.  17 — 
33 ;  Judg.  iii.  8,  12  ;  iv.  2  ;  vi.  1 ;  xiii.  1 ;  2  Kings  xvii.  20;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  17  ;  ol 
famine,  see  Lev.  xxvi.  19,  20,  26 — 29 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  22 — 24 ;  1  Kings  xviii.  1 — 18  ; 
Joel  i.  4 — 20 ;  iL  3 — 11 ;  of  pestilence,  see  Numb.  xvi.  46—49 ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  15  ; 
Ezek.  xiv.  19;  xxxviii.  22.  Of  these  three,  famine  and  pestilence  are  the  minm 
scourges,  and  are  employed  to  warn,  to  terrify,  to  arouse ;  war  has  sometimes  the  saiiM 
object,  but  is  especially  used  to  destroy.     War  destroyed  Assyria  (Nab.  iii  2 — \ij\ 


36  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHET  ISAIAH.  [oh.  ii.  1—21 

Babylon  (Jer.  1.  2—37  ;  li.  1—58 ;  Dan.  v.  30,  31),  Media  (Herod.,  i.  127, 128),  Bgyist 
(ibid.,  iii.  11—13),  Persia  (Dan.  viii.  3—7,  20,  21),  Greece,  Borne.  War  is  Still  God's 
last,  most  terrible  scourge,  and  will  remain  such  untU  the  happy  time,  described  by 
Isaiah  in  vers.  2 — i,  arrives. 

Vers.  12— 22.— The  terrors  of  the  day  of  the  Lord.  Every  visitation  of  man  by  God 
is  typical  of  his  coming  to  judgment.  "  That  day  "  is,  in  its  deepest  and  truest  sense, 
the  day  whereon  Christ  shall  come  again  to  judge  both  the  quick  and  the  dead.  Of 
"  that  day  and  that  hour  knoweth  no  man  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  36) ;  and  the  terror  is  increased 
by  the  mystery.  1'he  prophet  sees  God  descend  to  judge  Israel.  The  particular  features 
are  local;  but  through  them  may  be  discerned  without  much  difficulty  the  characteristics 
which  are  recurrent,  and  which  belong  especially  to  the  last  and  great  day,  viz.^ 

I.  Abasement  of  the  proud.  Earthly  distinctions  come  to  nought  when  the  earth 
itself  comes  to  an  end.  Rank,  titles,  dignities,  fail.  The  "  mean  man  "  and  the  "great 
man  *  (ver.  9),  the  highest  and  the  lowest  in  earthly  rank,  are  upon  a  par,  when  all  have 
to  appear  before  their  Judge.  And  spiritual  pride  is  equally  brought  low.  None  but 
must  then  feel  himself  a  miserable  sinner,  a  suppliant  for  mercy  at  God's  feet,  with  hope 
only  through  the  merits  and  intercession  of  the  incarnate  Son.  "  The  loftiness  of  man 
shaJI  be  bowed  down,  and  the  haughtiness  of  men  shall  be  made  low :  and  the  Lord 
alone  shall  be  exalted  in  that  day  "  (ver.  17). 

II.  Destruction  op  the  grandest  of  human  wokks.  Towers,  walls,  palaces,  are 
shattered  and  overturned  at  the  great  seasons  of  national  judgments,  and  will  fall  with 
a  crash  everywhere  at  the  final  judgment-day.  The  great  navies  of  the  world  will 
perish  in  the  "  fervent  heat ; "  the  works  of  art,  the  "  pleasant  pictures,"  and  all  the 
"  delightful  works  of  imagery,"  will  shrivel  like  parchment  scrolls.  The  accumulated 
civilization  of  millennia  will  be  brouglrt  to  nought.  Egypt's  pyramids  and  temples, 
Persia's  palaces,  Greece's  Icvely  fanes,  Rome's  amphitheatres,  Christendom's  magnificent 
cathedrals, — all  will  totter  to  their  base  and  be  overthrown.  Notliing  will  stand  that 
human  skill,  contrivance,  energy,  has  constructed ;  all  will  disappear,  and-^ 

"  Like  the  baseless  fabric  of  a  vision, 
Leave  not  a  wrack  behind." 

m.  Destruction  op  grand  objects  in  nature.  The  taint  of  man's  sin  has  passed 
upon  nature  itself.  Pride  and  vanity  have  employed  natural  products  for  self-glorification ; 
the  precious  metals  have  been  prostituted  to  sinful  uses ;  seltishness  has  turned  natural 
beauties  iuto  private  property,  and  either  made  a  gain  of  them,  or  jealously  secluded 
them  from  the  intrusion  of  ordinary  humanity.  'Therefore  Nature,  as  she  now  is,  has 
become  unfit  for  the  habitation  of  man  in  his  regenerate  condition ;  and  "  the  first  earth  " 
has  to  "  pass  away,"  and  to  be  succeeded  by  the  "  new  heaven  and  new  earth  "  of  the 
Apocalyptic  vision  (Rev.  xxi.  1).  What  the  exact  amount  of  change  will  be,  we  do  not 
know.  Many  features  of  the  existing  earth  may  remain — pure  snowy  summits  that  the 
foot  of  man  has  never  trod ;  blue  glacier  caves  that  have  escaped  his  prying  eyes ;  deep 
forest  glades  preserved  from  the  desecration  of  his  presence  by  thorny  jungle  or  im- 
penetrable wealth  of  undergrowth ;  but  much  of  that  with  which  man  is  most  familiar 
will  disappear — perhaps  all  that  could  recall  acts  or  thoughts  of  sin — and  the  "new 
heaven  and  new  earth,"  that  God  wiU  create,  will  to  such  an  extent  supersede  the  old, 
that  "  the  former  shall  not  be  remembered,  nor  come  into  mind  "  (ch.  Ixv.  17). 

rV.  General  alarm,  espbciallt  op  the  sinner  and  the  worldly.  They  of 
Israel  fled  into  "  the  holes  of  the  rocks,  and  the  caves  of  the  earth,  from  the  terror  of 
the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his  majesty  "  (ver.  19).  At  the  last  day,  "  men  shall 
say  to  the  mountains,  Fall  on  us ;  and  to  the  hills.  Cover  us  "  (Luke  xxiii.  30) ;  "  Hide 
us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  " 
(Kev.  vi.  16).  The  brightness  of  his  presence  will  be  intolerable  to  those  who  have 
"  loved  darkness  rather  than  light ;  "  and  they  will  desire,  at  any  rate,  to  flee  from  it. 
Alas  I  flight  will  be  impossible,  concealment  will  be  impossible ;  no  rocks  will  offer 
hiding-places  to  the  ungodly  from  the  presence  of  God.  One  only  refuge  is  possible ; 
but  to  that  men  must  have  fled  before,  with  tlie  heartfelt,  earnest  cry — 

"  Rock  of  ages,  cleft  for  me, 
Let  me  hide  myself  in  ttiee  t" 


OH.  n.  1—22.]  THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  87 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vera.  1 — 4. — The  golden  age.  I.  The  blessed  or  golden  age  a  stmrtor  of 
EARLY  PBOPHEOT.  It  IS  believed  that  we  have  in  these  verses  a  very  ancient  oracle, 
first  delivered  by  the  earlier  prophet  Joel  (see  Joel  iii.  10),  and  from  him  ^cpca^ed  by 
Isaiah  and  Mioah  (iv.  1 — 4).  An  eternal  hopefulness  lived  in  the  heart  of  the  great 
prophets,  like  a  light  shinin^;  in  a  dark  place,  amidst  all  the  scenes  of  national  sin  and 
depression.  What  has  been  said  of  true  poetry  is  to  be  said  of  prophecy — it  is  the  "  light 
that  never  shone  on  sea  or  shore  ;  the  inspiration  and  the  poet's  dream." 

II.     A   REVIVAL  OP   RELIGION    WIM,    USHER    IN   THE     GOLDEN    AGE.        The    mountains 

were  earliest  seats  of  Divine  worship,  both  aAongst  Jews  and  G-entiles.  One  of  the 
seats  of  the  great  god  of  the  Greeks,  Mount  Lycaeos  in  Arcadia,  commanded,  Pausanias 
tells  us,  a  view  over  nearly  the  whole  Peloponnese.  Zion  was  a  small  and  lowly  mount, 
but  it  is  to  become  a  peak  that  shall  overtop  all  mountains,  the  "  joy  of  the  whole 
earth"  (Ps.  xlviii.  2),  unrivalled  in  the  majesty  of  its  Divine  associations  (Ps.  Ixviii.  16). 
The  Gentiles  will  make  pilgrimages  to  this  holy  mountain.  All  this  poetically 
describes  the  commanding  influence  of  true  religion.  1.  The  revival  of  religion  means 
the  revival  vf  morality.  When  the  conscience  is  really  awakened,  the  inquiry  will 
ever  be — What  must  we  do  ?  What  are  the  ways  and  paths  of  God  ?  What  are  the 
principles  of  a  true,  a  just,  and  a  blessed  life  ?  2.  It  means  social  unity.  In  the  vision 
the  Gentiles  are  seen  converging  with  the  Jews  to  one  point — to  Zion.  The  more  deep 
religion  is,  the  more  do  men  feel  that  truth  is  but  one,  thought  one,  spiritual  worship 
one.  The  love  of  God  solves  all  differences  in  itself.  3.  True  religion  is  a  self-diffusive 
])ower.  It  goes  forth  like  light,  like  heat,  like  a  fame  and  rumour  insensibly  stealing 
through  the  air. 

III.  Justice  akd  peace  will  be  the  effects  of  true  religion.  We  can  clearly 
see  that  it  is  so  from  the  course  of  history.  With  theprogressof  Christianity,  the  admin- 
istration of  justice  within  the  sphere  of  each  nation  has  become  milder,  because  more 
thoughtful,  more  respectful  of  the  value  of  the  individual  life.  Not  only  so,  the  idea  of 
international  justice  has  gained  ground.  Whatever  a  certain  school  of  politicians  may 
say,  conscience  does  gain  ground  in  the  dealings  of  nation  with  nation.  Wrong  cannot 
be  done  to  the  weak  without  censure.  Nations  as  well  as  individuals  are  more  alive  to 
the  voice  of  public  opinion,  and  more  sensible  of  shame.  In  our  own  time,  "justice" 
has  again  and  again  been  the  watchword  of  our  politics,  and  has  gained  attention  and 
overcome  the  clamours  of  the  bellicose  and  the  sneers  of  the  cynical.  Let  us  be 
thankful  for  these  things.  Best  of  all,  peace  and  its  occupations  replace  war  and  its 
waste,  as  true  religion  prevails.  In  this  beautiful  picture,  or  slight  sketch  of  a  picture, 
we  see  the  soldier  going  back  to  his  fields,  that  he  may  turn  the  murderous  steel  into 
the  hoe,  the  share,  the  pruning-knife,  while  the  arsenals  and  military  schools  are 
closed  (see  the  touch  added  by  Mioah  iv.  4 ;  of.  Ps.  xlvi.  9 ;  Hos.  ii.  20 ;  Zech.  ix.  10). 
It  is  the  picture  of  an  ideal  and  a  future,  not  yet  nor  soon  perhaps  to  be  converted  into 
an  actual  present,  except  in  the  delightful  world  of  holy  dreams  which  makes  the  best 
of  our  life.  But  for  every  one  who  works  and  lives  in  the  true  Christian  spirit,  the 
picture  ever  more  nearly  tends  to  coincide  with  the  reality. 

IV.  Reflections  of  this  prophecy  among  the  Gentiles.  Doubtless  a  large  collec- 
tion might  bo  made  of  passages  of  similar  scope  from  the  lore  of  other  nations.  Best 
known  are  those  from  the  Roman  poets.  Virgil,  like  Joel  (iii.  10),  reverses  the  imagery. 
When  right  and  wrong  are  confused,  wars  prevail  and  all  manner  of  crimes.  The 
plough  receives  no  honour ;  the  fields  run  to  weeds,  because  the  farmers  have  gone  to 
serve  as  soldiers,  and  the  curved  sickles  are  turned  into  the  rigid  sword  ('  Georg.,'  i.  506, 
ggq.).  So  Ovid  :  in  time  of  war  the  sword  is  apter  than  the  plough  ;  the  toiling  ox  ^ves 
way  to  the  war-horse,  while  hoes  and  rakes  are  turned  into  javelins  ('  Fast.,'  i.  697,  iqq.). 
He  further  sketches  the  picture  of  peace  bringing  back  the  ox  to  the  yoke,  and  the  seed 
to  the  ploughed  land.  For  "  Peace  nourishes  Ceres,  and  Ceres  is  the  foster-child  of 
Peace."  We  must  reserve  the  further  pictures  of  the  perfection  of  the  golden  age  in 
the  Gentile  poets  until  we  come  to  ch.  xi.  In  their  way  they,  too,  recognized  that  so 
happy  a  state  of  things  could  only  be  brought  about  by  religion — b^  the  returning  of 
men  to  obedience  to  Divine  laws. 


'.8  Tflfi  BOOK  01^   THE   PROttlET  ISAUH,        [oa.  a.  1— 22. 

V.  Modern  lessons.  Let  us  "  come  and  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Eternal."  In  that 
light  the  hideousness  of  war  and  of  the  national  discords  which  lead  to  it  are  clearly 
seen.  No  sound  understanding  can  ever  look  upon  war  as  other  than  an  occasional  and 
dread  necessity.  Preaching  against  war  may  do  a  certain  good.  But  practically  to 
walk  in  the  light  and  lead  others  to  it  is  better.  All  sides  of  the  subject  need  to  be 
better  understood  by  the  popular  mind.  The  most  serious  fallacies  prevail.  Were  the 
energies  now  employed  in  preparing  for  and  carrying  on  war  devoted  to  exploring, 
breaking  up, and  cultivating  new  regions, how  truly  blessed  the  result!  In  fighting  witli 
the  stubbornness  of  nature  man  may  find  an  outlet  for  all  his  pugnacious  energy.  The 
poets  should  sanctify  their  art  to  glorifying  the  ideals  of  peace  rather  than  theme  of  war.  . 
None  can  read  these  lines  without  being  enkindled — 

*'  Ah,  when  shall  all  men's  good 
Be  each  man's  rule,  and  univerail  peace 
Lie  like  a  shaft  of  light  across  the  land. 
And  like  a  lane  of  beams  athwart  the  sea, 
Thro'  all  the  circle  of  the  golden  year  ?  " 

(Tetmyson.) 

And  let  every  earnest  toiler  in  whatever  sphere  for  the  good  of  man,  for  the  glory  of 
God,  take  these  words  to  heart — 

"  Unto  him  who  works,  and  feels  he  works. 
This  same  grand  year  is  ever  at  the  doors." 

Vers.  5—10. — Purgation  by  judgment.  The  blessed  age  cannot  yet  come  in.  If  we 
suppose  the  prophet  to  have  teen  reading  the  previous  oracle  as  a  sabbath  lesson  out  of 
[lie  elder  prophet  Joel's  scroll,  he  adds  the  exhortation,  "Let  us  walk  in  the  light  of 
Jehovah!  "  Then  a  sudden  pause.  For  he  calls  to  mind  the  present  corrupt  condition 
of  the  nation.  They  cannot  pass  over  to  that  new  and  happy  condition  of  things  as 
they  now  are.  Peace  can  only  be  the  fruit  of  righteousness.  God  cannot  impart 
blessings  for  which  the  heart  makes  no  room. 

I.  The  reasons  of  Divine  rejection.  The  nation's  practices  and  fashions  are 
inconsistent  with  the  religion  of  Jehovah.  1.  Wizardry,  magic,  soothsaying,  and 
augury  prevail.  These  are  distinctly  heathen,  Philistine,  practices.  The  Law  repudiated 
every  kind  of  magic  (Lev.  xix.  26;  Exod.  xxii.  17).  Such  arts  are  described  under 
various  names  in  Deut.  xviii.  10,  11.  The  principle  was  in  every  case  the  same — the 
attempt  to  gratify  human  curiosity  and  desire  by  unlawful  means.  Modern  "  spiri- 
tualism "  springs  from  the  same  root.  The  path  of  true  science  is  above-ground  and  full 
of  light ;  that  of  false  science  is  subterranean  and  dark.  The  methods  of  sound  know- 
ledge may  be  explained  to  all.  The  worker  of  good  comes  to  the  light,  and  hates  occult 
procedure  which  can  give  no  account  of  itself.  The  magical  spirit  still  works  against 
true  Christianity,  which  is  the  "  light  of  the  Eternal."  Christian  ministers  become 
magicians  if  they  teach  that  changes  can  be  wrought  or  blessings  secured  by  the  mere 
administration  of  sacraments ;  or  by  the  mere  repetition  of  a  formula,  such  as  "  I  do 
believe,  I  will  believe ; "  or  by  the  artificial  putting  on  of  a  particular  fiame  of  mind. 
Obedience,  not  the  mimicry  of  it,  purity,  not  the  representation  of  it,  is  required  by  God. 
2.  Ill-i.otten  wealth  and  luxury.  The  people  were  immoderately  money-loving.  Like 
Tyre,  they  heaped  up  silver  like  dust,  and  gold  like  the  mire  of  the  streets  (Zec£.  ix.  3). 

"  111  fares  the  land,  to  hastening  ills  a  prey, 
Where  wealth  accumulates  and  men  decay." 

The  excess  of  accumulation  ever  does  mean  the  waste  of  manhood.  A  nation  is  only 
healthy  when  the  vigour  of  its  mascuhne  intellect  goes  to  promote  the  ulterior  ends  of 
existence.  Those  ends  are  spiritual.  Wealth  should  be  prized  for  the  sake  of  leisure, 
and  leisure  for  the  sake  of  culture.  When  leisure  hangs  heavy  on  the  business  man's 
hands,  it  is  a  sign  that  he  has  been  overtrained  in  one  direction.  'Tis  a  sad  failure  to 
be  found  fit  only  for  grinding  at  the  money-making  mill.  Such  a  man  cannot  enjoy 
wealth  when  he  has  got  it.    We  need  a  larger  ccnception  of  the  true  conduct  of  life 


en.  n.  1—22.]         THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  39 

Men  often  lose  more  morally  in  their  rest-time  than  they  can  recover  in  their  work- 
time.  No  unjust  trading  can  produce  feal  prosperity.  Englaad  has  gained  by  every 
act  of  righteous,  policy,  such  as  the  abolition  of  the  corn-laws,  the  slave-trade. 
Whatever  is  gain  to  the  health  of  the  national  conscience  is  permanent.  Every  just 
act  is  a  tonic  to  the  soul.  3.  They  are  full  of  the  materials  for  war.  Their  reliance  is 
on  horses  and  chariots.  When  a  nation  places  confidence  on  physical  force  only,  it  is 
another  symptom  of  moral  enervation,  flow  often  has  this  been  seen  in  history !  The 
very  existence  of  a  great  armed  force  is  a  constant  provocative  to  war.  It  breeds  a 
martial  imagination  and  a  bellicose  spirit.  Kational  jealousies  are  roused,  and  the 
slightest  occasion  may  set  a  continent  aflame.  The  people  must  learn  that  Jehovah 
delights  not  in  the  legs  of  men,  i.e.  in  serried  battalions,  and  that  in  proportion  as  they 
lean  on  armies  they  are  faithless  to  God.  They  must  learn  to  say,  "  Asshur  shall  not 
save  us ;  we  will  not  ride  upon  horses :  neither  will  we  say  any  more  to  the  work  of 
our  hands.  Ye  are  our  gods :  for  in  thee  the  fatherless  findeth  mercy  "  (Hos.  xiv.  3).  4. 
TAey  are  full  of  idols.  This  is  perhaps  the  worst  feature  of  their  state.  The  prohibi- 
tion of  idols  is  grounded  in  the  nature  of  our  thought.  The  idol  defines  and  narrows  what 
ought  to  be  left  indefinable.  The  Phoenician  and  other  idols  introduced  into  Israel 
brought  down  the  Divine  to  the  forms  and  dimensions  of  the  human  being,  and  all 
human  passions  the  most  sensuous  conld  be  projected  upon  them.  And  when  man  sees 
only  his  idealized  self  before  him  in  the  sculptor's  work,  he  falls  to  self-adoration.  It 
was  quite  otherwise  with  the  grand  music  and  religious  poetry  of  the  prophets  and 
psalmists.  Lofty  poetic  images  by  their  very  vagueness  and  suggestiveness  lead  the 
mind  to  the  truth  beyond  and  behind  them.  High  music  and  poesy  we  ever  need  in 
worship ;  but  too  definite  forms  fetter  the  flight  of  the  devout  imagination.  In  general 
idolatry  means  self-love,  and  must  ever  be  antagonistic  to  pure  religion.  "  Thus  man 
lowers  himself,  becomes  unworthy  to  appear  before  Jehovah,  and  belong  to  his  people." 
And  judgment  is  inevitable ;  there  can  be  no  escape  from  it  now ! 

II.  Tebrob  at  the  approach  op  the  Judge.  "  Enter  into  the  rock,  and  hide  thee 
in  the  dust;  fleeing  before  Jehovah's  terror,  and  the  splendour  of  his  majesty."  The  soul 
living  in  falsehood  as  its  element  shrinks  away  from  the  coming  truth  which  must 
annihilate  it.     Men's  fears  represent  to  them  at  last  their  follies  and  their  sins. 

"  Like  bats  and  vermin  hurrying  from  the  sudden  light, 
Our  sordid  vices  far  from  God  would  take  their  flight." 

The  eyes  that  were  not  cast  down  in  prayer,  the  mien  of  profane  impudence  that 
laughed  at  Heaven,  are  now  shrivelled,  prone  in  the  dust  now  before  the  lonely 
sublimity  of  the  eternal  Holiness.  Those  who  made  nought  of  God  must  learn  that 
nought  can  exist  which  does  not  exist  in  God. 

"At  last  we  hear  a  voice  upon  the  slope 
Cry  to  the  summit,  Is  there  any  hope  ? 
To  which  an  answer  peals  fmrn  that  high  land. 
But  in  a  tongue  no  man  can  unrlorstaud  ; 
And  on  the  glimmering  limit  far  withilrawn, 
God  makes  himself  an  awful  rose  of  dawn." 

J. 

Vers.  12 — ^22. — The  day  of  judgm/eni.  Here  follows  a  grand  picture,  in  which  a  few 
simple  thoughts  are  set. 

I.  The  day  of  Jehovah.  This  stands  for  any  and  every  epoch  of  clearer  light 
which  reveals  the  relative  worth  of  things.  False  estimates  of  life  and  its  objects  have 
become  by  custom  fixed.  The  imagination  has  been  under  a  delusion.  A  false  idea  of 
greatness  and  goodness  has  become  so  fixed  that  nothing  but  a  revolution  will  subvert 
it.  The  criticism  of  words  may  be  defied ;  but  the  criticism  of  facts,  of  results, — against 
this  there  is  no  appeal.  There  is  no  reversal  of  the  judgment  of  events.  A  great  day  of 
judgment  was,  for  example,  the  French  Revolution  of  a  century  ago.  The  falsehood  of 
venerations  was  then  expiated  in  blood.  Social  institutions  which  were  bad,  inhuman 
yet  which  those  who  had  grown  up  in  them  regarded  as  impossible  to  alter,  were  effaced 
in  that  terrible  outpouring  of  the  wrath  of  God.   The  sense  amidst  great  wrong  that  the 


40  THE  BOOK  OF  THE    PROPHET   ISAIAH.  [ch.  n.  1— 2a 

judgment  of  God  cannot  long  be  delayed,  is  expressed  in  the  common  saying,  "ThingB 
must  take  a  turn  before  long."  In  the  life  of  the  individual,  every  stopping-point  or 
turning-point  at  which  a  false  way  of  life  terminates,  may  be  viewed  as  a  day  of  judg- 
ment and  a  day  of  Jehovah. 

II.  The  DAT  BniKos  with  it  a  shock  to  humak  imagination.  The  prophet  piles 
up  images  to  represoni  the  reversal  of  all  human  ideals  of  greatness  and  loftiness.  The 
gigantic  trees  of  Lebanon  and  Bashan,  the  mountains  and  hills,  the  towers  and  the  high 
ramparts,  the  tall  sldps  sailing;  Tarshish-wards  (Ps.  xlviii.  8),  the  turrets  of  villas  and 
houses  of  pleasure,  draw  down  upon  them  the  violence  of  the  storm.  The  vast  and 
lofty  in  nature  and  in  works  of  art  are  not  of  more  value  in  the  eyes  of  God  than  tlie 
small  and  lowly.  'I'hey  are  hints  of  the  greatness  of  the  spirit,  and  if  we  give  such 
objects  an  independent  greatness,  we  are  suffering  from  an  illusion.  The  greatness  and 
the  beauty  are  in  the  seeing  mind.  There  is  not  so  much  to  be  seen  of  the  work  of 
God  in  a  mountain  as  in  a  moth.  "  Life  apparent  in  the  smallest  midge  is  marvclloui 
beyond  dead  Atlas'  self."  The  palaces,  the  streets  of  a  great  city,  are  signs  of  the  human 
soul  and  its  greatness,  but  not  the  truest  sijtns.  It  is  a  common  error  to  look  for  the 
tokens  of  a  people's  greatness  in  their  buildings  and  mechanical  achievements.  Bui 
from  wliat  source  does  material  creation  and  production  come?  That  is  the  ultimate 
question.  Our  works  of  art  are  works  of  the  flesh  and  of  pride,  or  works  of  the  spirit, 
wrought  in  humility  and  the  love  of  truth.  A  few  such  works  in  plastic  stuff  of  stone, 
or  on  canvas,  or  in  poetic  words,  endure  through  all  change.  That  which  is  untrue  must 
fall  sooner  or  later  beneath  the  criticism  of  God  and  be  exposed.  And  in  the  downfall 
of  human  works  the  eternal  God  is  again  manifested  in  his  supreme  greatness  and  glory. 
It  is  our  own  false  imaginations  which  hide  him  from  us. 

III.  The  abandonment  of  the  idols.  For  the  idols  cannot  help  their  worshipper*, 
who  must  run  to  bide  themselves.  Yet  at  first  they  cling  to  them.  But  soon  in  alarm 
they  cast  them  away  into  any  corner,  any  refuse-heap,  any  filthy  haunt  of  bats  and 
moles.  "To  cast  lo  the  bats"  is  as  proverbial  an  expression  in  the  Bast  for  throwing 
clean  away  as  rejected  rubbish,  as  "  throwing  to  the  dogs  "  with  us.  There  comes  t 
time  when  men  will  be  willing  to  get  rid  of  their  most  precious  objects  so  that  they 
may  but  save  themselve.-i.  A  secret  terror  haunts  the  false  conscience,  which  it 
moments  of  clear  revelation  of  truth  rises  to  an  acme  and  becomes  a  panic.  The  true 
heart  longs  for  more  of  God's  li-ht,  the  false  can  only  exist  behind  an  artificial  veil  or 
screen.  In  every  time  larger  light  is  appearing,  truths  for  the  conduct  of  life  are  coming 
into  currency ;  in  short,  the  bivine  Critic  of  our  life  is  making  his  censure  felt.  Alas  for 
those  who  rush  into  any  cave  at  hai:d,  plunge  into  obscurantism  rather  than  face  the 
worst,  which  thus  faced  will  prove  the  best ! 

IV.  Thk  moral.  "Cea>^e  ye  from  man."  If  in  any  such  day  of  revelation  all  the 
proud  ideals  of  human  society  may  be  discovered  false,  and  cast  aside  as  worthless;  ii 
the  time  of  revelation  shows  that  we  have  been  resting  upon  rotten  shams ;  if  we  have 
an  uneasy  consciousness  that  it  is  always  so ; — how  vain  is  all  confidence  in  human  wit 
and  work !  The  bitter  words  seem  to  oast  contempt  upon  every  species  of  boast  and 
satisfaction.  A  poet  of  our  time  has  wjitten  a  great  work  to  ^how  that  "  our  human 
speech  is  nought,  our  human  testimony  false,  our  fame  and  human  estimation  words 
ai.d  wind  "  (Browning,  '  Ring  and  Book ').  But  huw  can  we  cease  from  man  ?  We  can 
only  know  the  true  and  the  eternal  through  some  form  of  human  experience.  I'hc 
answer  is — Man  merely  as  man,  an  independent  fact,  is  m  lUght ;  he  and  all  his" pass  away. 
In  living  for  himself  as  if  there  were  no  tiuth,  no  good,  beyond,  he  becomes  a  lie.  Il 
we  see  man  only  we  see  the  false ;  if  God  working  in  and  through  man  and  his  history, 
we  find  the  true  in  the  false.  Working  through  the  false,  shows  of  sense  we  may  reach 
the  spirit  of  things,  the  mind  of  God.  We  leave  our  hold  on  the  fugitive  human  fact, 
falM  if  we  try  to  stereotype  it,  that  we  may  plant  our  foot  on  Hya  constant.   The  Djyin* 

"  Truth  is  forced 
To  manifest  itself  through  falsehood  ;  whetioo  divorced 
By  the  excepted  eye,  at  the  rare  season,  for 
The  happy  moment,  truth  instructs  us  to  abhor 
The  false,  and  prize  the  true,  obtainable  thereby." 

J. 


CH.  11. 1—22.]  THE  BOOK    OF   'I'HE   I'KuPHET   ISAIAH.  i\ 


Ver.  3. — Real  religious,  revival.  "  Many  people  shall  go  and  say,  Come  ye,  and 
let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord,  to  the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob."  Here  is 
the  tide  of  national  feeling,  no  longer  on  the  ebb,  but  on  the  flow.  God  is  "  to  teach 
them  his  ways,  and  they  are  to  walk  in  his  paths ; "  for  they  have  found  out  that  pleasure 
gained  by  sin  is  peace  bartered.  Elevation  of  the  truest  kind  is  to  bu  theirs  now.  This 
is  the  image  of  thiir  uplifted  state.  They  are  to  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's 
house — the  consecrated  height  of  holiness  and  peace. 

L  There  is  spontanbitt  of  life.  "  Come,  let  us  go."  It  is  no  mere  fashion,  or 
custom,  or  compulsion  of  obedience.  Life  always  says,  "Come."  I  read  delight  here. 
For  what  wo  enjoy  we  invite  others  to  see.  When  we  ascend  to  the  ranuntain-top,  and 
see  the  winding  river,  like  a  streak  of  silver,  and  the  village-dotted  plains,  we  cry 
"  Come !"  to  others,  that  they  too  may  delight  in  the  loveliness  of  the  scene.  So  an 
earnest  Christian  not  only  says  "  Come!  "  because  of  the  urgency  of  the  salvation,  but 
also  because  of  the  beauty  and  blessedness  of  religion.  "  Oh  taste  and  see,"  he  says,  "  that 
the  Lord  is  good :  blessed  is  the  man  that  trusteth  in  him." 

II.  There  is  sacbud  fellowship.  "  Let  us  go  up."  For  religion  is  intensified  in  its 
experiences  by  mutual  faith  and  joy.  The  interaction  of  mind  on  mind  and  heart  upon 
heart  in  a  great  congregation  is  wonderful.  "  Let  us  go  up."  And  beautiful  were  thoso 
spectacles  in  Hebrew  history,  when  the  pilgrims  went  to  tabernacle  or  temple.  "  'J'hither 
the  tribes  go  up."  The  festal  caravans  met  each  other  from  distant  parts,  as  they 
merged  at  last  into  one  common  road  to  time-beloved  Jerusalem.  At  the  Feasts  o[ 
Pentecost  and  Passover,  as  in  the  days  of  our  Saviour,  the  interest  felt  in  these  upgoings 
to  Jerusalem  was  both  human  and  Divine.  Old  friends  met  again,  whilst  youths 
and  maidens  set  eyes  for  the  first  time  on  the  city  and  temple  of  their  fathers.  On  their 
way  they  sang  the  songs  of  Zion,  till  in  noblest  worship  the  gathered  tribes  lifted  up 
their  praise  to  the  Lord  God  of  Israel. 

III.  There  is  sublime  peopheot.  "  Many  shall  go."  Yes,  and  in  these  Christian 
days,  Greek  and  Jew,  bond  and  fjee,  have  been  united  in  one  common  song  ol 
deliverance.  Missionary  societies  have  founded  Churches  and  schools  on  well-nigl 
every  shore.  "Many  shall  come."  Verily,  unto  Christ  shall  the  gathering  of  the 
people  be.  "  All  nations  shall  call  him  blessed."  How  verified  the  words  have  been ! 
"  For  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  Law,  and  the  Word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem."— 
W.  M.  8. 

Vers.  1 — 5. —  The  promised  futtire :  a  rrnssionary  sermon.  I.  That  Divine  truth 
WILL  KNOW  A  TIME  OF  GLORIOUS  ELEVATiox.  The  "last  days"  (ver.  2)  may  be  distant 
days,  may  be  "  afar  off "  still,  but  they  are  coming ;  we  are  steadily  advancing  to  them. 
The  "  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  "  may  be  low  down  to-day,  but  it  will  rise ;  it  may 
be  but  as  a  hill  of  sacred  truth  obscured  among  the  mountains  of  error.  But  God's 
high  purpose  shall  surely  be  fulfilled  in  time ;  the  day  will  dawn  when  they  who  gaze 
upon  the  spiritual  scenery  of  the  world  will  see  Zion  lifting  up  its  head  far  and  high 
above  all  those  little  hills  into  which  the  proud  peaks  of  falsehood  will  have  diminished. 
There  is  a  power  that  can  raise  the  hills  and  that  can  "thresh  the  mountains" 
(ch.  xli.  15). 

II.  That  its  power  shall  have  the  widest  possible  extension.  "  All  nations 
shall  flow'  unto  it."  The  river  of  human  thought,  faith,  hope,  shall  set  in  a  strong  current 
to  this  high  mountain.  Divine  truth  shall  not  only  gain  a  formal  triumph  over  the 
idolatries,  superstitions,  infidelities  of  the  world,  but  human  hearts  everywhere  will 
rejoice  in  its  salvation. 

III.  That  one  sign  of  its  exaltation  and  extension  will  be  a  prevalent  spirit 
OF  RELIGIOUS  INQUIBT.  (Ver.  3.)  Men  will  be  convinced  of  the  hoUowness  of  their  old 
faiths ;  of  the  unsatisfying  character  of  their  present  pleasures ;  of  the  insufficiency  of 
the  light  in  which  they  have  been  walking  to  lead  them  into  wisdom  and  blessedness. 
And  they  will  turn  to  the  one  and  only  source  of  illumination  and  joy ;  they  will  say, 
"  Let  us  go  up,"  etc.  (ver.  3).  The  hungry  heart  will  cry  out  for  the  Bread  of  life ;  the 
thirsting  soul  will  pant  for  the  living  streams.  When  men  have  found — and  are  they  not 
finding  more  and  more  largely  ? — that  the  errors  into  which  they  have  wandered  are  bul 
ashes  in  their  mouth,  they  will  seek  and  they  will  accept  the  bountiful  provision  which 
awaits  them  in  the  "  Father's  house,"  in  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God. 


4:i  THE  BOOK  UK    lilt:  I'iiUPHET  ISAIAH,         [ca.  il  1— 22. 

IV.  That  one  besult  of  it  will  be  the  prevalence  of  the  spikit  and  of  the 
INSTITUTIONS  OF  PEACE.  (Ver.  4.)  The  love  of  war,  the  institutions  of  war,  the  readi- 
neas  to  have  recourse  to  war,  the  pridfi  and  glory  in  military  achievementB  which  even 
Christian  nations  are  not  ashamed  to  own, — this  will  disappear  as  the  will  of  God  takes 
its  due,  its  exalted  place  among  mankind.  The  sword  will  give  place  to  the  plough- 
share, not  only  in  the  use  of  the  nation's  metal,  but  in  the  honour  and  estimation  of  the 
people's  mind.  And  instead  of  a  country  wasting  its  strength  and  lavishing  its  energy 
in  the  cultivation  of  the  science  and  in  the  construction  of  the  enginery  of  war,  it  wiU 
ievote  its  mental  power  to  the  acquisition  of  those  arts  which  heal  and  bless  and  raise. 

V.  T'hat  one  contribution  to  its  coming  will  be  found  in  oub  own  faith- 
KULNEss.  (Ver.  5.)  If  we  would  be  sure  of  the  dawn  of  this  blessed  future,  let  us  take 
our  part,  however  humble  it  may  be,  in  the  work  of  enlightenment ;  let  us  walk  in  the 
light  of  the  Lord.  It  is  the  critical  and  the  censorious  whose  faith  fails  them;  it  is 
they  who  have  no  bright  visions  of  a  coming  day  of  glory :  they  are  only  conscious  of 
the  clouds,  and  see  no  light  in  the  far  horizon.  Hut  those  who  study  the  will  of  God 
la  revealed  in  liis  Word,  who  make  haste  to  keep  his  commandments,  who  live  the 
Master's  life,  and  illustrate  his  Word  by  deeds  of  helpfulness  and  love, — it  is  they  who 
have  the  assurance  in  their  hearts  that  "  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be 
ustablislicd,"  that  the  day  will  come  when  truth  will  be  crowned,  and  "vmiversal 
peace"  shall 

"Lie  like  a  sliaft  of  liglit  aeross  the  land. 
And  liki:  a  lane  of  beams  athwart  the  sea, 
Thro'  all  the  circle  of  the  goUlcn  year." 

l<'or  It  is 

"  Unto  him  who  works,  and  feels  bo  work^ 
This  same  grand  year  is  ever  at  the  doors." 

CI 

Ver.  6. — The  wisdom  of  walking  in  the  light.  The  prophet  inserts  s  parenthesis 
vvhich  evidently  expresses  the  deepest  and  strongest  feelings  of  his  heart.  He  is 
oppressed  with  a  sense  of  the  folly  of  those  who  deliberately  go  astray  in  the  darkness, 
when  they  might  walk  on  in  the  light  of  Divine  truth  toward  the  goal  of  human 
blessedness ;  hence  his  fervent  exclamation,  "  0  house  of  Jacob,  come  ye,  and  let  us,"  etc. 

I.  The  truth  op  God  the  light  of  the  human  soul.  Light  is  "  that  which  makes 
manifest "  (see  Eph.  v.  13).  And  as  the  sunshine  makes  clear  to  us  our  own  jiersons, 
shows  us  all  surrounding  nature,  and  enables  us  to  find  our  way  to  the  objects  of  our 
desire,  so  tlie  truth  of  God  (1)  enlightens  us  as  to  our  own  selves,  revealing  our  spiritual 
nature  and  our  actual  character ;  (2)  shows  us  the  relation  in  which  we  stand  to  our 
fellows  and  to  our  Divine  Maker,  revealing  to  us  human  life  and  human  destiny  ;  and 
(3)  enables  us  to  walk  in  the  way  of  eternal  life,  becoming  that  which  pleases  God,  and 
doing  that  which  is  right  and  good  in  his  sight. 

II.  The  supreme  wisdom  or  walking  in  its  light.  Well  may  the  man  of  God 
exclaim  with  even  passionate  earnestness,  "  Come  ye,  and  let  us  walk  in  the  light  of 
the  Lord."  For;  1.  It  is  the  one  right  course  to  take;  any  other  must  be  one  cf  error 
and  of  sin.  2.  It  is  the  path  of  progress,  leading  up  to  heights  of  strength,  proBperity, 
sanctity.  3.  It  is  the  way  to  abiding  joy ;  other  paths,  though  they  may  open  tempt- 
ingly enough  and  may  promise  keen  delights,  will  conduct  ultimately  to  sorrow,  shame, 
and  death.  This  way,  in  which  the  light  of  the  Lord  leads  us,  may  be  entered  upon 
with  spiritual  struggle  (Luke  xiii.  24),  may  be  attended  with  much  self-denial  (Matt. 
xvi.  24) ;  but  it  is  a  path  of  purest  and  noblest  joy  (Rom.  v.  H ;  Phil.  iii.  1 ;  iv.  4 ; 
1  Pet.  iv.  13),  and  it  ends  in  everlasting  glory  (1  Pet.  i.  8,  4). — 0. 

Vers.  6 — 21. — Retribution  and  its  results.  In  this  noble  prophetic  passage,  as 
charged  with  poetic  grandeur  as  it  is  full  of  religious  zeal,  we  have  our  thought 
directed  to — 

I.  Two  heinous  sins  which  belong  to  eveet  age  and  class.  They  are  these : 
1.  Disobedience.  The  divination  to  which  reference  is  made  (ver.  6)  is  expressly 
prohibited  in  the  Law  (Deut.  xviii.  10 — 12) ;  alliance  with  strangers  (ver.  6)  is  alsc 


«B.it.  1— 21]         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  48 

forbidden  (Exod.  xxxiv.  12;  Deut.  vii.  2);  the  multiplicatiuB  of  silver  and  guld  an' 
of  lioi-Bus  (ver.  7),  however  unobjectionable  it  may  seem  to  us,  was  disallowed  to  tl 
Hebrew  nation  (Deut.  xvii.  16,  17).  The  Jews  would  be  under  strong  temptation  t 
disregard  these  prohibitions ;  many  of  the  lower  ambitions  of  our  nature  would  urf 
them  to  transgression.  But  the  clear,  unmistakable  "  Law  of  the  Lord  "  pronounced 
against  these  tilings.  And  as  every  fact,  both  of  a  brighter  and  a  darker  kind, 
admonished  them  "  to  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  their  Grod,"  they  u  ere  "  verily  guilty  " 
in  their  disobedience.  God  requires  of  men,  of  every  age  and  land,  that  they  should 
obey  him.  He  will  accept  nothing  of  any  kind  as  a  substitute  (1  Sam.  xv.  22 ;  Matt. 
vii.  21).  Our  ignorance  of  his  purpose  in  commanding  is  no  excuse  for  our  disregard 
of  his  will.  How  can  such  little  children  as  we  are  expect  to  fathom  the  wisdom  of 
the  Infinite  Father?  When  we  set  our  poor  judgment  against  his  perfect  knowledge, 
our  mistaken  wishes  against  his  holy  will,  we  fall  -into  the  most  serious  sin.  Our 
obedience  is  to  be  intelligent  and  not  mechanical,  cheerful  and  not  grudging,  instant 
and  not  tardy,  or  it  will  not  be  obedience  at  all.  2.  Idolatry.  This  sin,  so  grievous  in 
the  sight  of  God,  is  found  in  one  of  three  forms.  (1)  In  its  most  gross  and  degrading 
form,  as  in  Judasa  at  this  period  (vers.  8,  9),  when  both  the  "  mean  "  and  the  "  great " 
prostrated  themselves  before  the  image  made  with  hands ;  or  (2)  iu  the  leas  gross  but 
still  degrading  form  of  superstition  in  "  Christian  "  rites ;  or  (3)  in  that  which  con- 
stitutes its  essence,  viz.  the  giving  to  the  creature  the  thought,  the  affection,  the  energy, 
which  are  due  to  the  Creator.  In  this  last  form  we  are  all  under  condemnation.  We 
withhold  from  him  whose  we  are  and  to  whom  we  owe  ourselves  and  all  we  have,  the 
devotion  and  the  tribute  which  we  reserve  for  our  neighbours  or  expend  upon  ourselves. 
This  is  essentially  idolatrous. 

II.  Divine  bbtribdtion.  Here  are  four  features  of  it.  1.  It  begins  in  the  with- 
drawal of  Divine  favour.  "  God  forsakes  his  people  "  (ver.  6).  He  ceases  to  make  the 
light  of  his  countenance  fall  on  them;  their  prosperity  wanes,  their  joy  diminishes, 
their  power  declines.  2.  It  may  well  be  dreaded  as  certain  to  arrive  in  time.  "  There- 
fore thou  wilt  not  forgive  them  "  (ver.  9).  God  cannot  and  will  not  pardon  the  im- 
penitent, and  those  who  are  disnbedient  or  idolatrous  may  count  on  the  coming  of  his 
judgments  as  the  most  certain  of  all  future  things.  3.  It  is  such  that  the  boldest  may 
well  shrink  from  it.  "  Enter  into  the  rock,  and  hide  thee  ...  for  fear  of  the  Lord,"  etc. 
(vers.  10,  19).  (1)  When  God  makes  the  sins  of  a  man's  life  to  bring  forth  their  natural 
and  fitting  fruits  (intemperance,  dissoluteness,  dishonesty,  etc.,  working  themselves  out 
in  penury,  disease,  contempt,  etc.);  (2)  when  God  causes  special  enormities  to  be 
followed  by  extraordinary  calamities ;  or  (3)  when  he  makes  the  hardened  sinner  to 
confront  death,  judgment,  and  eternity ; — then  does  he  come  as  One  who  is  in  "  the  glory 
of  his  majesty,  shaking  terribly  the  earth ; "  then  does  he  manifest  his  will  and  his 
power  in  such  wise  that  the  boldest  and  moat  fearlessmay  well  shrink  and  shudder  at 
his  appearing.  However  Valiant  sin  may  show  itself  while  the  righteous  Lord  delays 
to  speak  and  strike,  there  is  an  hour  coming  when  it  will  "  call  to  the  rocks  to  hide  it, 
and  to  the  hills  to  cover  it,"  when  it  will  tremble  and  cower  at  the  touch  of  the  hand 
of  the  Holy  One.  4.  It  is  that  which  nothing  can  escape.  (1)  No  man.  "  The  day  of 
the  Lord  .  .  .  every  one  that  is  proud,"  etc.  (ver.  12) ;  not  only  the  humble,  but  the 
haughty ;  not  the  defenceless  only,  but  the  strong  and  well  fortified,  even  those  who 
think  themselves  most  secure,  will  feel  the  keen  edge  of  the  avenging  sword  (ver.  17). 
(2)  Nothing.  The  cedars  of  Lebanon  and  the  oaks  of  Bashan,  the  mountains  and  the 
hills,  the  treasure-laden  ships  and  the  pleasant  pictures  and  even  the  trusted  idols, — 
all  shall  feel  the  blow  of  the  mighty  hand;  nothing  too  high  or  too  strong  to  be  beyond 
its  reach  (vers.  13 — 18). 

III.  The  issue.  The  end  of  Divine  judgment  is :  1.  The  humiliation  of  that  which 
is  false  and  evil.  The  idols  which  had  been  so  honoured  are  to  be  cast  to  the  moles  and 
to  tfcs  6ats  (ver.  20).  When  God  appears  in  judgment  there  is  a  great  reversal  and  over- 
throw'. That  which  was  first  becomes  last ;  that  which  was  highest  in  esteem  becomes 
the  object  of  derision  and  contempt.  2.  The  exaltation  of  the  Lord  himself.  "  The 
Lord  alone  shall  be  exalted,"  etc.  (ver.  17).  And,  though  we  do  not  gain  the  thought 
from  these  verses,  we  may  add :  3.  The  salvation  of  the  penitent  and  the  faithful. 
There  ts  one  Eock  in  which,  if  we  seek  its  gracious  shelter  now,  we  shall  then  be  able  to 
hide,  and  in  whose  shadow  we  shall  be  safe  j  "  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken 

— C 


W  THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  [oh.  n.  1--22. 

Ver.  22. — Trusting  in  man.  I.  Our  btrong  TBMrTATiox.  We  are  very  strongly 
tempted  to  "  put  our  trust  in  man,"  to  "  make  flesh  our  arm ;  "  for :  1.  We  see  signs  of 
stiength  in  man.  And  that  which  is  visible  has  most  influence  on  our  human  nature. 
"  If  a  man  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he  love  God  whom  h« 
hath  not  seen  ? "  (1  John  iv.  20).  In  like  manner  we  far  more  readily  trust  the  man 
who  is  before  us  with  visible  signs  of  health,  riches,  power  about  him,  than  any  unseen 
force  which  may  really  be  moie  reliable.  2.  Human  affection  invites  trust  in  man. 
There  are  loving  hearts  around  us,  enclosing  our  spiiits  in  the  embrace  of  their 
aft'ection ;  it  is  natural  to  us  to  respond  to  their  kindness,  and  to  offer  them  the  full 
confidence  of  our  souls.  We  love  those  who  love  us ;  and  whom  we  love  we  trust. 
3.  Confidence  is  often  directly  offered  to  us  and  urged  upon  us.  Those  who  wish — 
perhaps  for  their  own  purposes — to  secure  our  confidence  in  them  know  how  to  employ 
successful  arts  to  win  our  assurance.  They  virtually  say  to  us,  "  Trust  me,  I  will 
ensure  your  good,  I  will  lead  you  in  the  path  of  honour,  of  enjoyment,  of  prosperity ;  " 
and  it  is  all  too  likely  that  their  blandishments  or  their  importunity  will  prevail.  4.  Trust 
in  man  is  contagious.  We  find  our  fellows  on  every  hand,  in  every  circle,  leaning  the 
whole  weight  of  their  well-being  upon  the  arm  of  men,  confiding  wholly  in  their  friends 
and  neighbours,  risking  everything  on  their  integrity;  and  what  others  do  we  are 
tempted  to  do  also.  The  frosts  may  have  been  very  few  and  the  ice  may  seem  very 
thin,  but  many  are  skating  on  its  surface,  and  wo  think  that  where  they  have  gone  wo 
also  may  go  with  impunity. 

II.  Our  wisdom  in  its  preskncb.  1.  We  should  never  trust  man  absolutely.  We 
are  to  "  cease  from  man  ;  "  he  is  "  not  to  be  accounted  of  "  in  such  way  as  to  he  worthy 
of  our  implicit  trust.  Of  this  we  may  assure  ourselves  if  we  will  remember :  (1)  Hiit 
Uahility  to  mistake.  The  cleverest,  the  most  learned,  the  most  thoughtful,  the  most 
esteemed,  are  wrong  in  some  things,  are  often  found  wrong  in  great  and  grave  things ; 
there  is  no  man  whose  judgment  is  always  sound.  (2)  ffis  spiritual  insecurity.  The 
man  who  is  held  in  highest  regard  may  be  overtaken  by  a  storm  of  temptation  in  which 
even  he  will  make  shipwreck.  Men  have  fallen  on  whose  security  their  companions 
counted  with  unbounded  certainty.  Pefore  the  friend  whom  we  honour  above  all  others, 
there  may  prove  to  be  a  course  which  will  end  in  spiritual  declension,  or  even  in  moral 
degradation.  The  painful  facts  of  life  pierce  our  theories  while  they  break  our  hearts. 
(3)  His  physical  fragility.  "  Man,  whose  breath  is  in  his  nostrils."  Hale,  strong, 
capable  of  noble  work  to-day,  he  may  be  brought  down  to  utter  weakness  and  incapacity 
to-morrow  ;  nay,  before  the  sun  goes  down  he  may  have  drawn  the  last  breath  of  life! 
2.  We  should  trust  the  only  One  who  is  trustwortliy — even  him  who  is  the  "  Truth," 
who  is  the  "  Holy  One,"  who  is  the  "  Immortal  One."— 0. 

Ver.  3. — The  attractions  of  the  gospel  Church.  The  earthly  Jerusalem,  which  wms 
thought  of  as  a  mountain  surrounded  by  mountains,  but  superior  to  them  all,  is  in  the 
prophet's  mind,  and  it  gives  form  to  his  thought  of  the  Gospel  times — the  setting  up  of 
ihe  Christian  Church,  and  the  planting  of  the  Christian  religion  in  the  world.  Christi- 
anity shall  then  be  the  "mountain  of  the  Lord's  house,"  or  the  "Lord's  mountain 
house,"  exalted  above  all  other  religions,  and  made  the  rendezvous  of  all  the  .spiritual 
seed  of  Abraham.  "  The  prophet  sees  the  Church  permanently  placed  in  a  conspicuous 
position,  so  as  to  be  a  source  of  attraction  to  surrounding  nations.  To  express  this 
iiiea,  he  makes  use  of  terms  which  are  strictly  applicable  only  to  the  local  habitation 
of  the  Church  under  the  old  economy.  Instead  of  saying,  in  modem  phraseology,  that 
the  Church,  as  a  society,  shall  become  conspicuous  and  attract  all  nations,  he  represents 
the  mountain  upon  which  the  temple  stood  as  being  raised  and  fixed  above  the  other 
mountains,  so  as  to  be  visible  in  all  directions  "  (J.  A.  Alexander).  T.  K.  Chejme 
notices  an  "  old  belief  in  Eastern  Asia  that  there  was  a  mountain  reaching  from  earth 
to  heaven,  on  the  summit  of  wl  ioh  was  the  dwelling  of  the  gods.  The  prophet  is, 
|)crhaps,  alluding  to  this  belief,  which  he  recognizes  a.s  true  in  sul^tance,  though  attached 
liy  the  heathen  to  n  wrong  locality."  The  text  may  be  illustrated  by  the  custom  of 
'.he  Israelites  to  journey  from  all  parts  of  the  country  for  the  yearly  feasts.  Keeping 
the  ficruie  of  the  prophet,  we  observe — 

I.  The  gospel  Church  is  LircB  a  mountain.  Illustrate  from  the  conspicuous  position 
9f  Jerusalem,  or  of  Safed.    A  mountain  risen  up  out  of  the  plain ;  so  the  gospel  Church 


OH.  n.  1— 2ii,]  THE   BOOK  OP  THE  PBOFUET  ISAIAH.  45 


is  right  in  the  midst  of  the  world  aad  the  people.  A  mountain  towers  up  above  the 
plain,  within  sight  of  all ;  and  so  the  gospel  Church  is  such  a  striking  and  impressive  thing 
that  all  eyes  must  be  turned  to  it.  Men  cannot  he  blind  to  it ;  men  dare  not  ignore  it. 
Like  the  mountain,  it  is  an  indestructible  fact,  of  which  men  must  take  account.  The 
buildings  erected  for  its  worship  are  the  symbols  of  itself;  in  every  village,  town,  and 
city,  the  church  tower  and  cathedral  spire  rise  above  the  buildings  of  the  people,  well 
in  everybody's  sight.  Show  that  however  men  may  think  to  dispel  the  so-called  myths 
that  have  gathered  round  the  historic  Christ,  they  must  deal  with  this  mountain-fact, 
the  gospel  Church  exists;  it  must  have  had  a  source ;  it  must  have  a  mission  at  the 
heart  of  it.     Surely  it  is  the  witness  of  the  truth  of  Christ. 

II.  The  gospel  Church  is  figured  as  on  the  top  of  the  mountains.  Other 
religions,  other  social  and  philanthropic  schemes  for  the  elevation  of  the  race,  may  be 
figured  as  mountains.  But  let  them  all  be  gathered  together,  and  it  will  be  found  that 
Christianity  towers  high  above  them  all.  Its  origin,  its  character,  its  piuvisions,  make 
it  the  most  conspicuous,  the  most  important  of  them  all.  -Comparisons  may  be  insti- 
tuted (1)  with  man-made  religions,  paganism.  Buddhism,  etc. ;  and  (2)  with  previously 
given  Divine  religions,  such  as  patriarchism,  Mosaism,  etc.  The  points  of  superiority 
are  such  as  these :  1.  Eevelation  of  God  to  man  under  the  figure  of  Father.  2.  Mani- 
festation of  God  in  the  person  of  his  Son  as  a  fellow-man.  3.  Redemption  of  man  by 
the  intervention  of  Divine  love.  4.  Perfect  provision  for  the  needs  of  man,  as  a  spiritual 
being.  5.  Adequate  and  final  mastery  of  all  man's  moral  foes  and  evils.  Show  that 
other"  religions  touch  some  of  man's  needs.  Christianity  is  at  the  "  top  of  the  mountains," 
because  it  reaches  them  all,  and  deals  with  them  efSoiently. 

III.  The  gospel  Chueoh  attracting  all  nations.  They  will  be  drawn,  not  forced 
into  it.  One  shall  tell  another  of  it.  One  shall  invite  another  to  journey  to  it.  They 
shall  flow  to  it  as  streams  flow  to  the  sea.  "  There  is  an  Eastern  fable  of  a  great 
mountain  of  lodestone,  out  in  the  middle  of  the  sea,  that  attracted,  to  their  destruction, 
all  the  ships  that  came  near  it.  This  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  is  a  great  spiritual 
magnet,  and  it  draws  souls,  not  to  destruction,  but  to  everlasting  life  "  (Dr.  Edmond). 
Illustrate  (1)  from  the  various  nations  attracted  by  the  preaching  of  the  early  Church  ; 
(2)  from  the  power  of  the  preached  gospel  in  various  heathen  lands  now ;  (3)  from  its 
proved  fitness  to  meet  the  needs  of  all  sinners  and  all  sufferers.  Jesus  said,  "  I,  if  I  be 
lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me." — B.  T. 

Ver.  4. —  War  no  more.    It  seems  that  the  reign  of  Uzziah  was  famous  for  the  invention 

of  new  weapons  of  war  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  11 — 15).  Isaiah,  observing  this,  contrasts  with 
it  the  good  time  coming,  when  righteousness  rules  the  relations  of  kings  and  kingdoms  ; 
and  when  Messiah,  the  Prince  of  righteousness,  and  therefore  Prince  of  peace,  judges 
among  the  nations.  If  Christ  really  reigned,  and  held  the  allegiance  of  every  man  and 
of  every  nation,  all  disputes  could  be  settled  by  arbitration ;  if  each  man,  and  each 
nation,  only  wants  what  is  right  and  what  is  kind,  there  need  be  no  more  war. 
Matthew  Henry  well  says,  "  The  design  and  tendency  of  the  gospel  are  to  make  peace 
and  to  slay  all  enmities.  It  has  in  it  the  most  powerful  obligations  and  inducements 
to  peace,  so  that  one  might  reasonably  liave  expected  it  should  have  this  eli'ect;  and  it 
would  have  had  it  if  it  had  not  been  for  those  lusts  of  men  from  which  come  wars  and 
fightings."  Christianity  has,  in  some  measure,  already  triumphed  over  war  and  the 
war-spirit. 

I.  The  horrors  of  wae  are  relieved.  Certainly  they  are  so  far  as  concerns 
civilized  and  Christian  nations.  Compare  ancient  and  modern  warfare  in  respect  (1)  of 
giving  no  quarter ;  (2)  of  unbridled  licence  on  taking  a  city;  (3)  of  the  treatment  of 
captives ;  (4)  of  provisions  for  the  care  of  the  wounded ;  (5)  of  the  respectful  burial 
of  the  dead.  "  So  far  as  the  teaching  of  Christ  has  influenced  international  polity  and 
law,  he  has  been  the  supreme  Arbitrator  of  their  disputes."  "  It  is  undeniable  that 
Christianity  has  greatly  contributed  to  ameliorate  the  political  condition  of  mankind, 
by  diminishing  the  horrors  of  war,  promotmg  mutual  intercourse,  and  advancing  the 
useful  arts." 

II.  The  implements  of  war  are  devoted  to  other  uses.  The  expression,  "  beat 
their  swords  into  ploughshares,"  is  figurative,  and  what  it  represents  is  met  by  the  fact 
that  commerce  and  manufactures  advance  faster  than  the  making  of  war-tools.    Time 


4fl  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAlAH.  [oh.  ii.  1—22. 

was  when  men  and  energies  were  given  to  the  manufacture  of  weapons  and  implementi 
of  war,  and  when  kings  lived  to  make  war.  That  ia  all  past  and  gone.  Only  a  smaU 
fringe  of  human  labour  is  related  to  war  material;  and  kings  have  disooverea  thai 
national  prosperity  and  national  peace  go  together  hand  wt  nana.  Oonirast  the  hie  in 
England  under  the  Edwards,  and  under  Victoria.  '*  Xn  sutli  siaies  ot  society  as  U»^ 
among  the  Hebrews,  the  peasantry,  when  gummouea  i  <  the  helci,  are  obliged  «5  proviot 
their  own  weapons.  When,  therefore,  they  w«n  puoi.  and  inaierud  for  weapons  waf 
too  expensive  for  their  resources,  it  would  be  a  ibvio'ls  (lioaght  to  tum^  ths  plough 
share,  which  w;is  thin,  long,  and  light  for  such  ai  mstt!/>fllitj  into  a  swotio,  which  wat 
short  and  thick  as  compared  with  our  sword.  'Vi  '■  the  -rnr  was  over,  the  change 
might  easily  be  made  hack  again.  A  sword  woi  ■;,  oi  course  with  equal  facility,  bo 
changed  into  a  plough -ihare.,  Pruning-hooks  may  include  anything  employed  in  reaping 
or  mowing ;  such  as  a  sickle  or  scythe,  as  well  as  the  long  knives  used  for  trimming 
vines."  Show  that  commerce,  knitting  lands  together  by  mutual  interest,  is  a  hand- 
maid to  Christianity  in  her  work  of  ])cace. 

III.  Thb  waste  op  time  and  power  in  leabnino  war  are  checked.  Illustrate 
from  the  formation  of  our  volunteer  army,  the  members  of  which  give  their  best 
energies  to  peaceful  pursuits,  and  only  their  leisure  to  learning  the  art  of  vrar.  Note 
the  growing  feeling  that  the  soldier-class  is  almost  a  useless  class;  that  the  taoney 
expended  on  tbem  is  a  waste;  and  that  the  nation  suffers  by  having  so  much  of  her 
young  manhood  idle,  and  getting  into  the  moral  mischiefs  of  the  idle.  The  results  we 
thus  can  recognize  have  been  attained  by  the  triumph  of  the  great  Christian  principles, 
of  peace,  brotherhood,  and  care  for  others  ratlier  than  for  self.  But  we  may  not  rest 
with  any  present  attainments ;  we  must  witness  and  work  for  that  glorious  coining 
time,  when  the  ideal  king  is  to  "judge  among  the  nations,"  and  in  reliance  on  his 
wisdom  and  equity,  the  nations  will  refer  their  disputes  to  his  decision,  instead  of  the 
arbitrament  of  war. — E.  T. 

Ver.  5. —  Walking  in  the  light.  That  ia  in  the  path  of  present  duty  on  which  the 
light  of  revelation  shines.  The  text  ia  part  of  a  spirited  address  to  the  Jews  to  avail 
themselves  of  the  privUegea  they  had.  The  prospects  of  a  glorious  peace-time  must  not 
keen  them  from  fixing  their  thoughts  on  their  immediate  and  pressing  duty.  It  is  right 
for  us  to  cheer  our  souls  by  the  look  away  to  rest  and  heaven ;  but  we  must  not  lose 
the  present  opportunity  in  idle  dreamings.  The  real  way  to  win  the  heavenly  is  to  live 
in  righteousness,  in  truth,  and  in  charity — to  "  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord."  We 
remark,  in  unfolding  this  "  light "  in  which  we  are  invited  to  walk,  that — 

I.  God  gives  light  by  giving  commandments.  Illustrate  from  the  great  natural 
laws  written  in  men's  consciences  and  hearts.  The  Decalogue  was  in  existence  as 
imwritten  law  before  the  finger  of  God  traced  it  on  the  tablets.  Also  from  the  ten 
commandments,  as  elaborated  by  Moses,  and  made  to  cover  all  the  minutest  details  of 
a  Jew's  life  and  relations.  And  also  from  the  commandments  given  by  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  elaborated  in  detail  by  the  apostles,  so  as  to  apply  to  all  the  circumstances  and 
relations  of  the  early  Christiana. 

II.  God  gives  light  bt  revealing  principles.  These  underlay  Mosaism,  and  were 
discovered  by  the  more  devout  and  thoughtful  Jews.  These  wore  brought  out  to  view 
by  the  later  prophets.  It  is  the  great  characteristic  of  Christianity  that  it  is  a  religion 
of  principles  rather  than  of  commands;  and  makes  its  appeal  to  the  purposes  and  the 
motives  rather  than  to  the  mere  ordering  of  the  conduct.  The  renewed  man,  in  whom 
the  Holy  Ghost  dwells,  should  rule  life  by  the  light  of  holy  principles. 

III.  God  gives  light  by  manifesting  himself.  In  the  person  of  his  Son,  who  is 
the  "  Light  of  the  world ; "  "  the  Light  that  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the 
world."  God  shows  us  his  glory  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ;  and  to  walk  in  obedience 
to  Christ,  in  dependence  upon  Christ,  in  fellowship  with  Christ,  and  in  full  purpose  to 
serve,  honour,  and  glorify  Christ,  ia  the  way  to  "  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord." — R.  T. 

Vers.  10,  11. — Shame  for  the  sinner.  We  can  more  easily  bear  suffering  than 
shame.  Man  has  great  powers  of  physical  endurance.  But  we  dread  shame  as  we 
dread  nothing  else.  There  was  the  keenest  distress  in  that  old  and  cruel  way  of  treating 
some  criminals.     They  were  put  in  the  pillory.     They  were  lifted  up  on  a  stage  in  the 


OH,  I1.J— 22.J  THE  BOOK   OP  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  47 

market-place.  A  frame  was  fastened  round  the  neck  and  wrists,  which  left  the  head 
and  hands  exposed.  Crowds  gathered  helow,  and  scorned  the  poor  man,  throwing  at 
him  all  manner  of  vile  things,  and  then  raising  the  laugh  at  his  soiled  and  hemired  &ce. 
The  shame  of  such  a  punishment  must  have  heen  very  hard  to  bear.  The  chaptei' 
before  us  intimates  that  this  intenser  kind  of  punishment,  this  shame  and  humiliation, 
awaits  all  who  forsake  or  neglect  the  living  Grod,  and  serve  the  idols  of  their  own 
pleasure,  'the  Law  of  Oroi  must  indeed  rise  up  to  vindicate  its  claims  and  execute  its 
sanctions ;  it  must  lift  up  its  hand  to  smite,  liut  there  is  something  more  solemn  than 
that ;  the  Law  shall  come  to  the  sinner  himself  one  day.  It  shall  look  upon  him  with 
its  look  of  inward  purity  and  outraged'love ;  it  shall  be  the  look  of  his  God.  That  will 
be  a  flash  of  the  eternal  light ;  it  will  reveal  to  him  the  blackness  of  his  heart,  and 
pride  will  be,  once  for  all,  crushed ;  vain  confidences  will  drop  out  of  his  hands,  and, 
putting  those  hands  on  his  face,  he  will  cry  in  his  shame,  "  0  rock,  hide  me  from  the 
fear  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his  majesty."  The  fear  of  coming  shame  ought 
to  deter  men  from  evil. 

I.  Right  and  wnoNa  abb  readily  oonfoonded  in  this  wobld.  "  Woe  unto'  those 
who  call  evil  good,  and  good  evil,"  disturbing  thus  the  foundations  of  morals,  and 
confusing  the  testimony  of  men's  consciences.  Evil  and  good  are  opposites,  contra- 
dictories ;  they  meet  nowhere,  they  blend  nohow.  Pew  men  question  the  distinction 
between  right  and  wrong,  but  many  ask  on  what  ground  the  distinction  rests ;  and 
"Is  it  possible  for  us  men  clearly  to  recognize  the  distinction?"  Are  there  no  finer 
shades  of  circumstance  which  occasion  difficulty  and  confusion  ?  In  this  complicated 
state  of  society  do  we  not  need  some  very  clear,  sharp,  precise  test  ?  And  is  there  any 
such?  There  is.  The  right,  the  true,  is  everything  with  which  we  can  associate  the 
presence  and  inspection  of  God,  without  feeling  either  sense  of  unfitness  or  fear.  In 
order  to  discover  the  contents  and  qualities  of  a  substance,  the  chemist  will  add  some 
testing  fluid  to  it,  and  by  the  effect  produced  he  learns  the  qualities.  That  we  can  do 
to  test  the  rightness  or  wrongness  of  any  act  of  life.  Add  the  thought  of  Ood  to  it. 
But  the  fact  stares  us  in  the  face  that  good  and  evil  are  now  sadly  confounded.  1.  It 
is  often  so  when  the  movements  of  life  are  made  without  befitting  consideration.  Into 
so  many  undertakings  we  are  simply  borne  by  the  press  of  social  customs,  the  example 
of  our  neighbours,  or  the  infiuence  of  excitement ;  and  we  have  actually  stepped  over 
the  borderland  of  tlie  right  before  we  have  quite  realized  our  position.  2.  It  is  often 
so  because  the  false  can  put  on  such  appearances  as  will  suffice  to  deceive  us.  "Even 
Satan  himself  is  transformed  into  an  angel  of  light."  3.  And  it  is  often  so  because 
the  wrong  bias  of  our  souls  even  makes  us  willing  to  see  fancied  goodness  in  the  false. 
So  often  the  wrong  offers  a  present  gratification  of  passion,  and  so  stills  opposition  and 
elVects  its  evil  design. 

II.  Sooner  ok  later  the  falseness  of  the  false,  and  the  truthfulness  of  ■i'he 
TRUE,  MUST  HE  MANIFESTED;  and  that  manifestation  must  prove  an  overwhelming 
shame  to  all  who  have  served  the  false.  The  time  of  the  manifestation  is  called  "  the 
day  of  God."  In  some  sense  the  present  is  mans  day.  His  voice  is  loud  now ;  his 
will  is  strong  now ;  his  pleasures  abundant :  and  God  seems  to  be  still.  Wrong  riots, 
and  God  seems  to  hold  aloof.  Sin  rules,  and  in  forbearance  God  restrains  himself.  And 
yet  the  truth  is  that  God's  day  is  an  eternal  now ;  it  is  always  close  at  hand.  It  may 
be  shown  that  God's  day  comes  (1)  in  the  time  of  our  conversion ;  (2)  in  the  humbling 
of  our  first  sight  of  the  cross ;  (3)  in  the  time  of  the  sinner's  remorse ;  (4)  in  the  time 
of  national  calamity ;  (5)  and  in  what  is  spoken  of  in  Scripture  as  "  the  day  of  judg- 
ment." Men  may  do  in  this  twilight  time  of  earth,  deceiving  themselves,  and  being 
deceived,  in  this  dim,  uncertain  light,  this  mingled  shade  and  shine.  If  they  w  ant  to 
do  wrong,  it  is  only  to  push  it  a  little  further  into  the  shadow,  and  then  they  cannot 
well  see  what  it  is.  But  men  would  blush  to  do  their  wrongs  in  the  full  blaze  of  day. 
They  will  hide  their  heads  in  shame  when  God  dispels  the  shadows,  and  makes  the 
revealing  light  of  his  day  rest  on  their  lives. — ^R.  T. 

Vers.  12 — 17. — The  Lortfs  day  for  the  ■proud.  Any  time  of  specific  judgment  or 
mercy  is  in  the  Scriptures  called  a  "  day  of  the  Lord."  The  day  of  the  Lord  has  come 
for  the  antediluvian  world,  for  Sodom,  fur  the  Canaanites,  for  Babylon,  for  Israel.  It  is 
ever  coming  to  nations,  in  the  corruption  or  the  calamity  that  follow  on  national  sin. 


48  THE  aOOK  OJJ'   THE   PEUPUET  ISAIAH.  [oh.  u,  1—22 

it  will  come  as  long  as  the  world  endures;  that  is,  so  long  as  God  needs,  by  external 

Klgmcnts,  to  mark  the  evil  of  sin.  The  sin  of  all  others  that  calls  for  a  "  day  of  the 
rd"  is  pride,  self-confidence,  rebellious  self-assertion ;  and  this  was  precisely  the  mn 
af  the  'jmes  in  which  Isaiah  wrote.  Man  is  made  for  God ;  he  was  ruined  when  he 
broke  relations  with  God,  and  in  stlf-will  separated  himself  from  God.  And  there  is 
no  hope  of  restoration  until  pride  is  humbled.  Therefore  for  this  humblmg  of  self  God 
eads,  and  to  secure  this  God  semis  judgments.  Henderson  sayi,  "These  verses  con- 
tain a  specification  of  several  of  the  most  distinguished  objects  of  nature  and  art,  it. 
order,  inctaphorically,  to  represent  the  different  jiersons  or  orders  of  men  elevated  by  the 
'lignily  of  office,  or  rendered  notable  by  their  riches,  or  the  elegance  and  luxury  of  their 
establishments,  whom  the  judgments  of  God  would,  in  a  more  remarkable  manner,  hurl 
into  ruin."  It  has  been  also  observed  that  the  emphatic  iteration  of  "lifted  up"  is 
noticeable  as  indicating  that  the  prophet  sees  in  that  self-assertion  the  root-evil  of  his 
lime,  thnt  which  was  most  destructive  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  most  surely  brought 
down  judgment  ou  the  offender. 

I.  Oke  day  God  hujibles  the  proud  kation.  Illustrate  from  Babylon.  Nebuchad- 
uezzar  exalted  himself,  and  took  all  the  p;lory  to  himself,  and  Belshazzar  followed  him 
in  the  same  wilfulness;  but  a  day  of  darkue»s  and  terror  came  for  Babylon,  of.  which 
the  handwriting  on  the  wall  gave  awful  waiuings.  Or  take  Jerusalem  as  representing 
the  kingdom  of  Judah.  Puffed  upviith  self-confidence,  wilfully  resisting  the  Divine 
lead,  a  day  of  vindication  and  judgment  at  last  came;  her  enemies  poured  in  like  a 
flood ;  the  holy  city  lay  in  ashes,  and  her  people  -were  cither  slain  or  captive.  And  it 
is  not  without  good  reason  that  we  find  modem  illustration  of  God's  day  for  nations  in 
Napoleonic  France.  Napoleon  claiming  both  to  "  propose  and  dispose,"  and  overtaken 
by  God's  avenging  day  at  Moscow  and  Waterloo. 

II.  God's  day  humbles  the  puoud  inpividdal.  That  day  comes  in  such  forms 
as  these.  1.  A  slip  from  integrity  brings  disgrace  and  ruin.  2.  Masterfulness  and 
;irrogance  bring  hatred,  which  finds  occasion  to  injure.  3.  Riches  take  to  themselves 
a  ings  and  flee  away.  4.  Mind  becomes  unsettled,  as  in  the  case  of  Xebuchadnezzar. 
5.  Sickness  and  bereavement  come  in  his  family.    Sooner  or  later  a  day  dawns  in  which 

he  haughty,  self-reli."unt,  God-despising  man  is  touched  on  his  sorest,  tenderest  place. 
N'o  man  can  ever  be  i)ermitted  to  exalt  himself  against  God  and  permanently  prosper. 
Give  instances  from  modern  life  of  the  downfall  of  pride,  such  as  the  closing  yeftrs  of 
Squire  Beckford's  life. 

III.  God's  humblinos,  fob  nations  or  fob  men,  mat  be  meltings,  ok  they  may 
HAVE  to  be  CRUSHING8.  The  result  of  them  depends  upon  the  uay  in  which  they  are 
met  and  responiled  to.  That  which  is  designed  to  melt  may  harden ;  and  a  judgment 
I  hat  bruises  only  may  be  so  abused,  that  it  must  be  followed  by  a  judgment  that  breaks. 
Israel  would  not  be  humbled  by  calamity  after  calamity  graciou^ly  tempered,  so  it  must 
lie  made  overwhelming;  and  Samaria  was  taken,  and  the  distinct  life  of  Israel,  at  a 
iiation,  crushed  out  for  ever.  It  is  a  thought  full  of  painful  seriousness,  that  the  quality 
and  degree  of  our  troubles  depend  on  our  response  to  those  God  has  sent,  as  chastenings, 
in  earlier  times.  God's  hand  may  be  heavy  on  us,  because  wc  have  so  long  resisted  his 
pleadings  and  his  humhlings.  Judgment  is  his  strange  work,  mercy  is  his  delight;  but 
if  we  resist  him,  further  and  heavier  judgments  are  demanded  by  very  "  meicy." — B.  T. 

Ver.  20. — Man's  disgust  at  his  idols.  In  ver.  8  the  prophet  had  observed  that  one 
characteristic  of  the  times  was  prevailing  idolatry.  The  men  who  had,  in  their  self-will 
and  pride,  turned  from  the  living  God,  had  taken  up  with  idols,  deities  of  their  own 
imagining,  which  answered  to  the  devices  and  desires  of  their  own  heai  ts,  and  allowed 
them  to  keep  their  self-will  even  in  their  religion.  Divinely  revealed  religion  and  man- 
made  religions  differ  in  this — the  first  demands  the  surrender  of  self-will,  the  second 
finds  expressions  for,  and  strengthens  by  expression,  man's  self-will.  That  is  the  ruid 
reason  why  men  constantly  fall  into  idolatry ;  it  keeps  them  in  the  "  self-sphere."  The 
prophet  recognizes  this  by  saying,  "  Their  land  also  is  full  of  idols ;  they  worship  the 
work  of  their  own  hands,  that  which  their  own  fingers  have  made."  Then,  when 
Jehovah  arises  to  vindicate  himself,  man  is  humbled,  and  one  sign  of  that  humbling  \e 
sure  to  be,  that  his  trust  in  his  helpless,  self-fashioned  idols  is  broken. .  He  finds  out 
their  uselessness  when  God's  testingr  day  comes  upon  him,  and  in  disgust  he  is  ready 


RH.  D.  1— 22.]  THE   BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  49 

to  cast  them  to  the  "molas  and  to  the  bats,"  creatures  yf  the  darkness.  "God  can 
make  men  sick  of  those  idols  that  they  have  been  most  tend  of,  even  the  idols  of  silver, 
and  the  idols  of  gold,  the  most  precious.  The  idolaters  here  throvr  away  their  idols 
liici»ase  (1)  they  are  ashamed  of  them,  and  of  their  own  folly  in  trusting  to  them,  or 
(2)  because  they  are  afraid  of  having  them  found  in  their  possession  when  the  judg- 
ments of  God  are  abroad ;  as  the  thief  throws  away  his  stolen  goods  when  he  is  searched 
for  or  pursued."  Idolatry  is  a  delusion,  and  when  that  is  suddenly  dispelled,  the  idul^ 
will  be  "  thrown  away  in  haste,  terror,  shame,  and  desperate  contempt  by  those  who 
Uad  worshipped  them  and  trusted  in  them."  It  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  the 
prophet's  words  apply  to  the  characteristic  idolatries  of  civilized  and  modem,  as  well  as 
)f  heathen  and  ancient,  times.  "  Covetous  men  make  silver  and  gold  their  idols." 
Worldly  men  make  pleasure  or  fame  their  idols.  Parents  make  children  their  idols. 
A  il  will  be  cast  away  when  God  arises  to  vindicate  himself,  and  his  sole  claim  to  man's 
trust  and  love  and  life.  The  immediate  reference  of  the  prophet  probably  is  to 
the  terrible  earthquake  that  took  place  in  Uzziah's  reign,  and  the  fright  which  it 
occasioned. 

I.  Idolatbt  is  delusion.  The  calm  onlooker  sees  that  the  description  of  idols 
given  in  Ps.  cxv.  is^ strictly  and  perfectly  true.  But  the  worshipper  cannot  see  this. 
He  believes  his  idols  can  really  help  him,  and  prays  to  them  with  passionate  intensity. 
So  the  man  whose  idol  is  money  is  deluded.  He  thinks  his  money  can  help  him  in 
whatever  circumstances  he  may  be  placed.  But  sickness  comes,  danger  comes,  plague 
comes,  earthquake  comes,  shipwreck  comes,  fire  comes,  death  comes,  and  it  is  quite  plain 
that  he  was  deluded.  Money  is  a  helpless  idol ;  it  cannot  aid  its  votaries  in  God's 
day.  Point  out  that  the  root  of  the  delusion  is  self-trust ;  a  man  wants  to  rely  on 
uomething  that  he  has,  or  that  he  has  done,  or  that  he  has  made.  Blessed  only  is  that 
man  whose  trust  is  in  the  Lord  his  God. 

II.  SiioNER  OB  tATEE  THE  DELUSION  IS  DISPELLED.  Awakening  days  are  sure  to 
come  for  us  all.  The  apostle  teaches  that  all  our  trusts  and  all  our  works  must  be  tried 
by  fire';  "  the  day  shall  declare  them."  Illustrate  the  dispelling  of  the  delusions  of 
idolatry  :  1.  By  the  proved  helplessness  of  the  idols.  Baal's  priests  and  worshippers  had 
their  eyes  opened  at  Carmel,  when  there  "  was  none  that  heard,  nor  any  that  answered." 
2.  By  advancing  intelligence.  Illustrate  from  the  influence  of  education  on  the  natives 
of  India.  Science  and  geography  have  made  it  impossible  to  believe  in  the  legends  of 
their  gods.  The  delusion  is  in  great  measure  expelled,  but  a  first  i-esult  is  infidelity. 
Christianity  alone  can  satisfactorily  take  the  place  of  discarded  idolatry.  3.  By  Divine 
judgments.  Illustrate  by  such  scenes  as  the  earthquakes  at  Java  and  Ischia,  or  the 
destruction  of  Pompeii.  Or  take  a  visitation  of  cholera  or  plague  in  an  idolatrous  land. 
Churches,  temples,  idols,  are  fort^aken ;  public  helples!-ness  and  despair  prepares  the  way 
for  an  extension  of  the  evil.  He  only  can  be  calm  whose  trust  is  in  the  living  God. 
Impress  by  the  contrast  of  the  calmness  and  confidence  of  the  pious  psalmist  (Ps.  xci.) : 
"  Surely  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler,  and  from  the  noisome 
pestilence.  ...  Because  thou  hast  made  the  Lord,  which  is  my  Refuge,  even  the  Mot^t 
High,  thy  habitation ;  there  shall  no  evil  befall  thee,  neither  shal  'iany  plague  come  nigh 
thy  dwelling."— R,  T. 

Ver.  22. — The  unrelidbhness  of  man.  Some  think  this  verse  should  commence 
ch.  iii. ;  but  it  is  an  exhortation  naturally  following  on  the  humbling  of  all  human 
pride  and  the  destruction  of  all  human  glory.  Man  at  his  best  estate  is  altogether 
vanity,  therefore  do  not  rely  upon  man.  God  is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting, 
therefore  trust  him.  The  counsel  is  elsewhere  given  in  Scripture,  "  Cursed  he  the  man 
that  trusfeth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm,  and  whose  heart  departeth  from  the 
Lord.  For  he  shall  be  like  the  heath  in'  the  desert,  and  shall  not  see  when  good 
cometh ;  but  shall  inhabit  the  parched  places  in  the  wilderness,  in  a  salt  land  and  not 
inhabited  "  (Jsr.  xvii.  5,  6).  "  Put  not  your  trust  in  princes,  nor  in  the  son  of  man,  in 
whom  there  is  no  help.  His  breath  goeth  forth,  he  retumeth  to  his  earth;  in  that 
very  day  his  thoughts  perish."  Quick-passing  breath  is  the  symbol  of  fleeting  life 
(Gen.  ii.  7 ;  vii.  22) ;  and  the  sentence  of  the  text  would  better  read,  "  Cease  from  man, 
in  whose  nostrils  is  a  breath."  Trusting  man  was  the  sin  of  Isaiah's  age.  Compare, 
l»ler  on,  the  afflicted  nation  seeking  succour  from  Egypt  rather  than  from  God,  and 

I8AIAH,  s 


50 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.         [oh.  lu.  1— 2& 


therefore  coming  under  the  prophet's  reproach.    But  man-trusting  la  •  characteristic 
sin  of  OUT  age  ;  and  we  also  need  to  learn  that  there  is — 

I.  No  TRUSTING  IN  man's  POWER.  That  is  within  very  narrow  limits.  "  Let  not 
your  eye  he  to  the  power  of  man,  for  it  is  finite  and  limited,  derived  and  depending ;  it 
is  not  from  him  your  judgment  proceeds.  Let  not  him  be  your  fear,  let  not  him  be 
your  hope ;  hut  look  up  to  the  power  of  God,  to  which  all  the  powers  of  men  are 
subject  and  subordinate."  There  is  so  much  that  man  can  do,  we  fail  to  realize,  as  we 
should,  that  he  fails  us  just  at  the  points  of  om-  extremest  need,  at  the  times  when 
trouble  overwhelms,  heart  fails,  and  fears  are  on  every  side.  The  man  came  to  Christ 
with  confidence  that  he  could  help,  but  doubting  his  will.  We  may  seek  our  fellow- 
men  in  our  troubles,  confident  of  their  good  will,  but  full  of  fears  as  to  their  ability. 

II.  No  TRUSTING  IN  man's  KNOWLEDGE.  That,  indeed,  is  vast  and  wonderful ;  and 
it  is  ever-increasing.  Arid  yet  it  is  uncertain;  we  cannot  make  any  foundations  of  it. 
What  men  call/acis  of  knowledge  are  again  and  again  disproved  by  the  discovery  of 
other  facts ;  and  what  men  call  theories  give  place  to  new  theories,  as  fresh  minds  work 
upon  the  old  data,  and  gather  new.  Apart  from  revelation  men  have  never  found  out 
reliable  truth  respecting  God,  man,  sin,  redemption,  or  the  future. 

III.  No  TRUST  IN  man's  CHARACTER.  The  most  humiliating  thing  in  human  life  is 
th«  failure  from  righteousness  of  those  whom  we  have  admired,  trusted,  and  loved. 
Character,  built  on  self,  is  uncertain,  and  in  peril  whenever  temptation  draws  nigh.  In 
middle  life  the  honourable  man  so  often  fails  from  either  (1)  drink,  (2)  dishonesty,  or 
(3)  sensuality,  that  we  have  sometimes  felt  we  could  say,  in  a  moment  of  excitement, 
as  David  did,  "  AU  men  are  liars." 

IV.  No  TRUST  IN  man's  EXAMPLE.  It  is  always  imperfect;  it  never  can  be  an 
absolute  model.  Only  one  man  set  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  his  steps,  and 
he  was  the  Divine  man.  We  can  follow  no  other  man  wholly.  We  can  only  follow 
one  of  our  fellows  so  far  as  he  follows  Christ,  and  so  we  really  only' follow  the  Christ 
lu  him. 

Where,  then,  are  we  to  trust?  "Trust  in  the  Lord  for  ever,  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah 
is  everlasting  strength."    "  None  of  them  that  trust  in  him  shall  be  desolate." — R.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  III. 


Vers.  1 — 1. — God's  Judgment  dpon  Jeeu- 
BiLEM.  The  general  denunciations  against 
Israel  of  the  two  preceding  chapters  are 
here  turned  especially  against  Jerusalem. 
God  will  deprive  her  of  all  her  superior  and 
more  honourable  classes  (vers.  1 — 3) ;  and 
will  give  her  "  children  "  for  her  rulers  (ver. 
4).  There  will  be  continued  oppression,  and 
the  rise  of  an  insolent  and  undutiful  spirit 
(ver.  5).  Those  fit  to  bear  rule  will  refuge 
to  do  so  (vers.  6,  7). 

Ver.  1. — The  lord,  the  Lord  of  hosts  (see 
note  on  oh.  i.  24).  The  stay  and  the  staff; 
rather,  ttay  and  staff.  Neither  word  has  the 
article.  The  latter  is  the  feminine  form  of 
the  former ;  and  the  intention  is  to  announce 
that  all  support  of  evt  ry  kind  is  about  to  be 
withdrawn.  The  whole  stay  of  bread  ...  of 
water.  Mr.  Cheyne  agrees  with  Hitzig  and 
Knobel  that  this  clause  is  probably  a  gloss 
on  the  text,  subsequently  introduced  into  it, 
and  a  gloss  which  did  not  proceed  from  a 
very  enlightened  commentator.   The  "stay  " 


and  "  staff"  Intended  are  certainly  not  literal 
"  bread  "  and  "  water,"  but  the  powerful  and 
respectable  classes  enumerated  in  the  two 
following  verses.  If  the  words  are  Isaiah's, 
he  must  have  intended  them  to  be  taken 
metaphorically. 

Ver.  2. — The  mighty  man,  and  the  man  of 
war ;  or,  Twro  attd  warrior.  The  first  rank 
is  given  to  those  distinguished  in  war,  as 
being  held  in  the  highest  esteem,  and  per- 
haps as  actually,  under  the  coming  circum- 
stances, the  men  of  most  importance  to  the 
country.  It  is  thus  implied,  as  later  (vers. 
25,  26)  it  is  expressly  taught,  that  the  im- 
pending visitation  will  be  a  terrible  invasion. 
The  judge,  and  the  prophet ;  literally,  judge 
and  prophet.  The  judge  holds  his  place 
as  one  of  the  highest  ofBcers  of  the  state 
(see  oh.  i.  26) ;  the  prophet  holds  a  lower 
position  than  might  have  been  expected,  on 
account  of  the  writer's  humility.  The  pru- 
dent ;  rather,  the  diviner,  as  the  word  it 
translated  in  Deut.  xviii.  14;  1  Sam.  vi.  2; 
ch.  xliv.  25 ;  Jer.  xxvii.  9 ;  xxix.  8 ;  Ezek. 
xiii.  9 ;  Micah  iii.  7  ;  Zeuh.  x.  2 :  or  sooth- 
sayer, as  in  Josh.  xiii.  22.  Isaiah  arrange* 
the  classes,  not  ao  much  according  to  um> 


OH.  m.  1—26.]         THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


61 


order  in  which  he  values  them,  as  to  that  in 
which  they  were  valued  by  the  people.  The 
ancient;  f.e.  "the  elder,"  as  the  word  is 
translated  commonly.  The  "elders"  had 
an  ascertained  position  in  the  btate  under 
the  monarchy  (2  Sam.  T.  8;  xix.  11; 
1  Kings  viii.  1 ;  xx.  7  ;  2  Kings  vi.  32,  etc.). 

Ver.  3.— The  captain  of  fifty.  "  Captains 
of  fifties"  were  scarcely  at  this  period 
"  civil  oifioers  "  (Oheyne).  They  represent 
simply  the  lowest  grade  of  officers  in  the 
army  (2  Kings  i.  9,  11,  13).  Honourable. 
The  same  expression  is  used  again  in  oh.  ix. 
15.  It  occurs  also  iu  2  Kings  v.  1  and  Job 
xxii.  8.  The  cunning  artificer.  "All  the 
craftsmen  and  smiths"  in  Jerusalem  were 
carried  away  by  Nebuchadnezzar  in  the 
captivity  of  Jehoiacliiu  (2  Kings  xxiv.  11; 
cf.  Jir.  xxiv.  1).  They  were  among  the 
most  valuable  of  the  population,  in  time  of 
war  no  less  than  of  peace,  since  on  tliem 
depended  the  construction  and  repair  of  the 
military  engines  which  were  regarded  as  of 
so  much  importance  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  15). 
The  eloquent  orator;  rather,  the  expert  en- 
ehanter  (comp.  Eccles.  x.  11 ;  Jer.  viii.  17). 

Ver.  4, — I  win  give  children  to  be  their 
princes ;  rather,  youths  than  "  children." 
The  extreme  youth  of  the  later  kings  of 
Judah  at  the  date  of  their  accession  is  very 
remarkabla  After  Hezekiah,  only  one  was 
as  much  as  twenty-five  years  old  when  he 
came  to  the  throne.  Jehoahaz  was  twenty- 
three  (2  Kings  xxiii.  31) ;  Amon,  twenty-two 
(2  Kings  xxi.  19);  Zedekiah  twenty-one 
(2  Kings  xxiv.  18);  Jehoiachin,  eighteen 
(2  Kings  xxiv.  8);  Manasseh,  twelve  (2  Kings 
xxi.  1) ;  and  Josiah  eight  (2  Kings  xxii.  1). 
Thus  this  prophecy  was  fuliilled  to  the  letter. 
And  babes  shall  rule  over  them;  literally, 
puerilitiee  shall  rule  over  them;  i.e.  the 
youths  shall  behave  in  a  childish  way. 

Ver.  5. — ^Aud  the  people  shall  be  oppressed, 
etc.;  rather,  shall  oppress  eoAsh  man  his  fellow, 
and  each  man  his  companion.  This  would  be 
no  new  thing  (see  ch.i.  17,21, 23), but  perliaps 
might  be  more  widely  spread,  having  passed 
from  the  upper  classes  to  the  lower  ones,  as 
is  usual  with  vices.  The  child;  rather,  the 
yovih.  Shall  behave  himself  proudly ;  or, 
insolently.  The  respect  for  age  inculcated 
by  the  Law  (Lev.  xix.  32)  shall  disappear. 
Youths  shall  set  at  nought  the  counsel  of 
the  aged.  The  spirit  of  Eehoboam  shall 
prevail  over  that  of  Solomon,  with  the  usual 
result — rashness,  recklessness,  and  failure. 
And  the  base,  etc.  Bespect  for  station 
shall  likewise  disappear.  The  dregs  of  the 
people  shall  grow  insolent  towards  those 
above  them  iu  the  social  scale ;  and  thus  the 
old  social  order  shall  be  inverted. 

Ver.  6. — When  a  man  shall  take  hold  of 
his  brother.  A  new  departure.  In  the 
general  anarchy  described  (vers.  4,  5)  it  will 


be  felt  that  something  must  be  done.  A 
man  will  take  hold  of  his  brother  (i.e.  hit 
fellow)  in  his  (i.e.  the  latteWs)  father's  house, 
where  he  lives  iu  seclusion,  and  say  to  him, 
"  Thou  hast  clothing "  (or,  "  thou  art  de- 
cently clad  "),  "  thou  must  be.our  ruler ;  let 
this  ruin"  («.«.  "this  ruined  state")  "'be 
under  thy  hand."  This  ruin ;  literally,  thit 
stumbling-block  (see  Zeph.  i.  3 ;  and  com- 
pare the  uniform  translation  of  the  kindred 
noun  mihshdl  (Lev.  xix.  14 ;  Ps.  oxix.  165 ; 
ch.  Ivii.  14 ;  Jer.  vi  21 ;  Bzek.  iii.  20 ;  viL 
10,  etc.).  The  Jewish  community  is  meant, 
which  was  full  of  stumbling  itself,  and 
might  well  cause  all  those  to  stumble  who 
came  into  contact  with  it. 

Ver.  7. — In  that  day  shall  he  swear ;  or, 
Ufl  up  hii  voice — speaking  with  emotion 
(Kay).  I  mil  not  be  an  healer;  literally, 
a  binder-up  (comp.  ch.  i.  6) ;  "I  will  not 
undertake  to  heal  the  calamities  of  the 
state."  In  my  house  is  neither  bread  nor 
clothing ;  t'.e.  "  I  am  not  a  wealthy  man ;  I 
have  no  stores  laid  up ;  I  am  quite  unfit  to 
be  the  people's  ruler."  Uake  me  not ;  or,  ye 
shall  not  make  me.  The  decently  clad  man 
entirely  declines  to  be  advanced  to  the  helm 
of  the  state. 

Vers.  8. — 26. — The  cause  op  the  Judg- 
ment SHOWN  TO  BE  THE  SINS  OF  JeBUSALEU. 
1.  The  sins  of  the  men.  (Vers.  8^15) 
These  are  declared  to  be  partly  sins  of 
speech,  but  mainly  sins  of  act  (ver.  8).  Of 
Bins  of  speech  the  only  one  specified  is  the 
open  and  shameless  declaration  of  their 
wickedness  (ver.  9).  Under  the  head  of 
sins  of  act  are  enumerated  (1)  childishness 
and  efieminacy ;  (2)  irreligion  and  leading 
people  away  from  God  (ver.  12);  (3)  op- 
pression of  the  poor  and  a£Sicted  (vers.  14, 
15).  The  enumeration  of  the  sins  is  mixed 
with  exhortation  and  comment  in  such  a 
way  as  to  give  rise  to  the  conjecture  that 
we  have  here,  not  the  original  prophecy  as 
the  author  penned  it,  but  a  later  "  summary  " 
of  several  prophetical  discourses,  which 
summary  itself  is  "  a  little  fragmentary " 
(Cheyne). 

Ver.  8. — TemBalem  is  ruined;  or,  has 
come  to  ruin — the  "  perfect  of  prophetic 
certainty"  (Oheyne) — (comp.  Amos  v.  2, 
"  The  virgin  of  Israel  is  fallen ").  Their 
tongue  and  their  doings.  Sins  of  the  tongue 
are  denounced  in  the  Old  Testament  as 
well  as  iu  the  New,  though  not,  perhaps,  so 
frequently  (see  Exod.  xx.  7 ;  xxL  17 ;  xxii. 
28;  xxiii.  1,  2 ;  Ps.  xxxi.  18 ;  xciv.  4,  etc.). 
To  provoke  the  eyes  of  his  glory,  Tliis  is 
an  nnuBual  metaphor.  God's  glory  seems 
here  to  be  identified  with  himself,  as  being 


53 


THE  BOOK   OF  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


[CH.  III.  1—26. 


of  hie  very  essence ;  and  thus  "  provoking 
the  eyes  of  his  glory  "  is  simply  provoking 
him  to  look  on  them  with  anger. 

Ver.  9. — The  show  of  their  oonntenano? 
doth  witness  against  them.  This  is  not 
in  itself  a  sin,  but  it  is  a  sign  of  frequent 
and  hiibitual  sin.  Vico,  hing  indulged  in, 
stamps  its  mark  upon  the  countenance, 
giving  men  what  is  called  "a  bad  ex- 
pression"— a  guilty  nnd  hardened  look.  It 
does  not  require  a  skilleil  physiognomist 
to  detect  at  a  glance  the  habitual  criminal 
or  sensualist.  They  declare  their  sin  as 
Sodom.  Not  only  does  their  countenance 
betray  them,  but,  like  the  Sodomites  (Gen. 
xix.  5,  9),  they  boldly  and  impudently 
declare  their  wicked  purposes  beforehand, 
and  make  no  attempt  at  concealment. 
Hypocrisy  has  been  said  to  be  the  homage 
that  vice  pays  to  virtue.  Where  there  is 
none,  where  vice  has  ceased  to  shroud  or 
veil  itself,  a  very  advanced  stage  of  wicked- 
ness has  been  reached.  They  have  rewarded 
evil  unto  themselves.  They  have  "  received 
tn  themteloes  the  recompense]  of  their  error 
which  was  meet"  (Rom.  i.  27).  Their  sins 
have  at  once  marred  their  countenance  and 
injured  their  moral  nature. 

Ver.  10. — Say  ye  to  the  righteous.  The 
mention  of  the  fact  that  the  men  of  Jeru- 
salem have  permanently  injured  their  moral 
natures  by  sin,  and  thus  "  rewarded  evil  to 
themselves,"  leads  the  prophet  to  declare  at 
tliis  point,  parenthetically,  the  general  law, 
which  extends  alike  to  the  evil  and  the 
good — that  men  receive  in  themselves  the 
recompense  of  iheir  deeds.  The  righteous 
raise  their  moral  nature,  become  better,  and, 
in  becoming  better,  become  happier.  "It 
is  well  with  them,  for  of  the  fruit  of  their 
doings  they  eat."  The  wicked  deprave 
and  corrupt  themselves,  lower  their  moral 
nature,  become  worse  than  they  were,  and, 
in  becoming  worse,  become  more  miserable. 
"  Woe  unto  them  I  with  them  it  is  ill ;  for 
the  achievement  of  their  hands  is  given 
them." 

Ver.  12. — As  for  my  people.  Return  is 
now  made  to  the  sins  of  the  dwellers 
in  Jerusalem,  and  the  first  thing  noted 
is  that  the  people  suffer  from  the  child- 
ishness and  effeminacy  of  their  rulers. 
The  rulers  are  called  "  oppressors  "  by  the 
way  here,  the  sin  of  oppression  being  dwelt 
on  later  (vera.  14,  15).  Here  the  emphatic 
words  are  "  children,"  "  women."  Children 
(see  ver.  4).  The  rulers  are  "children," 
or  rather  "babes" — foolish,  capricious, 
cowardly.  It  is  not  clear  that  any  prince 
in  particular  is  meant;  rather,  by  the 
plural  form,  the  upper  class  generally  seems 
to  be  intended,  as  iu  cli.  i.  10,  17,  23,  etc. 
Women;  comp.  Herod.,  viii.  88,  where 
Xerxea  saya  that  "  his  men   have  shown 


themselves  women,  and  his  women  men ; " 
and  see  also  Virg.,  '  .^neid ' — 

"  O  vere  Fhrygiss,  neque  enim  Phryges." 

The  rulers  were  womanly,  i.e.  weak,  waver  i  ng, 
timid,  impulsive,  passionate,  and  are  there- 
fore called  actual  "  women."  There  is  no 
allusion  to  female  sovereigns.  They  which 
lead  thee  cause  thee  to  err ;  or,  (hey  which 
direct  thee  lead  thee  astray.  Professing  to 
point  out  the  right  path,  they  led  men 
away  from  it.  Destroy  the  way;  litorHlly, 
swallow  it  up,  or  obliterate  it. 

Ver.  13. — ^The  Lord  standeth  up  to  plead. 
The  great  sin  of  the  time  was  oppression  nf 
the  poor  by  the  rich,  and  especially  by  the 
rulers  (ch.  i.  15,  17,  21).  In  noticing  tins, 
the  prophet,  to  give  more  weight  to  his 
denunciation,  introduces  Jehovah  as  stand- 
ing up,  and  coming  forwnrd  on  the  popular 
side,  to  plead  the  people's  cause,  and  re- 
monslrate  with  their  oppressors.  There  is 
great  force  in  this  sudden  entrance  on  the 
scene  of  Jehovah  himself,  as  Pleader  and 
Judge.  And .  .  .  judge  the  people ;  rnthar,  the 

f  copies.  Primarily,  Israel  is  God's  care; 
ut  he  does  not  stop  at  this  point.  All  the 
nations  of  the  earth  are  also  under  his 
protection. 

Ver.  14. — The  ancients  .  .  .  the  princes. 
Thrse  were  the  chief  oppressors.  They  de- 
livered the  judgments,  and  it  was  by  them 
that  justice  was  perverted.  Jehovah  there- 
fore enters  specially  into  judgment  with 
them.  For  ye  have  eaten  up ;  rather,  So 
ye  have  eaten  up.  Jehovah  is  supposed  to 
address  the  unjust  judges.  He  reproachts 
them  with  having  "  eaten  up,"  or  rather 
"  scorched  up,"  his  vineyard,  i.e.  Israel 
(comp.  ch.  V.  1 — 7),  and  taxes  them  with 
having  still  their  ill-gotten  gains  in  their 
houses.  "  So  ye,"  he  says,  "  have  thus  acted 
— ye  whose  duty  it  was  to  have  acted  so 
differently." 

Ver.  15. — What  mean  ye  1  i.e.  "  What  has 
come  over  you  ? "  or  "  What  strange  per- 
versity has  possessed  you  ?  "  (Kay).  That 
ye  beat  my  people  to  pieces,  eto.  The 
strongest  possible  expressions  are  used  to 
mark  God's  abliorrence  of  the  oppression  to 
which  the  poor  were  subjecled.  Under  the 
Law,  he  constituted  himself  the  champion  of 
BUi.  h  persons  (see  Exod.  xxii.  22 — 24). 

2.  Tlie  sins  of  the  women.  (Vers.  16 — 
26.)  These  may  be  summed  np  under  the 
three  heads  of  pride,  wanton  manners  (ver. 
16),  and  love  of  dress  and  ornament  (vera. 
18 — 23).  It  was  natural  tliat,  with  in- 
creased commerce  (2  Kings  xiv.  22 ;  oh.  ii. 
16)  and  more  frequent  communication  with 
foreign  nations,  such  as  Assyria  (2  Kings 
ivi.  7—10)  and  Babylon  (2  Kings  xx.  1^ 


ca  m  1— 26.J 


THE  BOOS  OF  THE  iTvOfHET  ISAIAH. 


63 


13),  thoM  should  be  an  increase  of  luxury, 
and  quite  in  accoi'Jance  with  Eastern  ideas 
that  the  luxury  should  particularly  show 
itself  in  the  dress  and  adornment  of  the 
women.  The  Egyptian  remains  show  an 
advanced  state  of  luxury  among  the  women 
at  a  time  anterior  to  Moses ;  and  in  Assyria, 
though  tlie  evidence  is  less  abundant,  we 
find  also  indications  of  a  similar  kind.  The 
Jews,  whose  regard  for  their  women  was 
high,  are  not  likely  to  have  been  behind- 
hand in  the  gallantry  which  shows  itself  in 
henping  oruiiment  and  the  newest  appliances 
of  civilization  on  the  wiaker  sex. 

Ver.  Hi. — The  daughters  of  Zion.  It  is 
over-fanciful  to  go  beyond  the  plain  mean- 
ing of  the  words  here,  and  suppose  allegory. 
"  The  daughters  of  Zioii "  are  the  female 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  Are  haughty ; 
or,  proud— like  the  men  (ch.  ii.  11,  12,  17). 
Walk  with  stretched  forth  necks  and  wan- 
ton eyes.  Mr,  Cheyne  translates,  "  ogling 
eyes.''  Both  actions  indicate  the  desire 
to  attract  men's  attention,  and  are  shameless 
and  immodest.  Walking  and  mincing  as 
they  go ;  i.e.  taking  short  steps  in  an 
Bff«cte<lly  childish  way.  Making  a  tinkling 
with  their  feet.  This  meaning  is  generally 
acc/'pted,  though  not  very  certain.  It  has 
been  suggested  that  the  anklets  which  they 
wore  (Ver.  18)  had  silver  bells  attached  to 
them. 

Ver.  17. — Therefore  the  lord  will  smite 
with  a  scab.  Thus  destroying  their  beauty 
by  producing  baldiie.^s  (oomp.  ver.  24 ;  and 
for  the  meaning  "smite  with  a  scab,"  see 
Lev.  xiii.  2  ;  xiv.  56). 

Ver  18.— The  bravery  of  their  tinkling 
ornaments  about  their  feet ;  rather,  of  their 
anklets.  Anklets  were  worn  by  the  Egyp- 
tian women  from  the  time  of  the  twel.th 
dynasty  (about  B.O.  1900).  They  were,  in 
general,  plain  rings  of  metal,  but  appear 
to  have  Ijeen  sometimes  set  with  precious 
stones  (see  Lepsius,  '  Denkmaler,'  pt.  ii. 
pis.  128,  12;i).  No  bells  appear  attached 
to  any ;  but  bells  were  known  in  Assyria 
from  the  time  of  Sennacherib  ('  Ancient 
■Monarchies,'  vol.  i.  p.  417,  2nd  edit.). 
Their  cauls ;  margin,  networks.  The  mar- 
giuHl  rendering  is  probably  correct  (comp. 
LXX.,  c'/iTArJ/cia).  Network  cnps  to  cont-iin 
the  hair  seem  to  be  intended  (so  Kimchi, 
Saadiah,  Jarchi,  Bosenmuller,  Kay).  Mr. 
Cheyne  prefers  "wreaths  worn  round  the 
forehead,  reaching  from  one  ear  to  the 
other,"  Bound  tires  like  the  moon ;  rather, 
ereteenli.  Flat  omnmcnts  in  metal,  like  a 
young  moon,  generally  worn  suspended 
round  the  neck  (see  Judg.  viii.  26,  where 
the  same  wnr<l  oocurs). 


Ver.  19. — The  chains,  and  the  bracelets, 
and  the  mufflers ;  rather,  the  enr-drops,  and 
the  armlets,  and  the  veils.  Ear  rings  were 
worn  from  very  ancient  times  by  bolh  the 
Assyrians  and  the  Egyptians.  The  ring 
had  frequently  a  pendant  hanging  h:ira  it 
Men  wore  armlets  in  Assyria,  and  both  men 
and  women  in  Egypt  (Lepsius,  '  Denk- 
maler,' pt.  iii.  pi.  1).  Veils  have  always 
been  regarded  in  the  East  as  almost  a  neces- 
sary part  of  female  attire. 

Ver.  20. — ^The  bonnets ;  rather,  the  head 
gear.  It  is  quite  uncertain  what  this  was, 
since  we  have  no  representations  of  Hebrew 
women,  Egyptian  women  commonly  wore 
a  more  fillet  with  pendant  ends.  The 
Hebrew  word  here  employed  is  used  in 
Exodus  of  the  head-dress  of  the  priests 
(xxxix.  28).  The  ornaments  of  the  legs 
These  are  explained  as  chains  connecting 
the  two  anklets  together.  The  head-bands, 
and  the  tablets,  and  the  ear-rings;  rather, 
tlte  girdles,  and  the  scent-bottles,  and  the 
amulets.  Scent-bottles  and  jars  for  holding 
sweet-smelling  unguents  are  amono;  the 
most  frequent  toilette  articles  recovered 
from  Ejjyptiau  tombs  and  Assyrian  palaces. 
Amulets  have  been  worn  in  the  East  from 
very  ancient  times,  and  are  still  trusted  in 
as  much  as  ever.  They  frequently  take  the 
form  of  ornaments. 

Ver.  21. — Ihe  rings;  literally,  seal-rings, 
or  signet-rings.  Such  were  known  in  Egypt 
from  the  time  of  Joseph  (Gen.  xli.  42),  and 
probably  earlier.  It  wouM  seem  from  the 
present  passage  tliat  their  use  was  not  cim- 
fincd  to  men.  Nose-jewels.  Actual  nose- 
rings are  not  represented  in  any  of  the 
ancient  remains ;  and  the  use  of  them  seems 
to  be  confined  to  very  barbarous  commu- 
nities. Probably  the  "  nose-jewels  "  here 
mentioned  were  ornaments  depending  from 
the  forehead  and  touching  the  upper  part 
of  the  nose. 

Ver,  22. — The  changeable  suits  of  ap- 
parel ;  rather,  the  festival  robes  (Revised 
Version),  or  the  full-dress  suits;  i.e.  those 
warn  upon  grand  ocoasicms,  and  then  put 
off  and  set  aside.  The  mantles,  and  the 
wimples,  and  the  crisping-pins ;  rather,  the 
upper  petticoats,  the  wraps,  and  the  purses. 
An  inner  and  an  outer  tunic  or  petticoat 
were  commonly  worn  by  females  of  the 
higher  class  in  the  East.  The  inner  tunic 
was  a  simple  linen  vest ;  but  the  outer 
was  generally  of  a  better  material,  and 
richly  ornamented.  Outside  this,  a  sort  Of 
wrap,  or  cloak,  was  worn  occasionally  (see 
Buth  Iii.  15).  Purses  were,  no  doubt, 
carried  by  wealthy  persons  of  both  sexes; 
but  their  mention  in  this  list  does  not  seem 
v«ry  appropriate.  Perhaps  to'ief-bags  ot 
some  kind  or  other  aic  iutemlud  (see  2  Kings 
v.  23). 


64 


THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.         [ch.  m.  1—26. 


Ver.  23. — The  glasses  ;  rather,  the  mirron. 
In  ancient  times  these  were  not  made  of 
glass,  but  of  some  metal  which  took  a  high 
polish.  Most  commonly,  the  material  seems 
to  have  been  bronze.  Many  such  mirrors 
have  been  found  in  Egypt,  a  few  in  Assyria, 
in  Etruria  •  considerable  number.  They 
are  of  small  size,  intended  to  be  carried  in 
the  hand,  and  have  for  that  purpose  a  metal 
or  a  wooden  handle,  which  is  sometimes 
highly  artistic.  The  fine  linen;  rather,  the 
muslin  rohes.  Sedin,  the  Hebrew  word  used, 
is  probably  a  corruption  or  analogue  of  stn- 
don,  the  Greek  name  for  Indian  fabrics.  It 
is  only  used  here  and  in  Judg.  xiv.  12,  13 ; 
Prov.  xxxi.  24t.  The  hoods,  and  the  vails ; 
or,  the  turbans  and  the  scarfs.  The  word 
translated  "  hood  "  is  nearly  the  same  as 
that  which  desi^fnates  the  head-dress  of 
the  high  priest  in  Exodus  (xxviii.  4,  37, 3f) ; 
xxix.  6,  etc.)  ami  Leviticus  (viii.  9;  xvi.  4), 
which  seems  to  have  been  a  "  turban  "  (see 
note  on  Exod.  xxviii.  4).  The  other  word, 
here  translated  "  vail,"  occurs  only  in  this 
place  and  Cant.  v.  7.  Its  exact  meaning  is 
uncertain;  but  it  can  scarcely  be  a  veil; 
since  "  veils  "  have  b:!en  already  mentioned 
(ver.  19). 

Ver.  24. — Instead  of  sweet  smell;  lite- 
rally, ipiee  (comp.  Exod.  xxxv.  28  ;  1  Kings 
X.  10,  etc.).  Stink;  rather,  rottenness,  as 
translated  in  ch.  v.  24  (compare  the  cog- 
nate verb  in  Lev.  xxvi.  39).  Instead  of  a 
girdle  a  rent.  So  Lowth  and  Kay;  but 
most  moderns  prefer  the  meaning  given  by 
the  Septuagint  and  Vulgate,  "  instead  of  a 
girdle,  a  rope."  The  word  used  occurs  only 
in  this  place.  Instead  of  well-set  hair  bald- 
ness (compare  above,  ver.  17).  By  "well- 
set  hair  "  seems  to  be  meant  "  hair  arranged 


with  such  exactness  and  order  as  to  look 
like  a  work  of  art."  The  exact  arrange- 
ment of  the  hair  is  very  remarkable,  both  in 
the  Egyptian  and  the  Assyrian  sculptures. 
Instead  of  such  elaborate  attempts  to  im- 
prove their  looks,  the  daughters  of  Jeru- 
salem would  soon  pluck  tlieir  hair  out  by 
the  roots,  or  shave  it  off,  in  mourning.  A 
girding  of  sackcloth  (comp.  Gen.  xxxvii. 
34 ;  2  Sam.  iii.  31,  et.c. ;  and  for  the  adop- 
tion of  the  custom  by  women,  see  2  Sam. 
xxi.  10;  Joel  i.  8).  Burning  instead  of 
beauty.  This  meaning  is  now  generally 
acknowledg.  d,  the  sense  of  "  burning " 
being  borne  out  by  the  cognate  verb  used 
in  Prov.  vi.  28 ;  ch.  xliii.  2,  and  the  cog- 
nate noun  used  in  Exod.  xxi.  25.  The  "  burn- 
ing" intended  is  probably  branding  by  a 
barbarous  enemy  (see  Herod.,  vii.  233; 
'  Hist.  Tamerlan.,'  p.  320). 

Ver.  25. — Thy  men  ;  rather,  thy  people ; 
i.e.  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  genuruUy. 
Note  here  the  first  distinct  statement  that 
the  coming  visitation  will  be  one  of  war. 

Ver.  26.^Her  gates.  The  sudden  change 
of  person  is  common  in  Oriental  poetry. 
Shall  lament  and  mourn.  On  account  of 
their  destruction,  which  wonld  be  very  com- 
plete (see  Lam.  i.  4 ;  ii.  9 ;  Neh.  i.  3  ;  ii.  13). 
Conquerors  could  not  do  more  than  break 
breaches  in  the  walls  of  a  town,  but  they 
carefully  destroyed  the  gates.  Being  deso- 
late ;  or,  emptied — plundered  of  everything, 
and  so  far  "  cleansed  "  from  her  abomina- 
tions. Shall  sit  upon  the  ground.  In  deep 
grief  (see  Job  ii.  13 ;  and  comp.  ch.  xlvii.  1 ; 
Lam.  ii.  10).  So  in  the  coin  of  Vespasian, 
the  captive  Judah  {Judsea  capta)  sits  upon 
the  ground. 


H0MILETIC3. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Many  steps  in  the  decay  of  states.  Ruin  does  not  often  come  on  states 
at  once,  even  when  (Sod  has  determined  on  it.  There  are  many  steps  in  the  fall  of  a 
great  nation. 

I.  Cessation  of  a  succession  of  great  and  wise  men.  (Vers.  2,  3.)  One  of  the 
first  marks  of  decay  is  a  falling  off  in  this  succession.  When  the  intervals  between  one 
great  man  and  another  lengthen;  when  wise  men,  capable  of  giving  the  state  good 
counsel, 'grow  rare;  when  mediocrity  everywhere  prevails,  and  no  one  stepi  forth  con- 
spicuous by  marked  superiority  to  his  fellows ; — then  it  may  at  once  be  proclaimed  that 
decline  has  set  in,  and  that  the  nation  is  verging  towards  its  fall.  The  great  and  the 
wise  are  the  salt  which  pre8er«9  society  from  corruption.  Without  them  all  goes 
wrong ;  the  pulse  of  the  national  life  slackens,  energy  disappears,  foreign  aggression  is 
weakly  resisted,  a  general  debilitation  becomes  apparent  in  every  part  and  function  of 
the  body  politic.  No  state  can  long  resist  the  insidious  malady,  which,  like  atrophy  or 
ancemia,  steals  gradually  over  the  entire  frame,  exhausting  itj  and  bringing  about  its 
dissolution. 

II.  Active  folly  nsr  the  bulers.  (Ver.  4.)  When  the  great  and  the  wise  fail, 
government  necessarily  falls  into  the  hands  of  th»  incompetent.  If  not  "  children  "  in 
age,  they  will  be  "babes"  in  respect  of  policy  and  statecraft.     So  long,  however,  as 


CH.  III.  1—26.]         THE  BOOK   OF   THE  PEOFHET  ISAIAH.  55 


they  are  willing  to  follow  the  traditions  of  the  past,  to  work  upon  well-known  lines,  and 
carry  out  established  practices,  no  very  great  harm  can  arise.  But  they  are  seldom 
content  for  many  years  to  act  thus.  A  childish  desire  seizes  them  to  attract  attention, 
to  exhibit  their  power.  Hence  they  plunge  into  active  follies,  wild  schemes  of  aggression 
and  conquest,  or  imprudent  and  unsuitable  alliances,  as  that  of  Ahaz  with  Tiglath-Fileser 
(2  Chron.  xxviii.  16,  20).  The  state  is  brought  into  difBcultira  and  entanglements, 
and  the  wisdom  is  wanting  that  should  have  seen  a  way  out  of  them.  One  embarrass- 
ment follows  another.  Unexpected  circumstances  arise,  and  it  is  not  perceived  how 
they  should  be  met.  The  unwisdom  of  the  good  is  perhaps  as  fatal  as  the  folly  of  the 
wicked  (e.g.  Josiah's  uncalled-for  resistance  of  Pharaoh-Nechoh,  2  Kings  xxiii.  29),  and 
leads  to  great  disasters.  MeanwhUe  other  causes  are  at  work,  which  advance  the  general 
confusion  and  accelerate  the  final  catastrophe. 

III.  Development  op  selfishness  among  the  people.  (Ver.  6.)  Society  is  based 
upon  the  principles  of  justice  and  mutual  good  will.  While  states  prosper,  it  requires 
no  extraordinary  virtue  in  men  to  deal  justly  by  their  neighbours,  and  act  towards  them 
in  a  friendly  spirit.  But  when  the  times  are  out  of  joint,  when  there  is  general  im- 
poverishment and  distress,  it  is  no  longer  easy  to  be  amicable  or  even  just.  "  Every 
man  for  himself  1 "  becomes  the  cry ;  the  spirit  of  selfishness  is  evoked  and  runs  liot; 
"  the  people  "  (no  longer  the  "nilers''or  the  "judges,"  ch.  i.  10,  23)  "oppress  every 
one  another,  and  every  one  his  neighbour  "  (ch.  iii.  5).  This  indulgence  of  the  selfish 
spirit  acts  as  a  solvent — ^loosens  the  bonds  which  have  hitherto  held  society  together, 
and  goes  far  to  reduce  the  tmited  mass,  in  whose  union  was  its  strength,  to  a  congeries 
of  atoms. 

TV.  Cessation  of  respect  fob  age  ok  social  bank.  (Ver.  5.)  The  disintegration 
of  society  tends  to  place  all  the  atoms  upon  a  par.  While  the  social  order  was  maintained, 
and  the  whole  society  felt  itself  one,  the  parts  knew  their  need  one  of  the  other,  and 
recognized  their  respective  positions  of  inferiority  and  superiority.  But  with  the  loosening 
of  the  social  ties  comes  naturally  a  general  self-assertion.  In  a  physical  chaos  atoms 
are  of  equal  value,  and  why  not  in  a  disintegrated  society  ?  Hence  the  youiig  in  such 
a  state  throw  off  their  allegiance  to  the  old ;  even  sons  cease  to  respect  or  obey  their 
fathers,  and  daughters  their  mothers.  The  humbler  classes  of  toilers  for  daily  bread  no 
longer  look  up  to  their  more  favoured  brethren,  but  rather  view  them  with  jealousy  and 
hatred.  Glass  is  alienated  from  class,  and  the  tendency  to  a  complete  dissolution  of 
society  aggravated. 

v.  Neglect  of  theib  civil  duties  on  the  pabt  of  the  wkll-to-do  classes. 
(Vers.  6,  7.)  Noblesse  oblige.  In  a  distracted  state  of  society,  it  is  especially  incum- 
bent on  those  whose  means  place  them  beyond  the  reach  of  want,  and  allow  them  ample 
leisure,  to  come  to  the  relief  of  their  neighbours  by  undertaking  those  civil  duties  and 
offices  on  which  the  welfare  of  the  body  politic  depends.  But  it  is  exactly  at  such 
times  that  we  find  this  class  of  persons  most  inclined  to  ignore  this  obligation,  and  with- 
draw whoUy  from  political  life  (ver.  7).  Some,  like  Plato,  justify  themselves  under  the 
plea  that  nothing  can  be  done  to  save  society,  and  that  they  may  be  excused  for  taking 
refuge  under  the  first  shelter  that  offers  while  the  storm  rages  and  exhausts  itself.  Others 
plead  the  vulgarizing  effect  of  active  political  life,  and  claim  the  right  of  keeping  their 
superfine  hmnanity  free  from  the  smears  and  stains  which  mixtm-e  with  the  crowd  would 
bring  upon  it.  On  one  excuse  or  another,  or  not  unfrequently  without  condescending 
to  make  any  excuse,  the  upper  classes  in  a  distracted  state  stand  aloot,  neglect  their  civil 
duties,  and  refuse  all  the  caUs  that  are  made  on  them  to  come  to  the  rescue,  and  do  their 
best  to  save  the  "  ruin  "  that  is  tottering  to  its  fall. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — The  law  of  retributive  justice  not  mechanical,  but  moral.  -The  doctrine 
of  future  rewards  and  pimishments  is  sometimes  preached  in  a  way  that  is,  if  not  offensive, 
at  any  rate  unsatisfactory.  God  is  made  to  deal  with  men  as  not  even  judicious  parents 
would  deal  with  their  children — viz.  for  so  much  obedience,  so  much  bestowal  of  pleasure 
or  indulgence ;  for  so  much  disobedience,  an  equal  award  of  pain  and  punishment.  But 
this  is  certainly  not  the  doctrine  of  Holy  Scripture.  Scripture  represents  the  reward  of 
well-doing  as  "  eternal  life,"  and  this  "  eternal  life  "  is  the  vigorous  energy  of  all  that  ii 
good  in  the  man  himself,  sustained  and  strengthened  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  the  soul, 
and  accompanied  by  happy  feelings  of  love  and  trust  and  thankfulness.     "  Eternal  life  " 


56  THE  BOOK  Off  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.         [ch.  m.-l— 26. 

begins  in  this  world,  and  is  only  carried  out  to  perfection  in  the  next.  It  is,  in  the  mam, 
a  state  of  feeling — consciousness  of  being  at  one  with  God,  consciousness  of  communion 
with  him.  It  admits,  no  doubt,  of  exaltation  from  without,  as  here  by  the  special 
shedding  of  Divine  influences  upon  the  soul,  and  hereafter  by  the  transcendent  blessing 
of  the  beatific  vision ;  but  it  is  principally  in  the  man  himself.  1 1  is  a  condition  of 
mind,  not  a  set  of  external  circumstances.  And  so  with  ill-doing  and  its  consequence, 
"  eternal  death."  Men  make  their  own  misery  by  their  deeds.  They  "  receive  within 
themselves  the  recompense  of  their  errors."  They  mar  their  moral  nature ;  they  refuse 
to  hold  communion  with  Gk)d;  and  then,  thrown  back  upon  tliemsolves,  and  having 
nothing  » ithin  them  pleasing  to  contemplate  or  to  be  conscious  of,  they  find  themselves 
wretched— they  have  created  their  own  hell. 

Vers.  16 — 24.— 2%e  share  which  women  have  in  produciwj  the  ruin  of  a  nation.  The 
influence  of  women  upon  men  was  intended  to  be  helpful  (Gen.  ii.  20),  purifying,  and 
refining.  Woman  is  naturally  more  pure  than  man,  more  modest,  more  retiring,  more 
instinctively  right  in  her  moral  judgments.  Good  women  exercise  an  extraordinary 
influence  over  the  best  men,  who  continually  consult  them  in  the  most  difiicult  crises 
of  politics  and  diplomacy.  They  read  men  far  better  than  men  read  one  sinother,  and 
are  excellent  counsellors  on  many  of  the  most  important  occasions.  But  as  the 
power  for  good  which  they  wield  is  great,  so  is  their  power  for  evil.  Oorruptio  optimi 
pessima.  Bad  women  are  far  worse  than  the  worst  men;  and  the  ruin  of  a  state  i.s 
always  partly,  sometimes  mainly,  caused  by  its  women.  The  sins  of  women  chiefly 
noted  by  Isaiah  in  this  passage  are:  1.  'J'he  vanity  and  love  of  admiration  which  show 
themselves  in  excessive  attention  to  dress  and  ornament.  2.  The  wantonness  and 
immodesty  which  sometimes  characterize  their  conduct.  3.  The  pride  and  haughti- 
ness which  under  certain  circumstances  they  display.  All  these  are  corrupting  influences 
in  a  state,  and  help  forward  its  decay  and  ruin. 

I.  Vanity  and  love  of  admiration,  as  shown  in  excessive  attention  to  deess 
AND  ornament.  The  desire  to  please  is  not  in  itself  wrong,  and  attention  to  di  ess 
within  certain  limits  is  to  be  commended.  A  woman  does  not  prove  hei-sclf  perfectly 
virtuous  by  being  a  sloven.  But  there  is  an  attention  to  such  matteis  and  a  quasi- 
devotion  to  them  which  is  plainly  excessive,  and  which  has  often  the  most  injurious 
consequence-s.  A  tone  of  frivolity  is  engendered  by  much  consideratitin  of  matters  so 
trivial,  which  unfits  a  woman  for  dealing  with  the  difficult  problems  of  life  and  action. 
The  management  of  her  hou.-iehold  and  the  training  of  her  children,  which  are  the  prin- 
cipal duties,  at  any  rate,  of  married  women,  are  apt  to  be  neglected  by  the  woman  of 
fashion,  who  dresses  five  times  a  day,  and  passes  half  her  time  at  her  toilet-table. 
Serious  inroads  are  made  upon  a  husband's  means,  sometimes  to  the  extent  of  actual 
ruin,  by  the  extravagance  of  those  who  cannot  bear  to  see  any  one  better  dressed  than 
themselves.  Sellishness,  wuildliness,  littleness,  are  impressed  on  ilie  character,  all 
higher  aims  being  set  aside,  and  nothing  sought  but  the  admiration  of  the  other  sex. 

II.  Wantonness  and  immudesty  often  follow  on  the  love  of  ailmiiation  and  grow 
out  of  it.  A  woman  who  couit-  admiration  forgets  the  reserve  wiiich  becomes  her  sex, 
and  is  tempted  to  enhance  her  charms  by  an  indecorous  display  of  them.  Once  let  the 
limits  of  modesty  be  oversti  pped,  and  one  defence  falls  after  another.  Facilis  descenmu 
Averni.  Wanton  glances  (ver.  16)  are  succeeded  by  immodest  words,  and  those  lead 
on  to  immodest  deeds ;  and  at  last  every  barrier  is  thrown  down,  and  the  world  sees  a 
Messalina  or  a  Lucrezia  Borgia.  General  immodesty  in  the  women  of  a  state  is  of 
inl'requent  occurrence ;  but  where  it  occurs,  is  an  almost  certain  indication  of  approach- 
ing social  dissolution.  The  most  flagrant  instance  is  that  of  Rome.  There,  from  the 
time  of  the  establishment  of  the  empire,  the  disorders  of  niaiiied  and  domestic  life  were 
excessive.  "A  kind  of  rivalry  in  impurity  grew  up  between  the  two  sexes;  and  there 
were  more  seducers  than  seduced  of  the  female  sex"  (Dollinger,  'Jew  and  Gentile,' 
vol.  ii.  p.  257).  "  In  Rome  the  women,  deprived  of  all  moral  support,  became  just  what 
the  men  made  them,  and  so  sank  with  them  incessantly  deeper  and  deeper "  (ibid., 
p.  276).  Historians  generally,  ascribe  the  fall  of  the  Roman  empire  to  no  cauae  more 
than  to  the  corruption  of  the  Roman  women. 

III.  Pkidb  and  HAUQHTiNiiss  are  not  natural  vices  of  women;  but,  when  developed, 
they  attain  vast  proportions,  and  lead  on  to  great  calamiiiea.    Jezebel  and  Athaliah  in 


OH.  m.  1—26.]        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAlAH.  67 

Old  Testament  history,  Amestris  and  Farysatis  in  Persian,  Tanainiil  in  Roman,  are 
examples  of  the  power  of  women  for  evil,  when  they  step  out  of  their  .sphere,  assume  to 
direct  the  policy  of  states,  dispen-iie  life  and  death,  and  lord  it  over  the  people  of  a 
kingdom.  In  such  cases  their  haughtiness  outdoes  that  of  men,  and  provokes  a  more 
intense  feeling  of  dissatisfaction  and  resentment.  Revolution  often  follows,  or  in  any 
case  disaffection  towards  the  government ;  and  an  additional  element  of  danger  is  intro 
duced,  which  becomes  fatal  under  certain  circumstances.  Altogether,  it  would  seem 
that  women  have  quite  as  much  influence  as  men  towards  producing  the  ruin  of  •tates, 
and  are  quite  as  responsible  for  political  catastrophes. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — A  picture  of  anarchy.  The  words  carry  on  the  sense  of  the  closing 
saying  of  the  preceding  paragraph,  "  Cease  ye  from  man." 

I.  The  rulees  of  tub  peoi'LB  removed.  Government  is  one  of  the  necessities  of 
human  life.  Hence  the  rulers  are  spoken  of  as  'Staff  and  stay,  staff  of  bread  and  stafi 
of  water."  Even  bad  rulers  are  better  than  nuns,  so  that  they  may  be  described  as 
main  props  or  supports  of  life.  In  the  same  way  says  Ezekiel,  "  I  will  break  the  staff 
of  bread  in  Jerusalem"  (iv.  16;  v.  16).  To  see  how  truly  good  government  may  be 
thus  described,  let  us  remember  that,  by  timely  and  wise  legislation,  bread  and  other 
necessaries  of  life  have  been  clicnpenod  and  secured  to  the  people.  With  good  govern- 
ment men  may  be  well  fed  and  prosperous  even  in  unkindly  lands,  while  through  evil 
government  once  fertile  plains  (like  the  Roman  Campagna)  have  become  wastes. 

II.  The  nerve  and  strength  of  the  nation  bkokbn.  A  nation  needs  heroes,  men 
of  courage  for  the  battle-field.  It  needs  men  of  discretion  and  integrity  for  the  seat  of 
justice  and  the  bar.  It  needs  men  of  religious  faith  and  insight  as  prophets  and  teachers; 
and  in  every  department,  military,  civil,  ecclesiastical,  scientific,  there  is  a  constant 
demand  for  able  and  honest  men.  There  is  to  be  a  dearth  of  them  in  Jerusalem.  The 
false  leaders  to  whom  the  peojile  have  looked  up,  the  idol-prophets  and  the  magicians, 
are  to  be  taken  away  along  with  the  true.  "  Children  "  and  "  baby-boys,"  the  prophet 
caustically  says,  shall  become  the  princes  and  rulers  of  the  nation.  Ahaz  was  quite  a 
young  man;  his  "weakness  of  uharacter  and  foolish  humours  would  have  been  quite 
sufficient,  in  the' sixteen  years  of  his  reign,  to  put  the  whole  kingdom  out  of  joint." 
The  picture  may  remind  us  that  men  of  intelligence  and  virtue  are  the  great  necessity 
in  every  time.  Ii  in  the  state  statesmen  are  not  being  bred,  and  in  the  Church  weak 
and  illiterate  men  swarm,  it  is  a  sign  of  most  certain  moral  weakness  and  decay. 

III.  Anarchy  the  result.  1.  /n  privnte  life.  Good  neighbourhood  is  broken  up, 
for  it  must  rest  on  the  common  recognitiun  of  law  and  custom ;  and  what  if  these  be 
subverted  ?  Age  and  rank  no  longer  command  respect.  The  beardless  boy  affronts  the 
hoary  head,  the  churl  would  level  the  gently  born  with  himself.  Nothing  is  more 
odious  than  the  levelling  temper  of  troublous  times;  for  the  fine  gradations  of  rank  are 
part  essentially  of  a  system  of  higher  culture.  2.  In  public  life.  So  extreme  is  the 
need  of  guidance  and  rule,  that  private  proposals  will  be  made  to  almost  any  seeming 
respectable  man  to  take  up  the  reins  of  government.  But  none  will  be  found  willing  to 
govern  "these  ruins,"  or  to  be  chief  of  so  mere  a  rabble.  We  may  use  the  jiicture  as  an 
allegory  of  the  soul.  When  sin  has  set  our  being  at  variance  with  itself,  and  all  our 
confidence  and  self  has  failed,  we  may  be  glad  to  find  any  yoke  that  we  may  creep 
beneath.  Yet  this  may  be  denied.  Those  who,  in  the  rebellion  of  lust  and  self-will, 
have  sought  to  be  "lords  of  themselves,"  may  find  a  heritage  of  woe  entailed.  "The 
soul  would  never  rule.  It  would  be  first  in  all  things ;  but  this  attamed,  commanding 
for  commanding  sickens  it." — J. 

Yers.  8 — -15. — 2%«  reasons  of  judgment.  In  man's  sufTerings  they  must  own  they 
are  subject  to  the  reasonable  rule  of  him  who  is  eternal  Reason, 

L  Antagonism  to  thr  Divine  rule.  In  word  and  deed.  1.  In  current  talk,  writing, 
speechifying,  it  is  difficult  to  detect  wheie  the  falsehood  lies.  It  consists  in  the  siippreseion 
of  certain  important  sides  of  truth,  and  in  putting  forward  interested,  partial  views  of 
things.     The  literature  of  a  people  cannot  be  sound,  if  it  be  sunk  in  greed  of  gold  and 


58  THE    BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  [ch.  hi.  1—26, 

luxury  as  Judah  had  been.  The  hollowness  consists  in  the  reference  of  everything  to  a 
low  standard  of  value.  Not  until  a  great  preacher,  prophet,  or  writer — a  Savonarola,  a 
Latimer,  a  Carlyle — arises  to  shed  the  splendour  of  eternal  truth  upon  our  ways,  do  we 
discover  how  false  and  mean  they  have  been.  2.  We  find  we  have  "  provoked  the  eyes 
of  God's  majesty  "  by  our  way  of  life.  What  hard-heartedness  and  brazen  defiance  ol 
humanity  and  morality  is  brought  to  light  from  time  to  time,  when  some  reformer 
directs  attention  to  an  abuse !  Men  cynically  "  make  fortunes "  out  of  the  flesh  and 
blood  of  their  fellow-creatures.  Have  not  in  our  time  the  cries  of  factory  children,  and 
over-toiled  seamstresses,  and  drowning  sailors,  and  "  gutter  children  "  gone  up  into  the 
ears  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  ?  Isaiah  is  modem  as  well  as  ancient,  for  the  Word  he  delivers 
is  eternal. 

II.  The  Nemesis  of  evil,  the  recompense  op  good.  1.  Wickedness  ii  suicidal. 
"  Woe  to  their  soul,  for  to  themselves  they  did  evil  I  "  Here  lights  the  deepest  curse, 
here  rankles  at  last  the  arrow ;  in  the  soxil !  Dante  sees  in  hell  (c.  xii.),  in  three  circles, 
those  who  have  wronged  their  neighbour,  their  God,  and  themselves.  But  every  speciei 
oi  wrong  works  out  its  woe  in  self.  ' 

"  Man  can  do  violence 
To  himself  and  his  own  blessings ;  and  for  thil 
He  in  the  second  round  must  aye  deplore 
With  unavailing  penitence  his  crime. 
Whoe'er  depflves  himself  of  life  and  light. 
In  reckless  banishment  bis  talent  wastes, 
And  sorrows  there  where  he  should  dwell  in  joy." 

Men  may  afford  the  loss  of  property,  of  a  limb,  of  health ;  but  not  of  love,  not  of  the 
soul.  The  denial  of  love,  or  the  waste  of  it,  means  the  loss  of  the  soul.  2.  Goodness  is 
self-rewarding.  Often  is  the  good  man  compared  to  a  tree,  bringing  forth  fruit  by  a 
law  of  nature,  according  to  its  kind-  and  in  its  season.  There  is  strict  and  beautiful 
sequence  in  life  and  character.  No  curse,  no  blessing,  "  causeless  comes."  The  bitter 
fruit  we  bring  forth  comes  from  interference  with  the  Divine  nature  God  has  given  u«. 
It  is  said  that  wanton  Arabs  sometimes 

"  Foil  a  dwarf  palm 
Of  bearing  its  own  proper  wine  and  oil, 
By  grafting  into  it  the  stran;,'er-vine, 
Which  sucks  its  heart  out,  sly  and  serpentine^ 
Till  forth  one  vine-palm  fastens  to  the  root. 
And  red  drops  moisten  the  insipid  fruit;" 

(R.  Browning, '  Sordello,'  p.  131.) 

Such  ii  sin  and  sin's  result  on  the  being ;  a  parody  and  mockery  of  that  sound  and  true 
life  so  beautifully  presented  under  the  image  ol'  a  tree  in  the  first  psalm. 

HI.  MisEtTLB.  There  has  been  weakness  and  eifeminacy  in  high  places.  And  this 
is  often  more  mischievous  than  strong  and  open  violence.  A  vast  growth  of  vicious 
and  interested  passions  springs  up  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  weak  court.  It  is  the 
opportunity  for  many  bad  men  to  exert  their  ambition.  A  powerful  will  generally 
works  some  good  at  the  head  of  affairs,  even  though  its  wielder  be  not  a  good  man. 
But  feebleness  is  always  baneful  in  public  life.  Everything  is  uncertain  when  the 
purpose  is  vacillating,  and  no  settled  principle  exists.  The  fueble  ruler  will  be  swayed 
by  every  gust  of  caprice,  by  every  personal  influence  that  attacks  his  ear,  every  passion 
that  enslaves  his  heart.  Several  of  om-  kings — John,  Richard  II.,  the  Charleses — have 
been  examples  of  this.  The  country  may  be  compared  to  a  beautiful  vineyard  which 
the  rulers  have  been  appointed  to  keep  (ch.  v.  1 — 7).  They  have  trampled  it  down  and 
despoiled  it,  and  have  "  ground  the  sufferers'  laces.  The  image  is  taken  from  the  mill, 
where  a  substance  is  worn  down  until  nothing  is  left,  The  contemjwrary  prophet 
Micah  uses  still  stronger  language  (iii.  2,  3).  The  rulf  rs  flay  the  people,  and  cutting 
them  in  pieces,  cast  them,  as  it  were,  into  a  caldron.  Unhappily  this  picture  has  its 
counterpart  to-day  in  many  Eastern  lands.  The  women  of  the  harem  practically  rule 
and  devour  the  people  in  their  greed.  Personally,  the  description  may  be  applied.  Gkxl 
has  entrusted  to  each  of  us  a  garden  or  vineyard  to  keep.    Diligence  and  faithfulnew 


CH.  ra.  1— 26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  59 

will  have  their  reward.      For  sloth,  neglect,  waste,  and   abuse,  God  will  enter  into 
judgment  with  us. — J. 

Ver.  16 — ch.  iv.  1. — The  women  of  Jerusalem.  The  hahits  and  the  morale  in  general 
of  the  court  and  the  aristocracy  are  a  sure  index  of  the  state  of  the  nation.  Fashion 
guides,  but  is  in  a  measure  controlled  by  the  general  opinion.  Wanton  pride  and  luxury 
in  high  places  bespeak  a  general  want  of  moral  tone. 

I.  Their  pride.  The  picture  is  minute  and  scathingly  satiricaL  The  daughters  of 
Zion  walk  with  "  necks  held  up." 

II.  Thbib  lasoiviottsness.  The  ''  rolling  eyes  "  are  often  mentioned  as  characteristic 
of  Aphrodite  or  Ashtoreth,  the  unchaste  goddess  of  sensual  love. 

III.  Their  pinery  and  luxury.  A  complete  catalogue  of  articles  of  personal  adorn- 
ment is  givin.  The  instinct  for  dress  and  decoration,  so  strong  in  women  and  so 
graceful  if  followed  with  moderation, -easily  passes  beyond  the  bounds,  and  becomes  an 
offence  and  vice. 

IV.  The  reverse  of  the  picture.  The  perfumes  will  be  exchanged  for  a  stench, 
the  waistband  for  the  rough  cord  of  poverty,  the  abundance  of  flowing  hair  wUl  be 
replaced  by  repulsive  baldness.  "  A  brand  instead  of  beauty ! "  Their  husbands  will 
fall  in  the  war.  There  will  be  melancholy  groups  gathering  at  the  public  place,  the 
gates ;  and  in  vain  will  they,  once  lapped  in  luxury,  seek  the  protection  and  the  honour 
of  the  marriage  state  (cf.  1  Cor.  vii.  36).  One  of  our  poets  has  called  up  the  picture 
of  Venice  and  her  women  in  old  days  of  mirth  and  folly,  which  may  be  compared. 

"  As  for  Venice  and  her  people,  merely  bom  to  bloom  and  drop, 
Here  on  earth  they  bore  their  fruitage — mirth  and  folly  were  the  srop. 
What  of  soul  was  left,  I  wonder,  when  the  kissing  had  to  stop  ? 
Dust  and  ashes  I " 

Only  the  "sweet  and  virtuous  soul"  can  give  to  woman  an  immortal  charm,  and  ensure 
her  from  corrupting  and  being  corrupted. — J. 

Ver.  9. — The  revealings  of  the  face.  "The  show  of  their  countenance  doth  witnoi^s 
against  them."  We  are  "  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made."  Just  as  the  countenance 
reveals  the  state  of  our  physical  health,  so  do  thought  and  character  manifest  themselves 
in  the  face.  All  our  nature,  with  its  complexity  of  being,  has  yet  a  subtle  and  myste- 
rious oneness,  and  the  tone  of  the  mind  and  the  inclination  of  the  heart  are  made 
manifest,  not  alone  in  speech,  but  in  look  and  gesture  and  manner.  In  the  simple 
I  language  of  the  holy  Book,  there  is  a  show  of  the  countenance. 

I.  'Men  cannot  prevent  self-kevealing.  As  the  New  Testament  says,  "  They 
that  be  otherwise  cannot  be  hid."  There  is  no  concealment  in  nature.  The  hidden 
seed  springs  up  even  in  the  cleft  of  a  rock.  There  is  always  some  damaging  witness 
waiting  for  an  evil  man.  As  the  snow  reveals  the  footsteps  of  the  beast  of  prey,  as  the 
wind  of  the  desert  drifts  the  sand  from  the  body  that  is  buried  in  it,  so  sin  will  surely 
be  found  out.  A  bad  man's  face  is  a  tell-tale  of  levity  and  scorn  and  shame.  If  God 
is  not  in  the  heart,  the  light  of  his  presence  will  not  be  in  the  countenance. 

II.  Men  cannot  long  act  a  part.  Nature  is  agaiilst  insincerity.  You  cannot  forge 
her  handwriting.  You  cannot  make  your  artificial  rock  so  that  it  shall  remain  unknown 
beside  hers.  No.  And  it  is  so  with  voice  and  face.  Hypocrisy  drops  unconsciously 
its  mask.  The  same  words  are  spoken  differently  by  sincere  and  insincere  men.  We 
read  of  hollow  laughter.  So  there  is  hollow  exhortation  which  does  not  exercise  inspira- 
tion over  our  hearts.  So  men  cannot  twist  their  countenances  into  false  witnessing. 
There  is  a  blatant  iniquity  about  the  w icked  which  cannot  be  coacealed  by  long  effort. 
"  They  declare  their  sin  as  Sodom,  they  hide  it  not." 

m.  Men  cannot  avert  punishment.  "  Woe  unto  their  soul !  for  they  have 
rewarded  evil  unto  themselves."  They  create  their  own  inquisition-chamber.  Memory 
is  their  misery.  No  theories  of  unaccountability  can  live.  Excuses  there  are  none.  The 
conscience  tears  them  to  pieces  like  a  spider's  web.  Life  is  personal  and  accountable. 
We  all  feel  that.  "  Say  ye  to  the  righteous,  it  shall  be  well  with  him :  for  they  shall 
eat  the  fruit  of  their  doings.  Woe  unto  the  wicked !  it  shall  be  ill  with  him :  for  th? 
reward  of  his  hands  shall  be  given  him."    Eeward,  then,  is  not  always  blessing ;  it  it 


60  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.         [ch.  m.  1— 2t. 

harvest  of  golden  sheaves  or  gathered  tares,  according  to  our  planting.  Verily  a  light 
from  within  fills  the  countenance  even  of  godly  men.  The  prayer  is  fulfilled.  "  Cause 
thy  face  to  shine  upon  us."  "  Who  is  the  Health  of  my  countenance,  and  my  God." — 
W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — National  and  spiritual  anarchy.    We  have  a  vivid  picture  here  of— 

I.  National  anakcht.  1.  Its  cause  is  found  in  national  rebellion  against  its  rightful 
Lord.  "  Their  tongue  and  their  doings  are  against  the  Lord,  to  provoke  tlie  eyes  of  his 
glory  "  (ver.  8).  Sin,  both  in  word  and  deed,  draws  down  the  righteous  indignation  of 
Grod,  and,  under  his  just  administration,  the  penalty  of  iniquity  is  paid.  2.  Its  signs  are 
seen  in:  (I)  The  loss  of  all  fitting  leaders  (vers.  1 — 3).  Those  who  constiiuted  "the 
stay  and  the  staff"  are  no  longer  found  in  positions  of  authority;  those  capable  of 
ruling,  those  qualified  to  direct  and  to  advise,  those  who  have  learnt  political  sagaoiiy 
by  long  experience, — these  are  not  to  be  obtained ;  rthey  have  been  deported,  or  they  have 
withdrawn,  or  they  are  no  more  trained.  (2)  The  consequent  elevation  of  the  incapable 
(ver.  4).  Those  hold  the  high  offices  of  state  who  are  utterly  incompetent  to  fill  the 
posts  they  have  accepted.  (3)  The  presence  of  injustice  and  confusion  (ver.  5).  Instead 
of  all  doing  that  which  is  conscientious  and  right  as  between  man  and  man,  every  one 
seeks  to  overreach  his  neighbour;  fraud  and  violence  are  the  rule  rather  than  the 
exception ;  and  instead  of  the  natural  subordination  of  the  younger  to  the  elder,  there  is 
insolence  and  presumption.  (4)  The  absence  of  unselfish  patriotism  (vers.  6,  7).  They 
who  are  in  a  position  to  render  help  refuse  to  do  so,  untruly  and  unworthily  excusing 
themselves.  3.  Its  issue.  (Ver.  8.)  "  Jerusalem  is  being  ruined  (is  ruined) ;  Judahis 
falling  (is  fallen)."  Bad  as  things  are,  they  are  not  at  their  very  worst ;  there  remains 
a  darker  and  sadder  catastrophe  yet  to  complete  the  destruction ;  and  that,  viz.  dreary 
exUe  for  the  people  and  depopulation  for  the  land,  will  soon  arrive. 

II.  Spiritual  anakcht.  We  trace  the  same  cause  here  as  in  the  case  of  the  ruined 
nation.  1.  Its  cause  is  in  rebellion  against  God,  and  his  consequent  high  di^^pleasure 
showing  itself  in  just  and  appropriate  penalty  (ver.  8).  2.  Its  signs  are  found  in :  (1)  The 
dethronement  of  the  soul's  true  authorities :  conscience,  which  directs  us  what  we 
ought  to  do ;  reason,  which  leads  us  in  the  path  in  which  it  is  wise  to  walk ;  pure 
affection,  which  draws  us  toward  the  objects  we  do  well  to  love  (vers.  1 — 3).  When  sin 
does  its  work  within,  these  powers  which  were  meant  to  rule  are  supplanted  by  unworthy 
rivals.  (2)  The  enthronement  of  the  unfitting  (ver.  4).  As  unsuited  to  govern  a 
human  soii  are  the  rude,  uncultured  appetites  and  passions  of  our  lower  nature  aa  are 
"  children  "  and  babes  to  rule  over  the  great  affairs  of  state.  (3)  Internal  struggle  and 
insubordination  (ver.  5).  The  animal  appetites  asserting  themselves  unduly  and 
violently  against  spiritual  aspirations  and  holy  principles,  and  doing  them  dishonour. 
(4)  Appeal,  without  response,  to  our  better  nature  (vers.  6,  7).  It  is  one  of  the  last 
stages  in  spiritual  demoralization  when  an  earnest,  strenuous  challenge  is  made  to  that 
which  is  left  in  the  soul  of  the  heavenly  and  Divine,  and  it  makes  no  response,  or  none, 
but  a  miserable  resort  to  that  which  is  false.  There  is  little  hope  left  then ;  the  last 
sparks  are  expiring.  3.  Its  issue.  (Ver.  8.)  A  human  spirit  in  such  a  state  is  hastening 
fast  to  utter  and  irretrievable  ruin.  It  is  in  the  very  act  of  falling ;  it  is  coming  to  the 
ground,  to  be  utterly  humiliated  and  broken.  It  may  be  perhaps  that  on  earth  a  soul  is 
never  in  such  complete  ruin  but  that  it  may  be  repaired.  Yet  there  are  those  who  have 
fallen  into  such  disorder  that  it  may  be  said  that  the  last  destruction  overhangs  them. 
To  Buch  the  Master's  warning  words  may  well  be  uttered  (see  Luke  xvii.  31,  32) ;  for 
they  must  flee  for  their  life,  not  losing  a  moment  in  starting,  nor  looking  behind  them 
when  on  their  way. — C. 

Yen.  9 — 11. — The  path  of  sin  and  the  rest  of  righteousneit,  L  That  sdj  cannot 
BE  OONOEALBD.  "  The  show  of  their  countenance  doth  witness  against  them  "  (ver.  9). 
Whether  Isaiah's  words  point  to  the  unconscious  revelation  of  sin  is  uncertain,  but  they 
clearly  suggest  the  fact.  The  evil  that  is  in  men's  hearts  is  shown  in  their  countenance, 
whether  they  wish  to  conceal  it  or  whether  they  take  a  shameful  pride  in  it.  The 
thoughts  that  flit  through  the  mind,  the  passions  that  bum  within  the  soul,  the  sins 
that  defile  the  inward  man,  are  written,  line  by  line,  on  the  visage,  and  "  may  be  known 
and  read  of  all  men."     Are  there  not  those  whom  we  have  to  look  upon  in  the  inter- 


CH.  m.  1— 26.]         THE  BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  6i 

course  of  life  "whose  eyes  are  full  of  adultery,"  or  whose  cheeks  are  stained  with  intoxi- 
cation, or  whose  features  are  drawn  together  with  cruelty ;  those  who,  instead  of  "  bearing 
in  their  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  carry  with  them  the  signs  of  Satan's 
service  ?  It  is  a  fact  which  may  well  make  the  guilty  wince  and  hesitate  before  they 
continue,  that,  by  the  operation  of  God's  righteous  laws,  the  sin  which  at  the  beginning 
they  would  fain  hide  in  the  depths  of  their  own  soul,  will  at  length  be  written  on 
the  tablet  of  the  body,  and  "  the  show  of  their  countenance  will  witness  against 
them." 

n.  That  sin,  in  its  later  STAass,  scoens  to  be  scbbbned  from  view.  "  They 
declare  their  sin,  .  .  .  they  hide  it  not "  (ver.  9).  In  the  further  stages  of  iniquity  there  is 
no  attempt,  for  there  is  no  dosire,  to  hide  the  wrong  thing  from  view.  Shame  gradually 
declines  until  it  pa-ses  awtiy,  and  in  its  place  there  grows  up  a  horrible  pride  in  sin. 
Men  come  to  ghiat  over  tliat  fruni  which  they  ought  to  shrink  with  utmost  sense  of 
humiliation;  they  "  glory  in  their  shame"  (Phil.  iii.  19).  This  is  eminently  true  of 
acts  of  rapacity  and  fraud ;  it  also  applies  to  sins  of  direct  ungodliness  and  of  self- 
indulgence. 

III.  That  sin  is  always  workino  towards  ruin.  "Woe  unto  their  soul;  they 
have  rewarded  evil  unto  themselves  "  (ver.  9).  "  Woe  unto  the  wicked,"  etc.  (ver.  11). 
Sin  sometimes  prospers  long  ;  the  "  sinner  may  do  evil  a  hundred  timos,  and  his  days  be 
prolonged,  yet  surely  we  know  .  .  .  that  it  shall  not  be  well  with  the  wicked  "  (Eccles. 
viii.  12, 13).  Nor  is  it  well  when  the  end  comes  (see  Ps.  Ixxiii.  1 — 20).  1.  Sin  tends 
to  temporal  ill-being,  to  penury,  to  sickness,,  to  i  arly  death.  2.  Sin  tends  to  isolation, 
to  the  withdraw  al  of  confidence  and  affection  on  the  part  of  the  good  and  worthy,  to 
dishonour,  and  even  degradation.  3.  Siu  must  inevitably  lead  to  spiritual  deterioration 
and,  if  it  be  persisted  in,  to  spiritual  death.  "The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  4.  Sin 
fln-ally  conducts  to  condemnation  and  exile  from  the  home  of  God.  Alas !  for  the  soul 
that  is  impenitent,  that  seeks  not  Divine  mercy,  that  does  not  return  on  its  way  to  the 
living  God  and  to  his  righteousness.  There  is  a  world  of  meaning  in  that  one  small 
word  which  constitutes  here  such  a  significant  sentence — "  ill." 

IV.  That  righteousness  mat  best  SECtrBB  in  hope.  (Ver.  10.)  It  may  seem  ill  to 
the  righteous ;  "  weeping  may  endure  for  a  night."  He  may  find  himself  inclined  to 
sigh,  "All  these  things  are  against  me"  (Gen.  xlii.  36).  But  "unto  the  upright  there 
ariseth  light  in  the  darkness."  I'tie  converse  of  all  that  applies  to  the  ungodly  is  true 
of  the  godly.  Righteousness  (1)  tends  to  prosperity  here ;  (2)  begets  trust  and  love ; 
(3)  results  in  moral  excellency — the  good  man  finds  that  honesty,  purity,  truthfulness, 
sobriety,  kindness,  etc.,  issue  in  spiritual  increase,  in  a  harvest  of  inward  good,  and  thus 
he  "  eats  the  fruit  of  his  doings ; "  (4)  conducts  at  last  to  the  heavenly  land,  where 
he  who  does  the  will  of  God  "  is  recompensed  at  the  resurrection  of  the  just." — 0. 

Vers.  12 — 15. — Penalty,  natural  and  supernatural.    We  learn — > 

I.  That  the  natural  result  of  folly  is  to  be  governed  by  those  who 
have  no  right  to  rule.  1.  The  nation  suffers  this  penalty.  As  with  Judah  now 
(ver.  12),  so  with  each  and  every  country  in  its  turn  and  in  its  way.  Unmanliness, 
frivolity,  wickedness  among  the  people,  will  be  reflected  in  the  sovereign  power.  A 
nation  that  lives  supremely  for  material  enrichment,  or  for  military  conquest,  or  for 
pleasurable  excitement,  must  expect  to  see  upon  the  throne — in  the  government — men 
who  will  represent  their  evil  genius,  who  will  pamper  their  evil  tastes,  who  will  "cause 
them  to  err  "  more  wildly,  and  "  destroy  them  in  the  way  of  thy  paths."  Action  and 
reaction  we  here  as  everywhere ;  the  folly  of  the  people  expresses  itself  in  the  weakness 
and  perversity  of  the  ruler,  and  these  qualities  on  his  part  tell  in  their  time  and  measure 
upon  them.  2.  The  Church  endures  the  same  evil.  Unspirituality,  discord,  unbelief, 
laxity  in  the  Christian  community,  will  certainly  issue  in  a  degenerate  ecclesiastical 
authority,  and  the  ruler,  using  or  abusing  his  opportunity,  will  lead  astray  and  destroy. 
3.  The  individual  fvds  the  same  natural  law  operating  on  him  cmd  on  his  life.  By 
his  folly  he  allows  |.assions  instead  of  principles,  impulses  instead  of  convictions,  men 
instead  of  God,  to  be  his  rulers,  his  "oppressors;"  and  these  cause  him  to  err;  they 
pervert  the  way  of  his  paths. 

II.  That  tiiky  who  ark  guilty  of  misrule  and  perversity  Musff  look  for  the 
righteous  visitation  of  God.    (Vers.  13 — 15.)   "  The  Lord  standeth  up  to  plead,"  "  to 


62  THE    BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  [oh.  ni.  1—26. 

judge  the  people."  He  confronts  and  confounds  those  who  have  wronged  and  oppresaed 
his  people.  If  the  usurper,  the  tyrant,  the  oppressor,  the  debauchee,  the  misleader  of 
the  nation  (the  Church),  should  not  meet  with  the  resentment  and  feel  the  blows  of  those 
whom  he  has  wronged,  he  must  lay  his  account  with  the  facts  that  God  takes  note  of 
all  that  pas^es  in  our  human  communities,  that  he  holds  those  who  are  in  power 
responsible  for  tlie  eifeots  of  their  administration,  that  he  regards  with  severest  indigna- 
tion those  who  abuse  their  trubt,  that  he  will  visit  them  in  his  own  time  and  way,  here 
or  hereafter,  with  proofs  of  his  Divine  displeasure. — C. 

Vers.  16 — 26. — Tlie  vanity  of  vanity.  The  graphic  pen  of  the  prophet  brings  before 
US  the  thoughts — 

I.  That  the  last  and  saddest  symptom  of  national  decline  is  found  in  womanly 
FOLLY.  "  Moreover  .  .  .  the  daughters  of  Zion,"  etc.  (ver.  16).  Corruption  may  have 
spread  far  and  done  much  evil  work  in  the  community,  but  there  is  hope  for  the  city  or 
the  Church  so  long  as  the  wives  and  the  mothers,  the  dau<;hters  and  the  sisters,  retain 
their  moral  and  spiritual  integrity.  When  that  is  gone  all  is  gone.  Purity  and  worth 
find  their  last  retreat  under  the  domestic  roof;  if  they  be  driven  thence  they  are 
doomed  to  die,  and  with  them  perish  the  prospects  of  the  laud. 

II.  That  pride  and  vanity  in  woman  akb  offensivis  is  the  sight  op  God.  His 
prophet  here  condemns  them  "  because  they  are  haughty,  and  walk  with  stretched  forth 
necks  "  (ver.  16) ;  he  also  describes,  evidently  in  the  spirit  of  strong  reprobation,  the 
various  articles  and  instruments  of  vanity  (vers.  18 — 23).  Here  are  denounced  the  two 
sins  of  pride  and  vanity — the  overweening  estimate  of  self,  and  the  foolish  desire  to 
excite  the  attention  and  the  passing  admiration  of  others.  To  be  blind  to  our  own 
defects  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  magnify  our  own  excellences,  thus  gaining  and 
exhibiting  a  sense  of  our  own  goodness  aud  importance  quite  beyond  the  measure  of 
our  deserts, — such  pride  is  hateful  to  God(Ps.  xviii.  27  ;  ci.  5  ;  Prov.  vi.  17;  1  Pet.  v.  5). 
And  vanity  is  nearly  as  offensive  as  pride.  To  be  studying,  by  every  art,  to  attract 
the  notice  of  our  fellows,  and  to  be  peevishly,  nervously  anxious  to  secure  their  praise, 
instead  of  seeking  first  the  approval  of  God  and  then  the  commendation  of  our  own 
conscience, — this  is  sinful  in  the  sight  of  the  holy  and  the  true  One.  We  may 
safely  say — 

III.  That  these  abe  not  only  heinous  offences  against  God,  but  pitiable 
mistakes  in  the  sight  of  man.  1.  'I'hose  who  assume  a  worth  to  which  they  are 
not  entitled,  and  hence  walk  arrogantly  before  the  world,  do  not  receive  the  tribute  of 
honour  which  they  claim;  they  only  excite  derision  and  contempt.  2.  They  who,  by 
meretriciou.s  ornamentations  of  their  person  or  their  style,  endeavour  to  draw  to  them- 
selves admiring  observation,  only  succeed  in  provoking  the  t-mile  of  pity  or  disdain. 

IV.  That  frivolity  in  man  ob  woman  will  meet  its  doom  in  the  day  of 
Divine  penalty.  (Vers.  24 — 26.)  This  will  involve :  1.  The  removal  of  the  sources 
of  frivolous  delight.  These  "  the  Lord  will  take  away  "  (ver.  18).  For  how  brief  a  day 
do  the  pleasures  of  sense  last !  How  soon  the  sun  goes  down  on  the  trivialities  and 
temporalities  with  which  the  sons  and  daughters  of  men  amuse  themselves  and  waste 
their  time  !  2.  A  visitatfon  answering  to  the  folly  (ver.  24).  Sin  finds  itself  paid  in 
its  own  coin.  3.  The  sorrow  which  comes  with  a,  sense  of  desolation  (ver.  26).  The 
"  arm  of  flesh  "  will  fail ;  the  human  admiration  and  attention  will  soon  pass.  And  if 
the  esteem  of  the  wise  and  the  favour  of  God  have  been  unsought,  there  is  nothing  left; 
everything  is  in  ruins. — 0. 

Ver.  1. — Tht  mission  of  famines.  The  words  "stay  and  staff"  are  by  the  prophet 
referred  to  the  two  necessaries  of  life,  bread  and  water.  The  judgments  of  God,  in  the 
older  time,  often  came  in  the  form  of  famine  and  drought ;  famine  as  the  result  of  the 
drought. '  It  was  necessary,  and  it  still  is  necessary,  that  men  should  be  made  to  feel 
their  entire  dependence  upon  God  for  little  things  as  well  as  great,  for  common  everyday 
necessities  as  well  as  for  special  days'  gifts  and  mercies.  The  necessaries  of  every  day 
seem  to  be  our  right ;  famine-times  remind  us  that  they  are  always  direct  Fatherly 
providings.  Entering  into  covenant  with  Noah,  God  promised  that  "  while  the  earth 
remaineth,  seed-time  and  liarvest,  and  cold  and  heat,  and  summer  and  wmter,  and 
day  and  night  shall  not  cease."    But  the  promise  concerned  the  earth  as  a  whole,  and 


OH.  ni.  1—26.]         THE   BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  63 

cannot  be  applied  to  particular  portions  of  it.  Seeding  time  has  always  teen  kept ; 
harvesting  work  has  always  been  done.  Where  man  has  not  come  to  aid  the  operations 
of  mature,  God  has  provided  seeding  times  and  seeding  ways  for  himself.  In  desert 
districts,  where  tribes  wander,  and  corn  cannot  be  grown,  God  makes  two  plants  grow 
freely,  whose  fruitage  is  a  harvest  of  necessaries  for  the  people.  Local  and  temporary 
failures  there  have  been ;  but  they  have  been  due  to  special  causes  acting  but  locally 
over  certain  districts ;  terrible  oftentimes  for  the  sufferings  they  cause,  when  men  are 
isolated  from  their  fellows,  but  ameliorated  when  men  d«  ell  together  in  brotherhood, 
and  the  overplus  of  one  land  can  be  used  to  supply  the  deficiencies  of  another.  The 
chief  causes  of  harvest  failure  are  lack  of  rain,  destruction  of  growing  crops  by  caterpillar 
and  locust,  and  war  which  prevents  the  proper  seeding  of  the  fields.  A  special  cause  of 
famine  in  Egypt  was  the  failure  of  the  Nile-flood. 

I.  God  uses  famine  to  keep  up  men's  dependbnob  on  him.  A  tale  ii  told  of 
a  widow  woman  who  had  lived  for  many  years  rent  free  in  a  cottage,  through  the  good 
will  and  kindly  arrangement  of  the  owner.  She  lived  in  it  so  long  that  she  came  to 
think  the  place  was  her  own,  and  quite  forgot  her  dependent  condition ;  so  far  forgot 
herself,  indeed,  as  to  send  a  message  to  her  landlord  threatening  to  leave  the  house  if 
some  repairs  were  not  at  once  attended  to.  It  might  have  been  good  for  the  poor 
woman  to  let  her  feel  homeless  for  a  while,  so  that  she  might  learn  to  value  her  mercies. 
But  we,  like  her,  are  in  great  danger  of  presuming  on  the  goodness  of  God.  We  also 
get  the  feeling  of  a  right  to  the  things  which  God  freely  and  graciously  bestows.  We 
call  them  ours.  And  then  the  temporary  loss  of  them  wakens  us  to  thought ;  humbles 
UB  in  the  dust ;  calls  upon  us  to  look  on  the  fields,  and  say,  "  They  are  God's,  not 
ours ; "  and  on  the  sunny  skies  and  genial  rain,  and  say,  "  They  are  God's,  not  om's." 
"  Every  good  gift,  and  every  perfect  gift,  is  from  above,  and  cometh  down  from  the 
Father  of  lights." 

XL  God  uses  famine  as  an  agent  for  punishment.  No  man  is  able  to  say  of 
any  particular  famine,  it  must  be  a  punishment ;  but  we  have  a  perfect  right  to  say, 
famine  may  he  a  punishment.  When  God  would  visit  David's  sin  in  numbering  the 
people  for  his  own  vain-glorious  purposes,  he  offerpd  him  a  choice  which  included  "  seven 
years  of  famine  for  thy  land."  In  the  reign  of  Ahab  the  violent  adoption  of  Baalism 
was  visited  by  a  terrible  famine  for  the  humbling  of  the  wilful  king.  And  still  we 
must  keep  hold  of  this  truth — aU  outward  calamities  may  he  visitations  of  Divine  wrath. 
It  settles  nothing  to  say  that  pestilence  follows  on  man's  disobedience  of  sanitary  laws ; 
and  famine  results  from  deficient  government  and  hindered  commerce ;  and  wars  spring 
out  of  national  ambitions.  That  is  all  quite  true,  but  we  thus  deal  only  with  "  second 
causes."  God  is  still  the  First  Cause.  We,  at  least,  will  not  push  God  out  of  the  world 
he  has  made.  We  will  trace  his  working  everywhere.  And  just  as  we  know  he  orders 
our  personal  circumstances  so  that  they  shall  be  chastisement  and  correction  for  our 
personal  mistakes,  wilfulnesses,  and  transgressions,  so  we  will  be  sure  that  the  sins  of 
cities,  communities,  ^nd  nations  bring  judgments  and  corrections  by  public  calamities  ; 
famine  may  be  the  hand  of  the  Almighty  raised  to  smite  and  humble  sinful  peoples. 

III.  God  uses  famine  to  knit  the  lands  in  beotheehood.  In  the  older  times 
of  famine  in  Egypt,  other  nations  and  tribes  were  compelled  to  visit  that  land  to  secure 
their  supplies  of  food,  and  so  everybody  became  interested  in  the  preservation  of  peace 
and  kindly  relations.  The  common  distress  made  even  hostile  tribes  forget  their 
enmities.  In  the  present  day  it  is  essential  to  the  well-being  of  every  nation  that 
universal  peace  should  be  preserved.  Every  country  is  interested  in  keeping  a  free  way 
for  the  world's  ships  over  the  oceans.  War  is  a  calamity.  The  strong  men  who  are 
slaughtered  on  battle-fields,  ought  to  be  toiling  at  the  harvests,  growing  the  world's 
foody  carrying  it  from  land  to  land,  or  making  the  things  which  should  supply  the 
world's  ever-varying  and  multiplied  needs.  We  are  dependent,  as  nations,  on  one 
another,  and  our  mutual  dependence  ought  to  culture  a  spirit  of  brotherhood.  England 
cannot  grow  from  her  soil,  as  at  present  cultivated,  the  supply  of  all  her  people's  needs. 
Heavily  laden  grain-ships  bring  the  bounty  of  other  lands  for  our  relief  week  by  week 
throughout  the  year ;  and  so  intercourse  is  maintained.  We  get  to  know  and  respect 
each  other ;  we  even,  in  a  sense,  sit  down  at  each  other's  tables ;  we  eat  bread  and  salt 
together,  and  so  are  bound  to  one  another  in  eternal  amity,  as  are  the  desert  tribes.  We 
eat  bread  from  America,  and  Russia,  and  Hungary,  and  Egypt,  and  other  parts,  and  at 


64  THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PBOPHET  ISAIAH.  [ch.  ni.  1— 26. 

the  common  faast  we  cultivate  the  common  brotherhood.  And  it  may  be  further  said, 
nuihing  binds  men  together  and  breaks  down  prejudices  and  enmities  like  a  common 
tRiublL'.  How  we  are  drawn  together  when  a  common  woe  lies  upon  our  town,  or  upon 
the  community  to  which  we  belong !  Mutual  sympathy  and  mutual  sacrifice  make  us 
feel  that  God  has  "  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men  for  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of 
the  earth  ; "  and  that  brothers  of  the  one  family,  whose  Head  is  the  everlasting  Father, 
may  well  be  brotherly  and  kind.  In  conclusion,  gathering  up  what  has  been  illustrated 
and  enforced,  it  may  be  shown  that  (1)  famine  makes  a  public  testimony  for  the  one, 
living  Gbd ;  (2)  famine,  reaching  to  affect  all  classes,  makes  this  testimony  everywhere ; 
and  (3)  famine  becomes  everywhere  a  test  of  characters  and  beliefs. — R.  T. 

Var.  4. — The  evil  of  childish  rulers.  "  Babes  shall  rule  over  them."  No  greater 
calamity  can  come  on  a  nation  than  the  succession  of  mere  children  to  the  throne,  and 
government  by  regency  and  party.  Ahaz  ascended  the  throne  at  the  age  of  twenty 
(2  Chron.  xxviii.  1).  Manasseh  at  age  of  twelve ;  Josiah  at  age  of  eight  (2  Chron. 
xxxiii.  1 ;  xxxiv.  1).  The  evil  was,  of  course,  exaggerated  in  Eastern  countries,  where 
kings  are  irresponsible  despots.  "  In  an  Eastern  monarchy  the  rule  of  a  young  king, 
rash  and  without  experience,  guided  by  counsellors  like  himself,  was  ntiturally  regarded 
as  the  greatest  of  evils,  and  the  history  of  Rehoboam  had  impressed  this  truth  on  the 
mind  of  every  Israelite."  "  Woe  to  thee,  O  land,  when  thy  king  is  a  child"  (Ecclcs. 
X.  16).  When  the  strong  men  and  wise  men  are  removed  by  disease  and  calamity, 
weaklings  get  into  office  and  place  of  authority,  and  surely  create  fresh  evils  by  their 
incapacity. 

I.  The  evil  of  EniEBS  who  abe  children  in  age.  Such,  being  unable  to  decide 
and  act  for  themselves,  are  dependent  on  court  advisers ;  so  there  is  every  opportunity 
for  court  intrigue,  rivalry  of  parties,  and  the  sacrifice  of  natiimal  interests  to  party 
advantage.  Under  weak  governments  class  is  set  against  class.  Illustrate  the  petulance 
of  boys  in  the  exercise  of  assumed  authority.  It  comes  out  even  in  their  play.  In  old 
times  young  kings  were  under  the  supreme  influence  of  the  queen-mother,  and  she 
might  be  a  Jezebel  or  an  Athaliah.  -The  most  anxious  times  of  English  lustory  are 
times  of  regency. 

II.  The  evil  op  hvi.ers  who  are  children  in  undehstanding.  Such  as  Reho- 
boam. The  evil  is  qualified  in  constitutional  countries;  but  even  in  them  the  king 
gives  tone  to  society.  It  has  often  been  a  consequence  of  war  that  a  land  has  been  left 
to  the  government  of  the  incompetent.  Corruption  at  court  has  sometimes  led  the  best 
men  to  retire  from  the  government.  Under  such  inefficient  rule,  in  an  Eastern  kingdom, 
nil  is  chaotic  and  anarchic;  there  is  a  condition  which  can  only  be  fittingly  represented 
by  the  Turkey  or  Egypt  of  our  own  times.  Apply  to  the  small  kingdoms  of  (1)  society, 
(2)  friendship,  (3)  families,  and  urge  the  importance,  to  the  well-being  of  a  nation,  of 
manly  men,  and  manly,  strong,  wisely  ruling  fathers. — B.  T. 

Ver.  8. — The  secret  of  national  ruin.  "Their  tongue  and  their  doings  are  against  the 
Lord."  This  is  given  distinctly  as  the  reason  and  the  explanation  of  the  ruin  of  Judah. 
riie  prophet  goes  right  past  all  accidents  and  all  national  events,  and  fixes  on  the  moral 
cause  of  the  ruin.  A  nation  is  bad  at  the  core  when  it  can  doubt  and  dishonour  God ; 
and  no  such  nation  can  stand  long.  God  will  surely  arise  to  vindicate  himself  and  to 
shake  terribly  the  earth.  Isaiah  uses  a  singular  figure:  "To  provoke  the  eyes  of  his 
glory."  The  offence  which  wilfulness  and  iniquity  give  to  the  holiness  of  God  is  com- 
pared to  the  sensitiveness  of  the  human  eye.  Matthew  Henry  says,  "In  word  and 
action  they  brake  the  Law  of  God,  and  therein  designed  an  affront  to  him ;  they  wilfully 
intended  to  offend  him,  in  contempt  of  his  authority  and  defiance  of  his  justice.  Their 
tongue  was  against  the  Lord,  for  they  contradicted  his  prophets  ;  and  their  doings  were 
20  bettor,  for  they  acted  as  they  talked.  It  was  an  aggravation  of  their  sin  that  God's 
eye  was  upon  them,  and  that  his  glory  was  manifested  among  them ;  but  they  provoked 
him  to  his  face,  as  if  the  more  they  knew  of  his  glory  the  greater  pride  they  took  in 
slighting  it,  and  turning  it  into  shame." 

I.  Rebellious  speech  a  coRRurTiNo  fobcb.  Apply  to  boastful,  self-conceited 
speech ;  the  speech  of  the  ma.sterful  and  ambitious  man.  Apply  to  the  influence  of  the 
infidel  lecturer,  or  infidel  literature.     The  young  especially  are  carried  away",  by  it  tc 


OH.  m.  1—96.1  THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  65 


self-indulgence,  and  find  in  jt  excuse  for  vicious  practices.  Infidelity  never  layg 
foundations  for  virtue  to  build  on.  It  is  ever  the  substratum  of  vice.  Illustrate  from 
the  French  Revolution. 

II.  Rebellious  deeds  a  call  fob  judgment.  The  bad  deeds  are  the  proper  fruitage 
of  bad  speech.  Illustrate  by  the  evil  work  of  the  demagogue.  Break  down  the  sacred 
restraints  of  faith  in  God,  and  evils  rush  in  like  a  flood.  When  man  feels  free  to  do 
what  he  likes,  his  likes  are  sure  to  be  bad  ones,  ^m press  that  no  account  of  a  man's 
niin,  or  a  nation's  ruin,  will  suffice  which  deals  oily  with  his  circumstances.  Nobody 
was  ever  ruined  by  acciilent.  Man's  tongue  and  doings  will  always  provide  the  expla- 
nation of  his  extreme  calamities. — R.  T. 

Vers.  10, 11. — Messages  to  the  righteous  and  the  wicked.  These  verses  are  paren- 
thetical. ."They  assert  the  doctrine  of  future  rewards  and  punishment'  in  a  spiritual 
and  not  a  mechanical  sense.  Good  deeds  ripen  into  happiness,  as  evil  deeds  into 
misery  "  (Cheyne).     The  point  of  impression  may  be  stated  thus — 

I.  To  THE  niGHTEOUS— God's  judgments  are  not  indiscriminate. 

II.  To  the  wicked — God's  judgments  are  inevitable.  "The  pious  are  graciously 
assured,  that  in  the  worst  of  times,  and  under  the  most  trying  circumstances,  God  will 
be  their  Friend  and  Kewarder ;  while  the  ungodly  are  equally  assured  that  they  shall 
Bufler  merited  punishment "  (Henderson).  Compare  the  Divine  pleadings  with  Cain 
(Gen.  iv.  7),  and  Abraham's  pleading  over  guilty  Sodom  (Gen.  xviii.  25).  See  Asaph's 
perplexity  because  it  was  so  often  ill  with  the  righteous,  and  well  with  th«  wicked 
(Ps.  Ixxiii.).  How  can  God  answer  those  who,  looking  cursorily  upon  life,  say  that  the 
earthly  lot  of  the  righteous  and  of  the  wicked  is  very  much  the  same  ?  Hii  answer 
may  be  set  forth  under  the  following  divisions.  1.  God  cares  for  the  righteous,  and  has 
some  kind  purpose  towards  tliem  in  letting  them  suffer.  2.  The  righteous  should  be 
willing  to  accept  of  a  share  of  suffering,  which  aims  at  the  correction  and  salvation  of 
the  many.  3.  God  keejis  the  conscience  of  the  righteous  quiet  under  suffering,  and  so 
he  does  not  feel  its  real  bitterness.  4.  God  >MWi  keep  the  righteous  from  sharing  suffering 
■f  it  pleases  him  so  to  do,  just  as  he  saved  Israel  in  Go.shen  from  the  plagues  that  smote 
the  rest  of  Egypt.  To  the  wicked  God's  judgments  have  a  bitter  sting,  for  they  are 
conscious  of  the  connection  between  their  sins  and  their  judgments,  unless  conscience  is 
utterly  dead,  and  then  there  must  come  for  them  an  awful  day  of  awakening.  And  if 
the  wicked  do  escape  calamities  here,  there  is  the  inevitable  day  coming  when  he  must 
receive  "  according  to  the  deeds  done  in  his  body." — R.  T. 

Ver.  15. — Grinding  the/aces  of  the  poor.  Two  figures  are  here  employed :  "  Beat  my 
people  to  pieces ; "  "  Grind  the  faces  of  the  poor."  One  of  these  may  help  to  the  under- 
standing of  the  other.  Both  deal  with  the  tyrannies  of  masters,  and  may  be  illustrated 
by  the  cruel  treatment  oislavi-s  in  the  old  slave-holding  times.  J.  A.  Alexander  explains 
the  figures  thus :  "  Crush  my  people  is  a  common  figure  for  severe'  oppression  (Job  v.  t ; 
Prov.  xxii.  22).  Grind  the  faces  upon  the  ground,  by  trampling  on  their  prostrate 
bodies,  is  also  another  strong  figure  for  contemptuous  and  oppressive  violence.''  Ewald 
thinks  blows  or  wounds  in  the  face  may  be  referred  to.  The  figure  may  be  taken  from 
the  threshing-sled,  a  cart  without  wheels,  hiving  pieces  of  flint  and  .iron  on  the  under 
side,  which  was  drawn  by  oxen  over  tie  heap  of  wheat,  grinding  the  grains.  So  the 
exactions  and  forced  labocrs  to  which  the  poor  were  subject  was  making  lines  and 
furrows  in  their  faces  by  their  grinding  influence.  The  figure  may  be  illustrated  by  the 
«>6ndition  of  the  wretched /eWoWn  in  Egypt,  who  are  ground  with  taxation  until  life  hag 
become  a  burden.  Matthew  Henry  gives  two  suggestions  by  way  of  explanation.  "  You 
put  them  to  as  much  pain  and  terror  as  if  they  were  groimd  in  a  mill,  and  as  certainly 
reduce  them  to  dust  by  one  act  of  oppression  after  another."  "  Their  faces  are  bruised 
and  crushed  with  the  blows  you  have  given  them;  you  have  not  only  ruined  their 
estates,  but  have  given  them  personal  abuses."  Roberts  gives  specimens  of  similar 
proverbial  expressions  current  in  India.  "  Ah  1  my  lord,  do  not  thus  crush  my  face. 
Alas!  alas!  my  nose  and  other  features  will  soon  be  rubbed  away.  Is  my  face  to  I>e 
made  quite  flat  with  grinding  ?  "  "  That  head  man  has  been  grinding  the  faces  of  all  his 
people."  .  The  opposite  figure  to  this  is  to  "  amoutb  the  face,"  meaning  to  "  court  or 
flatter." 

WAUH.  • 


M  THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET    ISAIAH        [ch.  la.  1—26. 

L  Man's  cruelty  to  the  poob.  Illustrate  the  condition  of  poor  people  in  Easterr 
lands.  They  are  the  first  to  suffer  in  times  of  national  calamity,  pestilence,  famine,  oi 
war.  The  selfishness  induced  by  national  distress  is  seen  in  the  neglect  and  ill  treat- 
ment of  the  poor.  Weak  governments  make  cruel  exactions  from  the  poor.  Lordly 
and  rich  men  too  often  crush  the  poor.  Slave  countries  have  awful  records  of  cruelty  to 
the  slave  poor.  Forced  labour  has,  in  many  lands,  embittered  the  lot  of  the  poor.  Now 
the  evil  is  rather  selfish  neglect  than  open  cruelty.  Rich  and  poor  are  separated  by 
wide  class  distinctions,  and  the  poor  are  too  often  left  in  their  misery  to  perish. 

n.  God's  care  for  the  poor.  Seen  in  his  counsels  respecting  the  treatment  of 
tliem,  in  his  own  wondrous  ways  of  providing  for  them,  and  in  the  relation  of  bis 
manifested  Son  to  them.  Of  him  this  was  the  characteristic,  "  Blessed  are  the  poor ;  " 
"  To  the  poor  the  gospel  is  preached." 

III.  Man's  concern  fob  the  poor  when  he  becomes  God-like.  Then  he  strives  to 
feel  as  Christ  felt,  and  to  act  as  Christ  acts.  See  the  spirit  of  pious  Job  (Job  xxix.),  and 
compare  Barnabas  and  Dorcas.  The  regenerate  man  cannot  fail  to  interest  himself  in 
tljose  who  are  needy,  or  in  trouble.  The  good  man  deals  justly  and  kindly  and  thought- 
fully with  the  lowly  folk  who  serve  him.  Grinding  the  face  of  the  poor  is  au  absolute 
impossibility  to  any  man  who  has  "  the  mind  of  Christ." — E.  T. 

Ver.  16. — Dress  and  character.  The  Word  of  God  has  sometimes  things  to  say  which 
it  cannot  be  satisfied  to  address  generally  to  mankind ;  it  requires  a  more  direct  super- 
scription for  its  message,  and  writes  to  men,  to  women,  even  sometimes  to  wives, 
maidens,  mothers,  widows,  children.  In  the  effort  of  Isaiah  to  produce  a  deep  and 
general  conviction  of  the  national  sin  and  disgrace  and  impending  ruin,  he  singles  out 
the  women  of  that  day;  he  bids  us  trace  the  influence  of  a  godless  luxury  in  their  vain  ' 
dressing,  frivolous  manners,  and  overloaded  ornamentation  and  jewellery.  He  intimates 
that  the  nobler  qualities  of  womanly  mind  and  character  were  being  lost  in  this  great 
increase  of  frivolity  and  vanity ;  and  he  sets  us  upon  imagining  not  only  the  present 
degradation  of  the  land,  but  the  yet  deeper  degradation  that  must  come,  the  utter  ruin 
of  the  generation  that  owned  such  women  as  mothers.  Hallam  says,  "  The  love  of 
becoming  ornament  is  not  perhaps  to  be  regarded  in  the  light  of  vanity ;  it  is  rather 
an  instinct  which  woman  has  received  from  nature  to  give  effect  to  those  charms  which 
are  her  defence ;  and  when  commerce  began  to  minister  more  efficiently  to  the  wants  of 
luxury,  the  rich  furs  of  the  north,  the  gay  silks  of  Asia,  the  wrought  gold  of  domestic 
tiianufacture,  illumined  the  halls  of  chivalry,  and  cast,  as  if  by  the  spell  of  enchantment, 
that  ineffable  grace  over  beauty  which  the  choice  and  arrangement  of  dress  is  calcu- 
lated to  bestow."  God  cannot  be  especially  pleased  with  a  clothing  of  wearisome  drab ; 
and  he  must  know  that  when  bright  colours  are  forsworn,  the  vanity  of  the  human 
heart  will  still  find  expression  in  shape  and  pattern.  He  is  ever  dressing  the  brown 
earth  in  garments  of  grass  and  flower,  pluming  the  wings  of  his  birds  with  varied  tints ; 
and  making  gorgeous  with  bars  of  gold  and  crimson  and  blue  the  sky  at  sunsetting. 
There  are  a  few  simple  rules  of  dress  which  at  once  commend  themselves  to  Christian 
judgment. 

I.  A  Christlan  should  dress  within  reasonable  expense.  What  is  reasonable 
expense  can  never-be  settled  by  figures ;  it  must  always  be  left  to  individual  decision ; 
the  utmost  carefulness  of  one  person  may,  relative  to  station,  appear  censurable  extrava- 
gance to  another  person.  But  we  may  say  this :  any  expenditure  is  unreasonable 
which  deprives  us  of  the  means  for  meeting  those  higher  claims  which  may  be  made 
upon  us — claims  of  (1)  food,  (2)  family,  (3)  education,  (4)  hospitality,  (5)  charity,  or  (6) 
religion.  And  all  expenditure  on  luxurious  dress  is  unreasonable,  which  prevents  our 
laying  aside  something  against  the  calamities,  diseases,  and  old  age  of  the  future. 
Above  all,  dressing  which  involves  the  spending  of  money  which  belongs  to  our  creditors 
is  a  lie  towards  men,  and  an  insult  to  God.  Archbishop  Leighton  says,  "  Excessive 
costliness  argu'is  and  feeds  the  pride  of  the  heart,  and  defrauds,  if  not  others  of  their 
dues,  yet  the  poor  of  theic  charity,  which  in  God's  sight  is  a  due  debt  too;  and  far 
more  comfort  shalt  thou  have  on  thy  death-bed,  to  remember  that  at  such  a  time, 
instead  of  putting  lace  on  my  own  back,  I  helped  a  naked  back  to  clothing." 

II.  A  Christian  should  dress  accoroinq  to  the  best  standabds  or  tastk. 
Befit,  nut  aecesnarily  newest.     These  you  will  discover,  not  by  observing  persons  who 


OB-ui.  1— 26.]  THE   BOOK  OK  THE   PUOPHET    ISAIAH.  67 

are  foremost  in  fashion,  but  by  observing  those  persons  for  whom  you  have  the  most 
real  respect.  Whatever  may  be  the  cla^s  of  society  to  which  you  belong,  you  can 
discern,  within  the  limits  of  your  sphere,  the  contrast  between  the  dress  of  the  shallow, 
the  frivolous,  and  vain,  aud  the  dress  of  the  thoughtful,  the  humble,  and  the  worthy. 
Peter  gives  an  idea  of  the  standard  of  taste,  in  1  Pet.  iii.  3 — 5. 
in.  A  Christian  should  disesj  suitably  to  the  sphere  in  life  which  she 

OCCUPIES,  AND   the   CLASS   OF  SOCHSTY  TO  WHICH   SHE  BELONGS.      If  yOU  do  not  act  thus, 

you  make  yourself  a  caricature ;  you  must  be  a  hypocrite,  trying  to  deceive  people  into  the 
idea  that  you  are  what  you  know  that  you  are  not.  Most  people  easily  read  the  disguise, 
and  put  a  low  estimate  on  the  persons  who  foolishly  resort  to  it.  We  honour  the  men 
and  women  who  bravely  say,  "  My  sphere  in  life  luay  be  humble,  but  it  is  honest,  and 
th(^refore  it  is  honourable.  I  am  not  ashamed  to  dress  according  to  it.  I  can  occupy  my 
place,  and  look  just  myself,  with  the  smile  of  God,  and  the  approbation  of  all  good  men, 
upon  me."  Let  servants  dress  as  servants,  maidens  as  maidens,  married  women  as 
married,  and  the  a^ed  as  aged.     Each  to  herself  be  true. 

IV.  A  Christian  should  dress  so  as  to  serve  God  by  her  debss.  Our  dress 
has  an  influence  on  others — on  those  in  our  station,  on  those  in  classes  of  society  below 
us,  aud  on  the  cli  ildren  we  meet.  This  mode  of  influence  is  to  be  laid  in  service  on  the 
Lord's  altar.  Two  points  may  be  impressed  from  these  considerations.  1.  Dress  reveals 
character.  This  is  true  of  the  character  of  each  individual.  We  often  take  our. notions 
of  a  person  from  her  dress.  Carelessness,  untidiness,  and  uncleanliness,  things  which 
are  very  nearly  akin  to  ungodliness,  are  revealed  only  by  looking  at  some,  so-called, 
well-dressed  people.  Self-conceit,  passion,  and  temper  are  exhibited  in  others.  Some- 
times we  see  persons  of  whom  we  think  very  pityingly.  Poor  creatures  I  There  is 
little  inside  the  coxy  dress  but  vanity,  pride,  and  worldliness.  And  others  as  certainly 
tells  us  of  the  inward  modesty,  the  delicacy,  seriousness,  reflnement  of  their  souls. 
Buins  sings^ 

**  Oh,  wad  some  poo'er  the  giftie  gie  ui, 
To  see  o'orsels  as  ithers  see  iu  I " 

And  many  of  us  have  longed  for  the  courage  to  tell  others  around  us  the  impression 
which  their  dress  was  making  upon  us.  If  the  looking-glass  could  speak,  what  sur- 
prising revelations  it  would  make !  It  is  true  also  of  nations ;  dress  is  characteristic. 
It  is  true  of  towns  and  districts  in  our  own  land.  In  some  parts  of  our  country,  where 
wages  are  good,  and  imitation  finery  is  cheap,  we  find  sharp  contrasts  of  colour, 
commonness  of  material,  rude  bold  shapes,  and  overloading  of  tin-el.  In  other  parts 
where  work  is  concerned  with  the  more  necessary  articles  required  for  man's  use,  the 
taste  is  sober,  the  quality  good,  and  ornamentation  refined.  2.  Dress  cultures  character. 
A  woman  feels  right  when  she  is  well  dressed,  and  in  a  sense  is  kept  right  by  her  dress. 
The  beautiful  in  appearance  wants  the  beautiful  in  conduct  to  match  it.  Plato  says, 
"  Behaviour,  and  not  gold,  is  the  ornament  of  woman.  For  a  woman  who  wishes  to 
enjoy  the  favour  of  one  man,  good  behaviour  is  the  proper  ornament,  and  not  dresses. 
You  should  have  the  blush  upon  your  countenance,  which  is  the  sign  of  modesty, 
instead  of  paint,  and  worth  and  sobriety  instead  of  gold  and  emeralds." — B.  T. 

Vers.  25,  26. — National  evil  in  the  loss  of  male  population.  The  destruction  of  tn«, 
males  in  war  is  the  cause  of  the  extreme  grief  and  helpless  desolation  of  womanhood. 
The  figure  is  intense  when  read  in  the  light  of  the  condition  of  unprotected  woman  in 
Eastern  countries.  "  Iu  the  Bast  of  antiquity,  as  in  many  Eastern  lands  to  this  day, 
the  position  of  an  unmarried  woman,  whether  maid  or  widow,  was  a  very  unhappy 
and  perilous  one.  Only  in  the  house  of  a  husband  could  a  woman  be  sure  of  respect 
and  protection.  Hence  the  Hebrews  spoke  of  the  husband's  house  as  a  woman's  menw- 
ehah,  or  '  rest ' —  her  secure  and  happy  asylum  from  servitude,  neglect,  licence " 
(S.  Cox).  In  the  verses  before  us  the  effect  of  the  slaughter  of  the  males  on  the  com- 
munity is  described.  The  chief  places  of  concourse  are  full  of  desolate,  wailing  women ; 
and  the  state  or  nation  is  then  personified  as  a  desolate  widow  seated  on  the  ground,  a 
sign  both  of  mourning  and  degradation.  For  illustration  of  the  figure,  see  Vespasian's 
coin.  The  device  on  it  is  a  woman,  disconsolate,  in  a  sitting  posture,  leaning  acrainit 
ft  palm  tree,  and  the  legend  k  "  Judxa  capta."    At  •  modem  illustration  take  the 


B8 


THE    BOOK   Oif   THE    PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


[CH.  IV.  1 6. 


calamity  which  came  upon  France  through  the  series  of  revolutionary  and  Napoleonic 
wars.  The  conscription  swept  off  the  males ;  the  age  for  soldiers,  and  standard  height, 
were  again  and  again  reduced,  until  even  the  nation's  youths  were  destroyed;  and  it  has 
taken  years  to  recover  the  national  strength. 

I,  A  nation's  strong  men  are  HiiE  PRESENT  JOT.  They  work  well  in  the  factory. 
They  advise  well  in  the  council.     They  ensure  healthy  and  strong  populations. 

II,  A  ration's  steokq  men  are  her  DEiENCB.  They  ensure  her  respi'ct  abroad. 
They  preserve  her  when  attacked.     They  keqi  off  disease  by  their  vitality. 

III,  A  nation's  strong  men  are  her  hope  fob  the  FUTURE.  They  put  strength 
into  govemini  nt,  art,  science,  literature,  labour.  Health  is  energy.  A  nation's  hope 
lies- in  this  btiiig  the  dr.-cription  of  her  sons — mens  sana  in  corpure  suno.  Then  what 
a  national  calamity  war  is  I  It  takes  a  nation's  manhood.  We  may  well  "  seek  peace 
and  ensue  it,"  for  it  keeps  our  manhood. — B.  T, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IV. 
The  existing  division  between  ch.  iii.  and 
iv.  is  scarcely  balisfiictnry.  Ver.  1  of  oh.  iv. 
bt^longs  to  the  uiiuatory  portion  of  the  sec- 
tion beginning  with  cli.  ii.  1  and  terminating 
with  ell.  iv.  6,  and  so  stands  connected  in 
Bulijeet  with  ch.  iii.,  which  is  wholly  mina- 
tory ;  whereas  the  remainder  of  oh.  iv- 
(vers.  2 — 6)  is  consolatory,  consisting  of  a 
eeries  of  promises.  Oli.  iv.  1  is  also  for- 
mHlly  connected  with  ch.  iii.  by  the  com 
conjunctive,  while  the  absince  of  any  such 
link  at  the  opening  of  ver.  2  indicates  the 
oonimencement  of  a  new  paragraph  at  that 
point. 

Ver.  1. — Seven  women  shall  take  hold  of 
one  man.  This  verse  has  been  well  called 
a  "companion  picture  to  cli.  iii.  6,  7."  As 
there,  in  the  evil  time  of  God's  judgment, 
thedespairing  men  are  re|  >resented  as"  taldng 
hold  "  of  a  respectable  njan  to  make  hijii 
their  judge,  so  now  the  despairiug  women 
"  take  hold  "  of  such  a  man  and  request  him 
to  allow  them  all  to  be  regarded  as  his 
wives.  There  has  been  such  a  destruction — 
men  are  become  so  scarce — ^that  no  other- 
wise can  women  escape  the  shame  and  re- 
proach of  being  unweilded  and  childless. 
Out  own  bread  will  we  eat.  They  do  not 
ask  him  to  support  them ;  they  are  able 
and  willing  to  support  themselves.  To  take 
away  ;  rather,  take  lliou  away — the  impera- 
tive mood,  not  llie  infinitive.  Our  reproach. 
Children  were  regarded  as  such  a  blessing 
in  the  ancient  times  that  to  be  childless 
was  a  misfortune  and  a  subject  of  reproach. 
Hagar  "despised"  the  barren  Sarai  (Gen. 
xvi.  4).  Her  " adversary  provoked  Hannah 
sore,  because  the  Lord  had  shut  up  her 
womb  "  (1  Sam.  i.  6).  Compare  the  lament 
of  Antigon*,  who  views  it  as  a  disgrace  that 


she  descends  to  the  tomb  unwed  (Soph., 
'Antig.,'  11.  813—816).  Among  the  Jews 
ohildle  sness  was  a  special  reproach,  because 
it  took  aiiay  all  pnssibility  of  the  woman 
being  in  the  line  of  the  Jlessiah's  desocnl 
(comp.  ch.  liv.  1 — 4). 

Vers.  2 — 6. — As  the  present  prophecy  (ch. 
ii. — iv,),  though  in  the  main  one  of  tlireaten- 
ing  auil  denunciation,  opened  with  a  picture 
that  was  enonurap^ing  ami  comforting  (eh. 
ii.  2  —4),  .so  now  it  terniiuates  witli  a  similar 
picture.  The  evangelical  prophet,  like  the 
great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  is  unwilling 
that  any  one  should  be  "swallowed  up  with 
overmuch  soriow."  He  will  not  separate 
the  mercies  of  God  from  his  judgments. 

Ver.  2.— In  that  day  shall  the  branch  oi 
the  Lord,  etc.  Some  see  in  this  passage 
merely  a  promise  that  in  the  Messianic  times 
the  produce  of  the  soil  would  become  more 
abundant  than  ever  before,  its  harvests 
1  ioher,  and  its  fruitage  more  luxuriant  But 
in  the  light  of  later  prophecy  it  is  scarcely 
possible  to  shut  up  the  meaning  within  such 
nariow  limits.  The  "Branch"  of  Isaiah 
can  h  irdly  be  isolated  altogether  in  a  sound 
exegesis  from  the  "  Branch  "  of  Jeremiah 
(xxiii  5;  xxxiii.  15)  ami  of  Zerhariah  (iii. 
8;  vi.  12).  Now,  the  "Branch"  of  Zeoha- 
riah  is  stated  to  be  "a  man"  (vi.  12  :  note 
that  the  word  used  for  "Branch"  is  the 
same  as  Isaiah's,  viz.  tsemaUi),  and  the 
"Branch  "of  Jeremiah  is  a  King  (xxxiii.  15). 
Jloreoxcr,  Isaiah  uses  a  nearly  equivalent 
term  {uetxer)  in  an  admittedly  Jlessianic 
sense.  Although,  therefore,  there  is  some 
obscurity  in  the  phrase,  "  Brinich  of  Je- 
hovah," it  would  seem  to  be  hest  to  under- 
stand Isaiah  as  here  intimating,  what  he 
elsewhere  openly  declares  (ch.  xi.  I — 5) — 
viz.  the  coming  of  the  IMessiah  in  the  latter 
days  as  the  nrnanieut  and  gl"ry  of  his  people. 
Be  beautiful  and  glorious;  rithcr, /or  bfauiy 
and  glury ,  or,  for  ornament  a  nd  glory ;  i.e 
for  the  orqamcut  «nd  gluriticatiou  of  Larwi 


ott.  IV.  1—6.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAS. 


G9 


Ani  the  fmit  of  the  earth.  It  is  argued 
with  reasnn  that  the  two  clauses  of  this 
verse  are  parallel,  not  antithetical,  and  that 
as  we  understand  the  one,  so  must  we  undei- 
atuud  the  other.  If,  then,  the  "  Branch"  is 
the  Messiah,  so  is  "  the  fruit  of  the  earth  " — 
which  may  well  be,  since  he  was  "the  grain 
of  wheat "  which  "  fell  into  the  ground  and 
Jied,  and  so  l)rought  forth  much  fruit" 
(.luhn  xii.  21).  £zceUont  and  comely ; 
r.ither,  for  majesty  and  heauti/  (comp. 
l-'.xod.  xxviii.  2,  40).  Unto  the  escaped  of 
Israel ;  i.e.  "  to  those  who  shall  have  sur- 
vived the  groat  calamity,  and  become  citi- 
zens of  the  re.-'tored  Jerusalem."  Ur.  Kay 
well  remarks  that  "  the  prophecy  was  ade- 
quately fulfilled  only  in  those  who  'saved 
themselves'  from  the  generation  which  re- 
jected Christ.  That  remnant  was  the  Kerm 
of  the  Cath(jlic  Church,  made  such  by  being 
incorporated  into  the  true  Vine  "(' Speaker's 
Commentary,'  note  ad  loc  ). 

Ver.  3.— He  that  is  left  .  .  he  that  re- 
maineth.  Equivalent  to  the  "escaped "of 
tlie  preceding  ver  e.  Shall  be  called  holy. 
Strikingly  fullillod  in  the  fact  that  the  early 
Cliiistians  were  known  as  aytot,  "holy,"  or 
itAjjrol  617101,  "those  called  to  be  holy,"  in 
the  first  age  (Acts  is  13,  82,  41 ;  xxvi.  10; 
Rom.  i.  7 ;  1  Cor.  i.  2 ;  2  Cor.  i.  1 ;  Eph. 
i.  1  ;  Phil.  i.  1,  etc.).  Perhaps,  however, 
more  is  mount  than  this.  The  early  Chris- 
tians not  only  were  called,  but  were  "holy." 
Even  Gibbon  places  the  innocent  lives  of 
Ihe  early  Christians  among  th«  causes  of 
the  conversion  of  the  Roman  empire.  Every 
onD  that  is.  written  among  the  living.  A 
register  of  the  "  living,'  or  "  heirs  of  life," 
is  here  assumed,  as  in  Exod.  xxxii.  32 ;  Ps. 
Ixix.  28;  Dan.  xii.  1;  Rev.  xiii.  8;  xxi.  27, 
etc.  It  is  a  "  book,"  however,  out  of  wliich 
names  may  be  "  blotted  "  (Rev.  iii.  5). 

Ver.  4. — When  the  lord  shall  have  washed 
away  the  filth  of  the  daughters  of  Ziou  (see 
oh.  iii.  16 — 24).  Sin  must  not  be  merely 
repented  of  and  pardoned;  it  must  be  put 
away.  There  could  be  no  Jerusalem,  in 
which  all  should  be  "  called  holy,"  until 
the  moral  defilement  of  the  daughters  of 
Zion  was  swept  away.  Purged  the  blood 
of  Jerusalem  from  the  midst  (cump.  ch.  i. 


15;  lix.  3).  It  is  possible,  however,  that 
the  murder  of  infants  in  sacrifice  to  Mulocb 
may  bo  in  the  prophet's  mind.  Ahaz  "  burnt 
his  children  in  the  fire  after  the  abomina- 
tions of  the  heathen  "  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  3). 
Manasseh  did  the  same  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  6); 
and  the  practice  was  probably  widesproad 
among  the  people  long  before  Isaiah's  time 
(see  Pb.  ovi.  38 ;  ch.  Ivii.  5).  By  the  spirit 
of  burning;  or,  by  a  blast  of  burning;  i.e. 
a  fiery  blast  which  shall  destroy  everything 
(comp.  oh.  i.  31). 

Ver.  5.  —  Upon  every  dwelling-place 
("  over  the  whole  habitation,"  Revised  Ver- 
sion). Mr.  Chcyne  translates  "upon  the 
whole  site,"  and  takes  the  "  site "  to  be 
especially  the  temple.  Malion  seems  cer- 
tainly never  to  be  used  for  anything  but 
"God's  dwelling-place"  (Exod.  xv.  17;  1 
Kings  viii.  13,  39,  etc. ;  2  Chron.  vi.  2,  30, 
etc. ;  Ezra  ii.  68 ;  Ps.  xxxiii.  14 ;  Ixxxix. 
14;  xovii.  2;  civ.  5;  ch.  xviii.  4;  Dan.  viii. 
11).  Perhaps,  however,  every  dwelling- 
place  of  God,  i.e.  every  Christian  Church, 
is  iutended.  On  these,  and  on  all  Christian 
assemblies,  there  will  rest  a  new  presence 
of  God— one  which  he  will  have  "  created ;  ' 
recalling  that  of  the  pillar  of  fire  and  of 
cloud  which  rested  in  the  wilderness  on 
the  Jewish  tabernacle  (Exod.  xxxiii.  9 ;  xl. 
34 — 38,  etc.).  A  cloud  and  smoke  by  day. 
The  "  pillar  of  the  cloud "  is  never  said  in 
the  Pentateuch  to  have  been  one  of"  smoke ; " 
but  Sinai  "  smoked "  when  God  descended 
on  it  (Exod.  xix.  18  j  xx.  18),  and  the 
psalmist  speaks  of  a  "smoke"  as  issuing 
out  of  God's  nostrils  (Ps.  xviii.  8).  In  the 
poetry  of  Isaiah,  "smoke,"  no  less  than 
"  cloud,''  symbolizes  God's  presence  (see  oh. 
vi.  4).  Upon  all  the  glory  shall  be  a  de 
fence ;  rather,  as  in  the  margin,  o  covering. 
Over  all  the  glory  of  Zion,  its  purged  temple 
and  its  purified  assemblies,  the  presence  of 
God  shall  rest  like  a  canopy,  protecting  it. 

Ver.  6. — And  there  shall  be,  etc.;  rather, 
and  «t  (i.e.  "the  canopy")  sAaK  be  a  laber 
na/ile,  or  bower,  a  shelter  from  the  sun'ii  heat 
by  day,  and  from  storm  and  rain  both  by  day 
and  night.  The  metaphora  need  no  expl^ 
nation. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vers.  2 — 6. — The  glories  of  the  veatored  Church.  Three  principal  glories  »rc  liere 
noted  by  the  prophet  as  belonging  to  "  that  day  " — the  day  of  judgment  upon  J  udah 
and  Jerusalem  for  their  manifold  sins,  and  of  restoration  and  re-establishment  of  the 
mountain  of  God's  Church  at  the  head-of  the  mountains  (ch.  ii.  2).  These  are  (1)  the 
coming  of  Messiah  in  person  for  ornament  and  glory,  for  majesty  and  beauty,  to  be 
the  admiration  and  delight  of  his  people;  (2)  the  purity  and  holiness  of  the  persons 
who  constitute  the  restored  Church  ;  and  (3)  the  continuity  of  the  presence  of  God  wii  h 
his  Church  from  the  time  of  its  re-establishment,  and  the  security  consequent  upon  his 


?d  tttSS  BOOK  Of  THfi  tftOPHET  tSAtAS.  [ch.  tv.  l-ft 

protection.  At  all  periods  of  its  existence,  the  Church  will  do  well  to  bear  in  mind 
that  these  are  its  special  glories,  and  to  make  each  a  subject  of  frequent  thought  and 
meditation. 

L  The  coming  of  Messiah  to  found  his  Chukch  lies  at  the  boot  of  all.  The 
glorious  "  Branch " — the  new  shoot  of  the  house  of  David  (ch.  xi.  1) — which  sprang 
from  the  old  stock,  and  grew  up  "  like  a  tree  planted  by  the  water-side,  which  bringeth 
forth  its  fruit  in  due  season,  the  leaf  whereof  shall  not  wither  "  (Ps.  i.  3),  had  first  to 
come  and  to  dwell  with  man,  and  to  reveal  himself,  in  his  glory  and  majesty  and  beauty, 
as  the  perfect  moral  Being,  the  pattern  Man,  after  whom  all  should  shape  their  lives, 
before  a  holy  Church,  a  Church  of  "  saints,"  could  be  set  up  on  earth,  or  men  could 
know  in  what  true  holiness  and  righteousness  consisted.  The  "  Branch "  came, 
"  beautiful  and  glorious,  excellent  and  comely,"  "  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand  " 
(Cant.  V.  10),  "  his  eyes  as  the  eyes  of  doves "  (ver.  12),  "  his  lips  dropping  sweet- 
smelling  myrrh"  (ver.  13),  "his  countenance  as  Lebanon,  excellent  as  the  cedars,  his 
mouth  most  sweet,"  yea,  he  himself  "  altoo:ether  lovely  "  (vers.  15,  16);  and  the  earth 
saw  what  it  had  never  seen  before — absolutely  perfect  humanity.  Nor  was  this  the 
whole.  He  who  set  the  perfect  pattern  made  also  the  perfect  atonement ;  "  washed 
away  the  filth  "  of  sin  (ch.  it.  4) ;  "  purified  to  himself  a  peculiar  people  "  (Titus  ii.  14) ; 
made  holiness  possible  to  man,  who  was  "  very  far  gone  from  original  righteousness," 
corrupt,  "  sold  under  sin  "  (Bom.  vii.  14).  Thus  the  first  glory  fitly  introduces  the 
second — 

II.  The  holiness  of  those  who  are  true  members  or  his  Chitech.  "  Holiness 
becometh  God's  house  for  ever  "  (Ps.  xciii.  5) ;  "  Without  holiness  shall  no  man  see  the 
Lord"  (Heb.  xii.  14).  Christians  are  holy  by  profession,  by  call,  by  obli;;ation ;  if  they 
will,  by  life  and  act.  Not,  indeed,  holy  in  the  highest  sense ;  not  as  they  ought  to  be ; 
not  "  as  he  is  holy "  (1  Pet.  i.  l5) ;  for  "  if  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive 
our.<!elves,  and  the  truth  is  nut  in  us  "  (1  John  i.  8).  But  still  "  holy  "  in  a  real  sense; 
ever  striving  to  be  holy,  ever  repenting,  ever  seeking  and  obtaining  forgiveness,  ever 
washed  afresh  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  which  "  cleanseth  from  all  sin  "  (1  John  i.  7). 
The  unholy,  who  "  persist  in  sin  "  without  striving  against  it,  are  no  true  members  of 
the  Church  of  Christ,  but  false  pretenders  to  membership,  "strangers  to  Christ's 
covenant,  and  aliens  from  his  commonwealth"  (Eph.  ii.  12).  The  real  Church  is 
"holy,"  as  it  is  called  in  the  Apostles'  Creed;  deriving  its  holiness  ever  from  him  who  is 
its  Life,  from  whom  it  receives  continually  fresh  supplies  of  grace,  and  fresh  power  to 
resist  temptation.  The  holiness  of  the  Church  is  thus  dependent  on  the  presence  of 
God  with  it ;  and  the  second  glory  leads  naturally  to  the  consideration  of  the  third — 

IIL  The  contimued  presence  of  God  with  his  Church,  and  his  continued 
PROTECTION  OF  IT.  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world,"  is 
the  most  precious  promise  of  the  New  Testament.  Christ  is  with  his  Church  (1)  in 
her  sacred  buildings,  when  common  prayer  is  made  (Matt.  xiii.  19)  and  sacraments  are 
administered ;  (2)  in  her  synods,  when  doctrine  is  formulated  and  false  teaching 
exposed  and  condemned  (Matt,  xviii.  17);  and  (3)  in  the  secret  chamber  of  each  one 
of  her  members,  when  approach  is  made  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  confession  poured 
forth  or  prayer  offered  to  God  through  Christ,  In  this  presence  is  the  Church's  sole 
trust.  Without  it  she  would  be  powerless  against  the  world,  and  against  Satan.  With 
it  she  may  contemn  all  attacks.  Satan  can  do  her  no  harm,  for  "  the  gates  of  hell 
shall  not  prevail  against  her  "  (Matt.  xvi.  18).  The  world  cannot  hurt  her,  for  he  who 
is  her  Protefctor  "  has  overcome  the  world  "  (John  xvi.  33).  Safe  under  his  protection, 
nestling  under  the  shadow  of  his  wings,  she  is  safe  both  by  day  and  night ;  whether  the 
scorohing  fire  of  persecution  seeks  her  destruction,  as  in  the  early  times,  or  whether,  as 
now,  the  miu'ky  night  of  agnostic  criticism  closes  around  her  and  endeavours  to  affright 
her  with  its  shadows. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  2 — 6. — Glimpse  of  future  prosperity.  There  will  come  a  day  when  the  cleane- 
Ing  fire  will  h»ve  run  its  course  through  the  spiritual  field,  consuming  the  tares.  The 
Impurity  of  licentious  luxury  will  have  been  washed  away,  the  stain  of  blood  effaced 


ca.iir.  1— 6.]         Tfili  BOOK.  Oi?  THE  rtiOPttEt  ISAIAH.  ?j 


from  Judah's  rulers  (ch.  iii.  14 ;  comp.  ch.  i.  25 ;  vi.  13 ;  Matt.  iii.  11).     Then,  and  theT 
only,  can  the  glorious  day  come  in  the  vision  of  which  the  prophet  exuits. 

L  National  conditioks  of  prospbritt.  "The  shoot  of  Jehovah  will  be  for  adorn- 
ment and  honour."  Erit  germen  Domini  in  magnificentia  et  gloria.  The  rich  I'ertilily 
of  the  land  is  compared  to  a  new  sprouting  growth,  caused  by  the  creative  energy  ol 
God.  When  the  Spirit  of  God  is  felt  to  he  opeiative  in  the  life  of  a  people,  then,  and 
then  only,  can  its  life  be  both  strong  and  beautiful.  See,  again,  this  thought  in  ch. 
xxTiii.  5:  he  will  be  as  a  "  crown  of  glory  and  diadem  of  beauty  "  to  the  residue  of  his 
people.  "  Then  shall  he  give  the  rain  of  thy  seed,  that  thou  shalt  sow  the  ground 
withal;  and  bread  of  the  increase  of  the  earth,  and  it  shall  be  fat  and  plenteous:  in 
that  day  shall  thy  cattle  feed  in  large  pastures  "  (ch.  xxx.  23).  "  In  that  day  the 
mountains  shall  drop  down  new  wine,  and  the  hills  shall  flow  with  milk,  and  all  ihe 
rivers  of  Judah  shall  flow  with  waters,  and  a  fountain  shall  come  forth  out  of  the  house 
of  Jehovah,  and  shall  water  the  valley  of  Shittim  "  (Joel  iii.  18).  "  Behold,  the  days 
come,  saith  Jehovah,  that  the  ploughman  shall  overtake  the  reap.'i',  and  the  treader  of 
grapes  him  that  soweth  seed;  and  the  mountains  shall  drop  sweet  wine,  and  all  the 
liills  shall  melt.  .  .  .  They  shall  plant  vineyards,  and  drink  the  wine  there  f;  they 
shall  also  make  gardens,  and  eat  the  fruit  of  them.  And  I  will  plant  thein  upon 
their  land,  and  they  shall  no  more  he  pulled  up  out  of  their  land  which  I  have 
given  them,  saith  Jehovah  thy  God  "  (Amos  ix.  13 — 15).  "  I  will  sow  her  unto  me 
in  the  earth"  (Hos.  ii.  23).  Glowing  pictures!  Isruel's  golden  age  ever  is  in  the 
future.  And  for  all  who  "  hope  in  God,"  the  "  good  old  times,"  the  "  Saturnian  reign,'' 
is  coming  again.  Magnus  ah  inteyro  swdorum  nascitur  ordo.  The  hard  oaks  shall 
again  sweat  with  the  dewy  honey  ;  our  sweetest  dreams  become  a  solid  f^fct.  "  From 
me  is  thy  fruit  found  "  (Hos.  xiv.  8). 

II.  Personal  conditions  op  prosperity.  The  one  condition  is  personal  holiness. 
"^very  relict  in  Ziou,  and  every  one  remaining  in  Jerusalem,  will  he  called  a  saint  ; 
every  one  who  has  been  written  among  the  living  in  Jerusalem."  Profound  thought ! 
the  holy  man  alone  is  the  living  man.  Matter  is  death  ;  spirit  is  exemption  from  tlie 
rule  of  matter.  Holiness  is  victory  over  matter — in  its  lower  form,  fleshly  cleanliness ; 
in  its  higher,  the  purity  of  self-consistent  truth  that  will  not  mix  with  what  is  alien 
to  itself. 

III.  Visible  glories.  Upon  every  home  on  Mount  Zion,  and  every  place  of  prayer, 
there  will  be  the  cloud  by  day,  and  the  fume  and  splendour  of  flaming  fire  by  night ; 
over  all  the  glory  a  protection.  "  Wherever  there  is  true  spiritu>il  exaltation  and 
majesty,  there  is  around  it  a  covering  and  protection  which  keeps  the  world  away  from 
it."  "There's  a  divinity  doth  hedge  a  king."  We  cannot  constantly  bear  the  splen- 
dour ;  we  need  the  cool  calm  commonplaces  of  life  to  resort  to  when  our  eyes  at  e 
wearied  with  the  glare  of  highest  truth.  And  we  may  find  the  "  calm  retreat,  the  silent 
shade,"  of  religious  life  no  less  welcome  than  the  mount  of  glory  and  of  vision.  From 
the  storm  and  rain  we  may  find  a  refuge  in  the  "  secret  place  of  the  Most  High." — J. 

Ver.  1. — Depopulation  and  its  doctrine.  This  passage  belongs  to  the  two  concluding 
verses  of  the  last  chapter;  but  as  it  is  the  most  striking  of  the  three,  we  may  allow  it 
to  be  our  starting-point  in  gleaning  the  thoughts  which  the  whole  scene  suggests 
These  are — 

I.  Extreme  desolation  wrought  in  the  kiguteousness  of  God.  The  land  is- 
stripped  by  war  of  its  male  population  (ch.  iii.  25);  those  who  gather  at  the  gates 
bewail  the  humiliation  under  which  they  smart,  the  privation  to  which  they  are 
reduced.  "Her  gates  shall  lament,"  etc.  (ch.  iii.  26).  Jerusalem  can  no  longer  stanil 
in  her  strength  and  honour;  she  is  prostrate  in  weakness  and  in  her  shame;  desolate 
she  sits  upon  the  ground.  Such  is  the  havoc  which  war  has  made,  that  the  virgin 
daughters  of  the  land,  instead  of  waiting  modestly  to  be  addressed,  go  out  in  numbert 
to  find  themselves  husbands  under  any  unnatural  condition,  so  that  the  reproach  1 1 
l)eipetual  virginity  and  childlessness  may  he  somehow  removed  (text).  In  the  righteon 
rule  of  God,  sin  ends  in  utter  desolation.  It  may  be  the  history  of  the  nation,  as  in  thi 
instance.  Its  stages  are  these :  departure  from  the  will  and  Word  of  God ;  luxury  am 
corruption;  effeminacy  and  weakness;  strife  and  defeat;  exile,  poverty,  ioneliues^. 
attempts  to  gratify  hope  and  ambition  by  unnatural  and  pitiable  methodi.      But  thi- 


THE   BOOK   OF   1HF;    PllOrtir.T  ISAlAH.  :;cH,  iv.  1- 


may  be  the  experience  of  the  indlvirlwd.  "Evil  shall  slay  the  wickeii,  and  they  thit 
1  ate  the  righteous  shall  be  desolate  "  (Ps.  xxxiv.  21).  Sin  is  likely,  if  indeed  it  is  nol 
sure,  to  lead  down  to  tliis  sail  estate.  It  manifests  itself  in  folly  and,  through  folly, 
cnnducts  to  loss,  privation,  loneliness,  desolation.  And  the  last  scene  of  all  is  one  like 
this  of  the  text ;  it  resorts  to  unnatural  and  wholly  unsatisfactory  means  to  fill  its  heart 
and  restore  its  life. 

IL  A  BioNiFicANT  PROVISION  ORDEBED  IN  THE  PROVIDENCE  OF  GoD.  The  abnormal 
circumstance  suggests  the  normal.  In  the  absence  of  such  a  scourge  as  that  of  war — 
and  for  this  our  sin  is  entirely  nsponsible— there  would  be  found  to  be  a  virtual  equality 
iu  the  number  of  the  sexes.  For  ueiirly  every  son  of  man  a  daughter  is  born  into  tlie 
worlil.  Surely. this  points  to  the  Diviue  intention  that  man  and  wife  should  dwi  II 
together  in  bonds  of  conjugal  afl'ectiou.  It  places  no  stigma  on  single  life,  but  i( 
indicates  the  purpose  of  our  kin' I  Creator,  that  one  human  heart  should  comfort  and 
sustain  another,  with  reciprocated  love  and  complementary  succour,  along  the  path  o( 
human  life.  It  says  to  those  who  have  ears  to  hear  it  that  poly;^amy  is  not  accmding 
tii  the  Divine  will ;  tliat  the  celibacy  of  a  class,  or  order,  or  community  is  not  nf  Divine 
appointment ;  that  the  home  where  one  husband  and  one  wife  dwi  II  in  undisturbed  and 
1.  ver-deepening  attachment — the  providing  hand  of  the  one  clasping  the  disjicnsing 
hand  of  the  other — is  the  realiz^ition  of  ihe  Divine  design. 

III.  An  Honourable  ixstixot  planted  by  the  hand  of  God.  Similar  passages 
(Gen.  XXX.  23;  iSaui.i. 6;  ch.  liv.  1 ;  Luke i.  25)  suggest  that  the  "reproach"  wihich 
the  women  desired  to  have  removed  was  that  of  childlessness  rather  than  that  of  vir- 
ginity. Je.'isli  women,  we  know,  earnestly  desired  to  be  mothers;  the^'  may  have 
cherished  the  hope  that  of  them  the  Messiah  would  be  born.  In  any  ca.se  it  was  an 
linnourable  amliition.  The  real  reproach  rests  with  those  who  wish  to  be  childless  tli.it 
I  hey  may  be  saved  the  anxieties,  responsibilities,  and  la  hours  that  devolve  <ir,  [he  faithful 
mother.  'I  here  cannot  be  a  more  desirable  or  excellent  aspiration  for  the  parent' to 
nidulge  than  that  of  so  training  her  (his)  children  that  they  shall  become  men  and 
wumen  whom  the  Lord  will  love,  and  for  whom  the  Church  and  nation  will  give 
t  auks. — C. 

Vers.  2 — i.~  Beatnration.  It  is  uncertain  whether  there  is  a  secondary  allusion  here 
to  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  ;  but  it  is  certain  that,  in  its  primary  sense,  the  ]  assago 
refers  to  the  condition  of  Jiidah  after  the  return  from  exile.  Treating  it  in  this  latter 
signification,  we  karn — 

I.  That  the  end  of  Divine  judgment  is  human  transformation.  (Ver.  4.)  T'le 
Lord  would  "  wash  away  the  filth  of  the  daughters  of  Zion  ...  by  the  spirit  [or, '  power "] 
of  judgment."  It  may  be  that  the  righteous  Ruler,  as  such,  is  bound  to  make  penalty 
Ibllow  sin,  whatever  may  he  the  consequence  to  the  individual  transgressor.  But  it  is  clear 
that,  in  the  exercise  of  his  judicial  function,  God  seeks  mural  and  spiritual  renovaiiun. 
He  desires  that  the  nation  (the  man)  which  is  humbled  and  afflicted,  shall  be  purifii  A 
by  the  fires  through  which  it  (he)  is  passing.  In  the  midst  of  the  flame  the  offender 
may  hear  the  voiee  from  above  saying,  "  Put  away  thy  sin  ;  return  unto  me ;  enter  a  new 
path;  live  the  better  life  of  righteousness,  purity,  devotion." 

II.  That  the  new  and  better  life  will  be  an  essentially  holt  one.  (Ver.  5.) 
"  He  that  is  left  in  Zion  shall  be  called  holy."  Whether  by  him  "  that  is  left  in  Zion  " 
we  are  to  understand  those  that  were  never  carried  into  captivity,  or  those  that  have 
returned,  is  of  no  importance  ;  the  reference  is  to  Jews  who  have  undergone  humiliation 
and  suffering,  and  vvho  have  been  cleansed  and  [lurified  thereby.  These  shall  be  possessors 
of  life  in  its  excellency  and  reality — "  written  among  the  living."  Before,  exislcnce  was 
nothing  but  existence;  enlarged  and  ennobled  by  "the  spirit  of  judgment,"  it  has 
become  life ;  and  it  "  shall  be  called  holy,"  because  it  has  become  holy.  After  a  genuine 
repentance  (national  or  individual)  theie  comes  a  profound  and  enduring  sanctity  cf 
B|iirit  and  of  life.  Old  sin  is  abhorred,  strenuously  striven  against,  sedulously  shunned. 
New  graces  and  virtues  are  carefully  cultivated  and  daily  illustrated  (see  2  Cor.  vii 
10,11;  Ps.  li.  7— 11). 

III.  That  this  new  life  wilt,  de  not  only  acceptable  to  God,  but  even 
admirable  in  his  sight.  (Ver.  4.)  The  "  branch  of  the  Lord  "  «.e.  the  outgrowth  ol 
piety  from  the  fallen  nation,  shall  be  "  beauty  and  glory ; "  the  produce  of  the  land 


cH.  IV.  1— 6.]  THE  BOOK   OP  'J HE    fUOlHET  ISAIAH.  73 

(fruit  of  the  eartli),  the  worth  which  springs  up  from  the  restored  nation,  shall  be  ercel- 
lency  and  ornamentation.  The  Holy  One  of  Isriiel  will  not  only  accept  the  new  national 
life  thus  presented  to  him  ;  he  will  regard  it  with  distinct,  Divine  satisfaction.  And  that 
which  is  pleasing  in  his  sight  will  be  attractive  and  excellent  in  the  esteem  of  men. 
National  and  individual  renovation  is  not  only  a  thing  wliich  God  accepts  and  acknow- 
ledges, worthy  of  our  sanction  ;  it  is  much  more  tlian  that.  It  is  beautiful,  comely,  even 
glorious.  Iluro  is :  1.  Encouragement  to  the  fallen.  Let  the  nation,  or  the  Church,  or  the 
individual  sold  which  has  fallen,  which  has  felt  the  blow  of  the  Divine  hand,  and  which 
is  understanding  the  Divine  summons,  rise  and  be  renewed;  there  is  a  future  before  it 
of  acceptable  service,  of  beautiful  and  admirable  excellency.  2.  Inspiration  for  the 
levout  Worker.  Let  communities  or  let  souls  be  reduced  by  sin  and  brought  very  luw  ; 
let  the  judgment  uf  God  be  heavy  upon  them  ;  it  is  far  from  hopeless  that  they  may 
rise  again  ;  from  the  fallen  trunk  may  spring  a  living  branch,  beautiful  to  the  sight 
and  fruitful  in  every  good  word  and  work. — 0. 

Vers.  5, 6. — Divine  protection.     In  strong,  poetic  terms  the  prophet  intimates — 

I.  That  God  takes  a  Divine  pleasdre  in  his  people.  We  know  from  other 
Scriptures  tliat  the  Lord's  portion  is  his  people  (Exod.  xix.  5 ;  Deut.  xxxii.  9;  Ps.  xlvii.  4) 
Here  the  people  of  God  are  spoken  ot  as  "  the  glory  "  of  the  Lord  (ver.  5).  There  are 
aspects  in  which  it  must  appear  to  ns  the  extieme  point  of  Divine  condescension  to  use 
such  terms  of  liis  redecmeil  ones.  But  there  are  other  aspects  in  which  we  can  see  that 
they  are  not  altogether  inappropriate.  God's  ancient  people  were,  and  his  regenerated 
children  are,  tiie  witnesses  and  instances  of  his  ylorious  redemption.  Eedeemed  from 
political  or  spiriujal  bondage,  they  rejoice  in  a  blessed  freedom ;  raised  from  dark  deptlis 
of  misery  ami  ik'b[iair,  they  sing  the  psalms  of  joy  and  hope;  purged  from  vanity  ami 
folly,  they  xMilk  in  the  ascending  path  of  heavenly  wisdom. 

II.  That  (Job  promises  his  people  his  Divine  protection.  "Upon  all  the  glory 
.vhall  be  a  defence."  As  in  the  old  desert  days  the  tribes  of  Israel  were  led  by  the  pillar 
of  cloud  by  day  and  all  the  night  by  a  [iil  nr  of  fire,  so  shall  the  Divine  Leader  guide 
his  people  in  tlio  path  which  is  still  before  them  (ver.  5).  From  the  burning  heat  »iid 
from  the  pelting  storm  there  shall  be  found  a  covert  for  those  who  put  their  trust  iu 
liim.  God's  promised  defence  extends  :  1.  To  his  people  in  their  various  relationships; 
whether  gatheied  in  the  family  "dwelling-place,"  or  met  in  their  sacred  "assemblies," 
or,  we  niay  add,  whether  journeying  in  that  solitariness  of  spirit  with  which  we  must 
all  be  lamiliar  (Gal.  vi.  5)  along  the  path  of  life ; — that  is,  in  their  domestic, 
ecclesiastical,  and  individual  relations.  2.  To  his  people  in  the  checkered  experiences 
of  their  career.  God  will  be  their  defence  from  (1)  the  perils  peculiar  to  prosperity 
(pride,  selfishness,  conteniptnousness,  worldliuess,  etc.) — there  shall  be  "a  shadow  in 
the  daytime  from  the  heat ; "  and  (2)  the  clangers  incident  to  adversity  (suUenness, 
rebelliousness,  moruseuuss,  despair,  etc.) — there  shall  be  "  a  covert  from  storm  anu 
from  rain." 

ni.  That  these  Divine  promises  are  conditional  on  our  continued  obedience 
AND  BELiEviNO  PRAYER.  God  spcaks  peace  unto  his  people, "  but  let  them  not  turn 
again  to  folly  "  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  8 ;  see  Ezek.  xxxiii.  13).  The  Divine  promise  proved  gooa 
in  this  j)articular  instance  just  so  long  and  so  far  as  the  conditions  which  were  iinplieu 
were  faithfully  observed.  God's  promises  are  "  exceeding  great  and  precious,"  and  we 
may  "live  therelpy,"  if  we  will.  But  we  must  not  fail  (1)  to  walk  in  the  way  of  his 
commandments,  nor  (2)  to  plead  his  Word  in  expectant  prayer;  if  we  do,  we  shall  fail 
to  enjoy  in  its  fulness  the  defence  of  the  "  almighty  arms." — 0. 

Ver.  1. — Immortality  in  a  continued  race.  "  Take  thou  away  our  reproach."  This  verse 
has  been  much  misconceived.  Its  figures  are  Eastern,  and  their  interpret}vtion  depends 
on  our  knowledge  of  the  condition  and  sentiments  of  Eastern  women.  It  is  simply  a 
lorcible  description  of  the  calamities  brought  upon  a  nation  by  continued  war.  ')  he 
men  were  tu  fall  by  the  sword;  and  the  slaugliter  was  to  be  so  great  that  the  nnmlier 
of  women  should  far  exceed  the  number  of  men  who  should  survive.  Now,  to  lie 
unmarried  and  childless  is  an  occasion  of  the  greatest  reproach  in  the  East ;  from  the 
Jewish  standpoint  this  was  not  only  a  great  sorrow,  but  a  great  shame,  implyin  ■,  a-: 
wa.s  then  thought,  some  sin  of  which  it  was  the  chastisement.    And  there  was  a  yet 


n  THE  eCOK  Of  THE  fSof HfiT  ISAlAfl.  [ctt.  tv.  1-A 

deeper  sentiment  concerning  childlessness  whicli  needs  to  be  taken  into  account. 
Immortality  was,  in  those  older  days,  thought  of  as  a /oTOi?!/  ra'her  than  a  p"rsonal 
privilege.  A  man  lived  on,  lived  again,  in  his  descendants.  Lange  says,  "  In  its  most 
ancient  parts  the  Old  Testament  knows  no  other  genuine  life  than  that  on  this  earth, 
and  thus  no  other  continuation  of  living  after  death  than  by  means  of  children.  To  be 
childless  was,  then,  the  same  as  being  deprived  of  continuance  after  death.  It  corre- 
sponded to  the  being  damned  of  the  New  Testament."  In  their  distress  and  wretched- 
ness the  young  women  who  had  minced  and  flirted  through  Jerasulem  with  their  giy 
clothing  and  fine  trinkets,  contrary  to  their  natural  modesty,  would  become  suitors  to 
the  men,  and  under  the  hardest  conditions  seek  the  name  and  credit  of  wedlock,  to  be 
free  from  the  reproach  that  would  otherwise  be  their  portion.  Kimchi,  the  Jewish 
commentator,  says  this  happened  in  the  dnys  of  Ahaz,  when  Pekah,  the  son  of  Remaliah, 
slew  in  Judasa  one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  men  in  one  day.  The  widows  which 
were  left  were  so  numerous  that  the  prophet  said,  "  'i'heir  widows  are  increased  to  nio 
above  the  sand  of  the  seas "  (Jer.  xv.  8).  The  idea  that  man's  immortality  is  the 
continuance  of  the  race  has  been  revived  and  set  attractively  before  the  people  in 
modern  poetry  and  literature  ;  and  though  it  is  only  a  small  piece  of  the  truth  concern- 
ing man's  future,  a  mere  beginning  in  the  revelation  of  man's  immortality,  we  need  not 
hesitate  to  recognize  it  as  a  partial  truth,  and  to  set  be'bre  ourselves  those  views  of  the 
responsibility  of  our  present  lives  which  it.  suggests.  We  know  that  ''  life  and  immor- 
tality "  for  the  individual  have  bi'en  "brought  to  light  hy  the  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,"  and  in  this  fuller  and  higher  and  more  satisfying  revelation  we  heartily 
rejoice;  but  still  we  may  learn  somuthing  by  occupying  for  a.  moment  the  older 
standpoint. 

I.  The  immortality  of  a  nation  is  its  permanency  as  a  free  people.  This  is 
illustrated  by  the  anxiety  of  Eastern  kings  to  secure  heirs  to  their  thrones  and  continu- 
ance to  their  dynasties.  Divine  judgments  cut  off  kingly  races,  as  that  of  Saul, 
Omri,  etc.  Divine  promises  assured  that  David's  and  Solomon's  kingdoms  should 
endure  for  ever.     Nations,  as  such,  have  no  immortality  in  a  future  state. 

JJ.  The  immortality  of  a  generation  is  its  eeproduction  in  successive  oenera- 
TtONS.  "One  generation  passeth,  and  another  cometh,"  and  in  a  very  true  sense  ths 
next  generation  is  the  old  one  restored,  under  somewhat  varying  conditions.  The 
genius  of  a  generation  is  immortal  only  in  the  generations  that  follow  it. 

III.  The  immortality  of  a  man  is  the  family  he  starts.  This  explains  the 
ambition  to  "found  a  family,"  which  is  not  merely  man's  monument,  but  the  man 
himself  living  again,  and  living  on  through  the  ages.  He  puts  his  personal  impress 
n\xm  his  children,  and  the  children's  children  ktep  alive  the  idiosyncrasy  of  the 
parent.  Illustrate  from  the  Abrahamio  race,  which  is,  in  a  sense,  the  immortality  oi 
Abraham. 

IV.  The  practical  bearing  of  sucn  a  view  of  immortality.  Its  fills  with 
seriousness  the  positinn  of  all  parents.  "  What  manner  of  persons  ou<;ht  they  to  be," 
if  they  are  thus  to  be  perpetuated?  A  nation  must  be  riyhteous  if  it  is  to  be  worth 
continuing.  A  generation  must  be  physically  and  morally  healthy,  if  its  impress  on 
the  coming  generations  is  to  be  a  blessing.  The  father,  the  mother,  must  bear  pure, 
true,  worthy  characters  if  their  family  is  to  be  an  honour.  He  who  seeks  an  immor- 
tality in  his  race  is  bound  to  see  to  it  that  he  only  i)erpetuates  goodness,  integrity, 
truth,  faith,  and  all  things  that  are  noble.  From  this  lower  position  the  preacher  may 
easily  advance  to  argue  how  much  more  solemn  life  has  become  for  us  now  that  nobler 
views  of  the  future  are  revealed  by  him  who  came  foith  out  of  the  eternal  mysteries, 
and  has  passed  again  within  them,  that  we  might  henceforth  read  our  earth-lives  in  the 
light  of  that  sublime  personal  immoitality  which  he  has  disclosed. — E.  T. 

Ver.  2. — 77ie  Divine  and  human  Messiah.  This  verse  has  been  explained  as  a 
promise  merely  of  the  renewed  fertility  of  the  earth  in  God's  day  of  restorings.  That 
explanation  is  not,  however,  deep  enough.  It  does  not  recognize  how  characteristic  it 
was  of  the  ancient  prophets  to  refer  to  local  and  hist"iical  circumstances  while  their 
mind*  soared  away  to  these  Messianic  pictures,  which  local  incidents  only  suggested. 
'I'he  constant  thought  of  the  prophets  was  the  ideal  age  and  ideal  person  of  Messiah, 
and  we  are  right  in  detecting  the  expression  of  that  thought  everywhere.    This  verse 


ofi.  tv.  1—6.]  THE  BOOK   Of*  THfi  tROtSfiT  ISAlAtt.  tS 

in«y  be  regarded  as  intiodncing  tlie  person  by  whom  the  Church  is  to  be  delivered  and 
saved;  and  the  terms  employed  appear  to  bear  an  intimation  of  his  Divine  and  human 
natures.  The  figure  of  the"  Branch  "  suggests  his  divinity  (oomp.  Jer.  xxiii.  5  ;  xxxiii. 
15 ;  Zech.  iii.  8 ;  vi.  12).  The  figure  "  fruit  of  the  earth  "  suggests  his  humanity.  That 
this  may  have  been  the  thought  of  the  prophet  is  indicated  by  the  adjectives  which  are 
used.  "  Beautiful  and  glorious "  are  adjectives  of  admiration  applied  to  Messiah, 
regarded  as  the  "  Branch."  "  Excellent  and  comely  "  are  adjectives  of  appreciation 
end  relation  to  us,  and  are  applied  to  him  regarded  as  the  "  fruit  of  the  earth." 

I.  The  Divine  Messiah  can  be  a  sufficient  Revealbs  of  God.  Illustrate  from 
the  way  in  which  our  Lord  constantly  urged  that  he  only  spoke  the  words  given  him 
by  the  Father,  and  only  did  the  woits  of  the  Father. 

II.  The  human  Messiah  can  be  in  sympathy  with  men.  Illustrate  the  "  High 
Priest  who  can  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities."  In  view  of  the  troubles 
and  distresses  which  Isaiah  pictures,  and  which  Messiah  is  to  rectify,  it  is  evident  that  he 
must  be  divinely  strong  if  he  is  to  master,  heal,  recover,  cleanse,  and  bring  on  restored 
blessings ;  and  it  is  equally  evident  that  he  must  be  human,  to  sympathize  with  and 
come  helpfully  near  to  those  whom  he  would  bless  and  save. — B.  T. 

Ver.  3. —  The  roll  of  the  living.  "Every  one  that  is  written  among  the  living  in 
Jerusalem."  For  the  figure  of  "  Jehovah's  book,"  or  the  "  hook  of  life,"  see  Bxnd. 
xxxii.  32;  Ps.  Ivi.  8;  Ixix.  28;  Mai.  iii.  16;  Dan.  xii.  1;  Phil.  iv.  3;  Rev.  xiii.  8; 
xxi.  27.  Matthew  Henry  says,  "  Those  that  are  kept  alive  in  killing,  dying  times 
were  written  for  life  in  the  book  of  Divine  providence  ;  and  shall  we  not  suppose 
those  who  are  rescued  from  a  greater  death  to  be  such  as  were  written  in  the  I^ainh's 
book  of  life  ?  "  We  have  a  further  description  of  them,  which  really  explains  their  being 
on  the  roll ;  they  are  "  called  holy."  Now,  God  never  calls  people  what  they  are  not. 
In  olden  times  names  were  always  significant,  and  expressed  the  personality  to  which 
they  were  applied ;  thus  Jacob  was  railed  Israel,  because  he  was  a  "  prince."  We 
have,  then,  two  answering  views  of  the  godly  man.  Here  he  is  "holy;"  in  heaven 
his  name  is  in  the  "  book  of  the  living."  Following  this  out  in  a  meditative  way,  we 
dwell  on — 

I.  The  believer's  present  chabactee.  In  some  sense  he  is  "  holy,"  for  God  calls 
him  "  holy."  Illustrate  the  following  senses  in  which  we  may  be  called  "  holy,"  even 
while  we  tarry  amidst  the  human  frailties  :  1.  Holy,  as  separated  from  self-service  and 
the  world's  service.  2.  Holy,  as  consecrated  to  God's  service.  3.  Holy,  as  called  to 
pursue  holiness.  4.  Holy,  as  in  some  measure  actually  holy.  5.  Holy,  as  standing  in 
the  holiness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

IT.  The  believer's  eternal  security.  Name  is  among  the  living  ones.  Illustrate : 
1.  The  necessary  permanence  of  all  goodness.  Evil  can  die;  good  can  never  die. 
Eternal  life  is  in  everything  and  every  one  who  is  good.  2.  God  rewards  huliness  with 
immortality.  That  is  the  "  crown  of  life."  Upon  all  goodness  God's  special  favour  and 
protection  rests.  3.  The  holy  are  the  natural  citizens  of  the  heavenly,  which  is  the 
secure  eternal  home.  How,  then,  can  our  names  be  written  in  the  book  of  life  ?  Illus- 
trate (1)  the  way  of  regeneration ;  (2)  the  way  of  consecration ;  (3)  the  way  of  sancti- 
fication.  If,  through  grace,  we  are  numbered  among  the  holy  here,  then  one  day  the 
great  voice  will  speak  to  us  out  of  the  heavenly  and  say,  "  He  that  is  holy,  let  him  be 
holy  still."— E.  T. 

Ver.  4. — Christ's  purified  Church.  We  are  often  addressing  the  truths  revealed  in 
Christ  Jesus  to  the  individual,  but  perhaps  we  unduly  neglect  their  bearings  on  the 
Church  as  a  whole  which  Christ  has  founded  in  the  earth ;  those  relations  in  which 
Christ  himself  stands  to  the  Church,  as  the  kingdom  over  which  he  is  now  actually 
ruling.  It  would  be  well  for  us  distinctly  to  apprehend  this  truth,  that  the  gospel  only 
completes  its  work  when,  having  renewed  the  individuals,  it  has  also  brought  them 
into  a  fellowship  of  love  and  service  one  with  another.  The  iwvelation  which  is  made 
In  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  is  a  revelation  of  our  common  sonsliip  to  God,  and  si 
of  our  common  brotherhood  one  with  the  other.  We  can  only  reach  to  feel  or  to  kee| 
the  full  joy  of  our  sonship  through  realizing  and  living  out  day  by  day  our  brotherhoo 
The  best  brothers  are  the  best  sons. 


re  TSE  BOOK   OF   THE   PROl'IlET  ISAIAH.  [oh.  iv.  l-«. 

I.  Some  descbiptions  op  Christ's  Church  are  given  us  in  the  passage  now  before  us. 
The  Church  is  composed  of  those  who  are  "  escaped  of  Israel; "  those,  that  is,  who 
have  coiie  out  from  the  world,  and  are  separate;  who  have  escaped  through  the 
rescuings  of  Divine  mercy ;  who  have  been  "  plucked  as  brands  from  the  burning." 
The  bond  uniting  them  together,  and  securing  upon  t'lern  the  Divine  blessing,  is  no 
personal  peculiarity,  no  extraordinary  goodness  or  attainment  of  their  own.  It  is  not 
that  they,  differing  from  all  others,  have  been  without  sin,  but  that  the  Lord  has 
redeemed  them  from  sin;  the  mark  of  the  Lord's  rescue  must  be  upon  them  all.  They 
are  the  left  ones,  the  preserved  ones,  the  escaped  ones,  the  nvmuments  of  I)iv-ne  mercy. 
But  the  desorijition  should  keep  us  from  a  serious  mistake.  They  are  not  merely 
drlivered  ones ;  they  are  escaped  ones,  that  word  conveying  the  idea  that  their  own 
energy  has  been  put  forth,  their  own  will  was  in  the  escape.  The  hand  of  the  angel 
was  indeed  upon  them,  but  they  also  themselves  hasted  forth,  and  fled  from  the 
spiritual  Sodom. 

II.  The  text  describes  the  character  of  Christ's  Church.  "  Shall  be  called  holy.*" 
The  name  thus  put  upon  the  Church  is  that  of  its  most  necessary  and  distinguishing 
quality.  The  term  does  not  imply  that  each  member  has  attained  this  hnljness,  but 
that  each  one  has  it  in  his  heart  as  his  great  aim,  and  makes  it,  in  his  daily  life,  his 
great  pursuit.  "  God  hath  not  called  us  unto  uncleanness,  but  unto  holiness."  We 
are  "called  to  be  saints,"  and  the  central  idea  of  holiness  is  not  absolute  purity,  but 
separation  from  sin,  and  unto  God;  separation  from  the  world,  from  self-seeking,  self- 
indulgence,  self-seiving,  from  all  forms  and  features  of  evil ;  and  separation  unto  every- 
thing that  is  riL;liteous  and  lovely  and  of  good  report.  'I'his,  then,  is  to  be  the  one 
distinction  of  the  members  of  Christ's  Church — the  one  thing  which  they  are  to  main- 
tain by  their  union  together;  their  consecration  unto  God  to  the  doing  of  his  will;  the 
choosing  of  what  he  will  approve ;  the  following  whithersoever  he  may  lead.  The  man 
who  thus,  in  heart  and  life,  is  set  on  God,  is  in  his  measure  a  holy  man,  a  saint.  The 
Church  which,  in  its  collected  life  and  labour,  is  thus  set  on  God,  is  also  in  its  measure 
a  holy  Church,  made  up  of  "saints  and  faithful  brethren  in  Christ  Jesus."  The 
members  of  Christ's  Church  may  properly  be  described  as  "  a  peculiar  people."  Not 
odd,  but  peculiar ;  as  an  angel  from  heaven  would  be  if  he  dwelt  among  men ;  peculiar, 
as  Christ  was  when  he  went  to  and  fro  among  the  people  of  Judrea  -  Nowadays  we  too 
often  find  the  Church  striving  to  rub  away  all  tiie  marks  of  her  peculiarity.  The 
question  asked  by  those  who  have  been  "  called  to  be  saints"  is— How  near  may  we  go 
towards  the  world?  To  what  extent  may  we  yield  to  its  enticements?  What  of 
common  earthly  'nxury  and  self-indulgence  may  we  have  without  absolutely  imperil- 
ling our  eternal  safety  ?  While  the  Ciiurch  asks  such  questions  even  in  secret,  and  by 
its  conduct  and  spirit  rather  than  by  its  language,  it  is  proved  to  be  fallen — and  falling 
— from  the  Divine  standard.  "  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in  tlie 
world.  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him."  "  Without 
holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord." — R.  T. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — Christ's  gracious  dealings  with  his  Church.  In  this  passage  they  are 
presented  under  three  forms:  (1)  as  cleansings,  (2)  as  guidings,  (3)  SlS preservings. 

I.  Chkist  is  evbb  working  with  a  vikw  to  the  cleansing  and  purifylno  of  his 
Church,  so  that  it  might  be  presented  at  last  "  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot,  or 
wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing."  That  work  of  cleansing  demands  more  constant  watchful- 
fulness,  care,  and  toil  than  we  are  wont  to  imagine.  It  requires  that  the  Church,  as  a 
Church,  shall  pass  again  and  again  under  Divine  chastenings.  We  recognize  how  much 
the  Lonl  does  for  us,  as  individuals,  by  the  perplexities  and  disappointments  and 
sorrow  -  ...  our  lives,  but  we  do  not  so  readily  or  so  fully  admit  that  such  experiences 
are  also  needed  for  our  Churches.  Uninterrupted  prosperities  as  surely  imperil  the  life 
of  the  Christian  Church  as  of  the  Christian  man.  Indulgences  in  sin  hurt  Churches. 
The  neglect  of  Church  duties,  the  spirit  of  idle  contentment,  growing  tendency  to 
self-satisfaction,  disregard  of  holy  living,  and  the  encroachments  of  the  worldly  spiiit, 
all  hurt  and  spoil  the  Church.  Under  the  influence  of  such  things  the  light  of  the 
Church  will  as  surely  wax  dim  as  the  candle  iu  a  foul  atmosphere;  the  witness  of  the 
dhureh  will  become  fainter  than  a  whisper ;  the  unity  of  the  Church  will  be  broken  up, 
and  its  work  wUl  lie  about  it  untouched.    The  descriptions  of  the  seven  Churches  of 


CH,  T.  1—30.] 


THE    BOOK   OF   THE    I'llOPHBT  ISAIAH. 


77 


Asia  given  in  the  Book  of  Revelation  accurately  present  the  conditiong  into  which 
Churches  still  fall.  Losing  their  first  love.  Yielding  to  the  enticements  of  the  world. 
Weakened  by  false  doctrine.  Deadened  by  the  evU  influence  of  unworthy  members. 
Proud  of  outward  prosperities.  Lukewarm  in  Christian  service.  Surely  the  hope  of 
the  Church  lies  in  this — Christ  is  willing  to  he  in  the  midst  of  her  in  the  power  of  his 
cleansing, correcting,  and  restoring  grace,  and  he  is  actually  dealing  with  her  as  a  spirit 
of  purifying.  He  is  ever  washing  away  the  fast-gathering  "filth  of  the  daughters  of 
Jerusalem,  and  the  blood  of  her  sins  from  the  midst  thereof."  In  accomplishing  this 
work  of  cleansing,  it  may  sometimes  be  needful  that  our  Lord  should  deal  severely. 
The  operations  of  his  grace  will  sometimes  appear  as  a  "spirit  of  judgment  and  a  spirit 
of  burning." 

II.  OuK  Lord  also  deals  with  his  Chuboh  with  a  view  to  its  gitidance  and 
INSTEUCTION.  He  would  have  his  people  grow  in  grace  and  wisdom  and  knowledge, 
reaching  ever  further  into  the  mysteries  of  reve.iled  truth,  and  making  ever  holier  and 
wiser  expressions  of  their  renewed  spirit  in  all  the  spheres  of  their  life  and  activity. 
Journeying  through  the  wilderness  of  this  world,  through  the  wilderness  of  truths,  and 
through  the  wilderness  of  Christian  duties  Christ  is  ever  near  now,  as  he  was  in  the  olden 
days  to  wandering  Israel.  Then  a  cloud-pillar,  looking  dark  against  the  bright  sl^y  by 
day,  and  flashing  oat  like  flame  against  the  dark  sky  by  night,  kept  Israel  in  mind  of 
its  ever-present  Guide.  Now,  without  the  help  of  such  outwiird  symbols,  in  inward 
manifestations  to  trustful  hearts,  Christ  reveals  his  presence  as  our  Shepherd,  leading 
us  on,  now  into  scenes  of  conflict,  now  up  paths  that  are  rough  and  stony,  and  some- 
times into  "  the  green  pastures,  and  beside  the  still  waters."  The  power  of  a  Church 
to  hold  fast  the  "  truth  once  delivered  unto  the  saints,"  and  yet  to  receive  whatever 
new  forms  of  truth  God  may  be  pleased  to  unfold  from  his  Word,  lies  in  this  presence 
of  Christ  with  his  Church,  as  a  Teacher  and  Guide,  as  a  "  spirit  of  judgment." 

III.  ChEIST   deals   with   his   OhDBCH  with  a   view  to   ITS   PBESEBVATION   AND    ITS 

DEFENCE.  He  not  only  cleanses  and  teaches,  he  also  keep*.  "  Upon  all  her  glory  shall 
be  a  defence."  We  may  lovingly  submit  to  all  his  chastenings  and  corrections,  for  over 
all  the  glory  of  his  cleansing  shall  be  his  defence.  It  shall  never  be  destructive.  We 
shall  be  kept  through  it  all.  We  may  wait  on  all  Divine  teachings,  and  go  forth  to  all 
Christian  duties ;  perils  may  be  round  about  us,  but  over  all  the  glory  of  his  guiding 
there  shall  be  a  defence.  God  shall  keep  us  safely.  His  "mountains  are  round  about 
Jerusalem  from  henceforth,  and  even  for  evermore."  He  does  not  mean  by  his  dealings 
to  remove  the  candlestick  out  of  his  place,  only  to  make  the  flame  burn  clearer  and 
brighter.  He  is  but  keeping  it  safe  until  the  great  time  of  removals,  when  it  may  take 
its  place,  and  shine  for  ever  among  the  lamps  of  the  heavenly  sanctuary.— R.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  V. 
Vers.  1 — 7. — Israel  rebuked  bt  the 
Parable  of  a  Vineyard.  This  chapter 
etaiids  in  a  certain  sense  alone,  neither 
closely  connected  with  what  precedes  nor 
with  whiit  follows,  excepting  that  it  breathes 
throughout  n  tone  of  denunciation.  There 
is  also  a  want  of  connection  between  its 
parts,  the  allegory  of  the  first  section  being 
succeeded  by  a  series  of  rebukes  for  sins, 
expresBod  in  the  plainest  language,  and  the 
reliukes  being  followed  by  a  threat  of  pun- 
isliment,  also  expres.sed  with  plainness. 
The  resemblance  of  the  parable  with  which 
the  chapter  opens  to  one  of  those  delivered 
by  out  Lord,  and  recorded  in  the  three 


synoptic  Gospels  (Matt.  xxi.  33 — 41 ;  Mark 
xii.  1 — 9;  Luke  xx.  9 — 16),  has  been  fre- 
quently noticed. 

Vur.  1. — Now  will  I  sing  to  my  Well- 
beloved.  The  prophet  sings  to  Jehoviih 
a  song  concerning  his  vineyard.  The  mong 
consists  of  eight  lines,  beginning  with  "  Jly 
Well-beloved,"  and  ending  with  "wild 
grapes."  It  is  in  a  lively,  diiiiciug  measure, 
very  unlike  the  general  style  of  Isainh'i 
poetry.  The  name  "  WpU-beloved  "  seeme 
to  be  taken  by  the  prophet  from  the  Song 
of  Songs,  where  it  occurs  above  twenty 
times.  It  well  expresses  the  feelinj;; 
of  a  loving  soul  towards  its  Creator  and 
Redeemer.  A  song  of  my  Well-beloved. 
Bishop  Lowth  translates  "  A  song  of  loves," 
and  Mr.  Ohoyne  "  A  love-eong ; "  but  this 
re<^iure8  an  aUeratioa  of  the  test,  and  is 


THE    BOOK    OP    THE    PKOPHET    ISAFAH.        [ch.  v.  1— Sa 


aneatisfactoiy  from  the  fact  that  the  song 
which  follows  la  not  a  "lova-song."  May 
vre  not  understand  the  words  to  mean 
"  a,  Bong  cnncerning  my  Well-beloved  in 
respect  of  his  vineyard  "  ?  Touching  his 
vineyard.  Israel  is  compared  to  a  "  vine  " 
in  the  Psalms  (Ps.  Ixxx.  8—16),  and  the 
Church  of  God  to  a  "  gardea  "  in  Canticles 
(iv.  12;  V.  1);  perhaps  also  to  a  "vine- 
yard" in  the  same  book  (viii.  12).  Isaiah 
may  have  had  this  last  passage  in  his  mind. 
My  Beloved  hath  a  viueyard  ;  rather,  had  a 
vineyard  {atxire\^p  l^ev^^ij  to;  7jyaTrrifj.ev(ii, 
LXX.).  In  a  very  fruitful  hiU.  So  the 
passage  is  generally  understood,  since  keren, 
hum,  is  used  for  a  height  by  the  Arabs 
(as  also  by  the  Germans,  e.g.  Matterhorn, 
Wetterhorn,  Aarhorn,  etc.),  and  "  son  of 
oil "  is  a  riot  unlikely  Orientalism  for 
"rich"  or  "fiTiitful."  With  the  "hill" 
of  this  passage  compare  the  "mountain" 
of  ch.  ii.  2,  both  passages  indicating  that 
the  Church  of  God  is  set  on  an  eminence, 
and  "  cannot  be  hid  "  (Matt.  v.  14). 

Ver.  2.— He  fenced  it.  So  the  LXX.,  the 
Vulgate,  Aben  Ezra,  Jarchi,  Bosenmiiller, 
Lowth,  Kay.  Gesunius,  Ivnobel,  and  Mr. 
Cheyue  prefer  to  translate,  "  he  dug  it 
over;"  while  the  Revisers  of  1885  have 
suggested,  "he  mado  a  treuoli  about  it." 
The  word  occurs  only  in  this  place,  and  has 
no  cognates  in  Hebrew.  And  gathered  out 
the  stones  (comp.  ch.  Ixii.  10).  In  the 
stony  soil  of  Palestine,  to  collect  the  surface 
stones  into  heaps,  or  build  tbem  into  walls, 
is  of  primary  necessity  for  the  improvement 
of  the  land.  Conversely  the  stones  were  put 
back,  ami  scattered  over  the  land,  by  those 
who  wished  to  "  mar"  it  (2  Kings  iii.  19, 
25).  Planted  it  with  the  choicest  vine  (comp, 
Gen.  xlix.  11;  Jer.  ii.  21).  The  mrelc 
seems  to  have  been  a  particular  kind 
of  vine,  reckoned  superior  to  others.  The 
etymology  of  the  word  indicatss  that  it 
was  of  a  deep  red  colour.  Built  a  tower 
(coinp.  Matt.  xxi.  33).  Towers  had  to  be 
built  in  gardens,  orchards,  and  vineyards, 
that  watch  might  be  kopt  from  them  against 
thieves  and  marauders  (see  1  Kings  xvii.  9 ; 
xviii.  8  ;  2  Cliron.  xxvi.  10  ;  xxvii.  4,  etc.). 
Made  a  wine-press ;  literally,  dug  a  wine- 
press. The  excavation  was  made  to  contain 
a  vat,  above  which  was  I  he  "  press,"  worked 
by  men,  who  wrung  the  liquor  out  of  a 
great  bag  containing  the  grapes.  (See  the 
Egyptian  rock-paintings,  passim,  where 
the  operation  is  represented  repeatedly.)  It 
brought  forth  wild  grapes.  The  natural, 
not  the  cultivated  fruit,  a  worthless  product. 

Ver.  3. — The  prophet's  "  song  "  here  ends, 
and  Jehovah  himself  takes  the  word.  As 
if  the  story  told  ia  the  parable  had  been 
•  fact,  he  calls  on  the  men  of  Judah  and 
Jerusalem  to  "judge  between  him  and  his 


vineyard."  Compare  Nathan's  appeal  to 
David  by  the  parable  of  the  ewe  Ismb 
(2  Sara.  xii.  1—4). 

Ver.  4. — What  could  have  been  done 
more  1  Comp.  2  Kings  xvii.  13  and  2 
Ohron.  xxxvi.  15,  where  God  is  shown  to  have 
done  all  that  was  possible  to  reclaim  his 
peopl  e ; "  Yet  the  Lord  testified  against  Israel, 
and  against  Judah,  by  all  the  prophets,  and 
all  the  seers,  saying.  Turn  ye  from  your 
evil  ways,  and  keep  my  commandments  and 
my  statutes,  according  to  the  Law  which 
I  commanded  your  fathers,  and  which  I 
sent  to  you  by  my  servants  the  prophets ; " 
"  And  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers  sent 
unto  tliem  by  his  messengers,  rising  up 
early,  and  sending;  because  he  liad  com- 
passion on  his  people,  and  on  his  dwelling- 
place  :  but  they  mucked  the  messengers  of 
God,  and  despised  his  words,  and  misused 
his  prophi;ts,  until  the  wrath  of  the  Lord 
arose  against  his  people,  until  there  loas  no 
remedy." 

Ver.  5. — And  now  go  to;  I  will te''!  you ; 
rather,  and  now,  I  pray  yoti,  let  me  tell  you. 
The  address  is  still  smooth  and  persuasive 
up  to  the  word  "  vineyard."  Then  there  is 
a  sudden  change ;  the  style  becomes  abrupt, 
the  tone  fierce .  and  menacing.  "  Let  me 
tell  you  what  I  will  do  to  my  vineyard : 
break  down  its  hedge,  that  it  be  grazed  on ; 
destroy  its  wall,  that  it  be  trampled  under- 
foot," etc.  The  hedge  .  . .  the  wall.  Vine- 
yards were  usually  protected  either  by  a 
hedge  of  thorns,  commonly  of  the  prickly 
pear,  or  else  by  a  wall;  but  the  rabbis  say 
that  in  some  cases,  for  additional  security, 
they  were  surrounded  by  both.  God  had 
given  his  vineyard  all  the  prote'-tion 
possible. 

Ver.  6. — I  will  lay  it  waste ;  literally,  1 
will  make  it  a  desolation  (comp.  ch.  vii.  19, 
where  a  cognate  term  occurs).  Active 
ravage  is  not  so  much  pointed  at,  as  the 
desolation  which  comes  from  m-gleot. 
There  shall  come  up  briers  and  thorns. 
The  natural  produce  of  neglected  ground 
in  Palestine  (see  Prov.  xxiv.  81).  The 
"  tliorns  and  briers "  symbolize  vices  of 
various  kinds,  the  natural  produce  of  the 
hnman  soul,  if  God  leaves  it  to  itself.  The 
words  are  scarcely  to  be  taken  literally, 
though  it  is  probably  true  that  "  no 
country  in  the  world  has  such  variety  and 
abundance  of  thorny  plants  as  Palestine 
in  its  present  desolation  "  (Maomillan, '  Min. 
of  Nat.,'  p.  103).  I  will  also  command  the 
clouds.  Here  at  last  disguise  is  thrown  off, 
and  the  speaker  manifestly  appear*  as 
Jehovah,  who  can  alone  "  command  the 
clouds."  The  "  rain  "  intended  is  probably 
that  of  his  gracious  iufiueuccs. 

Ver.  7. — Tor  the  vineyard,  etc.  The  full 
explanation  of  the  parable  follows  imm«- 


CH.T.1— 30.]  THE  BOOJi:  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


T9 


diately  on  the  disclosure  in-ver.  6.  The 
'  vineyard  is  "  Israel,"  or  rather  "  Judah ;  " 
the  fruit  expected  from  it,  "juiigment 
and  righteousness ;  "  the  wild  grapes  which 
done  it  had  produced,  "oppression"  and 
Ihe  "cry"  of  the  distressed.  His  pleasant 
plant;  literally,  tte  plant  of  Ms  delights ;  i.e. 
the  plantation  In  which  he  had  so  long 
taken  delight.  He  looked  for  judgment, 
etc.  Gesenius  has  attempted  to  give  the 
verbal  antithesis  of  the  Hebrew,  which  is 
quite  lost  in  our  version — 
"Br  harrote   anf    Recht,  und  siehe  da 

Unrecht, 
Auf  Gereehtigkeit,  und  siehe  da  Schlech- 

tigkeit." 

Vers.  8— 24.— The  Six  Woes.  After  the 
general  warning  conveyed  to  Israel  by  the 
parable  of  the  vineyard,  six  sins  are  par- 
ticularized as  those  which  have  especially 
provoked  God  to  give  the  warning.  On 
each  of  these  woe  is  denounced.  Two 
have  special  punishments  assigned  to  them 
(vers.  8 — 17) ;  the  remainder  are  joined  in 
one  general  threat  of  retiibution  (vers.  18 
—24). 

Ver.  8. — Woe  unto  them  that  join  house 
to  house.  This  is  (he  first  woe.  It  is  pro- 
nounced on  the  greed  which  leads  men  to 
continually  enlarge  their  estates,  without 
regard  to  their  neighbours'  convenience. 
Niithmg  is  said  of  any  use  of  unfair  means, 
cnuch  less  of  violence  in  dispossessing  the 
former  proprietors.  What  is  denounced  is 
the  selfishness  of  vast  ai'cumulutioiis  of 
land  In  single  hands,  to  the  detriment  of  the 
rest  of  the  community.  The  Jewish  law 
was  peculiarly  inimical  to  tliis  practice 
(Numb,  xxvii.  1 — 11;  xxxiii.  54;  1  Kings 
xxi.  4) ;  but  perhaps  it  is  not  without 
reason  that  many  writers  of  our  own  time 
object  to  it  on  general  grounds.  Till  there 
be  no  place;  literally,  tUl  want  of  place;  i.e. 
till  there  is  no  room  for  others.  A  hyper- 
bole, doubtless,  but  marking  a  real  national 
inconvenience.  That  they  may  be  placed 
alone  in  the  midst  of  the  earth ;  rather, 
that  ye  may  dwell  by  yourselves  in  the  midst 
of  the  land.  The  great  landlords  wished 
.  to  isolate  themselves ;  they  disliked  neigh- 
bours ;  they  would  fain  "  dwell  by  them- 
selves," without  neighbours  to  trouble  them. 
Uzziah  seems,  by  what  is  said  of  his  pos- 
sessions (2  Chrou.  ixvi.  10),  to  have  been 
one  of  the  greatest  sinners  in  respect  of  the 
accumulation  of  land. 

Ver.  9. — Either  something  has  fallen  out 
in  the  first  clause  of  this  verse,  or  there  is 
a  most  unusual  ellipse  of  the  verb  "said," 
which  our  translators  have  sujiplied,  very 
properly.     There  eeema  to  be  upLhiiig  em- 


phatic in  the  words,  "on  mine  earn"  (see 
oh.  xxii.  14 ;  Bzek.  ix.  1,  5 ;  x.  13).  Many 
houses  shall  be  desolate.  The  greed  of 
adding  house  to  house  will  be  puniphed  by 
the  death  of  those  who  have  so  sinned, 
and  the  extinction  of  their  families,  either 
through  war,  or  through  a  more  direct 
divine  judgment. 

Ver.  10. — Yea,  ten  acres  of  vineyard  shall 
yield  one  bath.  The  greed  of  adding  field 
to  field  will  be  punished  by  tlie  curse  of 
barrenness,  which  God  will  send  upon  the 
land.  Dr.  Kay  calculates  that  ten  acres 
(Boman)  of  vineyard  ought  to  yield  upon 
the  average  five  hundred  baths  (or  four 
thousand  gallons)  instead  of  one  bath 
(eight  gallons).  An  homer  ...  an  ephah. 
The  "  ephah "  was  the  tenth-part  of  a 
"  homer  "  (Ezek.  xlv.  11).  Corn  lands 
should  return  only  oue-tenth  part  of  the 
seed  sown  in  them. 

Ver.  11. — Woe  unto  them  that  .  .  .  follow 
strong  drink.  We  have  here  the  second 
woe.  It  is  pronounced  on  drunkenness  and 
revelry.  Drunkenness  is  an  infrequent 
Oriental  vice;  but  it  seems  to  have  been 
one  whereto  many  among  the  Jews  weje 
at  all  times  prone  (see  Prov.  xx.  1 ;  xxiii. 
29—32;  Eccles.  x.  17;  Hos.  iv.  11;  ch. 
xxviii.  7,  etc.).  Even  the  priests  and  the 
soi-disant  prophets  "  erred  through  strong 
drink  and  were  swallowed  up  of  wine" 
(ch.  xxviii.  7).  That  rise  up  early  in  the 
morning.  Great  banquets  were  held  by  tlie 
"princes"  and  "nobles,"  beginning  at  an 
early  hour  (Eccles.  x.  16),  and  accompanied 
by  music  of  an  exciting  kind  (Amos  vi.  5, 6), 
which  were  "  continued  until  night,"  or 
rather,  "  into  the  night "  (Revise.  I  Version), 
and  terminated  in  general  drunkenness,  per- 
haps in  general  licentiousness.  (See  Prov. 
xxiii.  27 — 30  andHos.iv.  11  forthe  connection 
of  inebriety  with  whoredom.)  Two  kinds  of 
intoxicating  liquor  seem  to  have  been  con- 
sumed at  these  banquets,  viz.  ordinary  grape 
wine,  and  a,  much  stronger  drink,  which  i» 
said  to  have  been  "made  of  dates,  pome- 
granates, apples,  honey,  barley,  and  other 
ingredients,"  which  was  known  as  sk£kar 
(Greek,  aUtpa),  and  is  called  "  strong  drink  " 
in  the  Authorized  Version.  Till  wine  inflame 
them ;  or,  the  wine  inflaming  them. 

Ver.  12. — The  harp  and  the  viol,  the 
tahret  and  pipe.  It  is  dilScult  to  identify 
the  Hebrew  instruments  of  music  with 
modern  names ;  but  there  seeuis  to  be  no 
doubt  that  the  kinndr  was  a  sort  of  harp* 
and  the  khalib  a  sort  of  pipe.  The  nebel, 
generally  rendered  by  "  psaltery,"  but  here 
and  in  ch.  xiv.  11  by  "  viol,"  waa  a 
stringed  instrument  played  with  the  fingers 
(Josephus) ;  perhaps  a  lyre,  perhaps  a  sort 
of  (lulciraor.  The  ISph,  here  translated 
"  Ubrit,"   and    elsewhere  often  "timbrel," 


BO 


THE   BOOK   OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.         [ch.  v.  1—30 


vai  most  likely  a  tambourine.  All  four 
instruments  had  in  the  earlier  times  been 
dedicated  to  the  worship  of  Jehovah 
( 1  Sam.  I-  5) ;  now  they  were  employed  to 
inflame  men's  passions  at  feasts.  They 
regard  not  the  work  of  the  Lord.  The 
"  work  of  Jelioyah  "  is  his  manifestation  of 
himself  in  liistory,  more  especially  in  tlie 
history  of  his  cliosen  people  (Deut.  zxsii.  4 ; 
I's.  xcii.  4  ;  cxi.  3,  etc.).  A  pious  Israelite 
was  ever  marvelling  at  all  that  Gtod  had 
done  for  his  nation  (Deut.  xxxii.  7 — 14 ; 
Josh.  xxiT.  2—13;  1  Chron.  xvi.  12—22; 
Ezra  ix.  7—9;  Neh.  ix.  7—31 ;  Ps.  Ixviii.  7 
—28;  Ixxviii.  10— 72;  cv.  5—45;  cvi.7— 46; 
pxxxvi.  5 — 24,  etc.).  The  men  of  Isaiah's 
generation  hail  ceased  to  care  for  things  ot 
the  past,  and  devoted  themselves  to  enjoying 
the  present.  Neither  consider,  etc.  (cnnip. 
ch.  i.  3,  "  My  people  doth  not  consider  "). 
The  verb  ustnl  is  not,  however,  the  same  in 
the  Hebrew. 

Ver.  13. — Therefore  my  people  are  gone 
into  captivity.  "  Are  gone  "  or  "  have  gone" 
is  "  the  perfect  of  prophetic  certainty " 
(Cheynt)  The  prophet  sees  the  captivity 
as  a  thing  that  had  already  taken  place.  It 
n  B3  an  appropriate  punishment  for  drunken- 
ni'SS  and  revulry  to  be  carried  off  into 
servitude,  and  in  that  condition  to  suffer, 
as  slaves  so  often  did,  hunger  and  thirst. 
Because  they  have  no  knowledge ;  or,  un- 
awares, without  /(iriniriiiij  it  (so  Rosen- 
miiller,  Gesenius,  EwaM,  Delitzach,  Cheyne). 
Their  honourable  men;  liteially,  Ihnir  glury, 
for  "  their  glorious  ones  " — the  abstract  for 
the  concrete.  Are  famished  ;  literally,  icmi 
of  famine;  i.e.  "  Btar\elings."  Their  mul- 
titnde;  or,  their  noisy  crowd  (Kay) — the 
"throng  of  voluptuaries"  who  frequented 
the  great  banquets  of  vers.  11,  12. 

Ver.  14. — Therefore  hell  hath  enlarged 
herself ;  rather,  hath  enlarged  her  desire 
(oomp.  Hab.  ii.  5).  "  Hell "  here  represents 
the  underworld,  into  which  souls  ilesc(  nded 
at  death,  not  yet  perhaps  recognizeil  as 
comprehending  two  divisions,  but  regarded 
much  as  the  Greeks  regarded  tijeir  Ilailcs — 
as  ■  gem  ral  receptacle  of  the  dead,  dark  and 
silent.  Hades  (Slie6T),  not  viewed  as  a 
person,  but  personified  by  poetical  licence, 
"  enlarges  ner  desire "  and  "  opens  her 
mouth  "  to  receive  the  crowd  that  is  ap- 
proaching—  the  crowd  of  thnse  who  in 
captivity  succumb  to  the  hardships  of  their 
lot.  Their  glory ;  literally,  her  glory — the 
glory,  i.e.,  of  Jerusalem,  which  is  eB|ieuially 
in  the  prophet's  thoughts.  "  Her  glory,  and 
her  crowd,  and  her  pomp,  and  lie  that  is 
joyful  in  her,  shall  go  down"  into  the  ihetl 
that  gapes  for  them. 

Ver  15. — And  the  mean  man  shall  be 
brought  down ;  rather,  to  the  mean  mnn  t< 
hrought  downj  i.e.  ill  this  way,  by  the  Cap- 


tivity and  the  consequent  sufferings  and 
deaths,  both  high  and  low  are  brought  down 
and  humbled,  while  God  is  exalted  in  man's 
sight.  The  future  is  tliroughnut  spoken  of 
as  present  (comp.  cli.  ii.  9,  11,  17), 

Ver.  16. — God  that  is  holy  shall  be  sane 
tified  in  righteousness  ;  rather,  the  hoJy  God 
shows  himself  holy  hy  righleousnesi ;  i.e.  by 
executing  this  righteous  judgment  on  J  era 
Salem  the  holy  God  shows  his  holiness. 

Ver.  17.— Then  shall  the  lambs  feed.  Dr. 
Kay  takes  the  "  lambs  "  to  be  the  remnant 
of  Israel  that  survived  the  judgment,  who 
will  feed  freely,  oared  for  by  the  good 
Shepherd ;  but  the  parallelism  so  generally 
'  affected  by  Isaiah  seems  to  require  a  mean- 
ing more  consonant  with  the  later  clause  of 
the  verse.  Most  commentators  therefore, 
expound  the  passage  literally,  "Thin  shall 
lambs  feed  [on  the  desolaled  estates  of  the 
covetous]  "  (see  vers.  8 — 10).  After  their 
manner ;  or,  after  tlteir  own  guidance ;  i.e. 
at  their  pleasure,  as  they  list  (so  Lonth 
and  Kosenmiiller).  And  the  waste  places  of 
the  fat  ones  shall  strangers  eat.  Goim,  i.e. 
nomad  tribes,  shall  consume  the  proiluce 
of  the  wasted  fioMs  once  posse.ssed  by  the 
Hebrew  grandees.  Ewald  proposes  to  make 
the  verse  immediately  follow  ver.  10;  but 
this  is  not  necessury.  The  occupation  of 
their  lands  by  wandering  tribes,  Aral)S  and 
others,  was  a  part  of  the  punishment  that 
fell  on  all  the  nobles,  nut  on  those  only  who 
acenmul.ited  l.irgo  estates. 

\'er.  18. — Woe  unto  them,  etc.  We  come 
here  to  the  third  woe,  which  is  pronounced 
against  those  who  openly  pile  up  sin  upon 
sin,  and  scoff  at  God.  These  men  are  repre- 
sented as  "  drawing  iniquity  with  cords  of 
vanity,"  i.e.  dragging  after  them  a  load  of 
sin  by  cords  that  seem  too  weak  ;  and  thon 
as  "sinning  with  a  cart-rope,"  which  is  a 
mere  variant  expression  of  the  same  idea, 
Mr.  Cheyne  quotes  from  the  Rig- Veda,  as  a 
parallel  metaphor,  the  phrase,  "  Undo  the 
rope  of  sin." 

Ver.  19. — That  say,  Let  him  make  speed, 
etc  Instead  of  trembling  at  the  eoniing 
judgment  of  God,  which  Isaiah  has  an- 
nounced, tliey  pretend  to  desire  its  imme- 
diate arrival ;  they  want  to  "  see  it."  They 
walk,  not  by  faith,  but  by  sight.  At  the 
bottom  of  this  pretended  desire  there  lies  a 
complete  incredulity.  The  counsel ;  or,  pur- 
pose, as  in  ch.  xiv.  26.  Of  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel.  They  use  one  of  Isaiah's  favourite 
titles  of  God  (see  note  on  ch.  i.  4),  not  from 
any  lielief  in  him,  but  rather  in  a  mocking 
spirit. 

Ver.  20.— Woe  unto  them  that  call  evil 
good.  This  is  the  fourth  woe.  There  are 
persons  who  gloss  over  evil  deeds  and  evil 
habits  by  fair-sounding  names,  who  call 
cowardice  caution,  and  rashness  courage, 


OH.  T.  1— 30.J         THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


n 


niggftTcUineBs  thrift,  and  wasteful  profasion 
generosity.  The  same  men  are  apt  also  to 
call  good  evil ;  they  brand  prudence  with 
the  name  of  ounning,  call  meekness  want 
of  proper  spirit,  sincerity  rudeness,  and  firm- 
ness obstinacy.  This  deadness  to  moral 
distinctions  is  the  sign  of  deep  moral  cor- 
ruption, and  fully  deserves  to  have  a  special 
"  woe "  proQonnoed  against  it.  That  put 
darkness  for  light.  "  Light "  and  "  dark- 
ness" symbolizo  good  and  evil  throughout 
Scripture  (1  Sam.  ii.  9;  2  Sam.  xxii.  29; 
Job  xxix.  3;  Ps.  cxii.  i;  Prov.  ii.  13; 
Ecoles.  ii.  13 ;  ch.  ix.  2 ;  Matt.  vi.  22  ;  Johrt 
i.  19  ;  Acts  xxvi.  18 ;  Kom.  xiii.  12  ;  1  Cor. 
It.  5,  etc.).  They  are  sometimes  umie 
•ynonyms,  as  here ;  but  sometimes  they  ex- 
press rather  the  intellectual  side  of  molality. 
Bitter  for  sweet.  More  symbolism,  bui  of 
a  rarer  kind.  Jeremiah  calls  wiokuliicss 
"bitter"  (ii.  19;  iv.  18),  and  the  psalmist 
calls  the  judgments  of  God  "  sweet "  (Ps.  cix. 
103).  But  the  terms  are  not  often  used  with 
any  moral  bearing. 

Ver.  2]. — ^Woe  unto  them  that  are  wise 
in  thsif  »wn  eyes.  The  fifth  woe.  Self- 
conceit  is  the  antithesis  of  humility ;  and  as 
humility  is,  in  a  certain  sense,  the  crowning 
virtue,  so  self-conceit  is  a  sort  of  finishing 
touch  put  to  vice.  While  a  man  thinks 
humbly  of  himself,  there  is  a  chance  that  he 
may  repent  and  amend.  When  he  is  "wise 
in  his  own  eyes,"  he  does  not  see  why  he 
shauld  change. 

Ver.  22. — Woe  unto  them  that  are  mighty 
to  drink  vrine.  The  sixth  woe  seems  at  first 
sight  a  repetition-of  the  second.  But  there 
is  this  difference,  that  the  drinkers  in  the 
present  verse  do  not  succumb  to  their  liquor, 
or  remain  at  the  banquet  all  day,  but  pro- 
ceed to  the  business  of  their  lives,  attend 
courts  and  judge  causes,  but  with  brain 
obfuscated  and  moral  vision  bedimmed,  so 
that  they  are  easily  induced  to  pervert  jus- 
tice on  receipt  of  a  bribe.  The  sixth  woe 
may  be  considered  to  be  pronounced  rather 
upon  their  corruption  than  upon  their  drink- 
ing, and  so  to  be  really  quite  distinct  from 
the  second  (comp.  Prov.  xxxi.  4,  5). 

Ver.  2.3. — Justify  the  wicked ;  i.e.  "  decide 
his  cause  in  his  favour,"  declare  him  to  be 
right  and  his  adversary  wrong.  For  re- 
ward; or,  for  a  bribe.  Take  away  the 
righteousness  of  the  righteous ;  i.e.  "declare 
him  to  be  in  the  wrong  by  deciding  his 
cause  against  him." 

Ver.  24.— Therefore,  etc.  A  general  judg- 
ment is  now  pronounced  against  all  the 
Torms  of  wickedness  enumerated — a  judg- 
ment of  ruin  or  destruction.  It  is  expr..  ssed 
by  a  mixed  metaphor,  or  "combination  of 
two  figures,"  the  former  taken  from  the 
burning  of  stubble  and  withered  grass  by 
the  farmer  when  he  is  cleaning  his  fields. 


the  latter  from  the  natural  decay  of  a  bloa> 
eoming  plant  or  tree.  In  either  case  the 
destruction  is  complete,  but  in  the  one  it 
arises  from  an  external  force,  fire ;  in  the 
other  from  an  internal  failure  of  vitality. 
The  ruin  of  Israel  would  include  both;  it 
would  be  brought  about  by  an  internal 
cause,  their  corruption,  and  an  external 
one,  God's  anger.  As  the  fire  devonreth 
the  stubble  ;  literally,  as  a  tongue  of  fire  ealt 
up  stubble.  "  Tongue  of  fire  "  is  an  unusual 
phrase,  occurring  in  all  Scripture  only  hero 
and  in  Acts  ii.  3.  But  it  well  deoicts  the 
power  of  fire  to  lick  up  clean  all  that  comes 
in  its  way.  Isaiah  elsewhere  notes  the 
analogy,  making  it  the  foundation  of  a 
simile  (ch.  xxx.  27).  And  the  fiama  con- 
snmeth  the  chaff;  rather,  and  as  dry  grau 
einhs  down  in  flame.  The  withered  grass  of 
pastures  was  burnt  by  farmers  to  improve 
the  after-growth  (Luoan, '  Pharsal.,'  ix.  182). 
Their  root  shall  be  as  rottenness  (comp. 
Hos.  ix.  16).  The  root  is  the  last  thing  to 
decay.  When  that  fails,  the  case  is  des- 
perate. Judah's  "root"  did  not  utterly 
fail  (see  ch.  xi.  1);  but  the  present  warning 
is  to  individuals  and  classes  (vers.  8,  II,  18, 
20 — ^23),  not  to  the  nation.  Their  blossom 
shall  go  up  as  dust;  t.e.  their  external 
glory  shall  crumble  and  waste  away.  Be- 
cause they  have  oast  away  the  £aw.  All 
tlie  sins  of  Israel  had  this  one  thing  in 
common — they-  were  transgressions  of  the 
Law  of  God  as  delivered  to  them  by  Moses, 
and  enforced  upon  them  by  the  ptophetiail 
order  (comp.  2  Kings  xvii.  13 — 16).  De- 
spised the  word ;  or,  tlie  speech.  Imrah  is 
rarely  used  by  Isaiah.  It  does  not  refer  to 
tht!  written  "  Word,"  but  to  the  declarations 
of  God  by  the  mouth  of  his  prophets  (see 
ch.  xxviii.  23  ;  xxxii.  9). 

Vers.  25—30. — The  Natubb  o»  thb 
CoMiKO  Judgment  explained.  Hints  have 
been  already  given  that  the  judgment  which 
is  to  fall  on  the  nation  is  a  foreign  war,-or  a 
series  of  foreign  wars  (see  ch.  iii.  25 ;  v.  13). 
But  now  for  the  first  time  a  terrible  inva- 
sion, in  which  many  nations  will  participate, 
is  clearly  announced.  At  first  the  imagery 
is  obscure  (ver.  25),  but  it  soon  grows  more 
distinct.  "  Nations  "  are  summoned  to  the 
attack ;  a  vast  army  comes,  and  comes  "  with 
speed  swiftly  "  (ver.  26) ;  then  their  array 
is  described  (vers.  27,  28) ;  and  finally  their 
ravin  is  compared  to  that  of  lions,  and 
their  success  in  catching  and  carrying  off 
their  prey  is  prophesied  (ver.  29).  In  the  last 
verso  of  the  chapter  the  prophet  falls  back 
into  vaguer  imagery,  comparing  the  roar  of 
the  invaders  to  the  roaring  of  the  sea,  and 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  t.  1—30. 


the  desolated  land  to  one  Been  under  the 
gloom  of  a  preteinatural  darkness  (vei.  30). 

Yer.  25. — The  threats  of  this  yerse  are  all 
vague  and  general,  for  there  is  no  reason  to 
suppose  that  the  phrase,  "the  hills  did 
tremble,"  refers  to  an  actual  earthquake. 
That  there  was  an  earthquake  in  the  reign 
of  Uzziah  is,  indeed,  clear  from  Amos  i.  1 ; 
but  it  was  probably  a  thing  of  the  past  when 
Isaiah  wrote  this  chapter,  and  he  is  speaking 
of  the  future.  A  "  trembling  of  the  hills" 
is,  in  prophetic  language,  a  commotion 
among  the  chief  men  of  the  land.  He  hath 
stretched  forth  his  hand.  Again  the  "  per- 
fect of  prophetic  certitude."  Their  carcases 
were  torn;  rather,  were  as  re/use  (comp. 
Lam.  iii.  45).  There  would  be  many  slaiu, 
and  lying  uu buried,  in  the  streets  of  Jeru- 
salem. For  all  this,  etc.  (comp.  ch.  iz.  12, 
17,  21,  and  x.  4,  where  the  same  words  are 
used  as  a  refrain),  'i  he  words  imply  that 
God's  judgment  upon  Judah  will  not  be  u 
single  stroke,  but  a  continuous  smiting, 
covering  some  considerable  space  of  time. 

Ver.  26. — ^And  he  will  lift  up  an  ensign. 
Mr.  Cheyne  traublates,  "a  signal,"  and  would 
so  render  the  Hebrew  word  in  cb.  xi.  10, 12 ; 
xiii.  2;  zviii.  3;  xlix.  22;  Ixii.  10.  But 
" ensigns"  or  "  standards  "  were  in  use  both 
among  the  Egyptians  (Bosellini,  'Monn- 
menti  Civili,'  pi.  cxxi.)  and  among  the 
Assyrians  ('  Ancient  Monarchies,'  voL  i.  p. 
461)  before  the  time  of  Isaiah,  and  are,  there- 
fore, likely  to  have  been  in  use  among  the 
Hebrews.  The  standards,  however,  of  this 
early  period  were  not  flags,  as  Jarchi  supposes, 
but  solid  constructions  of  wood  or  metal, 
exhibiting  some  emblem  or  other.  God  lifts 
up  his  standard  to  draw  the  nations  together, 
indicating  thereby  that  they  are  to  fight  bis 
battles.  And  will  hiss.  "  Hissing  "  is  said 
to  have  been  practised  by  bee-keepers  to 
draw  their  bees  out  of  the  hives  in  the 
morning,  and  bring  them  home  again  from 
the  fields  at  nightfall  (Cyril,  ad  loo.}.  God 
wil^  collect  an  army  against  Israel,  as  such 
persons  collect  their  bees  (comp.  ch.  vii.  18). 
From  the  end  of  the  earth;  i.e.  "tohring  them 
from  the  end  of  the  earth."  The  nations 
are,  or  at  least  many  of  them  are,  extremely 
distant,  as  Elamites  from  the  Persian  Gulf 
(ch.  xxii.  6),  and  perhaps  Modes  from  beyond 
Zagros.  They  shall  come;  literally,  he 
cometh;  showing  that,  though  the  nations 
are  many,  they  are  united  under  one  head, 
which  here  is  probably  the  Assyrian  power. 
With  speed  swiftly  (comp.  Joel  iii.  4).  The 
reference  is  not  so  much  to  the  speed  with 
which  the  Assyrians  marched,  as  to  the  im- 
mediate response  which  they  would  make  to 
God's  eaXL 


Yer.  27. — ITone  shall  be  weary  nor  stumble. 
None  shall  lag  behind  on  the  march,  none 
fall  and  be  disabled.  None  shall  slumber. 
They  shall  scarcely  gire  themselves  time  for 
necessary  repose. 

Yer.  28. — Whose  arrows  are  sharp,  and  all 
their  bows  bent.  The  special  weapon  of  the 
Assyrian  soldiers  is  the  bow.  From  the 
king  in  his  chariot  to  the  light-armed  recruit 
jnst  pressed  into  the  service,  all  fight  mainly 
with  this  weapon,  more  particularly  in  the 
earlier  times  (see  'Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol. 
i.  pp.  414,  421,  424—437,  etc.).  Swords  and 
'spears  are  also  known,  but  comparatively 
little  used.  Their  horses'  hoo&  .  .  .  like 
fiint.  Hard,  strong,  and  solid,  as  was  most 
necessary  when  shoeing  was  nnknown. 
Their  wheels  like  a  whirlwind.  Sennacherib 
(ch.  xxxvii.  24)  is  represented  as  boasting  of 
the  "  multitude  of  his  chariots ;  "  and  Ix)th 
the  sculptures  and  the  inscriptions  oi 
Assyria  show  that  the  chariot  force  was 
numerous,  and  was  regarded  as  more  im- 
portant than  any  other.  The  king  always 
went  to  battle  in  a  chariot.  For  the  com- 
parison of  the  rush  of  chariot-wheels  to  • 
whirlwind,  see  below,  oh.  Ixvi  15;  and 
comp.  Jer.  iv.  13). 

_  Yer.  29. — Their  roaring  shall  be  like  a 
lion ;  rather,  like  a  lionets,  which  the  Hebrews 
appear  to  have  regarded  as  fiercer  than  a 
lion  (see  Gen.  xliv.  9 ;  Numb.  xiiv.  9 ;  Nah. 
ii.  11).  The  Assyrian  armies  probably  ad- 
vanced to  the  combat  with  loud  shouts  and 
yells  (see  Jer.  ii.  15).  Tea,  they  shall  roar; 
rather,  growl.  The  word  is  different  from 
the  one  used  previously,  and  may  express 
the  "deep  growl"  with  which  the  lion 
springs  upon  his  prey  (see  Dr.  Kay's  note, 
ad  loc.).  Shall  carry  it  away  safe.  Sen- 
nacherib says  in  one  of  his  inscriptions,  that 
he  carried  off  to  Nineveh  200,150  captives 
on  his  first  expedition  against  Jerusalem 
(Oppert,  ■  Inscriptions  des  Sargonides,'  pp. 
45,  46). 

Yer.  39. — ^Like  the  roaring  of  the  sea. 
Not  content  with  one  simile,  the  prophet 
has  recourse  to  a  second.  "The  noise  of 
the  Assyrian  army  shall  be  like  that  of  a 
a  raging  sea ;  "  or,  perhaps,  "  After  he  has 
carried  off  his  prey,  the  Assyrian  shall  still 
continue  to  growl  and  threaten,  like  a  stormy 
sea."  If  one  look  onto  the  land,  eta  U 
Israel  turn  its  gaze  from  Assyria  to  its  own 
land,  it  sees  nothing  but  a  dark  prospect- 
darkness  and  distress,  all  light  shrouded 
amid  clouds  and  deep  obscurity.  The  text 
and  the  construction  are,  both  (rf  them, 
uncertain;  but  the  general  meaning  ean 
scarcely  be  other  than  tbii. 


OH.  T.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHBT  ISAIAH. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Gn^»  eare  for  man,  and  man't  ingraUtu6h.  Three  timeg  has  God 
made  himself  a  vineyard  upon  earth,  planted  a  plantation  of  choice  vines,  endued  by 
him  with  the  capacity  of  bringing  forth  excellent  fruit,  fenced  his  vineyard  round  with 
care,  cleared  its  soil  of  stones,  pruned  its  superfluous  shoots,  hoed  out  the  weeds  from 
between  the  vine-stocks,  bestowed  on  it  all  possible  tendance,  and  looked  to  see  a  suitable 
result ;  and  three  times  has  the  result,  for  which  he  had  every  right  to  look,  not 
followed. 

I.  The  fikst  vineyard — the  world  before  the  Flood.  Man  was  placed  In  a 
world  which  God  saw  to  be  "  very  good  "  (Gen.  i.  31) ;  he  was  endued  with  excellent 
powers;  he  was  given  dominion  over  the  beasts;  he  was  bidden  to  "increase  and 
multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth,  and  subdue  it "  (Gen.  i.  28) ;  he  was  guarded  from  a 
thousand  dangers ;  he  was  fenced  round  by  the  Almighty  arms ;  God's  Spirit  "  strove 
with  him  "  (Gen.  vi.  3),  chastened  him,  warned  him,  spoke  through  his  conscience,  and 
showed  him  th^  right  path  to  walk  in.  What  more  could  he  have  done  to  his  first 
vineyard,  that  he  did  not  do  to  it?  Yet  the  time  came  when  he  "looked  upon  the 
earth  "  (Gen.  vi.  12) ;  looked  for  the  fruits  of  what  he  had  done ;  looked  for  "  judg« 
ment  and  righteousness."  And  what  did  he  find  when  he  looked  ?  "  The  wickedness 
of  man  was  great  in  the  earth ;  every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only 
evil  continually  "  (Gen.  vi.  5).  "  The  earth  was  corrupt  before  God ; "  "  all  flesh  had  cor- 
rupted his  way  upon  the  earth ; "  "  the  earth  was  full  of  violence  "  (Gen.  vi.  11, 12). 
The  vineyard  that  should  have  brought  forth  grapes  had  brought  forth  wild  grapes. 
God's  care  for  man  had  been  met  by  man  with  ingratitude  towards  God ;  and  it  only 
remained  that  God  should  take  vengeance,  and  lay  his  vineyard  waste,  and  so  vindicate 
his  justice. 

II.  The  second  tinbtard — the  people  of  Israel.  This  is  the  vineyard  whereof 
Isaiah  especially  speaks.  God  planted  his  second  vineyard,  Israel,  on  the  "  very 
fruitful "  upland  of  Palestine — "  a  land  of  corn  and  wine,  of  bread  and  vineyards, 
of  oil  olive  and  of  honey "  (2  Kings  xviii.  32) ;  "  a  good  land,  a  land  of  brooks  of 
water,  of  fountains  and  depths  that  spring  out  of  valleys  and  hills ;  a  land  of  wheat, 
and  barley,  and  vines,  and  fig  trees,  and  pomegranates ;  a  land  of  oil  olive,  and  honey ; 
a  land  wherein  they  might  eat  bread  without  scarceness,  and  needed  not  to  lack  any- 
thing ;  a  land  whose  stones  were  iron,  and  out  of  whose  hUls  they  might  dig  brass  " 
(Deut.  viii.  7 — 9).  He  fenced  his  vineyard  round  with  laws  and  ordinances  morally, 
as  with  mountains  and  deserts  topographically ;  he  cleared  out  from  it  the  stones  that 
maired  its  soil,  the  wicked  nations — "  stones  of  offence  " — ^that  once  dwelt  amid  his 
people ;  he  planted  it  with  choice  vine-stocks,  the  children  of  "  faithful  Abraham ; "  he 
built  a  tower — Jerusalem — in  the  midst  of  it,  and  made  therein  a  wine-press — the 
temple — where  he  would  have  the  gifts  and  offerings  of  the  people,  their  good  works, 
laid  up  in  store ;  and  he  then  "  looked  that  his  vineyard  should  bring  forth  grapes,  and 
it  brought  forth  wild  grapes."  Oppression,  wrong,  robbery,  murder,  the  form  of 
religion  without  the  power,  covetousness,  drunkenness,  vanity,  impurity, — these  were 
what  his  eyes  beheld  when  he  cast  them  on  his  chosen  people,  who  were  "  a  sipful 
nation,  a  people  laden  with  iniquity,  a  seed  of  evil-doers,  children  that  were  corrupters  " 
(ch.  i.  4).  Greater  benefits  than  those  bestowed  on  the  first  vineyard  had  been  met  by 
a  deeper  ingratitude;  and  now  the  time  was  coming  when  the  second  vineyard  would 
be  laid  waste,  withered  up,  and  utterly  "  ruined  "  (ch.  iii.  8). 

III.  The  third  vineyard — the  Christian  Chcrch.  God  has  yet  planted  a  third 
vineyard,  which  he  calls  "  his  Church  "  (Matt.  xvi.  18),  the  assembly  of  his  "  selected 
ones."  He  has  not  fixed  it  in  any  particular  land,  but  has  given  it  the  whole  fruitful  earth 
for  its  habitation.  Yet  has  he  fenced  it  round,  and  separated  it  off  from  the  rest  of  man- 
kind by  laws  and  rites  and  ordinances,  which  are  peculiar,  and  made  it  a  world  within  a 
world,  a  society  within  a  society.  He  has  gathered  out  from  it  the  stones  of  many 
heresies;  he  has  planted  it  with  choice  vines,  the  "chosen  vessels"  whom  his  grace 
has  from  time  to  time  converted  from  unbelief  to  the  true  faith  ;  he  has  given  it  for  its 
"  tower  "  of  strength  himself,  and  for  its  "  wine-press "  the  book  of  life,  in  which  he 
records  its  good  deeds.     And  now,  what  is  the  result  ?    Has  his  constant,  tender  care 


84  THE  BOOK  vf  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  [oh.  t.  1—80. 

awakened  the  gratitude  which  it  ought  to  have  awakened  ?  Has  his  Chut«h  brought 
forth  such  fruit  as  might  have  been  anticipated?  Is  it  not  to  be  feared  that  eren  now 
his  eye,  renting  on  his  third  vineyard  with  its  searching  gaze,  looks  for  something 
which  it  does  not  find — demands  "  grapes,"  and  sees  little  but  "  wild  grapes  "? 

Vers.  8 — 17. — The  appropriateness  of  Oo^s  pun  ishments.  Many  of  the  pnnishmenta 
of  sin  follow  in  the  way  of  natural  consequence,  and  these  are  generally  acknowledged 
to  be  fitting  aud  appropriate ;  e.g. — 

L  Idleness  is  punished  by  want.  .  "  If  a  man  will  not  work,  neither  shall  he  eat " 
(2  Thess.  iii.  10).  Labour  naturally  produces  wealth,  or  at  any  rate  value  of  some 
kind;  and  those  who  work  the  hardest  naturally  acquire  the  most.  The  idle  cannot 
complain  if  they  have  few  of  this  world's  goods,  since  they  have  made  no  efforts  to 
obtain  them.  They  are  fitly  punished  for  their  waste  of  time  in  sloth  by  the  want  of 
those  good  things  which  they  might  have  procured  by  diligence  in  toil.  'I'he  wise  man 
will  not  give  indiscriminate  relief  to  the  poor  and  needy.  There  is  much  poverty 
which  is  the  simple  natural  result  and  suitable  punishment  of  idle  "  loafing  "  habits. 

II.  DeONKENNESS  is  punished  by  loss  op  mental  POWEB,  and  in   sbllE  OASES  BT  A 

TEEBIBLE  MALADY.  The  drunkard  voluntarily  confutes  his  mental  faculties,  and 
suspends  tlieir  healthy  operation,  each  time  that  he  indulges  in  the  sin  whereto  he  is 
addicted.  What  can  be  more  appropriate  than  that  he  should  be  punished  by  a  per- 
manent diminution  of  his  intellectual  vigour,  a  loss  of  nerve,  promptitude,  and  decision  ? 
He  also  deranges  his  bodily  functions  by  causing  an  undue  flow  of  blood  to  the  brain, 
and  an  undue  excitement  of  the  nerves  whose  connection  is  so  close  with  the  cerebral 
tissues.  It  is  most  natural  and  most  fitting  that  such  ill  treatment  of  these  delicate 
tissues  should  result  in  permanent  injury  to  them,  and  cause  the  dreadful  malady 
known  to  medical  science  as  delirium  tremens.  The  drunkard  "  receives  within 
himself"  a  most  appropriate  "recompense  of  his  error"  (Bom.  i.  27). 

III.  LcfST  IS  PDNiSHED  BY  A  LOATHSOME  DISEASE.  The  nature  of  the  subject  here  is 
such  as  to  preclude  much  illustrati(m.  But  what  can  be  more  appropriate  than  the 
punishment  of  the  most  foul  and  filthy  of  sins  by  a  disease  wliicli  is  I'oul  and  filthy  and 
loathsome,  alike  to  otiiers  and  to  the  object  of  it?  The  body  marred  and  scarred,  the 
blood  infected,  the  wirolu  constitution  undermined,  form  not  only  a  just,  but  a  most 
fitting,  punishment  of  one,  the  peculiarity  of  whose  sin  is  that  he  "  sins  against  his 
own  body  "  (1  Cor.  vi.  18). 

In  the  case  of  Israel  special  national  sins  were  punished  by  special  judgments,  also 
peculiarly  appropriate ;  e.g. — 

I.  The  greed  which  joined  house  to  house  and  field  to  field  was  punished  by 
an  invasion  which  caused  the  destruction  and  ruin  of  the  annexed  houses  (ver.  9),  and 
the  desolation  of  the  annexed  estates.  The  ruin  of  the  vmeyards  was  such  that  it 
was  scarcely  worth  while  to  gather  the  produce,  the  continued  devastation  of  the  corn 
lands  such  that  the  harvest  did  not  nearly  equal  the  seed  corn.  Nomad  tribes  pastured 
their  flocks  on  the  over-large  estates,  and  the  so-called  owners  derived  little  or  no 
benefit  from  their  acqui!^itions  (vers.  10,  17). 

II.  Dkunken  kevelby  was  punished  by  the  captivity  of  the  revellers,  who  were 
earned  ofi'  as  slaves  into  a  strange  land,  and  there  experienced  the  usual  fate  of  slaves, 
which  included  bitter  experience  of  hunger  and  thirst  (yer.  13).  The  dole  allowed  the 
slave  was  seldom  more  than  sufficient  to  keep  body  and  soul  together.  His  drink  was 
water.  Kept  to  hard  labour  on  imperial  pilaces  and  other  "  great  works,"  he  lost  all 
cheerfulness,  all  lightness  of  heart,  all  love  of  song  or  music.  Asked  by  his  task- 
masters to  "sing  them  one  of  the  songs  of  Zion,"  he  declined  sadly;  the  harp  of  his 
revels  was  "hung  upon  the  willows"  of  Babylon  (Ps.  cxtxvii.  2 — 4). 

God's  judgments  upon  other  nations  have  often  had  the  same  character  of  appro- 
priateness. Egypt,  whose  great  sin  had  been  pride  (Ezek.  xxix.  4),  was  condemned  to 
be  "  the  basest  of  the  kingdoms  "  (ver.  15) ;  never  destroyed,  but  always  subject  to 
one  people  or  another — Assyrians,  Persians,  Greeks,  Komans,  Arabs,  Turks.  Rome, 
the  most  cruel  and  bloody  of  conquering  states,  was  made  a  prey,  first  to  bloody  tyrants 
of  her  own  race,  and  then  to  a  succession  of  fierce  and  savage  northern  hordes — Goths, 
Huns,  Vandals,  Burgundians,  Heruli,  Lombards — who  spared  neither  age  nor  sex,  and 
delighted  is  carnage  and  massacre.     Macedonia,  raised  to  greatness  by  h«r  military 


OH.  ▼.1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  8£ 

eystem,  and  using  it  unsparingly  to  crush  all  her  rivals,  is  ruined  by  being  brought 
into  contact  with  a  military  system  superior  to  her  own.  Spain,  elevated  to  the  first 
position  in  Europe  by  her  colonial  greatness,  is  corrupted  by  her  coloniiil  wealth,  and 
sinks  faster  than  she  bad  risen.  States  Ibrmtd  by  conquest  usually  perisii  by  conquest ; 
goremments  foiinded  on  revolution  are,  for  the  most  part,  destroyed  b}'  revolution. 
The  retributive  justice  which  shows  iiself  in  thn  world's  history  does  not  consist  iu 
th?  mere  fact  that  sin  is  punished,  but  rather  in  the  remarkable  adaptation  of  the 
punishment  which  is  dealt  out  to  the  sin  that  has  provoked  it. 

Vers.  25—29. —  Wicked  men  used  by  Qod  as  instruments  for  working  out  hispurp«ses. 
The  psalmist  declares  the  wicked  to  be  "God's  sword"  (Ps.  xvii.  13).  In  a  latei 
chapter  Isaiah  calls  Assyria  "the  rod  of  God's  anger''  (ch.  x.  5).  Nothing  is  more 
clearly  set  forth  in  the  prophetical  writings  tiian  the  fact  that — 

I.  CONQUEKINO  NATIONS  ARE  RAISED  DP  BY  GOD  TO  CHASTISE  THE  NATIONS  THAT  ABE 

HIS  ENEMIES.  1.  Assyria  was  "the  axe"  with  which  God  hewed  down  ofifending 
peoples  (ch.  x.  14),  "the  rod"  wherewith  he  smote  them.  God  exalted  her,  in  order 
that  she  might  "  hiy  waste  defenced  cities  into  ruinous  heaps"  (ch.  xxxvii.  26).  This 
was  her  raison  d'etre,  the  [lurpose  of  her  existence  (oh.  xxxvii.  .  6).  She  was  sent  against 
one  openly  wicked  or  "  hypocritical  nation"  after  another,  and  given  a  charge  "  to  take 
the  spoil,  and  to  take  the  prey,  and  to  tread  them  down  like  the  mire  in  the  streets" 
(ch;  X.  6).  2.  Babylon  was  raised  up  for  the  castigation  of  T\re  (Ezek.  xxvi.  7),  of 
Egypt  (Ezek.  xxix.  19,  20  ;  xxx.  10—26),  and  of  Judah  (Jer.  xxv.  9).  3.  Media  and 
Pers-ia  were  raised  up  to  work  the  will  of  God  upon  Assyria  and  B.ibylon  (Isa.  xiii.  17 ; 
xxi.  2  ;  Jer.  li.  11,  etc.).  4.  Greece  and  Macedon  were  raised  up  to  punish  Persia  and 
Media  (Dan.  viii.  5 — 8);  and  so  on.  Each  of  these  nations  was  ungodly — full  of 
impurity,  pride,  selfishness,  greed,  cruelty.  Yet  God  made  use  of  them  for  his  purposes, 
and  does  not  scruple  to  call  their  rulers  "  his  servants,"  "  his  shepherds,"  "  those  who 
performed  all  his  pleasure"  (ch.  xliv.  28 ;  Jer.  xxv.  11 ;  xxvii.  6,  etc.). 

II.  Bad  men  are  exalted  to  power  to  chastise  both  nations  and  individuals. 
Samson,  Sennacherib,  and  Nebuchadnezzar  seem  to  have  been  rather  instruments  for 
punishing  nations  and  states.  But  such  men  as  Joab,  Jehu,  Hazael,  effected  God's 
purposes  mainly  with  respect  to  individuals.  God  made  use  of  them,  and  of  their  sinful 
tempers,  to  execute  vengeance  upon  certain  special  offenders.  Jehu  was  anointed  king 
by  God's  prophet  to  punish  Jezebel  and  the  house  of  Ahab  (2  Kin.;s  ix.  2 — 2G  ; 
X.  1 — 11).  Fired  Iiy  ambition,  he  rushed  into  crime,  and  "the  blood  of  Jezreel"  was 
afterwards  avenged  upon  his  house  (Hos.  i.  4).  But  for  Joab  the  crimes  of  Abuer  and 
of  Absalom  would  probably  have  gone  unpunished,  lie  may  be  viewed  as  God's  instru- 
ment to  requite  their  ill  deeds ;  but  as  he  punished  the  one  treacherously  and  the 
other  against  his  king's  commands,  their  blood,  or  at  any  rate  thit  of  Abner,  "returned 
upon  the  head  of  Joab  "  (1  Kings  ii,  33).  Hazacl's  case  is  like  that  of  Jehu,  only  not 
set  before  us  with  such  distinctness.  He  was  "  God's  sword"  to  the  wicked  Benhadad  ; 
but  not  thereby  excused.  Qod  turns  the  wickedness  of  men  into  particular  channels, 
making  it  effect  his  ends ;  but  it  is  wickedness  none  the  lesi. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOR* 

■Vers.  1 — 7. — The  parable  qf  the  vineyard.  I.  Notice  the  art  op  the  parable.  It 
has  been  remark&l,  "  A  proverb  finds  him  who  a  sermon  flies."  Pictures  from  nature 
are  acceptable  to  all,  especially  of  that  nature  which  is  familiar  to  the  imagination  of 
the  listener.  Through  the  imagination  we  may  glide  into  our  listener's  heart  and 
conscience.  The  truth  comes  with  much  more  power  when  it  is  made  to  glance  from 
an  object  intermediate  between  the  mind  and  its  naked  reality.  A  great  secret  of 
teaching  is  to  leave  the  learner  much  of  the  work  to  do.  Here,  as  he  looks  upon  the 
bright  picture  drawn  by  the  prophet,  the  wrappings  of  the  parable  gradually  fall  aside, 
and  the  truth  itself  stands  out. 

IL  The  picture  of  the  vineyard.  The  close  touch  of  accuracy  auits  the  parable. 
Then  follows  a  short  song.  1.  Situation  of  the  vineyard.  It  lay  on  "  the  horn  of  Ben- 
Shamen,"  is.  son  of  fatness  ;  on  a  fertile  height.    The  Roman  poet  sung  that  the  vine 


86  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  [oh.t.  1— 30 

love8  the  open  sunny  hills  (Virgil,  'Georg.,'  ii.  113).  The  description  is  of  fniitful  Canaan, 
flowing  with  milk,  honey,  and  wine.  We  may  think  of  the  beautiful  slopes  of  the 
I  thine.  2.  The  care  expended  on  the  vineyard.  It  had  been  fenced,  the  stones  Lad 
been  cleared  trom  it,  and  it  had  been  planted  with  the  choicest  vines.  Some  take  the 
word  rendered  "fenced"  in  the  sense  of  digged  about,  thoroughly  digged.  The  watch- 
tower  had  alsu  been  set  up  in  the  midst  of  the  field,  a  post  of  observation  and  of  guard 
against  the  j;ickals  and  the  foxes  in  the  ripening  time.  3.  The  thankless  soil.  The 
vine-diesser's  hope  is  deceived ;  for,  instead  of  the  true  grapes  wild  ones  only  appear,  or, 
as  the  LXX.  render  akanthas,  thorns.  Gcsenius  and  others  think  the  plant  meant 
is  the  miink's-hood  or  nightshade,  which  produces  berries  like  the  grapes  in  appearance, 
but  puiBonous.  If  we  compare  the  story  in  2  Kings  iv.  39 — 41,  also  Deut.  xxxii.  32,  33 
("  vine  of  Sodom,  grapes  of  gail,  bitter  clusters"),  this  will  seem  probable.  The  Arabs 
call  them  wolf-grapes.    The  idea  is  caught  by  one  of  our  poets  when  he  sings  of 

"  Dead  Sea  fruits  that  tempt  the  taste, 
And  turn  to  ashes  on  the  lips." 

III.  Application.  1.  Jehovah's  appeal.  It  is  an  appeal  to  memory  and  to  con- 
science. What  more  could  God  have  done  ?  Israel  had  been  selected  for  special  service 
and  fruitfulness — had  been  fixed  in  a  fertile  land,  her  life  and  worship  centred  in  the 
holy  city.  What  was  that  city  now  ?  A  scene  of  order,  morality,  good  government  ? 
Alas  I  a  "  den  of  thieves,"  a  scene  of  misery  and  anarchy.  Instead  of  the  genuine 
grapes  of  a  national  life  strong  and  pure,  the  poisonous  berries  of  luxury  and  vice. 
Such  must  be  the  result  where  man  grafts  his  own  pride  or  folly  upon  the  stock  of 
tonscience.  2.  Jehovah's  denunciation.  The  thick  thorn  fence  shall  be  removed,  and 
the  vineyard  shall  become  a  prey  to  every  trampling  beast  and  invader.  The  hand  of 
the  pruner  and  the  digger  shall  be  stayed,  the  clouds  shall  suspend  their  gift  of  rain. 
Every  protection  and  every  blessing  shall  be  withdrawn,  and  the  thankless  nation  shall 
earn  its  appropriate  wages.  Having  deserted  God,  God  will  now  desert  her.  8o  must 
it  ever  be  with  the  nation  and  the  individual.  Unless  there  is  a  constant  disposition 
to  redress  discovered  wrong,  to  reform  manifest  evil,  the  doom  must  be  felt.  "  Thy 
vineyard  shall  be  wasted,  thy  candlestick  taken  from  its  place  "  (Eev.  ii.  5).  3.  The 
reason  of  the  judgment.  In  poignant  language,  by  the  use  of  paron(nnasia,  or  play  on 
words,  the  prophet  announces  the  ground  of  the  Divine  decision.  He  waited  for  Mish- 
pdth,  i.e.  Bight,  and  behold  Mispdth,  i.e.  Might ;  for  Zeddkah,  i.e.  Exactness,  and  lo 
Zedqach,  i.e.  Exaction  i     A  bitter  intensity  suggests  this  form  of  speech. 

IV.  Personal  application.  In  our  sinful  miseries  God  is  calling  us  to  account. 
Our  life-failure,  whose  fault  is  it  ?  Does  not  Nature  pour  her  beauty  around  us,  instruct 
us  from  childhood,  fill  our  sense  and  fancy  with  wonder  and  joy  ?  Does  not  the  world 
of  men  afford  us  a  daily  school  of  experience  ?  Is  not  every  suffering  a  pruning-knife, 
every  change  of  life  like  a  cleaning  of  the  ground  from  weeds  and  stones?  If  our 
lives  turn  out  selfish  and  vicious,  where  does  the  responsibility  lie  ?  Where^  except  in 
the  lecret  fiinlt  that  roay  poison  all  God's  good  ? 

*  Lord,  with  what  care  hast  thou  begirt  as  round  t 
Parents  first  season  us.    Then  schoolmasten 
Deliver  us  to  laws.     They  send  us  bound 
To  rules  of  reason.    Holy  messengers  ; 
Pulpits  and  Sundays ;  sorrow  dogging  sint 
Afflictions  sorted ;  anguish  of  all  sizes ; 
Fine  nets  and  stratagems  to  catch  us  in  I 
Bibles  laid  open ;  milliuns  of  surprises ; 
Blessings  beforehand ;  ties  of  gratefulnesi ; 
The  sounds  of  glory  ringing  in  our  ears ; 
Without,  our  shame ;  within,  onr  conscience*; 
Angels  and  grace ;  eternal  hopes  and  fears  I 
Yet  all  these  fences,  and  their  whole  array,) 
One  ouuiiiug  bosom-sin  blows  quite  away." 

Ven.  8 — 10. — Woe  to  the  covetous.  lo  understand  this  passage  we  sTionld  bear  o 
mind  the  truths  connected  with  real  property  as  a  condition  of  national  well-being. 


IH.T.  1— 30.]        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  81 

I.  The  iNSTiTnTioN  op  landed  property  in  Israel.  According  to  the  Law,  each 
3f  the  twelve  trihes  was  to  have  lis  landed  pnssessions,  and  each  particular  household 
was  to  have  its  definite  portion  of  the  land  belonging  to  the  tribe ;  and  this  was  to  he 
an  inalienable  heritage.  Among  an  agricultural  people  it  is  most  necessary  that  each 
family  should  thus  have  a  fixed  foothold  on  the  land,  a  home,  a  centre  of  toil  and 
acquisition ;  and  that  thus  its  members  should  be  firmly  bound  to  their  native  land 
and  to  their  fellow-countrymen.  In  a  conquered  land,  again,  it  was  equitable  that  the 
fields  should  be  divided  among  those  who  took  part  in  the  burdens  of  war,  and  whc 
desired  to  cultivate  the  conquered  land  in  peace.  In  many  passages  of  the  Law  we 
find  the  impress  of  this  institution  of  real  property.  In  the  year  of  jubilee  every  man 
was  to  be  restored  to  his  patrimony  (Lev.  xxv.  13).  The  land  was  never  to  be  sold, 
because  in  fact  it  belonged  to  Jehovah  (v£r.  23),  and  the  people  were  but  his  stewards. 
In  the  interesting  case  of  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad  (Numb,  xxvii.  1 — 11),  who  had 
died  in  the  desert,  we  find  it  laid  down  that  the  children,  or  neare.st  relatives  of  one 
who  had  died  without  coming  into  his  portion,  were  to  possess  it  in  his  stead.  Again, 
the  men  of  Reuben  and  of  Gad  refused  to  go  to  war  until  every  man  of  them  had 
received  his  inheritance  (Numb,  xxxii.  16,  sqq.y  And  Moses  agreed  to  their  conditions. 
In  the  same  book  we  read  the  direction,  "  Ye  shall  divide  the  land  by  lot  for  an 
inheritance  among  your  families :  and  to  the  more  ye  shall  give  the  more  inheritance, 
and  to  the  fewer  ye  shall  give  the  less  inheritance"  (Numb,  xxxiii.  54).  The  land,  it 
will  be  seen,  was  considered  as  in  tenure  from  Jehovah  himself,  the  only  landlord. 
And  how  attached  an  Israelite  would  become  to  his  ancestral  estate,  is  seen  from  the 
story  of  Naboth,  who  will  not  give  up  his  even  for  a  better  one,  and  at  the  king's 
request  (1  Kings  xxi.  3,  sqq. ;  2  Kings  ix.  10,  25,  sqq,).  The  virtues  of  patriotism 
struck  deep  root  in  this  relation  to  the  soil  of  Palestine.  These  facts  help  us  to  imder- 
stand  the  moral  and  national  evils  springing  from  selfish  greed,  which  threatened  this 
institution  of  property,  of  which  the  prophet  here  complains. 

n.  The  vice  of  oovetousnebs.  The  root  of  the  vice  is  a  thorough-going  selfishness. 
The  rich  men  use  the  means  at  their  command  unjustly  to  absorb  the  land  into  their 
own  possession.  The  result  must  be  the  hopeless  misery  and  degradation  of  the 
mass  of  the  people.  An  instructive  parallel  to  the  state  of  things  described  by  the 
prophet  is  to  be  found  in  the  history  of  Sparta,  at  the  time  of  the  great  lawgiver, 
Lycurgus.  Plutarch  tells  us  that  the  disorders  which  he  found  existing  in  the  state 
arose  in  great  measure  from  the  gross  inequality  of  property,  and  from  the  long  avarice 
and  rapacity  of  the  rich,  who  had  thus  added  house  to  house  and  field  to  field.  The 
lawgiver,  therefore,  redistributed  the  whole  territory  of  Sparta.  In  Roman  letters  we 
read  allusions  to  the  habit  of  forming  latifundia,  or  "  broad  farms,"  with  its  unsocial 
consequences.  "  How  far,"  indignantly  exclaims  Seneca,  "  will  ye  extend  the  bounds 
of  your  possessions ;  not  content  to  circumscribe  the  area  of  your  est  ites  by  the  sowing 
of  provinces  ?  The  broad  acres  own  one  lord ;  the  people  crowd  into  a  narrow  field. 
The  courses  of  bright  streams  flow  through  private  estates ;  great  rivers,  bounds  of 
great  nations,  from  the  source  to  the  mouth,  all  are  yours.  And  this  is  nothing  unless 
yon  have  girdled  your  broad  farms  with  seas;  unless  across  the  Hadriatic,  the  Ionian, 
and  the  .^gean  your  bailiff  reigns ;  unless  islands,  domiciles  of  great  dukes,  are  reckoned 
imongst  the  commonest  of  things.  .Shall  there  be  no  lake  over  which  the  roofs  of  your 
villas  hang  not  ?  no  stream  whose  banks  are  not  covered  by  your  buildings  ? " 
(Ep.  IxxxviiLX    In  his  beautiful '  Deserted  Village,*  Gtoldsmith  says — 

"U  fares  the  land,  to  hastening  ills  a  prey, 
'Where  wealth  accomnlates  and  men  decay." 

Too  well  we  know  what  inappeasable  discontent  and  seeming  incnrable  misery  has 
been  begotten  in  Ireland  of  past  selfishness  and  injustice  of  the  few.  Surely  it  is  the 
part  of  every  patriotic  Christian  man  to  forward  all  legislation  which  throws  open  God's 
land  to  tillage,  and  breaks  up  selfish  monopolies. 

III.  The  pasisHMBKT  oe  covetousness.  1.  Its/oily  i»  exposed.  One  would  think, 
from  their  conduct,  that  these  grasping  men  desired  to  dwell  alone  amidst  a  waste ! 
But,  as  the  old  agricultural  poet  of  Greece  says, "  The  man  who  frames  ills  against 
another  frames  them  against  himself,  and  ill  counsel  turns  out  worst  for  him  who 


88  THE   BOOK  OF   THE,    PEOPHET   ISAIAH.        [oh.  ▼.  1—30. 

devised  it.  The  all-sceinc;  eye  of  Zeus  looks  upon  these  things,  and  they  escape  him 
not "  (Hesiod,  '  Works  and  Days,'  265,  266).  Judgment  gets  the  better  of  injustice 
when  it  comes  to  the  final  issue,  and  the  fool  who  suffers  from  his  avarice  knows  it  to 
his  cost.  Like  a  wroii<ied  woman,  she  passes  through  the  city,  bewailing  the 
manners  of  the  people,  clothed  in  mist ;  for  men  see  not  her  approach,  and  know  not 
that  she  is  the  cause  of  their  calamities,  who  have  driven  her  forth  by  her  unjust  deeds. 
Those,  continues  the  poet,  who  do  ri;^ht  by  the  strangers  and  the  natives  of  the  land — 
their  city  flourishes,  the  people  blossom  therein ;  and  peace,  the  nourisher  of  youths, 
prevails  through  the  land.  To  them  far-seeing  Zeus  appoints  no  bitter  war ;  famine 
and  curse  are  unknown.  The  earth  produces  abundance,  the  trees  drop  fruit  and 
honey,  the  fleeces  are  heavy  on  the  sheep ;  and  mothers  bear  a  noble  offspring.  But 
often  a  whole  city  suffers  from  an  evil  man,  who  is  a  sinner  and  devises  haughty  plans. 
Pestilence  and  famine  come  from  the  hands  of  the  Supreme  upon  men  ;  the  houses  are 
thinned  and  the  people  perish  (ibid.,  vv.  217,  etc.).  These  are  close  analogies  to  the  great 
thoughts  of  our  proplu^t.  2.  The  appropriate  punishment.  Those  who  have  giasped 
at  more  than  their  right  will  find  the  coveted  good  dwindling  in  their  hands,  or,  like  a 
Dead  Sea  fruit,  turning  to  ashes  on  their  lips.  One  bucket  only  will  be  obtained  from 
the  "  yoke  "  of  vineyard ;  one  bushel  of  corn  from  a  quarter's  r-eed.  Thus  may  we  find  in 
nature  a  profound  Scripture,  a  record  and  a  testimony  of  Divine  law  not  to  be  gains.iid. 
In  this  day  of  science  perhaps  we  fix  our  thought  too  exclusively  on  the  dependence  of 
man  on  Nature.  There  is  another  side  of  truth  equally  important — the  dependence  cf 
Nature  on  man.  In  moral  energy,  in  compliance  with  the  laws  of  right,  we  become 
more  and  more  the  m.isters  of  Xnture,  and  she  smiles  back  upon  us  with  an  aspect  of 
recognition  and  blessing.  In  the  sloth  of  our  spirit  and  its  corruption  from  truth  we 
can  no  longer  win  the  sympathy  of  the  earth;  and  her  groaning  aspect  reflects  and 
represents  a  guilty  decline  of  the  soul.  These  truths  are  general ;  only  experience  ci-i 
teach  where  and  how  they  must  be  modified  in  their  ap|iUcation. — J. 

Vers.  11 — 16. — Mirth  and  mourning,  I.  Thoughtless  PLEAStmB-SEBKiNG.  A 
scene  of  habitual  dissipation  is  depicted  by  the  proiihet.  1.  Wine  and  music  are  used, 
•  not  legitimately,  to  relax  the  tension  of  the  overwrought  mind,  but  to  dispel  thought 
altogether.  Sensuous  pleasure  is  marie  an  end  and  object,  though  it  can  never  be 
healthy  except  in  succession  to  work.  "  They  rise  early  in  the  morning  to  follow  the 
wassail ;  late  into  the  night  are  heated  by  wine."  "  Guitar,  and  harp,  and  tam- 
bourine, and  flute,  and  wine  is  their  revel."  How  wise  were  the  teachings  of  Plato  on 
the  use  of  music  as  a  means  of  influence  over  the  mind  I  He  would  not  permit  the 
employment  of  "effeminate  and  convivial  "  airs  in  his  ideal  stale,  the  lax  Ionian  and 
Lydian.  He  would  have  only  two  kinds  of  tunes ;  those  which  represented  the  tones 
and  accents  of  the  brave  man  engaged  in  action,  and  those  which  chimed  with  the 
devotional  and  peaceful  mood;  in  short,  the  tones  which  reflect  the  temper  of  brave 
men  in  prosperity  and  adversity.  Makers  of  harps  and  dulcimers,  and  other  more 
elaborate  instruments,  were  not  to  be  maintained  in  the  city  ('Rep.,'  p.  399).  These 
hints  are  perhaps  too  little  attended  to  in  our  day.  Yet  there  is  niculern  music,  e.g. 
that  of  the  Italian  opera  in  general,  which  tends  to  enervate  tlie  soul.  Rather  shonld 
we  choose  to  listen  to  the  strains  of  the  great  German  masters,  Beethoven,  Handel, 
Meudelssohn.  These  men  inspire  us  with  lofty  ihoods  and  religious  thoughts.  Avoid 
mr'an  and  brainless  music,  whether  so-called  secular  cr  sacred.  ■  2.  Blindness  to  the 
thought  and  work  of  Ood.  The  most  glorious  privilege  we  can  enjoy  is  that  of  intel- 
lectual vision  of  Divine  work  in  nature  and  in  mankind,  the  loftiest  pleasure  that  of 
intellectual  sympathy  with  the  Divine  mind.  But  the  sensuous  pleasure  excludes  the 
spiritual.  Do  men  consider  what  they  lose  by  dimming  their  perceptions  and  confusing 
their  intelligence  in  these  lower  indulgences?  Not  on  wine  and  soft  music  is  that 
"vision  and  faculty  Divine"  nourished,  by  which  the  prophet  and  the  worshipper  enter 
into  the  scene  of  holiest  enjoyments,  of  eniapturing  reflations.  The  operation  of  the 
Eternal  in  the  soul  and  the  world  goes  on  silently  and  secretly,  and  we  need  the 
"purged  ear"  that  we  may  listen  to  his  voice,  the  ur clouded  eye  that  we  may  note 
events  wliich  flow  from  his  causation. 

II.  The  punishment  of  frivolity.      1.    Captivity  comes    suddenly    upon  these 
revellers,  and  they  wander  forth  "  unawares,"  like  those  who  rub  iheir  blear  eyes  after 


cs.  V.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PEOPHBT   ISAIAH.  89 

a  night's  debauch.  They  cannot  understand  what  has  happened  to  them.  They  talk 
of  "  strange  misfortunes,"  of  inexplicable  calamities.  But  they  have  an  explanation. 
The  decay  of  a  family,  or  of  a  class,  or  of  a  nation,  is  as  much  the  result  of  Divine  law 
as  any  other  form  of  decay.  In  exile  and  suffering  men  pay  the  long-due  debt  for  their 
voluptuous  indulgences.  The  "nobility  is  spent  with  hunger,  its  revel-rout  dried  up 
with  thirst."  The  music  has  to  stop.  The  voice  of  Jehovah  may  be  heard  saying, 
"  Take  thou  away  from  me  the  voice  of  thy  songs ;  for  I  will  not  listen  to  the  melody 
of  thy  viols  "  (Amos  v.  23).  Those  that  have  put  far  from  them  the  evil  day,  lying  on 
ivory  couches,  luxuriously  feasting,  singing  to  the  viol,  drinking  from  the  flowing  towl, 
anointed  and  perfumed,  reckless  of  human  suffering  around  them,  shall  pass  into 
exile,  and  darkness  and  desolation  shall  reign  in  the  once  bright  and  crowded  hall  of 
banqueting  (see  Amos  vi.).  2.  With  equal  suddenness  death  shall  come  upon  them. 
Hades  opening  its  jaws  to  swallow  the  uproarious  rout  of  revellers,  as  in  old  days  the 
rebellious  crew  of  Korah  (Numb.  xvi.  32).  There  is  meaning  in  the  phrase,  "The 
unexpected  always  happens."  To  the  thoughtless  and  unprepared  it  does.  But  to 
the  thoughtful  watchers  of  the  ways  of  God,  and  those  that  meditate  on  his  truth,  it 
may  be  said  that  the  expected  happens,  even  as  the  harvest  season  in  nature. 

III.  The  abasement  of  man  and  the  exaltation  of  God.  Deep  in  the  prophetic 
conscience  lies  tliis  thought — human  pride  meat  s  contempt  of  God,  and  human  pride 
needs  lowering  that  God  may  receive  his  proper  place  in  men's  thoughts.  The  Gentile 
poets  in  their  way  riflected  this  teaching.  The  man  whose  thoughts  aimed  at 
rivalry  with  the  gods,  the  man  who  gave  way  to  hyhris,  or  insolence,  was  certain  to  be 
a  mark  of  Divine  displeasure.  Cast  down  to  his  proper  level  of  weakness,  the  power 
of  the  Eternal  makes  itself  known,  in  an  "  awTul  rose  of  dawn,"  upon  the  conscience 
of  mankind.  It  is  suffering  alone  that  awakens  the  conscience,  and  brings  sharply  to 
light  that  dualism  of  good  and  evil  in  the  will  which  we  contrive  to  confuse  in  thought- 
less hours.  And  only  by  this  internal  revelation  do  we  learn  to  think  of  One  who  is 
sanctity  itself,  and  whose  sanctity  we,  through  life's  purging  fires,  must  be  brought  to 
share,  or  perish  in  the  sins  we  have  chosen,  the  lives  we  have  lived  in. — J. 

Vers.  18 — 24. — Analysis  of  sin.  I.  The  vain  and  wanton  mind.  A  ringular 
image  is  used.  Men  are  described  as  drawing;  down  upon  themselves,  as  with  stout  and 
strong  ropes,  the  burden  of  sin  and  guilt.  Such  is  the  effect  of  their  mocking  jests  and 
speeches.  Dramatically,  the  hearers  of  the  prophet  are  represented  as  exclaiming  defiantly, 
"  Let  his  wrath  hasten,  let  it  speed,  let  us  see  it ;  let  the  counsel  of  the  Holy  One  ol 
Israel  draw  near  and  come,  that  we  may  know  it  I  "  Amos  alludes  to  the  same  spirit 
of  the  time,  of  scoffing  contempt  of  the  signs  and  omens  of  a  dread  future.  "  Woe 
unto  you  that  desire  the  day  of  Jehovah!  to  what  end  is  it  for  you?  the  day  of 
Jehovah  will  be  darkness,  and  not  light "  (v.  18).  Idly  do  they  dream  that  thus  they 
put  far  away  the  evil  day  which  is  close,  at  hand  (vi.  3).  "  The  evil  day  shall  not 
overtake  nor  prevent  usl"  they  persist  in  saying  (ix.  10).  In  idle  and  wilful 
minds  superstitions  about  words  are  deeply  lodged.  By  insisting  that  a  wished  event 
must  take  place,  they  think  to  bring  it  about ;  by  repeating  of  something  dreaded,  "  It 
shall  not  happen,"  to  avert  it.  But  mere  words  have  no  magic  in  them.  As  the 
incoming  tide  had  no  respect  for  the  commands  of  King  Knut's  followers,  so  neither 
can  the  tidil  march  of  moral  forces  be  stayed  by  defiance  or  incantations.  But  our 
words  and  wishes  have  a  powerful  reflex  effect  upon  our  own  moods.  And  this 
denial  in  words  of  God's  truth  must  in  time  quite  harden  the  conscience  and  blind  tli( 
inner  eye  fur  them.  We  may  shake  our  fist  at  the  grov\ing  thunder-cloud,  but  it  will 
not  disappear.  We  may  try  to  quell  a  demand  for  reform  by  obstinate  clamours  of, 
"  It  shall  not  be!"  but  only  the  more  surely  will  it  proceed  to  accomplishment. 

II.  Confusion  of  moeal  dibtinotions.  This  is  a  further  step  in  the  climax  ana 
progress  of  evil.  It  is  indeed  a  serious  reflection — how  far  we  m*y  succeed,  by  acts  of 
depraved  will,  in  shutting  out  the  light  that  would  stream  in  upon  the  mind,  or  in 
quenching  the  light  within.  Both  are  at  once  involved  iu  the  sin  against  intelligence. 
'This  is,  indeed,  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost — the  sin  that  cannot  be  forgiven.  How 
solemn  are  the  words  of  the  prophet  elsewhere :  "  It  was  revealed  in  mine  ears  by  the 
Lord  of  hosts.  Surely  this  iniquity  shall  not  be  purged  away  from  you  till  ye  die  "  (ch. 
xxii.  14)1     AJaother  serious  question  is,  how  far  words  may  influence  thought,  and  th  : 


90  THE   BOOK  OP   THE  PEOPHET   ISAIAH.  [oh.  v.  1—30. 

hM\,  of  sayiag  false  things  disable  the  mind  from  seeing  the  true.  South  has  some 
powerful  sermons  from  this  text,  entitled  "  The  fatal  force  and  imposture  of  words." 
Though  an  absolute  falsehood  cannot  live,  adulterations  of  the  truth  may  and  do  obtain 
a  wide  currency,  just  as  adulterations  of  meat  and  drink  in  the  half-dishonesties  of  trade. 
Every  truth  comes  to  us  in  a  certain  gmse  of  falsehood ;  no  form  of  language  or  other 
expression  is  adequate  to  clothe  it.  By  insisting  on  the  form  as  if  it  were  the  content, 
the  outside  as  if  it  were  identical  with  the  inside,  the  part  as  if  it  were  the  whole,  we 
commit  ourselves  to  falsehood  rather  than  to  truth.  The  essence  <Jf  social  falsehoods 
seems  to  be  in  maxims  which  make  the  spiritual  subordinate  to  the  material.  In 
times  of  physical  comfort  and  prosperity  this  is  always  our  danger.  We  mistake  the 
means  of  living  for  the  ends.  We  rest  in  pleasure,  comfort,  wealth,  instead  of  making 
these  the  temporary  standing  ground  of  the  spirit,  whence  it  may  proceed  to  higher  levels 
and  nobler  ends. 

III.  Self-conceited  pollt.  We  never  see  the  full  efiFect  of;  sin,  of  heart-untmth, 
until  it  works  itself  out  in  the  imagination,  filling  the  mind  with  a  fatuous  self-com- 
placency in  its  own  weakness  and  blindness.  The  man  thinks  himself  "  wise," 
"intelligent,"  who,  to  the  piercing  gaze  of  the  prophet,  is  clearly  a  fool.  He  thinks 
himself  a  hero,  whose  best  exjiloit  is  to  shine  at  a  drinking-bout,  and  a  mighty  man 
because  he  can  play  his  part  at  the  wassail,  says  the  prophet  with  keen  irony.  Mean- 
while they  are  deep  in  bribery.  They  would  rob  the  poor  of  his  honesty,  and  take 
away  the  righteousness  of  the  righteous  from  them.  There  are  towns  and  villages 
where  we  may  now  see  on  a  small  scale  all  those  evils  which  the  prophet  exposed  in 
Jerusalem.  Evil  examples,  old  and  bad  customs,  have  so  long  had  their  way  that  a  true 
standard  of  living  seems  no  longer  to  be  visible.  Yet  the  moral  tone  may  be  restored, 
if  there  be  but  one  man  who  will  live  like  the  prophet,  like  a  Christian,  salting  the 
community  by  a  quiet  and  continuous  vritness  for  rectitude,  for  the  truth  of  God,  and 
the  soul. 

IV.  The  end  op  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner.  In  a  powerful  picture  the  end 
ij  depicted  as  the  end  to  which  all  that  is  empty  and  worthless  refuse  must  come.  They 
are  like  stubble  before  the  devouring  tongue  of  fire,  like  blazing  hay  sinking  down  in 
light  ashes,  like  a  root  struck  with  decay  and  rottenness,  like  flying  powdery  blossom. 
Evil  is  nought,  and  ends  in  nought  Those  whose  "  honour  has  been  rooted  in  dis- 
honour "  must  perish  with  the  perishing  of  their  root.  The  decline  of  once  great  nations 
and  cities  historically  proves  the  prophetic  truth.  A  "  name  and  a  shade  "  is  left  of 
Assyria,  Egypt,  Israel,  Greece,  and  Eomc.  But  one  thing  cannot  perish :  it  is  the 
"  doctrine  of  Jehovah,  the  Word  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel."  And  in  some  "  remnant " 
that  Word  ever  does  live,  to  breed  new  life  in  other  scenes  and  ages.  The  truth,  while 
it  slays  the  rebels,  gives  immortality  to  the  faithful ;  "  born  again,  not  of  corruptible, 
but  of  incorruptible  seed." — J. 

Ver.  25. — The  unappeasdble  wrath  of  Jehovah.  I.  "Oub  Gk>D  is  A  consumino 
FiBE."  Whether  to  burn  and  destroy  the  moral  refuse  of  a  people,  to  chasten  and 
refine  its  remnant  and  elect,  he  is  revealed  as  the  pure  Flame.  The  Gentiles  had 
a  deep  sense  of  the  national  significance  of  fire,  as  the  pure  element  not  to  be  united 
with  aught  foreign  to  itself.  In  their  simple  way,  the  hymns  of  the  Veda  to  Agni, 
the  god  of  fire,  betray  this  feeling  ;  and,  again,  the  idea,  in  Greek  and  Boman  religion,  of 
Hestia  or  Vesta,  on  whose  altar  the  fire  was  kept  ever  burning,  who  "  refused  to  wed," 
whose  priestesses  must  be  virgins. 

IL  Wab  the  8C0UK0B  OF  GoD.  Deep  has  been  the  sense  also  of  this  truth.  There 
is  an  obscure  perception  in  the  minds  of  men  that  war,  with  its  attendant  horrors,  comes 
as  •  retribution.  Attila  the  Hun  was  spoken  of  as  the  "  scourge  of  God."  To  have 
seen  a  fair  city  black  with  smoking  ruins,  and  corpses  lying  in  its  streets,  is  to  have 
read  with  ineffaceable  impressions  the  lesson  that  "  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  living  God."  There  are  moments  when  the  solid  base  of  things  seems 
trembling  beneath  our  feet,  the  "  eternal  hills  "  as  floors  trembling  beneath  the  awful 
tread  of  the  Eternal  as  he  "  cometh  to  judge  the  earth." 

III.  The  dueation  of  punishment.  It  seems  as  if  it  could  not  be  exhausted,  go 
vast  is  the  mass  of  guilt  to  be  purged  away.  A  protracted  war,  a  dragging  famine,  a 
prolonged  season  of  ruin,  seem,  as  we  say  in  common  speech,  "  interminable."    The 


«H.  V.  1— 30.]         THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  91 

broad  blue  heaven,  tli  at  seemed  In  sunny  days  as  a  benignant  hand  outspread  above 
mankind,  wears  the  expression  of  a  stern  and  relentless  frown.  Long  scores  must 
be  followed  by  long  payment.  The  guilt  of  centuries  cannot  be  wiped  out  in  •  day. 
Divine  judgment  may  require  even  the  obliteration  of  a  whole  people.  But  the 
individual  may  be  saved.  At  no  time  are  Jehovah's  "  mercies  clean  forgotten."  In 
the  saddest  times,  the  repentant  heart  pierces  through  the  gloom  to  the  sanctuary  and 
heart  of  him  who  slays  to  make  alive,  who  by  means  of  war  reconciles  to  himself  in 
Christ  Jesus, — J. 

Vers.  26 — 30. — Foreign  invasion.  This  powerful  picture  points  to  the  threatened 
Assyrian  invasion. 

I.  The  image  or  a  waelikb  advance.  It  is  wrought  out  with  singular  boldness. 
Jehovah  of  hosts  is  conceived  as  lifting  up  a  signal  visible  to  the  far-off  nations,  and 
sounding  at  the  same  time  a  whistle-cry,  so  that  they  swiftly  gather  together  and 
come  in  troops  from  the  horizon.  Then  rapid  and  unbrolien  is  their  march.  Not  a 
foot  tires,  not  a  warrior  droyvses  or  sleeps,  or  stays  to  rest.  Not  one  looses  his  girdle, 
or  the  thong  of  his  sandal,  as  the  eager  host  presses  on.  The  arrows  are  all  sharpened, 
the  bows  all  spanned.  The  sound  of  the  horses'  hoofs  strike  and  flash  like  flint-stones, 
and  the  chariot-wheels  roll  on  like  the  rush  of  a  whirlwind.  The  air  is  full  of  a  horrible 
roar,  as  of  lions  hastening  to  their  unescaping  prey.  Such  a  picture  is  the  faithful 
representation  of  the  mood  of  the  soul  in  its  guilt  and  alarm.  For  nature  reflects  all 
our  moods.  Her  sounds  and  sights  are  ever  full  of  foreboding  and  terror  to  the  self- 
condemned  conscience.  But  the  conscience  at  peace  will  throw  forth  its  light  upon  all 
external  gloom,  and  convert,  what  seem  to  others  the  sounds  of  hell  broke  loose,  into 
the  celestial  times  of  eternal  love. 

II.  The  image  op  the  babthqtjakb.  The  rage  in  the  heavens  will  be  like  a 
tempest  at  sea.  And  when  the  stricken  ones  turn  to  the  firm  land,  there  is  a  darkness 
which  only  reflects  the  anguish  of  their  souls— thick  darkness,  and  the  light  is  hidden. 
No  gloom  we  can  conceive  in  nature,  no  sounds  of  overwhelming  violence,  nor  sights 
that  strike  horror  to  every  breast,  can  rival  the  terrois  which  the  guilty  soul  may 
know.  The  soul  is  the  real  theatre  of  all  these  Divine  dramas.  So  far  as  we  can  read 
the  faces  of  men  or  look  into  their  breasts,  some  stand  for  fear  and  some  for  hope ; 
some  the  scenes  of  great  quaking  and  terrors,  some  still  conscious  where  the  soft,  still 
voice  of  the  God  of  mercy  is  ever  heard.  As  the  vox  humana  stop  may  be  used  to 
sound  the  accents  of  prayer  amidst  a  storm,  so  in  trouble  the  psalms  of  the  believer 
make  a  music  of  comfort.  "  God  is  our  Refuge  and  Strength.  . . .  Therefore  will  we  not 
fear,  though  the  earth  be  removed,  and  the  mountains  be  cast  into  the  midst  of  the 
sea.  .  .  .  The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us ;  the  God  of  Jacob  is  our  Refuge."  "  He  that 
dwelleth  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High  shall  abide  under  the  shadow  of  the 
Almighty."— J. 

Ver.  20. — Giving  false  names.  "Woe  unto  them  that  call  evil  good,  and  good 
evil ;  that  put  darkness  for  light,  and  light  for  darkness ;  that  put  bitter  for  sweet,  and 
sweet  for  bitter  1 "  Light  is  here  cast  upon  the  secret  of  Israel's  defection.  The  "  woe  " 
has  come  from  many  causes,  but  here  is  one  too  often  forgotten  root  of  evil — public 
estimate  as  expressed  in  public  speech. 

I.  The  mobal  influence  of  languaqb.  We  are  all  deceived  at  times  by  a  fair 
speech  that  covers  foul  things.  There  is  no  tendency  more  dangerous  than  to  call  the 
vicious  unfortunate,  or  the  wicked  gay.  By  this  means  the  evU  is  concealed  from  the 
conscience.  The  prophet  speaks  of  the  tendency  when  it  has  gone  so  far  as  to  exchange 
to  opposite  poles.  The  good  is  called  "  evil,"  and  the  evil  "  good."  Even  so  "  a  good 
fellow  "  is  often  the  synonym  for  "  a  bad  fellow ; "  for  revelry  and  selfish  enjoyment, 
»nd  neglect  of  home,  often  characterize  the  good  fellow.  The  young  are  often  led  astray 
by  evil,  in  the  angel-dress  of  beautiful  speech. 

II.  The  moral  deceit  of  sin.  We  are  promised  brightness,  good  cheer,  and  freedom 
from  gliiom  ;  whilst  evil  brings  darkness  insteau  of  light — a  darkness  which  shuts  out 
ftod,  and  a  gloom  which  takes  away  all  the  brightness  of  innocent  joy.  We  are 
promised  a  "  sweet "  bread ;  and  lo !  how  "  bitter  "  it  is  to  the  taste ;  what  a  flavour  it 
leaves  behind  1  Afterwards  1  Men  should  think  of  that.    Like  the  red  wine-cup,  pleasant 


92  THE   BOOK   OP   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.        [ch.  v.  1— 30. 

and  luscious  at  fust,  afierwarJs  "  it  bitcth  like  a  serpent,  and  etingeth  like  an  adder." 
We  can  never  make  a  pliilosophy  of  life  out  of  "  first"  experiences.  Wo  have  only  to 
wait  and  we  shall  find  that  "  the  way  of  transgressors  is  hard." 

III.  The  moral  judgment  of  God.  "  Woe  unto  them  1 "  Who  ?  Why,  special  woe  to 
those  who  "  put"  it.  False  counsellors,  like  Ahithophel  to  Absalom ;  false  teachers,  like 
those  who  corrupt  the  truth.  There  is  leadership  everywhere — at  school  and  college, 
in  the  Church  and  in  the  world.    Let  no  man  despise  the  warnings  of  God. — ^W.  M,  S. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Privilege  and  penalty.     We  have  a  striking  picture  of — 

L  The  fulness  of  the  Divine  provision.  (Vers.  1 — 4.)  The  second  verse  describes 
in  detail  the  processes  by  which  the  vineyard  is  prepared  for  fruitfulness,  and  in  the 
fourth  verse  the  question  is  asked,  "  What  could  have  been  done  more  to  my  vineyard, 
that  I  have  not  done  in  it?"  The  idea  is  that  of  the  fulness  of  the  Divine  provision 
for  the  Jewish  nation.  God  had  provided :  1.  Illustrious  men — Mosea,  Aaron,  Joshua, 
Samuel,  David,  etc.  2.  A  perfect  Law ;  perfect  inasmuch  as  it  (1)  reflected  his  own 
holiness,  and  at  the  same  time  (2)  was  accommodated  to  their  immaturity.  3.  A  helpful 
ritual,  a  series  of  ceremonies  adapted  to  the  age  and  to  their  nature.  4.  Providential 
discipline;  all  the  attractive  and  inviting  influences  of  prosperity  together  with  ihe 
solemnizing  and  cleansing  influences  of  adversity.  We  have  now  a  corresponding 
fulness  of  provision /or  mankind  in  the  gospel  of  Christ.  We  have :  1.  The  knowledge 
of  God  and  of  his  will  revealed  in  Christian  truth,  2.  The  way  to  himself  and  to  his 
pardoning  love  opened  by  the  mediation  and  atonement  of  his  Son,  our  Saviour.  3.  The 
influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  are  the  purchase  of  his  work  and  the  promise  of  his 
Word.  4.  The  leadership  of  him  who  lived  a  perfect  life,  and  offers  himself  as  the 
Exemplar  as  well  as  the  t'riend  of  man.  5.  The  hope  of  eternal  glory.  The  Author  of 
the  salvation  in  Jesus  Christ  may  w;ell  address  us  and  say,  "  What  more  could  have  b,  en 
done?"  We  may  almost  say  that  the  ingenuity  of  Divine  love  is  spent  and  exhausted 
on  the  provision  which  is  made  in  the  gospel  for  the  return,  for  the  acceptance,  for  the 
renewal,  for  the  elevation,  of  the  children  of  men. 

II.  The  soreness  of  the  Divine  dissatisfaction.  (Vers.  4,  7.)  Centuries  of 
bondage  in  idolatrous  Egypt  might  well  account  for,  if  they  could  not  excuse,  a  larjje 
measure  of  moral  feebleness,  of  religious  error,  of  spiritual  declension.  But  centuries  of 
Divine  teaching  and  Divine  discipline  should  have  wrought  much  of  restoration.  The 
sovereign  Euler  of  Israel  had  a  right  to  expect  rich  fruit  in  his  well-cultivated  vineyard. 
But  he  was  utterly  disappointed.  Instead  of  the  good  grapes  he  looked  for,  it  brought 
forth  "  wild  grapes ; "  instead  of  judgment  was  oiipression ;  instead  of  rightfiousness,  the 
cry  of  him  that  was  wronged.  In  us,  from  us,  who  have  been  the  recipients  of  his 
manifold  mercies  and  of  multiplied  privileges  in  Christ  Jesus,  God  looks  for  great  things ; 
he  looks  for  penitence,  faith,  purity,  spiritual  worth,  holy  usefulness.  Only  too  often 
he  finds  the  miserable  and  guilty  opposites  of  these — impenitence,  unbelief,  continuance 
in  sin,  moral  unsightliness,  injuriousness  of  life.  And  the  heart  of  the  Holy  One  is 
grieved.  He  who  would  have  looked  with  delight  on  his  "  pleasant  plant"  looks  with 
pain  and  sorrow  on  the  fruitless  tree,  on  the  bush  that  bears  poisonous  berries.  He  who 
would  have  regarded  with  pleasure  those  "  in  whose  heart  are  paths  "  observes  with 
indignation  and  regret  those  whose  hearts  are  as  a  tangled  wilderness,  uncultivated  and 
useless.  For  these  he  has  only  the  language  of  severe  reproach  and  of  stem  and  solemn 
warning. 

lU,  The  weight  of  the  Divine  penalty.  (Vers.  5,  6.)  The  doom  is  destruction. 
The  vineyard  should,  as  a  vineyard,  entirely  disappear.  The  defences  should  "be 
removed ;  the  useful  plant  should  give  place  to  the  useless  thorn ;  the  elements  should 
work  for  its  withering,  and  leave  nothing  that  was  desirable  or  valuable.  God's 
message  to  the  guilty  nation.  Church,  family,  individual  soiU,  is  this  solemn  one — the 
abuse  of  privilege  wiU  be  visited  by  terrible  tokens  of  Divine  displeasure;  all  that  was 
promising  will  be  removed ;  the  signs  and  the  sources  of  life  will  be  taken  away ;  from 
him  that  hath  not  (that  does  not  use  what  is  in  his  power)  will  be  taken  his  present 
privilege  (Matt.  xxv.  29).  He  who  (that  which)  is  exalted  to  heaven  in  opportunity 
will  be  cast  down  to  hell  in  condemnation  and  in  ruin  (Matt.  xL  23). — 0. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — 27ie  character  and  tht  doom  of  wueioutmeu.    The  judgment  denounced 


OfcT.  1— so.]  THE   BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,  93 

against  those  that  joined  house  to  house  and  field  to  field  brings  into  view  the  nature  of 
the  sin  of  oovetousness,  and  the  desolation  in  which  it  ends. 

L  Ths  essential  natukb  of  the  bin.  It  is  an  immoderate  ambition.  To  secure 
a  house  or  a  piece  of  land,  or  to  extend  that  which  has  been  acquired,  may  be  not  only 
lawful  but  positively  commendable ;  it  may,  indeed,  be  highly  honourable.  But  there 
are  bounds  beyond  which  this  ambition  may  not  pass,  the  transgression  of  which  is 
wrong  and  soon  becomes  perilously  evil.  In  the  ease  of  the  Jews  this  limitation  was 
defined  by  their  statutes — by  that  Law  which  they  had  received  direct  from  Grod  him- 
self, and  to  which  they  owed  a  strict  and  cheerful  obedience.  In  our  case  ambition 
becomes  oovetousness  when  it  is  indulged  either  at  our  own  expense  or  at  the  expense  of 
ottr  brother.  If  we  are  indulging  a  purpose  which  cannot  be  executed  without  moral 
or  spiritual  injury  to  ourselves,  or  without  doing  injustice  or  rendering  unkindness  to 
our  neighbour,  we  are  guilty  of  the  sin  of  covetousness.  To  some  men  the  transgression 
assumes  the  one  form,  to  others  the  other.  To  some,  oovetousness  is  the  craving  for 
property  or  money  which  becomes  engrossing,  abs'orliing,  positively  devouring  all  the 
higher  and  purer  aspirations ;  to  others  it  is  the  desire  and  determination  to  secure  the 
neighbour's  good,  however  serious  the  loss  they  may  thereby  inflict.  Solomon  coveted 
many  wives,  greatly  to  his  own  injury ;  Ahab  coveted  Naboth's  vineyard,  shamefully 
disreirarding  his  neighbour's  rights. 

II.  Its  insatiableness.  The  prophet  uses  the  language  of  hyperbole  when  he  says, 
"  Till  there  be  no  place,  that  they  may  be  placed  alone  in  the  midst  of  the  earth  " 
(▼er.  8) ;  but  his  words  clearly  point  to  the  fact  that  when  men  allow  their  ambition 
to  pass  beyond  moderate  and  reasonable  bouniis  they  permit  it  to  carry  everything 
before  it,  so  that  their  earth-hunger,  or  house-hunger,  or  their  thirst  for  money  is 
never  satisfied.  However  much  they  gain,  they  still  crave  and  strive  for  mors;  it  is 
not  only  gold  itself  but  that  which  it  will  bring  which  is 

"Hugged  by  the  oM 
To  the  very  verge  of  the  chm-ohyard  mould." 

In  nothing  but  death  can  the  greedy  eye  be  closed,  and  the  grasping  hand  relaxed. 

III.  Its  heedlessness.  The  concluding  clause  gf  the  eighth  verse  not  only  intimatei 
the  extent  to  which  covetousness  urges  its  victim  to  go  in  search  of  a  satisfaction  which 
it  does  not  find,  but  it  suggests  the  heartlessness  to  which  it  leads.  No  matter  who  or 
how  many  are  disturbed  and  displaced,  it  goes  on  its  devouring  way,  even  though  it 
finds  itself  "  alone  in  the  midst  of  the  land  (earth)."  Every  vice  tends  to  hardness  of 
heart,  to  pitilessness  of  spirit ;  and  covetousness  not  the  least.  Self  is  magnified  in 
importance  more  and  more,  and  the  rights  and  feelings  (if  others  become  of  less  and  less 
consideration  until  they  are  made  of  no  account  whatever. 

IV.  Its  doom.  The  end  of  the  covetous  man  was  to  be  desolation  (ver.  9)  and 
poverty  (ver.  10).  Sin  perpetually  overreaches  itself;  and,  of  all  particular  sins, 
ambition  "  o'ervaults  itself  and  comes  down  on  th'  other  side."  So  far  is  covetousness 
from  happiness  that  there  is  probably  no  more  miserable  man  to  be  found  in  any 
spiritual  region  than  is  the  victim  of  this  vice.  1.  He  is  desolate,  friendless ;  hated  by 
those  whom  he  has  injured  ;  unloved,  disregarded,  or  even  despised,  by  those  who  watch 
his  course.  2.  He  is  destitute.  0/'<e»j,veiy  often,  avarice  blinds  the  judgment,  and  the 
false  move  is  made  that  ends  in  overthrow  ahd  ruin  ;  always,  covetousness  shuts  out 
those  true  treasures  which  make  the  heart  rich  and  the  life  wealthy — those  possessions 
which  death  cannot  touch,  which  immortality  secures  for  ever. — 0. 

Vers.  11, 12,  22. — The  evil  and  the  end  of  intemperance.  When  other  evils  have 
entered  and  other  calamities  have  oveitakon  a  state,  intemperance  is  sure  to  make  its 
black  and  hateful  mark.    These  verses  suggest — 

I.  Its  tybanny.  Such  is  its  strength  that  it  makes  its  devotees  "rise  up  early  in  the 
morning  "  (ver.  11)  in  order  to  worship  at  its  shrine.  It  is  an  unnatural  and  detestable 
action ;  the  earliness  of  the  hour  of  the  day  mi^ht  well  be  pleaded  as  a  proof  of  inno- 
cency  (Acts  ii.  15).  But  when  the  passion  for  "  strong  drink  "  is  at  its  height,  it  com- 
pels its  helpless  victims  to  break  through  all  decencies  and  proprieties,  and  get  up  early 
in  order  to  indulge.  This  is  only  one  instance  of  its  despotism ;  it  leads  those  who 
"  follow  "  it  along  many  a  path  and  into  many  a  dark  pit,  from  widch  they  wouild  fain 


M  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.   [ch.  t.  1—30. 

tarn  away  but  cannot.  At  first  a  small  silken  cord,  U  becomes  at  last  an  adamantine 
chain. 

IL  Its  powbb  of  pekvbksion.  It  compels  good  things  to  minister  to  eyil  (ver.  12). 
"The harp  and  the  viol,"  etc.,  are  excellent  things  in  their  way  and  in  their  place ;  but, 
used  for  the  purpose  of  enlivening  and  protracting  immoderate  indulgence,  they  are 
perverted  to  an  evil  and  guilty~end.  Music  is  meant  to  cheer,  to  attract  toward  that 
which  is  good,  to  gladden  the  heart  and  to  brighten  the  life  of  man  ;  it  reaches  its 
highest  function  when,  in  the  worship  of  God,  it  conducts  the  thought  and  utters  the 
feeling  of  man  toward  the  Supreme.  Made  the  minister  of  vice,  it  sinks  to  its  lowfest 
level.  The  love  of  strong  drink  can  tbus  pervert  the  good  gifts  of  God  to  unworthy 
OSes. 

HI.  Its  DBaKADlNO  touch.  It  leads  "  men  of  strength  to  mingle  strong  drink  "  (ver. 
22)  in  order  that  they  may  glory  in  their  power  of  drinking.  In  many  lands  and  ages 
men  have  boasted  of  their  power  to  withstand  the  influence  of  the  intoxicating  cup. 
What  a  miserable  degradation  of  human  strength  1  That  men  who  are  capable  of  per- 
forming noblest  deeds,  of  rendering  highest  service,  of  engaging  in  Divine  worship,  should 
prostitute  their  powers  by  trying  to  drink  much  wine  without  becoming  inebriated, — 
this  is  a  shocking  degradation  of  human  faculty. 

IV.  Its  blinding  inflitencb.  "  They  regard  not  the  work  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  (ver.  12). 
Certainly,  at  the  table  of  unrestrained  revelling,  God  would  be  forgotten  and  his  works 
be  disregarded ;  but  not  there  alone  is  the  influence  of  intoxication  felt.  The  man  who 
gives  way  to  this  indulgence  finds  his  mental  powers  becoming  clouded,  his  spiritual 
sensibilities  benumbed,  his  appreciation  of  the  sacred  and  the  Divine  lessened  if  not  lost. 
Strong  drink  dulls  and  deadens  the  higher  faculties  of  the  soul,  and  the  nobler  functions 
of  our  manhood  are  uni1isoharp;ed,  its  purer  joys  abandoned. 

V.  The  wob  it  works.  "  Woe  unto  them,"  etc.  (ver.  11)  1  Beyond  the  evils  which 
we  have  been  tracing  to  th«  intoxicating  cup — evils  which  are  of  themselves  woe 
enough  for  any  one  sin  to  work — there  are:  1.  The  loss  of  physical  strength  and 
beauty.  2.  The  loss  of  reputation  and  of  friendship.  3.  The  loss  of  self-respect  and, 
with  this,  the  sinking  of  the  moral  character ;  the  upgrowth  of  attendant  moral  evils. 
4.  Death  and  condemnation. — C. 

Vers.  13 — 17. — The  calamities  of  spiritual  ignorance.  The  miseries  which  are  un- 
folded in  this  passage  are  ascribed,  in  the  thirtoentli  verse,  to  ignorance.  "  My  pt^ople 
are  gone,  etc.,  .  .  .  because  they  have  no  knowledge."  But  it  is  necessary  to  distin- 
guish here.     We  must  consider — 

L  The  ignorance  which  is  spiritual  and  therefore  guiltt.  There  is  ignorance 
which  is  entirely  mental  and  which  is  wholly  guiltless ;  e.g.  that  of  the  little  child  who 
cannot  understand  some  of  the  obligations  into  which  we  grow,  or  that  of  the  heathen 
who  cannot  possibly  acquire  a  knowledge  of  Christ  nnd  his  salvation.  There  is  a  mental 
ignorance  which  is  not  guiltless,  but  culpable;  viz.  tliat  of  the  man  who  has  not  acquired 
the  information  he  had  the  opportunity  of  gaining  in  earlier  days,  and  that  of  the  man 
who  goes  down  through  iniquity  and  immorality  into  intellectual  feebleness  and  impo- 
tence. But  the  ignorance  of  which  our  text  treats  (ver.  13)  is  not  mental,  but  spiritual; 
it  is  that  of,  the  whole  spiritual  nature  rather  than  of  the  understanding ;  it  is  that  of 
men  who  had  a  formal  knowledge  of  God  and  duty,  but  who  did  not  lay  it  to  heart  and 
did  not  act  upon  it.  It  is  the  ignorance  of  the  nation,  which  might,  if  it  would,  under- 
stand what  the  will  of  God  is  in  the  matter  of  Divine  worship,  or  in  regard  to  its  poor  and 
uninstruoted  members,  or  to  its  uncivilized  and  helpless  neighbours;  but  which  will  uot 
take  the  trouble  to  ascertain  it,  or  even  blinds  its  eyes  so  that  it  shall  not  see  it.  It  is 
the  ignorance  of  the  individual  man,  who  has  indeed  an  undefined  knowledge  of  his 
obligations  to  his  Father  and  his  Saviour,  but  who  studiously  keeps  it  out  of  view;  who 
will  not  present  it  to  the  eyes  of  his  soul,  lest  he  should  be  constrained  to  reproach 
himself  and  to  change  his  course.  These  are  they  who  "  have  no  knowledge,"  in  the 
sense  of  the  prophet. 

IL  The  calamities  which  it  entails.  These  are  manifold,  as  the  passflge  intimates. 
They  include :  1.  Exile—"  going  into  captivity  "  (ver.  13) ;  dwelling  in  a ''  fcir  country;" 
being,  spiritually,  where  all  is  strange  and  alien  and  hostile,  a  long  way  from  God  and 
from  the  privileges  of  his  house  and  the  enjoyment  of  his  service.    2.  A  void  and 


CH.T.  1— 30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  96 

• 
aching  heart.  "  The  honourable  men  are  famished,  and  the  multitude  dried  np  with 
thirst "  (ver.  13).  Not  knowing  God  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  he  has  sent,  depriving 
themselves  of  the  deep  and  lasting  satisfactions  of  his  favour  and  friendship,  men  find 
all  material  sources  of  joy  utterly  unsatisfying ;  they  eat,  and  hunger  still;  they  drink, 
but "  thirst  again."  3.  Impoverishment.  (Ver.  4.)  The  uation  that  does  not  act  up  to 
the  height  of  its  knowledge  and  its  opportunity,  that  is  not  governed  by  its  sense  of 
right  and  duty,  but  by  its  inclination  to  pride  and  pleasure,  is  a  nation  that  will 
decline ;  it  will  soon  be  stripped  of  its  power.  "  Eadts  will  open  its  mouth  without 
measure,"  and  "swallow  up"  its. glory,  its  eminence,  its  joy;  it  will  be  bereft  of  all 
of  which  it  boasts,  for  the  hand  of  the  Lord  will  be  against  it,  and  his  righteous  judg- 
ments will  overtake  it  (ver.  16).  4.  Humiliation.  (Ver.  15.)  5,  Mortification.  How 
unspeakably  mortified  would  those  Jewish  captives  be  to  find  themselves  pining  in 
a  foreign  land  when  their  own  fields  at  home  were  unoccupied,  the  spoil  of  the  roving 
flock,  the  prey  of  the  marauding  stranger  (ver.  17) !  And  how  bitter  must  be  the 
mortification  and  self-reproach  which  they  must  feel  who  have  to  realize  the  results 
of  their  guilty  spiritual  ignorance ;  who  have  to  see  that,  afar  off  and  beyond  their 
reach,  are  joys  which  they  might  have  shared,  honours  which  they  might  have  won, 
spheres  which  they  might  have  filled,  a  large  heritage  which  was  their  own  but  which 
will  never  be  theirs  again  1 — C. 

Vers.  18, 19. — Sin  in  its  strength.    We  have  here  some  thoughts  about  sin. 

I.  Its  evil  growth.  Whatever  the  precise  thought  of  the  prophet,  his  words  (ver. 
18)  are  strongly  suggestive  of  the  fact  that  sin  gradually  attains  a  terrible  power.  Its 
"  pull"  may  at  first  be  that  of  a  silken  thread ;  presently  it  becomes  that  of  a  strong 
string ;  then  it  is  found  to  be  that  of  a  hard  wire ;  finally  it  reaches  that  of  a  "  cart- 
rope."  And  this,  whether  we  regard  the  sinner  as  (1)  the  man  no  whom  iniquity  acts, 
or  as  (2)  the  agent  through  whom  its  force  is  exerted  on  others.  In  the  one  case  he  is 
moved  only  with  great  difiSculty,  and  often  the  bond  which  is  thrown  about  him  snaps 
in  twain ;  but,  in  time,  sin  gains  strength,  and  it  pulls  him  as  with  a  rope  that  cannot 
be  broken.  In  the  other  case — piobably  the  one  here  intended— he  himself  hardly 
succeeds,  sometimes  fails,  in  leading  men  astray ;  but  in  course  of  time  he  draws  hu 
neighbours  along  the  road  of  wrong-doing  with  ease;  the  tie  by  which  he  holds  and  by 
which  he  constrains  them  is  stout  and  strong.  He  draws  sin  "  as  it  were  with  a  cart- 
rope."  1.  Shun  the  first  overtures  of  the  ungodly ;  have  nothing  to  do,  in  the  way 
of  friendship,  with  the  enemies  of  truth  and  righteousness.  2.  If  men  have  acquired 
a  fascinating  power  over  you,  there  is  no  deliverance  from  their  evil  grasp  save  by 
genuine  penitence  and  an  earnest  appeal  to  the  Almighty  Friend ;  his  hand  can  cut 
the  strongest  cords  of  sin. 

IL  Its  feakful  culmination.  Sin  reaches  its  summit  when  it  stands  on  the 
height  of  impious  defiance  of  the  living  God  (ver.  19).  Reverence  shrinks  with  a  holy 
reluctance  from  taking  such  words  into  its  lips,  even  when  it  simply  quotes  the 
utterance  of  impiety.  Yet  men  are  found  in  the  path  of  sin  who  will  employ  such 
language  without  remorse !  In  the  earlier  stages  of  ungodliness  men  would  he  shocked 
at  the  idea  of  doing  and  being  that  to  which  a  continuance  in  irreligion  naturally  leads 
up.  That  puny  man  should  positively  defy  his  Maker  seems  antecedently  unlikely, 
if  not  impossible.  Yet  glaring  facts  too  plainly  prove  that  an  evil  course  does  not  stop 
short  of  even  this  extreme.  What  awful  possibilities  of  evil  reside  within  a  humau 
soul !  How  unmeasurably  wise  it  is  to  place  ourselves  under  the  guidance  of  the 
great  Teacher,  to  have  our  hearts  the  residence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  1  Then,  but  only 
then,  are  we  safe  from  moral  enormities  which  are  a  thousand  times  more  to  be  dreaded 
than  the  extinction  of  our  being. 

III.  Its  eightbous  dook.  "  Woe  imto  them  1 "  And  they  shall  have  woe !  They 
may  say  in  their  shameless  arrogance,  "  Let  us  break  their  bands  asunder,"  etc. ;  but 
"  the  Lord  shall  have  them  in  derision  ...  he  shall  vex  them  in  his  sore  displeasure  " 
(Ps.  ii.  3 — 6).  They  may  "  set  tTieir  mouth  against  the  heavens,"  and  may  say,  "  How 
doth  God  know  ?  "  but  "  how  are  they  brought  into  desolation,  as  in  a  moment  1  they 
are  utterly  consumed  with  terrors"  (Ps.  IxxiiL  9, 11, 19),  God  will  overturn  their 
purposes;  he  will  scatter  their  friendships  and  leave  them  in  helpless  loneliness;  he 
will  bring  them  into  an  intolerable  humiliation ;  he  will  condemn  them  at  his  judg- 
ment-bar ;  he  will  sentence  them  to  eternal  exile. — 0. 


M  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.         [ch.  v.  1— 30. 

Ver.  20. — Spiritital  perversity.  Antecedently  we  should  hardly  have  expected  that 
a  being  created  in  the  image  of  G-od,  a  rational  spiritual  agent,  would  bo  far  depart 
from  all  that  is  reasonable  and  right  a,s  to  put  evil  for  good,  and  good  for  evil,  etc.  Yet 
such  is  the  case.    We  have  to  consider — 

I.  The  pact  op  SPiRtTUAL  pebvbrsitt.  Human  perversity  ii  not  found  in  the 
higher  region  only.  We  find  it  in  things  physical,  notably  in  our  treatment  of  the 
body.  Men  take  noxious  drugs,  thinking  that  they  "  do  them  good,"  while  they  shrink 
from  plain  and  wholesome  food,  as  unpalatable  and  undesirable.  In  things  economical 
They  shut  their  markets  against  the  commodities  of  other  nations,  supposing  that  they 
are  thereby  benefiting  their  own  citizens,  wlien  they  are  only  injuring  their  neighbours 
and  impoverishing  themselves  thereby.  And  so  in  otber  spheres  of  activity.  In 
things  spiritual  the  fact  is  most  painfully  apparent.  1.  In  our  direct  relation  to 
God.  Some  men  are  found  who  condemn  all  worship  as  superstition,  all  earnestness  as 
fanaticism,  all  piety  as  hypocrisy ;  the  same  men  speak  of  atheism  under  the  euphe- 
mism of  free-tliought ;  with  them  godlessness  is  emancipation  from  spiritual  bondage  ! 

2.  In  our  relation  to  our  fellow-men.  There  are  those  who  call  clemency  weakness,  and 
oppression  vigour;  who  denounce  considerateiiess  as  mawkish  sentimentality,  and 
honour  a  brutal  selfishness  as  cleverness  and  spiritedness;  who  sneer  at  conscientious- 
ness as  being  "  priggish,"  and  talk  of  roguery  as  if  it  reflected  honour  on  its  agents. 

3.  In  our  relation  to  ourselves.  There  are  too  many,  especially  among  the  young,  who 
consider  diasipation  to  be  another  thing  for  "  life,"  and  who  decry  purity  and  self- 
restraint  as  dulness  and  poverty  of  spirit ;  they  have  honourable  terms  for  the  vilest 
and  foulest  sins,  and  terms  of  discredit  for  the  cause  of  virtue  and  self-respect.  Thus  is 
eveiything  misnamed,  and  not  only  misnamed  hut  mistaken.  These  words  are 
more  than  mere  labels  ;  they  represent  the  thought  which  is  beneath;  they  stand  for 
false  conceptions.  All  things,  human  and  Divine,  are  seen  in  false  lights,  are  regarded 
as  otber  than  they  are,  indeed  as  th«  very  opposites  of  what  they  are ;  the  evil  and 
shameful  thing  is  positively  admired  as  well  as  praised;  the  holy  and  the  bnautiful 
thing  U  actur''y  hated  as  well  ai  cursed  I  These  are  the  sad  facts  which  «ie  \efure 
our  eyes. 

II.  Its  explanation.  How  can  -wo  scooant  for  such  perversity  as  this,  such  a  sad 
and  disastrous  revolution  in  the  mind  ?  It  is  surely  due  to  the  deteriorating  influence 
of  sin  upon  the  soul.  He  that  sinneth  against  God  wrongs  his  own  spiritual  nature. 
Sin  blinds,  distorts,  discolours ;  not,  indeed,  suddenly  and  altogether,  but  gradually 
and  constantly.  A  man  who  falls  under  the  power  of  any  temptation  is  something 
the  worse  in  mind  as  well  as  in  heart  for  his  sin ;  his  mental  conception  as  well  as  his 
moral  habit  is  injured — imperceptibly,  perhaps,  but  not  unimportantly.  And  by  slow 
degrees  the  mind  is  affected  and  the  view  is  changed,  until  everything  is  reversed  in 
thought  and  in  language  (see  Matt.  vi.  22,  23). 

IIL  Its  end.  "Woe  unto  them  J"  But  what  worse  penalty  can  be  inflicted  than 
this  ?  Surely  they  have  their  reward,  in  the  overthrow  of  their  reason,  in  the  darkening 
of  their  mind,  in  the  deterioration  of  their  soul.  Truly  ;  yet  are  there  not  other  evik 
which  must  be  endured  ?  Will  not  the  light  of  eternity  flash  into  these  guilty  souls, 
showing  them  whereto  they  have  fallen  and  wherein  they  have  erred,  awakening  the 
sensibilities  which  they  have  sent  to  slumber,  stirring  up  in  them  the  remorse  which 
is  due  to  those  who  have  so  wronged  themselves,  so  ill-treated  their  fellows,  so  sinn*^ 
against  the  Lord  ? — 0,. 

Ver.  21. — The  pitiful  estate  of  the  proud.  We  may  well  commiserate  those  who  are 
"  wise  in  their  own  eyes,"  inasmuch  as— 

I.  Thbt  have  a  false  conception  as  to  theib  own  oapaoitt.  They  think 
themselves  able  to  determine  what  is  true  and  beautiful  and  good,  when  they  are 
liamfully  and  pitifully  in  need  of  guidance  from  without ;  their  estimate  of  themselves 
is  essentially  wrong.     They  "  live  in  a  fool's  paradise," 

II.  They  are  shutting  out  from  their  minds  the  truth  which  would  bedeeh 
AND  BNNOBLB  THEM.  The  blessing  of  the  Lord  is  promised  to  the  humble-hearted,  to 
those  who  have  the  docility  of  the  little  child.  It  is  they,  and  they  only,  who  are 
willing  to  empty  (hemselves  of  their  own  fancies  and  follies  that  they  may  receive  the 
Eternal  truth  ui'  God.     The  men  who  think  themselves  wise  can  find  no  room  in  thai* 


OH.  V.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  97 

minds  for  those  Divine  teachings  which  save,  which  purify,  which  enlarge,  whicb 
transform  the  heart  and  life  (see  1  Cor.  iii.  18). 

ni.  They  akb  in  a  spibituai,  condition  which  is  fositivklt  and  even 
PECULIARLY  OFFENSIVE  TO  GoD.  The  Word  of  God,  Old  Testament  and  New,  is 
studded  with  texts  in  which  the  dis]ileasure  of  Almighty  God  is  revealed  against  the 
haughty  of  heart.  God  "  resists  "  the  proud,  and  causes  them  to  fall.  It  is  the  arrogant 
Pharisee  who  is  no<  justiflrd  in  the  great  Teacher's  parahle,  who  is  continually  rehuted 
by  thp  Lord  of  truth,  who  is  repeatedly  condemned  by  the  Searcher  of  souls.  We 
may  therefore  conclude,  concerning  those  who  are  prudent  in  their  own  sight,  that — ' 

IV.  They  ark  all  unready  fob  the  great  day  of  trial.  They  will  then 
find  themselves  rejected  instead  of  being  accepted  and  commended,  and  to  the  ^loom 
of  condemnation  will  be  added  the  bitter  mortification  of  being  utterly  and  miserably 
disappointed. — 0. 

Vera.  24 — 30. — The  Judgments  of  the  Lord.  These  verses  are  obviously  pictorial  and 
fig;urative;  they  must  be  treated  as  highly  hyperbolical  or  they  will  be  misconceived. 
Though  their  primary  reference  is  to  the  judgments  which  impend 'd  over  thu  guilty 
natiim,  we  may  discover  in  them  some  principles  which  not  only  extend  to  every 
age,  but  apply  to  every  individual  soul. 

I.  That  tub  individual  as  well  as  the  nation  may  be  the  object  of  the 
AWFUL  ANOER  OF  Almiohty  God.  "  The  anger  of  the  Lord  is  kindled  against  his 
people"  (verj  25).  Without  attributing  to  the  Divine  Spirit  the  very  same  sentiment 
as  that  which  fills  our  human  minds,  we  may  and  should  feel  that  the  burning  indigo 
nation  of  which  we  are  conscious  when  we  witness  wrong-doing  is  the  reflection  of  the 
"anger  of  the  Lord"  against  all  unrighteousness;  and  we  do  well  to  think  that  what 
we  now  feel  in  regard  to  others  God  may  feel  toward  us,  if,  like  his  ancient  people,  we 
fall  into  disobedience  and  condemnation.  Well  may  we,  "  who  are  his  offspring," 
shrink  from  the  high  displeasure  of  the  holy  Father  of  souls. 

II.  That  God's  anger  is  excited  by  our  inattention  and  disobedience. 
"  Because  they  have  cast  away  the  Law  .  .  .  and  despised  the  Word  of  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel "  (ver.  24).  The  evil  thing  which  God  hates  takes  many  forms,  the  later  and 
darker  ones  being  shucking  even  in  the  sight  of  good  men.  But  they  all  sjiring  from  a 
disregard  of  his  will  m  revealed  in  his  Word.  Despising  the  Word  in  the  mind  leads 
to  a  casting  out  of  the  Law  from  the  rule  of  life,  and  thus  shows  itself  in  all  kinds  of 
iniquity.  He  who  is  neglecting  the  will  of  God,  as  that  will  is  stated  in  his  Word,  is  at 
the  source  of  the  stream  of  sin,  and  is  in  danger  of  being  carried  down  to  the  rapids  of 
destruction. 

III.  That  the  judgments  of  God  are  sometimes  bwot  in  thbib  approach. 
"  They  shall  come  with  speed  swiftly."  Sometimes  they  are  "  leaden-footed  but  heavy- 
handed;  "yet  at  other  times  they  speedily  overtake  the  transgressor.  At  all  times, 
indeed,  a  violation  of  righteousness  is  instantly  attended  with  some  spiritual  injury  and 
loss ;  but,  beyond  this,  the  more  apparent  punishment  often  comes  with  rapid  march 
to  confront  and  confound  the  transgressor. 

IV.  That  these  Divinb  judhjien'ts  are  sometimes  unexpectedly  prolonged. 
"  For  all  this  his  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  his  hand  is  stretched  out  stiU  "  (ver.  25). 
Men  are  apt  to  think,  when  they  have  suffered  some  great  adversity,  that  God  has 
poured  out  his  anger,  and  that  they  may  thenceforth  expect  continuous  prosperity. 
but  they  overlook  the  two  lacts:  (1)  that  at  any  time  in  each  man's  life  there  is  a 
vast  amount  of  unpaid  penalty  for  which  God  may  righteously  punish  him,  and  (2)  that 
God  is  seeking  a  remedial  as  well  as  a  punitive  end  in  his  inflictions,  and  that  impeni- 
tence has  always  reason  to  fear — ]ierliaps  we  should  more  properly  say  hope  -that  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  will  still  be  strutched  out  in  the  attitude  and  act  of  correction. 

V.  That  they  are  ikresistibly  STRONa.  "  Their  root  shall  be  as  rottenness,  and 
their  blossom  shall  go  up  as  dust,"  etc.  (ver.  24 ;  see  vers.  27—30).  God's  judgments 
cannot  be  evaded;  there  is  no  escape  from  them  by  human  strength  or  cunning.  They 
move  up  with  steady,  unflinching  step  (ver.  27);  they  strike  with  unerring  aim  and 
piercing  power  (ver.  28) ;  they  reach  the  source  as  well  as  the  sign  of  prosperity^- 
root  as  well  as  blossom  (ver.  24);  they  leave  no  way  of  escape  open — seaward,  heaver - 
ward,  landward  (ver.  30).     "It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  handi  of  the  liviii{ 


98  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  [oh.  v.  1—30 

God;"  "Who  may  stand  in  his  sight,  when  once  he  is  angry?"  Therefore: 
1.  Hearken  diligently  to  his  Word  and  hasten  to  obey,  that  the  anger  of  the  Lord  be 
not  kindled,  but  that  his  good  pleasure  may  abide  and  abound  unto  you.  2.  If  any 
one  of  his  judgments  fall,  turn  unto  hiin  with  unhesitating  penitence,  and  his  anger 
wUl  be  "  turned  away  "  (see  Joel  ii.  12 — 14). — 0. 

Ver.  4. — The  ingratitude  of  an  unfruitful  life.  The  passage  connected  with  thli 
rerse  is  conceived  quite  in  the  spirit  of  our  Lord's  parables.  In  a  picture  taken  from 
familiar  scenes  of  nature,  the  relations  between  God  and  his  people  are  shown.  A*  in 
the  parable  spoken  by  Nathan,  a  definite  judgment  is  asked.  That  judgment,  whether 
given  audibly  or  only  felt,  is  made  an  earnest  appeal  of  God  to  their  own  cooscience 
and  their  own  hearts.    Three  things  are  set  forth  prominently  in  this  parable. 

I.  The  obacious  attentioks.  The  picture  of  a  vineyard  was  especially  interestit^ 
to  Isaiah's  audience,  because  Canaan  was  a  land  ot  vines,  which  grew  freely  along  the 
terraced  hillsides.  The  prophet  observes  that  the  vineyard  of  which  he  speaks  had  every 
advantage  of  situation  and  soil ;  it  was  properly  protected,  well  cleared,  planted  with  vines 
ol  the  choicest  quality,  and  fitted  with  everything  necessary  to  the  securing  of  abun- 
dant fruitage.  Everything  was  dcie,  according  to  the  description,  that  good  judgment, 
large  ability,  and  careful  consideration  could  suggest.  It  was  not  a  mere  vineyard 
planted  for  gain;  it  was  a  garden  of  delights;  the  pleasure  as  well  as  the  interest  of 
the  owner  were  bound  up  in  it.  Such  was  the  land  of  Canaan,  as  prepared  by  God  for 
his  people;  and  such  was  Israel,  as  God's  vine  planted  in  it.  What  nation  ever  was 
like  Israel,  in  the  special  choice,  and  call,  and  settling,  and  tending,  and  pruning,  ami 
nourishing,  and  loving  interest  of  God  ?  The  deep  feelings  of  God  towards  them  find 
very  tender  expression  in  the  books  of  the  prophets  (see  Jer.  iL  2,  21 ;  Hos.  iL  ;  vL  4 ; 
xi.,  etc.).  We  may  well  think  that  no  other  nation  except  England  has  ever  been  so 
favoured  of  God.  He  has  chosen  hoi',  fenced  her  round,  "  encompasPS'l  her  with  the 
inviolate  sea,"  enriched  her  with  food  growing  out  of  her  soil,  and  with  wealth  stored 
in  almost  inexhausiible  heaps  beneath  it.  He  has  lit,  even  in  her  martyrs'  fires,  a 
candle  of  truth  which  neither  the  dogmatism  of  science  nor  the  extravagances  of  priests, 
will  ever  blow  out.  He  has  planted  her  with  noble  elements  of  character,  given  fruitful 
soil  for  their  growth,  watched  against  evil  influences,  sent  forth  right,  wise,  faithful 
husbandmen  in  every  age  to  prune  and  tend  and  clear  out  the  stones  of  ol>struction. 
Surely  God  rightly  looks  for  fruit — for  full,  rich,  ripe  clusters  of  the  "  vine  of  Sorek  " 
hanging  on  the  branches  of  England.  But  we  may  take  the  description  home  to  our- 
selves. What  gracious  attentions  have  we  received !  Sometimes,  looking  over  our  lives, 
it  seems  to  us  that  if  we  had  been  his  sole  favourites  in  the  world,  he  could  not  have 
been  more  kind,  more  constant,  more  gracious,  more  unsparing  in  his  dealings  with  us. 
We  think  of  the  godly  families  into  which  we  entered  as  members;  of  our  saintly 
"  forbears  ;  "  of  the  trust  of  health,  and  mental  power ;  of  the  place  where  we  are  set, 
and  the  successes  we  have  won.  Surely  we  are  just  a  vineyard  of  delights  to  our  God, 
and  we  ought  to  respond  to  him  with  abundant  fruitfulness. 

II.  The  reasonable  expectations.  "  I  looked  that  it  should  bring  forth  grapes." 
He  who  plants  and  tends  flowers  does  so  expecting  to  gain  beautiful  blossoms ;  and 
he  is  cheered  all  through  the  long  waiting  time  by  the  pleasant  expectation.  He  who 
casts  corn-seeds  into  the  ploughed  earth  buries  them  with  visions  of  the  waving  harvest 
and  the  loaded  barns.  He  has  long  patience  because  of  right  and  reasonable  expecta- 
tions. He  who  prepares  a  vineyard  waits  while  the  rough  branches  cover  with  leaves, 
and  the  clusters  hang  down,  growing  bigger  every  day.  He  too  expects  the  riches  and 
the  joy  of  the  ingathering.  And  God  planted  those  Jews  in  fertile  Canaan,  expectiiig 
from  them  the  fruitage  of  a  clear  witness  for  him  to  all  the  nations  around.  He  looked  lor 
fruits  of  judgment.  He  looked  fur  righteousness.  He  expected  that  they  would  be  a 
"  holy  people,  zealous  of  good  works."  What,  then,  does  God  now  expect  of  his  English 
vineyard  ?  What  does  he  expect  oi  uit  We  may  remind  of  some  of  the  good  fruit 
God  expects  to  find  on  our  tree.  1.  He  expects  us  to  reach  a  very  high  standard  ol 
Christian  intelligence.  Not  merely  believing  what  we  are  told,  but  finding  out  for 
ourselves  what,  upon  reasonable  grounds,  seems  to  be  true.  Able  to  give  good  reasons 
ror  the  hope  that  is  in  us,  with  meiknesa  and  fear.  2.  He  expects  an  unmistakable 
wttness  for  hiioself,  and  for  his  truth.    There  should  be  no  hiding  our  light  undei  a 


OH.  V.  1—30,]         THE  BOOK  OP   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  99 

bushel.  No  hesitating  to  confess  whose  we  are,  and  whom  we  serve.  No  acting  incon- 
sistently with  the  Christ-name  which  we  bear.  3.  He  expects  abundant  fruit  oi 
charitable  deeds  and  devoted  labours.  The  branches  on  the  vine  which  will  most 
glorify  God  are  those  that  hang  down  low  enough  for  men  to  pick.  His  law  is,  "  Inas- 
much as  ye  did  it  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  did  it  unto  me." 
4.  He  looks  for  holy  and  beautiful  character.  These  are  the  grapes  that  ought  to  grow 
on  Christian  trees :. "  Love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meek- 
ness, temperance."  "  If  these  things  be  in  you  and  abound,  they  make  you  that  you 
shall  neither  be  barren  nor  unfruitful  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Chriat;" 
"  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit." 

III.  The  painful  disappointment.  Nothing  but  hedgerow  dog-roses  bloflsoming  on 
the  budded  tree.  Nothing  but  sour,  useless,  wild  grapes  hanging  on  the  grafted  stock. 
Grapes  like  crab-apples,  or  apples  of  Sodom,  good-looking,  but  tasteless.  The  Hebrew 
word,  indeed,  is  a  very  vigorous  one,  and  expresses  even  the  offensive  putrefaction  of 
these  grapes.  All  the  loving  care,  the  labouring,  and  the  tending  seem  to  have  been 
in  vain.  Brought  out  from  idolatry,  the  Jews  sought  and  served  idols.  Separated 
from  temptations  to  moral  evils,  they  became  utterly  depraved.  Fenced  in  to  righteous- 
ness, over  the  wall  they  went,  in  the  dreadful  licence  of  iniquity.  Sometimes  there 
was  a  fair  show  of  leaf,  but  it  was  "  nothing  but  leaves."  Sometimes  there  seemed  a 
show  of  fruit.  The  heavenly  husbandman  tried  it,  and  it  crushed  into  foul  ashes  in  the 
mouth.  We  may  well  sympathize  with  Grod  in  his  sore  disappointment  at  the  result 
of  all  his  care  of  his  ancient  people.  Illustrate  by  the  scene  of  our  Lord's  weeping  over 
Jerusalem.  Does  England  disappoint  God,  too  ?  At  first  it  seems  as  if  we  could  say — 
Surely  not !  Think  of  her  spires  and  towers  dotting  every  landscape;  her  hospitals  in 
every  town ;  her  thousands  of  godly  homes.  But  what  shall  we  say  of  the  awful 
procession  of  her  drunkards ;  the  vision  of  her  drunkards'  homes ;  her  outcast  children  ; 
her  overcrowded  dwellings,  where  decency  cannot  find  a  place;  her  gin-palaces;  her 
gaols;  her  madhouses;  her  workhouses ;  her  soldiers'  barracks,  and  sailors'  tempters; 
her  "  city  snares  and  town  traps  "  ?  Do  we  disappoint  our  gracious  God  ?  What  is 
the  fruitage  of  our  characters,  our  homes,  our  places  of  prayer,  our  business,  our  Church 
life  and  relations  ?   Must  lie  say,  "  Wild  grapes,  only  wild  grapes ;  cut  it  down  "  ? — B.  T. 

Vers.  5,  6. — Divine  Judgments  on  ingratitude.  The  picture  presented  is  one  of  com- 
plete desolation.  A  miserable  sight  is  the  untended  vineyard.  No  desolation  is  so 
complete  as  that  which  conjes  to  lands  which  man  has  once  tilled  and  then  left  neg- 
lected. Hugh  Macmillaii  remarks  that  this  judgment  has  even  been  literally  fulfilled. 
"  No  country  in  the  world  has  such  variety  and  abundance  of  thorny  plants  as  Palestine 
in  its  present  desolation ;  there  are  giant  thistles,  growing  to  the  height  of  a  man  on 
horseback,  impenetrable  thickets  of  buckthorn,  and  bare  hillsides  studded  with  paliurus 
and  tribulus."  ".The  absence  of  the  pruning  and  digging  answers  to  the  withdrawal  of 
the  means  of  moral  and  spiritual  culture.  The  command  given  to  the  clouds  implies 
the  cessation  of  all  gracious  spiritual  influences." 

I.  The  unobateful  uust  lose  theib  pbitileoe.  The  grace  of  God,  and  the  pro- 
visions, defences,  and  guidings  of  grace,  are  the  glory  of  a  life  and  of  a  nation.  No 
nation  has  ever  been  so  favoured  as  Israel  was.  Compare  Jehovah's  pleadings  and 
reproaches  in  Hos.  ii. ;  and  also  our  Lord's  parable  Of  the  "  cumberer  of  the  ground  " 
(Luke  xiii.  6,  9).  "  God,  in  a  way  of  righteous  judgment,  denies  his  grace  to  those  that 
have  long  received  it  in  vain.  The  sum  of  all  is  that  those  who  would  not  bring  forth 
good  fruit  should  bring  forth  none.  The  curse  of  barrenness  is  the  punishment  of  the 
sin  of  barrenness  (Mark  li.  14).  This  has  its  frequent  accomplishment  in  the  departure 
of  God's  Spirit  iirom  those  persons  who  liave  long  resisted  him,  and  striven  against  him  " 
(Matthew  Henry). 

II.  The  ttngbatefttl  must  be  left  to  themselves  awhile.  Compare  the  figure  of 
the  unfaithfnl  wife  in  Hos.  ii.,  who  must  be  left  alone  to  her  wilfulness  and  its  bitter 
consequences.  Illustrate  from  the  garden  let  alone.  The  grass  grows  rank,  the  weeds 
flourish  and  seed  themselves,  the  paths  are  full  of  green ;  the  place  looks  neglected  and 
miserable.  So  is  the  man,  so  is  the  nation,  from  which  God  withdraws  his  gracious 
band,  his  special  care.  Illustrate  the  misery  of  David  in  those  months  when,  because 
of  his  sin,  God's  grace  was  withheld.    His  "  bones  waxed  old  through  his  roaring  all 


100  THE    BOOK   OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.        [cm.  ▼.  1— 3a 

the  day  long ; "  and  presently  he  comes  to  pray,  with  a  great  intensity  of  feeling, 
"  Restore  unto  me  the  joy  of  thy  f  alvation."  There  is  a  sense  in  which,  like  Jerusalem, 
our  "  day  of  grace  may  be  passed,"  and  we  may  be  left  to  ourselves,  to  the  woe  of  bein^ 
ourselves  only. — E.  T. 

Ver.  7. —  The  difference  between  what  God  aski  and  what  Ood  gets.  The  ori^nal 
terms  of  this  verse  contain  a  very  striking  play  upon  words,  which  can  but  imperfectly 
be  rendered  into  English.  "  He  looked  for  judgment  (mishpat),  and  behold  oppres- 
sion (^mishpach) ;  for  righteousness  (tsedakah,),  and  behold  a  cry  (tseakaK)  of  the  oppressed 
for  help."  Ur.  C.  Gtikie  translates  the  verse  thus :  "And  he  hoped  for  deeds  of  good, 
but,  behold,  there  are  only  deeds  of  blood ;  for  righteousness,  and,  lo  I  there  is  only  the 
cry  of  the  oppressed."  The  appeal  of  God  is  applicable  to  all  the  ages,  and,  taken  in 
a  large  sense,  may  be  also  applied  to  us.  It  should  be  our  exceeding  distreis  that  fo 
often  we  give  to  God  quite  other  things  than  he  asks  of  us. 

I.  God  always  asks  for  righteousness.  The  reference  in  the  text  is  to  public 
justice;  risht  dealing  between  man  and  man;  due  considerateness  for  others ;  and  the 
faithful  administration  of  laws,  both  social  and  ecclesiastical.  The  people  ought  to  be 
honest  in  all  their  dealings,  and  the  magistrates  just  in  all  their  decisions.  But  God 
asks  for  "  righteousness  "  in  a  much  higher  sense  than  this.  The  creatures  he  has  made 
in  his  image  he  wants  to  be  like  himself.  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy ; "  "  Be  ye 
therefore  perfect,  even  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect."  The  righteousness  that 
he  asks  from  us  he  has  nhown  us  in  the  person  and  the  life  of  his  dear  Son.  It  is  for 
us  no  vague  thing,  gathered  up  into  a  great  and  somewhat  mysterious  word;  it  is, 
plainly  and  practically,  our  being  changed  into  Christ's  imaije,  and  bringing  forth  fruits 
of  goodness  like  his.  This  may  be  fully  worked  out  and  illustrated  along  three  lines. 
The  rigliteousness  God  asks  of  us  is  (1)  loyalty  to  his  revealed  truth ;  (2)  obedience  to 
his  declared  will;  and  (3)  manifestation,  in  practical  life,  of  the  spirit  of  heavenly. 
Divine  charity. 

II.  GoD  OFTEN  GETS  "OPPRESSION  "  AND  A  "  CRT."  Here,  too,  the  first  saggestion  is 
of  social  and  national  evil;  injustice  of  magistrates,  and  masterfulness  of  the  strong 
,ind  wealthy  over  the  poor.  Everything  was  carried  by  clamour  and  noise;  wickedness 
liad  usurped  the  place  of  judgment.  But  here,  too,  the  response  made  to  God  may  be 
Iralt  with  in  a  larger  way.  The  essence  of  all  "oppression  "  and  "  cry"  is  somebody's 
ilf-secking  spirit  and  self-seeking  ways.     In  this  we  grieve  God.     He  asks  life  for 

liira,  aud  for  others  in  service  to  him  ;  and  we  give  him  lifp  full  of  self,  that  can  even 
Livtmple  over  his  poor  in  accomplishing  our  own  self-ends.  So  we,  too,  come  under  the 
Divine  reproaches  and  judgments. — B.  T. 

Ver.  8. — The  covetous  spirit,  and  its  judgment.  The  picture  presented  in  this  verse 
c!in  be  matched  by  the  conduct  of  our  English  king,  who  destroyed  the  villages  to 
make  the  New  Forest;  or  by  the  makers  of  deer-forests  in  North  Britain,  who  have 
driven  away  the  natives.  In  Isaiah's  time  the  wealthy  men  were  buying  up  the  houses 
and  estates,  and  destroying  the  old  village  life  of  Palestine.  "  In  the  place  of  the  small 
freeholders,  there  rose  up  a  class  of  large  proprietors,  while  the  origuial  holders  sank 
into  slavery,  or  tenants-at-will,  paying  exorbitant  rents  in  kind  or  money,  and  liable 
at  any  moment  to  be  evicted"  (Dean  Plumptre).  Bisliop  Latimer,  in  the  sixteenth 
century,  makes  a  bold  protest  against  the  enclosure  of  commnns.  Grasping  after 
property  is  almost  always  connected  with  a  neglect  of  charitable  duties  and  a  willingness 
lo  sacrifice  the  good  of  others.  Such  accumulation  of  landed  property  was  funda- 
mentally opposed  to  the  Mosaic  regulations.  Illustrate  by  the  law  of  jubilee,  which 
made  all  land  in  Palestine  purchaseable  only  on  lease  (comp.  Numb,  xxvii.  1^11; 
xixiii.  54 ;  1  Kings  xxi.  4 ;  Lev.  xxv.  8 — 17). 

I.  LiviNO  TO  GET.  There  are  three  ways  of  looking  at  life;  three  things  which  im 
may  supremely  aim  at  in  life.  1.  We  may  live  to  get.  South  says,  "  The  covetous 
person  lives  as  if  the  w^jrld  were  made  altogether  for  him,  and  not  he  for  the  world ;  to 
take  in  everyihing  and  part  with  nothing."  Austin  defines  covetousuess  as  a  "  dishonest 
and  insatiable  desire  of  gain."  The  Prophet  Micali  describes  such  persons,  "They  covet 
fields,  and  lake  them  by  violence;  and  houses,  and  take  them  away :  so  they  oppress  a 
man  aud  his  house,  even  a  man  and  his  heritage."    The  tenth  commandment  wjiolly 


CH.  T.  1—30.]         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROrHET  iSAIAa  lOJ 

forbids  our  making  any  personal  gain  the  end  and  aim  of  life.  Show  under  what  self- 
deceiving  forms  this  covetous  desire  to  get  ensnares  men  nowadays.  2.  We  may  live 
to  be.  That  is,  to  culture  ourselves,  and  win  the  worship  of  men  for  what  we  are,  ia 
talent,  ikill,  and  virtue.  This  is  nobler ;  and  this  is,  in  measure,  right  and  good  ;  yut 
it  has  this  exceeding  moral  peril,  that  it  keeps  us  in  the  self-spheres.  It  may  easily 
|>ass  into  the  degrading  thing — covetousness  for  fame.  3.  We  may  live  to  serve.  This 
!B  the  Divine  idea  of  life  for  us.  This  is  the  Christ-like  pattern  of  life  for  us.  This  is 
the  kind  of  life  that  suffering,  sinning  humanity  asks  for  from  us.  They  who  can  live 
to  terve  are,  with  Christ,  after  Christ,  and  in  his  strength,  the  world's  saviours,  and  the 
Ood-glorifiers. 

II.  God's  judgments  on  him  who  uvks  to  get.  Those  judgments  will  come  as 
natural  agencies,  as  fixed  results  of  ever-working  iaw,  and  as  circuinstances  for  which 
men  may  think  to  find  easy  explanation;  but  they  are  nuue  the  less  direct  Divine 
judgments.  Snch  judgments  ou  the  covetous  take  two  forms.  1.  Character  is  debased 
by  the  constant  getting  nnd  grasping.  This  may  be  effectively  illustrated  in  the  case 
of  the  apostate  Judas.  Nu  moral  deterioration  is  so  serious  or  so  certain  as  that  of  the 
covetous  man.  Hardening  against  his  fellow-men,  he  is  hardening  against  God.  Crush- 
ing but  all  considerateness  and  all  charity,  he  loses  men's  love  and  God's  smile,  and  is 
wretched  indeed  when  he  has  got  all,  and  is  "  placed  alone  in  the  midst  of  the  land." 
If  any  poor  creature  of  our  humanity  calls  for  otir  supremest  pity,  it  is  surely  the  man 
who  has  lived  to  get,  and  made  his  immortal  soul  grovel  among  mere  possessions. 
"  Take  heed,  and  beware  of  covetousness;  for  a  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abun- 
dance of  the  things  that  he  possesseth."  2.  The  calamities  of  life  will  prove  utterly 
ruinous  to  the  covetous.  Because  they  will  touch  them  at  their  tenderest  point, 
destroying  their  gains.  The  picture  presented  in  tlie  verses  is  a  most  affecting  one. 
By  the  insecurity  of  the  land  the  fine  mansions  are  uninhabited,  and  the  fields  are 
ceglected.  Travellers  tells  us  of  the  humiliating  sight  of  decayed  mansions  in  the 
East.  War  and  civil  commotion,  often  the  natural  result  of  the  masterful  ruling  of 
covetous  men,  make  property  valueless,  and  so  the  evil  brings  round  its  own  judgment. 
The  law  works  universally,  sometimes  quickly,  at  other  times  slowly,  so  that  nien 
presume  on  its  delaying,  that  "  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap." 
Apply  by  inquiring  what  is  the  end  and  aim  of  life  to  the  hearers.  Jacob  would  get, 
and  he  got  years  oif  homelessness,  hard  toil,  and  care.  Achan  would  get,  and  he  got  an 
early  and  dreadful  death.  Gehazi  would  get,  and  he  got  the  leprosy.  Ananias  and 
Sapphira  would  get,  and  they  got  a  sudden  destruction.  Woe — earth  cries  for  it,  and 
heaven  sends  it — woe,  sooner  or  later,  for  very  one  who  liveth  that  he  may  get,  and 
is  utterly  unworthy  of  him  who,  showing  God  to  us,  went  about  among  his  fellows  as 
"One  that  serveth."— R.  T. 

Vers.  11,  12. —  The  sin  of  dissipation.  That  which  is  here  reproved  ia  not  mere 
drinking  habits ;  it  is  the  riotous  feasting  and  wasting  which  characterizes  the  sensualist. 
Early  drinking  was  considered  by  the  Jews,  as  it  was  by  the  Komaus,  a  mark  of  the 
most  degraded  sensuality.  "In  the  time  of  Isaiah,  the  sensual  Jews  appear  to  have 
employed  musicians,  and  all  kinds  of  merry-makers,  as  dancers,  njimics,  buffoons,  etc., 
such  as  are  still  common  all  over  the  East."  "  They  shocked  public  feeling  by  morning 
banquets "  (Eccles.  x.  16,  17 ;  Acts  ii.  14).  Morier  says,  "  The  Persians,  when  they 
commit  a  debauch,  arise  betimes,  and  esteem  the  morning  as  the  best  time  for  beginning 
to  drink  wine,  by  which  means  they  carry  on  their  excess  till  night."  Dissipation,  in 
its  comprehensive  sense,  is  the  temptation  and  the  sin  of  our  young  men,  especially 
of  those  belonging  to  the  wealthier  classes.  The  excitement  and  rioting  of  it  may  be 
illustrated  by  the  following  true  incident.  When  inflamed  with  wine,  a  young  man 
was  challenged  to  eat  a  five-pound  note.  Placing  it  between  slices  of  bread,  in  wild 
foolishness  and  wickedness,  he  actually  destroyed  the  note  in  this  way.  We  fix  atten- 
tion on  the  wastefulness  of  dissiiiation,  and  point  out  that  it  is  a  grievous  sin  before 
God,  OS  abusing  his  sacred  trusts.  Illustrate  from  (1)  the  trust  <if  time ;  (2)  the  trust 
of  property ;  (3)  the  trust  of  the  body  ;  (4)  the  tiust  of  the  mind  ;  (5)  the  trust  of  the 
power  to  serve  others.  Show  how  mischievous  is  the  influence  exerted  by  the  familiar 
raying, "  Young  men  must  sow  their  wild  oats."  They  should  have  no  wild  oats  to 
so*  i  and  if  they  have  any,  the  very  last  thing  they  should  do  with  them  ii  sow  them, 


102  TSE  book  of  the  prophet  ISAIAH.        [(h.  v.  1—80. 

for  they  will  surely  spring  up,  and  bear,  for  their  reaping,  a  harvest  of  woe  unspeakabla 
F.  W.  Robertson  says,  "  There  are  men  who  '  make  provision  for  the  flesh,  to  fulfil  the 
lusts  thereof.'  They  whet  the  appetites  by  indulgence.  They  whip  the  jaded  seneet 
to  their  work.  Whatever  the  constitutional  bias  may  be — anger,  intemperance,  epicurism, 
indolence,  desires — there  are  societies,  conversations,  scenes,  which  supply  fuel  for  the 
flame,  as  well  as  opposite  ones  which  cut  off  the  nutriment.  Such  a  man  is  looking 
forward  to  a  harvest  wherein  he  may  reap  the  fruit  of  his  present  anticipations.  And 
he  shall  reap  it.  He  has  sown  to  the  flesh,  and  of  the  flesh  he  shall  reap  corruption. 
This  is  in  his  case  the  ruin  of  the  souL  He  shall  reap  the  harvest  of  disappointment — 
the  hai-vest  of  bitter,  useless  remorse.  His  harvest  is  a  soul  in  flames,  and  the  tongue 
that  no  drop  can  cool." — B.  T. 

Vers.  18,  20,  21,  23. — Four  grievous  sins.  The  ungodly  spirit  finds  very  Tarious 
modes  of  expression  in  wilful  and  self-pleasing  actions.  Men's  sins  are  repeated  over 
and  over  again  in  every  age,  sometimes  taking  more  open  and  defiant  forms,  and  some- 
times hiding  behind  a  pleasant  outward  show  of  delicacy  and  refinement,  but  always 
the  "  abominable  things  which  God  hates."  The  coarse  sins  of  Eastern  peoples  seem 
offensive  to  our  sensitive  Western  nations ;  but  the  sins  are  here  amongst  us,  only  in  a 
disguise  which  deceives  us.     Isaiah  reproves — 

I.  The  sin  of  prksumption.  (Vers.  18,  19.)  Evil-doers  are  thought  of  as  harnessing 
themselves  to  the  chariot  of  sin;  as  bold  enough  even  to  scoff  at  God's  threatened 
judgments,  and  taunt  him  with  his  merciful  delayings,  saying,  "  Let  Jehovah  hasten ; 
let  him  hurry  on  his  work,  that  we  may  see  it."  Wordsworth  paraphrases  ver.  18 
thus :  "  Woe  to  them  that  harness  themselves  as  brute  beasts  to  iniquity,  with  cords 
of  falsehood,  and  drag  on  the  weight  of  sin,  as  a  waggon,  with  the  ropes  of  vicious 
habits."  Illustrate  by  the  scofBng  thief  on  the  cross;  and  by  the  parable  of  the  man 
who  presumed  upon  his  abundant  harvest,  and  found  he  was  suddenly  called  away  from  all 
his  wealth.  Presumption  is  the  evil  into  which  men  are  led  through  temporary  successes. 
See  the  effect  of  prosperity  on  Nebuchadnezzar.  It  is  a  constant  effect  of  luxury  and 
self-indulgence  and  immorality.  It  is  the  brink  of  utter  and  irretrievable  ruin.  For 
the  presumptuous  man  there  is  little  hope.  He  must  fall,  and  be  bruised  and 
crushed,  ere  he  will  learn  lessons  of  humility  and  trust.  David  knew  human  nature 
well,  and  he  taught  us  to  pray,  "  Keep  back  thy  servant  also  from  presumptuous  sins ; 
let  them  not  have  dominion  over  me." 

II.  The  sin  of  confusing  moral  distinctions.  (Ver.  20.)  "  Those  do  a  great 
deal  of  wrong  to  God  and  religion  and  conscience — to  their  own  souls,  and  to  the  souls 
of  others  who  misrepresent  [evil  and  good],  and  put  false  colours  upon  them  ;  who  call 
drunkenness  good  fellowship,  and  covetousuess  good  husbandry,  and,  when  they  per- 
secute the  people  of  God,  think  they  do  him  good  service ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  call 
seriousness  ill  nature,  and  sober  singularity  ill  breeding,  and  say  all  manner  of  evil 
falsely  concerning  the  ways  of  godliness  "  (Matthew  Henry).  The  text  well  describes  the 
spirit  of  our  age.  In  oui  over-refinements  we  are  losing  the  sternness  of  the  truth, 
carefully  polishing  off  every  edge  and  point  and  corner  that  might  prick  conscience 
into  activity.  We  are  toning  down  moral  distinctions  until  they  are  becoming  quite 
confused  and  indistinct;  we  can  hardly  tell  for  certain  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong, 
what  is  evil  and  what  is  good.  One  of  the  most  thoughtful  of  American  divines.  Dr.  J. 
A.  Alexander,  writes  thus :  "  Do  not  we  with  one  breath  assert  the  inviolable  sanctity  of 
the  truth,  but  with  the  next  breath  make  provision  for  benevolent,  business,  jocose,  or 
thoughtless  falsehood  ?  Do  we  not,  in  the  abstract,  assert  the  claims  of  justice,  and  the 
obligation  to  give  every  man  his  own,  but,  in  application  to  specific  cases,  think  it  law'ul 
to  enrich  ourselves  at  other  men's  expense,  or  take  advantage  of  another's  weakness, 
ignorance,  or  error?  Do  we  not  admit  the  paramoimt  importance  of  religious  duties  in 
general,  but  in  detail  dissect  away  the  vital  parts  as  superstition,  sanctimony,  or 
fanaticism?  Do  we  not  approve  the  requisitions  of  the  Law,  and  the  provisions  of  the 
gospel,  in  so  far  as  they  apply  to  other  people,  but  repudiate  or  pass  them  by  ai 
applying  to  ourselves?  What  is  all  this  but  saying  of  evil,  it  is  good,  and  of  good,  it 
is  evil  ?  " 

IIL  The  sin  of  self-conceit.  (Ver.  21.)  The  first  reference  is  to  counsellors, 
"  whose  ideal  of  statesmanship  was  a  series  of  shifts  and  expedients,  based  on  no  prlnoi|jl8 


OttT.  I— 30.]  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  103 

of  righteousness."  This  form  of  sin  is  too  familiar  to  need  much  suggestion  as  to  its 
treatment.  God  resisteth  those  who  are  conceited  of  their  owd  wisdom  and  lean  to 
tlieir  own  understanding.  "  Seest  thou  a  man  wise  in  his  own  eyes  ?  there  is  more  hope 
of  a  fool  than  of  him." 

IV.  Thb  sin  of  COBEUPTINO  JUSTIOK,  (Ver.  23.)  "Who  clear  the  guilty  for  a 
bribe,  and  take  the  rights  of  worthy  men  from  them."  The  idea  is  that  justice  is 
sacrificed  to  meet  the  demands  of  an  expensive  luxuriousness.  So  men  now  grind  the 
faces  of  those  who  worls  for  them  to  support  their  own  extravagances.  No  greater  evil 
can  come  upon  a  land  than  the  poi^ioning  of  the  fountains  of  justice ;  and  there  is  no 
more  certain  source  of  national  discontent  hastening  to  rebellion.  The  prophet  was 
himself  deeply  moved  by  the  picture  of  the  evils  of  his  time  which  rose  up  before  him. 
Nowhere  could  he  loot  and  gain  the  relief  of  a  hope.  Such  an  utterly  wicljed  people 
must  suffer.  Seaward  he  looked,  but  there  was  not  one  gleam  of  light.  Landward  he 
looked,  but  not  one  gleam  of  light.  Such  is  the  end  of  wickedness.  Bold  though  it 
may  seem,  defiant  as  it  may  sound,  long  as  it  may  appear  to  hold  out,  this  is  the  issue 
of  it — dark,  all  dark.    The  very  "  light  is  darkeneid  in  the  heavens  thereof." — R.  T. 

Ver.  20. — Tks  importance  of  adequate  impressions  of  sin.  We  seldom  hear  sin  spoken 
about  now  as  the  old  prophets  spoke  about  it.  We  do  not  think  about  sin  as  the  defiance 
of  God,  the  attempteii  overthrow  of  his  authority,  the  expression  of  the  soul's  hatred  of 
God,  and  therefore  calling  for  terrible  vindications  of  the  Divine  power  and  claims.  In 
reading  biographies  of  very  holy  and  devoted  Uhristians,  we  have  observed  that  they  had 
deep  and  overwhelming  impressions  of  the  evil  of  sin — impressions  quite  beyond  the 
reach  of  our  sympathy.  Perhaps  we  have  inclined  to  call  them  morbid,  and  to 
think  such  views  were  the  result  of  diseased  imaginations.  The  truth,  however,  is  that 
these  holy  men  and  women  had  visions  of  the  infinite  holiness  of  God.  They  saw  the 
"  sapphire  throne,"  and  they  trembled  and  veiled  their  faces  before  the  exceeding  majesty 
of  the  Divine  purity.  They  saw  themselves  and  sin  truly  and  worthily,  because  they 
saw  these  things  in  the  full  clear  light  of  God.  We  do  not  so  see  them,  because  we  do 
not  live  near  enough  to  God.  Take  as  a  specimen  the  following  sentences  of  John 
Bunyan — surely  as  honest  and  sincere  a  man  before  God  and  his  fellows  as  ever  lived  : 
"  My  original  and  inward  pollution — that  was  my  plague  and  afdiction.  That  I  saw 
at  a  dreadful  rate,  always  putting  forth  itself  within  me.  That  I  had  the  guilt  of  to 
amazement.  By  reason  of  that  I  was  loathsome  in  my  own  eyes,  and  I  thought  I  was 
in  God's  eyes  too.  Sin  and  corruption,  I  said,  would  as  naturally  bubble  out  of  my 
heart  as  water  out  of  a  fountain.  I  thought  that  every  one  had  a  better  heart  than  I 
had ;  I  could  have  changed  hearts  with  anybody.  I  thought  none  but  the  devil  himself 
could  equalize  me  for  inward  wickedness  and  pollution  of  mind.  I  fell,  therefore,  at 
the  sight  of  my  ,own  vileness,  deeply  into  despair."  Making  all  allowance  for  the 
quaintness  of  this  language,  and  for  the  spirit  of  the  age  in  which  Bunyan  lived,  do  we 
not  feel  that  bis  Christian  life  became  so  noble  because  his  foundations  had  been  laid 
so  low  ?  And  we  need  more  worthy  apprehensions  of  the  essential  hatefulness  and  evil 
of  sin  to  lie  as  the  foundation-stones  on  which  we  may  rear  our  godly  life.  1.  All  the 
great  truths  and  doctrines  of  Divine  revelation  rest  upon  the  fact  of  human  sin.  Re- 
pentance, justification,  atonement,  redemption,  sanctification,  all  assume  the  fact  of  our 
sin.  It  is  too  much  the  habit  to  discuss  these  doctrines  as  if  they  were  merely  questions 
of  science,  having  a  general  intellectual  interest ;  but  with  the  smitings  of  guilt  on  our 
hearts,  and  the  avenger  of  blood  at  our  heels,  they  become  intensely  real ;  they  are  no 
leaa  than  the  conditions  of  the  soul's  safety  in  the  city  of  refuge.  We  should  under- 
stand them  so  much  better  if  we  had  more  soul-moving  impressions  of  the  evil  and  the 
guilt  of  our  state  before  God.  2.  All  the  Christian  graces  depend  on  deep  views  of  sin. 
That  possesses  our  souls  with  pity  and  charity  and  long-suffering  towards  others.  That 
makes  and  keeps  us  humble.  'The  believing  man  is  he  who, in  his  self-helplessness,  has 
learned  to  lean  wholly.  The  hopeful  man  is  he  who  has  cried  "  out  of  the  depths  " 
unto  the  Lord.  The  man  who  feels  for  others  is  he  who  "  knows  the  plague  of  his  own 
heart."  3.  All  the  earnestness  and  zeal  of  Christian  work  depend  on  worthy  views  of 
sin.  Are  men  perishing  in  sin  ?  then  we  must  rescue  and  save  them.  John  Howe 
lays,  "  Shall  our  Redeemer  be  left  to  weep  alone  over  perishing  souls  ?  Have  we  no 
(can  to  f p<ud  upon  this  doleful  lubject  ?    Oh  that  our  heads  were  waters,  and  our  eyei 


104  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  [ch.  v.  1— 30. 


fountains  I  Is  it  nothing  to  us  that  multitudes  are  sinking,  going  down  to  penlition, 
under  the  name  of  Christian,  from  under  the  means  of  life  and  salvation — perishing — 
and  we  can  do  nothing  to  prevent  it  ?  We  know  they  must  perish  that  do  not  repi  ut 
and  turn  to  God,  and  love  him  above  all ;  that  do  not  believe  in  his  Son,  and  pay  him 
homage  as  their  riglitful  Lord."  We  are  guilty  before  God  in  neglecting  to  keep  vivid 
in  our  hearts  humbling  convictions  of  sin ;  and  we  may  trace  to  this  negloct  our  im- 
perfect imiiressions  ol  the  holiness  of  God,  of  the  majesty  of  his  Law,  and  of  the  necessity 
for  atonement  by  blood-shedding.  We  may  also  t)  ace  to  this  neglect  our  easy  subjection 
to  the  pleasures  and  vanities  of  the  world ;  our  imlififereiice  in  the  pursuit  of  Christian 
virtues,  and  our  coldness  and  deadness  to  the  claims  of  Christian  work.  To  see  sin 
rightly  we  must  see  it — 

L  In  the  consequknces  to  which  it  leads.  We  wonder  why  these  stern  writings 
of  the  old  prophets  are  pieseived,  and  n  ake  up  so  large  a  portion  of  God's  Word.  Thi-y 
are  needed  to  keep  before  us  the  connection  between  sin  and  suft'eriug,  to  show  the 
wickedness  of  sin  by  the  bitterness  of  its  consequences.  We  do  not  need  either  old 
prophets  or  new  ones  to  convince  us  of  the  fact  of  sin.  Conscience  and  observation 
suffice  for  that.  Nor  do  we  need  old  prophets  or  new  ones  to  convince  us  of  the  fact  of 
suffering.  But  we  do  need  them  to  convince  us  of  the  connection  between  the  two. 
And  that  was  just  the  mission  of  the  old  prophets.  In  vigorous  language  they  desoriiie 
dreadful  famines,  devonring  j  estilences,  the  march  of  myriad  locusts,  friglitful  scenrs 
of  battle-fields  and  siege,  the  desulation  of  fair  countries,  tlie  exile  and  captivity  of 
nations.  But  tliey  never  leave  us  to  imagine  for  a  moment  that  such  things  are  mere 
calamities.  They  aie  consequences  of  sin ;  the  whirlwind  which  those  reap  who  sow  the 
wind.  They  try  to  make  us  see  b-  himl  the  apfiarent  order  of  cause  andeffect,  and  they  say, 
"  Ye  have  provoked  the  Lord  yonr  God  to  anger,  therefore  hath  all  this  evil  come  upon 
you."  Sin  is  invisihle.  Sin  is  pleasing  to  onr  corrupt  nature,  and  we  will  not  see  its 
true  character.  So  Uod  writes  it  up  before  our  eyes  in  bodily,  social,  national,  hereditary 
woes.  Illustrate  from  the  end  of  the  avaricious  man,  the  drunkard,  the  presumptuous, 
etc.,  as  given  in  this  chapter. 

IL  In  the  contbast  of  God'b  merciful  dealings  with  us.  It  is  mostly  in  this 
way  that  God  is  accustomed  to  present  sin  to  us.  See  the  opening  parable  of  this 
chapter.  Sins  and  vices  look  hateful  mdeed,  as  staining  and  'debasing  poor  Africans. 
Drunkenness  is  hideous,  corrupting  the  poor  islanders  of  the  Southern  Seas.  But  what 
do  such  things  look  like,  putting  to  utter  shame  the  enlightened  islanders  of  Christian 
Britain?  Are  not  lust,  and  passion,  and  greed,  and  drunkenness,  and  down-treading 
the  poor,  and  neglecting  the  ofiered  salvation,  aggravated  immensely  by  God's  abounding 
mercy  to  us  ?  God  pleads  his  mercy  (see  Hos.  xi.  3, 4).  We  plead  thus :  Do  you  think, 
if  you  had  lived  in  Christ's  days,  you  could  Lave  gone  on  sinning  on  the  very  knoll  of 
Calvary,  under  the  very  shadow  of  the  cross  on  which  your  Saviour  died?  Could  you 
have  cast  lots  for  his  raiment  with  those  rough  gamesters,  danced  a  merry  round  about 
his  cross,  and  done  the  deeds  beneath  his  very  agony  whicli  now  stain  your  life  ?  It 
may  be  that  very  thing  which  you  are,  in  spirit,  doing  now.  The  shadow  of  the  cross 
has  never  passed  away  ;  it  lies  right  across  Christian  England  to-day.  We  live  through 
our  daily  lives  hem  ath  it.  It  is  not  really  a  dark  shadow  ;  it  is  transformed ;  it  is  the 
Lord's  rainbow  of  love  shining  through  tears.  It  arches  our  whole  sky.  Its  presence 
glorifies  all  goodness;  but  its  presence  also  aggravates  all  sin,  all  self-indulgence,  all 
neglect  of  God.  The  issue,  the  final  issue,  for  all  who  sin  under  the  very  shadow  of 
tiie  cross — that  no  human  lips  can  describe,  as  no  human  imagination  can  conceive. 
That  must  be  the  woe  unspeakable,  the  dreadful  day  of  God. — E.  T. 

Vers.  24,  25. — God^s  judgments  through  natural  agencies.  The  Prophet  Isaiah  lived 
in  anxious  times.  He  was  keenly  observant  of  the  social  and  moral  features  of  his  age — 
a  discerner  of  tlie  "  signs  of  the  times."  He  was  sent  by  God  to  show  the  people  how 
national  wrong-doing  bore  its  sure  fruitage  in  ba  I  harvests  aud  in  national  calamities, 
and  to  help  tliem  to  see  in  such  fruilage  the  operation  of  Divine  judgments.  In  the 
text  the  propliet  clearly  sees  trouble  coming  on  apace,  and  taking  form  as  scant  and 
withered  harvests,  either  through  unkindly  seasons  or  the  visitation  of  locusts.  "Their 
root  shall  be  as  rottenness,  and  their  blossum  shall  go  up  as  dust."  Evvald  well  describes 
the  sociil  conditions  which  Isaiah  observea  in  their  more  serious  aspects  in  relation  to 


«iH.v.  1— 30.]  THE   BOOK   OF   TUE    PRnrHET   ISAIAH.  lOi 


the  Divine  will  and  Law.  "The  constant  increase  of  the  power  and  security  of  the 
realm,  and  the  profusion  of  an  age  rendered  prosperous  by  the  development  of  arts  Hnd 
distant  commerce,  were  accompanied  by  an  equally  vigorous  growth  of  other  things; 
the  craving  for  enjoyment  and  luxury  among  the  people,  and  especially  among  the- 
women  of  the  capital;  the  foolish  predilection  for  foreign  manners  and  foreign  super- 
(titioni  of  every  kind,  and  a  wantonness  of  life,  from  which  many,  even  of  the  judges, 
were  not  altogether  free,  and  under  which  the  defenceless  inhabitants  bad  to  suflfer  with 
increasing  severity;  all  of  which  Isaiah,  the  great  prophet  of  his  age,  who  lived  in 
Jerusalem,  recognized  and  depicted  in  the  sharpest  outlines."  Dean  Stahley  gives  a  yet 
more  striking  picture  of  that  luxurious  age.  "The  luxury  and  insolence  of  the  nobles 
was  in  a  high  degree  oppressive  and  scandalous.  Bribery  was  practised  in  the  seats 
of  judgment,  and  enormous  landed  property  was  accumulated  against  the  whole  spirit  nf 
the  Israelite  commonwealth.  With  the  determination  and,  we  may  add,  the  avarice 
of  their  race,  they  laid  their  deep  schemes  at  niglit,  and  carried  them  out  with  their  first 
waking.  They  "  did  evil  with  both  hands  ; "  they  skinned  the  poor  to  the  very  quick  ; 
they  picked  their  bones  and  ground  them  to  powder.  The  great  ladies  of  ZioU  were 
haughty,  and  paced  along  the  streets  tossing  their  necks,  and  leering  with  their  eyes, 
walking  and  mincing  as  they  went,  covered  witli  tinkling  ornaments,  chains,  bracelets, 
mantles,  veils,  of  all  fashions  and  sizes."  Isaiah  declares  that  Jehovah  observed  all 
these  moral  and  social  evils,  and  that  he  used  the  agencies  of  nature  to  execute  his 
jmlgments  on  such  sinners.  They  would  find,  when  the  harvest  came  round,  that  "ten 
acres  of  land  would  only  yield  one  baih,  and  the  seed  of  a  homer  would  only  yield  an 
ephah."  God  would  smite  them  through  the  fields.  Is  Isaiah's  teaching  obsolete  ? 
Does  God  speak  to  the  men  of  this  age  by  the  voice  of  nature?  Having  found  out  that 
the  world  is  ruled  by  law,  have  we  gained  the  right  to  banish  the  Lawgiver  ?  Whether 
men  call  us  superstitious  or  not,  we  unhesitatingly  say  that  God  is  in  the  harvest  still, 
and  its  liniitaiion  is  the  voice  of  God  calling  on  us  to  humble  ourselves  concerning  oui 
social  and  national  iniquities.  That  this  is  a  right  and  reasonable  view  to  take  will 
appear  if  we  consider — 

I.  Man  is  sensitive  to  nature,  and  nature  to  man.  If  we  are  still  thus  sensitive, 
God  can  use  nature  still  as  a  medium  by  which  to  communicate  his  will  to  us.  Nature 
has  not  yet  become  one  of  the  dead  languag'  s ;  God  can  spea  k  to  us  in  it.  We  are 
affected  by  the  nature-moods  of  each  passing  day.  Crisp  frost  braces  us  to  exertion ; 
glowing  sunshine  and  clear  skies  aie  retieoted  in  bright  and  chceiful  feelings;  cloudy, 
dull  days  make  our  work  drag  heavily.  Storm-times  fill  us  witii  fear.  Everybody 
anxiously  observes  the  character  of  the  seasons.  The  nation  alternates  between  hope 
and  fear  as  reports  coiue  of  rains,  or  late  I'rosts,  or  blight,  or  flood.  Nature  is  ever 
bringing  to  us  messages  from  Gud,  gracious  testimonies  of  his  acceptance,  or  of  his 
reproof.  And  no  voices  are  so  loud  or  so  clear  as  those  of  the  harvest,  which  is  God's 
yearly  replenishing  of  our  exhausted  stores,  and  so  the  intimation  of  Divine  regard  or 
Divine  disfavour.  And  nature  is  sensitive  to  man,  and  responsive  to  man's  conditions 
and  doings.  Go  into  some  parts  of  our  land,  some  metal  and  mining  districts,  and 
notice  how  nature,  in  response  to  man,  has  changed  her  aspect.  Her  trees  cannot  live. 
Her  atmosphere  has  become  damp  and  chill.  See  her  fields  responding  to  man's  draining. 
She  now  runs  off  her  moisture  in  sudden  and  desolating  floods.  See  the  thick  smoke- 
cloud  hanging  over  great  towns.  Nature  responds  by  breeding  fatal  diseases  beneath  it. 
God  is  ever  fitting  issues  to  actions,  and  in  the  issues  revealing  the  character  of  the 
action.  "  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death."  Visit  the  Holy  Land,  now 
desolate  and  barren,  once  fruitful  and  cultivated.  It  has  but  responded  to  the  destruction 
of  its  timber,  by  the  invading  armies  that  have  tramped  over  it  again  and  again.  The 
prophets  seem  to  have,  as  one  great  part  of  their  mission,  to  show  that  changes  in 
seasons,  loss  of  fruitage,  bad  harvests,  fearful  storms,  locusts  and  cateri)illars,  are  really 
the  judginent-response.'!  of  nature  to  the  doings,  the  wrong-doings,  of  men.  Close  up 
our  Scriptures  if  it  is  no  longer  true  that  God  speaks  to  men  through  nature ;  for  St.  Paid 
says,  "God  gave  them  rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful  seasons,  filling  their  hearts  vrith 
food  and  gladness."  Surely  the  invisible  things  of  God  may  be  clearly  understood  by 
the  things  that  are  made. 

II.  Nature  can  still  be  used  as  an  agent  of  Divine  judgment  on  mam.  If  God 
i»,  then  he  cannot  pass  by  sin.    If  God  visits  the  sins  of  cities  and  of  nations  m  such, 


106 


THE  BOOK  OP   THE  PROPHET  ISATAH.         [en. -n.!— 13 


then  he  must  find  some  instruments  of  chastisement  which  will  directly  affect  cities 
and  nations.  His  instruments  may  be  the  (le.-.ti  active  forces  of  nature — famine,  pestilence, 
fear,  and  war — which  directly  reach  corporate  and  national  feeling.  Herein  is  •  curious 
thing.  Men  are  ready  enough  to  hear  the  voice  of  God  when  he  sends  a  hountiful 
harvest.  The  whole  land  rings  with  the  harvest-song,  and  men  do  not  mind  our  saying 
that  God  sent  the  harvest.  But  how  blind  and  deaf  men  become  when  harvest  fails ! 
Our  blessings  come  from  God ;  but  how  we  try  to  make  out  that  our  disasters  are  only 
consequences  of  some  unwisdom,  or  some  neglect  of  social  or  agricultural  laws !  We  need 
not  see  God's  hand  in  them.  Let  ns  not,  however,  be  afraid  of  either  side  o(  the  great 
truth.  If  God  would  recognize  our  faithfulness  to  him,  he  can  find  rich  gnlden  corn, 
and  sunny  autunm  for  its  ripening  and  its  ingathering.  If  he  needs  to  cliastige,  and 
awaken  in  us  the  sense  of  sin,  then  he  can  make  withered  ears  stRnd  in  the  fields, 
summer  floods  damage  the  shocks,  and  sunless  autumn  hinder  the  ripening.  Can  it 
ever  take  away  from  the  judgment-aspect  of  national  calamity  that  we  are  able  to  explain 
how  the  earth,  in  its  movements  through  space,  has  come  into  a  damp  region,  or  into 
a  cold  region ;  how  certain  atmospheric  conditions  have  developed  the  blight ;  and  how 
the  current  of  certain  winds  has  brought  the  locusts ;  and  how  a  disturbance  of  nature's 
limiting  agencies  has  developed  unduly  the  caterpillar?  But  if  God  speaks  to  us  in 
judgment,  let  us  never  forget  that  he  really  speaks  to  us  in  mercy.  He  ever  blends 
mercy  with  judgment ;  and  the  response  he  asks  from  our  hearts  will  go  into  the  old 
words :  "  Come,  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord:  for  he  hath  torn,  and  he  will  lieal  us ;  he 
hath  smitten,  and  he  will  bind  us  up.  After  two  days  will  he  revive  us  :  in  the  third  day 
he  will  raise  us  up,  and  we  shall  live  in  his  sight."  "  To  the  Lord  our  God  bclongetb 
mercies  and  forgivenesses,  though  we  have  rebelled  against  him." — B.  T. 


^conoN  III.    Isaiah's  Vision  of  God  upon  his  Thkonb  (ch.  vi,). 
EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VL 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  Vision  op  God  seen  bt 
Isaiah.  It  is  thought  by  some  that  this 
vision,  and  its  sequel,  constitute  the  original 
call  of  Isaiah  to  the  prophetical  office,  and 
in  order  of  time  precede  all  the  other  con- 
tents of  the  bjok.  But  the  position  of  the 
"  vision "  in  the  book  is  strongly  against 
this  view.  Prophets  who  relate  their 
original  call  naturally  place  it  in  the  fore- 
front of  their  narrative  (Jer.  i.  10  ;  Ezek.  i. 
1).  It  is  quite  possible,  as  Bishop  Lowth 
says,  that  this  was  "  a  new  designation,  to 
introiluce  more  solemnly  a  general  declara- 
tion of  the  whole  course  of  God's  dispensa- 
tions in  regard  to  his  people,  and  the  fates 
of  the  nations."  The  vision  itself  may  pro- 
fitably be  compared  with  Ezeklel's  first 
vision,  which  it  much  resembles  (Ezek.  L 
4—28). 

Ver.  1. — In  the  year  that  King  TTzziah 
died.  The  year  B.O.  759,  probably.  We 
cannot  determine  from  the  phrase  used 
whether  the  vision  was  seen  before  or  after 
Uzziah's  death.  I  saw  also ;  rather,  then  it 
wot  that  I  saw  (comp.  Exod.  xvi.  6).  The 
Lord.  Not  "  Jehovah,"  as  in  vers.  3  and  5, 
but  "  Adonay,"  for  greater  leverencft    Si^ 


ting  upon  a  throne.  Ugh  and  lifted  np.  Thr 
imagery  is,  of  course,  taken  from  the  prac- 
tice of  earthly  kings.  Elaborate  thrones 
were  affected  by  the  great  monarchs  of 
Egypt  and  Assyria  (Lepsius, '  Dciitinaler,' 
pt.  iii.  pis.  2,  76,  100,  121 ;  Layard,  '  Nine- 
veh and  Babylon,'  p.  1 50).  Solomon's  throne 
was  perhaps  even  grander  than  any  of  these 
(see  1  Kings  x.  18 — 20).  It  was  placed  at 
the  summit  of  "  six  steps,"  so  that  its  occu- 
pant was  "  high  and  lifted  up  "  above  all 
his  courtiers.  His  train.  Not  his  train  of 
attendants,  but  "the  skirts  of  his  robe." 
Flowing  robes  were  commonly  worn  by  great 
monarchs.  Filled  the  temple ;  or,  the  palace. 
The  same  word  is  used  in  Hebrew  for  both. 
Dr.  Kay  supposes  the  propliet  to  be  "in 
vision  gazing  on  the  actual  temple — to  see 
its  veils  drawn  aside,  and  instead  of  the 
Shechinah  enthroned  on  the  cherubim,  to 
behold  tlie  King  of  glory,  enthroned  on 
high,  the  fringes  of  his  royal  robe  filling 
the  temple,  so  that  no  human  priest  could 
minister  there."  But,  as  Mr.  Cheyne  ob- 
serves, "palace  is  more  in  harmony  witn 
the  picture  tlian  temple."  It  is  the  heavenly 
palace  of  the  King  of  kings  into  which  thfi 
prophet's  gaze  is  allowed  to  penetrate. 

Ver.  2.— Above  it  stood  the  seraphims-, 
rather,  ahove  him  were  ttanding  eeraphim. 
The  "seraphim"  are  introduced,  not  as 
well  known,  with  the  article,  but  without  it, 
OS  unknown.    The  word  means  "  fiery  ones," 


HH.  VI.  1-13.]         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAlAH. 


107 


and  is  gupposeil  to  denote  the  burning  love 
of  the  blessed  spirits  spokea  of.  They  ap- 
peared to  the  prophet  as  standing  above  the 
King  as  he  sat  upon  his  throne — "  standing  " 
to  show  their  readiness  to  minister ;  but  why 
"above  him"  is  not  bo  clear.  Perhaps, 
simply,  a«  those  that  stand  are  "  above " 
those  that  sit;  perhaps  as  ready  to  fly 
through  infinite  space  at  the  bidding  of  him 
who  was  seated  in  his  palace,  as  it  were 
apon  the  ground.  Their  form,  as  seen  by 
the  prophet,  appears  to  have  been  human, 
and  only  distinguished  from  ordinary  hu- 
manity by  the  wings.  Thus,  though  in 
name  they  resembled  those  other  "  fiery 
one§,"  which  had  punished  the  Jews  in 
the  wilderness  (Numl).  xxi.  6 — 9),  there  is 
nothing  tu  show  that  Isaiah  in  any  way 
connected  the  two.  Each  one  had  six  wings, 
Geaenius  is  mistaken  in  saying  that  there 
are  at  Persepolis  any  six-winged  figures 
('  Thesaurus,'  p.  1342).  The  Persians  not 
nnfrequently  represented  their  genii  with 
four  wings  ('  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  iii. 
pp.  353,  354);  but  no  six-winged  fi^^ures 
have  been  found,  so  far  as  I  know,  among 
the  Persian  remains.  With  twain  he  covered 
his  face,  etc.  The  general  idea  of  the  six 
wings  was  probably  rapid  flight,  the  carry- 
ing out  of  God's  bLhe.st8  "with  speed 
swiftly."  But,  in  tlie  Divine  presence,  the 
wings  were  applied  to  a  different  use.  One 
pair  veiled  the  seraph's  head  from  the  in- 
tolerable effulgence  of  the  Divine  glory; 
another  concealed  the  feet,  soiled  in  their 
various  ministrations,  and  unmeet  for  the 
all-pure  presence;  the  third  pair  alone 
sustained  the  seraph  in  mid-air,  as  he 
hovered  in  readiness  to  depart  on  any 
errand  on  which  Jehovah  might  send  him. 

Ver.  3. — One  cried ;  rather,  kept  crying 
(comp.  Eev.  iv.  8,  "  They  rest  not  day  and 
night,  saying.  Holy,  holy,  holy").  But  the 
prophet  scanely  goes  so  far ;  he  describes 
only  his  vision — they  did  not  rest  while  the 
vision  was  vouchsafed  him.  Holy,  holy, 
holy.  The  Church  on  earth  has  taken 
pattern  by  the  Church  above;  and  the 
"Tiisrtgion"  is  ever  being  repeated  in  one 
part  of  the  earth  or  anotiier  without  ceas- 
ing: "  Thou  continuest  holy,  0  thou  Worship 
of  Israel."  There  is  no  attribute  so  essential 
to  God  as  this.  It  is  for  his  holiness,  more 
than  for  anything  else,  that  his  creatures 
worship  him.  The  triple  repetition  has 
been  understood  in  all  ages  of  the  Church 
as  connected  wi  I  h  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity. 
Holy  is  he  who  has  created  us,  and  bidden 
us  worship  )iim  in  the  beauty  of  holiness  ! 
Holy  is  lie  who  has  redeemed  us,  and  washed 
away  our  sins,  and  made  us  by  profession 
holy  t  Holy  is  he  who  day  by  day  sanctifies 
US,  and  makes  us  in  very  deed  and  truth,  so 
far  as  we  wiU  permit  him,  holy  I    Tfc  b  wh9l» 


earth  is  fall  of  his  glory.  Even  in  heaven 
the  seraphic  thoughts  are  turned  to  earth, 
and  its  relation  to  its  Divine  Creator  is 
made  the  subject  of  angelic  utterances 
(comp.  1  Cor.  iv.  9 ;  Heb.  xii.  22).  The  lesson 
which  they  gather  from  their  contemplation, 
even  under  all  the  miserable  circumstances 
of  the  time,  is  a  cheering  one  :  "  The  wlmle 
earth  is  full  of  God's  glory."  Men,  whether 
they  will  it  or  not,  are  working  out  God's 
purposes,  advancing  his  designs,  accomplish- 
ing the  ends  that  he  desires  (see  Homi- 
letics  on  eh.  v.  25 — 29). 

Ver.  4. — The  posts  of  the  door  moved; 
rather,  the  bases  of  the  thresholds  shook  (com- 
pare Eevised  Version).  The  shout  of  the 
seraphs  sliook  the  very  foundations  on 
which  the  thresholds  of  the  gates  of  heaven 
rested — a  testimony  to  the  energy  with 
which  it  was  uttered.  At  the  voice  of  him 
that  cried ;  i.e.  "  at  the  voice  of  each  and 
all."  The  house  was  filled  with  smoke. 
"Smoke"  is  sometimes  the  mere  sign  of  the 
presence  of  God,  as  in  eh.  iv.  5 ;  but  more 
often  it  indicates  his  presence  in  angor  or 
judgment  (see  Exod.  xix.  18;  xx.  18;  Eev. 
XV.  8).  Here  there  had  been  no  smoke  at 
first,  and  we  must  suppose  it,  therefore,  a 
sign  of  the  anger  which  finds  vent  in 
ver,  9—12. 

Vers.  5 — 7. — The  Sequel  of  the  Vi3I0> 
— THE  Prophet's  Sense  op  Unwobthiness. 
Tho  vision  of  God  in  this  life,  whether 
natural  or  ecstatic,  cnmiot  but  produce  in  the 
beholder  a  deep  feeliTig  of  his  unwortliiness. 
God  "  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  in  i- 
quity ; "  even  "  tlie  heavens  are  not  clean 
in  his  sight"  (Job  xv.  15)  Man,  being 
never  wholly  purged  from  sin  whilo  on 
earth,  cannot,  but  shrink  from  contact  with 
tlie  absolutely  Holy.  Hence  Isaiah's  cry 
(ver.  5) ;  and  hence,  to  comfort  him,  the 
symbolic  action  of  the '  seraph  (ver.  6)  and 
his  encouraging  words  (ver.  7). 

Ver.  5. — I  am  undone;  literally,  evt  off, 
destroyed  (comp.  ch.  xv.  1 ;  Jer.  xlvii.  5 ; 
Hos.  iv.  5,  6,  etc.).  God  once  said  himself^ 
"There  shall  no  mnu  see  me  and  live" 
(Exod.  xxxiii.  20).  Men  expected  to  die 
even  when  tliey  had  seen  angels  of  God 
(Gen.  xxxii.  30 ;  Judg.  vi.  22,  2a ;  xiii.  22). 
How  we  are  to  rcuonoile  Exod.  xxxiii.  20 
with  this  passage.  Job  xlii.  5,  and  Ezek.  i. 
26 — 28,  is  uncertain.  Perhaps  the  ecstutio 
sight  was  not  included  in  the  "  seeing  "  of 
which  God  spoke  to  Moses.  I  am  a  man  of 
unclean  lips.  A  man  must  be  indeed  "  per- 
fect "  never  to  offend  in  word  (Jas.  iii.  2). 
Isaiah  felt  that  he  had  often  so  offended. 
His  lips  were  not  "clean  "in  God's  sight, 
and  if  not  his  lips,  then  not  bis  heart;  fw 


108 


THE   BOOK   Oh'   I  HE  PRjl'UEl'   ISAIAH.         [en.  vi.  1—13. 


"  out  of  the  almiiilunop  n''  lli'  licart  llip  mnulh 
Bpeaketh "  (Matt.  xii.  ai).  I  dwell  in  the 
midst  of  a  people  of  unclean  Ups.  Men  catcb 
up  the  phraseology  of  their  time,  and  use 
wrong  forms  of  speech,  because  they  hear 
them  daily.  "  Evil  communications  corrupt 
goiid  manners"  (1  Cor.  xv.  33). 

Ver.  6. — A  live  coal ;  or,  a  glowing  Hone, 
as  Gesenius,  EosenmuUer,  Knobel,  and  Mr. 
Cheyne  understand  (comp.  1  Kings  xix.  6, 
wlicre  a  cognate  word  is  used).  The  tongs  .  .  . 
the  altar.  The  preseuce  of  an  altar  in  the 
heavenly  dwelling,  with  the  usual  appurte- 
nances, is  assumed  (comp.  Rev.  vi.  9; 
viii.  3).  The  altar  is,  no  doubt,  an  altar  of 
incense,  and  of  gold,  not  of  stone ;  but  the 
incense  is  burnt  upon  stones  heated  to  s 
glow,  and  it  is  one  of  these  stones  which  the 
angel  takes  with  the  golden  tongs  of  the 
sanctuary  (Exod.  xxv.  38). 

Ver.  7.— He  laid  it  upon  my  mouth;  lite- 
rally, he  caimed  it  to  touch  my  mouth;  i.e. 
"  he  touched  my  mouth  with  it."  He  brought 
it  into  contact  with  that  part  of  him  which 
the  prophet  had  recognized  (ver.  5)  as  the 
seat  of  impurity.  TMne  iniquity  is  taken 
away.  By  the  contact  the  prophet's  impurity 
is  purged,  and  Jae  is  freed  from  it.  The 
symbohcal  act  showed  (1)  that  sin  could 
be  purged;  (2)  that  the  highest  angelic 
nature  could  not,  alone  and  of  its  own  furce, 
purge  it;  and  (3)  that  the  purging  could 
come  only  from  that  fire  which  consumes  the 
incense  that  is  laid  upon  the  altar  of  God. 
Dr,  Kay  suggests  that  this  fire  is  "  the 
Divine  love." 

Vers.  8 — 13. — The  Pkopuet  entbusted 
wiTB  A  Special  Mission.  We  do  not  know 
what  special  call  Isaiah  hud  had  previously. 
Perhaps  he  had  been  brought  up  in  the 
"  schools  of  the  prophets."  Perhaps,  when 
the  "  word  of  the  Lord "  came  to  him,  he 
had  accepted  the  fact  as  sufficient  call.  Now, 
however,  he  had,  in  vision,  a  clear  and  dis- 
tinct call  and  mission  (vers.  8,  9).  He  was 
told  to  "  go,"  and  instructed  as  to  what  he 
was  to  say  (vers.  9,  10).  As  before  (oh.  1. 
— V. ),  while  in  the  main  he  was  to  denounce 
woe,  he  was  still  to  proclaim  the  survival  of 
a  remnant  (vers.  10 — 12). 

Ver.  8. — Whom  shall  I  Bend?  (comp. 
1  Kings  XI.  20).  Such  questions  enable 
tliose  who  wait  in  the  courts  of  heaven  to 
show  their  zeal  and  remliuess.  Who  will 
go  for  us?  Some  explain  the  plural  pro- 
noun as  used  of  the  Almighty  and  those 
with  whom  he  is  cousultiiig.  But  he  does 
uot  really  "  consult "  his  creatures  {infra, 
ch.  xl.  14;  Rev.  xi.  34),  nor  do  his  messen- 
gers do  bis  errands  for  them.  I'lie  plural 
furiu  is  best  ezplaiued  by  the  light  which 


ver.  3  t'  Mwson  it,  as  indicntive  of  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Trinity  (comp.  (JlU.M.  20). 

Ver.  9. — Hear  ye  indeed  .  .  .  see  ye  indeed ; 
literally,  J«'  hearing  hear  ...  in  eeeing  see— 
with  the  force  of  '■  Listen  and  hear ;  h  lok  and 
see ; "  "  Attend,"  that  is,  "  with  the  outward 
sense,  and  catch  all  that  sense  can  catch,  but 
without  perception  of  the  inward  meaning" 
(see  1\latt.  xiii.  14;  Mark  iv.  12,  etc.).  This 
is  what  tlioy  would  do.  Isaiah  is  bidden  to 
exhort  them,  in  grave  irony,  to  do  it. 

Ver.  10. — Make  the  heart  of  this  people  fat 
Isaiah  is  commanded  to  effect  by  his  preach- 
ing that  which  his  preaching  would,  in  fact, 
effect.  It  would  not  awaken  the  people  out 
of  their  apathy,  it  would  not  stir  tliein  to 
repentance;  therefore  it  would  only  hardeu 
and  deaden  them.  The  words  have  a  na- 
tional, not  an  individual,  application.  Shut 
their  eyes ;  literally,  heamear  their  eyes ;  or, 
teal  them  up  bjuch  sealing  has  been  em- 
ployed by  Oriental  monaxchs  as  a  punish- 
ment. And  convert ;  i.e.  "  turn  to  God." 
Our  translators  have  used  the  word  in  an 
intransitive  sense. 

Ver.  11. — Then  said  I,  Lord,  how  long? 
Either,  "How  long  am  I  to  oontinne  this 
preaching?"  or,"  How  long  is  this  blindneea 
and  callousness  of  the  people  to  continue?  " 
Isaiah  assumes  that  he  has  not  heard  as  yet 
God's  final  purpo.-e;  that  thi  re  is  some  mer- 
ciful intention  kept  in  reserve,  which  is  to 
take  effeet  aftir  the  close  of  the  peiind  of 
judgment.  The  cities  .  .  .  the  houses;  ratlKr, 
cities  ,  ,  .  houses.  An  entire  desolation  jf 
the  whole  laud,  and  extermin.itiou  of  its  in- 
habitants, is  not  prophesied,  and  never  took 
place.  Nebuchadnezzar  "  left  of  the  poor  of 
the  land  to  be  vinedressers  and  husband- 
men" (2  Kings  XIV.  12;  Jer.  xxxix.  10). 
Even  when  the  great  mass  of  these  persona 
went  into  Egypt  and  perished  there  (Jer. 
xliv.  11 — 27),  a  certam  number  escaped  and 
returned  to  Palestine  (Jer.  xliv.  14,  28). 
The  land ;  rather,  the  ground,  the  toil. 

Ver.  12.— And  the  Lord  have  removed  men 
far  away.  The  Assyriim  and  Babylonian 
policy  of  deportation  is  pointed  at.  Pul  had 
attacked  the  kingdom  of  Israel  ten  or  twelve 
years  before  Uzziali's  death,  and  had  perhaps 
made  the  Assyrian  policy  known,  though 
he  had  allowed  himself  to  be  bought  ofl 
(2  Kings  XV.  19,  20).  And  there  be  a  great 
forsaking ;  rather,  and  the  desolation  be  greal; 
i.e.  till  a  great  portion  of  Judah  be  depopu- 
lated. 

Ver.  13. — But  yet  in  it  shall  be  a  tenth, 
etc. ;  rather,  ami  should  there  still  be  in  it  a 
tenth  ;  i.e.  shouM  there  still  remain,  after  the 
great  deportation,  a  tenth  part  of  the  inhabi- 
tants, "  this  again  shall  be  burned  up,"  i.e. 
shall  be  destined  to  further  judgment  and 
dcstruetiiin.  The  trials  of  the  Jewish  nation 
under  the  Persian,  Egyptian,  and  Syrian 


CH.  VI.  1—13.]        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


109 


monarobies  may  be  intended.  As  a  teil  tree, 
and  as  an  oak,  etc. ;  latitei,  at  the  terehinth 
tree  nnd  as  (he  oah—ticea  which  shoot  uji 
again  frnm  the  stock  after  being  cut  down  ;  or, 
M  the  prophet  expresses  it,  "have  a  stem  in 


their  destruction."  So  to  Judah  shall  remain, 
after  all,  a  "  holy  .seed,"  whijli  eliall  be  its 
"stem"  or  "stock,"  and  from  wliioh  it  shall 
once  more  "take  root  downward,  and  bear 
fruit  upward  "  (ch.  xxxvii.  31). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 4. —  TJie  vision  of  God.  Sight  is  a  thing  of  degreos.  Tlie  Tiealtliy  eye  sees 
with  infinite  shades  of  distinctness  and  indistinctness,  according  to  tlie  amount  of  light 
which  is  vouchsafed  it.  The  diseased  eye  has  an  equal  variety  of  gradation  in  its 
powers  of  seeing,  owing  to  the  variations  in  its  own  condition.  And  it  is  with  our 
spiritual  as  with  our  natural  sight.  The  vision  which  men  have  of  God  vaiies  infinitely 
with  varying  circumstances — from  extreme  dimness  up  to  perfect  distinctness.  Amid 
this  infinitude  of  gradation,  depending  mainly  on  tlie  internal  condition  of  the  visual 
power,  three  main  varieties,  depending-  on  the  circumstances  under  which  the  spiritual 
sight  exerts  itself,  may  be  distinguished. 

I.  The  natural  vision  or  God  in  this  life.  This  is,  even  in  the  best  men,  dim 
and  unsatisfying.  "  Now  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12).  We  have 
to  look  within  us  and  without  us ;  and,  among  the  confused  shadows  of  things,  as  sight 
and  memory  and  imagination  present  them  to  us,  we  have  to  piece  toguther  a  conception 
of  that  mysterions  and  inscrutable  Power  which  alone  exists  of  itself  and  has  brought 
all  that  is  beside  itself  into  existence.  How  should  not  tlie  vision  be  unpatisfactory  ? 
Agnosticism  denies  that  any  conception  which  we  can  furm  can  possibly  bear  any 
resemblance  at  all  to  the  reality,  if  there  be  a  reality.  Agnosticism,  to  be  consistent, 
ought  not  to  go  so  far,  but  sljould  content  itself  with  saying  that  we  cannot  tell  whether 
there  be  a  resemblance  or  no.  Some  conception,  however,  of  God  all  men  form  who 
reflect  at  all;  and  there  is  so  much  likeness  among  the  conceptions  of  men  of  all  times 
and  countries  as  to  point  to  some  basis  of  truth  underlying  them  all  as  the  only  con- 
ceivable ground  of  the  similarity.  The  conceptions  differ  less  in  their  essential  character 
than  in  their  vividness  and  their  continuousness.  Most  men  "  see  God  "  dimly  and  rarely 
— by  snatches,  and  as  through  a  cloud  or  mist.  A  small  number  have  a  somewhat 
clearer  and  more  fieqiient  vision.  To  a  few  only  is  it  given  to  "  set  God  always  before 
their  face,"  and  to  see  him  with  something  approaching  to  dislinotness. 

II.  Thb  ecstatic  vision  of  God  in  this  life.  It  has  been  the  privilege  of  some 
great  saints  to  be  lifted  up  from  earth  into  that  condition  which  is  called  ecstasy,  and 
while  in  that  stale  to  have  a  vision  of  God.  In  ecstasy  Moses  saw  "  the  glory  of  God" 
from  the  "cleft  in  the  rock"  on  his  second  ascent  of  Sinai  (Exod.  xxxiii.  18—23; 
xxxiv.  6 — 8).  In  ecstasv  Isaiah  now  saw  him.  In  ecstasy  Ezekiel  saw  him  "  by 
the  river  of  Chebar"  (Ezt-k.  i.  26—28).  So  St.  John  the  divine  beheld  him  in  the 
island  of  Patmos  (Kev.  iv.  2 — 11).  The  exact  nature  of  such  visions  we  do  not  know; 
but  it  is  only  reasonable  to  suppose  that  they  were,  to  those  favoured  with  them,  reve- 
lations of  God  more  distinct,  more  vivid,  more  satisfying,  than  any  which  belong  to  the 
or.linary  course  of  nature,  even  to  those  which  are  vouchsafed  to  the  i'  pure  in  heart" 
(Matt.  V.  8).  They  fall  short  in  respect  of  duration;  they  are  transient — some  of 
them,  perhaps,  momentary.  But  their  vividness  seems  to  have  so  impressed  them  on 
the  beholders  as  to  have  given  them  a  g'wasi-permanency  in  the  lecoUection,  which  made 
them  possessions  for  life,  and  gave  them  an  undying  influence  on  the  character. 

III.  The  beatific  vision  of  God  in  anothisb  life.  What  this  is  no  tongue  of 
man  can  tell.  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,"  etc.  We  know  only  what  the  Word  of  God 
declares.  "  Then  shall  we  see  him  face  to  face;  then  shall  we  know  even  as  we  are 
known  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12).  That  this  vision  transcends  even  the  ecstatic  one  is  reasonably 
concluded,  from  its  being  the  final  reward  of  God's  saints — the  beatitude  beyond  which 
there  is  none  other  (Rev.  xxii.  4).  But  it  is  scarcely  reverent  to  speculate  on  a  theme 
BO  far  above  hnmau  imagining.  Even  Bishop  Butler  seems  to  overstep  the  just  limit, 
when  he  supposes  the  beatific  vision  to  include  the  contemplation  of  the  scheme  of 
the  universe  in  the  mind  of  him  who  contrived  it  ('Sermon  on  the  love  of  God,' p. 
J46).     We  shall  not  know  what  the  beatific  vision  i^  until  we  are  admitted  to  i^. 


110  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHBT  ISAIAH.        [oh.  vi.  1—13. 

Perhaps  it  will  not  be  the  same  to  all.  Probably,  as  on  earth  •'  the  eye  sees  that  which 
it  brings  with  it  the  powei;  of  seeing,"  so,  in  the  world  beyond  the  grave,  the  vision  oi 
God  will  stand  in  a  certain  correlation  with  the  seeing  faculty  of  the  beholders.  All 
will  "  see  his  face,"  but  all  will  not  be  capable  of  receiving  from  the  sight  that  which 
it  will  convey  to  some.  There  are  degrees  of  happiness  in  the  next  world  no  less  than 
in  the  present.  If  we  would  derive  from  that  blessed  sight  all  that  God  intemled  man 
to  derive  from  it,  we  must  in  this  life  cultivate  the  power  of  "  seeing  Gud"  and 
delighting  in  the  contemplation  of  him. 

Ver.  5. — Man's  unworthiness  hrought  home  to  him  hy  nothing  so  much  at  "  seeing 
Ood."  The  natural  man  is,  for  the  most  part,  very  well  contented  with  himself.  He 
does  not  deal  much  in  self-scrutiny,  and  is  not  often  troubled  with  twinges  of  conscience. 
If  at  any  time  he  has  any  misgivings,  he  compares  himself  with  other  men,  and  readily 
persuades  himself  that  he  is  quite  as  good,  or  even  very  much  better  than  his  neighbours. 
"  God,  I  thank  thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are,"  is  his  self-satisfled  utterance ;  or, 
if  he  is  not  quite  so  arrogant  as  this,  at  any  rate  he  thinks  himself  "quite  good 
enough  " — as  honest,  industrious,  liberal,  moral  generally,  as  he  needs  to  be.  Occa- 
sionally he  may  be  startled  a  little  out  of  his  self-complacency  by  coming  in  contact 
with  persons  of  a  different  stamp  from  himself,  whom  he  sees  to  have  a  different  rule  of 
life,  a  different  conception  of  their  duties  to  God  and  man.  But  it  is  seldom  that  be 
wakes  up  to  any  true  conviction  of  sin  until  in  some  way  or  other,  there  is  reveakd  to 
him  some  "  vision  of  God,"  some  conception  of  the  true  nature  of  that  pure  and  holy 
Being  who  has  made  and  rules  the  universe.  Once  let  him  open  the  eye  of  his  soul 
and  see  God  as  he  is — perfectly  pure,  holy,  just,  immaculate — and  he  cannot  but  be 
driven  by  the  contrast  to  recognize  his  own  weakness,  wickedness,  impurity,  unrighteous- 
ness, deeply  engrained  sinfulness.  Some  conviction  of  sin  must  flash  on  him.  Well 
for  him  if  it  be  deep  and  stiong !  Well  for  him  if  it  brings  him,  first  to  confession 
(Luke  xviii.  13),  and  then  to  earnest,  heartfelt  prayer  for  piirdon!  God's  seraph  will 
then  haply  bring  him  such  a  "burning  coal  "  from  the  altar  before  the  throne  of  God 
as  he  brought  to  Isaiah,  and  convey  to  him  the  assurance  that,  for  the  merits  of  Christ, 
his  "  iniquity  is  taken  away,  and  his  sin  purged." 

Vers.  H — 13. — The  loving-kindness  of  Ood  shovm  in  his  judgments.  "  I  know,  0 
Lord,  that  thy  judgments  are  ri^ht,  and  that  thou  in  faithfulness  hast  afflicted  me," 
says  the  psalmist  (Ps.  c?ix.  75).  No  doubt,  at  last  God  must  simply  punish  the 
obdurate  and  impenitent ;  but  for  the  most  part  he  sends  his  judgment  upon  men  in 
mercy,  either  to  turn  Ihem  from  their  sins,  or  to  refine  and  improve  their  characters. 

I.  Even  when  God  simply  punishes,  it  is  in  loving-kindness  to  mankind  at 
iiARGE.  When  a  nation,  like  Israel,  as  distinct  from  Juilah,  has  persisted  in  evil-doing 
for  centuries,  in  spite  of  warnings,  teaching,  remonstrance,  knowledge  of  the  truth,  its 
case  is  hopeless — "  there  is  no  remedy  "  (2  Chron  xxxvi.  16).  The  blow  that  then 
falls  upon  the  nation  is  penal  and  final — the  requital  of  its  ill  desert.  But  if  the  blow 
is  dealt  to  the  nation  itself  in  mere  justice,  it  is  also  struck  for  the  benefit  of  all 
neighbouring  nations,  in  mercy.  It  warns  them  from  their  evil  ways ;  it  says  to  them, 
in  a  voice  which  tliey  can  scarcely  fail  to  hear,  "  Take  heed,  lest  ye  too  perish." 

II.  Most  of  God"s  judgments  are  chastisements,  sent  to  turn  men  from  their 
SINS.  "We  have  had  fathers  of  our  flesh  who  corrected  us"  (Heb.  xii.  9)  when  we 
had  done  wrong,  and  strove  thereby  to  deter  us  from  evil.  So  God  acts  with  his 
children.  So  he  chastened  Judah,  bringing  calamity  after  calamity  upon  her,  until  at 
last  there  was  a  "remnant"  which  truly  turned  to  him,  and  became  the  germ  of  the 
Christian  Church.  So  he  has  chastened  many  a  nation  besides.  So,  too,  he  chastens 
individuals,  sending  on  them  sickness,  and  poverty,  and  loss  of  friends,  and  other  mis- 
fortunes, to  check  them  in  a  career  of  sin,  and  catise  them  to  pause,  and  reflect,  and 
tremble  at  his  mighty  hand,  and  humble  themselves  under  it,  and  change  their  course 
of  life.  In  this  way  he  chastened  David  by  the  loss  of  Bathsheba's  first  child,  and  by 
the  revolt  of  Absalom  and  Adonijah;  liezekiah  by  war  and  sickness;  Solomon  by 
"adversaries"  at  home  and  abroad.  Of  this  kind  again  are  the  natural  punishments 
which  he  has  attached  to  sins,  the  natural  tendency  of  which  i»  to  deter  men  ffom 
iheoa. 


OH.  VL 1—13.]       THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  Ill 

m.  One  olabb  or  his  judqments  are  trials,  sent  to  prove  uev,  and  thereby 
TO  PURIFY  THEM  AND  RAISE  THEM  TO  GREATER  SAiNTLiNESS.  "  Every  branch  in  me  that 
beareth  fruit,  he  porgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more  fruit "  (John  xv.  2);  "  The 
trying  of  your  faith  woiketh  patience  "  (Jag.  i.  3).  Christ  himself,  we  are  told,  was  in 
his  human  nature  "  made  perfect  through  suffering."  The  discipline  of  affliction  is 
needed  for  forming  in  us  many  of  the  highest  Christian  graces,  as  patience,  resignation, 
forgivingness,  mildness,  long-suffering.  The  sons  of  God  are  taught  to  expect  a  chasten- 
ing which  shall  b*  **&«:  their  profit,  that  they  may  be  partakers  of  his  holiness*  (Heb. 
<ii.lOX 


HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1—13. — 77te  prophets  call  and  consecration.  There  are  tiirniug-poluts  in  life 
which  give  a  meaning  to  the  whole  of  its  after-course.  A  light  may  be  given  to  the 
mind  at  such  moments  by  which  it  may  have  to  steer  its  course  for  years.  In  moments 
of  despondency  the  man  of  God  will  fall  back  on  memory,  and  encourage  himself  by 
the  recollection  that,  having  once  received  and  followed  Divine  guidance,  that  guidance 
will  not  desert  him  in  the  future.  Such  was  this  moment  in  the  history  of  Isaiah. 
l.ife  stood  before  him  like  a  crowded  picture ;  he  foresaw  the  difficulties  with  which  he 
would  have  to  contend,  yet  that  picture  did  not  dismay  him.  "  Like  Christ  from  thi 
first  beginning  of  his  Messianic  labours,  he  thought  of  the  end,  nor  did  he  shrink  from 
the  image  of  death,  so  that  the  fact  as  it  came  nearer  only  confirmed  what  had  not 
seemed  strange  from  the  beginning  "  (Ewald).  It  is  the  sense,  not  of  our  own  faithful- 
ness, nor  of  our  own  means,  but  of  a  Divine  destiny  working  in  and  through  us  that 
must  be  our  support  in  weak  and  lonely  hours.  To  feel  that  we  are  moving  against  the 
course  of  the  sun,  even  in  the  midst  of  external  comfort  or  popular  applause,  is  to  be 
weak  and  unnerved ;  while  a  stern  yet  sweet  joy  fills  the  soul  in  the  prospect  of  duty 
and  danger,  in  which,  though  we  seem  to  fail,  we  must  be  victors  for  ever.  Every  true 
man  has  his  hours  of  piophetio  revelation ;  and  well  for  him  whose  will  is  strong,  and 
who  abides  by  the  truth  of  that  revelation  through  good  and  through  evil  report, 
unswervingly  to  the  end. 

I.  Tub  vision  op  the  Divine  majesty.  1.  Its  date  is  fixed  in  memory.  "  The 
year  that  King  Uzziah  died."  Dates  are  the  resting-places  of  memoiy  and  fancy, 
around  which  accumulates  the  lore  of  our  years.  The  accessions  and  the  deaths  of 
kinga,  battles,  peaces,  revolutions,  acts  of  parliament  that  wrought  weal  for  the  people, 
— such  are  the  dates  of  nations.  And  every  soul  has  its  epochs — birth,  youthful 
events  of  pleasure,  love,  struggle,  defeat,  success;  and  for  each  there  must  be  more  to 
him  than  the  events  recorded  in  the  calendar.  The  most  "  uneventful "  year,  as  we 
speak,  is  eventful  for  the  hidden  sphere  of  many  a  spirit.  How  faint  and  poor  are  our 
])ublic  memorials  of  history  compared  with  those  private  recollections  which  are 
written  in  the  invisible  ink  of  memory!  Let  us  own  that  history  means,  first  and 
foremost  to  every  one  of  us,  the  history  of  our  own  spirit.  By  a  Divine  providence 
the  fragment  of  an  Isaiah's,  a  Jeremiah's,  an  Ezekiel's  autobiography  is  preserved 
through  the  ages,  to  remind  us  that  the  inner  life,  the  contact  of  God  with  the  soul, 
is  our  real  concern,  our  deepest  interest.  Between  the  two  dates  on  the  tombstone  that 
will  mark  our  entrance  into  the  world,  ouf  passage  from  it,  what  a  record  musv  lie, 
stored  in  the  archives  of  eternity— of  visions  beheld,  of  voices  heard,  whether  obeyed 
or  disregarded !  "  In  the  year  that  King  Uzziah  died."  2.  It  is  a  vision  of  the  iitb- 
limity  of  Ood.  Seated  on  a  high,  exalted  throne,  God  in  this  image  is  conceived  under 
the  analogy  of  the  Ruler.  Father  and  Ruler — such  is  the  Bible  view  of  God ;  his  rule 
based  upon  his  fatherhood,  his  fatherhood  imparting  benignancy  and  tenderness  to  the 
sterner  character  of  the  Lawgiver  of  the  universe.  But  here  the  Father  seems  for  the 
moment  absorbed  in  the  awful  Sovereign,  whose  throne  is  in  the  heights  of  heaven,  his 
footstool  earth.  It  is  only  his  skirts  that  are  visible  to  the  awe-struck  gaze  of  the 
prophet.  Amidst  the  most  magnificent  scenes  of  external  nature,  the  Alps  or  the 
Andes,  we  may  gain  a  passing  soul-expanding  vision  of  the  Highest — still  only  part 
revealed,  but  much  more  hidden.  The  verdure  bejewelled  with  flowers,  the  forests 
glancing  with  the  lustre  of  dazzling  birds  of  plumage, — these  may  represent  the  vesture 


112  THE  BOOK  OF  TUE   PROrHET  ISAIAH.        [oa.  vi.  1— 13 

of  the  great  King,  hinting  an  unutterable  beauty  on  which  none  can  look  and  live. 
And  BO  in  the  inward  or  moral  world.  In  the  history  of  a  people  or  of  a  man  there  are 
moments  when  God,  in  the  still  more  impressive  might  of  his  holiness,  sweeps  by,  an 
awakening  and  a  purifying  Spirit.  Or  in  higher  moments  of  devotion  we  may  gain  a 
momentary  glimpse  of  that  pure  love,  so  full  of  terror  yet  so  full  of  blessin",  which 
bums  at  the  core  of  things,  and  whose  light  is  reflected  in  the  light  of  every  human 
conscience.  Yet  these  are  partial  revelations,  like  that  to  the  prophet;  glimpses  of  the 
skirts  of  Jehovah's  majesty,  tastes  of  a  "  burning  bliss  "  which  in  its  fulness  could  not 
be  endured.  It  is  this  sense  that  there  is  a  beauty  all  around  us,  ready  at  any  inomenf 
to  break  into  glowing  manifestation,  were  not  our  mortal  eyes  too  dim  to  look  upon  it; 
an  eternal  music  from  which  this  "  muddy  vesture  of  decay  grossly  closing  us  in  " 
protects  us,  which  otherwise  might  pirnlyze  by  its  thunderous  tones ; — it  is  lliis  sense 
which  does,  or  which  should,  impress  an  habituiil  reverence  upon  the  mind.  We  should 
all  be  able  to  look  back  upon  moments  of  our  history  when  we  have  seen  in  the  inner 
chamber  of  the  mind  something  of  what  Isaiah  saw,  and  to  cherish  tlm  recnllection  as 
a  lore  never  to  be  fprgotten.  For  if  we  have  never  known  a  time  whun  we  were 
reduced  into  insignificance  in  the  preaince  of  God,  and  felt  that  he  was  all  and  we 
were  nought,  and  that  the  best  tradition  about  God  must  be  hushed  into  silence  before 
what  we  personally  know  of  God,  we  have  missed  an  elementary  lesson  which,  when 
once  obtained,  adds  weight  and  worth  to  all  onr  after-experience.  3.  The  seraphs  and 
their  song.  "  Seraphs  stood  high  around  [or,  '  nbove  ''i  him."  It  is  impuasible  to  gain  a 
true  notion  of  the  seraphic  fignres  without  consulting  works  of  art.  Like  the  cherubim 
and  the  griffins  and  the  sphinxes,  their  origin  is  in  the  remotest  fure-time.  All  these 
were,  in  fact,  among  man's  earliest  efforts  to  represent  to  himself  in  visible  art  the 
Divine  power  which  he  felt  to  be  working  in  and  through. nature;  in  the  flash  of  the 
lightning,  the  thunder's  roar,  the  might  of  the  blast,  and  all  those  mysterious  sounds 
and  sights  which  usher  in  the  changes  of  the  year.  As  this  is  the  only  place  where 
the  seraphim  are  named,  their  character  must  remain  for  the  most  part  speculative. 
Similar  winged  figures  are,  however,  found  in  Oriental  sculpture  (such  as  those  in  the 
British  Museum)  as  attributes  of  a  sovereign.  And  we  can  hardly  he  wrong  in  con- 
sidering them  as  appropriate  signs  of  Jehovah's  sovereignty  over  nature  in  the  visioB  of 
Isaiah.  Wings  in  art-figures  generally  denote  the  wind.  If,  then,  we  compare  the 
passages  in  the  Old  Testament  whence  Jehovah's  power  is  described  as  revealed  in 
storm  and  wind,  e.g.  Ps.  xviii.  10  ("He  rode  upon  a  cherub,  and  did  fly :  yea,  he  did 
fly  upon  the  winns  of  the  wind")  or  Ps.  civ.  3,  4  ("  Who  walketh  upon  the  wings 
of  the  wind;  who  maketh  his  messengers  spirits,  his  ministers  a  flaming  fire"), 
we  may  gain  a  fair  understanding  of  what  is  meant.  The  stormy  winds  at  the 
turning-points  of  the  year  reveal  force — the  force  of  the  omnipotent  Creator.  And  at 
the  same  time,  the  Creator  is  concealed  behind,  as  well  as  revealed  in,  these  expressions 
of  his  might.  And  so  the  seraphic  figures  are  seen  by  the  prophet  doubly  veiled- by 
their  own  wings — in  face  and  feet.  For  we  can  neitlier  look  ujion  the  face  of  God  nor 
follow  the  viewless  track  of  his  footsteps.  As  the  noble  verse  of  Cowper  aptly 
expresses  it— 

"  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way, 
His  wonders  to  perform ; 
He  plants  his  footsti'ps  in  the  80% 
And  rides  upon  the  storm." 

We  shall  not  be  far  wrong  if  we  find  this  truth  symbolically  set  forth  by  the  six- 
winged  seraphic  figures  of  the  prophet's  vision.  But  the  wind  is  full  of  music  as  well 
as  of  might,  and  the  seraphs  give  utterance  to  a  solemn  song,  which  falls  into  two 
members,  sung  antiphonally  by  these  celestial  choristers.  "  One  called  to  the  other," 
just  as  the  priests  in  the  temple-music  below.  Profound  and  weighty  is  the  burden  of 
this  alternate  chant — 

"  Holy,  holy,  holy,  is  Jehovah  of  hosts  I 
The  fulness  of  the  whole  earth  is  his  glory  I  "* 

How  shall  we  think  of  the  holiness  of  Jehovah  ?  As  height,  like  that  in  which  the 
Seraphs  sing — ^  nature  and  »  Ufe  so  "  far  above"  oi+r  base  and  groveiliiig  ways?    4^1^ 


0H.VI.1— 13.J        THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  118 

for  us,  if  we  do  not  ever  recollect  in  our  worship  that,  liigb  as  yonder  empyrean  above 
this  "dim  spot  that  men  call  earth,"  distinct  as  the  clouds  in  fleeciest  white  from  the 
stagnant  and  foul  spots  below,  are  the  thoughts  of  Jehovah  above  our  tlioughtg,  and 
his  ways  above  our  ways !  Shall  we  think  of  holiness  as  separation  t  Woe  to  us  if  we 
know  not  that  purity,  which,  like  the  flame,  refuses  to  wid  with  ought  that  is  alien  to 
itsi'lf ;  which,  like  the  light,  divides  and  discriminates  the  evil  from  the  goodwheresnever 
it  comes!  The  thrice-holy  God  is  none  other  than  the  supremely  pure  Intelligence, 
ihe  perfect  chastity  of  Love.  But  the  infinite  glory  as  well  as  the  holiness  of  Juhovah 
is  celebrated.  It  is  the  "fulness  of  the  earth,"  teeming  with  life,  throbbing  with 
mysterious  forces,  covered  with  a  rich  robe  of  rare  embroiikry,  holding  rich  ti\a.sure» 
in  her  kee[)ing;  which  embodies  to  our  thought  the  nature  of  God  in  its  vast  extent, 
i'lst  as  the  pure  sky  represents  the  intensity  of  that  nature  as  a  principle  of  holiuesg 
^^  .lent  and  inaccesnible  as  sun  and  stars,  he  ia  yet  near  to  us  in  the  throbbing  of  great 
nature's  heart — nay,  of  our  own, 

"Spettk  to  him,  then  I  for  he  hears,  and  spirit  with  spirit  may  meet; 
Closer  is  he  than  thy  breathing,  nearer  than  hands  and  feet" 

^God  in  all" — this  was  the  thought  of  Paul  the  apu-tle,  as  of  Isaiah  the  prophet. 
Incarnate  in  the  flower  and  in  the  stem,  vocal  in  the  "sound  of  many  waters,"  or 
in  the  tinkling  of  brook  or  murmur  of  zephyr;  there  is  nothing  in  the  world  in  which 
he  is  not  revealed. 

"Thou  art,  O  God,  the  Life  and  Light 

Of  all  this  wondrous  world  we  seel 
Its  glow  by  day,  its  smile  by  n  ght. 

Are  but  reflections  caught  from  tlioe  i 
Where'er  we  turn,  thy  glories  shine, 
And  all  things  fair  and  bright  are  tliine." 

4.  The  voice  of  Ood.  A  loud  cry  is  heard  even  above  the  hymn  of  the  seraphim,  and 
it  causes  the  tluesholds  to  tremble.  The  thunder  was  among  all  ancient  nations 
listened  to  as  ihe  vuice  of  God.  It  is  the  natural  exiiression  of  supreme  and  irres-istible 
p^-  jr,  before  which  man,  in  the  last  height  of  his  own  intelligence  and  power,  must 
bow.  In.-stantly  the  smoke  soars  from  the  altar,  and  the  temple  is  filled  with  smoke. 
Worship  is  man's  answer  to  God's  voice — the  answer  of  his  con.science,  the  answer  of 
his  heart.  Kor  can  we  truly  worship  without  the  sense  of  being  face  to  face  with 
unutterable  mystery.  For  behind  the  most  glorious  visions  reuiaius  he  "  whom  no 
man  hath  at  any  time  seen,  nor  can  see;"  at  the  heart  of  the  thunder  is  that  Divine 
emotion  which  must  slay  us  were  It  fully  discharged  into  our  souls.  The  rising  smoke 
may  fitly  typify  that  sacred  silence,  the  "offspring  of  the  deeper  heart,"  in  which  our 
worship  should  begin  and  end. 

II.  The  prophet's  consecration.  1.  2%e  effect  of  the  revelation  on  his  mind.  First, 
there  is  the  sense  of  utter  weakness.  When  the  true  glory  of  the  spiritual  world  burst* 
upon  us,  it  seems  as  if  we  must  die.  Every  difficulty  conquered  brings  us  a  new  sense 
of  strength  ;  every  human  being  we  have  fairly  faced  in  the  consciousness  of  our  own 
manhood  we  may  reduce  to  our  own  level;  for  one  man  is  virtually  the  peer  of  every 
other,  the  world  over.  But  who  can  look  and  live  in  the  presence  of  the  white  intense 
light  of  the  pure  and  burning  Spirit  of  God?  Already,  like  Abraham  (Gen.  xviii.),  the 
man  feels  himself  as  if  reduced  to  "  dust  and  ashes ; "  or,  like  Moses,  that  he  cannot  see 
the  Eternal  and  live,  but  must  shelter  himself  in  a  cleft  of  the  rock,  and  hide  bt  hiud  the 
hand  of  God  (Exod.  xxxiii.) ;  or,  like  Manoah,  forebodes  a  death ful  doom  as  he  gazes 
into  the  mystic  altar-flame  (Judg.  xiii.).  In  Greek  and  other  Gentile  legecls  we  read 
v(  children  receiving  a  nightly  birth  of  fire  as  the  condition  of  immortality,  the  mean- 
ing of  which  was  that  none  but  those  destined  to  divinity  could  endure  the  fiery 
ordeal.  Profound  enigma  of  our  nature  I  that  we  to  whom  has  been  imparted  the 
Kinging  for  life  eternal,  the  dim  consciousness  of  an  undying  destiny,  should  yet 
l,n(nv  moments  when  we  seem  on  the  verge  of  "  dusty  death."  But  the  man  whom 
Oud  calls  to  be  mighty  in  word  and  deed  must  pass  through  the  whole  ganut  and 
scale  of  human  emotion,  from  the  lowest  mood  of  sulf- distrust  to  that  of  loftifist 
confidence  in  God.    No  note  must  be  left  uustruck  in  our  own  heart,  if  we  are  to 

ISAIAH.  I 


lU  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  tu  1—13. 


make  it  sonnd  in  the  conscience  of  others.  There  is,  besides,  the  consciousness  oj 
ineffidency.  The  very  calling  which  already  glimmers  before  Isaiah's  mind  as  his  is 
that  for  which  he  finds  himself  unfit.  He  is  to  be  a  nabi,  a  prophet;  that  is,  % 
man  of  fluent  lips  and  pure,  through  which  the  streams  of  Divine  eloquence  are  to 
flow.  Alas!  how* can  this  be?  For  he  is  a  "  man  of  unclean  lips,"  and  will  not  the 
truth  be  muddied  passing  through  them,  and  so  cease  to  be  truth  ?  All  this  is  a 
typical  experience.  The  man  who  has  never  felt  unfit  will  never  be  fit  for  any  great 
thing.  Jeremiah,  at  his  call,  felt  that  he  was  "  a  child ; "  and  Moses  that  he  was  "  slow 
of  speech  and  slow  of  tongue"  (Exod.  iv.  10);  and  John  fell  at  the  feet  of  the  Son 
of  man  "  as  one  dead,"  brain  and  hand  paralyzed,  before  he  took  up  the  pen  that 
glowed  with  apocalyptic  fire.  Who  is  the  fit  man  for  God's  ends?  The  self-confident 
man  ?  It  depends  on  what  we  mean  by  "  self-confidence."  Appearances  deceive ; 
the  show  of  strength  is  not  the  same  thing  with  strength  itself,  nor  the  demeanour  ol 
weakness  a  certain  index  of  inefBoiency.  To  read  our  own  hearts  is  our  business. 
And  heartxxperience  may  teach  us  that  absolute  confidence  in  our  resources  bodes 
humiliation,  while  trembling  self-distrust  may  hint  that  something  is  to  be  done  by 
God  through  us.  "Do  the  very  thing  you  are  afraid  to  do,"  is  in  certain  moments  the 
voice  of  conscience  and  of  God.  So  it  proved  in  this  instance.  2.  Purification  and 
pardon.  One  of  the  burning  beings  flies  to  the  prophet's  side,  bearing  a  heated  stf^ne 
(for  such  seisms  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  word  ritzpdh)  forming  part  of  the  aliar,  and 
detached  without  difficulty  from  it.  With  this  he  touches  the  lips  of  the  trembling 
seer,  saying,  "  Lo  1  this  hath  touched^  thy  lips,  and  so  will  thy  guilt  depart,  and  thy 
sin  may  be  atoned  for."  More  meaning  can  be  condensed  into  a  symbolic  action  than 
into  any  mere  words.  Fire  is  the  enemy  of  all  impurity ;  and  the  idea  of  a  fire- 
baptism  as  the  means  of  cleansing  is  deeply  rooted  in  the  lore  of  olden  time.  In  this 
respect  it  seems  nearly  allied  to  the  sprinkling  of  blood.  And  just  as  when  Moses 
sprinkled  all  the  people  with  the  sacrificial  blood,  or  the  priests  sprinkled  the  altar 
and  other  sacred  objects,  one  drop  seemed  sufficient  to  diffuse  ceremonial  cleanness  on 
the  object  on  which  it  fell,  so  the  mere  touch  of  the  hot  coal  or  stone  is  enough  to 
signify  the  completeness  of  the  purification.  It  is  not  the  quantity  of  the  fiery  element, 
but  the  quality,  which  does  the  work.  A  small  spark  may  kindle  a  mass  of  fuel,  or, 
falling  on  the  hand,  spread  a  keen  pain  through  all  the  uervous  network  of  the  body; 
so  a  glimpse  of  God,  a  touch  from  his  hand,  may  change  the  mood  of  our  being  for  a 
lifetime.  It  may  set  up  a  glow  which  shall  not  die  down  .till  all  that  is  selfish,  sensual, 
base,  in  us  shall  lie  in  ashes.  The  sense  of  guilt  lies  deep  in  the  mind  ;  and  never  is 
it  so  clear  and  keen  as  in  moments  of  bodily  sickness  or  mental  depression.  The 
moment  when  we  are  tempted  to  say,  "I  cannot  help  it,"  there  rises  up  the  thought 
that  there  is  help  in  God,  and  therefore  that  we  are  not  helpless.  No  sooner  does  the 
cry  of  weakness,  the  complaint  concerning  the  unclean  lips,  escape  Isaiah,  than  the 
eternal  evangel,  in  all  its  supernatural  strengtli  to  heal,  comes  home  to  his  heart.  For 
this  is  the  eternal  gospel  in  its  essence,  whether  borne  by  lips  of  seraph,  prophet,  or 
Bon  of  God :  "  Thy  guilt  will  depart,  thy  sin  may  be  atoned  for."  And  in  those  blessed 
moments  when  we  grasp  this  message  in  its  fullest  meaning,  and  believe  it  in  its 
inmost  truth,  the  heart  is  set  free,  and,  despite  present  letters  and  prisons  in  which  fact 
or  fancy  holds  us  bound,  we  know  that  it  will  not  ever  be  thus.  Then,  indeed,  the 
yoke  of  duty  becomes  easy,  the  burden  of  toil,  for  the  sake  of  the  love  which  pardons 
and  emancipates,  light.  3.  The  call  to  service.  Again  the  august  and  dominant  voice 
of  the  Eternal  is  heard  :  "Whom  shall  I  send,  and  who  will  go  for  us?"  A  ready 
answer,  full  of  devotion,  full  of  self-abandonment,  comes  from  that  lately  overwhelmed 
heart :  "  Here  am  I ;  send  me."  Out  of  weakness  Isaiah  has  been  made  strong,  and 
there  is  no  hesitation  now.  There  is  "  triumph  lingering  in  his  eyes,  wide  as  of  some 
swimmer's  who  descries  help  from  above  in  his  extreme  despair."  The  foolish 
imprudence  which  cries,  "  Here  am  I ;  send  me,"  without  having  calculated  the  cost  of 
the  enterprise  and  the  extent  of  the  resources,  is  not  that  of  Isaiah.  Still  less  is  the 
unfaithful  trifling  with  one's  powers  and  opportunities  under  the  excuse  of  modesty,  or 
the  delight  in  di  cams  of  action  rather  than  in  action  itself,  seen  iii  him.  We  see  some 
men  rashly  staking  their  future  on  the  cast  of  a  die,  impetuously  crossing  a  Rubicon ; 
others  lingering  on  the  brink,  or  moving  superstitiously  in  a  fancied  circle,  beyond  which 
seems  to  lie  the  frowning  impossible.     And  we  see  a  third  class  who  have  learned  the 


OH.  VI.1— 13.J       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  116 


Divine  magic  of  the  word  "obey,"  and  who  abne  move  safely  and  with  high  heart  to 
ends  greater  than  their  dreams.  The  servant's  readiness,  his  quickness  of  eye  and  ear, 
is  what  we  need.  Can  we  allege  that  we  have  never  seen  our  vision-,  heard  our  call 
from  the  unmistalcable  voice  ?  If  the  plea  be  sound,  then  our  mistakes  and  aberrations 
cannot  be  charged  against  us.  But  can  we  maintain  such  plea  so  long  as  there  is  any 
meaning  in  the  words  "  truth  "  and  "  duty  "?  Truth  is  ever  beckoning  to  us,  duty's  low 
clear  voice  is  ever  sounding,  though  the  paths  to  which  they  guide  lie  but  dimly  before. 
The  call  to  act  is  for  us  all ;  the  call  to  act  greatly  but  for  God's  elected  few.  Let  ai 
not  mistake  our  wishes  for  Divine  commands,  nor  in  vanity  create  a  destiny  which 
is  only  our  own  fiction.  Still  less  let  us  treat  impressions  which  have  seized  us  and 
shaken  us  with  awe,  and  against  which  reluctant  flesh  and  blood  have  struggled,  as 
dreams  to  be  set  aside  and  fancies  to  be  overcome.  If,  after  straining  eye  and  ear,  God 
seems  to  leave  you  through  wide  tracts  of  life's  way  to  struggle  with  your  ignorance 
and  to  work  out  your  problems  unaided, — be  it  so.  This  is  your  call.  If  otherwise 
you  are  the  subject  of  strong  and  extraordinary  impressions,  reaching  into  the  reality 
behind  the  shows  of  things,  hearing  with  open  ears  where  others  know  but  confus^ 
sounds, — be  it  so.  Your  call  is  more  direct.  If  only  we  will  not  indulge  the  blindness 
of  those  who  will  not  see,  the  deafness  of  those  who  stop  their  ears,  the  proud  weakness 
of  those  who  hate  to  obey;  all  may  be  well. 

III.  The  mission.  1.  It  wiU  he  thankless  and  disappointing.  Isaiah  is  to  go  and  waste, 
as  it  seems,  his  eloquence  upon  dull  ears,  upon  intelligences  sealed  up,  and  hearts  that 
are  proof  against  religious  feeling.  The  light  of  truth  as  it  streams  from  him  will 
encounter  rocks  that  will  not  melt  in  the  sun,  natures  that  can  neither  be  softened  nor 
sweetened.  It  is  the  height  of  a  preacher's  joy  when  every  word  comes  back  to  him 
a  silent  echo  from  the  conscience  of  the  people ;  and  his  day  of  mourning  is  when  he 
feels  himself  to  be  speaking  in  a  valley  full  of  dry  bones,  or  before  beings  who  seem 
to  have  life  and  conscience,  yet  are  but  as  spectres  of  men.  In  his  best  moments  it 
seems  that  all  the  eloquence  is  in  the  people,  and  he  is  "  gathering  up  in  a  mist "  from 
them  that  which  he  is  to  "  return  upon  them  in  a  flood."  In  other  moments  of 
discouragement  it  seems  that  he  is  alone  in  the  world,  with  a  sublime  cry  upon  his 
lips,  now  become  meaningless,  because  there  are  none  to  whom  it  has  a  meaning.  We 
know  the  legend" of  St.  Antony  preaching  to  the  fishes;  and,  indeed,  it  seems  better 
to  talk  with  the  dumb  creatures  whom  we  can  win  to  silent  sympathy,  than  to  a  people 
which  "  does  not  consider."  The  company  of  the  ox  or  the  ass  seems  better  than  that 
of  men  who  have  become  as  "  stocks  and  stones,  and  worse  than  senseless  things." 
The  preacher  and  teacher  will  know  these  trials,  and  let  him  recollect  that  it  is  no 
uncommon  experience.  We  find  its  pathos  repeated  in  different  ways  in  all  the  great 
prophets,  in  John  the  Baptist,  the  "  voice  in  tlie  desert,"  and  in  Christ  himself.  Are 
we  to  cease  crying  when  the  echo  ceases?  Rather  let  us  go  on  until  we  hear  once  more 
the  truth  coming  back  to  us.  Let  us  believe  that  what  is  true  to  us  in  our  inmost 
heart  will  one  day  be  true  for  all  the  world.  One  of  our  great  countrymen  said  that 
he  was  wont  to  iterate  the  same  statement  again  and  again  until  he  heard  it  on 
the  tongue  of  common  talk ;  and  this  was  a  statesman  to  whom  the  people  owed  the 
greatest  material  blessings.  The  test  of  truth  is  not  the  way  in  which  it  is  received, 
but  the  immediate  reflection  of  it  in  our  own  mind.  2.  The  gloom  of  the  time  will 
deepen.  "How  long,  0  Lord?"  The  answer  describes  a -prophet  shut  in  by  clouds 
and  mist,  or  overhung  by  some  all-pervading  pall  of  gloom.  Sin  is  to  go  on  working 
out  its  waste,  until  there  be  an  empty  and  depopulated  land.  "  Things  bad  begun 
to  make  themselves  strong  by  ill."  And  there  are  times  when  evil  must  be  left  tc 
gather  to  a  head  and  run  its  full  course.  It  may  even  be  the  part  of  the  prophet  to 
hasten  it  on  its  way.  But  when  we  say,  "  Things  are  getting  worse  and  worse,"  let 
us  remember  that  beyond  the  worst  remains  the  best,  and  after  last  returns  the  first; 
for  God  is  the  principle  of  an  inexhaustible  and  unconquerable  life.  3.  Tht  gleam  of 
hope.  There  is  now  visible  at  the  close  a  gleam  on  the  dark  horizon,  denoting  a 
coming  dawn.  A  section,  an  elect  few,  a  tenth,  will  survive  these  coming  disasters. 
The  fire  of  judgment  and  purification,  of  which  the  burning  seraphs  are  symbolic,  must 
wither  the  goodly  branches  of  the  national  tree,  and  leave  the  stem  all  blackened 
and  charred.  Still  the  stump  will  remain  with  its  root  still  fastened  in  the  earth. 
"Just  as  the  trunk  of  terebinth  or  oak,  deeply  and  ineradicably  sunk  in  the  earth, 


116  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   rilOrUET   ISAIAH.        [oh.  vi.  1—13. 

bears  coniitantly  new  shoots,  an  image  of  eternity  and  Immortality,  springing  from 
an  inward  "rejuvenating  power,"  so  with  the  spiritual  life  of  the  nation  and  the 
individual.  Here,  then,  we  see  how  the  deepest  seriousness  and  sadness  is  yet  com- 
patible with  undying  hope.  (1)  The  nation  that  hopes  in  the  Eternal  can  never  perish. 
That  terebinth  root  lives  on ;  all  fresh  developments  of  Christianity  spring  from  its 
undying  life.  (2)  The  man  who  hopes  in  the  Eternal  shall  be  saved.  He  may,  he 
must,  pass  through  the  fire  of  trial ;  but  if  he  endure  to  the  end,  he  shall  be  saved. 
Amidst  his  ashes  he  will  discover  fresh  life ;  for  there  is  hope  of  the  tree,  and  hope 
of  the  man,  that  though  felled,  he  shall  rise  again.  (3)  Holiness  is  the  secret  of  life. 
It  is  health,  it  is  the  sanity  of  the  mind  which  has  made  truth  its  portion,  God  its 
delight,  and  his  service  its  eternal  choice. — J. 

Ver.  8. — The  call  of  Ood.  "  Also  I  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  saying.  Whom  shall 
1  send,  and  who  will  go  for  us  ?  Then  said  I,  Here  am  I ;  send  me."  The  symbol  of 
the  seraphim  had  been  on  the  prophet's  head,  and  the  voice  of  the  Lord  had  come  to 
his  conscience  and  his  heart.  The  live  coal  had  touched  his  lips.  Prophets,  apostles, 
teachers,  must  be  sent  of  God.  Other  qualifications  are  appropriate  and  excellent,  but 
this  is  indispensable. 

I.  The  Divine  query.  "  Whoni  ?"  Then  God  takes  thought  about  Divine  govern- 
ment in  human  hibtory.  Just  as  Nature  expresses,  in  all  her  forms  of  beauty,  his  skill 
and  care,  so  in  grace  God  is  observant  of  character,  and  watchful  for  the  wisest  means. 
He  knows  the  secret  places  of  grace  and  genius,  and  he  can  call  them  forth  at  the 
appropriate  time.    Isaiah  now ;  Paul  in  the  great  epoch  to  come. 

II.  The  elective  honoue.  "  Whom  shall  I  send  ? "  Hero  we  have  the  sublime 
election  to  privile;;.',  so  far  as  responsibility  is  concerned,  which,  rightly  considered, 
explains  God's  calling  of  Jews  then,  and  Jews  and  Gentiles  now.  It  is  not  an  election 
to  salvation,  but  to  a  status  of  honour  and  influence  in  witnessing  for  him.  "  Send  !  " 
Then  God  is  the  great  Father  of  all  human  spirits,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish. 
The  Jewish  Church  was  a  city  set  on  a  hill  to  enlighten  others;  the  salt  to  save  the 
world  from  death  and  putrefaction. 

III.  The  quick  besponse.  There  is  no  hesitation.  "  Here  am  I."  Men  should  fulfil 
their  own  prayers.  They  ask  for  grace  and  strength  to  work  and  give.  Let  thcni 
inquire  within  whether  they  cannot  turn  supplication  into  consecration.  "  Here  am  1." 
How  few  say  that !  They  look  round  and  exclaim,  "  Send  others ! "  "  Send  me !  " 
says  the  prophet,  fulfilling  the  commission  which  makes  him  the  great  evangelic  spirit 
of  the  Old  Testament.— W.  M.  8. 

Ver.  1. — The  vision  of  Ood.  "1  saw  .  .  .  the  Lord,"  writes  the  prophet.  These 
simple,  strong  words  suggest  to  us — 

I.  The  vision  which  is  impossible.  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time,"  our 
Lord  declares ;  and  his  declaration  is  sustained  by  the  philosophic  truth  that  he  who  is 
a  Divine  Spirit  must  be  invisible  to  mortal  eye.  So  far  as  our  apprehension  by  sense 
is  concerned,  God  must  remain,  to  every  human  being,  "the  King  eternal,  immortal, 
invisible."    Himself,  in  his  own  essential  nature,  we  cannot  look  upon. 

II.  The  vision  which  is  extbaoedinauy.  God  has,  on  some  few  occasions,  granted 
special  and  particular  manifestations  of  himself — such  that  those  to  whom  they  were 
vouchsafed  might  say,  without  impropriety,  that  they  had  "  seen  the  Lord."  Of  this 
kind  were  the  burumg  bush  (Bxod.  iii.),  the  vision  granted  to  Moses  on  the  mount 
(Exod.  xxxiv.  5,  6),  that  of  Micaiah  (1  Kings  xxii.  19),  this  one  narrated  in  the  text, 
those  of  the  Apocalypse.  In  these  cases  tliere  was  a  manifestation  of  Deity  in  snmu 
form,  temporarily  assumed,  cognizable  by  the  lenses,  and  bringing  the  soul  into  close 
communion  with  the  Eternal  One  himself. 

HI.  The  vision  which  is  constant.  It  is  something  more  than  poetry  to  think 
and  speak  of  God  as  being  in  the  various  objects  and  upci'ations  in  nature.  It  is  some- 
thing deeper  than  fanciful  sentiment,  and  truer  than  Pantheistic  thought,  to  say  that 
"  nature  is  the  robe  of  God."  For  his  power  is  immanent  in  all  living  things.  The 
"  forces  of  nature,"  which  are  working  everywhere  and  in  all  things,  are,  in  truth,  the 
outworkings  of  his  own  Divine  hand,  in  constant  and  regular,  and  therefore  in  measur-_ 
able  aud  reliable  activity.    When  we  watch  them,  we  do  well  to  feel  that  we  are  near 


Ott.vi.1— 13.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  117 

to  him ;  they  are  directly  suggestive  of  him,  and  we  ought  not  to  he  ahle  to  regard  them 
with  interest  without  reaching  and  resting  in  him  of  whose  presence  and  sliill  and  Iotb 
they  continually  speak  to  us. 

IV.  Thk  vision  which  18  HISTORICAL.'  There  are  two  manifestations  of  Deity  which 
stand  by  themselves,  the  latter  being  transcendently  the  greater  and  more  gracious  of 
the  two.  1.  One  was  in  the  visible  Shechinah,  which  remained  the  constant  symbol  of 
the  presence  of  Jehovah  for  many  generations  ;  there  in  the  midst  of  the  camp,  visible 
to  any  eye  that  looked  within  the  veil,  but  only  to  be  seen  by  one  man  on  one  great  day 
in  the  sacred  calendar.  2.  The  other  was  found  in  him  who  was  able  to  say,  "  lie  that 
hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  They  who  looked  on  him  in  the  days  of  his  flesh, 
and  who  heard  his  voice,  might  say  with  peculiar  meaning,  "I  have  seen  the  Lord." 
And  we,  before  whose  eyes  a  once-crucified  Saviour  has  been  conspicuously  upheld  (see 
Gal.  iii.  1),  and  who,  in  him,  have  presented  to  our  spiritual  vision  the  holy  and  loving 
One,  infinitely  worthy  of  our  reverent  affection,  may  also  say,  with  profound  truthful- 
ness, that  we  too  "  have  seen  the  Lord." 

V.  The  VISION  which  is  occasional.  .  There  are  certain  exceptional  experiences  which 
God  grants  to  us  now,  when  he  comes  very  near  to  us  and  reveals  himself  to  our  souls. 
It  may  be  on  the  occasion  of  some  outward  incident,  the  apparent  nearness  of  death 
and  the  future  world,  or  the  passing  of  some  intimate  friend  or  relation  into  the  unseen 
realm,  or  the  powerful  presentation  of  the  truth  by  some  faithful  minister  of  Christ, 
or  it  may  be  the  sudden  illumination  of  the  Spirit  of  God  apart  from  all  special  circum- 
stances whatsoever;  but  there  are  times  in  individual  history  when  God  comes  to  us, 
when  he  makes  his  person,  his  claims  upon  us,  his  grace  to  us  in  his  Son,  and  with 
these,  our  highest,  eternal  interests,  to  assume  to  our  souls  their  true,  their  grand 
proportions.  Then  is  it  well,  indeed,  for  us  so  to  act  that  we  can  thereafter  say,  "  I 
was  not  disobedient  unto  the  heavenly  vision." — 0. 

Vers.  2— A.— A  sermon  from  the  seraphim.  Taking  the  seraphim  of  this  prophetic 
vision  as  symbols  of  the  "  highest  creaturely  intelligences,"  we  gather  from  the  text — 

I.  That  the  lowliest  bevbbbncb  becomes  the  highest  cbbated  beings.  "  With 
twain  [of  his  wings]  he  covered  his  face,  and  with  twain  he  covered  his  feet."  Of  the 
six  wings  each  seraph  possessed, /our  were  used  to  indicate  their  sense  of  un worthiness 
in  the  near  presence  of  God ;  two  only  were  in  readiness  for  active  service.  May  we  not 
fairly  infer  that,  as  we  go  upward  in  the  order  of  intelligence,  we  become  more  impressed 
with  the  majesty  and  greatness  of  the  Divine,  and  consequently  with  our  own  little- 
ness ?  Elevation  in  rank  does  not  mean  diminution,  but  increase  in  reverence  of  spirit 
and  in  homage  of  worship.  The  higher  the  intelligence,  the  deeper  the  sense  of  low- 
liness, and  the  fuller  the  devotion  of  power  in  the  attitude  and  act  of  adoration. 

U.  That  the  hbavenlt  life  is  largely  spent  in  active  service.  "With 
twain  he  did  fly."  The  seraphim  are  represented  as  so  equipped  as  to  be  ready  for  the 
most  prompt  and  speedy  service.  The  heavenly  life  may  be  one  of  sacied  song  and 
peaceful  rest ;  but  it  certainly  is  also  one  of  joyous,  holy  activity.  It  will  be  the  very 
crown  of  our  blessedness  that,  unclothed  of  all  that  hampers  and  impedes,  and  clothe.l 
upon  with  those  celestial  organs  which  fit  for  fleetest  and  strongest  service,  we  shall  do 
the  King's  behests  with  untiring  wing,  with  unflagging  energy,  with  unlading  love 
and  joy. 

Hi  That  thb  celestial  iktelligences  have  a  keen  appreciation  op  the 
Divine  holiness.  "Holy,  holy,  holy,"  etc.  It  is  significant  enough  that,  in  this 
ascriptive  utterance,  only  one  of  the  attributes  of  God  finds  a  place.  Tha  repetition  of 
the  epithet  marks  the  fulness  and  clearness  of  the  thought,  as  also  the  intensity  of  the 
feeling.  In  Jesus  Christ  we  rightly  magnify  the  grace  and  mercy,  the  gentleness  and 
considerateness,  of  the  heavenly  Father  to  whom  we  are  reconciled  through  him  ;  bnt 
we  must  see  to  it  that  we  do  not  so  dwell  on  the  more  gracious  aspects  ol  the  Divine 
character  as  to  lose  sight  of,  or  even  dwarf  his  other  and  opposite  attributes.  As  we 
draw  near  to  the  heavenly  world  we  must  take  the  celestial  view,  which  is  one  of  a 
deep  and  strong  conviction  of  his  perfect  purity,  of  his  stainless  holiness,  of  his  utter 
and  eternal  hostility  to  every  shade  and  taint  of  sin. 

IV.  That  the  highest  intelligekces  bee  all  things  in  their  eelation  to 
Qon.    "  The  whole  earth  is  full  of  his  glory."    Those  who  will  receive  no  more  helpful 


118  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  vi.  1—13. 

and  decisive  teaching  than  that  of  science  and  philosophy  fall  short  of  this ;  they 
come  to  the  irreverent  conclusion  that  the  heavens  and  the  earth  declare  the  glory  of 
those  only  who  have  studied  their  secrets  and  discovered  their  laws.  But  the  highest, 
the  heavenly  intelligences  find  God  everywhere  and  his  glory,  in  everything.  The 
psalm  of  the  seraphim  declares  that  "  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  his  glory."  And  we,  m 
we  ascend  in  mental  power  and  spiritual  worth,  shall  let  all  earthly  things  speak  to 
us  of  God.  The  multitude  of  all  created  things  and  of  all  living  creatures  will  speak 
of  his  power ;  the  intricacy  and  delicacy  and  adaptation  of  all  things  will  tell  of  his 
wisdom ;  the  vast  and  measureless  amount  of  happiness  scattered  over  all  the  earth's 
Surface  and  even  in  its  depths  will  nng  of  his  beneficence ;  the  sorrow  and  the  death 
which  are  beneath  its  skies  will  chant  the  righteousness  of  hia  holy  rule;  the  upward 
struggle  and  the  better  life,  which  grow  clearer  and  stronger  age  by  age,  will  bear 
witness  to  his  regenerating  goodness.  All  things  will  speak  of  God,  the  whole  earth 
will  be  full  of  his  glory. — 0. 

Vers.  6 — 7. — Spiritual  agitation.  The  passage  depicts  the  prophet  in  a  condition  of 
great  mental  agitatiun;  his  state  may  suggest  to  us — 

L  Thb  alarm  of  the  human  spirit  dndbr  the  consciousness  op  the  DlVINlS 
puESENCB.  Anything  which  brings  us  into  close  contact  willi  the  unseen  world  power- 
fully affects  our  spirit  and  produces  an  apprehension  for  which  we  may  not  be  able  to 
account.  1.  Any  visitant,  real  or  imaginary,  from  the  spiritual  realm  fills  us  with 
fear  (see  Judg.  vL  22 ;  liii.  22 ;  Job  iv.  15 ;  Dan.  x.  8 ;  Luke  i.  12 ;  ii.  9).  We  have 
not  the  slightest  reason  to  apprehend  any  act  of  hostility  from  such  a  being,  and  may 
be  said  to  have  a  positive  interest  in  knowing  that  such  as  they  are  do  exist  and  do 
concern  themselves  in  our  welfare.  But  there  are  few  men  who  would  not  be  consider- 
ably agitated  if  they  believed  themselves  to  be  in  the  presence  of  a  disembodied  (or 
unembodied)  spirit.  2.  We  are  affected  with  lively  apprehension  when  we  think  our- 
selves to  be  on  the  confines  of  the  future,  the  spiritual  world.  3.  The  conception  of 
the  near  presence  of  the  Lord  himself  awakens  the  greatest  disquietude  of  soul.  So  was 
it  with  Isaiah  now.  "  Woe  is  me  I  I  am  undone,"  he  exclaimed.  So  was  it  with  Peter 
when  the  miraculous  draught  revealed  the  presence  of  his  Divine  Master.  "  Depart 
from  me ;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  O  Lord,"  was  his  prayer.  And  whenever  we  are 
brought  into  such  a  spiritual  condition  that  we  are  ready  to  say, "  Surely  God  is  in  this 
place,"  whenever  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  felt  to  be  upon  our  souls  and  his  voice  to  be 
manifestly  addressing  our  hearts,  we  are  awed,  agitated,  even  alarmed,  with  a  peculiar 
and  inexpressible  apprehension. 

II.  Its  justification  in  oub  human  guilt.  We  may  not  be  able  to  explain  our 
alarm  at  the  nearness  of  any  created  being  from  the  other  world,  but  we  can  well  under- 
stand how  it  is  we  are  affected  as  we  are  under  the  consciousness  of  the  divine  presence. 
It  is  that  our  littleness  is  abashed  at  the  presence  of  Divine  majesty,  our  ignorance  in 
presence  of  Divine  wisdom,  our  feebleness  in  presence  of  Divine  power.  But  this  is  not 
the  explanation  of  our  alarm.  It  is  found  in  the  fact  that  when  we  find  ourselves  before 
God  we  are  conscious  that  a  guilty  soul  is  in  the  near  presence  of  the  thrice-holy  One 
(see  ver.  3).  The  clue  to  our  agitation  is  in  the  words,  "  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips ; " 
"  I  am  a  sinful  man."  There  is  a  twofold  reason  why  sinful  men  should  be  alarmed  at 
the  felt  presence  of  God  :  one,  that  all  sin  by  its  very  nature  shrinks  and  cowers  in  the 
conscious  presence  of  purity ;  the  other,  that  the  guilty  human  soul  knows  well  that  it 
is  the  province,  and  is  in  the  power,  of  the  righteous  God  to  inflict  the  penalty  which 
is  its  due;  and  it  knows  that  the  rightful  penalty  of  sin  is  sorrow,  shame,  death. 

III.  Its  Divine  removal.  (Vers.  6,  7.)  Under  Divine  direction  (as  we  may 
assume)  one  of  the  cherubim  took  a  live  coal  from  that  altar  of  sacri  fice  which  God  had 
caused  to  be  built  for  the  purging  of  the  sins  of  the  people,  and  wiih  the  coal  he  touched 
the  "unclean  lips  "  of  which  the  prophet  had  made  confession  and  complaint ;  so  was  his 
"  iniquity  taken  away,"  and,  we  may  conclude,  his  spirit  calmed.  The  removal  of  that 
spiritual  agitation  which  comes  to  our  soul  when  we  realize  that  our  guilt  is  in  the 
full  view  of  the  Holy  One  can  only  come  from  God  himself.  We  may  bless  his  Name 
that  he  has  made  such  ample  provision  for  this  gracious  purpose.  1.  He  has  provided 
the  laeriflce  and  the  altar ;  that  is  found  in  him  who  is  the  Propitiation  for  our  sins,  in 
the  cross  of  Calvary.    2.  He  has  provided  the  messengers  of  merey ;  these  arc  found  iu 


CH.  VI.  1—13.]        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  119 

those  fiithful  servants  who  carry  the  gospel  of  his  grace  on  the  wings  of  their  ardent 
love.  3.  He  has  provided  the  means  by  which  the  sacrifice  and  the  soul  are  connected, 
and  the  virtue  of  the  one  is  made  to  touch  and  heal  the  other ;  this  is  found  in  that 
living  faith  by  which  the  Lamb  of  Grod  takes  away  our'sin,  and  our  soul,  *'  being  justified 
by  faith,  has  peace  with  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." — 0. 

Ver.  8. — On  Ood'i  errand.  Our  thought  is  naturally  divided  into— 
L  The  Divtnb  deuasd.  "Whom  shall  I  send,  and  who  will  go  for  us?"  1.  There 
are  some  demands  God  makes  of  us  all.  He  requires  that  we  should  hearken  when  he 
speaks ;  that  we  should  be  especially  attentive  to  his  Son  (Matt.  zvii.  6) ;  that  we 
should  accept  Jesus  Christ  as  our  Lord,  Saviour,  Friend,  Exemplar ;  that  we  should 
honour  him  before  the  world.  2.  There  are  other  demands  he  makes  of  most  of  his 
children.  That  they  should  actively  engage  in  the  work  of  extending  his  kingdom ; 
that  they  should  suffer  some  kind  of  persecution  for  his  sake.  3.  There  remain  some 
demands  he  only  makes  of  a  few.  Work  requiring  specially  hard  toil,  or  particular  pre- 
paration in  study,  or  unusual  tact  and  versatility,  or  exceptional  powers  of  mind  or 
body.     Then  he  says,  "  Whom  (of  all  my  servants)  shall  I  send ;  and  who  will  go  ?  " 

IL  The  ntDiviDUAL  response.  "  Here  am  I ;  send  me."  Li  order  to  say  this  wisely 
and  rijjihtly,  there  must  be :  1.  Thorough  duvotedness ;  half-heartedness  will  never 
succeed  on  such  errands  as  these.  2.  Special  qualification,  by  native  faculty  or  favour- 
able antecedents.  3.  Freedom  from  other  and  more  pressing  obligations.  These 
conditions  being  fulfilled,  all  the  highest  considerations — the  will  of  Christ,  the  pitiful 
necessities  of  the  sons  of  want  and  sorrow  and  shame,  the  example  of  the  noblest,  the 
recompense  of  the  righteous — combine  to  say,  "  Go,  and  the  Lord  be  with  you." — 0. 

Vers.  9 — 13.— 2%«  shadow  of  sacred  truth.  We  may  view  these  words  in — 
L  Theib  national  aspect.  Thus  regarded,  they  point  to :  1.  Painful  and  guilty 
obduracy.  The  prophet  should  speak,  but  the  people  would  disregard ;  all  that  was 
froward  and  perverse  in  them  would  repel  and  reject  the  Divine  message ;  their  reception 
of  the  truth  would  only  end  in  spiritual  deterioration  and  greater  moral  distance  than 
ever  from  deliverance  (vers.  9,  10).  2.  Protracted  impenitence  and  Divine  judgment 
(vers.  11,  12).  3.  Long-lingering  mercy  ending  in  partial  restoration  (ver.  13).  But  we 
shall  gain  most  from  these  verses  by  regarding  them  in — 

IL  Their  individual  aspect.  The  ninth  and  tenth  verses  have  the  most  direct 
and  serious  bearing  on  our  condition  now.  They  suggest  to  us  that  sacred  truth  not 
only  sheds  a  bright  light,  but  casts  a  deep  shadow  where  it  falls.  1.  It  casts  the 
shadow  of  solemn  responsibility  everywhere.  Wlien  a  greater  than  Moses  legislates,  and 
a  wiser  than  Solomon  speaks  to  us,  we  have  more  to  be  responsible  for  than  they  who 
received  the  Law  from  Sinai,  and  they  who  lived  under  the  reign  of  the  son  of  David. 
From  those  to  whom  much  is  given  will  much  be  required.  2.  It  casts  the  shadow  of  a 
heavy  condemnation  on  those  who  reject  it.  "  Of  how  much  sorer  punishment,"  etc.  I  "  It 
shall  be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in  the  day  of  judgment,"  etc. ;  "  This 
is  the  condemnation,  that  light  is  come,"  etc. ;  "  He  that  knew  his  Lord's  will  and  did 
it  not  shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes."  3.  But  the  special  lesson  from  our  text  is 
that  it  casts  the  shadow  of  spiritual  deterioration  on  those  who  refuse  it.  "  Make  the 
heart  of  this  people  fat  .  .  .  shut  their  eyes ;  lest  they  see  with  their  eyes,''  etc.  The 
apparent  sense  of  these  words  cannot  be,  and  is  not,  the  one  that  should  be  accepted. 
They  cannot  possibly  be  meant  to  signify  that  God  desired  his  prophet  deliberately 
and  intentionally  to  cause  moral  obtuseness,  spiritual  blindness,  in  order  that  the  people 
of  Judah  might  be  prevented  from  repenting  and  so  from  being  saved.  Such  a  thought 
not  only  outrages  every  reverent  idea  of  the  Divine  character,  but  flatly  contradicts  the 
most  express  statements  of  the  Divine  Word  (see  Ezek.  xviii.  23 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  4 ;  2  Pet. 
iii.  9 ;  Jas.  i.  13).  There  is  one  sense  of  which  the  words  are  susceptible,  and  which  is 
in  accordance  with  the  plainly  revealed  character  of  God ;  it  is  that  the  prophet  was  to 
declare  such  truth  as  would  actually  result  in  spiritual,  blindness,  and  therefor*  in 
irveapaxity  for  repentance  and  redemption.  Now,  it  is  the  solemn  duty  of  the  miniitcr 
of  Christ  to  do  the  same  thing  continually.  He  knows  that,  as  his  Divine  Master  was 
"  set  for  the  fall "  as  well  as  for  the  "  rising  again  of  many  in  Israel "  (Luke  ii.  84), 
and  M  he  bad  occasion  to  say,  "  For  judgment  am  I  come  into  this  world,  .  .  ,  that 


120  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.       [<».  vi.  1— 13. 

they  wlio  see  may  be  made  blind"  (John  ix.  39),  that  as  his  gospel  was  in  earliest  times 
a  "stone  of  stumbling  and  a  rock  of  offLnce"  (cL.  viii.  14;  and  see  Matt.  xxi.  44; 
1  Cor.  i.  23 ;  2 Cor.  ii.  16),  so  now  the  truth  of  the  living  God  must  prove,  to  thosa  who 
reject  it,  the  occasion  of  moral  and  spiritual  degeneracy.  He  must  lay  his  account  with 
this  sad  fact,  must  go  forth,  like  Isaiah,  well  aware  that  it  is  a  two-edged  sword  he 
wields.  But  let  the  sons  of  sacred  privilege  un.lerstand  what  is  their  peril  as  well  as 
their  opportunity.  Deliberately  rejected  truth  leads  down  to  (1)  a  diminished  sensi- 
bility, the  lessening  of  pure  religious  emotion ;  (2)  loss  of  spiritual  apprehension,  an 
enfeebled  capacity  to  perceive  the  mind  and  meaning  of  the  Divine  Teaclier;  (3) 
a  vanishing  likelihood  of  personal  salvation.  When  the  ear  is  shut  and  the  eye  is 
closed,  is  it  likely  that  the  feet  will  be  found  in  the  way  of  life  ?  Will  they  not  wandei 
off  to  the  fields  of  folly,  up  to  and  over  the  precipice  of  ruin  ? — 0. 

Vera.  1 — 4. — Symbolic  impressions  of  the  Divine  holiness.  This  is  the  only  visior 
recorded  in  Isaiah's  prophecy.  It  did  not  come  at  the  beginning  of  his  labours,  but  as 
an  inauguration  to  a  higher  degree  of  the  prophetic  office.  From  the  tone  of  the  latter 
part  of  the  chapter, it  is  evident  that  he  had  found  out  the  rebelliousness  and  obstinacy 
of  the  people,  and  perhaijs  had  become,  like  Elijah,  greatly  distressed  and  discourageil ; 
needing,  therefore,  such  a  reviving  and  encouragement  as  this  vision  was  fitted  to  afford. 
It  introduces  the  propliet  as  outside,  near  the  altar  in  front  of  the  temple.  The  doors 
are  supposed  to  be  open,  and  the  veil  hiding  the  holy  of  holies  to  be  withdrawn, 
unfolding  the  sight  of  Jehovah  as  a  Monarch  sitting  on  his  throne,  anl  surrounded  by 
his  ministers  of  state.  According  to  the  tradition,  Isaiah's  assertion  that  he  had  seen 
God  was  the  pretext  for  sawing  him  asunder,  in  the  reign  of  Miinass'  h.  In  the  record 
of  the  vision  it  should  be  noticed  that  Isaiah  gives  only  surroundings  of  God,  no  descrip- 
tion of  the  Divine  Being  himself.  If  this  hal  been  the  only  vision  recorded  as  granted 
by  God  to  his  people,  its  explanation  would  have  been  difficult.  It  is,  however,  but 
one  of  a  long  serieSj  and  it  appears  to  illustrate  a  recognized  mode  of  Divine  dealings. 
God  takes  opportunities  of  impressing  the  Divine  holiness  and  claims  by  symbolic 
manifestations.     We  review  the  principal  illustrations  from  Bible  records. 

I.  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Abram  in  a  vision,  saying,  "  Pear  not,  Abram  :  1 
am  thy  Shield,  and  thy  exceeding  great  Reward."  And  Abram,  by  Divine  direction,  took 
a  heifer,  a  goat,  a  ram,  a  turtle-dove,  and  a  young  pigeon,  killed  them,  divided  them, 
and  while  a  horror  of  great  darkness  fell  upon  him,  "  behold  I  a  smoldng  furnace  and 
a  burning  lamp" — symbols  of  Divine  holiness — "passed  between  the  pieces,  and  the 
Lord  made  a  covenant  with  Abram." 

II.  A  vision  was  granted  to  Jacob,  from  which  the  whole  tone  of  his  life  was 
changed,  and  he  began  a  covenanted.  God-fearing  career.  As  he  lay  wearily  on  his 
stone  pillow,  under  the  clear-shining  stars  of  an  Eastern  sky,  "  behold  a  ladder  set  up 
on  the  earth,  and  the  top  of  it  reached  to  heaven :  and  behold  the  angels  of  God  ascend- 
ing and  descending  on  it.  And,  behold,  the  Lord  stood  above  it,  and  said,  I  am  the 
Lord  God  of  Abraham  thy  father,  ...  the  land  whereon  thou  liest,  to  thee  and  thy 
seed  will  I  give  it." 

III.  Moses  led  the  flock  of  Jethro,  one  memorable  day,  to  the  back  side  of  the  desert, 
and  "  came  to  the  mount  of  God,  even  to  Horeb.  And  the  an>,'el  of  the  Lord  appeared 
to  him  in  a  flame  of  fire  out  of  the  midst  of  a  bush :  and  he  looked,  and,  behold,  the  bush 
burned  with  fire,  and  the  bush  was  not  consumed.  And  God  called  unto  him  out  of  the 
midst  of  the  bush  "—symbol  of  the  holiness  that  consumes  and  purifies — "and  said, 
Moses,  Moses.     And  he  said.  Here  am  I." 

IV.  When  commencing  his  arduous  life-work,  a  similar  impression  was  wrought  upon 
Joshua.  One  day  he  looked  towards  Jericho,  and  lo  I  "  there  stood  a  man  over  against 
him  with  his  sword  drawn  in  his  hand."  In  answer  to  Joshua's  question  he  said,  "  As 
Captain  of  the  Lord's  host  have  I  come  .  .  .  Loose  thy  shoe  from  ofi'  thy  foot ;  for  the 
place  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy." 

V.  In  the  times  of  the  judges  Gideon  and  Manoah  beheld  angels  who  delivered 
messages,  and  ascended  in  the  smoke  of  sacrificial  fires.  Samuel,  when  a  little  lad, 
heard  the  very  voice  of  God  spealdng  his  own  uame,  and  entrusting  him  with  prophetic 
messages..  Solomon  was  honoured  by  God's  appearing  to  him  in  a  night-dream,  and 
offering  the  bestowment  of  the  best  blessings  upon  him.    Elijah,  after  the  lightnin-', 


CH.V1. 1— 13.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAlAfi.  121 

and  thunder,  aud  earthquake,  and  wind  had  passed,  heard  Cod  in  l  lie  "still  small  voice." 
Job  exclaims,  as  in  the  rapture  of  a  vision,  "  I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the  hearing  of  the 
ear :  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  thee,  wherefore  I  abhor  myself."  Jeremiah  was  directly 
set  apart  for  his  prophetic  work.  "  The  Lord  put  forth  his  hand,  and  touched  my 
mouth.     And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Behold,  I  have  put  my  words  in  thy  mouth." 

VI.  In  the  New  Testament  records  we  find  similar  scones.  Manifestations  of  an^ela 
to  shepherds.  A  wonderful  scene  of  transfiguration  for  our  Lord  himself.  The 
ilescending  sheet,  and  its  strange  contents,  for  Peter.  The  overwhelming  light  and 
voice  on  the  road  to  Damascus,  and  the  elevation  into  the  third  heavens,  to  see  the 
unspeakable,  for  St.  Paul.     And  the  apocalyptic  vision  for  St.  John. 

Isaiah's  vision  is  in  fullest  sympathy  with  all  these.  For  its  explanation,  see  the 
exegetical  portion  of  the' Commentary.  It  bore  upon  tbe  prophet,  through  its  symbols, 
overwhelming  impressions  (1)  of  the  holiness,  (2)  of  the  direct  claims  of  God. — E.  T. 

Ver.  5. — Seeing  Ood  and  the  sense  of  sin.  "Then  said  I,  Woe  is  mel  for  I  am 
undone ;  because  I  am  a  man  of  unckan  lips."  To  Isaiah  a  work  of  unusual  solemnity 
had  been  entrusted,  one  that  needed  to  be  done  in  a  most  serious  and  reverent  spirit. 
He  was  at  once  tlie  prophet  of  the  Lord's  terror  and  of  the  Lord's  mercy.  He  was  to 
denounce  sin  with  the  solemnity  of  one  who  knew  what  God's  thought  of  sin  was. 
He  was  to  produce  ihe  conviciiun  of  sin  before  God  in  the  corrupt  minds  and  hearts  of  the 
people,  and  he  was  to  announce  tlie  coming,  presently,  of  the  great  Messenger  of  Divine 
mercy.  Therefore  it  was  nc cessaiy  for  him  to  have  his  own  soul  filled  with  the  infinite 
glory  and  holiness  of  God,  and  filled  with  a  very  humbling  sense  of  sin.  These  effects 
were  wrought  by  the  vibion  granted  to  him.  It  took  its  form  from  its  design.  All  about 
it  is  holy.  I(  is  the  holy  place.  The  seraphim  bow  before  the  infinitely  Holy.  They 
cry, "  Holy,  holy."  The  ilireshold  and  the  posts  tremble  before  the  Holy.  And  the  soul 
of  the  prophet  is  abased.  He  is  humbled  in  the  sight  of  his  own  uncleanness,  and  the 
uncleanness  of  his  people ;  for  how  can  a  man  seem  pure  before  his  Maker  ? 

I.  A     MAN   NEEDS   VISIONS   OF    GoD   WHO   HAS   THE   WOBK   OF   DENOUNCING   SIN.       N(l 

man  should  dare  to  touch  that  work  whose  own  soul  is  not  oppressed  with  the  evil  of 
sin.  Denunciation  of  sin  is  no  flippant,  easy  work ;  it  involves  a  tremendous  expense 
of  feeling.  We  talk  about  sin  so  freely,  that  for  many  of  us  it  has  lost  its  exceeding 
sinfulness.  We  confess  it  so  often  in  familiar  general  terms,  that  it  has  lost  almost 
all  its  terror.  It  may  have  been  thus  with  Isaiah.  He  may  have  been  so  constantly 
talking  about  sin,  that  he  had  exhausted  his  feeling  of  its  evil,  and  could  even  speak 
lightly  about  abomination  that  it  is  said  "God  hateth."  Certainly  we  need  such 
visions  of  God  to  fill  our  minds  and  hearts  with  seriousness ;  we  well  may  pray, "  Lord, 
show  mt'  thyself." 

II.  When  a  man  has  visions  of  God,  he  at  first  feels  helpless,  and  dares 
NOT  undertake  God's  WORK.  Compare  the  feelings  of  Moses  and  Jeremiah,  after 
their  visions.  The  first  feeling  will  be,  "I  dare  not."  "Who  is  sufficient  for  these 
things?"  But  this  will  soon  pass  into  humble  de| endence  on  Divine  strength,  and 
patient  readiness  to  go  where  God  sends,  and  do  what  God  bids.  When  a  man  before 
God  says, "  Woe  is  me  1 "  etc.,  he  will  soon  respond  to  God's  call,  saying,  "Here  am  I ; 
send  me."— R.  T. 

Ver.  5. — The  true  inspiration  for  workers.  "  Mine  eyes  have  seen  the  King,  the 
Lord  of  hosts."  What  a  scene  is  presented  in  this  chapter  for  our  imaginations  to 
reproduce  I  The  throng  of  worshippers  had  left  the  courts  of  the  sacred  temple ;  the 
chanting,  in  alternate  parts,  of  the  choir  of  singers,  clothed  in  white  linen,  had  died 
into  silence.  Other  devout  Israelites  were  praying  apart,  and  whitu-robod  priests 
silently  presented  their  prayers  in  the  fjagrant  cloud  of  incense  which  rose  from  the 
golden  altar  of  the  holy  place;  "then  the  veil  of  the  temple  seemed  to  be  withdrawn, 
and  the  holy  of  holies  discovered  to  the  propliet's  eye.  He  saw  the  Lord,  sitting  as 
a  King  uiion  his  throne,  actually  govemint;  and  judging.  His  train,  the  symbol  of 
ilig;nity  and  glory,  filled  the  holy  place,  while  around  him  hovered  the  attendant 
.•seraphim,  spirits  of  purity,  zeal,  and  love,  chaining  in  alternate  choirs  the  holiness  ol 
their  Lord.  The  threshold  vibrated  with  the  sound,  and' the  white  cloud  of  the  Di\ine 
presence,  as  if  descending  to  mingle  itself  with  the  ascending  incense  of  prayer,  filled 


122  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  vi.  1— lii. 

the  house.  The  eternal  archetypes  of  the  Hebrew  symbolic  worship  were  revealed  to 
Isaiah;  and,  as  the  centre  of  them  all,  his  eyes  saw  the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  of 
whom  the  actual  rulers,  from  David  to  Uzziah,  had  been  but  the  temporary  and  sub- 
ordinate viceroys.  In  that  presence,  even  the  spirits  of  the  fire,  which  consumes  all 
impurity  while  none  can  mix  with  it,  cover  their  faces  and  their  feet,  conscious  that 
they  are  not  pure  in  God's  sight,  but  justly  chargeable  with  imperfection;  and  much 
more  does  Isaiah  shrink  from  the  aspiring  thoughts  ho  had  hitherto  entertained  of 
his  fitness  to  be  the  preacher  of  that  God  to  his  countrymen ;  he,  a  man  of  unclean 
lips,  sharing  the  uncleanness  of  the  people  among  whom  he  dwells.  In  utter  self- 
abasement  he  realizes  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin,  and  the  separation  it  makes 
between  man  and  the  holy  God  "  (Sir  E.  Strachey).  This  was  a  vision  of  God  granted 
to  a  worker,  a  man  actively  engaged  in  God's  service,  and  'about  to  enter  on  more 
serious  and  more  arduous  duties.  Visions  have  seldom,  if  ever,  been  granted  to 
individuals  merely  as  helps  to  their  private  religious  life.  They  are  gracious  aids  to 
workers ;  and  God's  willing  servants  can  only  reach  adequate  convictions,  feel  worthy 
impulses,  or-  gain  a  suitable  and  inspiring  impression  of  the  dignity  of  their  work, 
through  some  direct  manifestation  of  God  himself  to  their  souls.  No  man  can  do  great 
things  save  as  he  is  sustained  by  the  conviction  that  God  has  sent  him  to  do  them,  and 
is  with  him  in  the  doing.  The  smallness  of  our  aims,  our  endeavours,  and  our  attain- 
ments, reveal  how  small  and  how  unworthy  are  our  views  of  God.  It  is  evident  that 
we  cannot  yet  be  said  to  have  seen  him.  He  has  not  yet  overawed  us  with  his  glory 
and  his  claims,  and  swelled  our  souls  with  great  thoughts,  great  resolves,  and  a  great 
consecration.  Those  only  who  have  seen  "  the  King  iu  his  beauty  "  can  give  their  very 
noblest  powers,  can  lay  down  their  lives,  in  his  service. 

I.  Can  theue  be  personal  kevelations  of  God  to  his  wobkebs  in  our  day? 
We  have  sadly  lost  in  spiritual  power,  in  self-abnegation,  and  in  holy  enthusiasm  for 
the  glory  of  the  Lord,  because  we  have  so  easily  settled  this  question  by  answering, 
"  Certainly  not.  God  does  not  now  give  visions.  Christian  workers  now  need  not 
expect  such.  We  are  left  now  to  the  ordinary  illuminations  of  the  Holy  Spirit."  But 
will  this  answer  bear  looking  at  and  thinking  about,  and  testing  by  the  light  of  actual 
experience  ?  God's  forms  of  Divine  dealing  do  indeed  dift'er  in  different  ages,  but  the 
essential  I'eatures  of  God's  relationship  with  men  do  not  change.  He  can  reveal  him- 
self still  to  individual  souls ;  and  he  is  not  limited  to  the  particular  forms  of  vision 
which  he  has  used  in  ancient  times.  He  may  adapt  his  visions  to  the  altered  circum- 
stances of  each  age ;  and  if  once  he  appeared  in  human  form  to  meet  the  sight  of  bodily 
eyes,  he  may  now  reveal  his  glory  in  the  spheres  that  lie  open  to  the  vision  of  the 
loving  and  believing  soul.  It  he  be  the  living  God,  ruling,  guiding,  choosing  out  his 
instruments,  fashioning  them  for  his  purposes,  and  sending  them  upon  his  commissions, 
he  must  still  have  visions  for  his  servants.  They  will  take  less  of  outward  symbolic 
shape,  they  will  relate  more  to  thought  and  less  to  dreams ;  but  that  only  makes 
them  more  immediate  and  direct  Divine  communications — contacts  of  the  Divine 
Spirit  with  the  human  spirit  without  the  intervention  of  any  earthly  symbols.  God 
spoke  to  the  boy  Samuel  with  an  audible  voice,  he  spoke  afterwards  to  the  man 
Samuel  in  a  spirit-voice ;  but  both  were  his  voice.  The  New  Testament  promise  is, 
"  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  lieart :  for  they  shall  see  God." 

II.  When  in  ouk  life  may  we  look  fob  such  Divine  visions  to  wobk  bbs  ? 
Is  there  any  special  time  or  occasion  at  which  they  may  be  expected  ?  They  will 
not  necessarily  come  at  the  beginnings  of  our  special  labours,  though  that  might  seem 
to  be  the  most  fitting  time.  They  do  often  come  at  the  outset,  but  sometimes  we  are 
[Permitted  for  a  while  to  "  go  the  warfare  at  our  own  .iharges ;  "  we  have  a  period  of  trial 
and  of  comparative  failure,  as  Isaiah  appears  to  have  had,  and  then  we  are  renewed  in  our 
consecration  by  some  holy  scensa  of  communion  and  revelation.  Among  the  visions 
of  the  Old  'I'estaniont  we  find  several  that  were  granted  in  the  very  midst  of  life's 
work:  e.g.  Abraham's,  Moses',  Joshua's,  this  of  Isaiah  ;compareour  Lord's  transfiguration, 
ind  Paul's  ascent  to  glory.  The  times  for  God's  personal  disclosures  of  himself  to  a  man 
can  never  be  fixed  and  anticipated.  Like  other  workings  of  grace,  they  are  divinely, 
sovereignly  free ;  the  fitting  occasion  for  them  the  unsearchable  Wisdom  alone  can 
decide.  This  only  may  we  say — No  Christian  man  has  ever  become  truly  great  and 
noble  and  enthusiastic,  no  man  has  become  utterly  self-denying  in  the  Lord's  work. 


OH.  VI.  1—13.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  123 

until  he  has  been  called  and  solemnized  and  prepared  by  some  soul-vision  of  God.  He 
may  be  a  Christian  worker  before,  but  he  is  not  inspired  and  spiritually  powerful 
until  then.  Life  takes  on  its  highest  nobility  only  after  we  are  able  to  say,  "  Mine 
eyes  have  seen  the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts."  We  may  not  say  that  such  visions  come 
only  once  in  a  man's  life.  They  will  be  given  as  often  as  there  is  need  for  them,  and 
openness  to  receive  them.  Christ,  our  Lord,  had  visions  at  his  baptism,  at  the  mount, 
in  the  wilderness,  and  in  the  garden.  The  Apostle  Paul  had  visions  on  the  road  to 
Damascus,  of  the  man  from  Macedonia,  of  the  third  heaven,  and  amid  the  dangers  of 
shipwreck.  We  often  hear  of  our  dying  friends  seeing  something  of  which  those 
around  their  beds  cannot  catch  the  faintest  glimpse.  And  this  is  true  of  Christian 
souls  in  life.  They  have  times  of  insight,  times  of  seeing  truth  and  seeing  God ;  times 
when,  apart  from  study  and  thought,  they  seem  to  be  plunged  in  all  the  glory  of 
Divine  and  eternal  things ;  moments  in  which  they  could  not  tell  whether  they  were 
"  in  the  body  or  out  of  tiie  body."  Two  or  three  instances  may  be  given  in  illustiation. 
While  Luther  was  laboriously  climbing  up  Pilate's  staircase  at  Rome,  seel<iug  to 
win  a  righteousness  out  of  his  own  works,  he  heard  a  voice  thundering  in  his  soul 
and  Baying,  "  The  just  shall  live  by  faith."  That  was  a  New  Testament  vision  of 
the  truth,  and  from  that  vision  Luther's  power  began.  The  following  is  a  testimony 
rendered  concerning  a  godly  man:  "About  a  year  after  his  conversion,  returning 
from  a  meeting  greatly  distressed  with  a  sense  of  his  unwoithiness,  he  turned  aside 
into  a  lonely  bam  to  wrestle  with  God,  and  while  kneeling  on  the  threshing-floor 
he  gained  a  little  light.  Shortly  after  his  eyes  were  opened  to  see  all  clearly.  He  felt 
that  he  was  nothing,  and  Christ  was  all  in  all ;  and  from  that  time  commenced  a  life 
of  most  devoted  and  successful  labour  for  Christ."  "  The  holy  John  Plavel,  being  alone 
in  a  journey  on  horseback,  and  willing  to  make  the  best  improvement  of  the  days 
solitude,  set  himself  to  a  close  examination  of  the  state  of  his  soul,  and  then  of  the  lile 
to  come,  and  the  manner  of  its  being  and  living  in  heaven.  Going  on  his  way,  his 
thoughts  began  to  swell,  and  rise  higher  and  higher,  like  the  waters  in  Bzekiel's  vision, 
till  at  last  they  became  an  overflowing  flood.  Such  was  the  intention  of  his  mind,  such 
the  ravishing  taste  of  heavenly  joys,  and  such  the  fuU  assurance  of  his  interest  therein, 
that  he  utterly  lost  the  sight  and  sense  of  this  world,  and  all  the  concerns  thereof ;  and 
for  some  hours  knew  no  more  where  he  was  than  if  he  had  been  in  a  deep  sleep  in  his 
bed."  The  following  passage  is  taken  from  the  margin  of  John  Howe's  study  Bible. 
It  is  the  only  record  of  his  personal  expeiience  preserved  for  us.  "  After  I  had,  in  my 
course  of  preaching,  been  largely  insisting  on  2  Cor.  i.  12,  this  very  morning  I  awoke 
out  of  a  most  ravishing  and  delightful  dream,  that  a  wonderful  and  copious  stream  of 
celestial  rays,  from  the  lofty  throne  of  the  Divine  Majesty,  seemed  to  dart  into  my 
expanded  breast.  I  have  often  since,  with  great  complacency,  reflected  on  that  very 
signal  pledge  of  special  Divine  favour  vouchsafed  to  me  on  that,  memorable  day,  and 
have,  with  repeater  1  fresh  pleasure,  tasted  the  delights  thereof.  But  what,  on  Oct.  22, 
1704,  of  the  same  kind  I  sensibly  felt,  ...  far  surpassed  the  most  expressive  words 
my  thoughts  can  suggest.  I  then  experienced  an  inexpressibly  pleasant  melting  of 
heart ;  tears  gushing  out  of  mine  eyes,  for  joy  that  God  should  shed  abroad  his  love 
abundantly  through  the  hearts  of  men,  and  that  for  this  very  purpose  my  own  should 
be  so  signally  possessed  of  and  by  his  blessed  Spirit."  Dr.  Bushnell  says,  "  We  have 
vast  crowds  of  witnesses,  rising  up  in  every  age,  who  testify,  out  of  their  own  con- 
sciousness, to  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  new-creating  power  of  Jesus,  who,  by 
his  Spirit,  is  revealed  in  their  hearts.  In  nothing  do  they  consent  with  a  rnore  hymn- 
like harmony  than  in  the  testimony  that  their  inward  transformation  is  a  Divine  work — 
a  new  revelation  of  God,  by  the  Spirit,  in  their  human  consciousness.  So  do  they  all 
iestify  with  one  voice — Paul,  Clement,  Origen,  St.  Bernard,  Huss,  Gerson,  Luther, 
Fenelon,  Baxter,  Flavel,  Doddridge,  Wesley,  Edwards,  Brainerd,  Taylor,  all  the 
innamerable  host  of  believers  that  have  entered  into  rest,  whether  it  be  the  persecuted 
saint  of  the  first  age,  driven  home  in  his  chariot  of  blood,  or  the  saint  who  died  but 
yesterday  in  the  arms  of  his  family."  We  do  well  to  guard  against  any  fanaticnl 
and  superstitious  watching  for  sensible  appearances,  symbolical  manifestations,  or  the 
guidance  of  our  dreams.  But  this  we  should  better  understand — there  are  delectable 
mountains  in  our  Christian  pilgrimage  nowadays,  and  we  may  climb  the  heights, 
and  get  visions  of  the  far-away  celestial  city.    We  are  Christians  of  the  plains  and  the 


1S4  TCE  COOK  OP  THE  f  ROt'ttEt  TRAtAS.       leu.  vt  1— IS. 

low  country;  we  shotild  oftener  be  breathing  the  fresh  air  of  the  mountain-side.  If  we 
would  open  our  hearts ;  if  we  would  have  a  well-trodden  path  to  the  place  of  prayer; 
if  we  would  yenrn  for  it, — God  would  come  nearer  to  us,  and  oftener  show  us  his  glory. 
He  is  a  new  man,  and  a  new  worker,  who  can  say,  "  Mine  eyes  have  seen  the  King, 
the  Lord  of  hosts."— R.T. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Divine  endowment  the  proof  of  Divine  forgivenes$  and  aeeeptance. 
Wh;it  occurred  must  be  explained  in  connection  with  the  vision.  One  of  those 
seraphim  who  stood,  with  poised  wings,  ready  for  an  instant  and  unquestionin<; 
obcilience,  at  the  bidding  of  the  King  flew  down,  having  taken  a  live  coal  from  the 
sublime  altar  which  formed  part  of  the  vision,  and  with  ittouched  the  mouth  of  the 
prophet,  spenking  also  words  of  gracious  assurance.  This  touch  of  the  mouth  of 
the  prophet  was  the  symbol  of  the  endowment  of  speakinj;  power ;  and  with  it  may 
be  compared  the  gift  of  tongues  made  to  the  early  Christian  Church.     We  note— 

I.  The  endowed  ones  must  be  the  forgivbyt.  It  scarcely  needed  the  seraph's 
words  to  carry  home  this  assurance.  Illustrate  by  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost — 
rcco2:Tiized  in  the  possession  of  some  special  talent — to  the  early  believers.  It  was  the 
seal  of  their  forgiveness.  Compare  the  case  of  fretful  and  desponding  Elijah.  The 
assurance  that  his  sin  was  fort^iven  came  in  the  renewal  of  his  prophetic  comm'ssion. 

II.  The  endowed  ones  must  be  the  accepted.  God  would  not  honour  with  a  place 
of  service  for  him  those  who  were  not  in  gracious  relations  with  him.  We  may 
recognize  that  God  uses  all  men,  "  making  even  the  wrath  of  man  praise  him,  and 
restraining  the  remainder  of  wrath ; "  but  so  far  as  his  redemption  work  is  concerned,  in 
all  its  many  branches,  the  possession  of  special  gifts  may  be  recognized  as  proof  of  God's 
acceptance  and  appointment.  It  shows  that  God  has  chosen  and  approves  the  work- 
man. Isaiah  was  rightly  cheered  by  such  an  endowment,  or  re-endowment,  to  pro- 
jAetic  work. 

III.  The  endowed  ones  respond  bt  sblf-conseoration.  When  the  joy  of  for- 
giveness and  acceptance  comes,  and  the  solemnity  of  a  Divine  trust  rests  on  a  man,  if 
he  be  a  good  man,  he  can  but  watch  for  the  Divine  voice  saying,  "  Whom  shall  I 
send  ?"  and  at  once  and  heartily  respond,  "  Here  am  I ;  send  me."  Compare  the  hesi- 
tation of  Moses  to  take  up  the  trust  God  would  commit  to  him,  and  his  grieving  God 
by  a  hesitation  that  was  based  on  a  false  humility ;  and  see  the  words  Eli  put  on  the 
lipa  of  young  Samuel :  "  Speak,  Lord ;  for  thy  servant  heareth." — R.  T. 

Ver.  9. — A  mission  of  hardening.  Dean  Plumptre  says,  "  No  harder  task,  it  may 
be,  was  ever  given  to  man.  Ardent  dreams  of  reformation  and  revival,  the  nation 
renewing  its  sti-ength  like  the  eagle,  were  scattered  to  the  winds ;  and  he  had  to  face 
the  prcpect  of  a  fruitless  labour,  of  feeling  that  he  did  but  increase  the  evil  against 
which  he  strove.  It  was  the  very  opposite  mission  of  that  to  which  St.  Paul  was  sent, 
'to  open  men's  eyes,  and  turn  them  from  darkness  to  light'"  (Acts  xxvi.  18).  Mr. 
Button,  in  one  of  his  essays,  says,  "  When  civilization  becomes  corrupt,  and  men  are 
living  below  their  faith,  I  think  it  may  often  be  in  mercy  that  God  strikes  the  nations 
with  blindness/ — that  the  only  remedy  lies  in  thus  taking  away  an  influence  which 
they  resist,  and  leaving  them  the  stern  lesson  of  self-dependence."  This  gives  the  key  to 
the  view  we  propose  to  take  of  Isaiah's  mission.  From  one  point  of  view  a  mission  of 
hardening  is  a  mission  of  judgment ;  but,  from  another  point  of  view,  it  is  a  mission  of 
mercy.  From  both  points  of  view  it  is  always  a  most  trying  mission  for  him  to  whom 
it  is  entrusted. 

I.  A  MISSION  OF  HABDENING  IB  A  MISSION  OF  JUDGMENT.  Compare  Moses'  DiissioQ 
to  Pharaoh.  It  was  a  fact  that  Pharaoh's  heart  was  hardened.  On  natural  mental  laws 
we  can  explain  the  process  of  hardening.  Yet  we  are  bidden  see  deeper,  and  recognize 
that,  in  judgment  on  his  wilfulness, "  God  hardened  his  heart."  If  a  man  resists  a 
gracious  influence  once,  he  finds  it  easier  to  resist  a  second  time,  and  gradually  the 
influence  has  no  persuasive  effect  on  him ;  he  Is  "  hardened."  Illustrate  by  the  Pharisees, 
who  at  first  inquired  concerning  Christ.  They  resisted  the  witness  of  his  words  and 
works,  until  at  last  a  blindness  and  hardness  came  upon  them  as  a  judgment.  The 
Jews  are  under  Divine  judgment  now ;  it  is  a  blinding,  veiling,  hardening,  which  makes 
it  impossible  for  them,  as  a  whole  nation,  to  see  the  Son  of  God  and  Saviour  of  tha 


OH.  m.  1—25.]        THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PEOPHET   ISAIAH. 


126 


world  from  sin  In  Jesus  of  Nazareth.     The  man  who  toon't  see  shall  come  into  this 

iudgment — he  shall  not  be  able  to  see.  All  missions,  even  Christ's,  have  a  side  of 
lardening.  Some  missions  are  almost  wholly  the  execution  of  this  Divine  judgment. 
Blindness  is  God's  punishment  for  refusing  to  see,  and  spiritual  blindness  comes  tbrough 
the  very  preaching  of  the  truth  that  saves  to  unwilling  hearts ;  and'such  preaching-work, 
that  seems  worse  than  fruitless,  may  be  the  mission  given  by  God  to  some  men.  To 
us  they  may  he  ministers  of  judgment,  even  in  their  preaching  of  the  gospel.  J.  A. 
Alexander  says,  "  The  thing  predicted  is  judicial  blindness,  as  the  natural  result  and 
righteous  retribution  of  the  national  depravity.  This  end  would  be  promoted  by  the 
very  preaching  of  the  truth,  and  therefore  a  command  to  preach  was  in  effect  a  com- 
mand to  blind  and  harden  them." 

II.  A  MISSION  OP  HARDENING  18  A  MISSION  OF  MERCY.  It  may  be  (1)  consideratcness 
for  individuals,' on  whom  it  will  prove  the  only  effective  agency.  It  may  be  (2)  tlie 
quickest  way  to  secure  the  humbling  of  the  soul.  God  may  have  to  let  men  get  hard 
in  their  pride  that,  through  the  fall  that  must  surely  follow,  their  pride  may  be  broken  ; 
just  as  the  mother  lets  the  child,  that  is  conceited  with  its  first  attempts  to  walk, 
stumble  and  fall,  in  order  that  henceforth  the  walking  may  be  less  venturesome.  The 
thought  is  almost  beyond  us,  but  we  are  permitt'  d  even  to  believe  that  God  works 
I  is  work  of  grace  by  calamities  that  we  call  destructive,  and  by  hardenin'j;s  tlmt  seem  to 
us  hopeles.s.  In  Isaiah's  days,  "  events  that  were  '  sigus  of  the  times,'  calls  to  repentance 
or  to  action,  were  taken  as  things  of  course.  For  such  a  state,  after  a  certain  stage, 
there  is  but  one  treatment.  It  must  run  its  course,  and  '  dree  its  weird,'  partly  as  a 
righteous  retribution,  partly  as  the  only  remedial  process  possible."  The  evident 
lesults  of  his  mission  made  Isiiiah's  ministry  extremely  trying  and  depressing;  his 
preaching  rocked  some  to  a  fatal  sleep,  and  made  others  outrageous  and  exasperated. 
And  the  final  results  of  his  work,  as  at  heart  a  work  of  mercy,  could  not  be  revealed 
for  his  cheering  during  his  life.  He  could  only  hold  that  before  him  as  a  mysterious 
vision  of  the  fur  away.  But  he  was  nobly  faithful ;  a  servant  of  God  who  reaped  no 
results  such  as  he  would  himself  desire,  but  actually  seemed  only  a  mischief-maker, 
an  increaser  of  existing  evils,  and  a  hardener  of  hearts.  But  to  nune  are  the  words 
mors  fitting  than  to  tried  Isaiah,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant,"  executor  of 
Divine  judgment,  and  ministrant  of  Divine  mercy. — R.  T. 


Sectiox  IV.    Fbofheoieb  connected  with  the  Syeo-Israblite  Wae  (ch.  vn. — x.  4X 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  PBorHEOT  given  to 
Ahaz  at  the  Time  op  the  Syro-Isb  aelitish 
Was.  The  Syro-Israelitish  war  is  touched 
on  both  in  Kings  and  Chronicles.  In  Kings 
the  alliance  between  Eeziu  and  Pekah  is 
distinctly  declared,  as  also  the  fact  that  they 
conjointly  besieged  Jerusalem  (2  Kings  xvL 
5).  From  Chronicles  we  learn  that,  before 
tiie  siege,  Ahaz  was  twice  defeated  with 
great  loss,  once  by  the  Syrians  (2  Chron. 
xxviii.  5),  and  once  by  the  Israelites  (2  Chron. 
xxviii.  6).  He  was  probably,  therefore,  re- 
duced tc  great  straits  at  the  time  wliea 
Isaiah  received  directions  to  seek  an  inter- 
view with  him,  and  communicate  to  him  a 
comforting  message  from  Jehovah. 

Yer.  1. — In  the  days  of  Ahaz.  The  reign 
of  Ahaz  covered, probably,  the  space  betwern 


B.O.  743  andjB.o.  727.  The  march  on  Jeru- 
salem appears  to  have  fallen  somewhat  late 
in  his  reign  (about  b.o.  733).  Rezin  the  King 
of  Syria.  Eezin  is  mentioned  as  King  of 
Damascus  by  Tiglath-Pileser  IL  in  several 
of  his  inBcription.<i.  In  one,  which  seems  to 
belong  to  B.C.  732  or  731,  he  states  tuat  he 
defeated  Bezin  and  slew  him.  Pekah  the 
son  of  Eemaliah  (see  2  Kings  xv.  25). 
Pekah  had  been  an  officer  under  Pekahiah, 
the  son  and  successor  of  Menahem;  but 
had  revolted,  put  Pukahiali  to  death  in  his 
palace,  and  seized  the  crown.  It  is  probable 
that  he  and  Rezin  were  anxious  to  form  a 
confederacy  for  the  purpose  of  resisting  the 
advance  of  the  Assyrian  power,  and,  dis- 
trusting Ahaz,  desired  to  place  on  the  throne 
of  Judah  a  person  on  whom  they  could 
thoroughly  depend  (see  ver.  6).  It  was  not 
their  design  to  conquer  the  Jewish  kingdom, 
but  only  to  change  the  sovereign.  Toward 
Jerusalem ;  ratlicr,  to  Jerusalem.  The  allits 
reached  the  city  and  commenced  the  siege 


126 


THE  BOOK  OP   THE  PEOPHET   ISAIAH,      [ch.  to,  1—26. 


(2  Kings  xvi.  5).  Could  not  prevaU  against 
it;  liteially,^eeot7ed»ot  in Jighting against 
it. 

Ver.  2. — It  was  told  the  house  of  David. 
Before  the  actual  siege  began,  news  of  the 
alliance  reached  Ahaz.  It  is  said  to  have 
been  "  told  the  house  of  David,"  because  the 
design  was  to  supersede  the  family  of  David 
by  another — apparently  a  Syrian — house 
(see  note  on  ver.  6).  Syria  is  confederate 
with  Ephraim ;  literally,  rests  upon  Ephraim. 
Under  ordinary  circumstances  the  kingdoms 
of  Syria  and  Israel  were  hostile  the  one  to 
the  other  (see  1  Kings  xv.  20 ;  xx.  1 — 3 ; 
xxii.  3—36;  2  Kings  v.  2;  vi.  8—24;  viii. 
29;  I.  32;  xiii.  3,  22,  26).  But  occasion- 
ally, under  the  pressure  of  a  great  danger, 
the  relations  were  changed,  and  a  temporary 
league  was  formed.  The  inscriptions  of 
Shalmaneser  II.  sliow  such  a  league  to  have 
existed  in  the  time  of  Benhadad  H.  and 
Ahab  ('Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  pp. 
103,  104).  The  invasion  of  Pul,  and  the 
threatening  attitude  of  Tiglath-Pileser  II., 
had  now  once  more  drawn  tiie  two  countries 
together.  On  the  use  of  the  word  "  Ephraim  " 
to  designate  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  see 
Hosea,  passim.  His  heart  was  moved;  or, 
$hook.  If  the  two  kings  had  each  been  able 
separately  to  inflict  on  him  such  loss  (see 
the  introductory  paragraph),  what  must  he 
not  expect,  now  that  both  were  about  to 
attack  him  together  ?  It  is  not  clear  whether 
Abaz  had  as  yet  applied  to  Assyria  for  help 
or  not. 

Ver.  3. — Thou,  and  Shear-Jashnb  thy  son. 
The  name  Shear- Jaslmb,  "  a  remnant  shall 
return,"  may  have  been  given  to  Isaiah's 
son  by  revelation,  as  Ewald  thinks  it  was ; 
or  Isaiah  miy  have  given  it  to  testify  his 
faith  both  in  the  tlireats  and  in  the  promises 
of  which  he  had  been  made  the  mouth-piece. 
The  command  to  take  him  with  him  on  the 
present  occasion  was  probably  given  on 
account  of  his  name,  that  the  attention  of 
Ahaz  might  be  called  to  it.  The  conduit 
of  the  upper  pool  is  mentioned  also  in 
2  Kings  xviii.  17.  It  was  probably  a  sub- 
terranean duct  which  brought  water  into 
the  city  from  the  high  ground  outside  the 
Damascus  gate.  Ahaz  may  have  visited  it 
in  order  to  see  that  it  was  made  available 
for  his  own  use,  but  not  for  the  enemy's 
(comp.  2  Chron.  xxxil.  3,  4,  30;  ch.  xxii. 
9. 11). 

Ver.  4. — Take  heed,  and  be  quiet;  or,  tee 
that  thou  keep  quiet ;  i.e.  "  be  not  disturbed; 
do  not  r«sort  to  strange  and  extreme  mea- 
sures; in  quietness  and  confidence  should 
b«  your  strength  "  (see  oh.  xxi.  15).  The 
two  tails  of  these  smoking  firebrands.  Bezin 
and  Pekah  are  called  "  two  tails,"  or  "  two 
gtnmps  of  smoking  firebrands,"  as  persons 
who  had  been  dangerous,  but  whose  power 


of  doing  harm  was  on  the  point  of  departing 
from  them.  They  could  not  now  kindle  a 
flame ;  they  could  only  "  smoke."  The  son 
of  Bemaliah.  Pekah  seems  to  be  called 
"Kemaliah's  son"  in  contempt  (comp.  vers. 
5,  9),  Bemaliah  having  been  a  man  of  no 
distinction  (2  Kings  xv.  25). 

Ver.  6. — Hake  a  breach  therein.  The 
word  employed  means  properly  "  making  • 
breach  in  a  city  wall "  (2  Kings  xxv.  4 ; 
2  Chian.  xxxiL  1;  Jer.  xxxix.  2;  Ezek. 
xxvi.  10),  but  is  useil  also  in  a  metaphorical 
sense  for  injuring  and  ruining  a  country 
(see  especially  2  Chron.  xxi.  17).  The  son 
of  Tabeal ;  or,  TaVel.  "  Tab-61 "  appears  to 
be  a  Syrian  name,  founded  upon  the  same 
pattern  as  Tab-rimmon  (1  Kings  xv.  18), 
the  one  meaning  "  God  is  good,"  the  other 
"  Bimmon  is  good."  We  cannot,  however, 
conclude  from  the  name  that  the  family  of 
Tabeal  was  monotheistic  (Kay),  for  El  was 
one  of  the  many  Syrian  gods  as  much  aa 
Bimmon  (see  Max  Miiller,  '  Science  of 
Eeligion,'  pp.  177,  178). 

Ver.  7. — Thus  saith  the  Lord  God;  lite- 
rally, the  Lord  Jehovah,  as  in  ch.  zxviii.  16; 
xl.  10 ;  xlviiL  16,  etc.  It  shall  not  stand ; 
t.e.  "  the  design  shall  not  hold  good,  it  shall 
not  be  accomplished."  Bezin  and  Pekah 
have  planned  to  set  aside  the  issueof  David, 
to  which  God  had  promised  his  throne 
(2  Sam.  vu.  11—16;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  27—37), 
and  to  set  up  a  new  line  of  kings  uncon- 
nected with  David.  They  think  to  frustrate 
the  everlasting  counsel  of  God.  Such  an 
attempt  was  of  necessity  futile. 

Ver.  8. — For  the  head  of  Syria  is  Damas- 
cus, etc.  Syria  and  Ephraim  have  merely 
human  heads — the  one  Bezin,  the  other 
(ver.  9)  Pekah;  but  Judah,  it  is  implied, 
has  a  Divine  Head,  even  Jehovah.  How, 
then,  should  mere  mortals  think  to  opptse 
their  will  aud  their  designs  to  God's  ?  0/ 
course,  their  designs  must  come  to  nought. 
Within  threescore  and  five  years  shall 
Ephraim  be  broken,  etc.  If  this  prophecy 
was  delivered,  as  we  have  supposed,  in  B.O. 
733  (see  note  on  ver.  1),  sixty-five  years 
later  would  bring  us  to  B.o.  669.  This  was 
the  year  in  which  Esar-haddon,  having  made 
his  son,  Asshur-baui-pal,  King  of  Assyria, 
transferred  his  own  residence  to  Babylon, 
anil  probably  the  year  in  which  he  sent  from 
Babylonia  and  the  adjacent  countries  a 
number  of  colonists  who  occupied  Samaria, 
and  entirely  destroy  edthe  nationality,  which, 
fifty-three  years  earlier,  had  received  a  rude 
blow  from  Sargon  (comp.  Ezra  iv.  2,  9, 10, 
with  2  Kings  xvii  6 — 24  and  2  Chron. 
xxxiii.  11).  It  is  questioned  whether,  under 
tlje  circumstances,  the  prophet  can  have 
comforted  Ahaz  with  this  distant  prospect, 
and  suggested  that  in  the  present  chapter 
prophecies   pronounced    at  widely  distant 


OH.  vu.  1—25.]         THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


127 


periods  have  been  mixed  np  (Oheyne) ;  but 
there  is  no  such  appearance  of  dislocation 
in  oh.  vii.,  in  its  present  form,  as  necessitates 
any  such  theoi-y ;  and,  wliile  it  may  be 
granted  that  the  comfort  of  the  promise 
given  in  ver.  8  would  be  slight,  it  cannot 
be  said  that  it  would  be  nil;  it  may,  there- 
fore, have  been  (as  it  seems  to  us)  without 
impropriety  added  to  the  main  promise, 
which  is  that  of  ver.  7.  The  entire  clause, 
from  "  and  within"  to  "not  a  people,"  must 
be  regarded  as  parenthetic. 

Ver.  9. — If  ye  will  not  believe,  etc. 
Translate,  If  ye  will  not  hold  this  faith 
fast,  surely  ye  will  not  stand  fast.  Full  faith 
in  the  promise  of  ver.  7  would  have  enabled 
Ahaz  to  dispense  with  all  plans  of  earthly 
policy,  and  to  "  stand  fast  in  the  Lord," 
without  calling  in  the  aid  of  any  "arm  of 
flesli."  Distrust  of  the  promise  would  lead 
him  to  take  steps  which  would  not  tend 
to  "  establish  "  him,  but  would  make  his 
position  more  insecure  (see  2  Kings  xvi. 
7—18;  2  Chron.  xxviii.  16,  20). 

Vers.  10 — 16. — The  Siqn  or  Immaotjei,. 
The  supposition  that  there  was  a  consider- 
able interval  between  ver.  9  and  ver.  10 
(Cheyne)  is  quite  gratuitous.  Nothing  in 
the  text  marks  any  such  interval.  God  had 
ient  Ahaz  one  message  by  his  prophet  (vers. 
4 — 9).  It  had  apparently  been  received  in 
silence,  at  any  rate  without  acknowledg- 
ment. The  faith  had  seemed  to  be  lacking 
which  should  have  embraced  with  gladness 
the  promise  given  (see  the  last  clause  of  ver. 
9).  God,  however,  will  give  the  unhappy 
monarch  another  chance.  And  so  ho  sends 
him  a  second  message,  the  offer  of  a  sign 
which  should  make  belief  in  the  first  mes- 
sage easier  to  him  (ver.  11).  Ahaz  proudly 
rejects  this  offer  (ver.  12).  Then  the  sign  of 
"Immanuel"is  given — not  to  Ahaz  indivi- 
dually, but  to  the  whole  "house  of  David," 
ftnd  through  them  to  the  entire  Jewish 
people.  "A  virgin  shall  conceive,  and  bear  a 
son,  whose  name  shall  be  called  Immanuel ; 
and  before  this  child  shall  have  grown  to 
the  age  of  moral  discernment,  God's  people 
will  have  been  delivered,  and  their  enemies 
made  a  desolation  "  (vers.  14—16).  The 
exact  bearing  of  the  "sign"  will  be  best 
discussed  in  the  comment  upon  ver.  14. 

Ver.  10. — ^The  Lord  spake  again  unto  Ahaz. 
As  before  (vers.  3, 4)  by  the  mouth  of  his 
prophet. 

Ver.  11. — Ask  thee  a  sign.  Asking  for  a 
sign  is  right  or  wrong,  praiseworthy  or  blam- 
able,  according  to  the  spirit  in  which  the 
request  is  made.    The    Jr-harisees    in   our 


Lord's  time  "asked  for  a  sign,"  but  would 
not  have  believed  any  the  more  had  they 
received  the  sign  for  which  they  asked. 
Gideon  asked  for  a  sign  to  strengthen  his 
faith  (Jndg.  vi.  37,  39),  and  received  it,  and 
in  the  strength  of  it  went  forth  boldly 
against  the  Midianites.  When  God  himself 
proposed  to  give  a  sign,  and  allowed  his 
creature  to  choose  what  the  sign  should  be, 
there  could  be  no  possible  wrong-doing  in  a 
ready  acceptance  of  the  offer,  which  should 
have  called  forth  gratitude  and  thanks. 
Ask  it  either  in  the  depth,  or  in  the  height 
above ;  i.e.  "  Ask  any  sign  thou  wilt,  either 
in  hell  or  in  heaven" — nothing  shall  be 
refused  thee. 

Ver.  12. — I  will  not  ask,  neither  will  I 
tempt  the  Lord.  Ahaz,  who  has  no  wish  for 
a  sign,  because  he  has  no  wish  to  believe  in 
any  other  salvation  than  that  which  will 
follow  fromthe  realization  of  his  own  schemes, 
finds  a  plausible  reason  for  declining  to  ask 
for  one  in  those  passages  of  the  Law  which 
forbade  men  to  "  tempt  God  "  (Exod.  xvii.  7 ; 
Deut.  vi.  16).  But  it  could  not  be  "  tempt- 
ing God "  to  comply  with  a  Divine  invita- 
tion ;  rather  it  was  tempting  him  to  refuse 
compliance. 

Ver.  13. — 0  house  of  David  (comp.  ver.  2). 
It  is  not  Ahaz  alone,  but  the  "house  of 
David,"  which  is  on  its  trial.  Men  are  con- 
spiring to  remove  it  (ver.  6).  If  it  wUl  not 
be  saved  in  God's  way,  it  will  have  to  be 
removed  by  God  himself.  Is  it  a  small  thing 
for  you  to  weary  men?  i.e.  "Are  you  not 
content  with  wearying  men ;  with  disregard- 
ing all  my  warnings  and  so  wearying  me  t 
Must  you  go  further,  and  weaiy  God  "  (or, 
"  wear  out  his  patience")  "by  rejecting  his 
gracious  offers  ?  "  My  God.  In  ver.  11  Isaiah 
had  called  Jehovah  "  thy  God ; "  but  as 
Ahaz,  by  rejecting  God's  offer,  had  rejected 
God,  he  speaks  of  him  now  as  "  my  God." 

Ver.  14. — Therefore.  To  show  that  your 
perversity  cannot  change  God's  designs, 
which  will  be  accomplished,  whether  you 
hear  or  whether  you  forbear.  The  Lord 
himself;  i.e.  "the  Lord  himself,  of  his  own 
free  will,  unasked."  Will  give  you  a  sign. 
"  Signs  "  were  of  various  kinds.  They  might 
be  actual  miracles  performed  to  attest  a 
Divine  commission  (Exod.  iv.  3 — 9);  or 
judgments  of  God,  significative  of  his  power 
and  justice  (Exod.  x.  2) ;  or  memorials  of 
something  in  the  past  (Exod.  xiu.  9,  lij);  or 
pledges  of  something  still  future.  Signs  of 
this  last-mentioned  kind  might  be  miracles 
(Judg.  vi.  3fi— 40 ;  2  Kings  xx.  8—11),  or 
prophetic  announcements  (Exod.  iii.  12; 
1  Sam.  ii.  84;  2  Kings  xix.  29).  These  last 
would  only  have  the  efieot  of  signs  on  those 
who  witnessed  their  accomplishment.  Be- 
hold. "A  forewarning  of  a  great  event" 
(Gheyne).    A  virgin  shall  oouceiTa.    It  ig 


128 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPnET  ISAIAH.       [oh.  vii.  1—25. 


questioned  whether  the  word  tranalateii 
"virgin,"  viz.  'almah,  has  necessarily  that 
meaning;  but  it  is  admitted  that  the  mean- 
ing is  borne  out  by  every  other  place  in 
which  the  word  occurs  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment (Gen.  xxiv.  43 ;  Exod.  ii.  8 ;  Pb.  bcviii. 
25 ;  Prov.  xxx.  19 ;  Cant.  i.  3 ;  vi.  8).  The 
LXX.,  writing  two  centuries  before  the  birth 
of  Christ,  translate  by  tiapBivos.  The  render- 
ing "  virgin  "  has  the  »upport  of  the  best 
modem  Hebraists, as  Lowth,Gesenius,Ewald, 
Delitzsch,  Kay.  It  is  observed  with  reason 
that  unless  'almah  is  translated  "  virgin," 
there  is  no  aunouucement  made  worthy  of 
the  grand  prelude  :  "  The  Lord  himself  shall 
give  you  a  sign — Behold  1 "  The  Hebrew, 
however,  has  not  "  o  virgin,"  but  "  the  vir- 
gin "  (and  so  the  Scptuagint,  t]  TrctpfleVos), 
which  points  to  some  special  virgin,  pre- 
eminent above  all  others.  And  shall  call ; 
better  than  the  marginal  rendering,  tliou  shall 
call.  It  was  regarded  as  the  privilege  of  a 
mother  to  determine  her  child's  name  (Gen. 
iv.  25 ;  xvi.  1 1 ;  xxix.  32 — 35 ;  xxx.  6 — 13, 
18—21,  24;  XXXV.  18,  etc.),  although  form- 
ally the  father  gave  il  (Gen.  xvi.  15;  2  Sam. 
xii.  24 ;  Luke  i.  G2,  63)  Immanuel.  Trans- 
lated for  us  by  St.  Matthew  (i.  23)  as  "God 
with  us "  (fifff  jjnaii  b  @i6s).  (Comp.  oh. 
viii.  8,  10.) 

Ver.  15. — Butter  and  honey  shall  he  eat. 
His  fare  shall  be  of  the  simplest  kind  (comp. 
ver.  22).  That  he  may  know ;  rather,  till  he 
ehall  fcnow  (Eosenmiiller) ;  te.  till  he  come 
to  years  of  discretion.  (The  rendering  of 
the  Revisers  of  1885, "  when  he  knoweth,"  ii 
less  satisfactory.) 

Ver.  16.  —  The  land,  etc.  Translate, 
The  land  $hall  he  deeolate,  before  whose  two 
Hngt  thou  art  afraid.  The  "  land "  must 
certainly  be  that  of  the  two  confederate 
kings,  Eezin  and  Pekah  the  Syro-Ephiaim- 
ilic  laud,  or  Syria  and  Samaria.  "Desolate  " 
may  be  used  physicnlly  or  politically.  A 
land  is  "  desolate  "  politically  when  It  loses 
the  last  vestige  of  independence. 

Vers.  17 — 25. — The  Danger  to  Judah  from 
Assyria.  The  perversity  of  Ahaz,  already 
rebuked  in  ver.  13,  is  further  punished  by  a 
threat,  that  upon  him,  and  upon  his  people, 
and  upon  his  father's  house,  shall  come 
shortly  a  dire  calamity.  The  very  power 
whose  aid  he  is  himself  bent  on  invoking 
shall  be  the  scourge  to  chastise  both  king 
and  people  (vers.  17 — 20).  The  land  shall 
be  made  bare  as  by  a  razor  (ver.  20).  Cnl- 
iivatlou  shall  cease ;  its  scant  inhabitants 
will  support  themselves  by  keeping  a  few 
cows  and  sheep  (ver.  21),  and  will  nourish 
themselves  on  dairy  produce,  and  the  honey 
that  (he  wild  bees  produce  (ver.  22).   Briers 


and  thorns  will  come  up  everywhere ;  wild 
beasts  will  increase ;  cattle  will  browse  on 
the  hills  that  were  once  carefully  cultivated 
to  their  summits  (vers.  23 — 25). 

Ver.  17.— The  Lord  shall  bring  upon  tKee, 
etc.  The  transition  from  promises  to  threat- 
eniiigs  is  abrupt,  and  calculated  to  impress 
any  one  who  was  to  any  extent  impressible^ 
But  Ahaz  seems  not  to  have  had  "  ears  tc 
hear."  From  the  day  that  Ep'iraim  departed 
from  Judah ;  i.e.  from  the  time  of  the  revolt 
under  Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xii.  16 — 24)— an 
evil  day,  which  rankled  in  the  mind  of  all 
true  Judajaiis.  Even  the  King  of  Assyria. 
The  construction  is  awkward,  since  "the 
King  of  Assyria"  cannot  well  stand  in  appo- 
sition with  "  days."  Hence  many  take  the 
words  for  a  gloss  that  has  been  accidentally 
intruded  into  the  text  (Lowth,  Gesenius, 
Hitzig,  Knobel,  Oheyne).  Others,  however, 
see  in  the  grammatical  anomaly  a  grace  of 
composition. 

Ver.  18. — The  Lord  shall  hiss  (see  cu.  v. 
26,  iiud  note  ad  Joe.).  For  the  fly  that  is  in 
the  uttermost  part  of  the  rivers  of  Egypt. 
The  "fly  of  Egypt,"  Uke  the  "bee  of  As- 
syria," represents  the  military  force  of  the 
nation,  which  God  summons  to  take  part  in 
the  coming  affliction  of  Judaea.  The  pro- 
phetic glance  may  be  extended  over  the 
entire  period  of  Judah's  decadence,  and  the 
"  flies  "  summoned  may  include  those  which 
clustered  about  Neco  at  Megiddo,  and  car- 
ried off  Jehoahaz  from  Jerusalem  (2  Kings 
xxiii.  29 — 34).  There  may  be  allusion  also 
to  Egyptian  ravages  in  the  reigns  of  Sargon, 
Sennacherib,  and  Esar-haddon.  In  any 
general  review  of  the  period  we  shall  find 
it  stated  that,  from  the  time  of  Sargon  to 
that  of  Cyrus,  Judosa  was  the  battle-ground 
upon  which  the  forces  of  Assyria  (or  Assyro- 
Babylonia)  and  Egypt  contended  for  the 
empire  of  western  Asia.  The  desolation  ol 
the  land  during  this  period  was  produced 
almost  as  much  by  the  Egyptian  "  fly  "  as 
by  the  Assyrian  "  bee."  The  "  rivers  of 
Egypt"  ar6  the  Nile,  its  branches,  and 
perhaps  the  great  canals  by  which  its  waters 
were  distributed.  The  bee  that  is  in  the 
land  of  Assyria.  The  choice  of  the  terms 
"  bee  "  and  "  fly,"  to  represent  respectively 
the  hosts  of  Assyria  and  Egypt,  is  not  with- 
out significance.  Egyptian  armies  were 
swarms,  liastily  levied,  and  very  imperfectly 
disciplined.  Assyrian  were  bodies  of  trained 
troops  accustomed  to  war,  and  almost  as  well 
disciplined  as  the  Eomans. 

Ver.  19.— And  lest;  or,  settle.  In  the 
desolate  valleys.  Oesenius  and  Vance  Smith 
translate  "  the  precipitous  valleys  ; "  Mr. 
Cheyne,  "  the  steeply  walled  valleys."  But 
the  cogniite  word  used  in  oh.  v.  6  can  only 
mean  "  waste,"  which  supports  the  rendering 


OH.  vn.  1—25.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


129 


of  the  Authorized  VerHion.  The  exact  word 
used  doeti  not  occvur  elsewhere.  Upon  all 
bushes ;  rather,  upon  all  paitures. 

Ver.  20. — Shall  the  Lord  shave  with  a 
razor  that  is  hired;  rather,  imth  the  hired 
razor ;  i.e.  the  razor  that  Ahaz  will  have 
hiri  d  (2  Kings  xvi.  8).  The  metaphor  well 
expresses  tlie  stripping  of  the  land  bare  by 
plunder  and  exaction  (comp.  Ezek.  t.  1,  12, 
and  2  Chron.  xiviii.  19 — 21).  God  would 
use  Tiglath-Fileser  as  his  instrument  to 
distress  Ahnz.  By  them  beyond  the  river; 
or,  tn  the  parts  beyond  the  river  (comp. 
I  Chron.  xix.  16).  "The  river"  is  un- 
doubtedly the  Euphrates,  and  they  who 
dwell  beyond  it  the  Assyrians.  By  the  King 
of  Assyria.  Once  more  a  gloss  is  suspected, 
as  in  ver.  17.  The  meaning  would  certainly 
be  sufficiently  plain  without  the  olauBe. 
The  head  .  .  .  the  hair  of  the  feet  .  .  .  the 
beard.  These  three  represent  all  the  hair 
on  any  part  of  the  body.  Judah  is  to  be 
completely  stripped. 

Yer.  21. — A  man  shall  nourish  a  young 
C3W,  and  two  sheep  ;  literally,  two  ewes.  A 
slop  having  been  put  to  cultivation,  men 
shall  return  to  the  pastoral  life,  but  shnU  not 
possess  more  than  two  or  three  head  of  cattle 
a  piece,  the  Assyrians  havin<;  swept  off  moat 
of  the  beasts.  Tiglath-Pileser,  in  his  in- 
scriptions, mentions  his  carrying  off  horned 
cattle  and  sheep  to  the  amount  of  many 
thousands  from  the  countries  which  he 
overran  or  conquered  ('  Becords  of  the  Fast,' 
vol.  V.  pp.  49,  52). 

Ver.  22. — For  the  abundance  of  milk  that 
they  shall  give.  The  small  number  of  the 
cattle  will  allow  of  each  having  abundant 
pasture.  Hence  they  will  give  an  abundance 
of  milk.  He  shall  eat  butter ;  ralher,  curds — 
Ihe  solid  food  most  readily  obtained  from 
milk  (comp.  above,  ver.  15).  Curdled  milk 
and  wild  honey  should  form  the  simple  diet 
of  the  remnant  left  in  the  land.  It  is,  of 
course,  possible  to  understand  this  in  a 
spiritual  sense,  of  simple  doctrine  and 
"  gospel  honey  out  of  the  flinty  rook  of  the 
Law ;  "  but  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that 
the  pro)ihet  intended  bia  words  in  any  but 
the  most  literal  sense. 

Ver.  23. — A  thousand  vines  at  a  thonsand 
sUverlings.  By  "  silverlings  "  our  translators 
mean  "pieces  of  silver,"  probably  shekels. 
"  A  thousand  vines  at  a  thousand  shekels  " 
may  mean  either  a  thousand  vines  worth 
that  amount,  or  a  thousand  vines  rented  at 
that  sum  annually  (comp.  Cant.  viii.  11). 
The  latter  would  point  to  vineyards  of  un- 
usual goodness,  since  the  shekel  is  at  least 
eighteenpence,  and  the  present  rent  of  a 
fineyard  in  Palestine  is  at  the  rate  of  a 
piastre  for  each  vine,  or  2J(i.  The  general 
ini-aniiii;  wtiuld  seem  to  be  that  not  even 
the  beet  vineyards  would  be  cultivated,  but 

ISAIAJO. 


would  lie  waste,  and  grow  only  "  briers  and 
thorns." 

Ver,  24. — With  arrows  and  with  bows. 
Only  the  hunter  will  go  there,  armed  with 
his  weapons  of  chase,  to  kill  the  wild  animals 
that  will  haunt  the  thickets. 

Ver.  25.— On  all  hills  that  shall  be  digged ; 
rather,  that  shall  have  been  dipged  in  former 
times,  whether  for  com  cultivation  or  for 
any  other.  There  shall  not  come  thither  the 
fear  of  briers  (so  Ewald  and  Kay).  But 
almost  all  other  commentators  translate, 
"Thou  sbalt  not  come  tliither  for  fear  of 
briers,"  etc.  Tie  briers  and  thorns  of  the 
East  tear  the  clothes  and  tlie  flesh.  It  shall 
be ;  i.e.  "  each  such  place  shall  be."  For 
the  sending  forth  of  oxen ;  riitlipr,  for  the 
sending  in  of  oxen.  Men  fliall  send  their 
cattle  into  them,  as  nlone  able  to  penetrate 
the  jungle  without  hurt. 

Supplementary  Note. 

Ver.  14. — Note  on  the  general  purport  of 
the  Immanuel  prophecy.  Few  prophecies 
have  been  the  subject  of  so  much  controversy, 
or  called  forth  such  a  variety  of  exegesis,  as 
this  prophecy  of  Immanuel.  Kosenmuller 
gives  a  list  of  twenty -eight  authors  who  have 
written  dissertatiouu  upon  it,  and  himself 
adds  a  twenty-ninth.  Yet  the  subject  is  far 
from  bein^  exhausted.  It  is  still  asked : 
(1)  Were  the  mother  and  son  persons  belong- 
ing to  the  time  of  Isaiah  himself,  and  if  so, 
what  persons  ?  Or,  (2)  Were  they  the  Virgin 
Mary  and  her  Son  Jesus  ?  Or,  (3)  Had  the 
prophecy  a  double  fulfilment,  fi  i  et  in  certain 
persons  who  lived  in  Isaiah's  time,  and 
secondly  in  Jesus  and  his  mother? 

I.  The  first  theory  is  that  of  the  Jewish 
commentators.  Originally,  tliey  oU;;gestid 
that  the  mother  was  Abi,  tlie  « ife  of  Ahaz 
(2  Kings  xviii.  2),  and  the  son  Hezekiah, 
who  delivered  Judah  from  the  Assyrian 
power  (see  Justin,  'Dial,  cum  Trypl.on.,' 
p.  262).  But  this  was  early  disproved  by 
showing  that,  according  to  the  nuniberi,  of 
Kings  (2  Kings  xvi.  2;  xviii.  2),  Hezekiah 
was  at  least  nine  years  old  in  the  first  year 
of  Ahaz,  before  which  this  prophecy  could 
not  have  been  delivered  (cli.  vii.  1).  The 
second  suggestion  made  identified  the  mother 
with  Isaiali's  wife,  the  "  proiihetess  "  of  ch. 
viii.  8,  and  made  the  son  acliilJ  of  his,  called 
actually  Immanuel,  or  else  his  son  Maher- 
shalal-hash-baz  (oh.  viii.  1)  under  a  sym- 
bolical designation.  But  ha-almah,  "  the 
virgin,"  would  be  a  very  strange  title  for 
Isaiah  to  have  given  his  wife,  and  the  rank 
assigned  to  Immanuel  in  oh.  viii.  8  would 
not  suit  any  son  of  Isaiah's.  It  remains  to 
regard  the 'aimaft  as  "tome  young  woman 
actually  present,"  name,  rank,  ami  position 
unknown,  and  Immanuel  as  her  son,  also 
otherwise    unknown   (Cheyne).      But    the 


130  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.       [oa  vu.  1— 25. 


grand  exordium,  "  The  Lord  himself  shall 
give  you  a  Bisn — Behold  I "  and  the  rank  of 
Immanuel  (cli.  viii.  8),  are  alike  again.it  this. 

II.  The  purely  Messianic  theory  ig  main- 
tained by  Edseiimiiller  and  Dr.  Kay,  but 
without  any  consideration  of  its  difficulties.' 
The  birth  of  Christ  was  an  event  more  than 
seven  hundred  yeiirs  distant.  In  what  sense 
and  to  what  persons  could  it  be  a  "  sign  "  of 
thecomingdeliveraiioe  of  the  land  from  Hezin 
and  Pckah  ?  And,  upon  the  purely  Messi- 
anic theory,  what  is  the  meaning  of  ver.  16? 
Syria  and  Samaria  were,  in  fact,  crushed 
within  a  few  years  of  the  delivery  of  tlie 
prciphecy.  Why  is  their  desolation  put  off, 
apparently,  till  the  coming  of  the  Messiah, 
and  even  till  he  has  reached  a  certain  age  ? 
Mr.  Cheyue  meets  these  difficulties  by  the 
startling  slatoment  that  Isaiali  expected  the 
advent  of  the  Messiah  to  synchronize  with 
the  Assyrian  invasion,  and  consequently 
tbought  that  before  Kezin  and  Pekah  were 
crushed  he  would  have  reached  the  age  of 
discemment.  But  he  does  not  seem  to  see 
that  in  this  case  tlie  sign  wns  altogetlier  dis- 
appointing and  illusoiy.  Time  is  au  essen- 
tial element  of  a  prophecy  which  turns  upon 
the  word  "before"  (ver.  16).  If  this  faith 
of  Isaiah's  disciples  was  aroused  and  tlieif 
hopes  raised  by  the  announcement  that 
Immanuel  was  just  about  to  be  born  (Mr. 
Oheyne  translates,  "  A  virgin  is  with  child"), 
what  would  be  the  revulsion  of  feeling  when 
no  Immanuel  appeared  ? 

IIT.  May  not  tlie  true  account  of   the 


matter  be  that  suggested  by  Bishop  Lowth 
— that  the  prophecy  had  a  double  bearin;j; 
and  a  double  fulfilment  ?  "  The  obvious  and 
literal  meaning  of  the  prophecy  is  this,"  he 
says :  "  that  within  the  time  that  a  young 
woman,  now  a  virgin,  should  conceive  and 
bring  forth  a  child,  and  that  child  should 
arrive  at  such  an  age  as  to  distinguish  be- 
tween good  and  evil,  tliat  is,  within  a  few 
years,  the  enemies  of  Judah  should  be 
dectioyed."  But  the  prophecy  was  so 
worded,  he  adds,  as  to  have  a  further  mean- 
ing, which  was  even  "the  original  design 
and  principal  intention  of  the  prophet,"  viz. 
the  Messianic  one.  All  the  expressions  of 
the  prophecy  do  not  suit  both  its  intentions 
— some  are  selected  with  reference  to  the 
first,  others  with  reference  to  the  second 
fulfilment— but  all  suit  one  or  the  other, 
and  some  suit  both.  The  first  child  may 
have  received  the  name  Immanuel  (comp 
Ittiel)  from  a  faithful  Jewish  mother,  who 
believed  that  God  was  with  his  people, 
whatever  dangets  threatened,  and  may  have 
reached  years  of  discretion  about  the  time 
that  Samaria  was  carried  away  captive.  The 
second  child  is  the  true  "  Immaiiuel,"  "  God 
with  us,"  the  king  of  ch.  viii.  8 ;  it  ig  his 
mother  who  is  pointed  at  in  the  expression, 
"  the  virgin,"  and  on  his  account  is  the  grand 
preamble ;  through  him  the  people  of  God, 
the  true  Israel,  is  delivered  from  its  spiritual 
enemies,  sin  and  Satan — two  kings  who 
continually  threaten  jt. 


HUMILBTICP. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — TJie  design*  of  the  wicked,  however  wed  laid,  easily  irought  to  nought 
by  God.  It  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  scheme,  humanly  speaking,  more  prudent  anci 
promising  than  that  now  formed  by  Eezin  and  Pekah.  They  had  each  measured  their 
strength  against  that  of  Ahaz  singly,  and  had  come  oflf  decided  victors  from  the  encounter. 
What  doubt  could  there  be  of  success  when  their  arms  were  united?  And  success 
would  be  a  matter  of  the  greatest  importance  to  them.  It  would  enable  them  to  form 
a  compact  alliance  of  three  considerable  warlike  nations  against  the  aggressive  power 
■which  was  threatening  all  Western  Asia  with  subjugation.  It  would  put  an  end  to  the 
perpetual  little  wars  in  which  they  had  been  for  centuries  wasting  their  strength,  aud 
weakening  themselves  for  resistance  against  an  alien  conqueror.  But  Gud  speaks  the 
word :  "  It  shall  not  stand,  neither  shall  it  come  to  pass ; "  and  the  promising  scheme 
drops  through,  ends  in  disaster.  Keziu,  its  framer,  instead  of  triumphing  over  Ahaz,  is 
himself  attacked  by  Tiglath-Pileser ;  his  tenitories  are  invaded,  his  capital  besieged 
and  taken,  his  people  carried  away  captive,  and  himself  slain  (2  Kings  xvi.  9).  Pekah, 
Kezin's  aider  and  abettor,  is  then  exposed  to  the  full  brunt  of  Assyrian  invasion,  is 
attacked,  defeated,  loses  cities  and  provinces,  and,  though  not  slain  by  the  Assyrians,  is 
left  so  weak  and  so  disgraced,  that  he  is  shortly  dethroned  by  a  new  usurper,  Hoshea, 
who  murders  him  for  his  own  security  (2  Kings  xv.  29,  30).  The  "  house  of  David," 
threatened  with  removal  by  the  confederates,  escapes  the  crisis  unhurt,  and  continues 
to  ojcupy  the  throne  of  Judah  for  another  century  and  a  half,  while  the  kingdoms  of 
Syria  and  Israel  fall  within  a  few  years,  and  their  inhabitants  are  deported  to  far-distant 
regions  (2  Kings  xvi.  9 ;  xvii.  6  ;  1  Ghron.  xv.  26).     We  may  learn  from  this — 

L  iiuc  iiAD^iiisa  oir  orposxKa  God.    tSyiia  aud  Kphraim  were  confederate  againat 


DH.  vn.  1—25.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  131 

Judah.  They  knew  that  Judah  was  In  an  especial  way  God's  people.  They  designed 
to  set  aside  the  house  of  David.  They  knew,  or  at  any  rate  Ephraim  knew,  that  the 
throne  belonged  to  the  descendants  of  David  by  God'4  promise.  Thus  they  set  them- 
selves against  God  knowingly.  They  thought  their  wisdom  would  be  greater  or  their 
strength  superior  to  his.  But  thus  to  think  is  utter  madness.  The  "  foolishness  of  God 
is  wiser  than  men,  and  the  weakness  of  Gk>d  is  stronger  than  men  "  (1  Cor.  i.  24).  In 
vain  do  "  the  kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  and  the  rulers  take  counsel  together, 
against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  Anointed,  saying.  Let  us  break  their  bands  asunder, 
and  cast  away  their  cords  from  us.  He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh :  the 
Lord  shall  have  them  in  derision  "  (Ps.  ii.  2 — 4).  God  had  only  to  put  it  into  the 
heart  of  the  King  of  Assyria  to  make  an  immediate  expeditioii,  and  all  the  fine  schemes 
of  the  confederates,  which  needed  time  for  their  execution,  came  at  once  to  nought,  and 
were  confounded.  The  would-be  allies  were  crushed  separately ;  their  victim  escaped 
them ;  and  "  the  house  of  David  "  outlasted  both  their  own. 

II.  The  wisdom  op  full  trust  ih  God.  When  once  God  had  sent  him  the  message, 
"  It  shall  not  stand,  neither  shall  it  come  to  pass,"  Ahaz  might  have  rested  securely  on 
the  promise,  and  have  been  content  simply  to  "  stand  still  and  see  the  salvation  of 
God."  But  he  can  only  have  had  a  weak  and  imperfect  trust  in  Isaiah's  words.  He 
must  bethink  himself  how  he  may  escape  his  foes ;  he  must  bring  in  another  to  help 
him  besides  God.  Accordingly,  he  "  goes  to  Assyria."  He  takes  the  silver  and  gold 
out  of  the  royal  palace  and  out  of  the  temple  treasury,  and  sends  them  to  Tiglath- 
Pileser,  with  the  oflFer  of  becoming  his  servant  (2  Kings  xvi.  7,  8),  and  he  probably 
flatters  himself  that  he  has  done  well,  and,  owes  his  escape  from  Bezin  and  Pek.ih  to 
himself,  But  he  has  really  taken  a  step  on  the  downward  path  which  will  conduct  the 
house  of  David  and  the  people  of  Judah  to  ruin.  He  has  placed  himself  under  an 
idolater,  and  paved  the  way  for  new  idolatries  (2  Kings  xvi.  10 — 16).  He  has  helped  to 
sweep  away  two  states,  which,  while  they  continued,  served  as  a  breakwater  to  keep 
the  waves  of  invasion  off  his  own  kingdom.  He  has  called  in  one,  who,  from  the  true 
point  of  view,  has  really  "  distressed  him,  and  strengthened  him  not "  (2  Chron.  xzviii. 
20).  How  much  wiser  would  he  have  been  to  have  accepted  God's  promise  in  /vll 
faith,  and  not  supplemented  it  by  his  own  "inventions  "  (I'Jocies.  vii.  29)1  God  would 
have  found  a  way  to  help  him  and  save  him,  which  would  have  involved  no  such  aTil 
consequences  as  those  which  flowed  from  his  own  self-willed  action. 

Vers.  11 — 14. — Rightful  and  wrongful  aaldngfor  signs.  To  ask  for  a  sign  is  sometimes 
spoken  of  in  Scripture  as  indicative  of  want  of  faith,  and  therefore-as  an  offence  to  God. 
"  An  evil  and  adulterous  generation  seeketh  after  a  sign  "  (Matt.  xii.  39).  "This  is  an 
evil  generation ;  they  seek  a  sign  "  (Luke  xi.  29).  "  Jesus  sighed  deeply  in  his  spirit, 
and  saith,  Why  doth  this  generation  seek  after  a  sign?  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  There 
shall  no  sign  be  given  to  this  generation  "  (Mark  viii.  12).  "  The  Jews  require  a  sign, 
and  the  Greeks  seek  after  wisdom"  (1  Cor.  i.  22).  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  sometimes 
spoken  of  without  any  dispraise,  and  seems  to  be  viewed  as  natural,  rightful,  even  as  a 
sort  of  proof  of  faith.  Ahaz,  in  the  present  passage,  is  bidden  to  "  ask  a  sign,"  and  is  blamed 
for  refusing  to  do  so.  His  refusal  "  wearies  "  God  (ver.  13).  The  disciples  ask  our  Lord, 
unrebuked,  "  What  shall  be  the  sign  of  thy  coming,  and  of  the  end  of  the  world  ?  " 
(Matt.  xxiv.  3).  Hezekiah  asks  Isaiah,  "  What  shall  be  the  sign  that  the  Lord  will 
heal  me,  and  that  I  shall  go  up  into  the  house  of  the  Lord  the  third  day?"  (2  Kings 
XX.  8 ;  comp.  oh.  xxxviii.  22).  Can  any  tests  be  laid  down  whereby  the  right  and  the 
wrong  may  be  distinguished  in  this  matter?     We  think  that  some  may. 

I.  It  is  bight  to  ask  fob  a  sign.  1.  When  a  person  comes  forward  and  claims  our 
obedience  as  a  Divine  teacher  or  leader.  Moses  anticipated  that  his  countrymen  in 
Egypt  would  refuse  to  listen  to  him  if  he  presented  himself  to  them  without  credentials, 
and  was  given  at  once  the  power  of  working  certain  miracles  as  signs  that  he  was  com- 
missioned by  God  (Eiod.  iv.  1 — 9).  As  soon  as  Jesus  came  forward  to  teach  and  to 
preach,  he  was  asked,  not  unreasonably  or  improperly,  "  What  sign  showest  thou?" 
(John  ii.  18),  and  responded,  without  blaming  those  who  asked  him,  by  a  reference  to 
the  greatest  of  his  miracles,  his  resurrection.  The  apostles  were  authorized  to  work 
miracles  as  signs  of  their  Divine  mission.  2.  When  we  have  an  invitation  from  God 
through  his  accredited  messenger,  as  Ahaz  had,  to  ask  a  sign,    8>  Wheu  we  feel  that 


132  THE   BOOK   OF   TIJE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.      [ch.  vil  1— ii6 

much  depends  on  our  decision  in  a  practical  matter — e.g.  the  lives  of  others — we  may 
humbly  ask,  as  Gideon  did  (Judg.  vi.  36 — 40),  that  Grod  will,  if  he  so  please,  give  ui 
§omo  extei-nal  indication,  or  else  sifoh  strength  of  internal  convictiun  as  will  asmire  us 
what  hid  will  is;  only  in  such  cases  we  must  he  careful  to  make  our  request  con iitional 
on  its  being  acceptable  to  him,  and  we  must  be  ready,  if  it  be  not  granted,  to  act  in  the 
matter  to  the  best  of  our  ability  on  such  light  as  is  vouchsafed  us. 

II.  It  is  wboko  to  ask  tob  a  sign.  1.  In  a-captious  siiirit,  with  an  intention  to 
cavil  at  it,  and  (if  possible)  not  accept  it.  This  was  the  condition  of  mind  of  the 
Pharisees,  who  would  not  have  believed  even  had  Christ  come  down  from  the  cross 
bi  fore  their  eyes,  as  they  asked  him  to  do  (Matt,  xxvii.  42).  2.  When  wo  have  airfady 
had  abundant  signs  given  us,  and  there  is  no  reasonable  ground  for  doubt  or  hesitatim 
as  to  our  duty.  This  was  the  case  of  those  Jews  who  still  "  recjuired  a  sign  "  (1  Cor.  L 
22)  after  the  Resurrection  and  Ascension.  3.  When  we  ask  for  it  merely  to  gratify  our 
cuiio:>ity,  as  Herod  Antipas  just  before  the  Crucifixion  (Luke  xxiii.  8).  4.  When  we 
arbitrarily  fix  on  our  own  sign,  and  determine  to  regard  the  result,  whatever  it  be,  as  a 
sign  from  heaven.  This  is  the  case  of  ihuse  who  choose  to  decide  a  practical  matter  by 
sortts  VirgiUunce,  or  sortes  Biblicce,  or  any  other  appeal  to  chance.  'J'hey  are  not 
entitled  to  ask  God  for  signs  of  this  kind,  or  to  regard  such  signs  as  significant  of  his 
will.    To  trust  to  them  is  not  faith,  but  superstition. 

Ver.  14. — Jesua  our  Immanvd.  I.  Reasons  fob  belibvino  this.  1.  None  but 
Jesus  was  ever  born  of  a  pure  virgin.  2.  None  but  Jesus  was  ever  "  Gol  with  us." 
3.  None  but  Jesus  ever  knew  truly  "  to  refuse  the  evil  and  choose  the  good." 

II.  Duties  flowixo  from  the  belief.  1.  If  Jesus  is  "God  with  us,'"  we  must 
ohey  him.  2.  If  Jesus  is  "  God  with  us,"  we  must  trust  him.  3.  If  Jesus  is 
"  God  with  us,"  we  must  strive  to  imitate  him.  4.  If  Jesus  is  "  God  with  us,"  we 
must  continually  worship  and  pray  to  him.  6.  If  Jesus  is  "  God  with  us,"  we  must 
love  liiui. 

III.  DocTEiNES  INCLUDED  IN  THE  BELIEF.  1.  The  Divinity  of  Christ,  since  he  is 
"  Qod  with  us."  2.  His  humanity,  since  he  is  conceived  and  bom  of  a  woman,  aad 
eats  earthly  food.  3.  His  love  and  pardoning  grace,  since  he  is  "with  us,"  not  against 
us ;  on  our  side,  not  our  adversary.  4.  His  atonement  for  oar  sins,  since  without 
atonement  he  could  not  pardon. 

Vers.  17 — 20. — Our  pleasant  vices  whips  for  our  own  hacks.  Ahaz  has  made  up  his 
mind  to  "hire  "the  keen  razor  that  lies  beyond  the  far  waters  of  the  Euphrates,  in 
Mesopotamia  and  Assyria  Proper.  He  means  to  meet  the  danger  which  he  sees  to  bo 
impenduig,  by  his  own  wisdom  and  in  his  own  strength.  His  ally,  Tiglath-Pileser,  "  the 
great  king,  the  King  of  Assyria  "  (2  Kings  xviii.  28),  shall  crush  the  hosts  of  Pekah  and 
Rezin,  save  Judah  and  Jerusalem  from  harm,  nay,  perhaps  exalt  Judah  to  the  position 
which  was  his  before  Israel  revolted  under  Jeroboam.  But  God  has  decreed  otherwise. 
He  will  endorse  Ahaz's  scheme  to  a  certain  extent ;  he  will  employ  the  sword  of  Tiglath- 
Pileser  to  destroy  Rezin  (2  Kings  xvi.  9)  and  chastise  Pekah  ('  Records  of  the  Past,' 
vol.  V.  p.  52) ;  but  he  wUl  then  make  him  a,  scourge  to  chastise  Ahaz  himself.  The 
razor  hired  by  Ahaz  shall  shave  Judaea  as  clean  as  Samaria,  exhausting  the  land  utterly, 
and  leaving  it  with  comparatively  few  inhabitants.  Ahaz  shall  find  that  he  is  not 
really  "helped"  by  his  ally,  but  only  "distressed"  and  injured(2Chron.  xxviii.  20, 21). 
In  all  this  we  have  a  specimen  of  one  of  the  ordinary  modes  in  which  God  works  out 
his  will.  He  "  hoists  us  with  our  own  petard,"  scourges  us  with  the  whip  which  we 
have  ourselves  made  for  anolher  purpose.  Ambition  brings  men  into  places  where  they 
are  fain  to  ciy,  "  UneMsy  lies  the  head  that  wears  a  crown."  Avarice  indulged  makes 
them  grudge  themselves  the  slightest  enjoyment.  Successful  plotting  deprives  them  of 
all  feeling  of  security,  putting  their  lives  and  libeities  into  the  power  of  those  who  may 
at  any  time  betray  them.  The  attainment  of  the  highest  position  at  which  they  have 
ever  aimed  leaves  them  a  prey  to  ennui  and  disappointment.  Rebekah's  plan  for  the 
advancement  of  her  favourite  son  succeeds  ;  but  it  deprives  her  of  her  son's  society  for 
ft  great  part  of  her  life.  Absalom's  rebellion  against  David  raises  him  to  the  thrune, 
but  brings  him  to  an  untimely  end  within  a  few  months.  Judas  carries  out  bis  scl.uiiie 
if  betrayal  with  complete  success,  and  in  consequence  of  his  success  bangs  himself.     In 


0H.vn.  1— 25.]       THE  EOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAlAH.  133 

oui  youth  we  forge  those  fetters  of  habit  which  make  us  miserable  in  our  old  age.  We 
plan,  and  scheme,  and  build  castles,  and  laboriously  Achieve  the  accomplishment  of  our 
plans  to  a  certain  extent,  with  the  result  that  we  are  utterly  dissatisfied,  and  would  like 
to  pull  all  down  and  begin  again.  "  Our  mischief  falls  on  our  own  head,  and  onr  wicked- 
ness on  our  own  pate  "  (Ps.  vii.  16).  God  turns  our  wisdom  into  foolishness,  •nd  cnuhes 
U8  beneath  the  structures  that  our  own  hands  have  erected. 


HOMILIES  BY  VAKIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ters.  1 — 9. — The  prophet  comforts  the  king.  I.  The  political  outlook.  The 
kings  and  chieftains  of  Palestine  were  in  dread  of  the  great  Assyrian  power.  Under  the 
weak  rule  of  Ahiiz  Judah  had  sunk  very  low,  and  the  King  of  Damascus,  with  the  King 
of  Ephraim,  think  it  a  favourable  opportunity  to  attack  the  little  kingdom,  and  so 
strengthen  themselves  against  the  Assyrians.  .  "  Far  down  to  the  gulf  of  Akaba  the 
shock  of  invasion  was  felt.  Elath,  the  favourite  seaport  of  Jehoshaphat  and  Uaziah,  was 
made  over  to  the  Edomites  "  (2  Kings  xvi.  6 ;  it.  37).  Jerusalem  was  now  threatened, 
and  a  usurper  was  to  be  placed  on  David's  throne  (ver.  6). 

II.  The  alabm  or  the  kotai  family.  (Ver.  2.)  News  is  brought  to  the  palaces 
"  Ar&m  encampeth  in  Ephraim ;  "  the  junction  of  the  forces  of  Syria  and  Israel  had 
taken  place.  A  shivering  fear,  like  the  wind  swaying  the  trees  of  the  forest,  passed 
over  their  hearts.  The  court  went  forth  to  inspect  the  fortifications  and  the  water- 
works, and  came  to  "  the  end  of  the  conduit  of  the  upper  reservoir,  upon  the  path  to 
the  fuller's  field  " — a  well-known  spot  (cf.  ch.  xxxvi.  2 ;  2  Kings  xviii.). 

III.  The  mbetino  with  Isaiah.  At  this  spot  the  prophet,  with  his  son,  stood  before 
them.  It  seems  that  by  Divine  intimation  the  prophet  had  called  the  boy  Shear-Jashuh, 
which  means  "  Remnant-shall-be-converted,"  reminding  us  of  the  hope  of  his  calling 
(ch.  vi.).  He  would  look  upon  the  boy  as  a  living  pledge,  not  only  of  conjugal  affection, 
but  of  Divine  promise  for  a  nobler  Israel.  See  how  he  dwells  upon  the  thought  in 
ch.  X.  20 — 22.     Inspired  by  this  confidence,  he  now  addresses  the  king. 

IV.  CoMFOBT  FOR  THE  FAINT-HEARTED.  "  Take  hced,  and  be  quiet ;  fear  not,  and 
be  not  faint-hearted."  A  calm,  collected  mind  is  a  match  for  any  danger.  Agitation 
and  fear  magnify  the  ill ;  stout  resolve  reduces  it  to  its  true  proportions.  The  worst 
is  ever  in  onr  own  fancy. 

"  Some  of  your  hurts  you  have  cured. 

And  the  sharpret  you  still  have  survived  j 
But  what  tormeuts  of  grief  you  endured 
From  evils  wliich  never  arrived  I " 

The  timid  king  sees  a  fiery  mass  of  war  rolling  towards  him ;  the  stout  heart  of  the 
prophet  contemptuously  defies  the  two  kings  as  "two  stum|is  of  smoking  firebrands." 
If  we  would  comfort  men,  we  must,  like  the  prophet,  tell  theru  to  draw  upon  the  resources 
God  has  placed  in  the  soul :  intelligence,  prudence,  self-reliance,  and  self-help.  There 
is  no  true  self-trust  which  is  not  at  the  same  time  a  trust  in  God. 

IV.  Thk  deepest  source  of  btbenoth  and  comfort.  What  are  the  heads  of  the 
Syrian  power  and  of  Israel's  power  against  Judah's  Head,  the  Lord  ?  Damascus  and 
Samaria  will  rear  their  fronts  in  vain  against  Jerusalem,  if  Jerusalem  only  trust  in 
Jehovah.  (Ewald  supposes  that  the  words,  "  Judah's  head  is  Jerusalem,  and  Jerusalem's 
head  is  Jehovah,"  have  fallen  out  of  the  text,  ver.  9.)  Only  have  confidence.  There 
is  a  play  upon  words  in  the  original  which  we  might  represent  in  English  by :  "  Pear  not, 
fail  not ; "  or,  "  Firm  in  faith  is  free  from  scathe  ;  "  or,  "  If  ye  confide  not,  ahide  ye  shall 
not."  1.  Confidence,  presence  of  mind,  is  a  duty  in  times  of  dan.;er.  2.  It  may  be  gained, 
if  we  will  fall  back  upon  God  as  our  Leader  and  Defence.  "  The  Lord  is  on  my  side :  1 
will  not  fear  what  men  shall  do  unto  me." — J. 

Vers.  If* — 17. — Faith  triumphing  over  doubt.  Faith  in  the  Eternal  personified  in 
the  projihet,  to  whom  all  things  desirable  are  to  be  hopad  for,  all  things  to  be  hoped  for 
are  pusaiblo;  and  distrust,  the  weakness  of  mere  flesh  and  M  lod,  represented  in  the 
timid  Ahaz,  Such  is  the  illusion  of  appearances.  The  outwardly  kingly  man  ia  thfl 
soward ;  the  real  king  of  men  is  the  plain-looking  prophet. 


134  THE  BOOK  OP   THE  PEOPHET  ISAlAH.       [oh.  vn.  1—25. 


L  The  challengx  of  faith.  In  the  Name  of  Jehovah,  Isaiah  hids  the  king  ask  a 
sign  from  above — a  sign  "  going  deep  down  to  hell  or  high  into  heaven."  Truth  should 
be  its  own  evidence  to  every  mind ;  intuition  is  better  than  proof.  Isaiah  has  seen  and 
listened  to  God  in  the  depths  of  his  own  spirit,  and  no  sign  in  the  air  above  or  in  the 
earth  beneath  can  give  him  more  assurance  than  he  already  possesses.  Would  any  man 
but  listen  and  look,  he  should  find  the  shrine,  tho  oracle,  the  Shechinah,  in  his  own 
heart.  Wilhin  that  awful  volume  of  the  heart,  it  may  be  said,  lies  the  mystery  of 
mysteries.  Yet  not  to  all  is  it  given  to  read  therein  clearly ;  all  other  reading,  even  in 
dead  tonguei,  is  easier. 

"  Happiest  they  of  human  rac« 

To  whom  our  God  has  granted  grace 

To  read,  to  fear,  to  hope,  to  pray, 

To  lift  the  latch  and  force  the  way  I " 

The  duller  eye,  untrained  to  such  visions,  needs  the  large  bold  characters  of  the  visible 
sign.  "  It  comes  in  with  its  palpable  meaning  to  aid  human  weakness.  The  prophets 
complained  of  the  craving  for  signs,  yet  were  compelled  to  comply  with  it.  Men  trust 
their  senses  more  than  they  trust  the  ghostly  and  majestic  shape  of  abstract  truth ;  and 
the  appeal  to  the  ear,  as  the  Roman  poet  said,  produces  but  a  sluggish  movement  in 
the  mind  compared  with  the  appeal  to  the  faithful  eye.  We  must  all  confess  ourselves 
weak ;  needing  to  see  before  we  can  believe,  instead  of  believing  that  we  may  see.  Yet 
such  incidents  as  this  may  remind  us  that  there  is  a  Spirit  to  help  our  infirmities,  and 
restore  its  poise  to  the  mind  unhinged  by  doubt.  When  Midian  threatened  Israel  in 
the  days  of  old,  God's  voice  was  heard  by  Gideon  :  "  The  Lord  is  with  thee,  thou  mighty 
man  of  valour."  Yet  the  heart  of  the  hero  still  quailed.  "  0  my  Lord,  if  the  Lord  be 
with  us,  why  then  is  all  this  befallen  us  ?  and  where  be  all  his  miracles  which  our  fathers 
told  us  of?  "  (Judg.  vi.  12,  sqq.).  Again  the  voice  came :  "  Go  and  save  Israel :  have  not 
I  sent  thee  ?  And  again  the  diffident  reply  :  "  0  my  Lord,  wherewith  shall  I  save 
Israel  ?  behold,  my  family  is  poor,  and  I  »ra  the  least  in  my  father's  clan."  Then  the 
sign  is  asked  for  and  granted ;  the  fire,  bursting  from  the  rock,  consumes  Gideon's 
offering.  God,  in  the  strength  of  an  almighty  wisdom,  "reasons  together"  with  men. 
In  our  day  it  is  equally  hard  to  "hold  on  and  hope  hard  in  the  subtle  thing  called 
spirit ;"  and  we  crave  as  urgently  for  signs,  though  not  of  the  same  kind. 

II.  The  excuse  or  mistrust.  Tlie  king  alleges  that  he  dare  not  "  tempt  Jehovah." 
True,  this  was  a  deep  reproach  of  old  against  Israel's  temper.  At  Eephidim,  in  the  wil- 
derness, Moses  stigmatized  the  demand  of  the  people  for  water  by  this  phrase,  "  Is  the 
Lord  among  us  or  not?"  (Exod.  xvii.  2).  There  lay  the  canker  of  guilty  scepticism. 
In  a  general  way  the  same  thing  is  seen  in  our  time,  in  the  impatient  demand 
that  the  difficulties  of  the  great  problem  of  the  universe  shall  be  cleared  up  to  our 
private  satisfaction.  Who  gave  us  the  right  thus  to  interrogate  and  cross-examine  him 
whose  works,  as  a  whole,  witness  to  his  goodness  and  love  ?  God  did  not  copy  our  puny 
schemes  in  this  construction ;  nor  does  he  manage  the  universe  as  we  manage  a  business, 
an  expedition,  the  government  of  a  state.  "  Ye  shall  not  tempt  the  Lord  your  God," 
means — You  shall  not  weigh  him  in  the  scales  of  your  finite  intelligence,  not  call  upon 
him  to  execute  your  wishes  as  if  they  were  the  same  as  his  holy  will.  So  difficult  is 
it  to  distinguish  the  plea  of  honesty  and  humility  from  that  of  dishonesty  and  disbelief, 
it  looks  as  if  Ahaz  might  be  right,  and  Isniah  wrong ;  the  latter  too  bold,  the  former  more 
reverent.  Scripture  may  be  made  to  mean  anything  and  everything ;  the  right  heart 
alone  reads  the  right  meaning  for  particular  time,  place,  and  person.  While  it  is  the 
mark  of  presumption  to  "  tempt  God,"  it  is  the  symptom  of  unbelief  when  proffered 
light  and  help  are  refused. 

III.  Tite  PERSBVERANOE  OF  FAITH.  With  a  rcbuke  of  the  king's  spirit,  charging  him 
in  effect  with  despi>iing  the  goodness  and  tending  to  weary  the  patience  of  God,  the 
prophet  proceeds  with  his  unasked-for  message.  What  are  we  to  learn  from  the  expres- 
sion, "  wearying  God"?  All  such  poetical  figures  of  Scripture  have  their  deep  meaning. 
To  despise  the  riches  of  God's  forbearance,  to  grieve  his  Spirit,  to  quench  his  Spirit, 
— these  are  ways  of  pointing  out  and  stigmatizing  that  indifference  and  coldness  to 
the  true  and  Divine  which  may  be  a  worse  symptom  than  open  hostility.  We  may 
either  neglect  to  ask  Divine  guidance,  we  may  disobey  it  when  we  have  it  intimated, 
pr  we  may  refuse  its  proffer.    Perhaps  this  last  state  of  mind  is  the  worst.    It  shows 


Oft.  vn.  1—25.]       THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  135 

lie  heart  to  be  already  prepossessed  and  biassed.  Ahaz  was,  in  fact,  under  the  influence 
of  his  false  prophets  and  soothsayers.  But  why  should  he  decline  to  hear  at  least  what 
Isaiah  had  to  say  ?  He  should  have  recognized  that  there  were  "  two  sides  "  in  the 
great  question  at  issue.  Ahaz  then  warns  us  against  listening  to  ea;  ^arte  counsels.  He 
who  will  only  attend  to  the  flattering  echoes  of  his  own  wishes,  is  like  him  who  trusteth 
in  his  own  heart  and  who  proves  a  fool.  Prom  Isaiah,  aiain,  the  lesson  comes  back  of 
faithful  perseverance  in  our  word  and  work,  in  spite  of  indiflerence,  which  threatens  to 
blunt  our  edge  and  paralyze  our  energy.  When  a  matter  is  on  the  conscience,  let  it 
come  forth,  "  whether  men  will  hear  or  whether  they  will  forbear."  We  calculate 
consequences  too  much ;  and  while  few  have  the  courage  to  risk  danger  by  preaching 
unwelcome  truth,  perhaps  fewer  still  have  the  faith  in  its  worth  to  insist  on  pressing  it 
upon  reluctant  ears.  ' 

IV.  The  sign  fbom  Jehovah.  1.  It  wiU  be  of  mixed  import.  Partly  it  will  confirm 
previous  expectation,  and  partly  it  will  intimate  what  had  not  been  expected.  It 
proclaims  a  happy  event  which  Ahaz  had  not  looked  for,  but  also  a  calamity  which 
he  might  have  averted  had  he  possrssed  greater  faith  and  truth.  Mysteriously,  our 
wishes  or  fears  have  some  creative  influence  on  our  future.  "  Omens  follow  those  who 
look  to  them,"  whether  for  good  or  evil. 

"  Man  is  his  own  star ;  and  the  soul  that  can 
Bender  a  perfect  and  an  honest  man. 
Commands  all  light,  all  influence,  and  all  fitte ; 
Nothing  to  him  falls  early  or  too  late. 
Our  acts  our  angels  are,  or  good  or  ill, 
Out  fatal  shadows  that  walk  by  us  still." 

(Beaumont  and  Fletcher.) 

2.  The  Immanuel.  In  a  "  dark  saying  "  the  prophet  opens  his  mouth.  "  Lo !  Malmdh  " 
(the  maiden,  she  who  is  no  longer  a  girl,  nor  yet  an  old  woman)  "  will  conceive,  and 
bear  a  son,  and  then  call  his  name  With-us-Qod."  Time  is  thus  hinted  at ;  it  will  be 
soon,  perhaps  in  a  year's  time.  Also  the  certainty  and  the  joy  of  deliverance,  as  the 
boy's  name  betokens.  It  is  the  very  rallying  cry  of  Israel  :  "  God  with  us."  We  must 
have  a  watch  word  in  every  noble  cause,  that  shall  condense  its  purport  and  sound  the 
tocsin  to  every  true  aspiration  and  energy  within.  So  the  Crusaders  shouted  "  Dieu  le 
veut  1 "  at  the  preaching  of  Peter  the  Hermit ;  so  wore  English  warriors  heartened  in  the 
olden  days  by  the  cry  of  "  England  and  St.  Q-eorge  !  "  Notice  how  this  phrase  echoes 
and  re-echoes — "Immanuel,  God-with-us  " — in  ch.  viii.  8, 10  (cf.  ch.  ix.  6).  Every  great 
Bian  raised  up  from  time  to  time  among  us  in  politics,  in  religion,  to  deliver,  to  lead, 
to  counsel,  is,  in  his  way,  an  heroic  reflection  of  Israel's  Messiah.  To  prophetic  faith 
and  hope  a  Messiah,  a  Deliverer,  is  ever  at  the  doors.  If  the  Eternal  lives  and  reigns, 
and  fulfils  himself  by  the  agency  of  men,  we  need  not  fear  that  when  the  hour  strikes, 
the  hero,  with  all  the  credentials  of  his  anointing,  will  appear.  3.  Speedy  help. 
"  Jehovah  shall  help  thee,  and  that  right  early,"  is  a  chronic  promise.  When  the  boy 
is  approaching  years  of  maturity  and  of  judgment,  his  food  will  be  curds  and  honey; 
that  is,  before  he  comes  to  manhood,  Ephraim  and  Damascus  will  be  discomfited,  and 
a  new  "  golden  age  "  will  have  set  in.  No  more  is  known  about  any  particular  youth 
of  Isaiah's  time  to  whom  the  mystic  prediction  could  refer  than  is  known  about  the 
illustrious  boy  of  Virgil's  prophetic  Eclogue,  who  was  to  restore  good  King  Saturn's 
reign  (Eel.  iv.).  It  is  a  misunderstanding  of  the  nature  of  prophecy  when  we  try  to  fix 
its  forecasts  to  place  or  time.  A  prophecy  is  never  fulfilled  as  we  expect.  It  refers  to 
a  world  not  bounded  by  our  horizons,  and  to  a  history  which  does  not  fall  into  our  time- 
perspective.  This  ideal  Immanuel  was  destined  yet  to  float  before  the  pious  hope  of 
the  nation  for  many  centuries,  till  it  was  united  with  the  real  in  the  person  of  Jesus. 
4.  The  chastisement  that  must  precede  prosperity.  The  great  Assyrian  conquest  and 
the  desolation  it  brings  must  come,  in  punisliment  of  the  unfaithfulness  of  the  royal 
house,  and  the  estrangement  of  the  nation  from  Jehovah's  ways.  It  is  only  after  long 
trial  in  the  fire  and  thorough  regeneration  that  prosperity  can  come.  It  is  a  doubtful 
picture  of  the  future,  in  which  rays  of  glory  strike  athwart  dark  masses  of  gloom- 
Such  is  ever  our  outlook,  whether  for  personal  history,  as  for  Isaiah  in  the  preceding 
chapter,  or  for  a  nation,  as  here.  Never  has  the  hope  of  Christ  been  wanting,  nevor 
the  promise  of  his  coming  died  out ;  and  never  proclaimed  without  the  intimation  of 


136  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHEl    ISAIAH.        [oh.  vn.  1—25. 

woe*  Mid  tribulations  first  to  come.  Christ's  own  forecasts  of  the  future  (see  the  closing 
chapters  of  Matthew)  present  the  like  half-veiled,  half-revealed  perspective.  We  must 
ever  look  out  upon  the  coming  time  with  confidence  or  with  mistrust,  according  as  our 
hearts  are  stayed,  like  Isaiah's,  upon  Jehovah,  or  weak,  because  trusting  only  to  the  arm 
if  flesh,  or  to  the  irrational  dreams  of  superstition,  like  Ahaz. — J. 

Vers.  18 — 25. — Wa,r-picture$.  I.  Invadinq  hosts.  The  armies  of  Egypt  and  Assyria 
ire  compared  to  swarms  of  bees.  As  the  bee-master  calls  to  his  winged  slaves  with  a 
peculiar  sound,  so  at  the  call  of  Jehovah  the  swaring  of  Israel's  foes  will  come  on,  with 
swords  that  sting,  and  settle  down  in  the  low-lying  pastures  of  the  land,  in  the  rcck- 
i:lefta,  the  hedges  of  thorn,  and  the  piistures.  (For  the  image  of  the  bees,  compare 
Deut.  i.  44 ;  Ps.  cxviii.)  In  Joel  ii.  we  find  a  splendid  picture  of  locusts  as  pictoriEd  ol 
an  invading  army. 

II.  Devastation.  Another  striking  image.  The'land,  devoured  by  strangers,  will 
be  like  a  man  clean  shaven  from  top  to  toe  of  all  his  manly  ornament  of  hair  and  beard. 
Like  a  keen  razor  will  be  the  sweeping  penal  judgineut  of  Jehovah  on  the  holy  land. 
The  rich  vineyards  will  disappear.  No  pruning  nor  digging  will  go  forward.  Briers 
and  thorns,  quick  usurpers  of  the  neglected  corn-fields,  will  flourish,  and  the  courts  of 
the  houses  will  be  weed-grown  (cf.  ch.  v.  6 ;  xxxii.  13).  Here  and  there  will  be  seen 
a  cow  and  a  sheep  or  two,  grazing  as  on  a  great  common  or  desert.  The  farmer  will 
iisappear,  or  will  return  to  the  wild  nomad  life,  living  on  the  produce  of  his  few  cattle 
and  on  honey.  Thorns  and  thistles  will  replace  the  vines,  and  the  hunter  will  wander 
with  bow  and  arrow  where  once  the  husbandman  had  been  seen  busy  with  spade  or 
plough.  The  hoe  will  cease  from  its  work,  for,  alas  I  with  hope  of  fruit  the  "fear  ol 
thorns  and  thistles"  has  ceased;  and  the  ox  and  the  sheep  will  find  free  pasuire 
everywhere.  We  have  seen  Landseer's  two  striking  pictures,  "  War  "  and  "  Peace,"  in 
the  National  Gallery,  and  can  feel  their  pathos.  To  look  out  from  peace  and  plenty 
ujMn  a  perspective  of  smoke,  bloodshed,  and  desolation  is  that  to  which  the  prophet 
calls  the  king.  Yet  amidst  the  gloom  appears  the  figure,  mystically  hinteil,  of  the 
young  Messiah.  And,  indeed,  it  was  in  the  midst  of  dowa-trodden  Galilee,  over  which 
armies  had  so  often  tratuped,  that  Jesus  appeared,  and  adopted  the  holy  and  comforting 
mission  of  the  Messiah  as  his  own  (Luke  iv.). — J. 

Ver.  9. — No  faith,  no  fixity.  "  If  ye  will  not  believe,  surely  ye  shall  not  be  estab- 
lished." Faith  is  older  than  the  Law.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  elder  principle  of  all  Divine 
teachings.  Believe.  "  For  he  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  he  is."  Moreover, 
it  is  a  living  principle.     It  is  not  a  cold  precept,  but  is  vital  with  trust  and  confidence 

I.  The  prophetic  revelation.  It  is  very  wonderful,  and  very  distinct.  See  the 
succeeding  (ver.  14) :  "  Therefore  the  Lord  himself  shall  give  you  a  sign ;  Behold,  a 
virgin  shall  conceive,  and  bear  a  son,  and  shall  call  his  name  Immanuel."  \Vell,  there- 
fore, has  Isaiah  been  called  "  the  evangelical  prophet,"  seeing  that  we  have  in  his  words 
the  revelation  of  an  immactilate  Mes.-.iah  and  a  suffering  Messiah. 

II.  The  general  principle.  That  we  are  not  "  established  "  unless  we  believe  is  a 
principle,  not  only  of  particular  but  of  universal  application.  We  must  believe  in  each 
other  to  have  commerce  established.  Home  itself  is  never  secure  without  mutual  trust, 
and  there  can  be  no  established  character  in  religion  unless  we  have  that  faith  without 
which  it  is  impossible  to  please  God,  and  which  gives  vital  energy  to  all  other  graces. 

III.  The  absolute  condition.  "  If  ye  will  not  believe."  Here  is  the  responsibility 
of  the  soul.  And  doubtless  we  are  responsible  for  our  beliefs.  We  are  to  weigh,  to 
judge,  to  consider,  to  prove  aU  things.  "Judge,  I  pray  you,"  says  God  in  this  same 
I'ook  of  Isaiah  (ch.  v.  3),  "betwixt  me  and  my  vineyard,"  The  condition  must  be 
absolute.  It  is  not  a  threat;  it  is  a  statement  of  that  which  cannot  be  other  than  so^ 
If  I  do  not  believe  that  corn  will  grow,  I  shall  not  plant  it.  If  I  do  not  believe  that 
God  is  able  and  willing  to  save,  I  shall  not  be  amongst  those  who  believe  to  the  saving 
of  their  souls.  If  1  do  not  believe  that  spiritual  aid  will  be  given  to  perfect  my  graces, 
I  shall  not  pray  for  ib  "  If  ye  will  not  believe,  surely  ye  shall  not  be  esiablished."— 
\V.M.S. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — Tht  establishing  power  of  faith.    The  practical  force  of  this  prophetiQ 


CH.  VII.  I— 25.]        THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PliUPHET   ISAIAH  i:  ■? 

utterancft  is  found  in  tlie  final  words  of  it:  "If  ye  will  not  bc'iove,  snrrly  ye  shall  nut 
be  establistied  "  (ver.  9).  We  may  see  in  them  a  declaration  expressly  per$ona!. 
They  intimate  to  Ah  iz  that  if  he,  the  present  King  of  Judah,  does  not  put  hia  faith  in 
the  minister  and  iu  the  message  of  the  Lord,  his  kingdom  and  his  power  will  luffor 
loss.  1.  His  faith  was  sorely  tried.  "  His  heart  was  moved  as  the  treef  of  the  wood  by 
the  wind  "  when  he  heard  that  two  powerful  monarchs  were  oonfedente  against  him 
(vers.  1,2).  It  required  no  little  faith  to  accept,  without  reserve,  the  assurances  of  Isainh 
(vers.  4 — 9).  2.  But  he  had  solid  ground  on  which  to  build  his  hope.  The  history  oi 
Ilia  country  should  have  made  it  perfectly  practicable  to  believe  llmt,  whatever  the 
Lord  had  decided  upon,  all  the  hosts  of  heathendom  would  be  unable  to  withstand. 
3.  His  human  fears  proved  too  strong  for  hia  religious  convictions.  4.  The  prophe' 
warned  him  that  with  the  failure  of  his  faith  would  come  material  loss.  This  minatory 
prediction  was  only  too  painfully  fulfilled.  Elath,  a  port  on  the  Red  Sea,  was  lost  to 
the  kingdom  (2  Kinga  xvi.  6) ;  great  numbers  of  the  people  were  slaughtered  (2  Chron, 
xxviii.  0);  many  captives  were  carried  away  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  8);  Judah  becani 
tributary  to  Assyria  (2  Kings  xvi.  8,  9).  "  The  Lord  Irought  Judah  low  because 
of  Ahaz"  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  19).  He  was  not  established;  he  was  enfeebled  an.l 
humiliated. 

The  lesson  which  the  passage,  particularly  these  final  words,  conveys  to  us  is  this 
that  WHEN  FAITH  FAILS,  POWEB  DEPARTS;  that  faith  is  the  one  sustaining  power  whicli 
will  establish  us  in  the  spiritual  position  to  which  we  have  attained.  We  look,  therefore, 
at  this  hroad  principle  applicable  to  every  one.  1.  As  Christian  men  we  enjoy  ai, 
excellent  estate.  We  are  "kinga  and  priests  unto  God ; "  we  are  made  to  "sit  in 
heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus."  "  Now  are  we  the  sons  of  God,"  and  all  the  joys  and 
privileges  of  sonship  are  ours.  2.  But  our  position  is  threatened  by  powcifnl  »dvor- 
saries.  There  come  up  against  us  the  foes  of  our  race — worldly  allnreniints,  fleshly 
indulgences,  inciteinents  to  spiritual  pride  and  unbelief,  temptations  to  fall  into  selfish- 
ness or  into  untruthfulness,  etc.  3.  Only  a  living  faith  will  uphold  us  in  our  integrity. 
We  must  have  the  faith  which  (1)  enables  us  to  realize  the  nearness  of  the  living  God  .; 
(2)  makes  spiritual  realities  and  successes  seem  to  our  souls  the  great  things  they 
lire  ;  (3)  brings  near  to  our  hearts  the  future  world,  with  its  judgment  and  its  reward  ; 
(4)  calls  down  from  above,  by  believing  prayer.  Divine  direction  and  support.  Without 
this  living  faith,  we  may  expect  the  enemy  to  overcome  ub  ;  with  it,  we  may  hope  to 
be  established  in  our  high  and  blest  estate. — 0. 

Vers.  10 — 13. — Sin  and  duty  in  regard  to  "  signs.''  The  passage  ii  Interesting  for 
this  among  other  reasons,  that  Ahaz  is  charged  with  puilt  for  declining  that  course  the 
resort  to  which  became  the  national  sin  (1  Cor.  i.  22),  and  for  using  words  which  were 
afterwards  employed  by  the  Saviour  himself  in  repelling  the  attack  of  the  evil  one 
(Matt.  iv.  7).     We  are,  therefore,  reminded — 

I.  That  the  worth  ob  unwobthiness  of  an  action  depends  larqeli  on  its 
ATTENDANT  CONDITIONS.  The  Jcws  who  soujiht  a  sign  from  Chri.st  were  rebuRi.d  by 
him  lor  so  doing  (Matt.  xii.  38,  39).  Ahaz  is  reproved  for  not  asking  for  one  on  this 
occasion.  The  ciicumstances  of  the  two  cases  made  all  the  difference.  In  the  case  of 
the  Pharisees,  abundant  miraculous  evidence  had  already  been  granted,  and  they 
demanded  a  work  of  a  particular  kind  after  their  own  fancy  ;  in  the  case  of  Ahaz,  he 
deliberately  refused  the  special  privilege  which  God  offered  him.  That  which  is  right 
and  wise  under  certain  circumstances  may  be  wrong  and  foolish  under  others.  Many 
things  which  »r«  pnper  to  yftuth  are  improper  to  age,  and  vice  versa ;  language  which  is 
devcition  on  the  lips  of  the  half-enlightened  would  be  irreverence  in  the  mouth  of  the 
cliildren  of  privilege.  Clearly  instructed  by  God,  the  Israelites  were  simply  obedient 
and  courageous  when  they  expelled  the  Canaanites  from  the  country  and  occupied 
their  land,  but  an  invasion  of  another's  territory  and  expulsion  or  slaughter  of  its 
inhabitants  without  such  express  authority  from  above  would  be  a  crime  of  the  greatest 
magnitude;  etc. 

II.  That  wb  do  well  to  shrink  honestlt  and  earnestly  from  temptino  God. 
Honestly ;  for  an  insinoeie  profession  of  doing  so  is  of  no  account.  Ahaz  probably  used  this 
as  a  mere  pretext  with  which  to  cover  his  real  unwilliimness  to  have  the  will  of  GoA 
unmistakably  revealed.   And  earwstly ;  for  to  tempt  God  is  a  serious  sin  and  a  calami- 


138  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.       [ch.  vn.  1— 25. 

tous  mistake.  We  do  tempt  him  when  we  neglect  onr  duty  as  citizens  of  this  world 
or  as  travellers  to  eternity,  or  when  we  deliberately  run  great  risks,  whether  bodily 
or  spiritual,  unwarrantably  presuming  on  God's  interposing  power  or  inexhaustible 
grace. 

ni.  That  we  should  gratefullt  accept  thb  lower  as  well  Ag  the  higher 
INFLUENCES  WHICH  GoD  OFFERS  US.  A  sigu  such  as  Jehovah  offered  Ahaz  was  a 
privilege  of  a  lower  order  than  the  exhortation  of  his  servant  Isaiah.  A  miracle 
which  appeals  to  the  senses  and  the  imagination  is  not  so  high  and  pure  an  influence 
as  a  sacred  truth  which  appeals  to  the  conscience  and  the  reason.  Yet  it  had  its 
own  value,  and  was  not  to  be  disregarded  or  aeolined.  We  should  fear  God,  should 
exercise  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  should  serve  our  race,  first  and  most  because  it  is  our 
sacred  duty  so  to  do;  but  we  may  well  be  animated  and  impelled  by  other  and  less 
lofty  considerations — by  the  fear  of  offending  God,  by  the  hope  of  gaining  his  favour 
and  his  reward,  by  a  desire  to  win  the  gratitude  of  those  we  serve,  by  a  wish  to  pleae. 
those  to  whom  we  are  related.  The  superfine  purity  which  will  not  be  moved  by  any 
but  the  very  highest  considerations  does  not  suit  our  human  nature,  and  is  not  sanctioned 
in  the  Divine  Word. 

rv.  That  the  patience  op  a  long-suffbrino  God  mat  be  outworn  bt  cub 
PERVERSITY.  "  Will  ye  weary  my  God  also  ?  "  (ver.  13).  Much  is  said  in  Scripture  of 
the  patience  of  God.  He  is  "slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  mercy"  (Ps.  cxlv.  8).  We 
read  of  "  the  riches  of  his  forbearance  and  long-suffering  "  (Eom.  ii.  4).  And  they  who 
are  honestly  trying  to  please  and  serve  him  may  count  on  his  oonsiderateness,  though 
their  efforts  be  imperfect  and  their  mistakes  be  many.  But  they  who  pertinaciously 
refuse  his  yoke,  and  stubbornly  go  on  their  own  way  when  he  is  calling  them  to  walk 
in  his  paths,  may  find  that  it  is  only  too  possible  to  "  weary  him  also,"  and  to  bring 
down  irreparable  evil  on  their  souls.— 0. 

Ver.  14. — 2%«  presence  of  God.  We  naturally  ask  the  question — In  what  ways  is 
God  our  ["  Immanuel ; "  in  what  respect  is  he  one  of  whom  we  can  say  that  he  is 
"  God  with  us ; "  how  and  where  is  his  presence  to  be  found  and  to  be  felt  ?  There  arc. 
many  answers  to  this  question  ;  there  is — 

I.  _The  answer  of  sacred  poetry.  That  the  presence  of  God  is  seen  in  the  results 
of  Ms  Divine  handiwork,  in  the  foundations  and  pillars  of  the  earth,  in  the  "  meanest 
flower  that  blows,"  in  the  varied  forms  of  life ;  that  it  only  needs  a  true  imagination  to 
see  him  in  all  the  objects  and  scenes  of  his  creative  power;  that  "every  bush's  afire 
with  God,  but  only  he  who  sees  takes  off  his  shoes." 

II.  The  answer  of  philosophy.  That  his  presence  is  in  all-surrounding  nature,  in 
which  he  is  immanent ;  that  though  all  nature  does  not  include  Deity,  the  Divine 
power  is  present  in  all  things,  sustaining,  energizing,  renewing;  the  "laws  of  nature" 
are  the  regular  activities  of  God. 

III.  The  answer  of  natural  religion.  That  he  is  with  us  in  his  omnipresent 
and  observant  Spirit;  that  he  fills  immensity  with  his  presence,  being  everywhere  and 
observing  everything,  and  taking  notice  of  every  human  soul ;  that  the  Infinite  One  is 
he  who  cannot  be  absent  from  any  sphere  or  be  ignorant  of  any  action. 

IV.  The  answer  of  the  earlier  revelation.  That  his  presence  is  in  his  over- 
ruling providence  ;  that  God  is  with  us,  not  only  "  besetting  us  behind  and  before," 
not  only  "understanding  our  thought  afar  off,"  but  also  "laying  his  hand  upon  us," 
directing  our  course,  ordering  our  steps  (Ps.  xxxvli.  23),  making  plain  our  path  before 
our  fact,  causing  «U  things  to  work  together  for  our  good,  defending  us  in  danger, 
deliveriuf  us  from  trouble,  establishing  us  In  life  and  strength  and  joy  (see  Gen. 
xxxlx.  2 ;  1  Sam.  iil.  19 ;  xviii.  12  ;  2  Kings  xviii.  7 ;  Matt,  xiviii.  20). 

V.  Th«  answer  of  thb  later  bbvblation.  That  his  presence  was  in  his  Divine 
Son.  The  time  came  when  the  words  of  the  text  proved  to  have  indeed  "  a  sprin^ng 
and  germinant  fulfilment ; "  for  a  virgin  did  conceive,  and  bring  forth  a  Son,  and  he  was 
the  "Immanuel"  of  the  human  race,  God  with  us — that  One  who  dwelt  amongst  us, 
and  could  say,  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  They  who  walked  with 
him^  and  watched  his  life,  and  who  understood  and  appreciated  him,  recognized  the 
S|iirit,  the  character,  the  life,  of  God  himself.  In  his  mind  were  the  thot^hts,  in  his 
words  the  truth,  in  his  deeds  the  principles,  in  his  death  the  love,  in  his  mission  the 


Ott.  vn.  1— 25.]       THE  BOOK   OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  139 

purpose,  of  Grod.     When  "Jesus  was  here  among  men,"  God  was  with  us  as  never 
Defore,  as  never  since. 

VI.  The  answer  of  our  own  conbciousn'ess.  That  his  presence  is  in  and  through 
\i$  Roly  Spirit.  God  is  with  us  because  in  us ;  present,  therafore,  in  the  deepest,  truest, 
most  potent,  and  influential  of  all  ways  and  forms ;  in  us,  enlightening  our  minds, 
subduing  our  wills,  enlarging  our  hearts,  uplifting  our  souls,  strengthening  and  sancti- 
fying our  spiritual  nature.  Then,  indeed,  is  he  neart'st  to  us  when  he  comes  unto 
us  and  makes  his  abode  with  us,  and  thus  "  dwells  in  us  and  we  in  him."  Out 
duty,  which  is  our  privilege,  is  (1)  to  realize,  increasingly,  the  nearness  of  the  living 
God ;  (2)  to  rejoice,  practically,  in  the  coming  of  God  to  man  in  the  presence  of  the 
▼irgin-born  Immanuel ;  (3)  to  gain,  by  believing  prayer,  the  presence  of  the  Divine 
Spirit  in  the  sanctuary  of  our  own  soAl. — C. 

Vers.  17 — 25. — Divine  retribution.  The  reference  of  these  verses  is  clearly  national ; 
nevertheless  they  may  be  pointed  so  as  to  bear  upon  individual  men  ;  for  we  may  be 
sure  tliat  it  is  on  the  same  principles  on  which  God  governs  communities  that  he  rules 
the  heart  and  life  of  each  one  of  his  subjects.  We  gather  concerning  Divine  retri- 
bution— 

I.  That  it  mat  be  wrought  bt  vauious  instrumentatjties.  1.  Sometimes  by 
nnconsci'ius  instruments.  (1)  It  maybe,  as  here,  by  men  acting  blindly.  Egypt  and 
Assyria  would  be  wholly  unaware  that  they  were  employed  by  God  to  do  his  punitive 
work.  It  often  hapjiens  that  men  suppose  themselves  to  be  simply  seeking  their  own 
ends  when  they  are  re^illy  fulfilling  the  purpose  of  the  Most  High.  (2)  Or  it  more  fre- 
quently is  by  the  regular  action  of  pliysical  or  social  laws.  2.  Sometimes  by  conscious 
agents.  As  when  the  parent  utters  his  strong  displeasure  in  the  Name  of  the  heavenly 
Father,  or  the  Church  passes  its  sentence  of  reproach  or  exclusion  in  the  Name  of  the 
Divine  Master. 

II.  That  it  may  take  one  ob  mobe  of  tabious  foems.  Retribution  may  assume 
the  form  of:  1.  Dimvnviion.  (Vers.  21 — 23.)  All  diminution  is  not  directly  caused  by 
sin,  but  sin  always  tends  to  despoil  and  to  diminish.  The  result  of  doing  wrong  is  to 
come  down  from  the  higher  estate  to  the  lower,  from  power  to  feebleness,  from 
eminence  to  obscurity,  from  influence  to  nothingness.  2.  Dishonour.  "It  shall  also 
consume  the  beaid"  (ver.  20).  When  men  have  long  persisted  in  iblly  and  in  trans- 
gression they  become  the  mark  of  general  dishonour.  From  qualified  respect  down, 
through  all  stages  of  ill  opinion,  to  absolute  aversion  and  contempt,  does  sin  conduct 
Its  victims.  Sin  may  Starr  in  lofty  defiance,  but  it  ends  in  lowest  shame.  3.  Degra^ 
dation.  (Vers.  24,  25.)  The  country  that,  was  once  cultivated  by  the  hand  of  skilful 
diligence  is  left  to  yield  the  wretched  and  useless  crop  of  "  briers  and  thorns."  The 
mind  that  once  produced  noble  thoughts  now  yields  guilty  imajjinntions ;  the  heart 
that  was  once  full  of  holy  love  is  now  crowded  with  unworthy  passions ;  the  spirit 
that  once  soared  heavenward  with  lofty  hopes  now  circles  round  ignoble  aims  and 
ambitions  that  are  of  earth  and  sense ;  the  life  which  once  brought  forth  all  honourable 
and  admirable  activities  has  nothing  to  offer  now  but  selfish  schemes  or  even  deeds  of 
darkness. — 0. 

Vers.  1,  2. — National  calamity  with  Ood  and  without  Qod.  The  historical  circum- 
stances connected  with  this  and  the  following  two  chapters  throw  light  on  the  object 
and  meaning  of  the  prophecy.  At  the  close  ol  Jutham's  reign,  both  the  neighbouring 
nations  of  Israel  and  of  Syria  invaded  the  country  of  Judah,  wasting  and  desolating  it. 
Now.  in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Ahaz,  they  agreed  to  unite  their  forces,  and  so 
they  imped  to  take  even  the  chief  city,  dethrone  the  reigning  king,  and  partition  the 
land  between  them.  News  of  this  confederacy  reached  Ahaz,  and  produced  the 
utmost  consternation  and  bewilderment  both  in  him  and  in  the  people  of  Jerusalem. 
Hurried  efforts  were  made  to  foitiiy  the  citv,  and  especially  to  secure  the  water-stores, 
on  which  their  ability  to  stand  a  siege  so  directly  depe-ded.  Plans  were  also  formed 
to  secure  the  help  of  the  King  of  Assyria,  though  the  price  of  such  help  would  too 
surely  be  the  loss  of  national  independence,  and  the  payment  of  tribute  to  Assyria. 
Ia  those  degenerate  days  few  people  even  thought  of  seeking  help  from  Jehovah,  thu 
mighty  God  of  their  fathers.    While  busy,  inspecting  the  waterworks,  and  probably 


ttO  THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.         [cH- vn.  1— 25. 

filled  with  new  anxiety  on  finding  them  neglected  and  out  of  repair,  Ahaz  sees  the 
prophet  of  Jehovah  approach.  Isaiali's  message  is  full  of  mercy  and  encouragement. 
He  would  quiet  the  nnreasnning  and  imreasonahle  fears  of  the  king;  he  speaks 
dlitshtingly  of  Bezin  and  Pebah,  as  only  two  tails  of  smoking  firebrands,  whose 
strength  is  almost  spent ;  they  can  only  smoke,  not  blaze,  and  their  kingdoms  are 
hasting  to  decay.  He  bids  the  king  not  to  think  for  a  moment  of  leaning  on  Assyria, 
but  to  trust  in  the  living  ( iod.  He  graciously  offers,  in  God's  Name,  a  sign  for  the 
confirming  of  his  faith,  bidding  Ahaz  even  choose  such  a  one  as  he  felt  would  con- 
vince him.  The  king  stubbornly  refuses ;  and  then  Isaiah  gives  one,  after  sternly 
rebuking  the  false  humility  of  the  king.  The  sign  is  a  figurative  and  poetical  assur- 
ance that,  within  some  three  or  four  years,  the  power  of  his  [iresent  enemies  would  be 
utterly  broken.  And  then  mercy  passes  into  judgment,  and  the  pro))het  sternly  reveals 
the  consequences  that  will  follow  any  leaning  U|jon  Assyria.  In  the  text  we  h^ve  a 
state  of  public  affairs  that  might  well  causu  alarm,  and  we  dwell  on  the  spirit  in  which 
times  of  national  peril  may  and  should  be  met. 

L  National  calamit?  without  thought  of  God  the  Overruleb.  Just  this 
we  have  in  the  historical  connection  of  the  text.  Viewed  politically,  there  weie  grave 
and  perilous  complications.  Assyria  was  pushing  its  way  towards  the  Mediturninean. 
Syria  and  Israel  were  in  its  way.  Instead  of  resisting  their  more  serious  Eastern  foe, 
ihey  confederated  to  injure  the  small  country  of  Judah,  which  blocked  their  way 
southwards  towards  Egypt.  Bezin  had  seized  Elath,  Judah's  great  commeicial  pjirt 
on  the  Bed  Sea,  and  Pekah  had  overrun  the  territory  of  Judah.  There  was  a  general 
panic.  King  and  people  alike  asked — How  could  they  resist  this  combination  of  tlie 
neighbouring  countries  against  them  ?  A  great  fear  possesseil  the  king,  and  drove  him 
to  the  most  impolitic  action  he  could  possibly  take.  Having  no  si  nse  of  reliance  on 
God,  consciously  severed  by  his  wilfulness  from  God,  he  sought  alliance  with  Assyria, 
and  brought  ruin  on  himself  and  his  neighbour-foes.  The  figure  of  the  trees  waving 
tfc  and  fro  confusedly  in  the  wind,  is  expressive  of  the  man  who  is  not  stayed  on  God, 
but  left  to  the  uncertainties  of  a  judgment  based  only  on  circumstances. 

II.  National  calamity  with  the  thought  or  God  the  0\errulbb.  Tit?  is 
the  contrast  suggested  in  the  passage.  If  Ahaz  had  been  a  God-fearing  man,  how 
differently  he  wuukl  have  looked  on  these  circumstances  !  If  he  had  been  a  David,  or 
a  Jehoshaphat,  or  a  Hezekiah,  a  man  with  the  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes,  he  would 
have  met  the  perilous  conditions  with  calmness,  and  seen  in  them  an  occasion  for  (1) 
s|>ecial  prayer;  (2)  renewed  dependence;  (3)  and  the  testing  of  the  sincerity  of  his 
trust ;  (4)  also  a  call  to  watching  for  the  Divine  will ;  (5)  and  the  requirement  to  set 
himself  in  an  attitude  of  obedience,  ready  at  once,  and  heartily,  to  follow  the  Divine 
lead.  Apply  to  modern  complexities  of  party  politics  and  international  complicationB, 
as  well  as  to  times  of  national  calamity,  by  disease,  or  by  depressed  trade.  Show 
what  a  vantase-ground  he  occupies  who  believes  in  God  as  the  God  of  nations,  looks 
for  his  providential  rulings  and  overrulings,  and  knows  that  he  "  makes  the  wrath  of 
man  praise  him,  and  restrains  the  remainder  of  that  wrath."  Show  how  quiet  a  nation 
may  be  when  it  knows  that  national  polity  is  directed  in  the  fear  of  him  who  must  be 
called  the  "  God  of  the  whole  earth."— B.  T. 

Ver.  7. — Man  proposes,  God  disposes.  Becalling  the  scheme  at  which  Bezin  and 
Pekah  had  been  so  busy,  arranging  everything  so  cleverly,  and  makina;  so  sure  of  a 
speedy  and  triumphant  success,  Jehovah,  sovereign  Buler  and  Judge,  looks  from  above 
u|X)n  it  all,  and  says  of  it,  "It  shall  not  stand,  neither  shall'it  be."  "  The  plan  shall 
not  even  take  practical  shape,  much  less  would  it  achieve  a  permanent  success."  "  They 
should  neither  of  tliem,  Syria  nor  Israel,  enlarge  their  domiuions  nor  push  their  con- 
quests any  further;  tbey  shall  be  made  to  know  their  own;  their  bounds  are  axed, 
and  tbey  shall  not  pass  them"  (Matthew  Henry). 

I.  The  limits  of  man's  fbbbdom.  He  is  (1)  fre«  to  think;  (2)  free  to  judge;  (3) 
free  to  plan.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  man  has  dominion  over  the  world  in  which  he  is 
set,  and  over  the  circumstances  in  which  he  is  placed.  God,  in  a  sense,  put  man,  separate 
from  himself,  in  the  garden  of  this  world,  and  stands  aloof  to  see  what  he  will  do. 
Man  has  the  trust  of  (1)  intelligence,  so  that  he  may  estimate  things  and  the  relations 
of  things;  (2)  free-will,  w>  that  he  may  «hoo«e  Itli  course  of  action.    But  it  is  limited 


IH.  viL  ]— 25.]        THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  141 

tnf«2%e«ce— limited  (a)  by  bra;in-ciipacity;  (6)  educational  opportunity;  (c)  conditions 
of  health ;  (d)  surrounding  prejudices ;  (e)  measures  and  degrees  of  Divine  revelation. 
And  it  is  carefully  ciiouuisciibed  free-uill — graciously  limited  because  man's  decisions 
are  constantly  made  upon  (a)  imperfect  knowledge,  and  (6)  ujiun  impiilses  of  biassed 
feeling.  The  will  of  ninn  is  also  limited  by  the  condition  of  its  aicordance  with  the 
supremo  will  of  God.  Man  can  plan,  purpose,  and  propose;  but  there  he  must  stop 
until  he  can  gain  Divine  permission  to  curry  out  his  plans.  II  he  dares  to  force  his 
plans  into  action  against  God,  he  will  surely  find  that  he  does  but  run  "  upon  the 
bosses  of  Jehovah's  buckler."     Who  hath  ever  resisted  God  and  prospered  ? 

U.  The  illimitable  character  of  God's  control.  There  is  the  flmiest  and 
most  peremptory  tone  in  ihis  declaration,  "It  shall  not  staiid."  Affirniint;  his  authority 
over  all  nations,  the  Loid  uf  hosts  says,  "  Blessed  he  Kgypt  my  people,  and  Ass,\  ria  the 
work  of  my  hands,  and  Israel  mine  inheritance  "(ch.  xix.  25).  God  controls  (1)  the 
minds  that  plan;  (2)  the  bodies  that  exccnie;  (3)  the  spheres  and  ciicunistances  in 
which  the  plan  is  to  be  worked.  Watching  everythin<r,  God  has  the  arresting  hand, 
and  can  say,  "  Thus  far  shalt  thou  go,  and  no  further." — R.  T. 

Ver.  9. — Tim  faith-condition.  "If  ye  have  no  faith,  verily  ye  shall  not  have  con- 
tinuance "  (Choyne's  translation).  "  if  ye  hold  not  fast,  verily  ye  shall  not  stand  fast." 
See  the  expression  illustrated  in  Jehnshaphat,  when  going  out  to  meet  the  army  of  tlie 
Moabites  and  Ammonites  (2  Ohrou.  xx.  20).  Ilabakkuk'  gives  the  sanie  sentiment 
in  his  familiar  expression,  "  The  just  shall  live  by  his  faith."  Faith  in  him  and  in 
his  Word  is  the  une  universal  com  iiion  that  God  demands,  and  righteously  demiiiids, 
in  view  (1)  of  what  he  is  ;  (i^)  of  what  he  is  in  relation  to  us  ;  and  (3)  of  what  he  has 
already  done  for  his  people,  in  the  experience  of  v^hich  we  have  shared.  God's  law  lor 
creatnres  dependent  on  him  is,  "Trust  me."  God's  grace  for  his  creatures  is, 
"Response  to  trust."  lie  unfulds  his  best  blessings  to  those  who  can  both  trust  and 
hope  in  him.  The  demand  for  faith,  as  the  condition  ot  receiving  Divine  blessings, 
may  be  traced  in  the  Divine  dealings  with  men  through  all  the  ages  and  dispensations. 

I.  God  required  faith  in  the  patriarchs.  Enoch  was  translated  as  a  response 
to  a  life  of  faith ;  Noah  was  saved  from  the  flood  because  he  believed  ;  Abraham's 
faith  was  ''  counted  for  righteousness."  They  all  "  died  in  faith,"  The  glory  on  their 
lives  is  the  shining  of  God's  accoiitance  given  to  uk  n  of  faith. 

II.  God  REQDiHED  faith  is  the  Israelites.  For  forty  years  he  was  teaching 
them  the  trust-lessun.  And  if  the  Divine  reproaches  and  reprovals  and  chastisements 
could  be  gathered  up  into  a  sentence,  they  woidd  read  thus  :  "  You  will  not  trust  me 
wholly.''  "The  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  How  long  will  this  people  despise  me?  and  how 
long  will  they  not  believe,  for  all  the  signs  which  I  have  showed  among  them  ?  "  (Numb. 
xiv.  11).     Those  Israelites  "  could  not  enter  in  because  of  their  unbelief "  (Ileb.  iii.  19). 

III.  God  required  faith  in  the  time  op  the  kings.  This  was  the  one  demand 
made  in  God's  I>Iame  by  the  projihets  ;  and  striking  illustrative  incidents  may  be  found 
in  the  mission  of  Elijah,  and  in  the  reigns  <if  Asa,  Jehoshajjhat,  and  Uezekiah. 

IV.  God  required  taith  when'  speaking  to  mkn  through  Christ.  Illustrate 
(i)  his  effort  to  secure  faith  in  sulforors  before  he  healed  them  ;  and  (2)  his  reproaches  of 
his  disciples,  again  and  again  saying  to  them,  "  0  ye  of  little  faith ! "  "  How  is  it  that 
ye  have  no  faith?"  Impress  that  this  is  God's  necessary  condition  still,  and  for  us. 
Whence  proceed  sterility  and  unfiuitfulm  ss  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  and  inefficiency 
to  good  works,  and  the  life  of  righteousnesg?  The  answer  is — We  have  not  "faith, 
even  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed." — R.  T. 

Ver.  12. — True  and  false  humility.  We  are  to  understand  that  Ahaz  had  already 
made  up  his  mind  to  resort  to  Assyria  for  help;  probably  he  had  even  already  sent  his 
ambassadors  to  Tiglath-Pileser,  and  ho  would  not  be  deterred  Irom  his  purpose  by  any 
promise  or  threatening  of  Jehovah's.  But  he  dissembled,  and  tried  to  get  out  of  his 
d.lTiculty  by  hypocritically  pretending  that  he  was  deterred  from  asking  a  sign  by  a 
religious  fear  of  temi'ting  the  Lord.  His  words  sound  as  if  ho"  were  hunible  and 
reverent ;  his  heart  was  strong  in  its  selt-willed  purposes.  lie  says,  "  Neither  will  I 
tempt  the  Lord,"  as  if  it  could  be  a  tempting  of  God  to  do  that  which  God  directed 
and  invited  him  to  do.     Remember  that,  in  such  passages  as  this,  the  word  "  tempt " 


142  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PKOPHET   ISAIAH.         [oh.  vu.  1—25, 

means,  "  Put  God  to  the  test,  as  if  you  doubted  him."  Dr,  Kay,  in  '  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary,' says,  "  In  his  estraucement  uf  lieart  Ahaz  had  coiae  to  look  on  God  as  his 
enemy,  as  a  dangerous  person  who  was  thwarting  him  in  his  most  cherished  plans,  and 
from  whom,  therefore,  it  were  best  to  stand  entirely  aloof.  If  he  should  ask  a  sign 
and  it  were  to  be  granted  him,  would  he  not  be  bound  by  his  own  act  and  deed  to 
confess  the  greatness  of  his  past  sins,  to  give  up  his  politic  plans  for  the  future,  ta 
submit  to  the  bonds  and  fetters  of  the  old  cycle  of  religious  teaching  from  which  he 
had  shaken  himself  free  ?  "  Can  we  find  some  searching  test  by  which  true  humility 
can  be  distinguished  from  false  ?  (It  is  assumed  that  humility  is  explained  and  enforced 
as  the  proper  attitude  for  man  to  take,  and  spirit  for  man  to  cherish,  in  the  presence 
of  God.) 

I.  Teub  humility  bubmits  and  obeys.  If  Ahaz  had  been  truly  humble,  he  would 
have  responded  at  once  to  the  Divine  invitation.  Illustrate  from  Moses  shrinking  from 
obedience  to  the  commands  which  God  gave  him.  True  humility  will  always  say, 
" If  God  has  called  me  to  do  anything,  I  must  do  it;  I  can  do  it,  and  I  may  be  quite 
sure  his  grace  will  be  with  me  for  the  doing."    True  humility  is  bold  unto  obedience. 

II.  False  humility  submits,  but  dobs  not  obey.  This  is  precisely  the  attitude 
of  Ahaz.  He  submits ;  he  takes  the  humble  posture ;  he  speaks  the  humble  words ; 
but  he  does  not  obey.  His  humility  is  but  hypocrisy.  Bishop  Hall  says,  "  Art 
imitates  nature,  and  the  nearer  it  comes  to  nature  in  its  effects,  it  is  the  more  excellent. 
Grace  is  the  new  nature  of  a  Christian,  and  hypocrisy  that  art  that  counterfeits  it ;  and 
the  more  exquisite  it  is  in  imitation  it  is  the  more  plausible  to  men,  but  the  more 
abominable  to  God.  It  may  frame  a  spiritual  man  in  image  so  to  the  life  that  not  only 
others,  but  even  the  hypocrite  himself,  may  admire  it,  and,  favouring  his  own  artifice, 
may  be  deceived  so  far  as  to  say  and  to"  think  it  lives,  and  fall  in  love  with  it ;  but  he 
is  no  less  abhorred  by  the  Searcher  of  hearts  than  pleasing  to  himself."  And  Matthew 
Henry  says,  "  A  secret  disaffection  to  God  is  often  disguised  with  the  specious  colours 
of  respect  to  him ;  and  those  who  are  resolved  that  they  will  not  trust  God  yet  pretend 
that  they  will  not  tempt  him."  It  may  be  impressed  that  the  truly  humble  man  is 
more  jealous  of  God's  honour  than  of  his  own,  and  therefore  promptly  submits  and 
obeys ;  but  the  man  who  is  not  really  humble  is  anxious  about  his  own  honour,  and 
only  makes  a  show  of  being  jealous  of  God's.  Ahaz  needed  this  counsel,  and  so  do  we : 
"  Humble  yourselves  therefore  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  that  he  may  exalt  you 
in  due  time."  And  the  greatest  test  of  this  great  grace  is — Does  it  lead  its  possessor  to 
follow  and  obey  ?— R.  T. 

Vers.  14 — 16. — The  nature  of  the  Messianic  prophecies.  This  being  the  first  in  the 
Book  of  Isaiah  recognized  as  Messianic,  the  general  subject  may  be  illustrated  in  con- 
nection with  it.  Isaiah  here  gives  a  sign.  Looking  upon  some  woman  in  the  king's 
presence  who  at  the  time  was  a  virgin,  he,  in  effect,  says,  "You  shall  know  that 
Jehovah  is  the  living  God,  and  the  all-sufficient  Helper  of  his  people,  by  this. — Before 
this  woman  can  bear  a  son,  and  that  son  grow  old  enough  to  know  good  from  evil, 
your  land  shall  be  delivered,  and  your  enemies  overthrown."  Many  Christian  inter- 
preters see  in  this  a  direct  reference  to  Messiah,  as  the  Virgin's  Son ;  a  reference  which 
makes  them  quite  indifferent  to  the  connection  of  the  passage  with  events  then  tran- 
spiring. There  are  some  cases  in  which  we  must  admit  that  the  prediction  almost 
wholly  concerns  the  Messiah.  It  is  nearly  impossible  to  exhaust  cb.  liii.,  for  instance, 
by  any  local  and  historical  references.  But  in  most  cases  we  shall  find  that  the 
Messianic  meaning  of  the  passage  is  its  second  reference,  its  inner  and  less  evident 
teaching.  The  words  immediately  relate  to  some  existing  condition  or  national  pros- 
pects, and  through  these  they  have  to  reveal  the  higher  truth.  We  ought  not  to  be 
surprised  at  this ;  we  should  rather  expect  it,  as  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  idea  of 
revelation  to  the  Jews.  Their  history  was  a  series  of  deliverances  and  redemptions; 
a  succession  of  types  of  the  coming  spiiitual  redemption.  Their  religion  was  a  set  of 
complicated  signs,  all  more  or  less"  keeping  up  the  expectation  of  him  who  was  to  come. 
What,  then,  could  be  more  natural  and  proper  than  that  the  prophecies  snould  do, 
what  the  history  and  the  religion  had  before  done — ^bear  within  their  external  form  a 
deeper  meaning,  and  help  to  lift  the  soul  of  the  nation  on  towards  its  great  glory,  the 
coming,  as  a  member  of  the  Isaiah  race,  of  the  long-promised  "  Seed  of  the  woman  * 


OH.  viL  1— 25.]        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROrHET  ISAIAH.  143 

who  should  "bruise  the  serpent's  head"?  The  general  fact  that  many  of  the  prophecies 
do  refer  to  the  life  and  times  of  Christ  cannot  reasonably  he  doubted ;  but  difficulties 
will  be  found  in  the  treatment  of  each  particular  case.  The  language  must  be  carefully 
weighed,  the  figures  skilfully  considered,  and  the  connections  adequately  explained,  er« 
any  decision  can  be  arrived  at.  We  illustrate  the  difficulties  by  considering  the  very 
perplexing  passage  now  before  us. 

I.  The  prophet  gives  a  sign  by  renewing  the  promise  of  deliverance,  and  connecting 
it  with  the  birth  of  a  child,  whose  significant  name  is  made  a  symbol  of  the  Divin* 
"Hiterposition,  and  his  growth  a  measure  of  the  subsequent  events.  Instead  of  saying 
that  God  would  be  present  to  deliver  them,  he  says  that  the  child  shall  be  called 
'  Immanuel,'  God  with  us.  Instead  of  mentioning  a  term  of  years,  ho  says,  '  Before 
the  child  is  able  to  distinguish  between  good  and  evil.'  Instead  of  saying  that  until 
that  time  the  land  shall  lie  waste,  he  represents  the  child  as  eating  curds  and  honey, 
spontaneous  products,  heie  put  in  opposition  to  the  fruits  of  civilization.  In  a  figura- 
tive manner,  and  usini;  the  large  vague  figures  and  metaphors  characteristic  of  pi-ophetio 
writing,  Isaiah  asserts  that  within  some  three  or  lour  years  their  deliverance  would  be 
effected. 

II.  But  the  question  which  is  found  so  difficult  to  answer  is  this — Of  what  child  does 
the  prophet  here  speak?  One  class  of  writers  suggest  a  cliild  born  in  the  ordinary 
course  of  nature,  and  in  Isaiah's  days.  Some  say  it  was  Hezi;kiah ;  others  a  younger 
son  of  Ahaz,  by  a  second  marriage ;  others  refer  the  passage  to  the  birth  of  the  prophet's 
own  son,' by  a  person  then  present,  wlio  is  afterwards  called  "the  prophetess."  Another 
class  of  writers  affirm  that  intentional  reference  is  made  to  two  distinct  children,  and 
two  births — that  of  Christ,  as  Immanuel,  and  that  of  Shear-Jashub,  the  son  of  Isaiah; 
and  so  a  double  meaning  was  given  to  the  passage.  Yet  another  class  of  writers  refer 
these  three  verses  directly  and  exclusively  to  the  Messiah.  One  of  this  class  says, 
"The  passage  describes  the  actual  desolations  of  the  early  period  of  Christ's  life."  Another 
skilfully  paraphrases  one  of  the  sentences  thus :  "  Before  the  Messiah,  if  he  were  horn 
now,  could  know  to  distinguish  between  good  and  evil."  And  one  suggests  that  Isaiah 
had  a  prophet's  vision  of  the  birth  of  Messiah,  and  so  spoke  of  it  as  though  taking 
place  then. 

UI.  The  conclusion  of  a  sober  and  careful  examination  of  this,  and  other  Bo-called 
Messianic  prophecies,  will  probably  be  that  the  sign  or  the  figure  always  relates,  more  or 
less  distinctly,  to  passing  events  and  passing  interests;  but  that  no  local  associations 
can  exhaust  their  meaning  and  mission.  The  spiritually  minded  will  always  discern 
more  in  the  Bible  than  appears  to  tho'se  who  treat  it  only  as  a  common  book.  The 
Spirit,  who  is  given  to  us,  "  searcheth  all  things,"  even  the  deep  things  of  God,  the 
hidden  references  of  his  revelation. — B.  T. 

Ver.  14. — 2%e  Immanuel- Child.  It  is  one  of  the  most  Important  facts  concerning  the 
manifestation  of  Christ,  that  he  was  "  born  of  a  virgin,"  or,  as  the  "  Te  Deum  "  expresses 
it,  "  He  did  not  abhor  the  Virgin's  womb."     We  dwell  on  two  points. 

I.  In  the  Virgin's,  Child  lies  hid  the  MrsTBBT  of  the  Inoabnation.  Isaiah  could 
have  had  but  faint  and  shadowy  glimpses  of  those  deeper  meanings  which  we  can  find 
in  his  words.  Reading  his  prophecy  in  the  light  of  its  fulfilment  in  the  wonderful 
beginnings  of  Christianity,  we  can  tell  of  a  virgin  unto  whom  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
came,  saying,  "The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee,  and  the  power  of  the  Highest 
shall  overshadow  thee  :  therefore  also  that  holy  thing  which  shall  be  born  of  th>e  shall 
be  called  the  Son  of  God."  That  was  the  anupimcement  of  the  coming  of  the  one  only 
true  virgin's  Child.  It  is  surely  a  surprising  thing  that  we  make  so  much  of  the  great 
events  ot  Christ's  life,  and  dwell  with  so  much  interest  upon  the  circumstances  of  his 
death,  and  yet  pay  such  comparatively  slight  attention  to  the  original  mystery,  the  wonder 
of  his  coming  to  earth  at  all,  the  marvel  of  the  woman-born  God.  The  Incarnation  ii 
the  mystery  of  mysteries,  and  he  who  has  received  right  impressions  concerning  it  will 
find  no  further  mysteries  in  our  Redeemer's  lift  or  death  over  which  he  will  need  to 
stumble.  Men  say — Can  there  be  such  things  as  miracles?  Is  there  not  an  antecedent 
improbability  that  the  order  of  nature,  as  we  know  it,  should  ever  be  changed?  To 
receive  the  record  of  Christ's  birth  of  a  virgin-mother  is  to  settle  the  whole  question  ot 
the  miraculous.    The  Incarnation  is  put  before  us  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  gospel 


144  THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PIIOPIIET   ISAIAH.        [cu.  vu.  1— 25 


history;  it  is  the  vestibule  of  the  temple  of  the  Christ.  He  who  can  venture  past  that 
entrance-hall  will  find  no  grander  mystery  in  any  of  the  courts  or  holy  places.  That 
Incarnaiion  is  so  distinct  from  tlie  ordinary  working  of  human  laws,  so  manifestly  the 
operation,  in  the  human  sphere,  of  higher  and  Divine  laws,  that  he  who  can  receive 
Christ  as  i he  Child  of  the  virgin-mother  and  the  Divine  Father,  will  find  no  mijacle 
wrought  during  our  Lord's  life  raise  any  disturbing  doubts.  Tlie  idea  of  inc:iniatioD 
is  not,  indeed,  peculiar  to  Christianity.  It  is  found  in  other  religions,  e.sijccially  in 
those  of  Iniiia  and  China.  But  the  contrast  thoy  present  is  most  significant.  In  other 
religions  the  incarnation  is  transient;  it  is  more  like  the  angeluphanics  of  tlie  Old 
'I'estanient  times,  than  like  the  living  Mao,  Christ  Jesiis,  of  the  New  Testament.  Theirs 
is  orjly  into  the  ap|)earance  of  a  man  ;  tliis  is  into  tlie  reality  of  human  flesh.  Tlieirs  is 
usually  into  some  monstrous  form  of  man  or  beast;  this  is  into  the  simple  but  perfect 
fiirm  of  a  true  manliood.  Our  faith  is  asked  for  the  incarnate  God.  Born  in  accordance 
»ith  human  times ;  coming  into  the  world  as  every  member  of  the  race  must  come ; 
nourished  for  months  with  a  mother's  own  life.  At  once  Man  and  God :  born  of  the 
earth,  earthy;  born  of  heaven,  heavenly  and  Divine.  Deity  in  the  dress  of  tlie  human 
tiesh ;  the  Creator  become  a  creature ;  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  in  the  form  of  a 
servant.  Infinity  pressed  into  the  hour  of  a  mortal  life.  Immortality  submitting  to 
die.  A  babe,  yet  a  King.  An  infant,  yet  a  God.  He  who  was  from  everlasting  con- 
sentin;^  to  begin  in  time.  That  being  the  awfiil  mystery  of,  the  Christ,  it  is  no  longer 
strange  that  he  should  heal  diseases,  feed  multitudes,  still  the  raging  seas,  and  waken 
the  slumbering  dead;  all  difficulties  begin  to  fade  before  us  when  we  can  say,  "This 
was  the  Son  of  God." 

II.  In  the  name,  Imhancel,  lies  hid  the  mystekt  of  the  eedemption.  If  God 
is  v/ith  his  creatures,  it  can  only  be  to  bless  and  save  them,  to  deliver  them  from  evil, 
to  bring  thmi  into  full  unity  with  himself,  to  cstahlish  them  in  all  good.  If  God,  who 
is  love,  is  with  his  sinful,  rebellious,  self-willed  children,  it  can  only  be  that  he  may 
deliver  them  from  the  consequences  of  their  transgressions,  and  recover  them  from  the  . 
degradation  of  iheir  sinl'iilness.  There  is  light  and  hope  for  humanity  in  this  great 
name;  the  name  by  which  prophecy  pointed  to  him  who  should  come;  the  name  by 
which  he  was  called  when  he  came;  the  name  which  fits  iu'with  Jesus.  The  full 
name  is  Imnianuel-Jehoahua — "  God  with  us,  saving  us  from  our  sins." — It.  T. 

Ver.  16. — The  culture  of  conscience.  "  Before  the  child  shall  know  to  refuse  the  evil, 
and  choose  the  good."  Some  take  this  expression  as  referring  to  pleasant  or  unpleasant 
food ;  but  it  probably  is  used  in  a  general  moral  sense.  Compare  the  tree  of  the  know- 
ledge of  pood  and  evil,  in  Gen.  ii.  9;  iii.  5.  For  the  expression  as  used  in  refeionce  to 
children,  see  Deut.  i.  39.  Isaiah  evidently  intends,  by  a  figure  of  speech,  to  indicate  two 
cjr  three  years,  the  time  when  a  child  may  be  regarded  as  getting  ont  of  his  infancy  u) 
ignorance  and  innocence.  Without  discussing  philosophically  the  nature  of  conscience, 
or  the  sense  in  which  man  has  innate  ileas,  and  keeping  quite  within  the  sphere  ol 
observation  and  experituce  in  family  life,  we  may  say,  with  Reid,  "  Conscience,  like  all 
other  fiowers,  comes  to  maturity  by  insensible  degrees,  and  may  be  more  aided  in  its 
strength  and  vigour  by  proper  culture."  The  following  line  of  thought  is  given  barelj; 
and  sug_'esnvely,  because  its  detailed  treatment  must  depend  on  the  philosophical  and 
theological  standpoint  of  the  preacher. 

I.  We  BEoi.N  LIFE  WITH  DESIRES.  As  soon  as  Eve  was  made  she  looked  longingly 
on  the  beautiful  Iruits  of  the  garden.  The  infants  are  crying  for  something,  if  it  be 
only  the  light.  Man  wants.  Ue  is  not  sufficient  to  himself.  And  the  wants  are  ever 
growing. 

II.  We  find  the  supply  of  some  desires  brings  pleasure,  and  of  some  brings  pain. 
So  we  begin  to  distinguish  things  by  their  attendant  consequences  in  onr  feeling. 

III.  We  call  the  painful  evil,  and  the  pleasant  uood,  and  so  establish  for  our- 
selves a  standard  which  will  test  more  than  we  at  first  imagine. 

IV.  Presently  we  i-ind  that  we  confuse  things,  and  call  things  pleasant 
WHOSE  consequences  ARE  EVIL.  So  We  discover  that  our  discernment  needs  educating ; 
and — 

V.  Wk  are  brought  to  seek  a  standard  by  which  to  judge  things;  that  is  away 
from,  and  beyond  ourselves ;  aud  wa  lenrn  to  find  the  only  sure  educating  force  in  the 


CH.  vm.  1— 22.]        THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH, 


1« 


revealed  will  of  Gtod.  Man  knows  with  certainty  what  is  evil  and  what  is  good,  when 
he  recogniTies  that  God  has  set  him  in  this  world  of  sensible  relations,  and,  pointing  to 
some  thing*,  has  said,  "Thou  mayest;"  and  to  other  things,  "Thou  shalt  not."  Con- 
science is  truly  cultured  only  when  it  clearly  witnesses  to  that  of  which  God  has,  in 
his  revelation,  expressed  his  approval. — B.  T. 

Vers.  18 — 25.~National  judgment  for  national  sini.  In  this  latter  part  of  the 
chapter  we  have  one  of  those  highly  elaborate,  intense,  and  suggestive  pictures  which 
are  peculiar  to  the  books  of  the  propliets.  The  mighty  Assyrian  army  sweeps  over  tlie 
land ;  the  people  flee  before  them  ;  they  fill  every  corner ;  they  eat  up  all  the  food  ; 
they  carry  away  all  the  flocks  and  henls ;  a  man  can  barely  save  ore  cow  and  two 
sheep;  they  consume  the  firuits;  they  trample  down  the  shrubs;  they  bear  off  ths 
|)eople  captive ;  tliey  leave  behind  them  a  wilderness ;  there  is  nobody  to  rent  or  till 
the  land;  the  few  scattered  inhabitants  are  content  to  live  on  the  spontaneous  products, 
milk  and  curds  and  honey;  agriculture  is  entirely  stopped,  and  the  wild  beasts  are 
again  encroaching  on  the  arable  imd  pasture  lands.  William  Jay,  of  Bath,  was  aociis- 
lomed  to  say,  "  God  can  punish  individuals  in  this  life,  and  in  the  next;  but  he  ca'i 
only  punish  nations,  as  such,  in  this  life."  This  may  be  further  illustrated  by  reference 
to  the  Roman  di  si  ruction  of  Jerusalem,  which  was  a  direct  national  judgment  on  their 
sins  as  a  nation,  culminating  in  the  judicial  murder  of  their  Messiah,  The  shout  bad 
risen,  "His  blood  bo  on  us,  and  on  our  children;"  and  so  it  was.  We  suggest  the 
following  points  for  consecutive  illustration  : — 

I.  Some  sins  are  distinctively  national.  Such  as  the  high-handed  dealings  of  modern 
nations  with  semi-civilized  peoples. 

II.  Some  judgments  are  distinctly  national.  Such  as  Isaiah  refers  to:  loss  of  states- 
men ;  or  of  male  population ;  war,  etc. 

III.  These  are  directly  related,  the  one  to  the  other,  as  are  sowing  and  reaping. 

IV.  They  are  thns  fitted  together,  as  outward  and  evident  illustrations  of  the  'alationj- 
between  sin  and  punishment,  for  the  individual. — B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

Veri.  1 — 4. — The  Sigh  of  Maher-shalal- 
HAsn-BAZ.  The  sign  of  Iramanuel  was  re- 
condite. In  its  more  spiritual  sense  it 
appealed  to  faith  in  an  event  far  distant. 
Rven  in  its  literal  import,  it  was  not  calcu- 
lated to  cheer  and  encourage  more  than  a 
few,  since  neither  tlie  maiden  nor  the  child 
was  pointed  out  with  any  distinctness.  A 
fresli  sign  was  therefore  given  by  God's 
goodness  to  re!»dsure  the  mass  of  the  people 
—a  sign  about  which  there  was  nothing 
obscure  or  difiScuIt.  Isaiah  himself  should 
have  a  ion  born  to  him  almost  immediately, 
'o  whom  he  should  give  a  name  indicating 
the  rapid  approach  of  the  spoiler,  and  before 
this  child  should  be  able  to  utter  the  first 
words  which  childhood  ordinarily  pro- 
nounces, "  Father,"  "  Mother,"  Damascus 
and  Samaria  should  be  despoiled. 

Ver.  1. — Take  thee  a  great  roll ;  rather,  a 
large  tablet.  The  word  is  the  snme  as  that 
used  for  "  mirror  "  in  ch.  iii.  23.  Write  iu 
it  witn  a  man's  pen;   i.e.  "write  upon  it 

ISAIAH. 


with  the  pen  nsed  by  ordinar;  men" — in 
opposition  to  the  implements  of  an  engraver. 
The  tablet  was  probably  to  be  hung  up  to 
view  in  a  public  place  (comp.  oh.  xxx.  8),  so 
that  all  might  read,  and  the  writing  was 
therefore  to  be  such  as  was  in  ordinary  use. 
Concerning  Maher-shalal-hash-baz.  TheSb 
were  the  words  which  wei  e  to  be  written  on 
the  tablet,  which  was  to  be  otherwise  left 
blanlc  They  would  naturally  excite  curi- 
osity, like  the  strange  names  placarded  in 
modem  streets.  The  name  is  literally 
"  Plunder  speeds,  spoil  hastens."  It  hat 
been  imitated  by  Goethe  in  his  "  Habebald- 
Eilebeute  "  ('  Faust,'  act  iv.  so.  3). 

Ver.  2. — And  I  took  onto  me ;  rather,  and 
I  will  have  taken  for  me.  It  is  still  God 
who  is  speaking.  Uriah  the  priest.  Pro- 
bably the  high  priest  of  the  time,  mentioned 
in  2  Kings  xvi.  10 — 16,  as  the  ready  tool  of 
Ahaz  at  a  later  date.  Though  a  bad  man, 
he  may  have  been  a  trustworthy  witness  to 
a  fact.  Zeohariah,  Perhaps  the  father  of 
Abi  or  Abijah,  Ahaz's  queen  (2  Kings  xviii. 
2;  2  Ohron.  xxix.  1).  It  would  serve  to  oal' 
public  attention  still  more  to  the  tablet,  il 
it  bore  the  names  of  two  snob  emiueul 
persons  as  witnesses. 


146 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROIHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  vra.  1— 22. 


Ver.  3. — The  prophetess.  It  ia  not  neoes- 
•ary  to  suppose  that  the  wife  of  Isaiah  must 
liave  uttered  prophecies  because  she  is  called 
"  the  prophetess  "  Titles  were  given  in  the 
Eflst  to  the  wives,  daughters,  etc.,  of  officials, 
which  merely  reflected  the  dignity  of  their 
husbands,  fathers,  etc.  Even  Miriam  seems 
to  be  palled  a  "prophetess"  (Exod.  iv.  20) 
from  lier  close  relationship  to  Moses,  rather 
thnn  from  any  supernatural  power  that  she 
had.  In  the  Mishna,  a  priest's  wife  or 
daughter  is  called  "priestess"  (Cheyne). 
Call  his  name.  There  is  no  reason  for 
doubting  that  the  name  was  actually  given. 
Other  Israelites  bad  such  names  as  Jushab- 
heeed  (1  Ohron.  iii.  20),  Haah-ashtari  (I 
Chron.  iv.  6),  Romamti-ezer  (1  Ohron.  xxv.4), 
Machnadebai  (Ezra  z.  40),  and  the  like. 
Assyrian  names  were  even  longer ;  e.g.  As- 
shur-bel-nisi-BU,  Asshur-kinat-ili-kain,  etc. 
In  ordinary  parlance,  names  of  this  type 
were  commonly  shortened,  "  Shalman-eser  " 
becoming  "  Shalman "  (Hob.  x.  14),  "  Sen- 
nacherib" "Jareb"  (Hos.  x.  6),  and  the 
like. 

Vcr.  4.— My  father. ,  .my  mother.  "Abi," 
"Immi,"  would  have  been  among  the  first 
utterances  of  childhood — simple  sounds, 
combinations  of  primary  vowels  with  labi- 
als, corresponding  in  easiness  of  utterance 
to  "  Pappy,"  "  Mammy,"  rather  than  to  the 
exjircssions  of  the  text.  A  child  commonly 
utters  such  sounds  when  it  is  about  a 
year  old.  The  riches  of  Damasons.  The 
position  of  Damascus  lay  In  the  direct 
patli  of  the  main  trade  that  was  carried  on 
between  the  West  and  East,  which  was  con- 
ducted by  the  merchants  of  Tyre  chiefly, 
and  passed  from  the  Syrian  coast  by  way  of 
Damascus  and  Tadmor  to  Nineveh  and 
Babylon.  This  commerce  greatly  enriched 
the  cities  lying  upon  its  route.  "Damas- 
cus," says  Ezekiel,  addressing  Tyre,  "was 
thy  merchant  in  the  multitude  of  the  wares 
of  thy  making,/or  the  multitude  of  aU  riches  ; 
in  the  wine  of  Helbon,  and  white  wool " 
(xxvii.  18).  The  "  palaces  of  Benhadad  " 
seem  to  have  been  noted  for  their  magnifi- 
cence (Jer.  xlix.  27 ;  Amos  i.  4).  The  spoil 
of  Samaria  shall  he  taken  away  before  the 
King  of  Assyria.  Scripture  does  not  record 
the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy,  which  makes 
the  same  Assyrian  king  carry  off  the  spoil 
of  Samaiia  and  the  spoil  of  Damascus, 
fixing  also  the  time  of  the  carrying  off  as 
within  a  few  years  of  the  time  when  the 
prophecy  was  given.  But  the  inscriptions 
of  Tiglatb-Pileeer  himself  supply  the  de- 
ficiency. They  state  that  this  monarch 
"sent  the  population,  the  goods  of  the 
people  of  Beth-Omri,  and  their  furniture  to 
the  land  of  Assyria;  "  after  which  he  "ap- 
pointed Husih  (Hoshea)  to  the  dominion 
over  them,"  and  fixed  their  annual  tribute 


at  two  talents  of  gold  and  a  thousand  talents 
of  silver  (see  'Becords  of  the  Post,'  vol.  t. 
p.  52). 

Vers.  5 — 10. — The  Flood  of  Absteias 
Invasion  will  pass  fbom  Stbia  and  Sa- 
maria lino  JUDAA,  Bl'T  WILL  THERE  BS 
ARRESTED.  Syria  and  Samaria  were  barriers, 
breakwaters,  so  placed  as  to  stem  the  tide 
of  invasion,  and  be  a  defence  to  Judiea 
against  Assyrian  attack.  When  once  they 
were  overwhelmed,  the  waters  would  have 
free  course,  and  the  submersion  of  Judsea 
was  certain.  It  might  be  delayed  by  the 
Divine  favour,  and  would  be,  so  long  as  the 
people,  or  even  a  remnant  of  them,  remained 
faithful,  but  only  through  the  might  of  the 
name  Imnianuel,  "  God  with  us." 

Ver.  6. — Forasmuch  as  this  people.  It 
is  a  question  which  people  is  intended, 
Judah  or  Israel.  Ewald  supposes  Judah, 
and  draws  the  conclusion  that  there  was  a 
strong  party  in  Jerusalem  which  favoured 
"the  son  of  Tabeal."  Dr.  Kay  does  the 
same,  but  understands  the  charge  agaiu>t 
Judah  to  be,  not  that  it  sympathized  with 
Gezin,  but  that  it  fell  into  the  same  sins. 
Other  commentators  suggest  that  Israel  ig 
the  people  intended  (as  in  ch.  ix.  16),  the 
sense  being  carried  on  from  ver.  4,  where 
the  word  "  Samaria "  is  suggestive  of  the 
Israelite  people.  Befuseth  the  waters  of 
SMloah.  The  "pool  of  Siluah"  (Neh.  iii. 
15)  was  the  tank  or  reservoir  at  the  south- 
western foot  of  Ophel,  which  is  supplied 
with  water  by  a  narrow  conduit  cut  through 
the  limestone  rock  for  a  distance  of  1750 
feet  from  the  "  Pool  of  the  Virgin  "  on  the 
opposite  side  of  Opiiel,  in  the  Kedron  valley. 
This  pool  itself  is  fed  from  reservoirs  under 
tlie  temple  area,  which  have  not  yet  been 
fully  explored.  It  is  probable  that  Isaiah 
uses  the  expression  "  waters  of  Shiloah  "  in 
a  general  sense  for  the  streams,  springs, 
reservoirs,  conduits,  which  supplied  the 
temple,  and  were  connected  with  its  service. 
"Refusing  the  waters  of  Shiloah"  would 
then  be,  without  any  violent  metaphor,  re- 
fusing the  temple  service  and  worship,  which 
was  exactly  what  the  Israelites  had  done 
from  the  time  of  Jeroboam.  That  go  softly. 
In  contrast  with  the  "  waters  of  the  river, 
strong  and  many,"  of  the  next  vene.  They 
who  refused  tlie  mild  and  gentle  govern- 
ment of  Jehovah  should  experience  the  im- 
petuous and  torrent-like  rush  of  the  Assyrian 
armies.  Bejoice  in  Bezin;  rather,  rejoice 
with  Bezin;  i.e.  sympathize  with  him,  ie> 
joice  when  he  rejoices. 

Ver.  7. — The  waters  of  the  river,  strong 
and  many.  "  The  river "  is,  of  course,  the 
Euphrates,  as  in  oh.  vii.  20.    In  itt  lower 


OH.  vm.  1—22.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


147 


oourse  the  Euphrates  often  oyerflowa  its 
banks,  and  inundates  the  adjacent  districts, 
causing  vast  damage  to  crops,  and  some- 
times threatening  to  break  down  the  walls 
of  cities  (Loftus,  '  Chaldea  and  Susiana,' 
p.  7).  It  is  scarcely  likely,  however,  that 
Isaiah  had  any  acquaintance  with  this  fact. 
His  experience  would  probably  have  been 
limited  to  the  "  swellings  of  Jordan  "  ( Jer. 
xii.  5;  comp.  Josh.  iii.  15).  All  his  glory 
(comp.  ch.  X.  12,  16,  18,  etc.).  He  shall 
oome  up  over  aU  Ms  channels.  A  graphic 
description  of  the  swelling  of  rivers  in  the 
East.  These,  when  they  are  low,  contract 
their  waters  from  the  many  channels,  in 
which  they  ordinarily  flow,  into  some  one 
or  two,  leaving  the  others  dry.  The  first 
effect  of  a  flood  is  to  fill  all  the  channels, 
after  which  it  may  proceed  further  and 
overflow  the  banks. 

Ver.  8. — ^And  he  shall  pass  thicngh  Jndah ; 
nther,  he  shall  pass  on  into  Judah  ("  He  shall 
sweep  onward  into  Judah,"  Revised  Version). 
The  Assyrians  will  not  be  content  with  in- 
vading Syria  and  Samaria ;  they  will "  pass  on 
into  Judsea."  It  is  not  clear  whether  this  is 
to  be  done  immediately  by  Tiglath-Pileser, 
or  by  one  of  his  successors  at  a  later  date. 
There  is  reason  to  believe  from  Tiglath- 
PUeser's  inscriptions  that  he  used  the  terri- 
tory of  Ahaz  for  the  passage  of  his  armies 
as  those  of  a  vassal  king,  but  did  not  ravage 
them.  He  shall  reach  oven  to  the  neok.  The 
Assyriau  attacks  on  Judtea  shall  stop  short 
of  destroying  it.  The  flood  shall  not  sub- 
merge the  head,  but  only  rise  as  high  as  the 
neck.  This  prophecy  was  fulfilled,  since  it 
was  not  Assyria,  but  Babylon,  which  de- 
stroyed the  Jewish  kingdom.  The  stretching 
out  of  his  wings  shall  fill  the  breadth  of  thy 
land.  The  Assyrian  armies  shall  visit  every 
part  of  the  land.  The  sudden  change  of 
metaphor  is  in  the  manner  of  Isaiah  (see 
ch.  i.  30,  31 ;  v.  24,  30,  etc.).  0  Immannel. 
On  tlie  importance  of  this  address,  as  indi- 
cating the  kingly,  and  so  (probably)  the 
Divine  character  of  Iminanuel,  see  the  notes 
on  ch.  vii.  14.  Isaiah  could  not  speak  of 
the  land  as  belonging  to  his  own  infant  son. 

Ver.  9. — Associate  yourselves.  It  is  im- 
possible to  obtain  this  meaning  from  the 
existing  Hebrew  text,  which  must  be  trans- 
lated, "Be  angry,"  or  "Eage"  ("Make  an 
uproar,"  Eevised  Version).  The  prophet 
passes  from  the  consideration  of  the  opposi- 
tion offered  to  Jehovah  by  Israel,  Syria,  and 
Assyria,  to  a  general  consideration  of  all  the 
nations  of  the  earth.  He  challenges  them 
to  the  comliat  against  Jehovah,  and  con- 
fidently predicts  their  defeat.  0  ye  people ; 
rather,  0  ye  peoples  (compare  the  corre- 
sponding expression  in  the  next  clause, "  All 
ye  of  far  countries  "). 
Ver.  10. — Take  counsel  together;  literally, 


devise  a  device;  i.e.  form  some  plan,  even 
the  cleverest  possible,  against  God's  people, 
and  ihe  result  will  be  utter  failure.  It  shall 
not  stand  (comp.  ch.  vii.  7).  For  God  is  with 
ns.  In  the  Hebrew,  Id  'immanu-M,  "for 
with  us  (is)  God,"  words  declarative  of  the 
true  meaning  of  the  name  which  God  had 
made  a  sign  to  his  people  (oh.  vii.  14).  It 
was  his  being  *'  with  them "  that  could 
alone  save  them  from  their  enemies. 

Vers.  11 — 16. — The  Grounds  of  Isaiah's 
Confidence.  Having  declared  his  absolute 
confidence,  not  only  that  the  attack  of  Pekali 
and  Eezin  will  fail  (vers.  1 — 4),  but  that 
Assyria  also  (ver.  8),  nay,  that  aU  the 
nations  of  the  earth  (ver.  9)  will  fail,  and 
bring  destruction  upon  themselves,  if  they 
"  devise  devices  "  against  God's  true  people, 
the  prophet  explains  the  ground  of  his  con- 
fidence by  relating  a  special  "  instruction  " 
which  he  had  received  from  God  some  time 
previously.  He  had  been  bidden  to  separate 
himself  from  the  mass  of  his  countrymen  in 
thought  and  feeling,  and  to  cling  only  to 
Jehovah,  who  would  "  be  for  a  Sanetuiiry  " 
(ver.  J 4)  to  his  own,  but  "for  a  Stone  of 
stumbling  and  a  Book  of  offence"  to  aU 
others. 

Ver.  11. — For  the  Lord.  Mr.  Cheyne  re- 
gards this  passage  as  "a  short  oracle,  com- 
plete in  itself,"  and  entiriiy  unconnected 
with  what  has  preceded.  But  the  initial  St, 
"for,"  is  in  that  case  inexplicable.  Spake 
thus  to  me  with  a  strong  hand ;  literally,  with 
strengOi  of  hand — i.e.  laying  a  strong  grasp 
upon  him ;  and,  as  it  were,  constraining 
him  to  attend  (comp.  Ezek.  i.  3 ;  iii.  14,  22, 
etc.).  That  I  should  not  walk  in  the  way 
of  this  people.  Isaiah  was  bidden  not  to 
"  follow  a  multitude  to  evil "  ( Exod.  xxiii, 
2).  It  was  not  merely  idolatry  against 
which  he  was  warned,  but  tlie  whole  spirit 
and  tone  of  the  society  of  his  day.  He  was 
not  to  enter  Lain  their  suspicions,  or  to  hope 
their  hopes,  or  to  fear  their  fears.  He  was 
to  take  a  line  of  his  own,  to  fear  God  and 
him  only ;  then  God  would  be  "  for  a  Sanc- 
tuary "  to  him. 

Ver.  12. — Say  ye  not.  The  transition  from 
the  singular  to  the  plural  is  noticeable.  It 
implies  that  Isaiah  did  nut  stand  alone,  but 
had  followers — a  "  little  flock,"  it  may  be — 
but  still  enough  to  give  him  the  support  of 
sympathy  (comp.  ver.  16).  A  oonfederaoy ; 
rather,  treason,  or  conspiracy  (see  2  Sam.  xv. 
12 ;  1  Kings  xvi.  20 ;  2  Kings  xi.  12 ;  xii. 
20 ;  Jer.  xi.  9 ;  Ezek.  xxii.  25,  etc.).  The 
command  is,  not  to  call  a  course  of  conduct 
treasonable  simply  because  the  people  gene- 
rally so  call    it.     Jeremiah   was    charged 


148 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.        [oh.  viii.  1—21 


with  treason  for  preaching  the  hopelessness 
of  offering  resiotauce  to  Nebuchadnezzar 
(Jer.  XX.  1 ;  xxvi.  8 — 11).  Tliose  who  op- 
posed an  Assyvian  alliance  were  probably 
now  taxed  with  treason.  To  all  them  to 
whom;  lather,  everything  which.  Translate 
the  entire  clau.-e  thus :  Call  ye  not  conspiracy 
everything  which  this  people  shall  call  con- 
spiracy. Neither  fear  ye  their  fear.  They 
feared  man  (oli.  vii.  2).  Isaiah  and  his  dis- 
ciples are  comm.mded  to  fear  no  one  but 
God. 

Ver.  13. — Sanctify  the  Lord  of  hosts.  God 
was  sanctified  by  btlng  lielieveJ  in  (Nnmb. 
XX.  12).  They  wlio  feared  Rezin  and  Pekali, 
despite  of  God's  ;ssuranoes  that  their  design 
should  fail,  did  not  believe  in  him,  and  bo 
did  not  "  sanctify  "  liira. 

Ver.  14. — He  shall  be  for  a  Sanctuary 
(oomp.  Ezek.  xi.  16,  "  Yet  will  I  be  to  them 
as  a  little  Sanctuary  ")•  A  sanctuary  w  "  a 
refuge"  (Ps.  xo.  1;  xci.  9),  and  something 
more.  It  is  a  holy  refuge,  a  place  which  is 
a  refuge  because  of  its  holiness.  Its  material 
counterpart  in  the  Mosaic  system  is,  not 
"the  city  of  refuge,"  but  the  altar  (1  Kings 
i.  50  ;  ii.  28).  Both  the  houses  of  Israel ;  i.e. 
"  the  two  reigning  houses  of  Samaria  and 
Judsea,"  both  of  which  were  Israelite.  Both 
the  "houses"  would  ultimately  foisake 
Jehovah,  and  timl  in  him  a  "  Snare"  and  a 
"Eock  of  offence." 

Ver.  15. — Many  among  them  (so  the 
Vulgate,  Bwiil  i,  Delitzsoh,  and  Knobel). 
But  most  others  translate,  "  Many  shall 
stumble  thcrenn,"  i.e.  on  the  stone  and  the 
rock  (Kosenniiiller,  Gesenius,  Vance  Smith, 
Kay,  Oheyne).  Fall,  and  be  broken.  The 
effect  of  Btumbliug  against  a  stone  (Matt. 
xxi.  44 ;  Luke  xx.  18).  Be  snared,  and  be 
taken.  Tlie  effeut  of  being  caught  in  a  gin 
(Ps.  is.  15, 16). 

Ver.  16. — Bind  up  the  testimony,  etc. 
The  words  are  still  those  of  Jehovah,  ad- 
dressed to  his  servant  Isiiah.  God  com- 
mands that  the  prophecy  aliall  bo  written  in 
a  roll,  which  is  then  to  be  carefully  tied  with 
a  string  and  sealed,  for  future  use.  Seal 
the  Law ;  rather,  the  instntction— the  advice 
given  in  vers.  12 — 15  (comp.  Dan.  xii.  4). 

Vers.  17,  18. — Isaiah  defines  his  own 
Attitude  and  that  op  his  Childeen.  It 
is  questioned  whether  something  has  not 
fallen  out  between  vers.  16  and  17.  The 
transition  is  exceedingly  -ihrupt,  undoubt- 
edly; but  perhaps  not  more  abrupt  than 
elsewhere  in  Isaiah  and  the  prophets  con- 
temporary with  him.  The  Divine  "  instruc- 
tion" comes  to  an  end  in  ver.  16 ;  and  Isaiah 
might  have  been  expected  to  comment  on 
it,  or  enforce  it«  teaching ;    but   he  does 


neither.  He  simply  states  what  his  own 
attitude  will  be  under  the  coming  calamitj 
(ver.  8).  He  will  "wait  for  the  Lord  and 
look  to  him ''  (ver.  17),  and  consider  himseU 
and  his  ihildren  as  doing  a  work  for  God  in 
being  "  signs"  (ver.  18) — signs  to  wliioh  the 
rest  of  Israel  may  look,  and  from  which 
they  may  derive  sufficient  hope  and  con- 
fidence to  carry  them  through  the  dark  time 
which  is  approaching. 

Ver.  17. — I  will  wait  upon  the  Lord; 
rather,  1  will  wait  for  the  Lord;  i.e.  "await 
the  time  of  his  relenting"  (see  ch.  xxs.  IS ; 
Ixiv.  4,  etc.).  That  hideth  his  face  from 
the  honse  of  Jacob  (compare  the  threats  in 
Deut.  xxxi.  17;  xxxii.  20).  The  liglit  of 
God's  countenance  is  to  the  spiritual  what 
that  of  the  sun  is  to  tlie  material  «orM. 
AH  life,  health,  joy,  happiness,  proceed  ('nan 
it.  This  light  was  now  to  be  withdrawn 
for  a  time  on  account  of  the  people's  sing. 
But  Isuiah  would  "wait"  for  its  reappear- 
ance. 

Ver.  18. — I  and  the  children  ...  are  for 
signs.  Isaiah's  children  seem  to  have  boin 
"lor  signa,"  especially  in  respect  of  their 
names.  Shear-Jathub  meant  "A  remnant 
shall  return"  (ch,  x.  21),  and  thus  In  Id 
out  two  hopes ;  one  that  a  remnant  of  h  r.i.  I 
would  return  to  God  and  become  his  true 
servants,  another  tliat  a  remnant  wou.d 
return  from  the  captivity  that  had  been 
prophesied  (ch.  v.  18).  Maher-slialal-liasli- 
baz-^"  Plunder  speeds,  spoil  hastens  "  — w«; 
a  "  sign  "  of  a  different  kind.  Primarily,  his 
name  referred  to  the  spoiling  of  Damascus 
and  Samaria  (vers.  3,  4) ;  but  it  may  further 
have  indicated  a  time  of  general  disturbance, 
plunder,  and  ravage.  It  is  not  quite  clear 
in  what  respects  Isaiah  was  a  "  sign."  Per- 
haps he,  too,  in  his  name,  which  meant 
"  (Our)  salvation  is  Jehovah  " — certainly 
also  in  his  symbolical  acts  (ch.  xx.  3;,  and 
possibly  in  the  firmness  of  his  faith,  which 
never  wavered.  From  the  Lord  of  hosts ; 
literally, /rom  by  the  Lord  of  host* — an  ex. 
pression  like  the  French  de  chex.  God  had 
Bupernaturally  appointed  the  sign  in  one 
case  (vers.  1—4),  but  in  the  other  two  had 
merely  brought  tliem  about  by  the  secret 
working  of  his  providence.  But  the  prophet 
treats  all  three  as  coming  equally  from  him. 
Whioh  dwelleth  in  Mount  Zion.  Here,  again, 
is  encouragement.  God  has  not  quitted 
Zion.  The  Shechinah  still  rests  between 
the  cherubim  in  the  holy  of  holies.  While 
this  is  BO,  God  is  still  viith  his  people 
(Immanuel). 

Vers.  19 — 22. — Isaiah  beoomhends  look- 
ing TOGOD  AND  THE  BeVEALED  WoRD  KATHEB 
THAN   TO   KeOROMANOT.        AfFLIOTIOM  WILL 


CH.  vm.  1— 22.]       THE   BOOK  OP   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


1-19 


BBiKO  Israel  to  God.  Isainh  returns,  in 
ver.  19,  to  the  oonsiderntion  of  his  disciples. 
In  the  terrible  tiiues  impending,  they  will 
be  recommended  to  have  recourse  to  necro- 
mancy ;  he  urges  tliat  they  should  look  to 
Ood  and  the  Law.  He  then  furtlier  suggests 
that,  in  the  coming  affliclion  wliich  he  de- 
scribes (vers.  21,  22),  men  will  generally 
turn  for  relief  to  the  same  quarter  (ver.  20). 

Ver.  19. — Seek  unto  them  that  have  fa- 
miliar spirits.  In  times  of  great  distress 
the  Israelites  seem  always  to  have  l>een 
tempted  to  consult  those  among  them  who 
pretended  to  magic  and  divination.  So  Saul 
in  the  Philistine  war  resorted  to  the  witch 
of  Endor  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  7—20) ;  Manasseh, 
threatened  by  Esar-haddon,  "  used  enchant* 
ments,  and  doiilt  with  familiar  spirits  and 
wizards"  (2  Kings  xxi.  6).  Israel  generally, 
oppressed  by  Syria  and  Assyria,  "  used 
Urination  and  enchantments"  (2  Kings  xvii. 
17).  There  was  the  same  inclination  now 
on  the  part  of  many  Jews.  The  vexed 
question  of  the  actual  powers  possessed  by 
such  persons  cannot  be  disousst^d  wil  bin  the 
limits  of  a  footnote.  It  has,  moieover,  al- 
ready been  treated  in  the  present  Com- 
mentary, in  connection  with  Lev.  xix.  ai. 
Wizards  that  peep,  and  that  mutter ;  rather, 
that  chirp  and  mutter.  Tricks  of  the  ventri- 
loquists, probably,  who  disguised  their  voices, 
and  represented  that  they  were  the  vuices 
of  gliosts  (comp.  ch.  xxix.  4).  The  natural 
speech  of  some  tribes  lias  been  compared 
to  the  "chirping  of  birds"  (Herod.,  iv.  183 ; 
Homemann, '  Travels,'  p.  1 1  d).  Should  not 
a  people,  etc.?  Very  abrupt  and  ellipticil. 
Isaiah  means  to  say,  "Do  not  attend  to 
them ;  but  answer,  Sbonld  not  a  people," 
etc.  ?  For  the  living.  This  may  either  mean 
'Hnitead  of  the  living,"  or  "on  behalf  of  the 
living."  The  latter  meaning  is  preferable. 
The  full  phrase  would  be,  "  Should  a  people 
on  behalf  of  the  living  seek  to  the  dead  ?  " 
or.  Would  not  that  be  plainly  preposterous  ? 

Ver.  20. — To  the  Law  and  to  the  testimony. 
A  aort  of  watchword  or  battle-cry,  to  be  used 


by  the  faithful  when  God's  enemies  assailed 
them.  Compare  Gideon's  cry  (Judg.  vii.  18), 
"  For  the  Lord  and  for  Gideon."  If  they 
speak  not  according  to  this  word,  it  is  be- 
cause there  is  no  light  in  them  ;  rather, 
Surely  they  will  speak  according  to  this  word, 
when  there  is  no  dawn  for  them;  i.e.  when 
tliey  are  plunged  in  darkness  (ver.  22)  and 
distre.-s,  and  see  no  prospect  of  better  days, 
surely  they — the  people  generally— 'Will 
riilly  to  this  cry,  and  repeat  it,  "For  the 
Law  and  for  the  testimony."  They  will  not 
always  trust  in  necromancy. 

Vers.  21,  22  are  supposed  by  some  to  be 
out  of  place,  and  to  belong  properly  to  the 
description  of  the  Assyrian  invasion,  given 
in  vers.  7,  8.  But  this  bold  solution  of  a 
diiHculty  is  scarcely  to  be  commended,  there 
being  no  limit  to  its  use.  An  order  followed 
in  all  the  manuscripts  should  not  be  dis- 
turbed, if  it  gives  any  tolerable  sense.  Such 
a  sense  can,  it  is  thought,  be  found  here  by 
regarding  the  two  verses  as  exegetical  of 
the  last  clause  of  ver.  20—"  when  there  is 
no  dawn  for  I  hem." 

Ver.  21. — They  shall  pass  through  it. 
"  It,"  which  is  feminine,  must  mean  "  the 
land."  The  Jews  left  in  it  shall  wander 
about  it  (comp.  ch.  vii.  21 — 25),  seeking  pas- 
ture for  the  remnant  of  their  cattle.  They 
shall  fret  themselves;  rather,  they  shall  be 
deeply  angered  (Cheyue).  And  curse  their 
king  and  their  God.  As  the  causes  of  their 
sulfbringB.  And  look  upward.  Not  in  hope, 
but  in  rage  and  defiance. 

Vor.  22.— They  shall  look  unto  the  earth. 
For  necessary  nutriment,  or  simply  as  the 
place  to  which  downcast  and  despairing 
eyes  are  turned  naturally.  They  shall  be 
driven  to  darkness.  So  Kay,  who  thinks  the 
Captivity  is  meant;  but  it  seems  better  to 
render  the  whole  passage,  with  Mr.  Cheyne, 
"  They  shall  look  to  earth,  and  behold, 
distress  and  darkness,  gloom  of  affliction, 
and  thick  darkness  driven  (upon  them)." 
The  darkness  is  spoken  of  as  if  it  were  a 
thing  palpable,  like  rain  or  snow  (comp. 
Exod.  z.  21). 


HOMILETICS. 

V«.  (i.—Wateri  of  Bhihah.  The  waters  of  Shiloah  Issued  from  the  rock  where  God 
had  set  his  Name  and  fixed  the  symbol  of  hU  presence.  They  were  a  copious  supply, 
ever  welling  forth  from  au  inscrutable  source  for  the  refreshment  and  delectation  of 
Israel.  Their  overplus  irrigated  numerous  gardens  in  the  valley  at  the  base  of  the 
temple  hill,  and  made  the  desert  "  blossom  like  the  rose."  Shiloah  is  the  same  as 
"  Shiloh  "  (Gen.  xlix.  10),  and  "  Shiloh  "  means  "  sent,"  or  "  he  who  is  sent."  Hence 
we  may  view  as  "  waters  of  Shiloah  "— 

I.  The  teaching  or  the  temple  and  its  bites,  which  God  tmt  to  Israel  by  the 
hand  of  his  servant  Moses  for  their  refn  shnient  and  delight — a  stream  of  living  water 
«9  those  who  accebted  the  truths  which  the  temple  rites  embodied  or  symbolized ;  a 


150  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH         [oh.  vni.  1— 22 

"  river  "  which  "  made  glad  the  city  of  God,  the  holy  place  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 

MostHigh"(P.s.  xlvi.  4). 

II.  The  tbaohino  of  the  pbophbts,  whom  Ood  continually  sent, "  rising  up  betimei 
and  lendiny  "  (2  Ohron.  xxxvi.  15),  of  which  Isaiah  said  [irimaiily,  "  Ho,  every  one 
that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters"  (oh.  Iv.  1) — these  waters  representing  the  truth 
of  God  which  he  was  commissioned  to  preach.  This  teachin.;  welled  forth  from  the 
true  "  Bock ;"  Cor  it  was  "  the  Spirit  of  Christ "  which  inspired  the  prophets,  and  made 
them  ever  approximate  more  and  more  toward  the  standard  of  evangelical  teaching 
which  was  to  be  set  up  later.  The  prophets'  doctrine  was  for  the  refreshment  and 
comfort  of  the  Jews  primarily;  but  its  influence  was  felt  beyond  the  limits  of  Judaism. 
In  many  a  pagan  wilderness  the  superfluous  waters  flowing  from  this  source  created 
gardens,  where  bhissoms  bloomed,  which,  without  the  "living  water "  of  revealed  truth, 
could  never  have  come  into  bi-inij. 

III.  The  teaching  of  the  ever-blesred  Son,  the  true  "  Shiloh " — sent  by  the 
almighty  and  most  merciful  Father  to  redeem  the  world  and  reconcile  it  to  him.  He 
is  "  the  Fountain  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness  "  (Zech.  xiii.  1) ;  "  the  Well-spring 
of  wisdom "  (Prov.  xviii.  4) ;  the  inexhaustible  and  inscrutable  Source,  to  whom  all 
may  come  fieely  and  drink  (John  vii.  37).  His  doctrine  doth  "  drop  as  the  rain,"  and 
fiis  speech  doth  "distil  as  the  dew"  (Deut. xxxii.  2);  he  gives  to  all  men  to  "  take  the 
water  of  life  freely"  (Rev.  xxii.  17).  Prom  depths  unsearchable  in  the  nature  of  hira 
who  is  "the  Ruck  of  our  salvation"  flow  forth  rivers  of  living  water,  cleansing,  puri- 
fying, refreshing,  satisfying  the  soul.  He  washes  us  once,  in  a  material  way,  in 
baptism;  he  washes  us  ten  thousand  times  spiritually,  as  often  as  he  cleanses  us  from 
sin ;  he  gives  us  to  drink  of  a  water  that  is  henceforth  to  us  "  a  well  of  water  springing 
up  into  everlasting  life"  (John  iv.  14).  True  "  waters  of  Shiloh  "  are  these.  All  may 
"  take  of  them  Ireely."  The  fountain  is  absolutely  inexhaustible.  Kor  are  its  benefits 
confined  to  those  only  for  whose  sake  especially  it  was  given — baptized  members  of  the 
Church ;  they  flow  on  to  others  also.  Great  are  the  uncovenanted  mercies  of  God. 
The  child  Christ  was  proclaimed  to  be  "  a  Light  to  lighten  the  Qentiles,"  no  less  than 
"  the  Glory  of  his  people  Israel "  (Luke  ii.  32).  And  so  it  is.  The  stream  of  Christian 
teaching  flows  on  from  the  Church  into  the  world,  if  not  with  sufficient  force  to  create 
a  garden,  at  any  rate  so  as  to  bring  forth  amid  the  arid  wastes  many  a  green  plant, 
many  a  blooming  flower.  The  washing  of  atonement  is  extended,  we  confidently 
believe,  to  thousands  who  are  not  formally  within  the  covenant.  And  the  flow  of  the 
water  will  never  cease.  Even  in  heaven  there  will  be  "  a  pure  river  of  water  of  life, 
clear  as  crystal,  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  God,  and  of  the  Lamb  "  (Rev.  xxii.  1), 
of  which  the  saints  of  God  will  drink  eternally  (Rev.  xxii."  17). 

Vers.  12,  13. — The  fear  of  man  and  the  fear  of  Ood  contrasted.  These  two  fears 
may  be  compared  (1)  in  respect  of  their  grouuds ;  (2)  in  respect  of  their  results. 

I.  In  their  grounds.  Our  fear  of  man  rests  upon  our  apprehension  of  the  power  of 
man  to  do  us  hurt.  Men  may  injure  us  (1)  in  our  reputation,  (2)  in  our  property, 
(3)  in  respect  of  those  who  are  near  and  dear  to  us,  (4)  in  respect  of  our  persons.  A 
certain  fear  of  the  supreme  civil  power  in  the  state  under  which  we  live  is  natural  and 
proper ;  it  is  one  of  the  elements  which  bind  society  together,  and  could  not  cease  to 
exist  without  disadvantage.  Malefactors  are  restrained  by  it  (Rom.  xiii.  4) ;  and  even 
the  mass  of  well-meaning  men  are  strengthened  in  their  good  intentions  by  the  know- 
ledge that  there  is  a  human  authority  above  them  which  notes  their  conduct  and  will 
punish  any  serious  departure  from  the  rules  of  right  behaviour.  So  far,  then,  the  fear 
of  man  has  a  sound  basis.  We  also  naturally,  and  almost  necessarily,  fear  our  enemies, 
if  they  are  powerful,  whether  public  or  private,  our  fear  being  proportional  to  our  belief 
in  their  power  and  malignity.  It  is  this  ground  of  fear  which  is  apt  to  be  unduly 
influential  upon  us,  from  our  exaggerated  notions  of  what  man  is  able  to  effect.  We 
too  often  forget  that  man  can  do  nothing  but  what  God  permits  (John  xix.  1 1),  that 
he  is  absolutely  impotent  against  God,  who  can  shatter  his  designs,  or  strike  him  with 
sudden  death  at  any  moment.  Again,  we  do  not  always  bear  in  mind  the  fact  that 
man  can  only  injure  us  in  respect  of  temporal  things,  his  utmost  punishment  being  to 
"  kill  the  body,"  whereas  God's  power  extends  beyond  the  grave.  The  fear  of  God  has 
for  its  ground  a  double  apprehension  or  conviction :  (1)  our  belief  in  his  power,  and 


OH.  Tin  1—22.]         THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  15) 

(2)  3:1*  conception  of  his  absolute  holiness.  These  grounds  are  unassailalile,  and  admit 
of  no  exaggeration,  so  that  we  cannot  fear  God  too  much,  though  we  may  fear  him  in  a 
wrong  way.  If  God's  character  be  misconceived,  if  he  be  viewed  as  malignant  or  even  as 
revengeful,  then  our  fear  of  him,  being  based  upon  a  wrong  ground,  may  lead  us  astray. 
Such  was  the  SeigiScuiiorla  of  too  many  in  the  ancient  world,  whose  deities  were  objects 
of  fear,  but  not  of  love. 

II.  In  theib  resitltb.  The  fear  of  man  has  no  good  effect  except  upon  evil-doers, 
and  upon  those  who  but  for  such  fear  might  become  evil-doers.  These  it  may  in  some 
degree  restrain.  But  if,  so  far,  it  may  have  a  good  result,  it  is  apt  in  other  ways  to 
have  results  that  are  anything  but  good.  1.  Fear  of  man  causes  the  morally  weak  to 
follow  the  bad.  example  of  the  wicked,  who  would  otherwise  ridicule  or  even  persecute 
them.  2.  Fear  of  man  makes  feeble  and  oppressed  classes  servile,  untruthful,  cowardly. 
3.  Fear  of  man  induces  many  to  keep  back  their  honest  convictions,  and  even  applaud 
the  evil  courses  which  in  their  heart  tbey  condemn  and  dislike.  4.  Fear  of  man  has 
in  some  cases  led  to  an  absolute  denial  of  God  and  of  Christ,  making  men  renegades  to 
their  religion,  and  professors  of  a  creed  which  they  detest.  5.  On  the  other  hand,  fear 
of  man  may  sometimes  cause  men  to  be  hypocrites,  to  pretend  to  a  faith  and  a  piety 
which  they  do  not  possess,  if  those  who  have  power  over  them  require  it.  Hence  the 
fear  of  man  is  so  often  condemned  in  Scripture  (ch.  xxxv.  4 ;  li.  7 ;  Jer.  i.  8 ;  Ezek. 
iii.  9 ;  Matt.  x.  28 ;  Luke  xii.  4 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  14,  etc.).  The  fear  of  God,  if  it  be  of  the 
kind  called  above  S«ii»Siu/toi'(a,  may  harden  men  in  sin,  or  lead  them  to  despair  of  God's 
mercy ;  but  if  it  be  the  true  fear  of  God,  that  is  to  say,  if  it  have  an  element  of  love  in 
it,  the  results  cannot  but  be  excellent.  1.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of 
wisdom  "  (Ps.  cxi.  10)  ;  it  restrains  from  evil  in  early  life  (Prov.  xvi.  6) ;  it  deepens 
into  awe  as  time  goes  on ;  it  produces  hatred  of  sin  (Prov.  viii.  13) ;  it  becomes  "  a 
fountain  of  life "  (Prov.  xiv.  27).  2.  They  who  grow  up  in  the  fear  of  God  acquire 
a  solidity  and  strength  of  character  that  nothing  else  can  give ;  they  have  a  firm  foun- 
dation on  which  to  rest;  they  "do  not  fear  what  flesh  can  do  unto  them  "  (Ps.  Ivi.  4); 
they  are  truthful,  manly,  brave.  And,  further,  they  are  reverent.  The  fear  of  God 
checks  over-familiarity,  begets  reserve,  produces  silence.  "  Keep  thy  foot  when  thou 
goest  into  the  house  of  God,"  etc.  (Eccles.  v.  1,  2).  3.  Though  "  perfect  love  casteth 
out  fear "  (1  John  iv.  18),  yet  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever  "  (Ps.  xix.  9). 
There  is  no  age,  however  advanced,  that  can  dispense  with  it ;  for  no  man  in  this  life 
is  ever  "  perfect  in  love."  The  beloved  apostle  even  represents  the  fear  of  God  as  con- 
tinuing in  heaven.  They  that  stood  on  the  sea  of  glass,  having  the  harps  of  God,  and 
sang  the  song  of  Moses  the  serrant  of  God,  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb,  before  God's 
throne,  exclaimed,  "  Who  shall  not /ear  thee,  0  Lord,  and  glorify  thy  Name  ?  "  (Rev.  xv. 
2 — 4) ;  and  again,  when  the  "  great  voice  of  much  people  was  heard  in  heaven,  saying, 
Salvation,  and  glory,  and  honour,  and  power,  unto  the  Lord  our  God,  and  the  four 
and  twenty  elders  and  the  four  beasts  fell  down  and  worshipped  God  that  sat  on  the 
throne,  saying,  Amen,  Alleluia,  a  voice  came  out  of  the  throne,  saying,  Praise  our 
God,  all  ye  saints,  and  ye  that /ear  him,  both  small  and  great "  (Bev.  xix.  1 — 5). 

Ver.  17. — Waiting /or  Ood.  "Waiting  for  God"  is  submitting  ourselves  to  his 
good  pleasure  in  respect  of  time,  being  content  that  he  should  settle  the  question, 
"How  long?"  and  looking  still  to  him  from  first  to  last,  however  extended  the  term 
during  which  our  "  waiting  "  has  to  continue.     It  is  important  that  we  wait — 

I,  Patibntlt.  "  I  waited  patiently  for  the  Lord,"  says  holy  David,  "  and  he  inclined 
unto  me,  and  heard  my  calling  "  (Ps.  zl.  1).  A  thousand  years  are  with  God  as  one 
day,  and  one  day  as  a  thousand  years — "  our  age  is  even  as  nothing  in  respect  of  him  " 
(Ps.  xxxix.  5).  It  is,  no  doubt,  hard  for  man  to  be  patient,  not  to  weary  in  well-doing, 
not  to  fret  at  what  seems  to  him  useless  and  unnecessary  delay,  not  to  desire  to 
expedite  matters  and  bring  about  the  accomplishment  of  any*  end  which  seems  to  him 
good  at  once.  But  God's  ways  are  not  as  our  ways.  God  is  never  in  a  hurry.  Ood 
tries  his  people  by  delay,  and  forms  in  them  the  temper  of  patience,  and  "  Ict^  it  h.ive 
ita  perfect  work  "  (Jas.  L  4).  God  knows  that  we  "  have  need  of  patience  "  (Ueb.  x. 
36),  and  makea  our  life  a  discipline  of  patience,  that  so  we  may  be  the  more  conformed 
to  hii  image. 

Q,  Ghkbbtuixt.    It  k  not  enough  to  wait  patiently,  unless  we  also  wait  cheerfully. 


152  THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PEOPIIET  ISAIAH.         [oh.  vni.  1— 2a 

■'  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  always,"  saj's  the  apostle ;  "  and  again  I  say,  Bejoice  "  (Phil.  iv.  4), 
We  should  do  the  will  of  God  "  from  the  heart."  If  he  makes  our  cross  to  be  one  of 
waiting,  we  should  feel  that  waiting  is  what  we  need,  wh.it  is  lest  for  na ;  ani^ 
we  should  be  thankful  that  God  deals  with  us  so  lovingly  as  to  lay  this  burden 
upoQ  ua. 

III.  Faithfully.  All  waiting  is  a  trial  of  faith.  God  "hides  his  face  from  us.' 
Will  he  ever  cease  to  do  so  ?  Will  he  ever  again  cheer  us  with  tlie  li^ht  of  his  counte- 
nance? He  does  not  grant  our  petitions.  Will  he  ever  grant  tlitm?  Our  gho.stly 
enemy  continually  suggests  these  questions,  endeavouring  to  undermine  and  destroy 
our  faith  and  trust  in  God.  It  is  our  part,  with  Isaiah,  to  defeat  him  by  continually 
"looking  for  God  "and  resting  upon  him.  We  must  "have  him  always  before  our 
face  ;"  hold  fast  by  hire,  cling  to  him, look  to  him,  and  pray  to  liiin  "  without  ceasing" 
lor  support  and  strength  during  the  whole  weary  time  of  waitinj;,  or  our  faith  may  fell, 
and  our  trial  prove  too  much  for  us.     We  must,  therefore,  also  wait-;— 

IV.  Pkaterpully;  ».«.,  with  cortiniied  farnest  supplication  to  Giid,  both  for  the  end 
that  we  desire  and -for  his  help  while  he  keeps  us  waiting.  His  help  alone  will  keep  us 
jiatient,  cheerful,  and  faithful  during  the  time  that  our  trial  lasts,  and  render  it  the 
blessing  that  he  intends  it  to  be  to  us. 

Ver.  19. — Seeking  for  the  living  to  the  dead.  The  necromancy  of  ancient  times  w»s 
a  system  of  appeal  to  the  dead  on  behalf  of  the  living.  The  shades  or  ghosts  of  dead 
men  were  supposed  to  be  brought  up  from  H^ides  by  the  necromancer,  who  compelln' 
ihem  to  answer  his  questions,  and  was  supposed  to  make  their  answers  useful  to  the 
living,  A  system  not  very  dissimilar  has  prevailed  of  recent  years  in  many  parts  both 
of  England  and  of  America,  whereby  "  spirits  "  are  believed  to  be  iTOUiht  into  commn- 
nioation  with  living  men  lor  the  presumed  benefit  if  the  latter.  To  all  such  cases  the 
reproach  of  the  prophet  would  seem  to  apply  :  "  Should  men  seek  for  the  living  to  the 
dead?  "  What  help  is  it  likely  that  the  dead  can  give  more  than  the  living,  even  il 
they  can  be  communicated  with,  which  must  always  be  doubtful?  Why  appeal  to 
them  when  we  do  not  know  whether  they  can  hear,  nor  wliether,  if  they  hoar,  they 
can  render  aid?  We  can  usually  appeal  for  the  living  to  the  living,  who  can  certainly 
hear,  and  in  most  instances  ca  i  help  to  some  extent.  And  there  is  one  living  One  on 
whom  it  is  always  possible  to  call,  who  always  hears,  and  can  always  help  if  he  sees  fit. 
Thus  every  form  of  necromancy  is  folly,  since  (1)  we  have  no  assured  ground  for 
believing  that  uny  good  can  result  from  it,  and  (2)  we  can  resort  to  One  who  is 
certainly  able  to  do  all  and  more  than  all  that  we  require. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — Symbolic  utterances.  The  prophet's  popular  method.  He  wished  to 
insj  ire  hope  in  the  people  as  well  as  in  the  king — to  expel  the  panic  fear  of  the  two 
northern  kings,  and  impress  the  expectation  tl;at  tlie  two  cajiiials  of  these  kings  would 
themselves  be  taken  and  sacked.  The  way  in  which  he  set  about  this  was  simple  yet 
remarkable.  1.  He  took  a  large  tablet,  and  wrote  therein  in  "  popular  characlers,"  i.e. 
in  large  text,  distinct  from  the  literary  character,  perhaps  a  character  half  pictorial, 
the  words  "  Hasten-booty,  Speed-spoil,"  or  "Booty-quick,  Spoil-speed."  In  those  days, 
tin  re  were  no  newspapers,  no  pufBng  placards  staring  from  the  walls,  and  books  were  only 
lor  the  learned.  I'his  was  suggestive  to  write  up  a  sentiment  or  suggestion  like  this  for 
the  public  eye.  To  this  day  in  the  East,  if  you  ask  the  people  their  reason  for  believing 
1  his  or  that,  their  answer  will  be,  "  Is  it  not  written  ?  Men  did  not  write  books  to  deceive 
us."  To  write  this  pregnant  phrase  was,  then,  to  impress  it  on  the  popular  imagination. 
"  Go,  write  it  before  them  iu  a  table,  and  note  it  in  a  book,  that  it  may  be  for  the  time  to 
nome  for  ever  and  ever  "  (ch.  xxx.  8).  "  Write  the  vision,  and  make  it  plain  upon  tables, 
that  he  may  run  that  readeth  it ''  (Hab.  ii.  2).  Then,  to  fix  the  solemn  act  of  putting  up 
i  he  tablet  in  memory,  he  takes  two  witnesses — Uriah  the  high  priest  (2  Kings  xvi.  10), 
and  Zechariah,  perliaps  "  mayor  of  Jerusalem  "  at  the  time.  2.  Next,  he  gave  this  same 
mystic  name  to  a  son  born  about  the  same  time,  so  that  the  boy  might  be,  as  it  were, 
»  "  living  epistle  "  by  means  of  his  significant  name,  "  known  and  read  of  all  men,"  and 


OH  nu.  1-22.]         THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PUOPH^T   ISAIAH.  163 

keeping  alive  in  their  hearts  the  hopeful  prophecy  of  bis  father.  Beforo  the  boy  can 
lisp  his  parents'  names,  that  prophecy  will  be  fulfilled,  and  the  wealth  of  Damascus  and 
the  spoil  of  S  maria  will  be  carried  away  before  the  Assyrian  king.  (1)  The  lessons 
of  the  teacher  m  ed  to  be  addressed  to  the  senses  of  the  multitude.  The  sign  for  the 
eye,  the  parable  for  the  imagination,  the  illustration  which  "  strikes,"  the  epigram  and 
"  winged  word"  which  fastens  in  the  memory, — all  may  be  pressed  into  the  service.  (2) 
Pith  and  condensation  should  be  studied.  A  sermon  is  not  wasted  if  the  text  sticks,  or 
if  a  single  pregnant  saying  has  lodged  itself  in  the  mind,  as  a  seed  to  stir  and  quicken 
thought  to  purpose. — J. 

Vers.  6 — 15. — "  Ood  with  «»."  The  prophet  looks  out  on  the  troubled  prospect  as  on 
a  deluge,  amidst  which  the  ark  of  promise  carrying  the  elect,  the  remnant,  the  Church 
of  the  faithful  and  chosen,  is  seen  riding. 

I.  Tempoeal  allusions.  1.  The  foreign  lympathies  of  the  people.  Tired  of  the 
inefBcient  reign  of  Ahaz,  they  watch  for  the  approach  of  the  two  northern  kings  with 
interest.  They  have  forgotten  their  patriotism,  which  once  rallied  round  the  house  of 
David  as  a  political  and  spiritual  centre.  The  "  softly  flowing  brook  of  Siloah"  by  Jeru- 
salem was  symbolic  of  that  house.  'Twas  the  river  that  made  glad  the  city  of  God,  the 
holy  place  of  the  Highest's  dwellina;  (Ps.  xlvi.).  Small  was  it  compared  with  the  groat 
-ioo'l  of  Nile  or  Euphrates,  but  mild  and  gentle.  "  Nile,  with  its  monstrous  crocodile 
and  behemah,  might  be  the  image  of  the  cruel  Egyptian  rale ;  and  mighty  Euphrates, 
with  its  frequent  overflowings,  that  of  the  Assyrian  power  and  of  its  swift  extension." 
As  t  indent  folk-lore  dragons  were  supposed  to  haunt  the  waters,  so  the  Assyrian 
,>ower  was  like  the  dasmon  of  the  great  river  (cf.  ch.  xivii.  1).  2.  The  wave  of  Assyrian 
smqueti. .  Onward  it  will  come,  a  magnificent  flood,  tn  punish,  to  purify.  The  Assyrian 
king,  with  all  the  "  pomp  and  circumstance  of  war,"  an  awful  array,  will,  as  the  riv.  r 
breaking  its  bounds  and  overflowing  all  banks,  rush  into  Judah,  overflowing  and  rolling;, 
till  the  flood  reaches  to  men's  necks ;  or,  as  with  the  outspread  wings  of  the  flying 
dragon,  the  foe  will  cover  all  the  breadth  of  the  land — land  of  the  passionately  hoped- 
for  iLimanuel. 

II.  Victorious  spiritual  hopes.  The  name  of  the  Messiah,  "  God  with  us,"  acts 
like  a  charm  on  the  troubled  spirit  of  the  seer.  His  discourse  suddenly  becomes  a  boM 
menace  against  all  heathendom.  1.  Material  power  defied.  Let  the  nations  rage  and 
let  them — despair  I  Let  them  fit  out  their  armaments  and — despair  /  exclaims  the 
prophet.  Let  tliera  form  their  plans — they  shall  be  broken ;  speak  their  words — they 
shall  not  stand.  For  "  with  us  is  God  I  "  What  magic  in  a  name,  in  a  phrase  I  Carry- 
ing our  thought  forward  through  the  centuries,  we  recall  what  powers  were  defied, 
what  wonders  wrought,  what  force  reduced  to  impotence,  what  counsels  reduced  to  folly, 
by  the  magic  of  the  Name  of  Jesus.  Yet  it  is  not  the  mere  name,  but  the  reality, 
denoted  by  the  iiame,  believed  and  felt  to  be  operating  through  the  human  spirit,  which 
is  tl)e  source  of  energy.  2.  Personal  inspiration.  Idle  had  been  these  defiances,  if  the 
prophet  did  not  know  of  a  secret  warranty  for  them  in  his  own  breast,  in  his  own 
spiritual  record.  "  Thus  said  Jehovah  unto  me  in  the  ecstasy."  He  had  heard  a  voice 
which  all  could  not  hear,  and  had  cleared  his  vision  in  a  light  not  vouchsafed  to  the 
vulgar.  It  was  a  discriminating  light.  He  was  taught  to  see  that  not  all  the  multitude 
called  rebellious  was  really  such,  nor  all  that  it  feared  was  really  to  be  dreaded.  The 
allusion  is  somewhat  obscure.  Probably  under  the  guise  of  fear  the  people  were  secretly 
rejoicing,  and  meditating  the  dethronement  of  Ahaz.  The  language  strikes  a  side- 
blow  at  the  pusillanimity  of  the  time.  The  prophet  has  learned  that  Jehovah  is  the 
true  Object  of  fear ;  that  noble  and  steadfast  reverence  which,  a  mighter  passion,  expels 
the  feebler  and  baser. 

"  Fear  him,  ye  saints,  and  yon  will  then 
Have  nothing  else  to  fear." 

If  this  condition  be  fulfilled,  Jehovah  will  be  found  an  inviolable  Sanctuary,  •  Shelter 
from  all  coming  trials.  We  find  the  same  thought  in  Bzek.  xi.  16.  He  will  be  a  "  little 
Sanctuary"  to  the  fugitive  and  dispersed  among  the  nations.  Fleeing  from  the  pursuer, 
men  laid  hold  of  the  "  horns  of  the  altar."  These  things  are  to  us  a  parable.  Religion 
is  the  spirit's  asylum  from  aU  distress.    In  times  when  the  newspaper  teems  with  war 


164  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEuPHET  ISAIAH.         [<>&.  viu.  1—221 

revolution,  rumours  of  dread,  or  the  evils  of  social  life  seem  intolerable,  we  may  go  into 
our  chamber,  shut  to  the  door,  pray  to  our  Father  in  secret,  flee  to  the  steps  of  the  altar 
that  slopes  through  darkness  up  to  Qod,  and  lo !  a  new  scenery  unfolds,  and  from  tlie 
secret  place  of  the  Most  High  fear  vanishes,  and  reverential  contemplation  reigns  in  the 
spirit. 

III.  Solemn  warnings.  He  who  will  ever  prove  an  Asylum  to  the  faithful  and  an 
Altar  of  refuge,  will  be  to  the  faithless  a  Stone  of  stumbling,  a  Bock  of  offence,  a  Trap, 
and  A  Snare.  We  know  how  tliese  thoughts  were  applied  to  the  coming  Olirist,  and 
how  they  were  fulfilled.  Set  "  for  the  fall  and  rising  again  of  many  in  Israel,"  and  for 
the  "  revealing  of  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts,"  he  is  to  them  that  believe  precious — 
"a  Stone,  a  tried  Stone;  and  he  tliat  believeth  on  him  shall  not  be  confouuded."  1. 
The  Name  cf  Ood  is  an  object  of  dread  or  of  delight  lo  us  according  to  the  slate  of  our 
own  affections.  2.  Truth  is  a  touchstone.  Either  we  recognize  in  it  the  "  pearl  of  great 
price,"  and  are  willing  to  sacrifice  all  to  possess  it,  or  it  is  like  a  certain  stone  of  which 
Plutarch  tells,  found  in  the  river  Inachos,  which  turned  black  in  the  hand  of  the  false 
witness.   Truth  seems  like  falsehood  to  the  debased  imagination  and  depraved  will. — J. 

Vers.  16 — 22. —  The  helplessness  of  superstition.  Here  a  mass  of  thought  is  found, 
struggling  for  expression  as  the  new-lighted  fuel  struggles  into  flame. 

I.  The  okaclb  sealed.  'Tis  time  to  make  an  end.  Let  what  has  been  written 
remain,  rolled  up  and  sealed  and  kept,  until  the  day  when  those  taciturn  letters  shall 
find  their  tongue  and  burst  into  flame.  And,  indeed,  every  true  thing  may  be  said  to 
be  "  written  down  for  the  time  to  come,  for  ever  and  ever."  It  may  be  lost  sight  of  for 
a  time,  but  only  to  be  recovered.  For  though  the  records  of  human  thought,  nay,  the 
human  mind  itself,  is  a  palimpsest,  oft  scribbled  over,  the  eternal  writing  of  God  upon 
the  conscience  is  indelible,  and  will  be  seen,  despite  wilful  blindness  and  pedantic 
glosses.  The  testimony  we  bear  is  first  and  last  for  the  eyes  of  God.  The  Roman  poet 
(Hor., '  Ep.,'  i.  20)  seems  to  dread  the  fate  of  oblivion  for  his  verse  at  certain  moments — 
cannot  brook  the  thought  that  his  roll  shall  be  packed  into  its  case  and  left  uuread. 
But  such  was  not  to  be  the  fate  of  the  poetry  of  Horace,  nor  of  any  true  poetry.  Ood 
can  read  through  the  closed  pages  of  true  lives,  and  faithful  utterances  find  audionoa  in 
the  court  of  angels,  in  the  halls  of  eternity. 

II.  Pledges  of  future  good.  "  I  and  the  children  whom  Jehovah  hath  given  me  are 
■igns  and  omens  in  Israel  on  the  part  of  Jehovah  of  hosts,  who  dwelleth  on  the  Zion- 
mount."  His  own  name  meaut  "  God's  salvation ; "  those  of  his  children,  as  we  have 
seen,  "The  remnant  will  return"  (or,  "be  converted"),  and  "Hasten-booty,  Speed-spoil." 
For  the  soul  that  is  strong  in  faith  is  also  strong  in  hope,  and  it  makes  its  own  omens, 
or  finds  omens  where  others  can  see  none. 

IlL  Magical  suggestions  repudiated.  The  wizard,  the  magician,  the  "  medium," 
as  he  is  now  called,  was  in  great  vogue  in  the  days  of  Ahaz.  Just  as  at  modern  stances, 
these  media  woidd  imitate  the  supposed  voices  of  ghosts  in  some  low  chirping  or 
muttering  tone.  What  keener  satire  could  be  launched  against  such  practices  than 
that  of  the  prophet !  It  is  indeed  turning  to  the  dead,  instead  of  to  the  living  and  the 
true  God.  Where  the  taste  for  truth  is  spoiled,  the  appetite  for  the  extraordinary  and 
marvellous  springs  up ;  and  men  will  fall  headlong  into  the  greatest  follies,  provided 
they  flatter  their  self-conceit,  though  wide  awake  to  their  interest,  and  keen  to  detect 
the  impositions  of  others  in  general 

IV.  Too-late  eepentance.  The  language  is  condensed,  the  thought  fused  in  a  mass. 
But  the  meaning  seems  to  be — too  late  will  the  weak  and  wicked  apply  to  the  true 
oracles  they  had  forsaken  for  the  false.  "  In  extteme  distress,  and  aiHicted  with  the 
pangs  of  starvation,  the  man  rushes  as  a  maniac  through  the  land,  curses  in  the  moment 
of  his  terrible  distress  and  exasperation  his  god  and  lord  whom  he  vainly  and  slavishly 
served,  and  directs  his  eyes  upwards  to  the  true  God.  But  when  he  looks  down  to  the 
earth  again  because  he  had  (Uscerned  no  light  above,  he  sees  there  the  most  dreadful 
darkness  and  distress,  without  any  ray  of  light,  without  any  hope  breaking  through 
it,  and  thus  he  is  hunted  forth  again  into  the  darkness  to  perish  theivin  (cl  Job  xt. 
22,  23 ;  xvilL  6, 13)  "  (Ewald).-^. 

Ver.  17. — Waiting  and  looking.    "  And  I  will  wait  upon  the  Lord,  that  Udeth  hU 


CH.  vm.  1— 22.J  TUB  BOOK    W  THE   rilOinil::'!'   ISAIAH.  155 

face  from  the  houM  of  Jacob,  and  I  will  look  for  him."  There  is  life  in  a  louk.  It 
it  so  true  that  the  eye  is  the  window  of  the  soul,  even  as  speech  is  the  door  of  the 
soul.  "  Look  unto  him,  and  he  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth,"  teaches  us  how  the 
whole  nature  of  man  can  concentrate  itself  in  a  look. 

I.  Dare  HOnits.  The  Lord  "hides  his  face."  This  expression  is  need,  because  the  fact 
is  the  expression  of  character  and  feeling.  It  reveals  our  emotions  of  love  and  anger,  of 
confidence  and  distrust.  To  hide  it,  is  to  turn  away  in  disgust,  in  sorrow,  in  shame. 
God  is  ashamed  of  his  people  Israel,  whom  he  had  set  apart  for  his  glory.  A  hidden 
face  is  a  terrible  punishment.  The  child  feels  that,  and  loni;s  for  the  returning  smile  of 
approval  and  love.  How  beautiful  is  the  prayer,  "  God  be  merciful  unto  us,  and  bless 
us ;  and  cause  his  face  to  shine  upon  us  " ! 

II.  Divine  supplication.  "  I  will  wait  upon  the  Lord."  Not  with  hurried  petition 
does  the  prophet  come,  but  with  an  attitude  of  soul  that  shall  show  depth  of  desire 
and  earnestness  of  purpose.  Prayer  is  a  sign  of  renewed  life.  We  cannot  long  con- 
tinue to  ask  for  blessings  that  we  do  not  really  desire.  Hypocrisy  soon  fatigues,  even 
where  it  is  not  found  out ;  and  our  poor  human  nature,  sinful  as  it  is,  wearies  of 
subterfuges.  In  waiting  upon  God  we  have  the  surest  evidence  that  our  penitence  is 
sincere  and  our  faith  vital. 

III.  Uplifted  vision.  "  I  will  look  for  hira."  Men  look  for  so  much,  and  not  for 
God.  For  human  approval,  fur  earthly  success,  for  ambition's  tinsel  crown.  In  looking 
for  God  his  Saviour,  the  prophet  is  looking  fur  all  that  the  house  of  Jacob  needs.  It 
is  a  wistful  eye  that  we  read  of  here.  Anxious,  but  yet  hopeful.  Some  had  "  sought 
unto  familiar  spirits,  and  wizards  that  peep  and  mutter ; "  and  it  seems  as  if  the  world 
had  not  yet  grown  wise  enough  to  forsake  all  .that  kind  of  seeking  to-day !  "  Should 
not  a  people  seek  unto  their  God  ?"  asks  the  prophet ;  and  in  every  age  those  who  look 
alone  unto  him  have  never  been  disappointed.  When  the  eyes  are  opened,  and  the 
heart  is  full,  even  if  the  lips  be  not  eloquent,  God  can  read  deep  meaning  in  the  earnest 
ga;!e  of  faith ;  and  he  will  return  and  bless  his  people  Israel,  according  to  his  Word.— 
W.  M.  S. 

Vera.  1 — 4. —  Orden  of  service.  We  may  serve  God  in  more  ways  than  one. 
There  is — 

I.  Unwilling  service.  We  may  conclude,  from  2  Kings  xvi.  10,  11,  that  Uriah  the 
priest  (ver.  2)  had  no  real  interest  in  the  service  of  Jehovah ;  that  he  did  what  Isaiah 
requested  of  him  with  an  indifferent,  if  not  a  positively  reluctant  mind.  We  may 
be  "  requisitioned  "  by  the  great  King  in  the  long  warfare  he  is  conducting.  He  who 
is  rebelliously  refusing  to  place  his  intelligence,  his  spiritual  nature,  his  resources,  at 
the  command  of  the  l5ivine  Saviour,  need  not  be  surprised  if  he  finds  himself  constrained 
to  serve  his  generation  against  his  will.  By  violent  excesses  sinful  men  have  made 
their  own  cause  odious ;  by  shameful  cruelty,  calling  out  heroic  endurance,  they  have 
made  the  cause  of  truth  most  honourable  in  the  ey^s  of  men.  God  can  make  the  wrath 
•nd  fhe  foolishness  and  even  the  stubbornness  (e.g.  Pharaoh)  of  men  to  praise  him. 

II.  Unconscious  sbbvice.  The  little  infant  was  a  "  sign  "  to  the  prophet  and  the 
people;  it  rendered  a  service  in  its  own  way,  but  it  must  have  been  an  entirely 
unconscious  one.  It  is  a  painful,  and  should  be  a  preserving  thought,  that  when  we  do 
wrong  we  "  know  not  what  we  do,"^how  heinous  is  our  offence,  or  how  large  and  long 
will  prove  to  be  its  issues.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  pleasant  and  inspiring  thought, 
that  when  we  are  doing  right,  in  our  several  spheres  and  according  to  our  various 
powers  and  opportunities,  we  do  not  know  what  service  we  are  rendering.  It  may  be 
one  rnuch  more  highly  esteemed  than  we  imagine  at  the  time  (see  Matt.  xxv.  37—40). 
It  may  be  one  that  has  far  more  valuable  and  lasting  results  than  we  could  possibly 
calculate.  Especially  is  it  true  of  the  little  child,  that  he  is  unconsciously  serving  his 
kind.  The  infant  in  the  family  has  a  softening,  sweetening,  humanizing  influence  of 
which  it  knows  nothing,  but  which  is  very  beautiful  and  valuable  Ever  and  every- 
where vpill  it  be  found  that  "  the  little  child  shall  lead"  them  whom  no  other  force  will 
either  draw  or  drive. 

III.  Acceptable  sebvice.  This  is:  1.  Intelligent.  Whatever  the  exact  signifi- 
cance of  "  writing  with  a  man's  pen  "  (ver.  1),  it  is  suggestive  of  the  double  truth  that, 
in  working  for  God,  we  should  (1)  put  out  all  our  powers  in  their  fulness  and  in  their 


156  THE  BOOK  OP   THE   PEOniET   ISAIAH.       [oh.  viii.  1—22. 

maturity,  and  shuulil  (2)  speak  (or  write)  words  adapted  to  the  capacity  of  those  whom 
we  address.  Many  who  seek  to  serve  throw  away  their  opportunity,  because  they  do 
not  tha  fitting  as  well  as  the  excellent  thing;  only  too  often  '  the  best  is  the  enemy 
of  the  good."  2.  Prudent.  (Ver.  2.)  The  prophet  placed  his  prcpheoy  beyond  reach  ol 
cavil  by  gecnriug  two  unexceptionable  witnesses,  one  of  them  being  the  more  convincing 
because  his  sym;'athies  were  on  the  other  side;  his  testimony,  therefore,  none  could 
challenge.  Thon,i<h  conscious  of  the  most  complete  integrity,  it  is  often  wise  and  well 
to  be  fortified  by  the  evidence  of  others.  Prudence  as  well  as  zeal  hasits  place  in  the 
catalogue  of  Chvistian  graces.  3.  Faithful.  It  was  no  smooth  message  which  the 
prophet  was  to  deliver  (ver.  4).  The  very  name  of  the  chiiil  was  to  be  a  standing 
threat  of  impending  evil  (ver.  3).  Not  only  he  who  now  speaks  for  God,  but  every 
Chi'istian  man,  is  bound  to  render  this  faithful  service :  his  words  and  his  life  are  to 
testify  against  the  vice,  the  levity,  the  worldliness,  the  imgodliness,  of  hia  age;  they 
are  also  to  bear  witness  to  the  excellency  and  beauty  of  unselfish  and  loyal  service. — O. 

Vers.  5 — 8. — The  false  standard  and  the  fatal  issue.  The  cardinal  error  into  which 
Israel  fell  was  that  of  jud.i;ing  by  appearances  instead  of  by  the  reality.  The  "softly 
flowing  waters"  (jf  the  Davidic  kingdom  seemed  far  less  reliable  than  the  "strong  and 
many  waters  "  of  Syria  and  of  Assyria,  and  therefore  Ephraim  trusted  in  the  one  and 
Judah  in  the  other  of  these  great  "  powers."  But  they  were  utterly  misplacing  their 
confidence.  Those  waters  that  "  went  softly  "  and  seemed  so  strengthless,  were  the 
river  of  God,  and  held  healing  virtues  in  their  waves;  these  strong,  tumultuous  rivers 
which  seemed  so  mighty  contained  no  remedy  for  the  stricken  and  declining  nation. 
Often  has  it  been  proved  that  it  is  not  the  apparently  insufficient  which  is  to  be 
despised,  and  as  often  that  it  is  not  the  apparently  irresistible  which  is  to  be  trusted. 

I.  The  false  stakdakd.  The  world  has  always  been  witnessing  illustrationg  of 
this  error.  The  history  of  the  Hebrew  nation  supplied  many  such :  Noah  and  the 
mocking  world  that  laughed  at  him ;  Abraliam  and  the  Canaanites ;  Moses  and 
Pharaoh ;  David  and  Goliath  ;  Joseph  and  his  persecuting  brethren ;  Elijah  and  Ahab, 
etc.  The  apparently  weak  man  (or  nation)  had  the  strength  of  the  Divine  arm  to 
sustain  him  (it) ;  the  apparently  strong  one  w  as  essentially  weak  and  unreliable.  We 
may  see  the  same  thing  in  :  1.  Christianity  itself,  which  in  its  first  beginnings  was  a 
"softly  going"  stream  as  compared  with  the  strong  tumultuous  waters  of  Jewish 
fanaticism  and  Boman  militarism,  2,  Divine  truth,  which  sometimes  goes  so  softly 
that  it  may  almost  be  said  of  it  that  "  there  is  no  speech  nor  language,  its  voice  is  not 
heard  ; "  that  it  "  does  not  strive  nor  crj',"  etc.,  as  compared  with  the  complicated 
organizations  of  men.  3,  Soly  love,  which  flows  on  unseen,  unheard,  "  like  subter- 
ranean rivers,"  as  compared  with  noisy  vehemence  and  untempered  zeal.  4,  The 
promises  of  Ood,  which  flow  so  quietly  and  giaciously  through  the  sacred  Scriptures 
from  the  beginning  even  to  the  end,  as  compared  with  the  pretentious  securities  of 
worldly  wisdom.  If  we  wish  to  krTow  whether  we  may  commit  the  keeping  of  our  soul, 
or  even  of  our  earthly  interests,  to  those  men  who  (or  those  things  which)  offer  them- 
selves to  our  choice,  we  must  not  be  satisfied  with  the  shows  and  semblances ;  we  must 
look  to  the  heart  of  things ;  we  must  ask  whether  there  is  soundness,  rectitude,  within ; 
we  must  ask,  above  all  other  questions — Have  they  the  approval  of  God  with  them,  and" 
the  power  of  God  behind  them ?  For  without  thai  the  strong  river  is  to  be  shunned, 
and  with  that  the  Boftly  going  stream  is  to  be  sought, 

II.  The  fatal  issue.  1.  Roman  imperialism  passed  away,  dragging  down  many 
thousands  with  it  in  its  &1L  2,  Spleudiif  but  corrupt  organizations  have  overflowed 
the  land,  even  as  the  "  waters  of  the  strong  river"  were  to  cover  Immanuel'B  land,  and 
beneath  their  deathful  influence  multitudes  have  perished,  3.  Rampant  zealotry  has 
slain  its  thousands,  not  only  of  those  whom  it  ruthlessly  assailed,  but  of  those  who 
wielded  its  weapon,  and  were  partakers  of  its  evil  spirit.  4.  Earthly  properties  and 
possessions  have  buried  innumerable  souls  beneath  their  destructive  weight.  It  ii  ■ 
fatal  thing  to  trust  that  which  is  not  worthy  of  our  confidence :  for  that  on  which  we 
lean  falls  on  us  and  slays  us;  the  river  to  whose  waters  we  resort,  instead  cf  fertilizing 
and  saving,  floods  and  drowns  us.  The  peril  here  is  one  which  threatens  the  Ohurdk 
as  well  as  the  world.  The  overflowing  river  "fills  the  breadth  of  thy  land,  0 
Imnanitel," — 0. 


CH.VUI.  1— 22.]        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  157 


1^ 


Vers.  9, 10. — The  impotence  of  ungodliness.    We  learu — 

I.  That  BI^^  sometimes  appears  in  imposing  aspects.  There  were  four  aspects 
not  to  say  elements,  of  power  in  these  world-kingdoms — confederation,  preparation 
'gird  yourselves),  consultation,  (take  counsel  together),  authority  (speak  the  word), 
i^in,  which  is  the  great  enemy  condactiag  a  long  campaign  against  the  Church  o( 
Christ,  certainly  seems  as  superior  in  strength  to  its  present  foe  as  did  these  great 
kingdoms  of  ttie  East  to  Judah  and  to  Israel ;  indeed,  far  more  so.  Sin  has  on  its 
side:  1.  Vastly  preponderating  numbers.  2.  Bank  and  authority.  3.  The  greater 
matwrial  resources,  including  military  power  and  money.  4.  Ancient  tradition  and 
inveterate  habit.  5.  An  apparently  impregnable  seat ;  it  is  defended  by  the  strong 
fortresses  of  worldly  interests,  animal  appetite,  spiritual  pride,  moral  indifference. 

■II.  That  the  pbophbtio  eye  sees  its  utter  overthrow.  "Ye  shall  be  broken 
in  pieces ; "  "  it  shall  come  to  nought  j "  "  it  shall  not  stand."  Under  the  shadow  of 
the  first  promise  we  See  the  head  of  the  serpent  bruised  (Gren.  iii.  15).  At  the  feet  of 
the  prophet  we  see  the  "  little  stone  "  "  break  in  pieces  and  consume  all  these  (earthly) 
kingdoms,"  itself  "  standing  for  ever "  (Dan.  ii.  44).  Standing  at  our  Master's  side,  we 
"behold  Satan  as  lightning  fall  from  heaven"  (Luke  x.  18).  With  apostolic  hope,  we 
look  on  the  time  when  Christ  "  will  have  put  down  all  rule,  and  all  authority,  and 
power,"  all  his  enemies  being  "  under  his  feet "  (1  Cor.  xv.  24,  25).  The  world-power 
shall  be  utterly  broken,  and  on  its  ruins  shall  rise  "  the  kingdom  which  cannot  be 
moved." 

ni.  That  oub  confidence  ib  in  the  pkesencb  of  the  invincible  Savioub. 
"  For  God  is  with  us."  We  may  rejoice  to  reckon  our  trophies  already  gained ;  we 
may  point,  with  congratulation,  to  the  gi-owing  intelligence  and  enthusiasm  of  the 
army  of  the  Lord ;  we  may  hail  signs  of  decay  in  ancient,  enfeebled  systems  ;  but  this 
is  our  confidence:  we  have  with  us,  working  in  us  and  for  us,  the  Holy  Spirit  of  the 
Divine  Redeemer :  "  For  Imraanuel.* — 0. 

Vers.  11 — 15, — Our  personal  relation  to  Ood.  It  is  clearly  insufficient  to  know  that 
we  are  on  the  same  side  as  that  of  the  majority  of  the  good.  The  voice  of  God's  people 
is  not  always  his  voice ;  their  way  not  always  his  way  (ver.  11).  They  may  call  for"  a 
confederacy  "  when  he  disapproves  of  it.  They  may  cry  "  peace  "  when  he  sees  only 
present  confusion  and  future  disaster.  They  may  be  shaken  with  fear  when  they  ougli  t 
to  be  calm  and  trustful  (ver.  12).  They  may  be  full  of  complacency  when  they  ought 
to  be  overwlielmed  with  shame.  We  shall  not  be  to  God  that  which  he  demands  of 
us,  except  we  come  into  distinct,  direct  relation  to  himself. 

I.  That  God  sometimes  acts  upon  its  with  constraining  power.  "  The  Lord 
spake  with  a  strong  hand  "  (ver.  11 ;  see  Bzek.  iii.  14).  The  Divine  impulse  was  one 
that  the  prophet  felt  he  must  not  resist.  Not  that  it  was  absolutely  irresistible,  but 
one  that  a  faithful  man  knew  that  he  must  not  hesitate  to  obey.  God  often  acts  upon 
the  soul  of  men  with  strong  and  urgent  power  to  constrain  or  to  restrain.  He 
approaches  and  influences  us  thus  by  (1)  his  Divine  providence;  (2)  one  or  other  ol 
the  privilerjes  he  has  provided  for  us ;  (3)  his  Holy  Spirit. 

IL  That  God  himself  is  the  true  Refuge  of  the  human  soul.  (Vers.  13, 14.) 
Here  is :  1.  Our  duty.  We  are  to  fear  God,  to  pay  a  reverential  regard  to  his  will,  to 
shrink  from  that  which  grieves  him,  to  "  dread  "  his  wrath.  2.  Its  recompense.  "  He 
shall  be  for  a  Sanctuary."  In  him,  as  in  a  pavilion,  we  Bhall  hide.  He  will  either 
deliver  us  from  trouble  by  saving  us  from  our  enemies  or  in  trouble,  by  granting  u> 
the  sustaining  grace  which  makes  us  "  more  than  conquerors  "  in  the  midst  of  it.  1 1 
we  who  are  his  "  saints"  will  but  "  fear  him  "  with  obedient  reverence,  we  »hall  thet 
'  have  nothing  else  to  fear." 

"How  was  it,  lovers  of  your  kind. 

Though  ye  were  mocked  and  hated, 
That  ye,  with  clear  and  patient  mind. 

Truth's  holy  doctrine  stated  ? 
In  God  as  in  an  ark  ye  kept ; 
Around,  and  not  above  you,  swept 

The  flood  till  it  abated." 


158  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [ch.  Tm.  1     «, 

in.  That  to  resist  Gud  is  to  walk  in  the  way  of  wrong  anb  ruin.  God  is,  to 
the  perverse  and  the  rebellious,  "  a  Btoiie  of  stumbling  and  a  Rock  of  offence  "  (ver.  14). 
God  must  be  everything  to  us,  for  life  or  death.  If  our  reLition  to  him  is  not  to  ub  the 
fountain  of  everlasting  joy,  then  it  will  be  to  us  the  source  of  unspeakable  sorrow. 
The  rejection  of  his  truth  and  of  himself  will  be  our  sin  on  earth,  our  condemnation  ia 
judgment,  the  subject  and  source  of  our  remorse  and  retribution  in  the  long  hereafter. 
Our  God  is  One  whom  it  is  infinitely  worth  while  to  make  our  Friend,  and  One  whom 
we  must  not  make  our  Enemy,  if  we  have  any  love  for  ourselves,  any  interest  in  out 
own  destiny. — C. 

Vers,  16 — 18. — The  teacher's  distress  and  his  consolation.  Those  who  have  taken 
positions  of  prominence  or  of  influence  in  the  Church  of  Christ  have  to  bear  their  own 
peculiar  burdens  as  tbey  are  gladdened  with  their  own  especial  joys.  The  teacher  ol 
Divine  truth,  in  whatever  particular  sphere  he  may  be  engaged,  whether  it  .be  a  high 
or  a  humble  one,  is  subject  to  his  own  discouiagements  and  encouragements.  If  we  ask 
what  are — 

I.  His  special  trials,  the  answer  to  that  question  is  this :  Apparent  failure  in 
his  work,  with  all  the  boij  ovvs  sucli  ciiscomflture  involves.  It  is  an  intensely  bitter  experi- 
ence for  a  human  soul  to  pass  through.  What  can  he  more  distressjiig  to  one  who 
earnestly  longs  for,  and  is  striving  to  promote,  "  the  kingdom  of  God,"  than  to  look  on 
and  see  faithful  labours  break  down  and  issue  in  nothing  ?  Such  was  the  keen  sorrow 
of  Isaiah.  It  seemed  to  him  as  if  God  were  "  hiding  his  face  from  the  house  of  Jacob  " 
(ver.  17);  for  the  i  eople  would  not  welcome  his  truth,  would  not  walk  in  his  ways, 
would  not  trust  in  his  mighty  power.  So  was  it  with  the  preacher  of  righteousni-ss 
(2  Pet.  ii.  5 — 8),  and  with  the  psalmist  (Ps.  cxix.  136),  and  with  Elijah  (1  Kings 
xix.  10),  and  with  Paul  (Giil.  i.  6;  iii.  1 ;  Phil.  ii.  21;  Acts  xx.  29,  30)  ;  and  so  was 
it  with  the  Mabtur  himseli  (John  \i.  66,  67).  The  human  teacher  at  such  times  is 
grievously  trouble!,  for  he  is  apt  to  conclude  (1)  that  God  may  be  dissatisfied  with  his 
testimony ;  or  (k!)  that  hu  himself  has  not  been  as  wise  or  as  faithful  as  he  might  have 
been ;  or  (3)  that  those  whom  he  has  been  addressing  have  incurred  serious  guilt.  But 
let  us  ask  what  are — 

II.  His  consolations.  They  are  such  as  these :  1.  There  are  disciples  who  learr. 
the  truth  aud  love  it.  "Bind  up  the  testimony.  .  .  among  my  disciples  "  (ver.  16). 
Isaiah  was  not  without  some  who  received  his  word,  and  for  whom  he  could  pray  that 
it  would  be  engraven  on  their  hearts.  Elijah  and  Paul  had  their  disciples;  the  Master, 
we  know,  had  his.  If  we  will  look  furtlier,  we  shall  find  that  there  are  fruits  on  the 
bough,  though  many  branches  be  barren  ;  good  results  are  not  invisible,  though  they  are 
not  so  apparent  as  we  could  wish.  2.  The  God  uf  all  truth  is  with  us,  and  his  ear  is  open 
to  our  appeal.  "I  will  wait  upon  the  Lord"  (ver.  17).  All  hearts  are  in  his  hand  ;  he 
is  earnestly  desirous  of  blessing  his  children ;  his  promised  aid  is  a  strong  assurance. 
3.  The  human  teacher  is  the  organ  of  Divine  truth.  "  I  and  the  children  are  for  signs 
and  wonders  .  .  .  from  the  Lord  of  hosts"  (ver.  18).  Even  their  very  names  were 
significant  of  some  truth  which  came  from  Jehovah  himself.  Everything  about  the 
propliet,  down  to  his  children's  names,  was  ordered  from  above.  The  prophet  only 
taught  that  which  he  was  inspired  to  teach,  and  the  truth  of  the  everlasting  God  must 
ultimately  prevail.  God  will  not  let  ihe  words  of  him  who  speaks  faiihfully  "fall  to 
the  ground  "  (1  Sam.  iii.  19).  Even  as  the  word  of  hhn  who  was  "  the  Truth  "  should 
never  pass  away,  so  shall  the  words  of  his  faithful  disciples  abide,  doing  their  work  in 
unsuspected  places  aud  in  unimagined  ways.  The  truth  we  have  received  from  the 
Lord  of  hosts  may  long  be  hidden,  tut  it  will  not  be  lost. — C. 

Vers.  19 — 12. — The  confession  of  ungodliness,  etc.  The  prevalence  of  the  evil  and 
sinister  arts  of  necromancy  is  exceedingly  significant.  The  attempt  to  supply  know- 
ledge for  the  living  by  appealing  to  the  dead  (ver.  19)  has  been  made  in  every  latitude 
and  longitude,  in  every  age,  in  every  condition  of  society.  What  is  the  significance  oi 
this  fact  ?     We  have  here — 

I.  The  confession  of  dkqodliness  and  its  degradation.  When  men  have 
thrown  ofi'  their  allegiance  to  God,  when  they  have  deuied  the  existence  of  theii 
Creator,  when  they  have  explicitly  refused. to  seek  and  to  serve  him  "in  whom  they 


CH.  vm.  1— 22.]       THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  159 

live  and  move  and  have  their  being,"  they  may  imagine  themselves  to  be  free  from  all 
spiritual  bonds ;  but  they  are  miserably  mistaken.  They  forsake  a  homage  which  is 
honourable  and  a  servico  which  is  ennobling,  to  fall  into  a  superstition  which  is  con- 
temptible and  degrading.  So  closely,  su  int>eparably  is  man  associated  with  the  spiritual 
world,  that,  try  how  he  may,  he  cannot  escape  from  it.  He  that  will  not  serve  God 
must  honour  demons  or  consult  spirits,  or  engage  in  some  "  cultus  "  which  is  discredit- 
able to  his  intelligence  and  injurious  to  his  moral  nature.  It  is  notorious  that  Rome 
never  sank  so  low  as  when,  losing  its  faith  in  the  gods,  it  sank  into  debasing  sujier- 
stitions  of  this  kind.  And  in  this  respect  a  corrupted  civilization  and  an  unredeemed 
barbarism  "  meet  together."  The  penalty  of  ungodliness  is  terrible.  Gorruptio  optimi 
peisima. 

II.  The  demand  of  intelligent  piety.  "  Should  not  a  people  seek  unto  their 
God?  ...  To  the  Law  and  to  the  testimony  "  (vers.  19,  20).  Aright-minded,  rational 
people,  possessed  of  that  fear  of  God  which  is  the  beginning  and  also  the  end  of  wisdom, 
will  ask —  What  does  God  say  1  For  they  will  consider  that :  1.  He  who  made  them 
knows,  as  they  cannot  know,  what  are  the  capacities  of  their  nature,  and  what  is  the 
purpose  of  their  lifo.  2.  He  who  has  all  power  in  his  hand,  and  who  miilcos  large 
requirements  of  his  creatures,  both  can  and  will  bless  those  whom  he  ajiproves,  and 
ban  those  whom  he  condemns.  3.  Therefore  it  is  infinitely  desirable  to  secure  his 
approbation  and  his  help.  Such  a  people  will,  consequently,  ask — What  does  his  Word 
state  !  What  can  we  gather  from  his  "  Law  "  as  to  his  will  concerning  us  ?  An  intelli- 
gent piety  will  resort  to  "  the  Law  and  to  the  testimony,"  not  that  it  may  find  minute 
correspondences  and  detailed  injunctions,  but  that  it  may  light  on  living  principles 
which  it  may  itself  apply  to  all  new  forms  and  changing  conditions. 

III.  The  hopelessness  of  sin.  If  we  read  the  prophet  thus,  "  There  is  no  light 
in  them,"  we  reach  the  truth  that  sin  brings  men  down  to  a  condition  in  which  tlie 

,  light  that  has  shone  from  leason,  conscience,  revelation,  has  gone  out ;  in  tliat  case 
the  sources  of  enlightenment  are  stopped,  and  our  Lord's  graphic  and  painful  picture 
is  realized  (Matt.  vi.  22,  23).  But  if  we  take  the  words  of  the  text  thus,  "  They  are  a 
people  for  whom  no  morning  dawns,"  then  we  arrive  at  anotlier,  though  a  kindred 
truth,  that  sin  leads  down  to  utter  spiritual  hojielessness,  to  evil  without  prosp'ct  of 
amendment,  to  death  without  hope  of  life,  to  darkness  without  gleam  of  morning  light. 
Men  do,  by  the  path  of  refusal  and  delay,  reach  a  moral  condition  in  which :  1.  Privilege 
does  not  benefit  them;  additional  services  only  add  to  their  accountability  without 
touching  their  soul.  2.  Cluistitement  does  not  awaken,  but  only  aggravate  them 
(see  ch.  i.  5).  3.  Direct  Divine  influence  fails  to  lead  them  into  the  path  of  life.  The 
night  of  spiritual  death  only  deepens  and  darkens ;  there  dawns  no  morning  of  tho 
eternal  life  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus. — C. 

Vers.  1,  3. — Prophecy  in  a  name.  The  interpretation  of  this  name  demands  some 
acquaintance  with  the  history  of  the  times,  and  with  the  views  of  political  parties 
in  the  city  of  Jerusalem.  The  great  danger  immediately  pressing  was  the  combined 
attack  of  Rezin  and  Pekah,  representing  the  neighbour-kingdoms  of  Syria  and  Israel. 
Isaiah  had  prophesied  the  fall  of  these  nations,  and,  so,  encouraged  Judah  to  hold  on, 
and  keep  trust  in  Jehovah's  protection.  But  time  passed  on,  and  there  were  no  signs 
of  calamity  overtaking  Rezin  and  Pekah.  On  the  other  hand,  they  seemed  to  be  only 
too  Buccessfi.ll.  They  had  overrun  the  country,  taking  many  away  captive.  Rezin 
had  captured  Elath,  the  Red  Sea  port.  And,  taking  advantage  of  Judah's  time  of 
weakness,  the  Edomites  were  harassing  the  north-eastern  frontier.  To  politicians  the 
state  of  affairs  was  hopelessly  dark  ;  and  they  could  see  no  way  out  of  the  difficulty, 
save  by  seeking  alliance  with  the  growing  power  of  Assyria,  which  was  pressing  its 
conquests  toward  the  Mediterranean.  But  to  do  this  was  to  declare  their  unbelief 
in  Isaiah's  assurances,  and  to  put  public  dishonour  uion  him  as  the  servant  of  Jehovah. 
So  he  repeats  his  prophecy.  In  order  that  the  people  might  know  it  and  und^  rstand 
it,  he  puts  it  into  one  word,  one  name ;  he  writes  it  in  large  letters,  sets  it  up  in  a  public 
place,  and  so  testifies  against  the  perilous  policy  which  fear  of  the  national  eneuiiea 
•was  dictating.  "  The  tablet  was  to  be  large,  and  the  writing  was  not  to  be  with  the 
sharp  point  of  the  artist,  or  learned  scribe,  but  with  a  '  man's  pen,'  i.e.  such  as  the 
common  workmen  used  for  sign-boards,  that  might  fix  the  gaze  of  the  careless  passer 


160  THE    BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [en.  viii.  1— 22 

by,  and  on  that  tablet,  as  though  it  were  the  heading  of  a  proclamation  or  dedication, 
he  was  to  write  '  to  Maher-shalal-hash-baz.' "  This  name  rooalls  the  prophecy  which 
Isaiah  had  already  given  (ch.  vii.  14 — 16).  The  word  actually  and  precisely  means 
"  Speed  plunder,  haste  spoil."  It  refers  to  the  Assyrians  whom  Isaiah  sees  hurrying 
to  spoil  both  Syria  and  Samaria.  First  the  public  sign,  and  then  the  child,  bearing  the 
prophetic  name,  were  to  be  a  constant  testimony  to  the  truth  of  Isaiah's  words,  and 
a  means  of  keeping  the  cheering  prophecy  ever  before  the  people.  The  passage 
reminds  us  of  the  value  attached  to,  and  the  use  made  of.  Old  Testament  namei.  0 
this  subject  P.  W.  Robertson  has  a  very  suggestive  passage  (vol.  i.  41,  42) :  "In  tin 
Hebrew  history  are  discernible  three  periods  distinctly  marked,  in  which  names  and 
words  bore  very  different  characters.  These  three,  it  has  been  observed  by  acute 
philologists,  correspond  to  the  periods  in  which  the  nation  bore  the  three  different 
appellations  of  Hebrews,  Israelites,  and  Jews.  In  the  first  of  these  periods  names 
meant  truths,  and  words  were  the  symbols  of  realities.  The  charactei istics  of  the 
names  given  then  were  sim,'lioity  and  sincerity.  The  second  period  begins  about  tin 
time  of  the  departure  from  Egypt,  and  it  is  characterized  by  unabated  simplicity,  will] 
the  addition  of  sublimer  thought,  and  feeling  more  Intensely  religious.  Words  mean 
realities,  but  they  are  impregnated  with  deeper  religious  thought.  The  third  period 
was  at  its  zeniih  in  the  time  of  Christ;  words  had  lost  their  meaning,  and  slared  the 
hollow  unreal  state  of  all  things."  Keeping  in  mind  how  conveniently  and  efiicientlv 
Isaiah  wraps  up  his  prophecy  into  a  name  which  will  at  once  arrest  attention,  this  u.se 
of  names  may  b"  illustrated :  1.  In  relation  to  families.  We  recall  to  mind  loveil 
relatives,  or  acts  of  kindness  done  to  us,  or  persons  whose  heroic  lives  we  admire, 
by  giving  to  our  children  some  significant  name.  2.  In  relation  to  the  sale  of  article: 
The  skill  of  the  advertiser  is  shown  in  the  discovery  of  some  taking  name,  which  will 
draw  public  attention  to  the  article  offered.  3.  In  relation  to  science  a/nd  invention. 
The  results  of  research  and  discovery  do  not  become  public  property  until  they  can 
bo  fixed  in  a  name ;  even  men's  theorizings  getting  thus  labelled  for  use.  4.  In  relation 
to  doctrines.  Statements  of  Divine  revelation  do  not  become  public  property  until  they 
get  a  name,  which  is  a  sort  of  handle,  by  which  the  ordinary  mind  may  grasp  tbeni 
By  such  illustrations  the  practical  wisdom  of  Isaiah's  act  may  be  shown,  and  then  tl.6 
truth  which  he  sought  thus  to  keep  before  the  minds  af  the  people  may  be  impressed. 
The  staring  name,  calling  the  attention  of  all  the  passers-by,  said  plainly,  "  Trust  God, 
not  man."  *'  Fear  nobody  but  God ;  nothing  but  God."  "  His  word  is  surely  true  : 
though  you  see  it  not,  it  is  hurrying  even  now  to  its  accomplishment."  That  name 
said,  '■  Trust  in  the  Lord  for  ever."  "  He  maketh  the  wrath  of  man  praise  him,  and 
restrains  the  remainder  of  wrath." — R.  T. 

Ver.  6. — Jehovah  like  the  waters  of  Fhiloah.  The  fountain  of  Siloam,  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Tyrol  ^^''^  valley,  and  so  at  the  roots  of  both  Zion  and  Moriah,  is  fed  with 
water  which  flows  through  a  narrow  subterranean  conduit  from  the  "  Pool  of  the 
Virgin."  The  point  of  the  comparison  presented  by  Isaiah  cannot  be  better  stated 
than  in  the  following  passage :  "  These  waters  of  Shiloah,  the  sacred  waters  that  came 
forth  from  the  holy  mountain,  seemed  poor  and  ignoble  in  comparison  with  the  Abana 
and  Pharpar  of  Syria,  or  the  Jordan  of  Ejihraim ;  how  much  more,  then,  with  the 
Euphrates  and  Tigris !  Calm  and  tranquil  faith  in  the  prophetic  word  which  God  sent 
them,  in  the  gently  flowing  current  of  his  providential  dealings  (springing  out  of  the 
deptbii  of  his  eternal  wisdom  and  goodness), — ^this  was  not  to  their  mind.  They  must 
have  lomething  that  appc.iled  to  eye  and  ear,  that  gratified  the  fancy  with  its  ambi- 
tious cravings  "  (Dr.  Ka.> ).  Henderson  applies  the  figure  of  the  text  to  the  house  of 
David,  but  Cheyne  properly  argues  that  it  is  better  to  take  the  phrase  as  symbolizing 
the  temple,  and  its  almighty  and  gracious  Lord ;  and  he  remarks  that  the  figure  is  not 
an  unfamiliar  one.  The  psalmist  says  (Ps.  xlvi.  4,  5),  "  There  is  a  river,  the  streams 
whereof  shall  make  glad  the  city  of  God ....  God  is  in  the  midst  of  her."  And  Jeremiah 
speaks  of  the  people  having  "  forsaken  the  Lord,  the  Fountain  of  living  waters  "  (Jer. 
xvi.  13).  Taking  these  waters  of  Shiloah  as  the  figure  for  Jehovah,  they  may  be 
shown  to  illustrate—^ 

I.  The  sentlenebb  of  Jehotah.  His  kingdom  "  cometh  not  with  observation.'" 
There  i»  no  cry,  no  lifting  up  of  voice.    He  never  rolleth  like  a  desolating  flood,  ikTS 


OH.  vm.  1—22.]       THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,  163 

in  times  of  special  judgmuat.  He  bubbleth  gently  as  a  fouctain ;  and  those  who  read 
their  lives  aright  learn  to  say,  "Thy  gentleness  hath  made  mo  great."  This  cha- 
racteristic comes  out  strongly  in  the  ministry  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  was 
a  gentle  persuasion  of  truth,  and  a'  gentle  example  of  rightoousncss.  And  still  it 
is  true  that  the  regenerative  force,  in  individual  lile  and  in  society,  "  flows  softly,"  like 
the  waters  of  Shiloah. 

n.  The  constancy  op  Jehovah.  A  fountain  is  fed  from  unfailing  sources;  it  is 
always  flowing,  ready  with  its  supplies  at  all  times ;  no  enemies  can  limit  it  or  cut 
it  off ;  in  the  secret  places  of  the  eavth  it  has  its  storehouse,  and  it  is  ready  with  its 
help  for  every  time  of  need.  These  suggest  what  God  ever  has  been  and  is  to  his 
people.  We  have  never  to  search  for  him  ;  he  is  always  here.  .  We  liave  never  to  force 
hira ;  he  is  always  ready — ■"  A  very  present  Help  ; "  "A  Refuge  and  Strength." 

III,  The  suitability  of  Jehovah,  This  may  not  be  the  best  term  for  the  thought, 
which  is,  that  the  perennial  fountain,  at  constant  command,  was  belter  adapted  to  tlie 
circumstances  of  Judah  than  the  river  of  Euphrates,  which,  if  turned  towards  them, 
could  only  rush  over  them  in  desolating  flood.  Jehovah  was  more  iirotisely  adapted 
to  their  conditions.  He  could  more  fittirigly  meet  their  demands  than  any  "  arm 
of  flesh,"  however  strong  it  might  seem  to  be.  The  thoHght  may  be  enlarged  upon 
under  the  guidance  of  the  following  passage  (2  Cor.  ix.  8) :  "  An''  Grod  is  able  to  make 
all  grace  abound  toward  you ;  that  ye,  always  having  all  sufficiency  in  all  things,  may 
abound  to  every  good  work," 

IV.  The  suFi'ioiENOY  of  Jehovah.  The  fountain  flows  on,  day  and  night,  pouring 
forth  its  fulness  of  blessing;  whosoever  will  may  drink  and  live.  We  are  never 
"  straitened  in  God."  He  can  do  abundantly  for  us,  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think. 
Judah  could  only  he  dissatisfied  with  Jehovah  because  they  did  not  prove  his  faith- 
fulness and  mercy ;  they  did  not  cast  themselves  upon  him.  "  Trust  in  the  Lord 
for  ever ;  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting  strength."  Advance  to  show  how  this 
figure  of  the  waters  of  Shiluah  gained  new  Ibrm  in  the  teachings  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
who  said,  "  Whosoever  drinketh  of  this  water  shall  thirst  again :  but  whosoever 
drinketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  never  tldrst;  but  the  water  that 
I  shall  give  him  shall  he  in  him  a  vrell  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting 
life.-— R.  T. 

Ver.  8. — Immanvd's  land.  The  figure  used  in  this  text  is  that  of  an  overflowing 
river,  sweeping  along  in  desolating  flood,  and  the  great  stretches  uf  water,  covering  the 
cultivated  lands  on  either  side  of  the  stream,  are  poetically  likened  to  the  outspread 
wings  of  a  flying  bird.  The  first  reference  of  the  ex]jression,  "Thy  land,  0  Ininianuel," 
may  he  to  the  prophetic  child  that  was  to  he  born  in  tiie  land  (cli.  vii.  It)-  The 
distant  reference  may  be  to  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  luiinanuel,  to  ihe  land  of 
Judah,  or  rather  of  Canaan.  But  probably  the  name  sliould  be  translated,  and  used  as 
a  succiucD  description  of  Palestine.  This  is  its  great  and  characteristic  peculiarity; 
it  is  the  "  God  with  us  "  land.  This  may  be  illustiated,  and  the  lesson  from  it 
enforced,  under  the  following  divisions. 

I.  It  is  the  land  pbepaeed  fob  Immanuel.  It  was  selected,  and  other  countries 
were  set  in  relation  to  it,  so  that  it  might  be  the  "  God  with  us,"  land,  in  which  a  special 
manifestation  and  relationship  of  God  might  be  tried,  in  the  face  of  the  whole  world. 
The  coimtry  was  remarkably  isolated  geographically.  And  it  was  as  remarkably 
centred.  These  corrected  each  other.  Israel  had  the  best  opportunities  for  preserving 
the  great  truths  of  the  unity  and  spirituality  of  God  which  were  entrusted  to  it. 
And  at  the  same  titne  it  was  set  in  the  "  eye  of  the  world,"  so  that  all  nations  could 
watch  the  singular  experiment  of  the  theocracy. 

II.  It  is  the  land  honodbed  by  the  abidino  of  Imuanuel.  That  direct  and 
sensible  presence  of  God  which  was  the  condition  of  the  covenant  was  indicated  by  the 
Shechinah-symbol  in  tabernacle  asid  temple.  The  glory  of  Israel  wandering  was  God 
present.  The  glory  of  Israel  settled  was  Ood  abiding  and  ruling.  The  presi  nee  of 
God  with  us,  as  we  know  it,  is  Christ,  the  Temple-body,  apprehended  by  our 
senses;  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Temple-spirit,  apprehended  as  witnessing  and 
working  within  us. 

in.  It  is  the  land  that  most  be  wobthy  of  Iumanuel.    It  was  the  fundamental 

ISALAU.  M 


162  THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  vui.  1—22 

i<lea  of  Judaism  that  the  land  was  holy,  because  God  walked  to  and  fro  in  it ;  and, 
therefore,  the  people  must  be  holy.  And  still  this  is  the  persuasion,  '*  Be  ye  holy ;  for 
I  am  holy."  The  figure  may  stand  for  the  land  of  each  man's  life.  That  ought  to  be 
a  "  God  with  us  "  land.— B.  T. 

Ver.  14. — Ood's  twofold  relations  with  men.  To  some,  a  "  Sanctuary ;"  to  others, 
a  "  Bock  of  offence."  For  the  Christian  form  of  the  same  truth,  comp.  2  Cor.  ii.  1,  6, 
"  To  the  one  we  are  the  savour  of  death  unto  death,  and  to  the  other  the  savour  of  life 
unto  life.  And  who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ? "  G«d  is  to  men  as  men  are  to 
him  (see  Ps.  xviii.  25,  26).  But  is  this  saying  anything  strange?  Surely  it  is  the 
secret  of  good  motherhood  and  fatherhood.  They  who  order  their  households  well  are 
wisely  responsive  to  the  various  states  of  the  children,  adapting  and  adjusting  conduct 
to  the  dispositions  and  circumstances  of  each  member  of  the  home,  i^o  skillul  parent 
treats  all  the  children  alike,  and  differing  modes  of  treatment  are  no  indications  ol 
v.irying  degrees  of  love.  He  who  loves  us  all  must  deal  with  each  upon  his  perfect 
understanding  of  each  one.  He  must  be,  he  had  better  be,  a  "  Eock  of  offence  "  to  some. 
To  the  trustful  child  he  can  be  a  "  Sanctuary ; "  but  to  the  wilful  child  be  must  be  a 
Severity.  His  dealings  will,  at  first,  cause  offence.  There  is  a  very  deep  and  searching 
truth  indicated  here,  which  may  be  illustrated  from  God's  dealings  with  his  people,  and 
with  individuals  from  among  his  people,  through  all  the  ages.  It  is  that  a  man  may 
compel  Qod  to  he  otherwise  towards  him  than  he  would  he.  The  passage  which  clearly 
states  this,  and  will  be  a  key  to  many  other  passages  and  illustrations,  is  the  following : 
"  Have  I  any  pleasure  at  all  that  the  wicked  shuuld  die?  saith  the  Lord  God"  (Ezek. 
xviii.  23).  It  is  difficult  to  realize,  but  it  is  not  beyond  belief,  that  the  same  infinite 
goodness  makes  God  both  a"Sanctuaiy"  and  a  "  Eock  of  offence."  In  very  grave 
measures — sometimes  we  feel  in  overwhelming  measures — the  responsibilities  of  our 
life-issues,  and  even  the  character  of  Divine  relations  with  us,  rests  upon  ourselves. 
After  the  wilful  ones,  hunying  to  their  doom,  God,  hastening,  pleads  thus:  "  Why  will 
ye  die  ?    0  house  of  Israel,  why  will  ye  die  ?  " — R.  T. 

Ver.  17. — 17te  hiding  of  Ood's  face.  Jehovah  is  here  spoken  of  as  "  the  Lord,  that 
bideth  his  face  from  the  house  of  Jacob ;  "  and  Jeremiah  uses  a  similar  figure  in  one  oi 
his  prayers:  "  Thou  hast  covered  thyself  with  a  cloud,  that  our  prayer  should  not  pass 
through"  (Lam.  iii.  44).  Aside  from  the  historical  associations  of  the  text,  the  expres- 
sion itself  is  a  suggestive  one,  and  may  be  made  the  basis  of  meditation.  Whatever 
may  be  the  fact  concerning  God,  this  at  least  is  the  fact  of  the  pious  man's  experience 
^it  feds  to  him  as  if  God  had  hidden  his  face  and  covered  himself  with  a  cloud.  Two 
thoughts  are  suggested  by  the  figure. 

I.  The  twilight  gloom  of  the  Christian  often  akisbs  from  the  sense  of 
CHANQB  IN  himself.  There  are  more  twilight-times  than  night-times  in  the  circle  of 
the  year,  and  in  the  circle  of  a  religinus  life.  Isaac  Taylor  reminds  us  that,  in  a  whole 
year,  there  are  only  two  or  three  absolutely  dark  nights.  Nature  gets  a  great  blessing 
«iut  of  those  two  or  three,  but  could  not  bear  more.  And  in  a  religious  life  there  are 
many  things  large  enough  to  dim  the  rays  of  hope,  and  cast  long  and  dark  shadows 
over  the  spirit,  but  very  few  things  strong  enough  to  blot  out  the  sun  and  stars,  and 
make  a  midnight  for  the  soul.  Now,  we  need  to  see  clearly  that  the  gloom  of  spirit  we 
feel  usually  comes  from  changes  in  ourselves.  We  are  so  ready  to  settle  our  twilight 
glooms  upon  God,  as  though  in  his  sovereignty  he  had  thus  dealt  with  us;  and  then 
we  fail  to  see  our  own  mistakes,  and  we  make  no  efforts  to  remedy  the  evils  which  are 
the  immediate  occasion  of  our  fears.  1.  Much  inward  trouble  comes  from  the  state  of 
our  hodies.  The  action  and  reaction  of  body  and  mind  are  exceedingly  subtle.  2. 
Much  of  our  inward  distress  comes  from  unwatchfulness.  We  may  easily  pass 
through  most  important  changes  of  circumstances  unheedin^jly.  We  often  are  in  new 
circumstances  before  we  are  at  all  prepared  for  them,  and  then  their  influence  may 
prove  depressing  or  overwhelming.  Life  is  to  be  for  us  all  a  succession  of  surprises, 
and  yet  we  are  never  to  be  taken  unawares.  Our  bodily  weakness,  our  unwatchful- 
ness, our  indulgence  in  sin,  hides  God's  face  from  us  by  putting  a  cloud  across  it.  It 
is  hidden,  but  we  must  see  that  we  ourselves  are  the  occasion  and  cause  of  the  hiding. 
It  lies  with  iu  to  get  the  cloud  away. 


OH.  vni.  1— 22.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  163 

II.  The  midnight  gloom  of  the  Christian  often  abisbs  fbom  the  idba  op 
CHANGE  IN  God.  Christian  joy  comes  from  a  clear  consciousness  of  the  Divine  near- 
ness— "  the  face  of  God  shining  upon  his  servant."  Christian  woe  comes  when  Cfod 
seems  to  be  afar  off,  hidden  ;  it  is  as  though  the  sun  had  passed  In  behind  a  cloud ; 
the  face  th»t  made  heaven  for  us  shows  frowns.  It  may  well  be  called  midnight  dark- 
ness when  the  soul  has  conceived  the  idea  of  changed  relations  in  God.  One  or  two 
comforting  considt^rations  may  be  dwelt  on.  1.  Change  in  God  only  comes  aa  a 
consequence  of  change  in  the  Christian.  He  is  the  unchangeable  One ;  but  In  his  rule 
he  adjusts  relations  to  those  wliom  he  would  bless.  To  the  sinner,  he  is  a  God  of 
holy  indignations.  To  the  penitent,  he  is  a  God  of  saving  mercies.  To  the  earth- 
child,  trying  to  live  a  godly  life,  he  is  a  watching,  guiding  Father.  To  the  Christian 
in  trouble  or  pain,  he  is  a  tender,  comforting  Mother.  He  is  not  varying  and  uncer- 
tain ;  that  would  make  him  untrustworthy.  He  is  adapting  himself  to  us,  so  that  if 
ever  God  seems  to  have  changed  towards  us,  we  may  be  quite  sure  that  the  truth  is 
we  have  changed  towards  him.  If  he  hides  himself,  there  must  be  some  cherished 
wrong  in  us,  as  certainly  as  there  was  in  the  Israel  of  Isaiah's  times.  2.  Change  in 
God  is  never  change  in  his  feelings,  only  in  sensible  relations.  It  should  be  settled,  as 
one  of  our  immovable  truths,  that  there  can  be  no  real  change  in  God,  whatever 
appearances  we  may  discern.  Look  long  with  our  human  eyes,  and  the  firmest  steeple 
will  seem  to  be  trembling  and  tottering  to  a  fall ;  but  the  trembling  is  only  in  our 
vision.  For  a  "  little  moment  God  may  hide  his  face  from  you,  but  with  great  loving- 
kindness  he  will  gather  you."  Change  in  sensible  relations  there  may  be.  The  joy  ol 
his  love  we  may  lose,  not  his  love.  The  impulse  of  his  grace  we  may  lose,  not  the 
grace.  The  comfort  of  his  presence  we  may  lose,  not  the  presence.  It  should,  indeed, 
humble  us  that  we  may  lose  so  much,  but  even  in  our  soul's  midnight  hours  we  need 
not  despair.  As  the  child  in  the  dark  whispers  "  Father  I "  and  is  at  peace  when  the 
father-arms  press  closer,  so  we,  in  the  night,  may  find  that  if  our  Father's  face  is 
hidden,  our  Father  himself  is  near. — B.  T. 

Ver.  18. — Man  every  way  GocFs  instrument.  "  Behold,  I  and  the  children  whom 
Jehovah  hath  given  me  are  for  signs  and  for  omens  in  Israel  from  Jehovah  Sabaoth, 
who  dwelleth  on  Mount  Zion"  (Cheyne's  translation).  The  thought  here  is  very 
simple  and  very  familiar,  and  no  more  than  the  statement  of  divisions,  for  the  ordering 
of  thought,  can  be  necessary.  Take  St.  Paul's  figure  of  the  "  living  sacrifice,"  as 
including  body,  soul,  spirit,  and  relationships,  all  consecrated  to  God's  service,  and 
illustrate — 

I.  How  a  man's  body  may  be  consecrated  to'God. 

II.  How  a  man's  health  may  bo  consecrated  to  God. 

III.  How  a  man's  gifts  may  be  consecrated  to  God. 

IV.  How  a  man's  possessions  may  be  consecrated  to  God. 

V.  How  a  man's  personal  friendships  may  be  consecrated  to  God. 

VI.  How  a  man's  family  life  may  be  consecrated  to  God. 

VII.  How  a  man's  social  influences  may  be  consecrated  to  God. — ^R,  li 

Ver.  20. — The  standard  of  truth  and  morals.  This  text  is  not  merely  a  DlThie 
declaration.  It  rests  upon  the  great  fact  that  man  can  never  be  satisfied  until  he  gets 
a  standard  of  truth  and  duty  outside  of  and  apart  from  himself.  No  man  anywhere 
can  reach  an  intelligent  satisfaction  by  becoming  wholly  a  law  unto  himself.  The 
moral  sense  in  every  man  is  vitiated,  and  its  attestations  are  uncertain.  The  testi- 
mony of  conscience  is  variable ;  it  is  not  now  always  prompt,  decided,  and  faithful  in 
its  judgments.  It  may  appear  at  first  sight  as  if  there  were  many  men  who  are  living 
entirely  according  to  their  own  will,  following  wholly  the  "  devices  and  desires  of  their 
own  hearts."  But,  if  we  look  a  little  deeper,  wo  shall  find  that  they  are  all  striving 
after  conformity  to  some  standard,  bad  or  good,  that  is  outside  them.  It  is  often 
custom,  etiquette,  society,  the  moral  level  of  the  age  in  which  they  happen  to  live. 
There  are  common  fallacies  which  tone  the  lives  of  some,  and  multitudes  are  content 
to  make  a  standard  of  the  teachings  of  an  authoritative  priesthood.  Even  the  hermit, 
dwelling  apart,  separated  from  the  associations  of  his  fellow-men,  cannot  be  satisfied 
with  bis  own  standard;  he  even  finds  an  ideal  outside  himself,  in  the  life,  endurance, 


164  1HE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.       [gh.  viit  1—22 

and  Buffering  of  some  more  saititly  fellow-creature.  God  has  graciously  considered 
this  common  human  necessity.  He  bas  not  left  his  creatures  to  search  for  such  a 
standard  in  their  blindness.  In  every  age,  in  forms  and  terms  such  as  »t  the  time 
they  could  understand,  God  has  given  models  of  truth  and  duty.  He  his  never  left 
men  to  mere  abstract  speculations;  in  some  kind  of  ordinarily  understood  human 
^.eaching,  by  word,  or  act,  or  example,  God  has  always  set  forth  a  standard;  and  so  ia 
every  age  he  can  make  his  appeal  and  say,  "  To  the  Law  and  to  the  testim<inyi''  In 
the  first  ages  of  the  world  the  standard  was  given  in  personal  characters,  such  as  Enoch, 
Methuselah,  Noah,  Abraham.  To  this  was  by-and-by  added  the  revelation  Of  the 
Divine  will  in  writien  and  spoken  words,  for  which  advancing  tiivilizatiou  and  culture 
prepared  men.  At  the  very  beginning,  as  the  written  revelation  could  not  get  into 
the  bands  and  use  of  all  men,  it  was  presented  for  a  time  in  the  pictures  of  an  elaborate 
ceremonial.  Later  on  it  was  expressed  in  the  free  speech  of  prophets  and  teachers, 
and  then  the  pictured  ceremonials  might  fade  away.  At  the  very  last  the  Divine 
standard  of  truth  and  morals  for  humanity  was  exhibited,  in  its  completeness  and  per- 
fection, in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Truth,  duty,  virtue,  were  here  among 
men.  Christ  was  the  perfect  realization  of  God's  idea  of  a  moral  being.  The  standard 
man  is  not  on  earth  now,  but  his  record  remains.  That  record  is  in  all  our  hands ;  it 
is  as  if  we  lived  our  daily  life  in  the  presence  of  the  Divine  ideal.  We  have  in  our 
Bible  God's  great  rule  of  truth  and  duty.  Consciously  or  unconsciously  We  do  test 
every  action  by  our  standard ;  all  the  questions  arising  in  connectiou  with  our  moral 
life  are  brought  to  the  test  of  the  "  Law  and  the  testimony." 

I.  The  Bible  exerts  its  moral  force  upon  us  by  the  truths  which  it  con- 
TADJB  AND  REVEALS.  These  truths  test  all  received  opinions.  Each  man  really  is 
according  to  his  opinions  and  beliefs ;  the  whole  temper  and  conduct  are  toned  by  the 
truths  received.  If  they  are  according  to  the  "  Law  and  testimony,"  their  fruit  will  be 
righteousness  and  mercy.  The  Bible  does  not,  indeed,  contain  any  formulated  sj'stem 
of  theology  or  of  morals,  but  it  does  contain  such  an  harmonious  setting  forth  of  all 
necessary  truth  as,  in  fact,  constitutes  a  coiaplote  sy.stem  both  of  doctrine  and  of  duty. 
The  Bible  has  its  own  sphere;  within  this  it  is  infallible.  It  is  the  sphere  oichdracter ; 
it  is  no  standard  of  appeal  for  geographers,  or  arithmeticians,  or  astronomers,  or 
ethnologists,  or  literati,  or  philosophers.  For  all  such  the  Bible  is  a  book  of  the  age 
in  which  it  was  written,  and  it  embodies  the  thought  which  was  the  common  pro- 
perty of  the  men  of  the  time.  Man  does  not  want  a  written  revelation  of  science,  for 
he  has  not  lost  the  key  which  enables  him  to  unlock  its  mysteries  for  himself.  Man 
does  need  a  written  revelation  of  standard  morals,  because  he  flung  away  his  key  in 
Eden,  and,  with  ages  of  painful  searching,  he  has  failed  to  find  it  again. 

II.  The  Bible  exerts  its  moral  force  by  the  principles  which  it  embodies. 
The  structure  of  the  Bible  compels  us  to  search  out  its  principles.  They  do  not  lie  on 
the  surface,  like  seeds  on  beaten  paths,  ready  for  every  passing  bird  to  pick  up.  They 
are  given  to  us  embodied  in  history,  illustrated  in  incidents  of  individual  lives,  and  in 
phases  of  perscnial  t  xjjerience.  Nothing  seems  to  be  said  in  the  New  Testament  about 
ecclesiastical  poUtios,  or  orders  of  Church  government;  but  there  are  to  be  found  great 
principles,  which  can  be  wisely  adapted  in  their  practical  expression  to  the  varying 
conditions  ol  men  in  iiifTerent  ages.  There  are  no  announcements  concerning  social 
manners ;  there  is  nothing  taught  in  a  direct  way  concerning  monarchy  or  slavery, 
for  instance ;  but  the  Bible  gives  principles  which,  gradually  gaining  sway  over  the 
minds  of  men,  constitutionally  attemper  monarchy,  and  will  after  a  while  banish 
slavery  froni  the  earili.  A  principle  is  more  searching  than  a  maxim.  Men  may 
think  they  could  have  done  better  with  a  Bible  like  the  books  of  Confucius^  full  of 
maxims,  shaping  into  order  the  whole  minutiaa  of  life.  Such  a  Bible  could  only  make 
automata,  not  living  men.  God  gives  a  Bible  full  of  quick  effective  principles ;  these, 
getting  into  the  soul,  are  the  seeds  whence  come  flowerings  and  fiuitings  of  righteous- 
ness. A  maxim  will  guide  us  in  one  case,  a  principle  will  put  us  right  in  ten  thousand. 
Circumstances  may  always  ILmit  the  application  of  an  express  commandment;  a 
principle  fits  and  shapes  itself  to  every  new  occasion,  as  the  rising  tide  into  erery  bay 
and  nook  and  crteV  of  the  winding  stream. 

III.  The  Bible  ^xbets  its  moral  force  by  the  example  which  it  peesbnts. 
Lis  men,  except  the  Lord  Christ,  are  fallible,  struggling  men.    Their  wrong-doiog  is 


OH.  IX.  1—21.] 


THE  BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH, 


165 


never  covered  over.  You  never  get  the  impression  of  a  character  painted  rose-cnlour. 
The  moral  quality  of  a  man's  action  is  never  confused.  Evil  is  always  evil.  Wrong- 
doing in  a  <!:ood  man  is  only  worse  wrong-doing  in  view  of  his  goodness ;  and  it  is  never 
palliated.  There  is  found  in  the  Bible  virtue  to  incite  us  and  evil  to  warn  us ;  a  great 
"cloud  of  witnesses"  putting  to  shame  our  meaner  lives.  But  the  great  standard 
example  is  the  earthly  Ufe  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  "  tries  every  man  that  cometh 
into  the  world."  The  final  test  of  moral  conduct  for  us  all  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Full  acceptance  with  God  can  come  only  from  being  perfectly  like  Christ.  And  if  the 
suggestion  makes  us  feel  that  we  are  far  down  below  him,  only  just  climbing  the  first 
ridge  of  the  mountain-side,  this  is  our  encouraging  assurance,  "  Then  shall  ye  know,  if 
y«  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord.*— B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


Vers.  1 — 7. — The  Troubles  op  Israel 

SHALL  BSD  THROUGH  THE  BlRTH  OF  A  MAR- 
VELLOUS Child.  The  section  of  the  pro- 
phecy commencing  with  ch.  vii.  1  terminates 
in  this  glorious  burst  of  glad  and  graoioua 
promise.  The  gist  of  the  whole  section  is : 
"  Israel  shall  not  suffer  from  Pekah  and 
Bezin  ;  her  oppressors  shall  be  Assyria  and 
Egypt,  more  especially  the  former ;  Assyria 
shall  overwhelm  her,  crush  her, lay  her  low; 
she  shall  remain  awhile  in  gloom  and  dark- 
ness; but  at  length  the  darkness  shall  be 
dispelled  ;  a  '  great  light '  shall  shine  forth, 
first  in  the  north,  then  over  all  the  land  I 
'  the  rod  of  the  oppressor '  shall  be  broken ; 
a  Child  shall  be  born,  who  shall  bear  mar- 
vellous names,  and  shall  rule  over  the  full 
kingdom  of  David  in  justice  and  righteous- 
ness for  ever."  God  has  spoken,  and  God 
will  perform  this. 

Ver.  1. — Nevertheless  the  dimness  shall 
not  he  snoh  as  was  in  her  vexation,  when, 
etc.  Our  translators  have  misconceived  the 
construction,  and  consequently  missed  the 
sense.  The  first  two  clauses,  which  they  run 
together,  are  entirely  separate  and  distinct. 
Translate,  Nevertheless  there  shall  6e  no  (more) 
darkness  to  her  who  was  in  affliction.  As  at 
the  former  time  he  brought  contempt  upon  the 
Imd  of  Zebulon,  etc.  Contempt  was  brought 
on  the  more  northern  part  of  the  Holy 
Land,  first  when  it  was  overrun  and  ravaged 
by  the  Syrians  (1  Kings  xv.  20)  under  Ben- 
badad,  and  more  recently  when  it  bore  the 
brunt  of  the  Assyrian  attack  (2  Kings  xv. 
29)  under  Tiglath-Piloser.  At  the  first 
.  ,  .  and  afterward ;  rather,  at  the  former 
tmu  .  .  .  in  the  latter  time.  The  contrast 
la  between  two  periods  of  Israel's  history, 
the  existing  period  and  tlie  Jlossianic.  And 
afterward  did  more  grievously  aifiiot  her. 
Xlii*  18  altogether  wrong.    Translate,  8o  in 


the  latter  time  he  hath  brought  honour  on  th« 
way  of  the  sea.  The  perfect  is  a  "  prophetic 
perfect,"  and  the  reference  is  to  the  honour 
tlmt  would  be  done  to  the  northern  districts, 
"  tlio  land  r,(  Zebulon  and  the  laud  of  Naph- 
tali,"  by  the  Messiah  dwelling  there  (comp. 
Matt.  iv.  14—16).  The  way  of  the  sea; 
i.e.  the  distriot  about  the  sea  of  Tiberias, 
called  "  the  sea  of  Kinnereth  "  (equivalent 
to  "  Gennesareth ")  in  Numb,  xxxiv.  11, 
and  "the  sea  of  Galilee"  in  John.  vi.  1. 
Beyond  Jordan;  i.e.  the  tract  east  of  the 
sea  and  of  the  upper  Jordan,  where  the 
five  thousand  were  fed,  and  where  our  Lord 
was  transfigured.  Galilee  of  the  nations. 
The  name  "  Galilee  "  seems  to  have  been 
given  to  the  outlying  circuit,  or  zone,  on 
the  north,  which  was  debatable  ground 
between  the  Israelites  and  their  neighbours 
(see  1  Kings  ix.  10 ;  Josh.  xx.  7 ;  xxi.  32). 
The  word  means  "  circuit,"  or  "  ring." 
Though  claimed  as  theirs  by  the  Israelites, 
it  was  largely  peopled  by  "  Gentiles." 

Ver.  2. — ^The  people  that  walked  in  dark- 
ness (comp.  oh.  viu.  22).  All  the  world 
was  "  in  darkness  "  when  Christ  came ;  but 
here  the  Jews  especially  seem  to  be  intended. 
It  was  truly  a  dark  time  with  them  when 
Christ  came  (see  DoUinger's  '  Judenthum 
and  Heidenthum,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  301-335).  Have 
seen  ;  rather,  saw.  The  "  prophetic "  pre- 
terite is  used  throughout  the  whole  passage. 
A  great  light.  "The  Light  of  the  world," 
"  the  Sun  of  righteousness,"  "  the  true  Light, 
which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into 
the  world,"  first  broke  on  man  in  that 
northern  trnct  "by  the  way  of  the  sea," 
when  Jesus  came  forward  to  teach  and  to 
preach  in  "Galilee  of  the  Gentiles."  For 
thirty  years  he  had  dwelt  at  Nazareth,  in 
Zebulon.  There  he  had  first  come  forward 
to  teach  In  a  synagogue  (Luke  iv.  16 — 21); 
in  Galilee  he  had  done  his  first  miracles 
(John  ii.  11 ;  iv.  54) ;  at  Capernaum,  "  upon 
the  sea  coast,  in  the  borders  of  Ziibulon  and 
Ncphthalim,"  he  commenced  his  preaching 
of  repentance  (Matt.  iv.  13—17).  The 
**  light"  first  streamed  forth  in  this  quarter 


iGC 


THE  BOOK.  OP  THE  PJlOPHET  ISAIAH.       [ca.  ix.  1— 21, 


glorifying  the  region  on  which  contempt 
had  long  been  pouTed. 

Ver.  3. — Thon  hast  multiplied  the  nation, 
and  not  inoreased  the  joy.  Dr.  Kay  defends 
this  reading,  and  supposes  a  contrast  of 
time  between  this  clause  and  the  next ;  he 
renders,  "  Thou  didst  multiply  the  nation  " 
(t.6.  in  the  daya  of  Solomon  and  again  in  those 
of  XJzziah)  "  and  not  increase  the  joy ;  but 
now,"  etc.  The  objection  is  that  the  verbs  are 
all  in  the  same  tense,  the  simple  preterite, 
and  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  original 
corresponding  to  "but  now."  Almost  all 
other  recent  oommenfatora  accept  the  solu- 
tion offered  by  the  Masoretio  reading  (^h  for 
kS),  which  makes  the  passage  simple  and 
easy  :  "  Thou  hast  multiplied  the  nation ; 
its  joy  thou  bast  increased ;  they  joy  before 
thee,  etc.  (So  many  Hebrew  manuscripts, 
the  Alexandrine  Septuagint,  the  Syriao, 
Gesenius,  Kuobel,  Cheyne,  etc.)  Aooordiug 
to  the  joy  in  harvest.  "  The  joy  in  harvest " 
was  to  the  Jews  the  joy  of  the  Feast  of 
Tabernacles, or  Ingathering  (Exod.  xxiii.  16), 
held  when  the  last  fruits  were  brought  in. 
But  the  prophet  is  perhaps  taking  a  wider 
view,  and  thinking  of  the  many  harvest 
festivals  prevailing  throughout  Western 
Asia,  all  of  them  originating  in  gratitude 
to  the  Giver  of  all  good,  and  many  of  them 
comprising  manifestations  of  joy  more  jubi- 
lant than  those  habitual  to  his  sedater 
countrymen. 

Ver.  4. — ^Ihon  hast  broken  the  yoke  of  his 
burden,  etc.  The  coming  of  the  Messiah  sets 
the  Israelites  free,  removes  the  yoke  from  off 
their  neck,  breaks  the  rod  wherewith  their 
shoulders  were  beaten,  delivers  them  from 
bondage  into  the  "glorious  liberty  of  the 
children  of  God."  Not,  however,  in  an 
earthly  sense,  since  the  Messiah's  kingdom 
was  not  of  this  world.  The  "  yoke  "  is  that 
of  sin,  the  "  oppressor "  is  that  prince  of 
darkness,  who  had  well-nigh  brought  all 
mankind  under  his  dominion  when  Christ 
camo.  His  oppressor;  literally,  his  task- 
master— the  same  word  which  is  used  of  the 
Egyptian  taskmasters  in  Exod.  v.  6.  As  in 
the  day  of  ffiidian.  The  "day  of  Midian  " 
is  probably  the  time  of  Israel's  deliverance 
from  the  Midianite  oppression  by  Gideon 
(Judg,  viL  19—25).  The  special  character- 
istic of  the  deliverance  was,  as  Dr.  Eay  well 
observes,  "that  it  was  accomplished  without 
military  prowess  by  a  small  body  of  men 
■elected  out  of  Israel,  selected  expressly  in 
order  that  Israel  might  not  vaunt  itself 
against  the  Lord,  saying,  My  own  hand  hath 
saved  me  (Judg.  vii.  2)." 

Ver.  5. — For  every  battle  of  the  warrior 
is  with  confused  noise;  rather,  for  all  the 
armcvr  of  him  that  armeth  noisily  (Knobel, 
Vance  Smith) ;  or,  perhaps,  "  every  hoof  of 
him   that    tiampeth    noisily"    (Gesenius, 


Oheyne).  The  noun  and  participle,  which 
are  cognate  words,  occur  only  in  this  pas- 
sage. And  garments,  etc.  Translate,  And 
every  garment  that  is  rolled  in  Hood,  shall  be 
for  burning,  even  fuel  for  fire.  All  military 
accoutrements  shall  be  committed  to  the 
flames,  that  the  reign  of  peace  and  justice 
may  commence  (comp.  ch.  ii.  4 ;  Ps.  xlvi.  9). 
Ver.  6. — ^Unto  us  a  child  is  bom  (comp.  ch. 
vii.  li — 16,where  the  promise  of  "a  child,"  "a 
son,"  is  first  made — a  child  who  was,  like  this 
Child,  to  be  "  God  with  us  ").  The  govern 
ment  shall  be  upon  his  shotilder.  The  word 
translated  "  government "  (misrah)  occurs 
only  here  and  in  ver.  7.  It  is  probably  to 
be  connected  with  ear, "  prince,"  and  Isra-el. 
Government  was  regarded  as  a  burden,  to  be 
borne  on  the  back  or  shoulders,  and  was 
sometimes  symbolized  by  a  key  laid  upon 
the  shoulder  (ch.  xxii.  22).  Vizier  means 
"burdened."  The  Latin  writers  often 
speak  of  the  civil  power  as  borne  on  the 
shoulders  of  magistrates  (Cic,  '  Orat.  pro 
Flaoc.,'  §  94 ;  Plin., '  Puneg.,'  §  10).  As  God, 
our  Lord  governed  all  things  from  the  be- 
ginning; as  rean,  he  set  up  a  "kingdom" — 
which  he  still  governs — upon  the  earth. 
His  name  shall  be  called.  It  is  perhaps  not 
very  important  whether  we  view  what  fol- 
lows as  one  name  or  several.  Isaiah  does 
not  really  mean  that  the  "Child"  should 
bear  as  a  name,  or  names,  any  of  the  expres- 
sions, but  only  that  they  should  be  truly 
applicable  to  him.  Wonderful,  Counsellor, 
It  has  been  proposed  to  unite  these  two 
expressions  and  translate,  "  Wondrous  Coun- 
sellor "  (compare  "  wonderful  in  counsel," 
ch.  xxviii.  29).  But  Dr.  Kay  is  probably 
right  in  saying  that,  if  this  had  been  the 
meaning,  it  would  have  been  expressed 
differently.  Gesenius,  Eosenmiiller,  De- 
litzsch,  and  Vance  Smith  agree  with  Dr. 
Kay  in  taking  the  words  separately.  Won- 
derful. The  Messiah  would  be  "  wonderful " 
in  his  nature  as  God-Man ;  in  his  teaching, 
which  "astonished"  those  who  heard  it 
(Matt.  vii.  28) ;  in  his  doings  (oh.  xxv.  1) ; 
in  the  circumstances  of  his  birth  and  death ; 
in  his  resurrection,  and  in  his  ascension. 
"Wonder"  would  be  the  first  sentiment 
which  his  manifestation  would  provoke,  and 
hence  this  descriptive  epithet  is  placed 
first.  As  the  Word,  as  Wisdom  itself,  as 
he  who  says,  "  Counsel  is  mine,  and  sound 
wisdom:  I  am  Understanding "  (Prov.  viiL 
14),  he  is  weU  named  "  Counsellor." 
None  will  ever  seek  his  counsel  in  vain, 
much  less  repent  of  following  it.  The 
mighty  God;  rather,  perhaps.  Mighty  God; 
but  the  difference  is  not  great,  since  El, 
God,  contains  within  itself  the  notion  of 
singularity,  which  is  given  to  ordinary 
nouns  by  the  article.  The  term  El,  God, 
bad  been  previously  applied  to  the  Messiab 


Cft.tx.l— 21.]       THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


167 


only  in  Ps.  xlv.  6.  It  denotes  in  Isaiah 
always  (as  Mr.  Cheyne  observes)  "divinity 
in  an  absolute  sense;  it  is  never  used 
hyperbolically  or  metaphorically."  The 
Kverlastlng  Father;  rather.  Everlasting  or 
Etetiiol  Father.  But  here,  again,  tliere  is  a 
singularity  in  the  idea,  which  makes  the 
omission  of  the  article  unimportant ;  for  how 
could  there  be  more  than  one  Everlasting 
Father,  one  Creator,  Preserver,  Protector  of 
mankind  who  was  absolutely  eternal?  If 
the  term  "Father,"  applied  to  our  Lord, 
grates  on  our  ears,  we  must  remember  that 
the  distinction  of  Persons  in  the  Oodhead 
had  not  yet  been  revealed.  The  Prince  of 
Peace ;  literally,  Prince  of-  Peace.  A  "  Prince 
of  Peace  "  had  been  long  shadowed  forth,  as 
in  Melohizedek,  "  King  of  Salem,"  i.e.  "  of 
Peace ;  "  and  again  in  Solomon,  "  the  peace- 
ful one ; "  and  Isaiah  himself  bad  already 
prophesied  the  peacef  ulness  of  the  Messiah's 
kingdom  (ch.  ii.  4).  Compare  the  song  of 
the  angels  at  our  Lord's  birth  (Luke  ii.  14). 
If  the  peaoefulness  has  not  yet  very  clearly 
shown  itself,  the  reason  would  seem  to  be 
that  our  Lord's  kingdom  has  yet  to  come 
into  the  hearts  of  most  men. 

Ter.  7. — Of  the  increase  of  his  goTemment 
and  peace  there  shall  be  no  end.  The 
Messiah's  kingdom  shall  ever  increase  more 
and  more ;  there  shall  be  no  limits  to  it ; 
ultimately  it  shall  fill  the  world  (comp. 
Matt,  xxviii.  18, 19).  The  continual  spread 
of  Christianity  tends  to  the  accomplishment 
of  this  prophecy.  Upon  the  throne  of  David, 
and  upon  his  Ungdom.  That  the  Messiah 
is  to  sit  on  the  throne  of  David,  suggests, 
but  does  not  absolutely  imply,  his  Davidio 
descent.  That  descent  is,  however,  an- 
nounced with  BufScient  clearness  in  ch.  xi. 
1, 10.  To  order  it,  and  to  establish  it.  A 
gradual  establishment  of  the  kingdom  would 
seem  to  be  implied,  such  as  is  taught  also 
in  the  parables  of  the  mustard  seed  and  the 
leaven.  From  henceforth  even  for  ever. 
The  kingdom  is  to  be  both  universal  in 
respect  of  extent  (see  the  firit  note  on  the 
verse),  and  in  respect  of  duration  eternal. 
The  zeal ;  or,  jealousy.  God's  jealousy  of 
his  own  honour,  which  is  bound  up  with  the 
prosperity  and  final  triumph  of  his  people 
over  all  their  enemies,  will  assure  the  per- 
formance of  all  that  is  here  prophesied. 

Vers.  8 — 21. — The  Pbophet  betdbns  to 
Threats  and  Wabsings,  addressed  chiefly 
TO  THE  KiNeDOM  OP  ISRAEL.  The  remainder 
of  this  chapter,  together  with  the  first  four 
verses  of  the  next,  seems  to  have  formed 
originally  a  distinct  and  separate  prophecy. 
The  passage  is  a  poem  in  four  stanzas,  with 
the  same  Mfrain  at  the  end  of  each :  "  For 
oU  tbi*  luB  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  hii 


hand  is  stretched  out  still."  A  somewhat 
early  date  has  been  assigned  to  the  pro- 
phecy, as,  for  instance,  "  some  period  in  the 
reign  of  Jotham"  (Cheyne);  but  the  in- 
ternal evidence  only  proves  that  it  was 
written  before  the  destruction  of  Samaria  by 
the  Assyrians. 

Ver.  8. — Jacob  .  .  .  Israel.  These  words 
do  not  show  that  the  prophecy  is  directed 
against  the  kingdom  of  Israel  only. 
"  Jacob "  designates  Judah  rather  than 
Israel  in  ch.  ii  3,  5,  6 ;  and  the  expression, 
"  both  the  houses  of  Israel,"  in  ch.  viii.  14, 
shows  that  the  term  "Israel"  embraces  both 
kingdoms.  The  distinctive  names  by  which 
Isaiah  ordinarily  designates  the  northern 
kingdom  are  "  Bphraiiu  "  and  "  Samaria." 

Ver.  9. — Even  Ephraim ;  rather,  especially 
Ephraim.  The  prophecy  is  no  doubt  mainly 
directed  against  the  northern  kingdom. 
That  say  in  the  pride  and  stoutness  of 
heart;  rather,  in  the  pride  and  stoutness  of 
heart,  wherein  they  say. 

Ver.  10. — The  bricks  are  fallen  down, 
etc. ;  i.e.  we  have  suffered  a  moderate 
damage,  but  we  will  more  than  mtike  up  for 
it ;  all  our  losses  we  will  replace  with  some- 
thing better.  Bricks  were  the  ordinary 
material  for  the  poorer  class  of  houses  in 
Palestine ;  stone  was  reserved  for  the  dwell- 
ings of  the  rich  and  great  (Amos  v.  11). 
Sycomore  wood  was  the  commonest  sort  of 
timber,  cedar  the  scarcest  and  most  pre- 
cious, having  to  be  imported  from  Phoenicia 
(1  Kings  V.  6;  2  Chron.  ii.  3;  Ezra  iii.  7). 
(On  the  contrast  between  cedar  and  sycomore 
wood,  comp.  2  Chron.  i.  15.)  Cut  down. 
The  Israelites  probably  alluded  to  damage 
done  by  Tiglath-Piloser  in  his  first  invasion. 
The  Assyrians  were  in  the  habit  of  actually 
cutting  down  trees  in  foreign  countries,  in 
order  to  injure  and  weaken  them;  but  the 
present  passage  is,  perhaps,  rather  intended 
to  be  figurative. 

Ver.  11. — Therefore  the  lord  shall  set 
up  the  adversaries  of  Bezin  against  him. 
"  Against  him  "  means  "  against  Ephraim," 
or  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  "  The  adversaries 
of  Kezin "  could  only  be  the  Assyrians ; 
but  these  seem  precluded  by  the  next 
verse,  which  mentions  only  "  Syrians  "  and 
Philistines."  Hence  many  critics  accept 
the  variant  reading  of  several  manuscripts 
—  sarey  for  tsarey — which  gives  the  sense  of 
"  the  princes  of  Rezin  "  (so  Lowth,  Ewald, 
Houbigant,  Weir,  Cheyne). 

Ver.  12.— The  Syrians  before,  and  the 
Philistines  behind ;  or,  tlie  Syrians  from  the 
east,  and  the  Philistines  from  the  west. 
The  Semitic  races  regarded  the  world  as 
looking  to  the  rising  sun,  and  used  for  the 
east  the  prepoiition  signifying  "in  front," 


IfiS 


TOE   BOO"   0?    THE    rilOPIlET  ISAIAH.        [ck.  ix.  1— 21, 


for  the  west  that  signifying  "behind." 
Syria  seems  to  have  been  hostile  to  Samaria 
until  the  league  was  formed  between  Eezia 
iind  Pekah,  and  may  have  become  hostile 
iigain  after  Pekah's  death  (2  Ohroa.  xxviii. 
23).  We  read  of  a  Philistine  invasion  of 
Judah  in  Chronicles  (2  Cliron.  xxviii.  18), 
but  not  of  their  attacking  Israel.  Still,  it 
was  as  easy  for  them  to  attack  the  one  as 
the  other.  They  abutted  on  the  territory 
of  Israel  towards  the  south-west,  as  Syria 
<li(l  towards  the  noith-east.  For  all  this  his 
anger  is  not  turned  away ;  since  Israel 
continued  impenitent.  It  would  have  cea»ed 
had  tiiey  repented  and  turned  to  God  (see 
ver.  13).  His  hand  is  stretched  out;  not 
to  save,  but  to  smite. 

Ver.  13. — ^ThB  people.  The  people  of 
Israel,  aB  distinct  from  the  people  of  Judah. 
The  particular  judgment  announced  in 
vers.  11,  12  is  clearly  to  fall  on  them. 
Neither  do  they  seek  the  Lord  of  hosts. 
Israel  had  set  itself  to  seek  after  Baal  from 
the  time  ef  Ahab  (1  Kings  xvi.  .SI).  The 
reform  of  Jehu  (2  Kings  x.  28)  had  gone 
but  skin-deep.  Baal  was  still  "  sought  to," 
rather  than  Jehovah,  when  the  final  judg- 
ment came  (2  Kings  xvii.  16;  Hos.  ii.  13). 

Yer.  14.  —Head  and  tail,  branch  and  msh ; 
t.«.  the  whole  nation,  from  the  highest  to 
the  lowest.  The  "branch""  intendeil  is  the 
"  palm  branch,"  at  once  lofty  in  position 
and  the  most  glorious  form  of  vegttable  life 
(Ps.  xcii.  12;  Cant.  vii.  7,  8,  etc.);  the 
"  rush  "  is  the  simple  "  sedge  "  that  grows, 
not  only  low  on  the  ground,  but  in  the 
"  mire "  (Job  viii.  11).  The  same  expres- 
sion occurs  again  in  ch.  xix.  15. 

Ver.  15. — Sopie  suppose  this  verse  to  be 
n  gloss,  or  marginal  note,  which  has  crept 
into  the  text;  but  it  is  too  pointed  and 
sarcastic  for  a  mere  gloss.  There  is  no 
reason  to  doubt  its  being  Isaiah's.  Having 
spoken  of  "the  tail,"  he  takes  the  oppor- 
tunity of  lashing  the  false  prophet,  who 
claimed  to  bo  among  Ihe  "  honourable,"  but 
was  really  the  lowest  of  the  low,  worse  than 
hio  dupes,  the  tnie  "  tnil "  (comp.  ch.  xxviii. 
7;  xxix.  10;  xxx.  10). 

Ver.  16. — The  leaders  of  this  people  cause 
them  to  err  (comp.  cli.  iii.  12).  Both  the 
peoples  were  led  into  idolatry  by  their 
rulers,  but  Israel  especially.  Jeroboam,  the 
first  king,  introduced  the  calf-worship,  and 
his  successors  from  first  to  last  persisted 
in  his  sin.  Ahab  added  the  still  grosser 
idolatry  of  Baal.  Those  who  held  higli 
position  under  the  kings  were  equally  bad 
examples  to  the  people  (see  above,  ch.  i.  2,3). 
Are  destroyed.  First,  morally  corrupted 
and  debased,  then  physically  given  over 
to  destiTiotion — slaughtered  by  Philistines, 
Syrians,  and  Assyrians. 

yer.  17. — The  lord  ihall  have  no  joy  in 


their  young  men.  "  The  Lord  taketh  plea- 
sure in  them  that  fear  him,  in  those  that 
hope  ill  his  mercy"  (Ps.  oxlvii.  11).  He 
can  have  no  joy  or  deligiit  in  evil-doers, 
or  idolaters,  or  in  those  whose  speech  is 
profanity.  Neither  shall  have  mercy  on 
their  fatherless  and  widows.  The  widow 
and  the  orphan  are  objects  of  God's 
tenderest  love  and  compassion  (Eiod. 
xxii.  22;  Deut.  x.  18;  xiv.  29;  ch.  i.  17, 
etc.);  but  when  the  wickedness  of  a  land 
provokes  him  to  send  any  one  of  his  "  four 
sore  judgments  "  upon  it,  the  widow  and  the 
fatherless  must  suifer  with  the  other  in- 
habitants. God  pities  them,  doubtless,  but 
his  justice  and  his  righteous,  anger  force 
him  to  restrain  his  pity,  and  carry  out  his 
judgment  in  spite  of  it.  Every  one  is  an 
hypocrite ;  or,  eurrupt ;  compare,  "  They  are 
all  gone  aside,  they  are  all  together  become 
filthy;  there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no, 
not  one"  (Ps.  xiv.  3).  A  certain  allowance 
must  be  made  for  the  natural  hyperbole  of 
strong  feeling.  Every  mouth  speaketh  folly. 
The  word  translated  here  (and  generally) 
"  folly  "  is  rendered  "  villany  "  in  ch.  xxxii. 
6  and  Jer.  xxix.  23.  Its  proper  maming 
Beems  to  be  "  lewdness  "  or  "  profligacy." 

Ver.  18. — Wickedness  humeth  as  the  fire  ; 
t'.e.  the  contagion  of  wickedness  overepieads 
a  whole  nation  in  the  same  rapid  way  that 
fire  spreads  over  a  field  of  stubble  or 
a  forest.  They  shall  mount  up  like  the 
lifting  up  of  smoke ;  rather,  the\j — i.e.  the 
forest  thickets — shall  he  whirled  upward 
with  the  uplifting  of  smoke.  The  burning 
thickets  shall  mount  up  with  the  volumes 
of  smoke  into  the  air,  and  hang  there  as 
a  murky  but  lurid  pall.  The  flames  of 
wickfdness  give  no  light  to  a  land,  but 
plunge  it  in  heavy,  hopeless  gloom. 

Ver.  19. — Is  the  land  darkened;  rather, 
burnt  up  (ffuyK^Ravrat,  LXX.).  The  root 
used  occurs  in  Arabic  in  this  sense.  It  is 
not  used  elsewhere  in  Scripture.  The  people 
shall  he  as  the  fuel  of  the  fire.  Though 
the  general  ravage,  devastation,  and  deso- 
lation of  the  land,  with  its  buildings,  iti 
trees,  and  its  other  vegetable  products,  is 
included  in  the  image  of  the  fire  devouring 
the  thorny  brakes  and  tangled  thickets  of 
a  dense  forest,  yet  the  threat  is  intended 
still  more  against  the  Israelite  people,  who 
were  the  true  "  fuel  of  the  Are,  since  the 
ravage  would  go  on  until  the  land  shculd 
be  depopulated.  No  man  shall  spare  his 
brother.  We  have  here  a  new  feature. 
Not  only  shaU  foreign  enemies — Syrians  and 
Philistines— devour  Israel,  bnt  the  Jjjague 
of  civil  war  will  also  be  let  loose  upon 
them  (comp.  ver.  21,  and  see  2  KingB  xv.  30, 
where  we  find  that  Pekah  fell  a  victim  to 
*  conspiracy  headed  by  Hoshea). 

Ver.  20. — He  shall  snatoh;  rather   ont 


m.  IX.  1—21."' 


THE  BOOK  OF   TIIR   IT.oniET   ISAIAH. 


Kjn 


thall  devour.  A  man,  i.e.,  shall  plunder  and 
ravage  in  one  quarter,  and  yet  not  be  satis- 
fied ;  tlien  he  shall  do  the  same  in  another, 
and  still  desire  more.  "  Increase  of  appetite 
shall  grow  by  what  it  feeds  on."  There 
thall  bo  no  sense  of  satiety  anywhere.  The 
flesh  of  his  own  arm.  In  a  civil  war,  or 
a  time  of  anarchy,  each  man  is  always 
"eating  the  flesh  of  his  own  arm" — i.e. 
injuring  his  neighbour,  who  is  hia  own 
natnial  protector  and  defender. 


Ver.  21. — Manasseh,  Ephraim,  These 
two  are  mentioned  as  the  two  principal 
tribes  of  the  northera  kingdom  (comp. 
1  Chron.  ix.  3 ;  2  Chron.  ixx.  1,  10,  IH; 
xxxi.  1;  xxxiv.  9).  It  is  not  to  he  sup- 
posed that  civil  discord  was  confiiieil  to 
them.  Probably  there  was  a  gemral  dis- 
oiganization.  Slill,  all  the  tribes  would  t\'. 
any  time  willingly  unite  "tog.  tlier  agiiiiiol 
Judah"  (see  2  Kings  xt.  37;  2  Chron. 
xxviii.  6—8). 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  6. — The  Hgniflcancy  of  the  names  of  Christ.  Five  narnes  of  the  Redeemer  are 
here  declared  by  Isaiah,  in  addition  to  the  name  given  him  in  cli.  vii. — viii.,  viz. 
Immanuel,  Names  of  Christ  are  always  worthy  of  the  deepest  and  most  attentive 
consideration,  lor  each  reveals  some  portion  of  his  nature,  eacb  exhibits  some  aspect  of 
him,  so  to  speak,  which  is  distinct  from  other  aspiots;  and  it  is  only  by  meditating 
upon  all,  that  we  approximate  to  a  full  and  complete  conception  of  hia  manifold 
excellences.  Very  specially  worthy  of  consideration  are  the  five  names  here  put  forth, 
which  may  be  viewed  either  separately  or  in  their  connection.    And  first  separately — 

I.  The  namp;  of  "Wonderful."  1.  Wonderful  is  the  Son  in  his  eternal  relation 
to  the  Almighty  Father,  an  unchani^ing  relation  of  mutual  love  and  tenderness, 
differenced  by  the  fact  of  derivation,  and  the  sense  on  the  one  hand  of  bestowal,  and 
on  the  other  of  acceptance  and  dependence.  Wonderful,  wholly  transcending  our 
utmost  reach  of  thought,  is  that  eteruity  of  pre-existence  which  he  enjoyed  wiih  the 
Father  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  not  only  before  the  world  was,  but  before  it  had  pleased 
the  Divine  Nature  to  bring  into  existence  any  other  being  besides  itself.  2.  Wonderful, 
again,  is  he  in  that  repeated  act  of  creation,  so  clearly  assigned  to  him  (John  i.  31 ;  Heb. 
i.  2),  whereby  he  brought  out  of  nothing  (Heb.  xi.  3)  the  entire  existing  universe — 
angels  and  arcliangels,  principalities  and  powers,  cherubim  and  seraphim ;  matter 
arranged  and  unarranged;  sun,  moon, stars,  planets,  satellites,  nebulte;  man,  animals; 
■ — aD  of  them  "  the  work  of  his  hands,"  created  by  him  out  of  non-existence.  3. 
Even  more  wonderful  is  he  in  his  dealings  with  the  children  of  men — in  his  patience 
with  them,  liis  regard  for  them,  his  mediatorial  office  towards  them,  his  inward 
revelation  of  himself  to  them,  his  constant  presence  with  them,  his  sacramental 
communication  of  himself  to  them,  all  unworthy  as  they  are.  4.  Wonderful  is  he  in 
his  life  on  earth,  which  even  unbelievers  cannot  but  admire;  wonderful  in  his  triumph 
over  death  and  the  grave ;  wonderful  in  his  ascension  into  heaven  in  the  sight  of  men  ; 
wonderful  in  his  appearances  to  St.  Paul  and  St.  Stephen  ;  wonderful  in  the  might 
wherewith  he  still  sustains  his  Church,  so  that  even  the  very  "  gates  of  hell"  cannot 
prevail  against  it. 

II.  The  name  of  "  Counsellor."  As  the  "  Logos,"  or  "  Reason,"  no  less  than  the 
"  Word  "  of  God,  the  Son  was  identified  by  the  ancient  Fathers  with  the  "  Wisdom  " 
of  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  of  whom  it  is  said,  "  I  Wisdom  dwell  with  prudence,  ami  find 
out  knowledge.  .  .  .  Counsel  is  mine,  and  sound  wisdom ;  I  am  understanding.  .  . 
The  Lord  possessed  me  in  the  beginning  of  his  way,  before  his  works  of  old.  I  was  set 
up  from  everlasting,  from  the  begiiming,  or  ever  the  earth  was.  .  .  .  When  he  appointed 
the  foundations  of  the  earth,  then  I  was  by  him,  as  one  brought  up  with  him;  and  I 
was  daily  his  delight,  rejoicing  always  before  him  "  (Prov.  viii.  12 — 30).  He  was 
thus,  in  some  sort,  the  Counsellor  of  the  Triune  Synod  which  presided  over  the  world 
and  directed  all  its  affairs.  But,  further,  he  was  the  Counsellor  of  man.  The  Logos  was 
"the  true  Light  which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world"  (John  i.  9). 
Our  natural  reason  and  conscience  come  from  him,  for  he  has  imiilanted  them  in  us, 
to  counsel  us  aright.  All  revealed  light  is  also  from  him,  for  he  is  the  Word  and  the 
Truth.  He  counsels  us  from  within,  by  the  inward  monitor  who  tells  us  what  is  right : 
he  counsels  us  from  without,  by  his  aj'ostles,  his  evangelists,  his  Church,  his  living 
miuiater*.    Do  we  lack  wisdom  generally  ?  let  us  ask  of  him,  and  he  will  poor  light 


ITO  THt;  ROOK  OF  TIIK  t  ftOPllET  ISAUS.       [ob.  tx.  1—51. 


into  our  souls.    Do  wo  need  counsel  on  any  special  matter  ?  let  us  take  it  to  him,  and 
he  will  show  us  the  wisest  and  best  course. 

III.  The  name  of  "Miohtt  God."  The  Son  of  God  is  himself  God,  and  if  God, 
then  certainly  "  mighty  " — nay,  "  almighty."  What  the  Messiah  was  to  do,  could  be 
done  by  none  less  than  God.  He  was  to  redeem  mankind  ;  he  was  to  vanquish  death 
and  edn;  he  was  to  triumph  over  Satan ;  he  was  to  be  a  meritorious  Sacrifice.  "  God 
with  us"  had  already  been  declared  to  be  one  of  his  names  (ch.  vii.  14).  Now  he  is 
announced  as  "  God  the  Mighty  One."  It  is  to  the  last  degree  uncritical  to  compare 
this  assignment  of  so  august  a  name,  coming  from  the  mouth  of  an  intense  theist, 
with  the  ascription  of  Divine  titles  to  the  Egyptian  kings  by  themselves,  or  by  their 
subjects,  when  both  king  and  subjects  were  polytheists.  Isaiah  could  not  have 
intended  to  call  a  mere  man  "God;  "he  must  have  recognized,  as  David  had  done 
(Ps.  xlv.  6),  that  the  Messiah  would  be  more  than  man,  would  in  some  way  or  othoj' 
be  a  partaker  of  the  Divine  nature.  Jeremiah  did  the  same  when  he  announced  the 
Messiah  as  "  Jehovah  our  Righteousness."  The  prophets  may  not  have  been  aware 
of  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  but  they  could  conceive  an  incarnation  of  God.  The 
name  of  "Mighty  God"  in  Isaiah's  list  must  be  accepted  as  a  distinct  announcement 
of  the  true  Divinity  of  the  Messiah,  just  as  the  words  "  child  "  and  "  son,"  which  had 
been  previously  applied  to  him  (ver.  6),  were  announcements  of  his  true  humanity. 

IV.  The  name  op  "Everlasting  Father."  When  the  Messiah  is  called  a 
"  Father,"  we  must  understand  the  word  as  meaning  primarily  "  Protector."  So  Job 
was  a  "father  to  the  poor"  (Job  xxix.  16),  and  Eliakim  a  "  father  to  the  inhabitants 
of  Jerusalem"  (ch.  xxii.  11).  The  idea  of  protection,  however,  implied  in  "  Father  " 
does  not  exhaust  the  connotation  of  the  word.  It  contains  also  the  notions  of 
"  Creator "  and  "  Preserver,"  of  one  whom  we  are  bound  to  love,  honour,  and  obey. 
"  Have  we  not  all  one  father?"  says  Malachi.  "  Hath  not  one  God  created  us  ?"  "  If 
I  be  a  Father,"  says  Jehovah  by  his  mouth,  "  where  is  my  honour  f  "  The  Messiah  was 
to  be  "  Father  "  in  all  these  senses.  As  the  Second  Person  in  the  Holy  Trinity,  he  created 
man ;  as  "  God  with  us,"  he  preserves  him ;  as  the  typical  Man,  the  Head  of  tlie  redeemed 
human  race,  he  will  ever  keep  and  protect  him.  The  prophet  calls  him  "  Everlasting 
Father,"  first,  to  show  that  he  is  no  mere  human  protector,  like  Job  or  Kliakim ;  but 
also,  further,  to  indicate  by  an  additional  phrase  his  Divinity,  since  God  alone  is 
"everlasting,"  or  "eternal."  His  people  are  assured  by  the  epithet  that  he  will 
never  cease  to  be  their  Protector,  will  never  desert  them,  or  weary  of  interposing  for 
them.  No ;  "  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us  "  (Heb.  vii.  25).  He  is 
"  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  Beginning  and  the  Ending,  the  First  and  the  Last "  (Rev.  i.  8). 
He  "  will  not  fail  us,  nor  forsake  us  "  (Deut.  xxxi.  6). 

V.  The  name  op  "  Prince  op  Peaob."  So  long  as  there  is  evil,  there  must  be  war 
between  good  and  evil.  The  Messiah  is  "  Prince  of  Peace,"  especially,  because  he  comes 
to  convert  the  world;  to  "  turn  men  from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan 
unto  God;"  to  destroy  sin,  and  "bring  in  everlasting  righteousness"  (Uan.  ii.  24). 
When  there  is  universal  righteousness,  there  will  be  universal  peace.  Certainly,  the 
time  is  not  yet  come.  The  Prince  of  a  peaceful  kingdom,  whose  servants  may  not 
seek  to  advance  his  kingdom  by  violence,  has  not  annihilated  evil,  has  not  swept  all  the 
wicked  from  the  world.  And  so  the  fight  goes  on ;  evil  men  still  stir  up  wars  and 
tumults,  and  good  men  are  forced  to  resist  them.  But  the  "  Prince  of  Peace  "  shows 
his  power  and  justifies  his  name,  (1)  in  the  peace  that  he  introduces  into  the  hearts 
that  love  him  ;  (2)  in  the  peace  found  wherever  the  Spirit  of  Christ  prevails,  as  in  pious 
households,  in  brotherhoods  and  sisterhoods,  in  assemblies  of  Christian  men  like  our 
convocations,  etc. ;  (3)  in  the  comparative  peace  that  obtains  in  Christian  lands,  the 
growing  desire  for  peace  and  hatred  of  war,  the  readiness  to  resort  to  arbitration,  and 
the  like. 

Taken  in  connection,  the  five  names  would  seem  to  teach  (1)  the  mysteriousness  of 
Christ's  nature,  which  lies  at  the  very  basis  of  Christianity,  and  upon  which  all  else  is 
built;  (2)  the  wisdom  of  his  teaching,  which  makes  him  our  only  safe  "  Counsellor;" 
(3)  the  power  which  he  has,  is  "  Mighty  God,"  to  accomplish  all  his  desii^ns  in  his 
own  good  time ;  (4)  the  love  which  leads  him  to  exert  this  power  continually  in  the 
protection  of  his  Church ;  and  (5)  the  peaceful  condition  to  which  he  will  in  the  end 
bring  hia  Church,  when  its  probation  is  accomplished  and  he  comes  to  reign  over  it  m 


CH.  tx.  1-21.]         THE  BOOK  OP  Tim  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  171 

its  visible  King.  The  names  begin  in  the  past,  advance  to  the  present,  and  end  in  th^ 
far  future.  They  first  bespeak  our  reverence  and  awe,  the  fuuudations  of  religious 
feeling.  They  then  call  forth  our  trust,  showing  Christ  to  us  all-wise,  almighty.  They 
end  by  eliciting  our  love  towards  him  as  a  protecting  "  Father,"  who  will  at  last 
conduct  us  to  perfect  peace. 

Vers.  8 — 21. — Persistent  impenitence  hringa  repeated  chastisementt.  One  would 
naturally  expect  that  so  weak  a  creature  as  man,  when  chastised  by  the  Divine  anger, 
would  readily  and  at  once  "  humble  himself  under  the  almighty  hand  of  God,"  accept 
the  chastisement  as  deserved,  and  entreat  for  mercy  and  forgiveness.  But,  weak  as  he 
is,  man  is  unwilling  to  acknowledge  his  weakness,  and,  faulty  as  he  is,  dislikes  nothing 
so  much  as  acknowledging  his  faults.  God's  judgments  he  will  not  allow  to  be 
judgments,  but  attributes  them  to  any  cause  but  God ;  as,  for  instance,  (1)  to  his  own 
mistakes;  (2)  to  accident  or  chance;  (3)  to  fate;  (4)  to  some  combination  of  circum- 
stances not  likely  to  recur.  God  brought  upon  Israel  four  great  chastisements,  placing 
intervals  between  them,  so  that  after  each  they  might  have  repented  and  turned  to 
him,  had  they  so  willed.     But  they  would  not.     These  chastisements  were — 

I.  The  Assyrian  invasion  undeb  Tiglath-Pilbseb.  This  was  a  comparatively 
"light  affliction,"  as  God's  earUer  judgments  commonly  are.  It  fell,  not  on  the  whole 
land,  but  only  on  a  portion — "  the  land  of  Zebulun  and  the  land  of  Naphtali  ; "  and  it 
resulted  in  the  loss,  not  of  national  life  or  national  independence,  but  only  of  a  province 
or  two  not  very  highly  valued.  "  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles  "  was  overrun  and  annexed 
by  Assyria ;  but  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  the  great  tribes  which  formed  the  heart  of 
the  nation,  were  untouched.  Still,  the  invasion  was  a  warning  which  a  wise  nation 
would  have  taken  to  heart.  When  dismemberment  begins,  it  is  apt  to  be  continued; 
each  fresh  act  of  spoliation  is  easier  than  the  last.  And  the  agaiessor  is  encouraged 
by  his  success,  and  tempted  to  repeat  his  aggression.  But  Israel  was  not  wise.  She 
consoled  herself  by  "  pride  and  stoutness  of  heart,"  making  light  of  her  losses,  and 
boasting  that  she  would  easily  repair  them  (ver.  10).  Her  pride  and  impenitence 
provoked  God  to  inflict  a  second  chastisement. 

II.  The  combined  Philistine  and  Syrian  attack.  Of  this  we  know  no  more 
than  what  is  lold  us  in  the  present  chapter.  Attack  was  made  "  before  "  and  "  behind  " 
— from  the  east  and  from  the  west.  Jehovah  "joined  the  enemies  ot  Israel  together  '' 
(ver.  11),  and  caused  them  to  make  a  combined,  or  at  any  rate  a  simultaneous,  invasion. 
Both  enemies  were  formidable,  and  Israel  was  unable  to  meet  either  with  her  full  force. 
Consequently  they  were  successful,  and  "  devoured  Israel  with  open  mouth."  Could 
not  this  second  chastisement  arouse  the  nation  from  its  mistaken  feeling  of  security, 
and  bring  it  to  cast  itself  down  before  God?  Alas !  no.  The  people  "  turned  not  to 
him  that  had  smitten  them,  neither  did  they  seek  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  (ver.  13).  The 
result  was  that  a  third  chastisement  fell. 

III.  The  internal  anarchy  and  disturbance.  Hostility  to  the  kindred  tribe  of 
Judah  lay  at  the  base  of  Israel's  existence  as  a  nation,  and  was  cherished  by  statesmen 
as  a  patriotic  feeling.  But  it  was  impossible  to  keep  the  feeling  as  closely  confined  as 
statesmen  would  have  wished.  Within  Israel  itself  one  tribe  grew  jealous  of  another ; 
and,  under  the  diminished  strength  of  the  central  authority  caused  by  the  external 
troubles  of  the  time,  jealousy  led  on  to  open  conflict,  "  no  man  sparing  his  brother  " 
(ver.  19).  As  Rome  perished  by  her  own  strength,  when  faction  became  arrayed 
against  faction  in  the  forum  and  the  field,  so  it  seems  to  have  been  with  Israel. 
Internal  quarrel  supervened  upon  foreign  attack ;  and  the  weakened  state,  when  a 
fresh  assault  from  without  came,  necessarily  succumbed  to  it.  Repentance,  even  at 
this  advanced  hour,  might  have  caused  God  to  avert  the  danger  and  turn  the  current 
of  Assyrian  conquest  in  some  other  direction ;  but  once  more,  there  was  no  sub- 
mission, no  sign  of  any  change  of  heart.  And  at  last  the  dread  fiat  went  forth  for 
Samaria's  final  destruction.     The  fourth  and  last  chastisement  was  — 

IV.  The  conquest  of  Samaria,  and  oaerying  away  of  Israel  into  captivity, 
BY  THE  Assyrians  under  Shalmaneskb  and  Sargon.  The  same  instrument, 
Assyria  was  employed  for  the  first  chastisement  and  the  last,  irihalmaneser,  (he 
successor  of  Tiglath-Pileser,  towards  the  iiiddle  of  his  short  reign,  having  "  found 
conspiracy  in  Hoshea  "—who  had  murdered  Pekab  and  succeeded  him—"  came  uj 


172  THE    B('OK   OF   THE    PROPHET   ISAlAH.        [ch.  ix.  1— 21. 

throuc;hout  all  the  land  of  Israel,  and  went  np  to  Samaria,  and  besieged  it  three  years'* 
(2  Kings  xvii.  5).  At  the  end  of  the  thrre  years  the  city  fell,  about  the  same  time 
(B.C.  722)  that  Sargon,  hnving  murdered  Shalnianeser  at  Nineveh,  caused  himself  to 
be  proclaimed  supreme  ruler  of  the  Assyrian  empire.  Sargon,  following  a  recognized 
Assyrian  practice,  deported  the  principal  part  of  the  population,  and  settled  it  partly 
in  Upper  Mesopotamia,  partly  in  the  cities  of  Media  (2  Kings  xvii.  6).  The  life  of  the 
uiition  thus  came  to  an  end.  God  had  borne  with  it  for  two  centuries  and  a  half — ^tried 
it,  tested  it,  sent  it  prophets  and  seers  (2  Kings  x  vii.  13),  chastened  it,  corrected  it ; 
but  all  in  vain.  Notwithstanding  all  that  he  could  do  and  did,  "  they  would  not  hear, 
lilt  hardened  their  necks,  like  to  the  neck  of  their  fathers,  and  rejected  his  statutes, 
and  his  covenant  that  he  made  with  their-  fathers,  and  his  testimonies  which  he 
testified  aaainst  them  ;  and  followed  vanity,  and  became  vain,  and  went  after  the 
heathen  that  were  round  about  them,  and  left  all  the  commnndments  of  the  Lord  their 
God,  and  sold  themselves  to  do  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  to  provoke  him  to  anger" 
(2  Kings  xvii.  14 — 17).  Nothing,  therefore,  remained  but  to  "  remove  them  out  of  bis 
sight " — to  sweep  them  away  with  the  besom  of  destruction. 

The  fate  of  Israel  is  a  warning,  primarily,  to  nations;  but  also,  secondarily,  to  indi- 
viduals. God  lays  his  chastisements  on  them  too,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  them  to 
repentance.  If  they  resist  and  are  impenitent,  he  follows  up  blow  with  blow.  If 
they  remain  obdurate,  be  breaks  their  pride  and  crushes  them. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. —  Vision  of  future  glory.  In  bright  contra,st  to  the  preceding  gloomy 
outlook,  bnrsts  the  enrapturing  view  of  future  glory  on  the  prophet's  soul. 

I.  Compensation  for  past  suffering.  Not  for  ever  is  the  land  to  lie  darkened. 
A  great  light  of  deliverance  is  to  appear.  The  prophet's  glance  rests  on  the  northern 
ami  eastern  portions  of  the  kingdom  of  Kphraim.  They  had  been  conquered  by  Assyria, 
and  the  people  carried  away  captive  (2  Kings  xv.  29).  But  "as  the  former  time  brought 
shame  to  Zobiilon  and  Na|ihlali,  the  latter  also  bringeth  honour  towards  the  sea,  beyond 
the  Jordan,  towards  the  heathen-march."  The  depopulated  land  will  bask  in  the 
sunshine  of  restored  prosperity.  Assembling  "before  Jehovah,"  i.e.  in  his  sacred  place, 
they  will  rejoice  as  at  a  harvest  ingathering,  or  at  a  division  of  spoil  after  victory.  For 
the  Assyrian  yoke  will  be  broken,  and  crushing  will  be  the  defeat  of  the  foes  of  the 
nation,  like  that  of  Midian  in  days  of  yore.  Every  trace  of  war  and  barbarity  will  be 
placed  under  a  ban,  and  be  destroyed  by  fire — the  boot  that  had  clanked  on  the  heel 
of  the  foreign  soldier,  and  the  red  battle-garment. 

II.  The  everlasting  kingdom  of  peace.  The  pledge  of  its  establishment  is  the 
promise  of  the  wondrous  Child.  1.  Bis  names.  Kot  only  Imraanuel,  Qod  with  us,  is 
he  to  be  called;  but  other  names  besiicak  his  attributes  as  a  great  Prince.  Wonderful 
Counsellor :  against  v  hose  deep  providence  no  plots  can  contend,  and  conspiracies  pf 
short-sighted  craft  will  be  in  vain.  Hero-God:  invincihle  in  battle.  Everlasting  Father: 
maintaining  and  fostering  his  people,  educating  them  by  law  and  by  love.  Prince  of 
peace :  who  wUl  cause  wais  to  cease  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  " The  empire  is  peace," 
was  the  noted  word  of  a  potentate  of  one  time,  that  charmed  the  ear  for  the  moment, 
only  to  deceive  men's  hopes.  None  but  the  Messiah  can  assure  peace  to  the  nations,  as 
nothing  but  the  fellowship  of  the  truth  and  of  justice  can  disincline  the  nations  to  war, 
2.  The  nature  of  his  yovernment.  It  is  for  "endless  weal."  It  is  to  resume,  in  the 
deepest  and  best  sense,  the  well-remcmliered  glories  of  David's  kingdom.  It  is  to  be 
supported,  not  by  countless  battalions  ("  The  Lord  delighteth  not  in  the  legs  of  a  man  '), 
but  by  "justice  and  righteousness  henceforth  and  for  ever."  Its  spread  will  include 
the  spread  of  true  religion.  Hence  it  may  be  confidently  expected  that  the  "  zeal  of 
Jehovah,"  tlie  ever-burning  energy  of  Divine  love,  will  bring  to  pass  these  happy 
result!, 

"  The  great  Shepherd  reigna. 
And  his  unsuffering  kingdom  yet  will  come."  J. 

Ver.  7 — oh.  x.  4. —  Oracles  concerning  Samaria.  I.  Oonoebnino  rw  infatuated 
raiDK.    (Vers.  8—12.)    The  word  of  menace  is  to  fall  like  a  heavy  weight  upon  th| 


CH.  IX.  1—21.]         THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  173 

nation,  a  "  burden  "  especially  to  be  felt  by  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  (of.  Zeoh. 
ix.  1).  It  has  been  made  tributary  to  the  Assyrians,  yet  imagines  it  will  recover  its 
former  power  by  violence  and  predatory  raids.  In  their  bravado  they  exclaim,  "  Though 
the  brickg  fall  down,  we  will  build  with  freestone ;  and  though  sycuiuores  are 
felled,  we  will  make  cedars  spring- up  instead!"  To  punish  this  insolence,  Jehovah 
has  armed  its  smaller  enemies  against  it — Syrians  in  the  north-east,  Philititines  in  the 
south-west;  and  severer  judgments  are  to  follow.  The  cup  is  not  yet  full ;  the  avenging 
hand  is  Btill  stretched  out.  The  strophe  gives  us  a  picture  of  infatuation,  leading  to 
obstinate  resistance  and  incurring  accumulation  of  punishment.  We  may  be  reminded 
of  that  fine  picture  in  Homer  of  At6,  the  spirit  of  error  or  bewilderment,  who  with  soft 
feet  walks  above  men's  heads,  and  who  would  lead  all  astray  to  their  ruin  ('  Iliad,' 
xix.  91,  »22.).  Yet  neither  the  nation  nor  the  individual  falls  a  prey  to  such  tempta- 
tions without  guilt,  though  where  the  guilt  begins  it  may  be  difficult  to  trace.  The 
temper  of  insolence  and  bravado  is  a  s>m|jtom  of  this  aberration  creepiui;  on.  What 
need  have  we  to  pray  that  the  "  eyes  of  our  mind  may  be  opened,"  that  we  may  never 
have  the  light  of  discernment  between  the  "  spirit  of  truth  and  the  spirit  of  error  "  put 
out  in  our  bosom ! 

IL  CoNOEBNiNO  ITS  OBSTINATE  IMPENITENCE.  The  nation  "  turns  not  to  him  that 
smote  it."  It  hears  not  the  rod  and  who  hath  appointfid  it.  Suffering  either  changes 
the  disposition  and  bends  the  will  upon  new  objects,  or  it  rouses  the  tciuper  to  dett-r- 
mined  perseverance  in  the  evil  course.  Men  must  know  the  time  to  retreat  and  turn 
back  no  less  than  to  go  forward  in  a  given  course.  For,  as  patient  continuance  in  well- 
doing ip  blessed  with  highest  promises,  the  harshness  of  the  impenitent  heart  treasures 
up  against  itself  a  store  of  wrath.  In  this  case  a  visible  destruction  has  come  upon 
Israel.  A  day  of  battle  has  taken  plnce;  "head  and  tail,  palm  and  rush,"  o£Scers 
and  privates  in  the  army  alike,  have  been  cut  off.  For  the  leaders  of  Israel  have 
proved  misleaders,  and  their  blind  followers  have  perished.  And  the  prophet  represents 
Jehovah  as  looking  sternly  on,  neither  rejoicing  in  the  youth  of  the  nation,  nor  pity- 
ing lis  disasters.  Suffering  unrelieved  by  pity,  woes  over  which  Heaven  frowns 
rather  than  expands  with  infinite  smiles  of  hope, — such  things  follow  impenitence  and 
wilfulness. 

III.  CoNOEKNiNG  ITS  FLAGBANT  INIQUITIES.  We  Say  flagrant,  and  this  word  exactly 
fits  the  prophet's  description :  "  Wrong  burning  like  fire,  devouring  thorn  and  thistle, 
and  kindling  the  thickets  of  the  forest,  so  that  they  curl  up  in  columns  of  smoke." 
Covetousness  devours  and  ravages  like  a  famine  or  a  pest.  Every  one  begins  to  devour 
his  own  arm  in  insatiate  greed ;  that  is,  one  tribe  its  brother-tribe.  Nut  content  with 
mutual  rapacity,  Manasseh  against  Ephraim,  and  Ephraim  against  Manasseh,  the  two 
turn  against  Judah.  And  so  again  and  again  the  deep  warning  reverberates :  "  His 
anger  is  not  turned  away ;  his  hand  is  stretched  out  still." 

IV.  CONCEBNING  JUDICIAL    WICKEDNESS    AND   THE    FINAL    ISSUE.      Here    the   prophet 

seems  to  turn  to  Judah.  As  one  of  Jehovah's  noblest  attributes  is  that  of  Father  of  the 
fatherless,  and  as  justice  is  his  delight,  so  nothing  can  more  darkly  designate  offence 
against  him  than  the  spoliation  of  the  widow  and  the  orphan.  Here,  then,  the  climaf 
of  denunciation  is  reached.  And  the  prophet  has  now  only  to  hint  the  future  judgment 
and  overthrow.  What  will  they  do  in  the  day  of  visitation  ?  Wliat  refuge  will  be 
open?  What  retreat  in  which  a  false  glory  may  be  hidden?  They  will  cringe  as 
prisoners,  and  as  slain  they  will  fall.  Better  to  have  the  troubled  heart,  which  never- 
theless &ids  its  refuge  in  God,  than  the  reckless  self-confidence  which  invites  his 
auger.  Poverty  of  spirit — against  this  no  prophetic  doom  is  hurled ;  and  adversity 
with  honesty  is  no  real  adversity,  for  the  hand  of  Jehovah  is  here  stretched  out,  not 
to  smite,  but  to  help. — J. 

Yer.  2. — The  davm  of  gospel  day.  "  The  people  that  walked  in  darkness  have 
seen  a  great  light ;  they  that  dwell  in  the  land  of  the  shadow  of  death,  upon  them 
hath  the  light  shined."  The  glory  which  God  revealed  then  through  the  prophet  was 
but  a  prelude  to  that  greater  glory  which  the  Incarnation  made  manifest.  So  much  sc 
that  these  words  are  used  in  Matt.  iv.  16,  and  relate  to  Jesus  leaving  Nazareth  and 
coming  to  Capernaum,  upon  the  sea  coast,  in  the  borders  of  Zabulon  and  Nephthalim 
that  BO  the  prophecy  might  be  fulfilled. 


174  THE   BOOK  OF  THK  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.       [ca  ix.  1— 21, 

L  Thk  obeat  darkness.  History  attests  that  of  which  prophecy  foretelli.  There 
was  moral  darkness.  Look  at  Corinth — so  much  so  that  to  Corinthianize  was  to  play 
the  wanton.  Look  at  Ephesus.  Look  at  Bome,  with  its  lust  and  licence ;  its  terrihla 
realism  in  the  cruel  sports  of  the  amphitheatre,  stained  with  the  massacre  of  heasts 
and  with  the  gladiators'  blood.  Think  of  the  intellectual  darkness,  when  even  the  city 
of  philosophy,  proud  Athens,  erected  an  altar — which  was  a  monument  of  its  failure 
in  the  search  after  wisdom — "  to  the  unknown  God." 

n.  The  sombre  shadow.  "  The  land  of  the  shadow  of  death."  This  language  does 
not  apply  alone  to  the  article  of  death  itself.  Every  hopeless  sorrow  is  a  shadow  of  the 
grave.  Death  K'igned  supreme  over  human  thought.  There  was  no  "  looking  for- 
ward" which  could  comfort  the  weary  heart  of  man  in  its  hereavements  and  griefs. 
Over  city  and  throne,  over  the  groves  of  philosophy  and  the  gardens  of  pleasure,  the  same 
shadow  brooded.  So  that  the  gloom  came  not  alone  when  life  drew  near  to  its  close, 
but  the  long  dark  shadow  fell  over  all  the  pursuits  and  hopes  of  human  life.  As  we 
think  of  all  this  we  shall  understand  what  the  prophet  means  by  a  "  great "  light.  For 
the  wondrous  glory  of  the  Saviour's  revelation  of  "  life  and  immortality  "  none  of  us  can 
overestimate.  It  changed  the  face  of  society,  and  turned  the  weeping  eyes  of  a  weary 
world  to  glory,  honour,  immortality,  and  eternal  life. 

m.  The  welcome  lioht.  Light  makes  all  things  beautiful.  And  light  from 
"  above  "  transfigures  the  lot  of  man.  It  turns  his  afflictions  into  momentary  tribu- 
lations, and  makes  him  to  look,  not  on  the  things  which  are  seen  and  temporal,  but  on 
those  which  are  unseen  and  eternal.  It  is  related,  therefore,  to  human  life  as  well  as 
spiritual  life.  Heaven  is  not  only  "  the  rest  that  remaineth ;  "  its  spirit  pervades  the 
entire  sphere  of  our  earthly  history.  Everywhere  that  blessed  light  shines ;  and  whilst 
it  makes  us  patient  and  hopeful  in  adversity,  it  gives  cheerfulness  to  our  pursuits  and 
saciedness  to  our  friendships — inasmuch  as  we  are  his  disciples  who  said, "  Let  not  your 
heart  be  troubled  ...  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you." — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Great  light  in  deep  darlenesa.  In  wrath  God  remembers  mercy;  he 
makes  us  to  "sing  of  mercy  and  of  judgment."  He  "will  not  always  chide,  nor  keep 
his  anger  for  ever."  Even  unto  disobedient  and  perverse  Israel  he  will  manifest  his 
Divine  pity,  his  redeeming  power.    Bespecting  this  promise  we  may  note — 

L  Its  historical  fulfilment.  This,  in  the  literal  and  primary  sense,  is  Involved 
in  no  slight  obscurity  (see  Exposition).  The  difficulty  in  determining  the  period  when 
these  regions  saw  the  light  of  liberty  and  plenty  after  the  time  of  darkness  and  desola- 
tion is  painfully  suggestive  of  the  fact  that  it  is  a  very  difficult  thing  to  find  any 
instances  of  a  nation  that  has  once  lost  its  place  and  power  recovering  its  position. 
Even  those  which  have'had  the  best  opportunities  of  so  doing  have  failed  to  use  them ; 
witness  Egypt,  Greece,  Eome.  It  seems  as  if  nations  could  "  find  no  place  of  repent- 
ance." The  fact  may  well  stir  every  patriotic  feeling  in  our  breasts,  and  make  us 
resolute  to  infuse  into  all  our  laws,  customs,  institutions,  the  purifying  and  preserving 
influences  of  Christian  truth. 

II.  Its  supreme  illustration.  (Matt.  iv.  15, 16.)  Undoubtedly  this  passage  finds 
its  culminating  fulfilment  in  the  advent  and  the  work  of  Christ.  "  That  was  the  true 
Light  which,  coming  into  the  world,  enlighteneth  every  one."  1.  The  era  when  Jesus 
was  horn  was  one  of  peculiar  darkness.  Ignorance,  vice,  superstition,  violence,  fanati- 
cism, unbelief,  despair, — these  abounded  as  never  before.  2.  He  became  tne  Light  of 
the  world.  (1)  His  truth  illumined  the  dark  valleys  of  error;  (2)  his  life  shed  a 
bright  light  on  the  life  of  man ;  (3)  his  redeeming  death  opened  and  made  clear  to  all 
mankind  the  way  of  return  and  restoration  to  God. 

III.  Its  realization  in  the  Christian  era.  1.  Among  peopUi.  Many  are  the 
communities,  larger  or  lesser,  which,  found  in  gross  darkness,  have  been  enlightened  by 
the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God.  Beside  the  various  European  nations  and  our  own 
islands,  there  are  such  places  as  Greenland,  the  islands  of  Polynesia,  Madagascar,  etc. 
2.  In  individual  men.  Down  into  the  human  soul,  into  the  mind  dark  with  unbelief 
or  crusted  over  with  worldliness,  or  blinded  by  prejudice  and  consequent  misconception, 
or  beguiled  and  led  astray  by  evil  passion  or  some  strong,  spiritual  hallucination,  there 
has  shone  the  light  of  Christian  truth,  a  "  healing  ray  fiora  heaven ; "  and  he  that 
walked  "  in  the  shadow  of  death  "  now  dwells  in  the  light  of  God,  and  will  dwell  in  his 


cu.  IS.  1—21.]         THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  175 

glory.  (1)  We  may  all  open  our  hearts  to  its  shining;  (2)  we  have  the  fatal 
pover  of  closing  them  if  we  choose ;  (3)  we  are  all  invited  to  reflect  and  multiply  its 
beams.— C. 

Ver.  6. — Spirititdl  empire.  "And  the  government  shall  be  upon  his  shoulder." 
L  The  achievement  which  lay  outside  the  pukposb  of  the  Son  or  God.  For 
what  end  was  that  wondrous  Child  bornj  that  holy  Son  given  ?  He  came  not  to 
restore  a  fallen  human  dynasty.  The  most  ardent  and  eager  hopes  of  liis  countrymen 
were  directed  to  the  overthrow  of  the  Boman  power  and  to  the  re-establishment  of  the 
Kingdom  of  David  in  all,  and  more  than  all,  its  pristine  glory.  Jesus  Christ  distinctly 
disavowed  any  such  purpose  as  this.     His  kingdom,  he  said,  was  not  "  of  this  world." 

II.  The  spiritual  empire  which  he  came  to  establish.  We  shall  see  what  and 
how  truly  great  this  was  if  we  consider :  1.  In  what  condition  Christ  found  the  world 
when  he  came.  He  found  it  (1)  with  its  mind  full  of  fatal  error — the  favoured  peoplu 
having  sunk  into  a  dreary,  withering  formalism,  and  the  whole  Gentile  world  into 
idolatry  or  unbelief;  (2)  with  its  heart  full  of  pride,  selfishness,  and  hatred ;  (3)  with 
its  life  full  of  unrighteousness  and  impurity.  2.  Viliat  he  came  to  accomplish  in  regard 
to  it.  He  came  to  undo  all  this;  to  expel  this  bliiihting  error;  to  uproot  this  pride, 
cruelty,  and  selfishness ;  to  abolish  this  iniquity  and  enormity ;  to  plant  and  nourish 
in  the  mind  and  heart  and  life  of  man  the  beautiful  and  admirable  opposites  of  all  this 
— truth,  humility,  love,  righteousness;  and  so  to  exercise  a  beneficent  and  transcendent 
power,  and  so  to  take  the  government  of  the  world  upon  his  shoulder.  3.  The  only 
way  hy  which  he  could  gain  his  end.  Christ  knew  that  the  one  way  to  exert  this 
renovating  power,  to  wield  this  victorious  influence,  was  by  winning  the  world's  devotion 
to  himself  through  his  own  dying  love.  Therefore  he  deliberately  entered  and  deter- 
minately  pursued  the  path  which  led  to  Gethsemane  and  to  Calvary.  Lifted  up  before 
the  eyes  of  a  wondering  and  believing  world,  he  would  draw  all  men  unto  himself,  and 
thus  to  truth,  to  holiness,  to  God.  4.  The  extent  to  which  he  has  xiwceeded.  In  spite 
of  the  miserable  corruptions  which  have  dishonoured  and  enfeebled  his  Church,  and  in 
spite  of  the  languor  and  inactivity  by  which  large  periods  of  its  history  have  betii 
marked,  we  find  that  (1)  error  is  dying  and  truth  reviving  imder  every  sky ;  the 
heathen  temple  is  being  closed ;  the  hoary  systems  of  misbelief,  pierced  and  penetrated 
by  modem  science  and  assailed  by  Christian  truth,  are  shaking  to  their  fall ;  (2)  pride 
is  being  humbled ;  (3)  philanthropy — a  pitiful,  generous,  self-sacrificing  regard  for  the 
unfortunate  and  the  abandoned — ^is  taking  the  place  of  hard-hearted  indifference; 

(4)  the  Prince  of  Peace  is  being  honoured  where  the  god  of  war  was  once  worshipped. 

(5)  Righteousness  and  purity  are  returning  to  human  life.  Slavery,  lust,  drunkenness, 
profanity,  are  not  yet  dead,  but  their  death-warrant  has  been  signed  and  they  are  doomed 
10  die.  The  thought  of  Jesus  Christ  is  taking  possession  of  the  human  mind ;  his  prin- 
ciples are  reaching  and  regulating  human  life ;  his  Siiirit  is  changing  the  human  world  ; 
the  government  is  being  laid  upon  his  shoulder.  (1)  Let  us  re/nice  in  the  growing  power  of 
that  Son  that  was  born  to  our  race.  The  empire  of  the  Cajsars,  of  the  Pharaohs,  of  the 
Napoleons,  is  nothing  but  a  memory,  a  history;  the  rule  of  Jesus  Christ  is  a  benign,  a 
mighty,  a  growing  power,  an  abiding  and  extending  influence.  That  is  a  fruitless,  sapless 
stump ;  this  is  a  tree  of  life,  bearing  all  manner  of  fruits, "  and  the  leaves  of  the  tree  are  for 
the  healing  of  the  nations."  (2)  Let  us  take  care  that  we  are  among  the  subjects  of  his 
spiritual  realm.  His  is  the  future  of  the  world ;  to  be  separated  from  him  is  to  lose 
the  heritage,  to  forfeit  the  citizenship  which  will  soon  be  tlie  one  thing  worth  possess- 
ing. (3)  Let  us  recognize  the  true  wisdom ;  not  to  strive  after  outward  grandeur.  In 
this  attempt  we  may  fall  and  be  bruised  or  even  broken,  or  we  may  succeed  and  be 
satiated  and  thirst  again.  The  true  wisdom  is  found  in  shedding  a  sweet  and  sanctifying 
influence  over  all  whom  we  can  reach  and  bless. — C. 

Ver.  6, — The  wonderful  Lord.  "  His  name  shall  be  called  WonderfuL"  And  well 
may  he  have  been  named  Wonderful,  whose  words,  whose  works,  and  whose  love  were 
such  as  those  of  Jesus  Christ.     We  look  at — 

L  The  marvel  of  his  tbachinq.  1.  It  struck  his  contemporaries  with  awe  and 
with  astonishment  (see  Matt.  v.  28, 29 ;  xiii.  54 ;  xxii.  22).  2.  It  strikes  us  with  wonder 
still.    That  a  Jew,  brought  up  at  Nazareth,  receiving  a  very  slight  education,  having 


176  THK  BOOK  OP  THE  PllOPilET   ISAIAH.         [ch.  ix.  1— 21 

no  intercourse  with  mea  of  other  nations,  acted  upon  by  the  narrowing  and  stiffening 
influences  which  were  prevalent  an(i  powerful  in  his  land  and  time,  should  teach  as  he 
taught  about  ( 1)  the  fatherhood  of  God ;  (2)  the  spirituality  of  Divine  worship  and  sacred 
service ;  (3)  the  openness  of  the  outcast  and  the  abandoned  to  return  to  the  favour  and 
likeness  of  God;  (4)  the  spiritual  and  univeisal  character  of  the  kingdom  of  God; 
(5)  the  needfulness  of  the  child-spirit  and  of  humility  for  entrance  into  the  kingdom 
of  truth  and  rigliieousness;  (6)  the  attainment  of  lil'e  through  death,  etc. ; — all  this  is 
not  only  surprising,  marvellous ;  it  is  positively  unaccountable  on  any  i/thw  theory 
than  that  God  dwelt  in  him  and  he  in  God. 

II.  The  wonder  of  his  poweb.  1.  This  also  excited  the  astonishjaent  of  his 
contemporaries  (see  Matt.  vii.  27 ;  Mark  i.  27 ;  vii.  37 ;  Lnkj  v.  26,  etc.)  2.  It  calls 
forth  our  reverent  admiration  still.  We  wonder  and  adore  as  we  realiz )  that  (1)  he 
compelled  the  earnest  attention  of  his  countrymen;  (2)  he  has  commaadid  the  atten- 
tiou  of  all  the  ages  and  of  most  of  the  peoi>les  ever  since ;  (3)  he  has  been,  and  is 
regarded  as  the  Saviour,  the  Lord,  the  Friend  of  millions  of  individual  s  juls,  and  has 
brightened,  comforted, 'transformed  innuraerable  human  lives;  (4)  he  hts  produced  a 
manifest  change — often  amounting  to  a  revolution — in  the  sentiment,  tne  principles, 
and  the  institutions  of  mankind. 

III.  His  knowledoe-i'assinq  love.  (See  Eph.  iii.  19.)  1.  On  one  occasioii,  at 
least,  tne  people  were  powerfully  impressed  with  the  fervour  of  his  love  (John  xi.  36 ; 
see  also  John  xiii.  1).  2.  The  love  of  Christ  is  far  more  astonishing  to  us  who  can 
better  recognize  its  greatness.  Now  that  the  facts  of  the  Incarnation  and  the  purpose 
of  his  sufferings  and  his  death  have  been  illumined  by  the  teaching  of  the  Divine 
Spirit,  we  kuow  how  surpassingly  great,  how  wonderful,  were  (I)  his  sacrificial  love  to 
uur  race — ^not  sparing  himself,  but  delivering  himself  up  for  us  all,  and  pursuing  that 
path  of  sacrifice  even  to  the  very  end ;  (2)  his  distinguishing  love  to  the  individual 
soul.  So  that,  with  Paul,  every  one  may  say,  "  He  loved  me  ; "  may,  indeed,  say,  "  He 
loves  me  " — is  seeking  my  salvation,  has  borne  with  my  sin  and  shortcoming,  extends  to 
me  his  pardoning  love,  is  dealing  patiently  and  tenderly  with  me,  is  leading  me  by  the 
right  and  wise  way  to  the  heavenly  city.— C. 

Ver.  6. — Chief  counsels  of  Christ.  "  His  name  shall  be  called  Counsellor.'*  If  we 
approach  Jesus  Christ  as  a  Divine  Counseller,  i.e.  as  One  that  has  unerring  wisdom  to 
impart  to  us  respecting  the  chief  good  of  human  life,  the  secret  of  true  success,  the 
way  to  reach  the  goal  and  secure  the  prize,  we  shall  find  from  him  these  principal 
counsels — 

I.  That  if  we  would  find  the  tkuth  wk  seek  wb  must  comb  ab  a  child  to 
ITS  souKCE.  Into  the  "kingdom  of  God,"  which  is  the  kingdom  of  truth  and  joy,  he 
tells  us  emphatically  and  repeatedly  we  must  enter  as  a  little  child,  that  has  everything 
to  leain,  and  is  willing  to  be  taught  by  its  heavenly  ii'ather,  by  its  one  great  Teacher 
(see  Matt,  xviii.  34 ;  Mark  x.  10 ;  Luke  xviii.  14 ;  cf.  1  Cor.  iii-.  18). 

II.  That  not  human  honoub  and  worldly  wealth,  but  the  likeness  and  the 
FAVOUR  of  God  are  the  true  objects  of  pursuit.  (See  Matt.  v.  45;  vL  19,  20; 
Luke  xii.  15;  iv.  4;  John  v.  44;  xiv.  23.) 

III.  That  not  by  self- assertion,  but  by  self-renunciation  abb  oub  ebal 
interests  secured.     (See  Matt.  x.  37 — 39 ;  John  xii.  25.) 

IV.  That  in  close  and  living  union  with  himself  wb  attain  oub  highest 
hbeitage.  The  chief  counsel  of  Christ  was  that,  with  our  sins,  our  sorrows,  our 
struggles,  our  aspiialions,  we  should  come  into  intimate  union  with  himself,  the 
Saviour,  the  Friend,  the  Master,  the  Leader,  of  mankind.  In  clearest,  strongest, 
tenderest  tones  he  says  ever  to  us  all,  "  Come  unto  me ;  abide  in  me ;  follow  me ;  and 
ye  shall  not  walk  in  darkness,  but  have  the  light  of  life." — 0. 

Ver.  6. — Christ  in  relation  to  time.  "  The  Everlasting  Father,"  If  we  take  the 
tvords  in  their  literal  rendering,  "  the  Father  of  Eternity,"  we  gain  a  meaning  whicn  is 
more  consonant  with  the  scriptural  teaching  respecting  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  man. 
He  is  One  who  has  much  to  do  with  eternity ;  he  is  an  (or  the)  Eternal  One.  This 
dttribution  to  Jesus  Christ  suggests  to  us — 

L  THB  BBIKir  BPACK  OF  TUIB  W  IICH  HIS  LIFE  0C0UPIE8  AS   A  MATTKB  OF  HISTOBX 


OH.  IX.  1—21.]        THE   BOOK  OP   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  177 

Only  "a  little  while"  had  they  the  Light  of  the  world  with  them.  Parts  of  three 
years,  a  space  of  time  to  be  counted  by  moaths, — this  was  all  the  interval  between  his 
coming  and  his  goiug ;  it  was  a  lightniug-flash  between  the  long  spaces  of  darkness. 

II.  Its  long  backward  look.  It  lo(jks  back  (1)  through  all  human  history :  for  all 
the  lines  of  national  lile  (Hebrew,  Roman,  Grecian,  etc.)  coaverged  and  met  at  hid 
birth ;  all  that  had  existed  had  been  leading  up  to,  had  buun  preparing  for,  his  advent ; 
(2)  to  the  remotest  ages,  even  to  the  beginning.  "  Before  Abraham  was,  I  am; "  "  He 
was  before  all  things ;  "  "  In  ttie  be';;iuniDg  was  the  Word." 

III.  Its  LOiSQ  FOBWAED  LOOK.  The  scribes  and  Pharisees  thought,  when  they  saw 
hitn  die  on  the  cross,  that  his  would  be  but  an  ephemeral  career ;  that  his  influence 
would  quickly  die,  and  his  name  be  soon  forgotten.  But  we  know  that  (1)  he  has 
commanded  the  attention  of  the  world  for  eighteen  centuries ;  (2)  he  has  been  by  far 
the  greatest  Power  therein ;  (3)  he  is  now  recognized  and  honoured  by  his  Church  as 
its  living,  reigning  Lord;  (4)  he  will  appear  as  its  Judge;  (5)  he  will  be  for  ever  the 
Object  of  our  heavenly  worship  and  servica.  He  is  the  "  Father  of  eternity."  'J'herefore : 
1.  Let  us  reverence  him  while  we  trust  and  love  him.  Our  Friend  with  whom  we  have 
such  happy  fellowship  is  One  in  very  closest  connection  with  the  Divine ;  he  is  the 
"  Father  of  eternity,"  though  manifested  in  time,  and  with  us  for  so  brief  a  day.  2. 
Let  us  truit  him  while  we  work  for  him.  Wu  may  be  disappointed  at  the  smallness  of 
results,  at  the  apparent  distance  of  the  goal ;  we  may  be  impatient  in  spii  it,  and  we 
may  be  hurried  or  even  unchristian  in  the  methods  we  adopt,  in  the  weapons  we 
employ.  Let  us  be  steadied,  calmed,  righted,  as  we  remember  that  he  whom  we  serve 
is  not  one  who  is  shut  up  to  a  few  years  or  decades,  or  even  a  few  centuries,  in  which  to 
work  out  his  mission  of  love ;  he  is  the  "  Father  of  Eternity ; "  he  is  Lord  of  all  future 
time;  he  will  cause  his  Word  to  be  fulfilled;  we  may  patiently  wait,  while  we  earnestly 
and  faithfully  work. — 0. 

Ver.  6. — Christian  peace.  "  The  Prince  of  Peace."  Before  considering  what  is  the 
peace  vvhich  is  distinctively  Christian,  it  may  be  well  to  remark:  1.  That  the  first, 
iucideutal  result  of  the  coming  of  Christ  is  not  peace,  but  discord  (see  Matt.  x.  34 — 36). 
The  first  consequence  of  the  introduction  or  the  revival  of  Christian  truth  is  per- 
secution. For  this  the  Christian  faith  is  not  responsible;  it  is  due  to  the  fact  that 
error  is  so  blind,  bigotry  so  pitiless,  sin  so  cruel.  2.  That  everything  is  not  gained  for 
Christ  when  a  superficial  smoothness  has  been  secured.  It  will  take  much  more  than  a 
cessation  of  "  war,"  a  Jismantling  of  forts  and  a  disbanding  of  troops,  to  arrive  at  the 
peace  which  is  of  Cliribt.     It  is  a  Christian  poet  who  writes — 

"  I  love  no  peace  which  is  not  fellowship. 
And  which  includes  not  mercy ;  I  would  h«Tft 
Bather,  the  raking  of  the  guns  across 
The  world." 

Better,  in  Christ's  name  and  in  his  cause,  the  stern  and  even  the  sanguinary  struggle 
which  seeks  to  establish  righteousness  than  the  hollow  peace  which  is  satisfied  with 
Slavery,  serfdom,  or  servility.  3.  That  the  peace  which  the  Messiah  came  to  bring 
was  not  that  of  the  conquering  sword,  but  the  prevailing  Spirit ;  that  which  is  won,  not 
on  the  battle-field,  but  in  the  depths  of  the  human  heart — first  in  the  heart  of  the  Son 
uf  man  himself,  and  then  in  the  souls  of  all  the  children  of  men.  Of  this  spiritual  rest 
which  the  Prince  of  Peace  imparts,  we  may  say  that  it  includes — 

1.  Peace  witu  God.  Sin  separates  between  us  and  our  Divine  Father ;  it  produces 
condemnation  on  his  part,  dread  on  our  part ;  it  ends  in  an  unnatural  and  deplorable 
alienation.  In  Christ  is  mercy,  restoration,  peace.  "Being justified  by  faith,  we  have 
(leace  with  God,"  etc.  (Horn.  v.  1 ;  see  Rom.  viii.  1). 

n.  Inwaed  best.  Sin  is  the  great  disturber,  the  constant  troubler  of  the  human 
heart.  It  is  the  source  of  all  disorder,  and  therefore  of  all  distress.  It  casts  down 
that  which  should  be  uppermoht — conscience,  reason,  holy  asjiration,  etc.;  it  enthrones 
that  which  should  be  in  subjection — passion,  self,  temporal  interests,  etc.  The  Prince 
of  Peace  seciues  to  the  human  soul  its  right  condition ;  he  restores  the  true  order ;  he 
redresses,  re-establishes,  revolutionizes ;  he  "makes  all  things  new "  within.  And  when 
the  spiritual  nature  is  thus  reset,  all  its  powers  taking  their  proper  place  and  discharging 

ISALkB.  X 


178  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH.  ,      [ch.  ix.  1—21. 

their  rightful  functions,  there  is  a  "  great  calm  "  within ;  they  who  repair  to  the  Bon  ol 
God,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  have  "  rest  unto  tlieir  souls  "  (Matt.  xi.  28 — 30). 

III.  Social  concoed.  (Jhristiiin  love  (John  xiii.  34,  35),  Christian  magnanimity 
(Matt.  V.  43 — 48 ;  Eom.  xii.  18 — 20) ;  Cliristlan  recimciUution  (Matt.  v.  211),  Christiaji 
generosity  (Rom.  xii.  10;  Eph.  v.  21;  I'liil.  ii.  3),  Christian  courtesy  (1  I'et,  iii.  8; 
1  J'et.  V.  5),  Cliristian  pwieuce  (1  Ttiess.  v.  14), — these  are  the  conditions  asd  IIm 
sou/ces  of  true  and  abiding  peace  amoug  men. — C. 

Y(  rs,  8 — 12. —  'ITie  evil  spirit  of  defiance.  The  spirit  which  is  Lufe  robuued  is  that 
of  a  guilty  defiapce  of  Gud.  Jehovah  had  visited  Israel  with  i/he  signs  of  his  dis- 
I  lea.s  ire — had  liunibled  and  impoverished  her.  What  attitude  should  she  now  assume  ? 
I'hai  of  humility  and  amenduient?  Nothing  was  further  from  her  mind.  She  would 
ci^nie  id  in  her  own  strength  a.ainst  her  fate,  against  the  Lord  who  had  a"based  her; 
-he  u  uld  show  to  him  the  futility  of  his  correction.  The  bricks  might  be  fallen  down ; 
I  wa.--  of  no  consequence—  they  would  build  with  hewn  stones.  The  sycomores  were 
ielled  it  was  all  tlje  better — they  would  put  cedars  in  their  place  (ver.  10).  They 
«oulil,  in  their  pioud  independence,  convert  Divine  chastisements  into  a  national 
advai.tage. .  Thus  they  breathed  the  very  spirit  of  defiance.  Respecting  this  arrogant 
Lemper,  we  mark — 

I.  Its  common  course.  1.  First  comes  some  serious  departure  from  God  or  from  his 
service  on  the  part  of  the  nation,  the  Church,  the  family,  or  the  individual  man.  2. 
'■'hen  comes  the  Divine  correction.  This  may  be  in  the  form  of  prophetic,  or  parental, 
ur  pastoral  rebuke,  or  of  some  serious  reverse  in  temporal  affairs,  or  of  bodily  sickness, 
or  of  painful  bereavement.  3.  Tlien  comes  the  resentment  and  revolt  of  the  human 
will  against  the  Divine.  Instead  of  heaikening,  heeding,  and  repenting,  the  nation  (or 
the  individual)  delermines  to  act  in  a  spirit  of  defiance.  In  its  (his)  own  strength,  it 
wiU  rise  above  its  present  circumstances;  it  will  make  good  its  position;  it  will  bravo 
the  worst  perils ;  it  will  endure  extremest  hardships,  the  greatest  losses ;  it  will  turn  its 
fallen  bricks  into  massive  stones  that  will  not  fall;  it  will  exchange  its  feeble  sycomores 
that  are  cut  down  for  strong  cedars  which  the  wildest  gales  will  spare. 

II.  Its  guilt.  The  guilt  of  cherishing  such  a  spirit  is  of  a  very  aggravated  character. 
1.  It  goes  beyond  the  ordinary  sin  of  inattention.  To  be  heedless  when  God  is  speakiiig, 
by  whatever  voice  he  may  address  us,  is  surely  iniquitous  enough ;  but  tc  sut  in 
deliberate  defiance  of  the  Almighty  is,  by  many  degrees,  worte.  2  ](  ti..>,uaits  to  a 
positive  rebelliousness  on  the  part  of  the  human  will  against  fhs-t  ^-i  ine  Divine.  It  is 
man  resolving  that,  with  his  puny  strength,  he  will  mifiL  himself  against  his  Maker 
and  will  prevail.  It  is  sin  which  contains  the  «i#L.e!ats  of  insubmissioo,  determined 
opposition,  arrogance. 

III.  Its  folly.  In  the  case  of  Israel  if  w&s  to  be  followed  with  fearful  penalty. 
That  guilty  naticm  was  (1)  to  be  pressed  on  every  hand  by  its  enemies  (ver.  12);  (2) 
to  be  devoured  by  them  (ver.  12) ;  (3)  to  be  prepared  for  still  impending  miseries :  "  For 
ail  this,"  etc.  (ver.  12).  The  nation  (or  the  individual)  that  indulges  in  this  evil  spirit 
of  defiance  will  find,  in  time,  what  a  disastious  mistake  it  (he)'  has  made.  For  the 
defiance  of  God  (1)  shuts  out  immeasurable  good — whuso  hearkens  when  God  reproves, 
and,  heeding  his  voice,  returns  in  ]>enitence  to  his  side  and  his  service,  begins  an  upward 
path  which  leads  to  the  heavenly  hills ;  but  it  also  (2)  shuts  in  to  unimaginable  woes. 
We  may  let  the  words  of  the  text  (ver.  12)  suggest  the  form  they  take.  1.  Inextricaile 
&fficulty.  The  being  surrounded  on  every  hand  by  enemies ;  ibr  sin  leads  on  and  down 
to  cruel  captivities  oi  many  kinds,  from  which  the  soul  struggles  vainly  to  disengage 
itself.  2.  Waste.  The  being  devoured  by  adversaries ;  time  lost ;  strength  impaired ; 
■the  soul  ravaged ;  reputation  despoiled.  3.  Fear  of  the  future.  A  dread  of  the  out- 
stretched hand  of  Divine  retribution  which  hag  more  strokes  to  deal. — C. 

Vers.  14 — 17. — Man  in  Ood's  view.  There  are  three  classes  among  mankind  in 
reference  to  whom  we  here  learn  the  thought  and  feeling  of  God.  We  infer  fioin  what 
is  stated  in  the  text — 

I.  His  KPKciAL  iNTBBEBT  IN  THE  TOUNO.  Things  had  come  to  such  a  state,  the  natural 
order  of  things  was  to  reversed,  that  "the  Lord  would  have  no  joy  in  thfeir young  men" 
(ver.  17).     Ueuce  we  may  fairly  argue  that  the  common  and  normal  condition  ia  that 


OH.IX.  1— 21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  179 

In  which  God  has  joy  in  the  young.  It  is  a  strange  and  unnatural  thing  to  him,  that 
which  is  altogether  alien  to  his  own  disposition,  to  take  no  deep  and  Divine  interest  in 
them.  God  has  the  young  people  in  his  thought,  in  his  aflfcction  ;  they  are  the  ohjects 
of  his  peculiar  regard  and  tender  interest.  He  is  seeking  their  true  welfare;  he  is 
addressing  himself  to  them  in  the  terms  and  the  tones  of  fatherly  love.  There  ia 
mthing  more  pleasing  in  his  eyes  than  the  response  which  the  young  heart  makes  to 
his  inviting  voice. 

II.  HiB    PBCtTLIAR  TENDBBNE8B  TOWARD    THE    AFFLICTED.      It   ig  a   Sign   of  the  Very 

extremity  of  the  Divine  displeasure  that  the  Lord  will  not  even  "  have  mercy  on  the 
fatherless  and  widows."  The  rehelliousness  of  Israel  must  have  heen  great  indeed,  her 
iniquity  heinous  and  aggravated  indeed,  to  hring  ahout  a  conclusion  so  startling  and 
so  Htranse  as  that.  For  it  is  the  most  wide  departure  from  the  constant  thouj^ht  and 
hahit  of  the  Most  High.  It  is  in  his  heart  of  pity  to  show  peculiar  kindness  to  his 
afflicted  children.  Those  who  are  in  sorrow  commonly  receive  the  precious  sympathy 
of  tlieir  fellow-men  ;  this  may  fail,  hut  it  is  certainly  insufScient.  Then  the  wounded 
spirit  finds  refuge  in  the  sympathy  of  Christ ;  it  has  the  strongest  assurance  of  hig 
presence,  his  pity,  his  succour  (Ps.  ciii.  13  ;  Heb.  iv.  15,  etc.). 

III.  His  sevbritt  towakd  the  false.  The  prophet  regHvded  himself  as  being  at 
the  head  of  the  nation,  and  expected  to  be  so  regarded  bv  others.  But  not  so  did  the 
Lord  regard  him  if  he  were  false  to  his  vocation.  In  the  Divine  view  he  was  not  the 
distinguished  hough  waving  from  the  top  ol  the  palm  tree ;  he  was  the  coarse  reed  that 
grew  in  the  rank  marshes  (see  vers.  14,  15).  1.  Any  and  every  dissembler  is  hateful 
to  God.  He  denounces  the  hypocrite,  wherever  he  is  found  (ver.  17).  2.  But  the  false 
teacher  is  the  object  of  especial  Divine  displeasure.  "  The  prophet  that  teacheth  lies 
is  the  tail."  Be  it  remembered  that  the  prophet  is  now,  what  he  was  then,  the  man 
who  pro/esses  to  speak/or  God;  that  if,  making  this  profession,  we  jiublish  that  which 
is  error  rather  than  truth,  we  do  two  things  which  are  most  deplornble.  In  the  first 
place  We  draw  down  on  ourselves  the  awfid  anger  of  the  righteous  Ruler;  and  in  the 
lecond  place  we  slay  those  w  hom  we  pretend  to  heal :  they  "  that  are  led  (misled)  of  iis 
are  destroyed"  (ver.  16).  To  receive  religious  error  into  the  soul  is  to  be  poisoned 
with  a  deadly  drug ;  guilty  indeed  is  the  hand  that  administers  it. — G. 

Vers.  18 — 21. — Bin  suicidal.  From  this  declaration  of  judgment  against  a  gflilty 
nation  we  may  gather  some  principles  which  are  applicable  to  men  as  well  as  nations 
slsewhere,  and  indeed  everywhere.     We  learn — 

I.  That  sin  is  a  wasting  power.  "Wickedness  burneth  as  a  fire"  (ver.  18). 
Where  sin  abounds  there  desolation  abounds.  The  longer  a  man  (or  nation)  has  lived 
under  its  dominion  the  more  has  power  withered  and  jjossession  decreased,  the  more 
has  heritage  been  wasted  and  lost.  1.  Sin  first  destroys  the  less  valuable.  "  The  brier 
and  the  thorn  it  shall  consume" — the  visible,  the  temporal,  the  pecuniary,  the  material, 
the  fleshly.  2.  Then  the  more  valuable.  "  It  shall  kindle  in  the  thickets  of  the  grove." 
The  reputation,  the  intelligence,  the  character,  the  influence  for  good, — these  disappear 
nnde.r  the  consuming  fires  of  sin.  3.  Then  it  amounts  to  a  conspicuous  disnster.  "  They 
shall  mount  up  in  volumes  of  rising  smoke."  The  ruin  is  so  striking  that  attention  is 
commanded  ;  all  surrounding  nations  must  observe  it ;  all  neighbours  must  remark  it. 

II.  That  it  turns  its  hand  upon  itself.  Of  the  fire  of  human  sin  humanity  itself 
is  the  fuel  (ver.  19).  This  is  palpably  and  painfully  true  :  1.  0/  the  individual.  He 
that  sins  against  God  wrongs  his  own  soul,  first  and  most  (Prov.  viii.  86).  It  is  not 
only  the  drunkard  and  the  debauchee  who  injure  themselves  by  their  iniquities.  Look 
on  far  enough,  or  look  doum  deep  enough,  and  you  will  find  that  every  transgressor  is 
putting  his  own  most  precious  interests,  as  fuel,  into  the  devouring  flame ;  every  such 
man  "eats  the  flesh  of  his  own  arm"  (ver.  20).  2.  0/  the  community.  It  is  sin,  the 
departure  from  the  Divina  will,  which  brings  about  (1)  faction  in  the  state ;  (2)  con- 
tention in  the  Church ;  (3)  discord  in  the  family.  Often,  in  its  ultimate  outworkings, 
it  becomes  remorseless  and  insatiable.  "  No  man  will  spare  his  brother ; "  he  "  eats  and 
is  not  satisfied  "  (ver.  19 ;  see  Gal.  v.  15). 

III.  That  the  waste  op  bin  is  its  divinely  appointed  penalty.  "  Through  the 
wrath  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  the  land  darkened."  It  seems  to  be  in  the  very  nature  o/ 
ti^ngs  that  iin,  whether  in  the  individual  or  the  community,  should  consume  ano 


180  THE   BOOK   OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.         [ch,  ix  1—21 

destroy ;  but  so  tawih  b^  the  Lord  of  hosts  to  do  with  th»  natiir&  of  things  t^t  those 
who  thus  suffer  the  consequences  of  their  guilt  may  well  feel  that  the  puaitiTe  hand 
of  God  is'  kill  upon  them.     And  they  will  also  do  well'  to  feel — 

IT.  That  God  has  somethinq  more  to  say  than  he  has  yet  bpokbh.  "  For  all 
this,"  etc.— C. 

Ver.  2. — Light  in  darkness.  Cheyne's  translation  brings  out  the  inean.iBg  and 
reference  of  this  passage.  "  Surely  there  is  (now)'  bo  (mofe)  gloomi  tc  ber  whose  lot 
was  affliction.  At  the  former  time  she  brought  shame  on  the  land  of  Zebulun,  and  on 
the  land  of  NaphtSiU,  but  in  the  latter  he  hath  brought  honour  on  the  way  by  the  sea, 
the  othei  side  of  Jordan,  the  distiict  of  the  nations."  The  historical  fa«ts  to  whieh 
allusion  is  made  are :  1.  The  des|)oiling  of  Upper  and  Lower  Galilee  by  Tiglatb-Pileser 
(2  Kings  XV.  29 ;  comp.  Zech.  x.  10).  This  pa/rt  of  the  eocintry  was  attacked  first,,  and 
it  suffered  most  and  longest.  2.  The  Messiah,  the  SaiFiour,  the  gucat  Light  shining  on 
the  darkness,  came  in  the  part  of  Galilee  belonging  to  Zebulun.  It  is  here  noted,  as  a 
characteristic  of  the  Divine  dealings,  that  those  who  suffer  most  are  graciously  eon- 
siilered  first,  and  that  Divine  restorings  come  most  tenderly  where  there  have  been 
Divine  wonndings  and  smitiugs. 

I.  The  dabkness  or  bondage  makes  beautiful  the  light  of  liberty.  This 
district  had  been  the  first  to  fall  under  the  yoke  of  Assyria.  As  the  border  country,  its 
sufferings  under  bondage  had  been  extreme.  This  may  be  taken  to  represent  the 
bondage  of  men  under  sin.  "  Whosoever  committeth  sin  is  the  bond-slave  of  si»" 
Christ  came  to  bring  liberty  for  such  captives.  And  the  more  bitterly  the  yoke  of  sin 
is  felt,  the  more  glorious  seems  that  breaking  of  bonds  and  letting  prisoners  go  &ee, 
which  was  the  work  of  the  spiritual  Redeemer. 

II.  The  dabkness  op  bufferiko  shows  up  the  light  of  life.  The  distress  of  the 
country  resulted  in  prevailing  diseases  of  singularly  painful  types,  such  as  the 
demoniacal  possessions.  In  View  of  these  how  gracious  was  his  work  who  came 
healing  all  the  diseases  of  the  people,  and  casting  out  the  evil  ^irits  I  Life  for  the 
stricken!  Life  for  the  maimed,  blind,  deaf,  dumb,  dead!  Life  even  for  those  "dead 
in  tresjiasses  and  sins."     "  In  him  was  life,  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men," 

III.  The  darkness  op  loneliness  glorifies  the  light  of  love.  Galilee  was  a 
despised,  neglected  region.  "  Can  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Galilee?  "  Christ,  the 
Lord  of  love,  finds  out  the  neglected  one  and  comes  first  to  it;  honours  it,  brings  to  it 
the  joy  unspeakable  of  being  cared  for  and  loved.  The  sinner,  in  the  sense  of  his  sin, 
feels  lonely — nobody  cares  for  him.  It  is  light,  hope,  the  dawn  of  bliss,  when  it  comes 
right  home  to  a  sinner's  heart,  "  JesBS  cares /<>»•  me."  The  light  has  risen  on  your  dark 
Galilee ;  but  the  grave  question  is — Have  you  seen  the  light?  Have  you  welcomed  the 
light?    Are  you  walking  in  the  light?— R.  T. 

Ver.  3. — Hie  Joy  of  men  in  a  Redeemer.  "They  joy  before  thee,"  in  view  of  the 
Redeemer  thou  bast  sent.  There  can  be  no  joy  like  that  men  feel  in  the  acceptance  of 
God's  "  uns|)eakable  gift."  Illustrate  by  the  song  and  choi-us  of  the  angels  at  Bethlehem : 
"  Unto  you  is  born  a  Saviour ; "  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest."  And  by  the  triumph- 
song  of  the  redeemed  ones  in  the  glory :  "  Unto  him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from 
our  gins  in  his  own  blood,"  etc.  There  had  been  times  of  great  rejoicing  in  the  history 
of  Israel,  such  as  in  the  days  of  Solomon  (2  Kings  iv.  20 }  xxii.  13) ;  and  of  riotous 
feasting,  as  in  days  of  Uzziah  (oh.  V.  11 — 14).  But  such  joy  was  merely  passing 
exciteiaent ;  it  was  as  the  "  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot"  compared  with  the  deep, 
lasting  joy  of  the  time  when  Jesus,  the  Redeemer  from  sin  and  all  its  consequences, 
bowed  the  heavens,  camu  down,  and  dwelt  among  men.  We  ask  (1)  why  men  should 
chiefly  rejoice  in  a  Redeemer ;  and  (2)  what  kmd  of  joy  theirs  should  be  who  have 
proved  how  he  can  redeem. 

I.  Why  men  should  chiefly  ebjoick  in  a  Redeemer.  1.  Because  the  one  thing 
man  needs  above  all  others  is  redemption;  not  science,  not  revelation,  not  civilization, 
not  morality,  not  social  elevation.  Man  is  in  one  condition  whose  interests  are,  to  him, 
supreme — he  is  a  sinner,  and  so  his  supreme  need  is  a  Saviour.  With  the  need  and 
the  suiply  the  Word  of  God  fully  deals.  It  is  the  Divine  message  to  man,  the  sinner. 
Its  voice  may  be  translated  thus :  "  O  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself;  but  in  me  is 


OH.  TX.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  181 


thy  help  found."  2.  Because  this  one  thing,  rerlcmption,  is  wholly  bcjtnd  mati's 
attainment.  We  are  amazed  at  what  man  can  do,  in  overcoming  matedal  obstacles 
»nd  yoking  to  his  service  the  giant  forces  of  nature.  But  at  redemption  from  sin  man  is 
arrested ;  there  his  power  ceases.  "  No  man  can  redeem  his  brother,  or  give  to  God  a 
ransom  for  him."  Grod  is  represented  as  saying, "  I  looked,  and  there  was  no  man  .  .  . 
therefore  mine  own  arm  brought  salvation."  3.  Because  man  had  no  reason  to  expett 
redemption,  and  could  make  no  claim  to  Divine  intervention.  Redemption  is  a 
sovereign  device,  a  display  of  infinite  mercy,  a  work  of  unbought  love.  Its  root  is, 
"  Clod  is  love." 

II.  What  kind  of  jot  theirs  should  be  who  have  proved  how  he  can  kedebm. 
There  are  two  figure*  blended  in  the  text.  Joy  of  harvest.  Joy  of  victors  on  dividing 
the  spoil  of  battle-fields.  They  suggest ;  1.  The  joy  of  'possession— a.  harvest  of  supply 
for  coming  needs,  spoil  from  the  tents  of  the  foe.  2.  The  joy  of  triumph.  To  possess 
the  enemy's  camp  is  proof  that  the  foe  is  wholly  vanquished.  Jesus,  as  our  Redeemer, 
has  "  led  captivity  captive,  and  received  gifts  for  men." — R.  T. 

Ver.  6. — The  fatherhood  of  God  revealed  in  Messiah.  The  word  "  Everlasting 
Father,"  or  "  Father  of  Eternity,"  is  applied  to  Messiah  as  the  Eevealer  of  God  to  men. 
That  the  passage  can  only  refer  to  Messiah  is  agree<l  by  all  devout  students.  God 
<iesigned  to  reveal  himself  at  last  and  fully  to  his  creatures  through  a  man's  earthly  life. 
God  can  only  reveal  himself  to  a  creature  in  the  lines  of  that  nature  which  he  has 
given  to  the  creature.  When  God  was  dealing  with  man,  he  sot  forth  the  manhood  of 
his  Messiah  most  prominently ;  but  when  man  comes  to  know  his  gift,  he  finds  he  has 
received  his  God,  and  learned  the  name  by  which  he  may  be  called.  Arguing  may  not 
always  convince  of  the  Deity  of  Christ.  It  is  rather  like  trying  to  prove  to  a  man  that 
it  is  the  spring-time  of  the  year.  Spring  is  in  the  atmosphere — in  the  balmy  breathing 
of  the  air,  in  the  quickening  power  of  the  sunshine,  in  the  lengthening  days,  and  in  tlie 
bursting  life  of  leaf  and  flower  everywhere  around  us.  So  the  very  atmosphere  of 
Christ  is  the  atmosphere  of  God.  Everywhere,  and  in  everything,  we  feel  that  he  is 
God.  Our  text  is  striking  in  the  contrasts  it  presents— contrasts  which  were  realized  in 
the  human  life  of  the  Messiah.  Everywhere  in  his  story  we  find  the  blended  God  and 
man.  He  was  the  outcast  babe  for  whom  there  was  no  room  in  the  inn,  and  yet  angels 
heralded  his  birth,  and  Magi  offered  to  him  the  worship  due  to  a  king.  He  was  a 
simple  child  of  twelve  years  old,  and  yet  the  temple  doctors  were  astonished  at  his 
understanding  and  answers.  He  submits  to  John's  baptism  of  water,  and  yet  the  Holy 
Ghost  descends  upon  him,  and  the  voice  of  "most  exceeding  peace"  gives  testimony 
to  him  as  the  Divine  Son.  He  weeps  the  tears  of  human  friendship  at  the  grave  of 
Lazarus,  and  yet  he  speaks  the  words  which  call  the  dead  to  life.  He  dies  in  agony  and 
shame,  as  only  a  man  could  die ;  he  rises  in  triumph  and  glory,  as  only  a  God  could 
rise.  So  in  this  prophecy  of  Isaiah.  The  "coming  One  "  is  a  child,  but-the  "  key  of 
government  is  upon  his  shoulder."  He  is  a  child,  and  yet  he  is  "  Wonder-Counsellor, 
God-Mighty-One,  Prince  of  Peace.''  He  is  the  Son,  and  yet  it  can  be  said  of  him  that 
he  is  the  "  Everlasting  Father."  This  last  assertion  seems  to  be  the  most  astonishing  of 
them  all.  "  The  Son  is  the  Father."  Christ  snstained  this  view :  "  He  that  hath  seen 
me  hath  seen  the  Father."  Every  man's  work  is  to  find  the  Father  in  Christ.  No  man 
has  truly  seen  Christ  who  has  not  found  in  him  the  Father,  and  learned  from  him  the 
fatherhood  of  God. 

I.  Mat  wb  think  of  God  as  Father?  To  show  himself  to  man,  God  must  come 
into  man's  sphere,  not  as  a  cherub  or  as  an  angel,  but  as  a  man. '  "  Verily,  he  took  not 
on  him  the  nature  of  angels,  but  he  took  on  him  the  seed  of  Abraham."  He  must  also 
show  himself  in  some  particular /orm  of  man.  Men  are  kings,  or  prophets,  or  judges, 
or  husbands,  or  fathers,  or  sons,  or  brothers,  and  God  must  make  choice  of  the  form 
that  may  most  worthily  represent  him.  Some  say  we  must  think  of  God  chiefly  as  a 
King.  But  few  of  us  are  stirred  at  heart  by  the  relations  of  a  king.  He  is  a  person  to 
be  feared,  obeyed,  and  served.  If  he  is  to  be  loved  it  is  only  with  a  patriotic,  it  is  not 
with  a  personal,  affection.  In  the  pages  of  history  we  can  scarcely  find  a  king  whose 
character  and  career  help  us  to  a  worthy  idea  of  God.  Think  of  the  kings  of  Eastern 
nations.  Think  of  so-called  Christian  kings.  There  rise  before  the  mind  scenes  of 
bwbarity,  blood-guiltiness,  tyranny,  debauchery,  and  cruelty  which  make  us  ashamed  to 


182  THE   BOOK   OF   THE   PEOPHET   ISAIAH.        [oh.  ix.  1— 2L 

set  the  thought  of  God  and  of  earthly  kings  together.  On  the  other  hand,  there  never 
has  heen  age  or  nation  in  which  the  dearest  thoughts  and  tenderest  associations  and  most 
reverent  feelings  did  not  gather  round  the  word  "father."  Elverywhere,  even  in  henighted 
heathendom,  fathers  have  heen  men's  ideals  of  the  pure,  the  revered,  and  tbe  good.  God 
comes  nearest  to  men  if  he  can  he  shown  to  tliem  as  the  "  Everlasting  Father."  Love 
is  the  supreme  glory  of  fatherhood;  hut  it  is  only^rmMs  inter  pares,  the  equals  of 
"authority,"  "justice,"  "holiness."  It  would  not  be  fair  to  say  of  any  good  earthly 
father,  "  He  is  all  love,  aU  indulgence ;  there  is  in  him  no  justice,  no  reverence,  no 
government."  We  never  want  to  holster  up  the  authority  of  our  earthly  father  by 
deluding  ourselves  into  the  notion  that  he  is  a  king;  and  we  can  yield  our  fullest 
allegiarice  to  God  as  our  "  Everlasting  Father."  We  need  not  force  ourselves  to  conceive 
of  him  as  that  mysterious  thing,  a  moral  Governor,  for  which  we  can  find  no  human 
model.  What  is  God  to  yoii  when  you  can  fully  receive  the  revelation  that  he  is  the 
Father?  Is  there  any  less  reverence  for  him?  Is  your  sense  of  justice,  righteousness, 
law,  or  authority  weakened  when  you  call  him  "  Father  "  ?  Let  Christ  teach  us  the 
true  God  and  the  eternal  life.  He  shows  us  a  weeping  prodigal  child  pressing  his  face 
into  a  father's  bosom,  heart  beating  to  heart,  the  one  in  all  the  anguish  of  penitence,  the 
other  in  all  the  anguish  of  pitying,  fatherly  love.  The  father's  arms  are  round  the 
restored  boy ;  and  who  shall  say  that  all  highest  law  is  not  vindicated  when  that 
father  wipes  away  the  tears,  and  calls  for  music  and  dancing,  the  best  robe,  and  the  fatied 
calf?  Who  ever  saw  weeping  rebels  on  kings'  bosoms?  Who  ever  saw  kings  shedding 
teura  over  returning  subjects  ?  We  must  go  deeper,  far  deeper,  into  the  very  heart  of 
the  truth  about  God  when  we  say,  "  He  is  our  Father." 

II.  Messiah  shows  God  to  us  as  "  Evbklastinq  Fathek."  The  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  opens  with  a  very  striking  statement :  "  God,  who  at  sundry  times  and  in 
divers  manners  spake  in  time  past  unto  the  fathers  by  the  prophets,  hath  in  these  last 
days  spoken  unto  us  hy  Son."  God  had  spoken  by  creation  of  a  Creator,  by  prophets  of 
a  God,  by  ambassadors  of  a  King,  and  now  by  Son  of  a  Father.  Messiah  is  represented 
as  Sou,  and  Son  of  God,  to  enable  us  to  conceive  of  God  as  Father.  The  very  person 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  itself  a  revelation  of  the  Father.  The  gospels  show  us  that 
his  supreme  effort  was  to  make  men  know  and  think  well  of  the  Father.  He  was  a 
Jew,  and  yet  his  originality  is  nowhere  felt  more  than  in  the  word  which  he  uses  for 
Gorl.  We  find  very  seldom,  almost  never,  any  of  the  recognized  Hebrew  terms — El, 
Klohim,  Shaddai,  or  Jah;  .lehovah  or  God;  his  word  is  always  "  Father."  On  every 
paiie  we  find  the  term  recurring.  Illustrate  from  the  sermon  on  mount ;  address  on 
sending  the  disciples  forth  for  their  trial-mission,  etc.  Conclude  by  commending  this 
view  of  God  as  the  first  and  foundation-truth  of  the  Messianic  revelation.  We  need  not 
be  anxious  to  set  it  under  limitations  and  restrictions.  Christ  never  fenced  it  off.  He 
never  limited  its  applications.  He  never  hesitated  to  preach  it  everywhere.  He  expected 
to  waken  a  new  spirit  in  men,  the  child-spirit,  by  telling  them  of  their  Father  in 
heaven.  If  we  simply  follow  Christ,  we  shall  show  men  the  Father-God  everywhere  in 
Messiah's  life  and  teaching,  seen  even  in  Messiah's  death  and  atonement  and  sacrifice. 
— E.  T. 

Ver.  7. — The  continuity  of  a  kingdom  founded  on  righteousness.  "  A  King  shall 
reign  in  righteousness."  "  Uf  the  increase  of  his  government  and  prosperity  there  shall 
be  no  end  ...  To  establish  it  with  judgment  and  with  justice  from  henceforth  even  for 
evtr."  David's  reign,  as  that  of  the  first  and  most  faithful  theocratic  king,  is  the 
imperfect  earthly  type  of  the  ideal  kingdom,  founded  on  riiihteousness,  and  ruled  in 
riuhteousness.  Whatever  may  have  been  the  personal  infirmities  of  David,  officially  he 
was  thoroughly  loyal  and  true  to  the  Divine  supremacy,  and,  speaking  in  human 
nieas  ires,  it  may  be  said  ol'  him,  "  Eighteousness  was  the  girdle  of  his  loins,  and 
faithfulness  the  girdle  of  his  reins."  Messiah's  spiritual  reign  is  the  complete  antitype 
and  realization  of  the  righteous  kingdom.  His  people  are,  ideally,  "all  holy;"  they 
are  called  to  be  holy,  pledged  to  strive  after  holiness,  and  Messiah  rules  them  in 
righteousness. 

L  The  foundation  of  the  righteous  kingdom.  That  is,  the  vindication  and 
manifestation  of  the  Divine  righteousness,  in  the  obedience,  submission,  life,  and  death 
of  the  Lord  Jeans.      He   "  magnified  the  Law  and  made  it  honourable."    In  him 


OH.  IX  1—21.]        THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PliOPHET   ISAIAH.  18 

"  righteousness  and  peace  kis^ied  each  other."  The  spiritual  liingdora  could  have  no 
other  basis  than  God's  righteousness,  and  Jesus  must  clear  that  righteousness  of  all 
niisat)prehension,  and  show  men  how  it  lies  as  the  corner-stone  of  the  kingdom  which 
he  built  up. 

II.  The  increabb  of  the  righteous  kingdom.  It  must  be  progressive,  because  it 
has  vitality,  which  necessarily  involves  increase  and  growth ;  it  must  be  aggressive, 
because  tliere  is  a  war-spirit  in  all  righteousness;  it  cannot  abide  quietly  beside  evil,  or 
rest  until  all  evil  is  conquered  and  won.  It  is  as  light,  and  must  conflict  with  darkness. 
It  must  be  universal ;  for,  being  the  kingdom  of  the  one  Q-od,  it  is  the  king  !om  of  all 
men  everywhere.  There  is  no  end  to  the  labours  of  the  servants  of  this  kingdom, 
until  the  very  utmost  limits  of  the  earth  are  reached.  Men  must  know  the  name  of 
God  the  Saviour,  from  "  the  rising  of  the  sun  unto  the  going  down  of  the  same." 

III.  The  stability  of  the  righteous  kingdom.  It  is  the  kingdom  of  God,  the 
yood,  the  right;  and  it  is  kin  with  him,  and  stable  as  he  is.  "  Who  shall  harm  you,  i( 
ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good  ?  "  Evil  can  never  become  so  strong  as  good  Good 
has  always  God  "  at  the  back  of  it."  And  security  means  peace  and  prosperity.  The 
first  and  essential  work  of  all  governments  is  to  obtain  perfect  security  for  life  and  for 
property.  Then  commerce  will  flourish,  and  civilization  will  advance.  Men  can  trust 
the  government,  and  adventure  their  wealth  in  business  enterprise.  The  righteous 
kingdom  of  Messiah  gives  absolute  security  to  its  members.  No  man  in  it  ever  wants 
to  wrong  his  brother,  so  no  disturbances  come  to  shake  its  stability. 

IV.  The  perpetuity  op  the  righteous  kingdom.  No  forces  can  ever  arise  in  any 
age  to  stop  it.  National  sins  bring  on  the  destruction  of  nations.  Bight  must  be 
eternal.  It  can  never  be  replaced  by  a  better.  "  Against  it  the  gates  of  hell  cannot 
prevail."  It  may,  in  conclusion,  be  shown  that  the  rule  of  righteousness  ensures  peace, 
power,  prosperity,  universal  piety  towards  God,  and  universal  brotherhood  amongst 
men.— B.  T. 

Ver.  12. — The  Divine  anger.  "  For  all  this  his  anger  is  not  turned  away."  The 
reference  of  the  previous  verses  is  to  the  calamities  which  are  surely  overtaking  Bezin 
of  Syria,  and  Pekah  of  Israel,  as  judgments  on  them,  signs  of  Divine  indignation,  for 
their  schemes  against  Judah.  Rezin  was  threatened  by  Assyria ;  Pel^ah  was  threatened 
both  by  his  former  ally,  Israel,  and  on  the  other  side  by  the  Philistines.  As  yet, 
however,  these  judgments  had  not  proved  effectual  in  humbling  Bezin  and  Pekah,  or  in 
leading  them  to  forsake  their  self-willed  wa^s  and  seek  the  help  and  guidance  of 
Jehovah;  so  yet  more  and  heavier  judgments  must  come  on  them,  and  they  must  not 
think,  because  there  seemed  a  litlle  lull  in  the  storm,  that  Divine  wrath  was  abated. 
Divine  judgments  were  exhausted,  or  God's  outstretched  hand  drawn  back. 

I.  Divine  anger,  being  that  of  an  infinite  Being,  can  never  be  at  a  loss  for 
MODES  of  expression.  There  are  always  fresh  arrows  in  his  quiver.  This  should  check 
all  carnal  security.  Clear  heavens  may  but  mean  gathering  storms.  Hush  in  the 
evening  air  may  but  indicate  approaching  earthquake.  The  seemingly  secure  house  of 
prosperity  may  be  within  a  moment  of  the  lightning-flash.  God  can  always  find  out 
bow  best  to  smite. 

II.  Divine  anger,  BEOia  A  remedial  force,  will  noT  oeabe  until  its  purposes 
ABE  WROUGHT  OUT.  It  proposed  the  humbling  of  Syria  and  Israel,  and  the  conviction 
of  the  sin  of  their  wilfulness  and  ungodliness.  Therefore,  if  Syria  and  Israel  resisted 
one  expression  of  the  anger,  another  must  be  found.  Since  the  anger  works  only 
towards  good,  we  may  well  say,  "  Blessed  be  God,  that  he  will  never  cease  to  be  angry 
'intil  he  is  enabled  to  forgive." 

III.  DiVINB  ANGER,  BEING  TEE  STERN  SIDE   OF  LOVE,  SPENDS  ITSELF  DT  CORREOTTVB 

dispensations.  If  we  ask  what  Divine  love  would  do  for  sinners,  for  rebellious,  for 
persistent  sinners,  then  the  answer  will  tell  us  what  Divine  anger  would  do  for  them. 
To  the  resistant  and  wilful  God's  dealings  take  form  as  anger.  To  the  submissive  and 
humble  Good's  dealings  take  form  as  chastisement.  The  features  prominent  in  Divine 
dealings  we  ourselves  determine  by  the  response  which  we  make  to  those  dealings. — B.  T. 

Ver.  16. — The  sin  of  leading  others  astray.  The  point  of  the  expression  is,  that  the 
leaders  of  the  nation  are  really  misleaders.    The  persons  referred  to  are  described  in 


184 


THE   BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.         [ch.  x.  1— «4 


ver.  15  M  "tlie  ancient  and  honourable,"  and  as  "tbe  prophet  that  teacheth  lies," 
evidently  including  those  having  infliiencn  by  reason  of  their  social  status,  and  having 
influence  by  reason  of  their  official  positions.  It  is  well  for  us  to  remember  the 
I  esponsibility  of  positions  as  well  as  of  talents.  Society  is  directly  affected  by  the 
morality,  the  prevailing  tone,  the  intelligence,  and  the  religiousness  of  the  upper  and 
the  learned  classes.  Leadership  is  also  a  talent  or  endowment,  given  by  God  to 
individual  men  and  women,  and  so  it  is  to  be  regarded  as,  and  used  as,  a  Divine  trust. 
A  man's  power  of  leadership  among  his  fellow-men  is  to  be  laid  on  God's  altar,  and 
used  in  God's  service. 

I.  BvEBTBODT  HAS  SOME  INFUJENCB  ON  OTHERS;  by  Virtue  of:  1.  Relationship,  m 
masters,  husbands,  fathers,  etc.  2.  Position,  one  class  of  society  becoming  ideals  to  the 
class  below  them.  3.  Character,  natural  and  trained.  4.  Education,  involving  superior 
knowledge  and  mental  control. 

II.  Some  have  vert  special  powers  of  leadership.  Illustrate  by  the  first  Napoleon. 
Some  men  seem  to  master  our  wills,  and  compel  us  to  do  what  they  wish.  We  find 
such  persons  in  all  spheres  of  life.  The  power  is  one  of  the  secrets  of  success  in 
business.  It  is  often  the  genius  of  secretaries,  and  of  teachers.  Illustrate  frsm 
T.  Moore's  poem  in  '  Lalla  Eookh,'  "  The  Veiled  Prophet  of  Khorassan." 

IlL  Such  inflttenck  mat  bb  made  a  oorsb.  Leadership  may  cover  and  excuse 
V  rong-doing.     Personal  relations  may  disturb  moral  distinctions. 

IV.  Such  infutejtcb  mat  be  made  a  blessino.  Leadership  may  present  the 
example  of  righteousness  and  obedience.  Personal  relations  with  others  may  be 
Ohrist-Hke,  and  so  a  leading  towards  goodness  and  God.  Special  Divine  judgments 
come  on  those  who  determinedly  lend  others  astray.  The  enticer  and  seducer  who  wile 
i  ito  tiie  ways  that  lead  down  to  the  pit,  God  surely  hateth  and  watcheth.  His  hand 
will  ba  heavy  on  them  some  day, — R.  T.  . 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  X- 

Ven.  I — 4. — The  prophecy  begun  in  ch. 
ix.  8  terminates- with  this  stanza,  which  con- 
tains a  warning  against  injustice  and  op- 
pression, addressed  to  Israel  and  Judah 
equally,  and  accompanied  by  the  threat  of 
a  "  day  of  desolation,"  when  those  who  have 
rufused  to  make  God  their  Refuge  will  have 
uo  resource,  but  to  go  into  captivity  with  the 
"  prisoners,"  or  to  perish  with  the  "  slain." 
A  foreign  conquest,  accompanied  by  slaughter, 
and  the  deportation  of  captives,  is  not  ob- 
scurely intimated. 

Ver.  1. — Woe  nnto  them  that  decree  un- 
righteous decrees  (comp.  ch.  i.  17,  20,  26; 
V.  28,  etc.).  The  perversion  of  judgment 
from  the  judgment-seat  is  the  sin  rebuked. 
It  was  certainly  prevalent  in  Judah,  it  may 
also  have  been  practised  in  Israel.  And 
that  write  grievousness,  etc.  Translate,  and 
unto  (he  tcriteri  that  enregister  oppression. 
The  decrees  of  courts  were,  it  is  clear,  care- 
fully engMBsed  by  the  officials,  probubly 
upon  parchment,  every  outward  formality 
being  observed,  while  justice  itself  was  set 
at  Bought. 

Ver.  2. — ^The  poor  ...  the  widow  .  .  . 
the  fatherien.    These  were  the  classes  who 


were  the  chief  suflTerers  by  the  perversion  of 
justice  (comp.  ch.  i.  17,  23).  They  were 
exactly  tiie  classes  for  whom  God  had  most 
compassion,  and  wliom  he  had  commended 
in  the  Law  to  the  tender  care  of  his  people 
(see  note  on  ch.  ix.  17). 

Ver.  3. — ^What  will  ye  do  in  the  day  of 
visitation  t  "  The  day  of  visitation  "  is  the 
day  when  God  reckons  witli  his  servants, 
and  demands  an  account  from  each  of  the 
work  done  in  his  vineyi.rd,  being  prepared 
to  recompense  the  good  and  punish  the 
bad  (comp.  Hos.  ix.  7).  It  is  oftenest  used 
in  a  bad  sense  because,  unhappily,  so  many 
more  are  found  to  deserve  punishment  than 
reward.  The  desolation  which  shall  oome 
from  far ;  rather,  the  crafhing  ruin  (Cheyne). 
It  is  sudden,  and  complete  destruction, 
rather  than  mere  desolateness,  that  is  threat- 
ened. Previous  prophecies,  especially  ch. 
vii.  17 — 20,  had  informed  the  Jews  that  it 
was  to  "oome  from  far,"  "by  them  that 
were  beyond  the  river."  To  whom  will  ye 
fleel  The  prophet  speaks  in  bitter  irony. 
Is  there  any  one  to  whom  ye  can  flee  ?  any  one 
who  can  protect  you  from  the  wrath  of  God? 
Ye  well  know  there  is  no  one.  Where  will 
ye  leave  your  glory  1  With  whom  will  ye 
deposit  your  riches,  your  magnificence,  youi 
jewels,  your  grand  apparel?  You  cannot 
save  them.     They  will  all  make  to  tiiem- 


OH.  X.  1—34.]         THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


186 


selves  wings,  and  "  fly  ttway  like  a  bird " 
(Hos.  ix.  11). 

Ver.  4. — Without  me.  That  this  is  a 
possible  rendering  of  the  word  used  seems 
proved  by  Hos.  xiii.  4.  But  here  it  scarcely 
suits  the  context.  God  does  not  speak 
directly,  in  the  first  person,  elsewhere  in  the 
entire  prophecy  (ch.  ix.  8 — x.  4),  but  is 
spoken  of  in  the  third  person  throughout,  as 
even  in  the  pr'sent  verse,  where  we  have 
"  his  anger,"  "  hin  hand."  It  is  better,  there- 
fore, to  give  the  word  its  ordinary  meaning — 
"unless,"  "except."  Have  they  anywhere 
to  flee  to,  unless  they  shall  crouch  amid 
the  captives  that  are  being  carried  off,  or 
fall  amid  the  slain  ?    In  other  words,  there 


is  no  escape  for  them ;  they  must  either 
submit  to  captivity  or  death.  For  all  this, 
etc.  Even  when  the  two  kingdoms  wera 
destroyed,  and  the  captivity  of  both  was 
complete,  God's  wrath  was  not  fully  ap- 
peased, his  anger  was  not  wholly  turned 
awBty.  Both  peoples  suffered  grievous  things 
in  their  captivity,  as  appears  from  the  Book 
of  Daniel  (ch.  iii.,  vi.)  and  other  places.  It 
took  seventy  years  for  God's  anger  to  be 
appeased  in  the  case  of  Judah  (2  Chron. 
xxxvi.  21),  while  in  the  case  of  Israel  it  was 
never  apneased.  Crushed  lieneath  the  iron 
heel  of  their  conquerors,  Israel  ceased  to 
exist  as  a  nation. 


Section  V.    Peopubcies  of  Woe  upon  Fobeion  Nations  (oh.  x.  6 — xxm.). 


Vers.  5 — 19. — Assyria,  after  being  Gon'i 
Instrument  to  punish  Israel,  shall  her- 
self BE  PUNISHED  IN  HEB  TURN.  The  wickcd 
are  a  swnrd  in  the  hand  of  God  (Ps.  xvii.  13), 
wherewith  he  executes  his  judgments ;  but 
this  fact  is  hid  from  them,  and  they  imagine 
that  they  are  successful  through  their  own 
strength  and  might.  So  it  was  with  Assyria 
(vers.  5 — 14),  which  its  long  career  of 
victory  had  made  proud  and  arrogant  above 
measure.  God  now,  by  the  mouth  of  Isaiah, 
makes  known  his  intention  of  bringing  down 
the  pride  of  Assyri:!,  and  laying  her  glory  in 
the  dust,  by  a  sudden  and  great  destruction 
(vers.  15—19),  after  she  has  served  his 
purposes. 

Ver.  5. — 0  Assyrian;  literally,  fib/  Asshur. 
"  Asshur  "  is  the  nation  personified,  and  is 
here  addressed  as  an  individual.  The  tran- 
sition from  vers.  1 — 4  is  abrupt,  and  may 
be  taken  to  indicate  an  accidental  juxta- 
position of  two  entirely  distinct  prophecies. 
Or  Assyria  may  be  supposed  to  have  been 
in  the  prophet's  thought,  though  not  in  his 
w?rds,  when  he  spoke  of  "  prisoners  "  and 
"slain"  in  the  first  clause  of  ver.  4.  The 
rod  of  mine  anger  (comp.  Jer.  li.  20,  where 
it  is  said  of  B.ibylon,  "  'Phou  art  my  battle- 
axe  and  weapons  of  war ;  for  with  thee  will 
I  break  in  pieces  the  nations,  and  with  thee 
will  I  destroy  the  kingdoms").  So  Assyria 
was  now  the  "  rod "  wherewith  God  chas- 
tised his  enemies.  The  true  "  staff"  in  the 
hand  of  Assyria,  wherewith  she  smote  the 
peoples,  was  "God's  indignation." 

Ver.  G. — I  will  send  him  against  an  hypo- 
critical nation ;  or,  against  a  corrupt  nation, 
Israel  in  the  wider  sense,  inclusive  of  Judah, 
seems  to  be  intended.  The  people  of  my 
wrath ;  i.e.  "  the  people  who  are  the  object 
of  my  wrath."  Will  I  give  Mm  a  charge. 
In  2  Kings  xviii.  25  Sennacherib  says,  "  Am 


I  come  up  without  the  Loid  (Jehovah) 
against  this  place,  to  destroy  it?  The  Lord 
(Jehovali)  said  to  me,  Go  up  against  this 
land,  and  destroy  it "  (compare  below,  ch. 
xxxvi.  10).  It  has  been  usual  to  consider 
Sennacherib's  words  a  vain  boast;  but  if 
God  instructed  Nebuchadnezzar  through 
dreams,  may  ho  not  also  by  the  same  means 
have  "  given  charges  "  to  Assyrian  monarchs? 
To  take  the  spoil,  and  to  take  the  prey; 
rather,  to  gather  spoil,  and  seize  prey.  The 
terms  used  carry  the  thoughts  back  to  ch. 
viii.  1 — 4,  and  to  the  symbolic  name,  Maher- 
shalal-hash-baz.  And  to  tread  them  down ; 
literally,  to  make  it  a  trampling.  "It" 
refers  to  "  nation  "  in  the  first  clause. 

Ver.  7. — Howbeit  he  meaneth  not  so. 
"  Assyria,"  «.«., "  does  not  view  the  matter  in 
this  light — ^is  not  aware  that  she  is  merely 
God's  instrument  in  working  out  his  wUl. 
On  the  contrary,  it  is  in  her  heart  to  destroy 
the  nations  for  her  own  advantage,  and  she 
imagines  that  she  is  doing  it  by  her  own 
strength." 

Ver.  8.— 'Are  not  my  princes  altogether 
kings?  One  mark  of  the  superiority  of 
Assyria  to  other  countries  was  to  be  seen  in 
the  fact  that  her  king  had  not  mere  officers, 
but  vassal  kings  under  him.  Hence  the 
title  "  king  of  kings  "  assumed  by  so  many 
Assyrian  monarchs.  While  conquered  ter- 
ritories were  by  degrees  and  to  a  certain 
extent  absorbed  into  the  empire  and  placed 
under  prefects  (see  the  'Eponym  Canon'), 
an  outer  zone  of  more  loosely  organized  de- 
pendencies was  always  maintained  by  the 
Assyrians ;  and  these  dependencies  con- 
tinued ordinarily  to  be  administered  by  their 
native  monarchs  (see  '  Ancient  Monarchies,' 
vol.  ii.  pp.  524—526).  These  are  the  "  princes" 
who  were  "  altogether  kings." 

Ver.  9. — Is  not  Calno  as  Carchemish  T  A 
further  proof  of  superiority,  and  ground  of 
confidence,  lay  in  tiie  farther  fact,  that  the 
strongest  cities  had,  one  and  all,  succumbed 


186 


THE  BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


[oh.  X.  1-34, 


to  the  ABsyrian  arms,  and  been  laid  in  ruins 
to  punish  them  for  offering  resistance.  Six 
such  cities  are  mentioned — Calneh,  probably 
Niffer,  in  Lower  Mesopotamia ;  Carohemish, 
on  the  right  bank  of  the  Euplirates  in  Lat. 
36°  30'  nearly;  Hamath,  tlie  "great  Ha- 
math  "  of  Amos  (vi.  2),  in  Coele^yria  on  the 
Orontes;  Arpad,  perhaps  Tel-Erfad,  near 
Aleppo ;  Damascus,  and  Samaria.  Calneh 
was  one  of  the  cities  of  Nimrod  (Gen.  x.  10), 
and,  according  to  the  LXX.,  was  "  the 
place  where  the  tower  was  built."  It  may 
have  been  taken  by  Tiglath-Pileser  in  one 
of  his  expedition.^  into  Babylonia.  Amos 
(vi.  2)  speaks  of  it  as  desolate  in  his  day. 
Carchemish  (Assyrian  Gargamii)  was  a  chief 
city  of  the  Hittites,  and  has  been  called 
"  their  northern  capital."  Long  confounded 
by  geographers  with  Circesium  at  the  junc- 
tion of  the  Khabour  with  the  Euphrates,  it 
has  recently  been  proved  to  have  occupied  a 
far  more  northern  position,  and  is  now  gene- 
rally identified  with  the  ruins  discovered  by 
Mr.  George  Smith  at  Jerabis  or  Jerablua. 
It  was  conquered  by  Sargon  in  b.o.  717,  when 
"  its  people  were  led  captive,  and  scattered 
over  the  Assyrian  empire,  while  Assyrian 
colonists  were  brought  to  people  the  city  in 
their  place ;  Carchemish  being  formally 
annexed  to  Assyria,  and  placed  under  an 
Assyrian  governor"  (G.  Smith,  'Assyria,' 
p.  97).  Hamath  was  originally  a  Canaanite 
city  (Gen.  i.  18).  By  the  time  of  David  it 
had  become  the  seat  of  an  independent 
monarchy  (2  Sam.  viii.  9,  10),  and  so  con- 
tinued until  its  reduction  by  the  Assyrians. 
We  find  it  leagued  with  the  Hittites,  the 
Syrians  of  Damascus,  and  the  Israelites 
against  Assyria  about  B.C.  850  ('Ancient 
Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  361— 3G3).  About 
B.C.  720  it  was  taken  by  Sargon,  wlio  be- 
headed its  king,  and  probably  reduced  it  to 
ruins  (ibid.,  p.  411 ;  oomp.  Amos  vi.  2).  The 
name  remains  in  the  modern  Snmah,  where 
many  curious  inscriptions  have  been  recently 
dug  up.  Arpad  was  attacked  by  Tiglatti- 
PUeser  in  the  early  part  of  his  reign,  and 
reduced  to  subjection.  It  revolted  in  con- 
junction with  Hamath  from  Sargon,  and  was 
severely  punished  ('  Ancient  Monarchies,' 
I.  (.  c).  Is  not  Samaria  as  Damascus  1  This 
mention  of  Samaria  among  the  subjugated 
and  ruined  cities  may  undoubtedly  be  pro- 
phetic ;  but  the  connection  with  Carchemish, 
Hamath,  and  Arpad — all  of  them  towns  re- 
duced by  Sargon  within  the  years  B.o.  720 — 
717 — points  rather  to  the  verse  being 
historical,  and  would  seem  to  indicate  that 
the  date  of  the  entire  prophecy — vers.  5 — 19 
— is  subsequent  to  the  capture  of  the  cities, 
and  so  not  earlier  than  B.o.  716. 

Ver.  10. — As  my  hand  hath  found  the 
kingdoms  of  the  idols.  "Found"  here 
meana     "reached,"     "punished,"    "subju- 


gated." It  is  quite  in  accordance  with  AB- 
syrian ideas  that  the  conquered  countries 
should  be  called  "kingdoms  of  the  idols" 
(literally,  "no  gods").  The  Assyrian 
monarohs  regarded  their  own  gods  as  alone 
really  deserving  of  the  name,  and  made  war 
very  much  wiih  the  object  of  proving  the 
superiority  of  their  deities  over  those  of  their 
neighbours.  Hence  their  practice  of  carry- 
ing off  the  idols  from  the  various  cities 
which  they  conquered,  or  else  of  inscribing 
on  them  "the  praises  of  Asshur."  And 
whose  graven  images ;  rather,  and  their 
graven  imaget.  Did  excel,  In  preciousness 
of  material  or  in  workmanship,  or  both. 
The  Assyrians  went  near  to  identifying,the 
idols  with  the  gods  themselves.  Those  of 
Jerusalem  and  of  Samaria.  The  chief  Sa- 
maritan idols  were  the  golden  calves  at  Dan 
and  Bethel ;  but,  in  addition  to  these, 
"  images  and  groves  were  set  up  in  every  high 
hill  and  under  every  green  tree "  (2  Kings 
xvii.  10),  images  of  Baal,  and  Ashtoreth, 
and  perhaps  Beltis,  and  Chemosh,  and 
Moloch.  Even  in  Judah  and  in  Jerusalem 
itself  there  were  idols.  Ahaz  "  made  molten 
images  for  Baalim"  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  2). 
The  brazen  serpent  was  worshipped  as  an 
idol  at  Jerusalem  until  Hezekiah  destroyed 
it ;  and  probably,  even  after  the  reformation 
of  Hezekiah  (2  Kings'  xviii.  4),  many  Jews 
retained  privately  tho  images  which  he  re- 
quired them  to  destroy  (2  Cliron.  xxxi.  1). 
Isaiah  had  already  declared,  speaking  .  of 
Judah  rather  than  of  Israel,  "  Their  land  is 
full  of  idols ;  they  worship  the  work  of  their 
own  hands,  that  which  their  own  fingers 
have  made  "  (ch.  ii.  8). 

Yer.  11. — Shall  I  not  ...  so  do  to  Jerura- 
lem  and  her  idols  t  The  speaker  ignoies 
the  fact  of  any  difference  in  kind  betweon 
the  religion  of  Judsea  and  that  of  the  neigh- 
bouring countries.  He  speaks  as  if  he  know 
noth  in^c  of  any  religion  without  idols.  No 
doubt  Assyrian  ideas  on  the  subject  of  the 
religion  of  the  Jews  were  at  this  time,  as 
they  were  even  later  (2  Kings  xviiL  22), 
exceedingly  vague  and  incorrect. 

Ver.  12,— Wherefore;  rather,  hut.  The 
final  result  shall  be  such  as  "  the  Assyrian  " 
little  expected.  When  the  Iiord  hath  per- 
formed his  whole  work.  The  "work"  as- 
signed to  Assyria  was  the  destruction  of  the 
kiugdom  of  Israel,  and  a  share  in  the  trial, 
punishment,  and  discipline  of  Judah.  The 
last  task  seems  ta  have  been  the  humiliation 
of  Manasseh,  which  brought  about  his  re- 
pentance (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  H — 18).  Soon 
after  tliis  the  troubles  began  which  led  to 
her  destruction.  I  will  punish. '  The  sudden 
change  from  the  third  to  the  first  person  is 
harsh  and  abnormal,  but  not  without  paral- 
lels in  other  passages  of  Isaiah  (see  ch. 
lit  1—4;  T.  3,  4,  eto.>    The  £nut  of  thi 


CH.  X.1— 34.]  THE  BOOK   OF  THE    PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


187 


•tout  heart ;  t.e.  the  actions,  language,  etc., 
which  flowed  from  the  stoutaess  of  heart — 
inch  lauguage,  e.g.,  as  that  of  vers.  8—11 
and  13,  11.  Of  the  King  of  Assyria.  The 
menace  is  not  levelled  against  any  one  par- 
ticular king,  as  Sargon,  or  Sennacherib ;  but 
against  the  monarchy  itself,  which  from  first 
to  last  was  actuated  by  the  same  spirit,  and 
breathed  the  same  tone,  of  pride,  selfishness, 
and  cruelty.  (See  the  ruyal  inscriptions, 
passim,  which  become  more  revolting  as 
time  goes  on.) 

Ver.  13. — For  he  saith.  Neither  this 
speech  nor  that  in  vers.  8 — 11,  nor  again  that 
given  in  ch.  xxxvii.  S!4,  25,  is  to  be  regarded 
as  historical  in  tlie  sense  of  being  the  actual 
utterance  of  any  Assyiian  monarch.  AU 
are  Imaginary  speeches,  composed  by  the 
prophet,  whereby  he  expresses  in  his  own 
language  the  thougiits  which  Assyrian  kings 
entertained  in  their  hearts.  I  have  removed 
the  bounds  of  the  people  ;  rather,  of  peoples. 
Assyrian  monaiclis  take  as  one  of  their 
titles  "  the  remover  of  boundaries  and  land- 
marks "  (Gr.  Smith's  '  Assyrian  Discoveries,' 
pp.  2i3,  244).  And  have  robbed  their  trea- 
sures (comp.  2  Kings  xv.  19 ;  xviii.  14 — 16). 
The  plunder  of  conquered  countries  is  con- 
stantly recorded  by  the  Assyrian  moiiarclis 
aa  one  of  the  most  important  results  of  each 
successful  expei  litlon.  It  is  not  unfrequeiitly 
represented  in  the  sculptures  (see  '  Ancient 
Monarchies,'  vol.  11.  p.  8.5).  I  have  put  down 
the  inhabitants  like  a  valiant  man.  The 
passage  is  obscure ;  and  many  different 
renderings  have  been  given.  Perhaps  the 
best  is  that  of  Mr,  Cheyne,  "  I  have  brought 
down,  like  a  mighty  one,  those  that  sat  on 
thrones."  Ahhir,  however,  the  word  trans- 
lated "a  mighty  one,"  as  often  means  "a 
bull "  (see  Ps.  xxii.  12 ;  1.  13 ;  Ixviii.  30 ; 
ch.  xxxiv.  7;  Jer.  1.  11). 

"Ver.  14. — My  hand  hath  found  as  a  nest 
the  riches  of  the  people ;  rather,  of  the  peoples. 
The  Assyrians  are  fond  of  comparing  their 
enemies  to  birds  ('  Records  of  the  Past,' 
vol.  vii.  pp.  36,  62,  etc.);  but  the  exact 
metaphor  liere  used  does  not,  I  believe,  occur 
in  the  insjcriptions.  The  nations'  treasures 
•re  like  eggs  found  in  deserted  nests,  which 
the  hunter  gathers  without  any,  even  the 
slightest,  risk.  All  the  earth.  Oriental 
hyperbole.  Assyrian  monarchs  often  say  that 
thoy  "  have  subdued  all  the  races  of  men,"  or 
"  carried  the  glory  of  their  name  to  the  ends 
of  the  earth,"  or  "  overthrown  the  armies  of 
tlie  wliole  world  in  battls."  Peeped ;  rather, 
chirped  (see  note  on  ch.  viii.  lu).  None  of 
the  inhabitants  offered  even  such  feeble  re- 
sistance as  a  bird  makes  when  its  nest  is 
robbed. 

Ver.  1 5. — Shall  the  axe  boast  itself  1  Here 
the  prophet  takes  the  word,  and  rebukes 
Assyria  for  her  foUy  in  forgetting,  or  hot 


perceiving,  that  she  la  a  mere  instrument, 
like  an  axe,  a  saw,  a  rod,  or  a  staff.  The 
saw  .  .  .  him  that  shaketh  it;  rather,  him 
that  moveth  it  to  and  fro.  The  action  of 
sawing  is  alluded  to.  As  if  the  rod  should 
shake  itself  against  them  that  lift  it  up; 
rutlier,  as  if  a  rod  were  to  move  them  to  and 
fro  that  lift  it  up.  For  Assyria  to  assert 
herself  as  if  she  wore  independent  of  God  is 
like  a  rod  attempting  to  sway  the  hand  tliat 
holds  it.  It  is  a  complete  inversion  of  the 
natural  order  of  things.  Or  as  if  the  staflf 
should  lift  up  itself,  as  if  it  were  no  wood, 
Translate,  or  as  if  a  staff  should  lift  up  thai 
which  is  not  wood ;  i.e.  ''  as  if  a  staff  should 
take  action  and  lift  up  its  holder,  who  is  nut 
wood,  but  flesh  and  blood." 

Ver.  16.— Therefore  shall  the  lord  .  .  . 
send  among  his  fat  ones  leanness.  A  con- 
tinuation of  ver.  12,  showing  what  the  nature 
of  Assyria's  punishment  shall  be.  The 
prophet  expresses  it  by  two  images — first, 
that  of  a  wasting  sickness;  and  secondly,  tl)at 
of  a  fire.  The  first  image  expresses  that 
gradual  decay  of  national  spirit  which  saps 
the  vital  strength  of  a  nation ;  the  second  is 
more  suited  to  denote  some  external  attack 
under  which  the  weakened  nation  should 
succumb.  There  are  traces,  in  the  later 
history  of  Assyria,  both  of  increasing  internal 
weakness  through  luxury  and  effeminacy, 
and  of  violent  external  attacks  culminating 
in  the  combined  Median  and  Babylonian 
invasion,  before  which  her  power  collapsed 
(Abyden,  ap.  Euseb.,  '  Chrnn.  Can.,'  pars  L 
c.  ix. ;  Syncell.,  'Chronograph.,'  p.  210,  B; 
Tobit  xiv.  15). 

Ver.  17.— The  light  of  Israel.  A  new 
name  of  God.  The-idea  on  which  it  is  based 
may  be  found  in  the  Psalms  (xxvii.  1 ; 
Ixxxiv.  11),  and  again  in  Isaiah  (Ix.  19). 
God  enlightens  his  people,  cheers  them, 
comforts  them  spiritually,  as  the  light  of  the 
sun  enlightens,  cheers,  and  comforts  men 
physically.  Christ,  as  true  God,  is  "the 
true  Light,  which  lighteth  every  man  that 
Cometh  into  the  world"  (John  i.  9).  Shall 
be  for  a  fire.  As  the  same  material  fire 
which  gives  light,  warmth,  and  comfort 
may  burn  and  destroy,  so  the  spiritual  light, 
finding  fit  material,  scorches  and  consumes. 
The  fire  which  devours  Assyria  is  to  be 
kindled  by  God.  His  Holy  One ;  i.e.  "  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel "  (see  ch.  i.  4).  It  shall 
bum  and  devour  his  thorns  and  his  briers. 
The  desti'uction  of  Assyria  shall  resemble 
that  of  Israel,  in  which  Assyria  was  the 
instrument  (ch.  ix.  18).  It  shall  be  ad  com- 
plete, as  terrible,  and  as  final.  In  one  day. 
Scarcely  " in  one  battle"  (Oheyne);  for  the 
destruction  of  Assyria  was  etfeotod  by 
many  battles,  many  sieges,  and  much  ex- 
hausting ravage.  "In  one  day"  rather 
means    "at   one    and    the    same    time," 


188 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [ch.  x.  1—34. 


"  -within  a  brief  space."    It  is  not  to  be  taken 
literally. 

Ver.  18. — Forest  .  .  .  fimitfnl  field. 
"  Foregt"  and  "  fruitful  field"  (carmeT)  are 
sometime!  uiited  together,  sometimes  con- 
trasted. Literally,  they  denote  wild  and 
cultivated  woodland.  Used  symbolically,  as 
here,  they  ate  not  lo  much  intended  to  desig- 
nate different  parts  of  Assyria's  glory,  as  to 
conrey  the  idea  that  the  destruction  will  be 
universal.  Both  soul  and  body.  Here  meta- 
phor is  suddenly  dropped,  and  Isaiah  shows 
that  he  is  speating  of  the  Assyrian  people, 
not  of  the  land  or  its  products.  Tlieir  de- 
struction, wicked  as  they  were,  would  bu  one 
both  of  body  and  soul.  As  when  a  standard- 
bearer  fainteth ;  rather,  as  when  one  that  is 
faint  fainteth.  Utter  prostiation  and  ex- 
haustion is  indicated,  whichever  way  the 
passage  is  translated. 

Ver.  19. — The  rest  of  the  trees ;  i.e.  those 
that  escape  the  burning — shall  be  few; 
literally,  a  numper ;  i.e.  so  few  that  their 
number  shall  be  apparent 

Vers.  20 — 34. — Coitsolation  fob  the 
Faithful  m  Israbx.  Tlie  destruction  of 
Assyria  shall  be  followed — how  soon,  is  not 
said — ^by  the  return  of  a  "  remnant  of  Israel," 
not  so  much  to  their  own  land,  as  to  God 
(vers.  20,  21).  The  remnant,  however,  shall 
be  but  a  remnant — judgment  shall  have  over- 
taken the  bulk  of  the  people  (vers.  22,  23). 
Still,  there  is  reason  for  the  faithful  to  take 
courage  and  be  of  good  heart ;  Assyria  will 
shortly  receive  a  check  (vers.  24 — 27)— wlien 
her  armies  swoop  upon  Jerusalem,  God  will 
swoop  down  on  lier  (vers.  28 — 34), 

Ver.  20.— In  that  day ;  i.e.  "at  that  time" 
—the  time  of  the  destruction  of  Assyria. 
The  remnant  of  Israel  (see  ch.  i.  9).  Isaiah 
had  indicated  his  firm  belief  in  the  existence 
of  this  faithful  remnant  and  its  return,  in 
the  name  which  he  had  given  to  his  son, 
Shear- Jashub  (see  note  on  oh.  vii.  8).  The 
escaped.  Those  who  escape  from  the  de- 
struction to  be  caused  by  the  Assyrian  in- 
vasion. Shall  no  more  again  stay  upon  Vi<Tn 
that  smote  them.  We  are  told  in  the  Second 
Book  of  Chronicles  (xxviii.  23)  that  Ahaz 
"  sacrificed  to  the  gods  of  Damascus  which 
tmote  him" — and  we  know  that  lie  also 
trusted  to  Tiglath  Pileser,  who  "distressed 
him  and  strengthened  him  not "  (2  Cliron. 
xxviii.  21).  Among  the  "remnant"  there 
eball  be  no  such  mistaken  confidences.  But 
BhftU  stay  npon  the  lord;  i.e.  "shall  put 
their  trust  in  God,  and  him  only "  (compi 
2  Sam.  xxii.  19 ;  Ps.  xviii.  18). 

Ver.  21.— The  mighty  God  (comp.  ch. 
!x.  6]j.  The  name  is  not,  however,  Hessianio 
in  this  place. 


Vers.  22,  23. — These  verses  are  exegetical 
of  the  term  "  remnant,"  and  bring  out  its 
fall  force.  The  promise  had  been  made  te 
Abraham  that  his  seed  should  be  "  like  the 
sand  of  the  sea  for  multitude  "  (Gen.  xxii. 
17).  This  promise  haJbeen  fulfilled  (1  KinM 
It.  20);  but  now  the  sins  of  the  peopw 
would  produce  a  reversal  of  it.  It  would  be 
a  remnant,  and  only  a  remnant,  of  the  nation 
that  would  escape.  Judah  would  have  to 
make  a  fresh  start  as  firom  a  new  beginning 
(see  Ezra  ii.  64). 

Ver.  22. — The  consumption  decreed  shall 
overflow  with  righteousness;  rather,  the 
consummation  (Dan.  ix.  27)  determined  on  it 
one  that  overflows  with  righteousnest  (comp. 
ch.  xxviii.  22).  The  prophet  means  that 
God  is  about  to  visit  the  land  in  such  a  spirit 
of  severe  justice  that  it  cannot  be  expected 
that  more  than  a  remnant  will  sarvivB  the 
awful  visitation. 

Ver.  23. — ^The  Lord  .  .  .  shall  make  a  eon^ 
sumption ;  rather,  a  consummation — a  /!nal 
and  decisive  end  of  things.  Even  deter- 
mined; i.e.  "determined  on  beforehand." 
In  the  midst  of  all  the  land.  "  Througliout 
the  entire  land,"  not  merely  in  some  portions 
of  it. 

Ver.  24.— 0  my  people  ...  be  not  afraid. 
God  now  addresses  those  who  are  faithful  to 
h'tn  among  the  people ;  they  have  no  need  to 
fear — he  will  bring  them  safely  through  all 
the  coining  troubles.  He  shall  smite  tliee ; 
rather,  if  he  smite  thee ;  or,  though  he  smite 
thee.  After  the  manner  of  Egypt;  (.e.  as  the 
Egyptians  did  in  the  oppression  that  pre- 
ceded the  Exodus.  The  yoke  of  Assyria 
was  heavy  even  upon  the  nations  that  sub- 
mitted to  her.  She  claimed  to  march  her 
armies  through  tlieir  territories  at  her  plea- 
sure, and  probably  pressed  men  and  cattle 
into  her  service.  She  exacted  a  heavy 
tribute,  and  otherwise  "distressed"  her 
many  vassals. 

Ver.  25. — The  indignation  shall  cease; 
rather,  there  shall  be  an  end  of  wrath;  Le. 
"my  wrath  against  Israel  shall  come  to 
an  end" — Israel  having  been  sufficiently 
punished.  And  mine  anger  in  their  destruc- 
tion ;  rather,  and  my  anger  shaU  be  to  their 
destruction;  Le.  to  the  destruction  of  the 
Assyrians  (see  the  margin  of  the  Bevised 
Version). 

Ver.  26.— The  Lord  .  .  .  shall  stir  np  • 
scourge  for  him ;  or,  Uft  up  a  scourge  over 
him.  Isaiah  uses  the  metaphor  of  the 
"  scourge  "  again  in  oh.  xxviii.  16,  18.  It  is 
rare  in  Scripture,  though  common  among 
the  Greek  and  Latin  writers.  According  to 
the  slaughter  of  Midian  at  the  rock  of  Oreb 
(comp.  ch.  ix.  4).  The  "  slaughter  of  Midian 
at  the  rook  of  Oreb  "  was  that  great  destruc- 
tion of  the  Midianites  which  was  begun  by 
the  three  hundred  under  Gideon,  and  coot- 


OH.  X  1—34.]         THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


189 


pleted  by  the  men  of  Eplivaim,  whereof  we 
nave  an  account  in  Judg.  vii.  19 — 25.  Its 
counterpart  in  Assyrian  history  would  seem 
to  be  th^  destxuction  of  Seimackerib's  army, 
as  rel.Ued  in  2  Kings  xix.  35.  As  Ms  rod 
was  dpaa  the  sea.  An  allusion  to  the 
drowning  of  Pharaoh's  host  in  the  Bed  Soa. 
This  was  a  nuarer  parallel  to  the  desti'uokion 
of  Sennacherib's  army  than  the  slaughter  of 
the  Midianites,  since  it  was  wholly  miracu- 
lous. By  "  his  rod"  we  may  understand  the 
rod  of  Moses,  endued  by  God  with  miiacu- 
loua  poweis  (Exod.  iv.  3,  4;  sir.  16)  27). 
After  the  mannoi  of  £gypt;  t.e.  "after  the 
manner  of  his  action  in  Egypt." 

Ver.  27. — ^The  yoke  shall  he  destroyed  be- 
cause of  the  anointing ;  literally,  before  the 
oil;  i.e.  "tlie  Anointed  One" — primarily 
Hezekiah,  "the  anointed  of  the  Lord" 
(2  Sam.  xix.  21 ;  2  Kings  xi.  12 ;  Lam.  iv.  20) 
for  the  time  being,  but  with  a  further  refer- 
ence to  the  Messiah,  who  breaks  all,  the 
bands  of  the  wicked  asunder,  and  oasts  away 
their  oorda  from  him  (Ps.  ii.  2,  3)  ;  and  who 
is  represented  by  each  prince  of  the  house  of 
David,  as  he  was  by  David  himself. 

Vers.  28 — 32. — This  graphic  portraiture  of 
the  march  of  an  Assyrian  army  on  Jerusalem 
ii  probably  not  historic,  but  prophetic. 
Isaiali  sees  it  in  vision  (ch.  i.  1),  and  de- 
scribes it  like  an  eye-witness.  There  are  at 
present  do  sufficient  means  of  deciding  to 
what  particular  attack  it  refers,  or  indeed 
whether  the  march  is  one  conducted  by 
Seniiadierib  or  Sargon.  Sargon  cat's  him- 
self in  one  inscription  "  conqueror  of  the  land 
of  Judah  "  (Layard, '  Inscriptions,'  xxxiii.  8), 
and  the  detaUs  of  the  present  prophecy, 
especially  ver.  9,  suit  the  reign  of  Sargon 
rather  than  that  of  his  son,  so  that  on  the 
whole  it  is  perhaps  most  probable  that  some 
expedition  of  Sargon's  is  portrayed. 

Ver.  28.— He  is  come  to  Aiath.  "  Aiath  " 
is  probably  Ai  (Josh.  viii.  1 — 28),  with  a 
feminine  termination.  It  lay  about  three 
miles  south  of  Bethel,  which  had  become 
Assyrian  \vith  the  conquest  of  Samaria.  If 
an  Assyrian  army  mustered  at  Bethel,  it 
would  naturally  enter  Judssan  temtory  at 
Ai.  He  is  passed  to  Migron ;  rather,  he  hag 
passed  through  Migron.  "Migron"  is  men- 
tioned as  a  village  in  the  territory  of  Gibeah 
of  Benjamin  (1  Sam.  xiv.  2)  ;  but  the  Migron 
of  this  passage  must  have  been  further  to 
the  north.  He  hath  laid  np  his  carriages ; 
1.8.  "  has  left  his  baggage-train."  Micbmash 
was  about  seven  miles  nearly  due  north  of 
Jerusalem.  The  heavy  baggage  might  con- 
veniently be  left  there,  especially  as  it  was 
difficult  of  attack  (1  Sam.  xiv.  4—13). 
while  a  lightly  equipped  body  of  troops 
made  a  dash  at  Jerusalem. 
Ver.  29. — Thej  are  gou  over  the  passag*. 


The  "  passage  of  Michmash "  (I  Sam.  xiii 
23) — tiiB  deeply  sunken  valley,  called  now 
the  Wady  Suweinit,  between  Michmash 
(_MuMimas)  and  Geba  (JebaX  They  have 
taken  up  their  lodgl.ig  at  Ocha ;  or,  at  Geba 
they  rest  for  the  mghl.  Having  crossed  the 
wady,  they  bivouac  on  the  crest  of  the  hills 
enclosing  it  on  the  south.  Bamah  .  .  . 
Gibeah  of  Saul.  Ramah  is,  no  doubt,  fiWiJam, 
a  village  on  an  eminence,  as  t'.ie  name  im- 
plies, about  six  miles  north  of  Jerusalem, 
and  on  the  direct  road  from  Boitin.  Gibeah 
of  Saul  is  thought  to  have  occupied  the  site 
of  the  modern  Tuleil-el-Ful,  two  miles  nearer 
Jerusalem.  It  is  certainly  a  distinct  plaee 
from  Geba.  The  inhabitants  evacuate  these 
two  places  during  tlio  night. 

Ver.  30. — Lift  up  thy  voice,  0  daughter  of 
Gallim.  Gallim  and  Laish  must  have  been 
villages  between  Geba  and  Jemsalem ;  but 
it  is  impossible  to  fix  their  site.  Anatboth 
(now  Anata)  obtains  mention  in  Joshua 
as  a  city  of  refuge  in  the  territory  of  Benja- 
min (Josh.  xxi.  18).  It  was  Jeremiah's  birth- 
place (Jer.  i.  1).  Gallim  was  the  birthplace 
of  the  man  who  became  tlie  second  husband 
of  Michal,  Saul's  daughter.  Laish  is  not 
elsewhere  mentioned.  Cause  it  to  be  heard 
unto  Laish;  rather,  hearken,  OLaisha. 

Ver.  31. — ^Madmenah  .  .  .  Gebim.  These 
are,  like  Gallim  aid  Laisha,  villages  other- 
wise unknown.  They  must  have  been  within 
a  mile  or  two  of  Jeruisalem,  towards  the 
north.  Their  inhabitants  fly  as  the  Aa- 
syiiana  approach. 

Ver.  32. — As  yet  shall  he  remain  at  Ifob 
that  day;  literally,  yet  that  day  {is  he)  at 
Nob  to  halt.  The  Assyrians  pitch  their  camp 
at  Nob.  the  priestly  city  destroyed  by  Saul 
(1  Sam.  xxii.  19),1  which  was  evidently 
within  sight  of  Jerusalem.  Major  Wilson's 
conjecture,  that  it  occupied  the  site  of  the 
later  Scopus,  is  probabla 

Ver.  33. — ^Tho  Lord  .  .  ,  shall  lop  the 
bough  with  terror.  A  check  to  the  As- 
syrian arms  is  intended,  but  of  what  nature 
is  not  clear.  The  "  lopping  of  the  bough 
with  terror  "  might  indicate  a  panic,  such  as 
that  wliirh  seized  the  Syrians  and  made 
BenbaJad  II.  raise  the  siege  of  Samaria 
(2  Kings  vii.  6,  7).  But  the  expressions 
used  later  on,  "hewn  down,"  "cui  down," 
**  shall  fall,"  rather  imply  a  defeat. 

Ver.  34. — He  shall  cut  down ;  or,  ant  shall 
eut  down;  Jehovah  being,  no  doubt,  intended. 
Lebanon  (comp.  Ezek.  xxxi.  3,  "  Behold,  the 
Assyrian  was  a  cedar  in  Lebanon  ").  Here 
the  comparison  is  enlarged,  and  Assyria  ap- 
pears as  Lebanon  itself  with  all  its  cedar 
woods.  By  a  mighty  one ;  rather,  a  gloriout 
one  (comp.  ch.  xxxiii.  21,  where  the  word 
here  u«ed — adir — ^i«  an  eftthet  of  Jeliovah), 


UO  THE   BOOK   OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,  [oh.  x.  1—34 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  3. — Ood  it  man'g  only  sure  Refuge  in  the  day  of  calamity.  "  God  is  onr  Refuge 
and  Strength,  a  very  present  Help  in  trouble.  Therefore  will  we  not  fear,  though  the 
earth  be  removed,  and  though  the  mountains  be  carried  into  the  midst  of  the  sea; 
though  the  waters  thereof  roar  and  be  troubled,  ihough  the  mountains  shake  with  the 
swelling  thereof"  (Ps.  xlvi.  1 — 3).  So  sang  the  psalmist, and  so  Israel  and  Jiidah  felt, 
so  long  as  they  clung  to  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  and  served  him,  and  strove  to  keep 
his  laws.  As  their  fidelity  wavered,  and  they  grew  cold  in  his  seryice,  and  allowed 
themselves  to  be  attracted  by  the  sensuous  reli>:;ions  of  the  nations  around  them,  their 
ti  ust  in  Jehovah  departed,  and  they  could  no  longer  look  to  him  as  a  Refuge.  Whither, 
then,  should  they  look?  Should  it  be  to  the  gods  of  the  nations?  or  to  foreign 
alliances?  or  to  their  own  strong  arms  and  dauntless  hearts? 

I.  False  gods  no  sueb  bepugb.  Ahaz  at  one  time  "sacrificed  to  the  gods  of 
Damascus  which  smote  him  "  (2  Ohron.  xxviii.  23),  thinking  to  obtain  help  from  them ; 
but  "  they  were  the  ruin  of  him,  and  of  all  Israel."  Other  kings  of  Judah  and  Israel 
trasted  in  Baal,  or  Chemosh,  or  Moloch,  or  Beltis,  or  Ashtoreth.  But  none  found  any 
of  them  a  "  sure  refuge."  Indeed,  how  should  false  gods  help,  when  they  are  either 
fictions  of  the  imagination,  mere  nonentities,  or  else  evil  spirits,  rebels  against  the 
Alniiiihty,  cast  down  by  him  from  heaven  ?  If  the  former,  they  can  have  no  power  at 
all,  for  how  should  something  come  out  of  nothing  ?  If  the  latter,  they  are  powerless, 
at  any  rate  against  God,  who  has  proved  their  inability  to  resist  him,  and  coiold  at  any 
time  annihilate  them  by  a  word. 

II.  The  kings  of  the  babth  no  subb  eefuge.  "  Put  not  your  trust  in  princes, 
nor  in  any  child  of  man,  for  there  is  no  help  in  them  "  (Ps.  cxlvi.  3).  Hoshea  trusted 
in  Shebek  of  Egypt  (So),  Hezekiah  in  Tirhakah,  Zedekiah  in  Pharaoh-Hophra  (Apries) ; 
but  all  were  equally  disappointed.  Even  Ahaz  obtained  no  real  advantage  from  his 
appeal  to  Tiglath-Pileser,  who  "distressed  him,  but  strengthened  him  not"  (2  CI  ron. 
xxviii.  20).  Foreign  aid  is  always  a  poor  thing  to  trust  to ;  for  the  foreigner  necessarily 
consults  mainly  his  own  interest,  which  he  may  find  to  conflict  with  ours  at  any 
moment.  Let  all  go  well,  and  an  obligation  is  incurred,  which  it  may  cost  us  more 
than  we  bargained  for  to  repay.  Let  things  go  Ul,  and  we  experience  perhaps  the  fate 
of  the  horse  when  he  called  in  man's  aid  against  the  stag.  In  the  best  ease,  foieign 
powers  can  help  us  only  against  man,  not  against  God.  They  can  never  be  a  "sure 
refuge."  "  Cease  ve  frum  man,  whose  breath  is  in  his  nostiils :  for  wherein  is  he  to  be 
accounted  of?"  (ch.  ii.  22). 

III.  Men's  own  steong  aems  and  stout  hearts  ko  sure  befdqb.  Better 
certainly  to  trust  to  these  than  to  false  gods  or  fickle  princes.  In  many  a  strait,  these 
will  help  us  a  long  way.  But  let  there  come  a  time  of  serious  trouble,  of  overpowering 
hostile  force  pressing  upon  a  nation,  or  deep  grief  or  dangerous  sickness  upon  an  indi- 
vidual, and  their  weakness  and  insufBciency  is  at  once  shown.  In  the  one  case,  the 
strong  man  has  met  with  a  stronger,  and  all  his  struggles  do  but  add  to  his  sufi'erings. 
In  the  other,  the  heart  and  hands  fail  when  the  call  is  made  on  them.  The  stalwart 
frame  is  bowed  down  with  grief  or  illness ;  the  heart  is  "  withered  like  grass  "  (Ps.  cii.  4), 
or  become  "  like  wax  that  is  melted  "  (Pa.  xxii.  14).  Man  discovers  under  these  circtmi- 
Btances  that  he  has  no  strength  in  himself,  and,  unless  he  can  find  an  external  refuge, 
is  lost  absolutely.  Happy  they  who  at  such  times  can  feel  with  David,  "  The  Lord  is 
my  Rock,  and  my  Fortress,  and  ray  Deliverer ;  my  God,  my  Strength,  in  whom  I  will 
trust ;  my  Buckler,  and  the  Horn  of  my  salvation,  and  my  high  Tower  "  (Ps.  xviii.  2). 
"  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd ;  I  shall  not  want.  He  maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green 
pastures :  ho  leadeth  me  beside  the  still  waters.  He  restoreth  my  soul :  he  leadeth  me 
in  the  paths  of  righteousness  for  his  Name's  sake.  Yea,  though  I  walk  through  the 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will  fear  no  evil :  for  thou  art  with  me ;  thy  rod  and 
thy  staff  they  comfort  me  "  (Ps.  xxiii.  1 — 4). 

Vers.  5 — 19. — Assyria,  a  noidbh  example  of  pride  and  its  punishment.  History 
furnishes  no  better  example  of  pride  and  its  punishment  than  that  of  Assyria.  Th« 
pride  of  the  Assyrians  is  equally  apparent  in  Scripture  and  on  the  native  monuments. 


en.  X.  1—34.]         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  191 

I.  Abbtria'b  fbide  as  shown  fobth  in  Sckiftubb.  1.  In  Eabshakeh's  embassy 
(2  Kings  XTiii.  19 — 35).  Rabshakeh  not  only  scoffs  at  the  military  power  of  Judzea 
and  Egypt,  but  ridicules  the  idea  that  Jehovah  can  deliver  Jerusalem  if  the  Assyrians 
attack  it.  "  Hearken  not  unto  Hezekiali,"  he  says,  "  when  he  persuadeth  you,  saying, 
The  Lord  will  deliver  us.  Huth  any  of  the  gods  of  the  nations  delivered  at  all  his  land 
out  of  the  hand  of  the  King  of  Assyria  ?  Where  are  the  gods  of  Hamath,  and  of  Arpad  ? 
where  are  the  gods  ol  Siphaivaim,  Hena,  and  IvahV  have  they  delivered  Samaria  out 
of  mine  hand?  Who  are  they  among  all  the  gods  of  the  countries,  that  have  dulivered 
their  country  out  of  mine  hand,  that  the  Lord  should  deliver  Jerusalem  out  of  mine 
hand  ?  "  2.  In  the  words  by  which  Isaiah  expresses  what  was  in  the  heart  of  Assyrian 
kings,  in  ch.  x.  8 — 11,  13, 14,  and  ch.  xxxvii.  21,  25. 

II.  Assyria's  peide  as  indicated  by  the  monuments.  Here  we  may  note :  1.  The 
titles  assumed  by  the  kings,  which  are  such  as  the  lollowing :  "  the  great  king  "  (comp. 
2  Kings  xviii.  19,  28),  "  the  powerful  king,"  "  the  king  of  kings,"  "  the  lord  of  lords," 
"  the  supreme  monarch  of  monarclis,"  "  the  favovirite  of  the  great  gods,"  "  the  illustrious 
chief  who  is  armed  with  the  sceptre  and  girt  with  the  girdle  of  power  over  mankind," 
and  the  like.  2.  The  contemi>t  poured  upon  adversaries,  who  are  "wicked  people," 
"  impious  heretics,"  "  enemies  of  Abshur,"  "  traitors,"  and  "  rebels."  3.  The  claim  to  a 
series  of  uninterrupted  successes,  w  ithout  notification  of  a  single  defeat,  or  even  check, 
as  ever  suffered  by  the  Assyrian  arms.  Their  pride  forbids  the  monarchs  to  allow  that 
they  ever  experience  a  reverse. 

III.  Assybia's  punishment.  The  downfall  of  Assyria  is  sudden,  strange,  abnormal. 
She  seems  at  the  zenith  of  her  power,  stretching  out  her  arm  on  the  one  side  to 
Ethiopia,  on  the  other  to  Lydia  and  the  coasts  of  the  ^gean,  when,  almost  without 
warning,  her  glory  suffers  eclipse.  A  vrild  nation  from  the  north,  previously  almost 
unknown,  invades  her  land,  devastates  her  fields,  threatens  her  towns,  destroys  her 
material  prosperity.  Scarcely  has  this  visitation  pass  d  by,  when  she  is  attacked  from 
the  east.  An  old  enemy,  long  contended  with  and  long  despised,  has  in  some  wonderful 
way  increased  in  strength,  and  assumes  a  menacing  attitude.  She  trembles,  but  she 
puts  on  a  bold  face  and  confronts  the  danger.  Summoning  to  her  aid  the  forces  of  her 
subject  allies,  she  retires  within  the  strong  walls  of  her  capital  city,  and  there  awaits 
attack.  But  the  chief  of  the  subject  allies  deserts  her  standard,  leagues  itself  with  her 
main  enemy,  and  joins  in  the  siege  of  Nineveh.  After  a  stubborn  defence  the  city  falls, 
and  witli  it  the  empire,  which  has  lasted  nearly  seven  centuries.  The  downfall  is 
strange,  sudden,  tragic,  astonishing.  Scripture  alone  reveals  its  cause.  Scripture  puts 
it  before  us  as  God's  doing — his  judgment  on  Assyria's  pride,  his  predetermined  and 
distinctly  predicted  punishment.  Because  "  the  axe  boasted  itself  against  him  that 
hewed  therewith,  and  the  saw  magnified  itself  against  him  that  moved  it "  (ver,  15), 
"  therefore  the  Lord,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  sent  among  Assyria's  fat  ones  leanness,  and 
under  her  glory  kindled  a  burning  like  the  burning  of  a  fire,"  and  she  was  consumed, 
"  soul  and  body,"  and  ceased  to  be  a  nation. 

The  warning  may  well  be  taken  to  heart  by  modern  countries,  which  set  themselves 
sgsinst  God;  by  modejn  scientists,  who  in  the  pride  of  their  intellect  deny  God;  and 
by  ihe  irreligious  generally,  who  practically  deny  and  defy  him. 

Ver.  27. — Blessings  through  the  anointing.  Blessings  come  to  men  "  through  the 
anointing  "  in  a  twofold  way :  (1)  indirectly,  through  the  anointing  of  Jesus ;  (2)  directly, 
through  their  own  anointing. 

I.  Through  the  ANOiNTnja  op  Jesus.  The  anointing  of  Jesus  was  that  complete 
sanctification  of  his  human  nature  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  resulted  from  his  most 
close  and  perfect  union  with  the  other  Persons  of  the  ever-blessed  Trinity,  whereby  his 
human  nature  was  never  left  an  instant  without  the  Spirit's  gracious  influence,  but  was 
ever,  as  it  developed  itself,  sanctified  in  every  part  to  the  highest  degree  possible.  1. 
Hence  comes  to  us  the  blessing  of  having  a  perfect  Pattern,  and  that  a  personal  one. 
Abstract  standards  of  virtue  are  all  more  or  less  imperfect,  and  are  weak  to  move  us  ; 
they  create  no  enthusiasm ;  they  draw  forth  no  love.  We  need  a  personal  standard — 
an  example  whom  we  may  imitate,  a  master  whom  we  may  admire,  a  friend  whom  we 
may  cherish  in  our  heart  of  hearts.  Ancient  philosophers  told  men  who  were  striving 
to  be  good,  to  look  out  for  the  most  virtuous  man  whom  they  could  find,  and  then 


192  THE  BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.         [oh.  1. 1—34, 

imitate  him.  But  every  merely  human  model  was  imperfect ;  each  led  his  followeri 
more  or  less  astray.  It  is  our  happiness  to  have  a  perfect  Model — ^a  real  Person ;  One 
whose  character  is  bo  clearly  depicted  that  we  cannot  mistake  it ;  One  whom  we  may  feol 
to  he  indeed  a  Friend ;  One  whom  we  may  at  once  revere  and  love.  2.  We  have,  furthur, 
through  the  anointing  of  Jesus,  the  hlessing  of  a  full  and  complete  satisfaction  aiid 
atonement  for  all  our  sins.  No  atonement  for  the  sins  of  others  could  he  made  but  by 
a  spotless  sacrifice.  Jesus  was  spotless,  "  through  the  anointing."  It  is  thus  "  through 
the  anointing  "  only  that  we  have  our  perfect  confidence  in  reconciliation  having  been 
made  for  us,  our  sins  blotted  out,  and  our  pardon  obtained  from  an  offended  God,  who 
will  receive  us  in  his  Son  and  for  his  Son's  merits. 

II.  Through  mkn's  own  anoistinq.  "  We  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One  " 
(1  John  ii.  20),  if  we  are  Christians  at  all,  and  through  that  unction  obtain  more  bless- 
ings than  we  can  enumerate ;  as  (1)  comfort  and  encouragement  from  him  who  is  "  the 
Comforter  "  (John  xiv.  26),  wbo  encourages  humble  souls,  and  cheers  up  those  who  are 
depressed,  and  infuses  hope  into  those  who  are  ready  to  despair  of  their  salvation ;  (2) 
strength  from  One  who  is  stronger  than  man,  who  can  enter  into  our  hearts,  and  give 
us  the  power  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure ;  (3)  release  from  the  bondage 
of  sin  through  the  "  free  Spirit,"  who  is  able  to  overcome  Satan,  and  release  us  from 
slavery  to  evil  habits,  and  make  us  free  and  willing  servants  of  God;  (4)  light  and 
knowledge  of  the  truth  from  him  who  is  "  the  Spirit  of  truth,"  among  whose  gifts  are 
wisdom,  and  knowledge,  and  faith,  and  discerning  of  spirits,  and  prophecy  (1  Cor.  xii. 
8 — 10) ;  (5)  holiness  from  "  the  Sanctifler,"  the  Holy  Spirit — the  "  Spirit  of  holiness  " 
(Bom.  i.  4).  The  anointing  of  the  Holy  Spirit  once  received  through  the  mercy  of  Uod, 
natiually  and  almost  necessarily,  unless  we  grieve  and  vex  the  Spirit  by  our  perversity, 
abides  in  us  (1  John  ii.  27),  and  teaches  us,  and  guides  us,  and  strengthens  and  sustains 
us,  and  purifies  our  hearts  and  lives,  and  enables  us  to  grow  in  grace,  and  press  un  ever 
towards  the  mark  of  our  high  calling  in  Christ,  and  become  more  and  more  conformed 
to  the  image  of  him  to  whom  God  guve  not  his  Spirit  "  by  measure  "  (Joim  iiL  34). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  6 — 15. — Auyria  the  rod  of  Jehovah.  L  A  waelike  poweb  mat  be  the  fehaIi 
msTBUMBNT  OF  Pkovidbnoe.  Assyria  is  here  descrilwd  as  the  "staff  of  Jehovah's 
anger,"  the  "rod  of  his  wrath,''  appointed  to  march  against  a  people  who  have  excited 
the  Divine  indignation.  As  he  plunders  and  spoils,  and  proceeds  on  his  devastating 
way,  he  may  be  in  effect  like  Attila,  the  "  scourge  of  Gk>d,-"  destined  like  a  wholesome 
tempest  to  purify  the  moral  air  of  a  corrupt  age,  and  to  prepare  for  a  better  sauitary 
state. 

II.  Yet  he  who  is  but  an  instbumbnt  of  anotheb  will  may  iqnoeb  his  office 
AND  WOBK.  The  Assyrian's  thoughts  are  bent  on  destruction.  His  motive  is  personal 
ambition.  In  haughty  pride  he  not  only  overvalues  his  power,  but  mistakes  its  nature. 
His  courtiers,  he  vaunts,  are  equal  to  kings.  All  foreign  lands  without  distinction  are 
to  meet  the  same  doom  from  him.  As  the  heathen  kingdoms  of  the  north  have  been 
subdued  by  him,  powerful  and  many  as  the  gods  had  been,  so  the  little  kingdom  of 
Judah.with  its  few  gods  or  idols,  will  not  be  able  to  withstand  him.  As  a  heathen,  the 
Assyrian  recognizes,  though  in  a  mistaken  way,  the  power  of  religion  as  the  mainstay 
of  a  state.  The  idols  or  fetishes  are  to  him  the  signs  of  a  real  supernatural  power 
residing  in  the  nation. 

III.  Divine  denunciation  of  vain-glokt.  When  Jehovah  executes  his  judgments 
at  the  right  time,  this  insolent  pride  will  be  punished.  1.  Its  folly  exposed.  The  prophet 
reads  the  heart  of  the  vain-glorious  Conqueror.  He  is  saying  to  himself,  "  It  was  the 
strength  of  my  band,  it  was  the  clearness  of  my  own  intelligence,  that  accomplished 
these  victories,  that  cast  down  my  powerful  foes.  I  was  like  a  boy  pillaging  a  deserted 
nest."  2.  Itsfullacy  rebuked.  It  is  as  il  the  axe  should  boast  that  it  does  the  work  of 
the  hewer,  or  as  if  the  saw  were  to  brag  against  the  sawyer,  or  the  staff  were  to  boast 
that  it  swings  ihe  hand  of  him  who  holds  it — that  the  lifeless  instrument  riises  the 
living  hand.  How  deeply  do  these  thoughts  run  through  the  lore  of  Israel  down  to 
Paul,  who  uses  the  image  of  the  potter  aud  the  clay  in  a  similar  manner  i    Says  Lord 


OH.  X- 1—84.]         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  193 

Bacon,  "  It  wag  prettily  devised  of  ^sop;  the  fly  sat  upon  the  axletree  of  the  chariot- 
wheel,  and  said,  '  What  a  dust  do  I  raise!'  So  there  are  some  vain  persons,  that  what- 
soever goeth  alooe  or  moveth  upon  greater  means,  if  they  have  ever  so  little  hand  in  it, 
they  think  it  \i  they  that  carry  it."    But 

"  All  servioe  lanka  the  same  with  God — 
With  God,  whose  pni)petB,  best  an.l  worst, 
An  we ;  there  i(  no  last  nor  first." 


Vers.  16 — 23. — Jvdgment  ami  conversion.  I.  Figures  of  jddgmknt.  The  Assyrian  is 
viewed  umier  the  image  of  a  stout,  well-fed  body,  into  which  a  wasting  disease  comes  by 
Divine  juiigraeiit.  Again,  that  judgment  is  depicted  as  a  fl.iming  fire,  kindling  and 
devouring  tlioms  and  making  a  swift  end  to  the  towering  beauty  of  the  forest  trees,  tht 
smiling  i)leasantness  of  the  fruitful  field.  The  remnant  of  the  host  will  soon  be  i;ounted 
"  on  one's  fingers,"  as  a  boy  might  count  the  still  standing  stems  in  a  wood  devastated  by 
the  fiiry  element.  The  decline  of  a  sick  man,  lastly,  may  represent  tlio  falling  away  of  a 
nation's  power.  At  best,  what  is  humanity  but  a  flower  fading  in  its  pride  ?  As  we  real 
in  the 'Prometheus' of  ^schylus,  "Its  strength,  is  it  strong;  its  beauty,  is  it  fair?  What 
hope  have  they,  these  dying  briers,  living  one  day  long  ?  How  like  a  dream  they  go,  this 
poor  blind  manhood,  drifted  from  its  eudl"  And  in  the  light  of  moral  disapproval,  of 
Divine  judgment,  a  declining  nation  seems  to  be  under  a  blight,  whose  ravages  cannot 
be  checked.  Where  are  the  ancient  civilizations,  ilissyria.  Babylonia,  Egypt,  Greece, 
Rome?  Their  root  was  long  ago  cankered,  and  their  blossom  went  up  as  dust.  Tiie 
explorer,  digging  out  a  statue  here,  or  there  deci|ihering  an  inscription,  helps  us  to 
construct  the  picture  of  cities  that  were  magnificent  poems  in  stone,  of  a  life  to  which 
no  secret  of  pleasure  or  of  power  was  denied.  Were  such  heights  in  vain  reached  for 
maulviiid  ?  Were  yonder  works  of  mighty  kings  the  efforts  of  gi.mts  who  lought  against 
God  ?  Rather  let  us  say  that  it  is  he  who  both  raises  up  and  sots  down — raises  up 
to  illustrate  the  greatness  of  the  spirit  of  man,  his  breath  ;  casts  down  to  show  the  bitter- 
ness of  human  pride  and  the  vanity  of  human  ambitions.  As  we  survey  the  remains 
of  the  "  cloud-cai'p'd  towers  and  gorgeous  palaces  "  of  Nineveh  and  Persepolis,  we  are 
reminded  that  all  earth's  splendour  is  but  a  dream,  from  which  we  must  again  and 
again  awake  anew,  to  find  in  the  spiritual  the  only  eternal ;  in  the  right  the  only 
enduring  throne  of  potentates ;  in  the  sweet  happiness  of  millions,  not  in  the  multitude 
of  armed  men,  the  mirror  of  Goil's  will  on  earth. 

II.  Conversion  through  judgment.  It  was  false  rdvinces  that  corrupted  Judah 
and  Israel.  As  faith  in  the  true  objects  of  faith  is  nothing  but  strength,  so  the  illusion 
which  tempts  us  to  trust  where  there  is  nothing  in  reality  to  lean  on,  must  betray  us. 
Men  under  such  illusions  will  confide  in  their  deadly  enemy  as  a  bosom  friend ;  will 
invite  the  point  of  the  weapon  aimed  at  the  heart ;  will  "  stay  themselves  uiion  them 
that  smite  them."  We  are  limp,  drooping  creatures.  Rare  is  he  wlio  walks  with  head 
quite  erect,  with  eye  undauntedly  fixed  on  the  unseen,  with  heart  bound  up  in  principle 
alone.  If  we  crave  countenance  in  our  foibles,  much  more  in  our  serious  projects.  And 
neve-  was  there  craze,  weakness,  silliness,  or  sin,  for  which  abettors  may  not  be  found. 
Never  have  we  so  sought  confirmation  in  views  that  should  never  have  been  entertained, 
but  the  hour  of  disenchantmeiit  has  come,  soon  or  late.  The  reed  breaks,  the  cistern 
leaks;  the  soft  foundation  gives,  and  the  ominous  crack  aprears  in  our  dwelling.  And 
then  we  return  to  "  stay  ourselves  on  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  with  faithfulness."  Or  so  the 
prophet  forecasts  the  effect  of  his  people's  disenchantment.  "  The  remnant  will  return, 
the  remnant  of  Jacob  to  the  Hero-God."  He  the  only  Head,  the  only  Battle-leader, 
as  the  only  Prince  of  Peace,  will  be  found  again  in  the  day  of  adversity,  at  least  by  a 
few.  As  in  the  olden  time  but  a  few  were  saved  in  the  ark  from  the  great  flood,  so 
from  these  overflowing  judgments  which  are  to  descend,  a  few,  though  only  a  few,  will 
be  able  to  escape.  A  public  end  and  decision  of  these  controversies  between  Jehovah 
and  his  people  is  to  be  made,  and  it  cannot  be  delayed  nor  averted.  1.  To  the  prophetic 
consciousiiess  it  seems,  at  any  epoch,  that  "the  whole  world  lies  in  wickedness,"  and 
that  the  righteous  are  but  a  very  small  remnant.  2.  Historically,  such  a  view  seems 
to  hold  good.    At  critical  epochs,  England  has  probably  been  saved  by  the  virtuous, 

ISAIAH.  O 


101  THE   BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  [oh.  x.  1^34. 

the  Cluistian,  the  self-denying  few.  3.  But  history  is  too  profound  for  any  mortal 
reading  ur  rendering.  If  nationi  have  passed  away  notwithstanding  that  they  had  a 
core  of  true  hearts  among  them ;  if  Israel  still  remains,  though  her  lamp  has  been 
removed  from  its  stand,  there  is,  doubtless,  a  deeper  meaning  in  the  prophet's  words. 
It  is  the  "  remcant "  which  has  given  us  our  Hebrew  Scriptures.  From  the  caldron  of 
suffering,  exile,  external  sorrow,  came  forth  the  fine  gold  of  the  great  prophet  of  the 
Captivity,  and  of  many  of  I  he  psalmists.  Every  nation  that  leaves  noble  and  Divine 
ihoughts  for  the  possessiuu  of  mankind  for  ever;  every  individual  who,  out  of  the 
wreck  of  life's  mistakes,  bequeaths  some  legacy  of  truth  to  posterity,  fulfils  in  a  way 
the  prophecies  of  the  recovery  of  the  remnant. — J. 

Vers.  24 — 34. — The  mighly  laid  low.  I.  Encoubaoehent  against  fbab.  Let  not 
Judah  fear  the  Assyrian,  who,  like  the  Egyptian  in  the  days  of  yore,  wields  over  her 
the  rod  of  the  slave-driver.  In  a  short  time,  the  hot  tide  of  Divine  wrath  will  pass 
from  Israel,  and  the  Assyrians  will  in  turn  fuel  it.  The  scourge  that  was  laid  in  the 
ancient  time  on  the  back  of  the  Egyptian  oppressor  will  be  brandished  over  the  heads 
of  the  Assyrians.  Their  burden  will  faU  from  Judah's  shoulder,  from  Judah's  neck 
the  yoke.  The  proverb  says,  "  A  youth  is  ruined  by  fat,"  and  so  wiU  the  swollen  bulk 
of  the  Assyrian  body  melt  away.  There  is  a  play  in  the  Hebrew  on  the  words  "  yoke  " 
and  "  youth."  The  prophet  in  a  word-picture  paints  the  onward  march  of  the  great  host. 
Swiftly  he  comes  on,  spreading  trembling  and  causing  flight  before  him.  Panic-struck 
clamours  sound  through  the  vales^and  from  hiU  to  hill  the  alarum  is  given.  Fugitives 
pour  in  through  the  gates  of  the  city.  Already  the  invader  is  at  Nob,  near  Jerusalem, 
and  has  hits  hand  lifted  on  high,  as  it  were,  to  smite  the  sacred  hill  with  a  fatal  blow. 
Then  suddenly  his  own  crown  is  cleft  by  the  hand  of  Jehovah ;  the  lofty  crested 
warriors  fall  as  the  trees  in  the  fcrest  before  the  woodman's  axe.  This  Lebanon  of 
warlike  spears,  this  mdUt  belli,  is  prostrate  before  the  "majestical  One"  whose  scat 
ia  on  Zlon. 

11.  Genbbal  lessons.  There  was  an  anointed  king  in  Zion,  the  representation  of 
Jehovali's  majesty,  then ;  there  are  spiritual  forces,  representative  of  Divine  might  and 
■will,  ruling  in  the  world  now.  There  were  moments  of  prophetic  insight  in  which  the 
hollowness  of  worldly  might,  the  doom  of  kini^doms  that  were  not  kingdoms  of 
righteousness,  were  clearly  seen.  There  are  such  moments  now.  What  is  force  without 
justice,  numbers  without  principle  ?  One  breath  from  the  lips  of  eternal  Truth  shall 
suffice  to  drive  them  away.  All  that  has  fixed  the  eye  of  the  people  in  fascinated 
terror,  filled  their  ears  with  tumult,  their  hearts  with  commotion,  dismayed  not  the 
prophet.  He  seems  to  look  above,  his  feet  securely  planted  upon  a  cliff,  on  the  boiling 
surge  below.  There  is  a  hand  that  can  stay  these  waves,  a  voice  that  can  command, 
"  Thus  far  and  no  further ;  here  shall  thy  proud  billows  be  stayed."  Then  shall  these 
hosts  become  such  "stuff  as  dreams  are  made  of,"  these  onwaid-roUing  columns  melt 
into  wreaths  of  cloud,  become  thin  air,  and  "  leave  not  a  wrack  behind." 

"  The  might  of  the  Gentile,  unsmote  by  the  sword, 
llath  melted  like  snow  in  the  glance  of  the  Lord  t " 

Onr  cares  and  troubles  may  be  to  us  personally  as  the  invasion  of  an  Assyrian  host. 
If  we  would  know  the  prophetic  confidence,  we  must  live  the  prophetic  life ;  the  ear 
attent,  the  heart  obedient — "  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord."  Nothing  can  bring  us  jjeace, 
lift  us  out  of  the  degradation  of  fears  that  unman,  but  faith  in  our  principles.  They 
must  triumph  in  the  end ;  in  them  alone  is  strength,  freedom,  victory. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 4. —  The  helplessness  of  man  under  the  wrath  of  Ood.  The  anger  of  the 
Lord  is  here  expressly  declared  against  the  oppressor.  We  are  again  reminded :  1. 
That  God  judges  those  who  are  in  authority  over  men ;  that  however  these  may  be 
placed  above  the  reach  of  human  justice,  they  will  not  escape  Divine  retribution.  2. 
That  God  especially  requires  an  account  of  our  treatment  of  the  suffering  and  the 
iependent.  Whoso  wrongs  the  widow  or  the  orphan  must  expect  a  fearful  reckoning 
with  the  pitiful  and  righteous  One  (Matt,  xviii.  6).  But  the  special  truth  which  is 
provided  for  us  in  this  pas^^age  is  the  utter  impotence  of  man,  and  the  ceitainty  and 
severity  of  his  doom  when  God  "  arises  to  judgment."     We  learn — 


OH.  X,  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  19S 

I.  THiT   BIN   IS   MOVING   ON    TO   A   DAT  OF   DiVINE   JUDGMENT.      "  The  day  of  Visita- 

tioa"  (ver.  3)  is  sure  to  come.  The  desolation  that  is  in  store  may  have  to  "  come 
from  far;  "  it  may  be  out  of  sight  now ;  it  may  come  "  as  one  that  travelleth/^  may  be 
liidden  by  interfening  days  and  weeks ;  but  it  is  on  its  way.  Not  more  surely  does  the 
sun  move  to  the  western  sky,  does  the  spiing  move  toward  the  summer,  does  youth 
move  toward  manhood  and  manhood  toward  age  and  death,  than  does  sin  move  on  to 
a  day  of  wrath,  of  Divine  visitation.  All  sin  takes  this  sad  course;  not  only  such 
daring  and  presumptuous  sin  as  that  of  the  text — cruel  wrong  at  the  hand  of  those 
nppointed  to  administer  justice — but  all  departure  from  the  revealed  will  of  God,  and 
also  the  deliberate  and  persistent  refusal  to  enter  his  service. 

II.  That  in  that  day  sin  will  lean  in  vain  on  its  old  suppoktb.  Not  only 
will  national  alliances  fnil  the  nation  which  God  is  visiting  with  his  displeasure,  but  all 
the  supports  and  consolations  with  which  individual  souls  have  surrounded  themselves 
will  prove  to  be  of  no  avail  then.  "  To  whom  will  ye  flee  for  help?"  (ver.  3).  What 
human  arm  will  arrest  the  uplifted  hand  of  God?  Of  what  avail  then  human  friend- 
ships, abundant  "  resources,"  maguificent  estates,  royal  or  princely  patronage,  the 
devices  of  the  cunning  counsellor?  How  will  these  be  brushed  kway  by  the  tempest 
of  his  holy  indignation  1 

III.  That  sin  will  then  bb  exposed  to  a  thbeefold  penalty.  1.  Irreparable 
lost.  "  Where  will  ye  leave  your  glory  ?  "  (ver.  3).  Our  earthly  treasures,  our  bodily 
powers,  our  worldly  honours  and  positions, — these  are  things  which  God's  punitive 
providence  will  take  away  from  us ;  and  where  is  the  custodian  to  whose  hands  we  can 
confide  them  ?  Who  will  receive  tliem  from  us  and  restore  them  to  us  ?  2.  Spiritual 
bondage.  "  They  shall  bow  down  under  the  prisoners,"  or  "  bow  down  among  the 
captives"  (ver.  4).  Sin  leads  down  to  a  cruel  bondage.  Evil  dispositions,  bad  habits, 
shameful  lusts,  "have  dominion  over  us  "  (lioin.  vi.  16).  3.  Spiritual  death.  "They 
shall  fall  under  the  slain."  We  add  the  welcome  truth,  not  stated  or  even  hinted  here, 
but  elsewhere  revealed — 

IV.  That  there  is  an  unfailing  Refuge  now  foe  the  penitent  and  believing 
SPIEIT. — 0. 

Vers.  5—19. — Man  in  his  folly  and  Ood  in  his  righteousneti.  We  have  a  graphic 
picture  here  of— 

I.  Man  IN  HIS  FOLLY.  Uniler  the  dominion  of  the  folly  whioh  is  bom  of  sin,  man : 
I.  Indulges  in  designs  which  are  beyond  his  strength.  (Ver.  7.)  It  is  "  in  his  heart "  to 
lo  much  greater  things,  often  to  work  much  greater  wickedness,  than  he  has  power  to 
■xecute.  Under  sin,  men  indulge  in  great  and  even  gross  self-exaggeration;  guilt  is 
an  infatuating  thing.  2.  Looks  with  dangerous  complacency  on  his  little  triumphs. 
(Vers.  8,  9.)  He  has  the  "  stout  heart "  and  the  "  high  looks  "  (ver.  12)  which  come 
Irom  a  consciousness  of  success,  and  which  are  the  sure  precursors  of  further  folly 
Few  men  can  stand  even  the  smaller  triumphs,  and  still  fewer  the  greater  ones.  When 
a  man  finds  himself  indulging  the  spirit  of  complacency  he  had  better  question  himself 
severely,  for  he  is  walking  on  a  "  slippery  jilace."  3.  Attributes  to  himself  what  is  his 
only  in  a  very  slight  degree.  (Ver.  13 ;  vide  1  Cor.  iv.  7.)  Man  can  only  work  with 
the  materials  which  he  has  received  from  God,  under  the  conditions  whiclm  God  deter- 
mines, within  the  limits  which  God  imposes.  "  All  our  springs  are  in  him.''  The 
attitude  of  arrogant  authorship  is  as  preposterous  as  it  is  offensive.  4.  Comes  to  hasty 
and  ignorant  conclusions.  (Vers.  10, 11,  14.)  The  blind  Assyrian  ignorantly  asso- 
ciated the  idols  of  other  lands  with  "  the  idols  of  Jerusalem."  He  was  either  ignorant 
of  Jehovah's  Name,  or  he  placed  him  on  a  level  with  other  gods.  He  was  going  tbrth 
in  a  blind  confidence  that  should  be  rudely  shaken,  that  should  be  completely 
shattered.  Man  in  his  guilty  folly  assumes  many  things  to  be  true  w  hioh  are  absolutely 
false;  befalls  to  make  inquiry,  and  his  ignorance  utterly  and  fatally  misleads  him. 
And  there  is  nothing  in  regard  to  which  this  is  so  true  as  the  nature,  the  character 
and  the  will  of  God.  5.  It  blind  to  the  end  and  issue  of  his  doings.  "  He  raeaneth  not 
oO,"  etc.  (ver,  7).  Under  the  sway  of  sin  man  moves  along  a  path  which  he  think: 
wUl  lead  to  honour,  enjoyment,  success,  triumph  ;  but  "  the  end  of  that  way  is  death.' 
Selfishness  has  its  own  purpose  in  view,  and  confidently  reckons  on  achieving  iti- 
end;  but  behind  or  above  it  is  a  Power  which  it  is  unable  to  resist,  and  which  turi  i 
it  to  another  and  very  different  end. 


196  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  x.  1— a4. 

n.  God  in  ms  righteousness.  Everywhere  present,  sleeplessly  watching,  mightily 
interposing,  is  the  righteous  Euler  uf  all.  1.  He  punishes  his  own  people  when  they  go 
astray.  "I  will  send  him  against  a  hypocritical  nation,"  etc.  (ver.  6);  "When  the 
Lord  hath  performed  his  whole  work  u|jon  Mount  Zion  "  (ver.  12).  Judgment  often 
"  begins  at  the  house  of  God,"  with  the  people  of  God.  Whom  the  Lord  loves  he 
chastens.  God  has  a  gracious  purpose  in  his  visitations;  he  desires  and  designs 
repentance  and  restoration,  but  he  does  not  spare.  He  speaks  of  his  own  people  as 
"  the  people  of  his  wrath  "  (ver.  6).  Let  no  "  Christian  nation,"  or  "  Christian  Church," 
or  Christian  man  wrap  itself  (himself)  up  in  imaginary  security.  Gtod  may  have  a 
rod  in  his  hand  even  for  Judah  as  well  as  for  Assyria,  2.  He  will  overwhelm  with 
humiliation  those  who  impiously  oppose  themselves  to  his  holy  will.  (Vers.  15 — 19.) 
3.  He  will  use  the  ungodly  as  instruments  in  his  hand  of  righteousness  and  power. 
(Vers.  5 — 7.)  Seimacljerib  should  be  the  rod  with  which  the  hand  of  God  would 
smite.  God  can  make  and  will  make  the  wrath  and  the  ambition  of  men  to  serve  tlie 
high  purpose  which  he  has  in  his  mind.  Thus  he  used  Pharaoh,  Cyrus,  Pilate,  and 
many  others,  who  thought  that  thtir  own  aims  were  the  ultimate  issue  that  was 
being  wrought  out.  (1)  IIow  uusjieakably  humiliating  is  the  involuntary  tiibute  God 
may  compel  us  to  render  1  (2)  How  immeasurably  preferable  is  the  willing  service  he 
invites  us  to  offer  I — C. 

Vers.  20 — 23. — Departure  wnd  return.    The  passage  suggests — 

I.  That  those  who  know  God  well  may  be  induced  to  fobsakb  him.  Israel 
had  been  well  taught  cf  God;  had  been  carefully  and  constantly  instructed  in  Divine 
truth ;  had  rectived  some  lessons  which  might  well  have  been  deeply  planted  in  the 
mind.  Yet  Israel  forsook  Jehovah  ;  ceased  to  trust  in  his"  delivering  arm,  and  sought 
alliance  with  Assyria.  So  we,  who  should  know  much  better,  forsake  the  Lord,  of 
whose  power,  faithfulness,  and  love  we  have  learned  so  much.  Instead  of  finding  our 
joy  and  our  heritage  in  liis  service  and  friendship,  we  resort  to  the  fascinat!ans  of  a 
seductive  world ;  instead  of  relying  on  his  promised  succour,  we  have  recourse  to 
human  help  or  to  material  securities. 

II.  That  every  earthly  refuge  proves  to  be  precarious.  Besting  on  Assyria, 
Israel  was  only  "  staying  upon  him  that  smote  them."  The  staff  on  which  they  leaned 
proved  to  be  a  rod  that  bruised  them.  So  has  it  been,  again  and  again,  with  national 
and  political  alliances.  So  is  it  with  our  individual  confidences  in  earth  rather  than 
in  heaven.  The  material  securities  fail  us;  the  ship  sinks,  the  bank  breaks,  the  mine 
is  exhausted,  the  company  is  defrauded  and  has  to  be  wound  up,  trade  declines,  and 
our  earthly  prop  is  gone.  The  human  help  we  built  upon  disappears;  our  friend 
sickens,  or  he  is  killed  in  the  fatal  accident,  or  he  is  himself  stripped  and  helpless,  or 
he  is  estranged  from  us  and  discards  us.  Our  hope  becomes  our  disappointment,  our 
pride  becomes  our  shame ;  we  have  been  staying  on  that  which  smites  us  (see  Jer. 
xvii.  5 ;  Ps.  cxviii.  6 — 9 ;  ch  ixxi.  1). 

III.  That  God  awaits  the  return  of  his  people  to  himself.  "They  shall 
stay  upon  the  Lord ; "  "  The  remnant  shall  return  unto  the  mighty  God  "  (vers.  20, 21). 
Not  only  was  God  not  unwilling  that  his  people  should  return  unto  him,  but  he  sent 
them  their  adversity  in  order  that  they  might  see  their  folly  and  incline  their  hearts 
unto  himself.  1.  God  is  grieved  at  our  departure  from  himself,  but  he  is  willing  to 
welcome  us  back.  2.  He  sends  the  adversity  which  is  suggestive  of  our  return.  When 
the  dark  hour  comes,  when  the  soul  sits  desolate,  when  our  heart  is  wounded  by  the 
very  hand  which  we  hoped  would  help  and  heal  us,  in  that  day  may  we  hear  the  voice 
of  the  Father  we  have  forsaken,  calling  to  us  and  saying,  "  Eeturn  unto  me ; "  "I  will 
heal  your  backslidings,  I  will  love  you  freely." — C. 

Vers.  24 — 34. — Rout  and  re-estahlishment :  Divine  interposition.   L  Thk  apvear- 

ANOE  OP   OVERWHELMING   POWER  ON    THE    SIDE   OF   BIN.        The   prophot    givCS    a     vivid 

description  in  vers.  28 — 38  of  the  triumphant  march  of  the  Assyrian.  Everybody 
and  everything  yields  at  his  approach  ;  opposition  melts  before  him;  his  adversary  is 
in  his  power;  already  his  hani  is  on  the  .prize  he  seeks.  Sin  often  seems  to  be  on 
a  march  that  is  irresistible,  and  to  be  secure  of  victory.  Numbers,  wealth,  learniu", 
lank,  riches,  custom,  habit, — the  most  powerful  forces  makeup  its  conquering  huaU 


OH.  X.  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPUET   ISAIAH.  197 


Must  not  truth,  virtue,  piety,  capitulate  at  its  summons  aad  leave  their  treasures  to  its 
impious  hands?  So  was  it  with  sin  generally  whtn  the  Saviour  ap[]eared,  to  lift  up  the 
standard  of  the  cross  against  its  power.  So  has  it  been,  agiiin  and  again,  with  the 
forces  of  superstition,  scepticism,  vice,  ungodliness,  as  these  have  assailed  somu  Church 
of  Christ  or  some  servant  of  God. 

II.  Its  aerest  and  overthrow  by  Divine  power.  Irresistible  a«the  invading  army 
Beamed,  its. victorious  course  should  be  arrested  and  its  ccufident  anticipations  dashed 
(vers.  26,  33,  34).  The  hand  of  the  boastful  warrior,  outsiretched  in  scornful  threaten- 
ing (ver.  3'^),  should  be  smitten  down  and  hang  helpless.  The  smiter  should  himself  be 
scourged,  the  proud  palm  disbranched,  the  great  forest  felled.  Anogant  impiety  should 
be  humiliated,  and  "by  the  way  that  he  came  he  should  return."  So  has  it  been  and 
thus  shall  it  be,  on  still  more  serious  and  critical  occasions.  God  will  say  to  the 
spiritual  adversaries,  "  Thug  far  .  .  .  and  no  further."  He  will  raise  up  the  prophet — 
the  Samuel,  the  Elijah,"  the  John,  the  Paul,  the  Luther,  the  Wesley — or  he  will  intro- 
duce the  spiritual  awakening  and  moral  power  which  will  encounter  and  defeat  the 
worst  efforts  of  sin  and  wrong,  and  impending  deleat  shall  be  changed  into  glorious 
victory. 

III.  The  be-bstablishment  of  RionTEonsNEss.  (Ver.  27.)  The  burden  shall  be 
removed  from  the  shoulder,  the  \  oka  taken  from  the  neck  ;  there  shall  be  comfort  and 
freedom  for  the  people  of  God,  that  they  may  walk  again  in  the  paths  of  righteousness, 
that  they  may  serve  again  in  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord.  We  learn  three  lessons:  1. 
That  successful  tin  may  well  hesitate  on  its  way  and  tremble  for  the  issue.  However 
appearances  may  favour  it,  and  though  ihe  spoils  may  seem  already  in  its  hand,  there  is 
a  Power  to  be  reckoned  with  whicli  will  ariest  its  march  and  consume  its  hopes.  2. 
That  threatened  uprightness  may  he  reassured.  It  need  not  be  afraid  of  any  Assyrian 
(ver.  24),  if  it  continue  in  or  return  to  its  spiritual  integrity.  God's  love  for  the 
faithful  will  remain  ;  his  indignation  toward  the  erring  who  are  the  penitent  will  cease 
(ver.  25).  3.  That  the  removal  of  sinful  servitude  must  be  contemporary  with  the 
acceptance  of  holy  and  happy  service.     (Matt.  xi.  28 — 30). — 0. 

Ver.  2. — The  Divine  avenger  of  the  poor.  The  idea  of  a  goel,  or  avenger,  belongs  to 
the  primitive  conditions  of  society.  When  there  was  no  settled  government,  no  police, 
and  no  magistracy,  each  individual  had  to  guard  his  life,  liberty,  and  properly  as  best  he 
could.  The  first  and  sim])lust  form  that  mutual  protection  took  was  "  the  family,"  and 
the  principle  was  esiablished  that  the  nearest  of  kin  to  an  injured  or  murdered  person 
should  avenge  the  injury  or  death.  As  this  led  to  feuds  among  families  siud  tribes 
lasting  for  generations,  and  as  it  was  a  kind  of  rough  ju,stice  which  often  became 
injustice,  Moses  set  tlie  old  custom  undir  limitations,  appointing  proper  courts  for  the 
settlement  of  disputes,  and  protecting  the  maiislaver  from  the  avenger  until  due  exami- 
nation could  be  made  into  the  circumstances  of  his  crime.  In  fully  civilized  society 
a  regular  system  of  law  and  magistracy  is  organized;  the  individual  commits  his  right 
of  personal  avengement  to  the  recognized  authorities.  It  is,  therefore,  of  supreme 
importance  to  the  welfare  of  any  natiDn  that  justice  should  be  free  to  all,  should  be 
perfectly  fair,  and  should  be  a  jiractical  avenger  of  the  poor,  the  distressed,  and  the 
wronged.  The  picture  which  Isaiah  sets  before  us  in  this  passage  reveals  a  most 
perilous  condition  of  society.  "All  the  formalities  of  justice  were  observed  punctili- 
ously. The  decision  of  the  unjust  judge  was  duly  given  and  recorded,  but  the  outcome 
of  it  all  was  that  the  poor,  the  widow,  and  the  fatherless  got  no  redress."  "  No  people 
had  statutes  and  judgments  so  righteous  as  they  had,  and  yet  corrupt  judges  found 
ways  '  to  turn  aside  the  needy  from  judgment,'  to  hinder  them  from  coming  at  their 
right  and  recovering  what  was  their  due,  because  they  were  needy  and  poor,  and  such 
as  they  could  get  nothing  by  nor  expect  any  bribes  from."  "  There  is  no  surer  sign  of 
the  misery  of  a  people  than  is  found  in  the  corrupt  administration  of  justice."  And  it 
may  be  added  that  a  country  is  on  the  borders  of  revolution,  or  of  calamity,  when 
righteousness  has  forsaken  its  judgment-seats,  and  there  are  no  avengers  of  iocia'. 
wrongs. 

I.  The  state  of  society  in  which  the  poor  find  no  help  tn  man.  Two  cases 
are  su"j;csted.  1.  Failure  to  obtain  just  judgment.  2.  The  painful  condition  of 
widows."    Where  there  is  wealth  and  luxury  there  is  sure  to  be  poverty  in  marked  and 


l'J8  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PEOl'HET  ISAIAH.         [cu.  x.  1— 3i 

terrible  features  close  beside  it,  as  may  be  illustrated  from  the  groat  and  rich  Europeaij 
cities  of  our  day.  Wealth  has  atendeiicy  to  go  in  thedireotioa  of  ulasses;  it  drains  nwny 
from  some  classes,  and  so  alieuates  and  embitters  tljem,  especially  as  the  result  of  sell- 
iridulgeuce  is  to  harden  i  man's  heart  against  liis  neighbonr.  Tlie  condition  of  widows 
in  the  East  is  an  extremely  painful  one,  because  they  have  no  rights  in  their  husband's 
property,  no  social  status,  and  are  the  prey  of  designing  and  wicked  men.  The  retired 
lile  they  lead  unfits  them  for  contending  on  behalf  of  their  own  rights,  or  thoseof  their 
children.  The  picture  of  a  national  life  in  which  the  wronged  ha^■e  no  judge,  the  poor 
no  helpers,  and  the  widows  no  friends,  is  an  exceedingly  ]  ainfnl  one.  i^elf-seeking, 
luxury,  and  class  prejudice  must  have  eaten  the  heart  out  of  such  a  kingdom. 

II.  In  such  a  state  of  society  the  poor  have  help  in  God.  This  may  be 
illustrated  along  the  following  lines,  (rod  will  help  them  by  :  1.  I'he  working  of  his 
)uilgmeiit-laws.  In  Grreece  despised  helots  multiply,  and  become  at  last  a  destructive 
foice,  for  a  time  breaking  up  snciety.  Slaves  learn  at  last  to  combine,  and  take  their 
own  avengements  on  their  persecutors.  Down-trodden  races  heave  awhile,  like  slum- 
bering earthiiuakes,  and  (ire-sently  burst  forth  in  revolutions  tliat  are,  iu  reality.  Divine 
judgments.  2.  By  the  orderinys  of  Biviiie  providence,  which  bring  the  nation  into 
such  a  condition  that  reformation  of  its  wrongs  becomes  immediately  necessary  to 
secure  its  continued  existence.  -  3.  By  the  raising  up  of  human  helpers.  Men  who 
plead  the  cause  of  the  poor,  and  make  their  voice  and  their  condition  to  be  heard  even 
in  the  high  places  of  a  land.  At  once  thought  turns  to  such  men  as  ^^'ilbelforce,  the 
friend  of  the  slave,  and  Howard,  the  friend  of  the  prisoner.  4.  By  special  Divine  con- 
solations. The  poor  have  their  ameliorations,  and  even  their  suijerior  advantaL;es; 
and  not  the  least  of  them  is  this — they  have  little  prejudice  hindering  the  reception  of 
Divine  truth.  To  "  the  poor  the  gospel  is  preached,"  and  in  every  age  it  is  found  true 
that  "  the  common  people  heard  Christ,"  and  hear  of  Christ,  "  gladly." — B.  T. 

Vers.  5 — 7. — The  Divine  overrulings.  The  figure  of  Assyria  as  an  aggrandizing 
power  is  here  set  before  us.  "  About  b.o.  1100,  the  rule  of  Assyria,  under  Tiglath- 
Pileser  I.,  had  stretched  from  Kurdistan  to  the  Grecian  Archipelago,  including  the 
w  h^jle  of  Lebanon  and  Phcenicia.  But  a  strong  league  of  the  Hittite  kings  of  Syria 
had  effectually  humbled  it,  and  torn  away  from  the  successors  of  the  great  king  ail  his 
dominions  on  this  side  the  Euphrates.  After  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  of  obscurity, 
Ass)  ria  once  more,  in  the  middle  of  the  ninth  century  B.O.,  under  its  warlike  king, 
Assur-Nazirhabal,  entered  on  a  career  of  conquest,  and  cleared  its  home  territories  of 
their  Babylonish  garrisons.  He  was  succeeded  by  his  son,  Shalmaneser  II.,  who  proved 
the  Napoleon  of  his  day.  After  conquering  Babylonia,  he  marched  in  triumph  to  the 
shores  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  exacted  tribute  from  the  petty  kings  of  Chalda^a.  But 
these  triumphs  only  kindled  his  military  ardour.  He  now  determined  to  extend  his 
empire  to  the  ancient  grandeur  it  had  obtained  under  Tiglath-Pileser  I.  The  kingdom 
of  Damascus  and  the  states  of  Palestine  were  thus  in  imminent  danger.  A  new  era  of 
mortal  struggle  had  come  to  them — a  struggle  only  to  end,  after  an  agony  of  more  than 
a  hundred  years,  in  the  destruction  of  Damascus  and  Samaria,  and  the  degrading  vas- 
salage of  all  the  nations  from  the  Euphrates  to  the  Levant.  Henceforth  all  Western  Asia 
trembled  at  the  name  of  Assyria.  The  heavens  were  black  with  tempests,  driving,  with 
only  momentary  lulls,  across  the  whole  sweep  of  Syria  and  Palestine "  (Dr.  Geikie). 
Fixing  attention  on  Assyria,  we  observe — 

I.  Self-willed  Assyria,  oakrting  out  its  own  plans.  Describe  the  historical 
fact*.  The  poet  seems  to  be  watching  this  aggrandizing  king  determined  to  push  his 
conquests  to  the  Mediterranean,  and  become  master  of  the  world.  The  career  and  spirit 
of  the  first  Napoleon  are  full  of  effective  comparisons.  The  lust  of  conquest  ever  grows 
with  success,  and  the  Assyrian  king  had  no  more  thought  of  God  than  Kapoleon  had. 
He  simply  meant  to  serve  his  own  ends.  These  great  world-conquerors  are  prominent 
example*  of  "  taking  life  into  our  own  ordering,  and  resolutely  fashioning  it  to  our  own 
ends ; "  and  they  are  examples,  too,  of  the  curse  to  all  around,  and  the  ruin  to  the  man 
himself,  of  every  self-willed  life. 

II.  OvEKRULED  ASSYRIA  CAKitYiNO  OUT  God's  PLAK8.  What  a  siiprome  humilia- 
tion for  conquering  Assyria  was  this  prophetic  declaration !  Assyria  was,  m  actual  fact, 
only  carrying  out  the  purpose  of  Jehovah,  who  was  known  to  the  Assyrians  but  as  th« 


OH.  X.  1—34.]         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  19fl 

God  of  one  of  the  little  states  which  they  would  he  ohliged  to  overrun.  Assyria  and 
its  proud  king  were  only  Jehovah's  rod  and  staff,  executing  for  him  the  fierceness  of  his 
indignation.  Assyria  was  now  as  much  tlie  servant  of  God  judging  and  punishing 
Syria  and  Israel,  as  the  Hebrews  had  been  the  servants  of  God  in  exterminating  the 
(^naanites,  whose  cup  of  iniquity  had  become  full,  and  was  runnins;  over.  God  makes 
"  the  wrath  of  man  praise  him,  and  the  remainder  of  wrath  he  restrains." 

III.  There  is  eveb  consolation  fob  God's  people  in  God's  ovbrrulinos.  We 
should  always  try  to  look  beyond  man's  little  plan,  and  see  how  things  fit  into  God's 
great  plan.  We  may  never  be  satisfied  with  what  things  look  like,  we  should  ask  God 
to  teach  us  what  they  are.  There  are  no  forces  working  in  the  moral  or  intellectual 
world  of  to-day  which  are  out  of  God's  range.  We  need  never  be  despondent.  The 
purposes  of  grace  are  overmastering  purposes.  It  is  always  true  that  "  man  proposes, 
and  God  disposes."  As  practical  appeal,  show  how  important  for  us  it  is  that  we  should 
be  kiu  with  God,  fit  into  his  purposes,  and  do  his  will,  not  just  by  his  overruling  and 
mastery,  but  by  our  own  spirit  of  surrender,  submission,  and  joyous  service;  never 
saying,  "  What  shall  I  do  ?  "  but  ever  looking  up  to  God  and  saying,  "  Lord  what  wilt 
thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "— R.  T. 

Vers.  12 — 14. — OocTs  Judgments  on  pride.  "  These  are  the  sentiments  and  boastings 
of  Sennacherib,  a  proud  Assyrian  monarch,  who  viewed  and  treated  cities  just  as  we  in 
Africa  viewed  and  treated  ostrich-nests,  when  they  fell  in  our  way ;  we  seized  the  eggs 
as  if  they  had  been  our  own,  because  we  had  found  them,  and  because  there  was  no 
power  that  could  prevent  us.  So  did  Sennacherib  seize  and  plunder  cities  with  as  little 
compunction  as  we  seized  the  eggs  of  the  absent  ostrich ;  never  thinking  of  the  misery 
for  life  which  he  thereby  brought  on  many  peaceable  families,  who  had  done  nothing 
to  injure  or  offend  him"  (Campbell).  Assyria  did  more  than  other  conquering  .king- 
doms in  merging  independent  nationalities  into  one  great  empire.  To  be  a  "  remover 
of  boundaries  and  landmarks  "  was  the  title  in  which  an  Assyrian  king  most  exulted. 

I.  The  feuil  of  success  in  life  is  pride.  Illustrated  in  Nebuchadnezzar, 
Solomon,  etc.     See  the  boastings  in  this  passage. 

II.  Pride,  kept  within  limits,  mat  be  corrected  by  ordinary  agencies.  Such 
as  failure,  disappointment,  falls  into  temptation,  seasons  of  affliction.  There  is  some 
measure  of  pride  in  us  all,  bringing  us  under  God's  chastening  iiand. 

III.  When  pride  combs  to  take  the  honoub  that  is  due  to  God  alone,  it 
MUST  BE  OPENLY  HDMBi.ED.  As  in  the  cases  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  Herod  at  Tyre,  etc. 
And  if  God  seems  to  delay  in  his  humblings,  we  may  be  sure  it  is  only  that  the  proud 
man  may  get  finished  the  work  which,  all  unknown  to  himself,  God  is  making  him 
do.  Then  we  may  well  learn  to  be  always  thankful  for  grace  received,  talents  entrusted, 
opportunities  given,  and  achievements  won ;  but  never  boast,  never  either  think  or  say, 
"  I  have  done  it ;  "  "  My  arm  hath  gotten  me  this  victory."  Boast,  if  you  must  boast, 
like  Paul,  of  what  God  has  wrought  in  you  and  by  you ;  but  never  boast  of  what  you 
have  wrought,  for  it  is  an  ever-working  and  necessary  law  that  "pride  must  have  a 
fall,"  and  the  "  Lord  alone  shall  be  exalted  in  that  day."— R.  T. 

Ver.  15. — Man,  the  instrument  of  Ood.  This  passage  is  most  humbling  to  that 
pride  of  man  which  leads  him  to  say,  "  I  am  my  own  ;  1  can  do  as  I  please  with  my 
own  powers  and  life."  Tiiat  pride  it  breaks  down  by  saying,  "  Not  so ;  you  are  not 
your  own  ;  you  are  God's ;  he  made  you  ;  he  gives  you  all ;  he  uses  you  for  his  own 
high  purposes."  The  proudest,  wealthiest,  mightiest  man  on  earth  may  seem  to  be 
something.  In  reality,  what  is  he  ?  An  axe,  a  saw,  a  staff  in  the  hands  of  God,  to 
work  out  his  will.  How  foolish  for  the  axe  to  boast  against  the  workman,  or  the  staff 
to  resist  the  living  man  who  uses  it  1  The  truth  which  we  propose  to  illustrate  is, 
that  man  can  never  be  other  than  the  instrument  of  God,  used  by  Inm  for  the  accom- 
plishment of  his  Divine  purposes.  We  can  find  nothing  else  tliat  God  has  created 
wliioh  is  without  a  purpose  and  end  for  its  being.  Winds  and  waters,  metals  and 
rocks,  flowers  and  trees,  sunshine  and  showers,  summer  and  winter,  day  and  nigiit, 
disease  and  death,  all  are  God's  tools.  Not  one  insect  hums  in  the  summer  evening 
but  has  received  its  commission  from  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth.  Not  a  flower 
opens  its  tinted  bosom  in  the  hedgerow  but  is  obeying  the  voice  of  God.     Not  a 


aOO  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PKOPHET  ISAIAH.         [oh.  x.  1—34. 

liiid  fans  tlie  air  with  its  waving  wing  but  hastens  to  do  the  Lord's  bidding.  The 
vvurld  is  full  of  tools  in  the  hands  of  God.  As  we  ascend  in  the  scale  of  creation  we 
unly  find  that  higher  beings  have  higher  work  to  do ;  they  are  more  subtle  tools,  set 
to  do  more  skilful  work,  but  they  never  cease  to  be  tools.  Man  may  be  the  crown  of 
creation,  but  he  is  only  a  creature,  and  sot  to  do  God's  most  dolicate  and  particular 
work.  So  far  as  we  can  understand  the  history  of  our  world,  we  can  sei;  that  great 
n:ition8  have  been  raised  up  to  do  certain  things  for  God,  and  they  have  done  them, 
either  with  their  wills  or  against  them.  Egypt  was  raised  up  to  educate  the  child- 
hood of  God's  chosen  people.  Assyria  was  raised  up,  as  we  see  in  this  chapter,  to  be 
tlie  rod  of  God  wherewith  he  might  punish  his  people  for  their  sin.  Babylon  was 
commissioned  to  guanl  the  years  of  Jewish  captivity.  Greece  was  exalted  to  show 
the  world  that  "  the  beautiful "  is  not,  of  necessity,  "  the  good."  Rome  proved  to  the 
world  that  "  restraint  of  law  "  can  never  take  the  place  of  the  "  liberty  of  righteousness." 
The  Gothic  nations  were  commissioned  to  overthrow  a  debased  and  worn-out  civiliza- 
tion. France  shows  how  the  passion  for  "glory"  can  lead  men  astray.  America 
illustrates  the  iirimiples  of  self-government.  England  tells  what  can  be  achieved  under 
the  inspiration  of  duty.  Every  prominent  man,  who  stands  conspicuously  out  from 
his  fellows,  is  a  tool  of  God.  Of  Pharaoh  it  is  said,  "  For  this  cause  have  I  raised  thee 
up,  to  make  known  my  power  in  thee."  Of  Cyrus,  who  was  appointed  to  arrange  the 
return  from  captivity,  it  is  said,  "  I  girded  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known  me." 
Every  man's  individuality  is  precisely  arranged  for  God's  purpose  in  him.  It  becomes 
a  most  oppressive  thought  that  each  one  of  us  is  not  only  a  tool,  but  a  tool  of  a  specific 
kind,  and  bhape,  and  weiglit,  and  foi:ce,  and  keenness,  adapted  and  attempered  for  that 
precise  work  which  God  wants  to  do  by  us.  What,  then,  shall  we  do  with  this  fact, 
that  man  is  the  instrument  of  God  ?    In  what  relation  shall  we  stand  to  it  ? 

I.  We  may  dkny  thk  fact,  and  make  this  support  cub  ebbellion.  Perhaps 
uo  one  ever  did,  soberly  and  thoughtfully,  say,  "  There  is  no  God."  Men  say  it  in  the 
bragging  of  tlieir  pride,  as  excuse  for  their  wrong-doing;  and  by  the  self-pleasing  of 
tlicir  lives ;  but  Scripture  reveals  their  secret  when  it  says,  "  They  do  not  like  to 
retain  God  in  their  thoughts."  The  difficulty  is  moral,  not  intellectual.  Even  a  bad 
man  would  hardly  dare  to  say,  "  Even  if  there  be  a  God,  he  has  no  rights  in  me ;  I 
am  my  own ;  I  rule  myself;  I  shall  take  care  of  myself  for  ever."  And  yet  many 
a  man's  life  does,  in  effect,  say,  "I  am  no  axe,  no  saw,  no  staff,  of  God's;  I  will  not 
be."  "The  axe  hoasteth  itself  against  him  that  heweth  therewith,  and  the  saw 
magnifies  itself  against  him  that  shaketh  it."  Scripture  refers  to  such  men.  Kebu- 
chadnezzar;  Jonah;  Assyria;  Ilerod  at  Tyre.  And  what  must  always  follow  when 
the  "  potsherd  strives  against  its  Maker"? 

II.  We  mat  accept  the  fact,  but  pervert  it,  and  bo  make  ourselves 
DJDIFFEKENT  TO  MOUAL  DisTiKCTlOKs.  A  man  Way  Say,  "  Yes,  I  am  a  tool  of  God's ; 
my  life  is  all  planned  out  for  me ;  it  is  all  fore-ordained  where  I  shall  be,  what  I  shall 
do ;  therefoie  there  can  be  no  real  difference  between  right  ami  wrung ;  whatever  I 
do  I  cannot  help  doing,  I  was  intended  to  do  ;  I  am  only  the  axe  or  the  saw  ;  the  virtue 
li<is  only  in  him  u  ho  uses  me,  and  whose  power  I  cannot  resist."  We  are  all  exposed 
tc  the  temptation  of  treating  this  sublime  fact  of  God's  relation  to  us  in  this  most 
mournful  and  mistaken  way.  Losing  the  distinction  between  right  and  wrong  out  of 
our  lives,  we  are  in  peril  of  losing  God  altogether  as  a  moral  Being,  and  transforming 
him  into  the  "  cloud-compelling  Jove"  of  whom  the  pagans  dreamed.  Cannot  we  see 
ilial  when  God  speaks  of  men  as  his  axe  or  bis  saw,  it  is  as  using  a  symbol,  which 
m-^wers  only  in  part  ?  Man  is  not  according  to  the  nature  of  the  axe  or  the  s»w ;  but 
hi.s  intelligence,  bis  powers,  his  will,  come  into  a  relation  of  dependence  on  God  and 
service  to  him,  just  as  the  saw  does  to  man.  God's  higher  will  takes  into  account 
man's  will,  and  woulil  even  work  out  its  gracious  plans  through  that  human  will. 

III.  We    mat  KEClilVE     THIS  FACT,  AKD    MAKE    IT    NOURISH     A     DAILT    OBEDIENCE. 

Was  the  life  of  the  Apostle  Paul  a  free,  noble,  blessed  life?  He  was  but  a  tool  in  the 
hands  of  God.  "  Go  thy  way ;  thou  art  a  chosen  vessel  unto  me,  to  bear  my  Name 
before  the  Gentiles."  He  did  not  resist ;  he  did  not  let  the  fact  that  he  was  God's 
lool  lead  him  tu  indifference.  He  cheerfully  accepted  God's  will  for  him;  he  filled 
his  will  to  God's  will,  and  said,  "  Yes,  the  very  best  thing  for  me  is  just  the  tiling 
that  God  re^jLihes  of  mc,  that  I  should  go  and  preach  tu  the  Gentiles."     If  there  moral 


OH.  X.  1—34,]        THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  201 

glory  in  the  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  on  the  earth?  It  comes  out  of  the  fixct  thai 
even  he,  in  his  earthly  manifestation,  was  a  tool  in  the  hands  of  God,  and  liked  to  be  a 
tool.  lie  fitted  his  mind  into  the  mind  of  God  so  as  to  say,  "  Lo,  I  come  to  do  Ihy  will, 
0  God  ; "  "  My  meat  and  my  drink  is  to  do  the  will  of  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven." 
The  truth  before  us,  in  this  our  text,  staggers  and  crushes  us  if  we  attempt  to  resist 
it.  It  is  one  rich  indeed  in  comfort  and  help  if  we  will  accept  it,  fit  our  will  and 
pleasure  into  God's  will  and  pleasure  for  us,  and  say,  "God's  plan  for  me  is  my  plan 
tor  mysdf.  God's  place,  Ooil's  work,  God's  difficulties,  God'.s  sorrows,  God's  helps  for 
me,  are  the  very  tilings  that  I  would  have  chosen  for  myself,  if  I  had  wisdom  enough 
to  choose."  The  truth  of  tjjo  text  will  be  a  stumbling-block  to  us  until  we  truly  know 
God.  Then  it  becomes  to  us  a  glory  and  a  buasting.  Why  should  the  infint  of  a  day 
be  set  to  steer  the  vessel  when  the  Lord  of  winds  and  seas  is  on  board  ?  Why  should 
a  stranger  lead  himself  through  the  trackless  forests  of  life  when  the  all-seeing,  all- 
knowing  Father-God  offers  the  guiding  hand?  What  can  be  better  for  us  than  to  be 
axe,  saw,  staff,  in  the  hands  of  him  who  is  good,  wise,  loving,  strong,  our  Almighty 
Father  ?— R.  T. 

Ver,  20. — Staying  upon  the  Holy  On$.  "  The  remnant  of  Israel,  and  the  escaped  of 
the  house  of  Jacob,  shall  no  longer  rely  upon  smiter,  but  shall  rely  upon  Jehovah, 
Israel's  Holy  One,  in  faithfulness  "  (Cheyne's  translation).  The  point  of  the  verse  is 
that  the  remnant  of  Israel  is  thoroughly  weaned  from  its  false  confidences,  and  returns 
to  the  true  God.  The  only  hope  for  preserving  the  liberties  of  Judah,  Israel,  and 
Syria  was  for  tlioin  to  combine  against  the  growing  power  of  Assyria.  But,  in.<tead  of 
that,  Israel  an<l  Syria  combined  against  Judah,  and  so  both  weakened  their  own  hands, 
and  drove  Jndah  to  seek  the  help  of  Assyria,  which  inevitably  hastened  the  overthrow 
of  all  the  three  kingdoms.  However  politic  the  appeal  of  Judah  to  Assyria  might  seem 
to  be,  it  was  utterly  unworthy  of  the  people  of  Jehovah,  who  had  so  often  proved  his 
faithfulness  and  power ;  so  they  had,  by  bitter  experience,  to  learn  that  they  should 
"cease  from  man,"  and  trust  wholly  in  the  living  God  (Jer.  xvii.  5 — 8).  "Their 
experience  of  the  failure  of  that  false  policy  should  lead  them  to  see  that  faith  in  God 
wa.s,  after  all,  the  truest  wisdom."  From  this  we  learn  for  ourselves  thiit  the  sanctified 
experiences  of  our  life  will  bring  about  the  same  results ;  self-trusts,  and  trusts  in  man, 
will  be  wholly  broken  down,  and  trust  in  God  will  be  fully  established.  We  may 
dwell  on  the  following  stages  in  the  experience  of  life. 

I.  I  CAN.  This  expresses  the  spirit  of  confidence,  conscious  strength,  and  hopeful- 
ness which  characterizes  youth.  Nothing  seems  to  be  impossible.  Life  must  yield  its 
best  to  energy. 

IL  I  WILL.  This  is  man's  first  effort  to  meet  the  sense  of  failure.  Things  will  not 
go  just  as  he  wishes.  He  cannot  attain  all  he  can  desire.  But  at  first  he  will  not 
admit  this.  So  he  calls  on  will  to  buttress  ability,  and  make  united  effort  to  master 
disability.     The  very  energy  of  man's  will  is  a  half-confession  of  man's  weakness. 

III.  I  CANNOT.  This  is  the  issue  of  the  strife,  sooner  or  later,  for  every  man. 
Strength  and  will  try  hard  to  shape  life  otherwise  than  God  appoints ;  and  however 
cheering  temporary  successes  may  prove,  every  year  brings  its  disappointments  and  its 
distresses,  and  at  last  the  cry  rises,  more  or  less  bitterly, "  It  is  not  in  man  that  walketh 
to  direct  his  steps." 

IV.  I  CAN,  THEOUQH  HIM  WHO  STBENGTHKNETH  MB.  This  is  the  right  issue  of  human 
•^k^rience.  The  great  life-ksson.  The  teaching  of  God's  Spirit.  The  meetness  for 
the  heavenly  service.  Untried  trust  is  only  profession.  Experience  brings  U3  to 
"  staying  upon  the  Holy  One." — K.  T. 

Ver.  2T.-^The  power  of  the  anointing.  This  verso  is  an  exceedingly  difiicult  one, 
because  containing  a  poetical  figure  which  modern  associations  do  not  readily  explain. 
Literally,  it  seems  to  read,  "  The  yoke  shall  be  destroyed  from  before  the  oil,"  or  "  the 
fat."  For  various  explanations  see  the  Expository  portion  of  the  Commentary.  Whsit. 
is  clear  is,  that  the  yoke  referred  to  is  the  bondage  of  Assyria  laid  on  the  house  ( I 
David.  This  yoke  shall  be  presently  removed.  The  deep  reason  for  the  removal  is 
that  on  the  house  of  David  lies  the  oil,  the  anointing  oil  which  consecrated  it  to 
Jehovali.    Jehovah  will  surely  deliver  those  who  are  in  covenant  relations  with  him 


202 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  xl  1—16. 


(comp.  ch.  xxxTii.  35).  The  reference  may  be  (1)  for  Hezekiah's  sake ;  (2)  for  David's 
sake;  (3)  for  Us  people's  sake;  (4)  for  Messiah's  sake.  The  passage  which  best 
explains  the  figure  of  the  text  i«  1  John  ii.  27 :  "  But  the  anointing  which  ye  have 
received  of  him  abideth  in  yon,  and  ye  need  not  that  any  man  teach  you :  but  as  the 
game  anointing  teacheth  you  of  all  things,  and  is  truth,  and  is  no  lie,  and  even  as  it 
hath  taught  you,  ye  shall  abide  iu  him,"  Taking  the  above  as  the  view  of  the  passnge, 
tlie  subject  set  before  us  is  this  :  A  man's  consecration  to  God  is  a  constant  considera- 
tion shaping  the  Divine  dealings.  Israel  was  an  anointed  race,  the  house  of  David 
was  an  anointed  family,  therefore  for  them  no  calamity  could  be  overwhelming;  all 
must  be  subject  to  gracious  Divine  mitigcitions,  and  all  must  be  made  rtmedial  in  their 
influence. 

I.  To  THE  "  ANOINTED "  BURDENS  AND  YOKES  MUST  OOMB.  1.  Becauso  they  are  not 
perfect.  2.  Because  they  are  being  perfected.  3.  Because  such  burdens  and  yokes  are 
precise  and  efficient  moral  agencies  in  the  work  of  perfecting.  (For  the  Christian 
setting  of  this  truth,  see  Heb.  xiL  4 — 11.) 

II.  On  the  "anointed"  burdens  and  yokes  cannot  stay.  Because,  having  a 
definite  object,  they  have  also  a  limited  time.  They  would  become  unmitigated  and 
useless  evils  If  they  remained  after  their  moral  purpose  had  been  wrought.  This  may 
be  applied  to  all  the  calamities  and  afflictions  of  life.  The  degree,  the  time,  the  form, 
are  all  in  strict  Divine  control.     In  fact,  all  affliction  is  "  but  for  a  moment." 

HI.  Fob  the  "  anointed  "  thebe  is  help  in  bearino  burdens  and  yokes  while 
they  must  stay.  God  is  with  all  loyal  Hebrew  youths  when  they  are  in  the  fires. 
"  When  thou  passest  through  the  water,  I  will  be  with  thee."  When  thorus  pierce, 
"  my  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee."  "  Therefore  we  may  boldly  say,  The  Lord  is  my 
Helper ;  I  will  not  fear  what  man  can  do  unto  me." — B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEK  XL 
Ven.  1 — ^9.— A  Renewed  Prophecy  of 
Messiah  and  op  hts  KiiNGDOM.  This  chapter 
is  cloHiily  coQuected  with  the  preceding. 
WUli  ibe  final  destruction  of  Assyria,  which, 
being  cut  down,  sends  out  no  snoot  (ch.  x. 
33, 34),  is  contrasted  the  recuperative  energy 
of  Israel,  which,  though  equally  levelled 
with  the  ground  (ch.  ix.  18, 19),  shall  spring 
afresh  into  life,  and  "renew  its  youth." 
The  recovery  is  connected — or  rather  identi- 
fied— Y.ith  the  coming  of  Messiah,  whose 
character  is  beautifully  portrayed  (vers. 
2 — 5).  An  elaborate  description  of  Messiah's 
kingdom  follows  (vers.  6 — 10) — an  expansion 
of  the  briefer  one  in  ch.  iL  ^  4. 

Ter.  1. — There  shall  oome  forth  a  rod  out 
of  the  stem  of  Jesse.  The  blasted  aud  ruined 
"  stem  "  or  stock  of  Jesse,  eut  down,  and  for 
ages  hidden  from  sight,  shall  suddenly  put 
forth  a  sprout — a  young  green  sapling, 
tender  yet  vigorous,  weak  seemingly,  yet 
full  of  life  (comp.  Job  xiv.  7 — 9,  "  There  is 
hope  of  a  tree,  if  it  be  cut  down,  that  it  will 
■prout  again,  and  that  the  tender  branch 
thereof  will  sot  cease.  Though  the  root 
thereof  wax  old  in  the  earth,  and  the 
stock  thereof  die  in  the  (rround ;  yet  through 


the  scent  of  water  it  will  bnd,  and  bring 
forth  boughs  like  a  plant ").  "  Tlie  stem  ol 
Jesse  "  must  mean  the  house  of  David,  for 
there  is  but  one  Jesse  {Ishai)  in  Scripture — 
David's  father.  A  Branch  shall  grow  out 
of  his  roots.  That  which  is  at  first  a  sapling 
gains  stren!,'th  and  grows  into  a  "  bianoh  " 
(see  ch.  iv.  2,  where  the  word  used,  though 
different,  is  synonymous). 

Ver.  2.— The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  rest 
upon  him  (cojnp.  IMatt.  iii.  16 ;  Luke  iL  40 ; 
iv.  1,  14,  18;  John  iii.  34,  etc.).  The 
human  nature  of  our  Lord  required,  and 
received  abundantly,  the  sanutifying  and 
enlightening  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
These  influences  were  not  in  him  transient 
or  occasional,  as  in  too  many  men,  who 
mnre  or  less  "  resist  tlie  Spirit,"  but  perma- 
nent and  enduring.  They  "rested  upon" 
him ;  from  first  to  last  never  quitted,  and 
never  will  quit, 'him.  The  spirit  of  wisdom 
and  understanding.  The  influences  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  are  manifold,  affecting  the 
entire  complex  nature  of  man  (see  1  Cor. 
xii.  8 — 11).  Here,  three  pairs  of  graces  are 
set  forth  as  specially  manifested  in  the 
Messiah  through  the  power  of  the  Spirit : 
(1)  "  Wisdom  and  understanding,"  or  intel- 
lectual and  moral  apprehension  {(vauv^ala), 
the  ability  to  perceive  moral  and  abstract 
truth;  (2)  ''counsel  and  miglit,"  or  the 
power  at  once  t»  scheme  and  originate,  and 


Oil.  i].  1—16,]        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH. 


203 


»180  to  carry  out  thought  into  act;  (3) 
'  The  kooWleUgo  and  the  fear  of  the  Lord," 
or  acquaintance  with  the  true  will  of  God, 
combined  with  the  ilcturniination  to  carry 
out  that  will  to  the  full  (John  iv.  34  ;  Luke 
xxii.  42  ;  Heb.  x.  7).  It  is  needless  to  say 
that  all  these  qualities  exi^ted  in  the 
greatest  perfection  in  our  blcKsed  Lord. 

Ver.  3.— And  shall  make  him  of  quick 
understanding.  This  rendering  <■■{  the 
ori>;inal,  though  defended  by  Dr.  Kay,  is 
quite  without  support  from  any  other  pas- 
ease  where  the  same  word  is  used.  Modern 
writers  almost  all  translate,  either  "  the 
breath  of  his  noslrils  shidl  be  in  the  fear 
of  the  Lord"  (Herder,  Ewald,  Meier, 
Cheyne),  or  "  a  sweet  savour  shall  he  find  in 
the  fear  of  the  Lord  "  (Gesenius,  Delitzsch, 
Eosenmiiller,  Knohel).  He  shall  not  judge 
after  the  sight  of  his  eyes.  "  God  seeth  the 
heart."  Our  I  lOrd  "  knew  men's  thoughts  " 
(Matt.  ix.  4,  etc.),  ami  therefore  did  not  need 
to  "judge  according  to  the  appearance" 
(John  Tu.  21).  Thus  his  judgments  were 
always  righteous. 

Ver.  4. — With  righteousness  shall  he 
judge  the  poor  (comp.  ch.  xxxii.  1,  -'A 
king  shall  reign  in  righteousness "). ,  It 
would  be  characteristic  of  the  Messiah's 
rule  that  the  poor  should  be  eared  for,  that 
oppression  should  cease,  and  judgment  be 
no  more  perverted  in  favour  of  the  rich. 
There  is  an  intended  contrast  between 
the  Messiah's  rule  in  this  respect,  and  that 
of  the  pj'inces  of  Judah  (oh.  i.  28 ;  iii.  15 ; 
I.  1,  2).  Christian  countries  still,  for  the 
most  part,  follow  their  Lord's  example  in 
this  particular,  if  in  no  other,  having  judges 
that  are  incorruptible,  and  tribunals  that 
are  free  from  any  leaning  against  the  poor. 
Eeprove ;  or,  plead  (as  in  Job  xvi.  21).  The 
meek  of  the  earth ;  rather,  the  Immhle,  or 
afflicted.  Low  condition,  not  meekness  of 
spirit,  is  what  the  word  used  expresses. 
He  shall  smite  the  earth.  A  slight  altera- 
tion of  the  text  produces  the  meaning,  Jie 
tliall  smite  the  terrible  one  (oomp.  ch.  xxix. 
20),  which  improves  the  parallelism  of  tlie 
clauses.  But  there  is  no  need  of  any 
alteration,  parallelism  in  Isaiah  being  often 
inciimplete.  The  Messiah  at  his  coming 
will  "  smite  the  earth  "  generally  (see  Mai. 
iv.  6,  and  comp.  Matt,  x,  34,  "  I  came  not 
to  send  peace  on  the  earth,  but  a  sword  "), 
and  will  also  especially  chastise  "  the 
wicked."  The  rod  of  his  mouth  .  .  .  the 
breath  of  his  lips.  "The  Word  of  God  is 
quick,  and  powerful,  and  sharper  than  any 
two-edged  sword,  piercing  even  to  the  divid- 
ing asunder  of  soul  and  spirit,  and  of  the 
"joints  and  marrow,  and  is  a  discerner  of 
the  thoughts  and  intents  of  tlje  heart "  (Heb. 
iv.  12).  The  sayings  of  Christ  pierce  the 
conscience  and  penetrate  the  soul  as  no 


other  words  that  ever  came  from  a  human 
mouth.  In  the  last  day  words  from  his 
mouth  will  consign  to  everlasting  life  or  to 
everlasting  destruction. 

Ver.  5. — Righteousness  shall  be  the  girdle 
of  his  loins,  etc. ;  t.e.  "  righteousness  shall 
be  ever  with  him,  ever  teady  for  active  use, 
ever  (as  it  were)  bracing  him  for  action." 
Assuredly,  he  was  "righteous  in  all  his 
ways,  and  holy  in  all  his  works  "  (Pa.  cxlv. 
17).  Faithfulness  (comp.  Eph.  vi.  14, 
"  Having  yuur loins  girt  about  with  truth"). 

Vers.  6 — y. — Messiah's  kingdom,  when 
fully  realized,  shall  be  one  of  perfect  peace. 
"  Thoy  shall  neither  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all 
his  holy  mountain."  Primarily,  no  doubt, 
the  passage  is  figurative,  and  points  to 
harmony  among  men,  who,  in  Messiah's 
kingdom,  shall  no  longer  prey  one  upon 
another  (see  especially  ver  9).  But,  from 
the  highest  spiritual  standpoint,  the  figure 
itself  becomes  a  reality,  and  it  is  seen  that, 
if  in  the  "new  heavens  and  new  earth" 
there  is  an  animal  creation,  it  will  be  fitting 
that  there  harmony  should  equally  prevaQ 
among  the  inferior  creation.  Human  sin 
may  not  have  introduced  rapine  and  violence 
among  the  beasts— at  least,  geologists  tell 
us  that  animals  preyed  one  upon  another 
long  before  the  earth  was  the  habitation  of 
man — but  still  man's  influence  may  prevail 
to  eradicate  the  beasts'  natural  impulses 
and  educate  them  to  something  higher. 
Already  domestication  produces  an  accord 
and  harmony  that  is  in  a  certain  sense 
against  nature.  May  not  this  be  carried 
further  in  the  course  of  ages,  and  Isaiah's 
picture  have  a  literal  fulfilment  ?  Jerome's 
scorn  of  the  notion  as  a  poetic  dream  has 
ahout  it  something  harsh  and  untender. 
Will  not  God  realize  all,  and  more  than  all, 
of  love  and  happiness  that  poets'  dreams  can 
reach  to? 

Ver.  6.— The  wolf  ...  the  leopard  .  .  . 
the  young  lion  ...  the  bear  are  the  only 
ferocious  animals  of  Palestine,  where  the 
tiger,  the  crocodile,  the  alligator,  and  the 
jaguar  are  unknown.  That  the  Palestinian 
bear  was  carnivorous,  and  a  danger  to  man, 
appears  by  Lam.  iii.  10 ;  Dan.  vii.  5 ;  Amos 
T.  19.  A  little  child  shall  lead  them.  Man's 
superiority  over  the  brute  creation  shall 
continue,  and  even  be  augmented.  The 
most  powerful  beasts  shall  submit  to  the 
control  of  a  child. 

Ver.  7. — The  lion  shall  eat  stiaw  (comp. 
ch.  Ixv.  25).  There  is  nothing  impossible 
in  this.  Cats  are  fond  of  some  kinds  of 
vegetable  food. 

Ver.  8. — The  sucking  child  shall  play  on 
the  hole  of  the  asp  ;  rather,  by  the  hole — near 
it.  The  "asp"  is  probably  the  Coluber 
Naje  of  Kgypt,  whose  bite  is  very  deadly. 
The  oookatrioe'  dea     The  "  cockatrice  "  ia 


204 


THE   BOOK   OF   TUB   PROPHET   ISAIAH.         [oh.  xl  1—16. 


aiiotliur  deadly  Bcrpent,  perhaps  the  Dahuia 
zanthina  (Tristram,  '  Natural  Hist,  of  the 
Bible'). 

Ver.  9. — ^My  holy  mountain.  Ab  the 
.lewiah  Church  is  always  bound  up  with  the 
"  holy  hill  of  Zion,"  so  the  Messianic  one 
receiTes  the  designation  of  "  tlie  mountain 
of  the  Lord  "  (oh.  ii.  3 ;  xxx.  29  ;  Micah  iv. 
2),  or  "  the  holy  mountain  "  (Zech.  viii.  3). 
What  was  physically  true  of  the  type  is 
transfeired  to  the  antitype,  which  is  "  a  city 
set  upon  a  hill"  in  a  certain  sense.  The 
earth  shall  he  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
Lord  (eomp.  Hab.  ii.  14  ;  Joel  ii.  28 ;  Slalt. 
xxviii.  29).  A  fruitful  knowledge,  guiding 
and  influencing  conduct,  seems  to  be  in- 
tended (see  below,  oh.  liv.  13,  "All  thy 
cliildren  shall  be  taught  of  the  Lord,  and 
trreat  shall  be  the  peace  of  tliy  children  "). 
As  the  waters  cover  the  sea;  i.e.  "as  the 
ocean  covers  and  fills  the  bed  prepared  for 
it." 

Vers.  10 — 13. — Thb  Jews  and  Gentii.e8 

SUALL  BE  QATHEBED  TOGETUEB  INTO  MES- 
SIAH'S Kingdom.  It  is  characteristic  of 
"  the  evangelical  prophet "  that  he  dwells 
earnestly  and  frequently  on  the  calling  of 
the  Gentiles  (see  ch.  ii.  2 ;  xix.  22 — 25 ; 
XIV.  6;  ixvii.  18,  etc.).  The  prophecies  to 
Abraham  had  repeatedly  declared  that  "  in 
him,"  or  "  in  his  seed,"  "  all  the  families  of 
the  earth  should  be  blessed"  (Gen.  xii.  3; 
xviiL  18;  xxii.  18;  xxvi.  4);  and  some  of 
the  psalmists  had  echoed  the  glad  sound 
and  spoken  of  God  as  worshipped  generally 
by  "  the  nations  "  (Ps.  cxvii.  1 ;  cxlviii.  11). 
But  the  idea  had  taken  little  hold  upon  the 
chosen  people  generally ;  and  was  practi- 
cally new  to  them  when  Isaiah  was  in- 
Kpired  to  preach  it  afresh.  To  render  it 
the  more  palatable,  he  unites  with  it  the 
j>romise  of  a  great  gathering  of  the  dispersed 
Israelites  from  all  quarters  to  the  banner  of 
Messiah,  when  it  is  set  up. 

Ver.  10. — There  shall  he  a  root  of  Jesse. 
The  "  root "  of  this  place  is  the  same  as  the 
"rod"  and  "brauch"  of  ver.  1.  The 
"  rod  "  springs  up  out  of  •  "  root,"  and  ii 
inseparably  connected  with  it.  'Whioh  shall 
stand  for  an  ensign  of  the  people;  ratlier, 
0/  the  mopla.  The  "  rod  "  shall  lift  itself 
up,  «nd  become  an  ensign,  seen  from  afar, 
and  attracting  to  itself  the  attention  of 
"th»  peoples"  or  "nations"  generally.  The 
Act*  and  Epistles  show  how  speedily  this 
pr(i|iheoy  was  fulfilled.  Greeks,  Romans, 
Oalatians,  Cappadociaiis,  Babylonians  (1 
Pet.  V.  13),  saw  the  ensigu,  and  sought  to 
it.  His  rest  shall  be  glorious;  rather,  hia 
rettiny-place ;  Le.  his  Church,  with  which 


he  abides  for  ever  (Matt,  xxviii.  20).  The 
Shechinah  of  his  presence  makes  the  Church 
"glorious"  (literally,  "a  glory")  through- 
out all  ages;  but  the  glory  will  not  fully 
appear  till  the  time  of  the  "  new  heavens 
and  new  earth "  (ch.  Ixv.  17 ;  Eev.  xxi., 
xxii.),  when  he  will  dwell  visibly  with  it. 

Ver.  11. — The  Lord  shall  set  his  hand 
again  the  second  time  to  recover,  etc.  The 
flist  recovery  was  from  the  servitude  in 
Egypt.  Isaiah  now  foresees  that  there  will 
be  a  dispersion  of  the  Israelites  through 
several  dibtant  lands,  instiad  of  a  mere 
transference  of  them  from  one  land  to 
another,  as  in  Jacob's  time  (Gen.  xlvi.  1 — 
29).  God,  who  brought  them  out  of  Kgypt, 
will  likewise  some  day  "  set  his  hand "  to 
recover  them  from  the  various  countries 
through  which  they  will  have  been  dis- 
perse I,  and  rest'ire  them  to  their  own  land 
once  mere.  The  first  fulfilment  of  the 
prophecy  was  undoubtedly  the  return  from 
the  biibylonian  captivity.  A  secondary 
fulfilment  may  have  been  the  gutiiering  of 
so  many  Jews  from  all  quarters  into  the 
Christian  Church  (Acts  ii.  9 — 41).  It  is 
pobsible  that  there  may  be  ultimately  a 
further  fulfilment  in  a  final  gathering 
together  of  Israel  into  their  own  laud. 
From  Assyria,  Assyria  is  placed  first  be- 
cause already  the  bulk  of  the  Israelites,  as 
distinct  from  the  Jews,  had  been  carried 
into  Assyria  by  Tiglath-Pileser  (2  Kings 
IV.  29)  and  Sargou  (2  Kings  xvii.  6;  xviii. 
11),  and  were  captives  there  at  the  time 
when  Isaiah  wrote.  The  transportation  of 
Israelitus  to  the  other  places  mentioned 
was  subsequent  to  his  day.  Egypt  .  .  . 
Fathros.  There  was  a  greut  migration  of 
Jews  into  Egypt  in  the  time  of  Jeremiah 
(xliii.  7 ;  xliv.  1),  and  a  steady  infiuz 
for  some  generations  under  the  early 
Ptolemies.  There  was  also  a  second  la'rge 
migration  in  the  time  of  Onias.  The 
Jewish  element  in  Alexandria  for  some 
centuries  both  before  and  after  Christ  was 
very  considerable.  Pathros  was  probably 
a  portion  of  Upper  Egypt,  perhaps  the 
Pnuturite  nome,  which  was  the  district 
about  Thebes.  It  is  meutioued  as  the 
residence  of  certain  Jews  in  the  time  of 
Jeremiah  (xliv.  1,  15).  Tram  Cnsh, 
"Gush"  here  may  be  either  the  African 
or  the  Asiatic.  It  is  slightly  in  favour  of 
the  African  that  we  hear  in  the  Acts  of  an 
Ethiopian  eunuch  who  was  a  Jew  in  the 
service  of  Candace,  Queen  of  the  African 
Ethiopia  (Acts  viii.  27).  And  it  is  against 
the  Asiatic  that  it  was  so  remote.  It  ad- 
joined, however,  upon  Elam.  From  Elam, 
and  from  Shinar.  "  Klam  "  was  the  fertile 
tract  of  alluvial  land  to  the  east  of  the 
Tigris,  between  that  stream  and  the  moun- 
tains, parallel  with  Babylonia.    Its  capital 


OH.  XI.  1—16.]         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


205 


was  Snga,  and  in  Isaiah's  lirao  it  was  an 
Important  country,  frequently  at  war  with 
Assyria.  Shinar  was  an  ancient  name  of 
Babylonia  (Gen.  X.  10  ;  xi.l — 9).  The  word 
is  used  also  by  Daniel  (i.  2)  and  Zechariah 
(v.  11).  Some  regard  it  as  meaning  "  the 
land  of  the  two  riven."  From  Hamath. 
(On  this  town,  see  note  to  oh.  x.  9.)  From 
the  islands  of  the  sea ;  i.e.  the  islands 
and  coasts  of  the  Mediterranean.  During 
the  Maccabee  period,  there  was  a  gradual 
spread  of  Jews  over  the  Western  world. 
Alliances  were  made  with  Rome  and  Sparta 
(1  Maco.  viii.  1;  xii.  2—21;  .\iy.  20—23, 
etc.),  and  Jews  became  fumiliar  with  both 
Greece  and  Italy.  St.  Piiul  finds  numerous 
Jews  at  Rome,  and  in  almost  every  city  of 
Greece. 

Ver.  12.— He  shall  set  up  an  ensign  for 
the  nations  (comp.  ver.  10).  Chiist  is  the 
Ensign.  God  .sels  it  up  to  draw  the  uations 
to  his  standaiil.  The  outoasts  of  Israel  .  .  . 
the  dispersed  of  Judah.  '•  Outcusts  "  is  mas- 
culine, "  tho  dispersed"  feminine.  The 
meaning  is,  "  He  shall  gather  toget)ier  the 
outcasts  and  dispersed  of  both  Israel  and 
Judah,  both  male  and  female." 

Ver.  13.— The  envy  also  of  Ephraim 
•haU  depart.  In  the  kingdom  of  the  Piiuce 
of  Peace  there  shall  no  longer  be  quunels 
or  jealousies  among  the  members.  Old 
fcucls  shall  bi-  put  aside;  the  northern  and 
southern  tribes  shall  agree  tnj>;ether,  and 
there  shall  be  jieace  and  harmony  through- 
out the  entire  Church.  Adversaries  of 
Judah.  If  any  such  remain  among  the 
Ephraimites,  Divine  vengeance  sliall  "  cut 
them  off,"  that  there  be  no  open  disturbance 
of  the  harmony. 

Vers.    14 — 16.  —  Thb    United    Chvboh 

BHALL  TRIUMPH  OVBB  ITS  EnBMIES.      PhTSI- 

OiiL  Obstacles  to  its  Union  God  will 
BEHOVE.  Israel's  most  persistent  enemies 
had  been  the  border-nations  of  the  Philis- 
tines, the  Edomites,  the  Arabs,  Moab  and 
Ammon.  These  are  now  taken  as  ty[]e3 
of  the  enemies  i:f  the  Church,  and  victory 
over  them  is  promised  (ver.  14).  A  further 
promise  is  made  that  physical  di£9cultiei 


•hall  not  prevent  the  return  of  the  Jewish 
exiles  from  distant  countries  (vers.  15,  16). 

Ver.  14.  —  They  shall  fly  upon  the 
shoulders  of  the  Philistines.  It  is  not  to  be 
supposed  that  actual  war  is  intended.  The 
subjects  of  the  Prince  of  Peace  will  not 
draw  the  sword.  But  the  Church  will  for 
many  centuries  be  confronted  by  enemies, 
and  must  contend  vrith  them  with  legiti- 
mate weapons.  It  is  this  warfare  of  which 
Isaiah  now  speaks.  The  united  Clmrch 
will  be  strong  enough  to  assail  lier  enemies 
on  all  sides,  and  will  "  swoop "  upon  the 
border-country  of  the  Philistines  like  a  bird 
of  prey.  They  shall  spoil  them  of  tho  east ; 
or,  the  Beni  Kedem.  The  phrase  is  com- 
monly used  in  an  ethnic  sense  of  the 
nomadic  Arabs  inhabiting  the  ileserts  east 
of  Jordan,  beyond  the  Amraonile  anl 
Moabite  country,  from  whose  raids  Palestine 
frequently  suffered  (see  Jer.  xlix.  28,  29 ; 
Ezek.  XXV.  4,  10). 

Ver.  15. — The  Lord  shall  utterly  destroy ; 
rather,  slidll  lay  under  a  curse  (Aquilu, 
afaee/xaTiaei).  Tho  tongue  of  the  Egyntian 
sea.  Either  the  Gulf  of  Suez  or  that  of 
Akabah.  God  shall  do  away  witli  those 
obstacles  which  keep  the  nations  apart  and 
prevent  ready  intercourse.  Both  gulfs  are 
thought  t»  have  extended  anciently  con- 
siderably further  inland  than  they  do  at 
present.  With  his  mighty  wind  ;  rather,witt 
the  might  of  his  breath  (in  forfitudine  spiritus 
sui,  Vulgate).  Shall  he  shake  his  hand. 
A  gesture  of  menace  (comp.  ch.  x.  32). 
Over  tho  river.  "  The  rivei  "  (han-nahar) 
is,  as  usually,  the  Euphrates,  Ihe  great  river 
of  Western  Asia.  And  amite  it  in  the  seven 
streams ;  rather,  and  smite  it  into  seven 
streams;  i.e.  divide  its  waters  am'mg  seven 
channels,  so  tliat  it  may  be  readily  forded, 
and  cease  to  be  a  barrier.  Dry-shod ; 
liter.iUy,  in  their  shoe* ;  i.e.  without  taking 
them  off. 

Ver.  16. — There  shall  be  an  highway. 
This  is  the  object  in  view — tho  free  and 
unhindered  passage  of  his  people  from  the 
various  regions  where  they  are  scattered 
(ver.  11)  to  their  resting-place  in  Palestine. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  spiritual  nature  of  Messiah's  perfections.  It  was  certainly  not 
from  Isaiah  that  the  Jews  derived  their  notion  that  the  Messiah  would  be  a  mighty 
temporal  prince,  the  leader  of  armies,  who  would  break  the  yoke  of  Kome  from  ofl 
their  shoulders,  and  give  them  dominion  over  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  leaiah 
does,  indeed,  announce  him  as  a  King  (ch.  xxxii.  1),  and  could  do  no  less,  since  he  was 
indeed  "  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords."  But  he  ever  puts  forward  his  spiritual 
character,  his  influence  over  men  as  a  Teaclier,  his  moral  and  mental  excellences. 
Messiah's  qualifications  for  his  high  office  (as  here  enumerated)  are — 

L  Hl8  POSSESSION  OF  wisiWM.     "  Wisdom  "  here  may  be  that  transcendental  quality 


206  THE    BOOK   OF    THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.        [ch.  xi.  1— 16. 

whereby  God  "  established  the  heavens  "  (Prov.  iii.  19 ;  viii.  27) ;  or  possibly  that  still 
more  recondite  faculty  which  Jehovah  "  possessed  in  the  beginning  of  his  way,  before 
his  works  of  old "  (Prov.  viii.  22).  Being  distinguished  from  "  understanding," 
"  counsel,"  and  "  knowledge  of  God,"  it  must  apparently  be  supra-mundane  and  abstract 
— a  power  of  which  it  is  diGBcult  for  man  to  form  a  conception.  Its  sphers  cannot  be 
human  life  or  mundane  affairs,  but  the  purely  intellectual  world  of  supra-seasuous  ideas 
and  concepts. 

II.  His  possession  of  trNDEEsTANDiNO.  By  "  understanding "  seems  to  be  meant 
moral  intelligence — the  power  of  appreciating  the  moral  character,  and  judging  aright 
the  moral  conduct  of  others.  Our  Lord  possessed  this  quality  in  the  most  eminent 
degree,  never  misjudging  the  character  or  conduct  of  any  one.  His  unerring  insight 
gave  him  an  absolute  fitness  to  be  the  final  Judge  of  men,  but  was  far  beyond  what  is 
needed  by  any  eartlily  ruler  or  king. 

III.  His  possession  of  the  spirit  of  counsel.  Here,  no  doubt,  is  a  quality  of 
which  a  temporal  ruler  has  need ;  but  it  was  not  as  a  temporal  ruler,  or  for  the  most 
part  in  temporal  matters,  that  our  Lord's  counsel  was  given.  The  maxims  of  his  lips 
were  not  maxiins  of  worldly  policy,  but  such  as  these :  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of 
God,  and  his  righteousness ;  "  "  Take  no  thought  for  the  morrow ; "  "  Sell  all  that  thou 
hast,  and  give  to  the  poor,"  and  the  like.  He  counselled  men  for  their  spiritual  rather 
than  for  their  worldly  good,  with  a  view  to  a  spiritual  and  not  a  temporal  kingdom. 

IV.  His  possession  of  might.  "Might,"  or  ability  to  execute  his  designs,  is,  again, 
a  quality  of  high  value  to  an  earthly  ruler ;  and  had  our  Lord  used  his  might  for  earthly 
ends,  he  might  easily  have  been  all,  and  more  than  all,  that  the  Jews  expecti'd.  But 
he  ever  restrained  himself  from  any  exhibition  of  physical  strength,  or  power  of 
organization,  or  even  of  persuasive  eloquence,  exhibiting  his  might  only  for  spiritual 
ends,  in  miracles  of  mercy,  whereby  he  sought  to  win  men's  souls  to  himself,  or  once 
and  a^;ain  in  miracles  of  power,  shown  forth  as  evidences  of  his  mission. 

V.  His  possession  of  knowledge  of  God.  None  could  know  God's  wiU  so  well 
as  he,  who  "  was  in  the  beginning  with  God,  and  was  God  "  (.John  i.  1).  Partaker  from 
everlasting  of  his  Father's  counsels,  the  instrument  whereby  the  Father  worked  in 
bringing  all  things  into  being  (Heb.  i.  2),  he  had  sounded  all  the  depths  of  that 
nature  which  he  had  In  common  with  the  Father,  and  knew  even  as  he  was  known. 
This  was  spiritual  knowledge  of  the  highest  kind,  and  enabled  him  to  be  man's  perfect 
spirit\ial  Guide,  capable  of  setting  before  him  the  true  and  "  perfect  will  of  God  " 
(Rom.  xii.  2)  as  none  other  ever  was,  or  will  be,  capable. 

VI.  His  possession  of  the  fear  of  God.  "  Fear "  in  the  Son  is  doubtless  so 
mingled  with  love  as  to  be  something  very  different  even  from  the  fear  which  the  angels 
feel,  when  they  veil  their  faces  before  the  throne.  But  the  words  "  Father  "  and  "  Son  " 
imply  authority  and  submission,  awfulness  and  reverence.  And  the  huriian  nature  of 
Christ  had  the  same  experience  of  the  "  fear  of  God  "  as  belongs  to  his  perfected  saints, 
whether  in  earth  or  heaven  (Ps.  xix.  9;  xxxiv.  9;  Eccles.  xii.  13,  etc.).  "Who  shall 
not  fear  thee,  O  Lord,  an(i  glorify  thy  Name  ?"  Messiah's  "  fear  "  brought  forth  that 
perfect  obedience  which  made  him  "holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  sinners" 
(Heb.  vii.  26),  and  constituted  him  at  once  our  perfect  Pattern  and  our  meritorious 
Sacrifice. 

Vers.  10,  12. — God's  mercy  in  bringing  the  Oentiles  into  his  kingdom.  In  the  old 
world,  when  " all  flesh  had  coirnpted  his  way  upon  the  earth,"  God  sent  forth  a  fierce 
destruction,  and  swept  away  the  entiie  human  race,  excepting  eight  persons.  After  the 
Flood  he  promised,  of  his  own  I'ree  grace,  that  he  would  never  so  destroy  mankind 
again  (Gen.  ix.  11 — 15).  But  it  was  open  to  him 'to  have  sent  upon  the  world  somi 
other  equally  severe  visitation,  and  to  have  once  more  rid  the  earth  of  "  a  seed  uf  evil- 
doers." The  general  coiTuption  of  the  Gentile  world,  when  Christ  came,  was  excessive. 
It  is  scarcely  possible  that  the  corruption  of  the  antediluvians  can  have  been  j;reater. 
As  a  moderu  historian  sums  up  his  account  of  heathendom  at  the  coming  of  Christ 
"  Corruption  had  attained  its  full  tide  at  the  commencement  of  the  second  centurv. 
V^ices  gnawed  at  the  marrow  of  nations,  and,  above  all,  of  the  Romans :  their  national 
existence  was  more  than  menaced ;  the  moral  sickness  had  become  a  physical  one  in 
its, effects — a  »ubtle  poison  penetratmg  into  the  vitals  of  the  state ;  and,  a.-  before  in  t'u;; 


OH.  XI.  1—16.]         THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  207 

sanguinary  civil  wars,  so  now  the  lords  of  the  world  seemed  minded  to  destroy  them- 
selves by  their  vices.  Men  were  denuded  of  all  that  was  really  good,  and,  suiTounded 
on  all  sides  by  the  thick  clouds  of  a  blinded  conscience,  they  caught  with  wild  eagerness 
at  the  grossest  sensual  enjoyments,  in  the  wild  tumult  of  which  they  plunged  to  intoxica- 
tion "  (DoUinger,  'Jew  and  Gentile,' vol.  ii.  pp.  284,285,  Eng.  Trans.).  Or  take  St. 
Paul's  account  of  the  condition  of  the  heathen  when  he  began  his  preaching :  "  As  men 
did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge,  God  frave  them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind, 
to  do  those  things  which  are  not  convenient ;  being  filled  with  all  unrighteousness,  forni- 
cation, wickedness,  covetousness,  maliciousness ;  full  of  envy,  murder,  deceit,  debate, 
malignity ;  whisperers,  backbiters,  haters  of  God,  despiteful,  proud,  boasters,  inventors 
of  evil  things,  disobedient  to  parents,  without  understanding,  covenant-breakers,  without 
natural  affection,  implacable,  unmerciful :  who  knowing  the  judgment  of  God,  that 
they  which  commit  such  things  are  worthy  of  death,  not  only  do  the  same,  but  have 
pleasure  in  them  that  do  them  "  (Rom.  i.  28 — 32).  Yet,  instead  of  destroying  this 
polluted  race,  God  had  compassion  on  them,  and  went  out  of  his  way  to  seek  them. 

L  He  lifted  ■dp  Ghkist  to  them  as  an  Ensign  from  afar.  By  the  manifes- 
tation of  Christ's  character  in  the  Gospels,  he  set  them  up  a  Pattern  which  they  could 
net  but  admire,  which  drew  them  irresistibly  by  its  purity  and  loveliness,  made  them 
hate  themselves,  and  brought  them  low  on  their  knees  before  his  footstool. 

II.  He  offered  his  gospel  freely  to  them  from  the  first.  "  Go,  disciple  ye 
aU  nations,  baptizing  them ; "  "  Preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature ; "  "  He  that 
believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  There  was  no  limit,  no  favouritism;  no  offe: 
of  salvation  only  to  those  who  had  acted  up  to  their  previous  light. 

III.  He    raised     up    a     special     teacher,    SPECIALLT     qualified,     to    BK     "  THE 

apostle  op  the  Gentiles."  What  impression  Christianity  would  have  made  on  the 
Gentile  world  without  St.  Paul,  or  some  one  similarly  qualified,  it  is  difficult  to  say. 
Conceivably,  it  might  have  taken  merely  the  dimensions  of  a  Jewish  sect,  which  believed 
that  the  Messiah  had  come.  St.  Paul,  raised  up  for  the  purpose,  lifted  it  above  the 
sphere  of  Jewish  coutroversy  into  world-wide  consideration.  Teaching  personally  at 
Antioch,  at  Ephesus,  at  Athens,  at  Corinth,  at  Rome,  disputing  with  philosophers, 
convening  members  of  Csesar's  household,  he  gave  it  a  position  among  the  religions  of 
the  world  which  could  not  he  ignored  by  later  educated  inquirers.  The  apostle  of  the 
Gentiles  spread  Christianity  from  Syria  to  Rome,  perhaps  to  Spain,  and  gave  it  that 
hold  upon  the  attention  of  the  educated  classes  which  secured,  under  God's  blessing,  its 
ultimate  triumph. 

Ver.  14. —  The  Church's  triumph  over  its  enem  ies.  The  Church  of  God  will  always  have 
its  enemies,  both  internal  and  external,  and  its  external  enemies  will  from  time  tc  time 
gather  their  hosts,  and  unite  themselves  together,  and  threaten  it  with  destruction.  Great 
was  Israel's  peril,  and  great  her  fear,  when  her  enemies  "consulted  together  with  one 
consent,  and  were  confederate  against  her :  the  tabernacles  of  Edom,  and  the  Ishmael- 
ites;  of  Moab,  and  the  Hagarenes;  Gebal,  and  Ammon,  and  Amalek;  the  Philistines 
with  the  inhabitants  of  Tyre ;  Asshur  also  joining  them,  and  helping  the  children  of 
Lot "  (Ps.  Lxxxiii.  5 — 8).  Yet  the  danger  passed,  the  confederacy  failed,  the  various 
nations  were  "  confounded  and  troubled  ;  they  were  put  to  shame  and  perished  "  (Ps. 
lxxxiii.  17).  So  it  is  with  the  Church.  Our  Lord  has  promised  that "  the  gates  of  hell 
shall  not  prevail  against  it "  (Matt.  xvi.  18)  ;  and  consequently  its  enemies  labour  in 
•  vain  to  effect  its  destruction.     The  Church  may  have  confidence — 

I.  Since  Christ  is  her  Head.  She  is  "his  Church,"  "built  by  him,"  "upon  a 
Eock,"  i.e.  himself;  purchased  by  him  with  his  own  blood;  loved  and  cherished  and 
purifiled  by  him,  that  she  may  be  presented  to  him  "  without  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any 
such  thing  " — his  city,  his  body,  his  bride. 

II.  Since  she  has  a  sure  word  of  promise.  1.  In  the  statement,  "  Lo,  I  am  with 
you  always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world  "  (Matt,  xxviii.  20).  2.  In  the  passage 
concerning  the  gates  of  hell.  3.  In  the  clear  declarations  of  the  apocalyptic  vision, 
which  show  her  ultimate  triumph. 

HI.  Since  she  has  passed  through  perils  as  great  as  ant  that  can  hereafteb 
assail  her.  1.  The  peril  of  the  imperial  persecutions  (Koro,  Diocletian,  Galerius, 
Julian).     2.  The  peril  of  the  barbarian  inva-ions  (Goths,  Huns,  VaiiJ.i's,  etc.).     S.  The 


208  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PBOPllET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  h.  1—16 

peril  of  Mohammedanism.  4.  The  peril  of  the  dark  a^es.  5.  The  peril  involved  in 
unlimited  private  judgment.  6.  The  peril  of  the  French  Ruvohition.  Half  a  Bcore  of 
times  has  she  seemed  on  the  poiut  of  succumbing;  but  uach  time  that  ihe  ia  atnick  to 
the  ground,  she  rises,  like  Antseus,  refreshed  and  rcitivigorateJ, 


HOMILIES  BY   VAKIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 9. —  TTie  coming  <^  the  Messiah.  I.  His  origin.  "  From  Ishafs  worn  stem 
a  shoot  will  sprout  forth,  and  a  green  branch  burst  forth  from  his  roots."  From  the 
stock  of  David,  now  fallen  very  low,  the  coming  Deliverer  will  arise  in  all  the  vigour 
of  youth.  Seldom  does  the  great  man  come  but  of  some  pure  and  generous  strain  oi 
blood.  Like  some  stream  which,  long  hidden  underground,  reappears  auain  in  the 
daylight,  or  some  vein  of  precious  ore,  recovered  after  some  extensive  "  fault,"  so  it  was 
believed  the  royal  race  and  the  spiritual  prowess  of  David  might  bo  obscured  for  ages, 
but  must  be  illustrated  btfore  the  world  again.  As  God  saves  and  blesses  the  world  by 
meaos  of  great  men,  so  in  a  measure  is  this  true  of  houses,  fiirailies,  tribes,  and  nations. 
There  is  a  principle  of  providential  selection  running  thruugh  life.  Though  men  be  of 
one  blood  in  all  their  tribes,  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  there  are  dilTeretit  qualities  in 
that  blood.  Hence  nohlesse  oblige,  and  great  endowments  make  great  expectations  and 
imply  great  responsibilities.  The  thouglit  of  the  seeming  extinction,  yet  destined 
revival  of  David's  house,  may  remind  us  of  the  imptrishableuess  of  the  germs  of  good. 
David's  house  was  never  restored  to  the  tlir<me  in  the  visible  sense.  Yet  the  memory 
of  David  persisted,  begot  hope,  inspired  jiatience,  and  was  gradually  converted  into  one 
of  the  mightiest  of  spiritual  forces  in  the  conscience  of  ilie  nation.  An  idea  may  pass 
through  many  changes  of  form,  but  it  dies  not  so  long  as  the  laith  and  passion  of  the 
heart  in  which  it  sprung  are  living. 

II.  His  spiiUT.  In  the  religious  mode  of  thought  a  true  temper  of  the  mind  is  to  be 
traced  to  Divine  inspiration,  no  less  than  the  great  physical  or  mental  ability.  What 
meaning  lies  in  our  common  expressions,  "  a  gift,"  "  an  endowment,"  "a  talent,"  "  an 
influence"!  None  of  them  but  is  deeply  religious,  if  we  trace  them  to  their  primary 
felt  significance.  Ujwn  this  chosen  one  there  "  rests  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah."  And  three 
characters,  in  the  iterative  idiom  of  the  Hebrew,  are  given  of  this  spirit.  It  is  that  (1) 
of  wisdom,  (2)  of  courage,  (3)  of  reverence.  The  qualities  of  the  statesman,  the  soldier, 
the  man  of  God.  "  His  breathing  is  in  Jehovah's  fear."  There  can  be  no  simpler  nor 
stronger  expression  of  a  man  thoroughly  "  animated,"  as  we  say,  by  religious  principle. 
And  (4)  he  has  the  attributes  ol  the  just  judge.  Prompt  to  redress  the  injuries  of  the 
oppressed  and  suffering,  his  rule  of  conduct  is  not  the  pleasure  of  his  eyes  and  ears,  but 
the  eternal  equity  of  him  who  is  no  r-es])ecter  of  persons.  As  the  cousequence  of  thus 
vitally  living  in  communion  with  God  as  in  the  common  and  necessary  air  he  breathes, 
he  possi  sses  irresistible  strength.  His  mere  word  of  judgment  smites  the  earth  more 
powerfully  than  the  desput's  sceptre,  while  his  mere  breatli  destroys  the  wicked  like 
a  pestilence.  In  a  word,  it  is  a  sublime  picture  of  moral  majesty.  This  King  needs  not 
the  weapons  of  ordinary  warfare.  He  has  a  better  defence  of  his  throne  than  swords 
and  spears,  a  better  battle-array  than  the  suit  of  armour.  Justice  and  faithfulness 
themselves  are  his  best,  his  only  preparations. 

III.  The  blessings  of  his  kule.  There  will  be  a  marvellous  growth  of  peac«  and 
prosperity.  The  progress  of  true  culture  is  marked  by  the  subduing  of  savagery.  The 
wild  animals  change  their  nature  and  become  harmless  to  mankind.  Wickedness  is 
ferocious  ;  men's  untamed  passions  are  like  the  wolf,  the  bear,  and  the  deadly  serjient. 
There  will  be  no  sin  nor  sinners  in  Zion,  because  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  will 
be  all-diilused  and  all-inexhaustible  as  the  ocean.  To  what  state  of  life  do  these  pre- 
dictions refer?  To  the  advent  of  Christ  and  his  kingdom  ?  Certainly ;  an.i  yet  when 
Christ  came,  not  only  did  not  universal  peace  set  in,  but  the  light  of  Zion  and  tlin 
glories  of  the  sacred  city  were  quenched  iu  blood.  And  Christ  himself  opened  up  a 
gloomy  perspective  of  the  future  in  his  closing  propliecies.  Wheie,  then,  and  when  this 
scene  of  bUss?  Lot  us  content  ourselves  with  believing  that  the  prophecy  refers  to 
some  state  to  us  unknown.  Earth  will  be  earth,  and  not  heaveu.  This  heaven  u  in 
the  soul  first ;  thure  w«  dream  of  it,  nay,  we  reidize  it  a&  y/o  listen  to  the  prophet's 


OH.  XJL 1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  20'. 

glowing  words,  and  believe  that  bat  a  step  may  carry  us  into  a  world  whifve  it  is  rea.lisied 
by  nil.  The  prophecy  is  already  fulQUed  for  us  if  God  has  made  a  boaveD  of  hope  in 
^)iif  hearts. — J. 

Vers.  10 — 16.— T/udoA  and  the  nations.  I.  Honoub  to  the  hoot  or  Ji'dah.  The 
scion  from  the  ancient  trunk  will  be  honoured  far  and  wide  among  the  luathon,  because 
of  those  virtues  already  desciibod  in  the  preceding  section.  It  will  be  a  lianner  to 
which  they  will  flock,  a  centre  of  light  and  living  oracles. 

II.  Rkdemption  of  the  uemnant.  The  mighty  hand  of  Jeliovali  will  be  stretched 
forth  to  guther  the  scattered  ones  from  all  the  four  quarters  of  thoii-  disiiergion.  When 
the  banner  is  raised,  the  heathen  will  own  its  power  and  the  captives  vVill  be  released. 

III.  Internal  unity.  The  two  great  tribes  will  remain  side  by  side,  but  then 
enmity  will  cease.  The  recent  destruction  of  Samaria  had  been  caused  by  that  enmil^  ; 
which  ceasing,  it  will  be  found  that  union  is  strength,  and  the  natiims  will  submit  on 
the  West  and  East.  And  those  great  threatening  neighbours,  Egyi)t  ai'd  Assyiia,  will 
feel  the  weight  of  Jehovah's  hand  and  the  punishment  which  the  word  of  his  mouth 
inflicts.  And  as  the  great  liver  is  smitten  into  seven  fordable  streams,  the  company  of 
pilt;rims  will  flow  back,  a  way  made  for  them  by  the  hand  of  their  Gud,  as  in  the  days 
of  their  forefathers,  and  the  exodus  from  Egypt.  The  scion  from  the  old  stump  mi^  be 
taken  as  a  figure  of  the  revival  of  true  religion  in  times  of  decay.  And  such  revival 
means  the  union  of  long-sundered  hearts,  the  recognition  of  an  internal  unity  among 
all  the  faithful,  the  restoration  of  influence,  and  the  dismay  of  the  ungudly  world. — J. 

Ver.  10. — 77ie  rest  of  Christ.  "And  his  rest  shall  be  gloiious,"  This  chapter 
commences  with  the  full  Messianic  strain.  "  There  shall  come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the 
stem  of  Jesse  j "  and  the  music  swells,  in  the  Hebrew  rhythm  of  thought,  into  a  sublime 
prophecy  of  the  reign  of  Christ.  This  "root  of  Jesse"  is  to  be  "an  ensign  of  the 
people,"  and  "  to  it  shall  the  Gentiles  seek."  We  are  thn»  led  to  understand  the  words, 
"his  rest,"  as  applying  to  the  triumph  of  the  Saviour. 

I.  Man V  IDEAS  oit  fobms  of  rest  aub  inglorious.  They  are  connected  with  uiere 
military  conquest.  There  is  the  peace  of  subjection,  or  there  is  the  peace  of  cuni|iromise, 
or  there  is  the  peace  which  belongs  to  the  desert  and  the  wilderness,  when  they  are  simply 
let  alone.  But  Christ's  peace  is  his  own  beautiful  peace  of  nature.  "My  jH'dce  I  give 
unto  you."  His  rest  is  nut  artiticial.  It  is  the  rest  of  holy  expectation.  He  sees  of 
the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  is  satisfied. 

II.  This  OLOWT  18  PROSPECTIVE  AS  WELL  AS  PRESENT.  It "  shall  bo  glorious."  The 
golden  age  of  the  gospel  is  in  the  future.  "  From  henceforth  expecting  ; "  "  He  must 
reign."  It  will  be  a  glorious  rest.  For  truth  will  conquer  error.  Riglit  will  conquer 
mi^iht.  Love  will  have  victory  over  all  forms  of  division  and  hate.  It  shall  be;  for 
Christ  hath  spuken  it.  It  shall  be ;  for  he  has  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth.  Ii  shall 
be  on  spiritual  grounds;  for  the  mightiest  moral  force  ever  and  always  triumphs  in 
the  end. 

III.  This  best  of  Christ  is  our  rest  too.  We  have  not  only  received  forgiveness 
through  the  cross,  but  newness  of  life  as  wdl.  We  have  rest  now,  not  in  its  fulness, 
but  in  its  ideal ;  for  we  have  the  mind  of  Christ,  We  have  within  us  the  kingdom  and 
patience  of  Christ ;  we  are  one  with  the  Father  through  Christ.  "  I  in  them,  and 
thou  in  me,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  oue." — W.  il.  S. 

Vera.  1— ^. — Characteristics  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  expression  of  the  prophet,  "  The 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  rest  upon  him,"  has  a  very  close  correspondence  with  the  New 
Testament  references  to  Jesus  Christ  (Matt.  iii.  16 ;  Luke  iv.  1, 14, 18 ;  John  iii.  34). 
This  full  i>ossession  by  our  Lord  of  the  Spirit  of  God  revealed  itself,  and  is  still  found, 
m  these  particulars  which  the  prophecy  indicates. 

L  His  PEUFEOT  PIETY.  lu  him  dwelt  the  "fear  of  the  Lord"  without  measure 
( ver.  2),  and  he  "  dcliglited  in  the  fear  of  Jehovah  ; "  "  the  fear  of  Jehovah  was  fragrance 
to  him"  (emended  readings  for,  "and  shall  make  him  of  quick  understanding,"  etc., 
ver.  3).  He  could  say,  "  1  delight  to  do  thy  will  .  .  .  yea,  thy  Lavi  is  within  my 
heart"  (Pb.  xl.  8).  To  reverence,  to  please,  to  obey  God,  to  consul*  his  will  and  he 
subject  to  it,  was  the  law  of  his  life  and  the  iefrosliuici;t  of  bis  spirit. 

iPAuu,  r 


210  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PRUPHKT  ISAIAH,        [oh.  ii.  1—16 

II.  His  intuitive  pebobption  of  thb  bebt  anb  highebt.  In  "  him  was  the  spirit  of 
wisdom  and  understanding."  He  distinguished  at  once  the  false  from  the  true,  th« 
glittering  show  from  the  genuine  good,  the  passing  pleasure  from  the  abiding  joy, 
the  fictitious  gain  from  the  invaluable  heritage,  the  vanity  of  earthly  honours  from  the 
blessedness  of  the  Divine  favour.  Christ  saw  all  things  on  which  be  looked  in  their 
actual  and  essential  nature,  and  in  their  true  proportions.    Hence — 

IIL  His  EXCELLENCY  A.B  ouB  GuiDE.  In  him  was  "  the  spirit  of  counsel "  (see  Homily 
on  •  Chief  counsels  of  Christ,'  ch.  ix.  6). 

IV.  Fi8  KNowLBDOE  OF  THB  DiviNB  AND  OF  THE  FDTOBE.  Fallen,  degenerate  man, 
with  conscience  defiled  and  reason  depraved,  could  know  nothing  certainly  of  these 
two  supreme  subjects :  he  wanted,  urgently  and  imperatively,  one  who  had  "  the  spirit 
of  knowledge  "  in  him,  and  could  tell  him  distinctly  and  finally,  not  what  he  guessed 
or  what  he  hoped,  but  what  he  knew.  This  Jesus  did.  He  revealed  the  Divine 
Father  unto  men  (Matt.  xi.  27 ;  John  i.  18 ;  x.  15).  And  he  made  known  to  us  the 
truth  as  to  'the  future ;  he  brought  life  and  immortality  out  into  the  light  (John  ▼. 
28,  29  ;  xi.  25,  26 ;  2  Tim.  L  10). 

V.  HiB  PROFOUND  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  HUMAN  HEABT.  He  judged  men,  "  uot  by  the 
outward  appearance,"  not  "  by  the  sight  of  his  eyes  or  the  hearing  of  his  ears,"  but  by 
looking  down  through  the  coverlet  of  the  flesh,  through  the  armoury  of  speech,  into 
the  secret  chambers  of  the  soul.  He  not  only  saw  through  the  fig  tree,  but  through 
the  flesh,  and  knew  Nathanael's  simplicity  of  spirit.  "  He  knew  what  was  in  man," 
and  knows  now,  discerning  the  hollowness  of  some  men's  pretensions,  appreciating  the 
excellency  beneath  some  men's  doubts  and  diffidences. 

VI.  His  absolute  impabtialitt.  (Ver.  4.)  He  had  one  measure  for  the  rich  and 
the  poor,  for  the  mighty  and  the  meek ;  he  showed  unvarying  kindness  towards  the 
humblest,  and  he  showed  a  constant  readiness  to  receive  those  who  were  enriched  with 
worldly  wealth,  or  endowed  with  social  honour.  The  testimony  of  his  enemies  was 
true  enough ;  he  "  regarded  not  the  person  of  men "  (Mark  xiL  14).  Such  is  the 
genius  of  his  gospel — "  the  common  salvation  "  (see  1  Cor.  iii.  11 ;  Gal.  iii.  28 ;  v.  6 ; 
Eph.  vL  8). 

VII.  His  BiooBons  biohtbousness.  (Vers.  4,  6.)  Christ,  in  his  righteousness, 
demanded  the  spiritual  service  of  all  men,  and  he  condemned  all  that  withheld  it.  He 
showed  himself  the  determined  enemy  of  evil.  1.  He  denounced  it  in  scathing  terms 
when  he  was  with  us  (see  Matt,  xxiii.).  2.  He  announces  himself  as  the  Judge  of  all, 
who  will  punish  the  impenitent  according  to  their  deeds  (see  Matt.  xxv.). 

VIII.  His  faithfulness.  (Ver.  5.)  "  Having  loved  his  own,  he  loved  them  to  the 
end."  He  "  never  leaves  nor  forsakes  "  those  who  serve  him.  Throughout  our  fidelity 
to  him  his  love  to  us  is  constant ;  in  the  time  of  our  slackness  or  departure  he  visits  us 
in  his  faithfulness  with  his  kind  correction,  in  order  to  attach  us  to  himself,  or  to  call 
uB  hack  to  his  side ;  in  the  hour  of  our  suffering  he  makes  good  his  presence  of  Divine 
•upport ;  when  everything  earthly  fails  us,  the  faithful  Promiser  will  fulfil  his  word, 
and  receive  us  to  himself,  that  we  may  dwell  in  bis  glory. — C. 

Vers.  6 — 9. — The  intensive  and  extensive  povrer  of  the  gospel.  L  Thb  raTENBTVB 
POWEB  OF  Divine  tbuth.  More  power  is  needful  (1)  to  act  on  any  living  thing  than 
on  lifeless,  inert  matter ;  (2)  to  act  on  a  sentient  creature  than  on  life  without  sensa- 
tion ;  (3)  to  act  on  intelligence  and  will  (on  man)  than  on  the  irrational  and  irre- 
sponsible animal ;  (4)  on  man  sunk  into  the  lowest  moral  condition  (with  seared 
conscience,  mastering  passions  and  habits  fixed  in  vice)  than  on  one  who  has  not 
yet  chosen  his  course,  or  who  has  been  trained  in  the  ways  of  virtue.  The  very 
highest  instance  of  power  with  which  we  are  famiUar  is  that  spiritual  influence  which 
transforms  those  who  have  gone  furthest  away  from  God,  from  truth,  and  from 
righteousness — those  who  are  to  the  moral  world  what  the  tiger,  the  lion,  or  the  asp  is 
to  the  animal  world.  The  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  has  this  power.  With  such  wonderful 
intensity  does  it  work  on  those  on  whom  its  truth  is  brought  to  bear,  that  it  redeems 
and  renews  the  worst,  so  changing  them  in  life  and  in  spirit  that  it  may  be  said  of 
tliem  ihat  %e  wolf  dwells  with  the  lamb,  etc. ;  so  transformed  do  they  become,  under 
its  benignant  infincnce,  that  the  most  innocent  and  lielpless  liave  nothing  to  fear, 
though  they  be  placed  completely  within  their  power  (ver.  8).    1.  Individual  instances 


aH.xi.  1— 16.]        THE  BOC'JC  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  211 


ftlwund  of  the  conversior.  rf  r.f,torious  drunkards,  of  savage  prize-fighters,  of  shameles 
courtesans,  of  ribald  athei.=tf,  of  those  who  were  abandoned  by  all,  and  who  abandoned 
themselves  to  hopeless  si:i,  of  men  who  were  the  terror  of  their  tribe  or  of  their  district 
etc.  Therefore  we  nied  not  and  we  should  not  despair  of  those  who  are  living 
amongst  «s,  and  who  are  at  present  a  long  way  off  from  truth  and  righteousness.  The 
gospel  of  Christ  nan  change  the  very  nature  of  these — can  tame  the  most  fericious,  can 
raise  the  mo?t  fallen,  can  liberate  the  most  enslaved,  can  make  bcautiiul  the  most 
deformed  of  the  children  of  men ;  it  can  do  so  by  the  power  of  the  truth  and  of  the 
Spirit  of  God.  2.  Families,  societies,  communities  liave  undergone  as  complete  a 
transformation. 

II,  The  EXTKNsrvB  kanqb  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  (Ver.  9.)  What  a  vast  void 
would  there  be  if  the  waters  were  withdrawn !  Into  what  profound  dppths  should  we 
look  down!  What  mighty  stretches  of  sand  and  clay  and  rock  would  be  disclosed! 
What  lengths  and  breadths  are  covered,  what  depths  are  now  filled  up  by  the  abounding 
waters  of  the  sea  !  As  containing  the  element  of  life  to  millions  of  living  creatures,  as 
supplying  a  highway  for  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  as  providing  scope  for  the 
ambition,  courage,  and  enterprise  of  man,  what  a  grand  sufficiency  do  we  see  in  the 
waters  of  the  ocean !  So  shall  it  prove  to  be  with  Divine  truth.  There  shall  be  seen  to 
he  a  sufficiency,  in  the  gospel  of  the  Saviour,  to  cover  the  entire  earth,  to  meet  the 
wants  of  the  whole  population  of  the  globe.  No  land  so  remote,  no  clime  so  rigorously 
cold  or  scorchingly  hot,  no  interior  so  impenetralile,  no  barbarism  so  rude,  no  prejuiiice 
so  inveterate,  but  that  the  gospel  of  Christ  sliall  cover  it  with  its  benignant  power.  1. 
Let  us  rejoice  iu  the  earnest  of  its  fulfilment;  great  things  have  been  already  done 
towards  the  realization  of  this  glorious  estate.  2.  Let  us  resolve  to  have  our  share  in 
its  execution  (1)  as  a  Church,  and  (2)  as  individual  souls,  to  each  of  whom  God  has 
committed  some  word  to  be  spoken,  some  work  to  be  done. — 0. 

Ver.  6  — 7?M!  leading  of  a  little  child :  Stmday  school  sermon.  "  And  a  little  child 
shall  lead  them."  The  reduction  of  the  fierceness  of  wild  animals  to  such  tameness 
that  a  little  child  may  lead  them  is  a  very  beautiful,  poetical  picture  of  the  transfor- 
mation of  the  worst  of  the  wicked  to  the  excellency  of  the  Christian  spirit.  We 
may,  without  impropriety,  allow  these  words  to  suggest  thoughts  on  the  way  in  which 
the  regeneration  and  perfecting  of  human  character  is  brought  about  by  the  leading  of 
the  little  child.  God  is  training  us  all ;  we  are  all  at  his  great  school.  Christ  is  the 
great  Teacher;  the  Word  of  God  is  our  "book  of  reference."  But  there  are  other 
sources  of  instruction  at  his  command.  Of  these  is  the  family  life  which  he  has 
instituted,  and  where  we  may  all  learn  most  valuable  lessons.  We  may  consider  how 
we  are  led  by  the  little  child — leading  sometimes  from  bad  to  good,  and  at  other  times 
from  good  to  better  things.    The  little  child  sometimes  leads — 

I.  Fbom  the  fab  distance  of  flagrant  wkono  towards  the  kingdom  of  Christ: 
We  have  often  read  of  the  dissipated,  or  ungodly,  or  unbelieving  parent,  who  has 
separated  himself  (herself)  from  all  sacred  privileges,  and,  it  may  be,  gone  far  in 
forbidden  paths,  when  all  other  influences  have  failed,  being  led  by  the  soft,  pleading 
accents  of  the  little  child  to  the  safe  precincts  of  the  home,  or  to  the  services  of  the 
sanctuary,  or  to  the  path  and  practice  of  sobriety,  and  so  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 
Som.etimes  it  is  not  the  living  voicCj  but  the  remembered  pleadings  of  the  departed 
child  coming  from  the  other  side  the  veil,  which  lead  the  distant  wanderer  to  "  come 
to  himself,"  and  then  to  "  arise  and  go  to  the  Father." 

II.  From  outside  into  the  BPiRiiaAL  kingdom.  And  this :  \.  Asa  model.  When 
the  disciples  were  discussing  amongst  themselves  which  of  them  should  be  the  greatest 
in  the  kingdom,  Jesus  Christ  took  a  child  and  set  him  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  said 
that,  except  they  were  wholly  changed  and  became  as  little  children  in  their  spirit,  they 
could  not  BO  much  as  enter  that  kingdom  at  all.  It  is  the  child-spirit  which  introduces 
UB  into  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  They  who  are  kept  outside  by  difficulties  which 
they  cannot  solve,  and  they  also  who  are  exchided  from  faith  and  peace  by  a  sense 
of  unworthiness  from  which  they  cannot  rise,  need  but  to  have  the  simple,  unquestion- 
ing spirit  of  childhood ;  they  need  but  to  realize  that  they  are  God's  very  little  children, 
and  should  take  his  word  even  as  they  expect  their  own  little  ones  to  take  theirs,  and 
tbey  will  "  come  in  "  and  be  blessed.    2.  4s  a  motive.   We  are  moved  by  many  motives, 


"12  THE   BOOK  Oe   THE  PBOrilKT  ISAIAH.        [ch.  xi.  1—U 

and  onr  serious  decisions  are  usually  determined  by  more  considerations  than  one. 
Tiiere  are  many  strong  and  urgent  reasons  why  a  man  sliould  yield  himself  tc  God; 
but  if  all  these  fail  to  move  him,  let  him  remember  tJie  little  child  (children)  beneath 
his  roof  for  whom  he  is  responsible,  who  will  almost  certainly  imbibe  hie  spirit,  and 
grow  up  to  be  such  as  he  is;  and  for  his  (their)  ^ake,  if  not  for  his  own,  let  him  live  the 
life  which  is  right  and  worthy  and  wise. 

III.  On,  in  the  kingdom,  toward  the  G/OAL  and  the  prize.  1.  The  little  child 
continually  reminds  us  of  those  graces  which  our  heavenly  Father  looks  to  see  in  us. 
As  we  are  pleised  with  the  docility,  the  trustfulness,  the  obedience,  the  affection  of  our 
cliildicn,  and  are  pained  when  we  witness  the  reverse,  so  is  he  affected  by  our  attitude 
towards  him.  2.  The  little  child  leads  us  iato  the  flold  of  Christian  usefulness.  The 
Christian  Church  saw  the  little  child  ignorant,  unenlightened,  neglected,  in  danger  of 
glowing  up  to  manhood  far  from  truth  and  God,  and  it  let  him  put  his  hand  into  its 
arm  and  lead  it  into  the  school  where  it  shoiild  receive  the  knowledge  and  the  influence 
which  it  needed.  And  the  child  having  thus,  by  its  very  weakness  and  simplicity  and 
necessity,  led  the  Church  into  the  school,  it  is  for  the  Cliureh  to  lead  the  child  into  the 
ways  of  heavenly  wisdom,  into  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ,  into  the  path  of  use- 
fulness and  holy  service. — C. 

Vers.  11,  12. — 2%e  refuge  of  the  remnant.  Allusion  ii  here  made  aga!n  to  "the 
remnant "  (see  ch.  x.  20 — 22),  who  are  spoken  of  in  the  following  verse  (ver.  12)  as 
"the  outcasts"  and  "the  dispersed."  The  remnant  of  a  thing  or  of  a  community 
is  not  the  choice  part,  but  ratlier  that  which  is  left  when  everything  (every  one)  else 
has  been  cliosen — the  shapeless  scraps  which  remain  when  all  else  has  been  selected  and 
appropriated ;  the  broken-off  tnds  which  are  flung  aside  as  of  no  account ;  the  scattered 
men  who  fall  out  of  rank,  dispirited  or  disabled,  etc.  It  signifies  that  which  is 
of  least  regard  among  men.  The  remnant  of  Israel  was  that  part  of  the  community 
that  was  left  when  kings  had  lost  their  throne,  and  nobles  their  nobility,  and  priests 
their  function,  and  the  country  was  wasted.  However  despised  and  rebuffed  of  man 
this  remnant  might  be,  it  should  still  have  a  place  in  the'thought  and  in  the  purpose 
(if  God.  He  would  remember  it,  would  "  recover "  it,  would  "  gather  it  together," 
would  manifest  his  favour  toward  it  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  nations.  We  may  let  God's 
treatment  of  the  remnant  of  Israel  remind  us^ — 

I.  That  human  society  always  contains  its  remnants,  those  of  very  small  account 
in  its  estimate.  We  can  always  find,  if  we  look  for  them,  those  who  seem  to  be 
abandoned,  to  be  helpless,  to  have  "  no  future,"  to  be  beyond  recovery ;  those  fbr  whom 
there  is  nothing  but  resignation,  if  not,  indeed,  despair ;  those  whose  cause  no  man 
espouses,  and  who  do  not  expect  to  be  recovered  or  restored.  Of  these  are :  1.  The  hope- 
lessly sick — those  who  inherit  a  constitution  or  receive  injuries  which  disqualify  them 
for  the  battle  of  life,  and  place  them  at  the  mercy  of  the  community  of  which  they  are 
members.  2.  Those  who  have  broken  down — who  went  up  eagerly  to  the  battle  and 
sti-uck  some  good  stroke,  but  have  been  sore  wounded  ;  who  have  overtaxed  their 
strengtii,  and  who  find  themselves  unnerved  and  incapable,  obliged  to  resign  their 
duties  ti  other  hands,  their  post  to  other  aspirants.  3.  Those  who  have  mistaken  their 
calling — who  have  pursued  a  line  of  action  beyond  their  capacity,  or  for  which  they  were 
not  fitted  ;  who  have,  consequently,  been  hailing  and  stumbling  all  along  their  course, 
and  have  come  into  ill  repute  and  condenmation.  4.  Those  who  have  been  signally 
unfortunate — who  have  embarked  all  their  resources  in  one  scheme  which  has  broken 
down,  or  who  have  eutered  into  some  most  serious  (perhaps  the  supreme  human) 
relationship  which  has  proved  to  be  a  disastrous  mistake ;  whose  heart  is  well-ni^h 
broken,  and  whose  hopes  are  quite  blighted. 

II.  That  these  are  the  objects  of  peculiar  Divine  regard.  Some  of  these  are 
near  to  us ;  they  are  the  poor  whom  "  we  have  always  with  us,"  living  hard  by  us, 
worshipping  in  our  sanctuaries,  walking  in  our  streets.  As  we  have  opportunity, 
we  should  assure  them  that  they  must  not  take  the  negligence  or  disregard  of  man  as 
In  any  way  indicating  the  mind  of  G.'d.  As  the  human  mother  lavisi.es  the  wealth 
oi  her  tenderness  and  love  on  that  one  of  her  children  who  is  the  frailest  and  the  most 
dependent  of  her  family,  so  does  the  Divine  Parent  care  most  for  those  of  his  children 
who  are  most  in  need  of  his  special  kindness.    Was  it  not  the  "  little  ones,"  i,«.  the 


OH.xi.  1— 16.]        THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  2U 

weak,  the  disregarded,  the  despised,  the  unbefriended,  whom  our  Lord  treated  most 
{traciousiy,  and  whom  he  apecuilly  commended  to  our  sympathy  and  succour  (see 
Matt.  xii.  20)?  Unto  such,  if  they  are  his  disciples,  he  will  multiply  his  favours,  and 
on  them  pour  out  his  richest  and  most  abounding  grace.  There  are  "  remnants,"  "out- 
casts," of  another  kind — those  who  have  gone  down  In  the  battle  of  temptation ;  who 
are  bowed  down  with  a  sense  of  shame  and  dishonour,  and  who  are  cast  off  by  their 
fellows  as  worsted  and  useless.  Is  there  any  hope  for  them  in  God  ?  Yes,  there 
is  ample  room  in  the  promises,  because  in  the  heart  of  the  Divine  Saviour,  for  these.  In 
his  thought  they  are  not  remnants  to  be  flung  into  the  fire;  driftwood  on  the  river 
of  fate,  for  which  there  is  nothing  but  to  be  carried  down  the  stream  and  cast  over  the 
cataracts;  disinherited  sons  for  whom  there  is  nothing  better  than  to  forget  the  family 
to  which  they  belong,  and  make  themselves  happy  with  the  husks  in  the  far  country. 
Ko;  in  the  heart  and  in  the  hope  of  Jesiis  Christ  these  are  gold  for  his  crown  ;  they  are 
ships  that,  with  chart  and  compass,  may  yet  sail  gall>mtly  down  the  river  of  life, 
and  out  into  the  shoreless  seas  of  a  blessed  immortality  ;  they  are  sons  and  daughters 
that  will  be  most  warmly  welcomed  betieath  the  Father's  roof,  and  seated  at  the 
Father's  table.     In  this  best  sense  may  the  remnant  be  restoied. — C. 

Vers.  13 — 16. — Conditions  of  victory.  These  verses  probably  point  to  the  time 
when  all  Israel  shall  be  gathered  into  the  fold  of  the  gospel,  and  when  "  their  fulness  " 
sliall  contribute  largely  to  the  conversion  of  the  Gentile  world  (see  Kom.  xl.).  But 
we  may  take  a  more  practical  view  of  the  subject  if  we  regard  it  thus;  we  have 
pictures  of — 

I.  Present  spiritual  anarchy.  The  people  of  God  everywhere  dispersed,  the 
theocracy  broken  up,  the  temple  destroyed,  the  Law  unobserved,  the  heathen  trium- 
phant,— all  this  a  vivid  picture  of  the  "  kingdom  of  God  "  in  a  state  of  dissolution  :  truth 
nnrecogtiized,  commandmerjts  disobeyed,  conscience  perverted,  the  Divine  will  dis- 
regarded, God  himself  unknown  in  the  world. 

II.  The  ultimate  establishment  op  the  Divinb  kingdom.  The  restoration  of 
Israel  as  depicted  here,  whether  it  be  to  their  own  land  and  their  ancient  ins'itutions 
or  whellier  it  be  to  their  true  place  in  the  spiritual  purpose  of  God,  may  speak  to 
us  of  that  graad  consummation  of  human  hope,  when  the  kingdom  of  our  God  shall 
be  re-estalilished  upon  earth ;  when  that  kingdom,  which  is  not  the  enforcement  of 
any  ecclesiastical  regime,  or  the  observance  of  any  rules  of  diet  or  of  devotion,  but 
"righteousness,  and  iieace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost"  (Rom.  xiv.  17),  shall  take 
the  i>lace  of  "  the  kingdom  of  this  world,"  which  is  iniquity,  unrest,  and  death. 

III.  The  coNDlTioss  OP  its  attainment.  These  are  threefold.  1.  The  disap 
pearance  of  fratricidal  strife.  (Ver.  3.)  What  .ludah  and  Ephraim  were  in  old  theo- 
cratic times,  that  nei>;hbouring  Churches  or  Christian  comrades  have  been  to  one 
another  all  through  these  "  Christian  centuries."  Sadly  must  the  Lord  of  love  have 
looked  down  on  his  heritage,  the  purchase  of  his  sorrow  and  his  death,  and  have  seen 
the  envies  and  the  jealousies,  the  hatreds  and  the  cruelties,  which  have  narked  and 
marred  the  intercourse  of  his  disciples.  No  progress  of  his  blessed  kingdom  can  bo 
expected  in  any  community  when  they  whose  relations  should  be  beautified  by  concord 
are  all  disfigured  by  enmity  and  strife.  Let  Christian  Churches  cease  to  hope  for  any 
results  from  their  preaching  or  their  praying,  so  long  as  bitterness  blights  the  heart, 
and  contention  characterizes  the  Church  (see  Matt.  v.  '24).  There  is  no  effort,  there 
is  no  sacrifice,  which  it  is  not  worth  while  for  any.  Christian  society  to  make  in  order 
that  it  may  wrench  out  "  the  root  of  bitterness"  which,  while  it  remains,  will  neutrahze 
all  devotion,  and  make  all  zeal  to  be  "  nothing  worth."  2.  Active  co-operation  among 
the  people  of  God.  "They  [Ephraim  and  Judah  together]  shall  fly  . .  .  they  shall 
spoil .  .  .  they  shall  lay  their  hand,"  etc.  (ver.  14).  Their  united  forces  were  to 
prevail  over  the  bands  of  the  enemy,  and  to  secure  victory  on  every  side.  So  shall 
it  bo  in  the  spiritual  campaign.  It  will  be  when  all  the  Churches  of  Christ  unite,  not 
indeed  in  any  one  visible  aWalgam,  but  in  well-concerted  action,  joining  heartily 
ag.'iiust  the  common  foe,  going  out  together  against  ignorance,  unbelief,  ungodliness, 
vice,  indecision,  and  all  the  long  train  of  sin  ;  it  will  then  be  found  that  the  enemy  will 
be  subdued,  and  victory  be  secured.  3.  1) i nine' energy  world hg  on  the  side  of  truth, 
(Vefl.  15,  16.)    As  the  Lord  interposed  on  behalf  of  Israel  in  one  deliverance,  and 


■:ii  >^m  feooit  ot*  fate  rtioMfef  tSAlAtt.     [caxtl— 16. 

would  do  so  in  another,  by  his  overcoming  might  making  the  pathway  from  Egypt 
and  tlie  highway  from  Assyria,  so  will  he  interpose  on  behalf  of  the  spiritual  foices 
which  are  doing  his  work  in  the  world.  He  will  make  that  possible  and  practicable 
which  seems  inipussible  and  impracticable ;  will  enable  the  champions  of  his  cause 
to  go  where  it  seems  hopeless  for  them  to  penetrate,  and  to  conquer  where  victory 
seems  utterly  out  of  reach.  Therefore  (1)  let  prayer  be  earnest,  (2)  let  the  heart  be 
hopeful,  (3)  let  effort  be  energetic  and  persistent. — C. 

Ver.  1. — Cfkrist  the  Branch.  "  But  a  shoot  shall  come  forth  from  the  stem  of  Jesse, 
and  a  fruitful  spront  shall  grow  up  from  his  roots  "  (Henderson's  translation ;  see 
h.  iv.  2).  'I'he  idea  is  of  a  sucker  springing  up  from  a  hewn  stump.  The  word  used 
iti'tser)  is  singularly  suggestive  of  despised  ^Nazareth,  with  which  place  the  early  life  of 
viessiah  was  associated,  and  of  which  it  could  jeeringly  be  said,  "Can  any  good  thing 
Loine  out  of  Nazareth  ?  "  Wordsworth  remarks  on  the  sublime  contrast  in  this  prophecy 
ind  the  foregoing,  "  The  mighty  and  haughty  worldly  power  of  Assyria — the  type  of 
impiety  and  antichristianism — will  be  hewn  down,  like  a  great  forest,  in  the  pride  of 
its  strength  and  glory,  never  to  rise  again ;  but  the  spirit  of  prophecy  here  reveals, 
that  when  the  house  of  David  seemed  like  a  tree  hewn  down  to  a  stump  in  the  earth, 
then  a  sucker  would  spring  up  from  the  stump,  and  a  branch  shooting  forth  from  its 
loots  would  bear  fruit  and  overshadow  the  earth.  And  so  it  came  to  pass.  At  a  tiiuo 
when  the  house  of  David  seemed  to  be  reduced  to  the  lowest  estate,  when  the  Virgin 
was  a  poor  maiden  in  a  village  of  despised  Galilee,  then  by  God's  miraculous  agency 
the  Branch  sprouted  up  from  the  hewn-down  stump,  and  grew  up  into  a  mighty  Tree, 
and  brought  forth  much  fruit,  and  received  the  world  under  its  shade."  It  has  been 
cleverly  suggested  that  "the  ceiiar  of  Lebanon,  the  symbol  of  the  Assyrian  power,  was 
to  be  cut  down,  and,  being  of  the  pine  genus,  which  sends  forth  no  suckers,  its  fall  was 
irretrievable.  But  the  oak,  the  symbol  of  Israel,  and  of  the  monarchy  of  the  house  of 
David,  had  a  life  remaining  in  it  after  it  had  been  out  down,  and  the  rod  or  sucker  that 
was  to  spring  from  its  roots  should  flourish  once  again  in  greater  glory  than  before." 
We  fix  attention  on  the  sentiment  entertained  respecting  suckers,  which  are  usually 
despised,  thought  to  be  weak  and  frail  things,  from  which  nothing  of  value  is  ever  to  be 
expected. 

I.  The  sukpeise  of  Chbist's  lowlt  beginnings.  Born  into  a  poor  family,  at  a 
time  when  David's  race  was  at  its  lowest  humiliation ;  born,  as  one  crowded  out  by  the 
hurry  of  life,  in  the  courtyard  of  an  inn ;  brought  up  in  a  despised  village.  There  were 
but  a  few  gleams  of  glory  resting  on  his  infancy.  Angels  heralded  the  tidings  of  his 
biith ;  Magi  oflered  worship  to  him  at  the  Bethlehem  cottage.  But  Ilerod  would,  if 
he  could,  have  broken  off  that  sucker,  almost  ere  it  began  to  show  its  greenness.  It 
would  take  a  great  power  of  imagination  to  picture  a  siJendid  career  and  a  world-wide 
renown  for  that  poor  Bethlehem  babe.  "  He  came  to  his  own,  and  his  own  received 
him  not." 

II.  The  hope  of  Chbist's  early  tears.  We  need  not  accept  the  strange  and  foolish 
legends  of  Apocryphal  Gospels  concei'ning  the  infancy  and  childhood  of  Jesus.  We 
have  one  all-sufficient  historical  incident,  presenting  the  boy  of  twelve  years,  and  con- 
vincing us  that  a  wonderful  manhood  was  in  its  unfolding.  His  mother  observed  much, 
and  pondered  over  many  things  in  her  heart,  and  the  story  of  Christianity  has  verified 
every  hope  which  that  good  mother  cherished. 

III.  The  beauty  of  Christ's  growth.  The  sucker  became  strong,  grow  into 
a  branch,  began  to  put  forth  branches  of  its  own,  became  a  tree  whose  beauty 
attracted  the  attention  of  all  men.  Two  passages  suggest  illustration  and  detail : 
"  And  the  Child  grew,  and  waxed  strong  in  spirit,  filled  with  wisdom ;  and  the  grace  of 
God  was  upon  him ; "  "  Jesus  increased  in  wisdom  and  stature,  and  in  favour  with 
God  and  man."  Other  suggestions  come  from  the  statements,  "  All  that  heard  him 
wore  astonished  at  his  understanding  and  answers;"  and,  "  He  went  down  with  them, 
and  came  to  Nazareth,  and  was  subject  unto  them."  Intelligenci',  submissiveness, 
obedience,  were  the  beautiful  features  of  his  child- time — the  splendid  promise  of  after- 
years. 

IV.  The  amazing  richness  or  Christ's  fruit.  When  the  sucker  came  to  bearing- 
time,  it  altogether  surpassed  the  old  tree  of  Dayid.     Illustrate  its  fruitage  (1)  of  holy 


Cti.  XI.  1—16.]       THE  SOOK  OP  THE  PHOftlEt  iSAlAH.  215 

example ;  (2)  of  wise  teaeliing ;  (3)  of  gracious  healings ;  (4)  of  heroic  suffering* ;  (5) 
of  eternal  triumph  over  sin.  Moral  and  spiritual  fruitage  answering  to  the  needs  of 
thirsting  and  hungry  men.  Fruit  which  was  the  "  Bread  of  life."  The  despised  tree 
of  David  at  last  sent  forth  a  sucker,  which  swiftly  grew  into  a  tree,  whose  leaves  were 
for  the  healing  of  all  the  nations,  and  whose  fruit  was  for  the  spiritual  quickening  of  a 
world  that  was  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins." — R.  T. 

Ver.  2. — Chri'sCs  enduements  h/  the  Spirit.  The  prophetic  conception  of  Messiah  is 
of  a  man,  specially  eniiowcd  and  fitted  for  his  mission  by  God's  Spirit.  The  figures  that 
help  prophetic  vision  are  David,  endowed  with  the  spirit  of  rule  and  of  song ;  and 
Solomon,  endowed  with  the  spirit  of  wisdom.  And  the  New  Testament  bids  us  think 
of  Christ  as  having  the  Spirit,  not  by  measure,  but  without  measure — the  fulness  of  God 
dwelling  in  him  (Col.  i.  19 ;  ii.  9).  Compare  the  beginning  of  our  Lord's  sermon  at 
Nazareth  :  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me  "  (Luke  iv.  18).  The  point  suggested 
is  that  God's  enduements  are  always  in  precise  adaptation  to  a  man's  work.  Here,  in 
relation  to  Christ,  the  "  qualities  are  arranged  in  three  pairs,  but  all  spring  from  one 
Source,  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah,  which  rests  permanently  upon  him.  They  are  (1)  moral 
and  intellectual  clearness  of  perception  ;  (2)  the  wisdom  and  bravery  which  befit  a  ruler ; 
(3)  a  knowledge  of  the  requirements  of  Jehovah,  and  the  will  to  act  agreeably  to  this 
knowledge  "  (Cheyne).  Christ  was  a  Teacher,  Healer,  "Example,  Saviour,  Head  of  a 
spiritual  kingdom.    As  fitting  him  for  these  positions  and  offices,  he  was  endued  with — 

I.  Wisdom.  The  special  gifts  of  the  ruler,  as  called  to  judge  difficult,  complex  cases. 
In  its  highest  form  implying  comprehension  of  the  secret  things  of  God. 

IL  Undebstanding.  Or  keen,  quick  discernment ;  the  sagacity  which  discovers  the 
right  thing  to  do,  and  the  right  word  to  say,  in  all  human  relationships. 

III.  Counsel.  The  power  to  form  wise  plans ;  the  clear  purpose  which  fits  a  king 
for  the  exercise  of  sovereignty.  "  He  shall  know  how  to  administer  the  affairs  of  his 
spiritual  kingdom  in  all  the  branches  of  it,  so  as  effectually  to  answer  the  two  great 
ends  of  it — the  glory  of  God,  and  the  welfare  of  the  children  of  men." 

IV.  Might.  The  ability  to  cairy  plans  into  execution.  With  men  we  often  find  a 
divorce  between  the  skill  to  plan  and  the  power  to  execute. 

v.  Feab  of  God.  The  disposition  which  keeps  us  ever  anxiously  watching  for,  and 
resolved  to  do,  God's  will.  The  reverence  and  faith  which  is  the  beginning  of  all 
wisdom. 

Illustrations  of  each  may  readily  be  found  in  the  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus;  and  it  may 
be  urged  that  all  these  enduements  brought  him  the  power  that  lies  in  righteousness — 
the  power  (1)  to  wither  all  evil ;  (2)  to  nourish  all  good. — B.  T. 

Vers.  3 — 5. — The  principles  of  Messianic  ride.  These  are  exemplified  in  the  actual 
administration  of  the  Aead  of  the  Messianic  kingdom.  The  picture  presented  here  ia 
designed  to  be  in  sharp  contrast  with  that  of  the  unjust  judges  referred  to  in  ch.  i.  23 ; 
ii.  14,  15 ;  x.  1,  2.  The  figure  of  clothing  one's  self,  or  being  clothed,  with  moral 
attributes  is  not  unfrequent  in  the  Scriptures.  The  girdle  is  mentioned  as  an  essential 
part  of  Oriental  dress,  and  that  which  keeps  the  other  garments  in  their  proper  place  and 
qualifies  the  wearer  for  exertion.  The  rules,  or  characteristics,  of  the  Messianic  or 
spiritual  kingdom  may  be  illustrated  under  the  following  headings. 

I.  Righteousness  as  befobe  God.  The  absolutely  right  is  to  be  sought ;  and  it  will 
be  found  in  what  (1)  God  is ;  (2)  what  God  commands ;  (3)  what  God  approves. 
Matthew  Henry  says,  "  He  shall  be  righteous  in  the  administration  of  his  government, 
and  his  righteousness  shall  be  bis  girdle ;  it  shall  constantly  compass  him  and  cleave 
to  him,  shall  be  his  ornament  and  honour ;  he  shall  gird  himself  for  every  action,  shall 
gird  on  his  sword  for  war  in  righteousness ;  his  righteousness  shall  be  his  strength,  and 
■hall  make  him  expeditious  in  his  undertakings,  as  a  man  with  his  loins  girt."  Com- 
pare the  kingdom  ruled  by  considerations  of  righteousnets  with  the  kingdoms  ruled  by 
eonsiderations  of  expediency. 

II.  Equity  between  man  and  man.  The  determination  that  every  man  shall  gel 
his  due,  and  hear  his  due.  Many  cases  arise  in  which  strict  justice  must  be  toned  by 
consideration  of  circumstances.  In  view  of  human  infirmity,  the  equitable  must  some- 
times be  put  instead  of  the  right 


■^IQ  THE  BOOK   Oi^  THEPROrnEl    ISAIAH.        [cii.  xl  1— 16. 

III.  Efficient  punishment  of  the  wicked.  The  strong  hand  on  the  wrong-doer 
is  ever  an  essential  of  good  government. 

IV.  Faithfulness  to  duty.  Duty  being  distinguished  from  right  in  this,  that  it 
is  Something  we  are  bound  to  do,  upon  the  authority  of  some  one  who  has  the  right  to 
command  us.  "  Faithfulness "  is  closely  kin  with  "  loyalty."  And  Messiah  is  i 
theocratic  King,  a  Vicegerent  of  Jehovah. 

V.  Peace  everywhere.  Because,  if  righteousness  prevails,  nobody  will  wrong 
others,  and  noboily  will  have  wrongs  to  avenge.  Jealousies,  envyings,  violence, 
covetinpis,  all  fade  before  advancing  righteousness ;  and  when  Jesus,  the  righteous  King, 
reigns  over  mind  and  heart  and  life,  then  the  glory-day  will  have  come,  and  "  no  war 
or  battle-sound  "  will  then  be  "  heard  the  world  around." — R.  T. 

Ver.  9.— Ke  Christian  "golden  year."  Isaiah's  relief,  from  the  burdens,  sins,  and 
sorrows  of  his  times,  is  his  anticipation  of  the  coming  days  of  Messiah,  which  were  to 
ancient  Jews  their  "  golden  year."  Isaiah's  visions  break  in  on  his  records  of  evil  and 
prophetic  denunciations,  and  lie  like  pools  of  blue  in  a  cloudy  sliy,  or  stand  like  an  oasis 
of  palm'trccs  in  a  dreary  desert.  The  general  thought  of  this  chapter  is,  that  when 
righteousness  can  really  and  fully  reign,  then  peace  will  be  attained.  As  soon  as  the 
righteous  King  can  reach  the  throne  of  universal  dominion,  the  world  shall  be  at  peace 
from  all  its  miseries,  and  not  from  war  alone.  When  the  perfect  King  is  univereally 
acknowledged,  then  there  will  be  established  the  perfect  kingdom. 

I.  Prophbtio  Scriptures  set  forth  a  perfect  Being,  an  ideal  Kino.  Men  have 
always  been  on  the  outlook  for  a  glorious  future — "a  good  time  coming."  But  poetic 
imagery  has  been  vagne,  and  gimeralization  has  meant  weakness.  Bible  prophecy  sets 
before  us:  1.  .4  Person — a  Son;  and  the  actual  incidents  of  his  life,  as  a  veritable 
human  bi'ing,  are  foretold.  2.  A  perfect  Person.  Observe  the  staten.eiits  of  this  chapter, 
and  the  idea  that  was  formed  of  Messiah.  3.  A  Person  with  kinyly  authority.  If  he 
be  a  perfect  man,  he  must  be  a  king  among  men.  This  kingly  idea  was  set  Ibrth  (1)  in 
the  theocracy  founded  by  Moses;  (2)  in  David's  reign;  (3)  in  Daniel's  vision.  In  the 
times  of  Jewish  captivity  the  promise  of  such  a  leader  and  deliverer  was  needed  to  keep 
men  from  utter  despair.  The  conception  of  a  perfect  peison  is  as  utterly  beyond  us  as 
the  conception  of  a  perfect  age.  Before  Christ  came  neither  hail  been  realized.  Now 
one  has.  The  perfect  Person  has  come,  and  we  have  a  riglit  to  sa\  that  "  with  God~all 
things  are  possible,"  seeino;  that  the  one  so-called  impossible  has  been  overcome.  The 
historical  Christ  is  the  realization  of  what  men  thought  to  be  the  impossible. 

II.  Pkophetio  Scbiptckes  set  before  us  a  perfect  age,  an  ideal  kingdom. 
Observe  the  figures  of  the  chapter  ;  and  such  expres^i(jns  as  "  He  shall  have  dominion 
also  frum  sea  to  sea,"  and  Dan.  vii.  13,  14.  Poetry  has  its  "  golden  age,"  for  the  most 
part,  in  the  past.  Scripture  has  it  in  the  future.  Towards  it  we  are  moving.  For  it 
we  are  working.  In  olden  time  men  fulled  in  faith  that  the  perfect  King  would  come, 
and  now  >ve  fail  in  faith  ihat  the  perfect  kingdom  will  ever  come,  because  we  cannot 
quite  expi.in  the  when,  the  how,  and  the  why.  It  may  be  said — Have  we  any  seemingly 
good  reasons  for  our  failing  faith?  And  it  may  be  urged  that  (1)  the  golden  age  has 
lever  yet  been  reached  in  part,  anywhere ;  (2)  there  are  no  signs  of  its  neariug  approach ; 
and  (3)  we  cannot  oUarly  mark  even  our  own  growing  meetness  for  it.  The  perfect 
age  has  scarcely  even  a  faint  beginidng  in  us.  But  who  can  discern  victory  through 
the  smoke  of  battle?  And  yet  the  victory  may,  in  elfect,  be  won.  With  cleared  eyesight 
we  wight  see  many  hopeful  signs;  such  as  these  :  1.  The  King  has  come,  and  is  con- 
flicting for  his  rights.  2.  The  peifect  kinudoni  is  sometimes  nearly  reached  by  the 
saintly  bolievers.  3.  In  limited  measure  it  is  realized  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  4.  In 
its  wider  form,  as  a  kingdom  of  righteousness,  it  is  extending  over  all  the  earth.  And 
if  (rod  could  give  the  world  the  perfect  Kins,  he  can  also  give  the  ^lerfect  age.  The 
practical  quesiion  is — What  are  we  doing  to  hurry  its  on-coming?''  The  world's  hopo 
lies  in  the  spreading  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord.  Everywhere  the  heralds  must  gc 
until  the  earth  is  full,  as  full  as  the  sea-basin  is  with  the  waters.  We  must,  for  our- 
selves, know  the  Lord,  and  we  must  speak  of  him,  and  witness  concerning  him,  to 
others ;  foi  cvoiy  act  of  godly  living  and  godly  labouring  is  bringing  near  the  "  golden 
jcar.-^B.T. 


CH.  XI.  1-16.]        THE  BOOK  OF  TUB  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  217 


Ver.  10. — The  ccnirt  qf  attraction  for  the  whole  world.  "  An  ensign  of  the  people ; 
to  it  shall  the  Gontiles  seek."  la  propheti'-  form  we  have  here  expressed  the  truth 
which  Messiah  himself  expressed  when  he  said,  "  And  I,  if  I  ho  lifted  up,  will  draw 
all  men  unto  mo."  Alt  humanity  is  figured  as  turning  to  look  on  the  crucified  One, 
and  responding  to  an  irresistible  attraction  which  makes  all  gather  round  him,  as  armicf 
gather  about  an  ensign  or  standard,  and  as  clans  gather  to  the  appointed  meeting-place 
Our  Lord  spoke,  on  three  separate  occnsions,  of  the  attractive  power  that  would  come 
from  his  "  uplifting."  (1)  John  iii.  14.  Here  the  idea  is  a  general  ouo.  Lifted  np  ii. 
the  sense  of  being  set  in  sight  of  men,  as  the  brazen  serpent  was  when  set  up  cm  the 
imle  in  the  middle  of  the  camp.  (2)  John  viii.  28.  Here  the  idea  is  that  his  Messiah- 
.sliip  would  be  evident  when  his  life  was  complete,  and  that  would  not  be  until  he 
was  lifted  up  in  death.  (3)  John  xii.  32.  Here  we  find  Greek  proselytes  anxious  to 
see  Jesus.  Such  pressing  into  the  kingdom  was  premature.  The  "com  of  wheat 
must  fall  into  the  ground  and  die."  Greeks  and  Gentiles  must  wait  just  a  littU  wLile 
longer.  The  ensign  would  soon  be  lifted  up ;  then  to  it  they  may  seek.  It  is  Interest- 
ing to  notice  that  the  Syriac  word  for  "  crucify  "  means  "  to  raise,"  "  to  lift  up,"  as 
men  set  np  a  standard.  Christ's  power  from  his  cross — Christ's  attraction  as  an 
Ensign — is  our  subject,  and  we  note— 

I.  CilUIST,  ON    HIS   CROSS,   ATTRACTIVELY   REVEALS   HIMSELF   TO  THE    MINDS   OF    MRN 

We  can  only  get  imperfectand  unsatisfactory  views  by  limiting  our  attention  to  CI  rist's 
work.  In  that  way  we  can  only  hope  to  formulate  cold  and  lifeless  doctrines,  liui 
our  views  are  equally  imperfect  if  we  limit  our  attention  to  Chrisi's  person.  Then  we 
can  do  no  more  than  nourish  sentiment,  or  set  before  ourselves  an  example  fur  imitation. 
We  must  combine  both,  and  let  each  illuminate  the  other.  Illustrate  the  splendour  cif 
the  combined  oxy-hydrogen  light.  How  much  Christ  made  of  himself!  In  a  man  it 
would  lie  jiainful  egotism  ;  why  isit  not  in  him  ?  Because  it  was  his  mission  to  manifmi 
God  to  men  ;  so  he  must  poiut  to  himself.  All  his  life,  speech,  doing,  suffering,  was  a 
gradual  dis^'li'sing  of  himself,  of  the  deep  mystery  of  his  origin,  his  claim,  of  God  in 
him.  But  wh;it  we  need  to  see  more  fully  than  we  do  is  that,  apart  from  liis  death,  as 
f.e  died,  his  life  could  not  have  efficiently  revealed  him.  Death  only  completes  the 
test.  If  he  had  failed  in  that  supreme  hour,  an  imperfect  sonship  could  never  have 
sliown  to  us  the  jicrfect  Father-God.  We  can  see  that  only  the  story  of  his  life  could 
nut  have  sufficed,  for:  1.  His  enemies  misrepresented  that  life,  and  said,  "  He  hath  a 
devil."  2.  Discijilos  misunderstood  it,  and  only  saw  its  meaning  after  his  death.  3. 
(.Jrilics  now  can  explain  the  life,  but  are  hopelessly  puzzled  by  the  mystery  of  his  death, 
l.illed  np,  Christ  is  set  before  us  (1)  as  the  model  Man  ;  (2)  as  not  a  more  man  ;  (3)  ns 
the  Son  of  God  with  power.  And  if  religion  demands  personal  love  to  and  trust  in 
the  Lord  .le.-<us  Christ,  then  we  must  know  him,  we  must  know  him  fully  ;  and  we  can 
only  thus  know  him  as  he  is  "lifted  up." 

II.  '_IlIiIST,   ON   HIS   caOSS,    ATTRACTIVELY   SHOWS   HIMSELF  TO  THE   HF.AKTS   OF    MEN. 

Men  iffiiy  be  driven  or  drawn  to  goodness.  The  gospel  has  its  majesty  of  driving,  its 
"  whip  of  small  cords."  "  Knowing  therefore  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  wo  persujvde  men." 
But  its  great  power  is  its  drawing  power;  its  moral  influence;  its  constraint  of  the 
affections,  and  of  the  will.  A  voice  from  the  "  Ensign,"  from  Jesus  lifted  up,  is  ever 
calling  to  us  and  saying,  "  Is  it  nothing  to  you,  all  ye  that  pass  by  ?  behold,  and  see." 
Suffering  has  a  strange  power  on  human  hearts.  Self-sacrificing  suffering  moves  us 
strangely.  Crucifixion  was  curse  and  shame,  but  it  set  Christ  in  the  world's  eye.  No 
kind  of  dentil  could  so  lift  him  up  and  Compel  the  dying  world  to  lonk.  And  Christ 
crucified  is  still  the  supreme  persuasion,  the  irresistible  attractinn,tO  men.  Jesus  lifted 
up,  an  Ensign  for  the  galhermg  of  the  people,  may  be  an  old  and  worn  story,  and  it 
may  have  lo.st  .souietliing  of  its  drawing  power  for  you.  Ah  t  that  can  only  be  because 
men,  and  men's  words,  have  stood  in  front  of  him,  and  taken  your  eyes  off  him.  See 
him  only.    Look  to  the  Ensign,  and  then  you  will  find  your  soul  asking  itseif— 

"  For  whom,  for  whom,  ray  soul. 
Wore  all  these  sorrows  borne  ?  " 

and  you  too  will  feel  "  the  strong  attractive  power." — R.  T. 
Vet,  XX.'—Tke  wit\j  of  (he  race  »«  Messtak'a  kingdom.    This  unity  is  the  great  dream 


m 


Mfi  BOOK  0^   f  as  tlSOJPHET  ISAlAH.         t™.  iti.  l-ft, 


and  hope  of  humanity.  It  can  never  be  attained  in  any  temporal  kingdom,  and  it 
could  be  only  a  formal  and  outward  unity  if  it  were.  No  unities  of  mind  or  of  govern- 
ment are  possible;  but  unity  of  heart  is.  Men  can  be  one  in  God;  and  one  in  tliat 
spiritual  kingdom  in  which  God  rules.  This  verse  is  used  as  an  argument  for  what  is 
known  as  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  Its  force  and  value  in  that  relation  we  do  not 
now  discuss.  The  spiritual  suggestion  of  the  passage  is  now  before  us,  and  we  are  to 
gee  that  Christ  is  the  bond  of  unity  for  the  world,  which  never  can  be  one  save  in  his 
love,  in  the  life  he  gives,  and  in  the  Father-God  he  reveals.  How  this  unity  is  to  be 
secured  we  may  fully  see  by  considLring  the  following  points  concerning  Chrigt'i 
influence. 

I.  He  AiTRAOTS  ALL.    (See  the  previous  Homily.) 

II.  Ha  BREAKS  DOWN  ALL  SEPARATIONS.  Of  racc,  class,  age,  prejudice,  religioui 
forms,  etc.  In  him  there  is  "  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  bond  nor  free,  male  nor  female. 
He  is  all  and  in  all." 

III.  He  is  superior  to  all  physical  difficdltiks.  They  come  to  him  from  %11 
parts.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  triumphs  over  mouiitai[j8  and  over  seas.  It  goes  into  the 
fever-lands,  and  gains  influence  in  the  frozen  zones.  Missionarii'S  go  everywhere 
preaching  Christ,  and  his  Spirit  in  them  is  their  heroic  mastery  of  all  disabilities. 

IV.  He  can  satisfy  all  hearts.  Glad  hearts  and  sorrowful  ones.  Empty  hearts 
and  full  ones.  Lonely  hearts  and  satisfied  ones.  Dead  hearts  and  yearning  ones.  He  has 
life,  love,  truth,  rest,  hope,  peace,  at  his  command ;  and  of  this  grace  he  giveth  to  all 
men  liberally.  He  can  perfect  the  unity  of  the  race  by  winning  the  universal  love,  the 
supreme  love,  which  is  the  life  of  humanity,  and  the  ensuring  of  the  brotherhood.  All 
men  can  be  sons  of  the  one  Father  in  their  love.  All  men  can  be  brothers,  indeed,  by 
the  love  of  their  commoi;  sonship.  Christ  is  God,  and  he  wins  us  for  God,  and  he  win  a 
us  as  God.— K.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER   xn. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  Song  of  Tuanksgivdiq 
or  THE  Uniteb  Chvucu.  On  each  of  her 
deliveiauces  the  Church  is  bound  to  praise 
God.  In  some  parts  of  the  Church  it  is 
customary  on  every  such  occasion  to  sing  a 
"Te  Deum."  TI.e  ordinary  Israelite  hymn 
of  praise  appears  to  have  been  the  hundred 
and  thirty -sixth  psalm  (1  Chron.  xvi.  34, 41 ; 
2  Chron.  v.  13;  vii.  3;  Ezra  iii.  11;  Jer. 
xxxiii.  11;  1  Mace.  iv.  24);  but  on  extraor- 
dinary ocoasious  special  thanksgivings  were 
sung  (Exod.  XV.  1—21 ;  1  Sam.  vii.  18—29, 
etc.).  Isaiah  is  now  inspired  to  give  a  pat- 
tern song,  suitable  for  the  Church  to  sing 
when  she  is  reunited,  enlarged,  and  restored 
to  favour. 

Ver.  1. — In  that  day.  In  the  day  of 
deliverance  and  restoration.  Thoagh  thou 
wast  angry ;  litcr.illy,  because  thou  waat 
angry.  Kuy  niideretnnds  an  actual  thank- 
fulness for  Ihe  severe  discipline,  which  had 
checked  them,  and  not  allowed  them  to 
glide  on  smoothly  to  ruin.  But  perhaps 
the  idiom  is  rather  that  of  the  passage, 
"Father,  I  thank  thee  that  thou  hast  hid 
these  thmgs  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and 


hast  revealed  them  unto  babes  "(Mutt,  xt 
2.1),  wliere  it  is  only  the  lust  chiiise  that  ex- 
presses the  true  object  of  the  tbankBgi\ing. 
Comfortedst;  rather,  hast  comforted,  since  tlie 
effect  continued. 

Ver.  2. — God  is  my  salvation  (ocmp. 
Ps.  ixvii.  1 ;  xxxviii.  22,  etc.).  The  em- 
ployment  of  the  abstract  "salvation"  for 
the  concrete  "  Saviour  "  is  extremely  com- 
mon. The  Lord  Jehovah;  literally.  Jolt 
Jehovah — a  combination  which  occurs  only 
here  and  in  ch.  xxvi.  4,  where  it  is  again 
used  as  an  encouragement  to  perfect  con- 
fidence and  trust.  Is  my  strength  .  .  . 
salvation.  This  is  quoted  from  the  song  of 
Moses  (Exod.  xv.  2),  which  the  prophet  has 
throughout  in  his  thou'^hts. 

Ver.  3. — With  joy  shall  ye  draw  water. 
The  prophet  interrupts  the  song  to  give 
a  comforting  promise.  The  "  salvation  " 
granted  to  the  Church  shall  be  as  an  inex- 
haustible well,  from  which  all  comers  may 
diaw  continually.  Compare  our  Lord's  pro- 
mise to  the  woman  of  Samaria  in  John  iv.  14. 

Ver.  4. — Declare  his  doings  among  ths 
people ;  literally,  among  the  people!  (conip. 
Ps.  ix.  11;  Ixxvii.  12;  cvii.  22;  cxviii.  17> 
It  is  always  regarded  as  one  of  man's  chief 
duties  to  testify  of  God's  goodness  to  others. 
Here  Israel  is  called  upon  to  publish  God's 
mercies  emd  great  deeds  to  the  GentUsf 


<)«.xtt.i-6j       tafi  660^  6P  m&  pfto^afif  tSAiAtt. 


S19 


His  name  is  exalted.  God  is  in  his  Name, 
and  his  Name  expresBes  his  nature.  As  there 
is  nothing  bo  exalted  in  all  the  universe  as 
Grnd,  so  there  is  no  name  bo  exalted  as  his 
Name.  Hence  his  Name  is  protected  by  an 
express  commandment. 

Ver.  5. — Sing  unto  the  lord ;  for  he  hath 
done  excellent  things.  This  is  amithur 
quotation,  very  slightly  modified,  fiom  the 
song  of  Moses,  in  which  these  words  were 
part  of  the  refrain  (Exod.  xv.  1,  21).  This 
is  known;  rather,  let  thit  be  known;  i.e. 
publish  it— noise  it  abroad. 

Ver.  6. — Cry  ont  and  shout,  thon  inhabitant 


of  Zion ;  i.e.  raise  •  "  cry "  that  may  be 
heard  far  and  wide — a  cry  that  elinll  be  a 
"shout"  of  rejoicing.  The  word  translated 
"inhabitant"  is  feminine,  and  designates 
the  entire  community  or  Church  that  dwells 
on  the  holy  liill.  For  great  is  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel  in  the  midst  of  thee.  Tlie 
crowning  glory  of  the  Church  is  the  pre- 
sence of  her  Lord  in  the  midst  of  her — 
a  presence  continuous  ("  I  am  with  you 
always"),  efficacious  (John  xv.  4—6),  yet 
invisible  (1  Pet.  i.  8).  Tlie  Church  is  ever 
to  proclaim  this  presence  and  rejuice  in  it. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Christian  thanksgiving — its  principal  characteristics.  There  la  so  much 
allusion  in  this  thanksgiving  song  to  the  "  song  of  Moses,"  that  Isaiah  cannot  bnt  be 
supposed  to  intend  some  conipiirison  between  the  two.  The  occasion,  however,  of  their 
utterance  is  so  different,  and  their  scale  and  method  of  construction  so  far  apart,  that 
it  is  difficult  to  draw  out  in  detail  any  comparison  between  the  two  that  would  not 
appear  forced  and  unnatural.  Moses's  song  is  a  burst  of  gratitude  for  a  particular 
temporal  mercy ;  the  Church's  thanksgiving  is  a  constant  outpour  of  thanks  and  praise 
for  continuous  spiritual  benefits.  The  song  may,  therefore,  better  be  considered  in  itself, 
as  a  moilel  to  "be  borne  in  mind,  and  in  its  main  points  followed,  by  the  Church  in  all 
ages.     We  may  regard  separately  (1)  its  form ;  (2)  its  matter ;  (3)  its  tone  and  spirit. 

I,  The  form  appropbiate  fob  thanksgiving.  The  form  employed  by  Isaiah  is  poetical. 
Ilis  song  consists  of  two  stanzas — one  of  six,  the  other  of  seven  lines. .  The  linos  are  of 
nearly  equal  length,  varying,  however,  between  three  and  four  feet.  The  predominant 
foot  is  the  iambic ;  but  there  is  an  admixture  of  anapaests  and  trochees.  The  details 
of  the  form  are  unimportant,  and  not  readily  transferable  from  poetry  so  peculiar  as 
the  Hebrew  to  the  poetry  of  modern  times  and  countries.  What  is  mainly  important 
is  the  simple  fact  of  the  thanksgiving  being  a  poem.  It  does  not,  of  course,  bind 
the  Church  to  express  thanksgiving  in  no  other  way,  but  it  is  a  strong  argument  for 
the  predominant  use  of  poetry  for  such  expression.  And  the  instinct  of  the  Church 
has  been  in  accordance.  From  the  first  she  has  made  the  Psalms  of  David  her 
especial  "  book  of  praise.''  She  has  found  in  other  parts  of  Scripture  a  number  of 
"  canticles "  framed  upon  the  same  Hebrew  model,  and  has  adopted  them  into  her 
services.  She  has  accepted  from  one  of  her  noblest  saints  the  glorious  poem  of  the 
"  Te  Deum."  She  has  found  one  hymn  of  praise,  worthy  of  frequent  use,  in  the 
Apocrypha.  And  further,  she  has  been  prolific  herself  of  hundreds  and  thousands  of 
sacred  songs,  written  in  a  score  of  languages,  and  in  more  varieties  of  metre  than  can  be 
counted,  with  which  her  members  delight  to  praise  God  in  the  congregation. 

II,  The  matter  appropbiate  fob  thanksgiving.  Thanksgiving  is  for  blessings 
or  benefits  received;  and  the  main  matter  for  thanksgiving  must  always  be  a  mention, 
more  or  less  full,  of  the  particular  blessings  or  benefits  for  which  the  thankfulness  is 
felt.  Moses  in  his  "  song "  dwells  at  some  length  on  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea  by 
Israel,  and  the  destruction  of  Pharaoh's  host  which  followed  (Exod.  xv.  1,  4 — 10, 12). 
The  Church,  according  to  Isaiah,  commemorates  her  deliverance  from  the  wrath  of 
God  (ver.  1),  her  possession  of  salvation  (ver.  2),  and  the  presence  of  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel  in  her  midst  (ver.  6).  In  her  deliverance  are  included  all  the  spiritual  benefits 
of  the  past,  in  her  salvation  all  the  joys  and  blessings  of  the  future ;  in  the  presence  of 
the  Holy  One  is  her  continual  actual  delight  and  happiness — a  delight  and  happiness 
that  words  are  feeble  to  paint.  What  is  most  remarkable  in  Isaiah's  representation 
is  the  absence  of  all  reference  to  temporal  bles.sings.  The  spiritual  benefits  absorb  all 
the  thought  and  attention  of  the  Church's  members,  and  are  alone  celebrated  in  their 
•ong  of  rejoicing. 

III,  Tub  tone    amd  spirit  pbopeb  foe  thanksgiving.    Thanksgiving   may  h« 


220  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIiH.  [ch.  xn.  1— 6 

fiirmal,  cold,  and  perfunctory,  or  it  may  be  heartfelt,  wann,  and  full  of  earnestness. 
Isaiah's  thanksgiving  song  is  a  model  of  hearty,  zbrIous,  earnest  praise.  It  expresses 
(1)  gratitude  for  past  favours ;  (2)  joy  in  preseut  !-alvation;  (3)  confidince  and  trust 
•in  God's  protecting  care  for  ihu  future;  (4)  anxiety  to  make  known  his  mercies  and 
cause  his  Name  to  be  praised  more  widely;  (5)  admiration  of  his  works;  (6)  adora- 
tion of  his  majesty.  The  abruptness  that  characterizes  it  is  •  sign  of  Tenemence ; 
the  repeated  calls  upon  others  to  join  in  indicate  a  strong  craving  for  sympathy. 
Altogether  the  tone  resemliles  that  of  some  of  the  later  psalms,  which  were,  perhaps, 
written  about. the  same  period  (see  Ps.  cxiii.,  cxvii.,  czxxiv.,  cxlix.). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — A  hymn  of  praise.  Some  orit'cs  say  that  the  iRnguago  and  the  tone  of 
thought  are  so  different  here  from  that  of  Isaiah,  ihat  the  hymnciinnot  befromliis  pen. 
'Ihe  theory  seems  probable  enough  that  "a  copyist  or  reader,  who  beheld  with  joy 
a  fulfilment  of  the  words  in  ch.  xi.  15,  16,  on  the  deliverance  from  the  Babylonian 
exile,  supplemented  the  oracle  with  these  jubilnnt  words." 

I.  The  full  hbaet  seeks  relief  in  rbligious  bono.  If  burdened  with  the  sense 
of  guilt,  it  must  have  its  litany  of  grief  and  depreiation.  Pain  in  the  mind,  the 
sense  of  lonely  suffering,  readily  translates  itself  into  tlie  image  of  the  anger  of  God. 
As  Madame  de  Stael  justly  remarks,  "  When  we  suffer,  we  easily  [lorsuade  ourselves 
that  we  are  gLiilty,  and  violent  griefs  carry  trouble  even  into  the  conscience."  And 
when  the  suffering  ceases,  it  seems  as  if  a  cloud  had  passed  from  the  sky,  and  the 
anger  of  Ged  were  allayed.  He  who  had  been  the  Judge  now  appears  as  tliC  Saviour; 
the  heart  that  had  been  trembling  as  the  bruised  reed  is  now  strong  as  if  the  feet  were 
based  on  eternal  rock.  Awhile  dejected  in  the  extreme,  "  writing  Ijitier  things  against 
itself,"  presently  it  is  filled  with  boasting  and  trinmph  in  the  sense  of  possessing  Gud, 
nay,  of  being  possessed  by  God.  There  is  a  long  gamut  of  religious  feelina  ;  in  critic.il 
moments  the  heart  may  run  through  every  tone  in  the  scale.  In  the  simple  life  of 
feeling  the  religious  spirit  expatiates.  The  habit  of  flower,  of  bird,  of  child,  upening  to 
the  sun,  singing  in  the  spring-time,  is  the  reflection  of  that  of  the  soid.  We  do  not 
suffer  our  memories  of  a  long  and  dreary  winler  to  mar  our  enjoyment  of  the  genial 
breath,  the  odours,  sights,  and  sounds  of  spring-time.  Nor  should  the  sen^c  of  the 
long  strngoles,  doubly  wintry  seasons  of  the  hiding  of  God's  face  from  the  soul,  linger  in 
those  moments  when  the  Sun  of  righteousness  returns  with  healing  in  his  wings,  and 
salivation  is  for  the  pre.^ent  a  fact,  no  longer  a  hope. 

II.  The  fitness  and  BEAtrTT  or  thakksgivikg.  To  withhold  thanks  from  an  earthly 
benefactor,  whose  hand  has  extracted  us  from  a  state  of  peril  or  need,  is  to  t-how  a 
deformed  Boul.  To  seal  the  fount  of  joyous  religious  expression,  is  the  way  to  have 
presently  nothing  to  express.  For  if  expression  follows  naturally  on  feeling,  so  the 
cultivation  of  religious  expression  tends  to  form  and  to  enrich  the  feeling  itself 
Nothing  an ifioial  is  recommended  j  bat  it  is  well  to  recognize  that  sentiment,  no  less 
than  thought,  remains  poorer  than  it  need  bo  without  training  ami  tillage.  This 
psalm  proliably  belongs  to  the  period  to  which  the  lust  section  of  the  psalter  belongs; 
they  are  songs  of  deliverance,  songs  of  return  from  exile,  as  those  which  immediately 
precede  them  refer  to  the  dispersion.  If  the  latter  sootlie  us  by  the  i)rofouud  insight 
into  Buffeting  and  sympathy  with  the  soul  in  its  seeming  loneliness  and  exile  from  God, 
no  less,  maybe,  the  psalms  of  the  return  educate  us  in  hope,  reminding  us  that  we  are 
on  our  way  to  God,  that  our  spiritual  exile  draws  to  its  close,  and  "  every  winter  yields 
to  spring." — J. 

V«r.  3. — A  religion  of  blessedness.  "Therefore  with  joy  hhall  ye  draw  water  out 
of  the  wells  of  salvation."  Religion  is  not  only  .safety,  it  i.s  1  lessi  dness— the  very 
highest  blessedness.  We  are  not  to  be  ever  in  fear  and  trembling  about  "  our  state," 
but  to  remember  that  ''  perfect  lovecasteih  out  fear."  A  really  religious  man  finds  that 
he  cannot  do  withottt  the  gospel  as  satisfying  his  c  ntire  being.  He  is  not  religious 
because  he  "  ought  to  be,"  or  must  be,  to  be  saved  ;  he  is  religious  because  also  it  is 
truest  joy. 


CH.  XIX.  1—6.]        THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH  221 


I.  Watier  must  BR  DRAWW.  Certainly.  The  wells  of  truth  are  deep  and  clear,  but 
we  must  coma  hither  in  one  sense  to  diaw.  It  is  quite  true  that  the  woman  of  Samaria 
at  Jacob's  well  said  to  the  Saviour, "  Give  me  this  water,  that  I  thirst  not,  neither  come 
hither  to  draw,"  and  that  Jesus  told  her  the  water  he  should  give  her  should  be  in  her 
"  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  But  at  the  same  time,  we  must 
remember  that  Jesus  spake  a  parable  about  "the  treasure  hid  in  a  field."  The  ideas  are 
both  true.  For  the  Christian  there  is  a  hidden  blessedness,  but  it  needs  discovering  by 
the  Word  and  the  Spirit  of  God.  Every  quiet  meditation,  every  prayerful  perusal  oi 
the  aacred  page,— this  is  a  diawing  of  water  out  of  the  »  ells  of  salvation. 

II.  Water  will  be  joyfully  drawn.  Not  "must  be,"  but  "will  be."  You 
cannot  command  "  pleasure  ; "  you  can  "  duty."  You  can  make  the  child  or  the  man 
read  Scripture,  hut  only  life  within  will  lead  them  to  draw  W!\ter  "  with  joy."  'I'he 
ai  t-student  loves  to  wander  in  the  foreign  galleries  and  to  gaze  upon  the  highest  ideala 
of  art.  We  listen  to  music  so  differently  when  we  love  and  delight  in  it.  And  a 
quickened  soul  loves  religion  far  its  own  sake. 

III.  Watkr  must  be  distributed  when  drawn.  We  can  "  give  "  the  cup  as  well 
as  drink  of  the  cup.  It  is  the  water  that  is  so  precious,  not  the  wooden  cup  or  the 
gulden  chalice  that  contains  it.  It  is  not  new  "  theories  "  and  "  views  "  and  "  opinions  " 
that  are  precious,  but  the  Word  of  the  living  God,  which  is  the  pure  water  of  life,  and 
of  which  whoso  drink  shall  live ;  for  the  written  Word  all  leads  to  the  living  Word — 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  men. 

IV.  The  many  wells  are  fed  by  one  fountain.  History  or  prophecy ;  Gospel  or 
Episllo;  precept  or  promise;  the  record  of  Pai'adise  lost,  in  Genesis;  or  the  story  of 
I'ararlise  regained,  in  the  Apocalypse ; — all  these  are  filled  from  the  same  Divine 
fountain.  It  is  the  Spiiit  that  testifies  of  Christ;  for  "  the  testimony  of  Jesus ''  is 
the  theme  of  liistory  and  "  the  spirit  of  prophecy."  Many  wells!  Ye»;  but  "all  my 
springs  ai'e  in  thee." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  1. — Eeconeiliaiion  with  Ood.     These  words  may  have — 

I.  A  national  fdlfilment.  The  Jews  might  have  taken  these  words  into  their 
lips  after  the  discomfiture  of  Sennacherib,  or,  with  fuller  meaning  later  on,  after 
the  return  from  captivity  and  the  rebuildinj;  of  the  walls  of  .lerusalem  (Neb.  vi.  15,  16). 
Other  nations,  after  retributive  sufferings  and  signal  deliverances  or  restorations,  may 
appropriately  use  this  reverent  language. 

II.  Their  fulfilment  in  the  circumstanoeb  of  many  an  individual  life. 
1.  The/re  is  spiritvMl  dedenaion.  A  mrm  has  been  living  professedly  in  the  service  of 
God,  but  his  devotion  has  been  dying  down,  his  obedience  has  been  growing  lax,  his 
usefulness  has  been  diminishing  and  may  have  come  down  to  nothing.  2.  Then  comes 
Divine  correction.  God  speaks  to  him  in  chastening  love ;  he  sends  the  affiiction  that 
is  intended  to  awaken  him  from  his  half-heartedness  in  the  service  and  cause  of  Christ. 
3.  Then  comes  conviction  and  amendment  on  his  part;  a  return  to  the  higher  and 
worthier  life  he  lived  before.  4.  And  then  the  chastisement  is  removed.  (Ps.  ciii.  8,  9.) 
God's  anger  is  visibly,  sensibly,  consciously  "  turned  away ; "  the  heavenly  Father 
"  comforts  "  him  with  his  loving  favour ;  and  there  follows :  5.  The  grateful  and  joyous 
song  of  praise. 

III.  Their  fulfilment  in  the  expbmenoe  of  every  sood  man.  In  the  case  of 
every  one  who  enters  into  the  full  heritage  of  those  Messianic  blessings  which  are  the 
subject  of  prophecy  in  this  chapter,  there  will  be  found :  1.  A  sense  of  Divine  dis- 
pleasure; reason  enough  for  saying,  "0  Lord,  thou  art  angry  with  me."  The  word 
"anger"  in  its  honourable  sense  is  certainly  referable  to  the  I)ivine  mind.  We  are  not 
to  identify  the  faulty  irritation  of  which  we  are  too  often  conscious  with  the  "  anger  " 
which  is  here  and  elsewhere  applied  to  the  Supreme.  That  feeling,  at  once  holy  and 
painful,  which  a  faithful  father  feels  towards  his  son  when  he  has  done  something- 
which  is  shamefully  wrong,  is  the  fueling,  deepened,  refined,  ennobled  by  divinity, 
which  the  heavenly  Father  and  righteous  Buler  feels  toward  us  when  we  sin  a-jainst 
him  and  against  his  holy  Law.  We  may  call  it  by  that  name  which  is  most  significant 
or  appropriate  to  our  own  thought,  but,  however  it  may  be  denoted,  it  becomes  ui  to 
recognize  the  fact,  to  be  affected  and  to  be  ajfflicted  by  the  fact,  that  God,  the  holy  and 
loving  One,  feels  towards  those  who  have  wilfully  broken  his  laws  or  who  deliberately 


822  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPUET   ISAIAH.  [ch.  xn.  1— 6. 


reject  his  overtures  of  mercy,  a  serious  Divine  displeasure.  He  is  pained,  grieved, 
angry.  He  blames  us,  he  condemns  us,  he  holds  us  to  be  deserving  of  retribution. 
2.  The  removal  of  Ood's  wrath.  Two  things  are  needed  for  this:  (1)  repentance  and 
(2)  faith  (see  Acts  xi.  21) ;  the  turning  of  the  heart,  and  therefore  of  the  life,  from 
selfishness  and  sin  ;  and  the  cordial  acceptance  of  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Propitiation  for 
our  sin  and  the  Sovereign  of  our  soul.  Without  these  we  have  no  right  to  loolt  for  the 
turning  away  of  God's  anger ;  with  these  we  may  he  perfectly  assured  of  it.  3.  An 
abiding  sense  of  the  Divine  favour,  "Thou  comfortedst  me."  Gud's  "comfort"  is 
not  always  simultaneous  with  the  exercise  of  his  mercy ;  there  may  be  an  interval 
of  no  short  duration  between  t!ie  act  of  Divine  forgive  ness  and  that  blessed  sense  of 
reconciliation  which  we  call  "assurance  of  salvation  "  (Ps.  xxxii.  1,  2,  7,  11).  Let  no 
one  despond  because  he  does  not  find  himself  possessed  of  inward  peace  and  sacred  joy 
as  soon  as  his  heart  turns  to  God  and  to  his  salvation.  Let  such  a  one  continue  to 
ask,  to  seek,  to  trust,  to  hope,  and  in  due  time  the  light  will  shine  into  the  soul.  It 
does  not  always  come  as  the  lightning-flash — cine  moment  the  blackness  of  darkness 
and  the  next  a  dazzling  light — but  often  as  comes  the  returning  day ;  first  a  few  streaks 
of  miirning,  then  the  darkness  turning  into  grey,  then  the  deepening  light  as  the  hours 
advance,  at  length  the  full  brilliancy  of  noon.  4:.  A  life  of  songful  gratitude.  "At 
that  day,"  and  through  all  remaining  days,  until  the  night  of  death  shall  usher  in  the 
endless  morning  of  immortality,  the  comforted  heart  will  say,  "  0  Lord,  I  will  praise 
thee."— 0. 

Ver.  2. — The  greatness  of  Ood's  goodness.  We  have  in  these  words  the  very  exube- 
rance of  holy  feeling.     They  refer  us  to — 

I.  The  shpbeme  act  of  God's  goodness.  "  God  is  my  Salvation."  He  has  been 
wonderfully  gracious  to  us  in  lestowal — ^in  the  gifts  of  our  being,  of  our  spiritual  nature 
with  its  varied  capacities,  of  our  physical  nature  with  all  its  organs  of  activity  and 
eujoyrncnt,  of  our  human  relationships,  of  a  rich  and  beautiful  dwelling-place,  etc. 
But  his  greatest  kindness  is  felt  by  us  to  be  in  deliverance,  in  that  which  is  called 
"  salvation."  Here,  again,  there  is  an  ascent  in  the  scale  of  Divine  goodness ;  for 
higher  than  salvation  from  trouble,  from  sickness,  from  death,  from  personal  captivity 
or  political  servitude,  stands  salvation  from  sin ;  and  in  the  Meosianio  era  this  spiritual 
deliverance  reaches  its  highest  point ;  lor  it  includes  not  only  the  negative  side  of  rescue 
from  [ireseiit  evil,  but  also  the  positive  side  of  enrichment  with  corresponding  good.  It 
embraces:  1.  Kedemption  from  sin — hs penalty  ani  its  power  (its  thraldom  and  its 
defilement).  2.  Eestoration  to  God — to  hisfavour  and  to  his  likeness.  3.  The  hope  of 
a  higher  a:  id  endless  life  in  another  world. 

II.  The  continuance  of   his  greatest  OIFT    in    imparting  BPIBITUAIi   BTHBNaTH. 

He  "  forsakes  not  the  work  of  his  own  hands."  Having  redeemed  us  from  the  power 
»nd  condi  mnation  of  sin,  and  lifted  us  up  into  the  state  of  sonship  and  heirship,  lie 
sustains  us  in  om-  new  and  blessed  life.  "  The  Lord  Jehovah  is  our  Strength."  He 
imparts  the  needful  strength  for  maintenance  in  our  course  by  (1)  the  privileges  of 
the  gospel ;  (2)  the  discipline  of  his  holy  providence ;  (3)  the  direct  influences  of  his 
own  Spirit. 

III.  The  bbsponse  of  oub  hearts  to  the  Divine  love.  1.  ITie  gratitude  which 
finds  utterance  in  sacred  song.  "The  Lord  ...  is  my  Song"  (see  Ps.  cxix.  54). 
The  Christian  man  should  carry  in  his  heart  such  a  sense  of  God's  redeeming  love  that 
he  should  be  always  ready  to  break  forth  into  praise;  his  life  should  be  a  song  of  grati- 
tude for  the  salvation  of  the  Lord.  2.  The  confidence  which  excludes  anxiety.  "  I  will 
trust,  and  not  be  afraid."  (1)  Many  are  the  occasions  of  human  fear  and  anxiety — the 
honourable  maintenance  of  the  family ;  the  preservation  of  our  personal  integrity,  both 
moral  and  spiritual ;  the  faithful  discharge  of  duty  in  the  post  we  have  undertaken  to 
fill ;  the  adorning  of  our  Christian  profession ;  our  passage  through  the  gateway  of 
death,  etc.  (2)  We  are  wholly  insufficietit  of  ourselves  to  meet  these,  and  to  triumph 
over  them  (2  Cor.  iii.  5).  (3)  But,  confiding  in  God,  we  may  go  forth  without  anxiety, 
Assured  of  bis  Divine  help  (Pa.  xxvii.  1;  IvL  H — 13;  cxviii.  6 — 8;  Heb.  xiii. 
5,6).— O. 

Ver.  3. — Thtjoy  of  Chritt't  talvation.    These  words  of  prophecy  must  have  been 


0H.XII.1— 6.]  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  223 

peculiarly  precious  to  those  who  first  heard  them.  They  sound  very  musical  to  lu,  but 
tliey  must  seem  more  melodious  still  to  the  Oriental  ear.  We  know  that  water  is  an 
invaluable  thing,  but  it  is  only  they  who  have  lived  or  travelled  in  tropical  countries 
that  appreciate  all  that  is  meant  by  burning  drought  or  by  refreshing  strean>s.  And  as 
words  gather  sweetness  and  excellency  to  the  ear  as  they  become  associated  with  that 
which  we  most  prize,  so  we  may  be  sure  that  the  words  "  water  "  and  "  wells  "  had  a 
most  inviting  sound  to  the  people  of  Palestine,  and  that  this  passage  had  (as  we  should 
say)  a  "  golden  ring  "  in  the  hearing  of  the  Jews.  It  may  bring  before  us  the  joy 
which  springs  from  the  salvation  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  several  stages  of  our 
experience. 

I.  Profound  and  most  blessed  peace.  It  is  said  that  the  most  exquisite  sensation 
that  mortal  man  enjoys  is  experienced  in  the  sudden  cessation  of  excruciating  pain. 
Similarly  we  may  truly  say  that  the  most  profound  satisfaction  of  the  soul  is  felt  in 
a  blessed  consciousness  of  the  removal  of  Divine  condemnation;  in  other  words,  in  a 
sense  of  forgiven  sin.  The  "  peace  of  God  "  not  only  "  passeth  understanding,"  but  it  is 
a  truer  and  a  deeper  calm  than  any  other  which  is  born  of  outward  Circumstance  or 
human  favour.    This  frequently  passes  into — 

II.  The  jot  which  rises  into  holt  rapture.  "  Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have 
peace  with  Grod ;  .  .  .  and  not  only  so,  but  we  also  joy  in  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ"  (Rom.  V.  1, 11).  The  sense  of  God's  fatherly  love,  the  conviction  that  sin, 
condemnation,  death,  hell — all  the  really  evil  and  harmful  things — are  left  behind  for 
ever,  and  that  before  us  is  an  ever-ascending  path  of  wisdom,  righteousness,  and  joy, 
will  awaken  in  the  soul  a  rapturous  delight  compared  with  which  the  excitements  and 
delectations  of  earth  are  very  poor  affairs. 

III.  The  jotous  activities  or  the  soul  throughout  all  its  Christian  course. 
With  joy  we  "draw  water."  In  the  activities  that  are  distinctively  Christian  we  find  a 
positive  delight — a  source  of  satisfaction  which  does  not  injure,  but  ennoble ;  which  does 
not  pall  and  fade,  but  abide  and  deepen.  In  the  course  of  our  Christian  experience  we 
have :  1.  Tht  joy  of  praise ;  of  pouring  forth  our  trust  and  gratitude  in  strains  of 
sacred  song,  "singing  and  making  melody  in  the  heart."  2.  The  joy  of  fellowship; 
holding  glad  communion  with  the  heavenly  Father,  with  the  Divine  Friend  of  our 
spirits;  holding  reverent  and  rejoicing  intercourse  with  him  both  in  social  worship 
and  in  the  hour  of  solitude;  bavins,  also,  happy  and  heart-gladdening  "fellowship 
one  with  another."  3.  The  joy  of  hope;  the  eager  anticipation  of  a  blessedness  and 
glory  which  will  follow  the  strife  and  sufi'ering  of  this  present  time.  Learn  (1)  the 
lolly  of  refusing  this  heritage  of  joy;  (2)  the  serious  and  mischievous  mistake  of 
giving  a  joyless  impression  of  Christian  service. — 0. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — Exultation  and  activity.  There  is  a  jubilant  strain  throughout  these 
verses;  not,  however,  without  a  sense  of  some  sacred  duty  to  be  performed.  We 
learn — 

I.  That  the  Church  of  Christ  mat  well  speak  in  the  accents  of  exultation. 
The  terms  of  the  prophecy  do  not  seem  to  be  satisfied  with  anything  less  than 
Messianic  blessings;  they  fit  perfectly  the  estate  to  which  Christ  has  called  us;  they 
belong  to  that  "  kingdom  of  heaven "  of  which  the  Son  of  man  had  so  much  to 
say  (see  Matt.  xiii.).  The  Church  may  exult  in  that:  1.  God  has  dont  such  great 
things  for  her,  in  (1)  the  large  and  long  preparation,  through  many  ages,  for  her 
redemption ;  (2)  the  supreme  act  of  Divine  revelation  in  the  person  of  his  Son ; 
(3)  the  wonderful  sacrifice  of  himself  he  made  on  its  behalf  (2  Cor.  viii.  9) ;  (4)  the 
lofty  privileges  to  which  he  has  summoned  it — holy  service,  affectionate  sonship, 
eager-hearted  heirship.  2.  OoA  himself,  the  mighty  and  victorious  One,  is  dwelling 
in  the  midst  of  it.  "  Great  is  the  Holy  One."  If  the  family  is  proud  of  its 
honoured  father,  the  army  of  its  invincible  captain,  the  nation  of  its  illustrious 
sovereign,  how  much  more  shall  the  Church  exult  in  its  almighty  and  victorious 
Lord!  He  is  great  in  all  the  elements  of  greatness — in  external  majesty,  in  intrinsic 
excellency,  in  overcoming  energy,  in  transcendent  beauty,  in  the  everlasting  character 
of  his  kingdom. 

II.  That  exultation  does  well  to  pass  soon  into  holt  and  beneficent  aotivitt. 
Blending  with  these  accents  of  triumph,  and  harmonizing  with  them,  is  the  voice  of 


224  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        fen-  xu.  1—6 

exhortation,  the  summons  to  useful  activity :  "  Praise  the  Lord  ; "  «'  Call  upon  his 
Name  5 "  "  Declare  his  doings ; "  "  Be  this  known  [let  this  be  known]  in  all  the  earth." 
Jehovah's  greatness  could  only  he  known  among  the  nations  by  the  unicd  and 
continuous  testimony  of  the  people  of  God.  The  gloiiis  of  liis  grace,  as  they  !>hine 
in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  are  to  be  beheld  by  all  peoples ;  but  they  must  be  fLflected 
from  the  lives  and  published  by  the  lips  of  his  faithlul  servants.  It  is  the  privilege 
and  the  duty  of  the  Church  to  carry  the  knowledge  of  his  Name  and  truth  to  the 
utmost  ends  of  the  earth.  It  is  well  to  rejoice,  '•  to  sing  for  joy,"  to  indulge  in 
pious  exultation;  it  is  better  to  act  in  such  a  way  that  m.iglibourJng  nations  (cities, 
districts,  streets,  homes)  shall  draw  from  the  wells  of  this  i;rcat  salvation  the  waters 
of  eternal  life  ;  better,  both  because  (1)  we  communicate  blessing  thereby,  and  because 
(2)  we  gain  iucrea.se  of  spiritual  worth  by  so  doing. — C. 

Ver.  2. — Holy  joy  in  Ood.  In  each  national  history  there  is  some  one  surpassingly 
great  event.  A  Thcrmopylas  for  Greece  ;  a  Leipsic  fur  Germany  ;  a  Moscow  for  Russia ; 
a  Waterloo  for  England.  The  Jews  had  one  great  event,  supreme  in  its  influence  on 
their  national  life.  By  his  relation  to  that  event  God  would  even  be  known.  "I  am 
the  Lord  thy  Gud,  which  brought  thoe  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of 
bondage."  All  other  deliverances,  acconnilished  afterwards,  were  treated  but  as 
reminders  of  this.  All  songs  of  thanksgiving,  sung  over  subsequent  redumptions,  were 
modelled  after  the  "song  of  Jloses,"  of  which  the  chorus  was  sung  by  tens  of  thousands, 
led  by  the  timbrels  and  dances  of  the  women,  on  the  fun  lier  shores  of  the  sea.  And  there 
was  much  in  that  event  which  fitted  it  to  hold  such  a  [ilaee  in  the  thoughts  of  generations. 
It  was  the  deliverance  which,  once  and  fur  ever,  assured  the  world  of  the  fact  Ihat  God 
— the  One,  living,  and  true  God — was  the  God  of  the  Jewish  race.  One  can  hardly 
imagine  the  excitement  and  the  triumph  of  that  time.  The  mightiest  nation  of  that 
day  roused  itself,  in  a  paroxysm  of  furious  revenge,  to  pursue  and  to  destroy  what  it 
regarded  as  a  crowd  of  fleeing  slaves.  What  hope  could  there  be  for  such  a  multitude, 
when  the  king  himself,  a  host  of  armed  warriors,  prancing  horses,  mighty  chariots, 
pressed  on  after  them  ;  when  the  pathless  waters  of  a  great  sea  waved  and  rolled  before 
them, and  the  mountains  hemmed  them  in  on  the  furtiar  side?  If  we  were  reading 
common  human  history,  such  a  story  could  only  have  endeil  soniovihat  in  this  way  : 
"  And  the  frightened  crowds  of  fugitives  were  pressed  on  and  on  into  the  pitiless  waters, 
or  were  ruthlessly  cut  down  and  slain  by  the  advancing  hosts."  But  we  are  reading  a 
page  out  of  sacred  history.  There  are  the  words,  "  Stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of 
God  ;  "  and,  behohl,  those  waters  are  arrested  in  their  flowing :  they  roll  back  in  swelling 
heaps;  the  ocean  bod  lies  bare;  and  those  "slaves"  step  steadily  across  the  strangest 
pathway  ever  made  for  mortal  feet  to  tread.  Pharaoh's  chariots  and  horsemen  dash 
boldly  forward  into  the  way  that  was  not  made  for  them.  The  Red  Sea  was  bright 
with  the  banners,  and  flashed  with  the  shields  of  warrioj'S  ;  and  then — dragging  wheels, 
softening  sauils,  hurrying  waves,  and  the  pride  of  Egypt  is  broken :  "  Pharaoh's  chariots 
and  horsemen  hath  he  cast  into  the  sea."  God  was  magnified  that  day,  magnified  in 
deliverance,  and  magnified  in  judgment.  He  was  that  day  the  Salvation  of  his  people, 
and  they  stood  upon  the  shores  of  that  flood,  uniting  in  one  triumphant  shout,  and 
saying,  "Sing  ye  to  the  Lord,  fur  he  hath  triurniihed  gluriuusly."  'J'he  verses  preceding 
the  text  allude  to  this  scene.  The  spiritual  blis.sings  of  Messiah's  reign"  are  described 
under  the  figure  of  this  pa-^sage  of  ihe  sea.  Eruni  all  siiiritual  scatterings  and  bondages 
and  captivities,  Messiah  shall  bring  his  peoi  le.  The  te.\t  is  part  of  a  song  to  be  sung 
by  the  spiritually  ransomed — a  song  formed,  partly,  ui)on  the  model  of  that  older  song 
of  Mosos.  We  gather  from  it  that  a  spirit  of  humble  and  trustful  joy  in  Gud  is  the 
proper  spirit  for  redeemed  souls  to  cherish. 

I.  Bbasons  fob  maintalnuiq  a  spibit  or  HOLT  JOT  IN  God.  Too  often  the  sombre 
sides  of  Christian  experience  are  dwelt  on,  and  young  people  take  needlessly  dark 
uuiloM  of  the  pious  life.  The  model  of  the  Christliness  is  not  the  calm  sister  of  mercy, 
but  the  ielf-denying  mother,  the  gentle,  thoughtful,  active  elder  sister,  the  strong  man, 
wlioso  bright  face  and  cheery  words  and  sinless  laugh  can  kindle  the  gladness  of  those 
around  him.  The  Bible  is  full  of  song.  Its  face  can,  indeed,  settle  into  the  severest 
gravity,  into  the  sternness  of  righteous  indignation,  into  a  tenderness  of  sympathy ;  but 
t)i«  f*ce  of  the  Bible  can  also  break  into  smiles.    Ripples  cross  ripjdes,  and  waves  leap. 


CH.  xn.  1— 6.]  THE  BOOK   OF   THE    PROPHET    ISAIAH.  522. 

over  waves,  on  the  surface  of  its  sea ;  it  can  waken  our  faculty  of  song,  it  can  fill  our 
life  with  its  joy  in  God.  It  is  well,  however,  for  us  to  distinguish  between  "  happiness  " 
and  "joy."  It  would  he  true  to  say  that  religion  does  not  promise  happiness,  it  promises 
joy.  It  would  even  he  true  to  say,  that  religion  does  not  promise  happiness  because  it 
promises  joy.  "  Joy  "  is  so  much  deeper,  so  much  more  satisfying  and  blessed,  that  he 
who  has  it  will  never  ask  for  happiness.  Observe  the  distinction  in  the  meaning  of  the 
words.  "  Happiness  "  is  pleasure  in  something  that  may  "  hap,"  or  "  happen ;  "  pleasure 
in  things  outside  us — in  circumstances,  in  excitements— 'and  so  it  cannot  he  abiding 
and  unchanging.  All  days  cannot  be  sunny.  All  lives  cannot  be  painless  and  sor- 
rowless.  All  circumstances  cannot  please.  He  who  wants  happiness  has  to  depend  on 
the  variable  conditions  of  a  sin-stricken  and,  therefore,  sorrow-filled  earth.  Mere  happi- 
ness too  often  proves  only  "  as  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot."  But  "joy  "  means 
"  leaping  out,"  pleasure  that  gushes  forth  from  a  fountain  within  us,  in  streams  ever 
refreshing  the  desert  ciroumstatices  around  us,  and  making  them  "  blossom  as  «  rose." 
Pleasure  that  beams  out  its  holy  rays,  as  from  a  central  sun  of  bliss  dwelling  in  our 
heart,  and  gilding  everything  about  us,  making  the  very  light  brighter,  the  clouds  fr) 
scatter,  or  to  be  flushed  with  crimson  glories,  and  turning  even  the  niglit  to  day.  The 
Christian  man  has  no  security  of  mere  happiness.  He  must  share  tiie  common  mingled 
heritage  of  sunshine  and  shadow,  health  and  sickness,  friendship  and  loss,  pleasures  and 
disappointments,  success  and  failure.  But  he  may  be  secure  of  joy.  "  He  that  bolieveth 
on  me,"  said  the  Lord  Jesus,  "  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water."  And 
close  by  our  text  we  read,  "With  joy  shall  ye  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation." 
The  one  great  reason  for  joy  is  stated  to  be  that  "  God  is  become  our  Salvation."  We 
joy  in  God  (1)  as  the  unchanging  One ;  (2)  as  the  almighty  One ;  (3)  as  the  alHoving 
One  5  (4)  as  the  redeeming  One.  It  is,  we  have  seen,  a  memory  of  deliverances  which 
calls  forth  into  expression  the  trustful  joy  of  our  text.  And  what  have  we  to  say  of 
gifts  bestowed,  sicknesses  healed,  broken  hearts  comforted,  bondages  of  evil  broken  up? 
We  keep  the  word  "  salvation "  too  exclusively  for  the  forgiveness  of  sins  and  recon- 
ciliation with  God ;  we  want  it  to  include  all  the  multiplied  and  ever-repeated  deliver- 
ances and  resouings  and  recoverings  of  God.  Matthew  Henry  says,  "  God  is  my 
Salvation ;  not  my  Saviour  only,  by  whom  I  am  saved,  but  my  '  Salvation,'  in  whom  I 
am  safe.  lie  shall  have  the  glory  of  all  the  salvations  which  have  been  wrought  in  mc, 
and  from  him  only  will  I  expect  all  the  future  salvations  I  may  need."  The  salvation 
of  God's  ancient  people  was  not  the  deliverance  from  Egypt  only,  but  that  togeth'  r 
with  a  thousand  other  deliverances  scattered  over  their  history.  And  so  we  joy  in  God 
because  he  saves  us  from  all  our  bondages.  He  saves  UvS  from  pride,  from  inward  lusts, 
from  outw  ard  evils.  He  saves  us  from  greed,  and  covetousness,  and  clinging  to  the 
world,  and  envyings,  and  backbitings,  and  unforgivings,  and  failing  charity.  Souls 
can  never  sing  that  have  such  fetters  on  them ;  but  he  piuclaims  "  liberty  to  the  captive, 
and  opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are  bound." 

II.  The  hallowing  inplubnce  which  a  spirit  of  holt  jot  m  GtOD  would  exebt 
OK  ouEBELVEB,  AND  ON  THOSE  ABOUND  VS.  In  Ordinary  life  the  men  of  sanguine,  hopeful 
temperament  are  usually  the  successful  men.  Despondent,  doubting  men  accomplish 
but  little.  The  invigorating  of  hope  makes  men  mightier  than  their  difficulties.  It  is 
the  same  in  Christian  life.  Doubt  and  fear  hinder.  Hope  cheers.  Joy  puts  »ong  into 
work.  Ought  a  Christian  to  live  in  a  minor  key?  Sonj^s  pitched  thus  will  never 
cheer  himself,  or  auy  one  about  him.  Joyful  Christians  are  a  joy  to  themselves,  and  to^ 
all  around  them.  The  homes  are  brightened  by  them  ;  the  children  learn  to  watch  their 
faces,  and  to  listen  for  their  words  ;  our  Churches  rejoice  ui  the  sunny-souled  merabcr?i. 
Everybody  is  glad  in  the  man  whose  very  presence  seems  to  say,  "  Sing  unto  the  Lord 
a  new  song,"     Such  Christians  let  us  all  seek  to  be, 

"  Ye  pilgrims  on  the  road 

To  Zion's  city,  sing; 
Sing  on,  rejoicing  every  d.iy 
In  Christ  th'  eternal  Kiug." 

».  T. 

Yer.  2.— Faith  and/ear.    "1  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid."    This  expression  remind* 
as  (1)  of  our  liability  to/ear,  and  (2)  of  tho  power  of  faith  to  overcome  fear. 

ISAIAU,  « 


•^M  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [uii.  xii.  1—6. 

I.  OuB  LIABILITY  TO  FEAR.  1.  As  dependent  creatures.  2.  Because  of  tli*  gre»t 
mysteries  of  existence  that  are  around  us — mysteries  of  God  ;  of  self;  of  sin ;  of  provi- 
dence ;  of  judgment ;  of  the  Juture.  S.  In  view  of  the  possibility  of  our  own  failure 
from  goodness. 

II.  The  power  of  faith  to  overcome  fear.  Trust  can  (1)  keep  hold  of  tl  e  pro- 
mises ;  (2)  see  satisfying  visions  ol  God  himself.  He  who  is  "  for  us  is  more  than  all 
they  that  can  be  against  us."  "This  faith — this  simple  believing  trust  in  God — will 
keep  the  soul  in  quietness  in  view  of  all  the  mysteries,  and  of  all  the  dark  possibilities 
of  life  aud  dealh.  When  reason  is  at  fault,  when  wisdom  gropes  for  the  way  and  falls 
into  the  ditch,  when  strength  trembles  and  sinks  into  feebleness,  faiih  keeps  the  heart 
in  quietness  and  confidence.  Whence  has  it  this  power?  Because  it  rests  on  Divine 
declarations,  deeper  and  wider  than  natural  laws ;  on  Divine  promises,  surer  than  the 
hills ;  on  Divine  power,  stronger  than  gravitation  and  the  sweep  of  ten  thousand 
worlds;  nay,  on  a  Divine  Person,  in  whom  all  faithfulness,  power,  and  love  for  ever 
dwell"  (Dr.  A.  Raleigh) —B.  T. 

Ver.  3. — 2%e  wells  of  salvation.  A  very  expressive  image  in  a  hot  country.  Wells 
are  treated  in  contrast  with  cisterns,  which  only  store  the  drainage  of  the  ground.  Wells 
are  fed  from  springs  and  storehouses  treasured  in  the  heart  of  the  earth.  Inside  Caris- 
brooke  Castle  is  a  deep  well,  which  ensured  constant  supply  for  the  garrison,  however 
closely  the  castle  might  be  besieged.  Salvation  is  like  a  well ;  forth  from  it  ever  comes 
"  living  water."  It  is  not  like  a  man-made  cintem,  which  only  holds  a  limited  quantity, 
and  is  apt  to  fail  in  the  supreme  hour  of  need.  There  may  be  a  reference  to  the  custom 
associated  with  one  of  the  great  feasts.  On  the  last  day  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles — 
some  say  on  each  day — the  Jews  used  to  bring  water  in  a  golden  pitcher  from  the  fountain 
of  Siloam,  and  pour  it,  mingled  with  wine,  on  the  sacrifice  on  the  altar,  with  great 
rejoicing.  Illustrating  the  joy  of  finding  fresh  and  living  water  in  hot  countries,  "  it  is 
said  that  while  the  French  engineers  were  boring  for  water  in  the  African  desert,  the 
Arabs  looked  on  in  silent  wonder,  until  they  saw  the  precious  stream  actually  gushing 
forth,  and  then  their  joy  knew  no  bounds ;  and  sweet  and  precious  as  the  cooling  waters 
are  now  to  the  weary  labouring  child  of  the  desert,  so  precious  were  they  to  the  people 
to  whom  the  words  of  the  prophet  were  originally  addressed ;  and  the  promise  to  them 
of  an  indefinite  supply  of  that  element  would  be  highly  appreciated  by  them,  and  well 
calculated  to  inspire  their  gratitude  and  joy."  The  idea  of  the  text  may  be  thus  given : 
Out  of  the  wells  of  salvation  in  God,  who  is  the  Fountain  of  all  good  to  his  people,  you 
shall  draw  water  with  joy.  Matthew  Henry  suggests  three  good  topics  for  meditation. 
"  1.  God's  promises,  revealed,  ratified,  and  given  out  to  us  in  his  ordinances,  are  wells 
of  salvation ;  wells  of  the  Saviour  (so  some  read  it),  for  in  them  the  Saviour  and  sal- 
vation are  made  known  to  us  and  made  over  to  us.  2.  It  is  our  duty  by  faith  to  draw 
water  out  of  these  wells,  to  take  to  ourselves  the  benefit  and  comfort  that  are  treasured 
up  for  us  in  them,  as  those  that  acknowledge  all  our  fresh  springs  to  be  there,  and  all 
our  fresh  streams  to  be  thence  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  7).  3.  Water  is  to  be  drawn  out  of  the  wells 
of  salvation  with  a  great  deal  of  pleasure  and  satisfaction.  It  is  the  will  of  God  that 
we  should  rejoice  before  him,  and  rejoice  in  him  (Deut.  xxvi.  11) ;  be  joyful  in  his  house 
of  prayer  (ch.  Ivi  7),  and  keep  his  feasts  with  gladness  (Acts  IL  46)."  Like  well-water, 
salvation  is — 

I.  Ever  fresh.    And  so  ever  pleasant. 

II.  Ever  abundant.  Fulness  for  whosoever  will.  Compare  cisterns,  or  wadys  of 
deserts.  Salvation  is  a  perennial  fount,  a  "  perpetual  tide  ;  it  flows  for  you,  for  me,  for 
all." 

IIL  Ever  free.     Nobody  can  seal  up  this  fountain, 

IV.  Ever  hbalth-givikg.  Restoring,  requickeningi  It  is  healing  for  the  rick, 
strength  for  the  disabled,  life  for  those  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  What  can 
surpass  in  power  to  bring  us  joy  our  sense  of  the  fitness  and  the  fulness  of  the  "  great," 
the  "  common  "  sal  vatioQ  ? — R.  T. 

Ver.  4. — God!'s  new  name  the  old  one  glorified.  "  Call  upon  his  Name,"  which  is,  in 
Messiah,  "Jehovah  Jesus,"  "  Immanuel  Jesus,"  or  "God  with  us  saving  us  from  our 
sins."     To  call  upon  God's  Name  is  to  publicly  give  him  the  glory  that  is  his  due. 


OH.  xui.  1— 22.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH. 


227 


I.  Tbe  old  name  IB  God  the  Pbovideb.  The  God  who  meeti  and  supplies  all 
ordinary  human  wants.  "  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob."  The  God  of  whom  Jacob 
could  say,  "  He  fed  me  all  my  life  long."  The  God  "  in  whose  hand  our  breath  ii, 
and  whose  are  all  our  ways."  "  Who  giveth  to  each  his  meat  in  dne  season,"  "  Who 
crowneth  us  with  loving-kindnesses  and  tender  mercies :  who  satisfieth  our  mouth  with 
good  things." 

"  II.  The  new  name  n  God  the  Saviou*.  Who  "  redeemeth  our  life  from  destruc- 
tion." Who  "  delivers  from  going  down  to  the  pit."  Who  "  gave  himself  a  Bansom 
for  ug."  Who  brought  "  deliverance  for  the  captives,  and  opening  of  the  prison  to  them 
that  are  bound."  Who  is  "able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost."  Who  is  "exalted  a 
Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  unto  Israel,  and  remission  of  sins." 

III.  The  new  name  only  tells  of  God  providing  iob  mam's  sorest  need  and 
SADDEST  CONDITION.  He  is  not  just  in  trouble;  he  is  in  «tn.  Stained  with  it,  bruised 
with  it,  degraded  by  it,  in  peril  through  it,  made  helpless  by  it.  The  man  in  sin  cannot 
save  himself;  no  fellow-man  can  save  him.  The  Hero  from  Bozrah,  who  speaks  in 
righteousness,  alone  is  "mighty  to  save"  (ch.  Ixiii.  1). — B.  T. 

Ver.  5. — God  honoured  througTi  his  mercies.  "  Sing  unto  the  Lord ;  for  he  hath  done 
excellent  things."  A  comprehensive  term,  summing  up  all  that  God  had  done  for  his 
people  through  the  long  ages.  The  Hebrew  indicates  an  echo  from  Exod.  xt.  1,  "  He 
hath  triumphed  gloriously."  Eeviewing  God's  wondrous  workings,  we  may  regard 
them  from  three  points  of  view. 

I.  They  are  things  which  we  ought  to  admire. 

II.  They  are  things  which  we  ought  to  study. 

III.  They  are  things  which  we  ought  to  peel. 
to  us  a»  frail,  and  their  mercifulness  to  us  as  sinners. 

mercy.  Christ  is  the  embodiment  of  mercy.  "  Oh  that  men  would  praise  the  Lord  for 
his  goodness,  and  for  his  wonderful  works  towards  the  sons  of  men  I "  Thy  mercy 
"  endureth  for  ever." — R.  T, 


Because  of  their  graciousness 
The  great  glory  of  God  is  his 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  Xin. 

The  Bceden  or  Babylon.  The  series  of 
prophecies  which  commences  with  this  chapter 
and  continues  to  the  close  of  oh.  xxiii.,  is 
connected  together  by  the  word  maesa, 
burden.  It  has  been  argued  that  the  term 
"  burden  "  is  an  incorrect  translation  oimassa, 
as  used  by  Isaiah  and  later  prophets  (Nah. 
i.  1 ;  Hab.  i.  1 ;  Zech.  iz.  1 ;  xii.  1;  Mai.  i.  1); 
and  that  "  utterance,"  or  "  prophecy,"  would 
be  more  suitable  (eomp.  Prov.  xxx.  1 ;  xxxi.  1, 
where  massa  is  thus  rendered  in  the  Autho- 
rized Version).  But  the  facts  remain  that 
maisa  means  a  "  burden  "  in  the  ordinary 
sense,  and  that  the  prophecies  to  which  it 
is  prefixed  are  generally  (in  Isaiah  always) 
of  a  denunciatory  character.  The  translation 
may  therefore  be  allowed  to  stand — at  any 
rate  in  the  present  chapter. 

It  is  remarkable  that  Babylon  heads  the 
list  of  the  Church's  enemies  in  the  present 
catalogue.  Dr.  Kay  supposes  the  term 
"  Babel"  to  be  equivalent  to  "Asshur-Babel," 


and  to  designate  "  the  Assyro-Babylonlan 
Empire."  He  thinks  that  "  Babel "  heads 
the  list  on  account  of  Assyria's  position, 
under  Tiglath-Fileser  and  Sbalmaneser,  in 
the  van  of  Israel's  adversaries.  But  neither 
Isaiah  nor  any  other  sacred  writer  knows  of 
an  Assyro-Babylonian  kingdom  or  empiiv. 
Assyria  and  Babylonia  are  distinct  kingdoms 
in  Genesis  (x.  8 — 12),  in  2  Kings  (xviii. — xx.), 
in  2  Chron.  (xxxii.),  in  Isaiah  (xxx  vi. — xxxix.) 
and  in  Ezekiel  (xxiii.  and  xxx.,  xxxi.).  They 
had  been  at  war  almost  continuously  for 
above  seven  centuries  before  the  time  of 
Isaiah  ('Becords  of  the  Past,'  voL  t.  pp. 
81 — 104).  Assyria  had,  on  the  whole,  proTed 
the  stronger  of  the  two,  and  had  from  time 
to  time  for  a  longer  or  a  shorter  period  held 
Babylonia  in  subjection.  But  the  two 
countries  were  never  more  one  than  Bnssia 
and  Poland,  and,  until  Tiglath-Pileser  as- 
sumed the  crown  of  Babylon  in  729  B.O.,  they 
had  always  been  under  separate  monarchs 
Individually,  I  can  only  account  for  the  high 
position  here  given  to  Babylon  by  the  prophet, 


228 


THE   BOOK  OK  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  xiii.  1—22 


on  the  supposition  that  it  was  thus  early(about 
"■^5  B.C.)  revealed  to  him  that  Babylonia 
was  the  groat  enemy  to  be  feared — the  ulti- 
mate destroyer  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  the 
power  that  would  carry  the  Jewish  people 
into  captivity. 

Ver.  1. — Which  Isaiah  ...  did  see  (comp. 
ch.  L  1 ;  ii  1,  etc.).  Isaiah  always  "  sees  " 
his  prophecies,  whether  they  are  of  the 
nature  of  visions  (as  ch.  vi.)  or  the  contrary. 
Ilie  word  is  probably  used  to  express  the 
strong  conviction  that  he  has  of  their  abso- 
lute certainty. 

Vcr.  2. — iitt  ye  up  a  banner;  rather,  a 
ftaiiilard — "  an  ensign,"  as  in  ch.  v.  2G ; 
xi.  12.  "Ensigns"  were  used  both  by  the 
Assyrians  and  the  Egyptians.  "  lianners," 
or  flags,  do  not  seem  to  have  been  employed 
in  the  ancient  world.  Upon  the  high  moim- 
tain ;  rather,  upmi  a  hare  mountain — one 
iliat  was  clear  of  trees,  so  that  the  signal 
might  be  the  better  seen  from  it.  God's 
army  liaviiig  to  be  summoned  against  Baby- 
lon, the  summons  is  made  in  three  ways : 
(1)  by  a  signal  or  ensign  lifted  up  on  a  high 
hill;  (2)  by  a  loud  call  or  shout ;  and  (3)  by 
waving  or  beckoning  with  the  hand.  The 
whole  description  is,  of  course,  pure  meta- 
phor. That  they  may  go  into  the  gates  of 
the  nobles.  Either  that  they  may  enter 
into  the  palaces  of  the  grandees  in  Babylon, 
or  that  tliey  may  take  the  towns  of  the  tribu- 
tary princes. 

Ver.  3. — I  have  commanded  my  sanctified 
ones.  The  pronoun  "I"  is  emphatic — "I 
myself."  Not  only  will  an  external  sum- 
mons go  forth,  but  God  will  lay  his  own 
orders  on  them  whom  he  chooses  for  his 
instruments,  and  bid  them  come  to  the 
muster.  All  who  carry  out  his  purposes  are, 
in  a  certain  sense,  ■"  sanctified  ones  "  (comp. 
Jer.  xxii.  7;  li.  27;  Zeph.  i.  7,  ete.).  Here 
the  Medes  and  Persians  are  specially  in- 
tended (see  ver.  17).  For  mine  anger;  i.e. 
"  for  the  purpose  of  executing  my  anger." 
Even  them  that  rejoice  in  my  highness ; 
rather,  mi/  proudly  exultant  ones  (Cheyue, 
Rosouimiller,  Gesenius).  .fflsohylus  calls 
the  Persians  virepKS/i-Kov!  ('  Perssa,'  1.  827) ; 
Herodotus,  uPpicTis  (i.  41).  The  high  spirits, 
however,  natural  to  gallant  soldiers  on  going 
out  to  war,  ratlior  than  any  special  haugliti- 
ness  or  arroganoy,  are  intended. 

Ver.  4. — The  noise  of  a  multitude  in  the 
mountains.  I  do  not  know  why  Isaiah 
should  not  have  been  "  thinking  of  his 
geography "  (Cheyne).  As  soon  as  the 
( i  reeks  knew  anything  of  the  Persians,  they 
knew  of  them  as  a  mountain  people,  and 
attributed  their  valour  and  their  hardy 
habits  to  the  physical  character  of  their 
country  (Herod.,  ix.  ad  fin.).  Jeremiah  con- 
nects the  invading  army  which  destroyed 


Babylon  with  mountains,  when  he  derives  it 
from  Ararat  (comp.  Gen.  viii.  4),  Minni 
(Armenia),  and  Ashohonaz  (Jer.  li.  27).  At 
any  rate,  the  mention  of  "mouutiins" 
here  is  very  appropriate,  both  Media  and 
Persia  being,  in  the  main,  mountainous 
countries.  A  great  people;  or,  much  people 
— not  necessarily  of  one  nation  only.  The 
host  of  the  battle ;  rather,  a  host  of  war  ; 
i.e.  a  multitude  of  men,  armed  and  prepared 
for  war. 

Ver.  5. — They  come  from  a  far  country 
(comp.  ch.  xlvi.  11).  Both  Media  and  Persia 
were  "  far  countries  "  to  the  Hebrews,  Persia 
especially.  There  is  no  indication  that  they 
knew  of  any  countries  more  remote  towards 
the  East.  Hence  the  expression  which  fol- 
lows, "  from  the  end  of  heaven '' — the  heaven 
being  supposed  to  end  where  the  earth  ended. 
Isaiah,  like  the  other  sacred  writers,  conforms 
his  language  on  cosmical  subjects  to  the 
opinions  of  his  day.  Even  the  Lord.  With 
a  most  effective  anthropomorphism,  Jehovah 
is  made  to  march  with  the  army  that  he  has 
mustered  (ver.  4)  against  the  land  that  has 
provoked  his  wral£ — i.e.  Babylonia.  The 
weapons  (comp.  ch.  x.  15 ;  Jer.  1.  25  ;  li.  20). 
To  destroy  the  whole  land.  Many  critics 
would  render  h&-dreti  by  "  the  earth  "  here. 
It  may  be  granted  that  the  language  of  the 
prophecy  goes  beyond  the  occasion  in  places 
(especially  vers.  11  and  13),  and  passes  from 
Babylon  to  that  wicked  world  of  which 
Babylon  is  a  type;  but,  wliere  the  context 
permits,  it  seems  hetter  to  restrict  than  to 
expand  the  meaning  of  the  words  employed. 

Ver.  6. — Hov7l  ye ;  for  the  day  of  the  Lord 
is  at  hand  (comp.  Joel  i.  15) ;  literally,  the 
expression  used  in  both  passages  is  a  day  of 
Jehovah.  The  idiom  would  not,  however, 
allow  the  use  of  the  article,  so  that  the  phrase 
is  ambiguous.  "The  day  of  Jehovah"  is 
properly  "that  crisis  in  the  history  of  the 
world  when  Jehovali  will  interpose  to  rectify 
the  evils  of  the  present,  bringing  joy  and 
gloiy  to  the  humble  believer,  and  misery 
and  shame  to  the  proud  and  disobedient" 
(Olieyne).  But  any  great  occasion  when 
God  passes  judgment  on  a  nation  is  called  in 
Scripture  "  a  day  of  the  Lord,"  "  a  coming  of 
Christ."  And  so  here  the  day  of  the  judg- 
ment upon  Babylon  seems  to  be  intended. 
It  shall  come  as  a  destruction  from  the 
Almighty.  Isaiah  is  thouglit  to  quote  from 
Joel  (i.  15)  hero;  but  perhaps  both  prophets 
quoted  from  an  earlier  author.  Shaddai 
(equivalent  to  "  Almighty ")  is  an  ancient 
name  of  God,  most  rarely  used  by  the  pro- 
phetical writers  (only  here,  and  in  Ezek.  i.  24 , 
X.  5;  Joel  i.  15),  and  uover  elnewhoro  by  either 
Isaiali  or  Joel.  It  has  generally  been  said  to 
mean  "  the  Strong  One ; "  but  recently  the 
theory  has  found  favour  that  it  meant  origi- 
nally "  the  Sender  of  stonns,"  from  the  Arabia 


rn.  sm.  1— 22.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PlioPHBT   ISAIAH. 


229 


eh'dd—jecft,  effudit.  However  this  may  be, 
the  word  is  certainly  used  is  the  later  times 
mainly  to  express  God's  power  to  visit  and 

Eunish,  and  the  present  passage  might  per- 
aps  be  best  translated,  "  It  shall  come  as  a 
destruction  from  the  Destroyer  (J^tMd  mish- 
Bhaddai  yaW)." 

Ver.  7. — Therefore  shall  all  hands  be  faint 
(comp.  Jer.  1.  43 ;  Ezek.  vii.  17 ;  Zeph.  iii. 
16).  There  shall  be  a  general  inaction  and 
apathy.  Eecently  discovered  accounts  of  the 
capture  of  Babylon  by  Cyrus  .show  a  great 
want  of  activity  and  vigour  on  the  part  of 
the  defenders.  Every  man's  heart  shall  melt 
(comp.  Deut.  xx.  8;  Josh.  ii.  11;  v.  1,  etc.). 
The  general  inaction  wUl  spring  from  a 
general  despondency.  This  statement  agrees 
much  better  with  the  recently  discovered 
documents  than  does  the  statement  of  Hero- 
dotus, that,  safe  within  their  walls,  the 
Babylonians  despised  their  assailants,  and 
regarded  themselves  as  perfectly  secure. 

Ver.  8. — They  shall  be  afraid ;  rather,  dis- 
mayed. Fangs  and  sorrows  shall  take  hold 
of  them;  literally,  they  shall  talie  hold  of 
pangs  and  sorrows.  They  shall  be  amazed ; 
rather,  loolc  aghast.  Their  faces  shall  be  as 
flames.  I  know  no  better  explanation  than 
that  of  Dr.  Kay,  that  a  sudden  transition  is 
intended  from  despondency  to  extreme  ex- 
citement. 

Ver.  9. — The  day  of  the  Lord  (see  the  com- 
ment on  ver.  6).  Cruel ;  i.e.  severe  and  painful, 
not  really  "  cruel."  To  lay  the  land  desolate. 
As  in  ver.  5,  so  here,  many  would  translate 
hA-arets  by  "  the  earth,"  and  understand  a 
desolation  extending  far  beyond  Babylonia. 
But  this  is  not  necessary. 

Ver.  10. — The  stars  of  heaven  .  .  .  shall 
not  give  their  light.  Nature  sympathizes 
with  her  Lord.  When  he  is  angry,  the  light 
of  the  heavens  grows  dark.  So  it  was  at  the 
crucifixion  of  "Christ  (Matt,  xxvii.  45);  so  it 
will  be  at  the  end  of  the  world  (Matt.  xxiv. 
2'.  I)-  So  it  is  often,  if  not  always,  at  the 
li  me  of  great  judgments.  The  constellations ; 
literally,  the  Orions.  Kesil,  the  Fool,  was 
tlie  Hebrew  name  of  the  constellation  of 
Orion,  who  was  identified  with  Nimrod,  the 
type  of  tliat  impious  folly  which  contends 
against  God.  From  its  application  to  this 
particular  group  of  stars  (Job  ix.  9;  xxxviii. 
al ;  Amos  v.  8),  the  word  came  to  be  applied 
to  constellations  in  general.  The  Baby- 
lonians very  early  marked  out  the  sky  into 
constellations. 

Ver.  11. — I  will  punish  the  world  for  their 
Bvil.  Here  the  prophecy  certainly  goes  be- 
yond the  destruction  of  Babylon,  and  becomes 
a  general  warning  to  the  wicked  of  all  coun- 
tries. Each  country  is  to  feel  that  its  turn 
wiU  come.  Punishment  will  fall  especially 
»n  the  unjust,  the  proud,  and  the  haughty 
(comp.  eh.  I  28  ;  ii.  U— 17,  etc.). 


Ver.  12. — I  will  make  a  man  more  preoioni 
than  fine  gold  (comp.  ch.  iv.  1).  Population 
shall  he  so  diminished  that  man  sliatl  be  the 
most  highly  estecmpd  of  commodities.  Tlie 
more  scanty  the  s>i  pply  of  a  thing,  the  grrn  ti  i 
its  value.  The  a'olden  wedge  of  Ophir ;  railier, 
pure  gold  of  Upliir.  Ophir  ii  mentioned  »a 
a  gold-regien  in  1  Ifiugs  ix.  28  j  x.  U  ;  xxii 
48 ;  1  Chron.  xxix.  4 ;  2  Chron.  viii.  18  :  ix 
10;  Job  xxii.  24;  xxviii.  16;  Ps  xlv.  9. 
Its  locality  is  uncertain.  Gold  of  (Jphir  ap- 
pears to  have  been  considered  especially 
pure. 

Ver.  13. — I  will  shake  the  heavens  (comp. 
Joel  iii.  16 ;  Hng.  ii.  7  ;  Matt.  xxiv.  29).  In 
general,  this  sign  is  mentioned  in  connection 
with  the  end  of  the  world,  when  a  "  new 
heaven  and  a  new  earth  "  are  to  supersede 
the  old  (ch.  Ixv.  17;  Ixvi.  22;  Kov.  xxi.  1). 
Isaiah  may,  prrhaps,  pass  here  th/m  signs 
connected  with  the  I'r  II  of  Babylon  to  those 
which  vrill  aunouucu  the  last  day — each 
"  day  of  the  Lord "  being,  as  already  oh- 
ecrved,  a  type  of  the  final  and  great  day  (ew 
the  comment  on  ver.  6).  Or,  possibly,  the 
allusion  may  be  to  some  "  shaking  "  by  God 
of  a  supra-mundane  kingdom  as  preliminary 
to  his  passing  judgment  on  Babylon  (so  Dr. 
Kay ;  comp.  oh.  xxiv.  21). 

Ver.  14. — It  shall  be  as  the  chased  roe. 
When  the  visitation  conies  on  Babylon,  there 
shall  be  a  loosening  of  all  ties  between  her 
and  the  subject  nations.  Her  armies  shall 
disband  themselves,  the  pressed  soldiers 
from  foreign  countries  deserting,  and  hasten- 
ing with  all  speed  to  their  several  homes. 
A  flight  of  the  foreign  traders  and  visitors 
may  also  be  glanced  at.  As  a  sheep  that  no 
man  taketh  up ;  rather,  at  sheep  with  none  to 
gather  them. 

Ver.  15. — Every  one  that  is  found  .  .  . 
every  one  that  is  joined  unto  them  ;  i.e.  all 
the  population,  butli  native  and  foreign. 

Ver.  16. — Their  children  also  shall  be 
dashed  to  pieces.  In  the  barbarous  warfare 
of  the  time,  even  children  were  not  spared 
(see  Ps.  oxixvii.  9 ;  Nab.  iii.  10 ;  Hos.  xiii. 
IG).  When  a  town  was  taken  by  aesault, 
they  were  ruthlessly  slaugliterod.  When 
spared,  it  was  only  to  be  dragged  ofif  as 
captives,  and  to  become  the  slaves  of  their 
captors  in  a  foreign  land.  Assyrian  sculp- 
tures often  illustrate  this  latter  practice. 
Their  wives  ravished  (comp.  I^am.  T.  11 ; 
Zech.  xiv.  2). 

Ver.  17.— Behold,  I  will  itii  np  th«  Medes 
against  them.  Isaiah's  knowledge  that  the 
Medes  should  take  a  leading  part  in  the 
destruction  of  Babylon  is,  no  doubt,  as  sur- 
prising a  fact  as  almost  any  other  in  the 
entire  range  of  prophetic  foresight,  or  in- 
sight, as  set  before  us  in  Scripture.  The 
Modes  were  known  to  Moses  as  an  ancient 
nation  of  some  importance  (Gen.  x.  3) ;  bat 


230 


THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  xiii.  1—22. 


since  hU  time  had  been  unmentioned  by  any 
sacred  writer;  and,  as  a  Uving  nation,  had 
only  just  come  within  the  range  of  Israelite 
vision,  by  the  fact  that,  when  Sargon  de- 
jrarted  the  Samaritans  from  Samaria,  he 
placed  some  of  them  "in  the  cities  of  the 
Medea"  (2  Kings  xvii.  6).  The  Assyrians 
hud  become  acquainted  with  them  some- 
what more  than  a  century  earlier,  and 
had  made  frequent  incuraions  into  their 
country,  finding  them  a  weak  and  divided 
people,  under  the  government  of  a  large 
number  of  petty  chiefs.  Sargon  had  con- 
quered a  portion  of  the  tribes,  and  placed 
prefects  in  the  cities;  at  the  same  time 
planting  colonists  in  them  from  other  parts 
of  the  empire.  That,  when  the  wealtiieaa  of 
Media  was  being  thus  made  apparent,  Isaiah 
should  have  foreseen  its  coming  greatness 
can  only  be  accounted  for  by  his  having  re- 
ceived a  Divine  communication  on  the  sub- 
ject. Subsequently,  he  had  a  still  more 
exact  and  complete  communication  (cli.  xxi. 
2).  Which  shall  not  regard  silver.  The 
Medes  were  not  a  particularly  disinterested 
people ;  but  in  the  attack  on  Babylon,  made 
by  Cyrus,  the  object  was  nut  plunder,  but 
conquest  and  the  extension  of  dominion. 
The  main  treasures  of  Babylon — those  in 
the  great  temple  of  Belus — were  not  carried 
off  by  Cyrus,  as  appears  both  from  his  own 
inscriptions,  and  &om  Herodotus  (i.  ISl — 
183). 

Ver.  18. — Their  bows  (comp.  Jar.  1.  9, 
14).  Both  the  Medes  and  the  Persians  were 
skilled  archers.  Herodotus  tells  us  that 
every  Persian  youth  was  taught  three  things 
— "  to  ride,  to  draw  the  bow,  and  to  speak  the 
truth  "  (i.  136).  At  Peraepolis,  Medes  and 
Persians  are  alike  represented  as  carrying 
bows  and  quivers,  .^schylus  regards  the 
contest  between  the  Persians  and  the  Greeks 
as  one  between  the  arrow  and  the  spear 
('PerssB,' 11.135,  136). 

Ver.  19. — Babylon,  the  glory  of  kingdoms. 
The  "glory"  of  Babylon  consisted:  1.  In 
her  antiquity.  She  had  been  the  head  .of  a 
great  empire  long  before  Assyria  rose  to 
power.  2.  In  her  origination  of  literature, 
architecture,  and  the  other  arts,  which  all 
passud  from  her  to  Assyria,  and  thence  to 
the  otlier  nations  of  Asia.  3.  In  her  mag- 
nificence and  the  magnificence  of  her  kings, 
which  provoked  the  admiration  of  the  As- 
syrians themselves  (' Records  of  the  Past,' 
vol  ix.  p.  15).  As  time  went  on,  she  grew 
in  wealth  and  splendour.  Perhaps  it  was 
granted  to  Isaiah  to  see  her  in  ecstatic  vision, 
not  merely  such  as  she  was  in  the  time  of 
Sargon  under  Merodach-Baladan,  but  such 
as  she  became  under  Nebuchadnezzar,  the 
greatest  of  her  kings,  who  raised  her  to 
the  liighest  pitch  of  glory  and  eminence. 
The  beauty  of  the  Chaldees'  excellency.  The 


Kaldi  appear  to  have  been  originally  one  of 
the  many  tribes  by  which  Babylonia  was 
peopled  at  an  early  date.  From  the  ex- 
pression, "  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,"  which  occurs 
more  than  once  in  Genesis  (xi.  28,  31),  we 
may  gather  that  they  were  inhabitants  of 
the  more  southern  part  of  the  country,  near 
the  coast.  Tlie  same  conclusion  may  be 
drawn  from  the  Assyrian  inscriptions,  espe- 
cially those  of  Shalmaneser  II. — the  Black 
Obelisk  king.  The  term  never  became  a 
general  name  for  the  Babylonian  people 
among  themselves  or  among  the  Assyrians; 
but,  somehow  or  other,  it  was  accepted  in 
that  sense  by  the  Jews,  and  is  so  used,  not 
only  by  Isaiah,  but  also  by  the  writers  of 
Kings  and  Chronicles,  by  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel, 
Daniel,  and  Habakkuk.  As  when  Ood  over- 
threw Sodom.  Equally  sudden  and  complete 
as  that  destruction. 

Ver.  20. — It  shall  never  be  inhabited. 
This  part  of  the  prophecy  did  not  receive 
its  fulfilment  till  many  centuries  had  gone 
by.  From  the  time  of  Cyrus  to  that  of 
Alexander  the  Great,  Babylon  was  one  of 
the  chief  cities  of  the  Persian  empire. 
Alexander  was  so  struck  with  it,  and  with 
the  excellence  of  its  situation,  tliat  he  de- 
signed to  make  it  his  capital.  It  first  began 
seriously  to  decline  under  the  Seleucida, 
who  built  Seleucia  on  the  Tigris  as  a  rival 
to  it,  and  still  further  injured  it  by  fixing 
the  seat  of  government  at  Antioch.  But  it  had 
still  a  large  population  in  the  first  century 
after  our  era  (Josephna,  '  Ant.  Jud.,'  xviii. 
9,  §  8) ;  and  is  mentioned  as  a  place  of  some 
consequence  in  the  time  of  Trajan  (Dio 
Cass.,  Ixviii.  27),  and  even  in  that  of  Seve- 
rus  (Dio  Caas.,  Ixxv.  9).  But  after  this  it 
went  rapidly  to  decay.  Under  the  Sas- 
sanians  it  diaappears  from  sight ;  and  when 
Benjamin  of  Tudela,  in  the  twelfth  century, 
visited  the  spot,  there  was  nothing  to  be 
seen  of  the  mighty  city  but  those  ruins  of 
the  Kasr,  or  palace,  which  still  arrest  the 
traveller's  attention.  The  site  had  become, 
and  has  ever  since  remained,  "  without  in- 
habitant." Neither  shall  the  Arabian  pitch 
tent  there.  A  superstitious  feeling  prevents 
the  Arabs  from  encamping  on  the  mounds 
of  Babylon,  which  ar^  believed  to  be  the 
haunts  of  evil  spirits  (Eioh,  '  First  Memoir 
on  Babylon,'  p.  67 ;  Ker  Porter,  •  Travels,' 
vol  ii.  p.  371).  Neither  shall  the  shepherds 
make  their  fold  there.  The  nitrous  soil  of 
the  Babylonian  mounds -allows  them  to  pro- 
duce nothing  but  the  coarsest  and  most 
unpalatable  vegetation.  The  shepherds  con- 
sequently do  not  feed  their  flocks  on  them. 
_  Ver.  21.— Wild  beasts  of  the  desert  shall 
lie  there.  It  is  not  quite  clear  what  par- 
ticular wild  beasts  are  intended.  Those 
actually  noted  on  the  site  of  Babylon  are 
lions,  jackals,  and  porcupines.    These  some- 


OH.  XIII.  1—22.]        THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PBOPHET   ISAIAH. 


231 


times  make  their  lairs  in  the  ruins  (Eich, 
•  First  Memoir,'  p.  69;  Ker  Porter,  'Travels,' 
vol.  ii.  p.  312).  Doleful  creatures ;  in  the 
original,  Shhim.  What  animal  is  meant  we 
cannot  say,  as  the  word  occurs  only  in  this 
passage.  Mr.  Cheyne  translates  it  by 
"  hyesnas.''  Owls  shall  dwell  there ;  literally, 
daughten  of  the  owl  (as  in  Lev.  zi.  16 ;  Deut. 
xiv.  15 ;  Job  xxx.  29 ;  Jer.  1. 39 ;  Mioah  i.  8 ; 
and  infra,  ch.  xxxlv.  IS;  xliii.  20).  Mr. 
Rich  says,  "  In  most  of  the  cavities  of  the 
Babil  Mound  there  are  numbers  of  owls  and 
bats."  Sir  A.  Layard,  "  A  large  grey  owl 
is  found  in  great  numbers,  frequently  in 
flocks  of  nearly  a  hundred,  iu  the  low  shrubs 
among  the  ruins  of  Babylon"  ('Nin.  and 
Bab.,'  p.  181,  note).  Satyrs  shall  danoe  there. 
The  word  translated  "  satvr  "  is,  etymologi- 
cally,  "  hairy  one,"  and  ordinarily  means  "  a 
goat."  Some  have  supposed  "  wild  goats  " 
to  be  here  intended,  but  they  are  not  found 
b  Babylonia.    The  translation  "  satyr  "  ia 


defended  by  many,  who  think  Isaiah  might 
draw  upon  current  beliefs  for  some  featurei 
of  his  description.  Dr.  Kay  gives  "  baboons," 
since  the  Moko — a  kind  of  baboon — is  known 
in  Babylonia. 

Ver.  22. — Wild  beasts  of  the  islands.  In 
the  Hebrew,  iyyim,  which  means  "  wallers  " 
or  "  howlers,"  probably  "jackals."  The  Re- 
vised Version  gives  "  wolves."  Iu  their 
desolate  houses ;  or,  t'n  their  castles  (Cheyne). 
And  dragons;  i.e.  "serpents.''  These  have 
not  been  observed  recently ;  but  one  of  our 
old  travellers  notes  that  "  the  lande  of  Baby- 
lone,"  in  his  day,  "  was  fulle  of  dragons  and 
grete  serpentes,  and  dyverse  other  veney- 
mouse  bestes  alle  abouten  "  (Mandeville, 
quoted  by  K.er  Porter,  •  Travels,'  vol.  ii.  p. 
336).  Near  to  oome.  About  one  hundred  and 
eighty  years  elapsed  between  the  utterance 
of  this  prophecy  and  the  fall  of  Babylon — a 
short  peri(>d  in  the  lifetime  of  a  nation. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  1 — 18. — The  fall  of  Babylon  a  type  of  the  general  punishment  of  the  wleked. 
Scripture  deals  with  history  altogetlier  in  the  way  of  example.  Wljelher  the  subject 
be  Assyria,  or  Syria,  or  Egypt,  or  Babylon,  or  even  the  "  peculiar  people  of  God,"  the 
object  is  to  teach  men  by  the  facts  adduced  what  they  have  to  expect  themselves. 
In  ch.  X.  Assyria,  here  Babylon,  is  held  up  as  a  warning  to  sinners.  The  absolute 
certainty  that  punishment  will  overtake  them  at  God's  hands  is  the  main  lesson 
taught ;  but,  beyond  this,  something  is  also  taught  concerning  the  method  and  (so 
to  speak)  economy  of  the  Divine  puaishments ;  as,  for  example,  the  following : — 

I.  That  God  pdnishes  by  means  of  instruments,  which  abb  generally  persons. 
Gk)d  has  two  sets  of  instruments — natural  agents,  such  as  storm,  lightning,  blight, 
pestilence,  etc.;  and  intellectual  and  moral  agents,  or  persons.  It  depends  entirely  on 
his  own  will  whether  he  will  employ  af^ents  of  the  one  kind  or  of  the  other.  In  dis- 
pensing good  to  man  he  employs  largely  natural  agents,  "  making  his  sun  to  rise  on 
the  evil  and  on  the  good,  and  sending  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust "  (Matt.  y.  45). 
But  in  punishing  men  he  seems  to  make  use,  to  a  greater  extent,  of  persons.  Now 
he  raises  up  a  tyrannical  and  oppressive  king,  like  Barneses  II.  or  Nebuchadnezzar,  to 
carry  out  his  sentence  of  suffering ;  now  he  allows  a  democratic  assembly  to  establish 
a  reign  of  terror  in  a  sinful  land;  anon  he  uses  the  arrows  of  savage  hordes,  or  the 
guns  and  bayonets  of  disciplined  hosts,  to  chastise  an  offending  people.  Ouce  only 
lias  he  ever  used  bis  power  to  strike  with-  sudden  death  on  a  large  scale,  and  even 
there  he  employed  a  spiritual  agent ;  it  was  "  the  angel  of  the  Lord,"  who  "  went  out 
and  smote  in  the  camp  of  the  Assyrians  one  hundred  and  fourscore  and  five  thousand  " 
(2  Kings  xix.  35). 

II.  That  the  instkumentb  are  fob  the  most. part  quite  unconscious  that 
God  is  using  them.  We  are  told  this  distinctly  of  Assyria.  "I  will  give  him  a 
charge  .  .  .  howbeit  he  meaneth  not  so,  neither  doth  his  heart  think  so  "  (oh.  i.  6,  7). 
And  it  was,  no  doubt,  equally  true  of  Babylon.  The  "hammer  of  the  whole  earth" 
(Jer.  1.  23)  did  not  know  that  she  was  being  used  to  "  break  in  pieces  the  nations,  and 
to  destroy  kingdoms"  (Jer.  Ii.  20).  She  too  "meant  not  so,"  but  was  only  seeking 
her  own  aggrandizement.  Even  the  Medes  and  the  Persians,  though  "  called  from  a 
far  country  to  execute  God's  counsel "  (ch.  xlvii.  11),  were  unconscious  of  their  call — 
Wind  instruments  in  the  hand  of  Jehovah,  as  much  as  if  they  had  been  an  army  ol 
locusts.  But  this  only  shows  the  power  of  God  the  more,  who  can  make  not  only 
good  men  serve  him,  but  bad  ;  not  only  angels,  but  devils. 

III.  That  God's   punishments    come   suddenly  and  take  men  by  surpbme. 


832  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  tin.  1—22, 

N^oither  Assyria  nor  Babylon  had  much  waming  of  their  fate.  Each  seemed  well-nigh 
at  the  zenith  of  its  power  when  the  final  blow  came.  "  I  have  laid  a  snare  for  thee,  and 
thou  art  also  taken,  0  Dabylon,"  says  Jehovah, "  and  thou  wast  not  aware  "  (Jer.  1.  24") ; 
and  again  we  are  told,  "  Babylon  is  suddenly  fallen  and  destroyed  "  (Jer.  li.  8).  God's 
punishments  are  apt  to  come,  even  on  individuals,  suddenly.  When  a  man  says  to  his 
soul,  "  Soul,  thou  hast  much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years ;  take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink, 
and  be  merry,"  then  comes  the  sentence  of  Grod,  "  Thou  fool,  this  nv.ht  thy  soul  shall 
be  required  of  thee  "  (Luke  xii.  19,  20).  Job's  example  is  an  extreme  one  (Job  i.  13^ — 19) ; 
but  modified  instances  of  men  crushed  by  quick  blows  of  unexpected  calamity  are 
within  every  one's  experience.  Destruction  comes  upon  God'g  enemies  generally  "  at 
unawares  "  (Ps.  xxxv.  8). 

IV.  That  on  findino  themselves  the  objects  op  Divine  tonishmbnt,  men  are 
FILLED  WITH  TERROR  AND  DESPONDENCY.  The  terror  and  despondency  of  the  Baby- 
lonians are  strongly  marked  in  the  descriptions  both  of  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah ;  e.g. 
"  Therefore  shall  all  hands  be  faint,  and  every  man's  heart  shall  melt :  and  they  shall 
be  afr.aid  :  pangs  and  sorrow  shall  take  hold  of  them ;  they  shall  be  in  pain  as  a  woman 
that  travaileth:  they  shall  be  amazed  one  at  another"  (ch. xiii.  7,  8).  "The  land  shall 
tremble  and  sorrow  .  .  .  The  mighty  men  of  Babylon  have  forborne  to  fif;ht;  they  have 
rem  ined  in  their  hold-;  .  .  .  they  became  as  women  "  (Jer.  li.  29,  30).  Some  such 
leelings  come  upon  all  who  are  conscious  that  the  hand  of  God  is  laid  upon  them,  not  for 
chastiseii  cnt,  but  for  punishment. 

V.  'I'liAT  Divide  pcnishmekts  seldom  stop  at  their  immediate  objects,  but 
PASS  on  AND  AFFECT  OTHERS  ALSO.  Partly,  tlus  would  soem  to  be  inevitable  from 
the  interconnection  of  man  with  man,  and  of  nation  with  nation;  but  paitly,  also,  it 
appears  to  be  the  result  of  the  Divine  will,  which  is  set  on  puuisi;ing  sin,  and  wherever 
it  finds  sin  must  piraish  it.  Let  Israel  have  to  be  punished  for  certain  sins,  Judah 
will  he  found  to  have  committed  the  same  sins ;  Judnh  must  there''ore  participate  in 
the  punishment.  When  God  arises  to  judge  one  nation,  he,  in  a  certain  sense,  arises  to 
judge  tlie  whole  earth  ;  there  must  be  equity  in  his  dealings.  If  he  has  pnrifhed 
Babylonia,  and  Eg3'pt  is  as  bad,  he  must  punish  Egypt  j  if  Egypt  is  no  war^e  than 
Ethiopia,  he  must  punish  Ethiopia.  The  sin  of  Sodom  brought  destruction  on  aU  the 
cities  of  the  plain — that  of  the  Conaanitish  nations  on  them,  and  on  many  of  their 
neighbours.  A  Jelioram  proiokes  Gud  by  his  idolatry,  and  is  deservedly  smitten 
(2  Kings  ix.  24).  '  An  Abaziah,  far  less  guilty,  but  still  guilty,  shares  his  fati'  (2  Kings 
ix.  27).  The  punishment  of  Babylon  led  on  to  the  punisliment  of  ttie  "  world  for  its 
evU"  (ch.  xiii.  11),  and  to  such  a  general  depopulation  of  Western  Asia  as  made  a  man 
more  precious  tnan  the  gold  of  Ophir  (eh.  xiii.  12). 

VI.  That  Divine  punishments  are  often  complete  and  final.  It  was  said  of 
Assyria,  "There  is  no  healing  of  thy  bruise"  (Nah.  iii.  19).  And  a  similar  finality 
attaches  to  most  jiidgments  upon  nations.  Babylonia,  though  she  made  some  desperate 
oH'orts  to  throw  ofl'  the  Persian  yoke,  never  recovered  herself.  Egypt,  a  few  years  later, 
sank  finally  under  foreign  dominion.  The  ten  tribes  lost  their  separate  existence  after 
their  captivity,  and  became  merged  in  Judah.  Judah's  nationality  was  obliterated  by 
Titus.  The  history  of  the  world  is  a  history  of  nations  whom  God  has  punished  for 
their  sins  by  final  destruction.  And  ihe  punishment  of  individuals,  too,  is  often  final. 
Korah,  Dathan,  and  Aiiiram  "  went  down  quick  into  hell  "  (Numb.  xvi.  30).  TJzzah 
was  smitten  with  sudden  death  for  touotiing  the  ark  (2  Sam.  vi.  7).  Ananias  and 
Saiiphira  fell  dead  for  uttering  lies  (Acts  v.  5,  10).  The  ques'ion  of  punishments  ia 
another  world  is  not  here  at  issue.  Wliat  the  example  of  Babylon  teaches  is,  that  God's 
punishments,  so  far  as  this  world  is  concerned,  are  often  final. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 22. —  Oracle  concerning  Babylon.  I.  Approach  of  tee  warriors  of 
Jei  ovau.  On  the  bare  mountain  the  banner  is  upraised,.and  with  loud  cry  and  com- 
ma, ding  gesture  of  the  hand  a  host  of  warriors  is  summoned  from  all  sides.  As  in 
vcr.  26,  Jehovah  is  vie\vcd  liy  the  poet  as  a  mighty  Battle-Leailer,  Lord  of  hosts.  His 
voice  is  heard,  "I  have  given  commission  to  my  anointed  ones,  have  called  my  heroes 


m.  xm.  1-22.]       THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PllOPUET   ISAIAH.  233 

for  my  work  of  punishnent,  my  proudly  rejoicing  ones!"  And  then  a  noise  i»  heard 
in  the  mountains  as  of  a  groat  multitude,  for  Jehovah  is  mustering  his  forces  from  the 
remotest  parts,  and  preparing  with  the  weapons  of  his  wrath  to  destroy  the  eiirlh. 
A  cry  of  terror  will  be  hoard  through  the  la  id;  men's  hands  will  droop,  their  hearts 
will  melt,  for  the  day  of  judgment  is  near.  Horror  will  be  depicted  on  every  face. 
The  lightning,  the  fire  that  burns  up  the  stubble  (Joel  ii.  6),  will  be  flashed  back,  ii»  i1 
seems,  fi-om  the  amazed  eye».  In  prophetic  thought  every  great  epoch  of  calamity  and 
ruin  is  a  judgment,  a  "  day  of  Jehovah."  For  wrath  and  clemency  are  the  two  opjiosite 
sides  of  the  unity  of  his  being  and  character.  No  spring-time  is  ushered  in  without 
atorms ;  no  epoch  of  fruitful  manhood  is  gained  without  struggles,  within  or  without ; 
no  mischief  depnrts  from  society,  no  false  power  is  overthrown,' without  violence.  Well 
for  us  if,  stayed  by  religious  faith,  we  can  see  the  day  of  Jehovah  shown  amidst  the 
darkest  times,  and  when  nations  are  perplexed  with  fear  of  change  to  be  able  to  say, 
"The  Lord  reigneth."  If  he  is  a  living  God,  then  his  will  must  bo  felt  in  political 
change.     Nothing  good  can  pass  away  ;  only  falsehood  must  be  overthrown. 

II.  The  DAT  OF  Jehovah.  Its  description  is  borrowed :  1.  From  the  most  /eatftU 
phenomena  of  nature.  The  stars  are  hidden,  the  sunrise  is  overclouled,  the  light  of  the 
moon  is  withdrawn.  A  universal  trembling  seems  to  fill  the  air,  while  the  earth  would 
bound  from  its  place.  So  close  is  the  sympathy  of  the  human  spirit  with  nature,  it? 
dark  or  bright  aspects  seem  to  be  the  aspect  of  the  God  of  nature  in  wrath  or  in  kind- 
ness to  man.  2.  From  the  most /earful  scenes  of  war.  In  a  few  bold  lines  the  picture 
is  struck  out.  Fugitives  are  seen  flying  in  every  direction,  like  frightened  gazelles,  oi 
like  a  flock  of  sheep  without  its  shepherd.  Those  overtaken  are  pierced  by  the  spear, 
or  struck  down  by  the  sword.  Children  at  the  breast  are  dashed  to  pieces,  houses 
plundered,  women  outraged.  More  horrible  is  the  spectacle  of  a  battle-field  than  that 
of  Nature  in  her  wildest  uproar.  It  is  the  opening  of  the  hell  in  the  heart  of  man 
3.  Its  moral  purpose  defined.  There  is,  then,  some  light  to  bo  found  even  here.  The 
God  of  justice  and  holiness  is  "  searching  home  for  evil  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  foi 
the  guilt  of  the  unrighteous." 

"Ever  and  anon  some  bright  white  shaft 
Burned  thro'  the  pine-tree  roof — here  burned  and  th«r«, 
As  if  God's  messenger  tliro'  the  close  wood  screen 
Plunged  and  repluiigod  his  weapon  at  a  ventur*. 
Feeling  for  guilty  thee  and  me." 

The  thought  that  God  holds  inquisition  for  evil  and  evil-doers  is  deeply  stamped  In 
Bible  lore.  There  are  heresies  which  he  cannot  and  will  not  tolerate.  They  are  not 
identical  with  what  some  call  heresies.  These  are  often  departures  from  our  fashions  of 
life  and  of  thought;  but  it  is  only  disagreement  with  him  and  his  law  of  inward  right 
that  is  the  condemnable  dissent.  Again,  it  is  his  object  to  bring  down  the  pride  and 
arrogance  of  the  haughty.  How  deeply  marked,  again,  is  this  thought  of  overstepping 
our  proper  limits  as  the  essence  of  sin,  from  the  Pall  onwards !  It  is  fixed  in  the  word 
"  transgression."  The  "  liist  to  seem  the  thing  we  are  not "  is  at  the  root  of  display,  of 
ambition,  of  domineering  over  others.  The  prophets  saw  in  the  bloated  dominion  of 
great  states  like  Egypt  and  Assyria  the  effects  of  these  unbalanced  lusts,  which  must 
sooner  or  later  topple  the  tyrants  into  ruin.  And  thus  the  purpose  of  judgment  resolves 
itself  into  that  of  sifting  mankind — to  make  the  people  "  rarer  than  fine  gcild,  and  men 
than  Ophir's  treasures."  When  ill  weeds  are  cleared  away,  there  is  a  chance  for  good 
plants  to  flourish ;  and  when  a  mass  of  human  evil  has  disappeared,  room  is  made  for 
something  of  another  quality,  to  renew  the  tradition  of  the  Divine  in  man. 

III.  The  final  devastation.  (Vers.  17 — 22.)  Here  is  a  picture  of  the  Medea — 
a  horde  of  savages,  who  despise  civilization,  and  who  will  pour  in  upon  Babylon,  as  in 
later  days  Attila  came  with  his  hosts  to  tread  on  the  necks  of  the  Romans.  The  dread 
memory  of  the  cities  of  the  plain  can  alone  furnish  a  parallel  to  what  will  be  seen  on 
the  site  of  Babylon.  Where  now  the  sounds  of  luxury  and  mirth  are  heard  in  proud 
palaces,  soon  not  a  nomad  tent  will  be  pitched,  nor  a  shepherd's  fold ;  but  only  the  cries 
of  wild  creatures  will  be  heard,  and  satyrs  hold  their  obscene  dances.  This  magnificent 
picture  of  the  overthrow  of  human  greatness  and  pride  springs,  let  us  observe,  from 
conscience.    And  none  can  study  such  pictures  or  visit  ttie  ruins  of  ancient  cities 


234  THE  BOOK  OM    THE    PfiOPHET  ISAIAH.        [ch.  xiii.  1—22. 

without  a  quickening  of  the  pulse  of  conscience.  Such  glimpses  as  we  can  gain  of 
ancient  life  in  those  proud  cities  of  the  Orient  bear  out  the  views  of  ihe  prophet.  It 
was  a  life  which  overpassed  life's  restrictions,  and  which  ended  in  death.  Mournful  is 
the  inscription  on  Sardanapalus's  tomb,  "Let  us  eat,  drink,  and  love;  for  the  rest  is  of 
little  worth."  We  may  learn  the  lesson  that,  when  men  so  speak  of  life,  they  have 
abused  it ;  and  while  we  believe  that  there  is  a  sacredness  in  human  life  and  in  the 
grand  products  of  human  life,  this  is  only  so  as  long  as  they  reflect  the  purposes  of  God. 
Out  of  such  scenes  as  those  the  prophet  depicts,  a  solemn  voice  seems  to  speak, 
declaring  that  human  life  and  glory  are  held  cheap  in  comparison  with  those  profound 
and,  from  us,  half-hidden,  half-revealed  ends  towards  which  the  whole  creation 
moves. — J. 

Ver.  7. — Mental  depression.  "  Faint."  A  common  experience  enough  this.  Some 
people  pride  themselves  on  the  speciality  of  their  experiences,  just  as  they  consider  their 
physical  ailments  to  be  altogether  peculiar  and  unique.  Faint !  Wlio  amongst  us  does 
not  understand  that?  "Why,  we  do  not  know.  Care  is  like  the  atmosphere;  its 
pressure  is  enormous,  but  the  thing  itself  is  invisible.  "  Light  as  air,"  some  say ;  but 
many  temperaments  could  say,  "  heavy  as  air,"  which  depresses  all  the  nerve-functions 
of  the  body.  Faint !  We  like  to  know  not  only  that  it  is  common,  but  that  greatly 
heroic  spiritual  natures  have  felt  it !  Bead  at  your  leisure  Luther's  letter  where  he  says 
of  the  evil  one,  "  He  lies  closer  to  me  than  my  Catharine,"  and  where  in  one  part 
of  his  diary  he  is  so  desolate  and  disheartened  that  he  suggests,  if  God  wishes  the 
Reformation  to  go  on,  he  must  come  and  take  it  in  hand  himself.  Faint !  If  busy 
men  feel  it,  women  feel  it  sometimes  more — thinking  about  the  children ;  having  the 
woiTy  of  household  management ;  finding  it  so  dificult  to  preserve  elevation  of  thought 
amid  the  cares  of  common  life. 

I.  We    are  faint  in    cub    PAILTJBES    to   beach  our  own    IDEAIi  OK  THE  DrviNB 

LIFE.  Our  ideals  have  been  beautiful.  They  have  charmed  our  meditation,  inspired 
our  purposes.  I  am  not  speaking  of  spiritual  excitements  or  emotions.  No,  my  friend ! 
Esther  quiet  and  meditative  hours.  When  we  verily  and  indeed  feel  that  piety  is  more 
than  safety,  when  we  feel  that  we  would  not  do  without  religion  if  we  could,  we  are  ful- 
filling all  the  noblest  aspirations  within  us.  And  these  have  been  noble.  In  gazing  on 
the  image  of  Christ  we  have  desire  to  be  conformed  to  that  image.  But  our  condition 
here,  you  say,  is  one  in  which  we  have  to  do  with  such  mean  things — it  is  such  a  battle 
to  live  at  all !  Mean  things?  No,  my  friend.  Nothing  is  mean  that  Christ  can  shine 
through.  We  can  dignify  common  life,  or  God  would  not  have  given  us  common  life 
to  dignify.  Christian  life  is  beautiful,  but  it  is  difficult.  It  is  detail  that  casts  down 
men  and  women  too.  When  we  read  Stanley's  last  journey  through  the  dark  continent, 
we  iind  a  week's  desolation  is  crowded  into  ten  lines  of  print ;  but  it  must  have  been 
very  wearisome  sometimes,  and  now  and  then  all  seemed  nearly  over.  Yet  the  motto 
was  "  Onward ! "  You  may  have  an  idea  or  two — but  try  and  write  a  book.  It  is 
completeness  that  tries.  You  may  have  looked  at  the  Christian  life  with  a'sthetic 
admiration.  But  now  you  are  in  it.  God  help  you,  as  he  will.  Be  diligent.  Gird  up 
the  loins  of  your  mind.  Be  sober.  Hope  to  the  end.  The  ideal  shcdl  be  realized  some 
day.     Not  destroyed.     Tou  will  be  without  fault  before  the  throne. 

II.  We   ABB   FAINT  IN    BKLATION    TO    THE   MOBAL    STATE    OP    THE    WORLD.         JeSUS 

wept  over  Jerusalem  as  he  gazed  on  the  city  that  was  doomed,  for  its  own  denial  and 
rejection  of  himself.  We  are  not  one  whit  nearer  solving  the  mystery  of  moral  evil. 
No  one  can  give  us  the  why  of  sin.  Some  of  the  Germans  have  tried  hard  at  a  philo- 
sophy of  that,  but  have  failed.  It  cannot  be  educational  only,  or  we  should  never  have 
the  sense  of  guilt.  But  here  it  is,  and  we  have  it  in  ourselves.  Even  now  sin  exists, 
if  it  does  not  reign.  And  here  it  is  around  us  everywhere.  We  have  a  mighty  Saviour, 
and  we  want  men  to  love  him,  to  trust  him.  But  they  are  often  so  besotted,  so  blinded, 
so  hardened,  that  they  prefer  their  slavery.  What  wonder  we  are  faint-hearted !  You 
tell  us  that  Christ  is  the  same  in  heaven  that  he  was  on  earth — the  same  in  all  sensitive 
care  and  love  and  desire.  Yes.  And  I  believe  that  the  world's  sin  grieves  him  still — 
pains  him  always.  "  Ye  crucify  the  Son  of  God  afresh  "  is  not  to  be  frittered  away  as 
a  mere  metaphor!  What  did  Christ  say  after  his  ascensioil  to  the  persecuting  Saul? 
"  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  mef"    Not  " My  Church"  merely.     The  Head  felt 


OH.  xin.  1—22.]       TUE  BOOK  OF  THE  PJROPUliT  ISAIAH.  236 

with  the  memberg.  Faint!  I  spoke  of  great  mm  just  now.  Did  not  Moses  shatter 
the  tables  of  the  Law  in  sad  and  bitter  disappointment  ?  Did  not  Paul  tind  fickleness 
in  his  converts ?  Did  not  the  Judaizers  hamper  his  work?  Did  not  some  of  his  com- 
panions desert  him  ?  Was  not  sin  still  mighty  within  him,  as  well  as  around  him  ? 
But  Christ,  the  Conqueror  of  sin  and  death,  was  his  Lord.  The  Holy  Ghost  gave  him 
inner  might. 

III.  Faint  in  relation  to  the  discipline  of  borrow.  We  need  it.  But  "  no 
affliction  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but  grievous."  Faint !  You  may  have 
left  one  at  home  who  used  to  come  and  drink  of  the  brook  by  the  way  at  church,  who  is 
frail  and  ill  now.  You  remember  some  who  have  had  a  dire  discipline  of  tiial  through 
kith  and  kin,  who  have  cast  the  crown  of  honour  into  the  dust.  You  would  not 
think  much  of  them  if  they  had  not  been  cast  down.  Superficial  people  who  say, 
"  Make  an  effort ! "  *'  Cheer  up ! "  only  worry  the  nerves ;  they  do  not  really  ease  trouble, 
because  vve  cannot  be  "merry"  wiih  a  heavy  heart.  You  must  lift  up  with  a  wise 
hope,  a  real  trust,  a  child's  confidence.  "Show  us  the  Father,"  then  wo  can  endure; 
then  we  can  "  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  him."  But  you  say,  "  Faintness 
depresses  us."  Mind  what  you  say,  because  you  reveal  character.  It  is  just  like 
saying,  "  Music  must  always  be  made  for  me ;  I  won't  be  made  sad  ;  I  won't  enter  an 
atmosphere  of  depression."  Human  hearts  cannot  always  smile.  Faint  people  must  be 
in  a  world  like  this,  but  it  will  be  only  for  a  season;  it  will  lead  them  to  him  who  can 
raise  up,  who  will  lay  beneath  them  bis  own  everlasting  arms,  who  will  "not  destroy." 
Ii'ever.  "  Chastened,  but  not  destroyed  " — tested,  but  not  destroyed.  At  such  times  do 
not  rest  in  "  moods  "  or  feelings,  but  look  out  of  yourselves  to  Christ. 

IV.  We  are  taint  in  relation  to  our  infldbnce  over  others.  We  had  hoped 
BO  much  to  send  such  bright  rays  over  the  dark  sea  from  the  lighthouse  of  our  faith ; 
to  give  the  emerald  beauty  of  a  new  spring  to  so  many  sterile  places.  We  have  not 
been  such  guides,  such  comforters,  as  we  hoped  to  ba.  And  the  fault  has  been,  not  in 
lack  of  doing,  but  in  want  oi  being.  To  Uve  has  not  beet  Christ.  We  have  not  been 
watchful  enough  either,  against  inimical  forces  in  our  fields.  The  Red  Indians  come 
when  we  are  asleep  or  on  a  journey,  and  stamp  out  our  corn.  We  are  "  faint "  too  because 
arrest  will  so  soon  be  laid  on  our  powers.  But  is  it  not  right  to  rejoice  that  we  have  been 
able  to  do  some  good?  Certainly.  We  have  been  unprofitable  servants  at  the  best, 
but  it  would  be  not  only  unreal,  but  wrong,  to  forget  what  God  may  have  accomplished 
through  us.  Paul  said,  "  Now  thanks  be  unto  Gud,  which  alway  causeth  us  to  triumph 
in  Christ."  We  are  not  as  the  men  of  this  world,  cast  down  into  the  loss  of  joy  and 
hope — and  in  despair.  No,  it  is  only  for  a  season.  We  are  Christ'i,  "  Weeping  may 
endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh  in  the  morning." — ^W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  1. —  The  burden  of  the  Lord.  "The  burden  of  Babylon"  (see  ch.  xv.  1 ;  xvii.  1 ; 
xix.  1,  etc.).  The  use  of  the  word  "  burden,"  to  signify  a  message  and  its  subsequent 
expansion  into  the  phrase  "the  burden  of  the  Lord"  (see  Jer.  xxiii.  33),  suggest 
to  us — 

I.  That  to  all  men  everywhere  bblonos  the  sacred  duty  of  carrying  the 
MESSAGES  of  God.  The  term  here  used  may  simply  signify  this — the  bearing  of  the 
Word  of  God  to  those  for  whom  it  was  intended.  This  is  a  work  which  belongs  to 
every  filial  son,  to  every  faithful  servant.  Possessed  of  it  oursulves,  and  experiencing 
its  exceeding  preciousness,  we  are  to  convey  it  to  all  who  are  in  need  of  it.  We 
can  all  carry  to  the  souls  of  men  "  the  will  of  God  concerning  them  in  Christ 
Jesus,"  his  Divine  desire  that  they  should  turn  from  all  iniquity,  should  believe  in  his 
Son,  their  Saviour  and  Lord,  and  should  follow  him  in  every  path  of  purity,  integrity, 
love. 

II.  That  on  some  men  there  sometimes  devolves  the  painful  duty  of  deliver- 
ing BURDENSOME  MESSAGES  FROM  GoD.  'i'his  was  notably  the  case  with  the  Hebrew 
prophets,  'i  hey  were  frequently  commissioned  to  convey  unpleasant,  unpalatable  truths 
to  men  and  nations,  such  as  few  cared  to  announce  and  none  liked  to  receive ;  e.g.  the 
message  of  Moses  to  Pharaoh,  of  Nathan  to  David,  and  of  Elijah  to  Ahab  ;  such,  also, 
as  these  "burdens"  to  Babylon,  Moab,  Egypt.  The  faithful  parent,  teacher,  minister, 
has  often  a  message  to  make  known  which  is  a  burden  in  this  sense ;  it  is  that  which 
is  likely  to  weigh  heavy  on  the  heart  of  him  that  receives  it;   it  is  (1)  the  condem- 


236  THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISA  I  All.        [oh.  Xiu.  1— 2i. 

intion  by  the  EigTitcoiis  One  of  some  form  of  sin  and  wrong;  (2)  it  is  the  purpose  of 
y.im  who  is  the  True  One  to  visit  persistent  folly  and  impenitence  with  the  marks  of  hia 
Divine  displea«!ure  both  in  the  body  and  in  the  spirit,  both  here  and  hereaZler. 

III.  That  on  those  in  whom  is  the  Spirit  or  Christ,  sacred  truth  rests  as 
K  BURDEN,  from  which  they  can  only  be  delivered  by  faithful  utterance.  So  was  it  with 
the  Saviour  himself  (Luke  xii.  50) ;  and  so  with  the  prophets  (Ps.  xxxix.  3;  Job 
xxxii.  18 ;  Jer.  xx.  9)  ;  and  so  with  the  apostles  (1  Cor.  ix.  16).  So  should  it  be  with 
us.  We  ought  to  feel  burdened  with  a  sense  of  the  sin  and  sorrow  of  the  world,  t  ogether 
with  the  fact  that  we  have  in  our  minds  the  knowledge  of  those  truths  which  are 
divinely  suited  to  destroy  that  sin  and  to  disperse  that  sonow.  This  is  "the  tmrden 
of  the  Lord,"  resting  on  the  man  in  whom  is  much  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ — a  burden 
which  will  only  he  lifted  from  him  wheh  he  has  spoken  his  most  earnest  word  and  done 
his  most  devoted  work,  to  teach,  to  heal,  to  save. — C. 

Vers.  2 — 5. — 2%e  kingdom  of  Ood.  These  stirring,  eloquent  words  of  the  prophet 
describing  the  gathering  of  the  hosts  at  the  summons  of  Jehovah  speak  to  us  of — 

I.  The  exceeding  breadth  of  the  Divine  claim.  All  things,  all  nations,  are 
Jehovah's ;  all  these  hosts  that  are  to  be  gathered  together  are  "  my  sanctified  ones ; " 
ihey  are.  "my  mighty  ones."  They  did  not  know  him,  but,  notwithstanding,  God 
claims  them  as  belonging  to  himself.  He  does  claim  all  nations  and  peoples  as  his  own  ; 
not  only  those  who  own  their  allegiance,  but  those  also  who  are  ignorant  of  his  Name, 
and  are  worshippers  at  other  shrines. 

II.  The  coMPHEHBXgiVENESS  OF  THE  DiviNB  PURPOSB.  God  has  his  purposes  (1) 
regarding  the  varieus  nations  of  the  earth.  He  had  a  certain  work  for  his  own  people, 
Israel,  to  accomplish.  But  his  "  wise  designs"  covered  a  far  jvider  area  than  any  Holy 
Land ;  they  embraced  Syria,  Assyria,  Babylonia,  Media,  Persia,  I'gypt,  Eome,  Greece, 
etc.  He  arranged  for  them  a  part  to  play  in  his  great  redemptive  scheme.  But  though 
this  large  aspect  is  a  true  one,  and  Isaiah,  in  prophetic  vision,  heard  the  "  noise  of  a 
multitude  .  .  .  like  as  of  a  great  people,  ...  a  noise  of  the  kingdoms  of  nations 
gathered  together,"  coming  "from  a  far  country,"  yet  is  it  equally  true,  and  it  is  » 
truth  of  ftt  least  equal  value,  that  God  has  his  purposes  (2)  respecting  each  humMe 
individual  life.  The  Christian  minister  has  the  right,  without  special  vision,  to  declare 
to  every  man  that  God  has  a  purpose  to  he  fulfilled  in  his  particular  life,  and  that  he 
is  ma'  shalling  events  and  mustering  "  forces  "  in  order  that  it  may  be  carried  out.  It 
ought  to  raise  our  estimate  of  the  sacredneis  and  value  of  the  life  God  has  given  us  to 
live  on  the  earth  when  we  remember  that  "  every  man's  life  is  a  plan  of  God,"  and 
that  by  it  he  desires  and  designs  to  accomplish  some  especial  end. 

III.  The  greatness  or  Divine  power.  1.  We  understand  that  God  has  unlimited 
power  over  unresisting,  inert  matter.  2.  We  have  a  larger  view  of  his  omnipotence 
when  we  realize  that  he  controls  all  sentient  life,  making  every  living  creature  to  praise 
and  serve  him.  3.  Our  thought  rises  far  higher  as  we  consider  how  he  is  directing  the 
activities  of  his  obedient  children,  his  voluntary  servants,  in  all  worlds.  4.  We  reach 
the  largest  and  loftiest  conception  of  Divine  wisdom  and  power,  in  marvellous  co- 
operation, when  we  dwell  on  his  overruling  energy.  Jehovah  so  turns  the  selfish  and 
ungodly  projects  of  kings  and  ajnjics  to  his  own  Divine  account,  that  he  can  speak  of 
Medea  and  Persians  as  "  his  sanctified  ones,"  or  as  those  set  apart  by  him  for  this 
I  special  work ;  that  he  can  represent  them  as  "  rejoicing  in  his  liighness  "  when  they 
were  eagerly  bent  on  their  owd  purposes ;  that  he  can  designate  them  "  the  weapons  of 
his  indignation."  (1)  We  little  think  how,  under  Divine  interposition,  we  are  contri- 
buting to  one  cause  when  we  are  absorbed  in  another.  (2)  How  immeasurably 
preferable  is  the  service  which  is  voluntary  and  conscious  to  that  whjeh  is  involuntary 
and  unconscious  I  It  is  only  the  former  which  gives  pleasure  to  the  Supreme,  and 
which  will  secure  approval  and  reward  for  the  human  worker. — 0. 

Ver.  6. — "  The  day  of  the  Lord."  We  may  truly  speak  of  every  day  as  a  "  day  of  the 
Lord."  For  when  does  the  morning  come  on  which  we  cannot  say,  "  This  is  the  day 
which  the  Lord  has  made"  (Ps.  cxviii.  24)?  Every  day  brings  with  it  fresh  tokens  of 
his  presence,  new  proofs  of  his  power.  The  refreshment  and  invignratJDn  of  sleep,  the 
provisions  of  the  table,  the  enjoyment  of  the  hearth,  the  activities  of  outward  life,  the 


CH.  xin.  1-22.]       THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  237 


continuance  of  mental  power,  etc., — do  not  all  these  daily  mercies  make  each  returning 
portion  ol'  our  time  a  "  day  of  the  Lord  "  ?  But  there  13  a  peculiar  sense  in  which  the 
time  of  special  visitation  is  to  be  so  regarded.     For  that  is  the  day  on  which — 

I.  God  reveals  his  nbabnbss  to  us  and  his  interest  in  us.  We  are  in  danger 
of  imagining  tliat  God  has  withdrawn  into  a  remote  solitude,  in  wliich  h«  takes  no 
heed  ot  the  passing  events  of  his  outlying  creation ;  that  he  is  too  gieat  and  high  to 
concern  himself  with  our  "  poor  affairs."  It  is  a  conception  unworthy  of  him  and  most 
injurious  to  us.  When  God  "arises  to  judgment,"  so  that  it  is  as  if  all  visible  nature 
were  disturbed  and  disordered  (vers.  10,  13),  and  the  hearts  of  men  are  filled  with 
consternation  (vers.  7,8),  "in  the  day  of  his  fierce  anger"  (ver.  13),  these  false  imagin- 
ings are  fcattered,  and  God  is  found  and  is  felt  to  he  a  God  at  hand  and  not  afar  off — 
a  God  who  has  much  to  do  with  us,  and  with  whom  we  have  everything  to  do 
(Heb.  iv.  13). 

II.  God  reveals  his  righteousness  to  va.  Such  events  as  these  (vers.  9 — 11)  are 
"terrible  thin  s  in  righteousness."  'I'he  anger  or  "  wrath"  of  the  Lord  (vers.  9, 13) 
is  thus  revealed  "against  all  unrighteousoeos"  (Rom.  i.  18).  God  is  "destroying  the 
sinners"  (ver.  U)  in  order, that  he  may  set  his  seal  against  the  sin  which  they  have 
committed  ;  he  is  humbling  the  proud  that  their  "arrogancy  may  cease"  (ver.  11),  and 
that  human  haughtiness  may  nceive  his  powerful  condemnation.  In  such  a  "day"  as 
this,  the  Lord  i.s  making  his  thought  concerning  iniquity  very  clear  to  the  children  of 
men. 

III.  God  manifests  his  power  to  ub.  Sin  is  apt  to  think  itself  triumphant ;  it  is 
arrogant,  haughty  (ver.  11) ;  it  says,  "  Who  is  the  Lord  ? "  etc.  (Exod.  v.  2)  ;  it  says, 
"  How  does  God  know  ?  "  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  11) ;  it  sajs,  "  Let  us  bieak  asunder  the  bands  of 
the  Lord  "  (Ps.  ii.  3).  In  "  the  day  of  the  Lord,"  the  nation,  the  confederacy,  the 
individual  man,  sees  that  human  bands  are  nothing  but  thinnest  thread  in  the  hands 
of  almighty  power.  Then  man  knows  his  nnthingness  in  the  presence  of  his  Maker; 
his  spirit  is  subJued  (ver.  8),  and  he  acknowledges  that  God  is  greater  than  he 
(Dan.  vl.  26). 

IV.  God  ati'estb  his  faithfulness  and  his  goodness.  God  has  given  many 
promises  to  his  people  that  he  will  appear  some  day  on  their  behalf.  Often  his  coming 
seems  to  be  long  delayed  (Rev.  vi.  10).  But  "  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  "  this  his  Divine 
word  is  redeemed ;  then  the  enslaved  nation  is  freed  from  its  bondage ;  then  the  per- 
secuted Church  is  delivered  from  its  oppressor ;  then  the  wronged  family  or  the  injured 
man  is  saved  from  the  wrong-doer,  and  walks  in  peace  and  in  prosperity.  Hence  the 
many  utterances  of  thanksgiving  for  the  "juiigmeuts"  of  the  Lord.  The  outpouring 
of  his  wrath,  which  seems  "  cruel "  (ver.  9)  to  the  guilty,  shows  itself  to  his  suffering 
people  as  the  long-awaited  proof  of  Ids  fidelity  to  his  word  and  pity  for  his  people.  1. 
Ijet  the  afflicted  wait  in  hope ;  their  cause  will  be  espoused,  their  prayers  heard  and 
answered.  2.  Let  the  guilty  tremble ;  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come,  a  day  of  dark- 
ness and  confusion,  a  day  of  terror  and  overthrow  for  them  ;  even  when  they  may  be 
most  confident  of  continuance  in  power  and  sin,  the  coming  of  God  in  judgment  may 
be  "at  hand."— 0. 

Ver.  12. — The  price  of  a  man.  The  aim  of  the  prophet  is  to  show  the  extent  of  the 
disaster  which,  in  the  indignation  of  God  (ver.  5),  should  overtake  the  guilty  city.  One 
feature  of  the  rnin  should  be  wholesale  slaughter  (ver.  15).  And  the  result  of  this 
would  be  a  terrible  reduction  of  the  male  population.  Men,  usually  so  prevalent,  so 
"  cheap "  in  Babylon,  should  become  scarce  and  precious ;  so  precious  should  they  be 
that  it  might  be  sMd,  speaking  figuratively,  that  a  man  would  be  more  precious  than 
gold,  even  than  "  the  golden  wedge  of  Ophir."  What  might  thus  be  afiirmed  of  man, 
in  figurative  language,  in  the  day  of  God's  wrath,  shall  become  true  of  man,  in  simple 
fact  and  truth,  in  the  day  of  Divine  grace.  Under  Christ  the  day  will  come  when  tlie 
worth  of  a  man  shall  be  felt  to  be  wholly  irreducible  to  terms  of  gold  and  silver;  that 
"  no  mention  shall  be  made  of  pearls"  when  it  is  attempted  to  form  an  estimate  of  the 
value  of  a  human  spirit. 

I.  Under  the  influence  and  dominion  of  bin  we  have  badly  lowered  out 
estimate  of  ourselves.  1.  Men  have  treated  their  fellows  as  nothing  worth.  They 
have  either  treated  their  sufferings  with  callous  indifference,  or  they  have  lor  Iced  on 


238  THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.        [oh.  xiii.  1—22 

their  neighbours  as  related  in  no  other  way  than  through  the  wages  market ;  or  they 
have  actually  bought  an<l  sold  them — their  sinews,  their  intelligence,  their  honour — 
for  so  much  gold.  2.  Men  have  pitifully  undervalued  themselves.  Tliey  have  acted  as 
if  they  were  nothing  better  than  iuteLigent  machines  for  making  money,  or  than 
creatures  capable  of  so  much  enjoyment,  or  than  office-holders  who  might  altain  to 
certain  dignities  for  a  few  passing  years. 

II.  Under  Christ  the  value  of  a  huhan  being  hab  been  lUMEAsnBABi.v 
RAISED.  Jesus  Christ  by  iiis  teaching  (see  especially  Mark  viii.  36,  37),  by  the  illus- 
tration in  his  own  person  of  what  a  Son  of  man  can  be,  by  the  great  purpose  of  his 
life  and  death,  has  lifted  up  to  an  altogether  different  level  our  conception  of  mankind. 
Now,  we  know :  1.  That  God  made  every  man  for  himself — for  his  favour,  his  friend- 
ship, his  likeness,  his  service.  2.  That  God  is  earnestly  desirous  that  every  child  of 
liis,  however  far  he  may  have  wandered  from  his  side,  should  return  to  the  Father's 
home  (Luke  xv.).  3.  That  for  every  child  of  man  a  Divine  Saviour  suffered  and  died 
(Heb.  ii.  9).  4.  That  before  every  man  who  will  accept  Jesus  Christ  as  his  Redeemer 
there  is  a  l)oly  life  on  earth  and  a  blissful,  glorious  immortality.  Instructed,  inspired 
by  these  high  truths,  we  have  come,  or  are  coming,  to  look  on  every  human  spirit  as 
possessed  of  a  value  which  money  does  not  in  any  degree  represent,  which  cannot  be 
told  in  "golden  wedges."  It  behoves  us  all  (1}  to  recognize  our  own  individual 
worth,  and  to  act  on  that  true  Christian  estimate ;  (2)  to  recognize  in  every  one  around 
us,  into  whatsoever  depths  of  evil  be  or  she  may  have  fallen,  one  who  may  be 
reclaimed  and  restored,  and  who  may  become  inexpressibly  dear  to  the  Father  and 
Saviour  of  men. — C. 

Vers.  19 — 22. — The  overthrow  of  evil.  The  minuteness  of  detail  with  which  this 
prophecy  has  been  fulfilled  goes  far  to  prove  that  holy  men  of  old  did  speak  "as  they 
were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  prediction  is  profoundly  interesting  in  this 
light ;  it  is  also  instructive  as  foretelling  the  entire  extinction  of  a  world-power  which, 
at  the  hour  of  utterance,  appeared  to  rest  on  immovable  foundations.  There  are  great 
powers — national,  ecclesiastical,  dynastic,  institutional,  social — which  are  as  Babylon 
in  Isaiah's  time,  and  which  need  to  be  extinguished  for  the  happiness  and  well-iaeing  of 
the  race.     Respecting  the  overthrow  of  evil,  we  see — 

I.  Its  apparent  impossibility  or  dishbaktenino  distance.  How  utterly  impos- 
sible, or  at  least  how  hopelessly  remote,  must  the  day  of  Babylon's  overthrow  have 
seemed  to  the  Jews  in  the  time  of  the  prophet !  To  those  of  a  scoffing  spirit,  or  to  the 
constitutionally  incredulous  or  despondent,  the  words  of  Isaiah  doubtless  seemed 
visionary,  if  not  altogether  nild  and  vain.  So  vain  may  seem  to  us  now  the  hopes 
which  are  held  out  of  the  fall  and  ultimate  extinction  of  existing  evils — the  despotic 
empire;  the  usurping  and  corrupt  Church;  the  huge,  wasteful,  war-inciting  military 
and  naval  organizations;  strongly  entrenched  social  habits  which  dishonour  and 
enfeeble  the  community;  venerable  systems  of  erroneous  belief  which  have  lasted  for 
eenturies  and  deluded  millions  of  minds,  etc.  It  seems  to  us  desirable,  beyond  all 
reckoning,  that  these  things  should  receive  their  death-blow,  and  should  be  numbered 
among  the  things  of  the  past.  '  But  how  can  we  venture  to  expect  their  defeat  and 
their  disappearance?  All  strong  things  are  in  their  favour;  the  majority  of  mankind 
favour  them ;  pecuniary  interests,  deep-rooted  habits,  social  customs,  inveterate  pre- 
judices, powerful  societies,  are  sustaining  them.  How  hopeless  it  seems  that  powers  so 
fortified  can  be  successfully  assailed  and  absolutely  demolished! 

n.  Its  arrival  in  due  course.  Babylon  did  fall ;  it  was  taken  and  re-taken  and 
taken  again,  and  finally  deserted,  until  it  became  what  is  here  foretold.  Every  evil 
thing  shall  share  its  fate.  Everything  which  exalts  itself  against  God,  everything 
which  is  hostile  to  the  truth,  eveiything  which  is  actually  harmful  to  mankind,  shall 
one  day  he  defeated  and  destroyed.  As  the  little  living  seeds  dropped  into  the  crack 
of  the  huge  temple  become  the  upspringing  plants  which  push  their  way  through  the 
strong  masonry  and  at  length  overturn  the  tall  columns  and  the  massive  walls  and  lay 
the  whole  structure  on  the  ground ;  so  the  seed  of  Divine  truth,  inserted  in  the  temple 
of  error,  of  vice,  of  tyranny,  of  idolatry,  of  iniquity,  shall  spiing  and  grow,  and  thrust 
and  overturn,  until  the  frowning  walls  have  fallen  and  the  structure  of  sin  Is  a  harmlesg 
riiiu.     The  great  I'abylon  of  sin  itself  shall  one  day  lie  waste  and  have  no  inhabitant. 


CH.  xin.  1—22.]        THE  BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  239 

III.  Its  moeal.  1.  It  i»  a  wretched  thing  to  le  on  the  side  of  wrong.  First  and  most 
of  all,  because  it  is  the  wrong  side  we  are  espousing,  and  it  ought  to  be  an  insufferable 
thing  to  us  that  we  are  thinking,  spealjing,  working  on  behalf  of  that  which  is  evil  in 
the  sight  of  God  and  hurtful  to  the  truer  interests  of  man.  But  also  because  we  are 
certain  to  be  defeated  in  the  end.  2.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  he  engaged  on  the  side  of 
righteousness.  First  and  most,  because  it  is  the  cause  of  God,  of  man,  of  truth,  on 
which  we  are  leagued  ;  and  also  because  we  are  sure  to  win  at  last.  The  wise  and  the 
good  may  meet  with  many  a  check,  but  they  will  gain  the  victory  j  the  unholy  and 
the  evil-minded  may  snatch  many  ati  advantage,  but  the  end  shall  be  a  miserable 
disaster,  an  utter  overthrow,  a  dragon-haunted  desert.  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  are 
fighting  on  God's  side,  and,  once  sure  that  we  are,  let  us  strike  our  blow  for  truth  and 
wisdom,  confident  that,  however  strong  and  high  stand  the  lowers  of  sin,  its  citadel 
will  be  taken,  its  day  will  descend  into  darkness,  its  million-peopled  streets  become 
a  doleful  desert. — 0. 

Ver.  3. — The  Lord's  sanctified  ones.  This  term  is  used  of  an  army,  regarded  as  being 
consecrated  by  the  sacrifices  which  wore  offered  at  the  beginning  of  the  campaign 
(comp.  2  Sam.  xiii.  9).  The  assertion  made  by  the  prophet  is  that  the  Persian  army 
was  not  really  consecrated  to  Ahura-Mazda,  but  to  Jehovah.  Whatever  might  seem  to 
be  the  fact,  the  fact  really  was  that  the  Persians  would  fulfil  Jehovah's  will  and  carry 
out  Jehovah's  judgments.  A  "  sanctified  one "  is,  properly,  one  separated  from  self- 
interests  and  from  other  people's  concerns,  in  order  that  he  might  carry  out  God's  will. 
"  Set  apart  by  the  purposes  and  providence  of  God,  disengaged  from  other  projects,  that 
they  might  wholly  apply  themselves  to  something  God  would  have  done :  such  as  were 
qualified  for  that  to  which  they  were  called,  for  what  God  employs  men  in,  he  does  in 
some  measure  fit  them  for."  We  learn  from  this  expression,  and  its  connection,  that 
we  too  may  be  set  apart  for  God,  we  may  be  the  Lord's  sanctified  ones ;  and  yet,  on  the 
one  hanil,  the  fact  may  he  unrecognized,  or,  on  the  other,  the  fact  may  bring  to  us 
impulse  and  honour  and  the  unspeakable  joy  of  service. 

I.  Set  apakt  fok  God  without  our  knowing  it.  As  of  Cyrus,  the  Lord's  anointed, 
it  is  said,  "  I  girded  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known  me."  But  in  this  case  there  can 
be  no  proper  rewards,  since  the  will  of  the  man  is  not  in  harmony  with  the  Divine 
will.  God  may  use  his  creature  man,  just  as  he  uses  clouds  and  winds  and  waves,  to 
fulfil  his  purposes,  and  there  is  no  more  to  be  said  about  it.  We  are  the  Lord's  tools, 
his  rod,  his  staff.     Willingly  or  unwillingly  man  must  do  the  Lord's  bidding. 

II.  Set  apart  fob  God  with  oub  own  glad  consent.  Then  we  come  into  the 
position  of  willing,  loving  servants ;  and  then  there  can  be  rewards  which  take  three 
forms.  Such  willingly  sanctified  ones  (1)  are  honoured  with  yet  further  and  higher 
trusts  ;  (2)  are  personally  cultured  by  the  doing  of  their  life-work  under  such  conditions ; 
and  (3)  are  sure  to  receive,  now  in  their  hearts,  and  by-and-by  in  some  open  manner, 
the  Master's  "Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servants,"  the  smile  and  the  word  of 
gracious  approval.  And  such  rewards  are  altogether  independent  of  the  particular 
character  of  the  work  for  which  we  are  sot  apart.  It  may  be  most  trying  and  painf.i! 
work,  even  work  of  judgment  or  retribution.  No  matter ;  the  Divine  recognition  is 
ever  of  willingness  and  faithfulness.  God  rewards  the  true  man,  not  the  particular 
form  the  man's  service  must  take. — B.  T. 

Ver.  6. — "  TTie  day  of  the  Lord!"  This  expression  is  employed  for  that  crisis  in  the 
history  of  the  world  when  Jehovah  will  interpose  to  correct  the  evils  of  the  present. 
Such  great  crises  are  called  "  days "  in  antithesis  to  the  ages  of  Divine  long-suffering. 
In  Christian  thought  the  term  is  associated  with  the  coming  day  or  time  of  judgment, 
and  mainly  with  that  in  view  we  dwell  on  the  words.  Isaiah  was  one  of  a  class  of 
prophets  to  whom  God  disclosed,  in  visions,  the  scenes  of  the  ever-nearing  future. 
Maybe  in  the  quietness  of  their  homes,  as  they  meditated  en  the  condition  of  the 
world,  and  the  purposes  of  God  concerning  men,  they  were  rapt  in  vision,  and,  with 
various  degrees  of  dimness  or  of  clearness,  they  saw  pass  before  their  entranced  view, 
now  the  scenes  of  battle  and  bloodshed,  now  the  scenes  of  famine  and  pestilence ;  now 
they  beheld  the  desolation  of  those  nations  that  oppressed  their  own  people — Nineveh 
and  Babylon  buried  out  of  sight,  Tyre  a  place  for  the  isher's  nets;  and  now  they 


240  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [cii.  siii.  1—22. 

seemed  to  hear  the  wild  shout  of  the  foes  of  Israel,  as  they  burst  through  into  the 
sflcreJ  city;  and  socm,  in  smoke  and  flames,  they  watched  her  very  temple  perish.  And 
yet  a^rain,  in  dimmer  lines,  as  though  further  on  in  the  march  of  ages,  they  seemed  to 
see  the  last  great  scene  of  human  history — a  world  arraigned,  the  thrones  set,  the  books 
0|itDe<l.  Th(se  visions  (.ften  prostrated  those  prophets  in  the  intensity  of  excitement; 
but  they  were  given  to  them  that  they  might  set  them  on  record,  for  the  sake  of  their 
own  people  and  the  whole  Church  of  the  redeemed,  that  we  all  might  learn  to  live  in 
the  vi(  \v  of  that  future,  with  the  infallible  decisions  of  the  future  ever  in  our  thought, 
and  reminding  us  I  hat  "he  which  soweth  to  the  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption, 
but  ho  that  soweth  to  the  Spirit  shall  of  the  Spirit  reap  life  everlasting."  There  is  much 
that  is  most  solemnizing  in  the  expression,  "  the  day  of  the  Lord,"  if  we  read  it  from 
the  Christian  standpoint,  and  see  it  to  mean  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

I.  Ouu  Lord  has  had:  1.  His  day  of  humiliation,  when  he  stepped  down  fiom  his 
heavenly  throne,  laid  aside  "his  most  Divine  array,"  and  entered  our  world  as  the  poor 
man's  babe,  born  in  a  stable,  laid  in  a  manger,  becuuse  there  was  no  room  for  him  in 
the  inn.  2.  He  has  had  many  a  day  of  toil,  and  patience,  and  pleading,  and  prayer 
among  men.  Year  after  year  he  tarried  in  the  flesh,  proving  bis  Divine  power  to  save, 
and  winning  men  to  himself  by  the  tender  sacrificings  of  his  love.  3.  He  has  had  a  day 
of  sufl'ering  and  angu'sh  fnr  men.  "  Behold,  and  see  if  there  ever' was  sorrow  like  unto 
his  sorrow,  wherewith  the  Lord  hath  afflicted  him  "  for  our  sakes.  4.  He  has  had 
many  a  day  of  inviting  grace,  when,  in  the  power  of  his  Spirit,  he  has  called  us  to 
yield  ourselves  unto  him  ;  when,  in  the  leadings  of  his  providence  and  the  ministry  of 
his  Word,  he  has  cried,  "My  son,  give  me  thy  heart;"  "Come  <mto  me  .  .  .  and  I 
will  give  you  rest "  He  has  had  many  a  day  of  patience,  of  waiting,  of  long-suffering 
to  us- ward,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish. 

II.  But  the  day  of  the  Loiid,  the  day  of  days,  is  yet  to  come.  1.  The  day  of 
the  Lord's  glory,  when  the  multitudes  of  the  redeemed  shall  crown  him  with  many 
crowns — shall  crown  him  Lord  of  all.  2.  The  doy  of  the  Lord's  vindication,  when  he 
shall  break  down  the  nbelliun  of  lost  souls  with  the  proofs  of  his  forbearance  and  the 
memory  of  his  rej  eated  calls.  3.  The  day  when  the  "  wrath  of  the  Lamb"  must  be 
revealed,  and  he  shall  come  in  flaming  fire,  taking  vengeance  on  thrm  that  know  not 
God,  and  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  his  Son.  There  must  be  an  end  of  this  dispensa- 
tion of  redemption,  there  must  be  a  clo.-ini  up  of  it;  there  must  be  the  "day  of  the 
Lord."     For  us  all  that  day  cometh  as  a  thirf  in  the  night. 

III.  The  decisions  of  the  day  of  the  Lord.  The  Scriptures  do  not  satisfy  oui 
questinnings  upon  the  terms  of  decision  on  that  day.  So  far  as  we  can  gather,  there 
will  be  a  general  term,  and  a  rrioie  particular  one.  The  more  general  term  may  be 
thus  expressed  :  "  No  condemnation  to  them  who  ai'e  in  Christ  Jesus."  "Condemned 
already,"  because  ye  believe  not  on  the  Son  of  God.  The  more  [laiticular  term  is  thus 
expressed :  "  We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  (^hrist,  that  every  one 
may  receive  the  things  done  in  his  body,  according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be 
good  or  bad."  How  these  are  to  fit  into  each  other  it  is  beyond  any  human  power  to 
explain,  because  the  Bible  does  not  afford  us  the  means  of  ex])lanation.  We  can, 
however,  settle  two  separate  facts  very  clearly.  Our  life,  in  its  minutest  acts,  carries 
eternal  issues.  Everything  we  do,  beyond  its  bearing  on  our  present  character,  has  its 
hearing  on  our  eternal  destmy,  because  on  our  eternal  character.  And  we  are  tested  by 
our  rel  ition  to  Christ.  The  test  of  the  great  coming  day  is  first  this — In  Christ,  or 
nut  o''  Christ.  The  answer  to  that  settles  all  else — whether  jou  shall  be  in  the  fold  or 
nut  of  it,  in  the  everlasting  peace  or  out  of  it,  in  heaven  or  out  of  it. — E.  T. 

Ver.  6. — Ood  as  El  Shnddai,  It  will  at  once  come  to  mind  that  this  is  the  name 
used  for  God  l>y  John  Bunyan  in  his  '  Holy  War,'  but  it  is  an  unl'an.iliar  one,  and  one 
that  needs  explan.Htinn.  It  is  translated  in  Sci  ipture  by  the  term  "  the  Almighty ,'"'  but 
that  properly  represents  the  Hebrew  El  Oibbor.  Cheyne  says,  "  Wherever  it  occurs 
(Joel  i.  15 ;  Ezek.  i.  24;  x.  5),  it  appears  to  express  the  more  severe  and  awful  side  of 
the  Divine  nature.  Though  used  as  a  mere  synonym  for  El,  or  Klohim,  it  must  at 
liast  be  clear  that  force,  and  specially  force  as  exhibited  in  a  dangerous  aspect  in  some 
natural  phenomena,  is  the  original  meaning  of  the  word,  a  meaning  suitable  enough  to 
the  earliest  stage  of  biblical  religion  (see  Exod.  vi.  3)."   Gesenius  thinks  that,  originally, 


OH.  xin.  1— 22.]        THE   BOOK   OF  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  24 J 

before  it  was  adopted  into  biblical  religion,  Shaddai  meant,  "  God  tbe  Sender  of  stftrinR." 
The  connection  of  this  physical  figure;  with  the  term  "Almighty"  is  very  plain,  for  the 
Controller  of  the  heavenly  forces  can  surely  do  everything  :  the  greater  implies  the  lew, 
and  the  great  of  which  we  know  is  so  great  that  the  mastery  of  It  assures  to  us  that 
there  must  be  ability  to  master  what  we  do  not  know. 

I,  The  term  "  uost  miohtt  "  as  applied  to  earthly  kqios.  It  is  quite  the  usual 
form  \u  which  the  worth-ship  of  subjects  is  presented,  and  it  was  especially  used  of  the 
monarchs  of  vast  Eastern  kingdoms,  who  ruled  by  an  absolute  authority.  It  was  n./t, 
however,  a  mere  high-sounding  title ;  it  gathered  up  the  very  various  sides  of  kingly 
greatness,  and  put  them  into  a  single  term.  We  may  illustrate  how  it  found  expression 
for  (1)  supreme  rank,  (2)  exalted  dignity,  (3)  vast  extent  of  dominion,  (4)  ready  and 
hearty  allegiance  of  subjects,  (5)  stren.:th  of  forces,  (6)  and  absoluten "ss  of  will.  1 1 
may  also  have  embraced  administration  of  august  character. 

II.  The  term  "all-mighty"  as  applied  to  the  Kino  of  kings.  The  teiin 
"almighty"  rises  above  "most  mighty,"  and  can  be  truly  applied  to  God  alone.  Tlie 
above  divisions  may  be  taken,  in  which  great  earthly  kings  are  said  to  be  "  most 
mighty,"  and,  as  applied  to  God,  they  may  help  us  to"  realize  the  senses  in  which  he  is 
"all-mighty."  Ami  occasion  maybe  made  for  urging  the  reverence  which  is  due  to 
him;  the  awe  he  claims,  which  should  make  "all  the  earth  keep  silence  before  him." 
It  may  be  well  also  to  meet  the  difficulty,  that  God  cannot  do  ahsnliitely  everything, 
by  showing  that  he  can  do  everything  which  is  not,  under  the  conditions  of  human 
thought,  absurd  in  the  statement,  such  as  make  two  straight  linea  enclose  a  space,  or 
two  and  two  count  five. — R.  T. 

Ver.  12. — The  preciousness  of  man.  Matthew  Henry  gives  very  clearly  the  first 
ideas  and  associations  of  the  passage.  "There  shall  be  so  great  a  slaughter  as  will 
produce  a  scarcity  of  men.  You  could  not  have  a  man  to  be  employed  in  any  of  the 
affairs  of  state,  not  a  man  to  be  enlisted  in  the  army,  not  a  man  to  match  a  daughter 
to,  for  the  building  up  of  a  family,  if  you  would  give  any  money  for  one."  Such  a 
comparison  of  man  with  gold  would  only  be  suiisiested  to  persons  familiar  with  the  sale 
and  purchase  of  slaves.  The  irony,  or  satire,  in  the  comparison  lies  in  the  over-estimate 
of  gold  in  a  luxurious  age.  It  is  a  sad  sign  for  any  nation  when  its  "  gold  of  Ophir  "  is 
valued  more  than  its  men.  The  second  clause  ha^  iug  the  more  general  term  "  human 
being,"  we  are  remitided  that  it  is  man  as  man,  and  not  man  in  view  of  his  learning, 
position,  mariners,  or  wealth,  that  the  prophet  regards  as  of  incomparable  value.  The 
position  of  Ophir  is  disputed,  but  J.  A.  Alexander  points  out  that  "  whether  the  place 
meant  be  Ceylon,  or  some  part  of  continental  India,  or  of  Arabia,  or  of  Africa,  it  is  hero 
named  simply  as  an  Eldorado,  as  a  place  where  gold  abounded,  eithur  as  a  native  pro- 
duct or  an  article  of  commerce."  The  oMer  idea  of  the  word  remlercd  "  j>rcci(>us  "  was 
meting  dear  or  costly;  the  modern  idea  is  making  rare  or  scarce.  The  expressinn 
may  fittingly  introdnce  the  general  topic  of  the  value  of  men,  for  only  in  view  of  their 
value  can  their  scarcity  be  treated  as  a  matter  of  anxiety.  That  value  may  be  set  forth 
as  to  be  recognized — 

I.  In  his  MOBAti  NATURE.  He  differs  essentially  from  the  material  and  aniniRl  crea- 
tions. Not  in  pnt^scssion  of  mind,  but  in  capacity  to  apprehend  the  distinction  between 
right  and  wrong,  and  in  power  to  will  the  right  and  refuse  the  wrong.  This  is  what 
we  mean  by  a  moral  nature.  The  animal  may  decide  its  *ction  upon  some  sort  of 
consideration  of  the  consequences,  pleasurable  or  painful,  that  may  attend  on  its  conduct. 
Man  does  not  merely  act  in  view  of  consequences ;  he  estimates  the  character  of  the 
action,  judging  it  in  the  light  of  what  he  apprehends  of  God,  as,  to  him,  the  ideal  of 
righteousness.  As  a  moral  being,  then,  man  transcen4s  all  creatures,  and  there  can  be 
no  possible  comparison  of  him  with  any  material  thing,  even  the  finest  gold  of  Ophir. 
This  moral  nature  belongs  to  all  men  everywhere,  and  cannot  bo  overlaid,  or  crushed 
wholly  out,  by  any  poverty,  ignniance,  or  debasement  of  vice.  The  man'  is  always  a 
man,  and  to  bis  moral  nature  God,  and  his  fellow  moral  beings,  may  always  hopefully 
appeal. 

II.  In  his  posstbilities  fob  good  or  evil.  He  must  be  a  precious  being  who  can 
rise  to  be  as  saintly  as  some  have  become,  and  can  sink  to  be  as  Satan'c  as -others  hiive 
become.    Dr.  Horace  Busbnell  has  a  fine  sermon  in  '  New  Life,'  p.  10,  entitled,  "  The 

18AIAH.  li 


242  TUE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [ch.  xui.  1—22. 

Dignity  of  Human  Nature  shown  from  its  Ruins."  After  speaking  of  many  who 
'*  inaguify  the  dignity  of  human  nature,  by  tracing  its  capabilities,  and  the  tokens  it 
reveals  of  a  natural  afllnity  with  God  and  truth.  They  distinguish  lovely  instincts, 
powers,  and  properties  allied  to  God,  aspirations  reaching  after  God,"  he  undertakes  to 
"  show  the  essential  greatness  and  dignity  of  man  from  the  ruin  itself  which  he 
becomes;"  and  then  he  says,  "  Kor  is  it  anything  new,  or  a  turn  more  ingenious  than 
just,  that  we  undertake  to  raise  our  conceptions  of  human  nature  in  this  manner,  for  it 
is  in  just  this  way  that  we  ftre  accustomed  to  get  our  measures  and  form  our  conceptions 
of  many  things;  of  the  power,  for  example,  of  ancient  dynasties,  and  the  magnificence 
of  ancient  works  and  cities,  such,  for  example,  as  Egypt,  Rome,  Thebes,  Karnac,  Luxor, 
or  Nineveh.  So  it  is  with  man.  Our  most  veritable,  though  saddest,  impressions  of 
his  greatness,  as  a  creature,  we  shall  derive  from  the  magnificent  ruin  he  displayed.  In 
that  ruin  wo  shall  distinguish  fallen  powers  that  lie  as  broken  pillars  on  the  ground ; 
temples  of  beauty,  whose  scarred  and  shattered  walls  still  indicate  their  ancient,  original 
glory ;  summits  covered  with  broken  stones,  infested  by  asps,  where  the  palaces  of  high 
thought  and  great  aspiration  stood,  and  righteous  courage  went  up  to  maintain  the 
citadel  of  the  mind — all  a  ruin  now — archangel  ruined."  We  estimate  the  value  of  raw 
material  by  "what  can  be  made  of  it."  On  that  condition  man  is  seen  to  be  more 
precious  thau  aught  else ;  he  may  be  changed  into  the  Divine  image,  from  glory  to  glory. 
III.  In  his  immortality.  Man's  natural  immortality  is  gravely  disputed  in  these 
days,  but  an  opinion  on  that  difficult  sabject  is  not  necessary  in  the  treatment  of  this 
subject  from  our  present  point  of  view.  It  is  possible  for  man  to  become  immortal,  and 
that  stamps  his  incomparable  value.  Continuity  is  a  common  sign  of  value ;  but, 
further  tlian  that,  the  being  who  can  be  immortal  must  have  capacity  for  immortal 
spheres.  In  conclusion,  .it  may  be  shown  that  the  preciousness  of  man,  or  the  sanctity 
of  human  life,  is  the  foundation  of  social  order,  and  the  inspiration  of  human  brother- 
hood and  self-denial. — R.  T. 

Ver.  19. —  The  fall  of  pride.  The  type  of  pride,  in  Scripture,  is  Babylon;  to  the 
grandeur  of  it  the  Chaldees  pointed  in  self-aiimjring  triumph.  "The  words  of  this 
text  paint  the  impression  which  the  great  city,  even  in  Isaiah's  time,  made  upon  all 
who  saw  it.  So  Nebuchadnezzar,  though  his  work  was  mainly  that  of  a  restorer, 
exulted  in  bis  pride  in  the  greatness  of  the  city  of  which  he  claimed  to  be  the  builder 
(Dan.  iv.  30).  So  Herodotus  describes  it  as  the  most  famous  and  strongest  of  all  the 
cities  of  Assyria,  adorned  beyond  any  other  city  on  which  his  eyes  had  ever  looked." 
God's  dealings  with  nations  are  illustrations,  in  the  large,  of  his  dealings  with  families 
and  individuals.  The  evil  recognized  as  characteristic  of  a  nation  may  be  equally 
characteristic  of  a  family  and  of  an  individual,  on  whom,  therefore,  the  appropriate 
Divine  judgments  will  be  sure  to  fall.  Nations  stand  forth  prominently  in  the  world's 
eye,  and  keep  their  lessons  in  history  for  the  instruction  of  all  the  ages.  This  may  be 
illustrated  from  the  Babylonian  kingdom  of  the  ancient  days,  and  from  Napoleonic 
France  of  modern  times.  The  following  points  will  readily  suggest  illustration  flrom 
history,  and  from  the  circle  of  our  actual  experience. 

I.  PwDB  OF  CONQUEST  HAS  NEVER  PROVED  LASTiNO.  See  the  storles  of  Sennacherib, 
Nebuchadnezzar,  Alexander,  Tamerlane,  Charlemagne,  Buonaparte,  and  others.  It  is 
equally  true  of  cases  of  private  acquisition.  The  man  who  grasps  his  neighbour's 
property,  and  joins  field  to  field,  has  to  learn  that  God  hateth  the  proud.  The  riches 
gathered  fly  away,  or  the  son  that  follows  him  squanders  it  all. 

II.  Pride  of  social  grandeur  has  never  proved  lasting.  Beckford  thought  to 
outrival  all  country  mansions  with  his  Fonthill  Abbey,  and  it  fell,  and  great  was  the 
fall  thereof.  Grant  thought  to  build  a  palace  in  the  west  of  London,. grander  than  all 
around  him,  and  it  has  passed  under  the  hammer  of  the  auctioneer. 

III.  Pride  of  commercial  prosperity  has  never  proved  lasting.  Venice  and 
Genoa  and  the  Holland  ports  illustrate  this.  God's  providence  brings  round  the  judg- 
ment when  the  pride  has  become  overwhelming.  God  holds  a  limit  beyond  which  he 
never  permits  a  nation,  a  family,  or  an  individual  to  go.  As  soon  as  pride  begins  to 
take  the  honour  due  to  God,  stability  is  over,  our  foundations  begin  to  shift,  and  the 
night  of  the  first  wild  storm  all  that  we  have  raised  so  anxiously  lies  about  us  in  ruin*. 
There  is  a  day  of  God  always  near  at  hand  for  the  proud. — B.  T. 


CH.  xnr.  1— 32.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPUET  ISAIAH. 


243 


Vera.  21,  22. — Literal  fulfilrr.ent  of  prophecy ,  The  languajie  of  modern  trarellers 
Illustrates  the  fulfilment  of  the  prediction.  Layard  says,  "  Owls  start  from  the  scanty 
thickets,  and  the  foul  -jackal  stalks  among  the  furrows."  "It  is  a  naked  and  hideous 
waste."  Dr.  Plumptre  says,  "  The  work  wfts,  however,  accompanied  by  slow  degrees, 
and  was  not,  like  the  destruction  of  Nineveh,  the  result  of  a  single  overthrow.  Dariui 
dismantled  its  walls,  Xerxes  pulled  down  the  temple  of  Belus.  Alexander  contem- 
plated its  restoration,  but  his  designs  were  frustrated  by  his  early  death.  Susa  and 
Eobatana,  Seleucia  and  Antioch,  Ctesiphon  and  Bagdad,  became  successively  the  centres 
Oi'  commerce  and  of  government."  By  th«  time  of  Strabo  (b.o.  20)  the  work  was  accom- 
plished, and  the  "  vast  city "  had  become  a  "  vast  desolation."  In  illustrating  the 
literal  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy,  the  dean  further  says,  "The  Bedouins  themselves, 
partly  because  the  place  is  desolate,  partly  from  a  superstitious  honor,  shiink  from 
encamping  on  the  sites  of  the  ancient  temples  and  palaces,  and  they  are  left  to  lions, 
and  other  beasts  of  prey.  On  the  other  hand,  Joseph  Wolff,  the  missionary,  describes 
a  strange  weird  scene — pilgrims  of  the  Yezidia,  or  devil-worshippers,  dancing  and  howl- 
ing like  dervishes  amid  the  ruins  of  Babylon."  It  is  interesting  to  note  the  following 
passage  from  the  '  Itinerary  '  of  Benjamin  Bar-jona,  given  by  Matthew  Henry.  "  This 
is  that  Babel  which  was  of  old  thirty  miles  in  breadth ;  it  is  now  laid  waste.  There 
are  yet  to  be  seen  the  ruins  of  a  palace  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  but  the  sons  of  men  dare 
not  enter  in,  for  fear  of  serpents  and  scorpions,  which  possess  the  place."  For  further 
indications  of  the  precision  of  fulfilment,  encyclopEedias  and  b^^oks  of  Eastern  travel 
should  be  studied.  We  point  out  here  that  prophecy  is  usually  poetic,  and,  rather, 
vaguely  (lescriptive  and  suggestive,  than  precise  or  minute.  Sometimes,  however,  for 
the  Verifying  of  all  prophecies,  some  portions  are  made  precise,  and  are  literally  fulfilled, 
as  in  the  case  ol  Babylon ;  and  the  two  following  points  may  be  usefully  illustrated: — 

I.  LiTBRAIi  FULFILMENT  OF  PBOPHBOT  OONFIRMINa  THE  DiVINB  WoBU. 

II.  GeNBKAL  fulfilments  thereby  SHOWN  TO  BE  EQUALLY  CONFLEMATOBT.      When 

once  the  principle  is  established,  we  are  freed  from  all  bondage  to  demands  for  exact 
and  minute  agreements,  and  can  freely  read  Scripture  projhecy  ai  full  of  poetical 
figure  and  imagery. — E.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Vers.  1 — 23. — The  Restoration  op  Isbael> 
AND  HER  Song  of  Triumi'h  over  Babylon. 
The  destiuction  of  Babylon  is  to  be  followed 
by  the  restoration  of  Israel,  with  the  good 
will  of  the  nations,  and  by  their  exercising 
rule  over  their  late  oppressors  (vers.  1,  2). 
In  this  time  of  rest  and  refreshment  they 
will  sing  a  song  of  triumph  over  Babylon. 
The  song  extends  from  ver.  4  to  ver.  23.  It 
consists  of  five  stanzas,  or  strophes,  each  com- 
prising seven  long  lines,  after  which  there 
is  a  brief  epode,  or  epilogue,  of  a  different 
chxiracter.  This  epode  is  comprised  in  vers. 
22  and  23. 

Ver.  1. — For  the  Lord  will  have  mercy  on 
Jacob.  God's  purpose  of  mercy  upon  Israel 
requires,  as  its  preliminary,  the  destruction 
of  Babylon,  and  may  be  conbidered  as  the 
final  cause  of  that  destruction.  His  desire 
to  have  mercy  on  Israel  toon  is  the  reason 
why  the  days  of  Babylon  are  not  prolonged 
(see  ch.  xiii.  22).  Will  yet  choose  Israel. 
The  Captivity  was  a  rejection  of  Israel  from 


their  position  as  •  favoured  race  — God's 
peculiar  people ;  their  restoration  was  a 
fresh  "  choice  "  of  them  out  of  all  the  nations 
of  the  world,  a  free  act  of  grace  on  his  part, 
to  which  they  had  no  claim  or  right  whatso- 
ever. And  set  them  in  their  own  land ;  or, 
on  (heir  own  ground.  The  land  that  once 
was  theirs,  but  which  they  had  forfeited  by 
their  disobedience,  could  only  become  "  their 
own  "  again  by  a  fresh  gift  from  God.  The 
strangers  shall  be  joined  with  them ;  rather, 
Ihe  etranger  shall  join  himself  to  them.  •  On 
the  retiun  from  the  Captivity,  there  would  be 
an  influx  of  proselytes  from  the  nations,  who 
would  voluntarily  join  themselves  to  those 
whom  they  saw  favoured  both  by  God  and 
man  (comp.  Esth.  viii.  17).  Though  the 
Jews  did  not  commonly  seek  proselytes,  they 
readily  received  such  as  offered  themselves. 
A  further  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  took 
plfloe  when  the  Gentiles  flocked  into  the 
Church  of  God  after  the  cgming  of  Christ. 

Ver.  2. — And  the  people  shall  take  them  ; 
rather,  peopleg  thall  take  them.  The  heathen 
nations  among  whom  they  have  dwelt  shall 
rejoice  at  the  restoration  of  Israel  to  theii 
own  land,  and  even  escort  them  in  a  friendly 
spirit  to  their  borders  (comp.  Ezra  i.  4,  6; 


244 


THE  BOOK  OF  THK   PROPHET  ISAIAH.      [ch.  xjv.  1—32 


Neh.  ii.  7 — ^9).  Some  shall  go  bo  far  as 
voluntarily  to  become  their  bondservants  in 
Palfstine.  They  shall  take  them  captive, 
whose  captive*  they  were.  This  can  scarcely 
h^ve  been  intended  literally.  The  Jews  were 
at  no  time  a  conquering  people,  nor  one  that 
set  itself  to  "take  captives."  The  true 
meaning  is  that  Jewish  ideas  shall  pene- 
trate and  subdue  the  nations  generally,  and 
among  them  those  with  whom  Israel  had 
dwelt  as  captives.  The  Jews  did  become 
very  jiowerful  and  numornus  lioth  in  Assyria 
and  Biibylonia  about  the  first  century  after 
Christ,  and  Christian  Churches  were  early 
formed  in  Mesopotamia,  Adiabene,  and  even 
Babylpn. 

Ver.  3.1 — The  hard  bondage  wherein  thou 
wast  made  to  serve  (oomp.  ch.  xlvii.  6).  We 
liiive  no  detailed  account  of  the  Babylonian, 
as  we  have  of  the  Egyptian,  servitude;  but 
it  was  probably  well-nigU  as  grievous.  A 
few,  of  royal  descent,  might  be  eunuchs  in 
the  palace  of  the  great  king  (2  Kings  xx. 
18 ;  Dan.  i.  3),  and  hold  offices  of  trust ;  but 
with  the  bulk  of  the  nation  it  was  otherwise. 
Ps,  pnxyii.  has  the  plaintive  ring  which 
marks  it  as  the  utterance  of  a  sorely  op- 
pressed people.  And  there  are  passages  of 
E?eki(l  which  point  in  the  same  direction 
(sio  especially  xxxiv.  27 — 29). 

Ver.  4. — Thou  shalt  take  up  this  proverb ; 
rather,  thU  parable,  as  the  word  is  translated 
in  Numb,  xxiii.  and  xxiv. ;  in  Job  xxvi.  1 ; 
xxix.  1 ;  Ps.  xlix.  4 ;  Ixxviii.  2  ;  Ezek.  xvii.  2 ; 
IX.  49;xxi.  5;  xxiv.  8;  Micahii.4;  Hab.ii. 
6 ;  or  "  this  taunting  speech,"  as  our  trans- 
lators render  in  the  margin  (see  Cheyne, 
ad  loc. ;  and  comp.  Hab.  ii.  6).  The  golden 
oity.  There  are  two  readings  here — mad- 
liSbah  and  marhehah.  The  latter  reading  was 
preferred  anciently,  and  is  followed  by  the 
LXX.,  the  Syriuo  and  Ohaldee  Versions, 
the  Targums,  Ewald,  Gesenius,  and  Mr. 
Cheyne.  It  vfould  give  the  meaning  of  "  the 
raging  one."  Madhebah,  however,  is  pre- 
ferred by  Bosenmiiller,  Vitringa,  and  Dr. 
Kay.  It  is  supposed  to  mean  "golden," 
fruni  d'hab,  the  Cljaldee  form  of  the  Hebrew 
taji'ib,  gold.  But  the  question  is  pertinent 
—  Why  should  a  Chaldee  form  have  been 
Unfd  by  a  Hebrew  writer  ignorant  of  Ohaldee 
and  Chaldea  ? 

Ver.  .'). — The  staff  .  .  .  the  soeptre.  Sym- 
bols of  Babylonian  power  (comp.  ch.  x,  6). 

Ver.  6.— He  who  smote  the  people  ;  rather, 
mhich  smote  the  peoples.  The  participle  trans- 
lated "he  who  smote"  refers  to  "staff"  or 
"  sceptre."  With  a  continual  stroke ;  i.e.  in- 
cecsantly,  one  war  following  another  without 
pause  or  bt"p.  He  that  ruled,  etc.;  rather, 
which  ruled  the  nations  in  anger  with  a  perte- 
eutior\  that  held  not  back. 

Ver.  7. — At  rest  .  .  .  singing.  The  first 
re^HH  of  the  fall  of  Babylon  is  |;f  neral  peace, 


rest,  and  quiet;  then  the  nations,  recog- 
nizing the  blessedness  of  the  change,  burst 
out  into  a  song  of  rejoicing.  The  peace  did 
not  really  continue  very  long;  for  Persia 
took  up  the  id'e  of  oonquror  which  Babylop 
had  been  fon  ed  to  drop,  and,  under  Cam- 
byses  and  Darius  Hystaspis,  produced  as 
much  stir  and  disturbance  as  had  been 
caused  by  Babylon,  i^tdl,  there  was  an  in-, 
terval  of  about  eleven  years  between  the 
conquest  of  Babylon  by  Cyrus  (b.c.  53S),  afld 
the  expedition  by  Cambyses  against  Egypt 
(B.C.  527). 

Ver.  S.T— Fir  trees  .  .  .  cedars.  We  may 
detect  a  double  meaning  here — one  literal, 
the  other  metaphorical.  Literally,  the  trees 
of  Lebanon  and  the  other  muuntaiu  ranges 
would  be  spared,  since,  while  both  the  As- 
syrian and  iiab\  Ionian  kings  cut  timber  in 
the  Syrian  forests  for  bnihling  j)U!  posi  s, 
the  Persians  had  no  such  practice ;  m  ta- 
phorioally,  the  firs  and  cedars  are  the  kings 
and  nobles  of  the  oountdes  (comp.  Kzek. 
xxxi.  16),  who  likewise  had  a  respite.  Since 
thou  art  laid  down ;  ratiier,  since  thou  liest 
low.  The  first  stanza  here  ends,  and  the 
second  begins  with  the  next  verse. 

Ver.  9. — Hell  from  beneath.  The  Hebrew 
Shedl  corresponded  nearly  to  the  Greek 
Hades,  and  tlie  Latin  In/eri.  It  was  a  dis- 
mal region  in  the  centre  of  the  e«rtli,  wliither 
depaited  soul^  descended,  and  where  they 
remained  thenceforth.  There  were  various 
depths  in  it,  each  apparently  more  dismal 
than  the  preceding; ;  but  there  is  no  evidence 
tl}at  it  was  considered  to  contain  any  place 
of  happiness,  until  after  the  return  from  the 
Captivity.  The  prophet  here  represents  Shcol 
as  disturbed  by  the  advent  of  the  Babylonian 
monarch,  and  as  rousing  itself  to  receive  him. 
The  great  ones  of  the  earth,  and  the  kings, 
who  are  kings  even  in  Hades,  and  sit  upon 
thrones,  are  espirial.y  moved  by  the  occa- 
sion, and  prepare  to  meet  and  greet  their 
brother.  Personal  identity  and  continued 
consciousness  of  it  after  death  are  assumed  ; 
and  the  former  earthly  rank  of  the  inmates 
seems  to  be  recognized  and  maintained.  It 
Btirreth  up  the  dead.  Hell  in  the  aggregate 
— the  place  pcisunified — proceeds  to  arouse 
the  individual  inmates,  who  are  called  re- 
phaim — the  word  commonly  translated 
"giants"(Deut.  ii.  11,  20;  xiii.  12;  Josh.  xii. 
4 ;  xiii.  12,  etc.),  but  meaning  properly  "  feeble 
ones."  The  thades  or  ghosts  of  the  departed 
were  regarded  as  weak  and  nerveless,  in 
comparison  with  living  men  (compare  the 
Homeric  e!!Sai\a  Ka/iSinwi').  All  the  chief 
ones;  literally,  the  lie-goats  (comp.  Jer.  1. 
8;  Ii.  40 ;  Zech.  x.  3).  Baised  up  from  their 
thrones ;  i.e.  "  caused  to  rise  up  from  their 
thrones,"  and  stand  in  eager  expectation  of 
what  was  about  to  happen. 

Ver.  ID. — 4rt  thou  also  beoome  w?a^  b,« 


dH,  xlv.  1—32.]       THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


24i 


we  t  rather,  So  (hou  also  art  made  uieah  as 
we  1  (On  the  supposed  wealcness  of  the  dead, 
sei;  the  comment  on  ver.  9.) 

Ver.  11.— The  noise  of  thy  viola.  (On  the 
fiindiiess  of  the  Babylonians  for  mosio,  and 
tlio  luimher  and  variety  of  their  miisical  in- 
struments, see  Dan.  iii.  7,  10,  etc.)  The 
word  here  translated  '■  viol "  is  more  com- 
monly lendered  "psaltery."  (On  the  probable 
character  of  the  instrument  intended,  see 
note  on  oh.  v.  12.)  The  worm  is  spread  under 
thee,  etc.;  rather,  beneath  thee  is  spread  the 
maggot,  and  the  worm  cover eth  thee.  The 
thought  of  the  grave  brings  the  thought  of 
corruption  with  it.  Fit  cushion  and  for 
coverlet  the  royal  corpse  liaj  only  the  loath- 
some ereiiturus  whioli  come  svith  putriaceuce. 
At  tliis  point  the  sccoml  slivnza  terminates. 

Ver.  12. — How  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven, 

0  Lucifer !  Babylon's  sudden  fall  is  com- 
p.ired,  with  great  force  and  licauty,  to  the 
(sei  ming)  fall  of  a  star  finra  heaven.  The 
woid  translated  "  Lucifer  "  moans  properly 
"fhiniug  one,"  and  no  druibt  here  desit;- 
nates  a  star ;  but  whethei  any  particular 
star  or  no  is  nneertain.  The  LXX.  trans- 
lated by  eaisipopos,  whence  our  "  Lucifer." 
The  subjoined  epithet,  "sonoftlie  morning" 
or  "of  the  dawn,"  accords  well  with  this 
rendering.  How  art  thou  out  down  to  the 
ground  !  One  of  Isaiah's  favourite  clianges 
of  meta|)hor.  It  is  a  favoirrite  metaphor  also 
to  wliich  ho  reverts — that  of  representing 
the  destruoliou  of  a  nation  by  the  felling  of  a 
tree  or  of  a  forest  (comp.  ch.  ii.  12, 13 ;  x.  33, 
34,  etc.).  Which  didst  weaken  the  nations ; 
rather,  which  didst  prostrate  the  niitions. 
The  word  used  is  one  of  great  force  (eomp. 
Exod.xvii.  13;  Job  xiv.  10). 

Ver.  13. — For  thou  hast  said ;  rather,  and 
thou  —  tlwu  saidst;  i.e.  weak  as  thou  art 
now  shown  to  have  been,  it  was  tliou  tliat 
didst  dare  to  say.  I  will  ascend  into  heaven, 
etc.  (comp.  ch.  x.  13,  14;  xxxvii.  24,  25). 
Isaiah  represents  ratlier  the  thoughts  of  the 
Babylonian  monaroli  thstn  his  actual  words. 
The  Babylonian  inscriptions  are  full  of 
boasting  egotism ;  but  they  do  not  contain 
anything  approaching  to  impiety.  The  king 
may  regard  himself  as,  in  a  certain  sense. 
Divine  ;  but  still  he  entertains  a  deep  respect 
and  reverence  for  those  gods  whom  he  re- 
gards as  tlie  most  exalted,  as  Merodaclj,  Bel, 
Nebo,  Sin,  Shamas.  He  is  their  worshipper, 
their  devotee,  their  suppliant  (see  '  Records 
of  the  Past,'  vol.  v.  pp.  111—148).  The 
Babylonian  monarolis  may  have  believed 
that  after  death  they,  would  mount  up  to 
heaven  and  join  the  "  assembly  of  the  great 
gods'*  (ibid.,  vol.  iii.  p. 83);  hut  we  scarcely 
know  enougb  as  yet  of  tlie  religious  opinions 
of  the  Babylonians  to  State  positively  what 
their  belief  was  on  the  subject  of  a  future  life. 

1  will  sit  also  upon  the  mount  of  the  con- 


gregatiott.  The  early  oommentatan  ex- 
plained this  of  Mount  Zion,  especially  on 
account  of  the  phrase,  "  in  the  sides  of  the 
north,"  which  is  used  of  the  temple-hill  in 
Ps.  xlviii.  2.  But  It  is  well  objected  that 
Mount  Zion  was  a  place  of  no  grandeur  or 
dignity  or  holiness  to  the  Babylonians,  Who 
had  made  it  a  desolation ;  and  that  no  Baby- 
lonian mnnarch  would  have  desired  to  "  sit " 
tiiere.  Moreover,  the  "  mountain  "  of  this 
passage  must  be  one  which  is  "above  the 
heights  of  the  clouds "  and  "  above  the 
stars  of  God,"  which  the  most  imaginative 
poet  could  not  have  said  of  Mount  Zion.  A 
mythic  mountain,  belonging  to  the  Baby- 
lonian theosophy,  was  therefore  seen  to  be 
intended,  even  before  the  times  of  cunei- 
form decipherment  (Rosenmiillor,  Michaelis 
Knobel).  Now  that  the  Babylonian  inscrip 
tions  can  be  read,  it  is  found  that  there  Was 
such  a  mountain,  called  "  Im-Kharsak,"  or 
"  Kharsak-Kurra,"  which  is  described  as 
"  the  mighty  mountain  of  Bel,  whose  head 
rivals  heaven,  whose  root  is  the  holy  deep," 
anil  which  "  was  regarded  as  the  spot  where 
the  ark  had  rested,  and  where  the  gods  had 
their  seat "  ('  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  xi. 
p.  131,  with  the  comment  of  Mr.  Sayce,  p. 
1 30).  In  Babylonian  geography  this  moun- 
taiu  was  identified,  either  with  the  peak  of 
Kowaiidiz,  or  with  Mount  Elwend,  near  Ec- 
batana.  In  the  sides  of  the  north.  Both  El- 
wend and  Rowandiz  are  situated  to  the 
north-east  of  Babylon — a  position  Whioti.ao 
cor  ling  to  ancient  ideas,  might  be  described 
indifferently  as  "  north  "  or  "  east." 

Ver.  14.— I  will  be  like  the  Most  High 
(comp.  ch.  xlvii.  8),  It  is  a  mistake  to  say 
thai  "the  Assyrians  gave  the  name  of  God 
to  their  monarchs "  (Kay),  or,  at  any  rate, 
there  is  no  evidence  that  they  did.  Not 
does  any  king,  either  Assyrian  or  Babylonian, 
ever  assume  a  Divine  title.  There  is  a 
marked  differenee  in  this  respect  between 
the  Egyptian  and  the  Assyro-Babylonian 
religions.  Probably  Isaiah  only  means  that 
Babylonian  monarchs  thought  of  themselves 
as  godSjWerked  their  own  wills,were  wrapped 
up  in  them,  elves,  did  not  in  heart  bow  down 
to  a  higher  Power. 

Ver.  15. — Thou  shalt  be  brought  down; 
ratlier,  thou  art  brought  down  (comp.  vers. 
9 — 11).  The  sides  of  the  pit ;  or,  th^  recesses 
—the  "  lowest  parts  "  of  the  pit.  With  these 
words  the  third  stanza  terminates. 

Ver.  16.— They  that  S3e  thee.  Dr.  Kay 
well  observes  that  "here  the  scene  of  the 
parable  is  changed  back  to  earth.  The 
corpse  of  the  mighty  conqueror  is  lying  un- 
buried."  Shall  narrowly  look  upon  thee. 
Like  the  inhabitants  of  hell  (ver.  10),  thoso 
of  earth  also  shall  scarcely  believe  their 
eyes.  They  shall  look  close  to  see  if  it  i« 
indeed  the  great  king  tnat  is  slain, 


246 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.      [ch-  xiv.  1—32. 


Ter.  17. — That  opened  net  the  house  of 
hi*  prisoners;  literally,  that  loosed  not  hit 
prisoners  homewards.  The  long  imprison- 
ment of  Jeholachin  by  Nebuchadnezzar 
(thirty-six  years,  2  Kings  xxv.  27)  is  an 
illustration;  bnt  perhaps  it  is  rather  the 
retention  in  captivity  of  the  entire  Jewish 
people  that  is  brought  to  the  prophet's 
cognizance. 

Yer.  18. — All  the  kings  of  the  nations,  etc. ; 
I.e.  the  other  kings,  speaking  generally,  died 
in  peace,  and  had  an  honourable  burial, 
each  one  in  the  sepuhhre  that  he  had  pre- 
pared for  himself  as  his  final  abode  or 
"house"  (comp.  ch.  xxii.  16).  The  care 
taken  to  prepare  tombs  was  not  confined  to 
Egypt,  tliough  there  obtaining  its  greatest 
development.  Among  otliera,  the  Persian 
kings  certainly  prepared  their  own  se- 
pulchres; and  probably  the  practice  was 
general. 

Ver.  19.  —  Bat  than  art  cast  out  (see 
ver.  13).  Again  "  thou "  is  emphatic. 
Translate,  Bat  thou — thou  art  east  out.  The 
Babylonian  monarch  did  not  rest  in  the 
tomb  which  he  hafl  prepared  for  himself. 
His  body  was  "ciist  out" — left,  apparently, 
where  it  fell  in  biitile.  If  there  is  allusion 
to  any  individual,  it  is  probably  to  Uol- 
shazzcir  (Dan.  v.  30).  Like  an  abominable 
branch.  As  a  shoot  from  a  tree,  which  is 
disapproved,  and  so  condemned  and  cut 
away.  As  the  raiment  of  those  that  are 
slain.  Tlie  garments  of  the  slain,  soaked 
in  blood  (ch.  ix.  5),  were  useless,  and  were 
consequently  flung  away  or  left  to  rot  un- 
cared  tor.  So  was  it  with  the  corpse  of  the 
great  king.  That  go  down  to  the  stones  of 
the  pit.  This  clause  is  thought  to  be  mis- 
placed. It  deranges  the  metre  and  damages 
the  sense.  Corpses  were  not  interred  on 
fields  of  battle  in  the  East  (Herod.,  iii.  26). 
They  weie  left  to  be  "  trodden  underfoot." 
It  is  best,  with  Jlwald  and  Mr.  Cheyne,  to 
transfer  the  clause  to  the  commencement  of 
the  next  verse.  Thus  the  fourth  stanza  is  re- 
lieved, and  the  fiftli  properly  filled  out. 

Ver.  20. — If  we  make  the  alteration  sug- 
gested in  the  preceding  note,  this  verse  will 
begin  as  follows:  "They  that  have  gone 
down  to  the  stones  of  the  pit,  with  these 
thou  shalt  not  be  joined  in  burial " — a  repe- 
tition certainly  of  the  first  clause  of  ver.  19, 
but  with  amplification,  and  with  the  reason 
appended.  Thou  hast  destroyed  thy  land ; 
i.e.  "  brought  ruin  on  it  by  displeasing  God, 
and  causing  him  to  visit  it  with  a  judgment." 
The  seed  of  evii-doers  shall  never  he  re- 
nowned ;  rather,  shall  not  he  named  for  ever 
(oomp.  Ps  cix.  13).  The  meaning  is  that 
they  shall  liave  no  seed,  or,  if  tliey  have  any, 
that  it  shall  be  early  cut  o%  and  the  whole 
race  blotted  out.  Pretenders  rose  up  under 
Dariut  Uystaspis,  claiming  descent  from 


Belshazzar's  father,  Nabonidus;  but  the 
claim  is  characterized  as  false,  and  a  false 
claim  would  scarcely  have  been  set  up  had 
real  descendants  survived. 

Ver.  21. — Prepare  slaughter  for  his  chil 
dren.  Belshazzar  had  "  wives  and  concu- 
bines "  (Dan.  V.  2),  and  therefore  probably 
children.  The  magnanimity  of  Cyrus  may 
have  spared  them ;  but  neither  Cambyses 
nor  Darius  Hystaspis  had  the  same  merci- 
ful disposition.  As  soon  as  there  was  seen 
to  be  danger  of  Babylon  revolting,  they 
would  almost  certainly  be  put  to  death. 
Tor  the  iniquity  of  their  fathers  (comp. 
Exod.  XX.  5).  The  destruction  of  their  pos- 
terity was  a  part  of  the  punishment  of  the 
fathers.  That  they  do  not  rise ;  i.e.  "  that 
they  do  not  recover  themselves  and  become 
great  monarchs  once  more,  and  once  more 
build  great  cities,"  such  as  those  which  they 
were  famous  for  —  Babel,  Erech,  Accad, 
Calneli,  Ur,  Sepharvaim,  Borsippa,  Opis, 
Teredon,  etc.  It  was  as  city-builders  that 
the  Babvlonans  were  especially  celebrated 
(Gen.  x.'lO ;  Dan.  iv.  30  ;  Herod.,  i.  178,  etc.). 

Vers.  22,  23. — These  verses  constitute  the 
epode  of  the  poem.  Their  main  object  is 
to  make  it  clear  that  the  punishment  about 
to  fall  on  Babylon  comes  from  none  other 
than  Jehovah,  whose  Name  occurs  twice  in 
ver.  22,  and  emphatically  closes  ver.  23. 
The  lines  are  much  more  irregular  than 
those  of  the  strophes,  or  stanzas. 

Ver.  22.  —  And  cut  off  from  Babylon  the 
name.  It  is  not  quite  clear  in  what  sense 
her  "  name  "  was  to  be  "  cut  off"  from  Baby- 
lon. One  of  the  main  masses  of  ruin  still 
bears  the  old  name  almost  unchanged  {Babil), 
and  can  scarcely  be  supposed  to  have  lost 
it  and  afterwards  recovered  it.  Perhaps 
"  name  "  here  means  "  fame  "  or  "  celebrity  " 
(comp.  Dent.  xxvi.  19  ;  Zeph.  iii.  20).  Son 
and  nephew;  rather,  son  and  grandson,  or 
t8s«e  and  descendants.  The  same  phrase 
occurs  in  the  same  sense  in  Gen.  xxi.  23  and 
Job  xviii.  19. 

Ver.  23. — A  possession  for  the  bittern. 
Some  water-bird  or  other  is  probably  in- 
tended, since  the  word  used  is  joined  in  ch. 
xxxvi.  11  with  the  names  of  three  other 
birds,  and  is  also  certainly  a  bird's  name  in 
Zeph.  ii.  14  ;  but  the  identification  with  the 
"  bittern  "  is  a  mere  guess,  and  rests  on  no 
authority.  And  pools  of  water.  The  swampy 
character  of  the  country  about  the  ruins  of 
Babylon  is  generally  noticed  by  travellers 
It  arises  from  neglect  of  the  dams  along  the 
-course  of  the  Euphrates.  Ker  Porter  says 
that  "  large  deposits  of  the  Euphrates  water 
are  left  stagnant  in  the  hollows  between  the 
ruins  "  ('  Travels,'  vol.  ii.  p.  389). 

Vers.  24 — 27. — A  Further  Pbopheot  oi 
Dbliteranox  rmm  Assyria.    From  the  di»- 


OH.  XIV.  1—32.]        THE   BOOK  OP   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


241 


tant  prospect  of  an  ultimate  deliverance  from 
the  power  of  Babylon,  the  prophet  turns 
his  gaze  to  a  nearer,  if  not  a  greater,  deli- 
verance. The  present  enemy  is  Asayria.  It 
is  she  who  has  carried  Samaria  into  capti- 
vity, and  who  now  threatens  the  indepen- 
dence of  Judah.  Deliverance  from  her  has 
already  been  promised  more  than  once  (oh. 
X.  16—19,  25—27,33,  34);  but  apparently 
the  people  are  not  reassured — they  still 
dread  the  foe  who  is  so  near,  and  who  seems 
so  irresistible.  God,  therefore,  condescends 
to  give  them  a  fresh  prophecy,  a  fresh  assur- 
ance, and  to  confirm  it  to  them  by  an  oath 
(ver.  24).  The  Assyrian  power  shall  bo 
broken — ^her  yoke  shall  be  cast  off  (ver.  25) ; 
God  has  declared  bis  purpose,  and  nothing 
can  hinder  it  (ver.  27). 

Ver.  24. — ^Hath  sworn.  This  is  the  em- 
phatic word — the  new  thing  in  the  prophecy. 
God  but  seldom  declares  his  purposes  mth 
anonth — never  but  in  condescension  to  the 
weakness  of  his  creatures,  who,  though  they 
misdoubt  his  word,  can  feel  the  immuta- 
bility of  an  oath  (Heb.  vi.  17),  and  yield  it 
the  credence  and  the  confidence  which  they 
rbfuse  to  a  bare  assertion.  As  I  have  thought 

.  .  as  I  have  purposed.  A  reference  to  the 
prophecies  previously  given  in  ch.  x.  So  shall 
it  come  to  pass ;  literally,  so  it  hath  been 
— a  striking  instance  of  the  "preterite  of 
prophetic  ceitainty."  So  shall  it  stand; 
literally,  as  I  have  purposed,  that  shall  stand. 

Ver.  25. — I  will  break  the  Assyrian  in  my 
land.  This  is  referred  by  some  critics  to  the 
miraculous  destruction  of  Sennacherib's 
army,  and  regarded  as  a  proof  that  the  scene 
of  that  destruction  was  Judsoa.  But  it  is 
possible  that  a  disaster  to  the  forces  of  Sar- 
gon  may  be  intended  (see  the  comment  on 
ch.  X.  28 — 32).  His  yoke  shall  depart  from 
off  them  (comp.  ch.  x.  27).  The  Assyrian 
yoke,  imposed  by  Tiglath-Pileser  (2  Kings 
xvi  7 — 10),  and  (according  to  his  own  in- 
scriptions) again  by  Sargon,  was  thrown  off 
by  Hezekiah,  who  "rebelled  against  tbe 
King  of  Assyria,  and  served"  him  not "  (2 
Kings  xviii.  7).  It  wns  this  rebellion  that 
provoked  the  expedition  of  Sennacherib, 
described  in  2  Kings  xviii.  13 — 16 ;  and  it 
may  be  this  rejection  of  the  yoke  which  is 
here  prophesied. 

Ver.  26. — The  whole  earth  ...  all  th« 
nations.  Blows  struck  against  Aesi  lia  or 
Babylonia  affected  all  the  then  known  na- 
tions. Each,  in  its  turn,  was  "the  hammer 
.  of  the  whole  earth  "  (Jer.  1. 23),  and  n  check 
received  by  either  caused  world-wide  dis- 
turbance. No  sooner  did  one  sulijoot  nation 
recover  her  freedom,  than  an  electric  shock 
can  through  all  the  rest — plots  were  laid. 


confederacies  formed,  revolts  planned,  em- 
bassies sent  hither  and  thither.  The  com- 
plete destruction  of  Assyria  involved  a 
complete  change  in  the  relations,  not  only 
of  the  principal  powers — Egypt,  Assyria, 
Babylonia,  Media,  Elam,  but  even  of  the 
minor  ones — Philistia,  £dom,  Iloab,  Syria, 
Phoenicia,  Ammon. 

Ver.  27. — His  hand  is  stretohed  out ;  lite- 
rally, hit  it  the  outstretched  hand,  which  is 
more  emphatic. 

Vers.  28 — 32. — TheBurdenofPhiustia. 
The  Philistines  had  saffered  grievously  at 
the  hands  of  Judah  in  the  reign  of  Uzziah 
(2  Chron.  xxvi.  6),  and  liad  retaliated  in  the 
reign  of  Ahaz  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  18).  It 
would  seem  that  after  this  they  were  in- 
vaded by  Tiglath-Pileser,  who  penetrated 
as  far  as  Gaza,  which  he  took  ('  Eecords  of 
the  Past,'  vol.  T.  p.  51)  and  made  tributary, 
as  he  also  did  Ascalon  ('  Ancient  Monar- 
chies,' vol.  ii.  p.  399).  Tiglath-PUeser  died 
shortly  before  Aliaz,  and  the  present  "  bur- 
den "  seems  to  have  been  uttered  in  connec- 
tion with  his  death.  Isaiah  warns  Philistia 
(equivalent  to  "  Palestina ")  that  her  re- 
joicing is  premature;  Tiglath-Pileser  will 
have  successors  as  powerful  and  as  cruel 
as  himself,  and  these  successors  will  carry 
destruction  and  ravage  over  the  whole  land. 

Ver.  28.- In  the  year  that  Kiag  Ahai 
died  was  this  burden.  These  words  intro- 
duce the  "burden  of  Philistia,"  and  shows 
that  it  is  chronologically  out  of  place,  since 
the  prophecies  from  ch.  x.  to  ch.  xiv.  1 — 27 
have  belonged  to  the  reign  of  Hezekiah. 
Ahaz  appears  to  have  died  early  in  B.o.  725. 

Ver.  29.— Whole  Palestina.  The  Greeks 
called  Philistia  riiv  Ua\ai<rTtrTiy  Supior,  or 
"  Syria  of  the  Philistines,"  whence  the  Latin 
"  Palestina  "  and  our  "  Palestine."  Isaiah 
adilitsses  the  countiy  as  "whole  Palestine," 
because,  while  it  was  made  up  of  a  number 
of  principalities  (1  Sam.  vi.  IS),  his  message 
concerned  it  in  its  entirety.  The  rod  of  him 
that  smote  thee  is  broken.  This  can  bcarcely 
refer  to  the  death  of  Ahaz,  since  Ahaz  did 
not  smite  the  Philistines,  but  was  smitten 
by  them  (2  Ohron.  xxviii.  18).  It  may, 
however,  refer  to  the  death  of  Tiglath- 
Pileser,  which  took  place  only  a  year  or  two 
previously.  Out  of  the  serpent's  root  shall 
come  forth  a  cockatrice ;  i.e.  a  more  poison- 
ous serpent  (see  note  on  ch.  xi.  8).  Shal- 
maneser  can  scarcely  be  meant,  sinofi  he  does 
not  appear  to  have  attacked  the  PhilistiucB. 
Probably  Sargon  is  intended,  who  "  took 
Ashdod  "  (ch.  xx.  I),  made  Khanun,  King  o( 
Gaza,  prisoner  ('  Hecords  of  the  Past,'  voL 
ix.  p.  5),  and  reduced  Philistia  geuorallf  to 


2^8 


THE   BOOK   OF  TliE   PUOPHBT   ISAIAH.      [oh.  xiv.  1— 32 


eubjieotion.  And  his  ^nit  shall  be  a  flery 
tying  serpent.  'J'he  fniit  of  the  cockatrice 
will  be  even  more  toriible  and  venomouB. 
He  will  resemble  the  "  fiery  flying  serpent " 
of  the  wilderness  (Numb.  xxi.  6).  Senna- 
cherib is,  perhaps,  this  "  fruit."  He  cun- 
quered  Asoalon  ('Ancient  BLnarcliies,'  vol. 
ii.  p.  432)  and  Ekroa  (ibiil.,  p.  433),  and 
bad  the  kings  of  Gaza  and  Aslidnd  among 
his  tributaries  (ibiJ.,  p.  438,  note  11). 

Ver.  30.— The  firstborn  of  the  poor  shall 
feed.  The  "  firstborn  of  the  poor  "  are  the 
very  poor  (Jarchi,  Eosenmulli  r).  The  refer- 
ence is  to  the  poor  Israelites,  wlio  will 
"  feed  "  and  "  lie  down  in  safety "  when 
Philistia  is  held  in  subjection.  I  will  kill 
thy  root  'with  famine,  and  he  shall  slay  thy 
remnant.  Gud  kills  with  famine,  man  witFi 
tiie  sword  (see  2  Sam.  xxiv.  13,  14).  Wben 
tlie  Philistines  had  resisted  behind  tlieir 
strong  walls  till  hunger  hiid  done  its  wiirk 
by  thinning  their  raulis,  tlie  Assyrian  lou- 
queror  would  storm  their  strongholds  and 
slaughter  "the  lemnaut." 

Ver.  31. — Howl,  0  gate ;  cry,  0  city.  Each 


city  of  Philistia  is  bidden  to  howl  and 
lament.  All  will  suffer;  not  one  will  bo 
spared.  Art  dissolved ;  literally,  art  melted; 
i.e.  "faintest  tbrough  fear"  (comp.  Josh.  ii. 
9;  Jer.  xlix.  23).  There  shall  oome  from 
the  ndSrth  a  smoke.  The  "smoke"  is  the 
Assyrian  host,  which  ravages  the  country  as 
it  advances,  burning  towns,  ami  villages,  and 
peasants'  cots,  and  watchmen's  towora.  It 
enters  tho  country  "  from  the  north,"  as  a 
matter  of  course,  where  it  adjoins  upon  Ju- 
dssa.  The  coast  route,  which-  led  through 
the  Plain  of  Sharon,  was  that  commonly 
followed  by  Egyptian  armies.  Hone  shall 
be  alone  in  his  appointed  times ;  rather,  there 
shall  be  no  straggler  at  the  renrlezvout. 

Ver.  32. — What  shall  one  then  answer, 
etc.?  What  answer  shall  be  made  to  tlie 
Philistine  ambassadors,  when  they  come  to 
Jerusalem  and  entreat  for  aid?  Simply 
this — that  God  has  f^iunded  and  will  protect 
Zion,  and  that  the  pour  and  weak  among 
God's  people — whether  Jews  or  Philistiiii^ 
— had  better  betake  themselves  to  the  shelter 
of  the  "  city  of  the  great  King." 


HOMILETlOa 

Vers.  4 — 23. —  Triumjjh  ovtr  enemies.  The  "  taunt-song  "  of  Israel,  as  it  has  been 
Cidled  (Cheyne),  like  the  "song  of  Deborah  "  iu  the  Bonk  of  Judges  (?.),  raises  the 
questidn  how  far  iriiiiniih  over  a  national  enemy  is  a  leeling  that  can  be  indulged  with 
(■ropriety.     There  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is — , 

L  A  NATURAL  FEKLiNG.  "  The  song  of  Deborah  and  Barak'  expresses  the  feelings 
which  have  usually  animated  the  victors  in  national  contests  from  the  beginning  of 
the  world  to  the  present  day.  The  poems  of  Homer  show  us  the  great  warriors  of  tho 
heroic  age  giving  the  freest  possible  vent  to  their  passions  of  scorn  and  hatred  on  such 
occasions.  'I'he  heroes  of  (Jermany  and  Iceland  indulge  in  the  same  strain.  Nor  h 
American  Indians  are  said  to  have  been  equally  outspoken.  The  "  natural  man  " 
would,  beyond  all  question,  on  every  occasion  of  the  kind,  give  free  and  unfettered 
expression  to  his  feelings  of  triumph  and  delight,  nor  would  he  see  any  reason  for 
checking  his  feelings,  or  making  any  effort  to  moderate  them.  There  is  also  a  good 
side  to  the  fi  eling,  inasmuch  as  it  is — 

IL    COSNECTED   WITH   THANKFULNESS   TO   GoD   FOB   DELIVBRANOB.        In    the    SOng   of 

Deborah  atid  Barak,  and  again  in  the  song  of  Moses  (Exod.  xv.  1 — 21),  this  is  very 
marked.  "  Praise  ye  the  Lord  for  the  avenging  of  Israel,  when  the  people  willingly 
offered  themselves.  Hear,  0  ye  kings;  give  ear,  0  ye  princes;  I,  even  I,  will  sing 
unto  the  Lord;  I  will  sing  praise  to  the  Lord  God  of  Israel"  (Judg.  v.  2,  3).  "The 
Lord  is  my  Strength  and  Song,  and  is  become  my  Salvation :  he  is  my  God,  and  I  will 
prepare  him  an  habitation;  my  father's  God,  and  I  will  exalt  him.  The  Lord  is  a 
man  of  war:  the  Lord  is  his  Name"  (Exod.  xv.  2,  3).  "  Sing  ye  to  the  Lord,  for  he 
hath  trinniphed  gloriously;  the  horse  and  his  rider  hath  he  thrown  into  the  sea" 
(Exod.  XV.  21).  It  is  not  their  own  valour,  or  strength,  or  prudence, and  warlike  skill 
that  the  Hebrew  leaders  vaunt  in  their  songs  of  triumph,  but  the  greatness  and 
strength  and  wisdom  of  the  God  who  has  given  to  them  the  victory  over  their  «nemies. 
And  so  the  Christian  song  of  joy  for  a  victory  has  ever  been  the  "  Te  Deum^— "  We 
praise  thee,  0  God ;  we  acknowledge  thee  to  be  the  Lord,"  So  long  as  wars  coatinuf, 
so  long  as  sworda  are  not  beaten  into  ploughshares,  or  apears  into  pruning-hooka 
(eh.  ii.  4),  it  must  be  right  for  the  combatants  to  look  to  the  God  of  battles  for  aid  and 
countenance  and  success;  and  if  so,  it  must  be  right  for  them  to  return  him  thanks 
fur  his  aid  given,  which  can  best  be  done  by  songs  of  praise  and  psalms  of  thanka- 


cii.  XIV.  1—32.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  249 

giving.     On  the  other  hand,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  feeling  of  triumph  is  one 
which  ought  to  be  very  carefully  watched  and  kept  unrlur  control,  since  it  is — 

III.  Liable  to  deqenebatb  into  self-glorification.  When  Assyria  was  vic- 
torious, her  song  of  triumph  was  as  follows :  "  By  the  strength  of  my  hand  I  have 
done  it,  and  by  my  wisdom;  for  I  am  prudent :  and  I  havo-remuveJ  the  Iwumts  of  the 
people,  and  have  robbed  their  treasures,  and  I  hive  put  down  the  iiilmbiUints  like  a 
valiant  mun:  and  my  hand  hath  found  as  a  nest  the  riches  of  the  |  eople  ;  and  as  one 
gathereth  eggs  that  are  left,  have  I  gathered  all  the  earth  ;  ami  there  was  none  that 
moved  the  wing,  or  opened  the  mouth,  or  chiiped"  (cli.  x.  13,  14).  There  is  some- 
thing of  the  same  spirit  in  the  song  of  Deborah  and  Baiak  :  "  The  inhabitants  of  the 
villages  ceased,  they  ceased  in  Israel,  until  that  1  Deborah  arose,  that  I  arote  a 
mother  in  Israel "  (Jiidg.  v.  7).  "  Awiike,  awake,  Deborah  :  awake,  awake,  utter  a 
s(nig;  arise,  Barak,  and  lead  thy  captivity  captive,  thou  son  of  Abinoara  "  (Jndg.  v.  12). 
Weak  human  nature  is  apt  to  have  its  head  turned  by  success,  and  to  attribute  the 
rt'sult  to  its  own  prowess,  instead  of  the  mercy  and  goodness  of  God. 

IV.  Liable  to  DEOESEnATB  into  scobn  of,  and  insultation  over,  the  enfmt. 
Scom  and  insult  are  utteily  unchristian,  and  a  Cliristiau  "  song  of  trlnuiiih  "  should 
most  carefully  avoid  them;  but  they  are  very  dear  to  the  "natural  man,"  and  viry 
ajit  to  show  themselves  in  the  outpourings  of  a  human  heart  on  the  occasion  of  a 
triumph.  The  closing  passage  of  the  soug  of  Deboiah  is  of  the  nature  of  insult,  and  so 
is  a  considerable  portion  of  Isaiah's  "  taunt-song."  The  "  evangelical  prophet "  was 
not  himself  fully  possessed  of  the  evangelical  spirit.  In  his  time  the  precept  had  not 
yet  gone  forth,  "  Love  youi:  enemius  "  (Matt.  v.  44),  and  men  believed  it  to  be  natural 
and  right  to  hate  them  (see  Ps.  cxxxix.  22).  Insult  and  scorn  were  but  indications  of 
liate,  or  of  hate  mingled  with  contempt  lor  those  who  had  been  proved  weak,  and  so 
seemed  to  be  legitimately  bestowed  on  beaten  foes.  But  the  Christian  may  hata  no 
man,  may  despise  no  man,  knowing  that  each  human  soul  is  in  God's  sight  of  price- 
less value.  Consequently,  although  he  may  rejoice  in  victory,  and  even  compose  songs 
of  triumph,  he  is  bound  to  avoid  anything  like  insultatiun  over  the  defeated.  They 
are  his  brethren,  th.y  are  souls  for  whom  Christ  died  ;  they  may  be  among  those  with 
whom  he  will  hold  sweet  converse  in  the  world  to  come. 

Ver.  24. — God's  condescension  in  confirming  promises  by  oath.  It  is  a  weakness  on 
the  part  of  man  to  need  any  confirmation  of  a  promise  which  God  makes.  "  God 
cmnot  lie"  (Titus  ii.  18);  "He  keepeth  his  promise  for  ever"  (Ps.  cxlvi.  6).  Wl  en 
ho  condescends  to  swear  that  his  promise  shall  hold-  good,  it  dues  not  really  add  to  the 
certainty  of  the  thing  promised,  since  the  certainty  was  absolute  from  the  first.  But 
man  is  so  accustomed  to  misdoubt  his  fellows  that  he  will  even  misdoubt  Gmi,  aa 
though  with  him  were  "variableness  or  shadow  of  turning."  And  God,  ku(nvin;j; 
man's  heart  and  compassionating  his  weakness,  does  sometimes,  though  but  nirelv, 
add  to  his  promises,  for  man's  greater  contentment,  the  confirmation  of  an  oath.  Aftir 
the  Flood  God  covenanted  with  mankind  that  he  would  never  again  destroy  the  earth 
by  water  (Gen.  ix.  11),  and  confirmed  the  cpvenaut  by  oath  (oh.  Ixv.  9).  On  the  call 
of  Abraham,  he  swore  that  he  would  give  the  land  of  Canaan  to  his  posterity  (Gen. 
xxiv.  7),  and  afterwards  that  in  his  seed  should  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blesseil. 
With  David  he  made  a  covenant,  and  swore  to  it,  that  he  would  "  establish  his  seed 
for  ever,  and  build  up  his  throne  to  all  generations  "  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  3,  4).  To  his  own 
Son  he  swore,  at  what  time  we  know  not,  "  Thou  art  a  Priest  for  ever,  after  the  order 
of  Melchizedek  "  (Ps.  ex.  4).  And  here  wo  find  that  he  condescended  to  swear  to 
I.irael  that  the  Assyrians  should  "  be  broken,"  and  their  yoke  "  depart  off  them." 
Wonderful  condescension  of  him  whose  word  is  truth  I  Not  merely  not  to  punish 
those  who  doubt  him,  but  to  compassionate  them,  to  make  allowance  for  them,  to  yield 
compliance  to  their  weakness,  and  give  them  such  an  assurance  as  compels  their  Iwlicf. 
"  God,  willing  more  abundantly  to  show  unto  the  heirs  of  promise  the  immutability  *f 
his  counsel,  confirmed  it  by  an  oath,  that  by  two  immutable  things,  in  which  it  was 
impossible  for  Gt)d  to  lie,  they  might  have  a  strong  coiisolation  " — a  hope  on  which  to 
anob6r  their  lotd  (Heb.  vi.  17 — 19). 

Ver.  32. — No  luri  refuge  hut  Zion.    When  danger  threateij;  men  commonly  itroke 


250  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  1SAIA£L      [on.  xiv.  1-32. 

human  aid — "  trust  in  Egypt,  fly  to  Assyria  " — think  to  be  safe  if  some  great  king,  or 
powerful  statesman,  or  important  country,  will  take  them  under  protectioa.  But  every 
such  refuge  is  untrustworthy.  States  prove  themselves  "bruised  reeds"  in  the  time 
of  trouble,  "  piercing  the  hand  which  leans  on  them "  (2  Kings  xviil.  21).  Princes 
disappoint  expectation,  and  show  that  "there  is  no  help  in  them"  (Ps.  cxlvi.  3). 
Statesmen  find  it  inconvenient  to  redeem  the  pledges  which  they  have  given,  and  turn 
a  deaf  ear  to  the  appeals  for  aid  addressed  to  them.  But  the  ear  of  Qod  is  always  open 
to  men's  cries.    They  may  appeal  with  confidence  to  him  either  in — 

I.  The  eabthlt  Zion,  his  holy  mountain,  the  "  city  set  upon  an  hill "  (Matt.  ▼. 
14),  in  which  he  has  promised  that  there  shall  dwell  his  presence  for  ever.  The  Church 
of  God,  founded  upon  the  sure  rook  of  faith  in  Christ,  is  a  refuge  from  the  assaults  of 
doubt  and  unbelief,  from  the  wiles  of  Satan,  from  the  seductions  of  evij  men.  When 
the  great  army  of  imbelief  advances,  like  a  smoke  from  the  north  (ver.  31),  and 
threatens  to  obscure  the  whole  world  with  the  dark  mantle  of  agnosticism,  marslialling 
its  hosts  with  military  precision,  so  that  "there  is  not  one  straggler  at  the  rendez- 
vous," let  men  remember  one  tijing,  "  The  Lord  hath  founded  Zion,  and  the  pbor  of 
his  people  may  trust  in  it"  (ver.  32).  The  poor  of  his  people,  such  as  feel  themselves 
"  wretched,  and  miserabie,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked  "  (Rev.  iii.  17),  may  find  in 
the  Church  of  Christ — the  Church  with  which  he  continues  always,  "even  unto  the 
end  of  the  world " — a  refuge,  a  defence,  a  rally  in  :);-point,  from  which  they  may  defy 
the  dark  host  of  their  enemies.  Against  the  Church  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail. 
Her  Lord  is  her  Defender,  and  will  give  her  victory  over  all  her  foes.  The  Lord's 
people  may  safely  trust  in  her.  Or,  if  this  docs  not  suffice,  if  (as  happens  to  men  in 
some  moods)  every  earthly  stay  seems  vain,  they  may  go  "  boldly  to  the  throne  of 
grace"  (Hub.  iv.  16),  and  address  themselves  directly  to  God  in — 

II.  The  heavenly  Zion — the  "  heaven  of  heavens  " — the  sphere  where  he  sits 
enthroned  above  angels  and  arcLangels,  yet  from  which  he  is  ever  lending  an  attentive 
ear  to  the  cry  of  all  his  creatures.  The  earthly  Zion  is  but  a  temporary  abiding-plase 
for  individuals ;  the  heavenly  Zion  is  alone  their  true  home.  In  the  heavenly  Zion 
alone  are  they  wholly  safe — saved,  garnered,  gathered  in,  secure  for  ever.  There  is 
the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  (Rev.  xxii.  1);  there  is  "the  river  of  the  wattr 
of  life,  clear  as  crystal"  (Rev.  xxii.  l);  there  is  the  "tree  of  lite,"  with  its  "twel'"8 
manner  of  fruits,"  and  its  leaves  which  are  "  for  the  healinii  of  the  nations  "  (Rev.  xxii. 
2).  The  earthly  Zion  is  but  a  type  of  the  heavenly ;  it  is  on  the  heavenly  that  our 
thoughts  should  rest,  our  minds  dwell,  our  spirits  stay  themselves  (Col.  iii.  1 — 3). 


HOMILIES   BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 23. — Song  of  redeemed  Israel.  I.  The  occasion  of  the  sono.  (Vers. 
1 — 3.)  The  immediate  purpose  of  that  awful  convulsion  of  the  nations  described  in 
•  the  preceding  chanter  was  judgment ;  but  beyond  this  lies  the  purpose  of  mercy.  The 
inspired  song  of  Israel  is  ever  of  "  mercy  ^and  judgment."  One  loving  purpose  works, 
whether  through  the  hiding  of  the  cloud  and  the  storm,  or  in  the  manifest  brightness 
of  the  calm  summer  day.  Whether  he  makes  himself  known  to  us  amidst  terror  and 
trembling,  or  in  peace  and  tranquilly  flowing  hours,  "  God's  in  his  heaven,  all's  right 
with  the  world."  After  the  storm  comes  the  still  small  voice,  heard  in  the  sanctuary, 
echoed  in  the  heart,  "  Fear  not ;  I  am  with  thee."  Jehovah  will  give  his  people  rest  in 
their  land  from  the  cruel  sufferings  of  slavery.  The  heathen  will  look  on,  astonished 
at  the  deliverance  of  Israel,  and  will  be  convinced  that  there  is  a  truth  in  the  religion  • 
of  Israel  superior  to  that  of  their  own.  They  will  escort  the  people  of  Jehovah  to  the 
sacred  place,  and  there  become  attached  to  their  service  as  dependents.  To  the  pro- 
phetic conscience  it  seems  that  this  is  but  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  compensation. 
It  seems  preposterous,  nothing  less  than  an  invasion  of  the  true  order  of  things,  for 
a  community  which  holds  the  purest  principles  to  be  enslaved  to  one  wliose  power  ig 
built  on  falsehood.  The  conscience  of  the  prophet  teaches  him  that  as  God  ia  right, 
so  there  must  be  a  rectiiication  of  the  world's  wiong.  The  present  first  must  become 
the  last,  and  the  last  first,  and  the  world  must  be  turned  upside  down,  that  Israel  may 
obtain  and  retain  her  destined  lead  among  the  nations.    This  \»  a  leading  ideal  of 


OH.  XIV.  1—32.]        THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET  ISAIAa  251 

prophecy,  and  we  find  it  reappearing  in  the  days  of  Christ.  We  may,  Indeed,  without 
straining  a  point,  say  that  such  predictions,  born  of  the  profouudest  religious  con- 
victions, have  been  fulfilled  in  the  course  of  our  religion.  It  will  hardly  be  denied 
that  the  great  spiritual  principles  summed  up  in  the  phrase,  "the  kingdom  of  God 
upon  earth,"  have  grown  upon  the  world,  have  obtained  a  larger  and  more  commanding 
recognition  with  every  great  change  among  the  nations.  Israel,  Greece,  broke  up  as 
mitions  only  to  resign  their  deposit  of  truth  to  a  larger  stewardship ;  and  Rome's  work 
was  fulfilled  when  she  became  the  vehicle  of  Christianity  to  the  wide  Western  world. 
The  forms  of  Divine  fulfilment  seen  by  the  prophets  in  their  forecast  may  not  have 
been  always  the  truest  forms,  limited  as  they  were  by  conditions  of  space  and  time. 
The  substance  and  spirit  of  thuir  message  was  ol  eternal  truth. 

II.  The  contents  of  tub  song.  (Vers.  4 — 8.)  1.  The  picture  of  rest  from 
tyranny.  The  Babylonian  oppressor  shall  be  quelled  ;  his  lordly  pride  and  wrath  shall 
cease.  For  the  staff  of  authority  wielded  by  impious  hands  shall  be  broken,  the 
tyrant's  sceptre  dashed  from  his  hand.  His  part  will  be  reversed ;  having  incessantly 
smitten  the  people  in  his  cruel  rage,  and  trodden  them  beneath  his  feet  in  the  exercise  of 
arbitrary  and  unchecked  [>ower,  he  will  himself  be  powerless,  as  all  injustice  must  be, 
disjoined  from  physical  force.  See  the  critical  notes  for  the  discussion  of  the  meaning 
of  the  words,  and  the  strong  imagis  of  violence,  inspired  by  tyrannic  caprice  and 
cruelty,  which  they  call  up  in  the  imagination.  "  The  oppressor's  scorn,  the  proud  man's 
contumely,"  are  enumerated  by  our  great  poets  among  thuse  conditions  which  tempt  men 
to  doubt  the  worth  of  existence.  Take  away  the  freedom  of  religious  life,  the  placid 
enjoyment  of  old  customs  of  family  and  social  life,  from  a  people,  and  you  extract  from 
them  the  relish  for  life. 

"  'Tis  liberty,  fair  liberty  alono. 
That  sives  the  fleeting  flower  of  life  its  sweetness  and  perfume." 

There  is  no  deeper  passion,  nor  one  more  just,  than  the  hatred  of  tyranny,  m  the  human 
breast.  If  we  look  at  the  question  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  tyrant  himself,  his 
lot  is  odious.  Xenophon  represents  Hiero  of  Syracuse  lamenting  to  the  poet  Simonide* 
his  unhappiness.  He  must  surround  himself  with  guards  whom  he  cannot  trust. 
Intimate  friendship,  such  as  blesses  the  meanest  of  his  subjects,  must  be  to  him  denied. 
He  cannot  close  the  sleepless  eye  of  suspicion.  Amiable  he  may  be  and  sympathetic 
by  nature,  yet  his  heart  may  not  expand  in  the  chilling  atmosphere  which  surrounds 
him.  The  cruel  necessities  of  power  may  even  render  the  lot  of  the  oppressor  less 
enviable  than  that  of  the  oppressed.  The  heart  of  the  people  in  every  land  and  age 
cries  out  against  tyranny  as  an  abuse  of  the  moral  order,  a  violence  done  to  the  nature 
of  things.  And  the  true  prophet,  ever  feeling  in  unison  with  that  heart,  translating  its 
dim  yearnings  into  articulate  oracles,  denounces  and  predicts  the  downfall  of  tyranny 
as  inevitable,  if  the  kingdom  of  Jehovah  on  earth  is  a  reality.  "  There  remaineth 
a  rest  for  the  people  of  God."  "The  empire  is  peace."  These  words,  once  uttered 
vainly  by  a  potentate  in  our  time,  and  soon  sternly  refuted  by  the  roar  of  artillery 
from  around  the  walls  of  his  fair  city  and  fi-om  a  score  of  battle-fields  throughout  hii 
pleasant  land,  contain  the  policy  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah.  Selfishness,  ambition, 
tyranny  of  individual  wills, — these  are  the  most  constant  causes  of  restlessness  and  war. 
When  "  all  man's  good  "  shall  be  "  each  man's  rule,"  such  evils  will  be  impossible ;  the 
"  unsufTering  kingdom  "  of  the  Messiah  will  come,  and  the  meek  will  inherit  tlie  earth. 
2.  The  sympathy  of  nature  with  man.  How  exquisite  is  the  poetic  feeling  for  nature 
in  the  next  verses  (7,  8)  1  Like  all  the  imagery  of  Hebrew  poesy,  they  are  full  of  sim- 
plicity, sublimity,  pathos.  "Mowresteth^nowis  quiet  all  the  earth;  songs  of  jubilation 
break  forth.  The  cypresses  rejoice  on  thy  account,  the  cedars  of  Lebanon.  Since  thou 
liest  low  (they  say)  none  will  come  up  to  lay  the  axe  against  us."  The  Chaldean  used 
the  wood  of  these  trees,  of  great  durability,  for  his  buildings,  his  besieging  apparatus, 
his  ships.  A  small  remnant,  heirs  of  those  magnificent  trees  on  Lebanon  of  the  pro- 
phet's time,  still  stands  on  the  spot.  They  seem,  in  their  robust  and  beautiful  forms, 
the  very  type  of  human  life  in  the  ideal  freedom  and  independence  of  its  growth. 
There  is  a  strong  poetic  feeling  for  the  tree  in  the  Hebrew  psalmists  an3  prophet?. 
T''e  just  man  is  like  the  tree  planted  by  the  flowin;;  stream,  or  like  the  palm  flourishing 
ifc  the  desert,  the  image  of  outward  suffering  and  deprivation.    We  all  yearn  for  tlj« 


252  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  rliOi'HET  ISAIAH.      [ch.  xiv.  1—32. 

sight  of  the  trees.  We  cannot  see  their  leaves  fall  in  autnmn  without  something  of  a 
pang.  We  hail  the  returning  blush  on  the  beech  woods  of  our  own  land  in  the  spring- 
time, and  the  dimly  deepening  green  of  the  herlgerowa.  A  silent  sense  of  sympathy- 
steals  to  OUT  heart,  as  if  sickness,  old  age,  and  death  were  illusions,  life  the  only  reality. 
The  dimpling  reflections  of  the  sunlight  on  the  leaves  are  as  smiles,  and  as.  a  whisper 
from  the  spiritual  world  the  rustle  of  the  wind  among  them.  We  can  understand  how 
in  olden  time  men  felt  the  trees  to  be  oracular,  and  believed,  or  half  believed  them  to  be 
tenanted  by  supernatural  beings.  A  landscape  without  a  tree,  like  a  sea  without  a 
sail,  is  a  sight  we  cannot  long  endure  without  pain.  Such  feelings  have  undoubtedly 
n  religious  ineaning  and  valne.  As  we  listen  to  them  and  cultivate  them,  the  I'aith 
grows  stronger  that  a  Divine  love  and  sympathy  is  stirring  at  the  very  heart  of  things. 
[t  is  an  ill  thing  if  we  permit  on  every  occasion  our  cold  scientific  conscience  to  chide 
us  out  of  such  a  mood.  In  the  present  exalted  mood  of  the  prophet,  the  trees  seem  not 
merely  to  offer  a  silent  sympathy,  bnt  to  find  tongue  and  to  break  Ibrth  into  articulate 
triumph.  Still  more  bnldly,  in  ch.  Iv.  12,  they  are  conceived  as  clapping  their  hands 
in  joy.  Here  the  cypresses  and  cedars,  appropriated  by  the  patriotic  eagerness  of  the 
prophet,  as  it  were,  exult  in  deliverance  from  the  axe  of  the  alien  feller,  as  he  exults  in 
the  breaking  of  the  alien  sceptre. 

III.  Lesson  on  the  sympathy  of  mind  with  nature.  Let  us  not  be  tempted  to 
idle  words  in  speaking  of  that  high  faculty  of  poetic  fancy  exercised  upon  the  objects 
and  scenes  of  nature,  and  illustrated  in  this  passage.  A  great  spiritual  poet  of  our  age 
— Wordsworth — has  taught  us  religiously  to  cherish  it.  We  accept  the  teaching,  but 
not  in  its  exaggerated  forms.  It  has  been  asserted  as  a  principle  of  primary  and 
universal  import^,  that  "it  has  pleased  God  to  educate  mankind  from  the  beginning 
through  impressiims  derived  from  the  phenomena  of  the  natural  world."  A  sounder 
theology  and  a  juster  theory  of  the  imagination  teaches  otherwise.  The  home,  the 
school,  the  Church,  the  state,  society, — these  are  the  scenes  of  our  spirit's  training  in 
religion  and  in  morals,  for  time  and  for  eternity.  We  cast  upon  the  forms  of  the 
external  world  refiecfions  of  sentiments  and  truths  we  could  not  divine  from  that  world. 
We  know  the  physical  cosmos  through  the  moral  cosmos,  not  vice  versa.  As  to  poeta 
of  the  highest  order,  all  have  been  at  home  in  the  grandeurs  of  the  spiritual  world,  not 
all  have  been  affected  by  the  forms  of  nature.  This  has  been  especially  remarked  o< 
Dante.  This  observation  is  fixed  almost  exclusively  upon  the  Divine  and  human  world. 
And,  indeed,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  noblest  objects  of  contemplation  are  God 
and  man  himself.  "  The  universe  and  all  its  fair  and  glorious  forms  is  indeed  includcil 
in  the  wide  empire  of  imagination ;  but  she  has  placed  her  home  and  her  sanctuary 
amidst  the  inexhaustible  varieties  and  impenetrable  mysteries  of  the  human  mind.  .  .  . 
Is  it  not  the  fact  that  external  ohjects  never  strongly  excite  our  feelings  but  when  they 
are  contemplated  with  reference  to  man,  as  ilhut  iting  his  destiny  or  as  influencing 
his  character?"  (Macaulay).  We  can  find  in  Nature  only  what  we  take  to  her.  The 
key  to  her  mystical  meanings  is  to  be  found  in  the  awakened  conscience,  the  heart 
made  pure.  Petrarch,  unlike  Dunte,  loved  the  face  of  nature.  But  on  one  occasion, 
in  the  njidst  of  a  glow  of  delight  in  a  glorious  prospect,  he  remembered  that  he  hail  a 
volume  of  St.  Augustine  iu  his  pocket.  Opening  the  book  at  random,  he  read  these 
words :  "  Men  go  to  admire  the  lofty  mountains,  the  mighty  sea-billows,  the  broad 
courtes  of  the  rivers,  the  circuit  of  the  ocean,  the  orbit  of  the  stars,  and  they  neglect 
themselves."  He  closed  the  book  and  reproached  himself.  Even  the  heathen  ]ihilo- 
sofhers  might  h^ve  taught  hiin  a  deeper  truth.  Doubtless.  Socrates  said  that  "trees 
did  not  teaeb  liini  anything,  but  man."  Let  us  adapt  the  saying  to  religious  feeling. 
The  trees  w  ill  yield  no  oracles  but  those  which  have  been  first  heard  in  the  inmost 
conscience.  And  if  there  are  times  when  they  seem  to  whisper  of  gladness,  or  to  smile 
and  clap  their  hands  for  joy,  it  is  because  God  has  already  opened  a  fountain  of 
perennial  trust  and  hope  within  the  soul.  Then  "  fruitful  trees  and  all  cedars  "  will 
praise  the  Lord,  when  the  heart  is  filled  with  praise  "  The  outward  face  of  nature  is 
a  I'eli^ious  communication  to  those  who  come  to  it  with  the  religious  element  already 
in  them,  but  no  man  can  get  a  reli^^ion  out  of  the  beauty  of  nature.  Those  who  have 
first  made  the  knowledge  of  themselves  and  their  own  souls  their  care,  its  glory  has 
ever  turned  to  light  and  hope.  They  have  read  in  nature  an  augury  and  a  presage  j 
ihey  have  found  in  it  a  language  and  a  revelation  "  (Monley).— J, 


OH.  XIV.  1-32.]      TUE  BOOK  OF  THE   I'llOPHET  ISAIAH.  268 


Vera.  9 — 23. — Song  o/rtdeemed  Israel:  the  teene  in  Madea.  I.  Entbanok  of  thb 
TYRANT  INTO  THB  UNDEBWOKLD.  (Vers.  9 — 11.)  The  realm  of  the  departed  trembles 
with  the  excitement  of  expectation  as  the  great  potentate  of  Babylonia  approaches 
to  take  up  his  abode  in  those  gloomy  regions.  The  shades  of  departed  chiefs  and 
kings  bestir  themselves,  and  rise  from  their  thrones  in  amazement  to  greet  the  new- 
comer. "Hast  thou  also  become  weak  like  us ?  Art  thou  become  one  of  us ? "  His 
pomp  and  splendour  is  cast  down  to  the  lowest  depth,  the  sound  of  his  festive  hnip 
is  silenced  in  that  joyless  place.  Instead  of  bis  costly  rugs,  maggots  are  now  his  bed- 
clothes, and  his  counterpane  wonns. 

II.  Ideas  of  the  ukderwobld.  These  pictures  reach  far  back  into  antiquity,  and 
represent  a  deep  and  universal  belief  in  the  heart  of  mankind.  Sheol  among  the 
Hebrews,  Hades  and  Tariaros  among  the  Greolts,  the  realm  of  Dis  or  Pluto  among 
the  ilomans,  are  different  representations  of  the  same  ideas  of  conscience.  But  with  the 
Hebrew  it  is  connected  more  sublimely  and  simply  with  the  faith  in  the  one  supreme 
and  righteous  God.  1.  It  is  viewed  as  a  state  of  physical  exhaustion.  In  Homer 
('  Odyssey,'  xi.)  the  departed  are  described  as  faint,  helpless  ghosts,  who  recover  not 
memory  and  consciousness  till  they  have  druuk  of  the  blood  poured  by  Odysseua  into 
the  trench.     And  when  his  mother  has  thus  revived  and  has  spoken  to  him— 

"  Thrice  in  my  amiB  I  strove  her  shade  to  bind ; 
Tlirice  through  my  arms  she  elipp'd  like  empty  wind, 
Or  dreams,  the  vain  illusion  of  the  mind. .  .  . 
All,  all  are  such  when  life  the  body  leaves  I 
No  more  the  substance  of  the  man  remiiins, 
Nor  bounds  the  blood  along  the  purple  veins. " 

Pale  and  wan  beneath  those  "  nether  skies,"  their  lot  is  in  extreme  contrast  to  that 
of  their  friends  who  still  "breathe  in  realms  of  cheerful  day."  '-.  It  is  a  pace  of 
profound  sadness  and  regret.  Who  can  forget  the  piercing  pathos  of  Achilles'  vyonii 
wlien  Odysseus  halls  Irim  as  a  king  among  the  shades,  even  as  on  earth  be  had  been 
a  guardian  divinity  to  his  countrymen — 

"  Talk  not  of  ruling  in  this  dolorous  gloom. 
Nor  think  vain  words  (ho  cried)  can  ease  my  doou. 
Eather  I'd  choose  lalioriously  to  bear 
A  weight  of  woes  and  breathe  the  vital  air, 
A  slave  to  some  poor  liind  that  toils  for  bread, 
Than  reign  the  sceptred  monarch  of  the  de&d." 

Oh,  how  gladly,  exclaims  Virgil,  in  describing  the  suicides  in  hell,  would  they  now 
endure  poverty  and  toil  beneath  the  deep  sky !  But  vain  the  wish  ;  justice  forbids, 
and  they  must  remain  confined  in  "the  horrid  swamp,  with  its  mehmcholy  waters,  shut 
in  by  the  ninefold  stream  of  Styx.  A  sullen  discontent  is  the  mood  of  others,  lik» 
Ajax,  brooding  over  the  loss  of  the  prize  of  arms.  It  is  a  scene  of  hopelessnt'^s. 
The  descent  is  easy;  but  to  retrace  the  steps — the  Roman  poet  admits  the  possibility 
only  to  a,  few,  sons  of  gods,  favoured  by  Jupiter,  or  inspired  by  superhuman  virtue. 
Says  the  gloomy  Italian,  "All  hope  abandon,  ye  who  enter  here."  In  the  soul,  where 
all  these  dread  events  must  happen,  first  and  last,  what  is  this  weakness,  this 
unavailing  regret,  this  void  of  hope,  but  the  reaction  of  powers  abused,  of  passioni 
indulged  beyond  their  proper  bound  ?  According;  to  our  sowing  must  be  our  reaping, 
and  our  daily  deeds  must  be  reflecting  their  colour  upon  the  wall  of  the  inner  chamber 
of  the  mind,  till  it  becomes  to  us  either  prison  or  palace,  a  hell  or  a  heaven. 

III.  The  contemplation  of  past  greatness.  From  the  depth  of  sorrow  men 
learn  to  measure  past  blessings,  from  the  lowest  point  of  abject  humiliation  the 
height  of  previous  greatness.  Two  things,  in  all  history,  in  all  legend,  in  the 
experience  of  daily  life,  impress  the  imagination,  and  thruugli  the  imagination  the 
moral  conscience — the  rise  of  the  obscure  into  glory,  and  the  fall  of  tbe  great  into 
Ignominy.  Such  changes  hint  at  a  great  law,  the  pnnc  pie  of  which  is  one,  the  effects 
of  whose  operation  are  dual  and  diverse.  The  King  ol  Babel  had  been  as  the  morning 
star,  the  type  of  the  Orient  in  all  its  splendour  of  intellectual  light,  heralding  the 
dawB  w4  the  onward  m^rch  of  the  stjn.    How  true  a  proposition  i*  it  in  reference 


254  THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROl'HET  ISAIAH.      [ch.  xiv."  1— 32. 

to  human  culture,  "  Light  comes  from  the  East "  I   Babylonia  was   an  early  centre 
of  iuoh  culture;  and  dimly  through  the  records  of  the  past  we  may  there  discern 
all  those  passions  and  energies  at  work  in  that  great  kingdom  which  lead  first  to 
external  greatness,  then  to  moral  corruption,  finally  to  external  ruin.     The  remains  of 
Oriental  architecture,  as  significant  to  those  who  understand  the  ethical  meaning  of 
art  as  a  whole  literature  could  have  been,  speak  of  a  towering  ambition,  such  as  the 
prophet  here  describes.     In  no  way  can  we  be  more  astonished  at  the  vastness  of  the 
passions  of  man's  little  heart,  than  in  contemplating  those  colossal  tombs  and  temples 
and  palaces  of  ancient   lands.     They  seem  a  visible  challenge  to   time,   a  defiarce 
of  death,  an  arrogation  of  divinity  and  of  immoitality.     To  the  prophet  they,  with 
other  accompaniments  of  despotic  power,  appeared  as  the  attempt  of  vain  man  to 
measure  himself  with  heaven.     The  secret  thought  he  detects  in  the  heart  of  the 
tyrant  is,  "  To  heaven  1  will  ascend,  beyond  God's  stars  I  will  raise  my  throne,  and  sit 
down  on  the  mount  of  all  the  gods,  in  the  extreme  north  ;  will  ascend  to  the  heights 
of  the  clouds,  and  make  myself  like  the  Most  High."   The  north  was  in  ancient  thought 
generally  the  sacred  quarter.    Zeus  dwelt  in  Olympus,  on  the  north  borders  of  Greece. 
Apollo  came  from  the  Hyperboreans,  ths people  beyond  the  north  wind.     Zion  is  "on 
the  sides  of  the  north,  the  city  of  the  great  king."    And  in  liis  epiphany  in  the  tempest, 
Jehovah  comes  in  majesty  from  the  north.     The    magnificent  heathen  would  then 
have  rivalled  him.     He  said  in  his  heart  as  he  looked   on  his  palaces  and  hanging 
gardens,  aa  he  reviewiid  Iris  troops,  as  he  listened  to  the  echoes  of  Western  alarms, 
"  By  the  strength  of  uiy  hand  I  have  done  it ; "  "As  one  gathereth  deserted  eggs,  I 
have  gathered  all  the  earth  "  (ch.  x.  11,  14).     He  felt  himself  to  be  like  a  magnificent 
tree,  deftly  striking  his  roots  through  the  whole  succulence  of  the  earth,  overtopping 
all  other  growths,  sheltering  all  fowls  in  his  branches,  all  beasts,  yea,  all  nations,  in  his 
shade.     AH  other  irees,  the  cedar  in  the  garden  of  God,  the  firtree  and  the  chestnut, 
seemed  to  envy  him'  (Ezek.  xxx.).     And  now  I     Oh,  tragic  change!   his  boughs  are 
broken,  his  branches  scattered  on  the  earth,  his  shade  deserted ;  the  birds  and  beasts 
remain,  but  only  as  haunters  of  a  ruin.     "Now  thou  art  cast  into  hell,  into  the 
lowest  depth." 

IV.  Astonishment  at  present  ionomint.  1.  Tht  world  looks  on.  "  Is  this  the 
man  who  made  the  earth  tremble  through  and  through,  who  shook  the  kingdoms 
to  their  base  ?  who  made  the  world  as  a  desert,  and  destroyed  its  cities,  and  let  not 
his  captives  return  home?"  The  scene  is  changed  from  Hades;  no  longer  is  the 
monarch  viewed  even  as  in  the  underworld,  to  which  only  the  buried  could  pass.  It 
is  an  outcast  corpse  the  spectators  look  upon,  and  no  sight  could  to  ancient  feeling 
be  more  abhorrent,  or  signify  more  deeply  the  curse  of  a  hero's  end.  The  other  kings 
of  the  peoples  rest  each  in  his  magnificent  mausoleum;  he  lies  amongst  the  meanest 
corpses  of  those  slain  upon  the  battle-field ;  not  even  hastily  interred  in  a  hole  filled 
with  stones,  but  liable  to  be  trampled  underfoot  by  the  victor.  He  who  would  have 
grasped  the  earth  in  his  ambitions  embrace,  cannot  now  find  six  feet  of  it  to  shelter  his 
remains.  The  lurid  light  of  such  an  end  is  cast  back  upon  the  beginning.  To  a 
prophetic  eye  false  greatness  is  already  smitten  by  the  Divine  judgment,  the  effects 
of  which  will  be  one  day  the  amazement  and  the  horror  of  men.  2.  The  prophet  reads 
the  moral.  Such  an  end  of  the  waster  of  landh  and  fierce  murderer  of  peoples  must 
serve  as  exanfple  and  prototype  to  all  times.  It  is  no  mere  personal,  but  a  dynastic 
doom.  'I'he  seed  of  evil-doers,  the  tyrant's  progeny,  will  pass  into  oblivion ;  his  sons 
will  expiate  his  offences  in  a  bath  of  blood,  so  that  the  very  species  of  human  savages 
called  "  tyrants"  shall  no  more  be  propagated.  Every  general  truth  has  its  particular 
application  to  a  given  time  and  condition ;  so  every  particular  catastrophe  that  fills  the 
nations  with  amaze  is  to  be  traced  up  to  some  great  central  ever-working  cause.  And 
for  good  or  for  evil,  there  is  organic  sympathy  in  the  lives  and  fates  of  individuals. 
If  we  wrench  ourselves  not  free  from  the  family  vice,  what  can  we  expect  but  the 
family  doom  ?  If  we  are  partakers,  by  the  force  of  custom  or  example,  of  the  sins  of 
our  party,  profession,  class,  we  may  not  be  exempt  from  the  moral  disgrace  which 
must  sooner  or  later  overtake  it. 

V.  Closing  obaole.  It  uses  images  of  the  utmost  energy  and  tragic  vehemence. 
Jehovah  will  root  out  of  Babylon  name  and  remnant,  sprout  and  shoot.  It  shall 
become  the  heritage  of  "  hedgehogs  and  swamps,"  shall  be  swept  with  the  beson; 


OH.  XIV.  1—32.]        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PUOPHET  ISAIAH.  255 

of  destruction.  The  doom  of  great  cities — what  is  it  but  the  doom  of  indlridoala 
"  writ  large "  ?  lu  'hat  doom  may  be  seen  eternal  justice  ;  can  we  find  mixing  with 
it  eternal  luercy,  eternal  love?  In  these  scenes  of  horror  on  earth,  in  the  reflected 
miseries  of  Hades  ?  Must  history  ever  pursue  its  spiral  course,  and  epicycle  upon 
epicycle  of  sin  and  damnation  eternally  succeed  ?  Let  us  fall  back  upon  our  deepest 
hopes,  and  think  that  the  yearning  of  the  creature  cannot  exceed  that  of  the  Creator, 
and  that  at  the  foundation  of  hell's  floor  must  still  be  Divine  justice  and  love.  So 
Dante  sang — 

"Justice  the  founder  of  my  fabric  moved  ; 
To  rear  me  was  the  task  of  power  Divine, 
Supremest  wisdom,  and  primeval  love." 

i. 

Vers.  24 — 28. — Oracle  concerning  Asshitr.  The  fate  of  Sennacherib  and  his  host 
appears  to  be  introduced  in  order  to  confirm  the  solemn  oracle  just  delivered  con- 
cerning Babylon  (see  Exposition). 

I.  The  stkono  assukances  op  Jehovah.  He  is  represented  here  and  in  other 
passages  as  taking  an  oath  that  he  will  fulfil  his  Word.  But  in  such  oaths  he  can 
appeal  to  no  mightier  name,  he  can  invoke  no  power  more  awful  than  his  own. 
Homer  makes  Zeus  swear  by  the  Styx,  the  dark  river  of  the  underworld.  And  Zeus 
is  himself  subject  to  necessity,  to  fate.  But  the  God  of  the  Hebrews  comprises  in 
himself  all  the  associations  of  woeful  necessity,  of  irresistible  fate ;  in  a  word,  of  law,  of 
intelligence  at  one  with  will,  of  will  equal  to  the  execution  of  all  the  designs  of 
intelligence.  Where  men  are  weak  it  is  that  the  brain  is  separated  from  the  hand  and 
the  foot.  The  thoughts  that  rise  before  them,  they  either  cannot  or  they  dare  not 
translate  immediately  into  fact.  A  chain  of  means,  of  secondary  causes,  lies  between 
them  and  their  ends.  And  so  we  have  the  great  thinliers  who  cannot  act,  and  the 
great  actors  who  fail  in  thought.  Magnificent  poets,  philosophers,  dreamers,  on  the  one 
side ;  on  the  other,  magnificent  conquerors — Alexanders,  Napoleons ;  both  stupendous 
failures.  In  God  are  united  omniscience  and  omnipotence — the  All-Thinker,  the  All- 
Doer.     His  purposes  are  equivalent  to  deeds ;  his  deeds  are  living  and  visible  thoughts. 

II.  Tub  doom  of  the  Assyrian.  (See  ch.  x.)  The  prophetic  tense  and  the  pro- 
phetic mode  of  contemplation  may  refer  to  the  past;  so  here.  The  thought  is  expressed 
in  Jer.  1.  18,  19,  "  Behold,  I  will  punish  the  King  of  Babylon  and  his  land,  as  I  have 
punished  the  King  of  Assyria."  The  one  event  was  a  pledge  of  the  other  (Delitzsch). 
Asshur  had  been  broken  in  Canaan,  had  been  subdued  upon  the  mountains  of  the  Holy 
Land,  aud  the  people  been  released  from  his  yoke  and  his  burdens. 

"  Like  the  leaves  of  the  forest  when  summer  is  green, 
The  host  with  their  banners  at  sunset  were  seen ; 
Like  the  leaves  of  the  forest  when  autumn  hath  blown, 
That  host  on  the  morrow  lay  wither'd  and  strowu.  .  .  . 

"And  the  widows  of  Asshur  were  loud  in  their  wail, 
And  tlie  idols  were  broke  in  the  temple  of  Baal ; 
And  the  might  of  the  Gentilo,  unsmote  by  the  sword. 
Hath  melted  like  snow  in  the  glance  of  the  Lord  1 " 

IIL  The  immutable  cocnsel  of  Jehovah.  1.  lis  contents.  It  is  earth-embracing, 
and  its  symbol  is  the  "  hand  stretched  out  over  all  the  heathen."  Assyria  and  Babylon 
destroyed,  heathendom  must  vibrate  through  all  iti  extent,  and  totter  to  its  fall. 
Turning  from  the  particular  to  the  general — for  only  in  this  way  can  we  reap  the  full 
instruction  of  such  oracles — and  standing  amidst  the  ruins  of  fallen,  or  on  the  ground 
of  now  shaking  empires,  we  may  listen  in  awe  to  the  ever-living  voice  of  him  whoaaith, 
"  I  will  shake  all  nations,  till  their  Desire  come."  About  a  thousand  years  later,  and 
we  find  Borne  shaking  beneath  that  outstretched  hand.  We  may  see  the  mementoes  o( 
that  shock  to-day,  in  the  ruins  of  the  Palatine  and  the  Forum  and  the  Sacred  Way. 
Yet  a  thousand  years,  and  again  she  shakes,  this  time  to  her  inmost  conscience,  beneath 
that  hand,  that  voice  of  judgment.  At  the  Eeformatiou  it  might  seem  that  the 
Almighty  was  about  to  make  a  short  work  in  the  earth..    But  a  thousand  years  are  in 


25€  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  xiv.  1— 3^ 

his  sight  but  a  day.  "  The  mills  of  God  grind  slowly,  yet  they  grind  exceeding  Bmall." 
Let  us  remember  that  the  great  cycles  of  history  are  repeated  iti  sniall  in  the  round  of 
eacb  man's  life.  The  great  world,  the  maorocosmos,  is  mirrored  in  the  microcosmos,  the 
small  world  of  each  conscience.  Above  every  one  of  us  the  hand  is  outstretched— shall 
it  be  to  bless  or  to  curse?  "  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts." 
2.  Ill  inflexibiliti/.  Who  can  break  this  counsel,  who  hinder  or  turn  back  that  hand  V 
And  what  people  or  confederacy  of  peoples,  knit  in  closest  alliance  of  arms  and  girt  with 
all  the  furniture  of  war,  can  resist  dissolution,  when  once  his  thought  is  against  them, 
his  hand  upraised  ?  "  Take  counsel  together,  and  it  shall  come  to  nought;  speak  the 
word,  and  it  shall  not  stand  :  for  God  is  with  us  "  (ch.  viii.  10).  So  may  the  lovers  ol 
ihe  truth  and  the  right  confidently  exclaim,  "  God  is  with  us."  What  the  superstitious 
man  calls  his  luck  or  fortune,  what  the  metaphysician  obscurely  designates  as  necessity, 
or  the  nature  of  things,  or  the  supremacy  of  the  moral  Law,  is  to  the  rtdigious  man  the 
inflexIMe  will  of  a  personal  Being.  The  duty,  the  art,  the  wisdom,  the  salvation  of  lif-, 
is  in  obeclionoe  to  tliat  wilL  It  is  to  know  that  we  are  here  to  be  acted  upon  by  that 
will  rather  than  to  act  from  our  own  self-centre.  We  are  "  God's  puppets."  He  gives 
to  men  and  to  nations  a  certain  space  wherein  to  learn  what  freedom  is,  and  what  its 
soou-reached  limits.  Then  comes  the  higher  lesson,  to  know  that  freedom  can  only  bo 
secured  by  obedience ;  that  in  the  choice  of  the  supreme  will  for  our  own  will,  we 
recover  that  better  freedom  in  which  is  strength  and  peace  and  stability  for  ever. — J. 

Vers.  28 — 32. — Oracle  concerning  Fhilistia.  I.  The  histobical  occasiok.  It  dates 
from  about  the  time  of  the  death  of  Ahaz,  ani  was  on  his  death  incorporated  with  the 
book.  The  PMomites  and  the  Philistines,  who  had  gi«en  way  before  the  powers  of 
David,  had  tnken  advantage  of  the  weakness  of  Ahaz's  government  to  iavs^de  Judah. 
'I'hey  had  taken  possessipu  of  several  towns  in  the  south  of  the  land  (2  Chron.  xxviii. 
17, 18).  The  Syrians  in  the  front  and  the  Philistines  in  the  rear  seemed  to  threaten  and 
devour  the  land  with  open  mouth  (ch.  ix.  12).  Bnt  the  year  of  the  death  of  Ahaz 
liniught  Hezekiah  to  the  throne,  who  successfully  resisted  Assyria  and  smote  the 
Philistiiics  to  Gaza  (2  Kings  xviii.  8),  not  only  recovering  the  cities,  but  dei'eating  them 
in  their  own  land.     To  this  eventful  time,  then,  the  oracle  belongs. 

11.  Warninq  to  Philistia.  1.  The  might  of  the  Davidic  house.  Its  symbols  are 
a  rod,  a  staff,  a  serpent,  a  cerastes  or  basilisk,  and  a  flying  dragon.  The  "  rod  that 
smote  Philistia  "  was  the  sceptre  of  David  and  of  Solomon,  later  wielded  by  Azariah  or 
Uzziah  (2  Kings  xv.  1 — 7 ;  2  Chron.  xxvi.  1),  who  broke  down  the  wall  of  Gath  and 
of  Qabneh  and  of  Ashdod.  But  the  conflict  with  Syria  and  Ephraim  had  brought  the 
jxiwer  of  Judah  low ;  the  rod  was  broken  in  pieces.  But  the  power  of  Judah  is  no 
mere  rod ;  a  root  is  the  fitting  symbol  of  its  inexhaustible  vigour.  The  terebinth  oak 
is  not  peri<:hed  when  its  leafy  honours  have  fallen  (ch.  vi.  13),  and  from  "the  root  of 
Jesse  a  young  sucker  shall  yet  spring  (ch.  xi.  1).  With  this  symbol  is  connected  that 
of  the  seriii'Lt,  also  widely  viewed  in  antiquity  as  a  chthonic  symbol,  i.e.  as  representing 
the  powers  supposed  to  be  seated  in  the  heart  of  the  earth.  The  serpent  is  a  "  son  of 
earth,"  and  this  significance  may  be  seen  illustrated -in  the  story  of  the  appearance  of 
the  sf-rpeiifs,  wliich  were  devoured  by  horses,  to  Croesus.  The  horses  symbolized  the 
invading  enemy,  under  Cyrus  (Herod.,  i.  78).  The  Greek  legends  of  the  slaying  of  a 
serpent  or  dragon  by  a  hero,  seem  in  several  cases  to  denote  the  taking  possession  of  a 
land — or  of  a  sanctuary — Apollo,  Perseus,'  Bellerophon.  If  such  be  the  meaning  of  the 
serpent  here,  then,  says  the  prophet,  so  far  from  destroying  the  serpent  of  Judah,  its 
power  in  the  land,  the  Philistine  will  encounler  a  more  dangerous  and  deadly  form  of 
that  power.  A  cerastes  or  basilisk  shall  arise  in  the  person  of  Hezekiah  ;  nay,  a  flying 
dragon  shall  be  the  ripe  fruit  from  the  indestructible  root  The  flying  dragon  is 
explained  by  the  'I'argum  to  be  the  Messiah,  so  that  the  reference  would  be  to  the 
Davidic  government  of  the  immediate  fnture  under  Hezekiah,  and  that  of  the  ultimate 
future  under  the  coming  Anointed  (Delitzsoh).  Ewald,  however,  refers  to  the  Assyrian. 
In  religious  symliolism  the  dragon  stands  for  the  foul  fiend ;  in  historical  symbolism 
he  may  stand  for  the  avenger,  as  here.  The  tribal  ensign  of  Dan  was  in  like  manner 
the  serpent  (Gen.  xlix.  17),  whose  deadly  hatred  to  the  Philistines  appeared  in  the 
deeds  of  the  hero  Samson.  2,  Effects  of  the  Davidic  rule.  The  poor  will  feed  upon 
Jehovah's  pasture  and  the  he'flees  lie  down  in  peace.    Deejdy  depressed,  men£^ced  OB 


OH.  XIV.  1-32.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  2P 

overy  hand,  they  shall  nevertheless  find,  under  the  care  of  the  good  Shepherd,  nourish 
mcnt  and  tranquillity  unbroken  by  fears  (of.  Zeph.  iii.  12,  13).  The  foe  will  bi 
eradicated  by  starvation  or  put  to  the  sword.  The  picture  may  be  regarded,  as  othei 
similar  pictures,  as  an  allegory  of  the  rule  of  the  eternal  Messiah,  the  enjoytaent  of  the 
eternal  sabbath.  For  historical  relations  ever  give  back  some  reflection  Of  eternal 
verities,  and  these  verities  enter  into  and  govern  the  events  of  every  epoch.  From 
every  time  of  national  distress,  of  personal  trouble,  the  spiritual  song,  undying  in  its 
truth  and  assurance,  may  be  heard  arising,  "  Jehovah  is  my  Shepherd ;  I  shall  not  want. 
...  He  prepareth  for  me  a  table  in  the  presence  of  mine  enemies." 

III.  Calm  amidst  the  storms.  Let  the  strong  cities  of  Philistia  lift  up  the  cry  of 
wailing.  A  smoke,  and  behind  the  smoke  dense  unbroken  ranks  of  men  are  rolling 
from  the  north.  Firm  i«  their  discipline,  united  and  invincible  their  army.  What, 
then,  will  be  Judali's  fate  ?  Shall  she,  tno,  melt  away  in  the  fire  ?  What  answer  do 
the  messengers  of  the  nations  bring  ?  "  That  Jehooah  hath  founded  Zion,  and  upon  it 
the  sufferers  of  my  people  trust."  Nothing  can  bring  us  triumph  but  the  adherence  to 
principle;  nothing  should  dismay  us  where  that  adherence  is  constant.  "Reverence 
the  Lord  of  hosts  himself,  and  let  him  be  your  Fear,  and  let  him  be  your  Dread  ;  and 
he  shall  be  for  a  Sanctuary"  (ch.  viii,  13).  "  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a  foundation  a 
Stone,  a  tried  Stone,  a  precious  Comer-stone,  a  sure  Foundation :  he  that  believeth  shall 
not  make  haste  "  (ch.  xxviii,  16).  The  "  poor  of  the  flock  "  (Zech.  xi.  7),  the  despised, 
suffering,  and  persecuted  in  eveiy  age,  are  welcome  to  the  sanctuary  and  to  tlie  heart  of 
the  great  God.  While  the  tempest  rages  without  and  his  judgments  are  abroad  in  the 
earth,,  they  are  sheltered  in  his  pavilion,  concealed  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High. 
The  lowly  heart,  looking  up  to  that  hand,  so  awful  in  menace  towards  all  that  is  "high 
and  lifted  up,"  sees  it  relax,  expand,  become  as  a  canopy  of  protecting  tenderness.  The 
suffering  are  stronger  than  they  seem  ;  they  know  a  way  of  escape  from  the  worst ; 
they  can  flee  to  the  Name  of  Jehovah  as  a  strong  Tower ;  they  can  enter  their  closet  and 
shut  to  the  door ;  they  can  pray  to  the  Father  in  secret.  The  thought  of  eternal  Love 
is  itself  a  "  little  sanctuary,*'  whose  walls,  as  they  tarry  there,  recede,  open,  and  afford 
the  prospect  of  eternal  day. — J. 

Ver.  5.— The  false  staff.  "  The  Lord  hath  broken  the  staff  of  the  wicked."  True  of 
the  King  of  Babylon,  this  is  true  also  of  every  evil  man.  It  was  a  sentence  that  GoJ 
commanded  to  be  taken  up  as  a  proverb  against  him,  and  it  may  be  illustrated  as  a 
universal  proverb  in  iJl  ages  and  na:tions.  Men  lean  on  •  staff;  and  unless  God  be 
the  Rod  and  the  Staff,  assuredly  it  will  be  broken. 

I.  Health  is  a  staff.  Men  lean  on  that.  A  well-organized  frame  and  a  well- 
strung  nervous  system  cause  men  to  mistake  the  tranquil  composure  of  good  spirits  for 
the  peace  which  only  religion  can  bestow.  Then  comes  the  season  of  affliction ;  the 
silver  cord,  if  not  loosened,  is  weakened ;  the  golden  bowl,  symbol  of  the  brain,  if  not 
broken,  is  sadly  shaken ;  and  with  broken  health,  all  else  seems  broken  too.  The  spirits 
fail,  the  inspirations  of  enterprise  and  endeavour  are  weakened,  and  the  proud  staff  is 
broken. 

II.  Wealth  is  a  staff.  Wicked  men  find  that  money  "  answereth  all  things."  It  ia 
the  key  that  unlocks  the  gates  of  art  and  travel,  and  the  loadstone  that  draws  genius  and 
beauty  to  their  festivals.  It  seems  a  strong  support,  and,  leaning  on  it,  many  are  tempted 
to  pity  the  noblest  hero  if  he  be  poor,  and  the  rarest  intellect  if  it  be  linked  with  low 
estate.  But  riches  take  to  themselves  wings  and  flee  away.  The  bank  breaks,  the 
factory  bums,  the  funAs  fall,  the  mines  are  exhausted ;  and  then,  with  the  departure  of 
riches,  departs  also  feigned  affection  and  the  flatterer's  praise.  "  How  hath  the  golden 
city  ceased  1 " 

IIL  PowBB  IS  A  STAFF.  They  shall  say  (Ter.  4),  "  How  hath  the  oppressor  ceased  1 " 
etc.  For  wicked  men  often  have  such  power  over  others  that  they  can  use  them  for 
their  evil  schemes'  and  bribe  them  so  that  they  tell  no  tales  that  shall  bring  shame  and 
dishonour.  But  this  does  not  last.  Some  "  revealing  hour  "  comes.  The  man  that  has 
been  "lifted  up"  is  laid  low;  he  can  no  longer  use  his  old  power.  Lost  cliaracter  has 
left  him  disorovyned.  Even  worldly  men  will  not  trust  him  now.  The  Josephs  are 
honoured ;  the  Daniels  are  trusted.  The  Mordecais  are  doomed.  No  staff  will  support 
in  life  or  death  but  the  old  staff:  "  Thy  rod  and  thy  staff  they  comfort  me." — W.  M.  8. 

IgAIAB.  * 


!i68  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  xiv.  1— 32 


Vera.  1 — 3. — The  reign  of  sin  and  the  rest  of  God,  Taking  the  period  of  exile  as 
a  picture  of  the  condition  of  the  human  soul  when  it  is  in  a  foreign  land,  undei;  the 
sway  of  the  enemy,  apart  and  afar  from  its  true  heritage,  and  regarding  the  return  and 
the  "  rest "  (ver.  3)  in  their  own  land  as  a  picture  of  the  soul's  conditi  Dn  when  it  has 
been  brought  back  to  Qod  and  has  re-eaterra  on  his  service,  we  have  heie  some  valuable 
suggestions. 

I.  OOB   SPIBITUAIi  CONDITION   UNDBB   THE   BEIQN  OF   SIS.      L   /<  M  One    in   which  We 

may  look  for  sorrow,  and  sorrow  unrelieved  by  those  alleviations  in  which  godliness 
finds  its  solace  (ver.  3).  Sin  and  sorrow  go  hand-in-hand,  or,  if  not  thus  conjoiaed, 
the  latter  follows  surely  and  steadily  on  the  steps  of  the  former.  The  grosser  trans- 
gressions bring  the  sterner  miseries,  but  all  departure  from  God  and  from  rectitude 
leads  down  to  trouble,  to  dissatisfaction,  to  sadness  of  spirit.  2.  It  is  one  in  which 
anxiety  is  always  appropriate.  "  Thy  fear "  (vtr.  3).  For  it  is  a  condition  in  which 
the  Divine  Disposer  of  everything  is  unreconciled  to  us,  is  decidedly  and  seriously  dis- 
pleased with  us,  is  warning  us  of  an  evil  doom ;  in  which  we  have  no  right  to  reckon 
on  the  continuance  of  his  kindness  for  another  hour,  and  in  which  the  termination  of 
our  earthly  course  places  us  before  a  judgment-bar  at  which  we  are  not  prepared  to  stand. 
3.  It  is  one  of  spiritual  bondage.  "  Thy  hard  bondage  "  (ver.  3).  How  truly  sin  is 
a  slavery  we  see  when  we  regard  it  in  its  more  flagrant  forms.  We  see  the  drunkard, 
the  opium-eater,  the  liar,  so  enslaved  by  their  respective  vices,  that,  try  how  they  may 
to  free  themselves,  they  are  held  down  as  by  an  unseverable  chain.  The  children  of 
folly  are  its  pitiable  victims,  held  in  a  "hard  bondage"  from  which  they  strive  to 
escape,  and  often  strive  in  vain.  All  sin,  that  of  omission  as  well  as  commission,  is 
enslaving.  The  withholding  from  God  that  which  he  claims  leads  the  soul  down  into 
a  confirmed  habit  of  neglect,  of  indifference,  of  procrastination,  which  holds  it  fast  in  its 
evil  toils.  4.  It  is  one  of  exile.  They  who  are  living  in  sin  are  living  in  a  country 
which,  emphatically,  is  not  "  their  own  land  "  (ver.  1).  They  were  created  to  live  with 
God,  consciously  near  to  him,  rejoicing  in  him,  engaged  perpetually  in  his  service; 
under  the  sway  of  sin,  human  souk  are  living  afar  off,  in  a  foreign  country,  in  a  "  strange 
land  "  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  4). 

II.  The  best  which  God  oives  ub  hebe.  1.  Sie  sets  his  heart  on  us  to  deliver  uc. 
He  "  has  mercy  on  us ;  he  cliooses  us  "  (ver  1).  He  looks  upon  each  one  of  us  with  dis- 
tinguishing interest,  affection,  yearning.  He  "  earnestly  remembers  "  us,  that  he  may 
save  us.  2,  He  leads  us  back  to  himself.  By  different  ways  he  leads  us  home,  and  "  sets 
us  in  our  own  land."  He  so  acts  upon  our  souls,  in  his  grace  and  in  his  providence, 
that  we  are  led  to  penitence  and  faith,  and  thus  find  ourselves  back  in  his  favour  and 
his  service.  3.  The  condition  to  which  Ood  restores  us  is  one  of  spiritucd  rest.  (1) 
We  rest  from  sorrow  in  the  possession  of  inward  peace  and  abiding  joy.  (2)  We  rest 
from  fear  in  the  enjoyment  of  well-grounded  trust,  and  a  hope  which  will  never  make 
ashamed.  (3)  We  rest  from  bondage  in  the  heritage  of  a  spiritual  freedom  (John 
viii.  36 ;  Bom.  viii.  21 ;  Gal.  v.  1, 13).  4.  The  rest  which  we  have  from  him  is  consistent 
with  a  large  measure  of  holy  usefulness.  The  children  of  Israel  were  to  take  back  with 
them  to  their  own  land  these  "  strangers,"  who  were  thenceforth  to  be  their  servants 
instead  of  their  oppressors  (vers.  1,  2).  So  are  the  children  of  God,  by  patient, 
strenuous  activity,  to  win  their  adversaries  to  the  faith  and  love  of  Qirist ;  to  make 
them  possessors  of  the  privileges  of  the  kingdom  of  God  even  with  themselves,  and  to 
secure  their  active  help  in  the  conquests  they  have  still  to  make. — 0. 

Vers.  4 — ^23. — Bin  and  its  humiliations.  This  strong,  poetical  utterance  of  Isaiah, 
though  primarily  directed  against  one  particular  city  and,  probably,  one  individual  king, 
may  convey  to  us  all  some  serviceable  lessons  respecting  sin  generally,  and  more 
especially  the  humiliations  which  are  in  its  train.    We  gather  therefrom — 

I.  That  the  oppeessivkness  op  bin,  though  long  (jontinued,  will  cebtadtli 
BE  BBOEEN  DOWN.  (Vers.  4 — 7.)  Sin  is  constantly,  naturally,  oppressive.  It  grasps 
at  power  that  it  may  wield  it  to  its  own  satisfaction,  irrespective  of  the  rights  of  the 
weak  and  the  helpless.  Often  its  usurj  ation,  like  that  of  Babylon,  is  very  long  con- 
tinued. The  oppressed  are  weary  under  their  afSiction ;  they  cry  patiently  to  Heaven 
for  deliverance  and  redress ;  they  are  sometimes  apt  to  think  that  they  are  forgotten  by 
the  righteous  and  merciful  One.    But  they  are  not  unobserved  by  him  (Exod.  iii,  7). 


OH.  XIV.  1—32.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PKOPHET  ISAIAH.  259 

He  hears  their  cry  ;  he  determines  on  their  relief;  at  the  right  moment  he  intervenes. 
"  The  staff  of  the  wicked  is  broken."  "  He  who  smote"  is  smitten  down,  and  "  the 
whole  earth  is  at  rest." 

II.  That  sin  makes  no  tbue  friends.  Adversity  is  the  test  of  faithfulness.  Until 
the  dark  hour  comes  we  cannot  be  quite  sure  whether  our  acquaintances  are,  or  are  not, 
oox  friends ;  then  we  "  know  the  proof"  of  them.  In  the  hour  of  Babylon's  discomfi- 
ture there  would  be  found  "  none  to  hinder  "  (ver.  6)  her  deslruction.  Her  allies  would 
fail  her  then ;  her  dependencies  would  make  no  effort  to  save  her ;  she  would  be  "  alone 
when  she  fell"  (Eooles.  iv.  10).  The  "  friends  "  whom  sinners  make  are  not  " friends  in 
deed,"  for  they  will  not  prove  to  be  "  friends  in  need."  If  financial  ruin,  the  loss  of  his 
good  name,  overwhelming  bereavement,  protracted  sickness,  the  near  prospect  of  death, 
should  overtake  a  man,  it  is  not  to  his  ungodly  companions  he  would  resort,  for  to  them 
he  would  look  in  vain.  The  man  of  Grod  will  not  be  without  those  who  will  graciously 
and  generously  intervene  to  "  hinder "  the  calamity  which  impends,  to  alleviate  the 
sorrows  which  are  wounding  the  spirit. 

III.  That  the  keaoh  of  sin,  in  its  effects,  is  bxceedinolt  wide.  (Ver.  8.) 
The  trees  of  the  mountain  forest  rejoice  in  the  downfall  of  Babylon.  The  requirements 
of  that  selfish  and  remorseless  power  extended  even  so  far  as  to  the  cedars  of  Lebanon. 
They  felt  the  weight  of  its  tyranny,  the  edge  of  its  exactions.  The  evil  consequences  tff 
the  unlawful  exercise  of  power  are  never  confined  within  a  narrow  compass;  they  spread 
far  and  wide ;  they  reach  places,  people,  g.nerations,  which  we  might  have  supposed 
they  would  not  touch.  No  man  who  uses  his  powers  wrongfully  can  calculate  how 
far  the  evil  will  extend,  or  how  many  will  be  glad  when  there  is  "  no  more  strength  in 
his  right  hand."     The  most  striking  lesson  in  this  vivid  and  eloquent  passage  is — 

IV.  That  sin  carries  sad  humiliations  in  its  evil  train.  (Vers.  9,  19.)  The 
humiliation  to  which  the  proud  monarch  of  Babylon  is  subjected  is  painted  in  rich  and 
glowing  colours  (see  Exposition),  from  the  loftiest  height  of  honour  he  is  cast  down 
to  the  lowest  depth  of  shuiiie;  from  the  softest  bed  of  luxury  to  the  "narrow  house 
of  death,"  where  the  worm  will  be  his  couch  and  his  coverlet  (ver.  11).  God  abases 
the  sinner;  to  whatever  height  he  climbs,  from  that  summit  he  must  come  down  to  the 
ground  and  sufier  the  painful  smart  of  humiliation.  1.  It  may  be  from  the  point  of 
impious  assumption.  (Vers.  13 — 15,  18,  19 ;  see  Dan.  v.  22,  23,  30 ;  Acts  xii.  21 — 23.) 

2.  It  may  be  from  the  summit  of  human  authority  and  power.    (Vers.  9 — 12,  16,  17.) 

3.  It  may  be  from  the  position  of  the  common  heritage  of  man.  They  who  have 
climbed  the  highest  must  fall  the  furthest,  but  inasmuch  as  we  have  all  sinned  we  must 
all  pay  one  of  the  invariable  penalties  of  sin.  We  cannot  continuously  ascend,  we 
cannot  maintain  our  position  at  a  certain  height.  The  hour  comes  when  we  must 
decline.  Even  if  there  be  not  for  us  a  sudd  u  and  precipitous  fall — as  to  most  of  the 
vain-glorious  and  oppressive  there  will  be — there  must'conie  the  gradual  descent:  the 
fading  of  faculty,  the  diminution  of  strength,  the  waning  of  influence,  the  advance  of 
conscious  feebleness,  increasing  dependence  on  others,  the  siok-ch amber,  death,  and  the 
dark,  lonely  grave.  Nothing  can  save  us  from  this  declension,  this  dishonour.  But 
there  are  in  the  gospel  of  Christ  blessed  and  glorious  compensations.  Instead  of  death, 
is  life  eternal ;  instead  of  humiliation,  everlasting  glory. — 0. 

Ver.  20. — The  children  of  the  ungodly;  or,  parental  responsibility.  "The  seed  of 
evil-doers  shall  never  be  renowned."  We  must  not  insist  on  a  literal  fulfilment  of  these 
words.  It  is  not  intended  that  there  has  never  been  an  instance  in  which  the  children 
of  wicked  parents  have  attained  to  celebrity.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  the  spirit,  not  the 
letter,  "  giveth  life."  The  ill  fortune  which  attends  the  sons  of  the  guilty  may  be 
regarded  as — 

I.  A  distinct,  divinely  ordered  penalty.  Under  the  old  dispensation  it  certainly 
was  this.  That  was  a  dispensation  in  which  temporal  rewaids  and  punishments  were 
almost  everything ;  then  the  spiritual  and  the  eternal  were  only  faintly  felt  as  motives 
to  action.  And  one  of  the  most  potent  considei-ations  which  could  be  brought  to  bear 
was  the  effect  of  a  man's  hehaviour  on  the  fortunes  of  his  children;  consequently  we 
oiintinually  meet  with  the  pro-spects  of  "  thy  seed,"  for  good  or  for  evil,  as  a  powerful 
incentive  to  rij,hteousness,  or  dissuasion  from  sin.  There  can  hardly  be  a  stronger 
force  than  this ;  where  everything  else  would  fail,  this  might  succeed.  There  is  nothing 


260  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  xiv.  1— 82. 

that  reaches  us  so  surely,  that  moves  us  so  mightily,  as  an  argument  in  which  our 
children's  fortunes  are  concerned.  Whatever  "  touches  them  touches  the  aiiple  of  our 
eye."  And  here  God  is  saying  to  those  who  were  showing  signs  of  wandering  from  his 
service,  "  If  you  fall  into  great  sin  and  grievous  condemnation,  you  not  only  do  your- 
selves irreparable  wrong,  but  you  involve  your  children  also  in  misery  and  shame.  The 
penalty  of  your  guilt  will  go  down  to  them." 

II.  The  inevitable  result  of  righteous  law.  It  is  likely,  in  a  very  high  degree, 
that  the  children  of  evil-doers  will  follow  in  the  steps  of  their  parents,  and  stoop  to  the 
shame  to  which  they  fall.  All  things  are  against  them.  1.  They  are  without  the 
incentive  which  comes  from  inheriting  a  good  name  and  the  natural  desire  to  perpetuate 
it.  2.  They  are  weighted  with  the  positive  and  most  serious  disadvantage  of  bearing 
a  name  which  is  dishonoured.  3.  They  are  depressed  hy  a  positive  and  disheartening 
sense  of  shame,  if  they  have  not  imbibed  the  spirit  and  acquired  the  habits  of  their 
parents.  In  the  latter  case  (which  is  by  far  the  worse  of  the  two) :  4.  They  suffer  in 
their  character,  and  therefore  in  their  career,  from  the  degenerating  influences  to  which 
they  are  subjected.  And  without  the  preserving  and  directing  principles  which  make 
life  a  true  success,  impelled  by  the  passions,  the  .prejudices,  the  ambitions  which  con- 
stitute it  a  lamentable  failure,  they  do  not  rise  to  "  renown ; "  they  sink  down  into 
disregard,  into  actual  disrepute,  into  open  shame.  (1)  2'his  is  not  positively  inevilable. 
A  determination  to  pursue  a  holy  course,  under  the  guidance  of  God,  in  the  service  of 
Jesus  Christ,  will  redeem  the  unlikeliest  life  from  failure,  and  lift  it  np  to  honour  and 
usefulness.  (2)  If  not  for  other  reasons,  then  for  the  sake  of  our  children,  let  us  walk 
in  the  ways  of  godliness ;  for  their  present  and  lasting  interests  are  bound  up  in  the 
choice  we  make  as  to  the  path  we  will  ourselves  pursue. — C. 

Vers.  24 — 27. — Divine  purpose  and  Divine  power.  We  have  our  thoughts  directed 
in  this  passage  to — 

I.  The  Divine  pubposb.  "  I  have  thought  ...  I  have  purposed  .  .  .  this  is  the 
purpose  .  .  .  upon  the  whole  earth,"  etc.  God  had  a  special  purpose  respecting  Assyria, 
and  he  may  have  had  a  distinct  purpose  in  inspiring  Isaiah  to  pronounce  at  this  especial 
time  what  it  was,  viz.  that,  in  the  dark  days  of  Babylonian  captivity,  his  people  might 
remember  its  fulfilment,  and  be  assured  of  an  accomplishment  for  which  they  had  still 
to  wait.  But  these  expressions  suggest  to  us  the  existence  of  Divine  purposes  in  the 
mind  of  God,  dating  from  the  remote  past  and  stretching  on  into  the  far  future.  GKxi's 
purposes  in  regard  to  his  creatures  have  been  or  are :  1.  Creative.  In  the  "  far  back- 
ward and  abysm  of  time  "  he  determined  to  call  worlds,  beings,  intelligent  and  immortal 
spirits,  into  existence,  to  be  the  objects  of  his  thought,  care,  love ;  to  many  of  whom  he 
himself  should  be  the  Object  of  worship,  affection,  service.  2.  Ministrative.  His  purpose 
was  that  of  boundless  benefaction— of  conferring  on  multitudes  and  millions  of  sentient 
beings  a  life  of  happiness  and,  to  a  vast  number,  that  of  true  dignity  and  worth.  3. 
Punitive.  His  purpose  has  been  to  punish,  never  indeed  under  the  impulse  of  mere 
resentment,  but  always  in  the  interests  of  righteousness  and,  ultimately,  in  that  of  true 
happiness  also.  4.  Restorative.  He  has  purposed,  and  does  purpose,  to  restore ;  either 
(1)  his  people  to  a  heritage  they  have  forfeited,  or  (2)  those  who  have  wandered  from 
his  service  to  the  spiritual  and  moral  integrity  from  which  they  have  fallen. 

II.  The  Divine  power.  "  So  shall  it  come  to  pass  ...  so  shall  it  staud  ...  I  will 
break  ...  I  will  tread  under  foot  .  .  .  This  is  the  hand  that  is  stretched  out  .  .  .  Who 
shall  disannul  .  .  .  who  shall  turn  back"  (his  har^d)?  It  is  true  that:  1.  God  has 
taken  time  to  effect  his  purpose ;  e.g.  the  building  of  this  world  for  man's  residence, 
the  preparation  of  the  world  for  Christ's  coming.  2.  God  has  permitted  his  rebellious 
children  to  lessen  the  sum  of  happiness  and  worth  they  would  otherwise  have  possessed, 
3.  God's  beneficent  design  for  the  redemption  of  the  world  by  the  gospel  has  been 
hindered  by  external  opposition  and  by  internal  shortcoming.  Yet  it  remains  true, 
and  this  is  the  larger  <is  it  is  the  brighter  half  of  the  truth,  that :  (1)  God's  purpose  o( 
ieneficence,  if  it  can  be  said  to  have  been  checked,  has  not  been  defeated :  from  his 
strong  and  bountiful  hand  he  has  been  bestowing  life,  joy,  blessedness,  sxcellency,  which 
is  quite  incalculable,  which  entirely  baffles  our  imagination  as  it  is  beyond  our  reckon- 
ing. (2)  God's  purpose  of  punishment  has  been  and  will  be  fulfilled ;  witness  the  Flood, 
the  outcasting  of  the  guilty  Canaanites,  the  destruction  of  "  the  cities  of  the  plain,"  the 


CH.  xiT.  1—32.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  261 

decimation  of  Sennacherib's  army  and  "  the  breaking  of  the  Assyrian,"  the  extinction  of 
Babylon,  etc.  And  now,  though  impiety  holds  up  its  head  for  years,  and  though  vice 
staves  off  the  evil  day  of  disease  and  death,  and  though  crime  long  eludes  the  pursuer, 
yet  the  hand  of  God  does  come  down  in  retribution ;  his  holy  purpose  cannot  be  dis- 
annulled. "  Let  sinners  look  to  it "  (see  Numb,  xxxii.  23 ;  Prov.  xi.  21 ;  Ps.  xxxvii. 
35,  36).  3.  God's  purpose  of  restoration  will  one  day  be  accomplished.  "  This  is  the 
purpose  which  is  purposed  upon  the  whole  enrth"  and  "  this  is  the  hand  that  is  stretched 
out  upon  all  the  nations."  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  hath  purposed."  There  may  he  many 
obstacles  in  the  way.  Difficulties  may,  to  the  eye  of  human  calculation,  seem  actually 
insurmountable;  the  estimable  forces  of  truth  may  appear  unequal  to  cope  with  the 
overwhelming  agencies  of  error  and  evil.  But  this  our  great  hope  is  not  a  bold  enterprise 
of  man ;  it  is  the  purpose  of  the  living  God,  the  Lord  of  hosts.  "  Sis  hand  is  stretched 
out,  and  who  shall  turn  it  back?"  Let  the  Christian  worshipper  offer  expectant  prayer  ; 
let  the  Christian  workman  go  up  to  his  post  with  holy  confidence;  for  the  purpose  of 
God,  though  it  be  long  delayed,  shall  assuredly  be  fulfilled. — 0. 

Vers.  29 — 32. — A  truth,  a  test,  and  a  solution.    "We  have  here — 

I.  A  TRUTH  RESPECTING  AN  INDIVIDUAL  DEATH;  viz.  that  WO  may  hope  or  may 
fear  too  much  from  the  death  of  one  man.  Philistia  was  evidently  inclined  to  hope 
too  much  from  the  death  of  a  Jewish  king ;  another  was  arising  (Hezekiah)  who  would 
be  to  his  predecessor  what  a  cockatrice  was  to  a  serpent — a  still  more  formidable  enemy. 
(2  Kings  xviii.  8).  The  wicked  nation,  or  the  unprincipled  party,  or  the  unscrupulous 
man  that  indulges  a  feeling  of  security  because  some  strong  opponent  is  dead  may, 
probably  ivill,  find  itself  (himself)  miserably  disappointed.  The  resources  of  a  righteous 
providence  are  not  exhausted,  though  a  very  pillar  of  justice  be  fallen.  Or,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  righteous  may  fear  too  much  from  the  death  of  a  powerful  friend.  Will  not 
the  good  cause  perish  now  that  the  tongue  of  its  most  able  advocate  is  silent  in 
death?  Christianity  did  not  perish  with  the  departure  of  Christ  or  with  the  death  of 
the  apostles.  The  Father  of  spirits  will  not  let  righteousness  expire  for  want  of  righteous 
men,  whom  he  can  create  and  endow  and  send  forth  into  the  world. 

II.  A  TEST  FOR  THE  COMMUNITY.  Is  the  nation,  is  the  Church,  doing  its  work,  ful- 
filling its  Master's  will  concerning  it?  One  good,  if  not  faultless,  test  is  found  in  the 
answer  to  the  question — Is  it  caring  for  its  humblest  members  f  If  nothing  better 
can  be  said  for  the  nation  than  that  its  monarch  is  living  in  magnificence,  or  that  its 
rulers  or  nobles  are  possessed  of  great  wealth  and  rejoicing  in  splendid  luxury,  then  is 
that  nation  rapidly  descending  to  ruin.  If  nothing  better  can  be  said  for  the  Church 
than  that  its  hierarchy  is  powerful  or  its  ministers  well  sustained,  then  is  that  Church 
a  long  way  from  its  Lord's  ideal.  It  is  when  it  can  be  said  of  the  one  that  "  the  first- 
bom  (the  poorest)  of  the  poor  feed,  and  the  needy  lie  down  in  safety  "  (ver.  30),  and  of 
the  other  that  "  the  poor  of  the  people  trust  in  it,"  or  "  betake  themselves  unto  it " 
(ver.  32), — it  is  then  that  the  end  of  their  existence  is  answered.  The  "  community  " 
exists  for  "  the  common  people,"  and  especially  the  Church  exists  for  the  "  little  ones," 
the  poor,  the  needy,  the  unbefriend"'!,  the  young,  the  dependent. 

III.  The  solution  or  prosperity.  What  should  be  the  answer  given  to  the  "  mes- 
sengers of  the  nation"  inquiring  about  the  deliverance  of  Jerusalem?  This:  "The 
Lord  hath  founded  Zion '-'  (ver.  32).  This  is  the  best  accoimt  we  can  give  to  others, 
as  it  is  the  best  we  can  give  to  ourselves,  of  any  deliverance  or  of  any  prosperity  we 
may  be  enjoying.  To  refer  it  to  good  fortune  is  shallow  and  irreverent.  To  ascribe  it 
to  our  own  ability  or  energy,  or  to  that  of  our  friends,  is  insufficient  and,  it  may  be, 
spiritually  harmful.  We  are  safe  and  wise  in  attributing  it  to  God  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  7 ; 
Ixxxix.  17;  cxv,  V;  1  Cor.  iv.  7).  Our  faculties,  our  resources,  our  opportunities,  are  all 
of  him ;  and  from'  him  come  the  energizing  force  and  the  overruling  power  without 
which  all  our  efforts  must  be  in  vain.  The  reverent  and  religious  spirit  (1)  gladly 
dedicates  to  the  cause  of  Christ  and  of  his  Church  all  that  it  can  yield,  and  (2)  thank- 
fully refers  all  prosperity  enjoyed  to  his  guiding  finger,  his  protecting  power,  his  life- 
giving  Spirit. — G. 

Ver.  1. — God's  mercy  may  delay,  it  does  not  fail.  The  captivity  in  Babylon  seems 
to  be  in  the  thought  of  the  prophet,  and  it  would  be  a  long  and  weary  time,  during 


262  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  xiv.  1— Si 

which  the  people,  even  the  faithful  among  the  people,  might  think  God  had  "  forgotten 
to  be  gracious," or  "delayed  his  coming;"  so  assurances  are  given  that, however  it  may 
please  God  to  tarry,  holding  back  the  fulfilment  of  his  promises,  they  are  always  "  yea 
and  amen,"  and  at  the  last  it  will  be  found  that  "  not  one  word  hath  failed  of  all  that 
tha  Lord  hath  spoken."  The  historical  connection  of  the  passage  is  that  the  fail 
of  Babylon,  to  which  previous  reference  has  been  made,  was  to  be  designed,  overruled, 
by  Jebuvah  for  the  fullilmeEt  of  his  promise  and  the  restoration  of  his  people.  God 
is  said  to  "  yet  choose  Israel,"  because  permitting  them  to  go  into  captivity  was  an 
appearance  of  having  temporarily  cast  them  off.  In  illustralion  of  the  topic  suggested 
by  the  passage,  we  note — 

I.  Mebcy  can  promise.  Judgment  is  always  blended  with  mercy.  Mercy  must 
get  in  its  gracious  and  comforting  word.  Judgment  without  mercy  is  only  crushing. 
Mercy  holds  before  us  the  hope  that  enables  us  to  endure  the  judgment,  and  learn  the 
lessons  of  It.  Show  what  the  Captivity  would  have  been  to  Israel  without  the  promises, 
and  the  hupe  of  return  when  the  julgnieut  had  wrought  its  work. 

II.  Mekcy  can  hold  back  fulfilment  or  promise.  Illustrated  in  the  forty 
years  ul'  wandering  in  the  desert:  an  unexjiected  holding  back,  necessitated  by  the 
wilfulne^.-.  and  niurmuimg  ol  the  people.  Or  by  David,  promised  the  kingdom,  but 
required  lu  wait  for  it,  even  after  the  death  of  Saul. 

III.  Mekct  can  keep  firm  to  conditions  op  promise.  This  is  the  real  reason 
of  the  delay.  All  promises  are  conditional;  and  it  could  be  neither  wisdom  nor 
kindness  on  God's  part  to  show  indifference  to  the  conditions.  Our  not  meeting 
conditions  is  the  real  reason  for  prolonged  and  renewed  delays.  God  never  really 
tarries.  His  deliverances  and  benedictions  always  come  at  the  first  possible  moment. 
This  may  be  shown  in  relation  to  the  Captivity;  and  the  promised  Messiah  only 
appeared  "  when  the  fulness  of  time  was  come." 

IV.  Mebcy  cannot  be  satisfied  without  FULniiiiiNG  promises  at  last.  We 
are  to  think  of  God's  meicy  as  a  most  active  attribute.  It  is  watching  for  its  oppor- 
tunity; determined  not  to  be  frustrated;  working  to  secure  its  ends;  and,  sooner  or 
later,  accomplishing  its  gracious  purpose.    Mercy  will  be  finally  triumphant. — R.  T. 

Ver.  3.— The  Lord's  rest.  "The  Lord  shall  give  thee  rest."  The  word  "rest" 
summarizes  God's  deliverances,  and  God's  protections,  and  God's  provisions,  for  his 
captive  peo|)le.  Assurbanipal  hoasts  that  he  made  his  Arabian  prisoners  carry  heavy 
burdens  and  build  brickwork.  And  the  wearied  Hebrews  in  Egypt  were  promised  the 
Lord's  rest  in  Canaan.  Treating  the  topic  in  a  comprehensive  manner,  we  may  say 
that  the  rest  which  God  provides  for  his  creatures  must  be  like  himself,  and  it  must  be 
adapted  to  the  deepest  and  best  in  them, 

I.  What  God's  rest  is.  It  must  stand  related  to  character,  not  to  mere  attributes, 
nor  to  mere  conditions.  God  must,  indeed,  be  thought  of  as  feeling  the  differences 
of  outward  conditions;  the  varied  states  of  his  creatures  do  move  him  to  pity, 
sympathy,  anger,  or  grief.  "  In  all  their  affliction  he  is  afflicted."  But  he  is  always 
at  rest,  because  the  changes  in  circumstances  never  imperil  the  basis-principles  of  his 
characier.  "  Justice  and  judgment  are  always  the  habitation  of  his  throne."  We  are 
"restless  unquiet  sprites," as  Keble  calls  us,  not  because  we  are  in  the  midst  of  variable 
conditions  and  circumstances,  or  because  these  affect  our  feeling,  but  because  the 
varying  circumstances  put  in  peril  the  principles  of  our  character.  God  has  eternal 
rest,  because  if  "  the  elements  melted  with  fervent  heat,  the  earth  and  all  therein  wi  re 
burned  up,"  God  would  never  question  the  perfect  fairness  and  righteousness  of  his 
rule.  Or  we  may  put  it  in  this  way.  Rest  comes  from  the  dominion  of  one  faculty  in 
us;  under  that  dominion  all  the  various  powers  of  our  nature  fall  into  order,  take  thdr 
place,  keep  the  peace,  and  secure  for  us  rest.  War  may  be  a  thing  of  the  soul  as  well 
as  of  the  circumstances,  and  the  inward  war  consists  in  the  conflict  of  motives.  Mind, 
and  will,  and  judgment,  and  affections  are  out  of  hai-mony,  and  make  the  war  in  the 
Bdul.  But  we  can  conceive  of  nothing  like  this  in  God.  He  is  at  rest  because  in  his 
Divine  nature,  which  is  the  true  after  which  we  are  imaged,  there  is  the  order  and 
harmony  that  follow  upon  the  rule  of  the  highest  faculty.  And  wjjxat,  for  God,  may 
we  think  is  the  highest  faculty?  This  surely  is  the  fullest  revelation  of  God — "  Goil 
is  love."    Ruling  love  secures  rest.    And  if,  for  God,  the  highest  is  "  love,"  what  i« 


OH.  XIV.  1—32.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  26. 

the  highest  for  man  ?  Surely  it  must  be  "  trust."  Then  the  rest  of  Qoi  is  the  rest 
of  character  and  of  love  ;  and  the  rest  for  man  is  the  rest  of  character  and  of  trust — o) 
that  character  which  grows  up  out  of  the  root  "  trust."  But,  treating  the  subject  ii 
another  way,  we  may  see  what  is  Involved  in  saying  that  God's  rest,  as  provided  for 
man,  must  be  adapted  to  man,  to  the  deepest  and  best  in  him.  Rest  is  the  great 
longing  of  every'  heart.  All  men  everywhere  have  this  for  their  supreme  quest. 
1.  Man,  as  man,  is  ever  seeking  rest.  It  is  his  "  good  time  coming."  2.  Man,  as 
a  sinner,  is  ever  seeking  rest.  3.  Man,  as  redeemed,  is  ever  seekin*  rest.  God's  rest 
for  man  is  a  glorious  whole,  beginning  within  us,  in  the  faith  we  set  on  God,  spreading 
through  all  the  forces  of  our  being  its  hallowing  influence,  and  bringing  the  quietness 
and  peace  of  settled,  centred  character ;  reaching  even  to  the  circumstances  in  which 
we  are  placed,  modifying  tbera,  bringing  them  into  its  obedience,  and  so  growing  from 
the  rest  of  the  soul  to  the  sublime,  eternal,  all-embracing  rest  of  heaven. 

IL  Who  mat  win  the  Lord's  best?  It  is  very  easy  to  say  that,  since  it  is  the 
rest  of  faith,  only  believers  win  it.  But  we  have  come  to  talk  about  "  faith "  and 
"  believing  "  in  such  a  way  that  they  are  rather  magical  words  to  conjure  with,  than 
deep,  full,  rich  expressions  whose  divinest  meanings  we  grasp  and  use.  Are  believers 
only  those  who  accept  a  particular  creed,  and  have  a  common  intellectual  conception 
of  the  "  plan  of  salvation  "  ?  Or  is  the  true  believer  the  man  who  possesses  the  spirit 
of  trust;  whose  heart  leans  on  God;  whose  loving  reliances  are  on  the  heavenly 
Father  ?  Surely  the  faith  th;it  saves  is  the  yielding  of  the  self  to  God ;  it  is  the  heart's 
grasp  of  the  righteousness  and  mercy  which  are  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ.  This  we  can 
all  win,  and  this  is  the  Lord's  rest. 

III.    How    FAB     MAT    THIS    BEST    BE    A    PRESENT    CONSCIOUS    POSSESSION?       It    is    a 

mistaken  notion  that  all  the  facts  and  processes  of  the  religious  life  must  come  into 
conscious  recognition.  Our  Lord  taught  us  that  the  growth  of  souls  was  like  that 
of  the  plants.  It  goes  on  secretly,  no  man  knoweth  how ;  no  man  can  trace  ail  the 
processes  of  change  from  seed  to  blade,  from  blade  to  ear,  from  ear  to  full  corn  in 
the  ear.  Rest  may  be  ours,  and  we  may  not  think  about  it.  It  will  never  be  won 
merely  by  seeking  for  it.  It  will  be  won  by  doing  our  duty,  by  simple  obedience,  by 
living  in  the  grace  of  Christ,  by  perseverance  in  well-doing,  by  "  holding  fast  the  pro- 
fession of  our  faith  vidthout  wavering."  Be  "  steadfast,  uninovable,  always  abounding 
in  the  work  of  the  Lord,"  and  it  will  be  plain  to  others  that  you  have  reached  the 
Lord's  rest ;  and  it  may  be  that  sometimes  the  joy  of  that  rest  will  come  into  your  own 
consciousness,  and  you  will  feel  that  "peace  passing  understanding"  which  is  the 
foretaste  of  the  "  sweet  rest  of  heaven." — R.  T. 

Ver.  4. — God's  Judgments  on  other  nations  than  our  own.  The  "burdens"  are  given 
as  a  series  of  prophetic  visions ;  events  pass  before  the  prophet's  mind  as  in  a  moving 
panorama,  and  he  notes  down  just  the  things  that  more  particularly  arrested  his 
attention.  A  prophetical  description  of  an  event  will  differ  from  an  historical  account 
of  the  same  event,  by  "being  a  bare  outline,  or  else  a  vigorous  word-pain  lina;  of  certain 
salient  features,  rather  than  a  circumstantial  detail.  Prophetical  work  is  akin  to 
poetical  work,  and  its  due  apprehension  depends  on  spiritual  sympathy  rather  than  on 
logical  precision.  The  passage  commencing  with  ver.  4  is  perhaps  the  most  striking 
passage  in  this  series  of  burdens.  It  is  an  ode  of  triumph  on  the  fall  of  the  Babylonian 
monarch.  Bishop  Lowth  says  of  it  that  he  "  knows  not  a  single  instance,  in  the  whole 
compass  of  Greek  and  Roman  poetry,  which  in  every  excellence  of  composition  can  be 
said  to  equal  or  even  approach  it.  It  may  with  truth  be  affirmed  that  there  is  no 
poem  of  its  kind  extant  in  any  language,  in  which  the  subject  is  so  well  laid  out,  and 
so  happily  conducted,  with  such  variety  of  images,  persons,  and  distinct  actions,  with 
such  rapidity  and  ease  of  transition,  in  so  small  a  compass,  as  in  this  ode  of  Isaiah. 
For  beauty  of  disposition,  strength  of  colouring,  greatness  of  sentiment,  brevity, 
perspicuity,  and  force  of  expression,  it  stands  among  all  the  monuments  of  antiquity 
unrivalled."  Babylon  may  be  treated  as  a  representative  of  all  the  nations  surrounding 
and  related  to  IsraeL  They  are  the  great  nations  of  the  ancient  world,  but  they 
fringed  round  the  laad  of  Otnaan  on  the  north,  the  east,  and  the  south.  The  prophet 
denounces  Babylon,  and  Moab,  and  Syria,  and  Egypt,  and  Tyre,  and  lolemnly  warns 
Edam. 


i64  THE  BOOK  CP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  xiv.  1—32 

I.   As   NEIfrHBOUanfO   nations,  their  prophesied   desolation   became   a   power  DJS 

VHi  J«w.  At  the  time  that  Isaiah  wrote  his  first  prophecy  the  nation  of  Israel 
was  in  a  perilous  and  painful  position.  The  consequences  of  prolongerl  national  self- 
will  and  idolatry  were  pressing  heavily  upon  it.  The  great  Asiatic  nation,  which  wa« 
to  be  the  Divine  agent  in  tlieir  punishment,  was  coming  nearei'  and  nearer  to  them, 
swallowiig  up,  in  its  irresistible  progress,  the  intervening  kingdoins.  'J'he  northern 
portion,  that  called  Israel  in  distinction  from  Judah,  was  about  this  time  subdued  by 
Shalmaneser,  King  of  Assyria,  and  its  people  were  carried  away  captive.  The  kings  of 
Judali  only  secured  a  temporary  respite  by  paying  a  heavy  tribute,  and  the  one  or  two 
good  kings  of  the  period,  such  as  Hezekiah  and  Josiah,  did  but,  as  it  were,  make  the 
(lying  taper  flare  up  for  a  while  ere  it  suddenly  went  out  in  darkness.  It  must  have 
been  a  hard  thing  for  a  godly  man  to  live  in  such  a  time,  and  in  the  midst  of  such 
surroundings.  We  can  imagine  the  pious  Jew  in  such  an  age  saying,  "  Are  we  not  the 
covenant  people  of  God  ?  Have  we  not  been,  through  long  years,  the  special  objects 
of  his  guidance,  defence,  and  care?  Yet  it  seems  now  as  if  God  had  forgotten  us. 
These  surrounding  nations  are  in  the  height  of  prosperity.  See  Babylon  the  magni- 
ficent 1  See  Damascus  the  wealthy !  See  Tyre  the  commercial ! "  To  such  as  these, 
in  Jerusalem  and  in  Judsea,  the  propliecies  of  Isaiah,  charged  with  the  "  burdens"  of 
I  hese  prosperous  nutions,  would  come  as  a  Divine  consolation,  and  would  say  to  them, 
"  Do  not  confine  your  thoughts  to  that  only  which  you  can  at  present  see ;  take  in  the 
luture;  view  things  in  the  larger  light  of  him  wiio  has  all  men  and  nations  in  his 
control,  ftnd  the  long  ages  in  which  to  work  his  purposes."  Isaiah  shows  them  that  sin 
is  sin  everywhere,  it  carries  its  tremendous  consequences  everywhere.  Delays  are, 
everywhere,  but  the  long-suffering  patience  of  God  that  loudly  calls  to  repentance. 
For  the  unrepentant  everywhere — call  him  Gentile  or  call  him  Jfew,  be  he  covenanted 
or  be  he  uncovenanted — there  is  only  a  "  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  and  fiery 
indignation,  which  shall  devour  the  adversaries."  But  these  prophecies  were  intended 
to  be  a  power  upon  the  many  as  well  as  upon  the  few.  The  riiany  were  heedless  and 
blind,  puffed  up  with  their  apparent  security.  For  long  years  the  warnings  of  their 
earlier  national  history  had  been  neglected.  In  their  self-security  they  had  ev;  j  ceased 
to  ftar  the  "Judge  of  aU  the  earth."  To  them  there  came  the  voice  as  of  a  man  rapt 
in  sublime  vision :  "  I  see  the  burden  of  Babylon.  Exalted  to  heaven  in  privilege ; 
thrust  down  to  hell  in  disgrace,  I  see  the  place  of  Babylon.  Behold,  it  is  not :  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  hath  swept  it  away."  "  Howl  ye,  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand : 
it  shall  come  as  a  destruction  from  the  Alniighty." 

II.  As  great  and  prominent  nations,  God's  dealings  with  them  carry  lessons 
FOR  all  after  generations.  In  order  to  reach  us  with  helpful  moral  influences, 
God  finds  it  necessary  to  set  the  little  matters  concerning  the  progress  of  our  little  life 
in  large  before  Ms  in  the  histories  of  nations.  A  nation  is,  as  it  were,  a  man  whose 
entire  life-course  can  be  watched  through  from  childhood  to  decay.  The  invisible 
things  of  morals  may  be  made  mani'est  in  the  visible  scenes  of  history.  An  old 
divine  has  tlie  following  remark:  "God  can  punish  nations,  in  this  world,  but  for  the 
punishment  of  individuals  he  wants  both  tliis  world  and  the  next."  We  live  such 
brief  lives  here  on  earth  that  we  cannot  get  extensive  and  worthy  ideas  of  the  issues 
of  sin  I'rom  studying  merely  our  own  experiences.  Nor  can  we,  oven  from  the  most 
strikin;;;  cases  of  individual  suHering,  as  a  result  of  sin,  discern  the  full  niaji'sty  of  the 
Divine  indignation.  But  the  life  of  a  nation  can  be  set  forth  in  its  completeness;  it  is 
a  finished  whole.  We  can  read  the  story  of  LSabylon  and  Tyre,  from  cradle  to  grave. 
The  life  of  a  nation  is  long  enough  for  us  to  trace  in  its  history  its  growth,  its  sin,  its 
fall,  and  its  wue.  And  the  calamities  that  come  at  last  upon  sinful  nations  is  figured 
in  such  aspects  of  terror  as  to  create  the  profouudest  impression  on  us.  This  may  be 
illustrated  by  the  Persian  overthrow  of  Babylon,  or  the  Roman  siege  of  Jerusalem,  or 
the  manifest  decay  of  the  Turkish  empire  in  our  own  times.  1.  i'rom  this  subject  we 
1(  am  to  have  faith  in  God  about  the  nations  of  the  earth.  God  lias  set  England  in 
tlie  very  midst  of  the  world-kingdoms,  very  much  as  he  fet  old  Canaan  in  the  centre 
of  tlie  great  ancient  empires,  on  purpose  that  we  might  be  a  gracious  power  on  them, 
and  learn  wise  lessons  from  them.  God  is  painting  truth  for  us  in  liis  dealings  with 
thorn.  And  God's  ways,  whether  in  the  small  for  individuals,  or  in  the  large  for 
nations,  are  ways  of  chastiaement,  are  instinct  with  love :  are  intecded  to  do  them  good 


OH.  MV.  1—32.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE   Pi!OPHET  ISAIAH.  265 

in  their  latter  ead.  So  we  may  have  faith  in  GoJ  concerning  the  nations  of  the  earth. 
2.  And  we  learn  to  have  faith  in  God  ahout  a  true  ami  godly  life.  If  we  only  see 
lives  in  the  little,  as  Asapli  did,  who  wailed  out  the  seventy-tliird  psalm,  we  mny  easily 
be  bewildered.  But  see  lives  in  the  large,  in  the  mass,  and  then  we  are  assured  that 
iniquity  never  flourishes  through ;  at  the  last  it  always  "  biteth  like  a  serpent,  and 
stingeth  like  an  adder."  Many  a  man  dies  without  the  suffering  and  punishment 
exhausting  itself.  But  a  nation  never  dies  without  the  sin-degradations  and  the 
sin-judaments  being  plain  to  view  upon  it.  It  is  true,  for  ever  true,  that  "  righteous- 
ness tendeth  unto  life."  Sin  is  simply  a  tremendous,  awful  burden,  more  than  any  man 
can  bear,  such  as  no  man  can  bear  away.  Kept,  it  must  crush  unto  wounding  and  woe. 
Somehow,  somewhere,  outside  ourselves,  we  must  find  a  sin-bearer,  who  can  carry  our 
sin  away. — ^R.  T. 

Ver.  9. — The  Hebrew  conception  of  Sheol.  Henderson  says,  "  In  this  verse  the  state 
of  the  dead  is  represented  as  thrown  into  great  agitation,  on  its  being  announced  that 
the  mighty  King  of  Babylon  is  about  to  enter.  Posonages  of  the  same  rank,  as  the 
fittest  to  conduct  the  ceremony  of  his  reception,  and  the  most  likely  to  sympathize 
with  him,  are  sel.cted  to  present  themselves  and  address  him  on  the  occasion.  They 
rise  from  their  thrones  of  state  on  which  they  had  b>>en  sitting — perpetuating  in  mock 
majesty  the  pageant  which  they  had  exhibited  while  on  earth."  "  Sheol  is  here  used 
collectively  of  the  entire  population  of  shades.  The  word  means  first  a  grave,  or 
individual  sepulchre,  and  then  the  grave  as  a  general  receptacle,  indiscriminately 
occupied  by  all  the  dead  without  respect  to  character."  In  its  further  signification  it 
means  the  abode  of  disembodied  souls,  and  these  are  regarded  poetically  as  retaining 
not  only  a  form,  but  a  position  also,  analogous  to  that  which  they  had  on  earth.  It  is 
an  interesting  and  important,  though  a  difficult  question,  how  far  we  may  regard 
Holy  Scripture  as  coloured  by  the  common  conceptions  of  a  future  state  in  ancient 
times.  We  need  not  regard  such  conceptions  as  true,  because  they  belonged  rather 
to  the  imaginations  of  men  than  to  the  revelations  of  God.  The  subject  may  profitably 
be  discussed  under  the  following  headings;  but  little  or  no  treatment  is  suggested, 
because  different  conclusions  are  reached  by  different  schools  of  theologians. 

I.  On  the  nature  and  occupations  of  the  future  state,  or  condition  of  the  dead,  no 
precise  revelations  were  made  in  olden  times. 

II.  Men  seem  to  have  been  left  to  fashion  the  future  by  their  own  imaginations. 
The  general  line  of  thought  seems  to  have  been  started  by  Egyptian  notions  concerning 
the  dead ;  but  each  nation  put  its  characteristic  seal  upon  its  esohatology. 

III.  There  is  a  very  real  sense  in  which  "  life  and  immortality  have  been  brought  to 
light "  by  Jesus  Christ. 

IV.  But  the  light  he  sheds  falls  rather  on  the  character  of  the  future  than  on  the 
form  of  it.  He  meets  all  that  man  actually  requires  to  know;  he  satisfies  man  in 
nothing  that  he  too  curiously  seeks  to  know.  Tiie  essence  of  Christ's  revelation  of  the 
future  is,  that  moral  goodness  is  crowned  with  everlasting  blessedness. — E.  T. 

Ver.  12. — 27(6  ambitious  spirit  in  man.  The  word  "Lucifer"  means  the  "light- 
bringer,"  and  so  has  been  in  modern  times  associated  with  our  matches.  As  standing 
in  this  text,  it  has  often  been  taken  as  a  synonym  for  Satan ;  but  it  really  is  a  highly 
poetical  description  of  the  King  of  Babylon,  and  the  Babylonian  empire  is  in  Scripture 
represented  as  the  type  of  the  ambitions,  aspiring,  tyrannical,  and  self-idolizing  power. 
Ver.  13  gives  the  supreme  boasting  of  this  king:  "I  will  a.»cend  into  heaven,  I  will 
exalt  my  thione  above  the  stars  of  God."  "Babylon  had  shone  forth  in  the  dawn  of 
the  world's  history  with  surprising  lustre,  but  was  perverted  by  self-admiration."  It 
should  be  remembered  that  tlie  ancient  Oriental  notion  was  that  kings  were  incarnations 
of  the  Divine,  and  everything  was  done  to  sustain  this  sentiment.  We  have  evidence 
of  this  as  regards  Egypt,  Assyria,  and  Babylonia.  Such  a  sentiment  must  have 
fostered  national  ambition  to  an  extravagant  height.  Treating  the  King  of  Babylon  as 
a  type,  we  consider  the  general  subject  of  the  "  ambitious  spirit  in  man,"  observing — 

I.  That  it  is  the  spbins  of  entkrprisk.  The  true  spring  of  human  enterprise 
should  be  loyalty  and  devotion  to  God.  Next  to  that  we  place  supreme  desire  for  the 
well-being  of  others,  the  "  enthusiasm  of  humanity."    But  these  have  been  made  to 


266  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.       [oh.  xiv.  1—32. 

give  place,  and  self-interests  have  fashioned  the  ambitions  which  have  inspired  men  to 
heroic  and  persevering  deeds,  ia  all  the  various  spheres  of  life.  Illustrate,  from  com- 
merce, science,  travel,  literature,  and  extension  of  kingdoms.  Ambition  has  been  the 
source  of  achievement  and  the  spirit  of  progress.  It  may  be  shown  how  far  it  has 
thus  proved  an  element  in  the  well-being  of  the  race.  Without  ambition  the  world 
could  never  have  been  won  for  man. 

XL  It  IB  AiiSO  A  coNDiTioir  OF  INDIVIDUAL  aBOWTH.  Without  it  a  man  remains 
in  the  educational  and  intellectual  range  of  his  class,  and  the  social  sphere  in  which  he 
was  born.  Illustrate  from  the  farm-labourer,  who,  through  a  long  life,  plods  on  his 
simple  way,  attaining  nothing,  because  utterly  lacking  the  inspiration  of  ambition. 
The  spread  of  education  is  chiefly  important  for  this — ^it  shows  higher  levels,  and  starts 
ambition.  A  man  ceases  to  grow  when  he  ceases  to  aspire.  And  the  infinite  perfection 
of  God  is  the  sublime  height  set  before  us.  We  may  all  grow  on  until  we  have  become 
like  him. 

III.  It    18    THE    SPIRIT    IN   MAN    TO    WHICH    EBLIGION    APPEALS.      Eeligion    finds    it 

crushed  down  into  hopelessness,  and  it  touches  it,  quickening  it  into  new  vigour  and 
hope.  Eeligion  finds  it  diverted  to  base  and  merely  self-seeking  ends,  and  it  brings  it 
back  to  the  right  lines,  and  makes  it  noble  and  self-denying.  Man  made  in  the  image 
of  God,  and  made  for  God,  must  want  to  reach  God.  Eeliiion  sets  God  before  him — 
so  attractively  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus — that  the  ambitions  are  drawn  in,  and 
become  one  supreme  ambition  to  be  worthy  sons  and  devoted  servants  of  the  Lord 
God  Almighty.  The  Christian  ought  to  be  the  most  ambitious  of  all  men.  A 
Christian  without  his  sacred  ambitions  does  no  honour  to  his  name. 

IV.  It  is  the  spirit  in  man  which  most  be  kept  under  strict  limitations. 
Uecause  ambition  so  soon  and  so  easily  gets  beyond  self-control — the  control  of  the 
sanctified  self — and  becomes  self-willed,  self-seeking ;  a  mere  striving  to  attain,  whether 
God  will  have  us  attain  or  not.  Then  ambition  is  like  that  of  the  King  of  Babylon, 
and  it  must  bring  us  under  Divine  arrestings,  checkings,  and  judgments.  The  law  of 
limitation  is,  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteousness."  There  is  no 
fear  for  the  influence  of  any  ambitions  that  come  after  this  first  and  supreme  one.  The 
nn  and  folly  of  men's  usual  ambitions  lie  in  their  putting  God  last.  It  is  with  them 
"  all  ot  self,  and  none  of  thee."— B.  T. 

Ver.  21. — Children  suffering  for  the  fathert.  The  idea  finding  poetical  expression 
here  is,  that  the  judgments  of  God  necessarily  fall  on  the  last  members — the  children— 
of  a  corrupt  and  wicked  dynasty.  It  is  in  the  public  and  open  administrations  of 
providence,  it  is  in  the  events  and  circumstances  and  history  of  this  world,  and  not 
in  the  secret  dealings  of  God  with  each  individual  soul,  that  the  law  of  this  text 
applies.  For  the  sake  of  moral  influence  upon  the  whole  race,  children  are  seen  to 
suffer  for  their  parents'  wrong-doing.  But  no  children  can  bear,  before  God,  the  burden 
of  their  parents'  guilt.  The  law  of  the  children  suffering,  generation  after  generation, 
belongs  to  the  solidarity  of  the  race.  But  that  is  a  purely  material  conception.  Souls 
are  individual,  and  every  soul  must  bear  entirely  its  own  burden.  It  may  share,  it 
can  share,  no  one  else's.  "  So,  then,  each  one  of  us  must  give  account  of  himself  to 
God."    This  truth  may  be  fully  illustrated  along  the  following  line. 

I.  Children  suffering  fob  the  fathers  is  a  physical  law.  Much  has 
recently  been  discovered  concerning  the  law  of  heredity,  but  only  the  fringe  of  a  great 
subject  has  yet  been  touched.  No  greater  calamity  rests  on  men  than  the  bodily  bias 
and  tendency  given  by  diseased  or  degraded  parentage.  The  familiar  illustration  is 
drunkenness ;  the  fact  equally  applies  to  other  sins. 

n.  Children  suffering  fob  the  fathers  is  a  moral  condition.  That  is,  as 
an  established  and  recognized  fact  it  is  designed  to  be  a  moral  power  on  parents.  It 
is  a  persuasion  to  righteousness  for  the  children's  sake.  No  higher  moral  force  on 
affectionate  natures  can  be  provided  than  this  consideration,  "You  physically  injure 
those  whom  you  love  best,  if  you  are  self-iudulgent." 

III.  Children  buffering  fob  the  fathers  is  a  Divine  judgment.  Striking 
men  in  one  of  their  tenderest  places.  Men  would  bear  an  extreme  of  suffering,  if  they 
might  bear  it  all  themselves ;  but  it  is  terrible  to  think  that  they  drag  their  children 
under,  and  the  weight  will  crush  them.    Only  let  us  see  quite  clearly,  that  it  is  the 


OH.XV.  1— 9.]        THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHBT  ISAIAH, 


267 


disability  and  the  tuffering  of  sin,  but  not  the  guilt  of  it,  which  thai  passes  from 
generation  to  generation. — B.  T. 

Ver.  24. — The  security  of  the  Divine  Word.  Cheyno  translates,  "  Sworn  hR» 
Jehovah  SabSoth,  saying,  Surely,  according  as  I  have  planned,  so  shall  it  be ;  and 
according  as  I  have  purposed,  that  shall  stand."  Q-od  here  declares  that  it  is  his  fixed 
and  unalterable  purpose  to  destroy  Assyria.  And  who  can  stop  the  fulfilment  of  the 
Divine  Word  ?    In  answer  to  this  question,  we  say — 

I.  Can  natubal  forces  ?  No,  for  that  was  settled  when  the  Bed  Sea  parted 
asunder,  and  made  a  highway  for  God's  people. 

II.  Can  natubal  events?  No,  for  that  was  settled  in  the  wilderness.  Such 
commonplace  things  as  murmurings  and  rebellions  could  destroy  a  particular 
generation,  but  could  not  keep  Israel  out  of  Canaan. 

III.  Can  individual  men  ?  No,  for  that  was  settled  in  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  had 
to  learn,  by  humiliation,  that  God's  will  would  have  to  be  done. 

IV.  Can  combined  man?  No,  for  that  was  settled  when  the  kings  of  Canaan 
joiiied  to  oppose  God's  advancing  hosts,  and  were  swept  away  before  them,  like  a 
summer  cloud  before  the  sun. 

Nobody  and  nothing  can  stop  the  fulfilment  of  God's  Word.  We  may  go  with  it, 
the  flood  will  carry  us  with  it,  like  helpless  logs,  if  we  struggle  to  oppose.  But  the 
Word  and  will  of  God  are  always  righteous,  beneficent,  and  good ;  so  it  is  well  that  they 
should  abide, — E.  T. 

Ver.  32. — Zion  a  safety  for  the  poor.  Take  Zion  as  a  type  of  Christ'*  Church  in  all 
the  ages.  It  should  be  a  shelter  for  the  poor  in  the  following  five  senses  which  may  be 
attached  to  the  word. 

I.  In  the  sense  of  the  ignorant, 

II.  In  the  sense  of  the  meek. 

III.  In  the  sense  of  the  young. 

IV.  In  the  sense  of  the  persecuted, 

V.  In  the  sense  of  the  doubting. 

Every  age  is,  in  one  form  or  another,  a  troublous  age  for  all  earnest  louls.  The 
Ohurch  is  ever  the  abiding  earth-shelter,  type  and  suggestion  of  that  soul-rest  in  God 
which  the  poor — in  every  sense — may  always  find. — B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XV. 
Vers.  1—9.— The  Burden  of  Moab.  The 
present  chapter  and  the  next  are  very  closely 
connected,  and  may  be  regarded  as  together 
OdDstituting  "  the  burden  of  Moab."  It  has 
been  argued  on  critical  grounds  that  the 
bulk,  of  the  prophecy  is  quoted  by  Isaiah 
from  an  earlier  writer,  and  that  he  lias 
merely  modified  the  wording  and  added  a 
few  touches  here  and  there  (so  Gesenius, 
Kosonmuller,  Hitzig,  Mauror,  Ewald,  Kno- 
bel,  and  Cheyne).  Jeremiah  is  thought  to 
have  also  based  his  "judgment  of  Moab" 
(Jer.  xlviii.)  on  the  same  early  writing. 
But  speculations  of  this  kind  are  in  tite 
highest  degree  nneertain,  and  moreover  lead 
to  no  results  of  the  slightest  importance. 
It  is  best,  therefore,  to  regard  Isaiah  as 
the  author  of  these  two  chapters.    Having 


threatened  Philistia,  Israel's  nearest  enemy 
upon  the  west,  he  turns  to  Moab,  her  nearest 
foe  towards  the  east. 

Ver.  1. — Because.  An  elliptical  begin- 
ning. Mr.  Cheyne  supposes  some  such 
words  as  "  Lament  for  Moab,"  or  "  Alas  for 
Moab  1 "  to  have  been  in  the  writer's  mind, 
but  to  have  been  omitted  through  "  lyrical 
excitement."  In  the  night.  This  is  best 
taken  literally.  Night  attacks,  though  not 
common  in  antiquity,  were  not  unltnown. 
Mesha,  King  of  Moab,  boasts  that  he  "  went 
in  the  night"  against  Nebo,  and  assaulted 
it  at  early  dawn  (Moabite  Stone,  1.  15). 
Ar  of  Moab;  or,  Ar-Moab.  An  ancient  city, 
mentioned  among  those  taken  from  the 
Moabites  by  Sihon  (Numb.  xxi.  28).  Ac- 
cording to  Jerome,  it  was  called  in  Koman 
times  Areopolis,  or  Eabbatli-Moab.  Modem 
geographers  identify  it  with  Bahha,  a  place 
on  the  old  Eoman  road  between  Kerak  and 
Arair,  south  of  the  Amon,  where  there  are 


268 


THE  BOOK   OP  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.        [oh.  xv,  1— 9. 


some  ancient  remains,  though  they  are  not 
very  extensive  (Burckhardt,  'Travels,'  p. 
377).  Is  laid  waste,  and  brought  to  silence ; 
rather,  ie  stormed,  is  ruined.  Kir  of  Moab. 
"Kir  of  Moab"  is  reasonably  identified 
with  Keralt,  a  place  very  strongly  situated 
on  a  mountain  peak,  about  ten  miles  from 
the  south-eastern  coiner  of  the  Dead  Sea. 

Ver.  2. — He  is  gone  to  Bajith;  rather,  he 
is  gone  to  the  temple.  Probably  the  temple 
of  Baal  at  Beth-baal-meon  is  intended. 
Beth-baal-meon  is  mentioned  in  close  con- 
nection with  Dibon  in  Josh.  xili.  17.  And  to 
Dibon.  Dibon  is  mentioned  in  Numb.  xxi. 
30;  xxxii.  3,  34;  Josh.  xiil.  9,  17;  Jer. 
xlviii.  18,  22.  It  was  an  ancient  Moabite 
town  of  considerable  importance,  and  hag 
recently  been  identified  with  the  site  called 
Dibdn,  where  the  Moabite  Stone  was 
found.  This  place  is  situated  in  the  country 
east  of  the  Dead  Sea,  about  three  miles 
north  of  tlie  river  Arnon,  on  the  old  Roman 
road  connecting  Eabbatli-Moab  with  Hesh- 
bon.  The  town  seems  to  have  gained  in 
importance  from  the  fact  that  it  was  the 
birthplace  of  Chemosh-Grad,  Mesha's  father 
(Moabite  Stone,  1.  2).  Mesha  added  to  its 
territory  (ibid.,  1. 21).  It  is  extremely  prob- 
able that  it  was  the  site  of  one  of  the 
Moabite  "  high  places,"  and  was  therefore 
naturally  one  of  the  places  whereto  the 
Moabites,  when  afflicted,  went  up  "  to  weep." 
Over  Nebo,  and  over  Medeba.  Nebo  and 
Medeba  were  also  ancient  Moabite  towns. 
Nebo  is  mentioned  in  Numb,  xxxii.  3,  38 ; 
xxxiii.  47 ;  1  Chron.  v.  8 ;  Jer.  xlviii.  1,  22. 
It  seems  to  have  lain  almost  midway  between 
Beth-ban  1-meon  (Jifain)  and  Medeba,  about 
three  or  four  miles  south-east  of  Heshbon. 
Medeba  obtains  notice  in  Numb.  xxi.  30 ; 
Josh.  xiii.  9,  16;  1  Chron.  xix.  7.  Mesha 
says  that  it  was  taken  from  the  Moabites  by 
Omri,  King  of  Israel,  but  recovered  by  him- 
self at  tlie  end  of  forty  years  (Moabite 
Stone,  11.  7 — 9).  It  lay  south-east  of  Hesh- 
bon, at  the  spot  which  still  retains  the  old 
name — Mddeba.  It  lias  been  suggested  that 
there  was  at  Nebo  a  shrine  of  the  Baby- 
lonian god  so  named  ;  but  this  is  to  assume 
a  resemblance  which  the  facts  at  present 
known  do  not  indicate,  between  the  Moab- 
ite and  Babylonian  religions.  On  all  their 
heads  shall  be  baldness.  The  practice  of 
cutting  oil'  the  hair  in  mourning  was  com- 
mon to  the  Jews  (ch.  xxii.  12 ;  Micah  i.  16) 
with  various  other  nations;  e.g.  the  Persians 
(Herod.,  ix.  24),  the  Greeks,  the  Mace- 
donians (Plut., '  Vit.  Pelop.,'  §  34),  the  primi- 
tive Arabs  (Krehl,  'Beligion  der  voris- 
lamit.  Araber,'  p.  33,  note  1),  and  the  North 
American  Indians  (Bancroft, '  Native  Eaces 
of  America').  It  w»3  profcably  intended, 
like  lacerations,  and  ashes  on  the  bead,  kg 
a  mere  disfigurement^ 


Ver. 3. — In  their  streets;  literally,  ^n  hi4 
ttreeti ;  i.e.  the  streets  of  Moab.  They  shall 
gird  themselves  with  sackcloth.  Aiiother 
widely  spread  custom,  known  to  the  As- 
syrians (Jonah  iii.  5),  the  Syrians  (1  Kings 
XX.  31),  the  Persians  (Esth.  ir.  1,  2),  the 
Israelites  (Neh.  ix.  1),  and,  as  we  see  here, 
to  the  Moabites.  The  modem  wearing  of 
black  garments,  especially  crape,  is  repre- 
sentative of  the  old  practice.  Every  one 
shall  howl.  "  Ho  .\  ling  "  remains  one  of  the 
chief  tokens  of  mourning  in  the  East.  It 
was  a  practice  of  the  Egyptians  (Herod.,  ii. 
79),  of  the  Persians  (ibid.,  viii.  99 ;  ix.  24), 
of  the  Babylonians  (Jer.  li.  8),  and  probably 
of  the  Orientals  generally.  Weeping  abnu- 
dantly ;  or,  running  down  toith  tears  (comp. 
Jer.  ix.  18 ;  xiii.  17 ;  Herod.,  viii.  99). 

Ver.  4. — Heshbon  shall  cry.  Heshbon, 
now  Hesbdn,  lay  about  twenty  miles  east 
of  the  Jordan,  nearly  on  the  parallel  of  its 
embouchure  into  tlie  Dead  Sea.  It  was  the 
capital  city  of  Sihon  (Numb.  xxi.  21),  who 
took  it  from  the  Moabites.  On  the  partition 
of  Palestine  among  the  tribes  of  Israel,  it 
was  assigned  to  Beuben  (Numb,  xxxii.  37 ; 
Josh.  xiii.  17);  but  at  a  later  time  we  find 
it  reckoned  to  Gad  (1  Chron.  vi.  81).  Vfe 
do  not  know  at  what  time  Moab  recovered 
Heshbon,  but  may  conjecture  that  it  w»8 
one  of  the  conquests  of  Mesha,  though  it  is 
not  mentioned  on  the  Moabite  Stone.  And 
Elealeh.  Elealeh  is  commonly  united  with 
Heshbon  (Numb,  xxxii.  3,  37 ;  oh.  xvi.  9 ; 
Jer.  xlviii.  34).  It  is  probably  identical 
with  tlie  modem  El-A'al,  a  ruined  town  on 
the  top  of  a  rounded  hill,  little  more  than  a 
mile  north  of  Hesbdn.  Even  nnto  Jahaz. 
Jahaz  lay  considerably  to  the  south  of  Hesh- 
bon, probably  not  very  far  north  of  the 
Arnon.  It  must  have  been  in  the  vicinity 
of  Dibon,  since  Mesha,  on  taking  it  from  the 
Israelites,  annexed  it  to  the  territory  of  that 
city  (Moabite  Stone,  11.  19 — 21).  It  was 
the  scene  of  the  great  battle  between  Sihon 
and  the  Israelites  under  Moses  (Numb.  xxi. 
23).  His  life  shall  be  grievous  nnto  him; 
rather,  his  soul  shall  be  grieved  within  him. 
The  Moabite  people  is  personified  (Cheyne). 

Ver.  5. — My  heart  shall  cry  out  for  Uoab 
(comp.  ch.  xvi.  9,  11).  Tlie  prophet  sympar 
thizes  with  the  sufferings  of  Moab,  as  a 
kindred  people  (Gen.  xix.  37),  and  perhaps 
as  having,  in  the  person  of  Euth,  furnished 
an  ancestress  to  the  Messiah  (Matt.  i.  5). 
His  fugitives ;  literally,  her  fugitives.  The 
country  is  here  personified,  instead  of  the 
people,  the  former  being  feminine,  the  latter 
masculine.  Shall  flee  unto  Zoar.  Zoar,  the 
"  little  "  town,  spared  for  Lot's  sake  (Oen. 
xix.  20 — 22),  is  placed  by  some  at  the  nor- 
thern, by  others  at  tlie  aouthem,  extremity 
of  the  Dead  Sea.  The  present  passaga 
makes  in  favcnir  of  the  more  southern  aite. 


OH.  XV.  1—0.]        THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


269 


An  heifer  of  three  years  old.  Those  who 
defend  this  rendering  refc  r  the  simile  either 
to  Zoar,  or  to  Moab,  or  to  t))«  fus;itivea. 
Having  regard  to  the  parallel  passage  of 
Jeremiah  (xlvili,  34),  we  may  pronounce 
the  last  explanation  to  be  the  best.  The 
resemblance  to  the  heifer  will  consist  in 
the  cries  uttered.  To  many  critics,  how- 
ever, this  idea  appears  harsh,  and  the  alter- 
native is  proposed  of  regarding  Eglath — 
the  word  translated  "  heifer " — as  a  place, 
and  the  epithet,  "of  three  years  old,"  as 
really  meaning  "  the  third."  Attempts  are 
made  to  show  the  existence  of  three  Eglaths 
in  these  parts ;  but  they  are  not  very  suc- 
cessful ;  nor  is  any  instance  adduced  of  a 
city  being  distinguished  from  others  of  the 
same  name  by  a  numerical  suffix.  The 
rendering  of  the  Authorized  Version  may 
therefore  stand,  the  comparison  being  re- 
garded as  one  of  the  fugitive  Moabites  to  a 
heifer  in  its  third  year,  "  rushing  along  with 
loud,  hopeless  bellowings"  (Kay).  By  the 
mounting  up  of  Luhith.  This  ascent  has  not 
been  Mentiiied.  It  should  have  been  on  the 
way  from  Moab  proper  to  Zoar.  The  way 
of  Horoualm.  On  the  Moabite  Stone 
Horonaim  is  mentioned  as  a  town  of  the 
Edomites  attacked  and  taken  by  Musha 
(11. 31—33).  It  lay  probably  south  or  south- 
east of  the  Dead  Sea.  The  Moiibites,  flying 
from  their  invaders,  seek  a  refuge  in  the 
territories  of  Bdom  and  Judah,  weeping  and 
wailing  as  they  go. 

Ver.  6. — The  waters  of  Nimrim  shall  be 
deiolate.  The  Wady  Numeira  is  a  water- 
course running  into  the  Dead  Sea  from  the 
east,  half-way  between  the  promontory  called 
the  "  Lisan "  and  the  sea's  southern  ex- 
tremity. It  is  fed  by  "  six  or  seven  springs  " 
('Quarterly  Statement'  of  Palest.  Kxpl. 
Fund,  October,  1880,  p.  254)— "  plenteous 
brooks  gushing  from  the  lofty  hills "  (Tris- 
tram), and  boasts  along  its  banks  a  number 
of  "well-watered  gardens."  There  is  no 
reason  to  doubt  the  identity  of  this  stream 


with  "the  waters  of  Nimrim."  Theii 
"  desolation "  was  probably  caused  by  the 
enemy  stopping  up  the  sources  (2  Kings  iii. 
19,  25 ;  2  Chron.  xxxii.  3,  4).  The  hay  ii 
withered  away.  There  is  luxuriant  vege- 
tation in  the  wadys  and  ghors  at  the  southern 
end  of  the  Dead  Sea,  especially  in  the  Ghor- 
es-Siifiyeh,  the  Wady  Numeira,  and  the 
Wady  el-Mantara  ('Quarterly  Statement' 
of  Palest.  Expl.  Fund,  October,  1880,  pp 
252,  25  j). 

Ver.  7. — The  abundance,  etc.;  t.e.  "the 
property  which  they  have  been  able  to 
save  and  rarry  off  with  them."  Tliis,  find- 
ing no  place  of  refuge  in  their  own  territory, 
they  convey  to  their  southern  border,  where 
"  the  brook  of  tlie  willows  "  separates  their 
country  from  Edom,  with  the  intention,  no 
doubt,  of  transporting  it  across  the  brook, 

Ver.  8. — Eglaim . . .  Beer-EUm.  Unknown 
sites  on  the  borders  of  Moab,  both  probably 
toward*  the  south.  The  enemy  has  come  iu 
from  the  north,  and  has  driven  the  popula- 
tion southwards.  A  hope  has  been  enter- 
tained of  the  pursuit  slackening;  but  it  is 
disappointed.  The  enemy  causea  grief  had 
"  bowling  "  in  every  part  of  the  territory. 

Ver.  9. — The  waters  of  Dimon.  It  is 
thought  that  "Dimon"  is  here  put  for 
"Dibou,"  in  order  to  assimilate  the  sound 
to  that  of  dam,  blood.  St.  Jerome  says 
that  in  his  day  the  place  was  called  indif- 
ferently by  either  name.  If  we  accept  this 
view,  "  the  waters  of  Dimon  "  will  probably 
be  those  of  the  Arnon,  near  which  Dibon 
was  situated  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  2). 
I  will  bring  more;  literally,  I  will  bring 
additions;  i.e.  additional  calamities,  which 
will  cause  the  stream  of  the  Anion  to  flow 
with  blood.  Lions;  or,  a  lion.  Perhips 
Nebuchadnezzar  (Jer.  iv.  7),  who  is  said  by 
Josephus  to  have  conquered  the  Moabites,  or 
possibly  Asshur-bani-pal,  who  overran  the 
country  about  B.O.  645  (G .  Smith,  '  History 
of  Asshur-bani-pal,'  p.  253). 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  6. — Denunciations  of  God's  wrath  upon  sinners  compatible  with  the  deepest  pity 
for  them.  It  is  sometimes  assumed  that  those  who  exert  themselves  earnestly  to  set 
before  nrien  the  severer  aspects  of  religion,  who,  like  Paul  before  Felix,  "  reason  of 
righteousness,  temperance,  and  judgment  to  come  "  (Acts  xxiv.  25),  must  be  persons  of 
harsh,  stern,  and  pitiless  tempers,  devoid  of  the  gentler  feelings,  or  at  any  rate  without 
keen  sympathy  with  their  fellow-men.  The  advocates  of  universal  salvation  claim  to 
be  more  tender-hearted  than  their  opponents,  and  brand  the  latter  with  e|iithets 
denoting  a  want  of  humanity  and  kindliness.  But  true  tenderness  and  kindness  will 
not  lead  men  to  conceal  unpleasant  truths,  but  to  state  them  with  the  utmost  clearness 
and  distinctness — to  press  them  upon  men,  insist  upon  them,  compel  attention  to  them. 
Their  outspokenness  is  no  sign  of  want  of  sympathy,  but  rather  an  indication  of  the 
contrary.  It  springs  from  the  deepest  love,  from  the  most  earnest  desire  to  save  souls. 
Three  great  examples  may  be  alleged  in  proof  of  this. 


270  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        Loh.  xv.  1— 9 

L  The  example  of  Isaiah.  Nowhere  do  we  find  more  unreserved  denunciations 
of  God's  wrath  against  sinners  than  in  the  writings  of  "  the  evangelical"  prophet."  All 
the  enemies  of  God  are  in  their  turn  arraigned,  condemned,  and  sentenced  to  the  severest 
sufferings.  But  can  it  be  said  that  Isaiah  is  cold,  or  harsh,  or  unsympatlietio?  No. 
Par  otherwise.  His  "heart  cries  out  for  Moab"  (ch.  xv.  5).  He  "bewails  with  the 
weeping  of  Jazer  the  vine  of  Sibmah  "  (ch.  xvi.  9) ;  he  "  waters  Heshbon  and  Elealeh 
with  his  tears "  (ch.  xvi.  9) ;  his  "  bowels  sound  like  an  harp  for  Moab,"  and  his 
"  inward  parts  for  Kir-Haresh  "  (ch.  xvi.  11).  Nor  is  it  only  the  kindred  nation  of  Moab 
which  draws  forth  such  feelings.  A  vision  of  the  siege  ot  Babylon  causes  him  to  cry 
out,  "  Therefore  are  my  loins  tilled  wiih  pain :  pangs  have  taken  hold  upon  me,  as  the 
pangs  of  a  woman  that  travaileth ;  I  was  bowed  down  at  the  hearing  of  it;  I  was 
dismayed  at  the  seeing  of  it.  My  heart  panted,  fearfulness  affrighted  me :  the  night 
of  my  pleasure  hath  he  turned  into  fear  unto  me  "  (oh.  xxi.  3,  4). 

n.  The  example  of  St.  Paul.  No  sacred  writer  is  more  direct  in  his  warnings 
against  sin,  or  more  plain  in  his  denunciations  of  eternal  death  to  sinners,  than  St.  Paul. 
"  As  many  as  have  sinned  without  Law  shall  also  perish  without  Law :  and  as  many  as 
have  sinned  iu  the  Law  shall  be  Judged  by  the  Law  "  (Rom.  ii.  12).  "  The  wages  of  sin 
is  death"  (Rom.  vi.  23).  "The  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest,  which  are  these; 
Adultery,  fornication,  uncleanness,  lasciviousness,  idolatry,  witchcraft,  hatred,  variance, 
emulations,  wrath,  strife,  seditions^^eresies,  envyings,  murders,  drunkenness,  revelhngs, 
and  such  like :  of  the  which  I  tell  you  before,  as  I  have  also  told  you  in  time  past,  that 
they  who  do  such  things  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God"  (Gal.  v.  19 — 21).  Yet 
what  writer  shows  greater  tenderness  towards  those  whom  he  warns,  or  a  more  affec- 
tionate concern  for  them,  than  the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  ?  "  Brethren,  my  heai  t's 
desire  and  prayer  to  God  for  Israel  is,  that  they  might  be  saved  "  (Bom.  x.  1).  "  I  say 
the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  my  conscience  also  biaring  me  wiiL^ss  in  the  Holy  Ghoot, 
that  I  have  great  heaviness  and  continual  sorrow  in  my  heart.  For  I  could  wish  that 
myself  were  accursed  from  Christ  for  my  brethren,  my  kinsfolk  according  to  the  flesh  " 
(Kom.  ix.  1—3). 

III.  The  example  of  our  Loed.  The  tenderness  of  Christ  is  without  a  parallel 
in  the  history  of  man.  Not  only  did  he  die  for  men,  but  throughout  his  life  he  showed 
at  every  turn  a  love  for  them  surpassing  human  love.  For  their  sake  becoming  poor 
and  despised,  for  their  sake  unwearied  in  works  of  mercy,  moved  with  compassion  if  he 
saw  them  faint  or  weary,  grieving  bitterly,  even  weeping,  when  he  found  them  impeni- 
tent, never  breaking  the  bruised  reed  nor  quenching  the  smoking  flax,  on  his  way  to  his 
death  of  shame  praying  for  his  murderers,  it  is  yet  he  who  delivers  the  warnings  con- 
cerning final  judgment,  which  are  most  awful  and  most  impossible  to  explain  away. 
"  Every  tree  tliat  bringeth  not  forth  good  fruit  is  hewn  down,  and  cast  into  the  fire  " 
(Matt.  vii.  19).  "  As  the  tares  are  gathered  and  burned  in  the  fire,  so  shall  it  be  ia 
the  end  of  the  world.  The  Son  of  man  shall  send  forth  his  angels,  and  they  shall  gather 
out  of  his  kingdom  all  things  that  offend,  and  them  which  do  iniquity  ;  and  shall  cast 
them  into  a  furnace  of  fire:  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  tec-th  "  (Matt.  xiii. 
40 — 42).  "  Then  shall  he  say  to  them  on  the  left  hand.  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed, 
into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.  ,  .  .  And  these  shall  go  away 
into  everlasting  punishment:  but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal"  (Matt.  xxv.  41,  46). 
"  It  is  better  for  thee  to  enter  into  life  maimed,  than  having  two  hands  to  go  into  hell, 
into  the  fire  that  never  shall  be  quenched:  where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fir*  it 
not  quenched  "  (Mark  ix.  43,  44), 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — Oracle  concerning  Moab.  I.  History  or  Moab.  Zoar  was  the  cradle 
of  the  race,  the  house  of  the  tribal  father  Lot.  While  the  brother-tribe  of  Ammon 
wandered  to  the  pastures  of  the  north-east,  Moab  remained  nearer  the  oiiginal  seat. 
They  were  confined  to  a  narrower  district  by  the  invasion  of  the  Amorites  (Numb, 
xxi.  26 — 30;  Deut.  ii.  10,  11).  Their  long  leud  with  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  lasted  to 
the  time  of  Saul.  But  in  the  Book  of  Ruth  we  have  a  pleasant  glimpse  of  the  inter- 
course between  the  people  of  Moab  and  those  of  Judah ;  and  David,  by  descent  froni 


OH.XV.  1—9.1        THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  271 

Ruth,  had  Moabite  blood  in  his  veins.  Eglaim,  a  Moabite  king,  had  reigned  at  Jericho  i 
but  a  fearful  war,  the  last  of  David's,  had  crushed,  almost  extirpated,  Moab  (2  Sam. 
viii. ;  1  Chron.  xviii.).  On  the  division  of  tlie  kingdom,  Moab  fell  under  the  dominion  of 
Israel,  and  paid  its  kings  an  enorranus  tribute  (2  Kings  iii.  21).  On  the  death  of  Ahab 
this  tribute  was  refused,  and  Moab,  in  alliance  with  the  Ammonites  and  otliers,  attacked 
the  kingdom  of  Judah  (2  Ohron.  xx.).  A  fearful  disaster  followed,  and  Israel,  Judah, 
and  Edom  united  in  an  attack  iipun  the  Moabites,  who,  deceived  by  a  stratagem,  were 
overcome  with  fearful  carnage.  And  then,  to  crown  these  horrors,  the  king  Mesha,  having 
retreated  to  the  strong  place  of  Kir-Hareseth,  was  seen  by  the  host  of  Israel  sacrificing 
his  own  son  upon  the  walls,  as  an  extreme  measure,  witli  a  view  to  obtain  deliverance 
from  the  gods  of  the  land.  From  that  time  we  know  little  of  the  fortunes  of  Moab 
until  the  date  of  this  prophecy,  about  a  century  and  a  half  later,  B.C.  726.  She  had 
regained  the  lost  grounii,  and  was  settled  in  the  territory  north  of  the  Arnon,  when  this 
disaster  overtook  her.  Ewald  tliinks  that  three  prophets  were  concerned  in  this 
prophecy,  and  that  it  Is  preserved  in  Jer.  xlviii.  more  nearly  in  its  original  form. 

II.  Tub  pathos  op  Moab's  pate.  The  whole  description  is  characterized  by  a  tone 
of  deep  sympathy.  The  prophet's  heart  is  torn  by  sorrow  and  compassion ;  it  melts 
with  tenderness.  The  mood  is  elegiac  rather  than  iirophetio.  The  fragment  is  unique 
among  the  elder  prophets ;  even  in  Hosea  there  is  nothing  quite  like  it  (Ewald).  "  In 
a  night  'Ar-Moab  is  laid  waste,  destriiyid;  for  in  a  niglit  Kir-Moab  is  laid  waste, 
destroyed."  Perhaps  the  ruins  of  the  capital  and  the  lor^ess  may  be  identified  by 
antiquarians;  perhaps  not.  But  what  is  more  important  to  us  to  notice  is  the  pathos 
of  ruined  cities.  What  are  they  but  the  speaking  symbols  of  man's  efforts  and  man's 
failures,  his  soaring  ambition,  his  profound  disappointment  and  humiliation?  So  the 
poet  in  our  own  time  amidst  the  colossal  ruins  of  Egypt:  "I  surveyed  the  generations 
of  man  from  Eameses  the  Great  and  Memnon  the  beautiful,  to  the  solitary  pilgrim 
whose  presence  now  violated  the  sanctity  of  those  gorgeous  sepulchres.  And  I  found  that 
the  history  of  my  race  was  but  one  tale  of  rapid  destruction  and  gradual  decay.  And 
in  the  anguish  of  my  heart  I  lifted  up  my  hands  to  the  blue  ether,  and  I  said, '  Is  th^re  no 
hope  ?  What  is  kno«  ledge  and  what  is  truth  ?  How  shall  I  gain  wisdom  ? ' "  (Disraeli). 
A  city  is  to  the  passionate .  fancy  of  prophet  and  poet  as  a  living  person,  a  woman 
glorious  in  her  beauty,  and  extorting  tears  from  the  onlooker  in  her  fall.  He  sees  the 
people  going  up  to  the  central  temple  of  the  land,  not  to  rejoice,  but  to  weep.  Every 
head  is  bald,  and  every  beard  is  torn  in  sign  of  mourning  for  the  departed.  Figures 
move  about  in  the  market-places,  not  in  holiday  attire,  but  in  sackcloth;  on  the  roofs 
and  in  the  streets  universal  wailing  is  heard,  and  there  is  beheld  as  it  wore  a  deluge  of 
tears.  The  hill  Heshbon  cries,  and  Elealeh  returns  a  hollow  sound,  ami  from  far-off  Jahaz 
an  echo  comes.  The  heroes'  hearts  are  paralyzed ;  they  cry  out  with  the  women  in 
helpless  lamentation.  'i"he  very  heart  of  the  land  trembles ;  it  is  an  earthquake  of  woe. 
In  sudden  calamities,  the  sudden  deaths  of  mdividuals,  the  sudden  fall  of  cities,  there 
is  an  expression  of  the  mystery  of  destiny  which  overwhelms  the  soul.  Goethe,  after 
describing  the  awful  earthquake  of  Lisbon  in  1755,  which  "spread  a  vast  horror  over  a 
world  already  accustomed  to  peace  and  rest,"  speaks  of  his  own  feelings  as  a  hoy  on 
hearing  the  details  often  repeated.  "  He  was  no  little  moved.  God  the  Creator  and 
Upholder  of  heaven  and  earth,  whom  the  explanation  of  the  first  article  of  belief  repre- 
sented as  so  wise  and  generous,  had,  in  dealing  out  like  destruction  to  the  just  and  the 
unjust,  by  no  means  acted  as  a  father.  In  vain  his  young  spirit  strove  to  recover  from 
these  impressions ;  and  it  was  the  less  possible,  because  the  wise  men  and  the  doctors 
could  not  agree  on  the  manner  in  which  the  phenomenon  should  be  viewed."  Without 
attempting  to  unravel  the  tragic  enigmas  of  existence,  it  may  be  well  to  note  how  deep 
is  the  abyss  of  thought  and  passion  in  our  own  hearts  opened  by  the  tale  of  such  horrors ; 
and  thus  to  learn  something  of  that  Divine  sympathy  which  broods  over  nature  and 
over  men,  and  to  be  reminded  of  those  tears  shed  over  Jirtisalem,  already  seen  by  Jesus 
in  the  lurid  light  of  its  approaching  doom. 

III.  The  sympathy  op  the  pbophet.  -  It  is  expressed  in  appropriate  figures.  His 
heart  cries  out  with  passionate  yearning  towards  Muab.  The  city  of  Zoar  seems  to  him 
lus  a  heifer  of  three  years  old,  in  all  the  unexhausted  fulness  of  its  strength.  This  is  an 
ima;,e  of  a  fair  and  fertile  land,  applitd  also  to  Egypt  and  to  Babylon  (Jer.  xlvi.  20; 
xlviii.  34;  L  11 ;  cf.  Hos.  iv.  r6;  x.  11).     The  roads  are  filled  with  fugitives,  weeping 


272  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  xv.  1— 9 

and  rmiging  the  cries  of  death  and  despair.  At  Nimrim,  the  "  fair  waters,"  the  springs 
have  been  filled  up  with  rubbish,  and  will  probably  be  a  waste  for  ever.  The  greenness 
of  the  spot  has  vanished  heneaih  the  hand  of  thu  conqueror,  and  the  fugitives,  with 
their  savings  and  stores,  are  sren  hurr\  ing  across  the  brook  of  the  willows  into  the 
territory  of  Edom.  From  south  to  north,  from  Eglaim  to  Beer-Elim,  there  is  wailing, 
there  is  wailing!  Dimon  or  Dibon's  ([lerhaps  the  Arnon)  waters  are  full  of  blood. 
And  yet  a  further  perspective  of  evil  opens.  A  lion  is  to  be  brought  upon  the  fugitives 
and  the  survivors;  probably  Judah,  as  this  animal  was  Judah's  tribal  ensign  (Gen. 
xlix.  9).     But  we  must  be  content  to  leave  the  passage  obscnre. 

IV.  MusiNQs  AMONG  THE  K0IN8  OF  MoAB.  I'he  land  has  been  but  seldom  visited  by 
Europeans,  and  their  descriptions  vary ;  but  all  agree  in  stating  that  the  country  is 
covered  with  an  extraordinary  number  of  ruins.  Of  the  language  vro  do  not  know  very 
much,  but  the  Moabite  Stone  shows  that  it  was  closely  akin  tu  Hebrew.  Of  the  religi(>n 
we  know  still  less.  Of  what  nature  was  their  great  god  Chemosh,  whose  worship 
Sulomon  introduced  into  and  Josiah  expelled  from  Judah?  Here  almost  all  is  con- 
jectural, and  imagination  has  free  course  and  unchecked  play  amidst  the  ruii.s  of  Moab, 
The  ruins  are  symbolic  of  human  greatness,  of  human  diseases  and  decay. 

"  All  things  have  their  end ; 
Temples  and  cities,  which  have  diseases  like  to  man. 
Must  have  like  death  that  we  hava" 

The  mouldering  stones  sermonize  with  silent  eloquence  on  the  old  text,  "  Vanity  of 
vanities ;  all  is  vanity."  They  remind  us  of  man's  short  life  and  long  hnpes.  He  builds 
for  a  thousand  years,  though  he  may  have  but  as  many  months  to  live.  Thus,  bearing 
their  witness  to  the  aspiration  for  immortality,  the  passion  to  create  the  bt-autiful  that 
shall  not  die,  venerable  ruins  of  remote  antiquity  have  a  lofty  spiritual  exjneision. 

"  There  is  given 
Unto  the  things  of  earth,  which  time  hath  bent, 
A  spirit's  feeling ;  and  where  he  hath  leant 
His  hand,  but  broke  his  scythe,  there  is  a  poww 
And  magio  in  the  ruined  battlement. 
For  which  the  palace  of  the  present  hour 
Must  yield  its  pomp,  and  wait  till  ages  are  its  dower." 

They  remind  us,  by  contrast  of  that  which  falls  not  into  ruin — the  edifice  of  God  In  the 
human  spirit ;  the  shrine  not  to  be  found  on  the  mounts  of  Moab  or  of  J  iiilah ;  the  living 
altar  on  which  the  fire  goes  not  out  from  age  to  age ;  the  element  in  life  which  abides 
for  ever,  when  this  world  and  the  lust  thereof  hath  passed  away. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — National  distress.    In  these  very  vigorous  touches  we  have — 

I.  A    riNB    BUT    FEAKrOL    PICTURE     OF    NATIONAL   DISTBESS.        We   See   tWO   of   the 

principal  cities  attacked,  unexpectedly,  in  the  night,  taken  by  assault  and  ravaged  with 
the  merciless  cruelties  of  ancient  war  (ver.  1) ;  we  see  the  inhabitants  flocking  to  their 
national  temples  to  weep,  "with  lamentable  voice,"  over  their  humiliation;  we  see 
them  resorting  to  the  last  indignities,  self-inflicted,  in  order  to  express  more  forcibly 
than  words  can  do  the  extremity  of  their  woe  (ver.  2) ;  we  see  them  neglecting  their 
daily  labour  and  going  up  to  their  house-tops,  there  to  pour  forth  their  loud  laments 
(ver.  3) ;  we  see  the  very  army  dispossessed  ot  its  manliness  and  weeping  like  a  com- 
pany of  women  (ver.  4);  we  see  fugitives  hastening  into  exile  with  bitter  cries,  more 
resembling  the  lowing  of  the  kine  for  their  calves  than  the  voice  of  man  or  woman 
(ver.  5) ;  we  see  the  land  afflicted  with  drought  and  white  with  famine  (ver.  6) ;  we  see 
those  who  had  wealth  to  lose  stealing  away  wiin  their  precious  thinas,  hoping  they  may 
secrete  and  save  them  (ver.  7);  we  see  the  waters  of  the  land  red  with  the  blood  of  her 
slaughtered  sons  and  daughters  (ver.  9);  and  in  the  background,  where  we  might  hope 
to  find  some  break  in  the  blackness  of  the  vision,  we  see  the  wild  beast*  that  haunt  the 
depopulated  land  hungry  for  their  prey  (ver.  9). 

II.  An  iNTiMATiojr  OF  COLLECTIVE  KESPONsiBiLiTT.  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  this 
fearful  fate  was  a  judgment  from  Heaven,  otherwise  it  would  not  have  been  thus  fore- 
told by  the  mouth  of  God's  prophet.    Moab  was  to  be  brought  low,  to  be  wasted,  to  be 


OH.  XV.  1—9.]        THE  BOOK   OF   THE   PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  273 

terribly  afflicted  because  it  was  guilty,  because  the  nation  had  incurred  the  condem- 
nation of  God.  In  the  first  instance,  individual  souls  are  responsible  for  their  thoughts, 
words,  lives.  But  responsibility  does  not  end  here ;  it  extends  to  the  family,  to  the 
Church,  to  the  society,  to  the  island  population,  to  the  great  kingdom  or  empire.  For 
the  action  which  it  takes,  for  the  influence  it  exerts,  for  the  principles  on  which  it  is 
shaping  its  course  and  living  its  life,  God  holds  it  responsible,  and  he  will  reward  or 
punish  it  some  day  according  to  his  judgment  concerning  it.  There  is  no  community 
too  small  to  be  disregarded  by  him ;  none  too  large  to  be  beyond  the  exercise  of  his 
righteous  government. 

III.  An  ikfbrencb  as  to  privilboe  and  guilt.  Moab  stood  outside  the  circle 
of  sacred  privilege.  Gorl  had  not  been  speaking  daily,  weekly,  monthly,  annually,  by 
priest  and  rite,  by  prophet  and  prophecy,  to  her.  Yet  was  she  held  responsible  for  her 
sin  and  punished  for  her  transgressions.  If  the  unprivileged  Moab  was  thus  accountable, 
how  much  more  the  people  to  whom  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God,  and  in  the 
midst  of  whom  dwelt  the  Most  High  himself?  And  how  much  more  yet  those  peoples 
of  the  earth  to  whom  has  been  vouchsafed  the  gospel  of  the  Son  of  God  ?  "  For  if  the 
word  spoken  by  angels,"  etc.  (Heb.  ii.  2,  3);  and  "if  he  that  despised  Moses'  Law,"  etc. 
(Heb.  X.  28,  29).  Moab  "  sinned  without  Law  "  and  perished  (Bom.  ii.  12).  Israel 
"  sinned  in  the  Law  "  and  "  was  judged  by  the  Law,"  and  was  condemned  (Rom.  ii.  12). 
If  England  sins  under  the  gospel,  she  will  be  judged  by  the  righteous  principle,  that 
"  from  them  to  whom  much  is  given  men  expect  the  more,"  and  from  them  God 
requires  the  more.  It  must  be  that  the  brighter  the  light  of  privilege  and  opportunity, 
the  deeper  the  shadow  of  disobedience  and  condemnation.  1.  Kealize  the  responsibility 
that  devolves  upon  citizenship,  upon  membership  of  a  society  or  of  the  Church,  axif 
use  all  the  power  that  can  be  exercised  upon  the  community  to  preserve  it  from  wron* 
couises,  to  incite  it  to  wise  and  worthy  measures.  2.  Remember  that  the  laiger  and 
also  the  smaller  communitieo  rest  upon  the  basis  of  the  family  and,  ultimately,  the 
individual.  Let  every  man  see  that  God  is  honoured  in  his  own  home  and  in  his  own 
heart,  and  then  will  the  rectitude  and  thus  the  prosperity  of  the  whole  Church-  of  the 
entire  kingdom,  be  assured. — C. 

Ver.  1. — Moab  a  national  type.  Of  late  years  attention  has  been  directed  to 
Moab,  through  the  discovery  of  what  is  known  as  the  Moabite  Stone,  which  contains 
the  earliest  inscription  we  have  wholly  in  alphabetical  characters.  This  stone  was  found 
at  Diban,  about  three  miles  north  of  the  central  part  of  the  Arnon.  Its  inscription 
remarkably  confirms  the  Scripture  record.  The  original  territory  of  Moab  seems  to 
have  been  divided  into  three  portions :  1.  What  was  known  as  the  "  land  of  Moab  ' — 
the  open  rolling  country  north  of  the  Arnon,  opposite  Jericho,  reaching  to  Gilead  on 
the  north.  2.  The  "field  of  Moab" — upland  undulating  plains,  extending  from  the 
precipitous  mountains  overlooking  the  Arabah  and  the  Dead  Sea  on  the  west,  to  the 
Arabian  desert  on  the  east;  from  the  deep  chasm  of  the  Arnon  on  the  north,  to  Edom 
on  the  south.  3.  The  "  Arboth-Moab,"  or  dry  tropical  regions  in  the  Arabah  on  the 
east  of  the  Jordan.  The  peculiarity  of  Moab,  so  far  as  indicated,  seems  to  have  been 
that  for  many  years  it  had  been  undisturbed  and  prosperous,  not  affected  by  invasions 
or  famines ;  and  so,  lacking  experiences  of  calamity  and  suffering,  social  and  moral 
evils  had  so  grown  that  at  last  terrible  and  .ilmoit  overwhelming  Divine  chastise- 
n-onts  seemed  necessary  ;  and  these  would  cause  tmusual  grief  and  distress.  The 
Prophet  Jeremiah  indicates  the  special  characteristic  of  Moab  in  a  very  striking  passage 
(xlviii.  11):  "Moab  hath  been  at  ease  from  his  youth,  and  he  hath  settled  on  his 
lees,  and  hath  not  been  emptied  from  vessel  to  vessel,  neither  hath  he  gone  into 
captivity :  therefore  his  taste  remained  in  him,  and  his  scent  is  not  changed."  A 
contrast  is  suggested  between  the  national  experiences  of  Israel  and  of  Moab.  Israel 
had  known  no  easy  restful  periods  in  her  history ;  she  had  been  "  shaken  loose  or 
unsettled  every  few  years  by  some  great  change  or  adversity — by  a  state  of  slavery  in 
Egypt,  by  a  forty  years'  roving  and  fighting  in  the  wilderness,  by  a  time  of  dreadful 
anarchy  under  the  judges,  by  a  revolt  and  separation  of  the  kingdom,  and  then  by  a 
captivity.  Moab  had  been  at  ease  from  the  first,  shaken  by  no  great  overturnings  Or 
defeats,  humbled  and  broken  by  no  captivities,  ventilated  by  no  surprising  changes  or 
adversities.  He  has  lived  on,  from  age  to  ago,  in  comparative  security,  settled  on  his 
J8AIAH.  « 


274  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  xv.  1— 9. 

lees ;  and  therefore  he  has  made  no  improvement "  (Bushnell);  Moab  is  thus  •  type 
of  those  nations  that  have  long  periods  of  peace  and  prospeiity,  and  of  those  families 
and  individuals  who  have  for  years  few  experiences  of  trouble.  From  Moab,  as  a 
type,  we  may  learn  sucli  lessons  as  these. 

I.  God  IB  Df  ouB  times  of  kestfulness  and  base.  It  is  a  fact  of  common 
human  experience  that  our  relations  with  God  are  recognized  in  our  times  of  trouble, 
but  lost  sight  of  in  our  times  of  prosperity.  It  is  woe  to  us  when  all  men  speak  well  of 
us,  and  it  is  woe  to  us  when  all  things  go  well  with  us.  Nothing  so  easily  hides  Gud 
from  our  view  as  success  attending  our  own  self-endeavours.  And  yet  God  is  in  our 
times  of  prosperity,  as  truly  sending  them,  presiding  over  them,  and  working  his 
purpose  through  them,  as  he  is  sending  and  using  times  of  suffering.  No  truth  needs 
more  constant  and  varied  reassertion  than  this — God  is  in  prosperity  and  success. 

II.  Such  times  op  BBSTFtrLNESS  and  ease  are  searching  tests  op  character. 
The  common  sentiment  is  that  troubles  alone  test  us.  The  truth  is,  that  removal  of 
trouble  tests ;  that  holding  off  of  trouble  teats  ;  and  that  bestowments  and  benedictions 
test.  These,  indeed,  become  most  searching  tests,  under  which  many  of  us  utterly  fail 
after  coming  well  through  our  times  of  tribulation.  What  is  thought  of  as  the  inequality, 
of  hfe — the  disproportionate  allotment  of  joy  and  sorrow,  success  and  failure — finds  a 
partial  explanation,  if  we  apprehend  that  a  man's  success  and  ease  are  his  moral  testings, 
and  that,  before  God,  thousands  more  fail  under  life's  prosperities  than  fail  under  life's 
adversities.  Man,  looking  at  Israel  and  at  Moab,  would  at  once  say  that  Moab,  in  his 
quietness,  was  the  best  off.  The  issue  plainly  ahows  that  the  lot  of  Israel  was  the  more 
desirable. 

IIL  Such  times  of  kestfulness  and  ease  develop  PAKTicdAB  porhb  of 
evil.  Not  the  same  forms  that  are  developed  by  adversities,  but  more  subtle  and 
more  vital  evils.  All  those  which  come  out  of  centering  thought  on  tdf — involving 
heart-separation  from  God;  self-conceit;  contempt  of  others;  over-estimate  of  the 
material  and  temporal ;  luxury  of  self-indulgence ;  and  those  aggravated  and  degrading 
forms  of  immorality  which  attend  unchecked  civilization  and  over-swift  development 
of  wealth.  We  know  the  moral  evils  of  war-times ;  we  fail  to  estimate  the  more  per- 
vading moral  evils  of  peace-times. 

IV.  Such  evils,  sooner  ob  later,  brino  on  special  Divihb  judgments.  As 
with  Moab.  When  the  judgment  comes,  it  needs  to  be  so  severe  as  to  seem  a  gathering 
up  of  all  the  testing  sufferings  of  years.  And  though  it  is  still  only  chastisement,  it 
takes  a  form  that  looks  hke  overwhelming  judgment.  In  this  chapter  the  jirophet 
seems  to  be  amazed  at  the  terrible  character  of  the  Divine  judgment  on  Moab  when  it 
did  fall.— R.  T. 

Ver.  3. — National  distress.  The  particular  trouble  causing  such  extreme  grief  was 
the  destruction  of  the  two  chief  cities  of  Moab,  Ar  and  Eir.  To  destroy  the  capital  of 
a  kingdom  is  to  strike  the  nation  at  its  very  heart.  Conquerors  can  dictate  peace  when 
the  chief  city  lies  at  their  mercy.  Illustrate  from  the  recent  German  siege  of  Paris. 
This  chapter  vigorously  pictures  the  distress  throughout  the  land  when  Ar  was  taken, 
the  rush  of  people  to  the  border  districts,  the  alarm  of  those  whose  property  was 
imperilled,  the  wail  of  those  who  had  lost  their  friends  in  the  strife.  Howling,  weeping, 
plucking  off  the  hair,  covering  with  sackcloth,  and  other  signs  of  despairing  grief,  were 
found  everywhere ;  and  the  cries  were  all  the  more  bitter  because  for  so  many  genera- 
tions Moab  had  dwelt  secure.  Here  one  kind  of  national  distress  brings  before  us  that 
general  subject,  and  sets  upon  coi.sidering — 

II.  Its  bearing  on  the  poor.  They  are  always  the  first  to  suffer  from  political 
or  international  conditions  which  affect  manufacture,  trade,  or  agriculture.  Living 
upon  daily  wage,  and,  when  thrifty,  only  able  to  provide  in  limited  degrees  for 
depressed  times,  the  poor  are  most  dependent  on  the  preservation  of  peace,  security, 
order,  and  mutual  confidence.  Demagogues  urge  the  poor  to  a  disturbance  of  social 
relations,  with  the  promise  of  material  advantage.  In  the  interests  of  the  poor  them- 
selves we  plead  that  war,  disturbance,  revolutionary  change,  never  even  temporarily 
sei:ve  their  interest.  So  grievous  is  the  effect  of  political  convulsions  on  the  poor,  that 
no  class  of  the  community  should  more  intensely  demand  the  knitting  of  land  to  land 
bjr  commerce  and  brotherhood,  and  the  correction  of  social  and  political  evils  b/ 


OH.  XV.  1—9.]        THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  275 

processes  which  do  not  disturb  the  sense  of  national  security.      Of  the  poor  the  words 
may  well  be  used,  "  In  quietness  and  confidence  shall  be  your  strength." 

II.  Its  bearing  on  the  rich.  They  are  always  the  aim  of  attack  in  lawless  tlmps, 
whether  the  evil  come  through  •ggressive  enemies  outside  the  nation,  or  through 
turbulent  people  inside  the  nation.  The  one  wants  "  booty,"  and  the  other  wants 
excuse  for  robbery.  The  rich  need  national  security  (1)  for  the  retention  of  what  they 
have ;  (2)  for  the  increase  of  what  they  have ;  (3)  and  for  the  enjoyment  of  what  they 
have.  National  distress  becomes  especially  afflictive  to  the  rich,  because  by  training 
and  association  they  are  unfitted  for  seK-help  when  their  riches  are  taken  away. 

III.  Its  mission  as  sent  by  Gtod.  It  is  often  that  which  we  find  illustrated  in  the 
case  of  Moab.  National  distress,  circumstances  that  unite  the  whole  land  in  a  common 
grief,  and  in  a  common  sense  of  helplessness,  is  the  Divine  corrective  of  the  evils  which 
attend  prolonged  peace,  security,  and  luxury.  Those  evils  may  be  traced  :  1.  In  the 
sphere  of  men's  thought.  The  material  is  exaggerated,  the  unseen  and  spiritual  are  at 
disadvantage,  and  cannot  hold  their  due  place  and  proportion.  2.  In  the  sphere  of 
tocial  life.  In  prolonged  times  of  peace  and  prosperity,  the  separations  between  classes 
of  society  are  grievously  widened,  and  there  grows  up  a  painful  contrast  between  the 
few  who  are  unduly  rich  and  the  many  who  are  miserably  jxxir.  National  distress 
brings  rich  and  poor  together,  in  mutual  dependence  and  service.  3.  In  the  spheres  of 
reliyion.  Like  the  voyager,  men  can  easily  dismiss  the  thought  of  God  when,  for  long 
times  together,  seas  are  calm  and  heavens  are  clear ;  but  when  the  skies  are  black,  and 
the  wild  waves  shake  the  frail  ship,  and  fear  whitens  every  face,  the  soul  begins  to  cry 
for  a  sight  of  God  and  a  touch  of  his  protecting  hand.  We  are  with  God  as  our 
little  children  are  with  their  mothers.  They  run  about  and  play,  taking  little  heed  of 
her,  until  the  head  aches,  and  the  pulse  is  high,  and  pain  wearies ;  and  then  there  is 
nobody  in  all  the  world  will  do  but  their  mother.  National  distress  brings  nations 
back  to  the  thought  and  love  of  God.  The  atheist,  the  agnostic,  and  the  secularist 
have  their  chance  when  the  sun  shines ;  nobody  wants  such  vain  helpers  when  the 
tempests  rage.     Then  nobody  will  do  but  the  God  of  our  fathers. 

IV.  Its  shame,  if  caused  by  man's  wilfulness  ob  man's  neolect.  And  these 
are  too  often  the  immediate  causes  of  national  distress.  War  is  almost  always  the 
issue  of  somebody's  wilfulness  or  masterfulness.  Nobody  would  need  to  go  to  war  if 
they  did  not  hanker  after  something  to  which  they  had  no  light,  or  were  not  com- 
pelled to  resist  these  envious,  masterful  folk.  And  such  distresses  as  come  by  prevailing 
disease  are  usually  traceable  to  men's  neglectings  of  social  and  family  and  household 
duty.  God  makes  even  man's  errors  and  sins  serve  his  purpose,  but  he  never  ceases  to 
declare  woe  unto  him  by  whom  the  offence  cometh. — K.  T. 

Ver.  6. — Divine  judgments  in  precise  adaptations.  The  point  which  arrests  atten- 
tion here  is  that  Moab,  being  so  largely  a  sheep-feeding  country,  was  dependent  on  its 
pastures,  and  these  were  dependent  on  the  dews,  and  rains,  and  fountains,  and  streains. 
To  a  grazing  country  no  gi'eater  calamity,  no  more  precisely  adapted  calamity,  could 
come  than  is  described  in  this  verse :  "  The  waters  of  Nimrim  shall  be  desolate :  for 
the  hay  is  withered  away,  the  grass  faileth,  there  is  no  green  thing."  Possibly  the 
mischief  was  wrought  in  part  by  the  malicious  act  of  the  invaders  in  stopping  the 
wells  and  defiling  the  streams.  If  one  thing  more  than  another  is  impressed  on  devout 
minds  by  a  review  of  life,  it  is  the  marvellous  way  in  which  Divine  wisdom  has  found 
the  best,  most  adapted  forms  for  judgment  and  chastisement  to  take.  Chastisement 
sent  by  the  Divine  Father  is  always  precisely  corrective  of  the  evil  which  has  called 
for  it,  and  always  precisely  corrective  to  the  individual  and  to  the  particular  nation. 
This  general  subject  may  be  opened  out  thus — 

I.  DiTiNB  judgments  HAVE  PKECisE  AIMS.  The  aim  expressed  in  general  terms  is — 
humiliation  with  a  view  to  exaltation. 

II.  Divine  judgments  abb  dikected  to  bboubb  those  aims.  And  this  decides 
the  form  and  the  degree  of  the  humiliation  that  is  found  to  be  necessary. 

III.  Divine  judgments  abb  adapted  in  ways  that  may  escape  pbesent  noticb. 
And  this  occasions  some  of  the  gravest  perplexities,  and  sternest  struggles  of  life. 

IV.  The  adaptation   of  all  Divine  judgments,  to  the  secuking  of  theib 

PBB0I8K   AIMS,  WILL  BE  THE  DELIGHTFUL  DISCOVEBY  OF  THE  FUTUBB.      It  will  be   OU^ 


276 


THE  BOOK   OF  THE   PEOPHET  ISAIAH,      [ch.  xvl  1—14. 


reading  of  our  own  history,  and  of  the  world's  history,  when  wo  have  learned  how  to 
-ead  aright. — E.  T. 

Ver.  7. — The  insecurity  (^  worldly  possessions.  The  picture  is  a  striking  «ne.  In 
the  national  flight,  the  people  are  seen  picking  up  what  they  can  of  their  treasures, 
and  escaping  for  life  to  the  border  districts ;  learning  the  le»son  ttat  "  riches  take  to 
themselves  wings,  and  flee  away."  The  word  "  abundance,"  in  the  text,  should  be 
replaced  by  the  word  "  remainder ; ''  and  the  most  probable  meaning  of  the  verse  is  that 
the  Moabites  shall  carry  what  they  can  save  of  their  possessions  into  the  land  of 
Bdom.     The  picture  suggests  two  topics. 

L  The  ixsecubity  of  the  man  who  is  rich  nr  what  hs  has.  Illustrate  from 
riches  (1)  in  land ;  (2)  in  money  ;  (3)  in  houses ;  (4)  in  goods.  How  dependent  he  is  on 
a  thousand  things  for  the  retention  and  use  of  all  1  The  lesson  of  Job  is  that  no  form 
of  earthly  possession  can  possibly  be  secure.  Land  is  unlet ;  money  cannot  be  profitably 
exchanged ;  houses  get  out  of  repair,  and  eat  up  rentals ;  and  goods  deteriorate  in  the 
warehouses.  When  ordinary  forces  leave  our  property  alone,  the  heavens  can  send 
fire ;  the  earth  can  heave  and  quake ;  and  by  mysterious  influences  we  can  be  made  to 
karn  our  lesson,  that  "  this  is  not  our  rest." 

II.  The  securitt  op  the  man  who  is  rich  in  what  he  is.  No  human  and  no 
supernatural  forces,  here  or  hereafter,  can  deprive  a  man  of  his  possessions  in  what  he 
is.  Character,  piety,  are  beyond  reach  of  moth,  or  worm,  or  rust,  or  storm,  or  earth- 
quake, or  death.  It  is  said  of  knowledge  that  a  man  "only  possesses  what  he  under- 
stands." It  might  be  said  of  a  man's  wealth  that  he  "  only  has  what  he  it,"  When 
calamities  come,  the  man  of  character  never  has  to  gather  his  treasures  hurriedly 
together  and  make  off  for  the  border-land.  Wherever  he  is,  he  has  his  riches  with  him. 
Stripped  of  all  his  so-called  wealth,  he  is  not  deprived  of  one  grain.  He  holds  it  all,  and 
his  riches  none  can  take  away.  The  Lord  Jesus  men  called  poor.  He  was  the  only 
trulv  and  perfectly  rich  man  that  ever  lived;  and  such  aa  he  was  we  would  desire  to 
be.— E.  T. 


EXPOSITION, 


CHAPTER  XVL 


Vers.  1 — 14. — The  Boisden  of  Moab 
(continued).  This  portion  of  the  "  buiden  " 
is  divided  into  three  sections.  In  section  1 
(from  ver.  1  to  the  end  of  ver.  5)  an  offer  of 
mercy  is  made  to  Moab  on  certain  con- 
ditions, viz.  that  she  return  to  her  allegiance 
to  the  house  of  David,  and  show  kindness 
to  fugitive  Israelites.  In  section  2  (vers. 
6 — 12)  she  is  supposed  to  have  rejected  this 
offer,  and  is  threatened  (aa  iu  ch.  xv.)  with 
severe  punishment.  In  section  3  (which 
consists  of  vers.  13  and  14)  the  time  is 
fixed  for  the  main  visitation  to  fall  upon  her. 

Ver.  1. — Send  ye  the  lamh  to  the  rtder  of 
the  land;  rather,  the  lamh  of  the  ruler  of 
ihe  land — the  lamb  (or  Iambs,  kar  being 
used  collectively)  due  to  the  ruler  as  a  mark 
of  subjection.  In  the  time  of  Ahab  Mesha 
had  paid  a  tribute  to  Israel  of  a  bundled 
thousand  lambs  and  a  hundred  thousand 
rams  annually  (2  Kings  iii.  4).  The  pro- 
phet recommends  that  this,  or  some  similar, 
tribute  should  now  be  paid  to  the  King  of 
Judah  instead,  Israel  having  been  absorbed 


into  Assyria.  From  Sela.  Either  Moab  It 
regarded  as  having  taken  refuge  in  Edom, 
and  is  therefore  bidden  to  send  her  tribute 
from  the  Edomite  capital,  Sela  (equivalent 
to  "Petra"),  or  "  Sela,"  here  is  not  a  proper 
name,  but  a  collective  used  to  designate  the 
rocky  parts  of  Moab,  to  which  she  had 
betaken  herself  (as  in  Jer.  xlviii.  28).  The 
latter  supposition  is,  on  the  whole,  the 
more  probable.  .To  the  wilderness ;  literally, 
wild^negswards ;  i.e.  by  the  way  of  the 
wilderness.  The  enemy  being  regarded  as 
iu  possession  of  the  northern  end  of  the 
Dead  Sea,  Moab  is  recommended  to  send 
her  tribute  round  the  southern  end,  and  so 
by  way  of  "  the  wilderness  of  Judah,"  to 
Jerusalem. 

Ver.  2.— For  it  shall  be;  rather,  and  it 
shall  be.  The  tribute  having  been  paid, 
Moab  will  regain  some  confidence.  Her 
fluttered. population  will  return,  and  collect 
at  the  fords  of  the  Amon,  ready  to  recross 
it.  As  a  wandering  bird  cast  ont  of  the 
nest;  rather,  ai  a  wandering  bird  (or, 
wandering  birds) — "as  a  scattered  nest "  (or, 
"  brood  of  nestlings  ").  The  daughters  of 
Moab.  The  population  of  Moab  generally, 
as  "the  daughter  of  Zion"  (ver.  1)  is  the 
population  of  Jerusalem  generally. 


m.  XVI.  1—14.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


271 


V«f.  3. — ^Take  eonnsel,  execute  judgment, 
etc.  Aocoiding  to  most  critics,  these  are 
the  words  of  the  Moabites,  or  of  a  Moabxte 
ambassador  at  Jerusalem,  and  are  a  call  on 
Jadiea  to  give  shelter  to  the  fugitives  from 
Moab.  Some,  however,  as  Dr.  Kay,  main- 
tain that  the  words  are  the  prophet's,  ad- 
dressed to  Moab,  calling  on  her  to  treat 
kindly  fugitives  from  Jndsea.  Make  thy 
shadow  as  the  night  (comp.  oh.  It.  6). 
In  the  hot  Itmd  of  Moab  the  sun  la  an 
enemy,  and  "  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  "  a 
welcome  refuge. 

Ver.  4. — Let  mine  outcasts  dwell  with 
thee,  Moab.  The  change  of  one  accent  will 
allow  of  this  passage  being  translated.  Let 
the  outcaete  of  Moab  dwell  with  thee;  and 
so  it  is  rendered  by  the  LXX.,  the  Syriac, 
by  Lowth,  Gesenius,  Hitzig,  Bwald,  and  Mr. 
Oheyne.  Delitzsch  and  Dr.  Kay  agree  with 
the  Authorized  Version.  For  the  extor- 
tioner is  at  an  end.  This  seems  to  be  urged 
as  a  reason  why  the  protection  asked  should 
be  given  :  it  will  not  be  for  long — the  op- 
pressor is  about  to  receive  chastisement. 
He  is  called  "  the  extortioner,"  as  exacting 
the  utmost  possible  tribute  from  conquered 
lands.  Such  exaction  was  characteristic  of 
Assyria  (2  Kings  xv.  19;  xviii.  14;  'As- 
syrian Inscriptions,'  passim).  The  spoiler 
oeaseth ;  literally,  devastation  ceasefh. 

Ver.  5. — And  in  mercy  shall  the  throne 
be  eftablished ;  rather,  and  there  shall  he  a 
throne  established  in  mercy.  A  Messianic 
vision  comes  upon  the  prophet  in  connection 
with  the  disappearance  of  the  oppressor. 
There  shall  be  one  day — he  knows  not  how 
soon  "or  how  late — a  throne  established  in 
mercy,  and  "  One  shall  be  seated  upon  it  in 
truth,  who  shall  occupy  the  tent  [or, '  liouse '] 
of  David,  as  one  who  judges,  and  seeks 
justice,  and  hastens  on  [the  leign  ofj 
righteousness." 

Ver.  6. — TVe  have  heard  of  the  pride  of 
Uoah.  A  new  section  commences.  Moab 
has  not  accepted  the  offer  of  mercy  made 
in  vers.  1 — 5,  and  is  therefore  denounced 
afresh.  Her  "pride"  prevented  her  from 
renewing  her  subjection  to  the  house  of 
David,  and  therefore  it  is  her  pride  which 
is  specially  condemned.  His  lies  shall  not 
be  so ;  rather,  of  no  worth  are  his  boast- 
ings. The  result  will  not  correspond  with 
them. 

Ver.  7. — Every  one  shall  howl;  rather, 
the  whole  of  it  shall  howl ;  i.e.  the  entire 
nation  collectively  (comp.  Herod.,  viii.  99 ; 
ix.  24).  For  the  foundations  of  Eir-Eareseth 
shall  ye  mourn.  The  word  here  translated 
"foundations"  is  elsewhere  always  ren- 
dered "flagons"  or  "flagons  of  wine" 
(2  Sam.  vi.  19 ;  Cant.  ii.  5 ;  Hos.  iii.  1). 
And  this  rendering  is  more  agreeable  to 
(b«  context  than  "  foondatiouB,"  since  it  is 


the  loss  of  the  products  of  the  soil  which  is 
threatened  in  the  next  three  verses.  "Kir- 
Hareseth"  is  probably  the  same  place  as 
the  "Kir-Moab"  of  ch.  xv.  1.  It  waa  one 
of  the  principal  cities  of  Moab  (see  2  Kings 
iii.  25). 

Ver.  8. — The  fields  of  Heshbon  (see  the 
comment  on  ch.  xv.  4).  The  whole  of  the 
Mishor,  or  Belka,  on  the  edge  of  which 
fles6(f»  •  stands,  is  cultivable  and  capable  of 
producing  good  crops.  The  Moabites  stored 
water  in  reservoirs  (Cant.  vii.  4),  and  made 
their  country  a  garden.  The  vina  of  Sib- 
mah.  "Sibmah"  is  mentioned  in  Numb. 
xxxii.  8  and  Josh.  xiii.  19  among  the 
towns  of  the  Eeubenites.  According  to 
Jerome  ('Comment,  in  Esaiam'),  it  was 
less  than  half  a  mile  distant  from  Heshbon. 
Jeremiah  follows  Isaiah  in  lamenting  the 
destruction  of  its  vines  (Jer.  xlviii.  32).  The 
lords  of  the  heathen  have  broken  down  the 
principal  plants  thereof.  "  The  lords  of 
the  heathen"  are  probably  the  Assyrians, 
who  made  a  practice  of  destroying  the  fruit 
trees  in  an  enemy's  country,  for  the  mere 
purposS  of  doing  mischief  ('Ancient  Mo- 
narchies,' vol.  ii.  p.  84).  It  is  wanton  to 
discard  this  very  satisfactory  sense  for  tlie 
strange  one  that  "the  choice  plants  have 
broken  down — i.e.  made  drunk — the  lords 
of  the  healhen"  (Cheyne).  The  rendering 
of  the  Authorized  Version  is  supported 
by  Gesenius,  Ewald,  Kosenmiiller,  Meier, 
and  Dr.  Kay.  They  are  come  even  nnto 
Jazer;  rather,  they  (the  vines)  reached  to 
Jazer;  i.e.  the  vine  of  Sibmah  was  culti- 
vated as  far  as  Jazer.  Jazer  lay  about 
twelve  miles  north  of  Heshbon,  in  the  ter- 
ritory of  Gad  (Numb,  xxxii.  35).  It  is 
probably  identified  with  Es  Szir,  which  is 
in  the  required  position,  and  retains  a  trace 
of  the  name  (Seetzen,  '  Eeisen,'  vol.  i.  pp. 
397,  398).  They  wandered  through  the 
wilderness ;  rather,  they  strayed  into  the 
wilderness  ;  i.e.  the  cultivation  was  pushed 
eastward  into  the  actual  midbar,  or  desert 
Her  branches  are  stretched  out ;  or,  her  off- 
shoots are  spread  abroad ;  i.e.  the  youiif); 
shoots  or  slips  are  taken  by  the  cultivators 
and  spread  further  and  further.  They  are 
even  carriLd  across  the  Dead-  Sea,  and 
planted  on  its  western  shore.  Mr.  Cheyne 
supposes  the  prophet  to  refer  to  the  "  vine- 
yards of  En-gedi "  (Cant.  L  14). 

Ver.  9. — Therefore  I  will  bewail  (comp. 
ch.  XV.  5,  and  see  the  Homiletics  on  that 
verse).  With  the  weeping  of  Jazer.  "  With 
tears  as  genuine  as  Jazer's  own  "  (Kay).  0 
Heshbon  and  Elealeh  (on  the  close  con- 
nection of  these  two  cities,  see  the  com- 
ment on  ch.  XV.  4).  For  the  shouting,  etc. ; 
rather, /or  on  thy  summer  fruits  and  on  thy 
hanest  a  shouting  is  fallen.  The  "  shout- 
ing"  intended  ia  thai  of  the   inviwiing 


m 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [ch.  xvt.  1— 14 


enemy,  which  replaces  the  ordinary  joy- 
song  of  the  vintagers  (see  ver.  10). 

Ver.  10.— The  plentiful  field;  Hebrew, 
Carmel.  The  word  carmel  seems  to  desig- 
nate "  garden,"  or  "  orchard  ground  "  gene- 
rally, without  reference  to  the  degree  of 
fertility.  It  is  generally  rendered  by  our 
translators  "  fruitful  field,"  which  is  right, 
if  we  regard  "  fruitful "  as  equivalent  to 
"  fruit-producing."  No  singing  ...  no 
shouting.  Those  who  have  heard  the  vin- 
tage-songs in  the  north  of  Italy  and  else- 
where will  appreciate  the  sadness  of  this 
silence.  The  treaders  shall  tread  ont  no 
wine  in  their  presses.  Wine-presses  were 
in  or  near  the  vineyards.  They  consisted 
of  two  vats,  or  two  reservoirs  cut  in  the 
rock,  one  above  the  other,  vrith  a  passage  of 
communication  between  them.  The  grapes 
were  placed  in  the  upper  vat  or  reservoir, 
and  were  crushed  by  the  naked  feet  of  the 
vintagers.  Sometimes  as  many  as  seven 
persons  "  trod  the  wine-press "  together 
(Wilkinson,  '  Ancient  Egyptians,'  vol.  i.  p. 
45).  It  was  usual  for  them  to  sing  as  they 
trod  (Jer.  xxv.  30 ;  xlviii.  33).  I  have 
made  their  vintage  shouting  to  cease.  The 
prophet  is  the  mouthpiece  of  God.  Acci- 
dentally, as  it  were,  he  here  betrays  the 
personality  which  is  behind  him.  It  is  not 
he,  but  God,  who  has  caused  the  invasion 
which  has  reduced  the  vintagers  to  silence. 

Ver.  1 1. — My  bevels  shall  sound  like  an 
harp  for  Moab ;  i.e.  they  shall  vibrate  with 
thrills  of  grief  (Kay). 

Ver.  12. — ^When  it  is  seen  that  Moab  is 
weary;  rather,  when  Modb  ehow$  Mrmdf, 
and  has  wearied  himself.  The  heathen 
"  thought  to  be  heard  for  their  much  speak- 
ing" (Matt.  vi.  7).  They  endeavoured  to 
weary  their  gods  into  granting  their  prayers 
(1  Kings  xviii.  26),  and  frequently  suc- 
ceeded in  wearying  themselves.  On  the 
high  place.  "  High  places  "  (bamSth')  were 
common  to  the  Moabites,  with  the  other 
cations  of  Syria  and  Palestine.    Mesha,  in 


his  inscription,  speaks  of  having  rebuilt  a 
city  called  "Beth-Bamoth  "  (1.  27),  which 
must  have  been  a  "  city  of  high  places ; " 
and  he  even  calls  the  etSU  which  he  dedi- 
cates to  Chemosh,  whereon  his  inscription 
is  written,  a  lamah,  or  "  high  place." 
That  he  shall  come  to  his  sanctuary  .  .  .  but 
he  shall  not,  etc. ;  rather,  and  has  come  into 
his  sanctuary,  that  he  shall  not  prevail. 

Ver.  13. — This  is  the  word,  eto.  The 
third  and  concluding  section  begins  hero. 
This  prophecy,  Isaiah  says,  is  one,  not  now 
delivered  for  the  first  time,  but  existent 
previously.  How  long  previously,  he  leaves 
quite  vague. 

Ver.  14. — But  now.  "  Now '' — an  addition 
has  been  made  to  the  prophecy.  Isaiah  is 
authorized  to  announce  that  in  three  years' 
time,  counted  as  strictly  as  possible,  the 
judgment  pronounced  shall  fall  on  Moab; 
her  "glory"  shall  be  turned  into  shame, 
her  "  multitude  "  shall  be  cut  off,  and  only 
a  "  remnant "  shall  be  left,  weak,  small,  and 
powerless.  As  the  years  of  an  hireling 
Counted  with  the  utmost  exactness.  A. 
hireling  would  not  consent  to  serve  a  day 
longer  than  his  contract  bound  him,  nor 
would  his  master  consent  that  he  should 
serve  a  day  short  of  it.  With  all  that  great 
multitude.  We  have  no  means  of  accurately 
estimating  the  population  of  Moab.  The 
entire  area  of  the  region  which  the  Moabites 
inhabited  seems  to  have  been  not  more 
than  fifteen  hundred  square  miles.  The 
greater  part  of  it  was,  however,  exceed- 
ingly fertile ;  and  we  are,  perhaps,  justified 
in  allowing  it  a  population  of  two  hundred 
to  the  square  mile,  which  is  about  that  of 
Germany.  This  would  give  three  hundred 
thousand  inhabitants,  of  whom  the  adult 
males  would  be  seventy-five  thousand. 
Feeble;  literally,  not  powerftd  ;  i.e.  very 
much  the  contrary,  very  weak.  Moab  seems 
to  have  offered  a  very  slight  resistance  to 
Asshur-bani-pal  (G.  Smith,  'History  of 
Asshur-bani-pal,'  p.  259^ 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1-— 5. — God's  offer  of  meroy  to  the  sinner.  Scarcely  ever  does  Grod  punish  sin 
Dy  a  sudden  unannounced  visitation,  or  without  previous  warning  to  the  sinner  of 
vphat  is  coining  upon  him.  And  this  warning  is  almost  always  accompanied  by  an 
offer  of  mercy.  God  has  "  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth  "  (Ezek.  xviii.  32) ; 
he  "  would  not  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance  "  (2  Pet. 
ill.  9).  And  therefore  "he  warns  men.  He  vrarned  even  the  ungodly  world  before  the 
Flood  by  the  preaching  of  Noah ;  he  warned  the  Ninevites  by  Jonah  ;  he  now  warned 
the  Moabites  by  Isaiah ;  be  warned  the  Jews  of  later  times  by  John  the  Baptist,  by 
his  Son,  by  the  apostles.  And  all  equally  in  vain.  How  often  do  we  not  see  in  cases 
of  this  kind — 

1.  Thb  OFrBE  MADK.  Sometimes  by  an  inward  awakening  of  the  conscience,  more 
»ften  by  preaching  or  teaching  from  without,  the  sinner  is  startled,  alarmed,  made  to 
Me  his  sin  knd  feel  his  danger.    Mercy  is  offered  to  him,  if  be  will  repent  and  amend , 


OE.  IVL  1— 14.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  rEOPHET  ISAIAH.  279 


a  course  of  conduct  is  placed  before  him  by  which  he  may  recover  himself.  But  the 
course  is  unpleasing;  it  involves  pain  and  trouble.  Pride  has  to  be  humbled  in  the 
dust,  confession  and  restitution  have  to  be  made,  pet  sins  have  to  be  surrendered, 
self-denial  has  to  be  attempted,  often  the  whole  course  of  the  life  hitherto  lived  has  to 
be  altered,  and  a  new  departure  made  from  a  new  beginning.  To  the  natural  man  this 
seems  hard,  as  to  Moab  the  resumption  of  a  tributary  position  ;  it  seems  intolerable, 
impossibls,  not  to  be  thought  of.  And,  after  a  longer  or  a  shorter  struggle,  the  secomi 
stage  is  reached — 

II.  The  offer  spurned.  The  sinner  desires  mercy  and  forgiveness,  but  he  wUl  not 
gonsent  to  pay  the  price.  Immediate  sufi'uring,  though  not  of  any  great  severity,  seems 
harder  to  bear  than  the  prospect  of  future  intense  suffering.  Or  perhaps  lie  flatters 
himself  that  the  future  suffrring  may  be  escaped.  He  thinks  tliat  he  may  repent  later ; 
or  he  doubts  whether  God  will  punish  so  severely  as  he  has  threatened ;  or  he  even 
doubts  whether  there  is  any  G-od  at  all.  On  one  ground  or  another  he  spuins  the  offer 
made  him — puts  it  aside,  ceases  to  think  of  it,  practically  rejects  it.  And  then  comes 
the  final  result. — 

III.  The  sptJBNiNO  of  the  offer  pjnished.  Punishment  may  be  in  this  life  or  in 
the  next.  That  of  nations  must  be  in  this  life ;  that  of  indiv  iduals  may  be  in  either,  or 
in  both.  Usually — ^it  is  in  both.  Our  sin  finds  us  out.  Unpleasant  physical  con- 
sequences follow  upon  most  sinful  indulgences.  Others  bring  loss  of  character  and  of 
men's  respect.  Others,  again,  lead  to  poverty  and  earthly  ruin.  .AH  are  liable  to  be 
followed  by  never-ending  regret  and  remorse,  feelings  as  painful  as  any  known  to  man. 
Furthw,  the  consciousness  of  ill  desert  cannot  but  arouse  a  fear  of  judgment  to  come — 
a  fear  which,  as  death  approaches,  becomes  often  a  constant  agonizing  dread.  To  all 
this  has  to  be  added  the  punishment  that  in  another  world  awaits  those  who  have 
spumed  God's  offers  in  this — punishment  shadowed  out  to  us  in  Scripture  under  the 
images  of  the  " undying  worm,"  and  the  "fire  that. never  shall  be  quenched."  It  is 
svurely  worth  while  for  sinners  to  ask  themselves  whether  the  enjoyment  which  they 
derive  from  their  sins  is  really  of  sufficient  value  to  them  to  compensate  for  all  this 
weight  of  after  suffering.  Would  they  not  act  more  prudently,  as  well  as  more  virtuously, 
if  they  accepted  God's  offer  of  mercy  as  soon  as  it  is  placed  before  them,  and  forsook 
their  sins  at  once,  and  repented  and  turned  to  God  ? 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  King  in  Zion.  "  I  have  set  my  King  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion '' 
(Ps.  ii.).  The  destined  Buler  of  the  world,  he  shall  spread  the  wing  of  his  mild  govern- 
ment and  protection  over  the  nations  in  their  harassment  and  despair,  as  now  over 
Moab. 

L  The  call  to  the  fugitives.  They  have  fled  into  Edom,  as  far  as  to  Petra,  near 
Mount  Hor.  It  was  a  region  surrounded  by  rocky  cliffs.  Sela  itself  means  rock  or 
cliff.  Between  Petra — whose  ruins  the  Arab  guide  of  Seetzen  said  he  must  weep  over 
every  time  he  saw  them — and  Jerusalem  lies  a  desert,  through  which  the  tribute  flocks 
must  pass.  1.  Demand  of  tribute.  "  Send  ye  the  lambs  of  the  prince  of  the  land  from 
Seltl  desert-wards  to  the  mount  of  the  daughter  of  Zion."  In  ibrmer  days  Mesha,  the 
King  of  Moab,  was  said  to  be  a  "  sheep-master,"  and  he  rendered  a  yearly  tribute  of  a 
hundred  thousand  lambs,  and  a  hundred  thousand  rams,  with  the  wool,  to  the  King 
of  Israel  till  the  death  of  Ahab  (2  Kings  iii.  4).  What  was  then  sent  to  Samaria  must 
now  be  sent  to  Jerusalem.  Under  the  form  of  this  demand  is  signified  an  appeal  to  the 
people  of  Moab  to  submit  to  the  house  of  David  as  their  only  hope  of  safety.  Spiritu- 
ally, the  appeal  may  be  construed  as  the  call  to  nations  and  to  men  to  submit  to  the 
spiritual  rule  of  the  Messiah,  as  anointed  King  and  Saviour  of  the  world.  2.  Effect  oj 
the  tummons.  The  "daughters"  of  Moab,  i.e.  its  cities  and  villages,  are  seen  in 
commotion.  They  flutter  about,  like  birds  driven  from  their  nests,  at  the  fords  of  the 
Arnon,  Moab's  chief  river.  The  first  effect  of  the  "long-drawn  trumpet  blast"  is  fear 
and  agitation.  The  name  of  Judah  is  a  spell  of  terror ;.  the  hand  of  Jehovah  is  felt  to 
be  held  out  and  to  be  shaken  in  menace  over  the  nations,  and  they  become  like 
women  (cfi  ch.  zix.  16).    He  demands  of  their  flocks  and  their  merchandise.    Will  thev 


280  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  xvi.  1— 14 

obey?  In  obeclience  only  will  be  tbeir  salvation.  Will  these  trembling  fugitives, 
seeking  escape  on  the  banks  of  Amon,  hear  the  timely  voice  of  counsel?  How  readily 
do  these  historical  pictures  suggest  a  spiritual  application  1  The  first  impression  of  the 
Divine  voice  is  that  of  fear ;  next  there  is  hesitation ;  next  the  critical  choice,  accept- 
ance of  the  Divine  offers,  or  recalcitrat'on  and  refusal.  The  merciful  God,  the  Saviour 
of  men,  would  gather  us  fugitives  from  the  world's  troubles  to  his  arms.  Shall  we  run 
to  him  as  a  strong  Tower  and  be  safe,  or  seek  by  perilous  paths  another  course,  only  to 
rush  upon  fresh  woes  ?    "  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts." 

n.  The  reply  of  Moab.  1.  They  appeal  to  Zion  for  counsel  and  arhitrameni. 
The  pov\eiful  neighbour  and  suzerain  is  asked  to  intervene  between  the  contending 
parties  as  an  umpire,  so  that  the  unjustly  oppressed  may  be  snccoMiod.  And  here  is 
a  sublime  image  of  the  Judge  and  Piotector.  May  he  be  "a  shadow  like  night  at  high 
moon."  In  our  cold  northein  clime  our  poets  chiefly  borrow  imaj;es  from  the  wintry 
season  to  represent  distress.  We  speak  of  the  wintry  frost  of  calamiiy,  the  cruel  wind, 
the  snows  of  adversity,  ef«.  Not  so  the  Hebrew  ;  to  him  the  hot  season  is  typical  of 
all  that  is  most  cruel  in  physical  or  mental  suffering.  Hence,  by  opposition,  the 
shadow  of  the  great  rock, -or  the  shadow  deep  as  niglit,  remind  of  all  that  is  most 
grateful  in  deliverance  and  repose.  Of  a  great  man  it  is  proverbially  said,  in  the  East, 
"  Like  the  sun,  he  warmed  in  the  cold,  and  when  Siiius  shone,  then  was  he  coolness 
and  shade."  And  in  the  Sunna  seven  classes  of  good  men  are  enumerated,  whom 
"the  Lord  will  overshadow  with  his  shade,  when  no  shade  will  be  like  his"  (of.  ch. 
XXX.  2,  3 ;  xxxii.  2).  So  may  the  outcasts  be  hidden,  the  wanderers  faithfully  pro- 
tected, and  Zion  throw  her  aegis  over  the  land  of  Moab,  and  guard  it  from  the  spoiler. 
2.  They  extol  the  government  of  Judah.  "  Oppression  has  ceased,  the  spoiling'  is  at 
end,  the  tormentors  have  vanished  from  the  land."  We  see  what  good  administration 
is  in  the  light  of  the  bitter  experience  of  tyranny  and  its  attendant  evils.  Notice  the 
strong  images  of  harsh  rule :  pressure,  applied  so  as  to  piess  out  the  marrow  from  the 
boD88  of  the  people,  as  it  were ;  preying  and  spoiling  (cf.  ch.  x.  6) ;  trampling  and 
treading  down  of  the  multitude  of  the  poor.  These  tyrants  exhibit  all  "  the  proud 
man's  scorn,  the  oppressor's  contumely."  Iniquity  is  their  pastime,  their  game.  They 
"watch  for  it,  they  lay  snares  and  gins  for  good  men,  as  the  hnnter  does  for  wild  beasts. 
The  liberty  of  speech  is  denied,  and  men  are  made  offeuders  for  a  word "  (ch.  xxix. 
20,  21).  They  are  faithless  to  the  faithful,  they  break  treaties,  they  despise  cities, 
they  regard  no  man  (ch.  xxxi.  1,  8).  Nature  seems  to  mourn  beneath  the  infliction,  and 
society  and  commerce  languish.  The  highways  are  deseited  of  the  merchant  and  the 
traveller.  The  glories  of  Lebanon,  the  loveliness  of  Sharon,  the  fruitful  glade*  of 
Bashan  and  Carmel,  are  dishonoured,  and  seen  to  weep  in  sympathy  with  man.  Is 
there  a  more  odious  offence  on  God's  earth  than  the  tyrant — than  despotism  and  all  its 
horrible  selfishness?  "Man's  inhumanity  to  man  makes  countless  myriads  mourn." 
But  these  things  have  passed,  are  passing,  or  shall  pass  away.  A  new  era  dawns  with 
the  establishment  of  the  throne  of  David.  This  throne  is  symbolic  of:  (1)  Grace,  or  gra- 
ciousness.  The  word  stands  for  all  that  is  good  in  principle,  benevolent  in  purpose,  benign 
and  healing  in  administrative  effort.  No  king  truly  rules  except  Dei  gratia,  by  the 
favour  of  God,  nor  is  kingly  unless  he  illustrates  the  benignant  spirit  of  the  Divine 
rule.  (2)  Faithfulness,  or  truth.  He  is  the  extreme  opposite  to  those  treacherous 
covenant-breakers,  who  have  made  tyranny  odious  and  contemptible.  His  words  are 
kingly  because  true,  and  the  expression  of  a  truthful  character.  The  character  of  the 
liar  and  the  hypocrite  sullies  the  crown  more  than  any  blot.  (3)  Justice.  "A  judge 
both  seeking  right  and  expert  in  justice."  A  burning  zeal  in  his  temper  for  the  right, 
and  the  habit  of  making  it  prevad.  Such  are  the  signs  of  Messianic  times — the  dawn 
of  God's  kingdom  upon  earth.  The  tent  of  David  which  had  fallen  and  been  ruined  is 
indeed  raised  up  agam,  and  built  as  in  the  days  of  old  (Amos  ix.  11).  And  it  shelters 
a  king  in  whom  the  ideal  of  Jehovah  is  realized. 

III.  Ebbukb  of  Moab.  It  seems  best  to  take  what  follows  as  the  utterance  of  the 
prophet,  pursuing  the  thread  of  meditation.  We  have  heard  what  Moab  miijht  have 
said,  and  should  have  said;  but  alas!  her  accustomed  pride  and  haughtiness  will  be  her 
bane.  Her  insolence  and  insincerity  are  also  stigmatized,  as  in  Jer.  xlviii.  30,  31, 
"  I  know  Mfe  wrath,  saith  the  Lord  j  but  it  shall  not  be  so ;  his  lies  shall  not  effect  it. 
Therefore  I  will  howl  for  Moab,  and  will  cry^out  for  all  Moab;  my  heart  shall  mount 


OH.  XVI.  1—14.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  28] 

for  the  men  of  Kir-Heres."  Some  take  the  words  as  given  from  the  throne  in  reply. 
"  If  Moab  continues  to  show  so  little  penitence,  it  cannot  be  assisted ;  and  therefon 
the  prophet,  however  it  grieves  him,  must  leave  Moab  to  her  further  chastisements " 
(Ewald).  It  seems  intended  that  we  should  look  upon  Moab's  language  here  as  insin- 
cere, and  therefore  unacceptable.  We  may  remind  om-selves  of  the  spiritual  lesson, 
"  God  draws  near  to  the  lowly,  but  recognizes  the  proud  afar  off."  It  is  pride  which 
keeps  us  aloof  from  blessings  that  might  be  had  by  stooping ;  it  is  pride  which  makes 
us  blind  to  opportunity,  insensible  to  the  bitter  lessons  of  experience,  and  lays  us  open 
to  further  chastisements. — J. 

Vers.  7 — 14. — Lament  over  Moah.  I.  Moab's  SBLr-LAMEKTATiON.  "  Moab  will  wail 
for  Moab;  everything  will  wail."  In  her  misery  and  distress,  she  reflects  on  her 
beauty.  A  fair  land  is  like  a  fair  maiden,  and  her  desolation  excites  the  like  poignant 
self-pity.  "  I  know  not  a  greater  grief,"  said  Dante,  "  than  to  recall  the  happy  time  in 
the  midst  of  distress."  The  picture  of  MoaVs  former  happiness.  The  vineyard  and  all 
its  gladdening  associations  represent  the  endearing  chaims  of  the  land.  These  are  no 
more  to  be  enjoyed  in  the  smitten  and  drooping  fields  of  Kir-Hareseth  and  Heshbon. 
Once  a  splendid  vine  threw  its  noble  branches  and  its  trailing  shoots  far  over  the 
borders  of  the  land  to  the  north,  to  Jazer,  near  the  Dead  Sea.  The  lords  of  the 
heathen  have  beaten  it  down. 

II.  The  pkophet's  sympathy  with  the  lament.  He,  too,  will  bewail  the  noble 
vine  of  Sibmah ;  he  will  water  Heshbon  and  Elealeh  with  his  tears,  as  he  thinks  of  the 
wild  uproar  that  fell  upon  the  midst  of  the  harvest  of  fruit  and  corn.  In  the  irony  of 
grief  he  uses  a  figure  of  speech  very  expressive.  The  hedad  was  the  shout  raised  by  the 
treaders  of  the  grapes.  It  was  a  mighty  heaven -rending  cry,  giving  forth  in  full  volume 
the  joy  and  thankfulness  of  the  rustic  heart  of  the  tillers  (of.  Jer.  xxv.  30).  There  was 
another  shout  of  different  import,  one  that  fell  like  a  knell  upon  the  ear — the  yell  of  a 
swarming  host  of  invaders,  of  Jer.  li.  14,  bursting  in  upon  the  summer  fruits  and  the 
vintage  (Jer.  xlviii.  32).  Then,  instead  of  the  rich  flow  of  the  trodden  gra]ie,  there  will 
be  "  the  red  rain  that  makes  the  battle-harvest  grow."  The  silence  of  desolation  succeeds 
to  the  sounds  of  rejoicing.  There  is  a  silence  "  more  dreadful  than  severest  sounds." 
It  is  the  silence  of  scenes  once  thronged  with  life,  and  resounding  with  cheerfol  songs 
knd  cries.    The  prophet,  as  he  muses,  finds 

•*  Eemembranoe  wake  with  all  her  busy  train, 
Swell  at  his  heart  and  turn  the  past  to  pain." 

Joy  and  exultation  is  withdrawn  from  the  fruit-fields,  and  in  the  vineyards  there  is  no 
jubilation  or  shouting ;  no  treader  treads  wine  in  the  presses,  and  the  shout  of  the 
vintagers  is  at  end. 

"The  sounds  of  population  fail; 

No  cheerful  murmurs  fluctuate  in  the  gale.  .  .  . 

Thy  sports  are  fled,  and  all  thy  charms  withdrawal 

Amiilst  thy  bowers  the  tyrant's  hand  is  seen. 

And  desolation  saddens  all  thy  green." 

The  prophet's  inmost  heart  is  touched,  his  feelings  vibrate  like  the  strings  of  a  hari, 
at  the  sound  of  Moab's  woes.  In  like  manner  Jeremiah  compares  his  heart  to  the 
flute.  The  poet  and  the  prophet  are  indeed  organs  of  the  world's  soriows.  And  indeed 
these  sorrows  turn  to  music  even  at  the  worst,  when  interpreted  by  the  heart  of  him 
who  is  in  sympathy  with  the  universal  and  eternal  love.  They  are  "tears  most 
sacred"  which  are  "shed  for  others'  pain,"  and  athwart  them  the  rainbow  of  hope 
seldom  fails  to  glimmer.    So  here. 

III.  A  GLIMPSE  OF  hope.  He  sorrows  over  Moab,  because  Moab  does  not  know  the 
living  God.  But  "  when  Moab,  in  the  pressure  of  the  further  calamities  of  the  future, 
again  appears,  as  now  in  his  idol-temple,  or  wearies  himself,  vainly  wringing  his  hands, 
and  in  utter  despair,  then  he  will  be  ashamed  of  his  god  Chemosh,  and  learn  true 
humility  in  Jehovah."  So  Ewald,  who  thinks  that  the  last  words,  necessary  to  com- 
plete the  sense,  have  been  lost.  Like  the  priests  of  Baal  calling  upon  their  god  from 
morning  to  noon,  and  saying,  "0  Baal,  hear  us  I "  and  when  there  was  no  voice,  nor  uy 


282  THE  BOOK  OF    THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  xvi.  1— W. 

that  answered,  leaping  upon  the  altar,  crying  and  gashing  themselves  with  knives, 
so  will  the  Moahites,  in  the  extremity  of  their  despair,  appeal  to  Chemosh.  What  is 
more  sad  in  the  life  of  superstition  than  this  passionate  resort  to  any  means,  however 
irrational,  to  wring  a  favour  from  the  deities  of  special  shrines  and  sanctuaries  ?  As  if 
the  true  help  were  not  ever  near ;  as  if,  that  heing  neglected,  there  could  be  hope  else- 
where !  Calvin  ohserves,  "  While  idolaters  have  their  ordinary  temples  and  places  of 
worship,  if  any  uncommon  calamity  befalls  them,  they  iio  to  another  temple  more 
sacred  than  the  rest,  expecting  that  there  they  will  be  more  abundantly  favoured  with  the 
presence  of  their  god.  In  like  manner,  the  Papists  of  the  present  day,  when  they  are 
reduced  to  any  uncommon  danger  (for  this  fault  has  existed  in  all  ages),  think  that  they 
will  more  readily  .obtain  their  wish  by  running  to  St.  Claude,  or  to  Mary  of  Loretto,  or 
to  any  other  celebrated  idol,  than  if  they  assembled  in  some  neighbourinj;  church.  They 
resolve  that  their  extraordinary  prayers  shall  be  offered  up  in  a  church  at  a  great  dis- 
tance. It  is  in  this  sense  that  the  prophet  applies  the  term  sanctuary  to  that  most 
highly  celebrated  among  the  Moahites,  and  says  they  will  go  to  it  without  any  a/lvan- 
tage."  One  cannot  help  thinking  of  those  melancholy  pilgrimages  to  Lourdes,  that 
focus  of  superstition  in  our  own  times.  So  do  men  continue  to  hew  out  to  theto  solves 
cisterns  that  hold  no  water ;  and  so  necessary  still  is  the  living  word  of  prophecy,  to 
remind  the  world  that  only  in  a  genuine  spiritual  relation  to  the  Eternal,  only  in  a  faith 
and  worship  which  is  independent  of  place,  because  ever  fixed  in  the  heart,  a&n  true 
comfort  and  help  be  found. 

IV.  Ratification  of  the  peopheot.  It  is  the  word  spoken  long  ago  by  Jehovah 
concerning  Moab.  And  now  he  speaks  to  solemn  effect,  that  in  three  yfars,  like  the 
years  of  a  hireling,  the  glory  of  Moab  will  be  disgraced,  together  with  all  the  multitude 
of  the  great;  only  a  very  small  remnant  will  be  left.  The  days  or  ypjrs  of  the  day- 
labourer  or  hireling,  are  those  strictly  measured,  neither  more  nor  less  (so  in  ch..xxi.  16 ; 
cf.  XX.  3).  "Of  working  time  the  hirer  remits  nothing,  and  the  labouujr  give*  nothing 
in."  The  statement  is  to  be  taken  in  its  exactness.  As  the  labourer  knows  that  his 
time  is  appointed,  and  may  look  for  an  end  of  his  toil  when  the  shadow  comes  (Job  vii. 
I,  2),  as  life  itself  must  surely  come  to  its  close  (Job  xiy.  6),  so  with  the  long-suffering 
of  God,  so  with  the  iniquity  of  nations  and  men,  so  with  every  abuse  and  oppression ; 
nay,  ao  with  every  nation  and  institution. 

"  They  have  their  day  and  cease  to  be  ; 
But  thou,  O  Lord,  art  more  than  they," 

"  After  the  lapse  of  almost  three  thousand  years,"  says  Barnes,  "  every  successive  tra- 
veller who  visits  Moab,  Idumaja,  or  Palestine,  does  something  to  confirm  the  accuracy 
of  Isaiah.  Towns  bearing  the  same  name,  or  the  ruins  of  towns,  are  located  in  the 
same  relative  position  he  said  they  were ;  and  the  ruins  of  once  splendid  cities,  broken 
columns,  dilapidated  walls,  trodden-down  vineyards,  half-demolished  temples,  and  fraa;- 
ments  broken  and  consumed  by  time,  proclaim  to  the  world  that  those  cities  are 
what  he  said  they  would  be,  and  that  he  was  under  the  inspiration  of  God."  And 
how  powerfully  come  back  to  us  from,  such  scenes  those  "  truths  which  wake,  to  perish 
never  I  "  Amidst  the  gloom  the  word  of  prophecy  shines  as  a  light  in  a  dark  place. 
Its  voice  prevails  over  time ;  imparts  warmth  to  the  heart  amidst  the  rigours  of  Provi- 
dence ;  calls  to  mind  with  its  persuasive  strain  long-slighted  truths ;  teaches  that  while 

"  Trade's  proud  empire  hastes  to  swift  decay. 
As  oceans  sweep  the  labour'd  mole  away," 

the  state  or  the  individual  that  is  possessed  of  moral  strength  may  be  blessed  in 
poverty ;  that  there  is  a  good  which  is  not  dependent  on  the  fertility  of  a  land,  or  the 
strength  of  its  fortresses — which  will  survive  the  desolation  of  its  fields,  the  downfall  of 
its  kings,  the  overthrow  of  its  idols.— J. 

Ver.  10. — A  harvest  failure.  "  I  have  made  their  vintage  shouting  to  cease." 
Why  ?  Because  the  harvest  is  fallen.  In  the  vineyards  there  is  no  shouting,  for 
all  the  fruits  are  blighted  and  withered.  Th'is  is  it  with  every  harvest  which  is  evil. 
Men  expect  much,  and  lo  1  it  often  comes  to  nothing.  The  glory  departs  if  Qod  is 
furgotten. 


OH.  rvi,  1—14.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THii  PROfHET  ISAIAH.  283 

I.  We  live  for  the  future.  Pew  live  in  the  present  hour  alone.  Some  amass 
property,  looking  forward  to  days  of  retirement  and  ease ;  some  go  to  far-away  fields 
of  war  to  gather  the  laurels  of  victory,  and  to  win  what  the  world  calls  fame ;  and  some 
seek  stores  of  intellectual  wealth,  so  as  to  secure  the  far-off  coronet  of  scholarship  and 
learned  renown.  But  the  harvest  fails.  Jealousy  and  envy  do  their  work ;  and  th« 
ambassador  is  recalled,  or  the  mind  becomes  feeble ;  through  weariness  or  weakness  the 
anticipated  victory  becomes  a  defeat.  Scjmehow  or  other,  either  through  events  with- 
out or  experience  within,  when  God  does  not  live  in  the  heart  and  his  glory  is  for- 
gotten, the  vintage  fails. 

II.  We  look  fob  joy  in  hakvest.  That  is  the  time  for  music  and  joy,  or,  as  the 
prophet  says,  for  singing  and  shouting.  It  is  a  time  of  stretched-out  branches  and  purple 
groves.  And  God  intended  us  to  have  joy  in  harvest.  All  innocent  pursuits  end  in 
blessing,  if  we  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness.  But  if  not,  then  there 
is  dulness  and  <iloom  and  failure ;  for  the  Lord  of  harvest  is  not  there.  The  vintage  fails, 
because  he  is  the  true  Vine,  and  we  are  the  branches,  and  every  branch  separated  from 
him  is  cut  down  and  withered. 

III.  Wb  look  fob  fbuit  as  well  as  leafage.  That  is  a  remarkable  sentence, 
"  The  treaders  shall  tread  out  no  wine  in  their  presses."  Nothing  but  leaves !  What  • 
significant  sentence  1  Everything  seemed  to  promise  well.  There  \\'as  the  tender  green 
of  spring  and  the  rich  foliage  of  summer,  but  no  blossoms  hide  under  the  luxuriant  foliage, 
So  it  is  with  all  mere  convictions  and  resolves,  with  all  passing  sensations  and  excited 
feelings.  We  need  ever  to  remember  that  the  end  of  religion  is  fniit.  Fruitful  service, 
fruitful  sacrifice.  And  without  these,  whatever  else  there  be,  the  vintage  fails. — 
W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  wisdom,  of  the  weaker.  The  prophet  counsels  Moab  to  "  make 
submission  meet "  to  Judah  (ver.  1),  and  to  show  her  such  kindness  in  the  day  of  her 
distress  (vers.  3,  4)  as  will  be  remembered  in  the  day  when  prosperity  and  power  will 
be  again  her  portion. 

I.  The  WISDOM  op  the  weaker  community.  1.  Submission  to  the  greater  power  under 
its  lawful  claim.  "  Send  ye  the  lamb  to  the  ruler  of  the  land  " — pay  the  tribute  which 
is  due,  and  which  will  be  accepted  as  an  offering  appropriate  for  the  weaker  to  present 
and  for  the  stronger  to  claim.  In  those  days  it  was  generally  acknowledged  that 
"might  was  right,"  and  that  the  stronger  potentate  might  properly  exact  tribute  from 
the  weaker,  rendering  a  certain  protectorate  in  return.  Even  in  these  days,  when 
there  have  been  happily  established  some  ideas  of  international  righteousness,  it  is 
generally  acknowledged  that  a  strong  nation  cannot  afford  to  have  a  small  province 
in  its  immediate  neighbourhood  in  a  condition  of  absolute  independence  of  it.  It 
considers  that  it  has  a  right  to  claim  its  submission,  receiving  protection  in  return.  It 
is  undoubtedly  the  wisdom  of  the  weaker  community,  in  every  realm,  to  submit  itself 
to  the  stronger,  to  make  terms  with  it,  to  give  what  it  demands  and  acceiit  what  it 
ofiferg.  2.  Kindness  to  the  greater  power  in  the  day  of  its  trial.  (Vers.  3,  4.)  A  short- 
sighted policy  would  advise  rebellion,  would  recommend  that  the  hour  of  its 
neighbour's  depression  should  be  used  to  strike  a  mortal  blow  and  throw  off  the 
yoke ;  but  very  often  a  deeper  wisdom  and  a  truer  sagacity  will  perceive  that  the 
strong  power  will  bend,  hut  cannot  be  broken — that  the  day  will  come  (ver.  4)  when 
it  will  shake  off  its  oppressors  and  regain  its  supremacy,  and  that,  therefore,  the  right 
course  to  pursue  is  to  render  every  possible  kindness  in  its  dark  and  distressing  hour, 
being  a  shadow  from  the  heat,  a  refuge  for  the  outcast,  a  home  for  the  exile.  Be  quite 
sure  that  your  rival  or  your  enemy  is  attacked  with  a  mortal  sickness  before  you  defy 
him,  even  on  the  low  ground  of  policy ;  on  the  higher  ground  of  rectitude,  render  aid  to 
the  nobler  power  when  it  is  stricken  down,  and  your  magnanimity  shall  not  be  forgotten 
in  the  day  of  its  revival. 

IL  The  wisdom  of  the  weaker  mak.  This  corresponds  closely  with  that  of  the 
community.  1.  Meet  at  once  every  claim  that  is  honestly  preferred.  It  is,  no  doubt, 
right  to  resist  claims  that  are  unjustly  made.  The  judge,  the  magistrate,  is  an 
authority  ordained  of  God,  and  to  his  tribunal  we  may  appeal.  But  if  we  cannot  dis- 
pute a  claim  that  is  made,  we  do  well  to  "  send  the  lamb,"  to  pay  the  tribute  at  once. 
Otherwise  we  open  the  sluices  through  which   many  waters  of  suffering  will  flow  in 


284  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PRi^PHBT  ISAIAH,      [oh.  xvt  1--11 

upon  us  (soe  M.itt.  v.  25).  2.'  G'ajre  the  favour  of  the  strong  in  the  day  of  her  distreis. 
A  foolish  mail  will  rejoice  over  the  great  wlieu  he  falls — will  say,  "  He  is  becum* 
one  of  ourselves,"  and  will  treat  him  with  indignity.  A  wi^e  man  will  only  welconit 
such  a  day  of  discomfiture  because  it  enables  him  to  offer  succour  to  the  unfortunate,  tc 
open  wide  the  door  of  his  hospitality,  to  be  a  shadow  from  the  heat  to  him  on  whom 
the  scorching  rays  are  falling;  and  the  time  will  come  when  he  who  is  thus  helped  will 
be  able  to  offer  welcome  recompense,  and  in  return  for  the  temporary  shelter  will 
"  leceive  to  everlasting  habitations"  (Luke  xvi.  9). 

III.  The  wisdom  of  the  human  soul  in  its  helation  to  Christ.  This  is :  1.  Ta 
meet  hia  righteous  claim;  not,  indeed,  to  send  a  lamb  to  Zion,  as  in  ancient  days,  for 
such  oflui  ings  he  nsks  not  of  us.  "  The  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken  spirit."  Humility 
of  heart ;  faith  in  the  Son  of  God,  the  Divine  Kedeemer ;  the  presentation  of  our  heart 
and  life  to  his  holy  service ;  the  offering  of  the  obedient  and  submissive  spirit ; — this 
is  the  tribute  to  bring  to  his  feet.  And  also :  2.  To  show  kindness  to  his  people.  Our 
Lord  is  urgent  with  us  that  we  should  show  kindness  to  all  them  that  hear  his  Name, 
especially  to  the  weak,  the  poor,  and  the  despised,  the  downcast  and  the  outcast,  the 
"  little  ones  "  of  his  flock.  Any  deed  of  love  we  may  do  for  any  one  of  them  will 
be  accounted  as  an  act  of  kindness  shown  direct  to  the  Lord  himself  (Matt.  xxr. 
34— 40).— 0. 

Ver.  5. —  Tlie  foundations  of  power.  On  what  foundation  does  power  rest?  What 
will  secure  it  to  those  who  have  gained  it,  or  into  whose  hands  it  falls  ?  We  look 
at  the  foundations  of — 

I.  Human  sovebeiqntt.  The  throne  of  Judah  was  to  be  restored,  and  it  should  be 
"  established  in  mercy  "  or  benignity.  He  that  sat  upon  it  should  "  sit  in  truth," 
"judging  and  seeking  judgment,  and  hasting  righteousness;"  i.e.  engaied  in  the 
administration  of  justice,  endeavouring  to  act  justly,  and  acting,  not  with  a  troublesome 
delay,  but  with  an  appreciable  promptitude.  These  are  the  two  foundations  on  which 
sovereignty  rests  everywhere  and  always — lenignity  and  justice.  The  throne  may  rely 
on  centuries  of  unchallenged  rule,  may  be  fortified  by  venerable  tradition  and  ancient 
laws,  may  be  guarded  by  many  thousands  of  muskets ;  but  it  does  not  stand  on  any 
secure  basis,  it  is  certain  to  be  ultimately  overthrown,  if  it  is  unjust  in  enactment 
or  harsh  in  execution.  Righteousness,  justice  between  man  and  man,  between  class 
and  class,  between  sect  and  sect — a  broad  and  unbroken  impartiality ;  this  great  virtue, 
and  its  most  excellent  handmaid,  benignity — kindness  in  manner,  sympathy  shown 
to  the  unfortunate,  consideration  for  the  poor  and  unbefriended ; — these  are  the  pillars 
on  which  alone  human  sovereignty  will  be  secure.  It  has  been  well  said  by  an  English 
statesman  that  "justice  and  mercy  are  the  supren^e  attributes  of  Deity,  but  all  men 
everywhere  comprehend  them ;  there  is  no  speech  nor  language  in  which  their  voice 
is  not  heard,  and  they  cannot  be  vainly  exercised  "  with  the  millions  of  mankind. 

II.  The  eule  of  Christ.  Jesus  Christ  claims  to  be  Sovereign  of  the  world.  "  Thou 
art  a  King,  then  ?  "  said  the  astonished  procurator.  "  Thou  sayest  that  I  am  a  King," 
replied  the  Son  of  man.  And  his  word  has  been  justified  by  the  event,  for  he  is 
ruling  now  over  vast  multitudes  of  human  souls.  On  what  does  his  power  rest  ?  On 
these  foundations — righteousness  and  mercy.  1.  He,  the  Lord  of  truth,  of  holiness,  of 
love,  has  a  right  to  the  homage  of  our  minds,  to  the  assent  of  our  conscience,  to  the 
unmeasured  gratitude  and  devoted  love  of  our  hearts.  2.  He,  who  is  full  of  kindness, 
of  forbearance,  of  tenderness,  of  beneficent  bestowal  and  gracious  purpose, — he  will 
continue  to  reign  over  those  who  have  willingly  bowed  beneath  his  spiritual  away.  "  In 
mercy  shall"  hii  "thione  be  established." 

III.  Individual  influbncb.  Men  covet  power;  they  do  well  to  do  so.  If  they 
seek  it  in  order  that  they  may  exert  a  precious  and  helpful  influence  on  the  minds  and 
on  the  lives  of  others,  their  ambition  is  no  other  tlian  an  honourable  and  laudable 
aspiration.  Its  possession  by  any  man  must  be  according  to  "  the  ability  which  God 
giveth"  (the  original  faculty  with  which  his  Creator  has  endowed  him),  and  according 
to  the  favouring  circumstances  which  God  has  thrown  around  him.  But,  these  being 
taken  into  thought,  the  power  which  a  man  will  wield  and  the  duration  of  its  exercise 
must  depend  on  the  measure  of  these  two  great  moral  qualities,  benignity  and  right- 
ei'UsnesB.    In  m«rcy — in  kindness,  in  breadth  of  beneficence,  in  readiness  and  itsM'Cy  ol 


OH.  XVI.  1—14.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  285 

sympathy,  in  genuineness  and  greatness  of  self-forgetting  love — shall  every  man's  throng 
be  established.  But  he  that  would  sit  long  on  the  throne,  he  that  would  continue 
to  exercise  power  with  men,  he  that  would  retain  his  influence  over  men,  must 
be  a  righteous  as  well  as  a  genial  and  gracious  man ;  he  must  "  seek  judgment,*  must 
"  haste  to  righteousness ; "  lie  must  obviously  endeavour  to  do  that  which  is  right 
between  man  and  man ;  he  must  eagerly  embrace  the  opportunity  of  making  the 
crooked  things  straight,  of  restoring  that  which  is  wrong,  of  lifting  up  that  which 
should  no  longer  be  abased. — 0. 

Vers.  6 — 11. — Ouilty  arrogance  and  commendable  compassion.  I.  The  guilt  op 
ARROQANCE.  (Ver.  6.)  Moab  was  proud,  haughty,  insolent,  boastful ;  she  lifted  up 
herself  in  contemptuous  defiance  of  Judah,  of  the  city  of  God ;  and  the  prophet  of 
Jehovah  speaks  of  her  arrogance  as  a  very  great  offence  in  the  eyes  of  the  supreme 
Disposer.  There  is  nothing  which  is  more  emphatically,  or  more  repeatedly  condenmed 
in  Scripture  than  haughtiness  of  heart  or  spiritual  pride ;  it  is  a  very  rank  offence  in 
the  estimation  of  the  Holy  One.  And  well  may  it  be  so ;  for  what  can  be  more  pitifully 
wrong,  more  utterly  unbecoming,  than  that  such  puny,  ignorant,  dependent  creatures 
as  we  are  should  assert  ourselves  against  the  God  from  whom  we  came  and  in  whom  we 
live?  It  should  be  remembered  that  there  is  not  only  the  arrogance  of  an  id"latrous 
defiance,  like  that  of  Moab,  but  also,  as  too  often  found  amongst  ourselves,  (1)  the 
arrogance  of  imbeluf — the  product  of  intellectual  pride ;  (2)  the  arrogance  of  impiety — 
the  daring  determination  of  the  soul  to  live  without  God,  to  delay  all  attention  to  his 
sovereign  claims  until  a  late  hour  of  life ;  (3)  the  arrogance  of  vice — the  reckless  reso- 
lution to  snatch  forbidden  and  unholy  pleasure,  whatever  Divine  laws  may  be  broken, 
whatever  human  hearts  may  be  embittered  and  human  lives  despoiled,  whatever  penal 
consequences  may  be  entailed. 

II.  The  depth  op  its  discomfiture.  1.  This  is  seen  in  the  sadness  of  the  cir- 
cumstances of  Moab.  Its  inhabitants  were  "  stricken  "  (ver.  7)  with  a  crushing  blow 
(see  ch.  v. ;  also  ver.  8).  Perhaps  the  culminating  feature  is  seen  in  the  shouting  of 
the  harvest  home  being  exchanged  for  the  shouting  of  the  enemy's  soldiery  taking 
possession  of  the  spoil  (ver.  9).  2.  It  is  also  seen  in  the  signs  of  prevailing  misery. 
"Moab  shall  howl  for  Moab;  every  one  shall  howl"  (ver.  7).  Each  one  for  himself 
and  all  for  one  another ;  "  the  people  to  the  city,  the  city  to  the  provinces."  The  land 
should  be  full  of  weeping.  "  Pride  cometh  before  a  fall ;  "  "  He  that  exalteth  himself 
shall  be  abased."  These  are  specimen-passages,  representing  a  large  number  and  a 
great  variety  of  Divine  declarations  that  arrogance  will  have  a  disastrous  end.  Of 
course,  the  special  form  which  the  sin  takes  will  usually  determine  the  particular 
punishment  which  will  ensue.  But  there  will  surely  come  defeat,  humiliation,  dis- 
tress ;  and  of  this  distress  the  most  intolerable  element  will  probably  be  a  lacerating 
remorse,  in  which  the  soul  will  smite  itself  because  it  yielded  not,  as  it  might  have  done, 
in  the  day  of  opportunity. 

III.  The  compassion  of  the  KittHTBOUS.  (Vers.  9 — 11.)  The  prophet  is  so  im- 
pressed with  the  deplorableness  of  Moab's  condition  that  his  heart  is  powerfully  touched 
on  its  behalf.  He  "bewails"  for  it;  his  heart  " sounds  like  an  harp "  fur  it.  Human 
indignation  against  sin  does  well  to  pass  into  pity  for  the  sorrow  and  the  ruin  which 
sin  entails.  This  is  truly  God-like,  Christian.  "  God  so  loved,"  with  the  love  of  an 
infinite  compassion,  this  sin-ruined  world,  "that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son."  Jesus 
Christ,  when  he  beheld  the  doomed  city  of  David,  moved  with  a  tender  compassion  for 
its  coming  woes,  "  wept  over  it."  Let  the  holy  grace  of  indignation  have  its  due  sharo 
in  the  Christian  character ;  the  soul  that  has  it  not  is  seriously  wanting :  but  let  it 
by  no  means  exclude  from  the  chambers  of  the  heart  that  heavenly  guest — Christ-like 
compassion.  Let  us  have  a  large  and  generous  pity  for  the  fallen,  for  the  guilty,  for 
those  who  are  suffering  the  bitter  pangs  of  self-reproach ;  and  let  sympathetic  sorrow 
pass  speedily  into  a  wise  and  kind  helpfulness,  which  will  lead  b*ck  from  the  "  far 
country  "  of  sin  and  shame  to  the  father's  home  of  righteousness  and  joy. — 0. 

Ver.  12. —  Unavailing  prayer.    Moab  "  will  come  to  his  sanctuary  to  pray,  but  he 
shall  not  prevail."    There  are  two  kfnds  of  unavailing  prayer — 
L  Tm:  fbaybb  wbich  is  addressed  to  non-existent  beinqs.    How  pitiable  that 


286  THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.      [oh.  xvi.  1—14, 

as  the  consequeDce  of  the  blinding  influence  of  sin,  men  should  have  spent  so  much 
thought  and  effort  in  devotion  that  must  have  been  absolutely  barren  of  all  good  result  i 
It  is  painful  to  think  of  the  multitude  of  sacrifices — even  human  sacrifices — that  have 
been  offered  up  beneath  every  sky,  of  the  labours  that  have  been  undergone,  of  the 
pilgrimages  that  have  been  made,  of  the  tortures  that  have  been  inflicted,  of  the 
privations  that  have  been  endured,  of  the  observances  that  have  been  gone  through, 
and,  if  last  not  least,  of  the  prayers  that  have  been  presented  from  full  and  burdened 
hearts,  that  have  all  been  wasted,  inasmuch  as  the  devotees  have  all  been  making  their 
appeal  to  an  ear  that  could  not  beai',  to  a  hand  that  could  not  help. 

II.  The  pkatbr  which  is  unavailinglt  addressed  to  God.  It  is  almost  equally 
sad  to  think  that  there  must  have  bten,  and  must  be,  a  vast  amount  of  devotion 
vainly  and  fruitlessly  directed  to  the  living  God.  There  is  (1)  the  formal  prayer — 
the  prayer  which  goeth  forth  from  feigned  lips,  in  which  men  "  honour  God  with  their 
lips,  but  their  hearts  are  far  removed  from  him  "  (oh.  xxix.  13) ;  (2)  the  prayer  of  'priie 
(see  Luke  xviii.  9 — 14) ;  (3)  the  prayer  of  impenitence  (Pa.  Ixvi.  18  ;  Prov.  xv.  29 ; 
XXV iii.  9;  ch.  i.  15);  (4)  the  prayer  of  unbdief  (Heb.  xi.  6);  (5)  the  prayer  of 
irreverence  (Heb.  v.  7) ;  (6)  the  prayer  which  is  unacceptable  by  reason  of  the  nature 
of  the  request.  If  we  ask  God  for  his  interposition  in  the  spirit  of  vindictiveness 
rather  than  of  generosity,  or  if  we  ask  for  material  enrichment  or  earthly  honours 
rather  than  the  Divine  favour  and  spiritual  progress,  we  may  be  asking  for  that  which 
our  heavenly  Father  will  deny  in  mercy  to  ov/rselves.  For  he  may  know  that  the  very 
thing  we  crave  would  prove  to  be  the  most  mischievous  thing  we  could  possibly 
possess.     It  may  be  worth  our  while  to  look  also  at — 

III.  The  pkayek  which  does  not  seem  to  prevail,  but  which  is  not  ineffeo- 
TUAL.  There  are  many  acts  of  devotion  which  do  not  bring  any  immediate,  desired 
result,  but  they  are  far  from  being  vain  and  fruitless.  Such  are :  1.  The  prayers  which 
are  not  supplicatory  at  all — those  which  begin  and  end  in  communion ;  those  in  which 
the  reverent  and  loving  heart  of  the  human  child  finds  a  holy  and  satisfying  joy  in 
holding  fellowship  with  the  heavenly  Father,  the  redeemed  spirit  with  its  gracious 
Saviour,  its  unchanging  Friend.  2.  The  prayers  which  are  not  answered  at  the  time, 
but  after  some  patient  waiting.  3.  The  prayers  which  are  answered  in  a  way  alto- 
gether different  from  that  expected  by  the  soul.  As  the  prophet  of  the  Lord  met 
Naaman's  request  in  a  way  which  surprised  and  even  angered  him,  so  the  Lord  himself 
often  meets  our  requests  in  a  way  which  surprises  and  even  "  offends  "  us.  We  should 
prefer  the  immediate  touch  of  his  mighty  hand,  renewing,  cleansing,  enlarging, 
enlightening.  But  instead  of  this,  he  employs  some  simple  and  common  instru- 
mentality, or  some  unpleasant  discipline,  which  brings  about  the  change  that  is  to 
be  desired.     Thus  in  Newton's  hymn — 

"  I  asked  the  Lord  that  I  might  grow 
In  faith  and  love  and  every  grace." 

But  instead  of  "  his  love's  constraining  power "  subduing  sin  and  giving  rest,  come 
assatilts  from  without  and  wrestlings  within  ;  and  when  the  disturbed  and  questioning 
spirit  asks,  "  Why  i«  this  ?"  the  answer  comes — 

"  These  inward  trials  I  employ 

From  self  and  pride  to  set  thee  free. 
And  break  thy  schemes  of  earthly  joy. 
That  thou  may'st  seek  thine  all  in  me," 

0. 

Ver.  1. — Rtoortering  false  steps.  The  word  "  lamb"  in  this  verse  should  be  rendered 
"  lambs."  From  2  Kings  iii.  4  we  loam  that  the  tribute  rendered  to  the  King  of 
Israel  by  Mesha,  King  of  Moab,  was  a  hundred  thousand  lambs,  and  a  hundred  thousand 
rams,  with  the  wool.  At  the  death  of  Ahab  Mesha  refused  to  pay  this  tribute,  and 
asserted  his  independence.  In  view  of  the  exposure  of  Moab  to  attacks  from  Assyria, 
this  was  a  false  step,  and  Mesha  is  here  urged  to  retrace  that  step,  and  at  once  send 
the  tribute  as  a  sign  of  renewed  allegiance.  The  urgency  of  the  case  is  shown  in 
the  advice  to  send  the  tribute  round  the  southern  part  of  the  Dead  Sea,  because  the 
northern  end  was  already  blocked  by  the  Assyrians.    This  introduces  the  subject  ot 


OH.XVI.  1—14,1      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  287 

retracing  our  false  steps ;  undoing  the  wrongs  we  have  done ;  stepping  back  from  our 
wilful  paths,  and  beginning  once  more  in  the  right  way. 

I.  This  is  absolutely  necbssart  work.  Its  necessity  may  be  argued  from  these 
points  of  view  :  1.  It  is  due  to  God  that  we  should  prove  our  sincerity  by  reparation 
as  a  sign  of  repentance.  2.  It  is  due  to  those  whom  we  have  wronged  that  when  we 
are  brought  to  a  right  mind  we  should  remove  and  undo  the  wrong.  3.  It  is  due  to 
ourselves  that  we  should  clear  away  from  memory  and  conscience  the  bad  past,  as  far  as 
its  evil  consequences  can  be  cleared.  It  is  never  enough  for  a  man  to  "  cease  to  do 
evil ; "  lie  is  bound  to  remove,  as  far  as  possible,  the  issues  of  his  past  evil ;  and  the 
intensest  bitterness  a  good  man  can  ever  know  arises  from  the  fact  that  he  cannot 
heal  the  wounds  he  has  made,  or  check  the  evil  working  of  the  influences  he  has 
exerted,  or  example  he  has  shown.  When  pleaded  with  in  respect  of  his  intense 
religious  earnestness,  John  Newton  is  said  to  have  replied,  "  How  can  the  old  blas- 
phemer be  silent?"  He  felt  that  life  was  not  long  enough,  or  powers  large  enough, 
for  the  undoing  of  the  wrong  wrought  by  a  godless,  vicious  youth.  And,  further,  il 
in  life  we  swerve  from  the  paths  of  rectitude,  we  shall  find  there  is  no  going  on  round 
into  those  paths  again ;  we  must  do  one  thing — ^we  must  go  back  the  bad  road  we  have 
chosen. 

II.  But  this  is  most  difficult  work.  In  either  the  larger  or  smaller  senses  to 
which  reference  has  been  made.  And  that  because:  1.  It  involves  serious  self- 
humiliations.  None  of  us  can  easily  say,  "  I  was  wrong."  2.  Because  it  exposes 
us  to  tlie  scorn  of  the  unprincipled,  who  regard  all  retracing  of  steps  as  a  sign  of  weak- 
ness, and  cannot  understand  the  heroism  of  conquering  the  baser  self.  In  the  sense  of 
undoing  wrong  that  has  been  done  it  is  most  difficult,  because  the  issues  of  our  words 
and  deeds  go  on  out  of  our  reach.  It  is  as  if  we  dropped  poison  into  the  fountain- 
head  of  a  river,  and  then  in  remorse  tried  to  cleanse  that  fount.  .  It  can  be  done,  but 
away  down  the  valley  the  poison  has  been  carried,  and  none  can  bring  back  to  life  the 
poor  dead  fish  that  are  borne  on  the  current  out  to  sea.  The  Apostle  Paul  never 
could  undo  the  wrongs  of  that  time  when  he  so  bitterly  persecuted  the  disciples  of  the 
Nazarene. 

III.  Yet  this  is  always  hopefully  remdnbbativb  wobk.  It  has  its  special 
rewards.  1.  It  satisfies  our  sense  of  duty.  2.  It  rests  a  conscience  which  otherwise 
would  ceaselessly  reproach.  3.  It  makes  us  clean-handed  to  appear  before  God.  4.  It 
enables  us  to  receive  the  assurance  of  Divine  acceptance.  5.  It  becomes  our  witness  to 
righteousness.  Restitution,  reparation,  humbly  going  back  the  wilful  way  we  may 
have  taken,  meet  gracioiis  Divine  response.  God  surely  smiles  od  the  man  who  is 
brave  enough  to  set  wrongs  right,  and  acknowledge  the  foolishness  of  his  self-willed 
way.— R.  T. 

Ver.  3. — Practical  righteousnest.  It  does  not  seem  certain  whether  this  counsel  is 
addressed  to  Moab  in  relation  to  the  people  fleeing  for  shelter  I'rum  the  invasion  of 
Sennacherib,  or  to  Israel  in  relation  to  the  outcasts  from  Moab.  Whichever  it  be, 
the  point  of  the  counsel  is  that  they  should  act  kindly,  considerately,  charitably. 
Righteousness  is  like  "pure  relisxion  and  undeflled;"  it  is  doing  something — "visiting 
the  fatherless  and  widows  in  their  affliction"  "He  that  doeth  righteousness  is 
righteous,  even  as  he  is  righteous  ; "  "  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do 
them."  Absolute  righteousness,  as  before  the  all-searching  God,  is  not  a  human  possi- 
bility ;  but  Scripture  uses  the  term  in  reference  to  men.  The  psalmist  says,  "  Judge 
me  according  to  mine  integrity,  and  according  to  my  righteousness  which  is  in  me." 
And  our  Lord  pleaded  thus,  "  Except  your  righteousness  shall  exceed  the  righteous- 
ness .  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  th«  kingdom  of 
heaven." 

I.  Riohteoubness  may  be  merk  sentiment,  a  delusion  of  excited  feeling,  as  it 
too  often  is  with  persons  who  take  up  with  "holiness  theories."  The  danger  ol 
sentiment  is  that  too  often  it  satisfies,  and  in  the  pleasant  enjoyment  of  it  a  man  has 
no  care  about  giving  righteousness  its  due  expression.  No  fruits  ever  grow  on  the  tree 
of  sentimentality,  and  its  leaves  have  no  virtue  for  the  healing  of  the  natims. 

IL  Righteousness  may  be  a  profession.  It  is  assumed  in  our  being  Christians. 
It  is  the  state  into  which  we  are  called.    It  is  guaranteed  in  our  regeneration.    Why, 


288  THK   BOOK  OF   THE    PBOPHET   ISAIAH,      [oh.  xti.  1—14 

then,  Bosy  we  not  be  satisfied  with  this  profession  ?  Because  such  righteousneM  's,  at 
the  best,  something  belonging  to  a  class,  and  not  to  the  individual;  and  the  onlj 
righteousness  worth  having  is  sometliing  which  the  individual  has  for  himself  alone. 

III.  EiQHTEOCSNESS  MUST  BE  A  PRACTICE.  "Even  as  he  [Christ]  is  righteouB;" 
and  his  righteousness  was  distinctly  cofiduct,  and  the  spirit  of  conduct.  Righteousness 
is  truth,  brotherliness,  service,  charity,  self-iienial,  purity ;  it  is  Ood-likeness,  and  Qod 
is  righteous  in  all  his  works.  It  is  well  for  us  to  have  and  to  cherish  right  feelings 
and  good  resolves,  but  the  question  to  ask  ourselves  is  this — If  we  have  the  opportunity, 
do  we  give  these  good  resolves,  do  we  find  for  these  good  thoughts  and  feelings  practical 
expression  ?  The  message  sent  to  David  has  often  been  misunderstood  and  misused. 
In  connection  with  building  the  temple  God  said,  "Thou  didst  well  that  it  was  in 
thine  heart."  But  we  forget  that  David  went  as  far  as  he  was  allowed,  in  giving 
practical  expression  to  what  was  in  bis  heart ;  he  made  preparations  for  what  he  might 
not  himself  accomplish. — B.  T. 

Ver.  5. — Righteousness  hindered  or  hastened.  There  is  a  possible  reference  here  to 
King  Hezckiah,  and  of  him  it  is  said  that  "  seeking  judgment  and  hasting  righteous- 
ness "  should  be  characteristics.  The  expression,  "  hasting  righteousness,"  is  a  very 
suggestive  one.  Cheyne  translates,  "is  prompt  in  righteousness."  The  following 
thought  may  be  worked  out  and  illustrated :  Establishing  righteousness  in  the  earth 
is  God's  purpose,  and  towards  the  accomplishing  of  that  purpose — the  speedy  accom- 
plishment of  it— every  good  man  should  work.  But  what  are  the  facts  of  life,  which 
we  cannot  fail  to  observe  ? 

I.  Righteousness  has  active  opponents.  They  who  would  dethrone  God  attack 
righteousness,  which  is  the  spirit  and  the  demand  of  his  rule. 

II.  Righteousness  is  hindered  by  stolid  besisters.  With  whom  it  is  much 
more  difficult  to  deal  than  with  active  opponents.  They  simply  block  the  way  of 
God's  chariot-wheels. 

III.  Righteousness  is  delayed  by  the  weakly  indipfebbnt.  Who  put  no 
strength  into  either  good  or  evil. 

IV.  Righteousness  has  earnest  hasteners.  Men  and  women  who  strive  for  i*, 
witness  for  it,  suffer  for  it.  Whose  whole  lives  do  but  repeat  the  great  cry  with  which 
the  Book  of  God  closes :  "  Come,  Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly  ; "  "  Even  so,  come.  Lord 
Jesus."— R.  T. 

Vers.  9,  10. — The  sadness  of  a  silent  land.  These  verses  bring  before  us  the  picture 
of  a  country  from  which,  at  the  proper  seasons,  there  rises  no  harvest  and  no  vintage 
song.  "  Gladness  is  taken  away,  and  joy  out  of  the  plentiful  field ;  and  in  its  vineyard 
there  shall  be  no  singing,  neither  shall  there  be  shouting."  In  every  age  and  every 
land  the  gladness  of  the  people  has  found  expression  in  the  joy  of  harvest,  and  no 
picture  of  woe,  want,  and  desolation  could  be  so  effective  as  this  simple  one  of  the 
harvest-fields  from  which  arise  no  song.     Meditatively  treated,  we  consider — 

I.  A  land  with  no  joy  in  it.  That  must  be  a  land  on  which  rests  no  Divine 
benedictions ;  and  it  must  be  the  picture  of — 

II.  A  LIFE  with  no  joy  IN  IT.  That  must  be  a  life  on  which  rests  no  Divine 
smile.  We  are  like  the  birds,  we  can  only  sing  in  God's  sunshine.  Inexpressibly  sad 
is  human  life  without  God.  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength  ;  "  but  the  sadness  of 
agnosticism,  atheism,  Comtism,  secularism,  is  the  all-sufficing  proof  that  these  can 
never  take  the  place  of  religion  for  man,  who  fain  would  sing  for  joy.  Let  such 
systems  prevail,  and  the  song  of  earth  would  cease.  From  the  silent,  songlesa  land  a 
heart-cry  to  the  great  heavens  would  go,  saying — 

"  Oh  for  a  vision  I    Oh  for  the  face  1 " 

R.T. 

Ver.  12. — Prayer  that  may  not  prevail.  The  immediate  reference  of  this  verse  is 
to  the  vain  and  hopeless  prayers  of  Moab,  offered  in  his  time  of  distress  to  his  idol- 
god  Chemosh.  Idols  are  only  gods  fur  sunshiny  days,  when  their  worshippers  want 
nothing.     There  is  no  prevailing  to  secure  help  from  them  when  life  is  full  of  calami- 


OH,  XVII.  1—14.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


2bi 


ties,  and  whea  hearts  ache.  Bat  the  expreasion  remitirls  us  that  prayer  offered  to  the 
true  God  does  not  always  prevail — at  least,  prevail  to  the  securing  of  the  precise  thing 
asked  for ;  though  this  comes  about,  not  by  reason  of  the  Divine  inability,  but  by  reason 
of  t'ly  Divine  wisdom  and  love.  Our  prayer  may  not  always  prevail  with  Jehovah,  for 
sucli  reasons  as  the  following — 

I.  Because  the  attitude  op  him  who  offers  it  is  weons.  1.  He  may  demand, 
and  that  God  can  never  allow.  2.  He  may  not  have  clean  hands  ;  and  man  must  put 
away  his  evil  doings  before  he  seeks  God.  3.  He  may  be  unforgiving  towards  hit 
orother ;  and  if  we  forgive  not  ouv  brother  his  trespass,  God  will  heed  no  prayer  from 
us  for  the  forgiveness  of  ours.  4.  He  may  fail  in  that  importunity  which  is  before 
God  the  sign  of  earnestness.  5.  He  may  ask  with  purely  selfish  intentions — to  consume 
the  blessing  sought  upon  his  lusts. 

II.  Because  the  peatee  is  only  a  cet  of  despair.  Not  a  quiet,  thou:;htful 
turning  to  God,  but  only  a  feeling,  "  Nobody  can  help  me — let  us  see  if  even  God  can." 
There  is  nothing  in  such  a  cry  to  which  God  can  hopefully  respond.  For  prayer  to 
prevail  with  God  there  must  be  some  trust  in  it. 

III.  Because  God's  good  time  for  blbssixo  may  not  have  comb.  Prayer  often 
only  seems'not  to  prevail,  because  the  answer  is  held  over  until  God's  best  time  has 
come.  And  Divine  delayings  are  tests  of  sincerity  and  inspirations  to  importunity. 
"Though  it  tarry,  wait  for  it;  it  will  surely  come,  it  will  not  tarry." 

IV.  Because  other  pbayebs  may  be  pbayinq  auainst  our  prayers.  Other 
people's  prayers,  and  the  voice  of  some  things  in  ourselves.  Sodom's  iniquity  was 
crying  hard  against  Abraham's  prayer,  and  Abraham  could  not  prevail.  Jerusalem 
was  crying  hard  against  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  his  prayer  could  not  prevail.  St.  Paul's 
infirmities  of  temper  were  crying  hard  against  his  prayer  that  the  thorn  in  the  flesh 
should  be  removed;  and  they  prevailed,  not  Paul,  and  the  thorn  stayed  piercing  on. 
Here  is  a  hidden  secret  unfolded.  Why  have  we  so  often  seemed  to  pray  only  to  feel 
the  heavens  like  brass  above  us?  We  should  know  if  we  could  hear  all  the  prayers 
that  rise  to  God,  and  know  how  many  and  how  loud  are  the. prayers  that  plead  against 
us.  God  weighs  them  all,  and  the  answer  to  us  is  always  that  which  is  best,  on  the 
wAoZe.— B.  T. 


rvpOSITION, 


CHAPTEK  XVIL 

Vers.  1— S.— The  Bceden  of  Damascus. 
The  eye  of  the  prophet  travels  northwards 
from  Moab,  and,  passing  over  Ammou  as  an 
enemy  of  small  account,  reats  onoe  more  upon 
Damascus,  already  threatened  in  oh.  vii.  1 
— 9,  and  probably  already  partially  punished. 
Damascus  is  seen  once  more  in  alliance 
with  Ephraim  (ver.  3),  and  the  two  are 
joined  with  a  new  power,  Aroer  [yev.  2), 
which  possesses  several  "  cities."  Woe  is 
denounced  on  all  the  tliree  powers  :  desola- 
tion on  Damascus  and  Aroer;  on  Damascus 
and  Ephraim,  the  complete  loss  of  the  last 
shadow  of  independence.  The  Assyrian 
inscriptions  point  out,  as  the  probable  date 
of  the  prophecy,  the  commencement  of  Sar- 
^[on's  reign — about  B.C.  722  or  721. 

Ver.  I. — Damascus  is  taken  away  from 
being  a  city.  According  to  Vitringa,  Da- 
mascus has  been  destroyed  ofti  ner  than  any 
other  town ;  but  it  has  a  wonilerful  power  of 
uaiah. 


jric'-'e:  again  from  its  ashes.  Probabl'^  a 
destiu^jS-  *iv  Sargon  is  h"*-  *«i,^uctefl 
('  Ib(  cords  of  cnc  *«„.,    70..  .i.  p.  6). 

Ver.  2. — The  cities  of  Aroer  are  forsaken. 
That  the  Aroer  of  this  passage  cannot  be 
either  that  on  the  Arnou,  or  that  facing 
Eabbath-Ammon  (Josh.  xiii.  25),  has  long 
been  perceived  and  recognized  (see  Mr. 
Grove's  article  on  "Aroer"  in  the  'Diet,  of 
the  Bible,'  vol.  i.  p.  115).  It  is  evidently 
B  city  of  the  siime  name  lying  much  fur- 
ther towards  the  north.  And  it  is  a  city 
of  far  greater  importance,  having  "  cities  " 
dependent  on  it.  Now,  Sargon's  annals  toll 
us  of  a  "Gargar,"  a  name  well  expressing 
the  Hebrew  nj)ii),  which  was  united  in  a 
league  with  Damascus,  Samaria,  Arpad,  and 
Simyra,  in  the  second  year  of  Sargon,  and 
was  the  scene  of  a  great  battle  and  a  great 
destruction.  Sargon  besieged  it,  took  it, 
and  reduced  it  to  ashes  ('  Records  of  the 
Past,'  i.s.c).  There  is  every  reason  to  recognize 
the  "Aroer"  of  this  vtrse  in  the  "Gargar" 
of  Surgon's  inscriptions.  They  shall  be  for 
flocks  (comp.  ch.  v.  17;  vii.  25).  It  marked 
the  very  extreme  of  desolation,  that  catth- 


290 


THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xvn.  1—14. 


thonld  be  pastured  on  the  sites  of  cities. 
NoQ«  shall  make  them  afraid;  i.e.  "there 
ihall  be  no  inhabitfuits  to  make  any  objec- 
tion." 

Ver.  3. — The  fortress  also  shall  cease  from 
Ephraim.  Sargon  did  not  destroy  Samaria 
ou  the  occasion  of  his  first  capture.  But  lie 
says  that  he  "  i  educed  it  to  a  heap  of  ruins  " 
oil  tlie  occasion  of  its  second  capture  ('  Ee- 
oords  of  the  Past,'  Z.8.C.).  And  the  kingdom 
from  Damascus.  We  do  not  hear  of  any 
King  of  Damascus  afler  Bezin,  ■who  was  slain 
by  Tiglath-Pileser  about  B.O.  732.  Damas- 
cus, however,  reasserted  her  independence 
in  B.C.  721,  and  probably  set  up  a  king  at 
the  same  time.  In  B.o.  720  she  was  reduced 
and  destroyed.  Nothing  more  is  heard  of 
her  until  b.c.  694 — the  eleventh  year  of  Sen- 
nacherib— when  her  "  governor  "  is  Assyrian 
Eponym,  and  she  must  therefore  have  been 
absorbed  into  the  Assyrian  empire.  The 
remnant  of  Syria.  This  phrase  shows  that 
tbe  great  blow  which  struck  down  Syria — 
Tiglath-Pileser's  capture  of  Damascus  and 
slaughter  of  Bezin — was  a  thing  of  the  past. 
Syria  was  already  but  "  a  remnant."  Now 
she  was  to  cease  to  exist  altogether.  They 
shall  be  as  the  glory  of  the  children  of 
Israel.  Ironical.  The  irony  is  made  appa- 
rent by  the  next  verse. 

Vers.  4 — 11. — A  Denunciation  op  Wob 
ON  Israel,  combined  with  the  Pbomisb  of 
A  Eemnant..  Israel,  having  united  herself 
with  Syria  to  resist  the  Assyrians,  will  incur 
a  similar  fate.  Her  glory  will  decay,  her 
population  dwindle  and  almost  disappear. 
Still  there  will  be  a  few  left,  who,  under  the 
eircumstanoes,  will  turn  to  God  (ver.  7). 
Bnt  it  will  be  too  late  for  anything  like  a 
national  recovery ;  the  land  will  remain  "  a 
desolation  "  on  account  of  the  past  sins  of  its 
inhabitants  (vera.  9 — 11). 

Ver.  4. — The  glory  of  Jacob  shall  be  made 
thin.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the 
deportation  of  the  Israelites  was  gradual. 
Sargon,  on  taking  Samaria  for  the  first  time, 
in  B.C.  722,  carried  off  no  more  than  27,290 
of  the  inhabitants  (G.  Smith,  .'Eponym 
Canon,'  p.  125).  Over  the  remainder  he 
appointed  governors,  and  required  them  to 
pay  the  same  taxation  aa  before.  About 
B.C.  715  be  placed  a  number  of  Arabs  in 
Samaria,  probably  deporting  natives  to  make 
room  for  them  (ibid.,  p.  128).  The  continu- 
ance of  a  remnant  of  Israelites  in  the  land 
down  to  B.C.  625  is  indicated  by  2  Oiiron. 
xxxiv.  9.  The  fatness  of  his  flesh  shall  wax 
lean  (comp.  ch.  x.  16).  Depopulation  is 
primarily  intended ;  but  there  is,  perhaps, 
also  a  more  general  reference  to  depression, 
wasting,  and  misery. 


Ver.  5. — As  when  the  harrestman  gather- 
eth  the  com.  Death  is  the  "harvestman" 
here,  and  gathers  the  Israelites  by  shocks,  oi 
sheaves,  into  his  garner.  A  great  depopula- 
tion appears  in  2  Kings  xvii.  25,  where  we 
learn  that  lions  so  multiplied  in  the  land  as 
to  become  a  terror  to  the  few  inhabitants. 
Beapeth  the  ears.  Mr.  Cheyne  well  remarks 
that  the  "  ears  "  only  were  reaped,  the  stalk 
being  cut  close  under  the  ear.  This  was 
the  practice  also  in  Egypt  (Bawlinson, 
'Hist,  of  Ancient  Egypt,'  vol.  i.  p.  162). 
In  the  valley  of  Bephaim.  The  valley  of 
Kephaim  was  the  scene  of  David's  double 
victory  over  the  Philistines,  related  in 
2  Sam.  V.  17 — 25.  It  is  disputed  whether  it 
lay  north  or  south  of  Jerusalem ;  but  the 
connection  with  Bethlehem  (2  Sam.  xxiii. 
13 — 17)  and  with  the  cave  of  Adullam  seem 
decisive  in  favour  of  a  southern  position.  A 
"  valley,"  however  ('enjefe),  suitable  for  the 
cultivation  of  com,  in  this  direction,  has  yet 
to  be  discovered, 

Ver.  6. — Yet  gleaning  grapes  shall  be  left 
in  it ;  rather,  yet  gleanings  shall  be  left  in  it. 
There  is  no  mention  of  grapes,  and  it  is  clear 
that  the  "  gleaning  "  intended  is  that  of  an 
olive-ground.  As  the  shaking  of  an  olive 
tree ;  rather,  as  at  the  heating  of  an  olive  tree. 
The  olive  crop  was  obtained,  not  by  shaking, 
but  by  beating  the  trees  (Dent.  xxiv.  20). 
The  owner  was  forbidden  to  "  go  over  the 
boughs  again,''  in  order  that  a  portion  of 
the  crop  might  be  left  for  the  stranger,  the 
widow,  and  the  fatherless  to  glean.  In  the 
top  of  the  uppermost  bough.  Where  the  sticks 
of  the  beaters  had  not  reached.  Four  or  five 
in  the  outmost  fruitful  branches ;  rather,/our 
or  five  apiece  on  its  fruitful  branches.  This 
is  the  average  that  would  be  left,  after  beat- 
ing, on  a  good-sized  branch. 

Ver.  7. — At  that  day  shall  a  man  look  to 
his  Maker.  We  have  evidence  of  this  revul- 
sion of  feeling  on  the  part  of  Israel  in  the 
statement  of  Chronicles  that,  in  the  reign  of 
Josiah,  offerings  of  money  were  made  for  the 
temple  service  by  men  of  "  Manasseh  and 
Ephraim,  and  of  all  the  remnant  of  Israel," 
which  tLe  Levites  collected  and  brought  to 
Jerusalem  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  9). 

Ver.  8. — And  he  shall  not  look  to  the 
altars.  The  altars  at  Dan  and  Bethel 
(1  Kings  xii.  28 — 33)  may  be  intended,  or 
the  Israelites  may  have  had  other  idolatrous 
altars  besides  these  (2  Kings  xvii.  11 ,-  Hos. 
Tiii.  11).  Josiah,  about  B.a  631,  broke  down 
altars  throughout  all  the  land  of  Israel,  in 
the  cities  of  Manasseh  and  Ephraim  and 
Simeon  (?),  even  unto  Naphtali  (2  Chron. 
xxxiv.  5 — 7).  Apparently  he  had  the  consent 
of  the  inhabitants  to  this  demolition.  Hither 
the  groves,  or  the  images.  Ashirah,  the  word, 
here  and  elsewhere  commonly  translated 
"  grove  "  in  the  Authorized  Version,  is  now 


OH.  XVII.  1—14.]    THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


291 


generally  admitted  to  haTe  designated  an 
artificial  coDstructiou  of  wood  or  metal,  which 
was  used  in  the  idolatrous  worship  of  tlie 
Phtsnicians  and  the  Israelites,  probably  as 
the  emblem  of  some  deity.  The  Assyrian 
"  sacred  tree  "  was  moat  likely  an  emblem  of 
the  same  kind,  and  may  give  an  idea  of  the 
sort  of  object  worshipped  under  the  name  of 
Aih£rah  (comp.  '  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol. 
ii.  pp.  235—237).  The  Israelites,  in  the 
time  (jf  their  prosperity,  had  set  up  "  groves  " 
of  this  character  "  on-  every  high  hill,  and 
under  every  green  tree  "  (2  Kings  xvii.  10). 
Many  of  them  were  still  standing  when 
Joaiah  made  his  iconoclastic  raid  into  the 
Israelite  country  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  5 — 7),  and 
were  broken  down  by  him  at  the  same  time 
as  the  altars.  The  "  images  "  of  this  place 
are  the  same  as  those  coupled  with  the 
Israelite  "groves"  in  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  7, 
namely  "  sun-images,"  emblems  of  Baal, 
probably  pillars  or  conical  stones,  such  as 
are  known  to  have  held  a  place  in  the  reli- 
gious worship  of  Phcenicia. 

Ver.  9. — In  that  day.  While  a  remnant  of 
the  Israelites  shall  repent  and  turn  to  God, 
throwing  in  their  lot  with  Judah,  as  it  would 
seem,  the  country  generally  shall  feel  the 
weight  ol'  God's  chastening  hand,  on  account 
of  Israel's  former  sins  and  offences.  As  a 
forsaken  bough,  and  an  uppermost  branch ; 
rather,  tu  the  forsaken  tract  of  woodland  and 
mountain- erett  (Kay).  The  reference  is  to 
the  condition  of  the  land  when  it  passed  out 
of  the  possession  of  the  Canaanitish  nations. 
It  was  then  forsaken  and  descilate.  So  shall 
it  be  once  more,  when  Israel  is  expelled  for 
the  same  sins  (see  2  Kings  xvii.  7,  8).  Which 
they  left  because  of  the  children  of  Israel; 
rather,  which  men  forsook  before  the  children 
of  Israel ;  i.e.  from  which  the  Canaanites 
fled  as  the  children  of  Israel  advanced  and 
took  possession.  The  writer  ignores  the 
long  and  fierce  struggle  which  the  Canaan- 
ites made,  and  looks  only  to  the  result — 
retirement  from  a  desolated  country. 

Ver.  10. — Because  thou  hast  forgotten; 
rather,  because  thou  didst  forget.  The  late 
repentance  of  a  "  remnant "  which  "  looked  to 
their  Maker  "  (ver.  7)  could  not  cancel  the 
long  catalogue  of  former  sins  (2  Kings  xvii. 
8 — 17),  foremost  among  which  was  their 
rejection  of  God,  or,  at  any  rate,  their  com- 
plete forgetfulness  of  his  claims  upon  them. 
The  Bock  of  thy  strength.  God  is  first  called 
-a Hock"  in  Deut.  xxxii.  4,  15,  18,  30,  31. 
The  image  is  caught  up  by  the  psalmists 
(2  Sam.  xxii.  2,  32,  47;  xxiii.  3;  Ps.  xviii. 
2,  31,  46;  xix.  14;  xxviii.  1,  etc.),  and  from 
them  pusses  to  Isaiah  (see,  beaides  the 
present  passage,  oh.  xxvi.  4 ;  xxx.  29 ;  and 
xliv.  8).  Among  the  later  prophets  only 
Habakkuk  uses  it  (i.  12).  Israel,  instead  of 
looking  to  this  "  Kock,"  had  looked  to  their 


rook-fortresses  (ver.  9).  Therefore  shalt  thot 
plant  pleasant  plants ;  rather,  dost  thou  plant 
or  hast  thou  planted.  Forgetfulness  of  Je- 
hovah has  led  to  the  adoption  of  a  voluptu- 
ous religion — one  of  debased  foreign  rites. 
There  is  possibly,  as  Mr.  Cheyne  thinks,  a 
special  reference  to  the  cult  of  Adonis. 
Shalt  set  it ;  rather,  settest  it,  or  hast  set  it. 
"  It "  must  refer  to  "  field  "  or  "  garden  " 
understood.  The  later  Israelite  religion  has 
been  a  sort  of  pleasant  garden,  planted  with 
exotic  slips  from  various  quarters — Phcenitia, 
Syriii,  Moab,  etc.  It  has  been  thought  per- 
missible to  introduce  into  it  any  Ufw  cult 
that  took  the  fancy.  Hence  the  multiplica- 
tion of  altars  complained  of  by  Rosea  (viii. 
11;  X.  1;  xiill). 

Ver.  11. — In  the  day;  or,  in  a  day  (Kay). 
Shalt  thou  make ;  rather,  thou  makest.  Each 
new  slip  that  is  planted  is  forced  to  take 
root  and  grow  and  flourish  at  once  ;  the  next 
morning  it  is  expected  to  have  formed  its 
seed  and  reached  perfection.  So  the  harvest 
is  hurried  on ;  but  when  it  is  reached,  the 
day  of  \  isitation  has  arrived — a  day  of  grief 
and  of  desperate  sorrow. 

Vers.  12—14. — A  Peophboy  against  As- 
STRIA.  This  passage  is,  apparently,  out  of . 
place.  At  any  ri;te,  it  is  quite  unconnected 
with  what  precedes,  and  almost  equally  so 
with  what  follows.  Still,  it  must  be  borne 
in  mind  that,  until  the  desti-uction  of  Sen- 
nacherib's army,  Isaiah  has  the  thought  of 
the  Assyrians,  as  the  pressing  danger,  always 
before  him,  and  continually  reverts  to  it, 
often  abruptly,  and  without  preparation  (see 
ch.  V.  26—30;  vii.  17—25;  viii.  6—8;  x. 
5—19,  24—34 ;  xiv.  24—27).  The  present 
prophecy  seems,  more  distinctly  than  any 
other  in  the  purely  prophetical  chapters,  to 
point  to  the  miraculous  destruction  of  the 
host  which  Sennacherib  was  about  to  bring 
against  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  12. — Woe  to  the  multitude  of  many 
people ;  rather,  Bo  for  the  tumult  of  many 
peoples  '  The  advance  of  an  army  composed 
of  soldiers  from  many  nations  is  descried. 
They  advance  with  noise  and  tumult — a 
tumult  compared  with  that  of  "  seas  that 
are  tumultuous."  Under  the  circumstances 
of  the  time,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  the 
Assyrians  to  be  intended  (comp.  ch.  xxii.  6, 
7).  The  rushing  sound  of  the  advance  is 
borne  in  strongly  upon  the  prophet's  mind, 
and  made  the  subject  of  three  consecutive 
clauses. 

Ver.  13.— God  shall  rebuke  them;  lite- 
rally, he  shall  rebuke  Ihem — he  who  alone 
can  do  so.  There  is  no  need  to  mention  hia 
name.    They  shall  flee  far  off.    The  destruo* 


292 


THE  BOOK  OP   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.    [cfH.  ivii.  1—14 


Hon  of  the  great  bulb  of  Sennacherib's  anny 
in  the  niglit  was  followed,  as  soon  as  morning 
came,  by  the  liasty  flight  of  the  suiTlvors 
(2  Kings  xix.  36 ;  ch.  xxxvii.  37).  And  shall 
be  chased.  Herodotus  says  that  the  Egyp- 
tians pursued  the  army  of  Sennaclierib  and 
slew  vast  numbers  (ii.  141).  As  the  chaff 
of  the  mountains  (comp.  Hos.  xiii.  3). 
Thieghing-floors  were  ordinarily  placed  upon 
eminences  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  18  ;  2  Chron.  iii.  1), 
where  the  wind  had  freer  course  and  conge- 


qucntly  greater  povror.  Like  a  rolling  thing ; 
or,  like  whirling  du»t  (Kay).  The  word  used 
commonly  means  "  a  wheel." 

Ver.  14. — Behold  at  evening-tide  trouble ; 
rather,  terror,  as  the  word  is  elsewhere 
always  translated  (comp.  2  Kings  xix.  33, 
"  It  came  to  [>asa  that  night  that  the  angel 
of  the  Lord  went  out,"  etc.).  He  is  not 
(comp.  2  Kings  xix.  35,  "  They  were  all 
dead  corpses  ").  That  spoil  us  .  .  .  that  rob 
ua  (see  2  Kings  xviii.  13 — 16). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  6 — 11. — National  repentance  may  come  too  late  to  avert  national  ruin.  The 
crisis  of  a  nation's  fate  is  brought  on  by  slow  degrees,  Knd  resulis  from  a  multitude  of 
acts,  each  one  of  which,  when  once  done,  is  past  recall.  Up  to  a  certain  point  there  is 
a  possibility  of  retrieval.  "  Tout  peut  se  r^tablir,"  as  a  great  raonarcli  of  our  own  time 
said.  The  modes  of  action  that  have  brought  the  state  into  difficulties  may  be  renounced, 
or  even  reversed ;  and  recovery  may  set  in  as  a  natural  consequence  of  stich  reversal. 
Or  the  change  of  conduct  may  have  appeased  God's  anger,  and  his  favour  may  raise  up 
the  nation  which  he  has  depressed,  to  mark  his  displeasure.  Such  was  the  case  with 
united  Israel  during  the  period  of  the  judges.  Seven  times  was  the  nation  for  its  sins 
"  sold  into  the  hand"  of  a  foreign  power,  its  independence  suspended,  its  ruin  all  but 
accomplished;  and  seven  times  upon  its  repentance  did  God  raise  up  a  deliverer  who 
restored  it  to  vigorous  life  and  re-established  its  prosperity.  But  this  process  cannot  go 
on  for  ever.  A  time  comes  when  the  sources  of  national  vigour  are  sapped,  when  exhaus- 
tion has  set  in,  when  foreign  neighbotirs  have  become  enormously  powerful,  and  when  it 
would  require,  not  one  miracle  only,  but  a  series  of  miracles,  to  save  the  state  from  the 
consequences  of  its  long-continued  misconduct.  Then,  although  the  remnant  left  may 
perceive  its  danger,  and  regret  the  past,  and  repent,  and  put  away  the  evil  of  its  doings, 
and  even  reverse  its  modes  of  action,  turning  to  (3od  (ver.  7)  instead  of  turning  away 
from  him  (ver.  10),  and  looking  to  the  Holy  One  instead  of  looking  to  idols  and  vanities, 
it  may  be  too  late  to  reverse  the  fiat  that  has  long  since  gone  forth,  or  to  arrest  the 
destruction  decreed  and  determined  on.  The  remnant  may  save  their  own  souls,  but 
they  cannot  save  their  country.  The  "  day  of  grief  and  of  desperate  sorrow  "  comes  on, 
whatever  they  may  do ;  and  the  nation  perishes  in  consequence  of  its  past  misdeeds, 
despite  its  tardy  amendment. 

Ver.  10. — The  Bock  of  our  strength.  Irreligious  men  have  many  "  rocks  of  strength," 
or  at  any  rate  think  that  tliey  have  many.  1.  "  Some  put  their  trust  in  chariots  and 
in  horses,"  believe  in  "  big  battalions  "  as  really  ruling  the  world,  and  think  they  have 
only  to  swell  their  armies  in  order  to  sway  the  course  of  events  at  their  pleasure.  Tell 
them  that  "  it  is  nothing  with  God  to  help,  whether  wiih  many  or  with  them  that  have 
no  power"  (2  Chron.  xiv.  11);  assure  them  that  "  it  is  no  hard  matter  for  many  to  be 
shut  up  in  the  hands  of  a  few,  and  with  the  God  of  heaven  it  is  all  one  to  deliver  with 
a  great  multitude  or  a  small  company,  for  the  victory  of  battle  standeth  not  in  the 
multitude  of  a  host,  but  strength  cometh  from  heaven  "  ( I  Maoc.  iii.  18, 19) ;  and  they 
open  their  eyes  wide  with  astonishment,  and  set  down  the  speaker  as  a  dreamy  fanatic. 
2.  Others  regard  vrealth  as  a  tower  of  strength,  a  "rock"  ihat  will  never  fail  them. 
Three  things  alone  are  wanted  to  secure  complete  success  in  life,  and  these  are  "  Money, 
money,  money."  1'heir  highest  idea  of  perfect  safety  and  security  is  "  the  Bank  of 
England."  No  qualms  of  fear  assail  them  so  long  as  tley  have  a  good  balance  at  their 
bankers.  "Soul,"  they  say  to  themselves,  "  thou  hast  much  goods  laid  up  for  many 
years;  take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry  "  (Luke  xii.  19'.  Tell  them  that 
riches  make  themselves  wings,  talk  to  them  of  failures,  bankruptcies,  revolutions,  and 
they  will  laugh  you  to  scorn ;  theirs  are  safe,  they  are  quite  certain,  and  that  is  enough 
for  them.  3.  A  third  class  "  trust  in  princes,"  or  great  men.  They  have  a  patron,  a 
protector,  a  "  friend  at  court ; "  and  aU  must  necessarily  go  well  with  them.    Nay, 


Cft.  xvn.  1— 14.]    THE  BOOK  01'  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  293 

perhaps  they  have  "  two  or  three  strings  to  their  how  " — powerful  friends  helonging  tc 
both  parties;  how,  then,  is  it  possible  that  they  should  not  be  secure  ?  Christian  men 
have,  on  the  other  hand,  but  one  "  Rock  of  strength,"  but  one  Trust,  but  one  Stay,  and 
that  is  God.    God  is  their  "  Rock  "— 

L  As  BEING  FiKM  AND  IMMOVABLE.  All  else  IS  shifting  and  changing.  Men  die, 
even  though  they  be  princes  or  prime  ministers.  Armies  melt  away,  suffer  defeat, 
mutiny.  Wealth  becomes  the  prey  of  the  spoiler,  is  lost  through  fraud,  or  taken  away 
by  violence.  God  always  remains  the  same — firm,  solid,  substantial;  something  on 
which  we  can  count,  something  that  will  not  disappear,  that  will  not  change,  that  we 
can  rely  upon  as  a  sure  foundation. 

II.  As  BEING  A  Stronghold  and  Defence.  The  Israelites  lool^ed  to  their  fortified 
cities  to  protect  them  (ver.  9).  The  Christian  looks  to  God.  God's  strength  is  such 
that  nothing  can  prevail  against  it.  He  is  an  absolutely  sure  Defence,  able  to  save  men 
"  to  the  uttermost."  No  one  that  has  relied  wholly  and  solely  upon  God,  has  ever 
found  his  reliance  misplaced  or  his  defence  fail  him.  If  we  make  God  our  Refuge,  we 
place  ourselves  in  an  impregnable  citadel.  He  is  omnipotent,  and  therefore  ever  able 
to  save ;  he  is  faithful,  and  therefore  ever  willing  to  save.  « 

III.  As  BEING  A  Shadow  from  the  heat,  a  Shelter  from  the  tempest.  God 
not  only  protects  but  consoles,  not  only  saves  but  comforts.  He  is  "  the  Shadow  of  a 
great' Rock  in  a  weary  land."  When  dangers  threaten,  when  calamities  come,  when  we 
are  drooping  beneath  the  noonday  heat,  or  chilled  by  the  pitiless  storm,  we  can  rest  on 
him,  and  he  will  cheer  us ;  we  can  make  our  appeal  to  him,  and  he  will  give  us  relief 
and  refreshment.  It  is  promised  that,  ultimately,  "  God  shall  wipe  away  tears  from 
all  eyes"  (Rev.  xxi.  4).  Already  he  does  this  to  a  large  extent.  Not  only  is  he  our 
Defence  and  Stay,  but  he  is  a  "  Rock  "  that  "  follows  us  "  (1  Cor.  x.  14)  through  the 
wilderness  of  human  life,  assuaging  our  griefs,  Inking  away  our  sorrows,  giving  us 
shelter,  comfort,  satisfaction,  peace,  happiness.  He  is  himself  an  ever-present  Joy, 
possessing  which,  whatsoever  happened  to  us,  we  should  be  content. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Damascus  and  Israd.  The  present  oracle  bids  us  turn  to  a  different 
scene — to  the  ffimed  city  and  territory  of  Damascus.  It  lies  in  the  vast  rich  plain  east 
of  Mount  Antilibanus,  on  the  border  of  the  desert.  Through  the  plain  flows  the  river 
Barada,  probably  the  Ahana  in  which  Naaman  delighted.  "  In  the  midst  of  the  p'ain 
lies  at  your  feet  the  vast  lake  or  island  of  deep  verdure — walnuts  and  apricots  waving 
above,  corn  and  grass  below ;  and  in  the  midst  of  the  mass  of  foliage  rises,  striking  its 
white  arms  of  streets  hither  and  thither,  and  its  white  minarets  above  the  trees  which 
embosom  them,  the  city  of  Damascus.  On  the  right  towers  the  snowy  height  of 
Hermon,  Overlooking  the  whole  scene.  Close  behind  are  the  sterile  limestone  mountains, 
so  that  you  stand  literally  between  the  living  and  the  dead  "  (Stanley).  The  river 
turns  what  would  otherwise  be  a  desert  into  a  rich  garden,  full  of  walnuts,  pome- 
granates, figs,  plums,  apricots,  citrons,  pears,  and  apples. 

I.  History  of  Damascus.  There  were  traditions  of  Abraham  lingering  from  early 
times  about  the  city.  Bliezer  of  Damascus  was  his  steward  (Gen.  xv.  2).  But  the 
history  is  a  blank  till  the  time  of  David.  He,  bring  at  war  with  Hndadezer,  King  of 
Zobah,  encountered  Syrians  of  Damascus,  who  came  to  succour  his  foe,  and  slew  of 
them  twenty-two  thousand  men.  He  then  garrisoned  the  whole  land  with  Israelites 
(2  Sam.  viii.  5,  6;  1  Chron.  xviii.  5).  From  Solomon's  time  we  have  hints  of  enmity 
between  Damascus,  whose  king  appears  to  have  been  titularly  desianated  "  Hadad,"  and 
Israel;  also  of  Rezin,  from  Zobah  (1  Kings  xi.  23;  xv.  19;  2  Chron.  xvi.  3).  Tha 
fourth  Hadad,  with  thirty-two  subject  kings,  marched  against  Ahab,  and  laid  siege  to 
Samaria  (1  Kings  xx.  1).  In  the  end,  the  invader  became  subject  to  Ahab  (1  Kings 
XX.  13 — 34).  Three  years  later,  Ahab  was  defeated  and  slain  in  his  attempt  on  Ramoth- 
gilead  (1  Kings  xxii.  1 — 4, 15 — 37).  The  Syrians  of  Damascus  were  encouraged  to  a 
second  invasion  of  Israel,  and  a  second  siege  of  S.imaria,  which  was  raised  in  a  panic 
(2  Kings  vii.  6,  7).  A  new  page  of  history  opens  with  the  succession  of  Hazael  to  the 
rule  of  Damascus,  and  the  struggle  against  the  Assyrians.    Probably  the  dread  of  the 


294  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xvii.  1— 14 

latter  led  to  an  alliance  between  Israel  and  Damascus  a  centniy  later.  The  march  of 
Rezin  of  Damascus  and  Pekah  of  Israel  against  Jerusalem  brings  us  within  the  scope  o( 
Israel's  vievv  (ch.  vii.  1 — 6  ;  2  Kings  xvi.  5).  Ahaz  placed  himself  under  the  protec-  ■ 
tion  of  Assyria;  Rezin  was  slain,  his  kingdom  brought  to  an  end,  and  Damascus 
destroyed,  its  people  being  carried  captive  to  Assyria  (2  Kings  xvi.  9 ;  cf.  ch.  yiL  8  ; 
Amos  i.  5). 

II.  The  pbophet's  descbiftion  op  its  fate.  The  fair  city  will  be  effaced  from 
the  number  of  those  that  exist,  and  will  become  a  heap  of  fallen  ruins.  And  Israel, 
which  ha«  hnng  her  fortunes  on  those  of  Damascus,  will  share  her  fate.  The  very 
sound  of  the  word  Aroer,  reminding  of  the  nature  of  bareness,  nakedness,  had  an 
ill  omen.  The  strong  places  of  Ephraim,  i.e.  of  Israel,  are  laid  low,  and  Damascus 
ceases  to  exist  as  a  kingdom.  And  the  Aramaeans  who  do  not  fall  in  battle  are 
carried  away  captive.  The  fate  of  Damascus  is  as  pathetic  as  that  of  a  distressed 
woman.  Cities  were  in  ancient  thought  generally  seen  under  the  ideal  of  the  woman, 
their  beauty  as  her  beauty,  their  sorrows  as  hers.  Damascus  waxes  feeble  and  turns 
to  flee,  and  fear  seizes  on  her;  anguish  and  sorrow  have  taken  her,  as  a  woman 
in  travail.  "The  city  of<praise  is  gone,  the  city  of  my  joy  I"  exclaims  Jeremiah 
(xlix.  24,  25).  "  Cities  have  been  as  Tamps  of  life  along  the  pathway  of  humanity  and 
religion.  Within  them  science  has  given  birth  to  her  noblest  discoveries.  Behind 
their  walls  freedom  has  fought  its  noblest  battles.  They  have  stood  on  the  snrface  o( 
the  earth  like  breakwaters,  rolling  back  or  turning  aside  the  swelling  tide  of  oppression. 
Cities  indeed  have  been  the  cradle  of  human  liberty.     I  bless  God  for  cities  "  (Guthrie). 

ni.  Affliction  of  Israel  and  her  bepentahoe.  (Vers.  4 — 8.)  1.  Images  of  ' 
national  decay.  'J'he  glory  of  Jacob  wastes,  the  fat  of  his  flesh  grows  thin.  Necessary 
and  constant  in  thought  is  the  connection  between  the  flourishing  of  a  land  and  the 
blessing  of  God,  the  withdrawal  of  his  blessing  and  the  withering  of  its  fruits,  the  failure 
of  the  supply  of  food.  We  must  believe  in  this  connection  without  hastily  presuming, 
as  superstition  does,  to  detect  the  exact  sin  which  has  called  down  the  displeasure  of 
God.  Our  poet  Tennyson,  in  some  dark  pictures  of  superstition  in.  his  '  Queen  Mary,' 
represents  the  queen  as  saying  that "  God  is  hard  upon  the  people  "  because  the  nobles 
would  not  give  the  Church  lands  back.  And  when  she  exclaims  on  the  "  harvestless 
autumn,  horrible  agues,  plague,"  the  king  replies — 

"The  blood  and  sweat  of  heretics  at  the  stake 
Is  God's  best  dew  upon  the  barren  field." 

Such  are  the  reasonings  of  bigotry  and  fanaticism.  Then  only  do  we  make  the  proper 
application  of  the  lessons  of  suffering,  when  we  visit  our  own  errors  with  self-chastise- 
ment, and  stir  up  the  neglected  gift,  the  forgotten  talent,  in  ourselves.  Another  image 
is  that  of  the  field  of  corn  falling  before  the  mower.  Israel  is  ripe  for  judgment,  as  ttie 
field  of  com  for  the  reaper.  On  the  broad  vale  of  Bephaim,  sloping  dow  n  to  Bethlehem, 
only  an  ear  or  two  will  be  seen  scattered  here  and  there.  1'hat  vale  may  be  viewed 
as  symbolic  of  the  great  world,  and  that  reaping  as  prophetic  of  the  day  of  judgment, 
when  on  the  white  cloud  sits  one  like  the  Son  of  man,  having  a  golden  crown  on  his 
head,  and  in  his  hand  a  sharp  sickle ;  and  another  angel  comes  out  of  the  temple,  and 
cries  with  a  loud  voice  to  him  that  sits  on  the  cloud,  "  Thrust  in  thy  sickle,  and  reap : 
for  the  time  is  come  for  thee  to  reap ;  for  the  harvest  of  the  earth  is  ripe  "  (Rev.  xiv.). 
Few  will  escape  the  judgment,  and  yet  a  few  there  will  be.  At  the  olive-beating,  when 
it  seems,  at  a  superficial  glance,  that  the  tree  is  quite  stripped,  there  nevertheless  remain 
"  two  or  three  berries  high  up  at  the  tup ;  four,  five  on  each  of  its  branches."  2.  Redemp- 
tion of  the  remnant.  'This  word,  "The  remnant  shall  return," .is  the  standing  word  of 
promise  and  of  hope  for  Israel.  It  contains  the  "  law  of  Israel's  history."  The  ring  is 
gone,  but  the  finger  remains ;  the  tree  is  felled,  but  the  root-stump  may  yet  send  out 
suckers ;  from  the  bared  harvest-field  some  gleanings  may  yet  be  gathered.  And  so 
Israel  stands  as  the  type  of  human  life,  All  is  not  lost  while  conscience  remains,  whilu 
will  may  still  exert  its  energy  against  evil,  and  in  the  refoimation  of  the  habits.  But 
there  must  be  this  reformation,  which  begins  with  a  linking  up  to  God.  The  state  of 
the  soul  depends  on  the  direction  of  its  gaze.  We  look  where  we  love,  and  our  looking 
may  produce  love.  Much  has  Scripture  to  say  on  the  moral  effect  pf  vision.  Some- 
times it  is  equivalent  to  enjoying :  "  What  man  is  he  that  will  see  good  ?  "    And  as  we 


OH.  xvn.  1—14.1    THE  BOOK  OP   THE  PBOPHET   ISAIAH.  295 

do  not  willingly  bend  our  eyes  and  keep  them  fixed  upon  sio;hts  which  strike  pain  to  the 
feelings,  the  prayer,  "Turn  away  mine  eyes  from  beholding  iniquity,"  is  equivalent  to 
the  prayer  that  we  may  have  no  relish  in  evil  ways.  In  the  days  of  repentance  men 
will  look  up  to  their  Creator.  It  is  when  we  turn  our  eyes  from  our  Maker  and  fix 
them  exclusively  on  the  creature  that  we  forget  our  dependence.  "  It  is  he  that  hath 
made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves;"  this  is  the  thought  which  expresses  the  foundation  of 
all  reverence,  the  duty  of  all  worship  and  obedience.  As  all  idolatry  means  loss  of 
self-respect,  so  regard  to  the  great  and  glorious  Creator  reflects  itself  in  veneration  for 
the  nature  he  has  given  us,  the  image  of  his  own.  And  he  is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel. 
In  every  family,  every  congregation,  every  state,  there  must  be  an  existing  ideal  of 
righteousness,  of  truth,  of  purity.  Such  ideals  are  the  shadows  of  the  personality  of 
the  holy  God.  If  they  pass  away  from  the  faith  and  religious  imagination  of  a  people, 
they  fidl  into  sensuality  and  materialism.  The  first  step,  then,  towards  a  better  life  is 
to  look  away  from  self,  and  from  the  evil  associations  which  have  grown  in*o  one's 
habits,  or  into  which  one  has  grown,  to  God  as  the  Supreme  and  the  Holy.  Loohmg  up 
to  Ood  will  mean  looking  away  from  idols.  "  He  will  not  look  to  the  altars,  the  work 
of  his  hands ;  and  what  his  fingers  have  made  he  will  not  regard,  neither  the  groves 
nor  the  images."  True  religion  alone  can  drive  out  superstition.  Science  has  not  and 
cannot  do  it.  Men  must  either  be  superstitious  or  religious ;  for  the  imaginative 
faculty  demands,  and  will  have,  nourishment.  The  great  prophets  of  Israel,  training 
men's  minds  to  look  up  to  the  great  spiritual  Source  of  man  and  of  nature,  have  taught 
us  lessons  that  can  never  become  obsolete.  But  the  heathen  idolatry  referred  to  ahould 
be  more  closely  considered. — J. 

Ver.  8. — The  prophet  on  heathen  worship.  Having  described  in  brief  the  true 
religion  as  a  "  looking  np  to  God  "  as  Maker  and  Bedeemer  of  Israel,  the  prophet  with 
equal  expressiveness  characterizes  the  heathen  woi:ship  around. 

I.  It  IB  EEVEBENCE  FOB  THE  OBJECT  OF  HUMAN  AET.  Coutemptuous  is  the  reference 
to  "  the  work  of  his  hands,"  and  "  that  which  his  fingers  have  made " — altars  and 
images.  When  the  spiritual  nerve  of  religion  is  weakened,  the  affections  fix  upon 
the  symbols,  foi-ms,  and  accessories  of  religion.  The  soul  that  has  lost  its  God 
must  have  some  visible  substitute,  as  a  pet,  a  plaything,  an  idol.  When  the  meaning 
of  sacrifice  is  deeply  realized  and  felt,  any  bare  table  will  suffice  for  altar.  But  as 
the  idea  and  feeling  become  extinct,  all  the  more  will  men  seek  to  supply  the 
TOid  by  some  beauty  in  the  object.  The  shrine  becomes  more  splendid  as  devotion 
becomes  more  cold.  Perhaps  the  prophet  is  thinking  of  the  case  of  King  Ahaz. 
He  went  to  Damascus  to  meet  Tiglath-Pileser  of  Assyria,  and  there  saw  an  altar 
which  so  pleased  him,  that  he  sent  the  pattern  of  it  to  Urijah  the  priest,  who  built 
one  to  correspond.  And  this  was  a  king  who  "  sacrificed  and  burned  incense  in  the 
high  places,  and  on  the  hills,  and  under  every  green  tree "  (2  Kings  xvi.).  And 
Manasseh,  rejecting  the  good  example  of  Hezekiah  his  father,  set  up  altars  to  Baal,  and 
made  a  grove,  and  plunged  deeply  into  all  manner  of  superstition  (2  Kings  xxi.).  The 
Prophet  Hosea  pointedly  speaks  of  the  tendency  in  the  people  generally:  "Because 
Ephraim  has  made  many  altars  to  sin,  altars  shall  be  imto  him  to  sin "  (viii.  2). 
The  connection  of  this  with  luxury  is  pointed  out  by  our  prophet  in  ch.  ii.  7,  8.  But 
what  strikes  him  especially  with  astonishment  is  the  addiction  to  "  art  for  art's  sake." 
This  has  been  a  cant  and,  to  some  extent,  a  creed  in  our  time.  When  carried  out,  it 
must  mean  the  valuation  of  human  genius  and  talent  regardlessly  of  the  subjects  on 
which,  and  the  ends  for  which,  it  is  employed.  No  matter  how  sensualizing  or  other- 
wise debasing  to  feeling  the  painter's  or  the  sculptor's  theme,  the  cleverness  with 
which  he  treats  form  and  colour,  light  and  shade,  is  only  worth  attending  to.  These 
doctrines  may  be  carried  into  the  church,  which  may  become  a  place  for  mere  imagina- 
tive and  sensuous  enjoyment ;  and  people  may  find  they  cannot  "  look  up  to  God  "  in 
a  building  whoso  lines  are  incorrectly  drawn,  or  where  the  latest  fashion  of  ecclesiastical 
foppery  is  not  kept  up.  By-aud-by  it  will  be  discovered  that  the  house  of  God  has 
been  turned  into  a  theatre,  containing,  it  is  true,  an  altar,  but,  like  the  altar  in  the 
great  theatre  at  Athens^  serving  for  little  more  than  a  station  of  performers.  Spiritual 
worship  is  extinct  with  us  if  we  cannot  lift  up  eye,  and  heart,  and  hand,  and  voice  to  the 
Eternal  with  equal  joy,  if  need  demand,  in  the  barn  as  in  the  cathedral.    But  how 


2oe  rSB  BOOK  Ot'  THE  fROPflET  ISAtAfl.    [oa.  xvii.  1—14. 

wide-reaching  the  principle  of  idolatry !  The  delight  in  genius,  the  admiration  for  it, 
may  enter  into  religious  feeling  as  one  of- its  richest  elements;  it  may,  on  the  other 
hand,  be  separated  from  religious  feeling  altogether,  and  be  the  principle  of  an 
idolatry. 

IL  It  IB  IMPURE  AND  CRCKL.  There  is  an  allusion  to  the  worship  of  Baal  and 
Ashtoreth,  and  wliat  we  ktjow  of  these  deities  indicates  beings  conceived  by  those 
worshippers  as  dark,  wrathful,  malignant,  and  lustful.  Baal,  often  named  in  the 
plural  Baalim,  is  closely  related  to,  if  not  identical  with,  Moloch  (see  Jer.  vii.  31 ; 
xix.  5;  zxxii.  35),  whose  terrible  wrath  was  supposed  to  be  manifested  in  the  torrid 
heat  of  summer,  and  who  exacted  human  sacrifices.  In  great  dangers  kings  sacrificed 
to  this  Bel-Moloch  their  only  sons  (2  Kings  iii.  27) ;  and  this  is  sternly  denounced  in 
Lev.  XX.  3.  It  would  seem  that  Israelites  in  their  decle"nsion  confounded  the  nature  of 
this  heathen  god  with  that  of  Jehovah  (Judg.  xi.  34;  Numb.  xxv.  4).  Read  the 
eloquent  protest  of  Micah  vi.  7,  and  see  how  clearly  in  that  animated  passage  the 
contrast  is  made  between  the  merciful  and  holy  religion  of  Jehovah  and  the  cursed 
ritual  of  Baal  or  of  Moloch.  "  To  do  justly,  to  love  mercy,  to  walk  humbly  with  God," 
— these  are  the  requirements  of  true  religion.  By  the  side  of  Baal  was  Ashtoreth  in 
Canaan  (Judg.  x.  6)  and  in  Syria.  The  Greeks  called  her  Astarte.  At  Babylon  she 
was  known  as  Mylitta  or  Beltis,'  consort  of  Bel ;  and  Herodotus  describes  tlie  darkly 
superstitious  and  impure  character  of  her  worship,  which  involved  the  profanation  of 
women  (i.  199).  The  religion  of  Israel  knows  no  goddess ;  the  people  itself,  when  true 
to  their  faith,  felt  themselves  to  be  as  a  people,  the  bride  of  Jehovah,  and  unfaithful- 
ness to  him  is  a  crime  analogous  to  unfaithfulness  to  the  nnptial  tie.  "Israel  my 
people,  I  their  God,"  is  the  symbolic  word  of  the  covenant  between  spirit  and  Spirit, 
which  religion  ever  is,  in  its  truth  and  purity.  There  are  lessons  for  us  in  all  this. 
There  are  ever  tendencies  at  work  to  degrade  and  defile  the  holy  ideas  of  our  religion. 
Sometimes  it  is  wealth,  sometimes  it  is  ignorance,  sometimes  greed  and  other  passions. 
Men  would  subdue  the  spirit  of  Christianity  to  their  own  liking,  and  bow  down,  if  not 
to  the  work  of  their  fingers,  to  the  impure  idols  of  an  unchastoned  fancy.  The 
preacher,  the  true  prophet,  must,  on  the  other  hand,  be  ever  upholding  the  puiity  ol 
doctrine,  and  exhibit  those  grand  requirements  to  which  the  conscience  must,  how- 
ever reluctantly,  respond.  And  he  must  lay  it  to  heart  that  the  purer  religion  can 
never  he  the  most  fashionable.  If  the  people  turn  aside  to  groves  and  altars  more 
Auited  to  their  taste,  at  least  let  him  make  it  his  one  concern  to  "  save  himself  and 
them  that  hear  him." — J. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — Forgetfulness  of  God  and  its  consequences.  I.  God  as  an  Object 
OF  THE  soul's  ATTENTION.  He  is  the  "  God  of  men's  salvation."  His  Name  calls  up 
all  those  ideas  of  power,  of  grace,  of  goodness,  necessary  to  the  Deliverer,  the  Saviour. 
To  acknowledge  that  such  a  Being  exists  is  not  enough  ;  the  eye  of  the  spirit  must  be 
turned  to  him,  its  gaze  fixed  upon  him,  its  ear  bent  towards  the  place  of  his  holy 
oracle.  Micah  says  in  evil  times,  "I  will  look  unto  Jehovah  ;  I  will  wait  for  the  God 
of  my  salvation:  my  God  will  hear  nic."  To  think  of  God  in  his  moral  relations  to 
us  brings  confidence  and  security  to  the  heart.  And  hence  the  expressive  image  of  the 
Rock  on  which  the  fortress  stands,  as  symbolic  of  him,  so  frei|uently  employed  in 
Scripture  (Deut.  xxxii.  4,  15,  18,  30,  31,  37;  1  Sam.  ii.  2;  2  Sam.  xxii,  2,  3,  32', 
Ps.  xviii.  31,  46 ;  xix.  14 ;  xxviii.  1 ;  xxx.  1,  2).  How  much  depends  in  our  intel- 
lectual life  oii  attraction — the  grasp  of  objects,  the  remembrance  of  what  they  are, 
the  firm  hold  of  principles  and  truths]  Impressions  are  made  upon  us  as  in  wax  or  in 
running  water,  without  this  tension  of  the  will.  And  how  in  various  ways  does 
Scripture  press  upon  us  the  need  of  attention  in  religious  things  1  "  Karnestly  give 
heed,"  "Remember,"  "Be  mindful,"  "Look  unto  the  Lord,"  eic,  are  all  exhortations 
implying  the  need  of  prayer  and  habitual  direction  of  the  spirit  to  higher  things. 
There  can  be  no  clear  memory  and  no  confident  expectation  where  the  mind  has  been 
lax  and  listless. 

II.  Consequences  op  forgettinq  God.  Ephraim,  turning  away  from  its  true  rocky 
stronghold  in  Jehovah,  will  see  its  own  castles  lie  in  ruin  and  desolation.  The 
estrangement  from  God  is  marked  by  indulgen-e  in  pleasure  and  idolatry.  The  people 
planted  pleasant  gardens,  and  sowed  them  with  strange  grapes ;  i.e.  formed  an  alliancv 


ea.  XVII.  1—14.]    THE  SOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIaH.  m 

with  a  stranger,  the  King  of  Damascus.  And  these  new  institutions  were  carefully 
fenced,  i.e.  apparently  they  were  established  as  a  state  religion.  "  And  the  very  next 
morning  he  had  brought  into  blossom  what  he  had  sown.  The  foreign  layer  had  shot 
up  like  a  hot-house  plant,  i.e.  the  alliance  had  speedily  grown  into  a  hearty  agree- 
ment, and  had  already  produced  one  blossom  at  any  rate,  viz.  the  plan  of  a  joint 
attack  upon  Judah.  But  this  plantation,  so  flattering  and  promising  for  Israel,  and 
which  had  succeeded  so  rapidly,  and  to  all  appearance  so  happily,  was  a  harvest  heap 
for  the  day  of  judgment."  The  closing  words  of  this  strophe  are  impressive:  "The 
day  of  grief  and  desperate  sorrow ; "  or,  "  The  day  of  deep  wounds  and  deadly  sorrow  of 
heat."  Let  us  fix  on  these  words.  Let  us  forget  Bphraim  for  the  moment,  and  think 
of  the  individual,  think  of  ourselves.  The  words  hint  at  remorse,  which  has  been 
called  "  the  echo  of  a  lost  virtue."  It  will  come  upon  all  of  us  in  so  far  as,  remem- 
bering many  things  not  to  be  neglected,  self-interest,  duty  to  family,  Church,  country, 
we  have  yet  forgotten  the  one  thing  needful — have  not  brought  all  uur  life's  concerns 
iiito  that  unity  which  reference  to  tlie  Supreme  Will  imparts.  Life  should  be  direct 
and  simple ;  a  simple  piety  can  only  render  it  so.  There  may  be  mindfulness  about 
many  things,  distracting  us  from  the  central  interest.  How  can  it  avail  us  to  have 
remembered  to  be  prudent,  to  have  regarded  public  opinion,  to  have  taken  care  to  be 
with  the  majority,  to  swim  with  the  stream,  and  in  the  end  we  find  that  this  has 
been  a  turning  ot  the  hack  on  God,  and  so  an  illusion,  a  misconception  of  life?  For 
if  God  be  remembered,  nothing  important  will  be  forgotten ;  if  he  be  forgotten,  nothing 
is  truly  seen — attention  is  beguiled  by  fantasy,  and  life  becomes  the  pursuit  of  a 
dream. — J. 

Vers.  12 — 14. — Sounds  from  afar.  In  the  distance  the  prophet  hears  a  vague 
tumult,  like  tliat  of  the  sea  with  its  roaring,  incoming  tide.  It  is  the  noise  of  the 
invading  host.  Headers  will  recollect  the  powerful  passage  describing  the  eve  of  the 
battle  of  Waterloo — the  dull  distant  sound  repeated  until  the  conviction  flashes,  "  It 
is — it  is — the  cannon's  opening  roarl"  So  does  the  prophet  listen  to  the  uprotr  of 
the  advancing  Assyrians. 

L  The  poetic  representation.  It  is  one  of  sublimity  and  terror,  appealing  througn 
the  sense  of  hearing  to  the  imagination,  and  calling  up  indefinable  alarm  and  sorrow. 
He  hears  in  the  distance  the  gathering  of  a  multitude  of  nations,  represented  by  the 
imperial  name  of  Asshur.  These  hosts  spread  out  in  long  line  like  the  rolling  wave, 
one  excited  surging  mass,  threatening  to  carry  everything  before  it  into  destruction. 
Such  an  image  may  represent  any  great  movement  which  seems  at  any  time  to 
threaten  the  spiritual  life  of  a  Church,  of  a  nation.  Never  was  there  a  time  wher 
anxious  listeners  did  not  hear  such  rising  sounds  in  the  distance;  the  statesman 
trembling  for  the  welfare  of  institutions,  the  believer  for  the  stability  of  faith.  Is 
there  just  cause  For  alarm?    Let  the  prophet  answer. 

II.  The  prophecy  of  judoment.  Remarkable  is  the  [licture  of  the  sudden  change. 
The  power  of  the  Divine  Word  is  instantaneously  felt.  "It  costs  God  simply  a 
threatening  word,  and  the  mass  all  flies  apart,  and  falls  into  dust,  and  whirls  about  in 
all  directions,  like  the  chaff  of  threshing-floors  in  high  situatinns,  or  like  dust  whirled 
up  by  the  storm."  In  the  evening  the  destruction  of  the  Assyrians  begins,  and  in  the 
morning  they  are  completely  destroyed.  And  the  oracle  ends  with  an  expression  of 
triumph  over  this  poition  and  lot  of  the  spoiler  and  the  plunderer. 

Lessons.  1.  The  Church,  Christianity,  religion,  civilization,  seem  in  every  age  to 
be  tlireatened  ;  yet  they  are  ever  safe.  Force,  numbers,  armies,  have  but  the  show  of 
strength  when  confronted  with  the  spiritual  world.  2.  God  is  ever  in  his  heaven — 
cannot  and  will  not  desert  his  place.  3.  His  judgments  and  rebukes  are  the  expression 
of  the  eternal  truth  of  things,  and  must  prevail.-— J, 

Ver.  14, — The  gloomy  evening.  "Behold  at  evening-tide  trouble."  We  all  love 
beautiful  evenings,  whether  on  land  or  sea.  Then,  when  the  clouds  of  purple  snd  amber 
across  the  horizon  constitute  a  royal  chariot  foi'  the  setting  sun,  we  gaze  with  admiration 
and  delight  on  the  glorious  close  of  day. 

I.  Trouble  is  never  so  sad  as  in  the  evbnino.  At  morning  or  midday  we  have 
more  of  itrength  to  bear  it ;  we  can  brace  our  energies  to  fight  the  battle  or  to  endura 


298  THE    nOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xvu.  1— K 


the  burden.  But  in  the  evening,  when  heart  and  strength  fail,  we  look  for  quiet 
comfort  »nd  considerate  friends,  and  the  gentle  words  of  love.  Trouble  in  the  evening 
is  a  pensive  si;;ht.  But  if  it  be  connected  with  sin,  with  pergonal  wrong-doing,  how 
bitter  a  cup  it  isj  Then,  when  there  should  be  memory  of  holy  deeds  and  earnest  words; 
then,  when  we  may  fairly  think  of  an  honourable  reputation  well  earned,  and  an  influence 
which  we  may  hope,  indeed,  will  be  an  "  after-glow  "  after  we  are  dead.  Yet  bo  it  is. 
Sin  has  its  judgments,  whicli  "  follow  after"  even  here  below. 

II.  Teouble  in  the  evening  is  well  explained.  The  prophet  says"(ver.  IS), 
"  God  shall  rebuke  them."  It  is  all  contained  in  that.  Rebuke !  That  involves  in  its 
utterance  conscience  and  memory,  else  how  could  we  feel  rebuke  ?  We  feel  ajl  that  is 
meant  by  rebuke  more  from  some  than  others.  It  does  not  always  need  words.  A  little 
spectacle  that  recalls  some  past  scene,  an  old  letter,  the  visiting  of  half-forgotten 
[jiaces,  the  swift  rush  at  times  of  old  memories, — these  often  have  rebukes  in  them.  We 
have  neglected  so  many  never-recurring  opportunities,  we  have  scattered  so  many  seedi 
of  evil.  But  when  God,  the  living  God,  rebukes  us,  how  can  we  stand  ?  For  he  knows 
our  most  secret  thoughts,  and  in  his  book  all  the  life  is  written. 

IIL  Tbouble  in  the  evening  mat  still  be  the  last  angel  of  God's  mekct  here. 
Even  then  it  is  evening,  and  the  light  lingers.  The  Saviour's  power  to  save  is  still 
the  same.  The  city  of  refuge  has  its  gates  open.  God's  renewing  and  redeeming 
grace  may  yet  be  ours.  Not  even  then  need  we  despair;  for  as  there  is  a  strain  of  hops 
coming  for  the  nation  Israel  which  will  occupy  us  further  on  in  these  prophecies,  sc 
there  is  hope  in  personal  life,  even  in  the  latter  days,  if  we  turn  to  the  Lord  with  ful 
purpose  of  heart.  The- lingering  light  of  evening  still  falls  on  the  cross  of  hini  who  said 
"  I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance." — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Seduction.  In  the  spoliation  and  consequent  decrepitude  of  Damascus 
and  Samaria  we  have  a  picture  of — 

I.  A  nation  denuded  or  its  power.  Under  the  judgments  of  Jehovah  the  proud 
city  of  Damascus  becomes  a  "  ruinous  heap  "  (ver.  1),  the  populous  towns  are  pasturage 
for  herds  and  flocks  (ver.  2),  the  strong  places  are  reduced  to  utter  weakness  like  th« 
departed  glory  of  Israel  (ver.  3) ;  under  his  judgment  Bphraim  also  shall  waste  away, 
shall  be  as  barren  as  the  reaped  corn-field,  shall  be  reduced  miserably  like  the  tree  on 
whose  uppermost  branches  only  a  few  thin  berries  can  be  discovered  (vers.  4 — 6).  Under 
the  action  of  God's  righteous  laws,  the  strong  nation  is  thus  reduced  by  sin,  from  power 
to  weakness,  from  pride  to  humiliation,  from  wealth  to  poverty,  from  populousn<;ss  tc 
depopulation.  And  it  is  always  sin  which  is  the  true  account  of  the  reduction. 
Violence  may  be  the  immediate  cause  of  overthrow,  but  violence  only  succeeds  when 
corruption  has  brought  enfeeblement  and  decline.  Greece  fell,  not  by  the  Roman 
■word,  but  by  its  own  inherent  weakness.  The  fall  of  Rome  was  due,  not  to  the  might 
of  the  barbarians,  but  to  the  corruption  which  sapped  it  of  its  strength,  and  thinned 
the  ranks  of  its  citizens.  If  England  falls  at  some  future  day,  it  will  not  be  because 
some  European  power  has  become  irresistible,  but  because  luxury  will  have  bred 
corruption,  and  corruption  have  laid  it  open  to  the  weapon  of  its  foes.  Its  fatness  will 
become  thin,  its  strength  will  be  seen  only  on  its  uppermost  boughs ;  it  will  fall  a  prey 
to  the  first  strong  adversaiy  that  assails  it. 

II.  A  Chubch  beeeft  of  its  beauty  and  its  influence.  Churches  do  not,  usually, 
suffer  loss  by  the  hand  of  violence.  But,  by  sins  of  their  own,  they  are  often  painfully 
reduced,  so  that  they  are  as  a  man  whose  "  fatness  has  waxed  thin,"  as  the  field  of  corn 
that  has  been  cut,  as  a  tree  stripped  of  its  goodly  fruit,  with  nolliing  left  but  "  two  or 
three  berries  in  the  top  of  the  uttermost  bough."  The  enemies  which  work  this  waste, 
which,  bring  this  pitiful  reduction,  are  these.  1.  Discord  within  the  ranks.  2.  The 
spirit  of  worldliness,  robbing  of  devotion  and  therefore  of  strength.  3.  Unbelief,  acting 
as  a  cancer  that  cuts  off  all  spiritual  nourishment.  4.  Inactivity,  begetting  selfishnesi 
of  aim,  and  causing  the  Church  to  miss  that  noble  exercise  which  is  the  source  and 
spiing  of  all  moral  vigour.  The  Church  that  would  not  be  thus  wretchedly  reduced 
must  sedulously  shun  these  sources  of  reduction ;  that  one  which  has  to  lament  its  wasted 
condition  must  "  repent,  and  do  the  first  works,"  and  the  field  shall  yet  be  covered  with 
the  precious  grain,  the  tree  with  its  clusters  of  fruit. 

III.  ThS    individual    man    deprived    op    UI8.   position    OB    HIB     BTEBNOTH.        In 


OH.  xvn.  1—14.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHBT  ISAIAH.  299 

individual  instances,  tte  words  of  the  text  find  illustration.  1.  When  the  proud, 
godless  man  is  brought  down  from  his  high  position ;  when  of  all  in  which  he  gloried 
nothing  but  a  few  berries  on  the  topmost  boughs  are  left.  Let  youth  shrink  from 
entering  on  a  course  which  will  certainly  have  this  pitiful  end ;  let  those  who  are 
pursuing  it  abandon  it  at  the  very  earliest  hour.  2.  When  death  (the  penalty  of  sin) 
intimates  its  approach,  when  the  leanness  and  fruitlessness  of  death  are  ap|iaient,  then 
let  a  man  ask  whether  there  is  life  in  its  fulness  and  fruitfulness  awaiting  him  on  the 
other  shore. — 0. 

Vers.  7,  8. — Tht  function  of  adversity.  I.  The  pkevalbnoe  of  trouble  in  this 
WOBLD  OF  BIN.  "  That  day "  was  the  day  of  national  disaster,  and,  therefore,  of 
individual  distress.  In  the  more  settled  and  durable  condition  of  modern  times  and 
Western  lands,  we  are  much  less  liable  to  suffer  from  this  particular  cause.  But 
civilization  brings  its  own  perils  and  its  own  troubles,  and  while  sin  lasts  "  the  day  "  ol 
sorrow  will  be  continually  recurring.  How  many  are  the  sources  whence  it  may  spring ! 
Pecuniary  embarrassment ;  disappointment ;  the  loss  of  kindred  or  friends,  or  (what  is 
worse)  the  loss  of  their  love  and  their  friendship;  humiliation;  ill  health,  and  the  fear 
of  sudden  removal  from  those  who  are  clinging,  and  perhaps  dependent;  a  sense  ol 
guilt  before  God;  a  sense  of  defeat  as  a  Christian  aspirant  or  Christian  workman,  etc. 

II.  God's  purpose  in  BENniNO  it.  1.  Ood  does  send  it.  (See  Amos  iii.  6.)  He 
directly  inflicts  it,  or  he  furthers  it  in  his  Divine  providence,  or,  at  the  least,  he  permits 
it  (see,  also.  Matt.  x.  29).  2.  He  sends  it  to  draw  us  to  himself.  (1)  To  withdraw  us 
from  the  inferior  and  the  untrustworthy  objects ;  that  a  man  may  "  not  look  to  the 
altars,  the  work  of  his  hands ; "  that  we  may  discover,  what  we  are  so  slow  to  learu, 
that  all  human  help  and  all  earthly  securities  are  insuf&cient  and  unavailing ;  that 
these  things  of  our  own  devising  and  constructing,  which  our  fingers  have  made,  break 
down  in  the  time  of  our  distress,  and  leave  us  "  naked  to  our  enemies."  (2)  To  draw 
us  to  the  mighty  and  the  holy  One.  Our  Maker  will  not  want  the  power  to  redeem 
us.  The  Soly  One  of  Israel  will  not  fail  to  sanctify  to  us  the  evil  he  has  sent  us.  He 
draws  us  to  himself  that,  at  his  throne  of  grace,  in  sacred  fellowship  with  him,  we  may 
l>e  drawn  to  penitence,  to  trustfulness,  to  prayerfulness,  to  the  consecration  or  the 
rededication  of  our  lives  to  his  service. — 0. 

Vers.  10,  11. — T?ie  sin  and  doom  of  ungodliness.    We  learn — 

I.  That  Gtod  is  wronged  anb  grieved  by  oub  neglect  of  himself  as  well 
A8  BY  OUE  disobedience  TO  HIS  LAWS.  Men  sometimes  mistakenly  suppose  that 
their  sin  is  limiti.d  by  the  number  of  tlieir  transgressions  of  God's  positive  enactments. 
They  make  a  very  serious  mistake  in  so  judging.  Great  guilt,  indeed,  is  contracted  by 
the  breach  of  Divine  commandment,  by  setting  at  defiance  the  "  Thou  shalt  not "  of 
sacred  Scripture.  But  our  obligation  strikes  deeper  far,  and,  when  we  fail,  our  sin 
includes  immeasurably  more  than  this.  God  deserves,  and  he  desires,  and  he  even 
demands,  that  we,  his  human  children,  should  render  to  him,  himself,  all  that  filial  love 
and  fellowship  which  is  iuefrom  such  beloved  and  enriched  ones  to  such  a  gracious  and 
bountiful  Father.  His  charge  against  us  is'Eot  merely  that  we  have  done  numbers  of 
things  which  he  has  prohibited ;  it  is  that  we  have  lived  on  through  days,  weeks, 
months,  years,  through  whole  periods  and  stages  of  our  life,  and  have  forgotten  him,  the 
God  of  our  salvation,  have  not  been  mindful  of  him,  the  Rock  of  our  strength ;  it  is 
that  we  have  taken  blessings  and  deliverances  from  his  strong,  redeeming  hand,  and 
have  been  content  to  spend  our  days  in  ungodliness,  withholding  the  gratitude,  the 
affection,  the  submission,  the  willing  and  joyous  service  which  a  relationship  so  near  as 
is  ours  to  him,  and  which  benefits  so  great  as  are  his  to  us,  do  emphatically  demand. 
The  simple  and  true  answer  to  the  question,  "  What  have  we  failed  to  render  to  our 
redeeming  and  our  beneficent  God  ?  "  should  cover  us  with  shame  and  send  us  to  our 
knees  in  penitence. 

II.  That  an  ungodly  life  is  not  only  a  peolonobd  iniquity,  but  is  also  a 
SUPREME  MISTAKE.  "  Bi  cause  thou  hast  forgotten  .  .  .  therefore  shalt  thou  plant 
pleasant  plants  .  .  .  hut  the  harvest  shall  he  a  heap"  etc.  The  mistake  of  ungodUness^ 
is  seen  in  that :  1.  It  leaves  out  and  loses  all  the  real' nobility  from  human  life — all  that 
which  rMses  man's  nature  above  the  brutes',  and  connects  it  with  the  angelic  ami 


SOe  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  iSAlAH.    [ch- ^'"i- 1— 1* 

Divine.  2.  It  includes  only  that  ■which  is  absolutely  insufficient  and  unsatisfactory.  It 
supplies  treasures  which  the  thief  can  steal,  joys  which  pall  and  perish,  Iriendships 
which  linger  only  for  a  few  passing  years.  It  has  nothing  which  fills  and  satisfiei  the 
human  soul,  made,  as  that  is  made,  for  heavenly  wisdom,  for  holy  service,  for  the 
worship  and  the  love  of  God.  Its  harvest  is  only  a  heap  of  hu^ks,  and  not  the  granary 
of  life-sustaining  corn.  3.  It  makes  no  provision  lor  the  time  of  trial — for  "  the  day  of 
grief  and  of  desperate  sorrow,"  for  the  day  of  death,  for  the  day  of  judgment. — 0. 

Ver«.  12 — 14. — The  overthrow  of  the  enemies  of  God.  I.  That  the  enemies  of 
God'b  people  ABE  THE  ENEMIES  OF  GoD  HIMSELF.  "  God  will  rebuke  "  those  who  come 
up  against  his  people  to  spoil  and  to  rob  them.  Those  who  assail  Israel  come  beneath 
liis  ban,  and  are  subject  to  his  "woe."  Jesus  Christ  taught  nothing  more  plainly  or 
emphatically  than  that  they  who  befriended  his  disciples  were,  in  his  estimation, 
befriending  him  (Matt.  x.  40 — 42  ;  xxv.  40).  It  is  equally  true  that  those  who  oppose 
his  friends  and  disciples  are  accounted  his  own  enemies.  Woe  imto  him  that  puts  a 
stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  any  of  his  "  little  ones  "  1  To  wrong  them  is  to  aggrieve 
him, 

II.  That  theib  worst  success  is  in  despoiling  the  holt  of  tiieib  heritage. 
There  is  nothing  worse  that  can  be  said  of  them  than  that  they  are  "  those  that  spoil, 
that  rob  us."  •  I5ut  the  worst  despoiling  is  that  which  robs  the  wise  and  good  of  their 
highest  heritage,  of  the  excellency  which  they  liave  in  Christ — of  i  eaoe,  of  joy,  of 
spiritual  integrity,  of  moral  beauty,  of  helpfulness,  of  hope. 

III.  That  they  make  theib  assault  with  every  confidence  of  success.  The 
enemies  of  Israel  came  on  with  a  "  noise  like  the  noise  of  the  seas,"  like  the  "rushing 
of  mighty  waters,"  i.e.  with  the  dash  and  daring  of  tliose  that  are  bent  on  carrying 
everything  before  them.  Sin  is  often  arrogantly  confident;  it  has  no  belief  in  the 
inviolable  purity,  in  the  impregnable  uprightness,  of  the  people  of  God.  It  says  with  a 
sueer  that  every  man  has  his  price.  It  believes  that  its  wiiipon  will  pierce  any  shield, 
however  firm  ;  will  slay  any  soul,  however  stron_'.  It  gds,  Goliath-like,  confidently  to 
the  encounter  ;  the  noise  of  its  impudent  assurance  is  in  the  air. 

IV.  That  they  abe  liable  to  be  utterly  and  immediately  overthrown.  When 
God  rebukes  them  they  "  flee  far  off,  and  are  chased  as  the  chaff  ot  the  mountains 
before  the  wind,"  etc.  "  At  evening-tide  is  trouble,  and  before  the  morning  he  is  not." 
So  absolutely,  so  speedily,  is  the  enemy  destroyed.  Dues  it  accord  with  omr  observation 
that  evil  is  thus  suddenly  and  irremediably  cast  down  ?  The  truth  is :  1.  That  when 
the  fatal  blow  falls  it  strikes  that  which  is  ripe  for  destruction.  The  last  blow  of  the 
hammer  seems  to  do  the  work ;  but,  in  fact,  it  succeeds  only  because  all  the  preceding 
ones  have  loosened  the  particles  and  made  the  final  stroke  effective.  So  when  the 
decisive  judgment  comes  down  from  Heaven,  it  brings  irrecoverable  ruin  because  long 
years  of  folly  and  of  sin  have  been  preparing  for  the  disaster  which  ensues.  2.  That 
when  God's  judgment  once  overtakes  the  sinner,  it  is  often  found  to  be  that  from  which 
there  is  no  escape  or  recovery.  The  empire  is  hopelessly  dissolved ;  the  "  house  "  is 
utterly  ruined  ;  the  family  is  scattered,  never  to  be  reimited ;  the  fortune  is  dissi|iated, 
never  to  be  repaired ;  the  reputation  is  blasted,  and  no  labours  or  severities  can  restore 
it ;  poverty,  shame,  death,  appear  and  will  take  no  denial ;  at  evening-tide  is  troublcj 
and  before  the  morning  the  worst  has  hapiiened.  (1)  Take  care  to  he  on  God's  side ;  be 
able  to  say,  "  The  Lord  is  on  my  side,"  or  there  will  be  irretrievable  disaster  at  the  end. 
(2)  Remember  that  Christ  identifies  himself  with  his  friends.  True  as  it  is  that 
those  who  assail  his  people  will  be  rebuked  of  him,  it  is  equally  true  that  they  who 
espouse  the  cause  of  his  disciples  will  win  his  approving  smile  and  his  large  reward. — C. 

Ver.  1. —  The  mission  of  Syria.  Discernment  of  this  mission,  so  far  as  it  bears  upon 
Israel,  and  carries  religious  lessons  for  all  the  generations,  depends  on  our  understanding 
the  history  of  the  times.  Two  nations,  distant  from  each  other,  contended  for  the 
country  which  lay  between  them.  Egypt  and  Assyria  both  wanted  to  be  universal 
world-powers.  Had  the  kingdom  of  David  been  kept  together,  it  might  have  effec- 
tively resisted  both  ;  but  when  separated  under  Jero)x>am,  and  encouraged  to  cherish 
rival  interests,  the  southern  portiou  naturally  inclined  to  ally  with  Egypt,  and  the 
northern  as  naturally  allied  with  Syria  to  resist  the  encroackments  of  Assyria.    To  the 


OH.  xvn.  1— 14.]    THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  301 

view  of  a  prophet  of  the  southern  kingdom,  Syria  was  the  ringleader  of  a  confederacy 
against  Judah,  and  so  against  Jehovah  and  the  Jehovah-worship.  And  to  such  a 
Jehovah-prophet,  Syria  was  the  agent  in  tempting  the  northern  kingdom  of  Israel  to 
forsake  even  its  show  of  allegiance  to  Jehovah,  and  throw  in  its  interest  altogether  with 
idolatrous  nations.  That  is  the  point  on  which  we  now  dwell.  God  carries  on  his 
work  of  grace  by  means  of  temptations  as  well  as  by  means  of  trials;  our  testings  of 
failh,  virtue,  and  obedience  are  just  as  truly  within  the  overrulings  of  God  as  are  our 
afflictions  and  our  cares.  This  is  taught  us  in  the  prologue  to  the  Book  of  Job,  where 
S.itan,  the  tempter,  is  represented  as  appearing  among  the  "  sons  ol  God," and  receiving 
Divine  commissions.  Syria  may  stand  for  the  associations  and  circumstances  which 
tested  the  allegiance  of  Israel  to  Jehovah ;  and  so  for  the  relationships  and  conditions 
of  our  life,  which  bring  out  and  prove  what  really  is  in  our  hearts  towards  the  God  of 
our  fathers.  It  is  true  that  God  tempts  no  man  in  the  sense  of  maliciously  enticing 
him  to  do  eviL  It  is  also  true  that  God  tempts  every  man  in  the  sense  of  placing  him 
in  circumstances  under  which,  while  he  may  fail  and  fall,  he  may  be  confirmed  and 
established  in  goodness.  This  view  is  strikingly  supported  by  a  passage  in  Dcut.  xiii. 
2,  3.  Tlie  prophet  who  uses  his  gift  to  persuade  men  to  forsake  the  Lord  God  is  to 
be  rije(;ted,  for  by  such  a  pro]  het  "  the  Lord  your  God  provcth  you,  to  know  whether 
ye  love  the  Lord  your  God  with  all  your  heart  and  with  all  your  soul."  All  »uch 
tempters,  whether  they  be  individuals,  classes,  or  nations,  come  at  last  under  Divine 
judgments,  as  Syria  did.     Syria  tempted  Israel — 

I.  By  the  attkactions  of  its  wealth.  Damascus  was  one  of  the  wealthiest  of 
ancient  cities,  and  situated  so  as  to  be  an  important  centre  of  trade.  The  attraction  it 
proved  to  Israel  may  be  illustrated  by  its  influence  on  the  luxurious  and  jesthetical 
king,  Ahaz.  Associations  of  wealthy  companions  are  often  serious  enticements  to 
youths.  The  entree  of  wealthy  society  makes  many  a  family  live  beyond  its  means. 
The  swiftly  growing  wealth  of  some  business  men  excites  others  to  grasp  at  wealth  by 
questionable  means. 

II.  Bt  the  ATTHA0TI0N8  OF  ITS  IDOLATBT.  Wealth  enabled  the  expressions  and 
forms  of  Syrian  idolatry  to  take  refined  and  artistic  shapes.  These  tended  to  hide  the 
abominations  which  attend  on  all  idolatrous  systems.  So,  it  may  be  shown  in  relation 
to  modern  times,  infidelity  offers  itself  in  the  garb  of  advanced  knowledge,  and  immo- 
rality appears  in  the  guise  of  exciting  pleasure.  Syrian  idolatry  would  have  presented 
but  feeble  temptation  if  it  had  looked  as  repulsive  as  it  really  was.  And  still  we  are 
so  often  "  drawn  away  and  enticed,"  because  Satan  can  appear  to  us  as  an  angel  of 
light.  Illustrate  by  the  well-known  picture  "The  Pursuit  of  Pleasure."  If  Pleasure 
were  not  such  a  lovely  syren  form,  surely  the  foolish  host  would  not  thus  vainly  pursue 
her.  The  practical  skill  of  life  is  shown  in  the  detection  of  what  a  thing  is,  no  matter 
in  what  form  it  may  appear. 

III.  Br  THE  ATTRACTIONS  OF  ITS  ALLIANCE.  Which  Bsemed  to  offer  security  for 
Israel  fiom  the  foe  which  was  becoming  so  dangerou^ly  strong.  But  it  was  soon  proved 
that  Syria  was  unable  to  protect  itself.  Its  position  exposed  it.  Its  wealth  attracted 
the  invader.  It  was  but  an  arm  of  flesh,  and  was  powerless  when  ihe  evil  day  came. 
It  took  I.-rael  away  from  allegiance  to  Jehovah  and  trust  in  him,  and  brought  on  that 
kingdom,  the  curse  of  him  who  trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm.  As  a 
general  application,  observe  that  untried  character  and  untested  piety  are  of  little 
worth.  No  man  can  hope  to  receive  the  crown  of  life,  save  as  he  is  tempted,  tried,  and 
proved.     That  crown  belongs  only  to  those  who  "stand  in  the  evil  day." — K.  T. 

Ver.  6. — The  LorcPs  remnant.  Figuratively  here  in  called  to  mind  the  fact  that 
God's  dealiugs  are  never  wholly  destructive;  they  never  utterly  desolate;  there  is 
always  a  mitigation,  always  a  spared  remnant.  The  figure  used,  of  the  few  olive  berries 
left  for  the  gleaner,  is  a  very  striking  one,  if  the  customs  of  the  olive-growing  countries 
is  understood.  In  Thomson's  'Laud  aud  the  Book'  there  is  a  full  description.  "Early 
in  autumn  the  berries  begin  to  drop  off  of  themselves,-or  are  shaken  off  by  the  wind. 
They  are  allowed  to  remain  under  the  trees  for  some  time,  guarded  by  the  watchman  of 
*he  town — a  very  familiar  Bible  character.  Presently  public  proclamations  are  made 
that  the  owners  may  gather  the  fruit.  And  in  Noxember  comes  the  general  and  final 
summons.    No  olives  are  now  safe  unless  the  owner  looks  after  them,  for  the  watchmen 


302  THE   BOOK   OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xvn.  1—14. 

are  removed,  and  the  orchards  are  alive  with  men,  women,  and  children.  It  is  a  merry 
time,  and  the  laugli  and  the  song  echo  far  and  wide.  Everywhere  the  people  are  in  the 
trees, '  shaking '  tliem  with  all  their  might,  to  bring  down  the  fruit.  The  effort  is  to 
njake  a  clear  sweep  of  all  the  crop ;  but  in  spite  of  shaking  and  beating,  there  is  always 
a  gleaning  left — '  two  or  three  berries  in  the  top  of  the  uttermost  boughs,  four  or  five 
in  the  outermost  fruitful  branches.'  These  are  afterwards  gleaned  up  by  the  very 
poor,  who  have  no  trees  of  their  own."  Matthew  Henry  well  expresses  the  thought  to 
which  this  figure  directs  us :  "  Mercy  is  here  reserved,  in  a  parenthesis,  in  the  midst  ol 
judgment,  for  a  remnant  that  should  escape  the  common  ruin  of  the  kingdom  of  the 
ten  tribes.  Though  the  Assyrians  took  all  the  care  they  could  that  none  should  slip 
out  of  their  net,  yet  the  meek  of  the  earth  were  hidden  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  angor, 
and  had  their  lives  given  them  for  a  prey,  and  made  comfortable  to  them  by  their 
retirement  to  the  land  of  Judah,  where  they  had  the  libfirty  of  Grod's  courts."  God's 
remnants  are  illustrated  in  the  Ploud ;  fate  of  Sodom  ;  0  ■ptii'ity ;  Elijah's  time;  and  siege 
by  the  Xlomans  of  Jerusalem.  Always  there  has  been  "a remnant  according  to  the 
election  of  grace."  This  remnant  has  shown  in  every  age  that  God's  judgments  are  never — 

I.  Vindictive.     They  are  always,  and  for  every  one— 

II.  Disciplinary.     And  they  are  so  mitigated  as — 

III.  Never  to  cbubh  out  hope  for  thb  future. — R.  T. 

Ver.  7. — Eyes  turned  to  God  only.  Cheyne's  translation  is,  "  In  that  day  shall  the 
earth-bom  look  towards  his  Maker,  and  his  eyes  shall  have  regard  to  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel."  The  reference  seems  to  be  to  those  who,  after  the  Assyrian  conquest  of  Israel 
accepted  Hezekiah's  invitation,  returned  to  Jerusalem,  giving  up  their  confiiience  in 
idols,  and  looking  with  single  eye  to  Jehovah,  and  serving  him  with  sincere  hearts. 
The  figure  suggests  for  consideration  the  possible  attitudes  of  human  vision  towards 
God. 

I.  There  is  the  blinded  vision.  Two  things  blind :  1.  Ignorance,  as  illustrated, 
in  the  case  of  the  heathen.  2.  Wilfulness,  as  'Uustiated  in  all  who  are  living  in  sia, 
The  one  blindness  is  a  calamity,  calling  forth  our  pity ;  the  other  is  a  crime,  calling 
for  our  indignation.  There  is  also  a  judicial  blindness — the  stroke  of  God  upon  those 
who  have  misused  their  eyesight,  keeping  it  fixed  on  vanity,  not  lifted  up  to  the 
heavens,  "  from  whence  cometh  man's  help."  They  who  will  not  see  shall  not  be  able 
to  see. 

II.  There  is  the  dimmed  vision.  Influenced  by  surrounding  atmospheres  of  (1) 
thought;  (2)  social  custom;  (3)  familiar  errors.  Nowadays  men  are  sadly  suffering 
from  dimmed  vision.  Fogs  of  prevailing  unbelief  are  for  a  time  half  hiding  God, 
and  even  Christians  are  troubled  lest  the  dimness  should  prove  to  be  in  their  eyes. 
The  evil  is  only  in  the  medium  through  which  the  eye  looks. 

III.  There  is  the  divided  vision.  Which  can  see  both  God  and  self,  and  tries 
hard  to  keep  both,  side  by  side,  in  the  field.  Of  some  in  the  olden  times  it  was  said, 
"  They  feared  the  Lord,  and  served  other  gods ; "  and  this  must  be  the  description  of 
very  many  in  the  modern.    "  Their  heart  is  divided."     They  cannot  see  "  Jesus  only." 

IV.  There  is  the  cleared  vision.  Oftentimes  cleansed  and  purified  by  the 
medicine  of  affliction,  as  in  the  association  of  the  text.  God's  chastisements  are  Ms 
teaching  us  to  see. 

V.  There  is  the  concentrated  vision.  Eyes  turned  to  God  only.  The  sign  of 
entire  devotement;  full  consecration.  An  eye  single,  and  fixed  on  one  object.  This 
one  thing  I  will  do,  "  I  will  lift  up  mine  eyes  unto  the  hills."  Plead  the  call  and  per- 
suasion  of  the  risen  and  living  Christ,  "  Anoint  thine  eyes  with  eye-salve,  that  thou 
may  est  see." — B.  T. 

Ver.  10. — Ood  our  Bock.  Here  called  the  "  Rock  of  thy  fortress  ;"  and  contrasting 
with  the  fortress-cities,  which  proved  no  defence,  and  the  fortress-rocks,  in  which  the 
refugees  had  found  safe  shelter.  -  The  city  represented  man's  power  to  defend  ;  the  rode 
represents  Gud's  power.  According  to  the  circum.stances  of  the  age,  and  in  view  of  the 
machinery  of  war  then  in  use,  the  steep  rock  was  a  better-safety  than  the  walled  city. 
The  figure  of  God  as  a  Rook  is  found  very  early  in  Scripture,  and  was  peihaps  associated 
with  the  fact  <>f  God's  revealing  himself  from  the  mount,  or  rock,  of  SiuaL    Moset 


en.  xvn.  1—14.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PKOPHBT  ISAIAH.  303 

pleads  in  striking  similarity  with  Tsainh,  saying,  "Then  he  forsook  God  which  made 
him,  and  lightly  esteemed  the  Rock  of  his  salvation  ;  "  "  Of  the  Rock  that  begat  thee 
thou  art  unmindful,  and  hast  foriiotten  God  that  formed  thee  "  (Deut.  xxxii.  15,  18). 

I.  Man's  pebils  as  a  moral  being.  These  can  be  illustrated  from  the  evils  and  the 
perils  of  social  and  national  life.  They  can  be  opened  out  fully  under  three  headings  : 
(1)  intellectual;  (2)  moral;  (3)  religious. 

II.  Fob  buch  perils  man  can  never  provide  efficient  defences.  Intellectual 
safeiJViards  fail  before  the  subtleties  of  aggressive  unbelief.  Moral  safeguards  fail  before 
the  uprising  swell  of  passions.  Formal  religious  safeguards  fail  to  satisfy  when  heart 
begins  to  cry.  In  the  dangerous  ways  of  an  earth  full  of  temptation  and  evil,  "  it  is 
not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps." 

II  [.  Man's  safety  from  all  perils  is  in  God  his  Rook.  On  God  a  man  may 
stand  secure,  though  the  wild  storm-waves  beat  around  him.  In  God  a  man  may  hide 
quite  safely  until  all  the  calamities  be  overpast.  His  house  may  feel  the  blowing  of 
the  mighty  winds ;  but  it  falls  not,  for  it  is  founded  on  a  rock. 

"  God  is  my  strong  Salvation ; 
What  foe  have  I  to  fear  ? 
In  darkness  and  temptation. 

My  Lio;ht,  my  Help,  is  near. 
Tliongh  hosts  encamp  around  mo, 

Firm  to  the  iight  I  stand; 
Wliat  terror  can  confound  me. 
With  Grod  at  my  right  hand  7" 

R.  T 

Ver.  11. —  The  mission  of  disappointment;  or,  disappointment  used  a$  a  Divine 
Judgment.  In  this  passage  is  presented  the  case  of  umewarded  toil.  Seed  is  sown, 
blades  spring  up,  there  is  every  prospect  of  harvest;  but  all  hopes  are  disappointud,  the 
harvest  proved  a  failure — it  was  "  a  heap  in  the  day  of  grief  and  of  desperate  sorrow." 
One  special  feature  of  the  discipline  of  life  is  the  disappointment  of  our  most  cherished 
hopes  and  expectations.  We  build  our  castles  on  some  new  enterprise,  and  at  first  all 
seems  to  go  well ;  but  at  last  our  castle  lies  in  ruins  about  us.  We  set  our  hopes  on 
one  of  our  children,  and  fashion  for  him  a  future  of  honour  and  success,  and  our  dis- 
appointment in  him  almost  breaks  our  heart.  We  make  important  changes,  which 
promise  much,  and  result  in  the  humiliation  of  failure  and  distress.  God  works  by 
disappointments;  they  are  keener  rods  for  smiting  than  aflSictions  are.  They  bear 
more  quickly  on  the  humbling  of  man's  pride  and  on  the  conviction  of  -his  sell-help- 
lessness. They  try  temper  more.  They  too  often  result  in  hardening  and  increased 
wilfulness.  There  is  no  harder  lesson  for  us  to  learn  than  this  one,  that  God  works 
his  work  of  grace  by  shutting  doors  against  us,  and  not  permitting  us  to  achieve  the 
success  which  is  the  desire  of  our  heart.  We  plan,  we  work,  but  all  proves  in  vain 
and  so  we  learn  that  it  is  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  alone  that  maketh  rich,  and  giveth 
good  success.     We  observe — 

T.  Disappointment  differs  from  affliction.  Take  two  scenes  from  David's  life. 
The  rebellion  of  Absalom  was  an  affliction.  The  refusal  to  permit  him  to  build  the 
temple  was  a  disappointment.  The  one  was  no  more  under  God's  overruling  than  was 
the  other.  They  are  perfectly  distinct  in  character  and  in  influence.  One  difference 
may  be  effectively  illustrated.  With  "afflictions"  there  is  usually  an  enfeebled  and 
depressed  state  of  body,  involving  weakened  will  and  limitation  cf  lesistance.  With 
"  disappointments  "  there  is  usually  the  full  health  and  energy ;  and  the  conflict,  that 
ends  in  true  submission,  is  therefore  more  severe. 

II.  Disappointments  k.ay  influence  when  afflictions  would  not.  That  depends 
on  dispositions.  Many  a  man  can  bear  sufferings  who  would  be  thrown  into  the  most 
violent  struggles  by  having  his  will  crossed.  Then  that  "  crossing  of  his  will "  may  be 
the  only  way  to  accomplish  his  sanctifying.  We  should  rejoice  that  he  who  knows  the 
best  methods  of  chastisement  also  knows  us  on  whom  the  correction  comes.  For  us 
the  way  to  heaven  may  be  round  by  a  series  of  lifelong  disappointments.  Most 
persons,  perhaps,  looking  back  over  their  lives,  would  say  that  their  bitterest  hours 
were  those  in  which  they  realized  that  they  "  could  not  do  the  things  that  they  would." 


304 


THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PEOPHBT   ISAIAH,    [oh.  xvin.  1— 7. 


St.  Paul  knew  Buch  tiroes.  The  story  of  one  svich  is  very  simply  told,  but  those  who 
read  between  the  lines  mav  find  indication  of  much  feeling.  "  We  assayed  to  go  into 
Bithynia,  but  the  Spirit  suffered  us  not."  And  it  is  not  easy  to  estimate  the  educa- 
tional influence  on  our  Lord's  disciples  of  that  overwhelming  disappointment,  which 
came  when  he  who  they  thought  should  have  redeemed  Israel  was  "hung  up  and 
crucified."  That  may  be  just  the  kind  of  weapon  which  our  heavenly  Father  may 
need  for  our  correction ;  and,  in  our  various  disappointments,  we  may  hear  his  gracious 
voice  saying,  "  Should  it  be  according  to  thy  mind  ?  "— B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XVm. 
Vers.  1 — 7. — The  Homage  of  Ethiopia. 
TO  Jehovah.  Amid  the  general  excitement 
caused  by  the  advance  of  Assyria,  Ethiopia 
bUo  is  stirred,  and  stirred  to  its  furthest 
limits.  The  kin','  sends  messengers  in  boats 
t[ion  the  canals  and  rivers  to  summon  hia 
troops  to  his  standard  (vers.  1,  2).  The 
earth  stands  agaze  to  see  the  result  of  the 
•pproaohing  collision  (ver.  3) ;  but  God  rests 
calmly  in  lie^iven  while  events  are  ripening 
(vers,  i,  5).  Wlien  the  time  comes  he  will 
strike  the  b'.ow — Assyria  will  be  given  to 
the  fowls  of  tlie  air  and  the  beasts  of  the 
field  (ver.  6).  Then  Ethiopia  will  make  an 
act  of  homage  to  Jehovoh  by  the  sending  of 
a  present  to  Jerusalem  (ver.  7).  The  time 
eeems  to  be  that  immediately  preceding  the 
great  invasion  of  Sennacherib  (about  b.o. 
700),  when  fehabatok  the  Ethiopian  was 
King  of  Egypt,  and  Tirliakah  (Tahark) 
cither  Crown  Prince  under  him,  or  more 
probably  Lord  Paramount  of  Egypt  over 
him,  and  reigning  at  Napatft. 

Ver.  1. — Woe  to  the  land ;  rather,  Ho 
for  the  land  I  (comp.  eh.  xvii.  12).  Shadowing 
with  wings ;  literally,  either  the  land  of  the 
shadow  of  wings  or  the  land  of  the  noise  of 
wings,  moat  [jrobably  the  latter.  Allusion 
is  thought  to  be  made  to  the  swarms  of 
buzzing  flies,  especially  the  tsetse,  with 
which  Ethiopia  abounds.  At  the  same  time, 
these  swarms  are,  peihaps,  intended  to  be 
taken  as  emblems  of  the  hosts  of  warriors 
which  Elhicipia  can  send  fortli  (comp.  ch. 
vii.  18).  Beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia. 
The  prophet  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  had 
more  than  a  vague  knowledge  of  African 
geography.  He  seems,  however,  to  be  aware 
that  Ethiopia  U  a  land  of  niany  rivers  (see 
Baker's  '  Nile  Tributaries '),  and  he  assumes 
that  the  dominion  of  the  Ethiopian  kings 
extends  even  beyond  these  rivers  to  the 
south  of  them.  His  object  is,  as  Mr.  Chi  yne 
says,  "  to  emphasize  the  greatness  of  Ethi- 
opia." It  may  be  questioned,  however, 
whether  the  dominion   of   the   Ethiopian 


kings  of  the  time  extended  so  far  M  he 
supposed.  The  seat  of  tlieir  power  was 
Napatft,  now  G^el  Berkal,  in  the  great  bend 
of  the  Nile  between  lat.  18°  and  19°  N. ; 
and  its  southern  limit  was  probably  Khar- 
toum and  the  line  of  the  Blue  Nile  (see 
Rawlinson's  'History  of  Ancient  Egypt,' 
vol.  ii.  p.  436). 

Ver.  2. — That  sendeth  ambassadors;  rather, 
perhaps,  messengers,  as  the  word  is  trans- 
lated in  ch.  Ivii.  9  and  Prov.  xxv.  13.  They 
are  sent,  apparently,  by  the  king  to  his  own 
people.  By  the  sea.  "  The  sea  "  must  in  this 
place  necessarily  mean  the  Nile,  which  is 
called  "  the  sea "  in  Nah.  iii.  8  certainly, 
and  probably  in  oh.  xix.  5.  Vessels  of  papyrus 
could  not  possibly  have  been  employed  in 
the  very  difficult  navigation  of  the  Bed  Sea. 
Vessels  of  bulrushes.  That  some  of  the 
boats  used  upon  the  Nile  were  constructed 
of  the  papyrus  (which  is  a  sort  of  bulrush) 
we  learn  from  Herodotus  (ii.  96),  Theo- 
phrastus  ('Hist.  Plant.,'  iv.  9),  Plutarch 
('De  Isid.  et  Osir.,'  §  18),  Pliny  ('Hist. 
Nat.,'  vi.  22),  and  Luoan  ('Pharsal.,'  it.  136). 
They  are  represented  occasionally  on  the 
Egyptian  monuments.  Saying.  This  word 
is  interpolated  by  our  translators,  and  gives 
a  wrong  sense.  It  is  the  prophet  that  ad- 
diesses  the  messengers,  not  the  king  who 
sends  them.  To  a  nation  scattered  and  peeled ; 
rather,  tall  and  polished,  or  tall  mtci  sleek. 
The  word  translated  "scattered"  means, 
properly  "  drawn  out,"  and  seems  to  be  ap- 
plied here  to  the  physique  of  the  Ethiopians, 
whose  stature  is  said  to  have  been  remark- 
able (Herod.,  iii,  20, 114).  The  other  epithet 
refers  to  the  glossy  skin  of  the  people.  A 
people  terrible  from  their  beginning  hitherto. 
The  Israelites  first  knew  the  Ethiopians  as 
soldiers  when  they  formed  a  part  of  the  army 
brought  by  Shishak  (Bheslionk  I,)  against 
Eehoboam,  about  b.o.  970  (2  Chron.  xii.  3). 
They  had  afterwards  experience  of  their 
vast  numbers,  when  Zerah  made  his  attack 
upon  Asa;  but  on  this  occasion  they  suc- 
ceeded in  defeating  them  (2  Chron.  xiv. 
9— 13).  It  was  not  till  about  two  centuries 
after  this  that  the  power  of  Ethiopia  began 
to  be  really  formidable  to  Egypt;  and  the 
"  miserable  Cushites,"  as  they  had  been  in 
the  habit  of  calling  them,  acquired  the  pre- 


OH.  xvin.  1— 7.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


305 


ponderating  influence  in  tbe  valley  of  the 
Nile,  and  under  Piankhi,  Shabak,  Shabatok, 
and  Tirhakah  (Taliark),  reduced  Egypt  to 
subjection.  Isaiah,  peihaps,  refers  to  tlieir 
rise  under  Piankhi  as  "their  beginning." 
A  nation  meted  out  and  trodden  down; 
rather,  o  nation  of  meting  out  and  trampling ; 
i.e.  one  accustomed  to  mete  out  its  neis'h- 
bours'  bounds  with  a  measuring-liue,  and  to 
trample  other  nations  under  its  feet.  Whose 
land  the  rivers  have  spoiled ;  rather,  whose 
lard  riven  detpoil.  The  deposit  of  mud, 
which  fertilizes  Egypt,  is  washed  by  the 
rivtirs  from  Ethiopia,  which  is  tlius  con- 
tinually losing  large  quantities  of  rich  soil. 
This  fact  was  well  known  to  the  Greeks 
(Ilcrod.,  ii.  12,  ad  fin.),  and  there  is  no  reason 
why  Isaiah  ahould  not  liave  been  acquainted 
with  it. 

Ver.  3. — ^All  ye  inhabitants  of  the  world. 
From  exhorting  the  messengers  to  liasten 
on  their  orrimd,  Isaiah  turns  to  the  nations 
generally,  and  bids  them  attend  to  a  coming 
signal — an  ensign  is  about  to  be  raised,  a 
trumpet  is  aliout  to  be  sounded — let  them 
grtze  and  heaiken;  the  result  will  be  well 
worth  noting.  The  imagery  is  not  to  be 
taken  literally,  but  in  the  snme  way  as  the 
notices  in  oh.  xi.  10,  12;  xiii.  2.  When  he 
Ufteth  up  an  eiisign  .  .  .  when  he  bloweth  a 
trumpet;  rather,  when  an  ensign  is  lifted 
up  ,  ,  ,  when  a  trumpet  sounds.  On  the 
mountains.  Wherever  the  great  event  tcok 
place,  the  signal  for  it  was  given  on  the 
mountains  of  Judaea  (see  2  Kings  xix. 
20—34). 

Ver.  i. — ror  so;  rather,  for  thus.  The 
word  lioh  is  prospective.  I  will  take  my  rest, 
and  I  will  consider;  or,  I  will  be  still  and 
look  on.  The  rest  of  God  is  cuntrasted  with 
the  bustle  and  hurry  of  the  Ethiopians  and 
Assyrians.  God  "  sits  in  his  holy  seat," 
calm  and  tranquil,  knowing  what  the  result 
is  about  to  be,  and  when  it  will  be  ;  he  w^dts 
while  the  influences  of  heat  and  moisture, 
sunshine  and  dew — his  own  agencies — ripen 
Aanyria's   suhemeg,  impassive,    taking  no 


part.  Then,  suddenly,  he  takes  the  pari 
described  in  the  latter  portion  of  ver.  5, 
"outs  off  the  shoots  and  hews  down  the 
branches."  Like  a  clear  heat  upon  herbs, 
etc. ;  rather,  while  there  is  clear  heat  in  the 
sunshine,  while  there  is  a  cloud  of  dew  in  the 
harvest-warmth;  i.e.  wliile  surrounding  in- 
fluences are  such  as  must  favour  the  growth 
of  Assyria's  power  and  piide. 

Ver.  5. — Por  afore  the  harvest.  God  can 
rest  thus  tranquil,  because  he  can  step  in  at 
any  time;  and  this  ho  is  about  to  Jo,  before 
Assyrin,  reaps  her  harvest.  When  the  bud  ia 
perfect,  etc. ;  rather,  when  the  blossom  is  jiaul, 
and  the  green  grape  is  becoming  a  ripening 
bunch.  He  shall  cut  off  (oomp.  ch.  x.  H3, 
34).  The  metaphor  is  sli;;htly  varied  in 
this  place,  to  suit  tlie  imagery  of  the  pre- 
ceding clause,  where  Assyria  has  been  re- 
presented as  a  vinu-stock.  Formerly  liur 
"  boughs  "  were  to  be  "  loppi  d ;  "  now  her 
"branches"  and  "sprigs"  or  "sprouts"  are 
to  be  cut  away  with  pruning-liouks. 

Ver.  6. — They  shall  be  left  together  unto 
the  fowls,  At  length  imagery  is  dropfii  d. 
The  vine  is  sjinwn  to  be  an  army,  slaughtered 
all  "  together,"  and  left  a  prey  to  kites  and 
vultures,  jackals  and  hysenas.  Shall  sum- 
mer .  .  .  shall  winter.  They  will  fun  ish 
food  to  the  beasts  and  birds  of  prey  for  the 
remainder  of  the  year. 

Ver.  7. — In  that  time  shall  the  present  be 
brought;  laiTaer,  a  present.  It  would  not  1)6 
at  all  improbable  that  Tii  kakah  should,  niter 
the  destruction  of  Sennacherib's  uimy,  send 
a  gift  to  the  temple  of  the  Jews,  either  as  a 
recognition  of  the  miracle  as  wrouglit  liy 
Jfehiivah,  or  simply  as  a  thank  offering. 
Necho  sent  tbe  armour  in  which  ho  U  d 
fought  at  Blegiddo  to  the  temple  of  Aj>i'llo 
at  Brancliiilse,  near  Illiletus,  as  a  tliank  oH'i  r- 
ing  (Herod.,  ii,  159).  We  have,  howevci, 
no  historical  record  of  Tirkakah's  present  as 
sent.  Of  a  people;  rather,  from  a  penjile 
(compare  the  next  clause,  which  supjilus 
the  ellipse  of  the  preposition).  (For  ilie 
rest  of  the  verse,  see  notes  on  ver.  2.) 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  contrast  of  Divine  calm  with  human  Imstle,  hurry,  and  excitements 
»Vhen  men  take  a  matter  in  hand  wherein  they  feel  an  interest,  and  set  themselves 
either  to  carry  out  a  certain  design  of  their  own,  or  to  frustrate  the  designs  of  others, 
nothing  is  more  remarkable  than  (if  we  may  use  a  vulgarism)  the  "fuss"  that  they 
make  about  it.  Heaven  and  earth  are  moved,  so  to  speak,  for  the  accompIi8hn}ent  of 
the  desired  end ;  the  entire  nation  ia  excited,  stirred,  thrilled  to  its  lowest  depths ; 
a  univerMl  eagerness  prevails ;  all  is  noise,  clamour,  haste,  bustle,  tumult,  whirl,  con- 
fusion. Assyria's  "noise"  is  compared  (ch.  xvii.  12)  to  the  roar  of  the  sea,  and  tbe 
rushing  of  mighty  waters.  Ethiopia's  stir  is  like  tlie  sound  of  many  wings  (ch.  xviii.  1). 
Even  Cyrus,  though  he  has  a  Divine  mission,  oanuot  set  about  it  without  "  tlie  noise  of 
a  multitude  in  the  mountains,  like  as  of  a  great  jieople ;  a  tumultuous  noise  of  the 
kingdoms  of  nations  gathered  together  "  (ch.  xiii.  4).  It  is  in  vain  that  men  are  told 
ISAUB.  X 


306  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xvm.  1—7 

to  "  stand  still  and  see  the  salvation  of  God"  (Exod.  xiv.  13),  or  admonished  that  "  in 
quietness  and  confidence  should  be  their  streugth "  (ch.  xxx.  15) ;  they  cannot  bring 
themselves  to  act  on  the  advice  tendered.  Great  minds  indeed  are  comparatively  quiet 
and  tranquil ;  but  even  they  are  liable  upon  occasion  to  be  swept  away  by  the  pre- 
vailing wave  of  excited  feeling,  and  dragged,  as  it  were,  from  their  moorings  into  a 
turbid  ocean.  And  the  mass  of  mankind  is  wholly  without  calm  or  stability.  It 
trembles,  flutters,  rushes  hither  and  thither,  mistakes  activity  for  energy,  and  "'  fussi- 
Dess  "  for  the  power  of  achievement.  This  condition  of  things  results  from  three  weak- 
nesses in  man  :  1.  His  want  of  patience.  2.  His  want  of  confidence  in  himself.  3.  His 
want  of  confidence  in  God. 

I.  Man's  want  of  patienob.  Man  desires  to  obtain  whatever  end  he  sets  himself 
at  once.  The  boy  is  impatient  to  be  grown  up,  the  subaltern  would  at  once  be  a  general, 
the  clerk  a  partner,  the  student  a  professor  of  his  science.  Men  "  make  haste  to  be 
rich "  (Prov.  xxviii.  20),  and  overshoot  the  mark,  and  fall  back  into  jjoverty.  They 
strive  to  become  world-famous  when  they  are  mere  tyros,  and  put  loith  ambitions 
writings  which  only  show  their  ignorance.  They  fail  to  recognize  the  force  of  the 
proverb,  that  "everything  conies  to  those  who  wait."  To  toil  loiK',  to  persevere,  to 
make  a  small  advance  day  after  day — this  seems  to  them  a  poor  thing,  an  unsatisfactory 
mode  of  procedure.  They  would  reach  the  end  per  sdltum,  "  by  a  bound."  Hence  their 
haste.  Too  often  " most  haste  is  worst  speed."  "Vaulting  ambition  doth  o'erleap  itself, 
and  falls  on  the  other  side." 

II.  Man's  want  op  confidence  in  himself.  He  who  is  sure  of  himself  can  afford  to 
wait.  He  knows  that  he  will  succeed  in  the  end;  what  matters  whether  a  little  sooner 
or  a  little  later?  But  the  bulk  of  men  are  not  sure  of  themselves ;  they  misdoubt  their 
powers,  caiiacities,  perseverance,  steadiness,  reserve  fund  of  energy.  Hence  their  spas- 
modic efforts,  hurried  movements,  violent  agitations,  frantic  rushings  hither  and  thither. 
If  they  do  not  gain  their  end  at  once,  they  despair  of  ever  attaining  it.  They  are  con- 
scious of  infinite  weakness  in  themselves,  and  feel  that  they  cannot  tell  what  a  day  may 
bring  forth  in  the  way  of  defeat  and  disappointment.  They  say  that  it  is  necessary  to 
strike  while  the  iron  is  hot ;  but  their  real  reason  for  haste  is  that  they  question  v.  hether 
their  ability  to  strike  will  not  have  passed  away  if  they  delay  ever  so  little. 

III.  Man's  want  of  confidence  in  God.  He  who  feels  that  God  is  on  his  side 
has  no  need  to  disquiet  himself.  He  will  not  fear  the  powers  of  darkness ;  he  will  not 
be  afraid  of  what  flesh  can  do  unto  him.  But  comparatively  few  men  have  this  feeling. 
Either  they  put  the  thoughts  of  God  altogether  away  from  them,  or  they  view  him  as 
an  enemy,  or  they  misdoubt,  at  any  rate,  his  sympathy  with  themselves.  Mostly  they 
feel  that  they  do  not  deserve  his  sympathy.  They  cannot  "  rest  in  the  Lord,"  and  they 
cannot  find  rest  outside  of  him.  Hence  they  remain  in  perpetual  disturbance  and 
unrest.  Strangely  in  contrast  with  man's  unquiet  is  God's  immovable  calm  and 
unrufled  tranquillity.  "  Th^.  Lord  said,  I  will  take  my  rest "  (ver.  4).  None  can  really 
resist  his  will,  and  hence  he  has  no  need  to  trouble  himself  if  resistance  is  attempted, 
"  The  fierceness  of  man"  will  always  "  turn  to  his  praise."  Time  is  no  object  with  him 
who  is  above  time,  "  whose  goings  have  been  from  the  days  of  eternity  "  (Micah  v.  2). 
In  silence  and  calm  he  accomplishes  his  everlasting  purposes.  Himself  at  rest  in  the 
si  ill  depths  of  his  unchangeable  nature,  it  is  he  alone  who  can  give  his  creatures  rest. 
As  they  grow  more  like  to  him,  they  will  grow  more  and  more  tranquil,  until  the  time 
comes  when  they  will  enter  finally  into  that  rest  which  "  remaineth  for  his  people  " 
(Heb.  iv,  9). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS, 

Vers,  1 — 7, — Homage  of  Ethiopia  to  Jehovah.  I.  Agitation  in  Ethiopia.  The 
oracle  opens  with  a  scene  full  of  life,  Hosis  of  Egyptian  and  Ethiopian  warriors  are 
seen,  like  buzzing  swarms  of  flies  moving  to  and  fro.  Messengers  are  speeding  in 
papyrus  boats  to  announce  the  approach  of  the  Assyrians.  The  Ethiopians  are  described 
as  a  nation  "  tall  and  polished,"  terrible,  strong,  and  all-subduing,  whose  land  rivers  cut 
through.  A  sense  of  mystery  and  greatness  hung  about  this  land  from  the  earliest 
times — the  land  of  the  source  of  the  Nile,  opened  up  by  our-  countryman  Speke  and 


OH.  xvm.  1— 7.]    THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  307 

others.  The  prnphet  lifts  up  his  voice  to  this  people,  A  signal  will  he  seen  on  the 
mountains,  the  hlast  of  a  trumpet  will  be  heard.  There  will  be  .symptoms  of  the  Divine 
presence,  restraining,  overruling  the  wrath  of  men  for  ends  of  Divine  wisdom.  "  When 
wars  are  carried  on,  every  one  sees  clearly  what  is  done ;  but  the  greater  part  of  men 
ascribe  tlie  beginning  and  end  of  them  to  chance.  On  the  other  hand,  Isaiah  shows 
that  all  these  things  ought  to  be  ascribed  to  God,  because  he  will  display  his  power  in 
a  new  and  extraordinary  manner ;  for  sometimes  he  works  so  as  to  conceal  his  hand, 
and  to  prevent  his  work  from  being  perceived  by  men,  but  sometimes  he  displays  his 
hand  in  it  in  such  a  manner  that  all  »'en  are  constrained  to  acknowledge  it ;  and  that 
is  what  the  prophet  meant "  (Calvin). 

II.  The  waiting  of  Jehovah.  Impressive  is  the  contrast  between  the  noise  and 
stir  and  aj^itation  below,  and  the  calmness  above.  Jehovah  "  will  be  still " — as  the  blue 
sky  behind  a  moving  host  of  clouds,  above  a  surging  sea  below.  la  the  second  psalm 
we  liave  the  picture  of  him  sitiing  in  the  heavens  and  "  laughing  "  at  the  vain  attempts 
of  the  enemies  of  the  Messianic  kingdom.  There  are  three  thoughts  here.  1.  The  repose  o/ 
Ood.  It  seoms  as  if  we,  must  ever  contemplate  him  resting  from  his  toils  of  designing 
and  cieating  and  providing — entered  on  an  eternal  sabbath.  The  consciousness  of  vast 
force,  sleeping,  held  in  reserve,  we  must  conceive  of  in  God.  Hence  his  stillness  amidst 
our  excitement.  At  limes  when  vague  movements  are  passing  through  the  bosom  of 
society,  many  voices  rend  the  air  with  opposing  cries,  deep  questions  agitate  the  heart 
and  conscience  of  thoughtlnl  men.  We  long  to  hear  the  one  infallible  voice,  to  see  the 
signal  extended;  and  yet  "God  speaks  not  a  word."  Perhaps  it  may  be  said,  a  still  small 
voice,  saying,  "  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God  ! "  may  be  heard  by  acuter  spiritual 

,  ears.  His  stillness  must  be  the  effect  of  infinite  strength  and  profoundest  confidence. 
2.  His  contrmplativeness.  He  "  looks  on  in  his  mansion."  Not  as  the  Epicureans  repre- 
sented the  gods  of  the  heaihen,  ."itting  apart,  reckless  of  the  weal  or  woe  of  men;  but 
intent!}'  watchful  of  the  development  of  things,  the  ripening  of  good,  the  gathering  up 
of  evil  towards  the  day  of  sifting  and  judgment.  In  a  powerful  biblical  image,  "  his 
eyes  are  in  every  place,  beholding  the  good  and  the  eviL"  And  our  thought,  to  be  in 
harmony  with  his,  must  in  many  matters  and  at  many  times  fall  into  the  mood  of 
contemplation.  Instead  of  seeking  to  theorize  rashly  upon  the  strange  mixture  of 
tendencies  life  at  any  troubled  epoch  presents,  it  were  well  to  possess  onr  souls  in 
{latience — to  look  on  and  "  let  both  grow  together  till  the  harvest."  3.  His  waiting 
attitude.  "  While  there  is  clear  heat  in  sunshine,  while  there  are  clouds  of  dew  in 
harvest-heal,"  be  is  waiting  till  "the  fruit  of  Assyrian  annoyance  is  all  but  ripe."  The 
heat  and  the  clouds  of  dew  hasten  the  powers  in  nature;  there  are  corresponding  forces 
at  work  in  the  moral  world,  seen  by  him  to  be  working  towards  certain  results.  God 
can  wait  because  he  knows.  And  may  not  we  in  a  measure  compose  our  souls  into  that 
attitude  of  waiting  ?  Some  things  we,  too,  know ;  about  many  others  we  can  say,  "  God 
knows,"  and  so  leave  them.  Especially  so  in  times  or  in  moods  of  alarm.  In  the 
]iresent  case  men  below  see  one  picture  of  the  future;  quite  another  is  seen  by  God 
above.  To  them  a  vast  black  cloud  is  gathering  over  the  horizon ;  he  sees  the  sun 
that  will  presently  smite  it  asunder.  They  see  a  fell  harvest  of  woe  for  themselves 
ripening ;  he  has  the  prunihg-knife  in  his  hand,  with  which  he  will  make  havoc  amonj; 
the  growth.  They  see  an  immense  host  of  irresistible  warriors ;  he  the  birds  of  prey  and 
the  beasts  that  will  soon  be  feeding  upon  their  remains.  Let  us  think  of  the  immense 
reserves  of  force  at  the  disposal  of  Jehovah.  The  statesman,  in  times  of  alarm,  assures  a 
trembling  country  that  the  "resources  of  civilization  "  are  not  yet  exhausted;  yet  they 
have  their  limit.  Behind  them  lie  the  absolutely  inexhaustible  resources  of  the  living 
and  eternal  God.     Let  our  hearts  be  stayed  on  him,  and  all  will  be  well. 

III.  The  effect  on  Ethiopia.  They  will  bring  a  tribute  to  Jehovah  S«baoth,  to 
the  Lord  of  hosts,  in  his  seat  on  Mount  Zion.  It  is  he  who  has  done  these  things.  We 
find  the  like  impressive  picture  passing  before  a  prophetic  eye  in  Ps.  Ixviii.  32  :  "  King- 
doms of  splendour  come  out  of  Egypt,  Ethiopia  stretches  out  her  hands  to  God."  The 
gathering  of  so  glorious  a  people  into  the  true  Ohurch  is  to  be  the  result  of  the  manifes 
tation  of  the  power  of  Israel's  God. 

Lessons.  1.  TJie  providence  of  Ood  over  the  Ohurch.  "  He  shows  that  he  takes  care 
of  the  Church,  and  that,  though  he  determines  to  chastise  it,  still  he  comes  forward  at 
the  proper  season  to  hinder  it  from  perishing,  and  displays  his  power  in  opposition  ta 


308  THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PBOPHET   ISAIAH,    [oh.  xym.  1— 7 

tyrants  and  other  enemies,  that  they  may  not  overthrow  it  or  succeed  in  accomplishing 
what  they  imagined  to  be  in  their  powers.  In  order,  therefore,  to  excite  them  to  patience, 
he  not  only  distinguislies  them  from  the  Ethiopians,  but  likewise  reminds  them  that 
God  mitigates  his  judgments  for  theirpreservation  "  (Calvin).  2.  The  indestructibility  oj 
the  spiritual  life.  This  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  institutions  in  which  it  dwells 
for  a  time.  But,  undersitauding  the  "Church  "in  the  spiritual  or  niygtical  sense,  it 
cannot  perish.  Calvin  wrote  in  his  day,  "  The  Church  is  not  far  from  despair,  being 
plundered,  scattered,  and  everywhere  crushi'd  and  trodden  underfoot.  What  must  be 
done  in  straits  so  numerous  and  so  distressing?  We  ought  to  lay  hi  Id  on  these  pro- 
mises so  as  to  believe  that  God  will  still  preserve  the  Church.  The  body  may  be  torn, 
shivered  into  fragments  and  scattered ;  still,  by  his  Spirit,  he  will  easily  unite  the  mem- 
bers, and  will  never  i.lluw  the  remembrance  and  calling  on  his  Name  to  perish."  3.  The 
s-lf-conctalment  of  God.  The  trial  of  faith  in  all  ages.  Oh  that  he  would  shuw  his  face, 
bare  his  arm,  disclose  his  majesty,  exert  his  power,  appear  as  Judge  to  end  once  for  all 
the  strifes  of  the  world  I.  But  we  must  learn  to  say,  "God's  in  his  heaven,  all's  right 
with  the  world."  At  the  proper  season  he  will  come  foitli,  "If  he  instanlly  cut  the 
wicked  down  and  took  tl  cm  away  like  a  sprnuting  blade  of  corn,  his  power  would  not 
be  so  manifest,  nor  would  his  goodness  he  so  fully  ascertained,  as  when  he  permits  them 
to  grow  to  a  vast  lioiglit,  to  swell  and  blossom,  th?.t  they  may  afterwards  fall  by  their 
own  weight,  or,  like  large  and  fat  ears  of  corn,  cu(s  them  down  with  pruniiig-knives."  4. 
The  unity  of  reliyion  the  prophetic  ideal.  "  Mount  Zic^n  "  was  its  ancient  symbol ;  for 
us  it  is  not  Rome,  nor  any  other  city  or  mount, — it  is  the  human  heart,  with  all  its 
pathos,  its  faith,  hope,  and  love,  its  regenerate  life  and  aspirations,  it  is  one  spirit  uni- 
versal in  mankind. — J. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  patience  of  power.  The  most  striking  and  distinctive  truth  this 
chapter  contains  is  that  of  the  patience  of  Divine  power,  which  permits  evil  to  rise  and 
to  mature,  and  which,  at  the  right  moment,  effectually  intervenes.  But  there  are  other 
points  beside  this ;  they  are — 

I.  The  misdirection  op  human  ihtblligencb.  Whatever  may  be  the  right  trans- 
lation and  the  true  application  of  these  verses,  it  is  clear  that  reference  is  made  to  a  war- 
like people — a  people  "  terrible  "  to  thyr  neighbours,  a  people  "  of  command  "  or  "  tread- 
ing underfoot,"  aggressive  and  victorious.  It  shows  how  far  we  have  fallen  from  our 
first  estate  and  from  the  condition  for  which  we  were  created,  that  it  does  not  strike  us  ■ 
as  strange  that  this  should  he  the  description  of  a  peo|)le  ;  that  the  number  of  nations 
whom  it  chaiacterizes  is  so  great  that  we  fail  to  identify  the  nation  which  is  in  the 
prophet's  vision.  Under  sin  it  has  become  common,  not  to  saj'  natural,  that  a  nation 
should  be  "  terrible,"  should  be  treading  down  or  crushing,  and  full  of  commands  to  its 
neighbours.  But  to  how  much  better  purpose  might  the  strong  peoples  of  the  earth 
devote  their  strength !  God  has  made  rich  provision  for  the  peaceable  and  fruitful 
exercise  of  our  largest  powers.  There  are  rivers  and  soas  (ver.  2)  for  travelling,  explo- 
ration, commerce ;  there  is  vegetation  (bulrushes,  papyrus),  which  may  be  made  to  carry 
men's  bodies,  or  which,  by  the  exercise  of  human  ingenuity,  may  be  made  to  convey 
their  thoughts  to  distant  lands  and  remotest  times;  there  is  land  and  there  are  seeds, 
there  is  sunshine  and  there  is  dew,  which  can  be  made  to  produce  golden  harvests  that 
will  satisfy  man's  wants  and  minister  to  his  most  refined  tastes  (vers.  4,  5) ;  ihere  are 
birds  and  beasts  (ver.  6),  with  whose  habits  men  may  become  intelligently  familiar ; 
there  is  wealth  beneath  the  soil  in  precious  metals,  which  can  not  only  be  raised  and 
collected  to  enrich  the  homes  of  men,  but  which  can  he  conveyed,  as  the  tribute  ( f 
piety,  to  the  house  of  the  Lord  (ver.  7).  But,  despising  and  neglecting  such  materials 
and  such  ambitions  as  these,  nations  have  aspired  to  rule  over  others — ^have  perfeolod 
themselves  in  all  the  arts  and  enginery  of  war,  have  congratulated  themselves  on 
nothing  so  much  as  in  being  "  toirible"  to  those  on  the  other  side  the  river  or  across 
the  mountain  range. 

II.  TllE   COMPLETENESS   OF  MAN's   OVEHTHROW  IN  THE    DAT   OF  DiVINE   ANOER.      The 

destruction  threatened  (vers.  5,  6)  probably  refers  to  that  of  the  army  of  Sennacherib ; 
but  if  the  reference  be  to  some  other  national  caVmity,  it  certainly  points  to  an  over- 
throw, signal  and  fearful,  from  which  the  imagination  turns'away  oppressed.  So  has 
it  beeji  found,  both  by  individual  men  and  nations,  that  when  God  arises  to  judgQient, 


oa.  xvni.  1—7.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAlAfi.  S6£ 

their  feeble  defences  are  scattered  to  the  winds,  and  their  doom  is  utterly  Irreversible  by 
anything  they  can  do  to  mend  it  (see  Ps.  ii. ;  Ixiii.  17 — 20;  xcii.  6,  9). 

III.  Thb  lesson  of  God's  judgments.  The  result  in  this  case  is  seen  in  tbe  bring- 
ing of  a  tribute  to  the  Lord  (ver.  7).  If  God  puts  forth  his  power  in  overwhelming 
retribution,  it  is,  chiefly  if  not  wholly,  that  they  who  witness  it  (men  or  nation*)  may 
repent  of  their  own  misdeeds  or  impiety,  and  may  return  Unto  the  Lord  in  penitence,  in 
prayer,  in  consecration ;  for  the  most  acceptable  "  present "  that  can  be  "  brought  unto 
the  Lord  of  hosts"  is  the  humbled,  believing,  obedient  heart. 

IV.  The  patience  of  Divine  power.  (Ver.  4.)  The  Lord  said,  "  I  will  take  my 
rest  [I  will  be  calm  or  still],  I  will  consider  in  my  dwellini;-place  [T  will  look  on  from 
my  habitation]  like  a  clear  heat  upon  herbs,  like  a  cloud  of  dew  in  the  heat  of  harvest." 
God  will  not  be  provoked  into  hurried  and  impatient  judgments ;  he  will  retain  a  Divine 
composure,  he  will  manifest  the  patience  which  belongs  to  conscious  power ;  the 
heavens  should  be  as  still  as  on  the  calmest  summer  day  while  evil  was  working  to  its 
bitter  end,  while  sin  was  advancing  to  its  doom.  Here  is  a  contiast  to  us  and  hero  are 
lessons  for  us.  We,  in  our  finite  feebleness,  are  often  impatient  in  spirit  and  hurried  in 
action.  We  are  afraid  that,  if  we  do  not  strike  at  once,  we  shall  not  have  time  to  strike 
at  all,  or  that  our  resources  of  retribution  will  fail,  or  that  our  adversary  will  be  out  of 
our  reach.  God  can  entertain  no  such  fear  and  be  affected  by  no  such  thought,  1.  All 
time  is  at  his  command.  2.  All  resources  are  in  his  hands.  3.  The  men  (nations) 
whom  he  may  find  it  needful  to  chastise  can  never  be  beyond  the  reach  of  his  power. 
Hence  his  calmness  in  place  of  our  confusion,  his  patience  in  contrast  with  our  feverish 
restlessness.  (1)  Let  not  the  wicked  presume  on  Divine  disregard ;  God  will  put 
forth  his  hand  in  punishment  at  his  own  chosen  time.  (2)  Let  not  the  righteous  be 
suri)rised  or  disheartened  by  his  delay ;  he  does  not  count  time  by  our  chronometry ; 
he  has  not  the  reasons  for  haste  which  urge  us  to  immediate  action;  the  hour  of  his 
merciful  intervention  will  arrive  in  time. — -G. 

Ver.  1. — Man's  energy  put  in  place  of  trust  in  Ood.  This  comes  to  view  in  a  more 
precise  translation  of  the  passage.  The  Kini;  of  Ethiopia,  who  was  nominally  also  King 
of  Egypt,  alarmed  by  the  near  approach  of  the  Assyrians,  is  aroused  to  the  exhibition 
of  fireat  energy,  and  sends  messengers  in  the  light  river-vessels  to  spread  the  news 
through  the  empire  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  call  the  troops  of  all  his  dependent 
nations  to  his  standard.  Geikie  translates,  or  paraphrases  the  passage  thus:  "0  land 
■of  the  buz!z  of  fly-swarms — emblems  of  countless  armies — by  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia, 
which  art  sending  messengers  upon  the  seas,  and  in  swift,  light,  papyrus  boats  along  all 
your  waters,  to  gather  allies,  and  muster  all  the  force  of  your  empire:  Go  back  to  your 
homes,  ye  swift  messengers — go  back  to  Bihiopia — the  tall  and  strong  race,  terrible  in 
war  from  their  rise  till  now, — the  nation  very  strong  and  all-subduing,  whose  land  is 
seamed  with  rivers  1  Jehovah,  alone,  will  destroy  the  invader!"  The  energy  of  the 
Ethiopian  king  is  so  far  commended,  but  the  proi]het  urges  that  in  this  case  it  is  not 
needed,  for  God  proposes  to  take  to  himself  all  the  glory  of  driving  back  the  Assyrian 
invasion. 

I.  Man's  energy  is  called  for.  Whatsoever  a  man  findeth  to  do  h«  should  do 
"  with  his  might,"  "  heartily."  Success  in  life  greatly  depends  on  the  strength  and 
vigour  in  our  touch  of  life's  duties  and  claims.  Energy  includes  strength  of  will, 
decision,  promptness,  perseverance,  power  to  overcome  obstacles  and  hindrances,  and 
fertility  of  resources.  Energy  is  the  quality  most  commended  in  business  life;  and  it 
is  found  to  make  up  for  the  absence  of  actual  abilities.  The  man  of  energy  compels 
life  to  yield  him  some  of  its  best.  It  is  thought  of  as  a  characteristic  of  American  busi- 
ness life,  and  is  illustrated  in  the  man  who  put  together  the  blackened  rafters  and 
boatds  of  his  burnt  warehouse,  and  commenced  business  again  before  the  great  fire  was 
fully  quenched,  putting  up  this  for  a  sign,  "William  D.  Kerfoot;  all  gone,  save  wife, 
children,  and  energy."  However  much  this  energy  may  be  a  peculiarity  of  individual 
disposition,  it  is-also  subject  to  culture,  and  may  be  nourished  into  strength  by  a  firm 
self-mastery  of  our  life  and  habits.     Exercise  thyself  thereunto. 

II.  Man's  enbuot  is  consistent  with  dependence  on  God.  Only  the  weak  man 
fails  to  make  try  harmonize  with  trust.  Here  the  point  may  be  fully  argued  and 
illustrated,  that  the  «ubmission  which  God  seeks  is  no  slavish  lying  down  to  bear, 


310  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xviii.  1— 7 

which  is  the  IbIS^iii,  or  iubmission  of  Mohammedanism,  but  the  suhraissiou  of  an  active 
and  cheerful  obedience,  which  expects  God's  will  to  be  doing  rather  than  tearing,  and 
carries  a  noble  spirit  of  watching  for  God  and  waiting  on  him,  into  every  detail  of  li!e. 
To  suffer  and  submit  is  no  very  great  triumph ;  to  carry  the  spirit  of  submission  at  tlie 
heart  of  our  work  is  the  sublime  victory  of  Cliristian  life.  And  just  this  is  the  g'ory 
of  the  energy  illustrated  in  tiie  Apostle  Paul.  To  men's  view  "  beside  himself;"  his 
secret  this,  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ." 

III.  Man's  energy  must  never  be  put  in  the  place  of  God.  But  just  in  this 
the  worldly  man  is  constantly  failing.  "  This  is  great  Babylon,  which  /have  builded." 
"/will  pull  down  my  barns  and  build  greater."  "See  this  business  which  /  have 
established."  "  My  might,  and  the  strength  of  my  arm,  have  gotten  me  this  victory." 
Nothing  tends  more  readily  to  separate  a  man  from  Gel,  and  God  from  a  man,  than  life 
success  attending  energy.  And  of  this  great  peril  the  Christian  man  needs  to  beware 
Even  he  may  find  that  he  has  dethroned  God  from  the  rule  of  his  life,  and  raised  up 
in  his  place  the  old  idol  of  self,  dreased  in  the  garmeuls  of  "  energy." 

IV.  Sometimes  man's  energy  must  be  put  aside,  that  God  alone  may  work. 
As  in  this  case,  theEtiiiopian  king  must  stop  his  hurrying  messengers,  and  be  still ;  I'oi 
Jehovah  would  work  the  needed  rescue.  There  are  times  in  our  lives  when  we  cannot 
work,  when  we  must  not  work ;  and  in  those  times  we  learn  how  to  put  energy  and 
enterprise  into  their  right  place.  God  puts  us  in  his  school,  and  teaches  us  the  hard 
lesson  of  practically  uniting  "energy  "  with  "dependence."  And  yet  this  is  but  the 
same  lesson  as  joining  harmoniously  together  "  faith  "  and  "  works  ; "  or,  as  the  apostle 
expresses  it,  "  woi'king  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,  for  it  is  God 
that  worketh  in  you  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure." — B.  T. 

Ver.  4. — Ood  can  wait.  "  I  will  rest."  God  was  apparently  inactive  and  unobser- 
vant, while  the  Assyrian  was  maturing  his  plans  and  taking  all  his  first  steps.  But 
God  watches  the  influences  gathering  round  the  growing-time  of  the  trees,  though  men 
trace  his  working  almost  only  in  their  fruitage.  The  words  of  this  passage  "paint 
with  marvellous  vividness  the  calmness  and  delibtration  of  the  workings  of  Divine 
judgments.  God  is  at  once  unhasting  and  unresting.  He  dwells  in  his  resting-p'ace 
(i.e.  his  palace  or  throne)  and  watches  the  rijisning  of  the  fruit  which  he  is  about  to 
gather.  While  there  is  a  clear  heat  in  sunshine,  while  there  is  a  dew-cloud  in  harvest- 
heat,  through  all  phenomenal  changes,  he  waits  still "  (Dean  Plumptre).  The  figure  of  a 
cloud  of  dew  in^;he  heat  of  harvest  is  well  illustrated  by  Thomson,  in  '  The  Land  and  the 
Book,'  who  writes  of  a  cloud  which  "absolutely  reposed  upon  the  vast  harvest-fields  of 
Philistia,  lying  on  the  corn  serene  and  quiet  as  infancy  asleep.  I  have  never  seen  such 
a  cloud  in  this  country  except  in  the  heat  of  harvest."  Olieyne  brings  out  the  jioint 
of  this  verse.  "In  the  midst  of  all  the  excitement,  of  the  Assyrians  on  the  one  liand, 
and  of  the  Ethiopians  on  the  other,  Jehovah  is  calmly  waiting  till  the  fruit  of  Assyrian 
arrogance  is  all  but  ripe.  Favouring  circumstances  are  hastening;  the  process  (clear 
heat,  etc.),  and  when  perfection  seenis  just  within  reach,  God  will  interpose  in  judg- 
ment." God  can  wait — quietly  wait — until  the  fulness  of  time  has  come.  God 
reproaches  our  restlessness  liy  his  example,  for  our  time  is  "always  ready,"  and  by  our 
impatience  and  failure  in  self-control  we  spoil  a  thousand  things.  This  subject  may 
be  opened  in  the  following  wav. 

I.  In  securing  material  ends  there  is  often  great  need  for  waiting.  Illus- 
trate from  the  failure  of  the  general,  because  he  did  not  wait  until  preparations  were 
complete;  or  from  the  farmer  who  loses  his  crops  by  cutting  them  too  soon,  before  the 
weather  has  become  settled ;  or  the  artist  who  cannot  wait  to  give  his  work  the  per- 
fecting touches  of  his  own  criticism ;  or  the  pastor  who  injures  the  young  blaiie  by 
worrying  anxiety  over  it,  and  cannot  wait  to  let  young  soul-life  gather  quiet  strength 
in  its  own  simple  ways.  The  wisdom  of  waiting  is  harder  to  learn  and  practise  than 
the  wisdom  of  acting  and  working.  Yet  the  motto,  by  no  means  untruthfully,  says, 
"All  things  come  round  to  him  who  can  wait." 

-II.  In  securing  moral  ends  there  is  often  absolute  need  fob  waiting. 
Because  moral  processes  can  never  bear  forcing.  They  vary  in  different  individuals. 
The  lesson  of  Virtue  which  one  person  learns  at  once,  another  grasps  only  as  a  final 
result  of  the  training  of  a  long  life.    This  poiut  may  be  opened  up  in  relation  to  the 


on.  xvni.  1— 7.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  311 

work  of  mothers  and  teachers.  They  seek  moral  ends.  They  are  often  distressed  by 
the  slowness  of  the  approach  to  the  end.  They  must  learn  the  importance  of  active, 
watchful  waiting.  And  in  the  highest  sense,  in  relation  to  Grod'a  moral  working,  we 
all  need  to  hear  the  voice  that  pleads,  "Wait  thou  his  time."  Marvellous  is  the  long- 
snffering  patience  of  him  who  waited  while  the  ark  was  buildiag,  and  waited  through 
the  ages  until  the  "  fulness  of  times  "  for  his  Christ  had  come. 

III.  In  man  waiting  mat  be  either  strength  ob  weakness.  It  may  be 
"  masterly  inactivity,"  and  it  may  be  that  "  procrastination "  which  loses  golden 
opportunities. 

IV.  In  God  waiting  is  always  wisdom  and  strength.  So  we  never  need  fret 
under  it,  or  make  mystery  of  it,  or  think  untrustful  things  about  it.  God  acts  on  the 
absolutely  best  moment,  and  we  should  wait  on  for  ages,  and  never  want  a  thing  until 
God's  best  moment  for  it  has  come.    Because  God  can  wait,  we  should  trust. — B.  T. 

Vers.  5,  6. — God  can  work.  When  his  time  has  come.  Then,  before  man  can  do 
his  harvesting  work ;  when  the  blossoming  and  the  growing  times  are  over,  through 
which  God  had  waited ;  when  the  fruit  becomes  the  full  ripe  grape, — then  God  will  show 
how  he  can  work,  putting  in  his  implements,  and  proving  himself  to  be  a  Deliverer 
and  a  Judge.  God's  working  here  referred  to  is  doubtless  the  sudden,  unexpected,  and 
complete  overthrow  of  the  Assyrian  army  under  Sennacherib,  which  came  at  the  time 
when  it  would  prove  absolutely  overwhelming,  and  perfectly  effective  as  a  deliverance. 
Matthew  Henry  states  the  case  in  this  way :  "  When  the  Assyrian  army  promises  Itself 
a  plentiful  harvest  in  the  taking  of  Jerusalem  and  the  plundering  of  that  rich  city, 
when  the  bud  of  that  project  is  perfect,  before  the  harvest  is  gathered  in,  while  the 
sour  grape  of  their  enmity  to  Hezekiah  aud  his  people  is  ripening  in  the  flower,  and  the 
design  is  just  ready  to  be  put  into  execution,  God  shall  destroy  that  armj'  as  easily  as 
the  husbandman  cuts  off  the  vine  with  pruniiig-hooks,  or  because  the  grape  is  sonr  and 
good  for  nothing,  and  will  not  be  cured,  takes  away  and  cuts  down  the  branches.  This 
seems  to  point  at  the  overthrow  of  the  Assyrian  army  by  a  destroying  angel,  when  the 
dead  bodies  of  the  soldiers  were  scattered  like  the  branches  and  sprigs  of  a  wild  vine, 
which  the  husbandman  lias  cut  to  pieces." 

I.  God'b  working  is  well-timed.  This  is  the  point  made  specially  prominent 
here.  What  was  needed,  for  the  due  impression  of  Judah  and  the  surrounding  nations, 
was  some  startling  deliverance ;  something  that  should  be  at  once  complete,  and  yet 
should  be  manifestly  beyond  mnn's  accomplishing.  Such  a  working  must  be  exactly 
timed.  When  the  success  of  Assyria  seemed  assured,  when  its  prey  seemed  within  its 
grasp,  and  when  men's  hearts  were  failing  them  for  fear, — just  then  the  wild  hot 
Simoom  blast  swept  over  the  army,  and  as  in  a  moment  there  were  heaps  of  dead  men, 
and  few  escaped  to  tell  the  awful  story.  For  the  timeliness  of  God's  judgment-work- 
ings find  illustration  in  the  Flood,  the  destruction  of  Sodom,  the  extirpation  of  the 
Canaanites,  the  captivities,  and  the  final  siege  of  Jerusalem. 

II.  God's  working  is  full  op  energy.  Ever  setting  before  us  the  example  of 
thoroughness  in  the  doing  of  whatever  work  has  to  be  done.  This  is  in  great  part  the 
reason  why,  in  making  Israel  his  executioner,  God  required  Israel  to  treat  everything 
belonging  to  the  Canaanites  as  accursed,  and  doomed  to  destruction.  It  was,  for  the 
first  ages,  a  Divine  lesson  in  thoroughness,  energy,  and  promptitude.  God  never  works 
with  a  slack  hand,  and  his  servants  must  not. 

III.  God's  working  is  always  effective  to  its  end.  And  that,  not  because  it 
is  almighty  working,  so  much  as  because  it  is  all-wise  working.  Power  is  quite  a 
sicondary  thing  to  adaptation.  A  thing  fitted  to  its  end  will  accomplish  it,  aud 
it  will  be  accomplished  better  through  the  fitness  than  by  any  displays  of  power.  The 
end  here  designed  was  an  adequate  impression  of  the  sole  and  sovereign  rights  of 
Jehovah,  and  a  loud  call  to  the  nations  to  put  their  trust  in  him.  The  overthrow  of 
a  mighty  army,  in  the  fulness  of  its  pride,  by  purely  natural — which  are  purely  Divine 
— forces,  was  exactly  adapted  to  secure  this  end.  Illustrate  by  the  moral  impression 
produced  by  great  and  destructive  earthquakes.  When  the  end  of  God's  working  is  the 
persuasion  of  his  fatherly  love,  then  we  find  his  means  marvellously  adapted  and 
effective.  "  He  gave  his  Son,  his  only  begotten  Son."  And  herein  we  say  is  love,  "  not 
that  we  loved  God,  but  that  he  loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  Propitiation  for  oui 


Slis  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PUOFHET  ISAIaH.     [oa.  xiX.  1— 25, 

sins."  Be  it  work  of  judgment  or  work  of  mercy,  of  this  we  may  be  quite  sure — God 
accomplishes  that  which  he  pleases,  and  his  work  prospers  in  that  to  which  he  sends 
it.— E.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CTTAPTKR  XIX. 
Vers.  1 — 17. — The  Bl'kujsn  of  Egtpt.  It 
lina  been  doubted  wheiher  this  prophecy 
icfera  to  the  conquest  of  Egjpt  by  Piankhi, 
as  reliited  in  tlie  ninuumcnt  whifh  he  set  up 
at  Napat;i,  ur  to  that  by  Esixrhaildon,  of 
wliich  we  g.iin  our  knowledge  from  the 
iii.^cii|ilions  of  his  son,  Asahur-bani-pal.  In 
the  foimer  case,  we  must  suppose  it  wiitten 
aa  early  as  B.o.  735 ;  in  tlie  latter,  its  date 
might  be  as  late  as  B.C.  690.  The  division 
of  Egypt,  "  kingdom  against  kingdom,"  is  a 
circumstance  ruther  in  favour  of  the  earlier 
date ;  but  the  "  cruel  lord,"  and  the  mention 
of  the  "princes  of  Zoan  and  Noph,"  are 
decisive  for  tl.e  later.  Piankhi  is  anything 
rather  than  a  "  cruel  lord,"  being  particularly 
mild  and  clement;  Napata  (Noph)  is  under 
him,  and  cannot  be  said  to  have  been 
"deceived"  or  to  have  "seduced  Egjpt;" 
and  Zoan  plays  no  part  in  the  history  of  the 
period.  Esarhaddnn,  on  the  contrary,  was 
decidedly  a  "  cruel "  prince,  and  treated 
Egypt  with  great  severity,  splitting  it  up 
into  a  number  of  governments.  Zoan  was 
one  of  the  leading  cities  of  the  time,  and 
Nopli  was  the  li  ading  power  on  the  Egyptian 
side,  the  head  of  the  patriotic  party  which 
resisted  the  Assyrian  monarch,  but  to  no 
purpose.  We  may,  therefore,  regard  this 
prophecy  as  one  of  Isaiah's  latest,  placed 
where  it  is  merely  on  account  of  its  head- 
ing— the  compiler  having  placed  all  the 
"burdens"    against   foreign    countries   to- 


Ver.  1. — The  Lord  rideth  upon  a  swift 
cloud.  Nrtturid  imagery  to  express  the 
rapidity  of  Divine  visitations  (com p.  Ps. 
civ.  3).  God,  being  about  to  visit  Egypt 
with  a  judgment  of  extreme  severity,  is 
represented  as  entering  the  land  in  person 
(hO  in  cli.  xiii.  5).  The  idols  of  Egypt  shall 
be  moved.  Neither  Piankhi  nor  any  other 
Ethiopian  conqueror  made  war  on  the 
Egyptian  idols;  but  the  Assyrians  were 
alwnys  bent  on  humbling  the  gods  of  tlie 
hostile  countries  (see  above,  eh.  x.  10;  and 
comp.  ch.  xxxvi.  18 — 20).  We  have  no 
detailed  account  of  Esaihaddon's  campaign ; 
but  wo  find  Asshur-bani-pal's  ilrat  victory 


over  Tirhakah  immediately  followed  by  th« 
presentation  to  him  in  his  camp  of  Egyptian 
deities  (G.  Smith,  *  Hiatnry  of  Asshur-bani- 
pal,'  p.  20,  1.  1)  i.e.  of  their  images.  These 
were  probably  talfen  to  Nineveh,  or  else 
destroyed.  At  a  later  date,  the  tame  monarch 
deprived  an  Egyptian  temple  of  two  of  its 
sacred  obelisks  (ibid.,  p.  54,  11.  4,  .5).  The 
heart  of  Egypt  shall  melt  (comp.  ch.  xiii.  7 ; 
Ps.  xxii.  14). 

Ver.  2. — I  will  set  the  Egyptians  against 
the  Egyptians.  The  disintegration  of  Egypt 
commenced  about  B.C.  700 — 750,  towards  the 
close  of  the  twenty  second  dynasty.  About 
B  c.  735  a  struggle  began  between  Pian- 
klii.  King  of  Upper  Egypt,  and  Tafnekht, 
King  of  Sais  and  jMeniphis,  in  which  the 
other  princes  took  different  aides.  Ten  or 
twelve  yeais  later  thire  was  a  struggle 
between  Bocohoris  and  Sabaco.  From  this 
time  on  wards,  until  Psamatik  I.  re-estublished 
the  unity  of  Egypt  (about  B.o.  650),  the 
country  was  always  more  or  less  divided,  and 
on  the  occurrence  of  any  cribis  the  princes 
were  apt  to  make  war  one  up'  n  another. 
Kingdom  against  kingdom,  Uuriug  the 
period  of  disintpgration,  the  title  of  "  king" 
was  assumed  by  mo.st  of  the  petty  princes, 
though  they  were  little  more  than  oliiefs  of 
cities  (see  '  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  ii.  p. 
100;  6.  Smith,  'History  of  Aaahnr-biini- 
pal,'  pp.  20—22). 

Ver.  3.— They  shall  seek  to  the  idols.  The 
Egyptians  believed  that  their  gods  gare 
them  oiacles.  Menephthali  claims  to  have 
bien  warned  by  Phtliah,  the  god  of  Memphis, 
not  to  t,d?e  the  field  in  person  against  tlie 
Libyans  when  thi  y  invaded  the  Delta,  but 
to  leave  the  task  of  contending  with  them  to 
his  generals  (Brugseh,  'History  of  Egypt,' 
vol.  ii.  p.  119).  Herodotus  speaks  of  there 
being  several  well-known  oracular sbiines  in 
Egypt,  the  most  trustworthy  being  that  of 
Maut,  at  the  city  wluoh  he  calls  Buto  (ii. 
152;  comp.  ch.  111).  The  charmers  .  .  . 
them  that  have  familiar  spirits  .  ,  .  wizards. 
Classes  of  men  oorre>pnnding  to  the  "  magi- 
cians"- and  "wise  men"  of  esrlier  times 
(Ge\i.  xli.  8).  (On  the  large  place  which 
magic  occupied  in  tliC  thoughts  of  the 
Egyptians,  see  'Pulpit  Commentnry'  on 
Exod.  \ii.  11.)  There  was  no  diminution 
of  the  confidence  repos(  d  in  ihem  as  time 
went  on  ;  and  some  remains  of  their  practices 
seem  to  survive  to  the  present  day. 

Ver.  4. — The  Egyptians  will  I  give  over 
into  the  hand  of  a  oruel  lord.    It  has  been 


CH.  XIX.  1— 2S.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAtt. 


313 


observed  above  that  Piankhi  will  not  answer 
to  this  description.  It  will,  however,  well 
suit  Esarhaddon.  Esarhaddon,  soon  after 
his  accession,  cut  off  the  heads  of  Abdi- 
Milkut,  King  of  Sidon,  and  of  Sanduarii, 
King  of  Kundi,  and  hung  them  round  the 
necks  of  two  of  their  chief  ofBcers  (G.  Smith, 
'Eponym  Canon,'  pp.  137 — 139).  In  an 
expedition  which  he  made  into  Arabia,  he 
slew  eight  of  the  sovereigns,  two  of  them 
being  women  ('  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  iii. 
pp.  106,  107).  Ou  conquering  Egypt  he 
treated  it  with  txtreme  severity.  Not  only 
did  he  divide  up  tlio  country  into  twenty 
governments,  but  he  changed  the  names  of 
the  towns,  and  assigned  to  his  twenty 
governors,  as  tiieir  main  duty,  that  they 
were  "to  shiy,  plunder,  and  spoil"  their 
subjects  (G.  Smith,  '  History  of  Assliur- 
bani-pal,'  p.  .37,  1.  7  ;  comp.  p.  16, 1.  7).  He 
certainly  well  deserved  the  appellations  of 
"  a  cruel  lord,"  "  a  fierce  king." 

Ver.  5. — The  waters  shall  fail  from  the 
sea.  By  "  the  sea"  it  is  generally  allowed 
that  the  Nile  must  be  meant,  as  inch,  xviii. 
2  ami  Xah.  iii.  8.  The  failure  might  be 
eausrd  by  dpflcluiit  rains  in  Abyssinia  and 
Equiitorial  Alrioa,  prnducing  an  insufficient 
inunilation.  It  might  be  aggravated  by  the 
neglect  of  ilykus  and  canals,  which  would 
be  the  natural  consequence  of  civil  dis- 
orders (see  Canon  Cook's  'Inscription  of 
Pianklii,'  p.  14).  Wasted  and  dried  up ; 
rather,  parched  and  dried  up.  Allowance 
must  be  made  for  Oriental  hyperbole.  The 
meaning  is  only  that  there  shall  be  a  great 
deficiency  in  the  water  supply.  Such  a 
deficiency  has  often  been  the  cause  of 
terrilile  famines  in  Egypt. 

Ver.  6. — And  they  shall  turn  the  rivers  far 
away;  rather,  and  tlie  rivers  shall  stagnate 
(Cheyne).  Probahly  the  canals  are  intended, 
as  inExod.  vii.  19  (bee  'Pulpit  Commentary,' 
ad  loc).  The  brooks  of  defence  shall  be 
emptied.  Some  render  this  "brooks  of 
Egypt,"  regarding  matsor  as  here  used  for 
"Miteraim;"  but  our  translation  is  more 
.forcible,  and  may  well  stand.  The  "brooks 
of  defence"  are  those  which  had  hitherto 
formed  the  moats  round  walled  cities  (comp. 
cli.  xxxvii,  25;  Nah.  iii.  8).  The  reeds  and 
flags  shaU  wither.  Reeds,  flags,  ruehee,  and 
water-platits  of  all  kinds  abound  in  the 
backwaters  of  the  Nile,  and  the  numerous 
ponds  and  marshes  connected  with  its  over- 
flow (see  the  '  Pulpit  Commentary '  On  Exud. 
ii.  3,  p.  2i).  These  forms  of  vegetation 
would  he  the  first  to  wither  on  the  occurrence 
of  a  deficient  inundation. 

Ver.  7. — The  paper  reeds  by  the  brooks, 
etc. ;  rather,  the  meadom  on  the  river,  aJoncj 
the  banks  of  the  river,  and  every  sted-phd  by 
tlie  river.  The  banks  of  tlie  Nile  wure  partly 
grass-land  (Gen.  xli.  2, 18),  paitly  cultivated 


in  grain  or  vegetables  (Herod.,  ii.  14),  in 
either  case  producing  the  most  luxuriant 
crops.  All,  however,  depended  on  the  in- 
undation, and,  if  that  failed,  or  so  far  as  it 
failed,  the  results  predicted  by  the  prophet 
would  happen. 

Ver.  8. — The  fishers  also  shall  mourn.  The 
fisherman's  trade  was  extensively  practised 
in  ancient  Egypt,  and  anything  which  in- 
terfered with  it  wouM  ncccs.M  rily  be  re- 
garded as  a  great  calamity.  A  large  class 
supported  itself  by  the  capture  and  sale 
of  fish  fresh  or  salted.  The  Nile  produced 
great  abundance  of  fish,  both  in  its  main 
stream  and  in  its  caniJs  and  backwaters. 
Lake  Moeris  also  provided  an  extensive  sup- 
ply (Herod.,  ii.  149).  All  they  that  cast 
angle  into  the  brooks ;  rather,  into  the  river. 
Fishingwith  abookwas  practised  in  Egy|ri, 
though  not  very  widely,  except  as  an 
amubcment  by  the  rich.  Actual  hooks  have 
been  found,  not  very  different  from  modern 
ones  (Rawlinson, '  History  of  Ancient  Egypt,' 
vol.  i.  p.  506),  and  representations  of  angling 
occur  in  some  of  the  tombs.  Sometimes  a 
line  only  is  used,  sometimes  b;  rod  and  line 
(see  Rawlinson, '  Herodotus,' vol.  ii.  pp.  101, 
lOH,  2nd  edit.).  They  that  spread  net*. 
Nets  were  very  much  mnru  widely  employed 
than  lines  and  hooks.  Or.linarily  a  drag- 
net was  used ;  but  sometimes  small  fry  were 
taken  in  the  shallows  by  means  of  a  double- 
handled  landing-net  (ibid,,  p,  108,  note  2). 

Ver.  9. — They  that  work  in  fine  flax 
Linen  of  great  fineness  and  delicacy  was 
-woven  in  Egypt,  for  the  priests'  dresses, 
for  mummy-cloths,  and  for  corselets.  Solo- 
mon imported  "  linen  yarn  "  from  his  Egyp- 
tian neighbours  (1  Kings  x.  28),  and  the 
Phteniciaus  a  linen  fabric  for  their  sails 
(Ezck.  xxvii.  7).  In  the  general  decline  of 
Egypian  prosperity,  caused  by  the  circum- 
stances of  the  time,  the  manufacturers,  of 
linen  would  suffer.  They  that  weave  net- 
works ;  rather,  they  that  weave  white  clothes. 
Cotton  fabrics  are  probably  intended.  Shall 
he  confounded ;  literally,  shall  bluth,  or  be 
ashamed. 

Ver.  10. — And  they  shall  be  broken  in  the 
purposes  thereof;  rather,  and  the  founda- 
tions thereof  shall  be  broken,  or  cruslted  to 
pieces  (Kay).  The  rich  and  noble,  the  foun- 
dations of  the  fabric  of  sociely,  seem  to  be 
meant.  All  that  make  sltrices,  etc.  Trans- 
late, all  that  work  for  hire  (comp.  Pro  v.  xi. 
18)  shall  be  grieved  in  svul.  The  meaning 
is  that  all  olassc  s,  from  the  highest  to  the 
lowest,  shall  suiiVr  affliction  (so  Lowth, 
Gcseniits,  Knobel,  Kay,  Cheyne). 

Ver.  11. — Surely  the  princes  of  Zoan  are 
fools.  Zoan,  or  Tauis,  which  had  been  an 
insignificant  city  since  the  time  of  the  shcp- 
berd-kings,  came  to  the  front,  once  more  at 
the  time  of  the  struggle  between  Egypt  and 


3U 


THE  BOOK  OF   THF  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [ch.  xix.  1— 26. 


Assyria.  Biarhaddon  made  it  the  head  of 
one  of  the  petty  kingdoms  into  which  he 
divided  Egypt  (G.  Smith, '  History  of  Asshur- 
bani-pal,'  p.  21, 1.  2).  Early  in  the  reign  of 
his  son  it  revolted,  in  conjunction  with  Sais 
and  Mendes,  but  was  ere  long  reduced  to 
subjection  by  the  Assyrians.  Its  king,  Petu- 
bastes,  was  taken  to  Nineveh,  and  there 
probably  put  to  death.  Its  "  princes  "  were, 
no  doubt,  among  those  who  counselled  re- 
sistance to  Assyria.  The  counsel  of  the 
wise,  etc. :  literally,  as  for  the  wise  coun- 
sellors of  Pliaratih,  their  counsel  is  hecome 
senseless.  Two  classes  of  advisers  seem  to 
be  intended — nobles,  supposed  to  be  quiili- 
fied  by  birth ;  anU  "  wise  men,"  qualitiid  by 
study  and  education.  Both  would  now  be 
found  equally  incapable.  Pharaoh.  Pro- 
bably Tirhakah  ia  intended.  It  is  possible 
that  he  was  really  suzerain  of  Egypt  at 
the  time  of  Sennaclierib's  invasion,  when 
Shabatok  was  nominally  king.  It  is  certain 
that,  after  the  deatli  of  Sliabatok  (about  B.C. 
698),  he  was  recognized  as  sovereign  both 
of  Ethiopia  and  of  Egypt,  and  ruled  over 
both  countries.  Esarhaddon  found  him 
still  occupying  this  position  in  B.C.  673, 
when  he  made  his  Egyptian  expedition. 
Tirhakah's  capital  at  this  time  was  Memphis. 
How  say  ye,  etc.  ?  With  what  face  can  you 
boast  of  your  descent,  or  of  your  learning, 
when  you  are  unable  to  give  any  sound 
advice  ? 

Ver.  12. — Where  are  they?  where,  etc.? 
rather.  Where,  then,  are  thy  wise  meni  If 
thou  hast  any,  let  them  come  forward  and 
predict  the  coming  course  of  events,  what 
Jeliovah  has  determined  to  do  (compare  simi- 
lar challenges  in  the  later  chapters  of  the 
book,  ch.  xli.  21—23;  xliii.  9;  xlviii.  14, 
etc.). 

Ver.  13.— The  princes  of  Noph.  There 
are  no  grounds  for  changing  "  Noph  "  into 
"Moph."  "Noph"  is  probably  "  Napata," 
known  as  "  Nap  "  in  the  hieroglyphic  in- 
scriptions— the  original  capital  of  the  Ethi- 
opian kings,  and,  when  Memphis  had  be- 
come their  capital,  still  probably  regarded 
as  the  second  city  of  the  empire.  The 
"  princes  of  Noph "  would  be  Tirhakah's 
counsellors.  They  have  also,  etc.  Trans- 
late, Even  they  have  led  Egypt  astray,  who 
are  the  corner-stone  of  her  tribes.  Strictly 
speaking,  there  were  no  "  tribes  "  in  Egypt, 
much  less  "  castes,"  but  only  classes,  marked 
out  by  strong  lines  of  demarcation  the  one 
from  the  other.  Herodotus  gives  seven  of 
them  (ii.  164)— priests,  soldiers,  herdsmen, 
Bwiiicherds,  tradesmen,  interpreters,  and 
boatn  en.  But  tliere  were  several  others 
also,  e.f.  agricultural  labourers,  fishermen, 
artisans,  official  employes,  etc. 

Ver.  14. — The  Lord  hath  mingled  a  per- 
verse spirit,  etc.    "Shall  there  be  eril  in 


a  city,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  Itf 
(Amos  iii.  6).  To  bring  Egypt  into  Bc  dis- 
tracted a  state,  the  hand  of  God  had  been 
necessary.  He  had  introduced  intf>  the 
nation  "a  spirit  of  perverseuess."  Those 
in  whom  this  spirit  was  had  then  "  led 
Egypt  astray  in  all  her  doings."  They  had 
made  her  "  like  a  drunken  man,*'  who  "  stag- 
gers" along  his  path,  and  slips  in  "his  own 
vomit."  Loiig-contiuued  success  aud  pros- 
perity produces  often  u  sort  of  intoxication 
in  a  nation. 

Ver.  15. — Neither  shall  there  be,  etc. 
Translate,  And  there  shall  he  for  Egypt  no 
work  in  which  both  the  head  and  the  tail, 
both  the  palm  branch  and  the  rush,  may  ^con- 
jointly) work.  The  general  spirit  of  per- 
verseuess shall  prevent  all  union  of  high 
with  low,  rich  with  poor. 

Ver.  16. — In  that  day;  or,  at  that  time-; 
i.e.  when  the  Assyrian  invasion  comes. 
Shall  Egypt  be  like  unto  women  (comp. 
Jer.  li.  30).  So  Xerxes  said  of  his  fighting 
men  at  Salamis:  "My  men  liavo  become 
women  "  (Herod.,  viii.  88).  Becauss  of  the 
shaking  of  the  hand  of  the  lo  d  (comp. 
ch.  xi.  15  and  xxx.  32).  The  Egyptians 
would  scarcely  recognize  Jehovah  as  the 
Author  of  their  calamities,  but  it  would  none 
the  less  be  his  hand  which  punished  them. 

Ver.  17.— The  land  of  Judah  shall  be  a 
terror  unto  Egypt.  In  Mauasseh's  reign 
Judaia  became  subject  to  Assyria  (2  Chron. 
xxxiii.  11;  G.  Smith,  '  Epony m  Canon,' 
p.  139,  1.  13),  and  had  to  take  part  in  the 
hostile  expeditions,  which  botli  Esarhaddon 
and  his  son,  Asshiu'banipal,  conducted 
against  E,!i;ypt.  Egypt  had  to  keep  her 
eye  on  Judasa  continually,  to  see  when 
danger  was  approaching  her.  It  is  not 
likely  that  Isaiali's  prophecies  caused  the 
"  terror  "  here  spoken  of.  Every  one  that 
maketh  mention  thereof  shall  be  afraid; 
rather,  when  any  one  mdkeih  mention  thereof, 
they  shall  turn  to  him  in  fear.  The  very  men- 
tion of  JuJiea  by  any  one  shall  cause  fear, 
because  they  will  expect  to  hear  that  an 
expedition  has  ttarted,  or  is  about  to  start, 
from  that  country  Because  of  the  counsel 
of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  This  is  how  Isaiah 
views  the  Assyiian  attacks  on  Egypt,  not 
how  the  Egyptians  viewed  them.  Tlie  fear 
felt  by  the  Egyptians  was  not  a  religious 
fear.  They  eimjily  dreaded  the  Assyrian 
armies,  and  Judraa  as  the  country  from 
which  the  expedit.ons  seemed  to  issue. 

Vers.  18 — 22. — The  Turning  of  Egypt 
TO  Jehovah.  The  chastisement  of  the 
Egyptians  shall  be  followed,  after  a  while, 
by  a  great  cliange.  Influences  from  Canaau 
shall  penetrate  Egypt  (ver.  18),  an  altar 
shall  be  raised  in  her  midst  to  Jehovah 
(ver.  19),  Mid  she  herself  shall  cry  to  him 


ta.  XIX.  1—25.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


315 


for  sucoonr  (ver.  20)  and  be  delivered  (ver. 
20).  Egypt  shall  even  become  a  part  of 
JehoTah'a  kingdom,  shall  "  know  him,"  and 
serve  him  with  sacrifice  and  oblation  (ver. 
21),  and  perform  her  vows  to  Jehovah,  and 
have  her  supplications  heard  by  him,  and  be 
couverted  and  healed  (ver.  22). 

Ver.  18. — In  that  day.  Not  really  the 
day  of  vengeance,  but  that  which,  in  the 
prophet's  mind,  is  most  closely  connected 
with  it — the  day  of  restitution — whereof  he 
has  spoken  perpetually  (oh.  i.  25  -  27 ;  ii. 
2—4 ;  iv.  2—6 ;  vi.  13,  etc.).  The  two  are 
parts  of  oue  scheme  of  things,  and  belong  in 
the  prophet's  mind  to  one  time.  Shall  five 
cities  in  the  land  of  Egypt  speak  the  language 
of  Canaan.  It  is  quite  true,  as  Mr.  Cheyne 
remarks,  that  the  Eastern  Delta  was  from  a 
very  early  date  continually  more  and  more 
Semitised  by  hn  influx  of  settlers  from  Pales- 
tine, and  that  Egyptian  literature  bears 
strong  marks  of  this  linguistic  influence. 
But  this  is  scarcely  what  tli«  propliet  intends 
to  speak  about.  He  is  not  interested  in  phi- 
lology. What  he  means  is  that  there  will 
be  an  appreciable  influx  into  Egypt  of  Pales- 
tinian ideas,  thoughts,  and  sentiments. 
"Five"  is  piobably  used  as  a  "round" 
number.  The  first  manifest  fulfilment  of  the 
prophecy  was  at  the  foundation  of  Alex- 
andria, when  tlio  Jews  were  encouraged  to 
become  settlers  by  the  concession  of  impor- 
tant privileges  (Josephus, '  Coutr.  Ap.,'  ii.  4), 
and  where  they  ultimately  became  the  pre- 
dominant element  in  the  population,  amount- 
ing, according  to  Philo  ('  In  Flaoc.,'  §  6),  to 
nearly  a  million  souls.  The  next  great 
Palestinian  influx  was  under  Ptolemy  VI. 
(Pliilometor),  when  Onias  fled  from  Palestine 
with  a  number  of  his  partisans,  and  obtained 
permission  to  erecta  Jewish  templenear  Helio- 
polis.  The  site  of  this  temple  is  probably 
marked  by  the  ruins  at  Tel-el-Yaboudeh 
('  Quarterly  Statement '  of  Palest.  Expl.  Fund 
for  July,  1880,  pp.  137—139).  It  seems  to 
have  been  a  centre  to  a  number  of  Jewish 
communities  in  tlie  neighbourhood.  In  this 
double  way  Jehovah  became  known  to  Egypt 
before  Christianity.  A  Christian  Church 
was  early  established  in  Alexandria,  po-isibly 
by  St.  Mark.  Swear  to  the  Lord  of  hosts ; 
t'.e.  "swear  fidelity  to  him."  One  shall  be 
called,  The  oity  of  destruction.  Some  manu- 
scripts read  'Ir-lia-Kheres,  "  City  of  the 
Sun,"  for  'Ir-lia^here»,  "  City  of  Destruc- 
tion," in  which  case  the  reference  wcmld  be 
plainly  to  Heliopolis,  which  was  in  the  im- 
mediate neighbourhood  of  Tel-el- Yahouaeh, 
and  which  in  the  Ptolemaic  period  may  well 
have  fallen  under  Jewish  influence.  Eveu 
if  'Ir-horhSres  stand  as  the  true  reading,  the 
name  may  still  have  been  given  with  allusion 
to  Heliopolis,  the  prophet  intending  to  say. 


"  That  city  which  was  known  as  the  City  of 
the  Sun-God  shall  become  known  as  the  City 
of  Destruction  of  the  Sun-God  and  of  idola- 
trous worship  generally."  That  Heliopolis 
did  actually  fall  under  Jewish  influence  in 
the  Ptolemaic  period  appears  from  a  re- 
marliable  passage  of  Polyhistor,  who  says  of 
the  Exodus  and  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea, 
"  The  Memphites  say  that  Moses,  being 
well  acquainted  with  the  district,  watched 
the  ebb  of  the  tide,  and  so  led  the  people 
across  the  dry  bed  of  the  sea ;  but  they  of 
Heliopolis  affirm  that  the  Ijing.  at  the  head 
of  a  vast-force,  and  haviiiR  tiie  sacred  ani- 
mals also  with  him,  pursued  u  fter  the  Jews, 
because  they  were  carrying  away  with  them 
the  riches  which  they  had  borrowed  from  the 
Egyptians.  Then,"  they  say,  "  the  voice  of 
God  commanded  Moses  to  smite  the  sea  with 
his  rod,  and  divide  it;  and  Jtoses,  wlien  he 
heard,  touched  the  water  with  it,  and  so  the 
sea  parted  asunder,  and  the  host  maiched 
through  on  dry  ground."  Such  an  account 
of  the  Exodus  would  scarcely  have  been 
given  by  Egyptians  unless  they  were  three 
parts  Hebraized. 

Ver.  19. — There  shall  be  an  altar  to  the 
Lord.  An  altar  to  the  Lord  was  undoubtedly 
erected  by  Onias  in  the  temple  which  he 
obtained  leave  to  build  from  Ptolemy  Philo- 
metor.  Josephus  says  that  he  persuaded 
Ptolemy  by  showing  him  this  passage  of 
Isaiah  ('Ant.  Jud.,'  xiii.  3  ;  '  ISell.  Jud.,'  vii 
10).  And  a  pillar  at  the  bordar  thereof.  It 
is  not  clear  that  any  "pillar"  was  ever 
actually  erected.  The  erection  of  pillars  for 
religious  purposes  was  forbidden  by  the  Law 
(Deut.  xvi.  22).  But  this  would  be  a  pillar 
of  witness  (Gen.  xxxi.  52),  and  would  mark 
that  the  land  was  Jehovah's.  Dr.  Kay  sug- 
gests that  "  the  Jewish  synagogue  first,  and 
afterwards  the  Christian  Church  at  Alex- 
andria, standing  like  a  lofty  obelisk,  with 
the  name  of  Jehovah  inscribed  upon  it,  at  the 
entrance  of  Egypt,"  suflioiently  fulfilled  the 
prophecy. 

Ver.  20.— It  shall  be  for  a  sign.  The  out- 
ward tokens  of  Jehovah-worsliip  shall  witness 
to  God  that  he  has  in  Egypt  now  a  covenant 
people,  and  he  will  deal  with  them  accord- 
ingly. He  shall  send  them  a  savijur,  and  a 
great  one.  This  does  not  seem  to  point  to 
any  earthly  deliverer,  but  to  the  Saviour  from 
the  worst  of  all  oppressors,  sin  and  Satan, 
whom  they  will  need  equally  witli  the  rest 
of  his  people. 

Ver.  21. — ^The  Lord  shall  be  known ;  rather, 
shall  make  himself  known,  as  in  Ezek.  xx. 
5,  9 ;  by  answering  prayer,  by  spiritual  in- 
fluences, and  the  lilce.  The  Egyptians  shall 
know  the  Lord  (comp.  Jer.  xxxi.  34,  "  They 
shall  all  know  me  from  the  least  of  them 
unto  the  greatest ").  And  shall  do  sacrifice 
and  oblation ;  rather,  $haU  serve  with  sacr^fiot 


lie 


THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAU.     [oh.  xix.  1— 2ft 


and  otHation.  The  btilk  of  the  Jews  settled 
in  Egypt,  together  with  their  Egyptian 
proselytes,  went  up  year  by  year  to  worship 
Jehovah  at  Jerusalem,  and  make  offerings 
to  him  there  (see  Zech.  xiv.  16^19).  Chris- 
tian Egypt  worshipped  God  with  sacrifice 
and  oblation  in  the  same  sense  as  the  lest  of 
the  Church  (Mai.  i.  11). 

Ver.  22. — And  Jehovah  shall  smite  'Egypt, 
smiting  and  healing;  i.e,  Jeliovah  shall  in- 
deed "  smite  Egypt,"  as  already  prophesied 
(vers.  1 — 16),  but  it  shall  be  with  a  merciful 
object,  in  order,  after  smiting,  fo  "  heal." 
His  smiting  shall  induce  them  to  "  return  " 
to  him,  and  when  theyreturn  he  will  forgive 
and  save  (comp.  Zeph.  iii.  8,  9 ;  Jer.  xii. 
11 — 16).  Egypt  was  a  Cliristian  country 
from  the  third  century  to  the  seventh;  and 
the  Coptic  Church  (though  very  corrupt) 
stdl  remains,  knowing  Jehovah,  and  offering 
the  holy  oblation  of  the  Christian  altar  con- 
tinually. 

Vers.  23—25. — TJnion  between  Egypt, 
Assyria,  and  Iseael.  Assyria's  conversion 
to  God  will  follow  or  accompany  that  of 
Egypt.  The  two  will  be  joined  with  Israel 
in  an  intimate  connection,  Israel  acting  as 
the  interiTiediary.  There  will  be  uninter- 
rupted communication,  common  worship, 
and  the  common  blessing  of  God  extending 
over  the  three. 

Ver.  23.— Shall  there  be  a  highway.  The 
phraseology  resembles  that  of  ch.  xi.  16; 
but  the  piirpese  Is  different.  Then  the 
"  highway "  was  to  facilitate  the  return  of 
the  Israelites  to  their  own  land.  J^ow  the 
object  is  perfectly  free  communication  be- 
tween the  three  peoples.  The  Egyptians 
shall  serve  with  the  Assyrians.  "  Shall 
serve  "  means  "  shiiU  worship "  (see  ver.  21). 
The  "Assyrians"  represent  the  inhabitants 
of  the  Mesopotamian  regions  generally.  As, 
from  the  time  of  Alexander,  Hebrew  influ- 
ence extended  itself  liirgely  over  Egypt,  so, 
even  from  an  earlier  date,  it  began  to  be  felt 
in  the  Mesopotamian  countries.  The  trans- 
plantation of  the  ten  tribes,  or  a  consider- 
able portion  of  them,  into  Upper  Mesopo- 
tamia and  Media,  was  the  commencement 
of  a  diffusion  of  Hebrew  ideas  through  those 
regions.  The  captivity  of  Judali  still  further 
impressed  these  ideas  on  the  native  races. 
Great  numbers  of  Jews  did  not  return  from 
the  Captivity,  but  remained  in  the  countries 
and  cities  to  which  they  had  been  trans- 
ported, particularly  in  Babylon  (Josephus, 
'Ant.  Jud.,'  xi.  1).  The  policy  of  the 
Seleucid  princes  was  to  establish  Jewish 
colonies  in  all  their  great  cities.  In  the 
time  between  xMexander  and  this  birth  of 
our  Lord,  tlie  Hebrew  community  was  re- 
oognized  as  composed  of  three  great  sections 


— the  Palestinian,  the  Egyptian,  and  the 
Syro-Babylonian.  Constant  communication 
was  maintained  between  the  three branchM, 
Ecclesiastical  regulations,  framed  at  Jeroifr' 
lem,  were  transmitted  to  Alexandria  and 
Babylon,  while  collections  made  in  all  parts 
of  Egypt  and  Mesopotamia  for  the  temple 
service  were  annually  carried  to  the  Pales- 
tinian capital  by  trusty  persons.  It  is  thus 
quite  reasonable  to  regard  as  an  "initial 
stage  in  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy" 
the  state  of  things  existing  at  this  period 
(Kay).  The  more  complete  fulfilment  was 
doubtless  after  Pentecost,  when  Christianity 
was  preached  and  established  in  Egypt  ami 
Libya  on  the  one  hand,  in  Parthia,  and 
Media,  and  Elain,  and  Mesopotamia  on  the 
other  (Acts  ii.  9,  10). 

Ver.  24. — -In  that  day  shall  Israel  be  the 
third;  rather,  o  third.  Not  third  in  rank, 
for  ver.  25  shows  that  she  would  retain  a 
pre-eminence,  but  the  common  inti  rmediary, 
bringing  the  other  two  togt  tlier.  A  blessing 
in  the  midst  of  the  land ;  rather,  in  the  midd 
of  tlie  earth.  Judsean  monotheism,  upheld 
by  God's  people  in  Palestine,  I'igypt,  and 
Mesopotamia,  would  be  a  blessing,  not  only 
to  those  three  countries,  but  to  the  world  at 
large.  So,  and  still  more,  would  Christi- 
an i  ty. 

Ver.  25. — Whom  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall 
bless ;  rather,  forasmuch  as  the  Lord  of  hostt 
hath  blessed  him.  "  Him  "  must  be  under- 
stood collectively,  of  the  threefold  Israel, 
spread  through  the  three  countries,  which 
all  partake  of  the  blessing.  The  three 
countries  are  able  to  be  a  blessing  to  the 
world  at  large,  because  God's  blessing  rests 
upon  them.  Egypt  my  people.  Egypt's 
great  work  in  Jewish  times,  by  which  she 
became  a  blessing  to  the  world,  was  her 
translation  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  into 
Greek,  commanded  by  Egyptian  kings,  and 
executed  at  Alexandria,  the  Egj-ptian  capi- 
tal. Neo-Platonism  certainly  owed  much 
to  this  source.  Stoicism  probably  some- 
thing. Assyria  the  work  of  my  hands. 
Assyria  did  no  such  work  as  Egypt.  Neither 
the  Targum  of  Onkelos  nor  the  Babylonian 
Talmud  can  be  compared  for  a  moment  with 
the  Septuagint.  Still  the  Mesopotamian 
Jews  were  a  blessing  to  their  neighbours. 
They  kept  alive  in  tlie  East  the  notion  of 
one  true  and  spiritual  God;  they  elevated 
the  tone  of  men's  thoughts;  they  were  a 
perpetual  protest  against  idolatry,  with  all 
its  horrors.  They,  no  doubt,  p-^pand  the 
way  for  that  acceptance  of  Christianity  by 
large  masses  o*'  the  population  in  Syria, 
Mesopotamia,  Babylonia,  and  even  in  Persia, 
of  which  we  have  evidence  in  the  ecclesi- 
astical history  of  the  first  seven  centuries. 
Israel  mine  inheritanee  (comp.  cU.  zlvil.  6 , 
IxiU.  17). 


OH.  xix.  1—25.]     THE  BOOK   OF   THE   riiOrHET  ISAIAH.  317 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 17. — Egypt's  punishment;  a  proof  loth  of  God's  Icmg-suffering  and  of  his 
inexorable  justice.  Tho  punishment  of  Egypt  by  the  Assyrian  conquest,  on  which  the 
prophet  enlarges  in  this  chapter,  may  be  regarded  in  a  double  light. 

I.  As   STEONGHiY  EXHIBITING   THE   LONG-SUFFEEINQ  AND  MEKCT  OF  GoD.      1.  Consider 

the  long  persistence  of  Kgypt  in  sins  of  various  kinds — -idolatry,  king-woi'sliip,  practice 
of  magic,  kidnapping  of  slaves,  cruel  usage  of  captives,  impurity,  indecency  ;  consider 
that  her  monarchy  had  lasted  at  least  sixteen  hundred  years,  and  that  both  in  religion 
and  in  morals  she  had  continually  grown  worse.  2.  Bear  in  mind  her  treatment  of 
God's  people — ^huw  she  had  first  oppressed  them  (Exod.  i.  8 — 14),  then  endeavoured  to 
exterminate  them  (Exod.  i.  15 — 22} ;  this  failiiiLi,  made  their  bondage  harder  (Exod.  v 
6 — 19);  repeatedly  refused  to  let  them  go;  sought  to  destroy  them  at  the  Red  Sea 
(Kxod.  XV.  9);  plundered  them  in  ihe  time  of  Rehoboam  (1  Kings  xiv.  25,  26); 
alt  ruately  encouraged  and  deserted  then'i  in  their  struggles  against  Assyria  (1  Kings 
.xvii.  4  ;  xviii.  21,  24).  3.  Note  also  that  she  had  helped  to  corrupt  God's  people.  In 
Eiypt  many  Israelites  had  worshipped  the  Egy[itian  gods  (Josh.  xxiv.  14;  Kzek.  xx.  8). 
They  had  brought  from  Egypt  an  addiction  to  magical  practices  which  had  never  left 
them.  Manasseh,  in  dialling  his  eldest  son  "  Amon,"  intended  to  acknowledge  the 
Rgyptian  god  of  that  name.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  is  marvellous  that  iigypt 
■  had  been  allowed  to  exist  so  long,  and,  on  the  whole,  to  flourish;  and  the  marvel  can 
only  be  accou'  ted  for  by  the  extreme  long-suifering  and  extraordinary  mercy  of 
Almighty  P'     . 

II.  A*"  fiEoisivE  PROOF  OP  God's  INEXORABLE  JUSTICE.  Howcver  long  God 
defers  ;  punishment  of  sin,  it  comes  at  last  with  absolute  certainty.  It  might  have 
seomei.  as  if  the  hardships  suffered  by  his  people  in  Egypt  had  escaped  God's  recollec- 
tion, so  many  years  was  it  since  they  had  happened.  It  might  have  seemed  as  if  all 
Egypt's  old  sins  were  condoned — as  if  she  was  to  escape  unpunisheil.  Sixteen  centuries 
of  empire  1  Why,  Home  herself,  the  "iron  kingdom,"  that  "  bruke  in  pieces  and 
bruised"  all  thim.;s  (Dan.ii.  4),  was  not  allowed  more  than  twelve  centuries  of  existence. 
But  Egypt  was  allowed  a  far  longer  term,  not  only  of  existence,  but  of  prosperity. 
Since  the  time  of  the  shepherd-kings,  four  hundred  years  before  the  Exodus,  she  had 
suffered  no  great  calamity.  Even  the  Ethiopians  had  not  been  so  much  foreign 
conquerors,  as  princes  connected  by  blood  and  identical  in  religion,  who  claimed  the 
cwwn  by  right  of  descent  from  former  Egyptian  sovereigns.  But  God  hail  all  the  time 
been  waiting,  with  his  eye  upon  the  sinful  nation,  counting  her  offences,  remembering 
them  against  her,  and  bent  on  taking  vengeance.  And  the  vengeance,  when  it  tame,  was 
severe.  First,  internal  discord  and  civil  war^"  kingdom  against  kinj^doni,  and  city 
against  city"  (ver.  2)  ;  then  conquest  by  an  alien  nation — conquest  effected  by  at  least 
three  distinct  exiitditions,  in-vvhich  the  whole  land  was  overrun,  the  cities  taken  and 
plundered,  and  army  after  army  slaughtered;  finally,  snbiection  to  a  "  fierce  king,"  a 
"cruel  lord"  (ver.  4).  And  the  sufferings  of  war  aggravated,  apparently,  by  the 
natural  calamity  of  a  great  drought — a  failure  of  the  inundation  either  lor  one  year,  or 
pos.sibly  for  several  (vers.  5 — 8).  Tridy,  when  the  day  of  vengeance  came,  Egypt  was 
afflicted  indeed !  No  wonder  she  "  was  afraid,  and  feared  because  of  the  shaking  of  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  (ver.  10).  It  is,  indeed,  "  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  living  God  "  (Heb.  x.  31). 

Ver.  22. — Smiting  and  healing  closely  connected  in  Ood's  counsels.  God's  smiting  is 
no  doubt  twofold,  (1)  remedial  and  (2)  penal ;  but  by  far  the  greater  portion  of  it 
is  of  the  former  kind.  Once  only  has  he  visited  mankind  at  large  penally — i.e.  at  the 
Deluge;  but  a  thousand  times  has  he  visited  them  remedially.  Similarly  with  nations. 
Ue  smote  Egypt  in  Moses'  time  with  the  ten  plagues,  not  to  destroy,  but  to  clui.^ten. 
So  again  at  the  Red  Sea.  So  now  by  the  hands  of  Esarhaddon  and  his  son.  So  l)y 
Nebuchadnezzar,  Cambyses,  Ochus.  And  at  last  he  bowed  their  hearts  and  caused 
them  to  turn  to  him,  first  partially,  when  Judaism  gained  an  influence  over  them  ; 
afterwards,  as  a  nation,  when  they  accepted  Christianity.  Former  chastisements  had 
doiibtlegg  some  remedial  force,  or  the  nation  would  scarcely  have  been  borne  with  so 


318  THE   BOOK   OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  six.  1—25. 

long ;  but  they  did  not  fully  heal,  and  blow  after  blow  became  requisite.  So  God  went 
on  "  smiting  and  healing."  And  the  course  of  his  providence  is  similu  with  indi- 
viduals. Primarily  he  smites  to  heal.  Each  offence  brings  down  his  rod,  but  the 
stroke  is  comparatively  light  at  first,  and  intended  to  warn,  admonish,  call  to  amend- 
ment. If  mun  persist  in  wrong  courses,  the  blows  become  heavier.  But  still  the  inten- 
tion it  the  same ;  it  is  sought  to  bring  them  to  repentance.  God  has  no  pleasure  in  the 
death  of  him  that  dieth.  Only  after  repeated  trials,  after  blow  upon  blow,  warning 
upon  warning,  if  they  will  not  repent,  if  they  will  not  be  healed,  the  penal  sentence 
goes  forth  to  "  pluck  up  and  destroy  "  (Jer.  xii.  17). 

Vers.  23,  24. — Unity  in  religion  joins  together  the  hitterest/oes.  As,  ultimately,  the 
establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  among  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  (ch.  ii.  2) 
will  produce  a  reign  of  universal  peace,  so  that  men  will  everywhere  "  beat  their  swords 
into  ploughshares,  and  their  spears  into  pruning-hooks"  (oh.  ii.  4),  so,  on  a  lesser  scale, 
wherever  true  religion  prevails,  asperities  are  softened,  old  enmities  die  out  and  dis- 
a[ipear,  a  friendly  spirit  springs  up,  and  former  adversaries  are  reconciled  and  become 
friends.  Assyria,  Egypt,  Israel,  long  the  bitterest  foes,  were  drawn  together  by  a 
common  faith  in  the  later  days  of  Judaism  and  the  earlier  ones  of  Christianity — felt 
sympathy  one  with  another,  and  lived  in  harmony.  The  Papacy  was  an  attempt  to 
bring  all  the  Eoman  communion  into  a  species  of  political  unity,  to  abolish  wars 
between  its  various  members,  and  unite  it  against  heathendom.  This  attempt  had,- 
however,  only  a  partial  success,  owing  to  the  admixture  of  bad  with  good  motives  in 
those  who  were  at  the  head  of  the  movement  and  had  the  direction  of  it.  That  war 
has  not  yet  ceased  among  all  Christian  nations  is  a  slur  upon  Christianity,  and  an 
indication  that  nations  are  still  Christian  in  name  rather  than  in  spirit.  The  league  of 
Assyria,  Egypt,  Israel,  may  well  be  held  up  to  the  modgrn  Christian  world  as  an 
eiample  that  should  shame  it  into  the  adoption  of  "peace  j  irinciples."  If  such  foes, 
80  fiercely  hostile,  so  long  estranged,  could  become  close  friends  through  the  influence 
of  a  community  of  religion,  why  cannot  the  Christian  nations  of  modem  times  attain 
to  a  similar  unity  ? 

HOMILIES  BY   VAEIOtS   AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — Coming  judgment  upon  Egypt.  The  historical  allusions  in  this  passage 
cannot  be  positively  cleared  up.  So  far  as  the  discovery  of  inscriptions  in  recent  years 
enables  us  to  lift  a  little  the  veil  which  hangs  over  the  land,  we  see  it  shaken  to  the 
centre  by  the  wars  of  rival  chieftains.  A  victory  of  Sargon  over  the  Egyptian  king 
Shabatok,  in  bo.  720,  has  been  made  out  from  Assyrian  inscriptions;  and,  again,  the 
conquest  of  Egypt  by  Esarhaddon  in  B.C.  672,  who  divided  the  land  into  twenty  small 
tributary  kingdoms.  The  chapter  may  refer  to  this  event,  and  it  may  not  (see  Cheyne's 
Introduction  to  the  chapter). 

I.  The  advent  op  Jehovah.  "  He  rideth  upon  a  swift  cloud  "  (comp.  Ps.  xviii.  10, 
"  He  rode  upon  a  cherub,  and  did  fly ; "  comp.  Ps.  civ.  3).  To  study  those  magnificent 
winged  figures,  which  pass  generally  under  the  name  of  griffins,  in  our  museums  and 
works  of  art,  and  as  they  are  described  by  Ezekiel  in  the  land  of  captivity  (i.), 
may  be  the  best  way  to  realize  the  significance  of  this  poetry.  We  must  throw 
ourselves  into  that  mood  of  mind  in  which  all  life  and  movement  in  nature  is  symbolic 
of  the  infinite  power  and  majesty  of  the  Divine  Being — audibly  the  wind,  visibly  the 
strong  gathering  cloud  upon  the  horizon.  This  picture,  then,  is  a  hint  (1)  of  the 
majesty  of  Jehovah ;  (2)  of  his  ascendency  in  the  world  of  spirit.  The  "  not  gods  "  of 
Egypt  shall  shake  before  him.  He  comes  to  judge  them.  The  God  of  Israel  is  on  his 
way  to  punish  the  teeming  multitudes  of  Memphis,  Pharaoh,  and  Egypt,  and  their 
gods  and  kings.  The  idols  are  to  be  destroyed,  their  images  are  to  cease ;  and  the 
secular  power,  which  has  been  supported  by  a  false  religion,  shall  be  laid  low  (comp. 
Eiod.  xii.  12;  Jer.  xlvi.  25;  Ezek.  xxx.  13).  A  striking  contrast  is  suggested  between 
the  pure  sublime  religion  of  Jehovah  and  the  debased  worship  of  the  Egyptians, 
whose  reverence  for  cats,  and  bulls,  and  crocodiles,  and  onions  attracted  the  satire  of 
later  times.     How  could  such  worshippers  do  other  than  tremble,  their  heart  melting 


CH.  XIX.  1—25.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  319 


within  the  mat  the  approach  of  the  light  that  reveals  and  judges  the  voluntary  dark- 
nesses and  confusious  of  the  mind?  As  Calvin  remarks,  we  should  hehold  the  same 
thing  exemplified  in  all  revolutions  of  kin^donas,  which  proceed  solely  from  the  hand  of 
God.  If  the  heart  melts  and  the  strength  fails  in  men  who  are  usually  hrave,  and  who 
had  formerly  displayed  great. courage,  this  ought  to  be  ascribed  to  the  judgment  of  God. 

II.  The  judgments  ubscbibed.  1.  Internal  dissension.  One  canton  is  set  against 
another.  Tliere  will  be  the  feud  of  brother  with  brother,  fellow  with  fellow,  city  with 
city,  and  kingdom  with  kingdom.  Men's  hearts  are  in  the  hand  of  God.  Whenever  we 
see  in  a  nation  social  dissension  setting  in,  unity  and  co-operation  no  longer  possible, 
it  is  a  sign  that  a  new  force  is  at  work,  that  a  new  light  has  come  in,  that  existing 
customs  are  being  criticized,  in  short,  that  "  Gfld  has  awoke  to  judgment."  Siich  times 
are  times  for  sell -scrutiny,  foi'  thoughtful  study,  fur  earnest  prayer.  2.  'Ilie  sense  of  the 
koUowness  of  existing  institutions.  Terrible  is  it  when  a  nation  suddenly  awakens  to 
find  its  stroiiyest  ideals  reduced  to  empty  and  mocking  delusions;  terrible  also  for  the 
individual.  The  "  heart  made  empty."  Sometimes  it  is  a  "  science  falsely  so  called  ; " 
sometimes  a  spurious  faith,  which  is  suddenly  found  to  be  a  leaking  cistern,  and  the. 
water  of  life  has  fled.  Under  these  conditions  there  will  be  a  feverish  outbreak  of  old 
superstition.  Men  will  resort  to  the  "not  gods"  and  to  the  "spiritualists" — the 
"  nmtterers,"  who  pretend  to  give  voices  and  messages  from  the  other  world.  So  men 
have  done  in  our  time.  The  history  of  the  heart  repeats  itself  from  age  to  age.  If 
men  have  not  genuine  religion,  they  must  have  the  counterfeit  of  it;  and  they  will 
love  the  lie  and  cling  to  tlie  i.lieat  when  the  possibility  of  the  truth  is  no  longer  within 
reach.  3.  Subjection  to  the  tyrant.  The  land  will  be  shut  up  into  the  hand  of  a  hard 
lord,  and  a  fierce  king  shall  rule  over  them.  And  is  not  tyranny  the  last  sign  of  Divine 
displeasure,  as  viewed  from  another  side  it  is  the  last  sign  of  d(  generacy  and  weakness 
in  a  nation's  manhood?  "  Hence  we  see  how  great  is  the  folly  of  men  who  are  desirous 
to  have  a  powerful  and  wealthy  king  reigning  over  them,  and  how  justly  they  are 
punished  for  their  ambition,  though  it  cannot  be  corrected  by  the  experience  of  every 
day,  which  is  everywhere  to  be  seen  in  the  world  "  (Calvin). — J. 

Vers.  5 — 10. —  The  drying  up  of  the  Nile.  Nothing  has  left  a  deeper  mark  on  the  tra- 
ditions of  Eastern  lands  than  the  impressions  of  burning  heat,  the  drying  up  of  springs, 
the  consequent  suffering.  Egypt  was  the  "gift  of  the  Nile,"  Herodotus  said.  Well 
might  the  presence  or  absence  of  its  waters  denote  the  pleasure  or  the  wrath  of  Deity. 

I.  The  description.  The  Pelusiac  arm  of  the  Nile  is  dried.  The  neglected  canals, 
dykes,  and  reservoirs  become  stagnant,  the  vegetation  withers.  The  bright  oasis  of  the 
Nile  will  melt  away  into  the  surrounding  desert.  The  canals,  first  undertaken  as  a 
necessary  work  of  civilization  and  culture,  become  naturally  neglected  and  choked  up  in 
time  of  civil  war. 

IL  The  effects  on  peaceful  industbt.  Besides  agriculture  there  were  three- 
main  sources  of  Egyptian  wealth :  the  fishing,  the  linen  manufacture,  and  the  cotton 
manufacture.  There  was  abundance  of  fish  in  the  Nile,  and  it  was  a  jireat  article  of  food. 
The  combed  flax  was  prepared  for  the  priests'  clothing  and  lor  the  mummy-cloths,  and 
the  cotton  for  dress  in  general.  The  result  is  universal  consternation  in  all  ranks  and 
classes.  The  wealthy  classes,  the  "  pillars  "  of  the  land,  and  the  artisan  population  are 
alike  in  despair. 

III.  The  coincidence  of  the  spiritual  and  the  natubal  world.  A  fertile  land, 
an  industrious  people,  peace  and  plenty,  the  favour  of  God, — these  are  ideas  that  lie 
linked  together  in  the  thought  of  the  prophet,  forming  one  causal  chain.  The  dis- 
pleasure of  Jehovah,  the  effect  in  war,  and  this,  again,  working  desolation  in  the  face 
of  nature  and  cutting  at  the  root  of  industry, — these  form  another  chain  of  connected 
representations.  Prom  the  sources  and  springs  of  the  mighty  Nile  up  to  the  seat  of 
thought,  passion,  and  motion  in  the  mightier  human  heart,  all  are  in  the  hands  of 
Jehovah.     Alike  in  every  occupation  of  the  industrial   and  of    the  political  and 

,  intellectual  world,  let  ua  own  our  deiiendence  upon  him. — J. 

Vers.  11 — 15. —  The  folly  of  statesmen.  God  hath  made  foolish  the  wisdom  of  this 
world,  in  Egypt  as  in  other  lands.  And  the  marks  and  characterg  of  folly  are  every- 
where the  same. 


320  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPUET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  xix.  1—25. 

I.  Thb  spirit  of  boastino.  The  king  and  his  priestly  counsellor*  possess  sacred 
hooke,  which  they  consult  as  a  college  in  times  of  emergency.  The  priests  boast  of 
being  "  sons  of  the  wise,"  and  sons  of  ancient  kinas.  The  Pharaoh  himself  belonged 
to  the  royal  stock.  Boasting  is  ever  a  sign  of  weakness.  The  strong  man  needs  not  to 
talk  of  his  strength ;  he  feels  it,  and  others  feel  it.  Wisdom  is  distinguished  by 
the  absence  of  self-conceit,  and  is  impressive  by  its  silence  and  modesty. 

II.  Peoofs  of  folly.  1.  Inahiliiy  to  read  the  signs  of  the  times.  Prediction  was 
their  favourite  occupation;  how  is  it  they  cannot  read  the  thoughts  of  Jehovah 
toward  the  land?  They  resort  to  false  methods — astrology,  divination,  etc.  Truth 
may  not  really  be  loveri,  or  it  may  be  sought  by  paths  that  can  only  lead  away  from 
it.  It  is  not  by  mere  reading,  it  is  not  by  diga;ing  in  quaint  and  curious  lore,  that  we 
can  arrive  at  sympathy  with  the  mind  of  God.  All  the  learning  of  the  schools  is 
fully  unless  we  keep  the  light  within  brightly  burning,  the  conscience  clear,  the  niinii,  if 
not  the  knees,  ever  bent  in  the  attitude  of  uplooking  and  prayer.  2.  Bail  administra- 
lion.  They  lead  the  country  astray.  The  priestly  class,  that  is,  the  intellectual  and 
educated  class,  looked  upon  as  the  "  corner-stone  of  the  tribes,"  are  themselves  under  an 
illusion,  and  their  "light  and  leading"  is  an  ignis-faiuus.  We  are  too  much  dazisled 
by  the  acuteness,  the  knowledge,  the  abilities,  the  vast  grasp  of  facts,  in  our  great  men. 
Often  the  cleverness  of  such  overreaches  itself,  and  great  men  stumble  and  fall,  and  "  run 
into  great  dangers  which  any  peasant  or  artisan-  would  have  foreseun."  They  become 
inebriated  by  their  own  thoughts.  But  it  ever  sobers  the  mind  to  collect  itself,  so  to 
speak,  in  God.  "This  wit,  this  insight, is  mine,  peculiarly  mine" — be  who  sjieaks  with 
himself  thus — is  on  the  brink  of  some  fatal  delusion.  "  It  is  God's  peculiar  gift  to  me; 
it  is  a  talent/roTO  him,  to  be  used /or  his  world" — this  is  the  thought  that  steadies  ; 
and  "  if  our  wisdom  rest  on  God,  he  will  truly  be  a  steadfast  Corner-stone,  which  no  one 
shall  shake  or  overthrow." 

III.  Judicial  inpatoations.  These  delusions  are  traced  to  the  judicial  act  of 
Jehovah.  It  is  he  who  has  put  a  cup  of  enchantment  to  their  lips,  so  tliat  the  power  of 
discernment  is  suspended.  The  image  of  drunkenness  fitly  represents  their  state.  It  is 
a  spirit  of  "  perverseness,"  or  of  "  subversion."  And  the  people  have  imbibed  the  same, 
so  that  they  stagger  about  helplessly  ;  there  ig  no  consistency,  no  agreement,  no  firm  and 
joint  action.  It  is  an  awful  thing — the  being  "  given  over  to  a  reprobate  mind."  Nor 
dare  we  accuse  the  Almighty  of  injustice.  We  are  ready  enough  to  throw  the  blame  of 
our  own  aberrations  upon  others,  upon  circumstances,  or  even  upon  him.  But  what 
"  right"  have  we  to  anything,  from  the  light  of  the  sun  to  the  light  of  reason  in  the 
soul?  God  gives  and  God  deprives,  for  reasons  iiiscrutalile  to  us  and  not  to  be 
questioned.  But  "the  heart  has  reasons  that  reason  knows  not  of;"  and  the  heart 
knows  that,  if  its  choice  be  true,  its  asking  will  not  be  refused,  the  needed  guidance  will 
not  be  denied. — J. 

Veri.  16 — 25. — Mingled  judgment  and  mercy.  I.  The  effect  of  judgment.  The 
land  will  be  like  timid  and  trembling  women,  for  the  mighty  hand  of  Jehnvah  will  be 
brandished  aloft  in  judgment.  Whenever  it  is  felt  that  Divine  power  is  working  on  the 
side  of  the  foe,  the  most  warlike  nations  lose  heart.  "  God  with  us !  " — a  watchword  that 
nerves  the  feeblest  arm,  and  fills  the  faintest  heart  with  courage.  "  God  ugainst  us!" 
— the  hand  of  the  bravest  hangs  down,  the  knees  of  the  stoutest  tremble.  Judah, 
Jehovah's  seat  of  empire,  will  be  a  terror  to  the  proud  land  of  Egypt.  The  seeming 
weakest  community,  the  most  insignificant  individual,  will  bo  a  power  if  the  truth  is 
operating  through  it.  It  is  not  magnitude  that  is  appalling;  it  is  spiritual  force.  Men 
will  shudder  at  the  Name  of  Judah ;  it  will  be  a  symbol  of  a  purpose  never  successfully 
resisted.  But  when  thus  the  prospect  is  at  its  darkest  for  Eg)  pt,  a  \i^\,  of  hope 
glimmers. 

II.  Pbomisbs  of  good.  1.  A  view  of  Egypt's  conversion  to  the  true  religion  here 
opens.  There  will  be  five  cities  speaking  the  tongue  of  Canaan,  or  Hebrew,  the 
language  of  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  They  will  take  the  oath  of  loyalty  to  him.  And 
it  seems  that  the  city  known  as  "  city  of  the  sun  "  shall  be  called  "  city  of  the  bieaking 
down  of  idolatrous  altars."  And  an  altar  of  the  true  religion,  with  the  pillar  marking 
the  holy  place,  will  be  seen,  visibly  witnessing  to  the  Lord  of  hosts  in  the  land.  There 
is  now  a  covenant  between  Jehovah  and  the  repentant  and  restored  land.     He  will  no 


OH.  XII.  1—25.]     THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  321 

loiter  \y  their  Foe,  but  their  Friend ;  and  when  they  cry  to  him,  in  the  midst  of  distivss 
and  oppression,  he  will  hearken,  and  send  a  Helper  and  Deliverer.  The  people  will 
sacrifice  to  him, and  he  will  make  himself  known ;  whether  in  tlie  Innd  or  at  JerusaUiii 
(oomp.  Zech.  xiv.  16 — 19)  is  not  stated.  2.  2'his  cannot  be  without  previous  suffi-riny. 
Never  does  conversion  from  evil,  from  obstinate  persisteuoe  in  it,  occur  without 
suffering.  But  the  sufFeiing  is  beneficent,  inflicted  by  love.  G^il  smites  to  heal.  It  is 
a  thought  echoed  back  from  many  a  pnge :  "  I  kill,  and  I  make  alive ;  I  wound,  aud  I 
heal ;  "  "  He  has  torn,  an.l  he  will  h-^al  us ;  hath  smitten,  and  will  bind  us  up ; "  "  He 
wounds, and  bis  hands  make  whole"  (Deut.  xxxii.  39;  Hos.  vi.  1;  Job  v.  18).  The 
fire  of  his  wrath  consumes,  but  |.uriSes.  "'Ihen  will  I  turn  to  the  people  a  pure 
laugua<re,  that  they  may  call  upon  the  Name  of  Jehovah,  to  serve  him  with  one 
consent"  (Zeph.  iii.  8,  9).  There  lives  a  fund  of  x>ity  in  the  heart  and  constitution  ol 
nature— compassion  in' Jehovah,  the  Hebrew  propnet  said  (Jer.  xii.  14,  15).  "God does 
not  punish  that  he  may  punish,  but  that  he  may  humble  ;  wherel'oje,  when  humility 
is  produced,  his  punishments  proceed  no  further.  God  is  of  too  great  mercy  to  triumpli 
over  a  prostrate  soul "  (South). 

III.  The  happy  .result.  Peace  replacing  war,  trust  substituted  for  mutual  haie. 
There  is  to  be  intercourse  between  Egypt  anil  Assyria,  a  free  highway  between  the  two 
lands.  Nay,  there  shall  be  a  triple  alliince.  Israel  being  thi.'  third,  and  blessing  is 
thus  to  be  diffused  over  all  the  earth.  Where  Jehovah'.s  ble>siug  is,  there  is  and  luunt 
be  prosperity.  Thus  have  the  clouds  di-perscd,  aud  the  golden  year  seems  to  liaie 
begun, "  peace  lying  like  a  lane  of  beams  across  the  sea,  like  a  shaft  of  light  athwurt  the 
land." 

Febsomal  application.  To  avoid  national  judgment, to  secure  the  Divine  favour,  let 
Bch  inquire  into  his  own  sins.  Personal  sins  brin^  down  national  juJimeuts.  It'  there 
rere  no  personal,  there  could  be  no  national  siu.  In  punishing  the  tuany,  God  does  not 
;verloQk  the  individual.  There  is  no  suffering  of  a  nation  without  the  sulTeiing  of  iis 
members,  no  repentance  which  is  not  that  ot  n)en  one  by  one,  no  prosperity  and  favour 
which  is  not  reflected  from  a  million  faces  and  hearts.  There  is  infinite  ground  of  hope 
from  the  promises  of  God,  and  from  their  actual  fulfilment. — J. 

Ver.  1. — Ood's  presence  a  trouble.  "  Behold  the  Lord  .  .  .  shall  come  into  Egypt .  .  . 
and  the  heart  of  Egypt  shall  melt  in  the  midst  of  it."  The  presence  of  God  would  pro- 
duce consternation  among  the  people.  This  is  significant  enough.  It  need  excite  no 
wonder,  indeed,  that  the  coming  of  the  holy  and  righteous  One  into  the  midst  of  those 
who  had  provoked  him  by  their  idolatries  would  result  in  quaking  of  spirit,  in 
liveliest  agitation.  What  could  await  such  guilty  ones  but  the  most  serious  rebuke, 
the  most  distressing  judgments?  But  the  presence  of  God  is  not  only  troublous 
to  idolatrous  Egyptians,  but  to  his  o«n  servants.  So  the  prophet  himself  found 
(ch.  vi.  5).  The  psalmist  "  remembered  Gud,  and  was  troubled  "  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  3).  Why 
\s  this  ?  Concerning  the  trouble  which  the  presence  of  God  brings  to  the  human  spirit, 
we  remark — 

I.  That  his  known  nearness  to  us  and  power  over  us  might  be  expected  to 
PRECLUDE  SUCH  ALARM.  Why  should  WO  be  concerned  to  find  God  appearing  unto  us? 
Do  we  not  know  well  that  he  is  "  not  far  from  any  one  of  us ;  "  that  "  in  him  we  live 
and  move  aud  have  our  being"?  Do  we  not  know  that  he  is  judging  our  actions  and 
our  attitude  toivard  himself  every  moment,  ami  is,  moreover,  expressing  his  judgment 
by  Divine  bestowals  and  iiiflictions  day  by  day  ?  Why  shoulii  terror  or  alarm,  or  even 
apprehension,  seize  us  because  he  manifests  .himself  to  us,  and  constrains  us  to  feel 
conscious  that  we  are  standing  in  his  near  presence  ?  But,  however  we  may  reason 
thus,  it  is  the  fact — 

II.  That  observation  AND  expebibnoe  unitk  to  prove  that  his  felt  presence 
DOES  TROUDLE  US.  Both  Old  Testament  and  New  Testament  history  show  that  am/ 
visitant  from  the  unseen  world  causes  "  the  heart  to  melt;"  and  if  aiiv  mere  messeni;er 
(angel),  how  much  more  he  who  reigns  over  all  that  realm— the  Divine  and  eternal 
Spirit  himself?  And  we  find  now  that  when  men,  in  the  full  possession  of  their 
spiritual  faculties,  have  believed  theftiselves  to  he  in,  or  to  be  abouc  to  pass  into,  the 
pear  presence  of  the  Eternal,  their  spirit  has  shrunk  and  trembled  at  the  thought.  We 
ask — 

W4IAS.  ▼ 


322  THE  BOOK   OP   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [ch.  xix,  1— 26 

in.  The  explanation  op  the  fact.  The  explanation  is  found  in  two  things.  1.  /« 
our  sense  of  God's  greatness,  and  the  corresponding  consciousness  of  our  own  littleness. 
Those  who  move  in  a  humble  social  sphere  are  agitated  when  they  find  themselres 
in  the  near  presence  of  human  rank,  especially  of  high  rank,  more  especially  of  royalty; 
how  much  more  so  when  men  feel  themselves  to  be  (or  to  be  about  to  be)  b§fore  the 
King  of  kings,  the  infinite  God !  2.  In  our  sense  of  Ood's  holiness  ani  the  corre- 
sponding consciousness  of  our  own  imperfection  and  sin.  (1)  The  Christian  man  may 
have  his  reason  for  apprehension  ;  for  has  he  not  to  bring  his  life  of  Christian  service 
to  the  judgment  of  his  Divine  Master,  for  his  approval  or  his  disapproval ;  and  is  he  not 
conscious  that  this  his  service  has  come  short  of  his  Lord's  desire,  if  it  has  not  been 
blemished  or  even  stained  by  many  sins?  (2)  The  impenitent  man  has  abundant 
reason  for  anxiety  and  even  for  alarm ;  for  he  is  the  child  of  privilege  aud  opportunity ; 
he  has  known  his  Lord's  will;  he  has  heard  many  times  the  sacied  summons;  he  has 
often  felt  the  movings  of  the  Divine  Spirit  in  his  heart.  But  he  has  "judged  himself 
unworthy  of  eternal  life;"  he  has  striven  to  silence  the  voices  which  came  to  him  from 
heaven.  He  is  open  to  the  most  terrible  and  intolerable  rebuke  of  Gud  (Prov.  i.  24,  etc.) ; 
he  lies  exposed  to  the  penalty  of  deliberate  disobidience,  of  peisisttnt  rejection  of  the 
grace  of  God  (Luke  xii.  47 ;  John  iii.  18,  19,  36 ;  Heb.  x.  26—31 ;  xii.  25).— 0. 

Vers.  2 — 10. — A  picture  of  penalty.  The  threatened  penalty  of  Eaypt  as  painted 
by  the  prophet  here  will,  on  examination,  be  found  to  be  essentially  the  penalty  with 
which  God  causes  sin  to  be  visited  always  and  everywhere. 

I.  Strife,  especially  internal  strife  (ver.  2).  The  guilty  nation  will  find  itself 
plunged  into  civil  war  (Egypt,  Gre<'ce,  Bome,  France,  America— northern  and  southern 
states,  etc.),  or  rent  with  bitter  and  vindictive  factions;  the  guilty /ami7y  will  have 
its  domestic  harmony  'destroyed  by  petty  broils  and  miserable  disagreements ;  the 
individual  soul  will  be  compelled  to  expend  its  powers  in  internal  strife — conscience 
having  a  long  and  perhaps  desperate  stTUgs;le  with  passion ;  reason,  which  urges 
to  immediate  decision,  contending  with  the  evil  spirit  of  procrastination ;  the  will  to 
submit  to  Divine  demands  doing  stern,  protracted  battle  with  a  desire  to  conform  to  the- 
good  pleasure  of  the  unholy  and  the  nnwise. 

II.  Delusion,  (Ver.  3.)  As  the  Egyptians,  paying  the  penalty  of  disobedience, 
were  to  abandon  the  counsels  of  huuan  wisdom  for  the  fancies  and  fooleries  of  the 
jnggler,  so  will  men  find  that  sin  leads  down  from  the  guidance  of  reason  to  the 
jlictates  of  folly  and  the  niisleadings  of  delusion.  It  is  not  long  before  the  sinner 
experiences  "  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  ; "  before  he  finds  that  he  does  not  impose  on  other 
men  half  so  much  as  he  is  imposed  upon,  or  as  he  imposes  on  himself.  He  comes 
to  think  that  utterances  which  are  earthly,  or  of  lower  origin  than  that,  are  the  voices 
of  hiaven;  he  "calls  evil  good,  and  good  evil;"  counsel  which  he  ought  to  abjure 
as  diabolical,  he  deems  excellent  and  wise ;  neglecting  truths  and  principles  which 
would  be  his  salvation,  he  falls  back  upon  sentiments  which  lead  down,  with  certain 
path,  to  innermost  and  uttermost  ruin. 

III.  Bondage.  (Ver.  4.)  It  is  one  of  the  most  certain  and  one  of  the  saddest 
penalties  of  sin  that  the  wrong-doer  is  handed  over  to  the  despotism  of  "  a  cruel  lord." 
By  what  truer  or  more  descriptive  terms  could  these  enemies  of  the  soul  be  charac- 
terized into  whose  iron  grasp  the  transgressor  falls  ?  Is  not  the  insatiable  craving  for 
strong  drink  or  for  the  hurtful  narcotic  a  "  cruel  lord "  ?  What  but  cruel  lords  are 
oovetousness,  ambition,  lasciviousness,  the  voracity  or  extreme  delicacy  of  those  "  whose 
God  is  their  belly  " — the  passion  which  demands  and  will  not  be  denied,  which  consumes 
the  time,  which  saps  the  energy,  which  steals  the  manhood  that  should  be  devoted  to 
nobler  ends,  that  should  be  laid  on  a  worthier  altar?  The  victims  of  vice  are  "holden 
with  the  cords  of  their  sins ; "  they  are  "  in  the  hand  of  a  cruel  lord,"  who  will  make 
tlMm  pay  "  the  uttermost  farthing." 

IV.  Shkinkagb.  (Vers.  5 — 10.)  Egypt  should  be  pitiably  reduced ;  the  waters  of  its 
life-giving  river  should  be  wanting  (ver.  5),  its  vegetation  should  fade  and  die  (ver.  6), 
itd  industries  should  be  stopped  (vers.  8,  9),  its  chief  men  should  be  overthrown 
(ver.  10).  All  Egyptian  life,  through  its  length  and  breadth,  should  be  struck  a 
ruinoui  blow,  should  shrink  from  fulness  and  power  into  feebleness  and  decline. 
Under  the  doniinion  of  tin,  human  life  suffers  a  ruinous  reduction.    M»de  for  God,  for 


OH.  XIX.  1—25.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  32S 


hi8  likeuess,  for  his  fellowship,  for  his  service,  for  the  highest  forms  of  usefulness  and 
the  noblest  order  of  enjoyment,  we  sink  into  folly,  into  selfishness,  into  smallness 
of  aim  and  littleness  of  accomplishment ;  our  lives  are  narrowed,  lessened,  shrivelled. 
It  is  the  pitiful  penalty  of  departure  from  God,  of  withholding  our  hearts  from  oui 
Divine  Friend.  In  Christ  we  realize  the  fair  and  blessed  opposites  of  these.  lu  him 
is  (1)  peace  (John  xiv.  27;  xvi.  33;  Eph.  ii.  14);  (2)  enliyhtenment  (1  Cor.  xiv.  20; 
Eph.  i.  18 ;  Col.  i.  9) ;  freedom  (John  viii.  32 — 36  ;  Eom.  vi.  18 ;  Gal.  v.  1) ;  enlarge- 
ment (Matt.  T.  45;  John  xv.  14;  Bom.  viii.  17  ;  Eph.  ii.  6 ;  Eev.  i.  6).— 0. 

Vers.  11 — 14. — Leaders  that  mislead.  The  strong,  energetic  language  of  the  prophet 
respecting  the  princes  and  counsellors  of  Egypt  express  for  us  the  vast  injury  which 
is  wrought  by  uutrustworthy  teachers  in  every  place  and  time,  and  the  duty  of  the 
people  to  be  on  their  guard  against  such  seducers  (ver.  13). 

I.  The  leadees  that  mislead.  (Vers.  10 — 13.)  These  are  :  1.  In  the  nation,  leading 
their  fellow-countrymen  into  a  false  and  spurious  patriotism ;  into  vain-gloriousness  ; 
into  luxury  and  extravagance;  into  the  ruinous  error  that  the  fascinations  of  military 
glory  are  preferable  to  the  advantages  of  peaceful  industry,  etc.  2.  In  the  Church, 
leading  their  fellow-members  into  theological  error ;  into  doctrine  which  id  not  a  faith 
but  only  a  philosophy,  or  which  is  not  a  faith  so  much  as  a  superstition ;  into  indulgence 
in  emotion  without  the  cultivation  of  Christian  morality  ;  or  into  habits  of  virtue  that 
do  not  rest  on  tlie  basis  of  personal  attachment  to  God,  etc.  3.  In  the  family,  lead- 
ing their  children  into  laxity  of  belief;  into  the  conviction  that  worldly  success  is  of 
greater  account  than  the  favour  of  God  and  the  possession  of  spiritual  integrity;  into 
the  practice  of  dubious  habits  which  tend  to  immorality  or  irreligion,  etc. 

II.  Their  lamentable  religious  ignorance.  (Ver.  12.)  The  "wise  men"  of 
Egypt  could  not  tell  "  what  the  Lord  of  hosts  had  purposed ;  "  they  did  not  know  his 
mind.  What  availed  all  their  other  knowledge,  all  their  political  sagacity,  all  their 
pretentious  skill,  if  they  were  utterly  ignorant  of  what  was  in  the  mind  of  God  ?  Our 
leaders  of  to-day,  in  whatever  sphere  they  may  preside,  are  useless  and  worse  than 
useless  if  they  cannot  propose  those  measures,  if  they  cannot  commend  those  doctrines, 
if  they  cannot  foster  those  habits  and  instil  those  principles,  which  are  according  to  the 
mind  of  God,  which  contain  the  will  of  Jesus  Christ.  To  advise  the  policy,  to  repeat 
the  phrases,  to  build  up  the  character  which  they  themselves  received  of  their  fathers, 
may  be  wholly  inadequate,  utterly  inapplicable,  entirely  wrong;  what  is  wanted  in  our 
leaders  is  the  power  to  perceive  the  mind  of  God,  to  especially  understand  what  is 
"  his  will  .concerning  us  in  Christ  Jesus,"  to  guide  and  teach  and  train  so  that  their 
disciples  shall  live  in  the  light  of  his  truth  and  the  enjoyment  of  his  friendship. 

III.  The  mischief  which  they  work.  (Vers.  13, 14.)  These  men  seduced  Egypt 
from  the  true  path,  and  they  led  her  to  err  and  stagger  in  false  paths.     The  immensity 

'  of  the  evil  which  is  wrought  by  false  leaders,  whether  in  the  nation,  the  Church,  or  the 
home,  is  seen  by  regarding  it  on  the  negative  and  on  the  positive  side.  1.  They  seduce 
from  the  saving  truth.  (1  John  ii.  26.)  They  lead  men  from  the  fear  of  the  living  God; 
from  the  faith  and  love  of  Jesus  Christ;  from  the  produce  of  the  henvenlier  graces,  and 
therefore  from  living  the  nobler  and  worthier  life ;  from  the  possession  of  a  peace  which 
no  distractions  can  disturb,  and  of  a  treasure  which  no  thief  can  steal,  and  of  a  hope 
which  triumphs  over  death,  2.  They  lead  into  the  saddest  and  even  the  grossest  evils. 
Their  disciples  "  err  ...  as  a  drunken  man  staggereth  in  his  vomit."  A  painful  but 
graphic  picture  of  those  who  are  led  .astray  into  evil  paths,  into  beliefs  which  are 
not  only  false  but  shocking,  into  companionships  and  alliances  which  are  not  only 
unsatisfactory  but  demoralizing,  into  habits  which  are  not  only  wrong  but  shameful. 
It  is  the  duty  of  the  community,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  false  and  foolish  leaders  have 
always  abounded,  and  that  their  influence  is  disastrous,  (1)  to  be  sedulously  on  guard 
lest  these  should  be  appointed ;  (2)  to  depose  those  that  are  found  unworthy  of  their 
charge,  (3)  to  realize  that  every  individual  mmn  is  responsible  to  God  for  the  faith  he 
holds  and  the  life  he  lives  (Luke  xii.  57  ;  GaL  vi.  4,  6). — C. 

Vers.  18 — 22. — Smiting  and  healing.     We  may  glean  from  these  verses — 
I.  That  the  blows  which  we  suffer  in  our  obdinaht  experience  comb  fbom 
THB  hand  of  God.    No  doubt  the  various  calamities  by  which  Egypt  was  afflicted 


324  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  xix.  1— 25 

came  to  hfir  in  the  ordirKiry  ways,  and  appeared  to  her  citizens  as  the  result  of  common 
causes.  They  aocouutud  for  them  by  reference  to  general  laws,  to  visible  human 
powers,  to  linown  processes  and  current  events.  Yet  we  know  them  to  have  been 
distinctly  and  decidedly  of  Gud,  by  whatever  instrumentalities  they  may  have  been 
brought  about.  "  The  Lord  shall  smite  Egypt "  (ver.  22).  So  now  with  us ;  the 
evils  which  overtake  us — sickness,  separation,  disappointment,  losses,  beireavement,  etc. 
— may  occur  as  the  result  of  causes  which  we  can  discover  and  name;  nevertheless 
they  may  be  regarded  as  visitations,  as  chastisement,  as  discipline,  from  the  hand  of  God. 

II.  That  these  wounds  op  God's  causino  are  intended  by  him  to  abound 
UNTO  THE  HEALTH  OF  THE  WOUNDED  SPIRIT.  "  He  shall  smitc  and  heal."  God's 
main  purpose  in  smiling  was  to  bring  about  a  far  healthier  condition  than  existed 
before.  Afterwards  the  chastening  would  "  yield  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness ; " 
and  for  this  end  chiefly,  if  not  wholly,  it  was  sent.  We  are  to  consider  that  this  is 
always  God's  design  in  sending  a£9iction  to  his  children,  He  smites  that  he  may  heal, 
and  that  the  new  health  may  be  much  better  than  the  old — that  the  blessing  gained 
may  greatly  outweigh  the  loss  endured  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).  To  part  with  bodily  health  and 
to  obtain  spiritual  soundness,  to  lose  material  possessions  and  secure  treasures  which 
make  "  rich  toward  God," — this  is  to  be  enlarged  indeed. 

in.  That  the  restoration  op  the  smitten  spirit  is  attended  and  followed 
BY  VAiuous  BLESSINGS.  1.  The  soul  addressing  itself  to  God  in  earnest  prayer.  "  They 
shall  cry  unto  the  Lord  "  (ver,  20) ;  "  He  shall  be  entreated  of  them  "  (ver.  22).  This 
is  an  act  of  returning  from  folly  and  forgetful ness  unto  the  God  who  has  been  forsaken  ; 
"  They  shall  return,"  etc.  (ver.  22 ;  see  also  ver.  21).  2,  The  soul  seeking  God's 
acceptance  in  his  appointed  way.  "There  shall  be  an  altar  to  the  Lord"  (ver.  19). 
However  interpreted,  this  passage  points  to  the  special  means  appointed  by  God  through 
Moses  for  obtaining  forgiveness  of  sin,  and  suggests  to  us  the  one  way — repentance  and 
faith — by  which  we  must  seek  and  may  find  the  Divine  mercy.  3.  Profession  of  attach- 
ment to  God.  These  five  cities  should  "swear  to  the  Lord  of  hosts"  (ver.  18).  The 
pillar  at  the  border  would  perhaps  be  an  obelisk,  making  mention  of  his  Name  as  the 
One  that  was  worthy  of  human  adoration.  4.  The  service  of  the  lip.  They  would 
"  speak  the  language  of  Canaan  " — the  language  spoken  by  the  people  of  God.  Language 
is  far  from  being  everything,  but  it  is  far  from  being  nothing  (Ps.  xix.  4  ;  Matt,  xii,  37  ; 
Rom.  X.  10).  By  truthful,  kindly,  helpful  speech,  and  in  sacred  song,  we  may  do  much 
in  serving  and  in  pleasing  God.  5.  Consecration,  "They  shall  vow  a  vow  unto  the 
Lord,  and  shall  perform  it ; "  the  solemn  presentation  of  self  unto  a  Divine  Saviour  and 
a  lifelong  redemption  of  the  vow. — 0. 

Vers.  23,  24. — The  crovm  of  privilege.  The  promise  of  the  text  may  not  have  seemed 
to  Israel  so  gracious  and  so  inspiring  as  many  others;  but  it  was  one  that  might  well 
have  been  considered  surpassingly  good.  Eor  it  predicted  that  the  time  would  come 
when  Israel  should  be  closely  associated  as  "a  third  "  with  two  great  world-powers — 
Egypt  and  Assyria;  not,  indeed,  to  triumph  over  tliem,  but  to  be  "a  blessing  in  the 
midst  "  of  them.  TThis  is  the  very  crown  of  privilege.  Concerning  privilege  itself  we 
may  consider — 

I.  Its  DNDOtTBTED  EXISTENCE.  There  are  "elect"  nations  and  individuals;  it  is 
not  only  a  truth  written  in  the  pages  of  Scripture,  but  a  fact  confirmed  by  all  testimony 
and  observation,  that  God  has  conferred  on  some  much  more  than  he  has  allotted  to 
others.  To  one  nation  (man)  he  gives  one  talent,  to  another  two,  and  to  another 
five.  Physical  strength,  intellectual  capacity,  force  of  character,  material  wealth  and 
natural  advantages,  knowledge,  revealed  truth, — these  are  some  of  the  privileges  by 
which  men  and  nations  are  favoured. 

II.  Its  peril.  The  great  danger  attending  the  possession  of  privilege  is  that  of 
entirely  mistaking  the  object  of  the  Creator  in  conferring  it;  of  assuming  that  he 
bestowed  it  simply  for  the  gratification  or  the  exaltation  of  its  recipients.  This  was 
the  disastrous  mistake  which  the  Jews  made:  hence  their  spiritual  arrogance,  their 
selfishness,  their  pitiable  exclusiveness,  their  misreading  of  Scrijjture,  their  maltreat- 
ment of  their  Messiah.  It  is  a  mistake  we  are  all  tempted  to  make ;  it  is  one  against 
which  we  do  well  to  guard  with  the  utmost  vigilance ;  for  it  is  a  sinful  one,  and  one 
that  carries  ruin  in  its  train. 


OH.xn.1— 25.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  325 

HI.  Its  obows.  This  is  to  be  "a  blessing  in  the  midst  of  the  land;"  to  be  a  bond 
of  union  between  other  powers — a  "  third "  to  the  Egypt  and  Assyria  by  which  w» 
may  be  surrounded.  Privileged  lands,  like  England,  find  their  crown,  not  in  military 
successes,  nor  in  annexations,  nor  even  in  well-filled  banks  or  well-fitted  vessels ; 
but  in  giving  free  institutions  to  neighbouring  or  even  distant  nations,  in  conveying 
th«  message  of  Divine  mercy  to  heathen  lands,  "  in  being  a  blessing  in  the  midst  of  the 
earth."  Privileged  men  find  the  crown  of  their  life,  not  in  possession,  nor  in  enjoy- 
ment, nor  in  conscious  superiority  to  others  "that  are  without;  "but  in  distributing, 
in  imparting,  in  making  others  partakers  of  the  peace  and  joy  and  hope  that  fill  their 
own  hearts,  in  broadening  the  belt  of  light  on  which  they  stand,  in  sowing  the  seed  of 
the  kingdom  in  land  which  now  bears  only  briers  and  thorns,  in  being  "  a  blessing  in 
the  midst  of  the  land." — C. 

Ver.  25. — Light*  in  which  God  regards  us.  The  words  intimate  that  there  are  various 
aspects  in  which  the  Divine  Father  looks  at  his  human  children,  and  they  may  suggest 
reciprocal  views  on  our  part. 

I.  LiOHTS  m  WHICH  God  BEOABDS  US.  1.  As  those  to  whom  he  is  nearly  related. 
r'gy  pt  in  her  hour  of  obedience  has  become  "  my  people,"  i.e.  closely  connected  with  God, 
au(i  having,  therefore,  serious  claims  upon  him.  God  does  regard  his  own  as  those  wlio 
are  most  closely,  most  intimately,  most  tenderly  related  to  him,  standing  in  such  close 
relation  that  they  may  confidently  reckon  on  the  continuance  of  his  kindness,  on  the 
protection  and  interposition  of  his  strong  arm.  2.  As  those  who  are  the  product  of 
his  Divine  energy.  "  Assyria  the  work  of  my  hands."  We  who  are  trusting  and 
rejoicing  in  him  and  walking  in  his  truth  are  frequently  to  remind  ourselves  that  we 
are  not  the  product  of  our  own  wisdom  and  effort,  but  are  "  his  workmanship  created 
in  Christ  Jesus"  (Eph.  ii.  10;  and  see  1  Cor.  iii.  9;  2  Cor.  v.  5).  God  has  expended 
on  us  Divine  thought,  Divine  love.  Divine  sorrow,  Divine  patience,  Divine  discipline. 

3.  As  those  in  whom  he  finds  a  Divine  delight.  "  Israel  mine  inheritance."  In  Israel, 
when  that  people  was  faithful  to  his  rule,  God  found  his  portion,  his  inheritance. 
In  us,  when  we  are  attentive  to  bis  voice,  responsive  to  his  love,  obedient  to  his 
commands,   submissive  to  his   will,  he  finds  a   Divine  satisfaction  (John  xv.  11). 

4.  As  those  on  whom  he  can  confer  blessedness.  "  Whom  the  Lord  shall  bless ; " 
"  Whom  God  blesses,  they  are  blessed  indeed."  Theirs  is  not  mere  physical 
excitement,  or  temporary  gratification,  or  dubious  delight,  but  true,  abiding,  ele- 
vating ioy. 

II.  Keciprocal  views  we  should  take  of  him.  We  should  consider  God :  1.  As 
One  to  whom  we  are  most  intimately  related — ^more  closely,  indeed,  than  to  any  human 
kindred.  2.  As  One  to  whom  we  owe  everything  we  are,  as  well  as  everything  we  have. 
3.  As  that  One  in  whom,  in  whose  friendship,  service,  presence,  we  find  (and  hope  to 
find)  our  true  and  lasting  heritage. — 0. 

Ver.  2. — Political  commotion  regarded  as  Divine  judgment.  "  And  I  will  spur  Egypt 
against  Egypt,  and  they  shall  fight  every  one  against  his  brother;  and  every  one  against 
his  fellow,  city  against  city,  and  kingdom  against  kingdom."  Civil  war  does  far  more 
serious  and  pennanent  mischief  to  a  nation  than  foreign  war.  There  are  no  such 
distressing  conditions  brought  about  by  any  other  agencies  as  those  which  follow  civil 
war.  There  can  be  no  true  heroism  in  its  scenes;  because  the  impulse  is  either 
mercenary,  pr  it  is  class  hatred  and  passion.  Patriotism  is  swallowed  up  in  mere 
sectional  interests.  The  historical  connections  of  this  prophecy  seem  to  be  made  clear 
by  the  recent  discoveries  of  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  inscriptions.  There  has  been  found 
an  inscription  containing  a  proclamation  of  one  Piankhi,  who,  in  the  eighth  century  B.C., 
united  under  his  sceptre  the  whole  of  Egypt  and  Ethiopia.  liower  Egypt  was  divided 
among  rival  princes,  whose  connection  with  their  over-lord  was  merely  nominal,  and 
civil  wars  from  time  to  time  arose.  That  which  is  true  of  actual  civil  war,  is  in 
measure  true  of  times  of  political  excitement  and  conflict,  when  party  feeling  runs  high. 
Some  of  the  evils  of  such  times  may  be  pointed  out. 

I.  These  times  of  oommotion  set  class  against  class.  It  is  curious  to  notice 
that  political  conflict  is  never  confined  to  the  subject  about  which  it  arose.  It  is 
opening  the  flood-gate*  and  letting  out  all  the  waters  of  class  jealousy. 


326  THE  BOOK  01?  THE  fttOPflET  ISAlAfl.    [oH.  six.  1—26 


IL  These  times  DisTtrsB  social  obdeb.  Breaking  up  families  and  friendships, 
and  diverting  men's  minds  and  energies  from  their  ordinary  occupations. 

III.  These  times  interfere  with  BUrslNEss.  Which  is  very  sensitive  to  disturbed 
conditions  of  the  body  politic.  Mutual  trust  is  essential  to  business  development,  and 
the  sense  of  security  gives  value  to  property. 

IV.  These  times  give  influenok  to  wu,  men.  The  demagogue  finds  then  his 
opportunity.  The  masses  of  society  gain  undue  importance.  Noise  has  more  power 
than  intelligence.  Beason's  voice  can  seldom  be  heard.  She  keeps  still,  for  it  is  an 
evil  time. 

V.  These  times  seriously  hinder  Christian  and  charitable  enterprise. 
Diverting  both  energy  and  money.  So  seasons  of  political  commotion  become  agencies 
in  executing  Divine  judgments,  and  become  times  of  national  warning  and  coirec- 
tion.— E.  T. 

Ver.  3. — Temptation  to  trust  in.  diviners.  "'They  shall  seek  ...  to  the  charmers." 
"A  time  of  panic,  when  the  counsels  of  ordinary  statesmen  failed,  was  sure  in  Egypt, 
as  at  Athens  in  its  times  of  peril,  to  be  fruitful  in  oracles  and  divinations."  The 
most  remarkable  instance  recorded  in  Scripture  is  that  of  King  Saul,  who  in  his 
extremity,  and  after  having  himself  driven  the  witches  out  of  his  laud,  imperilled  his 
life  to  consult  the  witch  of  Endor.  And  even  in  these  days  there  are  most 
curious  survivals  of  the  old  spirit,  in  the  consultations  of  fortune-tellers,  and  the 
confidence  placed  in  the  guesses  of  prophesiers,  and  the  vague  generalities  of  so-called 
astrologers.  Large  numbers  of  ignorant  and  only  partly  educated  people  hold  to  this 
day  their  confidence  in  lucky  and  unlucky  times,  and  their  fears  of  thirteen  at  the  table, 
the  ticking  of  the  death-watch,  and  the  coffin-shaped  cinder.  In  times  of  nation;il 
distress  men  who  pretend  to  prophesy  find  their  harvest,  and  trade  upon  the  fears  and 
hopes  of  men. 

I.  The  universal  desire  to  pierce  the  unseen  and  the  future.  On  this 
desire  rests  the  success  of  modern  spiritualism.  Where  there  is  no  restful  confidence 
in  God's  love  and  lead,  men  try  to  force  aside  the  veils  that  hide  God  and  God's 
purposes  from  mortal  view.  Man  can  do  so  much  in  the  present  that  he  is  fretted  and 
annoyed  because  he  can  get  no  guarantees  for  to-morrow,  and  every  day  must  act  upon 
the  uncertainty  whether,  for  him,  there  will  be  any  to-morrow.  After  this  life,  what 
then  ?  Men  are  angry  because  no  fellow-man  has  ever  answered  that  question  or  ever 
can.  Revelation  from  God  can  alone  relieve  the  mystery.  Show  how  in  all  ages  men 
have  peered  into  the  dark  future,  and  been  compelled  to  confess  that  they  could  see 
nothing  but  the  "  folds  of  the  wondrous  veil." 

II.  The  moral  reasons  why  the  future  is  hidden  from  us.  1.  It  is  necessary 
for  our  probation.  2.  It  prevents  procrastination  by  impression  of  the  supreme 
value  of  now.  3.  It  keeps  firom  the  self-security  which  nourishes  free  indulgence  in 
sin.    4.  It  makes  our  life  manifestly  a  life  of  faith. 

III.  The  rest  which  religion  gives  from  the  care  about  the  future.  Religion 
brings  God  into  direct  relations,  and  gracious  relations,  with  the  individual.  Past, 
present,  future,  are  all  in  God's  control.  If  the  soul  is  in  right  relations  with  God,  the 
present  is  his  overruling,  and  the  future  is  his  provision.  If  we  are  with  Ood,  all  is 
well,  here  or  there. — B.  T. 

Vers.  6 — 10. — The  withholding  of  Ood's  gifts  making  man's  woe.  These  verses  are 
suggestive  of  the  thousandfold  forms  of  trouble  that  follow  on  an  unusually  low  Nile, 
or  the  failure  of  the  Nile  flood.  It  is  peculiar  to  the  valley  of  the  Nile,  and  the  Delta 
forming  the  land  of  Egypt,  that  cultivation  of  the  soil  depends  upon  the  yearly 
flooding  of  the  river,  which,  by  canals,  sluices,  ponds,  and  ditches,  is  led  over  the  fields 
as  the  great  fertilizer.  Holy  Scripture  gives  us  the  picture  of  supreme  distress 
following  on  the  failure  of  the  Nile  for  seven  successive  y«ars  in  the  times  of  Joseph. 
The  complete  dependence  of  the  country  on  this  periodical  overflow,  and  the  fact  that 
all  agricultural  arrangements  are  adapted  to  this  peculiarity,  involved  a  remarkable 
helplessness  throughout  the  land  when  the  Nile  failed  to  rise.  The  people  could  not 
do  what  they  were  accustomed  to  do,  so  they  did  not  know  what  to  do,  aiid  could  not,  in 
any  effective  way,  make  up  for  this  calamity.    If  their  river  be  dried  up,  their  fruitfiil 


OS.  tix  1— 26.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PEOPHET  ISAIAS.  S:1 

iand  will  soon  be  turned  into  barrenness,  and  their  harvests  cease.  Two  things  are 
suggested  for  consideration. 

L  The  wondebful  way  Df  which  things  abe  linked  togethbb.  So  that  failure 
in  one  thing  brings  on  a  most  varied  train  of  evils.  The  prominent  thing  here  is  the 
failure  of  the  Nile  flood  ;  but  how  many  things  are  found  to  depend  on  that !  — the  basket- 
trade;  the  paper-trade;  the  farmer's  trade;  the  fish-trade;  the  dax- trade;  the 
net-trade ;  the  buildei^i  trade.  So  is  it  still.  The  cotton  supply  from  America  was 
checked  a  few  years  ago,  and  the  consequences  reached,  in  one  way  or  another,  all 
classes  of  society.  Depressions  in  trade  first  affect  one  branch,  but  presently  rise 
to  the  highest  and  descend  to  the  lowest  classes  of  society ;  and  so  it  is  again  and 
again  proved  that,  "  we  are  members  one  of  another." 

II.  The  wondebful  wat  in  which  all  pbospeeitt  is  made  dependent  on  the 
FiBST  GIFTS  OF  GoD.  Man's  riches  are  God's  gifts.  Man  can  never  add  to  the  wealth 
of  the  world  by  exchanges,  which  only  vary  the  possessors.  Air,  rain,  sunshine, 
water,  electricity,  coal,  increase  from  field  and  beast,  are  man's  riclies  ;  and  these  are 
first  things  that  are  absolutely  dependent  on  God,  and  out  of  man's  controL  God 
withholds  the  rains,  and  a  nation  is  in  misery ;  God  tempers  the  air,  and  plague  sweeps 
away  the  multitudes  ;  God  stops  the  flood,  and  Egypt  pines  away  in  its  helplessness. 
The  source  of  all  real  good  is  God,  in  whose  hands  are  the  very  springs  and  sources  of 
all  human  happiness  and  prosperity. — B.  T. 

Ver.  14. — Men'$  minds  a  sphere  in  which  OocPs  judgments  may  worTc.  "  The 
Lord  hath  mingled  a  perverse  spirit  in  the  midst  thereof."  Failuie  in  recognizing 
men's  minds  and  wills,  as  spheres  of  Divine  operation,  makes  difiioult  to  us  such  cases 
as  that  of  Pharaoh,  whose  heart  the  Lord  is  said  to  have  hardened ;  or  that  of  the 
prophets  in  the  time  of  Ahab,  amongst  whom  God  had  sent  a  "  lying  spirit."  But  the 
a[)estle  distinctly  taught  that  all  the  sides  and  all  the  forces  of  man's  nature  are  in 
God's  control,  and  that  he  can  work  his  purposes  through  them  all.  Writing  to  the 
liomans  (i.  28),  Paul  says  of  the  Gentiles,  "  God  gave  them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind, 
to  do  those  things  which  are  not  convenient."  And  the  heathen  have  a  motto  which 
embodies  the  same  truth,  "  Whom  the  gods  would  destroy  they  first  dement " — a 
sentence  involving  a  belief  in  the  control  of  the  gods  over  men's  minds.  A  further 
illustration  may  be  found  in  the  prayer  oifered  by  David  in  the  time  of  his  extreme 
peril :  "  0  Lord,  I  pray  thee,  turn  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel  into  foolishness"  (2  Sam. 
XV.  31).     This  truth  we  can  clearly  see  and  fully  accept. 

I.  God  has  contbol  oveb  man's  oiboumstances.  These  are,  undoubtedly,  the 
usual  spheres  of  Divine  operation.  Life  in  the  midst  of  varying  circumstances,  and 
subject  to  the  influence  of  circumstances,  is  our  present  lot.  God's  providence  we  assume 
to  have  its  sphere  in  things  and  events ;  and  too  easily  we  may  come  to  limit  God's 
working  to  the  incidents  of  Ufe,  and  keep  him  entirely  in  the  external  spheres, 
reaching  us  only  through  our  senses.  So  we  need  to  have  set  before  us  the  further 
and  more  searching  truth,  that — 

II.  God  has  contkol  oveb  man's  mind  and  heabt.  This  may  be  difficult  to 
harmonize  with  our  notions  of  man's  free-will  and  independence.  But  man's  free-will 
is  not  an  absolute  thing ;  it  is  set  within  careful  and  precise  limitations.  Man  has 
liberty  within  a  tether;  and  he  cannot  be  trusted  beyond  the  tether.  God  never 
looses  his  hold  on  him.  The  point,  however,  which  especially  calls  for  illustration  and 
enforcement  here  is,  that  God  may  execute  'hxs  judgments  on  man  in  the  sphere  of  his 
mind.  A  state  of  stubbornness,  perversity,  and  hardening  may  be  traced  by  man  as 
the  natural  response  of  certain  minds  to  certain  circumstances.  We  are  taught  to  look 
deeper,  and  see  in  bad  mental  states  and  moods  not  Divine  permissions  only,  but 
Uivine  operations  and  Divine  judgments.  The  mental  blindness  and  deafness,  the 
narrow-mindedness,  the  sceptical  tendency,  of  a  particular  age,  we  view  aright  when 
we  regard  as  Divine  judgment  working  towards  humility. — R.  T. 

Ver.  19. — The  cry  ^distress  after  the  true  God.  The  erection  of  the  altar  and  the 
pillar  would  be  a  sign  of  desire  after  God.  "  In  Isaiah's  time  it  must  have  seemed 
incredible  that  the  firmly  organized  idolatrous  system  of  Egypt  should  ever  be  broken 
up.    Yet  such  a  result  was  brought  about  by  a  aeries  of  movements— Assyrian, 


328  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh- xix.  1— 25 

Babylonian,  Persian,  and  Greek — which  commenceri  almost  immediately  after  the  date 
of  the  above  prediction.  la  the  district  of  Helinpolis,  on  the  site  of  a  ruined  temple 
at  Leontopolis  (twenty  miles  north-east  of  Memphis),  the  high  priest  Onias  IV.  built 
his  temple,  under  a  special  licence  from  Ptolemy  Phiiometor  (about  b.o.  150)."  The 
chapter  deals  with  the  corrective  judgments  which  were  to  come  upon  Egypt,  and 
gives  this  prophecy  as  the  assurance  that  they  will  in  measure  prove  efficient ;  and 
Egypt  in  her  distress  will  cry  after  the  true  God;  and  the  presence  of  Jews  in 
her  midst  would  give  direction  to  her  ciy.  We  only  suggest  the  following  topics  for 
illustration : — 

I.  The  mission  or  all  natiokaTi  distbess  is  cokvinobmjsnt  of  thk  olaius  or 
God. 

II.  The  pbessurb  op  national  distress  is  a  peesuabion  to  call  npoN  Q«d. 
[II.  The  akkangements  of  God's  pkovidencb  always  help  men's  desire  to  seek 

God.  Illustrated  in  the  fact  that  Jews  were  settled  in  Egypt,  and  witnessing  for 
Jehovah,  when  the  people's  hearts  were  turning  towards  him.  Prom  this  we  may- 
proceed  to  show  how  our  establishing  missions  in  various  parts  of  heathendom  proves 
to  be  providential  help  afforded  to  peoplis  who  have  begun  to  cry  after  God.  Our 
"  altar  "  and  our  "  pillar  "  are  thus  for  "  a  sign  and  for  a  witness  unto  the  Lord  cf  hosts." 
— R.  T. 

Ver.  22. —  Ood  loth  Smiter  and  Sealer.  "  The  meaning  is  not  simply  that  the  stroke 
should  be  followed  by  healing,  nor  is  it  simply  that  the  stroke  should  possess  a  healing 
virtue ;  but  bcith  ideas  seem  to  be  included."  The  full  thought  is  expressed  by  the 
Prophet  Hosea  (vi.  1,  2),  "Come,  and  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord  :  for  he  hath  torn, 
and  he  will  heal  us ;  he  hath  smitten,  and  he  will  bind  us  up.  After  two  days  will  he 
revive  us  :  in  the  third  day  he  will  raise  us  up,  and  we  shall  live  in  his  sight."  Hen- 
derson says,  "  The  doctrine  here  taught  is,  that  when  God  has  purposes  of  mercy  towards 
a  sinful  people,  he  will  continue  to  visit  them  with  calamities  till  they  are  humbled, 
and  thus  brought  into  a  fit  state  for  appreciating  the  value  of  his  mercies."  For 
illustrations  of  the  same  view  of  God's  workinc;,  see  Job  v.  27>-»-13 ;  ch.  Ivii.  15 — 19 ; 
Hos.  V.  15.  There  are  few  conceptions  of  God  which  should  seem  so  tender  and  so 
restfully  satisfying  as  this  to  conscious  sinners  who  long  to  be  freed  from  their  sins. 
God  will  not  leave  us  alone  ;  he  will  smite.  God  will  watch  the  effects  of  his  smiting, 
and  take  the  first  opportunity  to  heal.  God  never  smites  save  with  the  prospect  before 
him  of  healing,  and  with  gracious  intentions  of  making  his  healings  an  uns]  eakable 
blessing — "  the  intention  of  healing  is  predominant  throughout "  (comp.  Zeph.  iii.  8, 9 ; 
Jer.  xii.  5 — 7). 

L  These  two  things — smiting  and  healing — are  often  severed  in  maw.  1. 
Some  smite  for  others  to  heal.  2.  Some  smite  in  malice,  and  do  not;  want  us  to  be 
1  ealed.  3.  Some  smite  in  wilfulness,  and  do  not  care  whetlier  we  are  healed.  4.  Some 
smite  in  kindness,  but  are  unable  to  heal  the  wounds  they  make.  And  so  often  men 
do  not  know  how  to  smite,  though  they  nrean  well,  and  so  the  wounds  they  make  are 
mischievous,  and  only  wounds,  not  really  corrective  agencies.  Man's  bungling  ways 
in  smiting  and  healing,  make  us  say,  alter  David,  "  Let  me  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
Lord,  and  not  into  the  hands  of  man." 

II.  These  two  things — smiting  and  healing — are  always  united  in  God. 
1.  In  God's  thought.  2.  In  God's  arrangement.  3.  Given-  time  enough,  also  in  God's 
action.  Because  of  the  union  God's  smitings  can  always  be  severe  enough  to  be 
efiicient.  He  can  venture  to  smite  harder  than  any  man  can  ever  do.  But  God's 
wounds  never  go  beyond  his  healing  power.  The  most  striking  illustration  is  perhaps 
that  set  before  us  in  the  story  of  Job.  In  dealing  with  him  we  know  not  which  to 
admire  most — God's  wonderful  smiting^,  God's  wonderful  healings,  or  the  gracious 
way  in  which  the  imitings  and  the  hi  alings  fitted  in  together. — E.  T. 

Ver.  24. — Th^  Qod-fearing  man  a  blessing  wherever  he  is  found.  Israel  is  the  type 
of  the  God-fearing  man,  and  it  is  prophesied  of  Israel,  as  a  nation,  that  when  it  is 
linked  in  friendly  alliance  with  Egypt  and  Assvria,  its  testimony  for  the  true  God, 
and  its  example  of  noble  living  in  the  fear  of  God,  would  maike  it  a  blessing  in  the 
lands.    The  prophecy  was  fulfilled  in  the  time  of  the  Hasmonean  princes,    Comparr 


CH.  XIX.  1—25.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  829 

the  promise  made  to  Abraham,  as  a  man  of  God  nnd  man  of  faith,  that  "in  him,  and 
in  his  seed,  all  nations  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed  "  (Gen.  xxii.  18).  Scripture 
intimates  that  the  Jews  have  been  the  great  conservators  of  the  two  foundation-truths, 
of  (1)  God's  unity  and  (2)  God's  spirituality,  for  the  whole  world,  and  that  they  are 
yet  to  he  the  great  agents  in  the  conversion  of  the  world  to  Gr"i,  as  revealed  in  Jesus 
Christ ;  and  perhaps  no  race  is  so  widely  scattered  over  the  earth,  or  so  efficiently 
represented  in  all  lands,  as  the  Jews.  They  may  be  a  "  blessing"  indeed,  when  the  veil 
is  taken  away,  and  they  see  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth  the  world's  Messiah  and  Saviour. 
We,  however,  for  the  purpose  of  this  homily,  think  of  the  Jew  in  the  world  as 
representing  the  godly  man  set  in  various  circumstances,  and  exercising  a  gracious 
influence  in  his  circle,  whatever  it  may  he.  He  is  a  source  of  blessing,  a  means  of 
blessing,  and  an  object  of  blessing. 

I.  He  is  a  sourcb  of  blessikg.  This  term  brings  up  for  consideration  his  uncon- 
scious influence — the  blessing  which  flows  from  the  good  man,  by  virtue  of  what  he  is, 
rather  than  of  what  he  does.,  A  beautiful  picture,  a  work  of  perfect  art,  a  gracious 
and  gentle-mannered  person,  exert  power  for  good  apart  from  conscious  intention.  And 
80  the  pure  are  the  "  salt  of  the  earth." 

II.  B.-B  IS  A  MEANS  OF  BLESSING.  This  term  brings  to  view  his  conscious  influence. 
For  the  good  man  lies  under  trust,  and  wants  to  be  faithful.  And  the  good  man,  by 
virtue  of  his  goodness,  is  full  of  concern  for  the  well-being  of  others ;  so  his  life  must 
be  an  active  charity.  Like  his  Master,  he  is  "  ever  going  about,  doing  good,"  inventing 
ways  in  which  he  can  become  a  blessing. 

III.  He  18  AN  OBJBOT  TO  BE  BLESSED.  By  God,  whose  work  he  is  doing,  whose 
Name  he  is  honouring,  and  whose  service  he  is  commending.  Otod  never  forgets  our 
work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love,  but  ensures  that  all  who  are  a  blessing  are 
blessed.— &.  T. 

Ver.  25. — All  nations  belonging  unto  Ood,  This  is  a  singul^^  and  even  surprising 
expression.  These  nations  we;3  idolatrous,  and  they  came  under  severe  Divine  judg- 
ments, and  yet  God  claims  them  as  his,  and  even  declares  his  favour  towards  them, 
using  the  same  terms  concerning  Egypt  and  Assyria  as  concerning  his  own  people 
Israel,  and  saying,  "Blessed  is  my  people  Egypt,  and  the  work  of  my  hands  Assyria, 
and  mine  inheritance  Israel."  '  Speaker's  Commentary '  says,  "  The  widespread  influence 
of  the  Jews  over  Syria,  and  the  adjacent  countries  under  the  Syro-Macedonian  kings, 
as  well  as  over  Egypt  under  the  Ptolemies,  may  represent  an  initial  stage  in  the 
fulfilment  of  the  prophecy.  A  second  stage  commenced  with  that  great  day,  which 
sent  devout  men  back  from  Jerusalem  into  Egypt  and  Libya  on  one  side,  into  Parthia, 
Media,  Elam,  and  Mesopotamia,  on  the  other  (Acts  ii.  9,  10),  to  tell  how  "  God,  having 
raised  up  his  Son  Jesus  "  (the  Prince  and  the  Saviour),  had  sent  him  to  bless  "  the  Jews 
first,  and  in  them  all  nations." 

L  As  iNDivinnALS,  composing  nations,  all  men  ABE  God's  obeation.  So  he  has 
natural  rights  in  them  all.  "  It  is  he  that  hath  made  us, and  not  we  ourselves;"  then 
"  Come,  let  us  worship  aud  bow  down :  let  us  kneel  before  the  Lord  our  Maker." 

II.  As  located  in  pabticulae  positions,  nations  have  the  bounds  of  thkir 
HABITATIONS  APPOINTED  BY  GoD.     See  St.  Paul's  argument  in  Acts  xvii.  26. 

III.  Ab  ENDOWED   WITH   NATIONAL   OHAKAOTEKISTICS,  ALL   NATIONS   ARE   CALLED   TO 

THE  SERVICE  OP  GoD.  For  nations  have  special  gifts,  as  truly  as  individuals ;  and 
wherever  there  are  gifts  there  must  be  responsibility.  The  genius  of  every  nation  is 
its  special  ability  to  witness  for  and  work  for  God.  It  has  been  well  said  that  Israel, 
Greece,  and  Rome  were  three  countries  of  God's  election ;  Israel  called  to  witness  for 
religion,  Greece  for  art,  and  Rome  for  law.  But  a  similar  statement  might  be  made 
concerning  every  nation. 

IV.  As   UNDER   MORAL   TRIAL,  ALL  NATIONS  ABB  WITHIN   THJ!   BUPEEVISXON  OF   GoD. 

The  true  way  to  regard  naV.anal  history  and  experiences  is  this :  In  them,  God's 
dealings  with  individuals  find  open  and  public  illustration ;  and  so  individuals  may 
learn  moral  lessons  that  have  personal  application  to  themselves. 

y.   As   NEEDING  A  REDEEMER,  ALL  NATIONS   8HABB   IN   THE  ONB  PBOYISION  KADE  BT 

GtoD.  God  loves  the  world.  All  have  sinned.  There  is  only  one  Name,  but  by  it  all 
men  everywhere  may  be  saved, — B.  T. 


m 


THE  BOOK  Ot*  THE  PSoPHET  ISAlAS.       lea.  xx  1-A 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEE  XX. 
Vei*.  1—t. — A  Prophecy  AQAiirsT  Eqtpt 
AND  Ethiopia.  Tlie  Assyrian  inscriptions 
enable  ua  to  date  tliis  prophpey  with  a  near 
approach  to  exactness.  Ashdod  was  be- 
sieged by  an  Assyrian  army  twice  in  the 
reign  of  Sargon — in  his  ninth  year  (b.o.  713) 
and  in  his  eleventh  year  (b.o.  711).  On  the 
former  occasion  it  is  probable  that  the  arms 
of  a  general  (TartaTi)  weie  employed ;  on 
tlie  latter  it  is  nearly  certain  that  Sargon 
made  the  expedition  in  person.  The  capture 
of  Athdod,  here  mentioned,  is  consequently 
the  first  capture.  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  were 
at  the  time  united  under  one  head,  Shabak, 
or  Sliabatok ;  and  the  inhabitants  of  Ashdod 
looked  to  this  quarter  for  deliverance  from 
the  Assyrian  power.  Shortly  after  the  first 
capture,  they  revolted,  deposed  the  king 
«hom  Sargon  had  set  over  them,  appointed 
another,  and  then  proceeded,  in  conjunction 
with  Philistia,  Judah,  Edom,  and  Moab,  to 
call  in  the  aid  of  the  Egyptians  and  Ethio- 
pians. Isaiah's  mission  on  this  occasion 
was  to  discourage  Judaea  from  joining  Ash- 
dod and  her  allies  in  this  appeal.  He  was 
instructed  to  prophesy  that  Assyria  would 
shortly  inflict  a  severe  defeat  on  the  two 
African  powers,  and  carry  into  captivity 
large  numbers  of  both  nations.  The  pro- 
phecy seems  to  have  bad  its  accomplishment 
about  twelve  years  later,  when  Senuacherib 
defeated  the  combined  forces  of  Egypt  and 
Ethiopia  at  Eltekeh,  near  Ekron  (G.  Smith, 
'  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  133). 

Ver.  1. — In  the  year  that  Tartan  came 
unto  Ashdod;  rather,  u  tartan.  The  word 
was  not  a  proper  name,  but  u  title  of  office, 
equivalent  to  eurena  among  the  Partbians, 
and  signifying  "  commander-in-chief."  The 
tartan  held  the  second  position  in  the 
empire.  Isaiah  lias  been  accused  of  having 
confounded  together  the  two  sieges  of  Ash- 
dod (Cheyne) ;  but  if  one  was  conducted  by 
the  tartan,  and  the  other  by  Sargon  in 
person,  his  words  would  distinguish  as  per- 
fectly as  possible  which  siege  he  meant. 
When  Sargon  the  King  of  Assyria  sent  him. 
The  present  passage  furnished  almost  the 
sole  trace  of  the  existence  of  this  monarch- 
one  of  the  greatest  of  Assyria's  sovereigns — 
until  about  the  middle  of  the  present  cen- 
tury, when  the  exploration  of  the  Assyrian 
niins,  and  the  decipherment  of  the  Assyrian 


inscriptions,  presented  him  to  us  in  the 
most  distinct  and  vivid  way,  as  king,  con- 
queror, and  builder.  He  was  the  founder  of 
the  last  and  greatest  of  the  Assyrian  dy- 
nasties, tlie  successor  of  the  biblical  Shal- 
maneser,  and  tlie  father  of  Sennacherib. 
He  reigned  frum  B.o.  722  to  B.o.  705.  He 
was  the  captor  of  Samaria;  he  defeated  tho 
forces  of  Egypt ;  lie  warred  on  Susiana, 
Media,  Armenia,  Asia  Minor.  Cyprus;  and 
he  conquered  and  held  in  subjection  Baby- 
lon. He  built  the  great  city  explored  by 
M.  Botta,  near  Khorsabad,  whicli  is  some- 
times called  "  the  French  Nineveh."  It  is 
now  found  that  Ptolemy's  'Canon'  contains 
his  name  under  tlie  form  of  Arkeanus,  and 
that  Yacut's  'Geography'  merrtions  his 
great  city  under  the  form  of  Sarghun.  But 
these  facts  were  unsuspected  until  the 
recent  explorations  in  Mesopotamia,  and 
Isaiah's  mention  of  him  alone  gave  him  a 
place  in  history.  And  fought  against  Ash- 
dod, and  took  it.  Ashdod  was  the  strongest 
of  the  Pliilistiue  cities,  and  one  of  the  most 
ancient  (Josh.  xv.  47).  Its  name  is  probably 
derived  from  a  root  meaning  "strength." 
We  hear  of  its  having  stood  on  one  occasion 
a  siege  of  twenty-nine  years  (Herod.,  ii.  157). 
It  is  now  known  as  Esdud.  When  Ashdod 
is  first  mentioned  in  the  Assyrian  inscrip- 
tions it  is  tributary  to  Sargon,  having  pro- 
bably submitted  to  him  in  B.C.  720,  after  the 
battle  of  Eaphia.  It  soon,  however,  revolts 
and  reclaims  its  independence.  In  B.a.  718 
the  Assyrians  proceed  against  it;  and  its 
capture  is  implied  by  the  facts  that  the 
Assyrians  depose  its  king,  and  install  one  of 
his  brothers  as  monarch  in  his  room  (comp. 
2  Kings  xxiii.  34). 

Yer.  2. — loose  the  saokoloth  from  off  thy 
loins.  Dr.  Kay  supposes  that  Isaiah  was 
wearing  sackcloth  exceptionally,  as  during 
a  time  of  mourning.  But  it  is  more  probable 
that  the  Hebrew  sdk  represents  tm  hnir- 
cloth  ("rough  garment,"  Zech,  xiii.  4), 
which,  as  ascetics,  the  Hebrew  prophets 
wore  habitually  (2  Kings  i.  8 ;  Matt.  iii.  4). 
Walking  naked.  Probably  not  actually 
"  naked,"  fur  captives  were  not  stripped 
bare  by  the  Assyrians,  but  with  nothing  on 
besides  his  short  tunic,  as  the  male  captives 
are  commonly  represented  in  the  Assyrian 
sculptures. 

Ver.  3. — ^My  servant  Isaiah.  Isaiah  shares 
this  honourable  title,  "  my  servant,"  with  a 
select  few  among  God's  saints — with  Abra- 
ham (Gen.  xxvi.  24),  Moses  (Numb.  xii.  7), 
Caleb  (Numb.  xiv.  24),  Job  (Job  i.  8;  ilii. 
7, 8),  Eliakim  (ch.  xxii.  20),  and  Zerubbabel 
(Hag.  ii.  23).  It  is  a  great  acknowledgment 
for  the  Creator  to  make  to  the  oreatuie,  that 


ea.  tx.  1-e.]       THE  BOOS  OS'  TflE  PftOf HEl^  ISAIAH. 


§31 


he  really  does  him  service.  Three  years. 
Probably  from  B.C.  713  to  B.o.  711,  or  during 
the  whole  of  the  time  that  Fhilistia,  Edpm, 
Moab,  and  Judah  were  making  representa- 
tions to  the  Egyptians  and  Ethiopians,  and 
endeavouring  to  obtain  their  aid  (see  G. 
Smith,  'Eponym  Canoa,'  p.  130).  It  has 
been  proposed,  by  an  arbitrary  emendation, 
to  cut  down  the  time  to  "  tbree  days ;  "  but 
a  three  days'  sign  of  the  kind  covdd  not 
have  been  expected  to  have  any  important 
effect.  The  supposed  "  impropriety "  of 
Isaiah's  having  "  gone  naked  and  barefoot " 
for  three  years  arises  from  a  misconception 
of  the  word  "naked,"  which  is  not  to  be 
taken  literally  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  2). 
The  costume-  adopted  would  be  extraor- 
dinary, especially  in  one  of  Isaiah's  rank 
and  position ;  but  would  not  be  in  any  degree 
"  improper."  It  would  be  sitoply  that  of 
worlring  men  during  the  greater  part  of  the 
day  (see  Exod.  xxii.  20,  27). 

Ver.  4. — So  shall  the  King  of  Assyria  lead 
away  the  Egyptians  prisoners,  and  the 
Ethiopic^ns  captives.  In  Sennacherib's 
annals  for  the  year  b.o.  701,  twelve  years 
after  this  prophecy  was  given,  we  find  the 
foUowiag  passage:  "The  kings  of  Egypt, 
and  the  archers,  chariots,  and  horsemen  of 
the  King  of  Meroe,  a  force  without  number, 
gathered  and  came  to  the  aid  of  Ekron.  In 
the  neighbourhood  of  Eltekeh  their  ranks 
were  arrayed  before  me,  and  they  urged  on 
their  soldiers.  In  the  service  of  Asshur,  my 
lord,  I  fought  with  them,  and  I  accomplished 


their  overthrow.  The  clmrioteers  and  »on» 
of  the  kings  of  Egypt,  and  the  charioteert  of 
the  King  of  Meroe,  alive  in  the  midst  of  the 
hattle,  my  hand  captured  "(G.  Smith, '  Eponym 
Canon,'  pp.  133,  134).  Young  and  old.  The 
intermixture  of  young  and  old,  of  full-grown 
males  with  women  leading  children  by  the 
hand  or  carrying  them  upon  the  shoulder, 
in  the  Assyrian  sculptures,  stiikes  us  even 
on  the  most  cursory  inspection  of  them. 
Naked  and  barefoot.  Assyrian  captives  are 
ordinarily  represented  "  barefoot."  Most 
commonly  they  wear  a  single  tunic,  reaching 
from  the  neck  to  the  knees,  or  sometimes  to 
the  ankles,  and  girt  about  the  waist  with  a 
girdle.  It  is  probable  tljat  Egyptian  and 
Ethiopian  prisoners  would  be  even  more 
scantily  clad,  since  the  ordinary  Egyptian 
tunic  began  at  the  waist  and  ended  con- 
siderably above  the  knee. 

Ver.  5. — They  shall  be  afraid  and  ashamed. 
Those  who  have  resorted  to  Egypt  and 
Ethiopia  for  aid  shall  be  "  ashamed "  of 
their  folly  in  doing  so,  and  "  afraid "  of  its 
consequences  (see  the  last  claube  of  ver.  6). 

Ver.  6. — The  inhabitant  of  this  isle ;  rather, 
of  this  coast  (Knobel,  Hitzig,  Kay) ;  t.«.  of 
Palestine  generally,  which  was  a  mere  strip 
of  coast  compared  with  Egypt  and  Ethiopia. 
Sargon  speaks  of  all  the  four  powers  who 
at  this  time  "sought  to  Egypt, "  as  "dwell- 
ing beside  the  sea"  (G.  Smith,  'Eponym 
Canon,'  p.  130).  Such  is  our  expectation; 
rather,  so  hath  it  gone  with  our  expectation  ; 
i.e.  with  Egypt  and  Etluopia. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — Foolish  trust  rebuked  by  a  strange  sign.  Few  things  are  so  difiScult 
as  to  bring  men  to  rely  wholly  and  solely  upon  God.  The  circumstances  of  the  time 
were  these.  Humanly  speaking,  Judaea  lay  absolutely  at  the  mercy  of  Assyria.  There 
was  no  existing  power  or  combination  of  powers  that  could  sucoesslully  contend  at  the 
time  against  the  vast  bodies  of  well-armed  and  well-disciplined  solriiers  which  a  king  of 
Assyria  could  bring  into  the  field.  Nothing  could  prolong  Jewish  independence  for 
more  than  a  few  years  but  some  miraculous  interposition  of  (Jod  on  behalf  of  the  Jewish 
people.  But  for  God  to  interpose  miraculously,  it  was  necessary  that  implicit  trust 
should  be  placed  in  him  (Mark  vi.  5 ;  ix.  23,  etc.).  The  Jews,  however,  could  not  bring 
themselves  to  believe  that  they  bad  no  help  but  Jehovah.  They  thought  Egypt,  or 
Egypt  and  Ethiopia  combined,  might  well  prove  a  match  for  Assyria,  and  were  bent  on 
placing  themselves  under  the  protection  of  the  combined  powers.  The  lesson  of  the 
destruction  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  which  had  trusted  in  Egypt  (2  Kings  xvii.  4),  and 
then  been  destroyed  by  Assyria,  was  lost  on  them.  In  connection  with  Ashdod,  they 
had  actually  sent  ambassadors  to  Egypt  to  intreat  assistance  (ch.  xxx.  1 — 4).  Then  it 
was  that  Isaiah  received  the  special  mission  which  was  to  warn  his  countrymen  of  the 
utter  folly  of  trusting  to  human  aid.  For  three  years  he  was  to  wear  the  scant  clothing 
that  Assyrian  captives  ordinarily  wore,  announcing  that  he  did  so  in  token  that  ere 
long  the  warriors  of  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  would  be  seen  thus  clad,  on  their  way  from 
Egypt  to  captivity  at  Nineveh.  The  unusual  attire  of  the  prophet  could  not  but  create 
•  great  sensation.  It  probably  made  a  coniiderable  imprejsion  on  Hezekiah  and  his 
counsellors.  It  was  not  forgotten ;  and  if  it  did  not  at  once  cause  the  negotiations  with 
Egypt  to  be  broken  off,  it  produced  the  result  that,  when  Isaiah's  prediction  was  fulfilled 


S32  THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.        [ch.  xx.  1— 6. 

after  the  battle  of  Bltekeh,  the  Jewish  monarch  and  people  did  in  their  trouble  turn  to 
God.  At  the  crisis  of  his  danger,  Hezekiah  made  a]>peal  to  the  Almighty  (ch.  ixxvii, 
t) ;  and  his  appeiil  was  followed  by  that  destruction  of  the  Assyrian  host  (ch.  xxxviL 
36)  which  caused  the  Assyrians  to  respect  and  fear  the  Jews  thenceforward,  and  to  allow 
them  to  retain  their  independence.  Thus  the  life  of  the  Jewish  monarchy  was  extended 
for  aboTe  a  century. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Theprophet  as  a  sign.  I. ,  The  historical  ciecumstahoes.  The  illusion 
of  Egyptian  unity  had  passed  away  again.  The  country  was  broken  up  under  the 
rule  of  a  number  of  petty  kings,  of  whom  Shabak,  or  So,  or  Seve  (2  Kings  xvii.  4), 
was  one.  Negotiations  seem  to  have  been  begun  between  Judah  and  Egypt,  probably 
as  a  resource  against  the  Assyrian.  Ashdod  was  laid  siege  to  by  the  Assyrians  about 
B.O.  713 — 711,  and  the  inhabitants  carried  off  captives.  And  Judah's  name  appears 
in  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  among  the  nations  guilty  of  treason  to  Assyria.  Isaiali, 
both  as  the  prophet  and  the  politician,  is  seen  to  be  opposed  to  the  Egyptian  alliance. 
-Vnd  his  policy  SBems  to  have  been  justified  by  the  event,  for  Judah  was  subsequently 
invaded  and  subdued.  Wlien  the  tartan,  or  Assyrian  general,  came  to  Ashdod,  sent  by 
King  Sargon,  the  spiiit  of  Isaiah  was  stirred  within  him. 

II.  The  symbolic  act  of  the  peophet.  He  takes  his  distinctive  dress  of  hair- 
cloth from  his  loins,  and  is  "  bare,"  in  that  sense  in  which  the  Roman  soldier  wag  said 
to  be  nudus  without  his  armour.  So  the  Prophet  Micah  says  he  will  wail  and  howl, 
II nd  go  stripped  and  naked,  because  of  the  desolation  of  the  land.  The  reader  will  be 
reminded  of  George  Fox  at  Lichfield,  and  of  Solomon  Eagle  preaching  re|ientance  to 
the  people  amidst  the  horrors  of  the  Plague  of  London  (1665),  of  which  scene  there  was 
an  affecting  picture  by  Poole  in  the  Royal  Academy  winter  exhibition  of  1884.  The 
act  is:  1.  Expressive  of  strong  feeling ;  suited  to  Oriental  effusiveness,  though  not  to 
our  colder  habits.  The  mind  needs,  in  moments  of  strong  feeling,  to  see  itself  reflected 
in  some  outward  form.  We  all  acknowledge  this  in  connection  with  the  great  epochs 
of  life — the  funeral,  the  wedding.  The  great  heart  of  the  prophet  throbbing  in  sympathy 
with  his  nation,  must  signify  his  grief  at  its  condition  by  some  change  in  his  attire. 
And  then :  2.  It  is  a  means  of  impressing  others.  We  speak,  not  only  by  our  words, 
but  by  our  appearance,  our  apparel,  our  manners.  Though  we  are  not  called  upon  in 
our  time  to  adopt  a  peculiar  dress,  that  dress  should  betoken  a  serious  mind.  Incon- 
spicuousness  may  serve  as  good  an  end  as  conspicuousness  in  this  matter.  Let  us  at 
least,  without  straining  a  point,  learn  this  lesson,  that  life  should  be  significant.  It 
should  mean  something;  not  be  neutral,  utterly  without  emphasis;  or  dubious  to  the 
eye  and  ear,  like  heathen  oracles  and  heathen  symbols.  Without  affectation  and  folly, 
we  can  find  a  way  to  make  others  feel  that  we  feel  and  think  and  have  a  purpose  in 
existence.  But  this  way  of  self-manifestation  must  be  adapted  to  our  own  constitution, 
to  the  taste  of  others,  to  the  condition  of  our  times. 

III.  The  application  or  the  stmbolism.  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  will  fall  into 
hnrailiation  and  captivity.  There  will  be  every  sign  of  disgrace.  And  Judah  will  see 
the  fallacy  of  having  put  her  trust  in  Egyptian  alliances.  It  is  a  deeply  painful  picture 
of  a  nation's  shame  that  rises  before  us  in  these  verses.  Shameless  sins  bring  shameful 
punishment.  "  Conquest  and  captivity  are  perhaps  the  bitterest  cup  that  vengeance 
can  put  into  the  hands  of  a  sinful  people."  This  general  lesson,  then,  may  be  drawn :  The 
effect  not  only  points  to  the  cause,  but  the  nature  of  the  effect  to  the  nature  of  the 
cause.  "  Of  all  the  curses  which  can  possibly  befall  a  sinner,  there  is  none  comparable 
to  this,  that  he  should  add  iniquity  to  iniquity,  and  sin  to  sin,  which  the  shameless 
person  cannot  but  do,  till  he  falls  by  it  too ;  his  recovery,  while  under  that  character, 
being  utterly  impossible.  For  where  there  is  no  place  for  shame,  there  can  be  none 
for  repentance.     Ood  of  his  infinite  goodness  work  better  minds  in  us  I "  (South). — J. 

Vera.  1 — 3. —  Unpleasant  service.  It  may  afways  remain  uncertain  whether  Isaiah 
went  stripped  and  barefoot  for  three  whole  years  or  fcr  a  shorter  period.  Two  things, 
however,  txe  quite  certain,  viz.  that  for  some  time,  longer  or  shorter,  this  servant  oi 


CH.  XI.  1—6.]        THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  333 


Jehovah  (ver.  3)  went  about  Jerusalem  in  that  humiliating  condition,  and  that  he 
would  have  unhesitatingly  done  this  all  the  time  if  God  had  required  him  to  do  so. 
Many  suggestions  have  been  made  on  the  subject,  but  it  does  not  occur  to  any  one  to 
entertain  the  idea  that  Isaiah  would  decline  to  render  such  an  un^ileasant  service,  how- 
ever long  the  period  of  service  might  be. 

I.  That  God  sometimes  demands  oi'  ds  bebyice  which  we  find  it  habd  to 
BENDBB.  It  may  be :  1.  To  incur  the  hostility  of  those  whose  honour  and  affection 
we  woVfldfain  enjoy.  Isaiah  had  to  pronounce  against  an  alliance  with  Egypt  and 
Ethiopia,  thus  stirring  up  the  active  dislike  of  those  politicians  who  advised  that 
course.  We  may  often  have  to  take  a  course  which  is  regarded  and  denounced  as 
unpatriotic  or  disloyal,  2.  To  endure  privation  as  the  consequence  of  fidelity.  Isaiah, 
in  the  fulfilment  of  bis  prophetic  mission,  went  half-clad  through  all  changes  of 
temperature.  In  order  to  speak  the  true  and  faithful  word  which  God  has  put  into  our 
mind,  or  to  take  the  right  course  which  he  opens  before  us,  we  may  have  to  do  that 
which  will  lessen  our  resources  and  lead  to  straitened  means  and  even  to  serious 
embarrassment.  3.  To  expose  ourselves  to  the  derision  of  the  sceptic  or  the  scoffing. 
Doubtless  the  partisans  of  Egypt  sneered  and  the  idle  multitude  mocked  as  the 
unclothed  prophet  passed  by.  It  is  hard  to  have  to  utter  that  truth  or  to  identify 
ourselves  with  that  course  which  entails  the  bitter  raillery  of  the  opponent  and  the 
heartless -jest  of  the  ribald  crowd.  But  "  my  servant  Isaiah  walked  naked  and  bare- 
foot "  as  long  as  he  was  charged  to  do  so.     And  we  conclude — 

II.  That  we  cannot  hesitate  to  kendeb  instant  and  full  compliance.  For : 
1.  God's  demand  is  absolute  and  authoritative.  If  the  filial  son  hastens  to  do  the 
behest  of  his  father,  the  loyal  subject  that  of  bis  king,  the  brave  soldier  that  of  his. 
commander,  hoivever  uninviting  or  even  perilous  it  may  be,  how  much  more  shall  we 
render  instant  and  hearty  obedience  to  the  "Do  this"  of  our  heavenly  Father,  of  our 
Divine  Bedeemer.  2.  God  asks  us  to  do  that  which  is  small  and  slight  indeed  in 
comparison  with  the  service  which,  in  Jesus  Christ,  he  has  rendered  us.  What  are 
the  privations,  the  insults,  the  humiliations  we  may  be  summoned  to  endure  for  Christ 
when  compared  with  the  poverty  and  the  shame  and  the  sorrow  to  which  he  stooped 
for  us  ?  3.  Our  unpleasant  work  is  prior,  and  perhaps  preparatory,  to  nobler  and 
more  congenial  service  fuither  on.  I'aithful  in  the  "  few  things "  now  and  here,  we 
shall. have  rule  given  us  over  "many  things  "in  the  coming  years,  and  still  more  truly 
in  the  better  land. — C. 

Vers.  5, 6. — The  insufficiency  of  the  stronger.  Assyria  attacked  Ashdod  with  designs 
on  Judsa.  Judsea  rested  on  Egypt  and  Ethiopia ;  but  these  "  powers  "  would  be  utterly 
defeated  by  Assyria,  arid  their  citizeps  led  away  into  captivity  with  every  circumstance 
of  humiliation  and  shame.  In  that  hour  of  fear  and  humiliation  (ver.  5)  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Judsea  would  be  constrained  to  argue  from  the  insufficiency  of  Egypt  and 
Ethiopia  to  their  own  helplessness.  If  such  strong  nations  as  these  are  ignominioualy 
overthrown,  "  how  shall  we  escape  "  ?    We  conclude — 

I.  That  times  op  sevebe  teial  await  us  all.  Not  only  collectively  but  indi- 
vidually considered.  As  separate,  individual  souls  we  must  anticipate  that  the  future 
has  in  store  for  us  not  only  the  pleasant,  the  gratifying,  the  successful,  but  also  the 
unpleasant,  the  painful,  even  the  overwhelming.  Some  of  the  more  crushing  sorrows  it 
may  be  our  fortune  to  escape,  but  every  one  of  us  will  have  his  share.  Sickness  which 
threatens  to  be  fatal ;  bitter  disappointment  which  appears  to  throw  the  whole  future 
path  into  darkest  shadow ;  bereavement  which  takes  away  the  very  light  of  our  eyes ; 
the  sudden  loss  which  strips  the  tree  of  branch  as  well  as  bloom ;  the  financial  or  (what 
is  a  thousand  tiiues  worse)  the  moral  failure  of  beloved  friend  or  near  relation;  the  last 
illness  unexpectedly  arriving  and  extinguishing  many  a  cherished  purpose;  the  power- 
ful temptation  inviting  and  almost  constraining  to  folly,  or  vice,  or  crime; — one  or  more 
of  these  things,  or  things  as  bad  as  these,  will  certainly  overtake  us  all. 

II.  That  those  who  abb  steonqeb  than  we  abb  sometimes  found  to  bbeak 
beneath  the  blow.  We  hear  or  read  of  men  who  in  mental  capacity,  in  educational 
advantages,  in  worldly  endowments,  or  in  the  number  of  their  friends,  are  superior  to 
ourselves,  but  who  cannot  stand  the  strain  of  their  trial.  Either  their  health  breaks 
down,  or  their  sanity  seriously  suffers,  or  their  faith  fails,  or  their  courage  and  energy 


334  THE  BOOK  OF  TUE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.       [on.  xx.  1— ft 

Buccnmb,  or  their  moral  character  is  lost,  and  consequently  their  reputation  is  shattered, 
never  to  be  restored. 

III.  That  if  these  steonqeb  souls  are  beaten,  we  must  be  in  danger  op  defeat, 
If  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  are  led  into  captivity,  how  shall  Judaea  be  delivered^-"  how 
shall  we  escape "  ?  The  storm  in  which  such  noble  vessels  founder  will  wreck  oui 
fragile  bark.  On  any  ordinary  human  calculations  we  cannot  hope  to  be  victorious 
where  spirits  so  much  stronger  and  wiser  than  we  are  have  been  crushed.  But  we 
need  not  yield  to  despomlency ;  if  we  are  the  disciples  and  followers  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  if,  therefore,  "  the  Lord  is  on  our  side,"  we  may  find  relief  and  rest  in  the 
thought — 

rv.  That  we  have  a  safe  Refuge  in  an  almighty  Savioctb.  So  long  as  Judaea 
was  faithful  to  Jehovah,  she  had  no  need  to  be  afraid  of  Assyria,  and  she  could  afiford 
to  witness  the  overthrow  of  the  Egyptian  and  Ethiopian  armies.  So  long  as  we  are 
loyal  to  our  Divine  Lord  we  may  go  fearlessly  forward  into  the  future.  If  the  good 
Shepherd — "  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep  " — ^be  our  GuHrdian,  we  will  "  fear  no 
evil,"  though  we  wall;  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  though  the  darkest 
shadows  shut  us  round. — C. 

Vers.  2,  3. — Divine  revelation  in  actions  as  well  as  words.  The  language  is  some- 
what uncertain,  but  it  seems  better  to  understand  that,  for  three  years,  Isaiah  was  seen 
going  to  and  fro  through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  having  the  dress  and  appearance 
of  one  who  was  already  a  prisoner  of  war,  ready  to  be  led  into  an  ignominious  exile. 
Isaiah  wore  no  upper  oi  outer  garment,  and  no  sandals,  so  that,  when  his  dress  was 
compared  with  that  of  others,  he  might  be  said  to  go  naked ;  but  "  naked  "  in  Scripture 
usually  means  "witli  only  under-garments  on."  The  three  years  were,  perhaps, 
designed  to  represent  three  incursions  of  the  Assyrians.  The  geneial  topic  suggested 
is  the  variety  of  forms  which  Divine  revelations  may  take ;  the  diversity  of  agencies 
which  Divine  revelation  may  employ.  All  modes  by  which  man  may  be  reached  and 
influenced  God  may  take  up  and  use  for  conveying  his  mind  and  will. 

I.  Revelation  in  natuee.  We  often  speak  of  a  voice  in  nature.  That  vaice 
God  may  employ.  The  beautiful,  the  sublime,  the  gentle,  affect  us,  and  bring  to  us 
thoughts  of  God's  goodness,  wisilom,  and  power.  This  kind  of  revelatioa  St.  Paul 
recognizes,  pleading  thus  at  Lystra  (Acts  xiv.  17),  "  Nevertheless  he  left  not  himself 
without  witness,  in  that  he  did  good,  and  gave  us  rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful  seasons, 
filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness;"  and  writing  thus  to  the  Romans  (Rom.  i. 20), 
"  For  the  invisible  things  of  him  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  se'U,  being 
understood  by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead."  What 
is  called  natural  reliaion  is  that  common  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  our  duty  to  God, 
which  comes  through  nature  Slone ;  and  God  has  so  made  us  kin  with  nature,  has  so 
set  us  in  relation  with  an  external  world,  that  we  can  receive  moral  impressions 
through  it. 

II.  Revelation  in  incidents.  Events  of  personal  life  and  of  public  history 
convey  God's  mind  to  us.  And  therefore  so  much  of  our  Bible  is  but  a  treasured 
record  of  facts  and  incidents.  Our  Lord's  life  on  the  earth  was  full  of  incidents,  and 
we  find  in  these  the  truths  which  God  purposed,  by  Christ,  to  teach  us.  We  are 
constantly  receiving  fresh  revelations,  new  to  us  individually,  though  not  new  to  the 
world,  through  the  circumstances  of  public  or  of  private  life.  We  often  think  of  this 
as  God's  voice  in  providence. 

III.  Revelation  in  minds.  Or  in  those  parts  of  man  that  are  distinct  from  the 
senses.  What  we  think  of  as  the  spiritual  nature  of  man,  including  his  conscience. 
God's  witness  in  this  part  of  our  being  is  argued  by  St.  Paul,  when,  writini;  of  the 
heathen,  to  whom  a  book  revelation  has  not  been  given,  he  says  (Rom.  ii.  15),  "  Which 
show  the  work  of  the  Law  written  in  their  hearts,  their  conscience  also  bearina:  witness, 
and  their  riioughts  the  mean  while  accusing  or  else  excusinn  one  another."  We  must 
^uard  against  the  notion  that  God  has  put  all  his  will  into  a  book,  and  has  now  no 
direct  access  to  our  souls.  What  is  true  is  that  we  can  test  all  direct  revelations  by 
their  harmony  with  the  revelation  that  is  written. 

IV.  Revelation  in  symbols.  Since  symbols  do  convey  ideas  to  men,  God  may 
use  them.    Illustrate  by  vision  of  divided  pieces  to  Abraham;  pillar  of  cloud  va 


OH.  XX.  1—6.]       THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  335 

Israel ;  angel  with  drawn  sword  to  David ;  fire-flash  to  Israel  on  Cannel,  etc.  And, 
to  take  symbols  of  another  character,  the  prophets  acted  things  before  the  people, 
making  impressions  without  employing  words — as  Isaiah  here ;  as  Zedekiah's  horns 
(1  Kings  xxii.  11);  Jeremiah's  yokes  (xxvii.  2);  Ezekiel's  lying  on  his  si^  (iv.  4); 
and  Aftabus'  binding  himself  with  his  girdle  (Acts  xxi.  11). 

V.  Revelation  in  words.  The  more  ordinary  method  of  communication  between 
man  and  man.  This  opens  up  the  opportunity  of  showing  (1)  the  reasonablenegs  and 
(2)  the  practical  efficiency  of  a  book  revelation,  and  of  commending  that  collection 
of  revelations  which  we  call  Holy  Scripture.  Howsoever  God  may  be  pleased  to 
speak  to  us,  our  duty  is  to  heed,  listening  with  the  cherished  purpose  that  we  will 
carry  out  the  Divine  will  in  all  holy  and  loving  obedience. — K.  T. 

Ver.  6. — The  hitter  experience  of  all  who  trust  in  man.  The  sin  of  Judah,  in  its 
latter  days,  was  its  reliance  en  Egypt  for  help  rather  than  on  God.  In  alarm  at  the 
advance  of  Assyria,  the  natural  alliance  was  with  Egypt ;  but  alliance  with  any 
world-power  was  unworthy  of  a  nation  whose  history  had  been  so  full  of  Divine 
deliverings  and  dLfendings  as  that  of  the  Jews.  And  Egypt  could  not  help.  It  was 
a  broken'  reed.  A  type  of  all  merely  human  helpers ;  for  "  cursed  is  the  man  that 
trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm,  and  whose  heart  departeth  from  the  Lord." 
Hosea  represents  Isiael  as  finding  out  how  vain  is  the  help  of  man,  and  turning  to  God 
with  this  penitential  promise, "  Asshur  shall  not  save  us ;  we  will  not  ride  upon  horses : 
neither  will  we  say  any  more  to  the  work  of  our  hands,  Ye  are  our  gods."  The 
following  three  points  open  up  lines  of  thought  and  illustration,  and  should  be 
sufficiently  suggestive  without  detailed  treatment. 

I.  We  cannot  teust  man,  fob  we  cannot  be  subb  of  his  good  will.  These 
two  dangers  are  ever  before  us:  1.  The  man  who  seems  willing  to  serve  us  may  be 
deceiving  us,  and  really  serving  his  own  ends,  setting  his  interests  before  ours.  2.  And 
if  a  man  begins  sincerely  to  serve  us,  we  have  no  security  that  his  good  will  is 
maintained,  and  presently  he  may  take  advantage  of  us.  We  cannot  read  hearts. 
And  hearts  do  not  always  keep  steadfast.  So  " put  not  your  trust  in  princei,  nor  in  the 
sons  of  men,  in  whom  there  is  no  help." 

II.  We  cannot  trust  man,  fob  we  cannot  be  sure  that  his  abilitt  matches 
HIS  WILL.  So  often  we  find  in  life  that  men  who  could,  will  not  help  us,  and  men 
ivho  would,  cannot.  With  this  sort  of  feeling  in  his  mind  the  sufferer  came  to  the 
■'  Man  Christ  Jesus,"  saying,  "  If  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  nie  clean." 

III.  We  can  never  reckon  on  man  if  he  is  against  God.  Such  a  man  can 
never  be  any  help  to  us.  The  Jews  forsook  God  to  seek  help  from  a  godless  nation, 
and  it  was  bound  to  prove  a  bitter  and  humiliating  experience.  Man  may  be,  and  often 
is,  God's  agent  for  helping  us  ;  but  then  our  trusting  is  in  God  who  sends,  and  not  in 
the  man  who  may  be  sent  to  do  his  bidding. — B,  T. 

Ter.  6. — A  grave  question  with  many  applications.  "How  shall  we  escape?" 
Egypt  being  reduced,  no  defence  remained  for  Israel  against  the  overwhelming  power 
of  Assyria.  "  This  was  the  cry  of  despair  at  Jerusalem.  But  in  such  despair  was  her 
only  hope.  The  destruction  of  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  by  the  arms  of  Sennacherib 
weaned  her  from  looking  any  longer  to  earthly  powers  for  help,  and  raised  her  eyes 
to  heaven  "  (Bishop  Wordsworth).     The  expression,  or  exclamation,  may  be — 

I.  Applied  to  personal  troubles.  Oftentimes  in  life  we  are  brought  to 
extremities;  we  know  not  what  to  do,  nor  which  way  to  take.  In  our  difficulties, 
hedged  in  on  every  side,  we  cry  out,  "  How  shall  we  escape?  "  The  Israelites  cried 
thtis  when  the  Red  Sea  rolled  before  them,  a  wall  of  mountains  barred  the  path, 
and  an  enraged  foe  hurried  upon  them  from  behind.  The  secret  of  peace  and 
deliverance  is,  "  Trust  in  the  Lord,  who  maketh  ways  in  the  seas,  and  paths  in  the 
great  waters." 

II.  Applied  to  the  power  of  bin.  When  it  has  become  the  enslavement  of 
fixed  habit.  Compare  St.  Paul's  exclamation,  "0  wretched  man  that  I  am  !  who  shall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death?"  And  see  his  triumphant  answer,  "I  thank 
Giod  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord." 

IIL  Afpued   to   the   penalties   of   BiNNiNd.     The   "fearful   looking   for  of 


33« 


THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxl  1— 17. 


judgment  and  fiery  indignation,  which  shall  consume  the  adversaries."  The  utter 
despair  of  escape  is  pictured  in  Scripture  by  the  people  crying  to  the  very  rocka  to 
cover  and  hide  them  from  the  wrath  uf  God  and  of  the  Lamb. 

IV.  Applied  to  oxjb  present  opportunities  op  salvation.  The  writer  of  tha 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  finds  expression  for  this  (ii.  2,  3) :  "  If  the  word  spoken  by 
angels  was  steadfast,  and  every  transgression  and  disobedience  received  a  just  recom- 
pense of  reward ;  how  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  "  This  grave 
question — this  great  cry — may  be  the  cry  of  hopeful  self-humiliation  and  distrust; 
and  then  to  it  God  will  be  sure  to  respond.  But  it  may  be  the  cry  of  hopeless  despair, 
the  conviction  that  the  day  of  >jrace  is  passed,  that  it  is  "  too  late ;"  and  then  Ood's 
response  must  be  liolding  alodl',  and  letting  the  overwhelming  judgments  come,  if  even 
thus  at  last  the  true  humiliations  may  be  wrought.— :B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

Veil.  1 — 10. — The  Burden  of  the  De- 
sert or  tbb  Sea.  This  is  a,  short  and 
somewhat  vague,  but  highly  poetic,  "bur- 
den of  Babylon."  It  is  probably  an  earlier 
prophecy  than  oh.  xiii.  and  xiv.,  and  perhaps 
the  first  revelation  made  to  Isaiah  with 
respect  to  the  fall  of  the  great  Chaldean 
capital.  It  exhibits  no  consciousness  of  the 
fact  that  Babylon  is  Judah's  predestined 
destroyer,  and  is  expressive  rather  of  sym- 
pathy (vers.  3,  4)  than  of  triumph.  Among 
recent  critics,  some  suppose  it  to  refer  to 
Sargon's  capture  of  the  city  in  B.O.  710; 
but  the  objection  to  this  view,  from  the 
entire  absence  of  all  reference  to  Assyria  as 
the  conquering  power,  and  the  mention  of 
"Blara"  and  "Media"  in  her  place,  is 
absolutely  fatal  to  it.  There  can  be  no 
reasonable  doubt  that  the  same  siege  is 
intended  as  in  ch.  xiii.,  where  also  Media  is 
mentioned  (ver.  17) ;  and  there  are  no  real 
grounds  for  questioning  that  the  event  of 
which  the  prophet  is  made  cognizant  is 
that  siege  and  capture  of  Babylon  by  Cyrus 
the  Great  which  destroyed  the  Babylonian 
empire. 

Yer.  1.— The  desert  of  the  sea.  The 
Isaianic  authorship  of  this  title  is  doubtful, 
since  "  the  desert  of  the  sea  "  is  an  expres- 
sion elsewhere  wholly  unknown  to  biblical 
writers.  Some  regard  "  the  sea  "  as  the  Eu- 
phrates, in  which  case  "  the  desert  of  the  sea  " 
maybetlie  waste  tract  west  of  the  Euphrates, 
extending  thence  to  the  eastern  borders  of 
Palestine.  As  whirlwinds  in  the  south 
pass  through ;  rather,  as  whirlwinds  in 
fhe  south  country,  sweeping  along.  The 
"south  country"  is  that  immediately  to  the 
south  of  Judtea.  Its  liability  to  whirlwinds 
is  noticed  in   2iecb.  i^   14   and  in   Job 


xxxvii.  9  (compare  Major  Palmer's  '  Sinai,' 
p.  33).  It  Cometh.  What  cometh?  Dr. 
Kay  says,  "God's  visitation;"  Eosenmiiller, 
"  a  numerous  army."  But  is  it  not  rather 
the  "  grievous  vision  "  of  the  next  verse  ? 
From  the  desert.  The  great  desert  bound- 
ing Palestine  on  the  east — a  truly  "terrible 
land."  Across  this,  as  coming  from  Baby- 
lonia to  Palestine,  seemed  to  rush  the  vision 
which  it  was  given  to  the  prophet  to  see. 

Ver.  2.— A  grievous  vision;  literally,  a 
hard  vision ;  not,  however,  "  hard  of  inter- 
pretation "  (Kay),  but  rather  "  hard  to  be 
borne,"  "grievous,"  "calamitous."  The 
treacherous  dealer  dealeth  treaoherooaly ; 
rather,  perhap.s,  the  robber  robs  (Knobdl); 
or,  the  violent  man  uses  violence  (Rosen- 
miillcr).  'I'he  idea  of  faithlessness  passes 
out  of  the  Hebrew  bdged  occasionally,  anil 
is  unsuitable  here,  more  especially  if  it  is 
the  army  of  Cyrus  that  is  intended.  Go  up, 
0  Elam.  The  discovery  that  Cyrus,  at  the 
time  of  his  conquest  of  Babylon,  bore  the 
title  of  "  King  of  Ansan,"  not  "  King  of 
Persia,"  coupled  with  the  probability  that 
"  Ansan  "  Wiis  a  part  of  Elam,  lends  a  pecu- 
liar interest  to  these  words.  Isaiah  could 
not  describe  Cyrus  as  "King  of  Persia," 
and  at  the  same  time  be  intelligible  to  his 
contemporaries,  since  Persia  was  a  country 
utterly  unknown  to  them.  In  using  the 
term  «  Elam  "  instead,  he  uses  that  of  a 
country  known  to  the  Hebrews  (Gen. 
xiv.  1),  adjoining  Persia,  and,  at  the  time  of 
his  expedition  against  Babylon,  subject  to 
Cyrus.  Besiege,  0  Media.  Having  given 
"  Elam  "  the  first  pliioe,  the  prophet  assigns 
to  Media  the  second.  Eleven  years  before 
he  attacked  Babylon,  Cyrus  had  made  war 
upon  Astyages  (Isluvegu),  King  of  the 
Medes,  tad  captured  him,  and  become  king 
of  the  nation,  witli  scarcely  any  oppositiou 
(see  the  '  Cylinder  of  Nabonidus ').  Henoe 
the  Medes  would  naturally  form  an  impor- 
tant portion  of  the  force  which  he  led 
against  Babylon.  All  the  sighing  thereof 
b^ve  I  inade  to  oease.  The  "  sigliiu^"  cau^ 


CH.  XXI.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


337 


by  Babylon  to  the  nations,  to  the  captiyes, 
and  to  the  kings  whoae  prison-doors  were 
kept  closed  (ch.  xiv.  17),  God  has  in  his 
oouniels  determined  to  bring  to  an  end. 

Yer.  3. — Therefore  are  my  loins  filled 
with  pain,  etc.  (comp.  above,  ch,  xt.  5; 
XTJ.  9—11).  The  prophet  is  horrorstruck  at 
th'j  vision  shown  him — at  the  devastation, 
th3  ruin,  the  carnage  (oh.  xiil.  18).  He 
does  not  stop  to  consider  how  well  deserved 
the  punishment  is ;  he  does  nut,  perhaps,  as 
y  ot  know  how  that,  in  smiting  Babylon,  God 
will  be  specially  avenging  tiie  sufferings  of 
his  own  nation  (see  the  introductory  para- 
graph). I  was  bowed  down  at  the  hearing, 
e\o. ;  rather,  I  am  so  agonized  thai  I  cannot 
Ixar ;  I  am  so  terrified  that  I  cannot  see. 

Ver.  4. — ^My  heart  panted;  rather,  my 
heart  trembleth,  or  Jluttereth.  The  night  of 
ray  pleasure;  i.e.  "the  night,  wherein,  I  am 
'.Yont  to  enjoy  peaceful  and  pleasant  slum- 
^rs." 

Ver.  5. — Prepare  the  table,  etc.  With 
lyrical  abruptness,  the  prophet  turns  from 
nis  own  feelings  to  draw  a  picture  of  Ba- 
bylon at  the  time  when  she  is  attacked. 
He  uses  historical  infinitives,  the  most 
lively  form  of  narrative.  Translate,  They 
deck  the  table,  set  the  watch,  eat,  drink; 
i.e.  having  decked  the  table,  they  commit 
the  task  of  watching  to  a  few,  and  then 
give  themselves  up  to  feasting  and  revelling, 
as  if  tliere  were  no  danger.  It  is  impossible 
not  to  think  of  Belshazzar's  feast,  and  the 
destriptions  of  the  Greek  historians  (Herod., 
i.  191 ;  Xen.,  'Cyrop.,'  vii.  23),  which  mark 
at  any  rate  the  strength  of  the  tradition 
that,  when  Babylon  was  taken,  its  inhabi- 
tants were  engaged  in  revelry.  Arise,  ye 
princes,  and  anoint  the  shield.  In  the 
midst  of  the  feast  there  enters  to  the 
revellers  one  from  the  outside,  with  these 
words,  "Rise,  quit  the  banquet;  get  your 
shields;  anoint  them;  arm  yourselves." 
That  shields  were  greased  with  fat  or  oil 
before  being  used  in  battle  appears  from 
Virg.,  •  .ffineid,'  vii.  625,  and  other  places. 
It  was  thought  that  the  enemy's  weapons 
would  more  readily  glance  off  an  oiled  sur- 
face. 

Ver.  6.-r-Go,  set  a  watchman.  The  event 
is  not  to  be  immediate,  it  is  to  be  watched 
for ;  and  Isaiah  is  not  to  watch  himself,  but 
to  set  the  watohmau.  Moreover,  the  watch- 
man waits  long  before  he  sees  anything 
(ver.  8).  These  unusual  features  of  the 
narrative  seem  to  mark  a  remote,  not  a  near, 
accomplishment  of  the  prophecy. 

Ver.  7. — And  he  saw  ...  he  hearkened ; 
rather,  he  shall  see  ...  he  shall  hearken 
(Kay).  He  is  to  wait  and  watcli  until  he 
sees  a  certain  sight;  then  he  is  to  listen 
attentively,  and  he  will  hear  the  crash  of 
the  falling  city.    A  chariot  with  a  couple 

ISAIAH. 


of  horsemen;  rather,  a  troop  of  horsemen 
riding  two  and  two.  This  is  exactly  how  a 
cavalry  force  was  ordinarily  represented  by 
the  Assyrians.  Chariots  are  not  intended 
either  here  or  in  ver.  9.  They  were  not 
employed  by  the  Persians  nntil  a  late 
period  of  their  history  (see  *  Ancient  Mo- 
narcliies,'  vol.  iv.  pp.  113,  122).  A  chariot 
of  asses,  and  a  chariot  of  camels;  rather, 
men  mounted  on  asses  and  on  camels.  It  is 
well  known  that  both  animals  were  em- 
ployed by  the  Persians  in  their  expeditions 
to  carry  the  baggage  (Herod.,  i.  80;  iv. 
129;  Xen.,  'Cyrop.,'  vii.  1,  etc.).  But 
neither  animal  was  ever  attached  to  a 
chariot. 

Ver.  8. — And  ho  cried,  A  lion ;  rather,  he 
cried  as  a  lion ;  i.e.  with  a  loud  deep  voice 
(comp.  Eev.  x.  3).  The  watchman,  after  long 
waiting,  becomes  impatient,  and  can  contain 
himself  no  longer.  He  makes  complaint  of 
his  long  vain  watch.  My  lord;  rather,  0 
Lord.  The  vratchman  addresses  his  com- 
plaint to  Jehovah. 

Ver.  9. — ^And,  behold,  here  oometh,  etc. 
Our  translators  make  the  words  those  of 
the  watchman.  But  they  are  better  taken 
as  the  prophet's  statement  of  a  fact,  ■'  And 
behold,  just  then  there  oometh  a  troop  ol 
men,  rising  two  and  two" — the  sign  for 
which  he  was  to  watch  (ver.  7),  or  rather 
the  first  part  of  it.  We  must  suppose  11  le 
rest  of  the  sign  to  follow,  and  the  watchman 
then  to  listen  awhile  attentively.  Suddenly 
he  hears  the  sound  of  a  sacked  town,  and 
he  exclaims,  Babylon  is  fallen,  is  fallen, 
etc.  All  the  graven  images  of  her  gods  he 
hftth  broken  unto  the  ground.  Becent  docu- 
ments, belonging  to  the  time  of  Cjrus,  and 
treating  of  his  capture  of  Babylon,  show 
that  this  expression  is  not  to  be  understood 
literally.  Gyrus  was  not  an  iconoclast ;  he 
did  not  break  into  pieces,  or  in  any  way 
destroy  or  insult  the  Bain  Ionian  idols  On 
the  contrary,  he  maintained  them  in  theii 
several  shrines,  or  rcston.d  them  where 
they  had  been  displaced ;  he  professed  him- 
self  a  worshipper  of  the  chief  Babylonian 
goda— Bel,  Nebo,  and  Merodach — he  re- 
paired the  temple  of  Merodach ;  ho  prayed 
to  Bel  and  Nebo  to  lengthen  his  days ;  lie 
caused  his  eon,  Cambyses,  to  take  part  in 
the  groat  religious  ceremony  wherewith  the 
Babylonians  opened  the  new  year.  Tliua 
liis  conquest  of  Babylon  did  not  bring 
upon  its  gods  a  physical,  but  only  a  moral, 
destruction.  The  Persian  victory  discredited 
and  degraded  them.  It  proclaimed  to 
Western  Asia  that  the  jdolatrous  system  so 
long  prevalent  in  the  n  gion  between  Mount 
Zagros  and  the  Mediterranean  was  no 
longer  in  the  ascendant,  but  lay  at  the 
mercy  of  another  quite  different  religion, 
which  condescended  to  accord  it  toleration. 


338 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxi  1— 17, 


Suoh  was  the  permanent  result.  Ko  doubt 
there  waB  also,  in  the  sack  of  the  city, 
much  damage  done  to  many  of  the  idols  by 
a  greedy  soldiery,  who  may  have  carried  off 
many  images  of  gold  or  silver,  and  broken 
up  others  that  were  not  portable,  and 
stripped  off  the  plates  of  precious  metal 
from  the  idols  of  "brass,  and  iron,  and 
wood,  and  stone  "  (Dan.  v.  6). 

Yer.  10. — 0  my  threshing,  and  the  com 
of  my  floor.  These  are  the  words  of  the 
prophet  to  Israel.  Her  chastisements  hare 
long  been  "threshing"  Israel,  separating 
the  grain  from  the  chaff,  and  will  do  so  still 
more  as  time  goes  on.  The  prophet's  mes- 
sage is  for  the  comfort  of  those  who  shall 
have  gone  through  the  process  and  become 
the  true  "  children  of  the  threshing-floor " 
— pure  wheat,  fit  to  be  gathered  into  the 
gamer  of  God  (Matt.  iii.  12). 

Vers.  11,  12. — The  Bubden  of  Dtiuah. 
This  short  "  burden "  is  probably  to  be 
understood  as  uttered  with  reference  to 
Edom,  which  the  prophet  prefers  to  call 
"  Dumah,"  i.e.  "  silence,"  in  reference  to 
the  desolation  which  he  sees  to  be  coming 
upon  the  country.  Such  a  play  upon  words 
is  very  usual  in  the  East.  Isaiah  has 
already  given  an  instance  of  it  in  the  name 
under  which  he  his  designated  Heliopolis 
(ch.  xlx.  18). 

Ver.  11. — ^Dnmah.  There  were  at  least 
two  towns  of  this  name  ('  Diet,  of  the  Bible,' 
vol.  i.  pp.  459,  460) ;  but  neither  of  them  is 
in  the  district  of  Seir.  It  is  best,  thejefore, 
to  regard  "  Dumah "  here  as  representing 
Edom,  or  Idumsea  (so  the  LXX.,  Jarchi, 
Bosenmiiller,  Kay,  Oheyue,  and  others). 
He  calleth  to  me ;  rather,  one  calleth  to  me  ; 
i.e.  I  seem  to  hear  a  call  from  Mount  Seir, 
as  of  one  making  inquiry  of  me.  There  is 
no  need  to  suppose  that  the  inquiry  was 
actually  made.  Mount  Seir,  or  the  district 
south-south-east  of  the  Dead  Sea,  was  the 
heart  of  the  Idumsean  country,  which  thence 
extended  vaguely  eastward  and  westward. 
What  of  the  night?  i.e.  what  hour,  or, 
rather,  perhaps,  what  watch  of  the  night  is 
it  ?  May  we  consider  that  "  the  night  is  far 
spent,  and  the  day  at  hand  "  ?  Edom  had 
offended  Sargon  by  joining  with  Ashdod 
(G.  Smith, '  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  130),  and 
was  probably  at  this  time  oppressed  by 
Sargon  in  consequence. 

Ver.  12. — The  morning  oometh,  and  also 
the  night.  An  oracular  reply,  but  pro- 
bably meaning  (1)  that  a  brighter  time 
would  soon  dawn  upon  the  Edomite  people ; 
and  (2)  that  this  brighter  time  would  be 
followed  by  a  return  of  misery  and  aflSiction. 
We  may  (conjeoturally)  understand  the 
"morning"  of  the  earlier  part  of  Senna- 


cherib's reign,  when  Edom  was  at  peace 
with  Assyria,  merely  paying  a  moderate 
tribute  (G.  Smith,  'Eponym  Canon,'  p.  182), 
and  the  "  night "  of  the  later  period  in  the 
same  king's  reign,  when  (about  •.o.  694 — 
690)  the  country  suffered  from  another 
Assyrian  invasion,  in  which  the  king's 
treasures  and  his  gods  were  carried  off  to 
Nineveh  (ibid.,  p.  137).  If  ye  will  inquire, 
inquire  ye;  return,  come.  Some  take  this 
very  literally,  as  meaning,  "  If  yon  would 
inquire  further  into  the  meaning  of  this 
answer,  do  so ;  return  to  me ;  come  again." 
But  this  implies  that  the  Edomites  had  sent 
an  actual  messenger  to  make  the  inquiry 
of  ver.  5,  which  is  improbable.  Others 
imderstand  a  reproach  to  Edom :  "  If  yd 
will  have  recourse  to  God  in  tlie  time  of 
trouble,  do  so ;  but  then  do  more — return 
to  him  altogether ;  come,  and  be  oae  with 
Judah." 

Vers.  13 — 17. — The  Bubuen  or  Ababia. 
Edom  will  have  companions  in  misfortune 
among  the  Arab  tribes  upon  her  borders, 
Dedan,  Tema,  and  Kedar.  War  will  enter 
their  territory,  derange  their  commerce 
(ver.  13),  cause  flight  and  privation  (vers.  14, 
15),  and  within  a  year  greatly  diminish  the 
number  of  their  fighting  men  (vers.  16,  17). 
The  date  of  the  prophecy  is  uncertain,  but 
can  scarcely  be  earlier  than  b.o.  715,  when 
Sargon  made  an  expedition  into  Arabia  (G 
Smith, '  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  66). 

Ver.  13. — The  burden  upon  Arabia; 
rather,  in  Arabia.  The  phrase  is  varied 
from  its  usual  form,  probably  because  it  is 
not  Arabia  generally,  but  only  certain  of 
the  more  northern  tribes,  on  whom  calamity 
is  about  to  fall.  In  the  forest . . .  shall  ye 
lodge.  The  word  used  is  commonly  trans- 
lated "  forest ;  "  but  Arabia  has  no  forests, 
and  the  meaning  here  must  be  "brush- 
wood." Thorny  bushes  and  shrubs  are 
common  in  all  parts  of  Arabia.  The  general 
meaning  is  that  the  caravans  will  have  to 
leave  the  beaten  track,  and  obtain  such 
shelter  and  concealment  as  the  scanty  brush- 
wood of  the  desert  could  afford.  Te  travel- 
ling companies  of  Dedanim.  The  Dedanim, 
or  Dedanites,  were  among  the  chief  traders 
of  the  Arabian  peninsula.  They  had  com- 
mercial dealings  with  Tyre,  which  they 
supplied  with  ivory,  ebony,  and  "  precious 
clothes  for  chariots"  (Ezek.  xxvii.  16,  20). 
This  trade  they  carried  on  by  means  of 
large  caravans — the  "  travelling  companies  " 
of  tiie  present  passage.  They  are  thought 
to  have  had  their  chief  settlements  on  the 
shores  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  where  the  island 
of  Dadan  may  be  an  echo  of  their  name. 

Ver.  14. — ^The  inhabitants  of  the  land  of 
Tema  brought  water ;  rather,  bring  ye  waUr, 


ML  XXI.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH. 


339 


O  inhabitantt.  Tema  is  reasonably  iden- 
tified with  the  modem  Taima,  a  village  of 
the  Haiuan,  on  the  caravan  route  between 
Palmyra  and  Petra.  Its  inhabitants  are 
exhorted  to  bring  water  to  the  thirsty 
Dedanites,  as  they  pass  along  this  route 
with  tlieir  "travelling  oompiinieB."  (For 
other  mentions  of  Tema,  whicli  must  not  be 
confounded  with  Teman,  see  Job  vi.  19  and 
Jer.  XXV.  23.)  They  prevented  with  their 
bread  him  that  fled.  Several  commen- 
tators take  this  clause  as  impeiative,  like 
the  last,  and  render,  "  With  his  bread  meet 
the  fugitive ; "  but  the  existing  Hebrew 
text  seeiiis  to  require  the  rendering  of  the 
Authorized  Version.  Dr.  Kay  understands 
the  prophet  to  mean  tliat  the  men  of  Tema 
did  not  need  exhortation;  already  of  their 
own  accord  'had  they  given  of  their  bread 
to  the  fugitive  Dedanites. 

Ver.  15.— For  they  fled;  rather,  fhey  have 
fled.  The  Dedanites  have  been  attacked 
with  sword  and  bow,  and  have  fled  from 
their  assailants.    Probably  the  enemy  was 


Assyria,  but  no  trace  of  the  war  has  beer 
found  on  the  Assyrian  monuments. 

Ver.  16. — Within  a  year,  aocording  to 
the  years  of  an  hireling  (see  the  comment 
on  ch.  xvi.  14).  All  the  glory  of  Kedar 
shall  fail.  "  Kedar  "  is  a  name  of  greater 
note  than  either  Dedan  or  Tema.  It  seems 
to  be  used  here  as  inclusiTe  of  Dedan,  per- 
haps as  a  designation  of  the  northern 
Arabians  generally.  The  people  of  Kedar, 
like  those  of  Dedan,  carried  on  trade  with 
Tyre  (Ezek.  xxvii.  21).  The  y  dwelt  partly 
in  tents  (I's.  cxx.  5 ;  Jer.  xlix.  29),  partly 
in  villages  (ch.  xlii.  11),  and  were  rich  in 
flocks  and  lierds  and  in  camels.  Though 
not  mentioned  in  the  inscriptions  of  Sargon, 
Sennacherib,  or  Esarhaddon,  the  contem- 
poraries of  Isaiah,  they  hold  a  prominent 
place  in  those  of  Esarhaddon's  son  and  sac- 
oessor,  Asshurbanipal,  with  whom  they 
carried  on  a  war  of  some  considerable  dura- 
tion in  conjunction  with  the  Nabathajaus 
(G.  Smith, '  History  of  Asshur-ltani-pal,'  pp. 
261—290). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  3,  4^ — I%e  sadness  of  a  nation's  overthrow.    A  nation  is  God's  ereation,  no 

less  than  an  individual.  And  it  is  a  far  more  elaborate  work.  What  forethought, 
what  design,  what  manifold  wisdom,  must  not  have  been  required  for  the  planning  out 
of  each  people "s  national  character,  for  the  partitioning  out  to  them  of  tlieir  special 
gifts  and  aptitudes,  for  the  apportionment  to  each  of  its  place  in  history,  for  the  con- 
duct of  each  through  the  many  centuries  of  its  existence  1  It  is  a  sad  thing  to  be 
witness  of  a  nation's  demise.  Very  deeply^does  Isaiah  feel  its  sadness.  His  "  loins 
are  filled  with  pain ;  "  the  pangs  that  take  hold  of  him  are  "  as  the  pangs  of  a  woman 
that  travaileth  ; "  he  is  "  so  agonized  that  he  cannot  hear,"  "  so  terrified  that  he  cannot 
look"  (ver.  3).  "  His  heart  flutters,"  like  a  frightened  bird;  terror  overwhelms  him  ;  he 
cannot  sleep  for  thinking  of  the  dread  calamity ;  "  the  night  of  his  pleasure  is  turned 
into  fear."  The  sadness  of  such  a  calamity  is  twofold.  It  consists  (1)  in  the  fact ; 
(2)  in  the  circumstances. 

I.  The  sadness  op  the  pact.  We  mourn  an  individual  gone  from  us — how  much 
more  a  nation !  What  a  blank  is  created  I  What  arts  and  industries  are  not  destroyed 
or  checked  I  What  possibilities  of  future  achievement  are  not  cut  off!  Again,  an 
individual  is  only  removed ;  he  still  exists,  only  in  another  place.  But  a  nation  is 
annihilated.  It  has  but  one  life.  There  is  "no  healing  of  its  bruise"  (Nah.  iii.  19), 
no  transference  of  it  to  another  sphere.  Prom  existence  it  has  passed  into  non- 
existence, and  nothing  can  recall  it  into  being.  It  is  like  a  sun  extinguished  in  mid- 
heaven. 

n.  This  sadness  op  the  ciRcnxsTANCES.  The  end  of  a  nation  comes  necessarily 
by  violence,  from  within  or  from  without — from  without  most  commonly.  A  fierce 
host  invades  its  borders,  spreads  itself  over  its  fertile  fields,  tramples  down  its  crops, 
exhausts  its  granaries,  consumes  its  cattle,  burns  its  towns  and  villages,  carries  every- 
where ruin  and  desolation.  Wanton  injury  is  added  to  the  injury  which  war  cannot 
but  inflict — fruit-trees  are  cut  down  (ch.  xvi.  8),  works  of  art  are  destroyed,  good  land 
is  purposely  "  marred  with  stones  "  (2  Kings  iii.  10).  And  if  inanimate  things  suffer, 
much  more  do  animate  ones.  Beasts  of  burden  are  impressed  and  worked  to  death; 
horses  receive  fearful  wounds  and  scream  with  pain  ;  cattle  perish  for  want  of  care ; 
beaats  of  prey  increase  as  population  lessens,  and  become  a  terror  to  the  scanty  remnant 
(2  Kings  xvii.  25).  Not  only  do  armed  men  fall  "by  thousands  in  fair  fight,  but  (in 
barbarous  times)  the  un warlike  mass  of  the  population  suffers  almost  equally.    "  Every 


340  THE   BOOR   OP   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxi.  l—ll. 

one  that  is  found  is  thrust  through,  and  every  one  that  is  joined  to  them  is  slain  by 
the  sword"  (ch.  xiii.  15).  Even  women  and  children  are  not  spared.  Virgins  ai]d 
matrons  are  shamefully  used  (ch.  xiii.  16) ;  children  are  ruthlessly  dashed  to  the 
ground  (oh.  xiii.  16 ;  Ps.  cxxxvii.  9) ;  every  human  passion  being  allowed  free  course,  the 
mMit  dreadful  excesses  are  perpetrated.  No  doubt  in  modern  times  civilization  and 
Christianity  tend  to  alleviate  in  some  degree  the  horrors  of  war ;  but  in  a  war  of  con- 
quest, when  the  destruction  of  a  nationality  is  aimed  at,  frightful  scenes  are  almost 
sure  to  occur,  sufficient  to  sadden  all  but  the  utterly  unfeeling.  It  should  be  tlie 
earnest  determination  of  every  Christian  to  endeavour  in  every  possible  way  to  kei'p 
his  own  country  free  from  the  guilt  of  such  wars. 

Vers.  11, 12. — Half-hearted  turning  to  God  of  no  avail.  There  are  many  whu,  in 
the  hour  of  distress,  turn  to  God  and  his  ministers  with  the  question,  "  Watchman, 
what  of  the  night  ?  Watchman,  what  of  the  night  ?  "  They  are  anxious  to  be  assured 
that  the  dark  time  of  their  trouble  is  well-nigh  over,  and  light  about  to  dawn  upon 
their  horizon.  And  they  so  far  believe  in  God's  ministers  as  to  think  that  they  can, 
better  than  others,  give  them  an  answer  to  their  question.  Accordingly,  -they  impor- 
tune their  clergymen  with  such  inquiries  as  these :  "  Will  this  sickness,  or  the  effect 
of  this  accident,  or  this  time  of  slack  work,  last  long?  Is  there  likely  to  be  much 
more  of  it  ?  Or  may  we  look  to  be  free  from  our  trouble  speedily  ?  "  To  snch  the 
"  watchman  "  had  best  answer  with  some  reserve,  or  even  with  some  obscurity,  so  far 
as  he  gives  any  direct  answer  at  all  to  their  questions.  "  The  trouble  will  no  doubt 
pass  in  time — it  may  be  sooner,  it  may  be  later  ;  God  only  knows  the  times  and  the 
seasons  which  he  has  put  in  bis  own  power."  But  he  may  take  the  opportunity  of  the 
inquiry  to  give  a  very  clear  lesson.  "  If  ye  will  inquire,  inquire  ye  :  return,  come ;  " 
that  is  to  say,  "  Be  not  half-hearted,  beat  not  about  the  bush.  If  ye  throw  yourselves 
npon  Gk>d  for  one  purpose,  do  so  for  every  purpose ;  look  to  him,  not  for  an  answer  to 
one  inquiry  only,  but  for  everything.  Return  to  him — come."  "  The  Spirit  and  the 
Bride"  are  always  saying,  "Come"  (Rev.  xxii.  17).  Christ  himself  has  said,  most 
emphatically,  "  Come  "  (Matt.  xi.  28).  If  they  "  return  "  and  "  come,"  they  will  be  no 
longer  Edom,  but  Israel ;  no  longer  aliens  and  strangers,  but  "  fellow-citizens  with  the 
saints  and  of  the  household  of  God  "  (Eph.  ii.  19).  Let  the  cry,  then,  be  sounded  in 
their  ears  unceasingly,  "  Return,  come." 

Ver.  15. — The  grievousness  of  war.  The  grievousness  of  war  is  especially  felt  in 
defeat.  Kedar  was  the  most  turbulent  of  the  sons  of  Ishmael  (Gen.  xxv.  13).  "  His 
hand,"  like  that  of  his  father,  "  was  against  every  man,  and  every  man's  hand  against 
him  "  (Gen.  xvi.  12).  So  long  as  his  "  mighty  men,"  armed  with  their  formidable  bows, 
could  ravage  and  plunder  the  inhabitants  of  more  peaceable  districts  at  their  pleasure, 
and  carry  off  plenty  of  spoil  to  their  fastnesses  in  the  rooky  parts  of  the  desert 
(ch.  xiii.  11),  the  "grievousness  of  war  "  was  not  felt.  Rather,  "  tlie  inhabitants  of  the 
rook  sang,  and  shouted  from  the  top  of  the  mountain"  (ch.  xiii.  11).  But  at  length 
the  tide  of  battle  had  turned.  Kedar  was  itself  attacked,  invaded,  plundered.  The 
"  drawn  sword  "  and  the  "  bent  bow  "  of  the  men  of  Asshur  were  seen  in  the  recesses 
of  Arabia  itself,'  and  the  assailants,  becoming  the  assailed,  discovered,  apparently  to 
their  surprise,  that  war  was  a  "grievous"  thing.  Does  not  history  "repeat  itself"? 
Have  we  not  heard  in  our  own  day  aggressive  nations,  that  have  carried  the  fiamei  of 
war  over  half  Europe  or  half  Asia,  complain  bitterly,  when  their  turn  to  be  attacked 
came,  of  the  "grievousness"  of  invasion?  The  Greeks  said,  "To  siffer  that  which 
one  has  done,  is  strictest,  straitest  right;  "but  this  is  not  often  distinctly  perceived 
by  the  sufferers.  It  is  only  "  God's  ways  "  that  are  "  equal ; "  man's  are  apt  always  to 
be  "  unequal "  (Ezek.  xviii.  25). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vefi.  1 — 10. — Fall  of  Babylon.  It  is  thought,  by  some  recent  commentators, 
that  the  description  refer*  to  the  siege  of  Babylon  in  B.o.  710  by  Sargon  the  Assyrian. 
The  King  of  Babylon  at  that  time  was  Merodach-Baladan,  who  sent  letters  and  a  present 


es.  ixi.  1— It.]    TSB  book  OS*  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  341 

to  Hezelnah  when  he  was  sick  (ch.  xxxix.  1 ;  2  Kings  xx.  12).  The  prophpt  may  well 
grieve  over  the  fall  of  Babylon,  as  likely  to  drag  down  with  it  weaker  kingdoms. 

I.  The  sound  op  the  tempest.  What  sublime  poesy  have  the  prophets  found  in 
the  tempest !  We  are  perhaps  impressed  more  through  the  perception  of  the  ear  than 
that  of  the  eye,  by  the  sense  of  vague,  vast,  overwhelming  power  working  through  all 
the  changes  of  the  world.  The  sweeping  up  of  a  tempest  from  the  southern  dry 
country  of  Judah  is  like  the  gathering  of  a  moles  belli,  and  this  again  betokens  that 
Jehovah  of  hosts  is  stirring  up  his  might  in  the  world  unseen.  Hence  his  arrows  go 
torth  like  lightning,  his  trumpet  blows  (Zech.  ix.  14).  This  movement  comes  from 
I  he  terrible  land,  the  desert,  the  haunt  of  serpents  and  other  horrible  creatures. 

II.  The  vision  of  oalamitt.  The  march  of  the  barbarous  conqueror  is  marked 
by  cruelty  and  devastation.  The  prophet's  heart  is  overpowered  within  him.  He 
svrithes  with  anguish  as  in  the  visions  of  the  even-tide  the  picture  of  Babylon's  fall  passes 
before  his  mind.  He  beholds  a  scene  of  rivalry.  There  is  feasting  and  mirth.  We 
are  reminded  of  that  description  which  De  Quincey  adduced  as  an  example  of  the 
sublime :  "  Belshazzar  the  king  made  a  great  feast  unto  a  thousand  of  his  lords,  and 
lirank  wine  before  the  thousand"  (Dan.  v.  1);  and  of  Byron's  description  of  the  eve  of 
the  battle  of  Waterloo  at  Brussels.  Suddenly  an  alarm  is  given ;  the  walls  have  been 
stormed,  the  palace  is  threatened;  the  banqueters  must  start  from  the  couch  and 
exchange  the  garb  of  luxury  for  the  shield  and  the  armour.  The  impression  of  the 
picture  is  heightened  by  the  descriptions  in  Herodotus  (i.  191)  and  Xenophon  ('Cyrop..' 
vii.  5),  whether  they  refer  to  the  same  event  or  no.  It  is  the  picture  of  careless  ease 
nnd  Iwcury  surprised  hy  sudden  terror.  "Let  us  go  against  them,"  says  Cyrus  in 
Xenophon.  "  Many  of  them  are  asleep,  many  intoxicated,  and  all  of  them  unfit  foi 
battle."  The  scene,  then,  may  be  used  parabolioally  to  enforce  those  lessons  of  temper- 
nnce,  of  watchfulness,  of  sobriety,  and  prayerfulness  which  our  religion  inculcates. 

III.  The  watchman.  The  word  of  Jehovah  directs  that  a  watchman  shall  be  posted, 
I  he  prophet  "  dividing  himself  into,two  persons" — his  own  proper  |  lerson  and  that  of  the 
■••■peculator  or  scout  upon  the  height  of  the  watch-tower.  So  Habakkuk  "stands  upon 
his  watch,  and  sets  him  upon  the  tower "  (ii.  1).  And  what  does  the  prophet  see  ? 
Cavalry  riding  two  abreast,  some  on  horses,  others  on  asses,  others  (with  the  baggage) 
on  camels.  This  he  sees ;  but  lie  hears  no  authentic  tidings  of  distant  things,  though 
straining  his  ear  in  utmost  tension.  Then  he  groans  with  the  deep  tones  of  the 
impatient  lion.  How  long  is  he  to  remain  at  his  post?  We  cannot  but  think  of  the 
fine  opening  of  the  'Agamemnon'  of  .lEschylus,  where  the  weary  warder  aoliloqoizes — 

**  The  ^ods  I  ask  deliverance  from  these  labours, 
Watoli  of  a  year's  length,  whereby,  slumbering  thro'  it 
On  the  Atreidfd'a  roof  on  elbow,  dog-like, 
I  know  of  mighty  star-groups  the  assemblage, 
And  those  that  bring  to  men  winter  and  summer." 

(B.  Browning's  translation.) 

As  he  waits  for  "  the  torch's  token  and  the  glow  of  fire,"  so  does  Isaiah  wait  for  certain 
news  about  Babylon.  AnH,  no  sooner  is  the  plaint  uttered,  than  the  wish  is  realized. 
The  watchman  sees  a  squadron  of  cavalry,  riding  two  abreast,  and  the  truth  flashes  on 
him — Baliylnn  is  fallen  I  The  images,  symbols  of  the  might  of  the  city,  protected  by 
the  gods  they  represented,  are  dashed  to  the  ground  and  broken.  What  was  felt  Undei 
Biich  circumstances  may  be  gathered  by  the  student  of  Greek  history  from  the  awful 
impression  made,  on  the  e^e  of  the  expedition  to  Sicily,  by  the  discovery  of  the  mutiln- 
tion  nf  the  sttitues  of  the  Hermai.     It  is  all  over  with  Babylon. 

IV.  The  anguistt  op  the  patriot.  "  0  my  threshed  and  winnowed  one ! "  Poor 
Israel,  who  has  already  suffered  so  much  from  the  Assyrian,  how  gladly  would  the  prophet 
have  announced  better  tidings  I  The  threshing-floor  is  an  irrage  of  suffering,  and  noi 
confined  to  the  Hebrews.  It  may  be  found  in  old  Greek  lore,  and  in  modern  Gn  el< 
folk-poesy.  No  image,  indeed,  can  be  more  expressive  (comp.  ch.  xli.  15  ;  Mioah  iv.  I'A, 
13  ;  Jer.  li.  33).     "  But  love  also  takes  part  in  the  threshing,  and  restrains  the  wrath.'' 

V.  General  lessons.  The  Christian  minister  is,  too,  a  watcher.  He  must  liste7i 
nnd  he  must  look.  There  are  oracles  to  be  heard  by  the  attentive  ear,  breaking  out  ol 
the  heart  of  things — ^hints  in  the  distance  to  be  caught  by  the  wakeful  and  searchinc 


H2  THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxt  1— IT. 

eye.  "They  whom  God  has  appointed  to  watch  are  neither  drowsy  nor  dim-si'^htei 
The  prophet  also,  by  this  example,  exhorts  and  stimulates  believers  to  the  same  kind 
of  attention,  that  by  the  help  of  the  lamp  of  the  Word  they  may  obtain  a  distant 
view  of  the  power  of  God." — J. 

Vers.  11, 12. — J%e  watchman.  I.  The  call  prom  Sbib.  The  Bdomites  are  asking, 
"Will  the  light  soon  dawn?  What  hour  is  it?"  Like  the  sick  man  tossing  on  his 
bed,  they  long  for  the  first  tidings  that  the  night  of  tribulation  is  past. 

IL  The  ENIGMATIC  ANSWER.  "  Moming  cometh,  and  also  night."  There  were  "  wise 
men"  in  Eriom,  and  probably  the  answer  is  couclied  in  the  style  they  loved.  What  does 
it  mean?  We  can  but  conjecture.  It  may  mean  that  the  coming  liglit  of  prosperity 
and  joy  is  soon  to  be  quenched  in  the  night  of  calamity  again.  Or,  the  dawn  of  joy  to 
some  will  be  the  night  of  despair  to  others.  "  When  the  morning  comes,  it  will  still 
he  night"  (Luther).  Even  if  morning  dawns,  it  will  be  swallowed  up  again  imme- 
diately by  night.  And  in  what  follows,  also  obscure,  seems  to  be  a  hint  that  only  in 
case  of  Edom's  conversion  can  there  be  an  answer  of  consolali  in  and  of  hope.  The 
design  may  he  "  (1)  to  reprove  them  for  the  manner  in  which  they  had  asked  the 
question ;  (2)  to  assure  them  that  God  was  willing  to  direct  humble  and  serious 
inquiries ;  (3)  to  show  in  what  way  a  favourable  answer  could  be  obtained,  viz.  by 
repentance." 

III.  Apflioation.  1.  Bistorical.  "History  was  quite  in  accord  with  such  en 
answer.  The  Assyrian  period  of  judgment  was  followed  by  the  Chaldean,  the  Chaldean 
by  the  Persian,  the  Persian  by  the  Grecian,  and  the  Grecian  by  the  Kumaa.  Again 
and  again  there  was  a  glimmer  of  morning  dawn  for  Edom  (and  what  a  .limmi-r  in  the 
Herodian  a'^e !) ;  but  it  was  swallowed  up  directly  by  another  night,  until  Edom  became 
an  utter  Dumah,  and  disappeared  from  the  history  of  nations."  Herod  the  Great, 
"  Eling  of  the  Jaws,"  was  son  of  Antipater  of  Edom,  who  became  pxocurator  of  Judsea. 
Under  the  Mussulman  rule  in  the  seventh  century  a.d.,  the  cities  of  Edom  fell  into  ruin, 
and  the  land  became  a  desolation  (comp.  Ezek.  xxxv.  3,  4,  7,  9,  14).  The  famed  rock- 
built  city  of  Petra  was  brought  to  light  in  our  own  time  by  Burckhardt,  1812. 
2.  General.  The  prophetic  outlook  upon  the  world  at  any  epoch  is  of  the  same  general 
character.  Night  struggles  with  morning  in  the  conflicts  and  changes  of  nations,  in 
the  controversies  of  truth  with  error.  In  the  closing  chapters  of  St.  Matthew's  Gospel 
we  do  not  find  a  prospect  of  unmingled  brightness,  very  far  from  it.  Christianity  wiV. 
call  into  existence  vast  organized  hypocrisies ;  the  shadow  attends  closely  upon  the 
light.  At  the  conversion  of  the  empire  under  Constantino,  at  the  Reformation,  etc., 
"  the  morning  came,  and  also  night."  History  pursues  a  spiral  line ;  old  errors  return, 
decayed  superstitions  revive ;  then  again  the  day  breaks.  And  so  with  the  individual ; 
the  light  we  gain  at  happy  epochs  must  yield  to  fresh  doubts  or  fears,  again  to  be 
dispelled  by  redawning  faith.  Such  is  the  condition  of  our  life;  we  dwell  in  the 
chiaroscuro,  the  twilight  of  intuition;  we  "  see  as  in  a  glass,  enigmatically."  But  hope 
and  endeavour  remain  to  us;  and  the  looking  forward  to  the  everlasting  lib<ht  of 
Jehovah,  the  glory  of  God,  the  rising  of  the  sun  that  shall  no  more  go  down ;  the  end 
of  mourning;  the  "one  day"  that  shall  be  neither  day  nor  night;  the  evening-time 
when  it  shall  be  light  (oh.  Ix.  19,  20;  Zech.  xiv.  7).— J. 

Vers.  13 — 16. — The  tribes  of  Arabia.  L  The  patb  of  the  Dedanttes.  Their 
caravans  must  hide  in  the  thorn-bushes  away  from  the  beaten  track.  These  Dedanites 
belong  to  Edom  (Jer.  xlix.  8;  Ezek.  xxv.  13).  They  were  merchants,  and  among 
others  traded  with  wenltliy  Tyre  (ICzek.  xxvii.  15).  And  probably  the  meaning  is  thai 
when  on  their  way  from  'I'yre  they  would  be  compelled  to  camp  in  the  desert,  because 
of  the  widespreading  war  from  north  to  south. 

II.  The  sympathy  of  the  pbopiibt.  He  calls  the  people  of  Tema  to  supply  the 
thirsty  and  hungry  fugitives  with  water  and  with  bread.  Tema  lay  on  the  route 
between  Palmyra  and  Petra.  The  tribe  was  among  the  descendants  of  Ishmael.  In 
these  sad  scenes  the  light  of  human  kindness  in  the  heart  of  the  prephet,  reflected  in 
the  picture  of  Temanite  hospitality,  shines  forth. 

**  These  are  the  precious  balsam-dropa 
That  woeful  wars  distil." 


OH.  XXI.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  343 

Hoipitality  is  still  found  in  generous  flow  among  the  Arabs  of  these  regions,  and 
reminds  the  wayfarer  how  near  God  is  to  man  in  the  most  desolate  i>lacos.  Wherever 
there  is  a  loving  human  heart,  there  indeed  is  a  fount  and  an  oasis  in  life's  desert. 
And  this  scene  reminds  us  how  good  comes  out  of  evil,  even  the  bitterest ;  the  sight  of 
the  flying  warriors,  showing  the  bent  bow  and  .the  wave  of  war,  touclies  the  spring  of 
sympathy  and  mercy  in  yonder  wild  hearts. 

III.  Thb  pbopheot  op  doom.  In  a  year,  "  as  the  years  of  a  hireling,"  i.e.  swiftly, 
certainly,  without  delay,  and  without  time  of  grace,  Kedar's  glory  sliall  be  at  an  end, 
the  powerful  tribes  of  nomad  archers  will  be  reduced  to  a  remnant.  Those  tents, "  black 
but  comely,"  of  which  the  bard  of  the  Canticles  sang  (i.  5),  those  splendid  flocks,  and 
the  famed  "rams  of  Nebaioth,"  shall  disappear,  or  melt  down  to  a  fraction  of  the 
former  numbers.     So  again  the  night  sets  on  Edom,  after  a  brief  dawn. 

IV.  The  Word  op  the  God  op  Israel.  1.  These  events  were  to  happen  by 
Divine  appointment.  2.  The  God  of  Israel  is  the  true  God.  Let  us  take  the  saying  to 
heart,  amidst  all  that  is  most  saddening  in  the  fates  of  nations  and  institutions, 
"God  hath  done  it,  God  hath  said  it."  The  true  God  who  revealed  himself  to  the 
fathers,  and  manifested  himself  to  men  in  Christ,  is  the  Being  whose  will  is  made  known 
in  the  course  of  history.  And  amidst  his  heaviest  punishments  we  have  this  consola- 
tion, that  he  chastises  gently,  and  does  not  "  give  men  over  to  death "  (Fs.  cxviii. 
18).— J. 

Ver.  11. — A  momentoia  question.  "Watchman,  what  of. the  night?"  This  is 
<Ae  question  which  ever  occupies  earnest  minds.  That  the  darkness  of  sin  it  here 
wise  men  note,  without  wasting  metaphysical  thought  upon  the  how  or  why.  Here 
is  sin.     On  that  all  are  agreed.     Is  there  salvation  too  ? 

I.  Pbophetio  vision.  Isaiah  sees.  Far  away  on  the  world's  horizon  he  beholds  a 
rising  light ;  and,  in  anticipation  of  that,  he  himself  is  permitted  to  reveal  truths  which 
shall  brighten  the  darkness  of  Israel.  All  deliverance  is  a  prophecy  of  the  great 
Deliverer;  all  returnings  of  Israel  are  foreshado wings  of  that  day  when  to  Christ  shall 
the  gathering  of  the  people  be. 

II.  Pbophetio  declaration.  "The  morning  oometh."  Always  a  musical  note 
that.  To  the  sufferer  in  the  chamber  of  afiBiotion,  longing  for  the  first  beams  of  day ;  to 
the  dismantled  ship  out  far  away  on  the  melancholy  sea;  to  the  oppressed  people 
waiting  for  deliverance ;  to  the  idolatrous  Israel  in  returning  to  the  true  and  living 
God.  "The  morning  cometh."  A  thovight  to  be  meditated  on  in  all  long  and  weary 
nights  of  disappointment,  disaffection,  doubt,  and  trial.  "  Weeping  may  endure  for  a 
night,  but  joy  cometh  in  the  morning."  Patience,  poor  heart  1  The  morning  cometh 
to  the  penitent  Peter  and  the  doubtful  Thomas.  "  The  morning  cometh."  Not  for 
Israel  only,  but  for  the  world.  The  nations  that  sat  in  darkness  have  seen  a  great 
light.    Isaiah  was  right, 

III.  Pbophetio  counsel.  "If  ye  will  inquire,  inquire  ye,"  But  do  more  than 
that.  "  Eetiirn,  come."  This  is  the  condition  on  which  the  morning  glory  rests. 
"Return."  Give  up  your  love  of  darkness,  and  "come."  God  wait-i  to  forgive  and 
bless.  "Come."  The  curiosity  of  inquiry  may  belong  to  mere  intellectual  states  of 
being.  The  return  of  the  soul  means  a  great  moral  change.  We  must  feel  the  truth 
of  these  words,  "  The  morning  cometh,  and  also  the  night."  For  the  morning  will  be 
no  morning  unless  the  veil  of  night  is  taken  away  from  our  hearts. — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  effect  of  God's  judgments  on  the  good  and  on  the  guilty.  We 
gather,  preliminarily :  1.  That  God  uses  not  only  elemental  forces  but  human  agents 
for  the  accomplishment  of  his  righteous  purposes.  The  winds  and  the  waves  are  his 
ministers;  but  sometimes,  as  here,  the  whirlwinds  he  invokes  are  not  the  airs  of 
heaven  but  the  passions  and  agitations  of  human  minds.  2.  That  the  greatest  human 
power  is  nothing  in  his  mighty  hand.  Babylon  was  a  "  great  power  "  indeed  in  humat 
estimation  at  that  time,  but  it  needed  only  the  whirlwind  of  God's  holy  indignation  to 
sweep  it  away.    Concerning  the  judgments  of  the  Lord,  we  mark — 

I.  Their  effect  on  the  guilty.  1.  The  suddenness  and  surprise  of  th«ir  over- 
throw. "  Prepare  the  table  .  .  .  eat,  drink,"  say  they  in  the  palace.  But  even  while 
they  we  feasting  comes  the  cry  from  the  watchman  on  the  walls,  "  Arise,  ye  princes. 


344  I'UE   BOOK  OF   TflE  PROPHET  iSATAtt.    [CH.  xxi.  1— It. 


and  anoint  tlie  shield  "  (ver.  5).  How  often,  when  the  ungodly  are  in  the  raidst  of  their 
unjust  exactions  or  their  unlawful  pleasures,  comes  the  blow  which  strikes  the  weapon 
from  their  hand,  the  cup  from  their  lips  (see  Dan.  v.  30 ;  Acts  xii.  22,  28 ;  Luke  xii. 
20) !  2.  The  completeness  of  their  down/all.  "  Babylon  is  fallen,  i$  fallen, "  (ver,  9) — 
fallen  utterly,  never  more  to  rise ;  her  tyranny  broken  to  pieces,  her  fires  of  persecution 
put  out.  When  God  arices  to  judgment  his  enemies  are  not  merely  defeated,  they  are 
scattered.  3.  The  abasement  of  their  pride.  "Baliylon  is/aKin."  The  word  is  suggestive 
of  an  inglorious  descent  from  a  high  seat  of  assumption  atid  is  certainly  descriptive  of 
tlic  destruction  of  the  Babylonian  power.  We  know  that  G-nd  wills  to  hurable  the 
haiigiity,  and  that  nothing  is  more  certain  to  ensure  humiliation  than  the  spirit  of 
pride  (Prov.  xvi.  18 ;  xvii.  17 ;  ch.  x.  33 ;  Luke  xiv.  11).  4.  The  rebuke  of  their 
imjiiety.  "The  graven  images  he  hath  broken,"  etc.  As  idolatry  was  visited  with  the 
signs  of  God's  wrath,  so  impiety,  covetnusness,  absorbing  worldliness — which  are  idolatry 
ill  modern  form — must  expect  to  leceive  the  proofs  of  his  displeasure. 

II,  Their  fffeot  OJf  the  good.  1.  Merciful  relief  from  oppression.  "All  the 
sighing  thereof  have  I  made  to  cease."  The  downfall  of  the  tyrant  is  the  deliverance  of 
the  oppressed ;  hence  the  close  connection  between  Divine  judgments  and  human 
praise.  As  God,  in  his  providence,  brings  cruelty,  injustice,  inconsiderateness,  to  its 
doom,  he  makes  sigliing  and  soitow  to  flee  away.  Thfre  is  «nuch  tyranny  still  to  be 
struck  down  before  all  burdens  will  have  been  taken  from  the  heavy-laden,  and  before 
all  sighs  shall  cease  from  the  heavy-hearted.  2.  Gonversion  from  resentment  to  com- 
passion. The  vision  which  the  prophet  saw,  albeit  it  was  one  of  triumph  over  his 
enemies,  excited  his  compassion ;  it  was  "  a  grievous  vision  "  (ver.  2).  He  was  even 
"  bowed  down  at  the  hennng  of  it,"  "  dismayed  at  the  seeing  of  it "  (ver.  3).  The  night 
which  he  loved  (the  night  of  his  pleasure),  instead  of  bringing  him  tlie  sacred  joy  of 
communion  with  God  and  prophetic  inspiration,  brought  to  him  sympathetic  pain  and 
distress.  Thus  was  burning  patriotic  indignation  turned  into  humane  compassion.  It 
may  be  taken,  indeed,  as  an  anticipation  of  that  Christian  magnanimity  which  "loves 
its  enemies,  and  prays  for  them  that  despitcfully  use  and  persecute  "  it.  When  Go<J's 
judgments  on  our  enemies  thus  soften  our  spirits  and  Call  forth  the  kindlier  and 
more  generous  sentiments,  then  do  they  serve  an  even  higher  end  than  when  they  make 
our  sighs  to  cease  and  our  songs  to  sound.— C. 

Ver.  10. —  Tribulation.  There  is  no  little  tenderness  in  this  Divine  address  or  invo- 
cation ;  it  reminds  us  that  God's  love  may  be  set  upon  us  when  there  seems  least  reason 
to  think  so  if  we  judge  of  his  feeling  by  our  outward  circumstances.  We  think 
naturally  of-^ 

I.  TkibulatioS.  The  instrument  by  which  com  was  threshed  (tribula)  has  given 
us  the  word  with  which  we  are  Bo  familiar.  To  some  it  speaks  of  lonai-continued  sickness, 
or  weakness,  or  pain  ;  to  others  of  dcpre'fsing  disappointment ;  to  others  of  bereavement 
and  consequent  desolation ;  to  others  of  loss  and  the  inevitable  struggle  with  poverty  ; 
to  others  of  human  frailty  or  even  treachery  and  of  the  wounded  spirit  which  suffers 
from  that  piercing  stroke.  The  heart  knows  its  own  bitterness,  and  every  human  soul 
has  its  own  peculiar  story  to  tell,  its  own  especial  troubles  to  endure.  But  this  human 
suffering  is  only  appropriately  called  tribulation  when  it  is  recognized  that  the  evil 
which  has  come  is  sent  (or  allowed)  of  God  as  Divine  chastening,  when  it  is  understood 
that  the  Divine  Father  takes  a  parental  interest  in  the  well-being  of  his  children,  that 
he  is  seeking  their  highest  good,  and  that  he  is  passing  his  threshing-instrument  over 
"  his  floor  "  in  the  exercise  of  a  benign  and  holy  discipline. 

II.  Separation.  When  the  "  tribula"  passed  over  the  reaped  corn  it  separated  the 
valuable  grain  from  the  worthless  chaff;  one  was  then  easily  distinguishable  from 
the  Other.  Sorrow,  persecution,  trial,  tribulation,  is  a  "discerner  of  the  thoughts 
and  intents  of  the  heart."  Before  it  comes,  the  genuine  and  the  pretentions  may  he 
mingled  indistinguishably ;  after  it  has  come,  it  is  apparent  who  are  the  loyal  and  true 
disciples,  and  who  are  they  that  have  nothing  but  "  the  name  to  live."  We  cannot  be 
sure  of  "  the  spirit  of  our  mind  "  or  the  real  character  of  others  until  we,  or  they,  have 
been  upon  the  threshing-floor,  and  the  Divine  instrnnient  of  threshing  has  done  its 
decisive  and  discriminating  work.  It  comes,  like  Christ  himself, "  for  judgment ; "  and 
t>bon  many  who  were  supposed  not  to  sec  are  found  to  have  a  true  vision  of  Gk>d  and 


ctt.  iti.  1—1?.]    THB  BOOK  Of  TlIE  motllteT  ISAIAS.  «4S 


of  his  trath,  while  many  who  have  imagined  that  they  »aw  have  heen  found  to  be 
blind  indeed  (see  John  ix.  39). 

III.  Sympathy.  Israel  in  Egypt  may  have  thought  itself  unpiticd  and  ei'en  fnr- 
gottcn  of  God;  but  it  would  have  been  wrong  in  so  thinking  (Exod.  iii.  7).  The  Jews 
in  Babylon  may  have  imagined  themselves  disregarded  of  Jehovah ;  but  tliey  were 
mistaken  if  they  so  thought.  "  0  my  threshing,"  eto.,  exclaims  the  symp:iilip'ic  voice 
of  the  Lord.  When  we  are  tempted  to  bewail  oar  uniitied  and  forgott'n  cmnlition,  we 
must  check  ourselves  as  the  psalmist  had  to  do  (Ps.  Ixxiii.),  or  we  shall  be  imjust  and 
even  ungrateful;  "  for  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth."  The  mark  of  tiiOulation 
is  the  sign  of  parental  love  and  care. 

IV.  Prbpabation.  The  process  of  threshing  prepared  the  corn  for  the  granary,  a?ifl 
so  for  the  table,  and  thus  for  the  fulfilment  of  its  true  function.  When  God  stretches 
us  on  his  floor  and  makes  us  undergo  the  process  of  tribulation,  it  is  that  we  may  he 
refined  and  purified ;  that  we  may  he  made  "  meet  for  his  use  "  both  on  ea  th  and  in 
heaven  ;  that  we  may  be  prepared  for  such  higher  work  and  such  nobler  spheres  as  we 
should^  have  remained  unfitted  for,  had  he  not  subjected  us  to  the  treatment  which 
is  "not  joyous  but  grievous"  at  the  time. — 0. 

Vers.  11, 12. — Ta'unt,  retort,  and  overture.  1.  We  take  this  to  be  a  bitter  tannt  on 
the  part  of  the  Idumsean.  "  Watchman,"  he  says,  "  what  of  this  long  night  of  intioiia' 
calamity  through  which  you  are  passing  ?  Where  is  the  God  of  David,  of  Josiah,  and 
of  Hezekiah?  What  about  those  promises  of  Divine  deliverance  which  have  heen  your 
trust,"  etc.?  2.  Then  we  have  the  calm  retort  of  the  prophet.  He  says,  "'The 
morning  oometh.'  You  may  see  nothing  but  darkness ;  but  to  me,  on  my  watch-tower, 
there  are  apparent  the  grey  streaks  of  dawn.  I  see  afar  off,  but  appr"ao!iing,  a  glorious 
deliverance  and  return  —  a  repopulated  city,  rebuilt  walls,  a  reopened  temple,  a 
rehonoured  sabbath,  a  resieneiate  and  a  rejoicing  peojjle.  'The  morning  cometJi,  and 
also  the  ninht: '  to  us  the  morning,  to  you  the  night.  The  sun  that  shines  on  you  is 
a  setting  sun  ;  it  is  sloping  to  the  west.  The  dark  pall  of  defeat,  captivity,  destruction, 
will  soon  veil  your  skies;  you  have  little  reason  to  triumph.  We  are  down,  but  we  are 
moving  up;  you  are  up,  but  you  are  moving  down."  3.  And  then  comes  the  prophet's 
overture.  "I  do  not  want,"  he  says,  "  to  gain  a  barren  victory  of  words.  If  yon  will 
approach  me  in  the  spirit,  not  of  mockery,  but  of  inquiry,  really  wishing  to  know  the 
mind  of  God,  I  will  reply  to  your  question.  '  If  ye  will  inquire,  inquire  ye  :  return, 
come.' "  As  the  scoffijig  Idumsean  thus  assailed  the  Jewish  Church,  so  the  sceptical 
European  assails  the  Christian  Church,  and  we  have — 

I.^  The  triumphant  taunt  of  the  scorFEK.  "  What,"  says  the  scoffer, "  of  this  long 
night  through  which  the  Church  is  passing?  Eighteen ceiituiies  have  gone  since  Jesns 
Christ  declared  that  his  cross  would  attract  all  men  unto  him;  but  barbarism  is  still 
found  on  island  and  continent,  idolatry  still  prevails  among  the  millions  of  Asia, 
corrupt  Christianity  still  deludes  the  peoples  of  Europe,  and  infidelity,  immoiality,  crime, 
and  ungodliness  still  hang,  like  angry  clouds,  over  'Christinn  h^ngland.'  What  alwut 
this  long  night  of  Christendom  ?  "  Similarly  the  hostile  critic  speaks  conceruing  the 
individual  Christian  life.  "  What  of  this  long  night  of  protracted  sickness,  of  unsuc- 
cessful contest  with  financial  difSculties,  of  undeserved  dishonour,  of  repeated  losses  in 
the  family  circle  by  death,  etc.  ?" 

IL  The  calm  retort  of  the  Christian  advocate.  He  says,  "'The  morning 
ooraeth.'  Barbarism  is  steadily  disappearing  before  Christian  civilization  ;  superstition 
is  being  honeycombed  by  doubt;  unbelief  is  finding  itself  unsatisfied  with  its  hollow 
husks;  earnest,  practical  religion  is  making  its  attack,  by  a  hundred  agiticies,  on 
immorality  and  irreligion;  the  Churches  of  Christ  are  putting  on  strength,  aud  then^ 
is  a  sound  of  victory  in  the  air,  there  are  streaks  of  morning  light  in  the  sky.  On  the 
other  hand,  there  are  signs  that  overthrow  and  utter  discomfiture  will  overtake  and 
overwhelm  the  unholy  doubts  of  the  scoffer.  To  the  oppressed  Christian  n;an,  even 
though  weeping  should  endure  for  the  whole  night  of  this  mortal  life, '  joy  cometh 
in  the  morning   of  the  everlasting  day." 

III.  The  overt  ukb  of  the  Christian  advocate.  He  does  not  content  himseli 
with  an  effective  retort.  His  mission  is  not  to  silence,  but  to  convince  and  to  help. 
Ue  knows  that  beneath  the  sneer  is  doubt  or  disbelief,  and  this  is  too  serious  aud  too 


346  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxL  1— 17, 

snd  A  thing  to  be  left  unanswered.  So  he  say*,  "  If  you  will  '  inquire,'  do  inquire. 
Uoaae  into  the  court  of  inquiry  with  a  candid,  honest  spirit ;  do  not  delude  yourself 
by  holding  up  one  or  two  modurn  objections  before  your  eyes  and  declaring  that  there 
is  nothing  to  be  seen.  Take  into  account  aU  the  evidence — of  prophecy;  of  miracle;  of 
the  life,  character,  truth,  works,  of  Jesus  Christ ;  of  the  effects  of  his  gospel  on  ihe  world, 
on  human  hearts,  homes,  lives ;  on  man,  on  woman,  on  the  slave,  the  poor,  the  prisoner, 
etc.  Set  against  this  what  has  to  be  considered  on  the  other  side,  and  then  decide 
whether  this  redemption  in  Jesus  Christ  is  not  from  heaven.  Or,  again,  if  you  have 
any  serious  doubts  as  to  the  efficacy  of  true  piety  and  its  actual  worth  to  a  man  as  he 
goes  through  life,  inquire;  but  take  heed  of  whom  you  inquire.  Ask  of  one  who  has 
had  large  and  varied  experience  of  life ;  ask  of  one  who  has  seen  much  of  men,  in 
whom  men  have  trusted  and  who  knows  the  thoughts  of  their  hearts ;  take  the  testi- 
mony of  men  to  whom  religion  has  been  not  a  mere  name,  or  a  mere  ceremony,  but 
a  solid  conviction  and  a  living  power;  and  you  will  find,  on  such  fair  inquiry,  that  it 
is  not  only  a  stay  and  succour,  but  is  the  mainstay  and  the  strength  of  the  human 
soul  in  the  labours  and  conflicts  of  life." — C. 

Vers.  13 — 17. — Our  ills  and  their  remedies.  In  this  "burden"  upon  Arabia  we 
may  detect  a  picture  or,  at  least,  find  a  suggestion  of — 

I.  The  illb  to  which  flesh  is  hbib.  1.  Being  turned  out  of  our  course.  The 
caravans  of  Dedan  are  obliged  to  forsake  their  track  and  find  refuge  in  the  forests 
or  stony  retreats  of  the  desert  (ver.  13).  Continually  are  we  compelled  to  change  our 
loute  as  travellers  along  the  road  of  life.  We  mark  out  our  course  and  set  out  on  our 
way,  but  the  irresistible  obstacle  is  confronted  and  we  are  obliged  to  deviate  into  some 
other  track,  or  wait  in  hope  until  the  hindrance  be  removed.  2.  Being  straitened  for 
the  necessities  of  life.  The  refugees  are  reduced  to  such  straits  that  they  are  glad 
to  receive  the  bread  and  water  which  "  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  of  Tema  "  bring 
(ver.  14).  Though  God  has  made  this  earth  to  be  large  and  bountiful  enough  for 
a  vastly  greater  population  than  even  now  exists  upoli  it,  yet,  chiefly  owing  to 
huncaa  folly  or  iniquity,  though  sometimes  to  misfortune,  men  are  reduced  to  such 
extreme  hardship  that  the  common  necessaries  are  beyond  their  reach.  Between  this 
exigency  and  the  condition  of  competence,  how  many  deo:rees  of  want,  and  how  many 
thousands  of  the  children  of  want,  are  there  to  be  found !  3.  Being  assailed  and  pur- 
sued by  the  enemies  of  our  spirit.  (Ver.  15.)  There  are  adverse  powers  from  beneathr-^ 
the  "principalities  and  powers  "  of  the  kingdom  of  darkness ;  tliere  are  hostile  powers 
that  are  around  us — ^unprinciiiled  and  ungodly  men,  evil  practices  and  harmful  insti- 
tutions in  society  ;  but  our  worst  foes  are  those  which  are  "  of  our  own  household," 
those  that  are  within  the  chambers  of  our  own  souls — bad  habits,  evil  propensities, 
those  inclinations  toward  folly  and  sin  wliich  pursue  us  even  when  the  main  battle 
has  been  fought  and  won.  4.  Finding  our  life  oppressive  and  burdensome  to  ms. 
"According  to  the  years  of  a  hireling  "  (ver.  16).  The  time  thus  counted  is  reckoned 
with  extreme  carefulness ;  there  is  no  danger  that  a  single  day  will  be  left  untold. 
The  hireling  is  impatient  for  the  time  to  be  past  that  he  may  lay  down  the  yoke  and 
receive  his  wage.  How  many  are  there  to  whom  life  is  so  much  of  a  burden,  who  are 
so  oppressed  by  toil,  or  weighed  down  with  care,  or  overwhelmed  by  sorrow,  that  they 
look  gladly,  if  not  eagerly,  forward  to  its  evening  hour,  when  the  night  of  death  will 
release  them  from  their  struggle  I  6.  Being  distinctly  and  at  length  fatally  enfeebled. 
"  The  glory  of  Kedar  shall  fail,"  the  bowmen  and  the  mighty  men  "  be  diminished  " 
(vers.  16,  17).  Up  to  a  certain  point  human  life  means,  not  only  enjoyment,  but 
increase ;  from  that  point  it  means  diminution — at  first  unconscious,  but  afterwards 
sensible  and  painful;  at  length  fatal  diminution — in  the  capacity  for  enjoyment,  in 
intellectual  grasp,  in  physical  endurance,  in  force  of  character.  The  glory  of  life 
goei ;  the  faculties  of  soul  and  of  body  are  palpably  diminished ;  death  draws  near. 
But  we  may  take  into  our  view — 

II.  DiviNELT  PROVIDED  REMEDIES.  1.  Pursuing  the  straight  path  to  the  goal  which 
is  set  before  ua,  from  which  no  enemy  need  make  us  turn  aside.  2.  Trusting  in  the 
faithful  Promiser.  3.  Hiding  in  the  pavilion  of  Divine  power,  and  securing  the  mighty 
aid  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  4.  Seeking  and  finding  the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  6, 
Awaiting  the  immortal  youth  of  the  heavenly  land. — 0. 


on.  XXI.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK   OF   THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  347 

Ver.  2. — Nations  worldng  out  God's  providences.  The  reference  of  this  "  burden  "  is 
to  Babylon,  which  was  the  snooessor  to  Assyria  in  executing  the  Divine  judgments  on 
the  Jews.  Babylonia  is  called  "  the  desert  of  the  sea,"  as  a  poetical  figure,  suggested 
by  the  fact  that  its  surging  masses  of  people  were  like  a  sea-desert ;  or  because  it  was 
a  flat  country,  and  full  of  lakes,  like  little  seas.  It  was  abundantly  watered  by  the 
many  streams  of  the  river  Euphrates.  The  prophet,  writing  when  Babylon  was  the 
rising  and  triumphing  nation,  sees  in  vision  her  terrible  fall  and  humiliation.  Whicli 
siege  of  Babylon  he  refers  to  cannot  be  assured,  but  much  can  be  said  for  Cheyne's 
suggestion,  that  the  depression  under  which  Isaiah  writes  is  best  explained  bv 
referring  the  vision  to  the  first  siege  of  Babylon,  when  Merodach-Baladan  was  king  (b.c. 
709),  whose  interests  wore  in  harmony  with  those  of  Hezekiah,  and  whose  humiliation 
Isaiah  would  regard  as  injurious  to  Judah.  Watching  the  movements  of  these  several 
nations,  Assyria,  Babylonia,  Elam,  Med  a,  Judah,  we  meditate  on — 

I.  Bight  ideas  op  God's  peovidenob.  We  do  not  speak  of  providence  so  freely  as 
our  fathers  did,  because  we  have  less  impressive  views  of  the  Divine  rule  and  control. 
As  Dr.  Bushnell  expresses  it,  "  our  age  is  at  the  point  of  apogee  from  all  the  robuater 
notions  of  the  Divine  Being."  We  are  more  interested  in  the  ordinary  workings  ol 
Law,  than  in  the  continuous  adjustments  and  qualifications  of  Law  by  the  ever-pre- 
siding Lawgiver.  Yet,  if  our  eyes  were  opened,  we  might  see  manifest  signs  of  what 
our  fathers  called  "providence  "  in  the  personal,  the  family, and  the  national  spheres 
of  to-day.  The  proiier  idea  of  providence  may  be  thus  expressed — it  is  God  usinjr 
for  moral  purposes  commonplace  events,  and  therefore  adjusting,  arranging,  and  fitting 
together  those  events.  Providence  ordering  or  controlling  the  nations  is  "  God  in 
history."  And  the  illustrations  of  Divine  overruling  which  we  see  in  the  large 
spheres  of  the  world-kingdoms,  are  designed  to  convince  us  of  the  reality  of  that  over- 
ruling in  the  small  details  of  our  personal  life. 

II.  The  providential  distinouished  from  the  miraculous.  The  distinction  is  in 
Mir  apprehension ;  we  cannot  conceive  of  the  distinction  as  recognized  by  Ood.  As  by 
the  "  providential "  we  mean  God  intervening  to  readjust  the  usual  order  of  material 
events,  it  is  plain  that  sometimes  he  may  use  foices  with  which  we  are  familiar,  and 
then  we  call  his  working  "providential;"  but  at  other  times  he  may  use  (orces  with 
which  we  are  unfamiliar,  and  then  we  call  his  working  "  miraculous."  There  need  be 
no  ditficulty  in  recognizing  resources  in  God  beyond  what  he  has  been  pleased  to  explain 
to  man.  God  has  not  exhausted  himself  in  making  revelations  to  man.  If  we  could 
see  clearly  we  should  see  that  "  providential"  and  "  miiaculous"  are  convertible  terms. 

III.  The  relation  op  providence  to  moral  Law.  This  may  be  put  into  a 
sentence.  It  is  the  executor  of  its  sanctions.  The  rewards  of  obedience  and  tlie 
penalties  of  disobedience  are  not  things  deferred  until  some  yet  far-distant  day.  They 
are  continually  operating  in  all  spheres,  private  and  public.  And  what  we  call 
"  providence  "  is  the  agency  in  their  distribution.  But  our  "  providence  "  differs  from 
"  fate,"  or  the  pagan  conoeption  of  the  "  furies,"  because  it  is  the  working  of  an 
infinitely  wise  aud  good  Being,  who  acts  upon  comprehensive  knowledge  and  sound 
judgment. 

IV.  The  relatiok  of  providence  to  nations.  Here  we  take  one  single  point. 
Nations  have  a  corporate  life,  so  they  are,  as  it  were,  individuals,  with  a  distinct 
individual  character  and  action.  Just  as  God  uses  the  individual  man  for  his  purposes, 
so  he  uses  the  individual  nation.  For  the  characteristics  of  nations,  see  Greece,  Rome, 
Germany,  France,  etc.  The  natural  expression  of  a  nation's  character  or  genius 
becomes  the  providential  agency  for  carrying  out  God's  purposes.  Illustrate  the  con- 
quering genius  of  Babylon  under  Nebuchadnezzar  doing  God's  work  in  the  destruction 
of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  The  fact  that  a  nation  employed  as  an  executor  is  still  in 
God's  control,  is  shown  in  God's  judging  that  nation  for  evils  that  become  manifest  in 
its  doing  of  that  executive  work.  Efficient  illustrations  may  be  found  in  the  move- 
ments and  enterprises  of  the  European  nations  during  the  last  century. — B.  T. 

Ver.  3. — Sympathy  of  hodiea  with  distress  of  mind.  The  prophet  is  only  seeing  in 
a  vision  something  that  is  going  to  happen  by-aud-by.  But  the  scene  presented  to  him 
is  so  terrible  that  he  cannot  exult  in  it,  though  it  is  the  overthrow  of  an  enemy's  city. 
He  is  deeply  distressed,  and  the  mental  anguish  finds  its  response  in  acutest  bodily 


m  tHE  BOOK  OS"  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAS.     [ch.  xxl  i— 11 

pains.  The  "loins"  are  referrefi  to  in  Scripture  as  the  seat  of  the  sharpest  pains 
(Eztk.  xxi.  6  ;  Nah.  ii.  10).  The  most  familiar  illuslration  of  the  sympathy  between 
body  and  mind  is  the  expression  of  mental  emotinn  by  tears.  Ministers  ai:d  nubile 
spealsers  know,  from  bitter  experience,  how  nervous  excitement  stands  related  to  sharp 
bodily  pain  and  serious  bodily  depression.  The  connection  may  be  seen  in  Job,  in 
lii'zekiah,  in  the  Apostle  Paul,  and  in  David,  who,  with  vigorous  poetical  figures 
describos  the  bodily  distress  which  accompanied  his  months  of  restniining  himself, 
in  his  hardness  and  impenitence :  "  When  I  kept  silence,  my  bones  waxed  old  through 
my  roaring  all  the  day  long." 

I.  SotJL  AND  BODY  ARE  KIN.  OuT  normal  condition  is  the  perfect  harmony  of  the 
two,  so  that  the  soul  only  uses  the  body  for  good  and  right  purposes ;  and  the  body 
responds  perfectly  to  all  the  demands  which  the  soul  makes  upon  it.  Combat  the  Idea 
that  the  body  is  evil,  or  that  evil  lies  In  matter,  and  so  our  grtat  effort  should  be  to  get 
free  of  our  bodies.  The  true  triumph  is  to  win  the  use  of  our  body,  or,  as  the  Apostle 
Paul  puts  it,  to  get  "  the  body  for  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  for  the  body." 

IL  Body  mat  master  soto.  This  is  the  abnormal  condition  into  which  men  have 
jiassed.  They  are  practically  ruled  by  "sensations"  which  dominate  the  will,  and 
so  the  mass  of  men  are  merely  animated  bodies,  in  whom  the  soul  is  silenced  and 
crushed.  Illustrate  by  the  demoniacs  in  our  Lord's  time,  In  whom  the  man  was 
crushed  by  the  vice. 

III.  SouIj  should  cokteol  body.  This  is  the  recovered  normal  condition  and 
relation ;  and  to  energize  the  soul  unto  a  full  and  efBcient  mastery  and  use  of  the 
body  is  precisely  the  work  of  the  Divine  redemption.  The  indwelling  Spirit  of- God  is 
a  new  life  for  the  soul,  in  the  power  of  which  it  may  overcome  the  body  and  the 
world.— E.  T. 

Ver.  9. — 7%e  work  of  the  iconoclaat.  "  Fallen,  fallen  is  Babylon,  and  all  the  images 
of  its  gods  he  hath  broken  unto  the  ground."  Eecent  researches  have  disclosed  the  fact 
that  there  were  three  sieges  of  Babylon  during  the  time  of  Isaiah — in  B.O.  709  by 
S:irgon,  and  in  703  and  691  by  Sennacherib.  Mv.  George  Smith,  writing  of  the  last  of 
these  three  sieges,  says,  "  Babylon  was  now  wholly  given  up  to  an  infuriated  soldiery ; 
its  walls  were  thrown  down,  its  temples  demolished,  its  people  given  up  to  violence 
and  slavery,  the  temples  rifled,  and  the  images  of  the  gods  brought  out  and  broken 
in  pieces."  Herodotus  is  our  authority  for  the  supposed  aversion  of  the  Medes  and 
Persians  to  all  images.  "They  not  only  thought  it  unlawful  to  use  images,  but 
imputed  folly  to  those  who  did  so."  But  modern  n  searches  do  not  confirm  tlie  state- 
ment of  Herodotus,  and  we  need  see  in  the  destruction  of  the  Babylonian  idols  no  more 
than  the  signs  of  a  humiliatina;  and  overwhelming  conquest.  Cyrus  has  been  hitherto 
regarded  as  a  Persian  and  monotheist ;  it  is  now  argued  that  he  was  an  Elamite  and 
a  polytlieist.     Illustrating  the  subject,  we  note — 

I.  Some  men's  life-wokk  is  building  up.  They  make  businesses;  they  found 
families;  they  start  theories;  they  commence  organizations;  they  build  churches;  they 
initiate  societies.  Such  men  are  full  of  schemes.  Moses  founds  a  nation.  David 
organizes  a  kingdom.  Paul  establishes  a  Christian  society  in  the  Q-entile  world. 
Wesley  begins  a  sect. 

II.  Some  men's  life-work  is  kkbpino  up.  They  cannot  begin.  They  are  not 
fertile  in  resources.  Initial  diflicuUies  crush  them.  But  quiet  perseverance,  good 
faithful  work,  enables  them  well  to  sustain  what  others  have  beiinn. 

III.  Some  men's  life-work  is  bkbakino  down.  As  was  Carlyle's.  He  broke  down 
society  shams,  and  conceits  and  hypocrisies  of  modern  thouiiht.  So  Mahomet  broke 
down  corrupt  Christianity.  The  sceptic  is  an  iconoclast ;  but  he  breaks  down  for  the 
pleasure  of  breaking  down.  The  critic  is  an  iconoclast;  but  he  only  attacks  the  evil. 
The  reformer  must  often  be  an  iconoclast;  but  he  breaks  down  only  that  he  may 
rebuild.  Sometimes  things  roach  such  a  pass  that  they  cannot  be  reformed,  and  then 
"  destruction  cometh  from  the  Lord,"  whatever  agents  he  may  use ;  as  in  the  old  world, 
Sodom,  captivity  of  Israel,  destruction  of  Babylon,  etc. — E.  T. 

Var.  10. — Ood's  people  threshed  and  winnowed.  Isaiah  was  familiar  with  tlie 
threshing  and  winnowing  processes,  and  what  was  in  his  mind  may  be  presented  to 


OH.  XXL  1—17.]    THE   BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  849 

ouw.  In  the  East,  the  threshing-floor  is  prepared  upon  some  level  spot,  on  high  ground. 
The  soil  is  beaten  liard,  clay  is  laid  over  it  and  rolled;  this  soon  dries  in  the  heat  of  the 
sun,  and  makes  a  firm  clean  floor.  Sometimes  horses  or  oxen,  tied  together  and  led 
round  in  a  circle,  tread  out  the  corn-grains ;  but  the  more  general  plan  is  to  use  a  sort 
of  sled  made  of  thick  boards,  four  or  five  feet  in  length,  with  many  pieces  of  flint  or 
iron  set  firmly  in  the  wood  of  the  under  surface.  This  is  drawn  over  the  sheaves,  as 
they  are  laid  on  the  threshing-floor,  by  a  pair  of  oxen.  The  winnowing  is  done  by 
throwing  up  the  heap  with  a  large  shovel,  so  that  the  wind  may  separate  the  lighter 
chaff  from  the  heavier  grain.  The  familiar  word  "  tiibulation,"  it  will  be  remembered, 
is  taken  from  the  Latin  word  tribulitm,  a  heavy  threshing-roller.  The  comparison  of 
severe  oppression  or  affliction  to  threshing  is  a  common  one.  We  may  work  the  figure 
out  by  saying — Life  is  God's  floor ;  his  people  are  the  corn  laid  upon  it ;  dispensations 
of  providence  are  the  sharp  threshing-instruments ;  but  their  working  only  proves  how 
anxious  God  is  for  the  final  good  of  his  people  ;  and  over  their  separating  and  refining 
he  anxiously  aud  lovingly  presides.  The  reference  of  the  text  is  to  Judah,  suffering 
under  Babylonian  oppression.  Isaiah  sees  the  fall  of  Babylon,  and  he  would  gladly 
have  reported  that  the  success  of  its  enemies  would  prove  a  permanent  relief  to  Judah  ; 
but  alas !  he  only  sees  more  trouble,  and  heavier  trouble  still,  in  store  for  his 
country. 

I.  'I'HKBSHINQ   AND  WINNOWING   ABB   ALWAYS   TRYING  PEOOBSaES.        They  CrUsh   and 

cut  and  bruise ;  they  seem  to  fling  away  as  we  fling  away  worthless  things.  And  the 
answering  providential  dealings  of  God  try  faith,  try  patience,  try  emiurance,  try 
submission.  They  are  trying  only  because  they  must  be.  No  man  would  bruise  his 
com,  if  it  could  be  separated  from  its  husk  in  snnie  simpler  and  easier  way.  When 
we  think  of  the  work  God  would  do  in  us — get  tho  corn  of  goodness  quite  free  from 
the  husk  of  evil — then  the  wonder  is  that,  even  with  such  threshing-instruments  of 
trouble,  suffering,  humdiation,  disappointment,  as  he  uses,  he  yet  can  accomplish  so 
great  a  result.  Only  Divine  grace  can  make  such  means  adequate  to  such  an  end. 
On  this  dwell  further. 

II.  ThBBSHINO  and  winnowing  abb   PEOCESSBS  having  a   GRA0I0U8   BND   IN  VIEW. 

That  end  is  variously  stated.  It  is  "  holiness  ; "  it  is  our  "  sanctification ; "  it  is  know- 
ing how  rightly  to  use  these  "  vessels  of  our  bodies ;  "  it  is  "  likeness  to  Christ ; "  it  is 
"  meeiness  for  the  inhuritarice  of  the  saints  in  the  light;"  it  is  the  "liberty  of 
righteousness."  God  would  have  the  grain  clean,  free  from  all  chaff,  or  dust,  or  straw ; 
it  must  be  "  meet  for  the  Master's  use."  The  ends  of  Divine  threshing  are  the  further 
ends  sought  by  the  Divine  redemption.  God  forms  a  people  for  himself;  by  provi- 
dential threshings  and  winnowing:s,  he  beautifies  them  for  himself. 

III.  The  trying  process  may  be  borne  ip  wb  keep  the  geaciods  end  in  view. 
"  No  affliction  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but  grievous."  Yet  does  the  child 
of  God  yield  submissively,  singing  his  restful  refrain,  and  saying,  "  Our  light  affliction, 
whicli  is  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight 
of  glory."  Even  in  view  of  further  threshing-times,  Judah  may  be  quiet;  they  would 
but  be  God's  threshings,  with  a  view  to  final  good. — E.  T. 

Ver.  11. — Tlie  watchman's  response.  "  Dumah,"  meaning  "  silence,"  is  probably  a 
mystical  prophetic  name  for  Edom.  It  seems  that  Edom  was  at  this  time  in  a  con- 
dition of  humiliation  and  depression  that  is  well  represented  by  the  night-time.  As 
the  uight  passes,  Edom  calls  to  Isaiah,  as  the  prophet-watchman,  asking  how  much  longer 
the  darkness  is  to  last.  Isaiah  cannot  return  a  comfortable  aud  satisfying  answer;  he 
can  only  say,  "  If  this  night  of  trouble  passes,  it  will  but  give  place  to  another."  The 
prophet  foresees  a  short  day  of  prosperity  followed  by  a  new  night  of  trouble.  "  The 
words  sum  up  the  whole  future  of  Edom,  subject  as  it  was  to  one  conqueror  after 
another,  rising  now  and  then,  as  under  Herod  and  the  Bomans,  and  then  sinking  to  its 
present  desolation." 

L  Night-times  or  life  have  theib  mission.  They  stand,  in  private  life,  for  tho 
times  in  which  we  are  put  aside  from  active  work,  compelled  to  rest.  In  national  life 
they  stand  for  the  times  in  which  national  enterprise  is  chocked  by  calamities,  invasions, 
plagues,  famines,  etc.  It  is  found  that  night  has  an  important  and  necessary  place 
in  the  economy  of  nature.    Isaac  Taylor  has,  in  a  very  interesting  way,  proved  th.,t 


350  THE  BOOK  OP   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxl  1— 17. 

one  or  two  absolutely  dark  nights  in  »  year  are  essential  to  the  well-heing  of  Tegetation. 
Besting-times  are  important  for  individual  growth,  and  national  calamities  are  found 
to  bear  directly  on  the  conquest  of  national  evils  and  the  culture  of  national  virtues. 
We  may  thank  God  that  in  our  moral  life  he  never  gives  continuous  day,  but  relieves 
the  overstrain  by  recurring  nights. 

II.  NioHT-TiMEB  OF  LIFE  HAVE  THEiB  BELIEFS.  There  are  the  moon  and  stars  to 
shine  in  them ;  and  they  presently  give  place  to  the  "  garish  day."  Pain  is  never 
intense  for  more  than  a  little  while.  The  light  of  love  and  friendship  and  sympathy 
relieves  the  darkness  of  snffering.  National  calamities  develop  national  unity  and 
energy,  that  presently  issue  in  national  triumph  and  stability ;  as  is  well  illustrated 
in  Prussia's  night-time  when  she  was  humiliated  by  Napoleon  L  Out  of  that  night- 
time came  German  unity,  and  the  recovery  of  German  territory.  "  Our  light  afiSiciion, 
wliioh  is  hut  for  a  moment." 

III.  Night-times  of  life  have  their  returns.  They  are  like  the  tunnels  on 
some  of  our  railways.  We  are  scarcely  out  of  one,  and  enjoying  the  open  sky,  the  free 
air,  and  the  sunshine,  before  we  rush  screaming  into  another.  "  If  there  be  a  morning 
of  youth  and  health,  there  will  come  a  night  of  sickness  and  old  age ;  if  a  morning  of 
prosperity  in  the  family,  in  the  public,  yet  we  must  look  for  chano;es.''  And  such 
returns  of  trying  experiences  are  so  essential  for  our  moral  training,  that  it  is  the  most 
serious  calamity  to  an  individual,  or  to  a  nation,  that  they  should  be  spared  them. 
"  Because  they  have  no  changes,  therefore  they  forget  God."  "  Moab  hath  been  at 
ease  from  his  youth,  and  hath  not  been  emptied  from  vessel  to  vessel,  neither  hath  he 
gone  into  captivity;  therefore  his  taste  remained  in  him,  and  his  scent  hath  not 
changed."  Only  of  the  heavenly  and  the  sinless  world  may  it  be  said,  "  There  is  no 
night  there."  These  two  thoughts  may  suggest  an  effective  conclusion.  No  explana- 
tions can  avail  for  more  than  just  the  piece  of  life  now  over  us.  We  cannot  know 
God's  meaning  for  us  until  the  whole  of  life  is  before  us,  and  we  can  fit  together  the 
missions  of  the  darkness  and  the  light.  Well  did  our  Lord  quiet  our  restless  desire  to 
read  the  mystery  of  life  by  saying,  "  Ye  shall  know  hereafter."  And  David  turned 
away  from  the  mystery,  saying,  "  I  shall  be  satisfied,  when  1  awake,  with  thy  likeness." 
And  nobody  can  ever  know  the  meaninc;s  of  a  life  if  he  fixes  attention  only  on  its  night- 
times. They  are  the  shades  in  the  picture,  necessary  to  bring  out  the  picture,  but  they 
are  not  the  picture.  We  must  rise  to  the  outlook  of  God,  of  whom  it  is  said,  "  The 
darkness  and  the  light  are  both  alike  to  thee." — B.  T. 

Ver.  15. — The  grievousneis  of  war.  "  For  before  the  swords  have  they  fled,  before  the 
drawn  sword,  and  bufore  the  bent  bow,  and  before  the  pressure  of  war."  The  figures 
imply  that  the  people  are  conquered,  their  camp  or  city  taken,  and  they  pursued  and 
cut  down  by  a  relentless,  blood-thirsty  enemy.  As  this  subject  is  a  familiar  one,  and 
illustrations  lie  ready  to  hand,  only  divisions  need  be  given.  The  grievousnesi  of  war 
may  he  shown — 

I.  In  the  saoeifiobs  it  deuands. 

II.  In  the  lives  it  destroys. 

III.  In  the  treasure  it  wastes.  The  Franco-German  War  of  1870  cost  France 
£371,000,000,  ami  Germany  at  least  £47,000,000.  The  American  Civil  War  cost 
«;330,000,000.     The  Crimean  War  cost  England  £167,000,000. 

IV.  In  the  passions  it  engenders. 

V.  In  the  national  alienations  it  leaves  behind. 

VI.  In  the  suffeeinqs  it  entails.  In  the  Franco-German  War,  one  hundred  and 
thirty  thousimd  soldiers  died  on  the  battle-fields  or  in  the  hospitals,  and  thousands 
more  lost  limbs  and  health.  What  a  wail  of  sorrow  from  thousands  of  homes  and 
liearts  such  lacts  bring  to  our  ears  ! 

VII.  In  the  results  it  secures.  Which  are  usually  most  insignificant  when 
<<ompared  with  the  expenditure  and  loss. 

Talk  of  the  glory  of  war !  The  Bible  reminds  us  how  much  wiser  and  how  much 
(ruer  it  is  to  talk  of  its  grievousness. — B.  T. 

Ver.  17. —  The  security  of  the  Divine  Word.  "They  shall  ...  for  the  Lord  God  i  f 
Israel  hath  spoken  it,"    This  sentence  intimates  that  God,  as  the  God  of  Israel,  has  .i 


CH.  xxn.  1—26.1    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


S61 


quarrel  with  Kedar,  and  at  the  same  time  that  his  power  and  omniscience  will  secure 
the  fulfliBient  of  the  threatening. 

I.  The  Divine  foreknowledge.  "  All  things  are  naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes 
of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do ; "  "  He  knoweth  the  end  from  the  beginning."  God 
may  be  pleased  to  leave  man  his  freedom,  and  yet  he  may  so  know  man,  and  each  man, 
as  to  see  beforehand  how  each  will  act  in  given  circumstances;  and  the  Divine  plans 
can  he  based  on  such  foreknowings  and  fore-estimatings. 

II.  The  Divine  utterancbb  abb  based  on  such  foreknowlbdqb.  God  may  not 
be  pleased  to  tell  us  all  he  knows,  but  we  may  have  perfect  confidence  in  what  he  tells. 
Revelation  is  limited,  hut  it  is  absolutely  trae  within  its  limitation,  because  based  on 
complete,  adequate  knowledge. 

III.  Time  proves  the  harmony  of  the  utterance  and  the  events.  Because 
the  utterance  was  made  in  full  view  of  the  event.  To  God  the  unexpected  never 
happens,  and  his  Word  never  fails.  Men  do,  in  their  freedom,  just  exactly  what  Gk)d, 
surveying  their  work,  anticipated  that  they  would  do.  "  He  will  let  none  of  his  words 
fall  to  the  ground." 

IV.  Uhb  confidence  in  God's  utterances  involves  the  practical  obdebino 
OF  OUB  conduct.  This  applies  to  prophetic  anticipations ;  but  how  much  more  to 
announcements  of  ever-working  principles  1  There  are  no  exceptions  to  the  great  laws 
of  righteousness,  which  are  Jehovah's  Word  to  men.  "  God  has  said,"  is  enough  for  us, 
and  it  may  shape  our  lives.  It  will  come  to  pass,  it'  the  "  Lord  God  of  Israel  hath 
spoken  it."— li.  T, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXn. 


Vers.  1 — 14. — ^A  Prophecy  against  Jebu- 
BALEM.  The  prophet,  present  in  Jerusalem, 
either  actually,  or  at  any  rate  in  spirit,  sees 
the  inhabitants  crowded  together  upon  the 
housetops,  in  a  state  of  boisterous  merri- 
ment (vers.  1,  2).  Outside  the  walls  is  a 
foreign  army  threatening  the  town  (vers. 
5 — T).  Preparations  have  been  made  for 
resistance,  which  are  described  (vers.  8 — 11); 
but  there  has  been  no  turning  to  God. 
On  the  contrary,  the  danger  has  but  made 
the  bulk  of  the  people  reckless.  Instead  of 
humbling  themselves  and  putting  on  sack- 
cloth, and  weeping,  and  appealing  to  God's 
mercy,  they  have  determined  to  drown  care 
in  drink  and  sensual  enjoyment  (vers.  12, 
13).  Therefore  the  prophet  is  bidden  to 
denounce  woe  upon  them,  and  threaten  that 
Jehovah  will  not  forgive  their  recklessness 
until  their  death  (ver.  14).  There  is  nothing 
to  mark  very  distinctly  the  nationality  of  the 
foreign  army ;  but  it  is  certainly  represented 
as  made  up  of  contingents  from  many  nations. 
Delitzsch  holds  that  the  Assyrian  armies 
were  never  so  made  up,  or,  nt  any  rate,  that 
the  nations  here  mentioned  never  served  in 
iU  ranks  ('Site  of  Paradise,' p.  237);  but 
this  is,  perhaps,  assuming  that  our  knowledge 


on  the  subject  is  more  oomplete  and  exact 
than  is  really  the  case.  It  is  almost  im- 
possible to  imagine  any  other  army  than  the 
Assyrian  besieging  Jerusalem  in  Isaiah's 
time.  Moreover,  the  particulars  concerning 
the  preparations  made  against  the  enemy 
(vers.  9 — 11)  agree  with  those  mentioned  in 
2  Chron.  xxxii.  3 — 5  and  30  as  made  by 
Hezekiah  against  Sennacherib,  And  the 
second  section  of  the  chapter  has  certainly 
reference  to  this  period.  It  seems,  there- 
fore, reasonable  to  regard  the  siege  intended 
as  that  conducted  by  Sennacherib  in  his 
fourth  year  (b.c.  701),  of  which  we  have  a 
brief  account  in  his  annals  (G.  Smith, 
'Eponym  Canon,'  p.  135,  U.  15—18). 

Ver.  1. — The  burden  of  the  vaUey  of  vision. 
"  The  valley  of  vision  "  is  only  mentioned 
here  and  in  ver.  S.  It  must  have  been  one 
of  the  deep  depressions  "near  Jerusalem  from 
which  there  is  a  good  view  of  the  town. 
The  LXX.  render,  "  the  burden  of  the  valley 
of  Zion."  What  aileth  thee  now  ?  Jerusa- 
lem is  addressed  by  the  prophet,  who  assumes 
the  r6U  of  a  spectator,  surprised  at  what  he 
sees,  and  asks  an  explanation.  That  thou 
art  wholly  gone  up  to  the  housetops.  Partly, 
no  doubt,  they  went  to  watch  the  enemy  and 
his  movements,  as  Eosenmiiller  says;  but 
still  more  for  feasting  and  revelry  (Judg. 
xvi.  27;  Neh.  viii.  16).  The  flat  roofs  of 
Oriental  houses  are  often  used  as  places  of 
recreation  and  entertainment,  especially  in 


352 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxu.  1—26. 


the  evening  (Shaw, '  Travels,'  p.  211 ;  Clmr- 
din,  'Voyages  en  Perse,'  voL  iv.  p.  116; 
Layard,  'Nineveh,'  vol.  i.  p.  177,  etc.). 

Ver.  2. — A  joyous  city  (comp.  ver.  13), 
Thy  slain  men  are  not  slain  with  the  svrord. 
It  ia  a  blockade  rather  than  a  siege.  Mun 
die,  not  of  wounds,  but  of  privations  (Lam. 
IV.  9).  Sennscherib  himself  says, "  Hezekiuh, 
like  a  caged  bird,  within  Jerusalem,  his 
royal  city,  I  confined ;  towers  round  about 
liim  I  raised ;  and  the  exit  of  the  great  gate 
of  his  city  I  shut"  (G.  Smith,  'Eponym 
Canon,'  p.  135,  11.  15—18). 

Ver.  S. — AU  thy  rulers  are  fled  together; 
nither,  all  thy  chief  men.  We  must  make 
Hllowauce  for  Oriental  hyperbole.  The 
meaning  is  that  numbers  of  the  principal 
men,  regarding  resistance  as  vain,  had  en- 
deavoured to  make  their  escape  from  the 
doomed  town,  but  had  been  captured  and 
l)0und  by  the  enemies'  archers.  All  that  are 
found  in  thee ;  rather,  belonging  to  thee.  The 
riference  is  to  those  who  had  made  their 
escape  and  were  Hoeing  far  away.  The 
archers  seize  them,  and  bind  them  all  toqether. 
We  often  see  a  number  of  captives  bound 
tdgtther  by  a  single  rope  iu  the  Egyptian 
bas-reliefs.  Which  have  fled  from  far; 
rut  her,  which  were  flying  far  away. 

Ver.  4. — Therefore  said  I.  The  prophet 
turns  from  the  description  of  the  scene  before 
him  to  an  account  of  his  own  feelings.  Look 
away  from  me,  be  says  ;  "  leave  me  free  to 
vent  my  sorrow  without  restraint;  I  wish 
for  no  consolation — only  leave  me  to  myself." 
Because  of  the  spoiling.  The  word  used 
sometimes  means  "  destruction ; "  but "  spoil- 
ing "  is  a  bettei  rendering  here.  Sennacherib 
describes  his  "spoiling"  of  Jerusalem  on 
this  occasion  as  follows :  "  Thirty  talents  of 
gold,  eight  hundred  talents  of  silver,  precious 
carbuncles,  great  .  .  .  stones,  couches  of 
ivory,  lofty  thrones  of  ivory,  skins  of  buffa- 
loes, horns  of  buffaloes,  weapons,  everything, 
a  great  treasure,  and  his  daujjhters,  the 
eunuchs  of  his  palace,  male  musicians,  and 
female  musicians,  to  Nineveh,  the  city  of 
my  dominion,  did  Hezekiah  send  after  me  " 
(G.  Smith,  '  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  135, 11.  29— 
87).  To  what  straits  Hezekiah  was  reduced 
in  order  to  collect  a  sufRoicnt  amount  of  the 
precious  metala  we  leajn  from  2  Kings  xviii. 
1,5,  10. 

Ver.  5. — It  i»  a  day  ...  by  the  lord; 
rather,  there  is  a  day  to  the  Lord ;  or,  the  Lord 
has  a  day.  God  has  in  reserve  such  a  day ; 
and  it  will  assuredly  arrive  in  due  course. 
Hence  the  prophet's  grief.  In  the  valley  of 
vision.  We  may  suppose  that  Hezekiah, 
before  he  made  the  suljmisoion  recorded  in 
2  Kings  xviii.  H  and  iu  the  '  Cylinder  of 
Sennacherib,'  col.  iv.  11.  28,  29,  tried  the 
chances  of  battle  against  the  Assyrians  in 
this  valley,  and  that  Isaiah  had  a  prophetic 


vision  of  the  fight.  Braaking  down  the 
walls ;  rather,  undermining.  The  Assyrian 
sculptures  show  numerous  examples  of  this 
practice.  Sometimes  swords  or  spears  arc 
used  to  dislodge  the  stones  of  the  wall,  some- 
times crow-bars  or  axes  (see  '  Ancient 
Monarchiei,'  toL  ii.  p.  82).  Crying.  Some 
regard  this  word,  and  also  that  translated 
"the  walla"  in  the  preceding  clause,  ae 
proper  names,  and  render  the  passage,  "  Kii 
undermincth,  and  Shoa  is  at  the  mount " 
(Ewald,  Cheyne,  Luzzatto).  But  it  seems 
unlikely  that  "Kir"  would  bo  mentioned 
twice. 

Ver.  6. — Elam  bare  the  quiver.  Elam,  the 
country  extending  from  the  Zagros  range  to 
the  Lower  Tigris,  and  watered  by  the 
Ohoaspes,  Eulajus,  Pasitigris,  and  other 
rivers,  was  an  independent  kingdom  from  a 
very  early  date  (Gen.  xiv.  1,  9),  and  in 
Isaiah's  time  was  generally  hostile  to 
Assyria.  Sargon,  however,  relates  that  he 
conquered  a  portion  of  the  oouutry,  planted 
colonies  in  it  from  the  more  western  parts 
of  his  empire,  and  placed  both  colonists  and 
natives  under  the  governor  of  Babylon  ('  Be- 
cords  of  the  Past,'  voL  ix.  p.  16).  It  is  thus 
quite  possible  that  both  Sargon  and  Sen- 
naclierib  may  have  had  a  contingent  of 
Elamites  in  their  armies.  With  chariots  of 
men  and  horsemen;  rather,  with  troops  of 
men  (who  were)  horsemen  (oomp.  ch.  xxi.  7). 
Kir  uncovered  the  shield,  "  Kii "  is  men- 
tioned in  2  Kings  as  the  place  to  which 
Tiglath-Pileser  transported  the  inhabitants 
of  Damascus  (xvi.  9),  and  by  Amos  (ix.  7) 
as  the  original  country  from  which  the 
Syrians  were  derived.  It  has  been  recently 
identified  withKirkhl,  near  Diarbekr,orwith 
Kirruri,  in  the  Urumiyah  country  (Cheyne) ; 
but  neither  identification  is  more  than  pos- 
sible. (On  uncovering  shields  as  a  prelimi- 
nary to  engaging  in  battle,  see  Caesar, '  De 
Bell.  Gall.,' ii.  21.) 

Ver.  7.— And  it  shall  oome  to  pass,  etc. 
This  verse  and  the  next  are  closely  con- 
nected, and  introduce  the  new  subject  of 
the  preparatious  which  the  Jews  made  for 
their  defence.  Translate,  And  it  came  to 
past,  when  thy  choicest  valleys  were  /uZJ  of 
chariots  (or,  troops),  and  the  horsemen  had  set 
themsehes  in  array  toward  the  gate,  that  then 
did  he  draw  off  the  covering  of  Judah,  etc. 

Ver.  8. — The  covering  of  Judah  was  that 
which  hid  their  weakness  either  from  them- 
selves or  from  the  enemy — probably  the 
former.  God  drew  this  aside,  and  they 
suddenly  saw  their  danger,  and  began  to 
think  how  they  could  best  defend  them- 
selves. Arras  were  the  first  things  needed. 
The  armour  of  the  house  of  the  forest.  "  The 
house  of  the  forest "  was  probably  that  por- 
tion of  the  palace  of  Solomon  which  he  had 
called  "  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  " 


OH.  xxn.  1— 26,]    THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


iJDu 


(1  Eioga  vii.  2 — 5).  This  was,  it  wouM 
seem,  used  as  an  armoury  (1  Kings  x.  17 ; 
xit.  27;  ch.  zxxix.  2). 

Ver.  9.— ^Ya  have  seen  also  .  .  .  are  many ; 
lather,  ye  law  also  .  ,  .  were  many.  The 
breaches  of  the  city  of  David.  "  The  city  of 
David  "  may  be  here  a  name  for  Jerusalem 
generally,  as  "  the  city  where  David  dwelt" 
(th.  xxix.  l),orit  may  designate  the  eastern 
hill,  where  David  fixed  his  residunoe  (2  Sara. 
V.  7;  Neh.  iii,  15,  16,  25;  xii.  37).  In 
2  Chron.  xxxii.  5  we  read  that  Hezekiah  at 
tbia  time  "  built  up  all  the  wall  that  was 
broken,  ami  raised  it  up  to  the  towers,  and 
another  wall  without,  and  repaired  Millo  in 
the  city  of  Da vid"  where  a  particular  part 
of  Jerusalem  seems  certainly  to  be  meant. 
Ye  gathered  together  the  waters  of  the  lower 
pool.  The  arrangements  made  by  Hezekiah 
with  respect  to  the  water-supply  at  the  time 
of  Sennacherib's  Invasion,  seem  to  have  beun 
the  following :  He  found  on  the  north  of 
the  city,  where  the  Assyrian  attack  was 
certain  to  be  delivered,  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
Damascus  gate,  a  pool  or  reservoir  (ch.  vii. 
3),  fed  by  a  conduit  from  some  natural 
source,  which  lay  open  and  patent  to  view. 
Tho  superfluous  water  ran  off  from  it  by  a 
"  brook  "  (2  Chnm.  xxxii.  4),  which  passed 
.lown  the  Tyropoeon  valley,  and  joined  the 
Kedron  to  the  south-east  of  Ophel.  His 
first  step  was  to  cover  over  and  conceal  the 
open  reservoir,  and  also  tlie  "  brook  "  which 
ran  from  it,  at  least  as  far  as  the  northern 
city  wall,  to  prevent  their  use  by  the 
Assyrians.  He  then  further  made  a  conduit 
underground  (2  Chron,  xxxii.  30)  within 
'  tlio  city,  along  the  Tyropoeon  depression,  to 
a'  second  reservoir,  or  "  pool,"  also  within  the 
city,  which  could  be  freely  used  by  the 
iuhabitiints  (see  ver.  11;  and  conip.  Eoelus. 
xlviii.  17).  Further,  it  is  probable  that  he 
carried  a  conduit  from  this  second  pool,  under 
the  temple  area,  to  the  "  fount  of  the  Virgin  " 
on  the  eastern  side  of  Ophel,  and  thence 
further  conveyed  the  water  by  a  tuunel 
through  Ophel  to  the  "pool  of  Siloam." 
(This  last  maybe  the  work  here  alluded  to.) 
The  inscrip*ion  recently  discovered  at  this 
pool  is  probably  of  Hezekiah's  time  (see 
'  Quarterly  Statement '  of  Palest.  Expl.  Fuid 
for  April,  1881,  p.  70). 

Ver.  10. — Ye  have  numbered  .  .  .  haye 
broken  down;  rather,  ye  numbered  .  .  .  ye 
broke  down.  Tlie  "munbering"  was  pro- 
bably in  order  to  see  how  many  could  be 
spared  for  pulling  down.  The  repair  of  the 
walls  with  materials  thus  furnished  was  a 
sijrnof  extreme  haste  and  urgency.  It  would 
seem  from  vers  7,  8  that  the  repairs  were 
not  begun  until  the  town  was  invested. 

Ver.  11. — Ye  made'also  a  ditch  |  rather,  o 
l%lie,  or  reservoir  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  9). 
But  ye  have  not  looked  onto   the  maker 


thereof;  i.e.  you  have  not  looked  to  God 
who  in  his  eternal  counBcls  foreknew  and 
decieed  a,ll  the  steps  that  you  are  taking 
for  your  defence  (see  below,  ch.  xxxvii.  26). 

Ver.  12.— In  that  diy.  The  day  alluded 
to  in  \  er  7,  when  the  choice  valleys  In  the 
neighbourhood  of  JeruSiilom  wore  first  seen 
to  be  full  of  a  hostile  soldiery,  and  the  As 
Syrian  horsemen  were  ol  )served  drawing;  them- 
selves up  opposite  the  gates.  Such  a  sl;;ht 
constituted  an  earnest  call  upon  the  people 
for  immediate  repentance  Baldness  (comp. 
ch.  XV.  2;  Mic.ih  i.  16;  Amos  viii  10).  It 
has  been  said  that "  baldness  "  was  forbidden 
by  the  Law  (Oheyne);  but  this  is  not  Bo, 
absolutely.  Baldness  was  wliolly  forbidden 
to  the  prioots  (Lev.  xxi.  5 ;  colnp.  Eiek.  xliv. 
20) ;  and  certain  peculiar  modes  of  shaviug 
the  hair,  the  beard,  and  the  eyebrows,  prac- 
tised by  idolatrous  nations,  wi  re  prohibited 
to  all  the  people  (Lev.  xix.  27  ;  Deut.  xiv.  2). 
But  such  sliavi.  ig  of  the  head  as  was  practised 
by  Job  (Job  i.  20)  and  other  pious  men,  Was 
not  forbidden  to  Inymen,  any  more  than  the 
weaxing  of  saekcloth.  It  was  regarded  as  a 
natural  mode  of  exhibiting  giief. 

Ver.  13. — And  behold  jjy  and  gladntes 
(comp.  ver.  2).  "  Let  us  eut  and  drink,  f  r 
to-morrow  we  die,"  is  a  cnr.,mnn  sentiment, 
if  not  a  common  expression.  U  heis  been 
supposed  to  have  given  rise  to  the  Egyptiau 
practice  of  carrying  round  the  model  of  a 
mummy  to  the  guests  at  feasts.  According 
to  the  Greeks,  Sardanapalus  had  a  phrase 
very  like  it  engraved  upon  Lis  tomb  ('  An- 
cient Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  p.  500).  Sailorb 
have  often  acted  upon  it,  When  they  found 
it  impossible  to  save  their  ship.  On  seeing 
their  city  invested,  a  p  rlion  of  the  inhabit- 
ants of  Jerusalem,  despairing  of  safety,  did 
as  sailors  have  done  so  frequently. 

Ver.  14. — It  was  revealed  in  mine  ears  by 
tho  lord  of  hosts ;  rather,  the  Lord  of  hosts 
revealed  hirnself  in  mine  eats,  saying.  This 
iniquity  shall  not  be  purged  from  you  till  ye 
die.  The  sin  of  turning  a  call  to  repentance 
into  an  excuse  for  rioting  an  1  drunkenness 
is  one  which  God  will  not  pardon.  It  im- 
plies a  hardness  of  heart  wliich  cannot  fail 
to  issue  in  final  impenitence. 

Vers.  16 — 24. — Prophecy  ox  thb  Deposi- 
tion OF  Shebna  and  thk  Elevation  of 
Eliakim.  In  its  first  and  simplest  applica- 
tion, this  section  predicts  the  fall  of  one 
state  ofiicial  and  the  advancement  of  an- 
other—matters, no  doubt,  of  some  impor- 
tance in  the  court  history  of  the  time,  but 
scarcely  (with  reverence  be  it  said)  of  such 
moment  as  to  be  worthy  either  of  prophetic 
announcement  or  of  di\mely  inspired  re- 
cord. It  has,  therefore,  been  generally  felt 
that  there  must  be  a  secondary  applioatiuu 

2  A 


354 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oa.  xxn.  1—25 


of  the  pMBage.  According  to  some,  the  two 
ufficials  represent  respectively  the  two  cove- 
nanta,  the  old  and  the  new;  according  to 
others,  they  stand  for  the  two  great  parties 
in  the  Jewish  state  of  the  time — that  which 
put  its  trust  in  Jehovah,  and  that  which 
leant  upon  heathen  alliances. 

Ver.  15.— The  Lord  God  of  hosti.  This 
form,  Adonay  Jehovah  TsahaSth  —  rarely 
used  by  Isaiah,  hut  occurring  above  in  vers. 
5,  12,  and  13 — seems  to  show  that  this 
beetion  is  in  its-  right  place,  being  intended 
as  a  sequel  to  the  description  of  Sennache- 
rib's siege.  This  treasurer.  The  word  "  this  " 
is  contemptuous.  That  translated  "trea- 
surer "  is  of  doubtful  import.  The  key  to  it 
is  probably  to  be  found  in  the  cognate 
noun,  translated  "  storehouse  "  in  2  Cliron. 
xxxii.  28,  and  "  store  "  in  1  Kings  ix.  19 ;  2 
Chron.  viii.  4,  6 ;  xvi.  4 ;  xvii.  12.  Trans- 
late, this  etorekei-per.  Shebua  (see  below, 
cl).  XXX vi.  2,  11,  22;  xxxvii.  2;  and  comp. 
2  Kings  xviii  18,  etc.).  The  name,  wliich  is 
not  found  elsewhere,  is  thought  to  be  Syriao 
rather  than  Hebrew,  and  Shebna  himself  is 
coujectmed  to  have  been  a  foreign  adven- 
turer, perhaps  "  a  refugee  from  Damascus  " 
(Oheyne).  (See  the  next  verse.)  Which  is 
over  the  house.  An  office  like  the  imperial 
prxfectus  palatio"  at  Rome,  or  the  Frankish 
"  mayor  of  the  palace  "  (see  Gen,  xli.  40 ; 
1  Kings  iv.  6;  xviii.  3).  At  this  time  it 
seems  to  have  been  the  highest  oflice  that  a 
subject  could  hold  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  21 ;  2 
Kings  xviii.  18,  etc.). 

Ver.  1 6.  —What  hast  thou  here  1  i.e.  what 
business,  or  what  right  ?  It  seems,  certainly, 
to  be  implied  that  Shebna  was  wholly  un- 
connected with  Jerusalem.  Whom  hast 
thou  here  f  i.e.  what  relations  ?  what  family  ? 
To  be  justified  in  hewing  out  a  large  tomb, 
Shebna  should  have  had  a  numerous  family 
for  whom  graves  would  be  needed.  Other- 
wise, his  excavation  of  a  grand  sepulchre 
was  merely  selfish  and  ostentatious.  As  he 
that  heweth  him  out  a  sepulchre  on  high. 
Jewish  tombs  of  any  pretension  were  gene- 
rally excaviitions  in  the  solid  rock,  on  the 
side  of  some  hill  or  mountain,  and  had  often 
a  very  elevated  position.  Tombs  exist  on 
the  slopes  of  all  the  hills  about  Jerusalem, 
but  are  most  numerous  on  the  eastern  side 
of  the  temple  mount,  which  slopes  steeply 
to  tlie  Kedron  valley.  A  square-topped  door- 
way leails  into  a  chamber,  generally  square, 
from  which  recesses,  six  or  seven  feet  long, 
two  broad,  and  three  high,  are  carried  into 
the  rock  horizontally,  either  on  a  level  with 
the  floor,  or  with  a  platform,  or  shelf,  half- 
way up  one  of  the  walls.  These  recesses 
hare  been  called  locidi.  After  a  body  had 
been  placed  in  one,  it  was  commonly  closed 
by  a  stone,  which  fitted  into  the  end,  and 


thus  shut  off  the  body  from  the  chamber. 
Chambers  had  sometimes  twelve  such  loculi. 
An  habitation  (comp.  Eccles.  xii.  5).  Wa 
must  not  suppose,  however,  that  the  Jewi, 
like  the  Egyptians  and  Etruscans,  regarded 
the  soul  as  inhabiting  the  tomb.  The  soul 
descended  into  shedl;  the  grave  wa«  the 
"  habitation  "  of  the  body  only, 

Ver.  17. — The  Lord  will  carry  thee  away 
with  a  mighty  captivity ;  rather,  the  Lord 
will  hurl  thee  away,  0  man,  with  a  hurling ; 
i.e.  "  will  hurl  thee  away  to  a  distanee."  It 
is  not  said  that  Shebna  would  be  a  captive. 
Will  surely  cover  thee ;  literally,  will  cover 
thee  with  a  covering  ;  i.e.  "  will  make  thee  ob- 
scure" (Eoseumiillor) — a  fitting  punishmeat 
for  one  who  aimed  at  attracting  attention 
and  making  himself  famous  (ver.  10). 

Ver.  18. — He  will  surely  violently  turn 
and  toss  thee,  etc. ;  literally,  rolling  lie  will 
roll  thee  with  rolling  l/ke  a  baU,  etc.  Into  a 
large  country.  Assyria,  or  perhaps  Egypt. 
If  Shebna  was  disgraced  on  account  of  his 
recommending  the  Egyptian  alliance,  he 
may  not  improbably  have  taken  refuge  with 
Tirliakah.  There  the  chariots  of  thy  glory 
shall  be  the  shame  of  thy  lord's  house; 
ratLer,  there  shall  be  the  chariots  nf  thy  glory, 
0  thou  shame  of  tliy  lord's  house.  His  chariots, 
in  which  he  gloried,  should  accompany  him, 
eitlier  as  spoil  tiiken  by  the  enemy,  or  as  the 
instruments  of  his  flight. 

Ver.  19.  —  I  will  drive  thee  from  thy 
station;  rather,  from  thy  post,  or  office 
(comp.  1  Chron.  xxiii.  28).  Shall  he  pull 
thee  down.  Jehovah  seemd  to  be  meant  in 
both  clauses  (oomp.  ch.  xxxiv.  IB).  The 
full  accomplisliment  of  this  prophecy  is  no- 
where declared  to  us.  We  merely  find  that, 
by  the  time  of  Eabshakeh's  arrival  A  Jeru- 
salem as  Sennacherib's  envoy  (ch.  xxxvi. 
2—4),  Shebna  had  lost  his  post  as  prefect 
of  the  p  'lace,  and  filled  the  lower  position 
of  scribe  or  secretary.  He  may,  however, 
have  been  subsequently  further  degraded, 
and  thereupon  he  may  have  fled  to  Egypt, 
as  Jeroboam  did  (1  Kings  xi.  40). 

Ver.  20.— In  that  day.  In  the  day  ot 
Shebna's  deposition  from  his  oflSoe  of  prefect 
of  the  palace.  My  servant  Eliakim.  On  the 
dignity  of  this  title,  when  given  by  God 
himself,  see  the  comment  on  ch.  xz.  3. 

Ver.  21.— With  thy  robe  .  .  .  with  thy 
girdle.  The  dress  of  o£Sce  worn  by  Shebna 
would  be  taken  from  him,  and  Eliakim 
would  be  invested  therewith.  The  "  robe  " 
is  the  long-sleeved  cloak  or  tunic  worn  com- 
monly by  persons  of  rank  ;  the  "  girdle  "  is 
probably  an  ornamental  one,  like  those  ol 
the  priests  (Exod.  xxviii.  39X  worn  over 
the  inner  tunic.  He  shall  be  a  father;  i.e. 
a  protector,  counsellor,'  guide  (comp.  Job 
xxiz.  16, "  I  was  a  father  to  the  poor :  and  the 
cause  which  I  knew  not  I  searched  out ").    I< 


OH.  xxiL  1— 25.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


355 


is,  perhaps,  implied  tliat  Shebna  had  not 
conducted  himself  as  a  "  father." 

Ver.  22. — The  key  of  the  honse  of  David 
will  I  lay  upon  his  shoulder.  A  key  would 
seem  to  have  been  the  special  badge  of  the 
prefect's  office,  which  included  the  control 
of  the  stores  (ver.  15),  and  the  general 
management  of  the  household.  It  was,  per- 
haps, a  part  of  the  form  of  inyestiture,  that 
.  the  key  should  be  first  laid  on  the  prefect's 
shoulder  and  then  delivered  into  his  hand. 
Among  the  Greeks  the  priests  of  Ceres  are 
Said  to  have  borne  a  key  on  tlieir  shoulder, 
permanently,  as  a  badge  of  office  (Callimach., 
'  Hymn,  ad  Oe;-erem,'  1.  45).  The  reference 
to  this  passage  in  Rev.  iiu  7  is  sufBcieiit  to 
show  that  Eliakim,  the  "  servant  of  Jthovah  " 
(ver.  20),  is,  to  a  certain  extent,  a  type  of 
Christ ;  perhaps  also  of  his  faithful  ministers 
(Matt.  xvi.  19  ;  John  xx.  23). 

Ver.  23. — I  win  fasten  him  as  a  nail  in 
a  sure  place  (comp.  Ezra  ix.  8 ;  Zech.  x. 
4).  The  idea  intended  to  be  expressed  is 
firmness  and  fixity  of  tenure.  He  shall  be 
for  a  glorious  throne  to  his  father's  house 
(compare  the  next  verse).  All  his  relations, 
even  the  most  remote,  shall  derive  honour 
from  him,  and  bask  in  the  sunshine  of  his 
prosperity.  So  shall  all  members  of  the 
family  of  God,  made  sons  of  God  by  adop- 
tion in  Christ,  participate  in  the  final  glory 
of  Christ  in  his  eternal  kingdom. 

Ver.  24. — All  the  glory.  According  to 
scriptural  notions,  the  "  glory  "  of  a  family 
consists  very  much  in  its  size  (Gen.  xv.  5 ; 
Pb.  cxxvii.  5,  etc.).  And  Christ's  glory 
in  his  final  kingdom  will  consist  greatly  in 
the  number  of  the  saved  (Eev.  vii.  4—9). 
The  offspring  and  the  issue ;  t.e.  the  flourish- 
ing scions,  and  the  despised  seedlings  alike. 
The  word  translated  "issue"  is  a  term  of 
contempt  (see  Ezek.  iv.  15).  From  the  ves- 
sels of  cups  ;  rather,  of  howlg  (comp.  Exod. 
xxiv.  6).  To  all  the  vessels  of  flagons; 
rather,  of  pitchers.  "  A  numerous,  undis- 
tinguished, family  connection  "  seems  to  be 
intended  (Delitzsch). 
Ver.  25. — Sequel  of  thk  Peophecy  con- 


cerning Eliaeim.  This  verse  has  been 
truly  called  "  an  enigma  "  (Kay).  It  is  im- 
possible to  understand  it  of  Shebna.  "  The 
nail  that  was  fastened  in  a  sure  place  "  can 
only  refer  to  the  nail  said  to  have  been  so 
fastened  in  ver.  23.  Are  we,  then,  to  under- 
stand that  Eliakim  too  will  experience  a  re- 
verse of  fortune  ?  But  then  all  the  force  of 
the  contrast  between  him  and  Shebna  would 
be  gone.  Is  it  not  possible  that  the  prophet, 
seeing  in  Eliakim  a  type  of  the  Messiah, 
and  becoming  more  and  more  Messianic  in 
his  utterances,  has  ended  by  forgetting  the 
type  altogether,  and  being  absorbed  in  the 
thought  of  the  antitype  ?  He,  the  nail,  so 
surely  fixed  in  his  eternal  place,  would 
nevertheless  be  "  removed  "  for  a  time,  and 
then  "  be  cut  down  and  fall "  (comp.  ch.  lii. 
14;  liii.  8).  At  the  same  time  would  be 
"out  off"  the  burden  which  Mebsiah  bore 
(ch.  liii.  12,  "  He  bare  the  sin  of  many  "). 

Ver.  25. — In  that  day.  Not  the  day  of 
Shebna's  fall,  certainly  (ver.  20),  but  some 
other.  Is  not  the  day  that  of  Christ's  earthly 
mission,  when  it  seemed  as  if  his  people  were 
about  to  acknowledge  him  (Matt.  xxi.  1 — 1 1 ; 
Mark  xi.  1—10 ;  Luke  xix.  29—40),  and  his 
throne  to  he  established,  but  suddenly  Mes- 
siali  was  '•  cut  off"  (Dan.  ix.  26)— stricken 
for  the  transgression  of  his  people  (ch.  liii. 
8)?  The  burden  that  was  upon  it  shall  he 
out  off.  The  great  burden  upon  the  Messiah 
was  the  load  of  human  sin  which  he  had  to 
bear.  "  He  himself  bare  our  sins  in  his  own 
body  on  the  tree"  (1  Pet.  ii.  24).  By  his 
death  this  burden  was  "  cut  off"  (1  John  ii. 
2 ;  2  Cor.  v.  19 ;  Eph.  ii.  16 ;  Col.  ii.  14). 
For  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it.  The  double 
attestation,  at  the  beginning  and  at  the  end 
of  the  verse,  is  a  mark  of  the  vast  importance 
of  the  announoement  contained  in  it,  which 
is,  in  fact,  the  germ  of  the  great  doctrine  of 
the  atonement. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — xsaiah  weeping/or  the  daughter  of  his  people  a  typt  of  Christ  lamenting 
over  Jerusalem.  Isaiah  was  in  many  respects  a  type  of  Christ.  His  name,  which  signi- 
fies "Salvation  of  Jehovah,"  is  a  near  equivalent  of  "Jesus,"  which  means  "Jehovah 
is  Saviour."  Tradition  says  that  he  was  of  royal  lineage,  like  Jesus.  The  sphere 
of  his  teaching  fcas  in  the  main  Jerusalem,  where  our  Lord's  principal  discourses  were 
delivered.  He  reproved  sin,  yet  pitied  the  sinner,  like  Jesus  (see  Homiletics  on  ck> 
XV.  5).  He  was,  like  Jesus,  martyred  at  Jerusalem.  We  may,  therel'ore,  withool 
impropriety,  regard  the  "bitter  weeping"  of  ver.  4  as  in  some  respect  the  counterpart 
of  our  Lord's  lament  on  the  day  of  his  triumphal  entry  into  the  city,  when  he  beheld 
it  from  the  brow  of  Olivet.     They  were  alike  in  several  respects. 

I.  Both  were  caused  by  pkophetic  vision  ov  the  hmkors  of  a  biegb.    In  Isaiah's 


356  TUE  BOOK  OF  THE  ruOl'UET  ISAUH.    [ou.  iiu.  1— 25. 


time  the  siege  had  begun.  The  enemy  was  iiivesiing  the  place  (ver.  7).  But  his 
teaiB  floweii  on  account  of  the  future  "spoilint;"  of  his  people  on  that  "day  of  trouble 
and  treading  down  and  perplexity  ;  "  when  there  was  to  be  "  breaking  down  of  walls 
and  crying  to  the  mountains  "  (vei-.  5),  and  Elani  was  to  "  bear  the  quiver,"  and  Kir  to 
"  uncover  the  shield."  Jesus  wept  because  the  days  were  coming  upon  Jerusalem,  when 
"  her  enemies  would  cast  a  trench  about  her,  and  compass  her  round,  and  keep  Ler  in 
on  every  side,"  and  at  last  "  lay  her  even  with  the  ground,  and  her  children  witkin 
her"  (Luke  xix.  43,  44).  In  the  one  case  Rome  was  the  enemy,  in  the  other  Assyria, 
both  equally  truculent.  In  the  one  case  final  destruction  impended ;  iu  the  othi  r  a 
punishment  far  short  of  final  destruction,  but  still  a  very  severe  ptmishment.  In  b,.th 
cases  grievous  sins  had  provoked  the  catastrophe,  yet  the  thought  of  these  did  not 
prevent  the  tears  from  being  shed  on  account  of  it. 

II.  Both  derived  theib  bitterness  teom  the  fact  that  the  snFFBBEU  was  of 
KIN  TO  the  mourner.  "  I  will  weep,"  said  Isaiah,  "  because  of  the  spoiling  of  the 
daughter  of  my  people."  The  woes  of  other  peoples  shocked  anil  distressed  him  tn  some 
extent  (ch.  xv.  5;  xvi.  9 — 11;  xxi.  3,  4) ;  but  not  as  those  of  his  own  nation,  his 
"  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh."  And  so  it  was  with  Jesus.  Patriotism  moved  the 
spirits  of  both  mourners,  and  rendered  their  grief  especially  poignant. 

III.  Both  were  aggravated  by  the  thought  that  the  suffering  was  unex- 
fEOTED.  Isaiah  tells  us  that  at  Sennacherib's  siege  no  preparations  had  been  made 
to  resist  the  foe,  until  the  choice  valleys  were  full  of  troops,  and  the  horsemen  set  in 
array  at  the  gates  (vers.  7 — 10).  Our  Lord  gives  it  as  the  climax  of  the  horrors  at  the 
siege  by  'I'iius,  that  Jerusalem  had  not  "known  the  day  of  her  visitation"  (Iiuke 
xix.  44).  Jerusalem  was  at  the  time  expecting  the  Messiah,  who  would  enable  them 
to  cast  ofif  the  Roman  yoke.  She  did  not  know  that  her  Messiah  had  come.  Just 
when  she  was  looking  for  a  glorious  dejiverance,  there  came  a  crushing  disaster.  So 
Hezokiah  was  probably  L  oking  for  victory  by  the  help  of  Egypt,  when  he  had  to  make 
the  most  abject  submission^to  strip  the  temple  in  order  to  satisfy  the  cravings  of  the 
conqueror  for  "  spoil,"  and  to  see  a  large  part  of  his  people  carried  into  captivity 
(G.  Smith, « Eponym  Canon,'  p.  134). 

Vers.  15 — 24. — Shebna  and  Elidkim :  a  moral  lesson.  It  ig  a  remark  of  Bishop 
Butler's,  that  the  moral  government  of  God,  though  it  may  be  very  imperfectly  carried 
out,  is  at  any  rate  beguu,  in  this  world.  Many  virtues  have  natural  rewards,  and 
many  vices  natural  punishments,  attached  to  them.  Again,  though  undoubtedly  the 
righteous  do  suffer  a  large  share  of  affliction,  and  the  ungo  lly  are  often  seen  in  great 
prosperity,  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  very  signal  instances  from  time  to  time  manife-t 
themselves,  of  the  punishment  of  the  wicked  in  this  life  by  a  grievous  downfall,  and  the 
reward  of  the  righteous  by  an  exaltation  to  worldly  greatnt«s  and  honour.  The  most 
signal  instance  presented  to  us  in  Scripture  of  the  double  Nemesis  is  that  of  Haman 
and  Mordecal  in  the  Book  of  Esther.  In  that  most  striking  tale,  the  whole  history  of 
the  two  men  is  set  before  us,  and  the  rise  of  the  one  and  fall  of  the  other  are  inter- 
connected in  a  way  that  lends  peculiar  interest  to  the  narrative.  Here  we  have  simply 
a  moral  contrast,  leading  to  a  contrast  of  result. 

I.  A  MORAL  contrast.  1.  Shebna,  selfish,  isolated,  vain-glorious;  noted  for  his 
display  of  chariots,  like  Absalom  (2  Sam.  xv.  1);  no  "father"  to  the  people  under 
his  charge;  no  good  adviser  of  the  king  his  master;  chiefly  desirous  of  handing  his 
name  down  to  posterity  by  a  magnificent  tomb;  perhaps  not  even  a  worshipper  of 
Jehovah.  2.  Eliakim,  God's  "servant;"  kind  and  thoughtful  for  others;  regarded  as 
"  a  father,"  not  only  by  the  people  of  Jerusalem,  but  by  the  entire  "  house  "  or  tribe 
of  Judah ;  looked  up  to  by  a  large  body  of  relations,  of  whom  mauy  were  )poot  and  of 
low  rank,  and  willingly  shnring  his  prosp  rity  with  them;  an  honest  and  prudent 
counsellor  to  his  king;  a  faithful  worshipper  of  the  One  God,  whose  unity  his  name 
proclaimed.  No  two  dwellers  at  the  same  court,  no  two  servants  of  the  same  king, 
could  well  be  more  dill'erent  in  chaiacter,  in  circumstances,  in  moral  desert. 

II.  A  contrast  op  result.  1.  Shebna,  degraded  from  his  office,  is  forced  for  B 
time  to  serve  in  one  of  very  inferior  dignity.  Then  he  is  either  further  degraded  or  so 
dissatisfied  with  his  position  that  he  cannot  boar  to  retain  it.  He  becomes  a  refugee  iu 
»  distant  laud,  an  exile^  an  outcast.    2.  Eliakim,  advanced  into  Shebna's  place,  ha*  tht 


OB.  ixn.  1— 25.]    THE  BOOK  OP  TSK  PROPHET  tSATAfl.  S"? 

key  of  the  house  of  David  placed  upon  his  shoulder,  becomes  his  king's  most  trusty 
counsellor  and  representative,  is  a  glory  and  a  support  to  his  father's  house,  and 
retains  his  position,  if  not  till  his  death,  at  any  rate  for  a  long  period. 

In  estimating  the  extent  to  which  God's  moral  government  is  carried  on  in  this 
world,  such  instances  as  those  of  Haman  and  Mordecai,  Shebna  and  Eliakim,  should 
by  no  means  be  omitted  from  our  calculation.     History  contains  very  many  such  cases. 

Vers.  Ifi — 24. — Shebna  and  EUahim:  an  allegory.  Shebna,  set  over  the  house 
of  the  king  by  the  king  himself,  but  unfaithful  in  his  ofiSce,  worldly,  carnal,  fond  of 
grandeur  and  display,  typifies  the  old  covenant,  and  the  priesthood  to  which  it  was 
committed — a  priesthood  which  looked  more  to  the  enrichment  of  the  treasury  than  to 
the  pure  service  of  God  (Mark  vii.  H),  and  which  was  not  above  the  weakness  of 
raising  up  grand  sepulchres  for  its  members  in  a  conspicuous  place  (1  Mace.  xiii. 
27 — 30).  This  priesthood,  found  wanting,  had  to  be  cast  away,  and  a  better  priest- 
hood, after  a  different  order,  to  be  instituted.  Eliakim  typifies  this  new  priesthood — 
a  priesthood  "  made,  not  after  the  law  of  a  carnal  commandment,  but  after  the  power 
of  an  endless  life"  (Heb.  vii.  16).  Primarily,  he  tyjjifies  Christ  himself,  the  true 
"  Servant  of  theliord"  (ch.  xlii.  1—4;  xliii.  10;  xlix.  3,  6;  lii.  13,  etc.),  the  perpetual 
High  Priest  of  his  Church,  the  eternal  Possessor  of  "  the  key  of  David,  who  openeth, 
and  no  man  shutteth;  and  shutteth,  and  no  man  openeth"  (Rev.  iii.  7),  who  "hath 
the  keys  of  hell  aud  of  death"  (Rev.  i.  18).  Eliakim  was  "a  father"  to  Judah  and 
Jerusalem ;  among  Christ's  names  is  that  of  "  Everlasting  Father ''  (ch.  ix.  6). 
Eliakim  was  "as  a  nail  fastened  in  a  sure  place ; "  Christ  is  gone  up  where  he  "for 
ever  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  Gh)d"  (Heb.  x.  12).  Eliakim  bad  a  "glorious 
throne;"  Christ's  throne  is  that  "great  white"  one,  which  is  set  in  heaven  (Rev. 
XX.  11),  out  of  which  "come  lightnings,  and  thunderings,  and  voices"  (Rev.  iv.  5). 
On  Eliakim  hung  all  the  members  of  his  father's  house ;  on  Christ  depends,  for  pardon, 
for  peace,  for  life,  for  glory,  every  true  Christian.  Secondarily,  Eliakim  may  be 
regarded  as  typifying  the  faithful  minister  of  Christ,  to  whom  the  power  of  the  keys 
is  communicated  in  a  certain  modified  sense  (Matt.  xvi.  19),  who,  binding  and  loosing 
according  to  Christ's  ordinance,  binds  and  looses  effectively,  so  that  none  can  undo  his 
work,  and,  as  a  faithful  steward  in  the  household  of  Christ,  dispenses  the  good  things 
committed  to  his  charge  by  his  King  and  Master.  The  faithful  minister  will  not  blench 
before  the  powers  of  evil,  any  more  than  Eliakim  did  before  Rabshakeh  (ch.  xxxvi. 
11,  21) ;  he  will  be  "  a  father"  to  the  people  of  God,  i.e.  a  protector,  a  guide,  a  friend ; 
and  with  those  who  "  hang  upon  him  "  ho  wiU  always  be  ready  to  share  both  his  material 
and  his  spiritual  blessings. 

Ver.  25. — Meuiah's  burden  and  Messiah's  death.  How  Christ's  death  atones  for  sin 
we  know  not,  and  need  not  too  curiously  inquire.  But,  if  plain  words  have  a  plain 
meaning,  it  is  impossible  to  doubt  that  this  is  the  teaching  of  Scripture.  "By  his 
stripes  we  are  healed  " (ch.  liii.  5) ;  "  He  is  the  Propitiation  for  our  sins  "  (1  John  ii.  2) ; 
"One  died  for  all"  (2  Cor.  v,  14).  It  is  quite  possible  that  there  is  something  in  the 
nature  of  things,  which  we  cannot  fathom,  that  made  it  impossible  for  man's  sins  to  bi' 
forgiven  unless  God  died  for  them.  Our  wisdom  is  to  avoid  curious  speculation,  ainl 
to  view  the  matter  on  its  practical  side.  Thus  viewed,  it  manifestly  calls  on  us  lur 
three  things. 

I.  Intense  hatred  of  sin,  on  AccoOTiT  op  its  having  caused  Messiah's  death. 
If  un  animate,  or  even  an  inanimate,  thing  has  caused  the  death  of  one  we  loved,  how 
bitterly  we  detest  it  1  Often  we  cannot  bear  to  look  upon  it,  nay,  even  to  see  a  thing 
of  the  same  kind.  How,  then,  should  we  hate  sin — hateful  in  itself,  hateful  in  its 
effects,  hateful  in  its  origin,  most  hateful  in  that  it  caused  the  death  of  the  one  Man 
who  alone  of  all  that  have  ever  lived  did  not  deserve  to  die  1  And  he,  moreover,  One 
who  dearly  loved  us,  who  came  down  from  heaven  for  us,  lived  a  life  of  privation 
and  suffering  for  us,  at  last  died  for  our  sakes. 

II.  Intense  love  of  Cheist,  on  account  op  his  hating  died  for  us.  "  Greater 
love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends. "  But  Christ 
died  for  his  enemies.  Sin  is  an  insuperable  barrier  between  God  and  man,  sets  them  at 
variance,  makes  them  adversaries.     And  till  Christ  died  man  could  not  be  forgiven 


358  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  TSAIAH.     [ch.  xxii.  1—25. 


So  he  died  for  those  with  whom  he  was  at  enmity!  And  died  by  what  a  death  I 
1.  More  painful  probably  than  any  other.  2.  Considered  at  the  time  more  disgraceful. 
3.  Aggravated  by  the  insults  of  lookers-on.  4.  Regarded  as  bringing  a  man  under  a 
curse. 

III.  Intense  love  op  God  the  Father,  on  account  of  hib  oivino  his  Son  to  die 
FOR  u8l  We  cannot  realize  the  love  of  the  Father  for  the  Son ;  but  we  cannot  doubt 
that  it  transcends  any  love  known  on  earth.  Yet  Ite  gave  him  to  suffer  all  that  he 
suffered — and  why  ?  For  us.  Because  he  loved  us.  As  our  Lord  himself  says,  "  God 
30  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth 
in  him  should  not  pnrish,  but  have  everlasting  life"  (John  iii.  16).  If  the  knowledge 
of  this  fact  fail  to  stir  up  love  towards  the  Father  in  our  souls,  we  must  be  "  past 
feeling"  (Eph.  iv.  19),  utterly  dead  to  any  high  motive,  scarcely  better  than  "brute 
beasts"  (J ude  10). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 14. — Judgment  upon  Jerusalem.  I.  The  prophet  as  spectator.  The 
valley  of  vision  seems  to  mean  Jerusalem  as  a  whole,  round  about  which  are  mountains 
(Ps.  cxxv.  2);  the  city  is  spoken  of,  when  compared  with  the  surrounding  mountains, 
as  the  "  inhabitant  of  the  valley,"  otherwise  as  the  "  rock  of  the  plain  "  (Jer.  xxi.  13  ; 
comp.  xvii.  3).  If  Isaiah  is  gazing  from  his  house  in  the  lower  town,  the  city  would 
appear  as  in  a  valley  in  relation  to  the  mountains  inside  as  much  as  those  outside 
(IJelitzsch).  He  sees  the  whole  population  crowded  together  on  the  house-tops,  and 
the  air  is  filled  with  the  uproar  of  merriment.  The  house-tops  were  places  of  resort  at 
festival-time  (Judg.  xvi.  27  ;  Neh.  viii.  16). 

II.  The  mikth  of  despair.  It  was  famine  and  pestilence  which,  forcing  the  people 
into  despair,  had  brought  about  this  mad  rebound  of  hollow  merriment.  The  slain  of 
the  city  had  not  been  slain  upon  the  fii^ld ;  but  the  crowding  in  of  fugitives  from  the 
cf)untry  had  occasioned  the  plague.  The  description  reminds  us  of  Zephaniah's  picture  of 
Nineveh  :  "  This  is  the  rejoicing  city  that  dwelt  carelessly,  that  said  in  her  heart,  1  am, 
•nd  there  is  none  beside  me  "  (ii.  16).  And  again  we  think  of  scenes  in  connection 
with  the  plagues  in  the  Italian  cities  of  the  Middle  Asjes,  when  revelry  and  story-telling 
are  said  to  have  gone  on  amongst  groups  who  had  withdrawn  themstlves  from  the 
horrors  around  them.  How  terrible  the  contrast  between  the  dark  background  of 
calamity  and  this  hollow  feverish  exhibition  of  merriment  in  the  foreground  I  •'  I  said 
of  laughter.  What  is  it?"  Let  us  thank  God  for  the  precious  gift  of  humour.  Its 
light,  lambently  playing  upon  the  sternest  and  most  awful  scenes  and  imagery  of  the 
mind,  was  given  to  relieve  the  tragedy  of  life.     In  melancholy  minds  the  source  of 

■  humour  is  deeply  seated.  But  how  different  the  cheerfulness  which  springs  from  the 
sense  that  the  scheme  of  things  is  sound  and  right,  that  "  God's  in  his  fieaven,  all's 
rij;ht  with  the  world,"  and  that  which  confronts  a  hopeless  future  with  mad  defiance! 
There  is  something  lurid,  ominous,  in  the  lattei,  fall  of  foreboding;  and  the  scene  in 
Jerusalem  may  be  dwelt  upon  as  typical  of  the  ill-timed  mirth  of  the  sinner  when 
danger  is  impending,  soon  to  be  quenched  in  silence  and  night.  The  rulers  have  fled 
away  from  the  devoted  city ;  in  the  face  of  the  enemy  they  have  flung  down  their  bows 
and  yielded  themselves  prisoners.    All  is  lost. 

III.  The  forecast  of  doom.  1.  The  grief  of  the  prophet.  In  warm  patriotism  he 
identifies  himself  with  his  city  and  his  people,  and  gives  way  to  bitter  tears ;  a  proto- 
type of  Jesns  in  later  days,  looking  on  the  doomed  city,  perhaps,  from  sonje  similar  point 
of  view.  We  are  remindeii  also  of  Jeremiah,  whose  heart  "  fainted  "  under  a  similar 
sense  of  the  miseries  of  the  people,  and  who  exclaims,  "  Oh  that  my  head  were  full  of 
waters,  and  mine  eyes  a  fountain  of  tears,  that  I  might  bewail  the  slain  of  my  people ! " 
(iv.  31;  ix.  1).  These  are  living  examples  of  compassion,  aud  of  true  patriotic 
feeling,  including  a  true  Church  feeling.  "  We  are  altogether  unworthy  of  being 
reckoned  in  the  number  of  the  children  of  Gk)d,  and  added  to  the  holy  Church,  if  we 
do  not  dedicate  ourselves  and  all  that  we  have  to  the  Church  in  such  a  manner  that 
we  are  not  separate  from  it  in  any  respect.  Especially  the  ministers  of  the  Word  ought 
to  be  moved  by  this  feeling  of  grief,  becauie,  being  appointed  to  keep  watch  and  to  look 


OH.  xxn.  1— 25.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  859 

at  a  distance,  they  ousht  also  to  groan  when  they  perceive  the  tokens  of  approaching 
ruin  "  (Calvin).  2.  The  siege  and  capture.  "  We  seem  to  see  ami  hear  the  last  hurry- 
ing stages  of  the  siege  and  capture"  (Cheyne).  In  one  of  the  valleys  the  hosts  of  the 
enemy  are  seen  thickly  trampling  and  spreading  dismay  and  confusion  all  around.  As 
the  undermining  of  the  walls  by  the  siege  artillery  goes  on,  cries  of  woe  beat  against 
the  surrounding  hills^  and  are  echoed  back.again.  The  terrible  famed  bowmen  of  Blam 
(comp.  Jer.  xlix.  35)  and  the  people  of  Kir,  together  forming,  as  it  would  seem,  the 
vanguard  of  Assyria,  are  seen  advancing.  The  valleys  about  the  city,  all  teeming 
with  associations  of  the  past — ^Kedron,  Gihon,  Eephaim,  Hinnom — are  ploughed  by 
hoofs  of  horses  and  wheels  of  chariots;  and  the  foe  is  drawn  up  in  column,  ready  to 
enter  the  "  great  gate,"  so  soon  as  it  shall  be  broken  down  by  the  battering-rains. 
3.  The  state  of  the  inhabitants.  Jehovah  draws  aside  the  curtain  from  Judah.  This 
may  mean  (1)  he  expo.ses  their  weakness  to  the  enemy ;  or  (2)  he  takes  away  the  blind- 
ness of  the  people  to  their  danger.  Probably  the  former.  In  either  case  the  hand  of 
an  overruling  Providence  is  recognized.  The  "forest  house,"  or  arsenal  built  by 
Solomon  on  Zion,  is  examined  (1  Kings  vii.  2 ;  x.  17 ;  cf.  ch.  xxxix.  2).  The  "  city  of 
David,"  i.e.  the  fortress  on  Mount  Zion,  is  inspect^  by  the  leading  men,  and  the 
numerous  breaches  in  the  walls  are  observed.  They  survey  the  houses,  and  take 
material  from  them  to  repair  the  wall.  They  concentrate  the  water-supply  in  one 
reservoir — the  "  lower  pool,"  and  form  a  basin  between  the  two  walls.  These  prepara- 
tions may  be  compared  with  those  of  Hezekiah  (2  Ohron.  xxxii.  2 — ^5). 

IV.  Fatal  forgetfulness.  All  these  precautions  would  be  too  latel  A  dreadful 
word  I  And  why  ?  1.  The  Divine  counsel  has  been  forgotten.  "  Hast  thou  not  heard 
long  ago,  how  I  have  done  it;  and  of  ancient  times,  that  I  have  formed  it?  now  have 
I  brought  it  to  pass"  (ch.  xxxvii.  26).  These  harpers,  and  violinists,  and  tabret- 
players,  and  feasters  have  not  "regarded  the  work  of  Jehovah,  nor  considered  the 
operation  of  his  hands"  (ch.  v.  12).  Self-reliance  may  be  religious,  or  it  may  mean  an 
attempt  to  be  independent  of  God,  and  so  end  in  alienation  from  God.  How  feeble 
and  how  foolish  policy  must  become  if  from  the  first  it  ignores  the  Divine  will,  and  at 
the  last  only  comes  to  acknowledge  a  destiny  above  human  might  and  human  calcula- 
tion I  The  idea  of  all  that  will  he  exists  in  the  mind  of  God ;  we  may  know  something 
of  bis  meaning  by  constantly  consulting  the  "living  oracles,"  by  truthful  thinking, 
by  loyal  acting — ^in  a  word,  by  communion  with  the  living  God.  Wiiat  can  attention 
to  ramparts  and  ditches  and  reservoirs  avail,  if  men  have  not  found  their  defence  in 
God  ?  If  he  be  trusted,  what  is  there  to  fear?  If  he  be  denied,  what  can  shield  from 
calamity  ?  "  The  fate  of  Jerusalem  is  said  to  have  been  fashioned  long  ago  in  God. 
But  Jerusalem  might  have  averted  its  realization,  for  it  was  no  absolute  decree.  If 
Jerusalem  repented,  that  realization  would  be  averted  "  (Delitzsch).  2.  Divine  warn- 
ings have  been  neglected.  God  had  called — ^in  that  day;  at  every  critical  time.  By 
many  ways  he  speaks — by  the  living  and  passionate  tones  of  prophet  and  brother  man, 
by  the  general  course  of  events,  by  the  touch  of  sorrow,  by  the  hints  of  personal 
experience.  There  is  a  time  for  everything  under  the  sun;  to  know  our  opportunity 
makes  the  wisdom  of  the  world  ;  to  know  the  "  time  of  our  visitation  "  is  the  wisdom 
of  heaven.  But,  alas  I  the  Jews  knew  it  not;  "rushing  to  the  banquet-table  with 
despair  in  their  hearts,  and  wasting  the  provisions  which  ought  to  have  been  husbanded 
for  the  siege."  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink ;  for  to-morrow  we  die."  The  sensualism  of 
despair  (Cheyne).  When  the  light  of  life,  bright  faith  and  hope  toward  God,  dies  out, 
what  remains  but  to  counterfeit  its  glow  by  some  artificial  illumination,  kindled  from 
the  tow  of  physical  excitement  ?  A  love  of  life  which  scoffs  at  death  (Delitzsch).  'Tis 
dangerous  to  scoff;  to  scoff  at  the  great  scoffer  Death,  what  is  this  but  the  last  extreme 
of  self-abandonment  ?  And  does  not  despair  imply  the  last  sin  we  can  commit  ?  And 
is  not  recklessness  its  evidence?  And  follows  there  not  upon  all  this  the  shadow  of  a 
state  unforgiven,  a  mind  eternally  unreconciled  ?  Who  can  but  tremble  as  he  meditates 
on  these  things?  "  Probably  if  the  reai  feeling  of  the  great  mass  of  worldly  men  were 
expressed,  they  could  not  bo  better  expressed  than  in  the  language  of  Isaiah :  '  We 
must  soon  die,  at  all  events;  we  cannot  avoid  that — it  is  the  common  doom  of  all. 
And  since  we  have  been  sent  into  a  dying  world  ;  since  we  have  had  no  agency  in  being 
placed  here;  since  it  is  impossible  to  prevent  this  doom, — we  may  as  well  enjoy  lie 
while  it  lasts,  and  give  ourselves  to  pleasure  and  revelry.    While  we  can,  we  will  take 


360  TflE  BOOK  OE*  THE  tROPSET  tSAIAS.    [ch.  xxn.  1—25 

our  comfort, (iTicI,  when  death  comes,  we  will  submit  to  it,bpcaiise  we  cannot  avoid  it'" 
(Barnes).  But  such  argumentatinn  cannot  really  satisfy  the  conscience.  Blessed  the 
Word  which  evermore,  in  the  mercy  ol  the  Eternal,  calls  to  repentance,  and  reminds  us 
that  "now  is  the  acce[itable  time,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation  " I — J. 

Vers.  15 — 19. — Denunciation  of  Shehiia.  I.  Shbbna  the  house  steward.  He  was 
the  steward  of  the  household — a  high  office,  as  »o  may  see  from  the  allusion  in  ch. 
xxxTi..3 ;  xxxvii.  2.  Once  it  was  held  by  a  king's  son  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  21 ;  cf.  1  Kings 
iv.  6 ;  xviii.  3).  This  officer  stood  nearest  the  king,  and  had  the  domestic  affairs  of  the 
palace  under  his  superintendence.  The  office  of  the  mayor  of  the  palace  under  the 
Merovingian  kings  of  France  has  been  compared  with  it.  It  is  thoufiht  that  Shebna 
was  not  a  native  Israelite,  as  his  father's  name  is  not  mentioned.  Possibly  he  was  a 
Syrian  from  Damascus,  and  a  leader  of  the  Egyptianizing  party,  whose  perverse  and 
crooked  policy  in  collecting  the  subsidy  for  Egypt  is  denounced  by  the  prophet  in 
ch.  XXX.  12 

II.  Ills  TBiBE  AND  OSTENTATION.  He  was  busy  hewing  out  for  himself  a  family 
sepulchre  in  the  rock.  We  realize  what  is  meant  when  we  see  figured  in  works  of  art 
tlie  rnajrnificent  rock-built  tombs  of  Persia,  of  Lydia  and  Phrygia  and  Lycia,  of  Phoeni- 
cia, and  the  vast  pyramid-tdrp.bs  of  Egypt.  There  kings  desired  to  "lie  in  honour,  each 
in  his  own  house"  (ch.  xiv.  18).  So,  too,  grandees — Eshmunazar  King  of  Sidon, 
Jo-seph  of  Arimathsea,  etc. — built  thi-mselves  sepulchres  in  their  lifetime.  At  Rome  we 
look  upon  the  famous  tomb  of  Hadrian,  now  called  the  Castle  St.  Angelo,  and  the  tomb  of 
Csecilia  M  etella  upon  the  Appian  Way,  the  pyramid  of  Cistius.  What  may  we  learn  from 
the  habit  of  tomb-building?  It  expresses  man's  protest  against  the  doom  of  mortality. 
On  the  tomb  of  Sardanapalus  is  said  to  have  been  writton,  "  Eat,  drink,  and  love ;  for  the 
rest  is  1  ttle  worth;"  and  yet  the  tomb  itself  is  a  witness  that  there  hovers  before  the 
mind  the  thought  of  the  future,  in  which  man  would  still  live  and  still  be  remembered 
bj'  his  fellows,  even  though  only  by  means  of  the  lifeless  stone.  Thus  it  expresses 
man's  infinite  longings,  the  cravings  of  a  nature  that  notl]iMg  but  eternity  can  satisfy. 
There  was,  then,  something  great,  something  even  sublime,  in  this  tonib-building  instinct. 
"The  |Kiwer  of  acting  for  a  distant  object,  of  realizing  distant  good,  aud  reaching 
lorward  to  it  over  an  intervening  period  of  labour,  has  something  moral  in  it."  Sfet, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  motive  may  be  something  of  a  much  lower  order — vanity,  self- 
exaliation.  So  the  prophet  views  the  uudertaking  of  Sbebua.  He  has  no  right,  as 
a  foreigner,  thus  to  Hp()ropriate  the  soil  of  the  sacred  city,  the  slope  of  one  of  its  hills. 

III.  The  denunciation.  In  the  vehemence  of  his  indignation,  the  prophet  declare.s 
that  Jehovah  will  clutch  the  offender  tightly,  will  roll  him  as  a  l>all,  and  toss  him  into 
a  broad  land;  thither  he,  with  the  chariots  on  which  he  has  been  rolling  about  the  city, 
shall  go  to  die  !  Notice  the  opposition  between  the  ujight  of  Jthovah  and  the  weak- 
ness of  mere  man,  however  exalted.  Shall  mortal  man  attempt  to  rival  the  Eternal, 
proudly  seeking  to  perpetuate  his  memory  on  earth  (compare  the  thoughts  in  Jobiv.17  ; 
X.  5;  xxii.  2)?  The  leading  Hebrew  teaching  recurs — the  in-ignificance  of  ephemeral 
and  frail  man  in  jresence  ot  the  mighty,  just,  and  ever-living  Gud.  "  The  renown  oi 
that  sepulchre  which  Shebna  had  built  is  indirectly  contrasted  with  the  ignominy  which 
quickly  followed  it."  "That  the  mask  of  his  high  rank  might  not  screen  him  from 
the  prediction,  the  prophet  expressly  states  that  the  office  which  he  holds  aggravate  t 
his  guilt  and  renders  him  more  detestable.  Let  princes,  therefore,  if  they  do  not  wish 
to  expose  themselves  and  tbeir  houses  to  reproaches,  learo  to  act  with  judgmout  in 
appointing  men  to  hold  office  .  .  .  Infer  that  God  is  highly  displeased  with  thai  ambi- 
tion by  which  men  seek  to  obtain  undying  renown  in  the  world  instead  of  being  satis- 
W'  A  with  those  honours  which  they  enjoy  during  life,  (jod  puaishes  their  haughtiness 
aud  presumption,  and  causes  those  things  which  they  wished  to  be  the  records  of  their 
glory  to  become  their  disgrace  and  shame  "  (Calvin). — J. 

Vers.  20 — 25. —  Instalment  uf  Kliakim.     I.  A  servant  of  Jehovah.     So  he  is  cha- 
racterized.    The  title  may  be  of  personal,  spiritual,  import,  or  of  official;  or  both  may  • 
lie  blended,  as  in  the  case  of  Isaiah  himself  (ch.  xx.  3);  or  there  may  be  a  separation 
of  the  two.     Unhappy  for  a  nation  or  for  a  Church  if  the  true  servants  of  the  Eternal, 
the  true  devotees  of  right  and  truth,  are  excluded  from  the  places  of  honour  and  influ- 


eii.  itn.  1— 5?6.]    tHil  BOOK  Of  tnfe  ?tlOfllfiT  tSAtAH.  Ut 

etice;  or  if  the  " ministers  and  stewards"  of  Divine  mysteries  are  ho  only  technically 
and  officially.  The  true  servant  must  in  any  case  be  called.  Ho  must  not  pugh  himself 
forward,  but  must  be  drawn  forward  by  invisible,  Divine  leading.  He  does  not  "achieve 
greatness,"  but  it  is  "  tlirnst  upon  him."  "  In  that  day  I  will  call  to  my  servant." 
The  words  suggestively  remind  us  of  that  princiijle  oi  Divine  selection  which  runs 
through  the  order  of  the  world.  In  this,  in  every  day,  the  "  right  men  "  are  wanted 
for  every  place.  In  this  day,  too,  there  is  much  excitement  about  education.  What 
men  can  do  by  the  instruction  of  the  intellect  is  very  limited  ;  in  quiet  places  and  in 
hidden  ways,  unknown  to  the  schools,  the  Almighty  is  growing  men  and  training  men 
lill  the  time  is  ripe  for  their  service,  and  his  call  is  heard, 

II.  His  INVESTITURE.  1.  It  is  the  solemn,  syriibolieal  way  of  transferring  an  office. 
We  think  of  Elijah  finding  the  son  of  Shaphat  ploughing  with  twelve  yoke  of 
oxen,  and  casting  his  mantle  upon  him  as  he  passed  by  (1  Kings  xix.  19).  Thatyr&s, 
ti.e  prophet's  simpler  dress  ;  this  is  the  tunic  of  a  man  of  rankand  state.  The  girdle 
was  an  essential  article  of  Oriental  dress,  worn  by  all  classes  and  by  both  sexes.  The 
lineness  of  its  quality  denoted  the  rank  of  the  wearer.  Here  it  was  probably  similar  to 
that  worn  by  the  priests  (Exod.  xxviil.  39  ;  xxxix.  29).  Josephus  describes  it  as 
made  of  linen  so  fine  that  it  looked  like  the  slough  of  a  snake,  and  it  was  embroidered 
with  flowers  of  scarlet,  blue,  purple  ('  Ant.,'  iii.  7,  2).  This  is  the  only  place  where 
the  word  ahneth  is  used  for  any  but  a  priestly  girdle.  2.  The  girdle  is  in  other  ways 
symhoUc.  Jehnvah  "girds  kings  with  a  girdle,"  and  " ungirds  them  according  to 
his  pleasure"  (Job  xii.  18).  Thus  to  he  "girded  with  str.nj.th"  is  a  symbol  of 
Divine  invigoration  (1  Sam.  ii.  4);  to  be  "girded  with  gladness,"  of  refreshment 
(Ps.  XXX.  11).  "Have  your  loins  giit  about  with  truth"  (Eph.  vi.  14);  "Gird  up 
the  loins  of  your  mind,  be  sober,  and  hope  to  the  end" — are  noble  Christian  exhorta- 
tions, carrying  with  them  all  the  Ibrce  of  the  old  Oriental  imagery.  To  be  ungirt  is 
a  way  of  describing  nervelessness,  lack  of  strength  and  manhood  ;  and  the  very  picture 
of  the  good  servant  is  of  one  "  whose  loins  are  girt  about,  whose  lamp  is  burning." 

III.  The  sriBiT  and  functions  of  the  steward.  1.  He  is  to  be  like  a  father  to 
the  people.  An  appropriate  term  for  the  chief  man  of  a  town  or  the  prime  minister  of 
a  country  (1  Chron.  ii.  24';  iv.  5  :  cf.  ix.  6  ;  Job  xxix.  16  ;  Judg.  v.  7).  So  the  Roman 
senators  were  patres.  It  speaks  of  benevolence  united  with  wisdom  and  experience — a 
rule  both  firm  and  loving.  The  great  Father  in  heaven  must  be  the  sublime  ideal  before 
us  in  all  positions  of  rule  an  I  influence  on  earth.  2.  lie  is  to  har  the  key.  This  is  an 
ancient  badge  of  ofiice  ;  Callimachus  represents  the  priestess  of  Demeter  as  having  a  key 
upon  her  shoulder  ('  Hymn,  ad  Ccrerem,'  L  45),  and  in  the  '  Supjilices '  (291)  o(  JEticUy- 
lus,  in  like  manner,  16,  priestess  of  ESra,  is  "  key-bolder  "  of  the  goddess.  For  illustration 
the  following  interesting  passage  may  be  cited  from  Roberts:  "How  much  delighted 
was  I  when  I  first  saw  the  people,  especially  the  Moors,  going  along  the  streets,  with 
each  his  key  on  his  shoulder  1  The  handle  is  sometimes  made  of  brass,  though  some- 
times of  silver,  and  is  often  nicely  worked  in  a  device  of  filagree.  The  way  it  is 
carried  is  to  have  the  corner  of  a  kerchief  tied  to  a  ring ;  the  key  is  then  placed  on  the 
shoulder,  and  the  kerchief  hangs  down  in  front.  At  otlier  times  they  have  a  bunch  of 
large  keys,  and  then  they  have  half  on  one  side  of  the  shoulder  and  half  on  the  other. 
For  »  man  thus  to  inarch  along  with  a  large  key  on  his  shoulder,  shows  at  once  that 
he  is  a  persion  of  consequence.  '  Roman  is  in  great  favour  with  the  modehir,  for  he 
now  carries -the  key.'  '  Who»e  key  have  you  got  on  your  shordder? '  '  I  shall  carry 
my  key  on  my  own  shoulder.' "  (For  the  application  to  the  apostles  and  to  the  Lord 
himself,  see  Matt.  xvi.  19;  Bev.  iii.  7.)  3.  Mis  tenure  of  office.  The  nails  must  be 
ihose  hooks  or  spikes  which  were  worked  into  the  mortar  of  the  walls  of  houses  while 
still  soft,  answering  the  purpose  of  cramp-irons  to  hold  the  walls  together,  and  pegs  to 
bans  things  on.  So,  in  temples,  armour,  shields,  helmets,  swords,  spoils  of  war,  were 
hung  on  such  nails.  An  appropriate  image  these  of  stability,  of  (to  use  a  modern 
coinage)  reliableness.  All  may  depend  upon  a  man  such  as  this ;  aD  "  know  where  to 
find  him ;  "  sacred  and  precious  trusts  may  be  reposed  on  him  without  fear  of  disap- 
[lointment.     So  in  Zech.  x.  4  the  "  peg  "  means  a  prince. 

IV.  Abuses  of  station  and  office.  There  is  "another  side"  to  everything  good 
in  human  institutions.  "All  the  honour  of  his  father's  house"  will  be  found  hanging 
ipou  Biiakim.    All  bis  bumble  relations — the  "  small  fry,"  as  we  say ;  the  "  amaU 


■562  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxu.  1—25. 

vessels,"  as  the  propliet  calls  them — will  look  up  to  him,  and  he  will  shed  lustre  and 
give  support  to  all.  The  allusion  is  to  vessels  of  a  small  kind — ^basins,  leathern  bottles, 
earthen  pitchers.  We  must  respect  the  judgment  of  the  majority  of  commentators, 
who  see  a  turn  in  the  prophecy  about  Eliakim  here.  There  is  an  impression  of  nepo- 
tism, of  favouritism ;  and  it  seems  that  the  firm  "  peg  "  is,  after  all,  to  be  loosened  from 
its  place.  And  if  so,  how  Instiuntive  the  passage!  How  is  it  that  man,  once  high  in 
esteem  and  general  confidence,  came  to  be  weighed  in  the  balances  and  found  wanting? 
Some  weakness  of  fiesh  and  blood,  some  undue  leaning  to  one's  kith  and  kin,  some 
element  of  partiality  or  favouritism,  is  often  the  cause.  "  His  family  makes  a  wrong 
use  of  him ;  and  he  is  more  yielding  than  he  ought  to  be,  and  makes  a  wrong  use  of  his 
office  to  favour  them  I  He  therefore  falls,  and  brings  down  all  with  him  that  hung 
upon  the  peg,  and  who  have  brought  him  to  ruin  through  the  rapacity  with  which  they 
have  grasped  at  prosperity  "  (Delitzsch).  \yhatever  view  may  be  taken  of  the  passage, 
'twere  well  to  remind  ourselves  of  the  old  lesson,  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth 
take  heed  lest  he  fall."  God  raises  up  and  brings  low.  Let  us  walk  softly,  nor  boast 
ourselves  if  for  a  time  we  flourish  like  a  green  bay  tree.  Our  own  weakness  may,  like 
a  worm,  be  gnawing  at  our  root.  The  "  pitted  speck "  in  the  "  garnered  fruit "  may 
be  spreading,  the  "little  rift"  in  the  lute  be  widening. 

"  More  the  treacherous  calm  I  dread 
Than  tempests  sailing  overhead." 

Let  U8  be  content  with  obscurity,  with  fallentis  semita  vitee,  seeing  that  station  brings 
out  men's  weaknesses  no  less  than  their  strength,  and  the  loftier  the  columnar  height 
of  the  great,  the  more  overwhelming  the  fall. — J. 

Ver.  Vl.— Captivity,  and  yet  safety.  "  Behold,  the  Lord  will  carry  thee  away  with  a 
mighty  captivity,  and  will  surely  cover  thee."  These  threatenings  of  the  Almighty  had 
mercy  at  the  heart  of  them.  Captivity  was  a  drastic  remidy,  but  it  once  and  again 
saved  the  health  of  Israel.  It  was  a  time  of  home-longing  and  sickness  of  heart.  It 
was  a  time  when  the  old  religious  memories  flooded  the  heart  till  they  filled  it  with 
an  aching  sense  of  shame  for  sin,  and  supplication  for  mercy. 

I.  God  cabried  them  away.  The  enemies  of  Israel  were  but  instruments  in  the 
hands  of  Jehovah.  He  reigned  over  their  interests  as  truly  then  as  in  their  more 
prosperous  day.  "  The  day  is  thine,  the  night  also  is  thine."  And  in  the  Captivity, 
God  was  disciplining  the  people  as  no  other  dispensation  could.  Their  lofty  looks  were 
changed  for  penitential  tears,  and  their  proud  hearts  were  brought  low.  God  would  in 
due  time  "  turn  again  the  captivity  of  Israel;"  and  the  Law  would  be  read  ag^n,  and 
not  only  be  read,  but  be  "  lived." 

II.  The  Captivity  was  a  mighty  one.  It  occurred  to  a  mighty  multitude:  it 
affected  mighty  interests;  and  it  produced  mighty  results.  For  this  people  God  had 
formed  for  himself,  to  show  forth  his  praise.  We  have  to  leurn  the  lesson  too.  How 
tremendous  are  the  powers  of  grief  and  loss,  change  and  sickness,  under  which  God 
often  brings  his  children  captive  now  !  We  are  "  prisoned  "  by  pain  and  circumstance. 
In  our  hours  of  solitude  and  sorrow,  God  renews  our  will,  separates  the  chaff  from 
the  wheat  in  our  character,  and  meetens  us  for  service  here  and  for  the  inheritance  of 
the  saints  in  light  hereafter. 

IIL  The  covering  was  sure.  They  were  not  cast  away ;  they  were  only  cast 
down.  The  almighty  wings  were  still  over  them.  In  strange  lands,  amid  strange 
faces,  and  listening  to  strange  voices,  they  could  not  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a  strange 
land.  But  the  time  of  joy  was  to  return.  God  was  very  near  them  still,  and  none 
could  really  harm  them.  What  a  covering !  Not  the  mere  roof  of  the  home ;  not 
the  mere  outward  raiment ;  but  the  Lord  himself  was  there,  spreading  his  shield  over 
them,  when  they  were  away  from  the  munition  of  rocks  and  from  the  defences  of  dear 
Jerusalem.  Sure!  That  is  what  we  want.  He  also  is  our  Dwelling-place  in  aU 
generations  and  under  all  skies. — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 14. — "  The  sorrow  of  the  world."    We  have  here  a  striking  picture  oif  that 
which,  in  distinction  from  "  godly  sorrow,"  Paul  calls  "  the  sorrow  of  the  world." 
I,  That  Goo  sends  sorrow  to  human  soulev.    These  national  distresses  were  to  be 


OH.  xxn.  1— 25.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHBT  ISAIAH.  363 

of  his  sending;  it  was  to  be  "a  day  of  trouble  ...  by  the  Lord  of  hosts"  (ver.  5), 
The  human  instrumentality  would  be  visible  enough,  and  both  those  who  inflicted  the 
blow  and  those  who  endured  it — their  enemies  and  themselves — might  fail  to  discern 
any  Divine  hand  at  work ;  nevertheless,  it  was  a  chastisement  that  came  from  heaven, — 
it  was  sent  of  God.  And  to  whatever  second  causes  we  may  trace  our  troubles  in  the 
day  of  our  "  treading  down  and  of  perplexity,"  or  in  the  day  of  our  loss,  or  suffering,  or 
bereavement,  we  may  always  go  beyond  the  instrumentality  to  him  "  of  whom  are  all 
things,"  and  feel  that  what  has  happened  to  us  is  "  by  the  Lord  of  hosts." 

II.  That  his  pubpose  therein  is  oub  spiRiTnAL  amendment.  "  In  that  day  did 
the  Lord  Qoi  of  hosts  call  to  weeping,"  etc.  (ver;  12).  Ood  would  then  invite  to  a 
general  humiliatioa — he  would  draw  their  minds  to  a  view  of  their  guilt,  and  lead 
them  to  repentance  and  so  to  restoration  and  life.  This  is  always  the  Divine  purpose  in 
adversity.  God  seeks  our  spiritual  amendment.  Other  metho  Is  of  instruction  failing, 
he  lays  his  hand  upon  us  so  that  we  must  feel  his  touch;  he  speaks  to  us  in  tones  it 
is  difficult  to  disregard ;  and  we  know  that  the  thing  from  which  he  calls  us  is  sin — 
sin  in  one  or  other  (or  in  some)  of  its  many  forms ;  we  know  also  that  the  thing  to 
which  he  summons  us  is  rectitude — rightness  of  heart  and  life. 

III.  That  this  his  Divinb  end  is  sometimes  entxeblt  defeated.  "  Behold  joy 
and  gladness,  slaying  oxen,  and  killing  sheep,"  etc.  (ver.  13).  Both  national  history 
and  the  biography  of  individual  men  prove  to  us  that  affliction  may  prodnce  the  very 
opposite  result  to  that  for  which  it  is  sent.  Never  has  the  city  been  so  abandoned  to 
vice  as  when  the  plague  was  raging  and  the  dead  lay  unburied  in  the  streets.  Many 
a  man  allows  adversity  to  drive  him  to  dissolute  enjoyments  or  to  ruinous  crimes, 
instead-  of  letting  it  allure  him  to  a  Divine  Deliverer.  Trouble  that  was  intended  to 
lead  to  heavenly  wisdom  and  to  the  service  of  God  only  too  often  hardens  a  stony 
heart,  ni.akes  still  ungodlier  the  man  who  has  forsaken  the  sanctuary,  fastens  the  fetters 
of  some  enslaving  vice  on  the  limbs  of  its  wretched  victim. 

IV.  That  unsanctipied  sohrow  leads  down  to  spiritual  death.  This  iniquity 
would  not  be  purged  until  they  died  (ver.  H).  It  would  end,  not  only  with,  but  in 
dertth.  Death  is  the  penalty  of  unsanctiticd  sorrow  :  "  The  sorrow  of  the  world  worketli 
death  "(2  Cor.  vii.  10).  It  leads  doivn  inevitably  to  that  utter  estranj^enient  from 
God,  that  unlikeness  to  God,  and  that  condemnation  by  God,  in  which  spiritual  death 
is  found  here ;  it  leads  on  to  that  final  banishment  from  his  presence  and  glory  in  which 
it  will  be  found  hereafter. — 0. 

Ver.  4.—  Christian  patriotimn.  The  profound  concern  which  the  prophet  of  the 
Lord  displays  for  "the  daughter  of  his  people,"  showing  us  that  the  reception  and  the 
record  of  the  prophetic  vision  did  not  interfere  with  his  strong  feelings  as  a  Hebrew 
patriot,  may  suggest  thoughts  on  Christian  patriotism.  This  is  to  be  clearly  distin- 
guished from  :  1.  The  exaggerated  self-consciousness  or  vain-gloriousness  which  some 
"  patriots  "  exhibit.  2.  The  exclusiveness  of  spirit  which  others  betray.  3.  The  diseased 
sensitiveness  which  leads  many  to  catch  at  the  first  apparent  international  wrong  as  a 
valid  casus  belli.  A  great  deal  passes  current  as  patriotism  which  would  have  been 
allowable,  if  not  creditable,  under  heathenism,  but  which  is  simply  false  and  guilty 
under  the  Divine  teaching  we  have  received  who  have  learned  of  Christ.  That  man  is 
the  true  friend  of  his  country  who  takes — 

I.  A  DEEP  AND   PEACTICAL    INTEREST    IN   ITS   POLITICAL   WELFARE.      A   part    of    thp 

"  spoiling "  to  which  Isaiah  refers  is  to  be  found  in  the  threatened  seizure  of  his 
country's  political  independence,  its  being  made  subject  and  tributary  to  the  invader ; 
this  could  not  be  other  than  a  calamity  of  the  first  consequence  in  his  eyes.  The 
Christian  patriot,  while  he  ought  to  oppose  most  strenuously  all  unrighteous  projects 
on  the  part  of  his  own  people,  does  well  to  be  earnestly  concerned  for  the  integrity, 
the  independence,  thz  reputation,  of  his  native  land. 

II.  A  PBACTICAL  INTEREST  IN  ITS  MATERIAL  WELL-BEING.     No  douVlt  this  "  Spoiling'' 

included,  in  the  prophet's  thought,  the  destruction  of  its  property  and  the  deportation 
of  its  wealth.  Considering  how  all  the  citizens,  the  wage-receiving  multitudes  as  well 
as  the  wealthier  minority,  are  affected  by  the  material  prosperity  of  the  land,  it  is  right 
and  Christian  for  us  to  make  this  a  matter  of  careful  and  conscientious  effort. 

III.  A  PBOFOUND  INTBBB8T  IN  ITS  MORAL  AND  SPIBITDAL  CONDITION.       It  Was  (1) 


m  TttE  BOOR  01^  Tfll5  PROPfiET  ISAtAtL    (cb.  xjm.  1— 2S 

the  moral  condition  of"  Jerusalem,  feasting  and  making  merry  on  the  day  of  its 
humiliation  (vers.  12,13);  and  also  (2)  its  spiritiial  condition,  forgetting  its  true 
Deliverer  (ver.  11),  and  slighting  his  discipline  (ver.  12),  which  so  much  distressed  the 
holy  prophet.  And  it  should  be  the  moral  and  spiritual  condition  of  our  country 
which  should  create  in  us  apd  call  forth  from  us  our  most  profound  solicitude.  Aod 
this  because  (1)  that  is  the  matter  af  most  intrinsic  importance  ;  (2)  that  is  the  thing 
on  which  the  Divine  judgment  and  determination  will  depend;  and  (3)  that  will  be 
ultimately  decisive  of  our  country's  political  and  material  interests.  If  we  would  do 
our  whole  duty  in  relation  thereto,  we  shall :  1.  Join  in  prayer  for  Divine  mercies.  2.  Be 
careful  to  exert  the  influence  of  a  godly  and  irreproachable  example.  3.  Exert  all  our 
power  as  individual  men  and  through  useful  organizations  for  the  guidance  and  the 
elevation  of  the  people. — 0. 

Vers.  15 — 25. — Human  reckoning  and  Divine  interruption.  We  have  one  instance, 
if  not  two^according  to  the  application  we  give  to  the  "nail "of  the  twenty-flfth 
verse — of  ill-founded  security.  It  is  a  lesson  very  necessary  to  teach,  for  it  seems  to 
be  one  very  hard  to  learn. 

I.  Human  beckoning.  Shebna  had  carefully  and  successfully  built  up  his  position 
in  the  state,  and  he  maiie  sure  that  he  should  keep  it ;  he  had  not  only  "  feathered  his 
nest,"  but  lie  had  made  up  his  mind  that  he  should  "  die  in  his  nest."  He  had  arranged 
K  forehand  the  place  of  his  sepulchre  (ver.  16).  "  The  nail  was  fastened  in  a  sure 
place  "  (ver.  25).  All  his  plans  were  drawn,  and  he  confidently  anticipated  that  they 
would  be  justified  by  the  event.  In  this  respect  he  was  but  a  type  and  specimen  of 
mankind;  we  do  the  same  thing  in  our  turn  and  in  our  way.  1.  It  may  seem  strange 
that  it  .should  be  so.  A  modest  view  of  our  own  capacities ;  the  instruction  we  gain 
by  reading  what  has  happened  to  men  in  the  past;  the  lessons  we  gather  from  our 
observation  of  human  life ; — all  these  might  save  us  from  the  error,  but  they  do  not. 
2.  The  fact  is  that  men  do  indulge  in  this  illusion  :  the  boy  counts  on  the  prizes  he 
will  win  at  school,  and  the  young  man  on  the  honours  he  will  gain  at  college ;  the 
tradesman  reckons  on  the  profits  he  will  make  in  business,  and  the  professional  man 
on  the  mark  he  will  make  in  his  vocation ;  the  minister  anticipates  the  work  he  will 
accomplish  in  his  sphere,  and  the  statesman  indulges  the  confident  expectation  that  he 
will  carry  the  measures  on  which  his  heart  is  set.  Others,  we  know,  have  failed,  but 
we,  we  think,  shall  avoid  their  errors  and  escape  their  di.scomfiture. 

II.  Divine  interruption.  Shebna's  calculations  were  to  be  entirely  overthrown  ; 
instead  of  living  on  and  dying  in  Jerusalem,  and  being  buried  in  the  sepulchre  he  had 
so  elaborately  prepared,  he  should  be  hurled  away  like  a  ball  by  the  strong  arm  ol 
Jehovah  into  a  distant  land,  where  he  should  live  and  die  in  inglorious  exile.  1.  It 
may  be  that  Divine  jvdgment  will  overtake  us,  as  it  evidently  overtook  and  overwhelmed 
this  prefect  of  the  palace.  His  ostentation  (ver.  16),  his  luxury  ("  the  chariots  of  thy 
glory,"  ver.  18),  his  tyranny  (implied  in  characterizing  his  successor  "a  father  to  the 
inhabitants,"  in  contrast  to  his  own  severities),  brought  down  upon  him  the  Divine 
displeasure  and  the  prophetic  denunciation.  Sooner  or  later  our  sin  will  find  us  out. 
If  we  owe  our  elevation  to  our  iniquity,  or  if,  on  the  summit  of  our  success,  we  fear  not 
God,  neither  regard  the  claims  of  man,  we  may  be  sure  that  at  some  time  and  in  some 
way  defeat  and  dishonour  will  await  us.  2.  Or  it  must  be  that  disciplinary  changes 
will  affect  us.  Whatever  there  is  in  sorrow  which  is  not  judgment  is  discipline.  And 
of  this  latter,  we  must  all  have  our  share  ;  we  shall  find  that  events  will  not  fill  up  the 
outlines  we  draw,  that  our  future  will  bo  very  different  from  that  which  we  picture  it 
now :  boyhood  will  not  prove  to  be  all  that  childhood  imagines  ;  still  less  will  manhood 
be  what  youth  supposes  ;  friends  will  forsake  us,  schemes  will  be  thwarted,  hopes  will 
bo  extinguished,  props  will  be  cut  in  twain,  clouds  will  come  np  and  rains  will  pour 
down,  as  we  little  think  to-day.  The  hour  will  come  when  the  nail  that  now  seems 
BO  fast  will  be  removed,  and  all  that  hangs  upon  it  be  brought  to  the  ground  (ver. 
25).     (See  Luke  xii.  16—21 ;  Jas.  iv.  13—16.) 

III.  The  good  on  which  we  may  beckon  wrraonr  feab  or  interruption. 
1.  Holy  service,  either  in  the  form  of  action  or  endurance.  2.  The  favour  of  God,  the 
friendship  of  Jesus  Christ.  3.  Eternal  blessedness.  Between  the  faitliful  soul  aii4 
these  hlgn  hopei  no  power  can  intervene, — 0 


oa.  xxn.  1—25.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH.  865 

Vera.  20 — 25. — Authority  and  influence.  On  the  depositioa  of  Shebna,  Eliakim  was 
appointed  prefect,  clothed  with  the  robe  and  invested  with  the  keys  of  office ;  hence- 
forth he  should  shut  and  open,  should  appoint  and  depose  according  to  his  good 
pleasure.    We  look  at— 

I.  The  exobllenob  of  human  authobitt.  1.  It  satisfies  a  craving  which  is  both 
broad  and  deep.  Doubtless  his  succession  to  the  high  office  vacated  by  Shebua  brought 
great  gratification  to  the  heart  of  Eliakim.  Men  covet  office,  and  the  authority  which 
it  brings.  Many  meek  and  lowly  minded  ones,  indeed,  there  are  who  have  no  such 
thirst  of  spirit ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  very  many  who  profoundly  desire  and 
exceedingly  enjoy  it.  The  craving  is  both  broad  and  general ;  its  satisfaction,  conse- 
quently, brings  an  intense  and  a  widespread  delight.  2.  It  condiices  to  order  and  to 
all  those  activities  and  pleasures  of  which  order  is  the  first  cundition.  3.  It  enables 
its  holder  to  confer  benefits  (1)  on  those  whom  he  is  most  desiious  of  serving — "a 
u.lorious  throne  to  his  father's  house,"  a  source  of  strength  and  succour  to  all  those 
related  to  him  ;  and  also  (2)  on  those  whom  ho  should  account  it  a  privilege  to  serve 
— he  can  be  "a  father  to  the  inhabitants,"  etc.,  a  source  of  blessing  to  his  fellow- 
countrymen  ;  (3)  on  those  who  are  specially  deserving — a  man  in  authority  can  admit 
to  office  those  who  are  capable  and  honourable,  while  he  can  exclude  those  who  are 
incapable  and  undeserving  (ver.  22).  On  the  other  hand,  it  has  to  be  rumembered  that 
authority  (1)  often  injures  its  possessor  by  making  him  selfish  or  self-sufficient ;  (2)  is 
often  grossly  and  pitifidly  abuseil ;  (3)  is  often  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  withdrawn, 
plunging  him  who  holds  it  iiiio  humiliation  and  distress  (ver.  25). 

II.  The  gebateb  excellence  of  holy  influence.  Our  Lord  gave  his  apostles 
promise  of  power;  but  he  distinctly  told  them  that  such  power  would  lie,  not  in  the 
exercise  of  authority,  but  in  the  exertion  of  influence  (Mark  x.  42 — 45).  They  were 
to  be  commissioned  to  deliver  the  most  vitalizing  and  transforming  truth,  and  to  live 
a  life  purified  and  ennobled  by  that  truth ;  their  utterance  and  their  action  togethrr 
would  have  a  most  decisive  influence  on  individual  men  and  on  society  at  large.  We 
inherit  the  privilege  which  the  Master  conferred  on  them.  The  truth  they  taught  we 
teach;  the  life  they  lived  we  live.  And  this  Divine,  this  redeeming,  this  everlastii)>4 
wisdom,  thus  revealed  from  God,  and  thus  manifested  throu.;h  us,  is  a  far  greater  and 
a  far  mightier  thing  than  the  exercise  of  any  human  authority  whatever.  For  by  their 
attitude  towards  it  men  determine  their  destiny;  by  it  they  stand  or  fall  (Matt.  xxi. 
44 ;  John  iii.  36  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  15,  16).  It  "  opens,  and  no  man  can  shut ;  it  shuts,  and 
no  man  can  open."  It  is  not  only  a  mightier,  but  also  a  more  blesseii  thing.  This 
holy  influence,  thus  exerted  by  the  wise  and  good,  through  lip  and  life,  (1)  shuts  men 
out  of  evils  into  the  power  of  which  none  can  thenceforth  draw  them  ;  (2)  opens  the  gate 
into  kingdoms  from  which  none  can  exclude  them— those  of  Divine  wisdom,  of  holi- 
ness, of  usefulness,  of  heaveidy  joy  and  glory ;  (3)  has  a  salutary  and  elevating  effect 
upon  the  heart  of  him  who  wields  it.  It  blesses  him  that  gives  as  much  as  him  that 
takes.  I.  Only  the  minority  among  mankind  can  possibly  exercise  authority;  it  is 
to  a  small  fraction  only  that  it  will  prove  a  blessing  ;  and  from  all  of  t'lese  it  will  soon 
be  removed  by  the  fickleness  of  man  or  by  the  lapse  of  lime.  2.  But  it  is  open  to  every 
child  of  man  to  exert  a  holy  influence ;  this  will  confer  a  true,  spiritual,  undying  good 
on  others,  and  Will  leave  a  lasting,  inward  blessing  on  the  giver,  it  is  far  the  better  oi 
the  two.— 0. 

Vers.  1,  2.— Ill-timed  Joy.  The  "valley  of  vision"  is,  without  doubt,  Jerusalem, 
though  Mr.  Birks  thinks  Samaria  may  be  meant.  The  P'ophet  Isaiah  speaks  thus 
prDetically  of  it  as  the  place  where  he  had  his  visions.  Now  he  sees  the  people  hurrying, 
in  great  excitement,  on  to  the  flat  roofs  of  the  city,  to  watch  the  gathering  hosts  of 
Sennacherib's  army.  The  attitude  of  the  people  surprised  him.  At  such  a  time,  when 
pestilence  decimated  the  inhabitants,  the  leading  citizens  had  fled  to  secure  their 
personal  safety,  and  the  enemy  was  at  the  very  door,  he  looked  for  humiliation  before 
God,  or  at  least  the  calmness  of  a  noble  courage ;  but  alas  !  even  in  such  an  hour  it  was 
a  "  tumultuous  city,  a  joyous  city." 

I.  Joy  is  ill-timed  when  it  bxpeesses  sblf-secubity.  Foolish  notions  of  the 
impregnability  of  their  city  possessed  the  Jews,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  it  had  been 
taken.    Self-reliance  blinded  them  to  the  elements  of  weakness  in  themselves,  and  to 


366  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PfiOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  txu.  1—25. 

the  strength  and  energy  of  their  foes.  We  have  heard  many  a  man  laugh  at  threatened 
danger,  and  say,  "  I  am  safe,"  and  show,  as  Jerusalem  did,  the  folly  of  joy  with  no 
better  basis  than  self-security. 

II.  Joy  is  ill  timed  when  it  expresses  the  recklessness  of  despaib.  Some 
think  that  was  rather  the  spirit  of  Jerusalem  at  this  time — the  spirit  which  says,  "Let 
us  eat  and  drink ;  for  to-morrow  we  die  "  (see  vers.  12,  13).  Self-restraint  is  very 
dependent  on  hope.  Illustrate  by  the  wild  excitement  and  foolish  things  done  when 
shipwreck  is  imminent ;  or  by  the  riotings  of  the  man  who  ki.ows  he  is  within  an 
hour  of  b  iikruptcy.  "  I  said  of  laughter.  It  is  mad."  There  is  an  old  saying  which 
explain*  such  reckless,  heartless  joy :  "  Whom  the  gods  would  destroy  they  first 
demeijt."  All  such  joy  is  foolish  and  perilous,  especially  because  it  keeps  men  from  the 
duty  of  the  hour,  the  doing  of  which  might  be  the  means  of  delivering  them  from  the 
danger. 

III.  JOY   IS   ILL  TIMED  WHBNEVBB  IT   HAS  NO  BOOTAOE  OP  BELIANCB   ON  GrOD.      Joy 

in  Grod  is  the  foundation  of  all  joy.  We  can  rejoice  in  what  we  pcssess ;  for  it  is 
God-given.  We  can  rejoice  in  what  we  lose ;  for  the  Lord  taketh  away.  We  can 
rejoice  in  the  future ;  for  "  the  Lord  doth  provide."  We  can  rejoice  in  the  darkness 
and  peril ;  for  "  he  that  keepeth  Israel  neither  slumbers  nor  sleeps." — B.  T. 

Ver.  2. — The  moral  influence  of  pentilence.  "  Thy  slain  men  are  not  slain  with  the 
sword."  "  The  words  imply  something  like  a  reproach  of  cowardice.  Those  who  had 
perished  had  not  died  fighting  bravely  in  battle,  but  by  the  pestilence  which  then,  as 
at  all  times,  was  prevalent  in  the  crowded  streets  of  a  besieged  city."  The  law  of 
epidemic  disease  is  found  to  be  this — the  conditions  which  are  peculiarly  favourable  to 
the  development  of  vice  and  immorality  are  exactly  the  conditions  most  favourable 
to  epidemic  disease.  Illustrative  references  may  be  made  to  overcrowding  in  houses, 
and  to  want  of  cleanliness,  and  neglect  of  adequate  sanitary  precautions.  From  the 
picture  given  in  the  passage  now  before  us  we  gather  the  following  sentences. 

I.  Pestilence  ckbates  fright.  And  this  prepares  the  way  for  the  march  of  the 
pestilence ;  partly  because  those  in  whom  are  the  seeds  of  disease  go  to  other  places, 
carrying  the  evil  with  them ;  and  partly  because  fear  lowers  vitality,  and  so  limits  the 
power  of  resistance  to  disease.  Fright  in  time  of  pestilence  was  painfully  exhibited 
in  the  recent  visit  of  the  cholera  to  the  towns  in  the  south  of  France. 

II.  Pestilbncb  bebaks  up  social  life.  By  the  flight,  from  the  infected  neighbour- 
hood, of  all  whose  means  permit.  By  the  disturbance  of  commerce,  business,  educa- 
tion, etc.  Woise  than  this,  danger  of  life  nourishes  self-interest,  so  that  men  are  ready 
to  sacrifice  others  to  save  'themselves.  At  such  times  the  worst  of  humanity  is 
revealed  in  the  many,  and  the  best  of  humanity  in  the  few. 

III.  Pestilence  often  leads  to  ebcklessness.  As  was  most  painfully  seen  in 
the  time  of  the  great  plague  of  London,  and  as  is  indicated  by  Isaiah  in  the  text. 
Despair  flings  the  reins  on  the  nock  of  lust. 

IV.  Pestilence  makes  heroes.  Madame  de  Genlis  tells  of  an  incident  in  connection 
with  the  peste  at  Marseilles.  The  true  nature  of  the  disease  was  unknown,  and  could 
only  be  discovered  by  a  post-mortem  examination,  but  that  was  certain  death  to  the 
operator.  All  the  doctors  drew  back.  Then  a  young  surgeon,  named  Guyon,  of  great 
celebrity  in  his  profession,  devoted  himself  for  the  safety  of  his  country.  He  made  the 
necessai-y  examination,  recorded  his  observations,  made  his  suggestions,  placed  the 
papers  in  a  vase  of  vinegar,  retired  to  the  lazaretto,  and  in  twelve  hours  was  dead — a 
hero  made  by  the  pestilence. — B.  T. 

Ver.  4. — "  A  time  to  weep."  "  Therefore  I  say.  Look  away  from  me ;  let  m«  weep 
bitterly."  Eastern  weeping  is  excessive,  unrestrained.  Westerns  go  to  the  other 
extreme,  and  severely  repress  all  expressions  and  signs  of  emotion.  Eastern  grief  ia 
often  exaggerated,  and  it  is  in  danger  of  being  conventional  and  oven  hypocritical. 
Public  weeping,  at  least  on  the  part  of  the  prophets,  became  a  testimony  and  a  warning. 
It  belonged  to  their  teaching  by  signs.  Isaiah's  weeping  here  drew  public  attention, 
and  led  to  inquiries  as  to  the  meaning  of  such  exceeding  distress.  The  following  points 
are  sufficiently  suggestive  to  need  no  more  than  brief  statement. 

L  Wb  »ay  weep  in  anticipation.    If  we  can  see  trouble  ahead,  and  our  distress 


OH.  xxii.  1— 25.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  367 

c«n  be  the  means  of  awakening  others  who  are  careless,  but  who  ought  to  be  preparing 
to  meet  the  trouble,  our  very  griefs  may  be  a  "  fore-warning." 

II.  Wb  may  weep  in  time  01'  TROUBLE.  Because  tears  are  the  natural  expres- 
sions of  feeling,  and  the  natural  relief  of  overcharged  feeling.  Danger  to  brain  and 
heart  attend  undue  restraint  of  tears. 

III.  Wb  may  weep  in  sympathy  with  others.  Often  such  silent  sympathy  is 
more  effective  than  any  words.  To  feel  with,  another  so  as  to  join  in  the  same 
expression  of  feeling  is  most  soothing  and  comforting.  Ths  sublime  illustration  of 
this  is  our  Redeemer  weeping  in  human  sympathy  with  gentle  Mary  at  the  grave  of 
Lazarus. 

IV.  We  must  not  let  oub  weeping  become  a  self-indulgence.  Thig  is  a 
greater  peril  to  us  all  than  we  are  wont  to  estimate.  Thei'e  is  a  luxury  of  grief; 
a  keeping  it  up  for  the  sake  of  the  comforting  and  petting  it  brin^js ;  a  pleasant  giving 
way.  Weeping  is  wrong,  is  mischievous,  the  moment  it  passes  beyond  the  bounds  of 
what  is  necessary  for  relief.  As  soon  as  self  comes  in,  and  we  will  to  give  way,  our 
weeping  becomes  sin. 

V.  We  may  weep  as  a  testimony.  For  this  we  have  the  example  of  our  Divine 
Lord  and  Master,  who  "  when  he  beheld  the  city  [of  Jerusalem — the  very  city  concerning 
which  Isaiah  wept],  wept  over  it,  saying.  Oh  that  thou  hadst  known,  in  this  thy  day, 
the  things  that  make  lor  thy  peace  1 "  John  Howe  most  suggestively  calls  this  "The 
Redeemer's  tears  wept  over  lost  souls." — R.  T. 

Yer.  8.  —Man's  trust  in  his  weapons.  "  Thou  didst  look  in  that  day  to  the  armour 
(if  the  house  of  the  forest."  A  sermon  for  the  times,  in  which  the  highest  science  and 
inventive  skill  are  devoted  to  the  perfecting  of  the  deadliest  engines  of  war;  and  when 
men  dare  to  say  that  "Providence  is  always  on  the  side  of  the  hirgest  battalions." 
"  Some  trust  in  horses,  and  some  in  chariots,  but  we  will  trust  in  the  Name  of  the 
Lcjrd ;  "  "A  horse  is  a  vain  thing  for  safety ; "  "  God  is  a  Refuge  for  us." 

I.  Men  trusting  in  weapons  only.  By  the  term  "  weapons "  understanding 
all  that  belongs  to  aniiies,  navies,  fortifications,  and  the  material  forces  on  which  nations 
depend  (see  vers.  9—11).  So  often  we  hear  that  "  Her  navy  is  England's  defence ;  " 
"Her  insular  position  is  her  security."  Great  guns,  powerful  ships,  efBcient  drill, 
brave  hearts — these,  they  say,  guard  Albion's  honour.  But  these  are  only  things,  and 
they  have  to  be  continually  changed  and  renewed.  We  can  never  be  quite  sure  that 
we  are  abreast  of  the  war-engines  or  the  war-force  of  other  nations,  and  trust  in  more 
weapons  involves  keeping  the  nation  at  a  perpetual  strain.  Again  and  again  we  are 
alarmed  as  somebody  argues  our  insecurity  liecause  of  the  state  of  our  army  and  naTy 
and  coaling-stations. 

II.  Men  trusting  in  God  only.  They  should  trust  in  God  first  and  chiefly;  but 
not  only,  if  by  that  is  meant  letting  the  trust  keep  our  bands  idle,  and  put  us  on  an 
expectation  of  rairnculous  deliverance.  There  have  been  times  in  the  history  of  our 
race  when  men  wi  re  required  to  do  nothing,  and  simply  to  trust.  In  face  of  the  Bed 
Sea  Moses  said,  "  Stand  slill,  and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord."  And  Sennacherib's 
army  was  overthrown  without  use  of  man's  military  forces.  But  these  are  exceptional 
cases,  designed  to  impress  one  side  of  truth. 

III.  Man  making  hib  trust  in  God  appbae  through  the  use  of  his  weapons. 
This  is,  in  every  way,  man's  most  difficult  work.  It  may  be  dangerous  self-confidence 
to  trust  weapons  only.  It  may  be  mere  listlessness  to  trust  God  only.  It  is  the 
essence  of  piety  to  brace  ourselves  to  all  noble  and  wise  endeavour,  and  keep  through 
all  our  domgs  a  soul  full  of  trustings  in  God.  This  is  but  illustration  in  the  war- 
spheres  of  the  universal  rule,  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling ; 
for  it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you,  both  to  will  and  to  do,  of  his  good  pleasure." — R.  'T. 

Ver.  12. — Go^s  call  to  penitence.  "  In  that  day  did  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  call  to 
weeping,  and  to  mourning,  and  to  baldness,  and  to  girding  with  sackcloth."  These  are 
the  Eastern  signs  and  expressions  of  penitence  and  humiliation ;  as  may  be  illustrated  in 
the  case  of  Nineveh,  which  repented  at  the  preaching  of  Jonah  (iii.  5 — 9).  God  calls  on 
the  people  to  "  lament  their  sins,  by  wliich  they  had  brought  the.se  judgments  upon  theii 
land,  and  to  dispose  themselves  to  a  reformation  of  their  lives  by  a  holy  seriousness,  and 


368  THE   BOOK    DF   THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxii,  1— 26 

a  tenderness  of  lieait  under  the  Word  of  God."  God  is  ever,  and  has  ever  been,  in  variout 
wayg,  calling  men  to  repentance,  because  men  are  sinful,  and  constantly  grieving  him 
and  ruining  themselves  by  their  wilfulness. 

I.  God's  calls  to  penitbnob  bt  his  prophets.  Prom  Enoch  (Jude  15),  and  Noah, 
to  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Jonah,  etc.  It  is  the  burden  of  prophecy.  Their  voice  is  evei 
crying,  "  Put  away  the  evil  of  your  diiings." 

II.  Goo's  CALLS  TO  PENITBKOB  BY  THE  hILENT  HARCH  OF  EVENTS.      See  the  plea  of  Joe^ 

on  foretelliug  iuviisinns  (ii.  12 — 14).  "  Coining  events  cast  their  shadows  before,"  and 
those  shadows  ouglit  to  jrove  calls  of  God  to  thought  and  moral  preparation. 

III.  Oob's  calls  to  PENITENCE  BY  THE  REVEALED  WoBD.  "  When  God  threatens  us 
with  his  judgments  he  expects  and  requites  that  we  liUmhle  ourselves  under  his  mighty 
liand,  tliat  we  tremble  when  the  lion  roars,  and  iu  a  il..y  of  adversity  consider  "  (Matthew 
Henry). 

IV.  God's  calls  to  penitence  by  John  Baptist.  A  most  remarkable  person,  as 
standing  on  the  dividing  line  between  the  new  and  old  dispensations.  He  carries 
forward  into  the  new  God's  great  demand  in  the  old,  "  Bepent."  And  he  shows  that 
moral  preparaiion  by  repentance  is  the  threshold  of  the  new  kingdom  of  forgiveness, 
acceptauce,  and  grace. 

V.  God's  calls  to  penitence  by  the  Lord  Jesus  and  his  apostles.  They  slill 
demand  repeulance.  Our  Lord  sends  his  apostles  out  with  this  message,  and  the 
apostles  in  the  Penteco.-.tal  time,  and  in  their  letters,  plead,  saying,  "  Eepent,  and  he 
baptized,  every  one  of  yuu." 

VI.  Goo's  CALLS  TO  PENiTENcB  IN  MODERN  PREAaHiNQ.  In  this,  more  than  in  any 
other  aspect  of  revealed  truth,  modern  preaching  lails.  The  ministers  of  the  present 
day  have  no  oppressive  burden  from  the  Lord,  ahnost  making  them  run  away  like 
Jonah — ^a  burden  of  demanding  "  repentance  of  sin." — R.  T. 

Ver.  14. — Iniquity  that  cannot  be  purged  in  this  life.  God  is  a  God  of  infinite 
mercy  to  forgive  sin,  and  yet  he  will  "by  no  means  clear  the  guilty."  He  will  surely 
visit  iniquity  by  fi.xing  its  consequences  upon  the  sinner,  and  even  also  upon  others 
who  may  be  related  to  bim. 

I.  SiN-PENALTIKS  THAT  CAN  BE  REMOVED  NOW,  WHILE  WB  ARB  IN  THIS  WORLD.      They 

are  such  as  rest  on  the  soul.  Sin  has  a  twofold  aspect — it  is  both  an  act  of  trans- 
gression and  a  spirit  of  self-will.  It  is  the  soul  that  sinneth;  the  self-will,  as  opposing 
God's  will,  is  the  fountain  and  source  of  all  wrong-doing.  But  the  soul  finds  expression 
and  action  thruugli  the  body,  and  consequently  there  will  be  both  spiritual  and  bodily 
penalties  follov\ing  upon  all  sin.  Tlie  soul  will  undergo  a,  hardening  process.  The 
body  will  come  into  disabilities  and  sufferings.  Pharaoh  is  wilful.  Then  the  Lord,  in 
his  judgment,  will  harden  Pharaoh's  heart;  smite  him  in  the  tenderest  part  of  his 
family  feeling  by  the  death  of  his  firstborn ;  and  bring  down  the  pride  of  Kgypt  by  an 
ignominious  overthrow  iu  the  Bed  Sea.  The  soul-penalties  attaching  to  sin  are  expressed 
in  the  sentence,"  The  soul  that  sinne.h  it  shall  die."  Death,  spiritual  death,  is  the 
necesBiiry  result  of  soul-sin.  Our  first  lather,  Adam,  began  to  die  when,  in  a  spirit 
of  self-will  ami  self-pleasing,  he  ate  the  forbidden  fruit.  Every  one  of  us,  nowadays, 
begins  to  die  the  "  eternal  death  "  when  we  sin  with  our  souls.  The  sphire  of  the 
atonement  made  by  our  Lord  Jesus,  iu  his  life  and  in  his  cross,  is  precisely  this  Sphere 
of  soul-penalties.  Christ  removes  the  peualtios  of  sin  which  come  upon  our  souls. 
Christ  renews  the  life  of  love,  and  trust,  and  submission,  and  joy  in  God,  which 
efl'ectually  prevents  any  of  the  hardenings  and  debasiiigs  of  sin  becoming  permanent  in 
our  ca.-^os. 

II.  Sin-penalties  that  cannot  now  be  removed.  The  penalties  and  consequences 
of  sin  that  come  on  our  bodies,  our  circumstances,  and  others  who  are  connected  with 
us.  God  has  npi)ninted  the  order  iu  which  family  and  social  liff  should  be  arranged 
and  conducted.  If  We  would  carry  out  that  Divine  order  perfovtly,  and  obey  those 
Divine  laws  faithfully,  heaven,  with  its  eternal  puriiies,  its  peace  passing  understanding, 
and  its  joy  unspeakable,  woilld  be  begun  below.  !Sin,  in  its  outward  aspect,  is  the 
infringement  of  this  Divine  order,  the  breaking  of  those  gracious  and  holy  laws.  To 
every  such  infringement  a  natural  penalty  is  attached.  This  is  expressed  in  a  figure  bj 
the  familiar  words,  "  Whatsoever  a  man  Boweth,  that  shall  he  als«  reap."    The  redemp- 


OT.  xxn.l— 25.]     IHB  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  S6S 

tion  provided  by  the  Lord  Jesus  does  not  iminediatelj  and  directly  touch  these  natural 
penalties  of  sin.  There  is  an  important  sense  in  vhich  the  forgiving  God  "  by  no 
means  clears  the  guilty."  The  child  of  the  drunkard  or  the  sensualist  will  not  have 
the  spirit  of  drink  or  of  passion  taken  out  of  him,  nor  will  he  be  renewed  from  his 
physical  deterioration,  because  his  father  becomes  a  Christian  in  his  later  years.  Con- 
sequences of  wrong  reach  on  until  they  get  altogether  beyond  hand-grasp.  Do  any 
wrong,  and  for  the  soul  of  the  wrong  there  is  forgiveness,  and  full  restoration,  in  the 
Divine  mercy,  through  the  precious  blood-shedding ;  but  you  may  pursue  all  your  lifi- 
after  the  natural  consequences,  and  you  shall  never  overtake  them,  never  master  them, 
never  remove  them.  On  they  go,  carrying  their  burdens  of  woe  to  the  third  and  fourth 
generation.  And  Isaiah  reminds  us  that  there  are  some  special  kinds  of  iniquity  to 
which  the  rule  must  more  especially  apply,  for  whose  consequences  there  can  be  nn 
earthly  purging.  They  are  such  as  are :  1.  Maintained  in  a  spirit  of  wilfulness.  2. 
Such  as  outlast  all  warnings  and  corrections.  3.  Such  as  have  become  a  cause  of  open 
reproach.  4.  And  such  as  have  been  the  means  of  ruining  others.  In  all  these  cases 
the  judgment  must  come,  and  the  sinner's  fellow-men  must  see  it  hanging  over  him  as 
long  as  he  lives.  If  it  were  not  so,  adequate  impressions  of  the  evil  and  hatefulness  of 
lin  could  not  be  kept  before  the  eyes  of  men.  Though  we  should  also  see  that  these 
sin>penalties,  lying  so  heavy  on  the  race,  are  part  of  the  Divine  remedial  scheme  fo; 
finally  delivering  humanity  from  its  self-serving  and  its  sin. — B.  T. 

Vers.  16,  n.^Man'splansfor  himself  frustrated  by  Qod's  plan  for  him.  The  answer- 
ing New  Testament  case  to  this  is  our  Lord's  account  of  the  prosperous  farmer,  who 
had  no  room  to  bestow  his  fruits  and  his  goods.  Ho  said  to  himself,  "  I  will  pull  down 
my  barns  and  build  greater."  But  God  said,  "  Thou  fool,  this  night  shall  thy  soul  be 
required  of  thee."  In  the  passage  before  us,  Shebna,  in  the  full  assurance  that  he  will 
die  quietly,  and  be  buried  honourably  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem,  proposes  to 
build  a  tomb  or  sepulchre  for  himself.  It  would  be  one  of  the  rock-hewn  sepulchres  on 
the  slopes  of  the  hills  surrounding  the  holy  city.  The  aristocratic  families  had  their 
private  sepulchres,  but  this  Shebna  was  a  new  man,  not  belonging  to  any  of  the  ancient 
families,  so  he  had  to  begin  a  sepulchre  as  one  part  of  his  ambition  to  found  a  family. 
God's  plan  for  him  was  quite  different  to  his  plan  for  himself.  He  was  to  be  carried 
away  into  captivity,  and  the  fair  creation  of  his  energies  would  fall  into  ruins.  *  Han 
proposes,  God  disposes." 

L  Men  ouoht  to  make  flahs.  The  Bible  never  opposes  foresight,  practical  wisdom, 
reasonable  ambitions,  taking  life  with  a  strong  hand,  or  the  statesmanlike  sagacity,  that 
estimates  public  movements  and  prepares  for  inevitable  changes.  No  man's  ship  is 
expected  to  drift  anyhow ;  the  man's  hand  must  be  always  at  the  helm,  and  the  man 
must  know  for  what  port  he  sails. 

II.  Mek  too  often  make  plans  in  a  spirit  of  self-rbuancb.  As  the  Apostle 
James  (iv.  13—15)  puts  it,  men  say,  "  To-day  or  to-morrow  we  will  go  into  this  city, 
and  spend  a  year  there,  and  trade,  and  get  gain."  The  mistake  lies  in  that  ioill. 
"  Whatever  happens,  I  will."    "  They  that  mil  be  rich  fall  into  temptation  and  a  snare." 

III.  Men  should  make  plans  in  the  spirit  op  dei'bndbnob  oh  God  ;  and  with  due 
reference  of  every  case  to  him.  As  James  says  (iv.  15),  "For  that  ye  ought  to 
say,  If  the  Lord  will,  we  shall  both  live,  and  do  this,  or  that."  Man's  will  sometimes  is 
strong,  and  carries  him  over  and  through  great  difficulties ;  but  God  is  ever  stronger 
than  he,  and  grasps  him  with  effectual  restraints. — ^R.  T. 

Ver.  18. — Qod's  violent providencet.  Margin  Revised  Version,  "He  will  surely  wind 
thee  round  and  round  like  a  ball  and  toss  thee."  Generally  the  figure  is  assumed  to  be 
that  of  a  ball  flung  violently  on  a  smooth,  even  plain,  where  it  bounds  on  and  onwitti 
nothing  to  stay  its  progress.  But  a  gentleman  was  in  the  island  of  Mitylene  during  a 
great  storm  of  wind  in  winter,  and  observed  a  peculiar  plant,  not  unlike  wormwood, 
which  grows  into  a  compact,  globular  form,  with  very  stiff  stalks  and  branches.  In 
the  winter  the  plant  dies  down  to  the  ground,  and  in  its  dry  and  light  condition  is  torn 
from  its  I'oots  by  the  wind,  and  set  bounding  over  the  wide  and  unenclosed  country. 
He  reports  having  seen  five  or  six  of  these  balls  coursing  along  at  once.  If  such  plants 
were  found  in  the  countries  familiar  to  the  prophet,  they  would  furnish  a  vivid  emblem 

ISAIAH.  2  B 


370  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  ixn.  1— 25. 

of  the  man  who  is  at  the  mercy  of  a  higher  power,  and  helpless  either  to  choose  his  own 
course  or  to  find  rest.  The  point  which  is  proposed  for  illustration  is  that  there  must 
be  a  variety  of  arrows  in  the  Lord's  quiver,  and  a  needs-be  sometimes  for  the  severest 
and  most  searching  dealings.  God  must  sometimes  display  his  sovereign  power  over 
men  in  a  crushing  and  overwhelming  way,  in  order  to  silence  the  tongue  of  pride,  to 
prove  that  man  can  never  get  beyond  God's  reach,  never  raise  Babel-towers  that  he 
cannot  overwhelm.  The  mightiest  forces  of  nature  are  God's  instruments.  And  man's 
pride  he  will  utterly  abase.  Compare  the  death  of  the  lord  who  scorned  the  prophet's 
assurance  of  immediate  deliverance  (2  Kings  vii.  19,  20) ;  Nebuchadnezzar's  humilia- 
tion in  the  hour  of  his  boasting  (Dan.  iv.  29 — 33) ;  and  Herod's  awful  deatli  (Acts  xii. 
20 — 23),  when  he  permitted  men  to  offur  him  the  honours  due  alone  to  God,  Man's 
folly  in  trying  God's  power  to  smite  and  wound  is  finely  satirized  by  Eliphaz  the 
Temauite  (Job  xv.  25, 26) :  "  For  he  stretchetb  out  his  hand  against  God,  and  strength- 
eneth  himself  against  the  Almighty.  He  runneth  upon  him,  even  on  his  neck,  upon 
the  thick  bosses  of  his  bucklers." — B.  T. 

Vers.  20, 21. — The  infltience  of  an  individtuU  <m  pvhlic  policy.  Governments  always 
drift  into  the  control  of  the  most  energetic,  or  most  gifted,  man.  They  go  astray  unless 
ruled  by  some  niasttr-spiiit.  It  is  said,  with  as  much  truth  as  satire,  that  "committees 
are  always  committees  of  one."  They  are  the  comfortable  agencies  by  means  of  which 
some  strong-willed  man  gets  his  own  way.  And  it  may  be  urged  that  at  least  as  much 
good  as  evil  attends  the  arrangement.  Eliakim  is  raised  up  as  a  master-spirit,  in  a 
time  of  national  anxiety,  and  he  is  to  prove  a  "  father  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem, 
and  to  the  house  of  Judah."  There  recur  times  in  our  national  history  when  public 
ministrations  on  such  a  theme  as  this  may  wisely  guide  public  opinion.  Such  topics  as 
the  following  are  suggested. 

I.  The  genius  of  the  pcblio  leadeb.  As  much  a  Divine  endowment  and  trust 
for  the  world's  use  as  the  gifts  of  the  orator,  the  artist,  or  the  poet. 

II.  The  evu.  inflhencb  of  the  cnpeincipled  public  leadeb.  In  his  permission 
of  wrong  things.  In  bis  securing  of  right  things  by  wrong  methods.  In  the  public 
example  which  encourages  unprincipled  dealings  in  private  life. 

III.  The  poweb  of  tee  godlt  fbincipled  leadeb.  He  elevates  the  tone  of  society. 
Avoids  causes  of  offence  to  neighbouring  nations.  Aims  at  the  permanent  well-being 
of  the  whole  people.  Puts  the  moral  progress  of  the  nation  before  its  material  pros- 
perity.   Such  leaders  were  Moses  and  David. 

IV.  The  duty  of  the  gifted  ntDiviDnAii  to  take  public  responsibility.  Illus- 
trate by  Cincinnatus.  A  true  man  finds  a  sphere  of  service  for  his  God  in  the  common 
affairs  of  the  nation.  Joseph  served  God  through  years  of  famiue  in  Egypt.  Daniel 
served  his  God  through  important  national  changes  and  revolutions.  The  history  of 
each  age  in  nations  is  really  the  biography  of  the  leading  individual  of  the  age.  The 
world  curses  or  blesses  the  memory  of  its  public  leaders. — B.  T. 

Ver.  22. — 2%«  symbol  of  atithority.  The  "  key  on  the  shoulder  "  is  no  mere  badge 
of  the  steward's  office ;  it  represents  delegated  authority.  Large  wooden  locks  and  keys 
were  used  in  the  East,  and  these  keys  were  heavy  enough  to  need  carrying  on  the 
shoulder.  But  the  expression  is  best  regarded  as  a  recognized  figure  of  speech.  The 
figure  may  receive  four  illustrations. 

L  The  key  of  coubt  office.    As  in  case  of  Eliakim. 

II.  The  key  of  babbis,  as  txachebs.  Remember  the  expression,  "  The  key  of 
knowledge." 

III.  '&S  KEY  OP  Chbist,  a8  Head  OP  THE  Chuboh.    (Bev.  iii.  7.) 

IV.  The  keys  as  committed  to  Peteb.    (Matt.  xvL  19.)— B.  T. 

Ver.  23. — Hie  tttre  nail  as  a  type.  The  idea  may  be  the  peg  driven  into  the  ground, 
round  which  to  fasten  the  tent-ropes.  But,  more  probably,  the  reference  is  to  a  peg  in 
the  wall,  driven  in  so  securely  that  things  may  be  safely  hung  upon  it.  The  word  is 
here  used  metaphorically  in  application  to  the  support  which  ]Siakim  would  yield  to  all 
his  dependent  relations.  It  is  the  type  of  the  man  on  whom  «theni  out  depend.  The 
loUowing  points  will  be  readily  worked  oat  and  illustrated. 


OH.  xxui.  1— 18.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


371 


I.  The  sort  of  man  who  can  thus  be  a  nail  for  others  to  defeho  ov. 

II.  The  type  fcllt  realized  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

III.  The  type  realized,  in  measure,  in  Christ-like  men  and  women.  Nothing 
better  can  be  said  of  any  of  us  than  this — Men  trust  us.  What  can  be  said  of  woman 
nobl«r  than  thia^  "  The  heart  of  her  husband  trusteth  in  her  "  ?— B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEE  XXin. 

Ter».  1 — 14. — The  Burden  of  Ttbr  We 
here  reach  tlie  last  of  tlie  "burdens" — the 
concluding  chapter  of  the  series  of  denun- 
ciatory prophecies  which  commenced  with 
ch.  xiii.  It  is  an  elegy  "  in  three  stanzas, 
or  strophes"  (Oheyne) — the  first  extending 
from  ver.  1  to  ver.  5 ;  the  second,  thence  to 
vcr.  9 ;  and  the  third  from  ver.  10  to  ver.  14. 
An  undertone  of  sadness,  and  even  of  com- 
miseration, prevails  throughout  it,  the  pro- 
phet viewing  Tyre  as  a  fellow-sufferer  with 
Israel,  persecuted  and  oppressed  by  the 
same  enemy,  Assyria,  which  was  everywhere 
pushing  her  conquests,  and  had  recently 
extended  her  dominion  even  over  Babylon 
(ver.  13).  This  last  allusion  fixes  the  date 
of  the  prophecy  to  a  time  subseijuent  to  B.o. 
710,  when  the  Assyrian  monarch,  Sargon, 
first  conquered  the  country,  and  took  the 
title  of  king  (G.  Smith,  '  Eponym  Canon,' 
p.  86). 

Ver.  1. — Howl  (comp.  ch.  xiii.  6, 31).  The 
expression  is  common  in  the  prophets  (see 
Jer.  It.  8;  xxv.  34,  etc.;  Ezek.  xxi.  12; 
XXX.  2;  Joel  i.  5,  11, 13;  Zeph.  i.  11;  Zeoh. 
zi.  2,  etc.).  Te  ships  of  Tarshish.  "  Ships 
of  Tarshish  "  are  first  mentioned  in  con- 
nection with  the  trade  carried  on  by  Solo- 
mon. Apparently,  the  term  tiieredesignates 
a  certain  class  of  ship  rather  than  those 
engaged  in  a  particular  trade  (see  the  com- 
ment on  1  Kings  xxii.  48  in  the  '  Speaker's 
Commentary,'  vol.  ii  p.  623).  Here,  how- 
ever, rhrenioian  ships,  actually  engaged  in 
the  trade  with  Tartessus,  may  be  intended. 
Tartessus  was  a  very  ancient  Phoenician 
■ettlement  in  the  south  of  Spain,  beyond 
the  Pillars  of  Hercules,  and  was  the  centre 
of  a  most  important  and  lucrative  com- 
merce(see  1  Kings x.22;  Herod., i.  163;  Ezek. 
xxvii  12,  etc.).  In  the  present  passage  the  re- 
turning fleet  of  merchantmen  is  addressed, 
and  told  that  the  harbour  to  which  they  are 
hastening  is  closed,  the  city  desolate.  Jrom 
the  land  of  Chittim.  "  Chittim  "  here,  as  in 
Gen.  I.  4,  and  elsewhere  generally,  is  pro- 
bably Cyprus,  whose  most  ancient  capital 
was  called  by  the  Greeks  Kition  (see  Joseph., 


•  Ant.  J  lid  ,'  L  6,  §  1>  The  name  **  Chittim  " 
is  not  improbably  a  variant  of  "  Khittim," 
"the  Hittites,"  who  may  have  been  the 
first  to  colonize  the  island.  A  fleet  from 
the  Western  Mediterranean  would  natu- 
rally touch  at  Cyprus  on  its  way  to  Type, 
and  would  there  learn  the  calamity. 

Ver.  2. — Be  still ;  rather,  be  tilent,  as  in 
the  margin.  It  would  be  idle  to  complain 
or  lament.  Ye  inhabitants  of  the  isle.  Tyre 
was  situated  on  a  small  isle,  which  Alex- 
ander joined  to  the  mainland  by  means  of  a 
mole  (Arrian,  '  Exp.  Alex.,'  ii.  23).  It  is 
uncertain,  however,  whether  this  isle  is 
meant  here,  or  the  strip  of  Phoenician  coast, 
since  the  Hebrew  't'  lias  both  meanings. 
Then  whom  the  merchants  of  Zidon  .  .  . 
have  replenished.  During  the  flourishing 
period  of  Tyre  (b.o.  1025—585),  Zidon, 
though  it  had  generally  kings  of  its  own, 
played  a  secondary  part  to  Tyre,  and  for 
the  most  part  acquiesced  in  Tyrian  su- 
premacy. Its  best  sailors  served  in  the 
Tyrian  fleet  (Ezek.  xxvii.  8),  and  its  mer- 
chants were  content  to  enrich  the  recognized 
"chief  city." 

Ver.  3. — By  great  waters;  rather,  on 
great  waters ;  i.e.  on  the  waters  of  the  Me- 
diterranean (cf.^Ps.  evil.  23;  Ezek.  xxvii. 
26).  The  Egyptian  vessels  conveyed  tl:e 
com  intended  for  exportation  to  the  ports 
at  the  mouths  of  the  Nile,  where  it  was 
transhipped  aboard  Phoenician  craft,  which 
carried  it  on  the  open  sea  to  the  countries 
needing  it.  We  never  hear  of  the  Egyptians 
disputing  the  trade  of  the  Mediterranean 
with  the  Phoenicians  and  the  Greeks,  though 
the3'  certainly  had  trading-vessels  at  times 
on  the  waters  of  the  Bed  Sea.  The  seed  of 
Sihor ;  i.e.  the  com  of  the.Nile  valley.  "  Si- 
hor,"  or  rather  "  Sliihor,"  is  the  only  proper 
name  by  which  the  Nile  is  designated  in 
the  Hebrew  Scriptures.  It  means  "  the  dark," 
"tlie  turbid,"  and  may  be  compared  with 
the  modem  "  Bahr-el-azra/c,"  used  of  the 
Eastern  or  Abyssinian  Nile,  and  vrith  the 
term"Nilus"  itself,  if  that  signifies  "the 
dark  blue  stream."  It  occurs,  as  the  name 
of  the  Nile,  only  in  Josh.  xiii.  3 ;  1  Chron. 
xiii.  5;  Jer.  ii.  18;  and  the  present  place. 
Is  her  revenue ;  i.e.  "  produces  a  portion  of 
her  annual  income."  And  she  is  a  mart  of 
nations  (so  Gesenius  and  Ewald).  De- 
lltzsch  and  Mr.  .Oheyne  translate,  "A  ia 


372 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxm.  1— 18 


the  gain  of  the  nations,"  referring  "it"  to 
the  com  which  the  Tynans  exported. 

Ver.  i. — Be  thou  ashamed,  0  Zidon,  Zidon, 
the  most  ancient  and  venerable  of  the  Pho9- 
nician  cities  (Gen.  z.  15;  Josh.  xi.  8;  xix. 
28;  Judg.  xviii.  7;  Justin,  iviii.  8,  etc.), 
is  called  upon  to  feel  shame  because  Tyre 
is  captured.  The  ruin  of  the  metropolitan 
city  would  be  felt  as  a  disgrace  by  all  the 
lesser  towns,  and  by  Zidon  especially.  The 
sea  .  .  .  even  the  strength  of  the  sea; 
rather,  the  stronghold  of  the  sea;  i.e.  Tyre 
herself.  Tyre  declares  that  she  is  child- 
less, has  neither  son  nor  daughter,  is  as  if 
she  had  never  travailed  nor  brought  forth 
children.  I  travail  not,  etc. ;  rather,  /  hava 
not  travailed,  nor  irought  forth,  nor  nourished 
up,  etc.  My  children  being  dca<l  or  taken 
from  me,  it  is  as  if  I  had  never  borne  them. 

Ver.  5. — ^Ab  at  the  report  oonoerning 
Egypt ;  rather,  when  the  rumour  eluiU  reach 
Jigypt  (see  the  Septuagint,  the  Vulgate,  Ge- 
senius,  Knobel,  Cheyne,  etc.).  They  shall 
be  sorely  pained.  The  Egyptians  bore  no 
great  affection  towards  any  foreign  nation. 
They  were  a  people  whose  charity  began 
and  ended  at  home.  But  the  fall  of  Tyre 
was  always  a  shock  to  them,  and  was  felt  to 
portend  evil  to  themselves.  The  Asiatic 
power  which  was  strong  enough  to  ciipture 
the  island-fortress  would  be  a  formidable 
enemy  to  Egypt  itself,  and  might  be  ex- 
pected at  no  distant  date  to  attempt  the 
conquest  of  the  Nile  valley. 

Ver.  6. — Pass  ye  over  to  Tarshish.  The 
advice  was  good,  and  may,  perhaps,  have 
been  followed  to  some  extent.  When  Sen- 
nacherib attacked  ElulsBus  of  Sidon  (b.o. 
701),  that  monarch  fled  across  the  sea 
('  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  1.  p.  35),  pro- 
bably to  Cyprus.  When  Alexander  finally 
ruined  Tyre,  a  part  of  the  population  made 
its  escape  on  shipboard  to  Carthage  (Arrian, 
'  Exp.  Alex.,'  ii.  24,  §  8).  An  escape  of  the 
kind  is  represented  in  the  Assyrian  sculp- 
tures (Layard,  '  Monuments  of  Nineveh,' 
first  series,  pi.  71). 

Ver.  7. — Is  this  your  joyous  city?  lite- 
rally, your  joyous  one ;  I.e.  Can  this  wretched 
heap  of  ruins  be  tlie  rich  and  joyous  Tyre? 
Whose  antiquity  is  of  ancient  days.  Though 
n  arded  as  less  ancient  than  Zidon  (Justin, 
xviii.  3),  Tyre  nevertheless  claimed  a  very 
remote  antiquity.  Herodotus  was  told 
(about  B.o.  450)  that  its  temple  of  Hercules 
(Melkarth)  had  been  built  two  thousand 
three  hundred  years  previously  (Herod.,  ii. 
44).  Q.  Curtius  makes  the  city  to  have 
been  founded  by  Agenor,  the  father  of  Ciid- 
mus,  who  was  supposed  to  have  lived  three 
hundred  years  before  the  Trojan  War  ('  Vit. 
Alex.,'  iv.  4).  It  must  be  noted,  however, 
on  the  other  hand,  that  there  is  no  mention 
at  all  of  Xyre  in  Homer,  and  none  in  Scrip- 


tare  until  the  time  of  Joshua  (Josh.  xix. 
29),  about  B.O.  1300.  Her  own  feet  shall 
carry  her  afar  off  to  Bojonm  (so  Lowth, 
EosenmuUer,  Gesenius,  Bwald,  Kay).  Others 
render  the  passage,  "  whose  feet  were  wont 
to  carry  her  afar  off  to  sojourn."  In  the 
one  case  the  coming  flight  and  exile,  in  the 
other  the  past  commercial  enterprise  ot 
the  city,  is  pointed  at. 

Ver.  8. — ^Who  hath  taken  thii  oounseH 
Who  can  have  conceived  the  thought  of 
destroying  a  city  at  once  so  powerful  and 
so  conduiive  to  the  advantage  of  other 
states  ?  The  answer  is  given  in  the  next 
verse.  The  crowning  city ;  i.e.  "  the  dis- 
penser of  crowns."  Either  to  the  governors 
of  her  colonies,  or  perhaps  to  the  other 
cities  of  Phoenicia  Proper.  It  is  not  quite 
clear  whether  the  kings  of  those  cities  needed 
the  sanction  of  Tyre  to  confirm  them  on 
their  thrones,  or  not.  The  Hebrew  word 
used  must  certainly  be  rendered  "crown- 
ing," and  not  "crowned."  Whose  mer- 
chants are  princes.  Not  actually  sove- 
reigns, but  the  chief  men  in  the  state  under 
the  king.  TrafSckers;  literally,  CSunoanites. 
But  the  ethnic  name  seems  to  bare  early 
acquired  the  secondary  meaning  of  "tra- 
ders "  (see  Prov.  xxxi.  24 ;  Job  xli.  6). 

Ver.  9. — The  Lord  of  hosts  hath  purposed 
it ;  ratlier,  hath  counselled  it.  The  word  is 
the  same  as  that  used  in  the  opening  clause 
of  ver.  8.  God  has  conceived  the  thought 
of  destroying  Tyre,  for  the  reasons  which 
the  prophet  proceeds  to  specify:  1.  To 
stain,  the  pride  of  all  glory ;  or,  of  all  beauty. 
Not  that  "glory"  or  "beauty"  are  dis- 
pleasing to  him,  or  provoke  his  envy,  as  the 
heathen  thought  (Herod.,  vii.  10,  §  4),  but 
that  those  who  "  pride  "  themselves  on  their 
glory  and  beauty  offend  him.  2.  To  bring 
into  contempt  all  the  honourable  of  the  earth ; 
i.e.  to  render  contemptible  those  whom  the 
world  honours,  though  they  do  not  deserve 
honour. 

Ver.  10. — Pass  through  thy  land  as  a 
river;  rather,  overflow  thy  land,  as  the  Nile. 
Shake  off  all  rcbtraint;  that  is,  give  thy 
desires  free  vent — be  no  longer  cramped  and 
confined  by  the  restrictions  of  the  metro- 
polis. Tartessus  is  addressed,  as  the  leading 
colony,  and  perhaps  the  one  most  oppressed ; 
and  in  her  person  all  the  colonies  are  called 
on  to  shake  tliemselves  free  of  the  mother 
city.  There  is  no  more  strength;  rather, 
there  is  no  more  a  girdle;  i.e.  there  is  no- 
thing tliat  need  restrain  you — the  power  of 
Tyre  is  gone  I 

Ver.  11. — He  stretched  out  his  hand  over 
the  sea.  By  "  he "  we  must  understand 
"  Jehovah  "  (see  ver.  9).  God  has  smitten 
Tyre — the  great  maritime  power — destroyed 
its  dominion,  and  set  its  subject  cities  free. 
He  shook  the  Mngdoms ;  t.e.  uot  only  Tyre, 


cfi.  txm,  1— 18.]    THE  BOOK  OP  TTtE  PSOPHET  TSAIAH. 


S78 


but  the  other  pities  of  the  Fhcenician  coast, 
each  of  -whieli  had  its  own  king  (Herod., 
Tii.  98;  Stiab.,  xtL  p.  751).  Against  the 
meiohant  city;  rather,  againet  Canaan. 
Phoenicia  ii  called  "Canaan,"  as  England 
is  often  called  "  Britain."  So  the  "  Syro- 
FhoBnioian  woman"  of  Mark  vii.  26  is  "a 
woman  of  Canaan  "  in  Matt.  xt.  22. 

Ver.  12. — He  said.  Jehovah  continnes 
his  threateningg.  The  oppressed  virgin, 
daughter  of  Sidon — or  rather,  the  oppressed 
virgin-daitghter  of  Sidon — ^may  be  either 
Tyre,  which,  according  to  some,  was  built 
by  fugitives  from  Zidon,  or  Phoenicia  gene- 
rally, of  which  Zidon,  as  the  "firstlrarn" 
(Gen.  X.  15),  wag  a  sort  of  mother.  Pass 
over  to  Chittim  (comp.  ver.  6).  Ohittim 
(Cyprus)  was  a  nearer  refuge  than  Tarshlsh, 
and  far  more  easily  reached ;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  was  much  less  safe.  Sargon 
and  Esarhaddon  both  of  them  exercised 
dominion  over  it;  and  when  Abdi-Milkut, 
King  of  Sidon,  fled  there  in  the  reign  of  the 
latter,  the  Assyrian  monarch  pursued  him, 
caught  him,  and  "  cut  otf  his  head "  (G. 
Smith, '  Bpohym  Canon,'  p.  137).  Still,  it 
was  so  often  sought  by  princes  flying  from 
Fhcenicia  when  attacked  by  Assyria,  that 
cuneiform  scholars  call  it  "  the  usual  refuge 
of  the  Phoenician  kings"  ('Transactions  of 
Bibl.  Archaeology  Society,'  vol.  iv.  p.  86). 
There  also  shalt  thou  have  no  rest.  Cyprus 
submitted  to  Sargon  ('  Records  of  the  Past,' 
voL  vii.  p.  26),  and  again  to  Esarhaildon 
(ibid.,  vol.  viii.  p.  108).  It  was  included  in 
the  dominions  of  Asshur-bani-pal  (G.  Smith, 
'History  of  Asshur-bani-pal,'  pp.  31,  32). 
After  Nebuchadnezzar's  conquest  of  Tyre, 
it  was  annexed  by  Egypt  (Herod.,  ii.  182), 
on  the  conquest  of  wliich  country  by  Ciun- 
byses  it  became  Persian.  The  Phoenicians 
bad  "  no  rest "  there  after  Assyria  had  once 
found  her  way  to  the  island. 

Ver.  13.— Behold  the  land  of  the  Chal- 
deans (comp.  ch.  xiii.  19;  xlvii.  1,  5;  xlviii. 
14, 20).  Like  Jeremiah  ami  Ezekiel,  Isaiah 
knows  the  people  as  ChaMeans  (Katdim), 
the  capital  as  Babylon.  Kaldi,  in  the  in- 
scriptions, is  a  rare  word,  and  the  name  of 
a  not  very  important  tribe.  Yet  Berosus 
uses  the  term  to  designate  the  whole  nation. 
This  people  was  not;  rather,  is  not^  i,e.  "is 
no  more  a  people  " — "  has  ceased  to  exist." 
Sargon  conquered  Babylon  in  B.O.  710,  and 
made  himself  king,  ruling  it,  together  with 
Assyria,  until  B.o.  705,  when  it  rebelled  and 
recovered  its  independence.  Sennacherib 
reconquered  it  in  B.o.  704,  and  again  in  B.C. 
700,  nhen  he  made  his  eldest  son  viceroy. 
Esarhaddon  ruled  over  both  countries,  as 
did  Asshurbani-paL  Though  later  (about 
B.O.  620 — 610)  Babylon  reasserted  her  inde- 
pendence, and  became  a  great  empire,  yet 
laaiikh  was  justified,  at  almost  any  period  of 


his  life  after  b.o.  710,  in  speaking  of  her  as 
non-existent.  Till  the  Assyrian  founded  it  for 
them  that  dwell  in  the  wilderness.  There 
is  no  "  till "  in  the  original.  The  clause  is 
separate  and  independent,  not  connected 
grammatically  with  the  preceding.  Nor 
does  it  assert  that  the  Assyrians  "  founded  " 
Babylon  for  any  one,  but  only  that  they 
"established"  it,  or  "appointed"  it  to  be 
a  habitation  for  "  the  beasts  of  Oie  desert " 
(comp.  ch.  xiii.  21;  xxxiv.  14;  Jer.  1.  39, 
etc.).  The  prophet  views  the  Assyrians  as 
intending  to  reduce  Babylon  to  ruins,  and 
leave  it  waste  and  uninhabited.  The  towers 
thereof;  t.e.  the  siege-towers  requisite  for 
reducing  so  strong  a  city.  They  raised  up ; 
rather,  they  made  bare  (of.  Hab.  iii.  9). 
He  brought  it  to  ruin.  "  He  "  is  "  the 
Assyrian."  The  case  of  Babylon  is  ad- 
duced to  increase  the  alarm  of  Tyre,  by 
reminding  the  inhabitants  of  what  the  As- 
syrians had  done  to  a  town  greater  and 
stronger  than  their  own.  The  allusion  is 
prob  illy  to  certain  severities  of  Sargon's 
in  B.C.  710,  which,  however,  are  rhetorically 
exaggerated.  It  was  never  the  policy  of 
the  Assyrians  to  depopulate  or  destroy 
Babylon. 

Ver.  14. — Howl,  ye  ships  of  Tarshish 
(comp.  ver.  1).  The  ships  that  traded  with 
Tarshish,  not  those  belonging  to  Tarshish, 
are  intended.  Your  strength  is  laid  waste ; 
rather,  your  stronghold;  i.e.  Tyre  itself. 
The  elegy  ends  as  it  began,  with  a  state- 
ment of  the  bare  fact.  Alexander's  destruc- 
tion of  the  city  was  the  final  and  complete 
fuUilment  of  the  prophecy.  The  captures 
by  Esarhaddon  (G.  Smith,  '  Eponym 
Canon,'  pp.  139 — 142),  by  Asshur-bani-pal 
(ibid.,  pp.  144. 145),  and  by  Nebuchadnezzar, 
were  anticipations  of  the  final  one,  and 
partial  fulfilments  of  the  prophecy. 

Vers.  15 — 18. — Tyke's  Restoration  to 
Prospebitt  ajjd  Conversion  to  Jehovah. 
After  an  interval,  expressed  by  the  symbolic 
number  of  "  seventy  yciirs,"  Tyre  is  to  rise 
from  her  ashes,  and  become  once  more  a 
prosperous  state,  resuming  her  former  occu- 
pation of  a  "  merchant  city,"  and  once  more 
making  great  gains,  which  she  will  devote 
to  the  service  of  Jehovah.  St.  Jerome 
thought  that  this  prophecy  had  not  been 
accomplished  in  his  day.  If  so,  it  cannot 
be  said  to  have  been  accomplished  yet; 
unless,  indeed.  Tyre  may  be  regarded  ns 
representing  the  commercial  spirit,  which, 
under  Christianity,  is  not  necessarily  alien 
from  religion,  but  shows  itself  sometimes 
altogether  friendly  to  the  Church,  supplying' 
ways  and  means  for  ten  thooaand  philan 


374 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxhl  1—18. 


thnpio  and  praiseworthy  enterprisei  (ver. 
18). 

Ver.  15.— Tyre  shall  be  forgotten;  i.e. 
"  sholl  cease  to  occnpy  men's  thoughts,  as  a 
factor  in  politics — shall  pass  out  of  their 
calculations,  and  count  for  nothing."  Seventy 
years.  "  Forty  years  "  and  "  seventy  years  " 
are  the  chief  representatives  in  Scripture 
of  an  indefinite  time.  The  week  of  creation 
eeems  to  have  given  to  seven  its  quasi- 
sacred  character,  which  passed  from  the 
primary  number  to  the  corresponding  deci- 
mal one.  The  sacred  use  of  "seventy" 
appears  first  in  the  "seventy  elders"  who 
accompanied  Moses  to  the  covenant-feast  on 
Sinai  (Exod.  xxiv.  9).  After  this, "  seventy  " 
talents  are  mentioned  as  the  weight  of  the 
bronze  offerings  for  the  tabernacle  (Exod. 
xxxviii.  29),  and  "  seventy  "  shekels  as  the 
weight  of  the  silver  bowls  offered  by  the 
heads  of  tribes  when  the  tabernacle  was  set 
up  (Numb,  vii  13—85).  The  "indefinite  " 
use  of  "  seventy  "  is  most  apparent  in  such 
expressions  as  that  of  Gen.  iv.  24,  "  If  Cain 
shall  be  avenged  sevenfold,  surely  Lamech 
seventy  and  sevenfold  ; "  and  that  of  Matt, 
xviii.  22,  "I  say  not  unto  thee,  Until 
seven  times :  but.  Until  seventy  times  seven." 
"Seventy"  seems  also  to  be  Indefinite  in 
Exod.  XV.  27;  Numb,  xxxiii.  9 ;  Judg.  i.  7; 
xii.  13;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  15;  1  Kings  v.  15; 
1  Chion.  xxi.  14,  etc.  It  is  absurd  to  count 
the  "seventy  years"  of  the  present  passage, 
03  some  di),  from  the  accession  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar to  the  death  of  Nabonidus,  for  neither 
did  Tyre  begin  to  be  forgotten  in  the  first 
year  of  the  one  prince,  nor  did  she  imme- 
diately recover  herself  on  the  death  of  the 
other.  According  to  the  days  of  one  king ; 
or,  like  the  days  of  one  king.  The  period, 
whatever  its  length,  should  be  to  Tyie 
"  like  the  days  of  one  king;"  i.e.  unchanging, 
without  hope.  Oriental  kings  prided  them- 
selves on  maintaining  an  unaltered  policy 
(cf.  2  Kings  XXV.  27;  ch.  xiv.  17).  Shall 
Tyre  sing  as  an  harlot ;  literally,  it  shall  be 
to  Tyre  as  [•»]  the  song  of  Oie  harlot.  A 
patticnlar  song  seems  to  be  meant,  part  of 


which  the  prophet  proceeds  to  (iiiote  in  the 
next  verse. 

Ver.  16.— Take  an  harp.  Harlots  in  the 
East,  and  indeed  in  the  West  also  in  anciint 
times  (Hor.,  'Bpist.,'  i.  14,  L  25),  were 
expected  to  be  musicians.  The  harp  and 
the  guitar  were  their  usual  instruments. 
Forgotten  harlot  In  addressing  Tyre  as 
a  "harlot,"  the  prophet  does  not  seem  to 
mean  more  than  that  her  aims  were,  or  at 
any  rate  had  been,  selfish  and  worldly,  such 
as  sever  between  man  and  God.    She  had 

Eursued  wealth  for  the  enjoyments  that  it 
rought  her,  not  in  order  to  make  a  good 
use  of  it.  Hers  had  been  the  covetousness 
which  is  "idolatry  "  (Col.  iii.  5). 

Ver.  17.— The  Lord  will  visit  Tyre.  In 
mercy,  not  in  judgment  (cf.  Jer.  xxvii.  22 ; 
xxix.  10).  She  shall  tnm  to  her  hire;  i.e. 
"  to  her  oomraeroe,"  to  her  former  mode  of 
life.  But  with  the  difference  noted  in 
ver.  18. 

Ver.  18.— Her  merchandise  and  her  hire 
shall  he  holiness  to  the  lord.  There  is 
nothing  intrinsically  wrong  or  debasing  in 
commerce.  Rightly  pursued,  and  engaged 
in  with  the  view  of  devoting  the  profits 
made  in  it  to  good  and  pious  ends,  the  com- 
mercial life  may  be  as  religious,  and  as 
acceptable  to  God  as  any  other.  The  world 
has  known  many  merchants  who  were  Chris- 
tians, in  the  highest  sense  of  the  word. 
Solnmnn  in  his  best  days  was  a  merchant 
(1  Kings  ix.  27,  28;  x.  22),  butone  who 
employed  the  wealth  « hich  he  derived  from 
commerce  to  the  honour  and  glory  of  God. 
It  shall  not  be  treasured  nor  laid  up.  The 
merchants  shall  not  lay  it  up  in  their  own 
coffers,  but  expend  it  wisely  and  religiously. 
It  shall  be  for  them  that  dwell  before  the 
Lord;  i.e.  it  shall  be  applied  to  religious 
uses — to  the  sustentatiou  of  ministers,  the 
relief  of  the  poor  and  necessitous  among 
God's  people,  and  other  similar  pmposes. 
Such  an  employment  of  the  gains  made 
sanctifies  commerce,  and  makes  it  •  good 
and  a  blessed  thing. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Ver.  9. — The  fall  of  Tyre  a  warning  against  pride  in  (he  glorieg  of  civilization 
and  art.  In  destroying  Tyre,  God,  we  are  told,  "  purposed  to  stain  the  pride  of  all 
glory."  The  word  translated  "  glory  "  also  signifies  "  beauty  "  (2  Sam.  i.  19 ;  ch.iv.  2 ; 
Ezek.  vii.  20);  and  the  "  glory  "  for  which  Tyre  was  renowned  consisted,  not  in  mili- 
tary reputation  or  governmental  ability,  but  in  wealth,  commerce,  and  the  production 
ut  beautiful  objects,  as  garments,  bowls,  metal  castings,  and  other  works  of  art.  It 
was  on  the  perfection  to  which  she  had  brought  the  arts  which  aim  at  embodying  the 
Ueautiful,  that  Tyre  especially  prided  herself.  Her  boast  was,  "lam  of  perfect  beauty  " 
vEzek.  xxvii.  3).    By  her  fate  we  are  taught — - 

I.  That  thb  oult  of  the  beautiful  has  its  esfeoial  DAKasBs  to  oub  hobak 


OH.  xxiii.  1— 18.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  876 

NATUBE.  Artistic  work  seems  to  emanate  so  entirely  from  a  man  himself,  to  b«  so  purely 
his  own  ahsolute  creation,  that  it  naturally  raises  in  him  an  admiration  of  himself  and 
an  exalted  conception  of  his  own  powers.  How  shall  he  not  be  proud  of  fattulties  that 
enable  him  to  produce  works  which  send  a  thrill  of  delight  through  crowds,  and  ar« 
recognized  as  possessions  for  all  time  I  Again,  the  beautiful  is  so  charming,  so  attrac- 
tive, that  it  is  apt  to  seem  sufBcient  for  a  man,  and  so  to  absorb  all  his  attention,  and 
shut  out  all  thought  of  higher  and  nobler  things.  In  our  own  time  the  cult  is  actuaHy 
preached  as  a  sufficient  religion,  and  men  are  asked  what  more  they  can  possibly  desire 
than  to  feast  the  eye  perpetually  on  beautiful  objects — beautiful  buildings,  beautiful 
furniture,  beautiful  clothes,  pictures,  statues,  statuettes,  harmonious  colours,  delicate 
textures,  soft  and  subdued  light,  graceful  forms,  pleasing  contrasts.  A  weak  and  effe- 
minate race  is  produced  by  such  a  training;  the  rohuster  virtues  are  uncared  far;  men 
become  lapped  in  a  luxurious  sensualism,  and  need  a  warning  voice,  like  that  of 
the  prophet,  to  wake  them  from  their  delightful  dream  to  life's  stern  realities. 

II.   Q'HAT   the   EXCLUSIVB    CULT  OF   THE   BBAtTTIFDL    PROVOKES   God's    ANOEB    AND 

JEALOUSY.  Tyre  is  not  accused  of  crimes.  She  is  not  a  "  bloody  city,"  like  Nineveh 
(Nah.  iii.  1) ;  she  is  not  "  full  of  lies  and  robbery."  Her  punishment  does  not  come 
upon  her  "  because  of  the  violence  "  that  is  in  her,  nor  for  extreme  arrogancy,  nor  for 
hypocrisy.  Her  sin  seems  to  be  in  her  luxury,  in  her  softness,  in  her  "  perfect  beauty  " 
(Ezek.  xxviL  11).  She  is  rich,  she  is  comely,  she  has  things  of  beauty  all  about  her, 
and  she  is  content.  She  wants  no  more.  The  beautiful  and  the  enjoyable  satisfy  her. 
But  God  is  angered  thereby.  He  will  not  have  even  the  beautiful,  though  it  is  a  shadow 
of  himself,  shut  him  out  from  the  first  place  in  men's  thoughts.  He  will  vindicate  his 
own  honour.  He  will  suffer  no  rival  near  his  throne.  If  men  are  so  wrapt  up  in 
anything  as  to  forget  him,  he  will  remind  them  of  himself  by  some  terrible  judgment, 
which  can  be  ascribed  to  none  but  him  (vers.  8 — 11). 

Vers.  17, 18. — Hieptirsuit  of  wealth  culpable  or  praiseworthy  aeeording  to  the  object 
had  in  view.  To  seek  gain  for  gain's  sake,  either  for  the  mere  purpose  of  hoarding  and 
accuniulating,  and  so  having  the  satisfaction  of  feeling  that  one  is  rich  (Hor.,  'Sat.,'i.  1, 
11.  66,  67),  or  to  expend  it  on  one's  self  in  luxuries  and  enjoyments  of  various  kinds, 
though  perhaps  beneficial  to  the  community  whereto  a  man  belongs,  is  injurious  to  his 
own  moral  character,  and  an  offence  to  God.  Covetousness,  the  apostle  assures  us 
(Col.  iii.  5),  is  idolatry,  and  so  is  selfishness  of  every  kind.  Those  who  have  their 
heart  set  on  any  other  eud  except  pleasing  God,  are  idolaters,  whatever  the  end  may  be. 
They  let  something,  which  is  not  God,  absorb  their  thoughts,  occupy  their  minds, 
engage  their  affections.  They  gradually  and  silently,  perhaps  even  unconsciously,  lose 
the  sense  of  God's  presence,  of  his  providence,  at  last  of  his  very  existence.  They 
become  practical  atheists.  On  the  otlier  hand,  to  seek  gain  for  the  purpose  of  making 
a  right  use  of  it,  to  spend  it  in  the  service  of  God,  either  directly  in  church-building 
and  endowing,  or  indirectly  in  ameliorating  the  condition  of  mankind  at  large  or  of  any 
special  class  of  men,  is  elevating  to  the  moral  character  and  pleasing  in  God's  sight. 
Any  occupation  not  in  itself  wrong  is  rendered  honourable,  and  in  a  certain  sense 
sanctified,  by  being  pursued  in  this  spirit.  Better  to  be  a  "  publican,"  like  Zacchaeus, 
however  discreditable  the  calling  in  the  sight  of  man,  if  one-half  of  the  gains  made  be 
devoted  to  feeding  the  poor,  than  to  follow  the  most  elevated  calling  and  appropriate 
all  the  proceeds  to  one's  self.  "  Qain  "  becomes  "  godliness  "  when  the  great  wealth, 
which  is  the  result  of  high  qualities  wisely  employed,  and  blessed  by  God  in  such 
employment^  is  made  an  offering  to  him,  in  the  person  of  his  Church  or  of  bis  poor. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1—18. — The  fall  of  Tyre.  I.  The  ancient  fame  of  Ttbb.  Consecrated  to 
Melkarth,  the  principal  god  of  the  city,  the  temple  on  the  island,  the  supposed  site  of 
the  ancient  city,  is  said  by,  Arrian  to  have  been  the  most  ancient  within  the  memory 
of  man.  Ezekiel  speaks  of  Tyre  as  "  in  the  midst  of  the  seas  "  (xxvii.  25,  26).  The 
Tyrians  were  closely  connected  with  the  Zidonians,  those  famous  "  hewers  of  timber  " 
(1  Eingi  V.  6).    And  perhaps  the  Zidonians  of  Homer  ('IL,'  vi.  290;  xxiiL  743; 


^76  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxiii.  1— 18. 

'  Od,'  It.  841 ;  xvii.  424)  include  the  Tyriani.  Besides  their  renown  In  foreet-craft, 
tliey  were  skilful  workers  in  brass  and  copper.  In  Solomon's  time  there  was  close 
intercourse  between  Hebrews  and  Tyrians,  the  former  exchanging  their  corn  and  oil  for 
the  cedar-wood  and  precious  metals  of  the  latter  (1  Kings  is.  11 — 14,  26 — 28 ;  x.  22). 
The  denunciation  of  the  prophets  against  Tyre  begin  from  the  time  when  the  Tyrians 
and  the  Phoenicians  began  to  buy  Hebrew  captives  and  sell  them  to  the  Greeks : 
"  The  children  of  Judah  and  the  children  of  Jerusalem  have  ye  sold  unto  the  Grecians 
that  ye  might  remove  them  far  from  their  border  "  (Joel  iii.  6 ;  *i,  Amos  i.  9, 10).  A 
great  commercial  people,  they  planted  Carthage,  and  became  pobsessed  of  Cyprus.  We 
find  one  Luliya  (orBlulaeus)  named  in  Josephus  ('  Ant.,'  ix.  14.  2)  as  ruling  over  Tyre 
during  this  prosperous  period  ;  he  seems  to  have  been,  in  fact,  king  also  of  Zidon  and 
suzerain  of  Plioenicia.  He  fled  before  Sennacherib  to  Cyprus  ('  Records  of  the  Past,' 
vii.  61).  It  is  in  the  light  of  such  relations — Phoenicia  trembling  before  the  advance 
of  Assyria  and  warned  by  the  fate  of  Babylonia — that  we  must  read  the  prophecy  or 
oracle. 

II.  The  rumodb  of  iLt.  We  see  in  this  picture  the  trading-ships  of  the  Phoenicians 
returning  from  their  distant  colonies  in  Spain  on  the  Bsetis  (or  Guadalquivir).  Their 
last  landing-place  on  the  way  home  is  Cyprus,  the  "  land  of  Chittim "  (or  Citium). 
And  here  the  new.<i  meels  them  that  their  liarbour  and  their  home  is  desolate.  And  a 
mighty  howl  arises  from  the  fleet,  while  the  dwellers  on  the  Phoenician  coast  are  dumb 
with  grief.  Egypt  also  is  implicated  in  the  fate  of  Tyre.  In  the  description  by  Ezekiel 
of  the  wealth  of  Tyre,  we  read,  "  Pine  linen  with  broidered  work  from  Egypt  was  that 
which  thou  spreadest  forth  to  be  thy  sail "  (xxvii.  7).  So  here  the  "  seed  of  Sihor  "  (the 
Nile)  is  on  the  ocean-highway,  their  trade  being  carried  on  for  them  by  the  Phoenicians. 
The  Phoenician  coast  was  the  "  barn  for  the  corn  of  the  Nile,"  and  they  distributed  it 
to  the  nations.  And  now  Fhcenicia  is  addressed  through  Zidon,  the  ancient  ancestral 
city.  The  city  was  thought  of  in  antiquity  as  feminine — sometimes  as  a  daughter, 
sometimes  as  a  mother.  So  Tyrian  coins  bear  the  legend,  "  Of  Tyre,  mother  of  the 
Zidonians."  The  rocky  stronghold  of  the  sea  speaks,  and  complains  that  she  is  like  a 
barren  woman ;  for  the  war  has  robbed  her  of  her  young  men  and  maidens.  In  effect 
she  aays,  "  I  am  destroyed  ;  my  wealth  and  resources  gone,  my  commerce  annihi- 
lated, 1  cease  to  plant  cities  and  colonies,  and  to  nourish  and  foster  them  by  my  trade." 
Tyre,  a  daughter  of  the  sea,  is  denied  by  her  own  mother.  As  Tyro  was  an  outpost 
of  Egypt  against  the  Assyrians,  she,  too,  is  "  sore  pained  "  at  the  sad  tidings. 

III.  The  lamentation  over  Tyee.  The  prophet  advises  the  people  to  migrate  to 
their  Spanish  colonies;  for  the  capital  can  no  longer  shelter  them.  "Prum  later  times  we 
have  a  picture  of  a  scene  similar  to  that  now  passing  before  his  mind's  eye.  When 
Alexander  the  Great  besieged  Tyre  they  at  first  laughed  at  the  king  and  the  mound 
which  he  built,  "as  if  he  thought  to  vanquish  Poseidon,"  god  of  the  sea;  afterwards, 
as  it  grew  surprisingly,  they  sent  their  children,  wives,  and  old  people  to  Carthage  " 
(Diod.,  xvii.  41).  Ami  the  LXX.  says  that  they  fled  thither  on  this  occasion. 
1.  Luxury  and  pride  ashamed.  The  prophet  looks  in  vision  upon  a  heap  of  ruins;  it 
u  like  the  corpse  of  a  once  beautiful  and  proud  woman.  Once  she  was  the  "joyous 
city,  that  dwelt  carelessly  "  (Zeph.  ii.  15),  and  felt  herself  to  be  without  a  rival.  She 
boasted  of  her  antiquity.  The  Tyrians  told  Herodotus  (in  the  fifth  century  B.C.)  that 
their  city  had  already  been  founded  two  thousand  three  hundred  years  (ii.  44).  Her 
trailers,  like  those  of  Venice  in  the  Middle  Ages,  had  been  reckoned  the  equals  of  princes 
and  kings  (Jer.  xxv.  22).  But  greed,  arrogance,  oppressive  conduct  towards  other 
nations,  had  brought  her  low,  2.  The  Judgment  of  Ood.  The  hand  of  Jehovah  must 
be  traced  and  felt  in  all  this.  He  brings  the  haughty  low,  that  the  meek  and  despised 
may  be  raised.  Beauty,  which  has  itself  associations  of  sacredness  to  the  imagination, 
is  not  beautiful  when  it  gilds  and  glorifies  infamy.  Then  Jehovah  desecrates  it,  and 
brings  disgrace  upon  the  grace  and  honour  of  the  merely  worldly  great.  "  Whoever  is 
the  instrument,  yet  the  overthrow  of  wicked,  proud,  and  vicious  cities  and  nations  is  to 
be  traced  to  the  Ood  who  rules  in  the  empires  and  kingiloms  of  the  earth ;  and  he  often 
selects  the  most  distinguished  and  important  cities  and  men  to  make  them  examples  to 
others,  and  to  show  the  ease  with  which  he  can  b/ing  all  down  to  the  earth.  The 
dispersion  of  the  people  is  strongly  contrasted  with  their  own  belief  in  their  rooted  and 
immemorial  origin  in  the  soil  of  Phoenicia. 


CH  xxm.  1-18.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PHOPHBT  iSAIAfl.  3?1 

IV.  Emancipation  of  the  Ttrian  colonies.  Harshly  treated,  perhaps,  they  take 
the  first  opportunity  of  throwing  off  the  yoke  of  the  mother-city.  Especially  Tartessus 
is  mentioned.  She  may  now  freely  and  unhindered  overflow  the  land,  even  as,  in  the 
time  of  the  inundation,  Nile's  waters  overspread  Egypt  (Amos  viii.  8  ;  ix.  5).  There  is 
no  "  girdle ; "  perhaps  no  bridle  in  the  hand  of  Tyre  any  longer  to  restrain  her  colony's 
defiant  independence.  For  all  the  kingdoms  that  border  upon  the  sea,  especially  Phoe- 
nicia and  Syria,  have  been  convulsed  with  alarm,  as  Jehovah's  hand  was  stretched  out, 
and  the  order  was  given  to  destroy  the  strong  places  of  Canaan.  Then,  under  the 
favourite  figure  of  the  woman,  the  city  appears  no  longer  an  inviolate  maiden,  but 
dishonoured  and  defiled.  Cyprus  will  afford  no  refuge  for  the  fugitives,  for  she  will  be 
rejoicing  at  deliverance  from  the  Phoenician  yoke,  and  will  not  welcome  them ;  or  the 
"long  arm"  of  the  Assyrian  will  reach  them  there.  No  power,  however  well  founded  and 
far-extending,  can  endure  against  the^a*  of  the  Almighty.  It  might  seem  impossible 
that  a  city  so  celebrated  and  so  powerful,  so  well  defended  and  fortified,  and  associated 
wiih  many  allies  and  confederates,  should  be  destroyed  and  overturned ;  but  "  all  that 
appears  permanent  in  the  world  stands  or  falls  according  to  the  will  of  God,  and  there 
is  no  need  of  the  instruments  of  war  for  overturning  the  best  fortified  place,  but  the 
mere  expression  of  the  will  of  God  is  enough  "  (Calvin).  Warning  from  the/ate  of 
the  Kasdim.  We  know  little  about  this  people,  who  are,  perhaps,  used  to  denote 
Babylon  in  general,  conquered  by  Sargon.  This  land  has  been  turned  into  a  desert 
and  haunt  of  wild  beasts.  The  battering-engines  of  the  Assyrians  have  reduced  their 
forts  to  ruin.     All  around  denotes  the  impending  ruin  to  Tyre. 

V.  The  eestokation  op  Ttrb.  At  the  end  of  "  seventy  years,"  probably  put  for  a 
long  period,  it  appears  that  commerce  will  revive,  "  but  only  as  the  handmaid  of  reli- 
gion.* This  is  the  main  truth  to  be  dwelt  on,  and  the  obscurity  of  the  passage  must 
be  left  to  the  exegetes.  Eecurring  to  the  city  under  the  image  of  the  woman — now  a 
singing-woman — the  prophet  looks  ibrward  to  the  time  when  there  will  be  the  mirth 
of  restored  prosperity  in  the  seats  of  Tyre.  "  When  it  begins  again  to  make  love  to  all 
the  world,  it  will  get  rich  again  from  the  profit  acquired  by  this  worldly  intercourse. 
Wealtli  will  no  longer  be  stored  up  and  capitalized  as  formerly,  but  tributes  and 
]iresents  will  be  given  to  Israel,  and  thui  help  to  sustain  in  abundance  and  clothe  in 
stately  dress  the  nation  which  dwelt  before  Jehovah,  i.e.  whose  true  dwelling-place  was 
in  the  temple  before  the  presence  of  God  (Ps.  xxvii.  4;  Ixxxiv.  5)  "  (Delitzsch).  In 
Chrietian  times  there  was  a  Church  at  Tyre,  visited  by  St.  Paul  (Acts  xxi.  3,  4),  and 
so  its  trade  was  connected  with  the  spread  of  the  gospel. 

Lessons.  1.  Ood  mingles  compassion  with  hit  chastisements  of  cities,  peoples,  and 
individuals.  If  so  towards  the  wicked,  how  much  more  towards  the  children  of  his 
adoption  and  love  1  Restoration,  revivals  of  prosperity,  are  from  him  who,  as  the 
proverb  says,  "  never  smites  with  both  hands."  2.  There  is  a  selfish  and  corrupt  and  a 
true  and  generous  spirit  in  trade.  A  time  is  contemplated  when  richea  will  be  no 
longer  absorbed  by  a  few  enormous  capitalists,  but  be  diffused  for  the  common  good. 
The  narrow-minded  in  trade  is  the  sign  of  the  narrow  heart ;  the  best  traders  are  those 
whom  love  to  their  kind  has  taught  to  unite  personal  interest  with  the  general  good. 
The  accumulation  of  immense  wealth  can  hardly  be  the  object  of  a  Christian  ambi- 
tion. Let  us  hasten,  by  prayer,  by  teaching,  by  example,  the  time  when  we«tlth  shall 
not  be  treasured  nor  laid  up^ 

"  No  more  shall  rest  in  mounded  heaps. 
But  smit  with  freer  liglit  shall  slowly  melt 
In  many  streams  to  fatten  lower  lands, 
And  light  shall  spread,  and  man  be  lil<er  maa 
Thio'  all  the  season  of  the  golden  year." 

3.  Commtrt*  and  Christianity  should  go  hand-in-hand.  Our  sailors  and  oar  merchants 
should  be  the  best  pioneers  of -the  gospel,  and  our  missionaries  the  mo«t  enUghtened 
friends  of  commerce  and  civilization.    So  may  our 

"  Happy  sails  .  .  • 
Knit  land  to  land,  and  blowing  havenward 
With  silks,  and  fruits,  and  spices,  clear  of  toli^ 
Enrich  the  markets  of  the  golden  year," 


378  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxm.  1— 18. 

Ver.  3. — "  The  harvest  of  the  river."  Egypt  was  the  first  of  nations,  and  the  masts 
of  the  vessels  stood  like  tall  river-reeds  by  her  banks.  How  expressive  the  words  are  1 
There  is  life  where  the  river  comes,  life  along  the  emerald  banks  to  which  the  cattle 
come,  and  on  the  fields  where  the  waters  overflow. 

I.  All  lands  have  theib  rivers.  Think  of  the  Tiber,  the  Tigris,  the  Thames, 
the  Rhone,  the  Rhine,  the  Nile,  the  Niger.  Cities  rise  on  their  banks  which  are,  like 
Tyre,  populous  and  prosperous.  The  harvest  is  vast  indeed.  Ships  which  are 
freighted  with  necessaries  and  luxuries,  with  the  works  of  art,  the  spoils  of  the  sea, 
and  the  produce  of  far-away  lands,  all  come  up  the  river.  What  wonder  that  the 
river  should  become  a  type  of  the  blessings  of  the  gospel — that  the  prophet  should 
tell  us  "  living  waters  shall  flow  out  of  Jerusalem  "  1 

II.  The  harvests  are  manifold.  We  are  so  accustomed  to  think  of  the  golden 
sheaves  of  the  corn-fieMs  when  we  mention  the  rivers,  that  we  are  liable  to  forget  how 
indebted  we  are  to  the  broad  estuaries  which  bear  on  their  bosom  the  wealth  of  many 
nations.  How  manifold,  too,  are  our  harvests  under  the  gospel !  Where  that  comes 
philanthropy  lives,  and  social  purity  flows,  and  justice  is  sacred  in  its  rivers  of  righteous- 
ness, and  salvation  comes,  delivering  us  from  sensuality  and  sin.  Harvests  ?  Surely  the 
Christian  should  notice  how  wide  and  vast  the  gospel  waters  are. 

III.  Their  drying  up  is  death.  We  cannot  live  without  rain  and  rivers.  Cattle 
perish.  Verdure  withers.  Man  himself  dies.  No  wealth  can  purchase  what  God  gives 
so  plentifully.  "Hath  the  rain  a  Father?"  Oh  yes.  Not  a  mere  Creator,  but  a 
Father ;  for  it  is  rich  in  evidences  of  his  universal  care  and  love.  God  gives  "  the  former 
and  the  latter  rain,"  and  all  through  the  ages  the  rivers  flow  into  the  sea.  So  God's 
truth  remains  I  The  living  water  flows,  and  the  voice  is  still  heard,  "  Ho,  every  one 
that  thirsteth,  come  ye  tc  the  waters."— W.  M.  S. 

Vers.! — 15. — Aspects  of  Divine  Judgment.  I.  Its  certaintt.  1.  The  durationi^ 
time  is  no  guarantee  against  its  coming ;  Tyre  was  a  "  joyous  city,  whose  antiquity  was 
of  ancient  days "  (ver.  7),  but  judgment  would  fall  upon  her  in  God's  chosen  time. 
Both  men  and  nations  are  apt  to  think  that  long  continuance  in  comfort  is  a  sufBcient 
pledge  that  it  will  never  be  disturbed ;  duration  begets  a  false  sense  of  security.  If 
men  coiild  only  see  things  as  they  are,  they  would  perceive  that  the  true  argument  is 
exactly  opposite  to  that  in  which  they  indulge ;  for  the  longer  a  man  has  been  living 
in  unvisited  transgression,  the  longer  has  penalty  been  due,  and  the  sooner  may  he 
confidently  expect  retribution  to  arrive.  2.  Ordinary  defences  are  of  no  avail  against 
it.  The  commerce  and  consequent  wealth  of  Tyre  (vers.  2,  3),  her  replenishments  from 
Zidon,  and  her  enrichments  from  Egypt  would  not  save  her ;  nor  would  the  high  station 
to  which  she  had  mounted,  nor  the  social  position  of  her  sons ;  it  was  nothing  to  the 
righteous  Lord  that  she  was  esteemed  a  "  crowning  city  "  (ver.  8),  and  that  her  merchants 
were  princes.  No  defences  that  we  can  raise  will  avert  God's  judgment  when  the  hour 
is  ripe  for  sentence  to  be  executed.  Wealth  cannot  buy  off  retribution,  nor  can  rank 
interpose  its  influence  to  avert  it;  science  cannot  teach  us  how  to  elude  it;  and  the 
arm  of  affection  is  impotent  to  shield  us  from  its  blow.  There  is  no  barrier  man  can 
raise  which  is  not  swept  down  in  a  moment  when  God  arises  to  judgment. 

IL  Its  fulness  and  efficacy.  1.  It  silences.  (Ver.  2.)  It  brings  the  curses,  the 
clamours,  the  revilings,  the  slanderous  accusations,  the  shameful  innuendoes  of  ungod- 
liness and  of  malignity  to  a  disgraceful  end.  "  God  strikes  a  silence  through  them  all." 
2.  It  scatters,  it  dissolves.  (Vers.  6,  7, 10.)  It  sends  the  children  of  iniquity,  of  vice,  ol 
crime,  to  "  the  four  corners  of  the  earth  ; "  it  disperses  them  over  sea  and  land.  The 
bands  of  sin  are  broken  up,  and  its  guilty  members  are  scattered  far  and  wide.  3.  It 
humiliates.  (Ver.  12.)  The  virgin-daughter  of  Zidon  should  be  humbled;  God's  judg- 
ments bring  to  the  dust  of  humiliation  those  who  have  held  their  head  high  and  treated 
others  with  indignity.  4.  It  pursues.  (Ver.  12.)  "  There  also  shalt  thou  have  no  rest." 
The  penalty  of  a  man's  sin  finds  him  out  whithersoever  he  may  go  to  escape  it.  Jonah 
"  flees  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  j "  but  whither  shaM  a  maa  flee  from  his  presence, 
or  from  the  blow  of  his  chastisements?  No  change  of  skies,  of  scenes,  of  society,  of 
"Qcupations,  will  shut  out  accusing  recollections  from  the  soul,  or  shield  from  the 
uncompleted  corrections  of  the  Divine  hand.  The  serious  and  repeated  violation  of  the 
"  greater  commandments "  of  God  is  attended  with  penalties  which  pursue  the  soul 


OH.  XXIII.  1—18.]    THE  BOOK  OP   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  379 

from  place  to  place,  and  from  period  to  period,  in  all  the  journey  of  our  life.  6.  It 
incapacitates.  (Ver.  4.)  Tyre  should  lose  her  power  to  found  colonies  and  to  sustain 
cities ;  she  would  he  reduced  to  helplessness  and  incapacity.  This  is  the  fate  of  those 
whom  God's  judgment  overtakes.  What  they  once  did  with  pride  and  joy  they  can 
do  no  longer,  though  they  put  forth  all  their  remaining  powers ;  there  is  "no  strength 
in  their  right  hand."  The  energies  of  the  mind,  the  vigour  of  the  soul,  the  craft  of  the 
hand, — all  is  gone. 

III.  Its  bbmotb  bwectb.  When  Tyre  fell,  the  ships  of  Tarshish  would  hare  occasion 
to  lament  (vers.  1, 14),  Zidon  would  have  to  he  ashamed  of  her  daughter  (ver.  4),  and 
Egypt  would  he  sorely  pained  (ver.  5).  Far  across  sea  and  land,  and  a  long  way  down 
the  coming  and  departing  years,  reach  the  sad  consequences  of  guilt.  The  wisest 
moraUst  cannot  point  to  the  place  where  these  will  not  he  found,  nor  the  cleverest 
calculator  tell  the  time  when  these  will  not  be  felt. 

IV.  Its  Divine  ueaninq.  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  hath  purposed  it,  to  stain  the  pride 
of  all  glory,"  etc.  (ver,  9).  God  sends  punishment  because  it  ii  due ;  because,  in  the 
exercise  of  his  righteousness,  sin  must  be  marked  with  the  signs  of  his  deep  displeasure ; 
but  he  sends  such  penalties  as  he  does  send  in  order  to  compel  his  subjects  to  see  and 
to  feel  that  the  glory  of  man  can  be  scattered  in  a  moment,  and  that  over  all  his  mag- 
nificence the  shadow  of  death  will  be  thrown  whensoever  the  hand  of  Divine  judgment 
is  uplifted.  God's  visitations  are  man's  opportunities ;  then  may  he  learn  and  feel^ 
as  otherwise  he  never  would — that  his  only  wisdom  is  in  instant  abandonment  of 
every  evil  way,  and  immediate  return,  in  penitence  and  faith,  to  a  forgiving  and  restoring 
Saviour. — 0. 

Ver.  18. — Gain  and  devotion.    We  are  reminded  that — 

I.  We  cannot  devote  to  God's  seevicb  anythino  wb  have  not  honourably 
GAINED.  It  may  be  said  that  the  text,  taken  with  its  context  (see  ver.  17),  does  not 
sustain  this  thought ;  that,  indeed,  it  points  in  the  opposite  direction.  But  in  addition 
to  such  explicit  prohibitions  as  that  in  Dent,  xxiii.  18,  we  have  the  whole  strain  and 
spirit  of  the  Law  of  God.  It  is  the  glory  of  that  Law  that  it  so  states,  establishes, 
guards,  enforces,  emphasizes,  the  purity  of  the  Divine  Lawgiver  that  if  any  solitary 
passage  like  this  one  seems  to  sanction  that  which  is  inconsistent  with  it,  we  are  quite 
sure  that,  either  in  its  rendering  or  in  our  interpretation  of  it,  there  must  be  a  mistake. 
Eveiything  was  done  that  could  be  done  to  separate  the  people  of  God  from  the  impurities 
and  iniquities  into  which  other  nations  had  fallen,  and  into  the  sanction  of  which  they 
had  pressed  even  their  religious  rites.  We  may  be  uncertain  about  many  things  in 
Scripture,  but  we  are  quite  sure  of  this,  that  no  smallest  countenance  is  meant  to  be 
given  in  any  single  part  of  it  to  the  devotion  of  ill-earned  gain  to  the  service  of  the 
holy  God  (see  Acts  xix.  18,  19).  Not  only  such  "hire"  as  seems  to  be  hinted  at  here, 
but  all  revenue  that  is  obtained  by  unworthy,  unprincipled,  unconscientious  means 
must  be  wholly  unfit  for  an  offering  on  the  altar  of  God. 

IL  That  we  have  no  eight  to  withhold  from  God'b  service  the  resources 
WE  CAN  control.  They  are  not  to  be  "  treasured  or  laid  up."  To  keep  them  back 
for  use  at  some  future  time,  to  hold  them  in  reserve  for  some  possible  emergency,  is : 
1.  Disobedient.  God  plainly  and  repeatedly  requires  of  us  that  we  should  put  out  our 
"talents"  in  his  service  and  in  that  of  our  fellow-men ;  and  all  the  resources  we  may 
have  at  our  disposal  of  every  kind  are  talents  committed  to  our  charge.  2.  Distrustful, 
It  indicates  a  lack  of  faith  in  the  readiness  of  God  to  provide  for  our  returning  wants, 
and  to  meet  our  necessities  as  they  arise.  3.  Selfish  and  unsympathizing.  It  is  the 
action  of  one  who  has  no  heart  to  feel  the  strong  and  pressing  claims  of  ignoiance, 
sorrow,  and  degradation  on  our  pity  and  our  help.     4.  Wasteful. 

III.  That  wb  should  devote  some  good  part  of  our  substance  to  the  mainteit- 
ANCis  of  public  WORSHIP.  "  For  them  that  dwell  before  the  Lord,"  etc.  1.  All.  our 
possessions  are  to  be  gained,  held,  and  used  religiously ;  they  are  to  be  "  holiness  to  the 
Lord."  2.  Much  of  what  we  have  at  our  disposal  should  be  spent  in  the  furtherance  of 
philanthropy :  in  the  cause  of  education  ;  in  the  restoration  of  the  sick  and  suffering ; 
in  the  reclamation  of  the  fallen ;  in  the  help  and  rehabilitation  of  the  unfortunate,  etc 
3.  Some  of  our  "  means "  we  should  apply  specially  to  the  maintenance  of  Christian 
worship  and  of  the  Christian  ministry.    It  is,  indeed,  possible  to  give  handsomely 


38d  THE  BOOK  OS"  THE  PROPHET  ISAlAtt.    ic6.  xxm.  1—16. 

toward  the  erection  of  sacred  structures,  and,  in  so  doing,  to  be  ministering  to  our  own 
importance;  men  may  be  magnifying  themselves  when  they  propose  and  pretend  to  be 
honourmg  God.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  render  true,  acceptable,  and  lasting  service 
when  we  give  freely — and  in  such  a  way  as  to  encourage  similar  generosity  in  others — 
towards  the  worship  of  GKxi,  towards  the  publication  of  redeeming  truth  at  home  or 
abroad,  towards  the  support  of  those  who  employ  all  their  time  and  expend  all  their 
strength  in  the  noble  work  of  saving  men  and  training  them  for  the  kingdom  of 
heaven. — 0. 

Ver.  1. — The  mission  of  Tyre,  the  commercial.  This  is  the  aspect  under  which  Tyre 
is  best  known  and  remembered.  Dean  Stanley  gives  a  brief  but  characteristically 
suggestive  description  of  it.  "The  massive  remains  of  the  ancient  walls  of  Arvad, 
nearly  surrounding  the  island  of  the  modem  Kuad,  give  some  notion  of  the  defences  of 
Tyre.  The  limited  size  of  the  island  led,  both  in  Tyre  and  Arvad,  to  arrangements 
which  must  have  rendered  them  a  striking  exception  to  most  Oriental  and  to  most 
ancient  cities.  For  the  sake  of  economizing  the  narrow  space,  the  houses  of  both  were 
built  up,  fearless  of  earthquakes,  to  the  height  of  many  stories,  recalling,  says  Strabo, 
the  aspect  of  the  gigantic  mansions  of  the  Augustan  Rome.  With  this  lofty  mass  of 
edifices  towering  on  its  sea-girt  rock,  Tyre  might  well  be  thought  a  fit  type  of  the 
ancient  queen  of  commerce;  and  the  prophet  naturally  spoke  of  her  as  a  floating 
palace,  as  a  ship  moored  by  the  long  strand, '  in  the  midst  of  the  seas,'  with  her  '  masts 
of  cedar,'  her  '  sails  of  fine  linen,  blue  and  purple,'  her  '  mariners,  rowers,  and  pilots.' " 
The  practical  point  to  keep  in  view  is  that  commercial  nations  are  always  in  peril  of 
getting  to  merely  twe  other  nations,  and  sn  to  neglect  their  responsibilities  to  them.  To 
this  danger  commercial  England  is  now  exposed.  Very  much  of  the  talk  of  the  day 
goes  on  the  assumption  that  the  whole  world  was  made  for  the  sake  of  England.  We 
are  being  constantly  reminded  of  our  individuality,  and  of  the  precise  mission  of  the 
indi  vidua'. ;  we  may  be  profitably  reminded  that  there  is  an  individuality  of  nations, 
and  that  each  nation  has  its  separate  mission  and  responsibility.  Dr.  Arnold  illustrates 
this  when  he  says,  "  There  are  three  peojiles  of  God's  election — Borne,  Athens,  and 
Jerusalem;  two  for  things  temporal,  and  one  for  things  eternal.  Yet  even  in  things 
eternal  they  were  allowed  to  minister.  Greek  cultivation  and  Boman  polity  prepared 
men  for  Christianity."  "  God  appears  to  have  communicated  all  religious  knowledge  to 
mankind  through  the  Jewish  people,  and  all  intellectual  civilization  through  the 
Greeks."     As  a  distinctively  commercial  city,  we  may  observe — 

I.  The  mission  op  Ttbe  in  civilization.  The  refinement  of  human  lociety  comes 
about  by  the  operation  of  the  laws  of  association  and  emulation,  just  as  does  the 
refinement  of  the  individual  and  the  family.  It  is  by  seeing  the  things  others  possess, 
and  the  ways  others  take,  that  we  are  incited  to  personal,  family,  and  social  improve- 
ments. Families  that  shut  themselves  up  from  society  keep  their  boorish  manners. 
Nations  isolated  by  natuial  situation  civilize  very  slowly.  Exactly  what  happens  to 
the  young  men  through  Continental  travel  happens  to  a  nation  when  it  reaches  out  to 
other  lands  the  hand  of  commerce.  In  neither  case  is  the  result  wholly  good,  but  a 
large  share  of  goodness  is  in  it,  because  intellectual  growth  and  moral  advancement 
always  go  along  with  the  material  advantages  of  civilization. 

II.  The  mission  of  Ttrk  in  the  brotherhood  of  the  race.  The  scattering  of  the 
nations  over  the  earth ;  the  development  of  special  race-types ;  the  separations  made 
by  antagonistic  interests  and  aggrandizing  individuals,  all  tend  to  the  destruction  of 
the  sense  of  mutual  brotherhood.  And  just  this  commercial  nations  revive,  by  bringing 
plainly  to  view  how  the  prosperity  of  one  nation  depends  on  the  prosperity  of  another, 
and  how  the  well-being  of  the  whole  race-family  can  alone  be  secured  by  universal 
freedom,  peace,  and  kindly  helpfulness.    Tennyson  reminds  of  this  in  the  lineti>- 

"  Knit  land  to  land,  and  blowing  havenward,  .  .  . 
£nrich  the  marketa  of  the  golden  year." 

HL  Its  mission  in  the  demand  of  humanctt  fob  wokk.  It  is  singular  that  man's 
Idea  of  bliss  should  have  become  "  idleness."  The  end  set  before  a  man  in  this  life  is 
that  he  shall  no  longer  have  need  for  work.   Yet  work  is  man's  good — the  Divine  idea  id 


ra.  rxiii.  1-18.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  881 

his  creation ;  the  Divioe  agency  for  his  culture ;  and  the  inexpressibly  sad  thing  to  say 
about  any  man,  here  or  yonder,  is  that  he  does  not  work.  And  commerce,  by  con- 
stantly creating  new  demands  and  enriching  our  stores  of  raw  material,  makes  work. 
All  hindrances  to  commerce,  such  as  taxation  and  war,  injure  the  nations  by  putting 
limitations  on  work.  Universal  peace  would  mean  a  healthy  activity  throughout  the 
world.  Every  man  using  his  ability  in  the  service  of  his  fellow,  and  getting,  as  his 
return,  the  service  of  his  fellow  to  him.  But  there  are  evils  attending  the  spread  of 
commerce.  Especially  such  as  follow  the  undue  share  of  wealth  possessed  by  indi- 
viduals   Shelley  speaks  of  it  thus — 

"  Commeroe  has  set  the  mark  of  selfishneM, 
The  signet  of  its  all-enslaving  power, 
Upon  a  shining  ore,  and  called  it  gold  ; 
Before  whose  image  bow  the  vulgar  great, 
The  vainly  rich,  the  miserable  proud. 
The  mob  of  peasants,  nobles,  priests,  and  kings. 
And  with  blind  feelings  reverence  the  power 
That  grinds  them  to  the  dust  of  misery." 

To  this  also  must  be  added  the  tendency  of  commerce  to  create  selfish  interests — ^to 
destroy  the  idea  and  sentiment  of  personal  and  national  honour,  which  seeks  its  vindi- 
cations in  war,  and  to  encourage  the  notion  that  we  are  to  use  other  people  rather  than 
to  serve  them,  service  being  the  supreme  idea  of  Christ's  regenerate  humanity :  "  I  am 
among  you  as  he  that  serveth."  "  The  Son  of  man  came,  not  to  be  ministered  unto, 
but  to  minister."— B.  T. 

Ver.  2. — The  dependence  of  one  nation  upon  another.  Tyre  was,  according  to  some 
authorities,  a  culouy  of  Zidon.  And  the  figure  in  the  text  sets  forth  a  corporate  body, 
each  part  dependent  on  the  other.  Insular  Tyre  directly  dependent  on  the  mainland, 
and  both  closely  related  to  Zidon.  And  yet  further,  the  Egyptians  had  in  their  coun- 
try no  timber  for  the  building  of  seaworthy  ships,  so  their  foreign  trade  was  carried 
on  for  them  by  the  Phcenicians.  Some  of  the  European  nations  now  are  pressing  to 
•ecure  seaports,  in  order  to  relieve  their  sense  of  dependence  on  others.  Insular  England 
does  the  carrying  trade  for  the  world,  so  all  nations  depend  on  her,  and  she  in  turn 
depends  on  the  trading  of  the  nations.  In  the  pottery  districts  we  were  told  that  the 
white  clay,  of  which  biscuit  china  is  made,  is  brought  all  the  way  from  Coinwall, 
because  it  can  be  more  easily  carried  than  the  heavier  clay,  and  the  coal,  which  are 
needed  for  the  firing  process.  So  even  Staffordshire  depends  on  Cornwall,  and  Cornwall 
on  Staffordshire.  Some  countries  send  us  corn,  some  sugar,  some  spice,  some  cotton, 
some  fruit.  Countries  vary  in  their  genius.  Rome  finds  law  for  the  world,  Greece  finds 
art,  and  Palestine  finds  religion.  For  its  highest  well-being  no  one  nation  can  separate 
itself  from  the  others.     It  lives  and  tlirives  by  its  very  dependence.     We  only  not*— 

I.  That  this  mut0al  dependence  tends  to  check  the  war-spirit.  The  people  of 
the  nations  never  want  war.  They  may  be  roused  to  a  fever-heat  of  passion,  and  so  be 
driven  into  war;  but  the  long  experience  of  the  ages  proves  that,  whoever  gets  good  out 
of  war,  the  people  always  suffer.  Classes  of  society  want  war;  but  only  for  the 
maintenance  of  selfish  interests.  The  evil  of  war  is  seen  in  its  shutting  the  markets 
of  the  world.  Such  is  England's  dependence  on  foreign  corn,  and  so  nearly  does  it 
consume  its  stores  in  the  face  of  the  new  harvest,  that  six  months'  war  would  threaten 
famine.  All  classes,  except  those  who  trade  in  war  and  war  material,  pray  and  strive 
for  universal  peace.    Man's  true  interests  support  the  Christian  principles. 

II.  That  this  mut0al  dependence  enriches  all  sections.  God  has  ordered  his 
world  so  that  nobody  shall  be  "  sufficient  to  himself."  And  the  more  a  man  seems  to 
have,  the  more  dependent  he  becomes,  because  of  the  increase  of  his  wants.  The  most 
independent  man  is  the  ignorant  labourer,  who  can  lie  anywhere  and  eat  anything; 
the  least  independent,  the  wealthy  man  who  has  encouraged  ten  thousand  needless 
wants  and  luxuries.  God.  puts  the  abundance  of  one  thing  in  one  land,  and  of  another 
thing  in  another.  And  the  exchange  of  commodities  enriches  all.  The  world  is  one 
body,  "and  if  one  memlor  suffer,  all  the  members  suffer  with  it."  The  interest  of  one 
nation  U  the  interest  of  all.    God  is  the  God  and  Father  of  all. — B.  T. 


382  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxiii.  1— 1& 

Ver.  9. — <?o(?«  constant  w<yrk  of  humbling  pride.  "  Jehovah  Sabaoth  hath  devised 
it,  to  desecrate  the  pride  of  all  glory."  It  is  possible  that  reference  may  he  intended  to 
the  desecration  of  the  Tynan  temple  of  Hercules,  which  is  said  to  have  been  the  oldest 
in  the  world.  But  the  reference  may  be  general,  and  any  actual  case  would  but  illus- 
trate the  general  truth.  "  God  did  not  bring  these  calamities  upon  Tyre  in  a  way  of 
sovereignty,  to  show  an  arbitrary  and  irresistible  power;  but  he  did  it  to  punish  the 
Tyriana  for  their  pride.  Many  other  sins,  no  doubt,  reigned  among  them — idolatry, 
sensuality,  and  oppression ;  but  the  sin  of  pride  is  fastened  upon  as  that  which  was  the 
particular  ground  of  God's  controversy  with  Tyre,  for  he  resists  the  proud.  Let  the 
ruin  of  Tyre  be  a  warning  to  all  places  and  persons  to  take  heed  of  pride ;  for  it 
proclaims  to  all  the  world  that  he  who  exalts  himself  shall  be  abased."  Thomson,  in 
'  The  Land  and  the  Book,'  forcibly  describes  the  present  condition  of  humbled,  ruined 
Tyre :  "  It  (an  insignificant  village)  is  all  that  remains  of  her.  But  weep  not  for  Tyre ; 
this  very  silence  and  repose  are  most  eloquent  and  emphatic  on  themes  of  the  last  impor- 
tance to  the  Christian  faith.  There  is  nothing  here  of  that  which  led  Joshua  to  call  it 
'  the  strong  city '  more  than  three  thousand  years  ago  (Josh.  xix.  29) ;  nothing  o( 
that  miglity  metropolis  which  bafiBed  the  proud  Nebuchadnezzar  and  all  his  power  for 
thirteen  years,  until  every  head  in  his  army  was  bald,  and  every  shoulder  peeled  in  the 
hard  service  against  Tyrus  (Ezek.  xxix.  18);  nothing  in  this  wretched  roadstead  and 
empty  markets  to  remind  one  of  the  times  when  merry  mariners  did  sing  in  her 
markets ;  no  visible  trace  of  those  towering  ramparts  which  so  long  resisted  the  efforts 
of  tlie  great  Alexander; — all  have  vanished  like  a  troubled  dream.  As  she  now  is  and 
has  long  been,  Tyre  is  God's  witness ;  but  great,  powerful,  and  populous,  she  would  b« 
the  infidel's  boast."  The  point  to  be  illustrated  is  that  God  will  be  sure  to  deal  with 
individuals  and  with  nations,  for  the  humbling  and  crushing  of  pride.  He  will  do  lo 
because — 

I.  Peidb  involves  pbriii  to  a  man's  own  chabactbb.  There  can  be  no  healthy 
growth  where  it  is  present.  The  passive  virtues,  which  are  so  specially  commended  in 
Christianity,  cannot  dwell  with  pride,  which  is  so  closely  allied  with  satisfaction  in  self 
and  the  despising  of  others.     Pride  is  a  worm  at  the  root  of  the  tree  of  character. 

II.  Pride  dbstkotb  the  coMroBTABLENESS  op  a  man's  relations  with  his  fellow- 
men.  The  proud  man  trios  to  keep  away  from  his  fellows.  And  his  fellowt  are  glad 
enough  to  keep  away  from  him.  It  is  inconceivably  miserable  for  a  "  man  to  be  placed 
alone  in  the  midst  of  the  earth." 

III.  Pride  spoils  a  man's  bblations  with  God.  They  are  founded  on  the  proper 
humility  of  the  submissive  and  dependent  creature.  For  man  the  universal  law  iSi, 
"  Humble  yourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  that  he  may  exalt  you  in  due 
time,"  or  else  you  certainly  must,  as  Tyre,  be  hiimbled. — R.  T. 

Ver.  12. — No  escape  from  Ood's  Judgments.  "  There  also  shalt  thou  have  no  rest." 
Either  the  colonists  would  not  receive  them,  or  their  enemies  would  still  pursue  after 
them,  seeking  them  out  even  where  they  had  found  shelter.  Reference  is  intended  to 
those  calamities  which  befell  the  Tyrians  in  their  subsequent  settlements — Cyprug, 
Sicily,  Carthage,  and  Spain.  Cheyne  illustrates  the  expression  by  showing  that  "  the 
long  arm  of  Assyria  reached  them  even  in  Cyprus,  where  Lull,  King  of  Zidon,  had 
already  sought  refuge."  The  importance  of  Cyprus  as  a  naval  station  was  recognized 
by  the  Babylonians  fifteen  or  sixteen  centuiies  before  Christ,  The  inscription  of 
Sargon,  King  of  Agan6,  relates  how  "  the  sea  of  the  setting  sun  he  crossed,"  and  in  the 
third  year  conquered  a  land  which  can  hardly  be  any  other  than  Cyprus.  Cyprus  was 
also  conquered  by  the  Assyrian  Sargon.  God's  judgments  never  exhaust  themselves  in 
acts  which  fail  to  accomplish  the  desired  ends  of  humbling  men's  pride  and  correcting 
men's  faults.  They  go  on  until  their  purpose  is  reached.  The  point  to  be  illustrated 
here  is  that  God's  judgments  cannot  bo  escaped  by  any  fleeing  from  the  place  where 
God's  judgments  are  resting.  Tlie  judgmeut  was  on  the  Tyrians,  and  it  affected  Tyre 
only  for  their  sakea.  So  to  escape  from  Tyre  could  not  result  in  getting  away  from  the 
afflicting  and  humbling  hand  of  God.  'This  may  be  efBciently  illustrated  from  the 
Btory  of  Jonah,  who  hurried  from  the  upland  districts  of  Palestine  to  take  ship  at 
Joppa,  flee  across  the  great  sea,  and  get  away  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  He  could 
not.    God  holdeth  "  the  winds  in  his  fists,  and  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand," 


ixiv.  1— 23.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


383 


and  can  send  these  to  execute  his  judgments.  And  still  it  is  a  fixed  idea  of  men,  out 
of  which  they  need  to  be  driven,  that  they  can  get  free  of  their  disabilities,  and  of 
Divine  judgment  as  correction  of  sin,  by  chansing  their  circumstances,  or  going  from 
one  place  to  another.  Never.  God  deals  with  them,  and  only  in  a  secondary  sense 
with  their  circumstances.  As  long  as  we  sin  we  come  into  me  Divine  judgment.  If 
we  suffer,  and  yet  the  evil  is  not  cured,  the  Divine  judgments  must  continue.  "For 
all  this  his  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  his  hand  is  stretched  out  still."  And  some- 
times the  freedom  we  have  sought  by  changing  our  place  is  changed  to  an  even  more 
humiliating  form  of  chastisement,  as  the  Tyrians  endured  worse  things  in  their  escape 
than  if  they  had  remained  at  home.  However  we  flee  from  troubles,  we  can  liever  flee 
from  ourselves,  and  never  flee  from  Ood, — R.  T. 

Ver.  18. —  Gommerce  the  handmaid  of  religion.  "Her  merchandise  and  her  hire 
shall  be  holiness  unto  the  Lord."  This  appears  to  be  a  pre  liction  of  the  conversion  of 
the  Tyrians  to  the  worship  and  service  of  the  true  Grod.  "Instead  of  hoarding  up 
their  gains,  or  devoting  them  as  presents  to  the  temple  of  Hercules,  as  they  had  formerly 
done,  they  would  now  consecrate  theto  to  the  support  of  true  religion."  In  the  line 
of  fulfilment  we  may  note  that  Jesus  Christ  visited  the  neighbourhood  (Matt.  xv. 
21);  St.  Paul  found  disciples  there  (Acts  xxi.  3 — 6);  and  it  early  became  a  Christian 
bishopric.  The  prophecy  would  be  accomplished  if  the  Christians  of  Tyre  sent  gifts  to 
Jerusalem  ;  as  such  gifts  would  be  regarded  as  representative  of  the  "  merchandise." 
Dean  Pluniptre  says,  " Inteipreted  religiously,  the  prophet  sees  the  admission  of 
proselytes  to  the  woiship  of  Israel  in  the  future,  as  he  had  seen  it  probably  in  the  days 
of  Hezekiah  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  4).  Interpreted  politically,  the  words  point  to  a  return  to 
the  old  alliance  between  Judah  and  Tyre  in  .the  days  of  Solomon  (1  Kings  v.  1 — 12), 
and  to  the  gifts  which  that  alliance  involved  (Ps.  xlv.  12)."  The  Tyrians  and  Zidonians 
contributed  to  the  erection  of  the  second  temple  (Ezra  iii.  7).  Commerce,  as  having 
regard  to  purely  worldly  interests,  is  called  "  harlotry."  "  Large  marts  of  commerce 
are  often  compared  to  harlots  seeking  many  lovers,  that  is,  they  court  merchants,  and 
admit  any  one  for  the  sake  of  gain."  Commerce  is  the  handmaid  of  religion  wiien 
she  is — 

I.  The  agent  fob  righteousness.  In  the  sense  of  uprightness  and  fairness  between 
man  and  man.  Religion  is  the  chief  support  of  practical  Tightness,  truth  to  word  and 
promise,  fair  taking  of  samples,  honest  wages,  reasonable  profits,  and  doing  the  best  for 
those  who  buy  of  us  and  those  who  sell  to  us.  But  religion  is  glad  of  the  help  of  all 
good  business  principles,  and  all  good  business  customs.  Religion  is  strengthened  by 
the  sense  of  honour  that  is  found  in  commercial  men.  Honest  commerce  helps  on  the 
work  which  religion  would  do  in  the  world. 

II.  The  agent  fob  ohabitt.  In  the  sense  of  gentle  consideration  for  others,  and 
helpfulness  to  all  who  are  in  distress.  The  tendency  of  commerce  is  towards 
selfishness,  but  when  touched  by  the  spirit  of  religion,  it  is  sensitive  to  the  needs  of  the 
poor,  who  are  always  multiplieid  by  advancing  civilization.  Religion  inspires  worsers 
among  the  poor  and  suffering  and  disabled.  Commerce  is  noble  when,  acting  as 
handmaid  to  religion,  it  supports  the  workers  with  its  wealth,  helping  the  hungry  and 
the  outcast  to  "  sufficiency  for  eating,  and  to  durable  clothing." — R.  T. 


Section  VL    God's  General  Judgments  upon  the  Babth  (oh,  xxit,— xxvn.). 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Verg.  1 — 20. — God's  Jcdgments  on  the 
World  at  laroe.  From  special  denuncia- 
tions of  woe  upon  particular  nations — Baby- 
lon, Assyria,  Philistia,  Moab,  Syria  of  Da- 
<noecus,  Egypt  and  Ethiopia,  Arabia,  Judna, 
Tyre — tiia  prophet  paaies  to  denunciations 


of  a  broader  character,  involving  the  fntnre  of 
the  whole  world.  This  section  of  his  work 
extends  from  the  commencement  of  oh.  xxi  v. 
to  the  conclusion  of  ch.  xxvii.,  thus  including 
four  chapters.  The  world  at  large  is  the 
general  subject  of  the  entire  prophecy  ;  but 
the  "peculiar  people"  still  maintains  a 
marked  and  prominent  place,  aa  ipiritually 


-.34 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxiv.  1—23 


the  iMcUng  country,  and  at  one  In  whose 

Tortunea  the  world  at  large  would  be  always 

rit&Uy  goncemed  (see  especially  ch.  xxiv. 

23;  «XT.  6—8;  xxvL  1—4;  xxYii.  6,  9, 13). 

Yer.   1. — Behold,  the  lord  maketh  the 

arth  empty.   Several  critics  (Lowth,  Ewald, 

•esenius,  Knobel)  prefer  to  render, "  maketh 

lie  land  empty;"  but  the  broader  view, 

'  hioh  is  maintained  by  Bosenmiiller,  Kay, 

'  iheyne,  and  others,  seems  preferable.    The 

nention  of  "the  world"  in  ver.  4,  and  of 

■'  the  kings  of  the  earth  "  in  ver.  21,  implies 

I  wider  field  of  survey  than  the  Holy  Land. 

Of  oeorse  the  expression,  "  maketh  empty," 

'9  rhetorical,  some  remarkable,  but  not  com- 

'lete,  depopulation  being  pointed  at  (comp. 

<  er.  6).   Tiuneth  it  upside  down  (comp.  £zek. 

.xi.  27).    Scattereth  abroad  the  inhabitants. 

'lie  scanty  population  left  is  dispersed,  and 

lot  allowed  to  collect  into  masses. 

Yer.  2. — ^It  shall  be,  as  with  the  people,  so 

vith  the  priest,  eto.    There  shall  be  "no 

ospeot  of  persons  " — no  favour  shown  to  men 

i  >r  any  particular  rank  or  station.    All  shall 

suffer  equally.    The  author  is  obliged  to 

.\ke  as  examples  distinctions,  of  rank  known 

rn  him ;  but  he  carefully  selects  such  as  are 

f  almost  universal  occurrence.    There  was 

■arcely  any  nation  of  antiquity  in  which 

nere  were  not  "priests  and  people,"  "masters 

id  slaves,"  "  buyers  and  sellers,"  "  lenders 

id  borrowers,"  "takers  and  givers  of  usury." 

iy  "usury"  Is  meant,  not  exorbitant  in- 

erest,   but   interest   simply,  of  whatever 

mount. 

Ver.  3.— The  land;  rather,  the  earlh.  The 
-line  word  is  used  as  in  ver.  1  (areti). 
Jtterly  spoiled ;  i.e.  "wasted  by  rival  armies, 
which  have  carried  fire  and  sword  over  the 
vvhole  of  it."  Compare  the  declaration  of 
our  Lord,  "Ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and 
rumours  of  wars :  see  that  ye  be  not  troubled ; 
for  all  these  things  must  come  to  pass,  but 
the  end  is  not  yet.  For  nation  shall  rise 
against  nation,  and  kingdom  against  king- 
dom ...  all  these  are  the  beginning  of 
sorrows  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  6 — 8). 

Yer.  4. — The  earth  .  .  .  fadeth  away.  As 
a  flower  that  fades  and  withers  up  (comp.  oh. 
i.  30;  xxviii.  1,  4;  xxxiv.  4,  etc.;  and  Ps. 
i.  3;  xxivii.  2).  The  world.  Tahel  has 
never  any  narrower  sense  than  the  entire 
'■  world,"  and  must  be  regarded  as  fixing  the 
meaning  of  dreta  in  passages  where  (as 
liere)  the  two  are  used  as  synonymous.  The 
haughty  people ;  or,  the  high  onet.  All  the 
^'reat  are  brought  down,  and  laid  low,  that 
"  the  Lord  alone  may  be  exalted  in  that  day  " 
(uf.  ch.  ii.  11—17). 

Ver.  S. — The  earth  also  is  defiled.  Hither- 
to the  prophet  has  been  conoeined  with  the 
mere  fact  of  a  teirible  judgment  to  be  sent 
l>y  Oed  upon  the  whole  world    Now  he  sets 


forth  the  ttmse  of  the  fact.  It  is  the  old 
cause,  which  has  reduced  so  many  lands  to 
desolation,  and  which  in  the  far-oflT  timet 
produced  the  Flood,  viz.  the  wickedness  of 
man  (Gen.  vi.  5—13).  The  earth  it  "de- 
filed" or  "polluted"  by  the  eint  of  itt 
inhabitants,  and  bat  to  be  purged  from  the 
defilement  by  suffering.  They  have  trans- 
gressed the  lawt.  Apart  from  both  Judaism 
and  Christianity,  all  mankind  have  been 
placed  by  God  under  a  double  law :  1,  The 
"  law  written  in  their  hearts"  (Rom.  ii.  IS), 
which  speaks  to  them  through  their  con- 
sciences, and  lays  them  under  an  obligation 
that  cannot  be  gainsaid.  2.  The  law  of  posi- 
tive commands,  given  to  the  entire  human 
race  through  the  common  progenitors,  Adam 
and  Noah,  which  is  obligatory  upon  all  to 
whom  it  has  been  traditionally  handed  down; 
but  which  has  been  only  Tery  partially 
handed  down,  and  it  is  not  generally  felt  at 
obligatory.  Mankind  hat  in  all  ages  largely 
transgressed  both  laws,  and  both  would  seem 
to  be  pointed  at  in  the  present  passage.  The 
transgression  of  the  "  law  written  in  the 
heart"  is  doubtless  that  which  especially 
calls  down  God's  vengeance,  and  makes  him 
from  time  to  time  execute  wrath  on  the 
whole  world.  Changed  the  ordinance ;  rather, 
broken,  violated.  Transgression  in  act  is  in- 
tended, not  formal  abrogation  of  the  Divine 
ordinances.  Broken  the  everlasting  eove- 
nant.  Mr.  Cheyne  supposes  an  allusioB  to 
the  covenant  made  with  Noah  (G'en.  ix.  16); 
but  it  seems  better  to  understand  that  "ever- 
lasting covenant"  which  exists  between 
God  and  man,  in  virtue  of  the  nature  where- 
with God  has  endowed  man,  and  of  the  laws 
which  he  has  impressed  upon  man's  con- 
science. Sophocles  well  sayt  of  these  lawt, 
that  they  are 

Oif'tToStt,  ovpavtav  Si'  ittip^t 
TfKyodivTes,  wv^OKvfnros 
waTiip  ft6m%,  ovS4  ytv  Afari 
^^ais  aviptotf  ^riKTfit,  ov^\ 
jUTjV  n-OTE  \iBa  KaraKotjidiTtt, 
Or— 

"  Laws  that  walk  on  high,  begot  and  bred 
In  upper  air,  whose  only  sire  is  Heaven; 
Nor  did  the  race  of  mortals  give  them 

birth. 
Nor  will  oblivion  ever  cause  them  sleep." 

Ver.  6. — The  curse  j  rather,  a  eurM.  ^od 
has  pronounced  a  curse  upon  the  earth  on 
acoomit  of  man's  perversity ;  and  hence  tlie 
calamities  which  the  earth  is  about  to  suffer. 
Are  desolate ;  rather,  are  held  at  guilty  (see 
Zech.  xi.  5 ;  and  compare  the  marginal 
rendering  of  Ps.  v.  10;  xxxiv.  21).  Are 
burned;  or,  scoicAcd— shrivelled  up  by  the 
"  burning  anger  "  (ch,  xxx.  27)  and  "  4ery 
indignation  "  CHeb.  t..  27)  of  Jehovah. 


OH.  XXIV.  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


885 


Yer.  7. — ^The  new  wine  monmeth.  Even 
when  the  joyous  time  of  the  vintnge  comes 
round,  the  earth  is  still  sad,  cannot  shake 
off  its  depression  or  wake  up  to  merriment. 
Even  those  most  disposed  to  be  "  merry- 
hearted,"  under  the  dismal  circnmstanoes  of 
the  time  can  do  nothing  but  "sigh." 

Yer.  8.— The  mirth  of  tabrets  ...  of  the 
harp  ceaseth  (comp.  oh.  t.  12).  The  feasting, 
and  the  drinking-songs,  and  the  musical 
accompaniment,  common  at  the  vintage 
season,  are  discontinued.  All  is  dismay  and 
trretohednesB— desolation  in  the  present, 
worse  desolation  expected  in  the  future. 

Yer.  9. — They  shaU  not  drink  wine  with  a 
long.  Men  will  still  drink ;  they  will  seek 
to  drown  their  care  in  wine ;  but  they  will 
not  have  the  heart  to  attempt  a  song  as  they 
drink.  Even  in  their  cups  they  will  be 
silent.  Strong  drink  shall  be  bitter.  By 
"  strong  drink  "  (eltSJtar)  seems  to  be  meant 
any  intoxicating  liquor  whatever,  including 
wine.  Many  such  liquors  were  drunk  in 
Palestine  (see  'Diet,  of  the  Bible,'  vol.  i. 
pp.  458,  459).  All  were  more  or  less  plea- 
sant to  the  tasi»;  but  they  would  taste 
bitter  to  those  who  were  warped  and  soured 
by  the  calamities  of  the  time,  which  would 
prevent  all  enjoyment. 

Yer.  10. — The  oity  of  oonfnsion  is  broken 
down.  Ko  special  city  seems  to  be  intended. 
"  Est  urbis  nomen  collective  capiendum  " 
(Rosenmiiller).  Chaos  (tohu)  reigns  in  the 
cities,  where  there  is  no  civic  life,  no  govern- 
ment, no  order,  nothing  but  confusion. 
Every  house  is  dint  up;  bolted  and  barred 
against  intruders.  There  is  no  confidence, 
no  friendly  intercourse,  no  visiting. 

Yer.  11. — There  is  a  crying  for  wine  in 
the  streets.  Wine,  though  still  manufiictured 
(see  vers.  7, 9),  is  scarce,  but  is  much  sought 
after.  Men  clamour  for  it  at  the  doors  of 
the  wine-shops,  but  are  unable  to  obtain  it. 
They  crave  for  its  exhilarating  effects,  or 
perhaps  for  the  oblivion  which  it  brings 
when  drunk  to  excess.  If  they  could  obtain 
it,  they  would  act  as  the  Jews  in  the  siege 
of  Jerusalem  (oh.  xxii.  13).  But  they  can- 
not. Hence  even  the  factitious  merriment, 
which  wine  is  capable  of  producing,  is  denied 
now  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  with 
whom  all  joy  is  darkened,  from  whom  all 
mirth  is  gone. 

Yer.  12. — The  gate  is  smitten  with  de- 
stmotion.    The  very  gates  of  the  towns, 

fenerally  guarded  with  such  care,  are  broken 
own  and  lie  in  ruins. 
Yer.  13.— When  thu  it  shall  be ;  rather, 
/or  to  shall  it  te.  In  the  time  described  the 
ormdition  of  the  earth  shall  be  like  to  that 
oi'an  olive-ground  when  the  beating  is  done, 
or  of  A  vineyard  when  the  giapes  are 
gathered.  I'hat  is,  a  small  and  scattered 
remnant  of  iuhabllants  shall  alone  be  left, 

I8AIAU. 


like  the  few  grapes  and  olives  that  were  the 
portion  of  the  gleaners  (of.  eh.  xvii.  6). 
There  shall  he.  These  words  are  not  needed, 
and  should  be  erased.  The  nexus  is,  "  so  it 
shall  be  as  the  shaking  [rather,  '  beating'] 
of  an  olive  tree." 

Yer.  14. — They  shall  lift  up  their  voice. 
Even  in  this  time  of  depression  and  ruin 
there  shall  be  a  "  remnant,"  which  will  be 
faithful  to  God,  and  which,  from  the  midst 
of  the  sufferings  and  oalnmities  of  the  period, 
will  "  lift  up  its  voice,"  in  songs  of  adoration 
and  praise,  to  Jehovah,  and  sing,  or  "  send  , 
forth  a  cry."  This  chorus  of  praise  will  go 
forth — to  a  large  extent — from  the  sea ;  ».e. 
from  the  Mediterranean. 

Yer.  15. — Whorefore  glorify  ye  the  Lord 
in  the  fires.  The  reading  bd'urim,  "  in  the 
fires,"  is  doubtful.  If  it  be  regarded  as 
sound,  we  must  understand  the  "  fiery  trials  " 
which  were  coming  on  the  faithful  remnant 
But  the  LXX,  seems  to  have  had  the  read- 
ing httiyyim,  "in  the  islands"  or  "in  the 
coasts;"  and  so  Lovtb,  Hitzig,  and  Mr. 
Olieyne. 

Yer,  16.— Glory  to  the  righteous.  The 
righteous  remnant  perceive  that  the  calami- 
ties which  have  come  upon  the  eartli  are 
ushering  in  a  time  of  honour  and  glory  for 
themselves  ;  and  they  console  themselves  by 
making  this  fact  the  burden  of  some  of  tlieir 
songs.  Tlieir  honour,  it  must  be  remt  mbered, 
ifl  bound  up  with  (jod's  glory ;  which  will 
KOt  shine  forth  fully  till  their  salvation  is 
complete,  and  they  "reign  with  him"  in 
glory  (2  Tim.  ii.  12).  But  I  said,  My  lean- 
ness. The  thought  of  this  joyful  time,  when 
the  saints  shall  reign  with  their  Lord  in  a 
new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  recalls  the 
prophet  (contrast  being  one  of  the  laws  of 
the  association  of  ideas)  to  the  misery  of  the 
present,  and  his  own  partioipation  therein. 
A  time  of  suffering,  of  wasting,  and  pining 
away  must  be  endured — for  how  long  he 
knows  not — before  the  joyous  consummation, 
towards  which  he  stretches  in  hope  and 
confident  expectancy,  can  be  reached.  This 
is  the  period  of  his  "  leanness."  The 
treacherous  dealers,  or  ungodly  of  the  earth, 
will  bear  sway  during  this  period,  and  will 
deal  treacherously  and  cruelly  with  God's 
saints,  persecuting  them  incessantly  in  a 
thousand  ways.  Have  dealt  The  perfect 
of  prophetic  certainty. 

Yer.  17. — Fear,  and  the  pit,  and  the  snare, 
are  upon  thee.  Man  will  be  like  a  hunted 
animal,  flying  from  pursuit,  and  in  danger 
at  each  step  of  falling  into  a  pit  or  being 
caught  in  a  snare  (comp.  Jer.  xlviii.  43,  44, 
whera  the  idea  is  borrowed  from  this  place, 
and  applied  to  a  particular  nation). 

Yer.  18. — The  noise  of  the  fear;  t.e.  the 
sound  of  the  pursuers.  Hunters  pursuod 
their  game  with  shouts  and  cries.      Ik* 

2  o 


38« 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxiv.  1— 23. 


windows  from  on  high  are  open  (comp.  Gen. 
vii.  11).  It  is  not  actually  another  flood 
that  is  threatened,  but  it  is  a  judgment  as 
sweeping  and  destructive  as  the  Flood. 

Ver.  19. — The  earth  is  utterly  broken 
down.  The  material  globe  itself  breaks  up 
and  peiTshes.  It  is  "  the  ci  ai-k  of  doom." 
Mr.  Cheyue  remarks  that  "the  language 
imitates  the  cracking  and  bursting  with 
which  the  present  woiiJ  shall  pass  away." 
The  Authorized  Version  is  very  feeble  com- 
pared to  the  originaL 

Ver.  20. — The  earth  .  .  .  shall  be  removed 
like  a  cottage;  rather,  swayt  to  and  fro  lilte 
a  hammock.  J^osenmuUer  observes,  "Alludit 
ad  pensilet  lectos,  quos,  mctu  ferrarum,  in 
arboribuB  sibi  parare  solent,  iutis  in  terris, 
non  custodes  solum  hortorum  camporumve, 
Bed  et  iter  facientes."  The  transgression 
thereof  shall  be  heavy  upon  it ;  t.e.  the  earth 
perishes  on  account  of  men's  sins.  It  shall 
fall,  and  not  rise  again.  The  present  earth 
is  to  disappear  altogether,  and  to  be  super- 
seded by  "  a  new  heaven  and  •  new  earth  " 
(Rev.  xxi.  1). 

Vers.  21  —  23.  —  Thb  SuPBAHUimANx 
Jddoment,  and  Final  Establishment  of 
God'8  Einodom.  Upon  the  destruction  of 
the  world  there  is  to  supervene  a  visitation 
of  those  who  have  been  specially  instru- 
mental in  producing  the  great  wickedness 
that  has  brought  the  world  to  an  end.  These 
most  guilty  ones  are  classified  under  two 
heads :  they  consist  of  (1)  the  host  of  the 
high  ones  that  are  on  high  (literally,  "  the 
host  of  the  height  in  the  height");  and  (2) 
the  kings  of  the  earth  upon  th«  earth. 
These  are  to  be  "  gathered  together  in  the 
pit,"  and  "  shut  up  in  the  prison,"  and  finally, 
after  a  long  imprisonment,  punished  (vers. 
21,  22).  Then  the  visible  reign  of  the  Lord 
of  hosts  is  to  be  established  "in  Mount 
Zion  and  in  Jerusalem,"  and  he  is  to  rule 
in  the  presence  of  bis  "ancients"  in  glory 
(ver.  23). 

Ver.  21. — In  that  daj.  About  that  time — 
in  connection  with  the  series  of  events  just 
related.  The  lord  shall  punish  the  host  of 
the  high  ones.  It  is  generally  allowed  that 
these  "  high  ones,"  set  in  contrast  as  they 
•re  with  the  "Mngs  of  the  earth,"  must 
belong  to  the  class  of  supramundane  in- 
telligences, spiritual  beings  of  a  high  order. 
Some  have  inclined  to  identify  them  with 
the  "  patron-spirits  of  nations,"  spoken  of 
by  Daniel (x.  13,  20, 21) ;  but  those  "patron- 
spirits  "  are  among  the  elect  and  unfallen 
angels;  they  protect  nations,  but  do  not 
lead  them  iuto  dn  or  wickedness ;  they  have 
•o  need  to  be  "  visited,"  and  will  oertaiiily 


not  be  "  shut  up  in  prison  "  with  the  wicked 
kings  of  the  earth.  The  spirits  here  spoken 
of  must  belong  to  the  class  of  fallen  spirits 
— they  must  be  included  among  those  "  prin- 
cipalities and  powers,"  of  whom  St.  Paul 
speaks  (Eph.  vi.  12),  whom  he  calls  "  the 
rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world,"  and  to 
whom  he  ascribes  "  spiritual  wickedness  in 
high  places."  The  punishment  of  such 
spirits  is,  perhaps,  shadowed  forth  in  the 
eighty  -  second  psalm  ;  it  was  distinctly 
taught  in  the  Book  of  Enoch;  and  it  is 
glanced  at  by  St  Jude  in  his  Epistle  (ver.  6). 
And  the  kings.  Kings,  especially  kings  in 
the  Oriental  sense,  have  an  enormous  in- 
fluence over  the  nations  which  they  govern, 
and  therefore  a  heavy  responsibility.  The 
kings  of  the  nations  are  viewed  here  as 
having  brought  about  the  general  corruption 
and  wickedness  which  has  necessitated  the 
destruction  of  the  earth. 

Ver.  22. — In  the  pit ;  literally,  in  a  dun- 
geon. Mr.  Cheyne  suggests  that  sJiedl,  or 
"  hell,"  is  meant ;  but  the  context  points  to 
some  narrower  confinement.  In  the  prison; 
rather,  •»  yruon  (comp.  2  Pet.  it  4 ;  Jude  6). 
After  many  days.  In  the  Eevelation  (zx.  2) 
Satan  is  bound  "  a  thousand  years ; "  i.e.  an 
indefinite  tei-m.  The  imprisonment  of  the 
present  passage  is  scarcely  the  same,  but  it 
is  analogous.  Ood's  purposes  require  sume- 
times  long  periods  of  inaction.  Shall  they 
be  visited;  ox, punished.  The  word  is  the 
same  as  that  translated  "  punish  "  in  ver.  21. 
"  Visiting "  for  good  is  scarcely  to  be 
thought  oC 

Ver.  23. — ^The  moon  shall  be  confounded, 
and  the  sun  ashamed.  Some  interpret  this 
in  the  light  of  Joel  ii.  31 ;  iii.  15 ;  Matt, 
xxiv.  29;  Bev.  vi.  12,  as  pointing  to  that 
physical  change,  real  or  phenomenal,  in  the 
shining  of  the  sun  and  moon,  which  is  to  be 
one  of  the  antecedent  signs  of  Cbrist'i 
coming  at  the  last  day.  But  the  expressions 
used  suggest  rather  a  contrast  between  the 
dazi-ling  splendour  of  Christ's  actual  ap- 
pcaiauce  and  the  normal  brightness  of  sun- 
light and  moonlight.  The  greater  and  lesser 
lights  will  "pale  their  ineffectual  fires" 
before  the  incomparable  brightness  of  the 
"  Sun  of  Righteousness  "  (Mai.  iv.  2).  When 
the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  reign  in  Uount  Zion, 
and  in  Jerusalem,  The  tpiritual  Zion  and 
the  lieavenly  Jerusalem  can  alone  be  meant, 
since  the  earth  is  no  more  (ver.  20).  (On 
these,  see  Bev.  xxi.,  xxii.)  Before  his  an- 
cients; or,  Am  elder*.  Four  and  twenty 
elders,  clothed  in  white  raiment,  with  crowns 
of  gold  upon  their  heads,  are  represented 
in  tike  Apocalypse  as  sitting  round  about 
the  throne  of  God  perpetually  (Rev.  iv.  4). 
and  worshipping  God  and  the  Lamb  (Be* 
iv.  10;  V.8, 14> 


OH.  XXIV.  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PfiOPHET  ISAIAH.  887 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  1 — iO.— God's  final  Judgment  upon  the  earth.  In  striking  contrast  with 
man's  self-complaceut  theories  of  contiaual  progress  and  improvement  in  the  world, 
resulting  in  something  like  the  final  perfection  of  our  race,  is  God's  prophetic 
announcement  that,  as  the  years  roll  on,  mankind  will  go  from  bad  to  worse,  plunge 
deeper  and  deeper  into  wickedness,  bring  calamity  after  calamity  upon  themselves, 
and  finally  so  provoke  him  that  he  will  destroy  the  very  earth  itself  as  "  defiled  " 
by  its  inhabitants  (ver.  6),  causing  it  to  "  fall,  and  not  rise  again "  (ver.  20).  The 
judgment,  as  set  forth  in  this  chapter,  is — 

I.  Pbogressive.  It  begins  with  wars,  which  spread  from  country  to  country,  until 
all  nations  are  involved  in  them.  Territories  are  wasted  (ver.  3);  cities  are  thrown 
into  confusion  (ver.  10) ;  the  population  of  the  earth  rapidly  diminishes ;  the  "  few 
men  left "  (ver.  6)  are  scattered  widely  over  the  face  of  the  globe ;  there  is  general 
desolation  ;  and  there  is  general  sadness  and  misery  (vers.  7 — 12).  All  classes  suffer 
(ver.  2) ;  the  haughty  especially  are  brought  down  (ver.  4).  If  men  escape  one 
calamity,  they  are  overtaken  by  another  (ver.  18).  Treachery  is  at  work  (ver.  16), 
and  each  man  feels  like  a  hunted  animal,  sure  sooner  or  later  to  be  the  prey  of  the 
destroyer  (ver.  17).  The  judgment  passes  on  from  man  to  the  material  fabric  which 
he  inhabits ;  man's  trangression  lies  heavy  .upon  the  eaith  (ver.  20) ;  it  totters  and 
trembles  from  its  foundations  (ver.  18),  reels  to  and  fro  (ver.  20),  is  broken  up  and 
shattered  (ver.  19) ;  finally,  falls  from  its  place. 

II.  Final,  as  fab  as  this  dispensation  or  things  is  oonoebnbd.  "  The 
inhabitants  of  the  earth  are  burned  "  (ver.  6);  the  earth  is  "  utterly  emptied  "  (ver.  3) ; 
the  remnant  that  has  previously  escaped  necessarily  disappears  with  the  earth  that 
is  their  habitation;  and  that  earth  is  "utterly  broken  down,"  "clean  dissolved," 
"  fallen  "  bo  as  never  to  rise  again  (vers.  19,  20). 

III.  Yet  not  unohbebbd  by  some  bays  of  hope.  In  the  midst  of  the  gloom, 
and  the  sadness,  and  the  desolation,  and  the  confusion,  there  are  yet  cheerful  voices 
heard.  All  flesh  has  not  corrupted  its  way  before  the  Lord.  There  are  still  those 
who  "  lift  up  their  voice,  and  sing  for  the  majesty  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  14y,  who  "  glorify 
the  Lord  "  in  the  midst  of  the  "  fires "  of  affliction,  and  pour  forth  songs  whereof 
the  burden  is  "  Honour  to  the  righteous."  They  constitute,  it  may  be,  a  small 
minority;  but  they  are  not  dismayed.  "God,"  they  know,  "is  on  their  side;"  and 
they  "do  not  fear  what  flesh  can  do  unto  them."  They  bear  witness. for  God  to  the 
last ;  and  when  the  final  crash  comes  they  are  those  blessed  ones  who  "  meet  the  Lord 
in  the  air"  (1  Thess.  iv.  17),  and  are  translated  to  the  heavenly  kingdom,  without 
passing  through  the  gates  of  death,  there  to  "  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord." 

Vers.  21,  22. — A  sorer  punishment  reserved  for  the  authors  and  instigators  of  evil 
than  for  others.  The  kings  of  the  earth  to  a  large  extent  lead  their  subjects  into  sin. 
Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat,  by  the  setting  up  of  the  golden  calves  at  Dan  and 
Bethel,  "  made  Israel  to  sin,"  and  was  the  original  and  main  cause  of  that  lapse  into 
idolatry  which  brought  down  destruction  upon  the  Israelite  nation.  Ahab,  by  his 
marriage  with  Jezebel,  and  introduction  of  the  Baal-worship,  intensified  the  evil,  and 
hastened  the  final  overthrow.  Mana-^seh  "  seduced  Judah  to  do  more  evil  than  did 
the  nations  whom  the  Lord  destroyed  before  the  children  of  Israel"  (2  Kings  xxi.  9), 
and  brought  upon  Judah  a  fate  similar  to  that  which  had  befallen  the  sister  kingdom 
(2  Kings  xxiv.  3,  4).  The  blood-thirstiness  and  cruelty  of  the  heathen  nations  were 
encouiaged  by  their  kings,  who  were  for  ever  engaging  in  unjust  wars,  and  looking 
for  success  to  the  terror  tiiey  inspired  by  the  fierceness  of  their  soldiers,  who  were 
instructed  to  be  savage  and  unsparing.  Hence,  when  the  day  of  reckoning  came, 
it  was  just  that  the  kings  should  be  reserved  for  special  retribution,  and  punished 
with  special  severity.  We  must  not  too  closely  press  the  details  of  the  prophetical 
announcement.  "The  pit,"  "the  prison,"  are  wonted  phrases  in  the  imagery  of 
Divine  retributive  justice.  What  is  intended  to  be  taught  is  that  exact  justice  will  b« 
met«d  out ;  wherever  lies  the  main  guilt  of  the  evil  done  under  the  sun,  there  will 
be  the  main  severity  of  punishment.     Where  kings  have  been  in  fault,  kings  wiU 


388  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxiv.  1— 23. 

suffer ;  where  nobles  and  prime  ministers,  on  them  will  fall  the  heaviest  woe ;  where 
leaders  sprung  from  the  ranks,  theirs  will  be  the  sorest  suffering.  "  God  is  not 
mocked."  God  will  know  who  are  the  really  guilty  ones,  and  will  execute  his  special 
vengeance  upon  them,  however  exalted  they  be.  Nor  will  he  spare  the  instigators 
of  evil  who  belong  to  the  spiritual  world.  Fallen  spirits  are  ever  tempting  men  to 
siu,  suggesting  lines  of  sin,  egging  their  victims  on,  aiding  them  so  far  as  they  are 
permitted,  and  conducting  them  to  depths  of  sin  and  wickedness  whereof  they  would 
have  had  no  conceptiou  had  they  been  left  to  themselves.  It  is  just  that  these 
spirits,  who  are  the  primary  movers  in  the  widespread  conspiracy  of  crime,  should 
suffer  the  most,  St.  Jude  tells  us  of  those  evil  angels  who  are  "  reserved  in  ever- 
lasting chains  under  darkness  unto  the  judgment  oi  the  great  day "  (Jude  6).  St. 
John  saw  in  the  Apocalyptic  vision  that  "the  devil  who  deceived  the  nations  "was 
at  length  "  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone,  where  the  beast  and  the  false 
prophet  are,"  and  was  "tormented  day  and  night  for  ever  and  ever"  (Rev.  ix.  lOV 
These,  too,  have  their  deserts.  Inexorable  justice  requires  for  so  much  sin  so  much 
suffering.  The  law  is  absolute,  imperative,  universal.  And  the  whole  redounds  to  the 
honour  and  glory  of  the  great  Euler  of  the  universe.  "For  we  are  unto  God  a  sweet 
savour  of  Christ  in  them  that  are  saved,  and  in  them  that  perish :  to  the  one  we  aie 
the  savour  of  death  unto  death ;  and  to  the  other  we  are  the  savour  of  life  unto  life" 
(2  Cor.  ii,  15,  16).  The  thought  is  overwhelming,  and  the  apostle  with  reason 
exclaims,  "  And  who  is  sufScieut  for  these  things  ?  " 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vera.  1 — 23. — Prophecy  qfjvdgment.  The  difiiculties,  historically  considered,  of  this 
chapter  must  be  left  to  the  exegete.  We  concern  ousselves  with  the  larger  sense  it 
contains  of  a  prophecy  of  a  judgment  upon  the  whole  world. 

L  The  appeoaching  desolation.  (Vers.  1 — 3.)  The  figures  of  emptying,  draining, 
are  employed  to  denote  the  utter  depopulation  and  impoverishment  of  the  earth ;  also 
that  of  turning  upside  down,  to  denote  disorganization  and  demoralization  in  every  civil 
and  religious  institution,  while  the  people  will  be  driven  as  chaff  before  the  wind  by  the 
scattering  hand  of  the  invader.  All  ranks  will  be  alike  affected  and  coufuscd  togethei 
in  the  coming  calamity.  "Distinction  of  rank  is  highly  neoissary  for  the  economy 
of  the  world,  and  was  never  called  in  question  but  by  barbarians  and  enthusiasts,"  A 
variety  of  interests  and  feelings  is  represented  in  the  different  orders  of  society.  Each 
contributes  an  element  of  wealth  or  of  culture  to  the  commonwealth.  The  untutored 
instincts  of  the  mass  have  a  certain  wisdom  in  them ;  but  they  need  to  be  checked  and 
guided  by  the  intelligence  of  far-seeing  minds.  The  instinct  for  progress  only  safely 
operates  when  it  is  met  by  a  counter  sentiment  of  conservatism.  The  minister  of 
religion  is  a  necessity  in  society,  and  equally  necessary  the  free  spirit  of  the  people  to 
check  his  usurpations.  The  theory  of  society  is  that  of  a  complicated  organism,  where 
all  the  parts  are  mutually  dependent,  and  each  on  the  whole.  If  the  servant  is 
necessary  to  the  master,  not  less  so  the  master  to  the  servant;  the  lender  to  the 
borrower,  and  the  reverse.  One  of  our  chief  blessings  is  regular  government  and 
good  order.  IIow  marvellous  is  the  immense,  all-leeming,  yet  quiet  and  ordered  life  of 
London  I  The  slightest  menace  of  disturbance  to  it  makes  us  feel,  or  ought  to  make 
us  feel,  keenly  the  greatness  of  tlie  privileges  so  long  preserved  to  us.  "  We  ought," 
says  Calvin,  "  not  only  to  acknowledge  the  judgment  of  God,  but  also  lay  it  to  the 
blame  of  our  own  sins,  whenever  he  breaks  down  order  and  takes  away  instruction  and 
courts  of  law ;  for  when  these  fall,  civilization  itself  falls  along  with  them."  Again, 
God  in  his  judgment  is  no  reapeder  qf  persons.  No  rank  is  spared,  not  oven  the  most 
sacred.  On  the  contiary,  to  whom  much  has  been  given,  of  them  much  will  be 
required.  The  higlier  the  rank  the  deeper  the  fall,  and  the  sorer  the  punishment  where 
there  has  been  ingratitude  and  unfaithfulness.  It  is  secret  disloyalty  to-the  Eternal  and 
his  laws  which  saps  the  root  of  life,  and  causes  in  the  end  the  mournful  sight  of  a  nation 
mourning,  its  vigour  ebbing  away,  its  great  men  banging  their  heads  like  drooping 
flowers.  The  thought  of  many  cities  and  lands  once  flourishing,  now  like  a  flower 
withered  down  to  the  bare  stalk,  should  remind  us  of  the  constancy  of  moral  laws,  of 
the  fact  that  "  Jehovah  hath  spoken  the  word." 


oflt.  xtiv.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THS  PROPHET  ISAIAB.  889 

n.  The  rkason  op  the  jtjpoment.  It  closely  follows  upon  the  guilt  of  men.  And 
this  guilt  has  polluted  the  earth.  "Blnod  profanes  the  land ; "  "  The  land  is  polluted 
with  blood  "  (Numb.  xxxv.  33 ;  Ps.  ovi.  38).  This  may  be  taken  literally  or  generally. 
Kingdoms  and  empires  have  often  heen  "  founded  in  blood  "  (cf.  ch.  sxvi.  21).  And  tmg 
was  a  transgression  of  Divine  commandment — the  violation  of  a  Divine  statute,  the 
breach  of  a  standing  covenant  of  God  with  men.  The  allusion  may  be  to  the  covenant 
with  Noah  (Gen.  ii.  16).  But  if  the  prophecy  refers  to  mankind  in  general,  then  we 
must  think  of  the  "  Law  written  on  the  heart" — the  Divine  teaching  within.  "It was 
with  the  whole  human  race  that  God  concluded  a  covenant  in  the  person  of  Noah,  at 
a  time  when  the  nations  had  none  of  them  come  into  existence  "  (Delitzsch).  "  There- 
fore hath  a  curse  devoured  the  earth."  Tliere  is  an  awfulness  in  the  logic  of  the 
Almighty ;  there  is  nothing  arbitrary  in  his  conduct,  nor  meaningless  in  his  words. 
No  curse  "  causeless  comes."  The  premises  of  sin  contain  the  conclusion  of  punish- 
ment ;  and  from  the  fact  of  curse  the  fact  of  "  blood-guilt,"  or  of  sin  in  general,  may 
be  certainly  inferred.  "  All  Israel  have  transgressed  thy  Law,  even  by  departing,  that 
they  might  not  obey  thy  voice ;  therefore  the  curse  is  poured  upon  us,  and  the  oath  that 
is  written  in  the  Law  of  Moses  the  servant  of  God,  because  we  have  sinned  against 
him  "  (Dan.  ix.  11).  The  simple  and  sublime  reasoning  of  the  prophets  should  ever  be 
laid  to  heart  by  us  and  pressed  upon  the  conscience  of  others.  "  The  land  mourns ; " 
trade  is  dull,  taxation  is  heavy,  wars  are  rife;  there  is  murmuring  and  discontent. 
Why?  The  prophets  are  ever  ready  with  a  because — ^because  of  swearing  or  other 
falsehood,  because  of  adultery  or  other  impurity,  because  of  the  iniquity  of  statesmen, 
priests,  or  prophets,  the  pleasant  places  are  dried  up  (cf.  Jer.  xxiii.  10). 

Ill,  The  DESGRiFnoir  of  thu  cattse.    It  is  conceived  as  personal.    AsinZecb.T.  3 

it  is  said  to  "  go  forth  over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth,"  or  to  be  "  poured  upon  "  men 

(Dan.  ix.  11),  so  here  it  is  so  said  to  "  devour  the  earth."    The  Divine  anger  bums 

(ch.  XXX.  27),  and  the  God  of  judgment  is  as  a  "  consuming  fire."    And  under  this 

terrible  doom  Nature  betrays  her  silent  sympathy  with  the  fortunes  of  man.    The 

drooping  grape  and  the  languishing  vine  seem  to  reflect  the  sadness  of  the  people,  and 

visibly  to  mourn  in  response  to  their  sighs.     And  that  popular  music  which  charms 

away  the  pain  of  excessive  toil,  and  expresses  the  fund  of  health  and  mirth  which  lies 

at  the  heart  of  man  and  the  world,  ceases  ;  timbrel  and  lute  are  hushed,  and  the  merry 

shouts  of  the  labourers  no  longer  rise  from  the  vineyards.    "  Jerusalem  was  uninhabited 

as  a  desert.     There  was  none  going  in   and  coming  out  of  her  children;  and   the 

sanctuary  was  trodden  down,  and  the  sons  of  foreigners  were  in  her  high  place,  a  place 

of  sojourn  for  Gentiles.     Delight  was  tnken  out  of  Jacob,  and  the  flute  and  the  lyre 

ceased  "  (1  Maco.  iii.  45).    This  passage  in  the  prayer  of  Judas  the  Maccabee  is  thought 

by  Yitringa  to  allude  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  prediction.     It  is  the  doom  which  follows 

upon  the  abuse  of  the  gifts  of  God.     Abuse  consists  either  in  excessive  indulgence  or 

in  oblivion  of  the  Giver.     He  knows  how  in  chastisement  to  insert  a  bitter  flavour  into 

the  most  favourite  pleasures.     The  cup  will  be  dashed  from  their  lips,  or  a  want  of  relish 

will  be  felt  for  it.    A  mind  clouded  by  remorse  will  "darken  the  ruby  of  the  cup  and 

dim  the  glitter  of  the  scene."    If  the  time  comes  when  a  man  is  compelled  to  say  ot 

even  innocent  social  pleasures,  "  I  have  no  pleasure  in  them,"  can  there  be  a  keener 

mark  of  judgment  on  past  excess  or  abuse  ?    Better  the  crust  and  the  draught  from  the 

spring,  with  healthy  appetite  and  clean  conscience,  than  the  repast  of  luxury  and  the 

brimming  wine-cup  turned  to  gall  on  the  lips  by  the  secret  chemistry  of  guilt.     The 

city  is  chaos  and  the  houses  are  closed,  and  in  the  fields,  instead  of  the  vintage  shouts, 

are  heard  the  howls  of  those  who  mi^s  the  sweet  wine  (cf.  Joel  i.  5).     It  seems  that 

the  sun  of  joy  has  gone  down,  and  the  bright  spirit  of  gladness  has  fled  from  the  earth. 

The  olive,  as  the  vine,  is  a  speaking  symbol  of  fatness,  plenty,  wealth,  and  prosperity. 

But  the  land  wiU  be  like  an  olive  stripped  and  bared  of  its  fruits — a  vineyard  when  the 

gleaning  is  over.  Still  a  few  will  be  left  (cf.  ch.  xvii.  6, 6) ;  for  never  does  God  sufier  hii 

Church  to  become  extinct,  the  spiritual  life  of  mankind  utterly  to  fail,  or  his  work  to 

come  to  a  standstill.    Dark  as  every  cloud  of  judgment  is,  it  will  yet  pass,  and  crashed 

hearts  will  be  healed  and  voices  now  dumb  burst  forth  anew  into  song.    It  is  at  least 

glimpses  of  such  a  future  which  sustain  the  prophet's  heart  under  the  "  burden  of  the 

Lord." 

]nr.  BmouBS  or  betteb  things.    A  cry  is  heard  from  the  sea,  firom  the  Mediter 


390  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxiv.  1—23. 

ranean;  it  must  be  from  some  nf  that  sacred  remnant  acknowledging  Jehovah,  extolling 
loudly  his  majesty,  Israel's  G  od !  "  He  follows  out  and  increases  the  consolations  which 
he  had  briefly  sketched ;  for  having  formerly  (ch.  x.  19 — 22)  said  that  out  of  that  vast 
multitude  a  few  drops  would  be  left,  which  would  nevertheless  overflow  the  whole 
world,  in  like  manner  he  now  says  that  the  small  number  of  the  godly,  who  shall  be 
left  out  of  an  abundant  vintage,  will  nevertheless  rejoice  and  utter  a  voice  so  loud  that 
it  will  be  heard  in  the  most  distant  lands.  This  was  done  by  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel ;  for  as  to  the  condition  of  Judsea,  it  appeared  to  be  entirely  ruined  by  it — the 
national  government  was  taken  away,  and  they  were  broken  down  by  foreign  and  civil 
wars  in  such  a  manner  that  they  could  never  rise  above  them.  The  rest  of  the  world 
was  dumb  in  singing  the  praises  of  God,  and  deaf  to  hear  his  voice ;  but  as  the  Jews 
were  the  firstfruits,  they  are  here  placed  in  the  highest  rank"  (Calvin).  1.  G-od 
can  ia  a  moment  recreate  and  restore  his  Church,  as  it  were,  out  of  nothing.  From 
death  he  brings  life,  out  of  the  solitude  can  cause  songs  of  praise  to  resound,  and  con- 
verts the  scene  of  mourning  into  one  of  joy.  2.  Worshippers  are  fitly  employed  in 
extolling  God's  perfections,  and  not  their  own  claims  to  approbation.  His  benefits  should 
excite  our  gratitude,  and  we  testify  it  by  singing  his  praises.  3.  The  time  is  to  be 
looked  forward  to  when  all  rations  will  call  upon  the  true  God.  To  call  upon  the  Name 
of  Israel's  God  means  the  spread  of  true  religion  through  the  world.  The  knowledge 
of  him  merely  as  the  wrathful  and  avenging  God  must  strike  man  with  dumbness; 
the  knowledge  of  him  as  Kedeemer  must  open  the  heart  and  unloose  the  tongue  for 
praise.  4.  True  religion  and  human  blessedness  are  coincident.  "  Honour  for  the 
righteous ! "  will  be  the  burden  of  the  song ;  "  Hope  to  the  iiious ! "  the  LXX.  render. 
The  Jews  are  meant  in  the  first  place,  as  the  chosen  people ;  then  probably  the  elect  of  all 
nations,  as  typified  in  them.  "  When  the  prophet  predicted  these  things,  how  incredible 
might  they  appear  to  be  1  for  among  the  Jews  alone  was  the  Lord  known  and  praised 
(Ps.  Ixxvi.  2).  To  them  destruction  is  foretold,  and  next  the  publication  of  the  words 
and  the  celebration  of  the  praises  of  God;  but  how  shall  these  things  be  done,  when 
tiie  people  of  God  had  been  destroyed?  Hence  we  may  infer  that  there  were  few  who 
believed  these  predictions.  But  now  that  these  events  have  taken  place,  it  is  our  duty 
to  behold  with  admiration  so  great  a  miracle  of  God,  because,  when  the  Jews  had  been 
not  only  beaten  down,  but  almost  annihilated,  still  there  flashed  from  them  a  spark 
by  which  the  whole  world  was  enlightened,  and  all  who  were  kindled  by  it  broke  forth 
into  a  confession  of  the  truth  "  (Calvin). 

V.  Revulsion  of  feelino.  Before  this  spiritual  restoration  can  come  about,  an 
interval  ot  misery  must  be  passed  through.  A  cry  of  intense  pain  escapes  the  prophet's 
heart :  "  Wasting  away  is  for  me !  wasting  away  is  for  me ! "  He  sees  and  feels,  with 
realizing  imagination  and  sympathy,  the  barbarous  oppression  from  which  his  people 
will  suffer.  Wave  upon  wave  of  calamity  seems  to  roll  in  from  the  horizon.  To 
escape  from  the  "  terror  "  is  to  fall  into  the  "  pit,"  to  come  up  from  the  "  pit "  is  only  to 
be  taken  in  the  snare.  The  windows  of  heaven  will  be  opened,  and  a  new  deluge  will 
cover  the  earth,  which  will  tremble  js  with  universal  shock.  Then  Jehovah  will  "  hold 
visitation  ujxin  the  host  of  the  highest  in  the  height,  and  upon  the  kings  of  the  earth 
upon  the  earth."  They  will  be  imprisoned  and  shut  up  in  the  prison  of  the  lower 
world.  Then  there  will  be  a  visitation  after  many  days :  whether  for  the  purpose  of 
punishment  or  pardon,  the  prophet  does  not  say,  and  commentators  are  divided. 
Amidst  the  obscurity  of  the  passage,  some  truth  that  may  be  used  for  edificalion  appears 
to  glimmer.  All  that  takes  place  on  the  earthly  sphere  has  reference  to  a  supernatural 
world.  There  are  in  a  sense  "  angels  "  of  nations  and  of  men.  The  rabbinical  saying 
runs  that  "  God  never  destroys  a  nation  without  having  first  of  all  destroyed  its  prince ; " 
t.e.  the  angel  who,  by  whatever  means  he  first  obtained  possession  of  the  nation,  has 
exerted  an  ungodly  influence  upon  it.  "Just  as,  according  to  the  scriptural  view, 
both  good  and  evil  angels  attach  themselves  to  particular  men,  and  an  elevated  state 
of  mind  may  sometimes  afibrd  a  glimpse  of  this  encircling  company  and  this  conflict 
of  spirits;  so  do  the  angels  contend  for  the  rule  over  nations  and  kingdoms,  either  to 
guide  them  in  the  way  of  God,  or  to  lead  them  astray  from  God ;  therefore  the  judgment 
upon  nations  will  he  a  judgment  upon  angels  also.  The  kingdom  of  spirit  has  its  own 
history  running  parallel  to  the  destinies  of  men  "  (Delitzsch). 
VL  Final  apocaltpsb  of  Divinb  olobt.    The  moon  blushes  and  the  iun  turns 


OH.  xxnr.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  391 

pale,  and  Jehovah  of  hosts  reigns  royally  u^on  Mount  Zinn  and  in  Jenisalem,  and  the 
elders  or  representatives  of  the  people  are  permitted  to  gaze  upon  his  glory  (of.  Exoci. 
xxiv.  9;  xxxiv.  29).  The  glory  of  nature  fades  before  the  surpassing  glory  of  the 
spiritual  and  eternal.  Our  noblest  sense  is  that  of  vision,  and  its  exercise  involves  that 
of  imagination.  The  bright  heavenly  bodies  delight  us  in  part  because  they  are  signifi- 
cant and  symbolic  of  light  in  the  intellectual  and  moral  sphere,  of  him  who  set  them 
yonder,  and  who  is  the  Light  of  the  world.  We  can  think  of  nothing  more  glorious 
than  the  light  of  the  sun,  except  the  glory  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  That  must  he 
seen  in  the  soul,  in  the  conscience.  And  to  come  finally  to  the  beatific  vision;  in 
purity  of  heart  to  see  G-od ;  to  close  with  the  great  Object  who  lies  behind  all  the  finite 
objects  of  our  intellectual  research;  to  enjoy  that  reposeful  contemplation  of  the 
eternal  beauty,  of  which  every  imperfect  flash  and  hint  reminds  us  in  this  twilight  of 
life; — this  is  the  goal  of  spiritual  aspiration  in  every  time,  as  it  was  of  the  prophet's 
wishful  thought,  piercing  through  the  darkness  of  the  future.— J. 

Ver.  16. — Songs  from  afar,  "  From  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth  have  we  heard 
songs,  even  glory  to  the  righteous."  Beautiful  music  thatl  For  music  has  often  been 
set  to  unworthy  ends — to  the  praise  of  pride  and  power,  to  war  and  wrong.  It  has 
been  said  of  one,  "  I  care  not  who  makes  a  nation's  laws,  if  I  may  make  tlicir  songs." 
A  strong  antithetical  way  of  putting,  in  an  exaggerated  way,  a  great  truth.  The 
songs  of  a  people  are  always  with  them — in  the  field  and  at  home,  in  toil  and  in  rest. 

I.  The  subject  of  thr  sonos.  "  Glory  to  the  righteous."  How  could  this  otherwise 
end,  than  in  glory  to  God  ?  For  he  is  the  righteous  God,  and  there  is  no  word  by  which 
the  Psalms  oftener  describe  him.  Thus  in  praising  the  rishteons  we  are  led  onward 
to  praise  the  righteous  God,  as  the  God  who  inspires  righteousness  in  the  hearts  of 
others.  Thus  we  read  that  "  in  every  nation  he  that  worketh  righteousness  is  accepted 
of  God."  No  word  reaches  deeper.  We  may  sing  songs  to  the  valiant,  and  the  heroic, 
and  the  patriotic,  and  the  brave ;  but  righteousness  speaks,  not  only  of  courage,  but  of 
conscience  too. 

II.  The  distance  ritoH  which  they  cohe.  "Prom  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 
earth."  Prophecy  of  the  time  when  all  nations  shall  call  Christ  blessed,  and  when  his 
praise  shall  be  heard  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  to  the  going  down  thereof.  We  have 
this  sound  from  the  distant  places,  because  in  the  end  all  true  lovers  of  righteousn<'ss 
will  hail  Christ,  when  he  is  revealed  to  them,  as  containing  all  the  fulness  of  God. 

III.  The  globt  ok  which  they  breathe.  There  are  divers  kinds  of  glory.  But 
God's  glory  is  the  glory  of  the  cross!  There  is  an  empty  glory  of  self-righteousness, 
but  that  is  not  the  glory  of  the  righteous.  Far  from  it.  The  glory  of  strength  is  to 
help  the  weak.  The  glory  of  wisdom  is  to  enlighten  the  ignorant.  The  glory  of 
righteousness  is  to  shape  into  order  that  which  is  wrong  or  "  wrung,"  from  which  idea 
of  being  twisted  and  bent  from  the  straight  course  the  word  "  wrung  "  comes.  Yes. 
Glory  to  the  righteous  1  for  they  are  the  salt  of  the  earth,  the  safety  of  the  nation. 
The  Lord  our  Righteousness  is  revealed  in  Christ,  whose  holy  life  was  not  for  our 
admiration  only,  or  for  our  honour  and  worship, but  was  " lived  "  for  us  and  "laid 
down  "  for  us,  that  we  might  be  filled  with  his  strength,  and  become  holy  as  God  is 
holy.— W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — The  charge  and  the  calamity.  These  words  give  a  vivid  and  a  terrible 
picture  of  calamity  that  should  befall  the  people  of  God.  It  is  suitably  called  "  the 
curse  "  (ver.  6),  for  it  should  prove  an  evil  of  the  severest  kind ;  and  it  would  be  other 
than  a  national  misfortune — ^it  would  be  the  penalty  of  sin :  therefore,  because  of  the 
sins  charged  against  the  nation  (ver.  6),  these  multiplied  sorrows  would  overtake  and 
overwhelm  them ;  "  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken  this  word  "  (ver.  3). 

I.  God's  charge  against  his  people.  (Ver.  5.)  This  is  threefold.  1.  Disregard 
of  his  spoken  Word.  "  They  have  transgressed  the  laws."  Those  plain  statements  of 
the  will  of  God  which  had  been  revealed  in  "  the  Law  "  had  been  deliberately  disobeyed 
— requirements  unfulfilled,  prohibitions  set  at  nought.  3.  Perversion  of  Divine  truth. 
"  Changed  the  ordinance."  The  Jews  wure  subtle  and  sinful  enough  to  a'ppear  to  keep 
tbe  Law  when  they  were  habitually  breaRing  it.  This  they  did  by  chauging  or  perverting 
it,  by  making  it  mean  something  different  from  the  Divine  intention,  by  taking  the  heart 


392  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOrHET  ISATAH.    |.ch.  xxnr.  1— 23. 

out  of  It,  by  Tninimizing  and  dwarfing  it  (see  Maft.  xv.  3 — 9).  8.  Violation  of  Kit  mil 
as  revealed  in  our  common  human  nature.  "  Broken  the  everlasting  covenant."  This 
covenant  is  well  summariz&i  in  Ps.  xxxiv.  15, 16 ;  it  has  fallen  into  grievous  and  guilty 
disregard.  Men  refrained  from  rishteousness  and  "  did  evil,"  yet  they  shrank  not  from 
the  accufiing  eye  and  the  uplifted  hand  of  God  (see  Rom.  it.  14, 15).  The  people  of  God 
will  do  well  to  ask  themselves  whether  they  are  not  in  danger  of  being  obnoxious  to  the 
same  charge;  whether  they  are  not  neglecting  the  will  of  God  as  expressly  revealed  In 
the  words  of  Christ  and  his  apostles ;  or  are  not  changing,  by  radical  misconstruction, 
the  purpose  of  their  Lord ;  or  are  not  setting  aside  some  of  the  first  principles  written 
in  their  nature  by  the  Father  uf  spirits. 

IL  The  calamity  which  attends  disobfdiencb.  This  is  manifold,  as  indicated  in 
ihe  text.  1.  Desolation.  Emptiness,  waste, dispersion  (ver.  1),  inaccessibility  (ver.  10; 
sue  also  vers.  3,  6, 12).  2.  Degradation.  The  land  "  turned  upside  down,"  so  that  what 
was  meant  for  higher  ends  is  employed  for  baser  ones  (ver.  1);  "utterly  spoiled" 
(ver.  3);  defilement  (ver.  5);  resort  to  stimulants  for  false  courage  (ver.  11).  3. 
EnfeMement.  The  land  "  fadeth  away,"  "  langiiisheth  "  (ver.  4);  the  strength  of  the 
city  is  gone,  for  even  the  gate  (the  strong  place)  is  "  smitten  with  destruction  "  (ver. 
J  2).  A:.  Abject  misery.  (Vers.  7,  8.)  Even  (hat  which  usually  excites  with  pleasure 
has  lost  its  charm  (ver.  9).  5.  Completeness  and  commonness  of  the  scourge  (ver.  2). 
Such,  in  various  manifestations,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  subject  and  the  character 
of  the-guilt,  is  the  calamitous  issue  of  disobedience ;  so  heavy  is  the  devouring  curse 
(ver.  6)  when  Divine  laws  are  disobeyed  and  the  Divine  claims  denied.  The  land,  the 
Church,  the  family,  the  individual  life,  is  desolate,  is  degraded,  is  enfeebled,  is  rendered 
joyless.  The  best  companions  are  dispersed,  and  life  is  lonely ;  the  loftier  and  worthier 
ends  of  existence  are  surrendered  for  those  less  worthy,  and  ultimately  for  those  which 
are  posiiiveh-  base ;  the  strength  of  righteousness  and  virtue  gives  place  to  the  feeble- 
ness of  folly  and  to  the  degeneracy  of  vice;  song  dies  into  silence  and  then  into  a 
wail.  (1)  Beware  of  spiritual  and  then  moral  decline.  (2)  Seek  and  find,  in  repentance 
and  faith,  a  way  up  even  from  the  dark  depths  of  rnin. — 0. 

Vers.  13 — 16. — The  voice  of  the  chastened.     We  learn^ 

I.  That  God  tempers  judgment  with  mbbot.  (Ver.  13.)  There  will  be  some  fruit 
spared,  though  the  olive  tree  be  terribly  shaken,  though  the  grapes  have  been  gathered. 
All  will  not  be  taken  from  the  holy  land ;  a  remnant  shall  he  left.  Though  God  strip 
a  man  or  a  nation  of  his  (its)  resources,  yet  will  he  leave  him  (it)  a  remainder,  some- 
thing to  console  him,  something  with  which  he  may  start  anew.  A  starry  night  suc- 
ceeds a  stormy  day ;  a  calm  and  quiet  age  closes  a  life  of  struggle  and  of  sorrow ;  "  the 
old  familiar  faces"  have  disappeared,  but  a  few  faithful  souls  still  linger  who  can  go 
back  with  us  in  thought  and  sympathy  to  early  days. 

II.  That  fkom  the  lips  of  the  chastened  there  often  come  sweet  and  even 
triumphant  strains.  (Ver.  14.)  Those  who  have  been  visited  in  Divine  wrath,  and 
have  seen  their  compatriots  carried  away  into  captivity,  shall  not  give  way  to  despnnd- 
ency;  they  shall  learn  to  honour  and  to  rejoice  in  the  majesty  of  Jehovah ;  they  "shall 
lift  up  the  voice,"  "  shall  sing,"  "  shall  shout "  (exult).  Something  (it  does  not  appear 
what)  in  the  Divine  character  will  appear  to  them  so  majestic,  so  glorious,  so  bene- 
ficent, that  their  sweetest  and  strongest  accents  will  be  called  forth.  To  those  who 
stand  outside  it  often  seems  wonderful  and  incomprehensible  that  those  who  are  inside 
A  great  affliction  should  find  such  occasion  for  thanksgiving.  But  it  is  certainly  true 
that  the  sick  in  their  sickness,  the  poor  in  their  poverty,  the  bereaved  in  their  loneli- 
ness, often  find  more  reason  for  thankful  song  than  do  the  strong  in  their  strength  and 
the  wealthy  in  their  riches.  And  the  song  they  sing  is  not  one  in  which  submission 
struggles  with  complaint,  but  rather,  as  here,  the  happy  outpouring  of  perfect  tcqui- 
escsnce  in  the  Divine  will, — the  voice  of  sncvcd  joy 

III.  That  God  will  be  glorifikd  by  those  furthest  off  ab  bt  those  nkae  to 
HIS  sanctuary.  (Ver.  15.)  "Glorify  ye  the  Lord"  in  the  east  ("  in  the  fires");  in 
the  west  ("  the  isles  of  the  sea  ") ;  "  from  the'  uttermost  part  of  the  earth,"  etc.  (ver.  16), 
Under  the  chastening  hand  of  the  Lord  Israel  went  into  exile ;  in  exile  the  truth  of 
God  was  made  known  as  it  otherwise  would  not  have  been.  In  other  ways  the  judg- 
ments of  Gbd  led,  and  still  lead,  to  the  circulation  of  his  truth  and  to  the  'Dagnifying 


CH.  XXIV.  1— 23.J    tHE  BOOK  OV  THE  f^OPHET  ISATAH.  rf!l3 

of  his  Name.  A  cleansed  and  purified  Church  will  be  a  missionary  Church,  through 
whose  instrumentality  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  be  known  and  »ung  on 
every  hand. 

IV.  That  thb  rkoognition  of  the  Divine  EioHTEOtrsNESs  is  the  FOTmoATiON  of 
ALi,  KELiGions  SERVICE.  "  Glory  to  the  Eighteous  One  "  (ver.  16).  Ill  indeed  would  it 
be  for  the  land  in  which  the  piety  of  the  people  lost  its  hold  on  the  righteousncM  of 
Gkid.  In  the  absence  of  righteousness  from  his  character,  there  would  be  nothing  woi'th 
calling  goodness  or  mercy  on  his  part  and  nothing  worth  calling  reverence  or  devotion 
on  ours.  All  religion  worthy  of  the  name  rests  on  the  righteousness  of  God.  The 
wave  of  sentiment  that  would  weal?en  our  sense  of  it  is  one  that  washes  against  our 
deepest  and  highest  interests,  and  should  be  steadfastly  opposed.  Above  and  beneath 
all  other  things  God  is  the  Eighteeus  One,  at  the  remembrance  of  whose  holiness  we  do 
well  to  give  thanks  (Ps.  xxx.  4),  in  whose  purity  and  perfection  we  do  well  to  glory, — ^C. 

Vers.  16 — 22. — Five  fruits  of  transgression.  The  key-note  of  this  passage  is  found 
in  the  twentieth  verse:  "The  transgression  thereof  shall  be  heavy  upon  it."  All 
these  dire  evils  are  the  consequences  of  national  transgression.    They  are  fivefold. 

I.  It  IMPOVERISHES.  The  prophet,  speaking  not  only  for  himself,  but  for  his  country, 
exclaims,  "  My  leanness,  my  leanness,  woe  unto  me  I "  (ver.  16).  The  violation  of 
Divine  Law  not  only  (1)  reduces  a  man's  bodily  strength,  causing  him  to  waste  away, 
and  bringing  the  pale  cheek  and  the  trembling  nerve ;  but  it  (ii)  cuts  down  a  man's 
resources,  changing  the  princely  revenue  into  a  beggar's  dole ;  moreover,  it  (3)  im- 
poverishes the  mind,  causing  it  to  starve  on  empty  lolly  while  it  might  be  nourished 
with  heavenly  truth ;  and  (4)  it  despoils  the  sou),  making  it  barren  of  those  noble 
virtues  and  those  exquisite  graces  which  elevate  and  beautify  human  character. 

II.  It  deludes.  It  is  full  of  treachery  (ver.  16) ;  its  victims  delude  themselves  with 
the  notion  that  they  are  escaping,  but  they  only  flee  from  the  noise  to  fall  into  the  pit, 
or  escape  from  the  pit  to  be  entangled  in  the  net  (vers.  17,  18).  This  is  "  the  decei  t- 
fulness  of  sin."  -Men  think  they  will  shake  themselves  free  from  their  iniquity  a  little 
further  on,  but  they  find  that  temptation  awaits  them  at  every  point,  that  one  sin  paves 
the  way  for  another:  indulgence  leads  down  to  dishonesty,and  dishonesty  conducts  to 
falsehood;  superstition  ends  in  scepticism,  and  scepticism  in  utter  unbelief.  There  is 
no  escape  from  the  consequences  of  folly  but  by  entering  the  path  of  wisdom,  from  the 
penalty  of  sin  but  by  penitence  and  purity.  'Ihey  who  look  to  time  and  chance  for 
deliverance  are  only  deluding  themselves  with  a  hope  which  will  certainly  "  make 
ashamed  "  those  that  cherish  it. 

III.  It  A8ITATES.  "  The  foundations  of  the  earth  do  shake  .  .  .  the  earth  is  moved 
exceedingly  .  .  .  (it)  shall  reel  to  and  fro  "  (vers.  18 — 20).  There  often  comes  a  time 
in  the  history  of  folly,  or  of  crime,  or  of  transgression,  when  the  subject  of  it — individual 
or  collective — ^finds  everything  unsettled,  shaliing  beneath  his  (its)  feet; ;  it  is  to  him  as 
if  the  very  ground  were  rocking;  friends  fall  away,  kmdred  disown,  confidence  is  lost, 
obligations  are  pressed  against  him,  the  last  measures  are  taken,  liberty  itself  is 
threatened,  the  blackest  clouds  overhang;  behind  is  folly  and  before  is  ruin,  while 
within  are  agitation  and  alarm. 

IV.  It  oppresses  and  even  crushes.  "  The  transgression  thereof  shall  be  heavy 
upon  it;  and  it  shall  fall,  and  not  rise  again"  (ver.  20).  Sin  lies  with  a  heavy  weight 
upon  the  soul.  The  sense  of  guilt,  the  wearing  weight  of  wrong-doing,  oppresses  the 
spirit,  takes  away  its  elasticity,  its  freshness,  its  vigour.  Sometimes  it  does  much 
more  than  that — it  cruslies  the  soul ;  it  makes  it  incapable  of  attempting  anything 
better ;  it  gives  way  to  a  fatal  detipondency,  and  pursues  the  evil  path  even  to  the 
bitter  end.  One  of  the  very  worst  penalties  of  sin  is  the  dead  weight  which  it  lays  on 
the  spirit  of  the  sinner,  killing  his  liope  and  dooming  him  to  despair  and  death. 

V.  It  IMPRISONS.  The  "  high  ones  "  were  to  be  "  shut  up  in  the  prison  "  (vers.  21, 22). 
There  is  no  dungeon,  however  dark  and  strong,  in  which  the  bodies  of  men  have  been 
confined  that  is  so  dark  and  so  deplorable  as  "  the  pit "  or  "  prison  "  in  which  sin  shuts 
up  its  victims.  The  children  of  iniquity  are  slaves;  they  wear  bonds  which  are  more 
firmly  riveted  than  the  closest  iron  fetters  on  human  limbs;  they  are  bondmen 
indeed ;  their  pitiable  thraldom  is  slavery  itself,  of  which  the  imprisonment  of  the  body 
is  only  the  type  and  picture. 


S94  THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAlAH.    [ch.  xxur.  1—24. 

In  Jesus  Christ  and  in  his  service  is :  1.  Enlargement.  2.  Truth  and  disillusion. 
3.  The  calm  of  conscientiousness  and  a  well-grounded  hope.  4.  Expectation  founded 
on  a  wise  and  holy  trustfulness.  5.  Spiritual  freedom.  "  Whom  the  Son  makes  free^ 
they  are  free  indeed ; "  "  Where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty."— 0. 

Ver.  2. — Common  hur den-hearing.  The  figure  of  calamity  given  in  ver.  1  is  that  of 
emptying  a  vessel  by  turning  it  upside  down.  In  national  calamities  all  classes  share 
alike.  There  is  indiscriminate  ruin.  No  distinction  is  made  between  the  different 
ranks  and  conditions  of  life,  though  the  idle  poor  are  always  the  first  to  suffer.  Illus- 
trations may  be  taken  from  the  great  Lancashire  cotton  famine  ;  or  from  times  of  trade 
depression  which,  as  year  after  year  passes  on,  reaches  every  class  and  section  of  society. 
"It  is  in  a  special  manner  true  of  the  destroying  judgments  which  God  sometimes 
brings  upon  smful  nations;  when  he  pleases  he  can  make  them  universal,  so  that  none 
shall  escape  them  or  be  exempt  from  them;  whether  men  have  little  or  much,  they 
shall  lose  it  all.  Those  of  the  meaner  sort  smart  first  by  famine ;  but  those  of  the 
higher  rank  go  first  into  captivity,  while  the  poor  of  the  land  are  left.  Let  not  those 
that  are  advanced  in  the  world  set  their  inferiors  at  too  great  a  distance,  because  they 
know  not  how  soon  they  may  be  put  upon  a  level  with  them  "  (Matthew  Henry).  The 
Apostle  Paul  advises  that  we  accept  the  fact  of  burdens  being  common,  and  strive  to 
turn  the  bearing  of  them  into  Christian  virtue.  "  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens." 
"  Everyman  shall  bear  his  own  burden."  It  is  as  if  he  had  said, "  Bear  ye  one  another's 
burdens,  by  kindly  sympathy  and  ready  help,  as  far  as  ever  you  can,  partly  because  you 
have  a  very  lieavy  burden  of  your  own  to  bear,  so  you  know  what  burden-bearing 
means,  and  partly  because,  come  near  to  help  one  another  how  you  may,  you  know  from 
yourselves  how  true  it  is  tliat  every  man  must  hear  his  own  burden ;  the  really  heavy 
weight  of  it  can  rest  on  no  shoulders  but  his  own." 

I.  The  BDBDBN8  THAT  PRESS  ON  EACH  ONE.  The  text  suggests  such  as  are  special 
to  times  of  calamity  and  distress,  but  we  may  treat  our  topic  in  a  comprehensive  way, 
so  as  to  get  direct  practical  applications.  Each  one  of  us  has  burdens  as  directly  related 
to  his  sins  and  sinfulness  as  the  woes  of  Jerusalem  were  to  the  national  transgressions. 
The  histories  of  cities  and  nations  do  but  picture  in  the  large  the  story  of  individuals. 
The  cursory  reader  of  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress '  will  tell  you  that  the  pilgrim  lost  his 
burden  from  his  shoulders  when  he  gazed  so  trustfully  iipon  the  cross.  But  the  more 
careful  reader,  who  notes  Christian's  infirmities,  and  frailties,  and  stumblings,  and  falls, 
will  tell  you  that  the  pilgrim  bore  his  burdens  right  through  to  the  end,  and  that  they 
weighed  him  down  even  when  crossing  the  stream.  We  have  our  burdens  in  our  frail 
bodies — frail  in  the  nerves,  the  head,  the  bones,  the  lungs,  or  yet  more  secret  organs. 
Each  one  has  a  real  "  thorn  in  the  flesh,"  which  has  influences  far  wider  and  more 
serious  than  he  thinks.  We  have  our  burdens  in  our  dispositions  and  characters — 
burdens  of  despondency,  or  of  impulsiveness,  or  of  carnality,  or  of  masterfulness,  or  ot 
vanity,  giving  a  bad  appearance  to  all  our  work  and  relationship.  And  the  problem  of 
our  life  is  just  this :  "  How  true,  how  beautiful  can  we  become,  with  that  burden,  under 
the  pressures  and  hindrances  of  that  burden?"  There  is  divinely  arranged  a  great 
variety  and  wide  distribution  of  burdens  and  disabilities,  both  in  the  sense  of  infirmities 
and  calamities,  so  that  we  might  come  very  near  to  one  another,  and  really  help  one 
another.  As  we  meet  and  feel  "  1  am  a  man  with  a  burden,"  we  look  into  the  face  of 
our  fellows,  and  he  is  a  poor  face-reader  who  does  not  say,  "  And  my  brother,  too,  is 
evidently  a  man  with  a  burden."  Perhaps  a  suspicion  even  crosses  our  mind  that  our 
brother's  burden  is  heavier  than  our  own.  Burdens,  when  rightly  borne,  never  separate 
men  from  each  other.  The  sanctified  bearing  of  our  own  makes  us  so  simple,  so  gentle, 
po  tender-hearted,  that  we  can  bear  the  burdens  of  others,  in  the  spirit  of  our  meekness 
and  sympathy,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ. 

II.  The  burdens  that  we  mat  bbab  with  othrrs.  There  are  common  burdens 
in  the  home  life;  common  burdens  in  the  business  life;  common  burdens  in  the  social 
life ;  and  common  burdens  in  the  national  life ;  and  we  properly  think  ill  things  of  the 
Inilividuals  or  the  classes  that  isolate  themselves,  and  refuse  to  share  the  common 
hurden.  But  It  will  be  well  to  ask  how  practically  we  can  take  up  the  common  burden 
so  as  to  really  help  our  brethren  who  are  in  the  common  trouble  ?  Our  great  power  is 
our  power  of  lympathy.    We  can  come  so  near  to  oui  brother  in  his  weakness,  hii 


CH.  xxiy.  1— 23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  895 


disability,  even  in  his  sin,  that  he  shall  feel  as  if  another  sliouMer  were  put  under  his 
burden,  and  it  felt  to  him  a  little  lighter.  We  all  yearn  for  sympathy ;  we  all  want 
gome  other  human  heart  to  feel  in  our  trouble-times ; 

"  Oh  what  a  joy  on  earth  to  find 
A  mirror  in  an  answering  mind  t " 

But  we  can  often  enter,  as  a  relieving  power,  into  the  circumstances  that  make  the 
burden.  The  doctor  takes  the  sufferer  into  his  interest  find  care,  and  deals  helpfully 
with  the  circumstances  that  make  the  burden.  And  every  one  of  us  can  be  a  doctor 
for  the  moral  difficulties  and  distresses  of  life.  We  have  all  more  power  over  the  cir- 
cumstances that  make  trouble  than  we  think;  we  can  "  lift  up  hands  that  hang  down, 
and  strengthen  feeble  knees."  Beautiful  in  time  of  national  calamity  is  the  help  which 
the  poor  give  to  the  poor.  Beautiful  ought  to  be  the  help  whicli  each  gives  to  each, 
and  all  to  all,  in  the  ordinary  burden-bearing  of  family  and  social  life. — H.  T. 

Ver.  4. — The  future  for  haughty  folk.  "  The  haughty  people  of  the  earth  do  languish." 
The  proud  are  an  offence  unto  God.  It  is  not  the  rich  who  find  it  so  difficult  to  enter 
the  kingdom  of  God ;  it  is  they  who  "  trust  in  riches,"  who  boast  of  their  riches,  who 
make  their  riches  the  occasion  for  desjjising  others. 

I.  The  futdbb  is  against  the  haughty  natukallt.  Fortune  tells  upon  pre- 
cisely those  things  in  which  they  pride  themselves.  The  picture  of  trembling,  suffering 
old  age,  given  in  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes,  is  designed  as  a  warning  to  the  proud.  See 
what  you  are  certainly  coming  to  who  admired  your  fine  persons,  nade  so  much  of  your 
independence,  and  pampered  your  appetites  and  passions.  The  picture  of  old  age  is 
not  that  of  the  ordinary  man,  but  of  tlie  haughty,  liaasterfiil  sensualist,  the  sinner  of  the 
high  places  of  society,  whose  iniquity  comes  back  upon  him.  It  is  enough  for  haughty 
folk  to  live  ;  life  becomes  their  humbling  and  their  chastisement. 

II.  The  ruTUEE  is  against  the  haijohtt  peovidentiallt.  For  they  cannot  win 
love.  Everybody  serves  them  in  fear  or  for  pay ;  and  so,  oftentimes,  their  very  grandeur 
is  undermined  by  those  about  them,  their  richis  takes  wings  and  fly  away,  theii 
dependents  take  advantage  of  their  times  of  weakness,  and  all  are  glad  to  see  the 
haughty  humbled.  Striking;  illustration  may  be  found  in  the  career  of  Squire  Beckford, 
of  Fonthill.  An  insufferably  austere  and  haughty  man,  the  providences  were  against 
him.  His  mansion  fell  with  a  crash.  His  projects  failed.  He  was  humbled  to  the 
dust,  and  died  almost  a  beggar. 

III.  The  future  is  against  the  haughty  judicially.  For  God  must  punish 
pride.  It  cannot  be  allowed  to  lift  up  its  head.  The  Lord  hath  a  controver.sy  with  it. 
Nebuchadnezzar  eats  grass  like  an  ox.  "Babylon  is  fallen,  is  fallen" — Babylon,  the 
type  of  the  haughty.  Belshazzar  sees  the  recording  finger  write  the  judgment  of  the 
proud.  God  will  bring  into  contempt  all  the  proud  of  the  earth.  "  God  resistetli 
the  proud,  and  giveth  grace  to  the  humble."  Time  is  on  the  side  of  the  meek.  Time 
is  against  the  haughty.  The  judgments  of  God  gather,  like  black  thunder-clouds, 
against  those  whose  hearts  are  lifted  up.  The  storm  will  burst  in  the  ever-nearing 
future.  The  haughty  man's  prosperity  may  blossom  as  a  garden  of  delights;  but  God 
will  breathe  his  blight  upon  it,  and  behold,  as  in  our  text,  "  the  haughty  people  of  the 
earth  do  languish."  Then,  with  a  true  fear,  let  us  "humble  ourselves  under  the  mighty 
hand  of  God."— B.  T. 

Vers.  5,  6. — The  necessary  connection  of  suffering  with  sin.  "Because  they  have 
transgressed  the  laws  .  .  .  therefore  hath  the  curse  devoured  the  earth."  The  great 
Eastern  empires  had  no  staying  power.  In  a  few  generations  dynasties,  even  empires, 
were  swept  clean  away.  And  the  reason  is  not  far  to  seek.  The  great  Eastern  king- 
doms were  founded  on  blood-shedding ;  and  for  the  sin  of  violence  God  keeps  the  curse 
of  destruction.  A  lesson  which  he  taught  the  world  once  for  all  when  he  swept  away 
the  old  violent  humanity  with  a  flood :  "  The  earth  never  spues  out  its  inhabitants 
until  they  have  defiled  it  by  their  sin."  This  subject  is  presented  to  us  under  a  variety 
of  aspects,  and  with  an  abundance  of  illustration.  It  is  one  of  the  great  messages  of  the 
Bible.     We  do  but  give  it  here  a  little  freshness  of  form  and  setting. 

I.  Sin  comes  fibst.    God  always  begins  with  Eden.    The  Eden  of  bright  happy 


39«  TtlE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oa.  sxiv.  l—ii 

youth  in  every  man's  Ufa.  There  is  no  suffering  where  there  is  no  sin.  Thorns  and 
hriers  come  when  man  has  acted  in  wilfulness.  Suffering  has  no  mission  save  as  th» 
corrective  of  sin  and  sin's  consequences.  Our  first  parents  disobey,  and  then  suffering 
comes.  Man  follows  the  "  devices  and  desires  of  his  own  heart,"  and  then  the  corrective 
Divine  judgments  come.  And  suffering  has  always  this  justification,  that  sin  has 
come  first.    Illustrate  in  the  case  of  King  Sanl. 

II.  Sin  mat  have  a  long  tether.  This  often  creates  confusion  in  men's  minds. 
They  think  the  sin  cannot  be  evil  because  the  punislimeiit  is  so  long  delayed.  So  the 
unclfanness  of  cities  goes  on  fir  years,  and  seems  to  be  no  serious  evil ;  but  presently 
the  plague  comes  and^  sweeps  its  thousands  away.  Israel  presumed  on  the  holding  over 
of  its  national  judgments,  but  presently  overwhelming  destruction  came.  We  can  often 
sin  on  for  years  with  apparent  impunity,  never  with  real  impunity.  Storms  are 
gathering,  though  they  wait  their  time  for  bursting. 

III.  SuFFEBiNO  KEEPS  SIS  COMPANY  ON  ITS  WAT.  It  js  always  present ;  always 
ready  to  give  sigus  of  its  presence  ;  always  making  monitions.  It  is  held  back  only 
in  the  long-suffering  of  God's  mercy,  the  "goodness  of  God  thus  leading  men  to 
repentance." 

IV.  StJFFERINO   PLAINLY  STAMPS   THE   EVIL  OF   SIN   IN   THE  BNB.      As  in  the  Case  of 

the  drunkard,  the  sensualist,  the  dishonest.  You  can  tell  the  value  of  a  thing  by  its 
wage,  and  the  "  wages  of  sin  is  deatli."  You  can  estimate  a  thing  by  its  issues,  and 
"sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death."  This  lesson  the  history  of  indi- 
viduals and  of  nations,  ancient  and  modern,  teaches,  but  teaches  in  vain  to  the  sons 
of  men.  We  say,  "  Ah,  yes  1  It  may  be  true  of  sin,  but  it  is  not  true  of  vuf 
sin."— E.  T. 

Ver.  9. —  T%e  distress  of  pampered  appetite*.  "They  shall  not  drink  wine  with  a 
Bong;  strong  drink  shall  be  bitter  to  them  that  drink  it."  There  is,  at  first,  a  carnal 
pleasure  in  self-indi'l^ence,  in  lust  of  eating  and  drinking,  ami  in  sensuality.  But, 
sooner  or  later,  God  takes  the  song  out  of  it.  This  must  ever  be  the  distress  of  mere 
appetite — ^It  can  excite,  it  can  make  ever-increasing  demands,  but  it  cannot  satisfy. 
To  indulge  mere  appetite  and  passion  is  to  "  spend  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread, 
and  .  .  .  labour  for  that  which  satisfieth  not."  The  young  do  not  believe  this;  the  old 
man  knows  it,  and  he  says, "  Eejoice,  0  young  man,  in  thy  youth ;  and  let  thy  heart  cheer 
thee  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,  and  walk  iu  the  ways  of  thine  heart,  and  in  the  sight  of 
thine  eyes  :  but  know  thou,  that  for  all  these  things  God  will  bring  thee  into  judgment  1 " 
and  that  judgment  comes  either  in  early  death,  or  in  bitterness  and  woe  if  life  is  long 
spared.  Sir  W.  Raleigh  on  this  ground  solemnly  warns  his  son :  "  Take  special  care 
that  thou  delight  not  in  wine;  for  there  never  was  any  man  that  came  to  honour  and 
preferment  that  loved  it;  for  it  transformeth  a  man  into  a  beast,  decayeth  health, 
poisoneth  the  breath,  destroyeth  natural  heat,  brings  a  man's  stomach  to  an  artificial 
heat,  deformeth  the  face,  rotteth  the  teeth,  and,  to  conclude,  moketh  a  man  con- 
temptible, soon  old,  and  despised  of  all  wise  and  worthy  men."  And  Matthew  Henry 
says,  "  God  has  many  ways  lo  embitter  wine  and  strong  drink  to  those  that  love  them 
and  have  the  highest  gust  of  them — distemper  of  body,  anguish  of  mind ;  the  ruin  of  the 
estate  or  country  will  make  the  strong  drink  bitter,  and  all  the  delights  of  sense  taste- 
less and  insipid."  The  distress  of  the  men  of  pampered  appetites  comes  in  one  or  the 
other  of  the  two  following  forms. 

I.  Abundance  is  presented,  bct  the  power  to  bnjot  is  gone.  For  appetite  and 
passion  wear  out,  after  they  have  fixed  in  the  soul  a  dull  and  dreadful  craving  that 
gives  a  man  no  rest.  Late  in  life  circumstances  often  give  the  money,  the  time,  the 
positions  which  are  essential  to  self-indulgence,  and  the  man  is  in  the  midst  of  this 
unspeakable  misery — that  he  is  physically  unable  to  enjoy.  This  is  God's  bitter 
punishment  of  sensuality  in  this  life. 

II.  Appetite  becomes  ravenous,  and  there  ib  nothing  to  feed  it  on.  Or  it 
slips  away,  always  just  out  of  reach,  as  the  water  to  Tantalus.  Every  act  ot  self- 
indulgence  has  a  tendency  to  repeat  itseli.  You  cannot  stop  with  vmx.  But  as  the  act 
is  repeated  it  becomes  more  intense,  it  wants  more  force.  The  desire  grows  until  it  gets 
beyond  a  man,  and  nothing  on  earth  can  satisfy.  Then  Providence  places  a  man  in 
WDM  captivity,  like  these  pampered  Jews,  where  there  is  the  unspeakable  miiery  oC 


CH.  XXIV.  1—23.]    THE   BOOK  OJ)'  THE  PliOPHET  ISAIAH.  307 

immense  passion  for  sensual  enjoyment  and  nothing  to  enjoy.    These  are  th«  two 
features  of  God's  hell  upon  earth. — R.  T. 

Ver.  13. — The  mission  of  remnant/.  Explaining  the  figure  used  in  this  verse, 
Thomson  says,  "  Early  in  autumn  the  olive  btrries  hegin  to  drop  of  themselves,  or  are 
shaken  off  hy  the  wind.  They  are  allowed  to  remain  under  the  trees  for  some  time, 
guarded  by  the  watchman  of  the  town — a  very  familiar  Bible  character.  Then  a 
proolamation  is  made  by  the  governor  that  all  who  have  trees  £;o  out  and  pick  what  has 
fallen.  Previous  to  this,  not  even  the  owners  are  allowed  to  gather  olives  in  the  groves. 
This  proolamation  is  repeated  once  or  twice,  according  to  the  season.  In  November 
comes  the  general  and  final  summons,  which  sends  forth  all  Hasbeiya.  No  olives  are 
now  safe  unless  the  owner  looks  after  them,  for  the  watchmen  are  removed,  and  the 
orchards  are  alive  with  men,  women,  and  children.  Everywhere  the  people  are  in 
the  trees,  '  shaking'  them  with  all  their  might,  to  bring  down  the  fruit.  The  effort  is 
to  make  a  clear  bweep  of  all  the  crop;  hut,  in  spite  of  shaking  and  beating,  there  is 
always  a  gleaning  left.  'I'hese  are  gathered  by  the  very  poor,  vvho  have  no  trees  of  their 
own;  and  by  industry  they  collect  enough  to  keep  a  lamp  in  their  habitation  during 
the  dismal  nights  of  winter,  and  to  cook  their  mess  of  pottage  and  bitter  herbs." 
Reference  may  be  to  the  few  poor  who  were  left  in  the  land  of  Judah  to  till  the  fields, 
when  the  great  mass  of  the  people  were  carried  away  captive.  God  has  always  kept  a 
lemnant.  Noah  and  his  family  in  the  time  of  the  Flood.  Seven  thousand  in  the  time 
(if  Ahab,  an  election  of  grace.  And  remnants  have  always  their  witness  to  make  and 
their  work  to  do. 

I.  Remnants  witness  of  God's  judgments.  They  compel  ns  to  ask — ^Why  are 
they  thus  but  remnants  ?  and  so  the  Kvine  d'  alings  are  recalled  to  mind.  There  was 
punishment  because  there  was  sin;  there  was  overwhelming  punishment  because  the 
cup  of  iniquity  had  become  full.  The  nation  is  destioyed  as  a  nation  because  the 
world  must  be  tauglit,  over  and  over  again,  that  "  righteousness  exaltetb  a  nation,  but 
bin  is  a  rebuke  to  any  people." 

II.  Remnants  witness  to  God's  mercy  in  judoment.  They  say  God's  judgments 
iire  never  absolutely  destructive.  God  cuts  down  the  tree,  but  leaves  tiie  stock  in  the 
L  round.  God  removes  the  nation,  but  leaves  a  few  to  keep  up  possession  and  rights. 
Self-vindication  is  only  apart  of  God's  meaning  in  his  judgments.  Correction  is  his 
chief  purpose,  and  his  mercifulness  calls  for  repentance. 

III.  Remnants  witness  to  God's  bbstorino  MEBcy  through  judgment.  For  they 
only  keep  possession  till  better  days,  though  their  possession  declares  that  the  bettei 
days  will  come.    The  "  election  of  grace  "  has  this  to  say  :  "  All  Israel  shall  be  saved." 

These  points  may  be  applied  to  the  few  that  are  kept  faithful  in  time*  of  worldliness 
:ikI  spiritual  decay  in  connection  with  Christ's  Church. — R.  T. 

Ver.  15. — Man's  duty  in  times  of  refining.    "  Wherefore  glorify  ye  the  Lord  in  the 

list ;  "  margin,  "  fires  "  (Revised  Version).    The  word  translated  "  fires  "  in  the  Autho- 

izcd  Version  is  a  difficult  one.     It  points  to  the  "  land  of  the  sun,"  which  would  be  the 

Last  country,  to  which  Judah  was  taken  for  its  captivity,  and  which  was  to  it  as  a 

ifiijiiig  fire;  or  some  think  to  the  "  land  of  volcanic  fires,"  which  would  be  the  shores 

f  the  llediterranean  Sea.     We  prefer  to  see  a  figurative  reference  to  the  refining  fires 

.f  the  time  of  exile.     It  is  in  strict  keeping  with  the  mission  of  Isaiah  that  he  should 

ihus  bid  the  |;euple  "glorify  God  in  the  fires."     Whether  the  passage  directly  refers  to 

.he  flight  of  the  people  to  the  islands  of  the  sea,  or  to  the  great  deportation  into 

I  haldoa,  the  general  truth  is  set  before  us  that,  when  we  are  in  God's  chastising  and 

correcting  hand,  our  supreme  desire  and  endeavour  should  be  to  "  glorify  God  in  the 

fires."    And  this  is  done — 

L  When  the  suffering  is  recognized  as  ohastisbmbnt.  Suffering  Is  often  spoken 
of  as  if  it  were  accident,  hereditary  taint,  or  the  fault  of  other  people  ;  but  God  is  not 
glorified  until  we  see  and  admit  that  it  is  fatherly  chasiisement.  The  burden  of  woe 
resting  on  humanity  is  overwhelming,  unless  we  can  see  that  God  is  in  it,  and  thereby 
la  but  chastening  his  children  betimes.  The  world  is  God's  erring  child.  It  glorifies 
the  Father  to  see  that  he  will  not  let  him  go  on  in  sin.  "  What  son  is  he  whom  th.> 
jfher  chasteneth  not  ?" 


S98  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHBT   IBAIAH.    [ch-  xxnr.  1—23. 

IL  When  we  admit  the  sin  fob  which  the  chastisement  is  sent.  God  always 
sends  chastisements  that  can  have  a  revealing  power,  and  bear  evident  relation  to 
particular  sins.  National  sins  are  shown  up  by  national  calamities,  bodily  sins  by 
IxxMly  sufferings.  ITiis  point  may  gain  large  and  various  illustration,  as  in  Saul, 
David,  Ahab,  Jonah,  etc  We  glorify  God  when  we'  let  the  chastisement  show  us  the 
sin — act  as  the  revealer  to  reveal  the  bad  self. 

in.  When  we  determine  to  put  the  sin  away.  For  chastisement  then  is  shown 
to  be  effective ;  it  reaches  its  end  :  God  is  seen  not  to  have  wrought  in  vain.  Correction 
is  "for  our  profit,  that  we  may  be  partakers  of  his  righteousness." 

IV.  When  we  come  out  op  the  chastisement  purified,  humbled,  submissive, 
AND  obedient.  Our  Father  is  glorified  when  we  are  made  children  indeed.  Beautifully 
is  it  said  of  the  Lord  Jesus  that,  "  though  he  were  a  Son,  yet  learned  he  obedience  by 
the  things  which  he  suffered."  Glorifying  God  by  the  spirit  of  sonship,  which  he  kept 
all  through  the  burning  of  the  dreadful  refining  fires  of  Calvary.  Trust,  submission, 
clinging  love,  patient  waiting, — these  still  glorify  God  in  the  fires. — E.  T. 

Ver.  20. — The  burden  of  earth's  transgressions.  "  And  the  transgression  thereof  shall 
be  heavy  upon  it."  Sin  on  man  is  often  figured  as  a  burden.  Bunyan's  picture  of 
Graceless  with  the  load  on  his  back  is  familiar  enough  to  be  understood  by  all. 
Prophets  picture  God's  impending  judgments  as  a  burden  ready  to  fall  and  crush.  We 
will  here  take  the  term  as  referring  to  the  transgressions  rather  than  to  the  direct 
judgments. 

I.  The  burden  that  crushes  men.  It  is  transgression,  which  is  precisely  this — 
wilful  sin.  "  Sin  is  a  burden  to  the  whole  creation ;  it  is  a  heavy  burden,  a  burden 
under  which  it  groans  now  and  will  sink  at  last.  Sin  is  the  ruin  of  states  and  king- 
doms and  families;  they  fall  under  the  weight  of  that  talent  of  lead"  (Zech.  v.  7,  8). 
Illustrative  cases  may  be  given  of  the  crushing  of  health,  position,  success,  friendship, 
family,  by  the  burden  of  wilful  sin.  Pressed  down  by  it,  humanity  cries  as  did  St. 
Paul,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  1  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this 
death?" 

II.  Delivbeanob  from  this  burden  is  beyond  man's  power.  All  kinds  of  purely 
human  forces  have  been  tried — self-struggles,  strong  will,  education,  philosophy, 
religious  systems,  legal  enactments,  watching  of  one  another,  refinements  of  art,  etc.; 
but  none  have  succeeded  yet  in  doing  away  with  the  sin  of  the  individual,  and  so  none 
have  even  reached  the  fringe  of  the  world's  misery.  Have  we  any  better  reason  to  hope 
for  the  success  of  the  modern  panacea  of  scientific  knowledge,  than  our  fathers  had  of 
the  nostrums  they  tried?  Before  God  intervened,  there  was  "  no  eye  to  pity,  and  no 
arm  to  save."  For  "  sin  "  man  has  never  been  able  to  find  "  balm  in  Gilead ;"  there  is 
no  adequate  "  physician  "  there. 

IIL  Man's  helplessness  should  make  him  cby  mightily  unto  God.  "Thou 
canst  save,  and  thou  alone."  Yet  precisely  in  this  men  fail.  They  will  die  rather  than 
turn  to  Gud  for  pardon  and  life.  And  why  ?  Bi  cause  they  do  not  "  know  and  believe 
the  love  which  God  hath  unto  them."  False  and  unworthy  notions  of  the  God  of  love, 
and  Father  of  Jesus,  have  long  prevailed,  and  they  keep  men  away  from  God.  So  our 
work  is  to  preach  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,  which  alone  can  lift  the  burden  of 
transgression  that  now  presses  so  heavily,  so  crushingly,  on  men's  shoulders,  that  they 
"  fall,  and  cannot  rise  again." — R.  T. 

Ver.  23. — The  LmdCs  kingdom  is  the  doing  of  the  Lord^s  wiU.    "  For  the  Lord  of 

hosts  shall  reign." 

I.   A   KINGDOM   18   simply   THE   REIGN   AND   BULB    OF    A    WILL.      That    18    the    proper 

meaning  of  the  word  "  kingdom  ; "  it  is  the  "  dom  "  or  rule  of  a  king.  There  are  several 
ways  in  which  men  may  be  gathered  together  into  ordered  communities.  The  foi-m  ot 
the  kingdom  is  the  most  common.  We  only  in  part  realize  what  a  kingdom  is  in  our 
own  land  and  times,  because  the  relation  between  the  will  of  our  sovereign  and  the 
people  is  not  direct,  but  is  maintained  through  a  constitution,  which  involves  representa- 
tive and  responsible  government.  For  the  scriptural  idea  of  a  kingdom  we  must  refer 
to  the  kingdoms  established  in  those  Eastern  climes,  where  Bible  heroes  lived  and  the 
Bible  itself  was  written.     There  a  kingdom  is  the  rule  of  one  man's  will.     The  judg- 


OH.  XXV.  1— 12.J    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


S99 


ments,  wiylie!!,  and  comtaands  of  one  man  influence  the  spirit,  conduct,  and  even  choices 
of  a  whole  people  Properly  a  kingdom  is  a  number  of  persons  agreeing  to  accept  the 
'viU  of  one  of  their  number  as  their  rule  and  guide.  The  kingdom  grows  out  of  the 
family  idea ;  and  the  family  rule  is  the  fatherly  will.  So  the  kingdom  of  God  is  no 
merely  outward  thing ;  it  is  the  reign  of  God's  will.  The  subjects  of  it  are  precisely 
those  who  choose  his  will,  obey  him,  recognize  his  kingly  rights. 

II.  If  we  know  the  will  of  God,  we  know  the  spirit  of  his  kingdom.  We 
can  judge  of  any  kingdom  fairly  if  we  can  gain  a  feir  knowledge  of  its  king.  Of  God 
we  know  this — ^his  will  is  that  of  a  Father,  a  heavenly  Father,  a  holy  Father.  Qoi 
might  have  put  forth  his  power  and  forced  the  obedience  of  his  creatures.  He  does  not. 
He  appeals  to  our  motives  and  ftelings  as  reasonable  moral  beings.  He  wants  no 
kingdom  of  slaves  ;  he  wants  the  la»e  and  allegiance  of  free  men.  His  is  a  spiritual 
kingdom.  To  accept  the  will  of  some  men  is  hard ;  but  God  touches  our  feelings, 
wakens  our  confidence,  comnjands  our  reverence,  and  so  to  us  his  will  seems  mo^t 
beauliful,  ever  right,  ever  wise,  ever  gracious.  And  we  know  the  spirit  of  his  kingdom 
— it  is  the  obedience  which  love- renders. 

III.  If  WB   CHEEKF0LLY    ACCEPT  THE   WILL   OF   GoD,    WB   EEALIZE    THE   COMING   OF 

HIS  KiNaooM.  Prophecy  indeed  makes  pictures  of  the  sotting  up  of  a  kinj;  in  Jerasalem 
in  the  latter  days ;  but  prophecy  is  fulfilled,  over  and  nver  again,  when  hearts  yield  to 
God ;  when  families,  communities,  and  nations  accept  his  will  and  reign.  God  wants  to 
secure  the  voluntary  chuico  of  his  will  as  the  rule  of  life.  Wherever  that  is  gained  his 
kingdom  ia  set  up. — B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


Vers.  1 — 12. — Isaiah's  Song  of  Pbaisb  on 
THE  Establishment  of  God's  Kingdom.  As 
in  ch.  zli.,  after  describing  the  first  setting 
up  of  Christ's  kingdom  and  the  call  of  the 
Gentiles,  the  prophet  broke  out  into  song, 
through  joy  at  the  tidings  he  was  coiumis- 
•ioned  to  announce,  so  now,  having  pro- 
claimed the  final  establishment  of  the  same 
kingdom  in  the  heavenly  Zion,  he  is  again 
carried  away  by  the  sense  of  exultant 
gladness  into  a  fresh  Lobgesang,  which  he 
utters  in  his  own  person — ^not,  as  the  former 
one,  in  the  person  of  the  Church.  His  song 
divides  itself  into  three  sections:  (1)  vers. 
1—5,  a  thanksgiving  for  deliverance;  (2) 
vers.  6 — 8,  a  commemoration  of  blessings 
granted ;  and  (3)  vers.  9 — 12,  exaltation  in 
the  security  obtained. 

Ver.  1. — Thou  art  my  God;  I  will  exalt 
thee  (comp.  Exod.  xv.  2  and  Ps.  cxviii.  28). 
To  Isaiah  the  "Song  of  Moses"  seems  to 
have  been  a  pattern  thanksgiving,  from 
which  he  delighted  to  draw  his  phrases 
when  he  was  bent  on  formally  singing  praise 
to  Ood.  Compare  the  following :  Exod.  xv.  2 
with  ch.  xii.  2,  "  He  is  become  my  salva- 
tion ;  "  the  same  with  ch.  xxv.  1, "  He  is  my 
God;  I  will  exalt  him;  "  Exod.  xv.  6  with 
ch.  xiii.  16,  "  Hath  dashed  in  pieces ; "  Exod. 
XV.  7  with  cli.  xlvli.  14, "  Consumed  tijem  as 
■tubble;"  Exod.  xv.  11  with  ch.  xlvi.  5, 


"  Who  is  like,"  etc.  7  the  same  with  oh.  xxv. 
1,  "  Doing  wonders ; "  Exod.  xv.  16  with  oh. 
viii.  13,  "Fear  and  dread ;"  Exod.  xv.  18 
with  ch.  xxiv.  23,  "The  Lord  shall  reign." 
Wonderful  things ;  thy  counsels  of  old  are, 
etc.;  rather,  thoa  hast  urrought  wonders, 
counsels  of  old,  faithfulness  and  truth.  The 
wonders  for  which  God  is  praised  were 
decreed  in  his  counsels  from  all  eternity ; 
their  accomplishment  shows  forth  God's 
"faithfulness"  and  "truth." 

Ver.  2. — Ihou  hast  made  of  a  oity  an  heap. 
No  particular  oity  is  pointed  at.  The  pro- 
phet has  in  his  mind  the  fate  of  all  thosia 
cities  which  have  been  enemies  of  Jehovah 
and  persecutors  of  the  saints  upon  earth.  A 
defenced  oity;  i.e.  "a  fenced,  or  fortified, 
city."  A  palace  of  strangers.  As  the  "city" 
of  this  passage  is  not  an  individual  city,  so 
the  "palace"  is  not  an  individual  palace. 
All  the  palaces  of  those  who  were"btrangeiB" 
to  God  and  his  covenant  have  ceased  to  be 
— they  are  whelmed  in  the  general  destruc- 
tion (see  ch.  xxiv.  20).  They  will  never 
rise  again  out  of  their  ruins. 

Ver.  3. — Therefore  shall  the  strong  people 
glorify  thee;  rather,  strong  peoples.  God's 
judgments  on  the  nations  specially  hostile 
to  him  would  cause  some  among  the  heathen 
peoples  to  range  themselves  on  his  side. 
Perhaps  Persia  is  mainly  intended  (see  cli. 
xliv.  28;  xlv.  1,  etc.;  and  comp.  Ezra  i. 
1 — 4;  vi.  3 — 12,  etc.).  The  city  of  the 
terrible  nations;  rather,  cities  of  terrible 
nations.  Though  the  noun  is  singular,  the 
verb  is  plural,  showing  that  the  word  "oity  " 
is  again  used  distribuiioelii. 


iOO 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHET   ISAIAH,    [ch.  xx\.  1— 12. 


Ver.  4.— The  poor  .  ,  ,  the  needy.  The 
"  poor  and  needy  "  are  especially  the  afBiuted 
saints,  whom  the  ungodly  of  the  earth  have 
80  long  injured  and  oppressed.  God  is  ever 
a  "  Strength  "  and  "  Eef uge  "  to  such  (comp. 
rh.  ziv.  30;  xxix.  19;  and  see  also  Fs.  Izzii. 
12—14).  A  Eefuge  from  the  storm  (comp. 
cli.  iv.  6 ;  and  the  Paaims passim).  A  Shadow 
from  the  heat.  The  idea  is  a  little  enlarged 
ill  oh.  xxzii.  2.  Its  germ  is,  perhaps,  to  be 
foiiod  in  Ps.  oxxi.  6,  6.  No  writer  acoumu- 
lutes  striking  images  with  such  force  and 
biauty  as  Isaiah.  Primarily,  the  entire 
imagery  has  reference  to  what  God  will  have 
done  for  his  people  when  the  final  con- 
summation arrives.  Secondarily,  a  precious 
encouragement  is  held  out  to  all  who  are 
nndergoiog  their  earthly  trial  and  probation, 
who  are  taught  where  to  look  for  a  sure 
refuge  in  time  of  trouble. 

Ver.  5. — Thon  shalt  bring  down.  The 
past  foreshadows  the  future.  What  God 
had  done  in  "  bringing  down  "  the  enemies 
of  his  saints,  he  would  do  again  and  again. 
He  could  as  easily  bring  to  nought  the 
clamorous  uprising  of  heathen  nations 
(strangers)  against  his  people,  as  temper  the 
inn'a  heat  by  the  interposition  of  a  thick 
elond.  The  branch  ;  rather,  the  song  (comp. 
eh.  xxiv.  16;  Job  xxiv.  10;  Ps.  xcv.  2; 
cxix.  51).  The  exultant  chant  of  triumph 
which  the  ungodly  are  sure  to  raise  as  they 
deem  their  victory  over  the  people  of  God 
compli  te,  will  be  stopped  in  mid-career,  and 
"brought  low,"  or  reduced  to  silence, by  the 
crushing  overthrow  predicted  in  oh.  xxiv. 

Vers.  6 — 8.— The  blessings  of  the  final 
state  are  now  touched  upon,  as  a  special 
subject  for  thanlisgiving.  They  are  not 
enumerated ;  but  a  certain  number  are  set 
forth,  as  specimens  from  which  we  may  form 
a  conception  of  the  general  condition  of  the 
*  saved."  These  are :  (1)  a  heavenly  feast, 
in  which  they  will  all  participate  (ver.  6) ; 
(2)  a  removiil  of  the  "  veil,"  or  "  covering," 
which  is  in  this  life  over  all  things,  causing 
men  to  have  an  indistinct  vision,  and  an 
erroneous  estimate  of  their  value ;  (3)  the 
abolition  of  death,  which  will  no  longer 
hang  over  them  as  a  thing  to  be  feared ; 
and  (4)  the  cessation  of  tears,  or  the  entire 
freedom  of  the  saved  from  all  sorrow. 

Ver.  6. — Im  this  mountain ;  i.e.  the  heavenly 
Zion — the  "  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  " 
(eb.  ii.  2;  comp.  ch.  xxiv.  23).  Unto  all 
people ;  rather,  unto  all  peoples.  There  is 
no  restriction  of  salvation  to  any  particular 
race  or  nation — "Jew,  Greek,  barbarian, 
Scythian,  bond,  free"  (C!ol.  iii.  11),  are 
equally  invited,  and  some  of  each  come  in 
(comp.  Dan.  vii.  14;  Matt.  viii.  11;  Rev.  v. 
9;  vii.  9).  The  Church  of  the  redeemed 
contains  men  and  women  of  all  "nations, 
tod  kindreds,  and  peoples,  and  tongues." 


A  feast  of  fat  things.  It  follows  from  many 
passages  of  Holy  Scripture  tliat  there  is 
something  in  the  final  beatitude  of  man 
which  is  best  represented  to  us  in  our 
present  condition  by  the  image  of  a  "  feast " 
— something  very  different,  no  doubt,  from 
the  festive  joy  of  which  our  Teutonic  an- 
cestors hoped  to  partake  in  the  halls  of 
Odin,  but  yet  figured  to  us  most  fitly  and 
appropriately  by  terms  ordinarily  used  if 
describe  earthly  feasting.  Qur  Lord -tells 
of  a  "marriage  supper,"  to  which  he  will 
invite  bis  friends  (Matt.  xxii.  2 — 12);  and 
the  scene  of  the  "marriage  supper  of  the 
Lamb,"  according  to  St.  John  in  the  Reve- 
lation (xix.  7 — 9),  is  heaven.  There  man, 
it  woull  seem,  will  partake  of  a  sacrificial 
feast  with  his  gh^rified  Lord  (Matt.  xxvi. 
29) — will  eat  the  "  heavenly  manna,"  which 
is  "  angels'  food  "  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  25),  and  driuk 
a  spiritual  drink  wliich  may  be  called  "  the 
fruit  of  tho  vine,"  deriving  from  this  "  eat- 
ing" and  "drinking"  life  and  joy  and 
strength.  It  baa  been  already  observed,  in 
the  Commentary  upon  Exodus  (p.  581),  that 
the  sacrificial  meal  on  Sinai,  wheretio  the 
seventy  elders  were  admitted  (Exod.  xxiv. 
9 — 11),  prefigured  this  heavenly  feasting, 
and  throws  a  certain  light  upon  it.  All 
gross  and  carnal  ideas  must,  of  course,  be 
subtracted  from  the  conception  of  the 
heavenly  festivity;  but  it  seems  to  be  true 
to  suy  that  our  author,  and  also  St  John 
and  our  Lord  himself,  imply  that  in  the 
world  to  come  there  will  be  a  feast,  at  which 
God  will  be  the  Host,  and  all  men,  priests 
and  laity  alike,  his  guests,  and  receive  from 
him  the  choicest  and  most  exquisite  gifts — 
gifts  which  will  make  them  supremely 
happy  (see  Mr.  Cheyne's  note  on  the  passage, 
p.  148).  A  feast  of  wines  on  the  lees.  Wine 
which  remained  on  its  lees,  and  was  not 
poured  off  them  into  another  vessel,  was 
considered  to  be  of  especial  strength  (see 
Jer.  xlviii.  11).  Its  defect  was  a  want  of 
clearui  ss.  The  wine  of  the  heavenly  ban- 
quet is  to  be  at  once  strong  and  perfectly 
clear  or  "  well  refined." 

Ver.  7. — He  will  destroy  .  .  .  the  face  oi 
the  ooveiing.  According  to  some,  the 
"covering  cast  over  all  people"  is  death, 
and  the  second  clause  of  the  verse  is  a  mere 
repetition  of  the  first.  But,  though  the 
heads  of  criminals  were  covered  when  they 
were  led  to  execution  (Esth.  viL  8),  yet 
deatli  itself  is  never  elsewhere  called  a 
"  covering."  May  not  the  prophet  have  in 
Tiew  that  "  veil "  or  "  covering  "  of  miscon- 
ception and  prejudice,  whereof  St  Paul 
speaks  as  lying  "  on  the  hearts  of  the  Jewish 
nation,"  and  preventing  them  from  discern- 
ing the  true  sense  of  Scripture  (2  Cor.  iii. 
15)?  Certainly  one  of  the  great  curses  of 
humanity  while  hero  is  its  inability  to  gee 


en  XXV.  1—12.]    THE   BOOK  OP   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


401 


things  aa  thoy  really  are — its  coloured,  dis- 
torted, prejudiced  views  of  life  and  death, 
of  this  woild  and  the  next,  of  self-interest, 
duty,  happiness.  This  "veil"  is  certainly 
to  be  done  away ;  for  "  now  we  see  through 
a  glfiss  darkly,  but  then  face  to  face ;  now 
we  know  in  part,  but  then  shall  we  know 
even  as  we  are  known  "  (2  Cor.  xiii.  12). 

Ver.  8. — He  will  swallow  up  death  in 
victory;  rather,  he  will  abolish  death  for 
ever.  Uosea,  a  conlemporary,  was  inspired 
to  write,  "1  will  ransom  Israel  from  the 
power  of  the  grave ;  I  will  redeem  thom  from 
death:  0  denth,  I  will  be  thy  plagues;  O 
grave,  I  will  be  thy  destruction"  (xiii. 
1 1) ;  but  otlierwibe  this  was  the  first  an- 
nouncement that  death  was  to  disfijipoar 
and  to  cease  to  be  a  possibility.  It  was  an 
enormous  advance  on  the  dim  and  vngiie 
conceptions  of  a  future  life  hitherto  current 
(Job  xix.  25,  27 ;  Ps.  xvii.  15)  to  have  such 
an  announcement  made  aa  this.  Hitherto 
men  had  been  "  through  tear  of  death  all 
theii  life  subject  to  bon.lage"  (Heb.  ii.  15). 
Nosv  they  were  taught  (hat,  in  the  resur- 
rectioji-life,  there  would  be  no  fear,  no  pos- 
tibility  of  death.  The  joyous  outburst  of 
the  apostle,  when  he  quotes  the  present 
pnssage  (2  Cor.  xv.  51),  is  the  natural  thanks- 
giving song  of  reassured  humanity,  on  re- 
cognizing its  final  deliverance  from  the 
unspeakable  terror  of  death  and  annihilation. 
The  Lord  God  will  wipe  away  tears  from 
aU  faces.  A  recent  commentator  asks, "  Wliat 
place  is  left  for  tears  ?  "  But  surely  death 
18  not  the  only  cause  of  human  mouruin-. 
Oiu-  own  bins,  the  sins  and  sufferings  of  our 
dear  ones,  are  the  main  provocatives  of  our 
tears.  When  it  is  promised,  as  here  and  in 
Ruv.vii.  17  and  xxi.  4,  that  "there  shall  be  no 
more  pain,  neither  sorrow  nor  crying,"  the 
revelation  is  made  that  there  shall  be  no  more 
sin ;  for  where  sin  is,  sorrow  must  be.  The 
rebuke  of  his  people  shall  be  take  away. 
It  will  be  among  tne  lesser  satisfactions  of 
the  final  condition  of  the  saved  tliat  they 
aro  no  longer  subject  to  reproach.  In  tliis 
life  they  have  to  endure  continually  reproach, 
rubuke,  contumely  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  10;  Isxxix. 
50,  51,  etc.).  In  the  resurrection-life  they 
will  be  exempt  from  any  such  annoyance. 
The  Lord  hath  spoken  it.  God's  word  has 
gone  forth.  There  can  be  no  retractation. 
The  blessings  promised  are  certain  to  be 
olH^ained. 

Vers.  9 — 12, — After  thanksgiving  for  de- 
liverance in  the  past,  and  oomuii.moration 
of  blessings  in  thj  pruseut,  conlidonce  is 
expressed  in  the  future.  (1)  The  redeemed 
declare  their  joy  that  they  have  "waited  for 
God,"  trusted  in  him,  and  looked  to  him  for 
salvation.  They  feel  that  they  "  have  their 
reward."    (2)  The  prophet  declares  his  oon- 


viction  that  the  enemies  of  God's  elect  are 
henceforth  powerless.  They  are  personified 
under  the  name  of  "  Moab,"  and  regarded  as 
still  animated  by  sentiments  of  hostility; 
but  their  absolute  impotency  for  working 
evil  is  insisted  on  (vers.  II,  12). 

Ver.  9. — It  shall  be  said;  literally,  one 
thall  saij ;  i.e.  the  redeemed  generally  shall 
thus  express  themselves.  We  have  waited 
for  him.  During  all  the  weary  time  of  their 
oppression  and  persecution,  the  godly  rem- 
nant (oh.  xxiv.  13 — 15)  was  "  waiting  for 
the  Lord,"  i.e.  trusting  in  him,  expecting 
him  to  arise  and  scatter  his  enemies,  won- 
dering that  he  endured  so  lonf  the  "con- 
tradiction of  sinners  against  himself"  (Heb. 
xii.  3),  but  content  to  abide  his  determina- 
tion of  the  fitting  season  for  coming  forward 
as  their  Avenger,  and  now  quite  satisfied 
that  he  has  avenged  them  in  his  own  good 
time  and  in  liis  own  good  way.  .  We  will  be 
glad  and  rejoice  (comp.  Fd.  cxviii.  21  and 
Cant.  i.  4). 

Ver.  10.  —  In  this  mountain  shall  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  rest.  The  protecting  haml 
of  God  will  ever  be  stretched  out  over  tlie 
spiritual  Zion — the  Church  of  the  Redeemed 
— to  defend  it  and  keep  it  safe  throughout 
eternity.  Moab  shall  be  trodden  down. 
Various  reasons  have  been  given  for  the 
selection  of  Moab  to  represent  the  enemies 
of  the  redeemed.  I'erliap-s,  as  the  Moabites 
were,  on  the  wliole,  the  bitterest  of  all  the 
adversaries  of  tlie  Jews  (see  2  Kings  xxiv.  2 ; 
Ezuk.  XXV.  8 — 11),  they  are  regarded  as 
the  fittest  representatives  of  the  human 
adversaries  of  God.  For  the  dung-hill; 
rather,  in  the  water  of  a  dung-pit.  The 
image  is,  perhaps,  selected  with  conscious 
reference  to  Ps.  Ixxxiii,  where  the  psalmist 
prays  that  the  "  children  of  Lot"  and  tlieir 
helpers  may  become  "  as  the  dung  of'  the 
earth"  (ver.  10). 

Ver.  11. — He  shall  spread  forth  his  hands 
...  as  he  that  swimmeth.  Moab  will  en- 
deavour to  save  himself  from  sinking  in  the 
water  of  the  dung-pit;  but  in  vain.  God 
will  bring  down  his  pride,  or  abase  hia 
haughtiness,  togetlier  with  all  the  plots  and 
snares  that  he  contrives.  A  continued 
plotting  of  the  enemies  of  God  against  his 
Church  seems  to  be  assumed,  even  after  the 
Church  is  established  in  the  spiritual  Zion 
under  the  direct  protection  and  rule  of 
Jehovah. 

Ver.  12.— The  fortress  of  the  high  fort . . . 
shall  he  bring  down,  etc. ;  rather,  hath  he 
hawed  down,  laid  low,  brought  down  to  earth. 
The  past  mercies  of  God  in  abasing  the 
pride  of  the  Church's  foes,  rather  than  any 
further  mercies  of  the  same  kind,  si  em  to  be 
here  spoken  of.  Mrl  Cheyne  suggests  that 
the  verse  i*  out  of  place. 


2  B 


«2  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxv.  1— 12. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Yen.  1 — 12. — The  place  of  ihanJeBgiving  in  the  religious  life.  It  is  generally  mreed 
by  Christians  that  the  religious  life  embraces  a  considerable  number  of  separate  duties 
of  a  strictly  religious  character.  Among  these  the  first  place  is  ordinarily  assigned 
to  prayer ;  the  second  to  reading  of  the  Scriptures ;  the  third,  perhaps,  to  meditation  ; 
and  so  forth.  But  it  is  not  always,  or  indeed  very  often,  that  a  distinct  position,  or 
a  very  prominent  position,  is  assigned  to  praise  and  thanksgiving.  Prayer  is  apt  to  be 
made  the  staple  of  our  religious  exercises,  thanksgiving  to  be  huddled  off  into  a  comer. 
Yet,  if  we  will  consider  the  matter,  we  shall  find  that,  on  all  grounds,  thanksgiving  is 
entitled  to  at  least  an  equal  place  in  our  regards  with  prayer. 

I.  ThANKSQIVINO  18  POINTED   OUT  BT  NATURE  AS  A  DUTT  NO  LESS    THAN    PEATEB. 

It  is  as  the  Giver  of  benefits  that  man  seems  first  to  have  recngnized  God.  Worship 
began  with  altars  and  sacrifices  (Gen.  iv.  3 — 5),  which  were  primarily  thank  offerings. 
One  of  the  earliest  forms  of  religion  was  sun-worsliip,  and  the  reason  for  selecting  ths 
sun  as  the  object  of  religious  regard  was  the  manifest  fact  that  from  the  sun  man 
derives  so  many  and  such  great  blessings.  Geolatry  was  another  very  early  form  of 
worship,  and  took  its  rise  from  the  fi;eling  that  the  earth  was  a  nursing  mother, 
comprehending  in  herself  a  manifold  variety  of  beneficent  influences.  The  very  name 
"  God "  is  probably  a  modification  of  the  root  gut,  or  "  good,"  and  was  given  to  the 
Supreme  Being  by  our  Anglo-Saxon  forefathers,  in  recognition  of  his  goodneis  in 
bestowing  upon  us  so  many  benefits.  The  first  religious  utterances  seem  to  have  taken 
the  shape  of  hymns  rather  than  prayers  (Gen.  xiv.  19,  20 ;  Exod.  xv.  1 — 18) ;  and 
hymns  or  psalms  form  the  most  antique  portions  of  all  rituals. 

II.  ThANKSQIVINO     IS,    EQUALLY    WITH     PBAYEB,    ENJOINED     ON     MEN    AS    A    DUTf 

IN  ScBiPTUBB.  K  prayer  is  required  in  such  phrases  as,  "  Pray  without  ceasing  " 
(1  Thess.  v.  17) ;  "  I  will  that  all  men  pray  everywhere "  (1  Tim.  ii.  8) ;  "  Men  ouglit 
always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint "  (Luke  xviii.  1) ;  "  Pray  one  for  another  "  (Jas.  v.  16) ; 
thanksgiving  is  as  frequently  and  as  positively  enjoined  in  passages  like  the  following : 
"  Give  thanks  always  for  all  things"  (E|jh.  v.  20) ;  "  I  exhort  that .  . .  giving  of  thanks 
be  made  for  all  men "  (1  Tim.  ii.  1) ;  "  Offer  sacrifices  of  praises,  giving  thanksi " 
(Heb.  xiii.  15) ;  "  With  thanksgiving  let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto  Go>l " 
(Phil.  iv.  6). 

III.  ThANKSQIVINO    IS,   EQUALLY  WITH    PBAYEB,   BET    BEFOBE    US    BY  THE   ChUBCH 

AS  A  DUTY.  The  ritual  of  the  Jewish  Church  was  almost  entirely  one  of  praise.  The 
Book  of  Psalms  is  the  Israelite's  '  Manual  of  Devotion.*  Our  own  Church  declares 
the  objects  for  which  we  assemble  in  public  worship  to  be  (1)  "  to  render  thanks  for 
the  great  benefits  which  we  have  received  at  God's  hands ; "  (2)  "  to  set  forth  his  most 
worthy  praise ; "  (3)  "  to  hear  his  most  Holy  Word ; "  and  (4)  "  to  ask  those  things 
which  are  requisite  and  necessary  as  well  for  the  body  as  the  soul " — assigning  to 
thanksgiving  and  praise  the  foremost  place.  The  Eucliaristic  service  is  that  in  which 
Christian  worship  culminates,  and' that  service  is,  by  its  very  name,  a  service  of  praise. 
The  embodiment  of  tlie  entire  Psalter  in  our  Prayer-book  is  a  strong  evidence  of  the 
importance  which  our  Church  assigns  to  praise. 

IV.  PbAISB   is,   in   ITS   NATURE,   A    HIOHER  BELIOI0U8    EXERCISE  THAN   PBAYEB.      In 

prayer  we  approach  God  for  our  own  sakes,  desiring  something  of  him.  In  praise 
we  have  no  selfish  object,  but  desire  simply  to  honour  God  by  setting  forth  his 
admiiable  qualities  and  declaring  the  reasons  that  we  have  for  loving  and  adoring  him. 
Praise  is  the  enduring  attitude  of  angels,  who  have  (comparatively  speaking)  no 
occasion  for  prayer.  Prayer  implies  imperfection,  want,  need,  defect  of  nature.  Praise 
is  appropriate  when  all  wants  are  satisfied,  when  the  nature  is  no  longer  defective, 
when  no  need  is  felt.  Thus  prayer  belongs  to  the  probation  period  of  man's  existence ; 
but  praise  will  ring  on  through  the  vaults  of  heaven  for  all  eternity.  The  cry  in  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem  will  ever  be,  "Great  and  marvellous  are  thy  works,  Lord  God 
Almighty;  just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  tliou  King  of  saints.  Who  shall  not  fear  thee, 
0  Lord,  and  glorify  thy  Name  ?  for  thou  only  art  holy :  for  all  nations  shall  comp 
and  worship  before  thee ;  for  thy  judgments  are  made  manifest"  (He v.  xv.  3,  4). 


OH.  XXV.  1—12.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  40i 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS 

Vers,  1 — 8. — Hymn  of  praUe  to  Jehovah.  I.  The  personal  appropriation  ow  God, 
This  is  one  of  the  great  marks  of  personal,  spiritual  religion.  Other  nations  have  known 
their  gods  as  leaders  in  war,  protectors  of  hearth  and  home  ;  it  was  reserved  for  Israel 
and  for  Christianity  to  think  of  the  High  and  Holy  One  as  tenanting  the  heart  and  soul 
of  the  believer.  Jehovah  is  not  only  "  my  father's  God," — this  would  be  merely  tra- 
ditional religion  ;  but  "  my  God,"  "  my  Salvation," — this  is  personal  religion  (Exod.  xv. 
2).  The  language  of  Ps.  xviii.  28  and  cxlv.  1  seems  echoed  here.  The  prophet  becomes 
"  choral  leader  of  the  Church  of  the  future,"  of  the  Church  in  all  ages.  The  echoes  of 
all  past  ages  gather  up  into  one  volume,  and  become  a  mighly  prophecy  of  the  future. 
The  thought  of  the  faithfulness  of  the  Eternal  enters  into  the  approiiriation  of  his  Name. 
He  is  a  covenant-keeping  God.  What  he  has  been  in  the  past  is  a  pledge  of  what  he 
will  be  in  the  future.  "  There  shall  never  be  one  lost  good ;  what  was  shall  be  as 
before." 

II.  The  incomparable  wisdom  and  truth  of  God.  This,  too,  is  a  thought  deeply 
impressed  fiom  the  olden  time.  "  Who  is  like  untothee,  0  Lord,  among  the  gods  V  who 
is  like  thee,  glorious  in  holiness,  fearful  in  praises,  doing  wonders  ?  "  (Exod.  xv.  11 ; 
cf.  Pa.  Ixxvii.  15 ;  Ixxviii.  12).  This  is  seen  in  his  counsels  and  in  the  execution  of 
them.  1.  \ih,  far-reaching  counsels.  God's  thouijhts  are  not  extempore  inspiralions, 
accidental — "haiipy,"  as  we  say,  springing  up  in  no  fixed  order  or  method;  they  origi- 
nated "  long  ajio  "  (ch.  xxii.  11 ;  xxxvii.  26).  To  God  nothing  is  sudden  or  unfore.seen  ; 
though  to  us  it  may  seem  "  the  unexpected  always  happens."  All  things  were  oidained 
by  him  befire  the  foundation  of  the  woild  (Acts  xv.  18).  "All  the  wonders  which 
happen  comravy  to  the  expectation  of  men  are  the  result  of  that  regular  order  which 
Gud  maintains  in  governing  the  world,  arranging  all  things  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end.  Now,  s-ince  we  do  not  understand  these  secret  decrees,  and  our  powers  of  under- 
standing cannot  rise  so  high,  our  attention  must  therefore  br  directed  to  the  manifesta- 
tion of  them  ;  for  they  are  concealed  from  us,  and  exceed  our  comprehension,  till  the 
Lord  reveal  them  by  his  Word,  in  which  he  accommodates  himself  to  our  weakness  ;  for 
his  decree  is  unsearchable"  (Calvin).  2.  The  faithful  realization  of  ihfm  m  history. 
The  imperial  city,  the  city  of  Israel's  oppressors  (ch.  xxiv.  10),  is  destroyed.  It  has 
become  a  ruinous  heap  of  stones ;  and  the  palace  of  the  barbarians  will  never  agiiin  rise 
out  of  those  ruins.  It  is  symbolic  in  its  fate  of  heathen  pride  and  power  and  super- 
stition, and  all  that  exalts  itself  against  the  true  God  and  the  true  religion. 

III.  The  effect  of  his  judgments  on  the  heathen.  They  will  honour  the  mighty 
God  of  Israel.  They  will  be  converted  from  rudeness  and  wildness  to  meekness  and 
lowly  reverence.  The  former  oppressors  will  bow  in  fear  before  him.  "They  are 
affriuhted,  and  give  nh'ry  to  the  God  of  heaven"  (Rev  xi.  13).  For  in  great  crises, 
in  da^s  of  judgment,  the  nature  of  Jehovah  and  his  rule  is  made  manifest  to  men.  The 
calm,  unbroken  smile  of  the  summer  day  does  not  so  reveal  God  to  us  in  his  power  and 
beneficence  as  the  thunder  and  the  lightning,  followed  by  the  refreshing  rain.  Revo- 
lutions awaken  the  slumbering  consciences  of  the  nation  ;  and  God  is  revealed,  not  only 
by  the  objects  and  institutions  he  overthrows,  but  by  those  which  are  protected  and 
fostered  in  the  midst  of  and  by  the  very  means  of  change.  He  is  seen  to  Lave  been,  in 
the  magnificent  imagery  of  the  prophet,  "  a  fortress  to  the  weak,  a  fortress  to  the  poor 
in  his  distress,  a  refuge  from  the  storm,  a  shadow  from  the  heat "  (cf.  ch.  xxx.  3 ;  iv.  6 ; 
xxxii.  2 ;  xvi.  3).  As  he  can  quell  the  fiery  heat  by  bringing  up  a  shady  thicket  of 
clouds  ( Jer.  iv.  29  ;  Exod.  xix.  9 ;  Ps.  xviii.  12),  or  say  to  the  proud  waves  of  the  sea, 
"  Thus  far,  and  no  further ! "  so  did  he  dispel  the  thundering  hordes  of  the  assailants  of  his 
people.  So  In  later  times  did  he  meet  the  "  blast  of  threats  and  slaughter"  (Acts  ix.  1) 
from  the  mouth  of  an  arch-persecutor,  and  turn,  by  his  mighty  and  merciful  self- 
manifestation,  that  arch-persecutor  into  an  arch-apostle.  And  to  the  infant  Church 
he  became  what  is  described  in  ver.  4.  Behind  the  providence  which  "  frowns,"  the 
"  smiling  face  "  is  ever  hidden. 

IV.'  The  ultimate  consummation.  In  this  mountain  of  Zion,  where  the  prophet 
dwells,  the  seat  of  the  Divine  presence,  a  feast  of  fat  things,  with  wines  on  the  lees  well 
gtrained,  will  be  made  for  all  peoples.    They  will  be  incorporated  into  the  kingdoit  '' 


404  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [en.  xxv.  1— 12. 


Jehovah ;  many  having  come  from  east  and  west,  and  north  and  south,  to  sit  down  in 
the  kingdom  of  God.  The  feast  is  symbolic  of  all  tpiritual  and  tenyaoral  WessiTiga,  as 
it  is  in  the  parables  of  our  Saviour.  It  is  symbolic  of  satisfaction :  "  The  meek  ^ball 
eat  and  be  satisfied  "  (Ps.  xxii.  26).  The  allusion  may  be  to  the  thank  or  peace  ofibring  : 
"  I  will  satiate  the  soiJ  of  the  priests  with  fatness,  and  my  people  shall  be  satisfied  with 
ray  goodness  "  (Jer.  xxxi.  U  ;  cf.  Lev.  yii.  31).  The  meal  which  followed  the  saoriflce 
was  a  joyous  and  festive  occasion.  It  was  expected  by  the  Jews  that  the  glorious 
Messianic  time  would  be  ushered  in  by  a  great  feast ;  and  of  this,  doubtless,  the  guest 
at  the  dinner-table  of  the  Pharisee  was  thinking  wheji  he  exclaimed,  "  Blessed  is  be 
that  shall  eat  bread  in  the  kingdom  of  God  1 "  As  the  feast,  so  the  age,  of  the  Messiah 
is  to  be  unending.  Aud  in  one  great  burst  of  universal  joy,  death  and  sorrow  are  to  be 
swallowed  up.  Death  is  signified  by  the  covering  or  veil  cast  over  all  natipns,  or  wpb 
woven  over  them.  The  coverc  d  head  is  a  sign  of  mourning  in  antiquity  in  general ;  it 
will  be  withdrawn  (Ps.  xxi.  10 ;  Iv.  10).  Darkness  and  oblivion  are  associated  with 
death ;  this  will  greatly  give  way  before  the  light  of  Jehovah.  The  bondage  to  the 
Tear  of  death  will  be  broken,  death  itself  will  be  abolished,  and  life  and  immortality  be 
brought  to  light  (2  Tim.  i.  10 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  64).  The  promise  belongs  to  the  Jewish 
nation  (Hos,  xiii.  14),  and  to  all  its  believing  members.  All  sorrow  is  more  or  less 
rooted  in  the  associations  of  death;  this  too  shall  cease,  and  Jehovah  shall  wipe  sway 
all  tears  from  off  all  faces.  The  reproaches  so  long  levelled  at  the  people  in  the&  world- 
wide dispersion  shall  be  taken  away.  No  more  will  the  taunt  be  levelled  at  them, 
"  Where  is  now  your  God?  "  (Ps.  Ixxix.  10).  Sin  will  be  eradicated,  which  has  had  its 
fruit  in  tears,  in  shame,  and  in  death.  "  The  new  Jerusalem  is  Jehovah's  throQe,  but 
the  whole  earth  is  Jehovah's  glorious  kingdom.  The  prophet  is  here  looking  from  just 
the  same  point  of  view  as  Paul  in  1  Cor.  xv.  18,  and  John  in  the  last  page  of  the  Apoca- 
lypse "  (Delitzsch).  The  last  point  in  the  distant  perspective  on  which  the  eye  rests  is 
the  epoch  known  as  "  the  day  of  redemption,"  the  restoration  of  all  things,  when  the 
old  and  corrupt  order  shall  finally  give  place  to  the  new,  the  confusions  of  time  cease  in 
the  harmonies  of  the  eternal  world  (see  Luke  xxi,  28 ;  Acts  iii.  21 ;  Bom.  viii.  23 ; 
Bph.  iv.  30).  A  great  poet.  Burns,  said  that  he  could  never  read  this  passage  without 
tears.  It  does,  indeed,  touch  the  depth  of  the  heart,  as  it  strikes  the  full  tones  of  the 
eternal  evangel.  For  here  we  have  the  gospel  in  the  universality  of  its  message  ("  good 
tidings  of  great  joy  to  all  people  ") — the  fulness  of  its  power  to  satisfy  and  to  comfort,  in 
the  all-hopeful  perspective  of  the  iuture  it  opens  up.  "Let  us,  then,  direct  all  our  hope  and 
expectation  to  this  point,  and  let  us  not  doubt  that  the  Lord  will  fulfil  all  these  things 
in  us  when  we  have  finished  our  course.  If  we  now  sow  in  tears,  we  shall  reap  in  joy. 
The  reproaches  of  men  will  procure  for  us  one  day  the  highest  glory.  Having  obtained 
here  the  beginning  of  this  happiness  and  glory,  by  being  adopted  by  God  and  begin- 
ning to  bear  the  irpage  of  Christ,  let  us  firmly  and  resolutely  await  the  completion- of  it 
at  the  last  day  "  (Calvin). — J. 

Vers.  9 — 12. — Song  of  the  redeemed.  I.  The  'state  of  the  chosen  people.  They 
will  be  in  the  joyous  realization  of  long-awaited  blessings.  A  brief  ^train  from  their 
hymn  is  given — 

"  Lo  I  here  is  our  Gtod  I 
For  him  we  ha-ve  waited  that  he  should  save  ua ; 
This  is  Jehovah,  for  whom  we  have  waited; 
Let  us  exult  and  rejoice  in  his  salvation  t " 

As  "  a  ■omw'B  crown  of  sorrow  is  remembering  happier  things,"  lo  the  erown  of  joy  is 
the  recollection  of  past  miseries  in  the  hour  of  deliverance.  And  how  it  intensifies  joy — 
the  sense  of  having  waited,  of  having  ploughed  and  sown,  watched  and  wept,  with  a 
view  to  the  "  far-ofi'  interest  of  tears "  1  Ajid  finally,  to  see  and  know  that  in  this 
mingled  experience  one  hand  has  been  at  work,  one  will  has  been  guiding,  one  mercy 
mixing  the  ingredients  of  life's  cup  1  "  Verily  thou  art  a  God  that  hidest  thyself! "  yea, 
but  verily,  also,  thou  art  a  God  that  dost  in  due  time  disclose  thyself  to  reward  the 
patience  and  faith  of  thy  chosen,  and  to  pour  confusion  on  thy  foes !  On  tbe  sacred 
mountain  the  hand  of  Jehovah  will  rest,  to  protect  his  people,  to  judge  his  foes.  Beautiful 
image  !     As  a  symbol  ot  protection,  cf.  Ezra  tM.  6,  28 ;  viii.  18,  22,  31 ;  Neh.  ii.  8. 


OH.  XIV.  1-12.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  406 

IL  The  doom  op  the  heathen.  Moab  seems  to  stand  for  the  heathen  in  general.  Moab, 
M  the  proud  foe  of  Israel  (2  Kings  xxiv.  2 ;  Ezek.  xxviii.  8 — 11),  shall  be  trampled 
down,  swamped,  and  contend  like  a  swimmer  for  his  lite.  But  his  pride  will  be  abased; 
his  strong  walls  be  out  down,  even  to  the  dust.  So  that  hand,  which  is  outspread 
hsneflcenuy,  like  the  canopy  of  the  broad  sky,  to  protect  and  bless  the  chosen,  may  be 
clenched  in  threat  and  for  vengeance  upon  the  wicked.  There  are  two  senses  in  which 
that  hand  may  "  rest "  upon  na — lightly,  as  the  father's  hand  rests  on  the  head  of  a 
beloved  child,  to  express  affection,  approval,  and  the  promise  of  aid  ;  or  heavily,  to 
punish,  to  overwhelm,  to  "  turn  our  moisture  into  the  drought  of  summer."  To  listen 
to  the  voice,  to  submit  to  the  band  of  the  Eternal, — this  is  the  expression  of  genuine 
piety.  To  writhe  and  struggle  and  resist  the  pressure  of  that  ham),  to  turn  a  deaf  ear 
to  that  voice,' — this  is  the  expression  of  hardness  of  heart  and  impiety,  bringing 
certain  punishment  in  its  turn.  "  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your 
hearts  1  "-^. 

Ver.  8.— Cjmf*«  cotlqtiiest  of  death.  "He  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory." 
Here  the  fulness  of  Isaiah's  evangelical  prophecy  begins  to  break  forth.  In  the  fourth 
verse  he  has  described  Jehovah  as  "  a  Strength  to  the  poor,  a  Strength  to  the  needy  in 
his  distress,  a  Befuge  from  the  storm,  a  Shadow  from  the  heat ; "  and  all  this,  he  says, 
God  has  been.  Human  history  will  endorse  the  record.  But  he  will  be  more  to  men 
than  all  thisl  Death,  that  dogs  men's  footsteps  and  darkens  even  their  days  with 
fear;  death,  that  breaks  in  upon  all  dreams  of  perfect  friendship  and  permanent  joy ; 
death,  which,  as  invisible  monarch,  holds  empire  in  so  many  breasts ; — death  itself  shall 
be  destroyed. 

I.  The  viotobt  came.  It  was  not  then.  .  But  the  prophecy  was  fulfilled.  Death 
had  to  bring  its  sacred  spoils  and  to  lay  them  at  the  feet  of  Christ  during  his  earthly 
ministry.  And  trhen  men  Wondered  at  his  mighty  power,  Christ  said,  "  Marvel  not  at 
this,  f6r  all . .  .  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  shall 
come  forth," 

II.  The  viotobt  was  complete.  Death  was  swallowed  up  in  victory.  No  province 
was  left  undisturbed.  No  deltiy  Intervened.  No  conflict  occurred.  Death  knew  its 
Own  Lord  and  King,  and  gave  back  at  once  its  spoils.  Thus  we  understand  the  words, 
"  He  led  cdptiility  captive."  The  very  powers  that  once  had  held  empire  over  men  he 
bow  despoiled.  And  as  in  the  Boman  processions,  the  princes  who  once  had  spoiled 
others  wete  now  led  captive  at  the  chariot-wheels  of  a  greater  victor  than  themselves, 
so  death  was  led  captive  at  the  chariot-wheels  of  Christ. 

III.  The  viotoby  was  pebmanent.  "Christ  being  raised  from  the  dead  dieth  no 
more ;  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  him."  Now  that  Christ  has  risen  from  the 
dead,  he  has  become  the  Firstfruits  of  all  that  sleep.  The  triumph  of  the  Saviour  over 
the  grave  was  designed  to  give  great  rest  and  gladness  of  luart.  "  And  the  Lord  God 
will  wipe  away  tears  from  off  all  faces."  It  is  immortal  life  that  not  only  gives  pre- 
ciousness  to  friendship,  but  that  gives  relief  from  overwhelming  tribulation.  We  sorrow, 
indeed,  still ;  the  hot  rain  of  tears  falls  from  the  achi&g  brain ;  but  we  sorrow  not  as  those 
without  hope.  We  comfort  our  hearts  with  these  words  of  J  esus :  "  Let  not  your  hearts 
be  troubled.  ...  In  my  Father's  house  are  many  mansions." — W.  M.  S« 

Vers.  h-^f-^Befoicing  in  God.  Such  words  as  these  could  only  come  from  an 
enlightened  mind.  They  would  have  been  impossible  to  a  heathen  sage-  The  gods  of 
the  nations  were  beings  in  whom  no  right'minded  man  could  rejoice  at  all,  and  their 
character  could  not  have  been  painted  in  these  colours.  But  the  God  of  Isaiah,  our 
God,  if  One  for  whom  "  praise  may  be  continually  on  the  lips  "  of  the  wise  and  pure. 
Our  souls  can  "  delight  themselves  in  God  ; "  for— 

I.  His  ABiDiNa  faithfulness.  "  His  counsels  of  old  are  faithfulness  and  truth  '' 
(ver.  1).  "  The  counsel  of  the  Lord  standeth  for  ever,  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  to  all 
generations,"  .  What  he  has  purposed  and  promised  is  sure  of  fulfilment.  The  lapse 
of  time,  the  passing  of  Centuries,  makes  not  the  faintest  difference  in  the  certainty. 
Heaven  and  earth  may  pass,  but  his  promise  never  (Jas.  i.  17 ;  Heb.  xiii.  8).  We  may 
lean  all  the  weight  of  our  hope  on  his  Divine  Word,  and  we  ^11  find  that  we  are  lest- 
ihg  on  the  immovable  rock. 


40«  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PIIOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxv.  1— 12. 

n.  HiB  PERFECT  EiGHTEOUBNEBS.  (Vers.  2,  6.)  The  powerful  empire-city  might 
boast  of  its  antiquity,  its  defences,  its  soldiery,  but  its  iniquity  should  receive  its 
desert — it  should  be  humbled  to  the  very  dust ;  it  should  be  a  heap,  a  ruin,  a  desert. 
The  righteousness  of  God  will  assuredly  be  vindicated  "in  time.  God  must  not  be  judged 
as  if  a  few  decades  were  much  in  his  measurement.  Only  wait  his  time,  and  when  the 
cup  of  human  guilt  is  full,  the  arm  of  Divine  retribution  will  deal  its  stroke.  Then 
shall  tbe  shoutings  of  impious  arrogancy  be  silenced;  it  shall  be  dumb  with  shame 
(ver.  5). 

III.  His  DivmB  oompasbion.  (Ver.  4.)  When  the  raging  tempest  of  human  per- 
secution threatens  to  overtake  and  destroy  the  humble  and  the  helpless,  then  the 
pitiful  One  will  appear  on  their  behalf.  A  Strength  to  the  poor  and  the  needy,  a 
Shadow  from  the  heat,  will  he  piove  to  be;  as  the  saving  cloud  shelters  from  the 
scorching  heat  (ver.  5),  so  will  Divine  interposition  deliver  from  the  consuming  fires  of 
human  wrath.  And  this  giaoious  pity  is  not  an  unusual  or  occasional  feeling  in  his 
heart — ^it  is  his  constant  attitude,  it  is  his  abiding  spirit.  In  every  age  and  in  every 
land  he  regards  the  poor  and  the  needy,  the  sutfeiing  and  the  down-trodden,  with  a 
peculiar  kindness ;  he  is  always  ready  to  shelter  them  in  the  pavilion  of  his  power. 
Therefore :  1.  Let  the  guilty /ear.  (Ver.  3.)  What  God  has  done  in  holy  retribution 
he  is  (jrepared  to  do  again,  and  will  do  again  if  heedlessness  lead  to  impenitence,  and 
impenitence  to  greater  and  more  arrogant  rebellion.  2.  Let  the  oppressed  hope.  The 
destruction  of  the  strong  city  of  sin  is  the  relief  and  the  rescue  of  the  holy.  Not  only 
the  "  strong  people,"  but  the  obedient  and  humble  people — the  people  of  God — wil 
"  glorify  "  his  Name  (ver.  3).  .3.  Let  the  redeemed  praise  Qod  for  his  righteous  judgment 
and  his  merciful  deliverances.  "  I  will  praise  thee."  Not  only  those  delivered  from 
power  and  bondage  of  the  human  enemy,  but  those  who  have  been  ransomed  ann 
redeemed  from  the  tyranny  and  the  slavery  of  sin.  4.  Let  every  man  claim  a  direct 
perBonul  interest  in  Ood.  By  approaching  to  him,  by  communion  witti  him,  by 
reconciliation  to  him,  by  joyful  engagement  in  his  service,  let  each  one  of  us  daim  the 
right  to  say  with  holy  exultation,  "  O  Lord,  thou  art  my  God." — 0. 

Ver.  6. — Divine  provision  for  the  human  soul.  In  the  vegetable  and  animal  kingdoms 
God  has  made  lull  and  rich  provjsion  for  all  the  wants  and  cravings  of  our  body — for 
its  revival,  its  nourishment,  its  streusith,  its  enjoyment.  In  the  gospel  of  his  nraoe  he 
has  granted  us  the  most  ample  and  generous  provision  for  our  spiritual  nature.  In 
Chrisi  Jesus,  in  "  the  truth  as  it  is  in  him,"  and  in  his  holy  service,  we  have  all  we 
need  for — 

I.  QiiB  BPiP.iTUAL  REVIVAL.  Food,  especially  wine,  is  given  to  revive  as  well  as  to 
nourish.  "  Give  strong  drink  unto  him  that  is  ready  to  perish"  (Prov.  xxxi.  6).  Man^ 
a  hull  an  life  has  been  saved  by  the  restoring  cup  administered  with  a  wise  hand.  Tne 
wine  of  heavenly  truth  is  for  a  revival  indeed.  From  him  who  is  the  "  true  Viue  ' 
(John  XV.  1)  comes  that  reanimating  virtue  which  calls  firom  spiritual  death  the  soul 
that  was  about  to  perish  in  its  sin. 

II.  Nourishment.  Food  is,  above  all  things,  for  sustenance.  We  partake  of  the 
kind  and  welcome  growths  of  the  garden  and  the  field  that  the  waste  of  our  system 
may  be  repaired,  and  that  life  may  be  preserved  in  its  fulness  and  integrity.  Without 
constant  refreshment  from  "  the  Word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel,"  if  we  did  not  sit 
down  daily  to  the  table  which  Gud  has  spread  for  us  in  his  heavenly  wisdom,  our  souls 
would  soon  fade  and  fail  and  die.  As  we  eat  of  the  "  Bread  of  life,"  as  we  drink  of  "  the 
river  that  makes  glad  the  city  of  God,"  we  find  our  life  sustained ;  we  "  live  unto  God 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord." 

III.  Strength.  "A  feast  of  fat  things  full  of  marrow."  That  which  is  ample,  not 
only  to  sustain  life,  but  to  augment  its  force.  "Of  wines  on  the  lees" — wines  that 
have  acquired,  and  will  presumably  impart,  strength.  In  Jesus  Christ  is  everything 
to  confer  spiritual  vinour,  manliness,  power.  Communion  with  him,  the  study  of  his 
life  and  character,  active  service  in  his  cause,  the  direct  communicatioiis  which  proceed 
from  his  upholding,  energizing  Spirit, — all  these  minister  to  spiritual  strength;  they 
are  all  open  to  every  disciple,  so  that  the  Christian  teacher  has  a  right  to  say,  impera- 
tively, to  the  disciple,  "  Be  strong  in  the  Lord  "  (Eph.  vi.  10). 

IV.  Jot.   Wine  and  gladness  are  closely  associated  in  Scripture  (see  Pi.  iv.  7 ;  civ.  18). 


OH.  XXV.  1—12,]    THE   BOOK  OF   THE    PROPHET  ISAIAH.  407 

Feasting  and  joy  are  also  intimately  connected.  The  provision  which  ii  made  in  the 
feast  of  the  gospel  is  nne  that  gives  a  purer,  truer,  more  manly,  more  lasting  joy ;  for 
it  is  the  joy  of  the  soul,  and  it  is  a  joy  in  Ood. 

V.  Adaptation.  The  wine  of  this  feast  was  to  be  strong  for  those  who  wanted 
strength — "  on  the  lees ; "  it  was  also  to  be  "  well  refined  "  for  those  who  wanted  the 
coarse  flavour  removed  and  desired  purity  as  well  as  power  (see  Jer.  xlviii.  11).  The 
same  Divine  truth,  delivered  from  the  same  lips,  contained  within  the  same  covers,  has 
force  for  those  who  need  to  be  mightily  wrought  upon,  and  refinement  for  those  whose 
moral  perceptions  are  clear  and  whose  spiritual  taste  is  fine  and  cultured.  There  is 
everything  on  the  table  of  our  Lord  to  meet  the  varied  cravings  of  these  hearts  of  ours. 
1.  This  is  a  feast  which  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  decline ;  for  "  the  Lord  of  hosts  has 
made  it " — has  prepared  it  with  exceeding  care  and  at  great  cost.  2.  It  is  open  to  every 
hungering  soul.  It  is  made  "  unto  all  people."  It  iafree  to  all.  "  Ho,  every  one  that 
thirsteth,"  etc.— C. 

Ver.  7. — Spiritual  veils.  Anything  interposed  between  the  eye  and  the  object  of 
vision  may  be  called  a  veil ;  designed  for  the  purpose  of  convenience  or  of  modesty,  the 
veil  has  often  been  the  cause  of  imsightliness  and  inconvenience — it  has  been  abused 
almost  as  much  as  it  has  been  used.  In  Scripture  the  word  has  a  moral  significance, 
indicating  something  which  intercepts  the  truth,  and  blinds  the  soul  to  the  will  of  God 
and  to  its  own  duty  and  interest. 

I.  The  EXISTENCE  OF  SPIRITUAL  VEILS.  They  are  those  of :  1.  Credulity.  Often  the 
mind  freely  accepts  all  kinds  of  irrational,  superstitious  errors,  which  coat  and  cover 
the  truth  of  God,  rendering  it  invisible  beneath  a  mass  of  error.  2.  Prejudice.  Men 
who  act  as  did  the  Jews  in  our  Lord's  time,  determining  beforehand  and  judging  irre- 
spective of  the  evidence  before  their  eyes,  making  up  their  minds  in  advance  of  any 
facts  or  reasons  which  have  to  be  alleged,  are  sure  to  miss  their  way.  They  cannot 
see  through  the  veil  of  prejudice.  3.  Intellectual  pride :  unwillingness  to  believe 
anything  which  our  finite  faculties  cannot  comprehend ;  practical  forgetfulness  that. 
the  heavenly  Father  must  have  many  more  truths  that  we  can  only  very  dimly  discern 
to  reveal  to  his  children,  than  earthly  fathers  have  to  make  intelligible  to  their  sons. 
4.  Wbrldliness:  allowing  the  interests,  occupations,  gratifications,  of  this  world  to 
assume  a  magnitude  and  importance  to  which  they  have  no  claim;  and  allowing  the 
conventional  maxims  of  society  to  pass  current  as  heavenly  truth,  when  they  are  only 
too  often  misleading  and  even  deadly  errors.  5.  Passion.  The  false  glare  of  passion 
hides  from  many  souls  the  truth  which  otherwise  they  would  see  and  by  which  they 
would  live. 

II.  Theib  bemoval.  God  "  wUl  destroy  .  .  .  the  veil  that  is  spread  over  all  the 
nations."  1.  It  is  a  blessed  fact,  in  the  far  future,  which  God  will  establish.  By 
means  he  is  now  employing,  and  perhaps  by  ways  and  methods  of  which  we  may  have 
no  conception  now,  he  will  bring  it  i6  pass ;  the  day  will  come  when  the  nations  shall 
walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord ;  both  Jew  (2  Cor.  iii.  16)  and  Gentile  (ch.  Ix.  3).  2. 
We  may  contribute  our  share  toward  this  happy  issue :  there  are  mental  errors  and 
spiritual  delusions  which  we  can  help  to  expose,  both  by  enlightening  words  and 
convincing  action.  3.  We  are  bound  to  make  every  effort  to  put  away  whatever  veil 
may  be  over  our  own  eyes.  Unconscious  spiritual  blindness  is  sin  (see  John  ix.  41). 
It  may  be  in  part  a  man's  misfortune,  but  it  is  partly  his  fault.  There  may  be  that 
which  palliates  it,  but  nothing  will  excuse  it.  We  must  betake  ourselves  to  God 
(Ps.  cxxxix.  23,  24).— C. 


Vers.  8,  9. — The  evening  of  expectation.    Of  this  passage  we  may  look  i 

I.  Its  primary  histobioal  application.    (See  Exposition.) 

II.  Its  application  to  the  Chuboh  of  Christ.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  "the 
Israel  of  God,"  and  we  may  expect  mu,ch  of  the  language  first  used  in  reference  to  the 
Jewish  nation  to  be  appropriate  to  it  and  even  intended  for  its  service.  Like  ancient 
Israel,  the  Church  has  found  itself  in  great  humiliation  and  distress,  and  has  been  in 
sore  need  of  Divine  comfort  in  its  dark  days.  At  many  stages  in  its  history  the  Church 
has  felt  itself  oppressed  with  heavy  burdens,  beset  with  serious  difficulties,  threatened 
with  great  calamities ;  and  then  tJhe  blessed  promise  of  deliverance  has  dawned,  and  its 


408  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  tEOtHET  ISAIAS.    CoH.  xxV.  1—11 

heart  haB  lieeti  «lated,  and  smh  words  of  joyful  praise  sks  these  in  the  text  have  lieen 
npo:i  its  lips.  Even  when  there  are  no  signs  &f  the  doming  of  Christ  in  delivering  and 
r.  vi  ving  power,  the  Church  may  "  take  heart  of  grace  **  if  it  be  (1)  faithful  in  word  and 
ill  tlocd  to  its  Master's  ehai'ge ;  (2)  prayerfnlly  and  patiently  expectant,  waiting  on  him 
id  reverent  confidence  j  mindful  of  the  fact  that  our  ways  are  not  always  his  ways,  nor 
oar  chosen  times  his  times.  This  holy  and  rightful  attitude  Will  turn  the  night  of 
sirrow  into  the  evening  of  expectation;  and  in  due  time  will  come  the  morning  of 
rlBJlveranee  \  this  will  include  (1)  th6  removal  of  'reprO'ith-^"  The  rebuke  of  his  people  Will 
hp  take  away  ;"  (2')  the  cessation,  ofspiHtUal  distresi-^he  "will  wipe  aWay  tears,"  etc., 
tlio  tears  of  a  ChliSt-like  sympathy  and  regret  (see  Ps.  cxix.  136 ;  Jer.  ix.  1 ;  Luke 
i\lx.  41) ;  (3)  a  joy oUs  part mpation  in  the  eaxUttttim  of  Christ  and  the  establishment 
of  his  kiiigdom— "  Rejelee  in  his  salvfttion." 

Ill,  Its  APPLiOAliotf  TO  iNDivibUAi,  SOULS.  Our  Christian  life  presents  various 
aspects  according  to  the  path  by  which  our.Lord  leads  us  home.  The  life  of  some  may 
lie  characterized  as  that  of  abounding  privilege,  of  others  as  that  of  multiplied  mercies, 
of  others  as  that  of  honourable  and  usefal  activity ;  in  these  oases  the  heavenly  king- 
dom may  appear  to  be  a  continued  though  an  exalted  experience  in  another  sphere.  But 
ill  other  instances  human  life  is  one  Of  unflagging  toil,  or  of  unceasing  strugs;le,  or  Of 
oppressive  care,  or  of  crushing  sorrow :  the  night  for  which  Weeping  endures  (Ps.  xxx.  5) 
is  all  but  lifelong.  It  is  in  such  cases  as  these  that  we  are  "  saved  by  hope."  Hope 
is  the  morning  star  which  is  a  blessed  promise  of  an  eternal  day.  It  turns  the  night  of 
weary  trouble  into  the  evening  of  holy  dxpectatibn ;  it  puts  a  song  of  joy  even  into  the 
lips  of  suffering ;  it  Calmly  bnt  eagerly  "  prevents  "  the  approaching  morning ;  it  antici- 
pates the  hour  when  the  tears  of  sorrow  Will  be  wiped  away  fTom  eyes  that  will  weep  no 
more  for  ever,  when  every  burden  will  fall  from  every  heavy-laden  shoulder,  when  the 
heart  will  be  "exceeding  glad"  in  the  joy  of  God's  great  salvation.  Let  the  children 
of  afSiotion  comfort  themselves  with  these  words  of  the  prophet ;  but  let  them  (1)  be 
well  assured  that  they  are  the  children  of  God  by  faith  in  JeSus  Christ,  and  that  their 
title  is  good  to  the  heavenly  heritage ;  (2)  wait  patiently  for  Christ's  appearing.  If 
they  would  say, "  We  will  be  glad  ...  in  his  salvation,"  they  must  be  able  to  say, "  Wo 
have  waited  for  him."— 0. 

Ver.  8.^-The  supvevie  victory.  "  He  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory."  The  terms 
of  the  text  are  not  satisfied  by  anything  less  than  the  gospel  cf  the  grace  of  God ; 
(hat,  and  that  alone,  can  be  truly  said  to  swallow  up  death.  It  is  only  Jesus  Christ 
who  can  be  said  to  have  "abolished  death"  (2  Tim.  i.  10).  This  is  the  supreme 
victory.  Great  conquests  have  been  gained  in  other  fields :  in  geographical  research 
-^discovery  of  America,  penetration  of  Africa,  etc.;  in  the  useful  arts— printing, 
telegraphy,  steam-powfer,  etc.;  in  mathematical  science;  in  historical  exploration, .ete. 
These  things,  and  such  things  as  these,  have  Conferred  dignity  on  our  nature  and 
enlargement  on  our  life.  But  there  is  one  victory  compared  with  which  even  these  are 
small- — the  triumph  over  death.  Death  has  been  thought  of  and  Written  about  every- 
where as  the  great  conqueror,  before  whose  prevailing  arm  all  human  forces  go  down 
vanquished  to  the  dust.  It  has  been  acknowledged  to  be  ihe  master  of  our  humanity. 
But  in  the  gofipel  of  Jesus  Christ  death  is  defied,  is  met  fade  to  face,  is  overcome,  is  go 
Utterly  subdued  and  routed  that  we  can  truly  say  that  it  is  "swallowed  up  in 
victory."    In  Christ  there  is  a  double  defeat  of  its  power ;  for  in  him  is-^ 

I.  Abukdant  spiRiTtTAL  LifB  HERE.  Siu  has  led  man  down  to  moral  and  spiritiial 
death;  they  that  livp  apart  from  God  are  "dead  while  they  live,"  for  they  move  on 
toward  the  grave,  missing  all  those  things  which  give  nobility,  excellency,  beauty,  real 
and  lasting  joy  to  human  life.  But  to  Mow  Cfod  in  Christ  Jesus  is  life  (John  xvii.  3). 
And  whoso  enters  into  all  the  fulness  Of  the  life  Which  is  in  Christ  has  that  life  "  more 
abundantly  "  (John  x.  10).  Spiritual  death  is  lost  in  largeness  and  fulness  of  spiritual 
lifc'^life  in  God,  with  God,  for  God  ;  it  is  swallowed  up  in  Victory. 

n.  Ihuobtal  Mte  in  the  HBAVilifLTf  WoBtB.  Here  we  have  the  significance  of  the 
wurds  of  the  test.  Other  faiths  beside  that  of  Jesus  Christ  have  included  a  promise 
of  life  in  the  future ;  but  the  hopes  tbey  have  held  Out  have  been  uncertain,  vague, 
illusory;  the  life  they  hate  prottiised  bas  been  shadowyj  unreal,  unattractive.  Their 
disciples  must  have  felt  that  in  its  cont    t  with  death  the  faiih  has  met  its  match,  and^ 


m.  XXV.  1-12.]    tm  tOOK  OP*  THlil  TROPHET  ISAiAS.  409 

if  It  bag  Dot  been  aclually  worsted,  it  has  failed  to  triumph.  It  the  gosjirl  of  Christ  we 
fiave  a  decided  and  delightful  contrast  to  this.  There  the  victory  is  complete.  We  pass 
BWay,  indeed,  from  earih,  from  iis  Scenes,  Its  engagements,  its  fiiendships,  its  joys  ;  but 
we  pass  into  a  state  and  a  world  where  everything  is  immeasurably  belter  than  the 
present.  1.  We  are  unclothed  in  body,  hut  we  are  clnthed  Upon  with  a  house  which  is 
from  heaven  (2  dor.  V.  4).  2.  The  ipjnoraticH  of  earthiy  twilight  we  exchange  for  tlic 
full  knowledge  Of  the  celestial  day  (1  Oor.  xiii.  12).  3.  From  the  hroken  dejighis  and 
the  fatiguing  toils  of  time  we  pass  to  the  tearless  hippiness  and  to  the  Untiring 
activities  of  eternity.  4.  The  sorrowful  separations  of  the  present,  will  hiflke  more 
blessed  the  union  where  we  "clasp  inseparable  hands"  in  unfading  friendship.  5. 
The  apparent  absence  of  the  heavenly  Father  will  be  lost  in  the  conscimis  nenrnos-s 
which  will  make  us  to  dwell  continually  in  bis  holy  pretence,  Go'l  willi  ns  and  vn.' 
with  him  for  ever.  Death  will  be  "swallowed  up  in  victory."  (1)  It  will  be  Ion  ■ 
before  we  shall  meet  with  a  faith  which  will  offer  Us  greater  things  than  thcee.  (2) 
How  sad,  how  foolish,  how  guilty,  to  remain  SpilitUally,  and  therefore  essentially,  apar 
from  him  in  the  knowledge  and  service  of  whom  stands  ( tci  nal  life !— C. 

Ver.  1. — Penonal  rights  in  Ood.  "0  Lord,  thou  art  my  God."  The  difFerenrc 
between  the  "man"  a,nd  the  "godly  man"  may  be  seen  in  this.  The  man  snys, 
"O  Lord,  thou  art  God;"  but  the  godly  man  says,  "0  Lord,  thou  art  my  Gud."  'I'h  • 
difference  is  the  matter  of  conscious  personal  relation  ;  it  is  a  question  of  "  a|)|iiiipriation." 
At  first  sight  it  might  seem  to  detract  from  the  august  majesty  of  the  Divine  Beioi; 
that  any  single  individual  should  call  him  "  mine."  But,  whatever  we  may  make  Of  it, 
the  fact  must  be  admitted  that,  while  God's  revelation  to  man  in  nature  is  to  mati  as 
a  whole — to  man  as  a  race  the  revelation  of  God  to  man  in  a  book,  atid  in  a  person, 
is  a  Constant  encourflgeraent  t5  hini  to  reeOgnize  and  come  'nto  the  joy  of  personal 
relations.    This  point  may  be  variously  illustrated. 

I.  The   EAHLIESl-  REVELATION   Ol?    GOD   TO   THE   fiACE   AS   MORAL    6EIK0S    PEBMlTTED 

PERSON  RELATIONS.  This  is  shown  in  God's  trusting  Adam  and  Eve ;  also  in  his  huldin. 
the  communion  of  frietidship  with  them,  "  walking  in  the  garden ;  "  and  much  may  be 
made  of  the  assertion  in  Luke's  genealogy,  "  the  son  of  Adam,  vihidlt  was  the  lOn  tf 
God  "  (Luke  iii.  38). 

II.  'The  pathiarohs  lived  m  the  joy  of  personal  relations  witiI  God.  Illus- 
trated in  Abraham's  familiarity  in  intercession  for  Sodom;  indicated  in  the  faot  (jf 
covenant ;  and  proved  in  the  distinctness  with  which  God  is  spoken  of  as  the  "  God  of 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob." 

III.  The  rELIVEEANCES  AND  REDEMPTIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE  OP  IsRAEL  SHOW  AN 
IMMEDIATE   AND   PERSONAL   INTEREST   IN   THEM   ON   THE    PART   OF   GOD.        One  inStaUCO 

is  suggestive  of  many.  On  the  further  shores  of  the  Bed  Sea  Moses  put  a  song  of 
thanksgiving  into  the  mouths  of  the  people,  and  this  is  its  opening  verse;  "  The  Lord 
is  my  Strength  and  Song,  and  he  is  become  my  Salvation:  he  is  my  God." 

IV.  When  personal  godliness  finds  expression  we  see  the  signs  ot  the 
PERSONAL  appropriation.    (See  Ps.  cxviii.  28 ;  cxlv.  1.) 

V.  The  full  revelation  of  God  to  man  in  Christ  Jesus  is  permission  and 
invitation  to  come  into  personal  relations.  That  is  the  revelation  of  God  as  a 
Father,  a  word  which  involves  our  individual  rights  in  him  as  his  sons.  That  is  the 
revelation  of  a  salvation  which  restores  broken  relations  and  renews  our  rights  in  God. 
But  it  is  precisely  in  this  appropriation  of  God  that  men  are  so  often  hindered.  Many 
can  admit  that  "  Jesus  died  for  the  sins  of  the  world,"  and  "  God  loved  the  world  ; " 
but  there  is  no  life,  no  joy,  no  right  sense  of  relation,  until  we  can  say,  "  God  loves  me, 
tven  me ;  and  Jesus  died  for  tne,  even  me," — B.  T. 

Ver.  1.— 2%e  true  reading  of  the  Divine  dealings.  "  Thou  hast  done  ■wonderful  things, 
even  counsels  of  old,  in  faithfulness  And  truth  "  (Revised  Version).  When  We  can  read 
aright,  the  Divine  plan  and  workings  in  the  olden  times  lire  not  merely  wonderful,  catiMng 
surprise  at  the  Divine  wisdom  and  power ;  the  great  thing  about  them  is  seen  to  be  their 
goodness,  adaptation,  mercifulness,  and  truth  to  promise  and  pledge.  This  is  the  result 
of  a  true  t'eading  Of  history,  aud  many  of  us  have  found  this  to  follow  our  right  and 
worthy  fsading  of  our  own  lives,  and  of  God's  ways  with  us.    iJ'oW  we  can  say,  "  Not 


tlO  THE    BOOK    OF   THE   PROPHET    ISAIAH,     [ch.  xxv.  1—12. 

one  good  thing  hath  failed  u»  of  all  that  the  Lord  our  God  hath  promised."  "  All  the 
operations  of  providence  are  according  to  God's  eternal  counsels  (and  those  faithfulness 
and  truth  itself),  all  consonant  to  his  attributes,  consistent  with  one  another,  an  I  sure 
to  be  accomplished  in  their  season." 

I.  We  often  mistake  God's  pttbposb  while  it  is  bbino  wrought  out.  As  we 
might  mistake  any  work  in  progress.  Because  we  do  not  know  the  mind  of  the  Worker ; 
because  his  ways  are  other  than  our  ways;  because  he  uses  strange  agents  and  agencies; 
and  because  he  purposely  holds  from  our  view  his  meaaing,  so  that  he  may  encourage 
patience,  waiting,  and  trust. 

"  Blind  unbelief  is  sure  to  err. 
And  scan  his  work  in  vain." 

Illustrate  by  the  apparent  confusion  in  the  ground  where  a  cathedral  is  being  erected ; 
and  show  how  great  a  mistake  we  should  make  about  God's  purpose  in  Joseph  or 
David,  if  we  took  only  isolated  parts  and  incidents  of  their  lives  for  study.  We  often 
mistake  Ood's  meaning  when  we  try  to  read  only ^r<s  of  our  own  lives. 

II.  We  bhali,  not  mistake  God's  pubpose  when  we  see  it  in  its  issues.  That  is 
true.  God's  end  always  explains  and  justifies  his  means.  But  then  the  end  is  not  yet; 
it  is  often  away  in  the  future,  out  of  our  vision.  And  we  want  some  indication  of  God 
now.  All  we  can  have  is  the  vindication,  given  over  and  over  again,  in  history.  We 
have  "  seen  the  end  of  the  Lord,  that  the  Lord  is  very  pitiful  and  of  tender  meroy." 
And  we  liave  good  argument  and  well-grounded  faith  that  God's  counsels  are  always 
"  faithfulness  and  truth." 

III.  We  need  never  mistake  God's  dealinos  ob  God's  purpose  ip  we  will  read 
THEM  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  WHAT  WE  KNOW  OP  GoD  HIMSELF.  Life  for  US  all  may  be  full  of 
puzzling  things,  but  we  can  always  say,  "  We  know  God."  It  must  be  right,  it  must 
be  wise,  it  must  he  good,  it  must  be  for  the  absolute  best,  since  he  has  done  it,  who, 
being  love,  must  be  "  making  all  things  work  together  for  good."  True  reading  is  read- 
ing in  the  light  of  what  wo  know  God  to  be. — B.  T. 

Ver.  4. — Ood  our* Shadow.  "For  thou  hast  been  ...  a  Shadow  from  the  heat," 
The  prophet  sees,  in  Goil's  mercifulness  to  his  people,  a  reason  why  the  nations  around, 
the  masses  of  the  people,  should  fear  him.  We  can  understand  why  the  word  "  fear  " 
is  employed.  Gi'd's  deliverings  and  defendings  of  his  people  involve  judgments  on  the 
great  kingdoms  that  were  oppressing  Israel ;  and  judgments  are  striking  and  impressive 
to  masses  of  people,  who  must  act  upon  fear  rather  than  upon  love,  or  even  upon  a 
sense  of  duty,  for  they  are  like  children  who  are  only  learning  the  superior  power  of 
moral  motives,  and  meanwhile  must  be  subject  to  force,  and  put  into  right  ways.  The 
figures  in  this  verse  are  very  forcible.  The  "  storm  "  is  in  the  original  a  "  storm  which 
overthrows  a  wall,"  or  a  storm  so  violent  that  it  sweeps  down  walls  before  it  (Matthew 
Arnold).  In  Eastern  countries  the  value  of  a  shade  from  the  blazing  sunshine  is  well 
understood ;  and  Thomson  tells  of  a  terrible  heated  day  when  he  escaped  from  the 
burning  highway  into  a  dark  vaulted  room  at  the  lower  Belh-horon,  and  realized  what 
Isaiah  pictured.  Another  traveller  says,  "About  midday,  when  the  heat  was  very 
oppressive,  a  small  cloud,  scarcely  observable  by  the  eye,  passed  over  the  disc  of  the 
burning  sun.  Immediately  the  intense  heat  abated,  a  gentle  breeze  sprang  up,  and  we 
lelt  refreshed."  As  a  figure  for  God  this  may  be  variously  applied  and  illustrated. 
We  sugs;est  three  lines  of  illustration. 

I.  God  IN  HISTORY  HAS  OFTEN  PROVED  A  SHADOW.  Points  may  be  obtained  from 
such  reviews  of  history  as  are  given  in  Ps.  cv. ;  cvi. ;  cvii.  The  key-note  is, "  Then 
they  cried  unto  the  Lord  in  their  trouble,  and  he  saved  them  out  of  their  distresses." 

II.  GiiD  NEEDS  TO  BE  A  Shadow  IN  OUR  TIMES  OP  PROSPERITY.  For  then  all  that 
is  good  and  great  in  us  it  in  grave  dano;er  of  being  burned  up  in  the  blazing  heat, 
Pew  of  us  can  stand  long  in  the  sun  of  prosperity.  Woe  unto  us  when  all  men  speak 
well  of  us!  and  woe  unto  us  when  all  things  go  well  with  usl  It  is  most  gracious  in 
God  that  he  flings  his  shadow  across,  and  gives  us  times  of  quietness  and  peace; 
humbling  times  they  must  be,  when  self  is  put  down  fiom  his  boastful  place. 

III.  God  IS  SURE  to  be  a  Shadow  in  our  times  of  adversity.  So  David  found, 
and  when  new  trouble  came  he  could  say,  "  I  flee  unto  thee  to  hide  me."     Our  earthly 


OH.  XXV.  1—12.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,  411 


anxieties  corce  in  part  from  circumstance$,  in  part  from  enemies,  and  in  part  from  our 
own  evil  selves.  It  may  be  shown  that,  for  each  kind  of  trouble,  the  only  true  shelter 
is  in  God.  Close  with  this  idea — where  the  shadow  is,  God,  who  throws  it,  must  be 
near ;  then,  if  we  keep  well  within  the  shadow,  we  must  be  close  to  God,  and  so  quiet 
and  safe.— B.  T. 

Ver.  6. — Jehovah's  feast  after  reconciliation.  The  picture  in  this  text  is  based  upon 
the  familiar  custom  in  Judaism  of  associating  a  sacrificial  feast  with  a  thank  oflfering 
or  peace  offering.  Such  feasts  were  highly  festive  and  joyous  occasions.  As  an 
instance  of  the  custom,  reference  may  be  made  to  the  scene  of  the  anointing  of  King 
Saul.  Samnel  made  a  feast,  after  sacrifice,  to  which  some  thirty  persons  were  bidden 
(1  Sam.  ix.  19, 22).  ■  "  According  to  the  Mosaic  Law,  the  fat  pieces  of  the  victim  were  to 
be  devoted  to  Jehovah  immediately  by  burning,  and  the  next  best  piece,  the  breast, 
mediately  by  giving  it  to  his  servants  the  priests ; "  the  rest  was  a  foundation  for  a 
feast  in  which  the  offerers  shared.  The  "  wines  on  the  lees"  are  those  kept  long,  that 
have  become  old  and  mellowed.  "  Full  of  marrow"  indicates  superior  quality.  The 
first  reference  may  be  to  the  joy  of  tlje  returned  captives  when  God  permitted  a  revival 
of  Jerusalem;  but  the  full  reference  must  be  to  the  spiritual  provisions  of  Messianic 
times.  For  "feasts"  as  the  figure  for  spiritual  blessings,  gospel  iirovisions,  comp. 
Ps.  xxii.  26—29  ;  ch.  Iv.  1— 5 ;  Matt.  viii.  11 ;  xxv.  1 ;  Luke  xiii.  28,  29 ;  xiv.  15—24. 
Keeping  to  the  idea  of  feast  after  sacrifice  sealing  the  reconciliation,  and  working  that 
idea  out  in  relation  to  Christian  times,  we  note — 

I.  God  gives  communion  when  he  gives  eeconoiliation.  The  feast  was  designed 
to  assure  the  worshippers  that  all  separations  and  enmities  were  done  away,  and  God 
was  now  in  gracious  and  comfortable  relations  with  them.  In  the  Bast  restored 
frieirdship  is  sealed  by  eating  together.  It  will  at  once  be  seen  how  this  constancy 
of  Divine  communion  with  renewed  souls  is  sealed  in  the  symbolic  meal  of  our 
sacramental  Supper.  That  feast  keeps  up  the  assurance  of  God's  comfortable  relations 
with  us.     We  are  the  restored  and  accepted  ones  to  whom  God  gives  his  friendship. 

II.  God  is  concerned  about  his  tutube  belations  with  his  bbdeemed  ones. 
It  is  important  to  correct  a  sentiment  which  very  seriously  imperils  right  Christian 
living,  but  seldom  gets  shape  in  actual  words.  It  is  assumed  that  God  is  supremely 
anxious  for  our  salvation,  our  "conversion"  as  we  call  it,  but  indifferent  to  what  we 
are  and  do,  if  only  we  are  saved.  This  modern  modification  of  Antraomian  error 
is  met  by  the  fact  that  God  makes  a  feast  for  the  redeemed,  providing  for  them  after 
redemp'ion.     God  is  the  food  for  the  soul's  life,  and  that  life  he  quickens. 

III.  God  wants  jot  to  chabaotebizb  those  continuous  belations.  Therefore 
is  the  festive  fiaure  chosen.  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength."  The  redeemed 
of  the  Lord  ought  to  march  "  with  singing  unto  Zion."  Depressions  may  come,  but 
they  may  not  abide.  Our  Christian  life  should  be  a  glad  feasting  on  the  abundance 
God  provides. — B.  T. 

Ver.  8. — Triumph  over  death.  There  is  a  first  reference  here  to  the  restoration 
of  Judah  from  its  death-state  of  caj)tivity,  and  to  the  wiping  away  of  the  tears  the 
captives  shed  when  they  hung  their  harps  upon  the  willows.  But  we  cannot  for-get 
that  St.  Paul  and  St.  John  have  put  the  richest  Christian  meanings  into  these  beautiful 
and  pathetic  words  (1  '''■or.  xv.  54 ;  Eev.  vii.  17;  xxi.  4).  And  life  for  a  nation  out 
of  the  death-state  ot  captivity  may  well  be  taken  as  a  type  of  the  sublime  resurrection 
of  humanity  from  the  grasp  of  physical  death.  Our  triumph  over  death  is  assured  ; 
and  foretaste  of  it  is  given  in  the  conquest  of  the  Lord  Jesus  over  the  grave.  He 
is  our  Conqueror  of  death,  and  in  him  the  prophecy  of  this  text  will  have  its  large  and 
blessed  fulfilment.  We  read  the  prophecy  in  the  light  of  Christ  and  of  his  work. 
And  Scripture  teaches  us  to  regai'd  the  resurrection  of  Christ  as  a  final  conquest  of 
death  for  us  (Acts  ii.  24;  1  Cor.  xv.  21,  55,  56;  Eph.  iv.  8;  2  Tim.  L  10; 
Heb.  ii.  14;  Bev:  i.  18). 

L  Cubist  is  Trie  Conquekob  of  death  itself.  It  was  not  the  design  of  Christ 
to  destroy  death  altogether,  and  withdraw  its  commission  to  the  human  race.  He  left 
it  still  to  bite,  but  plucked  away  its  sting,  the  venom  of  its  hopelessness,  and  the 
bitterness  of   its  connection   with  human  sin.    W«  shall  die,  though  Christ  hai 


412  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  iSAlAH.    tca.xxv.l— 1^ 

conquered  death  ;  but  death  is  now  only  the  messenger  that  calls  us  home — he  is  no 
longer  the  jailer  that  drags  us  to  our  doom.  Dissolution,  or  translation,  such  as  we 
have  hints  of  id  the  cases  of  Enoch  and  Elijah,  may  be  the  Divine  idea  for  unfallen 
created  beings ;  but  certainly  death,  as  we  know  it.  With  all  its  attendant  circumstances 
of  evil,  is  the  immediate  risult  of  liuman  sin.  Change  of  state,  and  change  of  Worlds, 
may  be  death  in  an  abstract  sense;  but  death  in  fei^,  and  amid  sufferings,  and  under 
disease,  and  involving  agonizing  separations,  and  terrible  with  the  black  shadows  of  an 
unknown  future;  this  death-^and  this  is  the  death  with  which  we  lave  to  do — is  the 
penalty  Of  transgression.  "The  sting  of  death  is  sin."  Lord  Bacon,  in  his  essay  on 
death,  almost  makes  too  much  of  the  material  accompaniments  of  it,  and  under- 
estimates the  moral  feeling  in  relation  to  it.  He  says,  "Groans,  and  convulsions,  and 
a  discoloured  face,  and  friends  weeping,  and  blacks,  and  obsec[uies;  and  the  lilie,  show 
death  terrible.  ,  .  .  There  is  no  piission  in  the  niihd  of  man  so  Weak,  but  it  mates  and 
masters  the  fear  of  death ;  and  therefore  death  is  no  Such  terrible  enemy  when  a  man 
hath  so  many  attendants  about  hini  that  can  win  the  combat  for  him.  Revenge 
triumphs  over  death ;  love  slights  it ;  lionour  aspireth  to  it ;  grief  fleeth  to  it  {  and 
fear  preoccupieth  it."  But  this  is  only  true  for  certain  individuals,  and  under  various 
pressures  of  excitement.  To  most  of  us,  and  especially  to  those  who  are  thoughtful, 
and  oppressed  with  the  burdens  of  humanity,  death  has  aspects  of  great  bitterness. 
Then  in  What  sense  can  we  think  of  Chiist  as  the  present  Conqueror  of  death  ?  The 
answer  is  this^He  has  conquered  the  death-dread  in  us,  both  concerning  ourselves 
and  concerning  those  who  are  dear  to  us.  He  has  "  delivered  those  who  through  fear 
of  death  were  all  their  hfetime  subject  to  bondage."  And  he  has  conquered  it  by 
&Xias.  its  connections  with  the  body  alone,  and  severing  it,  once  and  for  ever,  Irom  all 
relation  to  the  renewed  and  redeemed  soul.  "He  that  liveth  and  believeth  on  me  shall 
ueVer  die."  In  Christ  death  is  compelled  to  take  rank  with  disease  and  pain,  as  the 
Servants  of  God.     Its  masterfulness  is  destroyed ;  its  dart  lies  broken  on  the  ground. 

11.  The  Cokqubeoe  of  death  ouc(ht  to  rhlb  in  its  btead.  In  Clirist  life  rules, 
hope  rules,  goodness  rules/  eternity  rules.  Mtm  may  despairingly  look  upon  his 
partially  raised  schemes,  and  say,  "  Alas  I  I  shall  die."  But  the  Christian  man  builds 
on  bravely  and  hopefully.  He  knows  that  beneath  all  the  outward  show  he  is  raising 
a  structure  of  character  on  which  death  has  no  power,  and  he  says,  "I  shall  never 
die."  The  diffeience  that  is  made  by  our  letting  death  rule  our  thoughts  and  hopes 
and  endeavours,  and  letting  Christ  rule  them,  may  be  illustrated  by  the  change 
wrought  in  the  land  of  Persia,  when  Zoroaster  proclaimed  that  Ormuzd,  the  Good,  was 
the  real  ruler  of  humanity.  When  Zoroaster  came,  the  religious  instincts  of  the 
people  were  debased,  the  divinity  Worshipped  was  malevolent,  the  moral  tone  was  low, 
the  Social  habits  were  vicious,  the  land  of  Iran  was  overgrown  with  thorns  and 
weeds ;  men  were  idle,  negligent,  like  the  surfeited  inhabitants  ot  Sodom,  given  up  to 
sensuality  ;  they  thought  of  their  divine  ruler  as  evil,  malicious,  cruel ;  they  had  the 
crushing,  despairing,  dislieartening  sentiments  which  always  follow  the  belief  that 
death,  the  representative  of  evil,  rules.  Zoroaster  brought  back  the  old  and  lost  truth 
that  God  rules^-nOt  evil,  not  death.  Evil  is  subject  to  G-od.  The  good  God  is  the  God 
of  life,  and  life  is  mightier  than  death ;  of  light,  and  light  triumphs  over  darkness. 
Ormuzd  was  the  god  of  prodtiction,  and  if  they  would  sow  and  plant  and  Weed,  they 
Would  be  sure  to  win,  under  his  benediction,  a  ^orious  triumph  over  waste  and  barren- 
ness and  death.  We  are  not  yet  free  as  we  should  be  from  the  notion  that  death  still 
reigns.  We  have  not  yet  opened  our  hearts  fully  to  the  glorious  truth  that  JeSUs, 
the  coniiuerOr  of  death,  now  reigns.  Above  everything  else  our  age  wants  to  yield 
its  allegiance  to  Christ,  ruling  in  morali,  in  education,  in  literature,  in  edenee,  in 
politics,  in  commerce,  and  in  so<deti/ ;  triumphing  now  ova  all  the  forms  of  evil  that 
death  can  symlX)li2e.—]8.  T. 

Ver.  9.-^ Waiting  on  God.  "This  Is  our  Gkid;  we  have  waited  for  him,  and  he 
will  save  us."  Waiting  on  QroA.  Waiting  for  God.  Waiting  on  when  all  is  dark. 
Waiting  still,  when  commotions  and  troubles  surround  us.  Bidding  us  wait  for  him, 
a  way  of  the  Lord's  dealing  with  us.  Making  it  hard  to  wait,  a  sign  of  God's  severer 
dealing  with  us.  And  waiting  sanctified  to  our  aoul-culture.  These  are  subjects  very 
suggestive  to  Christian  meditation. 


OH.  xxT.  1—12.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,  418 

L  WAiTiNa  oisdTMSTANOEB.  It  was  a  waiting-time  for  the  godly  in  Judah  when 
Isaiah  wrote.  In  their  own  country,  luxury  and  profligacy  were  plainly  bearing  the 
country  on  to  some  terrible  doom.  In  the  nations  around  them  the  cup  of  iniquity 
was  getting  full,  and  overwhelming  judgments  were  falling  on  one  itfter  another. 
Every  man  who  believed  in  the  covenant  was  put  into  silence  and  waiting.  The 
scenes  around  him  he  coujd  not  reason  out.  Precisely  what  God  would  do  with  his 
people  he  could  not  know.  All  about  him  waa  painful  mystery  ;  he  could  only  wail, 
keeping  firm  bold  of  the  truth,  faithfulness,  and  love  of  God  while  he  waited.  When 
circumstances  are  ag^nst  U3,  tio  best  thing  we  can  do  is  to  wait. 

**  Wait  thoq  his  time,  so  shall  thy  night     ' 
Soon  end  in  joyous  day." 

The  history  of  God's  ancieat  people  is  a  series  of  waiting  circumstances.  Through 
a  long  Egyptian  bondage  they  were  called  to  wait  for  the  day  of  their  deliverance. 
Surrounded  with  perils,  they  stood  at  the  shores  of  the  Bed  Sea,  and  were  bidden  to 
wait  for  the  salvation  of  God,  Crowded  in  the  plain  before  the  Mount  of  Sinai,  tlie 
pKople  failed  to  wait  in  patience  until  Moses  reappeared.  For  forty  years  ihey 
wandered,  waiting  for  adioission  to  their  promised  land.  In  their  first  siege  they  must 
wait  until  God's  signal  £()r  the  falling  walls,  At  last  they  must  bang  their  hai-ps  on 
the  willows,  in  the  stranger's  land,  waiting  the  completion  of  their  seventy  years  of 
judgment.  And  even  to-day,  among  us,  Israel  stands  in  waiting  circumstances — 
waiting  while  her  land  lies  fallow ;  waiting  while  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  are  being 
fulfilled.  While  the  story  of  that  people  Israel  remains  upon  the  records,  all  may 
know  that  God  does  a  part  of  his  work  of  grace  in  men,  by  placing  them  in  waiting . 
circnmstanees.  What  is  true  of  the  nation  is  true  of  her  heroic  sons  and  daughters : 
t,g.  Abraham,  Jacob,  Moses,  David,  Simeon,  and  a  host  of  others  had  to  wait,  and 
often  wwt  long,  for  the  fulfilment  of  their  hopes.  So  we  are  still  placed  in  waiting 
circumstances.  There  are  often  times  when  we  can  do  nothing— we  can  only  sit  at  the 
window,  like  the  sailor's  wife  when  the  storm-wrack  fills  the  sky,  and  the  sea  makes 
its  moan  almost  to  heart-breaking.  Times  when  we  are  put  aside  frum  busy  life. 
Times  when  our  way  seemed  to  be  walled  up,  no  door  would  open,  no  sign  of  the 
guiding  hand  appeared  ;  we  could  only  wait.  But  this  is  true,  the  circumstances  are 
God's  arrangement,  and  the  waiting  does  God's  work.  Life  itself  is  one  great  waiting- 
time.     The  earth  itself  is  but  in  waiting  circumstances  (Bom.  viii.  22). 

II.  Waiting  attitudes.  1.  The  attitude  of  prayer,  using  that  word  in  its  large 
sense  of  openness  of  soul  to  God ;  the  outlooking,  up-looking  of  the  soul  to  God ; 
the  humble  sense  of  self;  the  silent  and  the  spoken  cry  for  the  light  and  help  of 
God,  The  union  of  prayer  with  waiting  lifts  it  from  the  mere  dull  and  stricken 
submission  of  the  slave,  into  the  pleasant  waiting  of  the  child,  who,  being  sure  of  the 
Father's  love,  keeps  looking  for  the  Father's  time.  Waiting  work  never  becomes 
weary  work,  or  bitter  work,  until  we  cease  to  pray.  2.  The  attitude  of  expectancy. 
Waiting  ought  to  become  watching,  in  strong  faith  and  assured  hope ;  watching  like 
that  of  David,  when  he  could  sing  out  his  confidence  and  say,  "Yet  the  Lord  will 
command  his  loving-kindness  in  the  daytime."  Such  a  spirit  the  captives  in  Babylon 
might  cherish.  Flinging  open  their  windows  westward,  as  they  knelt,  they  might  see 
the  temple  arise,  the  streets  of  the  holy  city  fill  with  busy  people,  and  the  walls 
encircle  a  delivered  and  independent  nation ;  and  with  such  expectations  it  could  not  be 
hard  to  wait,  for  God's  time  to  bless  is  never  more  than  a  "  little  way  off."  3.  The 
attitude  of  keeping  on  in  the  ways  of  righteou9nees,  whether  we  find  them  jiaj/  or  not 
pay.  Doing  right,  even  if  it  does  seem  to  bring  suffering.  Purposing  that  our  mouth 
shall  not  transgress.  If,  while  we  wait,  we  faint  in  spirit,  let  us  take  good  care  never 
to  faint  from  righteousness. 

III.  Waitino  consolations.  We  may  be  quite  sure  that  God  is  in  the  waiting. 
Nearer  than  ever  to  us  in  the  hours  of  delay.  If  the  waiting  is  God's,  if  it  belon-s 
to  the  mysterious  ways  of  the  Divine  love,  then  even  waiting-times  are  blessed.  They 
are  even  a  gracious  agency  for  the  culture  of  our  souls ;  and  oftentimes  better  things 
are  done  for  us  in  the  waiting  than  in  the  suffering  times.  The  great  lessons  of  th« 
perfect  trust  are  learned  in  the  waiting  houn;  and  "patience  gets  her  perfect  work.' 
— R,  T. 


414 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxvl  1— 21. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  XXVL 


Vers.  1 — 18. — A  Sono  of  the  Beseemed 
IN  Mount  Zion.  The  prophet,  having  (in 
eh.  XXV.)  poured  forth  his  own  thankfulness 
to  God  for  ihe  promise  of  the  Church's  final 
redemption  and  triumph,  proceeds  now  to 
repieeent  the  Chnrch  itself  in  the  glorified 
state  as  singing  praise  to  God  for  the  same. 

Ver.  1. — In  that  day.  In  the  "day  of 
God "  (2  Pet.  iii.  12),  the  period  of  the 
"restitution  of  all  things"  (Acts  iii.  21). 
In  the  land  of  Jndah;  i.e.  in  the  "new 
eartli  " — whose  city  will  be  the  "  heavenly 
Jerusalem,"  and  wherein  will  dwell  "  the 
Israel  of  God  " — the  antitype  whereof  the 
literal  "  land  of  Judali "  was  the  type.  A 
strong  city  j  literally,  a  city  of  etrength.  In 
the  Revelation  of  St.  John  the  new  Jerusa- 
lem is  represented  as  having  "  a  wall  great 
and  high  "  (xxi.  12),  and  "  twelve  gates," 
three  on  each  side.  The  intention  is  to 
convey  the  idea  of  complete  security.  In 
the  present  passage  the  city  has  "gates" 
(ver.  2),  but  no  "  walls " — ^walls  and  bul- 
warks being  unnecessary,  since  the  saving 
might  of  God  himself  would  be  its  sure 
defence  against  every  enemy. 

Ver.  2. — Open  ye  the  gates.  The  com- 
mand is  given  by  God  to  his  angels  within 
the  city,  or  perhaps  by  some  angels  to 
others  to  "open  the  gates,"  and  let  the 
saints  march  in  and  take  possession  (comp. 
Ps.  cxviii.  19,  20,  whicli  seems  to  represent 
the  same  oijcasion ;  and  Ps.  xxiv.  7 — 10, 
which  tells  of  another  occasion  on  which  the 
angelic  warders  were  bidden  to  throw  open 
the  gates  of  the  celestial  city.  The  righteous 
nation  which  keepeth  the  truth ;  literally,  a 
righteous  nation.  A  people,  made  up  of  all 
kindreds  and  nations  and  tongues,  which 
should  henceforth  be  "  the  people  of  God." 
They  are  "  righteous,"  as  washed  clean  from 
all  taint  of  sin  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb. 
They  "keep  the  truth,''  or  "keep  faithful- 
ness," as  under  all  circumstances  clinging 
loyally  to  God. 

Ver.  3. — Thou  wilt  keep  him,  etc.;  lite- 
rally, the  steadfast  mind  tliou  wilt  keep  in 
peace,  in  peace;  Le.  "in  perfect  peace" 
(comp.  Ps.  cxii.  7,  8).  Tho  writer's  mind 
throughout  the  first  paragraph  of  his  "  song  " 
(vers.  1 — 4)  "is  running"  (as  Mr.  Cheyne 
well  observes)  "  on  the  security  and  im- 
movablenesB  of  the  new  Jerusalem."  All  is 
peace  and  sure  defence  on  (rod's  side ;  all 
is  trust  and  perfect  confidence  on  the  side  of 
man.  The  first  words  of  the  verse  may  be 
taken  in  various  ways — the  above  rendering 


(which  seems  to  as  the  best)  is  that  of  De< 
litzsch  and  Eay. 

Ver.  4. — Trust  ye  in  the  lord.  The  faith- 
ful exhort  each  other  to  perfect  trust,  in  the 
new  Jerusalem,  as  in  the  old  (see  Ps.  ex  v. 
9 — II).  In  the  lord  Jehovah;  literally,  in 
Jah  Jehovah  (comp.  ch.  xii.  2).  Is  everlast- 
ing strength ;  literally,  is  the  Bock  of  ages. 
A  certain  refuge  throughout  all  eternity  is, 
no  doubt,  intended  (see  the  comment  on  ch. 
xvii.  ID). 

Ver.  5. — Se  biingeth  down;  rather,  ht 
hath  brought  dovm.  The  redeemed  praise 
God  for  liis  past  mercies.  He  brought  down 
in  his  own  good  time  all  the  proud  and 
lofty  ones  who  exalted  themselves  against 
him  and  oppressed  his  saints,  making  cities 
desolate  (ch.  xxiv.  10,  12)  and  giving  over 
their  inhabitants  to  destruction  (oh.  xxiv.  6). 
Them  that  dwell  on  high;  i.e.  "that  exalt 
themselves."  It  is  not  eminence,  but  pride, 
that  provokes  the  Divine  anger.  The 
heathen  judged  differently  (see  Herod.,  vii. 
10,  §  4).  The  lofty  city  (comp.  ch.  xxiv.  10, 
12 ;  XXV.  2, 3).  The  "  world-city  "  (as  it  has 
been  called)  ;  i.e.  the  idealized  stronghold 
of  the  adversaries  of  God  in  this  world,  ig 
intended. 

Ver.  6. — ^The  foot  shall  tread  it  down; 
rather,  trade  it  doum.  The  feet  of  the  poor, 
and  the  steps  of  the  needy;  i.e.  the  feet  of 
God's  people,  the  weak  and  afflit-ted  of  this 
world,  trod  down  ultimately,  or  brought  to 
destruction  anil  ruin,  the  groat  world-power — 
not  so  much  that  they  were  victorious  in  an 
actual  )ihysical  contest,  as  that  they  finally 
triumphed  through  God's  judgment  on  the 
world-power,  which  brought  it  to  nought, 
and  left  it  for  his  people  to  show  their  con- 
tempt by  tiampling  upon  the  smoking  ruins. 

Ver.  7. — ^The  way  of  the  just  is  upright- 
ness;  or,  the  path  for  the  just  it  straight.  It 
is  one  of  the  main  blessings  of  the  righteous 
that  Ood  "  makes  their  way  straight  before 
their  face "  (Ps.  Iv.  8),  "  leads  them  in  a 
plain  path"  (Ps.  xxvii.  11),  "shows  them 
the  way  they  are  to  walk  in  "  (Ps.  cxliii.  8), 
so  that  they  are  for  the  most  part  free  from 
doubt  and  perplexity  as  to  the  line  of  con- 
duct which  it  behoves  them  to  pursue.  If 
this  is  so  in  the  present  life,  still  more  will 
it  be  the  uniform  condition  of  the  just  m 
another  sphere.  Then  God  will  of  a  surety 
"  direct  cM  their  paths  "  (Prov.  iii.  6).  Thou, 
most  upright,  dost  weigh;  literally,  O  up- 
right One,  thou  dost  weigh.  The  term  "  up- 
right "  is  applied  to  God  in  Dent,  xxxii.  4 ; 
Ps.  XXV.  8 ;  and  Ps.  xcii.  16.  By  "  weighing 
the  path  of  the  just "  is  meant  keeping  it, 
as  Justice  keeps  her  scales,  straight  uid 
level. 


OH.  XXVI.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


416 


Yer.  8. — Tea,  in  the  way  of  thy  jndgmenti 
,  .  .  have  we  waited  for  thee;  rather,  u« 
waited.  During  the  long  years  of  our  afflic- 
tion and  persecution  in  the  world,  we  waited 
in  the  constant  expectation  that  "  thy  judg- 
ments" would  fall  upon  our  persecutors. 
We  were  not  impatient.  We  knew  that  thou 
wouldst  visit  us  at  the  fitting  time.  The 
desire  of  our  soul  Is  to  thy  Name ;  rathor,  the 
desire  of  our  sold  was  to  fhy  Name.  During 
all  the  weary  time  of  waiting,  we  lunged 
for  thee,  and  thy  Name,  or  rather  what  thy 
Name  indicates,  thj  own  true  self.  In  de- 
fault of  thy  actual  presence,  we  desired  to 
have  thee  ever  in  remembrance. 

Ver.  9. — In  the  night ;  i.e.  "  the  long 
night  of  their  afHiction."  The  sentiment  is 
identical  with  that  of  the  preceding  verse, 
Will  I  seek  thee  early ;  ralher,  did  I  seek 
thee.  For  when  thy  judgments,  etc.  It  was 
not  a  mere  selfish  deisire  for  the  cessation  of 
persecution  that  caused  the  righteous  to 
long  for  the  time  when  God's  judgments 
would  be  manifested  upon  the  earth,  but  a 
conviction  that  so  only  would  an  impression 
be  made  on  the  persecutors,  and  a  certain 
number  of  them  be  induced  to  learn  right- 
eousness. A  desire  for  the  conversion  of 
sinners  to  God  characterizes  God's  saints 
generally,  and  none  mnre  than  Isaiah,  who 
is  here  expressing  what  he  conceives  will  be 
tlie  thoughts  of  the  redeemed,  and  naturally 
judges  their  thoughts  and  feelings  by  his 
ovrn. 

Ver.  10. — let  favour  be  showed  to  the 
wicked.  This  is  a  further  explanation  of  the 
reason  why  the  righteous  had  so  earjiestly 
desired  the  coming  of  God's  judgments 
upon  the  earth.  They  had  ft-lt  that  furtiier 
mercy  and  long-suffering  were  thrown  away 
upon  the  wicked,  and  "only  did  them  harm" 
(Kay).  When  "favour  was  showed  tliem," 
they  did  but  persist  in  unrighteousness.  In 
the  laud  of  uprightness  will  he  deal  unjustly. 
Even  good  example  does  not  convert  the 
wicked  man.  Though  he  live  in  a  "  land  of 
righteousness,"  where  God  and  his  Law  are 
acknowledged,  where  true  religion  is  pro- 
fessed, where  the  gospel  is  preached,  he  will 
continue  wicked,  he  will  "  deal  unjustly ; " 
he  will  not  behold — or,  consider — ^the  majesty 
of  the  Lord. 

Ver.  11. — When  tty  haiid  is  lifted  up,  they 
will  not  see.  The  original  is  more  graphic. 
It  runs,  "  Lord,  thy  hand  is  lifted  up,  [but] 
they  see  not.  They  shall  see  to  their  shame 
thy  jealousy  for  thy  people ;  yea,  fire  shall 
devour  thy  adversiiries."  God's  jealousy 
"  burns  like  fire"  (Ps.  Ixxix.  9;  Zeph.  i.  18) 
in  the  cause  of  Ids  people. ' 

Ver.  12. — Lord,  thou  wilt  ordain  peace  for 
us;  i.e.  henceforth  thou  wilt  give  us  an 
existence  of  perfect  peace  (see  ver.  3),  un- 
troubled by  adversaries.    For  then  also  hast 


wrought  all  our  works  in  ns ;  lathei,  aU  our 
work  for  u«.  The  "work"  intended  geems 
to  be,  as  Mr.  Gheyne  observes,  "  the  work  of 
their  deliverance. 

Ver.  13.— Other  lords.  The  saved  had 
not  always  been  faithful  to  Jehovah.  Some, 
no  doubt,  had  actually  been  idolaters,  as 
many  of  the  early  Christians  (1  Cur.  xii.  2 ; 
1  These,  i.  9,  etc.).  Others  heul  given  their 
hearts  for  a  time  to  other  vanities,  and 
turned  away  from  God.  Now,  in  the  new 
Jerusalem,  they  confess  their  shortcomings, 
and  acknowledge  that  only  through  God's 
mercy — by  thee — are  they  in  the  condition 
to  celebrate  his  Name. 

Ver.  14. — They  are  dead,  etc.;  literally, 
Dead,  they  shall  not  live  (i.e.  return  to  life) ; 
deceased,  thty  shall  not  arise.  The  power  of 
the  idol-gods  is  altogether  passed  away.  It 
was  for  this  end — therefore — that  God  had 
visited  and  destroyed  them,  and  made  their 
very  memory  to  perish.  How  strange  it 
seems  that  the  "  great  gods  "  whom  so  many 
millions  worshipped  in  former  times — Bel, 
and  Asshur,  and  Ammon,  and  Zeus,  and 
Jupiter — should  have  passed  so  completely 
away  as  to  be  almost  wholly  forgotten  I 

Ver.  15. — Thou  hast  increased  the  nation ; 
t'.e.  the  "  rigliteous  nation  "  of  ver.  2 — not 
the  Jewish  people  merely,  but  "  the  Israel 
of  God  " — who  are  to  be  "  a  great  multitude, 
that  no  man  can  number,  of  all  nations,  and 
kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues"  (Eev. 
vii.  9) .  Ihon  hadst  removed  it.  This  render- 
ing gives  a  very  good  sense.  It  makes  the 
redeemed  pass  in  thought  from  their  present 
state  of  happiness  and  glory  to  that  former 
time  of  tribulation  and  affliction  when  they 
were  a  remnant,  scattered  over  the  face  of 
the  earth  (ch.  xxiv.  13 — 15),  driven  into  its 
uttermost  comers  (ch.  xxiv.  16),  oppressed 
and  down-trodden  by  their  enemies.  But  it 
is  doubtful  whether  the  Hebrew  will  bear 
the  rendering.  Most  modern  commentators 
translate,  "  'Thou  hast  extended  far  all  tlie 
borders  of  the  land,"  which  is  certainly  the 
more  natural  meaning  of  the  words.  If  we 
accept  this  view,  we  must  regard  the  clause 
as  continuing  the  idea  lontained  in  the 
former  part  of  the  verse — the  nation  is  in- 
creased in  number,  and  its  borders  are 
advanced — it  is  "  a  multitude  that  no  man 
can  number,"  and  it  has  no  narrower  limits 
than  the  "  new  earth,"  which  has  been  given 
to  it  for  its  habitation  (Bev.  xxi.  1). 

Ver.  16. — Lord,  in  trouble  have  tiiey 
visited  thee.  Here,  at  any  rate,  the  redeemed 
go  bank  in  thought  to  their  time  of  trouble.. 
Tliey  remember  that  what  brought  them 
back  to  God  from  that  alienation  which  they 
have  confessed  (ver.  13)  was  the  affliction 
which  they  so  long  endured.  Their  present 
bliss  is  the  result  of  their  former  woe,  and 
recalls  the  thought  of  it.    They  poured  out 


«« 


THE  BOOK  OF  THF.  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxvi.  1—21. 


a  prayer;  rather,  as  in  the  Tnargin,  a  secret 
tpeteh,  at  a  low  whiiper  (Kay);  comp.  eh. 
xziz.  4.  The  word  elsewhere  means  "  the 
mntteriiig  of  a  charm,"  but  must  here  signify 
the  "  whispered  prayer "  of  one  in  deep 
humiliation. 

Ver.  17. — Like  ai  a  woman  with  child 
(comp.  ch.  xiii.  8 ;  xxi.  3).  Isaiah  uses  the 
metaphor  to  express  any  severe  pain  com- 
bined with  anxiety.  So  have  we  been  in  thy 
sight ;  rather,  to  have  we  heen  at  thy  presence. 
Wlien  thou  wert  visiting  us  in  anger,  and 
laying  thy  chastiseinents  upon  us. 

Ver,  18. — ^We  have  as  it  were  brought  forth 
wind.  Our  pains  have  been  idle,  futile — 
have  effected  nothing.  We  have  not  given 
deliverance  (literally,  "salvation")  to  our 
land;  we  have  not  effected  the  downfall  of 
our  heathen  enemies.  That  downfall  was 
God's  work  (ch.  xxiv.  1&— 20). 

Vers.  19 — 21. — The  Pbophet's  Comment 
ON  THE  SoNO  Off  THE  JcsT.  Having  con- 
cluded his  "  song  of  the  just "  ir  a  minor 
key  with  a  confession  of  human  weakness, 
the  prophet  proceeds  to  cheer  and  encourage 
his  disciples  by  a  clear  and  positive  decla- 
ration of  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection : 
"  Thy  dead,  0  Israel,  shall  live."  lie  then 
adds  a  lecommcndation  for  the  present — a 
recommendation  to  privticy  and  retirement, 
until  the  judgments  of  God  which  he  has 
predicted  (ch.  xxiv.)  are  shown  forth  upon 
the  earth. 

Ver.  19. — Thy  dead  men  shall  live.  A 
universal  resurrection  of  "  some  to  everlast- 
ing life,  and  some  to  shame  and  everlasting 
contempt"  (Dan.  xii.  2),  is  not  yet  an- 
nounced; but  only  a  resurrection  of  the 
just,  peihapa  only  of  the  just  Israelites. 
The  object  is  encouragement,  especially 
encouiagement  of  those  whom  the  prophet 
directly  addresses — the  religious  Israelites 
of  his  own  day.  It  is  enough  for  them  at 
the  present  time  to  know  th:it,  whether  the 
day  of  the  Lord  comes  in  their  time  or  no, 
when  it  comes,  they  will  have  a  part  in  it. 
The  assurance  is  given,  and  is  made  doubly 
sure  >iy  repetition.  The  prophet  does  not 
■ay.  Together  with  my  dead  body  they  will 
arise ;  for  there  is  nothing  in  the  Hebrew 
corresponding  to  "together,"  and  the  el- 
lipse of  Vm,  "with,"  though  suggested  by 
Kimchi,  is  impossible ;  nor  is  it  likely  that 
he  intends  to  sjjcak  of  his  own  dead  body 
•t  all.  He  may,  perhaps,  call  the  past  gene- 
rations of  just  Israelites  "  my  dead,"  i.e. 
the  dead  with  whom  he  is  in  sympathy ;  or 
the  supposed  personal  suffix  may  be  merely 
paragogic,  as  Bosenmiiller  argues.  In  any 
case  the  two  clauses  must  be  regarded  as 
identical  in  meaning — an  instance  of  "  syno- 


nymous parallelism : "  "  Thy  dead  men  shall 
live;  my  dead  shall  arise."  Awake  and 
sing;  rather,  awaJie  and  shout  for  joy 
(comp.  Ps.  XXXV.  27;  Ixvii.  4,  etc.).  Te 
that  dwell  in  dnst  (comp.  Dan.  xii.  2, 
"  Many  that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  shall 
awake  ").  Thy  dew  is  as  the  dew  of  herbs ; 
i.e.  refreshing,  vivifying,  potent  to  make 
even  dead  bones  live.  "  Thy  dew"  may  be 
said  with  reference  to  Jehovah,  for  changes 
in  the  person  addressed  are  frequent  in 
Isaiah ;  or  with  reference  to  the  people  of 
Israel,  meaning,  "  the  dew  which  Jehorab 
will  shed  on  thee,"  i.e.  on  thy  dead. 

Ver.  20. — Come,  my  people,  .  .  .  into  thy 
chambers.  As  when  a  storm  comes,  pru- 
dence counsels  men  to  seek  shelter  (Exod. 
ix,  19),  so  now  the  prophet  advises  his 
people  to  put  themselves  under  cover  during 
the  coming  tempest.  His  meaning,  pro- 
bably, is  that  they  should  retire  into  the 
privacy  of  communion  with  God,  withdraw- 
ing from  public  affairs  and  the  distractions 
of  a  worldly  life.  Shut  thy  doors  about 
thee  (comp.  2  Kings  iv.  33 ;  Matt,  vl  6). 
For  a  Uttle  moment  (so  in  ch.  x.  25 ;  and 
again  in  ch.  liv.  7,  8).  God's  estimate  of 
time,  we  must  remember,  is  not  as  man'e 
(Ps.  xc.  4;  2Pet.  iii.  8). 

Ver,  21. — The  lord  oometh  out  of  his 
place  (comp.  Micah  i.  3).  In  (he  Psalms 
God  is  represented  as  "bowing  (be  heavens 
and  conii?io;  down,"  bringing  them,  as  it 
were,  wi(h  liim.  Here  (and  in  Micah)  he 
quits  his  place  in  heaven,  as  a  king  quits 
his  own  country  when  he  proceeds  to  take 
vengeance  on  rebels  in  another.  The  ex- 
pre  sions  are,  both  of  them,  accommodations 
to  human  modes  of  thought.  To  punish  the 
iu'iiabitants  of  the  earth  for  their  iniquity; 
literally,  to  visit  tlie  iniquity  of  the  inhabitant 
of  the  earth  upon  him.  The  earth  alsD  shall 
disclose  her  blood ;  literally,  her  bloods  ;  i.e. 
her  bloodshediliugs ;  the  many  murders 
committed  by  man  upon  her  surface. 
Isaiiih  denounced  "munlerers"  in  his  first 
chapter  (ver.  27).  Manasseh's  murders  were 
the  main  cause  of  the  first  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  (2  Kings  xxiv.  4).  The  second 
destruction  was  equally  a  jud{,'ment  for  the 
innocent  blood  that  had  beeu  shed  upon  the 
earth,  "  from  the  blood  of  righteous  Abel 
unto  the  blood  of  Zaoharias  son  of  Bara- 
chias"  (Matt,  xxiii  35).  Bloodshed  "cries 
to  God  for  vengeance"  (Gen.  iv.  10),  and 
will  be  one  of  the  main  causes  of  the  world's 
final  destruction  (Rev.  xvi.  6 ;  xviii,  20). 
And  shall  no  more  cover  her  slain,  "  There 
is  nothing  covered  that  shall  not "  in  the 
last  day  "bo  revealed,  and  hid  that  shall 
not  be  known"  (Matt.  x.  26).  Every 
murder,  however  secret,  will  be  brought  to 
light,  and  every  murderer,  however  unsus- 
pected previously,  denounced  and  punished. 


OH.  XXVI.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  TUB  PJJOPHBT  ISAIAH.  417 


HOMILETICS. 

Vew.  1 — 18.— HianksgMng  tJie  employment  of  the  saints  in  bUss,  The  prophet,  in 
this  sublime  passage  of  uis  prophecy,  carries  us  with  him  within  the  veil,  and  reveals 
to  us  the  very  words,  or,  at  the  least,  tlje  general  tone  and  tenor  of  utterances,  which 
the  saints  make  when  they  have  passed  from  earth  to  heaven,  and  stand  in  the  ver; 
presence  of  God.  The  words  are,  as  we  should  have  expected,  mainly  words  of  praise 
and  thanksgiving.     The  saints  praise  God — 

I.  Fob  the  blessings  of  tueib  actual  state,  which  is  (1)  one  of  complete  security ; 
(2)  one  of  perfect  peace ;  (3)  one  of  the  fullest  and  liveliest  trust. 

II.  FoK  HIS  MERCIES  IN  THE  PAST.  (1)  Towards  themselves ;  (2)  towards  his  enemies. 
Among  his  mercies  to  themselves  they  reckon  (a)  deliverance  from  the  malice  of  their 
foes ;  (&)  direction  of  their  own  paths ;  (c)  chastisements  which  brought  them  back  to 
God  when  they  were  straying  from  his  ways. 

III.  Fob  HIS  GLOBiouB  ATTRIBUTES.  E.g. "  Jehovah  is  everlasting  Strength  "  (ver.  4) ; 
He  is  "  the  Upright  One  "  (ver.  7),  full  of  "  majesty  "  (ver.  10)  and  "  glory  "  (ver.  15)  ; 
he  is  all-powerful  (vers.  5, 11, 14),  all-gracious  (vers.  3, 12, 15),  a  sure  Refuge  in  trouble 
(ver.  16).     While  the  occupation  of  the  saints  in  the  heavenly  sphere  is  mainly  to 

firaise  God,  they  also  confess  before  him  (1)  their  rebellions  against  him  while  in  this 
ife  (ver.  13) ;  and  (2)  their  impotency  to  effect  anything  important  by  their  own 
strength  (ver.  18).  It  is  remarkable  that  the  confession  of  weakness  is  that  with  which 
the  song  ends.  Must  we  not  conclude  that  humanity,  brought  into  the  presi?noo  (if 
God,  is  at  first  penetrated  by  no  feeling  so  much  as  by  a  sense  of  its  own  utter  powcr- 
lessncss  and  nothingness  ?  "  Lord,  what  is  man,  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him  '/  and 
♦he  son  of  man,  that  thou  visitest  him  ?  "  (Ps.  viii.  4),  is  the  cry  that  rises  to  man's  li  | « 
instinctively.  Later  on,  he  may  forget  self,  and  be  absorbed  in  the  contemplation  ol 
the  High  and  Holy  One,  and  be  content  to  hymn  ceaselessly  the  Revelation  songs, 
"  Salvation  to  our  God  which  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  "  (Rev.  vii. 
10) ;  "  Blessing,  and  glory,  and  wisdom,  and  thanksgiving,  and  honour,  and  power,  and 
might,  be  unto  our  God  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen  "  (Rev.  vii.  12) ;  "  Great  and  marvellous 
are  thy  works.  Lord  God  Almighty ;  just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  King  of  saints  " 
(Rev.  XV.  3).  Happy  for  him  when  self-consciousness  disappears,  and  God  is  to  him 
"All  in  all"! 

Ver.  19. — 2%e  doctrine  of  the  resurrection.  The  belief  in  a  future  life  and  a  future 
judgment  was  held  by  the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians  from  a  time  anterior  to  the 
departure  of  Abraham  from  Ur  of  the  Chaldees.  A  very  elaborate  doctrine  of  a  resur- 
rection was  also  held  by  the  Egyptians  from  an  extremely  rurnote  antiquity.  The 
Jews,  on  the  other  hand,  do  not  appear  to  have  had  definite  notions  on  the  subject  until 
the  period  of  the  Captivity.  It  is,  perhaps,  possible  to  account  for  the  indistinct  ami 
undeveloped  state  of  the  doctrine  among  the  early  Israelites  by  Uie  effect  upon  them  of 
their  Babylonian  and  Egyptian  experiences. 

L  The  Babylonian  view,  with  which  they  came  into  contact  Ji  Ur  of  the  Chaldees, 
was  the  following.  A  life  beyond  the  grave  was  expected;  but  the  duration  of  this 
life  was  quite  uncertain.  Merodach,  a  sun-god,  was  the  Duyan  nisi,  or  "judge  of 
men,"  and  by  liis  favour  the  souls  of  the  just  were  received  into  a  neavenly  abode,  where 
they  enjoyed  life  and  happiness  ('  Religions  of  the  Ancient  World,'  p.  63),  The  wicked 
descended  at  death  into  an  infernal  region,  where  there  was  no  enjoyment,  and  (appa- 
rently) suffered  different  degrees  of  punishment  according  to  their  deserts.  Fire  was, 
perhaps,  an  agent  in  their  suffering. 

II.  The  Egyptian. view  was  far  more  complete  and  elaborate.  The  Egyptians  held 
that  the  soul  was  quite  distinct  from  the  body,  and  that,  immediately  alter  death,  it 
descended  into  the  lower  world  (Amenti),  and  was  conducted  to  the  "hall  of  truth," 
where  it  was  judged  in  the  presence  of  Osiris  and  of  his  forty-two  assessors,  the  "  lords 
of  truth"  and  judges  of  the  dead.  Anubis,  the  son  of  Osiris,  who  was  called  "  the 
tirector  of  the  weight,"  Drought  forth  a  pair  of  scales,  and,  after  placing  in  one  scale  a 
figure  or  emblem  of  truth,  set  in  the  other  a  vase  coutainiug  the  good  deeds  of  the 
deceased,  Thoth  standing  by  the  while,  with  a  tablet  in  his  hand,  whereon  to  record 

ISAUH.  %  ■ 


418  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxvi.  1— 21, 

the  Tesult.  If  the  good  deeds  were  sufScient,  if  they  weighed  down  the  scale  wherein 
they  were  placed,  then  the  happy  soul  was  permitted  to  enter  "  the  boat  of  the  sun," 
and  was  conducted  by  good  spirits  to  the  Elysian  fields  (Aahlu),  to  the  "  pools  of 
peace,"  and  the  dwelling-places  of  the  blest.  If,  on  the  contrary,  the  good  deeds  were 
insufficient,  if  the  scale  remained  suspended  in  the  air,  then  the  unhappy  soul  was 
sentenced,  according  to  the  degree  of  its  ill  deserts,  to  go  through  a  round  of  transmi- 
grations in  the  bodies  of  animals  more  or  less  unclean ;  the  number,  nature,  an>l 
duration  of  the  transmigrations  depending  on  the  degree  of  the  deceased's  demerits,  and 
the  consequent  length  and  severity  of  the  punishment  which  he  deserved  or  the  purifi- 
cation which  he  needed.  Ultimately,  if  after  many  trials  sufficient  purity  was  not 
attained,  the  wicked  soul,  which  had  proved  itself  incurable,  underwent  a  final  sentence 
at  the  hands  of  Osiris,  supreme  judge  of  the  dead,  and,  being  condemned  to  complete 
and  absolute  annihilation,  was  destroyed  upon  the  steps  of  heaven  by  Sbu,  the  "  lord  of 
light."  The  good  soul,  having  been  first  freed  from  its  infirmities  by  passing  through 
the  basin  of  purgatorial  fire  guarded  by  the  four  ape-faced  genii,  was  made  a  companion 
of  Osiris  for  a  period  of  three  thousand  years,  after  which  it  returned  from  Amenti, 
re-entered  its  former  body,  rose  from  the  dead,  and  lived  once  more  a  human  life  upon 
the  earth.  This  process  was  gone  through  again  and  again,  until  a  certain  mystic  cycle 
of  years  became  complete,  when,  to  crown  all,  the  good  and  blessed  attained  the  final 
joy  of  union  with  God,  being  absorbed  into  the  Divine  essence  from  which  they  had 
once  emanated,  and  so  attaining  the  full  perfection  and  true  end  of  their  existence. 
With  this  elevating  belief  were  mixed  up  a  number  of  strange  superstitions,  not  very 
easily  reconcilable  with  the  main  creed,  yet  occupying  an  important  place  in  the 
thoughts  of  the  people.  The  soul,  notwithstanding  its  transmigrations  and  presence  in 
Amenti  and  Aahlu,  was  never  at  any  time  wholly  separated  from  its  body,  but  still 
inhabited  the  tomb,  partook  of  the  offerings  left  for  it,  and  even  had  meetings  and  held 
converse  with  the  souls  belonging  to  other  neighbouring  bodies.  It  could  at  all  times 
read  the  passages  from  the  "ritual  of  the  dead"  painted  on  its  sarcophagus,  or  its 
mummy-bandages,  or  the  inner  walls  of  its  tomb,  and  could  thus  refresh  its  memory  if 
at  any  time  in  its  long  journeyings  through  the  lower  world  it  failed  to  recollect  at  the 
right  moment  the  proper  invocation  or  prayer  under  circumstances  of  danger. 

HI.  The  Hebrew  view.  Coming  from  Babylonia  into  Egypt,  with  prohably  only 
■ome  vague  notions  of  an  after-life,  in  which  the  inequalities  of  this  life  should  be 
remedied  and  justice  meted  out  to  all,  the  Hebrews  were  brought  into  contact  with  the 
complicated  and  elaborate  creed  of  Egypt  upon  the  subject — a  creed  which  filled  the 
thoughts  of  the  Egyptians,  and  dominated  their  whole  life,  entering  into  all  their 
relations,  political,  social,  and  domestic.  This  creed  was  mixed  up  with  all  the 
intricacies  of  the  Egyptian  polytheism,  involved  acceptance  of  the  Osirid  myth,  acknow- 
ledgment of  half  a  hundred  deities,  and  adoption,  if  it  were  accepted,  of  numerous 
superstitious  practices.  Whatever  may  have  been  the  case  with  individuals  (Josh, 
xxiv.  14 ;  Ezek.  ix.  6 — 9),  the  Hebrews,  as  a  nation,  rejected  the  Egyptian  creed, 
viewed  it  as  corrupting  and  debasing,  and  put  it  aside  en  bloc,  without  troubling  them- 
selves to  sift  the  wheat  from  the  chaff,  the  grains  of  goM  from  the  mud  and  sand  in 
which  they  were  embedded.  The  rejection  of  the  imaginative  theosophy  of  Egypt 
produced  a  reaction  in  the  Hebrew  mind  towards  the  material  and  the  mundane.  1'hey 
seem  to  have  left  Egypt  with  less  definite  views  on  the  subject  of  a  future  life  than 
those  which  their  ancestors  had  had  in  Babylonia.  And  in  his  revelationa  from  Sinai 
it  did  not  please  Ghxi  to  enlighten  them.  Light  was  vouchsafed  them  gradually  through 
the  psalmists  and  prophets — by  the  present  statement  of  Isaiah,  by  Ezekiel's  vision  of 
the  dry  bones  (xxxviL  1 — 10)  and  the  teaching  which  followed  it  (vers.  11 — 14),  by 
Daniel's  prophecy  (xii.  2)  already  referred  to,  and  otherwise,  until,  in  the  time  of  the 
Maccabees,  their  faith  in  the  resurrection  wai  as  strong,  and  almost  as  full  and  definite, 
as  that  of  Christians  (see  2  Mace.  viL  9, 14,  23,  29,  36 ;  xii.  43,  44). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS 

Tan.  1 — ^IS. — 3^  viiiMt  ^future  ghry.    It  seems  best  to  take  this  m  the  plotuie 
of  an  ideal  spiritual  state, 
L  Tmt  mPBEOMABu  orrr.    It*  walls  and  outworks  an  **  salration."    A  p«at 


OS.  xxvi  1— 21.J    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  419 

word — negatively  hinting  deliverance  from  the  enemy  and  the  oppressor ;  positively 
including  all  the  contents  of  sacred  peace,  prosperity,  and  happiness.  But  salvation  is 
nothing  without  a  Saviour;  it  is  the  loving  presence  of  Jehovah  who  girds  ahout 
Jerusalem  as  a  wall.  In  Zech.  ii.  9  he  is  spoken  of  as  a  "  wall  of  fire."  In  another 
magnificent  image,  "  Round  about  are  the  everlasting  arms."  The  idea  of  the  Eden- 
garden  may  he  compared  with  that  of  this  fenced  city.  A  "  garden  walled  around,  a 
chosen  and  peculiar  ground,"  may  represent  the  mystical  Church  Lere,  the  celestial  state 
hereafter.     The  city  is  created  and  fortified  hy  the  Eternal. 

II.  The  celestial  obt.  The  command  ia  heard  from  heaven,  "Open  ye  the 
gates  I "  As  in  oh.  xl.  1,  from  the  same  quarter,  sounds  the  gracious  word,  "  Comfort 
ye  my  people!"  The  righteous  nation  that  keepeth  faithfulness  may  enter  tVie  Divine 
city.  The  emphatic  thought  is  that  this  city  is  to  be  the  scene  of  righteousness,  a 
contrast  to  the  state  of  "  this  world  which  passeth  away."  "  Open  to  me,"  exclaims  the 
psalmist,  "the  gates  of  righteousness:  I  will  go  into  them  and  praise  Jehovah;  the 
gate  of  Jehovah  into  which  the  righteous  shall  enter  "  (Ps.  cxviii.  19,  20).  And  again, 
in  another  sublime  passage,  "  Who  shall  ascend  into  the  hill  of  Jehovah  ?  or  who  shall 
stand  in  his  holy  place  ?  He  that  hath  clean  hands,  and  a  pure  heart "  (Ps.  xxiv.  3, 4). 
This  righteousness  of  mind  and  heart  is  the  gift  of  the  Divine  grace.  Purity  in  the 
human  spirit  is  at  once  the  reflection  of  God's  nature  and  the  condition  of  "  bebiolding  " 
him.  If  men  are  good  and  faithful,  it  is  because  their  souls  have  kept  walk  and 
converse  with  the  truthful  God  (Ps.  xxxi.  24).  And  this  they  have  only  learned  to 
do  S3  the  result  of  chastisement  and  the  experience  of  the  evil  of  other  ways.  "  The 
Church  was  always  like  a  barn  (Matt.  iii.  12),  in  which  the  chaff  is  mingled  with  the 
wheat,  or  the  wheat  overpowered  by  the  chaff."  When  the  Jews  came  back  from 
captivity,  it  was  with  purified  hearts ;  a  large  portion  of  the  filth  of  idolatry  had  been 
swept  away.  And  so  universally ;  it  is  "  out  of  much  tribulation,"  much  sifting  ou 
life's  floor,  that  we  must  enter  the  kingdom — that  the  pure  wheat  of  chastened  character 
must  be  gathered  into  the  celestial  barn. 

III.  The  attributes  of  Jehovah.  1.  The  firmness  of  his  purpose.  The  words  in 
ver.  3  are  differently  rendered :  "  a  steadfast  mind  thou  keepest  in ; "  "  firm  is  the  hope 
thou  wilt  form ; "  "  a  purpose  established  thou  purposest."  And  this  purpose  is  one  of 
peace.  He  "  thinks  the  thought  of  peace  "  (Jer.  xxix.  11).  Hence  the  attitude  of  the 
believer  is  one  of  fearless  and  fixed  repose ;  "  He  shall  not  be  mcjved  for  ever  .  .  .  shall 
not  be  afraid  of  evil  tidings:  his  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  Jehovah"  (Ps.  czii.  6,  7). 
This  being  of  ours,  in  itself  frail,  anxious,  feverish,  needs  steadying,  staying;  and  its 
only  sufficient  prqp  must  be  "Jehovah,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  in  truth  "  (oh.  x.  20). 
The  esseirtial  thing  in  faith  is  habitual  dependence ;  the  result,  ineffable  peace.  "  Peace, 
peace,"  are  the  prophet's  emphatic  words.  "He  refrains  from  epithets;  such  peace  is 
indescribable."  So  in  ch.  Ivii.  19,  "  Peace,  peace  to  him  that  is  far  off,  and  to  him  that 
is  near."  And  the  Christian  apostle  takes  up  the  thought  of  the  profundity  and 
unutterableness  of  this  bliss  of  the  soul,  "  The  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  under- 
standing, shall  keep  your  hearts  and  minds  through  Christ  Jesus  "  (Phil.  iv.  7).  2.  The 
constancy/  of  his  being.  Jah  Jehovah  is  a  Bock  of  ages,  and  may  be  trusted  in  for  ever. 
One  of  the  four  places  where  our  translators  have  retained  the  original  name  Jehovah, 
of  which  Jah  is  the  abridged  form  (Exod.  vi.  3;  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  18;  cb.  xii.  2).  The 
doubled  name  is  used  for  emphasis,  as  in  "  Peace,  peace,"  above ;  it  expresses  the  per- 
fection of  his  majesty,  wisdom,  holiness,  which  should  reflect  the  utmost  reverence  and 
the  most  absolute  trust  in  the  mind  of  the  believers.  And  "  Eock,  Bock  of  Israel,"  etc., 
is  another  of  the  sacred  names  of  the  Divine  Being  (ch.  xxx.  29 ;  see  Deut.  xxxii.  4, 
15,  18,  80,  31,  etc.).  Actively,  to  protect,  to  throw  the  cool  shade  of  his  protection  upon 
thetsufliering  of  his  people ;  passively,  to  resist  the  utmost  shock  and  assault  of  his  foes. 
The  noble  image  of  one  of  our  poets,  too  lofty  to  be  applied  to  mortal,  may  be  applied 
to  him— 

"As  some  tall  cliff  that  lifts  its  awful  form, 
Swells  from  the  vale,  and  midway  leaves  the  storm, 
Tho'  round  its  breast  the  rolling  clouds  are  spread. 
Eternal  sunshine  settles  on  its  head." 

Let  us  contemplate  the  nature  of  God ;  no  other  nature  yields  a  lasting  satisfaction  and 
repose  to  the  beholder.    "  As  soon  as  we  turn  aside  from  beholding  it,  nothing  is  7«aD 


420  THE  BOOK  OJP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxtl  1— 2L 

but  what  is  fleeting,  and  then  we  immediately  faint.  Thus  ought  faith  to  rise  aboTe  the 
world  by  continual  advances ;  for  neither  the  truth,  nor  the  justice,  nor  the  goodness  of 
Qod  is  temporary  and  fading,  but  God  continues  to  be  always  like  himself."  3.  His 
irretistible  power.  He  brings  down  the  lofty  and  the  proud.  Bulwarks,  armed  hosts, 
enormous  wealth,  are  of  no  avail  against  "  moral  influence."  And  when. we  thus  speak, 
we  mean  nothing  less  than  the  just  will,  the  fixed  purpose,  of  the  Eternal.  No  Babylon, 
no  Borne,  no  empire  built  on  force  and  fraud,  need  be  a  terror  to  the  faithful.  They,  at 
the  day  of  doom,  niust  "  melt  like  snow  at  the  glance  of  the  Lord,"  or  be  abased  even 
to  the  dust.  "  We  live  amidst  closing  histories  and  amid  falling  institutions ;  there  is 
an  axe  laid  at  the  root  of  many  trees;  foundations  of  fabrics  have  been  long  giving  way, 
and  the  visible  tottering  commences.  '  The  earth  quakes  and  the  heavens  do  tremble.' 
The  sounds  of  great  downfalls  and  great  disruptions  come  from  different  quarters ;  old 
combinations  start  asunder;  a  great  crash  is  heard;  and  it  is  some  vast  mass  that  has 
just  broken  off  from  the  rock,  and  gone  down  into  the  chasm  below.  A  great  volume  of 
time  is  now  shattering,  the  roll  is  folded  up  for  the  registry,  and  we  must  open  another. 
Never  again — never,  though  ages  pass  away — ^never  any  more  under  the  heavens  shall 
be  seen  forms  and  fabrics,  and  structures  and  combinations  that  we  have  seen.  The 
world  is  evidently  at  the  end  of  one  era  and  is  entering  upon  another ; "  but  the  "  Bock 
of  ages  "  will  remain,  and  the  Church  which  rests  upon  him,  "  to  enlighten  ignorance, 
to  fight  with  sin,  and  to  conduct  man  to  eternity  "  (Mozley).  4.  His  Just  dealings.  A 
plain  or  straight  path  is  made  for  the  righteous — one  free  from  obstacles  and  opposition, 
even  as  the  path  of  the  Eternal  himself  to  the  fulfilment  of  his  purposes  (cf.  Prov.  iii.  6; 
xi.  5 ;  XV.  19).  He  is  even  said  to  make  their  path  "  plain  with  a  level,"  4.e.  to  a  nicety. 
It  could  not  have  seemed  so  to  the  Jews  in  captivity ;  and  often  it  must  seem,  in  the 
midst  of  perplexity  and  distress,  far  otherwise  to  the  children  of  God  now.  Yet  what 
seems  to  be  a  "roundabout"  path  in  a  mountainous  country  may  actually  be  the 
shortest  irom  point  to  point.  So  with  the  ways  by  which  the  Lord  our  God  leads  his 
children  to  the  end.  The  direct  line  which  haste  and  impatience  would  take  is  not 
really  the  "  straight  path"  in  the  world  of  spirit.  Here,  when  we  seem  to  be  turning 
back,  we  may  be  really  moving  forward ;  we  may  seem  to  be  "  fetching  a  compass," 
none  the  less  certainly  may  be  advancing  by  the  safest  and  most  direct  rwd. 

IV.  SosG  OF  THE  Chubch.  A  meditation  on  the  ways  of  God,  and  the  relation  of 
the  believing  soul  to  him.  Waiting  for  God.  They  had  watched,  as  it  were,  for 
Jehovah  to  advance  along  the  great  way  of  judgment  by  which  he  was  to  proceed  to 
open  the  Messianic  kingdom.  Longing' for  the  revelation  of  him.  Oh  that  his  Name 
and  memorial  (two  expressions  for  one  idea)  might  be  known  1  The  Name  of  God  is 
God  revealed,  "  the  side  of  the  Divine  Being  turned  towards  man  "  (Ps.  xx.  1;  cf.  Ps. 
XXX.  27 ;  Ixiii,  9).  (For  the  meaning  of  "  memorial,"  cf.  Exod.  iii.  15 ;  Ps.  xxx.  4 ;  cxxxv. 
13  ;  Hos.  xii.  6.)  The  Messianic  hope.  The  judgments  of  God,  the  thought  is,  must 
prepare  for  the  new  kingdom,  for  the  reign  of  righteousness  in  the  world.  Calamities  are 
symptomatic  of  evils  needing  to  be  cleansed  away,  if  significant  of  the  hand  of  Jehovah 
at  work  in  reformation,  and  so  prophetic  of  a  new  era.  The  reign  on  Mount  Zion  will 
be  ushered  in  by  a  series  of  judgments  on  the  unbelievers  and  the  unrighteous,  i.e.  the 
heathen  as  opposed  to  the  worshippers  of  Jehovah.  Those  Judgments  are  a  necessity, 
Bighteousness  is  not  learned,  the  need  of  it,  the  beauty  of  it,  are  not  experienced,  except 
in  the  school  of  suffering,  of  Divine  chastisement.  The  effect  of  wealth  and  honour  and 
success  is  not  to  lead  men  to  God,  and  to  the  paths  of  rectitude'  and  religion.  Neither 
the  Divine  mercy,  nor  the  bright  example  of  others,  nor  the  general  tone  of  moral 
society,  have  sufficient  iufiuence  to  attract  the  inveterate  sinner  to  better  things.  In 
vain  the  light  is  poured  upon  the  morally  blind,  upon  those  who  "  will  not  behold  the 
majesty  ol  Jehovah."  In  vain  his  hand  is  lifted  up  in  judgment ;  their  insensibility 
prevents  them  from  perceiving  it,  though  they  are  acute  enough  in  their  observation  of 
tlie  trifling  interests  of  the  sensuous  life.  There  is  but  one  way  of  dealing  with  such 
iTisensibility.  Those  Judgments  will  he  ejfective.  They  shall  see  the  jealousy  of  Jehovah 
for  his  people  (cf.  Ps.  Ixix.  9),  for  flre  shall  devour  his  adversaries.  His  jealousy  is  like 
fire  (Ps.  Ixxix.  5 ;  Zeph.  i.  18).  In  consuming  it  purifies,  in  purifying  it  consumes 
(cf.  Deut.  xxxii.  22  ;  Job  xx.  26 ;  xxii.  20).  Bemorse,  shame,  envy,  indignation, — those 
fires  within  the  bosom  reflect  the  judgment  of  God ;  resistance,  rebellion,  impenitence^ 
\i.ake  them  unquenchable.    Peace  and  deliverance  for  the  chosen.    The  past  supfdies 


OH.  xxvL  1— 21.]    THE   BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  421 

arguments  of  hope  for  the  future.  A  work  has  hecn  accomplished  by  the  Church,  but 
this  is  Jehovah's  work  in  it  and  by  it.  The  deliverance  from  a  foreign  yoke  wa»  his 
work  also.  They  had  been  enslaved  to  other  lords  (cf.  ch.  Ixiii.  18),  and  they  had  done 
as  they  pleased  with  Israel.  But  they  have  been  swept  away  into  the  kingdom  of  the 
shades,  and  are  forgotcen,  "  From  past  events  and  benefits  received,  we  should  reason 
to  Gbd's  future  kindness,  and  infer  that  he  will  care  for  us  for  the  future.  God  is  .not 
like  man,  to  be  capable  of  weariness  in  doing  good,  or  exhausted  in  giving  largely  ,■ 
therefore  the  more  numerous  the  beneBts  with  which  he  has  loaded  us,  so  much  the 
more  ought  our  faith  to  be  strengthened  and  increased  "  (Calvin) ;  cf.  Fs.  cxxxviii.  8  ; 
Gen.  xxxii.  10, 12 ;  Phil.  i.  6.  "  Thee  only."  Under  the  dominion  of  Jehovah  alone  is 
peace,  blessedness,  liberty,  to  be  found. 

*  He  is  a  freeman  whom  the  truth  makes  tieo, 
And  all  are  slaves  beside. ' 

J. 

Vers.  16 — 21. — The  resurrection  of  Israel.  The  population  of  Judah  hag  been 
increased,  and  its  borders  extended.  (For  this  cause  of  rejoicing  of.  ch.  ix.  2 ;  xlix.  19, 
20;  liv.  1,  etc. ;  Micah  ii.  1,  2 ;  iv.  7;  Obad.  19,  20.)  Probably  he  is  thinking  of  the 
population  and  strength  of  the  land  in  the  clays  of  David  and  Solomon,  as  typical  of 
what  is  again  to  be  in  the  happier  times.  But  actually  a  period  of  gloom  and  suffering 
must  precede  the  glorious  restoration. 

L  The  period  or  trouble  and  bxpectation.  It  is  a  pathetic  picture  of  the  soul 
in  its  attitude  of  anxious  suspense.  Jehovah  was  missed  and  longed  for  as  the  Light 
which  seems  to  tarry  in  the  dark  days  of  winter.  Prayer  was  poured  forth ;  and  there 
was  a  period  of  acute  suffering  like  that  of  the  mother  preceding  the  birth  of  a  child. 
Hope  was  deceived  and  disappointed  again  and  again  (cf.  ch.  xiii.  18 ;  xxi.  3).  Still  the 
land  was  not  blessed,  still  the  population  was  not  restored.  The  prophet  is  thinking  of 
the  days  after  the  return  firom  exile. 

n.  The  ebsubbeotion  of  the  people.  "Thy  dead  shall  live."  "Sublimely 
recovering  himself,  the  prophet  cries  that  God's  saints,  though  they  are  dead,  shall  live," 
and  shall  share  the  duties  and  privileges  of  regenerate  Israel.  The  prophet  sees,  as  it 
were,  his  countrymen  returning  from  the  under-world.  So  speaks  Hosea :  "  After  two 
days  will  he  revive  us :  on  the  third  day  he  will  raise  us  up,  and  we  shall  live  in  his 
sight"  (vi.  2);  cf.  the  vision  of  Bzekiel — the  valley  of  the  dry  bones  (xxxvli.  1 — 10). 
With  lively  faith  anticipating  the  event,  he  calls  upon  the  new  population  to  awake  and 
cry.  It  is  as  if  a  dew  had  fallen  on  the  baixen  land.  This  "  dew  of  lights"  is  thought 
of  as  something  supernatural,  existing  before  the  sun.  In  Ps.  ex.  3  the  ordinary  dew 
is  born  out  of  the  morning  shower.  "The  dew  from  the  glory  of  God  falls  like  a 
heavenly  seed  into  the  bosom  of  the  earth;  and  in  consequence  of  this,  the  earth 
gives  out  from  itself  the  shades  which  have  hitherto  been  held  fast  beneath  the  ground, 
BO  that  they  appcsar  alive  again  on  the  face  of  the  earth"  (Delitzsch).  There  is  thus  a 
connection  between  light  and  life,  so  often  found  in  conjunction  in  religious  thought 
(Ps.  xxxvi.  9 ;  Job  iii.  16—20 ;  John  i.  4).  For  as  the  return  of  the  morning  light  is 
coincident  with  the  refreshment  of  the  strength,  and  the  awakening  to  new  effort, 
so  in  all  spiritual  parables  of  the  revival  of  the  nation  or  the  individual,  light  brings 
life.  The  renaissance  of  knowledge  precedes  or  coincides  with  the  reformation  of 
manners,  the  stir  of  new  activities,  the  beginning  of  a  new  era.  And  this  connection 
should  never  be  forgotten,  "  And  God  said,  Let  there  be  light."  Even  so ;  and  the 
darkness  of  superstition,  of  prejudice,  of  obscurantism,  must  be  symptomatic  of  moral 
death.  As  the  light  arouses  the  sleeper,  so  the  sleeper  must  bestir  himself  to  greet  it 
and  rejoice  in  it,  "  Awake,  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  sWl 
give  thee  light." 

in.  Eetuen  to  8ELF-C0MJIDN10M.  From  this  enrapturing  vision  the  prophet 
returns  to  the  present,  with  all  its  sobering  and  in  part  depressing  circumstances. 
"  He  has  gained  on  behalf  of  his  people  the  comforting  certitude  that  a  great  exhibition 
of  the  Divine  justice  is  on  the  point  of  taking  place ;  and  his  counsel  is  to  withdraw 
from  the  doomed  into  the  privacy  of  communion  with  God  "  (Cheyne).  While  the 
storm  of  Divine  judgment  is  sweeping  by,  let  the  people  of  God  betake  themselves  to 
<olitud«  and  prayer  (of,  Fs.  zsvii,  6 ;  xxxi.  21 ;  Matt.  vi.  6).    The  opening  of  the  dooc 


122  THE   BOOK  OP   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxn.  1— 21 

of  the  prayer-cliamber  is  in  times  of  distress  the  opening  of  the  door  into  another  world 
than  this — a  scene  of  serenity  and  elevation.  In  the  presence  of  our  Father  who  seeth  in 
secret,  the  problems  of  the  hour  are  solved,  or  cease  unduly  to  harass  the  mind.  That 
which  threatened  to  crush  us  is  surmounted  by  the  new  energy  of  the  spirit  her«  imparted. 

"Prayer  ardent  opens  heaven,  lets  down  a  stream 
Of  glory  on  the  consecrated  hour 
Of  mnn  in  audience  with  the  Deity ; 
Who  worships  the  great  Go^  that  instant  join* 
The  first  in  heaven,  and  sets  his  foot  on  hell." 

And  it  is  but  for  "  a  little  moment "  that  the  wrath  will  last  (cf.  ch.  x.  24,  25 ;  Ut.  7,  8 ; 
Ps.  XXX.  6).  "  Just  as  Noah,  behind  whom  Jehovah  shut  the  door  of  the  ark,  was 
hidden  in  the  ark  while  the  floods  of  judgment  poured  down  without,  so  should  the 
Church  be  shut  off  from  the  world  without  in  its  life  of  prayer,  because  a  judgment  of 
Jehovah  was  at  hand  "  (Delitzsch). 

IV.  The  coming  foeth  of  Jehovah.  (Cf.  Micah  i.  3.)  Where  is  the  "place"  of 
Jehovah  ?  It  is  the  supernatural  sphere ;  and  every  great  manifustation  of  judgment 
mingled  with  mercy  is  a  "  coming  forth  of  Jehovah."  Here  it  is  expressly  for  judgment 
to  punish  men  who  have  incurred  blood-guilt,  which  is,  in  other  words,  sin.  Yet  in  the 
heart  of  judgment  still  his  pity  and  consolation  live,  and  we  "  should  keep  it  constantly 
before  aui  eyes,  when  the  wicked  slay,  mock,  and  ridicule  ns,  and  inflict  upon  us  every 
kind  of  outrage  and  cruelty,  God  will  at  length  make  known  that  the  cry  of  innocent 
blood  has  not  been  uttered  in  vain;  for  he  never  can  forget  his  own  people"  (Luke 
xviii.  7). — J. 

Ver.  9. — Seeking  Ood  in  the  night.  "With  my  soul  have  I  desired  thee  in  the 
night."  When  God's  judgments  are  in  the  earth,  even  the  righteous  become  more 
earnest.  They  need  the  quickening  of  spirit  which  comes  fnjm  marking  "  the  way," 
the  sure  way,  and  sometimes  the  swift  way,  of  God's  judgments.  Buc  the  night  must 
be  taken  in  a  personal  sense  as  well  as  in  a  national  sense. 

I.  Wb  debibe  God  nf  the  night  of  oub  sobeows.  Thick  clouds  come  over  the 
heart.  We  are  no  longer  surrounded  by  bright  skies  and  pleasant  sounds.  We  have 
come  to  the  wilderness  side  of  life.  The  morning  of  our  expectations  has  given  place 
to  the  noonday  of  our  toil,  and  to  the  evening  of  our  disappointment.  The  beautiful 
dream  is  over,  and  earthly  joys  are  only  passing  guests.  At  eventide  they  are  gone. 
The  soul,  sitting  alone,  feels  how  unrequited  has  been  the  love  of  God.  Alone  in  the 
darkness  it  seeks  bis  face. 

II.  Wk  desibb  God  in  the  night  of  otte  doubts.  These  will  come.  Old  evidences 
do  not  afford  us  the  same  basis  of  faith.  New  difficulties  come  face  to  face  with  the 
intellect.  Mysteries  born  of  experience  oppress  the  heart.  Before,  perhaps,  we  were  hard 
and  dogmatic  to  all  who  differed  from  us ;  before  we  were  inclined  to  think  that  doubt 
was  in  itself  a  sin,  and  not  the  exquisite  action  of  a  sincere  mind.  Now  we  sit  in 
darkness,  and  there  is  temporary  eclipse  of  faith.  What  we  want  is  God  himself — ^the 
living  GtoA,  God  in  Christ ;  and  we  are  thankful  if  we  can  but  "  touch  him."  We  feel 
how  blessed  religion  is,  even  when  our  evidences  are  darkened,  and  with  our  soul  we 
desire  God  in  the  night. 

IIL  Wk  debibe  Gk)D  in  th«  night  of  oub  befabatiohs.  They  must  come.  Be 
the  tie  ever  so  tender,  it  must  be  cut ;  and  we  must  say  or  look  farewell,  or  perchance 
hear  of  the  death  of  some  beloved  one  in  a  foreign  land.  These  tragedies  are  about  us 
every  day.  New  habiliments  of  mourning  are  put  on  every  hour.  No  "  touch  of  a 
vanished  hand."  Nothing  below  but  empty  space !  Then  the  soul  cries,  "  0  God,  be 
not  far  from  me  ] " 

IV.  Wb  desibb  Qov  in  thb  night  of  oub  own  depabtueb.  And  it  m  night.  To 
the  Christian,  who  looks  through  it  to  the  morning,  who  believes  in  the  better  country, 
and  who  sees  the  light  of  the  new  Jerusalem  flickering  up  into'  the  sky  as  he  ascends 
through  the  darkness, — still  to  him,  strong  as  he  may  be  in  foith  and  hope,  death  is  a 
dark  hour.  But  One  alone  can  lighten  that.  Not  lover,  acquaintance,  mother,  or 
friend.  No.  "  Whas  I  pass  throng  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  thou  art  wi^ 
m"— W.  M.  S. 


CH.  xxvL  1— 21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  423 

Ver.  16. — Prayer  in  trouble.  "  Lorfi,  in  trouble  have  they  visited  thee,  they 
poured  out  a  piaver  when  thy  chastening  was  upon  them."  The  "other  lords," 
mentioned  in  the  thirteenth  verse,  are  all  impotent  in  the  hour  of  tribulation.  Truly 
they  are  dead,  as  Carlyle  says.  "  These  idols  of  yours  are  wood ;  you  pour  wax  and 
oil  on  them ;  the  flies  stick  on  them ;  they  are  not  God,  I  tell  you ;  they  are  black 
wood."  So  at  the  Beformation.  Speaking  of  Luther,  he  says,  "The  quiet  German 
heart,  modest,  patient  of  much,  had  at  length  got  more  than  it  could  bear.  Formalism, 
pagan-popeism,  and  other  falsehood  and  corrupt  semblance,  had  ruled  long  enough; 
and  here  once  more  was  a  man  found  who  durst  tell  all  men  that  God's  world  stood, 
not  on  semblances,  but  realities ;  that  life  was  a  truth,  and  not  a  lie ! "  There  are 
idolatries  in  every  age ;  but  the  idols  of  rank  and  fame  and  pleasure  are  of  no  avail 
in  the  hour  of  trouble. 

I.  Here  is  eeception.  The  Lord  receives  them.  He  does  not  spurn  their 
approach  because  they  have  kept  away  till  then.  The  great  Father  never  reproaches 
the  repentant,  returning  Israel.  No.  Unlike  the  proud,  resentful  spirit  of  man,  "  the 
Lord  God  is  gracious  and  merciful,  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kindness."  The  haughty 
spirit  of  man  would  resent  the  approach  of  one  who  was  simply  driven  by  stress  of 
weather  into  the  haven  of  his  protection. 

II.  Hebe  is  bealitt.  They  are  filled  with  earnestness.  It  is  no  easy  ritual  of 
the  lips.  They  "poured  out"  a  prayer.  Very  expressive  indeed  is  that.  The  rock 
was  rent,  and  the  waters  flowed  forth.  The  poor  bruised  heart  could  contain  its  agony 
no  longer.  There  was  confession.  There  was  that  blessed  "  outness  "  which  of  itself 
brings  relief.  These  men  had  seen  the  pouring  forth  of  the  swollen  Jordan,  and  of  the 
storm-filled  streams  of  Lebanon.  So  is  it  that  the  earnestness  of  the  soul  at  once 
engages  the  attention  and  interest  of  God.  It  matters  little  whether  prayer  be  liturgical 
or  free,  whether  it  be  in  the  sanctuary  or  the  closet,  so  long  as  the  soul  seeks  God  as 
the  hart  desireth  the  water-brooks ;  and  the  literal  rendering  of  "  prayer  "  here  is  "  secret 
speech." 

III.  Hebe  is  disoiplink.  "  When  thy  chastening  was  upon  them."  This  is  very 
different  from  self-chosen  and  self-inflicted  chastisement.  Some  Cliristians  in  every 
age  have  become  self-tormentors :  some,  with  the  Flagellants,  in  the  infliction  of  physical 
torture,  and  some  in  constant  introspection — painful  searching  of  their  own  motives, 
and  mourning  over  their  own  want  of  faith  and  of  feeling.  But  this  text  speaks  of 
God's  own  discipline — a  Father's  discipline,  and  therefore  a  wise,  a  kind,  and  a  safe 
discipline.  Moreover,  it  is  but  for  "  a  season."  We  read,  "  when  thy  discipline  was 
upon  them,"  which,  in  its  very  language,  suggests  that  it  is  not  »  lasting  condition. 
The  Jews  came  back  from  exile.  Their  punishments  for  idolatry  gave  place  to  pardon 
and  restoration.  So  it  is  now.  God  dues  not  delight  in  the  sufferings  of  his  children. 
"  Tribulation  worketh  patience ; "  our  "  weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy 
cometh  in  the  morning."  In  the  heart  of  the  prickly  encasement  there  is  opening  out 
a  beautiful  flower. — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  6 — 7,  8  (latter  half). — 1%«  righteousness  of  OocFa  rule.  I.  Its  appabent 
ABSENCE.  We  still  find  on  the  earth  "them  that  dwell  on  high" — the  arrogant,  the 
presumptuous,  the  oppressor ;  there  is  to  be  seen  "  the  lofty  city,"  exalted  in  its  pride 
of  power,  dealing  its  blows  upon  the  weak  and  suffering,  fearing  not  God  nor  regarding 
the  rights  of  men.  In  every  age,  beneath  every  sky,  these  men  and  these  cities  have 
been  known.  To  those  who  have  been  humiliated  and  ill  treated,  God  has  seemed 
absent;  his  righteousness  has  appeared  afar  off;  their  cry  has  been,  "How  long,  0 
Lord,  how  long  dost  thou  not  avenge,"  etc.  ?  Among  such  suffering  and  perplexed  ones 
are  down-trodden  peoples,  persecuted  Churches,  wronged  individual  men  and  women. 

II.  Its  assertion  in  due  timb.  The  justice  of  God  "  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth." 
It  m»x  be  truer  to  say  that  it  waits  in  patience  for  the  hour  of  manifestation  ■  then  it 
descends  ;  and  it  appears :  1.  In  the  utter  overthrow  of  iniquity.  The  lofty  are  laid 
low,  the  proud  city  is  broiight  down  to  the  ground  (ver.  5).  Instead  of  power  is  utter 
en/eeblementj  the  weapon  of  cruelty  is  stricken  out  of  its  hand,  the  words  of  condem- 
nation and  cursing  are  taken  out  of  its  mouth.  Instead  of  honour  is  humiliation , 
the  throne  is  exchanged  for  the  very  dust  of  the  ground ;  and  instead  of  unholy  joy 
is  hopeless  miiery.    2.  In  the  exaltation  of  rectitude  (ver.  6).    Those  who  hare  been 


124  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PEOPHET  ISAIAB.    [ca.  xxvt.  1— 21. 

reduced  to  poverty  and  need  by  the  unscrupulonsness  of  the  sinful  will  accede  to  their 
heritage  of  power,  of  wealth,  of  pleasure,  or — what  is  hetter  than  these— of  influence, 
of  Bufficieney,  of  thankfulness.  3-od,  the  Most  Upright  One,  smooths  the  patli  of  the 
jnst  (ver.  7),  makes  it  level,  enables  the  righteous  to  pursue  their  way  of  fruitful 
activity,  of  Divine  worship,  of  holy  joy. 

ni.  The  effect  of  its  assertion.  "  When  God's  judgments  ar«  in  the  earth,"  t.«. 
when  the  righteousness  of  God  is  seen  and  felt  in  the  infliction  of  penalty  on  the  guilty 
and  the  levelling  of  the  path  of  the  just,  then  "  the  inhabitants  .  .  .  learn  righteous- 
ness" (ver.  8).  1.  The  devout  are  confirmed  in  their  devotion,  and  they  cleave  to  God 
and  to  his  service.  2.  The  waverers  are  decided,  and  they  resolve  to  unite  themselves 
with  his  people.  3.  The  presumptuous  are  alarmed,  and  they  may  be  awakened  and 
redeemed.  This  is  Gud's  intention  in,  and  is  tiie  fitting  end  of,  his  Divine  judgments , 
it  is  our  folly  and  our  sin  if  we  allow  that  purpose  to  be  defeated.— 0. 

Vers.  8,  9. — Athirst  for  God.  "  The  desire  of  our  soul  is  to  thy  Name  .  .  .  with 
my  soul  have  I  desired  thee."  The  primary  refeience  here  is  to  the  hope  of  troubled 
hearts  for  Divine  deliverance ;  but  the  words  of  the  text  are  suggestive  of  the  general 
truths — 

I.  That  man  is  constituted  to  crave  after  God.  We  have  many  indications  of 
this  truth.  We  find  it  in  the  facts  that :  1.  The  noblest  spirits  among  cultivated 
peoples  find  their  chief  joy  in  communion  with  him.  2.  The  worthiest  spirits  among 
uncultivated  peoples  have  been  athirst  for  God.  3.  Beligious  truth  and  Divine  wor- 
ship prove  a  powerful  attraction  to  the  vast  majority  of  mankind.  4.  Every  human 
being  is  foiind  to  possess  a  capacity  for  religious  knowledge  and  devotion.  6.  Human 
life  without  God  is  found  to  be  constantly  unsatisfying  aud  restless. 

II.  That  this  God  ward  aspiration,  dulled  by  sin,  is  often  awakened  by 
affijction.  "  I  desired  thee  in  the  night."  Our  interest  in  God,  reduced  by  the 
various  harmful  and  despoiling  influences  of  a  sinful  society,  sometiines  so  reduced  as 
to  be  practically  lost,  is  often  awakened  by  afiliction  of  some  kind.  It  is  not  until 
the  soul  is  brought  down  very  low  by  sickness,  by  calamity,  by  bereavement,  by 
treachery  and  disappointment,  or  by  earthly  failure  and  disenchantment,  that  it  finds 
its  deep  and  sore  need  of  a  heavenly  Father,  of  an  unfailing  Friend,  of  a  heavenly 
treasure.  When  thus  injured  and  spoiled  by  sin,  it  is  not  until  our  souls  are  made  to 
see  their  sinfulness  in  a  fierce  and  awful  light  that  we  crave  and  cry  out  for  an 
almighty  and  all-suflici(!nt  Saviour  ;  hut  then  we  do. 

III.  '1'hat,  reawakened  in  adversity,  it  becomes  a  permanent  habitudk  of  the 
FOUL.  "  With  my  spirit  .  .  .  will  I  seek  thee  early."  Whether  or  not  we  find  this 
doctrine  in  the  text,  we  find  this  truth  in  the  will  of  God ;  and  God  expects  to  find  this 
fact  in  human  experience.  It  is  bitterly  disappointing  to  the  good — and  is  it  not  a 
disappointment  to  the  Good  One? — when  they  who  have  been  brought  to  the  throne  of 
grace  by  reflection  are  found,  in  after-days  of  comfort  and  sunshine,  to  leave  the 
sanctuary  unvisited,  and  to  walk  on  their  way,  godless,  prayerless,  hopeless.  Such 
men  (1)  defeat  God's  kind  purposes;  (2)  add  iniquity  to  their  iniquity;  (3)  most 
seriously  endanger  their  own  future  (see  ch.  i.  5). — 0. 

Ver.  10. — Guilty  insensibility.  The  wise  and  good  man  will  learn  something  from 
everything;  the  foolish  and  sinful  man  will  learn  notliing  from  anything.  In  what- 
ever accents  God  may  speak,  this  latter  hears  not  his  voice,  and  heeds  not  his  will ; 
he  is  guiltily  insensible  to  all  kinds  of  heavenly  influence ;  he  is — 

I.  Untouched  by  the  visitation  of  God's  goodness.  He  does  not "  learn  righteous- 
ness, thoush  "  favour  be  showed  "  to  him  by  God.  God  may  be,  as  he  is,  multiplying 
his  mercies  unto  him,  so  that  they  are  as  the  sands  of  the  sea — ^innumerable ;  visiting 
him  by  day  and  by  night  with  loving-kindnesses  continually  renewed,  besetting  him 
behind  and  before  with  his  guardianship,  laying  his  hand  of  gentle  power  upon  him 
in  guidance  and  in  blessing.  But  all  is  lost  upon  him — he  is  unmindful  of  everything ; 
he  does  not  "  learn  righteousness ; "  he  goes  on,  if  not  in  oppression,  or  in  vice,  or  in 
open  atheism,  yet  in  a  guilty  forget  fulness,  in  an  unfilial  indifference  and  ingratitude. 

II.  UNDrrLUENCED  BY  HUMAN  EXAMPLE.  "In  the  land  of  uprightness  he  deaU 
unjustly."    Around  him  are  men  worshipping  God,  working  devot^j  in  his  causey 


cii.  XXVI.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  Of  THE  PROPHET  ISATAH.  425. 

living  in  accordance  with  his  will,  illustrating  Christian  virtues  in  the  daily  tnns- 
actions  and  in  the  common  relationships  of  life,  bearing  the  best  witness  to  the  power 
and  the  excellency  of  Divine  truth,  supplying  a  source  of  influence  which  ought  to  tell 
on  a  human  heart  and  to  mould  human  character;  but  this  is  of  no  avaiL  The 
hardened  heart  is  unmoved,  its  apathy  is  undisturbed,  its  course  .unchanged. 

III.  Uhafucted  by  the  evidences  op  God's  oebatnbss.  "He  will  not  behold 
the  majesty  of  the  Lord."  There  are  three  ways  in  which  the  majesty  or  the  greatneas 
of  God  is  revealed  to  us,  all  of  which  deserve  and  demand  our  most  patient  and  devout 
attention.  1.  In  the  material  world.  In  the  sky,  in  the  sea,  in  the  mountain,  in  the 
storm,  in  the  earthquake,  etc.  "  With  God,"  as  manifested  thus,  "  is  terrible  majesty  " 
(Job  xxxvii.  22) ;  and  he  who  does  "not  regard  the  works  of  the  Lord,  nor  the  opera- 
tions of  his  hand,"  is  guiltily  blind  to  the  majesty  of  the  Lord.  2.  In  Divine  providence. 
The  majestic  holiness  of  God  is  seen  in  the  revelation  of  his  wrath  against  impurity, 
intemperance,  violence,  passion,  and  all  other  evils;  also  in  the  revelation  of  his 
approval  of  righteonsness  and  peace,  in  the  ordering  of  our  human  lives.  Whoso  i« 
unobservant  of  this  is  a  wickedly  dull  scholar  in  a  world  where  such  plain  lessons  are 
to  be  learnt.  3.  In  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  There  the  majesty  of  God's  character 
shines  forth,  and  we  see  "  the  light  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesua  Christ." 
In  the  Incarnation  itself,  in  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  wverity  of  the 
sorrows  he  bore,  in  the  depth  of  .the  shame  to  which  he  stooped,  in  the  awful  moral 
grandeur  of  the  death  he  died,  in  the  unspeakable  glory  of  his  heavenly  mission, — there, 
indeed,  is  the  majesty  of  the  Lord  to  be  seen.  He  who  will  not  dwell  on  this  as  on 
that  which,  above  all  other  things,  is  worthy  of  his  most  patient  and  reverent  regard, 
is  one  of  "  the  wicked,"  with  whom  God  "  is  angry." 

Lessons.  1.  Let  us  be  thankful  if  we  are  hearing  and  heeding  the  voice  of  God,  if 
we  are  opening  our  hearts  to  the  heavenly  influence.  2.  Let  us  take  earnest  heed  to 
>he  fact  that  a  guilty  inattention  leads  on  and  down  to  a  fatal  deafness. — 0. 

Vers.  12 — 18. — The  argument /ram  the  past.  Great  things  are  represented,  by  the 
prophetic  voice,  to  have  been  done,  and  these  furnish  the  strongest  reason  to  expect 
great  things  in  the  future. 

I.  1'hb  great  things  God  has  done  fob  us.  1.  Se  has  heard  our  cry  in  the  day 
of  distress  (vers.  16,  17).  Few  things  go  home  to  our  hearts  more  readily  than  the 
words  of  the  psalmist,  "  I  cried  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  me."  It  is  a  great  thing 
to  have  been  heard  of  God,  to  have  gained  his  pitilul  ear,  and  to  have  enjoyed  his 
merciful  consideration;  that  amid  the  millions  of  his  chiWren  he  has  distinguished  us 
and  bent  on  us  his  benign  regard.  2.  He  has  granted  full  deliverance.  "  Other  lords 
.  .  .  have  had  dominion  .  .  .  but  [now]  thee  only  will  we  celebrate ;  they  are  dead; " 
their  very  memory  is  perishing  (vers.  13, 14).  We  may  have  been  under  the  dominion 
of  some  cruel  vice  (lust,  or  avarice,  or  intemperance),  or  of  "  the  world  "  (1  John)  ;  but 
in  the  mercy  of  God  these  spiritual  adversaries  have  been  defeated,  have  been  slain, 
they  are  no  more  to  be  dreaded,  and  now  a  Divine  Redeemer  is  the  Object  of  our 
adoration  ;  for  him  we  live,  his  honour  we  seek,  his  Name  we  strive  to  glorify  (ver.  15), 
iij  his  iioly  and  ennobling  service  we  spend  our  days  and  our  powers.  3.  He  has  granted 
npiritttal  enlargement.  (Ver.  15.)  "  Thou  hast  increased  the  nation,  0  Lord."  To  some, 
especially  to  thise  whnra  he  redeems  Irom  the  bondage  of  vice  or  crime,  God  grants 
material  enlargement,  the  improvement  of  their  estate,  the  brightening  of  their  life,  the 
broadening  of  their  sphere.  To  all  who,  at  the  touch  of  his  liberating  band,  come  out 
of  spiritual  captivity  into  the  freedom  of  his  children,  he  gives  spiritual  advancement, 
increase  of  knowledge,  of  joy,  of  love,  of  influence,  of  hope.  As  we  love  and  serve 
Christ,  we  are  enlarged  on  every  hand — the  horizon  of  our  souls  is  removed  beyond  its 
former  bounds. 

II.  The  akqumbnt  therefrom.  The  fact  that  God  has  done  such  great  things  for 
us — and  all  that  has  been  done  for  us  has  been  wrought  by  him  (ver.  12 ;  and  see 
Ps.  Ixxxvii.  7) — is  a  strong  reason  to  expect-other  gracious  things  in  the  future.  "  Thou 
wilt  ordain  peace  for  us"  (ver.  12).  It  is  a  scriptural  argument  that  the  conferring  of 
greater  blessings  is  a  security  to  us  for  the  possession  of  smaller  ones  (see  Matt,  vi.  25 ; 
Kom.  viii.  32 ;  Ps.  Ivi.  13).  The  gifts  of  God  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  (1)  his 
8»0it  costly  gifts,  (2)  his  most  valuable  gifts,  may  be  to  as  »  strong  assuranca  that 


426  THE   BOCK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxvi.  1— 21. 

God  will  not  only  "  ordain  peace  "  in  life  and  at  death,  but  also  lead  us  along  all  the 
path  of  life,  and  receive  us  to  his  presence  and  glory  when  our  earthly  course  is  run. — C. 

Ver.  19  (with  ver.  14). — Contrasted  issues.  Taking  ver.  19  as  it  surely  should  be 
taken,  in  connection  aid  ii  contrast  with  ver.  14,  and  understanding  the  primary 
reference  of  both  of  them  to  be  to  the  hopes  of  the  Hebrew  nation  at  the  time  of 
the  prophecy,  we  have  our  attention  called  to — 

L  The  issue  of  unkighteousness — death.  1.  It  tends  to  fatal  ruin.  The  tyrants 
of  Babylon,  being  overthrown,  should  rise  up  no  more,  should  never  regain  their 
position,  were  as  dead  men  whose  day  was  hopelessly  and  irretrievably  gone.  All 
unrighteousness  tends  to  the  same  issue ;  it  leads  down  to  loss,  to  overthrow,  to  shame, 
to  a  depth  of  ruin  from  which  there  is  no  recovery.  At  length  the  guilty  man  (party, 
nation)  is  down  so  low  that  those  who  look  on  say,  "He  (it)  is  dead ;  he  shall  rise  no 
more."  2.  It  travels  fast  to  the  grave.  Guilty  violence  (Ps.  Iv.  23;  cxl.  11)  and 
shameful  vice  (Prov.  ii.  18;  ix.,I8)  make  a  quick  passage  to  the  tomb.  3.  It  sinks 
into  permanent  oblivion.  God  makes  "  their  memory  to  perish  "  (see  Ps.  xxxiy.  16 ; 
Pr©v.  X.  7 ;  Eccles.  viii.  10).  No  man  cares  to  remember  those  whose  lives  have  been 
disgraced  by  sin ;  their  names  lie  unmentioned,  and  their  memory  fades  from  view  till 
it  is  lost  in  the  thickening  shadows  of  time.  4.  It  goes  down  to  the  death  which  is 
etemaL    "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death." 

IL  Thk  issue  of  bighteousness — REVIVAL.  "Thy  dead  men  shall  live."  God's 
people  who  have  fallen  till  they  have  seemed  to  be  wholly  lost  shall  be  recovered  and 
shall  reappear.  Bighteousness  is  immortal ;  it  cannot  be  buried  and  forgotten  and  lost. 
1.  It  commonly  ends  in  restoration  to  power  and  position.  Joseph  is  cast  into  pi4son. 
but  he  comes  out  to  be  the  first  minister  in  Egypt.  David  is  driven  into  the  caves,  but 
he  comes  forth  to  sit  down  upon  the  throne.  The  persecuted  people  of  God,  whether  in 
Babylon,  in  the  Vaudois  valleys,  in  Holland,  in  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,  in  the  woods 
and  rocks  of  Madagascar,  come  forth  when  the  "  red,  right  hand  "  of  cruelty  is  stricken 
down,  and  appear  as  those  that  have  risen  from  the  tomb.  2.  It  secures  an  earthly 
immortality — that  of  a  lasting  recollection :  "  The  righteous  shall  be  had  in  everlasting; 
remembrance"  (Ps.  cxii.  6;  Prov.  x.  7) :  that,  also,  of  abiding  influence ;  for  the  effect 
of  their  holy  lives  and  true,  faithful  words  shall  go  down  to  distant  generations.  8.  It 
issues  in  eternal  blessedness.    The  righteous  shall  go  into  "  life  eternal." — C. 

Ter.  20. — TTie  duty  (/retirement.  There  are  periods  in  a  nation's  history,  and  there 
are  times  in  a  good  man's  life,  when  it  is  well  to  hear  and  wise  to  heed  the  admonition, 
"  Enter  thou  into  thy  chambers,  and  shut  thy  doors  about  thee."  We  may  let  this 
language  suggest  to  us  that  we  should — 

L  Make  timb  foe  devout  reflection.  In  busy,  ojitwardly  active  times,  when 
there  is  an  imperious  demand  on  every  hand  for  "  work,"  there  is  uigetrt  need  that  this 
eounsel  should  be  given  and  be  taken.  Enter  into  the  chamber  of  solemn  and  sacred 
meditation ;  consider  what  is  your  present  spiritual  coiiditioa ;  estimate  the  progress  you 
are  making  in  your  course ;  reflect  upon  the  swift  and  steady  passage  of  your  life ;  realize 
that  the  time  is  not  far  off  when  all  earthly  interest  will  be  nothing,  and  when  it  will 
be  everything  to  know  that  the  righteous  Judge  is  well  pleased  with  the  witness  you  ave 
bearing  and  the  work  you  are  doing. 

IL  Compel  bach  day  to  yield  np  houb  of  direct  intercoukse  with  God.  We 
cannot  live,  spiritually,  on  public  devotion.  Nothing  will  nourish  the  soul  in  the 
absence  of  private,  individual  fellowship  with  God.  "  Enter  into  thy  closet,  and  when 
thou  hast  shut  thy  door,  pray  ...  in  secret "  (Matt.  vi.).  The  most  pressing  cares, 
domestic,  or  official,  or  public,  will  not  excuse  the  neglect  of  private  commiinion  with 
God.  If  Paniel,  with  all  the  cares  of  Babylon  upon  him,  found  time  to  pray  three 
times  a  day  regularly  (Dan.  vi.  10),  we  can  compel  our  duties  to  make  room  for 
devotion.  Every  day  let  God  speak  to  us,  and  let  us  speak  to  him,  within  the  shut 
doors  of  our  own  chamber. 

IIL  Take  dp  the  attitude  of  reverent  expectation.  There  are  times  when 
man  can  do  nothing  more  than  he  has  done,  and  all  that  is  left  is  patient  waiting  for 
God.  "And  now,  Lord,  what  wait  I  for?  my  hope  is  in  thee."  This  may  be  the  attitude : 
I.  (y  th»  diligent,  waiting  God's  increase  on  his  industry.   2.  0/the  disciplined,  waiting 


CB.  XXTI.  1— 21.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH  427 

God's  crowning  of  bis  patience ;  whether  of  the  embarrassed,  of  the  sick,  or  of  the 
defamed.  It  is  to  these  that  the  words  of  the  text  are  most  applicable ;  for  it  is  they 
who  are  to  wait  for  a  little  while,  "  until  the  indignation  be  overpast,"  i.e.  until  the 
hour  of  deliverance  is  fully  come,  and  the  work  of  redetuption  has  been  wrought.  But 
we  may  also  regard  this  as  the  attribute :  Z.  0/lht  co-worker  with  Christ,  waiting  the 
Divine  blessing  on  his  zeal. — 0. 

Ver.  1. — Z%«  htltuark  of  salvation.  Two  suggestions  are  made  concerning  the  associ- 
ation of  this  figure  in  the  mind  of  Isaiah.  Some  think  he  had  in  view  the  circumstances 
of  the  Assyrian  invasion  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah,  and  designed  to  assure  the  people 
that,  however  boastful  might  be  the  Assyrian  words,  and  however  terrible  the  appear- 
ance of  the  Assyrian  armies,  they  were  safe,  because  the  defence  of  God  was  better  than 
the  mightiest  walls,  or  the  loftiest  towers,  or  the  most  destructive  weapons.  In  pre- 
paration for  the  assault  of  the  Assyrians,  Hezekiah  had  done  all  in  his  powur  to  fortify 
and  defend  Jerusalem;  but,  in  the  doing  of  his  best,  his  trust  was  still  in  the  Lord  his 
God ;  and  he  looked  for  "  walls  and  bulwarks "  in  the  salvation  which  God  promised 
him  by  Isaiah.  But  others  regard  this  song  as  prepared  beforehand,  in  anticipation  of 
the  deliverance  from  Babylon,  and  possession  again  of  the  holy  city,  though  then  it 
would  be,  for  many  years,  a  city  without  walls  or  bulwarks,  and,  even  from  human 
points  of  view,  altogether  dependent  on  the  Divine  defence.  J.  A.  Alexander  says, 
"  The  condition  and  feelings  of  the  people  after  their  return  from  exile  are  expressed 
by  putting  an  ideal  song  into  their  moutlis.  Though  the  first  clause  does  not  necessarily 
mean  that  this  should  actually  be  sung,  but  merely  that  it  might  be  sang,  or  that  it 
would  be  appropriate  to  the  times  and  feelings  of  the  people,  it  is  not  at  all  improbable 
that  it  was  actually  used  for  this  purpose,  which 'could  more  readily  be  done  as  it  is 
written  in  the  form  and  manner  of  the  psalms,  with  which  it  exhibits  many  points  of 
resemblance."  It  would  be  quite  in  harmony  with  other  parts  of  Scripture  prophecy  to 
regard  Isaiah  as  having  in  mind  both  present  and  future  circumstances;  and  it  is 
usually  safe  to  recognize  an  immediate  historical  reference.  The  two  associations  of 
the  song  will,  therefore,  give  us  our  two  points  for  consideration :  1.  God's  salvation 
may  come  in  what  he  does  for  us,  or  outside  us.  2.  God's  salvation  may  come  in  what 
he  does  by  us,  or  within  us. 

L  God  may  defend  us  bt  what  hb  does  fob  us.  In  the  case  of  Hezekiah, 
Jerusalem  was  saved  by  the  sudden  and  overwhelming  destruction  of  Sennacherib's 
army.  In  this  we  may  find  a  type  of  all  the  cases  in  which  men  have  been  saved  by 
the  Divine  mastering  of  their  circumstances.  But  all  these,  which  may  be  called 
"  spectacular  salvations,"  have  for  their  chief  design  to  enable  us  to  apprehend  those 
far  higher  moral  and  spiritual  salvations  that  are  wrought  within  us.  The  outward 
has  little  interest  in  itself.  Our  chief  interest  in  events  lies  in  their  illustration,  for 
those  who  are  dependent  on  the  senses,  of  moral  and  spiritual  processes.  The  Bible 
is  full  of  records  of  God's  outward  salvations.  They  begin  with  the  dividing  of  the 
Bed  Sea,  when  the  people  were  bidden  to  "  stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  God." 
They  are  dotted  all  over  the  story  of  the  wanderings.  They  appear  again  and  again  in 
the  time  of  the  Judges.  Asa,  Jehoshaphat,  and  Hezekiah  have  such  stories  of  Divine 
deliverance  and  protection  to  repeat;  and  psalmists  of  all  the  ages  join  the  chorus  that 
follows  Moses'  great  song,  "  The  Lord  is  my  Strength,  and  my  Song,  and  he  is  become 
my  Salvation."  We  still  may  hold  fast  our  confidence  that  God  is  working  for  us  in 
our  circumstances,  and  even  by  the  discomfiting  of  our  foes,  and  making  for  us  plain 
paths.  The  God  of  providence  is  in  our  life ;  and  in  his  rule  of  the  events  of  our  lives 
we  too  can  see  his  salvation.  Keen  vision  of  God's  working  in  things,  persons,  and 
events  outside  us  we  ought  ever  to  cultivate ;  but  the  cultivation  is  a  work  of  exceeding 
difficulty  in  this  sensuous  and  scientific  age,  when  man,  Ms  skill  and  his  triumphs, 
are  so  unduly  honoured. 

n.  God  mat  DBrBiro  08  bt  wtbat  he  dobs  withdi  us.  He  may  give  us  a  spirit 
of  wisdom  and  good  counsel,  so  that  the  action  we  take  shall  be  prudent ;  and  in  this 
way  security  and  even  rescue  from  peril  are  oftentimes  obtained.  In  times  of  anxiety 
less  importance  attaches  to  what  our  foes  do  than  to  what  we  do ;  and  so  God's  grace 
in  us,  God's  salvation  of  us,  is  the  thing  of  supreme  concern  to  us.  Our  salvation 
comes  by  this,  "  He  strengtheueth  us  with  strength  in  our  soul,"    It  follows  upon  the 


-128  THE  BOOK   OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxti.  1— 21. 

fulfilment  of  this  assurance,  "The  meek  will  he  guide  in  judgment,  and  the  meek  will 
tie  teach  his  waj'."  When  the  exiles  went  back  to  a  Jerusalem  that  was  without  walls 
or  defences,  God  kept  them  safe  by  helping  them  to  act  prudently,  and  to  avoid  giving 
offence  to  those  around  them.  Looked  at  in  this  light,  how  full  all  our  lives  are  of 
Divine  salvations  !  Every  circumstance  of  difficulty  and  trial ;  every  time  of  perplexity, 
when  decisions,  on  which  the  most  serious  consequences  depended,  had  to  be  made, 
is  seen  to  be  a  time,  or  a  circumstance,  in  which  God  saved  us  by  giving  grace,  wisdom, 
guidance,  prudence,  or  good  judgment.  Either  by  help  within  us  or  without  ug,  God 
will  surely  prove  a  '•  strong  Salvation  "  to  all  who  put  their  trust  in  him. — R.  T, 

Ver.  3. — Perfect  peace  out  of  trutt.  Literally,  "  Peace,  peace ; "  the  Hebrew  super- 
lative form  •meaning  the  "  greatest,  or  perfect  peace " — ^inward  peace,  outward  peace, 
peace  with  God,  peace  of  conscience,  peace  at  all  times,  under  all  events,  God's  own 
peace,  the  peace  which  God's  own  Son  knew,  and  left  as  his  legacy  to  his  disciples. 
These  two  last  expressions  giTC  us  two  divisions  for  our  subject. 

L  God  gives  thosh  who  tkcst  hix  his  own  peace.  1.  Ood's  peace  is  the  result 
of  his  inward  harmony.  There  are  no  conflicts  within  him.  And  this  seems  an 
amazing  thing  to  us,  who  never  do  the  right  save  after  a  fight  with  the  wrong  in 
which  we  have  come  off  conquerors.  As  a  living  Being — a  Person — we  must  think  of 
God  as  having  mind,  will,  affection-^,  emotions,  attributes,  and  relations  to  others  outside 
himself.  He  is  One.  But  in  our  idea  of  the  unity  of  God  we  include  the  manifold 
comprehensiveness  of  God ;  and  we  understand  that  in  him  is  perfect  peace,  because 
there  is  harmony ;  jud;iment  never  conflicts  with  feeling,  will  never  struggles  against 
desire.  Every  line  tends  to  the  focus  of  Divine  purpose ;  every  power  combines  to 
execute  the  Divine  thought.  Sometimes  our  idea  of  the  Divine  peace  is  spoiled  by 
representations  tliat  are  made  of  the  work  of  redemption,  as  if,  in  connection  with  it, 
his  justice  was  in  antagonism  with  his  mercy,  and  his  Law  made  hard  terms  with  his 
love.  Surely  that  redemption  is  the  work  of  Divine  peace ;  it  is  the  outgoing  of  his 
whole  being  towards  us  in  the  harmony  of  pitying  love. 

"  Still  hushedly,  hushedly,  snowed  down  the  thought  Divine^ 
And  in  a  voice  of  most  exceeding  peace,  the  Lord  said 

(While  against  the  breast  Divine  the  waters  of  life  leapt,  gleaming,  gladdening), 
'  Let  the  man  enter  in.' " 

(B.  Buchanan.) 

2.  Oofft  peace  follows  on  his  ahoveness.  A  word  has  to  be  coined  to  express  thii 
thought.  We  feel  that  we  should  be  at  peace  if  we  could  get  above.  God  is  above : 
not  in  the  conflict  which  we  know,  but  calm  in  the  vision  of  it  all ;  calm  in  seeing  the 
end  from  the  beginning;  peaceful  as  the  doctor  is  when,  above  the  patient,  he  reads 
the  issue  of  the  disease;  peaceful  as  the  teacher,  who  is  above  the  child,  and  knows 
perfectly  what  is  causing  it  so  much  care  and  toil.  A  little  picture  in  the  Leeds 
Exhibition  showed  us  how  man  may  feel  God's  peace  out  of  his  ahoveness.  An  old 
farm-labourer,  dressed  in  his  long  patched  brown  smock  and  clouted  boots,  and  grasping 
tremblingly  his  stick,  was  looking  up  at  a  little  opening  that  appeared  in  a  dull,  heavy, 
leaden  sky.  A  grand  old  face,  seamed  and  lined  with  years  of  poverty,  toil,  and  care, 
but  full  of  the  peace  which  God  alone  can  give ;  tears  were  glistening  in  the  eyes,  and 
standing  ready  to  drop ;  but  smiles  were  breaking  through,  as,  remembering  sorrows  in 
the  home  and  weary  burdens  on  the  heart,  he  sweetly  said,  "  Up  beyant  is  the  bine 
sky."  Peace  and  God,  he  knew,  were  up  above ;  over  there.  3.  Ood^s  peace  attends  on 
his  righteousness  and  love.  Nothing  can  disturb  the  peace  of  him  who  alway  doeth 
right,  and  is  love.  Peace  and  HighteousneJis  go  hand-in-liand — twin  sisters — througli 
all  creation.  They  live  and  toil  and  die  together.  And  in  the  heart  and  home  of  God 
th^y  have  dwelt  together  from  everlasting,  before  the  earth  and  the  world  were  formed. 
So  he  is  the  God  of  peace. 

n.  God  gives  those  who  trust  him  his  Son's  peace,  it  is  one  thing  to  admire 
the  peace  of  God,  but  quite  another  thing  to  feel  that  it  may  become  ours,  that  it  can 
ever  be  the  possession  and  the  power  of  a  Tnan.  The  contrasts,  Goci,  man,  strike  us  as 
too  severe.  The  step  of  descent  is  too  vast.  We  want  a  Mediator.  We  ask  for  some 
instance  in  which  God's  peace  can  be  seen  in  a  man.    And  that  is  one  of  the  revelatioim 


CH.  ixvi.  1—21.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  429 

made  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  prophesied  of  as  the  Prince  of  Peace.  He  was  the 
Teacher  of  peace.  He  is  our  Peace.  He  knew  the  peace  passing  understanding.  His 
peace  was  the  peace  of  God,  for  it  also  came  from  inward  harmony,  from  abovenesg,  and 
from  the  intertwinings  of  righteousness  and  love.  But  it  also  was,  characteristically, 
man's  peace.  It  was  such  a  peace  of  mind  and  heart  as  we  may  know ;  and  from  Christ 
we  may  learn  what  its  sources  are.  Man,  too,  may  reach  the  restfulness  of  inward 
harmony.  Man,  too,  may  rise  above  the  petty  disturbances  of  life.  Man,  too,  may 
win  the  perfect  rule  of  righteousness  and  love.  But  it  is  Christ  who  teaches  us,  and 
shows  us  how,  and  gives  us  strength  to  win.  He  reveals  the  three  great  sources  of 
peace  for  man,  and  they  are  found  to  be  these — trust,  submission,  and  obedience. 
Trust  that  says,  "  The  Lord  knoweth  the  way  that  I  take."  Submission  that  says, 
"The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  talsen  away."  Obedience  that  says,  "My  meat 
and  my  drink  is  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me,  and  to  finish  his  work."  These  are 
the  sources  of  peace  for  man,  for  they  were  the  sources  of  peace  for  njaii's  Head,  the 
"  Man  Christ  Jesus."  Nay,  but  there  is  an  earlier  secret  than  this,  li)  Christ,  fur 
man,  is  tlie  great  peace.  Peace  with  God,  before  we  can  have  peace  in  Gud,  and  so  the 
peace  of  God  ruling  in  our  hearts.  We  "  liave  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ ; "  and  his  work  in  us  involves  such  a  change  in  us,  such  a  moral  regeneration 
and  renewal,  as  can  only  find  fitting  activity  in  lives  of  peacefulness  and  "sweet  reason- 
ableness." Yes,  man  can  have  God's  peace;  for  he  is  u  spiritual  being,  made  in  the 
image  of  God.  He  feels  like  God.  He  thinks  like  God.  He  wills  like  God.  He  loves 
like  God.  And  he  can  be  at  peace  like  God.  All,  indeed,  within  limitations  and  in 
narrow  measures ;  but  the  passing  clouds  can  find  a  true  mirror  in  a  wayside  pool  as 
well  as  in  a  mighty  mountain-lake.  A  dewdrop  will  hold  the  si  n^hine  iu  its  tiny 
ball;  and  the  mighty  forest  oak  will  go  into  the  limits  of  the  acorn-seed.  God  can 
give  his  own  eternal  peace  to  man,  his  creature.  He  will  give  it,  he  does  give  it,  to  all 
who  put  their  trust  iu  him. — B.  T. 

Ver.  4. — The  call  to  continuous  trust.  "  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord /or  ever."  The  words 
"  for  ever  "  in  the  prophetical  books  are  a  figure  for  "  always,"  "  continuously,"  under 
all  conditions;  even  in  times  when  trust  seems  to  have  no  foundations  we  may  keep  on 
trusting,  because  our  trust  really  is  in  God. 

L  We  cannot  keep  on  trusting  if  oub  trust  is  in  things.  "The  fashion  of 
this  world  passeth  away ; "  "  Here  we  have  no  abiding  city ; "  "  Moth  and  rust  corrupt, 
and  thieves  break  through  and  steal."  So  often  things  will  not  be  "  according  to  our 
mind."    Often  we  sadly  say  that  "  nothing  is  stable,"  and  "  we  are  sure  of  nothing." 

II.  We  cannot  keep  on  trusting  if  oub  trust  is  in  man.  For  the  pain  of 
life  is  our  disappointment  in  our  best-loved  friends.  Live  on  to  old  age,  and  we  are 
almost  alone ;  some  are  changed,  and  some  are  dead,  and  some  have  proved  unworthy. 
"  Cease  ye  from  man." 

IIL  We  cannot  keep  on  trusting  if  oub  trust  is  in  self.  The  self-revelations 
which  come  with  advancing  years  humble  us  in  the  dust.  Youth  can  have  its  self- 
confidences.  But  man  has  learned  the  life-lesson  badly  if  he  is  not  ready  to  say,  "  It 
is  not  iu  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps." 

IV.  Wb  can  keep  on  trusting  if  oub  trust  IB  IN  Jehovah.  For  he  is  what 
he  was ;  he  mil  be  what  he  is  and  has  ever  been.  He  is  an  "  everlasting  Eock."  He 
has  been  abundantly  proved.  Secure  and  blessed  always  are  they  who  put  their  trust 
in  him.— E.  T. 

Ver.  7. — 2%e  levd  path  of  the  good  man.  This  verse  would  better  read, "  The  way  of 
the  just  is  evenness ;  thou,  most  upright,  dost  make  even  the  path  of  the  just."  Tliis 
suggests  the  two  topics — (1)  ihe  prevailing  feature  of  the  good  man's  conduct ;  (2)  the 
aid  which  God  gives  towards  maintaining  that  feature. 

I.  The  pbevailino  feature  of  the  good  man's  conduct — evenness.  The  idea 
of  the  word  may  be  expressed  in  New  Testament  language  as  "  patient  continuance  in 
weU-doing."  The  triumph  of  the  good  man's  life  is  steady  walking,  never  running,  and 
never  dragging,  in  the  way  of  righteousness.  Evenness  may  suggest  "  rectitude  " — the 
ruling  of  all  conduct  and  relations  by  the  sensitiveness  to  that  which  is  right  and  kind. 
Or  it  may  snggest  "  consistency  " — a  shaping  of  all  actions  into  the  harmony  of  godly 


430  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxvi.  1— 2L 

principles.  Or  it  may  suggest  the  correction  of  the  varying  experience,  now  of  mountain 
heights  of  emotion,  and  now  of  dark  valleys  of  depression ;  the  good  man  learns  to 
prefer  the  level  road.  Or  it  may  suggest  the  quietness  of  the  good  man's  life.  It  flows 
on  like  the  smooth  river,  that  never  roars  in  flood,,  always  breathing  out  its  blessing, 
always  singing  its  low  sweet  song,  always  moving  on  to  the  ocean  of  God.  But  tc 
describe  any  man's  life  as  evenness  reminds  us  at  once  that  evenness  is  something  won ; 
it  is  not  sinful  man's  natural  state,  it  is  a  triumph  out  of  struggle.  The  man  who  gains 
it  at  last  must  have  known  much  levelling  of  mountains,  raising  of  valleys,  and  making 
rough  places  plain.  This  may  be  illustrated  by  the  labour  and  skill  demanded  in  the 
making  of  a  good  plain  level  road  through  a  country  of  hills  and  marshes.  Compare 
Bunyan's  figure  of  the  varied  pilgrim-path  of  "  Christian."  Many  of  us  can  only  say, 
"  Our  path  should  be  level,  and  we  wish  it  were." 

II.  The  aid  which  God  gives  towards  maintainino  this  fbatukb.  We  might 
have  said,  gaining  and  maiutaining  it;  for  only  through  grace  can  we  win  the  true  con- 
sistency of  goodness,  or  continue  in  it.  Isaiah  comforts  good  people  with  the  assurance 
that  God  is  ever  "  making  even"  their  path  ;  working  tuilh  tliera,  and  working  through 
them,  to  this  good  end.  He  removes  stumbling-blocks  which  are  too  big  for  them. 
He  reveals  to  them  the  things  that  make  their  way  uneven.  He  maintains  within  them 
the  desire  for  righteousness.  He  guides  every  practical  endeavour  alter  goodness  and 
charity.  He  makes  the  "  plain  path  for  our  feet."  If  any  man  would  be  holding  fast 
his  integrity,  he  may  be  sure  that  God's  hand  is  upon  his  hand. — B.  T. 

Ver.  8. — Attitude  in  times  qf  jttdgment.  "  In  the  way  of  thy  judgments,  0  Lord, 
have  we  waited  for  thee."  The  connections  of  this  chapter  need  some  careful  attention. 
The  prophet,  in  the  twelve  preceding  chapters,  has  given  visions  of  the  judgments  that 
were  ready  to  fall  on  the  nations  surrounding  Israel — judgments  in  which  Israel  itself 
must  share,  since  Israel  had  shared  in  the  idolatries  and  the  moral  evils  which  bad 
called  those  judgments  forth.  To  most  of  the  nations  Divine  judgments  would  prove  to 
be  desolation  and  destruction ;  an  irrecoverable  doom.  To  Israel,  because,  even  in  its 
shame  and  sin,  some  held  fast  by  righteousness  and  Ood,  judgment  would  be  but  chas- 
tisement, by  means  of  which  the  nation  should  be  purified  and  established.  Tyre 
should  he  wiped  away ;  its  place  would  be  no  longer  known ;  the  fouudation  of  her 
palaces  should  be  for  the  spreading  of  the  fisherman's  nets.  Babylon  should  be  brought 
low,  even  to  the  dust ;  no  shepherd's  hut,  no  wandering  Arab's  tent,  should  rise  on 
her  foundations ;  the  glory  of  Nebuchadnezzar  should  be  the  place  of  the  satyr  and 
the  owl  and  the  wild  beasts  of  the  desert.  But  Israel  should  oome  out  of  its  time  of 
judgment  renewing  its  youth,  purged  from  its  idolatries,  and  witnessing,  with  a  clearer 
voice  than  ever  before,  to  its  great  truth,  "The  Lord  Jehovah  is  one  Lord.'.*  The 
prophet,  in  his  vision,  sees  these  judgments  pass  one  by  one ;  but,  looking  on  beyond 
them,  he  sees  the  ransomed  of  Israel  reileemed  and  saved,  and  he  presents  us  before- 
hand with  the  song  which  they  would  unite  to  sing  in  the  raptures  of  their  deliverance. 
By  telling  the  people  the  song  which  their  noblest  and  best  would  sing  when  trials 
had  wrought  out  their  blessings,  Isaiah  teaches  them  the  spirit  which  they  ought  to 
cherish  now,  as  they  anticipated  the  judgments,  or  were  wearying  themselves  under 
their  burden.  By-and-by  they  would  rejoice  that  they  had  held  fast  by  God  under 
the  gloom.  Then  "  wailing  on  him,  and  waiting  for  him,"  is  just  the  attitude  they 
should  seek  and  cherish. 

I.  Viewed  in  one  way,  the  circumstances  through  which  Israel  would  be  passing 
would  be  jnoGMENTS  of  God  ;  but  viewed  in  another  way,  they  would  only  be  the 
obdinart  commonplace  facts  of  their  national  life.  The  growth  into  over- 
whelming power  of  some  nations,  until  they  swallowed  up  all  the  smaller  nations 
around  them,  became  proud,  tyrannical,  and  luxurious ;  lost  national  virtue,  and  fell  a 
prey  to  the  enterprise  and  energy  of  fresher  and  -younger  nations.  This  process  the 
Israelites  actually  saw  going  on,  at  different  stages,  in  the  kingdoms  around  them. 
The  laws  that  ruled  it,  the  final  results  of  it,  they  could  not  discern,  and  they  must 
have  been  gravely  bewildered  by  it.  All  the  more  because  they  had  themselves  to 
suffer  from  the  encroachments  of  these  rising  monarchies.  In  those  trying  days  It 
could  not  have  been  an  easy  thing  for  a  Jew  to  hold  fast  his  faith  in  God.  Beasoning 
could   explain   so  little.    Iniquity   seemed  to  be  triumphing  over  good.    Jehovah 


tfB.  xivi.  1—21,]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  431 

appeared  to  have  loosed  his  hand,  and  left  the  world  to  riot  in  its  self-will.  Those  were 
great  men  indeed  who  could  rise  above  the  disasters  and  the  helplessness  of  the  times, 
and  stay  themselves  on  God,  and  hope  in  him,  and  wait  for  him. 

II.  Bat  that  was  quite  A  modei.  obnisration.  Each  age,  though  expressing  itself  in 
new  forms  and  terms,  may  find  its  own  perplexities  mirrored  there.  Early  times  had 
their  chief  difSculties  in  outward  things,  such  as  the  aggrandizement  of  world-conquerors, 
and  the  debasing  effect  of  idolatrous  systems.  As  the  world  grows  older,  the  perplexities 
and  the  trials  of  faith  come  more  and  more  out  of  intellectual  and  moral  conditions  ; 
and  we  incline  to  think  that  it  is  much  harder  work  to  hold  on  to  God,  with  patient 
waiting,  in  times  of  mental  and  moral  CQnfusion  than  when  the  earth  is  disturbed  with 
sword  and  spear  and  shield.  Perhaps  never  were  men  called  to  steady  themselves  on 
God,  and  wait  on  him  in  the  way  of  his  judgments,  as  we  are  called.  There  are  two 
peculiarities  of  our  time  which,  seen  on  the  one  side,  are  just  facts  of  life,  but  seen  from 
the  other  side  are  judgments  of  God  in  the  midst  of  which  we  are  to  wait  upon  him. 

1.  The  disposition  to  accomplish  all  things  by  human  effort,  apart  from  God.  Man, 
according  to  present-day  teaching,  is  to  be  the  Saviour  and  Salvation  of  man.  Let  but 
every  man  lift  up  his  brother — so  they  say — and  the  world's  golden  age  shall  dawn ; 
but  the  light  that  lightens  it  shall  be  the  brilliancy  of  human  genius,  and  not  the 
"  glory  of  the  Lord."  2.  The  confusion  which  advancing  knowledge  has  seemed  to 
iutroduce  into  both  doctrines  and  morals.  Some  of  the  greatest  men  of  science  have 
been  reverent  men  who,  while  searching  with  a  free  spirit  into  all  that  can  be  known  of 
creation,  yet  held  God  fast  in  the  arms  of  trustful  love,  and  found  traces  of  his  handi- 
work in  everything  they  examined.  But  not  a  few  are  over-ready  to  discover — some- 
times even  ready  to  manufacture — antagonisms  between  reason  and  revelation.  And 
even  the  best  of  us  cannot  fail  to  be  influenced  by  the  atmosphere  of  doubt  which  has 
thus  been  created  for  us.  We  know  what  mental  struggle  means.  We  know  what  it 
is  to  search  after  truth  that  seems  ever  to  glide  beyond  our  grasp.  We,  too,  are  walking 
in  the  way  of  God's  judgments,  and  blessed  are  we  if  we  can  truly  say,  "  In  the  way  of 
thy  judgments,  O  Lord,  have  we  waited  for  thee." 

We  gather  two  lessons  from  these  considerations.  1.  The  hottom,  the  foundation,  the 
rest,  of  all  things  is  Ood.  The  first  truth  which  the  child  le.irns  is  the  truth  of  God. 
The  utmost  truth  towards  which  human  intellects  and  human  hearts  can  push  their 
devious,  struggling  way,  is  God.  The  simplest  word  that  infant  lips  can  utter  is  "  God ; " 
the  largest  and  awe-fullest  word  that  can  bum  upon  an  archangel's  lips  is  the  Name 
of  God.  That  man  knows  something  who  knows  a  little  of  God.  That  man  knowi 
nothing — all  he  may  seem  to  know  is  not  within  the  sphere  of  true  being — who  does 
not  know  God.  The  steadying,  the  resting,  of  a  man's  soul  is  impossible  save  in  God. 
"  Who  is  a  Eock  save  our  God  ?  "  Then  our  supreme  work  in  life  must  be  tu  know  Ood 
— to  know  him  by  "waiting  upon  him;"  to  know  him  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ. 

2.  And  we  learn  that  those  who  would  hold  by  God  will  have  to  "waif^  for  him.  God 
tests  the  trusting  ones  by  his  mysterious  doings  and  dealings.  He  hides,  as  it  were, 
behind  the  clouds  and  the  darkness  that  encircle  his  throne.  He  is  even  to  be  waited 
on  in  the  "  way  of  his  judgments."  And  such  a  spirit  of  waiting  alone  can  preserve  us 
amid  the  judgments.  It  lies  at  the  very  basis  of  noble  and  regenerate  character.  And 
all  life  is  to  us  according  to  our  character.  "  To  the  pure  all  things  are  pure ;  to  the 
impure  nothing  is  pure."  To  the  bad,  godless  man,  the  highest  mercies  become  curses ; 
the  self-centred  character  can  make  poison  even  out  of  angels'  food.  To  the  bad  man, 
punishments  are  ruin,  desolation,  woe;  even  as  to  heathen  nations  these  prophetic 
burdens  were  unredeemable  calamity.  But  to  the  good  man,  the  God-centred  man, 
punishments  are  but  chastisements,  out  of  which  are  wrought  "  the  peaceable  fruits  e( 
righteousness."  It  has  been  said  that  the  "dealings  of  God  are  punishments  to  the 
wicked,  but  chastisements  to  the  righteous."  It  should  rather  be  said  that  there  is  no 
difference  in  the  Divine  dealing — judgments  come  both  on  the  righteous  and  on  the 
wicked ;  but  the  attitude  in  which  we  meet  the  judgments  makes  all  the  difference. 
The  ungodly  man  bruises  himself  "against  the  bosses  of  Jehovah's  buckler."  The 
godly  man — who  "  waits  on  the  Lord  " — bends  to  bear  the  rod  of  his  heavenly  Father's 
chastening.  To  the  godless  man  life  is  just  stern  iron  and  brass ;  but  the  Christian 
man,  having  learnt  of  God,  is  alchemist  enough  to  turn  all  he  touches  to  finest  gold. 
Then  "  trust  in  tha  Lord  for  ever :  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  i«  everlastiDg  strength.'. 
.-B.T. 


432  THE  BOOK  OF    THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    t™-  s^vi.  1—21 

Yer.  13. — Full  allegiance  to  Jehovah.  This  may  be  regarded  as  still  a  part  of  the 
Eong  which  the  exiles  would  sing  when  the  way  was  made  plain  for  their  return  to  their 
own  beloved  land.  The  way  would  not  be  plain  until  the  great  oppressing  city  of 
Babylon,  and  the  great  oppressing  dynasty  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  had  been  humbled. 
Then  God  would  "  ordain  peace  "  for  his  people ;  and  then  the  full  and  glad  allegiance 
of  big  people  to  him  could  be  fully  and  freely  expressed  and  manifested.  The  answering 
spiritual  truth  is  that  we  are  under  the  tyranny  of  other  lords — "  the  lust  of  the  flesn, 
the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life."  Even  while  we  struggle  and  suffer  under 
their  oppression,  the  power  of  this  "  body  of  sin  and  death,"  we  may  hold  fast  our 
allegiance  to  God  in  heart  and  purpose ;  and  we  may  look  on  to  the  time  that  is 
speedily  coming,  when  God  shall  himself  accomplish  our  deliverance,  and  then  our 
allegiance  shall  gain  full  and  hearty  expression ;  we  shall  praise  him  only,  we  shall 
serve  him  only,  and  praise  and  serve  him  as  we  ought.  Getting  illustration  from  the 
historical  circunibtances,  we  may  set  forth  this  point  in  its  personal  applications  under 
three  divisions. 

I.  Israel's  times  of  oppression  ukdeb  heathen  rulers.  These  include  the 
oppression  under  Pharaoh  in  Egypt;  the  inroads  of  neij^hbouring  nations  in  the  times 
of  the  Judges;  the  temporary  supremacy  of  the  Philistines;  the  degrading  supremacy 
of  foreign  idolatrous  systems  in  tlie  age  of  the  later  kings ;  the  crushing  of  the  national 
life  by  the  self-aggrandizmg  Assyrians  and  Babylonians.  Israel  had  a  full  ezperience  ol 
the  power  of  the  oppressor,  many  "  other  lords  "  had  held  dominion  over  Israel.  These 
may  represent  the  tyrannies  of  social  custom,  prevailing  opinion,  bodily  lust,  easily 
besetting  sins,  and  worldly  persecution,  which  now  bear  so  hardly  upon  the  saints  of 
God.  If  these  do  but  hold  a  usurped  dominion,  it  is  too  often  so  stringent  as  almost  to 
crush  out  all  expressions  of  the  life  unto  God. 

II.  Ibbael'8  heart  or  alleoiance  to  God  in  times  of  oppression.  The  elect 
remnant,  in  every  age,  kept  the  allegiance,  though  they  had  to  hide  it  in  secret  places. 
A  "  ten  righteous  "  ever  kept  the  nation  from  utter  destruction.  There  is  a  holy  leaven 
among  us  now. 

III.  Israel's  freedom  for  full  alleoiance  in  the  Divini  ihtebvention. 
Sooner  or  later  God  would  deliver  them,  and  will  deliver  us ;  and  then  we  can  open  our 
lips,  "  make  mention  of  his  Name,"  and  give  ourselves  openly  to  him,  as  we  have  held 
ourselves  secretly  for  him  all  through  the  trying  time. — B,  T. 

Ver.  16. — Prayer  forced  hy  trouMe.  One  of  the  commonest,  and  often  one  of  the 
most  painful,  of  iiuman  experiences.  The  scoffer  bends  the  knee  when  life  is  placed  m 
sudden  peril.  The  prayerless  cry  mightily  when  death  stares  them  in  the  face.  Prayer- 
leisness  is  only  a  fair-weather  attainment.  Like  the  children  who  do  not  seem  to  care 
for  mother  when  health  abounds,  but  run  to  her  at  once  when  the  head  is  aching ; 
so  we  can  bravely  do  without  God  while  the  sun  shines,  but  want  him  when  the  black 
thunder-clouds  come  creeping  up  against  the  wind.  Let  the  cholera  come  into  our 
midst,  and  almost  abjectly  the  nation  begins  to  ask  for  days  of  humiliation  and  prayer. 
As  this  subject  is  a  somewhat  familiar  one,  the  following  divisions  may  give  some 
freshness  to  the  treatment  of  it. 

L   A   BPIBIT  OF  independence   IB  NOURISHED  BY  PROSPERITIES  AND  SUCCESSES.      The 

ordinary  man  does  not  feel  the  need  of  God  when  all  goes  well  with  him.  He  does  not 
need  prayer,  for  he  is  not  conscious  of  anything  to  pray  for.  If  man  can  stand  alone, 
why  should  we  seek  God?  And  the  Christiau  man,  who  believes  in  prayer,  is  under 
grave  and  serious  temptation  to  neglect  prayer  when  he  is  successful,  and  free  from 
care.  As  soon  as  we  become  satisfied  with  ourselves  we  begin  to  lose  our  "  first  love." 
The  spirit  of  independence  and  the  spirit  of  prayer  never  did,  and  never  can,  dwell 
together.  Ivy  is  a  poor  thing  if  it  grows  up  independently.  Its  beauty  unfolds  only 
when  it  leans  on  another — on  one  who  bas  independent  strength. 

II.   A  SPIRIT  OF   DEPENDENCE   IS   NOURISHED  BT   CALAMITIES.      In  ft  thoUSaud  formS 

they  come  to  us,  but  their  message  is  always  the  same.  They  say  to  us,  "  See,  you 
cannot,  by  yourself."  Life  is  nut  all  sunshine  and  prosperity.  We  must  take  it  as  a 
whole,  take  it  as  it  is.  We  must  reckon  for  trouble.  And  for  life  as  a  whole  we  need 
God ;  we  ought  to  be  dependent ;  we  should  be  happy  in  our  depeudeuce  Jacob,  in  his 
anxiety  at  mating  Esau,  was  forced  to  dependence  and  prayer,    Joshua,  discomfited 


CH.  xxvn.  1— 13.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


433 


before  Ai,  was  forced  to  prayer.  Jehoshaphat,  threatened  by  national  foes,  flies  to 
prayer.  Hezekiah,  stricken  with  disease  and  facing  death,  turns  his  face  to  the  wall, 
and  prays.  Then  impress  the  graciousness  of  the  Divine  ways  with  us.  Watching 
over  our  eternal  interests,  God  saves  us  again  from  the  perils  of  independence,  and  calls 
us  back  to  dependence,  by  putting  trouble  into  our  lives,  and  we  learn  to  say,  "  Before 
I  was  aflliotea  I  went  astray,  but  now  will  I  keep  thy  Word." — E.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXVn. 

Ver.  1. — The  Triple  Judgment  on  the 
PowEBS  op  Daekness.  The  crowning  judg- 
ment of  all  is  now  briefly  desoribed.  "  In  that 
day  " — the  day  of  God's  vengeance — when 
all  his  other  enemies  have  been  put  down, 
Jehovah  shall  finally  visit  with  his  sword 
three  mighty  foes,  which  are  described  under 
three  figures — ^the  firat  as  "  Leviathan,  the 
swift  serpent ; "  the  second  as  "  Leviathan, 
the  crooked  serpent ;  "  and  the  third  as  "  the 
dragon  that  is  in  the  sea."  It  has  been 
usual  to  see  in  these  three  monsters  three 
kingdomi  inimical  to  God — either  Assyria, 
Babylon,  and  Egypt;  or  Assyria,  Egypt, 
and  Tyrs;  or  Media,  Persia,  and  Egypt. 
But  this  diversity  of  interpretation  shows 
that  there  is  no  particular  fitness  in  the 
emblems  to  symbolize  any  special  kingdoms 
or  world-powers,  while  the  imagery  itself 
and  the  law  of  climax  alike  point  to  some- 
thing higher  than  world-powers  being  in- 
tended. "  Leviathan,"  in  Job  iii.  8,  where 
the  word  first  occurs,  represents  a  supra- 
mundane  power — probably  "  the  dragon,  the 
enemy  of  light,  who  in  old  Eastern  traditions 
ia  conceived  as  ready  to  swallow  up  sun  and 
moon,  aud  plunge  creation  in  original  chtios 
or  darkness"  ('Speaker's  Commentary,' 
vol.  iv.  p.  28);  and  the  "dragon"  is' a  cus- 
tomary emblem  of  Satan  himself  (Ps.  ioi. 
13;  ch.  li.  9;  Kev.  xii.  7,  9),  the  prince  of 
darkness.  The  triple  vengeance  here  is 
parallel  to  the  triple  punishment,  in  the 
apocalyptic  vision  (Rev.  xix.  20;  xx.  10), 
of  "the  devil,"  "the  beast,"  and  "the  false 
prophet,"  who  have  been  termed  by  com- 
mentators "  the  three  great  enemies  of  God's 
kingdom"  (see  'Speaker's  Commentary 
on  the  New  Testament,'  vol.  iv.  p.  802). 

Ver.  1. — The  Lord  with  his  sore  and  great 
and  strong  sword.  The  "sword"  of  Jeho- 
vah is  first  heard  of  in  the  Pentateuch, 
where  it  is  called  "  glittering."  (Dent,  xxxii. 
41).  It  is  spoken  of  by  David  (Ps.  vii.  12), 
and  frequently  by  Isaiah  (see  oh.  xxxi.  8 ; 

ISAIAH. 


xxxiv.  5,  6 ;  ilvi.  16).  Mr.  Cheyne  supposes 
the  idea  to  have  been  taken  from  the  Baby- 
lonian mythology,  aud  seems  to  think  it 
half  material.  But  it  is  merely  on  a  par 
with  other  anthropomorphismp.  The  word 
rendered  "sore"  probably  means  "well- 
tempered,"  "keen."  leviathan.  Etymo- 
logically,  the  term  "  Leviathan  "  appears  to 
mean  "that  which  is  coiled"  or  "twisted," 
whence  it  would  seem  to  have  been  pri- 
marily applied,  as  in  the  present  verse,  to 
serpents.  In  Job  xli.  1 — 84,  however,  it 
manifestly  deagnates  the  crocodile,  while 
in  Ps.  civ.  26  it  must  be  used  of  some  kind 
of  cetacean.  Thus  its  most  appropriate 
English  rendering  would  be  "  monster." 
The  piercing  serpent;  rathrr,  the  fieet,  or 
fugitive  serpent.  It  is  a  general  character- 
istic of  the  snake  tribe  to  glide  away  and 
hide  themselves  when  disturbed.  Even 
leviathan  that  orooked  serpent ;  rather,  and 
also  leviathan  that  crooked  serpent.  It  is 
qnit«  clear  that  two  distinct  foes  of  God 
are  pointed  at — one  characterized  as  "  fleet," 
the  other  as  "  tortuous."  And  he  shall  slay  the 
dragon,  Here  is  mention  of  a  third  enemy, 
probably  Satan  himself  (see  the  introductory 
paragraph  to  this  section). 

Vera.  2 — 6. — God's  Cake  fob  ms  YcfE- 
TABD.  This  piece  may  be  called  a  com- 
panion picture  to  ch.  v.  1 — 7,  or  a  joy-song 
to  be  set  over  against  that  dirge.  In  both 
the  figure  of  the  vineyard  is  employed  to 
express  the  people  of  God;  and  God  is  "  the 
Lord  of  the  vineyard."  But  whereas,  on 
the  former  occasion,  all  was  wrath  and  fury, 
menace  and  judgment,  here  all  is  mercy  and 
loving-kindness,  protection  aud  promise. 
The  difference  is,  no  doubt,  not  with  God, 
"with  whom  is  no  variableness,  neither 
shadow  of  turning"  (Jas.  i.  17),  but  with 
the  vineyard,  which  is  either  not  the  same, 
or,  if  the  same,  then  differently  circum- 
stanced. The  vineyard  of  ch.  v.  is  beyond 
all  doubt  the  Jewish  Church  in  the  time  «t 
Isaiah,  or  in  the  times  shortly  after.  Tha 
vineyard  of  the  present  place  is  either  '  he 
Christian  Church,  or  the  Jewish  Churct 
reformed  and  purified  by  suffering.  It  is 
not  the  Church  triumphant  in  heaven,  since 

2  F 


i34 


THE  BOOK   OP   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxvn,  1— 13. 


then  Eiie  etill  "  briars  and  thorns"  in  it,  and 
there  are  still  those  belonging  to  it  who 
have  to  "  make  their  peace  with  God."  The 
prophet  has  oome  back  from  his  investiga- 
tions of  tlje  remote  future  and  the  supia- 
mundane  sphere  to  something  which  belongs 
to  earth,  and  perhaps  not  to  a  very  distant 
period.  His  second  "song  of  the  vineyard" 
may  well  comfort  the  Chnroh  through  all 
her  earthly  struggles. 

Ver.  2. — Sing  ye  unto  her.  Our  transla- 
tors have,  strangely  enough,  inverted  the 
order  of  the  two  clauses,  which  stand  thus 
in  the  Hebrew :  "  A  vineyard  of  red  wine ; 
sing  ye  unto  it,"  or  "  sing  ye  of  it."  The 
"  vineyard  of  red  wine  "  is  one  that  produces 
abundance  of  rich  fruit. 

Ver.  3. — I  the  Lord  do  keep  it ;  or,  guard, 
it  (comp.  ch.  ixvi.  3;  xlii.  6;  xlix.  8; 
Ps.  cxxi.  5).  Vineyards  were  considered  to 
require  special  watching,  since  they  were 
liable  to  damage  both  from  thieves  and 
foxes  (Cant.  ii.  15).  It  was  usual  to  build 
towers  in  them,  from  which  a  watch  could 
be  kept  (ch.  v.  2;  Matt.  xxi.  33).  I  will 
water  it  every  moment  (compare  the 
threat  in  oh.  v.  6,  "I  will  command  my 
clouds  that  they  rain  no  rain  upon  it"). 
The  Church  needs  and  receives  "the  con- 
tinual dew  of  God's  blessing." 

Ver.  4. — ^Fnry  is  not  in  me ;  t.e.  "  I  am 
not  now  angered  against  my  vineyard,  as  on 
the  former  occasion  (ch.  t.  47) ;  or  at  any 
rate  my  anger  now  is  not  fury."  (Isaiah 
frequently  ascribes  "fury"  to  God,  as  in  ch. 
xxxiv.  2;  xlii.  25;  li.  17,  20,  22;  Iviii.  18; 
Ixiii.  3,  5,  6 ;  Ixvi.  15.)  Who  would  set  the 
briars  and  thorns  against  me  in  battle  1 
The  "briars  and  thorns"  are  apparently 
unrighteous  members  of  the  Church,  who 
have  fallen  below  their  privileges.  God 
asks,  "  Who  will  set  the  briars  and  thorns 
in  array  against  me  ?  "  in  a  tone  of  contempt. 
"  Who  will  dare  to  do  battle  against  me  with 
such  weak  material?"  And  then  he  adds 
a  forecast  of  the  result  in  such  a  case :  "  I 
would  move  forward;  I  would  bum  them 
all  together "  (comp.  ch.  x.  17). 

Ver.  5. — Or  let  him  take  hold  of  my 
strength.  There  is  another  alternative.  If 
the  "thorns  and  the  briars"  are  not  pre- 
pared to  contend  in  battle  against  God,  let 
them  adopt  a  different  course.  Let  them 
"lay  hold  of  God's  strength,"  place  them- 
selves under  his  protection,  and  make  their 
appeal  to  him,  and  see  if  they  cannot "  make 
their  peace  with  him."  A  truly  evangeliciil 
invitation  I  The  enemies  of  God  are  en- 
treated to  cease  from  striving  against  him, 
and  are  taught  that  the  door  of  repentance 
is  still  open  to  them.  God  is  willing  to  be 
teooiieiled  even  to  his  enemies.    Let  them 


I  make  peace  with  him,  make  peace  with  him. 
The  reiteration  constitutes  an  appeal  of 
extreme  earnestness  and  tenderness,  which 
none  could  reject  but  the  utterly  impenitent. 
Ver.  6. — He  shall  cause  them  that  oome  of 
Jacob  to  take  root;  rather,  in  the  days  to 
come  Jacob  shall  strike  root.  Jacob,  lately 
the  vineyard,  is  now  compared  to  a  single 
vine,  which  becomes  strong  by  striking  its 
roots  deep  into  the  soil,  and  then,  as  a  con- 
sequence, blossoms  and  bnds,  and  fills  the 
face  of  the  world  with  fruit.  So  the  Israel 
of  God,  firmly  rooted  in  the  soil  of  God's 
favour,  would  blossom  with  graces  of  all 
kinds,  and  bring  forth  the  abundant  fruit 
of  good  works. 

Vers.  7 — 11 . — The  Coming  Judgment  upoh 
JuDAH  A  Chastisement  in  which  Mebot 

IS     BLENDED     WITH     JUSTICE.        A     COmilJg 

judgment  upon  Jndah  has  been  one  of  the 
main  subjects  of  Isaiah's  prophecy  from 
the  beginning.  It  has  been  included  in 
the  catalogue  of  "burdens  "  (see  ch.  xxii.). 
It  will  have  to  be  one  of  the  prophet's  maia 
subjects  to  the  end  of  his  "  book."  Heiice 
he  may  at  any  time  recur  to  it,  as  he  does 
now,  without  special  reason  or  excuse.  In 
this  place  the  special  aspect  under  which 
the  judgment  presents  itself  to  him  is  that 
of  its  merciful  character,  (1)  in  degree  (vers. 
7,  8);  (2)  in  intention  (ver.  9).  While 
noting  this,  he  feels,  however,  bound  to 
note  also,  that  the  judgment  is,  while  it 
lasts,  severe  (vers.  10,  11). 

Ver.  7. — ^Hath  he  smitten  him,  etc  ?  i.e. 
"Has  God  smitten  Judiih,  as  he  (God) 
smote  Judah's  smiters?"  Judah's  chief 
smiters  were  Assyria  and  Btibylon.  The 
judgments  upon  them  would  be  more  severe 
than  that  upon  Judah.  They  would  be 
destroyed;  Judah  would  be  taken  captive, 
and  restored.  Them  that  are  slain  by  him; 
rather,  them  that  slew  him  (so  Lowth,  Ewald, 
Knobel,  and  Mr.  Cheyne).  But,  to  obtain 
this  meaning,  the  pointing  of  the  present 
text  must  be  altered.  The  law  of  parallelism 
seems,  however,  to  require  the  alteration. 

Ver.  8. — Our  translators  have  entirely 
mistaken  the  meaning  of  this  verse.  The 
proper  rendering  is.  In  measure,  when  thou 
puttest  her  away,  thou  wiU  contend  with  her  ; 
he  sighed  with  his  keen  breath  in  &e  day  of 
the  east  wind.  "  In  measure  "  means  "  with 
forbearance  and  moderation" — the  punish- 
ment being  carefully  adjiated  to  the  degree 
of  the  offence.  Grod  was  about  to  "put 
Judab  away" — ^to  banish  her  into  a  far 
country ;  but  still  he  would  refrain  himself 
— ^he  would  "  not  suffer  his  whole  displeasure 
to  arise,"  or  give  her  over  wholly  to  desl2ni». 


OH.  XXVII.  1—13.]     THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PEOPHET   ISAIAH. 


435 


iioD.  In  the  day  of  the  east  wind,  or  of  the 
national  oatastroplie,  when  his  breath  was 
fierce  and  hard  against  his  people,  he 
would  "sigh"  at  the  needful  chastisement.  • 
As  Dr.  Kay  well  says,  "  Amid  the  rough 
and  stern  severity  which  he  breathed  into 
the  tempest,  there  was  an  undertone  of  sad- 
ness and  grief." 

Ver.  9. — By  this;  •'.«.  "by  the  punish- 
ment inflicted."  God  accepts  punishment 
as  an  expiation  of  sin;  and  this  punish- 
ment of  JiiUah  was  especially  intended  to 
be  expiatory,  and  to  remove  at  once  liis 
guilt,  and  the  evil  temper  which  had  led 
him  into  sin.  Its  fruit  would  be  a  revulsion 
from  idolatry,  which  would  show  itself  in  a 
fierce  determination  to  destroy  all  idolatrous 
emblems  and  implements,  altars,  groves, 
images,  and  the  like.  This  spirit  was 
strongly  shown  in  the  Maccabee  period  (see 
1  Mace.  V.  44,  68;  x.  84;  xiii.  47,  etc.)- 
Ee  maketh  all  the  stones  of  the  altar  as 
ohalkstones.  A  calcining  of  the  stones 
into  lime  is  probably  intended.  It  was 
usual  to  subject  the  idolatrous  objects  to 
the  action  of  fire,  and  then  to  stamp  them 
into  powder  (2  Kings  xxiii.  4,  6,  11,  12,  15, 
etc.).  The  groves  and  images  (oomp.  1  Kings 
XV.  13;  xvi.  S3;  2  Kings  xvii.  10;  2  Ohion. 
xiv.  3 ;  and  see  the  comment  on  ch.  xvii.  8). 

Ver.  10. — Yet  the  defenced  city  shall  be 
desolate.  Though  her  punishment  is  in 
mercy,  as  a  chastisement  which  is  to  purge 
away  Iier  sin,  yet  Jerusalem  sliall  for  a  time 
be  desolate,  void,  without  inhabitant,  left 
like  a  wilderness.  Forsaken;  oi, put  away ; 
the  same  word  that  is  used  in  ver.  8  of 
Jerusalem.  There  shall  the  oalf  feed.  A 
familiar  image  of  desolation  (comp.  ch.  v. 
17 ;  xvii.  2  ;  xxxii.  14,  etc.). 

Ver.  11.— When  the  boughs  thereof  are 
'withered,  they  shall  be  broken  off.  By  a 
•udden  intioduction  of  metaphor,  the  city 
becomes  a  tree,  the  prophet's  thought  going 
back,  perhaps,  to  ver.  6.  "  Withered  boughs  " 
are  indications  of  internal  rottenness,  and 
must  be  "broken  off"  to  give  the  tree  a 
chance  of  recovery.  Samaria  may  be  viewed 
as  such  a  "  buugh,"  if  the  "  tree  "  be  taken 
as  "  the  Israel  of  God  "  in  the  wider  sense. 
Otlierwise,  we  must  suppose  a  threat  against 
individual  Judseans.  The  women  oome. 
Weak  women  are  strong  enough  to  break  off 
dead  branches;  they  fall  at  a  touch,  and 
"their  end  is  to  be  burned"  (Heb.  vi.  8). 
7or  it  is  a  people  of  no  understanding.  It 
was  folly,  madness,  to  turn  away  from 
Jehovah,  and  go  after  other  gods.  Only 
through  having  "no  understanding"  could 
Isruel  have  been  so  foolish  (comp.  Deut. 
xxxii.  28;  2  Kings  xvii  15;  Jer.  iv.  22). 
He  that  made  them  ...  he  that  formed 
them  (comp.  ch.  xliii.  1,7).  God"hateth 
nothing  that  he  has  made  "  (Collect  for  Ash 


Wednesday).  He  mode  all  men,  bat  he 
"made"  and  "formed"  Israel  with  excep- 
tional care,  and  exceptional  care  leads  on 
to  exceptional  love.  Will  not  have  mercy 
.  .  .  will  show  them  no  favour ;  i.e.  "  will 
not  spare."  No  contradiction  of  vers.  7,  8 
is  intended.  God  will  have  "  measure  "  and 
"mercy"  in  his  punishment  of  Israel,  but  will 
not  so  have  merey  as  not  to  punisli  severely. 
Vers.  12,  13.— Jttoah  promised  Resto- 
BATXON.  The  general  practice  of  Isaiah  is 
to  append  to  gloomy  prophecies  words  of 
encouragement  He  does  this  even  when 
heathen  nations  are  denounced  (oh.  xviii.  7 ; 
xix.  18 — 25;  xxiii.  17,  18);  and  stUl  more 
when  he  is  predicting  judgments  upon 
Israel  (oh.  il.  2—4 ;  vi.  13 ;  x.  20—34  ;  xxiv. 
23;  xxix.  IS — 24,  eto.).  The  encourage- 
ment in  this  place  is  a  promise  of  return 
after  dispersion,  and  of  la-establishment  on 
the  "  holy  mount  at  Jerusalem  "  (ver.  13). 

Ver.  12.— The  lord  shall  beat  off;  i.e. 
"  gather  in  his  harvest."  The  metaphor  is 
taken  either  from  the  beating  of  olive  trees 
to  obtain  the  berries  (see  ch.  xvii.  6),  or  from 
the  beating  out  of  the  grain  by  a  threshing- 
flail  (Judg.  vi.  11  :  Kuth  ii.  17;  and  below, 
ch.  xxviii.  27).  Perhaps  the  best  transla- 
tion would  be,  The  Lord  shall  thresh. 
From  the  channel  of  the  river ;  rather,  from 
the  strong  stream  of  the  river.  As  usual, 
"(he  river"  {hannahar)  is  the  Euphrates 
(comp.  Gen.  xxxi.  21 ;  Exod.  xxiii.  31 ;  Deut. 
xi.  24;  Josh.  xxiv.  2,  3,  14,  15,  etc.).  Its 
"  strong  stream,"  or  "  iiood,"  is  eontrasted 
with  the  scant  thread  of  water  which  was 
alone  to  be  found  in  the  "  Torrens  .SIgypti." 
The  stream  of  Egypt  (nacAal  Mizraini)  is 
generally  allowed  to  be  the  modern  Wady 
el  Arish,  which  was  appointed  to  be  the 
southern  boundary  of  the  Holy  Land 
(Numb,  xxxiv.  5 ;  1  Kings  viii.  65).  The 
Lord  would  collect  within  these  limits  all 
that  were  of  Israel.  He  would  also,  as 
appears  from  the  next  verse,  subsequently 
overstep  the  limits. 

Ver.  13. — The  great  trumpet  shall  be 
blown;  rather,  a  great  trumpet  (comp.  Matt. 
xxiv.  31;  1  Oor.  xv.  52;  1  Thess.  iv.  16) 
This  imagery,  and  the  return  of  the  Is- 
raelites from  Egypt  and  Assyria,  point  rather 
to  the  final  gathering  of  Israel  into  the 
Church  triumphant  than  to  the  return  from 
the  Babylonian  captivity.  Egypt  and  As- 
syria were  certainly  not  the  countries  from 
which  they  came  chiefly  at  that  time.  But 
tliey  are  the  countries  from  which  they  will 
chiefly  oome  when  Jehovah  "  sets  his  hand 
again  the  second  time  to  recover  the  remnant 
of  his  people"  (ch.  xi.  11).  The  outoasti 
(comp.  oh.  xi.  12). 


436  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [on.  xxvu.  1— 13. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — Spiritual  wielcedness  in  high  places  powerless  to  resist  Ood.  As  Isaitth 
was,  Eomeliow  or  other,  brought  into  contact  with  the  dualistic  doctrine  of  the  Zoro- 
astrians  (ch.  xlv.  5^—7),  it  was  important  that  he  should  bear  witness  to  the  impo- 
tency  of  the  powers  of  evil  when  they  matched  themselves  against  Jehovah.  The 
Zoioastrians  taught  that  there  were  two  great  principles,  one  of  good,  and  the  other  of 
evil,  whom  they  called  respectively  Ahura-mazda  and  Angro-mainyus,  who  were  both 
ol  them  uncreated  and  independent  one  of  the  other,  and  between  whom  there  had 
been  from  all  eternity,  and  always  would  be,  a  bitter  contest  and  rivalry,  each  seeking 
to  injure,  baffle,  and  in  every  possible  way  annoy  and  thwart  the  other.  Both  principles 
were  real  persons,  possessed  of  will,  intelligence,  power,  consciousness,  and  other 
pereonal  qualities.  The  struggle  between  them  was  constant  and  well-balanced,  with 
ceitainly  no  marked  preponderance  of  the  good  over  the  evil.  Whatever  good  thing 
Ahura-mazda  had  created  from  the  beginning  of  time,  Angro-mainyus  had  corrupted 
and  ruined  it.  Moral  and  physical  evils  were  alike  at  his  disposal.  He  could  blast  the 
earth  with  barrenness,  or  make  it  produce  thorns,  thistles,  and  poisonous  plants ;  his 
were  the  earthquake,  the  storm,  the  plague  of  hail,  the  thunderbolt ;  he  could  cause 
disease  and  death,  sweep  off  a  nation's  flocks  and  herds  by  murrain,  or  depopulate  a 
continent  by  pestilence ;  ferocious  wild  beasts,  serpents,  toads,  mice,  hornets,  mosquitoes, 
were  his  creation ;  he  had  invented  and  introduced  into  the  world  the  sins  of  witchcraft, 
murder,  unbelief,  cannibalism ;  he  excited  wars  and  tumults,  continually  stirred  up  the 
bad  against  the  good,  and  labuured  by  every  possible  expedient  to  make  vice  triumph 
over  Virtue.  Ahura-mazda  could  exercise  no  control  over  him ;  the  utmost  that  he 
could  do  was  to  keep  a  perpetual  watch  upon  his  rival,  and  seek  to  baffle  and  defeat 
him.  This  he  was  not  always  able  to ;  despite  his  best  endeavours,  Angro-mainyus  was 
not  unfrequently  victorious.  It  was  probably  to  meet  this  doctrine,  and  prevent  its 
having  weight  with  his  disciples,  that  Isaiah  taught  so  explicitly  the  nothingness  of 
the  highest  powers  of  evil  in  any  contest  with  the  Almighty.  He  had  already  stated 
that,  at  the  end  of  the  world,  God  would  visit  and  punish  "  the  host  of  the  high  ones 
that  were  on  high,"  as  well  as  the  kings  of  the  earth  upon  the  earth  (ch.  xxiv.  21). 
He  now  presents  evil  in  a  threefold  personal  form  if  the  highest  awfulness  and 
grandeur,  and  declares  its  conquest  in  this  threefold  form  by  Jehovah.  God  is  to 
"  punish"  the  two  leviathans  with  his  sword,  and  actually  to  "  siay  thedragon."  This 
might  seem  to  go  beyond  the  statements  of  the  Revelation  of  St.  John  (xx.  10)  ; 
but  it  is  probably  to  be  understood,  in  the  same  sense,  of  a  living  death.  The  triumph 
is  at  any  rate  complete,  final,  unmistakable.  Evil  can  do  nothing  against  good,  but  is 
wholly  overcome  by  it. 

Vers.  3 — 6. —  The  means  whereby  God  purifies  and  perfects  his  Churdt.  Despite 
human  weakness  and  human  perversity,  God  will  build  up  and  establish  a  faithful 
Church — he  will  "  purify  to  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works  "  (Titus 
ii.  14).  It  is  for  his  honour  that  this  should  be  so,  and  he  is  strong  enough  to  effect 
it.  His  "strength  is  jnade  perfect  in  weakness"  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  We  are  shown  here 
some,  at  any  rate,  of  the  chief  means  whereby  he  effects  his  purpose.  Most  prominent 
of  all  is — 

I.  HiB  PERPETUAL  wATCHFDii  ouABDiANSHip.  "  I  the  Lord  do  keep  it."  "  I  will 
keep  it  night  and  day."  Incessant  watchful  care,  never  slacking,  never  wearied,  the 
fruit  of  abounding  infinite  love, — this  is  the  first  thing.  The  Lord  "keeps  the  city." 
The  Lord  is  his  Church's  "  Keeper,"  so  that  "  the  sun  shall  not  bum  it  by  day,  neither 
the  moon  by  night ;  "  so  that  the  thief  shall  not  enter  in,  nor  the  fox  spoil ;  so  that  the 
hatred  and  wiles  of  Satan  shall  be  of  no  avail ;  so  that  "  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  pre- 
vail against  it  "  (Matt.  xvi.  18).  The  Lord's  care  is  unceasing — "  he  that  keepeth  Israel 
shall  neither  slumber  nor  sleep  "  (Ps.  cxxi.  4).  The  Lord's  care  is  effectual — '*  he  keepeth 
his  mercy /or  ever  "  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  28). 

XL  His  constant  refbbshino  qeaob.  "  I  will  water  it  every  moment."  Not  only 
day  by  day  and  hour  by  hour,  but  morr.ently,  does  his  grace  descend  on  his  Church, 
strengthening  it,  reviving  it,  refreshing  it.      His  Holy  Spirit  teaches  men's  hearts 


Ofi.±irtLl— laj    l-HB  BOOK  OP  TSE  PEOfHET  ISAIAH,  437 

continually  with  a  doctrine  that "  distils  as  the  dew  "  (Dout.  xxxii.  2),  softens  them  with 
an  influence  that  "  drops  as  the  rain."  He  gives  "  grace  for  grace ; "  leads  on  "  from 
strength  to  strength ; "  converts,  upholds,  confirms,  sustains,  each  weak  and  wavering 
soul ;  cleanses,  purifies,  infuses  light,  and  strength,  and  sweetness,  and  every  other  virtue 
into  each  heart  that  will  admit  thpm ;  thus  constituting  and  "presenting  to  himself 
a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  suoh  thing  .  ,  .  holy  and  without 
blemish"(Bph.  V.  27). 

III.  His  keen  pukging  fires.  "  The  hriars  and  thorni  .  .  .  will  I  hum  together." 
The  Church,  while  on  earth,  will  always  have  imperfections,  weak  brethren,  unworthy 
memhers,  faults,  ay,  siris,  even  in  the  best.  It  is  among  the  greatest  of  God's 
mercies  to  the  Church  that  he  does  not  overlook  these,  but  is  keenly  alive  to  them — 
yea,  "  sets  men's  secret  sins  in  the  Ught  of  his  countenance  "  (Ps.  xc.  8).  For  when 
these  things  are  noted,  there  is  a  hope  that  they  may  be  remedied.  God  is  ever  purging 
liis  Church,  He  "  turns  his  hand  upon  it,  and  purely  purges  away  its  dross  and  taketh 
away  all  its  tin  "  (ch.  i.  25).  By  pain  and  suffering,  by  chastisements  of  various  kinds, 
by  sickness,  and  disappointment,  and  ill  success,  and  loss  of  those  dear  to  them,  ho 
leads  men  to  conviction  of  sin,  and  hatred  of  it,  and  aversion  from  it,  and  contrition, 
and  amendment.  Where  these  fail,  there  is  the  final  remedy,  which  saves  the  Church, 
when  the  individual  will  not  be  saved — the  remedy  of  excision,  when  the  dead  branch 
is  broken  off,  and  "  cast  into  the  fire,  and  burned  "  (John  xv.  6).  But  in  thousands  of 
cases  the  purging  is  effectual,  the  keen  fire  does  its  work,  and  purifies  without  destroy- 
ing. The  soul  that  was  in  danger  turns  to  God,  and  "  takes  hold  of  his  strength,"  and 
"  makes  its  peace  with  him,"  and  both  the  Church  and  the  individual  gain. 

Vers.  7,  8. — The  moderation  of  GocTb  chastisements.  All  God's  doings  are  "  with 
measure."  At  the  creation  he  "  weighed  the  hills  in  a  balance  "  (ch.  xl.  12),  "  made  a 
weight  for  the  winds,"  and  "  weighed  the  waters  by  measure  "  (Job  xxviii.  25).  He  sets 
one  thing  against  another,  "looks  to  the  end  of  the  earth,"  and"seeth  under  the  whole 
heaven  "  (Job  xxviii.  24).  There  is  nothing  hasty,  rash,  or  inconsiderate  in  his  doings. 
He  is  a  law  to  himself;  and  the  perfect  harmony  of  his  own  nature  necessarily  produces 
the  result  that  order  and  measure  pervade  all  that  he  accomplishes.  "  Measure,"  as 
Hooker  says,  "  is  that  which  perfecteth  all  things,  because  everything  is  for  some  end, 
neither  can  that  thing  be  availaWe  to  any  end  which  is  not  proportionable  thereunto, 
and  to  proportion  as  well  excesses  as  defects  are  opposite  "  ('  Eocl.  Pol.,'  v.  55,  §  2). 
God's  chastisepionts  have  for  their  end  the  recovery  of  those  whom  he  chastises,  and 
would  not  be  effectual  for  this  end  unless  they  were  carefully  apportioned  and  adjusted 
to  the  particular  case.  Chastisements  unduly  light  would  have  no  restraining  or 
educational  force ;  they  would  be  contemned,  despised,  and  would  harden  those  whom 
they  were  intended  to  influence  for  good.  On  the  other  hand,  over- severe  chastisements 
would  crush  and  ruin.  They  would  "  quench  the  smoking  flax  "  and  "  break  the  bruised 
reed"  (Matt.  xii.  20),  so  rendering  recovery  impossible.  Thus  measure  is  needed  in 
chastisements  ;  and  those  which  God  inflicts  are  measured  with  most  marvellous  exacti- 
tude. He  metes  out  to  all  the  exact  cross,  diffioidty,  suffering,  which  is  suited  to  bring 
them  to  him.  He  afflicts  them  always  more  lightly  than  they  deserve.  "  In  measure 
he  contends  with  them,"  apportioning  their  day  to  their  strength,  and  their  temptations 
to  their  ability  to  bear  them. 

Ver.  12. — The  Israel  of  Ood  gathered  in  and  garnered  one  hy  <m«.  While  Scripture 
often  speaks  broadly  of  the  call  and  conversion  of  nations,  it  yet,  to  an  attentive  reader, 
is  continually  proclaiming  the  fact  that  salvation  is  an  individual  matter.  No  privileiies 
of  birth  or  covenant,  of  Church-membership  or  Church-position,  assure  any  one  who 
has  come  to  years  of  discretion  that  he  is  among  the  saved,  or  can  make  up  for  the 
want  of  personal  fitness,  personal  faith,  personal  sincerity.  God  is  very  careful,  and  very 
choice,  when  he  "makes  up  his  jewels"  (Mai.  iii.  17).  His  eye  is  not  only  overall,  but 
each.  He  tests  them  "  one  by  one."  He  says  to  each,  "  My  son,  give  me  thy  heart " 
(Prov.  xxiii.  26).  He  requires  of  each  conveision  to  him,  trust  in  him,  the  earnest  wish 
to  please  him.  "  One  by  one,"  as  they  become  fit  for  it,  he  gathers  them  in,  adds  them 
to  his  crown,  causes  them  to  join  the  "  innumerable  company  "  of  his  elect—"  the 
Bpiriti  of  iust  men  made  perfect "  (Heb.  xii.  22,  23).    This  consideration  should  make 


438  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxvn.  1—13. 

men  careful  to  assure  themselves;  (1)  of  their  hold  on  the  faith;  (2)  of  their  interert  in 
Christ ;  (3)  of  their  possession  of  that  "holiness  "  without  which  "  no  one  shall  see  the 
Lord"(Heb.  xii.14). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 13. — "In  that  day."  We  have  here  a  general  picture  of  the  eirenta  which 
precede  the  condition  of  the  inauguration  of  a  new  era. 

I.  The  fight  with  the  monbteb  ob  monstebs.  We  cannot  enter  into  the  subject  of 
this  symbolism,  in  reference  to  which,  in  the  absence  of  definite  information,  so  much  of 
fanciful  interpretation  has  gathered.  We  cannot  refer  the  serpent  or  the  dragon  to  the 
storm-cloud,  or  lightning,  as  some  have  done ;  nor  historically  to  Egypt  and  Assyria. 
Something  much  deeper  seems  to  be  meant,  as  in  the  legends  of  the  combat  of  Apollo, 
the  greatest  god  of  the  Greeks,  with  the  Python  at  DelphL  The  dragon  is  symbolic, 
in  ancient  thought  generally,  of  the  power  of  death,  of  the  under-world,  into  which 
humanity  in  its  sinfulness  and  weakness  is  prone  to  fall.  Jehovah  will  overcome  this 
fiendish  power  :  such  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  prophecy. 

II.  Restobation  of  IsEAEii  TO  FAvouB.  Here  the  prophecy  passes  into  song.  The 
Church  appears  under  the  favourite  image  of  the  vineyard.  Jehovah  is  its  Keeper,  who 
waters  and  watches  it  by  night  and  by  day.  His  feelings  are  those  of  pure  love,  and 
his  wrath  is  reserved  for  those  who  would  injure  the  sacred  enclosure.  Were  such 
thorns  and  thistles  before  him,  he  would  set  them  on  fire.  These  are  figures  of  the 
enemies  of  the  Church  (see  2  Sam.  xxiii.  6,  7).  Tet  if  ever  these  yield  themselves, 
they  may  find  mercy.  "A  truly  evangelical  belief  that  God  is  willing  to  be  reconciled, 
even  to  his  enemies.  Its  presence  has  given  the  prophecy  a  spiritual  superiority  over 
the  other  prophetic  descriptions  of  the  judgment  upon  the  hostile  nations,  e.g.  ch.  Ixvi. 
1 6.  Even  according  to  ch.  xix.  22,  Egypt  must  be  first  smitten  in  order  that  it  may 
be  healed"  (Cheyne).  As  the  proverb  says,  "The  Name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong 
tower:  the  righteous  runneth  into  it,  and  is  safe"  (Prov.  xviii.  10).  So  here  the 
meaning  is,  "  Let  the  unrighteous  man  take  sanctuary  with  Jehovah,  and  become  by 
penitence  and  obedience  a  servant  of  his."  And  the  elect  nation  will  take  root,  and 
throw  its  sheltering  foliage  over  the  nations — a  tree  of  healing  (Rev.  xxii.  2) ;  and  the  . 
blessings  of  salvation  shall  be  diffused  over  the  world  (cf.  ch.  xxxvii.  31 ;  Hos.  xiv. 
6).  The  union  of  Jew  and  Gentile  seems  foreshadowed,  and  the  removal  of  the  dis- 
tinction between  them.  Salvation  was  of  them  and  for  the  worl(f  (John  iv.  22 ; 
Eph.  ii.  14). 

III.  The  mitigation  of  Divine  chastisements.  The  punishment  of  the  people 
has  not  been  so  severe  as  that  of  their  enemies.  There  was  and  ever  is  "  measure  " 
in  the  afflictions  of  God;  they  do  not  exceed  the  bounds  of  justice  nor  the  limits  ot 
man's  enduring  power.  "  He  never  smites  with  both  hands ;  "  he  sifts,  but  does  not 
destroy.  (For  the  threshing-floor,  cf.  ch.  xxi.  10.)  He  was  wroth,  but  not  without 
love ;  has  banished,  but  not  put  an  end  to,  his  people.  And  now,  as  ever,  he  would 
"  reason  together  "  with  them,  and  proclaim  the  terms  upon  which  he  will  mercifully 
accept  their  repentance  as  an  atonement  for  guilt.  They  must  destroy  the  emblems  of 
idolatry,  and  put  an  utter  end  to  it;  and  thus,  purged  from  its  filth,  be  prepared  for 
salvation.  Punishment  will  cease  when  sin  ceases,  but  not  before.  And  when  the 
sin  is  honestly  put  away,  it  may  ever  be  said  to  the  sinner,  "  Do  as  the  heavens  have 
done,  forget  your  evil ;  with  them,  forgive  yourself." 

IV.  The  fate  of  the  wobld's  mktbopolis.  For  it  seems  better  so  to  understand 
the  allusion  than  to  Jerusalem.  Its  fortifications  will  be  razed,  its  population  be 
dismissed,  and  the  cattle  will  browse  upon  the  deserted  scene.  In  contrast  to  the 
magnificent  parka  and  gardens  of  the  great  cities,  there  will  be  but  stunted  bushes, 
affording  firewood  to  the  poor  women  who  come  to  pick  it  up  (Cheyne).  Others,  how-' 
ever,  understand  the  prophecy  to  refer  to  Jerusalem  itself.  The  reason  assigned  for 
the  doom  is  ignorance,  as  so  often  in  Scripture — gwiUy  ignorance.  As  the  "begin- 
ning of  wisdom  "  is  not  prudence,  policy,  science,  or  philosophy,  but  the  "  fear  of  God," 
so  irreverence  and  contempt  of  Divine  laws,  leading  to  sensuality  and  vice,  are  identical 
with  ignorance  and  folly.    "  Such  ignorance  does  not  excuse  men  or  lessen  the  guilt 


OH.  xxvn.  1— 13.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  439 


of  their  wickeilness ;  for  they  who  sin  are  conscious  of  their  sinfulness,  though  they 
are  blinded  by  their  lust.  Wickedness  and  ignorance  are  therefore  closely  connected, 
hut  the  connection  is  of  such  a  nature  that  ignorance  proceeds  from  the  sinful  dis- 
position of  the  mind  "  (Calvin).  Oh  "  to  be  wise  and  to  understand  "  (Deut  xxxii, 
29) !  How  dark  and  dreadful  the  ignorance  which  seems  to  shut  out  the  favour  and 
compassion  of  the  all-compassionate  God  I 

V.  Obaole  of  comfort.  The  hand  that  smites  and  brings  low  is  also  the  hand 
that  raises  up;  it  scatters  in  judgment,  but  recalls  and  gathers  together  again  in 
mercy.  From  the  great  rirer  of  Assyria  to  that  of  Egypt  the  children  of  Israel  will 
be  gathered  one  by  one.  A  great  trumpet,  signalling  the  Divine  interposition,  will  be 
blown  (fit  oh.  xviii.  3  ;  xL  12 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  31)i  and  the  scattered  abroad  will  be  seen 
thronging  to  the  holy  mount  in  Jerusalem.  Thus  again  there  rises  upon  us  that 
glorious  vision  of  a  united  and  redeemed  Church,  gathered  out  of  all  nations,  for 
which  change  and  suffering,  conflict  and  sifting,  prepare.  All  Christian  prayer, 
activity,  waiting,  and  watching  point  tow.ird  the  coming  of  the  Christ,  the  Deliverer, 
to  the  spiritual  Zion,  to  turn  away  ungodliness  and  to  found  the  new  and  enduring 
empiie  of  righteousness. — J. 

Ver.  3. — Divine  guardiamhip,  "  Lest  any  hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and  day." 
Then  there  are  hurtful  ))owers  and  hurtful  people  in  the  world.  The  Word  itself  lets 
light  in  upon  the  condition  of  humanity.  There  are  hidden  invisible  foes ;  and  there 
is  need  for  One  who  can  discern  and  defeat  them. 

I.  The  eye  that  sees.  This  is  all-important.  For  we  are  blind  to  our  worst 
enemies.  Evil  puts  on  the  garb  of  good.  And  evil  hides  itself.  The  serpent  is  coiled 
up  at  the  bottom  of  the  cup.  The  adder  lurks  in  the  grass.  By  the  river-side  the 
alligator  lurks ;  his  skin  the  very  colour  of  the  stones.  God's  eye  can  search  all. 
His  vision  sweeps  all  space.  His  vigilance  never  sleeps.  "  He  that  keepeth  thee  will 
not  slumber." 

II.  The  heart  that  loves.  This  is  our  truest  defence.  It  is  affection  that  keeps 
alive  this  vigilance.  There  is  no  eye  like  the  eye  of  love.  We  know  this  in  a 
measure  from  our  observation  of  the  human  spheres.  How  quick  a  mother's  eye  is 
to  detect  first  departures  from  the  holy  and  the  true — first  dalliances  with  evil  1  The 
tutor  is  not  so  sure  a  guardian  as  the  parent.  All  Divine  revelation  tells  us  that  Q-od 
is  love.  Why  warn,  rebuke,  exhort  ?  Why  send  the  prophet  to  the  guilty  cities,  and 
the  only  begotten  Son,  the  Saviour,  to  the  lost  race  ?  This  is  the  explanation  of  all : 
"  God  so  loved  the  world." 

III.  The  ottabdianship  that  I8  complete.  Lest  "any."  That  includes  all  the 
forms  and  forces  of  evil.  We  may  be  awake  to  special  dangers,  just  as  we  pay  honour 
to  special  virtues.  There  are  dangers  which  are  so  pronounced,  where  the  penalties 
are  so  marked,  that  our  consciousness  is  awake  to  the  dread  results.  But  when  we 
remember  the  vast  and  varied  sources  of  peril,  we  rejoice  to  know  that  there  may  be 
immunity  from  all  disaster.  "  Deliver  us  from  evil "  is  the  prayer  taught  us  by  the 
Saviour;  and  God  will  hear  that  prayer,  for  "thine  is  the  power." 

IV.  The  watchfulness  that  never  sleeps.  "By  night  and  by  day."  In  the 
darkness  and  in  the  night.  For  the  darkness  is  no  darkness  to  God.  As  Sentinel  he 
never  sleeps.  Our  watch-fires  die  out,  and  the  beasts  of  the  forest  break  into  the  camp 
in  the  silent  hours  of  darkness.  We  cannot  "  keep."  But  the  soul  is  too  precious  to 
be  left  to  finite  watchfulness.  The  Tower  of  London  contains  no  jewelled  crowns  so 
rich  in  value  as  the  nature  that  contains  the  pearl  of  great  price.  The  teruple  of  Jeru- 
salem had  costly  vessels  and  sacred  altars ;  but  the  temple  of  the  soul  has  in  it  the 
true  Shechinab.  This  is  God's  promise.  This  is  his  own  testimony  to  himself;  and 
it  is  a  promise  to  wear  as  an  amulet  on  the  heart  in  such  a  world  as  this. — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — OocFs  treatment  of  the  rebellious  and  the  righteous.  Amid  the  different 
and  difficult  interpretations  and  the  numerous  and  dubious  applications  given  to  these 
verses,  we  may  discern  some  truths  respecting  God's  treatment  of  human  character. 

I.  His  treatment  or  the  wicked.  1.  The  sharpness  of  his  instrumentt.  He 
punishes  with  "a  sore  and  great  and  strong  sword  "  (ver.  1).  He  "  whets  his  glitter- 
ing sword  "  (Deut.  zxxii.  41).    Out  of  the  month  of  the  Son  of  God  "  goeth  a  sharp 


HO  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  sxvn.  1—13, 

sword  "  (T^ev.  xix.  16).  Tlie  various  miseries,  visitations,  calamities,  which  come  to  ug 
a3  the  sad  consequences  of  sin  are  God's  sword — pain,  sickness,  separation,  bereave- 
ment, famine,  war,  death,  etc. ;  sore  and  sharp  and  strong  are  these.  2.  The  thoroughness 
of  his  judgments.  It  is  not  only  that  the  blows  he  senda  are  severe,  but  his  judgments 
are  continued  and  are  multiplied  till  all  their  punitive  or  corrective  work  is  done.  He 
will  "go  through  the  briars  and  thorns  "  which  are  spoiling  his  \  iiieyavd,  and  will  burn 
them  together  (ver.  4).  "  The  defeiioed  city  shall  be  desolate,"  so  abandoned  of  man  that 
the  calf  shall  feed  there  and  lie  down  and  browse  upon  the  bi'anches,  and  these  shall  be 
BO  withered  that  the  women  shall  come  and  "  set  them  on  Sre  "  (vers.  10,  11).  When 
headstrong  and  rebellious  men  defy  the  power  and  despise  the  Word  of  God,  they  find 
that  they  are  contending  with  One  whose  correction  Is  not  confined  to  one  or  two  blows. 
Gk)d  pursues  such  men  with  his  holy  and  righteous  punishment,  until  the  briars  are 
consumed,  until  the  city  is  desolate,  until  the  hauglity  heart  is  humbled  to  the  very  dust. 
8.  The  opening  which  he  offers  them,  "Or  let  him  take  hold  of  my  strength,  that  he 
may  make  peace  with  me,"  etc.  (ver.  5).  The  most  rubellious  may  return  unto  him  : 
Ahab  may  bumble  his  heart,  Manasseh  may  repent,  Saul  the  persecutor  may  become 
his  most  active  servant,  taking  hold  of  his  Divine  magnanimity,  which  is  the  strength 
of  the  Divine  character. 

IL  His  teeatment  of  the  eighteous.  1.  The  eare  which  he  takes  of  them.  He 
turns  the  neglected  wilderness  into  a  cultivated  vineyard  (ver.  2) ;  he,  tlie  Lord,  does 
keep  it  night  and  day ;  he  waters  it  every  moment ;  he  guards  it  against  the  despoiling 
enemy  (ver.  3).  God  distinguishes  his  people  by  granting  them  peculiar  privileges;  he 
expends  on  them  his  watchful  love ;  he  guards  them  against  tlieir  spiritual  adversaries : 
they  have  to  bless  him  for  attention,  for  enrichment,  for  defence.  2.  The  fact  thaf  he 
moderates  Ms  corrections  of  them,,  (Vers.  7,  8.)  He  does  not  visit  them  with  the 
severity  he  shows  toward  those  wlio  are  defiant  of  his  will ;  there  is  measure,  limitation, 
in  the  day  when  the  "  east  wind  "  of  his  chastisement  is  made  to  blow,  God  restrains 
his  hand  when  it  is  his  own  children  whom  he  is  correcting  (Ps.  ciii.  8 — 10).  3.  The 
parental  purpose  of  his  chastisement.  (Ver,  9.)  It  is  that  iniquity  may  be  purged,  that 
the  dark  consequences  and  the  evil  stain  of  sin  may  be  "  taken  away,"  that  the  dej;rad- 
ing  idolatries  of  the  heart  as  well  as  of  the  life  may  be  demolished ;  it  is  that  those  whom 
he  loves  may  be  cleansed  from  their  impurities  and  may  be  his  children  indeed,  not  only 
enjoying  his  favour  and  dwelling  beneath  his  roof,  but  bearing  his  likeness  and  fulfilling 
his  will.  4  The  prosperity  which  he  promises  them,  (Ver.  6.)  The  prosperity  which 
is  inward,  in  "  taking  root,"  in  laying  hold  of  the  regard  and  the  affections  of  men ;  that 
also  which  is  outward,  in  blossom  and  bud  and  widespread  fruit,  in  commanding  the 
honour  and  enjoying  the  blessings  of  the  w^rld. — C. 

Ver.  5. — Talcing  hold  of  Qod's  strength.  How  can  man  take  hold  of  God's  strength  ? 
The  answer  depends  on  the  kind  of  strength  which  God  is  putting  forth ;  and  his 
Btrength  is  manifold.    He  is  strong — 

I.  In  wisdom,  and  the  effectuating  power  which  results  therefrom.  It  is  in  virtue 
of  his  wisdom  that  the  elements  of  nature  have  their  various  attributes,  and  the  pro- 
cesses of  nature  their  constant  laws— that  seeds  sprout,  and  shrubs  and  trees  bear 
flower  and  fruit ;  that  living  bodies  grow,  and  minds  advance,  and  souls  mature.  We 
take  hold  of  God's  strength  of  wisdom  when  we  do  our  human,  instrumental  part  in 
these  his  workings — ^when  we  plough  and  sow  and  weed ;  when  we  observe  and  study  ; 
when  we  use  the  privileges  of  devotion. 

II.  In  magnanimitt.  God  is  strong  indeed  in  this  grace.  Provoked  by  everything 
in  man  that  is  fitted  to  arouse  his  anger,  he  has  withheld  his  retributive  hand  (Ps. 
ciii.  10).  He  has  not  sentenced  us  to  eternal  exile ;  he  has  continued  his  loving-kind- 
nesses even  to  the  most  obdurate  and  rebellious  (Matt.  y.  45).  He  has  shown  him- 
self willing  to  receive  again  the  sons  and  daughters  that  have  wandered  farthest  away 
from  his  home.  We  take  hold  of  this  his  strength  when  we  avail  ourselves  of  his 
mwciful  overtures,  and  hasten  in  penitence  and  faith  to  his  feet, 

III.  In  compassion.  Gvd  is  strong  in  pity.  "  Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  m 
he  pitieth,"  etc.  His  commiseration,  his  tenderness,  his  parental  responsiveness  to  our 
various  sorrows,  is  quick,  is  immediate,  is  perfect ;  there  is  great  strength  of  loving 
Bympathy  in  Jesus  Christ  (Heb.  iv.  15).    We  take  hold  of  his  strength  when,  in  oui 


ca.  ixvn.  1— 18.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOtHET  tSAIAS.  Ul 

dark  days,  in  our  heavier  sorrows,  we  unburden  our  hearts  to  him,  realize  the  fulness 
of  his  compassion,  make  our  earnest,  confldent  appeal  for  his  sympatliy  and  succour. 

IV.  In  UPHOLDiNa  power.  In  such  a  world  as  this  with  all  its  allurements  and  itg 
dangers,  with  such  a  nature  as  is  ours  with  all  its  frailty,  there  is  required  great 
power  to  preserve  us  in  our  integrity  and  to  build  us  up  on  the  foundation  of  our  faith. 
But  God  is  able  to  do  this ;  he  is  able  to  "  make  us  stand  "  (Rom.  xiv.  4),  to  "  keep 
us  from  falling,  and  present  us  faultless,"  etc.  (Jude  24),  We  take  hold  of  his  strength 
when  we  act  with  such  Obedience  and  wisdom  that  we  place  ourselves  in  the  path  where 
tliat  power  is  acting — the  path  of  reflection,  of  moral  safety,  of  Christian  fellowship,  of 
worship,  of  holy  activity. 

V.  In  transfobmino  power.  It  is  impossible  for  us  to  make  even  Divine  truth 
effectual  to  the  regeneration  of  a  sinful  soul.  But  Groi  is  mightier  than  we ;  the  things 
winch  are  impossible  to  us  are  possible  to  him  (Matt.  xix.  26).  His  strength  is  not 
unequal  even  to  the  softening  of  the  hard  heart,  the  bending  of  the  proud  and  stubborn 
will,  even  of  the  hardest  and  haughtiest  of  souls.  We  take  hold  of  this  his  strength 
when  we  faithfully  plead  with  our  fullow-men  that  they  should  return  to  God,  and  when 
we  earnestly  plead  with  God  that  he  should  put  into  exercise  that  renewing  and  trans- 
forming energy. — 0.  . 

Vers.  12,  13. — The  return  of  God's  absent  ones.  In  the  relation  of  God  to  his 
people  in  exile,  as  depicted  in  these  two  verses,  we  may  find  a  picture  of  the  relation  in 
which  he  stands  to  aU  his  absent  children. 

I.  Thb  breadth  of  his  kingdom  :  the  broad  fields  of  the  husbandman,  in  which 
he  might  "  beat  off"  fruit,  from  the  far  river  in  the  East  to  the  far  river  in  the  West — 
from  end  to  end  of  the  known  earth.  God's  rights  and  claims  extend  to  all  peoples,  to 
all  classes,  to  men  of  every  character  and  every  temperament  and  every  tongue,  to  both 
sexes;  his  empire,  like  his  commandment,  is  "exceeding  broad."  He  looks  everywhere 
for  fruit  to  be  beaten  off,  to  be  gathered  in,  at  the  time  of  harvest. 

II.  The  need  or  his  interposition.  This  fruit  which  God  is  seeking  is  spiritual ; 
it  is  the  reverence,  the  love,  the  worship,  the  obedience,  of  his  own  children.  But  these 
his  sons  and  daughters  are :  1.  Afar  off.  They  are  outcasts,  a  long  way  from  home.  It 
is  not  geographical,  but  moral  and  spiritual  distance  which  has  to  be  deplored.  They 
are  in  the  "  strange  land "  of  doubt,  of  denial,  of  disobedience,  of  indifi'irence  and  forget- 
fulnesB,  of  utter  unlikeness  to  the  heavenly  Father.  2.  Or  they  are  at  the  point  of 
extinction,  "  Eeady  to  perish."  Those  who  havB  not  "  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal,"  who 
have  not  been  fascinated  and  won  by  ruinous  seductions,  are  a  mere  remnant,  and  even 
their  life,  like  Blijali's,  is  at  stake".     Everything  cries  for  God's  merciful  interposition. 

III.  HiB  SUMMONS  TO  BET0RN.  The  "  great  trumpet "  is  being  blown ;  its  notes  are 
sounding  far  and  wide.  "  The  voice  Of  Jesus  sounds  o'er  land  and  sea,"  saying, 
"Return  unto  thy  Rest;"  "Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour."  From  the  "far 
country  "  of  sin,  of  folly,  of  selfishness,  of  unrest,  the  summons  calls  all  human  hearts 
to  leave  behind  them  their  sin,  tlieir  misery,  their  bondage,  and  to  cast  themselves  at 
the  feet  of  the  Divine  Father,  and  beg  to  be  taken  back  into  that  holy  service  which 
is  perfect  freedom. 

IV.  His  DI8TINGUISHTN0  KINDNESS.  "  Ye  shall  be  gathered  one  by  one."  God  does 
not  content  himself  with  issuing  a  general  proclamation  which  each  man  may  interpret 
and  apply.  He  comes  to  every  human  soul  himself.  In  the  Person,  and  by  the  direct 
influence,  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  he  makes  his  appeal  to  the  individual  heart  and  conscience. 
He  says,  "  Come  thou,  my  child,"  "  Return  thou,  my  daughter."  "  My  son,  give  me 
thy  heart," 

V.  The  oathbrino-plaob  of  his  returned  ones.  "  Ye  shall  worship  the  Lord 
in  the  holy  mount  at  Jerusalem."  All  they  who  return  nnto  God  (1)  gather  at  his 
house  on  earth  for  worship  there ;  and  (2)  meet  in  the  heavenly  city,  the  new  Jerusa- 
lem, for  "  nobler  worship  there."— O. 

Vers.  2,  S.—Vineyard-keqinng.  The  vine  is  a  familiar  Bible  figure  for  the  pious 
individual;  and  the  vineyard,  or  cluster  of  vines,  an  equally  familiar  figure  of  the 
Church.  Several  things  make  the  figure  specially  suitable.  The  vine  is  a  beautiful 
plant;  it  is  dependent,  and  cannot  be  its  best  when  standing  alone;  it  brings  forth 


442  THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxm.  1— 13. 

rich  and  abundant  fruit;  it  needs  constant  and  careful  tending;  its  wood  is  useless  foi 
any  other  purpose  than  carrying  the  sap  that  flows  through  it ;  and  it  is  exposed  to 
peril  from  changing  atmospheres  and  outward  foes.  To  this  last  point  of  comparison 
these  verses  direct  us.  For  the  others  such  passages  may  be  consulted  as  Ps.  Ixsz. 
8 — 16 ;  eh.  v.  1 — 7.     We  note  that  vineyard-keeping  includes — 

L  Tkndino.  This  is  called  to  mind  by  the  very  strong  assurance,  "  I  will  water 
it  every  moment,"  which  is  evidently  meant  to  impress  on  us  the  constancy,  the  care, 
the  gracious  wisdom,  the  prompt  helpfulness,  of  the  Divine  dealings  with  the  Church. 
To  our  minds  it  has  a  somewhat  exaggerated  sound,  but  that  is  only  because  we  have 
no  associations  with  a  parched,  hilly,  hot,  and  almost  rainless  country,  such  as  Pales- 
tine or  Egypt.  (Jonstant  and  abundant  irrigation  is  the  essential  condition  of  vege- 
table life  in.  such  lands,  and  to  it  the  science  and  practical  skill  of  the  people  are 
<levoted.  Channels  are  made  in  which  the  water  may  run  to  the  vineyards,  and  much 
of  the  gardener's  skill  is  devoted  to  this  regular  and  eSicient  watering.  The  Eastern 
idea  of  a  fruitful  tree  is  one  "planted  by  the  rivers  of  water;"  "its  leaf  shall  not 
wither."  They  who  are  thus  careful  about  the  watering  of  their  vines  will  be  sure  to 
do  everything  else  for  them  that  is  necessary  for  their  well-being.  They  will  gather 
out  the  stones,  enrich  the  soil,  clean  the  bine,  prune  luxurious  growths,  guide  the 
trailing  branches,  and  thin  the  crowded  bunches.  And  so  does  the  Lord  of  that  vine- 
yard, the  Church,  meet  her  needs  at  every  point.  That  he  should  "  water  it  every 
moment "  suggests  that  his  supreme  care  is  for  the  renewal  of  her  vitality,  and  assures 
us  of  his  further  care  of  all  the  forms  and  expressions  of  that  vitality.  We  may  be 
sure,  in  New  Testament  language,  that  with  "his  dear  Son,  God  will  freely  give  us 
all  things."  He  will  feed,  he  will  correct,  he  will  encourage,  he  will  check.  What- 
soever is  needful  for  the  wise  tending  of  the  Church,  we  may  fully  trust  him  that  he 
will  do,  for  he  is  a  Master-gardener.  In  following  out  this  thought,  precise  practical 
apfilications  may  be  made  to  the  conditions  and  necessities  of  the  particular  Church 
addiessed. 

II.  Watching.  "  Lest  any  hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and  day."  -Van  Lennop 
tells  us  that  "vineyards  which  are  at  a  distance  from  a  village  require  a  constant 
watch  and  guard  during  the  fruit  season,  or  they  are  completely  devoured  by  the 
jackals."  Some  of  the  very  earliest  Egyptian  paintings  are  vivid-hued  representations 
of  trellised  and  festooned  "  vines,"  while,  peering  through  the  bough-twisted  fences,  is 
seen  the  sharp  and  mobile  nose  of  the  "  fox,"  stealthily  stealing  towards  his  favourite 
repast.  It  is  usual  to  dig  a  ditch  all  round  the  vineyard,  into  which  stone  posts  are 
driven,  branches  are  twisted  in  and  out  of  these  posts,  and,  as  wild  plants  and  briars 
soon  grow  up  among  them,  a  thick  and  solid  fence  or  hedge  is  made.  But  the  hus- 
bandman is  obliged  from  time  to  time  to  examine  all  parts  of  the  hedge,  and  close  up 
any  gap  or  breach  made  by  the  foxes,  jackals,  badgers,  hares,  hedgehogs,  and  perhaps 
even  wild  boars  which,  by  trampling,  destroy  more  than  they  eat.  A  frail  shed  raised 
on  poles  a  good  height  is  prepared  for  the  defence  of  the  vineyard,  in  it  a  watchei 
remains  day  and  night  while  the  fruit  is  ripening.  From  his  elevated  position  he  can 
see  all  over  the  vineyard,  and  arrangement  is  sometimes  made  for  his  signalling  to  the 
neighbouring  village  in  case  of  emergency.  He  is  provided  with  weapons  suitable  for 
dealing  with  the  precise  foes  which  he  may  have  to  encounter.  These  points  wii\ 
suggest  the  gracious  forms  in  which  God  has  ever  defended  his  ancient  Church.  His- 
torical illustrations  may  be  given.  What  he  has  ever  been,  that  he  still  is ;  and  the 
individual  Christian,  as  well  as  the  Christian  Church,  may  rest  secure  in  his  keeping. 
No  foes  can  come  nigh  us  that  he  will  rot  see.  None  can  prove  stronger  in  attack 
than  he  in  defence.  Sometimes  the  Christian  may,  in  his  despairings,  say  after  over- 
worn David,  "  I  shall  now  perish  one  day  by  the  hand  of  Saul ; "  but,  with  God's 
watching  and  keeping,  he  shall  no  more  perish  than  David  did.  The  Church,  over- 
estimating the  force  of  evil  at  any  given  time,  may  cry  that  it  "  is  in  danger."  It  is 
always  an  untrustful  cry,  raised  when  men  fail  to  look  to  the  "  Watcher  in  the  booth," 
who  keeps  the  vineyard  night  and  day.  "  He  that  keepeth  Israel  shall  neither 
slumber  nor  sleep."  "  As  the  mountains  are  round  about  Jerusalem,  so  the  Lord  is 
round  about  his  people  from  henceforth  even  for  ever." — R.  T. 

Ver.  5. — Making  veace  with  Ood.    The  Eev.  T.  Toller  gives  a  very  striking  illus- 


OH.  XXVII.  1—13.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  443 

tration  of  the  figure  used  in  this  verse.  He  says,  "I  think  1  can  convey  the  meaning 
of  this  passage  so  that  every  one  may  understand  it,  by  what  has  taken  place  within 
my  own  family.  One  of  my  little  children  had  committed  a  fault,  for  which  I  thought 
it  my  duty  to  chastise  him.  I  called  him  to  me,  explained  to  him  the  evil  of  what 
he  had  done,  and  told  him  how  grieved  I  was  that  I  must  punish  him  for  it.  He 
heard  me  in  silence,  and  then  rushed  into  my  arms  and  burst  into  tears.  I  would 
sooner  have  cut  off  my  arm  than  have  then  struck  him  for  his  fault ;  he  had  taken 
hold  of  my  strength,  and  he  had  made  peace  with  me."  God,  with  whom  sinful  man 
is  at  war,  alone  can  make  peace;  but  he  can,  and  he  will.  "  We  are  ambassadors  foi- 
Christ,  as  though  God  did  beseech  you  by  us :  we  pray  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye 
reconciled  to  Ghjd."  The  text  is  suggestive  of  what  would  be  understood  as  a  "  simple 
gospel  sermon,"  and  the  main  lines  may  be  as  follows : — 

I.  Peace  is  bboken  between  man  and  God.  Eight  and  jcomfortable  relations 
depend  on  man's  submission  and  obedience.  Self-will  and  rebelliousness  break  up 
those  relations.  Man  is  God's  child;  peace  depends  on  obedience.  Man  is  God's 
servant ;  peace  depends  on  doing  the  Master's  will.     The  essence  of  sin  is  wilfulness. 

II.  God  is  able  to  restore  the  broken  peace.  He  may  be  able  as  a  matter  of 
sovereignty ;  but  it  is  more  interesting  to  us  to  know  that  he  is  able  through  a  scheme 
of  peace-making  which  he  has  himself  devised  and  carried  out  in  the  Person  of  his 
Son.  "  His  own  arm  has  brought  salvation."  Such  aspects  of  the  great  atoning  work 
may  be  here  dwelt  upon  as  most  commend  themselves  to  the  preacher. 

III.  God  actually  offers  restoration  of  the  broken  peace.  He  asks  us  to 
"  lay  hold  of  his  strength ; "  he  invites  us  to  "  come  and  reason  with  him ; "  he  even 
grieves  over  our  hesitancy,  saying,  "  Why  will  ye  die,  0  house  of  Israel?  why  will  ye 
die  ?"     God  hath  offered  to  us — given  to  us — "  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  his  Son." 

IV.  Thet  must:  be  right-hearted  who  seek  to  make  peace  with  God.  What 
is  included  in  right-heartedness  ?  1.  Humility.  2.  Sense  of  sin.  3.  Penitence.  4. 
Sign  of  earnestness  in  putting  away  sin.  5.  Forsaking  of  self-trusts.  6.  Fervent 
desire.  7.  Whole-heartedness  of  purpose.  "  Ye  shall  seek  me,  ajiAJind  me,  when  ye 
seek  for  me  with  your  whole  heart." — B.  T. 

Ver.  6. — 2%e  world-mission  of  Israel.  Just  as  "  no  man  liveth  unto  himself,"  but 
every  man  liveth  for  the  circle  in  which  he  is  set,  so  no  nation  liveth  unto  itself — it 
liveth  for  the  world  of  nations  in  its  time,  and  for  all  the  ages.  This  universal  truth 
is  illustrated  for  us  in  the  case  of  prominent,  or  elect,  or  selected  nations.  Egypt  keeps 
alive  the  sense  of  mystery  for  the  world,  the  claims  of  the  unknown.  Chaldea  pleads 
in  all  the  world  for  the  claims  of  human  observation,  for  the  basis-principle  of  science. 
Greece  keeps  up  to-day  its  mission  to  the  world,  and  preaches  to  us  the  claims  of  the 
"  beautiful,"  the  basis  of  all  art,  all  ideal  creations.  Rome  declares  to  the  world  the 
supreme  importance  of  wise  and  stable  government  for  the  ordering  of  society. 
And  Israel  has  its  voice  in  every  land  and  every  age,  pleading  for  the  foundation- 
principles  of  religion,  which  are  the  unity  and  spirituality  of  Ood.  Israel  is  a  tree 
whose  branches  overspread  the  earth ;  these  are  its  leaves,  and  these  leaves  are  for  the 
healing  of  the  nations  that  are  diseased  and  dying  of  idolatries  and  sensuousness.  As 
we  think  of  Israel  after  the  flesh,  we  should  remember  that  we  are  the  true  Israel,  the 
spiritual  Israel,  who  hold  fast  and  testify  for  the  old  Mosaic  truths,  "God  is  One" 
and  "  God  is  a  Spirit."     The  world-mission  of  Israel  is — 

I.  To  PRESERVE  THE  world's  TRUTH.  That  is,  "  In  the  beginning  Qod."  This 
truth  was  given  to  man  as  man.  It  is  man's  birthright.  When  man  became 
mentally  and  emotionally  biassed  by  yielding  to  self-will  and  sin,  this  first  truth  was 
imperilled.  If  man)  as  God  created  him,  had  thought,  he  would  only  have  thought 
of  God,  one  God.  When  sinful  man  thinks,  he  runs  along  one  or  .other  of  two  lines — 
he  either  conceives  of  two  gods,  one  presiding  over  pleasant  things,  and  the  other  over 
disasters ;  or  else  he  thinks  of  many  gods,  each  one  occupying  a  more  or  less  limited 
sphere.  So  "  monotheism  "  was  put  in  peril,  and  had  to  be  preserved  through  all  the 
ages  during  which  God  left  man  to  a  free  experiment  of  that  self-willcdness  which  he 
had  chosen.  In  his  infinite  wisdom  God  preserved  the  essential  and  foundation-truths 
of  religion  for  long  ages  in  a  direct  Adamic  line,  giving  to  men  length  of  life  sufficient 
to  permit  of  tradition  covering  the  long  generations  up  to  the  Flood.     After  the  Flood, 


t44  tfifi  fiOOK  OV  THE  PROtflt!t  tSAtAfl.    toH-  xi*n.  1—13. 

God  preserved  the  world's  truth  in  the  one  Abrahamic  family ;  and  when  that  family- 
grew  into  a  nation,  he  made  it,  in  a  very  Bolemn  way,  the  depositary  of  the  world's 
truth,  and  set  it  in  a  central  land,  where  it  might  be  but  slightly  influenced  by  the 
notions  of  surrounding  nations.  "  What  advantacte  then  hath  the  Jew?  or  what  profit 
is  there  in  circumcision  ?  Much  every  way,  chiefly  because  that  unto  them  were  com- 
mitted the  oracles  of  God."  It  is  true  that  Israel  did  not  prove  faithful  to  its  duty  of 
preserving  the  world's  truth  ;  but  after  the  chastisement  of  the  Babylonian  exile  (and 
to  that  the  prophet  is  refoiring  in  our  text)  they  never  fell  into  idolatry,  and  they 
exist  to-day,  scattered  everywhere,  but  holding  fast  their  trust  of  monotheistic  truth. 

II.  To  EXHIBIT  THE  woRKiNa  OF  THAT  TKCTTH.  "  Example  is  better  than  precept." 
The  world  might  fairly  ask  to  see  a  national  life  raised  on  the  foundation  of  belief  in 
one  unseen,  spiritual  God.  Israel  is  that  nation.  It  is  in  many  respects  a  strikin'^ 
example.  It  failed  only  when  it  shifted  from  its  foundation.  A  glance  at  the  old 
woi'ld,  which  gioujied  round  the  eastern  end  of  the  Mediterranean,  will  show  how 
central  "little  Palestine"  was,  so  as  to  be  in  view  of  all  the  nations,  as  a  "city  set  on 
a  hill."  The  practical  applications  of  this  part  of  the  subject  are  that  we  hold  the  trust 
of  these  truths,  and  of  the  yet  further  revelations  that  have  been  given;  and  the 
question  of  supreme  interest  to  all  around  us  is — Do  they  make  us  better  men  and 
women  ?  Are  others  won  to  accept  our  truths  because  of  the  illustrations  which  we 
find  for  them  in  our  lives  and  relations  ?     Do  we  "  walk  worthy  of  our  calling  "  ? 

in.  To  WITNESS  THKouGHoaT  THK  WORLD  FOR  THAT  TRUTH.  The  presence  of  a 
Jew  anywhere  is  a  plea  for  belief  in  one  God.  The  exaggerated  stubbornness  with 
which  Jews  plead  for  this  truth  prevents  their  being  willing  to  receive  the  further 
revelation  concerning  the  one  God,  that  he  has  been  manifest  in  the  flesh.  We  who 
are  the  spiritual  Jews  have  it  as  our  work  to  proclaim  "  God  in  Christ  reconciling  the 
world  unto  himself"  to  all  the  nations.  Jews  have  but  half  a  mission  now ;  but  the 
time  is  coming  when  their  veil  shall  be  taken  away;  they  shall  see  In  Jesus  •( 
Nazareth  the  Son  of  God,  and  join  with  us  in  going  out  through  all  the  world,  and 
preaching  the  old  truth  and  the  ne^v  gospel  to  every  creature. — B.  T. 

Vers.  7 — 9. — Judgments  and  chastisements.  These  verses  set  forth  two  modes  of 
apprehending  the  afflictions  and  sorrows  of  life,  and  help  us  in  estimating  the  distinction 
between  the  modes.  We  may  say  that  it  sets  forth  God's  ways  with  the  enemies  of 
Israel,  and  God's  ways  with  Israel. 

I.  The  distinction  between  judoments  and  ohabtisbments.  In  a  sense  we  may 
say  that  judgments  are  ends  in  themselves,  and  chastisements  are  means  to  a  higher 
end.  Then  has  God  two  ways  of  dealing  with  men  ?  Thoughtlessly,  and  misled  by 
appearances,  many  of  us  answer,  "  Yes,"  and  suppose  that  we  can  account  for  some 
difficult  and  perplexing  thinL;s  by  the  help'  of  this  supposition.  But  this  answer  will 
not  bear  the  test  of  either  patient  thought  or  Holy  Scripture.  Thought  says,  "  God 
is  One ;  truth  and  right  are  one ;  men  are  one ;  and,  if  there  be  two  principles  of  dealing 
with  the  same  creatures,  both  cannot  be  right."  What  God  does  may  to  us  look 
different ;  it  must  really  be  the  same,  for  the  "  God  of  the  whole  earth  shall  he  be 
called."  Scripture  assures  us  of  the  Divine  unchangeableness.  It  says,  "  One  event 
happeneth  to  the  righteous  and  to  the  wicked."  It  expresses  the  conviction  that 
the  "  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  do  right."  It  bids  us  see  that  Ck)d  makes  his  "  sun 
to  rise  on  the  evU  and  on  the  good."  There  is  no  modification  of  ordinary  natural 
conditions  for  the  sake  of  the  elect  few.  Health,  accident,  disease,  death,  affect  alike 
the  righteous  and  the  wicked.  Then  comes  in  another  question — <}an  off  judgments 
be  regarded  as  remedial  in  their  design  and  tendency  ?  'There  is  a  disposition  toward 
the  general  acceptance  of  this  theory  nowadays ;  in  dealing  with  orime,  the  reformation 
of  the  criminal  is  put  in  a  first  place.  We  may  venture  to  say  that  Gkid's  fiwU  end 
is  always  recovery.  But  he  works  over  indefinitely  long  periods ;  and  his  immediate 
ends — necessary  as  stages — may  not  always  be  remedial.  As  a  part  of  the  work 
towards  securing  the  final  end,  God  may  stamp  by  suffering  the  quality  of  sin;  he 
may  demonstrate  his  indignations,  as  in  the  case  of  Babylon.  It  may  even  lie  neces- 
sary to  make  us  fear  lest  the  consequences  of  sin  may  prove  Irremediable ;  and  this 
may  explain  such  things  as  everlasting  punishment,  the  sin  against  the  Holy 
Ghost  that  hath  never  forgiveness,  and  the  day  of  grace  that  may  be  lost.    Whethei 


CH.  XXTU.  1—13.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  445 

IMvine  dealings  be  judgment  or  chastisement  may  depend  on  three  things :  (1)  the 
point  from  which  they  are  viewed ;  (2)  the  moral  condition  of  those  who  suffer ;  and 
(3)  the  relations  of  God  being  regarded  as  governmental  or  as  paternal. 

II.  The  P0KPOSE  or  judgment  apprehended  as  chastisement.  (Ver.  9.)  Appre- 
hended as  only  judgment,  our  mind  is  overborne  by  our  calamity.  Apprehended  us 
chastisement,  the  mind  is  started  with  new  and  trustful  thoughts.  The  trouble  may  at 
first  crush,  but  soou  we  learn  to  accept  it  calmly.  That  we  are  under  fatherly  chastise- 
ments puts  the  deepest  solemnity  into  life  and  into  sin  ;  it  helps  us  to  lift  our  hearts 
away  froin  the  present  and  the  seen  to  the  future  and  the  unseen.  All  deaths  become 
gates  of  life  when  this  sunlight  streams  on  them.  (For  this  figure  see  Noel  Paton's 
picture,  '  Mors  Janua  Vita.')  Prophecy  tljpn  keeps  before  us  this  cheering  fact — all 
anxieties  and  sufferings  3X6  fatherly.  Their  "fruit  is  to  take  away  our  sin."  And  as 
we  so  little  know  the  subtleties  of  our  sin,  we  need  not  wonder  that  we  cannot 
understand  either  the  subtleties  or  the  severities  necessary  fur  taking  it  away.  Our 
wonder  ought  to  be  that  "  refining  fires,"  so  graciously  tempered  for  us,  are  made  to 
accomplish  so  great  a  cleansing. — E.  T, 

Ver.  9. — Hepentance  proved  in  deeds.  The  first  clause  may  be  translated  thus: 
"On  these  terms  shall  the  guilt  of  Jacob  be  purged."  There  must  be  the  signs  of 
reformation — the  actual  destruction  of  idols  and  all  idol-associations,  as  tlie  proof  and 
manifestation  of  the  declared  heart-surrenderof  idolatry.  The  child's  verse  is  correct 
theology  and  practical  godliness— 

"  Bepentance  is  to  lea ve 
The  sins  we  loved  before ; 
And  sf"'  T  that  we  in  eaine.-.t  grieve, 
C      joing  BO  no  more." 

The  reiy  "  stones  of  the  altar  "  must  be  as  "  chalkstones  that  are  beatem  in  snnder  " 
if  Jacob  would  make  plain  its  repentance  of  its  idolatries,  and  come  to  receive  Divine 
forgiveness.  Illustrations  may  be  taken  from  the  practical  reformations  on  which 
Hezekiah  and  Josiah  insisted  as  the  outward  signs  of  the  national  repenianoe.  From 
this  verse  deal  with  tlie  constant  temptation  to  rest  in  mere  sentiment,  and  impress  the 
demand  which  God  ever  makes  for  proof  in  act  of  the  repentance,  or  the  faith,  or  the 
humility,  or  the  zeal,  that  may  be  possessed.  As  our  Saviour  expressed  the  same  point 
in  another  of  its  connections,  "  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them." 

I.  Good  sentiments  aeb  good  beginnings.  Therefore  in  preachings  and  teachings 
appeal  is  properly  made  to  feeling;  effort  is  made  to  arouse  emotions  and  to  persuade. 
By  the  way  of  the  heart  access  can  often  be  gained  to  a  man  ;  and  Scripture  provides 
material  for  emotional  appeals.  "  Knowing  therefore  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade 
men."  To  move  feeling,  and  to  awaken  good  sentiment,  is  at  least  to  make  a  hreach  in 
the  walls.  It  is  a  beginnii.g,  and  there  is  hope  of  what  may  be  further  accomplished 
when  such  a  beginning  is  made.  But  we  should  be  alive  to  the  constant  disposition  of 
men  to  rest  in  sentiment.  There  is  a  subtle  pleasure  in  feeling  deeply.  We  easily  get 
a  kind  of  satisfaction  in  our  good  sentiments ;  and  so  Scripture  roughly  shakes  down 
the  satisfaction  by  calling  such  things  "  refuges  of  lies,"  or  staffs  that  pierce  the  hand 
that  leans  on  them. 

II.  Good  sentiments  may  soon  fade.  They  always  do  when  they  remain  as 
sentiments,  and  do  not  become  motives  to  action.  Our  minds  are  constantly  passing 
on  to  fresh  things,  and  the  older  ones  grow  dim  in  the  distance.  If  things  are  to  keep 
up  their  interest,  we  must  put  continuous  thought  to  them,  and  make  them"  bear  oil 
daily  conduct.  We  weep  over  a  pathetic  story-book,  but  in  a  little  while  all  is  forgotten 
as  a  dream  when  one  awaketh.  It  would  be  a  most  humbling  sight  for  us  all  if  God 
were  to  show  us  the  great  heap  of  beautiful  sentiments  we  once  had  and  enjoyed. 

III.  Good  sentiments  have  no  voice  that  God  can  heed.  If  we  ofier  such 
things  to  him,  he  will  entirely  withdraw  and  hide  himself  within  a  cloud,  and  wait 
and  see  how  long  the  good  sentiment  will  last.  Penitence  that  is  only  a  sensational 
iigh  or  tear  he  will  not  regard.  It  means  nothing.  It  is  but  a  passing  ripple  on 
a  pooL  Why  should  he  turn  aside  to  notice  that  ?  This  thought  will  unfold  into  a 
practical  dealing  with  the  danger  of  forced  emotions  in  revivalistic  services;  or  the 


«46 


THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxviii.  1— 29. 


■training  of  religious  feeling  in  children  and  young  people.    Mere  emotion  is  too  light 
a  thing  to  ascend  as  prayer  to  the  throne  of  God. 

IV.  Good  sentiments  must  speak  to  God  thbouoh  deeds.  Tou  say  you  repent. 
But  the  supreme  question  is — What  has  your  repentance  made  you  do?  You  repent  oi 
that  sin :  then  have  you  put  it  away  ?  You  repent  of  that  wrong  to  your  neighbour : 
then  have  you,  as  far  as  possible,  put  the  wrong  right  ?  You  repent  of  your  idolatry  : 
then  have  you  broken  up  your  idol-altars  ?  Corresponding  actions,  "  works  meet  for 
repentance," — these  are  the  terms  of  "  purging ; "  this  i»  the  "  fruit  to  take  away  all 
the  sin."— R.  T. 

Ver.  13. — Restorations  prove  Divine  forgiveneti.  This  is  the  answering  truth  to  that 
dwelt  on  above,  in  the  homily  on  ver.  9 ;  God  in  his  dealings  with  man  never  stops 
with  sentiment.  We  know  that  he  forgives  us,  because  with  the  forgiveness  he  grants 
us  restoration  to  his  favour.  Israel  had  grievously  offended  Jehovah  by  his  unfaithful- 
ness. Divine  indignations  had  put  the  offending  child  away.  But  the  child  le«med 
the  lessons  of  judgment.  The  child  came,  penitent  and  humble,  seeking  forgiveness ;  and 
the  Lord  heard,  granted  the  forgiveness,  and  sealed  it  in  a  gracious  restoration.  This 
is  the  vision  of  that  great  restoring-day.  "  They  shall  come  which  were  ready  to  perish 
in  the  land  of  Assyria,  and  the  outcasts  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  shall  worship  the 
Lord  in  the  holy  mount  at  Jerusalem."  Our  Lord  presented  this  truth  in  his  exquisite 
picture  of  the  prodigal  son.  The  father  forgives  the  penitent,  and  we  might  say,  "  That 
is  enough  ;  such  a  son  can  expect  no  more  and  deserves  no  more ;  forgiven,  let  him  go 
away  where  he  will."  But  love  cannot  stop  at  such  limitations ;  it  cannot  be  content 
until  it  can  restore:  it  wants  to  seal  its  forgiveness;  it  would  make  it  the  fullest 
blessing  possible ;  so  the  forgiven  son  is  in  his  old  place  at  the  home-table ;  nay,  he  is 
even  decked  in  the  joy-robe,  and  made  the  occasion  of  a  feast.  He  knows  he  is  forgiven, 
for  he  is  restored.  In  nothing  do  God's  ways  appear  to  be  higher  than  man's  ways 
than  in  this — God.  can  restore  when  he  forgives,  and  man  halts  at  the  restoring  work ; 
he  is  seldom  grand  enough  for  that.  We  cannot  restore  our  criminals  even  when  they 
are  penitent.  We  cannot  put  back  into  her  place  in  society  the  "  woman  a  sinner," 
who  bathes  the  feet  of  Jesus  with  penitential  tears.  The  apostle  makes  an  almost 
overwhelming  demand  on  us  when  he  says,  "  Brethren,  if  a  man  be  overlaken  in  a  fault, 
ye  which  are  spiritual  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  ofTneekness."  How  souls  yearn 
for  this  sealing  of  forgiveness  is  seen  in  David's  prayer,  "  Restore  unto  me  the  joy  ot 
thy  salvation. '     The  subject  may  be  treated  under  two  divisions, 

I.  Divine  hestoeation  assured  m  examples  and  promises.  These  assure  us  that 
it  is  God's  way  of  dealing,  and  so  they  become  a  persuasion  to  hope  even  in  our  penitence, 
and  in  our  prayer  for  forgiveness. 

II.  Divine  restoration  eealizbd  in  actual  circumstances.  Not  always  ou  to- 
ward circumstances;  only  so  far  as  these  may  have  been  affected  by  the  sin.  Always 
in  inward  circumstances  of  mind  and  feeling. — R.  T. 


Section  VII.    Renewed  Denunciations  of  Israel  and  Judah  (oh.  zxvin. — ^xxxi.), 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXVin. 
Vers.  1 — 1.— A  "Warning  to  Samabia. 
The  prophet  has  now  cast  his  eagle  glance 
over  the  whole  world  and  over  all  time. 
He  has  denounced  woe  upon  all  the  prin- 
cipal nations  of  the  earth  (oh.  xiii. — xxiii.), 
glanced  at  the  destruction  of  the  world  itself 
(ch.  ixiv.  17 — 20),  and  sung  songs  over  the 
establishment  of  Chiist's  kingdom,  and  the 
ingathering  of  the  nations  intoit(oh.xxv. — 
zxvii.).    In  the  present  chapter  he  returns 


to  the  condition  of  things  in  his  own  time 
and  among  his  own  people.  After  a  brief 
warning,  addressed  to  Samaria,  he  turns  tc 
consider  the  condition  of  Judah,  which  he 
accuses  of  following  the  example  of  Sa- 
maria, of  perisliing  through  self-indulgence 
and  lack  of  knowledge  (vers.  7 — 12).  Ha 
then  proceeds  to  expostulate  seriously  with 
the  "  rulers  of  Jerusalem,"  on  whom  lies  the 
chief  responsibility  for  its  future. 

Ver.  1. — ^Woe  to  the  crown  of  pride,  to 
the  drunkards;   rather,  of   Que  drunlcardM, 


OH.  xxvm.  1—29,]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


447 


The  "drunkarda  of  Ephraim,"  or  of  the 
ten  tribes,  were  at  once  intoxicated  with 
wine  (Amos  iv.  1 ;  Ti.  6)  and  with  pride 
(Amos  vi.  13).  As  the  external  aspect  of 
affairs  grew  more  and  more  threatening 
through  the  advances  of  Tiglath-Pileser  and 
Shalmaneser,  they  gave  themselves  up  more 
and  more  to  self-indulgence  and  luxury,  lay 
upon  beds  of  ivory,  drank  wine  from  bowls, 
feasted  to  the  sound  of  the  viol,  and  even 
inrented  fresh  instruments  of  music  (Amos 
vi.  4,  5).  At  the  same  time,  they  said  in 
their  hearts,  "  Have  we  not  taken  to  us  horns 
by  our  own  strength  ?  "  (Amos  vi.  13).  They 
persisted  in  regarding  themselves  as  secure, 
when  even  ordinary  political  foresight  might 
have  Been  that  their  end  was  approaching. 
Whose  glorious  beauty  ia  a  fading  flower; 
rather,  and  to  the  fading  flower  of  hU  glorious 
beauty.  The  "  glorious  beauty  of  Samaria 
was  a  beauty  of  magnificent  luxury.  "  Sum- 
mer "  and  "  winter  houses,"  distinct  each 
from  the  other  (Amos  iii.  15) ;  '•  ivory  pa- 
laces "  (1  Kings  xxii.  39 ;  Amos  iii.  15) ;  a 
wealth  of  "  gardens,  vineyards,  fig-orchards, 
and  oliveyards"  (Amos  iv.  9);  residences 
of  "hewn  stone"  (Amos  v.  11);  feasts  en- 
livened with  "the  melody  of  viols"  (Amos 
V.  23)  ;  "  beds  of  ivory  "  (Amos  vi.  4) ;  "  wine 
in  bowls  "  (Amos.  vi.  6)  ;  "  chief  ointments  " 
(Amos  vi.  6);  constituted  a  total  of  luxu- 
rious refinement  beyond  which  few  nations 
had  proceeded  at  the  time,  ami  which  Isaiah 
was  fain  to  recognize,  in  a  worldly  point  of 
view,  as  "  glorious  "  and  "  beautiful."  But 
the  beauty  was  of  a  kind  liable  to  fade,  and 
it  was  already  fading  under  the  sirocco  of 
Assyrian  invasion.  Which  are  on  the  head 
of  the  fat  valleys ;  rather,  which  is  on  the 
head  (or,  which  decks  the  head)  of  ilie  rich 
valley.  Samaria  was  built  on  a  hill  of  an 
oval  form,  which  rose  up  in  the  midst  of  a 
fertile  valley  shut  in  by  mountains.  The 
prophet  identifies  the  valley  with  the  'king- 
dom itself,  and  then  personifies  it,  and  regards 
its  head  as  crowned  by  the  fading  flower  of 
Samaria's  beauty. 

Yer.  2. — The  lord  hath  a  mighty  and 
strong  cue.  God  has  in  reserve  a  mighty 
power,  which  he  will  let  loose  upon  Samaria. 
The  wicked  are  "liis  sword"  (Ps.  xvii.  13), 
and  are  employed  to  carry  out  his  sentences. 
In  the  present  case  the  "  mighty  and  strong 
one "  is  the  Assyrian  power.  As  a  tempest 
of  hail,  etc.  The  fearfully  devastating  force 
of  an  Assyrian  invasion  is  set  forth  under 
three  distinct  images — a  hailstorm,  a  furious 
tempest  of  wind,  and  a  violent  inundation — 
as  tiiongh  so  only  could  its  full  horror  be 
depicted.  War  is  always  a  horrible  scourge ; 
but  in  ancient  times,  and  with  a  people  so 
cruel  as  the  Assyiians,  it  was  a  calamity 
exceeding  in  terriblenesg  the  utmost  that  the 
modern  reader  can  conceive.     It  involved 


,  the  wholesale  burning  of  oitiea  and  villages, 
the  wanton  destruction  of  trees  and  crops,  th« 
slaughter  of  thousands  in  battles  and  sieges, 
the  subsequent  massacre  of  hundreds  in  cold 
blood,  the  plunder  of  all  classes,  and  tlie 
deportation  of  tens  of  thousands  of  captives, 
who  were  carried  into  hopeless  servitude  in 
a  strange  land.  With  the  hand ;  i.e.  "with 
force,"  "  violently."  So  in  Assyrian  con- 
stantly (compare  the  use  of  the  Greek  x^pO- 

Ver.  3. — ^The  crown  of  pride,  the  drunk- 
ards ;  rather,  of  the  drunkards  (comp.  ver.  1). 
The  "  crown  of  pride  "  is  scarcely  "  Sa- 
maria," as  Delitzsch  supposes.  It  is  rather 
the  self-complacent  and  boastful  spirit  of 
the  Israelite  people,  which  will  be  "trodden 
under  foot "  by  the  Assyrians. 

Ver.  4. — And  the  glorious  beauty,  etc 
Translate,  And  the  fading  flower  of  his 
glorious  beauty,  which  is  on  the  head  of  the 
fat  valley,  shall  be  like  an  early  fig  (that 
comes)  before  the  harvest.  Such  an  "  early 
fig"  is  a  tempting  delicacy,  devoured  as 
soon  as  seen  (comp.  Hos.  ix.  10 ;  Nah.  iii.  12  ; 
Jer.  xxiv.  2,  etc.).  The  "beauty"  of  Sa- 
maria would  tempt  the  Assyrians  to  desire 
it  so  soon  as  they  saw  it,  and  would  rouse 
an  appetite  which  would  be  content  with 
nothing  less  than  the  speedy  absorption  of 
the  coveted  morsel.  Samaria's  siege,  once 
begun,  was  pressed  without  intermission, 
and  lasted  less  than  three  years  (2 .  Kings 
xviii.  9,  10) — a  short  space  compared  to  that 
of  other  sieges  belonging  to  about  the  same 
period ;  e.g.  that  of  Ashdod,  besieged  twenty- 
nine  years  (Herod.,  ii.  157) ;  that  of  Tyre, 
besieged  thirteen  j'ears  ('  Ancient  Mo- 
narchies,' vol.  ill.  492). 

Vers.  5, 6. — The  Fall  of  Samaria  coinci- 
dent WITH  AN  OFrBB  OP  FaVOCB  TO  JuDAH. 
Her  sister's  fate  was  the  most  powerful  of 
all  possible  warnings  to  Judah  against  tread- 
ing in  her  steps.  Samaria  had  perished 
through  want  of  faith  in  Jehovah.  She  had 
turned  to  other  gods;  she  had  trusted  in  her 
own  "glory"  and  "beauty;"  and  she  had 
trusted  in  Egypt.  If  Judah  would  do  the 
exact  opposite,  she  might  be  saved.  If  she 
would  take  Jehovah  for  her  "Crown  of 
glory"  and  "Diadem  of  beauty,"  he  was 
willing  to  be  so  taken.  He  was  willing  to 
impart  a  "  spirit  of  judgment "  to  her  rulers, 
and  "  strength  "  to  her  armed  force. 

Ver.  S. — In  that  day  shall  the  Lord  of 
hosts  be,  etc.  This  is  an  offer,  and  some- 
thing more  than  an  -offer.  It  is  implied 
that,  to  some  extent,  the  offer  would  be 
accepted.  And  clearly  the  closing  of  the 
clouds  around  Samaria  was  coincident  with 
the  dawn  of  a  brighter  day  in  Judah.  Heze- 
kiah  came  to  the  throne  only  three  years 


448 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxvm.  1— 2a 


before  the  fatal  siege  of  Samaria  began. 
His  accession  must  have  been  nearly  con- 
tempoianeous  with  that  expedition  of  Shal- 
raaneseT  against  Hoshea,  when  be  "  shut  him 
up,  and  bound  him  in  prison"  (2  Einga 
zrii.  4).  Yet  he  was  not  daunted  by  his 
neighbour's  peril.  He  began  his  reign  with 
a  political  revolution  and  a  religious  refor- 
mation. He  threw  off  the  yoke  of  Assyria, 
to  which  his  father  had  submitted  (2  Kings 
xviii.  7),  and  lie  cleared  the  land  of  idols 
and  idol-worsliip.  It  was  the  dawn  of  a  day 
of  promise,  such  as  the  prophet  seems  to 
point  to  in  these  two  verses.  Unhappily,  the 
dawn  was  soon  clouded  over  (vers.  7 — 9). 
The  residue  of  his  people ;  t.e.-  Judah.  All 
admit  that  "  they  also,"  in  ver.  7,  refers  to 
Judah,  and  Judali  only ;  but  the  sole  ante- 
cedent to  "  they  also  "  is  this  mention  of  the 
residue  of  God's  people. 

Ver.  6. — For  a  spirit  of  judgment.  How 
far  Judah  had  departed  from  the  spirit  of 
just  judgment  was  made  apparent  in  the 
very  opening  chapter  of  Isaiah's  prophecy 
(vers.  15 — 27).  To  him  that  sitteth  in 
judgment;  rather,  that  sitteth  on  thejtidgment- 
seat  (Cheyne).  For  strength  to  them  that 
turn  the  battle  to  the  gate;  t.e.  "to  those 
who  repulse  an  enemy,  and  drive  him  back 
to  his  own  city's  gate ''  (comp.  2  Kings  xviii. 
8,  "  He  smote  the  Philistines,  even  unto 
Gaza"). 

Vers.  7 — 10. — Judah's  SiNrnLNESS.  The 
reformation  eifected  by  Hczekiah  was  but  a 
half-reformation.  It  put  away  idolatry,  but 
it  left  untouched  a  variety  of  moral  evils,  as : 
1.  Drunkenness.  Judah  was  no  whit  behind 
Ephraim  in  respect  of  this  vice.  The  very 
priests  and  "  prophets  "  gave  way  to  the  dis- 
gusting habit,  and  came  drunk  to  the  most 
solemn  functions  of  religious  teaching  and 
hearing  causes.  2.  Scorn  and  mockery  of 
God's  true  prophets.  The  teaching  of  Isaiah 
was  made  light  of  by  the  officials  of  the 
priestly  and  prophetic  orders,  who  claimed 
to  be  quite  as  competent  to  instruct  men  in 
their  duties  as  himself.  They  seem  to  have 
ridiculed  the  mode  of  his  teaching — its 
catch-words,  as  they  thought  them,  and  its 
insistence  on  minutiffl. 

Ver.  7. — They  also.  Judah,  no  less  than 
Ephraim  (see  vers.  1,  3).  It  has  been  ques- 
tioned whether  literal  intoxication  is  meant, 
ai  1  suggested  that  Judah  "  imitated  the 
pride  and  unbelief  and  spiritual  intoxication 
of  Ephraim"  (Kay).  But  the  numerous 
passages  which  tax  both  the  Israelites  and 
the  Jews  of  the  period  with  drunkenness 
(ch.  V.  11,  22;  xxii.  13;  Ivi.  12;  Hos.  iv.  11 ; 
n\.  5 ;  Amos  vi  6,  eto.),  are  best  understood 


literally.  Orientals  (e.g.  the  Persians)  ai* 
ot'ton  given  to  such  indulgence.  Have  erred 
through  wine ;  rather,  reel  with  wine.  Are 
out  of  the  way ;  or,  dagger.  The  verbs  ex- 
press the  physical  erocts  of  intoxication. 
The  priest  and  the  prophet.  Priests  were 
forbidden  by  the  Law  to  drink  any  wine  or 
strong  drink  previously  to  their  taking  part 
in  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  (Lev.  x.  9), 
and  the  prohibition  was  always  understood 
to  apply  afortimi  to  the  temple  (Ezek.  xliv. 
21).  Prophets  might  have  been  expected 
to  act  in  the  spirit  of  the  command  given  to 
priests.  By  "  prophets  "  here  Isaiah  means, 
not  persons  especially  called  of  God,  but 
official  members  of  the  prophetical  order. 
Of  these  there  were  always  many  in  Judah, 
who  bad  no  strong  sense  of  religion  (see  ch. 
xxii.  10 ;  Jer.  v.  13,  31 ;  Ezek.  xiii  2—16 ; 
Amos  ii.  12;  Micah  iii.  11;  Zeph.  iii.  4, 
eto.).  They  err  in  vision;  rather,  Otey  red 
in  the  vision.  They  are  drunken,  even  in 
the  very  exercise  of  their  pro|ihetical  office — 
when  they  see,  and  expound,  their  visions. 
They  stnmble  in  judgment ;  or,  they  stagger 
when  pronouncing  judgment  (Delitzsch). 
Persons  in  authority  had  been  specially 
warned  not  to  drink  wine  before  the  hearing 
of  causes  (Prov.  xxxi.  4,  5). 

Ver.  8. — So  that  there  is  no  place  clean. 
This  is  probably  the  true  meaning,  though 
the  prophet  simply  says, "  There  is  no  place  " 
(comp.  ch.  V.  8). 

Ver.  9. — Whom  shall  he  teach  1  A  sudden 
and  abrupt  transition.  The  best  explana- 
tion seems  to  be  that  suggested  by  Jerome, 
and  followed  by  Bishop  Lowth  and  most 
commentators,  viz.  that  the  prophet  dra- 
matically introduces  his  adversaries  as  re- 
plying to  him  with'  taunting  speeches. 
"Whom  does  he  think  he  is  teaching?" 
they  ask.  "Mere  children,  just  weaned 
from  their  mother's  milk,  and  taken  away 
from  \he  breast?  Does  he  forf^et  that  we 
are  grown  men — nay,  priests  and  prophets  ? 
And  what  poor  teaching  it  is  I  What '  end- 
less potty  teazing'l  (Delitzsch) — ^precept 
upon  precept,'  ete.  The  intention  is  to 
throw  ridicule  upon  the  smallness  and  vexa- 
tious character  of  the  prophet's  interminable 
and  uninterrupted  chidings  (Delitzsch). 
Knowledge  .  .  .  doctrine.  Technical  terms 
in  Isaiah's  teaching,  which  his  adversaries 
seem  to  have  ridiculed  as  "  catch- words." 
The  term  translated  "doctrine"  means 
properly  "tidings,"  and  involves  the  idea 
that  the  prophet  obtained  the  teaching  so 
designated  by  direct  revelation  from  God. 

Ver.  10. — For  precept  must  be  upon  pre- 
cept ;  rather,  for  it  is  precept  upon  precept 
(Lowth,  Cheyne).  The  whole  teacliing 
is  nothing  but  an  accumulation  of  precept 
upon  precept,  rule  upon  rule,  one  little  in- 
junction followed  up  by  another,  here  a 


CH.  xxvm,  1—29.]    THE  BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


449 


little^  there  a  little.  The  objectors  profesi 
to  find  in  the  prophet's  teaching  nothing 
grand,  nothing  broad — no  enunciation  of 
great  leading  principles;  but  »  perpetual 
drizzling  rain  of  petty  maxims  and  rules, 
TezatiouB,  cramping,  confining;  especially 
unsuitable  to  men  who  had  had  the  training 
of  priests  and  prophets,  and  could  have  ap- 
preciated a  grand  theory,  or  a  new  religious 
standpoint,  but  were  simply  revolted  at  a 
teaching  which  seemed  to  them  narrow, 
childish,  and  wearisome.  It  has  been  said 
that  in  the  language  of  this  passage  "  we 
may  hear  tlie  heavy  babbling  utterance  of 
the  drunken  scoffers  "  (Delitzsoh) ;  but  in 
this  we  have  perhaps  an  over-refinement, 
[saiah  probably  gives  us,  not  what  his  ad- 
rersaries  said  of  him  over  their  cups,  but 
the  best  arguments  which  they  could  hit  on 
in  their  sober  hours  to  depreciate  his  doc- 
trine. The  arguments  must  be  allowed  to 
be  clever. 

Vers.  11 — IS. — Jcbah's  PuNiSHMBNT.  God 
will  retort  on  the  Jews  their  scorn  of  his 
prophet,  and,  as  they  wUl  not  be  tanght  by 
his  utterances,  which  they  find  to  be  childish 
and  unrefined,  will  teach  them  by  utterances 
still  more  unrefined — those  of  the  Assyrians, 
which  will  be  quite  as  monotonous  and  quite 
as  full  of  minuti»  as  Isaiah's. 

Yer.  11  — With  stammering  lips  and  with 
another  tongue.  The  Assyrian  language, 
though  a  Semitic  idiom  nearly  allied  to  He- 
brew, was  sufficiently  different  to  sound  in 
the  ears  of  a  Jew  like  his  own  tongue  mis- 
pronounced and  barbarized. 

Ver.  12. — To  whom  he  said;  rather,  he- 
cause  he  said  to  them.  God  bad  f lom  remote 
times  offered  to  his  people  "  rest "  and  "  re- 
freshing"— or  a  life  of  ease  and  peace  in 
i  V  Palestine — ^but  on  condition  of  tbeir  serving 
him  faithfully  and  observing  his  Laws 
(Deut  xxviii.  1 — 14).  But  they  had  re- 
jected this  "rest,"  since  they  had  refused  to 
observe  the  condition  on  which  it  waa  pro- 
mised. Because  they  had  thus  acted,  God 
now  brought  upon  them  war  and  »  con- 
queror. 

Yer.  IS. — The  word  of  the  Lord  was  to 
them;  rather,  shall  he  to  them.  God  will 
now  speak  to  them,  not  by  his  prophet,  but 
by  the  Assyrian  conqueror,  who  will  do 
what  they  said  Isaiah  bad  done,  i.e.  lay  upon 
them  command  after  command,  rule  after 
rule,  u  constant  series  of  minute  injunc- 
tions, under  which  they  will  chafe  and  fret 
and  at  last  rebel,  bat  only  to  be  "  snared 
and  taken."  It  ia  uncertain  whether  the 
reference  is  to  the  immediate  future  and  to 
the  Assyrians  proper  only,  or  whether  the 
Babylonians  are  not  taken  into  account  also, 
.ad  their  oppression  of  Judiea  pointed  to. 


The  yoke  of  Babylon  was  probably  quite  as 
difficult  to  endure  as  that  of  Assyria ;  and 
we  find  that,  in  the  space  of  eighteen  years, 
it  produced  at  least  three  rebellions. 

Yers.  14—22. — The  Rebuke  op  Josah's 
I^OBLES.  The  power  of  the  nobles  under  the 
later  Jewish  monarchy  is  very  apparent 
throughout  Isaiah's  prophecy.  It  is  they, 
and  not  the  king,  who  are  always  blamed 
for  bad  government  (oh.  i.  10 — 23 ;  iii.  12 — 
15,  etc.)  or  errors  of  policy  (oh.  ix.  15,  16; 
rxii.  15 — 19,  etc.).  Isaiah  now  turns  from 
a  dentmciation  of  the  priests  and  prophets, 
who  especially  opposed  his  teaching,  to  a 
threatening  of  the  great  men  who  guided 
the  course  of  public  affairs.  He  taxes  them 
with  being  "  men  of  scorn  "  (ver.  14),  i.e. 
scomers  of  Jehovah,  and  with  "  a  proud  and 
insolent  self-confidence  "  (Delitzsoh).  They 
have  made,  or  are  about  to  make,  secret 
arrangements  which  will,  they  believe, 
secure  Judsea  against  suffering  injury  at  the 
hands  of  the  Assyrians,  and  are  quite  satis- 
fied with  what  they  have  done,  and  fear  no 
evU.  Isaiah  is  instructed  that  their  boasted 
arrangemente  will  entirely  fail  in  the  time 
of  trial — their  "  refuge  "  (Egypt)  will  be 
found  a  refuge  of  lies  (ver.  17),  and  the 
"overflowing  scourge "  (Assyria)  will  pass 
through  the  land,  and  carry  all  before  it 
(ver.  18).  There  will  then  ensue  a  time  of 
"  vexation  "  and  discomfort  (vers.  19,  20) — 
God's  anger  will  be  poiu-ed  out  upon  the  land 
in  strange  ways  (ver.  21).  He  therefore  warns 
the  rulers  to  lay  aside  their  scorn  of  God, 
and  humble  themselves,  lest  a  worse  thing 
happen  to  them  (ver.  22). 

Yer.  14. — Te  scornful  men ;  literally,  ye 
men  of  tcom.  The  word  used  is  rare,  but 
wiU  be  found  in  the  same  sense  in  Prov. 
L  22  and  xxix.  8.  A  cognate  participle 
occurs  in  Hos.  vii.  5.  That  rule  this  people. 
(On  the  authority  of  the  nobles  at  this  period, 
see  the  introductory  paragraph.) 

Yer.  15. — We  have  made  a  covenant  with 
death  (comp.  Job  v.  23 ;  Hos.  ii.  18).  The 
words  are  a  boast,  expressed  somewhat  enig- 
matically, that  they  have  secured  their 
own  safety  by  some  secret  agreement.  The 
exact  nature  of  the  agreement  they  are  dis- 
inclined to  divulge.  With  bell  are  we  at 
agreement.  A  "synonymous  parallelism," 
merely  strengthening  the  previous  assertion. 
When  the  overflowing  scourge  shall  pass 
through.  Assyrian  invasion  has  been  com- 
pared to  a  "flood"  (oh.  viii  7;  xxviii.  2), 
and  to  a  "  rod  "  or  "  staff"  in  ch,  x.  21.    Her« 

2  a 


150 


THE   BOOK   OF  THE  PllOPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  xxviii.  1—29. 


the  two  metaphors  are  joincci  together.  It 
Bhall  not  come  to  us.  Bmnt;  ineane  will  be 
found — what,  they  do  ridt  say,  either  for 
divnting  the  flood,  or  for  st.  mming  it  For 
we  have  made  lies  our  refuge.  Here  the 
Divine  reporter  departs  from  the  language 
of  those  whose  words  he  is  reporting,  and 
substitutes  his  own  estimate  of  the  true 
nature  and  true  value  of  that  "  refuge  "  on 
which  they  placed  such  entire  reliance.  It 
appears  by  cli.  xxx.  1 — 7  and  ch.  xxxvi. 
6 — 9  that  that  refuge  was  Egypt.  Now, 
Egypt  was  a  "  bruised  reed,"  not  to  be  de- 
pended on  for  keeping  her  engagements. 
To  trust  in  her  was  to  put  confidence  in 
"  lies  "  and  "  falsehood." 

Ver.  16. — Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a  foun- 
dation a  stone.  In  contrast  with  the  insecure 
refuge  and  false  ground  of  confidence  where- 
on the  nobles  relied,  the  prophet  puts  for- 
ward the  one  sure  "Eoek"  on  which  complete 
dependence  may  be  placed — which  he  de- 
clares that  Jehovah  is  laying,  or  "has  laid," 
in  Zion  as  a  tried  stone,  a  precious  comer 
stone,  a  suie  foundation.  The  imagery  is, 
no  doubt,  drawn  from  the  practice  of  Orien- 
tal kings,  and  notably  Solomon,  to  employ 
foundation-stones  of  enormous  size  and 
weight  at  the  corners  of  buildings.  Some 
of  those  uncovered  at  the  comers  of  Solo- 
mon's temple  by  the  Palestine  Exploration 
Fund  are  more  than  thirty-eight  feet  long, 
and  weigh  above  a  hundred  tons  (see 
'  Our  Work  in  Palestine,'  pp.  38, 115).  But 
the  reference  cannot,  of  course,  be  to  the 
material  structure  of  the  temple  as  Israel's 
true  refuge.  Bather,  Jehovah  himself  would 
seem  to  be  the  Book  (ch.  xxvi.  i ;  xxx.  29, 
eto.)  intended;  and  hence  the  application 
to  Christ  by  the  writers  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment (Rom.  ix.  33;  Eph.  ii.  20;  1  Pet.  ii. 
6 — 8)  was  natural  and  easy.  But  it  may  be 
questioned  whether  the  passage  was  to  Isaiah 
himself  "Messianic,"  or  meant  more  than 
that  God  had  set  his  Name  and  his  presence 
at  Jerusalem  from  the  time  that  the  temple 
was  built  there,  and  that  it  was  a  mistake  to 
look  elsewhere  than  to  him  for  deliverance 
or  secui-ity.  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make 
haste.  The  LXX.  have  "  He  that  believeth 
shall  not  he  ashamed  "  or  "  confounded ; "  and 
St.  Paul  (Bom.  ix.  33)  follows  this  rendering. 
It  is  conjectured  that  the  Hebrew  had  origi- 
nally ydbish  instead  of  ydkhish. 

Ver.  17. — Judgment  also  will  I  lay  to  the 
line,  and  righteonsness  to  the  plummet; 
rather,  J  u>ftc«  aUo  wiUI  $etfor  my  rule,  and 
rigUeimineu  for  my  plumib-Une ;  i.e.  I  will 
execute  justice  and  judgment  on  the  earth 
with  all  strictness  and  exactness.  The 
Bcomerg  had  implied  that,  by  their  clever 
devices,  they  would  escape  the  judgment  of 
God  (ver.  15).  The  hail  (comp.  ver.  2). 
The  storm  of  Auyrian  invasion  will  over- 


whelm Egypt,  which  is  a  "  refuge  of  lies," 
false  and  untrustworthy  (see  the  comment 
on  ver.  15).  The  hiding-plaoe.  Mr.  Cheyna 
adds,  "  of  falsehood,"  supposing  a  word  to 
have  fallen  out  of  the  text.  Such  an  ad- 
dition seems  almost  required  to  complete 
the  parallelism  of  the  two  clauses,  and  also 
for  the  balance  between  this  verse  and 
ver.  15. 

Ver.  18. — And  jonr  oovenant  with  death 
■hall  be  disanuuUed;  or,  vnped  out.  The 
entire  clever  arrangement,  by  which  they 
thought  to  avert  the  danger  from  themselves 
and  from  Judtea,  shall  come  to  nought. 
When  the  overflowing  scourge  shall  pass 
through,  then  ye  shall  be  trodden  down  by 
it.  As  the  prophet  continues,  his  metaphor 
becomes  still  more  mixed.  "  Treading  down  " 
was  so  familiar  an  expression  for  destroying, 
that,  perhaps,  its  literal  sense  was  overlooked 
(comp.  oh.  V.  5 ;  vii.  25 ;  x.  6 ;  Dan.  viii.  13 ; 
Mioah  vii.  10 ;  Zech.  x.  5,  etc.). 

Ver.  19. — From  the  time  that  it  goeth 
forth  it  Shan  take  you ;  rather,  as  often  at 
it  passes  along,  it  shall  take  you  away ;  i.e.  as 
often  as  the  flood  of  Assyrian  invasion  sweeps 
through  Palestine,  it  shall  thin  the  popula- 
tion by  death  and  captivity.  We  know  of  at 
least  eight  passages  of  the  flood  through 
Judsaa— one  under  Sargon,  two  under  Sen- 
nacherib, three  or  four  under  Esarhaddon, 
and  two  under  Asshnr-bani-pal.  There  may 
have  been  more.  Morning  by  morning;  «.e. 
frequently — time  after  time.  Shall  it  pass 
over ;  rather,pa«>  along,  or  past  through.  It 
shall  be  a  vexation  only  to  understand  the  re- 
port ;  rather,  it  will  bis  sheer  terror  to  under- 
stand the  doetrine.  There  is  an  allusion  to 
ver.  9.  They  had  thought  scorn  of  Isaiah's 
"  doctrine,"  when  he  taught  it  them  by  word 
of  mouth;  they  will  understand  it  but  too 
well,  and  find  it "  nothing  but  a  terror,"  when 
it  is  impressed  on  them  by  the  preaching  of 
facts. 

Ver.  20.— For  the  bed,  eto.  We  have  a 
proverb,  "  As  a  man  makes  his  bed,  so  must 
he  lie  in  it,"  The  Jews  will  have  made 
themselves  a  bed  in  which  they  can  have  no 
comfort  or  ease,  and  consequently  no  rest. 
But  they  will  only  have  themselves  to  blame 
for  it. 

Ver.  21. — The  lord  shall  rise  up  as  in 
Uount  Ferazim.  The  "  Mount  Perazim  "  of 
this  passage  is  probably  the  same  as  the 
"  Baal-Perazim  "  of  1  Ohron.  xiv.  11,  where 
David  completely  defeated  the  Philistines 
by  the  Divine  help.  This  victory  is  con- 
nected with  another  over  the  same  nation  in 
the  valley  of  Gibeon  (1  Chron.  xiv.  13— 16)l 
Now,  however,  God  was  to  be  on  the  side 
of  the  enemies  of  his  people,  who  were  to 
sufler  as  the  Philistines  had  suffered  in  the 
olden  time.  This  punishment  of  his  own 
people  by  the  iword  of  foreigners  was  strange 


ca.  XXVIII.  1—29.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHBT   ISAIAH. 


461 


work  on  God's  part — a  strange  aot.  But  it 
was  their  strange  conduct  which  caused 
God's  strange  action.  They  had  become, 
0$  it  were,  Philistines. 

Ver.  22. — Be  ye  not  mockers.  As  they 
had  shown  themselves  previously  (vers.  9, 
10).  Lest  your  bands  be  made  strong ;  or, 
leat  your  fettere  grow  strong.  The  prophet 
views  Judah  as  still,  to  some  extent,  an  As- 
syrian dependency,  held  in  light  bonds ;  and 
warns  his  countrymen  that  an  attempt  to 
break  the  light  bonds  may  result  in  Assyria's 
making  them  stronger  and  heavier.  A  con- 
sumption, .  ,  .  determined  upon  the  whole 
earth;  rather,  a  consummation  (comp.  ch. 
X.  22,  23). 

Vers.  23 — 29.— A  Parable  to  comfobt 
Believers.  Isaiah  is  always  careful  to 
intermingle  promises  with  his  threats, 
comfort  with  his  denunciations.  Like  his 
great  Master,  of  whom  he  prophesied,  he 
was  fain  not  to  "break  the  bruised  reed" 
n  "  quench  the  smoking  flax."  When  he 
had  searched  men's  wounds  with  the  probe, 
he  was  careful  to  pour  in  oil  and  wine.  So 
now,  having  denounced  the  sinners  of 
Judah  through  three  long  paragraphs  (vers. 
7 — 22),  he  has  a  word  of  consolation  and  en- 
couragement for  the  better  disposed,  whose 
hearts  he  hopes  to  have  touched  and  stirred 
by  his  warning.  This  consolation  he  puts 
in  a  parabolic  form,  leaving  it  to  their 
spiritual  insight  to  discover  the  meaning. 

Yer.  23. — Give  ye  ear  (comp.  Ps.  xlix.  1 ; 
Ixxviii.  1).  A  preface  of  this  kind,  enjoin- 
ing special  attention  and  thought,  was 
appropriate  to  occasions  when  instruction 
was  couched  in  a  parabolic  form. 

Ver.  24. — Doth  the  plowman  plow  all  day  t 
The  Church  of  God,  so  often  called  a  vine- 
yard, is  here  compared  to  an  arable  field, 
and  the  processes  by  which  God  educates 
and  disciplines  his  Church  are  compared  to 
those  employed  by  man  in  the  cultivation  of 
such  a  piece  of  ground,  and  the  obtaining 
of  a  harvest  from  it.  First  of  all,  the . 
ground  must  be  ploughed,  the  face  of  the 
earth  "opened"  and  the  "clods  broken." 
This,  however,  does  not  go  on  for  ever ;  it  is 
for  an  object — ^that  the  seed  may  be  sown ; 
and,  as  soon  as  the  ground  is  fit  for  the 
sowing  to  take  place,  the  preparation  of  the 
soil  ceases.  Doth  he  open  and  break,  etc.? 
Harrowing  succeeds  to  ploughing  in  the 
natural  order  of  things,  the  object  of  the 
harrowing  being  to  break  and  pulverize 
the  clods. 

Yer.  25. — ^When  he  hath  made  plain  the 
fece  thereof;  i.e.  levelled  it — brought  the 
ground  to  a  tolerably  even  surface.    Soth  he 


not  cast  abroad  the  fltohest  The  Hebrew 
word  translated  "  fitches  " — i.e.  "  vetclies  " — 
is  qetsaeh,  which  is  generally  allowed  to 
represent  the  Nigella  saliva,  a  sort  of  ranun- 
culus, which  is  cultivated  in  many  parts  of 
the  East  for  the  sake  of  its  seeds.  These 
are  black,  and  have  an  aromatic  flavour. 
Dioscorides  (iii.  83)  and  Pliny  (xix.  8)  say 
that  they  were  sometimes  mixed  with  bread. 
And  scatter  the  cummin.  "Cummin" 
((juminum  sativum)  is  "an  umbelliferous 
plant,  something  like  fennel."  The  seeds — 
or  rather,  berries — have  "  a  bitterish  warm 
taste,  with  an  aromati-  flavour"  ('Diet,  of 
the  Bible,'  vol.  i.  p.  372).  They  seem  to 
have  been  eaten  as  a  relish  with  various  kinds 
of  food.  And  cast  in  the  principal  wheat ; 
rather,  and  put  in  wheat  in  rows.  Drill- 
ploughs,  which  would  deposit  gj  ain  in  rows, 
were  known  to  the  Assyrians  ('  Ancient 
Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  p.  198).  And  the  rie  in 
their  place.  Cussemeth,  the  word  translated 
"rie,"  is  probably  the  Iloleus  sorghum,  or 
"  spelt,"  which  is  largely  cultivated  in 
Palestine  and  other  parts  of  the  Bast,  and 
is  the  ordinary  mateiial  of  the  bread  eaten 
by  the  poorer  classes  (see  the  'Pulpit 
Commentary'  on  Exodus,  pp.  219,  220). 
For  "  in  their  place,"  Kay  translates,  "  in  its 
own  border."  The  wheat  and  the  barley 
and  the  spelt  would  all  be  sown  separately, 
according  to  the  diiection  of  Lev.  xix.  19, 
"  Thou  shalt  not  sow  thy  field  with  mingled 
seed." 

Ver.  26. — For  his  God  doth  instrnot  him. 
Through  the  reason  which  God  has  given  to 
men,  they  deal  thus  prudently  and  carefully 
with  the  pieces  of  land  which  they  culti- 
vate. 

Yer.  27. — ^7or  the  fitches  are  not  threshed 
with  a  threshing-instrument.  ,Tbe  Nigella 
saliva  is  too  tender  a  plant  to  be  subjected 
to  the  rude  treatment  of  a  threshing-instru- 
ment, or  "threshing-sledge."  Such  in- 
struments are  of  the  coarsest  and  clumsiest 
character  in  the  East,  and  quite  inapplicable 
to  plants  of  a  delicate  fabric,  Karsten  i^ 
Kiebuhr  thus  describee  the  Arabian  and 
Syrian  practices :  "  Quand  le  grain  doit  €tre 
battu,  les  Arabes  de  Yemen  posent  le  bleit 
par  terre  en  deux  rang&s,  ^pis  centre  ^pis, 
apris  quoi  ils  font  trainer  par-dessus  urte 
grosse  pierre  titie  par  deux  boeufs.  La 
machine  dont  on  se  sort  en  Syrie  consiste 
en  quelquet  planehes  garnies  par-dessous 
d'une  quantitc  de  pierres  Ik  fusil "  ('  Descrip- 
tion de  I'Arabie,'  p.  140).  Neither  is  a  cart 
wheel  tnmed'abont  upon  the  cummin.  The 
allusion  is  to  another  coarse  mode  of  thresh- 
ing practised  in  Palestine  and  elsewhere,  by 
driving  a  cart  with  broad  wheels  over  the 
grain.  But  the  fitches  are  beaten  out  with 
a  staff,  and  the  cummin  with  a  rod.  Canon 
Tristram  says,  "While  tiw   cummin    can 


452 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxvin.  1—29, 


easily  be  separated  from  its  case  by  a  slender 
rod,  the  harder  pod  of  the  Nigella  requires 
tn  be  beaten  by  a  stout  staff"  ('Natural 
History  of  the  Bible,'  p.  445). 

Ver.  28. — Bread  com  is  bruised ;  literally, 
bread ;  but  no  doubt  the  corn,  from  which 
bread  is  made,  is  meant.  Most  critics  regard 
the  clause  as  interrogative,  "  Is  bread  com 
bruised?" — -and  the  answer  as  given  in  the 
negative  by  the  rest  of  the  sentence,  "  No ; 
he  will  not  continue  always  threshing  it,  nor 
crunch  it  with  his  cart-wlieel  and  his  horses 
— he  will  not  bruise  it."  Even  where  the 
rougher  modes  of  threshing  are  employed, 
there  is  moderation  in  their  employment. 
Care  is  taken  not  to  injure  the  grain.  Here 
the  main  bearing  of  the  whole  parable 
appears.  The  afflictions  which  God  sends 
upon  his  people  are  adapted  to  their  strength 
and  to  their  needs.   In  no  case  are  they  such 


as  to  emsh  and  injure.  Only  such  violence 
is  used  as  is  required  to  detach  the  good 
seed  from  the  husks.  Where  the  process  ia 
most  severe,  stUl  the  "bread-Hiom"  ia  not 
"bruised." 

Ver.  29.— This  also  (eomp.  ver.  26).  This 
prudent  dealing  of  the  husbandman  with 
his  produce  is  the  result  of  the  wisdom  im- 
planted in  him  by  God.  The  prophet  goes 
no  further,  but  leaves  his  disciples  to  draw 
the  conclusion  that  God's  own  method  of 
working  will  be  similar.  Wonderfnl  in 
oouusel  (comp.  ch.  ix.  6).  Excellent  in 
■working;  rather,  great  in  wisdom  (comp. 
Job  vi  13;  xii.  16;  Prov.  it  7;  Hi.  21; 
viii.  14;  xviii.  1;  Hicah  vi.  9).  Prov.  vili 
14  is  especially  in  point,  since  there  the  same 
two  qualities  are  ascribed  to  God  as  in  the 
present  passage. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vers.  1,S. — The  drunJcards  of  Epkraim.  While  Scripture,  from  first  to  last,  upholds 
the  moderate  use  of  wine  as  cheering  and  "  making  glad  the  heart  of  man,"  it  is  dis- 
tinct and  severe  in  its  denunciations  of  drunkenness  and  unrestrained  revelry.  The 
son  who  was  "  stubborn  and  rebellious,  a  glutton  and  a  drunkard,"  was  to  be  brought 
by  his  parents  before  the  elders  under  the  Jewish  Law,  and  "stoned  with  stones  that 
he  might  die"  (Deut.  xxL  20,  21).  Kabal's  drunkenness  and  churlishness  together 
caused  him  to  be  "  smitten  by  the  Lord  that  he  died "  (1  Sam.  zxv.  38).  Solomon 
warns  his  son  against  drunkenness  by  reminding  him  of  the  fact,  which  experience  had 
sufficiently  proved  by  his  time,  that  "  the  drunkard  and  the  glutton  shall  come  to 
poverty  "  (Prov.  xxiii.  21).  The  "  drunkards  of  Ephraim  "  are  denounced  in  unsparing 
terms  by  Isaiah  and  Amos.  Christians  are  taught  that  drunkards  "  shall  not  inherit 
the  kingdom  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  vi.  10),  and  bidden,  "If  any  man  that  is  called  a  brothiT 
be  a  drunkard,  with  such  a  one,  no,  not  to  eat"  (1  Cor.  v.  11),  Drunkenness  and 
gluttony  are  naturally  coupled  together,  as  being  each  of  them  an  abuse  of  God's  good 
gifts  to  man;  but  drunkenness  is  far  the  worse  of  the  two,  since,  by  robbing  man  of  his 
belf-control,  it  is  apt  to  lead  him  on  to  a  number  of  other  sins  and  crimes,  and  thus, 
uhile  not  perhaps  worse  in  itself,  it  is  in  its  consequences  far  more  injurious  than 
gluttony.  Drunkenness  is  often  pleaded  as  an  excuse  for  the  crimes  whereto  it  leads ; 
but  some  of  the  wisest  amongst  ancient  legislators  were  so  far  from  accepting  this  plea, 
that  they  doubled  the  penalty  for  an  offence  if  a  man  was  drunk  when  he  committed  it 
(Arist., '  Eth.  Nic.,'  iii.  5,  §  8).  In  the  case  of  the  "  drunkards  of  Ephraim,"  it  may  be 
suspected  that  the  desire  to  drown  their  cares  in  wine  was  at  the  root  .of  their  drunken- 
ness (comp.  ch.  xxii.  13 ;  Prov.  xxxi.  6,  7).  But,  however  we  may  pity  those  who  i»o 
act,  we  cannot  excuse  them.  Difficulties  are  a  call  upon  us  to  use  to  the  utmost  the 
intellect  wherewith  we  are  endowed  by  God,  if  so  be  we  may  anyhow  devise  an  escape 
from  our  troubles — not  •  reason  for  our  pushing  reason  from  its  seat,  and  rushing 
blindfold  on  calamity. 

Vers.  9, 10. — The  dbfectioni  of  unhelieveri  U  tuioh  at  fireach  (he  truth.  The  mgu- 
mentum  ad  hominem,  to  which  Isaiah's  adversaries  had  recourse,  is  one  very  generally 
employed  by  those  who  are  indisposed  to  receive  religious  teaching,  "  Who  are  you," 
the  teacher  is  asked,  "  that  you  should  set  yourself  up  to  teach  us  ?  On  what  grounds 
do  you  suppose  that  you  are  so  much  wiser  than  we  7  We  are  not  babes — not  tied  to 
our  mothers'  apron-strings,  not  mere  children  without  exjwrience  of  life.  We  think 
that  probably  we  know  quite  as  much  on  any  religious  subject  as  you.  Why  should 
you  imagine  that  we  do  not ? "  It  is. difficult  to  meet  this  objection.  By  setting  up 
to  be  a  religious  teacher  »  man  does  certainly  claim  to  be  wiser  th^n  his  neighbours, 


ofi.  iXTin.  1-29.J    TflE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  4S3 

and  a  primS  facie  objection  of  nndne  self-assertion  most  decidedly  lies  against  him. 
He  can  only  meet  this  objection  by  disclaiming  all  personal  merit,  and  declaring  himse  f 
a  mere  mouthpiece  of  One  infinitely  above  him,  whose  doctrine  he  is  commissioned  to 
ipread.  The  objectors  will  then  have  to  question  either  the  fact  of  his  commission  or 
the  authority  of  the  Person  who  gave  it.  Another  line  of  argument,  and  a  very  common 
one,  is  to  turn  the  doctrine  itself  into  ridicule.  Has  the  teacher  nothing  more  to  say 
than  what  has  been  heard  so  often  ? — nothing  but  little  rules,  petty  precepts,  minuto 
directions  for  conduct,  a  touch  here,  a  touch  there,  tiresome  trivialities  1  Has  he  no 
new  grand  scheme  to  propound,  no  fresh  way  of  salvation,  no  interesting  "Church  ol 
the  Future  "  ?  Surely  it  is  idle  to  repeat,  over  and  over  again,  the  same  stale  maxims 
the  same  well-worn  rules!  Who  will  listen  to  a  harper  who  harps  always  on  on', 
string  ?  Something  new,  something  lively,  something  out  of  the  common,  is  wanted,  if 
the  preacher  is  to  secure  attention ;  still  more,  if  he  is  to  affect  conduct.  Unfortunately, 
what  is  new  is  seldom  true ;  and  though,  no  doubt,  novelty  in  treatment  is  to  a  certain 
extent  desirable,  since  the  "instructed  scribe"  should  know  how  "to  bring  out  of  hii 
treasure  things  old  and  new"  (Matt.  xiii.  52),  yet  it  is  the  old  truths  which  alone  have 
power,  which  alone  can  save ;  and  these  need  to  be  perpetually  impressed  on  men,  "  'u 
season  arid  out  of  season,"  dinned  into  their  ears,  forced  on  their  attention,  cut  mv 
their  hearts  by  stroke  after  stroke,  even  at  the  risk  of  its  wearying  them. 

Vers.  14 — ^22. — The  Judgment  prepared  for  scomen.  "  Scomers,"  in  the  language  >f 
Scripture,  are  those  who  set  at  nought  God's  prophets,  or  his  messages,  or  his  Foly 
Word,  or  his  Church,  or  his  ministers.  Men  delight  in  such  scorn  because  it  geenis  to 
them  so  fine  a  thing,  so  grand  a  thing,  so  bold,  so  brave,  so  heroic.  It  is  a  poo"  thing, 
comparatively,  to  exalt  one's  self  against  man ;  it  is  magnificent  to  measure  one'r  strength 
vTith  God's,  and  enter  the  lists  against  him.  This  may,  no  doubt,  be  so  in  rrae  point  of 
view,  and  for  a  time,  while  God  chooses  to  endure  the  contradiction  of  sioners  against 
himself.  But  nothing  (Jan  be  really  grand  or  heroic  which  is  irrationfJ,  "bsurd,  doomed 
to  end  in  failure,  shame,  and  ruin.  There  is  nothing  admirable  in  «  child  kicl^irig 
against  the  commands  of  a  wise  father,  or  in  a  schoolboy  setting  at  p.jught  the  rules  of 
grammar  or  of  conduct  given  him  by  a  good  schoolmaster.  It  is  he  tme  wisdom  of 
those  who  know  themselves  to  be  weak,  and  ignorant,  and  short-sighted,  and  imperfect,  and 
liable  to  error,  to  accept  loyally  the  rule  of  an  authority  stronger  sad  wiser  and  better  than 
themselves.    The  "scomers"  find  in  a  little  time  that  their  rieistance  of  God  is  folly. 

I.  Thbib  earthly  eeliance  fails  them.  This  reliance  -nay  be  (1)  physical  force — 
the  fact  they  have  at  their  heck  and  call  vast  armies,  a  r.umerous  police,  a  well-filled 
treasury,  important  allies,  and  the  like ;  or  (2)  intellectrtl  power,  a  consciousness  of  a 
reserve  of  mental  strength  in  themselves,  an  indomitah'ie  will,  a  keen  intellect,  a  fertilt 
imagination,  great  logical  acumen,  etc.  But  their  hf-ld  on  all  such  things  is  uncertain 
Armies  revolt,  melt  away  by  sickness  and  desertior,  suffer  defeat,  become  demoralized, 
surrender  themselves;  a  police  fails  and  fraternizos with  revolution;  a  treasury  becomes 
"Khausted ;  allies  draw  back  in  the  hour  of  dangei,  as  the  Egyptians  did  in  Israel's  greatest 
need  ;  and  the  mighty  potentate  who  has  scorned  God  and  his  laws  finds  himself,  together 
with  his  advisers,  brought  to  shame,  defeat-'»d,  ruined.  So  with  the  "  scomers  "  whose 
mental  pride  has  puffed  them  up,  God  car.,  abase  them  in  a  moment  by  mental  disease, 
brain-softening,  paralysis,  sense  of  depreision,  disgust  with  life.  How  the  bold  atheist 
trembles,  and  wishes  that  he  could  ret'ict  his  daring  speeches,  when  he  is  struck  down 
Ijy  sickness,  crippled,  bed-ridden,  p'-lsied  perhaps.  God  does  not  always  launch  his 
bolts  in  this  life  ;  but  he  can  at  any  time  do  so,  and  he  does  it  with  sufficient  frequency 
CO  leave  men  without  excuse  if  thty  do  not  note,  and  profit,  by  hb  warnings. 

II.  Am  extebnal  danoeb  ttibbatbns.  No  one  is  safe  from  the  worst  forms  of 
human  suffering.  Temporal  r'  in  may  come  upon  the  rich,  disfavour  and  unpopularity 
upon  the  long-applauded  stst-^man,  domestic  woe,  severe  illness,  excruciating  pain,  upon 
any  one.  In  every  caie  there  is  always  death  threatening  men.  Some  "overflowing 
wotuge"  or  other  is  fliROS^  sure,  sooner  or  later,  to  "pass  through,"  and  press  upon  us, 
and  threaten  to  l»ing  us  <lown  to  the  ground.  The  scorner  trembles  when  such  an  hour 
arrives,  and  inwardly  confesses  his  impotenoy,  even  if  outwardly  he  wear  a  front  of 
jrass,  and  profetiset  to  fear  neither  God  nor  man. 

III.  CaIiAUIty  hwoofs  down  at  last.     Even  if  no  special  judgment  i«  sent  tg 


<'i  THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxvni.  1—29. 

pTinigh  tlie  scorner,  there  arrives  at  last  of  necessity  the  time  of  old  age,  wealtness, 
weariness ;  there  arrives  at  last  death  ;  and,  some  time  before  death,  the  fear  of  death. 
The  scorner  must  go  to  that  God  whose  message  he  has  scorned,  whose  messengers  he 
has  treated  with  contempt  and  contumely.  "  A  consummation  is  decreed."  He  must 
"  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God  "  I  Then  the  folly  of  that  "  brave  "  conduct  on 
which  he  prided  himself  becomes  apparent,  and  he  would  fain  retract  his  old  speeches, 
and  submit  himself,  and  make  his  peace.  But  the  words  addressed  to  scomers  (Prov.  L 
22)  sound  in  his  ears  and  hold  him  back :  "  Because  I  have  called,  and  ye  refused ;  1 
have  stretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  man  regarded ;  but  ye  have  set  at  nought  all  my 
counsel,  and  would  none  of  my  reproof:  I  also  will  laugh  at  your  calamity ;  I  will  mock 
when  your  fear  cometh ;  when  your  fear  cometh  as  desolation,  and  your  destruction 
cometh  as  a  whirlwind ;  when  distress  and  anguish  cometh  upon  you.  Then  shall  they 
call  upon  me,  but  I  will  not  answer ;  they  shall  seek  me  early,  but  they  shall  not  find 
rne :  for  that  they  hated  knowledge,  and  did  not  choose  the  fear  of  the  Lord :  they 
would  none  of  my  counsel :  they  despised  all  my  reproof.  Therefore  shall  they 
eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  own  way,  and  be  filled  with  their  own  devices.  For  the  turning 
»way  of  the  simple  shall  slay  them,  and  the  prosperity  of  fools  shall  destroy  them" 
(Prov.  I  24—32]^ 

Vers.  24 — 28. — The  analogy  of  Divine  to  human  methods  of  working.  Isaiah's  com- 
parison in  this  chapter  rests  wholly  upon  the  assumption  of  an  analogy  between  God's 
dealings  and  man's,  when  the  latter  are  such  as  are  consonant  wiih  reason.  Eeason, 
the  highest  gift  of  God  to  man,  he  assumes  to  be  an  adumbration  of  some  quality  in  the 
Divine  nature,  which  bears  a  real  resemblance  to  it.  Eeason  "  comuth  forth  from  the 
Lord  of  hosts."  It  is  the  voice  of  God  speaking  in  the  soul  of  man.  Let  man 
follow  it,  and  his  actions  are  divinely  guided.  God's  mode  of  action  in  parallel  matters 
may  be  gathered  from  his.  The  general  principle  is  involved  in  the  particular  analogy 
here  indicated.  As  in  human  husbandry,  so  in  God's  tendancg  of  that  Church,  which 
is  his  "  vineyard  "  and  "  fruitful  field,"  there  are  three  principal  processes. 

I.  The  preparation  of  the  ground.  Israel  was  prepared  by  the  long  course  of 
Egyptian  affliction,  by  the  "  ploughshares  "  and  "  harrows"  of  tyrannical  overseers  and 
taskmasters,  which  broke  up  and  pulverized  what  would  otherwise  have  been  an 
ungenial  and  unpromising  soil,  very  unapt  to  bear  fruit.  After  this  preparation  had 
been  made  for  four  hundred  and  thirty  years,  there  followed — 

II.  The  puttdio  in  or  the  seed.  God's  revelation  of  himself  and  of  his  will  at 
Sinai  was  the  sowing  of  the  seed  of  his  Word  in  the  soil  of  Israel's  hearts.  When  he 
had  sufficiently  prepared  the  soil,  he  scattered  the  seed  abundantly — seed  of  various 
kinds — ^which  all  fell  in  its  "  appointed  place,"  and  did  its  appointed  work,  "  turning 
the  hearts  of  the  disobedient  to  the  wisdom  of  the  just,"  and  differencing  the  Jews  from 
1heir  neighbours  by  a  higher  moral  tone  and  a  purer  religion  than  prevailed  elsewhere. 
FinaQy  cam^— 

III.  The  qathbrinq  in  of  the  harvest.  The  seed  is  sown  for  the  sake  of  the  crop 
which  it  will  produce.  God  is  continually  gathering  in  his  crop  by  a  process  analogous 
to  that  which  men  pursue.  He  needs  good  grain  for  his  garner,  and  to  obtain  this  he 
must  separate  the  grain  from  the  husks  and  chaff  with  which  it  is  accompanied.  As 
men  use  various  methods  for  this  object,  some  gentler,  some  severer,  so  God,  too,  in 
the  purifying  of  his  grain,  has  many  varieties  of  treatment.  To  each  kind  of  grain  he 
applies  the  treatment  that  is  fittest.  Some  kinds  are  lightly  beaten,  as  with  slender 
rods;  others  more  heavily,  as  with  stout  staves;  some, on  the  other  hand, are  threshed, 
as  it  were,  with  spiked  drags  and  rollers,  to  clear  them  of  their  encumbrances.  No 
more  force,  however,  is  applied  in  any  case  than  is  necessary,  nor  is  any  force  applied 
for  a  longer  time  than  is  needed.  And  even  in  the  severest  treatment  there  is  gentle- 
ness.   God  has  a  care  that  the  good  grain  shall  never  be  "bruised." 


HOMILIES  BT  VAMOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Condition  of  Samaria.    I.  Denunciation  of  woe.     The  condition  of 
Samaria  was  like  that  of  Jerusalem.    And  judgment  must  first  fall  upon  Samaria,  and 


OH.  xxvm.  1— 29.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  455 

then  upon  Jerusalem  (ch.  viii.  S;  cf.  Micah  i.  6).  Drunkenness  is  named,  "not  as  tlie 
root  of  the  national  evil,  but  rather  as  its  flower.  The  appalling  thing  is  that  when  all 
is  on  the  point  of  collapsing,  those  responsible  for  the  state  should  be  given  up  to  careless 
self-indulgence  "  (Cheyne).  Samaria  is  describeil  as  the  city  of  the  "  proud  crown."  So  in 
Greece  Athens  was  called  the  city  of  the  violet  crown,  and  Thebes  the  "  well-crowned." 
Some  explain  the  crown  of  the  towers ;  others  think  that  the  mere  beauty  of  the  hill 
on  which  the  city  stands,  with  its  cultivated  terraces,  covered  with  corn  and  with  fig 
and  olive  trees,  has  given  rise  to  the  figure.  But  a  worm  is  at  the  root  of  all  this 
beauty,  and  Samaria  must  die.  Drunkenness  may  stand  for  sensuality  in  general, 
which  saps  the  root  of  a  nation's  life.  The  crown,  or  chaplet,  alludes  also  to  the 
custom  among  Greeks,  Bomans,  and  Jews,  of  wearing  a  chaplet  of  flowers  at  fMsts. 
In  the  Book  of  Wisdom  we  read — 

*'  Let  us  fill  ourselves  with  costly  wine  and  ointments : 
And  let  no  flower  of  the  spring  pass  by  us : 
Let  UB  crown  ouiselvea  with  rose-buds,  before  they  be  withered." 

(Wisd.  a.  8.) 

XL  Thb  impending  destruction.  Jehovah  has  an  unflinching  instrument  for 
destruction.  And,  like  an  overwhelming  tempest  and  flood  of  waters,  destruction  will 
come  down  on  the  devoted  city.  The  bright  crown  shall  be  trampled  underfoot ;  and 
Ephraim's  beauty  shall  be  swallowed  up  with  all  the  haste  with  which  one  devours 
the  special  delicacy  of  the  "  early  fig  "  (cf.  Hos.  ix.  10 ;  Micah  vii.  1 ;  Nah.  iii.  12 ; 
Jer.  xxiv.  2).  It  ripens  in  June.  The  whole  is  a  picture  of  sudden  and  utter  destruction. 
(For  the  Assyrian  king  as  agent  in  the  hand  of  Jehovah,  cf.  2  Kings  xvii.  3—6.  For 
the  storm  of  hail  as  a  symbol  of  desolation,  cf.  Job  xxvii.  21 ;  Hos.  xiii.  15.  And 
for  the  flood  as  a  representation  of  hostile  devastation,  cf.  Fs.  xcv.  5 ;  Jer.  xlvi.  7,  8.) 
In  the  moral  order,  sudden  destruction  is  always  connected  with  great  impiety.  The 
triumphing  of  the  wicked  is  short ;  and  while  they  speak  of  peace,  sudden  destruction 
arriveth.  "  What  Isaiah  declared  about  the  kingdom  of  Israel  applies  also  to  the  whole 
world.  By  their  ingratitude,  men  prevent  all  the  goodness  which  the  Lord  has  bestowed 
upon  them  from  reaching  maturity ;  for  we  abuse  his  blessings  and  corrupt  them  by  our 
wickedness.  The  consequence  is  that  hasty  and  short-lived  fruits  are  produced,  which 
cannot  yield  us  continual  nourishment "  (Calyin).  Luxury  blinds,  blindness  leads  to 
stumbling,  and  presently  to  a  sudden  fall. 

IIL  Fulfilments  or  Messianic  peomisk.  Here  again  the  sky  clears,  and  the  star 
of  hope  glimmers.  To  the  converted  remnant  Jehovah  will  be  as  a  glittering  Crown 
and  a  splendid  Diadem.  The  royalty  of  the  Divine  King  shall  be  more  glorious  than 
the  famed  beauty  of  Samaria,  whose  crown  shall  have  been  trampled  in  the  dust,  and 
his  government  a  fairer  chaplet  to  adorn  the  Divine  seat.  There  will  be  a  true  itauty 
and  glori/  in  the  Messianic  times.  Moreover,  there  will  be  a  spirit  oi  Justice  and  sound 
intelligence  diffused.  The  priests,  the  spiritual  leaders,  will  be  especially  imbued  with 
it  (cf.  Deut.  xvii.  8 — 12 ;  Exod,  xxi.  22 ;  2  Chron.  xix.  5 — 8).  But  the  magistracy  in 
general  will  be  enlightened  and  instructed  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  Further,  there  will  be 
valour  in  Ihefidd,  so  that  the  generals  and  their  soldiers  will  be  able  to  turn  back  war  to 
the  gate — probably  of  the  city  whence  their  foes  came  (2  Sam.  xi.  23,  "  And  we  were 
upon  them,  even  unto  the  entering  of  the  gate  ").  There  will,  in  short,  in  the  ideal  or 
Messianic  government,  be  a  government  strong  both  internally  and  externally,  wisdom 
and  justice  in  home  administration,  strength  and  valour  towards  the  foe  vdthout.  These 
are  needed  for  every  empire  and  kingdom ;  and  they  come  from  God.  "  The  Lord  is  our 
Defence."  "  Magistrates  will  not  be  able  to  rule  and  administer  justice  in  a  city,  and 
military  generals  will  not  be  able  to  repel  enemies,  unless  the  Lord  shall  direct  them." 
To  place  our  CMifidence  in  the  world  ia  to  gather  flowers,  which  forthwith  fade  and 
decay.  We  then  seek  to  be  happy  without  God,  that  is,  without  happiness  itself. 
~  if  we  seek  protection  and  good  in  God,  then  no  calamities  can  prevent  him  from  adorn- 
ing the  Church.  When  it  shall  appear  that  everything  is  on  the  eve  of  destruction,  God 
will  (till  be  a  Crown  of  glory  to  hia  peo^e  (Calvin).— J. 

Vers.  7 — 13. — The  mockers  and  the  prophet.  Here,  it  appears,  the  scene  changes  to 
Jerusalem.  And  we  should  compare  the  picture  of  drunkenness  and  luxury  with  that 
in  Amos  yi  1 — 7  and  Micah  ii.  11. 


456  TEE    BOOK   OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxvm.  1— 2S 

I.  The  priests  and  pkophbtb  of  the  time.  They  are  seen  reelin<;  and  staggering 
in  the  mitlst  of,  or  as  they  come  from,  their  most  sacred  functions.  It  is  a  strong  and 
indignant  description  of  drunkenness  in  general  (of.  Prov.  xx.  1).  What  more  humi- 
liating than  the  spectacle !  To  have  "  put  an  enemy  in  one's  mouth  to  steal  away 
one's  brains,"  to  be  the  thrall  of  one's  own  brutal  appetites,  and  a  "scoured  dish  of 
liquor"! 

"  Ebrius  urgeris  multis  miser  undique  curls 
Atqne  animi  incerto  fluitans  errore  vagaria." 

How  much  worse  the  yice  in  those  who  need  all  the  clearness  of  the  brain,  all  the 
composure  of  the  nerves,  for  the  discharge  of  their  high  office !  They  should  be  "  filled  " 
with  another  "  spirit "  than  this.  The  effect  of  the  bodily  intoxication  must  be  to 
cloud  the  judgment,  to  confuse  the  perception  of  truth.  And  how  truly  the  proverb 
must  apply,  "  Like  people,  like  priest "  1  If  such  the  habits  of  the  representatives  of 
the  people,  what  must  the  people  themselves  have  been  ? 

II.  The  8PIBIT  OF  MOCKEBY.  (Vcrs.  9,  10.)  "  The  drunkards  mock  Isaiah  over  their 
cups.  Does  he  not  know  what  respectable  persons  he  is  dealing  with — not  like  children, 
who  need  leading-strings,  but  educated  priests  and  prophets  ?  "  (Cheyne).  They  scoff 
at  him  by  taking  up  words  o'ften  on  his  mouth.  Whom  would  he  teach  knowledge  t 
This  designates  prophetic  preaching  (see  oh.  i.  3  ;  xxxiii.  6).  And  tidings  t  Another 
word  for  revelation,  for  something  "  heard  from  Jehovah  "  (ver.  22 ;  of.  ch.  ixi.  10 ; 
liii.  1).  Then  they  ridicule  his  manner.  He  is  always  "  harping  upon  the  same 
string,"  always  dwelling  upon  the  same  commonplaces  of  morality  and  reli;;ion.  "  It  is 
childish  repetition,"  say  they.  But,  in  fact,  the  preacher  must  keep  dwelling  upon  a 
few  main  points,  so  easily  do  they  "  slip  by  us  "  1  (Heb.  ii.  1).  "  Here  a  little,  and  there 
a  little,"  it  is  a  true  description  of  popular  preaching.  It  may  seem  "  foolishness  "  to 
A  scientifically  trained  understanding;  but  it  has  pleased  God  to  save  many  by  means 
of  it.  The  gospel  requires  us  to  receive  it  as  little  children,  and  little  by  little,  a  say- 
ing here,  and  there  a  verse,  and  again  a  proverb;  this  is  how  little  children  learn. 

III.  Ebplt  of  the  peophbt.  He  "  retorts  their  own  language  upon  them.  Yes ; 
it  shall  be,  in  fact,  as  you  say.  This  childish  monotone  shall  indeed  sound  in  your 
ears.  The  description  which  you  give  of  the  revelations  of  Jehovah  shall  be  exactly 
applicable  to  the  harsh  laconic  commands  of  a  merciless  invader.  For  Assyrian, 
though  closely  allied  to  Hebrew,  was  sufiBciently  different  from  it  both  in  grammar  and 
in  vocabulary  to  seem  a '  stammering '  or  '  barbarous '  tongue  to  Isaiah's  contemporaries. 
1'he  common  diplomatic  and  commercial  language  of  Syria  and  Assyria  was  Aramaic 
(see  ch.  xxxvi.  11)  "  (Cheyne).  (For  the  word  rendered  "  stammer,"  i.e.  speak  tmin- 
telligibly,'  aa'  in  a  foreign  tongue,  cf.  ch.  xxxiii.  19 ;  Prov.  i.  26 ;  xvii.  5  ;  Ps.  ii.  4 ; 
lix.  9 ;  Job  xxii.  19.)  The  lessons  which  the  people  refuse  to  heed  when  taught  them 
in  their  native  tongue,  shall  bo  pressed  home  upon  them  in  the  harsh  accents  of  the 
barbarian.  "  Since  the  Divine  patience  has  been  lost  upon  them,  a  stronger  way  shall 
be  taken  to  force  their  attention.  God  will  thunder  in  their  ears  what  to  them  will 
appear  jargou,  tlie  language  of  a  foreign  nation  1 "  How  prophetic  the  words  in  general ! 
The  ill  taste  on  our  part  which  makes  truth  unpalatable  in  its  simplicity  and  gentle 
persuasiveness  will  be  sorely  criticized  when  we  are  forced  to  listen  to  hoarse  and  rude 
accents.  The  prophet's  burden  had  been  of  rest — rest  to  the  weary ;  of  refreshment  by 
hearty  faith  in  Jehovah  (ch.  xix.  15 ;  cf.  Micah  ii.  10 ;  Jer.  vi.  16).  And  now  the  old 
words,  "  line  upon  line,"  etc.,  will  come  back  upon  memory  and  conscience,  to  be 
enforced  by  retreat,  and  flight,  and  fall,  and  captivity.  "  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let 
him  hear."  If  truth  sound  barbarous,  it  is  because  we  have  not  the  true  listening 
faculty.  If  it  be  not  sweet  to  the  taste  as  honey,  it  is  because  the  stomach  is  dis- 
ordered. If  the  Word  profit  not,  it  is  because  men  do  not  "  mix  it  with  faith,"  i.e. 
with  obedient  and  loving  dispositions.  A  wilful  ignorance  and  blindn,ess  alone  deprives 
of  spiritual  benefits ;  a  stubbornness  ia  turning  away  from  the  offered  light,  and  choosing 
to  remain  in  darkness  (cf.  ch.  viii.  16 ;  vi.  9 ;  xxix.  11 ;  Mark  iv.  12). — J. 

Vera.  14 — 22. — Jehovah  pronounces  Judgment.  The  rulers  or  politicians  are  addressed. 
They  are  stigmatized  as  "  men  of  scorn  "  (cf.  ver.  22 ;  ch.  xxix.  20;  Hos.  vii.  6).  The 
scornful  or  scoflSng  habit  implies  excessive  self-mtifidence  on  the  one  hamd,  on  the  other 


<SH.  xxviii.  1—29,]    THE  BOOK  Of  THE  PROPHET  ISAlAfl.  457 

contempt  of  religion  and  of  God.  But  "  be  not  deceived  ;  God  is  not  tnoclteil."  "  Tt 
has  been  commonly  found,"  says  Calvin,  "  in  almost  every  age,  that  the  common 
people,  though  they  are  distinguished  by  unrestrained  fierceness  and  violence,  do  not 
proceed  to  such  a  pitch  of  wretchedness  as  nobles  and  courtiers,  or  other  crafty  men, 
who  think  that  they  excel  others  in  ability  and  wisdom."  It  is  a  dreadful  and  mon- 
strous thing  when  the  governors  of  the  Church,  not  only  are  themselves  blinded,  but 
even  blind  others,  and  excite  them  to  despise  God  and  ridicule  godly  doctrine. 

I.  False  becduitt.  It  is  some  delusion  aa  to  their  own  secwrity  which  leads  men  to 
mock  at  the  judgments  of  God.  The  ruling  classes  thought  they  had  secured  themselves 
against  an  Assyrian  invasion.  "They  had  their  fortresses,  their  soothsayers  and 
prophets,  their  diplomatists — ^the  latter  almost  occupied  with  the  preliminaries  for  a 
treaty  with  Egypt "  (Cheyne).  This  fancied  security  is  expressed  under  a  bold  figure. 
To  be  in  covenant  with  death  is  like  being  in  covenant  witli  the  beasts  or  the  stones  of 
the  field  (Job  v.  23 ;  Hos.  ii.  18).  They  have  made,  as  they  think,  a  compact  with 
Hades,  Probably  enough  the  allusion  may  be  to  the  wizards  whom  they  consult.  If 
so,  it  is  true  enough  to  all  experience  that  men,  when  they  have  cast  off  the  restraints 
of  true  religion,  seek  to  make  up  for  it  by  dabbling  in  superstition.  "  The  scorners  or 
free-thinkers  have  retained  a  strong  belief  in  the  infernal  powers,  though  little  enough 
in  those  supernal "  (Cheyne).  Idly  have  they  made  lies  their  refuge,  and  so  think  to  be 
exempt  from  the  " flooding  scourge" as  it  sweeps  over  the  land  (cf.  ch.  viii.  7,  8).  They 
act  as  if  there  was  any  security  except  in  "  walking  uprightly,  and  in  speaking  truth 
with  the  heart,"  Their  resources  are  spoken  of  by  them  under  plausible  names,  and 
there  are  ways  that  "  seem  right  to  them."  They  do  not  think  they  are  falsehoods ; 
but  the  prophet  tears  away  the  disguise,  and  calls  them  by  their  proper  names.  "  The 
essential  substance  of  the  thoughts  and  words  of  the  rulers  is  manifest  to  the  Searcher 
of  hearts  "  (Delitzsch). 

II.  The  true  foundation.  A  Foundation-stone  is,  or  shall  be,  laid  in  Zion,  nay, 
costly  and  solid  (cf.  1  Kings  v.  17,  "  Great  stones,  costly  stones,  hewed  stones,  to  lay 
the  foundation  of  the  house").  The  foundation-stone  of  the  temple  typifies  the 
unchangeable  verity  of  God,  as  revealed  from  age  to  age  in  his  holy  seat  and  oracle. 
The  believer  shall  rest  securely  upon  God,  and  only  here  shall  true  security  be  found. 
(For  the  general  idea,  cf.  Matt.  vii.  24,  25.  For  the  application  to  the  Messiah,  see 
1  Pet.  ii.  6 ;  Rom.  x.  11 ;  Matt.  xxi.  42  ;  Luke  xx.  17,  18 ;  ii.  34 ;  l<:ph.  ii.  20.)  The 
kingdom  of  God  on  earth  rests  on  the  Messiah.  He  was  tried  by  temptation  and  other 
suffering,  and  so  proved  able  and  sufficient  for  the  work  of  salvation.  His  Name,  his 
work,  is  the  most  precious  element  in  the  Church's  foundation.  And  amidst  every 
tempest  of  judgment  which  shall  sweep  over  the  world,  he  who  confides  in  Christ  shall 
feel  that  he  has  built  upon  a  Bock  which  cannot  be  shaken ;  and  shall  make  no  haste, 
shall  be  free  from  agitation  and  alarm.  Till  we  possess  faith,  we  must  have  continual 
perplexity  and  distress ;  for  there  is  but  one  Object  on  which  we  can  safely  rely — the 
truth  of  the  Lord,  which  alone  will  give  us  peace  and  serenity  of  mind.  Peace  is  the 
direct  result  of  fnith  (Eom.  v.  1),  and  faith  is  repose  on  that  Foundation  other  than 
which  none  can  be  laid  (1  Cor,  iii.  11). 

III.  Otbbthrow  op  false  refuges.  There  will  be  judgment  exact  and  severe, 
figured  by  the  carpenter's  line  and  plummet.  The  hail-symbol  of  Divine  wrath  (Ps. 
cv.  32 ;  Ezek.  xiii.  13 ;  xxxviii.  22 ;  Bev.  viii.  7 ;  xi.  19)  will  sweep  away  the  refuge 
of  falsehood,  and  the  hiding-place  of  deceit  shall  be  carried  along  in  the  flood.  That 
"covenant  with  death"  shall  be  cancelled,  and  the  "agreement  with  Shedl"  shall  not 
stand.  There  shall  be  repeated  Assyrian  invasions;  and  the  "  tidings "  at  which  men 
laughed  shall  be  a  terror  for  them  to  hear  (cf.  ver.  9).  Or,  having  neglected  the  iioul. 
message,  they  shall  be  compelled  to  listen  to  the  preaching  of  facts.  The  proverb  (ver. 
20)  dejiicts  the  state  of  distress  which  will  exist.  History  will  repeat  itself.  As  when 
David  conquered  the  Philistines  on  Perazim  and  Gibeon  (2  Sam.  v.  20 ;  1  Ohron.  xiv. 
16),  or  as  in  the  scene  of  Josh.  x.  10,  Jehovah  will  arise  to  do  his  work  of  judgment, 
a  work  more  fitted  for  an  alien  people  than  that  of  his  choice  and  love.  God  does  not 
delight  in  judgment;  it  may  even  he  called  his  "strange  work,"  being  foreign  to  the 
kindness  of  his  heart.  All  that  he  drives  at  in  his  chastisements  is  to  bring  men  to 
the  knowledge  of  themselTes.  He  is  "slow  to  anger,"  and  infinitely  compassionate 
(Ps.  ciiL  8;  Ixod,  xxxiv.  6).    Or  the  strangeness  mAy  be  that  he  will  bow  proceed  to 


458  THE  BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxvm.  1- 29, 

attack  and  exterminate  his  people,  as  formerly  he  had  their  foes.    Th«  hand  felt  by 
their  fathers  for  salvation  shall  be  felt  by  them  for  destruction. 

IV.  Closing  appeau  These  scornful  politicians  who  desire  to  break  the  Aseyrian 
bonds  are  exhorted  to  change  their  minds,  and  so  avoid  the  destruction  otherwise 
certain  and  infallibly  decreed  by  Jehovah  of  hosts.  They  wished  to  escape  from  their 
fetters  by  a  breach  of  faith,  with  the  help  of  Egypt,  without  Jehovah,  and  so  mocked 
at  the  prophet's  warning.  He  therefore  appeals  to  them  to  stop  their  scoffing,  lest  they 
should  fall  out  of  their  present  bondage  into  one  more  severe,  and  lest  the  judgment 
certainly  at  hand  should  fall  more  weightily  upon  them.  Timely  repentance  might 
even  now  open  a  way  of  escape.  We  may  apply  the  appeal  as  general.  As'  God  gives 
us  to  foresee  the  issue  of  unwise  ways  in  time,  so  by  repentance  may  we  avert  the 
^nger.  To  despise,  the  Divine  justice  is  not  courage,  but  madness.  Let  ns  judge  our- 
selves, that  we  may  not  be  judged  of  the  Lord;  and  because  "  that  day"  shall  come  as 
a  thief  in  the  night,  ever  let  us  have  oil  in  our  lamps,  t.e.  faith  and  repentance  in  our 
hearts,  wisdom  in  the  intelligence,  justice  and  charity  in  our  lives ;  and  meditate  daily 
on  the  vanity  and  shortness  of  our  lives,  the  certainty  and  uncertainty  of  our  deaths, 
the  exactness  and  severity  of  the  judgment  to  come,  and  the  immutability  of  its  results 
(South).— J. 

Vers.  23 — 29. — Proverbial  lore.  The  ploughman's  activity  and  the  thresher's  are  set 
before  the  people  as  a  parable  of  Israel's  tribulations.  At  least,  this  is  one  of  the  views 
of  the  passage. 

I.  The  purpose  op  AFrLicriosr.  It  is  from  God,  and  the  end  ever  kept  in  view  is 
the  good  of  the  soul  and  its  productiveness.  The  ploughman  does  not  plough  for 
ploughing's  sake.  He  opens  the  soil,  turns  up  the  furrows,  breaks  the  clods  with  the 
harrow,  and  all  to  prepare  for  the  sowing  of  the  seed.  And  so  far  the  tiller  is  an  image 
of  God  and  of  his  operations  on  the  spirit  of  man.  There  is  seeming  severity  of  method, 
but  ever  beneficence  in  the  end.  Again,  there  is  variety  of  method  in  God's  husbandry 
of  the  soul.  As  the  farmer  adapts  his  plans  to  the  soil  and  to  the  kind  of  grain, 
selects  the  best  modes  of  preparing  the  ground,  of  sowing  the  grain,  of  collecting  the 
harvest,  of  separating  the  corn  from  the  chaff.  "  He  does  not  always  plough,  nor  always 
sow,  nor  always  thresh.  He  does  not  deal  with  all  lands  and  all  grains  in  the  same 
way.  Some  he  threshes  in  one  mode,  some  in  another,  but  he  will  be  careful  not  to 
break  the  grain  or  destroy  it  in  threshing  it.  However  severe  may  appear  to  be  his 
blows,  his  object  is  not  to  crush  and  destroy  the  grain,  but  to  remove  it  from  the  chaff 
and  save  it.  in  all  this  he  acts  the  part  of  wisdom,  for  God  has  taught  him  what  to 
do.    So  with  God." 

II.  The  wisdom  of  the  Ditinb  Husbandman.  The  prophet  seems  struck  with  the 
power  of  the  analogy  he  has  drawn ;  and  we  "  notice  his  large  conception  of  revelation." 
It  is  a  want  of  reason,  as  it  seems  to  us,  in  what  we  suffer  that  gives  rise  to  impatience. 
To  detect  wisdom  in  all  we  suffer  is  to  know  calm  and  peace  in  the  soul's  depths.  Let 
us  learn,  then :  1.  That  there  is  o  reason  at  the  bottom  of  the  mystery  of  all  we  suffer, 
though  we  may  not  be  able  to  search  it  out  and  make  it  plain  to  ourselves.  For  our 
own  good,  or  for  the  good  of  others  in  the  scheme  of  providence,  we  must  undergo  and 
endure.  Generally,  perhaps,  we  may  detect  in  the  nature  of  the  cliastieement  the  nature 
of  the  sin.  2.  We  may  expect  variety  of  trial.  This  means  variety  of  experience,  of 
knowledge.  And  every  such  experience,  manfully  and  dutifully  outlived,  brings  fresh 
access  of  hope  to  the  soul.  "  Tribulation  "  is  an  expressive  word  ;  it  is  the  threshing  and 
sifting  process  that  must  ever  go  on,  to  fit  us  for  the  garner  of  eternity.  3.  It  is  not 
the  design  of  God  to  crush,  us.  He  will  not  always  chide,  nor  always  bruise,  will  remit 
his  strokes  when  they  have  had  their  due  effect.  4.  In  patience,  then,  let  us  possess 
our  souls.  As  the  homely  proverb  says,  "  Patience  is  a  plaster  for  all  sores,"  and  "  AH 
things  come  round  to  him  that  waits."  We  may  be  here  more  to  be  acted  upon  than 
to  act ;  to  submit  to  a  probation,  the  fruit  and  result  of  which  will  be  brought  to  light 
in  some  future  sphere  of  service. — J. 

Ver.  12. — Rest  amd  refreshment.  "  To  whom  he  said,  This  is  the  rest  wherewith 
ye  may  cause  the  weary  to  rest ;  and  this  is  the  refreshing :  yet  they  would  not  hear." 
Eeligion  is  designed  to  give  us  both  rest  and  refreshment.    We  are  described  hen— 


CH.  xxviii.  1—29.]    THE   BOOK   OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  469 

L  As  ■WEART,  AND  NEEDINO  REST.  Weary !  Can  we  not  feel  that  ?  Ws  tvear  away. 
The  world  is  full  of  cares  that  fret  and  chafe  us.  We  lose  elasticity  of  step  and  cheeri- 
ness  of  heart.  How  many  can  say,  "  I  am  very  weary"  ?  The  Bible  understands  man, 
and  therefore  its  words  are  so  true  and  its  blessings  so  welcome.  What  do  the  weary 
need  ?  Why,  first  of  all,  rest.  We  read  of  Jesus  that,  being  weary,  "  he  sat  himself  on 
the  well : "  so  completely  exhausted  was  he  that  all  strength  was  gone.  So  not  only  in 
a  physical  sense  do  we  need  sweet  sleep  and  rest ;  but  in  our  human  life  and  in  our 
spiritual  life  we  are  weary.  What  we  need  is  rest  in  a  Person — rest  in  God  himself; 
to  rest  in  the  Lord. 

II.  As  WEAK,  AND  NEEDING  REFRESHMENT.  We  become  exhausted  in  life's  pilgrimage. 
Even  in  relation  to  spiritual  supplies,  our  forces  of  faith  and  hope  and  courage  fail. 
We  need  new  supplies  of  grace  and  strength.  This  is  well ;  for  it  would  not  be  good  for 
us  to  be  able  to  live  on  yesterday's  piety.  Languor  would  come  over  our  efforts  after 
the  Divine  hfe  if  we  had  no  need  to  seek  daily  bread.  But  refreshment  com«s.  The 
faded  flowers  of  our  graces  lift  their  drooping  heads  again.  We  have  all  seen  and  smelt 
the  sweet  fields  after  the  rain-showers ;  we  have  all  noticed  these  "  seasons  of  relreshing." 
So  in  the  highest  things.  These  Hebrews  would  yet  find  God.  He  will  be  again  dew 
unto  Israel,  and  they  will  have  times  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord. 

III.  As  HEEDLESS  AND  UNWILLING  TO  HEAR.  "  Yet  they  would  not  hear."  Some  syren 
voice  is  still  charming  them  and  deadening  their  hearts  to  the  heavenly  ministry.  Let 
us  remember  that  we  hear  what  we  will  to  hear.  That  is  still  the  responsible  function 
of  humanity,  viz.  to  close  or  to  open  the  ears  to  the  messages  of  the  great  King.  It 
is  not  that  God  does  not  speak ;  for  he  speaks  in  many  dialects  :  all  the  languages  of 
human  event  and  circumstance  are  at  his  command.  With  us  let  it  be,  "  Speak,  Lord ; 
for  thy  servant  heareth." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  16. — Christ  the  Corner-stone.  "  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a  foundation  a  Stone, 
a  tried  Stone,  a  precious  Corner-stone,  a  sure  Foundation."  This  stone  we  all  know 
to  be  Christ,  concerning  whom  all  the  prophets  did  testify.  It  is  historically  true  that 
the  Stone  was  laid  in  Zion,  and  what  we  have  to  treat  of  is  the  house.  Here  is  the 
Foundation.  Firm,  as  the  eternal  Bock,  with  its  roots  in  God's  own  everlasting 
nature.  The  Foundation  is  not  created ;  it  is  laid.  God  sends  forth  his  Son  to  be  the 
Saviour  of  men.  This  foundation  is  laid  deep  in  toil  and  tears,  in  humility  and  imlignity. 
It  is  laid  in  the  agony  and  bloody  sweat,  the  cross  and  Passion.  Yet  there  it  is.  None 
can  move  it.  Kor  can  any  soul  of  man  find  other  foundation.  This  Foundation  ig 
designated  in  three  ways. 

L  It  IS  A  TRIED  Stone.  We  are  reminded  of  tried  things.  The  Word  of  the  Lord 
is  a  tried  Word.  Already  prophets  speak  of  the  Christ  as  the  tried  Stone.  The  vision 
they  have  of  him  is  not  of  a  great  Teacher  simply,  but  of  a  Divine  Redeemer,  upon 
whose  mighty  work  all  generations  of  men  may  rest  for  redemption  and  life.  The 
centuries  have  rolled  away,  and  now  history  endorses  prophecy.  Generations  of  departed 
saints  have  testified  that  Christ  is  a  Friend  that  loveth  at  all  times — a  Rock  that  no 
waters  of  sorrow,  not  even  the  waterfloods  of  death,  can  move. 

II.  It  IS  A  PRECIOUS  Corner-stone.  Yes ;  here  the  weight  of  the  building  has  to 
come,  the  Corner-stone.  Precious;  for  there  is  this  description  everywhere  given  oi 
the  Christ :  "  Beside  me  there  is  no  Saviour."  He  is  the  Pearl  of  great  price.  He  is 
the  Church's  one  Foundation.  Precious  in  himself,  as  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and 
separate  from  sinners.  Precious,  because  of  the  living  temple  of  redeemed  souls  which 
he  supports.  Precious  in  the  Father's  eyes,  in  the  eyes  of  angels,  and  of  all  the  great 
multitude  of  the  redeemed. 

III.  A  SURE  Foundation.  That  is  what  we  all  want  in  religion — certainty.'  We  can- 
not do  with  a  mere  philosophic  "  quest."  We  want  "  rest."  We  do  not  want  an  ornate 
religion ;  we  want  rather  to  be  able  to  say,  "  I  know  in  whom  I  have  believed."  When 
the  mind  is  palsied  with  doubt,  when  the  heart  is  quaking  with  fear,  then  we  experience 
the  deepest  misery  possible  to  man;  for  the  sky  above  us  is  soon  lost  to  view  if  the 
rock  beneath  us  is  not  firm  and  true.  Heaven  goes  when  faith  goes.  God  himself 
declares,  "  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  ...  a  tv/re  Foundation." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver,  28,— ini«  we  of  tribulation,     "Bread-corn  is  bruised."     TribulaUon  miut 


4ed  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxvin.  1— Sd- 

thresh  our  lives.  And  when  the  chaff  U  separated  from  the  wheat,  then  the  corn 
must  be  bruised  and  broken.  It  is  not  the  outwardly  peaceful,  comfortable  life  that  has 
in  it  the  elements  of  ministry.  The  Saviour  was  a  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with 
grief.  He  is  brought  near  to  us  as  being  not  of  the  seed  of  angels,  but  of  the  seed  of 
Abraham.  How  were  those  sensibilities  of  his  nature  bruised  with  the  hardness, 
coldness,  and  neglect  of  men  I  How  even  his  disciples  hurt  him,  forsaking  him,  and 
not  even  watching  with  him  one  hour  !  "  Bread-corn  is  bruised."  "  The  wm  of  man 
came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for 
many." 

I.  The  best  lite  means  pain.  Bruised!  Com  is  not  enough.  It  must  be  made 
into  bread.  It  is  thus  that  true  affection  comes  out  when  we  suffer  for  others.  So 
:)l?o  is  it  with  true  humility.  It  is  the  bruised  heart  that  has  medicaments  in  it  for 
others  out  of  its  own  castings  down. 

IL  The  best  life  means  usefulness.  We  stand  in  constant  relationship  to  others. 
Man  may  be  to  his  brother  bread  of  thought,  through  long  hours  of  mental  struggle  and 
agony.  He  may  be  bread  of  compassion  too.  We  are  to  be  "  meet  for  the  Sfester's 
use."  Thus  we  learn  that  to  be  mere  quietists  or  pietists  is  not  enough.  We  must 
not  light  the  lonely  lamp  of  incense  before  the  altar,  and  remain  in  rapt  meditation  or 
even  devotion,  always.  No.  The  disciples  had  to  come  down  from  the  ecstatic  moments 
of  the  transfiguration  to  the  common  earth  and  to  homespun  duty. 

III.  The  best  life  means  opposition  to  the  spirit  of  the  world.  "  Save  us  from 
being  bruised,"  is  the  cry  of  men  of  this  world.  "  Give  us  comfort,  ease,  health,  outward 
prosperity."  And  so  these  are  protected  at  every  point.  Sorrow  is  never  welcomed  as 
an  angel.    Discipline  is  never  thought  of  as  a  moulder  of  character. 

IV.  The  best  life  means  God's  own  chastisement.  This  is  divinely  appointed 
and  delicately  ordered.  It  means  wisdom  and  forethought  and  adaptation  ;  ver.  27, 
"  For  the  fitches  are  not  threshed  with  a  threshing-instrument,  neither  is  a  cart-wheel 
turned  about  upon  the  cummin ;  but  the  fitches  are  beaten  out  with  a  staff,  and  the 
cummin  with  a  rod."    Yes,  that  is  it,  there  is  a  hand  at  work— a  Father's  hand. 

V.  The  best  life  heanb  heaven.  "  Because  he  will  not  ever  be  threshing  it." 
No.  Discipline,  however  painful,  ends  in  the  grave.  The  beauty  of  spiritual  per- 
fection begins  when  we  are  with  the  saints  in  light.  "  These  are  they  which  came  out 
of  great  tribulation.  'J'hey  hunger  no  more.  They  thirst  no  more.  There  shall  be  no 
night  there."— W.  M.  S. 

Vera.  1 — 4,  7,.  8. — The  evil  of  excess ;  a  sermon  on  intemperance.  The  allusion  here 
is  to  the  prevalent  baneful  vice  of  intemperance.  The  evils  which  are  connected  with 
it,  and  which  constitute  its  condemnation,  are  such  as  belong  to  other  kinds  of  excess, 
but  especially  and  emphatical  ly  to  it. 

I.  Honour  is  humiliated  bt  it.  "The  crown  of  pride  is  trodden  under  feet" 
(vers.  1,  3).  The  proud  city,  which  was,  alas  1  a  city  given  up  to  drunkenness,  should 
be  brought  down  to  the  very  dust.  Intemperance  causes  the  man  who  has  held  the 
highest  position  to  become  despised  by  every  neighbour  that  has  the  common  virtue  of 
sobriety ;  it  takes  the  crown  of  honour  from  the  brow ;  it  humbles  even  to  the  ground 
the  pitiable  victims  of  vice. 

II.  Beauty  is  spoiled  by  it.  Its  "glorious  beauty  becomes  a  faded  flower" 
(vers.  1,  4).  Excess  is  found,  not  only  in  the  vulgar,  in  the  illiterate,  in  the  uncomely, 
but  also  in  the  refined,  in  the  accomplished,  in  the  beautiful,  of  the  sons  and  daughters 
of  men.  When  it  is  found  there  it  soon  does  its  fatal  work.  The  beautiful  is  soon 
gone  both  from  the  form  and  from  the  spirit ;  the  green  leaf  withers,  the  exquisite 
bloom  fades.  From  that  which  once  attracted  every  eye,  all  men  turn  away  grieved,  if 
not  positively  repelled. 

III.  Strength  ib  sapped  by  it.  "Overcome  with  wine"  (ver.  1).  The  man 
whose  strength  is  composed  of  so  many  elements — material,  mental,  spiritual — is  posi- 
tively beaten,  overcome,  made  helpless,  useless,  ludicrous,  despicable,  by  a  few  glasses 
of  liquor  1  It  is  a  painful,  shameful  instance  of  strength  being  mastered  by  that  which 
it  ought  to  be  able  to  subdue. 

IV.  WisuoM  is  misled  by  it.  "  They  have  erred  through  wine  .  .  are  oat  of 
the  way  .  .  ,  they  err  in  vision,  they  stumble  in  judgment  *  (ver.  7).    Tbaj  who,  if 


OH.  xxvin.  1— 29.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  461 

their  faculties  were  unclonded,  would  perceive  truth,  and  have  spiritual  insight,  and 
gain  the  guidance  which  Heaven  grants  to  them  that  seels;  it,  are  so  weakened  in  mental 
power,  or  so  bereft  of  spiritual  strength,  that  they  grope  in  darkness  when  they  might 
walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord. 

v.  Influence  is  forfeited  by  it.  "The  priest  and  the  prophet  have  erred." 
Even  those  who,  but  for  guilty  excess,  might  have  led  the  people  in  every  good  way, 
are  caught  in  the  toils,  are  numbered  among  the  victims,  and  their  power  is  gone, 
their  influence  is  forfeited.  A  drunken  prophet  is  one  whom  all  unite  to  spurn,  and  his 
word  is  worth  less  than  nothing  to  the  cause  he  pleads. 

VI.  It  leads  on  and  down  to  that  which  ib  loathsome.    (Ver.  8.) 

VII.  It  consumes  its  consumeb.  (Vers.  4,  7.)  Man  may  say  that  they  swallow 
their  wine,  but  it  is  truer  to  say  of  many  that  their  wine  "  swallows "  them ;  for  it 
devours  their  substance,  their  character,  their  reputation,  their  prospects.  Everything 
is  "  eaten  up  "  like  the  "  hasty  fruit  before  the  summer,"  speedily  and  utterly. 

VIII.  God  is  decidedly  and  empha,ticallt  aoaesst  it.  (Ver.  2.)  He  has  pro- 
nounced against  it  in  strong  terms,  and  he  brings  down  a  heavy  hand  upon  it ;  the 
enemy  which  he  calls  against  those  guilty  of  excess  is  "  a  mighty  and  strong  one : " 
poverty,  shame,  remorse,  loneliness,  early  death,  and  final  exclusion  from  his  presence 
(1  Cor.  vi.  10).— 0. 

Vera.  5,  6. — God!  our  Olory,  Beauty,  etc,  "In  that  day,"  ».e.  in  the  day  when  God 
shall  reign  over  his  people,  either  the  day  of  their  return  to  him  in  loyal  obedience,  or 
the  day  of  their  return  to  their  own  land  under  his  delivering  power — in  that  day  God 
would  be  everything  to  his  chosen  people;  he  would  be  the  Object  and  the  Source  of 
their  glory,  their  beauty,  their  righteousness,  their  strength.  We  may  see  how  God  in 
Christ  is  the  same  to  us. 

I.  OuB  GiiOBY.  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  shall  be  for  a  Crown  of  glory."  We  glory  in  our 
God  as  the  Lord  of  all  power  and  might,  as  the  One  whose  right  hand  is  full  of  righteous- 
ness, as  the  faithful  Creator,  etc. ;  but  we  glory  most  in  him  as  the  God  and  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  him  who  so  pitied  a  rebellious  race  "  that  he  gave  his  only 
begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth,"  etc.  In  Christ  Jesus  the  glories  and  grandeurs 
of  the  Divine  character  are  most  brilliantly  illustrated. 

II.  OuB  Beauty.  "  For  a  Diadem  of  beauty."  In  the  gospel  God  has  (1)  revealed 
the  beauties  of  his  own  character  to  us ;  for  in  the  life,  in  the  spirit  of  Jesus  Christ,  we 
behold  transcendent  moral  loveliness,  all  imaginable  graces  perfectly  blended  and  inter- 
mingled. And  in  it  he  has  (2)  called  forth  the  utmost  possible  beauty  in  human 
character.  There  are  produced  in  Christian  lands  and  by  Christian  processes  not  one  or 
two  exquisite  human  characters  here  and  there,  but  multitudes  of  them  beneath  every 
sky  and  in  every  age ;  such  that  it  is  not  enough  to  say  that  they  are  good  or  that  they 
are  useful;  it  must  be  added  that  they  are  exceedingly  beautiful — they  are  diadems, 
attracting  the  eye,  delighting  the  soul. 

III.  OuB  Righteousness.  "For  a  Spirit  of  judgment."  The  man  who  has  "  learned 
Christ"  is  a  man  of  integrity ;  to  him  injustice,  unrighteousness,  dishonesty,  the  with- 
holding of  that  which  is  due,  of  whatever  kind,  is  not  only  distasteful,  but  impossible : 
"  the  spirit  of  judgment,"  the  spirit  of  equity  and  truth  is  in  him,  gained  from  Christ, 
implanted  by  the  Divine  Spirit.  If  this  spirit,  which  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  be  not  in 
him,  he  is  none  of  Christ's  (Rom.  viii.  12). 

IV.  OuB  Stbbngth.  "  And  for  Strength  to  them  that  turn  the  battle  to  the  gate." 
They  who  truly  know  Qoi  in  Christ  are  "  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his 
might."  God  communicates  to  them  something  of  the  "exceeding  greatness  of  his 
.power."  In  Divine  strength  they  are  strong  (1)  to  discharge  duty ;  (2)  to  bear  burdens ; 
(3)  to  work  in  the  field  of  holy  service;  (4)  to  resist  spiritual  adversaries,  to  "  turn  the 
battle  to  the  gate."— C. 

VerB.  9 — 13. — IndociUtf/.  When  God  apeaks  man  may  well  listen,  whatsoever 
strains  the  Divine  Teacher  may  employ.  But  man  is  often  found  to  be,  not  only  an 
inapt,  but  even  an  unwilling,  scholar.    Such  were  they  who  are  here  terribly  rebuked. 

I.  The  design  or  God's  teaching.  God  had  been  saying,  "This  is  the  rest,"  etc. 
(v«r.  12).    The  end  of  all  God's  instruction  is  to  give  rest  to  his  human  scholars.    Fe<Ke 


462  THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PKOPHBT   ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxvin.  1— 29, 

(yas  the  promise  of  the  old  covenant  (Numb.  vi.  26 ;  xxv.  12).  Best  was  the  offer  of 
the  great  Teacher  (Matt.  li.  28,  29).  Rest  of  heart  in  the  favour  and  love  of  Grod  was 
the  high  and  elevated  hope  held  out  for  all  who  would  learn  and  be  obedient;  and 
this  is  still  the  desire  and  the  design  of  God  in  all  his  teaching  and  in  all  his 
correction. 

n.  Man's  objection  to  God's  method.  "  To  whom,"  they  complain,  "  shall  he 
teach  knowledge  ...  to  them  that  are  weaned  .  .  .  must  it  be  precept  upon  precept?" 
etc.  (vers.  9,  10).  Are  we  such  little  children  that  we  are  to  be  treated  thiM  by 
Jehovah  ?  Men  have  always  been  found  who  object  to  God's  ways  of  guiding  them. 
It  is  too  plain  and  palpabloj  or  it  is  too  mysterious;  it  demands  no  effort  of  the  intellect, 
or  it  taxes  the  thought  too  severely;  it  is  too  commonplace,  or  it  is  too  startling,  or  it 
is  too  hard ;  were  he  to  adopt  some  other  method,  to  come  to  them  in  some  other  way, 
they  would  listen  and  obey ;  but  as  he  speaks  they  will  not  hear.  Especially  are  men 
slow  to  learn  the  simple  and  repeated  lessons  by  which  God  teaches  them  in  his 
providence — the  lessons  which  come  with  every  morning  light  and  with  every  evening 
shade,  with  the  continued  loving-kindnesses  of  the  passing  hour,  with  the  changes  of 
the  seasons,  with  the  passage  of  neighbours  and  friends  to  another  world ;  these  reite- 
rated teachings  are  disregarded,  and  the  one  great  lesson  of  reverence  and  of  devoteduess 
is  unlearned. 

III.  God's  indignation  at  human  contumacy.  The  strain  of  the  prophet  it  one 
outpouring  of  intense  indignation  and  keen  rebuke;  the  anger  of  Jehovah  is  kindled 
against  them.  We  may  understand  that  persistent  indocility  is  a  very  serious  sin  in 
the  estimate  of  God.  Not  to  hearken  when  he  speaks  to  us,  whether  he  speaks  in 
providence,  in  his  Word,  or  in  Christian  ordinance!,  is  to  place  ourselves  beneath  his 
very  high  displeasure. 

IV.  Divine  kbtkibution.  The  penalty  of  their  perverse  indocility  shall  be  that 
they  will  have  to  learn  by  far  less  agreeable  methods  than  the  one  which  they  despised ; 
the  repeated  elementary  instruction  of  the  Hebrew  prophet  should  give  place  to  the 
barbarous  sounds  of  a  foreign  tongue.  Guilty  folly  often  finds  that  punishment  awaits 
it  which  corresponds  only  too  painfully  with  the  sin.  The  Jews  demand  a  king  because 
they  prefer  the  visible  to  the  invisible,  the  physical  to  the  spiritual ;  and  they  gain  one 
who  is  chosen  on  thi.s  cherished  principle  of  theirs,  and  his  bodily  stature  and  visible 
form  prove  to  be  a  sorry  substitute  for  the  wisdom  of  the  invisible  Sovereign :  the  penalty 
is  paid  in  the  same  coin  as  the  transgression,  David's  unholy  interference  with 
domestic  right  is  punished  by  saddest  and  most  serious  disappointments  in  his  own 
family.  Retribution,  not  general  only,  but  that  which  is  particularly  appropriate  to 
our  sin,  awaits  us  a  little  further  on.  Disobedience — and  emphatically  indocility — leads 
to  misery  and  shame.  Hearken  intelligently,  however  and  whenever  God  may  speak, 
and  hasten  cheerfully  to  obey. — 0. 

Vers.  14, 15,  18 — 20. — The  infatuation  of  tin.  In  strong,  pictorial  language  the 
prophet  points  out — 

I,  That  sinful  men  act  as  tb  thet  oould  avbkt  impending  doom.  They  act 
as  if  they  said,  "  We  have  made  a  covenant  with  death,"  etc.  Every  day  the  guilty 
and  the  foolish  are  living  as  if  they  were  possessed  with  a  power  to  wrestle  with  and 
overcome  approaching  doom.  The  drunkard  seems  to  say,  "  I  will  drink,  and  not  be 
ruined  in  health ; "  and  the  gambler  to  say,  "  I  will  stake  money,  and  not  be  disap- 
pointed ; "  and  the  rogue  to  say,  "  I  will  defraud,  and  not  be  detected ; "  and  the  men 
who  "mind  earthly  things"  to  say,  "  We  will  invest  all  our  hopes  and  find  all  our 
heritage  in  this  world,  and  not  be  robbed  of  our  portion,"  etc.  Such  men  seem  to  buoy 
themselves  up  with  that  which,  to  all  that  look  on,  is  a  tran.sparent  infatuation, 

II.  That  sinful  men  convince  themselves  of  that  which  they  might  know 
TO  BE  WHOLLY  FALSE.  They  "make  lies  their  refuge,  and  hide  themselves  under 
falsehoods."  1.  They  choose  the  wrong  course,  and  tell  themselves  they  are  acting 
under  compulsion,  and  are  guiltless.  2,  They  soften  their  sin  by  covering  it  with  some 
pleasant  euphemism,  3,  They  place  between  themselves  and  the  condemnation  of  God 
the  shield  of  human  example,  the  frequency  and  popularity  of  their  vice;  they  screen 
themselves  behind  their  brethren,  as  if  God  did  not  see  them,  and  did  not  hold  them 
guilty.    4.  They  allow  evil  practice  to  beget  such  obliquity  of  moral  viuon  that  they 


OH.  xxvm.  1—29.]    THE  BOOK  OJJ'  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  463 

call  gooi  "  evil,"  and  evil  "  good ; "  thoy  even  "  glory  in  their  shame,"  so  have  they  lied 
unto  theinselves. 

in.  That  sinfui,  men  act  ab  nr  thbt  could  rblt  on  BucconB  which  n  wobth 
LESS.  They  stretch  themselves  m  a  bed  which  is  too  short  for  their  stature ;  they  wra|  ■ 
themselves  with  clothing  which  will  not  cover  them  (ver.  20).  In  their  weariness 
they  resort  t«  pleasures  which  do  not  give  them  rest,  and  from  which  they  rise  as  tired 
as  before.  In  their  sorrow,  or  in  their  shame,  or  in  their  defeat,  they  have  recourse  to 
comf<N:ts  which  give  no  heart-ease,  and  leave  them  sad  and  troubled  in  soul.  Many 
weary  years,  whole  periods  of  life,  even  an  entire  earthly  course,  will  men  spend,  trying 
and  pitifully  failing  to  console  themselves  with  false  comforts,  to  find  rest  in  excite- 
ments, in  vanities,  and  sometimes  in  vices,  which  have  no  power  to  soothe  and  satisfy 
the  soul  which  only  truth  and  love  can  fill. 

rV.  That  God  will  one  day  arouse  them  feom  their  guilty  error.  (Vers. 
18,  19.)  The  overflowing  scourge  will  come,  and  will  not  pass  by  them  ;  they  will  bn 
trodden  down  beneath  it.  The  overwhelming  storm  will  hold  them  in  its  embrace  of 
death.  The  day  of  disillusion,  of  self-reproach,  of  shame,  of  Divine  retribution,  will 
arrive :  "  Be  not  deceived  [do  not  deceive  yourselves] ;  Ood  is  not  mocked :  for  what- 
soever a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap." — G. 

Vers.  16 — i2. — The  Judgments  of  Ood.  When  human  folly  has  gone  to  so  great 
a  length  (ver.  15),  it  may  look  out  for  the  coming  of  Divine  judgment ;  for  this  cannot 
be  long  delayed.     And  when  we  look  we  find — 

L  The  severity  op  God's  visitation.  1.  It  will  correspond  closely  with  man's 
guilt,  as  if  measured  with  line  and  plummet  (ver.  17) ;  it  will  be  broad  as  its  bieadth, 
deep  as  its  depth,  enlarged  to  its  magnitude ;  more  severe  as  man'f  g  lilt  is  more  wanton, 
most  severe  as  it  is  must  aggravated  and  inexcusable.  2.  It  will  be  literally  destructive, 
sweeping  away  the  false  refuge  (ver.  18),  tearing  up  the  unholy  compact  (ver.  19), 
causing  consternation  as  it  proceeds  on  its  desolating  path  (ver.  19),  compelling  those 
who  try  to  make  shift  with  earthly  succour  to  know  the  utter  insufficiency  of  their 
measures  (ver.  20),  constituting  a  very  "  consumption  "  of  all  that  had  been  -possessed 
and  rejoiced  in  (ver.  22).  When  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  "  comes  it  is  often  found  to  he 
a  very  terrible  time  indeed,  stripping  the  rich  and  strong  of  his  wealth  and  power, 
humbling  the  society  or  the  nation  to  the  very  dust,  causing  lamentation,  shame, 
death. 

II.  The  apparent  suddenness  of  it.  (Ver.  21.)  As,  in  the  person  of  David,  the 
Lord  "  broke  forth  like  a  breach  of  waters  "  upon  the  enemy  (2  Sam.  v.  20),  so  suddenly 
will  he  appear  in  judgment  against  those  who  break  his  laws  and  reject  his  Son.  The 
waters  have  been  long  collecting,  the  banks  have  been  long  loosening,  but  in  a  few 
minutes,  at  the  last,  the  dam  is  broken,  and  the  rushing  streams  are  down  the  valley- 
side,  carrying  destruction  in  their  path.  So  is  it  with  the  accumulating  wrath  of  God : 
this  is  "  treasured  "  up  by  sin  after  sin,  year  after  year  (Rom.  ii.  5) ;  but  at  some  point 
in  the  career  it  "  breaks  forth  "  like  David's  army,  like  the  descending  waters,  and 
behold  everything  is  gone — treasure,  reputation,  health,  prospects,  life  itBel£ 

III.  God's  indisposition  to  smite.  It  is  a  strange  work,  a  strange  act,  to  God 
(ver.  21).     To  confer  and  to  sustain  life,  to  impart  blessing,  to  multiply  riches,  to 

•  enlarge  the  mind,  to  strengthen  and  sanctify  the  soul,  to  fill  with  hope  and  joy, — this 
is  the  work  which  is  natural,  congenial,  pleasant  to  him  whose  Name  is  love.  But  to 
visit  with  penalty,  to  smite  rather  than  to  spare,  to  inflict  sorrow  and  humiliation, — 
this  ii  strange,  ungenial,  joyless  to  the  heavenly  Father.  "  As  I  live,"  saith  God,  "  1 
have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked."  He  delighteth  in  mercy,  but  he  is 
constrained  to  punish. 

IV.  The  purpose  of  mbkcy  that  runs  through  the  Divine  judgment.  (Ver.  16.) 
In  the  midst  of  a  passage  where  we  should  expect  to  find  nothing  but  holy  indignation, 
we  meet  with  the  intention  to  bless.  Notwithstanding  all  that  provokes  to  wrath 
and  deserves  destruction,  there  is  to  be  laid  the  precious  Comer-stone  which  nothing 
can  remove,  and  which  will  -uphold  the  most  majestic  fabric  of  prosperity  and  joy. 
God  visits  with  correction — severe,  continuous,  complete ;  yet  he  has  a  redemptive 
purpose  on  his  mind,  and  out  of  all  the  strife  and  discord  a  glorioui  temple  of  truth 
and  piety  will  arise. 


464  THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxvin.  1— 29 

We  learn  that  the  faithful  have  no  need  to  fear,  "  He  that  helieveth  shall  not  make 
haste."  (1)  No  need  to  be  alarmed  for  his  own  safety  ;  for  God,  who  is  his  Refuge,  will 
hide  him  in  the  pavilion  of  his  power.  (2)  No  need  to  take  hurried  or  questionable, 
certainly  not  forbidden  or  unworthy,  steps  for  the  deliverance  of  others;  for  Qod't 
promised  word  is  the  aasurance  of  ultimate  redemption! — C 

Vers.  23 — 29. — Divine  discrimination.  There  are  two  preliminary  lessoni  we  may 
gather  from  these  verses  before  we  pluck  the  principal  one. 

1.  That  in  the  acts  and  rNDUSTBiES  of  man  we  mat  find  apt  illusteations 
OF  THE  WISDOM  OF  GoD.  "  Give  ear  and  hear "  (ver.  23).  There  is  something  well 
worth  observing  in  human  husbandry ;  it  will  teach  the  student  a  useful  lesson  respect- 
ing the  ways  of  God.  Not  only  from  the  lilies  of  the  field  and  from  the  birds  of  the 
air,  but  also  from  the  arts  and  industries  of  man,  come  suggestions  which  will  explain 
Divine  providence  and  give  rest  to  the  troubled  mind. 

n.  That  AORictrLTUBB  affords  one  pboof  of  the  pbbsenob  and  poweb  of  a 
Divine  intellioence.  How  is  it  that,  while  the  birds  and  the  beasts  continue  through 
all  succeeding  ages  to  supply  their  wants  by  the  same  unchanging  processes,  man  is 
ever  moving  forward?  From  hunting  to  grazing,  from  grazing  to  agriculture,  he 
ascends ;  and  in  agriculture  he  shows  a  discretion  and  a  versatility  wliich  are  striking 
to  all  who  have  eyes  to  see  and  souls  to  learn.  The  fact  is  that  man  is  taught  of  God. 
"  His  God  doth  instruct  him,"  etc.  (ver.  26) ;  it  comes  from  him  who  is  "  wonderful 
in  counsel "  (ver.  29).  The  intelligence,  the  shrewdness,  the  inventiveness,  the  patience, 
the  foresight,  which  are  manifested  in  husbandry,  go  far  to  assure  us  that  God  is  near 
us,  laying  his  hand  upon  us,  touching  the  springs  of  our  mind,  calling  forth  from  us 
intellectual  and  moral  faculties  which,  though  immeasurably  inferior,  are  yat  akin  to 
Ua  own. 

III.  That  God  ib  sHowiNa  a  oABEFtn.  disobimikation  in  the  teeatmjint  of 
HiB  ERBiNa  OHixj>BEN.  This  is  the  lesson  of  the  prophet's  illustration :  the  husband- 
man only  ploughs  till  he  is  ready  to  sow;  he  always  threshes  with  the  instrument 
which  is  suitable,  adjusting  his  means  to  the  character  of  the  com ;  he  orders  every- 
thing with  carefal,  discriminating  consideration  of  what  is  best  at  the  particular  time 
with  the  particular  object.  Bo  carefully,  so  wisely,  so  tenderly,  does  God  deal  with  us. 
1.  He  mingles  mercies  with  judgments,  light  with  shade,  hope  with  fear:  "He  does 
not  always  chide."  He  sows  as  well  as  ploughs.  2.  He  places  us  in  spheres  that 
suit  us ;  some  in  the  more  prominent,  others  in  the  more  humble,  parts  of  the  field 
(ver.  25).  3.  He  applies  his  chastisement  according  to  our  nature  and  our  character 
(vers.  27,  28) :  to  some — to  the  more  hardened  and  abandoned — he  administers  hi* 
severer  blows;  to  others — to  his  people  who,  though  his  people,  have  much  yet  to 
learn — ^he  sends  the  milder  and  gentler  measures  of  rebuke ;  on  them  he  lays  his  han(' 
more  tenderly. 

Learn :  1.  That  God,  in  chastisement,  is  seeking  fruit — the  harvest  of  love,  of  truit, 
of  obedience,  of  service.  2,  That  if  he  deals  severely  with  us,  it  is  because  severity  is 
needed  for  the  high  purpose  he  has  before  him.  3.  That  he  will  never  deal  too 
rigorously  with  any  one  of  hia  children. — C, 

Tor.  1. — The  woe  of  the  drunkard.  On  this  subject  there  Is  gnive  danger  of  saying 
extravagant,  unqualified,  and  unreasonable  things.  The  abstract  rightness  or  wrong- 
ness  of  using  strong  drinks  must  be  decided  by  the  individual  judgment.  Enough  now 
to  say  that  no  man  with  the  spirit  of  a  patriot,  much  less  with  the  spirit  of  a  Christian 
— who  is  his  brother's  keeper, — can  observe  the  growth  of  drinking  habits  in  modern 
society  without  serious  alarq ;  no  mothers  without  grave  anxiety  for  their  sons ;  no 
wives  without  deep  concern  for  their  husbands  and  themselves.  The  common  speech 
dbout  drink  too  often  leaves  the  impression  that  the  evil  of  it  lies  in  the  drink  itself, 
and  lo  tands  to  take  our  minds  from  the  much  more  serious  fact  that  the  evil  of  drink 
lies  in  us,  and  ia.  its  relation  to  as — in  feebleness  of  will,  and  lack  of  self-restraint  and 
self-control. 

I.  Wherein  ueb  the  pebil  of  btbono  dbink?  Precisely  in  its  strength,  in  its 
raging.  "  Strong  drink  is  raging."  There  is  produced  by  it  an  elevation  and  excitement 
that  are  beyond  nature;  according  to  the  differences  of  men's  dispositions,  it  is  either  an 


eu.  xx-rai.  1— 29.J    THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  465 

elevation,  or  a  raging  of  folly  or  of  violence.  Our  peril  lies  in  yielding  to  the  unnatural 
or  the  unnecessary.  1.  The  unnatv/ral.  Every  man  is  in  duty  bound  to  develop  all 
his  faculties  up  to  the  limit  of  their  capacity.  But  every  man  is  in  duty  bound  also 
not  to  develop  some  to  the  neglect  of  others;  and  not  to  excite  any  to  a  degree  beyond 
his  full  and  perfect  self-control.  So  far  as  he  does  he  ceases  to  be  a  true  man ;  a  foreign 
power  has  taken  the  place  of  his  central  will,  and  he  ie,  in  fact,  a  man  possessed  and  ruled 
by  an  evil  force,  by  a  devil.  This  may  be  illustrated  by  showing  (1)  the  unnatural 
effect  produced  by  strong  drink  on  the  physical  Irame ;  (2)  the  effect  on  the  moral 
nature,  especially  in  exciting  sensual  passions ;  (3)  the  influence  on  the  children  and 
descendants  of  the  self-indulgent.'  'I'his  is  so  important  a  point,  and  brings  to  view 
such  obscure,  but  painful  facts,  that  a  few  may  be  set  down  from  which  selections  may 
be  made.  Gall  relates  the  case  of  a  Russian  family,  where  the  father  and  grandfather 
had  both  died  prematurely  from  the  effects  of  intoxication,  and  the  grandson  manifested 
from  the  age  of  five  years  the  most  decided  taste  for  strong  liquors.  M.  Morel  says,  "  I 
have  never  seen  the  patient  cured  of  his  propensity  whose  tendencies  to  drinking  were 
derived  from  the  hereditary  predisposition  given  to  him  by  his  parents."  He  gives  also 
the  history  of  four  generations  of  a  family.  First  generation :  the  father  an  habitual 
drunl;ard,  killed  in  a  public-house  brawl.  Second  generation  :  son  inherited  the  father's 
habits,  which  gave  rise  to  attacks  of  mania,  terminating  in  paralysis  and  death.  Third 
generation:  j^randson  strictly  sober,  but  full  of  hypochondriacal  and  imaginary  fears 
of  persecution,  and  had  homicidal  tendencies.  Fourth  generation:  great-grandson,  very 
limited  intelligence,  an  attack  of  madness  when  sixteen  years  old,  terminating  ii^ 
stupidity  nearly  amounting  to  idiocy.  With  him  the  race  became  extinct.  We  can 
conceive  no  revelation  of  the  unnaturalness  of  the  condition  and  rtlations  produced  by 
strong  drink  more  impressive  than  this.  2.  It  is  unnecessary ;  for  it  satisfies  no  demand 
of  the  true  manhood ;  only  the  demands  of  a  depraved,  disordered,  and  diseased  taste. 
The  best  that  can  be  said  of  it  is  that  it  may  be  k  medicine.  It  is  now  well  established 
that  it  is  not  a  necessary  food. 

II.  Who  among  us  lie  exposed  to  the  temptations  of  strong  deink  ?  This  may 
be  answered  with  great  plainness,  simplicity,  and  practical  force.  1.  Those  who  are  bom 
into  a  heritage  of  drinking  tendencies.  2.  Those  who  have  some  ability  in  song  or  enter- 
taining, and  so  are  enticed  into  company  and  tieated  for  tlie  sake  of  the  pleasure  they 
give  (compare  the  case  of  the  poet  Burns).  3.  Tnose  who  have  idle  time  which  can  be 
spent  in  inns  and  hotels.  4.  Those  who  have  great  business  energy  and  enterprise 
without  the  restraining  influence  of  high  moral  principle.  5.  Those  who,  having  little 
pleasure  in  intelligent  occupations,  seek  excitement  in  the  indulgence  of  bodily  passion. 
6.  Those  who  have  unhappy  or  uncomfortable  homes.  7.  Those  whose  daily  work 
takes  them  to  houses  where  they  are  treated  to  drink.  All  are  in  special  peril  at  holi- 
day or  convivialseasons,  and  in  times  of  convalescence  from  disease,  or  of  family  trouble. 
No  one  of  us  can  venture  to  say,  amidst  the  enticements  of  modern  social  life,  "  I  shall 
never  fall.  I  shall  never  be  a  drunkard."  He  neither  knows  himself,  nor  the  subtlety 
of  the  evil,  who  speaks  so  confidently.  Our  power  to  stand  lies  in  our  laying  hold  of 
One  who  is  stronger  than  ourselves,  and  keeping  up  the  prayer,  "  Lead  us  not  into 
temptation,  but  deliver  us  from  evil."  Every  day  and  everywhere,  with  our  eyes  on 
God,  we  should  be  saying,  "  Hold  thou  us  up,  and  we  shall  be  safe." — E.  T. 

Vers.  6,  6. — Bea/uiy,  msdom,  and  strength  for  us  in  God.  Kings  wear  crowns;  kings 
decide  causes  and  give  judgment ;  kings  lead  armies  to  battle ;  so  kings  must  be  chiefly 
in  the  thought  of  the  prophet  here.  But  kings  are,  or  ought  to  be,  the  representatives 
of  the  nations  they  rule ;  the  realized  ideals  of  the  nation,  the  persons  in  whom  they 
can  see  their  best  selves.  Hezekiah  was  in  some  good  sense  such  a  king.  What  God 
was  to  him,  God  would  be  to  all  his  people ;  Isaiah  even  says,  God  was  to  the  residuf. 
of  his  people,  to  the  pious  ones  of  Judah,  when  Samaria  was  taken,  and  the  kingdom  of 
Israel  destroyed.  The  prophet  first  speaks  admiringly  of  them,  and  then  finds  occasion 
for  the  qualifying  of  his  praise  (vers.  7,  8).  We  may  consider  what  God  can  be  to  his 
people,  when  they  open  heart  and  life  to  his  incomings  and  inworkin>;s. 

I.  Ghaeaoteb  fob  the  fellowships  of  life  comes  of  God.  Upon  character  the 
pleasantness  and  gracioUsness  of  life  unions  and  associations  almost  entirely  depend. 
Those  who  have  the  true  helpful  and  sanctifying  power  among  us  are  those  who  have 

IBALAK.  2   B 


i66  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xivra.  1— 29, 

the  "  beauty  of  the  Lord  their  God  upon  them."  There  are  spheres  of  life  in  which 
talent  tells ;  but  in  homes  and  society  it  is  character  that  tells.  After  illustrating  and 
enforcing  this,  the  importance  of  correcting  the  error  of  sentiment,  which  regards 
character  as  a  purely  human  growth  and  attainment,  should  be  shown.  So  easily  do  we 
say,  "  Character,  we  can  win  that  ourselves."  So  needful  is  it  to  show  that  "  character 
is  of  God."  It  comes  out  of  the  circumstances  which  God  provides,  and  out  of  the 
relations  in  which  God  sets  us,  and  through  sorrows,  bearings,  and  strugglings,  which 
God  sanctifies.    St.  Paul  says,  "  I  am  what  I  am."   "  His  grace  on  me  was  not  in  vain." 

n.  Wisdom  for  the  affairs  of  life  comes  of  God.  We  have  natural  skill  for 
some  forms  of  business  or  of  profession ;  but  who  endowed  us  with  the  natural  ability  ? 
We  gain  practical  skill  amidst  the  experiences  of  life;  but  who  renews  the  mental 
powers  and  bodily  health,  and  presides  over  impressions  made  ?  A  thousand  complex 
conditions  come  in  every  life  :  who  guides  to  right  decisions,  directing  the  judgment  in 
ways  of  truth  ?    "  This  wisdom  cometh  from  above." 

III.  Strength  fob  the  demands  of  life  combs  of  God.  The  psalmist  lifts  a 
thankful  heart  to  God  who  "  renews  our  youth  like  the  eagle's."  He  "  giveth  power  to 
the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  he  increaseth  strength."  No  experience  of 
lile  is  more  assured,  none  brings  a  deeper  rest  to  our  hearts  than  this — "  when  we  are 
weak,  then  we  may  be  strong  "  in  God. — R  T. 

Ver.  7. — The  moral  deterioration  of  self-indulgent  habits.  "They  err  in  vision,  they 
stumble  in  judgment."  Isaiah  treats  wine  and  strong  drink  in  much  the  same  way  as 
we  do  now.  To  him  it  was  the  prominent  instance,  and  so  it  could  be  made  the  type, 
of  self-indulgence,  which  has  many  forms  and  many  expressions.  Certain  very  manifest 
degradations  follow  on  indulgence  in  strong  drink,  or  in  opium,  or  in  morphia,  and  in 
these  cases  oppressive  illustrations  are  given  of  the  evils  that  attend  lesser  or  less 
apparent  indulgences.  An  ever-woiking  law  applies  to  all  cases,  small  as  well  as  great ; 
but  we  may  more  easily  trace  the  working  in  the  great.  This  may  be  shown  by  some 
careful  accounts  of  the  dtterioiation  of  mind  and  character  following  on  drink-indulgence 
in  men,  and  even  more  painfully  in  women.  Terrible  stories  of  the  ruin  of  character 
wrought  by  oiauin-smoking  in  China  can  be  given.  And  recently,  very  painful  revela- 
tions have  been  made  of  the  existence  of  a  degiading  morphio-mania,  especially  among 
the  upper  classes.  Persons  who  have  had  moiphia  injected  under  the  skip,  to  relieve 
pain,  find  a  craving  for  it  created;  they  indulge  the  passion,  and  the  result  is  utter 
mental  and  moral  helplessness,  and  a  certain,  dreadful  death.  In  measure,  the  law  of 
deterioiation  applies  to  indulgence  in  eating,  in  drinking  tea,  in  matters  of  sensual 
passion,  in  craving  for  newspapers,  in  seeking  pleasure,  and  even  in  matters  of  play 
or  of  liobby.  As  soon  as  the  indulgence  in  anything  gets  established  it  begins  to 
degrade.  A  man  loses  his  manhood  as  soon  as  any  thing  is  allowed  to  gain  control  over 
him ;  and  with  lost  manhood  comes  dimmed  vision  and  stumbling  judgment.  The 
moral  consequences  of  self-indulgence  may  be  fully  treated  under  four  divisions. 

I.  PiiYsicAL  effects  ON  BODIES.  This  must  be  considered,  because  we  are  every  day 
coming  better  to  understand  the  close  connection  between  bodily  conditions  and  moral 
states.  The  moral  habit  becomes  tightly  fixed  by  an  actual  bodily  bias,  an  actual 
tendency  of  nerve  and  muscle  to  do  again  what  has  been  done  once. 

II.  Moral  effect  on  wills.  There  is  an  actual  weakening  of  will-force.  The 
power  to  say  "  No  "  fades  and  dies  out,  and  the  will  is  borne  away  wheresoever  mere 
appetite  leads. 

III.  Practical  effect  on  conduct.  Wherever  moral  control  is  limited  conduct 
becomes  dangerous  or  disgraceful. 

IV.  Final  eb-fect  on  fate.  Whatever  the  view  taken  of  the  future  state,  they  are 
at  terrible  disadvantage  in  it — even  if  it  be  a  continuous  reforming  condition — whe 
start  on  it  degraded  by  self-indulgence. — R.  T. 

Ver.  10. — Need  for  the  reiteration  of  truth.  "  Line  upon  line."  It  is  not  difficult  to 
set  forth  the  practical  applications  of  this  passage ;  but  we  cannot  be  quite  sure  that  we 
know  the  exact  original  bearing  of  the  words.  Three  suggestions  have  been  made.  1. 
Ver.  9  may  refer  to  God's  favour  to  the  Jews ;  then  ver.  10  describes  the  abimdant 
revelation  made  to  them,  with  rules  and  duties  related  to  all  the  conditions  and  emer- 


CH.  xxvni.  1— 29.]    THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PKOPHET  ISAIAH.  467 

gencieg  of  life.  2.  Ver.  9  may  refer  to  the  incapacity  of  the  leaders  and  religious 
teachers  of  the  Jews ;  then  ver.  10  describes  their  puerile  methods  of  instruction.  3. 
Ver.  9  may  refer  to  the  incapacity  of  the  people  for  high  attainment  in  spiritual  know- 
ledge ;  then  ver,  10  describes  ti:ie  elementary  methods  of  iustruction  which  are  found 
necessary  for  them.  This  may  be  regarded  as  the  most  probable  explanation.  The 
prophet  is  describing  the  effect  of  drunkenness,  which  was  moral  and  intellectual 
weakening.  Sin  is  represented  as  an  enfeebling  drunltenness.  It  is  quite  in  Isaiah's 
method  to  complain  of  the  incapacity  of  the  people  for  the  reception  of  truth :  ch.  liii.  1, 
"  Who  hath  believed  our  report,"  etc.  ?  ch.  vi.  9,  "  Hear  ye  indeed,  but  understand 
not ;  and  see  ye  indeed,  but  perceive  not ; "  ch.  xliii.  8,  "  Bring  forth  the  blind 
people  that  have  eyes,  and  the  deaf  that  have  ears ; "  ch.  xliii.  17,  "  0  Lord,  why  hast 
thou  made  us  to  err  from  thy  ways,  and  hardened  our  heart  from  thy  fear  ?  "  Out  of 
this  relation  of  the  text  comes  the  thought  for  present  consideration.  It  is  this — ■ 
Religious  truths,  daims,  wnd  duties  need  to  be  constantly  reiterated.  The  work  of  the 
Christian  teacher  can  be  put  into  two  words — "  simplify"  and  "  repeat."  Both  obser- 
vation and  experience  prove  the  necessity  for  such  constant  repetition.    We  inquire — 

I.  The  beasons  fob  this  abbangement.  As  a  fact,  it  has  been  found  an  essential 
of  effective  teaching  in  every  age.  One  generation  only  passes  in  a  very  limited  degree 
into  possession  of  the  thought  and  knowledge  of  the  previous  generation.  No  one 
individual  can  make  advances  from  the  platform  of  attainment  reached  by  another. 
Each  one  must  reach  the  knowledge  of  truth,  and  the  sense  of  duty,  for  himself.  This 
makes  the  Bible  and  Christian  teaching  such  ever-new  things.  Solomon  tells  us  that 
there  is  no  new  thing  under  the  sun  ;  but  he  might  with  equal  tiuth  have  said  that 
there  is  no  old  thing.  We  can  see  that  there  must  be  reiteration:  1.  Because  moral 
completeness  is  never  reached  on  this  side  the  grave,  and  so  there  is  always  a  sphere  for 
the  teacher,  and  a  demand  for  the  old  truths.  We  are  constantly  aslung  for  the  renewal 
of  the  same  good  influences,  and  as  we  grow  in  experience  we  even  care  more  for  the 
simpler  first  principles.  2.  Because  the  power  of  spiritual  motives  is  always  liable  to 
weaken  and  fade.  Christian  teaching  proposes  no  mere  fashioning  of  life ;  it  would 
nourish,  revive,  requicken  the  very  springs  of  motive  and  feeling,  ever  seeking  to  make 
and  to  keep  the  heart  and  the  will  right.  The  physician  not  only  removes  sufl'ering,  he 
purifies  the  blood,  and  seeks  to  quicken  the  vitality.  Just  as  the  fountains  and  the 
streams,  so  our  spiritual  natures,  tend  to  lose  their  volume,  and  even  run  dry  ;  there 
must  be  the  constant  reiteration  of  the  showers  for  their  replenishing.  3.  Because 
truth  and  duty-claims  can  only  enter  in  as  they  find  souls  prepared  for  them ;  and 
therefore  truth  and  duty  must  be  always  standing  before  men's  doors,  waiting  their 
opportunity.  The  human  heart  is  closed  to  religion,  and,  when  opened,  its  tendency  is 
ever  to  close  again.  It  is  like  a  spring-door,  and  sin  and  self-love  have  put  the  spring 
on.  When  providences  and  sanctified  influences  open  the  door,  the  old,  old  truth,  and 
the  old,  old  gospel,  must  be  waiting,  reaily  to  enter  in. 

II.  Some  things  oonneotbd  with  us  in  which  this  eeiteration  is  evidently 
nbcessabv.  What  a  joy  it  would  be  to  Christian  pastors  and  teachers  if  none  of  their 
people  needed  I — 1.  To  be  urged  to  accept  the  offers  of  Divine  mercy.  But  many  a  door 
is  shut  yet ;  so  the  message  must  be  spoken  again  and  again.  2.  To  be  reminded  of 
the  duty  of  attending  public  worship,  and  the  means  of  grace.  3.  To  be  persuaded 
concerning  the  cultivation  of  Christian  unity ;  the  expression  of  a  Christly  forgiveness, 
forbearance,  and  charity  in  relations  one  with  another.  4.  To  have  enforced  upon  them 
the  duty  of  watchfulness  against  the  encroachments  of  the  worldly  spirit,  and  the  loss 
of  Christian  zeal,  fervour,  and  first  love.  What  a  joy  it  would  be  to  Christian  teachers 
if  they  could  safely  "  leave  these  first  principles,  and  go  on  unto  perfection  "  1  if  they 
might  lay  down  the  minister's  commission,  as  it  is  now  understood,  because  they  could 
say, "  Lord,  thy  people  no  longer  need  precept  upon  precept,  and  line  upon  line  "  1  Plead, 
in  conclusion,  thus  :  "  You  often  say  of  tlie  ministry, '  It  is  the  same  old  story ;  thei-e 
is  nothing  new.'  But  the  question  is — Have  you  accepted  the  message  ?  Have  you 
obeyed  the  command  ?  It  can  never  be  old  until  you  have,  and  then  it  will  be  so  loved 
and  so  precious  that  you  will  never  think  it  old;  it  will  be  ever  fresh  and  ever  new." — E.T. 

\  er.  10. — Mockers  of  religion.  A  different  explanation  to  that  given  in  the  previous 
homily  is  finding  favour  in  modern  times.     The  passage  is  supposed  to  represent  the 


468  THE   BOOK  OV  THE  FROPHE 1.'  ISAIAH,    [oh.  Xivui.  1—29 

drunkards  mocking  Isaiah  over  their  cups.  "Does  he  not  know  what  respectable 
persons  he  is  dealing  with,  not  like  children  who  need  leading-strings,  hut  educated 
priests  aad  prophets  ?  They  have  caught  up  from  Isaiah  one  of  his  favourite  words 
(probably),  and  repeat  it  with  a  sneer.  He  is  always  interfering  with  moral  and  politi- 
cal recommendations;  always  finding  some  'little'  point  to  censure  and  correct" 
(Cheyne).  "Vers.  9,  10  contain  the  taunting  language  of  the  drunken  priests  and 
judges  of  the  Jews,  who  repel  with  scorn  the  idea  that  they  should  require  the<plain 
and  reiterated  lessons  which  Jehovah  taught  by  his  messengers.  Such  elementary 
instruction  was  fit  only  for  babes ;  it  was  an  insult  to  their  understanding  to  suppose 
that  they  stood  in  need  of  it "  (Henderson).  Dr.  S.  Cox  puts  this  view  of  the  passage 
in  s  very  striking  and  forcible  way  :  "  In  their  private  intercourse  with  each  other, 
when,  as  Isaiah  tells  us,  they  '  were  swallowed  up  of  wine '  ...  in  their  shameless 
carousals,  the  false  priests,  and  the  prophets  who  backed  them  with  '  lying  visions,' 
made  themselves  great  sport  in  jeering  at  Isaiah,  in  ridiculing  the  one  prophet  who 
cared  more  for  the  welfare  of  the  people  than  for  their  applause,  and  loved  the  service 
of  God  more  than  the  pleasure  of  the  senses.  They  mocked  at  his  incorrigible  sim- 
plicity. They  mimicked  and  burlesqued  his  manner  of  speech.  '  Whom  could  he  teach 
knowledge  ? '  they  cried ;  '  and  to  whom  would  he  make  a  message  intelligible  ?  To 
weanlings  from  the  milk,  just  withdrawn  from  the  breast?'  To  them  he  seemed  an 
intolerable  moralist,  for  ever  schooling  them  as  if  they  were  babes,  and  needed  the  mere 
milk  of  instruction,  and  not  strong  men  capable  of  digesting  meat.  '  With  him,'  they 
said, ' it  is  always  precept  on  precept,  line  on  line,  line  on  line,  here  a  little,  and  theie 
a  little.'  Or,  as  we  may,  perhaps,  better  translate  their  words,  they  said, '  With  him  it  is 
always  "  bid  and  bid,  forbid  and  forbid,  a  little  bit  here,  and  a  little  bit  there."*  What 
really  angered  these  burly  scorners  was  that  the  prophet  treated  them  as  though  they 
were  children  only  just  weaned,  and  not  masters  in  IsraeL  They  were  weary  of  hearing 
him  repeat  the  first  rudiments  of  morality,  and  apply  them  to  the  sins  and  needs  of 
the  time."  We  may  fix  attention  on  this  point—Mocking  at  religion  and  religious 
teachers  represents  the  last  stage  of  apostasy.  There  is  little  hope  for  the  mockers; 
they  mutt  go  into  the  fires  of  judgment.  But  what  stages  do  men  pass  through  before 
they  reach  this  point  of  decline  ?  In  answering  this  question  we  may  keep  our  eye  on 
the  illustrations  afforded  by  the  apostasy  of  Jewish  priests  and  rulers,  and  at  the  same 
time  make  due  applications  to  the  perils  of  apostasy,  as  we  may  omselves  be  exposed  to 
them. 

I.  The  religious  man  steps  upon  the  sliding,  downward  road,  when  he  begins  to 
NEGLECT  PERSONAL  souL-cuLTUBB.  As  the  Apostle  John  tells  us,  a  man  prospers  only 
as  his  soul  prospers.  The  essential  thing  in  the  good  man  is  not  well-ordered  conduct, 
but  the  regenerate  life.  The  new  life  needs  its  care  and  its  food  continually.  This 
neglect  of  soul-culture  is  the  "  grieving  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  of  which  St.  Paul  warns  us 
so  earnestly.  It  is  the  "  leaving  of  the  first  love  "  of  which  the  risen  and  living  Christ 
complains.     A  man  goes  wrong  first  in  matters  of  private  devotion  and  Christian  habit. 

II.  The  next  step  is  the  enihboning  or  self-will  in  the  place  or  God's  will. 
Lose  the  sacred  humility  and  fear  that  comes  with  close  relations  to  God,  and  self 
will  be  sure  to  grow  big,  and  the  rule  of  life  comes  to  be  the  '•  devices  and  desires  of  our 
own  hearts."  Then  mistakes,  stumblings,  and  wanderings  are  easy  j  and  "  broad  "  ways 
are  pieferred  to  narrow. 

III.  As  soon  as  this  condition  is  established,  there  arises  the  wish  to  sek  and  know 
nothing  that  can  possibly  conviot  and  humble  ;  and  the  man  lets  the  dust  cover 
his  Bible,  the  grass  grow  over  his  kneeling-place,  and  excuses  keep  him  from  the  house 
of  God.  Like  these  priests  and  leaders,  they  are  at  heart  afraid  of  what  God's  Isaiahs 
might  say  to  them.  May  we  not  ftar  that  this  is  the  secret  reason  for  modem  neglect 
of  God's  worship  ?  Men  do  not  wish  to  be  warned.  They  fear  lest  they  should  be 
warned.  They  do  not  want  to  hear  the  truth  about  the  degrading  slavery  in  which 
idol  self  always  holds  its  victims. 

IV.  Then  comes  the  beginning  of  the  almost  hopeless  stages.  A  blinding  and 
haedeninq  pbocess  goes  on;  and  presently  those  who  would  not  see  cannot  see. 
Then  a  man  can  hear  all  the  terrors,  and  heed  none  of  them ;  can  listen  to  all  the  per- 
suasions of  the  everlasting  love,  and  be  moved  by  none  of  them. 

y.  And  at  last  he  can  even  hook  at  goodness  and  good  men  ;  and  in  his.  foolish 


CB.  xxTiiL  1— 2».J    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHBT  ISAIAH.  46« 

and  wicked  pride  can  scoff  even  at  God's  Word  and  God's  prophet.  Down  low  indeed 
that  man  must  liave  fallen  who  once  knew  the  "  ginry  of  the  Lord,"  and  waited  for  the 
Lord's  will,  and  now,  in  his  rioting,  can  jeer  at  sacred  things.  Impress  that  those  who 
neglect  the  culture  of  piety  put  from  them  all  gracious  influences,  and  become  so 
possessed  with  the  evil  spirit  of  self  that,  like  the  demoniac  in  the  Gospels,  they  say, 
even  to  the  healing,  saving  Ohrist,  "  What  have  we  to  do  with  thee  ?  " — E.  T. 

Ver.  16. — The  ture  Foun'Iation.  "A  precious  Corner-stone,  •  sure  Foundation" 
(Revised- Version).  It  is  characteristic  of  prophetic  messages  that,  however  severely  sins 
may  be  denounced,  and  judgment  declared,  in  the  very  midst  of  the  message  some  word 
of  love  and  hope  and  cheer  is  put  in  for  tlie  sake  of  the  true  and  faithful  ones.  God  is 
ever  mindful  of  his  elect  remnant.  Those  who  are  striving  to  be  obedient  and  righteous 
in  a  degenerate  age,  and  in  the  midi^t  of  abounding  self-indulgence,  are  within  bis 
observation,  and  they  shall  never  want  the  encouragement  of  his  smile,  or  the  cheering, 
comforting  word  of  his  promise.  This  text  is  a  message  sent  to  such  faithful  ones. 
It  contrasts  the  grounds  on  which  the  confidence  of  the  true  Israel  rests  with  the 
grounds  of  confidence  which  those  wore  trying  to  fashion  for  themselves  who  wished  to 
live  in  sin  and  self-will.  Whatever  might  be  the  appearances  of  things,  their  founda- 
tions would  surely  prove  in  the  day  of  trial  to  be  "  refuges  of  lies."  However  it  may  be 
despised,  the  old  Zion-Foimdation  would  be  found  to  abidcj  firm— a  tried  Stone,  a  sure 
Foundation,  in  the  days  of  flood  and  storm.  The  best  of  all  commentaries  on  this  text, 
and  its  associated  verses,  is  found  in  the  figure  with  which  our  Lord  closed  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount.  Our  Lord  translated  the  Zion-Poundation  for  ug,  setting  it 
out  BO  plainly  that  none  need  misimderstand.  God's  safe  foundation  is  just  this — 
Hearing  his  words,  and  doing  them.  He  that  builds  his  life  and  his  hope  on  that 
foundation  "  shall  never  be  moved." 

I.  Thk  foundation-pbinciple  of  II0BAL8  AKD  RELIGION.  By  "  morals  "  we  mean 
right  relations  with  our  fuUow-men.  By  "  religion  "  we  moan  right  relations  with  God. 
Both  these  lie  on  one  and  the  same  foundation-principle.  The  prophet  spoke  to  the 
men  of  Jerusalem  and  Judah,  who  were  familiar  with  the  temple  of  Solomon.  He 
bids  them  look  at  its  foundations,  and  especially  observe  how  all  the  temple  was  reared 
upon  the  majestic  stone  laid  at  the  corner  that  juts  out  into  the  valley,  the  massive 
stone  that  lies  in  its  place  to-day  just  as  they  set  it  in  Solomon's  time — a  precious  corner- 
stone, a  sure  foundation.  But  he  reminds  them  that  the  temple,  its  courts,  and  its 
worship,  represented  and  symbolized  the  Jewish  people,  as  a  nation  consecrated  to  God, 
and  so  that  foundation-stone  represented  the  first,  the  essential  principle  of  the  national 
life,  which  was  this — full  consecration  to  God,  in  trust,  obedience,  and  righteousness. 
They  were  a  people  pledged  in  a  covenant  with  Jehovah.  Their  pledge  was  the  founda- 
tion-stone of  their  national  life.  That  pledge  they  expressed  thus :  "  The  Lord  our 
God  will  we  serve,  and  him  only  will  we  obey."  When  they  passed  to  a  life  of  self- 
will  they  shifted  from  the  true  foundation.  But  so  long  as  that  old  temple  stood  in  the 
centre  of  the  land,  it  spoke  out,  day  and  night,  its  unceasing  reproach.  "  Other  Founda- 
tion can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid."  Translated  into  Christian  form  by  St.  Peter 
(1  Epist.  ii.  6,  8),  the  spiritual  Foundation  is  Christ ;  and  we  are  to  be  building  day  by 
day,  stone  by  stone,  on  the  foundation-principle  which  Christ  laid  for  us  in  his  own 
consecrated  life — the  principle  of  full  obedience  to  God,  rendered  in  a  spirit  of  trustful, 
childlike  humility  and  love.  There  is  really  but  one  antagonistic  principle  of  life  to 
this.  It  may  gain  various  forms  and  expressions,  but  they  are  shapes  assumed  by  one 
body.    The  principle  is  this — life  for  self,  the  making  of  self  our  foundation. 

II.  The  possibility  of  kaisino  a  noble  life  on  this  foundation.  Foundations 
usually  do  no  more  than  give  stability  to  a  building,  but  a  moral  foundation  does  more 
than  this — it  gives  character  to  all  that  is  reared  upon  it.  Let  a  man's  foundation  for 
life  be  a  determination  to  win  material  success,  and  it  wiU  surely  tone  everything  he 
does  with  energy  and  perseverance.  Life  touched  and  inspired  with  this  principle  of 
trustful  obedience  to  God  cannot  fail  to  be  noble,  because  it  will :  1.  Be  pure ;  the 
charm  of  the  •  right "  will  lie  on  everything.  2.  Be  generous ;  because  living  out  of 
self  and  for  God  involves  living  out  of  self  and  for  others.  3.  Be  God-like  ;  for  the 
very  things  which  God  approves  and  seeks  we  also  shall  approve  and  seek. 

III.  The  security  of  the  chakaotbb  and  life  eaisbd  on  the  foundation. 


470  THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxvai.  1— 29 

This  is  expressed  in  the  figure  of  the  last  clauie.  As  repeated  in  Scripture  it  takes 
three  forms.  1.  Shall  not  make  haste,  or  hurry  out  of  his  house  when  calamity  seems 
to  threaten.  2.  Shall  not  be  ashamed  when  the  angels  come  to  test  the  character  of 
the  life.  3.  Shall  not  be  confounded  when  the  days  of  storm  threaten  to  orerwhelm. 
We  are  each  one  of  us  raising  a  temple — the  temple  of  a  character,  of  a  life.  Concerning 
OUT  work  we  may  veil  ask  two  searching  questions.  It  is  on  the  one  sure  Fouadation  ? 
Are  we  raising  it  in  •  manner  that  is  worthy  of  the  Foundation? — B.  T. 

Yer.  20. — MaiCt  indbility  to  order  hit  own  life,  niis  Terse  is  very  possibly  a 
popular  proverb,  which  suggested  a  condition  of  painful  uneasiness.  Matthew  Henry 
gives,  briefly  and  suggestively,  its  meaning  as  used  here  by  Isaiah,  and  as  applicable 
to  us :  "  Those  that  do  not  build  upon  Christ  as  their  Foundation,  but  rest  in  a  right- 
eousness of  their  own,  will  prove  in  the  end  thus  to  have  deceived  themselves ;  they 
never  can  be  easy,  safe,  or  warm ;  tlie  bed  is  too  short,  the  covering  is  too  narrow." 
1'his  line  of  thought  may  be  followed  out,  and  duly  illustrated.  First  make  a  fair 
and  true  picture  of  a  human  life  fashioned  by  the  maa  himself.  Let  him  win  good 
measures  of  success ;  and  let  him  stand  forth  the  envy  of  his  fellows.  Let  us  see  the 
bed  he  makes  for  himself  to  lie  on ;  and  the  coverlet  with  which  he  proposes  to  wrap 
himself  up — a  fine  bed,  a  beautiful  coverlet.  But  all  life-creations  have  to  be  tested  ; 
they  must  be  "  tried  so  as  by  fire."  Let  us  see  this  human  life  tested.  Time  tests ; 
success  tests ;  trouble  tests ;  the  true  Mxn,  Christ  Jesus,  as  our  standard,  tests ;  the 
future  tests.     How  does  the  self-ordered  life  stand  these  testings?    It  is  plain — 

I.  That  tbb;  self-obdebed  life  only  ueets  the  bodilt  needs,  and  fboves 

SHORT   FOB   THESE. 

n.  It  only  meets  the  mental  needs,  and  is  bhobt  fob  these. 

III.  It  only  meets  the  social  needs,  and  is  short  fob  these. 

IV,  It  makes  no  provisions  for  the  spikitual  and  eternal  needs,  and  every 
advancing  year  makes  these  more  and  more  the  supremely  important  ones.  Verily 
"  it  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps."  Then  what  can  he  do?  What 
should  he  do?  (see  ch.  xxvii.  5). — B.  T. 

Ver.  27. — Qod  in  matericU  things  Ulustratet  Ood  in  moral  things.  The  precise 
purpose  for  which  this  illustration  from  agricultural  customs  is  introduced  by  the 
prophet  is  much  disputed.  We  note  that  Isaiah  declares  the  skill  which  the  farmer 
shows  in  choosing  his  times  and  adapting  his  methods,  comes  directly  from  Qod ;  and 
this  suggests  two  points  for  treatment. 

L  Man  plainly  wants  God  fob  the  gettino  of  his  daily  bread. 

II.  How  much  more,  then,  does  he  want  God  fob  that  bbead  which  shall 
feed  the  soul  onto  everlasting  life  ! — B.  T. 

Ver.  29. — Ood's  work  in  men's  minds  and  wills.  The  literal  translation  of  the  last 
clause  of  this  verse  is,  "  He  makes  counsel  wonderful,  he  makes  wisdom  great."  The 
husbandman's  treatment  of  his  crop,  no  less  than  his  preparation  of  the  soil,  is  a  dic- 
tate of  experience  under  Divine  teaching.  But  these  things  are  not  chiefly  matters  of 
hand  and  arm;  they  are  mattersof  thought,  mind,  judgment,  will,  decision.  The  handi- 
craft in  a  farm  is  the  carrying  out  of  decisions  of  mind  and  resolves  of  will.  This  is 
true  of  all  the  business  life  of  men ;  the  bodily  activities  follow  upon  mental  activities, 
and  we  are  reminded  that  God  is  at  the  very  beginnings,  the  secret  sources  of  things, 
presiding  over  movement  of  thought  and  impulse  of  will.  The  consideration  of  this 
tuple  may  be  useii  to  correct  our  constant  disposition  to  close  wp parts  of  our  being  and 
our  life  from  Gud,  giving  him  access  only  to  some  of  them.     We  may  consider — 

I.  The  Maker  or  man's  mind  and  will  surely  knows  them.  The  thought 
of  our  bodies,  se'  by  their  five  senses  in  relation  to  the  material  world,  was  altogether 
the  thought  of  God.  But  it  is  harder  to  realize  that  the  endowment  of  a  mental  nature 
is  also  a  thought  of  God.  It  is  harder  because  oiu-  mental  nature  is  subject  to  growth ; 
and  we  can  separate  the  idea  of  growth  from  God.  And  it  is  yet  harder  for  us  to 
realize  that  the  partial  independence  of  the  creature,  in  the  trust  of  free-will,  is  also  a 
thought  of  God,  because  that  very  independence  leads  us  to  shake  off  all  senae  of  Ood. 
Yet  the  fact  remains  that  he  made  us,  and  he  kuowi  us  altogether. 


CH.  XXIX.  1— 24.J    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH, 


471 


n.  The  Makeb  or  man's  mind  and  will  surely  controls  them.  We  must 
recognize  that  both  mind  and  will  are  under  strict  limitations.  Men  think  and  think 
on,  but  at  length  the  biain-ag«nt  breaks  down,  or  they  get  beyond  themselves,  and  talk 
vague  folly.  And  to  the  most  strong-willed,  the  authoritative  voice  presently  comes, 
saying,  "  Thus  far  shalt  thou  go,  but  no  further,"  Constantly  man  cries,  "  I  would,  but 
I  cannot,  for  God  holds  me  in." 

Ill,  Tms  Maker  of  man's  mind  and  will  sttrelt  inspires  them.  This  is  his 
gracious  and  helpful  relation  to  them  ;  and  this  depends  on  the  attitude  in  which  men 
place  themselves  towards  him.  In  conclusion,  show  what  the  right  attitude  is ;  and 
what  hinders  us  from  takinz  it ;  and  how  the  hindrance  may  be  overcome.  This  will 
lead  to  a  declaration  of  the  gospel  message, — B.  T. 


EXPOSITION, 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 


Vers.  1 — 4. — ^A  Warning  to  Jerusalem. 
ExpoBtulation  is  followed  by  threats.  The 
prophet  is  aware  that  all  his  preaching  to 
the  authorities  in  Jerusalem  (ch.  xzviii.  14 
— ^22)  will  be  of  no  avail,  and  that  their 
adoption  of  measures  directly  antagonistic 
to  the  commands  of  God  will  bring  on  the 
very  evil  which  they  are  seeking  to  avert, 
and  oanse  Jerusalem  to  be  actually  besieged 
by  her  enemies.  In  the  present  passage  he 
distinctly  announces  the  siege,  and  declares 
that  it  will  commence  within  a  year. 

Ver.  1. — ^Woe  to  Ariel,  to  Ariel,  the  oity 
where  David  dwelt  I  "Ariel"  is  dearly  a 
mystic  name  for  Jerusalem,  parallel  to 
"Sheshach"  as  a  name  for  Babylon  (Jer. 
ixv,  26)  and  " 'Ir-ha-heres  "  as  a  name  for 
Heliopolis  (ch.  lix.  18).  It  is  generally  ex- 
plained as  equivalent  to  Ari-El,  "lion  of 
God ; "  but  Delitzsoh  suggests  the  mean- 
ing of  "  hearth  of  God,"  or  "  altar  of  God," 
a  signification  which  "  Ariel "  seems  to 
have  in  Ezek.  xliiL  15,  16.  But  there  is  no 
evidence  that  "  Ariel "  was  ever  employed 
in  this  sense  before  the  time  of  Exekiel. 
Etymologically,  "Ariel"  can  only  mean 
"  lion  of  God,"  and  the  name  would  in  this 
sense  be  sufBciently  descriptive  of  the 
Jewish  capital,  which  had  always  hitherto 
been  a  sort  of  champion  of  Jehovah — a 
warrior  fighting  his  battles  with  a  lion's 
courage  and  fierceness.  Dwelt;  literally, 
pitched  hit  lent — an  expression  recalling  the 
old  tent-life  of  the  Hebrews  (comp.  1  Kings 
zii.  16).  Add  ye  year  to  year;  rather,  a 
f/ear  to  a  year ,-  i.e.  the  ooming  year  to  the 
present  one.  The  intention  is  to  date  the 
commencement  of  the  siege.  It  wil^  fall 
within  the  year  next  ensuing.  Let  them 
kill  saorifioes.  The  best  modem  authorities 
translate,  "lietthe/eatU  rmtheir  round" 
(Kay,  Oheyne,  Delitzsch);  t.«.  let  there  be 
one  more  round  of  the  annnal  festiTal-times, 


and  then  let  the  enemy  march  in  and  com- 
mence the  siege. 

Ver.  2. — ^Tet  will  I  distress  Ariel ;  rather, 
and  then  mill  I  distress  Ariel.  The  sense 
runs  on  from  the  preceding  verse.  There 
shall  be  heaviness  and  sorrow.  Mr.  Cheyne's 
"  moaning  and  bemoaning  "  represents  the 
Hebrew  play  upon  words  better.  The 
natural  consequence  of  the  siege  would  be 
a  constant  cry  of  woe.  And  it  shall  be 
unto  me  as  Ariel.  It  would  be  better  to 
translate,  "  Yet  she  shall  be  unto  me  as 
Ariel."  The  meaning  is  that,  though  dis- 
tressed and  straitened,  Jerusalem  shall  still 
through  all  be  able  by  God's  help  to  answer 
to  her  name  of  "Ariel" — to  behave  as  a 
lion  when  attacked  by  the  hunters. 

Ver.  3. — ^I  will  camp  against  thee  round 
about ;  i.e.  "  I  will  bring  armed  men  against 
thee  who  shall  encamp  around  the  entire 
circuit  of  thy  walls."  There  was  small 
chance  of  forcing  an  entrance  into  Jerusa- 
lem on  any  side  except  the  north ;  but,  in 
order  to  distress  and  harass  her,  an  enemy 
with  numerous  forces  would  dispose  them  all 
round  the  walla,  thus  preventing  all  ingress 
or  egress  (see  Luke  xix.  43).  And  .  .  ,  lay 
siege  against  thee  with  a  mount ;  or,  toith 
a  mound.  Artificial  mounds  were  raised 
up  against  the  walls  of  cities  by  the  As- 
syrians, as  a  foundation  from  which  to  work 
their  battering-rams  with  greater  advantage 
against  the  upper  and  weaker  portion  of 
the  defences  (see  'Ancient  Monarchies,' 
Tol.  ii.  p.  80).  And  .  .  .  raise  forts  against 
thee.  ••  Forts ''  were  usually  movable,  and 
accompanied  the  battering-ram  for  its  better 
protection.  Archers  in  the  forts  cleared 
the  walls  of  their  defenders,  while  the  ram 
was  employed  in  making  a  breach  (see 
Layard,  '  Monuments  of  Nineveh,'  Second 
Series,  pi.  21). 

Ver.  4.— Thy  speech  shall  be  low.  The 
feeble  ones  of  a  people  wasted  and  worn 
ont  by  a  long  siege  are  intended.  These 
cries  would  resemble  those  which  seemed 
to  come  out  of  the  ground  when  a  necro- 
mancer professed  to  raise  a  ghost.    The 


472 


THE  BOOK  OP   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxix.  1— 24 


Hebrew  'ohv  is  need  both  of  the  neoro- 
mancera  (Lev.  xlx.  31 ;  xx.  6,  etc.)  and  of 
the  ghosts  which  they  professed  to  raise 
(1  Sam.  xxviii.  7,  8 ;  2  Kings  xx.  6,  etc.). 
Here  the  "ghost"  is  spoken  of.  Thy 
speech  shall  whisper ;  literally,  chirp  (comp. 
ch.  viii.  19).  The  word  used  oocuis  only 
in  Isaiah. 

Vers.  5 — 8. — The  Warning  tollowed 
BT  A  Pkomise.  It  is  ever  God's  care  to 
prevent  men  from  being  "swallowed  up 
with  overmuch  sorrow  "  (2  Cor.  ii.  7).  As 
long  as  he  is  not  about  to  "  make  a  full 
end"  (Jer.  iv.  27),  he  mingles  promises 
with  his  threats,  words  of  cheer  with  words 
of  warning.  So  now  the  prophet  is  directed 
to  attach  to  his  four  versea  of  denunciation 
(vers.  1 — 4)  four  others  of  encouragement, 
and  to  declare  the  utter  discomfiture  of  the 
vast  host  of  enemies  which  for  a  time  hai 
besieged  and  "  distressed  "  Ariel. 

Ver.  5. — ^Moreover;  ratlier,  hut.  The  re- 
lation of  vers.  5 — 8  to  vera.  1 — i  is  that  of 
contrast.  The  multitude  of  thy  strangers; 
i.e.  "of  thy  enemies"  (comp.  ch.  xxv.  5). 
In  primitive  societies  every  stranger  is  an 
enemy ;  and  hence  language — the  formation 
of  primitive  men — often  has  one  word  for 
the  two  ideas.  In  Latin  hostis  is  said  to 
have  originally  meant  "  foreigner  "  (Oic, 
•  De  Off.,'  i.  12).  Shall  be  like  small  dust. 
Ground  down,  i,e.  to  an  impalpable  powder 
— rendered  utterly  weak  and  powerless. 
The  meaning  is  determined  by  the  clause 
which  follows,  with  which  it  must  neces- 
sarily be  in  close  accordance.  As  chafT 
that  passeth  away.  "  Cliaff,"  in  Scripture, 
is  always  a  metaphor  for  weakness  (comp. 
ch.  T.  24;  xvii.  13;  xxxiii.  11;  xli.  15; 
and  see  also  Ps.  i.  4 ;  xxxv.  5 ;  Job  xxi.  18 ; 
Hos.  liii.  3 ;  Dan.  ii.  35  ;  Zeph.  ii.  2).  It 
has  no  value ;  man's  object  is  to  get  rid  of 
it:  a  light  wind  carries  it  away,  and  no 
one  inquires  whither.  Yea,  it  shall  be  at 
an  instant  suddenly.  Dr.  Kay  says  it  is 
"the  collapse  of  Jerusalem"  which  is  here 
intended.  But  most  other  commentators 
understand,  with  more  reason,  the  collapse 
of  her  enemies  (Cheyne,  Delitzsch,  Vance 
Smith,  Knobel,  etc.). 

Ver.  6. — Thou  shalt  be  visited;  literally, 
ihall  there  be  a  visitation.  On  whom  the 
visitation  will  fall  is  not  expressed;  but  the 
context  shows  that  it  is  on  the  enemiea  of 
Judah.  The  terrible  nature  of  the  visita- 
tion is  signified  by  an  enumeration  of  the 
most  fearful  of  God's  judgments — "thunder, 
earthquake,  great  noise,  whirlwind,  tem- 
pest, and  a  flame  of  devouring  fire."  AU 
the  expressions  are  probably  metaphorical.     I 

Ver.  7. — Her  munition ;   i.e.  her  defences  ' 
—the  walls  and  towers  in  which  she  put  her  i 


trust  (comp.  ver.  3).  As  a  dream  of  a  night 
vision.  •'  The  baseless  fubiic  of  a  vision, 
when  it  has  once  passed  by,  "leaves  not  • 
wrack  behind."  The  entire  host  of  the 
"  terrible  ones  "  would  melt  away  and  dis- 
appear, as  a  night  vision  before  the  light 
of  day — ^it  would  dissolve  into  nethug, 
vanidh,  leave  no  trace. 

Ver.  8. — It  shall  be  even  as  when  a« 
hungry  man  dreameth.  Tlie  melting  anay 
of  the  vision  would  involve  a  keen  dis- 
appointment. The  enemies  of  Israel  had 
expected  to  secure  a  most  valuable  prey. 
They  had  dreamed  of  a  rich  booty  when 
they  should  take  the  city — a  booty  which 
would  reward  them  for  all  the  hardships  ot 
their  marches,  their  watches,  their  toils  in 
the  siege,  the  dangers  to  which  they  ex- 
posed themselves  in  the  assaults.  It  was 
aa  if  a  hungry  man  had  dreamed  that  he 
was  engaged  in  a  feast,  or  a  thirsty  man 
that  he  was  drinking  deep  at  a  banquet, 
when  suildenly  he  wakes  up,  and  finds  that 
he  has  been  merely  dreaming,  and  that 
there  is  no  reality  in  his  fancies.  Dr.  Kay 
quotes  a  passage  which  is  much  to  the 
point  from  Mungo  P.iik's  journals:  "No 
sooner  had  I  shut  my  eyes  than  fancy 
would  convey  me  to  the  streams  and  rivers 
of  my  native  land.  There,  as  I  wandered 
along  the  verdant  bank,  I  surveyed  the 
clear  streams  with  transport,  and  hastened 
to  swallow  the  delightful  draught;  but, 
alasl  disappointment  awaked  me,  and  I 
found  myself  a  lonely  captive,  perishing  of 
thirst  amid  the  wilds  of  Africa."  Those 
engaged  in  the  siege,  wbile  themselvea 
vaniahing  away,  would  likewise  find  their 
dreama  of  plunder  vauish,  and  would 
bitterly  feel  the  disappointment.  That 
fight  against  Mount  Zion.  To  attack  Jeru- 
salem was  to  fight  against  the  mount  of 
God,  the  place  where  Jehovah  had  "  set  his 
Name,"  and  where  he  condescended  in  some 
true  sense  to  dwell  continually.  How  could 
those  who  engaged  in  such  an  enterprise 
hope  to  succeed? 

Vers.  9 — 12. — Neither  Wabndio  nob 
Promise  oompbbhended  bt  those  to  whom 
THEY  have  been  addrbssed.  "  Who  hath 
believed  our  report?"  says  the  prophet  iu 
another  place  (ch.  liii.  1),  "  and  to  whom  ia 
the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed?"  It  was 
among  the  most  painful  circumstances  at- 
taching to  the  prophetical  ofSce,  that 
scarcely  ever  was  the  prophet  held  in  any 
esteem  among  his  own  people,  or  in  his  own 
lifetime.  Isaiah  knows  that  his  warning 
will  fall  de&d — that  the  people  and  their 
rulers  have  neither  "eyes  to  see"  nor 
"ears  to  keu."    He  places  on  lecoid  this 


OH,  XXIX.  1—24.]    THE  BOOK  OP   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


473 


knowledge,  while  at  the  same  time  etriving 
if  by  any  means  he  may  aronse  some  from 
their  condition  of  dull  apathy. 

Ver.  9.— Stay  youxselTes,  and  wonder; 
lather,  ittmd  stupefied  and  be  cutonished. 
The  prophet  bids  them  act  as  he  knows 
that  tliey  will  act.  They  wiU  simply 
"stare  with  aatonishment "  at  a  prophecy 
which  will  seem  to  them  "  out  of  all  rela- 
tion to  facts"  (Oheyne).  They  will  not 
yield  it  the  slightest  credence.  They  will 
only  marvel  how  a  sane  man  could  have 
uttered  such  egregious  folly.  Cry  ye  out, 
and  ory.  Delitzsch  and  Mr.  Cheyne  trans- 
late, "Blind  yourselves,  and  be  blind," 
which  certainly  gives  a  much  better  sense, 
and  is  justified  by  the  use  of  the  same  verb 
in  ch.  vi.  10.  As  Pharaoh  began  by  harden- 
ing his  own  heart,  and  tlieu  God  iiardenid 
it  ('  Pulpit  Commentary '  on  Exodus,  pp. 
103,  166,  203,  etc.),  so  those  who  blind 
their  own  eyes,  and  will  not  see  when  they 
have  the  power,  are,  in  the  end,  if  they 
persist,  judicially  blinded  by  God.  They 
are  drimken,  but  not  with  wine.  The 
drunkards  of  Bphraim"  (oh.  xxviii.  3)  were 
such  literally.  They  "  erred  through  strong 
drink"  (ch.  xxviii.  7);  they  "were  swal- 
lowed up  of  wine ; "  but  the  case  was  dif- 
ferent with  the  infatuated  ones  of  Judah. 
They  were  morally,  not  physically,  intoxi- 
cated. Their  pride  and  self-trust  rendered 
them  as  irrational  and  as  unimpressionable 
as  ever  drunkenness  rendered  any  man ; 
but  they  were  not  actual  drunkards. 

Ver.  10. — The  Lord  hath  poured  out  upon 
you  the  spirit  of  deep  sleep.  "  Sleep,"  in 
Scripture,  is  sometimes  "  rest,"  "  repose  from 
trouble  "  ("  So  he  giveth  his  beloved  sleep," 
Ps.  oxxviii.  2).  But  here  it  is  "  spiritual 
deadness  and  impassiveness  " — an  inability 
to  appreciate,  or  even  to  understand, 
spiritual  warnings.  The  Jews  oi  Isaiah's 
time  were  sunk  in  a  spiritual  lethargy, 
from  which  he  vainly  endeavoured  to  arouse 
them.  This  spiritual  lethargy  is  here  said 
to  have  been  "poured  out  upon  them  by 
Jehovah;"  but.  we  are  not  to  suppose  that 
there  was  anything  exceptional  in  their 
treatment — "because  they  did  not  like  to 
retain  God  in  their  knowledge,  God  gave 
them  oyer  to  a  reprobate  mind "  (Bom.  L 
28),  as  he  does  men  generally.  Hath  closed 
your  eyes  (comp.  oh.  vi.  10 ;  and  see  also 
Matt,  xii  13 ;  Mark  iv.  12 ;  Luke  viii.  10  ; 
John  xii.  40;  xi.  8,  etc.).  The  prophets. 
As  the  text  stands,  the  proper  translation 
would  be,  "  For  the  Lord  hath  poured  out 
upon  you  the  spirit  of  deep  sleep,  and  hath 
closed  your  eyes  (the  prophets),  and  your 
heads  (the  seers)  hath  he  covered."  But  it 
is  reasonably  conjectured  tha,i  the  expres- 
sioiLi,    "  the    prophets,"  "  the  seers,"  are 


glosses,  which  have  crept  from  the  margin 
into  the  texf(Eichhom,  Koppe,  Cheyne).  If 
so,  they  are  probably  mistaken  glosses,  the 
allusinu  being,  not  to  particular  classes,  but 
to  the  actual "  heads  "  and  "  eyes  "of  indi- 
vidual Hebrews,  which  were  "closed"  nn<l 
"covered"  by  the  judicial  action  of  the 
Almighty.  In  the  Bast  a  covering  is  often 
drawn  over  the  head  during  sleep. 

"Ver.  11. — The  vision  of  all ;  i.e.  "  the  en- 
tire vision  " — all  that  Isaiah  has  put  before 
them  in  vers.  1 — 8.  As  the  words  of  a 
book  that  is  sealed ;  rather,  the  words  of  a 
letter  (marginal  rendering)  or  writinc/. 
Written  documents  were  often  sealed  up  ito 
Secure  secrecy,  the  sealing  being  done  in 
various  ways.  When  the  writing  was  on  a 
clay  tablet,  it  was  often  enclosed  in  a  clay 
envelope,  so  that  the  document  could  not  be 
read  till  the  outer  clay  covering  was  broken. 
Rolls  of  papyrus  or  parchment  were  secured 
clifierently.  One  that  is  learned;  i.e.  "one 
that  can  read  writing,"  which  the  ordinary 
Jew  could  not  do,  any  more  than  the  ordi- 
nary European  in  the  Middle  Ages.  Neither 
the  learned  nor  the  unlearned  Jews  would 
be  able  to  understand  Isaiah's  prophecy,  so 
as  to  realize  and  accept  its  literal  truth. 
They  were  devoid  of  spiritual  discernment. 
Even  the  rulers  were  but  "  blind  leaders  of 
the  blind." 

Ver.  12. — ^Him  that  is  not  learned;  i.e. 
"that  cannot  read  writing."  Even  in  our 
Lord's  day  the  ordinary  Jew  was  not  taught 
to  read  and  Wiite.  Hence  the  surprise  of 
the  rulers  at  his  teaching  the  people  out  of 
the  Law  (John  vii.  15,  "  How  knoweth  this 
man  letters,  having  never  learned?  "). 

Vers.  13 — 16.— A  Renewal  of  Warning. 
The  inability  of  the  Jews  to  comprehend 
Isaiah's  threatening  prophecies  probably 
arose  in  part  from  their  accomplishment 
seeming  to  be  inconceivable,  since  they  ran 
counter  to  the  covenant  promises  made  by 
God  to  Israel.  Isaiah  is  therefore  instructed 
to  inform  them  that  it  was  a  most  marvel- 
lous and  almost  inconceivable  thing  that 
God  was  now  purposing  to  do,  yet  a  thing 
justified  by  their  hypocrisy  (ver.  13)  and 
their  rebellion  (vers.  16,  16). 

-Ver.  13. — Wherefore  the  Lord  said; 
rather,  moreover  the  Lord  said.  This  people 
draw  near  me  with  their  mouth,  Samaria 
had  been  punished  fur  open  idolatry  and 
flagrant  neglect  of  Jehovah  (2  Kings  xvii. 
7 — 17).  Jerusalem  had  not  gone  these 
lengths.  She  still,  in  profession,  clung  to 
the  worship  of  Jehovah,  and  had  even  re- 
cently accepted  a  purification  of  religion  at 
the  hand  of  Hezekiah,  who  had  "  removed 
the   high    places,  ,  t  .  and  cut  down   the 


474 


THE   BOOK   OP  THE   PEOPHBT  ISAIAH,     [oh.  xxix  1—24. 


grove*,  and  broken  in  pieces  the  braien  ser- 
pent," because  the  people  burnt  incense  to  it 
(2  Kings  xviii.  4).  But  her  religion  was  a 
mere  lip-service,  which  God  detested — it 
was  outward,  formal,  hypocritical  (corap. 
ch.  1.  11 — 17).  Jerusalem,  therefore,  no  less 
than  Samaria,  deserved  and  would  receive 
a  severe  chastisement.  But  have  removed 
their  heart  far  from  me.  Here  lies  the  gist 
of  the  charge.  It  was  not  that  there  was 
too  much  outward  religion,  but  that  there 
was  no  inward  religion  corresponding  to  it. 
Lip-service  without  inward  religion  is  a 
mockery,  though  it  is  not  always  felt  as 
audi.  "Sheix  fear  toward  me  is  taught  by 
the  precept  of  men.  Mr.  Cheyne  conjec- 
tures that  ritual  books  bad  been  already 
published  by  the  authority  of  the  priests, 
and  that  these  were  followed,  on  account 
of  the  human  authority  which  had  issued 
them,  without  any  reference  to  the  Law. 
Thus  ritual  obedience  became  mere  obe- 
dience to  "  the  precept  of  men." 

Yer.  14. — I  will  proceed  to  do  •  marvel- 
lous work.  Commentators  are  not  agreed 
what  this  "  marveUous  work  "  was.  Some, 
with  Delitzsch,  consider  it  to  be  the  harden- 
ing of  the  hearts  sf  the  Jews  to  such  an 
extent  that  even  the  appearance  of  wis- 
dom and  understanding,  which  the  rulers 
of  the  people  had  hitherto  retained,  would 
completely  disappear.  Others,  with  Mr. 
Cheyne,  regard  it  as  the  coming  siege, 
with  those  extreme  sufferings  and  penis 
(vers.  3,  4)  which  the  Jews  would  have  to 
undergo — sufferings  and  perils  barely  con- 
sistent with  the  previous  covenant-promises 
made  to  the  nation.  It  is  difficult  to  decide 
between  these  two  views ;  but,  on  the  whole, 
Mr.  Cheyne's  view  seems  preferable.  A 
marrelloQB  work  and  a  wonder;  rather,  a 
marvellout  work  and  a  marvd.  The  repeti- 
tion is  for  the  sake  of  emphasis.  For  the 
wisdom ;  rather,  and  the  wisdom;  i.e.  "when 
I  do  my  marvel,  then  the  wisdom  of  the 
wise  men  shall  perish " — all  their  crafty 
designs  and  plans  shall  be  of  no  avail,  but 
come  wholly  to  nought.  The  chief  of  these 
designs  was  that  alluded  to  in  the  next 
verse. 

Yer.  15. — ^Woe  unto  them  that  seek  deep 
to  hide  their  counsel  ttom  the  Lord.  The 
allusion  is  to  the  schemes  which  were  afloat 
for  calling  in  the  bid  of  Egypt.  Ai  Isaiah 
had  long  sinee  denounced  these  schemes 
as  the  height  of  folly  (oh.  zix.  11 — 17), 
and  prophesied  their  failure  (ch.  xx.  5,  6), 
every  effort  was  made  to  conceal  them  ttom 
his  knowledge  and  from  the  knowledge  of 
all  who  were  like-minded  (comp.  ch.  xxx. 
1,  2).  Steps  were  probably  even  now  being 
taken  for  the  carrying  out  of  the  schemes, 
which  were  studiously  concealed  from  the 
prophet.    Their   works   are    in  the   dark. 


Underhand  proceedings  are  kt  all  times 
suspicious.  "  Men  love  darkness  rather  than 
light,  because  their  deede  are  evU."  The  very 
fact  of  concealment  was  an  indication  that 
the  works  in  which  the  rulers  were  engaged 
were  evil,  and  that  they  knew  them  to  be 
evil.  They  say,  Who  seeth  us  ?  (comp.  P». 
Ixxiii.  11,  "  Tush,  they  say.  How  should 
God  perceive  ?  Is  there  knowledge  in  the 
Most  High  ?  ").  The  wicked  persuade  them- 
selves that  God  does  not  see  their  actions. 

Yer.  16. — Surely  your  taming  of  things 
upside  down  shall  be  esteemed  as  the 
potter's  clay ;  rather,  0  for  your  perverse- 
ness !  Shall  the  potter  he  reckoned  at  day  ? 
They  were  so  perverse  and  wrong-headed 
that  they  inverted  the  relation  in  which 
they  stood  to  God  and  God  to  them.  God 
was  to  be  passive,  or  merely  give  oppor- 
tunities of  action,  and  they  were  to  mould 
their  own  plans  and  carve  out  their  own  des- 
tinies. For  shall  the  work  say,  etc.  ?  rather, 
for  the  work  taUh.  Taking  their  destinies 
into  their  own  hands  was  equivalent  to 
saying  that  tliey  were  their  own  masters, 
which  they  could  not  be  if  God  made  them. 
Shall  the  thing  framed  say,  ete.  ?  rather, 
yea,  the  thing  formed  hath  said.  To  refuse 
to  take  counsel  of  God,  and  direct  the 
national  policy  by  the  light  of  their  own 
reason,  was  to  tax  God  with  having  no 
understanding. 

Vers.  17 — ^24. — A  Benewal  of  Fbomise. 
God's  judgment  (ver.  14),  whatever  it  is, 
will  pass.  In  a  little  while  there  will  be  a 
great  change.  The  lowly  will  be  exalted, 
the  proud  abased.  From  the  "  meek  "  and 
"  poor "  will  be  raised  a  body  of  true  wor- 
shippers, who  will  possess  spiritual  discern- 
ment (ver.  18),  while  the  oppressors  anc 
"  scomers "  will  be  brought  to  nought. 
When  Isaiah  expected  this  change  is  un- 
certain; but  he  holds  out  the  hope  of  it 
here,  as  elsewhere  so  frequently  (oh.  1.  24 — 
31 ;  ii.  2  — 5 ;  iv.  2—6 ;  v.  13,  eto.X  to  keep 
np  the  spirits  of  the  people  and  prevent 
them  from  sinking  into  a  state  of  depression 
and  despair. 

Yer.  17. — Lebanon  shall  he  turned  into  a 
firuitful  field.  Lebanon,  the  wild  forest, 
shall  become  smiling  garden-ground,  while 
garden-ground  shall  revert  into  wild  un- 
cultivated forest.  An  inversion  of  the  moral 
condition  of  Judna  is  shadowed  forth  by 
the  metaphor. 

Yer.  18. — ^In  that  day — i.e.  when  that 
time  comes— shall  the  deaf  hear  the  words 
of  the  book;  the  spiritually  deaf  shall  have 
their  ears  opened,  many  of  them,  and  shall 
not  only  hear,  but  understand,  the  words  of 
Scripture  addressed  to  them  by  God's  mes 


OH.  XXIX.  1—24.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


475 


■engerg.  No  particular  "  book  "  ia  intended 
— eepher  being  without  the  article,  but  the 
■words  of  any  writing  put  forth  with  Divine 
authority.  The  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  see 
also  out  of  obsonrity.  Men  shall  shake 
oflf  the  "  deep  sleep "  (ver.  10)  in  which 
they  haye  long  lain,  and  have  once  more 
"  eyes  to  see  "  the  truth. 

Ver.  19.— The  meek  ...  the  poor.  The 
"evangelical  prophet"'  anticipates  the 
gospel  in  this,  among  other  points— that  he 
promises  his  choicest  blessings,  not  to  the 
rich  and  mighty,  but  to  the  poor  and  meek 
(oomp.  ch.  Ivii.  15 ;  Ixi.  1). 

Ver.  20. — The  terrible  one  , . .  the  soomer. 
"  The  terrible  one "  may  be  the  foreign 
enemy,  as  in  ver.  5,  or,  possibly,  the  native 
oppressor  (ch.  i.  23 ;  v.  23,  etc.) — a  still  more 
fearful  evil.  "  The  scoiner"  is  the  godless 
man,  who  sooifs  at  religion  (ch.  xxviii.  14, 
22).  Both  classes  would  be  "consumed" 
and  "brouglit  to  nought"  when  the  new 
state  of  things  was  established.  All  that 
watch  for  iniquity ;  i.e,  "  all  those  who,  for 
the  fui'therance  of  their  iniquitous  schemes, 
rise  up  early  and  late  take  rest,  and  eat  the 
bread  of  carefulness  "  (Ps.  cxxvil.  2). 

Ver.  21. — That  make  a  man  an  offender 
for  a  word.  The  meaning  of  this  clause  is 
Tery  doubtful.  Kay  translates,  "  That  lead 
men  into  sin  by  words  j "  Mr.  Cheyne, 
"That  make  out  people  to  be  sinners  by 
their  words,"  i.e.  by  bearing  false  witness 
against  them ;  while  Delitzsch  upholds  the 
rendering  of  the  Authorized  Version.  Mr. 
'\'ance  Smith  has  other  suggestions  ('  Pro- 
phecies,' p.  171).  There  seems  to  be,  on 
the  whole,  no  sufficient  reason  for  setting 
aside  the  authorized  rendering,  which  con- 
demns one  form  of  oppression — the  severe 
punishment  of  mere  words.  And  lay  a 
snare  for  him  that  reproveth  in  the  gate. 
"  The  gate  "  was  the  place  where  judgment 
was  given  and  public  assemblies  held.  If 
any  one  boldly  stood  up  and  reproved  the 
oppressors  "  in  the  gate,"  they  instantly  set 
to  work  to  lay  a  trap  for  bim  and  bring  him 
to  ruin.    And  tuin  aside   the  just  for  a 


thing  of  noaght;  rather,  mid  deprive  (he 
just  [of  their  right]  hy  empty  charges.  "  Turn- 
ing aside  the  just "  means  turning  thum 
from  their  right  (Amos  v.  12 ;  Exod.  xxiii. 
6);  audhat-tohu  is  not  "for  nothing"  but 
"  by  nothing,"  «.«.  by  some  vain  empty  pre- 
tence. 

Ver.  22. — ^The  Lord,  who  redeemed  Abra- 
ham ;  rather,  who  delivered  Abraham,  as 
the  verb  used  is  often  rendered  (see  Job 
xixiii.  28;  Ps.  Iv.  18;  Ixix.  18;  Ixxviii. 
42,  etc.).  God's  directions  to  Abraham  to 
remove  from  a  land  of  idolaters  (Josh.  xxiv. 
2,  3;  Acts  vii.  2,  3)  were  practically  a 
"  deliverance."  The  work  thus  commenced 
would  not  be  suiiered  to  remain  incomplete. 
Israel — the  true  Israel — would  not  be 
ashamed,  or  wax  pale  through  fear  any 
more ;  they  would  be  God's  children,  his  true 
worshippers,  and  would  have  no  need  to 
expeiience  either  fear  or  shame. 

Ver.  23. — The  work  of  mine  hands;  i.e. 
regenerated  and  "created  anew  unto  good 
works  "  (Eph.  ii.  10) — God's  work,  and  no  - 
longer  denying  themselves  to  be  such  (ver. 
16).  They  shall  sanctify  my  B'ame,  and 
aanctify,  eto. ;  rather,  they  shall  sanctify  my 
Name,  they  shall  even  sanctify  the  Holy  One 
of  Jacob,  and  fear  the  God  of  Israel.  TUa 
last  two  clauses  are  exegetical  of  the  first 
(Kay). 

Ver.  24. — They  also  that  erred  in  spirit ; 
i.e.  those  who  were  blind  and  deaf  (vor. 
18).  Shall  come  to  understanding ;  literally, 
sh«U  know  understanding ;  i.e.  recover  their 
power  of  spiritual  discernment.  They  that 
murmured.  The  reference  cannot  be  to  the 
"murmuring"  in  Egypt,  though  the  verb 
used  occurs  only  elsewhere  in  Deut.  i.  27 
and  Ps.  ovi.  25,  where  that  murmuring  is 
spoken  of.  We  must  look  for  some  later 
discontent,  which  we  may  find  in  quite 
recent  "  murmuring  resistance  to  the  ad  mo 
nitions  of  Jehovah"  (Delitzsoh),  without 
going  back  so  far  as  the  time  of  the  Exodus. 
Shall  learn  doctrine  ;  i.e.  "  shall  willingly 
receive  the  teaching,  of  God's  prophets,  and 
profit  by  it" 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1 — 4. — "  Woe  to  Arid  1 "  The  lesson  of  this  section  leemg  to  be  that  even  those 
nearest  and  dearest  to  God,  who  bear  his  name,  who  are  in  a  certain  sense  his,  are  not 
exempt  from  suffering  at  his  hands.  Even  Jerusalem,  "  thfe  city  where  David  dwelt " — 
"  God's  lion,"  his  champion,  his  "  mighty  one  " — was  shortly  to  experience  all  the  horrors 
of  a  prolonged  siege,  to  be  brought  down  to  the  dust — to  be  distressed,  weakened, 
humiliated.  The  memory  of  David  would  not  save  her;  her  name  of  "Ariel"  would 
not  exempt  her.  She  would  have  to  go  through  the  fearful  ordeal.  The  Christian  may 
humbly  ask — Wherefore  ? 

L  Bbcausb,  having  sinned,  she  deserved  punishment.  God  cannot  allow  sin  to 
go  unpunished.  His  attribute  of  fierfeot  justice  requires  that  even  for  pardoned  sin 
there  should  be  a  penalty.     It  is  well  for  sinners  when  the  penalty  is  exacted  in  this 


476  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxix.  1— 24 

life.  The  siiflferings  of  the  inhahitants  of  Jerusalem  during  the  siege  were  no  doubt,  in 
some  measure,  punishments.  1.  For  the  national  sin  of  unfaithfulness.  2.  For  the 
particular  sins  of  the  sufferers.  But  this  is  not  a  full  account  of  the  matter.  Jerusalem 
suffered  also — 

II.  Because  she  needed  chastisement  and  would  bk  the  better  fob  it. 
Jerusalem  was  still  undergoing  her  probation.  There  were  hopes  of  her  turning  to  God. 
Nay,  she  did  from  time  to  time  partially  turn,  and  her  actual  destruction  was  deferred 
for  above  a  century  after  that  of  her  sister,  Samaria.  The  sufferings  of  the  siege  were 
in  the  main  intended  to  bring  the  sufferers  to  repentance — to 'humble  proud  hearts,  to 
bend  stubborn  wills,  to  show  the  vanity  of  earthly  supports  and  stays,  and  induce 
entire  dependence  and  trust  in  God.  "  Ariel "  was  punished  far  more  in  love  than  in 
wrath.  She  was  still  to  God  "  as  Ariel."  Her  "  woe  "  was  not  the  final  woe  pronounced 
on  the  hopelessly  impenitent,  but  the  woe  which,  while  it  is  grievous  at  the  time  of  its 
infliction,  "nevertheless  afterward  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  unto 
them  which  are  exercised  thereby  "  (Heb.  xii.  11). 

Vers.  5 — 8. — The  disappointment  that  awaits  OocPs  enemies.  All  the  enemies  of 
God  have,  some  day  or  other,  an  awaking.  The  designs  which  they  cherish,  the  selfish 
hopes  in  which  they  indulge,  are  mere  dreams.  Even  when  the  dreams  are  realized 
the  result  is  disappointing.  No  man  evei  yet  found  the  pleasure  of  success  equal  to 
his  expectation.  If  there  is  a  little  satisfaction  at  first,  fruition  soon  begets  satiety. 
"  Vanity  of  vanities,"  says  the  preacher,  "  all  is  vanity."  But,  for  the  most  part,  the 
dreams  are  not  realized.  God  arises,  and  his  enemies  are  scattered ;  those  that  hate  him 
have  to  flee  before  him  (Ps.  Ixviii.  1).  The  schemer  finds  himself  baffled  just  when  he 
thinks  success  most  certain.  Dishonesty  is  detected ;  the  bubble  of  speculation  bursts ; 
unexpected  obstacles  arise ;  a  sudden  death  or  a  sudden  outbreak  of  war  deranges  the 
best-laid  plans :  the  fortune  just  about  to  be  made  vanishes  into  the  air,  the  dreamer 
"awakes,  and  his  soul  is  empty" — all  his  hopes  have  passed  away  "at  an  instant 
suddenly."  There  is  but  one  security  against  constant  disappointment,  which  is  to 
trust  all  to  God,  to  have  no  will  but  his,  no  desire  but  that  expressed  in  the  prayer, 
"  Thy  will  be  done,  as  in  heaven,  so  on  earth." 

Vers.  9, 10. —  Two  kinds  of  spiritual  llindness.  Spiritual  blindness  is  not  the  natural 
condition  of  man.  God  has  given  to  all  men  a  certain  power  of  spiritual  discernment. 
He  is  "  the  Light  which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world  "  (John  i.  9). 
Children  are  invariably  found  to  be  teachable  at  an  early  age — to  have  a  power  of 
receiving  and  appreciating  spiritual  verities.  The  spiritually  blind  have  become  such, 
and  in  their  condition  we  may  trace  two  stages. 

I.  The  initial  btage.  The  commencement  of  spiritual  blindness  Is  a  wilful 
shutting  of  the  eyes.  Instead  of  seeking  to  see,  striving  to  see,  looking  out  for  the 
spiritual  in  life  and  action,  men  turn  away  from  it,  "  wink  with  their  eyes,"  put  veils 
over  them,  refuse  to  let  the  light  of  truth  shine  in  upon  their  understaiiriing.s.  They 
"love  darkness  rather  than  light"  (John  iii.  19).  The  whole  of  life  should  be  a 
continual  exercise  of  the  spiritual  discerning  power.  Men  give  the  power  as  little 
exercise  as  possible.  They  weaken  it  by  disuse.  After  a  while  they  deprare  it,  so 
that  its  judgments  become  uncertain — even  false. 

II.  The  final  stage.  In  Scripture  the  final  stage  is  called  "  a  reprobate  mind," 
literally,  "  an  nndistingui.shing  mind  (aZoKtitht  coSi)."  By  the  law  of  God's  providence, 
the  wilful  shutting  of  the  eyes  leads  on  to  an  inability  to  see.  The  moral  vision 
becomes  actually  distorted.  The  "  light  that  is  within  a  man  "  becomes  "  darkness ; " 
and  then,  "  how  great  is  'that  darkness  I "  "  Bitter  is  put  for  sweet,  and  sweet  for 
bitter  "  (ch.  v.  20),  "  good  for  evil,  and  evil  for  good."  The  state  is  hopeless,  irremedi- 
able. It  results  naturally  from  the  repeated  sins  against  light  of  the  first  stage ;  but 
it  is  none  the  less  God's  judgment  upon  the  sinner.  Hence  ithas  be<ui  ualled  "judicial 
blindness  " — an  expressive  name. 

Vers.  13,  14. — Ood's  hatred  of  mere  lip-serviot.    Lip-eerrice  is  offensive  to  God  on 
two  accounts. 
I.  It  IB  mBHONOD&iNQ  TO  HiHBKL*.     It  implies,  either  that  he  has  not  the  powei 


OB.  XXIX.  1—24.]    THE   BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  471 

of  reading  the  heart  and  of  peioeiving  when  worship  is  rendered  to  him  sincerely  and 
when  feignedly,  or  that  he  does  not  care  which  kind  of  homage  he  receives,  whethei 
adoration  is  offered  to  him  really  or  formally.  In  the  one  case  he  must  he  considerec^ 
as  a  Being  of  very  limited  power  and  capacity;  in  the  other,  as  a  Being  indifferent  tc 
the  gravest  moral  distinctions.  To  profess  loyalty  to  an  earthly  monarch  without 
feeling  it  would  be  to  insult  him  grossly.  How  much  more  to  seek  to  pass  such  a 
cheat  on  the  King  of  heaven  I 

II.   It   IB   DEGEADINO   TO   THE   OBBATUBBS  WHICH   HE    HAS   MADE   IN   HIS  OWN   IMAGE. 

All  falsehood  is  degrading  to  those  who  condescend  to  it.  False  pretences,  flatteries, 
insincere  professions  of  love  and  devotion  for  the  purpose  of  winning  favour  and  approval 
from  those  to  whom  we  address  them,  are  among  the  basest  and  most  contemptible  acts 
to  which  a  human  being  can  stoop.  They  are  Ues,  and  lies  which  have  their  origin  in 
downright  unadulterated  selfishness.  False  professions  made  to  Grud  are  also  foolish, 
idiotic  lies,  which  cannot  possibly  impose  on  the  Bein^;  who  is  the  Object  of  them,  and 
which  do  not  very  often  impose  even  on  such  of  our  fellow-men  as  witness  them.  It 
was  their  insincere  "  lip-service"  which  caused  our  Lord  to  denounce  the  seribei  and 
Pharisees  of  his  time  as  "  actors,"  or  "  hypocrites  "  (Matt.  iv.  7 ;  Mark  vii.  6). 

Vers.  17 — 24:. — Religious  revivals.  It  is  sometimes  supposed  that  religious  revivals 
are  modern  inventions,  concessions  to  the  weakness  of  the  degenerate  man  of  the 
nineteenth  century ;  and  no  doubt  there  have  been  features  in  many  so-called  "  revivals  " 
which  have  justified  this  view  of  them.  But,  in  point  of  fact,  revivals,  if  we  follow 
out  the  history  of  religion,  are  found  to  be  movements  which  have  belonged  to  all  ages, 
and  without  which  it  appears  more  than  probable  that  religion  in  this  world  would 
stagnate  and  lose  all  vital  energy.     The  subject  may  be  best  viewed  under  three  heads. 

L  Revivalism  is  a  law  of  nature.  Not  only  does  Nature  annually  revive  in 
spring  from  her  winter's  trance,  but  throughout  the  universe  exhaustion  is  continually 
occurring  at  irregular  intervals,  and  recoveries  from  exhaustion,  i.e.  revivals,  are  the 
only  mode  by  which  Nature  is  recruited  and  enabled  to  maintain  hersolf.  A  long  series 
of  wet  and  cold  seasons  produces  at  any  rate  the  impression  that  Nature's  productive 
powers  are  declining  and  wearing  out ;  when,  suddenly,  there  is  a  complete  inversion  ot 
what  had  come  to  be  regarded  as  an  established  order,  and  a  summer  of  brilliant  sun- 
shine causes  an  overflowing  harvest  and  an  agricultural  reaction.  The  ozone  in  the 
atmosphere,  so  essential  to  human  health,  decreases  (it  may  be)  for  months ;  then,  all 
at  once,  there  is  a  revival,  and  the  average  of  a  century  is  exceeded.  Electrical 
phenomena  are  for  a  time  in  abeyance,  and  the  earth  seems  to  have  "  used  up "  the 
power  on  which  her  vitality  principally  depends ;  when,  lo !  the  reaction  comes,  fresh 
I  lectricity  is  developed,  or  conveyed  to  the  earth  from  without,  and  electrical  phenomena 
become  more  frequent  and  more  striking  than  ever. 

11.  Kevivalism  is  consistent  with,  and  oonduoivb  to,  a  constant  advance. 
A  priori  we  might  have  expected  that  all  growth  and  progress  would  have  been  regular 
and  gradual.  But  the  fact  is  otherwise.  L»  all  the  fields  of  human  energy,  in  art,  in 
.  science,  in  philosophy,  in  religion,  long  periods  of  comparative  deadnesa  and  apathy 
occur,  during  which  there  is  scarcely  any  perceptible  advance  at  all,  followed  by  shorter 
intervals  of  activity  and  energy,  when  progress  is  made  "by  leaps  and  hounds."  The 
scientific  energy  of  the  last  half-century  is  a  case  in  point.  The  artistic  revival 
initiated  by  Reynolds  and  Grainsborough,  is  another.  The  history  of  the  Church,  dis- 
passionately viewed,  shows  a  manifest  progress;  but  the  progress -has  been  far  from 
uniform.  Many  centuries  have  been  centuries  of  stagnation.  Religion  has  just  kept 
itself  alive,  and  that  has  been  all.  Then  some  stir  has  come  from  within  or  from 
without,  and  a  rush  of  vitality  has  supervened,  which  has  exercised  an  influence  for 
good  on  all  later  times.  Indifference  to  doctrinal  truth  was  overspreading  the  world, 
when  the  dogmatic  revival  of  the  fourth  century  at  once  saved  the  faith,  and  advanced 
it.  The  expansion  of  the  Ohirrch,  which  is  a  special  mark  of  its  life,  had  almost 
ceased,  when  missionary  zeal  broke  out  suddenly  in  the  West,  an<i  the  seventh  and  eighth 
centuries  saw  the  conversion  of  England,  Scotland,  Friesland,  Batavia,  Switzerland, 
and  most  of  Germany.  A  general  deadness  and  dulness  had  come  over  Christendom 
between  the  eighth  and  the  eleventh  centuries,  when  the  Crusades,  which  were  a 
political  necessity,  produced  the  revival  of  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth.    The  greatest 


478  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxix.  1—24. 

revival  of  all  was  the  Reformation,  which  recovered  spiritual  religion  when  it  seemed 
almost  lost,  and  exerted  a  purifying  influence  even  on  those  parts_  of  Christendom 
which  most  opposed  it.  Lesser  revivals  have  heen — in  Germany  Kctism,  in  France 
Jansenism,  among  ourselves  Methodism  and  the  Church  movement  still  in  progress. 
It  seems  scarcely  too  much  to  say  that,  without  revivals,  religion — even  the  Christian 
religion — would  perish. 

III.  Revivals  ark  most  commonly  the  besult  of  ohastisembntb.  As  it  was 
with  the  Jews  of  whom  Isaiah  wrote,  so  in  the  Christian  Church  generally,  revivals 
have  been  produced  by  judgments.  The  blasphemies  of  Arius,  and  tlie  patronage  of 
Arianism  by  the  court,  gave  rise  to  the  counter-movement  of  Athanasius.  The  con- 
traction of  Christendom  in  the  Bast  by  the  conquests  of  Mohammed  and  his  immediate 
successors  led  on  to  its  expimsion  in  the  West  by  renewed  missionary  effort.  The 
alarming  progress  of  the  Saracens  and  Turks  caused  the  revival  connected  with  the 
Crusades.  The  exactions  and  tyranny  of  the  court  of  Rome,  being  felt  as  a  burden 
that  could  no  longer  be  borne,  brought  about  the  Reformation.  Among  ourselves,  the 
revival  which  dates  from  1830  was  due  to  the  loss  of  ten  Irish  bishoprics  and  the  other 
attacks  made  on  the  Church  by  her  enemies  at  that  period.  Methodism  ia  about  the 
only  Christian  revival  not  provoked  by  some  manifestcalamity. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vers.  1 — 12. — Concerning  Ariel.  I.  Vicissitudes  of  Ariel.  The  name  is  symbolic, 
perhaps  signifying  "  God's  lion."  It  was  the  city  where  David  dwelt.  The  prophet 
bids  the  city  enter  upon  the  new  year,  and  run  the  round  of  the  feasts.  The  distress 
will  come,  and  the  city,  true  to  her  name,  will  be  mourning  lilie  a  wounded  lioness ; 
and  yet  her  prowess  will  be  seen.  She  will  be  beleaguered,  the  moimd  for  the  battering- 
ram  will  be  set  up ;  she  will  be  abased,  and  her  low  voice  will  be  like  the  muttering 
of  a  ghost  from  the  under-world.  Thea  a  sudden  change  will  occur,  and  the  multitude 
of  foes  will  be  dispersed  like  dust  or  chaff  in  the  wind.  After  the  noise  as  of  thunder 
and  earthquake  and  hurricane,  menacing  absolute  extinction  of  the  city,  the  vast  host 
will  disappear  like  a  dream  and  vision  of  the  night.  They  too  will  dream  of  conquest, 
as  a  hungry  and  thirsty  man  dreams  of  meat  and  drink ;  and  their  hope  will  melt 
with  the  morning  light. 

II.  The  bliksness  of  tee  people.  Those  who  listen  are  astonished  at  a  prophecy 
which  nothing  in  the  past  appears  to  warrant.  The  prophet  takes  occasion  to  explain 
the  cause  of  their  blindness  and  stupefaction,  and  to  warn  them  that  they  may  find 
this  their  fixed  condition.  They  are  responsible  for  this  state,  he  seems  to  imply  when 
he  says,  "  Astonish  yourselves ! "  "  Blind  yourselves  1 "  Some  strange  prepossession 
causes  them  to  act  like  men  intoxicated ;  their  reason  reels  and  staggers.  A  deep 
sleep  is  poured  upon  them ;  their  eyes  are  closed,  and  their  hands  wrapped  up  in 
Oriental  fashion.  The  result  is  they  cannot  aee  the  truth.  The  '•  vision  and  the 
faculty  divine,"  so  bright  and  eminent  in  the  prophet,  is  not  recognized  for  what  it  is. 
His  words  are  like  a  sealed  book  in  the  hands  of  a  reader.  He  can  read,  but  cannot 
loose  the  seals  of  the  book,  which  is  so  far  like  that  described  in  Rev.  v.  2.  Or  again, 
if  a  book,  though  open  and  legible,  be  handed  to  one  that  cannot  read,  the  result  is  the 
same.  It  may  be  a  large  tablet,  with  large  characters,  like  that  in  ch.  viii.  1,  so  that 
the  passer-by,  if  he  can  read,  may  catch  the  meaning ;  but  what  if  he  cannot  read  ? 
It  is  the  same  as  if  the  writing  were  non-existent.  1.  Seeing  truth  is  like  seeing 
the  meaning  of  what  we  read.  AH  see  something  in  the  book — some  little  more  than 
that  it  is  a  book ;  some  can  extract  a  certain  superficial  sense  from  the  signs,  and  are 
asleep  towards  the  deeper  and  central  meaning.  That  meaning  must  be  lived  out 
by  the  whole  effort  of  the  reason,  the  conscience,  the  heart.  It  requires  an  intense 
effort  of  wiU  to  see  any  object  as  it  ought  to  be  seen.  2.  Absence  of  spiritiml 
intelligence  infers  guilt.  Men  will  not  see,  because  the  sight  is  too  painful,  or  some 
other  sight  is  more  pleasurable  and  more  easy  to  take  in.  Moral  obtuseness  is  another 
word  for  want  of  conscience,  or  for  inertness  of  conscience. — J, 

Vers.  13 — 16. — Lip-service  and  dissirmtlation,    L  The  semblance  withodt  thh 


OH.  XXIX.  1—24.]    THE  BOOK  OB'  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  479 

BBALiTr  OF  EELiQioir.  To  "  dr»w  mea"is  a  Scripture  phrase  full  of  expressiveness 
for  true  worship.  To  draw  near  to  God  is  to  assume  our  holiest  mood  of  feeling ;  it  is 
to  humble  one's  self  in  the  presence  of  the  Highest  and  Holiest,  The  distance  between 
ourselves  and  the  Supreme  is  not  to  be  overcome  by  an  effort  of  thought ;  it  is  in  the 
sphere  of  intelligence  that  that  distance  is  most  deeply  felt,  which  mere  thought 
and  study  only  increase.  In  the  region  of  feeling  only  can  that  distance  be  diminished 
or  made  to  disappear.  As  we  kneel  in  our  weakness  and  abandon  all  our  self-sup- 
ports, the  heavens  seem  to  stoop  to  us,  and  the  arms  of  the  Ahuighty  are  thrown 
about  us.  Pride,  dishonesty,  low  self-seeking, — these  throw  the  soul  far,  far  asunder 
from  its  God.  From  the  reverent  and  the  obedient  he  is  never  far  off.  But  so  beautiful 
is  this  action  of  drawing  near  to  God,  so  truly  ennobling  to  our  manhood,  it  is  certain, 
like  all  the  genuine  moods  and  acts  of  religion,  to  be  mimicked  and  counterfeited. 
All  hypocrisy  is  a  testimony  to  the  grandeur  of  that  which  is  copied  or  caricatured. 
This  imitation  of  true  religion  may  be  carried  out  in  speech.  Nothing  more  easy  than 
to  learn  by  heart  the  great  phrases  of  Scripture  concerning  spiritual  religion,  and  to  repeat 
them ;  and  make  the  verbal  not  express,  but  hide  the  absence  of,  the  real.  And  so 
magical  is  the  effect  of  sacred  and  beautiful  words  on  the  ear  and  on  the  heart,  for  the 
time  they  may  create  an  illusion,  and  it  may  seem  that  we  have  really  felt  what  we 
have  done  little  more  than  utter.  Again,  res'pectfor  mere  custom  may  take  the  place 
of  respect  for  God.  "  Their  fear  of  me  is  nothing  but  a  commandment  of  men,  which 
is  taught."  Religion  is  part  of  social  institutions — it  is  decorous,  it  is  advantageous 
to  pay  it  outward  respect,  unsafe  to  contemn  it.  Thus  fear  of  men  and  self-interest 
may  really  pass  under  the  outward  guise  of  the  fear  of  God  and  his  Law. 

n.  The  dealing  op  Jehovah  with  the  people.  It  will  be  "  wonderful,  very 
wonderful."  Inconceivable,  as  it  seems,  running  counter  to  all  his  ancient  covenant- 
promises.  Already  the  Assyrian  invasion  had  broken  in  on  tliem ;  and  the  visitation 
w»s  not  to  cease,  but  to  continue.  These  judgments  will  bafHe  their  intelligence.  The 
wisdom  of  the  wise  will  perish,  and  the  understanding  of  the  intelligent  be  obscured. 
The  politicians  think  to  hide  their  thoughts  and  deeds  from  Jehovah,  "  to  throw  the 
veil  of  secrecy  over  their  pursuit  of  worldly  alliances.  The  prophet  divines  their 
purpose  and  exposes  its  perversity.  The  favourite  comparison  of  the  potter  is  intro- 
duced (of.  oh.  xlv.  9 ;  Ixiv.  8 ;  Jer.  xviii.  6 ;  Rom.  ix.  20) "  (Cheyne).  Hiding  from 
Jehovah  means  here  the  same  thing  as  hiding  from  the  prophet  of  Jehovah.  They  did 
not  wish  to  listen  to  Isaiah's  reproof.  We  seem  to  see  them  watching  the  prophet 
(cf.  ch.  viii.  12).  And  he,  from  amidst  the  light  of  the  higher  or  eternal  policy,  sees 
through  their  time-serving  intrigues.  "  They  think  they  can  dispense  with  Jehovah, 
and  yet  they  are  his  creatures ;  they  attribute  cleverness  to  themselves,  and  practically 
disown  him,  as  if  the  pot  should  say  to  the  potter  who  has  turned  it, '  He  does  not 
understand  it'"  (Delitzsch).  The  great  lessons  are :  1.  The  short-sightedness  of  worldly 
wisdom.  It  sees  so  clearly  the  immediate  interest  to  be  gained,  it  ignores  the  distant 
future,  and  falls  headlong  into  fallacy.  2.  The  far-sightedness  ^  conscience.  The 
prophet  represents  conscience.  What  is  now  right  is  profitable  now  and  ever  will  be. 
And  only  the  real  and  the  sincere  is  the  right.  Men  may  be  deceived  and  mocked  for 
a  time  j  but  "  be  not  deceived :  God  is  not  mocked."— tJ. 

Yen.  17 — 24. — A  time  of  regeneration.  A  time  of  refreshing  and  of  renewal 
is,  notwithstanding  all  the  gloom  of  preceding  pictures,  at  hand. 

I.  The  change  in  natuee.  "  One  of  Isaiah's  most  characteristic  ideas  is  a  future 
transformation  of  nature  corresponding  to  that  of  man"  (Oheyne).  The  forest  will  be 
turned  into  the  garden-land.  Lebanon  stands  for  the  wild  or  uncultivated  land  (cf  ch. 
X.  18,  34).  The  passage  in  ch.  xxxii.  15  is  parallel.  When  God  again  begins  to  bless 
his  people,  the  untilled  land  will  become  a  cultivated  country,  and  the  fields  will 
produce  an  abundance  compared  with  which  their  present  condition  may  be  pronounced 
barren.  The  meaning  may  be  both  literal  and  symbolical.  When  human  energy  is 
renewed,  so  is  the  face  of  nature,  which  saddens  with  war,  pestilence,  and  the  depres- 
sion of  industry.  And  the  turning  of  waste  laml  into  cultivated  fields  is  typical  of 
the  regeneration  of  human  life;  for  what  is  all  depravity  and  misery,  but  thought, 
focuity,  passion,  run  to  waste  ? 

IL  Signs  of  the  new  life.    The  deaf  will  hear  the  words  of  a  writing,  aad  the 


480  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh  xxix.  1—24. 


blind  shall  be  brought  out  of  gloom  and  darkness  into  new  spiritual  perception,  the 
lowly  hearted  shall  receive  a  fresh  access  of  joy  in  Jehovah,  and  the  poor  shall  exult  in 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  Notice  everywhere  the  loving  spirit  of  the  gospel.  Ever  it  is 
good  news  to  those  who  need  that  news  the  most — the  ignorant,  the  humble,  and  the 
poor.  And  correspondingly,  the  proud  and  the  self-sufficient  are  to  be  brought  l«w. 
The  terrible  foe  without,  and  the  scornful  foes  within,  will  have  vanished  and  be 
brought  to  nought.  The  prophetic  message  in  every  age  is  vehement,  burniug  against 
oppression  ami  treachery.  There  are  men  that  watch  for  iniquity,  that  swear  away 
otliers'  lives  by  false  testimony,  or  seek  to  ruin  those  who  plead  in  the  gate  or  judicial 
court,  and  wrest  the  just  verdict  from  the  righteous  by  frivolous  pretences.  (For  the 
expression,  "turning  aside  the  right"  of  the  weak,  etc.,  of.  Exod.  xxiii.  6  ;  Amos  v.  12; 
Mai.  iii.  5.)  Traitors,  conspirators,  false  witnesses,  and  false  men  of  every  kind  will 
be  rooted  out  of  the  new  kingdom;  and  all  that  is  incorrigible  will  be  given  up  to 
destruction,  thai  there  may  be  room  for  the  plants  of  Jehovah's  planting  to  flourish. 

III.  The  holt  and  happt  consummation.  No  more  shall  Jacob  be  ashamed  and 
his  face  turn  pale.  His  oppressors  will  haTe  been  swept  away.  He  will  see  "  his  suns, 
the  work  of  Jehovah's  hands,  within  him."  In  presence  of  the  judgments  of  Jehovah 
there  will  be  a  true  conversion ;  they  will  become  holy  even  as  he  is  holy — a  Church 
sanctifying  him,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  A  sound  intelligence  will  displace  the  former 
spirit  of  error,  and  former  murmnring  will  give  way  to  a  willingness  to  receive  instruc- 
tion. This  is  the  state  of  things  for  which  we  pray  when  we  say,  "  Hallowed  be  thy 
Name."  "  They  shall  hallow  thy  Name,"  says  the  prophet ;  "  They  shall  fear  the  God. 
of  Israel."  Pure  reverence,  united  with  brif^ht  clear  intelligence,  and  applied  in  every 
department  of  thouaht  and  practice,  will  be  the  spirit  of  the  future  kingdom,  must  be 
the  spirit  in  all  who  sincerely  pray  for  the  coming  of  that  kingdom  in  their  hearts 
now.— J. 

Ver.  13. — Intincerity.  "  Forasmuch  as  this  people  draw  near  me  with  their  mouth, 
and  with  their  lips  do  honour  me,  but  have  removed  their  heart  far  from  me." 
Sincerity  is  the  lile  of  devotion.  Eloquence  in  prayer  is  execrable  if  the  heart  be 
worldly  and  vain.     Here  we  have  Divine  insight  into  man's  soul. 

I.  Hebe  is  the  bended  knee  without  the  prostrate  heart.  Eeverential  manner 
and  sacred  solemnities  of  speech  may  deceive  others,  but  with  God  all  hearts  are  open, 
ftll  desires  known.  It  is  mere  mou^/i-worship.  It  is  the  trick  of  the  muscles,  not  the 
tone  of  the  heart.  We  resent  the  false  man.  Nothing  offends  the  better  instincts  of 
humanity  so  much  as  deceitful  mannerism.  Better  the  "drawn  sword"  than  the 
disguised  enemy  with  fawning  friendship  on  his  lips. 

II.  HeBB   18   THE   HONOUR  OF   THE   LIPS  WITHOUT   THE   DEVOTION   OF   THE  LIFE.      To 

give  a  place  of  "  honour  "  to  religion  is  common  to  the  worldliest  men.  It  is  like  the  com- 
pliment that  vice  pays  to  virtue  by  imitation  of  its  manner,  and  hiding  of  itself.  What 
should  we  think  of  men  who  did  not  honour  religion  ?  They  would  be  losers.  Men 
would  not  trust  them.  They  would  be  suspected  of  indifference  to  those  bonds  which 
hold  society  together.  So  they  pay  outward  honour  to  the  Almiglity,  they  join  in  the 
Church  anthem,  and  in  the  public  confession  of  the  great  Christian  Creeds.  But  in  their 
life  there  is  no  honour  paid  to  religion,  inasmuch  as  they  serve  and  worship  other  gods. 

III.  Herb  is  the  true  bending  of  the  heart,  which  is  the  microcosm  or  the 
MAN.  The  heart  is  removed  far  from  God.  It  does  not  thrill  with  his  love,  nor  beat 
in  sympathy  with  his  claims.  This  is  the  loadstone  that  leads  us  everywhere.  We 
can  propheay  where  the  footsteps  will  be  if  we  know  the  longings  of  the  spirit.  The 
hea/ri  that  he  made  capable  of  so  much  endurance  and  affection  is  far  from  him.  Then 
it  must  be  lomewhere  else.  It  will  find  some  object.  The  ivy  torn  down  from  the  cdd 
church  tower  will  cling  to  the  nearest  object  in  its  path.  Oling  it  must,  "0  Lord, 
thou  hast  searched  me,  and  known  me." — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  city  of  God.  "The  city  where  David  dwelt"  was  undoubtedly 
Jerusalem,  the  "city  of  God."  It  is  here  called  Arid;  i.e.,  according  to  some,  the 
hearth  or  altar  of  God.     This  fact,  taken  with  the  prophecy  itself,  may  remind  us — 

I.  That  the  city  of  God  is  the  place  where  God  dwells.  It  is  where  hit 
hearth  u — the  "  place  of  his  abode  "  where  he  is  at  home  with  his  people,  where  they  are 


OH.  XXIX.  1—24.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE,  PROPHET   ISAIAH,  481 

"  at  home  "  with  him.  The  true  Church  of  Christ,  the  ideal  Chrfetlaii  family  or  seeiettjf, 
IS  that  company  which  feels  that  Grod  is  with  it  of  a  truth,  which  realizes  and  i-ejotecs 
In  hfs  presence. 

n.  That  the  citt  op  God  ib  thk  place  of  baokifioe.  The  "altar  "  of  Old  Testa' 
ment  times  has  for  ever  disappeared  now  that  the  great  Sacrifice  has  heen  presj^iijted, 
now  that  the  way  into  the  holiest  is  open,  now  that  nothing  stands  between  the  Divine 
mercy  and  the  penitent  and  believing  soul.  But  still  the  city  of  Gad.  is  the  plaee  of 
sacrifice}  for  still  every  true  servant  of  Christ  is  continually  engaged  in  offerit),g  up 
"spiritual  sacrifices"  UBto  God.  These  are  the  offe.rings  of  praise  (Heb.  xiii.  1^),  (^ 
conteeraiion  (Horn.  xii.  1),  of  imdreess  (Heb.  xiiL  16);-^these  and  such  as  these  are 
"aeceptablo  to  God"  (1  Pet.  ii.  5). 

III.  That  the  city  of  God  is  a  place  of  reverent  and  joyous  commbnion. 
"Add  ye  yea^toyea^,"  etc.  (ver.  1);  i.e.  let  the  festivals  go  round  frota  year  to  year. 
The  propliet  is  thought  to  have  spoken  iroaically,  as  if  he  would  say,  "  Go  on  with  your 
solemnities,  but  they  will  a^iail  you  nothing."  However  this  may  be^  we  may  be  sure 
that  when  Jerusalem  was  what  Jehovah  meant  it  to  be,  it  was  a  city  in  which  sacred 
festivals  brought  the  people  of  God  into  holy  and  happy  communion  with  one  ajiolher 
and  with  their  Divine  Ruler.  And  when  that  which  is  now  the  couaterpart  of  the  city 
of  God  is  what  its  Lord  meant  if  to  be,  it  i&  a  place  where  human  souls  minjjle  in 
sacred  fellowship,  and  where  they  all  unite  in  reverent  and  happy  intercourse  with  the 
Father  of  their  spirits,  with  the  Saviour  of  their  souls. 

I¥.  That  the  city  of  God  mat  be;  a  place  of  Divine  judgment.  "  Yet  I  will 
distress  Ariel,  and  there  shall  be  heaviness  and  sorrow,"  etc.  (vers.  2 — 4).  When  the 
Church,  the  society,  'ihe  family,  or  the  individual  soul  needs  Divine  correotion,  God 
will  send  bis  chastisements.  The  Author  of  its  peace  will  be  the  Source  of  its  sorrow. 
1.  It  (he)  will  be  as  a  besieged  dty,  as  a  city  against  which  the  agents,  of  God  are 
encamped,  shut  in,  circumscribed,  reduced  to  privation  and  distress,  made  to.  feel  its 
feebleness,  driven  to  ory  out  for  help,  2.  It  (he)  will  he  humiliated.  "  Thou  shalt  be 
brought  down,"  etc.  (ver.  4).  Nothing  so  much  offends  God  as  pride,  haughtiness  of 
heart,  presumption ;  and  when  this  is  manifested  by  bis  people,  they  may  expect  to 
be  abased  to  the  very  dust,  until  their  spirit  has  been  renewed  and  they  have  learned 
humility  under  his  correcting  hand. 

V.  That  the  city  of  God  is  the  object  or  the  Divine  deliveuanob.  (Yera. 
5 — ^9.)  When  God  arises  to  deliver  his  people,  his  visitation  may  be  :  1.  Uneicpected. 
(Ver.  5.)  When  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  will  he  find  his  people  expecting  his  appear- 
ance (Lute  xviii.  8)  ?  2.  Overwhelming.  (Vers.  6,  7.)  It  will  (may)  be  as  if  all  the 
elements  conspired  to  work  his  will.  3.  Attended  with  interest  disappoint  ment  to  his 
foea.    (Ver.  8.) 

1.  See  to  it  that  this  severe  correction  be  not  called  for ;  that  it  is  not  brought  down 
by  worldliness,  by  formality,  by  selfishness,  by  pride,  by  discord,  by  indulgence.  2.  II 
the  hour  of  correction  should  arrive,  let  immediate  repentance  bring  on  at  once  the  time 
of  deliverance. — 0. 

Vers.  9 — 1%.— Spiritual  incapacity.  Our  powers,  as  men  and  women,  are  limited 
enough ;  and  it  may  well  be  that  those  of  God's  children  who  move  in  wider  spheres 
and  are  endowed  with  greater  capaciiies  look  down  in  wonder,  if  not  with  amusement, 
on  our  large  pretoDsioHS.  Yet  we  talk  freely  of  the  incapable,  the  feeble,  the  helpless, 
as  if  we  ourselves  were  strong.  There  art  various  degrees  of  power  and  weakness 
among  us,  but  the  most  important  belong  to  that  kind  of  incapacity  to  which  the  text 
refers. 

I.  Its  domain.  The  prophet  treats  of  spiritual  helplesssneas.  We  see  and  lament 
physical  incapacity  in  the  sliap©  of  blindness,  deafness,  paralysis,  etc.  We  also  have,  to 
treat  memtal  incapacity  in  the  form  of  intellectual  feebleness,  decline,  imbi^cility, 
insanity.  But  by  far  the  saddest  sight  in  the  view  of  God  is  spiritual  incapacity ^hat 
moral  condition-  in  which  the  soul  has  lost  its  native  powers^  is  destitute  of  those, 
acquirementB  which  would  enable  it  to  stand  side  by  side  with  the  holiest  of  the 
heavenly  world,  lacks  the  wisdom  by  which  it  might  defend  itself  against  its  adver- 
saries, and  is  therefore  the  prey  of  the  worst  evils,  forfeits  its  birthright,  and  moves 
towards  its  doom.    This  incapacity  affects  the  soul  in  all  its  higher  and  more  serious 

ISAIAB.  2  I 


482  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.    Loh-  xxix.  1—24 

relations— in  Ita  relation  to  God,  to  those  to  whom  it  li  under  obligation,  to  its  own 

character. 

II.  Its  two  peincipal  makifestations.  1.  Blindnesi,  "The  spirit  of  deep  sleep" — 
the  closing  or  covering  of  the  eyes  (ver.  10).  The  last,  or  nearly  the  last,  effect  of  sin 
is  to  take  away  the  faculty  of  spiritual  insight ;  so  that  a  man  cannot  see  those  things 
which  a  human  soul  ought  to  recognize  at  once,  the  recognition  of  which  is  indispen- 
sable to  its  very  life;  viz.  the  presence,  the  claims,  the  power  of  God;  the  excellency 
of  his  service ;  the  unworthiness  and  insufBciency  of  sensual  gratifications  and  worldly 
ambitions ;  the  deathfulness  of  sin,  etc.  But  to  the  spiritually  incapable  these  things 
are  as  if  they  were  not.  Such  souls  are  as  unconscious  of  these  realities  as  is  a 
man  in  a  deep  sleep,  or  as  is  one  whose  eyes  are  covered,  of  the  objects  which  are  before 
him.  2.  Error.  "They  stagger,  but  not  with  strong  drink"  (ver.  9).  As  a  man 
under  the  influence  of  stimulants  cannot  "walk  straight,"  but  staggers  from  side  t" 
side  or  wanders  out  of  his  way  altogether,  so  men  who  are  robbe(i  of  their  rightful 
powers  by  sin  fail  to  walk  straight  on  in  the  path  of  rectitude :  they  deviate  into  (1) 
false  notions  about  God  and  man,  about  life  and  destiny;  and  into  (2Xevil  habits,  into 
sad  departures  from  purity,  from  uprightness,  from  truth,  from  wisdom. 

III.  Its  completeness.  1.  It  extends  to  the  highest, — he  has  covered  the  eyes  of 
"  your  rulers "  (ver.  10) ;  to  those  who  lead  and  who,  being  blind  themselves,  will 
certainly  mislead  (Matt.  xv.  14)  ;  to  those  whose  social  influence  is  strong  and,  in  this 
case,  most  pernicious.  2.  It  includes  <Ae  specialists — the  privileged,  those  who  profess  to 
have  peculiar  access  to  truth :  "  The  seers  hath  he  covered."  Woe  to  the  land,  to  the 
Church,  whose  religious  teachers  are  unable  to  see  the  directing  finger  of  God,  and  are 
giving  way  to  dreams  of  their  own  imagination  1  3.  It  embraces  those  instructed  in 
other  things.  It  is  not  only  the  unlearned  that  cannot  read  at  all,  but  the  learned  men 
also,  who  are  blind  to  the  truths  of  God  (vers.  11, 12).  Here,  in  nature,  in  providence, 
in  Scripture  is  a  glorious,  three- volumed  work,  the  full  work  of  God ;  here  are  sacred 
truths  which 'enlarge  the  mind  and  elevate  the  soul,  which  beautify  and  ennoble  life, 
prepare  for  death,  and  fit  for  immortal  blessedness.  But,  with  powers  diminished, 
depraved,  or  destroyed  by  sin,  they  who  can  learn  other  lessons  and  read  other  secrets 
are  as  undiscerning  as  the  most  illiterate  boor  in  presence  of  a  language  of  which  he 
does  not  know  the  alphabet,  as  helpless  as  the  finished  scholtu:  in  presence  of  a  roU  the 
seal  of  which  he  cannot  break  ! 

IV.  Its  explanation.  How  can  we  account  for  this  depravation  of  man's  spiritual 
powers  ?  It  is  the  fitting  penalty  of  sin  ;  it  comes  in  the  righteous  judgments  of  God : 
"  The  Lord  hath  poured  out  upon  you,"  etc.  (ver.  10).  It  is  the  retribution  attached  to 
a  guilty  non-use  or  misuse  of  spiritual  faculty ;  it  is  a  "  woe  "  that  is  always  working : 
"  From  hira  that  hath  not " — does  not  use,  or  abuses  his  talents — "  shall  be  taken  away 
6ven  that  which  he  hath  "  (Matt.  xxv.  29). — C. 


Vers.  13 — 17. — The  Church  which  Ood  condemns.    Here  i 

I.  A  Church  condemned  or  God.  It  has  four  characteristics  of  which  the  Lord 
complains.  1.  Unspiritual  worship.  "  This  people  draw  near  me  with  their  mouth," 
etc.  (ver.  13).  The  service  of  the  lip  without  the  homage  of  the  heart  is  an  unaccept- 
able sacrifice  to  God  (see  Ps.  1. ;  Ixxviii.  36,  37 ;  ch.  i. ;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  31 ;  Matt.  xv. 
8,  9  ;  John  iv.  24).  To  take  sacred  words  into  the  lips  with  nothing  of  their  meaning 
in  the  mind,  to  asstune  the  attitude  without  cherishing  the  spirit  of  devotion,  is  not  to 
propitiate  but  to  ofiend  the  Holy  One.  2.  Unauthorized  doctrine.  "  Their  fear  toward 
me  is  taught,"  etc. — ^rendered  in  the  New  Testament,  "  teaching  for  doctrines  the  com- 
mandments of  men  '•'  (Matt.  xv.  9).  This  was  an  early  departure  from  the  will  of  Christ 
(see  Col.  ii.  18—22 ;  Titus  i.  14 ;  Acts  xx.  30).  The  Church  has  always  been  in  danger 
from  men  who  have  represented,  first  to  their  own  minds  and  then  to  the  minds  of 
others,  their  own  reasonings  or  imaginations  as  if  they  were  the  pure  truth  of  God.  So 
the  mind  and  will  of  Christ  have  been  grievously  and  mischievously  perverted.  3. 
Incapable  teachers.  "  The  wisdom  of  their  wise  shall  perish,"  ete.  (f  er.  14).  A  Church 
fallen  under  the  rebuke  of  its  Lord  is  usually  one  that  has  wholly  unsuitable  and 
incompetent  teachers — men  who  have  lost  their  way,  who  have  failed  to  discover  or  have 
abandoned  heavenly  wisdom,  who  cannot  declare  the  way  of  life.  4.  Unenlighteneu 
members.    (Ver.  16.)    So  destitute  of  the  very  rudiments  of  religion  as  to  ask  such  a 


atu  XXIX.  1—24.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  483 


question  as  this,  as  to  entertain  such  a  thought  as  this.  With  a  faulty  and  tacapablc 
ministry  you  may  have  a  Church  ignorant  of  those  elements  of  the  gospel  with  which 
it  leema  impossible  that  men  should  not  he  familiar. 

II.  The  DivDfE  warnino  which  is  also  a  Divikb  pkomisb.  (Vers.  16, 17.)  He 
says — ^You  hace  perverted  everything,  turned  everything  upside  down,  made  nothing 
of  my  Word  when  you  should  have  made  everything  of  it,  elevated  the  outward  and 
visible  above  the  inward  and  spiritual,  acted  as  if  you  could  conceal  your  doings  from 
the  all-beholding  God,  treated  me  as  the  clay  might  treat  the  potter,  unworthily  and 
irreverently.  I  will  bring  it  to  pass  that  things  shall  be  turned  upside  down  in  your 
experience :  "  Lebanon  shall  be  turned  into  a  fruitful  field,"  etc.  The  humble  shall  be 
exalted  and  the  proud  abased.  Tour  false  confidence  shall  be  cast  down,  and  that 
which  you  have  neglected  shall  be  honoured  in  the  eyes  of  all.  The  Church  that  has 
lost  its  first  estate  of  truth,  spirituality,  wisdom,  must  expect  a  terrible  reversal.  1. 
Its  mistaken  notions  will  be  shaken  from  its  mind  to  make  way  for  God's  living  truth. 
2.  Its  incapable  leaders  will  be  compelled  to  step  down  and  give  place  to  those  whom 
they  have  arrogantly  disregarded.  3.  Its  pompous  but  unspiritual  rites  will  be 
exchanged  for  simpler  and  spiritual  engagements.  4.  Its  luxurious  rebgious  enjoy- 
ments will  be  lost  in  earnest  self-denying  labours,  or  even  in  trying  hardships.  Thus 
will  the  fruitful  field  become  a  forest,  while  Lebanon  is  turned  into  a  fruitful  field. 
The  revolution  in  the  character  and  condition  of  the  Church  will  be  very  intimately 
connected  with,  will  be  immediately  followed  by,  a  revolution  in  the  character  and 
condition  of  the  world. — C. 

Vers.  18 — 24. —  The  hour  cf  revival.  I.  Its  chabacteeistics.  1.  The  spirit  of  docility. 
Those  once  deaf  now  "  hear  the  words  of  the  book  "  (ver.  18)  ;  "  They  also  that  erred 
in  spirit  shall  come  to  understanding,  and  they  that  murmured  shall  learn  doctrine  " 
(ver.  24).  It  is  one  of  the  surest  signs  of  the  presence  of  God's  Spirit  that  the  attitude 
of  insensibility  or  of  eaptiousness  is  exchanged  for  the  desire  to  learn  the  will  of  God 
— that  those  who  once  held  aloof  altogether  or  came  to  carp  and  quibble  now  lend  a 
reverent,  inquiring  ear,  sit  like  Mary  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  look  heavenwards  like  Paul 
and  say,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ? "  2.  2%e  power  of  spiritual  per- 
ception. "  The  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  see,"  etc.  (ver.  18).  God  awakens  human  souls 
from  the  sleep  of  sin  or  the  languor  of  spiritual  decline.  Then,  in  the  one  case  men  see 
the  guilt  of  continued  rebellion  against  God's  will,  also  the  terrible,  risks  they  run  whu 
remain  rebellious,  and  also  the  excellency  and  openness  of  the  salvation  which  is  in 
Jesus  Christ,  etc. ;  in  the  other  case  they  see  the  transcendent  value  of  the  humar 
souls  around  them,  the  admirableness  of  Christian  zeal,  the  desirableness  of  gainiii:; 
the  approval  of  Christ  for  carrying  on  his  work  of  redeeming  love,  etc.  3.  Oladness  of 
heart  in  God  and  in  man.  (1)  In  God.  "Joy  in  the  Lord  "  (ver.  19)  will  be  increaseil, 
not  only  on  the  part  of  the  meek,  but  in  the  heart  of  all  those  who  are  affected  by  the 
action  of  Divine  truth  and  the  influence  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  Men  will  realize  the 
closeness,  the  blessedness,  the  nobility  of  their  relation  to  God,  as  his  children,  friends, 
co-workers,  heirs ;  and  their  souls  wiU  be  lifted  up  and  will  swell  with  a  sacred  joy. 
(2)  In  man.  Jacob  "  will  not  now  be  ashamed,"  his  face  will  not  "  wax  pale  "  (ver. 
22)  as  he  regards  his  children;  on  the  contrary,  he  will  behold  them  with  unbounded 
joy  when  he  sees  them  "sanctifying  the  Name  of  the  Holy  One"  (ver.  23).  The 
fathers  and  mothers  in  Israel,  the  leaders  and  teachers  of  the  Church,  will  exult  in  the 
extension  of  piety  and  purity,  of  worth  and  wisdom,  among  all  the  people,  and  ■par- 
ticularly among  the  young.  4.  The  disappearance  of  iniquittf.  (Vers.  20,  21.)  The 
oppressor,  the  scorner,  the  vicious,  the  unrighteous, — these  and  such  as  they  arc 
removed  from  the  scene;  they  no  longer  linger  about  the  gates  or  frequent  the  courl^■ 
or  walk  the  streets  of  Jerusalem.  The  force  of  sacred  fervour,  like  the  cleanaii.g 
indignation  of  Christ  himself,  sweeps  unholiness  from  the  sanctuary ;  "  that  whi-rh 
deflleth  "  is  cast  out  with  the  strong  hand  of  reawakened  purity. 

II.  The  Divine  Soubce  of  it.  All  those  thus  made  true  children  of  Go«k  are 
"  the  work  of  mine  hands"  (ver.  23) ;  everything,  as  every  one,  is  his  workmanship ; 
it  is  all  of  God.  It  is  his  Spirit  that  "  renews  the  face  of  the  earth,"  that  also  revives 
cho  souls  of  men  and  the  condition  of  his  Church. 

III.  Tek  bops  or  rrs  comiso.    1.  We  may  lode  to  Ae  pr»miiu  </  CM$  Word, 


484  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIaH.    [gh.  xxix.  1— 2i 

that  hold  out  to  us  the  hope  of  better  and  brighter  days  in  the  future.  2.  Or  to  tht 
grace  and  power  of  our  Lord ;  for  we  cannot  believe  that  his  yearning  compassion  and 
his  mighty  power  will  leave  outside  for  ever  the  multitudes  that  are  still  afar  ofiF.  3. 
But  we  do  well  to  look  to  devout  and  earnest  preparation  on  our  ovm  part.  Can  we 
not  "  prepare  the  Lord  his  way  "  by  cleansing  our  hearts  of  selfishness  and  sin,  of 
pride  and  unbelief;  by  devout  expectation  and  eager  readiness  for  the  sound  of  hi« 
chariot-wheels ;  by  earnest  and  believing  prayer  for  the  action  of  hi«  reviving  Spirit  ? — O. 

Ver.  2. — Divine  corrections  through  temporal  distrestea.  This  subject  may  be  treated 
in  the  larger  spheres  of  nations,  classes  of  society,  or  Churches,  and  applications  may 
be  made  to  individual  experience.  God's  ways  in  the  world  of  men  are  designed  to 
reveal  the  mystery  of  his  ways  with  each  man.  That  impression  which  we  are  now 
gaining  concerning  the  constancy  and  inexorableness  of  law,,  godly  people  have  long 
had  concerning  the  constancy  and  inexorableness  of  the  Divine  dealings.  What  God 
has  been  to  one  man,  he  has  been  to  many,  he  has  been  to  alL  What  Gfod  haa  b^n 
here,  he  has  been  there,  and  he  has  been  everywhere.  It  is  a  law  and  order  with  him 
that  he  should  correct  men  for  their  faults  by  means  of  temporal  distresses.  The 
calamities  that  come  to  men  and  nations  are  no  accidents.  In  them  God  is  working 
for  righteousness.  The  term  Ariel  is  one  of  Isaiah's  favourite  symbolical  names.  It 
stands  for  Jerusalem.  The  prophet  exclaims,  "  Alas  for  Ariel  1 "  because  of  the  wrong- 
headedness  and  the  wilfulness  which  were  leading  its  rulers  away  from  reliance  on 
Jehovah  to  confidence  in  Egypt.  The  word  "  Ariel "  means  "  God's  lion,"  but  it  is  not 
easy  for  us  to  recognize  the  appropriateness  of  the  figure.  Some  think  it  may  mean 
the  hearth,  or  altar  of  God,  and  then  the  reference  to  "  sacrifices  "  in  ver.  1  is  seen  to 
be  appropriate.  Henderson,  feeling  that  the  figure  of  Jerusalem  as  a  lion,  devourii^ 
the  flesh  of  many  sacrifices,  is  very  strained,  accepts  the  figure  of  "  hearth  or  altar," 
and  says,  "  The  reference  is  to  Jerusalem  as  the  centre  of  the  Jewish  polity,  where 
alone  it  was  lawful  to  sacrifice  to  Jehovah  "  (comp.  ch.  xxxi.  9).  In  favour  of  the 
translation,  "  Lion  of  God,"  it  may  be  noticed  that  the  lion  was  the  emblem  of  the 
tribe  of  Judah.  The  historical  reference  of  these  verses  is  to  the  coming  attack  of 
Sennacherib's  army,  which  would  be  a  distress  to  Ariel,  but  would  not  tovolve  her 
ruin.  It  would  be  a  providence  with  tlje  evident  design  of  warning  and  correcting. 
It  is  matched  by  many  circumstances  in  individual  lives  which  are  distressing  rather 
than  afflicting  or  overwhelming. 

I.  Pabticulab  evils  in  Ariel.  Perhaps  the  point  of  reproach  here  is  the  insin- 
cerity attending  the  reformation  which  Hezekiah  instituted.  There  is  an  important 
difference  between  a  reformation  which  starts  from  the  people  and  reaches  to  affect  the 
throne,  as  in  the  case  of  Nineveh  in  the  time  of  Jonah  ;  or  as  in  the  case  of  the  German 
Protestant  Reformation,  which  was  in  the  heart  and  purpose  of  the  people  before 
Luther  found  it  voice ;  and  a  reformation  which  starts  from  the  throne  and  tries  to 
carry  the  people  with  it,  as  in  the  cases  of  Hezekiah  and  Josiah.  There  is  the  grave 
danger  of  the  people's  acceding  to  the  wish  of  the  sovereign,  and  the  example  of  the 
court,  apart  from  their  own  convictions.  This  was  the  particular  evil  of  the  time 
which  needed  correction.  There  were  signs  of  religious  awakening  which  were  insin- 
cere. How  insincerity  in  the  leaders  was  shown  in  the  efforts  of  a  considerable  party 
to  turn  from  Jehovah  and  negotiate  for  help  with  Egypt  1  Still,  we  may  observe  the 
praralence  of  insincerity,  and  the  fact  that  "  distresses  "  are  just  the  fitting  eoirective 
of  ijiis  evil. 

II.  The  delusion  of  kebpino  up  sacrificbs  ra  Abisl.  An  important  port  of 
prophetical  work  was  the  denunciation  of  sacrifices  and  religious  rites  when  the  soul 
of  meaning  was  lost  out  of  them,  and  they  expressed  no  devotion,  no  thankfulness,  no 
love,  and  no  consecration  (see  ch.  i.  11 — 15).  Here  Isaiah  intimates  that  increasing 
the  number  of  festivals  and  multiplying  sacrifices  could  not  deceive  Gtod  or  hide  from 
him  the  real  moral  and  religious  condition  of  the  pople.  Keeping  up  the  formalities 
of  religion  is  often  successful  in  deceiving  men,  but  it  never  deceives  God.  This  is 
his  absolute  condition,  "  They  that  worship  him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in 
truth." 

ILL  The  forms  m  which  Ariel  mioht  be  hopefuixt  dibtbsssxo.  The  Hosai« 
system  had  established  the  idea  that  men  would  be  sure  to  get  good  things  by  being 


OS.  XXIX.  1-24,]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAiAH.  485 

good.  This  was  founded  in  truth,  but  it  involved  men's  having  right  ideas  of  what 
are  "good  things,"  and  what  is  "  being  good."  Men  made  it  mean  that  they  would  be 
jure  to  get  temporal  blessings  if  they  made  large  outward  show  of  goodness.  And 
therefore  temporal  distresses  and  anxieties  were  precisely  the  things  that  would  awaken 
nven  to  a  sense  of  their  mistake,  and  to  a  worthier  apprehension  of  Divine  claims. 
Temporal  safety  and  blessing  did  not  attend  such  goodness  as  theirs,  and  so  they  were 
led  to  suspect  their  goodness.  So  we,  finding  our  religion  fail  us  in  the  evil  day,  are 
brought  to  see  that  formal  religion  never  can  be  acceptable  unto  him  who  "  desires 
truth  in  the  inward  parts." 

IT.  Thb  I8SUB  OP  Divine  DEAxnros  with  Ariel.  Here  we  must  distinguish 
between  the  issue  which  Gud  designs,  and  for  the  accomplishment  of  which  the  means 
he  uses  are  appropriate,  and  the  issue  which  is  actually  attained  in  consequence  of 
man's  resistant  wilfulness.  One  of  the  saddest  things  in  all  human  lives  is  the  contrast 
between  the  results  of  distressful  dispensations  -and  the  gracious  desigas  contemplated 
by  God  in  sending  them.    Corrections  that  fail  to  humble  succeed  in  hardening. — ^U.  T. 

Ver.  11. — God's  Word  a  sealed  Booh.  Eeferenoe  is  to  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah,  which 
were  evidently  circulated  in  writing  among  the  people ;  but,  by  reason  of  prevailing 
)«y.pociisy,  pride,  and  obstinacy,  they  were  not  understood — they  were  like  a  sealed 
book  (compare  the  figure  in  Eev.  v.  2).  The  connection  of  the  text  may  be  stated 
thus  :  "The  hearers  stare  in  astonishment  at  a  prophecy  seemingly  so  out  of  relation 
to  facts.  The  prophet  warns  them  that,  if  they  wilfully  deaden  their  spiritual 
faculties,  there  will  be  no  emerging  afterwards  from  this  state  of  blindness  «nd 
-:t  apefaction.  Jehovah  will  judicially  fix  them  in  it.  The  ruling  class  is  mainly 
.uldressed.  They  are  spiritually  asleep,  with  eyes  closed  and  heads  wrapped  up  (in 
Oriental  fashion)." 

I.  God's  Wobd  is  not  a  bbai,ed  Book  by  Divine  design.  A  curious  notion  has 
'gained  acceptance  that  the  Bible  could  not  be  the  Word  of  God  if  it  did  not  contain 
mysteries  quite  btjyond  the  possibility  of  man's  apprehension.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
ka  been  well  urged  that  God  can  have  no  need  thus  to  "  show  off "  his  superiority ; 
and  that  revelation  must  mean  "  light,"  "  unfolding ; "  it  can  never  be  intended  to  mean 
"  bewildering."  Of  this  we  may  be  sure — there  is  nothing  in  the  Bible  sealed  from  man. 
Whatever  is  there  is  for  our  understanding,  for  our  instruction.  Isaiah's  prophecies, 
givei!  by  God's  inspiration^  are  plain  enough ;  he  may  read  them  who  runs. 

II.  Gem's  'Wobd  becomes  a  sbaled  Book  through  human  pebvbksity.  This  may 
be  shown :  1.  In  the  blinding  influence  of  prejudice.  We  cannot  find  in  the  Word  what 
we  do  not  want  to  find.  This  may  be  applied  to  national  prejudice,  sectarian  prejudice, 
and  personal  prejudice.  2.  In  the  closing  of  men's  minds  to  the  incomings  and  gracious 
illuminations  and  inspirations  of  God's  Spirit.  He  who  gives  the  Word  gives  the  keys 
to  its  meanii^gs  and  applications,  through  the  guiding  Spirit.  It  is  a  sealed  Book  if  we 
have  not  the  key.  3.  In  the  judicial  sealing  which  comes  as  a  judgment  on  the  per- 
versity. This  is  the  precise  case  associated  with  the  text.  These  wilful  rulers  were 
determined  to  treat  Isaiah's  prophecies  as  a  sealed  book :  then  to  them  it  shall  be  a 
sealed  bookj  and  when  they  want  to  understand  it,  they  shall  "weary  themselves  to 
find  the  door."  Apply  to  our  own  relations  with  God's  Word.  The  openness  and 
sBiggestiveness  of  it  is  a  test  of  our  spiritual  state.  We  must  never  think  that  God 
has  dosed  it ;  the  fiact  can  only  be  that  we  have  closed  ourselves  to  it. — B.  T. 

Ver.  13. — L^iervice  ;  or,  the  peril  of  losing  the  heart  out  of  our  piety.  There  wag  a 
time  when  Israel  rendered  heart-service  to  God,  There  was  a  life  in  the  Mosaic  system. 
Taking  a  figure  from  the  sacrifice  which  Noah  offered  as  consecrating  a  regenerate 
eskxth  unto  God,  there  was  "  a  savour  of  a  sweet  smell "  to  rise  up  to  God.  The 
.reproacli  of  Isaiah  is  that  the  sacrifice  was  left,  but  the  savour  was  gone ;  the  huSk  was 
left,  but  the  kernel  was  gone ;  the  form  was  left,  the  heart  was  gone ;  the  voice  still 
spoke^  but  it  had  no  message  to  deliver.  "  They  draw  near  with  lip,  but  heart  is 
far  away."  And  still,  whensoever  personal  piety  is  failing,  men  fall  back  on  some  past 
experiences,  or  else  they  exaggerate  the  mere  formalities  of  religious  worship  and 
ordinance.  Ages  of  stroug  faith  are  very  independent  of  forms.  Ages  of  failing  faith 
always  exaggerate  forms.    If  we  have  little  heart  for  obedience,  we  put  in  its  place 


m  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oa.  xxix.  1— 2i 

much  bowing  and  kneeling  and  offering — as  if  God  could  not  see  veiy  deep,  and  would 
be  taken  by  appearances  (see  1  Sam.  xvi.  7). 

I.  Lip-sEBVicB  18  THE  REQDiEEMBNT  OF  GoD.  "  Whoso  offereth  pnuse  glorifieth 
me,"  saitli  the  Lord.  Hosea  expresses  a  right  feeling  when  he  leads  the  people  to  say, 
"  So  will  we  render  the  calves  of  our  lips  "  (Hos.  xiv.  2).  To  worship  God  is  to  make 
our  approaches  to  him,  and  to  present  our  adorations  to  him ;  it  is  to  draw  nigh  to  him 
as  those  that  have  business  with  iiim,  with  an  intention  therein  to  honour  him.  This 
we  are  to  do  with  our  mouth  and  with  our  lips  in  speaking  of  him  and  in  speaking  to 
him.  And,  if  the  heart  be  full  of  his  love  and  fear,  out  of  the  abundance  of  that 
heart  the  mouth  will  speak.  It  should  be  carefully  pointed  out  that  the  modern 
neglect  of  meetings  for  worship,  praise,  and  prayer  is  as  sad  a  sign  of  failing  heart-love 
for  God  as  is  the  exaggeration  of  formal  rites  and  ceremonies.  It  must  be  plainly  and 
forcibly  urged  that  God  calls  for  due  expression  of  our  piety  ;  he  asks  for  "life-service." 

II.  LiP-SERViOB  ONLY  IS  AN  OFFENCE  UKTO  GoD.  Because  it  is  Worthless.  God 
the  Spirit  cannot  be  satisfied  with  things;  he  asks  for  spirit,  for  emotion,  affection, 
thankfulness,  and  trust.  "  Voice  and  nothing  else  "  must  be  mockery  to  him  who 
can  only  heed  a  voice  when  the  heart  speaks  by  means  of  it.  We  call  thai  false,  in 
relation  to  ourselves,  which  is  warm  expression  of  affection  for  us  when  there  is  no 
heart-love;  and  such  falseness  is  an  offence.  And  Isaiah  tells  the  rulers  that  the 
secret  of  their  falseness  is  that  they  have  taken  to  ordering  their  daily  conduct  by  "  the 
precepts  of  men,"  and  did  not  want  to  obey  the  Law  of  God ;  so  they  gave  him  words 
in  place  of  works. — E.  T. 

Ver.  15. — God  the  Mind- Searcher.  Foolish  indeed  are  they  who  "  seek  deep  to  hide 
their  counsel  from  the  Lord."  The  first  reference  of  this  warning  may  be  to  the 
secret  schemes  of  the  party  in  Jerusalem  which  advocated  an  offensive  and  defiisive 
alliance  with  Egypt  in  the  national  emergency.  Such  a  policy  was  so  evidently 
unthe'icratic  that,  in  the  days  of  the  good  Hezekiah,  they  were  obliged  to  work  in  the 
dark.  It  may  be  noticed  that  the  Divine  omniscience  of  all  events  and  circumstances 
is  a  much  more  familiar  and  readily  recognized  truth  than  the  Divine  omniscience  of 
all  thoughts  of  mind  and  decisions  of  will.  Yet  we  are  to  understand  that,  as  the 
palmist  expresses  it,  "  Thou  understandest  my  thought  afar  off.  .  .  .  For  before  a  word 
is  yet  on  my  tongue,  lo !  0  Jehovah,  thou  knowest  it  altogether."  By  our  "  thoughts  " 
is  not  meant  the  passing  set  of  mental  associations  from  which  we  have  to  select, 
but  the  selections  we  make,  the  things  we  cherish.  The  omniscience  of  God  is  most 
searching  to  us  when  we  regard  it  as  his  "  knowledge  of  the  deepest  thoughts  and  most 
seciet  workings  of  the  human  heart." 

I.  The  Divine  omniscience  as  a  check.  A  boy  was  required  to  accompany  his 
father  when  out  stealing  potatoes  frbm  a  field.  The  boy  was  set  to  watch  while  the 
man  dug.  Presently  he  called  out,  as  if  there  was  danger.  "Where?  where?"  said 
the  man,  who  could  see  no  signs  of  any  one  approaching.  "  Look  up  I "  replied  the  boy. 
This  should  always  be  taken  into  consideration  in  our  thinking  and  our  planning — 
God  sees ;  God  knows.  We  all  need  that  check  of  the  Divine  eye  upon  us,  reading 
our  very  hearts. 

II.  The  DrvtNB  omniscibnoe  as  a  terboe.  Such  it  must  always  be  to  the  evil- 
doer, to  the  man  who  wants  to  do  wrong.  It  checks  the  good  man ;  it  frightens  the 
bad  man.  A  servant-girl  was  accustomed  to  pilfer  when  dusting  her  master's  room,  but 
there  was  a  portrait  on  the  walls,  the  eyes  of  which  seemed  to  be  always  following  and 
watching  her ;  so,  to  relieve  herself  of  her  terror,  the  foolish  girl  cut  out  the  eyes.  An 
oppressive  picture  of  the  terror  of  God's  looking  at  and  into  evil-doers  is  given  in  the 
description  of  the  judgment,  when  men  will  call  on  the  rocks  and  hills  to  hide  them 
from  the  face  of  God — as  if  they  could  I 

III.  The  Divine  omniscience  as  a  oonsolatiok  and  strength.  This  it  is  to 
all  who  wish  to  be  good.  The  best  source  of  illustration  is  Pa.  cxxxix.  See  especially 
the  restfulnees  and  the  joy  breathed  in  the  prayer  of  vers.  23,  24.  As  Calvin  says, 
"  That  man  must  have  a  rare  confidence  who  offers  himself  so  boldly  to  the  scrutiny 
of  God's  righteous  judgment." — B.  T. 

Ver.  19. — The  j'oy  of  the  meek.    "  The  meek  also  shall  increase  their  joy  in  the  Losi,' 


CH.  ixix.  1— 24.]    THE  BOOK   OP   THE    PROPHET   ISAIAH.  487 

It  is  quite  usuaj  to  confuse  the  "  meek  "  with  the  "  humble ; "  but,  though  the  con- 
fusion may  sometimes  be  excused,  it  is  better  to  associate  distinct  meanings  with  each 
term.  The  "  humble "  man  is  the  man  who  thinks  in  a  lowly  way  about  himself. 
The  "  meek  "  man  is  the  man  who  is  concerned  for  the  interests  of  others  rather  than 
himself.  The  ideal  "  meek  "  man  has  supreme  concern  for  the  interests  of  (Jod.  Tha 
"humble'*  man  does  not  think  of  himself  more  highly  than  he  ought  to  think.  The 
"  meek  "  man  is  really  "  disinterested."  The  Bible  models  of  meekness  are  first,  Moses, 
who  sacrificed  himself  in  his  zeal  for  the  interests  of  the  Hebrews  ;  and  then,  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  who  sacrificed  himself  for  the  redemption  of  maakind.  In  precise  har- 
mony with  this  text,  it  is  said  of  him,  "  Who,  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him, 
endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame,  and  is  set  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God." 
The  immediate  historical  connection  of  the  verse  may  be  thus  indicated :  The  scoffers 
jeered  at  Isaiah's  assurance  that  the  distress  arising  from  the  Assyrian  invasion  would 
pass  away  ;  there  was.no  need  to  think  of  Egypt;  Jehovah  could  and  would  defend 
his  own.  Isaiah  replies  to  them  that  they  need  only  wait  awhile,  and  they  would  learn 
that  God  rules,  and  the  day  of  deliverance  and  restoration  would  prove  a  day  of 
increased  joy  for  all  those  meek  and  pious  souls  that  held  fast  their  trust  in  God.  The 
expression,  "  shall  increase  their  joy,"  suggests  two  very  simple  and  natural  divisions. 

I.  The  meek  have  the  joy  op  their  trust  in  the  time  op  peril.  Even  in 
the  national  distress  they  held  their  hope  in  God,  and  that  hope  was  Btrenu;th  and 
cheer  and  song.  They  did  not  think  so  much  about  themselves  and  their  troubles  as 
about  Gk)d  and  about  the  ways  in  which  he  would  vindicate  liimself  and  make  his 
glory  known.  Meek  souls  are  taken  out  of  themselves ;  and  this  is  the  secret  of  joy. 
Meek  souls  are  so  satisfied  in  those  whom  they  trust  that  they  can  be  quiet  from  fear 
of  evil.  "  Blessed  are  the  meek  :  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth."  They  are  always 
rich ;  they  may  always  be  happy. 

IL  The  meek  have  the  jot  op  deliverance  when  God's  day  combs.  They 
are  ready  for  it,  expecting  it,  waiting  to  welcome  it.  'I'hey  are  not  hindered  by  the 
sense  of  shame,  as  are  the  scoffers.  Long  expectation  makes  possession  at  last'a  keener, 
holier  joy ;  and  prepares  them  fully  to  enjoy  all  the  blessings  it  brings.  Still  it  is  true 
that  the  meek  have  the  best  of  life  while  they  walk  under  its  gloom,  and  they  will 
have  the  best  of  heaven  when  its  gates  are  opened  for  the  ransomed. — R.  T. 

Ven.  20,  21. — The  humiliation  of  the  suspicious.  We  should  see  in  these  verses  a 
strictly  personal  reference.  Some  parties,  especially  among  the  leaders  of  the  people, 
could  see  nothing  good,  nothing  wise,  in  Isaiah's  teachings  and  warnings.  They  thought 
them  babyish,  untimely,  leading  to  a  false  security.  They  valued  statesmanship, 
political  wisdom,  and  the  subtlety  of  setting  one  great  nation  against  another,  so  that 
their  kingdom  might  be  let  alone.  The  kinds  of  scorning  and  sneering  in  which  they 
indulged  are  described  to  us  in  ch.  xxviii.  9 — 13.  Here  Isaiah  utters  his  complaint  of 
their  suspiciousness  and  unreasonableness.  "They  make  a  man  an  offender  for  a 
word,  and  lay  a  snare  for  him  that  reproveth  in  the  gate."  There  are  no  members  of 
society  more  disagreeable  to  society  than  the  suspicious,  who  can  so  keenly  discern 
evil  when  there  is  none  to  discern;  and  find  evil  motive  in  actions  of  trans  parent 
sincerity.  If  men  praise,  the  suspicious- tempered  call  it  flattery.  If  men  reprove, 
the  suspicious-tempered  say  they  are  jaundiced.  Suspiciousness  comes  to  be  a  disease, 
a  mania.  It  is  absolutely  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  considerate  brotherliness  and 
heavenly  Divine  charity,  which  "  thinketh  no  evil,  and  is  not  easily  provoked." 
Matthew  Henry,  describing  the  people  referred  to  here,  says,  "  They  maae  a  man, 
though  he  were  ever  so  wise  and  good  a  man,  though  he  were  a  man  of  God,  an  offender 
for  a  word,  a  word  mischosen  or  misplaced,  when  they  could  not  but  know  that  it  was 
well  meant.  They  cavilled  at  every  word  that  the  prophets  spoke  to  them  by  way  of 
admonition,  though  ever  so  innocently  spoken,  and  without  any  design  to  affront  them. 
They  put  the  worst  construction  upon  what  was  said,  and  made  it  criminal  by  strained 
innuendoes.  Those  who  consider  how  apt  we  all  are  to  speak  unadvisedly,  and  to  mis- 
take what  we  hear,  will  think  it  very  unjust  and  unfair  to  make  a  man  an  offender  for 
a  word."  As  the  illustration  and  enforcement  of  this  subject  must  greatly  depend  on 
the  experiences  and  observations  of  each  preacher,  we  only  give  suggestive  divisions, 

I.  TbI  8USPICI0US  TEUPEB  MAY  HAYS  ITS  BOOT  IN  NATURAL  DISPOSITION. 


488  tfiE  BOOK  Of*  THE   PROPflET   iSAlAfl.    [oh.  xxix.  1— 24 


is.  The  suspicious  tempbk  swiftly  gkows  with  induijObncb. 

III.  The  suspicious  temper  leads  men  to  make  mistakes. 

IV.  The  suspicious  tempbb  limits  a  man's  enjoyments. 

V.  The  suspicious  tempeb  may  make  it  nearly  impossiblb  fob  a  man  « 
trust  in  God. — R.  T. 

Ver.  23. — The  sanctifying  power  of  sanctified  people.  "They" — Gfod's  redeemed 
and  sanctified  ones — "shall  .sanctify  my  Name, -and  sanctify  the  Holy  One  of  Jacob." 
This  thought,  in  its  New  Testament  form,  may  be  found  in  the  words  of  the  great 
High  Priestly  prayer,  "  And  for  their  sakes  I  sanctify  myself,  that  they  also  might  be 
sanctified  through  the  truth."  Christ,  the  Model  of  the  sanctified  ones,  honours  God, 
and  redeems  and  purifies  man.    Two'  things  need  consideration. 

I.  God's  sanctified  ones.  "  Sanctify  "  is  a  familiar  term  to  godly  people.  It  is  a 
word  bearing  several  distinct  meanings,  or,  it  would  be  more  exact  to  say,  several  dis- 
tiact  parts  of  meaning.  Sometimes  one  of  these  parts  is  set  in  prominence,  and 
sometimes  another  part ;  and  it  is  always  worth  while  to  use  religious  terms  with 
care,  precisely  apprehending  the  senses  in  which  they  are  employed.  "Sanctify  "  may 
mean  "  make  actually  pure  and  holy."  This  is  indeed  the  more  common  and  usual 
meaning  of  the  term,  which  comes  at  once  to  our  minds.  We  think  that  for  us  to  be 
sanctified  must  be  for  us  to  be  made  "  perfectly  holy."  The  "word  seems  to  express  our 
"  meetness  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  the  light,"  When  we  are  wholly 
sanctified  we  shall  be  ready  for  presenting  faultless  before  the  presence  of  God.  Some  of 
us  think  that  such  "  holiness  "  may  be  attained  in  this  life ;  wliile  others  of  us  feel  that 
the  testing  death-time  must  come  ere  the  sanctification  can  be  completei,  and  tlie  full 
bloom  can  rest  on  the  sacred  fruitage  of  our  life.  But  by  putting  this  side  of  meaning 
into  undue  prominence,  we  lose  sight  of  other  ideas  which  lie  in  the  word — ^ideasof  <;ven 
more  practical  importance  to  us.  The  Jews  had  thoughts  about  this  word  "sanctify" 
which  brought  it  more  helpfully  within  the  sphere  of  their  actual  life  and  labour.  To 
them  to  sanctify  a  thing  was  to  take  it  away — to  separate  it  from  common  uses,  and 
devote  it  wholly,  consecrate  it,  to  Divine  and  holy  uses.  A  person  or  a  thing  was  sancti- 
fied when  it  was  given  over  wholly  to  God  and  God's  service,  A  laml)  separated  from  the 
flock  for  sacrifice  was  said  to  be  sanctified.  Samuel,  taken  by  his  mother  away  from 
the  home-life,  and  left  with  Eli  at  the  tabernacle,  was  sanctified — lent  to  the  Lord, 
given  over  wholly  to  the  Lord's  service,  for  so  long  as  he  might  live.  The  Levites  were 
a  sanctified  tribe,  because  they  were  taken  from  the  other  tribes,  and  devoted  ■wholly 
to  the  tabernacle  service.  The  Jewish  idea  of  the  word  comes  out  very  fully  in  the 
ceremony  of  the  consecration  of  a  Levite.  The  priest  touched  with  the  blood  of  a 
sacrificed  animal  the  Levite's  right  hand,  right  eye,  and  right  foot.  This  was  the 
Levite!s  sanctification.  It  devoted  every  faculty  and  every  power — of  seeing,  hearing, 
doing,  walking,  the  right-hand  faculties,  the  best  and  the  choicest — to  God^  peculiar 
service.  He  was  a  man  set  apart.  This  is  the  side  of  sanctifying  which  we  may 
realize,  and  in  this  sense  our  Lord  could  declare,  "  I  am,"  daily,  continuously,  "  sanc- 
tifying myself."  We,  too,  must  be  "  sanctifying  ourselves"  for  the  bearing  and  the 
doing  of  God's  holy  will  and  service.  And  "  sanctifying  self  "  means  (1)  the  full  and 
hearty  devotion  of  all  our  powers  to  God's  work ;  (2)  the  patient  and  anxious  culturing 
of  the  inner  life ;  (3)  hearty  and  entire  separation  from  all  self-seeking  interests.  01 
Christ's  school  it  may  be  said, 

**  Here  we  learn  to  serve  and  glw, 
And,  rejoicing,  self  deny," 

II,  The  sanctifying  power  of  the  SANCTirtED  ones.  This  ii  the  oniy  reai  fitness 
of  a  man  for  doing  God's  work  in  the  world.  It  ensures  the  highest  and  best  power 
for  the  doing,  because  itljrings  all  the  force  of  the  man  himself  to  bear  upon  his  work. 
It  is  not  a  man's  knowledge  blessing  his  fellow-men,  nor  a  man's  experience,  nor  a 
man's  genius,  nor  a  man's  efforts ;  it  is  a  man  blessing  men.  It  is  a  regenerate, 
divinely  endowed  man,  blessing  men.  It  is  a  Ghristly  man  continuing  Christ's  work 
of  grace.  It  is  a  man  who  has  seen  Christ  telling  his  vision  to  others.  It  is  the  man 
become  a  saint,  and  therefore  an  apostle,  "That  self-sanctifying  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  was  '  for  our  sakes,'  and  it  has  power  on  us.    It  is  the  inspiration  of  ao 


ott.  lix.  1— 33.]    TflE  BOOK  Of  THE  TROPSET  ISAlAfl, 


489 


example.  It  is  more  than  the  realization  of  our  ideal.  7%ere  is  th«  noblest,  the 
loftiest  manhood;  there  is  the  truest,  the  meekest  piety;  there  is  tlie  perfection  of 
human  sonship ; — there,  in  that  sanctified  Man,  who  kneels  before  Gai  and  says, 
'  For  thy  sake,  0  Father,  I  am  sanctifying  myself.  For  their  sakes,  0  Father,  I  am 
sanctifying  myself.' "  And  there  we  learn  that  most  blessed  lesson  that  "  aanetity  is 
power  " — power  to  honour  the  Divine  Name,  power  to  redeem  and  uplii't  onr  feUow- 
men.— B.  X. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 


Vers.  1 — 7. — The  Alliance  with  Egypt 
OPENLY  KEBUKED.  In  tlie  preceding  chapter 
(ver.  15)  the  design  of  the  Jewish  rulers  to 
seek  the  alliance  of  Egypt  was  covertly 
glanced  at  and  condemned;  now  it  is  openly 
declared  and  rebuked.  The  rulers  are 
warned  that  no  good  can  possibly  come  of  it, 
even  in  a  worldly  sense.  The  Egyptiuns 
will  give  no  aid,  or  at  any  rate  no  effectual 
aid.  The  sums  expended  In  purchasing 
their  friendship  will  be  utterly  thrown  away. 

Ver.  1. — Woe  to  the  rebellious  children 
(comp.  cli.  i.  23 ;  Ixv.  2).  The  word  trans- 
lated "  rebellious  "  is  used  in  Deut.  xxi.  18, 
20  of  the  persistently  disobedient  son,  who 
was  to  be  brought  before  the  elders  and 
storied  to  death.  That  take  counsel ;  rather, 
that  form  plans,  such  as  the  plan  now 
foraied  to  call  in  the  aid  of  Egypt.  It  must 
be  borne  in  mind  that,  under  the  theocracy, 
there  was  an  authorized  mode  of  consulting 
God,  and  receiving  an  answer  from  him, 
in  any  political  emergency.  That  cover 
with  a  covering.  The  exact  metaphor  em- 
ployed is  uncertain.  Mr.  Chcyne  renders, 
"  that  weave  a  web ; "  Di.  Kay,  "  that  pour 
out  a  molten  image."  The  meaning,  how- 
ever, in  any  case  is,  "  that  carry  out  a 
design,"  the  clause  being  a  mere  variant  of 
the  preceding  one.  That  they  may  add 
sin  to  sin ;  i.e.  "  to  add  a  fresh  sin  to  all 
their  former  sins." 

Ver.  2. — That  walk ;  or,  are  on  their  way 
(comp.  ch.  xxxi.  1).  Either  the  Jewish 
ambassadors  have  already  started,  or  the 
anticipatory  vision  of  the  prophet  sees  them 
as  if  starting.  In  the  history  (2  Kings 
xviii.  13 — 37;  oh.  xxxvi.  1 — 22)  it  is  not 
expressly  said  that  Hezekiah  made  applica- 
tion to  Egypt  for  aid ;  but  the  reproaches 
of  Eabshakeh  (2  Kings  xviii.  21,  24)  would 
be  pointless  if  he  had  not  done  so.  Have 
not  asked  at  my  mouth.  As  they  ought 
to  have  done  (see  Numb,  xxvii,  21 ;  Judg. 
i.  1 ;  XX.  18 ;  1  Sam.  xxiii.  2 ;  1  Kings 
xxii.  7,  etc.).  To  strengthen  themselves 
in  the  strength  of  Pharaoh.  It  is  very  nn- 
^^ertain  who  is  the  "Pharaoh"  liere  in- 
"^aded.     The  supreme  power  over  Egypt 


was  probably,  at  this  time,  in  the  hauds 
of  Tirlcakah  (2  Kings  xix.  9);  but  Lower 
Egypt  seems  to  have  been  ruled  by  vaiions 
princes,  the  chief  of  whom  was  Shabatok, 
and  any  one  of  Wiese  may  have  been  regarded 
by  Isaiah  as  a  "  Pharaoh."  To  trust  in  the 
shadow  of  Egypt.  Trust  in  the  "shadow 
of  God  "  was  am  expression  very  familiar  to 
the  Jews  (see  Ps.  xvii.  8 ;  xxxvi.  7 ;  ixiii. 
7 ;  xoi.  1 ;  ch.  xxv.  4;  xxxii.  2).  To  "  trust 
in  the  shadow  of  Egypt "  was  to  put  Egypt 
in  the  place  of  God. 

Ver.  4.  —  His  princes  were  at  Zoan. 
"Zoan"  is  undoubtedly  Tanis,  which  is 
now  "  Sam,"  a  heap  of  ruins  in  Wie  Delta, 
where  some  interesting  remains  of  the 
shepherd-kings  have  been  discovered.  It 
was  a  favourite  capital  of  the  monarcfas 
of  the  nineteenth  dynasty,  and  seems  to 
have  been  tlie  sceneof  the stiuggle  between 
Moses  and  the  Pliaraoh  of  the  Exodus  (Ps. 
Ixxviii.  12,  43).  It  then  declined,  but  4s 
said  to  have  been  tlie  biarthiplace  of  the  first 
king  of  the  twenty-first  dynasty.  In  the 
Ethiopian  period  it  rose  once  more  to  some 
importance,  and  was  at  one  time  the  capital 
of  a  principality  (see  G.  Smith's  '  Asshur- 
bani-pal,'  pp.  21,  26,  32).  The  "  princes  " 
heie  spoken  of  are  probably  Hezekiah's 
ambassadors.  His  ambassadors  came  to 
Hanes.  "Hanes"  has  been  generally 
identified  with  the  modem  Esnes,  <a 
village  between  Memphis  and  Thebes, 
which  is  thought  to  mark  the  site  of  Hera- 
cleopoUs  Magfta.  But  it  has  been  wdl 
remarked  tliSt  the  Jewish  envoys  would 
scarcely  have  proceeded  so  far.  Mr.  B.  S. 
Poole  suggests,  instead  of  Esnes,  Tahpenes, 
or  Baphnse  ('Diet,  of  the  Bible,'  vol.  i.  p. 
753);  bnt  that  name  is  somewliat  remote 
from  Hanes.  Perhaps  it  would  be  best  to 
acknowledge  that  "  Hanes  "  cannot  at  pre- 
sent be  identified.  It  was  probably  not 
very  far  from  Tanis. 

Ver.  5.— They  were  all  ashamed ;  rather, 
all  are  ashamed.  The  reference  is  not  to 
the  ambassadors,  wtlio  felt  no  shame  in  their 
embassy,  and  probably  returned  elated  by 
the  promises  made  them ;  but  to  the  sub- 
sequent feelings  of  tlie  j<ewi8h  'nation,'w1ien 
it  was  discovered  by  sad  experience  that  no 
reliance  was  to  be  placed  <on  "  the  StarengWi 
of  Pharaoh."    A  people  that  could  not  profit 


+90 


THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET  ISAlAH.     [ch.  xxx.  1— 33. 


them.  Mr.  Cbeyne  compares,  very  perti- 
nently, an  inBoiiption  of  Sargon's,  where  he 
Bays  of  the  people  of  Phillstia,  Judah,  Edom, 
and  Moab,  that  "  they  and  their  evil  chiefs, 
to  fight  against  me,  unto  Pharaoh,  King  of 
Egypt,  a  monarch  who  could  not  save  them, 
their  presents  carried,  and  besought  his 
alliance  "  (G.  Smith,  '  Eponym  Canon,'  p. 
130, 11.  35—39).  Egypt  was,  in  fact,  quite 
unable  to  cope  with  Assyria,  and  knew  it. 
A  shame,  and  also  a  reproach.  A  matter  of 
which  they  would  themselves  be  "  ashamed," 
and  with  which  the  Assyrians  would 
"reproach"  them  (as  they  did,  2  Kings 
iviii.  21,  24). 

Ver.  6.— Burden  of  the  beasts  of  the  south. 
Delitzsch  thiuks  that  the  Egyptians  are 
intended  by  the  "  beasts  of  the  south  " — the 
expression  pointing  primarily  to  the  hippo- 
potamus, which  was  an  apt  emblem  of  the 
slow-moving  Egyptians.  But  most  com- 
Bientators  regard  the  "beasts"  of  this 
clause  as  equivalent  to  the  "  young  asses 
and  camels"  mentioned  towards  the  end 
of  the  verse.  (On  the  sense  of  the  word 
"burden,"  see  the  introductory  paragraph 
to  ch.  xiii.)  Into  the  laud  of  trouble  aud 
anguish ;  rather,  through  a  land.  It  is  not 
Egypt  that  is  spoken  of,  but  the  desert 
between  Judaea  and  Egypt.  The  remini- 
scences of  this  desert  were  such  that  the 
Israelites  always  exaggerated  its  terrors  and 
dangers  (see  Deut.  viii.  15 ;  Jer.  ii.  6). 
From  whence  come  the  young  and  old 
lion ;  rather,  the  lioneta  and  the  lion  (see 
'  Speaker's  Commentary '  on  Gen.  xlix.  9 ; 
vol.  1  p.  227).  Lions  can  never  have  been 
numerous  in  the  tract  in  question ;  but  they 
may  have  haunted  portions  of  it,  when  it 
was  better  watered  than  at  present.  The 
viper  and  fiery  flying  serpent.  Snakes  of 
various  kinds  have  always  been  abundant 
in  the  desert  between  Judsea  and  Egypt 
(Numb.  xxi.  ti ;  Strab.,  ivi.  p.  759  ;  Schubert, 
'Travels,'  vol.  ii.  p.  406;  Burckhardt, 
'Travels,'  p.  499,  etc.).  Some  of  them 
were  believed  anciently  to  have  wings 
(Herod.,  ii.  75 ;  iii.  107) ;  but  the  fact  is 
doubted.  Isaiah  is  not  concerned  with 
natural  history,  but  with  definitely  marking 
out  the  locality  through  which  the  am- 
bassadors would  march.  For  this  purpose 
it  was  best  to  describe  it  in  terms  drawn 
from  the  popular  belief.  Their  riches  . .  . 
their  treasures.  Ambassadors  who  came  to 
riiqui  st  military  aid,  as  a  matter  of  course 
carrieil  rich  presents  with  them.  Young 
asses  . . .  camels.  The  ordinary  beasts  of 
burden  employed  in  the  passage  of  the 
deiert  (Gen.  xxivii.  25;  xlii  26;  Herod., 
iii.  9,  etc.). 

Ver.  7. — Therefore  have  I  oried  concerning 
this,  Their  strength  is  to  sit  still.  No 
modem  critic  accepts  this  interpretation. 


Most  translate,  "Wherefore  I  name  it* 
(i.e.  Egypt)  "  Eahab,  that  sits  still ; "  or 
"Arrogance,  that  sits  still."  Eahab, 
"  pride  "  or  "  arrogance,"  would  seem  to 
have  been  an  old  name  for  Egypt  (Job 
xxvi.  12;  Ps.  Ixxxvii.  4;  Ixxxix.  10;  ch. 
Ii.  9),  not  one  given  at  this  time  by  Isaiah. 
What  he  means  to  say  is,  "  Proud  as  thou 
art,  thou  doest  nothing  to  maintain  thj 
pride,  but  art  content  with  sitting  still." 
This  he  "  cries  "  or  "  proclaims  "  concerning 
Egypt,  as  the  most  important  thing  for 
other  nationato  know  about  her. 

Vers.  8 — 17. — A  Renewal  of  Threateu- 
INO.  The  denunciation  of  the  Egyptian 
alliance  had  been  made  viva  voce,  in  the 
courts  of  the  temple  or  in  some  other  place 
of  public  resort.  As  he  ended,  Isaiah  re- 
ceived a  Divine  intimation  that  the  prophecy 
was  to  be  put  on  record,  doubly,  upon  a 
tablet  and  in  a  book.  At  the  same  time, 
the  "rebelliousness"  of  the  people  was 
further  pointed  out,  and  fresh  threats  (vers. 
13,  14,  and  17)  were  uttered  against  them. 

Ver.  8. — Write  it  before  them  in  a  tablet ; 
i.e. "  write  the  prophecy  before  them  "  (equi- 
valent to  "  to  be  set  up  before  them  ")  "  on  a 
tablet,"  in  the  briefest  possible  form  (comp. 
ch.  viii.  1).  And  note  it  in  a  book ;  t.  e. "  aud 
also  make  a  full  notation  of  it  in  a  book,"  or 
parchment  roU.  The  "  tablet "  was  to  be  for 
the  admonition  of  the  living  generation  of 
men ;  the  "  book  "  was  for  future  generations, 
to  be  a  record  of  God's  omniscience  and  faith- 
fulness "  for  ever  and  ever."  That  it  may 
be  for  the  time  to  come ;  rather, /or  an  afler- 
day — not  for  the  immediate  present  only. 
For  ever  and  ever.  Modern  critics  observe 
that  the  phrase,  l&'ad  'ad  'olam,  never  occurs 
elsewhere,  and  suggest  a  change  of  the 
pointing,  which  would  give  the  sense  of 
"for  a  testimony  for  ever."  Whether  we 
accept  the  change  or  not,  the  meaning  un- 
doubtedly is  that  consigning  the  prophecy 
to  a  "  book  "  would  make  an  appeal  to  it 
possible  in  perpetuum.  The  perpetuity  of 
the  written  Word  is  assumed  as  certain. 

Ver.  9. — That  this  is  a  rebellious  people ; 
rather, /or  this  ii  a  rebellious  people.  The 
words  to  be  written  were  those  of  the  pre- 
ceding prophecy.  The  reason  for  their 
being  written  is  now  given  (comp.  Dent, 
xxxi.  26,  27).  lying  children  (comp.  ch. 
lix.  13).  They  professed  devotion  to  God ; 
but  their  acts  contradicted  their  words. 

Ver.  10.— Which  say,  ©to.  Not,  of  course, 
directly,  in  so  many  words.  But  indirectly 
they  let  it  be  understood  that  this  was 
what  they  wished.  Compare  the  advice 
given  to  Micaiah  by  Ahab's  messenger, 
who,  no  doubt,  correctly  interpreted  th« 
wishes  of  the  monarch  and  Us  noblM  (1 


CB.  XXX.  1-33.]    THE  BOOK;  OP  THE  tROPHET  ISAIAR 


491 


Kings  xxii.  13).  Bean  .  .  .  prophets.  Not 
two  olassea  of  persona,  but  two  names  for 
the  same  olaas.  The  "parallelism"  of  He- 
brew poetry  leads  to  the  constant  employ- 
ment of  synonymous  clauses.  Bight  thmgs ; 
t.e.  the  tenth  in  all  its  plainness.  Smooth 
things;  i.e.  soft,  pleasant  announcements. 
Deceits;  or,  illuiiom  (comp.  Jer.  ix.  5, 
"  They  will  deceive  "  or  "  mock  " — where 
we  have  the  same  root). 

Yer.  11. — Cause  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  to 
cease  from  before  us.  "The  Holy  One  of 
Israel"  was  one  of  laaiali's  most  frequent 
names  for  the  Almighty.  He  used  it  especi- 
ally when  rebuking  Israel's  unholiness  (ch. 
i.  4;  V.  24,  etc.).  The  irreligious  Jews 
were  weary  of  this  constant  iteration,  and 
wished  to  hear  no  more  concerning  this 
"Holy  One,"  whose  very  holiness  was  a 
reproach  to  them. 

Yer.  12. — Because  ye  despise  this  word; 
rather,  because  ye  ryect  thU  word  (see  1  Sam. 
viii.  7;  xv.  23,  26;  2  Kings  xvii.  15,  etc.). 
The  "  word  "  intended  is  probably  the  pro- 
phecy against  trusting  m  Egypt  (vers. 
1 — ^7).  And  trust  in  oppression;  or,  extor- 
tion. Oppressive  measures  employed  to 
obtain  the  rich  gifts  which  had  to  be  sent 
into  Egypt  (ver.  6)  are  probably  intended 
(comp.  2  Kings  zv.  20).  Grotz  and  Obeyne 
cliange  the  reading  from  'oihek  to  'ikkesh 
("  perverseness  ") ;  but  without  any  neces- 
sity. And  perverseness;  literally,  crooked- 
ness;  i.e.  "tortuous  policy"  (Kay).  And 
stay  thereon ;  rather,  lean  or  stay  yourielvet 
thereon. 

Yer.  13.— This  iniquity  shall  be  to  yon 
as  a  breach  ready  to  fall.  Your  sin  in  re- 
belling against  God,  rejecting  the  warnings 
of  his  prophets,  and  trusting  in  your  own 
devices  shall  bring  you  into  the  condition 
of  a  wall  in  which  there  is  a  "  breach,"  or 
ratlier,  s  "bulge,"  which  therefore  totten 
to  its  fall,  and  is  liable  to  dissolve  in  ruins 
at  any  moment.  Swelling  out  in  a  high 
walL  The  higher  the  wall,  the  greater  the 
danger,  and  the  more  complete  the  destruc- 
tion. 

Yer.  14. — And  he  shall  break  it  as  the 
breaking  of  the  potters'  vessel  that  is  broken 
in  pieces.  Isaiah  is  fond  of  mixed  meta- 
phors, and  of  superseding  one  metaphor  by 
another.  From  comparing  Judah's  fall  and 
ruin  to  the  shattering  of  a  lofty  wall,  be 
suddenly  turns  to  a  comparison  of  it  with 
the  breaking  to  pieces  of  an  earthen  pitcher. 
Judah  shall  be  so  broken  as  when  the 
pitcher  is  crushed  into  minute  fragments, 
so  that  there  is  no  piece  large  enough  to 
convey  a  coal  from  one  fire  for  the  lighting 
of  another,  or  to  be  of  even  the  least  use  for 
drawing  water  from  a  welL  A  complete 
dissolution  of  the  political  fabric  is  fore- 
shadowed, such  as  did  not  actually  take 


effect  till  the  conquest  of  Jerusalem  by 
Nti  buchadnezzar. 

Yer.  15. — For  thus  saith  the  Lord  Qod, 
the'  Holy  One  of  Israel,  As  the  irreligious 
party  wished  to  hear  no  more  of  "  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel "  (ver.  11),  Isaiah  takes  care 
to  keep  him  constantly  before  their  minds 
(comp.  ch.  xxxi.  1).  ia.  returning  and  rest 
shall  ye  be  saved;  rather,  should  ye  be 
saved,  or  might  ye  be  saved.  The  conditions 
are  put  forward,  not  as  now  capable  of 
being  realized,  but  as  those  whicli  might 
have  been  realized  at  an  curlier  date.  The 
"returning"  spoken  of  is  an  abandonment 
of  the  course  hitherto  pursued,  which  was 
reckless  provocation  of  Assyria  and  trust  in 
Egypt.  The  "rest"  is  staying  upon  God — 
renunciation  of  trust  on  any  arm  of  flesh, 
and  simple  reliance  on  the  Divine  aid,  as 
sure  to  be  sufficient  when  the  need  came. 
In  quietness  and  confidence  shall  be  your 
strength;  rather,  should  be.  The  clause  is 
a  mere  iteration  in  other  words  of  the  pre- 
ceding one.  Ye  would  not.  They  had 
practically  rejected  the  policy  of  quiescence 
and  patient  waiting  upon  God,  when  they 
sent  the  embassy  into  Egypt. 

Yer.  16. — ^Ye  said,  No;  for  we  will  flee 
upon  horses ;  rather,  we  will  fly  upon  horses. 
The  nobles  had  perhaps  a  manly  eagerness 
to  mount  the  Egyptian  war-horses,  and 
rush  upon  the  enemy  at  full  speed,  in  the 
hope  of  discomfiting  them.  Isaiah  warns 
tiiem  that  they  will  not  really  fly  on  the 
enemy,  but  flee  before  him.  We  will  ride 
upon  the  smft.  "The  swift"  (kal)  seems 
to  be  a  mere  variant  for  "  horse,"  the  paral- 
lelism being,  as  so  frequently,  "synony- 
mous. ''  Therefore  shall  they  that  pursue  yon 
be  swift.  However  swift  the  horses  of  the  Ju- 
deeans,their  enemies  would  be  as  well  mounted 
and  would  pursue  and  overtake  them.- 

Yer.  17. — On^  thousand  shall  flee  at  the 
rebuke  of  one.  A  hyperbole  common  in 
Scripture  (Deut.  xxxii.  30 ;  Josh,  xxiii. 
10 ;  Lev.  xxvi.  8),  and  not  confined  to  the 
sacred  writers.  Fiankhi  the  Ethiopian 
boasts,  in  his  great  inscription,  that,  with 
Ammon's  help,  "many  should  turn  their 
backs  upon  a  few,  and  one  should  rout  a 
thousand  "  ('  Eecords  of  the  Past,'  vol.  ii.  p. 
84).  At  the  rebuke  of  five.  The  "  rebuke  " 
of  five  (i.e.  their  war-shout)  would  put 
to  flight  the  whole  army.  As  a  beacon ; 
rather,  as  a  flag-staff — stripped  and  bare 
(comp.  ch.  xxxiii.  28;  Ezek.  xxvii.  5). 
A  tree  stripped  of  its  branches  and  left 
standing  as  a  landmark  seems  to  be  in- 
tended. As  an  ensign.  A  military  stand- 
ard, such  as  was  in  common  uso  among 
the  Assyrians  and  Egyptians,  as  among 
the  Greeks  and  Bomans  (see  '  Ancient 
Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  p.  57;  Bawlinson, 
'  Hist,  of  Egypt,'  Tol.  i,  p.  463). 


m 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  fEOPHET  ISAIAH.    fcH.  xxx.  1— 33. 


Vers.  18—26. — A  Eenewal  of  Promise. 
The  deirauoiatioms  of  the  preceding  passage 
(vers.  9 — 17)  had  been  so  terrible  thiit,  witli- 
«)ut  some  counterpoise  of  promise,  they  must 
bave  produced  a  general  despair.  This  was 
not  the  Divine  purpose.  Judah's  probation 
etill  continued.  Therefore  it  was  necessary 
to  let  it  be  seen  that  the  Divine  long-isuffer- 
ing  was  not  yet  exhausted — there  were  s.till 
conditions  under  which  God  would  be  gra- 
cious to  his  people.  The  conditions  were 
"crying  to  tlie  Lord"  (ver.  19),  and  entire 
abolition  of  idolatry  (ver.  22). 

Ver.  18. — An&  therefore.  "  Because  your 
fiioB  tequire  this  diastisement "  (Kay) ; 
■"  ©eeause  of  the  extremity  of  your  need  " 
'(ObByme).  It  is,  perhaps,  best  to  own  that 
the  motives  of  the  Divine  action  are  very 
commonly  obscure ;  aiKl,  if  seen  'dearly  by 
the  prophets,  are  certainly  not  clearly  set 
forth,  being  (it  may  be)  inscrutuhie.  While 
theaiotive,  however,  is  obscure,  the  promise 
is  plain  and  unmistakable.  The  Lord  mil 
wait,  that  he  may  be  ^avions  unto  you. 
God  is  not  about  at  present  to  "  make  a  full 
end ; "  he  is  bent  on  *'  waiting  " — ^his  intent 
is  "  to  be  graoTous."  He  will  he  exalted,  that 
he  may  have  meroy.  He  will  find  some 
means  of  vindicating  his  honour  and  exalt- 
ing himself,  short  ■of  your  destruction,  in 
orde*  that  it  may  be  open  to  him  to  give 
you  a  further  chance  of  repentance,  whereby 
you  would  obtain  mercy.  Per  the  Lord,  is  a 
0od  of  jadgment.  God  is  essentially  just; 
sianmtt  receive  punishment;  but  the  punish- 
ment may  be  short  of  destruel/ion.  Justice 
does  not  exclude  mercy.  If  men  bear  their 
punishment  with  patience,  and  wait  &r 
God.'a  brighter  day  will  dawn  on  them  in 
course  of  time. 

Ver.  19.— Tor  laie  people  shall  dwell  in 
Son ;  rather,  o  people  sliaM  oonUnue.  Jeru- 
salem shall  not  now  he  made  desolate,  or 
■deprived  of  its  inhabitants.  Whatever  the 
number  of  captives  taken,  "  a  people  shall 
remain."  Thou  Bhalt  weep  no  more.  The 
reasons  for  weeping  shall  he  removed.  He 
will  he  vei^  gracious  unto  Uiee  at  Vba  voice 
of  thy  cry.  For  God  to  be  gracious  to  tliem, 
they  must  first  "  cry "  to  him — make  an 
eatnest,  hearty  appeal  to  him  for  mercy. 
Their  "cry"  will  be  answered  as  soon  as 
heard,  i.e.  as  soon  as  uttered. 

Ver.  20. — And  though  the  Xord  give  you 
the  bread  of  adversity  (so  Mr.  Cbeyne). 
But  most  modern  critics  (Kay,  Delitzsoh, 
Vance  Smith,  etc.)  regard  the  words  as  a 
promise  of  support  through  the  siege,  and 
omit  the  interpolated  •'  though."  Translate, 
And  the  Lord  will  give  you  bread  of  ad- 
vertUy,    and  water  -of  ajfiietion ;  i.e.  scant 


rations,  but  iufflcient;  and  fhy  teacheri 
ehall  not,  etc.  Be  removed  into  a  comer; 
i.e. ''  have  to  hide  themselves  from  persecu- 
tion." A  persecution  of  Jehovah's  priphets 
had  commenced  in  Judah  during  the  reign 
of  Joash  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  19—22),  and  had 
probably  continued  with  moK  at  less  te- 
verity  ever  since. 

Ver.  21.— Thine  ears  shall  hear  «  word 
behind  thee.  Kay  says,  "  The  teacher  will 
go  before  his  flock,  marking  out  the  way 
before  them."  But  in  that  case,  the  flock 
wonld  hear  the  word  before  them.  Delitzsch 
explains  better,  "They  (the  teachers),  as 
the  shepherds  of  the  flock,  would /oiW  the 
people  with  friendly  words  of  admonition." 
Even  in  the  East,  shepherds  sometimes  fol- 
low their  flocks  (see  Gen.  xxxii.  17).  'ViiBu 
ye  turn,  i.e.  when  ye  are  about  to  turn. 

Ver.  22. — Ye  shall  defile  also  the  covering 
of  thy  graven  images  of  silver.  Idolatry, 
greatly  encouraged  by  Ahaz,  had  been 
strictly  forbidden  by  ilezekiah  at  the  be- 
ginning of  his  reign  (2  Kings  xviii.  4) ;  but 
the  present  passage,  among  others,  diows 
how  impossible  it  was  for  a  king,  with  the 
best  intentions,  to  effect  the  extirpation  of 
idolatry,  if  his  subjects  were  attached  to  it. 
Evidently  the  Jews  had,  in  many  cases, 
secretly  maintained  their  idols  and  their 
idolatrous  practices,  despite  the  efforts  of 
Hezekiah.  But  now,  in  their  repentance, 
they  would  "  defile"  (i.e.  destroy)  both  the 
outer  "  covering  "  of  precious  metal,  and  the 
iimer  core  of  wood  or  stone,  or  base  metallio 
substance.  The  ornament  of  thy  molten 
images  of  gold ;  rather,  the  coating  or  over- 
laying. It  was  usual  to  overlay  with  gold  or 
silver  molten  images  (jf  bronze  or  other  in- 
feiior  metal.  Cast  them  away;  literally 
tcatter;  i.e.  either  griod  them  to  powdei 
'(2  Kings  xxiii.-6),  or  at  any  rate  break  them 
to  bits,  and  then  disperse  -the  fragments  far 
and  wide. 

Ver.  23.— Then  sh^  he  give  the  rain  of 
thy  seed,  that  thou  dialt  sow  ttie  ground 
witJhal ;  rather,  then  shall  lie  give  rain  for 
thy  seed,  wherewith  thou  sowest  the  ground. 
God,  having  forgiven  his  people,  will  once 
more  renew  the  blessings  of  his  ordinary 
providence,  giving  them  "  rain  from  heaven, 
and  fruitfal  seasons,  filling  their  hearts  with 
food  and  gladness "  (Acts  xiv.  17).  Bread 
of  the  increase  of  tJie  earth ;  rather,  bread, 
the  produce  of  the  ground;  i.e.  ordinary 
bread,  not  "  bread  from  heaven,"  like  the 
manna  in  the  wilderness.  Fat  and  plenteous ; 
literally,  ricftond/a«.  Thycattle.  To  com- 
plete the  general  prosperity,  there  should  be 
plentiful  pasture  for  the  flocks  and  lierds. 

Ver.  24.— The  oxen  likewise  and  the  young 
asses  that  ear  the  ground ;  rather,  that  till 
or  cultivate  the  grownS,.  The  Hebrew  word 
is  generic,  and  does  not  apply  to  *  earing  " 


OH.  XXX.  1—33.]    THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


493 


({.&  ploaghingV  only.  Shall  eat  eleaa  pro- 
Tender.  DelitzBoli  says  that  b'lil  Ithamitz  is 
"a  mash,  eomposed  of  oats,  bailay,  and 
vetchest  made  more  savoury  with  salt  and 
sour  vegetables."  Mr.  Oheyne  translates, 
"  Shall  eat  mixed  provender  with  salt."  The 
general  idea  is  cl^ly  that  they  shall  have 
for  their  ordinary  food  that  superior  kind  of 
provender  which,  according  to  existing 
practioes,,  was  reserved  for  rare  oocasioBS. 
Winnowed  with  the  shovel.  Anciently,  win- 
nowing was  chiefly  effected  by  tossing  the 
grain  into  the  air  with  shovels  in  a  draughty 
place  (see  Wilkinson, '  Ancient  Egyptians,' 
vol.  iv.  pp.  86, 89,  90),  The  fan  was  scarcely 
in  use  so  early  as  Isaiah's  time.  He  means 
by  mizreh  probably  a  second  instrument  for 
tossing  the  grain.  Delitzsch  translates, 
"  winnowing-/orfc." 

Ver.  2S. — Bivors  and  streams  of  water ; 
rather,  rivulets,  courses  of  water.  Channels, 
along  w,hich  water  was  conveyed  for  the 
puipose  of  irrigiitiou,  are  intended  (comp^ 
Ezek.  xMi.  1—12  ;  Joel  iii.  18).  No  doubt 
there  is  a  secondary  allegorical  meaning 
running  through  the  whole  description  of 
Judah's  prosperity  (vers.  23 — 2e).  In  this 
allegorical  intention  the  waters  stand  for 
the  streams  of  God's  grace.  In  the  day  of 
the  great  slaughter.  Equivalent  to  "the 
day  of  vengeance"  (oh.  xxxiy.  8)— the  day 
when  God  shall  tread  down  his  enemies. 
The  prophet  passes  from  the  immediate 
effect  of  Judah's  repentance  to  a  broader 
view  of  what  shall  happen  when  God's 
kingdom  is  established  upon  the  earth. 
When  the  towers  fall ;  i.e,  when  there 
shall  be  a  general  "  pulling  down  of  strong 
holds,"  and  a  "  casting  down  of  every  high 
thing  that  exalts  itself  against  God"  (2  Cor. 
x.4.5> 

Ver.  26. — The  light  of  the  moon  shall  be 
as  the  light  of  the  sun.  "  The  promise  now 
rises  higher  and  higher,,  and  passes  from 
earth  to  heaven"  (Delitzsch).  All  natui'e 
will  become  more  glorious  in  the  "last 
times."  Moonlight  will  be  as  sunlight,  and 
sunlight  will  be  seven  times  brighter  than  it 
is  now.  Again,  there  may  he  an  under  alle- 
gorical sense.  The  light  of  truth  will  shine 
with  greater  brilliancy,  so  that  all  men  will 
be  enlightened  by  it.  "  For  the  earth  shall 
be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  as  the 
waters  cover  the  sea"  (ch.  xi.  9).  As  the 
light  of  seven  days ;  t.e.  as  though  the  light 
of  seven  days  were  concentrated  into  one. 
In  the  day  that  the  Lord  bindeth  np  the 
breach.  At  that  period  in  the  world's  his- 
tory when  God  forgives  the  iniquities  of  his 
people,  and  condescends  to  reign  over  them 
as  their  actual  King,  either  in  this  present 
world  or  in  "  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  " 
(Eev.  xxi.  1 ;  comp.  ch;  Ixvi.  22),  wherein 
shall "  dwell  righteousness  "  (2  Pet  iii.  IS). 


And  healeth  the  stroke  of  their  wound;, 
rather,,  fte  wound  of  his  stroke;  i.e.  the  wound 
caused  by  the  stroke  wherewith  be  ha« 
smitten  them. 

Vers.  27 — 33. — A  Propheoy  or  AmYTUA\ 

Destsuction.  Mr.  Cheyne  regards  this 
passage  as  "  a  symbolic  description  of  Hie 
judgment  introduced  by  a  theophany."  But 
is  it  not  rather  a  poetical  description  of 
God's  judgment  on  Assyria,  which  may  be, 
probably  is^,  a  type  of  his  final  judgment 
upon  an  iniquitous  world?  The  mention  of 
Assyria  in  ver.  31  seems  to  be  decisive  in 
favour  of  the  propheoy  being  (primarily)  of 
special  application  to  the  circumstances  of 
the  time. 

Ver.  27. — The  Name  of  the  Iiord  oometh 
from  far.  "The  Name  of  Jehovah"  U 
scarcely  distinguishable  from  Jehovah  him- 
self. Jehovah,  who  has  long  hid  himself, 
and  seemed  to  keep  himself  remote  from 
worldly  affairs,  now  is  about  to  manifest  hid, 
glory,  and  interpose  in  the  doings  of  men  in 
a  wonderful  way.  Burning  with  his  anger ; 
rather,  his  anger  bumeth  (comp.  ch.  xlii.  25). 
And  the  burden  thereof  is  heavy ;  "  and 
heavy  is  its  grievousness."  His  tongue  as,  a 
devouring  fire  (comp.  Exod.  xxiv,  17 ;  Dent. 
ix.  3 ;  ch.  ix.  19 ;  x.  17 ;  xxix.  6 ;  xxxjii.  14), 

Ver.  28. — His  breath,  as  an  overflowing 
stream,  shall  reach  to  the  midst  of  the  neck. 
When  the  sacred  writers  are  oppressed  by 
the  tremendous  character  of  the  revelations 
made  to  them,  their  metaphors  are  often 
laboured  and  incongruous.  Here,  the  mouth, 
in  which  there  is  a  tongue  of  iice,  sends 
forth  a  rush  of  breath,  which  is  compared  to 
an  "  overflowing  stream," which  reaches  to  the 
middle  of  the  neck,"  and  sweeps  those  who 
try  to  cross  it  away  (comp.  Ezek.  xlvii.  5). 
To  sift  the  nations  with  the  sieve  of  vanity- 
More  incongruity,  to  be  excused  by  the 
writer's  theme  being  such  as  to  transcend 
all  language  and  all  imagery.  One  of  tlie 
Divine  purposes,  in  all  violent  crashes  and 
revolutions,  is  "  to  sift  nations  " — to  separate 
in  each  nation  the  good  from  the  bad,  the 
precious  from  the  vile;  and  this  is  done 
with  "the  sieve  of  vanity,"  t.e.  the  sieve 
which  allows  the  good  corn  to  pass  through, 
separating  from  it,  and  keeping  back,  all 
that  is  vile  and  refuse  (comp.  Amos  ix.  9). 
There  shall  be  a  bridle  in  the  jaws  of  the 
people,  causing  them  to  err.  Another  entire 
change  in  the  metaphor.  The  result  of 
God's  interference  shall  be  "  to  put  a  bridle 
in  the  jaws  of  the  peoples,"  whereby  the 
hand  of  the  Almighty  will  guide  them  to 
their  destruction. 

Ver.  29. — Ye  shall  have  a  song;  Utertklly, 
to  yoH  mil  [fAen]  be  a  «<mg.     While  tl)e 


494 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxx.  1— Sa 


nationa  weep  and  lament,  and  are  bamt  np 
by  Qod'B  anger,  and  swept  away  by  his 
"overflowing  flood,"  and  guided  to  their 
destruction  by  his  bridle  in  their  jaws,  Israel 
shall  rejoice  with  singing.  As  in  the  night 
when  a  holy  solemnity  is  kept.  Per  ;ips  a 
special  reference  is  intended  to  the  Pass- 
over-feast, which  commenced  with  an  even- 
ing or  night  celebration  (Bxod.  xii.  6, 8, 42 ; 
Matt.  xxvi.  30).  Or  perhaps  "  Isaiah  is  not 
referring  to  one  feast  more  than  another " 
(Cheyne),  night-rituals  belonging  to  all 
feasts,  since  the  day  commenced  with  the 
sunset.  The  Passorer-song  consisted  of 
Ps.  cxiii. — cxviii.  And  as  when  one  goeth 
with  a  pipe  to  come  into  the  mountain  of  the 
Lord.  Joyful  processions  from  the  country 
districts  to  Jerusalem  are  alluded  to.  These 
were  commonly  headed  by  a  piper  or  a  band 
of  pipers  (Vltringa).  They  took  place  several 
times  in  the  year — at  each  of  the  three  great 
feasts,  and  irregularly  when  any  district 
sent  up  its  firstfruits  to  the  temple  treasury 
(Neh.  X.  35—37).  To  the  Mighty  One  of 
Israel ;  literally,  to  the  Sock  of  Israel ;  i.e.  to 
Jehovah  (comp.  ch.  xvii.  10;  and  see  also 
Dtut.  xxxii.  4,  15,  18,  30,  31;  Ps.  xviii.  2, 
31,  46,  etc.).  The  idea  embodied  in  the 
metaphor  is  rather  that  of  an  unfailing 
refuge  than  of  mere  might  and  power. 

Yer.  30. — The  Lord  shall  cause  his  glorions 
voioe  to  be  heard ;  literally,  the  majesty  of  Ms 
voice.  Mr.  Cheyne  renders,  "the  peal  of 
his  voice."  Delitzsch  understands  fearful 
thundering,  like  that  at  Sinai  (Exod.  xix. 
16 ;  XX.  1«),  to  be  intended  (comp.  Ps.  xxix. 
3 — 9).  The  lighting  down  of  his  arm ;  ».e. 
the  blow  causing  the  destruction,  of  ver.  31, 
of  whatever  kind  that  destruction  might  be 
— blasting  by  lightning,  plague,  simoom, 
death  by  the  visitation  of  God,  as  men 
slept,  or  any  other  sudden,  sweeping  catas- 
trophe. With  the  indignation  of  his  anger ; 
rather,  in  fury  of  anger.  With  the  flame  of 
a  devouring  fire;  rather,  with  a  flame  of 
devouring  fire.  AH  the  elements  of  storm 
are  accumulated  by  the  prophet,  to  express 
the  terrible  character  of  the  coming  judg- 
ment— lightning,  and  scattering  (of  crops  ?), 
tempestuous  wind,  and  hail-stones. 

Ver.  31. — For  through  the  voioe  of  the 


Lord  shall  the  Assyrian  b«  beaten  down; 
rather,  for  at  the  voice  of  the  Lord  shall 
Assyria  be  dismayed  (compare  the  first  clause 
of  ver.  30).  Which  smote  with  a  rod ;  rather, 
with  the  rod  aill  he  (i.e.  Jehovah)  smite. 

Ver.  32. — In  every  place  where  the 
grounded  staff  shall  pass,  etc. ;  rather,  and  it 
shall  come  to  pass  that  every  stroke  (literally, 
passage)  of  the  destined  rod  which  Jehovah 
causes  to  rest  upon  him  shall  be  with  an 
aecmnpaniment  of  drums  and  citherns. 
Each  blow  dealt  to  Assyria  shall  rejoice  her 
enemies,  and  cause  them  to  break  out  into 
■ongs  of  praise,  accompanied  by  the  music 
of  various  instruments  (comp.  ver.  29 ;  and 
see  also  Bxod.  xv.  1 — 21).  In  battles  of 
shaking ;  or,  battles  of  swinging — "  those  in 
which  Jehovah  swings  his  rod,  and  deals 
(repeated)  blows  to  his  enemies"  (Cheyne). 
Will  he  fight  with  it ;  rather,  wtfl  he  fight 
against  her  ;  i.e.  against  Assyria. 

Ver.  33. — For  Tophet  is  ordained  of  old ; 
rather,  for  a  Tophet  hat  been  long  since  pre- 
pared. A  "  Tophet "  is  a  place  of  burning, 
probably  derived  from  the  Aryan  root  tap 
or  taph,  found  in  Greek  riipos,  riippa,  Latin 
tep-\A\ia,  Sanskrit  tap,  Persian  taphtan.  The 
name  was  specially  attached  to  a  particular 
spot  in  the  Valley  of  Hinnom,  where  sacrifices 
were  offered  to  Moloch  (2  Kings  xxiii.  10  ; 
Jer.  vii.  31;  xix.  6,  11,  etc.);  but  Isaiah 
seems  to  use  it  geaerically,  as  if  there  were 
many  Topheti.  For  the  long  it  is  prepared ; 
literally,  it  also  is  prepared  for  the  king — in 
the  Hebrew  "  for  the  melech,"  which  is  the 
same  word  as  "Moluch,"  who  was  looked 
upon  by  his  worshippers  as  *'  the  king"  xar' 
Hoxhv.  Isaiah  means  to  say,  "  As  the  To- 
phet of  the  Vale  of  Hinnom  is  prepared  for  a 
king  (Moloch),  so  this  new  Tophet  is  pre- 
pared for  another  king  (the  King  of  Assyria)." 
He  hath  made  it  deep  and  large — a  vast 
burning-place  for  a  vast  multitude  (2  Kings 
xix.  35),  with  the  fire  and  the  wood  ready, 
only  awaiting  the  breath  of  Jehovah  to 
kindle  it.  As  the  bodies  of  great  malefactors 
were  burnt  (Josh.  vii.  25),  and  not  buried, 
80  the  prophet  consigns  to  a  great  burning 
the  hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand  As- 
syrian corpses,  of  which  it  would  soob  be 
necessary  to  dispose  in  some  way. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver«.  1 — ^7. — A  godless  policy  issues  in  disaster,  however  seemingly  wise.  In  the 
sight  of  man  there  was  no  more  prudent  course  for  the  Jews  to  take  than  to  ally  them- 
selves with  Egypt.  Egypt  was  the  only  power  in  their  neighbourhood  that  could 
possibly  make  head  against  Assyria.  Egypt  had  a  standing  army,  trained  warriors, 
an  ancient  military  system,  numerous  chariots  and  horses,  ample  siege  material,  and 
abun<bnt  appliances  of  war.  She  was  at  the  time  closely  conaected  with  Ethiopia,  and 
could  bring  into  the  field  the  forces  of  two  great  nations.  Had  she  been  thorouo'hly 
awake  to  hei  own  interests,  she  would  have  strained  evwy  iMrv*  to  make  an  effective 


OH.  XXX.  1—33.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  496 

league  of  the  small  nations  and  tribes  lying  between  her  and  Assyria  Proper,  in  order 
to  check  the  advance  of  that  ambitious  and  dangerous  power.  Hezekiah  and  his  advisers 
might  naturally  see  in  Egypt,  not  only  their  only  possible  protector,  but  one  to  whose 
protection  they  might  look  with  confidence  and  hope.  There  was  one  thing  only  to  be 
set  against  all  this.  The  Egyptians  were  a  nation  of  idolaters,  and  God  had  expressly 
warned  the  Jews,  by  the  mouth  of  Isaiah,  against  relying  on  them  (ch.  xx.  2 — 6).  Thus 
reliance  on  Egypt  was  a  godless  policy — involved  taking  up  a  position  of  hostility  to 
God :  ceasing  to  ask  his  counsel  (ver.  1),  turning  a  deaf  ear  to  any  warnings  that  might 
be  addressed  to  them  by  God's  prophets  (oh.  xxix.  10 — 14).  And  God  made  it  of  none 
effect.  God  blinded  Tirhakah  to  his  true  interests,  and  made  him  act  in  the  most 
foolish  way  possible — ^first  encourage  Hezekiah  to  revolt,  and  then  desert  him  in  the 
hour  of  need  and  peril.  Some  such  result  follows  always  on  the  adoption  of  a  godless 
policy.  The  expectations  of  those  who  engage  in  it  are  disappointed ;  there  is  a  failure 
somewhere :  "  God  arises,  and  his  enemies  are  scattered ; "  their  clever  schemes  break 
down  and  come  to  nought. 

Ver.  8. — The  ivritten  Word  endures/or  ever.  There  is  always  a  permanency  about 
written,  that  does  not  belong  to  uttered,  speech.  " Litera  scripta  manet"  said  one 
Roman  poet ;  " Exegi  monumentum  eere perennius"  said  another,  when  he  had  com- 
pleted a  book  of  his  odes.  It  was  to  secure  continuance  to  human  utterances  that  the 
act  of  writing  was  invented  at  the  first ;  and  it  was  probably  long  employed  for  no  other 
purpose.  The  permanency,  however,  that  attaches  to  ordinary  writings  is  a  limited 
permanency.  They  are  not  intended  to  "  endure  for  ever."  For  the  most  part  they 
are  on  a  frail  and  perishable  material,  which  cannot  be  expected  to  last  a  century,  and 
there  is  no  expectation  of  their  being  copied  and  so  prolonged  in  existence.  But  it  is 
otherwise  with  the  Divine  Word.  The  Divine  Word  is  enshrined  in  writing,  that  it 
may  continue  as  long  as  the  world  continues.  It  is  too  precious  to  be  lost.  When  the 
material  on  which  it  is  written  shows  signs  of  decay,  there  always  have  been,  and  there 
always  will  be,  pious  persons,  who  will  take  care  that  the  words  are  reproduced  exactly 
on  some  fresh  material,  and  so  handed  on  unchanged.  Since  the  invention  of  printing, 
it  has  become  practically  impossible  that  any  work  held  in  esteem  by  any  considerable 
number  of  persons  should  "perish.  The  written  Word  could  only  pass  away  by  all 
interest  in  it  being  lost  among  all  sections  of  human-kind.  Against  such  a  miserable 
result  the  promise  of  God  to  be  with  his  Church  "always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the 
world  "  (Matt,  xxviii.  20),  furnishes  an  absolute  security.  Hence  we  may  be  sure  that 
"  the  Word  of  the  Lord  will  endure  for  ever  "  (1  Pet.  i.  25). 

Vers.  10, 11. — Smooth  things  more  acceptable  to  man  them  the  truth.  In  connection 
with  this  subject  there  would  seem  to  be  three  things  to  be  specially  set  forth. 

I.  The  fact  of  the  pbbfebencb.  Man.  has  no  natural  aversion  to  truth  as  truth. 
On  the  contrary,  truth  is  congenial  to  his  nature  and  acceptable  to  his  intellect. 
Scientific  truth,  historic  truth,  is  readily  received  when  offered  to  him,  and,  if  not  very 
eagerly  desired  or  very  carefully  sought  out,  is  at  any  rate,  when  put  before  him, 
generally  to  some  extent  appreciated.  The  truth  that  is  disliked  is  moral  truth.  Even 
when  set  before  him  in  an  abstract  form,  moral  teaching  frets  him,  vexes  him ;  and 
moralists  have  been  always  unpopular  from  the  days  of  Socrates  to  those  of  Samuel 
Johnson.  Especially  disliked  are  the  teachers  who  do  not  stop  at  abstract  morality, 
but  point  their  moral  teaching  by  applying  it  to  the  life  and  conduct  of  those  to  whom 
they  address  themselves.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  surer  way  of  pleasing  men 
than  by  flattering  them,  provided  it  is  done  skilfully  and  with  a  delicate  hand.  We 
like  to  have  our  conduct  praised,  our  characters  admired,  our  example  held  up  as  a 
model  to  be  imitated.  We  detest  being  found  fault  with,  criticized,  told  that  we  have 
done  wrong.  We  do  not  perhaps  asJc  men  to  "  prophesy  unto  us  smooth  things,"  but 
we  make  it  very  plain  to  all  with  whom  we  come  into  contact  that  "  smooth  things '' 
alone  are  agreeable  to  us. 

n.  The  okound  of  the  pbefbrknob.  Moral  truth  is  disliked  because  it  is  felt  as  a 
reproach.  We  are  conscious  to  ourselves  of  our  own  moral  imperfection ;  and  every 
exhibition  of  a  high  moral  standard,  every  inculcation  of  high  moral  principles,  seema 
to  us  a  reflection  on  our  own  shortcomings,  not  far  short  of  actual  personal  censure. 


t96  THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [ch,  xxx.  i— 33. 


The  smootli  voice  o£  flattery  pleases  us,  partly,  through  Us  contrast  with  the  rough 
toaes,  of  the  unwelcome  moraUst,  but  further  through  its  persuading  us  that  we  realty 
have  some  of  the  good  qualities  which  the  flatterer  imputes,  and  thus  oalU»g  into,  play 
our  seK-tespeet  a,iid  self-esteern.  Moral  warnings  awaien  fear  for  the  fttture ;  flattery 
awakens  hope.  Moi-al  warnings  disturb;  flattery  soothes.  Even  whence  peroeiva 
that  the  flatterer  is  cozening  us,  we  let  ourselves  be  cozened ;  our  vanity  is  pleiised  at 
being  tickled,  and  asks  for  nothing  but  a  prolongation  of  the  pleasurable  excitement. 

III.  The  itL  RESULTS  THAT  FLOW  TEOM  THE  PREFBBENOB.  Character,  which  would 
naturally  improve  uiader  the  bracing  discipline  of  a  storn  and  strict  inculcation  of  moral 
truth,,  coutiauaUy  deteriorates,  if  flattery  takes  the  place  of  honest  plain-speaking. 
Men  believe  themselves  better  than  they  are,  and  take  less  pains  to  become  betteir. 
They  grow  vain  and  self-satisfied,  thinking  themselves  in  need  of  nothing,  when  truly 
they  are  "  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked "  (Rev.  iii.  17). 
Sidritual  teachers  should  beware  of  encouraging  men's  self-indulgent  desire  for  spiiitual 
ease;  and,  while  careful  not  to  "quench  the  smoking  flax,"  or  "break  the  bruised  reed," 
should  constantly  sound  in  the  ears  of  all  denunciations  of  vice,- warnings,  rebukes, 
admonishments.  In  no  other  way  can  they  be  either  faithful  to  their  calling  or  truly 
serviceaible  to  their  fellow-men. 

Vers.  19 — 22. — Turning  to  God.  It  is  the  intention  of  God's  chastisements,  and 
their  natural,  though  perhaps  scarcely  their  ordinary,  result,  to  stir  the  soul  to  penitence, 
and  produce  a  turning  of  the  heart  to  God.  When  the  spirit  of  the  man  is  truly  touched, 
the  steps  on  the  path  of  repentance  are  commonly — 

I.  The  bttbbance  of  a  cby.  "  Men  and  bretliren,  what  shall  we  do  ? "  (Acts  iL  37). 
"  Sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?"  (Acts  xvi.  30).  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me 
to  do?"  (Acts  ij.  6).  "Lord,  save  us,  we  perish  1"  (Matt.  viii.  25).  Some  bitter  cry 
or  other  is  wrung  from  the  lipa  of  the  awakened  sinner,  who  feels  his  own  weakness 
and  guilt,  despairs  of  Baring  himself,  and  makes  appeal  to  him  who  is  alone  "  mighty 
to  save,"  in  tones  of  earnest  entreaty  and  extreme  longing  for  help.  The  "  cry  "  ii 
answered  as  soon  as  heard  (ver.  19).  By  external  teaching,  or  an  inward  secret  voice, 
men  are'  warned  what  they  must  de  as  the  next  step  on  the  path  which  leads  to  life. 
This  is— 

II.  The  F0R8AKIS0  OF  THEIR  SINS.  Be  It  impurity,  be  it  lying,  bo  it  idolatry,  that 
has  separated  between  the  sinner  and  God,  he  must  at  once  set  himself  to  cast  it  off, 
and  rid  himself  of  it.  "Ye  shall  defile  the  covering  of  thy  graven  images"  (ver.  22). 
"Put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings:  cease  to  do  evU"  (.eh.  i.  16).  It  is  sin,  and  sin 
only,  that  separates  us  from  God.  If  we  would  be  at  one  with  him,  sin  must  be  put 
away.  AU,  however,  is  not  completed  yet.  Those  who  truly  turn  to  (lod  will  not  be 
content  with  a  negative  goodness  ;  they  will  follow  up  the  forsaking  of  tlieir  sins  by — 

in.  The  earnest  endeavour  to  lead  a  life  of  active  well-doing.  "  Cease  to 
do  evil ;  learn  to  do  well,"  says  the  prophet  (ch.  i.  16).  It  is  not  enough  to  "  put  off  the 
old  man ; "  we  must  "  put  on  the  new  man,  which  after  God  ia  created  in  righteousness 
and  true  holiness  "  (Eph.  iv.  24).  For  every  weed  that  we  pluck  from  our  hearts,  we 
must  put  in  a  flower ;  for  every  vice  that  we  uproot,  we  must  plant  a  virtue.  God 
wills  that  we  should  "add  to  our  faith  virtue;  and  to  virtue  knowledge;  and  to 
knowledge  temperance ;  and  to  temperance  patience ;  and  to  patience  godliness ;  and 
to  godliness  brotherly  kindness ;  and  to  brotherly  kindness  charity"  (2  Pet.  i.  B — 7). 
We  must  endeavour,  by  "  patient  continuance  in  well-doing,"  at  once  to  improve  our 
own  characters,  to  help  the  brethren,  and  to  rebuke,  if  we  cannot  cunvince,  the 
gainsayer. 

Vers.  23 — 20.-3^  glories  of  Okrisf$  kingdom  shovm  in  figur*.  Isaiah  g^yes  us 
several  descriptions  of  Christ's  kingdom,  all  of  them  more  or  less  allegorical  (see  ch-  !▼• 
2 — 6 ;  li.  1 — 9 ;  xxxv.  1 — 10 ;  Ix.  X — 22).  In  the  present  description  all  is  allegory. 
The  blestiings  of  the  kingdom  are — 

L  RicB  AND  ABUNDANT  HABVE8TB,  by^which  would  Seem  to  be  signifled  a  great  con- 
version of  the  nations  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  (comp.  Matt.  ix.  37,  SB ;  John  iv. 
35),  together  with  the  display  of  a  great  zeal  to  do  abundant  good  works  (Mat^  v^ 
16-30). 


OH.  XXX.  1—33.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  497 

II.  Frequent  rain  ;  i.e.  an  abundant  shedding  upon  the  earth  of  the  dew  of  God'd 
blessing ;  a  continued  pouring  down  from  him  of  refieshing,  invigorating,  healthful, 
life-giving  influences.  By  these  the  rich  harvests  would  be  produced,  the  paatuies 
made  luxuriant,  and  God's  creatures  upon  the  earth,  both  men  and  animals,  rendered 
happy. 

III.  Conduits  bvbrtwhbeb,  to  convey  the  MTE-orviNa  fluid  fab  and  wide. 
These  appear  to  represent  appointed  means  of  grace — artificially  constructed  channels 
whereby  the  heavenly  influences  are  ordinarily  communicated  to  the  faithful.  They 
flow  everywhere,  not  only  in  the  valleys  and  plains,  but  also  upon  the  mouatains  and 
high  hills — the  remotest  and  most  inaccessible  parts  of  the  kingdom. 

IV.  Floods  of  light  evebtwhehb  and  at  all  times  ;  i.e,  general  illumination  and 
enlightenment — the  spread  of  spiritual  knowledge  and  true  wisdom  through  all  parts  of 
the  Church  and  all  ranks  of  Christians ;  the  disappearance  of  spiritual  darkness,  of 
ignorance,  folly,  and  blinded  consciences.  This  appears  to  be  mentioned  at)  ihe  crowning 
glory  of  all,  beyond  which  description  cannot  go,  and  with  which  therefore  the  allegoricsd 
sketch  comes  to  an  end. 

Vers.  29,  32. — The  puniihmenta  of  nationa/or  deUverance,  rather  than  for  vengeance. 
God  "  hath  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth  "  (Ezek.  xviii.  32).  His  justice 
compels  him  to  punish  the  wicked,  and  sonretimes  requires  the  destruction  even  of  a 
nation;  but  the  main  object  of  the  Almighty  in  all  such  destructions  is  not  to  take 
vengeance  on  the  oppressor,  but  to  deliver  the  oppressed.  Assyria,  and  the  nations 
leagued  with  her,  had  now  by  their  wickedness,  their  pride,  their  blasphemy,  tlieir 
cruelty,  their  idolatry,  their  impurity,  provoked  him,  as  scarcely  ever  had  he  been 
provoked  before.  He  was  about  to  inflict  a  signal  punishment,  the  fame  of  which  would 
spread  far  and  wide.  But  it  was  not  on  the  punishment  itself,  or  on  the  sufferings  of 
those  affected  by  it,  that  his  own  eye  was  CaoJ.  It  was  on  the  consequences  which 
would  follow  to  his  own  people.  They  would  "  have  a  song,  as  in  the  night  when  a 
holy  solemnity  is  kept ; "  they  would  have  "  gladness  of  heart,  as  when  one  goeth  with 
a  pipe  to  come  into  the  mountain  of  the  Lord."  The  result  to  them  would  be  the 
removal  of  a  constant  and  terrible  fear;  a  feeling  of  satisfaction  and  safety;  a  sense  of 
relief  which  would  fur  a  time  be  jubilant,  and  show  itself  in  music  and  song,  perhaps 
in  shouting  and  dancing.  The  punishment  of  the  Assyrians  would  he  to  thorn  deliverance 
— a  deUv«iaace  which,  it  might  he  hoped,  would  convert  the  heart  of  the  nation  to  God. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS, 

Vers.  1—7. — The  embassy  to  Egypt.  The  embassy  to  Egypt  has  been  Bent,  and  the 
]irophet's  object  it  to  show  that  the  policy  of  it  is  false,  as  all  policy  must  be  false 
»  hich  does  not  rest  upon  religion. 

I.  The  policy  oharaotbrizbd.  It  is  that  of  "  unruly  sons,"  and  they  "  carry  out  a 
purpose  which  is  not  from  Jehovah."  So  in  Hosea  we  read,  "  They  have  set  up  kings, 
but  not  by  me;  they  have  made  princes,  and  I  knew  it  not"  (viii.  4).  They 
"  weave  a  net "  or  "  plait  alliances"  without  his  Spirit,  ami  add  sin  to  sin.  They  go 
rlown  into  Egypt  without  having  inquired  of  Jehovah's  mouth,  and  flee  to  the  fortress 
ijf  Pharaoh,  to  take  refuge  in  tho  shadow  of  Egypt.  1.  The  Divine  leading  and 
t  ispiration  make  men  humble,  while  self-will  and  self-reliance  are  stubborn,  obstinate. 

2.  Where  the  first  step  has  been  wrong,  every  subsequent  step  aggravates  the  error. 

3.  The  root  of  a  mistaken  policy  is  a  false  reliance,  dependence  on  an  "arm  of  flesh." 
I  here  is  a  true  and  a  false  self-reliance :  that  which  forgets  God  is  ignorant  and  impious; 
that  which  recognizes  him  as  the  Source  of  all  true  intelligence  is  genuine.  To  the 
extornal  observer  tlie  difference  between  acting  from  the  self-centre  and  the  God-centre, 
between  "going  in  one's  own  strength"  and  "going  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  of 
hosts,"  may  not  be  perceptible.  It  must  be  known  in  the  feeling  of  the  actor,  and  in 
the  retultB  of  his  action. 

II.  The  BES0LTS  op  the  pouoy.  The  fortress  of  Pharaoh  will  become  a  shame  to 
them,  and  the  refuge  in  Egypt's  shadow  confusion.    "  Shame  and  confusion  of  face ;  " 

ISAIAH.  2   K 


498  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxx.  1— Sa 

great  Scripture  words,  most  expressive  of  the  result*  of  false  principles,  false  policy, 
obstJBate  error.  1.  It  is  the  very  bitterness  of  ill  success  to  feel  that  it  is  tlie  harvest  of 
our  own  faults ;  while  misfortune  is  sweetened  at  its  bitterest  by  the  consciousness  of 
having  followed  the  light  to  the  best  of  one's  ability.  The  prophet  follows  in  imagina- 
tion this  mistaken  embassy  into  the  heart  of  Egypt.  They  will  come  to  Zoan  (or  Tanis), 
and  to  Haiies  (or  Heracleopolis),  but  will  be  abashed  to  find  that  in  the  expected, 
saviours  and  helpers  no  salvation  is  to  be  found.  2.  That  bitterness  is  iggravated  by 
the  sense  of  the  great  toil  and  suffering  which  has  only  led  to  failure.  How  different 
I  he  journey /ro7«  Egypt  and  that  to  Egypt!  Then  men  were  led  through  "that  great 
and  terrible  wilderness,"  full  of  the  fiery  serpents  and  scorpions  and  lions,  the  land  of 
drought,  and  there  were  fed  with  manna  (Deut.  viii.  15;  Jer.  ii.  6).  And  now,  after 
encountering  all  these  dangers,  they  are  to  find,  after  all,  that  there  is  no  help  in  Egypt, 
though  they  have  carried  thither  rich  presents  on  asses  and  on  camels.  Emphatic  is 
the  prophet,  "  Yea,  the  Egyptians ;  in  vain,  and  empty  is  their  help,  therefore  I  proclaim 
toncerning  it,  Eahab,  they  are  utter  indolence."  There  is  a  play  on  the  name  here, 
which  cannot  well  be  rendered  in  English.  But  Egypt  may  stand  as  a  type  of  the 
"  world,"  the  absence  of  true  principle,  or  the  principle  of  policy  as  opposed  to  reliance 
on  God.  And  then  the  lesson  will  be  the  inherent  weakness  of  all  worldly  policy,  as 
compared  with  simple  trust  in  God  and  obedience  to  his  dictates. — J. 

Vers.  8 — 18. — "A  testimony  for  ever."  The  prophet  pauses.  Perhaps  he  hears  an  inner 
voice  bidding  him  to  write  down  a  few  words,  such  as  the  last  significant  Sahdb.  As 
in  ch.  viii.  1,  the  inscription  is  to  be  on  a  large  tablet,  set  up  in  a  conspicuous  place,  so 
that  he  who  runs  may  read.  Then  he  is  to  inscribe  the  prophecy  more  fully  on  a  scroll. 
Litera  scripta  manet.  The  oracle,  the  oral  utterance,  transferred  to  parchment,  becomes 
a  KTTJiia  tit  ifl,  a  "  possession  for  ever."  The  perpetuity  of  his  protest  and  warning  must 
be  secured.  The  word  rendered  "  inscribe  "  is  more  literally  rendered  "  carve."  Every 
earnest  man  has  surely  something  worth  thus  carving,  inscribing,  engraving,  some- 
where, on  some  material — tablet,  book,  or  "  fleshy  table  of  the  heart ;  "  the  condensa- 
tion of  a  life-experience,  the  sum  of  life-truths,  the  whole  self-revelation,  which  is  at  the 
same  time  God's  revelation  to  his  soul  of  what  is  substantial  and  eternal. 

I.  The  need  fob  such  insobiption.  The  people  refuse  to  listen  to  any  but  flat- 
tering prophecies.  They  are  disobedient  and  untruthful  at  heart.  They  refuse  to 
listen  to  the  prophet's  messsige ;  then  they  must  be  made  to  look  upon  it  in  a  permanent 
form.  None  are  so  blind  as  those  who  will  not  see,  unless  it  be  those  who  will  not  let 
others  see.  Light,  more  light,  is  our  constant  need :  what  shall  be  said  of  those  who 
would  stay  the  hand  that  is  drawing  up  the  blinds  from  the  windows  of  the  soul  ? 
What  more  precious  than  insight  ?  How  should  we  cherish  the  man  who  sees  deeper 
into  the  heart  of  things,  or  gathers  up  the  scattered  fragments  of  truth  into  one  inspiring 
unity  of  representation ;  the  mind  gifted  with  the  power  to  shed  luminous  effects  upon 
what  were  otherwise  gloomy  in  life's  outlook !  How  all-precious  is  that  purer  eloquence, 
not  of  ephemeral  and  party  passion,  but  of  the  truth  which  is  of  no  party  nor  time  ! 
How  shall  these  elements  of  indisiiensable  worth  be  preserved  ?  Can  we  trust  them  to 
the  popular  memory  and  heart  ?  Alas !  no,  or  not  entirely.  In  the  hour  of  excitement 
and  passion  all  will  be  forgotten.  "  You  shall  not  prophesy  unto  us  right  things,"  has 
been,  in  effect,  the  cry  of  the  multitude  again  and  again  at  such  hours.  The  Jewish 
prophets  themselves  felt  these  things  keenly.  "  Don't  preach  ! "  is,  in  effect,  the  cry  by 
which  they  are  met.  Or,  "  Preach  to  us  of  wine  and  strong  drink  " — any  doctrine  of 
indulgence,  is  the  demand  (Micali  ii.  6,  11 ;  cf.  Amos  ii.  12).  If  the  prophet  sternly 
resisted  this  temper  of  the  people,  and  told  the  homely  truth  that  God  had  forsakeu 
them  because  they  had  forsaken  him,  a  shower  of  stones  was  likely  to  be  the  dreadful 
answer,  as  in  the  case  of  the  martyr  Zechariah  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  20,  21).  Greedy  is  the 
appetite  for  "  smooth  things  "  and  "  illusions,"  and  never  wanting  a  supply  of  such 
flattering  prophets  who  will  run,  though  Jehovah  has  not  sent  them,  and  utter  what  k* 
has  not  said  (Jer.  xxiii.  21).  Tliere  is  a  demand  for  those  who  will  make  flexible  wha4 
he  has  made  inflexible,  mark  out  a  deviating  path  from  that  which  he  has  traced 
straight  and  plain.  Nay,  some  would  be  glad  to  efface  the  thought  of  God  from  their 
minds,  because  thus  they  would  efface  the  sense  of  responsibility,  "  Abolish  out  of  our 
sight  the  Holy  One  of  Israel ! "    For  then  there  will  be  free  course  for  all  licence. 


CH.  XXX.  1—33.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  499 

From  all  this  we  see  the  need  of  religious  literature.  Libraries  may  be  burned ;  a  few 
manuscripts  worth  more  to  mankind  than  gold  and  silver  will  be  preserved.  The  truth 
in  Isaiah  has  been  preserved  for  us  by  the  art  of  writing,  has  come  down  to  ua  in  the 
form  of  Scripture.  Let  us  thank  God  for  art  as  the  handmaid  of  religion.  At  every 
epoch  in  the  history  of  the  world,  religious  life  Is  threatened  with  decay  or  degeneration ; 
but  it  will  renew  itself  from  the  sacred  "records  of  the  past." 

II.  The  substance  of  the  testimony.  1.  Simple  faith  in  the  Eternal  opposed  to 
worldly  policy.  We  must,  in  order  to  apprehend  the  nature  of  the  "  testimony  for 
ever,"  strip  away  the  temporary  references,  and  regard  Bahab  and  Israel  as  types  of 
permanent  phases  of  character  (Cheyne).  What  does  "  Bahab  "  stand  for  ?  "  Perverse- 
ness  and  crookedness  "  (or  oppression).  Crookedness  and  frowarduess  mean  what  we 
mean  by  "  unprincipled  conduct "  (comp.  Prov.  ii.  15 ;  iv.  24).  To  trust  in  shrewdness 
and  policy — this  is  worldliness.  It  is  one  of  the  many  ways  in  which  man's  wit  would 
contend  with  eternal  wisdom.  And  punishment  must  surely  attend  upon  this  sin, 
according  to  the  laws  of  the  Divine  kingdum.  Various  is  the  imagery  under  which 
Scripture  represents  the  connection  between  evil  in  the  mind  and  the  result — first  in 
sin,  then  in  destruction.  The  strong  will  be  as  tow,  and  burn  unquenchably ;  the 
foolish  will  conceive  chaif,  and  bring  forth  stubble,  or  will  be  burned  as  thorns  (ch.  i. 
31 ;  xxxiii.  11,  12).  Here  guilt  is  compared  in  its  result  to  the  cracking  or  bulging 
of  a  wall,  which  suddenly  crashes  down  in  ruin ;  to  a  pitcher  dashed  violently  to  the 
ground,  and  broken  into  a  multitude  of  fragments,  so  that  it  can  never  be  of  the 
slightest  use  again.  But  the  vessels  of  God's  fashioning  shall  endure.  Let  us  be 
content  to  be  what  God  would  make  of  us ;  self-devices  that  would  contravene  his 
purpose  will  be  "  ground  to  powder."  2.  The  condition  of  deliverance,  returning. 
From  what?  Is  it  the  general  sense  of  conversion — the  absolute  turning  once  for  all, 
in  choice  and  conduct,  from  moral  evil  ?  Or  is  it  rather,  more  specifically,  the  relin- 
quishment of  the  search  for  worldly  aids?  "  Self-chosen  ways,"  "  self-confident  works," 
seem  certainly  to  be  meant.  Would  they  but  lay  aside  this  restless  eagerness  and 
over-anxious  care  for  safety,  and  simply  fall  upon  the  Almighty  arms  t  Such  lessons 
can  never  be  obsolete.  Trust  in  God  does  not  imply  supineness,  but  it  should  still 
excessive  and  feverish  fears.  Behind  all  our  plans  and  proposals,  he  is  thinking  and 
acting;  if  they  are  unsound,  they  must  come  to  nought;  if  sound,  they  will  be  fur- 
thered. "Take  heed  and  be  quiet;  fear  not,  neither  be  faint-hearted."  The  worldly 
mind  will  lean  on  worldly  support — swift  horses  of  Egypt  or  the  like,  only  to  fiiid 
theihselves  outmatched  upon  their  own  chosen  ground.  "  One  thousand  shall  fiee  at 
the  rebuke  of  one."  Mere  numbers  give  no  strength.  Strength  is  in  being  able  to 
stand  alone,  if  need  be.  To  find  one's  self  suddenly  deserted,  "  as  a  mast  on  the  top  of 
a  mountain,  a  signal  on  a  hill,"  is  often  the  fate  of  those  whose  only  policy  is  to  side 
with  numbers  and  with  power.  3.  The  compassion  of  Jehovah.  Human  needs  call 
forth  Divine  deeds.  We  are  to  think  of  God  as  One  who  longs  to  manifest  and  exert 
himself  for  the  good  of  his  creatures ;  as  One  who  is  hindered  by  human  pride, 
impatience,  petulance;  as  One  who  therefore  waits  for  his  opportunity  and  fit  seasun 
to  be  gracious ;  as  One  who  is  ever  true  to  himself,  aonstant  to  his  covenant,  keeping 
.favour  for  his  people  and  wrath  for  his  foes.  How  happy,  then,  those  who  in  turn 
"  long  for  Jehovah  "  I — whose  eyes  are  directed  to  the  "  hills  whence  cometh  help ! " 
who  watch  his  pleasure  as  the  servant  that  of  his  master,  the  handmaiden  that  of  her 
mistress !  "  To  possess  God  there  must  be  that  in  us  which  God  can  possess.  Still  to 
aspire,  after  the  Highest  is  our  wisdom ;  to  cease  from  aspiration  is  to  faU  into  weak- 
ness."— J. 

Vers.  19 — 26. — 2%e  blessedm*$  ofZion.  Throughout  the  book  the  idea  of  temporal 
blends  with  that  of  spiritual  weal.  The  images  are  drawn  from  the  state  of  temporal 
happiness  and  prosperity.  Tet  Zion  and  Jerusalem  may  be  regarded  as  symbolical  of 
the  Church  in  general. 

L  Jot  in  God.    There  will  be  "  no  more  weeping."    Tears  are  significant  of  the , 
lot  of  humanity :  and  in  the  poetry  of  the  Old  Testament  we  hear,  as  Lord  Bacon 
gays,  "  as  many  hearse-like  airs  as  carols,"  and  the  pencil   of  the  Holy  Ghost  has 
laboured  more  in  depicting  the  sorrows  of  David  than  the  felicities  of  Solomon.     It  is 
because  the  gospel  meets  the  mood  of  tears  in  us  that  its  assurances  fall  so  sweetly  on 


500  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxx.  1— 33. 


tlio  heart.  Burns  the  poet  said,  "After  all  that  has  beif  said  on  the  other  side  of 
tlie  question,  man  is  by  no  moans  a  happy  creature.  I  do  not  speak  of  the  telected 
fow,  favoured  by  partial  Heaven,  whose  souls  are  tuned  to  gladness,  and  nches,  and 
honourg,  and  prudence,  and  wisdom;  I  speak  of  the  neglected  many,  whose  nerves, 
whose  sinews,  whose  days,  are  sold  to  the  minion  of  fortune."  It  is  this  way  of  thinking 
—it  is  these  melancholy  truths,  that  make  religion  so  precious  to  the  poor  miserable 
children  of  men.  If  it  is  a  mere  phantom,  existing  only  in  the  heated  imagination  of 
I  iilhusiasni,  "what  truth  on  earth  so  precious  as  the  lie"  ?  What  is  needed  is  "ihe 
expulsive  power  of  a  new  affection  in  the  sense  of  the  nearness  of  God— the  sense  that 
he  does  hear  and  that  he  does  answer  out  of  the  vastness  and  the  void."  And  he  will 
so  answer,  if  he  be  sought  for  with  "  all  the  heart"  (Jer.  xxix.  12—14). 

IL  The  blessing  or  TEACHBna.  On  the  one  hand,  here  is  physical  want — "  bread 
of  adversity,  and  water  of  affliction."  On  the  other  hand,  a  perpetual  supply  of 
spiritual  food  and  spiritual  consolation.  The  best  of  the  people  felt  that  it  was  the 
saddest  thing  that  could  be  suffen  d — to  have  no  more  "  signs  "  from  God,  to  be  destj- 
(ute  of  the  prophet,  and  of  the  man  of  superior  insight  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  9).  The  famine  of 
"not  henring  the  Word  of  Jehovah"  (Amos  viii,  11)  is  bitterer  ihan  hunger  or  thirst. 
The  effect  may  he  traced  to  a  definite  cause — the  sin  of  the  people  or  of  the  teachers 
themselves  (ch.  xliii.  27).  Tiie  one  might  be  unworthy  to  listen  to,  the  other  to  deliver, 
ihe  truth  of  God  (ch.  xliii.  27).  There  is  no  calling  more  glorious,  none  which  leads 
to  a  more  lustrous  immortality  (Dan.  lii.  3),  than  that  of  the  religious  teacher,  none 
which  is  of  greater  service  in  the  promotion  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  If  so  great  be 
the  blessing  of  the  ministry  of  the  truth,  it  flows  from  the  goodness  of  God  that,  in 
the  happy  times  to  come,  teachers  shall  never  be  absent  from  the  people. 

III.  The  blessing  of  ikward  illumination.  The  "  word  behind  them  "  may  be 
the  Bath-Kol,  the  daughter  of  the  Voice,  as  the  Jews  say,  or,  according  to  a  way  of 
thinking  more  familiar  to  ourselves,  the  voice  of  conscience.  "God  is  not  a  hidden 
God  in  the  sense  that  his  life  is  closed  up  within  himself.  His  Word  goes  forth  to  the 
world,  that  it  may  come  into  being,  and  to  the  children  of  men  that  they  may  know 
it  and  find  life  in  it  (Ps.  xxxiii.  6 ;  cf.  Deut.  iv.  12 ;  1  Sam.  iii.  4  ;  1  Kings  six.  11, 
sqq.).  (On  the  Bath-Kol,  see  Matt.  iii.  17  ;  xvii.  5 ;  John  xii.  28.)  The  notion  is  that 
of  invisible  and  unexpected  agency.  The  admonitions  of  providence,  of  conscience, 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  seem  often  to  come  behind  us— to  recall  us  from  the  path  on  which 
we  were  going,  from  the  course  that  would  be  fraught  with  danger.  When  in  danger 
of  straying  to  this  side  or  to  that,  the  voice  will  call  us  back.  In  this  respect  the 
Divine  voice  is  like  the  dsemonion  of  Socrates,  which  was  a  restraining  influence. 

IV.  PuBiTT  AND  PROSPERITY.  A  Symptom  of  a  return  to  true  religion  will  be 
the  casting  away  of  the  relics  and  reminders  of  idolatry — the  defiling  in  the  Name  of 
tlie  holy  God  of  that  which  to  heathen  eyes  was  holy.  Josiah's  conduct  was  an 
example  of  this  (2  Kings  xxiii.).  The  expression  of  abhorrence  for  the  symbol 
expresses  at  the  same  time  abhorrence  for  the  thing  symbolized.  The  repentance  of 
tlie  individual,  the  reformation  of  the  nation,  must  be  signalized  by  the  "  rending  of  the 
idol,"  not  merely  from  its  high  place,  bnt  from  the  heart  itself.  When  the  heart  is 
brought  into  the  fuller  knowledge  of  God,  it  loves  what  he  loves,  and  hates  what  he 
hntes.  The  thought  of  what  is  " an  abomination  to  Jehovah"  (Deut.  vii.  25)  is 
reflected  in  an  intense  distaste  in  the  sonl.  2.  This  will  be  consistent  with  external 
l>riisperity.  Rain  will  come  down  upon  the  sown  seed.  As  the  withholding  of  the 
lain  followed  upon  national  iniquity  as  the  greatest  curse  (Zech.  xiv.  17,  18),  so  the 
giving  of  the  rain  meant  at  once  all  physical  blessing  and  all  Divine  favours  (Zech.  x. 
! ,  etc.).  Bread — rich  and  abundant  produce  of  the  land — cattle  teeming  in  the  wide 
pastures ; — it  is  the  happy  picture  of  a  golden  age.  Bread  and  water — simple  elements 
if  living;  yet  what  poetry  hangs  upon  their  supply  I  and  what  woe,  what  tragedy  and 
liorror,  upon  the  want  of  them  I — J. 

A'^er.  15. — Sources  of  strength.  "In  quietness  and  in  confidence  shall  be  your 
strength."  Because,  "  if  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  "  When  the  winds  are  in 
our  favour,  all  we  have  to  do  is  to  set  our  sails.  When  the  tides  are  with  us,  we  need 
not  fret  concerning  the  issues  of  the  voyage.  God  is  on  the  side  of  the  just  man,  the 
true  man,  the  pure  man.     The  discijdes  of  his  Son  are  not  likely  to  lose  his  fiivour 


CB.  XXX.  1-33.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  60i 

and  reward.    "  Blessed  are  tliey  that  do  his  commandments,  that  they  may  have  right 
to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may  enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the  city." 

I.  The  diotdm  is  Divine.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God."  There  is  direct  and  special 
emphasis  given  to  this  promise.  And  he  calls  himself  "  the  Holy  One  of  Israel."  So 
that  the  "holy  people"  need  not  fear,  inasmuch  as  the  Holy  One  cannot  lie,  cannot 
prosper  anything  opposed  to  holiness,  cannot  therefore  let  evil  overcome  goodness. 
What  we  have  to  look  to  is  our  state.  We  need  not  dream  that  quietness  will  help  ns 
if  it  be  the  indifference  of  sloth  or  the  quiescence  of  an  indulgent  soul  in  evil.  But  if 
"  holiness  unto  the  Lord "  be  written  on  our  hearts  and  lives,  God,  who  is  the  Holy 
One,  will  surely  prosper  us. 

II.  The  DEOLABATioN  18  DUKii.  "  Qaietness  and  confidence."  Because  there  is  a 
quietness  which  comes  from  the  paralysis  of  fear,  or  from  the  coma  of  fatalism.  We 
are  to  have  a  confidence  which  keeps  the  soul  alive,  and  fills  it  with  intense  ardour  and 
devotion.  Nature  is  intensely  active,  but  all  her  ministrations,  as  in  the  light  and  the 
dew,  are  quiet.  Fussiness  and  loudness  are  no  true  signs  of  energy.  Nay,  rather  they 
bespeak  a  superficial  and  shallow  nature.  Confidence  is  the  child  of  wisdom  and 
courage.  It  is  not  the  result  of  ignorance,  or  of  under-estimating  the  power  of  our  foes. 
It  takes  cognizance  of  them  all — their  number  and  their  variety  and  their  ubiquity,  but 
then,  looking  up  to  him  who  is  mightier  than  them  all,  it  says,  "  This  is  the  victory 
that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith." 

III.  The  steength  is  within.  What  we  need  ii  not  so  much  a  lessoning  of  the 
forces  without  us,  but  a  strength  in  the  inward  man  to  overcome  them.  Take  temp- 
tation. We  are  told  that  no  temptation  shall  come  but  such  as  we  are  able  to  bear. 
We  are  not  promised  immunity  from  keen  attacks.  Everything  depends  upon  the  state 
of  the  soul.  Temptation,  to  be  successful,  requires  correspondency  within.  Sparks 
falling  upon  the  ocean  are  not  dangerous.  Christ  said,  "  The  prince  of  this  world 
cotncth,  and  hath  nothing  in  me."  Take  trial.  Sorrow,  coming  to  the  worlilly  heart, 
breaks  it  down — it  ends  in  the  death  of  hope  and  energy  and  joy.  Sorrow  to  the 
Christian  is  an  angel  of  di.soiiiline.  The  soul  is  sustained  by  the  presence  within  us  of 
tbe  Man  of  sorrows,  who  can  make  all  grace  abound.  So  even  the  martyr  and  the 
confessor  have  been  able  to  rejoice ;  even  Paul  and  Silas  sang  "  songs  in  the  night." 
"  As  thy  day  thy  strength  shall  be."  This,  then,  is  proven  true  in  human  history,  and 
must  be  accepted  as  a  fact.  Spiritual  consciousness  is  worthy  of  as  much  honour  and 
to  be  accepted  with  confidence,  as  the  boasted  facts  of  science.  The  promise,  there- 
fore, is  comforting  to  every  generation.  "  in  quietness  and  in  confidence  shall  be  your 
•trength."— W.  M.  8. 

Vers.  1—7. — Ooing  down  into  Egypt.  The  prophet  of  Jehorah  utters  another 
"  woe,"  he  denounces  another  sin ;  for  the  people  of  the  Lord,  in  the  day  of  their 
difficulty,  have  looked,  not  to  their  Divine  Redeemer,  but  to  that  arm  of  flesh  in  which 
they  should  not  have  trusted,  and  by  which  they  will  be  abandoned.    We  see — 

L  Theib  bin.  It  is  threefold.  1.  Desertion  of  Qod.  They  take  counsel,  but  not 
now  of  God,  as  in  better  days  (Josh.  vii.  6 ;  Judg.  xx,  27 ;  1  Sam.  xxiii.  2 ;  xxx.  8) ; 
they  made  alliance,  but  not  with  the  Divine  consent — not  "of  my  Spirit"  (ver.  1); 
they  did  not  ask  "  at  God's  mouth  "  (ver.  2).  Once  they  would  not  have  dreamed  of 
acting  without  encouragement  from  God ;  now  they  look  elsewhere  for  sanction.  This 
desertion  of  him  who  was  their  Lord,  and  who  had  so  often  proved  himself  their 
Deliverer,  had  its  root  in :  2.  Distrust  of  God.  They  trusted  in  "  the  shadow  of 
Egypt "  (ver.  2),  because  they  had  come  to  distrust  the  "  shadow  of  his  wings  "  in 
whom  David  found  his  refuge  until  his  calamity  was  overpast  (Ps.  Ivii.  1).  It  was 
the  loss  of  their  faith  in  Qod  which  made  them  cast  about  for  another  power  which 
should  befriend  and  deliver  them.  And  this  deplorable  distrust  was  due  to :  3.  ■  Tlie 
spirit  of  materialism.  They  preferred  the  visible  nation  to  the  invisible  God ;  the 
fleshly  "  power  "  to  the  Divine  Spirit  j  the  material  army  of  Egypt,  whose  forces  they 
could  count  and  whose  weapons  they  could  handle,  to  the  unseen  One  whose  angels 
were  beyond  the  range  of  vision,  and  whose  instruments  were  unfashioned  by  human 
hands.  This  is  the  sin  of  mankind.  Desertion  of  God,  departure  from  his  side  and 
firotn  his  service;  desertion  springing  from  distrust,  and  this  distrust  rooted  in  « 
wretched  and  pitiiral  materialism. 


502  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxx.  1— 33, 

II.  Theib  punishment.  1.  Fruitless  expenditure.  (Vers.  4 — 6.)  They  would  take 
the  trouble  to  secure  princely  ambassadors,  and  these  would  travel  through  inhospi- 
table and  perilous  regions,  laden  with  costly  gifts,  paying  servile  attention  to  flie 
foreigner — and  all  for  nothing;  an  immensity  of  trouble  and  no  profit  whatever. 
i.  Bitter  disappointment.  (Ver.  7.)  The  land  from  which  they  hoped  so  much  would 
prove  utterly  useless;  their  expectations  would  end  in  nothing  but  chagrin;  their 
exasperation  could  only  find  expression  in  an  opprobrious  epithet,  in  a  bitter  epigram 
directed  against  Egypt.  3.  Mortification.  "  The  gtrength  of  Pharaoh  shall  be  their 
shame,"  etc.  (vers.  3,  5).  The'  result  of  this  attempted  alliance  would  be  political 
reproach ;  and  the  court  and  the  nation  would  be  ashamed  of  having  taken  a  step 
that  turned  out  so  ill.  These  are  the  common  penalties  of  sin :  the  waste  of  that 
which  is  precious — time,  money,  strength,  reputation,  energy,  affection,  etc;  disap- 
pointment— the  soul  finding  out  that  that  in  which  it  trusted  cannot  do  what  it 
hoped,  that  it  leaves  it  still  empty,  still  athirst,  still  poor;  shame — the  position  in 
which  it  is  dishonoured  of  men,  and  has  keenly  to  reproach  itself  for  folly  into  which 
it  need  not  have  fallen,  for  sin  which  it  might  easily  have  shunned. 

IIL  Their  altbrnativb.  God  was  with  them;  one  of  his  truest  and  most  faithful 
prophets  was  at  hand,  accessible  at  any  hour.  Why  not  trust  in  the  Almighty? 
Why  not  take  counsel  of  the  All-wise  ?  The  alternative  .to  sin  is  always  at  hand. 
The  gates  of  obedience  are  unfastened ;  the  oracles  of  God  are  open ;  the  paths  of 
piety  are  such  as  every  foot  may  tread.— C. 

Vers.  8 — 14, 17, 18. — Aspects  of  sin.  This  severe  denunciation  by  the  prophet  of  the 
sins  of  the  Jews  may  remind  us  of  some  of  the  darker  and  sadder  aspects  of  sin  itself. 

I.  The  permanency  of  its  record.  Isaiah  was  to  record  the  guilt  of  "the 
rebellious  children  "  in  a  book,  that  it  might  be  there  inscribed  "  for  the  time  to  come 
for  ever  and  ever."  And  in  the  sacred  volume  there  stand  written,  to  be  read  for  all 
time,  the  accusations  which  the  Lord  brought  against  Israel;  the  record  of  their 
national  perversity  remains  after  all  these  centuries  have  passed,  and  will  remain  for 
centuries  to  come.  Apart  from  such  instrumentality  as  was  here  employed,  the  sins 
we  commit  find  a  lasting  record.  They  are  printed  in  the  faces  and  the  forms  of 
men,  they  are  legible  in  their  lives,  they  are  apparent  in  their  characters,  they  survive 
in  their  reputation,  they  live  on  for  ever  in  the  ineffaceable  influences  which  are  left 
behind  them  and  which  are  transmitted  from  age  to  age.  The  sins  of  the  fathers 
may  be  read  in  the  lowered  and  injured  lives  of  the  children  unto  the  third  and  the 
fourth  generation.  We  little  think  how  and  where  and  when  our  guilt  is  -being 
recorded  in  one  or  other  of  the  many  books  of  God. 

II.  Its  OBDtmAOT.  "  Children  that  will  not  hear  the  Law  of  the  Lord "  (ver.  9). 
Contumacy  reaches  its  utmost  length  when  it  closes  its  ears  against  the  Word  of  the 
all-wise  and  almighty  God.  It  is  by  degrees  that  the  heart  becomes  thus  hardened. 
Diminished  pleasure,  inattention,  avoidance,  the  closed  ear  of  the  soul — ^by  such  stages 
as  these  man  descends  to  the  obduracy  which  is  here  rebuked. 

HI.  Its  power  op  imposing  on  itself.  (Vers.  10, 11.)  When  sin  is  in  full  pos- 
session of  the  soul  it  makes  men  believe  that  to  be  false  which  they  do  not  wish  to  be 
true,  and  that  true  which  they  do  not  like  to  consider  false ;  it  prevails  on  them  to 
regard  the  rugged  things  to  be  wrong,  and  the  smooth  things  to  be  sound ;  then  it 
leads  them  to  find  a  voice  for  this  palatable  and  comforting  doctrine ;  so  that  they 
encourage  those  to  speak  who  will  keep  silence  as  to  all  Divine  but  disagreeable  truth, 
and  give  utterance  to  pleasant  and  profitable  perversions. 

IV.  The  apparent  suddenness  of  its  penalty.  (Ver.  13.)  The  spendthrift  is 
setting  poorer  every  month  for  many  years,  but  bankruptcy  comes  on  him  suddenly  at 
last  The  dishonest  man  is  getting  hopelessly  involved  for  years,  but  his  reputation  is 
blasted  in  an  hour.     The  fa.scinations  of  the  cup  are  long  gaining  ascendency,  but  in 

iJijie  evil  day  the  victim  of  this  baleful  vice  is  seen  staggering  in  the  streets.  Passion 
.nay  have  been  winning  the  mastery  from  youth  upwards,  but  at  a  certain  point  it 
blazes  forth,  and  the  life-blood  is  shed.  Penalty  generally  comes  at  last  with  seeming 
suddenness,  like  the  breaking  wall  that  has  long  bent  but  comes  down  in  a  moment. 

V.  The  completeness  of  its  penalty.    (Ver.  14.) 

VL  Im  appropriateness.    (Ver.  16.)    The  punishment  of  Judah's  sin  should  have 


OH.  XXX.  1—33.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PKOPHET  ISAIA.H.  CO. 

a  marked  correspondence  with  the  guilt  itself.  This  is  constant.  Sins  of  the  flesli 
make  their  mark  upon  the  body;  sins  of  the  mind  leave  their  stain  upon  the  spirit ; 
folly  in  the  home  will  end  in  domestic  sorrow  ;  he  that  withholds  from  others  starves 
himself;  he  that  oppresses  others  does  violence  to  his  own  soul,  etc.  There  will  always 
be  found  a  fitness  In  the  penalty  to  the  sin  for  which  a  man  is  suffering.  "  Whatsoever 
a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap ; "  he  that  soweth  the  wind,  shall  reap  the  whirl- 
wind (Qal,  vi.  7 ;  Hos.  viii.  7). — 0. 

Ver.  15. — Quiet  strength.    These  beautiful  words  suggest— 

I.  The  misT  duty  or  the  erkino.  Judah  had  forsaken  God  to  find  a  refuge  in 
another  power;  the  first  duty  of  the  nation,  therefore,  was  "to  return"  unto  the  Lorfi, 
and  to  find  its  rest  and  its  salvation  in  him.  This  is  now  and  ever  the  immediate  duty 
of  all  wanderers  from  God;  both  of  those  who  have  never  been  reconciled  to  hiiii 
through  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  those  who,  like  the  Jews  on  this  occasion,  have  tempo- 
rarily forsaken  his  service.  The  way  of  return  is  that  of  penitent  confession  (Eom. 
X.  10),  of  trust  in  the  Divine  promise  (Acts  x.  43),  of  surrender  to  the  Divine  will 
(Acts  ix.  6). 

II.  The  btbekoth  of  quiet  aottvitt.  "  In  quietness  .  •  .  shall  be  your  strength." 
It  is  a  common  fallacy  that  noise  and  strength  are  closely  allied.  On  the  contrary,  it 
is  the  quiet  and  even  the  silent  things  which  are  the  strong  ones.  Tlie  thunder  startles 
or  appals,  but  it  efiects  nothing ;  gunpowder  deafens  the  ear,  but  it  enriches  no  one  ; 
tempestuous  rhetoric  excites  to  momentary  force  of  feeling,  but  it  adds  nothing  to 
character.  It  is  the  silent  forces  of  gravitation  and  electricity  acting  for  ages  without 
being  known  to  exist ;  it  is  the  soft  sunshine  and  the  still  rains  of  heaven ;  it  is  the  quiet 
words  of  the  calm  teacher  finding  their  way  to  the  mind  and  working  conviction  anl 
conversion  there ; — ^it  is  in  these  things,  and  in  things  like  these,  that  real  power  resides. 
The  quiet  strength  of  a  gentle  mother's  purity  and  love,  of  a  faithful  father's  warning, 
of  an  honoured  teacher's  counsel  and  example,  of  an  earnest  Church's  testimony  and 
work ;— these  are  the  God-given  agencies  by  which  the  world  is  to  be  won  to  righteous- 
ness and  truth.  Noisy,  spasmodic,  irregular  outbursts  may  be  auxiliaries,  but  they  are 
oniy  that. 

ni.  The  power  of  faith.  "In  confidence  shall  be  your  strength."  Sometimes 
we  have  simply  to  wait  for  God,  and  the  best  thing  we  can  do  is  to  "  be  still "  and  wait ; 
our  activity  would  only  be  harmful  (see  Bxod.  xiv.  13).  So  it  was  on  this  historical 
occasion  (see  ch.  xxxvii.).  So  was  it  often  with  our  Lord's  disciples  (Mark  iv.  39,  40 ; 
Acts  i.  4).  So  is  it  now,  when  in  duty  or  in  danger  we  have  done  all  that  we  can  do ; 
then  we  wait  for  God — our  expectation  is  in  him  only  (Ps.  xxxix.  7 ;  Ixii.  5). — C. 

Ver.  18. — Ood^s  waiting  and  ours.  I.  God's  waiting  fob  us.  "  Will  the  Lord 
wait."  We  may  look  at :  1.  The  occasions  of  his  waiting.  He  waits  "  that  he  may 
be  gracious."  (1)  That  he  may  show  his  grace  in  forgiveness;  in  "having  mercy  upon 
US,"  or  in  making  us  to  feel  that  we  are  the  subjects  of  his  mercy.  (2)  That  he  may 
show  his  grace  in  interposition,  delivering  from  danger,  relieving  from  distress,  saving 
in  sickness.  (3)  That  he  may  show  his  grace  in  final  and  complete  redemption  (Rom. 
viii.  23) — the  taking  his  children  away  from  the  struggle  and  sorrow  of  earth  to  the 
rest  and  joy  of  heaven.  2.  ITie  reason  of  his  waiting.  It  is  because  "  the  Lord  is  a 
God  of  judgment,"  or  of  rectitude.  (1)  He  cannot  forgive  us  till  we  return  in  spirit  to 
him  and  accept  his  rule,  until  we  obey  his  supreme  command  (John  vi.  29).  (2)  He 
cannot  interpose  until  his  intervention  is  fitted  to  purify  and  sanctify  us.  (3)  He  can- 
not call  us  home  until  the  privilege  and  discipline  of  time  have  prepared  ui  for  the 
scenes  and  spheres  of  eternity. 

IL  Cub  waitdto  fob  Gk)D.  "  Blessed  are  all  they  that  wait  for  him."  1.  Blessed 
is  the  patient  inquirer ;  for  he  who  seeks  the  truth  and  waits  till  light  shines  in  upon 
his  soul  will  surely  find  his  goal.  2.  Blessed  is  the  patient  worker ;  for  he  who  sows 
the  good  seed  of  the  kingdom  and  waits  for  God  to  give  the  increase  will  "  doubtless 
come  again  with  rejoicing,  bringing  his  sheaves  with  him,"  3.  Blessed  is  the  patient 
sufferer;  for  he  who  "  waits  for  the  morning"  through  the  night  of  pain,  or  loneliness, 
or  poverty,  or  any  other  ill,  will  find  that  the  glory  which  is  to  be  revealed  will  make 
t/he  BafferiugB  of  the  preMnt  time  incomparably  small  (Bom.  viii.  18).    Now  God  waits 


504  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [an.  xxx.  1—33, 


for  M»,  and  we  for  him.    A  few  steps  more  and  his  largest  promises  and  our  highest 
hopes  will  be  all  fulfilled.  —0. 

Vers.  19—26. — The  people  of  Ood  in  their  prosperity.  These  verses  are  primarily 
applicable,  and  they  are  more  or  less  true  as  they  are  applied,  to  the  return  of  the  Jews 
from  captivity,  and  their  residence  in  their  own  land.  But  they  find  a  larger  fulfilment 
in  the  condition  of  the  Church  of  Christ  in  its  last  days.  Possibly  they  anticipate 
the  felicities  of  the  heavenly  future.  "We  refer  them  to  the  Church  in  its  prosperity, 
and  conclude — 

I.  That  the  people  op  Q-od  abb  thobb  that  have  known  a  tum  of  tboublb. 
Dark  days  have  passed  over  their  heads ;  there  has  been  "  the  breach  of  his  people,  and 
the  stroke  of  his  wound"  (ver.  26).  God  once  made  them  to  "eat  the  bread  of 
adversity,"  etc.  (ver.  20).  They  have  passed  through  grave  spiritual  anxieties  j  they 
have  felt  the  burden  of  unforgiven  sin ;  they  have  sighed  for  the  sense  of  God's  favour ; 
they  have  known  the  miseries  of  separation  from  God,  and  the  weariness  of  a  life 
unbrightened  with  sacred  joy. 

II.  That  in  thbib  distkkss  thet  made  effectual  appeal  to  God.  (Ver.  19.) 
God  is  never  deaf  to  the  cry  of  sorrow ;  but  to  the  appeal  of  the  penitent  spirit,  longing 
to  return  unto  him,  his  ear  is  peculiarly  alive ;  he  will  be  "  very  gracious  "at  the  voice 
of  that  cry — "  when  he  shall  hear  it,  he  will  answer  thee."  No  loudest  sounds  will 
drown  the  sigh  of  the  contrite  spirit,  no  multiplied  activities  will  prevent  the  heavenly 
Father  from  giving  it  his  immediate  regard. 

III.  That  the  day  of  Christian  pbivileob  is  one  of  vert  blessed  illumina- 
tion. In  the  day  of  its  prosperity  there  should  be  abundance  of  light  for  the  Christian 
Church.  Its  teachers  should  not  have  to  hide  in  obscurity,  but  should  be  visible  and 
accessible  to  all  (ver.  20);  and  there  should  be  times  when  the  light  of  Divine  truth 
would  be  not  only  clear,  but  brilliant  and  powerful,  making  other  days  to  seem  dark 
by  comparison  (ver.  26 ;  see  2  Cor.  iii.  9, 10).  Compared  with  the  condition  of  heathen 
lands,  or  even  with  the  state  of  Israel  under  Samuel  or  David,  or  even  with  many 
c:hristian  countries  now,  how  blessed  the  state  in  which  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God 
shall  be  made  known  in  its  freedom  and  its  fulness  in  every  town  and  hamlet,  and  in 
every  cottage  home ! 

IV.  That  this  day  of  Chkistian  PBiviLEaE  will  be  one  of  kind  and  faithful 
WATCHFULNESS.  (Ver.  21.)  The  vision  is  one  of  high,  but  not  heavenly,  blessedness ; 
of  advanced,  but  not  absolute  excellency.  The  citizens  of  the  holy  kingdom  will  be 
found  walking  in  the  King's  highway,  but  there  will  remain  a  tendency  to  "  turn  to  the 
right  hand  or  to  the  left,"  to  go  off  into  by-paths  of  error,  or  mistake,  or  unwisdom,  if 
not  of  actual  transgression.  In  this  case  there  will  be  the  faithful  monitor,  the 
Christian  teacher,  who  will  be  ready  with  the  timely  intervention,  "  This  is  the  way, 
walk  ye  in  it."  This  readiness  to  intervene  at  the  moment  of  digression  ought  to 
characterize  our  own  times ;  it  should  be  the  holy  habit,  the  careful  acquirement,  of  the 
Christian  pastor.  On  the  other  hand,  a  readiness  to  be  admonished  is  one  of  the  graces 
of  a  godly  character. 

V.  That  the  time  op  teub  peosperitt  will  be  masked  by  the  decisive 
INTOLEEANOE  OP  EVIL.  (Ver.  22.)  They  that  name  the  Name  of  Christ  will 
not  only  "depart  from  all  iniquity,"  but  they  will  reprobate  it;  they  will  thrust  it 
away ;  they  will  not  like  even  to  allude  to  shameful  things  (Eph.  v.  3) — these  wLl  be 
hateful,  intolerable  to  them.  We  may  measure  our  nearness  to  God  by  the  degree  of 
our  abhorrence  of  evil  (Heb.  i.  13 ;  Rom.  xii.  9). 

VI.  That  the  time  op  Christian  pbivileob  will  be  one  of  abounding  joy. 
(Vers.  23 — 25.)  This  language  is  clearly  figurative ;  it  is  the  utterance  of  exultation. 
Everything  contributes  to  joyous  prosperity — the  timely  rain,  the  large  increase  of  seed, 
the  rich  pastures,  abundance  of  food  for  cattle  as  well  as  for  man,  unfailing  "  brooks 
that  make  the  meadows  green."  The  land  will  laugh  with  exuberance,  the  nation  will 
exult  in  overflowing  wealth.  In  the  days  of  unfettered  liberty  and  universal  privilege 
the  Christian  Church  will  delight  itself  in  God ;  its  aongs  of  peace  and  of  hope  will  arise 
from  every  valley ;  its  life  will  be  touched  and  Ughted  with  the  sunshine  of  a  holy 
gladness.  The  light  of  God's  countenance  will  rest  upon  it,  and  it  will  rejoice  greatly 
in  his  salvation.— t). 


CH.  XXX.  1—33.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHBT  ISAIAH.  605 

Vera,  27 — 33. — Judgment  and  joy.    This  forcible,  energetic  language,  in  which  darkest 

shadow  and  brightest  sunshine  very  strikingly  intermingle,  may  remind  us — 

L  That  God  does  ooub  im  tebbible  jtrDGMENTS  to  thb  children  or  kkn 
1.  Sometimes  to  men  collectively — to  societies,  to  cities,  to  nations.  2.  At  other  timei 
to  individual  men.  In  the  special  ordering  or  in  the  permission  of  his  Divine  providenca 
he  sends  the  overwhelming  loss  and  consequently  reduced  or  even  impoverished  estate, 
or  the  wasting  and  consuming  sickness,  or  the  undermining  and  final  destruction  of 
influence,  or  the  shattering  of  power,  or  sudden,  perhaps  violent,  death,  God  lets  such 
things  overtake  the  guilty,  that  the  pictorial  and  poetical  language  of  the  text  is 
Hpplicabte.  It  is  as  if  his  "  anger  burned,"  as  if  his  "  lips  were  full  of  indignation  ;  " 
his  judgments  come  down  as  an  overflowing  stream,  they  cast  forth  the  guilty  like  a 
winnowing-shovel ;  his  glorious  voice  is  heard,  his  arm  descends  in  righteous  retribution, 
II.  That  the  judgment  of  God  is  accompanied  with  the  jot  op  man.  "Ye 
shall  have  a  song,  as  in  the  night  .  .  .  and  gladness  of  heart "  (ver,  29)  j  "  in  every 
place  where  the  grounded  staff  shall  pass,  ...  it  shall  be  with  tabrets  and  harps " 
(ver.  32).  Here  and  elsewhere  the  judgments  of  God  are  made  the  occasion  of  human 
thankfulness  and  joy.  It  is  clear:  1.  That  in  such  joy  there  should  be  no  element  of 
vindictiventss.  It  would  be  positively  unchristian  to  find  a  source  of  satisfaction  in  the 
bodily  or  mental  suffering  of  men  because  they  have  injured  us  (Rom.  xiL  19,  20). 
Christian  magnanimity  should  rise  to  the  height  of  earnestly  desiring  that  its  foes 
may  be  won  to  truth,  wisdom,  and  eternal  life.  2.  That  there  may  be  in  such  joy  the 
element  of  righteous  satisfaction ;  not,  indeed,  that  men  sufier,  but  that  their  sin  receives 
its  appropriate  mark  of  Divine  disapproval ;  that  the  integrity  of  the  Divine  rule  is 
vindicated ;  that  God's  presence  and  his  holiness  are  seen  to  be  near  and  not  afar  off. 
This  is  the  spirit  of  the  psalmist  (Ps.  xcvii.  1).  3.  That  there  may  be  also  the  element 
of  human  sympathy.  Often  at  such  times  we  have  great  gladness  of  heart,  because, 
when  he  that  once  "  smote  with  a  rod  "  is  himself  "  beaten  down  "  (ver.  31),  those 
who  were  smitten  by  the  oppressor  walk  in  liberty  and  security.  The  humiliation  of 
the  wrong-doer  is  the  exaltation  of  the  righteous — is  the  enfranchisement  of  the  holy 
and  the  wise.  4.  That  there  will  also  be  the  elem,ent  of  holy  expectation.  When 
Sennacherib  has  God's  bridle  in  his  jaws  and  is  caused  to  wander  far  from  his  chosen 
path,  Jerusalem  is  safe  and  Jehovah's  service  is  secure.  When  the  enemies  of  religion 
are  scattered,  there  is  a  goodly  prospect  of  opened  sanctuaries,  of  multiplied  privileges, 
of  increase  of  piety  and  virtue  on  every  hand.  When  the  persecutor  perishes  the 
minister  of  truth  rejoices  greatly,  and  there  is  music  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
because  there  is  every  reason  to  hope  that  the  Churches,  having  rest,  will  "  walk  in  the 
fear  of  God  .  .  .  and  be  multiplied  "  (Acts  ix,  31). 

1,  It  is  well,  in  the  time  of  danger  or  distress,  to  ask  for  Divine  deliverance.  2.  It 
is  better  to  ask  for  Divine  strength  to  be  enabled  to  overcome  the  evil  from  which  we 
suffer  by  the  good  which  we  do  (Rom.  xiL  21). — 0. 

Ver.  1.— Adding  sin  to  sin.  This  prophetic  warning  seems  to  have  been  spoken 
when  the  embassy  to  seek  offensive  and  defensive  alliance  with  Egypt  had  actually 
started  on  its  way.  The  sin  of  neglecting  to  seek  direction  from  God  in  the  time 
of  national  anxiety  was  now  added  to  by  the  sin  of  openly  seeking  help  from  man. 
There  was  a  constant  disposition  on  the  part  of  the  Jews  of  the  later  monarchy  to 
seek  their  safety  in  national  alliances.  When  imperilled  by  the  Israelites,  they  sought 
help  from  the  Syrians.  When  threatened  by  the  Syrians,  they  made  treaties  with 
the  Assyrians.  When  the  Assyrians  became  their  enemies,  they  tried  to  strengthen 
themselves  with  the  support  of  hesitating,  inactive  Egypt.  First  men  lose  their 
faith  in  God ;  then  they  neglect  to  seek  or  obey  him ;  and  then  they  turn  to  mere 
human  helpers.  So  sin  follows  on  sin.  Illustrating  this  from  life  and  experience,  with 
precise  applications  to  each  audience,  it  may  be  shown  that — 

I,  Sin  is  added  to  sin  in  the  natural  obdeb  of  events.  It  is  but  the  simple 
fact  of  life  that  a  sin  never  goes  alone.  It  always  has  its  companions  and  its  followers. 
It  must,  if  for  this  one  reason  only — every  sin  is  a  disturbance  of  order  by  man's  self- 
will  ;  that  self-will  is  sure  to  go  on  sinning  in  the  effort  to  get  the  order  right.  The 
child  who  finds  order  disturbed  by  some  wrong  act,  goes  on  to  tell  lies  in  its  vain  effort 
to  get  the  order  straight  again. 


506  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   rBOPHBT  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxx.  1—33. 

IT.  Sin  is  added  to  bin  bt  the  influenob  op  habit.  There  is  a  strange 
tendency  in  dh  all  to  do  a  second  time  what  we  have  done  once.  This  has  not  been 
8u£Sciently  noticed,  though  it  is  the  basis  on  which  criminals  are  often  detected.  A 
sin  done  once,  we  are  actually  disposed  to  do  again ;  and  there  seems  to  be  even  a  bodily 
blau  towards  this  formation  of  habits.  Parents  and  teachers  have  to  watch  for  it,  that 
they  may  check  and  correct  it. 

ni.  Sin  is  added  to  bin  bt  the  enticements  of  Satah.  For  an  act  of  gin  is 
giving  Satan  the  advantage  over  us,  putting  ourselves  into  his  power.  And  the 
increase  of  that  power  dependi  on  leading  us  to  do  evil  again.  He  will  not  let  us  stop 
and  think.     We  must  go  on,  as  the  gambler  does,  until  we  are  enslaved  and'niined. 

IV.  Sin  IB  added  to  sin  as  a  beginning  of  punishment.  A  man  is  usually 
"  heady  and  high-minded  "  at  the  successful  result  of  his  first  wrong ;  so,  in  order  that  he 
may  be  smitten  and  humbled,  God  lets  him  go  on  from  sin  to  sin,  until  shame  whips 
him  awake,  so  that  he  may  see  his  iniquity.  The  way  round  to  right  has  often  to  be 
by  the  mire  of  sin  added  to  sin.  There  is  a  gracious  sense  in  which  God  lets  wilful 
men  alone  awhile,  as  he  left  these  Jewish  leaders  who  advocated  the  Egyptian  alliance, 
that  they  might  convince  themselves  of  their  own  wickedness  and  folly. — B.  T. 

Ver.  2. — Trusting  othert  than  Jehovah.  "  Belying  upon  human  aid,  involving  a  distrust 
of  the  Divine  promises,  was  a  crying  sin  of  the  ancient  Ohurcli,  not  at  one  time  only, 
but  throughout  her  history."  It  is  quite  as  truly  the  crying  sin  of  the  modern  Church, 
and  of  the  Christian  individnal.  In  every  time  ot  pressure  and  need  we  first  fly  to 
some  form  of  human  help.  It  is  either  the  expression  of  "  first  simplicity,"  or  else  of 
"  cultured  sanctity,"  to  acton  the  words,  "  Our  help  is  in  the  Lord  our  God." 

I.  The  delusions  on  which  oiib  trusting  others  rest.  Some  of  these  take 
shape,  and  we  can  recognize  them.  Others  lie  down  in  men's  souls,  doing  their  mis- 
chievous work,  but  never  getting  put  into  propositions,  which  can  be  fairly  dealt  with. 
They  are  such  as  the  following  :  1.  God  is  far  away,  and  his  help  is  not  anything 
really  practical.  2.  God  does  not  heed ;  he  is  so  largely  concerned  in  the  great 
affairs  of  the  universe  that  it  is  only  an  imagination  that  he  can  take  interest  in  an 
individual  life.  3.  God  is  so  long  about  his  work  ;  and  impatieut  man  cannot  bear 
waiting — if  he  is  in  any  trouble,  he  wants  it  dealt  with  at  once.  Compare  the  King  of 
Israel,  in  the  famine-time,  saying  pettishly  to  Elisha,  "  What  should  I  wait  for  the 
Lord  any  longer?"  4.  God  makes  such  hard  terms.  He  always  wants  repentance  and 
submission,  and  letting  our  own  hands  hang  down ;  he  crushes  human  energy  and 
enterprise.  The  very  statement  of  these  cherished  delusions  of  men  suggests  their 
correctives.     Surely  to  all  who  cherish  them  the  great  Father  is  an  unknown  God. 

II.  The  roRMS  which  oub  tbustins  others  mat  take.  The  Jewish  nation 
leaned  on  the  help  of  another  nation  in  her  extremity.  We,  in  our  individual  life  and 
experience,  are  in  danger  of  some  form  of  sacerdotalism ;  we  pin  our  faith  to  some  sect- 
leader,  some  scientific  teacher,  some  admired  stjitesman,  some  popular  preacher,  some 
assertive  priest.  Thousands  of  people  find  individual  responsibility  in  religion  too 
heavy  a  burden  for  them  to  bear,  and  do  not  grasp  the  truth  that  God  is  with  them  in 
the  bearing,  and  that  it  is  their  dignity  to  stand  under  the  yoke  only  with  God. 
Sacerdotalism  is  just  the  "  man-trust "  which  prophets  denounce.  In  puUic  life  and 
association  the  tendency  is  to  lean  on,  and  worship  material  strength.  We  seek  the 
help  of  riches  for  the  carrying  out  of  all  our  religious  schemes.  We  fly  to  men  rather 
than  to  God. 

III.  HiSTOBT  AND  EXPERIENCE  ALIKE  PROVE  THE  PRACTICAL  FOLLT,  AS  WELL  AS 
the   ingratitude   and  KBBBLLI0USNB8S,  OP  THUS  FORSAKING   GoD.      Our    truSts   prOVe 

like  Egypt,  only  shebheth,  inactive,  do-nothings  (see  tm.  7).    Egypt  promised  much^ 
but  CtUed  utterly  in  the  day  of  trial. — B.  T, 

V«r.  16. — Qm^nest  and  confidence.  These  terms  are  related.  Quietness  is  the 
resuH  of  confidence.  Confidence  is  the  secret  of  quietness.  The  quietness  thought  of 
by  the  prophet  was  the  abandonment  of  the  disquieting  and  distracting  search  for 
earthly  aids,  as  in  the  case  of  seeking  help  from  Egypt;  the  confidence  he  commends  is 
Uiat  patient  waiting  on  Qod  and  waiting  for  Ood,  which  are  the  necessary  expressions 
of  our  fiuth  in  him. 


CH.  XXX.  1—33.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  607 

L  A  OBEAT  ATTAiNMEKT.  So  great,  80  nearly  impossible  for  men  while  on  the 
earth,  that,  despairingly,  men  have  thought  of  it  as  only  reached  in  the  grave  whither 
man  hastens.  Byron  says,  "  I  found  in  the  Certosa  Cemetery  such  a  beautiful  inscrip- 
tion ;  in  Italian  the  words  are  absolute  music  :  '  Luigi  Martini  implora  eterna  quietc' 
On  the  restless,  tossing,  changing  earth  who  can  be  quiet?"  "The  word  is  like  an 
angry  sea.  The  vessel  of  our  life  is  rooked  and  dashed  hither  and  thither,  as  blast  after 
blast  assails  it,  and  wave  after  wave  comes  rolling  on.  Tliink  what  that  power  must 
be  which  comes  into  a  iumau  life  in  such  a  condition  as  this,  and  gives  '  quietness ' — 
a  quietness  so  deep  that  none  can  make  trouble."  Quietness  never  comes  by  the 
smoothing  of  circumstances.  They  never  are  smoothed  for  more  than  a  very  "  little 
while."  And  fears  of  the  clouds  that  are  gathering  disturb  even  the  "  little  while." 
Quietness  only  comes  by  soul-mastery  over  circumstances.  Hearts  must  win  peace, 
and  then  only  can  they  make  peace. 

II.  The  means  by  which  quietness  mat  be  keached.  Through  confidence; 
heart -coufideDce — heart-confidence  in  God.  "We  must  keep  our  spirits  calm  and 
sedate  by  a  continual  dependence  upon  God  and  his  power  and  his  goodness;  we  must 
letire  into  ourselves  with  a  holy  quietness,  suppressing  all  turbulent  and  tumultuous 
passions,  and  keeping  the  peace  in  our  own  minds.  And  we  must  rely  upon  God  with  a 
holy  confidence  that  he  can  do  what  he  will,  and  will  do  what  is  best  for  his  people. 
And  this  will  be  our  strength ;  it  wiU  inspire  us  with  such  a  holy  fortitude  as  will  carry 
us  with  ease  and  courage  through  all  the  difficulties  we  may  meet  with"  (Matthew 
Henry).  In  this  matter  the  principle  holds  that  our  own  endeavour  must  go  along  with 
God's  bestowments.  "Work  out  your  own  salvation,  .  .  .  for  it  is  God  that  worketh  in 
you."  Some  of  us  make  no  effort  to  get  outside  the  whirl  of  life.  How  can  we  expect 
God  to  give  us  quietness  ? 

III.  The  ekcoubagembnt  to  the  use  op  such  means.  Found  in  God's  gracious 
ways  of  giving  his  people  heart-peace,  and  then  peace  in  circumstances,  when  they  have 
fully  trusted  in  him. — E.  T. 

Ver.  16. —  The  peril  of  the  mil/id.  "We  will  ride  upon  the  swift;  therefore  shall 
fney  that  pursue  you  be  swift."  We  will — there  is  man's  sin.  That  is  not  a  fit 
position  for  dependent  man  ever  to  take.  "  They  that  taill  be  rich  fall  into  temptation 
and  a  snare."  "  Go  to  now,  ye  that  say.  To-day  or  to-morrow  we  will  go  into  such  a 
city,  and  continue  there  a  year,  and  buy  and  sell,  and  get  gain. . . .  For  that  ye  ought  to 
say,  if  the  Lord  will,  we  shall  live,  and  do  this,  or  that."  From  some  points  of  view 
these  strong-willed  men  may  be  regarded  as  the  noble-men  of  earth.  They  have  a 
purpose  in  life,  which  holds  in  and  guides,  as  with  bit  and  bridle,  all  the  forces  of  their 
being.  They  are  the  great  men  in  our  mills  and  warehouses;  the  foremost  as  states- 
men, and  in  carrying  out  great  social  and  national  enterprises.  They  seem  to  have  a 
power  of  control  over  all  the  circumstances  surrounding  them,  and  a  power  of  recoil 
from  the  greatest  disappointments  and  disasters.  Yet  this  disposition  lays  men  open 
to  peculiar  dangers.  Strong  will  is  liable  to  become  self-will — to  refuse  the  ordinance 
of  God  ;  to  refuse  the  help  of  God  ;  to  refuse  to  wait  for  God.  It  stands  up  in  fancied 
luajesty  and  says,  "  I  will."  "  Whatever  God  may  say  or  do,  I  will.  I  will  be  rich,  I 
will  be  successful,  I  will  be  great."  When  a  man  in  such  a  spirit  says,  "  I  will,"  he  is  on 
the  very  pit-edge,  and  on  the  pit-edge  blindfolded. 

L  WilfijIjNess  is  eebelliouskbss.  Because  man  is  God's  servant,  pledged  to  carry 
out  his  Master's  will,  and  not  his  own  will.  Man  is  God's  child,  and  in  duty  bound 
to  fulfil  his  Father's  commands.     Disobedience  is  rebellion. 

II.  Wilfulness  is  weakness.  Because  man  is  entirely  dependent  on  the  God 
whose  will  he  refuses,  for  the  means  of  accomplishing  what  he  determines  to  do.  His 
wUfultiess  is  as  weak  as  a  child's  who  has  no  money,  no  power,  but  depends  entirely 
on  his  parents. 

III.  Wilfulness  is  foolishness.  For  It  is  a  setting  of  ourselves  against  the 
Almighty  God,  as  if  he  would  allow  us  to  shift  and  rearrange  his  plans.  Man's 
wilfulness  may  make  a  noise,  and  bring  him  into  trouble ;  but  it  is  only  a  child's  attempt 
to  hold  back  the  flowing  of  the  great  river  of  God.  A  little  time  of  vain  trying,  and 
then  the  child  is  swept  away  by  the  flood,  which  still  rolls  on. 

IV.  Wilfx7IKE88  is  febil.    It  will  be  a  marvel,  almost  •  miracle,  if  such  a  man  do 


508  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET   iSAlAH.       [oh.  xxx.  1—33. 


not  "fall  into  temptation  and  a  snare,  and  into  many  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts,  which 
drown  men  in  destruction  and  perdition." — E.  T. 

Ver.  20. — Advenity  as  Divine  bread.  "  The  bread  of  adversity,  and  the  water  of 
affliction."  We  can  only  think  of  God  by  the  help  of  our  associations  with  tnan.  Tliere- 
fore,  in  the  revelation  which  he  has  given  iia  in  a  book,  God  is  spoken  of  as  if  he  liad 
the  form  of  a  man  (anthropomorphism),  and  as  if  he  had  ihe/eelings  of  a  man  (anthro- 
popathism).  We,  indeed,  know  no  other  moral  beings  beside  man,  and  probably 'our 
senses  would  allow  of  the  apprehension  of  no  other.  We  are  not  allowed  to  create 
material  images  representing  Goii,  but  we  are  allowed  to  think  of  God  through  the  figures 
iif  the  hiunan  being.  Answeiing  to  tliis  is  the  truth  that  we  can  only  know  our  soul 
through  our  body ;  we  have  to  think  of  it  as  a  kind  of  spiritual  body.  So  it  needs  care, 
clothing,  food,  etc.,  eveu  as  the  body.  This  is  the  line  on  which  it  can  best  be  shown 
that  adversity  is  Divine  bread  for  the  soul,  which  must  be  nourished  by  appropriate 
food.    Working  out  this  thought,  two  points  may  be  more  especially  treated. 

L  Bbead  is  the  btaflb  rooD  fob  thb  body.  It  is  in  itself  sufficient  to  sustain 
life ;  it  contains  all  the  necessary  elements  for  the  renewal  of  vitality.  So  is  adversity 
the  staple  food  for  the  soul;  for  it  contains  all  the  necessary  elements  for  the  renewal 
of  cliaracter.  Since  we  are  sinners,  wayuard,  and  wilful,  the  prosperities  of  life  are  but 
like  luxuries;  and  adversity  is  our  staple  food,  which  nourishes  humility,  penitence, 
godly  fear,  and  trust.  The  expression  is  used  of  King  Manasseh,  the  wilful,  who,  in 
prison,  was  fed  with  the  bread  and  water  of  affliction,  and  thereby  nourished  unto 
penitence,  forsaking  of  sin,  and  hearty  return  to  the  God  of  his  fathers.  -If  we  pray, 
"  Feed  me  with  food  convenient  for  me,"  we  must  clearly  see  that  the  answer  may 
include  "  adversity  and  affliction." 

II.    BbEAD  18   A   GENERAL   TERM   EHBKAOIKO   ALL   KECESSAEY   FOOD.      And  UCCeSSary 

food  for  the  body  includes  some  things  that  are  unpleasant  to  the  taste.  Sometimes 
even  medicine  is  bread — the  very  best  of  bread  for  us  under  the  circumstances.  And 
so  our  soul-conditions  and  our  soul-culture  may  make  necessary  things  that  are  very 
trying  to  feeling.  "  No  affliction  for  the  present  seemeth  joyous,  but  grievous ;  never- 
theless, afterward  it  yieldeth  (he  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  unto  them  who  ar« 
exercised  thereby." — E.  T. 

Ver.  21. — Sins  of  will  and  sins  of  frailty.  "When  ye  turn  to  the  right  hand,  and 
when  ye  turn  to  the  left."  This  is  an  evident  recognition  of  the  infirmities  and  wander- 
ings of  those  who  do,  of  set  purpose  of  heart,  mean  to  serve  God.  The  verse  is  a  gracious 
assurance  that,  in  such  times  of  frailty,  God's  people  shall  have  due  warning  and  cor- 
rection. We  may  take  as  types  of  the  two  kinds  of  sin — sins  of  will  and  sins  of  frailty 
—the  two  persons  who  were  present  to  the  mind  of  Christ  when  he  spoke  as  in  John 
xii.  10;  and  these  two  persons  will  illustrate  the  classes  who  were  in  the  mind  of  Isaiah 
when  he  gave  the  warning  of  the  text — the  boldly  wilful  who  persisted  in  the  policy  of 
seeking  aid  from  Egypt,  and  the  frail  ones  whose  faith  faltered  under  the  pressure  of 
the  anxiety  of  the  times  and  the  delay  of  the  Divine  intervention.  They  were  swayed 
to  this  side  or  to  that,  but,  nevertheless,  tried  hard  to  keep  steadily,  right  oa. 

L  Judas,  type  op  those  who  are  heaet-wrong,  insincere,  ruled  by  cohsideba- 
TI0N8  OF  self-interest.  There  are  no  minute  details  given  of  the  process  of  Judas's 
apostasy.  There  was,  indeed,  nothing  unusual  about  it.  The  covetous  spirit  made  him 
connect  himself  with  Christ  chiefly  for  personal  ends.  The  essential  thing  in  any  one 
who  unites  with  Christ  is  surrender  of  seZ/'and  sdf-wHl,  and  this  surrender  Judas  never 
made.  The  point,  however,  to  be  specially  dwelt  on  here  is  that  his  great  sin  was  a 
matter  of  will,  plan,  resolve,  determination.  He  did  not  drift  into  it ;  he  was  not 
enticed  into  it;  he  was  not  taken  at  unawares:  he  schemed  it;  he  willed  it;  the  guilt 
of  it  fully  rested  on  him.  Whenever  men  sin  with  their  wills  and  openly,  they  must 
come  under  the  crushings  of  Divme  judgment.  Sins  of  will  are  rebellions  that  must 
be  mastered.  The  distinction  between  sins  of  will  and  sins  of  frailty  may  be  further 
shown  in  King  Saul  and  King  David. 

n.  Pbtbb,  type  of  the  binoebb  but  faulty  and  fkail.  Compare  David.  Peter 
was  hasty,  impulsive,  uncertain,  sometimes  even  weak.  "  The  spirit  was  willing  but 
the  flesh  was  weak."    He  swayed  now  to  this  side,  and  now  to  that,  and  needed' jus* 


OH.  XXX.  1—33.]    THE   BOOK  OP   THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  50£ 

such  warnings  as  are  provided  in  the  ahove  text.  The  Apostle  John  urges  ou  those 
who  are  sincere  Chilstians,  that  if  they  "  say  they  have  no  sin,  they  deceive  themselves, 
and  the  trutii  is  not  in  them."  And  these,  which  at  first  are  "goings  aside,"  "fr»ilties," 
will  soon  grow  tq  become  "  wilfulnesses,"  if  they  are  not  checked  and  corrected.  There- 
fore may  we  rejoice  in  God,  and  assure  our  hearts  in  his  promise  that  the  voice  shall 
call  us  hack  when  our  feet  incline  to  wander  to  the  right  or  the  left, — R.  T. 

Ver.  29. —  The  joy-smg  of  the  delivered.  Reference  is  to  the  deliverance  of  Hezekinb 
and  Judah  from  the  yoke  of  the  Assyrians  and  the  fear  of  their  overwhelming  attack. 
Illustrating  the  pleasure  Eastern  people  feel  in  "  night-songs,"  Roberts  says,  "  Music  U 
considered  far  more  enchanting  at  night  than  at  any  other  period ;  it  gives  cheerfulness 
in  darkness,  and  pleasure  to  the  heflrt."  Nothing  is  more  common  than  for  adults  to 
sing  themselves  to  sleep ;  thus,  as  they  recline,  they  beat  a  tabret  and  chant  the  praises 
of  their  gods  till,  through  heaviness,  they  can  scarcely  articulate  a  word.  In  passing 
through  a  village  or  town  at  midnight  may  be  heard  people  at  their  nightly  song,  t« 
grace  the  festive  scene,  to  beguile  away  their  time,  to  charm  their  fears,  or  to  procure 
refreshing  sleep." 

I.  God  oiyeb  bongs  in  the  niqht  of  oue  fkabb.  A  striking  illustration  is  foutiil 
in  the  times  of  Jehoshaphat  (2  Ohron.  xx,).  A  time  of  exceeding  peril  and  fear  came 
through  an  invasion  of  Moabites  and  Ammonites;  the  matter  was  committed  to  God 
in  prayer;  deliverance  was  assured,  and  we  read  that  the  singers  went  out  before  the 
army,  to  praise  the  beauty  of  holiness,  and  say,  "  Praise  the  Lord,  for  his  mercy 
endureth  for  ever."  They  were  to  sing  their  songs  of  trust  while  yet  the  deliverance 
tarried.  Singing  songs  when  we  are  well  out  of  fears  is  easy  work ;  singing  songs  even 
while  struggling  with  our  fears  is  the  beautiful  triumph  of  faith. 

IL  God  gives  bongs  in  the  night  of  weeping.  Weeping  represents  troubles  being 
borne,  not  troubles  only  feared.  Smiles  can  break  through  tears.  God  gives  heart-rest 
that  can  give  forth  a  song,  even  to  the  sons  and  daughters  of  pain  and  grief. 

III.  God  orvEs  bongb  nf  the  night  op  wkart  filobimagb.  For  oftentimes  "wait- 
ing work,"  and  the  work  of  keeping  steadily  on,  is  very  trying  and  hard.  Many  a  man 
knows  the  painful  depression  of  "  patient  continuance  in  well-doing."  This  is  typified 
in  the  long,  dreary  journey  of  Israelites  from  distant  imrts  of  the  country  to  the  feasts 
at  Jerusalem.  Weary  work,  indeed,  in  those  slow-travelling  days.  It  is  said  th;it 
each  band  of  pilgrims  on  its  way  to  Jerusalem  was  headed  by  a  person  who  played 
the  flute.  Nothing  cheers  a  journey  like  a  song.  See  the  power  of  music  on  a  soldier's 
march.    Than 

•*  Sing  on  your  heavenward  way, 
Te  ransomed  sinners,  sing." 

IV.  God  orvMl  songs  in  the  night  of  death.  Songs  in  the  soul,  when  lips  ari' 
sealed  in  weakness.  How  often  those  who  watch  beside  dying  saints  see  the  lips 
moving,  and  catch  faint  sounds  of  the  old  trustful  hymns  learned  in  childhood  ! 
Familiar  texts  and  well-lovid  hymns  are  the  wings  that  hear  many  a  soul  through 
the  long  dark  valley  into  the  holy  realms  of  light  and  love  and  song. — R.  T. 

Ver.  33. — 2%«  mission  of  Tophet.  "  Fire,  being  the  most  destructive  of  all'  the  element? , 
is  chosen  by  the  sacred  writers  to  symbolize  the  agency  by  which  God  punishes  or 
destroys  the  wicked.  We  are  not  to  assume  from  prophetical  figures  that  material  fire 
is  the  ]irecise  agent  to  be  used.  It  was  not  the  agency  employed  in  the  destruction  ot 
Sennacherib,  who  is  the  leing  mentioned  in  the  text.  He  was  killed  by  his  two  souk, 
whilst  worshipping  in  the  house  of  Nisroch  his  god  (ch.  xxxvii.  38).  Tophet  proper! ,\ 
begins  just  where  the  Valley  of  Hinnom  bends  round  to  the  east,  having  the  cliffs  (W 
Zion  on  the  north,  the  Hill  of  Evil  Counsel  on  the  south.  It  terminates  at  Beer  'Aynli, 
where  it  joins  the  Valley  of  Jehoshaphat.  The  cliffs  on  the  south  side  especially  aboun  i 
in  ancient  tombs.  Here  the  dead  carcases  of  beasts,  and  every  offal  and  abominati'ii. 
were  cast,  and  left  to  be  either  devoured  by  that  worm  that  never  died,  or  consumed  li. 
that  fire  that  was  never  quenched.  Hinnom  was  condemned  to  this  infamous  ser^  icr. 
perhaps,  because  in  it,  when  Israel  fell  into  idolatry,  they  offered  their  children  in  saci  i 
fice  to  Baal."  Tophet  came  to  represent  the  place  of  punishment,  especially  that  kii.c 
of  punishment  which  is  destructive  rather  than  remedial. 


BIO 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.      [ch.  xxxi.  1— 9 


I.  DivnrB  PUNISHMENTS  OF  THE  INDIVIDUAL  ABE  BEKEOIAL.  We  are  not  able  to  fit 
together  the  fatherly  relation  and  the  hopeless  destructioil  of  any  of  his  sons.  Much 
of  our  difficulty  in  dealing  with  the  conditions  of  the  future  life  arises  from  our  failing 
to  distinguish  between  the  individual  and  the  corporate  life  of  men.  Nations,  sects, 
classes,  families  even,  can  he  destroyed.  Their  corporate  life  may  once  for  all  cease. 
God's  judgments  may  reach  them  in  this  form  for  the  sake  of,  and  for  the  due  impres- 
sion of,  the  individual.  We  understand  the  destruction  of  an  army  or  of  a  city,  but 
not  the  destruction  of  a  man. 

II.  Divine  punishments  of  the  nation  ob  the  class  mat  be  destructive. 
Tophet  here  is  the  figure  for  the  destruction  of  the  army  of  Sennacherib,  and  of  him  as 
king,  not  as  man.  Tophet  tells  of  material  destructions,  and  such  only  can  concern 
man  in  human  and  earthly  relations.  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  may  be  burned  up  in  the 
fires  of  God,  destroyed  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth ;  hut  we  know  nothing  of  the 
standing  of  individual  Sodomites  before  God.  The  Canaanite  race  was  to  he  swept  from 
the  earth,  but  we  are  sure  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  do  right  by  each  Canaanite. 
God's  temporal  destructions  for  corporate  sins  are  part  of  the  world's  education,  but  are 
no  basis  for  belief  in  any  everlasting  material  punishments  for  individuals. — B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTBK  XXXI. 


Vers.  1 — 3. — A  Further  Warning  aoainst 
sEEKiNa  THE  Alliance  of  Egypt.  This 
prophecy  seems  to  he  quite  independent 
of  the  lust  (oh.  XXX.  1 — 1).  It  may  have 
beeu  given  earlier  or  later.  The  chief  point 
brought  out,  which  had  not  distinctly  ap- 
peared previously,  is  the  value  set  on  the 
horses  and  chariots  of  Egypt  in  the  conflict 
with  Assyria  (oomp.  2  Kings  xviii.  24). 

Ver.  1. — Woe  to  them  that  go  down  to 
Egypt  for  help  (comp.  ch.  xxx.  1,  2;  and 
see  also  the  earlier  prophecy,  ch.  xx.  2 — 6). 
Tlie  examples  of  Samaria,  Gaza,  and  Ashdod 
might  well  have  taught  tlie  lesson  of  dis- 
trust of  Egypt,  without  any  Divine  warnings 
(see  G.  Smith's  '  Eponym  Canon,'  pp.  125 — 
131).  But  the  Jews  were  infatuated,  and 
relied  on  Egypt  despite  her  previous  failures 
to  give  effective  aid.  And  stay  on  horses. 
The  Assyrian  cavalry  was  very  numerous, 
and  very  efficient.  It  is  often  represented 
on  the  monuments.  Egyptian  cavalry,  on 
the  other  hand,  ia  not  represented  at  all ; 
and  it  may  he  questioned  whether,  in  the 
early  times,  the  Egyptian  war-horses  were 
not  entirely  employed  in  the  chariot-service 
(see  'Pulpit  Commentary'  on  Exodus,  p. 
321).  The  later  dynasties  of  Egyptian 
king!,  however,  employed  cavalry,  as  appears 
from  8  Chron.  xii.  3;  Herod.,  ii.  162,-  'Be- 
oords  of  the  Past,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  68,  70,  72,  etc. 
And  trust  in  chariots,  because  they  are 
many.  The  large  number  of  the  chariots 
maintained  by  tlie  Pharaohs  is  abundantly 
evidenced.  Diodorus  assigns  to  Sesostris 
twenty-seven  thousand  (i.  54,  §  4).  This 
is,  no  doubt,  an  exaggeration ;  but  the  six 


hundred  of  the  Pharaoh  of  the  Exodns  (Exod. 
xiv.  7),  and  even  the  one  thousand  two 
hundred  of  Shishak(2  Chron. xii.  3)  are  mode- 
rate computations,  quite  in  accord  with  the 
monuments,  and  with  all  that  we  otherwise 
know  of  Egyptian  warfare.  Egypt  exported 
chariots  to  the  neighbouring  countries 
(1  Kings  X.  29),  and  was  at  this  time  the 
only  power  which  seemed  capable  of  furnish- 
ing such  a  chariot-force  as  could  hope  to 
contend  on  tolerably  even  terms  with  the 
force  of  Assyria.  They  look  not  unto  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel  (comp.  ch.  xxx.  11,  12). 
The  trust  in  the  Egyptian  alliance  was 
accompanied  by  a  distrust  of  Jehovah  and 
his  power,  and  a  disinclination  to  look  to 
him  for  aid. 

Ver.  2. — ^Yet  he  also  is  wise.  Intense 
irony.  "  Wisdom  is  not  wholly  confined 
to  the  human  counsellors  whose  advice 
Judah  follows  (ch.  xxix.  14).  He  (Jehovah) 
is  '  wise '  too,  and  could  give  prudent  counsel 
if  his  advice  were  asked."  As  he  is  not 
consulted,  he  will  bring  evU  upon  Ida 
people,  and  wUl  not  call  hack,  or  retract, 
his  words  of  threatening,  but  will  give  them 
accomplishment,  by  rising  up  against  the 
house  of  the  e^-doers  (i.e.  the  Jews),  and 
their  help  (».e.  the  Egyptians). 

Ver.  3. — ^Now  the  Egyptians  are  men,  and 
not  Ood.  Judah  relied  on  Pharaoh,  as  on 
a  sort  of  God,  which  indeed  he  was  con- 
sidered in  his  own  country  ('Eecords  of  the 
Past,'  vol.  vi.  p.  145,  1.  320;  p.  148,  1.  418, 
etc.).  Isaiah  asserts  the  contrary  in  the 
strongest  way  :  the  Egyptians,  one  and  all, 
are  men — mere  men ;  and  "  there  is  no  help 
in  them"  (Ps.  oxlvi.  3).  Their  horses  fleah, 
and  not  spirit.  The  horses,  on  which  so 
much  reliance  was  placed,  were  mere  animals, 
subject  to  all  the  weakness  of  the  anima] 


OH.  XXXI.  1—9.]      THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


511 


nature,  not  epirit-hor««i,  with  a  life  and 
vigour  of  tlieir  ovra,  by  which  they  could 
be  a  real  tower  of  strength  to  those  on 
whose  side  they  -ranged  themselves.  They 
all  shall  fail  together ;  i.e.  the  helpers  and 
the  helped  (compare  the  oonclading  olausei 
of  ver.  2). 
Vers.  4 — 9. — ^A  Pbomisb  of  Peoteotion, 

AND     OF     THE    DiSCOMFlTCRB    01'     ASSTBIA. 

In  the  promise  of  protection  (vers.  4,  5) 
there  is  nothing  new  but  the  imagery, 
which  is  of  remarkable  beauty.  The 
promise  is  followed  by  a  brief  exliortation 
(vera.  6,  7) ;  and  then  the  discomfiture  of 
Assyria  is  declared  in  the  plainest  terms, 
and  her  flight  before  the  avenging  sword  of 
God  (vers.  8,  9). 

Ver.  4. — like  as  the  lion,  etc.  The  re- 
semblance of  this  simile  to  Horn., '  Iliad,'  xviii. 
11.  161, 162,  has  been  often  noticed.  In  both, 
the  liou  has  seized  his  prey,  and  is  crouch- 
ing over  it;  the  shepherds  gather  them- 
selves togfther  against  him,  and  seek  to 
scare  him  away;  but  he  remains  firm, 
umlauuted  by  their  threats  and  cries,  never 
for  a  moment  relinquishing  the  body  of 
which  he  has  made  himself  the  master. 
The  image  is  best  explained  as  representing 
Jehovah,  standing  over  and  keeping  guard 
on  Jerusalem,  which  he  will  allow  no  one 
to  rend  from  him.  And  the  young  lion; 
rather,  even  the  young  lion  (Lowth).  A 
single  animal  must  be  intended.  Roaring 
on  his  prey ;  rather,  growleth  over  Ms  prey. 
So  shall  the  Lord  of  hosts  oome  down  to  fight 
for  Mount  Zion;  rather,  lo  ehall  the  Lord 
of  hosts  descend,  to  fight,  on  Mount  Zion. 
If  we  connect  tlie  concluding  words  of  the 
clause  with  tsabd,  to  fight,  the  meaning 
must  be  "  fight  against,"  as  Delitzsch  shows 
conclusively.  But  we  may  connect  them 
with  the  more  distant  .yered,  will  descend, 
in  which  case  they  will  mean  "on,"  or 
"  upon  iVIount  Zion  "  (oomp.  Exod.  xix.  18  ; 
Pd.  cxxxiii.  3).  The  best  commentators  are 
of  opinion  that  this  must  be  the  sense.  The 
words  are  a  promise,  not  a  threat. 

Ver.  5. — As  birds  flying ;  rather,  as  birds 
hoveriTig,  or  fluttering,  over  their  young,  to 
protect  them.  A  second  simile,  expressive 
of  tenderness,  as  the  foimer  one  was  of 
power  and  strength.  Defending  also,  etc. 
Translate,  defending  and  delivering,  passing 
over  and  preserving.  In  the  word  "  passing 
over  "  there  seems  to  be  a  reference  to  the 


institution  of  the  Passover,  when  tke  angel, 
sometimes  identified  with  Jehovah  himselt 
"passed  over"  and  spared  the  Israelites. 

Ver.  6. — Turn  ye  unto  him.  Then,  at 
any  rate,  if  not  before,  turn  to  him  who 
will  have  delivered  you  from  so  great  a 
peril,  "  Turn  to  him,  O  children  of  Israel, 
from  whom  men  have  so  deeply  revolted." 
The  third  person  is  used  instead  of  the 
second,  out  of  tenderness,  not  to  hurt  their 
feelings  by  mingling  with  promise  an  open 
rebuke. 

Ver  7. — For  in  that  day  every  man  shall 
oast  away  his  idols.  "  In  that  day  "^-the 
day  of  Assyria's  discomfiture  —  shall  the 
vanity  of  idols  be  seen  and  recognized. 
They  have  not  helped  Assyria.  How  should 
they  help  Judah  (comp.  ch.  xxx.  22)? 

Ver.  8. — Then  shall  the  Assyrian  fall  with 
the  sword,  not  of  a  mighty  man;  rather, 
and  Assyria  shall  fall  by  the  sword  of  one 
who  is  not  a  man.  Assyria's  destruction 
will  not  be  by  tlje  visible  swords  of  hum.in 
enemies,  but  by  the  invisible  sword  of  God 
(comp.  2  Kings  xix.  35).  And  the  sword, 
not  of  a  mean  man,  shall  devour  him ;  rather, 
and  the  sword  of  one  who  is  not  a  mortal  shall 
devour  him— an  instance  of  "synonymous 
parallelism."  He  shall  flee ;  more  literally, 
betake  himself  to  flight.  His  young  men 
shall  be  discomfited ;  rather,  as  in  the 
margin,  shall  be  for  tribute.  They  shall 
become  the  vassals  of  a  foreign  power. 

Ver.  9. — ^And  he  shall  pass  over  to  hia 
strong  hold  for  fear ;  rather,  and  his  Booh 
shall  pass  away  for  fear  (marginal  render- 
ing). It  is  generally  agreed  by  recent 
commentators  (Kay,  Delitzsch,  Cheyne), 
that  the  rook  intended,  which  is  contrasted 
with  the  "princes"  of  the  next  clause,  is 
Assyria's  king  (see  the  contrast  of  the  king, 
who  is  "a  great  roah,"  and  his  princes,  in 
ch.  xxxii.  1,  2).  (On  the  hurried  flight  of 
Sennacherib  to  Nineveh,  see  below,  ch. 
xxxvii.  37.)  His  princes  shall  be  afraid  of 
the  ensign.  The  word  nes,  ensign,  seems 
to  be  here  used  collectively.  The  Assyrian 
princes  would  tremble  at  every  signal  that 
tliey  saw  displayed  along  their  line  of  route, 
expecting  some  enemy  to  fall  upon  them. 
His  furnace.  Jehovah  was  at  once  a  Light 
to  his  people,  and  "  a  consuming  Fire  " 
(Heb.  xii.  29)  to  his  enemies.  His  presence, 
indicated  by  the  Shechinah  in  the  holy  of 
holies,  was  et  once  for  blessing  and  for 
burning. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  2,  3. — ThefoUy  of  trusting  in  an  arm  of  flesh.  "  Put  not  your  trust  in  princes, 
nor  in  any  child  of  man,"  says  the  psalmist  (Ps.  cxlvi.  3) ;  "  for  there  is  no  help  in 
them."    All  human  props  are  uncertain — 


612  TUB  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.       [oh.  xxxi,  1— 9. 

I.  Because  of  humah  ohangefulnebs.  Men  do  not  continue  always  of  one  mind. 
They  make  promises,  and  regret  tliat  they  have  made  them,  and  find  some  way  of 
escaping  their  force,  or  else  boldly  break  them  with  a  cynical  disregard  to  what  others 
may  think  or  say.  Their  interests  change,  or  the  views  that  they  take  of  them ;  and 
the  wise  policy  of  to-day  seems  foolishness,  or  even  madness,  to-morrow.  Some  men 
are  actuated  by  niere  caprice,  and  have  no  sooner  effected  a  desired  purpose  than  jt 
loses  favour  in  their  eyes,  and  seems  to  them  of  little  worth.  'I'hey  'vnll  make  heavy 
sacrifices  to  obtain  an  alliance,  and  none  to  maintain  it.  They  sigh  always  for  some- 
thing that  they  have  not,  and  despise  what  they  have.  Human  protection  is  always 
uncertain,  owing  to  the  fickleness  of  man,  who  is  naturally  "double-minded,"  and 
"  unstable  in  all  his  ways  "  ( Jas.  i.  8), 

If.  Because  of  possible  insufficiency.  The  human  protector  may,  with  the  best 
intentions  in  the  world,  prove  insufficient,  Syria  and  Ammon  summoned  Assyria  to 
their  aid  when  they  contended  with  David  (2  Sam.  x.  6,  16  ;  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  8) ;  but  the 
result  was  the  entire  defeat  of  the  confederate  army.  Hannibal  called  on  Macedonia  to 
assist  him  against  the  Romans ;  but  Macedonia  proved  too  weak,  and  her  efforts  resulted 
in  her  own  subjection.  There  must,  in  almost  every  case,  be  the  risk  that  the  pro- 
tector, though  doing  all  he  can,  may  faU,  and  our  having  called  him  in  exasperate,  or 
even  infuriate,  our  adversary. 

III,  Beoaubb  of  human  gkeed  and  selfibhkess.  The  protector  may  become,  is 
only  too  apt  to  become,  the  oppressor  and  the  conqueror.  Rome's  vast  empire  was 
built  up  largely  by  taking  states  imder  her  protection,  and  then  absorbing  them.  Had 
Kgypt  succeeded  in  defeating  Assyria,  and  rolling  back  the  tide  of  invasion  that  had 
so  long  been  rising  higher  and  higher,  and  threatening  her  own  independence  and  that 
of  her  neighbours,  the  result  would  simply  have  been  that  Judasa  and  Samaria  would 
liavo  been  absorbed  into  Egypt,  or  at  any  rate  hsve  become  Egyptian  dependencies. 
The  small  state  that  calls  in  one  powerful  kingdom  to  help  her  in  her  struggle  against 
snother  rarely  gains  anything  more  than  an  exchange  of  masters. 

IV.  Because  the  greatest  human  stgbnoth  is  foweeless  aoaixst  God.  The 
Egyptians  were  "men,  and  not  Grod;  and  their  horses  flesh,  and  not  spirit"  (ver.  3). 
Hi\d  all  the  chariots  of  Egypt  come  forth,  and  all  their  footmen  and  all  their  horsemen, 
tlioy  would  not  have  saved  Judah,  since  God  had  declared  that  here  there  was  "no  work 
fur  Bgyjjt "  (ch.  xix.  15),  and  that  Judah,  if  she  trusted  in  Egypt,  "  should  be  ashamed 
of  Etiiiopia  their  expectation,  and  of  Egypt  their  glory  "  (ch.  xx.  5).  God  can  strike  an 
army  with  blindness,  as  he  did  that  of  Benhadad  (2  Kings  vi.  18)  on  one  occasion;  or 
with  panic  fear,  as  he  did  that  of  the  same  monarch  on  another  (2  Kings  vii.  6) ;  or  he 
can  cause  quarrel  to  break  out  among  the  constituent  parts  of  an  army,  and  make  the 
soldiers  slay  one  another  (2  Chron.  xx.  23) ;  or  he  can  send  out  a  destroying  angel,  and 
kill  a  hundred  and  eighty  thousand  men  in  a  night  (2  Kings  xix.  35).  Again,  the  God 
of  battles  determines  the  issue  of  battles.  "  It  is  nothing  to  him  to  help,  whether  with 
many  or  with  them  that  have  no  power  "  (2  Chron.  xiv.  11).  He  can  cast  down  and 
bring  to  nought  the  mightiest  human  protector ;  he  can  save,  if  he  wills  to  save,  by 
his  own  angelic  army,  without  the  intervention  of  any  human  aid  at  all. 

Ver.  9. —  The  rock  of  Assyria  and  the  Bock  of  Israel.  In  each  case  the  "  rock*'  was 
(1)  the  refuge,  stronghold,  and  main-  reliance  of  the  people ;  (2)  a  person,  not  an  inac- 
cessible height  or  a  fortress ;  (3)  the  recognized  monarch  and  master  of  the  nation. 
But  in  all  other  respects  the  contrast  between  the  two  was  extreme,  the  difference 
immeasurable. 

I.  Assybia's  bock — Sennacherib.  A  man,  a  wealc,  fallible,  ephemeral  man — the 
creature  of  an  hour — mortal,  soon  wearied,  needing  rest  and  sleep,  liable  to  sickness, 
daily  losing  sticngth,  approaching  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  grave.  And  not  only 
a  man,  but  a  wicked  man — proud,  cruel,  contemptuous  of  his  foes,  blasphemous 
towards  God,  meiciless,  pitiless  1  What  a  poor  object  on  which  to  place  reliance,  trust, 
dependence !  No  doubt  to  the  Assyrians  he  seemed  a  grand  figure,  seated  on  his 
throne  of  carved  cedar  and  ivory,  receiving  tribute  from  kings  and  princes,  and  sur- 
rounded by  his  army  of  perhaps  two  hundred  thousand  men.  But  of  what  avail  was 
his  granrleur?  He  could  not  save  a  single  soldier  out  of  the  two  hundred  thousand 
from  an  ache  or  a  pain,  if  God  sent  them — no,  nor  from  death  itself,  if  their  lives  were 


OH.  XXXI.  1—9.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  513 

required  by  the  Most  High,  To-night  Sennacherib  lies  down  to  rest,  confident  of 
victory,  his  camp  guarded  on  every  side  by  nigh  a  qiiarterof  a  million  of  strong  warriors. 
To-morrow  he  is  woke  up  by  a  sound  of  universal  wailing.  More  than  a  hundred  and 
eighty  thousand  of  his  soldiers  are  dead  in  their  tents.  His  chances  of  victory  are  clean 
gone ;  and  in  half  an  hour  he  is  an  alarmed  and  trembling  fugitive. 

II.  Israel's  Book — Jehovah.  God,  and  not  man — the  Strong  One,  everlasting,  he 
that  "  inhalHteth  eternity "  (oh.  Ivii.  15),  that  is  never  wearied,  that  needs  not  to 
slumber  or  sleep,  that  knows  no  sickness,  that  never  loses  strength,  that  has  "  neither 
beginning  of  days  nor  end  of  life  "  (Heb.  vii.  3).  And  One  who  to  all  this  might  adds 
tenderness,  and  the  deepest  love  of  his  own,  and  the  gentlest  care  of  them.  A  Bock,  but 
not  hard  or  rugged — a  Refuge  from  all  foes,  a  Shadow  from  the  heat,  a  Befreshment  to 
the  weary,  a  Help  to  those  in  need.  God  is  able  to  save  all  men,  not  only  from  death, 
bnt  from  all  suffering  or  unhappiness.  There  is  no  foe  that  can  daunt  him,  none  from 
whom  he  will  have  to  flee.  And  he  is  willing  to  save  all.  Only  let  them  "return  to 
him  "  (ver.  6),  "  cry  to  him  "  (cli.  xxx.  19),  trust  in  him,  wait  on  him.  He  is  indeed 
a  "  great  Rock  "  (ch.  xxxii.  2),  a  "  strong  Bock  "  (Ps.  xxxL  2),  even  "  the  Bock  of  our 
salvation  '  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  26). 

HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  3.— 2%e  help  of  Egypt.  A  party  in  Judah  is  negotiating  with  Egypt ;  and  the 
prophet  points  out  the  falseness  of  this  policy. 

I.  It  is  a  reliance  oton  bkute  fokoe.  "  Horses  "  are  symbolic  of  martial  strength. 
And  Judah,  being  peculiarly  deficient  in  cavalry,  was  "tempted  to  trust  in  Egypt  for 
chariots  and  horsemen "  (ch.  xxxvi.  8,  9).'  Famed  in  Homer  was  Egyptian  Thebes, 
with  the  hundred  gates,  and  the  two  hundred  men  who  issued  forth  from  each  with 
horses  and  chariots  ('  Iliad,'  ix.  382).  The  memory  of  the  pursuit  of  the  Israelites  at  the 
time  of  the  Exodus  contained  the  picture  of  those  chariots  and  horsemen  (Bxod.  xiv.  6,  9). 
They  were  in  request  in  Solomon's  time  (1  Kings  xix.  26).  Egyptian  cavalry,  the  veiy 
nerve  and  sinew  of  war ;  Egypt  who  possesses  them,  the  most  coveted  ally.  "  Oa 
horses  will  we  fly, ,  .  .  on  the  swift  will  we  rMe,"  was  the  word  of  the  party.  Such  was 
their  "  creaturely  confidence."  These  horses  were  but "  flesh,"  and  "  all  flesh  is  as  grass," 
and  withers  when  the  breath  of  the  Eternal  blows  upon  it.  The  strength  of  the  creature 
is  but  the  strength  of  the  dependent  nature;  folly,  then,  to  lean  on  that  which  is  itself 
a  leaning  thing. 

II.  It  IS  A  BEiiiANCB  UPON  MAN,  AND  NOT  UPON  GoD.  Here  man,  as  usual  in  the 
Hebrew  prophets,  is  sharply  opposed  to  God;  the  dependent,  the  frail,  the  mortal,  to 
the  Self-dependent,  the  Strong,  the  Immortal  and  Eternal ;  the  tool  to  the  hand  that  holds 
it,  the  might  that  alone  can  render  it  effective.  The  axe,  the  saw,  the  staff:  they  are 
dead  and  helpless  things,  until  they  are  brought  into  connection  with  spiritual  force. 
So  horses  and  chariots  can  avail  naught,  unless  they  be  the  instruments  of  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  the  engines  of  a  spiritual  and  enduring  policy  in  the  earth.  Man  himself, 
wi^out  tools  and  weapons,  is  the  most  defenceless  of  animals ;  with  them,  yet  still 
without  God,  he  is  in  no  better  plight. 

m.  It  is  typical  or  iereligiousnbss  in  qenebal.  The  folly  is  not  so  much  in 
looking  to  material  resources  and  defences  as  in  "  not  looking  to  the  Holy  One  of  Israel " 
— in  "  not  consulting  Jehovah."  All  worldlinoss  is  negative,  and  there  lies  its  weakness. 
It  is  a  strategy  of  Ufe  which  defeats  itself;  moving  far  from  the  true  base  of  operations, 
and  finding  itself  presently  cut  off,  without  the  chance  of  return.  Again,  it  is  a  departure 
from  the  Source  of  true  wisdom.  The  "  wisdom  of  the  wise,  and  the  understanding 
of  the  understanding  ones  " — this  is  policy,  prudence.  In  Jehovah  is  a  higher  wisdom 
than  that  of  Jewish  politicians;  his  is  wisdom  united  with  perfect  rectitude.  And 
without  reverence  for  him,  the  "  fear  of  Jehovah,"  m«n  do  not  partake  of  this  higher 
wisdom. 

IV.  The  end  of  Eoyptian  help.  In  the  first  place,  the  hoUowness  of  the  Jewish 
policy  will  be  exposed.  The  word  of  Jehovah  has  gone  forth,  and  will  not  come  back 
to  him  void.  Per  it  is  itself  spiritual /orce,  truth,  mightier  than  any  material  force  that 
Is  kaown.    Put  into  the  mouth  of  a  prophet  (Jer.  i.  9),  those  words  become  mighty  as 

UAIAB.  '  2  Ik 


B.14  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHBT  ISAIAH,      [oh- xxxi.  1— 9, 

fire,  to  devour  all  that  stays  their  course  as  wood  (Jer.  v.  14).  "  All  that  the  Lord 
speaketh  must  he  done  "  (Numb,  xxiii.  26).  The  wall  of  a  worldly  wisdom  will  bulge 
and  suddenly  fall,  and  the  "  wisdom  of  the  wise  ones"  be  brought  to  naught.  The 
words  of  the  Eternal  are  backed  up  by  the  baud  of  the  Eternal ;  and,  when  stretched 
out,  the  "  helper "  who  has  been  so  much  looked  up  to  will  ba  seen  to  totter,  and  the 
"  helped  "  one  be  buried  beneath  the  ruini.— J. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — SimiU»  of  the  nature  and  power  of  Jehovah.  I.  The  lion.  He  is 
pictured  watching  over  the  holy  city,  the  "  peculiar  treasure,"  the  invisible  Sanctuary 
of  the  religion  and  the  people,  as  a  lion  over  its  prey,  in  the  presence  of  threatening 
shepherds. 

*  As  from  a  carcase  herdsmen  strive  in  vain 
To  scare  a  tawny  lion,  hunger-pinoh'd  ; 
Ev'n  80  th'  Ajaces,  mail-olad  warriors,  fail'd 
The  son  of  Priam  from  the  corse  to  scare." 

('niad,'xTiU.  161.) 

It  l8  a  fine  image — found  twice  in  Homer — of  the  undaunted  prowess  of  the  bold  and 
steadfast  warrior.  Invincible  towards  his  foes,  what  is  Jehovah  towards  his  friends,  the 
people  of  his  choice  and  love  ? 

II.  The  bird.  Infinite  tenderness  mingles  with  irresistible  might  in  the  nature  of 
God.  It  is  no  narrow  view  of  the  Divine  attributes  whiih  the  Bible  gives.  All  that  we 
see  of  nobility  in  living  creatures,  all  traits  of  courage  and  of  love,  may  be  borrowed  to 
enrich  our  representations  of  that  nature  which  includes  all  other  nature  within  its 
scope  and  grasp.  Thus  the  magnificent  queen  of  birds,  no  less  than  the  magnificent 
king  of  beasts,  supplies  in  its  actions  and  habits  a  parable  of  eternal  providence.  The 
eagle  fluttering  over  her  young,  spreading  her  wide  wings  and  bearing  them  thereon, 
was  a  type  of  Jehovah's  conduct  to  his  people  in  the  desert  (Deut.  xxxii.  10).  So  does 
he  now  hover  over  the  city,  protecting,  rescuing.  Nor  was  it  otherwise  in  the  days  of 
the  Saviour,  who  employs  also  the  simile  of  the  maternal  bird.  Every  ideal  of  Uon- 
lieaited  hero,  of  father,  strong  yet  tender,  of  all-brooding  mother,  of  living  creatures 
inspired  by  mysterious  and  mighty  instincts  of  love,  helps  to  bring  into  momentary 
clearness  some  I'eatiire  of  the  nature  of  him  whose  being  is  only  "  dark  from  excess  of 
light."  His  voice,  pleading  with  youth  and  innocence,  with  the  unsophisticated  con- 
science, says,  "Come  1  "  and  with  the  sinner  and  the  sophist,  "  Return!  " — J, 

Vers.  7 — ^9. — The  fire  of  Jehovah.  I.  "  Our  God  is  a  consuming  Fikb."  He  bums 
&om  that  sacred  oracular  centre  in  Jerusalem.  And  his  foes  are  seen  melting  away 
before  him — the  Assyrian  fleeing  from  and  falling  before  the  sword,  the  huge  rock  of 
his  power  disappearing,  princes  falling:  into  panic  terror  as  the  rallying  signal  of  Judah 
is  raised.  The  briars  and  thorns  of  iniquity,  all  the  weed-like  growth  of  worldly  ways 
are  kindled  and  devoured. 

II.  Our  God  is  a  Light  of  salvation.  "  Light  of  Israel "  goes  along  with  "  devour- 
ing fire "  (oh.  X.  17).  To  be  enlightened  is  to  know  God  and  our  relation  to  him. 
It  is  to  know  what  is  not  Divine,  and  what  is  sinful,  and  what  is  worthless  in  refer- 
ence to  salvation.  And  so  the  people,  having  "  returned,"  will  be  seen  respecting 
their  "not-gods  of  silver  and  their  not-gods  of  gold,"  the  sinful  manufacture  of 
godless  art. 

III.  There  must  bk  both  the  fiery  and  the  illuminatino  element  in  true 
EBLIGION.  Enthusiasm  is  needed ;  without  it  we  have  no  motive  force.  Evil  will  yield 
to  nothing  else  than  to  the  heart  aflame  with  piety,  the  tongue  of  Heaven-kindled  fire. 
Yet  blind  zeal  is  mischievous ;  and  therefore  the  illuminated  mind  is  needed,  the  dis- 
criminating intelligence.  The  union  of  intellect  with  piety,  the  white  heai  of  zeal 
kindling  all  it  touches  into  light-giving  flame, — ^what  can  resirt  it  ? — J. 

Ver.  1. — Wrong  source*  of  help.  "Woe  to  them  that  go  down  to  Egypt  for  help." 
Egypt  is  used  in  Scripture  as  a  symbol  of  all  foreign  worldly  powers.  It  represented 
carnal  force — "  trusting  in  chariots,  horses,  and  horsemen,  because  they  are  very  strong." 
"  Looking,"  as  the  same  verse  says,  "  to  them,"  and  not  looking  unto  the  Beij  One  of 

IsraeL 


OH.  XXXI.  1—9.]      THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  618 

I.  Woe,  beoausb  God  has  said  it.  He  is  wise,  and  knows  tlie  end  from  the 
beginning.  We  are  dazzled  with  fche  show  of  power.  The  neighing  of  the  war-horse 
and  the  glitter  of  the  golden  chariot  and  the  flashing  steel  of  the  warriors,  all  look  like 
strength.  But  Crod  says  to  Israel,  "  This  is  not  yov/r  strength.  This  m»y  succeed  for 
a  time,  but  it  is  an  empire  held  by  the  throat,  not  by  the  lieart." 

II.  Woe,  because  we  have  seen  it.  The  facts  of  history  are  on  our  side.  When 
Israel  was  pure  and  pious  she  prospered.  Deliverance  from  Egypt  was  wrought  out 
in  the  face  of  superior  force ;  and  an  undisciplined  band  of  slaves  were  too  mighty 
for  the  cohorts  of  Pharaoh.  So  have  we  seen  in  history  ever  since.  In  the  end  it  is 
"  righteousness  that  exalteth  a  nation ; "  but  shame,  reproach,  and  defeat  come  to  those 
who  forsake  God.  Woe !  Yes ;  the  fires  of  Loudon  had  to  burn  out  its  profligacies. 
The  plague  followed  its  debaucheriei. 

III.  Woe,  bbcattse  Divine  laws  abb  ikuutable.  It  is  not  only  taid  and  seen, 
it  is  sure.  For  to  find  true  help  in  Egypt  would  be  like  reversing  the  law  of  gravita- 
tion, or  making  the  stars  change  their  courses,  or  water  forsake  its  leyel.  "  GcS  is  noi 
a  man,  that  he  should  lie,  neither  the  son  of  man  that  he  should  repent." 

There  are  many  Egypts — force,  fashion,  fraud;  these  have  empire  at  times;  but 
woe  to  those  who,  forsaking  the  simplicities  and  spiritualities  of  the  gospel,  seek  "  help  " 
therefroml— W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  arm  »f  flesh.  How  important  is  this  subject  we  may  gather  from 
the  fact  that  the  prophet  is  inspired  to  return  to  it,  and  to  reiterate  his  condemnation 
(see  ch.  xxx.  1).  The  disposition  to  lean  on  the  arm  of  flesh  instead  of  trusting  in  the 
li\  ing  God  is  not  Jewish,  but  human  ;  not  peculiar  to  any  age  or  dispensation,  but  is 
an  abiding  spiritual  peril.     We  learn  here — 

I.  The  fallacy  which  it  involves.  1.  The  Jews  were  trusting  in  numlers. 
Looking  to  the  horses  and  chariots  of  Egypt,  "  because  they  were  many  "  (ver.  1).  We 
are  apt  to  be  imposed  upon  by  numbers,  to  think  there  is  safety  and  even  salvation  in 
them,  to  indulge  the  notion  that,  because  we  are  among  a  great  crowd  or  are  supported 
by  a  very  large  majority,  we  are  all  on  the  side  of  truth  and  victory.  Yet  nothing  is 
more  uncertain  ;  often  the  vast  hosts  have  been  overthrown  in  conflict  by  the  devoted 
and  determined  few ;  often  the  small  section, "  every  where  spoken  against "  and  despised, 
has  been  proved  to  be  in  the  right  and  has  ultimately  prevailed;  If  God  be  on  one  side 
and  the  mightiest  multitude  on  the  other,  we  may  be  sure  that  the  fact  that "  the 
chariots  and  horses  are  many  "  will  be  of  no  account  at  all.  Divine  providence  is  not 
by  any  means  necessarily  or  constantly  "  on  the  side  of  the  strongest  battalions." 
2.  They  trusted  in  apparent  human  strength.  "  In  horsemen,  because  they  are  very 
strong."  Many  regiments  of  cavalry  have  a  very  imposing  aspect  to  the  eye  which 
looks  upon  and  judges  by  the  surface  of  things;  they  seem  invincible,  overwhelming,  an 
invaluable  ally  when  the  enemy  is  approaching.  And  not  only  the  well-equipped 
cavalry  in  time  of  war ;  but,  in  time  of  peace  and  in  the  ordinary  life  of  men,  the 
sagacious  couusellor,  the  wealthy  merchant,  the  influential  statesman  or  courtier,  the 
eloquent  and  admired  speaker  or  pleader, — these  men  seem  to  have  in  them  a  source  of 
strength  on  which  we  may  build,  or  to  which  in  the  time  of  peril  we  may  repair.  But 
"  the  Egyptians  were  men,  and  not  God,"  etc.  (ver.  3) ;  their  promised  word  might  be 
broken,  their  overtures  might  turn  out  to  be  selfishly  made  and  to  be  unscrupvdously 
withdrawn ;  their  cavalry  might  be  ridden  down  by  troops  still  stronger  than  they. 
Being  but  men  and  but  horses,  they  might  prove — as  they  would  prove — nothing  better 
than  a  bi  oki-n  reed,  which  would  pierce  the  hand  that  leaned  on  it  (ch.  xxxvi.  6).  And 
the  human  strength  on  which  we  are  all  so  inclined  to  lean  will  very  likely  prove  to  be 
nothing  more  or  better.  How  often  the  sagacity  of  the  prudent,  the  riches  of  the 
wealthy,  the  influence  of  the  great,  the  eloquence  of  the  orator,  fail  us  at  our  hour  of 
need,  and  we  "  go  down  to  our  house  "  bitterly  disappointed,  w  perhaps  stricken,  stripped, 
ruined  I    "  The  arm  of  flesh  will  fail  you." 

II.  The  feuit  which  belongs  to  it.  "God  will  not  call  back  his  words'*  of 
condemnation  (ver.  2 ;  see  ch.  xxx.  1 — 13).  He  is  grieved  and  offended  that  his  word 
has  been  disobeyed,  and  himself  distrusted  and  deserted.    (See  homily  in  he.) 

III.  The  penalty  which  will  follow  it.    God  will  arise  against  both  those  that 
and  those  that  offer  help ;  at  the  stretching  out  of  his  hand  they  will  both  fall 


616  'nm  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.      [ch.  xxxi.  1— 9, 


together  (vers.  2,  3).  They  who,  distrusting  God,  pat  their  trust  in  man  will  fall 
under  God's  high  displeasure,  and,  according  to  their  circumstances  and  the  character  oi 
their  error,  will  fall  into  discomfiture,  into  disrepute,  into  disappointment,  into  shame. 
IV.  The  resource  which  it  overlooks.  All  the  while  that  Judah  was  leaning  on 
"  that  broken  veed,  Egypt,"  it  had  at  hand  a  sure  Support,  an  almighty  Deliverer,  One  that 
would  be  as  a  lion  for  fearlessness  and  irresistible  strength,  One  that  would  be  as  a  mother- 
binl  for  swiftness  and  tenderness  (vers.  4,  5),  to  whom  it  might  have  looked,  and  by 
whom  it  would  have  been  graciously  received  and  effectually  succoured.  By  our  side, 
in  our  time  of  trouble  and  of  peril,  is  an  almighty  Friend,  whose  delivering  hand  no 
army  can  resist,  who  wiU  come  at  the  right  time  to  reduem  us,  who  will  treat  us  with 
more  than  parental  tenderness  and  care.  Shall  we  not  go  unto  him,  and  say, "  My  soul 
trnsteth  in  thee,  yea,  in  the  shadow  of  thy  wings  will  I  mak^  my  refuge,  until  these 
calamities  be  overpast "  (Ps.  Ivii.  1)  ? — 0. 

Ver.  2. — Divine  reservation  and  consistency.  "  Yet  he  . . .  will  bring  evil,  and  will 
not  call  back  his  words."  Doubtless  God  seems  to  call  back  his  words.  "  The  Lord 
repented  of  the  evil  which  he  thought  to  do  "  (E.'coJ.  xxxii.  14 ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  16 ;  Judg. 
ii.  18,  etc.).  "  He  beard  their  cry  . .  .  and  repeuteii,  according  to  the  multitude  of  his 
mercies  "  (Ps.  cv.  44,  45).  Yet,  says  the  prophet, "  he  will  bring  evil  and  not  call  back 
his  words."  How  e.xplain  this?  The  explanation  of  it  is  found  in  the  fact  that  there  is 
some  necessary  reservation  understood,  if  not  expressed,  in  the  Divine  promise  and  in  the 
Divine  threatening. 

I.  Uis  RESERVATION  AND  CONSISTENCY  IN  PROMISE.  God  promises  life  to  theobedicnt 
and  the  faithful ;  yet  there  are  those  who  believe  themselves,  and  are  believed,  to  be 
among  this  number,  whose  end  is  destruction.  Has  God  called  back  his  word  ?  No  ; 
fur  his  promise  was  contingent  on  their  steadfastness,  and  they  have  forfeited  all  claim 
on  his  promised  word  (Josh.  xxiv.  20;  Ps.  Ixxxv.  8;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  13;  John  xv.  6; 
Hcb.  vi.  4—8). 

II.  His  reservation  and  consistbnct  in  threatenino.  Although  God  may  seem 
to  call  back  his  words  of  solemn  threatening,  yet  he  "  will  bring  evil ; "  he  is  not  incon- 
sistent with  himself.  1.  God  reveals  his  wrath  against  sin.  He  declares  that  it  shall 
not  go  unpunished ;  that  the  soul  that  sinneth  shall  die ;  that  the  wages  of  sin  is  death. 
2.  Ood  offers  pardon.  The  message  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  essentially  and  emphati- 
cally one  of  Divine  mercy.  3.  His  mercy  in  Christ  Jesus  is  large  and  free.  It  is  not 
grudging,  half-hearted.  It  is  not  like  the  forgiveness  we  extend  to  one  another 
(ch.  Iv.  7 — 9).  It  means  a  complete  restoration,  of  the  estranged  but  reconciled  child 
to  full  parental  favour  (Luke  xv.  22,  23).  Where,  then,  is  the  Divine  consistency  ?  It 
is  found  in  the  coDsideration  that :  4.  Uis  declaration  of  penalty  was  always  contingent 
on  the  attitude  of  the  sinner.  (Ezek.  xxxiiL  14,  15.)  It  is  not  intended  to  be  absolute 
and  unalterable,  whatever  be  the  future  career  of  the  guilty.  Like  all  his  promises, 
God's  warnings  are  conditional.  God  does  not  call  back  his  own  words  from  their 
meaning  or  their  fulfilment,  he  calls  us  back,  through  them,  to  our  duty  and  to  our  right 
relation  to  himself.  And,  besides :  5.  He  doeshring  evil  in  some  serious  measure.  Por:(l) 
Previous  to  our  penitence  sin  has  wrought  suflering,  sorrow,  weakness.  (2)  At  the  time 
of  penitential  return  it  works  self-reproach,  shame,  anxiety.  (3)  Reconciliation  is 
inevitably  followed  by  some  kind  and  tome  degree  of  spiritual  deterioration  ;  there  is  a 
lost  power,  a  lessened  influence,  a  narrowed  sphere — the  absolutely  irremovable  conse- 
quences of  repeated  wrong-doing  and  protracted  ill-being. — 0. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Deep  disloyalty.  The  children  of  Israel  had  "deeply  revolted"  from 
God  by  preferring  Egyptian  cavalry  to  the  defence  of  almighty  power.  This  preference 
of  the  human  and  the  niaterial  to  the  Divine  is  only  too  common  everywhere. 

I.  The  dislotal  attitude  op  mankind  towards  God.  Mankind  is  in  revolt 
against  the  Divine  rule.  We  have  all  said  in  our  hearts,  "  We  will  not  have  this  One 
to  reign  over  us."  1.  God  righteously  claims  our  allegiance — the  homage  of  our 
hearts,  the  subjection  of  our  will,  the  obedience  of  our  life.  2.  We  have  deliberately 
refused  it.  We  have  practically  disallowed  his  claim ;  we  have  retained  our  power  for 
our  own  enjoyment,  to  be  spent  according  to  our  own  tastes  and  choices.  Amid 
various  forma  of  iniquity  there  is  one  which  is  common  to  the  race — we  have  all  with- 


cM.isii.i^9.j     Ttim  BOOK  OF  Ttn<:  PROPHET  ISaIAS.  61? 

held  from  the  Divine  Father  of  our  spirits  the  willing  and  practical  allegiance  for 
which  he  has  looked. 

II,  Human  disloyalty  in  rre  depth.  There  are  many  degrees  of  rebelliousness. 
Only  he  who  searches  the  hearts  and  knows  the  real  nature  of  righteousness  and  iniquity 
can  accurately  measure  them,  but  we  can  form  an  approximate  idea.  Men  may  be 
deeply  disloyal  by  going  far  in  the  direction  of  (1)  npen  and  flagrant  transgression — the 
commission  of  baneful  vices  or  cruel  and  devastating  crimes ;  (2)  distinct  and  formal 
denial  of  God's  existence — the  avowal  and  advocacy  of  blank  atheism ;  (3)  the  public 
denial  of  the  Divine  claims — the  representation  of  the  cardinal  error  that  God  is  indif- 
ferent to  the  character  of  his  human  children,  and  does  not  ask  for  their  worship  or 
service ;  (4)  deliberate  and  persistent  disregard  of  his  will  as  revealed  in  his  Word — the 
turning  a  deaf  ear  to  his  inviting  voice. 

IIL  The  Ditotb  summons  to  eeturn.  "  Turn  ye  unto  him."  1.  God's  message 
through  inspired  men.  At  sundry  times  God  spake  by  the  prophets.  Then  and  thus 
he  spoke  in  very  clear  and  in  very  gracious  tones;  he  said  emphatically  and  repeatedly, 
"  Return  unto  me  "  (see  text ;  ch.  i.  16 — 18 ;  Iv.  6—9 ;  Jer.  iii.  12 — 16  ;  Ezek.  xviii. 
30 — 32;  Hos.  xiv.  1,  2,  etc.).  2.  God's  invitation  through  his  Son,  our  Savionr. 
(1)  That  the  disloyal  hearts  of  men  should  return  to  their  allegiance  and  become  the 
holy  and  rejoicing  citizens  of  his  heavenly  kingdom  was  the  very  end  for  which  Jesus 
came.  (2)  To  accomplish  this  he  lived,  wrought,  spoke,  suffered,  died.  (3)  This  is 
the  spirit  and  the  scope  of  the  message  he  has  left  behind  him,  and  of  the  work  in 
which  he  is  now  engt^ed.  (4)  The  way  of  return  tlirough  Christ  is  the  heart's  accept- 
ance of  him  as  its  Divine  Lord  and  Redeemer.  The  voice  which  comes  from  the  Man 
of  sorrows,  from  the  ascended  Lord,  is  "  Come  xmto  me ; "  "  Believe  in  me ; "  "  Abide 
in  me," 

IV.  The  spiBiruAL  consequence  of  betubn.  "  In  that  day  every  man  shall  cast 
away  his  idols."  Return  to  the  service  of  Jehovah  and  to  a  sincere  trust  in  him  cer- 
tainly meant  the  utter  abandonment  of  idolatry.  Our  restoration  to  the  favour  and 
friendship  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ  must  also  mean  the  putting  away  of  every  form  of 
idolatry;  e.g.  (1)  the  worship  of  pleasure  or  indulgence  in  any  unholy  or  injurious 
gratification ;  (2)  covetousness,  "  which  is  idolatry  "  (Col.  iii.  5) ;  (3)  the  worship  of 
mammon,  or  absorption  in  the  struggles  and  ambitions  of  this  earthly  life  (Matt.  vi.  24). 
(4)  Such  a  devotion  to  any  human  object  of  love  as  leaves  no  room,  or  no  sufficient 
room,  for  attention  to  the  highest  duties  and  the  most  sacred  claims.  It  may  be 
that  not  once  nor  twice,  but  again  and  again,  the  Christian  man  may  find  himself 
called  on  to  "  cast  away  his  IdolB,"  to  put  them  out  of  his  heart,  and  therefore  out  of 
his  life. — 0. 

Vers.  8,  9. — Fleeing  away.  Here  is  a  prophetic  vision  of  flight,  which  may  suggest 
other  kinds  and  instances  of  "fleeing  away."  Sennacherib  comes  up  vain-gloriously 
against  Jerusalem,  confidently  reckoning  on  complete  success,  thinking  to  swallow  up 
Judah  as  a  pleasant  morse! ;  and,  behold  I  he  is  loimd  hurrying  homewards  as  one  that 
is  pursued  by  overtaking  legions,  not  staying  at  lii-<  first  fortification,  but,  in  his  terror 
and  humiliation,  "  passing  on  beyond  his  stronghold  "  for  fear,  his  princes  "  frightened 
away  by  the  flags  "  of  the  enemy  that  was  to  have  been  so  easily  and  so  utterly  sub- 
dued.   Our  thoughts  may  he  directed  to — 

I.  The  vanquished  FLBEiNa  from  the  victokious.  The  annals  of  human  history, 
which  have  hitherto  been  principally  the  record  of  human  strife,  are  only  too  full  of 
heart-rending  illustrations  (see,  among  others,  Erckmann-Chatrian's  '  Waterloo  *). 

II.  Cbiue  fleeing  from  the  feet  of  justice.  Both  fact  and  fiction  will  supply 
abundant  illustrations  of  the  intolerable  wretchedness  of  those  who,  pursued  by  the 
officers  of  law,  are  dogged  by  apprehension  and  alarm  at  every  step  they  take.  "  Let 
no  man  talk  of  murderers  escaping  justice,  and  hint  that  Providence  must  sleep :  there 
were  twenty  score  of  violent  deaths  in  one  long  minute  of  that  agony  of  fear." 

III.  Wbono  fleeing  peom  revenge.  See  the  vivid  picture  of  Carker  fleeing  from 
Dombey  (Dickens)  :  "  Shanie,  disappointment,  and  discomfiture  gnawing  at  his  heart,  a 
constant  apprehension  of  being  overtaken:  the  same  intolerable  awe  and  dread  I  hat 
had  come  upon  him  in  the  night  returned  unweakened  in  the  day :  .  .  .  rolling  on  and 
on,  always  postponing  thought,  and  always  racked  with  thinking  .  .  .  preaiing  on 


518  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.      [oh.  xxxi.  1—9. 


.  .  .  dutnge  upon  change  .  .  .  long  roads  and  dread  of  night  .  .  .  and  still  the  M 
monotony  of  bells  and  wheels  and  horses'  feet,  and  no  rest." 

IV.  Gtjii,t  fleeing  7B0U  THE  FACE  OF  GoD.  Guilt  fleeing :  1.  Weakly  and,  vainly. 
Long  before  Jonah,  in  the  hour  of  self-reproach  that  followed  his  act  of  disobedience, 
"  fled  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,"  men  had  tried  to  put  a  distance  between  their  sin 
and  its  rightful  Judge.  And  long  since  then  have  they  tried  to  escape  his  eye  and  his 
hand.  Saddest  of  all  vain  euduavours  is  the  thrice-guilty  deed  of  the  suicide,  who  acts 
as  if,  by  entering  another  woild,  he  could  flee  from  the  face  of  the  Omnipresent  One.  2. 
But  there  is  a  sense  in  which  guilt  flies  away  from  the  face  of  God  really  and  most 
blessedly.  When  God's  conditions  of  penitence  and  faith  have  been  fulfilled,  then  is  our 
guilt  "  purged  away,"  our  transgressions  are  "  removed  from  us  as  far  as  the  east  is 
from  the  west,"  our  sins  are  "  hidden  from  his  face,"  they  are  "  cast  into  the  depths  of 
the  sea"  (Ps.  Ixv.  3;  oiii.  12;  li..9;  Micah  vii.  19).  Moreover,  we  look  forward  to 
the  time  when  there  shall  be  a  gloriooa  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  promises,  and  we 
shall  have — 

V.  Evil  DisAPPEABiNa  from  the  face  of  man  ;  when  "  sorrow  and  sighing  shall 
flee  away,"  when  "  death  and  hell  shall  be  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire,"  when  "  there  shall 
be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow  nor  crying  ...  for  the  former  things  are  passed 
away  "  (ch.  xxxv.  10 ;  Bev.  xx.  14 ;  xxi.  4).-— 0. 

Ver.  1. — Name*  for  Ood.  Here  the  Lord,  or  Jehovah,  is  called  the  "  Holy  One  of 
IsraeL"  When  the  mysterious  name  "  Jehovah  "  was  given,  another  name,  suited  for 
more  familiar  use,  was  commended,  even  this,  "  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob." 
Instructive  suggestions  come  from  placing  these  three  names  together,  as  representing 
(1)  God  absolute ;  (2)  God  in  relations ;  (3)  God  in  history. 

I.  "I  am"(Yehveh);  or,  God  absolute.  1.  This  name  in  truth  involves  the 
namdessness  of  God.  It  is  as  if  he  had  said  to  Moses,  "  You  ask  for  my  Name.  '  I  am,' 
and  that  is  all  that  you  can  say  about  me."  The  words  are  not,  properly  speaking,  a 
name ;  they  are  but  the  assertion  of  a  fact  about  God.  They  are  a  refusal  of  God  to 
put  all  his  great  glory  into  a  name.  A  name  is  the  brief  summing-up  of  a  definition, 
and  since  it  must  ever  be  an  imiiossible  thing  wholly  to  define  God,  he  cannot  permit 
any  name  to  be  used  which  shall  appear  to  assume  that  a  definition  has  been  found. 
2.  This  so-called  name  involves  the  v/nity  of  God.  It  is  as  if  he  had  said,  "  I  am,  and 
there  is  none  beside  me."  In  a  magnificent  conception,  the  prophet  represents  Jehovah 
as  rising  up  from  his  place,  scanning  the  whole  nuiverse,  from  the  infinite  east  to  the 
infinite  west,  and  then,  seating  himself  again  upon  his  eternal  throne,  saying,  "  There 
is  no  God  beside  me ;  I  know  no  other."  3.  This  so-called  name  involves  the  »df- 
existence  of  God.  It  is  as  if  he  had  said,  "  I  am,  and  no  one  made  me."  None  gave 
him  being.  On  no  one  has  he  to  depend.  He  has  life  in  himself.  He  is  the  very 
Fountain  of  Hfe.  And  thus  is  declared  the  perfect  and  eternal  distinction  between  God 
and  all  created  existence.  Nowhere  can  we  find  uncaused  being.  Everywhere  are 
effects  which  can  be  more  or  less  perfectly  traced  to  their  causes.  In  Jehovah  we  have 
effect  without  cause.  "  In  the  beginning  God."  "  From  everlasting  to  everlasting 
thou  art  God."  4.  This  so-called  name  involves  the  eternity  of  God.  It  is  as  if  he  had 
said,  "I  am,  and  shall  be  for  ever."  It  is  absolutely  impossible  for  us  to  conceive  of 
the  force  whiah  can  stop  his  existence.    There  is  no  death  that  can  touch  him. 

"  How  dread  are  thine  eternal  yean, 
O  ever-living  Lord  1 " 

This  impression  of  God  as  the  Unknowable,  Unseeable,  August,  and  Awful  One,  ovu- 
souls  greatly  need  in  these  light  and  frivolous  times.  God  is  revealed  to  the  soul  in 
awe.  A  horror  of  great  darkness  fell  on  Abraham,  and  under  it  he  saw  God.  Trem- 
bling agony  filled  the  soul  of  wrestling  Jacob,  and  in  the  awe  of  his  conflict  he  heard 
Qoi.  We  may  heed  the  voice  that  says,  "  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God.  I  will 
be  exalted  among  the  heathen ;  I  will  be  exalted  in  the  earth." 

II,  "God  of  Abraham,  Ibaao,  and  Jacob;"  or,  God  in  personal  relations 
WITH  US.  We  are  to  know  what  God,  is  by  observing  what  he  has  been  to  his  people, 
and  what  he  has  done  for  them.  By  calling  himself  thus  God  represents  himself  as  the 
Promise-maker  and  Promiae-keeper.    At  the  call  of  God  Abraham  had  broken  away 


<!H.  XXXI.  1—9.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  510 

from  hU  Chaldean  home,  tncl  wandered  forth,  a  sojourner  in  a  stiange  land ;  but  God 
was  faithful  to  his  word,  and  proved  towards  him  an  iinchangiiti  Friend.  Guilty  Jacob 
fled  from  home,  and  God  met  him,  revealing  himself  as  the  faithful  Watcher,  willing  to 
be  in  dose  and  gracious  personal  relations  with  him.  For  years,  while  in  service,  God 
bletsed  his  basket  and  his  store.  When  journeying  back  to  Canaan,  God  defended  him, 
subdued  the  enmity  of  E.sau,  and  gave  him  prosperity  and  honour.  Few  lives  aie 
offered  for  our  study  which  hear  such  manifest  traces  of  the  nearness  and  providence  of 
Gbd.  Pew  names  could  suggest  so  much  to  us  as  this  most  simple  one — the  God  of 
Jacob.  Still  God  is  what  he  has  ever  been — Defence  of  his  endangered  people ;  Wisdom 
for  his  perplexed  people ;  Support  of  his  enfeebled  people  ;  Corrector  of  his  mistaken 
people;  Saviour  of  his  sinning  people.  For  all  the  actual  needs  of  a  tried,  toiling, 
tempted  life,  we  may  come,  even  as  the  patriarchs  did,  into  close  personal  relations  with 
God,  for  "this  is  his  Name  for  ever,  and  this  is  his  memorial  to  all  generations."  Graves, 
in  his  work  on  the  Pentateuch,  says,  "  The  peculiar  and  incommunicable  character  of 
God  is  self-existence;  he  is  the  great  'I  Am.'  But  this  abstract  and  philosophical 
description  of  the  Supreme  Being  was  not  sufficiently  calculated  to  arrest  the  attention, 
conciliate  the  confidence,  and  command  the  obedience  of  a  people  entirely  unaccustomed 
to  scientific  speculations,  and  incapable  of  being  influenced  by  any  other  than  temporal 
motives;  it  was  therefore  necessary  to  represent  to  them  the  Governor  of  the  universe  in 
a  more  circumscribed  and  attractive  form,  as  the  God  of  the  fathers,  who  had  conferred 
the  most  distinguished  honours  on  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  to  whom  their 
Ijosterity  might — from  the  full  confidence  which  fact  and  experience  supply — ^look  up 
and  trust  as  their  peculiar  guardian  God." 

III.  "Holy  One  or  Israel;"  or,  God  in  history.  This  is  the  new  name  given  to 
Gild,  when  his  dealings  with  our  race  through  many  generations  could  be  reviewed,  and 
the  character  of  all  those  dealings  make  due  impression  of  the  character  of  God  himself. 
What  one  thing  comes  out  most  plainly  from  all  reviews  of  God  in  history  ?  The 
prophet  says,  in  reply,  his  holiness.  This  estimate  of  God  may  be  illustrated  on  the 
following  lines.  1.  The  Holy  One  of  Israel  has  ever  been  faithful  to  his  covenant. 
2.  The  Holy  One  of  Isniel  has  ever  required  the  holiness  of  a  simple  and  trustful 
obedience.  3.  The  Holy  One  of  Israel  has  ever  been  swift  to  mark  iniquity.  4.  The 
Holy  One  of  Israel  has  ever  been  redeeming  and  saving.  5.  The  Holy  One  of  Israel 
has  ever  been  jealous  of  his  supreme  claims.  "  His  glory  he  would  never  give  to 
another."  So  the  three  great  names  on  which  we  have  been  dwelling  (1)  touch  us  with 
reverence  and  awe ;  (2)  open  our  eyes  to  see  his  working  all  round  about  us ;  and  (3)  call 
upon  us  to  render  to  him  hearty  trust  and  lowly  service. — B.  T. 

Ver.  2. — T7te  wisdom  of  Ood  in  his  punishments.  "  Tet  he  also  is  wise."  These 
words  seem  to  have  been  spoken  as  an  ironical  parenthesis.  He  also,  as  well  as  the 
Jewish  politicians.  "  The  words  vindicate  to  Jehovah  the  skill  and  power  adequate  to 
inflict  punishment  on  both  the  contracting  parties,  together  with  veracity  in  carrying 
his  threatenings  into  execution."  "  God  was  as  wise  as  the  Egyptians,  and  ought 
therefore  to  have  been  consulted ;  he  was  as  wise  as  the  Jews,  and  could  therefore 
thwart  their  boasted  policy."  As  Isaiah  leads  us  to  consider  so  many  phases  of  the 
subject  of  Divine  punishment,  we  only  suggest  this  topic  as  giving  a  fresh  point  of 
view.  We  are  reminded  of  the  wisdom,  rather  than  the  mysteriousness,  severity,  or 
love,  of  the  Divine  judgments  and  chastisements.  In  sending  calamities  "  God  is  wise.'' 
Corering  the  whole  subject,  the  following  divisions  may  be  taken. 

L  God's  wisdom  is  seen  in  the  threatenings,  which  act  as  warnings,  and  inoreaie  the 
guiltineis  of  the  wilful. 

IT.  God's  wisdom  is  seen  in  making  his  threatenings  conditional,  so  that  repentance 
of,  and  forsaking,  sin  may  be  hopeful. 

III.  God's  wisdom  is  seen  in  fulfilling  threatenings,  so  that  no  wilful  men  may  dare 
to  presume. 

IV.  God's  wisdom  is  seen  in  what  he  does  for  sinners  themselves  by  his  judgments. 
Y.  God's  wisdom  is  seen  in  what  he  does  by  his  judgments  for  the  spiritual  training 

of  the  onlookers.    "  He  is  known  by  the  judgments  which  he  executeth." — R.  T. 

Ver.  A. — Ood  unhindered  by  fears  qf  man.    We  fear  and  tremble  before  boastful 


520  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAtAH.       [oh.  ixxi.  1— 9: 

words  and  a  great  show  of  force,  but  we  may  \\  ell  lemember  that  God  does  not.  Ha 
reckons  it  all  at  its  trutf  worth,  and  goes  on  with  his  Divine  working  quite  unmoTed  by 
all  the  rage.  The  figure  in  this  verse  needs  careful  explanation.  The  allusion  is  to  the 
boastings  and  threatenings  of  Sennacherib.  God  has  undertaken  to  defend  the  city  of 
Jerusalem.  As  the  lion  will  not  give  up  his  prey,  so  Jehovah  will  not  allow  the 
Assyrians  to  rob  him  of  hi*  "peculiar  treasure,"  Jerusalem.  The  vast  armies  of 
the  Assyrians  were  as  nothing  in  the  estimation  of  Jehovah.  He  viewed  unper 
turbed  their  attempt  to  seize  the  locality  which  he  had  chosen  as  his  special 
residence.  Matthew  Henry,  with  quaint  force,  says,  "  Whoever  appear  against  God, 
they  are  but  like  a  multitude  of  poor  simple  shepherds  shouting  at  a  lion,  who 
scorns  to  take  notice  of  them,  or  so  much  as  to  alter  his  pace  for  them."  Taking  an 
illustration  from  another  spliere  of  nature,  the  Divine  calmness  under  excitement 
that  alarms  men  may  be  illustrated  by  tlie  following  passage  from  Gosse:  "There  was 
a  heavy  swell  from  the  westward,  wliich,  coming  on  in  broadly  heaving  undulations, 
gave  the  idea  of  power  indeed,  but  of  power  in  repose,  as  when  a  lion  crouches  in  his 
lair  with  shcatl  ed  talons  and  smoothed  mane  and  half-closed  eyes.  But  no  sooner 
does  each  broad  swtll,  dark  and  polished,  come  into  contact  with  these  walls  and  towers 
of  solid  rock,  than  its  aspect  is  instantly  changed.  It  rears  ifself  in  fury,  dashes  with 
hoarse  roar,  and  apparently  resistless  might,  against  the  opposition,  breaks  in  a  cloud  of 
snowy  foam,  which  hides  the  rocky  eminence,  and  maUes  us  for  a  moment  think  the  sea 
has  conquered.  But  the  next,  the  baffled  assailant  is  recoiling  in  a  hundred  cascades, 
or  writhing  and  grovelling  in  swiils  around  the  feet  of  those  strong  pillars  which  still 
.stand  in  their  majesty,  unmoved,  immovable,  ready  to  receive  and  to  repel  the  succes- 
sive assaults  of  wave  after  wave  with  ever  the  same  result."  There  is  a  quality  or 
power  in  man,  which  we  call  in  a  good  sense  sang-froid — a  power  of  keeping  calm  in 
times  of  excitement,  which  we  are  accustomed  to  admire,  and  which  may  help  us  to 
realize  the  figure  of  God  given  in  this  passage.  A  remarkable  stoiy  is  told  in  connection 
with  Prince  Bismarck,  who  is  a  striking  example  of  persistent  keeping  on  at  his  designs, 
however  loud  may  be  the  bowlings  around  him.  It  is  said  that  lie  wears  an  iron  ring, 
on  which  is  inscribed  the  Russian  word  "  Nitschcwo,"  or  "  It  does  not  matter."  In  the 
winter  of  1862  he  was  hurriedly  journeying  in  Eussia,  and  in  answer  to  various  appeals 
to  his  driver,  he  could  get  nothing  from  him  save  this  one  word,  "  Nitschewo."  At  last 
the  sledge  was  upset,  and  taking  an  iron  bar  which  had  become  detached  from  the 
sledge,  Bismarck,  in  his  annoyance,  thought  of  striking  the  man,  but  feeling  he  had 
learned  a  life-lesson  from  the  frequent  repetition  of  this  word,  he  kept  the  bar,  and  had 
a  ring  made  of  it  to  remind  him,  in  the  worryful  times  of  life  that  "  it  does  not  matter." 
Consider — 

L  The  things  which  God  dobs  not  hbed.  They  go  under  this  heading — the 
boasts  of  the  proud.  Empty  words.  Noisy  deeds.  The  material  forces  which  lie  at 
the  command  of  men.  These  greatly  alarm  us.  Let  but  a  sound  of  threatening  rise 
into  the  air,  and  we  cry  in  our  fright,  "  The  Church  is  in  danger  I  "  God  is  not  disturbed. 
His  Church  is  safe  ;  the  "  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  her."  Let  but  the 
nations  unite  for  some  act  of  violence  towards  the  Lord's  Jerusalem,  and  in  fright  her 
statesmen  run  off  to  Egypt  for  help.  Jerusalem  is  in  no  real  danger — a  wall  of  Divine 
guardian  fire  is  all  round  about  her,  and  Gbd  will  defend  his  own. 

11.  The  tiiikgs  which  Gk)D  does  heed.  These  will  go  under  the  heading — the  cry 
of  the  humble.  He  who  is  best  heard  by  man  when  he  speaks  with  a  "  still,  small 
voice,"  best  hears  man  when  he  speaks  to  him  with  a  "  still,  snjall  voice."  Not  the 
thunder  of  men's  anger,  but  the  quiet  evening  breeze  of  men's  humble  prayer,  goes 
right  in  to  the  throne  of  God.  We  may  learn  from  this  figure  of  God's  patient  indiffer- 
ence to  what  seems  so  alarming,  how  we  may  rightly  estimate  opposing  forces  and 
persons  who  show  enmity  to  us.  Most  of  such  forces  and  persons  had  better  just  be 
passed  by,  loft  alone.  "Nitsclicwo"—"Itdoe8  not  matter."  We  all  of  us  make  too  much 
of  evil  things  and  noisy  oppositions.  We  magnify  them  until  they  fret  and  weary 
and  hinder  ua.     Would  that  we  were  more  like  God,  who —  , 

" Moves  on  his  undisturbed  afiairs "I  R.  T. 

Vet,  6. — Turning  to  God  in  giving  up  tin.    Connect  with  ver.  7.     Here  is  indicated 


OH.  ixtiL  1-20.]    THE  BOOK  OP  TllE  PROPHET  ISAIAH, 


621 


one  essential  characteristic  of  a  genuine  conversioa  or  reformation.  Two  kinds  ol 
"  turning  "  are  suggested. 

I.  TuBNiNO  TO  God  as  a.  voiceless  sentiment.  Merely  good  sentiments,  revi- 
valistic  emotions,  gushing  fervours,  temporary  excitements,  have  no  voice  that  can 
reach  to  Qod. 

II.  ToBNiNO  TO  GtoD  SFEAKINO  THKODGH  ACTS.  Putting  away  idols — God  can  heai 
that.  He  kaows  what  that  means.  Giving  up  sins — God  can  liear  that.  Cutting  off 
right  hands — God  can  hear  that.  Plucking  out  right  eyes — God  can  hear  that.  This 
is  the  voice  for  which  GtoA  asks,  and  to  which  he  so  graciously  responds.  "  Wash  you, 
make  you  clean  ;  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before  minu  eyes;  cease  to  do 
evil ;  learn  to  do  well  ;•  seek  judgment,  relieve  the  oppressed,  judge  the  fiiitherless, 
plead  for  the  widow."— R.  T. 

Ver.  8. — The  surprise  of  the  Lord's  deliverances.  No  inhabitant  of  Jerusalem  could 
have  imagiaed  how  Gud  intended  to  deliver  the  city  from  Sennacherib.  God's  way  is 
in  the  sea,  his  footsteps  are  not  known  ;  hut  he  leads  his  people  safely  like  a  flock.  The 
following  points  will  recall  familiar  illustrations. 

I.  God's  promised  dklivebances  always  do  comb.  "If  it  tarry,  wait  for  it;  it 
will  surely  come,  it  will  not  tarry."  "No  good  thing  has  failed  God's  people  of  all 
that  he  has  promised."  "  This  poor  man  cried,  and  the  Lord  heard,  and  saved  him  out 
of  all  his  troubles." 

II.  They  comb  when  we  do  not  expect  them.  And  therefore  we  are  constantly 
urged  to  keep  watchful  and  expectant.  Disraeli  truly  remarked  that  "  the  unexpected 
is  the  thing  that  happens." 

III.  They  comb  in  ways  that  seem  strange.  In  some  cases  not  seeming  at  all 
to  be  the  deliverances  which  they  really  are. 

IV.  ThB   SCRPKISE   they    being  is   usually  full  of   gratitude   Afn  JOY.     For    11 

most  cases  it  is  manifestly  better  than  our  thought.  Then  let  God  save  us  and  deliver 
us  just  in  his  own  way  and  time.  Enough  for  us  to  wait  earnestly  on  him  in  our 
prayer,  and  wait  patiently /or  him,  trustingly  sure  that  he  always  has  his  "  set  time  in 
which  to  favour  Zion." — R.  T, 


Bkotion  VnL    A  Peopheoy  of  Messiah's  Exmodom  (oh.  xxxn.  1 — 8). 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXn. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — A  Propheot  of  Messiah's 
Kingdom.  It  is  generally  allowed  that 
this  prophecy  is  Messianic ;  but  some  critics 
insist  that  it  is  not  so  "in  a  narrow  sense." 
They  regard  Isaiah  as  expecting  Messiah's 
kiugdom  to  follow  immediately  on  the  dis- 
comfiture of  Sennacherib,  and  as  looking  to 
HezeMah  to  inaugurate  it.  According  to 
this  view,  Hezekiah,  renovated  in  character, 
was  to  be  the  Mussiab,  and  might  have 
been  so  had  be  been  "  equal  to  the  demands 
providentially  made  upon  him."  But  he 
was  not;  and  the  task  of  establishing  the 
kingdom  fell  to  "  annttier,"  at  a  later  date. 
It  is  simpler  to  regard  the  prophet  as  look- 
ing for  a  greater  than  Hezekiali  (comp.  oh. 
vii.  14;  ix.  6),  but  ignorant  how  soon,  or 
how  late,  his  coming  would  bo 

Ver.  1. — A  king  -  .  .  princes.    Delitzsoh 


and  Mr.  Cheyne  translate,  "  the  king  .  .  . 
the  princes;  but  the  Hebrew  gives  no 
article.  The  announcement  is  vague,  and 
corresponds  to  those  of  other  prophets,  ai 
of  Jeremiah  (xxiii.  5),  "  Beholil,  the 
days  come  that  I  will  raise  unto  David  a 
righteous  Branch,  and  a  king  shall  reign 
and  prosper ; "  and  of  Zechariali  (ix.  9), 
"  Ilejnioe  greatly,  0  daughter  of  Zion  .  .  . 
bel.old,  thy  King  cometh  uuto  thee."  The 
"  princes  "  of  the  text  are  the  minor  authori- 
ties whom  the  king  would  set  over  his 
kingdom — i.e.  the  apostles  and  tlieir  suc- 
cessors. In  righteousness  ...  in  judg- 
ment. Messiah's  rule  will  be  a  rule  of 
strict  justice  and  right,  oifering  the  strongest 
contrast  to  that  under  which  the  Jews  have 
been  living  since  the  time  of  Jehoshaphat 
(see  oh.  i  15—23  ;  iii.  1—12,  etc.). 

Ver.  2. — ^A  man  shall  be  as  an  hiding- 
place  from  the  wind,  etc.  Modern  critics 
mostly  render,  "  each  man  "  —  i.e.  the 
king,  and  each  of  his  princes.  But  it  is, 
to  say  the  least,  allowable — with  Vitriuga 
I  and  Kay — ^to  regard  the  word  as  refei-ring 


522 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxn.  1— 20. 


to  tke  king  only  ^comp.  Zeoh.  vi.  12, 
where  ish,  a  man,  is  used  in  the  same 
vag^e  way  of  One  who  is  clearly  the 
Messiah).  There  was  never  but  one  man 
who  could  be  to  other  men  all  that  is 
predicated  in  this  verse  of  the  "  man  "  men- 
tioned (oomp.  oh.  xxT.  1,  where  nearly  the 
saae  epithets  are  predicated  of  God).  A 
oovert ;  i.e  a  proteotion  against  Divine  wrath. 
Such  is  Messiah  in  his  mediatorial  character. 
Bivers  of  water ;  i.e.  refreshing  and  invigo- 
rating (camp.  oh.  Iv.  1 ;  John  iv.  14 ;  vii. 
37).  !nie  shadow  of  a  great  rook.  At  once 
refreshing  and  protecting  (see  ch.  zxr.  4), 

Ver.  3. — ^Ihe  eyes  of  them  that  see  shall 
not  be  dim.  In  Messiah's  kingdom  there 
shall  be  no  judicial  blindness,  such  as  that 
threatened  in  cb.  vi.  9,  10,  and  described 
in  oh.  xxix.  10, 11 ;  but  men  shall  see  the 
truth  clearly  (oomp,  ch.  xxix.  18 ;  xxxv.  5 ; 
Matt,  xiii.  16,  etc,).  The  ears  ,  ,  ,  shall 
hearken ;  i.e.  "  shall  both  hear  and  under- 
iland"  (compare  "He  that  hath  ears  to 
hear,  let  him  bear  "). 

Ver,  4. — The  heart  also  of  the  rash ;  i.e.  of 
thoee  who  tmre  rash  and  hasty,  who  would 
not  giro  themselves  time  to  understand  the 
warnings  addressed  to  them,  or  to  think 
of  the  real  chargeter  of  their  actions.  These 
shall,  in  Messiah's  kingdom,  "  liaye  the  gift 
of  discernment  to  perceive  things  in  their 
true  nature"  (IXelitzsch).  The  tongue  of 
the  stammerers.  The  tongue  of  those  who 
hitherto  have  spoken  hesitatingly  and  in- 
consistently on  moral  and  religious  subjects 
shall  be  ready — i.e.  prompt  and  eager — to 
spe«k  upon  them  with  clearness  and  ele- 
gance. The  grace  given  to  the  uneducated 
fishermen  of  Galilee  enabled  them  to  preach 
and  teach  gospel  truth,  not  only  with  clear- 
ness, but  with  refinement, 

Ver,  5. — The  vile  person  shall  be  no  mora 
called  liberal;  rather,  the  foolish  perion 
— M  nctbal  is  commonly  translated  (Deut, 


xxiii.  6;  2  Sam.  iii.  33;  xiii.  18;  Pi,  xiv. 
1 ;  xxxix,  8 ;  Ixxiv,  22,  eto.) — snob  a  man 
as  the  "  Nabal  "  of  1  Sam,  xiv.  Men  are 
apt  to  confound  moral  distinctions,  and  to 
call  the  "  fools  "  who  waste  their  substance 
in  feasting  and  revelry  "generous"  oi 
"liberal,"  and  the  niggards  (ohnrls)  who 
hoard  their  riches  "  warm  men,"  "  wealthy 
men,"  "men  well  to  do  in  the  world"  (see 
ch,  V,  20;  and  comp,  Arist.,  *Etb.  Nic.,'  ii. 
8,  §  3 ;  Thuoyd.,  iii.  82).  This  perversion 
of  trutli  shall  not  obtain  in  Messiah's 
kingdom.  Botmtifol ;  rather,  wealthy  (comp. 
Job  xxxiv.  19,  where  the  same  word  is  trans- 
lated "  rich  "). 

Ver.  6, — ^For  the  vile  person  will  apeak 
villany,  etc. ;  rather,  for  the  fool  tpealeeth 
folly,  and  hit  heart  doeth  wickedneas,  practis- 
ing profanity  and  uttering  error  against 
Jehovah,  making  empty  ilie  soul  of  tlie  hungry 
— yea,  the  drinh  of  the  thirsty  will  he  eause 
to  fail.     The  prophet  seems  to  have  the 

Eortrait  of  Nabal  in  his  mind,  and  to  take 
im  as  the  type  of  a  class. 
Yer.  7. — The  instruments.  Mr.  Gheyne 
translates,  "  the  machinations,"  which  gives 
a  better  sense ;  but  the  rendering  is  scarcely 
borne  out  by  any  parallel  use  of  the  term 
c'M  in  Scripture  or  elsewhere.  Cli  properly 
mean  i  "  vessels,"  "  weapons,"  "  implements,' ' 
He  deviseth  wicked  devices ;  rather,  he 
devisetk  plots.  The  word  "  he  "  is  emphatic . 
Unlike  the  fool,  who  passively  does  evil 
through  thoughtlessness,  the  niggard 
actively  devises  crafty  plans  against  his 
fellow-men.  He  seeks  to  cheat  the  poor  out 
of  their  rights  by  false  witness  (comp.  ch.  i. 
17,  23;  iii.  14,  15;  v.  28,  eto,).  Even 
when  the  needy  speaketh  right;  t.<,  "has 
right  on  his  side,"  The  translation  in  the 
text  is  to  be  preferred  to  that  in  the  margin. 
Yer.  8. — By  liberal  things  shall  be  stand  ; 
or,  to  liberal  things.  The  Hebrew  will  bear 
either  sense. 


Section  IX.    Fdbtheb  Denunciations  of  Ibbabl,  joined  with  Pbomisbs 
(oh.  xxxn,  9—20), 

Vers,  9 — 12. — ^A  Bxbceg  op  the  Women,  i       Ver,  9.— Else  up.    The  "careless  daugh- 


It  might  seem  at  first  sight  as  if  we  had 
here  a  detached  utterance  of  the  prophet, 
accidentally  conjoined  with  the  preceding 
passage  (vers.  1 — 8).  But  vers.  15 — 18 
furniah  a  link  of  connection  between  the 
two  portions  of  the  chapter,  and  make  it 
probable  that  they  were  delivered  at  the 
■ame  time.  Mr,  Cheyne  supposes  that  the 
indifference  of  a  knot  of  women,  gathered 
at  some  little  distance  from  the  men  to 
whom  Isaiah  had  addressed  vers,  1 — 8, 
provoked  the  prophet  suddenly  to  turn  to 
them,  and  speak  to  them  in  terms  of  warning. 


ters  "  are  sitting,  or  reclining  upon  couches, 
at  their  ease.  The  propliet  bids  them  stand 
up,  to  hear  a  message  from  God  (comp. 
Judg,  iii,  10).  Ye  women  that  are  at  ease ; 
i.e.  "that  are  self-satisfied  and  self-com- 
placent." The  word  employed  has  almost 
always  a  bad  sense  (see  2  Kings  xiz.  28 ; 
Job  xii.  5 ;  Pg.  oxxiii.  4 ;  Amos  vi,  1 ;  Zech. 
i,  15),  Hear  my  voioe.  This  clause  should 
be  attached  to  the  first  half  of  the  verse. 
The  order  of  the  words  in  the  original  is, 
"  Ye  women  that  are  at  ease,  rise  up  and 
hear  my  words ;  ye  careless  daughters, 
hearken  unto  my  speech." 

Ver.  10. — Many  days  and  years  shall  ye 


OH.  xxsn.  1—20.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH. 


523 


be  troubled ;  rather,  <n  a  year  anil  days ; 
i.e.  "  in  less  than  two  years."  T ho  object 
of  the  prophet  is  not  to  fix  the  duration 
of  the  trouble,  but  to  mark  the  time  of  ite 
commencement  (comp.  ch.  xxiz.  1).  Shall 
ye  he  troubled ;  rather,  ihall  ye  tremble,  or 
thudder  (so  Deut.  ii.  25;  Ps.  Ixxvii.  18; 
zcix.  1;  ch.  T.  25;  Ixiv.  2;  Jer.  xxxiii.  9, 
etc.).  Ye  careless  women ;  rather,  ye  con- 
fident one:  The  word  is  different  from  that 
employed  in  vers.  9  and  11.  The  vintage 
shall  fail ;  literally,  hat  failed — "  the  perfect 
of  prophetic  certitude"  (Cheyne).  Some 
critics  understand  a  literal  failure,  or  de- 
struction, of  the  vintage  through  the  invasion 
of  the  Assyrians.  Others  suggest  a  refer- 
ence to  oh.  V.  4 — 7.  The  vineyard  of  the 
l^rd  (Judah)  has  utterly  failed  to  bring 
forth  grapes — tliere  is  no  ingathering — 
therefore  destruction  shall  fall  upon  it. 

Ver.  11.— Tremble  ...  be  troubled.  Tlie 
repetition  of  this  verse  is,  as  usual,  emphatic. 
Its  object  is  to  impress  those  whom  the 
prophet  is  addressing  with  the  certainty 
of  the  coming  judgment.  Strip  you,  and 
make  you  bare;  i.e.  "bare  your  breasts," 
in  preparation  for  the  beating  which  is  to 
follow  (see  the  comment  on  the  next  verse). 

Ver.  12. — They  shall  lament  for  the  teats, 
etc. ;  rather,  they  shall  heai  upon  the  breasts 
for  the  pleasant  fields,  etc.  (so  the  LXX., 
the  Vulgate,  Jarchi,  Gesenius,  Ewald, 
Maurer,  KuobeI,Delitzsch,  and  Mr.  Choyne). 
Dr.  Kay  prefers  the  rendering  of  the  Autho- 
rized Version,  understanding  by  "  the  teats" 
such  "  dry  breasts "  as  Hosea  speaks  of 
(ix.  14).  But  nothing  has  been  said  in 
this  place  of  any  such  affliction,  for  the 
pleasant  fields,  etc.;  >.e.  for  their  loss  {lee 
ver.  10). 

Vers.  13 — 20. — A  Fdkthbr  MinaiiifQ  oi' 
Threats  with  Oomfobtino  Promises. 
The  women  require,  like  the  men,  to  be 
both  warned  and  comforted,  wherefore  the 
prophet  addresses  to  them,  as  to  the  men 
in  ch.  XXX.  and  xxxi.,  an  intermixture  of 
threatening  (vers.  13,  11)  witli  promise 
(vers.  15—20). 

Ver.  13. — TTpon  the  land  of  my  people 
■hall  eome  up  thorns  and  briars.  This  was 
the  punishment  with  which  the  unfruitful 
vineyard  waa  threatened  in  ch.  v.  6.  It 
may  be  understood  either  literally  or  of 
the  wickedness  that  would  abound  when 
the  time  of  judgment  came.  Yea,  upon 
all  the  houses  of  joy  (comp.  ch.  v.  9).  If 
Sennacherib  carried  off,  aa  he  deolaiea 
(G.  Smith, '  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  134),  more 
than  two  hundred  thousand  captives  from 
Judsea,  he  must  have  left  many  houses 
without  inhabitants.  The  solitude  begun 
by  him  was  completed  by  the  Babylonians. 


The  joyous  city  (see  ch.  xxii.  2).  The  word 
used  has  generally  the  sense  of  unholy 
mirth  (comp.  ch.  xxiii.  7;  xxiv.  8;  Zepb 
ii.  15;  iii.  11), 

Ver.  14. — The  palaces  shall  be  forsaken; 
literally,  the  palace;  but  the  word  is  used  in 
a  generic  sense.  The  prophet  sees  in  vision 
Jerusalem  deserted  by  her  inhabitants, 
the  grand  houses  of  the  rich  empty,  the 
strongholds  haunted  by  wild  beasts,  and  the 
slopes  of  the  hills  fed  on  by  sheep,  and 
even  occasionally  vioitc  d  by  the  timid  and 
solitude-loviug  wild  a^s.  The  description 
suits  well  the  time  of  tlio  Babyloniaa  cap- 
tivity, but  not  any  earlier  period.  Probably 
it  was  not  reveakd  to  the  prophet  how  soon 
the  condition  would  be  reached.  The  multi- 
tude of  the  oity  shall  be  left.  The  real 
meaning  is,  as  Bishop  Lowth  expresses  it, 
"  The  populous  city  shall  be  left  desolate." 
But  the  whole  passage  is,  as  Delitzsch 
observes,  "grammatically  strange,  the  lan- 
guage becoming  moie  complicated,  dis- 
jointed, arid  difficult,  the  greater  the  wrath 
and  indignation  of  the  poet."  The  forts 
and  towers ;  rather,  hill  and  tower,  with 
(perliaps)  a  special  reference  to  the  pai-t 
of  Jerusalem  called  Ophel  (2  Chron.  xxvii.  3 ; 
Neh.  iii.  26,  etc.),  the  long  projecting  spur 
from  the  eastern  hill,  which  poinis  a  little 
west  of  south,  and  separates  the  Kedron 
valley  from  the  Tyropceon.  Shall  be  for 
dens ;  literally,  for  caves ;  but  dens  for  wild 
beasts  seem  to  be  meant  (comp.  ch.  xiii.  21 ; 
xxxiv.  14;  Jer.  1.  .39).  Tor  ever.  This 
expres.sion  inust  not  be  pressed.  Hyperbole 
is  a  recognized  feature  of  poetry  written 
under  strong  excitement.  A  joy  of  wild 
asses.  The  wild  ass  is  not  now  found 
nearer  Palestine  than  Mesopotamia,  or  per- 
haps Northern  Syria.  It  is  exceedingly 
shy,  and  never  approaches  the  habitations 
of  men, 

Ver.  15. — Until^  The  expression  "  until" 
modifies  the  previous  "for  ever,"  showing 
that  the  desolation  was  not  always  to 
continue.  The  Spirit  be  poured  upon 
us  from  on  high.  An  effluence  from  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  God  on  individuals  of  emi- 
nence, prophets,  kings,  artificers,  to  fit  them 
for  th<>ir  tasks,  is  recognized  in  many  of  the 
earlier  books  of  Scripture,  and  especially 
in  the  Davidical  psalras.  But  a  general 
effluence  of  the  Spirit  of  holiness  on  a 
nation,  to  produce  a  change  of  heart,  seems 
to  be  first  announced  by  Isaiah.  The 
nearly  contemporary  prophecy  of  Joel  (ii. 
28,  29)  is,  perhaps,  as  wide  in  its  scope,  but 
limited  to  the  prophetic  gift,  which  is  not 
necessarily  conjoined  with  spiritual-minded- 
ness  or  holiness  of  life.  Isaiah,  the  "  evan- 
gelical prophet,"  first  teafhes  that  the 
conversion  of  a  nation  is  God's  work, 
effected  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  effectual 


S24 


THte  ttOOK  OF  THE  PnOPHET  ISAIAfi.    [cit.  xxin.  1—20 


to  the  entire  change  of  the  heart  of  a  people. 
And  the  wilderness  he  a  fruitful  field;  i.e. 
"  the  commnnity  long  cursed  with  bairen- 
nesa  of  good  works"  (ver.  10)  "becomes 
once  more  fruitful  of  them."  And  the 
fruitful  field  be  oounted  for  a  forest.  An 
order  of  climax  seems  to  be  here  intended. 
The  midbar,  the  bare  pasturage-ground, 
becomes  a  Carmel,  t.e.  carefully  cultivated ; 
the  Oairael  becomes  like  Lebanon,  a  rich 
and  luxurious  forest.  Tliere  is  no  dose 
parallel  between  this  verse  and  ver.  17  of 
ch.  xxix.  The  prophet  is  not  tied  down  by 
his  previous  metaphors. 

Ver.  16. — Then  judgment  shall  dwell  in 
the  wilderness.  In  all  parts  of  the  kingdom 
of  Christ,  the  lowest  as  well  as  the  highest, 
"  judgment  "  and  "  righteousness  "  shall 
prevail  (comp.  ver.  1). 

Ver.  17.  —  The  work  of  righteousness 
shall  be  peace.  Peace— a  true  peace,  not 
a  false  one  (Jer.  vi.  14) — shall  be  the  result 
of  the  reign  of  righteousness.  War,  quarrels, 
enmity,  hostile  feelings,  are  all  of  them  the 
fruit  of  unrighteousness.  In  the  kingdom 
of  the  Messiah,  just  so  far  forth  as  it  is 
thoroughly  established,  "the  frnit  of  right- 
eousness is  sown  in  peace  of  them  that 
make  peace  "  (Jas.  iil.  18).  The  effect  of 
righteonsness  ;  literally,  the  service  of 
righteomness,  which  perhaps  means  here 
"the  wages  of  righteousness."  Quietness 
and  assurance ;  or,  quietnese  and  confidence 
(oomp.  ch.  XXX.  15).  The  final  happiness 
of  the  bleaied  in  Christ's  kingdom  is  always 


spoken  of  as  a  state  of  "  rest  and  quietness  " 
(see  Ps.  xci'.  11  ;  Job  iii.  17;  Jw.  vi.  16; 
Matt.  xi.  28;  H,b.  iv.  9-11,  etc.).  The 
"  confidence  "  felt  would  be  an  assured  con- 
fidence, not  a  rash  and  foolish  one,  like  that 
of  the  women  of  vers.  10,  1 1. 

Ver.  19. — When  it  shall  hail,  owning 
down  on  the  forest ;  ratlier,  but  it  shall 
hail  in  the  coming  down  (i.e.  the  destruction) 
of  the  forest.  "The  forest"  has  commonly 
been  regarded  as  Assyria,  on  the  strength 
of  ch.  X.  18,  19,  33,  34.  Mr.  Cheyne, 
however,  suggests  Judah,  or  the  high  and 
hauglity  ones  of  Judah,  whose  destruction 
was  a  necessary  preliminary  to  the  establish- 
ment of  Christ's  kingdom.  May  not  God's 
enemies  generally  he  meant?  The  oity. 
Nineveh  (Lowth,  Gesenius,  Eosenmiiller) ; 
Jerusalem  (Delitzsch,  Knobel,  Cheyne, 
Kay);  "the  city  in  which  the  hostility 
of  the  world  to  Jehovah  will,  in  the  latter 
days,  be  centralized  "  (I)rechsler,  Nagel) — 
the  "  world-power,"  in  fact.  The  last  view 
seems  to  give  the  best  sense. 

Ver,  20. — -Blessed  are  ye  that  sow  beside 
aU  waters.  The  idyllic  picture,  begun  in 
ver.  15,  terminates  here.  The  people  of 
the  kingdom  have  a  well-watered  land  (eh. 
XXX.  25),  wliere  they  live  peacefully,  sowing 
their  seed  beside  the  water-courses,  and 
having  abundant  pasture  for  their  peaceful 
beasts — the  ox  and  the  ass  (comp.  ch.  ixx. 
24).  A  spiritual  meaning  doubtless  under- 
lies the  literal  sense. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — Strict  Justice  a  characteristic  of  MessidKs  kingdom.  Whatever  may  1)6  said, 
and  said  with  truth,  of  the  Divine  mercy,  still  there  is  no  quality  more  characteristic 
of  God's  rule  over  man  than  his  jnstice.  "  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do 
right  ?  "  (Gen.  xviii.  25) ;  "  God  is  a  righteous  Judge  "  (Ps.  vii.  II) ;  "  He  ahall  judge 
the  world  in  righteousness,  and  minister  judgment  to  the  people  in  uprightness  "  (Ps. 
ix.  8).  If  this  were  not  so,  the  whole  foundations  of  morality  would  fall.  And  Mes- 
siah's rule  was  to  he  like  God's — was,  in  very  truth,  to  be  God's.  It  had,  therefore,  to 
be  strictly  just.  What  is  most  wonderful  in  that  marvellous  scheme  of  salvation, 
which  infinite  wisdom  conceived  and  decreed  from  everlasting,  is  that  in  it  a  way  was 
contrived  whereby  "  mercy  and  truth  "  might  "  meet  together,"  and  "  righteousness 
and  peace  kiss  each  other  ".  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  10).  Attributes  of  God,  seemingly  contradictory, 
obtained  a  wondrous  reconciliation  by  means  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  which,  though 
its  whole  import  may  transcend  our  faculties,  was  beyond  all  doubt  in  integer  in  the 
equation  wherein  mercy  and  truth  met  together,  and  reconcilement  was  made  between 
"  the  wrath  of  man  "  and  "  the  righteousness  of  God."  The  justice  of  Messiah's  king- 
dom was  shown — 

I.  In  Chbist'b  severe  condemnation  of  every  form  op  uobal  evil.  "  Woe  unto 
you,  scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites  1 "  (Matt,  xxiii.  13) ;  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  thiit 
work  iniquity  "  (Matt.  vii.  23)  ;  "  Every  idle  word  that  men  shall  speak,  they  shall 
give  account  thereof  in  the  day  of  judgment "  (Matt.  xii.  36)  ;  "  Out  of  the  heart  pro- 
ceed evil  thoughts  .  .  .  and  these  defile  a  man  "  (Matt.  xv.  19,  20).  Christ  made  no 
compromise  with  sin.  In  his  most  signal  act  of  mercy  his  words  were,  "  Neither  do 
I  condemn  thee ;  go,  and  tin  no  more  "  (John  viJL  11), 


CH.  xxxu.  1— 20.}    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  625 

IL  In  thk  strict  DiscirLiNB  at  first  established  in  his  Chuboh.  "  Purge  out 
.  .  .  the  old  leaven  "  (1  Cor.  v.  7) ;  "  Put  away  from  among  yourselves  that  wickeiJ  person  " 
(1  Cor.  V.  13) ;  "  Now  I  have  written  unto  you  not  to  keep  company,  if  any  man  that 
is  called  a  brotlier  be  a  foniicator,  or  covetous,  or  an  idolater,  or  a  railer,  or  a  drunkard, 
or  an  extortioner ;  witli  such  a  one  no  not  to  eat "  (1  Cor.  v.  11).  The  apostUs 
"delivered  to  Satan"  those  who  sinned  grievously  (1  Cor.  v.  5;  ITim.  i.  20) — cut  them 
off  from  the  cotmnunion  of  the  faithful  (Gal.  v.  12),  and  only  restored  them  after  con- 
fession and  penai.ce.     "  Tho  princes  ruled  in  judgment "  (ch.  xxxii.  1). 

III.  In  the  solemn  declarations  made  of  a  final  judgment  according  to  works 
"  I  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before  God ;,  and  the  books  were  opened :  and 
another  book  was  opened,  wliich  is  the  boot  of  life :  ami  Uie  dead  were  judf^cd  out  of 
those  things  which  were  written  in  the  books,  according  to  their  work.s.  And  the  sea 
gave  up  the  dead  which  were  in  it  ;  and  death  and  Lull  .lelivered  up  the  dead  which 
were  in  them:  and  they  were  judged  every  man  according  to  their  works"  (Rev.  xx. 
12, 13;  comp.  Matt.  vii.  23;  xii.  37;  xiu.  39—43;  xxv.  31—46,  etc.). 

Ver.  2. —  What  Christ  is  to  his  people.  The  prophet  enumerates  (in  ver.  2)  ionie 
of  the  chief  reliitious  in  which  Messiah,  when  he  came,  would  stand  to  his  people.  All 
his  announceraeuts  are  fulfilled  in  Christ. 

I.  Christ  is  a  IIiding-placb  from  the  wind.  Wlien  the  winds  of  affliction  blov-, 
when  "the  blast  of  the  terrible  ones"  is  upon  us,  above  all,  when  the  breath  of  the 
wrath  of  God  seems  to  sweep  down  on  us  and  scorch  us  up,  there  is  one  Refuge  only 
to  which  we  can  ilee — one  "  l"lirling-place  " — Christ.  In  the  time  of  natural  grief  and 
trouble,  he  lets  us  find  a  Refuge  in  him ;  when  our  enemies  threaten,  he  "hides  us  in 
the  secret  of  his  presence  from  the  pride  of  man,"  and  "  keeps  us  secretly  in  a  pavilion 
from  the  strife  of  tongues"  (Ps.  xxxi.  20)  ;  when  we  shrink  Irom  the  thought  of  God's 
wrath,  anil  the  breath  which  is  "  like  a  stream  of  brinistune"  (ch.  xxx.  33),  he  offers 
himself  to  lis  as  our  Shelter.  How  many  saints  have  not  found  comfort,  unspeakable 
comfort,  in  the  blessed  words— 

"Book  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me, 
Let  me  hide  myself  in  Thee  "  t 

n.  Christ  is  a  Covert  from  the  tempest.  Christ  not  only  hides  us  away  from 
wind  and  storm,  tempest  and  evil  of  all  kinds,  but  is  himself  our  Coverture.  He  is 
"a  Tabernacle  for  a  Covert  from  storm  and  from  rain"  (ch.  iv.  6).  His  merits 
"cover  up"  our  sins,  and  make  atonement  for  them.  His  righteousness  is  the  "  white 
raiment"  which  clothes  us,  so  that  "the  shame  of  our  nakedness  doth  not  appear" 
(Rev.  iii.  18). 

III.  Christ  is  as  Rivers  of  water.  Rivers  give  refreshment.  They  are  the  great 
source  of  life,  fertility,  delight,  in  a  parched  and  desert  land.  In  the  wilderness  of  this 
life,  in  the  dry  arid  waste  which  our  tired  feet  have  to  traverse,  any  refreshment  that 
wo  enjoy  conies  from  Christ^ — is  Uhiist.  He  pours  upon  us.  the  refreshing  "  dew  of  his 
blessing."  He  gives  us  to  drink  out  of  himself;  a:nd  then  "out  of  our  belly  there 
flow  rivers  of  living  water"  (John  vii.  37,  38).  The  water  that  he  imparts  to  us  is  "  a 
w^l  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life  "  (John  iv.  14).  He  is  unto  us  "  a  place 
of  broad  rivers  and  streams  "  (ch.  xxxiii.  21),  refreshing,  life-giving,  exhaustless. 

IV.  Christ  is  as  the  Shadow  of  a  great  bock  in  a  weart  land.  The  world  is 
"  a  weary  land."  We  are  travellers  across  its  waste.  A  hot  sun  beats  down  upon  our 
heads ;  a  scorching  soil  is  under  our  feet.  But  we  have  a  Rock  with  us — a  Ruck  which 
"  follows  us  "—and  "  that  Rock  is  Christ "  (1  Cor.  x.  4).  In  the  shadow  of  that  Rock 
we  may  at  any  time,  and  at  all  times,  find  rest,  renovation,  refreshment,  protection, 
delight.  The  traveller  in  the  desert  comes,  once  and  again,  \ipon  "  a  great  rock,"  as  he 
plods  his  weary  way  over  the  vast  solitude,  and  rejoices  at  the  sight,  and  toils  for  hours 
to  reach  the  blessed  refuge  of  its  shade.  Our  "  Rock"  is  ready  to  give  us  shade  when- 
ever we  please — it  is  near  us  constantly  ;  we  have  but  to  flee  to  it,  to  cling  to  it,  to 
remain  in  its  shadow. 

Vers.  9 — 12. — The  need  of  rousing  women  in  critical  times  from  a  state  of  sdf-satis- 
faction  and  self-complacency.     Women  are  less  apprehensive  than  men,  more  inclined 


526  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxii.  1— 20. 


to  suppose  that  the  state  of  things  to  which  they  are  accustomed  will,  as  a  matter  of 
course,  remain  unchanged.  They  have,  as  a  general  rule,  less  historical  knowledge 
than  men,  and  less  acquaintance  with  the  condition  of  the  world  wherein  they  lire. 
The  self-complacency  and  unsuspiciousness  of  Marie  Antoinette  and  the  ladies  of  her 
court,  when  the  French  Revolution  was  drawing  on,  has  been  a  matter  of  surprise  to 
historians;  but  it  is  merely  a  striking  instance  of  what  is,  in  fact,  the  ordinary  condi- 
tion of  things  when  great  changes  are  imminent.  Jezebel  did  not  expect,  or  appre- 
ciate, the  revolution  initiated  by  Jehu ;  nor  Athaliah  that  carried  out  under  the  auspices 
of  Jehoiada  the  high  priest  (2  Kings  xi.  4 — 16).  The  instinctive  belief  in  "  con- 
tinuance," of  which  Bishop  Butler  speaks  ('  Analogy,'  part  i.  oh.  i.),  whereby  we  expect 
"  all  things  to  continue  as  we  experience  'they  are,  in  all  respects,"  and  "  to-morrow 
to  be  as  to-day,"  only  perhaps  "  more  abundant"  (ch.  Ivi.  12), — is  especially  strong  in 
women,  and  explains  their  inapprehensiveness.  The  result  is  :  1.-  That  reverses  come 
upon  them  suddenly  and  unexpectedly,  without  their  being  prepared  to  encounter  them, 
and  are  thus  sorer  trials,  under  which  they  often  fall  into  despair  and  recklessness,  to 
their  great  hurt.  2.  That  the  men,  who  are  their  associates,  through  the  contagion 
of  their  security,  are  rendered  themselves  less  apprehensive,  and  consequently  less 
inclined  to  realize  the  coming  danger  and  guard  against  it  by  wise  measures  of  precau- 
tion. Under  these  circumstances,  it  becomes  the  preacher's  duty  at  such  times  to 
address  himself  especially  to  the  rousing  of  the  women  from  their  "  carelessness  "  and 
security,  both  for  their  own  sakes,  and  still  more  for  the  sake  of  the  community,  whose 
prosperity  or  whose  very  existence  they  imperiL 

Vers.  15 — 17. — The  fruits  of  the  Spirit  in  a  commtmity.  The  first  result  of  the 
effluence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  man  is  fruitfulness  :  "  the  wilderness  becomes  a  fruilful 
field,  and  the  fruitful  field  a  forest."  The  dry  ground  of  a  stony  heart  is  changed  into 
a  cultivated  garden,  which  "  brings  forth  much  fruit."  'I'hu  heart  which  already  bore 
some  fruit  is  "  purged,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more  fruit "  (John  xv.  2).  Then,  when 
individuals  have  been  thus  changed  and  "  purged "  and  perfected  one  by  one,  judg- 
ment and  righteousness  "  dwell "  in  the  land — the  King  "  reigns  in  righteousness,"  and 
his  "  princes  rule  in  judgment ; "  far  and  wide  there  is  a  reign  of  justice,  right,  equity. 
Next  comes  a  further  consequence.  "  The  work  of  righteousness  is  peace,"  peace  sub- 
jective and  objective,  in  the  heart  and  iu  the  life — the  peace  of  quiet  consciences  assui  ( il 
of  God's  favour,  l;novving  that  theiv  sins  are  atoned  for,  and  feeling  that  they  are  at  one 
with  God ;  and  the  peace  of  internal  concord  and  agreement  among  all  members  of  the 
community,  mutual  respect  of  clnss  towards  class,  and  of  man  towards  man,  general 
good  will  of  all  towards  all,  kindliness,  courtesy,  ready  aid,  sympathy,  consideration. 
The  complete  result  has  not  been  seen  as  yet,  because  men  have  resisted  God's  Spirit, 
and  the  copious  outpouring  of  it,  which  he  is  willing  to-give,  has  never  yet  been  given. 
But  if  this  impediment  were  removed,  if  Gk)d's  Spirit  had  free  course,  and  a  kingdom 
or  society  of  perfectly  virtuous  men  were  once  formed,  then  we  should  see  such  further 
consequences  as  are  pointed  out  by  Bishop  Butler  in  his  '  Analogy  : '  "  In  such  a  state 
there  would  be  no  such  thing  as  faction ;  but  men  of  the  greatest  capacity  would,  of 
course,  all  along  have  the  chief  direction  of  affairs  willingly  yielded  to  them  ;  and  they 
would  share  it  among  themselves  without  envy.  Each  of  these  would  have  the  part 
assigned  him  to  which  his  genius  was  peculiarly  adapted;  and  otheis,  who  had  not 
any  distinguished  genius,  would  be  safe,  and  think  themselves  very  happy,  by  being 
under  the  protection  and  guidance  of  those  who  had.  Public  determinations  would 
really  be  the  result  of  the  united  wisdom  of  the  community ;  and  they  would  be  faith- 
fully executed  by  the  united  strength  of  it.  Some  would  in  a  higher  way  contribute, 
hut  all  would  in  some  way  contribute,  to  the  public  prosperity;  and  in  it,  each  would 
enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  own  virtue.  And  as  injustice,  whether  by  fraud  or  force,  would 
be  unknown  among  themselves,  so  they  would  be  sufHciently  secured  from  it  in  their 
neighbours.  For  cunning  and  fabe  self-interest,  confederacies  in  injustice,  ever  slight, 
and  accompanied  with  faction  and  intestine  treachery, — these,  on  one  hand,  would  be 
found  mere  childish  folly  and  weakness,  when  set  in  opposition  against  wisdom,  public 
spirit,  union  inviolable,  and  fidelity  on  the  other ;  allowing  both  a  sufficient  length  of 
years  to  try  their  force.  Add  the  general  influence,  which  such  a  kingdom  would  have 
over  the  face  of  the  earth,  by  wa^  of  example  particularly,  and  the  reverence  which  would 


OH.  xxxn.  1— 20.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  527 

be  paid  It.  It  would  plainly  be  superior  to  all  others,  and  the  world  must  gradually 
come  under  its  empire ;  not  by  means  of  lawless  violence,  but  partly  by  what  must  bu 
allowed  to  be  just  conquest,  and  partly  by  other  kingdoms  submittiog  themselves 
voluntarily  to  it,  throughout  a  course  of  ages,  and  claiming  its  protection,  one  after 
another,  in  successive  exigencies.  The  head  of  it  would  be  a  universal  monarch,  in 
another  sense  than  any  mortal  has  as  yet  been ;  and  the  Eastern  style  would  be 
literally  applicable  to  him,  that  all  people,  nations,  and  languages  ihould  serre  him  " 
(part  L  ch.  iii.  §  5). 


HOMILIES  BY  VAKIOUS  AUTH0B8. 

Vers.  1—8. — An  (Seal  of  political  good.  When  the  Divine  Spirit  has  been  out- 
IMured,  when  the  idols  have  been  cast  away,  and  the  Assyrian  yoke  has  been  cast  off, 
happy  days  will  dawn. 

I.  Royalty  will  be  synonymous  with  mghteousnbss.  The  King  will  be  seen  in 
his  beauty — not  the  splendour  of  purple  robes  and  lofty  throne  and  brilliant  court,  but 
that  of  the  equity  and  justice  which  imitate  Heaven.  God  will  call  him  by  his  name, 
will  make  him  ricli  with  hidden  possessions,  will  go  before  him  to  make  the  crooked 
ways  straight  (oh.  xlv.  1 — 4).  In  spite  of  all  the  failings  of  kings,  the  mass  of  the 
people  bear  a  deep  reverence  and  affection  to  royalty.  Even  in  trhe  counterfeit  they 
recognize  some  relation  to  the  real  thing.  "  A  divinity  doth  hedge  a  king ; "  this  is 
not  only  poetically,  but  religiously  true,  if  the  king  in  any  sort  answer  to  the  truth 
of  his  position.     In  happier  days  he  will  so  answer. 

n.  Th  k  upper  classes  will  be  the  spikitual  supbbioes  of  the  people.  Aristocracy 
began  with  personal  worth,  and  by  it  only  can  be  maintained.  We  see  from  the  descrip- 
tion what  iho  nobility  ought  to  be  in  relation  to  the  people.  Patrons,  protectors  - 
"hiding-pl.vces  from  the  wind,"  a  "covert  from  the  rain-storm,  rivulets  in  a  parchei) 
land,  the  shadow  of  a  huge  cliff  in  a  thirsty  land."  Noblesse  oblige.  1'hey  should  be 
looked  up  to ;  every  popular  cause  should  find  in  them  its  defenders  and  active  advo- 
cates ;  every  philanthropic  scheme  in  them  its  leaders ;  every  misery  of  the  poor  in 
them  its  zealous  redressers.  High  place  without  high  qualities  is  a  mockery ;  lofty 
station  coupled  with  low  manners,  a  scandal  and  an  abuse.  Alas  1  too  often  in  the 
history  of  the  "ruling  classes"  these  truths  have  been  forgotten,  these  relations  have 
been  reversed.  Again  and  again  God  has  called  them  to  judgment :  "  You  have  eaten 
up  the  vineyards,  the  plunder  of  the  afflicted  is  in  your  houses.  What  mean  ye  that 
crush  my  people,  and  grind  the  face  of  the  afSicted  ?  "  Notably  so  at  the  time  of  the 
great  French  Revolution. 

III.  The  EESULT3  OF  A  SPIBITUAL  OHANaE.  No  reformation  of  manners,  no  happy 
reconciliation  of  class  with  class  can  come  about,  except  by  a  change  of  mind  and  heart. 
Asd  that  change  itself  can  only  come  whence  all  changes  in  the  realm  of  nature  and 
b^jirit  come — from  the  creative,  the  re-creative  energy  of  God.  The  body  is  the  organ  of 
the  spirit  in  its  manifold  activities.  Any  fresh  sensibility  of  the  physical  organs  is  typical, 
therefore,  of  an  awakened  and  living  conscience.  The  closed  eye  is  typical  of  the  blind- 
ness of  those  who  will  not  see.  To  shut  the  eye  to  evil,  to  turn  the  head  away  from  what 
disgusts, — this  may  seem  for  a  time  equivalent  to  cancelling  the  evil  itself.  Not  so ; 
and  reformation  sets  in  from  that  hour  when  men  are  willing  to  face  the  most  painful 
facts,  to  let  the  light  into  the  darkest  corners  of  existence.  Hars  were  made  to  listen, 
not  to  be  stopped.  Let  the  bitter  cry  be  hearkened  to ;  its  tones  thrill  through  every 
fibre  of  our  sympathetic  being ;  nor  let  its  pleading  be  dismissed  until  the  question,  What 
can  Idol  has  found  some  distinct  answer.  The  tongue  was  made, not  to  stammer, but 
to  flow  with  truthful  and  gracious  speech.  Silence  may  mean  that  we  have  no  help  to 
offer  ;  stuttering  accents  that  we  are  of  a  divided  mind,  of  obscure  habits  of  thought. 
Lucidity  is  what  we  need — the  lucidity  of  the  single  eye,  the  sensitive  organism  filled 
through  and  through  with  light.  And  what  does  our  haste  and  feverish  precipitation 
signify,  but  want  of  that  deliberate  forethought  and  that  circumspection  which  is  a  con- 
stant duty  ?  "  The  heart  of  the  hasty  shall  perceive  distinctly,"  Although  we  cannot 
refer  all  sin,  like  Socrates,  to  want  of  insight,  yet  no  sin  but  implies  that  want.  God's 
deepest,  most  far-reaching  blessings  must  ever  be  for  the  heart,  in  that  large  sense  in 


528  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxxa.  1— 20. 

which  Scripture  uses  the  word — ^inclufling  every  mental  faculty  or  activity.  Material 
ImprovementB  are  not  to  be  neglected.  The  sanity  and  weal  of  the  body  have  a  direct 
bearing  ou  the  weal  of  mind ;  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  there  will  be  no  material  improve- 
ments until  the  improving  mind  has  been  awakened  and  truly  educated. 

IV.  The  constitution  of  thikgs  needing  refobmation.  It  is  a  confusion  which 
needs  to  be  removed.  It  is  a  world  turned  upside  down  which  needs  to  be  righted.  The 
fool  and  the  knave  may  designate  the  ruling  classes  of  the  time.  Fooll  how  weighty 
the  condemnation,  how  deep-buruing  the  brand,  which  belongs  to  the  use  of  the  word  in 
Scripture !  The  world  may  call  him  par  excellence  the  fool  who  minds  all  business  but 
his  own ;  the  prophet  calls  him  the  fool  who  thinks  of  self,  but  forgets  his  God.  The 
sinner,  in  short,  is  the  fool.  His  is  the  worst  and  least  excusable  ignorance.  He  may  be 
called  "  noble  "  in  the  convention  of  society,  he  is  contemptible  in  the  judgment  of  God. 
The  characteristics  of  the  fool  are  that  he  speaks  folly,  and  this  "  rfut  of  the  abundance  " 
of  a  wicked  heart — a  forge  and  workshop  where  the  production  of  evil  is  ever  going  on ; 
that  he  delights  to  propagate  heresy  and  atheism  as  a  centre  of  religious  darkness. 
Hungry  souls  look  to  those  Nabals,  and  are  not  fed,  but  deprived  of  their  sustenance ; 
and  the  waters  they  point  out  prove  to  be  as  ttie  mirage  of  ttie  desert  on  near  approach. 
The  denunciation  of  such  spurious  leaders  of  the  people  reminds  of  Milton's  invective— 

"  The  hungry  sheep  look  up,  and  are  not  fed ; 
But,  swollen  with  wind  and  the  rauk  mist  they  draw, 
Bot  inwardly  and  foul  contagion  spread." 

And  the  knave,  with  his  crafty  plots  and  machinations,  his  insidious  lies,  drawing  into 
his  net  the  defenceless,  honest  poor.  The  age  sorely  needed  true  nobles,  not  of  title  and 
rank,  but  of  Qtxi's  own  mint  and  stamp — men  of  principle ;  men  as  long-headed  in  their 
good  devices  as  the  others  in  evil ;  men  of  firm  and  constant  heart ;  no  time-serving, 
truckling,  tide-waiting,  opportunist,  wavering  spirits  ;  but  stearly  to  their  convictions, 
direct  in  their  aims,  consistent  with  themselves.  Every  time  needs  such  men.  God 
preserve  to  us  the  nobility  of  the  land — the  kind  hearts  that  are  worth  more  than 
coronets,  the  simple  faith  that  is  worth  more  than  Norman  blood ;  the  holy  seed,  the 
vital  element  of  a  nation. — J. 

Vers.  9 — ^20.—"  UntU  the  Spirit  be  powred  cut."  How  constantly  does  Scripture 
speak  of  every  happy  reformation  as  due  to  the  "  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,"  or  the  send- 
ing or  breathing  of  the  Spirit  on  human-kind!  Language  none  the  less  expressive 
because  mysterious.  Those  epochs  cannot  be  forecast :  no  meteorology  can  explain  to 
us  these  movements  "  from  on  high."  But  they  may  be  waited  for  and  prepared  for, 
without  fear  of  disappointment.  Again  and  again  they  had  come  to  the  prophet's 
heart ;  and  from  his  heart  he  knew  they  must  some  time  come  also  in  a  wider  sphere 
of  operation. 

L  Until  then — what  ?  The  women  are  addressed,  the  daughters  of  Zion.  The 
manners  of  the  women  must  be  a  sure  index  of  the  state  of  a  nation.  Kew  religious 
feeling  kindles  quickly  in  their  hearts;  they  welcome  and  further  revivals.  Their 
indifference  to  spiritual  things  seems  to  belie  their  nature;  atheism  in  woman  is 
monstrous.  The  Jewish  women  are  in  a  state  of  careless  unconcern.  This  attitude  of 
"  ease,"  of  apathetic  noncJmlance,  aruuecs  the  indignation  and  the  alarm  of  the  prophets, 
perhaps  more  than  vivacity  in  sin.  It  is  an  ominous  symptom  in  the  bodily  life,  not 
less  so  in  the  soul.  It  offers  a  dull  prosaic  resistance  to  enthusiasm  of  any  kind, 
which  it  holds  in  smiling,  sensuous  contempt.  A  psalmist's  soul  is  "  exceedingly 
filled"  with  perturbation  at  this  attitude  (Ps.  cxxiii.  4);  Amos  denounces  woe  (vi.  1), 
and  Zechariah  the  great  displeasure  of  Jehovah  against  them  that  "  are  at  ease." 
Perhaps  the  vintage-harvest  was  over  when  the  prophet  spoke.  The  time  would  come 
wken  a  shudder  wuu'd  pass  through  those  luxurious  frames;  the  outer  garment  would 
!•  torn  off,  the  sackcloth  assumed,  the  breasts  that  once  heaved  only  with  the  sigh  of 
pleasure  be  beaten  in  wild  lament  for  the  "  days  that  are  no  more,"  for  the  pleasant 
fields  and  the  fruitful  vine.  Those  fields  will  be  thorn  and  briar  overgrown ;  the  houses 
of  the  city  deserted,  its  mirth  quelled.  The  wild  cattle  will  sport  around  the  temple 
hill,  the  palaces  be  forsaken.    Impossible  to  dissociate  in  our  minds  the  desolaiion  of 


CH.  xxxu.  1— 20.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  VfiOPHET  ISAIAH.  629 

onoe  populous  scenes  from  the  sin  of  man  and  the  withdrawal  of  the  gracious  Bpirit,  of 
God.  Take  these  descriptions  as  figures  of  the  state  of  the  soul ;  then  power  and  beauty 
r«mftin.  The  well-kapt  garden,  the  sweet  fields  in  the  harvest-time,  the  mirth  of 
reapers  and  ip~gatherers ;  these  sights,  these  sounds,  provide  unsought  expression  for 
the  soul  that  feels  itself  "  at  ease.''  The  untilled  fields,  the  signs  of  wild  nature  creepiitg 
to  old  ascendency  over  the  works  of  man, — such  sights  cany  symbolic  meaning  which 
depresses  the  most  cheerful  heart.  "  Until  the  Spirit  be  outpoured  from  on  high" — 
that  is  OUT  state,  and  that  it  must  remain. 

n.  Ajtbrthen — WHAT?  I.  "  Justice  shall  inhabit  the pasiure-coimtry,  <md  right- 
eousness ^ioil  dimll  in  the  gQ,rden-land."  "  Men  ought  not  to  be  like  cattle,  which  seek 
nothing  but  plenty  of  food  and  abundance  of  outward  things.  We  should  not,  like 
hogs  in  a  sty,  judge  of  the  happiness  of  life  by  abundance  of  bread  find  wine  "  (Calvin). 
Eighteousness  alone  exalts,  righteousness  alone  can  uplift  a  falleji  nation.  2.  "  T/ie 
fruit,  of  righteousness  shall  be  peace"  This  is  inwardly  and  outwardly,  subjectively  and 
objectively,  true.  Peace  in  the  heart  is  the  companion  of  rectitude ;  it  flows  from  right, 
order  in  the  home  and  family,  and  from  just  administration  in  the  slate.  Peace,  quiet- 
ness, confiden.ee  i  a  triple  blooming  in  one ;  a  threefold  band  of  prosperity  and  condition 
of  all  welfare,  "  Homes  of  peace,  dwellings  of  confidence,  easeful  resting-places, — theso 
are  the  pictures  that  all  men  draw  in  fancy ;  this  the  life  for  which  they  dream  they 
were  made.  Such  a  state  depends  upon  piety,  upon  personal  and  social  morality.  "  It 
is  as  true  now  as  it  was  in  the  time  qf  Is:nah,  True  religion  would  put  an  end  to  strifes 
and  litigations !  to  riots  and  mobs ;  tooiipressiunsaud  tumulls;  to  alarms  and  robbery ; 
to  battle  and  murder  and  conflict  among  the  nations."  3.  These  blessings  cmnot  come 
without  suffering.  The  hail  of  jud;nient  will,  fall  ujion  forest  ai.d  upon  city.  The 
refuge  of  lies  and  the  hiding-place  of  falsehood  must  be  swept  away.  Renewing  and 
leforming  forces  work  destractivelyon  one  side,  as  creatively  on  the  other.  Upon  whom 
these  judgments  will  fall  is  not  evident  from  the  text.  Hail  is  an  image  of  Divine 
judgment  (ch.  xxviii.  2, 17 ;  xxx.  30).  4.  The  happiness  of  the  tiller.  He  sows  beside 
all  waters—a  reference  to  the  Oriental  custom  of  casting  the  seed  upon  the  waters  of 
overflowing  streams  and  rivers,  so  that,  when  the  waters  subside,  it  will  be  found  again 
in  the  springing  crop  and  the  abundant  harvest,  'i'he  ox  and  the  ass  are  employed,  to 
tread  the  moistened  earth  and  prepare  for  the  sowing  (cf.  Eccles.  xi,  1, 6).  In  a  figura- 
tive senae — ^happy  those  who  go  steadily  on  with  useful  work,  the  work  that  lies  nearest 
them,  the  sowing  which  looks  for  a  "  far-off  interest  of  good,"  amidst  the  most  troubled 
times.  No  troubles  of  the  time  should  divert  us  from  our  daily  task,  or  unsettle  us 
from  the  habit  of  continuous  useful  labour, — J. 

Ver.  2. — The  souPs  rest.  "  The  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land."  This  ig  an 
Eastern  picture.  God  \s  described  as  our  Shade,  In  the.  glare  of  a  too-garish  day  we 
become  endangered ;  the  sun  of  prosperity  smites  us.  Sunlight  has  its  penalties  as 
well  as  its  pleasures.  So  has  success!  The  human  heart  cannot  bear  too  much  of 
brightness.     We  need  shadows  for  the  mind  to  rest  under  as  well  as  for  the  body. 

I.  A  MAN  IS  HERE  DESOBIBBD.  The  God-Mau.  One  who,  knowing  our  infirmities 
and  temptations,  is  able  to  succour  them  that  are  tempted.  The  true  King  who  ia  to 
reign  in  righteousness  is  prophesied  of.  "  A  man  shall  be,"  Christ  has  been  the  Refuge 
and  the  Rest  of  hearts  wearied  of  the  world  and  scorched  with  its*  radiant  beams. 
We  are  led  to  Christ.  Not  to  theological  systems;  not  to  human  creeds;  hut  to 
Christ.  The  shadow !  Yes.  Shadow  of  a  cross,  where  we  may  find  forgiveness  and 
peace.  Shadow  of  brotherhood,  where  we  may  find  ti'ue  sympathy  in  our  hours  of  lone- 
liness and  dissppointment.  Shadow,  where  we  may  recline  and  rest  as  the  patriarch 
did  under  the  oak.s  of  Beersheba,  and  Moses  did  under  the  mountains  of  old.  And  Christ's 
Divinity  ia  proclaimed  in  the  words,  "  a  great  Rock."  High  as  heaven,  having  its  roots 
in  God's  own  eternal  years.  So  great  that  it  ofiera  shelter  for  all  the  weary  hearts 
of  men. 

IL  A  PiLGBiMAGB  IB  HEBE  iMPiiiED.  "Awearj  land."  The  pilgrims  are  passing 
on  through  the  scorching  heat,  the  camel-drivers  walking  then,  as  they  do  now,  in 
the  shadow  cast  by  these  "ships  of  the  desert."  Before  them  stretch  miles  on  miles 
of  burning  sand.  The  blinding  sun  is  above  them.  With  their  white  cummerbunds 
and  their  light  Eastern  dress,  they  ease  the  heat-burden  all  they  can.    And  now  the 

I8AIAH.  2    M 


530  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,    lea.  XTxii.  1—20 

great  mountains  come  in  sight.  Some  with  gentle  acclivities  and  some  with  sharp-cut 
rocks  jutting  out  ahove  the  pilgrim-way.  Wliat  blessed  shadows  tliey  cast  I  Such 
shady  places  are  our  sabbaths  and  sacraments  and  sanctuaries,  our  holy  moments  ol 
Divine  fellowship,  when  God  comes  near  and  casts  over  us  the  protecting  shadow  of  his 
gracious  presence. 

III.  Weariness  is  the  ohabaotebistio  of  the  wat.  "  A  weaty  land."  We  are 
often  tired.  How  many  hearts  have  said,  "  0  God,  I  am  a-weary ! "  and  then,  instead 
of  the  sad  cry,  "  0  God,  that  I  were  dead  I "  we  hear  the  voices  of  spiritual  souls 
crying,  "Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  himl"  and  the  blessed  answer  comes 
from  the  lips  of  the  incarnate  God  himself,  "  Cume  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are 
heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest " — weary  with  the  load  of  sin ;  weary  with  the 
care  and  fret  of  daily  life ;  weary  with  inward  conflicts ;  weary  with  ceaseless  watching, 
for  our  Arab  enemies  dash  suddenly  by,  and  point  their  rifle  as  they  fly.  Pain  makes 
us  weary.  The  loss  of  dear,  trne-hearted  friends  makes  us  weary.  Doubt,  with  al) 
our  dark  mental  conflicts — doubt,  which  is  sometimes  the  exquisite  action  of  a  sincere 
mind,  makes  us  weary.  So  we  come  to  the  great  Father,  and  rest  in  the  gracious  answer 
to  the  cry,  "  Lord,  show  us  the  Father,"  in  the  revelation  vouchsafed  unto  us  by  our 
Divine  Lord,  who  has  taught  us  when  we  pray  to  say,  "  Our  Father,"  and  also  has 
declared,  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father." — ^W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  2. — Ee/uge  in  Christ  and  in  one  another.  In  this  country  we  can  hardly  hope 
to  feel  all  the  force  and  beauty  of  this  illustration.  To  do  that  we  must  have  visited 
tropical  regions.  There,  with  the  rays  of  the  sun  shining  directly  down,  the  heat 
becomes  so  intense  and  intolerable  that  it  cannot  be  endured,  and  often  "  the  shadow 
of  a  great  rock  "  means,  nut  merely  refreshment,  but  salvation.  And  as  with  the  heat, 
so  with  the  storm — the  whirlwind,  the  tempest,  the  simoom :  what  desolations  do  not 
these  produce  ?  what  terrors  do  they  not  excite  ?  How  precious  in  such  lands,  on  sucb 
occasions,  the  hidiag-place  from  the  wind,  the  covert  from  the  storm  1  But  lifting  our 
thoughts  from  the  illustration  to  the  thing  itself  which  is  pictured  here,  to  that  human 
heart  and  life  of  which  all  visible  nature  only  supplies  the  types  and  hints,  we  make 
no  abatement  for  change  of  scene ;  for  the  scorching  rays  of  temptation  fall  as  fiercely 
and  the  winds  of  passion  blow  as  furiously  in  England  as  in  Judaea,  or  in  Babylon,  or 
in  India.  Indeed,  such  are  the  confusions  and  complications  of  our  time,  so  subtle  and 
so  seductive  are  the  temptations  to  err  from  the  straight  line  of  rectitude,  that  more 
ratJter  than  less  is  there  need  for  a  hiding-place  for  the  heart,  a  covert  from  the  storm 
of  sorrow  and  of  sin,  A  man  shall  be  for  a  hiding-place  1  One  man  in  particular  ?  or 
any  man  at  any  time  in  any  land  ?  In  both  senses  the  words  may  be  taken.  We  may 
consider — 

I.  Christ  the  Befuoe  of  the  huhan  soitl.  1.  Suck  he  was  in  the  days  of  his  flesh. 
For  his  disciples  had  to  share  something  of  the  enmity  and  opposition  he  encountered, 
and  they  always  found  an  effectual  shield  in  his  protection.  As  evangelists  they 
brought  their  success  and  their  disappointment  to  him,  that  the  one  might  be  sanctified 
and  the  other  be  relieved  (Luke  x.  17 — 20).  When  worsted  by  the  enemy,  they  fell 
hack  on  his  power  and  found  defeat  swallowed  up  in  victory  (Matt.  xvii.  14— -20). 
When  imminent  danger  threatened  their  lives,  they  made  their  appeal  to  his  all-con- 
trolling voice  (Matt.  viii.  23 — ^27).  2.  Such  he  hecame,  in  a  deeper  sense,  after  his 
ascension.  It  was  expedient  that  he  should  go  away.  "  Before  his  departure  he  was 
with  them,  afterwards  he  was  in  them."  The  death  and  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord 
enlightened  their  minds  and  changed  their  spirits.  Then  they  went  to  him  as  they 
never  could  have  done  during  his  presence  ;  they  trusted  in  him,  gave  themselves  tu 
him,  leaned  on  him,  were  lost  in  him,  as  they  would  not  have  been :  he  became,  in  a 
deeper  and  fuller  sense,  the  Hiding-place  of  their  hearts.  3.  Such  it  he  now  t«  all 
believing  hearU.  (1)  As  sinners,  burdened  with  a  sense  of  guilt  and  craving  mercy  and 
reconciliation,  we  want  some  other  refuge  than  we  can  find  in  the  best  and  wisest  ol 
mankind ;  and  with  what  glad  eagerness,  with  what  profound  thankfulness,  with  what 
inexpressible  relief,  do  we  resort  to  him,  and  cry — 

"  Eock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  ma. 
Let  me  hide  myself  in  the* "I 


OH.  xxxu.  1— 20.]    THE  BOOK   OF  THE   PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  531 

(2)  As  the  children  of  sorrow,  we  have  need  of  more  than  human  help !  There  are  depths 
of  disappointment,  extremities  of  loss,  intensities  of  pain  and  suffering,  wastes  of  loneli- 
ness, gulfs  of  darkness  and  woe,  for  which  human  sympathy  is  entirely  inadequate,  in 
which  the  only  thing  we  can  do  is  to  hasten  to  that  Sou  of  man  who  i»  touched  most 
keenly  with  the  feeling  of  our  trials,  and  say^ 

"Jesus,  Lover  of  my  soul, 
Let  me  to  thy  bosom  fly  I " 

n.  The  ebfuge  we  may  be  to  one  another.    Any  man  may  he,  and  every  man 

should  seek  to  be,  a  hiding-place,  a  covert.  Our  domestic  life  shows  us  how  this  may  be, 
and  provides  the  first  instance  and  best  picture  of  human  shelter.  Our  social  life  should 
provide  us  with  many  opportunities  of  succouring  the  needy  and  the  tried.  Our  Church 
life  should  do  the  same ;  every  Christian  Church  should  be  an  asylum  for  the  poor,  the 
weak,  the  sad,  the  anxious-minded,  the  troubled  of  heart.  Who  would  not  like  so  to  live, 
with  such  quick  and  ready  sympathy  of  spirit,  with  such  kindliness  and  hopefulness  of 
word,  with  such  friendliness  of  uplifting  hand  and  sustaining  arm,  that  his  life  should 
be  suggestive  of  the  words,"  A  man  shall  be  a  hiding-place"? — 0. 

Vers.  3,  4. — Disabled  and  restored.  The  .words  are  suggestive  of  the  spiritual  incapa- 
city of  which  Israel  was  too  often  guilty  (see  Ezek.  xii.  2),  and  of  the  recovery  which,  in 
better  days,  they  were  to  experience. 

I.  Man  disabled  by  bin.  There  are  four  directions  in  which  we  suffer  sad  deterio- 
ration ami  incapacity  as  the  consequence  of  our  sin.  1.  Spiritual  perception.  After 
some  transgressions,  after  continued  disobedience  and  estrangement  from  God,  we  fail  to 
"  see  light  in  his  light; "  our  vision  of  his  truth  is  less  clear  and  full ;  sacred  truths 
lose  their  true  proportions  in  our  view.  Then  come  positive  error,  actual  misconception, 
moral  blindness ;  and  finally  comes  that  terrible  mental  distortion  of  which  the  Master 
spoke  so  sorrowfully  and  the  prophet  wrote  so  strongly  (Matt.  vi.  22,  23;  oh.  v.  20). 
2.  Becognition  of  the  Divine  voice.  The  commission  of  sin  ends  in,  first,  a  partial,  and 
ultimately  a  complete,  spiritual  deafness.  At  first  the  quieter  and  more  habitual  tones 
in  which  God  is  speaking  to  us  (daily  loving-kindnesses,  sabbath  privileges,  etc.)  become 
inaudible  to  us,  coavey  no  message  to  us  from  God;  then  more  distinct  and  unmistak- 
able voices  from  heaven  are  unheeded  and  unheard ;  at  last,  the  loudest  demands  which 
Gud  ever  malies  fail  to  produce  any  impression  on  the  ear  of  the  soul.  3.  Tlie  choice  of 
that  which  is  wise.  The  rash  heart  (of  the  text)  is  the  heart  which  chooses  precipi- 
tately, and  therefore  foolishly.  Under  the  dominion  of  sin  we  come  to  choose  the  visible 
in  preference  to  the  invisible,  the  material  to  the  spiritual,  the  transient  to  the  abiding, 
the  human  to  the  Divine.  4.  The  utterance  of  Divine  truth.  The  clouded  vision 
naturally  leads  to  the  "stammering  tongue."  As  man  becomes  more  affected  by  the 
sin  which  dwells  within  and  works  upon  him,  he  utters  God's  truth  less  plainly,  less 
faithfully,  more  partially,  with  ever-widening  divergence  from  the  mind  of  the 
Eternal. 

II.  The  touch  or  Divine  power.  When  man  has  become  disabled  there  is  no  hope 
for  him  but  in  God.  Human  teaching  is  valuable  enough, but  it  does  not  avaiL  Only 
the  awakening,  reviving  touch  of  the  Divine  power,  brought  into  immediate  contact 
with  the  soul,  can  call  back  these  slumbering  powers.  But  it  can  and  does ;  God's 
renewing  Spirit  breaks  upon  the  disabled  mind,  upon  the  degenerate  nature,  and  that 
which  was  lost  is  regained ;  the  faculties  of  the  soul  revive.  Then  we  have- 
Ill.  Spiritual  restoration.     Revived  by  the  power  of  God:   1.  We  see  clearly. 

We  apprehend  the  will  of  God  in  Jtsus  Christ  concerning  us,  the  excellency  of  his 
service,  the  beauties  of  holiness,  the  luxury  of  usefulness.  2.  We  hear  distinctly  the 
voice  of  God  as  he  speaks  to  us  in  his  Word,  in  his  providence,  in  the  privileges  of  the 
Christian  Church.  3.  We  choose  wisely.  We  become  thoughtful,  reflective,  studious  of 
the  Divine  desire,  obedient,  and  therefore  wise ;  we  "  understand  knowledge."  4  We 
speak  plaitdy.  Discerning  that  which  is  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  we  speak 
simply,  faithfully,  fearlessly, "  with  all  boldness  as  we  ought  to  speak,"  "  the  everlasting 
gospel" — both  the  elementary  truths  which  make  wise  unto  salvation,  and  those  "deeper 
things  of  God,"  which  enrich  the  mind  and  sanctify  the  spirit. — 0. 


532  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOIUET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxxu.  1— iiO. 

Vtri.  5 — 8. — A  mark  of  good  government,  etc.  Three  lines  of  thought  are  here  laid 
down.    We  have — 

I.  A  HARK  OF  GOOD  oovEBNMENT.  The  displacement  of  the  unworthy  and  the 
elevation  of  the  good  and  wise.  Under  the  reign  of  the  righteous  King  (ver.  1)  tha 
"  fool  will  no  longer  be  called  a  nobleman,"  the  man  of  mean  character  but  lofty  rank 
will  be  made  to  know  his  true  place  in  the  commonwealth ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  man 
who  has  in  liim  the  qualities  of  nobility  (ver.  8)  shall  have  the  opportunity  of  dealing 
graciously  and  bountifully.  There  is  no  surer  sign  of  demoralization,  no  more  certain 
indication  of  approaching  ruin  in  any  community,  than  the  promotion  of  the  unfit  and 
the  unworthy ;  and  there  is  no  healthier  symptom  than  the  advancement  of  the  upright 
and  the  capable.     Let  nations,  societies,  Churches,  look  to  it. 

II.  A  HINT  AS  TO  sin's  laeqb  DIMENSIONS.  1.  Its  tenacity  of  purpose.  "The  vile 
person  will  [continue  to]  speak  villany,  and  his  heart  [to]  work  iniquity  "(ver.  6).  You 
may  put  him  in  a  position  in  which  you  might  hope  that  the  commonest  self-respect 
would  ensure  propriety  of  conduct,  but  you  will  be  mistaken;  the  corrupt  tree  will 
bear  evil  fruit  on  any  soil.  2.  Its  guUefulnesM.  "  To  practise  hypocrisy ; "  professing 
justice  and  purity,  it  enacts  all  that  is  unfair  and  evil.  3.  Its  falsity.  "  To  utter  error," 
etc.  Sin,  especially  when  found  in  high  places,  is  most  mischievous  in  that  it  scatters 
everywhere  the  fruitful  seeds  of  error;  it  poisons  the  mind  with  misleading  fancies, 
with  shallow  notions  which  may  sound  well  but  are  essentially  false  and  which  conduct 
to  wrong  and  ruin.  Thus  it  leads  men  to  act  "  against  the  Lord,"  for  they  pursue  a 
path  which  he  has  forbidden,  and  they  diffuse  principles  which  are  hostile  to  his  reign. 
4.  Its  heartlessness.  (Ver.  6.)  What  though  the  issue  ol  those  evil  actions  be  that  men's 
hearts  are  hungry  and  their  souls  athirst;  what  though  they  bring  a.bout  impoverish- 
ment, destitution — bodily  or  spiritual,  or  both  together, — let  the  cup  be  drained,  let  the 
game  be  played  out!  5.  Its  unscrupulousness.  Its  "instruments  are  evil "  (ver.  7). 
6.  Its  effrontery.  (Ver.  7.)  They  whom  it  is  wronging  may  be  the  poor,  and  therefore 
the  appropriate  object*  of  compassion ;  they  may  be  the  innocent,  those  who  are  in  the 
right,  and  therefore  the  proper  objects  of  regard  ;  nothing  but  downright  falsehood  may 
suffice  to  prevail  against  them  (Ahab  and  Kaboth).  No  matter;  let  the  case  be  estab- 
lished, let  sentence  be  executed]  * 

III.  A  COMMENDATION  OP  GENEBOSITT.  "  The  liberal  deviseth  liberal  things,"  etc. 
(ver.  8).  1.  A  man  of  a  noble  nature  will  find  opportunities  fordoing  generous  things. 
How  well  a  man  serves  the  Church  or  the  world  is  not  a  question  of  circumstance  half 
so  much  as  a  matter  of  character.  Given  a  free,  generous,  open-hearted  man,  and  you 
may  confidently  reckon  on  repeated  and  continuous  acts  of  unselfish  usefulness.  Jesus 
"  went  about  doing  good,  for  God  was  with  him,"  and  because  God  was  in  him ;  because, 
in  him,  as  in  a  perennial  fountain,  dwelt  Divine  love,  pity, self  sacrifice.  We  need  care 
comparatively  little  about  arranging  opportunities  of  service,  though  that  is  not  a 
matter  of  indifference ;  what  is  of  supreme  consequence  is  that  those  we  teach  and  train 
should  have  planted  within  them  the  sacred  seeds  of  holy.  Christian  generosity.  2. 
Generous  measures  will  give  a  noble  heart  stability :  by  them  "  he  shall  stand."  (1) 
They  will  commend  him  to  the  affection  and  the  support  of  the  direct  recipients  of  his 
goodness  (Job.  xxix.  11 — 13).  (2)  They  will  result  in  general  pros|ierity  (Prov.  xi.  24 ; 
Luke  vi.  38 ;  2  Cor.  ix.  6).  (3)  They  will  command  the  blessing  of  God  (Ps.  xli.  1 ; 
cxiL  9 ;  Luke  vi.  35 ;  Heb.  xiii.  16). — C. 

Vers.  17, 18. — "  77ie  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousnesB."  Righteousness  and  peace  m»y 
be  supposed  to  be  entirely  separate  things ;  by  those  who  look  only  on  the  surface  they 
may  even  be  imagined  to  be  opposed  to  one  another.  In  fact,  they  are  closely  and  even 
vitally  related  to  each  other. 

I.  Those  who  abe  incapable  of  biobteousnebs  abb  cvbeceftivb  of  peace.  To 
them  peace  ii  simply  incommunicable;  it  does  not  come  within  the  range  of  their 
faculties.  The  horse,  the  swallow,  the  salmon,  the  unintelligent  and  irresponsible 
animal,  may  have  quietude  and  comfort,  but  it  cannot  enjoy  ^eace,  in  the  fullest  and 
truest  sense  in  which  we  use  that  word.  It  is  only  capable  of  that  sense  of  satisfaction 
which  attends  a  perfect  adjustment  of  its  circumstances  to  its  bediiy  nature;  but  <&< 
is  not ^eoce.  Peace  is  that  spiritual  contentment  which  results  fiom  inward  as  will 
•8  outward  harmony — from  a  sense  of  rectitude,  a  consciousness  that  everything  is  right 


ctt.  xxxn.  1— 20.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  iSAlAfl.  63S 

in  its  most  Important,  most  sacred  relationships.  They  who  are  beneath  the  sense  of 
responsibility,  and  are  therefore  incapable  of  righteousness,  can  never  possibly  attain  to 
thepoEseasion  of  peace ;  they  are  constitutionally  below  it. 

EC  Thet  who  have  lost  eightbousnbbs  must  regain  it  bbfobe  thbt  can  hate 
THK  heritaoe  OF  PEACE.  1.  This  is  so  with  the  community.  When  the  country,  or 
the  company,  or  the  Cliurch  has  fallen  into  disorder  because  it  has  fallen  into  error  and 
tha  commission  of  wrong,  there  is  but  one  way  to  reofain  the  harmony  which  has  been 
lost.  Absolutism  will  never  yield  it.  Force  will  not  secure  it.  Compromise  will  not 
permanently  restore  it.  Nothing  will  avail  until  righteousness  is  re-established. 
Justice  must  be  done  to  those  to  whom  it  has  been  denied.  £ights  must  be  conceded 
to  those  who  have  feiirly  won  them.  Relations  must  be  adjusted  to  changed  con- 
ditions; everyone  and  everything  mnst  make  way  for  rectitude.  In  no  other  way 
whatever  vrill  the  path  of  peace  be  found.  2.  It  is  thus  with  the  human  soul.  We 
have  all  wandered  from  the  way  of  wisdom  and  of  righteousness  ;  we  have  refused  to 
God  the  love,  the  reverence,  the  service  which  is  his  due  and  which  it  is  our  highest 
intpiest  to  render.  We  have  thereby  become  disordered,  disquieted,  confused;  instead 
of  il welling  in  "a  peaceable  habitation,"  in  "quiet  resting-places,"  we  have  become 
inliahitants  of  a  realm  of  condemnation,  reproach,  peril,  agitation,  misery.  There  is  no 
way  back  to  the  home  of  rest  which  we  have  left  behind  us  but  by  a  return  to  right- 
eousness ;  that  is  to  say,  by  repentance,  the  turning  our  back  on  the  sinful  selfishness  in 
which  we  have  been  living,  and  becoming  right  with  God,  accepting  the  gracious  offer 
of  his  Son  our  Saviour  (Matt.  xi.  28,  29).  (1)  Eejection  of  truth  may  give  a  false 
lecuriti/ ;  (2)  absorption  in  worldly  pursuits  or  in  pleasurable  excitements  may  provide 
temporary  indifference ;  but  only  righteousness,  only  the  restoration  of  the  soul  to  its 
true  relation  to  God,  by  repentance  and  faith,  will  givejpeoce. 

III.    ItlOHTEOUSNESS   WILL   ENStJBE   PEACE   BOTH  IN  POSSESSION  AND  IN  PBOSPECT.      It 

will  effect :  1.  Reconciliation  with  Ood,  and  the  consequent  "  peace  which  passes 
understanding  " — a  blissful,  satisfying  "  rest  unto  the  soul,"  which  is  incomparably  more 
precious  than  any  earthly  satisfaction  to  the  body  or  the  spirit.  2.  The  inward  and 
abiding  rest  which  belongs  to  spiritual  harmony ;  this  is  the  invariable  consequence 
of  the  soul  being  in  a  right  relation  with  the  Supreme,  and  with  its  fellows,  and  of  all 
its  faculties  being  rightly  related  to  one  another.  3.  A  peaceful  departure  from  the 
present  bfe.    4.  A  home  in  the  quiet  resting-place  of  the  heavenly  land. — 0. 

Ver.  20. — Fruitful  labour.  "  Blessed  are  ye  that  sow  beside  all  waters."  "  There  will 
be  widespread  desolation,"  says  the  prophet;  "  tlie  fields  will  be  untilled,  the  land  will 
be  covered  with  briars  and  thorns  ;  but  a  glorious  change  shall  come  over  the  sCene^ 
the  'wilderness  shall  become  a  fruitful  field '(ver.  15),  the  happy  scones  of  industry 
will  again  be  witnessed,  the  arts  and  industries  of  agriculture  will  revive  and  flourish 
in  all  their  former  fulness.  Happy  w  ill  be  the  land  that  shall  put  forth  its  whole 
strength  in  the  field ;  '  blessed  are  they  that  sow  beside  all  waters.' "  Two  general  truths 
spring  from  this  passage. 

I.  'J'HAT  THEY  ARE  BLESSED  WHO  PUT  FORTH  ALL  THE  POWBES  WITH  WHICH  THET  ABB 

ENDOWED.  It  should  he  the  happiness  of  Israel  in  its  time  of  restoration  to  leave  no 
soil  uncultivated  that  would  yield  produce ;  they  would  sow  beside  all  waters.  All  its 
inhabitants,  with  all  their  agricultural  implements,  would  be  busy  in  the  open  fields  ; 
no  strength  left  unexercised  in  the  homes ;  no  weapons  left  unused  in  the  storehouses. 
Unhappy  indeed  is  (1)  the  country  whose  population  is  doomed  to  enfcirced  idleness, 
whose  looms  are  still,  whose  ploughs  are  rusting  in  the  homestead  ;  (2)  the  family  where 
sons  and  daughters  are  letting  their  various  faculties  lie  idle,  when  they  might  be  put 
forth  to  their  own  great  advantage  and  for  the  good  of  others ;  (3)  the  man  whose 
individual  powers  are  slumbering  in  his  soul,  unspent  and  undeveloped.  Blessed  are 
they  who  expend  all  the  resources  they  possess,  who  cultivate  all  their  skill  of  hand, 
who  develop  all  their  strength  of  mind,  who  so  put  out  all  their  talents  that  the  whole 
energies  of  their  spiritual  nature  will  he  employed,  increased,  perfected.  By  sowing 
beside  all  waters  is  meant  sowing  seed  in  well-watered,  and  therefore  fruitful,  soil. 
The  expression  consequently  contains  the  idea — 

II.  That  thit  are  blessed  who  are  engaged  in  remunerative  labour.  This  is 
peculiarly  true  of  the  Christian  workman.    1.  He  has  the  very  best  seed  to  sow :  truth, 


534  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxii.  1—20. 

which  God  took  centuries  to  prepare,  which  Is  the  purchase  of  a  Savioui's  tears  and 
blood,  which  is  exquisitely  adapted  to  the  soil  for  which  it  is  intended.  2.  He  has 
well-wattrcd,  i.e.  fertile,  responsive  soil  in  which  to  place  it.  He  has,  amongst  others  : 
(1)  The  virgin  soil  of  youth.  Youth  may  often  be  inattentive,  frivolous,  unstable; 
nevertheless  it  is  docile,  affectionate,  trustful,  tender-hearted.  (2)  The  prepared  soil  of 
affliction.  When  God  has  chastened  the  soul  with  his  fatherly  hand,  there  is  a  softness 
of  spirit,  an  impressionableness  of  heart  which  makes  words  of  comfort,  of  exhortation, 
of  warning  peculiarly  welcome.  (3)  The  productive  soil  of  poverty.  Prom  the  days  when 
"  the  common  people  heard  Jesus  gladly,"  and  when  it  was  said  "  to  the  poor  the 
gospel  is  preached,"  to  these  times  in  which  we  live,  the  poor  have  been  comparatively 
rich  in  faith  and  hope.  By  those  to  whom  the  riches  and  enjoyments  of  caith  are 
denied,  the  treasures  of  truth  and  the  blessedness  of  the  kingdom  of  God  are  likely  to  be 
prized  and  gained  (see  1  Cor.  i.  26 — 28).  Blessed  are  they  who  sow  such  fertile  soils, 
for  theirs  is  not  only  the  blessing  which  comes  to  all  faithful  labourers — the  approval  of 
Christ  and  their  own  spiritual  advancement — but  the  great  "joy  of  harvest,"  the  joy 
which  fills  the  husbandman's  heart  when  he  "comes  again"  from  the  "heavy-fruited" 
fields,  "  bringing  his  sheaves  with  him." — C. 

Ver.  1. — 77ie  ideal  reign.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  first,  and  historical, 
reference  of  this  prophecy  is  to  the  reign  of  Hczekiah.  Cheyne  says,  "  It  descrihes  the 
happy  condition  of  Judah  when  idols  have  been  cast  away,  and  the  rod  of  Assyrian 
tyranny  has  been  removed.  A  more  just  and  merciful  government  shall  then  be 
enjoyed,  the  result  of  a  large  outpouring  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  As  the  consequence  of 
this,  moral  distinctions  shall  no  longer  be  confounded — men  shall  be  estimated  at  their 
true  value.  When  Isaiah  wrote  he  may  have  had  grounds  for  the  charitable  belief  th;it 
his  sovereign  would  really  be  equal  to  the  demands  providentially  made  upon  him." 
But  the  pro[)hecy  is  Messianic.  Its  anticipations  are  only  fully  realized  in  the  king- 
dom of  Christ.  Weber  says, "  The  picture  which  the  prophet  paints  here  of  the  Church 
of  the  last  time  is  the  picture  of  every  true  congregation  of  Christ.  In  it  the  will  of 
the  Lord  must  be  the  only  law  according  to  which  men  judge,  and  not  any  fleshly  con- 
sideration of  any  sort.  In  it  there  must  be  open  eyes  and  ears  for  God's  work  and  word  ; 
and  il^in  some  things  precedence  is  really  allowed  to  the  children  of  this  world,  still  in 
spiritual  things  the  understanding  must  be  right  and  the  speech  clear.  Finally,  in  it 
persons  must  be  valued  according  to  their  true  Christian,  moral  worth,  not  according  to 
advantages  that  before.  God  are  rather  a  reproach  than  an  honour."  It  is  almost  impos- 
sible for  us  to  realize  the  idea  of  a  theocracy,  or  direct  rule  of  God  over  a  people,  as  the 
pious.  Jew  did.  Exactly  what  Isaiah  pictures  is  the  theocracy  fully  established  in  a 
spiritual  sense;  and  of  this  Hezekiah's  reformed  kingdom  gave  good  sugg.stions.  To 
bring  the  subject  home  to  modern  congregations,  the  leading  features  of  a  spiritual 
theocracy,  a  real  and  practical  reign  of  God,  in  lives  and  in  society,  should  be  shown 
thus — 

I.  God's  will  shotjld  be  the  oue  supreme  law. 

II.  God's  Wobd  should  be  the  practical  rule  of  conduct. 

III.  God's  Son  should  be  the  great  Model  of  characteei. 

IV.  God-likeness  should  be  the  one  objeot  op  pursuit. 

Be  it  heart,  be  it  life,  be  it  Church,  or  be  it  society,  wherever  this  is  an  honest  and 
truthful  desciiption,  there  is  the  "  ideal  reign ; "  there  the  woi-ds  of  the  text  are  fulfilled, 
and  a  "  king  reigns  in  righteousness."  It  is  to  establish  individually  and  imiversally 
just  this  kingdom,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  come.  He  begins  his  work  by 
subduing  to  his  obedience  tingle  souls. — E.  T. 

Ver.  6.— ZHe  correction  of  social  confusions.  "When  men's  eyes  are  opened,  they 
will  no  longer  confound  the  essential  distinctions  of  moral  character,  because  they  will 
no  longer  be  deceived  by  mere  appearances  "  (J.  A.  Alexander).  "  A  due  discrimination 
of  character  would  be  made  in  the  times  of  the  Messiah,  and  persons  and  things 
would  be  called  by  their  appropriate  names  (comp.  Mai.  iii.  18;  Matt,  xxiii.  13 — 33; 
Eph.  V.  5)"  (Henderson).  "The  differences  between  good  and  evil,  virtue  and  vice, 
shall  be  kept  up,  and  no  more  confounded  by  those  who  put  darkness  for  light  and 
light  for  darkness  "  (Matthew  Henry).    These  sentences  show  that  the  subject  intro> 


CH.  xxx«.  1— 20.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISA.tAIl  53.; 


duced  is  the  influence  of  a  righteous  reign  in  helping  men  to  see  things  as  they 
really  are,  and  to  estimate  persons  according  to  their  true  worth,  and  not  according, 
to  the  mere  show  they  may  make.  We  deal  specially  with  those  coniusions  wliicii 
come  hy  false  judgments  of  persons,  and  these  take  the  following,  among  otlier  forms. 

L  Admiration  or  talbnts  blinds  us  to  badness  of  chabaoteb.  What  is  thought 
to  he  "  genius  "  is  too  often  allowed  to  excuse  all  sorts  of  laxity.  The  men  who  cau 
astonish  and  amuse  us  may  be  unclean,  untruthful,  injurious  ;  hut  we  readily  pass  all 
this  by.  When  righteousness  reigns,  talent  will  have  to  go  with  character,  or  men  will 
count  it  to  be  Satanic  agency.  What  a  man  can  do  must  never  be  separated  from  what 
the  man  t«. 

II.  The  command  or  wealth  brings  plattebbbs  to  bad  men.  There  is  no  more 
i  ainful  sign  of  the  moral  deterioration  of  a  race,  than  its  worship  of  the  rich  because 
they  are  rich.  Money  can  never  make  goodness.  Wealth  is  not  the  stability  of  a 
nation.  Its  hope  lies  wholly  in  its  good  men.  Yet  the  rich  man  may  be  violent,  rude, 
masterful,  cruel ;  nevertheless,  multitudes  will  fawn  on  him,  and  call  the  "  vile  person 
hberal."  When  righteousness  reigns,  that  confusion  will  be  rectified,  and  the  rich  man 
shall  have  worship  only  if  he  deserves  it  for  what  he  is. 

III.  The  bank  and  sooiai.  position  of  men  now  bewildeb  their  fellows,  and 
MAKB  TBUE  ESTIMATES  NBABLT  IMPOSSIBLE.     Well  does  Robert  BuTiu  remind  us  that 

"The  rank  is  but  the  guinea-stamp, 
A  man's  a  man  for  a  that." 

No  word  of  bitterness  need  be  spoken  concerning  those  to  whom  God  has  entrusted 
talents,  or  wealth,  or  social  position.  The  point  to  enforce  is  simply  the  peril  of  letting 
these  things  confuse  our  ideas  of  moral  character  and  moral  worth.  Evil  is  evil,  and 
must  be  denounced  as  evil,  in  the  genius,  the  man  of  wealth,  and  the  man  of  title. 
L(-t  Christ  reign,  and  sin  will  be  called  sin,  wherever  it  is  found.  He  will  strip  all 
disguises  off,  and  show  us  things  as  they  are,  and  men  as  they  are.  The  Lord  hasten  his 
coming  1 — R.  T. 

Ver.  8. — The  stability  of  liberal  men.  "  The  liberal  deviseth  liberal  things ;  and  by 
liberal  things  shall  he  stand,"  or,  "  be  established."  It  is  q  uite  possible  that  Isaiah  had 
in  mind  the  good  King  Hezekiah,  of  whom  very  noble  and  generous  things  are  narrated 
in  2  Chron.  xxx.  22 — 26.  Passing  away  to  Messianic  times,  we  are  to  see  that  the 
true  subjects  of  Messiah,  the  ideal  Prince,  the  King  who  reigns  in  righteousness,  will 
be  distinguished  by  a  noble-minded  benevolence,  contriving  and  persevering  in  the 
execution  of  enlarged  schemes  of  charity.  In  Ps.  ex.  3  they  are  very  strikingly 
described  as  "  a  people  of  voluntarinesses."  The  term  here  used,  "  liberal,"  is  a  compre- 
hensive one  and  may  fairly  include — 

I.  The  noble-minded  man.  That  is  the  man  who  takes  high,  generous  views ;  who 
does  not  make  himself,  and  his  own  small  interests,  the  measure  of  all  his  opinions  and 
judgments.  The  man  who  is,  everywhere  and  in  everything,  ruled  by  what  is  right, 
and  not  by  what  will  pay.  That  man  may  often  seem  to  be  at  disadvantage.  Keenly 
self-interested  men  push  him  aside  and  push  before  him.  It  is  not  really  so.  God 
will  give  him  the  only  true  and  eternal  prosperities.  He  deviseth  liberal  things ;  in 
liberal  things  he  perseveres;  and  by  liberal  things  he  shall  stand. 

n.  The  broad-minded  man.  Who  is  not  limited  in  his  views  by  the  sect  or 
school  to  which  he  belongs,  the  class  in  society  of  which  he  forms  part,  or  even  by  the 
bias  which  follows  his  own  preferences  in  reading.  The  man  who  knows  the  "  world 
is  wide,"  and  has  room  for  all  kinds  of  men  and  all  varieties  of  opinion.  The  man  who 
is  quite  sure  there  is  a  "soul  of  good  somewhere,  even  in  things  evil."  That  man 
makes  the  best  of  life,  gets  honey  everywhere.  He  is  a  "  liberal  soul,  that  shall  be 
made  fat." 

III.  The  charitably  minded  man.  One  who  accepts  cheerfully  the  great  "  law  of 
service,"  and  recognixes  that  all  he  has  is  for  the  use  and  benefit  of  others.  It  is  all 
for  spending,  none  for  hoarding.  "  Even  Christ  pleased  not  himself."  He  could  say, 
"  I  am  among  you  as  one  that  serveth."  One  who  is  sensitive  to  the  wants  and  woes 
of  his  fellows,  and  has  in  him  the  soul  of  the  Samaritan,  who  pities  and  helps,  rather 
thaii  the  soul  of  priest  or  of  Levite,  who  pity  and  pass  on.    Such  a  man  puts  con- 


5:!6  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [en.  xxxn.  1— 2a 

trivance,  care,  f.nd  self-denial  into  his  fiervice.  And  such  &  man  " shall  stand."  "The 
providence  of  Grod  will  reward  him  for  his  liberality  with  a  settled  prosperity  and  an 
established  reputation.  The  grace  of  God  will  give  him  abundance  of  satisfaction  and 
confirmed  peace  in  his  own  bosom  "  (comp.  Ps.  cxii.  5,  6). — R.  T. 

Ver.  11. — Folk  who  are  at  ease.  Special  reference  is  made  to  the  women  of  the 
upper  classes  in  Jerusalem,  who  were  living  in  self-indulgence  and  extravagance,  and 
setting  mischievous  exaitiple  to  all  the  women  of  the  land.  The  coming  woes  would 
affect  them  all  the  more  seriously  because  of  the  luxuries  which  they  had  gathered 
round  themselves,  and  which  had  become  to  them  fancied  necessities.  No  doubt'the 
idle,  self-indulgent,  and  too  often  profligate  conduct  of  these  women  greatly  added  to 
the  pressure  of  the  existing  evils.  It  is  suggested  to  us  to  consider  how  greatly,  in 
every  age,  women  represent  and  augment  the  evils  of  their  times.  Many  a  man  has 
been  ruined  by  his  efforts  to  feed  tee  pride,  vanity,  and  luxury  of  these  ease-loving, 
careless  wives  and  daughters.  And  nations  have  lost  their  manhood  in  the  moral 
decay  of  the  "mothers"  of  the  race.  "  When  a  land  goes  to  ruin  a  great  part  of  the 
blame  of  it  rests  upon  the  women.  For  they  are  more  easily  prompt^  to  evil,  as  they 
are  to  good."  But  this  "being  at  ease"  describes  the  condition  of  what  is  called  a 
"  high  state  of  civilization,"  when  money  is  fl.ccumulated  in  the  hands  of  the  few,  and 
these  few,  having  no  need  to  work,  give  themselves  up  to  self-indulgence,  manufacturing 
wants,  and  constantly  craving  for  some  excitement  to  relieve  the  dreadful  ennui  of  life. 

I.  Men  and  women  should  not  be  at  ease.  There  is  work  to  be  done.  Work 
for  all.  It  is  put  close  to  our  hand.  There  are  evils  to  fight — evils  so  gigantic  that 
every  man  and  woman  niviy  have  a  place  in  the  soldier-ranks.  God  worketh  hitherto; 
Christ  woiks ;  and  woe  to  all  who,  in  negligence  or  in  rebelliousness,  refuse  to  bear  the 
yokel 

II.  Many  men  and  women  must  masteb  tiiemsblveb  and  thkib  circumstances 
\t  THEY  ABE  TO  CEASE  TO  BE  AT  EASE.  Por  carelcss  ways  may  have  become  fixed 
habits.  We  may  have  deceived  ourselves  into  the  idea  that  our  "  doing  nothing,"  our 
busy  idleness,  is  really  doing  something.  We  begin  to  take  life  into  our  hauds  for 
ordering,  when  we  fece  the  question,  "  What  is  life  given  me  for?" 

"  Life  is  real,  life  is  earnest." 

III.  God's  woe  surely  comes  on  all  who  keep  at  base.  Out  Lord  pictured  this 
in  his  purable  of  the  "  rich  man  and  Lazaru-;."  That  rich  man,  living  at  ease,  is  not 
to  be  envied  while  he  lived,  for  the  woe  of  God  lay  on  him,  making  bitterness  for  his 
many  idle  hours.  Much  less  is  he  to  be  envied  when  his  life  is  done,  for  the  woe  of 
God  is  on  him  there.  "  In  hell  lie  lift  up  his  eyes,  being  in  torments."  "  Tremble,  ye 
women  that  are  at  ease ! " — R.  T. 

Ver.  15. — The  Spirit  as  a  quickening  Sain.  The  results  produced  by  heavy  rains  in 
the  East  are  so  striking  that  these  rains  become  a  suggestive  figure  of  the  influence  of 
God's  Spirit  on  souls  and  on  Churches.  In  times  of  prolonged  drought,  the  ground 
is  burnt  up  and  chapped,  and  eveiy  sign  of  vegetation  is  destroyed.  Then  come  the 
rains,  the  life  in  the  soil  responds,  and  in  a  few  hours  the  world  is  green  again.  The 
figure  of  "  pouring  forth,"  or  "  pouring  out,"  needs,  however,  to  be  very  carefully  used 
m  relation  to  God's  Spirit.  It  is  only  suited  to  the  one  aspect  of  the  Spirit  as  an 
ihfluence.  It  may  be  misconceived  if  applied  to  God  the  Spirit  regarded  as  a  Person. 
When  we  use  this  term  "pouring"  nowadays,  we  should  carefully  keep  in  mind  the 
figure  of  the  rains,  with  which  it  is  properly  associated.  The  Jewish  Church  thought 
of  the  Spirit  as  an  influence.  The  Christian  Church  has  received  the  largei  revelation, 
and  knows  Of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  a  Divine  Person,  "dwelling  with  us,  and  being  in  us." 
He  comes  to  us.  We  may  grieve  him.  Ho  may  depart.  But  only  as  a  figure  can  we 
now  speak  of  him  as  being  "  poured  on  us."  The  figure  of  "pouring"  is  also  given  in 
Joel  iii.  1. 

I.  Christ's  Church  is  too  oftun  as  a  dead  thing.  Illustrate  from  a  parched 
field.  Only  noxious  weeds  can  get  vitality  out  of  such  n  soil.  Fields  are  dead  because 
God  withholds  his  rains.  Souls  are  dead,  Churches  are  dead,  because  God  withholls 
bis  Spirit.     Such  withholding  is  done  in  judgment.     The  deadness  of  a  Church  U 


OH.  xxto.  1— 20.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAtt.  S37 


always  begun  in  neglect  of  God,  and  self-indulgence.  The  first  love  fades  out;  and 
then  spirituai  death  waits,  "crouching  at  the  door."  Dead,  for  there  are  no  expressions 
indicating  the  life  of  trust  and  love. 

n.  OuiiT  God  can  quicken  the  dead.  This  one  thing  is  always  and  altogether 
out  of  human  reach.  Man  can  do  much;  but  he  cannot  make  anything  live.  Gtod 
quickens  dead  souls,  and  dead  Churches,  by  the  gift  of  his  Spirit.  Life  wakens  life. 
The  Spirit  of  God  moved  on  the  face  of  the  waters,  and  brought  forth  life.  Tliat  Spirit 
of  God  comes  down,  like  refreshing  rains,  upon  the  thirsty  fields.  That  Spirit  of  God 
enters  the  temple  of  a  human  soul,  and  the  response  is  life,  finding  all  due  expression 
in  activity :  "  The  wilderness  becomes  a  fruitful  field."  "  The  kingdom  of  Messiah  was 
brought  in,  and  set  up,  by  the  pouring  out  of  the  Spirit;  and  so  it  is  still  kept  up,  auii 
will  be  to  the  end."  Then,  with  unceasing  constancy  and  earnestness  it  becomes  us  to 
ppay  for  the  quickening,  reviving  grace  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost. — R.  T. 

Ver.  n.— Righteousness  and  peace.  Christianity  means  " lighteousness,"  and 
"righteousness"  is  an  active  power,  ever  working  towards  the  production  of  peace, 
quietness,  and  mutual  confidence.  "The  element  of  peace  is  that  by  which  order  is 
estalilished  and  perpetuated,  people  are  brought  to  cordial  agreement  and  willing  sub- 
mission, unity  is  made  a  living  and  growing  fact,  and  all  the  arts  of  domestic  life  and 
of  civilized  communities  are  promoted."  The  great  Napoleon  said,  "War  is  the 
business  of  barbarians."  Our  own  Wellington  said,  "Men  who  have  nice  notions  of 
wligion  have  no  business  to  be  soUliers."  Lord  Brougham  aa;d,  "  I  abominate  war  as 
unchristian.  I  hold  it  the  greatest  of  human  crimes.  I  deem  it  to  include  all  others — 
violence,  blood,  rapine,  fraud,  everything  that  can  deform  the  character,  alter  the 
nature,  and  debase  the  name  of  man."  John  Howe  wrote  in  this  way,  "  Very  plain 
it  is  that  war  is  a  mark  of  the  apostasy,  and  stigmatizes  man  as  fallen  from  God,  in 
a  degenerated,  revolted  state;  it  is  the  horrid  issue  of  men's  having  forsaken  God, 
and  of  their  being  abandoned  by  him  to  the  hurry  of  their  own  furious  lusts  and 
passions." 

L  Christianity  ib,  distinotivei.t,  righteousness.  This  is  its  essential  character- 
istic, and  its  necessary  work.  In  this  it  stands  alone,  differing  from  all  other  religions. 
Matthew  Arnold  finds  an  expression  for  God  which,  though  it  has  been  well  scorned, 
is  really  suggestive  and  hel|)ful.  He  speaks  of  him  as  "the  Eternal  which  makes  for 
righteousness,"  which  is  always  working  towards  this  end,  and  regards  this  as  the 
highest  of  all  attainments.  Other  religions  propose  methods  for  propitiating  God ;  in 
Ohristianity  Ood  proposes  to  make  men  good.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  first,  the  model 
Christian,  and  he  is  good — "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  sinners."  His 
requirement,  of  all  his  disciples,  is  personal  character — righteousness.  Apostles  say  of 
this  religion,  "Herein  is  the  righteousness  of  God  revealed,  from  faith  to  faith." 
Clirist's  personal  call  is,  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy."  Christian  growth  is  "  changing 
into  his  image  from  glory  to  glory."  We  must  "follow  peace  with  all  men,  and 
holiness,  without  which  none  can  see  the  Lord."  Prophets  pictured  the  Christian 
ages,  and  saw  holiness  so  pervading  that  it  was  even  engraven  on  the  bells  of  the 
horses.  Let  the  Christian  faith  come  to  our  hearts,  and  it  will  work  out  into  righteous- 
ness. Let  it  go  forth  into  society,  and  it  will  establish  right  principles,  show  right 
ways,  give  right  impulses,  tone  with  a  right  spirit,  and  work  on  until  righteousness 
flows  over  all  the  land,  like  the  waves  ol'  the  sea. 

IL  Righteousness  is  linked  closely  with  peace.  "  The  fruit  of  righteousness  is 
sown  in  peace."  These  two  things  can  never  be  separated.  Find  the  one,  and  you  will 
soon  find  also  the  other.  Unrighteousness,  uncharily,  selfish  passions,  an!  war  go 
naturally  together,  hand-in-hand.  Begin  "righteousness"  anywhere,  and  you  have 
started  on  its  working  an  active  power  that  makes  for  peace.  Every  soldier  that 
walks  our  streets,  every  cannon  forged  in  our  arsenals,  is  a  testimony  that  the  sin-curse 
yet  hangs  over  us.  We  are  not  yet  "  all  righteous,"  or  the  sight  and  the  sound  of  war 
would  to  heard  no  more.  When,  as  individuals,  we  are  set  right  with  God,  peace 
comes  at  once  into  our  hearts,  and  peiceableness  gives  tone  and  character  to  au  our 
relations.  The  inner  conflicts  are  stayed;  the  struggles  between  the  flesh  and  the 
spirit  are  checked;  the  fever-heat  of  ambition  is  soothed;  charity  and  brotherhood 
bring  vs  into  peace  with  all  men.    The  gospel  comes,  "preaching  peace  by  Jesus 


5S8  TttE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAlAH.    [ch.  xxsti.  1— 20 

Christ."  Righteousness,  thus  getting  rotmd  it  the  one  small  circle  of  s  life,  soon 
begins  to  widen  its  sphere.  It  rays  out  on  every  side.  Tt  flows  forth,  like  a  sweet 
scent,  purifying  the  atmospheres  wherever  a  man  goes.  Families  would  have  a  "  peace 
passing  understanding "  if  their  members  were  "all  righteous."  Our  Churches  would 
cease  to  be  the  scenes  of  dissension,  if  the  members  were  "  all  righteous."  Social  life 
would  no  longer  witness  the  bitter  antagonism  of  classes,  if  the  people  were  "all 
righteous."  Nations  would  soon  turn  wasteful  war  expenditure  on  armies  and  weapons 
into  the  fruitful  channels  of  commerce,  and  gracious  schemes  of  education  and 
philanthropy,  if  righteousness  did  but  pluck  up  ambitions,  envyings,  and  rivalries, 
and  plant  in  charity,  brotherhood,  and  peace.  Envy,  hatred,  malice,  pride,  ambition, — 
these  unrighteous  things  bring  forth  war.  Charity,  meekness,  self-denial, — these 
righteous  things  keep  happy  fellowship  with  gentle  peace.  "  First  pure,  then  peace- 
able." Alas  that  the  prophetic  picture  should  still  seem  to  be  but  a  vision  of  the 
distant  future !  But  what  a  vision  it  is !  and  how  our  hearts  spring  towards  it  1 
Prophets  paiat  it.  Saints  pray  for  it.  God  is  working  towards  it.  And  it  shall 
surely  come.  "  The  mountains  shall  bring  peace  to  the  people,  and  the  little  hills,  by 
righteousness."  "  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  have  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord, 
and  of  his  Christ  [the  Prince  of  Peace],  and  he  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever." — R.  T. 

Ver.  18. — "  Quiet  retting-places."  The  figure  in  this  verse  is  connected  with  the 
relief  afforded  by  the  destruction  of  Sennacherib's  army,  and  consequent  retirement  of 
Sennacherib  to  Assyria.  Before  the  invaders  all  persons  living  in  the  country  had 
to  flee  to  the  shelter  of  the  walled  cities,  abandoning  the  property  which  they  could 
not  readily  carry  with  them.  On  the  removal  of  the  invaders,  the  sense  of  security 
would  return,  and  such  persons  would  go  home  and  find  "quiet  resting-places." 
We  see  in  this  passage  an  on-looking  to  the  times  when  the  Holy  Ghost  should  be 
given,  and  he,  ruling  in  hearts  and  lives,  would  make  for  all  trustful  souls  "quiet 
resting-places."  Treating  the  text  meditatively,  we  dwell  on  times  when,  for  us,  this 
promise  is  realized. 

I.  The  quiet  bestiko  of  bvenino-time.  Such  it  is  for  wearied  bodies  and  worn 
minds.  Soothing  is  the  calmness  of  natural  evening,  when  the  winds  fail,  the  sun 
throws  level  yellow  beams  and  long  shadows,  and  the  thousand  noises  of  earth  are 
subdued.  Evening  has  a  gracious  influence  on  our  spirits.  It  is  the  time  for  medita- 
tion, with  Isaac.  Very  precious  to  Christian  hearts  are  the  quiet  places  for  meditation, 
when  holy  feeling  can  be  nourished. 

II.  The  quiet  restino  of  the  sabbath.  Its  first  idea  is  "rest."  We  feel  quiet; 
aa  if  a  spell  had  been  breathed  over  us.  The  strain  of  life  is  relaxed.  The  world  is 
away.  We  belong  to  the  eternal  world.  Life-bustle  is  stilled.  We  can  give  room 
to  other  thoughts,  and  so  we  rest,  body,  mind,  and  soul. 

III.  The  quiet  eestino  op  times  op  affliction.  Such  times  come  into  all  lives. 
Times  when  we  must  be  still.  In  illness,  and  in  convalescence,  there  are  many  quiet, 
lonely  hours.  These  are  the  scenes  to  which  Christ  invites  us  when  he  says,  "Come 
ye  into  a  desert  place,  and  rest  awhile." 

IV.  The  quiet  eesting-placb  of  death.  The  grave  is  spoken  of  as  the  "  place 
where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at  rest."  And  the  place 
where  there  are  memorials  of  the  dead  is  often  a  most  "quiet  resting-place"  for  the 
living.  This  may  be  illustrated  by  the  soothing,  silencing,  solemnizing  influence 
exerted  on  us  by  a  visit  to  Westminster  Abbey.  On  earth  there  can  hardly  be  found 
a  more  "  quiet  resting-place."  Sometimes  the  chamber  where  we  watch  the  dying  of 
a  saint  of  God  is  such  a  place.  Beautiful  to  see  the  pain-worn  face  at  last  go  into 
the  repose  of  death.  "  When  sinks  the  weary  soul  to  rest."  We  may  add  that  those 
who  have  found  rest  in  God  prove  how  graciously  he  gives  retfftU  momentt  in  the  very 
midst  of  the  hurry  and  worry  of  life. — R.  T. 

Ver.  20. — Sowing  freely.  T  ais  is  part  of  the  description  of  restored  prosperity  when 
the  national  troubles  are  removed.  "  While  the  enemy  shall  be  brought  low,  the  Jews 
shall  cultivate  their  land  in  undisturbed  prosperity."  The  Assyrians  must  have  almost 
entirely  stopped  all  agricultural  processes,  and  this  involved  terrible  losses  and  suffer- 
ings.   In  explanation  of  the  figure  of  the  text  it  is  suggested  that,  where  the  seed  is 


OH.  xxxm.  1— 24.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PilOPHET  ISAlAH. 


539 


sovra  in  the  soil  covered  by  water,  it  wai  onstomaiy  to  send  oxon  iiito  the  water  to 
tread  the  ground  before  the  seed  was  cast,  so  as  to  prevent  it  from  being  washed  away 
by  the  subsidence  of  the  waters.  This,  however,  applies  to  such  countries  as  Egypt, 
and  to  such  crops  as  rice.  The  point  set  forth  by  the  test  seems  to  be  that  quiet  and 
persistent  continuance  in  duty,  in  daily  toil,  may  be  the  most  efBcient  expression  of 
our  trust  in  God.  Regarding  the  sower  as  a  type  of  the  Christian  worker,  we  may 
note  the  following  things. 

I.  The  sower  is  a  man  in  trust.  He  has  the  seed-corn  for  next  year's  harvest. 
The  food  of  the  people  depends,  in  measure,  on  each  one's  faithfulness  to  his  trust. 
The  Christian  is  a  man  put  in  trust.  He  has  what  is  for  the  blessing  of  men.  Truth, 
more  precious  than  seeds.  Powers  of  sympathy  and  love  that  bring  bountiful  harvests. 
Wealth,  and  knowledge,  and  position,  and  opportunities,  that  may  all  prove  life-giving 
to  men.     Above  all,  he  has  the  trust  of  the  gospeL 

II.  The  sowEii  is  kequikbd  to  sow  all  he  has  in  trust.  He  is  not  to  live  on  the 
seed,  fie  is  not  to  store  it  up  safely.  He  is  not  to  use  it  for  any  objects  of  his  own. 
He  must  not  delay  in  fulfilling  his  master's  will  with  tlie  seed.  Jt  was  given  to  him 
that  he  might  sow  it  all  in  the  soil.  So  God  would  have  the  Christian  put  to  use 
every  talent,  every  trust,  he  has  committed  to  him.  In  this  our  Lord  is  our  example. 
Everything  God  gave  him  he  gave  away:  love,  truth,  comfort,  healing,  pity,  time, 
strength,  character,  life, — all,  he  gave  away.  In  him  there  was  no  getting  to  heep ; 
only  getting  to  give. 

HI.  The  sower  is  required  to  sow  freely.  "  Beside  all  waters."  Not  too  nicely 
examining  the  conditions  of  the  soil ;  not  seleciing  just  the  deep  and  prepared  earth, 
but  scattering  freely,  and  scattering  wide.  The  Christian  never  knows  where,  in  Qod^s 
fields,  the  richest  harvests  will  bo  reaped.  So  he  sows  all  over  the  field,  sows  in 
perseverance,  and  sows  in  faith. 

In  conclusion,  it  may  be  shown  that  the  true  snwer  is  much  more  concerned  with  the 
excellence  of  his  sowing  than  with  the  results  that  may  attend  it.  These  he  must 
leave  altogether  in  the  hands  of  him  who  surely  will  not  "  let  his  work  return  imto 
him  void."— E.  T. 


Section  X.    A  Pbopheot  of  Judgment  on  Assyria  (ch.  xxxiii.). 
EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXin. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  Judgment  on  Assyria 
AND  Deliverance  of  Jerusalem,  stated 
GENERALLY.  Events  had  progressed  since 
the  preceding  prophecies  were  delivered. 
The  negotiations  carried  on  with  Sen- 
nacherib had  been  futile  (ver.  7),  the  heavy 
fine  imposed  and  paid  (2  Kings  xviii  14) 
had  been  of  no  avail  (ver.  18)  ;  the  Assyrian 
monarch  was  still  dissatisfied,  and  threat- 
ened a  second  siege.  Already  he  was  upon 
his  march,  spoiling  and  ravaging  (ver.  1). 
The  people  of  the  country  districts  had 
removed  into  the  town  (ver.  8) — in  a  little 
time  the  vast  host  might  be  expected  to 
appear  before  the  walls.  All  was  terror, 
grief,  and  confusion.  Under  these  cireum- 
stanoes,  Isaiah  is  once  more  conmiissioned 
to  declare  the  approaching  discomfiture  of 
the  mighty  conqueror,  and  deliverance  of 
Jerusalem  oat  of  his  hand  (vera.  3,  4).    The 


deliverance  nshera  in  a  reign  of  righteons- 
ness  (vers.  5,  6). 

Ver.  1. — Woe  to  thee  that  spoilest.  The 
"  spoiler "  is  here,  evidently,  Assyria — the 
world-power  of  this  entire  group  of  pro- 
phecies (see  especially  ch.  xxx.  31 ;  xxxi.  8), 
and  the  greatest  "  spoiler"  of  Isaiah's  time. 
Thou  wast  not  spoiled ;  i.e.  "  that  hast  not 
yet  been  spoiled  thyself."  A  covert  threat 
is  conveyed  in  the  words.  And.  dealest 
treacherously;  rather,  tisest  violence  (com- 
pare the  comment  on  ch.  xxi.  2).  When  thou 
Shalt  cease  to  spoil,  etc.  Conquering  nations 
cannot  with  safety  pause  on  their  career. 
Their  aggressions  nave  roused  so  many 
enmities  that,  let  them  cease  to  attack,  and 
at  once  they  are  attacked  in  their  turn. 
Every  man's  hand  is  against  the  spoiler 
whose  hand  has  been  against  every  man. 

Ver.  2. — 0  lord,  etc.  The  mingling  of 
prayer  with  prophecy  is  very  unusual,  and 
indicative  of  highly  excited  feeling.  Isaiah 
realizes  fully  the  danger  of  his  people  and 
nation,  and  knows  that  without  prayer 
there  is  no  deliverance.  His  prayer  is  at 
once  an  outpouring  of  his  own  heart,  and 


S40 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAL4.H.    [oh.  xxxm.  1— 24. 


>n  exBtrple  to  others.  "We  have  waited  for 
thee  (ooiiip.  ch.  viii.  17;  xxvi.  8).  Their 
Arm ;  i.e.  "  the  Arm  of  thy  people."  Every 
morning.  Gontlnually,  day  by  day,  since 
their  need  of  thy  support  ia  continual. 

Ver.  3. — At  the  noise  of  the  tumult  the 
people  fled;  rather,  the  people$;  i.e.  the 
contingents  from  many  nations  which  made 
up  the  huge  army  of  Sennacherib.  The 
"  noise  "  is  that  caused  by  God  "  lifting  up 
himself"  (comp.  I's.  xxix.  3 — 9). 

Ver.  4. — ^Your  spoil  shall  he  gathered. 
The  "spoilins"  of  As^yiia  would  commence 
with  the  discomfiture  of  the  ijr.at  host.  In 
the  historiofil  narrative  (2  Ki  iga  six.  35; 
ch.  xxxvii.  36)  notliing  is  said  uf  it;  but, 
beyond  a  doulit,  when  the  host  was  lo  a 
large  extent  destroyed,  and  the  remainder 
fled,  there  must  Iiave  been  an  enormous 
booty  left  behind,  which  the  enemies  of  tlie 
Assyrians  would  naturally  seize.  A  further 
spoiling  of  the  fugitives  probably  followed  ; 
and,  the  prestige  of  the  great  king  being 
gone,  marauding  bands  would  probably  on 
all  sides  ravage  the  Assyrian  territory. 
Like  the  gathering  of  the  caterpillar.  The 
"  caterpillar  "  (Icliosil)  is  probably  the  grub 
out  of  which  the  locust  develops — a  very 
destructive  insect.  Shall  he  run.  It  would 
be  better  to  render,  ^liall  they  run.  The 
word,  indeed,  is  in  the  singular ;  but  it  is 
used  distributively,  uf  ilie  varimis  spoilers. 

Ver.  5. — The  Lord  is  exalted.  His  de- 
struction of  the  Assyri.in  host  is  an  exalta- 
tion of  God ;  i.e.  it  causes  him  to  be  exalted 
in  the  thoughts  of  tuose  who  have  cogni- 
zance of  the  fact  (comp.  Exod.  xv.  14 — 16; 
Ps.  xcvi.  3 — 10,  etc.).  It  is  an  indication 
to  them  that  he  has  his  dwelling  on  high, 
and  is  the  true  King  of  heaven.  He  hath 
filled  Zioa  with  judgment,  etc.  (comp.  ch. 
xxxii.  16 — 17).  The  destruction  is,  in  part, 
the  result,  in  part  the  cause,  of  the  Jews  once 
more  turning  to  God,  putting  away  their 
iniquities,  and  establishing  the  reign  of 
iustice  and  righteousne.s8  in  the  land  (see 
ch.  i.  26). 

Ver.  6.— Wisdom  and  knowledge  shall  be 
the  stability  of  thy  times ;  literally,  and 
the  stability  of  thy  times  shall  be  li.a  consist 
in)  a  rich  store  of  salvations,  tcisdinn,  and 
knowledge.  The  prophet  hero  addresses 
the  people  of  Judah  in  the  second  p  rson, 
though  in  the  next  clause  he  reverts  to  tlie 
third.  Such  transitions  are  common  in 
ancient  compositions,  and  especially  cha- 
racterize the  writings  of  Isaiah.  The  fear 
of  the  Lord  is  his  treasure ;  i.e.  the  wisdom 
intended  is  tliat  which  is  based  upon  "the 
fear  of  the  Lord  "  (P.s.  cxi.  10).  This  will 
be  at  once  Judiili's  "  treasure,"  and  a 
guarantee  of  htnbility  to  her  government 
and  institutions  (o>  impure  the  Homiletics  on 
cli.  xxxii.  15 — li}. 


Vers.  7 — 12.  —  The  Pkophet  ENTSBa 
FTTRTHER  INTO  Pabtioulabs.  Having 
"  sketched  the  main  outlines  of  his  revela- 
tion," Isaiah  proceeds  to  "  fill  in  and  apply 
the  details"  (Cheyne).  He  first  describes 
the  despair  and  low  'condition  of  Judah : 
the  men  of  war  wailing  aloud ;  the  ambas- 
sadors just  returned  from  Lachish  weeping 
at  the  ill  success  of  their  embassy  ;  all 
travelling  stopped ;  the  land  wasted  and 
made  a  desei  t ;  the  Ass}  rians  still  ravaging 
and  destroying,  despite  the  peace  which 
had  been  made  (2  Kings  xviii.  14 — 16). 
Then  suddeuly  he  sees  Jehovah  rousing 
himself  (ver.  10),  and  the  Assyrians  con- 
sumed, as  if  with  a  fire  (vers.  11, 12). 

Ver.  7. — Behold,  their  valiant  ones  shall 
ory  without.  "  Their  lion-hearts  "  (Cheyne); 
"heroes"  (Delitzsch).  Literally,  lions  of 
God  (comp.  ch.  xxix.  1).  They  raise  a 
cry  of  mourning  in  the  streets,  with  child- 
like effusiveness  (comj).  Herod.,  viii.  99;  ix. 
24).  The  ambassadors  of  peace.  Hezekiuh 
probably  sent  seveml  embassies  to  Sen- 
nacherib in  the  course  of  the  war.  One 
went  to  Lacliish,  offering  submission,  in 
B.o.  701  (2  Kiugs  xviii.  14);  another  to 
Nineveh,  with  tribute  and  presents,  in  the 
same  or  the  following  year  (2  Kings  xviii.  1 5 ; 
comp.  '  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  135).  A  third 
probably  sought  to  deprecate  Sennacherib's 
anger,  when  he  made  his  seoond  invasion 
(2  Kings  xviii.  17)  in  B.C.  6!)9  (?).  These 
last  would  seem  to  be  the  "  ambassadors  " 
of  this  verse. 

Ver.  8. — The  highways  lie  waste  (comp. 
Judg.  V.  6).  The  meaning  is  that  they 
were  vmoccupied.  Fear  of  the  Assyrians 
restrained  men  &om  travelling.  He  hath 
broken  the  covenant.  Sennacherib,  when 
he  accepted  the  sum  of  money  sent  him  by 
Hezekiah  (2  Kings  xviii.  15;  'Epnnyra 
Canon,'  p.  135),  must  have  contented  to 
leave  him  unmolested  for  the  future.  But 
in  a  very  short  time  we  find  him,  apparently 
without  any  reasonable  pretext,  sending  a 
fresh  expedition  against  Jerusalem,  rwiuir- 
ing  it  to  be  admitted  within  the  walls,  and 
even  threatening  the  city  with  destruction 
(2  Kings  xvifi.  17—35;  xix.  10—13). 
Isaiah,  therefore,  taxes  him  with  having 
broken  his  covenant.  Despised  cities.  "Sen- 
nacherib," says  Delitzsch,  "continued  to 
storm  the  fortified  places  of  Judah,  in  viola- 
tion of  his  agreement."  Eegardeth  no 
man  ;  ».«.  "  pays  no  attention  to  the  protests 
that  are  made  against  his  infraction  of  the 
treaty— does  not  c«re  what  is  said  or  thought 
of  him." 

Ver.  9. — The  earth  maurnvth;  rather,  the 
Und.    Lebanon  ii  .  .  .  hewn  down ;  rather, 


OH.  xxxiii.  1— a4.j    THli  BOOK  OF  THK  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


541 


aa  in  the  margin,  is  withered  away  (comp. 
ch.  xix.  ti).  Lebanon,  Sharon,  Oarmel,  and 
Bashan  are  tlie  four  most  beaulit'ul  regionsof 
the  Holy  Land,  tak  ing  the  word  in  its  widest 
extent.  Lebanon  is  the  northern  mountain- 
range,  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  in 
length,  dad  with  cedars  and  firs,andgenerally 
crowned  with  snow,  whence  the  name  (from 
Idban,  white).  Sharon  is  "  the  broad  rich 
tract  of" laud"  which  stretches  southwards 
fiom  the  foot  of  Carmol,  and  melts  into  the 
Shefelah,  noted  for  its  flowers  (Cant.  ii.  1)  and 
forests  (Josephus,  'Ant.  Jnd.,'  xiv.  13,  §  8). 
Carmel  is  the  upland  dividing  Sharon  from 
the  Esdraelon  plain,  famous  for  its  "roeky 
dells"  and  "  deep  jungles  of  copse."  Finally, 
Bashan  is  the  traus-Jordanic  upland,  strttch- 
ing  from  the  flauks  of  Hermon  to  Gihad, 
celebrated  for  its  "  high  downs  "  and  "  wide- 
sweeping  plains,"  for  its  "  forests  of  oak," 
and  in  ancient  times  for  its  herds  of  wild 
cattle.  All  are  said  to  be  "  waste,"  "  with- 
ered," and  the  like,  partly  on  account  of 
the  Assyrian  ravages,  but  perhaps  still  more 
as  sympathizing  with  the  Jewish  nation  in 
their  distress — "ashamed"  for  them,  and 
clad  in  monrning  on  their  account.  Shake 
off  their  fruits  ;  ralher,  perhaps,  ehake  down 
their  haves.  Mr.  Cheuie  conjectures  that 
the  prophecy  was  delivered  in  autumn. 

Vtr.  10. — Now  will  I  rise.  Judah's  ex- 
tremity is  Jehovah's  opporhmity.  "  Now  " 
at  length  the  time  is  come  for  God  to  show 
himaelf.  lie  will  rise  from  his  throne,  and 
actively  display  bis  power ;  he  will-  exalt 
himself  above  the  heathen — lift  himself  up 
above  the  nations. 

Ver.  11. — Ye  shall  oonceive  chaff.  The 
Assyrian  plans  against  Jerusalem  shall  be 
mere  "chaff"  and  "stubble."  They  shall 
cnme  to  nought.  Nay,  the  fury  of  the  foe 
against  Jerusalem  shall  be  the  fire  to  destroy 
them. 

Ver.  12. — ^The  people ;  rather,  fhe  peoples, 
as  in  ver.  3 ;  i.e.  the  nations  composing  the 
Assyrian  army.  As  the  burnings  of  lime; 
i:s  thorns.  Things  that  fire  consumes  utterly 
aud  quickly. 

Vers.  13 — 24. — Befleotions  on  Asstbia's 

OVBBTHBOW  VIEWED  A3  AOCOMPLISHBD.     The 

prophet's  first  thought  is,  how  wonderfully 
the  overthrow  has  manifested  the  might  of 
God  (ver.  13).  Next,  how  it  must  thrill 
ivith  fear  the  hearts  of  the  wicked  among 
his  people  (yer.  14).  Thirdly,  how  the 
righteous  are  by  it  placed  in  security,  and 
can  look  back  with  joy  to  their  escape,  and 
can  with  confidence  look  forward  to  a  future 
of  happiness  and  tranquillity  (vers.  15 — 24). 
Messianic  ideas  intermintcle  with  these 
latter  thoughts  (vers.  17,  23),   the  image 


of  a  happy,  tranquil  Judah  melting  into 
that  of  Messiah's  glorious  kingdom. 

Ver.  13. — Hear,  ye  that  are  far  off,  etc. 
Jehovah  speaks  by  the  mouth  of  his  prophet, 
and  calls  on  the  nations  of  the  earth,  far 
and  near,  to  consider  and  acknowledge  his 
might,  as  shown  in  his  judgment  on  Assyria 
(comp.  Exod.  XV.  14—16). 

Ver.  14. — The  sinners  in  Zion  are  afraid. 
The  prophet  prncoeds  to  speak  in  his  own 
person.  The  judgment  on  Assyria,  he  says, 
cannot  but  strike  terror  into  the  hearts  of 
the  immoral  aud  irreligious  in  Zion.  They 
cannot  fnil  to  realize  their  own  danger,  and 
to  tremble  at  it.  Who  among  us,  they 
will  say,  can  dwell  with  the  devouring  Are  ? 
Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  everlasting 
burnings  ?  They  will  recognize  God  as  "  a 
consuming  Fire"  (Deut.  iv.  24),  whose  next 
outbreak  may  be  upon  themselves,  and  will 
shudd(!r  at  the  prospect. 

Ver.  15. — He  that  walketh  righteously,  etc. 
The  prophet  answers  the  question  which  he 
lias  supposed  to  be  asked.  None  can  endure 
the  revelation  of  the  presence  of  God  but 
the  holy  ami  the  upright — "  he  that  hath 
clean  hands,  and  a  pure  heart ;  who  hath 
not  lifted  up  his  soul  unto  vanity,  nor 
sworn  deceitfully  "  (Ps.'  xxiv.  1 ;  comp.  xv. 
2 — 5).  Uprightness  is  then  explained  as 
consisting  in  six  things  mainly — (1)  Just 
conduct ;  (2)  righteous  speech  ;  (3)  hatred 
of  oppression ;  (4)  rejection  of  bribes ;  (5) 
closing  the  ear  against  murderous  sugges- 
tions; (6)  closing  the  eye  against  sinful 
sights.  We  may  compare  with  this  sum- 
mary those  of  the  Psalms  above  quoted. 
No  enumeration  is  complete,  or  intended 
to  be  complete.  Isaiah's  has  special  refer- 
ence to  the  favourite  sins  of  the  time — ^injus- 
tice (ch.  iii.  15 ;  v.  23),  oppression  (ch.  i. 
17,  23;  iii.  12,  14;  v.  7;  etc.),  the  receiving 
of  bribes  (ch.  i.  23;  Hos.  iv.  18;  Micah  iii. 
11),  and  bloodshed  (ch.  i.  15,  21 ;  lix.  3). 

Ver.  16. — He  shall  dwell  on  high;  lite- 
rally, inhabit  Ae»giAt«— live,  as  it  were,  in  the 
perpetual  presence  of  God.  His  place  of 
defence  shall  be  the  munitions  of  rocks; 
rather,  strongJiolds  of  rocks  (i.e.  rocky  strong- 
holds) shall  6e  his  refuge.  He  shall  fly  to 
God,  as  his  "Eock  and  his  Fortress "  (Ps. 
xviii.  2),  not  from  him,  as  his  "  Enemy  and 
Avenger  "  (Pg.  viii.  2).  Bread  . .  .  waters  ; 
I.e.  all  that  is  necessary  for  his  support  and 
sustenance.  Shall  be  given  him  .  ,  .  shall 
be  sure;  I'athcr,  is  given  him  .  .  .  is  sure. 
Godliness  has  "  the  promise  of  the  life  tliat 
now  is,"  as  well  as  that  of  the  life  "  which 
is  to  come"  (1  Tim.  iv.  8). 

Ver.  17. — ^Thine  eyes.  Another  transi- 
tion. Here  from  the  third  person  to  the 
second,  the  propliet  now  addressing  those 
righteous  ones  of  whom  he  has  been  speak- 
ing in  the  two  preceding  verses.     Shall  sea 


542 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxin.  1— 24. 


the  King  in  his  beauty.  Th«  MeBsianie 
King,  whoever  he  might  be,  anil  whenever 
he  might  make  his  appearance.  It  has 
been  said  that  beauty  is  not  predicated  of 
the  heavenly  King  (Oheyne);  but  Zech. 
ix.  17 ;  Ps.  xlv.  2 ;  and  Canticles,  passim, 
contradict  this  assertion.  "How  great  is 
his  beauty ; "  "  Thou  art  fairer  than  the 
children  of  men ; "  "  His  mouth  is  most 
sweet;  yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely."  The 
land  that  is  very  far  off;  literally,  the  land 
of  far  distances.  Bishop  Lowth  renders, 
"  Thine  own  laud  far  extended,"  and  so 
Delitzsch  and  Mr.  Cheyne.  But  if  "the 
King"  is  Messianic,  so  doubtless  is  "the 
land " — the  world-wide  tract  over  which 
Messiah  will  reign  (Kev.  xxi.  1). 

Ver.  18. — TMue  heart  shall  meditate 
terror ;  •'.e.  "  thou  shalt  look  back  upon 
the  past  time  of  terror,  the  dreadful  period 
of  the  siege,  and  contrast  it  with  thy  present 
happiness."  Mr.  Cheyne  quotes  as  an 
illustration,  appositely  enough,  Virgil's 
"  Et  hBBO  olim  meminiese  juvabit."  Where 
is  the  scribe  t  .  .  .  the  receiver } ...  he  that 
counted  the  towers?  Where  now  are  the 
Assyrian  ofBciala  —  the  scribe,  who  regis- 
tered the  amount  of  the  tribute  and  booty 
('  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  i.  p.  476) ;  the 
rooeiver,  who  weighed  the  gold  and  silver 
carefully  in  a  balance  (Layard,  'Nineveh 
and  its  Eemains,'  vol.  ii.  p.  377) ;  and  the 
engineer  officer  who  surveyed  the  place  to 
bo  besieged,  estimated  its  strength,  and 
ounnted  its  towers?  AH  have  perished  or 
have  fled  away  in  dismay. 

Ver.  19. — Thou  shalt  not  see  a  fierce 
people,  etc. ;  rather,  tlwu  shalt  see  no  more 
that  barharous  people — the  Assyrians — a 
people  gruff  of  speech  that  thou  canst  not 
hear  them,  stiimmering  of  tongue  that  thou, 
canst  not  understand  them  (comp.  ch.  xxviii. 
11).  The  generation  which  witnessed  tlie 
destruction  of  Sennacherib's  army  probably 
did  not  see  the  Assyrians  again.  It  was 
not  till  about  b.o.  670  that  Manasseh  was 
"taken  with  hooka  by  the  captains  of  the 
King  of  Assyria,  and  carried  to  Babylon" 
(2  Chron.  xxxiii.  11). 

Ver.  20. — Look  upon  Zion,  etc. ;  ».«.  turn 
thy  thoughts,  O  Judah,  from  the  past  to 
tlie  present — from  the  time  of  the  siege  to 
the  time  after  tlie  siege  teiminated.  The 
city  of  our  solemnities ;  or,  of  our  festal 
meetings;  the  city  where  we  celebrale  our 
Passovers,  our  Feasts  of  Weeks,  our  Feasts 
of  Ingathering,  and  the  like.  A  tent  that 
shall  not  be  taken  down.  There  is,  perhaps, 
a  reference  to  Sennacherib's  threat  to  remove 
the  entire  population  from  Jerusalem  to  a 
far  countij  (ch.  zxxvi.  19).     This  threat 


should  not  take  effect.  Kot  one  of  the 
stakes  thereof  shall  ever  he  removed.  By 
"the  stakes"  are  meant  "the  tent-pegs," 
to  which  the  ropes  are  fastened  which  keep 
the  tent  firm  (comp.  Exod.  xxvii.  10 ; 
xxxviii.  18,  31 ;  Judg.  iv.  21).  The  promise 
that  they  shall  "never"  be  removed  must 
be  understood  either  as  conditional  on  the 
people's  walking  upriglitly  (ver.  15),  or  as 
a  promise  of  a  long  continuance  njerely. 

Ver.  21. — But  there  the  glorious  lord 
will  be  unto  tis  u,  Place  of  broad  rivers ; 
rather,  there  in  majesty  the  Lord  is  ours-; 
[the  Lord  who  js]  a  Flace  of  broad  rivers,  etc. 
Some  critics  think  that  "  a  plnoe  of  broad 
rivers  "  may  be  exegetical  of  ehdm,  "  there," 
and  so  apply  it  to  Jerusalem ;  but  the 
majority  regard  the  phrase  as  applied 
directly  to  Jehovah.  As  he  is  "  a  Place 
to  hide  in"  (Ps.  xxxii.  7;  cxix.  114),  so 
he  may- be  "a  Place  of  broad  rivers,"  full, 
i.e.  of  refieshment  and  spiritual  blessing 
Wherein  shall  go  no  galley.  The  river  of 
God's  grace,  wliich  "  makes  glad  the  city 
of  God,"  shall  bear  no  enemy  on  its  surface, 
allow  no  invader  to  cross  it. 

Ver.  23. — Thy  tacklings  are  loosed.  The 
comparing  of  God  to  a  river  has  led  to  the 
representation  of  Judah's  enemies  as  war- 
ships (ver.  21).  This  causes  Judah  herself 
to  be  viewed  as  a  sbip^a  badly  appointed 
ship,  which  has  to  contend  with  one  whose 
equipment  is  perfect.  The  prophet's 
thoughts  have  travelled  back  to  the  exist- 
ing state  of  tilings.  They  could  not  vrell 
strengthen  their  mast ;  rather,  thfy  cannot 
hold  firm  the  Imoer  part  of  their  mast.  The 
mast  had  its  lowir  extremity  inserted  into 
a  bole  in  a  cross-beam,  and  required  to  be 
kept  in  place  by  the  ropes.  If  they  weia 
loose,  it  might  slip  out  of  the  hole  and  fall 
overboard.  They  could  not  spread  the  sail , 
rather,  they  cannot  spread  the  ensign.  The 
ensign  would  seem  to  have  been  attached 
to  the  top  of  the  mast.  If  the  mast  fell, 
it  would  no  longer  be  spread  out,  so  as  to 
be  seen.  Then  is  the  prey  of  a  great  spoil 
divided.  The  word  "then"  is  emphatic. 
Now  the  disabled  ship  seems  incapable  of 
coping  with  its  enemy.  Then  (after  Assyria's 
overthrow)  Judah  will  obtain  an  immense 
spoil  (see  ver.  4).  Even  the  lame  shall 
have  their  portion. 

Ver.  24.— And  the  inhabitant  shall  not 
say,  I  am  sick.  There  shall  be  no  sickness 
in  the  restored  Jerusalem  —  at  least,  no 
"sickness  unto  death."  The  people  that 
dwell  therein  shall  be  forgiven  their  iniquity. 
Once  more  the  prophet  floats  off  into 
Messianie  anticipations 


OH.  xxxm.  1—24.]    THE  BOOK  Off  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  643 


HOMILETI08. 

Ver.  6. — The /ear  of  the  Lord,  Juduh's  treasure.  The  beat  treasure  of  a  nation  is  a 
religious  spirit.  Judiea  had  been  ravaged  by  the  host  of  the  Assyrians  under  Senna- 
cherib, had  had  all  her-"  fenced  cities "  taken  (ch.  xxxvi.  1),  had  been  stripped  of  her 
most  precious  treasures  in  silver  and  gold  (2  Kings  xviii.  14 — 16 ;  '  Eponym  Canon,' 
p.  135)  by  the  rapacious  king,  and  was  left  with  an  empty  treasury,  down-trodden  vine- 
yards, and  fields  unsown  (2  Kings  xix.  19) ;  but  her  best  treasure  still  remained  to  her — 
she  was  rich  in  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  The  fear  of  the  Lord  gave  her  (1)  wisdom,  to 
direct  her  steps  aright,  to  keep  out  of  entangling  alliances,  and  abstain  from  provoking 
attack ;  (2)  energy,  to  throw  off  her  depression  and  struggle  manfully  against  her  mis- 
fortunes, to  clear  and  sow  her  lands,  replant  her  vineyards  (2  Kings  xix.  19),  and  rebuild 
her  villages  and  country  towns ;  and  (3)  complete  trust  in  Grod,  to  support  her  amid  all 
trials  and  troubles  through  which  she  might  have  to  pass,  and  secure  her  against  the 
despondency  which  is  the  worst  foe  of  declining  states.  After  the  deliverance  which 
she  hiid  experienced,  it  must  have  been  plain  to  her  that  "  God  was  in  the  midst  of 
her ; "  that  his  power  had  no  limit ;  and  that,  so  long  as  she  feared  him  and  put  her 
trust  in  his  protection,  she  was  safe  from  any  and  every  enemy.  A  nation  thus  circum- 
stanced is  a  thousand  times  richer  than  one  which  has  countless  store  of  silver  and  gold 
laid  up  in  its  treasuries,  gi  anaries  overflowing,  lands  teeming  with  crops,  magnificent 
cities  full  of  goodly  merchandise,  well-stored  magazines  and  arsenals,  but  no  trust  in  a 
Divine  Protector,  nor  reliance  on  him  who  is  alone  "  mighty  to  save." 

Ver.  10. — The  opportuneness  of  Qod's  judgments.  It  is  characteristic  of  Divme  mier- 
positions  that  they  take  place  at  the  moment  of  greatest  need.  Isaac  is  on  the  point  of 
being  sacriflced  when  the  angel  calls  to  Abraham  out  of  heaven  (Gen.  xxii.  10,  11). 
Elisha  is  compassed  about  with  horsemen  and  chariots,  and  on  the  point  of  falling  into, 
his  enemies'  hands,  when  they  are  smitten  with  Windness  (2  Kings  vi.  15 — 18).  The 
Israelites  are  hemmed  in  between  the  Egyptians  and  the  sea,  and  must  perish  on  the 
morrow,  when  the  waters  are  divided  for  them,  and  a  way  opened  to  them  for  escape 
(Exod.  xiv.  10 — 22).  More  especially  is  the  appropriateness  of  the  time  noticeable,  when 
the  interposition  is  in  the  shape  of  a  judgment.  Judgments  are  opportune  doubly  :  (1) 
with  respect  to  those  on  whom  they  fall ;  (2)  with  respect  to  those  whom  tliey  relieve. 

I.  Judgments  abe  oppobtune  with  bespbot  to  those  on  whom  they  fall.  God  ia 
so  merciful  that  he  will  not  judge  men  "  before  the  time,"  or  until  they  have  "  flUed  up 
the  measure  of  their  iniquities."  Hence  it  is  the  general  rule  that  his  enemies  are.  at 
their  greatest  height  of  exaltation,  and  at  the  very  acme  of  their  haughtiness  and  pride, 
when  the  fatal  blow  falls  upon  them.  Assyria  had  reached  the  zenith  of  her  greatness 
under  Sennacherib  in  b.o.  700.  He  himself  had  reached  a  pitch  of  arrogance  unknown 
to  former  kings  (2  Kings  xix.  23,  24 ;  ver.  8),  when  the  destroying  angel  went  forth. 
So  Nebuchadnezzar  was  stricken  down  at  the. height  of  his  glory  and  his  glorying 
(Dan.  iv.  29 — 33) ;  and  Haman  had  attained  to  the  greatest  elevation  possible  for  a 
subject  (Esth.  v.  ll)  when  he  was  seized  and  hanged  in  front  of  his  house.  Herod 
Agrippa  (Acts  xii.  21 — 23)  is  another  instance ;  and  so,  perliaps,  is  Arius. 

II.  Judgments  abb  oppobtunb  with  bespbot  to  those  whom  they  believe. 
Generally,  though  not  always,  a  deliverance  accompanies  a  judgment.  God,  when  he 
"putteth  down  one,  setteth  up  another."  Hezekiah  and  the  Jewish  nation  were 
delivered  by  the  destruction  of  Sennacherib's  host.  Mordecai  was  saved  when  Haman 
suffered  death.  Alexander  and  the  Catholics  of  Constantinople  breathed  agaia  when 
Ariui  suddenly  expired.  The  Church  had  rest  when  Galerius  perished  miserably.  It 
is  in  their  utmost  need  especially  that  God  succours  men,  perhaps  because  they  then 
turn  to  him  with  most  sincerity,  and  offer  their  supplications  to  him  with  most  earnest- 
ness. When  they  call  to  him  "  out  of  the  depth,"  their  need  and  their  faith  both  plead 
for  them,  and  he  "  hears  their  voice  "  (Ps.  cxxx.  1,  2). 

Ver.  17. — "  The  King  in  hit  beauty."  When  Christ  appeared  on  earth  at  his  first 
coming,  he  "had  no  beauty  that  men  should  desire  liim"  (ch.  liii.  2).  Roughly  clad 
and  toil-worn,  whatever  the  heavenly  expression  of  his  countenance,  he  did  not  strike 


544  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxm.  1— 24. 

men  as  beautiful,  majestic,  or  even  as  "comely"  (ch.  liii.  2).  But  at  his  second  coming 
it  will  be  different.  St.  John  the  Divine  describes  him  as  he  saw  him  in  vision  :  "  In 
the  midst  of  the  seven  candlesticks  ^tas  one  like  unto  the  Son  of  man,  clothed  with  a_ 
I  arment  down  to  the  feet,  and  girt  about  the  paps  with  a  golden  girdle.  Uis  head  and 
his  hairs  were  white  like  wool,  as  white  as  snow  ;  and  his  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire ; 
and  his  feet  like  unto  fine  brass,  as  if  they  burned  in  a  furnace ;  and  his  voice  as 
the  sound  of  many  waters.  And  he  bad  in  his  right  hand  seven  stars:  and  out  of  hia 
mouth  went  a  sharp  two-edged  sword  :  and  his  countenance  was  as  the  sun  shineth  in 
his  8trent;th  "  (Eev.  i.  13 — 16).  The  description  in  Canticles  is  cast  in  a  more  terrene 
mould,  but  equally  indicates  a  more  than  earthly  beauty :  "  My  beloved  is  white  and 
ruddy,  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand.  His  head  is  as  the  most  fine  gold,  his  locks  are 
bushy,  and  black  as  a  raven.  His  eyes  are  as  the  eyes  of  doves  by  the  rivei  s  of  waters, 
washed  with  milk,  and  fitly  set.  His  cheeks  are  as  a  bed  of  spices,  as  sweet  flowers ; 
his  lips  like  lilies,  dropping  sweet-smelling  myrrh.  His  hands  are  as  gold  rings  set  with 
the  beryl :  his  belly  is  as  bright  ivory  overlaid  with  sapphires.  His  legs  are  as  pillars 
of  marble,  set  upon  sockets  of  fine  gold ;  his  countenance  is  as  Lebanon,  excellent  as 
the  cedars.  His  mouth  is  most  sweet :  yea,  he  is  aUoyether  lovely  "  (Cant,  v.  10 — 16). 
The  following  adaptation  by  Dr.  Piisey  of  the  woids  of  an  ancient  writer  says  all  that 
can  be  said  by  unassisted  human  pen  on  a  topic  transcending  man's  power  of  thought 
or  speech :  "  lif  we  could  ascend  from  the  most  beautiful  form  which  the  soul  could  here 
imagine,  to  the  least  glorious  body  of  the  beatified,  on  and  on  through  the  coimtloss 
thousands  of  glorious  bodies,  compared  wherewith  heaven  would  be  dark,  and  the  sun 
lose  its  shining ;  and,  yet  more,  from  the  most  beautiful  deified  soul,  as  visible  here,  to 
the  beauty  of  the  disembodied  soul,  whose  image  would  scarce  be  recognized  .  .  .  yea, 
let  the  God-enlightened  soul  go  on  and  on,  through  all  those  choirs  of  the  heavenly 
hierarchies,  clad  with  the  raiment  of  Divinity,  from  choir  to  choir,  from  hierarchy  to 
hierarchy,  admiring  the  order  and  beauty  and  harmony  of  the  house  of  God ;  yea, 
let  it,  aided  by  Divine  grace  and  light,  ascend  even  higher,  and  reach  the  bound  and 
term  of  all  created  beauty, — yet  it  must  know  that  the  Divine  power  and  wisdom  could 
create  other  creatures,  far  more  perfect  and  beautiftd  than  all  which  he  hath  hitherto 
created.  Nay,  let  the  highest  of  all  the  seraphs  sum  in  one  all  the  beauty  by  nature 
and  grace  and  glory  of  all  creatiues,  yet  could  it  not  be  satisfied  with  that  beauty, 
but  must,  because  it  was  not  satisfied  with  it,  conceive  some  higher  beauty.  Were  God 
forthwith,  at  every  moment,  to  create  that  higher  beauty  at  its  wit-h,  it  could  still  con- 
ceive something  beyond;  for  not  being  God,  its  beauty  could  not  satisfy  its  conception. 
So  let  him  still,  and  in  hundred  thousand,  hundred  thousand  thousand  years  with 
swiftest  flight  of  understanding,  multiply  continually  those  degrees  of  beauty,  so  that 
each  fresh  degree  should  ever  double  that  preceding,  and  the  Divine  power  should,  with 
like  swiftness,  concur  in  creating  that  beauty,  as  in  the  beginning  he  said, '  Let  there  be 
light,  and  there  was  light;'  after  all  these  millions  of  years  he  would  be  again  at  the 
beginning,  and  there  would  be  no  comparisou  between  it  and  the  Divine  beauty  of 
Jesus  Christ,  God  and  Man.  For  it  is  the  bliss  of  the  finite  not  to  reach  the  Infimta ' 
(Pusey, '  Minor  Prophets,'  p.  562). 

HOMILIES  BY  VABI0118  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Jehovah  a  Sefuge,  It  is  "  Israel's  extremity,  but  GM's  opportunity." 
Retribution  is  about  to  fall  on  Assyria ;  salvation  and  every  resource  is  to  be  found  in 
Jehovah. 

I.  WoB  TO  AssTRiA.  This  land  appears  under  the  image  of  a  rapacious  spoiler.  The 
time  is  about  b.o.  700,  and  the  allusion  is  to  Sennacherib  and  his  army,  who  had  advanced 
on  a  plundering  and  destroying  course.  The  tables  are  to  be  turned,  and  the  greedy 
conqueror  (cf.  2  Kings  xviii.  14,  15)  was  to  become  the  object  of  other's  greed  in  turn. 
Whether  the  words  imply  a  complaint  of  unprovoked  aggression  and  of  perfidy  is  not 
clear.  But  to  the  projihetic  eye  in  every  age  it  is  clear  that  empires  founded  upon  force, 
fraud,  and  rapacity  cannot  endure;  that  they  who  take  the  sword  will  perish  by  the 
sword.  It  was  the  fate  of  Assyria  to  fall  beneath  the  mightier  powers  of  Media  and 
Babylon. 


tH.  XXXIII.  1—24.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  645 

II.  The  attitude  of  pbater  and  tettst.  "  0  Jehovah,  be  gracious  unto  usl  For 
thee  have  we  waited."  It  is  the  attitude  of  calm  confidence ;  it  is  the  mood  in  which 
things  distant  and  unseen  are  realized.  Here  .the  prophet  sees  what  is  improbable  to 
the  eye  of  worldly  calculation — ^the  downfall  of  the  proudest  power  of  the  time.  It  is 
not  less  an  energetic  attitude — all  the  endeavour  of  the  spirit  straining  after  that  highest 
point  of  view,  where  the  confusions  of  the  time  fall  into  the  unity  of  the  Divine  purpose. 
It  is  » teeming  weak,  yet  really  powerful,  attitude ;  the  foe  trembles  when  he  sees  us  on 
our  knees.  The  arm  of  Jehovah  is  the  symbol  of  strength,  .put  forth  in  time  of  danger, 
interposing  and  delivering  (of.  Exod.  xv.  16 ;  Job  xl.  9 ;  Ps.  xliv.  3 ;  Ixxvii.  15  ;  Ixxxix. 
21 ;  xcviii.  1).  Not  only  in  particular  emergencies,  but  "  every  morning,"  i.e.  con- 
stantly and  evermore,  may  that  arm  be  ours  to  lean  upon,  and  we  shall  be  strong  and 
know  no  fear.  And  such  is  the  effect  of  this  act  of  prayer  and  contemplation,  that 
already  the  symptoms  of  change  are  heard  in  the  air.  There  is  a  confused  sound  in  the 
distance,  as  of  the  roU  of  many  waters ;  the  people  are  rushing  in  flight.  Jehovah  is 
seen  lifting  himself  up  (cf.  Numb.  x.  35 ;  Ps.  IxviiL  1),  and  a  great  rout  of  the  nations 
ensues;  and  the  conquerors  are  seen  swarming  down  upon  the  spoils,  as  the  caterpillars 
on  their  food. 

III.  The  attribdtes  or  Jehovah  as  they  are  beve;ai.ed  m  peophetio  thought, 
AS  they  ABE  CONFIBMBD  BY  HiSTOKic  EVENT.  1.  His  iniHoloble  Strength.  He  is  secure ; 
he  is  One  who  dwells  in  the  height  (Ps.  xcvii.  9).  The  heavens  shall  rather  fall  than  he 
be  dethroned,  his  dynasty  over  all  nations  come  to  an  end.  2.  His  abundant  resources 
of  good.  A  chorus  seems  here  to  break  forth  In  his  praise.  He  has  filled  Zion  with 
spiritual  treasures,  these  being  ever  united  with  temporal  blessings  in  the  theocracy. 
Justice  and  righteousness.  The  effect  of  the  temporal  deliverance  will  be  that  men  will 
turn  to  the  Deliverer,  and  will  walk  in  his  ways  and  according  to  his  laws  (cf.  ch.  xix.  22, 
etc.;  xxxi.  6;  xxxii.  15,  etc.).  Amidst  the  vicissitudes  of  these  times,  the  people  will 
hav^  a  principle  of  constancy.  There  wiU  be  "store  of  salvations"  for  every  time  of 
need  in  the  religious  "  wisdom  and  knowledge "  diffused  among  the  people.  Compare 
with  this  the  picture  of  Hezekiah's  reign  (2  Kings  xviii.).  In  one  word,  the  "  treasure" 
of  the  nation  will  be  the  fear  of  Jehovah,  i.e.  true  religion — in  distinction  from 
successful  wars  or  commercial  prosperity.  Perhaps  the  love  of  material  treasured  on 
the  part  of  the  kings  of  Judah  is  iudiiectly  rebuked.  The  true  wealth  of  a  people,  as 
of  an  individual,  must  ever  be  the  muSs  of  its  available  wisdom  and  piety. — J. 

Vers.  7 — 12. — Tlie  uprising  of  Jehovah.  L  His  upeisino  is  a  riGUUE  of  peovi- 
DBNTiAii  INTEEPOSITION.  There  are  times  when  he  seems  to  be  still, »  ated,  and  looking 
on,  and  the  course  of  events  to  defy  his  will  (ch.  xviii.  4).  Men  cry,  "  How  long,  0  Lord  ? 
.^.wake,  stir  thyself  up  to  deliver!"  But  he  knows  his  own  time;  he  is  not  a  day  too 
soon,  nor  too  late.  When  the  hour  of  providence  has  struck,  the  sceue  instantly  changes. 
"  Now  wiU  I  rise ;  nouil  will  lift  up  myself  I  "  It  is  not  for  us  to  know  the  times  and 
the  seasons.     Our  part  is  to  tarry,  expect,  work,  and  pray. 

II.  God  upeises  when  man  is  cast  down.  The  condition  of  the  land  seems  hopeless 
and  despairing.  The  lion-liearted  heroes  break  down  in  weeping  and  lamentation,  and 
the  njessengers,  bewailing  the  hard  conditions  of  peace,  keep  them  (,ompany.  The  scene 
is  Oriental  and  passionate.  The  roads  are  deserted ;  the  land  at  the  mercy  of  a  perfidious 
conqueror,  who  holds  his  promise  in  contempt.  The  land  languishing  in  the  wane  of  the 
year,  and  the  falling  leaves  of  Bashan  and  Carmel,  seem  silently  to  sympathize  with 
human  woe.  Yet  one  word  from  the  Eternal  suffices  to  change  the  whole  situation;  it 
is  a  word  of  supreme  contempt  for  all  the  machinations  of  man.  Their  conceptions  are 
as  "hay,"  their  pretensions  as  "  stubble,"  their  furious  breath  as  self-devouring  fire ;  and 
in  a  great  conflagration  the  people  will  perish.  Worldly  passions  and  worldly  might, 
he  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  derides ;  his  word  abolishes  the  proud,  while  it  supports 
the  humble. — J. 

Vers.  13 — 16. — Living  near  to  Ood.  Jehovah  has  uprisen ;  he  has  revealed  his  might 
in  the  destruction  of  the  Assyrian  host ;  he  calls  through  the  prophet  upon  all  the 
nations  to  acknowledge  him. 

L  The  awfulness  of  God.  We  see  it  reflected  from  the  horror-struck  faces  of  the 
nngodly  and  the  pro&ne.    He  is  indeed  seen  to  be  a  "  consuming  Fire,"  having  bis 

ISAIAH.  2   N 


546  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  ixxin.  1— 24. 

"  furnace  in  Jerusalem  "  (ch.  xxxL  19).  And  all  the  immoral  and  the  unprincipled,  tb< 
heedless  and  the  worldly,  feel  themselves  as  fuel  for  his  wrath — they  whom  the  con- 
tinual returns  of  the  Word  preached  do  not  alter,  so  that  their  old  sins  remain  firm, 
entire,  and  unbattered,  the  baseness  of  their  inclinations  unchanged,  the  levity  of  their 
discourse  and  behaviour ;  those  whose  former  distresses  and  disasters  have  not  laid  low 
in  the  valleys  of  humility,  nor  circumscribed  the  lashings  out  of  their  luxury;  they 
whose  past  miseries  and  restraints  give  only  a  relish  instead  of  a  check  to  present  pride 
and  intemperance ;  those  whom  all  the  caresses  of  Providence  have  not  been  able  to 
win  upon,  so  as  to  endear  them  to  a  virtuous  strictness,  or  deter  them  from  a  vicious 
extravagance ;— all  such — ^unless  the  great  God  be  trivial  and  without  concern  m  his 
grand  transactions  with  our  immortal  souls — during  this  condition,  so  far  as  we  can 
judg  %  are  fashioning  for  wrath.  "  He  is  a  probationer  for  hell,  and  carries  about  with  him 
the  desperate  sjrmptoms  and  plague-tokens  of  a  person  likely  to  be  sworn  against  by 
God,  and  hastening  apace  to  a  sad  eternity  "  (South). 

II.  Dwelling  neab  to  God.  Who  can  endure  the  vicinity  of  this  devouring  Fire? 
Only  they  who  have  intrinsic  spiritual  worth,  which  when  tried  by  fire  will  appear  xmto 
"  praise  and  glory."  "  Only  that  which  yields  itself  willingly  to  be  God's  organ  can  abide 
those  flames  (cf.  on  the  burnmg  bush,  Bxod.  iii.  2)."  Of  all  else,  like  briars  and  thorns, 
the  "end  is  to  be  burned"  (ch.  x.  17;  xxx.  27).  The  fire  ever  burning  on  the  altar 
(Lev.  vL  13)  is  the  symbol  of  him  in  whose  nature  wrath  and  love  unite ;  the  wrath 
being  the  symptom  of  love,  which  must  ever  glow  against  evil.  The  answer  to  the 
question  is  given  in  the  picture  of  the  good  man  which  follows ;  his  character  positively 
and  negatively,  his  consequent  security. 

III.  PlOTUEE  OP  TRUE  PiETT.  1.  Its  complttenest.  He  walks  in  "perfect  righteous- 
ness." Not  so  the  righteousness  of  "scribes  and  Pharisees,"  partial  and  imperfect,  but 
rounded  out  to  the  full  requirements  of  the  Divine  Law.  The  hypocrite  "  singles  out 
some  certain  parts,  which  best  suit  his  occasions  and  least  thwart  his  corruptions."  The 
proud  or  impure  man  may  be  liberal  to  the  poor,  may  abhor  lying  and  treachery,  and 
may  be  ready  in  the  fulfilment  of  duties  which  do  not  jostle  his  darling  sin.  But  it 
"will  not  suffice  to  chop  and  change  one  duty  for  another;  he  cannot  clear  his  debts 
by  paying  part  of  the  great  sum  he  owes  "  (South).  To  offend  in  one  is  to  be  guilty  of 
all  (Jas.  ii.  10).  The  chain  of  duty  is  broken  by  the  removal  of  a  single  link.  "  Then 
shall  I  not  be  ashamed,  when  I  have  respect  unto  all  thy  commandments  "  (Ps.  cxix.  6). 
It  is  not  a  handsome  feature  or  a  handsome  limb  which  makes  the  handsome  man,  but 
the  symmetry. and  proportion  of  all.  So,  not  the  practice  of  this  or  that  virtue,  but  an 
entire  complexion  of  aU,  can  alone  render  a  man  righteous  in  the  sight  of  God.  2.  Its 
leading  characteristics.  It  unites  what  human  corruption  is  ever  tending  to  dissever, 
religion  and  morality.  It  imitates  the  Father  in  heaven  in  the  justice  of  his  perfect 
Being.  It  rejects  unjust  gain,  flings  the  bribe  as  a  thing  of  pollution  from  the  hand.  It 
is  absly7ien.t  from  the  greed  of  gold,  that  most  downward  and  degrading  vice,  making  the 
soul "  all  earth  and  dirt,  burying  that  noble  thing  which  can  never  die."  "  Thou  shalt  not 
take  a  gift,  because  a  gift  blinds  the  eyes  of  the  wise"  (Deut.  xvi.  9 ;  c£  1  Sam.  xii.  3 ; 
Eccles.  vii.  7).  Covetousness  is  a  thing  directly  contrary  to  the  very  spirit  of  Christianity ; 
which  is  a  free,  a  large,  and  an  open  spirit — open  to  God  and  man,  and  always  carrying 
charity  in  one  hand,  and  generosity  in  the  other  (South).  It  is  exclusive  in  reference  to 
evil,  a»  inclusive  \n  reference  to  good.  The  good  man  walks  with  ear  and  eye  shut  against 
the  moral  contagion  around  him.  As  the  leaven  of  disease  will  not  develop  save  in  the 
unhealthy  body,  so  moral  evil  will  not  grow  to  a  head  in  the  soiU  antipathetic  to  it.  He 
"  seals  up  the  avenues  of  ill."  By  listening  and  looking  come  all  our  best  and  all  our 
worst  inspirations.  Dead  to  sin,  he  "  neither  hears  nor  sees ; "  alive  to  Qod,  he  is  all 
ears  and  all  eyes,  for  his  words,  his  inspirations.  The  chastity  of  the  spirit  extends  to 
the  senses,  and  if  the  mind  be  full  of  the  love  of  purity, "  each  thing  of  sin  and  guilt "  is 
driven  far  from  it.  Itself  remains  intact  as  the  sunbeams  glancing  on  the  garbage-keap. 
3.  lis  lecurityand  satisfactUm.  The  good  man  dwells  on  the  heights  (cf.  Ps.  xv. ;  xziv. 
3,  4),  inaccessible  to  miasmata  from  the  poisonous  swamps  below,  braced  by  the  4ifFerent 
air,  eti  ivened  by  glorious  prospects.  He  will  have  food,  and  that  in  abundance.  To 
"  eat  and  he  satisfied  "  is  the  simplest  and  strongest  figure  for  intellectual  satisfaction, 
for  a  rich  inner  life ;  as  hunger  that  of  an  empty,  distressed,  self-torturing  spirit.  But 
M  food  is  of  no  service  without  an  appetite  for  it,  so  this  spiritual  satisfaction  can  only 


OH.  xxxni.  1— 24.]    THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  547 

be  theirs  who  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,  who  have  fixed  their  minds  upon 
an  Object,  which  still  invites  the  most  boundless  and  unlimited  appetite.  The  nobler 
senses  are  never  weary  of  exercisfe  upon  objects  which  delight  them.  We  do  not  surfeit 
upon  noble  music,  nor  do  rare  pictures  cloy.  The  desires  of  the  righteous  are  «o 
agreeable  to  the  ways  of  God  that  they  find  a  continual  freshness  growing  upon  them 
in  the  performance  of  duty ;  like  a  stream,  which,  the  further  it  has  nm,  the  more 
strength  smd  force  it  has  to  run  further  (South). — J« 

Vers.  17 — 24. — Hit  reign  of  Rezekiah,  Amidst  all  the  agitation  caused  by  the 
invasion  of  Sennacherib,  and  his  perfidy,  "  the  voices  of  true  prophets  were  raised  with 
power,  pointing  to  the  imperishable  elements  in  the  true  community,  and  proclaiming 
the  approach  of  a  great  crisis,  the  crusliing  weight  of  which  should  alight  only  on  the 
faithless,  whether  among  the  Assyrians  or  in  Judah"  (Ewald).  Here  we  find  a 
reflection  of  the  excitement  of  the  time. 

I.  The  olobt  of  the  kino.  His  beauty  is  a  moral  beauty — that  of  a  just  rule  (ch. 
xxxii.  1) ;  an  "ideal  beauty — the  evidence  of  God's  extraordinary  favour."  The  picture 
should  be  compared  with  that  in  Ps.  xlv.  The  eyes  of  the  people  shall  see  a  land  of 
distances.  Looking  northward  and  southward,  and  eastward  and  westward,  the 
boundaries  of  the  kingdom  shall  still  be  extended,  far  as  eye  can  reach. 

II.  Vanished  tebkoes.  The  Assyrian  officials  who  registered  the  amounts  of  the 
tribute,  who  tested  the  silver  and  the  gold,  who  counted  the  towers  of  the  city  about 
to  fall  their  prey,  shall  have  vanished.  The  people  themselves  shall  proudly  and 
thankfully  number  those  intact  towers  (Ps.  xlviii.  13).  No  longer  shall  the  jarring 
accents  of  the  foreigner's  stammering  tongue  fall  upon  their  ears. 

in.  The  strength  and  splbndouk  of  Zion.  Look  upon  herl  Once  more  the 
festive  throngs  shall  gather  there.  Once  more  she  shall  be  a  house  of  peace,  or 
dwelling  of  confidence,  a  quiet  resting-place.  She  had  indeed  seemed  like  the  tent  of 
wanderers,  the  pegs  ready  to  be  drawn  out,  the  cords  to  be  rent,  at  the  bidding  of  the 
conqueror.  The  people  had  been  thieatened  with  removal  (ch.  xxxvi.  17).  This  fear  shall 
have  passed  away.  The  majesty  of  Jehovah,  like  an  all-protecting  aegis,  terrifying  to 
his  enemies,  assuring  to  his  friends,  shall  be  revealed  in  Zion's  state.  That  presence, 
which  is  "  glorious  in  holiness,  fearful  in  praises,  doing  wonders,"  shall  have  returned 
thither;  that  right  hand,  which  is  glorious  in  power,  shall  again  have  been  stretched 
forth  to  deliver  and  to  protect.  Jehovah,  and  he  alone,  is  the  Defence  of  Jerusalem. 
What  though  she  be  unlike  "  populous  No,  situate  among  the  rivers,  with  the  waters 
round  about  it,  and  the  rampart  of  the  sea  "  (Nah.  iii.  8),  or  Babylon,  "  seated  on  vhe 
waters"  (Jer.  li.  13), — he  shall  be  instead  of  rivers  and  canals  to  his  holy  city.  It 
is  the  streams  of  a  spiritual  river  which  "  shall  make  glad  the  city  of  God "  (Ps. 
xM.  4). 

IV.  The  Divine  Buleb.  By  him  kings  reign  and  princes  decreed  justice.  The 
earthly  king  is  but  representative  of  him  who  is  enthroned  in  heaven,  the  "great 
King."  Hezekiah  is  but  his  vicegerent,  his  inspired  servant.  The  weak  political 
power  becomes  strong  through  him.  Though  Zion  be  like  a  dismasted  ship,  she  will 
prevail  over  the  proud,  well-rigged  ships  of  her  foes.  Sin  will  cease,  punishment  will 
be  at  end,  and,  with  it,  bodily  suffering  and  sickness  (ch.  xxxv.  5,  6 ;  Ixv.  20 ;  Mark  ii. 
10,  11).  "  A  people,  humbled  by  punishment,  penitent  and  therefore  pardoned,  will 
dwell  in  Jerusalem.  The  strength  of  Israel  and  all  its  salvation  rest  upon  the  forgive- 
ness of  its  sins." 

V.  Lessons.  1.  National  Judgments  will  only  cease  toith  national  sins.  "  Humble 
repentance  is  to  cure  us  of  our  sins  and  miseries ;  and  there  can  no  cure  be  wrought 
unless  the  plaster  be  as  broad  as  the  sore."  2.  2%«  most  effectual  way  to  avert  national 
judgments  is  the  way  of  personal  amendment.  Particular  sins  often  bring  down  geueral 
judgments.  Sin,  like  a  leprosy,  begins  in  a  small  compass,  yet  quickly  overspreads  the 
whole.  3.  The  forsaking  of  sins  heyets  hope  in  the  mercy  of  Ond.  Bepause  he  has 
promised  upon  that  condition  to  remove  them ;  because  he  actually  often  has  so  removed 
them ;  because,  when  men  are  thus  humbled,  God  has  attained  the  end  of  his  judgments 
(South).— J. 

Ver.  17. — The  glorious  vision.    "Thine  eyes  ediall  see  the  King  in  hi»  beauty." 


S48  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxra.  1—24, 

There  is  much  of  heauty  in  this  world.  And  by  Christ  Jesus  Qod  created  the  worlds. 
So  that  he  is  the  Archetype  of  all  beauty.  Everything  lovely  was  first  a  thought  dl 
Christ  before  it  became  a  fact  in  life.  These  eyes  of  dura  have  seen  glorious  spectacles : 
the  sun  rising  to  run  his  race ;  the  tender  greens  and  purples  of  the  seas ;  the 
magnificence  of  Carmel  and  Lebanon.  How  much  also  have  we  all  seen  of  moral 
beauty  I — the  gentleness  of  pity ;  the  heroism  of  endurance ;  the  sublimity  of  sacrifice. 
Yet  these  have  all  been  mingled  with  some  elements  of  worldlineas  and  sin. 

I.  This  pbophect  is  fulfilled  in  Christ  ar  the  true  Kura.  Think  of  the 
kings  of  every  age :  the  Pharaohs  ;  the  Caesars.  There  we  see  power,  pageantry, 
and,  alas !  too  often  criminality  and  cruelty.  Here  we  see  the  true  King.  One  whose 
government  is  Divine,  because  it  is  within,  holding  in  supremacy  the  conscience  and 
the  heart.     Oue  who  is  a  King  who  "reigns  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save." 

IL  A  PBOPHECT  FULFILLED  IN  THE  BEAUTY  OF  Cheist's  chabaoteb.  Beauty  lies  in 
symmetry  and  completeness ;  he  was  perfectly  holy,  without  spot  or  blemish.  Beauty 
lies  in  subtle  harmonies;  and  in  Christ  justice,  love,  and  wisdom  were  all  united  in 
oue.  Beauty  lies  in  conformity  with  moral  law;  and  he  was  "  harmless,  undefiled,  and 
separate  from  sinners."  Beauty  is  not  to  be  found  in  mere  sentiment  alone.  Character 
is  not  to  be  tested  simply  by  exquisite  feeling  or  profound  teaching,  but  by  a  life 
where  truth  fdt  and  truth  spoken  and  truth  lived  are  all  embodied  in  one.  He  who 
spake  as  never  man  spake  could  also  say,  "  Which  of  you  convinceth  me  of  sin?" 

III.  A  PEOPHECY   fulfilled   THBOUGU   THE   POWEB  OF   SPIRITUAL    VISION.      "Thine 

eyes  shall  see."  The  beauty  of  Christ  can  be  seen  only  through  the  lens  of  moral 
disposition.  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they  shall  see  God."  It  is  distinctly 
said  of  the  wicked,  concerning  their  view  of  Christ,  "  Thoy  shall  see  no  beauty  in  him 
tliat  they  should  desire  him."  We  may  have  the  artistic  eye  to  see  the  beauty  of 
Gieeian  capitol  and  Roman  arch,  but  we  may  not  have  the  spiritual  eye  whereby  alone 
we  discern  spiritual  things. 

IV.  A  PEOPHEOY  FULFILLED  IN  PEB80NAL  EXPBBIENOB.  "  Thine  eyes."  Powers  of 
vision  cannot  be  transferred.  How  we  have  longed,  perhaps,  that  those  we  love  should 
see  this  beauty  too !  Nor  can  they  be  intellectually  willed.  We  must  have  the  spiritual 
hcai  t  before  we  can  enjoy  the  spiritual  eye. 

V.  A    PROPHECY    TO    BE     PERFECTLY    FULFILLED    VS    THE     FINAL    EKVELATION     OF 

HEAVEN.  Whatever  we  may  see  there  of  new  displays  of  God's  creative  energy  and 
power,  however  fair  and  lovely  our  own  beloved  ones  may  be  now  that  they  are 
"  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God," — we  may  be  sure  of  this,  that  Christ  will  be 
"  the  Altogether  Lovely."  The  eye  will  be  perfectly  purged  from  sin,  and  the  soul 
perfectly  alive  to  God.  Then  Christ's  own  prayer  will  be  fulfilled, "  That  they  may 
behold  my  glory,  which  thou  hast  given  me." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  1. — Aggravated  evil.  I.  That  sin  is  often  found  in  an  aggravated  fobm 
It  may  take  the  forms  of  which  the  prophet  here  complains.  1.  Unprovoked  aggression 
"  Thou  spoilest,  and  (though)  thou  wast  not  spoiled."  Men  may  go  so  far  as  to  assail 
their  fellow-men  without  the  slightest  justification ;  this  may  be  in  the  shape  of  open 
war,  or  of  brutal  individtial  assault,  or  of  unlawful  appropriation,  or  of  shameful  slander. 
2.  IiiexcusiMe  treachery.  "  And  dealeth  treacherously,  and  (though)  they  dealt  not," 
etc.  Men  will  go  so  far  in  iniquity  as  to  deceive,  entrap,  and  even  ruin — and  that  not 
only  in  a  pecuniary,  but  even  in  a  moral  sense — those  who  are  guileless  and  unsuspicious ; 
they  will  take  a  mean  and  execrable  advantage  of  the  innocence  which  should  not 
appeal  in  vain  for  the  protection  of  the  strong.  Those  thus  wantonly  and  heinously 
guilty  may  beguile  others  from  the  paths  of  (1)  faith  and  piety ;  (2)  virtue ;  (3)  the 
practical  wisdom  on  which  depend  the  maintenance  and  comfort  of  the  home. 

II.  That  when  thus  found  it  excites  God's  deep  disflbascbe.  The  Divine 
"  woo  "  is  pronounced  against  it.  And  this  "  woe  "  is  only  one  note  in  a  large  and  full 
outpouring  of  Divine  indignation  in  all  parts  of  the  sacred  Scriptures.  Prophet  and 
psalmist  and  apostle,  yes,  and  the  Lord  of  love  himself  (see  especially  Matt,  xxiii.), 
unite  to  utter  the  awful  anger  of  Qoi  "against  them  who  commit  such  things."  It 
includes:  1.  His  holy  indignation  directed  against  the  evil-doers  themselves;  not  the 
fin,  but  the  sinner  (Ps.  vii.  11;  Bom.  ii.  8,  9).  2.  His  boundless  hatred  of  the  evil 
I  Iced  ;  not  the  agent,  but  the  act  (Jer.  xliv.  4;  Hab.  L  13).    All  sin  is  a  leprous,  a 


flfi.  ixxm.  1— 24.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  fKomET  ISAlAH.  6  :t 

loathsome,  thing  in  God's  sight:  how  much  more  so  those  aggravated  forms  of  it  ir 
which  man  wantonly  injures  and  ruins  his  fellow-man  I 

TIL  That  it  is  oebtaik  to  meet  with  retbibution  answering  to  the  offence. 
We  know :  1.  That  impenitent  sin  will  be  followed  by  the  judgments  of  a  righteous  God. 
The  Divine  "woe"  points  to  severe  punishment — to  loss,  sorrow,  ruin,  death  (Exod. 
xxxiv.  7;  Prov.  xi.  21;  Rom.  ii.  6,  etc.).  2.  That  retribution  will  be  proportionate  to 
the  magnitude  of  the  offence  (Luke  xii.  47,  48;  John  ix.  41;  xv.  22;  Rom.  ii.  12) 
3.  That  retribution  is  lilsely  to  take  a  form  which  corresponds  to  the  offence.  "  When 
thou  shalt  cease  to  spoil,  thou  shalt  be  spoiled,"  etc.  (1)  Violence  provokes  violence ; 
they  that  take  the  sword  do  commonly  perish  with  the  sword  (Matt.  xxvi.  52).  (2) 
Graft  will  be  undermined;  against  the  subtle  schemer  men  will  combine  and  use  their 
ingenuity  to  overturn  him.  (3)  Avarice  finds  its  own  wealth  an  insupportable  burden. 
(4)  The  rejection  of  the  supernatural  ends  in  the  acceptance  of  the  superstitious,  etc. 
"  With  what  measure  wo  mete,  it  is  measured  to  us  again." — 0. 

Ver.  2. — The  lesser  and  the  larger  mercies.  This  prayer  includes  the  striking  request, 
"  Be  thou  their  arm  every  morning,  our  salvation  also  in  the  time  of  trouble."  The 
words  suggest  the  pertinent  and  not  unprofitable  question — Are  we  laid  under  greater 
obligation  by  the  lesser  mercies  of  God  wliich  we  are  continually  receiving,  or  by  the 
larger  ones  which  we  occasionally  receive  at  his  hands  ?     We  look  at  both — 

L  The  lessee  mercies  we  are  continually  rbceivino.  God  is  to  us  "  our  Arm 
every  morning ; "  he  is  our  support  from  day  to  day,  from  hour  to  hour ;  "  in  him  we  live 
and  move  and  have  our  biing."  We  may  pass  many  days  in  which  no  striking  or 
impressive  mercy  is  bestowed  upon  us;  but  we  pass  no  single  hour,  we  spend  no  fleeting 
minute,  in  which  some  kindnesses  do  not  come  from  his  bountiful  hand.  Our  indebtedness 
arising  from  these  may  be  estimated  when  we  consider:  1.  Their  regularity.  The 
nature  of  God's  kindnesses  is  commonly  missed  by  reason  of  their  regularity;  they  are 
referred  to  "  law,"  as  if  law  had  any  power,  in  itself,  to  originate  or  to  sustain.  Con- 
sequently, they  are  not  traced,  as  they  certainly  should  be,  to  the  love  and  care  of  a 
Heavenly  Father.  But  their  value  is  immeasurably  enhanced  by  their  regularity.  How 
much  more  "  gracious  unto  us"  is  our  God  in  that  he  is  "our  arm  every  morning"! 
in  that  we  can  confic'ently  reckon  on  the  msrning  light,  on  the  evening  shadows,  on  the 
incoming  and  outgoing  tides,  on  the  retur[jing  seasons,  and  can  arrange  and  act 
ouxordingJy,  than  if  the  Author  of  nature  gave  us  his  blessings  irregulaily,  spasmodically, 
at  such  uncertain  intervals  that  we  could  make  no  arrangements,  and  hold  no 
permanent  ollices,  and  be  in  constant  doubt  as  to  whether  or  when  our  agency  would 
be  required  1  2.  Their  constancy.  We  are  leaning  on  God's  arm  continually.  It  is 
not  merely  a  matter  of  frequency ;  it  is  not  by  a  permissible  hyperbole  that  the 
psalmist  says,  "  the  goodness  of  God  endureth  ccmtinuaUy "  (Ps.  lii.  1) ;  nor  is  it 
without  reason  that  he  asks  of  God  "that  his  loving-kindness  and  his  truth  may 
continually  preserve  him "  (Ps.  xl.  11).  Every  year  God  is  crowning  with  his 
goodness ;  he  " daily  loaleth  us  with  benefits  ; "  he.  is  our  arm  every  morning  of  our 
Ufe ;  each  night  he  lays  his  hand  upon  us  in  sleep  and  "  restores  our  souL"  We  may 
well  join  in  singing — 

"  The  wings  of  every  hour  shall  bear 
Some  thanlcfol  tribute  to  thine  ear." 

For  on  the  wings  of  every  passing  hour  come  many  mercies  to  otir  hearts  and  to  our 
homes  from  the  protecting  and  providing  love  of  God ;  and  we  may  go  yet  further  and  say, 
or  sing,  "  Minutes  came  fast,  but  mercies  were  more  fast  and  fleet  than  they."  God's 
creative  power  gives  us  our  life,  and  his  constant  visitation  preserves  our  spirit  (Job  x.  12). 
IL  The  larger  mercies  we  sometimes  receive.  God  is  "  our  salvation  also  in  the 
time  of  trouble."  The  greatness  of  our  indebtedness  to  him  for  these  his  larger,  his 
especial  and  peculiar  loTing-kindnesses,  we  may  estimate  if  we  consider:  1,  Their 
frequency.  Though  infrequent  as  compared  with  his  constant  favours,  yet  they  are 
not  infrequent  in  themselves,  if  we  count  them  aU — national,  ecclesiastical,  family, 
individual.  2.  Their  exceeding  preciousness  to  us  who  receive  them.  Who  can  reckon 
the  worth  of  one  single  deliverance  from  (1)  the  gulf  of  black  disbelief;  or  from  (2) 
the  power  of  some  unholy  passion — avarice,  or  lust,  or  revenge ;  or  from  (3)  the  misery 


5r,0  THE   BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,     [oh.  xxxiii.  1—24 

of  some  threatened  loneliness  or  (what  is  far  worse  than  that)  some  entangling  and 
ruinous  alliance ;  or  from  (4)  the  dark  shadow  of  some  false  and  cruel  slander  ?  Only 
they  who  have  been  thus  saved  in  the  time  of  trouble,  who  have  been  lifted  up  and 
placed  on  the  solid  rock  of  safety,  and  made  to  walk  again  in  the  sunshine  of  pi  ace 
and  hope,  can  say  how  great  is  that  mercy  from  the  hand  of  God.  3.  Their  costliness 
to  the  Divine  Giver.  (1)  If  in  all  human  sympathy  there  is  an  expenditure  of  self, 
which,  though  most  willingly  rendered,  is  yet  painful  and  oppressive  to  the  spirit, 
shall  we  not  think  that  there  is  this  element  also  in  him  whose  sympathy  is  so  much 
stronger,  and  whose  sensibility  is  so  much  finer  than  ours  (see  ch.  Ixiii.  9 ;  Luke  xix.  41 ; 
John  xi.  35;  Heb.  iv.  15)?  (2)  One  great  redemptive  act — the  salvation  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus — was  wrought  at  the  cost  of  a  Divine  incarnation,  of  sorrow,  of  shame,  of 
death.  He  gave  himself  for  us.  We  conclude  that,  (a)  taking  this  last  thought  into 
account,  the  special  mercies  of  God  do  incalculably  outweigh  the  constant  ones; 
(6)  that  together  they  constitute  an  overwhelming  reason  for  worship,  for  obedience,  for 
consecration ;  (c)  that  we  do  well  to  appeal  to  God  in  earnest  prayer  for  the  special 
mercies  we  need,  and  to  wait  expectantly  for  them.  "  0  Lord,  be  thou  gracious  ujito 
us ;  we  have  waited  for  thee." — 0. 

Vers.  5,  6. — A  wise  nation  (^Church).  These  verses  supply  us  with  three  features 
by  which  a  nation  or  Church  that  is  possessed  of  true  wisdom  will  be  characterized. 

L  A  PBEVADINO  SENSE  OP  GoD — of  his  greatuess,  his  power,  his  righteousness.  "  The 
Lord  is  exalted;  he  dwelleth  on  high;  he  hath  filled  Zion  with  judgment  and 
righteousness."  The  result  of  the  deliverance  wrought  by  Jehovah  would  be  the 
creation  of  this  devout  sentiment.  The  holy  nation,  the  Church  alter  the  heart  of  its 
Divine  Author,  will  strive  to  maintain  this  as  an  abiding,  religious  sense ;  it  will  cherish 
that  feeling  of  reverential  awe  which  fills  the  heart  when  the  greatness  of  the  Exalted 
One  is  realized,  when  the  power  of  him  that  makes  his  judgments  to  be  known  is  lelt, 
when  the  righteousness  of  him  who  overturns  iniquity  is  present  to  the  mind.  Well 
does  it  speak  for  the  community,  civil  or  sacred,  when  this  sacred  sense  of  God  "  hath 
filled"  it  from  end  to  end,  from  the  least  to  the  greatest.  This  pervading  conviction  is, 
indeed,  an  essential  thing;  without  it  the  most  vehement  protestations,  the  moat 
honoured  creeds,  the  most  ecstatic  fervours,  will  soon  be  found  to  be  as  "sounding 
brass  or  a  tinkling  cymbal." 

II.  A  DEEP   SENSE   OF  THE   TRUE   BOTJRCB   OF   BTABILITT   AND   STRENGTH.      "Wisdom 

and  knowledge,"  etc.  It  has  always  been  the  case  that  communities  have  imagined 
that  their  stability  and  strength  rested  in  things  material  and  visible — in  seas  and 
mountains,  in  armies  and  navies,  in  lanils  and  houses,  in  large  numbers  of  men  and 
women,  in  goods  and  grants.  But  all  those  things  prove  to  be  of  no  avail  when  there 
is  inward  rottenness,  when  disunion  has  crept  into  the  state  or  into  the  Church, 
when  the  process  of  demoralization  has  set  in  so  that  it  cannot  be  arrested.  No 
external  resources  of  any  kind,  however  numerous  or  strong  they  may  be,  will  save  a 
society  that  is  giving  itself  up  to  that  which  is  false  and  foul.  Its  defeat  and  dissolu- 
tion are  only  a  question  of  years — or  days.  The  true  source  of  stability  and  of  strength 
is  in  heavenly  wisdom — that  "  knowledge"  of  God  which  means,  not  only  a  perception 
of  the  truth  but  a  love  of  it,  a  delight  in  it,  an  acceptance  of  it  as  the  one  thing  that 
will  cleanse  the  heart,  and  that  should  regulate  the  life. 

III.  A  HioHT  ESTIMATE  OF  PROSPERITY.  "The  fear  of  the  Lord  Is  his  treasure." 
What  is  it  that  constitutes  wealth  or  prosperity  ?  According  to  the  answer  which  we 
give  to  this  question  our  spiritual  position  may  be  well  determined.  If  we  are 
indulging  the  iilusioii  that  our  prosperity  consists  mainly  in  money,  or  in  stocks,  or  in 
mines,  or  in  acres;  or  if  we  seek  for  it  in  numbers,  or  in  reputations,  or  in  the  patronage 
of  the  titled  and  the  strong,  we  are  living  in  a  "  paradise  of  fools."  "  Surely  our  riches 
are  not  where  we  think,  and  the  kind  heart  is  more  than  all  our  store."  Yes  1  and  not 
simply  the  kind  heari,  but  the  pure  heart,  the  heart  (1)  that  has  been  purified  of  the 
love  and  tolerance  of  sin  by  the  trutn  and  by  the  Spirit  of  Ckxi ;  (2)  that  has  been  led 
to  hide  itself  in  the  Divine  mercy,  and  to  lose  itself  in  the  love  of  a  Divine  Friend  and 
Lord ;  (3)  that  lives  to  bear  witness  to  his  truth,  and  to  magnify  his  holy  Name.  That 
Christian  Church  that  holds  itself  rich,  that  finds  its  treasure  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord, 
in  the  consequent  and  complementary  love  of  Jesus  Christ,  is  the  Church  that  is 


jh.  xxxm.  1— 24.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAT.Ul,  551 

divinely  wise.    "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  heginning  " — and  a  very  large  part  also — 
"  of  wisdom." — 0. 

Vers.  10 — 16.— 7n  the  presence  of  the  Huly  One.  The  great  question  which,  in  a 
somewhat  different  form  from  that  of  the  text,  Balak  proposed  to  Balaam  (Micah  vi.  6) 
is  one  that  has  always  stirred  the  hearts  of  men  everywhere  and  in  all  ages.  We  must 
find  an  answer  to  it  if  we  are  to  enjoy  any  "  rest  unto  our  souls." 

I.  The  thrice-holy  Lord,  our  God.  That  which  makes  God's  intervening  purpose 
(ver.  10)  so  serious  to  liis  creatures  is  that  when  he  arises  he  will  be  found  to  he  as 
"the  devouring  Fire,"  as  "everlasting  Burnings;"  i.e.  he  will  prove  himself  to  be  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel :  (1)  Whose  Spirit  is  ahsolutely  intolerant  of  iniquity,  haling  it  with 
perfect  hatred,  to  whom  it  is  so  abhorrent  that  he  "  cannot  look  "  upon  it.  And  (2)  whose 
action  is  inflexibly  opposed  to  it ;  (a)  placing  limits  to  its  temporary  success  (ver.  11) ; 
(6)  bringing  its  decrees  and  its  achievements  to  nothing,  as  the  lime-kiln  reduces  every- 
thing to  ashes ;  (c)  consuming  the  strength  of  the  impious  and  the  rebellious  as  easily 
and  as  swiftly  as  the  fiery  flames  burn  up  the  thorns  (ver.  12).  To  fallen,  guilty  man, 
whose  character  has  been  depraved  and  whose  life  has  been  stained  by  sin,  God  is 
obliged  to  make  himself  known,  and  to  make  himself  feared  as  "  the  devouring  fire,"  aa 
"  the  everlasting  ['  the  continual ']  burnings,"  consuming  iniquity  in  the  holy  ardour  of 
his  unquenchable  purity. 

II.  The  presence  of  the  Holt  One.  Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  this  Holy 
One,  this  consuming  Fire?  Who  shall  abide  in  his  presence  and  dwell  in  his  holy  hill  ? 
(Ps.  XV.  1;  xxiv.  3)?  There  are  different  senses  in  which  we  are  before  God,  or  stand 
in  his  presence.  1.  His  observant  presence,  which  is  constant,  of  which  we  do  well  to 
remind  ourselves  often,  with  the  thought  of  which  our  minds  and  hearts  may  well  be 
filled.  2.  His  interposing  presence.  Those  times  and  oqpasions  in  paTticular  when  he 
arises  to  judgment  (ver.  10) ;  when  he  stretches  forth  his  hand  in  punishment  or  in 
reward ;  when  he  sends  back  the  Assyrian  monarch  in  humiliating  flight,  and  at  the 
same  time  lifts  up  the  head  of  bowed  and  trembling  Jerusalem ;  when  he  breaks  the 
arm  of  the  oppressor  and  the  chains  of  the  captive ;  when  he  scatters  his  enemies  and 
redeems  his  people.  3.  His  presence  in  the  sanctuary.  When  he  manifests  himself  to 
his  waiting  ones  as  he  does  not  unto  the  world.  4.  His  nearer  presence  in  another 
world.  When  in  a  most  solemn  sense  we  shall  "  stand  before "  him,  and  when  in  a 
most  blessed  sense  we  shall  "  dwell  with  "  him. 

III.  Those  who  can  abide  in  his  presence.  The  answer  is  negative  and  positive. 
1.  Negative.  (1)  Not  the  guilty  ones  among  the  unprivileged.  To  those  who  "  have  not 
the  Law,"  but  who  are  guilty  of  transgressing  the  unwritten  law ;  to  all  who  act  aa 
Assyria  did  on  this  occasion,  spoiling  those  who  had  not  spoiled  them,  etc.  (ver.  1), 
God  virill  mete  out  his  indignation  (see  ver.  11).  (2)  Not  the  insincere  among  the 
children  of  privilege.  "Fearfulness  will  surprise  the  hypocrites"  (ver.  14).  Let  all 
who  sing  the  praises  and  utter  the  words  of  the  Eedeemer  consider  whether  gratitude 
and  devotedness  are  in  their  hearts  as  well  as  on  their  lips.  2.  Positive.  They  can 
dwell  with  the  Holy  One  who  are  possessed  of  moral  because  of  spiritual  integrity. 
"  He  that  walketh  righteously,"  etc. ;  i.e.  he  that  is  of  sound  heart,  and  therefore  of  a 
pure  life.  With  us,  in  this  Christian  era,  it  may  be  said  of  spiritual  integrity  (1)  that 
its  foundation  is  laid  in  genuine  repentance,  in  a  change  of  heart  towards  God ;  (2)  that 
it  takes  the  form  of  a  living  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesaa  Christ ;  (3)  that  it  manifests  itself 
in  excellency  of  character.  And  this  last  is  seen  in  the  marks,  which  the  prophet  here 
indicates :  in  upright  conduct  (walking  righteously,  refusing  bribes) ;  in  soundness  of 
speech;  in  refusing  all  access  to  evil  (stopping  the  ears  and  shutting  the  eyes  from 
hearing  and  seeing  what  is  injurious  and  defiling) ;  in  a  hearty  hatred  of  injustice 
(despising  the  gain  of  oppression). 

IV.  The  blessedness  of  those  who  dwell  with  God.  Whether  here  or  hereafter, 
but  in  a  higher  degree  and  more  perfect  form  hereafter,  there  are  promised  these  two 
great  blessings.  1.  Security.  "  He  shall  dwell  on  high :  his  place  of  defence,"  etc. 
Notiing  shall  harm  him,  no  sin  shall  have  dominion  over  him ;  in  the  arms  of  God's 
protecting  care  his  home  shall  be  impregnable  to  assault.  2.  Sufficiency.  "  Bread  shall 
be  given  him,"  etc.  He  may  not  have  all  he  would  desire,  but  he  shall  have  everything 
he  needs  for  his  real  welfare  and  his  true  joy, — C. 


652  TUt  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [m.  xxxm.  1—24 

Vei .  17  — "  The  King  in  his  leauty."  "  Thine  eyes  shall  see  the  King  in  his  beauty." 
Of  this  we  may  take — 

I.  The  contempokaby  view.  Those  who  heard  these  words  from  Isaiah's  Kps  or 
read  them  from  the  roll  on  which  he  wrote  them  would  naturally  think  ofHezekiah. 
But  in  what  aspect  would  they  think  of  him  as  clothed  on  with  beauty  ?  Not,  surely, 
as  one  arrayed  in  gorgeous  royal  robes,  or  as  one  surrounded  with  the  pomp  of  a  royal 
court;  but  as  one  who  wielded  the  kingly  sceptre  in  righteousness  and  in  wisdom. 
The  king  in  his  beauty,  to  the  eye  of  the  man  who  speaks  for  God,  is  that  sovereign 
who  (1)  honours  God  in  all  his  doings  and  dealings  with  man ;  (2)  uses  his  position  and 
his  power  to  further  Divine  truth ;  (3)  lays  himself  out  for  the  good  of  others  rather 
than  for  his  own  enjoyment  or  the  aggrandizement  of  his  house.  And  these  things, 
mutatis  mutandis,  constitute  the  beauty  of  all  earthly  authority  and  powers 

n.  The  Messianic  view.  If  we  refer  the  words  of  the  prophet  to  him  to  whom,  in 
themselves  and  apart  from  the  context,  they  are  most  appropriate — ^to  that  Son  of  man 
who  came  to  be  the  Saviour-Sovereign  of  mankind,  we  have  two  views  brought  before 
us.  1.  That  of  Jesus  Christ  as  he  lived  on  earth — the  meek  King  of  men  (Matt.  xxi.  5), 
he  who  claimed  to  be  a  King  even  as  he  stood  bound  before  Pilate  (John  xviii.  33 — 36). 
Here  we  see  the  King  in  his  beauty  as  we  see  him  in  his  purity  of  heart,  in  his  devoted- 
ness  to  the  work  his  Father  had  placed  in  his  hands,  in  his  submissiveness  to  that 
Father's  will,  in  his  quick  and  tender  sympathy  with  the  sorrowing  and  the  abandoned, 
in  his  inexhaustible  patience  with  the  undeserving  and  the  wrong.  2.  That  of  the 
Divine  Redeemer  as  he  reigns  in  heaven.  Thus  viewed,  we  see  in  him  the  beauty  of 
one  who  (1)  once  surrendered  everything  he  was  and  had  in  order  that  he  might  redeem 
a  fallen  race, — the  beauty  of  the  most  perfect  sacrifice;  (2)  now  welcomes  to  his 
kingdom  the  worst  of  all  that  have  rebeUed  against  his  will,— the  beauty  of  perfect 
magnanimity;  (3)  now  beairs  with  his  servants  in  all  their  manifold  infirmities  and 
insufliciencies  of  service, — the  beauty  of  perfect  patience ;  (4)  now  dispenses  grace  and 
help  to  every  one  of  his  followers  according  to  their  individual  necessities  and  requests, 
— the  beauty  of  perfect  beneficence. 

HI.  The  distant  view.  Our  eyes  will  see  the  King  in  his  beauty  when  we  see 
"  him  as  he  is  " — the  ascended  and  reigning  Lord.  Then  we  shall  (1)  behold  the  glories 
of  his  heavenly  administration ;  we  shall  (2)  dwell  upon  the  transcendent  excellence 
of  his  Divine  character;  and  we  shall  then  (3)  be  drawn  towards  him  in  spuitual 
resemblance  (1  John  iii.  2),  live  under  his  reign  in  unremitting  and  untiring  service 
(Eev.  vii.  15 ;  xxi.  25),  dwell  with  him  and  reign  with  him  La  everlasting  joy  (2  Tim. 
ii.  12 ;  Rev.  ii.  26 ;  iii.  21 ;  ixiL  5).— 0. 

Ver.  17. — 77ie  breadth  of  the  kingdom.  "They  shall  behold  the  land  of  far  distances  " 
(see  marginal  reading).    We  look  at— 

I.  The  breadth  of  the  histobical  kingdom.  Judah  was  to  be  delivered  from 
her  Assyrian  oppressor.  At  present  she  was  beleaguered,  shut  in  on  every  hand,  by  the 
invading  army ;  her  citizens  had  no  range  of  land  they  could  traverse — they  were 
confined  to  the  narrow  circle  made  by  the  besieging  hosts  of  Sennacherib.  But  soon 
those  boundaries  would  be  removed,  the  army  would  be  scattered  and  would  disappear. 
Then  the  country  would  be  open  everywhere ;  in  whatsoever  direction  they  looked  they 
would  see  hills  they  might  climb  and  valleys  they  might  cultivate  at  will;  as  far  as  the 
eye  could  reach  the  coimtry  would  be  free  to  the  traveller  and  to  the  husbandman.  They 
would  behold  a  "land  of  far  distances,"  a  broad  kingdom  they  might  call  their  own. 

II.  The  breadth  of  the  bpimtital  kinqdom.  That  kingdom  of  Christ,  wherein 
we  stand  and  in  which  we  so  much  rejoice,  is  a  "land  of  far  distances,"  a  region  of 
glorious  breadth  of  view  and  range  of  motion  and  of  action.  There  is  nothing  in  it  that 
is  limiting,  nothing  that  confines ;  everything  is  on  an  enlarged  scale.  There  is  about  it 
a  noble  and  inviting  freedom;  the  horizon-line  recedes  perpetually  as  we  advance 
This  applies  in  full  to  its  distinguishing  features.  1.  The  grace  of  Ood  shown,  to  us  in 
Jesus  Christ.  The  breadth,  the  fulness,  of  the  Divine  Father's  love  in  giving  us  his  Son 
(John  iii.  16;  Rom.  viii.  32);  the  fulness  of  the  Saviour's  love  in  making  such  a  sacrifice 
of  heavenly  dignity,  glory,  and  joy  (John  i.  1 — 14 ;  Phil.  ii.  6,  7 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  9),  and 
stooping  to  such  depths  of  darkness,  shame,  and  woe,  humbling  himself  even  unta 
death :  what  glorious  breadths  and  depths  and  heights  have  we  here  1    2.  Ute  mtrcy 


ca.  xxxm.  1-24J    TflE  BOOK  OF  THE  rROPHET  ISAIAH.  653 

of  God  now  extended  to  us  in  Jesus  Christ ;  reaching  to  those  who  have  gone  furthest 
in  presumptuous  sin,  in  vice,  in  crime,  in  vmspeakabie  enormities ;  extending  to  those 
who  have  sinned  against  the  clearest  light  and  the  most  gracious  influences;  touching 
those  who  have  gone  to  the  very  verge  of  human  life :  what  noble  breadths,  what  far 
distances,  have  we  here  I  3.  The  patience  of  Christ  with  his  erring  and  imperfect 
followers.  4.  The  vsefulness  of  a  devoted  and  generous  Christian  life.  Who  can 
calculate  the  extent  to  which  a  life  of  holy  love,  of  self-denying  service,  stretches  out 
and  flows  on,  out  into  the  remote  distance  of  space,  on  into  the  far  future  of  time  ? 

III.  Thb  bbbadth  of  the  heavenly  kingdom.  We  confidently  expect  to  find  in 
the  heavenly  country  a  "land  of  far  distances."  1.  In  its  spacial  dimensions ;  if,  indeed, 
that  can  be  truly  said  to  have  dimensions  which  is  boimdless  in  its  lengths  and  breadths. 
To  no  narrow  sphere,  reckoned  in  yards  or  miles,  shall  we  there  be  limited.  Our  outbok 
wUl  be  one  that  is  immeasiarably  large,  for  the  country  of  the  blessed  is,  "  to  our  heart 
and  to  our  hoping,"  a  land  of  very  far  distances  indeed.  2.  In  the  excellences  and 
glories  of  the  character  of  its  King.  When  will  the  time  come  that  we  shall  have 
covered  all  the  ground  in  that  great  exploration,  that  we  shall  have  surveyed  all  the 
heights  and  traversed  all  the  breadths  of  the  glorious  and  beautiful  character  of  the  Son 
of  God  ?  There  are  regions  beyond  regions,  summits  beyond  summits,  there.  3.  In  the 
capacities  of  its  subjects.  There  is  something  of  great  interest  and  of  genuine  worth  in 
the  growth  of  the  human  mind  from  infancy  to  maturity ;  something  well  worthy  of 
being  watched  and  in  every  way  to  be  desired.  But  there  comes  a  point  beyond  which 
that  development  may  not  go;  there  is  a  meridian-line,  reached  at  a  different  age 
by  different  men,  across  which  we  may  not  step,  at  which  it  is  imperative  that  we 
return,  that  we  decline.  We  dare  to  hope  that,  in  the  "  land  of  far  distances,"  that 
boundary-line  is  indefinitely  far  off;  that "  age  after  age,  for  ever,"  we  shall  go  on  acquir- 
ing not  only  knovvlcdge  but  power,  the  horizon-line  of  spiritual  maturity  continually 
receding  as  we  advance  in  wisdom  and  strength.  4.  In  the  range  of  its  service. 
"  His  servants  shall  serve  hiia ;"  and  in  what  varieties  of  way  may  we  not  hope  to  serve 
him  there  ?  Here  the  service  of  God  and  of  man  takes  many  forms — we  can  serve  by 
action  and  by  suffering,  by  example  and  by  persuasion,  in  word  and  deed,  in  things 
secular  and  in  things  sacred,  alone  and  in  company  with  others.  We  look  for  a  land, 
we  wait  for  a  life,  in  which  opportunities  of  serving  the  Eternal  Father  and  of  blessing 
his  children  wUl  be  far  more  numerous,  far  more  varied,  far  greater  and  nobler  in 
their  nature.  We  hope  for  a  land  of  such  glorious  breadth  on  every  hand  that,  not 
only  in  our  enlarged  capacities,  but  also  in  our  multiplied  and  magnified  opportunities, 
we  shall  find  it  a  "  land  of  great  distances."  (1)  Take  care  to  be  there.  (2)  Be  ready  to 
start  well  on  the  heavenly  course,  for  according  to  our  beginning  will  be  our  progress  at 
every  point  in  all  succeeding  ages. — 0. 

Vers.  18 — 24. — Happy  times.  A  very  pleasant  picture  is  this  of  "a  nation  or  of  a 
Church  on  which  the  full  blessing  of  God  is  resting.  Tkere  are  several  elements  in  its 
prosperity. 

I.  A  SENSE  OF  THE  DiviNB  MEKOT.  "The  peoplo  . . ..  shall  be  forgiven  their  iniquity" 
(ver.  24).  A  sense  of  pardoned  sin  and  of  reconciliation  to  God  is  at  the  foundation 
of  all  true  peace,  all  sacred  joy,  and  all  holy  usefulness. 

II.  The  maintenance  of  devotional  habits.  Zion  is  to  be  always  known  as 
"the  city  of  solemnities"  (ver.  20).  There  reverent  prayer  and  gratefol  praise  and 
earnest  inquiry  of  the  Lord  are  to  be  continually  foimd. 

III.  The  abiding  presence  and  felt  poweb  of  God.  The  word  that  will  most 
commonly  be  heard  on  the  lips,  because  most  frequently  rising  from  the  soul,  will  be 
"  the  Lord."  "  Jehovah  is  our  Judge."  "  Jehovah  is,"  etc.  (ver.  22).  Everything  is  to 
suggest  him,  is  to  be  referred  to  his  will,  is  to  be  ascribed  to  his  grace. 

IV.  A  pleasant  kecollection  of  evils  that  abb  over.  (Ver.  18.)  Happy  the 
Church  or  the  man  when  the  dark  days  that  have  been  and  are  gone  are  sufficiently 
removed  from  present  experience  to  make  the  memory  of  them  a  source  of  joy  and  not 
of  pain.  Such  a  time  does  often  come,  and  we  may  well  rejoice  and  be  glad  in  it. 
The  home  is  the  dearer  and  the  more  delightful  for  the  privations  that  have  been 
passed  through  on  the  way. 

V.  Abundance  fob  kvebt  pubb  desibe.    The  "  glorious  Lord  "  will  secure  bountiful 


554  THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PHOrilET    ISAIAH,     [ch.  xixm,  1— 24 


supplies  for  every  imaginable  need,  even  as  the  broad  river  and  outi^tretcbing  streams 
provide  verdure  and  grain  over  all  tbe  surface  of  the  well-watered  land,  even  as  the 
affrighted  and  fleeing  army  leaves  prey  which  even  the  halt  and  the  lame  will  be  litrong 
enough  to  take.  In  the  day  of  God's  blessing  there  will  be  nourishment  for  the  thought- 
ful, and  also  for  those  who  feel  more  than  they  think ;  truth  for  the  wise  and  for 
the  simple,  for  the  mature  of  mind  and  for  the  little  child ;  posts  of  service  for  the 
advanced  Christian  and  also  for  those  who  have  just  begun  their  course ;  such  fulness, 
even  to  overflow,  of  all  that  meets  the  wants  and  cravings  of  the  heart,  that  the  weakest 
as  well  as  the  strongest  shall  find  his  place  and  take  his  share. 

VI.  DrvnJE  gitardianship.  Prosperity  la  dungerous,  but,  with  God's  Spirit  in  the 
Church,  it  shall  not  be  harmful.  On  the  broad  river  of  success  and  satisfaction  the 
sails  of  the  spiritual  enemy  shall  not  be  seen  (ver.  21).  "  The  sun  shall  not  smite  by 
day ; "  it  will  illumine  and  warm,  but  will  not  scorch  and  wither.  Consequently,  there 
shall  be — 

VII.  Soundness  and  sbcubitt.  The  inhabitant  will  not  be  sick  (ver.  24);  "Jeru- 
salem will  be  a  quiet  habitation,"  etc.  (ver.  20).  Spiritual  soundness,  moral  integrity, 
purity  of  heart,  shall  prevail.  And  this  abounding,  there  will  be  no  abatement  of 
prosperity ;  the  stakes  will  not  be  removed,  the  tent  will  remain  ;  there  will  be  no  need 
for  any  going  into  exile ;  there  will  be  a  happy  permanence  and  fixedness  of  abode. 

The  picture  is  one  that  is  ideal  rather  than  actual ;  it  is  what  every  Church  should 
aim  to  present.  Only  the  favour  of  God  can  possibly  secure  it.  The  vital  question  is — 
How  is  that  favour  to  be  won  ?  And  that  question  resolves  itself  into  other  questions 
— Is  there  occasion  for  humiliation  and  a  change  of  spirit  and  of  behaviour  ?  Is  there 
need  for  more  internal  union  (Ps.  cxxxiii.  3)  ?  or  for  more  prayer  (Luke  xviii.  1 ;  Jas. 
iv.  3)  ?  or  for  more  love  both  of  Christ  and  man  (1  Cor.  xiii.  1 ;  Bev.  ii.  4)  ?  or  for  more 
zeo?(Bev.  iii.  15)?— C. 

Ver.  2. — Constant  renewals  of  Divine  help.  "Be  thou  their  Arm  every  morning." 
Prophetic  reference  is  made  to  that  wonderful  morning,  when  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  arose,  and,  looking  forth  from  the  walls  of  the  city,  beheld  the  besieging  army 
of  Sennacherib  a  multitude  of  corpses  (ch.  xxxvii.  36).  The  prayer  is  that  every 
morning  of  life  may  bring  its  witness  of  as  real,  if  not  as  striking,  helpings  and 
deliverings  and  defendings  of  God.  The  reference  to  the  "  arm  "  is  specially  appropriate, 
as  keeping  in  view  the  soldierly  defence  of  the  city.  The  prophet  and  others  may  do 
what  they  can  with  heart  and  head ;  but  in  view  of  defence  against  an  outward  enemy, 
those  that  serve  with  the  arm  are  specially  important.  Therefore  we  have  the  prayer 
that  the  Lord  himself  might  be  the  Arm  of  those  who  have  devoted  their  arm  to 
the  country.  Matthew  Henry  paraphrases  thus :  "  Hezekiah  and  his  princes  and  all 
the  men  of  war  need  contintial  supplies  of  strength  and  courage  from  thee;  supply  their 
need,  therefore,  and  be  to  them  a  God  all-sufficient.  Every  morning,  when  they  go  forth 
upon  the  business  of  the  day,  and  perhaps  have  new  work  to  do,  and  new  difficulties  to 
encounter,  let  them  be  afresh  animated  and  invigorated,  and,  '  as  the  day  so  let  the 
strength  be.' "  Treating  the  text  as  a  basis  for  meditation,  we  observe  that  God  has 
been  graciously  pleased  to  arrange  om*  life  on  earth,  not  as  one  continuous  and  unbroken 
space  of  time,  but  as  a  succession  of  brief  periods,  carefully  and  regularly  separated  from 
each  other ;  a  series  of  days,  we  call  them,  divided  by  ever-recurring  nights  of  sleep. 
A  man's  life  is  not  properly  a  thing  of  so  much  length ;  it  is  made  up  of  so  many  days. 
Looking  back  over  life,  the  patriarch  Jacob  says,  "  Few  and  evil  have  the  days  of  the 
years  of  the  life  of  my  pilgrimage  been,  and  have  not  attained  unto  the  days  of  the 
years  of  the  lives  of  my  fathers."  If  our  life  on  earth  were  one  continuous,  imbroken 
scene,  it  would  surely  be  impossible  for  any  of  us  to  become  truly  good.  So  much  of 
our  hope  of  ever  winning  goodness  lies  in  our  being  able  to  try  again  and  again,  to  begiu 
again  and  again  with  each  returning  day.  However  hopelessly  we  may  end  one  day, 
we  may  step  cheerfully  forth  to  new  endeavours  as  each  new  morning  comes.  Then 
how  tenderly  helpful  is  the  assurance  that  we  can  have  the  "  arm  of  the  Lord  "  for  our 
help  every  morning !  God's  idea  of  life  for  us  is  that  it  shall  be  given  to  us  in  pieces, 
separated  from  each  other — pieces  shaped  and  fashioned  as  he  may  please,  and  each  piece 
given  to  us  as  fresh  as  if  we  were  really  bom  again  every  day.  God  gives  us  thus, 
morning  by  morning,  and  day  by  day,  in  order  that  our  thoughts  may  be  fully 


CH.  xxxni.  1— 24.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  55£ 

concentrated  on  to-day.  To-day  is  ours.  To-night  is  not  ours.  To-morrow  is  not  ours. 
No  man  has  any  to-morrow  until  God  gives  it  to  him,  and  then  he  must  call  it  to-day. 
We  cannot  grasp  a  whole  life ;  we  can  grasp  the  duties  of  to-day.  What "  grace  "  is  for 
a  long  and  changeful  life  w«  do  not  know,  we  cannot  know.  God  offers  us  grace  for 
just  the  day  that  begins  with  this  morning.  And  the  arm  of  the  Lord  is  precisely 
what  we  need  day  by  day.  Gathering  up  the  scriptural  associations  of  this  figure, 
especially  in  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  the  following  points  may  be  illustrated. 

I.    EVEBT  MORNING  WB   NEED  ASS0BANOE  OF  God's  ABM  TO  LEAN  ON.      The  distinction 

between  the  godly  and  the  ungodly  man  cannot  be  more  sharply  defined  than  by 
saying,  "The  ungodly  man  tries  to  stand  by  himself,  and  the  godly  man  loves  to  lean  on 
another."  The  change,  the  renewal,  the  new  birth  of  a  man,  finds  its  expression  in  this 
"  loving  to  lean."  It  is  but  the  gracious  response  of  God  to  this  gracious  disposition, 
that  he  offers  his  arm  afresh  every  morning  for  the  good  man  to  lean  upon.  "  On  my 
arm  shall  they  trust." 

II.  EvEBT   MORNINO  WK  NEED  THE   ASBDBANOB   OP    God's   ABM   TO   GUIDE   08.      It  is 

the/ac<  of  life,  but  it  is  much  more  than  that — it  is  the  experience  of  life,  that  "it  is  not 
in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps."  So  Isaiah,  speaking  of  the  joumeyings  of 
Gtod's  people,  refers  to  God  who  "  led  them  with  his  glorious  arm."  That  arm  is  like 
a  signal  held  out,  showing  our  daily  path.  It  is  even  the  arm  and  hand  that  keeps  us 
steadily  in  the  right,  the  narrow  path.  The  figui-es  of  the  unknown  journey,  or  voyage, 
may  be  used.  This  journey  is  taken  in  stages,  and  every  morning  our  wise,  safe,  strong 
Guide  is  waiting,  ready  to  give  us  his  good  help. 

III.  EVBBT    MOBNINO    WB    NEED    THE    ASSUBANOE    OF    God's    ABM    TO    DEFEND    US. 

•'  That  arm  is  not  shortened,  that  it  cannot  save."  How  little  we  realize  our  day-by- 
day  dependence  on  Divine  providence !  "  Dangers  stand  thick  and  hover  round."  By 
what  we  call  "  accidents,"  men  and  women  about  us  are  killed  or  wounded  every  day. 
Some  one  defends  us.  It  would  be  well  for  us  if  we  more  clearly  saw  God's  saving  arm 
defending  us  continually.  Then  there  are  our  enemies ;  some  are  by  circumstance 
enemies,  and  some  are  by  wilfulness  enemies.  But  how  little  they  ever  do  that  really 
hurts  us !  Noisily  they  dwell  around  us,  like  the  armies  of  Sennacherib,  but  our 
Defender  is  there  every  morning.  Shield  for  each  new  day.  But  it  is  more  searching  to 
think  of  our  had  selves,  and  how  we  need  defending  from  them.  Every  morning  wakes 
the  old  self,  with  some  of  the  old  frailties,  habits,  prejudices,  passions.  Above  all  else 
we  need,  day  by  day,  the  presence  and  the  power  of  him  who  alone  can  defend  us  &om 
omrselves. — ^B.  T. 

Ver.  6. — The  secret  of  stability  for  every  age.  This  is  presented  by  showing  what 
would  be  the  secret  of  stability  in  the  kingdom  of  Hezekiah,  when  safety  and  peace  were 
again  restored.  The  prophet  anticipates  the  removal  of  the  great  and  serious  national 
evils,  which  had  brought  on  the  people  Divine  judgments,  and  rejoices  in  the  prospect 
that  "  righteousness  would  exalt  the  nation."  We  may  well  think  that,  in  thought,  he 
passed  on  to  the  times  of  Messiah,  when  alone  his  great  hopes  could  be  perfectly  realized. 
We  Lave  four  words  given  as  the  great  sources  of  the  national  security  and  stabiMty 
— "judgment,  righteousness,  wisdom,  and  knowledge."  If  we  attach  precise  and  appro- 
priate meanings  to  each  of  these,  we  shall  learn  what  are  the  secrets  of  stability  for  all 
times. 

I.  Judgment.  Not  here  equivalent  to  "  wise  decisions,"  "  skilful  plans,"  or  "  good 
counsels."  The  idea  is  rather  that  of  strong  and  vigorous  dealing  with  sin.  There  is 
no  security  for  any  commnnity  or  society  that  is  weak  in  its  handling  of  sin.  And  .thip 
is  true  also  of  the  individual  lite ;  we  must  be  resolute  and  firm  in  mastering  our  owh 
habits  and  passions,  "  cutting  off  right  hands,  and  plucking  oat  right  eyes."  If  a  nation 
is  to  prosper  it  must  be  strong  and  firm  in  its  judgments. 

n.  EiGHTEOUSNESS.  Here  ordering  life  and  relations  by  good  and  wise  principles  and 
rules.  Unrighteousness  is  disorder — the  chaos  which  follows  when  "  every  man  does 
that  which  is  right  in  his  own  eyes.''  Righteousness,  for  a  people,  is  rightness,  cora- 
formity  to  good  rules,  the  copying  of  good  models.  And  this  is  a  first  and  important 
sense  of  righteousness  for  the  individual.  It  is  the  righteousness  which  a  man  may 
attain ;  but  there  is  the  further  righteousness  which  a  man  may  receive  from  Jehovah 
Tiidkenu,  "  the  Lord  our  Righteousness." 


55«  TfiE  BOOR  OP  TflE  PROtSET  ISAtAH.    t™.  Xiiiit  1— 24. 

III.  Wisdom.  This,  on  its  practical  side,  is  the  skilful  ordering  and  rule  of  circnm- 
Btances,  so  as  to  get  the  most  and  the  best  out  of  them,  and  resist  the  evils  that  may  be 
connected  with  them.  "  The  wisdom  profitable  to  direct."  The  wisdom  which  may  be 
illustrated  for  social  and  political  life  from  the  ever-watchful  man  of  business,  who 
seeks  to  turn  everything  to  good  account ;  or  from  the  anxious  housewife,  who  tries  to 
make  the  best  of  everything. 

IV.  Knowledge.  Which,  in  this  connection,  is  the  careful  adjustment  of  things 
which  men  may  make  on  the  lasts  of  experience.  Knowledge  proving  a  practical  help. 
The  knowing  man  is  the  opposite  of  the  simple,  or  inexperienced,  man,  who  is  bewil- 
dered and  endangered  by  difficult  circnmstances. — R.  T. 

Ver.  14. — Who  can  gland  the  testing  firei  t  The  terms  "  devouring  fire,"  "  everlast- 
ing burnings,"  do  not  mean  hell ;  they  mean  God  in  visible,  material  judgments,  such 
as  may  be  symbolized  by  the  destruction  of  the  Assyrian  army ;  and  such  as  the  pre- 
sence of  that  army  became  to  the  people  of  Jerusalem.  The  appeal  of  Isaiah  seems  to 
be  this :  See  the  fright  into  which  the  people  have  fallen  at  the  presence  of  this  hostile 
army.  See  who  has  been  calm  and  strong  in  this  hour  of  national  peril.  How,  then, 
would  it  be  with  men  in  the  more  awful  times  of  Grod's  testing  jndgments  ?  The  man 
who  alone  can  dwell  in  the  "devouring  fire"  is  the  good  man.  He  that  is  able  to  abide 
"the  everlasting  burnings"  is  "the  man  that  walketh  rigliteously  and  speakcth 
uprightly."  Maclaren  says,  "The  prophet  has  been  calling  all  men,  far  and  near,  to 
behold  a  great  act  of  Divine  judgment,  in  which  Gk)d  has  been  manifested  in  flaming 
glory,  consuming  evil ;  now  he  represents  the  "  sinners  in  Zion,"  the  unworthy  members 
of  the  nation,  as  seized  with  sudden  terror,  and  anxiously  asking  this  question,  which 
in  effect  means,  "  Who  among  us  can  abide  peacefully,  joyfully,  fed  and  brightened, 
not  consumed  and  annihilated,  by  that  flashing  brightness  and  purity?"  The  pro- 
phet's answer  is  the  answer  of  common  sense :  "  Like  draws  to  like.  A  holy  God  must 
have  holy  companions." 

I.  The  tbstino  fires.  These  are  future,  but  they  are  not  altogether  future.  Per- 
haps we  shall  presently  come  to  see  that  the  passing  testings  are  more  serious  than  the 
future  ones.  Every  life-work  must  be  tried  with  fire ;  it  is  beinjj  tried  with  fire. 
Every  day  we  are  in  the  "  everlasting  burnings."  Life  is  God's  testing  fire.  This  is 
illustrated  by  the  influence  national  calamities  have  upon  nations.  Through  baptisms 
of  blood  and  devouring  fires  nations  come  forth  purified.  "  Through  much  tribulation 
[God's  testing  for  us]  we  must  all  enter  the  kingdom." 

II.  The  effect  of  the  testing  fibes  on  the  evil-minded.  Symbolized  in  the 
panic  of  the  godless  folk  in  Jerusalem  when  Sennacherib  drew  nigh.  At  the  sound 
of  threatening  they  took  alarm,  and  hurried  to  Egypt  lor  help.  Their  vain  self-confi-. 
dences  fell  about  them  as  soon  as  the  test  was  applied.  Can  we  face  the  judicial  and 
punitive  action  of  that  Divine  Providence  which  works  even  here?  and  how  can  we  face 
the  judicial  and  punitive  action  in  the  future  ? 

III.  The  effect  op  the  testing  fibes  on  the  good-minded.  They  cannot  escape 
from  the  common  earthly  conditions.  The  fires  try  every  man's  spirit  and  every  man's 
work.  There  are  some — should  we  not  be  among  them  ? — on  whom  even  the  "  second 
death  "  hath  no  power. — R.  T. 

Ver.  16. — God's  witness  to  character.  Connect  this  verse  with  the  description  of  ihe 
righteous  man  given  in  ver.  15,  obsei'ving  how  very  practical  is  the  righteousness 
which  God  requires  and  approves.  The  good  man  walks  uprightly,  speaks  worthy 
things,  wants  nothing  that  is  his  neighbour's,  will  neither  be  bought  nor  forced  to  do 
that  which  is  wrong,  refuses  to  listen  to  evil,  and  shuts  his  eyes  that  he  may  not  see  it. 
CK)d  ia  on  the  side  of  such  a  good  man,  and  whatever  may  be  the  disabilities  in  which 
he  is  placed  by  his  fellow-men,  he  may  be  quite  sure  of  safety  and  provision.  "  God  is 
•  Refuge  for  him."  "  None  of  them  that  trust  in  him  shall  be  desolate."  "  The  Lord 
doth  provide." 

I.  The  good  man  must  be  in  the  wobld,  Bxrr  he  shall  be,  above  it.  Our  Lord 
prayed  thus :  "  I  pray  not  that  thou  should Jst  lake  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that 
thon  shouldest  keep  them  from  the  evil."  Put  into  Eastern  figure,  before  earthly 
traablei  the  good  man  is  as  safe  as  a  people  hia  behind  the  "munitions  of  rocks" 


CH.  xxMi.  1— 24.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  557 

when  the  invader  is  in  the  land.  God  makes  no  new  lot,  no  fresh  circumstances,  for  the 
good  man.  Hu  does  not  promise  any  man  that  he  will  alter  his  earthly  conditions,  or 
altogether  relieve  him  of  his  troubles.  He  lifts  the  good  man  up  above  his  earth-scenes, 
by  "  strengthening  him  with  strength  in  the  soul,"  making  his  soul  bigger  than  bis 
circumstances,  A  man  is  not  lost  until  be  has  lost  heart.  But  if  God  supplies  inward 
strength  we  never  shall  lose  heart,  and  so  we  never  shall^be  lost.  Outwardly,  a  man 
may  be  tossed  about,  worn,  wearied,  wounded,  almost  broken,  yet  inwardly  he  may  be 
kept  in  perfect  peace,  his  mind  stayed  on  God ;  he  may  be  "  strong  in  the  Lord,  and 
in  the  power  of  his  might."  He  may  "  dwell  on  high,"  "  out  of  the  reach  of  present 
troubles,  out  of  the  hearing  of  the  noise  of  them ;  he  shall  not  be  really  harmed  by 
them,  nay,  he  shall  not  be  greatly  frightened  at  them."  This  is  the  portion  of  the 
good ;  God's  witness  to  character. 

II.  The  good  man  may  have  little,  but  he  is  sboure  of  enough.  "  Bread  and 
water"  represent  his  necessities,  not  his  indulgences ;  a  sufficiency,  but  not  a  luxury. 
So  good  Agur  prays,  "  Feed  me  with  food  convenient  for  me."  The  figure  here  is  taken 
from  the  limitations  of  a  time  of  siege.  The  "  necessary,"  as  distin.;uished  from  the 
"  luxurious,"  is  so  difficult  to  decide.  What  has  become  a  necessity  for  one  person 
another  still  looks  upon  as  luxury.  One  great  evil  of  our  age  is  the  development 
of  fictitious  wants.  We  are  called  back  to  simplicity  by  the  promises  of  God.  "  No 
good  thing  will  he  withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly."  All  that  is  needful  is 
pledged  to  us,  but  for  all  the  rest  we  are  dependent,  on  Divine  grace ;  then  what 
"  monuments  of  grace "  we  must  be! — R.  T. 

Ver.  17. —  Visionso/the  King.  The Targum reads,  "Thine  eyes  shall  see  the  Shechinali 
of  the  King  of  ages."  The  idea  of  the  prophet  probably  is,  that  the  good  man  shall 
see,  with  his  soul-eyes,  God  himself  delivering  and  rescuing  the  city  from  its  threaten- 
ing foes.  The  good  man  never  can  be  content  with  agencies  and  instrumentalities  ami 
second  causes.  He  must  recognize  the  living  God,  working  his  work  of  grace  by  means 
of  them.  He  cannot  be  content  unless  he  can  "  see  the  King  in  his  beauty  " — the  beauty 
of  his  redemptive  workings.  Some  see  a  reference  to  Hezekiah,  clothed  with  an  ideal 
beauty,  the  evidence  of  God's  extraordinary  favour.  But  however  we  may  begin  with 
that,  it  is  but  a  step  to  the  much  more  satisfying  thing,  the  spiritual  vision  of  God. 
"  Can  God  be  seen  ?  and  if  so,  how?  What  is  the  true  vision  of  God  ?  Is  it  possible 
to  men?  By  what  means  can  we  realize  it?  It  is  a  question  as  old  as  humanity. 
In  a  thousand  ways  of  formal  interrogation,  or  unconscious  yearning,  we  are  ever 
patting  it.  In  a  thousand  ways  of  ignorance,  superstition,  or  intelligence,  we  are  ever 
trying  to  answer  it."    We  may  dwell  on — 

I.  The  eyes  that  see.  Strangely  imprisoned  by  their  boilily  senses,  which  are 
their  sole  mediums  of  communication  with  the  world  of  material  things,  men  over- 
value the  knowledge  which  the  senses  can  bring  them,  and  under-value  those  more  real 
and  more  important  worlds  which  are  revealed  only  to  the  eyes  of  the  mind  and  of  the 
soul.  No  bodily  vision  of  God  can  ever  be  given  to  dependent  creatures;  meeting  oui 
sense-conditions,  Jesus  Christ,  the  Man,  is,  for  us,  the  "  Brightness  of  his  glory,  and  tlie 
express  Image  of  his  person."  But  souls  can  have  that  near  sense  of  God  which  can 
only  be  represented  as  a  vision.  Faith,  love,  purity,  holy  desire,  patient  wniling,  are 
the  conditions  of  soul-eyes  to  which  God  is  revealed.  Bach  of  these  suggests  illustrations 
and  practical  applications. 

II.  The  things  that  aee  seen.  Three  things  are  indicated.  1.  Soul-eyes  see  the 
King.  They  are  quick  to  discern  God's  presence.  They  detect  him  everywhere  and 
in  everything.  Life  is  serious,  life  is  glorious,  to  them,  because  God  is  abvays  "  walk- 
ing in  the  garden,"  always  close  by.  2.  Soul-eyes  are  keen  to  detect  his  beauty  or  his 
graciousuess ;  especially  as  seen  in  the  tenderness  and  care  of  his  watchings,  defendings, 
and  deliverings.  Soul-eyes  are  long-visioned,  and  can  see  the  future,  which  they  know 
is  in  God's  hands,  and  will  surely  prove  to  be  the  scene  of  God's  triumph.  Wiiatevcr 
men  may  think  and  say  and  feel  about  the  preaent,  this  is  certain— the  future  is  will) 
the  good.— R.  T. 

Vw.  22. — 7%e  true  theocracy.  It  Is  most  difficult  for  us  to  realize  that  idea  of 
JehOTah  as  the  direct  lluler  and  Governor  of  a  nation,  which  was  the  one  characteristic 


558  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHBT  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxxiii.  1— 24, 

thought  of  the  Jews,  and  the  great  underlying  idea  of  the  Mosaic  revelation.  But  this 
verse  gives  us  most  material  help  by  setting  out  a  threefold  relation  of  God  to  men  in 
the  theocracy. 

L  God  is  the  Law-maker.  "  The  Lord  is  our  Lawgiver."  This  is  true  in  two  senses. 
1.  God  gave  the  formal  laws  from  Mount  Sinai,  which  were  written  down  by  Moses, 
and  made  the  basis  of  the  national  covenant.  Compare  and  illustrate  by  the  work  of 
Lycurgus  and  Justinian.  tJod's  laws,  as  arranged  for  the  Hebrews,  were  only  the 
adaptations  to  their  national  life  of  the  conditions  and  rules  under  which  God  set 
humanity  from  the  first.  This  should  be  made  quite  clear,  lest  a  notion  should  pre- 
vail that  God's  Law  to  the  Jew  was  his  first  revelation  to  men.  It  was  the  wriling  out 
of  essential  law  for  the  practical  use  of  one  people.  2.  God  gives  revelntions  of  his 
will,  which  are  law  for  all  who  receive  them.  There  is  no  finality  in  the  revelation 
of  God's  law,  for  the  very  reason  that  Gfod  maintains  living  relations  with  us,  and  those 
relations  involve  that  the  expression  of  his  will  is  law  to  ui  at  any  given  time.  Illustrate 
by  the  prompt  and  entire  obedience  of  the  prophets  to  God's  wiU,  howsoever  it  may 
be  revealed  to  them.     Such  revelations  are  made  to  us,  and  for  us  God's  will  is  law. 

II.  God  is  the  Law-applier.  "The  Lord  is  our  Judge."  This  is  precisely  the 
work  of  the  judge — to  show  how  the  principle  and  the  comprehensive  terms  of  the  law 
bear  on  each  particular  case.  Moses,  Joshua,  David,  Samuel,  and  Hezekiah,  referied 
each  case  of  difficulty  directly  to  the  Divine  Judge.  But  in  just  this  Isiael  so  often 
failed ;  and  thi§  we  still  find  to  be  our  supreme  difficulty.  We  can  accept  the  fact  that 
law  is  from  God,  but  we  want  to  preside  ourselves  over  all  applications  of  law.  What 
we  need  is  the  confirmed  liabit  of  referring  all  things  to  God  our  Judge. 

III.  God  is  the  Law-executob.  "  The  Lord  is  our  King."  The  proper  idea  of  a 
king  is  one  entrusted  with  power  to  carry  out  the  requirements  of  the  national  law. 
The  king  is  the  executive.  God  carries  out  his  own  laws.  Scripture  is  full  of  striking 
instances  which  are  designed  to  impress  the  general  truth.  Take  such  cases  as  Acban, 
Korah,  Uzza,  Ananias,  and  Sapphira.  This  phase  of  God's  relation  is  not  so  difficult  to 
apprehend  as  the  previous  one ;  and  yet  in  these  days  we  are  in  some  danger  of  losing 
our  sense  of  the  directness  of  Divine  judgments. — R.  T. 

Ver.  24. — No  more  sickness.  This  is  clearly  a  figure,  designed  to  complete  the  picture 
of  relief  from  the  strain  and  pressure  and  anxiety  of  the  time  of  invasion.  Sickness  is 
the  constant  attendant  on  prolonged  siege.  The  point  on  which  we  may  dwell  is  that 
sickness  is  the  sign  of  the  presence  of  evil,  of  sin ;  and  so  heaven  is  represented  as  the 
place  where  there  is  no  more  sickness,  because  there  is  no  more  sin.  This  connection 
between  sickness  and  sin  lies  at  the  basis  of  some  of  the  most  important  Mosaic 
regulations.  It  explains  the  importance  ceremonially  attached  to  the  one  disease 
of  leprosy.  Trench  states  this  very  skilfully  :  "  The  same  principle  which  made  all 
that  had  to  do  with  death,  a  grave,  a  corpse,  the  occasions  of  a  ceremonial  uncleanness, 
inasmuch  as  all  these  were  signs  and  consequences  of  sin,  might  in  like  manner,  and 
with  a  perfect  consistency,  have  made  every  sickness  an  occasion  of  uncleanness,  each 
of  these  being  also  death  beginning,  partial  death-echoes  in  the  body  of  that  terrible  reahty 
— sin  in  the  soul.  But,  instead  of  this,  in  a  gracious  sparing  of  man,  and  not  pushing 
the  principle  to  the  uttermost,  God  took  but  one  sickness,  one  of  those  visible  outcom- 
ings  of  a  tainted  nature,  in  which  to  testify  that  evil  was  not  from  him,  could  not  dwell 
with  him ;  he  took  but  one,  with  which  to  link  this  teaching.  Leprosy,  which  was 
indeed  the  sickness  of  sicknesses,  was  selected  of  Qod  to  the  end  that,  bearing  his  tes- 
timony against  it,  he  might  bear  his  testimony  against  that  out  of  which  it  and  all  other 
sicknesses  grew — against  sin,  as  not  from  him,  as  grievous  in  his  sight ;  and  against  the 
sickness  itself  also  as  grievous,  inasmuch  as  it  was  a  visible  manifestation,  a  direct  con- 
sequence, of  the  inner  disharmony  of  man's  spirit,  a  commencement  of  the  death,  which 
through  disobeilience  to  God's  perfect  will  had  found  entrance  into  a  nature  made  by 
God  for  immortality." 

I.  All  sickness  is  a  little  death.  It  is  a  beginning  of  death.  Strangely  death 
lurks  in  the  smallest  thuigs — a  pin-prick,  a  slip  of  the  foot,  a  tiny  clot  of  blood,  the  bite 
of  a  fly,  etc. 

II.  All  deaths  are  the  sign  of  bin.  "  The  sting  of  death  is  sin."  Sickness  and 
death  keep  ever  before  men  the  fact  that  they  are  sinners. 


OH.  xxxiT.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


659 


III.  Sickness  and  death  will  oo  away  when  bin  gobs. 

IV.  As  God  is  graciously  working  fob,  the  removal  of  sins,  we  know  he  la 
working  also  for  the  removal  of  sufferino.  The  day  cometh  when  he  shall  be 
able  to  "  wipe  all  tears  from  our  eyes." — B.  T. 


Seotioh  XI.    The  Divine  Judgment  on  the  WobIiD,  and  the  Glort  of  thb 

ChUKOH   consequent   upon  it   (cH.   XXXIV.,   XXXV.). 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXI"V 


Ch.  xxxlv.  and  xxxv.  are  generally  re- 
cognized as  constituting  a  distinct  prophecy, 
complete  in  itself,  and  only  slightly  con- 
nected with  what  precedes.  The  passage 
is,  as  Bishop  Lowth  observes,  "an  entire, 
regular,  and  beautiful  poem,  oonaistiug  of 
two  parts,  the  first  (oh.  xxxiv.)  containing 
a  denunciation  of  Divine  vengeance  against 
the  enemies  of  God ;  the  second  (ch.  iixv.) 
describing  the  flourisliing  state  of  the 
Church  of  God,  consequent  upon  the 
execution  of  those  judgments."  The  pre- 
sent chapter,  which  forms  the  first  half  of 
the  poem,  is  wholly  denunciatory.  Its 
theme  is  vengeance  on  God's  enemies 
generally;  but,  as  a  typical  specimen,  the 
lidomites  are  selected,  and  their  punish- 
ment is  depicted  in  the  strongest  colours. 
Tlie  awful  pieture,  with  its  dark  aTid  lurid 
linos,  prepares  tlie  way  for  the  soft  and 
lovely  portraiture  of  tlie  blest  condition  of 
the  Church  triumphant,  which  is  contained 
in  the  ensuing  chapter. 

Ver.  1. — Ye  people;  rather,  ye  peoples. 
The  address  is  couched  in  the  widest 
possible  terms,  so  as  to  include  the  whole 
of  humau-kiiid.  The  earth  ...  and  all 
that  is  therein;  literally,  the  earth,  and  tlie 
fulness  thereof.  The  inhabitants  are  no 
doubt  intended. 

Ver.  2. — For  the  indignation  of  the  Lord 
ia  upon,  etc. ;  rather,  for  the  Lord  hath 
indignation  against  all  the  nations,  and 
wrath  againit  all  llieir  host.  He  hath  utterly 
destroyed;  rather,  he  hath  devoted,  or  put 
Wider  han. 

Ver.  3. — Cast  oat;  ijt,  refused  burial — ' 
thrown  to  the  doga  and  vultures  (oomp.  Jer. 
xiii.  19;  xxxvi.  30).  Such  treatment  of 
the  dead  was  regarded  as  a  shame  and  a 
disgrace.  It  was  on  some  occasions  an 
intentional  insult  (Jer.  xxii.  19);  but  here 
the  idea  is  rather  that  it  would  be  impossible 
to  bury  the  slain  on  account  of  their  number. 
In  ancient  times  corpses  often  lay  unburied 
on  battle-fields  (Herod.,  iii.  12).  The  moun- 
tains shiill  be  melted  with  their  blood.   When 


the  feelings  of  the  prophet  are  excited,  he 
shrinks  from  no  hyperbole.  Here  he  repre- 
sents the  blood  of  God's  enemies  as  shed 
in  such  torrents  that  mountains  are  melted 
by  it. 

Ver.  i. — All  the  host  of  heaven  shall  be 
dissolved,  A  dissolution  of  the  material 
frame  of  the  heavens,  in  which  the  moon 
and  stars  are  regarded  as  set,  seems  to  be 
intended  (comp.  Matt.  xxiv.  29 ;  2  Pet.  iii. 
10).  The  slaughter  of  God's  enemies  is 
here  connected  with  the  end  of  the  world, 
as  in  the  Book  of  Eevelation  (xix.  11 — 21). 
The  heavens  shall  be  rolled  together  as  a 
Boroll ;  literally,  as  a  hook.  Ancient  books 
were  written  on  long  strips  of  paper  or 
parchment,  which,  when  unrolled,  extended 
to  many  yards  in  length,  but  which  might 
be  rolled  together  "  by  means  of  one  or  two 
smooth  round  sticks  into  a  very  small 
compass."  Such  a  rolling  together  of  the 
widely  extended  heavens  ia  here  intended, 
not  a  shrivelling  by  means  of  heat  (comp. 
Bev.  vi.  11).  All  their  host  shall  fall  (comp. 
Matt.  xxiv.  29,  "The  stars  shall  fall  from 
heaven  "). 

Ver.  5. — My  sword  shall  be  bathed  in 
heaven;  rather,  has  been  hathed,  or  has  been 
made  drunlcen  (4 iMfBitrSri,  LXX.)  in  heaven. 
Some  suppose  a  reference  to  the  old  "  war  in 
heaven,"  when  the  sword  of  Divine  justice 
was  drawn  against  the  devil  and  his  angels. 
Others  regard  the  sword  now  to  be  used 
against  the  Iduineans  as  first,  in  heaven, 
"made  drunken"  with  the  Divine  anger. 
It  shall  come  down  upon  Idnmea  (comp.  cli. 
Ixiii.  1 — 6).  The  Edomites  first  showed 
themselves  enemies  of  Israel  when  they 
refused  to  allow  the  Israelites,  under  Moses, 
"a  passage  through  their  border"  (Numb. 
IX.  14 — 21).  David  subdued  them  (2  Sam. 
ix.  14) ;  but  they  revolted  from  Jehoram  (2 
Chron.  xxi.  8 — 10),  and  were  thenceforward 
among  the  most  bitter  adversaries  of  the 
southern  kingdom.  They  "smote  Judah" 
in  the  reign  of  Ahaz  (2  Chion.  xxviii.  17), 
and  wore  always  ready  to  "  shed  the  blood 
of  the  children  of  Israel  by  the  force  of  the 
sword  in  the  time  of  their  calamity"  (Ezek. 
xzxv.  5).  Amos  speaks  of  them  very  much 
in  the  same  tone  as  Isaiah  (Amos  i.  11,  12). 
They  ultimately  "filled  up  the  measure  of 
their  iniquities"  by  open  rejoicing  when  ■ 


560 


THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxxiv.  1— 17 


Jerusalem  was  destroyed,  and  the  people 
led  away  captive  by  Nebuchadnezzar  (Pa. 
cxxxvii.  7 ;  Obad.  10—14 ;  Lam.  iv.  21,  22 ; 
Ezek.  xxxT.  1 0 — 1 3).  In  the  present  passage 
we  must  regard  the  Edomites  as  representa- 
tive of  the  enemies  of  God's  people  generally 
(see  the  introductory  paragraph).  The 
people  of  my  curse ;  i.e.  "  the  people  on 
whom  I  have  laid  a  curse  " — the  Edomites. 
Esau  was  to  "  serve  "  Jacob  (Gen.  xxv.  23 ; 
xxvii.  40),  Edom  to  be  "  a  possession "  for 
Judah  (Numb.  xxiv.  18).  God  had  said  of 
Edom,  probably  before  Isaiah  uttered  the 
present  prophecy,  "  For  three  transgressioua 
of  Edom,  and  for  four,  I  will  not  turn  away 
the  punishment  thereof  .  .  .  but  I  will  send 
a  fire  upon  Teman,  which  shall  devour  the 
palaces  of  Bozrah"  (Amos  i.  11,  12).  Thus 
Edom  was  under  a  curse. 

Ver.  6.— The  sword  of  the  lord  is  filled ; 
or,  glutted  (Lowth).  The  tense  is  "the 
perfect  of  prophetic  certainty."  It  is  made 
fat  with  fatness.  "  Fed,  as  it  were,  on  the 
fat  of  sacrifices"  (see  hew.  iii  3,  4,  9,  10, 
15;  Tii.  3,  etc.).  Iambs  .  .  .  goats  .  .  . 
ram*.  The  lesser  cattle  represent  the  lower 
clastee  of  those  about  to  be  slain,  while  the 
"  unicorns"  and  "  bullocks"  of  ver.  7  repre- 
sent the  upper  classes — the  great  men  and 
leaders.  The  Lord  hatha  saciifloe  in  Bozrah. 
This  Boziah,  one  of  the  principal  cities  of 
Idumssa,  is  to  be  distinguished  from  "  Bozrah 
of  Moab,"  which  was  known  to  the  Romans 
as  "  Bostra."  It  lay  in  the  hilly  country 
to  the  south-east  of  the  Dead  Sea,  about 
thirty-five  miles  north  of  Petra,  and  was  one 
of  the  earliest  settlements  of  the  descendants 
of  Esau,  being  mentioned  as  a  well-known 
place  in  Genesis  (xxxvi.  33).  The  threats 
here  uttered  against  it  are  repeated  by 
Jeremiah  (xlix.  13),  who  says  that  "  Bozrah 
shall  become  a  desolation,  a  reproach,  a 
wastes  and  a  curse;  all  the  cities  thereof 
[i.e.  the  dependent  cities]  shall  be  perpetual 
wastes."  Bozrah  is  probably  identified  w  ith 
the  modern  El-Busaireh,  a  village  of  about 
fifty  housi  s,  occupying  a  iite  in  the  position 
above  indicated,  amid  ruins  which  seem  to 
be  those  of  a  considerable  city  (Burckhaidt, 
'Syria,'  p.  407;  Eobinson,  'Researches  in 
Palestine,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  570,  571). 

Ver.  7. — The  uniooms.  Bishop  Lowth 
renders  reim  by  "  wild  goats ;  "  Mr.  Cheyne 
by  "buffaloes."  Probably  the  wild  ox,  a  native 
or  the  trans-Jordanio  region,  is  intended 
(«ee  Mr.  Houghton's  paper  on  the  animals 
of  the  Assyrian  bus-reliefs,  in  the '  Transac- 
tions of  the  Society  of  Bibl.  Archteology,' 
vol.  V.  p.  .S36).  Shall  come  down;  rather, 
ihall  go  down;  i.e.  shall  fall  and  perish 
(comp.  Jer.  1.  27). 

Ver.  8. — The  day  of  the  Lord's  vengeance 
(comp.  ch.  Ixi.  2  and  Ixiii.  4).  In  all  three 
places  the  "day"  of  Gods  vengeance  is 


contrasted  with  the  "year"  of  his  recom- 
pense, to  show  how  infinite  it  his  meroy, 
how  short-lived,  comparatively  speaking, 
his  anger.  Mr.  Cheyne  well  compares  the 
concluding  clauses  of  the  lecond  com 
mandment,  where  "retribution  is  declared 
to  descend  to  the  third  and  fourth  genera- 
tion, but  mercy  to  the  thousandth."  Becom- 
penses  for  the  controversy  of  Zion ;  rather, 
for  the  vindication  of  Zion;  i.e.  for  the 
maintenance  of  her  right  in  the  quanel 
between  her  and  her  enemies. 

Ver.  9.. — And  the  streams  thereof;  i.e. 
"  the  streams  of  the  land  of  Edom."  Though 
Edom  has  no  perennial  rivers,it  has  numerous 
torrent-courses  to  carry  off  the  winter  rains 
(see  2  Kings  iii.  20—22).  These  should 
run  with  pitch,  instead  of  water.  The 
general  idea  is  that  Edom  should  be 
visited  with  a  destruction  like  that  of 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  (Gen.  xix.  24 ;  comp. 
Jer.  xlix.  18).  But  the  prophet  scarcely 
intends  his  words  to  be  taken  literally ;  he 
is  making  Edom  a  type  or  representation  of 
God's  enemies,  and  the  gist  of  his  teaching 
is  that  a  dreadful  vengeance,  an  utter 
destruction,  will  come  upon  all  who  set 
tliemselves  up  against  the  Most  High.  In 
the  next  verse  he  declares  that  the  vengeance 
will  be  eternal  (comp.  oh.  Ixvi.  24). 

Ver.  10. — None  shall  pass  through  it  for 
ever  and  ever.  There  was  a  literal  fulfil- 
ment of  the  prophecies  against  Edom  to  a 
considerable  extent.  Malachi,  writing  three 
hundred  years  after  Isaiah,  says  that  the 
"mountains  and  the  heritage  of  Esau 
leere  laid  waste  for  the  dragons  of  the 
wilderness"  (i.  3);  and  he  makes  the 
Edomites  themselves  exclaim,  "We  are 
impoverished,  but  we  « ill  return  and  build 
tlie  desolate  places"  (i  4).  A  certain 
amount  of  recovery  must  have  followed ; 
and  in  the  Maocabee  period  Edom  appears 
once  more  as  au  atlveisary  of  Israel,  and  an 
adversary  of  some  importance  (1  Mace.  v.  3, 
65).  Gradually,  however,  she  had  to  yield 
to  the  superior  power  of  Judeea,  and  was 
even  ruled  by  viceroys,  whom  the  Moccabee 
princes  nominated.  One  of  these,  Antipater, 
was  the  father  of  Herod  the  Great.  From 
his  time  Xdnmea  languished  until,  in  the 
seventh  century  after  Cfirist,  it  was  over- 
run and  conquered  by  the  Mohammedan 
Arabs,  who  completed  its  ruin.  It  is  now, 
and  has  been  for  above  a  thousand  year*, 
one  of  the  most  desolate  tracts  upon  the 
earth's  surface. 

Ver.  11. — The  cormorant  and  the  bittern 
shall  possess  it.  Compare  the  prophecy 
against  Babylon  in  Ml.  xiv.  23.  The 
Hebrew  word  translated  "cormorant,"  is 
now  generally  regarded  a*  designating  the 
"  pelican,"  while  the  one  rendered  "bittern" 
is  thought  by  some  to  mean  "  hedgehog " 


OH.  XXXIV.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PKOPHET  ISAIAH. 


661 


or  "porcupine."  Animals  that  delight  in 
Bolitude  are  certainly  meant,  but  the  par-, 
ticnlar  species  is,  more  or  less,  matter  of 
conjecture.  He  shall  stretoii  out  upon  i^; 
rather,  and  one  shall  etrntch  out  upon  it. 
The  verb  is  used  impersonally.  The  line 
of  confusion,  and  the  stones  of  emptiness ; 
riithev,  the  Ihte  of  desolation,  and  the  plummet 
of  emptiness  (comp.  2  Kiugs  xxi.  18  ;  Lam. 
ii.  8 ;  Amos  vii.  7,  8).  Tlie  destruction  of 
cities  was  elfected  by  rule  and  measure, 
probably  because  difl'ereiit  portions  of  the 
task  were  assigned  to  dilt'erent  sets  of 
labourers,  and,  if  the  work  was  to  be  com- 
pletely done,  it  required  to  be  done 
systematically.  Here,  the  measuring-tape 
and  the  plumb-line  are  to  be  tliose  of  tohu 
and  vohu,  or  of  the  eternal  chaos  out  of 
which  God,  by  his  word,  produced  order 
(Gen.  i.  2). 

Ver.  12. — They  shall  call  the  nobles,  etc. ; 
rather,  as  for  her  nobleg,  there  shall  be  none 
there  for  them  to  call  to  the  Icingdom.  The 
nobles  are  termed  horim,  probably  because 
the  right  of  succession  to  the  kingdom  was 
vested  iu  the  descendants  of  the  Horites, 
from  whom  I  he  lidoiiiitcs  took  their  territory 
(Gen.  xxxvi.  20,  29,  30).  These  having 
died  out,  there  would  be  no  one  to  appoint 
as  king. 

Ver.  13. — Thorns  shall  oome  up  in  her 
palaces.  The  "palaces"  of  Bozrah  are 
mentioned  also  by  Amos  (i.  12),  and 
are  threatened  with  dustjuction  by  fire. 
Amid  their  ruins  should  grow  up  thorus 
and  briars.  It  shall  be  an  habitation  of 
dragons ;  or,  of  jackals  (see  the  comment  on 
ch.  xiii.  22).  Owls ;  literally,  daughters  of 
screaming — a  description  better  suited  to  tlie 
owl  than  to  the  ostrich,  which  some  regard 
as  the  bird  meant. 

Ver.  14. — WUd  beasts  of  the  desert  .  .  . 
wild  beasts  of  the  island.  In  the  original, 
Isiyim  and  'iyim — "  wailers ' '  and  "  howlers  " 
— probably  "jackals  and  wolves,"  or  "  wolves 
and  hyenas"  The  satyr  (see  the  com- 
ment on  ch.  xiii.  21).  The  screech  owl.  The 
word  here  used,  lilith,  occurs  only  in  this 
place.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  any 
bird,  or  other  animal,  is  meant.  Lilit  wns 
the  name  of  a  female  demon,  or  w.icked 
fairy,  in  whom  the  Assyrians  believed — a 
being  thought  to  vex  and  persecute  her 


victims  in  their  sleep.  The  word  is  pro- 
bably a  derivative  from  leilah,  night,  and 
designates  "  the  spirit  of  the  night " — a  mis- 
chievous being,  who  took  advantage  of  the 
darkness  to  play  fantastic  tricks.  A  Jewish 
legend  made  Lilith  the  first  wife  of  Adam, 
and  said  that,  having  pronounced  the 
Divine  Name  as  a  charm,  she  was  clianged 
into  a  devil.  It  was  her  special  delight  to 
murder  young  children  (Buxtorf,  '  Lex. 
Kabbin.,'  ad  voo.).  The  prophets,  when 
they  employ  poetic  imagery,  are  not  tied 
down  to  fact,  but  are  free  to  use  the  beliefs 
of  their  contemporaries  in  order  to  heighten 
the  force  of  their  descriptions. 

Ver.  15. — The  great  owl ;  rather,  the 
arrow-snake  (Serpens  jaculus).  Gather  under 
her  shadow;  i.e.  "gather  her  young  ones 
under  her."  There  shall  the  vultures  also 
be  gathered;  rather,  there  verily  shall  the 
vultures  assemble. 

Ver.  16. — Seek  ye  out  of  the  book  of  the 
Lord.  By  "the  book  of  the  Lord"  some 
understand  a  collected  volume  of  Moses  and 
the  prophets,  jisalinists,  etc.,  previous  to 
Isaiah's  time,  which  they  suppose  to  have 
existed  in  his  day.  But  there  is  no  evidence 
of  any  such  collection.  It  is  better  to  under- 
stand the  expression  of  Isniah's  own  pro- 
phecies, or  of  such  a  collection  of  them  as 
he  had  made  previously  to  the  composition 
of  the  present  chapter.  Nothing  contained 
in  the  entire  book  should,  he  says,  fail  of 
its  accomplishment.  Even  the  minutiss  of 
the  present  chapter  should,  each  aud  all, 
have  their  fulfilment,  though  not,  perhaps, 
in  every  case  a  literal  one.  My  mouth  .  .  . 
his  Spirit.  The  "  mouth "  of  the  prophet 
and. the  "Spirit"  of  God,  which  dictates  to 
him  what  he  is  to  write,  are  in  accord;  and 
the  Spirit  will  bring  to  pass  what  the  mouth 
inspired  by  him  has  "  commanded." 

Ver.  17. — He  hath  oast  the  lot  for  them. 
God,  who  allots  to  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth  their  several  countries,  has  now 
allotted  Idumca  to  the  unclean  beasts  aud 
birds  and  reptiles  which  have  been  men- 
tioned ;  henceforth  it  is  formally  assigned 
to  them  as  their  habitation.  It  is  through- 
out to  be  understood  that  Idumea  stands  for 
the  world-power  which  resists  God  and 
will  be  finally  abased  and  put  to  shame. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1 — 10. — The  terrors  of  the  Lord  not  to  le  held  hack  hy  the  preacher,  "Know- 
ing therefore  the  terror  of  the  Lord,"  says  the  great  apostle  of  the  (Jentiles,  "  we 
persuade  men."  There  is  in  these  modern  times  a  sickly  sentimentality  prevalent, 
which  protests  against  the  employment  by  preachers  of  arguments  that  address  them- 
selves to  the  fears  of  their  hearers.  Delicate  nerves  are  not  to  be  hurt  by  disagreeaile 
images,  or  highly  wrought  descriptions  of  sufferinjs.  Ears  accustomed  to  flatteries  are 
nut  to  be  shocked  by  suggestions  that  ni^ke  the  listeners  uncomfortable.     "  Speak 


562  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH.    [<w.  xxsiv.  1— 17. 

unto  UB  gmootk  things"  is  the  uniTeraal  demand,  or,  at  any  rate,  the  uniyersal  defrire. 
There  is  considerable  danger  of  preachers  yielding  to  the  wishes  of  their  heareri 
in  this  respect ;  since  it  is  always  pleasant  to  be  popular,  and  disagreeable  to  be  thought 
to  take  a  pleasure  in  hurting  people's  feelings.  But  the  preacher  of  God's  Word 
should  be  actuated  by  higher  considerations.  He  must  shape  his  conduct  by  (1)  the 
example  of  great  preachers  in  the  past,  as  Isaiah,  St.  Paul,  St.  John,  Christ  himself; 
(2)  the  real  needs  and  true  interest  of  those  whom  he  addresses ;  and  (3)  the  declara- 
tions of  Holy  Scripture  concerning  the  duty  of  a  preacher. 

I.  The  example  of  great  fbeaoeebs  in  the  fast.  It  ii  clear  that  Isaiah  did  not 
hold  back  the  terrors  of  the  Lord.  Almost  one-half  of  his  prophecy  is  denunciiitory ; 
and  the  denunciations  uttered  are  of  a  truly  fearl'ul  character.  '  All  the  great  powers 
ol  the  earth,  and  many  minor  powers,  are  threatened  with  the  DiTine  vengeance,  and 
that  vengeance  is  depicted  in  very  terrible  language.  Babylon  is  to  be  "  brought  down 
to  hell,  to  the  sides  of  the  pit "  (ch.  liv.  15) ;  Assyria  is  to  be  burnt  up ;  his  glory  is  to 
be  consumed;  he  is  to  be  "as  when  a  standard-bearer  fainteth"  (oh.  x.  17, 18);  Bdom 
is  to  become  "  burning  pitch  "  (ch.  xxxiv.  9),  which  "  shall  not  be  quenched  night  nor 
day  "  (ch.  xxxiv.  10) ;  God's  enemies  generally  are  to  be  "  slain  "  and  "  consumed,"  and 
set  in  a  place  where  "  their  worm  shall  not  die,  neither  shall  their  fire  be  quenched  " 
(ch,  Ixvi.  24).  St.  Paul  persuaded  men  by  "  the  terror  of  the  Lord "  (2  Cor.  v.  11). 
Ho  warned  them  to  "  look  for  judgment  and  a  fiery  indignation,  which  shall  devour 
the  adversaries"  (Heb.  x.  27).  He  reminded  them  that  "our  God  is  a  consuming 
Fire  "  (Heb.  xii.  29),  and  that  "  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  his  hands"  (Heb.  a.  31). 
St.  Juhn,  the  apostle  of  love,  spoke  of  those  who  should  "drink  of  the  wine  of  the 
wrath  of  God,  which  b  poured  out  without  mixture  into  the  cup  of  his  ind^nation," 
and  who  should  be  "tormented  with  fire  and  brimstone  in  the  presence  of  the  huly 
angels,  and  of  the  Lamb,"  and  said  that  "  the  smoke  of  their  torment  ascendeth  up  Ct 
ever  and  ever,"  and  that  they  "  have  no  rest  day  nor  night"  (Rev.  xiv.  10,  11).  It  is 
to  (lur  blessed  Lord  himself  that  we  owe  the  picture  of  the  rich  man  tormented  in  the 
flame,  and  praying  Abraham  to  send  Lazarus,  that  he  might  "dip  the  tip  of  his  finger 
in  water  and  cool  his  tongue  "  (Luke  xvi.  24).  Our  Lord,  moreover,  adopts  the  dreadful 
imagery  of  Isaiah  with  respect  to  the  umlying  worm  and  the  fire  that  is  never  quenched 
(Mark  ix.  44,  46,  48),  and  points  his  teaching  by  revealing  to  us  the  awful  words  of 
ilje  final  sentence  of  reprobation,  "Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire, 
prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels  "  (Matt.  xxv.  41). 

II.  The  eeal  needs  of  those  to  whom  preaching  is  addressed.  It  cannot  be 
denied  that  fear  is  a  strong  constraining  motive.  Human  laws  are  enforced  by 
penalties,  the  object  of  which  is  to  "  put  men  in  fear."  Punishment  holds  its  place 
in  evary  system  of  moral  training,  and  punishment  is  an  appeal  to  fear.  Whatever 
Miay  be  the  case  with  a  chosen  few,  tlie  bulk  of  mankind  will  always  be  more  readily 
influenced  by  fear  than  by  hope,  by  punishments  than  by  rewards,  bythreats  than  by 
promises.  The  preacher  cannot  afford  to  lo.se  the  moral  force  which  is  thus  put 
within  his  reach.  It  is  hard  enough  to  restrain  men  from  evil  courses,  and  induce 
them  to  lead  a  godly  life,  by  freely  using  all  the  means  of  persuasion  that  are  in  our 
power.  To  refrain  from  iisiug  one  of  the  most  potent  would  be  to  fight  Satan  with 
one  hand  instead  of  two. 

III.  The  teaching  of  Scriptubk  conokrniso  the  duty  of  a  preacher.  Preachers 
are  directed  to  open  to  their  disci}iles  "the  whole  counsel  of  God."  They  are  not  to 
pick  and  choose  what  doctrines  of  Christianity  they  will  teach.  They  are  to  deliver 
to  others  "  the  gospel,"  "  that  which  they  also  received  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  3)— not  "  another 
gospel "  (Gal.  i.  6).  Now,  it  cannot  be  pretended  tliat  "  the  terrors  of  the  Lord  "—his 
wrath  against  sin,  and  its  dreadful  final  punishment,  are  not  as  much  portions  of  the 
teaching  of  Christ  ai  any  other.  Not  to  preach  them  is  to  keep  back  a  part  of  the 
message  which  Christ  brought  us  from  the  Father.  No  preacher  is  entitled  so  to  act, 
whatever  the  disinclination  of  his  congregation  te  hear  the  plain  teaching  of  Scripture 
on  these  points  plainly  declared.  The  disinclination  is  itself  an  indication  of  a  need. 
Those  who  most  dislike  the  doctrine  of  final  punishment  are  probably  those  who  most 
require  to  have  the  doctrine  pressed  upon  them. 


dH.  xxiiv.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PilOPHET  ISAIAH.  663 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTH0B8. 

Yen.  1 — ^17. — The  sins  and  punishment  of  Edom,  The  Edomites  appear  in  th» 
blackest  colours  in  the  descriptions  of  the  prophets.  And  in  this  oracle  their  punish- 
ment is  represented  in  the  horrible  desolation  of  their  land. 

I.  Thbik  siKS.  Their  cruelty  is  above  all  stigmatized.  At  the  siege  of  Jerusalem 
by  Nebuchadnezzar  they  helped  to  plunder  the  city  and  slaughter  the  poor  Jews. 
Their  conduct  on  this  occasion  was  never  forgotten  (Ps.  cxxxvii.).  In  Ubadiah  wa 
have  the  feelings  about  them  brought  into  the  clearest  light  (10 — 16).  They  were 
akin  to  the  Jews,  Esau  the  ancestor  of  the  one,  Jacob  of  the  other.  Their  cruelty  was 
accused  as  "violence  against  a  brother."  They  had  entered  the  gate  of  the  city  on 
the  day  of  their  brethren's  calamity,  to  exult  over  them,  and  to  join  hand  in  hand 
with  the  conqueror  and  the  spoiler.  But  the  day  of  vengeance  has  come,  and  their 
violent  dealing  is  to  be  returned  upon  their  own  heads  (cf.  ch.  IxiiL  1 — 4;  Jer.  xlix. 
17 ;  Lam.  iv.  21 ;  Ezek.  xxy.  13, 14 ;  xxxv. ;  Amos  i.  11,  12). 

II.  Thbie  punishment.  1.  The  sword  of  Jehovah  an  emblem  of  Divine  vengeance. 
So  in  numeious  passages  (ch.  xxvii.  1;  xxxi.  8:  xxxiv.  5;  Ixvi.  16;  Deut.  xxxii.  41, 
42 ;  Jer.  xii.  12  ;  xlvi.  10 ;  xlvii.  6,  35 — 38 ;  Zech.'  xiii.  7).  It  has  been  bathed  in  blood 
in  heaven,  that  is,  upon  the  objects  of  idolatrous  worship,  demons  of  the  stars,  etc. 
2.  Sacrifice  as  also  a  figurt  of  vengeance.  A  "sacrifice  in  Bozrah,  a  great  slaughter 
in  the  land  of  Edom."  So  sacrifice  and  feasting  connected  with  judgment  in  Zeph.i.  7; 
Jer.  xlvi.  10 ;  Ezek.  xxxix.  17 — 19.  3.  Pictures  of  desolation.  It  is  a  volcanic  land, 
and  the  prophet  seus  it  deluged  with  lava-flonds,  like  the  guilty  cities  of  the  plain 
(cf.  Jer.  xlix.  18;  Eev.  xiv.  10;  xix.  3).  The  further  features  of  the  picture  are 
sketched  in  the  most  gloomy  ooloiurs — its  castles  and  strong  places  in  ruins  and  over- 
grown with  weeds ;  wild  animals  haunting  the  former  abodes  of  man ;  and  demons  or 
fairies,  such  as  are  in  popular  superstition,  hovering  about  the  former  scenes  of  human 
pride  and  power. 

III.  Edom  as  typical  of  the  ungodly  wokld.  There  seems  reason  for  supposing 
the  prophet  to  have  had  this  larger  thought  in  mind.  1.  All  the  nations  are  summoned 
to  hear  the  judgments  of  God.  2.  The  desolation  predicted  is  said  to  be  eternal ;  and 
this  is  four  tinjes  repeated.  The  general  lessons,  then,  of  Divine  judgments  may  be 
repeated  in  connection  with  this  awe-inspiring  picture.  1.  IVie  particular  exa'n.ple  of 
Divine  jvdgmei(t  illustrates  the  general  truth.  That  which  concerns  the  people  in 
this  respect  concerns  ■  mankind.  The  beam  which  strikes  this  or  that  object  strikes 
many  others  in  its  rebound.  2.  Destruction  and  discrimination  in  the  judgments  are 
the  mark  of  Providi  nee.  When  God  strikes  an  individual,  or  a  nation,  the  conclusion 
is  that  they  were  aimed  at.  3.  An  utter  doom  the  consequence  of  utter  sin.  None  can 
think  of  the  doom  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  of  Edom,  without  a  shudder,  vrithout 
hearing  the  reverberations  of  the  thunder  from  Sinai ;  without  attending  to  the  appeal, 
"  Break  off  your  sins  by  righteousness ! "  "  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not 
your  hearts  1 " — J. 

Vers.  1 — 15.— The  Divine  indignation.  The  strong,  pictorial  language  of  the 
prophet  brings  into  bold  relief  some  truths  respecting  God's  indignation  of  which  it  is 
needful  to  be  occasionally  reminded.    We  learn — 

I.  That  it  is  a  constant  faotoe  in  the  goveenmest  of  the  woeld.  "Come 
near,  ye  nations,  to  hear;  and  hearken,  ye  people;  let  the  earth  hear,  and  all  th*t  is 
therein  ...  for  the  indignation  of  the  Lord  is  upon  all  nations,"  etc.  (vers.  1,  2).  It 
is  seldom,  pei  1  aps  never,  the  duty  of  the  Christian  minister  to  employ  such  terms  as 
those  used  in  this  prophecy  (vers.  3,  5,  6).  But  it  is  his  duty  to  make  it  clear  that 
benevolence  and  its  kindred  attributes  do  not  constitute  the  character  of  God ;  that, 
though  it  is  a  truth  of  inestimable  price  that  "  God  is  love,"  it  is  also  true  that  "  our 
God  18  a  consuming  Fire; "  that  though  it  is  a  fact  that  "justice  and  judgment  are  his 
strange  work,"  it  is  also  a  fact  that  God  does  pour  out  his  indignation  "upon  all 
nations;"  that  "the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  against  them  that  do  evil,"  that  he  will 
render  "indignation  and  wrath  .  .  .  upon  every  soul  of  man  that  doeth  evil." 
KeligiouB  doctrine,  like  all  other  truth,  must  he  seen  in  its  true  proportions,  or  it  will 


564  THE  B005.  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxxiv.  1— 17. 

be  misconceived.  To  represent  God's  indignation  against  sin  as  the  chief  element  in 
his  character  is  essentially  false;  to  represent  his  love  as  absorbing  or  eclipsing  hia 
hatred  of  sin  and  his  intention  to  punish  the  guilty  is  also,  if  not  equally,  false.  The 
■ame  lips  which  opened  to  invite  every  weary  Vfanderer  to  return  to  him  and  find  rest 
in  his  happy  service  declared  that  many  of  the  children  of  privilege  should  be  shut  out 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  To  the  Thrice-Holy  One  sin  is  now  "  that  abominable  thing 
which  his  soul  hateth,"  and  against  it  he  will  always  express,  both  in  word  and  deed, 
his  righteous  indignation. 

II.  That  it  is  sometimes  positively  overwhelming  m  its  effects.  "He  h»th 
utterly  destroyed  them "  (ver.  2) ;  "  Their  slain  shall  be  cast  out  .  .  .  the  mountains 
shall  be  meltid  with  their  blood  "  (ver.  3) ;  "  All  the  host  of  heaven  shall  be  dissolved," 
etc.  (ver.  4);  "The  sword  of  the  Lord  is  filled  with  blood  .  .  .  the  Lord  hath  a  great 
slaughter  in  the  laud  "  (ver.  6).  Grod  is  sometimes  "  terrible  in  his  doings  toward  the 
children  of  men."  'Ihe  flood  swept  away  the  race;  the  fires  of  heaven  consumed 
the  cities  of  the  plain ;  the  avenging  armies  destroyed  the  population  of  the  guilty 
land.  And  now  the  corrupt  nation  pays  for  its  apostasy  and  its  crimes  the  penalty  of 
defeat  and  humiliation ;  the  degenerate  Church  also  suffers  feebleness,  decline,  perhaps 
positive  extinction ;  and  the  debased,  hardened  man  finds  himself  bereft  of  every  good, 
pursued  and  overtaken  by  gathering  evils,  having  nothing  to  hope  and  everything  to 
fear.  God  is  "slow  to  wrath,"  he  gives  opportunities  for  repentance,  he  welcomes  and 
restores  the  penitent ;  but  on  the  impenitent  and  unreturning  sinner  he  lays  his  hand 
of  retribution,  and  alas  for  those  who  find  from  their  own  experience  that  "  the  way  of 
transgressors  is  hard"! 

III.  That  it  is  often  excited  bt  offences  committbd  against  his  people. 
"  The  day  of  the  Lord's  vengeance  "  is  "  the  year  of  recompenses /or  the  controversy  of 
Zion"  (see  Numb,  xx.  20 ;  2  Chron.  xxi.  8—10 ;  xxv.  12 ;  Ps.  cxxxvii.  7 ;  Obad.  10— IG). 
Our  Divine  Lord  has  told  us  that  to  cause  one  of  his  little  ones  to  sttmible  is  a  heinous 
offence  in  his  sight ;  that,  inasmuch  as  we  do  not  our  duty  to  one  of  the  least  of  his 
brethren,  we  withhold  what  is  due  to  himself.  The  persecution  of  the  people  of  God 
has  taken  many  forms  beside  that  of  slaughter  or  imprisonment;  they  who  resort  to  it 
must  reckon  on  a  very  serious  measure  of  Divine  disapproval. 

IV.  That  it  shows  itself  in  its  saddest  foem  in  a  complete  dbgenekact. 
"From  generation  to  generation  it  shall  lie  waste"  (ver.  10  and  vers.  11 — 15).  It  is 
a  sad  descent,  a  melancholy  instance  of  degeneracy,  when  the  thickly  peopled  city 
is  abandoned  by  mankind,  is  untrodden  by  the  human  foot,  and  becomes  the  haunt 
of  the  wild  beast,  of  the  obscene  bird,  and  of  the  "  night-monster."  The  last  and  worst 
penalty  which  God's  indignation  inflicts  on  the  children  of  men  is  utter  spiritual 
degeneracy — the  mind  losing  its  intellectual  faculties,  and  becoming  imbecile  through 
vice  and  folly ;  the  tvHl  broken  down  and  become  helpless,  bent  and  swayed  with  every 
breeze;  the  heart  hardened  so  that  all  feeling  of  pity  and  affection  has  departed;  the 
soul  foregoing  and  forgetting  its  higher  aspirations  and  sunk  into  the  condition  in 
which  it  craves  nothing  better  than  worldly  increase  or  animal  indulgence.  Sad  as 
is  the  loss  of  position  or  estate  when  the  powerful  prince  becomes  a  menial  or  the 
wealthy  merchant  becomes  a  beggar,  immeasurably  sadder  in  the  sight  of  Heaven  is 
that  spiritual  degeneracy  in  which,  as  the  inevitable  wages  of  sin,  a  human  spirit  loses 
all  its  nobility  of  character  and  becomes  an  outcast  in  creation,  mere  driftwood  on  tho 
ocean,  the  sport  of  the  devouring  waves. — 0. 

Vera.  16, 17. — The  Divine  Word  and  human  woe.  These  words  are  called  forth  by — 
I.  Anticipated  incredulity.  The  prophet  thinks  that  the  Bolemn  threatenings  he 
has  uttered  will  not  be  credited.  He  seems  to  say, "  Ton  heard  these  awful  utterances, 
but  you  will  not  heed  them  ;  you  will  indulge  the  thought  that  they  are  nothing  more 
than  a  fanatic's  dream ;  you  think  in  your  hearts  that  they  will  never  be  fulfilled ;  you 
imagine  that  you  can  afford  to  disregard  them ;  but  you  are  mistaken,  there  will  be 
the  closest  correspondence  between  what  is  written  in  'the  book  of  the  Lord'  and 
what  shall  one  day  be  witnessed  in  the  experiences  of  Edom."  There  is  a  great  deal  of 
unwarranted  incredulity  in  the  hearts  of  men  respecting  the  penal  purposes  of  God. 
He  has  spoken,  has  warned  men,  has  clearly  intimated  what  will  be  the  consequences 
of  crime,  of  vice,  of  ungodlip?ss,  of  t}ie  rejection  of  the  gospel  of  QhrUt,  of  imfeithfiil- 


OH.  XXXIV.  1—11]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  565 

ness  and  disloyalty  in  tlie  Christian  life.  But  men's  hearts  are  hard,  tlieir  undorstanding 
is  veiled  so  that  they  do  not  see.  1.  They  delude  themselves  with  the  thought  that, 
though  other  men  suffer  the  penalty  of  their  sin  or  folly,  they  will,  in  some  way, 
escape.  2.  Or  they  deceive  themselves  by. holding  up  before  their  minds  one-half  only 
of  the  truth  ;  they  dwell  on  the  graciousness  and  mercy  of  G-od,  and  act  as  if  he  were 
not  as  righteous  as  he  ig  tender,  as  pure  as  he  is  pitiful.  3.  Or  they  misrepresent  the 
character  of  their  misdeeds  to  their  own  minds,  persuading  themselves  that  they  are 
slight  and  venial,  however  serious  they  maybe  in  the  sight  of  God.  It  is  a  melancholy 
fact,  calling  for  utmost  vigilance,  that  the  frequent  repetition  of  sin  and  ultimate 
familiarity  with  it  reduce  its  apparent  guiltiness  to  the  smallest  fraction. 

II.  The  peophetio  assurance.  The  prophet  says,  "Compare  what  is  written  in  the 
'  book  of  the  Lord'  with  the  facts,  and  they  shall  tally  with  one  another — not  one  shall 
fail;  for  the  command  shall  go  from  heaven,  and  these  wild  beasts,  whose  presence  has 
been  threatened  as  a  dire  scourge  and  as  the  mark  of  saddest  degeneracy,  shall  possess 
the  holy  land,  and  '  from  generation  to  generation  shall  dwell  therein ; '  the  very 
worst  that  has  been  foretold  shall  happen,  and  what  the  Divine  Word  has  predicted 
shall  be  endured  in  its  most  grievous  form."  They  who  now  speak  for  God  have  to  give 
similar  assurance :  they  have  to  warn  men  that  the  worst  must  be  expected  if  they 
remain  impenitent  and  disobedient;  they  have  to  insist  upon  it,  sorrowfully  but 
emphatically,  that  everything  threatened  in  the  "  book  of  the  Lord"  will  compare  with 
the  experiences  of  the  persistently  obdurate  and  disloyal.  It  is  their  duty  to  show: 
1.  That,  sooner  or  later,  men  may  expect  the  righteous  retribution  of  God  to  overtake 
them ;  "  the  sword  of  heaven  is  not  in  haste  to  smite,  nor  yet  doth  linger;"  thnt,  though 
God  keeps  silence  long,  he  will  reprove  men,  and  set  their  sins  in  order  before  their  eyes 
(Ps.'l.  21).  2.  That,  if  not  here,  yet  hereafter,  the  judgments  of  God  will  reach  the 
guilty,  and  then,  if  not  now,  "every  one  will  receive  the  things  done  in  his  body, 
according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad."  3.  That  Divine  retribution 
will  take  some  other  form  if  it  come  not  in  the  one  men  have  expected.  There  are 
other  "  wild  beasts,"  and  worse,  than  those  which  are  here  referred  to  (vers.  14,  15). 
There  are  other  evils,  and  worse,  than  the  poverty,  the  diseases,  the  mortality,  from 
which  sinners  shrink  and  from  which  they  may  long  escape.  There  are  evils  which 
haunt  the  heart,  calamities  which  afflict  the  soul,  ruin  which  reaches  the  character, 
death  which  overtakes  the  man  Mmself, — judgments  which  God  in  righteousness  "hath 
commanded,"  and  which  more  'than  fulfil  the  saddest  and  strongest  word  he  has 
instructed  his  spokesmen  to  employ. — 0. 

Ver.  1. — Ood^s  dealing  with  one  nation  for  the  take  of  many.  "Let  the  earth  hear." 
This  chapter,  with  the  following  one,  constitutes  a  distinct  jirophecy,  and  forms  the 
completion  of  the  first  part  of  Isaiah's  work.  This  chapter  further  illustiates  the  point 
which  has  been  again  and  again  enforced,  that  "  no  man  liveth  unto  himself; "  a  man's 
successes,  achievements,  failures,  losses,  troubles,  are  all  for  the  sake  of  others.  Every 
man's  life  is  really  vicarious,  and  this  truth  is  pictured  for  us  in  the  history  and  rela- 
tions of  nations.  It  is  plain  that  no  nation  liveth  unto  itself;  it  is  inspiiation  or  warning 
to  other  nations  around.  A  man's  experience,  and  a  nation's  experience,  can  only  to 
a  very  limited  extent  help  the  man  or  the  nation;  but  it  can  most  materially  help  oiAec 
men  and  other  nations.  Therefore  "  let  the  earth  hear  "  what  God  will  do  unto  Bdom. 
For  Edom  is  principally  referred  to  here,  as  the  peculiarly  inveterate  and  malignant 
enemy  of  ancient  Israel.  As  we  know  that  Edom  submitted  to  Assyria,  it  is  quite 
possible  that  they  played  a  part  in  Sennacherib's  invasion  of  Judah,  in  his  attack  on 
Jerusalem;  so  the  prophet  foresees  Divine  judgments  falling  on  Edom  as  soon  as  Sen- 
nacherib is  removed.  The  historical  relations  of  Edom  and  Israel  should  be  carefully 
studied.  It  is  thought  that  from  the  historical  reference  to  one  nation  the  prophetic 
vision  advances  to  the  end  of  the  world  and  the  final  judgment.  We  may  keep  to  the 
lessons  which  arise  out  of  the  purely  historical  association.  Dealing  with  one  or  with 
%  tew,  for  the  sake  of  the  many,  has  been  God's  universal  law  of  relationship  with  men. 
It  is  the  law  of  elections,  or  rather  selections,  the  calling  out  of  specially  fitted  ones  to 
be  workers  for,  or  examples  to,  all.  We  readily  recognize  this  law,  as  the  responsibility 
of  talents,  positions,  or  opportunities ;  but  it  is  less  usual  to  see  that  it  equally  applies 
(O  disabilities,  failures,  and  judgments.    Men  work  for  others,  and  men  suffer  fur  others. 


666  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oa.  xxxiv.  1—17. 

Nations  gain  power  for  the  sake  of  others;  nations  are  crushed  and  humbled  for  the 
sake  of  others.     Illustration  of  this  point  may  run  along  three  lines. 

I.  A  man's  ok  a  nation's  obntos  is  not  foe  self.  "  The  earth  must  hear,"  and 
know  about  it.    All  gifts  are  trusts. 

II.  A  man's  OB  A  nation's  suffeeings  are  not  fob  belt.  The  most  striking  illus- 
tration in  a  man  is  Job ;  in  a  nation,  the  people  of  IsiaeL  All  sufferers  bear  their  pait 
in  the  moral  education,  the  redemption,  of  the  race. 

III.  A  man's  ob  a  nation's  judgments  ABE  NOT  FOB  SEtF.  We  are  not  punished 
for  our  own  sakes  alone.    Judgments  follow  us  for  the  sake  of  the  on-lookers. — ^R.  T. 

Ver.  2. — Divine  indignations.  It  is  important  that  we  use  the  words  which  express 
the  severe  side  of  Divine  dealings  with  great  judgment  and  carefulness.  We  should 
resist  the  tendency  of  modem  times  to  eliminate  all  the  severer  features  from  the  con- 
ception of  the  Divine  Being.  Dr.  Bushnell  thus  expresses  it :  "  Our  age  is  at  the 
point  of  apogee  from  all  the  robuster  notions  of  Deity."  Our  fathers  made  too  much  of 
the  Divine  "  wrath ;  "  but  we  are  in  danger  of  making  too  little.  "  There  is  a  consider- 
able variety  of  words  that  we  may  use  to  express  this  sterner  side  of  ttje  Divine  dealing 
— 'wrath,'  'anger,'  'indignation,'  'fury,'  'vengeance,'  'judgment,'  'justice,' and  the  like, 
but  they  are  all  more  or  less  defective.  Wrath  is  the  term  most  commonly  used  in  our 
translation,  and  it  is  really  the  best,  if  only  we  can  hold  it  closely  enough  to  the  idea  of  a 
moral,  in  distinction  from  a  merely  animal,  passion  ;  else,  failing  in  this,  it  will  connect 
associations  of  unregulated  temper  that  are  painful,  and  as  far  as  possible  from  being 
sacred.  It  requires  in  this  view,  like  the  safety-lamps  of  the  miners,  a  gauze  of  defini- 
tion round  it,  to  save  it  from  blazing  into  an  explosion  too  fierce  to  serve  the  purposes 
of  light."  Indignation  is  the  most  unexceptionable  word,  and  it  is  to  one  point  in 
connection  with  it  that  attention  is  now  invited.  It  is  especially  suited  to  express  the 
feeling  of  God,  because  it  applies  to  wrong-doers  rather  than  to  wrong  actions.  It  links 
on  to  the  view  that  the  essence  of  sin  is  not  a  wrong  thing  done,  but  the  wrong  will 
out  of  which  the  doing  came.  We  cannot  get  up  indignation  merely  at  things  done ; 
our  feeling  settles  and  centres  on  the  bad  doers.  In  all  cases  of  sin  we  should  keep 
quits  clearly  before  us  that  the  Divine  concern  is  not,  supremely,  the  disturbed  circum- 
stances, but  the  sinners  and  the  sufferers.  Divine  power  can  readjust  and  rearrange 
all  our  conditions  and  circumstances,  just  as  that  power  can  preserve  the  order,  and  put 
straight  the  broken  or  deflected  order,  of  creation.  It  is  God's  own  condition,  laid  upon 
himself,  that  moral  states  can  only  be  reached  by  moral  means.  Divine  indignations, 
as  they  concern  moral  beings,  find  expression  in  the  persuasions  of  Divine  judgments ; 
these  fall  on  the  man  himself,  or  they  may  fall  on  his  substitute  and  representative ; 
and  BO  is  opened  up  for  treatment  the  mystery  of  Dirine  indignations  resting  on  Christ 
for  UB,  for  our  sakes. — R.  T. 

Ver.  8. — The  Lord's  controversy.  "  The  year  of  recompenses  for  the  controversy  of 
Zion."  Fausset  says,  "When  Judah  was  captive  in  Babylon,  Edom  in  every  way 
insulted  over  her  fallen  mistress,  and  killed  many  of  those  Jews  whom  the  Chaldeans 
had  left,  and  hence  was  held  guilty  of  fratricide  by  God  (Esau,  their  ancestor,  havin.; 
been  lH«ther  to  Jacob)  :  this  was  the  cause  of  the  denunciations  of  the  prophets  against 
Edom  (ch.  Ixiii.  1 ;  Jer.  xlix.  7 ;  Ezek.  xxv.  12 — 14;  xxxv.  3 — 15;  Joel  iii.  19;  Amos  i 
11, 12 ;  Obad.  8,  10, 12—18 ;  Mai.  i.  3, 4)."  The  Israelites  were  familiar  with  the  law  of 
retaliation.  It  was  the  pervading  law  of  men  as  gathered  into  tribes,  and  their  basis- 
idea  of  justice.  Moses  adopted  it  for  his  legal  system,  but  qualified  its  operation,  pre- 
pariag  the  way  for  an  entire  change  from  personal  retaliation  for  offences,  to  a  calm, 
unbiassed,  Bystematic  consideration  of  the  case  of  all  wrong-doers,  and  adjustment  of 
pvinlakraents  on  a  fixed  scale.  So  far  as  the  idea  of  retaliation  was  right  as  between 
men,  it  may  be  apt^ed  as  between  God  and  men,  and  it  is  introduced  in  tkis  verse. 
Edom  took  advantage  of  Israel's  weakness  to  act  unbrotherly,  and  to  encroach.  There- 
fore the  Lord  has  a  controversy  with  Edom;  and  he  will  surely  retaliate,  bringing 
judgments  upon  them. 

I.  Retaliation  as  a  frimitivi:  idea  of  justice.  "  It  was  an  ethical  maxim, 
extensively  accepted  among  ancient  nations,  that  men  must,  suffer  the  same  pates  that 
they  hare  inflicted  on  others.    The  later  Greeks  called  this  the  Ntoptolemic  t^i^^  fioro 


OH.  xmv,  1— 17.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  5R7 

the  circumstance  that  Neoptolpiniis  was  punished  in  the  same  way  in  which  he  had 
sinned.  He  had  murdered  at  the  altar,  and  at  the  altar  he  was  murdered."  Show  how 
natural  the  retaliatory  idea  seems  to  children.  The  old  sentiment  still  lingers  in  men's 
minds,  bo  that  we  have  great  satisfaction  in  hearing  of  cases  wherein  Providence  deals 
the  blow  to  men  which  they  have  dealt  to  others. 

II.  Betaliatioh  danqbeous  because  of  the  ohabaoteb  op  avbnqbrs.  It  would 
be  a  safe  working  principle  if  men  were  good,  and  not  subject  to  unworthy  passions. 
These  make  men  do  more  than  retaliate. 

III.  Retaliation  as  a  part  of  Divine  dealino.  He  has  a  "  year  of  recompenses  " 
— k  time  when  he  will  make  a  man's  violent  doing  fall  upon  his  own  pate.  All  sin  is 
wrong  done  to  him ;  it  calls  for  due  recompense.  It  must  be  precisely  shown  how  far 
the  idea  of  retaliation  may  be  applied  to  God. 

IV.  Retaliation  by  God  is  orrARANXEED  bt  the  charactkb  op  God.  It  can 
never  be  the  expression  of  personal  feeling.  It  can  never  he  unqualified  or  excessive. 
It  can  never  be  without  its  own  aim  to  secure  the  final  good  of  those  on  whom  it  must 
fall.— B.  T, 

Vers.  18 — 16. — The  witness  of  desolate  lands.  In  every  age  there  have  been  such. 
In  the  forefront  of  the  world's  history  there  was  desolated  Sodom  and  Gomorrah, 
witnessing  to  Israelites,  and  witnessing  to  all  the  world.  Our  Lord,  as  a  Teacher,  called 
attention  to  its  message.  Attention  may  be  directed  to  Babylon,  Tyre,  Palestine ;  and 
for  modem  times,  to  the  decay  of  the  commercial  cities  of  Italy,  to  Holland,  etc. — coun- 
tries which  may  be  spoken  of  as  "  desolate  "  when  compared  with  former  prosperities. 
Edom,  or  Idumea,  is  the  country  alluded  to  by  the  prophet,  and  travellers  describe 
very  forcibly  the  completeness  of  its  desolation.  "  Captains  Irby  and  Mangles  tell  us 
that  the  Arabs  about  Akaba  are  a  very  bad  people,  notorious  robbers,  and  at  war  with  all 
others.  The  desolation  of  the  land  is  utter  and  perpetual — a  terrible  monument  of  the 
Divine  displeasure  against  wickedness  and  idolatry.  The  whole  land  lies  under  a  curse ; 
the  ruins  of  its  cities  of  rock,  and  the  remains  of  architectural  skill  and  ingenuity,  attest  its 
former  greatness,  while  they  set  forth  the  solemn  fact  that  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into 
the  hands  of  the  living  God."  Dr.  Robinson  says,  "  A  more  frightful  desert  it  had 
hardly  been  our  lot  to  behold.  Now  and  then  a  lone  shrub  of  the  Ghudah  was  almost 
the  only  trace  of  vegetation.  The  mountains  beyond  presented  a  most  iminviting  and 
hideous  aspect;  precipices  and  naked  conical  peaks  of  chalky  and  gravelly  formation 
rising  one  above  another  without  a  sign  of  life  or  vegetation."  Dr.  Olin  speaks  of  it  as 
in  "  a  state  <rf  des<^ation  and  ruin  the  most  absolute  and  irretrievable,  such  as  probably 
no  portion  of  the  globe  once  populous  and  fertile  now  exhibits."  What,  then,  is  the 
message  which  such  a  desolate  land  bears  for  all  the  world  and  for  us  ?  This  may  be 
worked  out  and  illustrated  under  the  following  divisions. 

I.  It  WITNESSES  FOR  Gk)D.  "  He  is  known  by  the  judgments  which  he  eiecuteth." 
There  is  evidently  more  than  a  mere  operation  of  natural  forces — there  is  Divine  direction 
of  natural  forces  to  effect  Divine  ends.  This  may  get  more  familiar  illustration  from 
Palestine,  which  is  a  country  with  God's  curse  on  it. 

II.  It  witnesses  fob  eiohtbousness.  "  Eightfeousness  exalteth  a  nation."  Right- 
eousness is  sure  defence,  security,  stability.  If  a  land  is  desolate,  it  calls  to  all  other 
lands,  saying,  "  Hold  fast  by  ri^teousness."  Lands  fall  through  the  iniquity  of  the 
peoples. 

III.  It  witnesses  fob  judgment.  "  Though  hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not 
go  unpunished."  Sooner  or  later  every  kingdom,  every  nation,  will  find  that  God  will 
arise  and  vindicate  himself,  and  render  a  reward  to  the  proud. — R.  T. 

Ver.  16. — Appeal  to  the  Word.  "  Seek  ye  out  of  the  book  of  the  Lord,  and  read." 
Literally,  the  word  is  "from  upon  the  book,"  meaning,  "Search  it  from  the  top  to  the 
bottom;  and  in  so  doing  you  will  find  abundant  illustrations  of  Divine  threatenings 
faithfully  executed."  "Be  sure  that  the  desolation  which  is  here  preannounced  to 
the  literal  Edom,  and  which  is  foretold  in  other  parts  of  Scripture,  as  the  doom  of  God's 
enemies,  will  be  exactly  fulfilled  m  all  those  who  imitate  their  temper,  in  rebellion 
against  God,  and  in  cruelty  and  treackery  to  Israel." 

I,  All  God's  wbittkk  Wobd  will  be  found  to  aobeb  tooitbeb.    It  is  th« 


563 


TtTB  BOOK  OP  THE  f  ROPHET  ISAIAB.    [oh.  xxxv.  1— Ifli 


exceeding  marvel  of  it,  the  best  evidence  of  Divine  inspiration,  that,  thlough  written  by 
different  men,  at  different  times,  and  in  different  lands,  on  all  main  points  of  revelation 
it  is  at  absolute  agreement ;  and  contradictions,  which  men  may  fancy  they  find,  gain 
easy  solution.  Moral  principles,  religious  teachings,  representations  of  Divine  dealings, 
are  the  same  throughout.  This  may  be  illustrated  in  specific  cases.  Take  the  idea  of 
God  as  One,  and  as  a  Spirit ;  or  take  the  Divine  relation  to  idolatry ;  of  take  the  response 
of  God  to. penitence ;  in  each  instance  search  the  book,  and  you  will  surely  find  a  uni- 
form and  harmonious  testimony.  Or  take  the  case  of  the  text,  and  show  the  certainty 
that  judgment  will  follow  threatening,  if  penitence  do  not  intervene. 

]  1.  All  Gob's  written  Word  is  in  harmony  with  his  spoken  word.  This  seem.* 
to  be  the  point  of  Isaiah's  appeal.  He  spoke  this  denunciation  of  Bdom  by  word  of 
mouth ;  it  had  not  yet  been  written  down,  so  he  pleads  thus :  "  Test  it  as  much  as 
you  please  by  the  written  "Word  that  you  possess :  it  is  all  one ;  God  spoke  then ;  God 
speaks  by  me.  The  vision  is  true.  The  judgment  is  sure."  The  condition  of  listening 
to  any  one  who  professes  to  ha've  a  message  and  revelation  from  God  is  that  they  shall 
speak  in  harmony  with  the  Word  of  God  which  we  possess.  "  If  they  speak  not  accord- 
ing to  this  Word,  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  them."  Distinction  may  wisely  be 
made  between  the  mere  details  of  the  Word,  and  the  great  truths  and  principles  of  the 
Word.  _  These  latter  alone  can  be  used  as  tests ;  and  very  much  of  the  sect-separation 
of  Christianity  has  come  through  overvaluing,  and  unskilfully  using,  mere  biblical 
details.  All  doctrine,  all  morals— but  no  science — can  be,  and  should  ever  be,  fully 
tested  by  scriptural  principles. — ^B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

Vers.  I — 10. — The  Glory  of  the  Last 
Times.  On  the  punishment  of  God's  enemies 
will  follow  the  peace,  prosperity,  and  glory 
of  his  Church.  Previously,  the  Church  is 
in  affliction,  waste,  and  desolate.  Its  ene- 
mies once  removed,  destroyed,  swept  out  of 
the  way,  it  rises  instantly  in  all  its  beauty  to 
a  condition  which  words  are  poor  to  paint. 
The  highest  resources  of  the  poetic  art  are 
called  in  to  give  some  idea  of  the  glory  and 
happiness  of  the  final  Church  of  the  re- 
deemed. 

Ver.  1. — The  wilderness  and  the  solitary 
place  shall  be  glad  for  them ;  rather,  the 
wilderness,  and  the  dry  place,  shall  be  glad. 
The  Oiurch,  that  has  been  long  wasted  and 
kept  imder  by  the  wicked,  shall,  at  their  de- 
struction, feel  a  sense  of  relief,  and  so  of  joy. 
The  desert  shall  rejoice,  and  blossom.  The 
first  result  of  the  joy  shall  be  a  putting  forth 
of  lovely  prodnctg.  Blossoms,  beautiful  as 
the  rose  or  the  narcissus  (Kay),  shall  spring 
up  all  over  the  parched  ground,  and  moke  it 
a  parterre  of  flowers.  The  blossoms  are  either 
graces  unknown  in  the  time  of  affliction,  or 
saintly  characters  of  a  new  and  high  type. 

Ver.  2. — It  shall  blossom  abundantly,  and 
rejoice  even  with  joy  and  singing ,  rather, 
loilh  dancing  and  singing.  Dancing  and 
singing  were  tlie  ordinary  manifestatinns  of 
religious  joy  (Exod.  xv.  ],  20,  21 ;  Judg.  xi. 
■M;  xxi.  19—21 ;  2  Sam.  vi.  5,  14,  15;  Pi. 
XXX.  11,  etc.),  and  would  naturally  follow 


the  great  deliverance  of  the  Church  from 
the  power  of  its  enemies.  The  clause  is  a 
touch  of  realism  intruded  into  a  prolonged 
metaphor  or  allegory,  and  is  quite  in  the 
manner  of  Isaiah  (comp.  ch.  xiv.  7;  xxvi. 
1 ;  XXX.  32,  etc.).  The  glory  of  Lebanon  . . . 
the  excellency  of  Carmel  and  Sharon;  t.e. 
productiveness  of  all  kinds,  of  abundant 
harvests,  fruits,  and  flo-wcrs,  and  forest  trees 
(comp.  ch.  X.  18,  19,  33,  34;  xxxii.  15)— 
a  resumption  and  prolongation  of  the  meta- 
phor in  ver.  1.  They  shall  see  the  glory  of 
the  lord.  The  culminating  joy  and  delight 
and  blessedness  of  the  Church  shall  be  the 
vision  of  God — either  the  spiritual  percep- 
tion of  his  presence  (Matt.  v.  8 ;  Bom.  i.  20) 
or  the  actual  beatific  vision  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12 ; 
Rev.  xxi.  11,  23;  xxii,  4),  the  first  during 
the  probation  period,  the  second  in  the  stats 
of  final  bliss. 

Ver.  3. — Strengthen  ye  the  weak  hands. 
In  the  Church  of  the  redeemed  there  will  be 
"  weak  "  brethren  as  well  as  strong, "  feeble" 
as  well  as  healthful  (see  1  Cor.  iii.  1;  Gal.  vi. 
1 ;  Heb.  v.  12—14).  God,  by  the  mouth  of  his 
pi'ophet,  calls  on  tiie  strong  to  impart  of  their 
strength  to  their  weaker  brethren,  uplifting 
their  "  weak  hands,"  as  Aaron  and  Hur  did 
those  of  Moses  (Exod.  xvii.  12),  and  "  con- 
firming" or  sustaining  their  "feeble  knees." 
So  St.  Paul :  "  We  that  are  strong  ought  to 
bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak,  and  not  to 
please  onrseives  "  (Rom.  xv.  1). 

Ver.  4. — Say  to  them  that  are  of  a  fearful 
heart.  There  will  be  fearful  and  trembling 
hearts  always,  even  among  the  saints  of  Ood. 
These  are  to  be  encourag«l  and  Msnied  Umi 


OB.  ixxv.  1—10.1    TM:  book  of  the  PEOPHfiT  ISAIAtt, 


669 


God  will  come  to  their  aid,  will  ayenge  them 
of  their  spiritual  enemiea,  reward  their 
efforts  to  serve  him.  and  in  the  end  "  save " 
them.  He  will  oome  and  save  yon ;  rather, 
he  will  come  himself  to  tave  you.  There  ii 
One  alone  who  can  save,  and  he  must  do  it 
himself,  and,  to  do  it,  he  must  "  oome  "  to 
UB.  The  words  were  at  once  an  announce- 
ment of.  the  Incarnation,  and  a  promise  to 
every  trembling,  doubting  heart^-a  promise " 
of  direct  Divine  assistance,  of  the  presence 
of  Grod  within  us,  of  help  potent  to  save. 
The  predominant  thought  of  the  prophet 
appears  to  have  been  Messianic,  and  hence 
the  burst  of  glorious  prophecy  which  follows 
— a  burst  of  prophecy  most  inadequately  ex- 
pounded "of  the  time  of  the  return  from  the 
Captivity. 

Vers.  5, 6.— Then  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall 
be  opened.  In  the  literal  sense,  our  Lord 
claims  these  prophecies  to  himself  and  )iis 
earthly  career,  when  he  says  to  the  disciples 
of  John  the  Baptist,  "  Go  and  show  John 
those  things  which  ye  do  hear  and  see,  the 
blind  receive  their  sight,  and  the  lame  walk, 
the  lepers  are  cleansed,  and  the  deaf  hear  " 
(Matf.  xi.  i,  5) ;  but  they  have  doubtless  a 
further  spiritual  sense,  in  which  they  belong 
to  the  whole  periodof  his  mediatorial  kingdom, 
and  are  correlative  to  former  utterances  of  the 
prophet,  in  which  the  blinded  eyes  and  deaf 
ears  and  stammering  tongues  of  God's  people 
had  been  spoken  of  and  made  the  subject  of 
complaint  (see  ch.  vi.  10;  xxix.  10,  etc.). 
Our  Lord's  miracles  of  bodily  healing,  per- 
former! during  the  three  yeiira  of  his  jarthly 
ministry,  were  types  and  forcthadowings  of 
those  far  more  precious  mi incles  of  spiritual 
healing,  which  the  great  Physician  is  ever 
performing  on  the  sick  and  infirm  of  his 
Church,  by  opening  the  eyes  of  their  under- 
standings, and  unstopping  the  deaf  ears  of 
their  hearts,  and  loosening  the  strings  of 
their  tongues  to  hymn  his  praise,  oild  stirring 
their  paralyzed  spiritual  natures  to  active 
exertions  in  his  service.  Doubtless  Isaiah, 
or  the  Spirit  which  guided  him,  intended  to 
point  to  both  these  classes  of  miracles,  and 
not  to  one  of  them  only,  as  characteristic  of 
the  Messiah's  kingdom. 

Ver.  6. — For  in  the  wilderness  shall  waters 
break  out.  The  wilderness  of  humanity  shall 
be  renovated  by  a  large  effluence  of  God's 
grace  (comp.  oh.  xxx.  25;  xxxii.  2;  xli. 
18 ;  xliii  19 ;  John  vii.  37,  38). 

Ver.  7. — The  parched  ground  shall  become, 
etc. ;  rather,  the  glistening  sand.  That  hot 
glow  of  the  parched  desert  soil,  which  pro- 
duces the  mirage,  shall  be  replaced  by  a  real 
lake  of  cool  water.  Illusive  imitations  of 
goodness  shall  gire  way  to  the  display  of 
genuine  virtues  and  excellehcea.  In  the 
habitation  of  dragons ;  or,  according  to  some, 
^j'acftoli— the  driest  and  most  desolate  of 


all  places.  Shall  be  grass  with  reeds  and 
rushes;  i.e.  "shall  be  a  luxuriant  vegeta- 
tion, like  that  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile" 
(comp.  vers.  1,  2). 

Ver.  8. — And  an  highway  shall  be  there, 
and  a  way  (comp.  ch.  xxx.  21).  There  shall 
be  a  clear  "  way  "  m  uked  out  in  whidh  all 
shall  be  bound  to  walk  —  a  "strait  and 
narrow  way"  doubtless  (Matt.  vii.  14),  but 
one  not  readily  missed.  The  way  shall  be 
called  The  way  of  holiness.  It  shall  be  that 
path  through  the  dangers  and  dliSculties  of 
life  which  holiness  points  out  and  requires 
The  unclean  shall  not  pass  over  it.  It  is 
temptin  g  to  imagine  that  there  is  here  a  refer- 
ence to  the  famous  chinvat  peretu  of  the  Zoro- 
astrinns— the  "bridgeof  the  gatherer" — along 
which  all  souls  had  to  pass  in  order  to  reach 
the  abode  of  the  blessed,  but  which  the  souls 
of  the  wicked  never  succeeded  in  passing 
('  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  p.  339).  The 
'  bridge  of  the  gatherer  "  is,  however,  in  the 
other  world,  not  in  this  worhl ;  but  Isaiah's 
"  highway  "  is  here.  It  is  that  right  course 
of  life,  which  "the  unclean"  do  not  follow, 
though  they  might  do  so  if  they  chose,  but 
which  the  righteous  follow  to  their  great 
gain  and  advantage.  But  it  shall  be  for 
those ;  rather,  as  in  the  margin,  hut  he  shall 
be  toith  them ;  God,  i.e.  shall  be  with  those 
who  seek  to  walk  in  the  way,  and  not  to  err 
from  it.  He  shall  direct  them,  support 
them ,  su  stain  their  footsteps.  The  wayfaring 
men ;  rather,  they  that  walk  in  the  wo^— that 
make  up  their  minds  to  try  to  walk  in  it. 
Though  fools ;  i.e,  however  simple  and  un- 
learned they  may  be—"  Ne  simplicissimi  qui- 
dem  "  (Rosenmiiller).  Shall  not  err  therein ; 
shall  not  wander  from  the  way  through  mere 
simplicity.  It  shall  be  easy  to  find,  difficult 
to  miss. 

Ver.  9. — No  lion  shall  be  there.  No  great 
tyrannical  power,  like  Assyria  (Kah.  ii.  11, 
12)  or  Babylon,  shall  arrest  the  energies  of 
the  Church,  take  it  captive,  or  enslave  it. 
No  ravenous  beast  shall  make  it  his  prey. 
In  proportion  as  the  Church  is  holy  (ver.  8) 
it  shall  be  free  from  the  molestation  of 
bloody  persecutors  (see  oh.  li.  9).  The  re- 
deemed— those  whom  God  has  purchased  for 
his  own  (Exod.  vi.  6 ;  Hos.  xiii.  14>— shall 
be  free  to  walk  there,  untroubled  by  cruel 
enemies.  There  is  an  under-current  of  com- 
parison between  the  blessedness  of  the  last 
times  and  the  existing  troubles  of  Israel,  still 
threatened  by  Sennacherib. 

Ver.  10. — The  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall 
return.  The  blessedness  of  the  last  times 
would  be  incomplete  to  Jewish  ideas  without 
this  crowning  feature.  There  had  already 
been  a  great  dispersion  of  the  faithful  (ch.  i. 
7 — 9);  there  was  to  be  a  still  greater  oue 
(oh.  xi.  11);  Israel  could  not  be  content  or 
happy  until  her  "outcast*"  were  recalled, 


570 


TUE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  iSAlAH.    [oh.  xxxy.  1— 10 


"  the  dispeised  of  Jndah  gathered  together 
from  the  four  comers  of  the  earth  "  (oh.  xi. 
12).  The  return  here  prophesied  is  again  an- 
nonnced,  in  almost  the  same  words,  in  eh. 
IL  11.    With  longi  (see  the  comment  on 


ver.  2).  Ererlasting  joy  upon  their  heads 
Anointed,  as  it  were,  with  "  the  oil  of  glad- 
ness" (Ps.  xlv.  7)  for  ever  and  ever.  Sorrow 
and  sighing  shall  flee  away  (comp.  ek.  xir. 
8;  BeT.  TU.17:  xzi.  4). 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — The  glory  of  the  Church  not  temporal  greatness,  hut  spiritual  petftctitm. 
Amid  the  wealth  of  metaphor  which  Isaiah  employs  to  depict  the  final  prosperity, 
glory,  and  happiness  of  the  Cli  uroh,  it  ia  remarkable  how  little  use  is  made  of  any  images 
drawn  from  the  conditions  or  circumstances  of  earthly  grandeur.  Images  of  natural 
beauty  are  principally  employed — the  shady  forest,  the  spreading  cedar  tree,  the  rich 
luxuriance  of  arable  and  pasture  land,  the  choice  beauty  of  the  most  lorely  among 
flowers,  the  placid  lake,  the  pellucid  rill,  the  gushing  fountain.  These  raise  no  ideas 
of  earthly  greatness  or  temporal  dominion.  They  point,  by  what  may  be  called  the 
laws  of  prophetic  language,  to  two  main  features  of  spiritual  life;  (1)  abounding  grace 
granted  to  the  Church  freely  from  above — a  supply  copious,  unlimited,  inexhaustible, 
such  that  the  cry  may  be  confidently  raised,  "  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye 
to  the  waters,  and  he  that  hath  no  money ;  come  ye,  buy,  and  eat "  (ch.  Iv.  1) ;  and  (2) 
abundant  fruit  borne  by  her  members  in  their  several  stations — ^fruit  of  various  kinds 
and  of  various  degrees  of  excellency,  but  all  "  good  fruit,"  spontaneously  brought  forth 
from  ungrudging  hearts,  hearts  desirous  of  showing  forth  their  love  and  gratitude  to 
their  Maker  and  Redeemer.  Beyond  these  two  main  characteristic  features  of  the  Church 
of  the  redeemed,  we  descry  further — first,  a  power  of  working  miracles  (vers.  5,  6), 
physical  or  spiritual,  or  both ;  and  secondly,  a  gift  of  spiritual  insight,  whereby  the 
redeemed  are  enabled  to  penetrate  through  the  dense  veil  wherewith  material  things 
overlay  the  great  realities  that  are  behind  them,  and  to  discern  through  all  the  "  glory 
and  excellency  "  of  the  Most  High  (ver.  2).  The  redeemed  seek  for  no  external  dominion 
— their  efforts  are,  primarily,  to  walk  themselves  in  "  the  way  of  holiness  "  (ver.  8) ; 
secondarily,  to  "  strengthen  the  weak  hands  and  confirm  the  feeble  knees  "  of  their 
brethren  (ver.  3) ;  and,  finally,  to  realize  to  themselves,  by  continual  meditation  and 
study  of  nis  works,  the  goodness  and  greatness,  ttie  "  glory  and  excellency,"  of  their 
Lord  and  God. 


HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOXJS  AUTHORS. 

Vem.  1 — 10. — Glories  of  the  Messianic  age.  This  is  a  picture  of  the  happy  and 
glorious  condition  of  Israel  after  the  return  from  Captivity.  Nature  is  beheld  rejoicing 
with  man ;  and  the  whole  scene  is  suffused  with  the  light  of  a  universal  spiritual  joy. 

I.  The  tkansformation  of  the  natural  world.  The  desert  will  rejoice  "like  the 
narcissus,"  the  beautiful  white  flower  found  in  abundance  in  apring-time  in  the  Plain  of 
Sharon.  A  ringing  musical  cry  shall  break  out  from  those  solitudes.  The  beauty  of 
the  most  favoured  spots,  of  Carmel  and  Sharon,  shall  be  diffused  over  the  whole.  In 
poetic  pathos  a  feeling  is  lent  to  Nature  which  does  not  really  exist  in  her.  There  is  a 
deep  truth,  not  of  the  reason,  but  of  the  heart,  in  this  mood.  Inanimate  Nature  is 
incapable  either  of  joy  or  of  sorrow,  of  exultation  or  depression.  This  our  reason  tells 
us.  But  we  are  all  something  more  than  cold  rationalists  in  this  matter.  We  take  back 
from  Nature  impressions  which  we  have  first  lent  to  her,  and  supjxjse  we  have  borrowed 
them.  This  has  been  called  the  "pathetic  fallacy,"  and  there  is  a  truth  in  the  fallacy 
better  than  that  of  syllogistic  reasoning.  To  the  lover  Nature  looks  love,  and  whispers 
of  love ;  to  the  desponding  temper  her  expression  is  a  frown,  her  tones  are  inspirations 
of  lament ;  she  wears  a  nuptial  robe  far  the  happy  bridegroom,  and  a  pall  for  the  mourner ; 
silent  and  morose  to  the  eyes  of  him  who  is  cast  down  in  the  sense  of  Divine  wrath,  it 
breaks  forth  into  jubilant  song  for  the  ears  of  him  whose  heart  overflows  with  the  sense 
of  the  redeeming  mercy  of  God.  "  There  is  not  the  least  flower  but  seems  to  hold  up 
its  head,  and  look  pleasantly,  in  the  secret  sense  of  the  goodness  of  its  heavenly  Maker. 
This  silent  ritetoric,  though  we  cannot  hear,  but  only  see  it,  is  so  full  and  exprewive, 


ea.  xxxt.  I-IOJ    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  19A1AH.  67i 

that  David  thought  he  spoke  neither  impropriety  nor  nonsense,  in  a  strong  line,  wheE 
he  said, '  even  the  valleys  break  forth  into  singing.' "  It  is  a  song  of  praise  and  thanks- 
giving, a  song  of  joy  and  triumph  in  the  "  glory  of  Jehovah,"  the  manifestations  of  Lis 
creative  and  renewing  powers,  the  liberal  effusions  of  his  goodness,  even  upon  the  lowest 
parts  of  the  creation, 

n.  Thk  transformation  of  the  human  world.  1.  Weakness  made  strong — ^under 
the  figure  of  the  nerving  up  of  languid  hands  and  of  tottering  knees.  Languor,  dulness, 
the  privation  of  power,  are  symptomatic  of  the  absence  of  vital  energy,  alike  in  the 
physical  and  the  moral  sphere.  People  may  be  seemingly  weak  and  impotent,  not 
because  they  want  the  organs  for  action,  but  because  the  inspiration  to  action  is  want- 
ing, A  life  without  defined  activity  is  hardly  worth  the  name.  In  the  fixed  light  of  the 
eye,  the  prompt  hand,  the  willing  foot,  we  see  signs  of  the  Divine  afflatus  upon  a  man. 
The  sails  have  caught  the  favouring  breeze,  while  others  lie  becalmed.  But  there  is 
always  some  part  for  the  will.  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given ;  and  the  paradox  is 
true,  power  comes  to  those  who  exert  it.  2.  Despair  exchanged  for  confidence.  Despair 
unfit*  alike  for  human  and  Divine  service.  Men  are  moved  to  duty  by  the  hope  of  good 
or  by  the  fear  of  evil.  These  motives  cannot  avail  one  who  does  not  believe  that  his 
state  can  be  either  bettered  or  worsened.  The  man  becomes  careless  of  his  happiness, 
indifferent  to  salvation.  The  biblical  medicine  for  despair  is  the  firm  insistence  on  the 
message  of  salvation.  God  is  coming— is  on  the  way,  to  requite,  to  redeem,  to  deliver. 
How  careful  should  preachers  be  nut  to  force  men  into  a  "  preternatural  melancholy," 
liy  an  unskilful  handling  of  the  Word  of  truth,  by  indiscreet  severity,  by  dwelling  too 
much  on  the  dark  themes  of  human  depravity  and  predestination  I  3.  The  removal  of 
human  infirmities  and  limitations.  Blindness,  deafness,  lameness,  dumbness,  are 
symbolic  of  all  obstructions  in  the  soul  to  the  entrance  of  light,  and  music,  and  power, 
and  fluency.  One  great  outflow  of  the  Spirit  sweeps  all  these  hindrances  to  enjoyment 
and  to  activity  away.  Near  to  us  is  a  God  of  infinite  fulness ;  all  about  us  is  a  world 
of  beauty,  strength,  and  joy ;  but  we  are  "  straitened  in  ourselves.'-'  Life  is  full  of 
illusions,  which  tempt  us  forward  with  all  the  power  and  promise  of  reality.  These  are 
like  the  mirage  of  the  desert — a  seeming  sheet  of  water  in  the  distance,  with  its  offer  of 
refreshment  to  the  pilgrim ;  in  fact,  an  optical  deception.  But  these  illusions  bear  a 
certain  relation  to  truth.  For  we  cannot  believe  that  the  Almighty  has  planted  a  spring 
of  error  in  the  very  mechanism  of  our  fancy.  Our  minds  were  maide  for  truth  and  tend 
towards  truth,,  even  through  hallucinations.     "  The  mirage  shall  become  a  lake." 

III.  The  EBroBMATlON  OF  RELIGION.  There  wUl  be  a  "  raised  way,"  called  "  The  Holy 
Way."  It  will  be  exempt  from  all  that  is  unclean ;  it  will  be  so  clear  and  straight,  that 
even  the  simple-minded  cannot  go  astray ;  a  secure  and  peaceful  way,  undisturbed  by 
the  fuirious  beasts  of  ravening  and  destruction.  Its  every  stage  will  be  marked  with 
joy,  as  singing  pilgrims  pass  along  it ;  and  the  sighs  of  sorrow  will  die  away  in  the 
distance.  It  is  a  picture  of  true  evangelical  religion,  as  it  is  revived  among  the  peoples, 
from  epoch  to  epoch,  and  of  its  blessed  effects.  True  religion  is  an  elevating  thing ; 
nobility  of  manner  and  reflnement  of  taste  go  hand-in-hand  with  it.  It  is  a  holt/  thing ; 
and  distinction  of  characters  and  classes,  of  tastes  and  pursuits,  must  appear  wherever  it 
comes.  Its  doctrine  is  simple,  intelligible,  yet  sublime.  "Justification  by  faith  "  can 
be  understood  and  received  by  the  humblest  miad,  while  the-  most  powerful  intellect 
must  exert  itself  to  rise  to  the  serene  height  of  the  truth.  It  is  a  way  of  gentleness  and 
peace,  uavexed  by  the  furious  storms  of  controversy,  sheltering  timid  souls.  It  is  a 
way  o{ freedom  and  oijoy,  and  it  leads  to  a  fixed  destination — a  celestial  place,  an  eternal 
kingdom,  a  city  that  cannot  be  removed,  whose  Builder  and  Maker  is  God. — J. 

Ver,  3. — Inspiration!  to  energy.  "  Strengthen  ye  the  weak  hands,  and  confirm  the 
feeble  knees."  It  is  not  enough  to  be  sorry  for  the  woes  of  others.  Sympathy  may 
be  a  sort  of  mental  "  minor,"  wherewith  we  simply  soothe  ourselves.  We  must  be  earnest 
and  iMpirational.  Pity  must  be  practical.  "Jesus,  moved  with  compassion,  put 
forth  his  hand ! "  We  have  plenty  of  critics  and  satirists ;  we  want  men  who  will  help 
to  save. ' 

L  We  may  strengthen  by  cub  words.  "  /Say  to  them  that  are  of  a  fearful  heart, 
Be  strong,  fear  not."  Tell  a  sorrow  to  some  persons,  and  they  draw  a  picture  of  still 
darker  possibilities,  and  to  feed  the  already  gloomy  fancies  of  the  mind.    But  it  is 


572  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROrHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxv.  1— 10. 

possible  to  give  "cheer"  instead — to  record  God's  great  deliyerances  to  ourselves,  and 
tell  of  all  his  wondrous  works.  Thus  we  may  put  the  brightness  of  hope  into  the  sky, 
and  help  to  chase  the  dark  clouds  away.  "  Say."  We  have  all  the  faculty  of  t^uickly 
telling  lad  news ;  let  us  tell  the  "  good  news  "  of  God's  gracious  kingdom. 

II.  Wb  can  cheer  the  heart.  That  is  the  centre  of  life.  We  may  not  be  able 
to  lift  the  burden,  but  we  may  strengthen  our  brother's  hands  by  energizing  his  heart. 
It  is  wonderful  what  a  few  depressing  influences  will  accomplish.  Some  are  more 
senffltive  than  others,  and  are  easily  cast  down.  "Do  not  my  words  do  good?"  says 
Gkid ;  for  they  reach  at  once  to  the  inner  .nan.  Blessed  angels  of  help  are  words  that 
go  to  the  heart.  No  man  is  so  great  but  sympathy  can  cheer  him ;  no  man  is  bo  weak 
but  he  may  be  made  heroic  by  holy  inspirations!  ' 

III.  Wb  can  help  the  pilgrimagb.  The  knees  are  feeble ;  for  it  is  a  "  tiring " 
journeyto  many.  They  are  very  weary.  Disappointments  have  multiplied ;  fountains 
have  dried  up  in  the  desert;  friends  have  died,  and,  like  Naomi,  they  went  out  full, 
and  are  reluming  home  empty.  We  are  all  pilgrims ;  and  the  statesman's  steps  often 
tire  as  well  as  the  poor  student  seeking  after  his  first  ideal.  In  the  spiritual  pilgrimage, 
too,  we  often  faint  and  fail.  The  way  is  hard.  We  are  disappointed  with  ourselves. 
It  may  be  that  some  soul  was  just  turning  back  when  we  strengthened  the  feeble 
knees  by  our  own  eager  pressing  forward,  even  when  tired  and  faint. 

How  much  thus  depends  on  our  own  Christ-like  disposition  1  We  cannot  do  all  this 
if  we  are  insolent,  quarrelsome,  or  hard.  The  very  duties  the  gospel  enjoins  manifest 
what  a  lofty  ideal  of  character  the  gospel  requires. — W.  M.  8. 

Ver.  4. — Tremor  of  spirit.  "  Say  to  them  that  are  of  a  fearful  heart."  This  implies 
that /ear  will  be  a  necessary  element  in  our  life.  All  depends  on  the  heart.  Pear 
increases  with  experience. 

I.  Thy  God  reigneth  to  salvation.  His  power  is  in  this  direction.  He  is  Ood. 
He  il  thy  God — the  God  of  thy  salvation.  1.  It  is  an  empire  over  sin.  All  its 
agencies  and  influences.  2.  Jt  is  an  empire  over  hearts.  Becuise  it  is  connected  with 
the  cross  I  -8.  It  is  an  empire  over  enemies.  There  is  no  Manichean  universe  of  equally 
divided  forces.    The  Lord  is  King. 

II.  Thy  God  rbioneth  to  consolation.  He  is  human  as  well  as  Divine.  1.  He  is 
Lord  of  circumstance.  2.  He  is  Lord  of  condition.  He  can  and  does  extend  his  pity 
to  the  weak  and  the  poor.     3.  He  is  Lord  of  dissolution.     For  death  is  in  his  hands. 

III.  Thy  God  reigneth  to  glorification.  All  things  make  manilest:  1.  Ilii 
praise.  2.  Eia  perfections.  3.  His  permanence.  "  Thy  kingdom  is  an  everlasting 
kingdom." 

IV.  Thy  God  rkigneth  to  subjugation.  All  enemies  under  his  feet.  1.  Power 
to  amfrol.     2.  Power  to  ediue  good  out  of  evil.    3.  Power  to  raise  and  to  cast  down. 

V.  Thy  God  reigneth  to  adoration.  His  kingship  will  evoke  the  worshiiiping 
homage  of  all  creation.  1.  Angels  adore  him.  2.  Saints  adore  him.  Heaven  shull 
ring  with  the  glad  acclaim  of  a  greatmultitude  that  no  mau  can  number.  "  Blessing, 
and  honour,  and  glory,  and  power,  be  unto  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto 
the  Lamb  for  ever."— W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1,  2,  6—7,— Transformation  hy  the  truth.  Accepting  these  words  as  Messianic 
in  their  scope,  we  may  treat  thorn  as  descriptive  of  that  most  blessed  transformation 
which  is  effected,  in  the  individual  man  and  in  the  nation,  by  the  gospel.  When  the 
truth  of  Christ  is  made  efficacious  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  has  had  time  to  work  out  its 
true  results,  there  will  be  found — 

I.  Illumination  or  the  understanding.  "  The  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened, 
and  the  ears  of  the  deaf  shall  be  unstopped."  Darkness  of  mind,  deafness  of  soul,  have 
prevailed;  the  spirit  has  been  insensible  to  all  that  is  most  beautiful  and  harmonious, 
most  preciouB,  in  the  universe.  But  then  shall  things  appear  as  they  are.  Men  shall 
"  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  and  the  excellency  of  our  God."  In  the  Father,  the  Friend, 
the  Sanctifier,  the  Refuge  of  the  human  soul,  men  will  recognize  him  who  is  worthy  of 
their  trust,  their  love,  their  search. 

II.  Gratitude  op  heart.  Instead  of  the  "guilty  silence,"  bo  often  and  S3  long 
maintained  by  men  under  the  r«ign  of  sin,  "  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  will  sing"  psalm* 


OH.  XXXV.  I— 10.]    THE  BOOK  OP  IHB  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  673 


of  grateful  praise  to  the  Divine  Author  of  all  being,  to  the  bountiful  Giver  of  every 
good  and  perfect  gift.  The  mouth  will  be  full  of  aong  because  the  heart  will  be  fiill  ol 
thankful  remembrances. 

III.  Stkength  op  soul.  "Then  shall  the  lame  leap  as  an  hart."  Instead  of  the 
moral  feebleness  and  incapacity  which  showed  itself  in  painful  spiritual  inactivity,  the 
goul  will  go  forth,  with  all  its  renewed  and  regenerated  powers,  to  do  God's  work,  to  bear 
witness  to  his  Kame,  to  work  in  his  vineyard. 

IV.  Loveliness  and  feuitftjlness  o»  life.  "The  desert  shall  .  .  .  blossom  aa 
the  rose ;  ...  the  glory  of  Lebanon  shall  be  given  unto  it,  the  excellency  of  Carmel," 
etc.  1,  Instead  of  bareness  and  unsightlinesg— the  invariable  product  of  sin  in  its  final 
outworkings — there  shall  be  spiritual  beauty.  There  shall  be  "the  beauty  of  holi- 
ness," "  the  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit ; "  all  that  is  attractive  and  entraiicing 
to  the  changed  and  cultivated  judgment  of  the  good  and  wise.  2.  Instead  of  fruitless- 
ness  there  shall  be  fertility.  The  desert  shall  "  blossom  abundantly."  Holy,  devoted 
life  will  be  spent  in  the  service  of  a  present  Saviour  and  for  a  sin-stricken  world.  We 
shall  abound  in  help,  in  healing,  in  blessing. 

V.  Pbe VAILING  JOY.  The  whole  strain  of  the  passage  is  jubilant,  and  it  speaks  of  the 
desert  "rejoicing  with  joy  and  singing."  Sin  and  sadness  are  most  intimately  associated; 
even  if  they  are  not  so  inseparably  allied  as  to  be  always  seen  together,  they  are  so 
essentially  connected  that  when  one  appears  the  other  is  sure  to  follow.  It  is  a  guilty 
world  that  knows  so  much  of  disappointment,  of  regret,  of  grief,  of  shame.  But  when 
the  truth  of  God  has  wrought  its  full  effect  on  the  human  soul,  the  prevailing  note,  even 
of  the  earthly  life,  will  be  that  of  joy.  The  near  presence  of  the  heavenly  Father,  the 
close  friendship  of  the  Divine  Redeemer,  the  happy  service  of  love,  the  blessed  work  of 
doing  good,  the  exulting  hope  of  heavenly  bliss, — these  are  sources  of  joy  which  quicken 
and  animate  the  soul,  which  make  a  holy  human  life  radiant  with  a  blessedness  which 
anticipates  the  glory  of  the  skies. — 0. 

Vers.  3, 4. — The  privilege  of  the  strong.  In  this  strenuous  and  vigorous  appeal  we  h^rve — 

I.  The  compkehensivb  chabacter  of  the  Chuech  or  Chbist,  In  it  are  the  weak 
as  well  as  the  strong.  There  is  nothing  whatever  that  is  narrow  about  the  Christian 
faith.  It  is  not  adapted  to  any  particular  class  or  character.  In  Jesus  Christ  there  is 
neither  male  nor  female,  Greek  nor  Jew,  cultivated  nor  uncultivated,  bond  nor  free.  And 
in  him  there  is  no  favour  reserved  for  any  special  disposition.  It  is  not  a  gospel  for 
those  in  particular  who  are  most  admired  of  men — for  the  strong,  for  the  brave,  for  the 
wise,  for  the  winning ;  it  is  a  refuge  for  the  weak,  for  the  timid,  for  the  imknown  and 
the  unbeloved.  Those  who  are  of  no  account  at  all  amongst  men,  those  whom  human 
leaders  would  gladly  leave  out  of  their  army  as  weakening  rather  than  strengthening 
their  forces, — these  are  all  welcome  to  flock  to  the  standard  and  to  fight  under  the  banner 
of  the  heavenly  Prince. 

II.  The  privilege  of  the  strong.  Untaught  by  the  truth  of  Christ,  unchanged  by 
his  Spirit,  it  has  been  considered  the  privilege  of  the  strong  (1)  to  despise  the  weak ;  (2) 
to  displace  them  and  to  enjoy  their  portion ;  (3)  to  delight  in  playing  the  part  of  despot 
over  them.  These  have  been  the  uses  which  the  strong  have  made  of  their  strength. 
But  we  have  not  so  learned  Christ.  So  far  as  we  possess  his  Spirit  and  have  any  right 
to  bear  his  Name,  we  shall  count  it  our  privilege :  1.  To  show  them  a  genuine  symipathy ; 
remembering  that  often,  if  not  always,  their  weakness  reflects  no  discredit  on  them, 
and  our  strength  no  credit  on  ourselves.  2.  To  render  them  effectual  succour;  to  grant 
them  needful  protection  and  guidance,  to  instil  courage  into  their  minds,  to  impart 
vigour  to  their  souls,  to  make  them  partakers  of  our  own  strength.  We  shall  say  to 
them,  speaking  in  more  ways  than  one,  "  Be  strong." 

III.  The  main  source  of  their  scccoub.  The  strong  will  help  the  weak :  1,  By 
offering  them  the  honour  which  is  their  due,  instead  of  the  disdain  to  which  they  have 
been  accustomed.  The  former  elevates,  the  latter  crushes.  2.  By  their  mspiriting 
example.  Walking  with  them,  working  or  struggling  by  their  side,  the  fellowship 
which  they  afford  unparts  a  constant  access  of  strength  to  their  soul.  3.  By  words  of 
wise  encouragement.  And  of  these  the  best  and  the  most  effective  will  be  those  which 
bring  out  the  nearness  and  the  salvation  of  God.  "  Behold,  your  God  will  come  .  .  . 
ftQd  wve  jW    if  we  would  do  om  very  best  to  streiitheB  tUe  weak,  we  must  bring 


574  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxt.  1—10 


them  into  conscious  relation  to  the  Divine  Source  of  all  power.  Let  men  realize  that 
God  is  -with  them  and  for  them,  and  they  will  be  strong  to  do  tike  bravest  deeds  and  to 
endure  the  sharpest  sufferings.— C. 

Vers.  8,  9. — The  way  to  Zion.  The  outward  incidents  of  the  Jewish  peopi*  have 
a  aingularly  close  correspondence  with  the  inward  experiences  of  human  souls  in 
Christian  times.  The  captivity  in  Egypt  and  also  that  in  Babylon  find  their  analogue 
in  the  state  of  spiritual  bondage  which  is  the  constant  penalty  of  sin.  The  way  back 
to  Jerusalem  stands  for  our  homeward  pilgrimage  as  we  travel  to  the  city  of  the  blessed. 
As  here  described,  there  are  several  features  in  which  the  one  answers  strikingly  and 
instructively  to  the  other. 

I.  The  highway  to  the  heavenly  city.  In  all  his  dealings  with  man  God  has 
been  constructing  a  highway  from  bondage  to  spiritual  freedom,  from  sin  to  holiness, 
from  guilty  selfishness  to  sacred  service,  from  utter  ruin  to  complete  salvation,  from 
earth, to  heaven.  He  was  engaged  in  this  beneficent.  Divine  procedure  when  he 
spake  to  us  through  the  patriarchs,  when  he  instituted  the  Law,  when  he  gave  to  us 
his  prophets.  And  he  completed  this  "  way  "  when  he  "  sent  forth  his  Son."  Jesus 
Christ  had  so  much  to  do  with  preparing  for  us  the  highway  to  the  heavenly  city 
that  we  appropriately  speak  of  him,  as  indeed  he  spoke  of  himself,  as  actually  heing  the 
Way  itseif  (John  xiy.  6).   He,  the  Truth,  is  the  Way  by  which  we  have  a  knowledge  of 

"God  and  of  his  will.  He,  tlie  Mediator,  is  the  Way  by  which  we  ourselves  come  into 
close  spiritual  contact  with  God  himself.  He,  the  Propitiation,  is  the  Way  by  which 
we  ascend  to  forgiveness  and  reconciliation.  He,  the  Life,  is  tiie  Way  by  which  we 
rise  into  loving  union  with,  and  growing  likeness  to,  and  ultimate  preparedness  for,  the 
Divine  Father. 

II.  Three  characteristics  op  the  beavenwabd  way.  1.  Here  is  that  which  is 
paradoxical,  but  true  withal ;  for  this  homeward  way  is  characterized  by  breadth.  It  is 
the  broad  "  highway,"  the  open  road,  along  which  all  travellers  are  free  to  pass.  There 
is  no  such  exclusiveness  about  it  as  is  often  found  in  the  ways  we  construct.  It  is  for 
all  classes  of  society,  for  all  nations  and  races  of  mankind,  for  men  who  have  lived  all 
kinds  of  human  lives,  for  men  of  all  tempers  and  dispositions ;  the  "  King's  highway  " 
has  ample  room  for  them  all.  2.  But  it  is  also,  strangely  though  not  inconsistently, 
characterized  by  narrowness.  "  And  a  way,"  i.e.  a  path,  an  elevated  and  narrow  cause- 
way along  which  only  one  or  two  can  walk  abreast.  About  this  way  of  life  there  is  a 
narrowness  of  its  own  (see  Matt.  vii.  13, 14;  Luke  xiii.  24).  (1)  Its  gateway  can  only 
be  entered  by  one  at  a  time.  Men  do  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  in  regiments  or 
companies,  but  as  separate  and  individual  souls  (see  Gral.  vi.  5).  (2)  No  man  can  enter 
in  swollen  with  pride,  or  carrying  his  vices  with  him,  or  wrapped  round  with  selfish- 
ness. It  is  "  the  way  of  holiness,"  "  the  unclean  shall  not  pass  over  it."  3.  It  is  also 
characterized  by  directness.  A  man,  "  though  a  fool,  shall  not  err  therein."  There  is 
no  serious  difficulty  here.  Mysteries  there  are  which  are  msolubk,  but  these  can  be 
left  alone — they  will  keep  for  a  future  time.  But  what  the  will  of  God  is  in  Jesus 
Christ,  how  he  would  have  us  order  our  life,  what  manner  of  men  we  ought  to  be  in 
order  to  please  him, — this  is  as  clear  and  plain  as  it  coidd  be.  The  little  child,  the  man 
who  is  little  better  than  "  a  fool,"  need  not  miss  his  way  in  travelling  to  the  heavenly  city. 

III.  The  immunity  and  the  communion  of  the  way.  1.  Immunity.  "No lion 
shall  be  there."  Not  that  there  is  no  adversary  to  be  found  in  the  way  to  Zion.  The 
evil  one  himself,  as  a  roaring  lion,  haunts  the  path  of  life.  But  there  will  be_  found  no 
temptation  which  belongs  peculiarly  and  especially  to  the  heavenward  way,  as  is  the  case 
with  other  paths.  In  the  path  of  financial  success  is  the  lion  of  covetousness  or  avance ; 
in  the  path  of  fame  is  that  of  vanity ;  in  the  way  of  professional  success  is  that  of 
complacency,  etc. ;  but  in  the  way  of  holiness  is  no  especial  "  lion  "  which  frequents 
that  road.  It  is  morally  and  spiritually  safe.  2.  Comimwion.  There  is  (1)  fellowship 
with  the  holy.  "  The  redeemed  shall  walls  there."  And  there  is  also  and  above  all  (2) 
fellowship  with  Grod  himself;  with  the  Divine  Friend  of  maa.  "He  shall  be  with 
them  "  (marginal  reading) ;  he  shall  be  with  them — he — 

"Leader  of  faithful  souls,  and  Guida 
Of  all  who  travel  to  the  sky." 


OH.  XXXV.  1—10.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  676 

Ver.  10. — Within  the  gates.  If,  the  two  preceding  verses  may  be  regarded  as 
descriptive  of  the  Christian  pilgrimage,  the  text  may  appropriately  be  treated  as  pictorial 
of  the  heavenly  city  in  which  that  journey  ends.  The  language  of  this  verse  suggests 
to  us — 

I.  The  DisTiNQtnsHiNO  feature  of  those  who  abk  admitted.  They  are  "the 
ransomed  of  the  Lord."  They  were  in  spiritual  bondage :  they  have  been  redeemed  by 
a  Divine  Deliverer ;  they  have  been  ransomed  at  a  great  price ;  they  have  been  rescued 
from  the  power  of  their  enemies  (outward  and  inward)  and  walk  in  liberty,  thankful 
tur  what  they  have  escaped  from,  anticipating  the  more  perfect  freedom  and  the  more 
excellent  estate  they  are  travelling  toward. 

II.  The'  special  chaeacteristics  of  the  oitv  itsklp.  "  Shall  come  to  Zion." 
L.  It  is  the  very  home  of  Ood.  Jerusalem  was  "  the  city  of  God  " — it  was  the  place  on 
( arth  which  he  chose  for  his  manifested  presence.  There,  in  a  peculiar  sense,  he  abode  ; 
there,  as  in  no  other  city,  he  was  approached  and  was  worshipped  ;  there,  as  nowhere 
else,  men  felt  that  they  stood  in  his  near  presence  and  rejoiced  in  fellowship  with  him. 
The  heavenly  Zion  is  to  be  to  all  who  shall  be  received  within  its  gates  the  place  where 
Uod  is,  the  home  of  the  living  and  reigning  Saviour.  There  we  are  to  he  "  at  home 
with  the  Lord."  2.  It  is  the  place  of  perfect  security  and  of  transcendent  beauty.  The 
"mountains  were  round  about  Jerusalem,"  and  "beautiful  for  situation,  the  joy  of  the 
whole  earth,  was  Mount  Zion."  The  heavenly  city,  of  which  it  is  the  earthly  type,  will 
prove  a  home  of  absolute  security,  into  which  no  enemy  will  over  come,  from  which 
temptation  and  sin  are  safely  barred  (see  Rev.  xxi.  27) ;  and  of  surpassing  beauty  and 
glory  (Rev.  xxi.  1,  10,  11, 18,  19,  23).  There  shall  be  everything  which  will  give  pure 
and  inexhaustible  delight  to  all  holy  souls,  to  those  in  whom  has  been  planted  and 
nourished  the  appreciation  of  that  which  is  really  beautiful  and  glorious. 

III.  The  joy  which  will  attend  admission.  They  "shall  come  to  Zion  with 
songs."  How  transcendent  must  that  moment  be  when  the  human  soul  is  assured,  by 
actuiil  sight  of  the  heavenly  city,  that  immortal  glory  is  his  blest  estate! 

IV.  The  pull  and  abiding  blessedness  of  the  celestial  home.  "  Everlasting 
joy  .  .  .  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away."     Here  are  the  two  grand  essentials  of 

"  iierfeot  blessedness.  1.  The  absence  of  aU  that  mars.  Here  many  a  "goodly  heritage" 
loses  half  its  value  to  the  possessor  of  it  by  reason  of  some  one  serious  drawback ;  it  is 
some  bodily  infirmiiy,  or  it  is  some  grave  anxiety,  or  it  is  some  keen  disappointment, 
or  it  is  some  irreparable  loss  which,  though  everything  else  be  fair  and  fruitful,  makes 
life  seem  to  have  as  much  of  shadow  as  of  sunshine.  There,  sorrow  and  sighing  shall 
have  fled  away.  2.  The  presence  (f  lasting  and  ever-growing  joy.  Here,  with  the 
constitution  of  our  mind  and  with  the  fading  of  our  faculty,  pleasure  paUs,  joys  fade 
and  disappear.  After  a  few  decades  life  becomes  less  and  less  valuable,  until  it  is  felt 
to  be  a  burden  that  can  ill  be  borne.  There,  it  is  an  "everlasting  song,"  and  instead  of 
its  strain  becoming  less  tuneful  or  inspiriting,  the  enlarging  and  unfoldiog  powers  of  our 
immortal  manhood  will  make  the  heavenly  life  more  musical  and  rapturous  ai  the  years 
and  the  centuries  are  left  behind  us. — C. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Changed  circumstances  follovnng  the  return  of  Divine  favour.  This, 
which  is  expressed  in  the  figures  of  these  verses,  may  be  further  illustrated  by  the 
experience  of  David.  His  "  bones  waxed  old  through  his  roaring  all  the  day  long,"  while 
God  hid  his  face  from  him.  He  sang  again  the  old  songs  when  God  "  restored  unto 
him  the  joy  of  his  salvation."  "  In  contrast  to  the  ruin  of  Edom,  the  prophet  now 
describes  Israel's  triumphant  march  home  through  the  blossoming  wilderness  "  (Martthew 
Arnold).  Two  points  may  be  dwelt  on.  1.  God's  favour  often  includes  improved  cir- 
cumstances.    2.  God's  favour  brings  such  cheer  as  lifts  us  above  circumstances. 

I.  God's  favour  often  includes  improved  circumstances.  The  actual  removal 
of  our  difficulties  or  hindrances;  restored  relationships ;  business  prosperities,  etc. ; — all 
such  things  being  poetically  represented  by  the  bare,  dry  desert  becoming  a  watered, 
flowery  garden.  In  actual  fact,  the  weariness  and  danger  of  the  long  desert  route  were 
graciously  mitigated  and  relieved  for  the  returning  exiles.  Cheyne  resists  the  reference 
to  the  exiles;  but  the  same  point  may  be  illustrated  if  the  picture  of  the  text  be  that 
of  the  condition  of  desolated  Judasa  when  God's  favour  rested  on  the  remnant  that 
remained  there.     The  contrast  may  be  between  desolated  Edom  on  which  rested  God's 


576  THE  BOOK   OF  THE   PliOPUET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxxv.  1— 10. 

frown,  and  refreshed  and  revived  Judaea  on  whioli  rested  God's  favour.  So  when  God's 
curse  is  taken  off  Palestine,  the  old  blossom  and  beauty  will  return  to  her.  We  cannot 
always  be  sure  that  God's  smile  on  our  souls  will  be  followed  by  improvement  of  our 
circumstances ;  but  this  great  comfort  we  may  take — God  oftentimes  dues  in  this  way 
seal  and  complete  his  mercies  to  his  people. 

II.   GrOD's  FAVOUB  BRINGS  SUCH  CHEER  AS  LIFTS  US  ABOVE  OXECimSTANCES.      It  is  Very 

easy  to  say  that  we  ought  to  rise  above  circumstances  in  our  own  strength.  Bat  we 
cannot  do  it;  nobody  ever  really  does  it,  however  loud  may  be  their  boastings.  Tlie 
bond  uniting  body  and  mind,  soul  and  life,  is  altogether  too  close  and  subtle  to  permit 
even  the  holiest  man  to  cease  to  feel.  What  alone  is  possible  is  that  God's  favour  and 
grace  may  be  such  an  inspii  ation  and  strength  to  a  man's  spirit,  or  a  man's  will,  that 
he  may  be  able  to  control  his  circumstances,  and  even  change  them  through  the  new 
and  masterful  relation  in  which  he  stands  to  them.  God's  favour  and  acceptance  is 
man's  supreme  uplii'ting.  I'here  is  no  clieer,  no  strength,  like  that  which  comes  to  the 
man  who  can  say,  "The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us,  the  God  of  Jacob  is  our  Ecfuge." 
That  man,  and  that  maii  alone,  can  do  all  things,  and  hear  all  things,  and  make  life 
yield  to  him  its  beit.— B.  T. 

Ver.  3. — Qheer  fm-  the  faint-hearted.  This  term  may  well  be  applied  either  to  the 
sTJiall  remnant -left  in  Judaea,  or  to  the  small  company  that  represented  the  exiled 
nation  on  the  return  to  Jerusalem.  The  cheer  comes  through  the  assurance  of  God's 
direct  and  gracious  relations  with  them.  Faint-hearted  ones  can  only  be  steadied  by 
leaning  on  the  Strong  Oue  for  strength.  The  prayer  Of  all  such  should  be  this,  "0  Lord, 
I  am  oppressed,  undertake  thou  for  me."  lutroduction  may  include  the  reasons  for 
faint-heartedness  which  these  people  had  who  are  here  addressed ;  and  the  correspond- 
ing reasons  for  faint-heartedness  which  now  may  press  upon  us.  We  have  times,  like 
those  which  Job  knew,  when  everybody  and  everything  seems  to  be  against  us ;  we 
have  to  suffer  much  through  the  wrong-doing  of  others;  and  the  frailty  of  our  bodies 
often  makes  us  write  bitter  things  against  ourselves.  Our  hope  is  in  God.  He  sends 
cheering  assurances. 

I.  Wb  have  this  good  cheeb — God  lives.  Even  if  we  are  as  nearly  shipwrecked 
as  the  Apostle  Paul,  and  for  days  and  nights  together  neither  sun  nor  stars  appear,  the 
fact  cannot  be  altered,  the  sun  is  there  behind  those  clouds ;  they  cannot  blot  him  out. 
In  our  troublous  and  weary  times  men  may  bruise  us  sorely  with  their  taunts,  "  Where 
is  now  thy  God?"  But  taunts  cannot  push  him  from  his  place,  and  blot  him  from  our. 
sky.     He  is  there,  behind  the  cloud,  if  his  time  is  not  yet.    We  shall  praise  him. 

II.  Wb  have  this  good  oheee — God  is  for  us.  He  is  on  our  side.  "  Who  shall  harm 
you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good  ?  "  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against 
us?'"  We  have  a  champion,  a  "  Great  Heart"  pilgrim's  guide.  "Greater  is  he  who 
is  with  us  than  all  that  can  be  against  us."  And  if  we  are  still  placed  under  disabilities 
and  burdens,  we  keep  this  confidence— seeing  God  is  for  us,  he  must  know  that  it  is 
better  for  us  to  let  the  burdens  stay  than  to  remove  them.  He  could  remove  them ; 
it  is  enough  for  us  that  he  does  not. 

III.  Wk  have  this  oood  cheeb— God  ib  with  us.  His  is  not  a  grace  and  kelp 
which  we  may  have  on  appeal  merely ;  it  is  a  grace  and  strength  which  are  our  con- 
stant possession.  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us."  We  are  safely  defended ;  we  are 
wisely  inspired;  we  possess  all  things— "all  are  ours  "—for  we  have  God. 

IV.  Wb  have  this  good  ohbeb— God  is  in  us.  This  is  the  deeper  Christian  view, 
and  opens  up  the  Pauline  teaching,  "I  live,  yet  not  I,  Christ  liveth  in  me;*'  and,  wu 
may  even  say,  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  himself.  Cheer  for  the  faint-hearted  follows 
our  response  to  this  appeal,  "  Abide  in  me,  aud  I  in  you."— B.  T. 

Vers.  6,  6. — Pre-visiona  of  the  Great  Physician.  These  may  be  poetical  figureh 
designed  to  present,  in  an  impressive  way,  a  time  of  great  national  joy ;  but  we  cannot 
fail  to  recognize  in  them  forcshadowings  of  the  miracles  of  healing  and  of  grace  that 
were  wrought  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  first  and  general  meaning  of  the  passage 
may  be  that,  "  so  conspicuous  and  overpowering  would  be  the  interference  of  God  or. 
behalf  of  his  people,  those  of  the  most  obtuse  intellect  could  not  fail  to  perceive  it. 
go  joyous  would  be  the  event,  that  ^rsons  the  most  unlikely  would  participate  in  the 


OH.  xxxT.  1-^10.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOHBT    ISAIAH.  677 


exultation."  But,  for  spiritual  readers,  there  must  be  a  second  and  further  meaning,  for 
the  language  too  well  suits  that  time  when  "  the  blind  saw,  the  lame  walked,  the  lepers 
were  cleansed,  the  deaf  heard,  and  the  dead  were  raised."  Beading  the  mission  of 
Ghrist  from  this  prophecy  as  a  text,  we  note —  ' 

I.  Ohbibt  bemovino  men's  disabilities.  All  are  typified  in  these  failures  of  the 
senses  of  sight,  hearing,  walking,  and  speaking.  Some  of  the  human  disabilities  are 
hereditary,  others  are  brought  on  by  men's  own  negligences  or  wilfulnesses.  But  this 
is  to,  he  specially  noticed,  they  are  all  the  direct  products  and  results  of  tin.  And 
Christ  only  designed  to  impress  on  men  the  greatness  of  his  work  as  Redeemer  from  sin, 
by  showing  them  how  vigorously  he  would  deal  with  all  sin's  consequences. 

n.  Christ  givino  life  to  the  dead.  Death  is  the  supreme,  and  apparently  resist- 
less triumph  of  sin.  Before  it  man  stands  utterly  hopeless.  But  Christ  does  not.  He 
speaka,  and  Lazarus  comes  forth,  boimd  with  the  grave-clothes.  He  even  submits 
himself  to  the  worst  that  death  can  do,  and  then  breaks  the  bars  of  his  prison-house 
asunder.    There  is  nothing  he  cannot  do  for  us. 

IIL  Chbwt  wivbalino  God's  work  in  souls.  We  only  read  our  Lord's  life  aright 
when  we  see  it  to  be  illustration  of  permanent  spiritual  facts.  God  is  always  coming 
and  saving  men.  He  has  always  been  coming  and  saving  men.  Prophets,  by  their 
miracles  (such  aa  Elisha'a),  in  part  illustrated  God's  soul-saving  work;  but  the  "Lo«i 
Jesus  gives  the  full,  sublime,  ever^suggestive  illustration."  God  gives  life  from  the 
"death  of  trespassM  and  ains."  G^  removes  the  soul-disabilities  which  sin  has 
brought  in  its  train.  This  opens  up  the  consideration  of  our  Lord's  position  as 
Mediator,  doing,  for  Gk>d,  his  part  of  this  great  work  in  souls ;  and  further  of  the 
mission  of  the  Spirit,  as  Comforter,  Inspirer,  and  Teacher.  Verily  QoA  works  wonders 
of  grace  In  the  aouls  of  men, — B.  T. 

Ver.  8. — 2%«  Lord's  highway.  Under  the  figure  of  deliverance  from  Assyria  and 
Babylon  the  times  of  Messiah  are  foreshadowed.  From  the  previous  verses  we  get 
suggestions  of  his  miracles  of  healing,  and  assurances  that  he  will  supply  grace  to  men 
(ike  abundant  fountains  in  thirsty  places.  The  figure  of  a  "  way  "  was  even  used  by 
Christ  himself.  He  said,  "  I  am  the  Way  " — the  way  to  the  Father ;  the  way  of  salva- 
tion; the  way  of  holiness;  the  way  to  glory,  "bringing  many  sons  unto  glory." 
Spiritualizing  the  way  described  in  this  text,  we  may  note— ^ 

L  The  hiohwat  of  salvation  is  a  raised  way.  A  made  way ;  one  actually  lifted 
up,  levelled,  prepared.  This  is  the  idea  in  the  Hebrew  word.  We  must  distinguish 
between  the  ordinary  Eastern  path,  a  mere  track  in  the  sand  or  the  soil,  and  the  road 
carefully  made  for  a  royal  progress,  valleys  raised,  mountains  levelled,  stones  removed. 
Such  a  road  is  Christ's  way  of  life  and  salvation  for  us.  All  hindrances  are  taken  out 
of  the  way,  and  a  plain  ,path  is  laid  before  our  feet.  There  are  some  points  of  view 
from  which  the  way  of  life  appears  as  a  "  strait  gate"  opening  on  to  a  narrow  path. 
But  from  other  points  of  view  it  is  a  broad,  open  road,  which  none  can  mistake.  This 
may  lead  to  consideration  of  the  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  which  was,  as  it  were,  the 
making  of  the  way  of  life. 

IL  The  highway  oy  salvation  ib  a  holt  way.  There  is  no  possibility  of  our 
treading  it  with  the  uccleanness  of  wilful  sin,  kept  sin,  upon  us.  Sinners  may  tread  it, 
but  they  must  be  penitent  sinners.  And  a  penitent  man,  so  far  as  heart  and  purpose 
are  concerned,  ia  a  holy  man.  Imperfect  saints  may  tread  it,  but  only  if  their  heart  is 
set  on  holiness.  Only  if  they  are  "  clean  every  whit,"  but  needing  to  "  wash  their 
feet" 

HI.  The  hiohwat  of  salvation  is  a  siiiPLE  wat.  "  The  wayfaring  men,  yea  fools, 
shall  not  err  therein."  The  difBculties  we  make ;  they  are  not  really  in  the  way.  The 
way  of  salvation  seems  to  wise  people  full  of  mystery,  yet  it  is  grasped  by  the  wayfar- 
ing, the  fool,  the  child.  None  need  miss  the  way,  for  it  is  thoroughly  well  fitted  with 
directions  and  guide-posts.  We  may  blind  ourselves,  and  refuse  to  see  them.  We  may 
put  obstacles  in  our  own  path.  The  one  great  obstacle  takes  many  forms.  What  we 
really  want  is  to  keep  our  wilfulness ;  to  make  a  way  of  our  own ;  to  get  God  to  save 
us  on  our  own  terms.  There  is  the  highway  open  right  before  us,  and  we  persist  in 
l(x)king  this  way  and  that,  if  so  be  we  may  find  any  way  but  Christ's  way  of  penitence 
\nd  fMth.— B.  T. 

;SAIAB.  2  ' 


578  THE   BOOK  OF    THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxr.  1— la 

Ver.  10. — The  return  of  the  ransomed.  "  Whoever  is  familiar  with  the  bold  and 
magnificent  character  of  the  prophetic  style  will  not  deem  the  liberation  from  the  Cap- 
tivity an  event  too  trivial  to  be  predicted  in  the  language  here  employed."  "  Minor 
and  temporary  deliverances  are  not  only  emblems  of  the  great  salvation,  bat  preparatory 
to  it."  "  The  first  volume  of  Isaiah's  prophecy  closes  fitly  with  this  transcendent 
picture,  carrying  the  thoughts  of  men  beyond  any  possible  earthly  fulfilment.  The 
outward  imagery  probably  had  its  starting-point  in  the  processions  of  the  pilgrims 
who  came  up  to  the  temple  singing  pi«alms,  like  those  known  as  the  '  songs  of  degrees,' 
at  their  successive  halting-places."  Very  strange  is  the  fascination  which  the  "  future" 
exercises  on  men.    It  is  a  "  Will-o'-the-wisp  "  which  is  ever  enticing  man  on. 

"At  first  Time  made  nought  but  to-day 
With  its  joys,  its  successes,  and  sorrow ; 
Then,  to  keep  on  good  terms  with  the  worl4. 
He  promised  he'd  make  a  to-morrow." 

No  man  is  really  satisfied.  He  is  always  hoping  for  something  to  happen  in  the  future. 
And  so  he  is  lifted  onwards  towards  the  eternal,  and  in  his  very  restlessness  ho  reveals 
his  immortality.  Illustrate  from  the  romance  of  the  child,  the  ambition  of  the  appren- 
tice, the  outlobking  of  the  man,  the  persistent  hopes  of  the  Jewish  race.  This  onluok- 
ing  is  peculiarly  characteristic  of  the  Christian,  who  has  the  "  promise  of  the  life  that 
now  ii,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."     The  Christian's  best  is  in  the  eternal 

I.  Thb  people.  "  Ransomed  of  the  Lord."  The  word  reminds  us  of  the  prisoner  and 
the  slave.  It  may  properly  be  applied  in  a  religious  sense,  because  the  Bible  repre- 
sents men  as  "  in  bondage,"  and  as  "  redeemed."  "  Sold  under  sin."  "  Te  were  the 
servants  of  sin."  "  Ghive  his  life  a  ransom."  1.  Observe  from  what  bondage  we  are 
ransomed.  Describe  the  wretched  condition  of  the  slave.  How  much  worse  is  the  con- 
dition of  the  slaves  of  sin,  drink,  lust,  evil  passions,  or  selfish  worldlinessi  There  is  a 
peculiar  degradation  and  a  certain  final  ruin  mvolved  in  the  supreme  service  of  self. 
"  Whosoever  committeth  sin  is  the  slave  of  sin."  2.  By  whom  were  we  ransomed/ 
"  Of  the  Lord.**  It  was  a  glorious  day  for  England  when  she  broke  the  fetters  of  the 
slave,  and  let  the  oppressed  go  free.  It  would  be  thought  a  great  thing  for  a  king  t» 
bend  down  and  with  his  own  hands  release  the  slave.  Yet  God's  own  Son,  God  himself 
"  manifest,"  is  our  Deliverer.  When  "  there  was  no  eye  to  pity,  and  no  arm  to  save, 
his  eye  pitied  and  his  arm  brought  salvation."  We  sing,  as  Moses  did,  "  The  Lord  is 
become  my  Salvation."  3.  At  what  price  has  the  ransom  been  accomplished  f  "  Not  with 
corruptible  things,"  but  with  "  the  precious  blood  of  Christ."  Illustrate  the  supreme 
efforts  that  are  often  made  to  raise  a  ransom  price ;  but  what  is  all  the  wealth  m  the 
world  compared  with  Jesus,  who  was  given  for  us?  Surely  such  a  ransom  involves  that 
some  (treat  blessedness  is  yet  in  store  for  us.  ,,,.,,.•      /i  j 

IL  1'me  plbdgb  of  eetubn.  "  ShaU  return."  It  is  the  word  of  the  hvmg  God, 
Israel,  while  in  captivity,  may  fully  rest  upon  the  Lord's  promises.  'There  is  a  sense  in 
which  we  may  regard  ourselves  as  the  "ransomed  of  the  Lord,"  left  for  a  whUe  m  the 
land  of  bondage  until  our  home  is  ready ;  and  whUe  we  wait  we  have  comfortmg  assur- 
ances in :  1.  The  work  of  Jesus :  which  is  represented  as  being  still  <amed  on  for  us  u 
the  heavenly  places.  2.  The  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  oitf  Seal,  our  Earnest,  our 
Sanctifier,  tmto  the  day  of  redemption.  3.  The  promises  of  God,  which  are  '^'  exceedmg 
great  and  precious  promises,"  and  which  are  "  yea  and  amen  in  Christ  Jesus. ' 

III  The  retubn.  (For  the  figures  of  Israel  going  to  the  temple  for  the  feast^  see 
Ps  cix.— cixvL)  Picture  the  scene  of  the  journey  of  the  exUes  from  Babylon  to  Jeru- 
salem. "Songs  and  everlasting  joy"  they  know.  1.  Theirs  is  the  ]oy  of  ransomed 
ones.  Illustrate  by  the  ecstasy  of  the  freed  bird,  the  Uberatod  wisoner,  the  escaped 
slave.  2.  Theirs  is  the  joy  of  conquerors.  Over  sin  and  self  and  the  worW.  lllus- 
trate  by  the  triumph  of  a  general  returning  to  his  country.  8.  Theirs  u  the  joy  of 
thoM  who  are  going  home.  Illustrate  by  the  schoolboy,,  or  tU  traveUer,  aearlH  »• 
Hme  tot  hfn 

«  As  when  the  weary  traveller  nins 
llie  height  of  tome  o'er-looking  hill, 
The  light  uis  fainting  spirit  oheers. 
He  eyes  his  home,  though  distaLt  ittU." 


CH.  XXXV.  1—10.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  579 

IV.  The  home.  "Zion."  Our  "Father's  house."  "Is  it  a  place?"  we  often 
ask.  We  know  little  about  it.  God  gives  us  only  figures  and  pictures  which  ap- 
peal to  imagination.  The  text  gives  two  aspects  of  it.  1.  "  Sorrow  and  sighing  flee 
ama/y.  "  Sorrow  comes  out  of  (1)  separations ;  (3)  infirmities ;  (8)  death ;  (4)  sin. 
"There  the  weary  are  at  rest." 

"  The  pilgrims  enter  the  city  like  worn  sky-birds  to  their  nests. " 

3.  They  obtain  joy  and  gladness.  This  they  have  through  (1)  exalted  powers ;  (3) 
established  purity ;  (3)  intercourse  with  the  loved  ones  of  their  human  fellowship ; 
(4)  nobler  and  higher  service ;  and  (5)  the  vision,  the  presence,  the  smile,  of  Jesus. 
They  are  "  ever  with  the  Lord. "— K.  T. 


HOMILETICAL   INDEX 


ve 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


VOLUME  I 


CHAPTER  L 

"  Tho  Vision  of  leaiah  which  ho  saw  " 

God'a  ArraigniiieDt  of  his  People      ... 

The  Prophet's  Enforcemeut  of  God's 
Charge 

The  Outward  Form  of  Religion,  with- 
out Inward  Piety,  an  Oifeuce  to  Qod 

God  will  not  listen  to  the  Prayers  of 
the  Wicked 

No  Ketum  to  God's  Favour  without 
Amendment  of  Life 

The  Grievousness  of  the  Sin  of  Oppres- 
sion in  God's  Sight 

The  Purifying  Power  of  Punishment 

Jehovah  arraigns  his  People  ... 

The  People's  Plea  considered  ... 

Argument  and  Conviction  ,„  ... 

Sentence  passed    ...  ...  m. 

"  Children  that  are  Corrupters  "        ». 

The  Faithful  Bemnant        ...  m. 

Salvation  to  the  Uttermost ...  m. 

Ingratitude  and  InteiventioB  ^ 

Obligation  and  Interest      .m  m. 

The  Course  of  Sin ...  m<  ••• 

Sin  in  its  Hopelessness        m<  •.. 

The  Prophetic  Stmin  ...  ... 

The  Magnitu4e  of  the  Divine  Meroy 

Divine  Dealing  with  the  Degeiiiiato 

The  Times  and  Mission  of  Isaiah 

Sin  as  Broken  Sonship 

The  FooUshness  of  increasing  Divine 
Judgments 

Here  Ceremonial  an  Offence  to  Gkxl ... 


FJLOB 
8 


10 
10 

n 

12 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
17 
18 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
23 
.24 
25 

26 
27 


THRMB  rAOB 

Conditions  of  Divine  Acceptance      ...  28 

Reasoning  with  God  about  our  Sin  a  ...  28 

Unrighteousness  a  Nation's  Curse    ...  29 

Hope  in  God's  Refininga    ...           ...  30 

CHAPTER  n. 

Hope  and  Pear  to  be  both  called  out  as- 

Motives  by  the  Preacher ...            ...  34 

National    Judgments    the   Result    of 

National  Sins    ...            ...            ...  35 

TheTerrorsof  theDay  Of  theLord...  36 

The  Golden  Age ...  37 

Purgation  by  Judgment     ...            ...  38 

The  Day  of  Judgment        ...            ...  39 

Real  Religious  Revival      ...            ...  41 

The  Promised  Future:  a  Missionary 

Sermon              ...            ...            ...  41 

The  Wisdom  of  Walking  in  the  Light  42 

Retribution  audits  Results...            ...  42 

Trusting  in  Man  ...            ...            ...  44 

The  Attractions  of  the  Gospel  Church  44 

War  no  more         ...            m«            ...  *5 

Walking  in  tho  Light         ...            »..  46 

Shame  for  the  Sinner          ...            ••■.  46 

The  Lord's  Day  for  the  Proud           ...  47 

Man's  Disgust  at  his  Idols ...            ».  48 

The  Unrellableness  of  Man . . .            h«  49 

CHAPTER  m. 

Many  Steps  in  the  Decay  of  States   ...  54 
The  Law  of  Retributive  Justice  not 

Mechanical,  but  Moral    ...            ...  55 


a 


tKDfiX. 


The  Shftre  which  Women  have  in  pro- 
ducing the  Ruin  of  a  Nation          ...  56 
A  Picture  of  Anarchy         ...            ...  57 

The  Beasone  of  Judgment  ...  m.  57 

The  Women  of  Jerusalem   ...  n.  59 

The  RevealingB  of  the  Faoa  ...  59 

National  and  Spiritual- Anarchy        ...  60 
The  Path  of  Sin  and  the  Best  of  Bight- 

eousneas  ...  ...  ...  60 

Penalty,  Natural  and  Sapetnatural  ...  61 

The  Vanity  of  Vanity         ...  ...  62 

The  Mission  of  Famines      ...  ...  62 

The  Evil  of  Childish  Bulen  ...  61 

The  Secret  of  National  Bnin  ...  64 

Messages  to  the  Bighteona  and  the 

Wicked  ...  ...  ...  65 

Grinding  the  Faces  of  the  Poor        ...  65 

Dress  and  Character  ...  ...  66 

National  Evil  in  the  Loss  of  Male 

Population        ...  ...  •«•  67 

CHAPTER   IV. 

The  Glories  of  the  Restored  Ch  uroh ...  69 

Glimpse  of  Future  Prosperity  ...  70 

Depopulation  and  its  Doctrine  ...  71 

Bestoration  ...  ...  »•  72 

Divine  Protection...  ...  ...  73 

Immortality  in  a  Continued  Bace     ...  73 

The  Divine  and  Human  Messiah      ...  74 

The  Boll  of  the  Lining       ...  ...  75 

Christ's  Purified  Clmroh     ...  ...  75 

Christ's  GraoiooB   Dealings  with  his 

Church  ...  ...  ...  76 


CHAPTER  V. 
God's  Care  for  Man,  and  Man's  Ingrati- 
tude   ...           ..•           .'•           •>•  S3 

The  Appropriateness  of  God's  Punish- 
ments ...           ...           .*■           ■••  '^ 

Wicked  Men  used  by  God  as  Instm- 

ments  for  Working  out  his  Purposes  85 

The  Parable  of  the  Vineyard           ...  85 

Woe  to  the  Covotons           ...           ...  86 

Mirth  and  Monraing          ».            ...  88 

Analysis  of  Sin    ...            ...            ...  89 

The  Unappeasable  Wrath  of  Jehovah  90 

Foreign  Invasion  ...            ...            ...  91 

Giving  Fiilse  Names           ».           ...  91 

Privilege  and  Penalty         ...            ...  92 

The  Character  and  the  Doom  of  Oove- 

iooMies*            ...           ...           ..•  92 


The  E  vil  and  the  End  of  Intemperance  93 

The  Calomities  of  Spiritual  Ignorance  9-1 

Sin  in  its  Strength              ...            ...  95 

Spiritual  Perversity             ...            ...  96 

The  Pitiful  Estate  of  the  Proud       ...  96 

The  Judgments  of  the  Lord              ...  97 

The  Ingratitude  of  an  Unfruitful  Life  98 

Divine  Judgments  on  Ingratitude  ...  99 
The   Difference    between  what    Gtod 

asks  and  what  God  gets  ...           ...  100 

The  Covetous  Spirit  and  its  Judgment  100 

The  Sin  of  Dissipation       ...           ...  101 

Four  Grievous  Sins            ...           ...  102 

The  Importance  of  Adequate  Impiee- 

sionsofSin       ...           ...           ...  103 

God's   Judgments    through   Katnial 

.•«               .••               ...  Ivi 


CHAPTBB  VI 

The  Vision  of  God  ...  109, 116 

Man's  Unworthiness  brought  Home  to 

him  by  Nothing  so  much  as  "  seeing 

God" 110 

The  Loving-kindness  of  Qod  shown  in 

his  Judgments  ...            ...            ...  110 

The  Prophet's  Call  and  Consecration  111 

TheCaUofGod 116 

A  Sermon  from  the  Seraphim           ...  117 

Spiritual  Agitation            ...           m.  118 

On  God's  Errand  ...            ...            ...  119 

The  Shadow  of  Sacred  Truth  ...  119 
Symbolic  Impressions  of  the  Divine 

Holiness            ...            ...            ...  120 

Seeing  God,  and  the  Sense  of  Sin     ...  121 

The  True  Inspiration  for  Workers  ...  121 
Divine  Endowment  the  Proof  of  Divine 

Forgiveness  and  Acceptance         ...  124 

A  Mission  of  Hardening     n»           —  124 

CHAPTBB  Vn. 

The  Designs  of  the  Wicked,  however 
well  laid,  easily  brought  to  Nonght 

by  God  130 

Bightfnl  and  Wiongfol   Asking  for 
Signs  ...  ...  ...  ...    131 

Jesoa  OUT  Immannel  ...  ...    182 

Qur  Pleasant  Vices  Whips  for  oni  OWB 
Backs ...  ...  ...  ...    IS2 

The  Prophet  comforts  the  King        ...    133 
Faith  triiunphing  over  Doubt  „,    133 

War-Piotares        m.    136 


INDEX 


iii 


niRin 

N<>  Fuith,  no  Kixity  ...  ,„ 

Tho  EstabUshiiig  Power  of  Faith      ... 

Sin  and  Duty  in  Begard  to  "Signs"... 

The  Presence  of  Gkxl 

Divine  Retribution 

National  Calamity  with  Ood  and  with- 
out Ood  ...  ...  ... 

Man  proposes,  God  disposes  •.. 

The  Faith-Oondition 

True  and  False  Humility   ... 

The  Nature  of  the  Messianic  Fro- 
pheciea  ...  ... 

The  Immannel-Child  ... 

The  Culture  of  Conscience  ... 

National  Judgment  for  National  Sins 

CHAPTER  Vni. 

Waters  of  Shiloah... 

The  Fear  of  Man  and  the  Fear  of  Ood 
contrasted 

Waiting  for  Grod   ...  ... 

Seeking  for  the  Living  to  the  Dead  ... 

Symbolic  Utteisnoea  ...  ... 

"God  with  us"    ... 

The  Helplessness  of  Superstition      ... 

Waiting  and  Looking 

Orders  of  Service  ... 

The  False  Standard  and  the  Fatal 
Issue   ... 

The  Impotence  of  Ungodliness 

Our  Personal  Relation  to  God 

The  Teacher's  Distress  and  his  Con- 
solation 

The  Confession  of  TTngodliness,  etc.  ... 

Prophecy  in  a  Name 

Jehovah  like  the  Waters  of  Shiloah  ... 

Immanuel's  Land ... 

God's  Twofold  Relations  with  Men  ... 

The  Hiding  of  God's  Face  ... 

Man  Every  Way  God's  Instrument  ... 

The  Standard  of  Truth  and  Morals  ... 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Th«  Significanoy  of  the  Names  of 
CSirist... 

Persistent  Impenitence  brings  Re- 
peated Chastisements      ... 

Vision  of  Future  Glory       ... 

Oracles  concerning  Samaria 

The  Dawn  of  Gospel  Day  ... 

Qieat  Light  in  Deep  Darkness 


fAG5 

THm 

»AGC 

13G 

Spiritual  Empire  ...            »< 

... 

175 

136 

The  Wonderful  Lord 

... 

173 

137 

Chief  Counsels  of  Christ     ... 

... 

17G 

138 

Christ  in  Relation  to  Time... 

••. 

176 

139 

Christian  Peace     .... 

... 

177 

The  Evil  Spirit  of  Defiance 

... 

178 

139 

Man  in  God's  View             ... 

... 

178 

140 

Sin  Suicidal 

... 

179 

141 

Light  in  Darkness 

... 

180 

141 

■  The  Joy  of  Men  in  a  Redeemer 

... 

180 

The  Fatherhood  of  God  revealeJ 

in 

142 

Messiah 

■  •• 

181 

143 

The  Continuity  of  a  Kingdom  founded 

144 

on  Righteousness 

..• 

182 

145 

The  Divine  Anger 

•  ■• 

183 

The  Sin  of  leading  Others  astray 

•  ■• 

183 

149 

CHAPTER  X. 

God  is  Man's  Only  Sure  Refuge  in 

the 

150 

Day  of  Calamity 

... 

190 

151 

Assyria,  a  Notable  F^xample  of  Pride 

152 

and  its  Punishment 

... 

190 

152 

Blessings  through  the  Anointing 

•.. 

191 

153 

Assyria,  the  Rod  of  Jehovah 

••( 

192 

154 

Judgment  and  Conversion  ... 

..* 

193 

154 

The  Mighty  laid  Low 

... 

194 

155 

The  Helplessness  of  Man  under 

tho 

Wrath  of  God 

... 

194 

15G 

Man  in  his  Folly,  and  God   in 

ms 

157 

Righteousness  ... 

195 

157 

Departure  and  Return 

■  •• 

196 

Bout  and  Re-establishment :    Divine 

158 

Interposition 

... 

196 

158 

The  Divine  Avenger  of  the  Poor 

••■ 

197 

159 

The  Divine  Overrulings     ... 

... 

198 

160 

God's  Judgments  on  Pride ... 

■•• 

199 

161 

Man,  the  Instrument  of  Grod 

••• 

199 

162 

Staying  upon  the  Holy  One 

«•■ 

201 

162 

The  Power  of  the  Anointing 

•M 

201 

163 

163 

CHAPTER  XL 

The  Spiritual  Nature  of  Messiah's 

Per- 

fections 

... 

205 

God's  Mercy  in  bringing  the  Gentiles 

169 

into  his  Kingdom 

... 

206 

The    Church's    Triumph    over 

its 

171 

Enemies 

... 

207 

172 

The  Coming  of  the  Messiah 

... 

208 

172 

Judah  and  the  Nations 

... 

209 

173 

The  Rest  of  Christ 

... 

209 

174 

Characteristics  of  Jesus  Christ 

..( 

209 

Iv 


INDEX. 


The  Intensive  and  ExtenBive  Power  of 

theGos|jel         ...            ...            ...  210 

The  Leading  of  a  Little  Child :  Sun- 
day Sc  I  lool  Sermon          ...            ...  211 

The  Eefugo  of  the  Remnant              ...  212 

ConditioDS  of  Victory          ...            ...  213 

Christ  the  Branch               ...            ...  214 

Christ's  Bnduements  by  the  Spirit   ...  215 

The  Principles  of  Messianic  Rule     ...  215 

The  Christian  "  Golden  Year  "         ...  216 
The  Centre  of  Attraction  for  the  Whole 

World ...  217 

The  Unity  of  the  Bace  in  Messiah's 

Kingdom           ...            ...            ...  217 

CHAPTER  Xn. 

Christian  Thanksgiving — its  Principal 

Characteristics  ...            ...            ...  219 

A  Hymn  of  Praise               ...            ...  220 

A  Religion  of  Blessedness  ...            ...  220 

Reconciliation  with  God     ...            ...  221 

The  Greatness  of  God's  Goodness     ...  222 

The  Joy  of  Christ's  Salvation            ...  222 

Exultation  and  Activity     ...            ...  223 

Holy  Joy  in  God  ,..            ...            ...  224 

Faith  and  Fear     ...            ...            ...  225 

The  Wells  of  fJalvation      226 

God's  New  Name  the  Old  One  glorified  226 

God  htoonred  through  his  Mercies  ...  227 


CHAPTER  XIIL 

The  Fall  of  Babylon  a  Type  of  the 
General  Punishment  of  the  Wicked 
Oracle  concerning  Babylon 
Mental  Depression  ... 

The  Burden  of  the  Lord     ... 
The  Kingdom  of  God  ... 

"  The  Day  of  the  Lord  "     ... 
The  Price  of  a  Man 
The  Overthrow  of  Evil        ... 
The  Lord's  Sanctified  Ones 
God  as  El  Shaddai 
The  Precionsness  of  Man    ... 
The  Fall  of  Pride 
Literal  Fulfilment  of  Prophecy 


231 
232 
...  234 
...  235 
...  236 
836, 239 
...  237 
...  238 
...  239 
...  240 
...  241 
...  242 
...    2*3 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Triumph  over  Enemies       ...  ... 

God's    OondesoMuioD    in    coBflrBUDg 
Promises  fcy  0»th  ... 


248 


249 


THKICK  FAOE 

No  sure  Refuge  but  Zion    .m            ...  249 

Song  of  Redeemed  Israel    ...           ...  250 

Song  uf  Redeemed  Israel:  the  Scene  in 

Hades...            ...            ...           ...  253 

Oracle  concerning  Asshur  ...            ...  255 

Oracle  oonceming  Fhilistia               ...  256 

The  False  Staff 257 

The  Beign  of  Bin,  and  the  Rest  of  God  2.'>8 

Sin  and  its  Humiliations    ...            ...  258 

The  Children  of  the    Ungodly;    or. 

Parental  Responsibility  ...            ...  25'.) 

Divine  Purpose  and  Divine  Power   ...  2G0 

A  Truth,  a  Test,  and  a  Solution  ...  261 
God's  Mercy  may  delay,  it  does  not 

faU 201 

The  Lord's  Rest  ...            ...            ...  262 

God's  Judgments  on  other  Nations  than 

our  own             ...            ...            ...  263 

The  Hebrew  Conception  of  Shedl      ...  265 

The  Ambitious  Spirit  in  Man            ...  205 

Children  suffering  for  the  Fathers     ...  266 

The  Security  of  the  Divine  Word     ...  267 

Zion  a  Safety  for  the  Poor  ...           ...  867 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Denunciations  of  God's  Wrath  upon 
Sinners  compatible  with  the  Deepest 

Pity  for  them    ...            ...            ...  269 

Oracle  concerning  Moab     ...            ...  270 

National  Distress...  ...  272,274 

Moab  a  National  Type        27» 

Divine  Judgments  in  Precise  Ada|>ta- 

tions    ...            ...            ...            ...  275 

The  Insecurity  of  Worldly  Possessions  276 


CHAPTER  XVL 

God's  Offer  of  Mercy  to  the  Sinner  ...  278 

The  King  in  Zion               279 

Lament  over  Moab              ...            ...  281 

A  Harvest  Failure              ...            ...  282 

The  Wisdom  of  the  Weaker              ...  2£3 

The  Foundations  of  Power  ...            ...  284 

Guilty  Arrogance  and  Commendablo 

Compassion       ...            ...            ...  285 

Unavailing  Prayer              ...            ...  285 

Recovering  False  Steps      ...           ...  286 

Practical  Righteousness      ...            ...  287 

Righteousness  hindered  or  hastened  288 

The  Sadness  of  a  Silent  Land           ...  288 

Prayer  that  may  not  prevail             ...  288 


INDEX. 


OHAPTEB  XVn. 

Katioiml  Bepentance  may  ooma  too  late 

to  avert  National  Buin    ...           ...  292 

The  Book  of  oTir  Strength  ...            ...  292 

Damascai  and  laiael            ...            ...  293 

The  Prophet  on  Heathen  Worship    ...  295 
Forgetfiilnesa  of  God,  aad  its  Ocsasa- 

qnenoes             ...            ^           m.  S96 

Sounds  from  afar  ...           ...           „.  897 

The  Gloomy  Evening         ,„           ,.,  297 

Beduction             ...            ...           ...  298 

The  Function  of  Adversity               ...  299 

The  8in  and  Doom  of  UngodlineM   ...  299 

The  Overthrow  of  the  Enemies  of  God  30O 

The  Mission  of  Syria          ...            ...  800 

The  Lord's  Remnant          ,„           ...  301 

Eyes  turned  to  Ood  mif    m.            ...  302 

God  our  Bock       ...            ...            ...  302 

The  Mission  of  Disappointment;  or, 
Disappointment  naed  ••  a  Divine 

Judgment         ...            ...           ...  803 

OHAPTEB  XVIH. 

The  Contrast   of  Divine  Calm  with 
Human  Bustle,  Hurry,  and  Excite- 
ment  ...           ...            ...            ...  805 

Homage  of  Ethiopia  to  Jehovah       ...  806 

The  Patience  of  Power       ...           ...  808 

Man's  Energy  put  in  Place  of  Trust  in 

God    ...           ...           ...           ...  809 

Gk>d  can  wait        ».           ^           ...  810 

God  can  work       .m           m.            m.  811 


CHAPTBE  XIX. 

Egypt's  Punishment,  a  Proof  both  of 
God's  Long-suffering  and  of  hia  In- 
exorable Justice              ...           ...  817 

Smiting  and  Healing  closely  connected 

in  Grod's  Counsels           ...            ...  817 

Unity  in  Beligion  joins  together  tiie 

Bitterest  Foes   ...            ...            ...  818 

Coming  Judgment  upon  Egypt         ...  818 

The  Drying  up  of  the  Nile               ...  819 

The  Polly  of  Statesmen      ...            .„  819 

Mingled  Judgment  and  Mercy          ...  820 

God's  Presence  a  Trouble  ...            —  821 

A  Picture  of  Penalty          _            ...  822 

Leaden  that  mislead           ...            _  S23 

Smiting  and  Healing          _            _  323 

The  Crown  of  Privilege      ._            ».  324 

liights  in  which  God  regards  01       ...  825 


THEME  txai 

Political  Commotion  regarded  as  Divine 

Judgment          ...            ...            .„  825 

Temptation  to  trust  in  Diviners  ...  326 
The  Withholding  of  God's  Gifts  maksac 

Man's  Woe        ...             ...             ...  826 

Men's  Minds  a  Sphere  in  which  Oofs 

Judgments  may  work      ...            ...  827 

The  Cry  of  Distress  after  the  True  God  827 

God  both  Smiter  and  Heakr  ...  828 
The   Gk)d-fearing    Man   a    Blessing 

wherever  be  is  found       ...            ...  328 

All  Nations  belonging  unto  God       ...  829 

CHAPTEB  XX. 

Foolish  Trost   rebuked  by  a  Strange 

Sign    ...             ...            ...             ...  331 

The  Prophet  as  a  Sign        ...            ...  832 

Unpleasant  Service             ...            .„  832 

The  InsufBciency  of  the  Stronger     ...  333 
Divine  Bevelation  in  Actions  as  well  as 

Words                ...             ...             ...  aS4 

The  Bitter  Experience  of  all  who  trust 

in  Man               ...             ...             ...  335 

A  Grave  Question  with  Many  Appli- 
cations             ...                          ...  335 

CHAPTEB  XXI. 

The  Sadness  of  a  Nation's  Overthrfiw  339 

Half-heartedTnmlugtoGodofnoaTail  .340 
The  Grievousness  of  War   ...            340,350 

PaU  of  Babylon     ...             ...              ..  340 

The  Watchman    ...            _            ...  342 

The  Tribes  of  Arabia          ...            ...  342 

A  Momentous  Question        ,.            ...  343 

The  Effect  of  God's  Judgments  on  the 

Good  and  on  the  Guilty  ...            ...  343 

Tribulation            ...            ...            ...  344 

Taunt,  Betort,  and  Overture              ...  345 

Our  nia  and  their  Bemedirs              ...  346 

Nations  working  out  God's  Providences  347 
Sympathy  of  Bodies  with  Distrtes  of 

Mind 347 

The  Work  of  the  Iconoclast               ...  348 

God's  People  threshed  and  winnowed  348 

The  Watchman's  Besponse...            ...  349 

The  Security  of  the  Divine  Word     ...  350 

CHAPTEB   XXn. 

Isaiah  weeping  for  the  Daughter  of 
his  People  a  Type  of  Christ  lament- 
ing over  Jerusalem          „.           ...  856 


*1 


INDEX. 


THSn  PAOK 

Shebiui  and  Eliakim :  a  Moral  Leason  356 

Shebna  and  Eliabim :  an  Allegory  ...  357 
Messiah's     Burden     and     Measiah's 

Death                 ...  357 

Judgment  upon  Jernaalem ...            ...  858 

Denunciation  of  Shebna      ...            „,  S60 

Instalment  of  Eliakim        »•            t..  860 

Captivity,  and  yet  Safety    ^            ...  362 

"The  Sorrow  of  the  World "             ...  362 

Christian  Patriotism            ...            ...  363 

Human  Reckoning  and  Divine  Inier- 

ruption               ...            ...            ...  364 

Authority  and  Inflnenoe     ...            ...  365 

Ill-timed  Joy         ...            ...            ,..  365 

The  Moral  Influence  of  Pestilence  {...  366 

"  A  Time  to  weep  "             ...           ...  866 

Man's  Trost  in  his  Weapons             ...  867 

God's  Call  to  Penitence      ...            ...  867 

Iniquity  that  cannot  be  purged  in  thia 

Life     ...           ...           ...           ...  368 

Man's  Plans  for  himself  frustrated  by 

God's  Plan  for  him           ...            ...  869 

God's  Violent  Providences  ...           ...  369 

The  Influence  of  an  Individual  on 

Public  Policy    ...            ...            ...  370 

The  Symbol  of  Authority    ...            ...  870 

The  Sure  NaU  as  a  Type    ...            ...  870 

CHAPTER  XXra. 

The  Fall  of  Tyre  •  Warning  againct 
Pride  in  the  Glories  of  Civilization 

and  Art             ...           ...           ...  374 

The  Pursuit  of  Wealth  Culpable  or 
Praiseworthy  according  to  the  Object 

had  in  View      ...           ...           ...  375 

The  Pall  of  Tyre 375 

«  The  Harvest  of  the  Biver "            ...  378 

Aspects  of  Divine  Judgment            ...  378 

Gain  and  Devotion             ...           ...  879 

The  Mission  of  Tyre,  the  Commercial  380 
The  Dependence  of  One  Nation  npon 

Another             ...            881 

God'i   Constant   Work    of    humbling 

Pride  ...            ...            ...           ...  382 

No  Escape  from  Gkid's  Judgments    ...  382 

Commeroe  the  Handmaid  of  Beligion  888 

OHAPTEB  XXIV. 

Ood's  Final  Judgment  upon  the  Earth  887 
A  Sorer  Pmiishment  reserved  for  the 
Authon   and    Instigators   of   Evil 

than  for  Othen ...           ...           ...  887 


TBin  »A01 

Prophecy  of  Judgment       .m           m.  888 

Songs  from  afar     ...            ...            ^a  891 

The  Charge  and  the  Calamity           m.  891 

The  Voice  of  the  Chastened              „,  392 

Five  Fruits  of  Transgression            ...  893 

Common  Burden-bearing    ...            ...  894 

The  Future  for  Haughty  Folk  ...  895 
The  Necessary  Connection  of  Suffering 

with  Sin            ...           ...           .,,  395 

The  Distress  of  Pampered  Appetites  396 

The  Mission  of  Remnants  ...            ...  397 

Man's  Duty  in  Times  of  Refining     ...  397 

The  Burden  of  Earth's  Transgressions  398 
The  Lord's  Kingdom  is  the  Doing  of 

the  Lord's  Will ...            ...            ...  398 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

The  Place  of  Thanksgiving  in  the  B»- 

ligious  Life       ...            ...            ...  402 

Hymn  of  Praise  to  Jehovah              ...  403 

Song  of  the  Redeemed        ...            ...  404 

Christ's  Conquest  of  Death...            ...  405 

Rejoicing  in  God  ...            ...            ...  405 

Divine  Provision  for  the  Human  Soul  406 

Spiritual  Veils      ...            ...            ...  407 

The  Evening  of  Expectation             ...  407 

The  Supreme  Victory         ...            ...  408 

Personal  Rights  in  God      ...            ...  409 

The    True   Reading    of   the    Divine 

Dealings            ...            ...            ...  409 

God  our  Shadow  ...            ...            ...  410 

Jehovah's  Feast  after  Reconciliation  411 

Triumph  over  Death           ...            ...  411 

Waiting  on  God    ...            ...            ...  412 


CHAPTER  XXVL 

Thanksgiving  the  Employment  of  the 

Saints  in  Bliss   ...            ...            ...  417 

The  Doctrine  of  the  Resurrection      ...  417 

The  Vision  of  Future  Glory              ...  418 

The  Resurrection  of  Israel ...           ...  421 

Seeking  God  in  the  Night 422 

Prayer  in  TionUe...           ...           ...  423 

The  Righteousness  of  God'i  Bnle     ...  423 

Athirst  for  God 424 

Gnilty  Insensibility             ...            ...  424 

The  Argument  from  tlie  Ffett           ^  425 

Contrasted  Issues ...           ...           „,  426 

The  Duty  of  Retirement     ...           ...  426 

The  Bulwark  of  Salvation  .»           ».  427 

Perfect  Peace  out  of  Tnut 488 


INDEX. 


Vll 


The  Call  to  Continaotu  Tnut  ...  429 

The  Level  Path  of  the  Good  Man  ...  429 

Attitude  in  Times  of  Jadgment  ...  430 

Full  Allegiance  to  Jehovah  ...  432 

Prayer  foroed  by  Trouble    .m  ...  432 


CHAPTEB  XXVn. 

Spiritaal  Wickedness  in  High  Plaeoi 

powerless  to  resist  God    ...  ...  436 

The  Moans  whereby  God  puriiles  and 

perfects  his  Church         ...  ...  436 

The  Moderation  of  Ood'g  Ohastise- 

mcnta  ...  ...  ...  ...  437 

The  Israel  of  God  gathered  in   and 

garnered  one  by  one        ...  ...  437 

"In  that  Day"     ...  ...  ...  438 

Divine  Guardianship  ...  ...  439 

God's  Treatment  of  the  Bebellioni  and 

the  Bighteous    ...  ...  ...  439 

Taking  Hold  of  God's  Strength        ...  440 

The  Betura  of  God's  Absent  Onei    ...  441 

Vineyard-keeping...  ...  ...  441 

Making  Peace  with  God     ...  „.  442 

The  World-Mission  of  Israel  ...  443 

Judgments  and  ChListisements  ...  444 

Bepentance  proved  in  Deed*  ...  445 

Bestontions  prove  Divine  Forgiveness  446 

CHAPTEB  XXVIU 

The  Drunkards  of  Ephraim  ...  4.52 

The  Objections  of  Unbelievers  to  such 

as  preach  the  Truth        ...  ...  452 

The  Judgment  prepared  for  Scomers  453 
The  Analogy  of   Divine   to  Human 

Methods  of  Working       ...  ...  454 

Conditions  of  Samaria        ...  ...  454 

The  Mockers  and  the  Prophet  ...  455 

Jehovah  pronounoea  Judgment         ...  456 

Proverbial  Love    ...  ...  ...  458 

Best  and  Befreshment         ...  ...  458 

Christ  the  Comer-Stone      ...  ...  459 

The  Use  of  Tribulation      ...  ...  459 

The  Evil  of  Excess :  a  Sermon  on  In- 
temperance       ...  ...  ...  460 

God  our  Glory,  Beauty,  etc  •..  461 

Indocility  ...  .-  ~.  *61 

The  Infatuation  of  Sin        ...  ».  462 

The  Judgments  of  God       ...  m.  463 

Divine  Discrimination         ...  •••  464 

The  Woe  of  the  Drunkard  ...  ~>  464 


Beauty,  Wisdom,  and  Strength  for  oa 

in  God               ...            ...            ...  465 

The    Moral    Deterioration    of    Self- 
indulgent  Habits             ...            ...  466 

Need  for  the  Beiteration  of  Truth    ...  466 

Mockers  of  Beligion             ...            ...  467 

The  Sure  Foundation         ...           ...  469 

Man's  Inability  to  Order  his  own  Life  470 
God  in   Material  Things    illustrates 

God  in  Moral  Things      ...            ...  470 

God's  Work  in  Men's  Minds  and  Wills  470 

CHAPTEB  XXIX. 

"Woe  unto  Ariel  I"             ...            ...  475 

The     Disappointment     that     awaits 

God's  Enemies  ...            ...            ...  476 

Two  Kinds  of  Spiritual  Blindness    ...  476 

God's  Hatred  of  Mere  Lip-Service    ...  476 

Beligious  Bevivals              ...           ...  477 

Concerning  Ariel  ...            ...            ...  478 

Lip-Service  and  Dissimulation         ...  478 

A  Time  of  Begeneration     ...           ...  479 

Insincerity            ...            ...            ...  480 

The  City  of  God 480 

Spiritual  Incapacity            ...            ...  481 

The  Church  which  God  condemns    ...  482 

The  Hour  of  Bevival           ...            ...  483 

Divine  Corrections  through  Temporal 

Distresses           ...            ...            ...  484 

God's  Word  a  Sealed  Book  ...  485 
Lip-Service;   or,  the  Peril  of  losing 

the  Heart  out  of  our  Piety             ...  485 

God  the  Mind-Searcher      ...           ...  486 

The  Joy  of  the  Meek           ...            ...  486 

The  Humiliation  of  the  Suspicious  ...  487 
The  Sanctifying  Power  of  Sanctified 

People               ...           ...           ...  488 

CHAPTEB  XXX 

A  Godless  I'dlioy  issues  in  Disaster, 

however  seemingly  Wise ...            ...  494 

The  Written  Word  endures  for  Ever  495 
Smooth   Things  more  Acceptable  to 

Man  than  the  Truth        ...            ...  495 

Turning  to  God    ...           ...           ...  496 

The    Glories    of    Cbiisfa    Kingdom 

shown  in  Figure             ...           ...  496 

The  Punishment  of  Nations  for  De- 
liverance, rather  than  for  Vengeance  497 
The  Embassy  to  Egypt       ...         "  ...  497 
"  A  Testimony  for  Ever  "  ...            ...  498 


via 


INDEX. 


flTEKS  rAOV 

The  BleBBednesa  of  Zion     m«            >••  499 

Sources  of  Strength            ...            •••  SOO 

Going  dowu  into  Egypt      ...            ^m  501 

Aspects  of  Sin       ...            ...            »•  502 

Quiet  Strength      ...            ...            ...  503 

Gk)d'»  Waiting  and  ours      ...            ...  503 

The  People  of  Ood  in  their  Pioapority  504 

Judgment  and  Joy              ...            ...  505 

Adding  Sin  to  Sin               ...            .^  505 

Trusting  Others  than  Jehovah          ...  506 

Quietness  and  Confidence   ...            ...  506 

The  Peril  of  the  Wilful      .„            „.  507 

Adversity  as  Divine  Bread                ...  508 

Sins  of  WiU  and  Sins  of  Frailty        ...  ."iOS 

The  Joy-Song  of  the  Delivered        •«  509 

The  Mission  of  Tophet       ...           .^  609 

CHAPTER  XXXL 
The  Folly  of  trusting  in  an  Arm  at 

Flesh 611 

The  Bock  of  Assyria  and  the  Bock  of 

Israel  ...           ...           ...           •••  512 

The  Help  of  Egypt             513 

Similes  of  the  Nature  and  Power  of 

Jehovah             ...            ...            •••  514 

The  Fire  of  Jehovah           ...           ...  514 

Wrong  Sources  of  Help       ...            ...  514 

The  Arm  of  Flesh              ...           ...  515 

Divine  Beservation  and  Consistency  516 

Deep  Disloyalty    ...           ...           —  516 

Fleeing  away        ...           ...           •••  517 

Names  for  God      ...            ...            •••  518 

The  Wisdom  of  God  in  his  Punish- 
ments ...            ..■            •••            •••  ^'^ 

God  unhindei-ed  by  Fears  of  Man     ...  519 

Turning  to  God  in  giving  up  Sin      ...  520 

TheSnrprigeoftheiiord'gDulivoranoe*  521 

CHAPTER  XXXII. 
Strict    Justice    a    Characteristic    of 

Messiah's  Kingdom         ...            ...  524 

What  Christ  is  tK)  his  People            ...  525 
The  Need  of  rousing  Women  in  Critical 
Times  from  a  State  of  Self-satisfac- 
tion »nd  Self-complacency             ...  525 
The  Fruits  of  the  Spirit  in  a  Com- 
munity             •■•           •••           •••  526 

An  Ideal  of  Political  Good ...            ...  527 

"  Until  the  Spirit  be  poured  out "     ...  528 

The  Soul's  Best    ...            ...            •••  629 

Eefuge  in  Chrirt  and  in  One  Another  530 


THxm  ,ia. 

Disabled  and  restored        ...           ...  53i 

A  Mark  of  Good  Government,  etc   ...  532 
"The  Peaceable  Fmit  of  Bighteon*. 

ness" 632 

Fruitful  Labour   ...            ...            ...  533 

The  Ideal  Eeign  ...            ...            ...  534 

The  Correction  of  Social  OonfarioB* ...  534 

The  Stability  of  Liberal  Hen           ...  635 

Folk  who  are  at  Ease          ...            .»,  536 

The  Spirit  as  a  Quickening  Bain     ^,  536 

Righteousness  and  Peace    ...            ,„  537 

"  Quiet  Besting-Placea"    ,„           ^  538 

Sowing  freely        ...           „•           m*  538 


CHAPTBB  XXXm. 

The  Fear  of  the  Lord,  Judah's  Treainre  543 
The  Opportuneness  of  God's    Judg- 
ments ...            ...            ...            .,.  543 

"  The  King  in  his  Beanty  "  643,  552 

Jehovah  a  Refuge               ...            ...  544 

The  Uprising  of  Jehovah   ...           m.  545 

Living  near  to  God             .^            ...  545 

The  Beign  of  Hezckiah      ...            ...  547 

The  Glorious  Vision           ...            ,„  547 

Aggravated  Evil  ...            ...            .„  548 

The  Lesser  and  the  Larger  Herciea ...  549 

A  Wise  Nation  (Chui-ch)    ...            ...  550 

In  the  Presence  of  the  Holy  One      ...  551 

The  Breadth  of  the  Kingdom           ...  552 

Hiippy  Times        ...            ...            ...  553 

Constant  Renewals  of  Divine  Help  ...  554 

The  Secret  of  Stability  for  Every  Age  555 

Who  can  stand  the  Testing  Fires?    ...  R^6 

God's  Witness  to  Character               .;.  556 

Visions  of  the  King             m«            n.  557 

The  True  Theocracy           ^           ».  557 

No  More  Sickness               »,            ...  658 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

The  Terrors  of  the  Lord  not  to  be  held 

back  by  the  Preacher      ...  ...  561 

The  Sins  and  Punishment  of  Edom  ...  503 

The  Divine  In<ligiiation      ...  ...  563 

The  Divine  Word  and  Human  Woe  ...  564 
God's  Dealing  with  One  Nation  tat 

the  Sake  of  Many  ...  ...  565 

Divine  Indignations  ...  ...  566 

Tlie  Lord's  Controversy      ...  ...  5C6 

The  Witness  of  Desolate  Lands         ...  567 

Appeal  to  the  Word  ...  ».  667 


INDEX. 


OHAPTEB  XXXV. 

TBBHl  rAAB 

The  Qlotj  of  the  Ghnioh  not  Tem- 
poikl  GreatneM,  bat  Bpiritual  Pat> 

feetimi              ...           ...           ...  S70 

GIoriM  of  the  Meuianio  Age            ».  S70 

InspintioM  to  Energy       ...            m.  571 

Tremor  of  Spirit   ...            ...             ...  672 

Traniformation  by  the  Tmtt             .,,  S72 

The  PliTilego  of  the  Strong               _.  978 


TBUfl  rAOI 

The  Way  to  Zion ...            ^  ...  574 

Within  the  Gate*  ...            ^  ...  575 

Changed  Oiroumitaneea  following  the 

Return  of  DiTine  Favour  ...  675 

Cheer  for  the  Faint-hearted  ...  576 

Pre- vieioQi  of  the  Great  Phyiioian  m.  576 

Tlie  Lord's  Highway           ...  ...  677 

TVm  Betam  of  the  RanMOMd  ...  Sf?" 


K";!al.ii'!!iJ!«L':ijlSi 


UiliiijiiiMijjiliiM^MtM 


